Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/| 


Xibran? 


of  tlic 


Tllnipereitf  of  Midconeiti 


r 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


VOLUME  II 

CONSTRUCTION  OF  SEWERS 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


THREE  VOLUMES 

BY 

METCALF  AND  EDDY 


Vol.  I    — Design  op  Sewers 

Vol.  II  — Construction  of  Sewers 

Vol.  Ill — Disposal  of  Sewage 


(In  Preparation) 


AMERICAN 
SEWERAGE    PRACTICE 


VOLUME  II 

CONSTRUCTION  OF  SEWERS 


BY 
LEONARD  METCALF 

AND 

HARRISON  P.  EDDY 


fiBST  Edition 


McGRAW-HILL  BOOK  COMPANY,  Inc. 
239  WEST  39TH  STREET,  NEW  YORK 

6  BOUVERIE  STREET,  LONDON,  E.  C. 

1915 


Copyright,  1915,  by  the 
McGraw-Hill  Book  Company,  Inc. 


THB*kfAPLB*PRl!BS*TORK.PA 


192967 

MAR  11 

!9  5 

■\)  \  -: 

.lV(c  C 

(^lor^M 


?, 


PREFACE 


The  construction  of  a  sewerage  system  involves  attention  to  many 
apparently  unimportant  details  which,  if  neglected,  may  materially 
diminish  the  value  of  the  works.  If  the  alignment  and  grades  are  not 
true,  there  may  be  places  where  the  velocity  of  the  sewage  will  be 
checked  and  deposits  of  sand  and  organic  matter  will  occur.  These 
not  only  reduce  the  capacity  of  a  sewer,  but  if  they  remain  for  some 
time  the  organic  matter  decomposes  and  thus  affects  injuriously  the 
sewage  flowing  over  it,  which  should  reach  the  place  of  disposal  or  treat- 
ment as  fresh  as  possible.  If  the  inner  surfaces  of  sewers  are  not  so 
smooth  as  contemplated  by  the  designer,  the  resistance  to  the  flow  of 
the  sewage  is  increased  and  the  sewers  will  not  have  the  desired  ca- 
pacity. In  order  to  avoid  these  and  other  defects,  the  field  engineering 
and  insp>ecting  force  must  insist  on  many  things  which  are  discussed  in 
this  volume  but  have  been  rarely  taken  up  in  books  or  papers  on  sewerage. 

In  addition  to  acting  as  designing  and  supervising  engineers  upon 
work  executed  by  contract,  the  authors  have  had  direct  charge  of  the 
construction  by  day  labor  of  many  miles  of  sewers,  large  and  small, 
in  earth  and  rock,  trench  and  timnel.  The  construction  of  sewers  from 
the  contractor's  point  of  view  is,  therefore,  xmderstood  clearly  by  them. 
They  have  endeavored  to  present  in  the  following  pages  the  instructions 
they  would  issue  to  the  superintendents  and  foremen  in  charge  of  day- 
labor  forces,  and  the  advice  they  would  give  to  contractors  taking  up 
sewer  construction  for  the  first  time.  The  authors  believe  that  there 
is  need  of  improvement  in  much  of  the  sewer  work  done  in  this  country 
and  that  this  improvement  should  be  made  in  inspection  as  well  as  in 
the  operations  carried  on  by  contractors,  in  construction  done  by  day 
labor  as  well  as  in  that  executed  by  contract.  Their  experience  has  been 
that  contractors  generally  haver  desired  to  do  only  the  best  work,  but 
that  they  sometimes  fell  short  of  attaining  their  object  through  un- 
familiarity  with  the  special  requirements  for  good  seswrers.  It  is  hoped 
that  this  book  will  prove  helpful  to  all  such  men,  as  well  as  to  engineers 
and  inspectors  who  should  be  familiar  with  practical  methods  of 
construction. 

Leonard  Metcalp. 

Harrison  P.  Eddy. 
14  Beacon  Street, 
Boston,  Mass. 
Sept,  11,  1914. 


CONTENTS 


Page 
V 


Preface  

CHAPTER  I 

Preliminary  Investiqations 1 

Maps  for  preliminary  investigations — Field  work — Examination  of 
existing  structures — Character  of  soil — Borings — ^Jet  drilling — 
Core  drilling — Frequency  of  borings — Surface  conditions — Maps 
and  profiles — Contract,  specifications  and  drawings — Organization 
of  engineering  department  for  construction. 

CHAPTER  II 

Engineering  Work  and  Inspection   during  CoNSTRtrcnoN 25 

Laying  out  trench  work — Reference  marks — Transferring  line  to  the 
sew^er — Grades — ^Laying  out  disposal  works  and  similar  structures 
— Supervision  and  inspection — Pipe — Cement — Sand — Crushed 
stone  and  gravel — Brick — Reinforcing  steel — Excavation — Backfill- 
ing— Removal  of  sheeting — Final  inspection — ^Leakage — Relations 
of  engineers  and  inspectors  to  the  contractor — Estimates — Records 
— Cost  keeping — Printed  forms — ^Progress — Cost  of  engineering 
and  supervision. 

CHAPTER  III 

Excavation 54 

Material  to  be  excavated — Classification — Definitions  of  rock  ex- 
cavation— Hand  excavation — ^Loosening  surface — Opening  trench 
in  frozen  ground — Preserving  pavements — Excavated  material — 
Tunneling — Work  in  different  materials — ^Lighting — Ventilation — 
Handling  and  transporting  materials — Shafts — Methods  of  tun- 
neling in  soft  ground — Methods  of  tunneling  in  rock — ^Pumping, 
bailing  and  underdrainage — Settlement  of  adjacent  structures. 

CHAPTER  IV 

MAcraNERT  FOR  Trench  Excavation 82 

When  machines  are  economical — Carson  trench  machine — Potter 
trench  machine — Potter  excavator  and  conveyor — Cableways — 
Carson-Trainor  hoister  and  conveyor — Steam  shovels — Endless 
chain  machines — Drag  scrapers — Derricks  and  cranes — Excavating 
buckets — Economical  use  of  machinery. 

vii 


viii  CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  V 

PAQK 

Methods  op  Rock  Excavation 101 

Hand  drilling — Spacing  drill  holes — Cleaning  holes — Rotary  or 
core  drill — Reciprocating  or  percussion  drill — Electric-air  drill — 
Hammer  drill — ^Limits  of  the  several  methods  of  drilling — Drill 
bits — Drill  sharpeners — Portable  air  compressors — Handling  rock. 

CHAPTER  VI 

Explosives  and  Blasting 129 

Black  powder — Contractors'  powder — Dynamite — Ammonia 
powder — Gelatine  dynamite — Cartridges — Rapidity  of  action — Se- 
lection and  economical  use  of  explosives — Effect  of  fumes — Ex- 
plosives in  wet  holes — Freezing  and  thawing  dynamite — Loading 
holes — Exploders  and  fuses — Stemming  and  tamping — Unloading 
holes — Blasting  machines — Wiring — Shipment  and  storage  of  ex- 
plosives— Magazines — Cost  of  dynamite. 

CHAPTER  VII 

Quantity  and  Cost  op  Excavation 151 

Effect  of  materials  on  width  of  trench — ^Lines  of  excavation — 
Narrowed  bottom  of  trench — Excess  excavation — Measurement 
of  excavation — Cost  of  excavation  in  general — Cost  of  Louis- 
ville sewerage  project — Engineer's  estimates  and  actual  costs — 
Force  account  costs — ^Local  contractors'  bids — Cost  of  excavation 
and  backfilling,  Denver — Cost  of  complete  sewers,  Louisville — 
Cost  of  earth  and  rock  excavation,  Louisville — Cost  of  concrete  and 
steel  in  sewers,  Louisville. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

Rate  op  Progress  in  Building  Sewers 195 

Influence  of  conditions — Tabulation  of  records  on  tunnels — Rate 
with  machine  at  Denver — Rates  of  excavation  and  placing  con- 
crete at  Louisville. 

CHAPTER  IX 

The  Sheeting  and  Bracing  op  Trenches  and  Tunnels  .  .  .  .214 
Necessity  for  shoring  trenches — Vertical  sheeting — Bill  of  ma- 
terials for  trenches  of  different  depths  and  widths — Examples  of 
shoring — Box  sheeting — Poling  boards — Stay  bracing — Pulling 
sheeting — Kinds  of  lumber — Dressing  lumber — Steel  sheet  piling — 
Tim!>ering  tunnels — Timbering  tunnels  in  gravel  and  sand — 
Timbering  large  tunnels — Tunneling  with  shield  and  compressed 
air — Tools  required — Practical  suggestions  on  timbering. 


CONTENTS  ix 


CHAPTER  X 

Paob 

Sizes  of  Sheeting,  Rangers  and  Braces 267 

Need  of  shoring  different  materials — Cohesion — ^Lack  of  adhesion — 
Tendency  of  soil  conditions  to  change — Rankine's  formula — Hy- 
drostatic pressure — Meem's  theory  of  earth  pressures — Calcula- 
tion of  sizes  of  rangers  and  braces. 

CHAPTER  XI 

Purchasing,  Handling  and  Laying  Sewer  Pipe 291 

List  prices — Discounts — Inspection — Tests — Handling  and  stor- 
ing pipe — ^Laying  pipe — Branches — Iowa  pipe-laying  require- 
ments— Cost  of  laying  pipe — Rate  of  pipe-laying — ^Laying  large 
concrete  pipe — Laying  cast-iron  pipe — ^Laying  steel  pipe — 
Subaqueous  pipe  laying — ^Laying  pipe  from  supports — Floating 
pipe — Pulling  pipe  into  place. 

CHAPTER  XII 

Jointing  Sewer  Pipe 330 

Materials  for  joints — Cement  joints — Sulphur  and  sand  joints — 
Asphalt  and  tar  joints — G.-K.  compound — Tests  of  pipe  after 
laying. 

CHAPTER  XIII 

Construction  of  Brick  and  Block  Sewers 347 

Competitive  bids  on  alternative  materials — Quality  of  workman- 
ship— Use  of  pipe  and  masonry  sewers — Tests  of  sewer  brick — 
Handling  brick — Mortar — Brick  laying — Quantities  of  materials 
required — Rate  of  progress — Cost  of  brick  sewers — Vitrified  block 
sewers — Concrete  block  sewers — Construction  of  manholes. 

CHAPTER  XIV 

Construction  of  Concrete  Sewers 367 

Advantages  of  concrete — Disintegration  of  concrete  by  chemical 
action — Use  of  materials  excavated  from  trench — Quantities  of 
sand,  stone  and  cement — Mixing  concrete  by  hand — Machine 
mixing — Placing  concrete — Placing  reinforcement^ — Waterproofing 
— Work  joints — Placing  concrete  in  freezing  weather — Rate  of 
progress — Cost  of  sewers. 

CHAPTER  XV 

Profiles,  Templates,  Forms  and  Centers 396 

Definitions — Centers  and  profiles  for  brick,  stone  and  block 
sewers — Wooden  forms  for  concrete  sewers — Metal-covered 
wooden    forms — Steel    forms    for    concrete — Forms    for    sewers 


X  CONTENTS 

PAQX 

built  of  concrete  and  brick  or  blocks — Building  concrete  sewers  in 
one  or  more  operations — Full-round  wood  forms  for  building  con- 
crete sewers  at  one  operation — Forms  for  manholes — Forms  for 
curves  and  junctions — ^Lumber  for  wood  forms — Cost  of  steel 
forms — Cleaning  forms  preparatory  to  pouring  concrete — ^Lubrica- 
tion of  forms — ^Length  of  time  forms  should  be  left  in  place — 
Handling  forms. 

CHAPTER  XVI 

Contracts,  Specifications  and  Drawings 433 

Essentials  of  a  contract — Arbitration — Advertisement  of  con- 
tract— Information  for  bidders — Form  of  proposal — Form  of 
bidder's  bonds — Contract — Insurance — Workmen's  compensation 
— ^Liability  insurance — Kinds  of  contracts — Unit  price  contracts — 
Lump  sum  contracts — Percentage  contracts — Cost  plus  fixed  sum 
contracts — Liquidated  damages  and  bonus  clauses — Contract 
drawings — Authors'  form  of  contract — Typical  general  specifica- 
tions. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

Technical  Specifications 465 

Numbering  cl  auses — ^Excavation — Shoring — Blasting — Pumping, 
bailing  and  draining  —  Backfilling —  Piling  — Foundations —  Ce- 
ment— Sand,  gravel  and  broken  stone — Mortar — Billet-st«el  con- 
crete reinforcement  bars — Rail-steel  concrete  reinforcement  bars — 
Iron  castings — Brick  masonry — Concrete,  plain  and  reinforced — 
Vitrified  pipe  and  specials — Cement  concrete  sewer  pipe — Pipe 
laying — ^Laying  cast-iron  pipe — ^Inlets  and  catch-basins — Man- 
holes and  wellholes — Curbing,  gutters  and  sidewalks. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

Operation  and  Maintenance  of  Sewerage  Systems 491 

Investment  in  sewers — Inspection — Deposits  in  sewers — Flushing 
sewers — Removing  roots  from  sewers — Removal  of  heavy  de- 
posits from  sewers — Cleaning  and  care  of  catch-basins — Repairs — 
Regulators  and  inverted  siphons — Records — Cost  of  operation  and 
maintenance  of  sewerage  systems. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

Explosions  in  Sewers 527 

Sources  of  inflammable  gases  and  explosions — Pittsburg  explosion 
— New  York  explosions — Boston  explosion — Behavior  of  gasoline 
in  sewers — Sources  of  ignition — Prevention  of  explosions — Safety 
precautions — Ordinances  and  regulations  governing  discharge  of 
inflammable  liquids — Other  dangers. 

Index 543 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


VOLUME  II 

CONSTRUCTION  OF  SEWERS 


\ 


AMEEICAN 
SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS 

Many  sewers  have  been  built  without  much  engineering  assistance 
and  when  isolated  and  grades  have  been  steep  they  have  served  their 
purpose  fairly  well.  If,  however,  a  municipality  requires  a  system 
of  sewers,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  it  be  designed  and  its 
construction  supervised  by  an  engineer  of  experience  in  this  kind  of  work. 
This  chapter  has  been  prepared  mainly  with  a  view  to  giving  helpful 
suggestions  to  the  student,  to  the  young  engineer  taking  up  sewerage 
engineering  and  to  the  inspector,  and  to  presenting  an  outline  of  the 
steps  taken  by  the  engineering  department  of  a  comprehensive  sewerage 
project.  Some  details  and  refinements  are  suggested  which  have 
doubtless  often  been  omitted,  and  some  of  them  may  not  be  required 
upon  small  projects,  but  if  a  high  grade  of  construction  is  to  be  secured 
the  quality  of  the  engineering  must  be  equally  high.  It  is  a  most  com- 
mon error  to  save  a  few  dollars  upon  engineering  work  and  lose  hundreds 
or  thousands  of  dollars  upon  the  construction  of  sewer  systems  poorly 
designed.  The  average  citizen  does  not  know  whether  a  sewer  is  5  ft. 
deeper  than  necessary,  contains  25  per  cent,  more  masonry  than  is 
required,  or  is  adequate  for  only  10  years  when  it  should  provide  for  a 
period  of  30  years,  but  he  can  readily  detect  an  extra  inspector  or  a  few 
hundred  dollars  spent  upon  a  topographic  survey  which  will  enable  the 
engineer  to  study  his  problems  intelligently.  One  of  the  important 
duties  of  the  engineer  is,  therefore,  to  instruct  and  educate  commissions, 
committees,  city  councils  and  the  public  as  to  the  necessity  and  value  of 
a  high  grade  of  engineering  work. 

Considerable  attention  is  given  to  the  necessity  and  desirability  of 
preparing  adequate  plans  and  of  preserving  records  which  shall  be  of 
value  after  the  work  in  hand  has  been  completed.  Surprising  as  it  may 
seem  to  some  engineers,  there  are  many  municipalities  in  this  country 
which  do  not  possess  even  the  most  obviously  necessary  records  of  their 
sewers,  such  as  those  of  their  sizes  and  slopes.  This  is  a  condition 
which  can  be  remedied  only  at  great  expense,  if  the  system  has  been  built 

X 


I 


2  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

many  years.  An  illustration  of  this  kind  is  furnished  by  the  underground 
survey  carried  out  under  Henry  M.  Waite,  Chief  Eng.  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Public  Service  of  the  city  of  Cincinnati,  at  a  cost  of  more  than 
$70,000.  To  secure  information  for  the  records  prepared  by  this  survey, 
it  was  necessary  to  make  a  manhole  to  manhole  inspection  of  the  sewers, 
measiuing  their  diameters  and  securing  elevations  from  which  their 
slopes  could  be  computed. 

MAPS  FOR  PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS 

While  the  engineering  force  is  being  organized,  a  diligent  search  should 
be  made  to  obtain  all  available  existing  maps  which  may  have  a  bearing 
upon  the  contemplated  work. 

The  United  States  Geological  Survey  has  prepared  maps  showing  the 
topography  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  United  States.  These  are 
published  in  20  X  16-1/2-in.  sheets,  the  unit  of  area  being  a  quadrangle 
15  min.,  30  min.  or  1  deg.  in  extent  each  way.  The  scales  are  there- 
fore 1  to  62,500, 1  to  125,000,  or  1  to  250,000,  which  are  almost  equivalent 
to  scales  of  1  in.,  1/2  in.,  or  1/4  in.  to  the  mile  respectively.  These 
maps  are  sold  by  the  Director  of  the  Survey  at  Washington,  D.  C,  for 
10  cents  per  sheet,  or,  in  quantities  of  fifty  or  more,  at  the  rate  of  6  cents 
per  sheet.  They  will  be  of  value  in  computing  areas  of  very  large  drain- 
age basins,  such  as  those  of  creeks  and  rivers,  and  in  showing  the  general 
topography  of  the  commimity  as  a  whole,  but  they  are  valueless  for  use 
in  laying  out  individual  sewers. 

Street  Maps. — City  engineers,  town  surveyors,  local  assessment 
boards  and  land  title  companies  frequently  have  maps  of  their  localities. 
These  often  indicate  not  only  street  lines,  but  lot  lines  and  buildings. 

It  is  usually  important  to  note  the  exact  location  of  all  pipes  and 
conduits,  which  can  sometimes  be  done  through  the  aid  of  maps  prepared 
by  the  public  service  corporations. 

In  many  districts  post  route  maps  may  be  had,  drawn  to  scales  varying 
from  4  to  12  miles  per  inch,  showing  highways,  railroads,  ponds,  rivers, 
streams,  and  range,  township,  section  and  meridian  lines,  in  addition  to 
the  postal  routes.  These  are  oftentimes  extremely  useful  in  preliminary 
studios. 

Although  too  much  dependence  should  not  be  placed  on  the  accuracy 
of  county  atlas  maps,  these  also  are  of  considerable  service  in  connection 
with  the  preliminary  work. 

If  upon  checking  up  such  maps  they  are  found  to  be  substantially 
correct,  they  may  be  used  as  a  foundation  for  more  extended  mapping 
of  the  locality.  Frequently  little  is  saved  by  making  use  of  such 
maps,  imless  they  are  found  to  cover  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
district  to  be  surveyed. 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS  3 

FIELD  WORK 

Having  determined  the  scope  of  the  work  and  the  data  required,  unless 
satisfactory  maps  are  available,  surveys  of  the  district  must  be  made. 
The  degree  of  precision  required  will  be  determined  by  conditions  of  the 
problem.  If  the  expense  is  justified,  it  is  desirable  to  establish  a  trian- 
gulation  system  which  will  fmrnish  the  skeleton  for  further  filling-in 
surveys.  The  latter  should  include  the  precise  location  of  street  and 
property  lines;  street  car  tracks;  water,  gas,  sewer  and  drain  pipes;  fire 
hydrants;  conduits  for  electric  lighting,  telephone,  telegraph  and 
heating  service;  all  pavements,  noting  character  and  approximate  age; 
tunnels,  subways,  and  culverts;  public  parks,  play  grounds,  boulevards ; 
all  bodies  of  water,  lakes,  ponds,  streams,  brooks  and  important  ditches, 
and  other  natural  featmres  or  artificial  structures  which  may  be  of 
importance  to  the  problem  in  hand  or  influence  the  design  of  the  new 
works. 

Preliminary  to  taking  the  profiles,  an  accurate,  permanent,  and  com- 
plete system  of  bench  levels  should  be  established  throughout  the  entire 
area  to  be  covered  by  the  proposed  sewerage  system.  The  bench 
marks  should  be  on  points  eaaily  described,  readily  accessible,  and 
that  are  not  likely  to  be  disturbed.  They  should  be  located  at 
sufficiently  close  intervals  for  subsequent  xise;  for  instance,  in  heavy 
work  one  bench  to  each  block  in  all  streets  where  sewers  are  to  be  laid, 
and  at  frequent  intervals  where  topographic  details  are  to  be  obtained 
subsequently. 

In  establishing  these  benches  it  is. desirable  to  run  several  circuits 
covering  the  entire  area,  thus  establishing  bench  marks  of  primary 
order.  Each  circuit  may  thus  be  checked  independently,  and  inaccura- 
cies of  the  field  work  within  each  circuit  detected.  The  accuracy  with 
which  such  circuits  should  close  depends  in  great  measure  upon  the 
quality  of  construction  work  to  be  obtained  and  the  flatness  of  the  grades 
to  be  used  in  the  work. 

The  Board  of  Water  Supply  for  the  City  of  New  York,  in  establishing 
the  bench  marks  for  its  Catskill  Aqueduct  Line,^  established  the  requirement 
that  circuits  should  close  with  an  error  in  feet  less  than  0.02  -s/miles.  On 
this  work  the  15-in.  Berger  inverting  dumpy  level  with  stadia  wires  set 
for  a  ratio  1:200  was  used.  Two  self-reading,  white  pine  level  rods,  10 
ft.  long,  were  used.  These  rods  were  similar  to  the  Molitor  rod  (Trans. 
Am,  Soc.  C,  E.J  vol.  xlv,  page  14)  except  that  they  were  divided  into 
tenths  and  two-hundredths  of  a  foot,  the  tenths  being  numbered  con- 
secutively. Each  rod  was  shod  with  a  phosphor-bronze  shoe,  terminating 
in  a  cylindrical  pin  about  3/4  in.  in  diameter  and  about  1  in.  long,  the  bot- 

*  See  "  Bench  leveling  Operations  on  the  Catskill  Aqueduct  Line,"  by  M.  £.  Zipaer, 
BnoT'  New,  Feb.  20.  1908. 


4  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

torn  face  of  this  pin  being  accurately  faced  in  a  plane  normal  to  the  axis  of 
the  rod.  The  rod  was  also  provided  with  a  mercurial  therhiometer,  a 
watch  glass  level  capable  of  easy  adjustment,  and  provision  for  the  hanging 
of  a  plumb-bob. 

In  order  to  obtain  the  speed  and  accuracy  required,  two  rodmen  were 
employed  to  hold  on  alternate  turning  points,  these  points  being  selected  so 
as  to  make  back  sights  and  fore  sights  practically  equal.  The  level  was 
protected  from  the  rays  of  the  sun  by  an  umbrella.  Each  of  the  two  stadia 
wires  was  read  and  recorded  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  level  reading,  and 
these  several  readings  reconciled  before  moving  ahead.  The  speed  obtained 
on  this  work  averaged  about  2  miles  per  day  in  rugged  or  wooded  country 
and  4  miles  per  day  in  comparatively  level  and  open  country,  while 
check  levels  were  run  at  the  rate  of  about  1  mile  per  hour.  The  adjust- 
ments of  the  instrument  were  tested  at  least  once  per  week,  although  actually 
no  adjustments  were  required. 

In  ordinary  work  with  flat  surfaces  this  is  a  desirable  and  readily 
attainable  standard.  In  small  cities  in  a  rolling  or  hilly  country  a  lower 
standard  of  accuracy  may  suffice.  Having  obtained  the  primary  bench 
marks,  intermediate  bench  marks  within  the  area  embraced  by  each 
circuit  can  then  be  established,  care  being  taken  to  check  each  cross  line 
with  benches  of  the  primary  order. 

Profiles  should  be  run  on  all  existing  streets  and  alleys,  and  along  the 
location  of  all  proposed  streets.  Levels  may  be  taken  in  the  center  of 
the  street  at  intervals  of  100  ft.,  and  at  such  intermediate  points  as  the 
changing  of  grades  may  require.  For  all  proposed  streets,  the  proposed 
grade  should  be  ascertained,  provided  it  has  already  been  "established. " 

Where  sewers  exist,  sufficient  levels  should  be  taken  in  their  inverts  to 
determine  the  accuracy  of  the  profiles  which  are  on  record,  if  there  be 
doubt  of  their  accuracy,  and  if  these  are  found  to  be  incorrect,  or  if  none 
exist,  an  accurate  profile  should  be  made  by  taking  levels  of  the  invert 
at  each  manhole.  This  may  require  the  use  of  a  very  long  pole,  grad- 
uated in  feet,  tenths  and  hundredths,  shod  with  a  steel  point  for 
penetrating  the  sediment  in  the  sewer. 

Topography  notes  should  be  obtained  for  the  preparation  of  a  map 
showing  the  topography  of  the  entire  city,  with  contour  intervals  of  1, 
2-1/2,  5  or  10  ft.,  according  to  the  slopes  of  the  ground  surveyed. 
This  map  should  include  the  area  within  the  present  city  limits  and 
such  suburban  territory  as  is  likely  to  be  annexed  within  the  next  30  to 
50  years.  If  possible,  it  should  also  cover  such  contiguous  territory  as 
may  drain  tlirough  or  into  the  city. 

The  approximate  cross-section  of  the  streets  should  be  determined  and 
the  elevation  of  the  sills  of  buildings  along  the  street,  more  particularly 
of  the  low-lying  ones.  Similarly  the  approximate  depth  of  the  cellars 
should  be  noted,  in  order  that  the  sewers  may  be  laid  out  so  as  to  drain 
the  cellars  of  all  houses. 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS  6 

.The  elevations  should  be  taken  of  the  beds  of  all  streams  and  inverts 
of  canals  or  culverts  encountered,  and  the  various- water  levels  or  stages 
should  be  recorded,  the  minimum,  mean  low,  mean  high,  and  maximum 
flood  levels. 

Examination  of  Eidsting  Structures. — It  is  desirable  to  locate  by  means 
of  test  pits  the  elevations  of  all  pipes  and  conduits  which  are  likely  to  be 
encountered  in  the  construction  of  the  proposed  sewers,  unless  they  are 
clearly  and  accurately  shown  upon  the  drawings  which  purport  to  show 
these  structures. 

The  accuracy  of  such  drawings  as  have  been  procured  should  be 
determined  before  making  use  of  them. 

The  existing  sewers  should  be  examined  to  determine  their  physical 
condition,  the  deposits  in  and  leakage  into  them. 

For  physical  examination  of  the  sewers  it  is  frequently  possible,  by 
means  of  two  mirrors,  to  reflect  sufficient  sunlight  into  the  sewers  to 
enable  one  to  determine  the  quality  of  the  workmanship,  the  location  of 
imperfections  in  the  construction  of  the  sewers,  and  the  location  of 
foreign  matter  contained  therein.  Under  this  method  one  man  stands 
upon  the  surface  of  the  ground  and  reflects  the  sunlight  down  to  a  mirror 
held  by  a  man  in  the  bottom  of  the  manhole,  who  stands,  figuratively 
speaking,  upon  his  head,  and  flashes  these  rays  into  the  sewer,  and  at 
the  same  time  examines  its  interior.  Good  mirrors,  5  in.  in  diameter, 
which  can  be  carried  in  the  pocket  will  be  found  convenient  for  this 
purpose.  An  electric  lamp  deriving  current  from  a  battery  may  be 
floated  through  from  manhole  to  manhole.  A  lighted  lamp  or  candle 
should  not  be  used  for  this  purpose  because  of  the  danger  of  explosion. 

At  times  when  sunlight  is  not  available,  and  where  incandescent 
electric  lighting  circuits  are  convenient,  it  is  frequently  possible,  by 
means  of  long  extension  cords,  to  make  this  examination  by  means  of 
powerful  tungsten  lamps  equipped  with  good  reflectors,  although  such 
light  cannot  be  thrown  as  far  as  good  reflected  sunlight. 

The  amount  of  ground-water  leakage,  if  sufficient  to  warrant  its 
measurement,  can  often  best  be  determined  by  means  of  weirs  within 
the  manholes,  due  allowance  being  made  for  velocity  of  approach. 

Run-off  Data. — The  river  or  stream  flow  is  often  of  great  importance, 
particularly  in  connection  with  problems  involving  the  disposal  of  sew- 
age. For  its  study  there  should  be  obtained,  first,  the  drainage  or 
catchment  area;  second,  the  rainfall  records;  third,  the  run-off  or  dis- 
charge records;  fourth,  rainfall  and  run-off  records  of  other  similar  or 
comparable  drainage  areas  in  the  neighborhood. 

Where  reliable  records  of  stream  flow  are  not  available,  it  is  desirable 
to  establish  gaging  stations  upon  such  streams  early  in  the  investigation, 
in  order  to  secure  as  long  and  complete  a  record  of  discharge  as  possible. 
Such  measurement  should  surely  cover  the  dry-weather  flow  of  the  year 


6  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

in  which  the  investigation  is  made,  and  should  be  continued  throughout 
the  entire  period  of  investigation. 

In  connection  with  such  stream-flow  measurements,  it  is  very  impor- 
tant that  the  site  of  the  gaging  station  be  selected  only  after  careful 
and  thoughtful  consideration  of  all  available  places.  It  is  important 
that  the  channel  should  be  straight  w^ith  approximately  uniform  cross- 
sections  for  several  hundred  feet  above  and  below  the  site  selected.  The 
bed  of  the  stream  at  that  point  should  be  fairly  permanent  and  of  regular 
shape.  It  should  be  a  sufficient  distance  above  any  dam  or  the  junction 
with  any  other  stream  to  be  free  from  the  effect  of  backwater,  and  be 
reasonably  accessible  during  all  stages  of  the  stream. 

A  permanent  gage  should  be  established  at  the  outset,  in  such  a  posi- 
tion that  it  may  serve  its  purpose  during  all  ranges  of  depth  of  water 
which  are  likely  to  occur,  and  its  location  should  be  such  as  to  permit  of 
its  being  read  at  all  such  stages. 

This  gage  should  be  read  and  recorded  daily,  and  more  frequently 
when  the  flow  is  fluctuating  with  considerable  rapidity. 

The  cross-section  of  the  stream  should  be  determined  at  the  beginning 
and  remeasured  from  time  to  time  during  the  season,  in  order  to  ascer- 
tain what  changes,  if  any,  have  taken  place.  Especially  should  this  be 
done  after  all  floods,  at  which  times  the  section  may  be  changed,  either 
by  erosion  or  by  sedimentation. 

The  velocity  of  flow  should  be  determined  frequently,  and  especially 
during  the  summer  low- water  stage.  The  velocity  may  be  determined 
by  a  current  meter,  by  floats,  or,  where  small  flows  exist,  it  may  be 
computed  from  the  flow  measured  by  a  weir. 

From  the  velocity  of  flow  determined  for  various  stages  of  the 
river,  a  rating  curve  may  be  prepared,  from  which  the  flow  may  be 
estimated  for  the  intermediate  depths  of  water,  with  a  limit  of  error  of 
about  6  per  cent. 

Coincident  with  the  records  of  stream  flow,  the  rainfall  near  the  gaging 
station  and  at  numerous  places  scattered  over  the  drainage  area  of  the 
stream  in  question  should  be  recorded. 

Character  of  Soil. — ^The  character  of  the  gpil  should  be  determined, 
in  order  that  the  cost  of  the  work  may  be  estimated  with  as  fair  a  degree 
of  accuracy  as  practicable.  For  this  purpose,  information  may  be 
obtained  by  inquiry  of  local  parties  who  have  made  excavations  or  sunk 
wells,  and  also  by  means  of  soundings,  drillings,  and  borings. 

For  shallow  determinations,  approximate  information  may  be  obtained 
by  driving  a  solid  steel  rod  or  a  pipe  fitted  with  a  steel  point  and  a  driving 
head.  If  the  ear  is  placed  close  to  the  rod  as  it  is  driven,  it  is  possible, 
after  a  little  practice,  to  determine  when  the  point  passes  into  and  through 
soils  of  various  grades,  such  as  clay,  sand  and  gravel.  The  man 
holding  the  rod  can  distinguish  between  different  materials  in  a  similar 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS  7 

manner.  By  withdrawing  the  rod  from  time  to  time  and  examining  its 
point,  minute  Bamples  may  be  obtained,  especially  if  a  alight  groove  has 
been  cut  in  the  driving  point.  Such  a  rod  may  be  withdrawn  by  means 
of  a  long  lever  and  chain,  or  by  meana  of  a  friction  clutch.  Fig.  1, 
having  a  large  ring  attached  to  one  end  into  which  the  end  of  a  lever 
may  be  slipped. 

The  methods  and  cost  of  making  1435  ft.  of  punch  borings  in  116  holes 
at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  were  described  by  W.  W.  Homer  in  Engineering  News, 
Sept.  5,  1912.     The  borings  were  made  by  s  gang  of  four  men  using 
7/S-in.  steel  rods  12  ft.  in  length.    A  boring  point  waa  screwed  into  the 
lowerend.    It  was  about 
a  foot  long  and  tapered 
from  a  shoulder  some- 
what   larger    than    the 
rod    to    a   fine   point. 
Another     point     called    y^i'i 
the     "punching    rod"    i*™* 
waa  practically  &  chum    ^^', 
drill  and  waa  used   to    ''*"' 
punch  throi^h  strata  of 
hardpan  or  obstractions 
which  were  encountered. 

In  boring,  two  men  usu-        „      ,      n.-  ,■       ■        t     j      ■      j  -i. 
„        ,    ,,     ,       „    ,  Fia.  1. — Friction  damp  tor  drawmg  drill, 

ally  rode  the  handle  bar,  "^  ^ 

while  two  others  turned  the  rod.  In  hard  ground  a  small  quantity  of 
water  waa  used  to  soften  the  clay  and  lubricate  the  hole.  The  rods 
were  removed  at  intervals  of  5  ft.,  the  point  being  replaced  by  a  spoon 
with  which  a  sample  was  taken.  In  soft  ground  the  samples  were  not 
of  much  value,  aa  the  hole  might  close  in  and  the  spoon  become  par- 
tially filled  before  reaching  bottom.  In  firm  material  a  true  sample 
could  be  obtained  if  proper  care  were  used.  Rock  was  detected  by  the 
ring,  which  indicates  to  those  familiar  with  the  work  whether  a  boulder 
or  ledge  is  encountered. 

Mr.  Homer  stated  that  the  cost  of  this  work  was  higher  than  usual, 
because  of  the  character  of  earth  encountered;  about  300  ft.  of  boring 
was  through  hard  shale,  40  ft.  through  old  macadam  road,  and  of  the 
remainder,  about  half  was  through  very  hard  clay  and  gravel.  The 
depth  of  holes  was  13  ft.  average,  2  ft.  minimum,  and  39  ft.  maximum. 

The  total  labor  amounted  to  180  days,  equivalent  to  45  days' work  for 
one  gang  of  four  men.  The  average  depth  bored  was  32  ft.  per  gang 
per  day,  which  cost  24  cents  per  linear  foot  of  boring.  Such  work 
through  ordinary  clay  and  loam  costa  from  6  to  10  cents  per  foot  for 
holes  averaging  15  ft.  deep,  according  to  Mr.  Horner. 

Borings. — Samples  of  earth,  sand,  and  gravel  may  be  obtained  from 


8 


AMERICA  N  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


depths  not  exceeding  15  to  30  ft.,  by  means  of  post-hole  augers  or  even 
with  an  ordinary  carpenter's  auger  welded  to  a  steel  rod  or  gas  pipe  and 
operated  by  a  handle  formed  by  a  plumber's  tee  into  which  two  short 
pieces  of  pipe  have  been  threaded,  one  on  either  side,  which  serve  as 
handles.  This  auger  will  probably  work  to  better  advantage  if  the  center 
point  is  removed,  Fig.  2. 


fl 


3^p 


3 


m 


□ 


-I- 


-2- 


FiG.  2. — Auger  handle  and  bits. 


Jet  Drilling. — In  the  jet  drilling 
method,  a  pipe  casing  is  sunk  by 
means  of  a  heavy  hammer  or 
weight,  operated  from  a  frame  or 
tripod  and  raised  either  by  hand 
or  machine;  it  is  allowed  to  fall  on 
the  end  of  the  pipe,  within  which 
there  is  another  pipe  to  which  a 
hose  is  attached  and  connected 
with  a  powerful  force  pump.  At 
the  bottom  of  this  inner  pipe  is 
an  expansion  drill  point  which 
cuts  away  the  material  below  the 
casing.  This  material,  stirred  up 
and  held  in  suspension  by  the 
water  jet,  flows  out  with  the  water 
through  a  side  outlet  at  the  top  of 
the  casing  pipe,  as  shown  in  Fig. 
3,  from  "  Water  Supply  Paper  No. 
257, "  U.  S.  Geological  Survey. 

By  collecting  portions  of  this 
water  in  a  tub,  a  sample  of  the 
eroded  material  may  be  obtained. 
A  record  t)f  the  depth  at  which  the 
drill  was  operating  at  the  time  the 
sample  was  taken  should  be  made. 
In  this  manner  a  fair  idea  of  the 
materials  encountered  may  be  ob- 
tained, although  frequently  it  is 


difficult  to  distinguish  between  such  similar  deposits  as  the  conglom- 
erates and  stiff  and  compact  gravel.  This  may  prove  serious  be- 
cause the  expense  of  excavating  the  one  is  far  greater  than  the  other. 
In  the  report  of  the  Burr-Hering-Freeman  "  Commission  on  Additional 
Water  Supply  for  the  City  of  New  York"  (1903,  page  629)  may  be  found 
a  description  of  the  method  adopted  in  determining  the  location  of 
ground  water  and  the  character  of  substrata  as  affecting  the  quantity, 
percolation  and  velocity  of  ground-water  flow,  from  which  report  the 
following  has  been  abstracted: 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS 


■A  wagh-boriDg  outfit. 


10 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


2  6mWhetis—; 


DomtNavl  —  lH^ 


Wathh'fM. 


As  these  test  wells  were  to  be  left  in  place  for  ground-water  observations, 
economy  in  material  was  necessary  and  2-in.  wells  were  used. 

The  washed  borings  were  to  be  made  at  intervals  of  several  miles  in  a 
country  for  the  most  part  devoid  of  surface  streams,  and  at  points  necessarily 
at  some  distance  from  existing  wells.  The  problems,  then,  were  to  devise 
an  outfit  of  great  portability,  that  could  be  operated  with  the  least  possible 
labor,  and  to  haul  to  each  outfit  all  the  water  that  was  required  to  drive  the 
wells  and  secure  good  samples.    The  most  serious  of  these  problems  was  that 

of  securing  sufiicient  water 
for  good  washed  samples. 
Throughout  the  work  the 
necessary  water  was  hauled 
to  each  outfit  in  barrels 
on  the  wagons  that  also 
served  for  the  transporta- 
tion of  the  outfit. 

The  rig  finally  adopted 
for  the  test  boring  work 
of  the  Commission,  Fig.  4, 
was  patterned  after  a  Bos- 
tdn  rig.  Two  large  gin 
wheels  were  suspended  at 
the  peak  of  a  l-l/2-in.  pipe 
derrick  about  12  ft.  high, 
which  served  at  the  same 
time  to  carry  a  staging  for 
handling  the  wash  pipe, 
drive  head  and  hammer. 
The  great  width  of  these 
gin  wheels  permitted  the 
use  of  1-in.  ropes  and  the 
great  diameter  resulted  in 
less  frictional  resistance; 
the  height  of  the  gin  wheels 
allowed  the  men  on  the 
hammer  to  sway  out  on  the 


ti'in.  W.I. 

Pipe 


Fig.  4.— Wash-boring  rig,  New  York  Commis- 
sion on  Additional  Water  Supply. 


lines  instead  of  obliging  them  to  double  up  on  the  last  few  feet  of  a  length  of 
casing,  as  with  the  Boston  rig.  With  the  stiff  pipe  derrick,  it  was  also 
possible  to  secure  core  samples  by  driving  1-1/4-in.  pipe  3  or  4  ft.  into 
the  material  at  the  bottom  of  the  casing.  The  drive-head,  hammer, 
pump,  suction  and  discharge  hose  and  the  wash  pipe  that  were  used  with 
the  Boston  rig  were  retained.  A  force  of  four  men  and  driver  were  em- 
ployed with  this  outfit.    The  cost  of  this  rig  complete  was  about  $150. 

The  engineering  inspector  assigned  to  each  test  boring  outfit  located  the 
wells  and,  through  the  foreman,  directed  the  work  of  driving.  In  addition 
to  these  duties,  the  inspector  measured  up  the  pipe  that  was  driven,  classified 
the  samples  and  took  all  notes  that  were  required.  On  the  completion  of 
each  well,  these  notes  were  sent  to  the  office  on  specially  printed  blanks. 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS  11 

Samples  of  the  substrata  were  taken  at  all  wells  unless  closed  end 
points  were  used  or  unless  a  number  of  wells  were  grouped  together, 
when  samples  from  only  one  well  were  preserved.  At  each  test  well  from 
which  a  knowledge  of  the  material  was  required,  dry  samples  of  the  soil 
and  the  subsoil  immediately  below  were  secured,  and  washed  samples  of 
the  deeper  substrata  were  taken  every  5  ft.  below  the  surface  of  the  ground 
and  at  any  change  of  material  between  those  intervals. 

When  the  inspector  directed  a  washed  sample  to  be  taken,  the  entire 
discharge  from  the  casing  was  caught  in  a  large  pail  or  tub  of  8  to  15  gal. 
capacity,  which  was  not  allowed  to  overflow.  The  tub  containing 
the  sample  was  set  aside  for  15  to  30  minutes,  after  adding  2  c.c.  of 
hydrochloric  acid  to  hasten  the  precipitation  of  the  flne  material.  When 
most  of  this  had  settled,  the  slightly  turbid  water  was  poured  off  and  a  suffi- 
cient amount  of  the  material  to  fill  the  sample  bottle  was  removed  from  the 
tub  and  the  bottle  was  properly  labeled  and  packed  in  the  sample  case 
provided  for  the  purpose.  The  turbidity  of  the  water  that  was  poured  off 
was  observed  and  recorded  in  order  to  have  a  measure  of  the  material  lost. 

It  was  hoped,  at  the  beginning  of  the  work,  that  it  would  be  possible 
to  use  nothing  but  clear  water  in  washing  up  the  samples,  but  the  distances 
over  which  it  was  generally  necessary  to  haul  the  water  and  the  large  amount 
that  was  sometimes  lost  in  driving  through  the  coarse  sands  and  gravels, 
made  it  necessary  to  use,  on  many  wells,  water  containing  considerable  fine 
material;  a  limit  to  the  turbidity  of  the  water  was  fixed,  however,  and  any 
water  having  a  turbidity  exceeding  200  on  the  silica  standard  was  thrown 
away.  In  all  the  washed  samples,  the  amount  of  fine  material  obtained  did 
not,  therefore,  represent  the  actual  quantity  in  the  sample  when  in  place, 
because  of  the  rejection  of  turbid  water  from  the  sampling  tub  and  the 
occasional  use  of  turbid  water  for  jetting. 

The  washed  samples  taken  from  the  wells  on  which  perforated  pipe  or 
open-end  well  points  were  used  and  those  that  were  washed  up  with  the  small 
"house  lift"  pumps  were  not  always  as  satisfactory  as  the  others,  because 
when  washing  through  a  mixture  of  gravel  and  sand  the  amount  of  water 
that  returned  to  the  surface  was  not  sufficient  in  volume  or  velocity  to 
readily  bring  up  the  coarse  material.  This  was  left  in  place  after  the  sand 
in  the  mixture  had  been  removed,  and  could  sometimes  be  washed  up  only 
with  great  difficulty. 

In  many  wells  entire  samples  were  obtained  with  an  open-end  or  choke 
bore  pipe,  or  a  sand  bucket,  to  serve  as  a  check  on  the  washed  samples 
when  the  character  of  the  material  was  such  that  the  washed  sample  did 
not  appear  to  be  correct. 

The  plan  of  the  work  was  to  first  fill  in  the  large  areas  in  which  no  existing 
wells  were  found  by  driving  wells  4  to  5  miles  apart;  later,  to  locate  other 
test  wells  at  intervals  of  a  mile  or  two,  so  that,  with  the  existing  wells,  the 
surface  of  the  ground  water  could  be  everywhere  determined  and  accurately 
contoured. 

An  estimate  of  the  total  cost  of  the  test  boring,  including  the  cost  of  in- 
spection and  supervision,  and  all  other  expenses  incurred  in  the  field  and 
office  on  this  work,  is  shown  in  Table  1  under  the  several  items  into  which 
the  cost  may  be  divided. 


12 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Table  1. — Cost  ov  Test  Boring 

(Commission  on  Additional  Water  Supply  for  the  City  of  New  York) 


Item                                                Total  amount 

Cost  per  foot 

of  pipe  driven 

(11.605  ftl 

Superuitendence  and  inspection  (including 
ftnarinftftrinir  fl-T^d  RUDerviRJon) 

$2,815.36 

5,074 .  30 

1,612.20 

559 . 73 

618.43 

1,723.90 

315.02 

$0:243 

0.437 

0.139 

0.048 
0.053 
0.149 

0.027 

Jj&hoT — foremen,  $3  and  $3.50  per  day; 

laborers,  $1.50  and  $1.75  per  day 

Teams  employed  with  outfits,  $3  and  $3.50 

per  day 

Transportation,  car  fare,  livery,  freight 
and  express 

Cost  of  rental  of  test  borine  riits 

Two-inch  pipe,  perforated  pipe  and  joints . 
Misc.  expenses,  sample  bottles,  cases,  clas- 
sifying material,  blastins,  etc 

Total 

$12,718.94 

$1,096 

In  loose  gravels  the  cost  of  the  boring  was  not  far  from  60  cents  per  foot, 
but  in  compact  till  where  dynamite  was  used,  the  cost  ran  up  to  $2  per  foot, 
and  some  wells  even  higher. 

To  make  the  total  cost  per  foot  comparable  with  other  work  of  this 
character  which,  however,  has  usually  been  confined  to  much  smaller  areas, 
the  items  of  inspection,  superintendence,  pipe  and  fittings  must  be  reduced, 
and  the  greater  part  of  the  item  for  teams  taken  out;  for  it  is  not  generally 
customary  to  place  more  than  one  engineering  inspector  on  several  outfits, 
if  any  at  all  be  assigned;  the  casings  are  usually  pulled  up,  and  the  pipe 
used  repeatedly;  and  water  can  ordinarily  be  piped  to  the  work  from  a  town 
supply,  or  from  a  small  temporary  pumping  plant.  If,  then,  we  take  15 
cents  per  foot  from  the  item  of  inspection,  10  cents  per  foot  from  that  of 
teams,  and  10  cents  per  foot  from  the  cost  of  the  pipe,  we  reduce  the  total 
cost  per  foot  to  75  cents.  Considering  the  cost  of  labor,  which  was  paid  at 
the  rate  of  $1.75,  excepting  during  the  first  few  weeks,  and  also  the  quality 
of  labor  that  it  was  necessary  to  employ,  this  is  a  reasonable  figure  for  the 
work. 

In  Fig.  5  is  shown  a  combination  drill  and  sand  pump  used  by  the 
city  of  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  sounding  along  the  line  of  a  proposed  outfall 
sewer  in  the  bottom  of  Lake  Ontario.  N.  A.  Brown,  Assistant  City 
Engineer,  who  was  in  charge  of  this  work,  furnished  the  following 
description : 

"To  determine  the  material  through  which  the  trench  will  be  dredged  for 
the  outlet  pipe  of  the  Rochester  sewage  disposal  plant,  borings  were  made  in 
the  bottom  of  Lake  Ontario  from  the  shore  to  a  point  8400  ft.  therefrom 
in  August,  1909.     A  scow  10  ft.  wide  and  30  ft.  long,  having  a  3  X  3-ft. 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS 


13 


well  in  the  center,  was  used  for  this  work.  Over  this  well  a  single  block 
was  placed  at  the  head  of  a  12-ft.  tripod  to  raise  and  lower  the  drill  and 
handle  the  casing. 

*'A  2-in.  pipe  casing  was  used  with  a  1-in.  pipe  for  a  drill  rod.  At  the 
bottom  of  the  drill  rod  a  combined  sand  pump  and  drill  was  attached.  By 
means  of  holes  in  the  casing,  water  was  admitted  to  the  casing  and  circu- 
lated through  the  sand  and  out  the  drill  rod  through  a  T  at  the  top.  Four 
holes  were  made  on  shore  and  26  made  in  the  water.  The  depth  of  water 
at  the  last  hole  was  61  ft.  Of  the  372.5  ft.  of  borings,  279  was  sand,  88  was 
clay  and  5.5  was  gravel. 


Copper 

to  might 
Vatve 


,' Leather  Valve 


r\ 


Open- 
t'ng 


^NaiiRivefed 
M.    \      toHoidVbihe 


0        r 


3' 

J 


Fig.  5. — Drill  and  sand  pump,  Rochester. 


"The  following  data  give  the  cost  of  the  drilling: 

Equipment,  including  rigging  scow,  ropes  and  anchors,  pipe,  etc..  $114.89 

Rental  of  scow  and  launch 139 .  00 

Labor: 

2  drillers  at  $4.00  per  day 

1  helper  at  $2.50  per  day 142 .  85 

Supervision 250 .  00 

$646 . 74 

Total  length  of  hole  drilled 372.5  ft. 

Cost  per  foot $1 .  74 

Average  depth  of  hole 12 . 4  ft. 

Cost  per  hole $21 .  56 


14 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Average  number  of  holes  per  day,  not  including  the  days  lost  because  of 
unfavorable  weather,  3. 

Average  number  of  holes  per  day,  including  those  lost  because  of  the 
weather,  2  1/2. 

"The  time  required  to  lower  casing,  do  the  drilling  and  to  remove  the  cas- 
ing was  26  hours  and  10  minutes  to  drill  226.4  ft.  of  sand  and  54.1  ft.  of 
clay.  This  gives  an  average  of  1  ft.  of  hole  every  6  minutes.  Much  time  was 
required  to  move  the  scow  and  anchor  it  in  position.  All  work  was  done 
2  miles  from  the  harbor  so  that  no  dhlling  was  done  any  day  before  10 
o'clock." 

In  Fig.  6  is  shown  part  of  a  profile  of  the  bottom  of  Lake  Ontario 
along  the  line  of  the  proposed  sewer  outlet,  which  illustrates  one  way  in 
which  the  results  of  borings  may  be  indicated  graphically. 

In  the  larger  part  of  Louisville,  Ky.,  the  soil  consists  of  loam  overlying 
fine  yellow  sand  or  clay,  below  which  are  sand  and  gravel.    In  the  east- 


'2M'-, 


6/wtf 
Clay 


250*- 


200' 


1000'  2000'  3000' 

Fig.  6. — Part  of  profile  of  site  of  Rochester  outfall. 


4000' 


em  section  considerable  ledge  underlies  the  fine  yellow  sand  and  some 
sandy  clay  is  found.  The  data  given  in  Table  2  fairly  represent  the 
amount  and  cost  of  borings  to  furnish  information  relative  to  the  char* 
acter  of  materials  to  be  encountered  in  excavating  for  the  sewers  built 
by  the  Commissioners  of  Sewerage. 

Table  2. — Data  Relating  to  Borings  at  Louisville,  Kt. 

(July-October,  1909) 

(Report  of  Commissioners  of  Sowerage,  Louisville,  Ky..  January,  1907,  January,  1910) 


_  -     ^,                1            _     .             I    Cost  per  foot 
Month              i            Feet                       ^          , 

1          (cents) 

Average  depth 
of  holes  (feet) 

1 

Remarks 

July 

1,274.5 
267.2 
157.0 
223.5 
161.1 

6.1 

9.6 

7.7 

17.9 

21.3 

19.6 
21.5 
21.7 
24.8 
20.1 
12.6 

Light  augers 
Light  augers 
Light  augers 
Light  augers 
Cased 
Light  augers 

"  ***  J 

August 

September 

October 

October 

October 

126.2     ,         11.5 

1 

Totals 

2,209.5 

9.2 

19.9 

PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS  15 

Core  Drilling. — This  method  of  drilling  has  ^the  advantage  that  an 
exact  sample  of  the  material  through  which  the  well  is  driven  is  obtained, 
and  may  be  preserved  to  show  the  exact  nature  of  the  soil  or  rock.  Of 
the  various  core  drills  the  most  common  types  are  the  diamond  drill  and 
the  shot  drill.  One  form  of  diamond  driU  is  described  by  its  makers, 
the  Sullivan  Machinery  Co.,  as  follows: 

"The  diamond  drill  consists  of  a  line  of  hollow  rods  screwed  together  in 
5  or  10-ft.  sections,  rotated  by  an  engine  through  a  shaft  and  gearing, 
and  fed  forward  by  either  a  hydraulic  piston  or  by  a  screw  feed.  At  the 
lower  end  of  the  rods  is  placed  a  bit,  in  which  pieces  of  'black  diamond' 
or  carbon  are  set,  and  which,  as  tbe  rods  are  rotated,  cuts  an  annular 
hole  in  the  rock,  leaving  a  center  pipe  or  'core*  undisturbed.  Water  is 
forced  through  the  rods  to  keep  the  diamonds  cool  and  to  wash  away 
the  cuttings  from  the  bit.  The  essential  feature  of  this  method  is  the 
core  or  section  of  rock,  which  is  formed  by  the  hollow  bit  and  rod  as  the 
drill  advances.  At  intervals,  usually  after  drilling  10  ft.,  the  rods  are 
withdrawn  by  means  of  hoisting  mechanism,  bringing  with  them  the  rock 
core,  which  is  caught  and  held  by  a  self -locking  'core-lifter.*  The  core  is 
then  removed,  the  rods  again  lowered,  and  the  process  repeated  until  the 
desired  depth  is  reached." 

The  shot  drills  are  operated  in  much  the  same  way  as  are  the  diamond 
drills,  but  in  place  of  the  diamonds  in  the  cutting  edge,  hard  chilled  steel 
shot,  w^hich  are  fed  into  the  bottom  of  the  hole  through  the  wash-water 
pipe,  work  their  way  beneath  the  cutting  edge  and  become  crushed  and 
embedded  into  the  softer  steel  of  which  the  cutting  edge  is  composed. 
The  process  is  described  by  the  McKieman-Terry  Drill  Co.,  makers  of 
such  drills,  as  follows: 

"The  actual  cutting,  however,  is  caused  by  the  breaking  of  the  shot, 
which,  being  of  chilled  steel  and  very  hard,  imbeds  itself  in  the  softer  material 
of  which  the  bit  is  composed.  This  action  produces  hundreds  of  minute 
pockets  or  cavities  into  which  these  small  particles  of  shot  are  constantly 
caught  and  dropped,  each  time  presenting  a  new  facet  which  mills  away  the 
rock.  This  action  keeps  up  until  the  shot  particles  become  so  small — 
practically  powder — that  the  flow  of  water  forces  it  up  the  bore  hole  above  the 
drilling  tools,  at  which  point  the  water  pressure  is  diminished,  and  it  falls 
back  and  settles  in  the  sludge  receiver,  together  with  the  ascending  detritus. 
When  working  properly  the  cutting  edge  of  the  bit  will  assume  a  half-round 
form,  which  keeps  some  of  the  shot  off  the  bottom  of  the  hole,  and  so 
produces  for  itself  a  sufficient  space  for  clearance,  both  inside  and  outside 
of  the  bit." 

Core  drills  have  the  added  advantage  that  they  may  be  operated 
through  water  as  well  as  through  the  earth,  thus  permitting  samples 
to  be  obtained  from  the  bed  of  a  river,  lake,  or  other  body  of  water. 
These  devices  are  available  for  operation  either  by  hand  or  horse  power, 


16  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

and  by  belt  or  gearing  from  gasoline,  oil,  or  steam  engines,  compressed 
air  or  electric  motors. 

The  cost  of  diamond  core  drilling  varies  within  wide  limits,  depending 
not  alone  on  differences  in  the  formation  encountered,  but  also  on  labor, 
fuel,  water,  availability  of  supplies,  living  expenses,  etc. 

The  Sullivan  Machinery  Co.  gives  the  following  costs: 

"A  careful  record  of  the  cost  of  drilling,  kept  by  a  Michigan  iron  mining 
company  which  uses  a  number  of  diamond  drills,  shows  total  drilling  costs 
(including  carbon)  ranging  from  $1.50  to  $2.00  per  foot.  A  large  Western 
coal  mining  concern  places  the  cost  of  its  extensive  diamond  drilling  opera- 
tions at  SI  per  foot  or  less.  A  large  number  of  holes,  bored  in  the  Lake 
Superior  iron  country  and  aggregating  over  11,000  ft.,  showed  costs  ranging 
from  $1.63  to  $2.65  per  foot.  The  cost  of  carbon  in  the  former  item  was 
19  cents  and  in  the  latter  $1  per  foot,  the  remainder  being  due  to  labor,  fuel, 
superintendence,  supplies,  etc.  A  Mexican  copper  mine  reports  the  cost  of 
4160  ft.  of  diamond  drilhng  as  $2.22  per  foot,  of  which  $1.03  was  due  to 
carbon  wear.  Eleven  hundred  feet  of  drilling  in  the  copper  formation  of 
southeastern  Arizona  cost  38  cents  a  foot  for  carbon,  and  $1.35  for  labor 
and  all  other  items.  The  expense  of  long-continued  coal  prospecting  in 
various  states  is  reported  as  follows:  Colorado,  $1.65  per  foot;  Tennessee, 
$1.26;  Indian  Territory,  $1.18;  West  Virginia,  $1.13  to  $1.50. 

"A  recent  compilation  of  statistics  with  reference  to  the  cost  of  diamond 
drilling  goes  to  show  how  variable  is  the  cost  of  such  work,  and  how  utterly 
impossible  it  is  to  fix  anything  more  than  general  rules  from  which  an  ap- 
proximate figure  of  cost  can  be  deduced.  Out  of  20  holes  drilled  through 
jasper,  marble  and  iron  slate,  and  varying  in  depth  from  110  to  1100  ft., 
the  average  cost  was  $3.14  per  foot.  Of  this  cost,  39  per  cent,  went  for  labor, 
22  per  cent,  for  carbon  and  the  remainder  for  fuel,  repairs,  supplies,  etc. 
Another  series  of  16  holes,  varying  in  depth  from  94  to  380  ft.,  with  an 
average  of  314ft.,  showed  an  average  cost  of  $2.70  per  foot.  Of  this  amount  38 
per  cent,  went  for  labor,  and  13  per  cent,  for  diamonds.  The  cost  of  drilling 
in  soft  schist  rock  was  as  low  as  SI  per  foot,  of  which  labor  formed  66  per  cent, 
and  diamonds  30  per  cent.  The  cost  of  drilling  in  hard  syenite  rock  was 
twice  that  of  drilling  in  tough  diorite;  the  cost  of  the  diamonds  in  drilling 
the  syenite  rock  approximated  63  per  cent,  and  the  labor  38  per  cent.;  in 
the  diorite  rock  the  carbon  cost  30  per  cent.,  and  the  labor  66  per  cent,  of 
the  total.  The  speed  of  drilling  varied  from  6  to  25  ft.  per  day,  and  the 
holes  had  a  mean  diameter  of  1-3/4  in." 

Frequency  of  Borings. — The  frequency  with  which  borings  are  made 
depends  on  the  existing  conditions,  the  requirements  of  the  work  in  hand, 
and,  in  some  cases,  on  the  relative  cost  of  excavation  in  different  classes 
of  material.  For  deep  sewers  laid  in  open  cut,  soundings  or  borings 
need  be  made  no  more  frequently  than  is  sufficient  to  show  the  approxi- 
mate location  and  kinds  of  the  several  classes  of  excavation.  If  in 
tunnel  work  the  grade  to  be  established  is  dependent  on  the  materials 
encountered,  then  borings  must  be  made  with  sufficient  frequency  to 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS  17 

furnish  information  for  the  preparation  of  a  complete  and  accurate 
geological  profile.  If  the  grade  is  already  established,  then  only  suffi- 
cient borings  are  required  to  enable  the  engineer  to  determine  the  feasi- 
bility of  the  location  and  the  approximate  quantities  of  each  of  the 
several  different  classifications  of  material  to  be  excavated. 

In  taking  notes  of  soundings  and  borings,  it  is  necessary  to  make  an 
accurate  description  of  the  location  of  the  test  hole,  to  state  the  method 
used,  to  record  the  elevation  of  th^  surface  of  the  ground  at  the  point 
and  the  depth  at  which  each  class  of  material  is  encountered,  giving  a 
description  of  the  character  of  each  material.  For  each  hole  an  accurate 
record  of  the  cost  of  drilling  should  be  made. 

These  records  should  be  made  at  the  time  the  work  is  performed,  and 
later  should  be  copied  into  the  official  record,  and  likewise  be  plotted 
upon  the  profiles,  each  classification  of  material  being  noted  by  char- 
acteristic and  conventional  marks,  so  that  each  classification  may  be 
quickly  and  readily  recognized,  as  was  done  in  the  Rochester  profile, 
Fig.  6. 

Surface  Conditions. — Record  should  be  made  of  the  extent  and  char- 
acter of  all  impervious  areas.  It  is  desirable,  when  practicable,  to  obtain 
the  areas  of  the  street  pavements,  noted  under  their  several  classifi- 
cations, such  as  asphalt,  brick,  granite  block,  wooden  block,  and  maca- 
dam pavements;  the  areas  of  sidewalks,  classified  according  to  their 
several  kinds;  and  the  areas  of  roofs,  yards,  and  passage-ways.  These 
should  be  recorded  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  possible  their  ultimate 
classification  by  sewerage  districts. 

Investigation  should  be  made  to  determine  the  approximate  level  of 
the  ground  water  at  different  times. 

The  location  of  all  outlets  and  points  of  discharge  of  all  public  and 
private  sewers  and  drains  should  be  carefully  recorded,  the  sizes  of 
pipe  noted,  and  memoranda  of  the  amount  and  character  of  the 
effluents  should  be  kept. 

The  daily  quantity  of  sewage  discharged  from  the  im{)ortant  sewers 
and  drains  under  wet-season,  dry-season,  and  mean-flow  conditions 
should  be  determined,  and  the  hourly  variations  in  rate  of  flow  should  be 
noted,  especially  in  the  case  of  those  sewers  which  carry  industrial 
wastes. 

Samples  of  river  water  above,  within,  and  below  the  city  should  be 
taken  and  analyzed  during  the  season  at  several  stages  of  the  river 
level,  and  particularly  at  the  low-water  stage. 

Investigation  should  be  made  of  the  condition  and  use  of  the  river 
above  and  below  the  city.  This  should  include  investigation  of  any 
litigation  due  to  contamination  of  the  river  water. 

Records  of  population  should  be  obtained  for  as  long  a  period  as 
they  exist,  and  estimates  of  the  density  of  population  should  be  made 

2 


18  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

at  the  time  of  the  mvestigation,  such  density  to  be  estimated  separately 
for  each  of  the  several  sewer  districts  into  which  the  conmiunity 
will  ultimately  be  divided.  This  subject  is  discussed  more  fully  in 
Volume  I. 

The  record  of  water  consumed  may  be  obtained  from  the  water  depart- 
ment or  company.  Such  information  should  cover  the  maximum, 
minimum  and  mean  daily  total  and  per  capita  consumption  during  each 
month,  and  the  annual  average  consumption  for  a  number  of  years 
previous  to  the  time  of  the  investigations. 

The  importance  of  compiling  all  available  data  relating  to  rainfall  was 
discussed  in  several  chapters  of  Volume  I.  While  records  showing  the 
daily,  monthly  and  annual  precipitation  should  be  made  available  for 
use  in  the  study  of  certain  problems,  it  is  much  more  important  to  secure 
records  of  intensity  of  precipitation,  as  it  is  this  rather  than  the  total 
quantity  which  governs  the  sizes  of  the  storm-sewers  or  drains.  Such 
records  covering  a  number  of  years  are  now  available  at  many  stations 
of  the  U.  S.  Weather  Bureau.  Occasionally  valuable  precipitation 
records  have  been  kept  by  private  parties. 

Materials  and  Labor. — In  order  to  be  prepared  to  make  close  estimates 
of  the  cost  of  the  proposed  work,  information  should  be  gathered  as  to 
the  prevailing  prices  upon  all  classes  of  material  to  be  used  in  the  work. 
Such  cost  should  include,  where  possible,  not  only  the  price  of  the 
material  and  the  freight  charges,  but  also  the  cost  of  distribution  to  the 
several  parts  of  the  city  where  such  materials  will  be  delivered.  Prices 
should  be  obtained  upon  cement,  crushed  stone,  screened  gravel,  sand, 
sewer  brick,  vitrified  sewer  pipe  and  specials,  light-weight  cast-iron 
water  pipe,  lumber,  manhole  and  catch-basin  frames  and  covers,  inlets, 
steel  reinforcement  of  various  types,  coal  and  wood,  loam,  various 
classes  of  labor,  foremen,  sub-foremen,  brickmasons  and  tenders,  stone- 
masons, carpenters,  blacksmiths,  engineers  and  firemen,  mechanics, 
bracers  and  semi-mechanics,  unskilled  labor,  and  single  and  double 
teams  including  driver. 

OFFICE  WORK  PRELIMINARY  TO  DESIGN 

Without  waiting  for  the  completion  of  the  preUminary  field  work,  it  is 
desirable  to  organize  the  drafting  department  and  begin  the  plotting  of 
maps  and  profiles,  so  that  even  before  the  field  work  is  completed  many 
of  the  maps  may  be  ready  for  the  studies  preliminary  to  design. 

In  plotting  the  surveys  of  city  streets  together  with  their  structures, 
both  surface  and  underground,  the  scale  to  be  adopted  will  depend  upon 
the  conditions  involved  in  each  problem.  In  general,  it  is  possible  to 
show  by  characteristic  lines  all  of  the  structures  in  sufficient  detail  on  a 
map  drawn  to  a  scale  of  1  in.  to  200  ft.    In  some  of  the  closely  built 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS 


19 


s 

a 

^ 

09 

9 

43 

QU 

-M 

-»A 

t 

S4 

0 

tS 

a 

«4-l 

V 

0 

0^ 

OS 

.a 

• 

& 

• 

0 

s 

-3 

c 

•H« 

66 

•^ 

Im 

0 

« 

u:: 

H 

sttnpuo;)   oj  •»/0i 


u*>U  "O,  SL  V  *ZI'  SI  Si 


**PUy9S9PH2/ 


H 
Z 
< 

O 


SjpU  1^9.9  Z£*2J 


tsn^/',s  o  9**e 


t/OtfUC  nr.  IMCfj 


20  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

up  cities,  with  numerous  pipes,  conduits,  etc.,  laid  at  random,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  make  such  a  map  on  a  scale  of  1  in.  to  100  ft.  Fig.  7  is 
reduced  from  such  a  -map  of  Scranton.  In  either  case,  except  for  very 
small  cities,  it  will  be  necessary  to  divide  such  a  map  into  several  sheets, 
in  which  case  it  is  desirable  to  have  all  sheets  of  the  same  size,  having  a 
general  or  key  map  drawn  to  a  smaller  scale,  say  1  in.  to  1000  ft., 
on  which  are  indicated  the  areas  covered  by  the  individual  sheets.  In 
some  Western  cities  with  rectangular  street  systems  the  maps  of  sub- 
surface work  have  the  street  widths  considerably  exaggerated,  and  where 
details  at  street  intersections  must  be  shown  to  scale  these  are  placed 
inside  one  of  the  blocks. 

On  such  maps  should  be  plotted  all  of  the  information  which  has  been 
determined  by  the  surveys,  such  as  the  street  lines,  car  tracks,  water, 
gas  and  sewer  pipes,  conduits  for  telephone,  telegraph,  electric  light  and 
heating,  together  with  all  manholes,  gate-boxes,  catch-basins,  and  othet 
buried  structures.  The  names  of  all  streets,  parks,  public  buildings, 
railroads,  and  water-courses  should  be  noted  and  the  points  of  compass 
shown  by  the  plotting  of  a  needle  indicating  true  or  magnetic  north, 
as  the  case  may  be. 

In  determining  the  weight  of  the  lines  and  lettering,  due  regard  must 
be  paid  to  the  ultimate  reduction  which  will  be  made  in  reproducing  the 
map,  if  for  publication,  so  that  the  lettering  and  lines  may  be  well  pro- 
portioned after  the  reduction  has  been  made. 

If  possible,  it  is  desirable  to  have  the  maps  reduced  by  an  amount 
such  as  to  give  an  even  scale,  such  as  1  in.  to  500,  800,  or  1000  ft., 
depending  upon  the  amount  of  detail  shown  and  the  size  of  the  maps 
desired. 

If  the  map  is  to  be  photo-reduced  it  will  be  necessary  to  use  colors 
which  can  be  reproduced  by  that  method.  Blue  reproduces  very  poorly, 
but  if  a  little  red  is  put  in  sepia  the  latter  will  come  out  fairly  if  the  work 
is  done  by  a  good  photographer. 

The  scale  to  be  adopted  for  topographic  maps  will  depend  in  great 
measure  upon  the  amount  of  detail  to  be  shown  and  the  area  covered. 
On  a  scale  of  1000  ft.  to  the  inch,  it  is  possible  to  plot  contours  taken  at 
5-ft.  intervals  in  rolling  country,  although  in  a  hilly  or  mountainous 
country  it  would  be  necessary  to  adopt  a  larger  scale  in  order  to  show 
sufficient  detail. 

The  topographic  map  of  Cincinnati  recently  made  under  the  direction 
of  Henry  M.  Waite  included  an  are^i,  of  about  102  square  miles.  It 
comprised  about  48  sheets,  the  scale  being  1  in.  to  400  ft.  and  the  contour 
intervals  being  2-1/2  ft.  on  slopes  of  6  deg.  or  less,  5  ft.  on  slopes  of  from 
6  to  12  deg.  and  10  ft.  on  slopes  of  more  than  12  deg.  Each  sheet  covers 
an  area  8000  X  11,000  ft.,  the  engraved  portion  being  20  X  27.5  in. 
About  150  miles  of  precise  levels  were  run  in  connection  with  this  work 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS 


21 


and  217  bench  marks  were  set.    The  approximate  cost  of  this  map  is 
given  in  Table  3. 

Table  3. — Approximate  Cost  of  Topographic  Map  of  Cincinnati 


Total 


Per  sq.  mi.    I      Per  cent. 


Triangulation 

Precise  levels 

Traverse,  plane  table  and  mapping . 

Reproduction  (200  copies) 

Office  expenses 


$5,326 

6,660 

38,242 

19,145 

4,837 


73,200 


$62 . 20 

55.40 

374.90 

187.70 

47.40 


$717.60 


7.27 

7.72 

52.25 

26.15 

6.61 


100 . 00 


In  addition  to  the  contours,  which  should  be  plotted  in  sepia,  if  prac- 
ticable under  the  method  of  reproduction,  the  water-courses,  swamps, 
etc.,  should  all  be  shown,  preferably  in  blue,  while  the  artificial  features, 
such  as  roads,  boundary  lines,  buildings,  and  all  lettering,  should  be 
done  in  black,  the  weight  of  lines  being  decided  upon  after  giving  due 
regard  to  the  possibility  of  reduction  in  reproduction. 

The  maps  which  are  to  be  used  to  show  the  proposed  sewer  system 
should  not  have  all  of  the  detail  which  has  been  plotted  on  the  regular 
city  maps.  In  fact,  it  is  probable  that  none  of  this  detail  is  required 
except  possibly  the  street  and  steam  railway  tracks,  thus  giving  ample 
space  to  plot  the  proposed  sewers  and  their  connections  in  a  bold  line. 
The  detail  maps,  however,  should  be  made  and  studied  with  considerable 
care  in  order  to  decide  upon  a  suitable  location  for  the  proposed  sewer 
in  each  street.  Where  possible,  it  is  desirable  to  have  the  entire  sewer 
map  on  one  sheet,  even  though  this  may  require  the  complete  re-plotting 
of  the  map.  If  this  is  not  practicable,  then  a  tracing  may  be  made  from 
the  city  map,  giving  street  and  alley  lines,  railway  tracks,  water  courses, 
parks,  the  important  public  buildings,  and  the  magnetic  needle;  on  this 
the  proposed  sewers  can  afterward  be  plotted. 

Profiles. — Profiles  of  each  street  in  which  sewers  are  contemplated, 
either  at  the  time  or  in  the  future,  should  be  plotted. 

The  scale  adopted  for  the  profile  will  dejjend  upon  the  profile  paper 
used,  and  the  detail  to  be  shown.  It  is  quite  common  to  use  Plate  B 
profile  paper  with  a  vertical  scale  of  1  in.  to  6  ft.  and  a  horizontal 
scale  of  1  in.  to  40  ft. 

In  such  a  profile,  in  addition  to  the  surface  of  the  ground,  there  should 
be  shown  an  approximate  profile  of  the  ledge  to  be  encountered,  as 
determined  from  the  borings  which  have  been  made,  these  boring 
being  shown  graphically  on  the  profile  to  the  depth  to  which  each  was 
taken,  and  the  material  through  which  the  soundings  were  made  being 
indicated  by  characteristic  and  conventional  signs.  All  sewers  and  exist- 
ing pipes,  conduits,  etc.,  which  intersect  the  line  of  the  sewer,  should  be 
shown  at  their  true  location  and  elevation  on  the  profile.    The  names  of 


22  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

all  cross  streets  should  be  indicated,  as  well  as  the  names  of  the  streets 
through  which  the  profile  runs.  The  kinds  of  pavement  to  be  excavated 
along  the  line  of  the  sewer  should  be  indicated,  with  arrows  to  show  the 
limits  of  each  class  of  pavement.  The  elevations  of  the  inverts  of  all 
pipes  and  structures  and  of  all  deep  cellars  should  be  indicated. 

Contract,  Specifications  and  Drawings. — Contract  drawings  showing 
practically  all  details  should  be  completed  before  contractors  are  re- 
quested to  figure  the  work,  thus  giving  them  the  benefit  of  a  complete 
knowledge  of  exactly  what  structures  are  to  be  built  and  how  they  are 
designed.  Such  drawings  should  show,  so  far  as  practicable,  all  avail- 
able information  bearing  upon  the  character  of  materials  to  be  excavated, 
the  location,  size  and  character  of  structures  likely  to  be  encountered  in 
the  excavation,  pavements,  car  tracks,  etc. 

The  contract  and  sf>ecifications  should  be  so  drawn  as  to  set  forth 
clearly,  and  as  completely  as  possible,  all  work,  requirements  and  condi- 
tions included  in  or  affecting  the  contract.  While  more  time  and 
expense  will  be  involved  in  preparing  drawings  and  writing  contracts 
and  specifications  setting  forth  clearly  all  details  and  requirements, 
the  net  cost  of  the  entire  project  will  usually  be  materially  less  than  if  the 
drawings  merely  show  in  a  general  way  what  is  to  be  done  and  the 
specifications  are  incomplete  and  obscure.  Too  much  care  cannot  be 
used  in  this  part  of  contract  work,  and  much  misunderstanding  and 
difference  of  opinion  between  contractors,  owners  and  engineers  can  be 
avoided  if  this  part  of  the  work  is  thoroughly  and  well  done. 

ORGANIZATION  OF  ENGINEERING  DEPARTMENT  FOR  CON- 
STRUCTION 

No  hard  and  fast  rule  can  be  given  for  the  organization  of  this  depart- 
ment, which  must  be  such  as  to  m£et  the  requirements  of  the  specific 
work  in  hand.  The  organization  must  have  structure  and  a  definite 
plan.  It  must  have  a  well-defined  line  of  authority,  and  individual  and 
departmental  responsibility  must  be  so  clearly  defined  that  it  may  be 
thoroughly  appreciated  by  each  individual  in  the  organization.  To  this 
end  the  work  within  each  division  or  department  must  be  clearly  out- 
lined, so  that  there  may  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  field  embraced  thereby. 
The  work  must  be  systematized,  and  a  thorough  system  of  accounting 
established,  so  that  the  cost  of  running  each  department  may  be  clearly 
shown.  Above  all,  there  must  be  good  esprit  de  corps,  cordial  co- 
operation and  good  discipline.  Toward  this  end  weekly  joint  meetings 
or  conferences  between  the  chief  and  division  engineers  at  headquarters 
and  occasional  visits  to  the  different  branches  of  the  work  are  very 
desirable. 

The  size  and  plan  of  organization  will  depend  largely  upon  the  size  of 


PRELIMINARY  INVESTIGATIONS 


23 


12 

.2    p 

•—  o  > 


E 
o 
o 


0) 

to 


1^ 


I 


8 

> 
d 

c 

w 
O 


€ 

to 


bfl 

& 

a 
o 

J 

a 
a 

o 
O 

**•         00 


1 


CL 

c 


o 


< 


f 


»» 

*» 

* 

O 

§ 

'1 

6 

< 

't 

c    o 

w     CD 


w 


a 
o 

-*^ 

03 
ei 

to 

6 

^^ 


c 
E 


24  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

the  undertaking.  An  example  which  may  be  helpful  to  engineers  about 
to  form  such  an  organization  is  that  of  the  Commissioners  of  Sewerage 
of  Louisville,  Ky.,  Fig.  8.  In  this  organization  the  work  was  under  the 
direction  of  a  sewerage  commission;  the  engineering  work  was  in  the 
charge  of  a  chief  engineer,  who,  together  with  his  consulting  engineer, 
reported  directly  to  the  commission  and  was  responsible  for  the  work  of 
the  entire  engineering  department.  The  several  departmental  en- 
gineers, one  of  whom  was  in  charge  of  the  headquarters  and  design 
division  and  the  others  of  different  divisions  of  the  construction  work, 
all  reported  to  the  chief  engineer. 

The  headquarters  division  engineer  had  control  of  the  drafting  de- 
partment, the  laboratory,  the  accounting  and  bookkeeping  depart- 
ment, and  the  department  having  charge  of  the  test  pits  and  borings. 
It  is  often  advisable  for  him  to  have  charge  also  of  the  preliminary 
field  surveys. 

Each  of  the  resident  or  division  engineers  had  an  office  assistant 
who  had  charge  of  the  records  of  the  division,  and  several  field  parties, 
each  with  an  assistant  engineer  in  charge,  and  also  a  force  of  inspectors 
in  charge  of  the  inspection  of  respective  sections  of  the  construction 
tvork. 

In  the  organization  here  shown  the  stenographic  force  served  the 
engineering  department  as  well  as  the  commissioners,  and  although 
their  duties  were  apparently  divided  they  were  directly  responsible  to 
the  chief  engineer,  whose  work  occupied  the  greater  portion  of  their  time. 


CHAPTER  II 

ENGINEERING  WORK  AND  INSPECTION  DURING 

CONSTRUCTION 

.  Laying  Out  Trench  Work. — There  are  a  number  of  different  methods 
in  use  for  staking  out  trenches  for  sewer  construction.  In  undeveloped 
country  stakes  may  be  driven  on  the  center  line  of  the  sewer  at  50-ft. 
intervals,  from  which  the  line  of  the  excavation  may  be  marked  off 
on  either  side,  after  which  the  stakes  are  removed  as  the  excavation 
proceeds. 

A  similar  method  may  be  used  in  city  streets,  except  thsit  in  place  of 
the  stakes  large  spikes  are  driven  into  the  pavement.  In  order  that 
these  spikes  may  be  readily  found  a  small  piece  of  heavy  canvas  about 
4  in.  square  may  be  placed  on  the  ground  and  the  spike  driven  through 
it,  thus  pinning  the  canvas  to  the  surface  of  the  street. 

Stakes  or  spikes,  according  as  the  sewer  may  be  in  undeveloped  or 
developed  territory,  may  be  driven  on  a  line  parallel  to  and  offset  a  few 
feet  from  the  center  line,  at  50-ft.  intervals.  In  choosing  the  side  on 
which  these  offset  stakes  or  spikes  should  be  driven,  due  consideration 
must  be  given  to  the  side  of  the  trench  on  which  the  excavated  earth  will 
probably  be  thrown  out,  the  stakes  being  placed  upon  the  opposite  side. 

If  it  is  possible  to  have  an  instrument  man  on  the  work  at  all  times, 
stakes  or  spikes  at  the  center  of  each  manhole  will  be  sufficient.  In  this 
case  the  line  for  the  opening  of  each  piece  of  trench  may  be  given  directly 
by  means  of  the  instrument. 

Reference  Marks. — In  staking  out  sewer  trench,  the  line  should  be  so 
referenced  that  it  may  be  readily  and  quickly  located  at  the  time  of 
construction.    Several  methods  are  used  for  this  purpose: 

1.  The  center  of  each  manhole,  where  the  sewer  is  straight  between 
manholes,  may  be  referenced  by  means  of  "cross  references"  intersect- 
ing at  the  center.  These  reference  points  must  be  such  that  they  will 
not  be  disturbed  and  yet  may  be  easily  re-located  and  readily  used.  It 
should  be  possible  to  set  the  transit  over  one  point  in  each  pair  of  refer- 
ences in  case  it  becomes  necessary  to  use  the  transit  in  finding  or  re-locat- 
ing the  center  point.  In  replacing  a  center  point  which  has  been  dis- 
turbed it  may  not  be  necessary  to  set  the  instrument  on  each  pair  of 
references,  if  these  reference  points  have  been  so  located  that  a  string 
•may  be  stretched  between  each  pair.  In  this  case  the  intersection  of  the 
two  strings  determines  the  center  of  the  manhole. 

25 


26  AMERICAIf  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

2.  Points  on  the  center  line  of  the  eewer,  including  the  centers  of  all 
manholes,  may  each  be  located  by  two  or  more  ties  taken  with  a  steel 
tape  from  nails  driven  into  trees,  poBt«,  or  fences,  each  properly  described 
so  as  to  be  readily  found.  In  making  such  ties  originally,  it  may  be  well 
to  hang  the  ring  of  the  tape  on  the  nail  so  that  the  ties  may  be  used  by 
one  person  without  assistance. 

Transferring  Line  to  the  Sewer. — If  the  ofFaet  method  of  staking  out 
sewers  has  been  adopted,  it  is  possible  to  locate  a  stake  in  the  bottom  of 
the  trench  as  it  neara  completion  by  measuring  the  offset  from  the  oRset 
stake.  This  method  is  not  recommended,  however,  inasmuch  aa  caving 
of  the  banks  may  disturb  the  offset  stake  and  the  use  of  bottom  stakes  is 
not  convenient. 

A  more  acceptable  method  of  determining  the  sewer  line  is  by  means 
of  "batter  boards"  located,  as  shown  in  Fig.  9,  at  25-ft.  intervals. 


Fio.  9. — Giving  line  and  grade  tor  pipe  sewers. 

The  method  of  erecting  these  "batter  boards"  is  as  follows:  2  X  8-in. 
planks  are  selected,  about  7  or  8  ft.  longer  than  the  top' width  of  the 
trench.  These  planks  are  set  up  edgewise  across  the  trench  every  25  ft. 
and  sunk  into  the  surface  of  the  ground  on  either  side  of  the  trench  to 
a  depth  of  5  in.  or  more,  and  held  securely  in  position  by  tamping  earth 
solidly  about  them.  In  paved  streets,  rather  than  to  cut  into  the  pave- 
ments outside  of  the  trench  lines,  these  planka,  or  preferably  4  X  6-in. 
or  6  X  6-in,  timbers,  may  be  set  on  the  pavement  and  weighted  down 
with  compact  earth  or  paving  stones. 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  27 

When  a  number  of  these  cross  pieces  are  in  place,  a  transit  is  set  up  at 
the  nearest  transit  point,  and  after  obtaining  line,  a  nail  is  driven  on  the 
true  center  line  in  the  top  of  each  of  these  cross  pieces  and  close  to  one 
(uniformly  the  same)  edge  of  it.  Pieces  of  3  X  1-in,  batten,  dressed 
all  around  and  about  3  ft.  long,  are  then  nailed  securely  to  these  cross 
pieces,  with  one  edge  (uniformly  the  same)  placed  on  line  as  determined 
from  the  nails  above  referred  to,  and  are  plumbed  by  means  of  a  car- 
penter's hand  level  or  a  plumb  string. 

The  level  party  then  establishes  a  grade  upon  these  battens  at  a  given 
distance  above  the  invert  of  the  sewer  and  drives  a  finishing  nail  (nail 
without  a  head)  horizontally  into  the  batten.  These  nails  should  be 
driven  into  the  "line  face"  of  the  batten,  and  the  distance  which  these 
nails  are  above  the  invert  of  the  sewer  should  be  clearly  marked  on  the 
face  of  the  batten.  A  stout  cord  is  then  fastened  around  the  batten  and 
drawn  up  over  the  nail,  at  the  same  time  resting  against  the  ''line  face" 
of  the  batten.  This  cord  is  then  run  to  the  nearest  batten,  drawn  tightly 
over  its  nail,  and  wound  around  the  batten,  and  if  it  is  desired  to  con- 
tinue the  line  over  a  longer  stretch  of  trench,  the  cord  is  then  run  ahead 
to  the  next  batten,  and  so  on  until  at  the  last  batten  the  string  is  firmly 
fastened.  If  the  battens  have  been  properly  set,  and  nails  .accurately 
driven,  and  the  cord  carefully  adjusted,  making  sure  that  it  passes  over 
the  nail  and  close  to  the  batten  in  each  case,  it  will,  therefore,  be  parallel 
to  the  invert  and  vertically  over  the  center  line  of  the  sewer. 

Checking. — The  alignment  of  the  battens  should  be  checked  by  eye 
immediately  following  their  setting,  to  detect  errors,  such  as  the  setting 
of  the  wrong  edge  of  the  batten  to  line,  etc.  The  alignment  may  be 
conveniently  checked  by  sighting  several  battens  with  the  naked  eye, 
and  in  doing  this  care  must  be  taken  each  time  to  allow  the  sight  to  in- 
clude two  or  more  battens  that  have  previously  been  checked,  so  as  to 
detect  a  sudden  break  in  the  line. 

It  is  not  sufficient  merely  to  check  these  lines  at  the  outset,  but  the 
inspector  should  cast  his  eye  along  the  battens  frequently  during  each 
day,  and  if  the  trench  has  any  tendency  to  settle  or  if  there  is  opportunity 
for  the  batter  boards  to  be  disturbed,  these  lines  should  be  checked  by 
instrument  at  frequent  intervals,  possibly  daily. 

Grades. — As  previously  stated,  it  is  desirable  to  have  well-defined 
and  accurate  bench  marks  established  at  frequent  intervals,  so  that 
the  instrument  man  may  obtain  the  height  of  his  instrument  directly 
from  a  well-established  bench  at  any  point  along  the  sewer  trench  where 
he  may  desire  a  "set-up. "  Having  determined  the  height  of  instrument 
from  such  a  bench,  it  is  desirable  to  check  that  height  of  instrument 
before  any  grades  are  given  by  a  sight  upon  a  second  bench  mark,  if  one 
is  available.  In  the  absence  of  a  second  convenient  bench  mark  it  is 
desirable  to  establish  a  turning  point  in  the  direction  of  the  next  adjacent 


28  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

bench  mark.  After  all  the  grades  have  been  given  from  the  one  set-up, 
the  second  bench  or  the  temporary  turning  point  should  be  carefully 
checked  to  satisfy  the  instrument  man  that  his  level  has  not  been  dis- 
turbed. Where  the  turning  point  has  been  used  a  secondary  set-up 
should  then  be  made  to  check  this  work  with  the  next  bench  mark. 

In  driving  nails  in  the  line  face  of  the  batten,  preferably  at  even  feet 
above  the  sewer  invert,  the  exact  position  of  this  nail  should  be  deter- 
mined by  the  rodman  by  holding  his  rod  against  the  face  of  the  batten 
and  at  the  same  time  holding  the  blade  of  his  knife  at  the  base  of  the  rod 
ready  to  insert  the  point  of  the  blade  into  the  batten  when  the  levelman 
signifies  the  correctness  of  the  position.  The  nail  is  then  driven  so  that 
its  top  will  be  level  with  this  cut  mark.  After  the  nail  has  been  driven, 
the  rodman  should  hold  his  rod  upon  the  top  of  the  nail  for  the  level- 
man's  check.  As  soon  as  the  nail  is  established,  the  rodman  should 
mark  upon  the  face  of  the  batten  the  distance  which  the  nail  is  above 
the  invert. 

A  more  convenient  method  under  some  conditions  is  to  hold  the  rod  on 
the  cross  piece  at  the  line  nail,  securing  its  elevation  and  computing 
therefrom  the  distance  above  or.  below  the  cross  piece  at  which  the  nail 
should  be  driven.  This  distance  may  be  measured  by  a  rule  and  the 
nail  driven  accordingly. 

Still  another  method  is  to  measure  off  the  proper  distance  on  the  batten 
and  mark  it  with  a  pencil  line  across  the  stick.  The  batten  is  then 
nailed  to  the  cross  piece  so  that  the  pencil  line  will  coincide  with  the  top 
of  the  cross  piece.  The  cord  is  then  drawn  over  the  top  of  the  batten, 
the  center  of  which  is  over  the  center  line  of  the  sewer.  This  is  probably 
the  quickest  method  and  in  the  hands  of  careful  engineers  has  given 
entirely  satisfactory  results. 

When  the  cord  is  tightly  drawn  over  these  nails  from  batten  to  batten, 
the  string  then  being  parallel  to  and  at  a  stated  distance  above  the  invert 
of  the  sewer,  the  grade  is  transferred  therefrom  to  the  invert  by  means  of 
a  graduated  pole  terminating  in  a  shoe,  shaped  like  a  bracket,  set  at 
right  angles  to  the  pole  in  such  a  manner  that  when  the  base  of  the  bracket 
is  in  the  invert  of  the  pipe  and  the  pole  held  plumb.  Fig.  9,  the  correct 
distance  is  established  by  raising  or  lowering  the  pipe  until  a  mark  on  the 
pole  agrees  with  the  distance  marked  on  the  face  of  the  batten. 

After  the  pipe  has  been  brought  substantially  to  its  true  grade,  its 
alignment  is  checked  by  means  of  a  plumb-bgb,  suspended  by  a  string 
held  lightly  against  the  stretched  cord,  so  that  the  point  of  the  plumb-bob 
rests  immediately  above  the  crown  of  the  sewer  pipe,  the  pipe  being 
moved  over  until  its  center  is  immediately  below  the  point  of  the 
plumb-bob. 

The  grade  nails  should  be  checked  frequently,  first  immediately  fol- 
lowing the  setting,  and  occasionally  throughout  the  day  by  sighting 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  29 

over  the  tops  of  a  half  dozen  or  more  to  make  sure  that  they  also  are 
in  a  common  plane,  care  being  taken  to  sight  over  at  least  two  nails 
that  have  been  previously  and  similarly  checked. 

Layout  of  Disposal  Works  and  Other  Structores. — ^All  structures 
should  be  staked  out  in  a  manner  that  will  permit  placing  reference 
marks  which  will  remain  permanent  and  accessible  throughout  the 
construction  period.  Many  of  these  reference  points  should  permit 
setting  a  transit  over  them.  The  reference  points  should  be  sufficient 
in  number  so  that  as  the  structure  grows  there  always  may  be  several 
points  from  which  the  line  of  sight  may  be  obtained. 

In  addition  to  these  p>ermanent  reference  marks  and  transit  points,  it 
is  of  great  advantage,  especially  during  the  period  of  excavation,  to 
make  use  of  batter  boards  placed  outside  the  line  of  excavation  in  a 
similar  manner  to  those  used  by  the  house  builder  in  excavating  for  and 
building  house  foundations.  The  posts  for  such  batter  boards  should  be 
firmly  driven  and  the  boards  placed  at  a  uniform  elevation,  correspond- 
ing with,  or  to  a  stated  distance  above  or  below,  some  important  grade 
of  the  structure.  The  lines  of  the  excavation  may  be  established  on 
these  boards  and  nails  driven  in  their  tops,  across  which  strings  may 
be  drawn  to  indicate  such  lines. 

When  a  large  area  is  to  be  excavated  to  one  or  more  levels,  these 
batter  boards  may  be  used  for  sighting,  and  the  finished  grade  of  excava- 
tion ascertained  by  a  stick  on  which  a  cross  stick  is  nailed  at  such  an 
elevation  above  its  bottom  as  corresponds  with  the  elevation  of  the  batter 
boards  above  the  grade  required.  In  this  way  a  number  of  points 
about  the  area  to  be  excavated  may  be  "spotted"  and  the  balance  of  the 
excavation  brought  to  conform  to  these  grades. 

Where  concrete  or  other  masonry  is  to  be  placed  directly  upon  the 
bottom  of  the  excavation  over  a  considerable  area  it  is  always  wise  to 
test  such  excavation,  just  prior  to  its  completion,  with  a  level  and  rod  as 
a  precaution  to  prevent  unnecessary  excavation  and  refill. 

Lines  and  grades  should  be  given  by  the  instrument  man  directly  on 
all  forms  for  masonry  as  well  as  on  all  other  structures  when  these  are 
first  placed,  and  such  lines  and  grades  should  be  frequently  checked  dur- 
ing the  progress  of  the  work. 

.  Before  the  work  is  laid  out  a  nimiber  of  bench  marks  should  be  estab- 
lished at  convenient  points.  The  elevations  of  these  bench  marks  should 
be  accurately  determined  and  the  benches  should  be  permanent,  easily 
accessible,  and  well  protected. 

Where  a  river  is  to  be  crossed  by  a  sewer  and  where  outfalls  are  to  be 
laid  far  out  into  a  body  of  water,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  have  the 
lines  so  referenced  that  they  may  be  re-established  accurately  and 
quickly  at  any  time. 

Where  possible  to  get  a  permanent  foresight,  a  conunon  method  is  to 


30  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

establish  a  transit  point  on  or  near  the  shore,  at  a  point  on  the  center  line 
of  the  proposed  structure,  which  can  be  readily  occupied  at  any  time 
during  the  progress  of  the  work,  either  directly,  before  the  excavation 
has  been  made,  or  by  means  of  a  platform  during  the  progress  of  the 
work. 

A  range  line  is  thus  established  between  this  point  and  the  per- 
mianent  foresight,  which  may  be  a  prominent  point  on  a  building,  such 
as  a  steeple  or  flag  pole  on  the  opposite  shore,  in  the  case  of  a  river  or 
small  lake,  or  a  target  upon  a  bunch  of  piles  driven  beyond  the  limits  of 
the  outfall  or  intake  in  the  lake  or  ocean,  as  the  case  may  be. 

To  establish  definite  points  on  this  range  line,  a  second  transit  may  be 
located  at  the  other  end  of  a  base  line  established  on  the  shore  of  the 
lake  or  the  bank  of  the  river,  this  base  line  being  of  such  a  length  as  to 
make  the  angles  of  intersection  between  the  base  line  and  the  line  of 
sight  to  the  various  points  along  the  line  of  the  structure  larger  than  45 
deg.,  if  possible. 

The  stadia  may  be  used  for  locating  points  along  the  range  line, 
provided  it  is  possible  to  hold  the  stadia  board  reasonably  quiet  during 
the  observation.  This  can  be  done  where  a  sight  is  given  from  a  heavy 
and  substantial  steam  launch,  raft,  or  scow,  but  is  not  practicable  with 
the  ordinary  rowboat. 

Another  and  very  positive  method  of  locating  the  center  line  of  an 
outfall  or  intake  is  by  means  of  batter  boards  upon  pile  bents  driven 
solidly  into  the  bottom  of  the  body  of  water  across  the  proposed  line  of 
the  structure.  The  center  line  can  be  established  on  these  batter 
boards  and  can  be  checked  up  frequently,  the  distances  being  measured 
directly,  using  extra  long  tapes  where  it  seems  necessary  to  make  the 
spacing  greater  than  the  length  of  the  ordinary  steel  tape.  In  this  case 
floats  should  be  provided  to  support  this  tape  at  intermediate  points. 

SUPERVISION  AND  INSPECTION 

All  construction  work  should  receive  careful  supervision  to  insure 
securing  structures  conforming  with  the  plans  and  requirements  of  the 
engineer.  For  this  purpose  it  is  customary  to  furnish  the  resident 
engineer  one  or  more  inspectors,  whose  duty  it  is  to  see  that  all  work  as 
laid  out  by  the  engineering  department  is  faithfully  and  accurately 
executed. 

It  is  the  duty  of  the  inspector  to  safeguard  the  permanency  of  all  line 
and  grade  boards,  reference  marks,  etc.,  and  he  should  satisfy  himself 
by  frequent  observations  that  such  boards  and  points  have  not  been 
disturbed,  and  if  in  doubt  as  to  their  accuracy  at  any  time  should  call 
immediately  upon  the  engineering  force  to  re-test  them. 

The  inspector  should  assure  himself  that  all  lines  and  grades  furnished 


ENGINEERINQ  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  31 

by  the  engineer  on  batter  boards  are  acciirately  transferred  to  the  struc- 
ture. In  sewer  work  the  inspector  may  choose  to  perform  this  work 
first  hand,  giving  the  line  by  means  of  the  plumb-bob  and  testing  the 
grade  by  means  of  the  grade  pole  as  already  described.  Where  the  work 
is  performed  by  contract,  specifications  usually  require  this  work  to  be 
done  by  the  contractor  "to  the  satisfaction  of  the  engineer/'  in  which 
case  the  inspector  may  justly  require  the  contractor  to  attend  to  the 
alignment  and  grading  of  the  structure,  the  inspector  satisfying  himself 
by  frequent  tests  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  work. 

All  materials  should  be  inspected  upon  delivery,  and  some  should  be 
again  inspected  when  they  are  to  be  put  into  the  work.  The  character 
of  workmanship  should  be  subject  to  constant  inspection. 

Pipe. — The  inspection  of  vitrified  pipe  is  described  in  Chapter  XI. 
Cast-iron  pipe  should  be  inspected  as  unloaded  from  the  car  and 
again  before  lowering  into  the  trench,  special  care  being  taken  to  note 
the  appearance  of  cracks  at  the  spigot  end.  A  heavy  cotton  mitten  or  a 
bunch  of  dusty  waste  may  be  used  to  rub  over  the  spigot,  both  outside 
and  in,  and  if  the  pipe  is  cracked,  the  dust  found  on  the  pipe  or  contained 
in  the  waste  when  rubbed  into  the  crack  make;;3  it  more  readily  visible, 
as  is  the  case  with  vitrified  clay  pipe.  Cracked  pipe  may  also  be  dis- 
covered by  "sounding"  with  a  wooden  mallet  while  suspended  or  on  the 
"roUs." 

Cement — Cement  should  be  delivered  sufficiently  in  advance  of  the 
time  when  it  will  be  required  for  use  to  permit  the  tests  required  under 
the  contract.  The  method  of  storing  and  tagging  will  depend  upon  the 
size  of  the  work.  Where  only  small  quantities  are  being  used  and  the 
cement  is  delivered  by  the  dealer  in  wagon  loads,  the  tagging  should  be 
done  when  it  is  unloaded  from  the  cars  into  the  dealer's  storehouse. 
Provision  should  be  made  for  setting  aside  that  portion  of  the  cement  to 
be  used  upon  the  sewer  work  so  that  the  dealer  will  not  send  it  out  for 
other  construction.  Under  these  conditions,  it  is  usually  necessary  to 
place  a  tag  on  each  bag  of  cement,  for  the  storehouse  is  not  likely  to  be 
under  the  eye  of  the  inspector.  He  can  be  sure  that  the  cement  de- 
livered has  been  tested  only  if  each  bag  is  tagged.  Upon  larger  work, 
requiring  a  number  of  carloads  of  cement,  where  the  contractor  must 
provide  a  special  storehouse  for  its  protection,  it  will  only  be  necessary 
to  tag  a  relatively  small  number  of  bags,  as  one  in  every  six  or  ten. 
Such  storehouses  are  usually  sufficiently  close  to  the  work  so  that  the 
inspector  may  have  a  reasonable  knowledge  of  the  quantity  of  cement 
on  hand  and  the  portion  which  is  being  delivered.  Where  large  quanti- 
ties of  cement  are  being  used  upon  several  different  portions  of  the  work, 
and  the  testing  is  done  at  a  central  laboratory,  it  will  be  found  convenient 
to  mail  from  the  laboratory  each  evening  postal  cards  designating  the 
numbers  of  the  carload  lots  of  cement  which  have  been  released  by  the 


32  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

tests  of  the  day,  thus  giving  to  the  inspectors  a  record  of  released  cement 
from  which  the  contractor  is  entitled  to  draw. 

Sand. — All  sand  should  be  inspected  for  its  cleanliness  and  suitable- 
ness, and  where  the  importance  of  the  work  justifies  it,  may  be  analyzed 
mechanically  to  make  sure  that  it  is  of  the  proper  proportions.  Experi- 
ence shows  that  some  sands  give  good  results  with  certain  brands  of 
.  cement  and  poor  results  with  other  equally  good  brands.  On  important 
hydraulic  work  some  engineering  firms  now  require  cement  to  be  tested 
with  the  sand  to  be  used  on  the  work,  as  they  have  had  to  change  brands 
on  important  contracts  because  of  this  peculiarity.  Taylor  &  Thomp- 
son, in  the  second  edition  of  "Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced,"  page 
159,  express  the  belief  that  "unless  the  sand  is  from  a  bank  of  known 
quality  it  is  even  more  necessary  to  test  the  sand  than  to  test  the 
cement,"  and  they  refer  to  the  tests  recommended  by  the  Joint  Com- 
mittee on  Concrete  and  Reinforced  Concrete  in  1909,  as  follows: 

"Mortars  composed  of  one  part  Portland  cement  and  three  parts  fine 
aggregate,  by  weight,  when  made  into  briquettes  should  show  a  tensile 
strength  of  at  least  70  per  cent,  of  the  strength  of  1 : 3  mortar  of  the  same 
consistency  made  with  the  same  cement  and  standard  Ottawa  sand.  To 
avoid  the  removal  of  any  coating  on  the  grains  which  may  affect  the  strength, 
•  bank  sands  should  not  be  dried  before  being  made  into  mortar,  but  should 
contain  natural  moisture.  The  percentage  of  moisture  may  be  determined 
upon  a  separate  sample  for  correcting  weight.  From  10  to  40  per  cent, 
more  water  may  be  required  in  mixing  bank  or  artificial  sands  than  for 
standard  Ottawa  sand  to  produce  the  same  consistency. 

"Since  the  relative  strength  of  sand  mortars,  which  are  free  from  organic 
or  other  impurities,  is  governed  by  the  sizes  and  relative  sizes  of  the  grains, 
mechanical  analysis  tests  are  recommended  by  the  Reinforced  Concrete 
Committee  of  the  National  Association  of  Cement  Users,  1909,  as  frequently 
of  great  value  in  selecting  a  sand. 

*'The  relative  strength  of  mortars  from  different  sands  is  largely  affected 
by  the  size  of  the  grains.  A  coarse  sand  gives  a  stronger  mortar  than  a  fine 
one,  and  generally  a  gradation  of  grains  from  fine  to  coarse  is  advantageous. 
If  a  sand  is  so  fine  that  more  than  10  per  cent,  of  the  total  dry  weight  passes 
a  No.  100  sieve,  that  is,  a  sieve  having  100  meshes  to  the  linear  inch,  or  if 
more  than  35  per  cent,  of  the  total  dry  weight  passes  a  sieve  having  50 
meshes  to  the  linear  inch,  it  should  be  rejected  or  used  with  a  large  excess 
of  cement. 

"For  the  purpose  of  comparing  the  quality  of  different  sands  a  test  of 
the  mechanical  analysis  or  granulometric  composition  is  recommended, 
although  this  should  not  be  substituted  for  the  strength  test.  The  per- 
centages of  the  total  weight  passing  each  sieve  should  be  recorded.  For 
this  test  the  following  sieves  are  recommended.* 

i  Sheet  brass  perforated  with  round  holes  passes  the  material  more  quickly  than  square 
holes.  Round  holes  corresponding  to  sieves  No.  8,  20  and  50  respectively  are  approxi- 
mately 0.125,  0.050.  0.020  in.  diameter. 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  33 

0.250  inch  diameter  holes^ 
No.  8  mesh,  holes  0.0955  in.  width,  No.  23  wire 
No.  20  mesh,  holes  0.0335  in.  width,  No.  28  wire 
No.  50  mesh,  holes  0.0110  in.  width.  No.  35  wire 
No.  100  mesh,  holes  0.0055  in.  width.  No.  40  wire 

"To  determine  the  percentage  of  organic  impurities,  the  silt  can  be 
removed  from  the  sand  by  placing  it  in  a  large  bottle  and  washing  it  with 
several  waters.  The  wash  water  is  evaporated,  and  the  residue  is  screened 
through  a  No.  100  mesh  sieve  to  remove  coarse  particles  which  do  not  affect 
the  strength.  The  silt  passing  this  sieve  is  weighed  to  obtain  the  percent- 
age of  the  original  sand,  and  then  ignited  in  a  platinum  crucible  to  determine, 
after  driving  off  the  water,  the  percentage  of  combustible  organic  matter. 
Although  data  on  the  subject  are  incomplete,  tests  by  Mr.  Thompson  tend 
to  indicate  that  if  the  silt  in  a  sand  has  more  than  10  per  cent,  organic 
matter,  and  at  the  same  time  if  the  organic  matter  amounts  to  over  0.1 
per  cent,  of  the  total  sand,  the  use  of  the  sand  may  be  dangerous."* 

Crushed  stone  and  gravel  should  be  inspected  as  to  character, 
quality,  and  condition  after  the  same  general  manner  used  for  the  sand. 
The  character  of  the  material,  particularly  with  reference  to  its  sound- 
ness and  suitability  for  the  work  in  hand,  is  of  importance  because  there 
is  a  great  difference  in  the  character  and  hardness  of  the  different  stones, 
Particular  care  should  be  taken  to  obtain  sound  stone  that  has  not  weath- 
ered badly.  The  limestones  may  be  distinguished  from  the  quartzite 
and  trap  rocks  by  the  use  of  hydrochloric  acid,  which  produces  effer- 
vescence when  applied  to  the  limestone.  Care  must  be  taken  to  have 
stone  which  is  reasonably  clean  and  free  from  dirt,  in  order  that  the 
cement  may  bond  the  stones  securely. 

It  is  desirable  to  make  mechanical  analyses  of  the  aggregate  from  time 
to  time  in  the  same  general  manner  as  of  sand,  in  order  to  get  the 
densest  and  most  economical  mixture.  The  mechanical  analysis  of 
sand  is  described  in  Volume  III. 

Brick. — Brick  should  be  examined  to  make  sure  that  deliveries  are  in 
accordance  with  the  contract,  and  that  the  brick  are  similar  in  hardness, 
size,  shape,  imperviousness,  composition,  color,  etc.,  to  the  sample 
submitted.  The  brick  should  also  be  clean  and  free  from  any  foreign 
coating  which  would  prevent  good  bond  with  the  mortar.  In  certain 
classes  of  work,  absorption  tests  must  be  made  to  determine  the 
porosity  of  the  brick. 

Reinforcing  steel  should  be  examined  when  delivered,  to  make  sure 
that  it  conforms  with  the  bill  of  materials,  and  the  cross-sections  of  the 

'  A  No.  4  sieve,  having  4  meahos  por  linear  inch,  parses  approximately  the  same  sise 
grains  as  a  sieve  with  0.25  diameter  holes. 

*  See  "Impurities  in  Sand  for  Concrete"  by  Sanford  E.  Thompson.  Tran*.  Am.  Soc.  C.  E., 
1909.     The  subject  is  also  discussed  in  Chapter  XIII  under  Mortar. 
3 


34  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

different  rods  should  be  measured.  It  is  desirable,  of  course,  that  the 
material  should  be  received  free  from  rust  and  mill  scale,  but  absolute 
adherence  to  this  requirement  is  difficult  of  attainment  in  practice  and 
will  involve  substantial  cost  which  is  generally  not  warranted  in  view 
of  the  protective  effect  of  mortar  upon  the  steel.  Any  serious  rusting 
or  pitting  of  the  material  should,  however,  be  sufficient  cause  for  its 
rejection. 

Miscellaneous. — Gates,  valves,  and  other  specials  should  be  examined 
to  make  sure  that  the  correct  number  of  the  various  sizes  as  called  for  in 
the  order  are  delivered,  that  they  conform  with  the  specifications,  and 
that  they  have  not  been  damaged  in  transit. 

All  other  materials  delivered  for  use  in  the  work  should  be  thoroughly 
examined  to  make  sure  that  they  are  suited  for  the  work  required. 

It  is  the  inspector's  duty  to  require  and  secure  the  quality  of  work- 
manship required  by  the  contract.  To  this  end  he  should  satisfy  himself 
that  pipe  inverts  are  smoothly  laid  and  set  to  the  proper  grade;  that 
joints  are  prepared  as  required  by  the  contract;  that  all  surplus  jointing 
material  is  removed  from  the  inside  of  the  pipe  as  the  work  progresses; 
that  water  in  the  trench  is  kept  below  and  from  within  the  pipe  until 
the  joints  are  perfectly  set;  that  concrete  is  mixed  in  proper  proportions 
and  of  suitable  consistency  and  placed  in  a  satisfactory  manner;  that 
concrete  forms  are  erected  to  the  lines  required,  and  so  constructed 
as  to  secure  a  satisfactory  surface  and  to  prevent  loss  of  water 
through  imperfect  joints. 

Ezcavatioii. — Although  inspectors  often  consider  that  excavation  and 
backfilling  require  but  little  or  no  inspection,  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  very 
important  that  due  attention  be  given  to  this  branch  of  the  work 
throughout  the  entire  period  of  construction.  In  fact,  carelessness  in 
excavation  or  in  backfilling  may  be  the  cause  of  great  inconvenience  and 
heavy  financial  loss,  due  to  the  settlement  of  the  surrounding  ground  and 
the  adjacent  buildings,  cracks  in  or  deformation  of  the  structure  being 
built,  and  like  troubles. 

To  prevent  the  occurrence  of  such  settlement,  it  is  very  important 
that  the  inspector  should  be  keen  in  his  observations  of  the  excavation  to 
make  sure  that  no  unnecessary  materials  are  excavated,  either  directly 
or  indirectly,  from  outside  the  trench  line;  that  the  bracing  of  the  trench 
d  sufficient  to  prevent  settlement,  and  that  the  sheeting  is  kept 
driven  sufficiently  in  advance  of  the  excavation  to  prevent  inflow  of 
materials  at  the  side  of  the  trench.  Where  quicksands  are  encountered, 
the  greatest  precautions  should  be  taken  to  prevent  boiling  of  the 
sand  with  its  resulting  tendency  to  cause  settlement  of  the  surrounding 
territory. 

In  this  connection,  when  material  is  to  be  traversed  of  such  a 
nature  or  under  such  conditions  as  to  be  likely  to  displacement  or 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  36 

flow,  which  may  cause  serious  or  damaging  settlement  of  adjacent 
structures,  it  is  well  to  take  photographs  (which  should  be  dated  on 
the  negatives)  of  the  adjacent  buildings  and  to  take  a  sufficient 
number  of  elevations  upon  the  buildings  so  that  complete  informa- 
tion may  be  had  as  to  the  condition  of  these  buildings  before  and 
after  the  execution  of  the  work.  Such  information  may  be  of  the 
greatest  value  in  case  of  litigation. 

Precautions  should  also  be  taken  to  prevent  the  excavation  of  material 
from  below  grade  except  where  its  inferior  quality  requires  its  removal 
and  replacement  with  more  suitable  material. 

Backfilling. — Careful  and  faithful  backfilling  is  of  the  utmost  impor- 
tance, although  frequently  seriously  neglected.  Where  underdrains  are 
laid  beneath  sewers,  the  inspector  must  see  that  they  are  properly  laid 
and  surrounded  with  screened  gravel  or  crushed  stone  and  that  the  refill- 
ing below  subgrade  is  thoroughly  done,  that  there  may  be  no  danger  of 
settlement  of  the  sewer. 

Underdrains  for  filter  beds  may  require  special  treatment,  in  which 
case  the  information  in  the  specifications  and  drawings  should  be  such 
as  to  afford  the  inspector,  as  well  as  the  contractor,  his  instructions. 

The  material  used  in  backfilling  around  pipe  sewers  should  be  fine  and 
free  from  lumps,  well  tamped  beneath  and  adjacent  to  the  sides  of  the 
pipes,  and  in  4  to  6-in.  layers  until  the  pipe  has  been  covered  from  6  to  12 
in.  in  depth,  and  where  settlement  of  the  surface  is  to  be  prevented,  the 
remaining  backfilling 'should  also  be  placed  in  layers,  each  thoroughly 
tamped.  If  the  material  is  dumped  from  a  height  exceeding  5  ft.  above 
the  top  of  the  masonry  or  pipe  its  fall  must  be  broken  by  a  timber 
grillage  or  other  means,  so  that  no  damage  will  occur 'to  the  structure. 

If  the  backfilling  around  and  beneath  the  pipe  is  not  carefully  and 
thoroughly  placed,  there  is  a  tendency  for  the  earth  to  settle  away  from 
the  pipe  and  leave  it  without  support,  so  that  the  weight  of  the  super- 
imposed earth  may  deform  the  pipe  and  cause  ultimate  failure. 

Removal  of  Sheeting. — Sheeting  driven  below  the  springing  line  of  a 
sewer  should  not  be  withdrawn  unless  absolutely  necessary,  as  it  is 
extremely  difficult  to  fill  the  voids  thus  left,  in  which  case  the  structure 
does  not  have  the  support  it  should  from  the  banks  of  the  trench. 

If  the  sheeting  is  drawn  after  the  trench  has  been  backfilled,  and 
especially  if  it  has  been  driven  below  the  springing  line,  care  should  be 
taken  to  fill  the  voids  thoroughly  so  as  to  prevent  the  ultimate  slumping 
of  the  earth  already  backfilled  around  the  pipe.  One  way  of  accom- 
plishing this  is  to  withdraw  the  sheeting  a  little  at  a  time,  as  the  back- 
filling progresses,  and  to  force  some  of  the  partly  backfilled  earth  into 
the  void  thus  left  by  the  withdrawn  sheeting  by  means  of  a  water  jet, 
consisting  of  a  1-in.  garden  hose  terminating  in  a  piece  of  3/4-in.  water 
pipe.    This  pipe  nozzle  can  then  be  forced  down  through  the  backfilling 


36  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

and  by  moving  it  up  and  down  the  partly  backfilled  earth  may  be 
washed  into  the  void,  thus  compactly  filling  it.  This  pipe,  if  of  sufficient 
length,  may  be  operated  by  a  man  on  the  surface  without  interruption 
of  the  backfilling. 

Where  it  is  considered  that  the  backfill  is  liable  to  settle,  it  is  not 
desirable  to  replace  the  paving  in  its  final  position  until  time  has  been 
allowed  for  this  settlement.  Consequently  paving  is  frequently  placed 
in  a  temporary  manner,  so  as  to  permit  the  passing  of  teams  and  traffic 
with  safety  during  the  period  of  settlement. 

Final  Inspection. — Notwithstanding  that  the  daily  inspections  may 
have  been  thorough  and  painstaking,  a  complete  and  systematic  inspec- 
tion of  the  entire  work  should  be  made  before  it  is  accepted. 

The  engineer  should  walk  through  the  entire  length  of  all  large  sewers, 
with  a  powerful  lamp  equipped  with  a  good  reflector,  to  observe  critic- 
ally their  physical  condition,  cracks,  abrasions,  leaks  or  defects  or  weak- 
nesses of  any  kind,  and  the  presence  of  foreign  substances,  such  as  lum- 
ber, bricks,  and  debris. 

In  passing  through  tunnels,  test  should  be  made  frequently  by  striking 
with  a  long  and  heavy  bar  for  hollow  sounds  resulting  from  incomplete 
filling  of  the  entire  excavation  outside  of  the  tunnel  lining.  If  any  such 
points  are  found  their  location  should  be  noted  and  marks  should  be 
placed  directly  upon  the  masonry  to  aid  in  re-location.  Such  voids 
should  thereafter  be  completely  filled  with  rich  cement  grout,  by  means 
of  a  powerful  force  pump. 

All  small  sewers  should  be  systematically  inspected  by  means  of  light 
thrown  in  either  by  reflecting  sunlight,  powerful  electric  lamps  with 
reflectors,  acetylene  lamps,  or  by  means  of  floating  lamps  or  candles. 

If  there  appears  to  be  considerable  leakage  into  the  sewer,  it  is  well  to 
measure  it  as  accurately  as  practicable  at  a  time  when  conditions  are 
favorable  to  infiltration.  At  certain  seasons  of  the  year  there  may  be 
little  or  no  infiltration  because  the  sewer  lies  above  the  surface  of  the 
ground  water,  while  at  other  seasons  it  may  be  under  considerable  head 
and  the  quantity  of  leakage  may  be  large.  Under  conditions  favorable 
to  infiltration  an  average  leakage  as  low  as  5000  gal.  per  day  per  mile  of 
sewer  may  be  considered  to  have  reached  the  practical  minimum, 
although  if  this  quantity  of  water  finds  its  way  into  the  sewer  at  a  single 
point  or  in  a  short  length  of  sewer,  the  leakage  may  be  considered 
excessive  and  the  re-construction  of  the  sewer  at  this  point  or  locality 
may  be  warranted.  The  subject  of  leakage  is  discussed  in  Volume  I, 
page  182. 

It  is  difficult  to  fix  upon  the  maximum  quantity  of  leakage  which 
should  be  permitted  and  beyond  which  the  sewer  must  be  repaired  or 
re-laid.  One  principle  to  be  borne  in  mind  is  that  it  is  useless  to  tear  up 
and  re-build  a  sewer  to  prevent  leakage  if  the  conditions  are  such  that 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  37 

there  is  a  probability  that  the  re-constructed  sewer  may  leak  as  much 
as  the  one  taken  out.  The  time  to  prevent  leakage  is  when  the  sewer 
is  b/eing  built.  If,  however,  in  spite  of  the  most  careful  work  and 
rigid  inspection,  it  develops  that  there  are  serious  leaks  in  the  sewer, 
those  portions  through  which  the  water  finds  admission  should  be  taken 
up  and  re-constructed,  or  the  sewer  may  be  encased  in  masonry  if  the 
leakage  is  localized. 

Leakage. — By  noting  the  increase  in  the  rate  of  flow  from  manhole  to 
manhole  or  section  to  section,  it  may  be  possible  to  locate  the  sections  of 
the  sewer  furnishing  the  larger  portions  of  the  leakage.  By  damming 
the  flow  just  above  this  section  of  the  sewer  by  means  of  movable 
plugs,  sand  bags,  or  other  devices  it  may  be  possible,  by  means  of  reflected 
light,  to  locate  the  source  of  leakage  within  the  section.  If  such  leakage 
is  found  to  be  local,  the  spot  or  spots  should  be  excavated  and  the  sewer 
or  the  house  drain,  as  the  case  may  be,  should  be  repaired  or  re-laid. 

In  connection  with  the  damming  of  such  sewers  for  the  purpose  of 
inspection,  care  should  be  taken  to  make  sure  that  neither  the  sand 
bags  nor  the  plugs  which  may  be  used  are  forced  into  the  sewer,  lest  the 
sewer  be  thus  plugged  in  a  manner  which  it  may  be  very  expensive  to 
remedy. 

The  entire  district  in  which  sewers  have  been  laid  should  be  traversed, 
and  the  backflUing  carefully  inspected  and  notes  taken  of  any  pave- 
ments which  should  be  replaced  or  trench  which  needs  repair. 

Relations  of  Engineers  and  Inspectors  to  the  Contractor. — So  many 
and  varied  conditions  affect  the  relations  existing  between  the  engineers 
and  inspectors  and  the  contractor  that  no  specific  rules  of  conduct  can 
be  formulated  which  the  engineers  and  inspectors  can  follow  in  all  cases. 
The  engineer  is  usually  in  the  position  of  judge  rather  than  advocate, 
and  it  is  for  him  to  interpret  the  contract  fairly  as  between  the  sometimes 
conflicting  interests  of  the  two  parties  to  the  contract.  This  position  is 
often  a  diflicult  one,  requiring  experience,  a  judicial  temperament,  self- 
control,  tact  and  firnmess. 

Much  difficulty  may  be  avoided  by  carefully  prepared  contract, 
specifications  and  drawings  showing  the  work  to  be  done  with  accuracy 
and  in  detail,  based  upon  a  general  scheme  well  thought  out  and  studied 
in  advance.  Under  ideal  conditions,  the  contract,  specifications  and 
drawings  will  tell  the  contractor  exactly  what  is  to  be  done  and  he  can 
base  his  bids. upon  a  nearly  complete  knowledge,  the  only  questions 
remaining  being  those  raised  by  conditions  which  cannot  be  known 
in  advance.  Ideal  specifications  and  drawings  rarely  if  ever  exist,  but  it 
should  be  the  effort  of  the  engineer  to  make  his  approach  the  ideal  as 
closely  as  possible. 

A  spirit  of  active  and  friendly  co-operation  with  the  contractor  should 
always  be  cultivated  by  members  of  the  engineering  corps  in  the  interest 


38  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

of  good  and  rapid  construction.  Under  such  conditions,  good  mutual  re- 
spect is  usually  soon  established,  and  if  the  questions  arising  in  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  contract  are  decided  in  the  light  of  common  sense  and 
fair  dealing,  the  work  should  proceed  under  harmonious  and  favorable 
conditions.  It  is  the  duty  of  engineers  and  inspectors  to  secure  the 
quality  of  work  required  by  the  specifications,  which  quality  should  be 
defined  in  them  as  accurately  as  possible.  As  a  rule,  it  is  scarcely  more 
expensive  for  the  contractor  to  provide  first-class  workmanship  than  to 
do  the  work  in  a  careless  and  slovenly  manner.  If  this  principle  is 
recognized  by  the  contractor,  and  his  work  is  so  planned  as  to  be  skillfully 
handled,  much  will  have  been  accomplished  to  secure  harmony  between 
the  engineering  force  and  the  builder  of  the  sewer. 

MEASUREMENTS  AND  ESTIMATES 

Preliminary  Measurements. — ^The  necessary  measurements  depend 
largely  upon  the  method  of  payment  stipulated  in  the  contract. 

In  trench  work,  if  payments  are  to  be  made  on  the  basis  of  ''unit 
prices, "  a  profile  upon  the  center  line,  using  stations  in  common  with 
those^  used  in  lajdng  out  the  work,  should  be  made,  and  where  ledge  is 
encountered  at  an  elevation  above  subgrade  it  must  be  profiled  before 
being  removed.  These  measurements  are  made  the  basis  of  payments, 
and  must  be  accurately  made  and  recorded. 

Where  the  contract  provides  for  payment  on  a  "per  linear  foot  of 
trench"  basis,  the  above  profiles  are  desirable  for  record,  although  not 
absolutely  necessary. 

For  sewage  treatment  works  and  other  structures,  the  surface  for  the 
entire  area  to  be  excavated  should  be  cross-sectioned,  together  with  all 
areas  of  ledge  encountered  at  the  start  or  during  the  progress  of  the  work. 
All  features  calling  for  special  payment  under  the  contract  should  be 
measured  up  in  advance  of  the  work,  such  as  the  number  of  square 
yards  in  all  pavements  to  be  removed,  the  area  and  average  depth  of  all 
top  soil  to  be  removed  and  reserved  for  future  use,  and  the  linear  feet  of 
piping  to  be  taken  up  and  re-laid. 

All  the  pipes  and  other  structures  encountered  by  the  excavation 
during  the  progress  of  the  work  should  be  carefully  located  and  a  full 
description  recorded  as  a  part  of  the  permanent  record. 

Final  Measurements. — In  trench  work  the  length  of  each  size  of  pipe 
should  be  recorded  as  laid  in  each  section  of  the  work,  and  an  accurate 
record  made  of  the  size,  location  and  description  of  all  branches  and 
specials  built  in  the  work.  Unless  the  engineer  is  constantly  upon  the 
work  it  may  not  always  be  practicable  to  secure  ties  to  all  branches 
before  they  are  covered.  Where  this  is  impracticable,  the  inspector 
should  provide  a  suitable  marker  which  can  be  measured  when  the 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  39 

engineer  is  next  available.  This  is  sometimes  done  by  placing  at  the 
branch  a  long  pole  which  extends  to  the  surface  of  the  street.  Other 
engineers  require  a  proper  mark  upon  the  sheeting  or  a  stake  driven*  at 
one  side  and  ''tied''  into  the  branch.  Many  mistakes  have  occurred  in 
the  location  of  branches  due  to  these  indirect  methods  of  measurement 
and  it  is  preferable  to  require  that  the  branches  be  left  uncovered  until 
measurements  are  taken.  All  structures  such  as  manholes,  catch  basins 
and  flushing  chambers  should  be  measured  and  carefully  recorded 
immediately  upon  their  completion.  The  length,  size,  location  and 
method  of  construction  of  underdrains  should  be  accurately  measured 
and  recorded.  All  sheeting  ''left  in  place"  should  be  recorded,  showing 
the  location  of  the  same  together  with  its  length  and  dimensions. 

For  sewage  works  and  other  structures  the  grade  of  all  finished 
excavations  should  be  taken  by  means  of  cross-sections  on  the  same  sta- 
tioning as  were  the  original  cross-sections,  and  the  limits  of  ledge  ex- 
cavation should  be  clearly  shown  by  the  records. 

Estimates. — ^Although  the  contract  may  only  require  the  making  of 
monthly  and  final  estimates,  it  is  frequently  desirable  that  the  engineer 
make  approximate  daily  estimates  of  certain  portions  of  the  work.  For 
example,  where  a  concrete  structure  is  being  built,  it  may  be  desirable 
to  make  daily  estimates  of  the  quantity  of  concrete  placed,  and  compare 
them  with  the  record  of  the  quantity  of  cement  and  aggregate  used.  The 
quantity  of  concrete  produced  by  the  use  of  a  given  quantity  of  cement 
and  the  required  proportions  of  aggregate  may  be  determined  approxi- 
mately by  the  use  of  Wm.  B.  Fuller's  formula.  A  comparison  of  the 
quantity  of  concrete  actually  placed  with  that  computed  in  this  way 
may  disclose  errors  in  mixing,  or  in  the  size  and  placing  of  forms. 
Fuller's  rule  is  simple  and  may  be  expressed  as  follows: 

"Divide  11  by  the  sum  of  the  parts  of  aU  the  ingredients,  and  the  quotient 
will  be  the  number  of  barrels  of  Portland  cement  required  for  1  cu.  yd. 
of  concrete.  The  number  of  barrels  of  cement  thus  foi^nd,  multiplied 
respectively  by  the  "parts"  of  sand  and  stone,  will  give  the  number  of 
barrels  of  each  required  for  1  cu.  yd.  of  concrete,  and  multiplying  these 
values  by  3.8  (the  number  of  cubic  feet  in  a  barrel),  and  dividing  by  27 
(the  number  of  cubic  feet  in  a  cubic  yard),  will  give  the  quantities  of  sand 
and  stone,  in  fractions  of  a  cubic  yard,  needed  for  1  cu.  yd.  of  concrete. 
To  express  this  rule  in  the  shape  of  formulas:  Let  c  »  number  of  parts 
cement;  s  =  number  of  parts  sand;  g  =  number  of  parts  gravel  or  broken 
stone;  then  P  =  ll-4-(cH-«H-(7)=  number  of  barrels  Portland  cement 
required  for  1  cu.  yd.  of  concrete.  S,SPg/27  =  number  of  cubic  yards  of 
stone  or  gravel  required  for  1  cu.  yd.  of  concrete."  (Taylor  &  Thompson's 
"Concrete,"  second  edition,  page  16.) 

Measurements  should  be  taken  monthly  covering  the  total  amount 
of  work  done  to  date  under  each  of  the  items  of  work  as  enumerated  in 


40  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

the  contract.  These  measurements  should  be  approximately  complete 
and  serve  as  the  basis  of  the  monthly  estimates  upon  which  the  con- 
tractor draws  his  intermediate  payments. 

At  the  completion  of  each  portion  of  the  work  and  at  the  completion 
of  the  entire  undertaking,  final  measurements  should  be  taken  with 
necessary  accuracy,  to  determine  the  actual  amount  of  work  performed 
upon  which  final  payments  are  to  be  made  to  the  contractor.  The 
computations  for  these  final  statements  should  be  carefully  made, 
systematically  arranged  on  computation  sheets,  thoroughly  and  intelli- 
gently checked,  and  carefully  preserved  as  a  part  of  the  construction 
records.. 

RECORDS 

All  records  made  in  staking  out  sewer  trenches  and  structures  should 
be  preserved  in  standard  note-books.  Such  records  should  be  syste- 
matically arranged,  so  that  all  steps  are  shown  and  are  easily  intelligible. 
They  should  be  thoroughly  indexed  during  the  progress  of  the  work. 

For  sewer  work  these  notes  should  show  not  only  the  elevation  of  the 
invert  for  each  station  where  grades  are  given  but  also  the  rate  of  grade, 
or  slope  of  sewer,  the  size  of  sewer,  the  elevations  given  upon  the  batter 
boards  or  grade  pegs,  and  all  level  notes  by  means  of  which  such  eleva- 
tions are  given.  All  secondary  readings  given  in  "checking  up"  of 
grades  should  also  be  recorded.  A  form  of  notes  suggested  for  the 
staking  out  of  sewers  is  shown  in  Fig.  10. 

It  takes  but  a  little  time  to  record  the  character  of  the  soil  encountered 
in  trench  excavation,  and  it  is  highly  desirable  that  such  records  be  made. 
The  information  may  be  of  service  nob  alone  to  the  department  for 
which  the  work  is  undertaken,  but  also  to  other  departments,  public 
service  corporations  and  private  parties  having  occasion  later  to  excavate 
in  the  same  locality.  Such  records  should  show  the  characteristics 
of  the  various  soils,  ledge,  etc.,  together  with  a  memorandum  as  to  the 
elevation  of  ground  water,  note  being  made  of  the  seeison  of  the  year,  the 
weather  and  temperature  to  afford  as  much  information  as  possible  as 
to  the  conditions  existing  at  the  time  the  data  were  recorded. 

Accurate  location  of  all  pipes,  culverts,  conduits  and  other  biuied 
structures  encountered  in  the  excavation  should  be  made  and  recorded 
permanently.  Each  sheet  should  be  dated  and  the  initials  of  the 
note-taker  preserved. 

All  official  computations  should  be  made  on  standard  computation 
sheets,  each  sheet  being  headed  with  a  description  of  the  computation 
involved,  together  with  the  date  and  initials  of  the  computer,  each  in  a 
space  allotted  for  it  near  the  head  of  the  sheet.  To  prevent  loss  of 
such  sheets  during  computation,  it  is  desirable  to  keep  them  at  all  times 
in  a  ring-book,  and  when  any  set  of  computations  is  completed  they 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DVRINa  CONSTRUCTION  41 

should  be  fastened  together  on  the  left-haad  edge,  so  that  they  may  still 
be  used  in  the  ring-book  if  desirable,  clearly  marked  on  a  title  page,  and 
if  not  required  for  frequent  reference,  filed  away.  AU  such  computation 
sheets  should  show  the  source  of  all  information  by  means  of  reference 
to  the  note-books,  diagrams  or  other  data  used  in  the  computation. 
The  summarized  findings  should  always  be  clearly  indicated  to  save 
time  in  assembling  and  checking  data.  The  use  of  red  ink  for  record- 
ing the  results  will  save  time  and  lessen  the  chance  for  oversight. 


Flo,  lO.^Form  of  notes  for  staking  out  sewer  grades;  kept  on  facing  pages 

of  note-book. 

Eaoh  of  Ihe  tvo  Ragca  a[  thia  note-book  i*  4|  in,  wide  and  7  in.  hiah.    The  rujini  an  the 

i>  blue  e.tppt  for  n  verl'ii-Bl  red  line  down  the  center.  The  line*  aie  A  in.  »PBrt  verUcally 
and  horiiunmlly.  Th<-  il.ilc  of  the  work  and  the  initials  of  the  inatriunentmui,  lodman  and 
note-taker  ahuuld  be  placed  on  the  top  of  one  of  the  pofica. 

Each  field  note-book  should  be  thoroughly  indexed  within  its  own 
covers  on  pages  allotted  for  the  purpose  at  the  b^inning  of  the  book. 
This  index  should  also  be  recorded  in  a  general  office  index,  either  in  a 
book  provided  for  the  purpose  or  in  a  card  index. 

As  the  completed  structures  rarely  conform  exactly  with  contract  or 
preliminary  drawings,  it  is  important  and  customary  to  provide,  at  the 
completion  of  the  work,  record  drawings  showing  in  detail  the  structures 
as  finally  complete<l. 

Record  drawings  may  be  provided  by  making  alterations  upon  the 


42  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

tracings  of  the  contract  drawings,  although  usually  it  is  better  to  make 
new  drawings  for  this  purpose.  One  reason  why  this  latter  course  is 
preferable  is  that  it  makes  it  possible  to  preserve  unaltered  the  original 
preliminary  or  contract  drawings.  Either  the  originals,  or  copies  of 
contract  drawings,  should  always  be  preserved  for  future  reference,  at 
least  until  final  settlement  has  been  made  with  the  contractor  and  all 
claims  for  damages  arising  out  of  the  contract  have  been  fully  satisfied, 
and  where  practicable,  it  is  desirable  to  keep  them  indefinitely,  as 
questions  are  likely  to  arise  in  the  consideration  of  which  the  contract 
drawings  may  be  of  considerable  value. 

Record  drawings  should  show  the  exact  location  and  dimensions  of  all 
specials,  branches,  house  connections,  manholes,  flush- tanks,  catch- 
basins,  inlets  and  the  details  of  all  other  structures  built.  They  should 
show  the  elevation  of  inverts  and  the  slopes  of  sewers,  and  should  have 
upon  them  references  to  note-books  containing  the  data  upon  which  the 
drawings  are  based. 

Record  profiles  are  often  made  and  are  frequently  helpful  in  future 
studies.  They  may  be  placed  upon  the  sheets  upon  which  the  other 
record  drawings  are  made,  or  they  may  be  drawn  upon  separate  sheets, 
as  proves  more  desirable.  They  should  show  the  kind,  size,  slope  and 
elevation  of  the  sewer,  and  where  practicable,  it  may  be  well  to  indicate 
the  kinds  and  stratification  of  the  materials  excavated.  They  should 
show  the  location  and  names  of  cross-streets  and  alleys,  and  location  of 
pipes,  conduits  and  other  structures  encountered. 

In  most  cases  a  scale  of  1  in.  to  40  ft.  will  be  found  practicable  and 
most  convenient  for  record  drawings  and  for  record  profiles  1  in.  to  40  ft. 
for  the  horizontal  scale  and  1  in.  to  4  ft.  for  the  verti?al  scale. 
Elevations  and  sections  of  details  are  preferably  made  on  a  scale  of 
1/4  in.  to  1  ft.  or  1/2  in.  to  1  ft.,  depending  upon  the  size  and  character 
of  the  detail. 

Tracing  cloth  of  the  best  quality  has  proved  satisfactory  for  record 
drawings.  Where  the  drawings  are  subject  to  frequent  use,  prints 
should  be  provided,  bound  in  loose  leaf  covers,  and  the  original 
drawings,  laid  flat,  should  be  filed  in  a  dry,  fire-proof  vault.  The 
originals  should  be  used  only  for  the  reproduction  of  prints  and  for 
making  additions  or  corrections  from  time  to  time,  as  may  be  required. 
The  older  practice  of  using  egg  shell  paper  mounted  on  musUn  for  record 
drawings  has  the  distinct  advantage  that  changes  can  be  made  without 
serious  injury  to  the  paper.  This  material,  however,  is  subject  to  the 
great  disadvantage  that  reproduction  from  it  can  only  be  made  by  trac- 
ing or  photography. 

Record  profiles  are  preferably  made  on  tracing  cloth,  although  the 
comments  already  made  with  reference  to  other  record  drawings  apply 
to  the  record  profiles.    As  all  papers  and  cloths  are  subject  to  shrinkage, 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  43 

it  is  desirable  upon  important  work  to  provide  vertical  and  horizontal 
graphical  scales,  from  which  the  amount  of  shrinkage  in  either  direction 
may  be  determined.  This,  however,  is  rarely  done  and  will  probably 
prove  of  little  use  if  all  dimensions  are  shown,  which  is  very  desirable. 

Photographs  should  be  taken  before,  during  and  upon  the  completion 
of  all  work.  It  is  highly  desirable  that  these  photographs  should  be 
taken  at  comparatively  regular  intervals  in  order  to  give  thereby  a  clear 
conception  of  the  rate  of  progress  of  the  construction  work.  If  it  is 
possible  to  select  a  few  points  where  periodical  photographs  may  be 
taken  with  the  camera  pointed  in  exactly  the  same  direction  each  time, 
the  uniformity  of  the  view  will  be  of  great  help  in  comprehending  the 
progress  which  has  been  made  in  the  interval  between  consecutive  photo- 
graphs. Sometimes  it  may  prove  desirable  to  erect  a  semi-permanent 
scaffold  or  stage  at  two  or  three  well-chosen  points,  so  as  to  elevate  the 
camera  and  thus  prevent  to  some  extent  the  foreshortening  which  may 
take  place  when  the  camera  is  used  from  the  surface  of  the  ground. 

Photographs  are  useful  in  many  wa3r8.  They  serve  to  convey  to  the 
owner,  chief  engineer  and  others  who  are  interested  in  the  work  but 
are  unable  to  watrh  its  progress,  a  clear  conception  of  the  progress  of  the 
work.  They  serve  as  a  record  which  often  carries  more  weight  in  legal 
proceedings  than  does  a  written  report.  The  fact  that  systematic  and 
well-chosen  photographs  are  preserved  may  deter  parties  from  pursuing 
doubtful  claims  through  the  coiirts.  Photographs  showing  the  details 
of  construction  are  a  valuable  record  of  methods  of  construction. 

Each  photograph  should  be  assigned  a  number  conforming  to  some 
definite  system  of  numbering  and  each  plate  and  film  should  be  per- 
manently marked  with  its  assigned  number,  its  date  and  a  brief  descrip- 
tion to  identify  it.  It  is  desirable  that  this  notation  should  be  on  the 
gelatin  side  of  the  films  and  plates  and  the  lettering  should  be  executed 
backward  or  in  reverse  type  (photoscript)  so  that  in  printing,  it  may 
be  easily  read. 

COST  KEEPING 

Well  kept  records  of  the  cost  furnish  the  engineer  and  sewer  builder 
with  information  which  may  be  useful  in  forming  estimates  for  future 
work  of  similar  nature  conducted  under  similar  conditions.  Such 
records,  provided  they  are  promptly  and  accurately  worked  up,  enable 
the  engineer  to  ascertain  during  the  progress  of  the  work  the  degree  of 
eflSciency  developed  by  the  organization.  With  this  information  it  is 
frequently  possible  for  the  engineer  to  call  the  attention  of  the  con- 
tractor to  conditions  which  are  the  cause  of  inefiicient  results,  thus 
enabling  the  contractor  to  place  the  work  upon  a  more  profitable  basis. 
Where  the  work  is  bei^g  done  by  direct  labor  an  effective  system  of  cost 
accounting  may  result  in  a  large  saving  in  expense. 


44 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


o 

% 

o 

o 
y 

H 

o 

Q 
H 

00 

I 


-«3     5 


o 


NecessaxyData. — Information 
should  be  recorded  under  main 
divisions  of  engineering  and  su- 
pervisioEf,  labor,  materials,  ma- 
chinery and  tools,  and  overhead 
charges  of  contractor  or  direct 
labor  organization. 

All  labor  employed  should  be 
classified  according  to  the  rates 
of  pay  and  the  work  performed 
by  the  several  classes  of  labor, 
such  classifications  being  made 
under  each  item  of  work  for 
which  separate  pa3anents  are 
provided  in  the  contract.  If  the 
work  is  divided  into  sections, 
then  similar  records  should  be 
kept  separately  for  each  section 
of  the  work. 

Similarly  for  each  item  of  the 
contract  in  each  section  of  the 
work  a  record  should  be  kept  of 
the  kind  and  grade  of  material, 
rated  according  to  the  price  paid 
for  each. 

Similar  classifications  and  dis- 
tributions should  be  kept  under 
this  heading  for  each  type  of 
machine  and  for  machines  of  va- 
rious rental  rates. 

There  are  many  items  the  cost 
of  which  cannot  be  directly 
charged  to  any  one  part  of  the 
work.  Such  charges  may  be 
anticipated,  in  part,  at  the  out- 
set, and  the  cost  distributed  pro 
rata  to  the  several  subdivisions 
of  the  entire  work  from  month  to 
month  as  the  work  progresses,  in 
order  that  each  item  may  bear 
its  proportional  part  of  the  en- 
tire expense  and  thus  be  on  a 
comparable  basis  at  all  times. 
At  the  close  of  the  work,  and 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION   45 


a 


e^ 


c 


H  ^ 


& 


e 

QQ    o 

2  - 

•<   a 

o 

go 

g   o 

^  8 

g  § 

tf  .^ 
O    B 

«s 

<<  g 

2 -a 

O  OQ 
W  - 
«  B 

J;  «3 

i 


s 

a 
ir 


Value 
remain- 
ing 

0.00 
27.00 

• 

CI 

• 

o 
O 

10% 
18.00 

6.67% 

to 

1-t 

— 

10% 
9.00 

25% 
46.00 

40% 

n 

■ 

Aug. 

h«     ■  o     .  to     •  O     •                   h»     • 
ci^Of-ieocO"*                     CO 

IM              tH              KH              lO 

40  %         66  % 
62.00  i  85.26 

CO 

o 

00 

- 

July 

O      -to      'O      'O      -Q      -flO      -to 

-4a»^t*e4r-4CiXdco   v  ^  n  '-*  ao 
d       CI       ^       ra   g 

61%    '     28% 
27.50       12.50 

§ 

•-> 

- 

15% 
13.50 

20% 
36.00 

25% 
27.00 

25% 
22.60 

>us  instal 

15% 

5.40 

20% 

10.80 

20% 

32.00 

6% 

7.75 

— 

• 

6?8  6^8  ^8  ^8        g  ^S 

30%        25% 
16.20      13.50 

30% 
48.00 

11% 
5.00 

April 

26% 
22.50 

30% 
54.00 

20% 
21.60 

chased  ii 
25% 
9.00 

40% 
64.00 

s 

ui 

• 

— 

30% 
27.00 

3% 
5.40 

!ms  pur< 

30% 

10.80 

3% 

1.63 

10% 

16.00 

Use 

Excavation 

Excavation 

Excavation 

Excavation 

Excavation 
allowed  for  it 

Excavation 

54.00  '  Excavation 

160.00     See  separate 

sheet 
165.00  '           do. 

d 

8 

CI 
CI 

s 

c 
£ 

c 

X 

X 

Si 

w. 

•v. 

.      5 

c 

'                                  foundation 
6 ' l.^i      ."^n  tons    0.90      46.00      Foundation 

underdrains 
culverts 

!0Bt 

vered 

Amount 

90.00 
180.00 
108.00 

• 

90.00 

180.00 
lould  be 

36.00 

Crushed  Stone         i                  *                , 
4/in    .  2.'i  tons ' 0.90       22.50 

Material              ;  Quantity;       deli 

g 

8     8     8     8     S:     8 

X          X          X          X          X    S          (X, 

•-<       f^       r^       ^M       ^^  .a       ^ 
^       *i       ^       ^       *i  S       ^ 

•m             «m             (m             V«             ***      c8             ^ 

,4         ^         <4        ,<        S    eS         ^ 
to         O         CO         >o         O    ^        d 

:       :       :       :       '5 

.M         ^         ^         .^         .M    O 

u  0.      a       a      ft      a       ^ 
1 1  fl       fl      .S       S       S      1  .£ 

C      mm»                  •#«                  •"*                  '^                  •**                     ^        ^ 

^X        X        00        X        X        'C  <c 
X       X       X       X       X           X 

.9      .5      .2      .9      .9          .£ 

CI           M           CI           CI           d                  0* 

4  in.  V  6  in 3M  ft.    '    18.00 

g 

i: 

i 

c 

OD 

2 
>      M 

Date 

*o       o                 Ui 
CO       CI       ^       -^       -^            r: 

,:i-      "^      ^      \      "^          "^ 

eo       CO       -*       lO       fc*            p: 

Ui 

)           CJ 

1          CJ 

1          iC 

46 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


in  large  undertakings  at  intermediate  times,  such  figures  should  be 
computed  with  accuracy  and  the  preliminary  figures  revised  accordingly. 
The  overhead  charges  and  the  incidental  expense  to  be  thus  distributed 
will  include  the  following  items :  Field  office  rentals ;  salaries  of  superin- 
tendents, timekeepers,  bookkeepers  and  clerks;  cost  of  office  labor 
and  supplies;  maintenance  and  depreciation  of  vehicles;  rental;  value 
of  horses  and  carriages;  cost  of  transportation  of  labor;  telephone 
charges,  insurance,  liability  insurance,  and  miscellaneous  expenses. 


\                                                                                  — 

^/^wrrr/fi^/Kc^t  jaL««^<^.^         force  Aocounti^ TfUt^. ^. \  9  /A 

» 

Tortal 

Cxcotv. 

npeUiyinq 

Backfill 

Repocvinq 

ICoTKretel 

r: — 1 

T, 

Hri 

Airrr. 

/ 

Amt. 

/ 

Aifir. 

irs 

Amr. 

irs. 

Amt. 

Mrs 

Anrt.  |Hri 

Amr. 

Amr. 

Supt. 

.i5r 

s 

/.^ 

^ 

A 

fbremen         \.9f 

ytr 

P 

y 

/ 

Z 

M 

.^ 

1 

Ifr- 

9 

Mechanics  Carp 

,fr 

f 

1 

■  •*      Bracers 

Af 

7/ 

tf 

t4 

. 

Masons 

•*      Helper? 

Rovers 

9 

f 

•*      Helpers 

i 

f 

hpe  Layers       .ir 

f 

1 

- 

"     "Assts.  .IS" 

f 

f 

Pipe  lenders 

.25- 

f 

9 

Mortarmen 

.2(r 

9 

9 

Laborers    ' 

Pi 

^ 

Uf 

ft 

7ff 

36 

71 

u 

M 

l\jmpers,DaY 

H 

9 

**       Niqhr 

jiX. 

ts 

If 

Teams  Doubk 

**      Single 

$r 

9^ 

^^ 

9 

Total 

M 

yyr 

n 

Tfji 

t* 

^i 

'■        ■      ■   1 

7^ 

FiQ.  11. — Daily  force  account  blank  (face). 

To  obtain  such  records,  systematic  methods  must  be  adopted,  and 
these  methods  will  vary  according  to  the  character  of  the  work  involved. 
The  engineer  in  charge  of  such  records  should  have  a  clear  understanding 
of  construction  methods  and  also  a  grasp  of  commercial  methods,  and  he 
should  have  an  anal3rtic  mind  and  be  able  to  interpret  the  statistics  and 
records  thus  obtained.  He  should  have  such  assistance  as  will  enable 
him  to  collect  the  information  as  well  as  to  record  and  summarize  the 
same. 

It  is  frequently  possible  to  have  the  field  inspector  record  the  labor, 
materials,  and  machinery  employed  in  the  work,  under  the  direction  of 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  47 

the  cost-keeping  engineer,  to  whom  the  notes  should  be  sent  daily,  al- 
though it  may  prove  more  desirable  to  have  an  entirely  independent  or- 
ganization for  the  purpose.  Above  all,  the  material  should  be  promptly 
worked  up  so  that  the  cost  data  may  be  compared  with  the  monthly 
estimates. 

Printed  Fonns. — It  is  desirable  to  have  forms  printed  so  as  to  reduce 
the  labor  of  entering  and  classifying  the  many  items  in  the  field,  and  to 
insure  the  proper  subdivision  of  the  items,  especially  if  such  information 


10^ 

"HkoiitK  Mm.jSmCid'  .DailvFVna 

imm(^ 

•Nort 

. . 

*"*—■"" "• 1«^ 

- — Inspectior 

Jma,.&tUm^tti..  fram4^'^'*'1o^*^l 

Remarks  and  Pwfites 

I 

From 

To 

Distance 

/n 



Lqmb 

howU  also  r 

ccord  juppiws 
f>an|it«,Hfcfcliini 

nv.efc.                ravomentRontoveci 

^rZi 

gi-ZC 

faf 

Cut        t      ft.  deep 

fi-Zf 

gtit 

fdi 

i_ 

1 

M                 Zt.         •*       ** 

J^Tf 

r^-zr 

/S9 

^ 

4(                 //-      M      M. 

3 'tis 

ii-75- 

sv 

t£L 

1 

Trench  Bonomed 

f-f^ 

s-f-ir 

ttr 

L 

hpeDistribuled 

/f^sv 

L. 

^fei 

h 
k 

/Z'  RpeLoid 

l-f-fB 

z-h^e 

trr 

f 

tt        u 

ts. 

• 

u      u 

. 

i 

PlpeJornHed 

£_ 

! 

•      >» 

ia  ^^j 

U           t4 

ta. 

«j  goj 

Backfiirmq  Completed 

s 

K 

•*      fT.bek>«  Surfna 

ftf 

h 

.Sheeting^  Side 

s-hsr 

tSt 

i 

«*       JT    " 

S-t-sr 

' 

'1 

^ 
^ 

BricKworK         cuyds. 

1 

Concrete            •* 

Rubble               <« 

t» 

k 

Cenficnr  Rec'd  BWs. 

•? 

**       Used   " 

L. 

f 

"Transferred  " 

1 

Fig.  12. — Daily  force  account  blank  (reverse). 


is  to  be  collected  by  the  field  inspectors.  In  the  latter  case,  cards  should 
be  provided  so  that  the  information  may  be  sent  to  headquarters  by 
mail  or  collected  by  a  clerk  of  the  department  daily. 

The  blank  shown  in  Figs.  11  and  12  has  been  found  very  convenient 
for  records  made  by  the  field  inspectors.  These  forms  measure  about 
8  X  7  in.,  may  be  folded  and  carried  inside  of  the  regular  field  note-books 
and  may  be  held  in  place  by  a  rubber  band  or  a  string.  The  total  force 
is  recorded  in  the  first  set  of  double  columns,  whereas  the  subdivisions  of 
the  forces  are  made  in  the  columns  following,  appropriate  headings  being 


48 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


a 


a 


I 


•a  E.S 


o 

O 


a. 


s 

CI 


CO 

w 


8 


9 


» 


«8 


s 

"8 


CI 
CI 


a  fl  ** 

O      »      h 

S  ^  8. 


I 


p 


£ 
% 

TS 
■*» 

s 


o 
< 

c 


oooooooooooo 


U3   GO   >0 


.2 

«8 
> 

«S 

o 

M 


d  fl  d  d  d 
o  o  o  o  o 


d 

o 


M     M     M 

H  H  H 


d   d  d  d  d 

•5  '5  •&  '5  '5  '5  "3  '5  "5  '^S  '5   B 

(8c8e8«8«e8tfeSeStf(8^ 
>>>►►>.>>>>> 

ouoooocoocoo 
hmmhmmhmS 


5 
g 

a 

o 


.    > 


5 

£ 

v 

a 
o 

O 


8 
8 


o  _o 


5 
Q 


.3 


o,  o, 

-     .   n 

7^ 


N 

o 
o  o 


«o  — 


!^  A  >«  p  d 


o  o 

U3  ^ 


e 

« 

a 


M 


d 


CI     » 


CI 


00QQ(COMtSS<< 


of 

^  : 

08  O 


d 
o 

I 


IS    =^ 

a 

3 

a 


o 


o 


d  "sj 


jd 


5 

e 
o 


CI 
CI 


W  Cf  C 


CI     •- 

CI    cc 


,t  »-"-■ 

« 

08  ;3^ 

4^                             .       h. 

1  ^  fl   ■ 

« 

•  X     o  _> 

J« 

Si    «^    3 

kl 

3^         «s 

4 

a 

0*    .^    ^ 

hi 

1 

0 

wer    pipe, 
furnished 
on  cars,  av 

^^ 

4^ 

•*» 

■  ^ 

•^  1 

" 

U  \ 

1 

ai 

H 

9 

• 

o 

1  £ 

ft) 

\^ 

^  J* 

Cl< 

M 

•^       M 

•< 

o  '^ 

"d 

o 

H 

1 

b 

S" 

^' 

O 

K 

<»4 

fc4 

O 

i£ 

O 

• 

t 

•3 

1 

o 

JS 

O 

H 

§ 

H 

H 

• 

■ 

la 

g 

V  1     (L, 

-2  0.'^^ 

o 

.2     p, 

5  Sl-3 

flS 

■*3 

^ 

O 

?5 

• 

»*• 

o* 

b 

S    <=> 

o 

OS 

K-3 

^  6 

"_    o  " 

._   . 

rt    "N 

•»J 

0     © 

H    <£> 

-^ 



I 

"3 

^  -^     2 

T 

4'     ^           «^ 

C-.S           I* 

jC 

.... 

• 
• 

-M 

•                  ,        • 

-"    o 

a 

j3    :    .    • 

5   ^ 

a      t^  >.  i  . 

o  - 

''^     ^  1  -'  §  ^ 

H   c 

^.  <  ^.  ►^  w 

1 

;:> 

be 

P. 

d 
o 

o 

d 

O 

a 

CI 


o 

d 


.a 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  49 


filled  in  for  each.  On  the  right-hand  portion  of  the  reverse  side  provision 
is  made  for  the  record  of  the  daily  progress,  while  on  the  left  hand  por- 
tion is  space  for  sketches  or  profiles  and  records  of  supplies  received,  etc. 

Form  D. — General  and  Overhead  Charges 

New  Salem,  Mass.,  Sewerage  System,  Section  (1),  Smith,  Joned  &  Brown,  Contractors, 

Laying  12-in.  Pipe. 


1011. 


Classification 

Monthly 
rate 

Pro- 
portion 
for  this 

job 

Total  charges  to  this  job 

Mar. 

1 

Apr. 

May ,  June 

July 

Aug. 

Rent 

Main  office 

60.00     ! 
20.00 

10% 
100 

6.00      6.00 

Field 

20.00 

20.00 

Telephone 

Main  office  service 

10.00 
3.00 

10% 
100 

1.00 
2.00 
3.00 

1.00 
1.60 
3.00 

Main  office  tolls 

Field  office  service 

Field  office  tolls 

100 
100 

1.60 
0.75 

1.50| 
1.25 

Teleoratne 

Clerical  force 

Main  office 

300.00 

10% 

30.00 

Field  office 

Timekeepers 

75.00 

75.00 

75.00 

X 

Boolckeeoer 

90.00 

100 

90.00 

90.00 

Cost  keener 

80.00 

100 

80.00 

80.00 

Stenoflrraohor . 

50  00 

100 

50.00 

50.00 

Livery  and  auto  aerxice 

Automobiles  rented 

125.00 

100 
100 

125.00"  125. 00 

Automobile  repairs 

50.00 

40.00 

Automobile  chauffeur 

60.00 

100 

60.00 

60.00 

Carriaice  hire 

40.00 

100 

40.00 

WasoQ  hire 

40.00 

100 

Ineurance 

General  pUint 

Expense  loading 

Expense  unloading 

Freight 

• 

Traneportation 

Firm 

Labor 

1 

MieceUaneoue 

\ 

1 

Total 

1           i 

Proportion 


Earth  excavation 
Pipe  laying 
Backfill 
Re- paving 


'0 


% 


Thei?e  force  account  records  should  be  submitted  to  the  cost-keeping 
engineer  daily,  and  the  information  contained  therein  should  be  at  once 
entered  on  blanks  prepared  for  the  purpose.  On  Form  A  the  daily 
amounts  of  labor  are  recorded  on  separate  sheets  for  each  classification 
into  which  the  accounts  are  subdivided.  Where  only  a  few  classes  of 
labor  are  employed,  thus  requiring  but  a  few  lines  for  each  month's 

4 


50 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


record,  records  of  several  months  may  be  placed  on  one  sheet,  thus 
economizing  space.  The  quantities  of  materials  and  supphes  are 
recorded  on  Form  B.  Where  numerous  installments  of  a  given  article 
are  anticipated  during  the  progress  of  the  work,  it  is  desirable  to  reserve 
a  sheet  for  each  classification,  although  several  such  groups  may  be 
placed  on  one  sheet  where  only  a  few  items  of  each  are  anticipated. 

As  the  material  supplied  in  one  month  may  serve  its  purpose  during 
the  following  months,  it  is  desirable  to  distribute  this  cost  over  the  entire 
period  during  which  it  will  be  used,  and  if  it  has  value  at  the  completion 
of  the  work  this  value  should  be  noted,  as  shown  in  the  last  column. 
For  instance,  the  2  X  8-in.  plank  used  for  trench  sheeting,  purchased  in 
March,  may  not  be  all  used  until  the  following  month,  and  then  in  all 
probability  it  will  be  withdrawn  and  used  again  and  again.  Its  cost 
has,  for  the  purpose  of  illustration,  been  divided  as  follows:  March, 
30  per  cent.;  April,  25  per  cent.;  May,  20  per  cent.;  June,  15  per  cent.; 
July,  10  per  cent.;  after  which  the  limiber  is  assumed  to  have  no  value; 
whereas  the  cost  of  the  lumber  purchased  July  15  is  distributed  through 
the  months  of  July,  August,  September  and  October,  and  15  per  cent,  is 
shown  as  salvage  at  the  completion  of  the  work. 

Form  E2. — Summary  of  Labor  Costs  in  Pipe  Latino 

Now  Salem,  Mass.,  Sewerage  System,  Section  (l).  Smith,  Jones  &  Brown,  Contractors, 

1011.    Laying  12-in.  Pipe 


Month 


Wage-rate       0 .  50|    0 .  35 


Asst. 
pipe 
layer 

0.30!  0725 


Pipe 
layer 


Tender 


Mor- 
tar- 
man 


Labor 


Labor 
pumping 


Total 


i\ 


0.251  0.20 


^1 ' 


0.17J     0.17J 


I 


March...      12.50  24.50'69.00  56.25  58.00  46.00  59.50  |143.50   469.25 
April. .  . . 
May. .  .  . 
June. . . . 
July 


August 
Sept.... 
Oct.... 


Total. 


Cost  per 
foot. . . . 


0.0025  0.005 


In  a  similar  way  the  expenditures  for  tools,  equipment  and  repairs 
are  recorded  on  Form  C.  The  general  and  overhead  charges  will  be 
ascertained  by  the  cost-keeping  engineer  and  will  be  recorded  on  Form 
D  and  similarly  distributed. 

The  results  obtained  and  recorded  on  the  forms  just  described  are 


ENGINEERING  AND  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  51 

summarized  on  Form  E.  In  addition  to  the  summarized  detail  costs 
recorded  herein,  the  unit  costs  should  be  worked  out  and  recorded,  with 
a  separate  blank  for  the  several  divisions  of  the  work,  such  as  earth  ex- 
cavation, pipe  lajring,  refilling,  re-paving,  etc.  We  are  thus  able  to  com- 
pare the  unit  costs,  month  by  month,  for  each  of  these  divisions,  each 
subdivided  into  labor,  materials  and  supplies,  tools,  equipment  and 
repairs,  overhead  charges,  and  total  unit  costs. 

If  it  is  desirable  to  have  this  detailed  information  weekly  instead  of 
monthly,  as  shown  on  these  blanks,  four  or  five  additional  lines  may 
be  allotted  to  each  month  instead  of  one  line  as  shown,  and  the 
weekly  figures  may  be  inserted  in  small  figures  in  pencil  or  in  an  ink  of 
a  different  color  from  the  monthly  record,  without  great  additional 
labor  or  confusion. 

PROGRESS 

At  the  dose  of  each  day  the  inspector  should  record  the  stations  to 
which  the  several  parts  of  his  work  have  advanced  during  the  day,  such  as 


J  1000 


-  1913- 
FiG.  13. — Progress  Diagram. 

trench  bottom,  pipe  laid,  excavation  (in  zones),  pavement  removed 
backfilling  partially  complete,  backfilling  complete,  etc. 

Unless  the  daily  measurements  are  sufficiently  accurate  and  if  the 
weekly  cost  accounts  are  to  be  worked  up  accurately,  additional 
measurements  should  be  taken  to  show  the  progress  made  during  the 


52  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

week.  These  records  should  be  entered  on  the  appropriate  daily 
report  blanks. 

The  monthly  measurements  taken  primarily  as  a  basis  for  the  monthly 
estimates  of  payments  due  the  contractor  should  be  recorded  in  such  a 
way  as  to  show  the  progress  made  during  the  month  and  in  such  detail  as 
will  permit  the  determination  of  all  the  unit  costs  desired  by  the  oost- 
keeping  engineer. 

Actual  and  Required  Progress. — It  is  desirable  to  formulate  at  the 
beginning  of  the  work  a  schematic  outline  of  the  progress  required  for  its 
completion  at  the  time  specified.  Such  an  outline  may  be  shown  in 
tabular  form  or  by  a  diagram.  Progress  data  procured  at  the  intervals 
selected  may  be  tabulated  or  plotted  upon  the  diagram,  using  the 
calendar  weeks  or  months  as  abscissas  and  the  accumulated  sum  of  the 
man-days  of  labor,  cubic  yards  of  excavation,  feet  of  sewer  pipe  laid,  or 
other  pertinent  unit,  as  ordinates.  By  comparing  the  actual  progress 
made  with  that  anticipated  at  the  outset,  it  is  possible  to  ascertain  at  any 
time  how  close  to  the  original  forecast  the  work  is  being  executed. 
Such  schedules  may  be  helpful  to  the  contractor  as  well  as  to  the  engineer, 
enabling  him  to  gage  his  force  and  to  provide  plant  so  as  to  attain  the 
required  rate  of  progress.  In  addition  to  the  chart  showing  the  total  or 
general  progress  of  the  undertaking  separate  charts  may  be  required  for 
different  sections  of  the  work  and  for  different  portions  of  the  work  upon 
each  section,  as  for  example,  for  excavation,  for  pipe  laying,  for  placing 
concrete  and  for  backfilling.  A  chart  for  recording  progress  is  illustrated 
by  Fig.  13. 

COST  OF  ENGINEERING  AND  SUPERVISION 

The  cost  of  engineering  and  supervision  depends  upon  the  size  of  the 
project,  the  extent  of  preliminary  investigations,  survejdng  and  mapping 
required,  the  thoroughness  with  which  studies,  designs  and  contract 
drawings  are  executed,  the  amount  of  care  and  watchfulness  put  onto  the 
construction,  the  difficulties  encountered  in  building  the  works,  and 
many  other  conditions,  all  of  which  make  it  impossible  to  state  any 
proportionate  amount  of  the  cost  of  the  complete  project  which  must  be 
devoted  to  engineering.  In  a  general  way  the  cost  will  range  from  71/2 
to  15  per  cent.,  although  there  are  many  cases  in  which  it  will  exceed  the 
upper  limit  and  in  some  cities  where  there  are  regularly  organized  depart- 
ments doing  a  nearly  uniform  amount  of  relatively  simple  work  from 
year  to  year  it  may  fall  to  5  per  cent,  of  the  total  cost  of  the  projects. 

These  costs  often  include,  or  are  closely  related  in  the  accounting 
system  to,  the  expenditures  for  rights-of-way,  damage  suits  and  sundry 
other  items.  Upon  contract  work  aggregating  nearly  four  million  dollars 
at  Louisville  the  expenditures  were  as  indicated   in  Table  4.    The 


'ENGINEERING  A^fD  INSPECTION  DURING  CONSTRUCTION  53 


preliminary  expenses  cover  such  work  as  topographic  survey  and 
mapping,  preliminary  studies  and  preparation  of  general  schemes  for  the 
project.  The  entire  work  was  done  in  about  seven  years,  1906-1912, 
although  little  construction  work  was  executed  during  the  first  two  years 
and  only  a  relatively  small  amount  in  1912. 

Table  4. — Distribution  of   Expense    Including  Payments  to  Con- 
tractor, ON  Contract  Work  to  January  31,  1913,  Louisville,  Ky. 


Item 


Total  coet 


Per  cent. 

of  total 

expenditures 


Preliminary  engineering  and  administra- 
tion expenses 

Administration 

Engineering 

Rights  of  way 

Castings  and  other  metal  work  supplies. . 
Damage  suits  (exclusive  of  rights  of  way) 
Amount  of  payments  to  contractors 


$57,271.74 

78,025.03 

336,544 .  87 

12,319.36 

15,461.29 

8,307 .  52 

3,289,330.89 


1.51 
2.05 
8.86 
0.32 
0.41 
0.22 
86.63 


S3,797,260.70 


100.00 


Note. — Work  aggregating  slightly  over  $400,000  was  done  by  direct  labor. 
This  shoidd  be  taken  into  account  when  considering  Preliminary  Engineering 
and  Administration  Expenses. 

Where  engineers  are  to  enter  into  contract  to  provide  engineering  and 
sui>ervision  they  should  exercise  great  care  to  set  forth  fully  and  clearly 
just  what  work  is  covered  by  the  agreement.  Some  engineers  stipulate 
that  such  a  contract  shall  not  cover  services  in  court  arising  out  of 
litigation,  and  in  any  event  this  item  should  be  specifically  mentioned 
if  the  work  is  to  be  done  upon  a  percentage  or  lump  sum  basis.  The 
probability  of  delay  in  completing  the  work  covered  by  construction 
contract  should  also  be  taken  into  consideration  and  it  is  entirely 
reasonable  for  the  engineer  to  be  allowed  additional  compensation  for 
each  day  of  delay  in  such  completion  or  for  the  cost  to  him  resulting 
from  such  delay  as  mt^y  occur. 


CHAPTER  III 
EXCAVATION 

The  excavation  is  usually  the  part  of  sewer  construction  most  im- 
portant toth^  contractor,  as  upon  it  the  most  money  is  generally  made 
or  lost.  The  cost  of  work  done  under  this  item  and  for  which  there 
is  usually  but  one  pa3anent  covers  a  multitude  of  things,  among  which 
may  be  mentioned  the  excavation  proper,  handling  water,  sheeting  and 
bracing,  backfilling,  re-paving,  hauling  waste  material  to  the  dimip, 
rental  of  mAohinery,  coal,  oil,  waste,  minor  repairs,  and  the  larger  portion 
of  the  overhead  charges,  such  as  office  rent,  capital  charges,  and  com- 
pensation for  time  spent  by  the  contractor  and  his  superintendent.  To 
excavation  must  also  be  charged  a  part  of  the  cost  of  employees  not 
actually  engaged  in  excavating,  such  as  engineers,  firemen,  tagmen, 
watchmen,  timekeepers,  bookkeepers,  and  a  niunber  of  others. 

To  handle  excavation  to  advantage  requires  good  management  and 
excellent  judgment  on  the  part  of  the  contractor,  engineer  or  foreman. 
Such  judgment  is  the  fruit  of  long  experience  in  which  he  has  had  to  do 
with  materials  of  many  kinds  and  under  many  conditions.  He  must  be 
able  to  judge  from  his  past  experience  how  to  handle  the  work,  whether 
the  excavation  should  be  done  by  hand,  or  if  by  machinery,  what  type 
of  machines  and  how  many  he  will  put  on  the  work.  It  is  not  uncommon 
to  find  work  much  over-planted,  which  always  results  in  excessive  cost, 
and  often  in  actual  loss  upon  the  whole  contract. 

The  materials  entering  into  the  sewer  usually  cost  about  the  same  as 
the  labor  required  for  its  construction,  but  there  is  generally  little  profit 
to  the  contractor  in  the  materials  furnished.  The  chief  profit  comes 
through  the  economical  handling  of  the  work  so  that  the  labor  cost  may 
be  reduced  to  a  Tninimiim.  The  element  of  time  is  also  an  important 
item  which  is  often  overlooked.  It  has  an  important  bearing  upon 
excavation.  The  longer  the  work  lasts  the  greater  are  likely  to  be  the 
overhead  charges,  and  also  the  charges  for  machinery  and  the  cost  of 
engineers,  firemen,  tagmen,  etc.,  and  even  larger  items  chargeable  against 
unnecessary  delay,  such  as  the  extra  expense  involved  in  carrying  on  the 
work  under  unfavorable  weather  conditions.  Rapid  work  during  the 
summer  time,  when  costs  can  be  kept  low,  may  avoid  a  large  unnecessary 
cost  which  will  result  if  the  work  is  prolonged  into  the  winter.  A  high 
charge  against  the  contractor  on  account  of  liquidated  damages  for 
delay  often  inures  to  his  benefit  much  more  than  to  the  benefit  of 
the  party  with  whom  he  contracts  to  do  the  work, 

54 


EXCAVATION  55 

MATERIAL  TO  BE  EXCAVATED 

A  great  variety  of  materials  are  enoountered  in  sewer  excavation,  such 
as  sand,  gravel,  loam,  clay,  hardpan,  quicksand,  disintegrffted  rook, 
boulders  and  ledge.  These  materials  merge  into  each  other  so  that 
frequently  there  is  no  sharp  line  of  demarcation  between  them.  Some  of 
them  also  vary  greatly  from  season  to  season.  The  surface  materials  in 
the  northern  and  colder  climate  are  relatively  soft  and  easy  to  excavate 
during  the  warm  season  of  the  year,  but  in  the  winter  become  frozen 
and  in  some  cases  are  nearly  as  expensive  to  excavate  as  solid  rock. 
Many  trenches  have  been  excavated  with  comparative  ease  in  dry 
weather,  which  would  have  been  excavated  with  the  greatest  difficulty 
had  the  ground  water  been  high  and  had  frequent  rains  occurred  during 
the  progress  of  the  work.  These  facts  have  often  misled  contractors 
who  have  based  their  estimates  upon  their  observation  of  the  way  in 
which  similar  work  was  being  done,  or  their  judgment  as  to  how  it  should 
be  done,  under  favorable  weather  conditions.  When  overtaken  by  un- 
favorable conditions,  such  as  rain  and  frost,  easy  and  inexpensive  work 
has  become  difficult  and  costly.  While  many  different  kinds  of  materials 
have  to  be  excavated,  there  are  two  general  classifications  in  common 
use  in  the  drawing  of  contracts  for  sewers,  namely,  earth  excavation  and 
rock  excavation. 

Classification. — Under  earth  excavation  is  included  all  excavation  of 
earthy  substances,  except  ledge  rock  or  large  boulders. 

The  line  of  demarcation  between  earth  and  rock  excavation  is  one 
which  has  caused  much  dispute  and  litigation.  There  is  often  no  sharp 
dividing  line  between  them,  and  the  opinions  and  judgments  of  different 
engineers  and  contractors  are  often  at  variance  upon  this  distinction. 
In  the  East  there  is  generally  not  so  much  question  as  to  the  definition 
of  rock  as  in  the  Middle  and  Western  portions  of  the  country,  for  in  the 
East  the  rock  is  generally  hard  and  not  seriously  disintegrated,  in  which 
condition  it  is  easily  distinguished  from  earth.  Even  in  the  East, 
however,  there  are  cases  where  the  rock  overlying  hard  ledge  rock  which 
requires,  without  question,  drilling  and  blasting  for  its  excavation,  is 
disintegrated  to  such  an  extent  that  it  can  be  removed  by  the  use  of  pick 
and  shovel  and  without  drilling  and  blasting.  Such  material  is  gener- 
ally classified  as  earth. 

Definitions  of  Rock  Excavation. — ^In  view  of  the  difficulties  and  dis- 
putes which  have  arisen  over  the  definition  of  rock  the  following  quota- 
tions from  contracts  drawn  by  engineers  of  experience  are  given: 

**  Where  rock  is  encountered  of  such  hardness  that  it  can  be  most  econom- 
ically removed  by  blasting,  the  contractor  shall  remove  the  same  from 
the  trench,  and  shall  receive  pay  therefor  ...  at  the  price  per  cubic  yard 


56  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

for  the  rock  excavation  mentioned  in  the  contractor's  proposal."  (Alvord 
and  Burdick,  consulting  engineers,  Chicago.) 

"Only  such  ledge  or  rock  in  trench  as  cannot  be  readily  removed  with 
a  pick  and  shovel  and  requires  blasting  for  its  removal,  and  which  has  been 
measured  by  the  engineer  before  blasting,  and  all  boulders  of  1/2  cu.  yd. 
or  more  in  volume  which  are  removed  from  the  trench,  will  be  estimated  as 
rock  excavation.  The  bottom  of  the  trench  shall  be  excavated  to  a 
depth  of  6  in.  below  the  outside  of  the  pipe,  and  shall  be  refilled  in  a  proper 
manner  with  suitable  material."  (Hering  &  Fuller,  consulting  engineers. 
New  York.) 

"Only  ledge  rock  as,  in  the  opinion  of  the  engineer,  requires  blasting  for 
its  removal,  and  boulders  of  1/2  cu.  yd.  or  more  in  volume,  shall  be  measured 
and  paid  for  as  rock  excavation."  (Hering  &  Gregory,  consulting  engi- 
neers, New  York.) 

"Rock  excavation  shall  include  hard  rock  of  such  nature  that,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  engineer,  it  cannot  be  removed  by  picking  or  barring,  found 
in  ledge  or  detached  boulders  containing  more  than  1/2  cu.  yd.  each.  All 
other  materials  found  in  excavation,  however  hard,  stiff  and  compact,  in- 
cluding soft  and  disintegrated  rock  which  can  be  removed  without  the  aid 
of  explosives,  shall  be  classed  and  paid  for  as  earth."  (Frank  A.  Barbour, 
consulting  engineer,  Boston.) 

"Only  such  ledge  or  rock  in  trench  as  cannot  be  readily  removed  with  k 
pick  and  shovel  and  requires  blasting  for  its  removal,  and  which  has  been 
measured  by  the  engineer  before  blasting,  and  all  boulders  of  1/2  cu.  yd. 
or  more  in  volume  which  are  removed  from  the  trench,  will  be  estimated 
as  rock  excavation."     (George  W.  Fuller,  consulting  engineer,  New  York.) 

Allen  Hazen  writes  to  the  authors:  *'My  feeling  would  be  that  I 
should  write  it  (rock  specification)  for  any  particular  conditions  for 
which  I  was  designing  the  work,  based  upon  local  conditions." 

W.  A.  Cattell,  consulting  engineer,  San  Francisco,  stated  to  the 
authors: 

"I  have  never  yet  found  it  necessary  to  use  any  classification  for  excava- 
tion for  any  kind  of  engineering  work.  It  has  been  my  observation  that 
the  definitions  and  classifications  generally  in  use  in  engineering  specifications 
of  this  nature  have  been  such  fruitful  sources  of  dispute  and  litigation,  that 
it  is  best  to  eliminate  them  altogether  whenever  it  is  possible  to  do  so. 
There  are,  of  course,  some  conditions  under  which  it  might  be  necessary  or 
advisable  to  specify  certain  classifications  to  be  used  in  measuring  and  pay- 
ing for  excavated  material,  but  in  a  great  majority  of  cases  they  can  and 
should  be  omitted  entirely.  This  may  seem  somewhat  arbitrary  to  those 
who  have  always  followed  the  old  method  of  classification,  but  I  have  found 
it  to  work  out  very  well  in  actual  practice." 

M.  M.  O'Shaughnessy,  city  engineer  of  San  Francisco,  states  that 
it  is  not  the  practice  of  his  office  to  distinguish  between  rock  and  earth 
excavation  in  letting  contracts  for  sewer  or  other  work  involving 
excavation. 


EXCAVATION  67 

Another  method  of  specifying  rock  excavation  by  classifying  under 
loose  rock  and  solid  rock  and  paying  two  prices  for  these  materials,  is 
illustrated  by  the  following  quotation  from  Bums  &  McDonnell's  form 
of  contract  for  the  excav.ation  of  trenches  at  Riverside,  Cal. : 

'*  Loose  rock  shall  include  all  masses  of  stone  and  detached  rock  contain- 
ing no  single  rocks  or  boulders  larger  than  9  cu.  ft.  in  volume  and  containing 
not  more  than  40  per  cent,  of  earthy  material;  also  all  decomposed  granite 
or  other  rock  which  can  be  practicably  quarried  without  blasting,  even 
though  blasting  may  be  done  to  more  conveniently  accomplish  the  excava- 
tion of  this  material.  The  classification  of  materials  shall  in  all  cases  be 
determined  by  the  engineer. 

''Solid  rock  is  defined  as  any  material  which  cannot  be  practicably  exca- 
vated without  drilUng  and  blasting.  All  boulders,  ledge  rock  or  stratified 
rock  of  such  material  having  9  cu.  ft.  or  more  of  volume  shall  be  paid  for  as 
"solid  rock.''  The  engineer  shall  in  all  cases  decide  whether  or  not  it  is 
practicable  to  excavate  the  material  without  drilling  and  blasting,  and 
the  fact  that  the  contractor  may  find  it  expedient  to  blast  any  material 
which  in  the  opinion  of  the  engineer  may  be  practicably  excavated  without 
blasting,  shall  in  no  way  change  or  modify  this  classification,  nor  entitle 
the  contractor  to  solid  rock  price  for  material  so  removed." 

The  definition  of  rock  in  sewer  specifications  adopted  by  the  Board  of 
Local  Improvements  of  Chicago,  in  1911,  is  as  follows: 

"Wherever  the  word  'rock'  occurs  in  these  specifications  it  shall  be 
interpreted  to  mean  any  material  geologically  in  place  and  of  a  hardness 
when  first  exposed  of  three  or  greater  in  the  scale  of  mineral  hardness, 
which  corresponds  to  the  hardness  of  the  transparent  variety  of  calcite. 
Other  materials  shall  not  be  classed  as  rock,  although  it  may  be  more  eco- 
nomical to  reifiove  the  same  by  blasting.  .  .  .  No  claim  for  an  amount  of 
money  beyond  the  contract  price  of  the  work  will  be  entertained  or  allowed  on 
account  of  the  character  of  the  ground  in  which  the  trench  or  other  excava- 
tions are  made,  except  for  the  rock  cutting  heretofore  specified." 

It  is  evident  that  there  is  more  or  less  difference  of  opinion  among 
engineers  in  this  country  as  to  whether  or  not  it  is  best  to  classify 
materials  to  be  excavated  under  two  headings,  earth  and  rock.  The 
prevailing  opinion  among  eastern  engineers,  where  rock  is  usually  hard 
and  fairly  sharply  distinguishable,  is  that  such  a  classification  should  be 
made,  while  among  the  engineers  of  the  Pacific  Slope  it  appears  to  be 
customary  to  avoid  this  classification,  grouping  excavation  of  all  kinds 
of  materials  under  one  item. 

In  much  sewer  work  it  is  not  easy  for  the  contractor  to  ascertain  even 
approximately  the  probable  quantity  of  rock  which  he  will  be  required  to 
excavate.  Provision  has  therefore  generally  been  made  in  the  contract 
that  a  definite  unit  price  should  be  paid  for  rock  excavation  and  it  has 
been  the  understanding  that  the  contractor  would  bid  a  price  sufficient  to 


58  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

cover  the  cost  of  excavating  the  rock,  so  that  he  might  not  lose,  even 
though  the  quantity  should  be  in  excess  of  that  expected;  and  on  the 
other  hand,  the  party  awarding  the  contract  should  not  pay  an  unneces- 
sary amount,  because  of  the  fear  of  the  contractor  that  rock  might  be 
encountered  when  in  fact  it  was  not. 

Following  are  two  quotations  from  the  specifications  for  rock  work 
which  the  authors  have  used  with  satisfactory  results  upon  a  number  of 
contracts.    The  second  is  now  used  exclusively: 

''All  excavations  shall  be  classed  and  measured  either  as  earth  or  rock, 
the  latter  to  include  all  boulders  1/2  cu.  yd.  or  more  in  volume.  All  other 
materials  found  in  excavation,  however  hard,  stiff  or  compact,  including 
soft  or  disintegrated  rock  which  can  be  loosened  with  a  pick,  shall  be  classed 
and  paid  for  as  earth.'' 

"Rock,  wherever  used  as  the  name  of  an  excavated  material,  shall  mean 
boulders  exceeding  1/2  cu.  yd.  in  volume  or  solid  ledge  rock  which, 
in  the  opinion  of  the  engineer,  requires  for  its  removal  drilling  and  blasting 
or  wedging,  or  sledging  or  barring.  No  soft  or  disintegrated  rock  which  can 
be  removed  with  a  pick;  no  loose,  shaken  or  previously  blasted  rock  or  broken 
stone  in  rock  filUngs  or  elsewhere,  nor  rocks  exterior  to  the  maximum  limits 
of  measurement  allowed,  which  may  have  been  previously  loosened  in 
excavating  for  water  pipes  or  other  purposes  and  which,  by  reason  of  such 
loosening,  may  fall  into  the  trench,  will  be  measured  or  allowed." 

HAND   EXCAVATION 

The  sewer  builder  will  find  it  advantageous  to  determine,  if  possible, 
prior  to  making  estimates  or  bids  the  nature  of  the  materials  to  be 
excavated;  this  can  be  done  by  means  of  test  pits  or  borings,  thus 
limiting  so  far  as  practicable  the  uncertainty  of  his  knowledge  of  the 
nature  of  the  work  to  be  performed.  Where  the  construction  must  be 
carried  on  in  a  locality  in  which  the  contractor  has  previously  done 
similar  work,  he  will  have  a  knowledge  of  local  conditions  which  will  aid 
him  in  making  his  proposals  and  in  preparing  for  the  work.  If  local 
conditions  indicate  that  sheeting  will  be  necessary,  the  lumber  and  other 
materials  and  tools  required  should  be  provided  and  brought  on  to  the 
ground  for  immediate  use  when  the  need  develops,  in  order  to  prevent 
the  caving  of  the  banks,  with  consequent  injury  to  adjacent  pavements 
and  the  possible  settlement  of  buildings  or  other  structures.  If  water  is 
likely  to  be  encountered  suitable  pumping  machinerj'^  should  be  pro- 
vided at  the  outset,  that  the  work  may  not  be  delayed  while  waiting  to 
procure  and  erect  such  machinery. 

In  la5dng  out  a  sewer  trench  to  be  excavated,  it  is  desirable  to  line 
out  the  trench  to  the  proper  width  by  the  methods  described  in  Chapter 
II,  and  allot  a  given  length  of  trench  to  each  laborer  or  pair  of  laborers 
upon  small  work,  or  to  a  squad  of  laborers  upon  larger  work,  so  as  to 


EXCAVATION  59 

furnish  each  man  or  group  of  men  with  approximately  the  same 
amount  of  work,  as  for  example,  one-half  day's  work,  or  in  very  deep 
trenches,  a  full  day's  work.  In  this  way,  the  burden  may  be  distributed 
equally  among  all  of  the  men  and  the  foreman  may  have  an  opportunity 
to  distinguish  between  the  efficient  and  inefficient  workmen,  while  the 
men  themselves  are  made  to  feel  the  spur  of  competition  and  comparison 
with  others. 

Loosening  Surface. — ^Where  the  surface  of  the  ground  is  hard  and 
compact,  either  in  its  natural  state  or  as  paved  with  gravel  or  macadam, 
it  must  first  be  loosened,  either  by  hand  with  pick  and  shovel  or  by 
means  of  a  substantial  plow  drawn  by  horses  or  a  traction  e^gine.  In 
narrow  trenches  such  plowing  is  liable  to  weaken  the  top  crust  outside  of 
the  trench  line  and  thus  to  increase  the  liability  of  caving  banks,  in 
which  case  the  use  of  the  pick  and  shovel  may  be  preferred.  Durable 
pavements,  such  as  brick,  asphalt,  and  wooden  or  granite  block,  must 
first  be  removed  by  bar  and  pick,  and  the  concrete  foundation  taken  out 
in  like  manner. 

Opening  Trench  in  Frozen  Ground. — ^In  the  northern  part  of  the 
country  the  frost  penetrates  from  1  to  3  ft.  in  depth  in  fields  and  wooded 
territory  and  from  3  ft.  to  6  ft.  in  streets.  It  is  found  to  enter  the  ground 
to  the  greatest  depth  in  the  center  of  the  street,  where  the  earth  is 
compacted  by  traffic  and  is  therefore  a  better  conductor.  In  streets  the 
frozen  crust  usually  thaws  both  from  the  top  and  the  bottom,  so  that 
just  before  the  frost  leaves  the  ground  it  is  found  in  a  thin  layer  about  6 
in.  thick  perhaps  2  ft.  down  from  the  top. 

Opening  a  trench  in  frozen  ground,  by  picking,  is  an  exceedingly  ex- 
pensive and  slow  operation.  In  rare  cases  the  frozen  earth  may  be 
drilled  and  blasted  but  this  method  is  seldom  feasible  in  city  streets 
because  of  the  danger  to  persons  and  buildings.  A  common  method  of 
opening  such  trenches  is  by  building  fires  on  the  surface  of  the  street, 
usually  at  night,  and  thus  thawing  the  ground  so  that  it  may  be  easily 
shovelled  the  following  morning.  Another  convenient  method  of 
thawing  the  frost,  if  a  steam  boiler  is  available,  is  by  steaming.  This  is 
done  by  building  a  number  of  wooden  boxes  open  on  the  bottom.  These 
boxes  are  of  convenient  length,  usually  12  to  15  ft.,  about  10  in.  high  and 
approximately  of  the  width  of  the  trench.  The  boxes  are  laid  with  the 
open  side  down  and  holes  are  bored  in  the  other  side  every  12  in. 
along  the  box  and  about  every  2  ft.  crosswise  of  the  box.  Each  hole  is 
provided  with  a  wooden  plug  to  prevent  the  escape  of  steam.  When  the 
boxes  have  been  placed  in  position,  they  are  banked  up  with  soft  earth  to 
prevent  the  escape  of  steam  and  warm  air  from  beneath  them.  One 
man  is  usually  left  out  at  night  to  tend  the  fire  under  the  boiler  and  to 
steam  out  the  frozen  ground.  This  he  does  with  a  3/4-in.  gas  pipe  about 
6  ft.  long,  provided  with  an  iron  cross-bar  for  a  handle.    To  the  end  of 


60  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

this  pipe  is  attached  a  steam  hose,  the  other  end  being  open.  The 
operator  phices  this  pipe  in  a  vertical  position  on  the  ground,  passing  it 
through  one  of  the  holes  in  the  box.  As  the  steam  thaws  the  ground, 
he  gradually  works  the  iron  pipe  down  until  he  has  penetrated  the  whole 
layer  of  frozen  ground.  He  then  withdraws  the  pipe,  plugs  the  hole  and 
follows  the  same  coiu'se  in  the  next  hole  and  so  on  until  he  has  thawed  the 
entire  length  of  trench  required  for  the  next  day's  work.  One  man  will 
usually  be  able  to  thaw  out  a  sufficient  area  of  street  for  a  trench  4  to  6 
ft.  wide,  48  ft.  long,  in  one  night,  where  the  frost  is  4  ft.  deep. 

Pavements  to  be  Preserved. — ^All  paving  material  should  be  pre- 
served and  piled  at  one  side  of  the  street  for  use  in  replacing  the  pave- 
ment. Paving  blocks,  bricks,  etc.,  should  be  placed  in  neat  piles  outside 
of  the  probable  limits  of  the  material  to  be  excavated.  The  crushed 
stone  from  macadam  pavements  is  frequently  piled  in  a  windrow  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  trench  from  that  used  for  storage  of  the  balance  of  the 
excavation.  Where  tl-enches  are  deep  or  are  likely  to  remain  open  for 
some  considerable  length  of  time,  it  is  usually  found  that  before  this 
material  is  required  for  replacement  in  the  trench  much  of  it  has  been 
scattered  and  lost.  If  it  is  of  good  quality,  it  may  be  worth  while  to 
haul  it  away  and  store  it  in  a  vacant  lot,  or  in  a  windrow  on  one  side  of 
each  of  several  cross  streets,  care  being  taken  not  to  obstruct  driveways 
and  to  warn  the  public  at  night  by  the  liberal  use  of  red  lanterns. 

Excavated  MateriaL — ^It  is  desirable  to  throw  all  material,  except  rock, 
excavated  from  the  trench  on  one  side  of  the  trench.  The  material  from 
the  first  6  ft.  in  depth  of  the  trench  should  be  cast  as  far  back  from  the 
opening  as  is  possible  at  one  throw,  thus  leaving  space  between  this 
material  and  the  trench  for  the  material  excavated  from  lower  depths. 
Unless  the  excavated  material  is  plastic  or  sticky,  it  is  usually  possible 
for  the  laborers  to  throw  out  material  from  trenches  up  to  a  depth  of 
about  8  ft.  Below  this  depth,  it  is  advisable  to  arrange  platforms 
(see  Chapter  IX)  about  6  ft.  below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  these  plat- 
forms resting  on  the  cross  braces  if  the  trench  is  sheeted,  or  on  temporary 
braces  where  the  trench  is  not  sheeted.  This  platform  should  be 
sufficiently  long  to  permit  material  to  be  thrown  upon  it  by  two  excava- 
tors, one  at  either  end,  while  one  staging  man  should  be  able  to  keep  the 
platform  clear,  casting  the  material  well  back  from  the  edge  of  the 
trench.  Such  stages  may  extend  entirely  across  the  trench,  but  where 
trenches  are  wide  enough  to  permit,  it  will  be  found  convenient  to  build 
narrow  stages  onto  which  the  men  in  the  bottom  can  throw  the  excavated 
material  from  any  points  at  which  they  may  be  working. 

For  trenches  deeper  than  14  ft.  a  second  set  of  platforms  or  stages 
should  be  used,  built  about  12  ft.  below  the  surface,  and  so  arranged  that 
two  men  shall  throw  from  the  bottom  of  the  excavation  onto  the  stage, 
and  that  the  material  shall  be  overcast  by  one  man  at  each  platform. 


EXCAVATION  61 

In  constructing  the  platforms,  a  piece  of  plank  may  be  placed  on  edge 
across  each  end,  or  along  the  side,  to  prevent  the  excavated  material  from 
falling  upon  the  laborers  below.  "Square  pointed"  shovels  should  be 
used  on  the  platforms,  whereas  the  "round  pointed"  type  are  generally 
best  for  the  work  in  the  bottom.  It  is  usually  necessary  to  provide  one 
man  on  the  bank  for  every  two  in  the  trench  to  overcast  the  material 
thrown  out  after  a  depth  of  5  ft.  has  been  reached.  The  distance 
between  platforms  should  be  regulated  according  to  the  depth  of  the 
trench,  rarely  allowing  it  to  exceed  6  ft.  In  some  cases  more  rapid  work 
will  result  from  a  somewhat  closer  spacing. 

Material  should  be  kept  back  from  the  edge  of  the  trench  a  distance  of 
2  ft.  where  practicable,  to  allow  room  for  the  passing  of  foremen,  in- 
spectors, laborers,  etc.;  to  prevent  material  from  falling  from  the  bank 
upon  the  laborers  in  the  trench;  to  furnish  space  for  the  landing  of  the 
outcast  material;  and,  where  necessary,  to  fiu-nish  space  for  the  handling 
of  pipe,  brick,  mortar,  concrete,  lumber,  and  other  materials  to  be 
placed  in  the  trench,  although  it  may  be  found  more  convenient  to 
handle  such  supplies  on  the  side  not  used  for  storing  the  excavated 
material.  The  side  of  the  street  opposite  that  on  which  the  excavated 
material  is  placed  should,  however,  be  kept  comparatively  free  from 
obstructions,  so  that,  except  in  narrow  streets,  traffic  may  not  be  inter- 
rupted. The  pipe,  lumber,  cement,  sand,  etc.,  which  are  required  for 
use  in  the  trench  should  be  kept  in  neat  piles  either  close  to  the  trench 
line  or  at  or  near  the  curb  line,  so  as  to  keep  the  street  free  from  ob- 
struction and  to  facilitate  economic  handling.  • 

TUNNELING 

Tunneling  is  a  method  of  excavation  often  employed  in  the  building 
of  sewers,  although  relatively  few  large  tunnels  have  been  driven  for  this 
purpose.  The  methods  used  are  those  employed  in  all  classes  of  tunnel- 
ing and  are  described  in  a  number  of  books  on  this  subject,  among  which 
are  "Tunneling"  by  Charles  Prelini,  "Modern  Tunnel  Practice"  by 
the  late  David  McNeely  Stauffer,  and  "Modern  Tunneling"  by  Da^dd 
W.  Brunton  and  John  A.  Davis. 

The  relative  cost  of  trenching  and  tunneling  generally  determines 
which  method  is  to  be  adopted,  although  the  latter  may  be  undertaken 
to  avoid  interference  with  street  traffic  or  tearing  up  a  good  pave- 
ment. Where  the  sewer  is  to  be  laid  at  a  considerable  depth,  the 
danger  of  progressive  settlement  of  the  earth  over  the  structure  may  be 
largely,  if  not  wholly,  prevented  by  building  the  sewer  in  tunnel. 

Very  small,  shallow  sewers  are  frequently  laid  alternately  in  short 
trenches  and  tunnels,  the  latter  being  of  very  small  bore,  often  not  more 
than  3  ft.  in  diameter.    This  method  is  rarely  employed  except  in  clay. 


62 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


hardpan  or  similar  material,  which  is  sufficiently  cohesive  to  stand  with- 
out timbering.  The  sections  of  trench,  usually  from  4  to  8  ft.  in  length, 
are  sufficiently  supported  by  the  earth  covering  the  tunnel  sections  which 
are  usually  of  the  same  length  as  the  trench  sections.  Where  pipe 
must  be  laid  during  winter  when  the  ground  is  frozen  to  a  depth  of  2  ft. 
or  more,  this  process  may  prove  economical  by  reducing  the  quantity 
of  frozen  ground  to  be  thawed,  picked  or  wedged  out. 

Depth  at  Which  Tunneling  May  Prove  Economical. — The  depth  at 
which  tunnehng  may  prove  less  expensive  than  trenching  depends  upon 
many  local  conditions  and  no  specific  rule  of  general  application  can  be 
formulated  for  determining  it.  In  soft  ground,  excavation  conditions 
which  tend  to  make  trenching  expensive  also  increase  the  cost  of  tunnel- 
ing. In  rock  excavation  on  the  other  hand,  this  fact  does  not  usually 
hold  true  and  the  cost  of  tunneling  will  be  more  uniform  and  the  point 
at  which  it  is  exceeded  by  the  cost  of  trenching  will  depend  almost  wholly 
upon  the  quantity  of  material  to  be  handled. 

As  an  illustration  of  the  method  of  comparing  the  relative  cost  of 
trenching  and  tunneling,  let  it  be  assumed  that  sewers  3  ft.  in  diameter 
are  to  be  built  25,  30  and  35  ft.  deep,  respectively.  The  minimum 
quantity  of  excavation,  if  built  in  tunnel,  will  be  1  cu.  yd.  per  Unear  foot. 
The  sewers,  if  built  in  trench,  will  involve  the  excavation  of  at  least  the 
quantities  of  earth,  or  rock,  shown  by  Table  5. 

Table  5. — Quantity  and  Cost  op  Excavation  Required  for  Building 

3-FT.  Sewer  in  Trench 


Depth  of  trench 

25  Ft. 

30  Ft. 

35  Ft. 

If  two  sets  sheeting  are  used,  cu.  yd.  per  lin. 
ft 

5.9 

7.7 

$5.90 

$7.70 

If  three  sets  sheeting  are  used,  cu.  yd.  per 
lin.  ft 

8.75 

9.75 

Cost  per  lin.  ft.  if  two  sets  sheeting  are  re- 
Quired,  at  $1  per  cu.  vd 

Cost  per  hn.  f t.  if  three  sets  sheeting  are  used 
at  $1, 1.26,  and  $1.50  per  cu.  yd.,  respectively 

$10.94 

$14.63 

Arbitrarily  assimiing  further  that  the  trenching,  including  timbering 
and  backfilling,  can  be  done  for  $1,  $1.25, 'and  $1.50  per  cubic  yard  for 
the  respective  depths,  it  follows  that  the  cost  per  linear  foot  will  vary 
from  $5.90  to  $14.63,  depending  upon  the  number  of  sets  of  sheeting 
used  and  the  depth  of  excavation.  In  other  words,  if  tunneling  is  to  be 
adopted,  it  must  be  estimated  at  less  than  $5.90  to  $14.63  per  cubic 
yard  for  the  several  conditions  given. 

In  general,  it  is  wise  to  consider  the  relative  cost  of  trenching  and 
tunneUng  when  the  depth  of  the  sewer  is  to  be  over  25  ft. 

In  rare  cases  tunneling  may  afford  a  means  of  successfully  doing  work 


EXCAVATION  63 

which  could  be  conducted  by  trenching  only  at  great  expense  and  danger 
to  life  or  neighboring  structures,  as  where  the  sewer  must  be  laid  through 
very  treacherous  water-bearing,  running  sand  or  subaqueous  ground. 
In  such  material,  pneumatic  tunneling  affords  a  relatively  safe  and 
economical  means  of  handling  the  work. 

Tunneling  in  Different  Kinds  of  Material. — Probably  the  simplest 
and  easiest  tunneling  is  in  hardpan,  dry  clay  or  other  earth,  cohesive 
enough  to  retain  its  position,  without  caving,  sufficiently  long  to 
allow  laying  the  pipe  or  placing  the  masonry.  In  such  cases  timbering 
is  not  required  and  the  heading  may  be  out  out  to  the  exact  line  of  the 
masonry.  The  progress  can  be  rapid  and  in  some  cases  little,  or  possibly 
no,  backfilling  maybe  required.  The  cost  of  excavation  will,  of  course, 
vary  with  conditions,  but  will  probably  not  be  less  than  S0.75  and  may 
considerably  exceed  $1.50  per  cubic  yard,  including  cost  of  excavating 
shafts. 

Difficulties  are  met  when  loose  sand  and  gravel  are  encountered  and 
recourse  must  be  had  to  timbering  and  close  sheeting,  great  care  being 
taken  to  prevent  material  from  "running"  into  the  heading.  The  use 
of  timbering  increases  the  cost  and  the  difficulties  of  maintaining  correct 
alignment.  The  cost  of  driving  such  a  tunnel  will  hardly  be  less  than  $3 
in  large  tunnels  and  may  reach  $  15  or  $20  per  cubic  yard  in  smaller 
ones,  and  the  quantity  excavated  will  also  be  greater  than  when  the 
excavation  is  in  the  more  favorable  material. 

Unfortunately,  most  sewers  are  built  below  the  natural  water  table, 
thus  often  greatly  increasing  the  difficulties  of  tunneling.  This  ground 
water  is  handled  in  the  same  way  as  in  trenching,  but  if  the  earth  is  of 
such  a  character  that  it  tends  to  "run"  when  wet,  the  attendant  diffi- 
culties will  be  increased  and  the  rate  of  progress  may  be  greatly  reduced. 
Where  the  soil  is  verj''  treacherous,  or  where  the  work  is  being  done  under 
a  stream  or  body  of  water,  it  may  be  necessary  to  drive  the  tunnel 
under  air  pressure.  A  case  of  this  class,  carried  out  under  the  authors* 
direction  in  Worcester,  was  a  tunnel  about  6  ft.  in  diameter,  lined  with 
wooden  segmental  rings  made  in  eight  pieces,  which  accommodated  a 
32  X  42-in.  sewer.  A  view  of  this  work  is  given  in  Fig.  95.  The  air 
pressure  required  did  not  exceed  10  lb.  per  square  inch  and  the  earth 
excavated  was  fine  sand.  The  cost  of  excavation  was  about  $19.73 
per  cubic  yard. 

Since  rock  drills  operated  by  compressed  air  became  available  and 
high  explosives  fired  by  electricity  have  been  perfected,  tunneling  through 
rock  has  been  greatly  simplified  and  in  fact  is  now  subject  to  less  uncer- 
tainties and  difficulties  than  most  soft  ground  tunnel  work.  This, 
however,  is  not  true  of  tunnels  driven  partly  in  rock  and  partly  in  loose 
earth,  where  great  trouble  is  sometimes  experienced  in  keeping  the  roof 
and  sides  securely  braced  at  all  times  so  that  the  earth  may  not  run. 


64  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Each  blast  is  likely  to  blow  out  bracing,  which  is  replaced  with  difficulty 
often  only  to  be  blown  out  again.  The  cost  of  tunneling  in  rock  may 
vary  from  $3  in  large  tunnels  or  those  through  rock  which  is  verj*^ 
easy  to  excavate,  to  $15  per  cubic  yard  in  small  tunnels,  including 
shafts. 

Lighting. — ^The  best  source  of  light  is  electricity,  but  even  with  it 
miners'  lamps  are  desirable  for  the  use  of  the  miners  and  bracers.  Where 
compressed  air  is  used  for  drilling,  it  may  be  possible  to  get  along  with 
oil  lamp>8  and  gasoline  torches,  although  this  is  not  to  be  recommended. 
If  electric  current  is  run  into  a  rock  tunnel,  care  must  be  exercised  to 
prevent  the  premature  firing  of  the  dynamite  by  accidental  contact  of 
lead  or  fuse  wires  with  lighting  or  power  circuits.  It  is  difficult,  espe- 
cially in  small  tunnels,  to  prevent  the  workmen  from  touching  bare  wires 
and  rails  so  that  high-tension  currents  are  inadvisable.  Circuits  carrying 
220  to  250  volts  have  been  much  used  and  have  given  satisfaction. 
Machinery  wound  for  this  voltage  for  use  in  mines  and  tunnels  is  readily 
obtained,  as  it  is  largely  used  on  this  class  of  work. 

Ventilation. — There  is  little  difficulty  in  providing  suitable  ventilation 
in  rock  or  pneumatic  tunnels,  as  the  exhaust  from  the  drills  and  the 
leakage  from  the  headings  are  usually  sufficient  to  provide  ample  change 
of  air.  In  earth  tunnels,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  seldom  so  convenient 
a  supply  of  air  and  it  is  frequently  necessary  to  install  ventilating 
machinery  and  ducts.  Sometimes,  where  pumping  is  required,  this 
may  be  done  by  compressed  air  and  the  exhaust  piped  to  the  headings 
for  ventilation. 

Hacndling  and  Transporting  Materials. — Methods  of  mucking  and 
transporting  materials  must  be  worked  out  for  each  tunnel.  In  earth 
tunnels  the  mining  and  mucking  proceed  simultaneously  and  are  usually 
suspended  while  the  masonry  is  being  placed.  In  rock  tunnels  it  is 
often  convenient  to  do  the  drilling  and  blasting  during  one  shift  and  the 
mucking  during  the  next. 

If  the  tunnel  is  very  long  some  means  of  transporting  materials  must 
be  provided.  Usually  a  track  is  laid  and  the  loaded  cars  are  pushed 
by  workmen,  drawn  by  mules  or  hauled  by  compressed  air  or  electric 
motor  cars.  Fig.  14  gives  two  views  of  an  electric  car  used  by  the 
authors  in  several  small  tunnels.  An  electric  current  of  220  volts  was 
provided,  being  carried  in  by  a  small  third  rail,  the  return  being  through 
the  rails  of  the  track.  The  lighting  current  was  taken  from  the  rails 
wherever  required. 

The  motor  car  hauled  one  or  more  flat  cars  on  which  were  buckets 
loaded  with  the  excavated  materials.  When  the  shaft  was  reached  the 
buckets  were  hoisted  by  suitable  machinery.  The  materials  for  the 
construction  of  the  sewer  were  handled  in  the  same  way. 

Shafts. — In  very  short  tunnels  work  may  be  carried  on  from  the 


EXCAVATION  65 

portals  only,  but  where  the  tunnels  are  long,  reasonable  progress  gener- 
ally requires  the  sinking  of  shafts  so  that  work  can  be  carried  on  at  a 
number  of  points.  They  are  generally  sunk  on  the  line  of  the  tunnel 
and  are  of  suitable  size  to  allow  for  the  passage  of  men  and  materials 
and  for  such  pipes,  wires,  ventilating  flues,  chutes  and  other  accessories 
as  may  be  required.  As  the  line  of  the  sewer  is  usually  taken  down  the 
shafts  by  the  surveyors,  it  is  desirable  to  make  them  fairly  long  even  on 
small  work,  a  length  of  at  least  8  ft.  being  desirable.  In  Louisville, 
where  borings  were  made  prior  to  letting  the  contracts,  wrought-iron 
pipe  casings  were  driven  into  the  bore  holes  at  proper  points  and  capped, 
being  left  for  use  in  transferring  the  line  into  the  tunnel  when  required. 

Shafts  are  excavated  and  sheeted  in  the  same  manner  as  trenches, 
except  that  it  is  advisable  to  make  the  bracing  somewhat  more  substan- 
tial that  it  may  withstand,  without  deformation,  heavy  pressures  likely 
to  be  developed  during  the  long  time  the  shafts  are  to  remain  open. 

Methods  of  Tunneling  in  Soft  Ground. — Small  tunnels  are  driven  by 
excavating  the  whole  section  at  one  time,  properly  timbering  it  and  pro- 
ceeding with  the  excavation  of  another  portion,  or  inmiediately  lining 
it,  in  which  case  the  excavation  and  lining  proceed  alternately,  the  one 
being  suspended  while  the  other  is  going  on.  In  such  cases  it  is  advan- 
tageous to  carry  on  work  at  several  headings  that  the  miners  and  masons 
may  be  economically  employed  at  all  times.  This  may  also  be  accom- 
plished by  alternating  shifts,  the  excavation  being  done  on  one  shift  and 
the  masonry  placed  during  the  next. 

Upon  large  tunnels,  headings  or  drifts  are  often  driven  some  distance 
ahead  of  the  excavation  of  the  whole  section,  the  remainder  of  the  work 
consisting  simply  of  breaking  in,  or  down,  the  earth  or  rock  surrounding 
the  headings.  The  term  "heading"  is  frequently  used  upon  smaU  work 
as  meaning  the  end  of  the  tunnel  in  which  excavation  is  being  carried 
on  at  the  time,  but  upon  large  tunnels,  it  more  often  refers  to  a  small 
tunnel  driven  ahead  of  the  main  tunnel.  Prelini,  in  "Tunneling,*' 
after  discussing  the  confusion  which  has  arisen  over  the  use  of  the  terms 
"heading"  and  "drift,"  suggests: 

"For  the  sake  of  distinctness  of  terminology,  it  seems  preferable  to  call 
the  passage  a  heading  when  it  is  located  at  the  top  of  the  profile,  and  a  drift 
when  it  is  located  near  the  bottom/' 

The  problem  of  timbering  the  tunnel  is  generally  the  governing  con- 
sideration in  the  selection  of  a  method  of  tunneling,  although  drainage 
and  prospecting  to  determine  the  character  of  materials  to  be  traversed 
by  the  main  tunnel  may  be  important  factors.  Prelini  describes  four 
general  methods  of  driving  large  tunnels  as  follows: 

"  (1)  Excavating  the  tunnel  by  beginning  at  the  soffit  of  the  section, 
or  by  the  Belgian  method,  is  the  method  of  tunneling  in  loose  soils  most 
5 


66  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

commonly  employed  in  Europe  at  the  present  time.  It  consists  in  excavat- 
ing the  soffit  of  the  section  first;  then  building  the  arch,  which  is  supported 
upon  the  unexcavated  ground;  and  finally  in  excavating  the  lower  portion 
of  the  section,  and  building  the  side  walls  and  invert. 

"  (2)  In  excavating  tunnels  along  the  perimeter  an  annular  excavation  is 
made,  following  closely  the  outline  of  the  sectional  profile  in  which  the  lining 
masonry  is  built,  after  which  the  center  core  is  excavated.  In  the  German 
method  two  drifts  are  opened  at  each  side  of  the  tunnel  near  the  bottom. 
Other  drifts  are  excavated,  one  above  the  other,  on  each  side  to  extend  or 
heighten  the  first  two  until  all  the  perimeter  is  open  except  across  the  bottom. 
The  masonry  lining  is  then  built  from  the  bottom  upward  on  each  side  to 
the  crown  of  the  arch,  and  then  the  center  core  is  removed  and  the  invert  is 
built. 

"  (3)  This  method,  as  its  name  implies  (tunnels  excavated  in  the  whole 
section — English  and  Austrian  methods),  consists  in  taking  out  short  lengths 
of  the  whole  sectional  profile  before  beginning  the  building  of  the  masonry. 
In  the  English  method  the  lengths  of  section  excavated  vary  from  10  ft. 
to  25  ft.  The  masonry  invert  is  built  first,  then  the  side  walls,  and  finally 
the  arch.  The  excavators  and  the  masons  work  alternately,  the  excavation 
being  stopped  while  the  masonry  is  being  built,  and  vice  versa.  The  Aus- 
trian method  differs  in  two  particulars  from  the  English;  the  length  of 
section  opened  is  made  great  enough  to  allow  the  excavators  to  continue  work 
ahead  of  the  masons,  and  the  side  walls  and  roof  are  built  before  the  invert. 

"  (4)  The  Italian  method  is  very  seldom  employed  on  account  of  its  ex- 
pensiveness,  but  it  can  often  be  used  where  the  other  methods  fail.  It 
consists  in  excavating  the  lower  half  of  the  section,  and  building  the  invert 
and  side  w^alls,  and  then  filling  the  space  between  the  walls  in  again  except 
for  a  narrow  passageway  for  the  cars;  next  the  upper  part  of  the  section  is 
excavated,  as  in  the  Belgian  method,  and  the  arch  is  built;  and  finally  the 
soil  in  the  lower  part  is  permanently  removed." 

Methods  of  Tunneling  in  Rock. — In  full  rock  headings,  there  is  usually 
no  necessity  for  timbering,  although  some  rocks  are  so  soft  and  seamy 
that  shoring  is  required.  The  invention  and  development  of  rock  drills, 
high  explosives  and  methods  of  electric  firing  have  greatly  simplified  rock 
tunneling  during  the  last  half  century,  so  that  now  the  ordinary  rock 
tunnel  presents  a  far  less  difficult  problem  than  many  of  the  tunnels 
which  have  to  be  driven  through  soft  ground. 

As  in  soft  ground  tunnels,  in  some  cases  headings,  or  drifts,  are  driven 
ahead  of  the  full  section  of  the  tunnel  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the 
character  of  the  rock  through  which  the  tunnel  must  pass.  In  most 
large  rock  tunnels,  such  passages  are  driven  at  least  a  short  distance 
ahead  of  the  full  section  of  the  tunnel  to  aid  in  breaking  down  the  sur- 
rounding rock.  These  drifts  are  usually  in  the  neighborhood  of  6  or 
8  ft.  in  diameter.  In  small  tunnels,  it  is  customary  to  drill,  near  the 
center  of  the  tunnel,  three  or  four  holes  directed  along  converging  lines 
toward  the  apex  of  a  pyramid.    These  holes  are  fired  together,  consti* 


EXCAVATION  67 

tuting  the  culnshot.  After  these  holes  have  been  fired,  the  breaking-in 
holes  which  surround  them  are  fired,  upon  small  work  usually  all  at  one 
time  and  upon  larger  work  in  relays.  The  development  of  the  "  delay" 
fuzes  has  greatly  facilitated  this  class  of  work  as  it  permits  the  firing  of 
the  cut-shots  first  and  breaking-in  shots  successively  thereafter,  with- 
out the  necessity  of  clearing  the  tunnel  of  fumes  and  rewiring  the  holes. 

PUcing  Masonry. — The  placing  of  masonry  in  tunnels,  and  especially 
in  small  tunnels,  involves  difficulties  not  ordinarily  encountered  upon 
similar  work  in  trenches.  Usually,  the  entire  space  between  the  inside 
profile  of  the  structure  and  the  excavation  must  be  filled  with  masonry. 
Upon  small  work,  the  masonry  of  the  upper  portion  of  the  sewer  must  be 
placed  from  the  end,  necessitating  ^he  use  of  relatively  short  centers 
and  forms. 

Upon  most  sewer  work,  the  concrete  or  mortar  is  prepared  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  ground,  and  taken  down  the  shaft  and  into  the  tunnel  when 
ready  to  be  placed. 

PUMPING,  BAILING  AND  UNDERDRAINAGE 

One  of  the  most  variable  and  oftentimes  perplexing  problems  which 
has  to  be  overcome  in  sewer  excavation  is  the  removal  of  the  ground  water 
which  finds  itj  way  into  the  trench.  Its  quantity  varies  from  an  almost 
negligible  amount,  which  may  ooze  or  percolate  into  the  trench  from 
very  compact  soils,  to  an  almost  constant  flow  from  the  free  and  water- 
bearing gravels.  The  method  adopted  to  care  for  and  remove  the 
ground  water  will  vary  according  to  its  quantity  and  with  the  character 
of  the  soil  in  which  it  is  found. 

Where  the  amount  of  water  encountered  is  slight  it  can  frequently  be 
allowed  to  gather  or  flow  into  little  sumps,  from  which  it  can  be  removed 
by  bailing. 

The  most  common  method  of  disposing  of  water  where  it  accumulates 
in  moderate  quantities  is  by  means  of  a  diaphragm  suction  pump  operated 
by  hand  and  capable  of  handling  from  30  to  50  gal.  per  minute,  when 
lifting  it  from  a  depth  of  about  16  ft.,  the  maximum  lift  depending  in 
great  measure  upon  the  condition  of  the  rubber  diaphragm  and  valve. 
Power  diaphragm  pumps  of  a  capacity  of  from  50  to  100  gal.  per  minute, 
driven  by  gasoline  engines  mounted  upon  trucks,  are  now  available. 

Diaphragm  Pumps. — These  are  made  either  as  suction  pumps  or  as 
force  pumps.  In  the  former  case  the  water  is  discharged  freely  over  a 
lip  on  the  side  of  the  pump  body  and  in  the  latter  it  is  forced  through  a 
pipe.  These  pumps  are  made  in  several  sizes,  ranging  in  rated  capacity 
from  1800  to  6000  gal.  per  hour,  under  most  favorable  conditions.  The 
size  most  commonly  used  is  that  requiring  a  3-in.  suction  hose  and  weigh- 
ing about  185  lb.    This  pump  operated  by  one  man  at  a  rate  of  30 


68  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

strokes  per  minute  will  deliver  about  30  gal.  per  minute.  Upon  very 
shallow  work  a  angle  length  (12  ft.)  of  hoee  is  ordinarily  used.  A 
variety  of  strainers  are  on  the  market  and  it  is  well  to  select  that  having 
the  largest  holes  which  it  Ib  safe  to  use  with  the  water  to  be  pumped, 
Bince  fine  holes  increase  the  frictional  resistance.  The  cost  of  a  pump, 
two  lengths  of  hose  and  a  str^ner  will  be  from  $50  to  f  75. 

The  life  of  the  hose,  which  is  fuUy  as  expensive  aa  the  pump,  may  be 
greatly  prolonged  by  using  it  with  care,  not  allowing  it  to  become  kinked, 
rubbed  on  the  bank,  or  cut.     Cotton-covered  or  jacketed  hose  may  be  , 
obtained  at  small  extra  expense. 

While  with  a  perfect  pump  and  suction  hose  it  may  be  possible  to  lift 
water  from  a  depth  of  25  or  26  ft.,  it  is  generally  not  practicable  to  use 


Fig.  15. — Gasoline-driven  diaphragm  pump  (Edson). 

this  pump  for  lifts  of  over  20  ft.  at  sea  level,  and  even  at  such  a 
lift  it  is  necessary  to  use  several  men  on  the  pump. 

In  Fig.  15  is  shown  an  Edson  diaphragm  pump  connected  to  a  gaso- 
line engine.  The  outside  dimensions  of  the  wooden  base  are  3  ft.  9  in. 
by  3  ft.  It  can  he  easily  carried  about  by  four  men  or  it  can  be  mounted 
on  a  4-wheel  hand  truck.  It  is  stated  that  a  10-hr.  continuous  run  will 
require  approximately  2  qt.  of  gasoline,  and  that  the  outfit  will  handle 
6000  gal.  an  hour.  The  prices  of  complete  outfits  vary  from  JlOO  to 
S160. 

Centrifugal  Pumps. — These  can  generally  be  used  to  good  advantage 
where  large  quantities  of  water  are  to  be  handled,  and  if  a  pump  with 
an  open  impeller  is  used,  it  will  handle  very  dirty  water  without  much 
injury  in  most  cases.  Table  167  and  the  description  of  centrifugal 
pumps  in  Volume  I  make  any  notes  on  the  subject  unnecessary  here. 
Most  of  the  pump  makers  supply  outfits  made  specially  for  construction 


EXCAVATION  69 

purposes.  These  consist  of  the  pump  and  a  direct-connected  electric 
motor,  or  steam  or  gasoline  engine,  mounted  on  skids  or  on  a  wheeled  truck. 

Where  a  large  volume  of  water  must  be  handled  for  a  long  time,  as  in 
tunneling,  and  where  the  lift  is  considerable,  a  high-grade  plant  designed 
to  fit  the  conditions  will  often  prove  more  economical  than  one  of  the 
less  efficient  but  also  less  expensive  outfits  for  general  service.  If  such 
an  expensive  equipment  is  used,  particularly  if  turbine  pumps  are  em- 
ployed, attention  should  be  paid  to  preventing  materials  from  entering 
the  pimip  which  will  interfere  with  its  operation,  and  a  sump  in  which 
a  sand-catching  chamber  is  incorporated  may  prove  desirable. 

Wh'ere  the  drainage  of  a  trench  can  be  accomplished  through  under- 
drains  discharging  into  a  sump  which  can  .be  kept  in  service  for  a  con- 
siderable time,  it  is  often  advisable  to  install  a  centrifugal  pump  at  the 
sump,  but  the  low  lift  and  dirty  water  to  be  handled  by  such  an  outfit 
make  high  efficiency  less  desirable  than  reliability. 

Reciprocating  Pumps. — These  are  not  well  adapted  to  the  handling  of 
water  under  the  conditions  usually  existing  about  sewer  trenches,  because 
of  the  grit  likely  to  be  carried  by  the  water,  which  cuts  the  plungers  and 
valves.  In  some  cases,  however,  the  water  may  be  relatively  clean 
and  if  a  supply  of  steam  or  compressed  air  is  available,  a  reciprocating 
pump  may  be  set  up  and  operated  with  very  little  attention  and  often  at 
small  expense.  Where  such  pumps  are  used  in  connection  with  driven 
wells  to  lower  the  ground  water  which  would  otherwise  flood  a  trench 
or  pit,  it  is  usuaUy  necessary  to  place  on  the  suction  line  a  sand-catcher, 
such  as  is  employed  in  water-works  plants  using  a  well  supply. 
Outside-packed  plunger  pumps  of  the  low-pressure  type  are  suited 
for  this  service  and  are  better  than  the  heavier  patterns  for  250  lb. 
pressure.  Piston  pumps  are  unsuited  for  construction  purposes  except 
in  the  very  rare  cases  where  clear  water  is  to  be  handled. 

Steam  Vacuum  Pumps. — Three  types  of  steam  pumps  of  a  special 
class  are  largely  used  on  construction  work  where  very  dirty  water  must 
be  handled  and  the  position  of  the  pumps  must  be  changed  frequently. 
The  first  of  these  to  come  into  general  use  was  the  pulsometer,  which  was 
followed  by  the  Nye  and  Emerson  types. 

The  pulsometer  has  a  body  with  two  bottle-shaped  pumping  chambers. 
Fig,  16,  with  their  necks  communicating  at  the  top,  each  opening  into 
an  outlet  chamber  through  a  check  valve.  An  air  chamber  connects 
with  the  suction  inlet  and  cushions  the  incoming  pulsations.  Near  the 
top  of  each  pumping  chamber  is  an  air  check  valve  opening  inwardly, 
which  admits  a  small  quantity  of  air  automatically  at  each  pulsation 
at  the  moment  the  vacuum  is  formed.  This  layer  of  air  cushions  the 
inrushing  water  and  forms  an  air  piston  between  the  steam  and  water, 
preventing  the  former  from  being  condensed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
stroke. 


70  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Steam  from  the  boiler  is  piped  to  the  inlet  at  the  top  find  from  there  is 
turned  to  the  right  or  left  chamber  according  to  the  position  of  the  ball 
steam  valve,  which  is  free  to  roll  to  either  side,  forming  a  steam-tight 
joint  with  whichever  fleat  it  rests  upon.  In  the  position  illustrat«d  the 
steam  would  pass  to  the  left-hand  chamber,  which  may  be  assumed  to  be 
full  of  water.  The  pressure  of  the  steam  forces  the  water  through  a 
pass^c  between  the  air  and  outlet  chambers  and  a  check  valve  into  the 
outlet  chamber  and  thence  into  the  discharge  pipe.  .When  the  water 
falls  to  the  level  of  the  opening  into  the  outlet  chamber,  the  water  and 


TronBver&e    Section.  Longitudinal  Section. 

Fig.  IB. — Sections  of  the  pulsonietcr. 

steam  become  churned  up  together  and  the  latter  is  condensed.  This 
forms  a  partial  vacuum  in  the  left-hand  chamber,  which,  assisted  by  a 
slight  upward  pressure  in  the  right-hand  chamber,  immediately  pulls 
the  ball  valve  over  to  the  left-hand  seat,  shutting  off  the  steam  supply. 
The  vacuum  in  the  left-hand  chamber  then  draws  up  a  new  charge  of 
water  through  the  suction  pipe,  and  while  it  is  filling,  the  right-hand  one 
is  emptying,  bringing  about  the  conditions  that  existed  at  the  beginning 
of  the  cycle. 


EXCAVATION 


71 


Table  3  gives  the  more  important  dimensions  of  the  sizes  now 
(1914)  made;  the  manufacturer,  the  Puiaometcr  Steam  Pump  Co., 
New  York,  states  that  the  capacities  are  underrated  for  most  oases, 
particularly  with  a  short  suction  and  high  steam  pressure. 

The  Nye  steam  vacuum  pump,  made  by  the  Nye  Steam  Pump  & 


Fia.  17. — The  Nye  pump. 


Machinery  Co.,  of  Chici^o,  is  the  result  of  an  evolutionary  process 
beginning  in  an  1869  patent.  The  "new  model"  shown  in  Fig.  17  was 
patented  in  1909.  The  steam  valve  is  hollow  and  it  offers  very  little 
resistance  to  motion.  The  two  air  valves  are  located  so  as  to  admit 
a  piston  of  air  between  each  charge  of  steam  and  the  water  on  which 
it  acts.    In  starting  the  pump  both  the  steam  and  air  valves  are  closed. 


72 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Table  6.— 

Capacities 

AND  Dimensions 

OF  PuiiSOMETERS 

Trade  No. 

2 

3  1  4 

6 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Gal.  per  min. 

25-ft.  head. .. 

50-ft.  head. .. 

76-ft.  head . . . 

Weight,  lb 

Height,  in 

Floor  space,  in.. . . 
Boiler  h.p 

20 
17 
13 
96 
25 

\\ 
4 

60 
60 
38 
140 
27 

il 
5 

100 
80 
65 

295 
33 

is 

6 

180 
160 
115 
430 
38 

» 

10 

300 
265 
200 
670 
43 

\i 
12 

425 
375 
275 
745 
49 

K 

16 

700 
625 
450 
1,375 
61 

H 

25 

1000  2,000 
900  1,800 
650j  1,400 

2,100  3,800 
72    88 

n     n 

35    70 

Then  the  valve  on  the  steam  pipe  at  the  boiler  is  opened  wide,  after  which 
the  steam  globe  valve  at  the  pump  is  quickly  opened,  allowed  to  remain 
open  3  or  4  sec,  and  is  then  quickly  closed,  this  being  repeated  after  the 
steam  has  remained  off  during  4  or  5  sec.  This  manipulation  is  repeated 
until  a  click  of  the  hollow  steam  valve  of  the  pump  indicates  that  the 
pimip  has  caught  its  suction.  The  steam  valve  is  then  left  half  or  three- 
quarters  open  and  the  air  valves  are  adjusted  until  the  pump  is  work- 
ing satisfactorily.  The  shorter  the  suction,  the  greater  the  quantity 
of  air  required.  The  suction  valves  are  of  the  clack  type,  the  discharge 
valves  of  the  ball  type.  The  method  of  operation  is,  in  general,  like 
that  of  other  types  of  vacuum  pumps. 

Table  7. — Capacities  and  Dimensions  op  Nye  Pumps 


Trade  No. 


Gal.  per  min. 

50-ft.  head 

100-ft.  head 

Weight,  lb 

Steam  pipe,  in 

Suction  pipe,  in . . 
Discharge  pipe,  in 
Boiler  h.p.^ , 


2 

3 
300 

4 

5 

6 

200 

600 

800 

1000 

100 

200 

400 

600 

800 

650 

900 

1600 

2300 

2800 

i 

1 

li 

li 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

16 

20 

25 

30 

40 

^Thifl  boiler  capacity  is  suited  for  a  50-ft.  lift.  Two-thirds  as  much 
capacity  will  answer  for  25  ft.  and  about  33  per  cent,  more  will  be  needed 
for  100-ft.  lift. 


The  Emerson  pimip,  made  by  the  Emerson  Steam  Pump  Co.,  of 
Alexandria,  Va.,  has  two  chambers.  Fig.  18,  each  with  a  disk  suction 
valve  at  the  bottom  and  a  disk  discharge  valve  opening  into  a  small 
chamber  from  which  the  discharge  pipe  runs.  On  top  of  each  chamber 
is  a  flange  with  a  baffle  plate  cast  on  its  lower  side  opposite  the  port 
through  which  steam  enters  the  cylinder.  The  baffle  plate  distributes 
the  steam  evenly  and  prevents  any  agitation  of  the  surface  of  the  water 
in  the  cylinders.    A  condenser  nozzle  in  each  chamber  is  connected  with 


EXCAVATION 


Fit}.  18. — The  Emerson  pump. 


74 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


the  bottom  of  the  opposite  chamber  by  an  extra  heavy  pipe  into  which  a 
check  valve  opens  upward.  As  the  pressure  in  the  chambers  alternates, 
sufficient  water  will  be  injected  through  each  nozzle  into  the  opposite 
chamber  to  condense  the  steam  in  it  and  promptly  form  a  vacuum.  A 
small  air  check  valve  attached  to  each  chamber  at  the  top  and  opening 
inward  admits  a  small  quantity  of  air  while  the  chamber  is  filling  with 
water,  to  act  as  an  air  cushion  or  piston,  as  in  other  t}'pes  of  steam 
vacuum  pumps.  The  globe  valve  just  above  the  steam  chest  is  used  to 
regulate  the  amottnt  of  steam  to  the  conditions;  another  valve  for  start- 
ing and  stopping  must  be  placed  between  the  boiler  and  pump. 

The  steam  chest  has  two  ports,  one  leading  to  each  chamber.  A  fiat 
rotary  slide  valve,  entirely  enclosed  in  the  steam  chest,  admits  steam 
through  these  ports  to  the  two  chambers  alternately.  This  slide  valve  is 
driven  by  a  small  three-cylinder  engine  rigidly  attached  to  the  lower  side 
of  the  steam  chest. 

The  engine  crank  shaft  extends  into  the  steam  chest  in  the  center  of 
the  bearing  around  which  the  slide  valve  rotates,  and  a  positive  connec- 
tion is  made  between  the  engine  and  the  valve  by  steel  and  bronze  gears, 
so  arranged  that  the  engine  will  run  faster  than  the  valve.  The  motion 
of  the  engine  is  controlled  by  a  valve  on  the  exhaust  pipe  passing  down 
from  the  engine  to  the  suction  chamber,  where  the  exhaust  steam  is 
condensed. 

Table  8. — Capacities  and  Dimensions  of  Emerson  Pumps 


Trade  No. 


6 


B 


C 


Gal.  per  min^ 

Weight,  lb 

Height,  in 

Breadth,  in 

Width,  in 

Steam  pipe,  in 

Suction  pipe,  in 

Discharge  pipe,  in. 


225 

950 

98 

17, 
18 

3 
2J 


415 

725 

1,200  2,100'  3,275 

100 

150 

1,375 

1,900 

3,100  4,400 

5,400 

219 

290 

104 

113   127 

132 

135 

47 

47 

1   22 

26 

30 

44 

52 

15 

18 

21 

24 

28 

33   37 

11 

11 

i    1 

U 

1^. 

2 

21 

i 

} 

4 

5 

6 

8 

10 

3 

4 

3 

4 

5 

6 

8 

2i 

3 

200 

410 

47 

21 

14 

i 

5 
4 


Note. — No6.  1  to  6  are  two-oylindcr  pumpH  and  Nos.  A  to  C  are  singlo-cylindpr  pumps. 

1  Capacities  ffivcn  in  the  table  are  calculated  for  a  lift  of  20  ft.  Those  diminish  at  the 
rate  of  about  4  per  cent.- for  every  10  ft.  additional  head,  for  Nos.  1  to  6,  and  at  the  rata 
of  6  per  cent,  for  every  10  ft.  additional  head,  in  the  case  of  Nos.  A  to  C.  The  maximum 
head  for  two-cylinder  pumps  is  150  ft.  and  for  single-cylinder  pumps  100  ft. 

In  starting  up,  the  air  check  valves  are  opened,  and  the  steam  valve 
is  opened  for  5  or  6  sec.  and  then  closed.  The  steam  expels  the  air 
from  the  cylinders  and  condenses,  forming  a  partial  vacuum  which 
causes  water  to  rush  toward  the  suction  chamber.  The  engine  is 
started  by  opening  an  exhaust  valve  (not  shown  in  the  illustration) 
which  opens  outside.    After  the  water  has  been  worked  out  of  the  engine 


EXCAVATION  75 

and  it  exhausts  steam,  the  outside  exhaust  valve  is  closed  and  the  engine- 
control  valve  is  opened  about  half  a  turn.  The  steam  valve  is  next 
opened  two  or  three  turns  and  the  engine-control  valve  manipulated 
until  the  pimip  runs  smoothly  and  quietly.  If  the  suction  valves 
hammer  it  is  because  either  the  steam  valve  has  not  been  opened  enough 
or  the  engine-control  valve  has  been  opened  too  much. 

The  same  company  also  makes  a  smaller  single-cylinder  steam  vacuum 
pump,  called  the  Emerson  Junior,  which  utilizes  a  balanced  valve  to 
control  the  operating  cycle. 

Underdrains. — Underdrains  may  be  divided  into  two  classes,  con- 
struction underdrains,  which  are  put  in  simply  to  facilitate  the  building 
of  the  sewer  and  are  generally  abandoned  ux)on  its  completion;  and 
permanent  imderdrains,  which  are  made  a  part  of  the  drainage  system, 
and  are  provided  with  permanent  outlets.  The  latter  are  particularly 
serviceable  where  a  sanitary  system  of  sewers  alone  is  provided,  as  they 
lower  the  elevation  of  the  water  table,  thus  making  it  possible  to  provide 
dry  cellars  which  would  otherwise  be  wet,  and  often  prevent  much 
infiltration  into  the  sewers.  As  such  drains  are  laid  immediately  below 
the  sewers,  they  are  likely  to  receive  the  leakage  from  the  latter,  if 
there  is  any,  and  care  should  be  taken  to  prevent  the  contamination  of 
water  supplies  by  the  discharges  from  such  underdrains. 

Obviously  the  joints  in  underdrains  must  be  left  open  for  the  admission 
of  ground  water,  and  in  some  places  much  trouble  has  been  experienced 
wdth  the  growth  of  roots  in  the  pipes,  and  also  with  deposits  of  fine  sand 
and  earth,  carried  in  through  the  joints  with  the  water.  In  some  places 
the  sewer  manholes  have  been  provided  with  chambers  through  which 
access  may  be  had  to  the  underdrains,  for  purposes  of  inspecluon,  flushing 
and  cleaning,  as  illustrated  by  Figs.  220  and  249,  Volume  I.  In  general 
less  trouble  with  the  growth  of  roots  has  been  experienced  in  underdrains 
than  in  sewers,  as  the  latter  are  usually  nearer  the  surface  and  contain 
many  joints  which  are  not  sufficiently  tight  to  prevent  the  entrance  of 
roots,  although  in  some  places  the  reverse  is  true,  more  trouble  being 
experienced  with  underdrains.  Little  can  be  done  to  prevent  the 
entrance  of  roots  into  the  underdrains,  but  if  they  are  thoroughly  well 
laid,  as  described  later,  there  should  be  relatively  little  difficulty  from 
the  admission  of  dirt. 

If  good  work  is  to  be  done,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  have  a  dry 
trench.  Joints  made  of  cement  must  not  be  submerged  or  exposed  to 
running  water  until  the  cement  has  had  ample  time  to  acquire  its  final 
set.  It  is  usually  safe  to  allow  the  water  to  come  in  contact  with  mortar 
after  it  has  had  24  hours  in  which  to  set. 

It  is  claimed  that  certain  plastic  jointing  materials  may  be  poured 
successfully  under  water.  While  the  authors  have  seen  a  few  joints 
successfully  poured  in  this  way,  where  care  was  taken  to  pour  the  fluid 


76  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

jointing  material  into  one  side  of  the  bell,  thus  allowing  water  to  flow 
out  the  other,  they  beheve  the  practice  to  be  dangerous,  as  there  is 
difficulty  in  getting  good  work  under  such  conditions.  While  concrete 
can  be  placed  under  water,  under  many  conditions,  this  should  not  be 
attempted  upon  ordinary  sewer  construction,  where  the  thickness  of  the 
concrete  is  relatively  small,  and  where  the  entire  section  should  be  in 
excellent  condition  and  thus  available  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was 
designed. 

Where  considerable  water  finds  its  way  into  the  trench  it  is  generally 
wise  to  provide  a  construction  underdrain,  through  which  the  ground- 
water may  flow  to  a  gravity  outlet  or  to. a  pump  well  provided  for  the 
purpose. 

The  method  of  constructing  underdrains  depends  much  upon  the 
material  through  which  they  are  to  be  laid.  If  in  rock,  there  is  little 
danger  of  the  entrance  of  sand  or  earth  which  will  cause  clogging,  and 
it  is  obviously  desirable  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  quantity  of  rock 
excavated.  In  gravel  there  may  be  little  danger  of  the  entrance  of  fine 
material,  and  it  may  be  necessary  only  to  excavate  the  trench,  lay  the 
pipe,  and  refill  with  a  small  quantity  of  screened  cobbles  or  crushed 
stone.  The  greatest  difficulty  is  encountered  where  the  drain  is  to  be 
laid  in  fine  water-bearing  sand.  Here  great  care  must  be  taken  in  lay- 
ing and  surrounding  the  pipe  with  gravel  and  sand,  if  the  admission 
of  fine  material  is  to  be  prevented.  In  many  instances  underdrains  have 
been  laid  only  to  be  completely  clogged  within  a  few  hours.  The  authors 
have  laid  many  miles  of  underdrains  in  such  trenches,  by  surrounding 
the  pipes  with  screened  cobbles  or  broken  stone,  sometimes  even  covering 
the  entire  bottom  of  the  trench  with  gravel  to  a  depth  of  2  or  3  in. 

In  an  article  on  the  "  Maintenance  of  the  System  of  Separate  Sewers 
at  Newton,  Mass.,"  by  Stephen  Childs  {Jour,  Assoc.  Eng,  Socs.,  Jan., 
1899),  the  method  of  laying  underdrains  in  Newton  is  described  as 
follows: 

"  Under  all  of  our  sewers  (with  the  few  exceptions  where  it  was  definitely 
known  that  the  level  of  the  ground  water  was  much  lower  than  the  sewer 
grade)  an  underdrain  has  been  laid.  The  size  necessarily  varies,  our  largest 
being  18  in.  under  one  of  our  main  sewers,  and  4  in.  being  the  minimum. 
The  underdrain  pipes  are  surrounded  by  screened  gravel,  and  the  whole  is 
covered  with  a  layer  of  bagging  to  prevent  the  clay  from  working  down  into 
the  drain.  This  bagging  does  not  rot  until  the  soil  above  has  become  so 
compact  that  there  can  be  no  tendency  for  it  to  settle  into  the  drain.  The 
underdrains  are  so  designed  that  they  discharge  at  frequent  intervals,  either 
into  convenient  brooks  or  the  Charles  River;  and  as  they  are  inspected  and 
kept  free,  together  with  the  system  of  sewers,  they  furnish  a  continuous 
outlet  for  ground  water,  and  are  therefore  of  great  advantage,  especially 
in  those  parts  of  our  city  where  the  soil  is  compact  clay  and  the  level  of  the 
ground  water  high." 


EXCAVATION 


77 


Where  underdrains  are  to  be  laid  in  bad  material  or  are  to  be  a  part  of 
tjie  permanent  drainage  system,  it  may  be  necessary  to  adopt  the  method 
of  construction  used  for  the  building  of  underdrains  in  sand  filter  beds, 
illustrated  by  Fig.  19.  Where  the  material  in  which  the  drain  is  laid 
is  very  fine,  it  is  usually  necessary  to  use  two  or  three  grades  of 
gravel  and  a  relatively  coarse  sand,  as  indicated  by  the  sketch.  The 
gravel  should  be  so  graded  from  coarse  to  fine  that  the  finer  material 
overlying  the  coarser  will  not  penetrate  it.  By  this  method  underdrains 
have  been  laid  in  relatively  fine  sand  and  have  been  kept  open  for 
many  years,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  large  quantities  of  water  filtered 
into  them  continuously. 

Underdrains  may  discharge  into  rivers,  brooks  or  sewers,  or  into 
pump  wells.  Such  wells  may  be  located  directly  on  the  line  of  the 
sewer  or  at  one  side  of  the  trench.  T*he  latter  location  is  preferable  in 
many  cases  as  it  is  possible  to  lay  the  sewer  past  the  pump  well,  thus 


from Z'foS'CoafS* Jam/ ffaetd  k 
^onJbpafttrlliuriovalofB(Ut_        X 


S'MtdfuntSfofte 


1 


I 


3' Medium  Stone 


I 

I 
I 
I 
I 

.J 


i 


tiMbafh'pts. 


Mold  for  Placing 
Material . 


ZXaaaeiand  (/fAm/htft) 


7we-ttiiids 
CMifneJemeli' 


rilling  around  Underdrains. 


FiQ.  19. — Grading  material  around  underdrains. 


completing  it  before  closing  the  drain  and  filling  the  well.  In  some 
cases  where  the  slope  will  permit,  it  is  desirable  to  turn  the  under- 
drain  up  and  allow  it  to  discharge  into  the  sewer.  In  such  cases, 
unless  it  is  a  storm  drain  or  combined  sewer,  it  is  afterwards  necessary 
to  plug  the  underdrain,  which  is  sometimes  a  matter  of  considerable 
difficulty.  One  method  of  accomplishing  this  is  to  insert  into  the 
underdrain,  or  the  well  into  which  the  drain  discharges,  and  build  securely 
into  the  masonry,  an  iron  pipe  provided  with  a  thread  at  its  upper  end, 
this  pipe  terminating  from  4  to  6  in.  below  the  water  line  of  the  masonry 
sewer.  Onto  this  pipe  is  screwed  a  length  of  iron  pipe  through  which 
concrete  is  forced  into  the  well  or  underdrain,  thus  completely  or  par- 
tially stopping  the  flow  of  water.  The  upper  pipe  is  then  removed  and  a 
pipe  cap  is  screwed  onto  the  pijje  previously  built  into  the  tnasonry. 
This  makes  a  tight  joint  and  the  concrete  or  brick  work  of  the  sewer  may 
be  completed  over  it. 


78  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Ocoasionally,  underdrains  are  laid  long  distanoes  in  water-bearing 
gravel  and  collect  very  large  quantities  of  water,  which  may  be  used  to 
advantage.  In  one  or  two  instances,  the  authors  have  extended  such 
underdrains  into  wells  from  which  large  supplies  of  water  were  pimiped 
for  condensing  purposes.  In  Baltimore,  Md.,  large  quantities  of  water 
collected  by  underdrains  are  used  for  condensing  at  the  sewage  pumping 
station.  Ground  water  is  particularly  good  for  this  purpose  as  it  is 
alwayB  relatively  cold. 

Where  underdrains  are  to  have  permanent  outlets  great  care  should  be 
taken  to  so  build  them  as  to  prevent  the  water  from  carrying  fine  sand 
or  clay  into  them,  thus  eventually  undermining  the  sewers  and  possibly 
other  structures,  as  well  as  clogging  the  underdrains. 

Method  of  Cleaning  Underdrains. — Notwithstanding  the  considerable 
variety  of  precautions  which  may  be  taken  to  prevent  sand  from  en- 
tering construction  underdrains,  experience  teaches  that  it  does  often 
enter  and  it  is  desirable  to  have  ready  a  means  of  agitating  the  sand 
so  that  the  water  flowing  in  the  under  drain  may  carry  it  to  the  pump. 
The  means  usually  adopted  for  such  agitation  is  to  thread  a  manila 
rope  through  the  bore  of  the  underdrain,  as  it  is  laid.  This  may 
be  pulled  back  and  forth,  thus  stirring  the  sand  and  preventing  its 
sedimentation. 

The  rope  should  be  of  hemp,  about  3/4  in.  in  diameter,  having  a  loop 
at  its  forward  end  which  should  be  drawn  ahead  as  fast  as  the  pipe  are 
laid.  It  should  be  wound  upon  a  reel  suspended  in  the  last  manhole, 
and  should  pass  through  a  snatch-block  so  arranged  that  the  rope  may 
enter  the  lower  end  of  the  underdrain  without  disturbing  the  pipe  and 
thus  avoid  the  necessity  of  keeping  a  man  at  the  lower  end  to  feed  the 
rope  in  as  the  work  progresses.  If  the  rope  fails  to  stir  the  sediment 
sufficiently  a  chain  may  be  drawn  back  and  forth  through  the  pipe,  until 
it  is  cleared. 

Method  of  Handling  Excavation  in  Advance  of  Underdrains. — The 
difficulties  experienced  with  underdrains  filling  up  with  sand  are  due  in 
great  measure  to  the  sand  which  enters  the  pipe  at  its  upper  or  free  end. 
Sand  does  not,  or  at  least  should  not,  enter  the  pipe  along  its  length, 
provided  the  underdrain  has  been  properly  constructed.  It  is  difficult 
to  prevent  the  sand  entering  the  pipe  at  its  upper  end,  as  the  very 
process  of  excavation  keeps  the  sand  stirred,  and  with  large  volumes 
of  water  flowing  directly  to  the  free  end  of  the  pipe  the  sand  is  carried 
along  with  the  water  into  the  pipe. 

As  the  construction  in  the  trench  of  sumps  in  which  the  sand  may 
deposit,  and  from  which  the  clearer  water  may  flow  directly  into  the  free 
end  of  the  underdrain,  greatly  delays  the  progress  of  laying  the  under- 
drain, it  is  generally  considered  better  practice  to  keep  the  drain  laid 
close  to  the  excavation. 


EXCAVATION  79 

In  some  cases  it  may  be  advisable  to  handle  the  water  which  gathers 
within  the  portion  of  the  trench  under  excavation  by  means  of  hand 
pumps,  raising  it  to  the  surface,  unless  the  depth  is  such  as  to  prohibit 
this.  Handled  in  this  way,  a  comparatively  short  length  of  trench  bottom 
should  be  worked  at  one  time,  and  the  underdrain  should  be  laid  as  fast 
as  a  portion  of  the  bottom  is  ready,  its  upper  end  being  continuously 
protected  by  means  of  a  substantially  constructed  strainer  so  arranged 
as  to  keep  out  the  fine  sand.  One  or  more  hand  pumps  should  remove 
the  sand-ladened  water  which  finds  its  way  into  this  short  portion  of  the 
trench,  while  other  pumps  should  take  care  of  the  water  that  gathers 
in  advance  of  this  portion  of  the  trench.  In  this  manner  the  portion 
of  the  trench  ready  for  the  sewer  is  kept  dry  and  the  danger  of  clogging 
the  underdrain  is  greatly  reduced. 

SETTLEMENT  OF  ADJACENT  STRUCTURES 

Frequently  following  or  during  the  construction  of  sewers,  structures 
or  buildings  adjacent  to  the  line  of  the  sewer  Are  found  to  have  settled. 
There  are  a  number  of  different  conditions  which  may  be  responsible 
for  this.  The  settlement  of  pipes,  conduits,  pavements,  curbing  and 
sidewalks  along  the  street  in  which  the  sewer  is  constructed  may  be  due 
to  the  caving  of  the  banks  of  the  sewer  trench,  to  the  slow  running  of  dry 
sand  or  gravel  through  the  joints  of  the  sheeting,  or  to  the  carrying  of 
sand  into  the  trench  by  the  water  flowing  through  the  cracks  in  the 
sheeting  or  from  underneath. 

The  settlement  of  adjacent  buildings  is  due  to  the  movement  of  the 
strata  which  lie  beneath  their  foundations.  This  movement  is  either  duo 
to  the  drainage  of  water  from  them,  thus  causing  them  to  subside  or 
shrink,  or  else  to  a  horizontal  movement  of  a  portion  of  the  sand  and 
the  settlement  of  the  balance  with  its  superimposed  load,  owing  to 
the  reduced  pressure  within  the  trench.  There  have  also  been  cases 
where  settlement  of  buildings  has  been  due  to  the  movement  of  in- 
clined, wedge-shaped  masses  of  rock.  Such  was  the  case  in  1902,  when 
buildings  on  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York,  were  damaged  during  the  con- 
struction of  the  Rapid  Transit  Subway. 

To  prevent  such  settlement,  the  construction  should  be  watched  with 
great  diligence.  Where  sand  is  finding  its  way  in  considerable  quantities 
between  the  sheeting  planks,  greater  care  should  be  taken  in  placing 
and  driving  them,  while  the  existing  joints  should  be  stuffed  with 
oakum,  hay  or  other  material,  and  boards  or  planks  nailed  securely 
over  the  larger  openings.  In  some  cases  it  may  be  necessary  to  resort 
to  the  use  of  tongued  and  grooved  timber,  although  this  is  not  usually 
advisable. 

Where  water  finds  its  way  into  the  trench  between  or  below  the 


80  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

sheeting  planks,  frequent  observation  should  be  made  to  determine  the  f; 

presence  of  sand  in  the  flowii^  water.    If  this  water  is  allowed  to  :, 


Fia.  20. — Interior  of  pit  wrecked  by  flow  of  bi 


Flo.  21. — Ejrterior  of  pit  wrecked  by  flow  of  sand. 

carry  sand  with  it  for  a  considerable  time,  larRc  voids  may  be  formed 
behind  the  sheeting  into  which  the  superimposed  soil  may  slide,  thus 
causing  damage  to  adjacent  pipes,  conduits,  curbing,  and  possibly  to 


EXCAVATION  81 

buildings.    When  such  slides  occur,  damage  may  result  not  alone  to  the 
adjacent  structures  and  buildings  but  the  sudden  blow  of  the  falling 
material  against  the  sheeting  may  break  braces  and  walings  and  force 
in  the  sheeting,  destroying  the  trench  for  a  considerable  distance.  ^^^ 
{     The  effect  of  the  unchecked  flow  of  sand  is  illustrated  in  Figs.  20  and 
■  21,  which  are  views  of  an  excavation  for  a  pit  for  the  construction  of  a 
*  piunping  station  at  New  Bedford,  Mass.    Here  the  sand  was  allowed 
to  flow  with  the  water  for  a  niunber  of  weeks  before  the  slide  actually 
occurred. 
\  The  boiling  of  quicksand  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  which  is  usually 
due  to  the  relieved  pressure,  and  the  horizontal  flow  of  sand  from  the 
quicksand  stratiun  must  be  watched  with  great  care.    At  such  times 
the  sheeting  must  be  driven  down  on  both  sides  of  the  trench  consider- 
ably in  advance  of  the  excavation,  thus  tending  to  intercept  the  hori- 
zontal flow  of  the  sand.  [jEhe  depth  of  the  driving  will  depend  on  the 
thickness  of  the  quicksand  stratum,  head  of  water  in  the  sand  and  many 
other  conditions. 

Where  such  conditions  are  anticipated  and  in  all  cases  where  en- 
countered, measurements  and  observations  should  be  made  carefully 
from^  which  the  exact  condition  of  the  adjacent  structures  before  and 
after  the  completion  of  the  work  may  be  clearly  shown.  Such  informa- 
tion should  include  the  taking  of  exact  elevations  at  several  points  on  the 
structures,  such  points  being  accurately  and  fully  described  so  that 
there  may  be  no  doubt  that  subsequent  levels  were  taken  at  exactly  the 
same  points.  Photographs  should  be  taken  and  notes  made  of  the 
exact  time  at  which  this  was  done  and  of  the  exact  location  of  the 
camera.  Measurements  showing  the  relation  of  the  front  and  sides  of 
the  buildings  to  true  vertical  planes  should  be  made.  Such  measure- 
ments should  be  made  in  advance  of  any  settlement  for  comparison 
with  later  measurements,  from  which  the  effect  of  unequal  settlement 
may  be  shown.  Sucli  measurements  should  be  made  with  a  transit  in 
perfect  adjustment,  set  in  the  plane  of  the  front  or  side  of  the  building, 
or  a  plane  parallel  to  it,  and  at  such  a  distance  from  it  that  the  entire 
height  of  the  building  may  be  brought  within  the  range  of  the  transit. 
Offsets  from  the  plumb  line  to  the  face  of  the  building  may  then  be 
taken  by  means  of  a  graduated  steel  straight-edge  upon  which  is  mounted 
a  spirit  level  and  a  target  rider  which  may  be  set  by  the  transitman, 
accurate  and  clear  descriptions  of  the  points  to  which  the  offsets  are 
taken  being  carefully  and  permanently  recorded.  Accurate  levels 
should  be  taken  along  a  given  course  of  masonry  near  the  surface  of  the 
ground,  and  upon  window  and  door  sills,  from  which  the  extent  of  the 
settlement,  if  a!ny,  may  be  determined. 


6 


CHAPTER  IV. 
MACHDIERYFOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION 

Where  trenches  are  narrow  and  shallow,  hand  excavation  is  generally 
more  economical  than  the  use  of  machinery.  The  depth  at  which 
mechanical  excavation  has  an  advantage  depends  upon  many  local 
conditions,  and  no  definite  rule  can  be  given  for  determining  it.  The 
types  of  machinery  most  commonly  used  require  trenches  to  be  at  least 
3  ft.  wide,  and  such  machines  are  seldom  put  on  trenches  unless  they 
are  at  least  12  ft.  deep,  except  where  there  are  traffic  conditions  which 
make  it  necessary  to  confine  the  work  to  narrow  limits,  which  can  be 
done  much  better  with  machinery  than  by  hand  excavation.  In  the 
middle  and  western  states  the  soils  often  lend  themselves  to  the  use  of 
machines  of  the  Austin,  Buckeye  and  other  types,  either  bucket  or 
breast  wheel,  and  many  trenches  22  and  24  in.  wide  and  6  ft.  and  more 
deep  are  thus  dug.  There  seems  to  be  a  feeling  that  for  less  than  about 
6  ft.  depth  there  is  no  great  saving  imless  labor  is  scarce  or  very  expen- 
sive. Under  the  latter  conditions,  one  machine  may  do  the  work  of  100 
to  200  men  per  day.  These  machines  are  particularly  adapted  for  use 
in  soils  like  loam  and  soft  sandy  clay,  which  do  not  require  close  sheeting 
or  heavy  bracing.  They  have  been  used  successfully,  however,  in 
heavy  material  like  shale  and  hardpan.  Pipe  lines  across  trenches 
seriously  interfere  with  their  use,  but  in  some  cases  it  may  be  more 
economical  to  tear  out  such  pipes  with  the  machine  and  replace  them 
later  than  to  forego  its  use. 

With  the  ordinary  hoisting  machinery,  the  cost  of  picking  and  shovel- 
ing the  earth  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench  is  usually  the  same,  whether  a 
trench  machine  is  used  or  the  work  is  done  by  hand.  To  arrive  at  the 
comparative  costs  of  hand  work  and  that  type  of  machine  work,  then,  it 
is  only  necessary  to  compare  the  cost  of  staging  and  overcasting  the 
excavated  material  and  shovelling  it  back  into  the  trench,  with  the 
cost  of  operating  a  machine,  including  labor,  fuel,  rental  and  all  inci- 
dental expenses.  When  these  two  charges  balance  each  other,  it  may  be 
wise  to  adopt  some  sort  of  a  trench  machine  as  it  is  much  more  con- 
venient and  does  not  usually  constitute  as  great  an  obstruction  in  the 
street.  It  is  different  with  digging  machines,  for  they  require  little  labor 
and  the  decision  to  install  them  should  depend  largely  on  the  supply  of 
labor  and  their  cost.  Due  regard,  however,  should  always  be  given 
to  the  probable  quantity  of  work  to  be  done.    It  is  not  advisable 

82 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION  83 

to  secure  and  use  a  machine  for  the  sake  of  a  very  short  piece  of  work, 
as  the  cost  of  unloading  and  erecting  the  machine,  taking  it  down  and 
re-loading  it  on  the  car,  together  with  freight  charges,  is  so  great  that 
it  may  prove  a  source  of  exp>en8e  rather  than  of  economy. 

A  number  of  machines  have  been  designed  expressly  for  use  in  exca- 
vating trenches,  some  for  the  actual  digging  of  trenches;  others  built 
primarily  for  other  kinds  of  excavation  have  been  adapted  to  trench  work 
so  that  they  may  be  used  to  advantage  under  certain  conditions.  It  is 
not  the  intention  to  describe  all  the  machines  which  have  been  used  for 

» 

excavation  of  trenches,  but  only  those  which  are  most  commonly  used 
upon  sewer  work  and  a  few  of  the  larger  machines  which  have  been 
adapted  for  trench  work  and  may  be  used  to  advantage  upon  some  of  the 
larger  excavations. 

Among  the  different  tjrpes  of  machines  which  are  available  for  trench 
work  may  be  mentioned  machines  in  which  buckets  are  raised  and 
lowered  by  means  of  cables,  such  as  the  ordinary  cableway  and  the  Car- 
son, Potter  and  Moore  trench  machines;  trench  diggers  like  the  Buckeye 
Traction  Digger;  the  steam  shovel  with  or  without  an  extra  long  dipper 
arm,  and  either  moved  on  standard  gage  tracks  laid  in  the  bottom  of  the 
trench  or  carried  on  tracks  or  traction  wheels  upon  the  surface  of  the 
ground;  clam-shell  and  orange-peel  buckets  operated  by  derricks  or 
locomotive  cranes  are  also  useful  upon  large  work  and  wide  trenches,  and 
scrapers  drawn  by  horses  or  mules,  operated  by  derricks  or  by  means  of 
hoisting  engines  and  cables,  have  been  used  to  a  limited  extent  upon 
sewer  work. 

Carson  Trench  Machine. — ^The  Carson  trench  machine  was  designed 
by  Howard  A.  Carson  and  first  used  upon  work  in  the  vicinity  of  Boston, 
Mass.  It  was  designed  especially  for  sewer  trenches  and  is  particularly 
well  adapted  to  this  class  of  excavation.  It  consists  of  a  set  of  trestles 
tied  together  by  connecting  rods  at  the  bottom  and  girders  at  the  top. 
the  whole  being  moved  along  a  track  laid  on  the  siuiace  of  the  ground. 
Attached  to  the  girders  is  an  iron  track  upon  which  travelers  canying 
the  buckets  are  drawn  forward  and  backward  by  means  of  two  ropes 
operated  by  a  double-drum  hoisting  engine,  as  shown  in  Fig.  22. 
The  engine  is  carried  upon  a  bed  or  car  which  rolls  along  the  rails  of  the 
lower  track.  The  drums  of  the  engine  are  placed  forward  in  the  direc- 
tion in  which  the  work  is  to  progress.  The  head  rigging  which  is  bolted 
to  the  engine  bed  projects  forward  a  short  distance  to  carry  the  blocks 
through  which  the  ropes  run  from  the  drums  to  the  rear  part  of  the 
machine.  The  trestles  in  the  rear  of  the  engine  bed  are  made  in  the 
shop  and  are  set  up  individually.  The  first  trestle  when  erected  is 
attached  to  the  engine  bed  and  head  rigging  by  means  of  two  connecting 
bars,  one  on  each  side  immediately  over  the  rails  of  the  bottom  track, 
and  a  girder  at  the  top  which  is  fastened  at  one  end  to  the  trestle  and  at 


AMERICAN  SBWERA6B  PRACTICE 


I 

I 

s 

If 


11 
si 

U 

! 
1 

S5 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION  85 

the  other  to  the  head  riggmg.  In  erecting,  work  is  begun  at  the  engine 
bed  and  proceeds  toward  the  tail  end.  All  of  the  trestles  are  inter- 
changeable, except  the  one  which  carries  the  tail  table  and  those  making 
up  the  head  rigging.  At  the  rear  end  of  the  machine  are  two  braces 
which  may  be  attached  to  the  next  trestle  forward  or  which  may  be 
swung  around  and  placed  against  the  ground  to  support  the  machine. 
The  trestles  are  braced  by  means  of  diagonal  braces  against  the  girders, 
thus  stiffening  the  machine.  Hangers  are  attached  to  the  girders  and 
carry  the  upper  track,  which  is  made  of  flat  pieces  of  steel  about  6  in. 
wide  and  3  /8  in.  thick.  These  are  usually  in  8-f t.  lengths.  The  girders 
are  a  little  short  of  16  ft.  in  length,  the  distance  from  center  to  center  of 
trestles  being  16  ft. 

The  carriages  or  travelers  which  carry  the  buckets  are  provided  with 
wheels  hung  upon  the  upper  track.  Each  traveler  contains  a  large 
wheel  over  which  the  bucket  rope  passes.  These  tub  ropes,  shown  in 
Fig.  22,  are  attached  to  an  equalizer  carried  by  a  small  traveler  near  the 
forward  end  of  the  machine.  The  ropes  are  of  the  exact  length  required 
for  spacing  the  travelers  8  ft.  apart.  The  main  hoisting  rope,  carried  on 
the  drum  nearest  the  boiler,  is  attached  to  the  equalizer  and  runs 
through  a  large  block  at  the  forward  end  of  the  head  rigging.  By  means 
of  this  main  hoisting  rope  the  buckets  are  raised  or  lowered  into  the 
locks  in  the  travelers.  Another  rope  runs  from  the  outer  drum  of  the 
engine  through  a  smaller  head  block  in  the  head  rigging  and  over  the 
trestle  to  the  tail  table  at  the  rear  end  of  the  machine.  The  rope  passes 
through  this  table,  which  contains  two  blocks,  one  at  the  top  and  one  at 
the  bottom,  and  back  through  the  table  to  the  rear  end  of  the  last  traveler. 
By  means  of  this  rop>e  the  buckets  are  drawn  to  the  rear  of  the  machine  as 
the  hoisting  rop>e  is  allowed  to  run  off  its  drum. 

The  traveler  is  provided  with  two  jaws  upon  which  the  tubs  rest,  thus 
preventing  them  from  faUing  into  the  trench  when  the  main  hoisting 
rope  is  released.  When  it  is  desired  to  lower  the  tubs,  the  locks  are 
raised  by  means  of  a  latch-lever  and  rod,  after  which  the  main  hoist  rope 
is  very  slowly  released,  constant  tension  being  kept  upon  it,  until  the 
lugs  on  the  tub  ropes  have  passed  through  the  locks.  The  jaws  of  the 
locks  may  then  be  allowed  to  drop,  the  rope  passing  between  them.  The 
tubs  are  then  gradually  and  carefully  lowered  into  the  trench,  the 
engineer  keeping  a  constant  strain  upon  the  hoisting  rope  so  that  he 
may  stop  them  at  any  moment  upon  signal  from  the  latchman,  who  stands 
on  a  running  board  near  the  forward  end  of  the  machine  with  one  hand  on 
the  bell  cord  and  the  other  free  to  operate  the  latch-lever. 

When  the  empty  tubs  reach  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  the  ropes 
attached  to  them  are  unhooked  and  hooked  onto  another  set  of  full 
tubs.  The  signal  is  then  given  by  the  latchman  to  the  engineer  to  hoist 
the  tubs  carefully  into  the  locks.    The  lugs  on  the  tub  ropes  are  conical  in 


86 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


shape,  and  when  raised  ultimately  lift  the  jaws  of  the  locks  and  pass 
through  them  to  a  height  sufficient  to  allow  them  to  drop.  When  the 
locks  have  thus  dropped,  the  latchman  signals  the  engineer,  who 
carefully  releases  the  main  hoist  rope  allowing  the  tubs  to  settle  back 
on  to  the  jaws,  after  which  they  cannot  drop.  When  the  full  buckets 
have  thus  been  landed  in  the  locks,  and  the  latchman  is  sure  that  the 
jaws  of  all  the  locks  have  properly  fallen  and  the  tubs  are  securely 
fastened,  he  gives  a  signal  to  the  engineer  who  releases  the  main  hoist 
rope  and  draws  in  the  tail  rope,  thus  drawing  the  buckets  to  the  rear  of 
the  machine.  They  are  dumped  by  the  dumpman  at  whatever  point  is 
desired,  either  into  the  trench,  on  the  bank,  or  into  carts  provided  to 
carry  the  surplus  material  to  the  spoil  bank. 

When  excavation  in  a  section  has  been  completed,  a  rope,  one  end  of 
which  is  secured  to  the  engine  bed,  is  carried  through  a  snatch  block 
secured  to  a  deadman  ahead  of  the  machine,  and  back  to  a  winch  on  the 
engine.  The  machine  may  then  be  drawn  ahead  by  coiling  this  rope 
around  the  winch.  Thus  only  one  engine  is  required  for  operating  the 
machine  and  moving  it  ahead.  The  sizes  and  capacities  of  these 
machines  are  given  in  Table  9.  As  the  tubs  are  spaced  8  ft.  apart,  the 
four-bucket  machine  will  provide  for  the  excavation  of  a  section  of 
trench  32  ft.;  the  six-bucket  machine  one  of  48  ft.,  and  the  eight-bucket 
machine  one  64  ft.  long.  Machines  may  be  had  with  double  or  single 
upper  tracks.  The  nominal  capacity  of  the  double-track  machine  is  50 
per  cent,  greater  than  the  single  trench  machine,  as  one  set  of  buckets  is 
being  hoisted  while  the  other  is  being  lowered.  Thus  three  sets  of 
buckets  are  continually  in  use,  one  set  being  filled,  one  hoisted  and 
carried  to  the  dump,  the  other  dumped  and  returned  to  be  loaded. 


Table  9. — Sizes 

AND    Capacities   op  Carson  Trencb 

[  Machines 

No.  of  tubs 

hoisted  at 

a  time 

No.  of  tubs 
furnished 

with 
machine 

Single  or 

double 

upper 

track 

Capacity  of  machine 
when  run  at  moderate 
speed  continuously  for 

10  hours,  with  tubs 
holding  5.5  cu.  ft.  each 

Length  of 

working 

section 

Horse- power 

double  drum, 

double  cylinder 

hoisting  engine 

required 

4 

6 
8 
4 
6 
8 

12 
18 
24 
16 
24 
32 

Single 

Single 

Single 

Double 

Double 

Double 

200  cubic  yd. 
300  cubic  yd. 
400  cubic  yd. 
300  cubic  yd. 
450  cubic  yd. 
600  cubic  yd. 

192  feet 
288  feet 
320  feet 
192  feet 
288  feet 
320  feet 

20 
20 
20 
20 
20 
30 

The  capacities  given  in  Table  9  are  nominal  capacities.  It  is  not  to 
be  expected  that  these  capacities  will  be  reached  continuously  for  long 
periods  of  time.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  an  average  of  100  cu.  yd.  per  day 
of  8  hours  is  very  good  work  with  a  six-bucket,  sin^e-track  machine, 
and  often  the  output  of  the  machine  will  fall  considerably  below  that 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION  87 

amount,  due  to  delays  from  various  causes  such  as  time  required  for 
placing  sheeting,  lack  of  sufficient  teams  to  carry  the  surplus  material 
away,  difficulties  due  to  ground  water,  changing  laborers  from  one  sec- 
tion to  another,  pipes  to  be  moved,  and  a  multitude  of  obstacles  en- 
countered in  this  type  of  work. 

Three  counter-buffers  are  provided  with  each  single>track  machine. 
These  are  spaced  48  ft.  apart  on  a  six-bucket  machine  and  near  the  for- 
ward end.  A  buffer  is  attached  to  the  rear  traveler,  so  that  when  the 
empty  tubs  which  are  being  drawn  in  by  the  hoisting  rope  reach  the 
counter-buffer,  the  carriages  stop  and  the  hoisting  rope  then  raises  the 
buckets  slightly  so  that  the  latchman  has  an  opportunity  to  lift  the  jaws 
of  the  locks.    The  buckets  are  then  lowered  into  the  trench. 

If  excavation  is  carried  on  in  the  section  nearest  the  hoisting  engine, 
the  coimter-buffers  for  the  next  two  sections  are  tied  so  that  the  carri- 
ages can  be  pulled  past  them  to  the  forward  coimter-buffer.  In  very 
hard  digging,  and  sometimes  in  other  cases,  excavation  is  carried  on  in 
two  or  three  sections  simultaneously.  In  this  case  the  latchman  is 
required  to  operate  the  counter-buffers  from  time  to  time  as  may  be 
necessary.  If  the  buckets  are  to  be  lowered  in  the  section  farthest  from 
the  engine,  the  buffer  of  the  last  carriage  will  engage  the  counter-buffer 
farthest  from  the  engine,  the  tubs  will  be  lifted,  the  locks  opened  and 
then  the  tubs  lowered.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  work  is  progressing  in  the 
second  section,  the  last  counter-buffer  from  the  engine  must  be  lifted 
to  allow  the  buckets  to  pass  forward  to  the  middle  counter-buffer,  which 
engages  the  buffer  on  the  last  carriage,  after  which  the  tubs  can  be  low- 
ered into  this  section. 

Each  tub  is  provided  with  a  pair  of  common  bails  and  a  latch.  When 
the  latch  is  lifted  one  of  the  bails  is  released,  allowing  the  bucket  to  be 
revolved.  The  latchman  releases  these  latches  one  at  a  time,  as  the  tubs 
pass  him,  dumping  the  tub  and  turning  it  back  into  position  and  latch- 
ing it,  or  sometimes  he  will  release  the  latches  and  dump  the  tubs  as  they 
pass  him  going  out  and  right  and  latch  them  as  they  are  drawn  past  him 
on  the  return  trip. 

A  sufficient  number  of  trestles  must  be  provided  to  allow  for  hoisting  in 
as  many  sections  as  it  is  desired  to  devote  to  excavation,  usually  at  least 
two;  to  provide  space  for  the  masonry  construction,  which  would  usuaUy 
require  two  sections;  and  to  provide  suitable  additional  space  for  back- 
filling the  trench,  which  should  generally  be  two  sections,  making  a  total 
of  six  sections  back  of  the  engine.  In  the  case  of  a  six-bucket  machine 
each  of  these  sections  would  be  48  ft.  long,  making  the  total  length  of 
the  working  section  288  ft.  The  method  of  operating  a  machine  and  of 
carrying  on  the  work  in  the  trench  is  well  illustrated  by  Fig.  23,  in  which 
excavation  is  represented  as  being  carried  on  only  in  the  head  section, 
the  brick  sewer  is  being  laid  in  the  next  section,  the  completed  sewer  is 


88  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

being  allowed  to  stand  until  the  cement  has  an  opportunity  to  set,  in 
the  next  succeeding  section;  while  the  remainder  of  the  sections  are  be- 
ing used  for  backfilling  the  trench.  This  is  a  double-track,  four-bucket 
machine,  using  three  sets  of  buckets.  One  is  being  filled,  one  is  being 
lowered  into  the  trench,  and  the  third  is  being  dumped. 

The  manufacturers  of  this  machine  claim  for  its  advantages  that  the 
earth  is  handled  but  once;  all  operations  are  carried  on  over  the  sewer, 
thus  neither  obstructing  the  street  nor  trench  operation;  a  compactness 
of  work  is  secured,  by  which  it  is  carried  on  systematically;  there 
is  a  systematic  division  of  labor  so  that  the  work  of  each  laborer  or  pair 
of  laborers  can  be  observed  and  efficiency  thus  obtained,  and  exca- 
vation in  quicksand  and  soft  mud  can  be  done  more  successfully  than 
with  hand  work,  or  the  use  of  apparatus  requiring  very  large  tubs  and 
slow  operation. 

The  force  required  to  oi>erate  one  of  these  machines  consists  of  an 
engineer,  fireman,  latchman  and  tubman.  In  some  cases  where  the  work 
is  proceeding  slowly,  the  engineer  can  do  his  own  firing.  It  is  sometimes 
thought  desirable  to  use  boy^  for  latching  and  dumping  as  they  are 
quicker  and  lighter,  whereas  the  older  men  are  slower  and  do  not  get 
along  as  well  on  the  running  boards,  which  are  usually  2  or  3-in.  plank 
12  in.  wide  and  about  18  ft.  long,  extending  from  trestle  to  trestle  the 
entire  length  of  the  machine.  It  is  very  essential  to  have  a  careful  and 
alert  man  or  boy  to  do  the  latching,  as  he  must  observ'e  carefully  each 
of  the  travelers  to  make  sure  that  the  jaws  have  fallen  before  the  engineer 
releases  the  main  hoisting  rope,  otherwise  a  tub  may  fall  through  one  of 
the  locks,  in  which  case,  unless  the  engineer  is  remarkably  skilful,  it  is 
likely  to  fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  to  the  great  danger  of  laborers 
below.  Even  where  the  engineer  is  quick  enough  to  stop  the  tub,  the 
strain  upon  the  tub  rope  may  be  great  enough  to  part  the  roi>e,  in  which 
case  the  bucket  will  fall  to  the  bottom.  The  latchman  should  be  fairly 
well  acquainted  with  the  machine,  and  each  noon  should  look  over 
the  travelers  and  the  upper  track  and  see  that  all  bolts  are  tight  and 
that  the  travelers  and  sheaves  are  well  oiled.  The  authors  have  also 
found  it  desirable  to  have  a  skilled  mechanic,  or  perhaps  the  engineer, 
go  over  the  machine  carefully  on  Sundays,  to  make  sure  that  the  ropes 
are  properly  adjusted,  that  all  parts  of  the  machine  which  have  worn 
are  replaced  by  new  ones,  and  that  the  whole  mechanism  is  in  perfect 
condition.  Too  much  emphasis  cannot  be  laid  upon  the  necessity  of 
having  the  machine  in  good  order,  as  it  is  a  source  of  danger  to  men 
working  below  it  if  it  is  not  in  condition  for  successful  and  safe 
operation. 

For  ordinary  sewer  construction  the  six-bucket  single-track  machine 
is  probably  the  most  convenient  and  desirable  type.  If  the  trench  is 
very  wide,  or  the  excavation  exceedingly  hard,  it  may  be  desirable  to  use 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION  89 

the  double-track  machine,  thus  mcreasing  the  output.  Where  the 
machine  is  to  be  taken  around  curves  it  is  desirable  to  use  the  narrow 
track  rather  than  the  I-beam  track  which  is  sometimes  furnished. 
Machines  of  this  kind  can  be  taken  around  curves  of  fairly  short  radius, 
but  difficulties  are  encountered  when  this  radius  is  less  than  100  ft.  A 
skilful  foreman,  who  has  had  experience  with  these  machines,  however, 
will  successfully  take  them  around  a  curve  of  very  short  radius, 

Moving  forward  requires  usually  but  about  10  minutes  shut-down 
of  the  machine.  The  lower  track  should  be  laid  before  the  excavation 
of  the  section  being  worked  is  finished.  When  the  track  is  laid,  the 
deadmen  provided  and  the  moving  ropes  are  in  place  and  attached  to 
the  winch,  excavation  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench  is  stopped  and  the 
machine  is  quickly  drawn  forward.  Immediately  after  the  machine 
has  reached  its  new  position,  the  work  can  be  resumed.   ^ 

The  cost  of  operation  depends  primarily  upon  the  cost  of  labor,  fuel 
and  rental.  The  union  wage  for  engineers  around  Boston  is  S25  for 
a  44-hour  week  with  time  and  one-half  for  overtime  and  65  cents  per 
hour  for  broken  time.  Firemen  are  usually  paid  the  same  rate  as  com- 
mon laborers. 

The  charge  for  a  six-bucket,  single-track  machine  including  suitable 
engine,  is  about  $200  per  month,  the  cost  of  unloading  from  cars,  hauling 
to  the  work  and  erecting  depending  upon  the  skill  of  the  men  employed 
and  the  distance  it  is  hauled.  When  the  men  upon  the  work  have  used 
such  inachines  many  times,  as  in  the  case  of  some  municipal  day-labor 
organizations,  a  machine  can  be  taken  out  and  erected  ready  for  opera- 
tion in  two  days,  and  can  be  taken  down  and  packed  up  at  headquarters 
in  from  one  day  to  one  and  one-half  days.  The  cost  of  taking  out  and 
setting  up  where  the  distance  from  the  shop  yard  or  railroad  is  not  more 
than  2  miles,  should  average  about  $100,  and  the  cost  of  taking  down 
and  loading  for  re-shipping  or  packing  away  in  the  storehouse  should  be 
about  $50.  Where  the  men  on  the  work  are  not  familiar  with  the 
machine  and  handling  it,  these  costs  may  be  doubled  or  trebled. 

The  amount  of  coal  used  by  a  six-tub,  single  machine,  upon  nine  jobs 
in  Worcester,  Mass.,  averaged  561  lb.  per  day,  the  minimum  being 
501  and  the  maximum  646  lb.  These  pieces  of  work  each  lasted  for 
several  months,  and  were  not  exceptional  for  work  in  this  part  of  the 
country.  On  one  piece  of  work  where  a  four-tub,  single-track  machine 
was  used,  473  lb.  of  coal  were  used  per  day.  To  arrive  at  the  real  cost 
of  the  use  of  the  machine  the  cost  of  setting  up  and  taking  down  and 
transportation  between  shop  or  cars  and  the  job  must  be  added.  If  the 
job  is  of  long  duration  these  items  will  make  only  a  small  addition  to  the 
daily  cost  of  operation.  The  cost  of  moving  ahead,  equivalent  to  the 
cost  of  one  additional  man  per  day,  must  be  included  in  the  estimate. 
There  must  also  be  a  slight  addition  for  minor  repairs,  inspection,  oil 


90 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


and  waste,  so  that  the  net  cost  of  operation  ought  not  to  be  figured,  in 
estimating  work,  at  less  than  S25  per  day.  Based  upon  this  estimate 
and  an  average  of  100  cu.  yd.  per  day  excavated,  the  cost  per  cubic 
yard  would  be  $0.25.  This  cost  includes  only  the  cost  of  hoisting  the 
excavated  material,  carrying  it  back  and  dumping  it  into  the  trench  or 
into  carts  to  be  hauled  away.  The  cost  of  picking  and  shovelling  in 
the  bottom  of  the  trench  and  of  tamping  the  backfill  or  hauling  waste 
material  to  the  dump  must  be  added  to  this,  to  arrive  at  the  true  cost 
of  excavation,  exclusive  of  such  items  as  sheeting,  pumping,  etc. 

Potter  Trench  Machine. — ^Another  excavating  apparatus  especially 
designed  for  trench  work  is  the  Potter  trench  machine,  Fig.  24.  This  is 
a  cable-oi>erated,  bucket  machine,  running  upon  a  track  laid  on  the 


iS^ 

~^                                                                       1 

1 

sy&gSa^  j 

jjr 

« 

^^S 

n 

^ 

i/"""""^^'"^^ 

y 

yml 

mJ 

1^^--^ 

•Ml. 


'il\i' 


;;:I2:lr^. 


'S^i 


'<^^ 


--.i'Ezav 


---'^ 


}^ 


■  y  ^■' 


-A- 


J  / 


FiQ.  24. — Potter  standard  hoister  and  conveyor. 


ground  like  the  Carson  trench  machine.  A  standard  machine  is  10  ft. 
6  in.  wide  and  the  height  of  the  trestles  above  the  ground  is  about  7  ft. 
On  top  of  the  trestles  are  two  rails  on  which  a  car  is  moved  backward 
and  forward.  On  this  car  are  carried  the  tubs,  usually  two  in  number, 
although  the  car  can  be  equipped  for  four,  or  one  of  them  may  be  taken 
off  and  the  machine  operated  with  the  remaining  one.  This  machine  is 
operated  by  a  double-drum  hoisting  engine  carried  on  a  car  at  the  for- 
ward end  of  the  machine.  The  machine  is  moved  ahead  from  section 
to  section  like  the  Carson  trench  machine.  Twelve  buckets  are  usually 
supplied  with  each  machine.  They  are  made  of  steel  and  vary  in 
capacity  as  desired  from  1  /4  to  1  cu.  yd.     For  very  wide  trenches,  these 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION 


91 


machines  may  be  had  wide  enough  to  accommodate  two  upper  tracks 
and  two  cars,  thus  greatly  increasing  the  output  of  the  machine. 

Potter  Excavator  and  Conveyor. — ^The  Potter  Manufacturing  Co.  also 
makes  a  machine  known  as  the  Potter  Excavator  and  Conveyor,  Fig.  25. 
This  is  equipped  with  an  orange-peel  or  clam-sheU  bucket  by  means  of 
which  digging,  as  well  as  hoisting  and  conveying,  is  done.  The 
material  thus  excavated  is  raised  and  dumped  onto  a  Gonve3ring  car 
which  runs  on  the  upper  track.  When  the  car  is  loaded  it  is  pulled  to  the 
rear  of  the  machine,  under  a  scraper,  which  scrapes  the  material  off  and 
allows  it  to  fall  into  the  trench  as  backfilling. 


Fig.  25. — Potter  excavator  and  conveyor. 

The  Cableway. — The  cableway,  which  is  used  so  frequently  on  many 
classes  of  work,  is  occasionally  employed  on  sewer  trench  excavation,  and 
some  special  cablewajrs  have  been  made  for  this  purpose.  A  large 
cableway  of  the  ordinary  type  is  not  particularly  well  adpated  for 
sewer  trenching.  For  this  work,  light  towers  which  can  be  easily 
moved  should  be  provided,  and  the  cableway  should  be  relatively  short, 
usually  not  over  300  ft.  in  length.  Only  one  tub  is  handled  at  a  time, 
and  this  has  a  capacity  varying  according  to  the  requirements  of  the 
work,  from  1/2  to  1-1/2  cu.  yd. 

As  a  cableway  is  relatively  high  above  the  ground  and  is  supported 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Fio.  27. — Steam  ehovel  taking  10-foot  first  cut  in  si 


Fio.  2X. — Steam  hIiovcI  with  high  c 


B  inches  wide  and  15  feet 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION  93 

and  steadied  only  at  the  ends,  300  to  1000  ft.  apart,  it  is  difficult  to 
prevent  the  buckets  from  swinging  and  hitting  and  occasionally  knock- 
ing out  the  timbering  and  endangering  the  men  in  the  trench.  It  is 
also  difficult  to  land  the  buckets  gently  and  if  landed  roughly  there  is 
danger  to  the  men  and  difficulty  in  moving  the  empty  bucket  to  the 
desired  position.  Similar,  though  less  serious,  trouble  attends  the 
hoisting.  Another  objection  to  the  cableway  upon  sewer  work  is  due  to 
the  fact  that  it  cannot  be  moved  forward  quickly  but  must  be  taken  down, 
carried  forward  and  again  erected  every  time  it  is  moved.  This  opera- 
tion consumes  considerable  time  during  which  all  excavation  is  stopped. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  cableway  possesses  some  advantages  over 
some  of  the  other  trench  machines,  as  the  cable  is  high  above  the  street 
and  there  is  no  track  to  maintain  and  keep  clear.  The  excavated  material 
may  be  piled  as  high  as  desired  under  the  cableway.  There  is  also  less 
danger  of  damaging  the  machine  when  blasting.  As  the  cableway  is 
supported  only  at  each  end  it  adds  no  weight  to  that  of  the  banks  to  be 
supported  by  the  sheeting  and  bracing. 

The  standard  400-ft.  span  sewer  cableway  made  by  the  Lambert 
Hoisting  Engine  Co.  is  shown  in  Fig.  26,  a  view  taken  on  some  sewer 
work  in  St.  Louis,  where  such  cableways  have  been  used  to  a  considerable 
extent.  A  double-dnun  hoisting  engine  is  used  on  these  plants,  built 
to  enable  the  operator  to  hoist  and  convey  his  load  simultaneously. 

Carson-Trainor  Holster  and  Conveyor. — For  trenches  in  which  the 
cableway  t3rpe  of  machine  is  desirable  but  its  system  of  anchorage  is 
objectionable,  a  type  of  machine  has  been  devised,  by  which  single 
buckets  are  operated  much  the  same  as  by  the  cableway,  but  are  carried 
upon  a  steel  track  supported  by  wooden  or  steel  frames  of  similar  design 
to  those  of  the  Carson  Trench  Machine.  This  is  known  as  the  Carson- 
Trainor  Holster  and  Conveyor  and  is  moved  forward  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  trench  machine. 

Steam  Shovels. — While  the  steam  shovel  is  not  particularly  well 
adapted  to  ordinary  sewer  construction,  it  has  been  used  with  more  or 
less  success  upon  some  large  work.  For  this  purpose  it  is  usually  desir- 
able to  provide  an  imiisually  high  crane  or  a  long  dipper  arm  or  both, 
although  a  shovel  of  standard  dimensions  may  be  used  for  a  first  cut  in  a 
trench,  ultimately  to  be  carried  deeper,  or  for  the  whole  excavation  in  a 
very  shallow  trench.  The  use  of  such  a  shovel  for  making  the  first  cut 
on  the  Southern  outfall  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  1908,  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  27. 
This  shovel  was  moved  upon  rails  laid  at  the  bottom  of  the  cut.  It  was 
of  standard  design  and  made  a  cut  about  10  ft.  deep,  the  excavated 
material  being  discharged  into  cars  run  on  a  standard  gage  track  close 
to  the  edge  of  the  trench. 

A  shovel  designed  for  sewer  construction  is  shown  in  Fig.  28.  This  is 
carried  by  a  specially  constructed  car,  moving  on  rolls  running  on  planks 


94  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

on  either  side  of  the  trench.  The  crane  is  high  and  the  dipper  arm  is 
long;  so  that  it  was  possible  to  excavate  to  a  considerable  depth.  Similar 
shovels  are  sometimes  mounted  upon  traction  wheels  which  run  upon 
heavy  timbevs  on  each  side  of  the  trencjh.  About  10  lin.  ft.  of  trench 
may  be  excavated  for  each  move  of  the  shovel,  each  section  being 
thoroughly  braced  before  the  shovel  is  moved  ahead,  to  prevent  the 
caving  of  the  banks  while  carrying  the  shovel. 

The  capacity  of  steam  shovels  varies  greatly  and  the  capacity  of  a 
shovel  used  upon  a  sewer  trench  is  likely  to  vary  greatly  from  day  to 
day.  While  the  nominal  capacity  of  a  shovel  may  be  perhaps  1000  or 
1500  cu.  yd.  per  day,  the  delays  incident  to  the  work  are  often  so  great 
that  only  a  relatively  small  percentage  of  the  nominal  capacity  is  ex- 
cavated. Such  dela3n3  may  be  due  to  the  sheeting  and  bracing  of  the 
trench,  the  placing  of  masonry  and  waiting  for  masonry  to  set  and 
become  strong  enough  to  carry  the  backfilling.  If  the  shovel  is  used 
only  to  excavate  the  upper  part  of  the  trench,  it  is  probable  that  the 
excavation  of  the  lower  part  wiU  not  proceed  as  rapidly  as  the  shovel  is 
capable  of  removing  the  upper  portion.  The  steam  shovel  will  therefore 
remain  idle  for  considerable  periods  of  time,  thus  greatly  reducing  the 
nominal  output. 

In  estimating  the  cost  of  steam  shovel  work  on  sewers  these  elements  of 
delay  should  be  given  proper  weight.  While  the  cost  of  steam  shovel 
excavation  under  most  favorable  conditions,  where  trenches  are  relatively 
shallow  and  delays  are  few,  such  as  ditching  for  drainage  purposes  where 
masonry  structures  are  not  required,  may  be  as  low  as  5  to  10  cents  per 
cubic  yard,  the  cost  of  ordinary  sewer  excavation,  where  trenches  are 
fairly  deep  and  the  usual  difficulties  are  encountered,  is  likely  to  run 
from  15  to  25  cents  per  cubic  yard,  even  upon  relatively  large  work. 
These  estimates  do  not  include  the  cost  of  pumping,  sheeting,  handling 
backfill,  transporting  surplus  material  to  the  spoil  banks,  etc. 

It  is  difficult  to  sheet  and  brace  securely  a  trench  excavated  by  steam 
shovel,  as  the  bracing,  if  put  in  before  the  excavation  is  carried  danger- 
ously deep,  will  be  in  the  way  of  the  dipper.  Furthermore  it  is  not 
possible  to  excavate  to  the  exact  lines  required  for  the  sheeting.  Either 
the  shovel  excavation  must  be  kept  narrow,  necessitating  much  hand 
trimming  of  the  banks,  or  it  will  be  too  wide  in  places,  making  it  im- 
possible to  sheet  and  brace  the  banks  properly.  Where  the  trench  is 
through  paved  streets,  or  streets  in  which  gas  and  water  pipes  are  laid 
and  where  buildings  stand  near,  damage  is  almost  sure  to  follow  the  use 
of  a  steam  shovel  because  of  settlement  of  the  adjoining  ground  due  to 
improper  sheeting  and  bracing.  In  some  cases,  also,  it  has  been  found 
that  the  great  weight  of  the  shovel,  necessarily  supported  close  to  the 
trench,  has  increased  the  strain  upon  the  timbering  and  caused  the  settle- 
ment of  the  adjoining  ground. ' 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION  95 

In  spite  of  these  facts,  the  ste&m  shovel  may  be  used  successfully  in 
some  cases,  for  makiug  the  first  cut  for  deep  sewers  of  lar)^  dimensions, 
the  material  so  excavated  being  hauled  away  and  wasted,  while  the 
remaining  and  deeper  portion  of  the  excavation  ia  made  by  one  of  the 
other  methods  herein  outUned,  the  material  excavated  thereby  being 
retained  for  backfilhng  the  trench;  and  it  may  prove  advantageous  upon 
Bome  other  trench  work  where  conditions  are  particularly  favorable. 

Endless  Chain  Machines. — Machines  of  the  endless  chain  variety  are 
usually  operated  directly  on  the  ground  by  engines  mounted  upon  wheels. 


Fio.  30. — Buckeye  traction  ditcher. 

The  digging  is  done  by  buckets  carried  by  an  endless  chain  running  over 
sprocket  wheels  on  the  end  of  an  arm  suspended  from  the  rear  of  the 
machineandadjusted  to  permit  the  excavation  of  the  trench  to  a  precise 
grade  regardless  of  the  inequalities  of  the  surface  over  which  it  passes. 
The  width  of  the  trench  excavated  is  governed  by  the  width  of  the 
buckets  selected,  each  machine  being  supplied  with  buckets  of  eevoral 
widths.  The  material  excavated  by  the  buckets  may  be  dropped  upon 
an  endless  belt  operating  crossways  of  the  ditch  and  discharging  the 


96  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

excavated  material  in  a  windrow  on  either  ade  of  the  trench  or  into 
wagons  to  be  hauled  to  the  rear  of  the  work  for  bacltfilling  or  wasted. 

There  are  a  number  of  different  makes  of  machines  of  this  type,  each 
having  its  particular  method  of  loosening  and  excavating  the  material, 
all  of  which  should  be  investigated  before  the  most  desirable  machine  can 
be  selected  for  the  particular  work  in  hand.  The  Austin  Trencher  is 
illustrated  by  Fig,  29.  The  advantage  of  these  machines  over  those  of 
the  Carson  type  is  that  no  picking  and  shovelling  is  required,  the  ma- 
chines doing  the  excavating  as  well  as  the  hoisting,  and  discharging  onto 
a  spoil  bank  at  the  aide  of  the  trench  or  into  carts.  These  machines  are 
adapted  for  relatively  shallow  trenches  through  virgin  soil  where  brac- 
ing is  not  necessary,  and  where  pipes,  conduits  and  sewers  crossing  the 


Fig.  31. — Excavating  a  ditch  with  a  drag-line  scraper. 

trench  are  not  encountered.  In  some  classes  of  material  which  require 
bracing,  it  may  be  possible  to  excavate  a  short  distance  ahead  of  the 
bracing,  moving  the  machine  along  and  then  adjusting  the  braces  behind 
it,  as  illustrated  by  Fig.  29.  This  would  not  be  practicable  in  many 
sandy  soils,  and  especially  where  there  is  considerable  ground  water  likely 
to  cause  caving  of  the  banks.  The  sizes  and  capacities  of  Austin  trench- 
ing machines  are  given  in  Table  lOA,  and  those  of  the  Parsons  machines 
in  Table  lOB. 

Another  somewhat  similar  type  of  trench  extavator  has  the  buckets 
attached  to  a  large  wheel  instead  of  endless  chains.  The  Buckeye  Trac- 
tion Ditcher,  Fig.  30,  is  an  example;  it  has  been  used  mainly  in  laying 
drain  tDe,  but  has  also  been  employed  in  sewer  and  water-main  trenches 
of  relatively  narrow  width.    The  trench  shown  in  the  illustration  was 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION 


97 


Wheel 
base, 

ft. 

.4M                                          •«• 

c^       CO  «o  CO  <-; 

s 

o 

1 

§ 

•■3 

1 

Length, 
ft. 

"S*      o  lo  •*  t^r 
w       CO  •*  "t*  »o 

s 

o 

in 

Width, 
ft. 

tr      ooo  c 

1    rt 

1 
Q 

Total  area 
both  bearings 
sq.  ft. 

N         W  CO  -^ 

■  U3 

8 

< 

Dimensions 
each  bearing 

24  in.  X  60  in. 

30  in.  X  60  in. 
30  in,  X  72  in. 
30  in.  X  108  in., 
28iin.  X  132  in. 

0 

0^ 

•1 

1 

Speed 
per  min. 

1  ft.-lO  ft. 

1  ft.- 10  ft. 
1  ft.-10  ft. 
1  f t.-6  ft. 
3  in.-36  in. 

1 

flS 

> 

(9 
U 
H 

Widths* 
inches 

12.  15,  18 

15.  18.  24 
18,  24,  30.  36 
24  to  39* 
24  to  72 

• 

o 

Max. 

depth. 

ft. 

< 

c 

1 

M 

n 

< 

E- 

_                  .    Weight. 
Power 

tons 

Gasoline I          9 

Gasoline  or 

steam |        11^ 

Gasoline 20 

Si«Am 24 

CO 
CO 

'  E 

as 
o 

1 

o  o       o  •-<  o 

O  O                     i-< 

o 

< 

n 
u 

g 

H 

55 
O 

CO 

O 


O 


OQ 

M 

OQ 


o 

H 


» 

M 

M  *i 

C4  O  >0  lO 

d  £ 

•^l"  ^  CO  00 

« 

*-; 

.a 

.«•  .«• 

3d 

9  oa  o  o 

^ 

^^ 

"<    c 

na  o 

Caterp 
tracti( 

« 

13-3 
'•2.2 

^  POO 

m 

t   6 

e^  C4  <o  o 

A  a 

^ 

» 

.a 

■4.i 

a  a 

o»  o 

©  .« 

Q 

2 

•> 

ja 

0) 

CS   N   00   « 

es  C4  c^  c^ 

3 
PC 

^ 

- 

M- 

♦a 

S.a 

-*  5« 

M  w 

^ 

C4   O   X 

"*  «  t* 

§ 

"S  d 

?5  S3S 

t 

ft 

M  00  00 
CI   CI   M 

> 

. 

at 

S 

1 

H 

H 

I'd 

°°2g§ 

^ 

•€.  " 

M  a 

»H     ^     -^     O 

'S  0 

1- 

•-•     IH    d    CI 

•  • 

•  • 

s  1 

hi 

■^    ■= 

& 

•   • 

^ 

b    fs 

0 

o  o 

04 

«   2 

a  d 

S  S  3  S 

- 

S  9  II 

O  O  05  as 

O 

H 

t^  M  H  Ei« 

Q 
o 


p 
o 

GO 

H 


P* 
-«{ 

o 

OQ 

H 

H4 

T 

o 

1-1 

a 


U3 


d  Ji 
<  K 


b-  O  N 

^  iQ  iQ  ;0  t. 


O  S 

00 


9  » 

d  «> 


■5  S 

^8 


s 


a-' 


o  o  o  o 

t*  s  «  © 

»         lb         »         « 

TH  •©  t»  00 


00  00 


s? 


Oft  o  o 


00  t*  t*  oo  00  00 


•^  ■^  t*  ^  p  '«p 

iH    1-4    1-4    iH    C^    N 


o 
'•J 

flS 

> 

& 

M 


CO 

X   00  00  CI  C«  Cl 

CI    N   «   CO  Y  f 

^  ^  ^  ob  «6  o 

CI  CI  CI  ci  CO  CO 

6^<^4.o[>ot 

CI  C)   C«   C4  C«  C4 


CO  r»  t«  t»  o  CI 


M  « 

M  d 

•S    o 


^ 


lo  <o  t*  «^  CO  CO 
iM  1-1  1-4  d  CO  CO 


V 

o 


.  6  6  g 

'«rf  «>  '««  '«>' 

gQ  gQ  gQ  gg 

»•  hi  b  b 

o  o  o  o 

O     «  «>  9  «     « 

fi   c  g  a  d  g 

"o  "o  "o  "o  "o  "o 

3  3  S  S  S  S 

o  o  o  o  o  o 


O  CO  t«  00  o   o 


I 

-a 

o 
.a 

u 
O 


9 
« 

d 
•c 

i 


7 

CI 

\ 

iM 

^ 

M 

d 

■^ 

• 

-& 

>> 

» 

d 

a 

o 

•S 

• 

s 

•  M 

1-4 

CO 

•« 

CO 

o 

o 

JQ 

S 

ters. 
hs  u 

o 

«a 

■4»      *' 

•tf 

3  -O 

a 

« 

•O     M 

a 

in  si 
hfo 

CO 

^» 

SS' 

o 

chan 
ft.  d 

1 

^g 

ried 
for 

J 

s-g 

g 

5  15 

ths  may 
y  be  ezt€ 

ncremen 
pillar  tra 

TS    at 

S 

•5  6 

9i  E 

^  2 

I  8 

98  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

32  in.  wide  and  12  ft.  deep,  on  a  contract  taken  by  Laurin  &  Leitch, 
Montreal,  P.  Q. 

Drag  Scrapers. — Drag  scrapers  have  long  been  used  to  remove  the 
upper  portion  of  the  trench,  but  have  usually  been  operated  by  animal 
power.  More  recently  similar  devices  have  been  operated  by  portable 
derricks  built  with  extremely  long  booms  which  handle  a  specially  de- 
signed scraper.  This  scraper  is  dropped  from  the  end  of  the  boom  into 
the  trench  and  drawn  along  the  bottom  until  it  is  filled,  when  it  is  raised 
by  the  cable,  moved  to  one  side  by  the  boom,  and  its  contents  deposited 
along  the  trench  or  in  wagons  or  cars  to  be  hauled  away  for  backfilling  or 
to  be  wasted,  as  may  be  desired. 

The  machine  shown  in  Fig.  31  was  an  electrically  operated  Bucyrus 
excavator,  but  the  steam-operated  machines  are  similar  in  appear- 
ance. The  boom  was  45  ft.  long  and  the  bucket  held  1-1/4  cu.  yd.  The 
machine  moved  on  caterpillars  instead  of  ordinary  wheels,  and  was  em- 
ployed on  an  irrigation  ditch  by  the  U.  S.  Reclamation  Service. 

Derricks  and  Cranes. — Derricks  and  cranes  are  frequently  used  for 
sewer  construction,  and  may  be  supported  either  upon  rolling  platforms 
or  wheel  trucks  moving  on  the  ground  or  on  tracks.  These  derricks 
are  usually  placed  along  the  side  of  the  trench  and  are  used  to  operate 
orange  peel  buckets,  or  to  hft  buckets  which  have  been  filled  by  laborers 
in  the  ditch,  dumping  the  material  in  windrows  along  the  trench,  or  into 
wagons  or  cars  for  hauling  back  to  the  finished  portion  of  the  sewer  for 
backfilling  or  wasting. 

For  this  type  of  machine  the  r^ular  locomotive  crane  pivoted  to 
operate  in  any  direction  is  most  convenient,  especially  as  it  may  be 
moved  quickly  forward  or  backward  along  its  track  by  its  own  power. 
With  proper  management  this  machine  should  seldom  be  idle,  for  when 
it  is  not  needed  in  excavating  it  can  be  used  in  loading  or  unloading 
cars  or  wagons,  in  placing  materials  in  the  trench,  in  operating  scrapers 
for  backfilling,  or  in  pulling  sheeting. 

The  locomotive  crane,  however,  is  an  expensive  machine,  costing 
about  $7500.  On  this  account,  many  contracts  are  too  small  to  warrant 
its  use.  A  wooden  stiff  legged  derrick  operated  by  ^^  ordinarj'^  double- 
drum  hoisting  engine,  costing  from  $1500  to  $2500,  has  been  found  very 
useful  upon  large  work.  A  derrick  of  this  sort  used  on  the  Louisville 
sewers  is  shown  in  Fig.  32.  The  length  of  boom  will  depend  upon 
the  width  of  trench  and  the  available  space  for  the  spoil  bank,  but 
will  generally  not  exceed  30  ft. 

Excavating  Buckets. — Upon  some  classes  of  large  sewer  work  where 
the  material  to  be  excavated  is  of  a  loamy  or  sandy  nature,  the  use  of 
orange  peel  or  clam  shell  buckets  operated  by  locomotive  cranes  or 
stiff  legged  derricks  may  prove  economical.  Obviously  it  is  not  possible 
to  trim  banks  accurately  to  line  with  such  excavators.    This  must  be 


MACHINERY  FOR  TRENCH  EXCAVATION  99 

done  by  hand,  the  material  trimmed  off  being  thrown  toward  the  center 
of  the  trenoli  where  it  can  be  picked  up  by  the  bucket.  Where  such 
buckets  are  to  be  used  it  is  desirable  to  make  the  sections  between 
braces  10  ft.  or  so  long,  to  allow  ample  room  for  the  swinging  of  the 
bucket,  which  cannot  be  altogether  prevented.  With  such  apparatus, 
as  with  the  steam  Bhovel  and  other  mechanical  excavators,  it  is  not 
desirable  to  carry  the  excavation  to  within  6  to  12  in.  of  subgrade.- 
This  latter  portion  of  the  excavation  should  be  done  by  hand,  because 
digging  with  buckets  or  dippers  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  subgrade 
is  likely  to  loosen  the  material,  thus  gjviug  an  opportunity  for  the 
settlement  of  the  masonry  structure  to  be  placed  upon  it.  Further- 
more it  is  not  posMble  to  excavate  with  such  macliinery  exactly  to  a 
given  elevation.    If  the  attempt  is  made  to  excavate  exactly  to  subgrade, 


Fio,  32.— Traveling  derrick,  Louisville. 

the  probablility  is  that  much  of  the  excavation  wiU  be  carried  slightly 
below  subgrade.  Refilling  with  soft  and  loose  material  will  then  become 
necessary.  Fig.  32  shows  an  orange  peel  bucket  dumping  its  contents. 
In  excavating  it  is  dropped  in  an  open  position  to  the  bottom  of  the 
trench  and  then  closed  by  hauling  on  the  main  rope.  The  heavy  leaves 
or  scoops  are  so  formed  and  the  weight  of  the  bucket  is  so  great  that 
they  dig  into  the  material  in  the  trench  as  they  close. 

Economical  Use  of  Machinery. — The  type  of  machine  to  be  used 
and  the  extent  to  which  it  is  used  will  vary  according  to  the  conditions 
BiUTOunding  each  particular  undertaking.  Where  much  rock  excava- 
tion is  anticipated,  the  necessary  delay  in  its  excavation  may  preclude 


100  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

the  use  of  expensive  machinery  upon  the  excavation  of  the  overlying 
earth  as  it  will  be  likely  to  remain  idle  much  of  the  time. 

Success  in  the  use  of  machinery  for  excavation  is  dependent  upon  con- 
tinuity of  operation,  at  a  rate  approximating  its  nominal  capacity. 
When  machinery  is  employed  on  sewer  construction  a  fuU  quota  of 
labor,  teams,  cars,  etc.,  should  be  provided,  so  that  the  machinery  may 
be  constantly  employed,  and  consequently  the  unit  cost  of  the  machinery 
charge  may  be  reduced  to  the  lowest  possible  figure.  In  this  connection 
it  is  important  to  note  that  the  machinery  should  be  kept  constantly 
in  repair,  the  repairs  being  made  at  times  when  the  work  is  shut  down  for 
any  cause. 


CHAPTER  V 
METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 

The  method  to  be  adopted  for  the  excavation  of  rock  in  sewer  trenches 
depends  upon  the  quality  and  quantity  of  rock  to  be  excavated.  Ledge 
varies  greatly  in  character,  from  that  which  is  disintegrated  and  soft 
and  may  be  removed  by  picking  and  shoveling  as  readily  as  some  kinds 
of  earth,  such  as  hardpan,  to  extremely  hard,  igneous  rock  like  granite 
and  trap,  which  require  drilling  and  blasting  for  removal.  Between 
these  two  limits  ttere  are  many  kinds  of  rock  of  varying  degrees  of 
hardness.  Some  may  be  removed  by  picking,  barring  and  wedging 
without  the  use  of  explosives,  and  some,  like  limestone/ may  lie  in  nearly 
horizontal  strata  and  may  be  removed  by  methods  similar  to  those  em- 
ployed in  the  ordinary  quarrying  of  building  stone. 

The  method  to  be  adopted  for  excavating  a  certain  quality  of  rock 
may  vary  under  different  conditions.  In  some  cases  the  quantity  to  be 
removed  is  so  small  or  the  danger  of  damaging  adjacent  structures  may 
be  so  great  as  to  warrant  its  removal  by  picking,  barring  and  wedging 
even  where  the  nature  and  quality  of  rock  are  such  as  to  warrant  drilling 
and  blasting  under  other  conditions. 

The  methods  commonly  used  for  drilling  ledge  may  be  divided  into 
two  classes,  hand  drilling  and  power  drilling.  Hand  drilling  in  turn  may 
be  subdivided  into  three  classes,  single  hand,  double  hand  and  chum 
drilling.  Power  drilling  may  be  classified  in  accordance  with  the  type  of 
machine  drill  used,  which  may  be  a  rotary  or  core  drill,  a  reciprocating 
or  percussion  drill  or  a  hammer  drill. 

Hand  Drilling. — For  small  holes  and  occasionally  for  large  ones  of 
moderate  depth,  the  drill  may  be  held  in  one  hand  and  struck  by  a  ham- 
mer held  in  the  other  hand,  the  hammer  weighing  about  4  lb.  This 
method  is  largely  used  in  quarrying,  where  a  number  of  small  holes  are 
drilled  in  a  line  along  which  the  rock  is  to  be  split  by  driving  small 
wedges  into  the  holes  between  tapered  strips  of  steel.  The  wedges  and 
strips  of  steel  are  called  '*slugs  and  feathers." 

For  larger  and  deeper  holes  it  is  customary  to  have  one  man  hold  and 
turn  the  drill,  while  two  or  three  men  strike  the  head  of  the  drill  in  rota- 
tion with  hammers  weighing  from  8  to  12  lb.  In  this  method,  the  drills 
should  be  turned  about  45  deg.  each  time  in  order  to  insure  a  nearly 
round  hole. 

In  churn  drilling  the  hole  is  drilled  by  the  churning  of  a  steel  drill, 
which  is  raised  by  hand  and  allowed  to  drop  of  its  own  weight,  or  it  may 

101 


102  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

be  thrust  into  the  hole,  although  but  little  advantage  is  gained  thereby. 
Each  time  the  drill  is  raised,  it  is  turned  about  one-eighth  of  a  revolution 
so  as  to  prevent  its  striking  the  bottom  of  the  hole  successively  in  the 
same  position.  By  confining  the  turns  to  about  45  deg.,  the  hole  is 
maintained  more  nearly  circular  than  would*  be  the  case  if  a  larger  tun\ 
were  given  each  time.  Where  added  weight  is  desirable,  a  ball  of  iron  or 
steel  is  sometimes  welded  to  the  drill  rod,  at  or  slightly  below  its  middle 
point,  care  being  taken  to  have  the  center  of  gravity  of  the  baU  in  the  line 
of  the  axis  of  the  rod. 

The  bit  ordinarily  used  in  double  hand  drilling  is  provided  with  a 
chisel  edge  and  is  made  from  octagonal  steel  7/8  in.  in  diameter.  The 
wedge-6hap>ed  edge  varies  in  sharpness  according  to  the  quality  of  rock 
to  be  drilled.  It  should  be  made  as  sharp  as  possible  and  yet  not  break 
or  become  rapidly  dulled.  The  angle  of  the  wedge-shaped  edge  usually 
varies  between  45  deg.  for  soft  rocks  and  90  deg.  for  hard  rocks. 

Bits  are  usually  made  up  in  sets,  depending  upon  the  depth  of  holes 
to  be  drilled.  The  bottom  of  the  hole  must  be  about  1  in.  in  diameter 
to  receive  the  ordinary  dynamite  cartridge.  The  finishing  drill  must 
therefore  have  a  face  at  least  1  in.  in  length,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is 
usually  made  somewhat  longer,  in  order  to  allow  for  wear.  Each  bit 
must  be  slightly  smaller  than  the  bit  preceding  it  in  order  to  allow  for 
wear  in  drilling.  A  set  of  four  bits  will  ordinarily  vary  approximately 
between  1-5/8  in.  for  the  starting  bit  to  1-1/4  in.  for  the  finishing  bit. 
It  is  necessary  to  re-sharpen  the  drills  at  frequent  intervals,  not  only 
that  they  may  be  reasonably  sharp,  but  that  they  may  be  of  proper  gage. 

The  cost  of  hand  drilling  varies  according  to  the  hardness  of  the  rock, 
although  the  difficulty  of  drilling  is  not  always  dependent  wholly  upon 
hardness.  Rock  which  is  seamy  and  lies  at  an  angle  steeper  than  45 
deg.  with  the  horizontal,  may  be  quite  difficult  to  drill  because  of  the 
tendency  of  the  drills  to  bind  and  stick  in  the  holes.  Limestone  is 
usually  very  easily  drilled,  while  trap  rock  and  quartzite  are  hard  to 
drill.  Some  seamy  shale,  although  relatively  soft,  lies  at  such  a  steep 
angle  with  the  horizontal  that  it  is  difficult  to  drill. 

The  authors  have  usually  found  it  desirable  to  provide  one  man  to 
turn  the  drill  and  two  men  to  do  the  striking.  An  illustration  of  the 
amount  of  work  done  by  such  a  gang  of  men  is  furnished  by  the  data 
given  in  Columns  1  and  2  of  Table  11. 

Assuming  that  the  wages  paid  the  laborers  for  this  work  were  %2  per 
day  of  8  hours,  it  appears  that  the  cost  of  labor  for  actually  drilling  the 
holes  varied,  on  the  average,  from  28  to  60  cents  per  foot  of  hole  drilled. 
This,  however,  does  not  include  the  cost  of  the  steel,  of  sharpening  the 
drills,  or  of  the  time  of  the  foreman,  supervision,  or  any  cost  for  supplies, 
bookkeeping,  etc.  The  holes  drilled  were  of  proper  size  for  the  ordinary 
cartridges  of  blasting  dynamite. 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


103 


Table  11. — ^Length  of  Holes  Drilled  by  Hand  and  bt  Steam  Drills 
IN  Day  of  Eight  Hours  in  Sewer  Trenches  at  Worcester, 

Mass.     (1905-1906) 


Holes  drilled  by  hand 

Holes  drilled  by  one 

by  3  n 
Maximum 

nen 

3i  in.  ste 
Maximum 

am  drill 

Character  of  ledge 

Average 

Average 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(6) 

24 . 0  ft. 

12.3  ft. 

68.0  ft. 

60.3  ft. 

Soft,  seamy,  mica  schist  on  edge 

20.7 

13.2 

76.0 

49.5 

Soft,  seamy,  mica  schist  on  edge 

21.2 

17.8 

42.0 

30.3 

Gneiss,  hard  with  seams 

13.0 

10.2 

78.0 

43.2 

Schist,  very  soft  in  some  places 

19.5 

11.9 

38.0 

32.1 

Traprock,  very  hard 

28.6      ' 

21.5 

64.0 

45.6 

Very  soft  mica  schist 

Note, — ^The  holes  drilled  were  from  2  to  4  ft.  in  depth,  averaging  3  ft. 
Steam  drills  accomplished  from  two  to  four  times  as  much  work  as  the 
hand  drills. 

H.  P.  Gillette,  in  his  work  entitled  "Rock  Excavation,"  gives  an  ap- 
proximate esimate  of  the  rate  of  progress  of  double  hand  drilling,  two 
men  striking,  when  drilling  a  6-ft.  vertical  hole,  as  7  ft.  in  10  hours  in 
granite,  11  ft.  in  trap  and  16  ft.  in  limestone. 

Spacing  of  Drill  Holes. — The  spacing  of  drill  holes  and  the  quantity  of 
rock  loosened  per  foot  of  hole  and  per  pound  of  dynamite  vary  greatly 
with  the  character  of  rock  to  be  excavated,  the  strength  of  the  dynamite 
used,  the  width  of  trench  and  the  necessity  of  loading  lightly  to  protect 
buildings  and  underground  structures.  Blasting  in  trenches  requires 
much  more  powder  than  blasting  on  the  surface,  for  it  is  possible  to 
provide  but  one  face,  and  that  often  a  narrow  one,  toward  which  to 
blow.  Prof.  Henry  N.  Ogden,  in  his  book  on  "Sewer  Construction," 
p.  225,  has  covered  this  subject  very  clearly. 

"The  spacing  and  depth  of  the  holes,  as  well  as  the  amount  of  the  charge, 
will  depend  on  the  methods  employed  and  on  the  specifications  followed. 
The  behavior  of  different  kinds  of  rocks  is  most  confusing  to  the  foreman 
who  meets  a  new  formation.  In  soft  rock  and  in  sedimentary  rock  in 
thin  layers,  properly  distributed  blast  holes  will  carry  down  a  trench  with 
regular  and  smooth  sides,  but  granite  and  igneous  rocks  are  broken  out  in 
irregular  and  uncertain  lines,  often  loosening  the  dirt  cover  for  many  feet 
on  each  side  of  the  trench,  if  not  actually  filling  the  trench  with  such  dirt. 
Most  specifications  require  excavation  in  rock  to  be  carried  to  a  depth  6  in. 
below  the  bottom  of  the  pipe.  In  sedimentary  rock  in  thin  layers,  or  when 
a  thick  layer  comes  just  above  the  excavation  bottom,  it  is  only  necessary  to 
drill  the  blast  holes  to  the  bottom  of  the  desired  trench.  But  in  tough  gran- 
ites and  thick,  hard  limestones  with  strata  disadvantageously  placed,  it  is 
frequently  necessary  to  drill  1  ft.  below  the  trench  bottom  in  order  to  have 
every  point  of  the  bottom  at  least  6  in.  below  the  pipe. 

"The  usual  practice  of  placing  the  holes  in  a  trench  is  to  space  them  about 


104  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

3  ft.  apart  longitudinally  and  transversely  about  the  same  distance.  Thus, 
in  a  trench  3  ft.  wide,  two  holes  are  drilled,  one  on  each  side  of  the  trench. 
In  a  trench  6  ft.  to  8  ft.  wide,  three  holes  would  be  used,  one  on  each  side 
and  one  in  the  middle.  In  a  trench  14  ft.  wide,  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  five  holes 
in  each  row  were  used,  the  distance  apart,  longitudinally,  of  the  rows  being 

4  ft.  In  soft  limestone  the  author  has,  for  trenches  for  6-in.  pipe  npt  over  8 
ft.  deep,  particularly  when  only  the  bottom  of  the  trench  was  in  rock, 
put  down  a  single  row  of  holes  in  the  middle  of  the  trench,  but  a  large  amount 
of  picking  and  hammering  is  always  necessary  to  finish  up  the  work. 

''As  to  the  depth  of  the  hole,  the  necessity  of  avoiding  accidents,  excessive 
noise,  and  rattling  in  nearby  houses,  limits  the  amount  of  the  charge. 
Usually  the  depth  of  the  holes  is  made  the  same  as  the  distance  between  the 
holes,  although  in  tough  rock  the  depth  can  with  advantage  be  made  greater 
than  that  distance.  The  deeper  the  holes,  the  cheaper  the  work,  since 
frequent  changing  of  drilling  machines  means  loss  of  time.  Gillette  gives 
the  following  theoretical  table  (Table  12)  to  show  the  eflFect  of  spacing  of  holes 
upon  the  cost  of  excavation,  tabulating  the  number  of  feet  of  hole  drilled 
per  cubic  yard  excavated : 


Table  12. — Effect  of  Spacing  of 

Holes  on  Cost  of 

Excavation 

Distance  apart  of  holes,  ft.            '       1           2     !     3        4          5     |    6           8         10    | 

Cubic  yards  per  foot  of  hole 

Feet  of  hole  per  cubic  yard 

.04 
27. 

.15 
6.8 

.33    .59 
3.0    1.7 

.93 
1.08 

1.332.373.70 
.75    .42    .27 

"Since  drilling  costs  from  10  cents  to  50  cents  per  linear  foot,  an  unwise 
or  unforseen  combination  of  high  cost  drilling  with  shallow  holes  near 
together,  may  very  easily  add  from  $1  to  $3  to  the  cost  of  a  cubic  yard  of 
rock  excavation.  In  loose  seamy  shale,  shallow  holes  near  together  are 
necessary  to  retain  the  force  of  the  explosion." 

Where  a  trench  is  to  be  excavated  in  a  stratified  rock  like  limestone,  in 
which  the  strata  are  practically  horizontal,  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind 
the  probable  necessity  of  removing  practically  the  whole  of  the  bottom 
stratum  although  the  grade  line  may  come  only  a  few  inches  below  its 
upper  surface. 

From  data  given  in  Gillette's  "Rock  Excavation — Methods  and  Cost," 
Table  13  has  been  compiled,  and  by  reference  to  this  table  it  will  be 
possible  to  obtain  a  very  rough  idea  of  current  practice  in  trench  ex- 
cavation regarding  the  spacing  of  holes,  the  quantity  of  rock  loosened 
per  foot  of  holes  drilled,  and  the  quantity  of  dynamite  required  per  cubic 
yard  of  rock.  One  of  the  authors  found  in  the  excavation  of  rock  in 
three  trenches,  the  quantities  excavated  varjdng  from  1 10  to  2335  cu.  yd., 
that  the  quantity  of  dynamite  required  ranged  from  1.4  to  1.82  and  aver- 
aged 1.58  lb.  per  cu.  yd.  of  rock  removed.  He  also  found  that  excava- 
tion in  a  very  hard  rock  in  trench  required  about  2  lb.  whereas  excava- 
tion of  this  same  quality  of  rock  in  a  tunnel  required  8.4  lb.  of  dynamite 
per  cubic  yard  of  rock  removed.     It  should  be  stated,  however,  that 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


105 


this  tunnel  was  very  small,  was  so  situated  that  it  was  not  possible 
to  use  deep  holes  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  load  very  lightly. 

Table  13. — Data  Relating  to   Drilling  and  Blasting  of  Rock  in 

Trenches  (Gillette) 


Kind  of  rook 


Width 

of 

trench, 

feet 


No.  of 
holes 


Spacing 

of  rows 

of  holes, 

feet 


Length  of 
drill  hole 

per  cu. 

yd.,  it. 


j  Dynamite 
per  cu.  yd., 
lb. 


Granite 

Trap 

Trap 

Soft  sandstone. 
Sandstone^ . . . . 


2i-3 

6 

8^ 

14« 

6 


2 
3 
3 
5 
3 


3 
3 
4 
4 
3 


6 

4J 

2.53 
2.4 
4J 


2.6 


1 
0.55 


*  12  ft.  deep     *  10  ft.  deep.     '  Seamy  rock  and  holes  4  to  6  ft.  deep. 

• 

Cleaning  Holes. — During  the  process  of  drilling  water  is  poured  into 
the  holes,  which  tends  to  hold  the  rock  powder  in  suspension  and  forms  a 
sludge  which  must  be  removed  from  time  to  time.  This  may  be  done 
by  the  use  of  a  scraper  or  "spoon,"  made  by  attaching  a  semi-cylindrical 
strip  of  steel  to  the  end  of  an  iron  rod  about  3/8  or  1/2  in.  in  diameter. 
The  bottom  of  the  cylindrical  portion  of  the  spoon  should  be  turned  up 
much  the  same  as  the  point  of  an  ordinary  tablespoon.  Where  such  a 
spoon  is  not  available,  the  broomed  end  of  a  round  stick  of  slightly  smaller 
diameter  than  the  lower  portion  of  the  hole  may  be  dropped  into  the 
hole  and  withdrawn,  bringing  with  it  a  portion  of  the  sludge,  which  may 
be  removed  by  striking  it  over  a  nearby  object. 


DRILLING  BY  MACHINERY 

When  the  depth  of  holes,  hardness  of  rock  or  quantity  of  ledge  to 
be  excavated  is  such  that  the  economical  limitations  of  hand  drilling 
are  exceeded,  drilling  machinery  should  be  used.  Of  the  three  different 
types  of  drilling  machines  in  conunon  use,  the  rotary  or  core  drill  is 
rarely  if  ever  used  for  the  drilling  required  on  ordinary  sewer  work, 
although  it  may  occasionally  be  used  to  advantage  for  making  test 
borings. 

Rotary  or  Core  Drill. — The  rotary  drill  rotates  the  bit  which  cuts  or 
chips  the  rock  at  its  base.  The  more  common  form  is  the  so-called 
"core  drill,"  by  which  an  annular  hole  is  cut  by  the  bit,  thus  leaving  in- 
side the  hollow  steel  a  core  of  the  rook  which  may  afterward  be  broken 
off  and  withdrawn,  thus  furnishing  a  sample  of  the  material  encountered. 
There  are  two  types  of  core  drills  which  are  described  in  Chapter  I. 

Reciprocating  or  Percussion  DrilL — The  reciprocating  drill  has  been 
used  upon  all  kinds  of  rock  excavation  for  many  years.    It  is  driven  by 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


steam  or  compressed  air  and  is  used  upon  hesvy  work  where  band  or 
hammer  drilbng  would  not  prove  economical      It  consists  essentially 


Differential  Vdlve  DriU  . 


Tappet  Valve  Drill. 


Auxiliary  Valve  Urlll. 


Butterfly   Valve  Drill. 
Fia.  33. — Four  types  of  valves  for  percusBion  drillB. 

of  a  steam  cylinder  in  which  a  piston  is  driven  forward  and  backward  by 
the  steam.  The  bit  is  attached  to  the  lower  end  ot  the  piston  rod,  which 
ia  rotated  on  the  upward  stroke  in  order  that  the  hole  may  be  drilled 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION  107 

round  and  true.  The  bit  is  made  to  follow  the  rock  as  fast  as  it  is  cut 
away,  by  moving  the  entire  cylinder  toward  the  rock  by  means  of  a  feed 
screw  and  crank.  This  type  of  drill  withdraws  the  bit  from  the  rock  at 
each  upward  stroke  and  forces  it  back  against  the  rook  at  each  down- 
ward stroke,  whence  its  old  name  of  percussion  drill. 

There  are  several  types  of  reciprocating  drills,  differing  as  to  details  of 
construction.  The  drills  ordinarily  used  are  often  distinguished  by  the 
nature  of  the  valve  controlling  the  steam  or  air  supply,  four  leading 
types  being  shown  in  Fig.  33. 

The  differential  valve  is  of  the  spool  pattern,  so  arranged  that  the 
length  of  stroke  and  the  force  of  the  blow  may  be  governed  by  the 
operator.  This  enables  him  to  employ  a  short  light  stroke  in  starting 
new  holes  and  drilling  seamy  rock,  whereas  after  a  hole  is  well  started  in 
good  ledge  a  powerful  blow  may  be  delivered  under  full  steam  or  air 
pressure.  This  type  of  valve  is  desirable  on  a  drill  for  hard,  even  rock, 
requiring  a  heavy  blow  and  high  air  pressure. 

The  tappet  valve  is  of  the  rocker  type  which  necessitates  a  full  stroke 
of  the  piston.  This  type  of  valve  is  used  in  comparatively  soft  rocks  and 
with  moderately  low  steam  or  air  pressures. 

The  auxiliary  valve  drill  is  a  combination  of  the  differential  and  tappet 
types,  in  which  the  strain  to  which  the  tappet  or  rocker  is  subjected  is 
transferred  from  the  main  valve  to  a  smaller  auxiliary  valve.  Drills 
with  this  valve  are  used  for  general  work,  where  the  rock  may  vary  from 
very  hard  to  very  soft  and  the  pressure  of  the  steam  or  air  may  be 
variable. 

The  butterfly  valve  drill  is  a  later  type  than  the  others,  and  possesses 
advantages  of  both  the  differential  and  tappet  types,  in  that  the  valve  is 
positive  and  instantaneous  in  action,  opens  fully  at  the  beginning  of  the 
stroke,  and  has  small  travel  and  large  port  openings. 

The  size  and  type  of  drill  to  be  used  depend  upon  the  hardness  of  the 
rock  and  the  diameter  and  depth  of  holes  to  be  drilled.  For  ordinary 
sewer  sections  where  the  drills  must  be  used  in  relatively  narrow  quarters 
it  is  desirable  that  they  be  as  light  as  is  consistent  with  the  character  of 
work  they  are  to  perform.  DriUs  having  a  cylinder  from  2-3/4  to  3-1/4 
in.  in  diameter  and  a  stroke  from  6  to  6-1/2  in.  in  length  are  commonly 
used.  The  feed  screw  operated  by  hand  varies  in  length  in  the  different 
types  of  machine,  but  may,  for  ordinary  work,  be  taken  at  24  to  30  in. 
The  difference  in  length  between  consecutive  bits  in  a  single  set  should 
be  substantially  equivalent  to  the  lengths  of  the  feed  screws. 

In  open  trench  work,  drills  are  commonly  operated  by  steam,  in  which 
case  it  is  important  to  have  the  steam  supply  pipe  of  suitable  size  and  a 
boiler  of  ample  capacity.  For  a  3-1/4-in.  drill  a  steam  pipe  from  100  bo 
200  ft.  in  length  should  be  1-1/4  in.  in  diameter.  A  boiler  of  at  least  10 
h.p.  should  be  provided  for  a  drill  of  this  size,  but  if  more  than  one  drill  is 


108 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


used,  the  required  horse-power  can  be  obtained  by  multiplying  that 
required  for  one  drill  by  the  constant  given  in  Table  14,  which  is  a  part 
of  a  table  prepared  by  the  Tngersoll-Rand  Co. 

Table   14. — Multipliers  to  be  Used   in   Determining   the   Boiler 

HORSB-POWER    for    RoCK   DrILLS  FROM  THE   PoWER  FOR  OnE   DrILL 


Drilk,  No. 
Multiplier. 


Drills,  No. 
Multiplier. 


7       8 
5.4|  6.0 


9 
6.5 


10 
7.1 


40  !  50 
21.4|25.5 


60 
29.4 


70 
33.2 


The  weight  of  the  drill  will  be  approximately  300  lb.  and  the  weight  of 
the  tripod  on  which  it  is  mounted  will  be  approximately  250  lb.  without 
the  weights,  which  will  add  about  300  lb.,  making  the  total  weight  of  the 
drill  mounted  upon  its  tripod,  ready  for  use,  approximately  850  lb. 
The  handling  of  such  a  drill  in  a  narrow  sewer  trench  is  a  matter  of  some 
difficulty  and  requires  considerable  time.  It  is  always  necessary 
to  provide  at  least  2  men  to  operate  and  handle  the  drill,  the  drill  runner 
and  a  helper.  When  the  drill  must  be  moved  it  is  usual  to  call  up)on  a 
third  man.  In  case  two  or  more  drills  are  being  used  in  close  proximity 
it  may  be  possible  to  draw  the  third  man  from  another  drill,  thus  provid- 
ing only  4  men  for  the  operation  of  two  drills. 

Under  ordinary  conditions  the  rock  pulverized  by  the  drill  is  carried 
from  the  hole  by  water  thrown  into  it  and  churned  by  the  up-and-down 
motion  of  the  bit.  In  some  cases,  however,  difficulty  is  experienced  in 
cleaning  the  hole  in  this  manner,  and  it  is  necessary  from  time  to  time 
to  remove  the  bit  and  pump  or  "gun"  out  the  hole.  To  meet  this 
difficulty  a  drill  has  been  placed  upon  the  market  which  has  a  water 
tube  leading  through  the  rotating  screw,  the  piston  and  piston  rod  and 
communicating  with  the  hole  in  a  hollow  steel  bit.  By  attaching  a 
water  hose  to  a  fitting  at  the  top  of  the  drill,  a  supply  of  water  can  be 
forced  through  the  machine  and  bit,  thus  providing  a  constant  flow  of 
water  to  the  bottom  of  the  hole,  from  which  it  rises  around  the  bit, 
carrying  with  it  the  rock  dust,  and  overflows  at  the  surface,  thus  freeing 
the  hole  of  sludge.  This  device  is  said  to  be  particularly  useful  for 
horizontal  or  up  holes  required  for  tunnel  work.  It  is  also  claimed  that 
compressed  air  can  be  forced  through  this  inner  tube  and  drill,  thus 
blowing  the  rock  dust  out  of  the  hole  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  attend- 
ing the  use  of  the  ordinary  hammer  drill.  This  method  of  ejecting  the 
dust  is  said  to  be  effective  to  a  depth  of  about  8  ft. 

For  excavating  rock  in  tunnel  headings,  it  is  usually  more  convenient 
to  mount  the  drill  upon  a  mining  column  or  shaft  or  stoping  bar,  than 
upon  a  tripod.  The  columns  are  braced  or  jacked  against  the  rook  in  a 
horizontal,  vertical  or  other  position.  The  drill  mounted  upon  the 
column  may  be  slid  along  to  the  desired  position  and  rotated  about  the 


II 

1 
I 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


109 


column  in  any  direction.  In  Fig.  34  the  drill  is  shown  as  mounted  upon 
an  adjustable  arm,  onto  and  from  which  it  can  be  moved  after  simply 
slacking  off  two  nuts.  This  view  was  taken  in  a  sewer  tunnel  in  Wor- 
cester, Mass. 

Upon  ordinary  sewer  work  where  the  number  of  drills  employed  is 
relatively  small,  it  is  more  common  to  provide  steam  than  compressed 
air  for  operating  the  drills.  It  often  happens,  also,  that  other  machines 
are  operated  by  the  same  boiler,  so  that  furnishing  power  for  the  drill  is 
only  one  of  the  considerations  entering  into  the  problem  of  the  selection 
of  the  power  plant.  Compressed  air,  however,  has  some  advantages  over 
steam,  perhaps  the  most  important  being  its  greater  elasticity,  if  the 
word  may  be  permitted,  which  causes  the  air  drills  to  operate  in  a  more 
snappy  and  efficient  manner  than  those  driven  by  steam.  Another 
consideration  is  that  the  rubber  hose  connecting  the  supply  main  with  the 
drills  will  last  much  longer  in  the  case  of  air,  and  that  there  is  somewhat 
less  danger  of  injury  to  the  workmen  in  case  the  hose  bursts  or  the  con- 
nection of  the  hose  with  the  drill  is  blown  out.  Furthermore,  the 
escape  of  steam  from  leaking  joints,  and  the  exhaust  itself,  in  many  cases 
causes  discomfort  and  hinders  the  work  of  the  men.  There  is  also  con- 
siderable loss  of  power,  due  to  the  condensation  of  steam,  especially  in 
cold  weather  and  where  long  pipe  lines  are  required.  Better  lubrication  is 
possible  when  the  drills  are  operated  by  air  as  the  steam  seems  to  wash  the 
oil  out  of  the  cylinder. 

Table  16. — Information  Concerning  Drilub  (Sullivan)  Suitable  por 

Ordinary    Sewer    Work 


Diameter  of  cylinder,  in 

Length  of  stroke,  in 

Length  of  feed  (depth  drilled  without  chang- 
ing steel),  inches..' 

Depth  of  hole  machine  will  drill  easily,  feet  . 

Diameter  of  hole  that  may  be  drilled,  in 

Size  of  drill  steel,  in 

No.  of  pieces  in  set  of  steel  to  drill  holes  to 
depth  above  stated 

Diameter  of  steam  inlet,  in 

Size  of  hose  to  connect  to  drill,  in 

Size  of  steam  pipe  to  carry  steam  100  to  200 
feet,  in 

Size  of  boiler  to  supply  steam  for  one  drill,  h.p. 

Weight  of  drill  unmounted,  lb 

Standard  size  of  drill  shank,  in 

Weight  of  tripod  only,  lb 

Weight  of  tripod  weights,  lb 


2| 
5i 

22 
11 

11-2 
1-U 


6 


i 


1 

8 
162 
lX6i 
215 
305 


The  use  of  compressed  air  for  operating  drills  in  tunnels  and  very  deep 


no  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

shafts  is  almost  &  necessity,  although  the  authors  have  driven  a  short 
tunnel  with  steam  drills,  the  exhaust  being  piped  back  to  the  outside 
air  and  care  being  taken  to  prevent  leaky  joints.  Aside  from  the  fact 
that  less  discomfort  on  account  of  high  temperature  is  caused  where  air 
is  used,  the  exhaust  from  the  drill  furnishes  ventilation  for  the  headings, 
which  is  a  very  important  point.  It  also  makes  it  possible,  by  tumii^on 
the  air  from  a  valve  at  the  shaft,  to  blow  out  the  tunnel  after  blasting, 
thus  quickly  removing  the  obnoxious  gases. 

Information  concerning  the  dimensions,  weight  and  operating  condi- 
tions of  percussion  drills  of  the  type  suitable  for  ordinary  sewer  trench- 
ing and  tunneling  is  given  in  Table  15. 

Wheeled  Trench  Drills. — Upon  some  trench  work,  notably  upon 
some  sewer  work  in  Havana,  Cuba,  drills  and  steam  boilers  have  been 


Fio.  36.— Electrie-ftir  drill  (Ingereoll-Riind) , 

mounted  on  the  same  trucks,  Fig,  35,  and  run  over  the  trench  in  which 
the  drilling  was  to  be  done.  When  the  drill  is  in  the  proper  position,  the 
rear  of  the  truck  is  jacked  up  from  the  ground  so  that  the  jacks  may  take 
up  the  strains  and  vibration.  This  machine  is  intended  to  save  much 
of  the  labor  required  to  set  up  and  move  a  drill  mounted  on  a  tripod  and 
to  be  a  macliine  which  can  be  easily  moved  about.  The  drill  is 
mounted  upon  a  bar  along  which  it  can  be  moved  a  distance  of  about  3 
ft,  and  about  which  it  can  be  revolved  so  that  holes  may  be  drilled 
obliquely  as  well  as  vertically.  This  machine  is  adapted  for  trenches 
from  2  to  5  ft.  in  width. 

Electric-air  DriU. — The  electric-air  drill,  Fig.  36,  is  driven  by  com- 
pressed air  furnished  by  a  pubator.  This  pulsator  is  geared  to  an 
electric  motor,  using  either  direct  or  slternating  current,  and  both 
are  mounted  on  a  small  truck  for  ease  in  handUng.     The  air  is  never 


METHODS  OP  ROCK  EXCAVATION  111 

exhausted  in  this  pulsator,  but  ia  simply  used  over  and  over  again, 
moving  back  and  forth  in  a  closed  circuit.     The  pulsator  requires  no 
intake  or  discharge  valve  or  water-jackets,     This  drili  may  weU  be  used 
where  electric  power  ia  available  and  is  cheaper  than  air  or  steam  power  on 
account  of  high  fuel  cost,  and  where  high  altitudes  impair  the  efficiency 
of  the  ordinary  air  compressor  and  where  pipe  lines  would  be  objection- 
able.    Part  of  the  rock  drill- 
ing at  the  Kensico  dam  of  the 
Catskill  wat€r  supply  for  New 
York  was  done  by  these  drills. 

Hammer  Drills.^The  ham- 
mer drill  is  a  relatively  new 
invention,  having  come  into 
genefal  use  since  1900.  With 
it  the  bit  remains  at  the  bot- 
tom of  the  hole  in  contact 
with  the  rock,  instead  of  re- 
ciprocating with  the  piston  at 
each  stroke,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  reciprocating  drill.  The 
pifiton,  or  hammer,  strikes  the 
upper  end  of  the  bit,  which  ia 
rotated  either  by  turning  the 
drill  by  hand  or  automatically 
by  a  mechanical  device. 

The  advantages  of  the 
hammer  drill  over  the  recip- 
rocating  drill  are  that  it  is 

Ught,  can  be  readily  handled       ^  ■  ■  ,■  j  ^  ■r-' ; 

by  one  man  and  requires  no 
tripod  or  other  mounting,  aa 
shown  in  Fig.  37.  It  is  par- 
ticularly serviceable  in  narrow  trenches  where  it  is  difGcult  to  handle  the 
reciprocating  tripod  drill.  Holes  may  be  drilled  with  this  maohine  in 
any  direction.  There  is  considerable  saving  in  time  in  changing  bits, 
as  with  the  hammer  drill  it  is  simply  necessary  to  lift  oR  the  machine, 
take  out  the  drill  and  replace  it  with  a  new  one,  replacing  the  machine 
on  the  new  bit;  while  with  the  reciprocating  drill  it  is  necessary  to  crank 
back  the  feed  screw,  withdrawing  the  bit  from  the  hole,  remove  the 
bit  from  the  chuck,  place  the  new  bit,  and  finally  turn  down  the  feed 
screw  to  bring  the  bit  to  the  required  position. 

This  drill  occupies  a  sort  of  middle  place  between  the  double-hand 
drill  and  the  reciprocating  drill,  aupersedin?  each  under  many  conditions. 
The  double-hand  drill  will  still  be  used  when  there  is  insufficient  drilling 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


—Hammer  drill  (Sullivan).     Fia.  3U. — ytoping  drill  (Sullivan). 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION  113 

to  be  done  to  warrant  providing  an  air  compressor  for  operating  power 
drills^  but  where  such  a  machine  is  available  there  appears  to  be  little 
field  left  for  the  hand  drills.  Similarly  the  reciprocating  drill  has  been 
replaced  upon  work  too  heavy  for  hand  drilling  and  yet  within  the 
practical  limits  of  the  hammer  drill.  Where  power  is  available  the 
hammer  drill  may  be  used  advantageously  for  block-holing  to  break 
boulders^  for  trimming  small  outcroppings  of  ledge,  and  for  following 
up  reciprocating  drills  where  shallow  holes  are  required. 

Several  sizes  of  hammer  drills  are  commonly  used  upon  construction 
work)  the  lightest  weighing  from  20  to  25  lb.,  being  capable  of  drilling 
holes  to  about  4  ft.  in  depth  large  enough  for  7/8-in.  powder,  and  the 
heaviest,  weighing  from  30  to  50  lb.,  capable  of  drilling  holes  large  enough 
for  1-1  /4-in.  powder  and  to  about  6  ft.  in  depth.  The  valve  is  so  ar- 
ranged as  to  be  opened  when  pressure  is  exerted  on  the  handle  of  the 
drill.    When  this  pressure  is  released  the  valve  is  automatically  closed. 

The  piston,  or  hammer,  in  the  type  shown  in  Fig.  38,  rises  and  falls 
with  the  corresponding  admission  of  compressed  air  to  the  cylinder, 
imparting  to  the  top  or  head  of  the  drill  a  sharp  blow  each  time  it  falls. 
This  type  of  drill  depends  upon  the  admission  of  exhaust  air  to  the  hole 
passing  through  the  bit  for  blowing  the  dust  and  mud  out  of  the  drill- 
hole. A  valve  is  provided,  by  means  of  which  the  operator  can  regulate 
the  quantity  of  exhaust  air  admitted  to  the  hole,  so  that  when  drilling 
shallow  holes  the  quantity  admitted  may  be  relatively  small,  but  when 
drilling  deep  holes  a  relatively  large  supply  of  air  can  be  used. 

The  two  objections  to  this  type  of  drill  are  the  vibration  imparted 
to  the  operator  and  the  quantity  of  dust  thrown  into  the  air,  which 
may  have  some  effect  on  the  health  of  a  person  operating  one  of  these 
drills  continuously.  The  former  objection  b  met  in  part  by  cushioning, 
thus  reducing  as  much  as  practicable  the  vibration  imparted  to  the 
operator.  The  second  objection  is  met  in  part  by  providing  for  the  ad- 
mission of  water  to  lay  the  dust.  This  is  particularly  useful  in  tunnel 
work  but  is  net  ordinarily  attempted  in  open  trench  drilling. 

The  hammer  drill  has  been  adapted  for  some  grades  of  tunnel  work  by 
mounting  it  on  the  upper  end  of  a  hollow  steel  cylinder  provided  at  the 
bottom  with  a  point  to' hold  it  .securely  in  position.  Fig.  39.  A  feed 
plunger  moves  backward  and  forward  in  the  cylinder,  being  actuated  by 
compressed  air  admitted  to  the  cylinder  through  the  throttle  valve. 
When  the  throttle  is  slightly  opened,  air  is  admitted  to  the  feed  cylinder 
thus  forcing  the  drill  out  until  the  bit  comes  in  contact  with  the  rock. 
Upon  opening  the  valve  further  the  air  is  admitted  to  the  operating 
cylinder  and  the  drill  set  in  motion.  The  pressure  of  air  in  the  feed 
cylinder  holds  the  drill  constantly  in  contact  with  the  rock,  even  when 
drilling  overhead.  The  feed  cylinder  is  about  2  ft.  in  length.  The  drill 
is  rotated  by  moving  the  rotating  handle  backward  and  forward  about  a 

8 


114 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


quarter  of  a  turn.  When  the  hole  has  been  drilled  to  the  required  depth, 
the  throttle  is  closed,  thus  releasing  the  air  in  the  feed  cylinder  and  allow- 
ing the  drill  to  recede  slowly  from  the  hole. 

In  Table  16  are  given  the  cylinder  diameters,  weights,  etc.,  of  several 
t3rpes  of  hammer  drills,  the  figures  being  taken  from  various  bulletins 
of  the  Ingersoll-Rand  Co.  The  table  also  gives  the  amount  of  free  air 
required  to  run  drills  of  several  types  and  at  different  gage  pressures. 
These  figrires  have  been  determined  by  tests  made  from  time  to  time 
with  these  drills. 

As  with  the  reciprocating  drills,  the  quantity  of  air  required  to  operate 
a  battery  of  drills  is  not  proportional  to  the  number  at  all  times,  as  some 
of  the  drills  are  running  slowly  or  are  shut  down,  while  others  are  running 
at  full  speed.  The  quantity  of  air  required  to  run  from  1  to  70  of  these 
drills  may  be  obtained  by  using  the  multipliers  given  in  Table  10. 

Table  16. — Dimensions,    Performance    and    Air    Requirements    of 

Hammer  Drills  (Inoersoll-Rand) 


Type 


B 


D 


E 


Cylinder  diam.,  inches 

Stroke,  inches 

Length  over  all,  inches 

Depth  of  hole,  inches 

Weight  of  drill,  lb 

Size  of  air  inlet,  inches 

Size  of  shank,  inches 

Starter  bit,  12-in.  runs 

Last  bit 

Air  per  min.  per  drill,  cu.  ft.. . 

Gage  press.,  60  lb 

Gage  press.,  70  lb .' 

Gage  press.,  80  lb 

Gage  press.,  90  lb 

Gage  press.,  100  lb 


If 

2i 
17i 

6 
21 

I 

ttX2j 

f-J 


17 
21 
25 
30 
35 


1A&  IH 
2i 
15 
48 
22 

I 

JX3 

lA 
lA 

12 
15 
19 
23 
27 


lA&lH 
2i 
15 
48 
30 

I 

iX3 

lA 
lA 

12 
15 
19 
23 
27 


2 

li 
17i 
72 
29  or  34 

i 

iX3i 

li 
li 

30 
35 
39 
44 

48 


2i 
2 

18 
144 

40 

i 

:x3i 

2i 

li 

37 
43 
49 
55 
62 


Practical  LimitationB  to  the  Several  Methods  of  Drilling. — Single 
hand  drilling  is  not  used  to  a  great  extent  in  the  excavation  of  ordi- 
nary sewer  trenches.  It  is  occasionally  useful,  however,  in  cracking 
boulders,  and  it  may  possibly  be  used  to  a  limited  extent  where  the 
ledge- lies  in  strata  in  a  wide  trench,  and  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it 
can  be  split  off  readily  by  methods  ordinarily  used  in  quarrying.  This 
method  of  drilling  may  in  some  cases  be  extended  to  holes  from  3  to 
5  ft.  in  depth,  but  such  cases  are  exceptional. 

Double  hand  drilling  is  commonly  used  where  the  holes  are  not  to 
be  deep,  say  from  1  to  3  ft.,  or  where  the  total  quantity  of  ledge  to  be 
excavated  is  relatively  small,  thus  making  it  inadvisable  to  provide  a 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


116 


power  drilling  plant.  This  method  is  also  used  in  connection  with 
the  reciprocating  drill  for  drilling  the  odds  and  ends  of  ledge  where 
too  much  time  would  be  consumed  in  moving  the  drill.  It  is  generally 
not  wise  to  attempt  drilling  holes  more  than  4  or  5  ft.  in  depth  by 
this  method,  although  if  necessary  they  may  be  drilled  to  a  depth  of 
10  to  15  ft.  by  the  use  of  heavy  hammers. 

The  hammer  drill  has  changed  materially  the  limit  to  which  double 
hand  drilUng  can  ordinarily  be  carried  with  economy.  This  driU  is  not 
in  itself  particularly  expensive  and  does  not  require  an  expensive  power 
plant.  Consequently,  it  is  being  used  extensively  for  the  drilling  of 
shallow  holes  which  formerly  were  drilled  by  the  double  hand  method. 
Formerly  it  was  usually  wise  to  change  from  double  hand  drilling  to 
steam  or  air  drilling  where  the  holes  became  from  2-1  /2  to  4  ft.  deep  and 
the  quantity  of  ledge  to  be  excavated  was  large  enough  to  warrant  the  use 
of  such  machinery.  With  the  possibility  of  using  the  hammer  drill,  the 
older  type  of  steam  drill  does  not  come  into  use  except  upon  deep  holes  or 
holes  in  very  hard  ledge. 

The  length  of  holes  which  may  be  drilled  with  the  hammer  drill 
depends  upon  the  character  of  the  rock.  Upon  very  hard  rocks,  occa- 
sionally a  progress  of  not  more  than  1  ft.  an  hour,  on  the  average,  can 
be  made,  but  in  ordinary  rocks  a  progress  of  from  3  to  5  ft.  per  hour 
may  be  expected. 

Upon  sewer  excavation  in  Hopedale,  Mass.,  where  the  quartzite  en- 
countered is  extremely  hard,  the  fates  of  progress  with  hammer  and 
tripod  drills  are  given  in  Table  17,  which  contains  a  record  of  several 
weeks  continuous  use  of  drills. 


Table  17. — Rates  op  Progress  per  Day  op  9   Hours  op  Steam  and 
Hammer  Drills  Working  in  Vert  Hard  Quartzite  at  Hopedale, 

Mass.,  1913 


Type  of  drill 


Hammer  drill . 
Hammer  drill 


Tripod  drill 
Tripod  drill, 
Tripod  drill . 
Tripod  drill . 


AvR.  rate 

Max.  rat« 

Min.  rate 

15.2  ft. 

18  ft. 

13  ft. 

16 . 2  ft. 

19  ft. 

14  ft. 

15.7  ft. 

24  ft. 

12  ft. 

13.4  ft. 

19  ft. 

10  ft. 

19.3  ft. 

24  ft. 

15  ft. 

17.2  ft. 

20  ft. 

14  ft. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  minimum  rate  for  the  trip>od  drill  was  as  low  as 
10  ft.  and  for  the  hammer  driU  13  ft.  per  day  of  9  hours,  while  the  maxi- 
mum rates  were  24  and  19  ft.  respectively.  The  average  rates  obtained 
by  the  use  of  hammer  drills  were  practically  the  same  as  those  of  the 
tripod  drills.  It  should  be  taken  into  consideration,  however,  that  the 
tripod  drills  were  put  upon  the  hard  steady  drilling  while  the  hammer 


1 1 6  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

drills  were  used  for  the  shallower  and  less  diffioult  holes.  This  arrange- 
meat  doubtless  tended  to  equalize  the  output  of  the  two  tyx>e8  of 
machine,  each  proving  economical  upon  its  class  of  work. 

DRILL  BITS 

The  drill  bits  used  with  the  reciprocating  drill  are  made  of  round  or 
hexagonal  steel  with  points  of  many  shapes.  The  drill  bits  in  a  set  vary 
in  length  progressively  ordinarily  by  intervals  of  24  in.,  although  these 
intervals  are  dependent  upon  the  length  of  the  feed  screw  and  may  vary 
according  to  the  drill  selected.  The  bits  used  with  the  hammer  drill  are 
made  of  hollow  steel,  the  so-called  six-point  rose  bit  being 'commonly 
used  upon  construction  work.  The  drill  bits  required  for  the  hammer 
drill  vary  in  length  progressively  by  intervals  of  12  in. 

An  instructive  article  by  T.  H.  Proske,  printed  in  Mining  and  Scien- 
tific Press,  March  5, 1910,  gives  many  practical  points  of  value  regarding 
the  shape  and  sharpening  of  drill  bits,  for  both  reciprocating  and 
hammer  drills.    The  following  quotation  is  from  this  article: 

"The  success  of  almost  every  drilling  operation  depends  on  the  selection 
and  treatment  of  the  bits.  Too  much  attention  cannot  be  given  this  impor- 
tant part  of  the  work.  If  the  bits  have  been  properly  formed,  sharpened  and 
tempered  for  the  work,  and  if  they  are  changed  just  as  soon  as  their  edges 
and  gages  are  worn,  the  result  will  be  found  to  be  most  economical. 

"For  the  guidance  of  those  unfamiliar  with  the  forms  of  drill  bits  used 
in  the  different  sections,  I  have  prepared  a  few  drawings  of  those  in  use. 
A,  Fig.  40,  represents  the  square  cross-bit  adopted  as  the  standard  for 
American  mining  practice.  It  is  made  from  either  round,  octagon  or  cruci- 
form steel.  The  reason  for  the  adoption  of  this  form  of  bit  as  a  standard 
will  be  appreciated  when  the  three  requirements  of  a  rock-drill  bit  are  re- 
called. These  are  'to  chisel  out  a  hole  in  the  rock,'  Ho  keep  this  hole  round 
and  free  from  rifles,'  and  'to  mud  freely.'  There  is  really  a  fourth  require- 
ment, which  is  'to  do  as  much  drilling  as  possible  before  being  re-sharpened.' 

"The  different  kinds  of  rock  to  be  drilled  affect  the  wear  of  the  bit. 
Very  hard  rock  will  blunt  the  chisel  and  reaming  edges.  The  softer  rocks 
do  not  blunt  these  edges,  but  wear  the  outer  sides  so  that  it  loses  its  gage 
and  s<ze,  still  appearing  to  be  quite  sharp.  For  this  reason  a  bit  that  is 
made  with  a  square  edge  and  a  clearance  angle  of  8  deg.  will  drill  about 
four  times  as  long  in  soft  rock  as  a  bit  with  round  edges  and  a  clearance 
angle  of  16  deg.,  before  being  reduced  to  the  size  of  the  next  bit  that  is  to 
follow.  Referring  to  A  and  B,  Fig.  40,  the  latter  being  a  round-edge  bit 
with  a  clearance  angle  of  16  deg.,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  A  the  corners  of  the 
bit  at  the  base  of  the  bevel  describe  a  circle  that  is  equal  to  the  circle 
that  the  chisel  edges  describe.  This  is  as  it  should  be,  as  it  is  impossible 
for  the  chisel  edge  to  cut  out  all  of  the  rock.  The  reaming  edge,  which  is 
that  part  of  the  bit  extending  from  the  chisel  edge  to  the  base  of  the  bevel, 
marked  a  in  both  A  and  B,  must  ream  the  outer  edge  of  the  hole  and  keep  it 


METHODS  OF  BOCK  EXCAVATION 


117 


d 

I\ 

y 

Jy 

h 

H 

P 

o 


UJ 


pSKfmiM 


11 


^^mmum 


* 

0. 


3 


o  .^ 


5 


=2 

«*^ 

O 

00 

-♦a 
C 


SO 

■ 


■-        ID 


118  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

round  and  free  from  rifles.  In  B  it  will  be  noted  that  the  circle  described 
by  the  comers  of  the  bit  at  the  base  of  the  bevel  is  much  smaller  than  the 
circle  described  by  the  chisel  edges.  This  causes  an  excess  of  wear  on  the 
corners  of  the  chisel  edges,  the  bit  rapidly  loses  its  gage,  as  well  as  its 
efficiency,  and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  keep  the  hole  round.  Rifles  form, 
and  these  cause  the  rotating  parts  of  the  drilling  machine  to  break,  often 
resulting  in  the  loss  of  the  hole. 

"The  angle  of  the  bevel  of  the  face  of  the  bit  has  to  do  with  its  life  as  well 
as  with  the  property  of  *mudding'  freely.  It  is  generally  accepted  that  if 
this  angle  be  90  deg.  it  gives  strength  and  permits  the  bit  to  'mud'  or  throw 
back  the  cuttings  from  the  face  of  the  bit  when  the  drill  is  pointed  downward. 
Another  reason  why  bits  such  as  is  shown  in  A  are  preferable  to  those 
illustrated  by  B  is  that  having  a  long  wing  they  are  stronger  and  will  not 
break  so  readily  as  does  a  short  bit. 

"  The  Simmons  bit  is  shown  in  Fig.  C.  In  it  two  of  the  wings  are  devoted 
entirely  to  reaming  and  keeping  the  hole  round  and  free  from  rifles. 

"The  Brunton  bit  is  shown  in  D.  The  object  of  this  bit  is  to  obtain 
the  advantages  of  the  X-bit  without  the  attendant  difficulties  of  re-sharpen- 
ing. With  this  bit,  as  in  the  case  of  the  X-bit,  the  piston  must  revolve  a 
half  turn  before  the  cutting  edges  w^ill  strike  in  the  same  place  a  second  time. 
It  is  as  easily  re-sharpened  as  the  regular  square  cross  bit. 

"The  X-bit  itself  is  shown  in  E.  It  is  designed  to  prevent  rifles.  This 
the  hand-sharpened  cross  bit  would  not  do,  but  the  machine-sharpened 
cross  bit  effectually  accomplishes. 

"F  shows  what  is  commonly  termed  the  high-center  bit.  This  was  for 
many  years  accepted  as  the  proper  form.  Since  the  introduction  of  hammer 
drills  this  bit  is  again  finding  favor.  It  is  of  especial  advantage  in  starting 
a  hole,  the  high  center  immediately  making  an  impression  on  the  rock, 
whereas  the  square-faced  bit  requires  a  flat  face  for  ready  starting.  For 
a  starting  bit  in  hammer  machines  it  has  no  equal.  Here,  however,  its 
advantages  over  the  square  bit  end.  Used  as  a  bit  to  follow  the  starter, 
it  is  liable  to  follow  slips  and  seams  in  the  rock,  causing  crooked  holes,  w^hich 
are  sometimes  lost  before  being  finished.     This  the  square  bit  will  not  do. 

"G  shows  a  bit  where  the  comers  are  in  advance  of  the  center.  This  is 
a  fast  cutting  bit.  The  corners  break  up  the  rock  in  advance  of  the  center 
and  leave  little  for  the  center  to  do;  this  causes  the  comers  to  wear  fast, 
but  still  not  to  excess  when  it  is  considered  that  they  do  most  of  the  work. 
This  drill  will  not  follow  slips  and  seams,  will  drill  a  round  hole,  and  is  easy 
on  the  drilling  machine.  The  weak  point  of  this  form  is  that  the  leverage 
is  so  great  on  the  comers  that  they  are  liable  to  break  off  if  tempered  too 
hard. 

"H  shows  the  round-edge  bit,  which  is  a  favorite  with  some.  In  soft 
rock  this  is  good,  but  in  hard  rock  it  permits  rifles  to  form  in  the  hole  because 
there  are  no  reaming  edges. 

"The  Y-bit  shown  in  I  gives  the  advantage  of  plenty  of  room  for  the 
cuttings  to  escape.  It  is,  however,  quite  difficult  to  make  and  re-sharpen 
by  hand.  With  the  power-sharpener  it  can  be  made  as  easily  as  any  other 
form. 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


119 


'*J  shows  the  'six-wing  rosette'  bit.  li  is  used  in  hammer  drills  only. 
Of  all  the  rosette  forms  of  bits  this  has  been  found  to  be  the  most  satisfactory. 

"K  shows  the  square  cross  bits  when  made  up  for  hammer  drills  where  a 
hole  for  the  introduction  of  air  or  water  to  remove  the  cuttings  apexes  at  a 
point  back  from  the  bevel  of  the  bit  in  one  of  the  recesses  between  the  wings. 

'^L  shows  the  same  form  where  the  hole  ends  in  the  center  of  the  cross  of  the 
cutting  edges.  This  form  of  bit  is  extensively  used.  Its  faults  are  that  a 
core  is  formed  by  this  hole;  this  core  fills  the  hole,  and  causes  a  stoppage  of 
air  and  water.  These  cores  have  been  known  to  become  as  much  as  8  in. 
long  and  are  quite  difficult  to  remove.  To  clear  them  away  the  core  must 
be  burned  out  by  heating  the  steel  the  full  length  of  the  core  in  a  slow  fire; 
sometimes  a  slow  and  tedious  process.  This  difficulty  is  entirely  overcome 
by  the  use  of  the  bit  shown  in  K. 

"The  Z-bit,  M,  is  extensively  • 
used  in  Germany.  In  hammer  drill-  H" 
ing  machines,,  the  steel  is  formed 
in  bars  having  a  Z  shape.  While 
I  show  this  bar  straight,  it  is  usu- 
ally twisted  to  form  a  spiral.  It 
is  an  easy  matter  to  form  a  Z- 
bit  on  the  end  of  such  a  bar.  The 
results  obtained  are  excellent. 
Holes  to  a  depth  of  16  ft.  hori- 
zontal have  been  drilled  with  this 
form  of  steel.  The  spiral  draws 
out  the  cuttings  much  the  same  as 
an  auger. 

"After  a  bit  has  been  forged,  it 
should  be  properly  tempered  as  in 
N.    O   shows    the    result  of  the 


3 


-^^6rai^~^=^^TzL\ 


vV".   t.' 


Fig.  41. — Bit  tempering  tank. 


common  method  of  tempering.  The  center  of  the  bit  is  soft,  while  the  cor- 
ners are  hard.  When  the  bit  is  immersed  in  the  water  about  an  inch,  the 
large  mass  of  metal  in  the  center  cools  more  slowly  than  the  comers  since 
the  comers  have  three  sides  exposed  to  the  water.  Perhaps  the  center 
has  not  chilled  at  all  when  the  bit  is  withdrawn  for  annealing,  and  the  final 
result  is  a  soft-center  bit,  which  will  flatten  and  retard  the  work  of  drilling. 
P  and  Q  show  the  result  of  trying  to  temper  the  bit  with  the  forging  heat, 
by  plunging  the  whole  bit  into  the  water  as  soon  as  it  is  sharpened.  The 
line  of  tension  induced  by  cooling  is  indicated.  At  this  place  the  drill 
will  break.  R  shows  the  checking  caused  by  first  chilling  the  steel  back  of 
the  bit  and  then  plunging  with  the  forging  heat. 

"For  the  purpose  of  tempering  a  bit  as  shown  in  N  a  tank  should  be  pro- 
vided, such  as  shown  in  section  in  Fig.  41.  This  should  be  about  12  in. 
deep  by  12  in.  wide,  and  of  sufficient  length  to  accommodate  whatever  num- 
ber of  drills  are  to  be  sharpened  in  a  day  with  the  machine.  The  water  inlet 
should  be  at  the  bottom,  and  the  outlet  should  be  placed  about  3/4  in.  above  a 
grate,  which  itself  should  be  about  8  in.  above  the  bottom.  This  permits 
the  bit  to  be  immersed  to  a  depth  of  about  3/4  in.     With  a  tempering  tank  of 


120  AMERICAN  SEWERAQE  PRACTICE 

this  constructioD  the  bit  can  be  hardened  to  any  desired  degree.  This 
depends  on  the  temperature  of  the  bit  when  placed  on  the  grate.  It  is 
essential  that  the  drill  stand  in  a  vertical  position.  To  lean  either  way 
would  cause  it  to  harden  to  a  great«r  depth  on  one  side  than  on  the  other, 
causing  a  tension  that  might  lead  to  breaking  of  the  wings.  It  is  best  to 
provide  a  rail  around  the  tank  about  the  distance  required  to  hold  the  shortr 
est  drill,  and  to  drive  pins  about  3  in.  apart  in  this  rail.  By  placing  the  drills 
between  these  pegs  they  can  be  kept  in  a  vertical  position.  When  using  this 
tank  a  small  flow  suflicient  to  displace  the  water  heated  by  the  cooling  of 
the  bits  should  be  turned  on  to  keep  the  supply  always  cool." 


J'lQ.  42. — Leyner  drill  sharpener  (Ingereoll-Rand). 

Drill  Sharpeners. — The  recent  advances  made  in  the  manufacture 
of  rock  drills  are  no  more  important  than  those  made  in  the  art  of 
sharpening  drills.  Perhaps  the  greatest  advance  in  this  direction  is 
the  invention  of  driU-sharjiening  machines,  in  which  the  bits  are  formed 
in  exact  accordance  with  p re-determined  designs.  All  bits  made  in 
machines  are  uniform  in  shape  and  size.  The  use  of  sharpeners  has 
resulted  in  a  great  reduction  in  cost  of  sharpening.  In  an  annual 
report,  Matthew  Gault,  Superintendent  of  the  Sewer  Department  of 
Worcester,  Mass.,  states  that  the  cost  of  drill  sharpening  has  been  re- 
duced two-thirds  by  the  use  of  a  Leyner  drill  sharpener.  In  spite  of  these. 
advantages,  however,itisimportantnotto  lose  sight  of  the  great  impor- 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION  121 

tance  of  proper  tempering,  which  is  probably  the  most  essential  part  of 
the  blacksmith's  work,  especially  where  rock  of  a  great  range  of  hard- 
ness, requiring  differently  tempered  bits,  is  encounterd,  as  in  some 
New  England  cities. 

The  Leyner  diill  sharpener  is  typical  of  such  machines.  The  bit 
is  formed  entirely  within  a  split  conical  die,  Fig.  42,  by  a  properly 
shaped  dolly.  The  machine,  is  shown  with  a  bit  clamped  in 
the  sharpener  just  after  the  bit  has  been  formed  and  the  dolly  withdrawn. 
This  sharpener  is  operated  entirely  by  compressed  air. 

The  top  of  the  sharpener  consists  of  a  heavy  clamp,  which  holds  the 
die  and  bit,  and  a  hammer,  which  is  built  like  a  small  rock  drill  and  has 
the  dolly  held  horizontally,  as  shown  in  the  illustration.  The  clamping 
portion  of  the  device  consists  of  a  support.  A;  a  clamping  head,  B;  and  a 
yoke,  C.  Inside  of  A  and  B  there  is  a  large  differential  piston,  the  head 
within  B  being  much  the  larger  and  receiving  the  air  pressiire  on  its 
upper  surface.  Two  steel  rods  rise  from  this  piston  through  the  clamping 
head  and  yoke  C,  to  which  they  are  attached.  If  the  handle  D  is 
turned  in  one  direction,  the  air  pressure  is  admitted  to  the  top  of  the 
large  end  of  the  piston,  holding  the  die  and  steel  firmly,  as  shown;  if  the 
handle  is  turned  the  other  way  the  air'pressure  is  admitted  below  the 
small  end  of  the  piston  and  the  yoke  is  raised. 

The  hammer  cylinder,  which  resembles  the  ordinary  rook  drill  cylinder, 
contains  a  freely  moving  hammer  the  front  end  of  which  travels  in  two 
steel  bushings  and  strikes  on  the  shank  end  of  the  dolly,  resting  in  a 
forged  steel  guide  flange.  The  hammer  cylinder  travels  in  a  guide 
shell  and  may  be  fed  backward  and  forward  by  means  of  a  screw,  thus 
enabling  the  operator  to  change  dollies  quitskly.  To  do  this  the  clamp 
bolts  are  loosened,  the  cylinder  cranked  back,  the  doUy  changed  and  the 
cylinder  returned  to  the  proper  position  and  reclamped.  The  sharpener 
may  be  used  to  form  and  sharpen  pins,  drill  steel  shanks,  bolt  and  rivet 
heads  and  drill  bits  of  any  design. 

COMPRESSED  AIR 

Useful  information  relating  to  compressed  air  and  its  use  in  reciprocat- 
ing drills  is  given  in  Tables  18  and  19,  prepared  by  thelngersoU-Rand  Co., 
which  gives  the  following  explanation  of  them: 

''The  tables  will  determine  the  amount  of  free  air  required  to  operate  rock 
drills  at  various  altitudes  with  air  at  given  pressures.  The  tables  have  been 
compiled  from  a  review  of  a  wide  experience  and  from  tests  run  on  drills  of 
various  sizes.  They  are  intended  for  fair  conditions  in  ordinary  hard  rock, 
but  owing  to  varying  conditions  it  is  impossible  to  make  any  guarantee 
without  a  full  knowledge  of  existing  conditions.  In  soft  material,  where  the 
actual  time  of  drilling  is  short,  more  drills  can  be  run  with  a  given  sized  com- 


122 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


pressor  than  when  working  in  hard  material,  when  the  drills  would  be  work- 
ing continuously  for  a  longer  period,  thereby  increasing  the  chance  of  all  the 
drills  operating  at  the  same  time.  In  tunnel  work,  where  the  rock  is  hard, 
it  has  been  the  experience  that  more  rapid  progress  has  been  made  when  the 
drills  were  operated  under  a  high  air  pressure,  and  it  has  been  found  profit- 
able to  provide  compressor  capacity  about  25  per  cent,  in  excess  of  require- 
ments. There  is  also  a  distinct  advantage  in  having  a  compressor  of  larger 
capacity,  in  that  it  saves  the  trouble  and  expense  of  moving  the  compressor 
as  the  work  progresses,  and  will  not  interfere  with  the  work  of  driving  the 
tunnel.  No  allowance  has  been  made  in  the  tables  for  loss  due  to  leaky 
pipes,  or  for  transmission  loss  due  to  friction;  but  the  capacities  given  are 
merely  the  displacement  required,  so  that  when  selecting  a  compressor  for 
the  work  required  these  matters  must  be  taken  into  account." 

Table  18. — Cubic  Feet  op  Free  Air  per  Minute  Required  to  Run 
One  Reciprocatino  Drill  of  the  Size  and  at  the  Pressure  Stated, 

AT  Sea  Level  (Inqersgll-Rand) 


Gage 
pressure. 

Cylinder  diameter  of  drill                                                  ] 

2 

2i 

2i 

n 

3 

3i 

3A 

3J 

3* 

31 

41 

5 

5* 

lb. 

in. 

50 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 
130 

in. 

in. 

60 

60 

68 

82 

90 

95 

97  i  100 

108 

113 

150 

164 

70 

56 

68'    77 

93 

102 

108 

110'  113 

124 

129 

147 

170 

181 

80 

63 

76    86  1  104 

114 

120 

123  '  127 

131 

143 

164 

190 

207 

90 

70  84 

95 

115 

126 

133 

136 

141    152 

159 

182 

210 

230 

100 

77   92'  104 

126 

138 

146 

149  1  154  '  166 

174 

199 

240 

252 

Transmission  of  Compressed  Air. — An  important  part  of  the  instal- 
lation of  an  air  driUing  outfit  is  the  selection  and  laying  of  the  com- 
pressed air  line.  It  is  important  to  provide  air  mains  of  sufficient  size 
so  that  the  working  pressure  will  not  fall  too  low.  There  is  not  the 
loss  in  power,  due  to  reduction  in  pressure,  which  at  first  thought  might 
be  expected,  as  with  a  reduction  in  pressure  there  is  an  increase  in  volume. 
The  information  given  in  Tables  20  and  21,  prepared  by  the  Sullivan 
Machinery  Co.,  gives  the  loss  due  to  friction  in  pipes  100  ft.  in  length, 
for  different  diameters  of  pipe  and  volumes  of  air,  the  initial  or  compressor 
pressure  being  90  and  100  lb.  per  square  inch,  respectively.  To  ascertain 
the  loss  in  pressure  at  the  drill,  the  loss  in  100  ft.  should  be  multiplied 
by  the  length  of  pipe  in  units  of  100  ft. 

Air  Cooling  and  Reheating. — ^In  an  extensive  line  of  air  piping,  it 
is  very  important  that  the  air  be  kept  dry,  otherwise  the  freezing  of  the 
condensation  from  the  air  will  cause  damage  to  the  pipes  and  drills.  The 
amount  of  moisture  that  can  be  carried  in  suspension  by  the  air  increases 
with  rise  of  temperature.  The  "  af tercooler "  is  an  instrument  for  lower- 
ing the  temperature  of  air,  thus  precipitating  the  moisture  and  reducing 
the  liability  of  freezing.  It  consists  of  a  steel  shell  containing  steel 
tubes  through  which  the  air  is  conducted.    Cold  water  enters  the  cooler 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


123 


3 

M 

Q 

M 
O 

o 

g 

o 


:4 

o 


< 

H 
O 


(4 


H" 


S^ 


OS 

o 


a 

o 
U 

o 
-< 

% 

O 

H 


H 
O 
5? 


00 

H 
P 

s 

H 

OS 
H 


-< 


g 
OS 


o 

o 

«0 

o 

o 

o 

o 

1^ 

1 

Si 

o 

:? 

o> 

00 

N   C^   _   Tt< 
C^  04   iQ  iO  00   00 


SSS8 


ss 


N  00  r^ 

00    Tt<     "^ 


£2  eo  »o  r^ 

Ttf     TT     ^^     ^^ 


coTt<»o«or^oooag 

00  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  00  ^ 

CO"t*<  cm       CO  '^  CM     OO  Tt* 

^cOTt<cc»C'^'^i-iOoaooc^O 


OiO'-«NCO'<^"3«OI>»l>»OOOCS 
C^  CO  CO  00  CO  OO  00  CO  CO  00  CO  ^  ^ 

cO~oo  liT't*"'^        CO  CO        CO  "^  CO" 
lOC^CMOOOOCOOOi-iOSCOOi"^ 


»/5COt*000>0>OTHNC^OOTt<CO 
C^   C^    Ol   Ol   C<   C<    00   CO   00   CO   CO   CO   CO 

rt4     rt«  00  CM  CO     ic~  C^ 
'^00510'^OCOCOOacOO^COCO 


*Hc^c^cO"Tt*»o^coo»t*oooao 

CM  CM  C^  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  00 

x»H05"coco       6oco"^a> 

00C0O»C0O'«*<0i"^0>00XC0»0 


»CCOCOt^OOOOXO>OapOi-iCM 

-^  U5  CO  t*  00  >*  Oi 
"^  00  CM  CO  O  t^  W3 


00  r^  05 

O  t^  W3 

C0'^'^tCtOcOCOCOI»b<>0000Od 


CO  l^  CM  CO 

l^  »-i  CO  O  CO  O 


iOCMb*^OJ^O5^O5^00C0 
t^O»0X00c0OC0t*O"^Ot* 


'HC^^ICMCOCO'^'^'^JOiOCOCO 


00 
»o  t*  »-< 


t>.»coocM   xjor^co-^^oo 

•^  00  1-1  ^^   Oi  O^  »0  O  W3 


OiOaOOO'-«i-ii-i*-«CMNOOCO 


e 

3 


"^  t>-  »-i  CO  00  CM 
»-i  00  CO  Oi  CM  Tt<  t* 


1-1   »0   Oi  00 

CM   "^   CO   tH   »C 


000000000>0»0i0aOOO'-«'-« 


Oi-iOSt-^CMCOiOCOb-COiO 
i-lOOcOOOOCO»Ct^Oi»-<COl>»*-i 


t»t^i>t^ooooooooooa)0)0)0 


»>.  I 


•o 


iOCOOi-i'<!}<COOOOdi-iOO^OdOO 


CO  CO  CO  t^  b»  b»  t^  l>  00  00  00  00  d 

OOCM    '«tC<l    'OOCO'-^O^CMOO 
O'-i"^C000OCM00>Ot*0iCM»C 


CO  CO  COcOcOt^t^b-b-t^*  b-  00  00 

CO  '<Xr^    iO  CM  00  "^  '  CO  00    CM 
'^«5t*Oi^00"^cO00O>'-«'^l>» 


CO 


> 
o  . 

•  >  ■»» 


iO_»0  »0  UDCO  CO  CO  CO_CO  CO  t*  b*  b* 

Tt<   rf   00   b-   CM   CO'         lO   05   '^   b«   CO 
0005'-«CM'^COt*OiO'-<CO»000 


iti  \ti  \o  ^  ^  ^ 

CO 

CO 

• 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CM 
i-«  CM 

Oi  »-<  b-       '^ 
00  ^  CO  00  Od  o 

b- 

• 

CM 

• 

1— • 

• 

CM 

CO 

• 

CO 
OO 

• 

rf^'^-^^-^'^iOUdlCUSkO^ 


OOOOXOOOkOacOCO 
050»HCMCO'^COOO 


CO   CO   CO   CO   CO   CO   ^   "^   ^   '^_'^   '^t*    ^ 

~00   oTt^TQC"^   rtTcM^O^OO   CO'O   CO 

b-.i^«oaO»-<CMcO"^"^»ot*oo 


<N 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO* 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO* 

CO  00 

00 

X 

OO 

CM 

o 

o 

CO 

1-^ 

CM 

CM 

u 

CO  ^ 

»-< 

»-< 

y-i 

1-1 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM  CM 

CM 

00 

o 

• 

b- 

O 

■ 

o 

■ 

• 

• 

00 
CM 

• 

CO 
CM 

• 

1-1 

05 
CM 

• 

CM  t^ 

00  CO 

■      ■ 

1-*   1—1 

CO 

i-HCMCO-^iOcOb-OOOiOCMiC 


tc 


V 


O  S 


124 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


O 


o 

H 

5 


9 

d 

a 

t 

£ 
'2 

0) 

£ 


U3 


o  o 

o  o 


So 

00 

& 

o 

o 

9 

3 

o 

o 

o 

f&n 

*^ 

s 

o  o 

o 

o 

o 


_o  o 
o  d 


s 

C4 


s 


s 


s 


o 


s 

CO 


o 

3 


S  S  3 

■  •  • 

s  s  s 

•          •  •  ■ 

»-i  1-1  o  o 


f-  ^  ^ 

^.  '^.  '^ 

^^d  d 

d  d 
o  o 


&3 

■       • 

d  d 

ss 

d  d 
d  d 

s 

d 


^S 


■  • 

o  o>  ■; 

cq  d  o 

OB    £2  1^ 

CO    <0  CO 

1-1  d_d 

Ct    «N  lA 

1-1  lO  e4 

ii'  d  d 


0»     MO 

eo  1-^ 


1-1  o  o  o 
_  «6  w  e<i 

O    lO    CO    1-1 

^_d  d  d^ 

§  as 


poo 
G  <i  d> 


CO 
CO 

—4 
OO 


ti 


e4 

o» 


Ok 


»H    O 


8SS 

-«  o 


8 


00 


•  * 

p  o 

58:2 

d  d 


OO  ^  e« 
eo  -H 

lo  s^, ;: 

-p  *^_p. 

SS2S 

«  •  • 

OOP 
C9  wo 

ei  »-•  o 
d  d  d 

2'8 

dp 

8" 

o_ 

8 

d 


— 4  VN  O 

•  •  • 

O  O  O 

""^  OO  W 

«-i  o  o 

•  •  • 

O  OO 

S  8  8 

■  •  • 

o  o  o 

8  3 

d  d 

83 

•  • 

o  o 


S3 

•       • 

o  o 

8  8 

d  d 
d  d 
d_ 

8" 


o 
d 


25  '^ 


o 

iO 


s 


•o  ^ 


d 


N  ^    1^ 

o>  00  CO 

„  «o   '^ 

CO  CO    ^ 

»-i  d  d 

SS  8    : 

d  d 


S;8 

d  d^ 

S  8 
pj=> 

d  d 

■ 

o      • 

\  : 

d 


8 


.2     0 

a 


«M*-4e4e4coco^^>0(ei<>aooc>4 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


125 


n 
o 


m 


09 

s 


^ 


« s 

g  f; 


S 


o 


n 

00 
CO 

H 


CO 

QQ 


S 
o 

t 

N 


d 

•§ 

« 

a 

£ 

> 

« 
•d 

M 
•»^ 

CO 


jPO 

I 


8 


8 


o 


8 


Si 


^  -a 


g — 

d  d 

d  d 

to  •H  o 

•  •  • 

OOP 

a»  CO  s 
CO  ^  o 

•  •         • 

OOP 

SSS8S 

■       ■        •       • 

p  p  p  p 

O  S3" 

^   C4    P    O 

p  d  d  d 

lo  d  *-i  p  p 
______^ d  <S  o  <s  d 

•  •  V  •  ■ 

P  p  P  O  P 

9   W   P3   *^    P   P    P 

w-t    P    P    P    P    P    P 

1^  00  CO  c>i         !C  £i      '^ 

»«  oa  Md  C4  «^  P  P 

^  P  P  P  P  P  P      • 

«"?9  !S  ■*  SB  s  ra 
vN  «e  «o  «^  p  p  p 

•  ■•■«••• 

^^_P  P  P  p  P  P 

g*-4   A   ^4   >0   C9       • 
to    C9    1-4    P    O       •       • 

•  •••■■•> 

p  p  p  p  p  p     •     • 

QoS3:^^SSS    :    : 
^^  p  p  p  p  p  p    » 

lA    IS.    00*  «b    P    ^    N 

e4  lO  M  •-)  p  p  o 

»-«  p  p  d  d  d  d  •  _  ■ 

^  *0  CO  CO  tm  n 
P   "*   M   1^   p   P 

^  d  d  d  d  d     ' •  ' 

h«   IS.   00  ®   « 

•^  00  eo  «-i  »^  P  p 

ci_d  d_d_d  d_d  _'■  '     • 

S  S  3  S  S  3 

^  d  d  d  d  d     '     '•     •  _  •     • 

S   CC   1^   p   p 

d  d^  d^     '     ■     ■     •     ■  _■ 

00   S  04   8   3 

»-i  d  d  d  d •  _•     •"  _  •     ■ •  _^ 

^_d  dj6 [_    '•'  '     •     •  J 

peo»-*0'      ••■■■■• 
^  d  d  d     '     '     '     •"     •"     •_  ■  _• 

f-  ©3  p     •••■•■••     • 
d^d  d L_'_  •     ■  _"     •  _•     •     • 

3  5:  2:  S    :    :":':":    ■/]    [ 

ci  dp"  d_  '''■'•'.'.'■''. 

S  §'8  S    ::::::::    : 

ii'  d  d  d  _•     •     •     •   _■     •     ■     ■_• 

00  22  8    :    :    :    :  V:    :    :    :    : 
d  d  d •    }_   •  _•     '•     •     •     "  _  •     • 

*0         _  €*»  59 

^  ,^_o  d  d'-     '•     •     •  _  •    j_    "    _•     •    _• 

Scocbfc" 
t<"  C4  p 

e«  d  d_d •_    ■     ■ ■'     ■'     • *  _■     •  __•     ■ 

00  coT  CO  CO  "   ."    ". 

1-H    e<$   1-1   C5       ••;;;;;•;;       ; 

^  d  d_d     '•     '•_  •'     • •  _•     •_•     •     •  _• 

CO    8       •••'■•;;■••;•       • 

d  d     ■•••••••••••     • 


«i4^Me«e4eoco^'« 


■o  40  >«•  00  p  e« 


124 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


o 


O 
PS  ^ 


CO 


o 

H 

9 


as 

d  d 


9 

■ 

o 


S^8 

djd 
22  B 

d  j3 

•      • 
P  o 


•  a 

O  O 


•  » 

o  o 


d 
6 

I 

08 
o 


.a 


CO 


s 


s 


p 


s 

CO 


p 

S9 


s& 


S8 

1-1  d 


S8^ 

•        « 

o_p_ 

OB    >0 


•  ■ 

Jp  p 

d  d 

«  1-t 
d  d 

S  8 

d  d^ 
d  d 


&8 

•  • 

p  p 
8  8 

•  • 

p  p 

d  d 

8p 
d  d 

s  : 

d 


CO 

P   iO 


p  p  p  p  p 


S3 


S 

8 


S 


• 

d 

^  d  G  o 

SS8S8    : 

*-4 

o 

IS 

p 

p  p  p  p  .  . 
388    ::    : 

p 

a» 

e^ 

p 

_«o_ 

CO 

p 

p  p  p  •  .  • 
wS8    : 

CO 

»^ 

p_ 

p 

_P 
«.4 

p  p  p  •  •  • 
SS    :    :    :    : 

C4 

v4 

C9 

_P 

o  o      •      ■      •      • 

8S    :    :    :    : 

CO  00 

e^  p 

p 

CO 

P 

o  o  o     .     >     •     . 

88    :    :    :    :    ; 

00  8 

1-1  p 

p 

'?5 

P_ 

1>H 

o  p      •      .      ■      • 

88    :    :    :    :    : 

-^  p 

p 
«o 

P     P 

"8S" 

o 

s^ 

p  p 

p 

^1 

p 
S 

p 

' ' —    '  — '        '  — '- 

^  OB  e<i 
o  >o  ei 

i-<  p  p 

p 

* 

p 

"    '—     ' '      -' '- 

58  J8^ 

•       •       • 

.091 
.33  0 
.13,0 

p 

8 

• 

— ^' 

_L  _  '__  ' — L_-"  _' 

761 
230 
09,0 

_p_ 

• 
• 

— '.' 

— '. — T" ! — .  ~'  ~~ 

p  p  p 

• 

• 
• 

—[ 

— ;    r"  '.  ~'.    \"  r 

Si9:S8 

e9  p  p  p 

^k8  8 

• 

— [ 

"'. — '~  '.  ~.     '. — r 

1-i    P   P    P 

SoSS    : 

• 

• 
• 

—\  — ]    '—  \    ■  -^ 

9 

56  0 
12  0 
040 

•  •  • 

— * 

— [ 

-■- 

-]  —  ■-■     \    \     \ 

ao 
d 

14  0.310 
03  0.07  0 
0. 

• 

• 
« 
• 

- 

— 

'_  '  _  ■     ■    ■  _  ■_ 

33,1 
090 

pp.. 

■                       B                       •                       • 

•             •             ■             a 

• 

-  ] 

'  - ■     \     \-  \  -\ 

d 

d 

■             t             •             • 

• 

al 


«-if-4«-ie4e<ieoco^^>0(Di<>aoo«^ 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


125 


s 

o 

t 

H 


5 

1- 


"c — 
o  o 


o 


CO 


d  d 


eo 


o 
d 


as 

d  d 


d  d 
d  d 

s's 
ss 

do 

•       ■ 

o  o 


o  o 


35 

•       • 

o  o 


l>  op 
»-i  d 


a 

> 

M 

'3 


.a 
O 


8 


C4 


» 


U3 


si; 


a  ": 


^  d 

•  • 

o  o 


^    »-*   M 

^  00  m 

•  •  ■ 

•N  JD_0 

o_o 

•  • 

JD_0 

■  • 

o  o 


2:s 

o  o 


e$  o 

o  o 


^8 

o  o 

8  8 

d  d 


8 

o 


o 
d 


00 


e^  3  ^ 

00    '^   C4 

d  d  d 


04  8 

•  • 

o  o 

d  d 


"a 


!*•  OQ  (O 

to  04  1^ 

•  •  • 

OOP 

(O  m  0O 

^  61  »^ 

•  •  • 

o  o  o 


8S 

o 


88 

•       • 

o  o 

38 
B 

m 

O 

8" 


o  o 


04 


00 

d 


ss 


04 
04 


O 

d 


3 

■ 

o 


£o3 

3  9 

•  • 

8    TO 

•  * 

^   O 


to 
d 

04 

d 


l>    00 

eo  •-•  iH 
d  d^d^ 

§5';2  8 

odd 
^  f*  o 

•  «         « 

o  o_o 
d  d  d 

8  8 

•  * 

o  p 
I*. 


^8 

®_® 
8  8 

d  d 
d 


8 

ft 

o 


o« 


•o 

r-  CO  <D 

■  •  • 

s  ^  s 

•  ft  • 

e>»_o  o 

00    CO    CO 

»-«  CO  -^ 
•H  d  d 

c«  8 
d  d 


d  d 

St*  »* 

d  d 

(O  go 
e>4  o 

^_® 

S8' 

<3^d 
d  d 

s   " 

d 

s' 

d 


o_o 
d_d 

8 

d_ 

8 

d_ 
d 


00 

d 


^   t^   M   04   04   CO   CO 


iO   40   ««   00    O    04 


124 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


» 

.S 

S;: 

o 

8 

•      • 

o  o 

§ 

S8 

i_] 

s 

o  o 

8 

r^  00  ^ 

*o  *-<  o 

z 

1 

o 

o  o 

M 

9 

:5S 

« 

i>. 

o  o  o 

§ 

sss^s 

g 

o  o  o 

o 

8 

9SSg 

8 

1-i 

■|- 

o 

o  o  o 

ss^ 

388 

'^ 

o  o  o  o  o 

s 

f*  vN  «^  m  *-4 

^    M    ir4    d»    O 

M 

1^ 

>             B             •             a             • 

CO 

o  o  o  o  o 

§ 

ssg^ssss 

g 

1-4  d  d  d  d  d  dl 

^  g 

S&SS;  :^S8    : 

il 

S 

cj 

1-i   «-i   O   O   O   O   O       ■ 

0 

d 

1 

cS  S   CO   «-i   o   o   o 

•           •••••■■ 

s 

1 

c^ 

1-4  o  o  o  o  o  o      ■ 

i« 

1>H 

oS?3S2.  8  8    . 

^  G  <:>  d  c>  & 

^5 

•d 

i 

gr.^SS  8S8 

ss 

t 
% 

^^ 

»-•  o 

o  o  o  o  o 

-  4 

O   Ok   -^ 

S5S88 

gs 

0) 

•-4 

C4    O   O   O   O   O   O 

•o 

s 

CO    8    ?9    1^    «H    S    O 

fl£ 

-3 

1>H 

^  o  o  o  o  o  o 

Q 

04    ^    to    ^    00    CO       • 

A) 

?B^ 

.-1  lo  e)  *-i  o  o 

^  pa 

S 

A 

M  o  o  o  o  o 

i 

CO  S  ^  C4  S  8  8 

■            ••■•■            ■ 

l-H     r^ 

V 

C4    O    O    O    O    O    O 

ARE 
TRAN< 

9 
O 

*m4 

1 

OO  S  CO  «^  o  o 

•            ••••• 

1-1  o  o  o  o  o 

3 

g 

^^^:ZSZ 

P    55 

o 

g 

*H 

O    O    O    O    O 

4 

tgw 

ss 

23S8S 

M    H 

s 

o 

o  o  o 
«  I-"  s 

o 

\  — 

- 

ss 

A«    H 

o 

^'  o 

o  o 

5:8 

■                  4 

o 

— 

— 

[  — 

- 

— ■ 

s  g 

58  tg 

• 

br     OQ 

«H  o  o  o 

P    H 

s 

8  ^  S  8 

o  S 

CO 

^  o  o  o 

— 

f^  PL, 

£238 

z  » 

e* 

o  o  o 

^ 

S5g:S8    . 

go 

P 

ei» 

C4    O    O    O 

1-^ 

■^'  d  d  d 

» 

SoS8 

•           •           • 

o  o  o 

C>4 

s 

1^ 

•          •          -          •         • 

iO  «-4  o  o  o 

z 

e 

M     *-4     «ii4     IS. 

a»  00  CO  o 
C4  d  d  d 

0 

q 

s 

<?  ^  r  ^ 

»-•  d  d  d 

h3 

s 

CO    o        • 

do'"' 

• 

o 

oi 

a. 2 

w*»  w4n          Mm         .«n          p«i 

^ 

as 

i-^^,.4e«c4coeQ^'^u3«oi<>ooo«« 

•JS      « 

«^    1^« 

Q    a 

METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


125 


n 
o 

H 


n 


s 


3 
o 

1 

H 


5 

a 

1 


a 

« 
o 

> 


S 


o 


ID 

O    O 


«  -  ■ 


C4  O 

_      O  O 

1-4  «e  9 

kQ    *-4  o 

■          •  ■ 

o  o  o 


•  ■  ■ 

o  o  o 


1^   Oft 

o  o 


d  d 


^  64  o  S 

•         ■         «         ■ 

o  o  o  o 


S  S9.  S  3  8 

d  d  o  d  d 


CO 


eo 

8 
S5 


8 


o 


9  ««  ^  S  o 

■       •       •       •       • 

o  o  o  o  o 


f^  -M   C»   "*   t^  fiS  SJ 

^  CO  CO  *^  o  o  o 
f^  o  o  o  o  o  o 


r«  QO  «o  9)        £  S3 

f»  0»   >0   04   «-<   O   O 

•  ■■«■•• 

f^  o  o  o  o  o  o 


SSSSS885 

•  ■•■••■ 

»H  o  o  o  o  o  o 

S  S  ^  n  3  8   : 

o  o  o  o  o  o     • 


§$S^c«S3S 

«  «  •  ■  t  ■  • 

<-i  o  o  o  o  o  o 


CM 


8 


•           ■•■••           • 

1-4  o  o  o  o  o  o 

•       •••■•• 

tH  o  o  o  o  o  o 

•-4  «o  CO  CO  r>.  « 
o  ^  cS  ^  o  o     • 

•-4  o  o  o  o  o     • 

tH    CO   CO   f-t    «-«    O    o       • 

M  d  d  d  d  d  d 

8  «  eS  2  S  3 

Si  9  cS  «-«  O  o 
»^  d  o  o  o  d 

00    CO    vH    O    O 

. 

S  21  «  fc    ;::::::    : 

^^    ^^    ^^    ^s        ■■..■--- 

—    _ 

8  S  r;  g    :::::::    : 

*HOOO 

S  S  S    :    :    :    :    :    : 

•    >    • 

ooo 

S5;S3i''ii;i:i 

*^  ^^  ^^  ^^    .■••■■■■• 

2  s  s  s    i    '.    I    ;    ;    ;    I    '    ! 

^^     ^^     ^S     ^^           .■■...-'- 

— 

oo  22  S    :::::::::    : 

^^    ^^    ^s        .......... 

KbamSS 

g  £2  s  s    .'    :    I    r    :    ^    I    I    ;    ^    ^ 

^^     ^^    ^s    ^^         ..>■>>■■--- 



22  S  2  S    I    ;    !    I    -    :    *    ^    ;    .    I 

— 

e«  S    !!*!::::    i    I    ;;    I 

o  o 

*M  «>4  1-4  e«  ct 


CO  -^i  9 


•o  <o  r*  00  o  M 


126  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

at  one  end,  surrounding  the  air  tubes  completely,  and  leaves  the  cooler 
at  the  other  end.  It  ia  essential  that  the  aftercooler  be  placed  as  near 
the  compressor  as  possible. 

It  la  sometimM  desirable  to  remove  the  moisture  from  the  wr  at  the 
end  of  the  pipe  line.  Tor  this  purpose  a  combined  water  trap  and 
separator  is  used.  It  consists  of  a  oast-iron  tank  with  inlet  and  outlet 
openings,  and  a  number  of  baffles  against  which  the  air  strikes,  causing 
a  oheckii^  of  ite  velocity  which  reeulta  in  the  moisture  entrained  in 
the  air  becomii^  collected  on  the  baffles,  whence  it  drips  off.  There 
is  a  qtop  cock  throi^h  which  the  accumulated  water  is  forced  out  by  air 


Fig.  43.— Portable  air  compressor  (Abenaque). 

pressiu^.    The  apparatus  is  similar  to  the  steam  separator  in  deugn 

and  operation. 

When  the  compressed  air  has  reached  the  point  where  it  is  to  be  used, 
it  having  lost  its  heat  of  compression  in  transmission  or  by  aftercooling 
devices,  a  large  saving  may,  often  be  effected  by  raising  its  temperature 
again  before  it  is  used.  For  this  purpose  a  reheater  is  emploj'ed,  which 
should  be  placed  as  near  the  drills  as  possible.  As  the  air  passes  through 
this  reheater  it  expands  in  volume  about  30  to  35  per  cent.,  thus 
increasing  its  working  capacity  proportionally.  There  are  many  types  of 
these  reheatera,  ranging  from  an  open  fire  over  which  a  rude  coil  of 
pipe  ia  kept  hot,  to  an  elaborate  device  like  a  cast-iron  house  heater, 
except  that  air  circulates  through  it  instead  of  water  or  steam. 

Portable  Air  Compressors. — There  are  several  makes  of  portable  tur 
compressors  for  use  in  drilling  rock  in  pipe  trenches,  in  highway 
construction,  block-holing  in  stone  quarries  and  other  places  where  the 
rock  is  too  scattered  or  too  small  in  quantity  to  warrant  the  use  of  a 
fixed  compressor  and  drill  plant.  These  outfits  consist  of  a  compressor 
driven  usually  by  a  gasoline  ei^ne,  the  whole  mounted  on  a  wagon 


METHODS  OF  ROCK  EXCAVATION 


127 


truok  as  shown  in  Fig.  43.  If  the  outfit  is  to  be  hauled  only  a  short 
distance,  a  sufficient  number  of  men  can  usually  be  taken  from  the 
trench  and  the  truck  hauled  by  hand,  thus  saving  the  expense  of  horses. 
Table  22  gives  the  general  dimensions  of  the  outfits  of  this  class  made 
by  the  Sullivan  Machinery  Co. 

Table  22. — General  Dimensions  op  Sullivan  Portable  Compressors 


15  h.  p. 

1           20  h.  p. 

Displacement  capacity,  cu.  ft.  per 
min 

95 
90 

7i 

9 

8 

10 

dia.  16,  length  60 

20 
dia.  12,  length  36 
dia.  36,  face  5 
dia.  44,  face  5 
4  ft.  8  in. 
8  ft.  0  in. 
22  ft.  0  in. 
11  ft.  6  in. 
6  ft.  0  in. 
6  ft.  4  in. 

6100  lb. 

112> 
100 

7} 
101 

8 
10 
dia.  16,  length  60 
26 

Terminal  air  pressure,  lb 

Diameter  of  gasoline  engine  cylin- 
der, in 

Stroke  of  gasoline  engine  cylinder, 
in 

Diameter  of  compressor  cylinder, 
in 

Stroke  of  compressor  cylinder,  in. . 
Main  air  receiver,  in 

Capacity  of  gasoline  tank,  gal . . . .  * 

Auxiliary  starting  receiver,  in 

Front  truck  wheels,  in 

dia.  36,  face  5 
dia.  44,  face  5 
4  ft.  8  m. 
8  ft.  6  in. 
23  ft.  0  in. 
12  ft.  6  in. 
6  ft.  0  in. 
6  ft.  11  in. 

7300  1b. 

Rear  truck  wheels,  in 

Track  firaire 

Axles,  center  to  center 

JiCngth  over  all,  with  pole 

Length  over  all,  without  pole 

Width  over  all 

Total  net  weight,  including  pole 
and  tools • 

Handling  Rock. — Where  machinery  is  installed  for  trench  excavation, 
the  rock  can  be  handled  in  much  the  same  way  as  earth,  except  that 
large  masses  may  be  removed  by  chains  without  the  use  of  buckets. 
Where  rock  is  handled  in  this  way  great  care  must  be  taken  to  insure 
the  safety  of  the  laborers  below,  and  to  prevent  knocking  out  any  of 
the  trench  bracing. 

Where  machinery  is  not  installed  the  rock  in  shallow  trenches  may  be 
thrown  out  by  hand.  This  necessitates  breaking  it  up  into  compara- 
tively small  pieces,  either  by  secondary  blasting  or  by  the  use  of  heavy 
sledges.  For  deeper  trenches,  a  hand  tripod  derrick  will  be  found  use- 
ful, while,  where  considerable  quantities  of  rock  are  to  be  handled 
from  a  comparatively  deep  trench,  a  i)ortable  stiff-legged  derrick 
mounted  on  wheels  and  operated  by  steam  hoist  will  generally  be  found 
to  be  economical. 


128  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Whenever  rock  is  used  in  backfilling  it  should  be  mixed  with  earth 
so  as  to  prevent  voids  which  will  result  in  future  settlement.  Rock 
should  always  be  excavated  sufficiently  below  the  sewer,  6  in.  more  or 
less,  to  permit  the* introduction  of  a  layer  of  sand  or  gravel  to  prevent' 
localization  of  stress  and  resulting  injury  to  the  structure  unless  the 
masonry  is  to  be  built  directly  upon  the  rock  in  a  manner  to  give  good 
distribution  of  the  local  stresses. 


CHAPTER  VI 

EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING 

Most  rock  excavation  connected  with  sewer  construction  must  be 
done  in  trench  or  in  tunnel.  In  both  cases  the  rock  is  firmly  bound  in 
place  by  the  surrounding  ledge,  making  it  necessary  to  blast  it  out  by  the 
use  of  relatively  greater  quantities  of  explosives  than  are  required  for 
loosening  corresponding  quantities  of  rock  in  a  quarry  or  on  the  surface 
of  the  ground.  It  is  only  rarely  that  rock  can  or  need  be  quarried  with 
the  intent  of  producing  stone  suitable  for  building  purposes,  indeed  it  is 
generally  desirable  to  shatter  the  stone  as  much  as  practicable  to  render 
its  excavation  easy  and  also  to  leave  it  suitable  for  refilling  the  trench. 

Trenches  for  sewers  are  often  so  located  that  extreme  care  must  be 
taken  to  prevent  the  injury  of  water  pipes,  conduits,  and  neighboring 
buildings  and  other  subsurface  and  surface  structures.  This  necessitates 
the  use  of  small  quantities  of  explosives,  the  firing  of  relatively  few  holes 
at  one  time,  the  use  of  shallow  holes  and  most  careful  and  effective  cover- 
ing of  the  blast  to  prevent  the  escape  of  flying  fragments  of  stone. 

The  conditions  surrounding  the  excavation  of  rock  in  sewer  trenches 
and  tunnels  are  such  that  it  is  important  to  give  particular  attention  to 
the  selection  of  materials  and  methods  to  be  used  in  drilling  and  blasting, 
a  matter  of  much  importance  in  all  rock  excavation. 

Dynamite  is  the  explosive  now  most  commonly  used  on  sewer  excava- 
tion, although  gunpowder,  or  black  powder,  and  contractor's  powder  are 
sometimes  used,  especially  for  breaking  down  frozen  earth,  for  quarrying 
stone  which  may  be  readily  spilt  out  and  for  cracking  boulders  and  large 
pieces  of  ledge  rock.  The  disruptive  and  shattering  effects  of  an  explo- 
sion are  due  to  the  instantaneous  generation  in  a  restricted  chamber  of 
large  volumes  of  gases  at  high  temperatures.  Explosives  are  either 
solid,  like  gunpowder,  or  liquid  like  nitroglycerin,  in  either  Qf  which  forms 
they  occupy  relatively  little  space.  The  gases  generated  from  their 
combustion,  however,  tend  to  occupy  a  very  large  space  and  when 
generated  in  restricted  space,  as  in  blasting,  the  compression  of  these 
gases  is  so  great  as  to  cause  the  disruption  and  shattering  of  the  rock 
surrounding  the  enclosing  chamber.  The  power  of  the  explosive 
depends  upon  the  rapidity  of  the  generation  of  gas;  the  volume  of  gas 
generated  from  a  given  volume  of  explosives,  and  the  temperature  of 
the  gas  thus  formed,  for  the  volume  occupied  by  the  gas  is  directly 
proportional  to  its  temperature. 

0  129 


130  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

The  gases  are  generated  by  chemical  action  of  one  of  two  kinds, 
a  combination  of  two  or  more  substances,  as  saltpeter  (potassium  nitrate), 
sulphur  and  charcoal,  comprising  gunpowder,  or  dissociation  of  one 
or  more  relatively  unstable  chemical  compounds,  as  nitroglycerin  into 
gases.  Many  explosives  are  composed  of  substances  of  both  kinds, 
so  that  both  combination  through  combustion  and  dissociation  take 
place  during  the  explosion.  These  two  processes  are  described  by 
Richard  P.  Dana  and  W.  L.  Saunders  in  "Rock  Drilling"  as  follows: 

"The  operation  of  blasting  is  conducted  through  the  explosive  force  of 
gases  generated  either  by  explosions  or  by  detonation.  .  .  .  An  explosion 
is  the  result  of  combustion  instituted  and  propagated  at  high  temperature. 
Gunpowder,  which  is  an  explosive  mixture,  is  composed  of  saltpeter,  charcoal 
and  sulphur.  Upon  being  raised  to  the  temperature  of  combustion,  or  explo- 
sion, these  materials  combine  chemically  and  in  so  doing  produce  a  gas.  .  .  . 
It  should  be  noticed  that  the  chemical  combination  must  take  place 
progressively  from  grain  to  grain,  as  it  were,  and  is  not  likely  to  be  caused  by 
a  jar  or  shock,  unless  such  shock  should  be  sufficiently  violent  to  generate  a 
spark  in  the  mass.  The  explosives  are  comparatively  bulky  .  .  .  con- 
sidering the  amount  of  gas  that  they  can  liberate  and,  therefore,  they  require 
a  large  hole  in  the  rock  in  order  to  introduce  a  sufficient  amount  of  explosives 
to  break  it.  .    .    . 

"A  detonation  may  be  described  as  a  disruption  caused  by  synchronous 
vibration  of  a  wave-like  character,  but  the  causes  of  detonation  have  not  as 
yet  been  satisfactorily  determined.  There  are  a  great  many  detonating 
compounds,  including  nitric  derivatives  such  as  gun  cotton,  nitroglycerin 
and  dynamite,  and  nitrosubstitution  compounds  such  as  joveite,  masurite, 
lyddite,  securite,  and  a  host  of  others.  These  compounds  are  definite  chem- 
ical substances,  as  distinct  from  mixtures  of  several  different  substances, 
which  are  in  such  condition  that  a  wave-like  shock  will  cause  their  decom- 
position into  gas.  The  speed  of  the  wave  that  can  produce  this  combus- 
tion is  so  great  as  to  make  the  detonation  of  large  amounts  of  these  sub- 
stances practically  simultaneous,  thereby  causing  a  very  much  more  sudden 
and  quick  shock  than  in  the  case  of  the  explosive  proper." 

Gunpowder,  or  Black  Powder. — Gunpowder  is  a  mixture  of  various 
substances,  such  as  saltpeter  (potassium  nitrate)  sulphur  and  charcoal. 
A  standard  composition  is  75  parts  saltpeter,  10  parts  sulphur  and  15 
parts  charcoal.  In  "Earth  and  Rock  Excavation,"  Charles  Prelini 
states  that  when  ignited  the  burning  gunpowder  develops  gases  amount- 
ing to  280  times  its  former  volume  and  that  they  exert  a  pressure  of 
4.68  tons  per  square  inch  at  atmospheric  pressure  and  a  temperature  of 
32°  F.  The  experiments  of  Nobel  and  Able  show  that  the  temperature 
of  the  gases  at  the  instant  of  the  explosion  is  about  4000°  F.,  from  which 
Prelini  calculates  that  the  pressure  actually  exerted  by  the  gases  may  be 
taken  at  37.9  tons  per  square  inch,  which  he  does  not  consider  cxag- 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING  131 

gerated,  as  experiments  have  indicated  a  pressure  as  high  as  42  tons  to 
the  square  inch. 

Black  powder  is  used  where  a  comparatively  slow,  heaving  or  splitting 
action  is  required,  or  where  the  material  is  brittle  or  easily  fractured. 
By  carefully  selecting  the  size  of  grain,  a  wide  range  in  explosive  effect 
may  be  obtained.  The  large  sizes  burn  slowly,  exert  a  slow  pushing  force 
and  tend  to  split,  while  the  fine  sizes  burn  more  quickly,  exert  a 
shattering  force  and  tend  to  break  up  the  material  into  finer  pieces. 

The  black  powders  are  very  sensitive  to  moisture  and,  therefore, 
should  be  used  only  in  waterproof  packages  or  where  the  holes  are 
comparatively  dry.  •  Black  powder  for  blasting  purposes  is  carried  in 
the  market  in  air-tight  steel  casks  containing  25  lb.  each. 

Contractors'  and  Judson  Powders. — Contractors'  powder  and 
Judson  powder  are  granular  black  powders  made  honeycombed  and 
contain  a  small  percentage  of  nitroglycerin.  They  are  similar  to  black 
powder  except  lacking  in  glaze  and  are  used  for  blasting  gravel,  hard- 
pan,  frozen  earth,  seamy  rock  and  other  materials  too  soft  or  yielding 
to  be  blasted  with  dynamite.  They  are  fired  by  means  of  caps  or 
explosives. 

These  powders  are  somewhat  sensitive  to  moisture  and  should  not 
be  used  where  ventilation  is  poor,  as  in  very  deep  trenches  or  in  tunnels, 
on  account  of  the  gases  liberated  by  the  explosion. 

Contractors'  powder  is  packed  in  paper  bags,  heavily  coated  with 
paraffine  and  will  run  freely  into  the  holes.  Some  grades  of  Judson 
powder  are  put  up  in  cartridges. 

Djrnamite. — The  active  and  determining  ingredient  of  dynamite  is 
nitroglycerin,  a  clear,  yellow,  oily  liquid  without  odor  but  having  a 
sweetish  taste  which  has  a  specific  gravity  of  1.595  while  that  of  gun- 
powder is  about  1.0.  Nitroglycerin  burns  quietly  when  ignited  in  the 
open  air,  explodes  at  a  temperature  of  388®  F.,  and  freezes  at  41®  F. 
When  inhaled  or  absorbed  through  the  pores  of  the  body,  it  produces 
headache  and  sickness.  Nitroglycerin  is  a  very  unstable  compound, 
exploding  very  easily  when  subjected  to  detonation  or  percussion. 
The  handling  of  nitroglycerin  is  therefore  subject  to  grave  danger,  and 
for  this  reason  it  is  not  commonly  used  in  blasting  operations. 

Nitroglycerin,  being  a  liquid,  is  readily  absorbed  by  various  sub- 
stances, such  as  sawdust,  wood  pulp,  wood  meal  and  kieselguhr,  an 
earthy  silicious  limestone  composed  of  small  fossil  shells,  each  of  which 
act  as  a  minute  receptacle  for  the  nitroglycerin.  The  mixture  of  nitro- 
glycerin and  such  a  substance  is  called  dynamite.  The  dynamites  may 
be  divided  into  two  classes,  depending  upon  the  character  of  the  absorb- 
ent substance,  called  "dopes"  in  the  trade,  these  classes  being  called 
"true"  and  "false'*  dynamites.  The  true  dynamite  is  a  mechanical 
mixture  of  nitroglycerin  and  inert  absorbent,  such  as  kieselguhr.    The 


132  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

false  dynamites  are  composed  of  nitroglycerin  and  absorbent  mixtures 
which  themselves  enter  into  the  chemical  reaction  causing  the  explosion 
and  add  to  the  strength  and  power  which  would  be  furnished  by  the 
nitroglycerin  alone.  As  the  nitroglycerin  is  merely  absorbed,  not  under- 
going chemical  changes,  dynamite  burns,  freezes  and  explodes  much 
the  same  as  liquid  nitroglycerin.  It  is,  however,  less  sensitive  to  per- 
cussion and  can  be  handled  and  transported  without  excessive  danger. 
The  compositions  of  some  of  the  dynamites,  more  commonly  called 
"powders,"  in  common  use,  are  given  in  the  following  list,  abstracted 
from  Gillette's  "Rock  Excavation." 


• 


Atlas  Powder  (75  per  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 75  parts 

Wood  fiber 21  parts 

Sodium   nitrate 2  parts 

Magnesium  carbonate 2  parts 

Rendrock  (40  PER  Cent.) 

r 

Nitroglycerin 40  parts 

Potassium  nitrate 40  parts 

Wood  pulp 13  parts 

Pitch 7  parts 

Giant  Powder  No.  2  (40  per  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 40  parts 

Sodium  nitrate 40  parts 

Sulphur 6  parts 

Resin 6  parts 

Kieselguhr 8  parts 

Stonite  (68  PER  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 68  parts 

Kieselguhr 20  parts 

Wood   meal 4  parts 

Potassium  nitrate 8  parts 

DuALiN  (40  PER  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 40  parts 

Sawdust 30  parts 

Potassium  nitrate 30  parts 

Carbonite  (25  PER  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 25  parts 

Wood  meal 40 J  parts 

Sodium  nitrate 34  parts 

Sodium  carbonate J  part 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING  133 

Hercttlbs  (40  PER  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 40   parts 

Potassiiim  nitrate 31    parts 

Potassium  chlorate 3i  parts 

Magnesium  carbonate 10   parts 

Sugar 15}  parts 

ViooRiTB  (30  PER  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 30   parts 

Potassium  chlorate 49   parts 

Potassium  nitrate 7    parts 

Wood  pulp 9    parts 

Magnesiiun  carbonate 5    parts 

Horslet  Powder  (72  per  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 72  parts 

Potassium  chlorate 6  parts 

Nutgalls 1  part 

Charcoal 21  parts 

Geliqnite  (62 i  PER  Cent.) 

Blasting  gelatin  (containing  96  per  cent,  of  nitro- 
glycerin and  4  per  cent,  of  collodion  cotton) 65   parts 

Absorbent  (containing  75  per  cent,  sodium  nitrate, 
1  per  cent,  sodiiun  carbonate  and  24  per  cent, 
wood  pulp) 35   parts 

FoRCiTE  (49  PER  Cent.) 

Blasting  gelatin  (containing  98  per  cent,  nitroglycerin 
and  2  per  cent,  collodion  cotton) 50   parts 

Absorbent  (containing  76  per  cent,  sodium  nitrate, 
3  per  cent,  sulphur,  20  per  cent,  wood  tar  and  1  per 
cent,  wood  pulp) 50   parts 

JuDSON  Giant  Powder  No.  2  (40  per  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 40  parts 

Sodium  nitrate 40  parts 

Resin 6  parts 

Sulphur 6  parts 

Kieselguhr 8  parts 

Vulcanite  (30  per  Cent.) 

Nitroglycerin 30   parts 

Sodium  nitrate 62i  parts 

Sulphur 7   parts 

Charcoal 10}  parts 


134  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

The  designation  of  the  strength  of  explosives  by  a  percentage  figure  is 
now  (1914)  somewhat  ridiculous.  In  the  original  Nobel  dynamite  the 
dope  was  kieselguhr,  to  which  various  amounts  of  nitroglycerin  were 
added.  These  amounts  were  recorded  as  percentages  of  the  total  weight 
of  the  explosives,  and  with  dynamite  of  that  nature  this  method  of 
naming  them  was  a  good  one.  Even  when  Nobel  later  used  nitrate 
of  soda  and  wood  pulp  as  dopes,  he  continued  to  rate  the  dynamite 
by  its  nitroglycerin  content  alone,  although  the  substances  mentioned 
may  contribute  to  the  force  of  the  explosion.  It  was  definitely  ascer- 
tained at  a  later  period  that  explosives  like  cellulose  nitrates  could 
form  compositions  with  nitroglycerin  having  an  explosive  effect  greater 
than  that  corresponding  to  the  original  dynamite  prepared  with  the 
same  percentage  of  nitroglycerin.  These  compounds  are  not  rated 
by  the  amount  of  nitroglycerin  in  them  but  by  the  amount  of  nitro- 
glycerin in  a  true  dynamite  of  the  same  explosive  properties.  Equally 
great  confusion  exists  in  the  trade  names  by  which  black  blasting 
powder  and  blasting  caps  are  known. 

Ammonia  Powder. — Ammonia  powder  is  a  form  of  dynamite  in  which 
a  portion  of  the  nitroglycerin  is  replaced  by  nitrate  of  ammonia.  As 
the  ammonia  powder  is  somewhat  slower  and  less  violent  in  its  action 
than  the  regular  dynamite  it  is  useful  where  a  slow  and  lifting  effect 
is  desired  rather  than  a  shattering  action. 

Gelatin  Djrnamite. — Gelatin  dynamite  is  similar  to  the  ordinary 
form  except  that  a  certain  portion  of  the  nitroglycerin  is  replaced  by  a 
portion  of  gun  cotton.  This  explosive  is  denser  than  ordinary  dynamite 
and  therefore  by  its  use  it  is  possible  to  concentrate  more  explosive  in  a 
hole  of  given  size.  It  has  the  added  advantage  that  less  smoke  is  pro- 
duced, thus  making  its  use  more  desirable  in  tunnels.  The  gelatin 
brands  are  more  difficult  to  explode  and  require  much  more  powerful 
caps,  double  strength  fuzes  being  used,  to  develop  the  full  force  of  its 
explosion. 

Cartridges. — Dynamite  is  placed  on  the  market  in  the  form  of  cylin- 
drical cartridges  or  sticks,  wrapped  in  paper  and  coated  with  paraffine 
to  protect  the  dynamite  from  the  action  of  water  and  the  absorption  of 
moisture,  as  well  as  to  prevent  so  far  as  possible  the  escape  of  nitroglyc- 
erin. The  cartridges  are  packed  in  wooden  boxes  containing  about  50 
lb.  each.  The  cases  should  always  be  kept  right  side  up  that  the  car- 
tridges may  lie  flat  and  thus  prevent  the  concentration  of  the  nitro- 
glycerin at  one  end  of  the  cartridge  and  its  escape  through  the  paper 
wrapper. 

When  ordering  dynamite,  the  purchaser  should  specify  the  size  which 
will  best  fill  the  drill  hole.  The  sizes  of  cartridges  of  high  explosives 
manufactured  by  the  E.  I.  du  Pont  de  Nemours  Powder  Co.  are  given 
in  Table  23. 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING 


135 


Table  23. — Sizes  op  Dynamite  Cartridges  (do  Pont) 


Nitroglycerin 

dynamite, 

extra  dynamite 


Judaon  powder^ 
Gelatin  dynamite 


Permiasible 
explosives' 


Blasting  gelatin 


i  in.  by  8 

1  in.  by  8 
It  in.  by  8 
IJ  in.  by  8 
li  in.  by  8 
1}  in.  by  8 

2  in.  by  8 


n. 
n. 
n. 
n. 
n. 
n. 
n. 


1  in.  by  8  in. 
1}  in.  by  8  in. 
IJ  in.  by  8  in. 
1}  in.  by  8  in. 

2  in.  by  8  in. 
2  in.  by  18  in. 


IJ  in.  by  8  in. 
1}  in.  by  8  in. 
IJ  in.  by  8  in. 
2  in.  by  8  in. 


IJ  in.  by  8  in. 
1}  in.  by  8  in. 
IJ  in.  by  8  in. 
2  in.  by  8  in. 


1  Judaon  Powder  R.R.P.  in  6-i  lb,  and  12-i  lb.  bags  instead  of  cartridges. 
'  Monobel  also  in  1  by  8  in.  and  1  1/8  by  8  in.  cartridges. 

Dynamite  at  ordinary  temperatures  is  a  soft  yellowish  material, 
easily  molded  in  the  hands  and  substantially  free  from  odor.  The 
absorbent  is  more  or  less  completely  saturated  with  nitroglycerin,  which 
readily  escapes  onto  the  hands  and,  being  more  or  less  volatile,  may  be 
inhaled.  It  is,  therefore,  advisable  to  handle  dynamite  carefully  and 
not  run  unnecessary  chances  of  taking  the  nitroglycerin  into  the  body, 
either  by  inhaling  it  or  absorbing  it  through  the  pores  of  the  skin. 

Rapidity  of  Action. — There  is  a  great  difference  in  the  rapidity  of 
action  of  the  several  available  explosives,  coarse  gunpowder  being  slow 
and  nitroglycerin  being  one  of  the  quickest  of  the  explosives.  The  finer 
the  grains  of  gunpowder,  the  quicker  will  be  the  action,  while  the 
dynamites  increase  in  rapidity,  in  a  general  way,  with  the  increase  in 
the  proportion  of  nitroglycerin  contained  in  them. 

As  the  effect  of  an  explosion  depends  upK)n  the  expansive  force  of  the 
gases  generated,  it  is  apparent  that  the  gases  must  be  closely  confined 
in  order  to  produce  the  most  effective  results.  If  the  rock  is  compact 
and  relatively  free  from  seams  and  the  holes  are  thoroughly  and  tightly 
tamped,  the  gases  will  be  well  confined  and  their  power  will  be  expended 
in  effective  work.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  rock  is  full  of  seams,  thus 
permitting  the  escape  of  more  or  less  of  the  gases,  the  effective  work 
produced  by  the  explosives  will  be  reduced.  To  overcome  this  difficulty, 
it  is  desirable  to  select  a  quick-acting  dynamite  that  the  gases  may  be 
produced  so  quickly  that  they  will  become  effective  before  sufficient 
time  has  elapsed  for  their  escape  into  the  seams  in  the  rocks.  It  natur- 
ally follows  from  these  considerations  that  for  a  seamy  rock,  a  quick- 
acting  dynamite  should  be  used  and  that  for  a  compact,  close-grained 
rock  relatively  free  from  seams,  a  slower  acting  dynamite  or  even  a 
powder  may  produce  satisfactory  results.  Dana  and  Saunders  have 
given  an  illustration  of  the  practical  utilization  of  the  rapidity  of  action 
of  different  dynamites  as  follows: 

"Where  the  rock  bottom  does  not  break  properly  near  the  bottom  of  the 
holes  a  higher  explosive  or  detonant  can  be  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole 


136  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

than  at  the  top,  and  by  placing  the  firing  primer  at  or  near  the  top  of  the 
hole  the  pressure  of  the  gases  can  be  made  much  greater  at  the  bottom  than 
elsewhere,  thus  producing  a  greater  rupture.  .  .  .  When  the  high  explo- 
sive is  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole,  if  the  primer  also  be  placed  at  the 
bottom,  the  explosion  is  likely  to  be  so  quick  as  to  blow  some  of  the  charge 
out  of  the  hole  before  the  explosive  at  the  top  has  an  opportunity  to  do  its 
work;  if,  however,  one  grade  of  dynamite  be  used  throughout  the  depth  of 
the  hole,  the  detonation  of  the  whole  mass  is  likely  to  be  so  nearly  simul- 
taneous as  not  to  affect  the  result/' 

Selection  and  Economical  Use  of  Explosives. — By  far  the  meet  com- 
mon waste  of  explosive  occurs  in  the  use  of  one  not  suited  to  the  work  it 
is  called  upon  to  perform.  It  is  an  altogether  too  common  practice  for 
powder  men  to  use  one  type  of  explosive  for  practically  all  kinds  of 
work,  and  especially  for  all  rock  work,  regardless  of  the  physical  condi- 
tions of  the  rock.  In  blasting  in  a  quarry  or  in  deep  rock  trenches, 
instead  of  changing  to  a  higher  grade  of  explosive  after  passing  through 
the  softer  and  weathered  rock  the  powder  man  will  generally  use  the 
same  grade  of  explosive  but  in  larger  quantities,  with  the  result  that  a 
large  percentage  of  the  energy  is  wasted.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  high 
power,  rapid  acting  explosive  is  used  for  earth  and  soft  rocks,  loss 
occurs  not  only  due  to  the  greater  expense  of  the  higher  grade  of  explo- 
sive, but  to  the  decreased  efficiency  due  tt)  the  lack  of  propelling  force. 

Dr.  Walter  0.  Snelling,  in  a  paper  before  the  Engineers'  Society  of 
Western  Pennsylvania  in  1912,  presented  a  practical  classification  of  the 
various  explosives  used  in  construction  work  in  the  order  of  their 
percussive  and  propellent  forces,  based  upon  results  of  tests  made  on 
lead  blocks.  This  list,  reprinted  below,  is  so  arranged  that  each  ex- 
plosive in  the  list  has  a  higher  percussive  force  than  the  explosive  next 
below  and  a  higher  propellent  force  than  the  one  above  it. 

Nitroglycerin. 
Blasting  gelatin. 
66  per  cent,  gelatin  dynamite. 
60  per  cent,  dynamite,  active  dope. 
60  per  cent,  dynamite,  active  dope. 
40  per  cent,  dynamite,  active  dope. 
30  per  cent,  dynamite,  active  dope. 
40  per  cent,  ammonia  dynamite. 
40  per  cent,  gelatin  dynamite. 
Granular  nitroglycerin  powder. 
Black  powder  (fine  grained). 
Black  powder  (coarse  grained). 

If  a  certain  grade  of  explosive  is  being  used  and  it  is  found  that  it 
does  not  shatter  to  the  extent  desired,  then  by  referring  to  this  table 
an  explosive  should  be  selected  which  appears  on  a  line  higher  in  the 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING  137 

table,  whereas  if  more  propellent  force  is  required,  an  explosive  lower 
in  the  table  should  be  selected. 

The  grade  of  dynamite  most  generally  used  is  that  known  as  40  per 
cent.  While  there  may  be  times  when  it  will  be  difficult  to  detonate, 
especially  in  cold  weather,  it  has  the  great  advantage  that  it  can  be 
transported  and  handled  with  comparative  safety.  It  is  often  advis- 
able to  use  60  per  cent,  dynamite  upon  sewer  excavation  because  of  the 
way  in  which  the  rock  is  bound  in  place  and  the  necessity  of  shattering 
it  to  aid  in  handling.  In  tunnel  work  it  may  be  necessary  to  use  75  per 
cent,  dynamite  for  the  cut  shots. 

Effect  of  Fumes. — When  the  gases  generated  by  the  combustion  or 
dissociation  of  the  explosives  have  spent  their  force  in  shattering  the 
rock,  they  are  Mberated  into  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  A  portion 
of  these  fumes  are  given  off  from  the  pile  of  rock  fragments  somewhat 
slowly,  although  a  very  large  proportion  of  them  are  liberated  immedi- 
ately upon  the  shattering  of  the  rock.  If  the  men  return  to  the  site  of 
the  blast  and  immediately  begin  work  they  will  inhale  more  or  less  of  the 
fumes,  and  in  tunnels  they  are  obliged  to  inhale  large  quantities,  which 
may  result  in  more  or  less  prolonged  headaches,  dizziness,  and  even 
asphyxiation  in  extreme  cases.  Because  of  the  discomfort  caused  by  the 
fUmes,  it  is  always  well  to  do  blasting  at  such  times  as  will  allow  utilizing 
the  men  upon  other  work  immediately  following  the  blast,  or  to  do  it 
during  the  noon  hour  or  early  evening,  so  that  there  may  be  ample  time 
for  the  escape  of  the  fumes.  In  tunnel  work,  where  a  supply  of  com- 
pressed air  is  almost  alwajrs  available,  it  will  be  found  convenient  to 
provide  a  valve  at  the  shaft  by  means  of  which  the  air  can  be  turned 
into  the  heading  immediately  after  the  blast.  Where  this  is  done,  care 
should  be  taken  always  to  see  that  the  valve  at  the  heading  is  open  before 
firing. 

An  account  of  the  effect  of  the  fumes  generated  by  the  explosion  of 
nitroglycerin  was  given  in  the  Medical  Record  in  1890  by  Dr.  Thomas  Dar- 
lington, who  treated  some  1500  cases  of  asphyxia,  partial  asphyxia  and 
poisoning  resulting  from  the  use  of  dynamite  in  the  construction  of  the 
Croton  Aqueduct  of  New  York  City.  Dr.  Darlington  classified  the 
cases  as  acute  and  chronic,  depending  upon  whether  the  men  inhaled 
large  quantities  of  gas  at  one  time  or  constantly  breathed  air  containing 
small  quantities  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time.  The  acute  cases  were 
accompanied  by  giddiness,  nausea,  vomiting  and  intense  headaches. 
Where  the  men  were  brought  into  sudden  contact  with  large  quantities 
of  poisonous  fumes,  as  just  after  a  blast,  the  giddiness  was  immediately 
followed  by  unconsciousness,  the  patient  presenting  the  usual  appear- 
ance of  asphyxia.  This  condition  soon  passed  away,  however,  and 
was  succeeded  by  drowsiness,  languor,  cold  perspiration,  intermittent 
pulse  and  often  nausea  and  vomiting.    The  prominent  s3rmptom8  in 


138  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

chronic  cases  were  headache,  cough,  indigestion,  and  disturbance  of  the 
nervous  system.  If  the  patient  was  removed  from  the  tunnel  and 
put  to  work  above  ground,  he  steadily  improved  and  finally  recovered 
entirely.  Nearly  all  the  cases  mentioned  by  Dr.  Darlington  recov- 
ered in  spite  of  the  fact  that  some  of  them  appeared  very  serious  at 
the  time.  When  the  patients  seemed  to  be  suflFering  from  asphyxia 
Dr.  Darlington  treated  them  with  cold  applications  on  the  head,  ad- 
ministering subcutaneously  at  the  same  time  atropine,  ergotine,  and 
other  vasomotor  stimulants.  He  recommended  that  workmen  carry 
small  vials  of  aromatic  spirits  of  ammonia  for  immediate  internal  use  in 
case  of  necessity,  and  stated  that  the  inhaling  of  anmionia  has  a  beneficial 
effect. 

Use  of  Explosives  in  Wet  Holes. — Where  the  holes  can  be  readily 
pumped  out  and  will  not  immediately  refill  with  water,  ordinary  dyna- 
mite can  be  used  successfully.  When  dynamite  is  immersed  in  water, 
some  of  the  nitroglycerin  is  gradually  displaced  by  water  so  that  if  the 
dynamite  is  not  to  be  immediately  exploded,  there  is  a  tendency  toward 
a  reduction  in  strength.  It  is,  therefore,  always  desirable  to  fire  the 
blast  as  soon  after  loading  as  possible,  where  the  work  is  being  carried 
on  in  the  presence  of  water.  Much  protection  is  afforded  to  the  ordinary 
dynamite  cartridge  by  its  paraffine  covered  paper  wrapper,  although 
this  is  not  a  complete  protection.  Where  much  water  is  to  be  encoun- 
tered and  the  holes  cannot  be  immediately  blown,  it  will  be  found  de- 
sirable to  use  nitrogelatin  in  sealed  tubes  in  place  pf  the  true  dynamite. 

Freezing  of  Dynamite. — While  pure  nitroglycerin  does  not  freeze  until 
its  temperature  has  been  reduced  to  about  41°  F.,  several  kinds  of  dyna- 
mite freeze  at  temperatures  of  from  42°  to  50°  F.,  dependent  upon  the 
character  of  the  absorbent,  although  there  are  "low  freezing"  dynamites 
which  do  not  freeze  until  a  temperature  of  about  32°  F.  is  reached. 
When  completely  frozen,  it  is  hard  and  rigid,  a  condition  easily  recog- 
nized, but  careful  examination  is  required  to  determine  wliether  or  not  a 
dynamite  cartridge  is  partially  frozen  or  chilled.  Dynamite  which  is 
frozen  or  chilled  is  not  easily  detonated.  The  first  warning  of  this 
condition  generally  comes  when  a  number  of  holes  misfire  while  others 
appear  to  detonate  in  the  ordinary  manner.  If,  however,  a  careful 
investigation  is  made,  it  will  generally  be  found  that  the  charges  which 
appeared  to  detonate,  as  usual,  were  far  less  effective,  yet  dynamite  while 
chilled  or  frozen  is  exceedingly  sensitive  to  friction  and  sticks  should  not 
be  broken  or  cut  while  in  this  condition.  Probably  more  blasting  acci- 
dents occur  in  connection  with  the  use  (or  thawing)  of  frozen  dynamite 
than  in  any  other  way.  It  is,  therefore,  of  the  greatest  importance 
to  examine  the  dynamite  carefully  to  know  accurately  its  condition 
and  to  provide  suitable  means  for  storing  it  so  that  it  may  not  freeze, 
or.  for  properly  and  safely  thawing  it,  if  it  has  frozen.    A  further  pre- 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING  139 

caution  which  will  be  found  of  assistance  is  to  blow  out  the  holes  with 
live  steam  before  loading  them.  If  after  thus  thoroughly  blowing  them 
out  they  are  quickly  loaded  and  immediately  thereafter  are  detonated, 
there  will  be  little  opportunity  for  well-thawed  dynamite  to  become 
chilled  or  frozen  after  being  placed  in  the  holes.  The  best  results  may 
be  expected  when  the  dynamite  is  at  about  80**  F.  at  the  time  of  firing. 

Dangers  in  Thawing  Dynamite. — ^It  is  a  common  occurrence  on  con- 
struction work  to  find  "powder  men"  of  long  experience  who  adopt 
dangerous  expedients  for  thawing  dynamite  and  who  will  persist  in 
following  the  easy  way.  Precautions  should  be  taken  to  prevent  the 
leaking  of  the  nitroglycerin  from  its  absorbent  while  thawing,  as  this  is  a 
most  frequent  cause  of  danger.  Immersion  in  water,  especially  hot 
water,  tends  to  drive  some  of  the  nitroglycerin  out  from  its  absorbent 
by  displacement  by  the  water.  Heat  also  drives  it  out.  Any  act 
which  may  then  explode  even  this  minute  portion  of  nitroglycerin  may 
cause  sufficient  shock  to  set  off  or  explode  the  entire  lot  of  dynamite 
which  is  in  the  process  of  thawing.  Thawing  by  immersion  in  water  is 
not  only  dangerous  but  objectionable  on  the  ground  that,  by  diminish- 
ing the  quantity  of  nitroglycerin,  it  decreases  the  power  of  the  explosive. 

Thawing  by  holding  over  a  hot  stove  either  in  the  hand,  upon  a  shovel 
or  in  a  container  of  any  sort,  is  dangerous,  as  the  nitroglycerin  which 
may  thus  be  freed  by  heat  is  liable  to  premature  explosion,  with  attend- 
ant danger  of  the  explosion  of  the  adjacent  dynamite. 

Method  of  Thawing  Dynamite. — Frozen  dynamite  may  be  thawed 
with  comparative  safety  if  suitable  methods  are  adopted  and  strictly 
followed.  Valuable  suggestions  for  suitable  apparatus  for  thawing 
frozen  dynamite  are  given  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  "High  Explosives," 
published  by  the  E.I.  du  Pont  de  Nemours  Powder  Co.  In  this  bulletin, 
the  company  states: 

"When  large  quantities  of  explosives  are  required  on  temporary  work,  an 
excellent  device  for  thawing  consists  of  a  large,  dry,  water-tight  milk  can, 
having  a  half  inch  of  sawdust  in  the  bottom.  This  can  should  be  placed  in  a 
cask  or  barrel  containing  water  that  has  been  previously  heated  by  a  jet  of 
steam,  or  if  steam  is  not  available,  the  cask  may  be  filled  with  warm  water 
heated  in  some  other  receptacle  as  often  as  is  necessary.  If  the  water  in  the 
cask  is  to  be  heated  by  a  steam  jet,  the  milk  can  containing  the  dynamite 
must  always  be  taken  out  of  the  cask  while  the  water  is  being  heated.  The 
cask  should' be  covered  with  insulating  material  to  retain  the  heat.  The 
water  must  never  be  hotter  than  can  be  borne  by  the  bare  hand." 

Thawing  kettles,  especially  designed  for  this  work.  Fig.  44,  may  be 
procured  from  dealers  in  contractors'  supplies.  They  are  designed  for 
thawing  relatively  small  quantities,  as  from  one  to  two  dozen  sticks,  and 
may  be  used  with  comparative  safety  provided  the  precautions  indicated 
above  and  suitable  directions,  usually  accompanying  the  kettles,  are 


AMERICAN  SEWERAOE  PRACTICE 


Miner's.  Bradford,  CatosQuqua, 

Fio.  44. — Commercial  kettles  for  thawing  dynamite. 


Section  A-A.  Section  B-B. 

Fio.  45, — Authors'  kettle  for  thawing  dynamite. 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING  141 

strictly  followed.    A  thawing  kettle  used  by  the  authors  with  satis- 
factory results  is  shown  by  Fig.  45. 

Perhaps  the  best  method  of  providing  a  supply  of  thawed  dynamite 
is  to  place  the  dynamite,  immediately  upon  delivery  on  the  work,  in  a 
box  set  in  a  suitable  pit  in  the  ground  and  entirely  surrounded  with 
green  horse  manure,  as  shown  in  Fig.  46.  Such  a  thawing  box  may  pro- 
vide for  one,  two,  or  possibly  more,  cases  of  dynamite  at  onetime. 


-  Single-  -  Double.  - 

Fia.  46. — Thawing  boxes  for  dynamite  {du  Pont). 

The  sticks  may  be  taken  from  this  pit  from  time  to  time  as  required 
upon  the  work,  care  being  taken  not  to  take  the  dynamite  out  until  it 
has  had  ample  time  for  thawing  if  it  was  delivered  in  frozen  condition. 
Dynamite  should  not  be  left  in  such  a  pit  longer  than  necessary,  as 
dampness  may  in  time  penetrate  and  injure  it.  For  larger  quantities, 
regular  thaw  houses  should  be  provided.  The  method  of  heating  should 
be  indirect,  and  such  as  will  under  no  circumstances  permit  the  tempera- 
ture to  bo  raised  above  100°  F. 

Loading  Drill  Holes. — All  drill  holes  should  be  thoroughly  cleaned  be- 
fore loading.  When  the  hole  has  been  drilled  to  its  full  depth,  it  will  be 
found  advisable  to  drive  a  wooden  plug  into  it  to  prevent  the  entrance 


142  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


% 


of  dirt  or  water;  such  a  plug  will  also  aid  in  finding  the  hole.  Where 
water  and  dirt  have  found  their  way  into  the  hole,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  blow  them  out  with  compressed  air  or  steam,  the  latter  being  prefer- 
able in  cold  weather  as  it  will  thaw  the  ice  and  warm  the  surrounding 
rock,  thus  preventing  the  chilling  and  possibly  the  freezing  of  the  dyna- 
mite which  might  occur  if  the  hole  were  blown  out  with  compressed  air. 

As  the  effectiveness  of  the  blast  depends  upon  confining  the  gases  in 
the  smallest  space,  it  is  always  advisable  to  use  cartridges  which  fill  the 
hole.  A  space  between  the  cartridge  and  the  walls  of  the  hole  filled  with 
air  or  water  will  have  a  cushioning  effect  upon  the  explosive. 

The  proper  quantity  of  powder  to  be  used  for  a  blast  must  be  deter- 
mined by  judgment  and  experiment.  It  is  always  wise  to  begin  work 
by  loading  cautiously,  increasing  the  charge  upon  successive  blasts,  if 
found  necessary. 

Exploders  and  Fuses. — Black  powder  may  be  exploded  by  the  ordi- 
nary blasting  fuse  ignited  by  a  match,  or  it  may  be  set  off  by  an  electric 
exploder  of  low  power. 

For  exploding  contractors'  powder  or  dynamite,  a  powerful  shock  is 
required,  for  which  purpose  either  electric  fuzes  or  blasting  or  fulminating 
caps  are  provided.  The  caps  are  made  of  copi>er  shells  1  /4  in.  in  diam- 
eter and  about  1  in.  long,  loaded  with  a  little  fulminate  of  mercury  and 
carefully  sealed.  The  fulminate  of  mercury  occupies  only  about  1  /4  in. 
of  the  closed  end,  while  the  balance  of  the  shell  serves  to  hold  the  fuse. 
The  electric  fuze  consists  of  a  special  cap  containing  fulminate  of  mer- 
cury, as  in  the  blasting  cap,  and  in  addition,  two  electric  wires  projecting 
through  a  sulphur  plug  and  connected  by  a  platinum  wire  which  becomes 
heated  to  a  red  heat  by  the  current  of  electricity  used,  and  thus  explodes 
the  fulminate  of  mercury. 

In  selecting  exploders,  care  should  be  taken  to  purchase  only  those 
which  are  amply  strong  for  the  dynamite  being  used.  In  shallow  holes 
one  fuze  only  will  generally  be  used  and  that  will  be  placed  in  the  top, 
or  next  to  top,  stick.  Where  deep  holes  are  used,  fuzes  should  be  placed 
about  5  ft.  apart.  The  following  instructions  for  priming  dynamite  and 
other  high  explosive  cartridges  are  given  in  a  bulletin  published  by  the 
E.I.  du  Pont  de  Nemours  Co. : 

"To  prime  a  dynamite  or  other  high  explosive  cartridge  with  blasting  cap 
and  safety  fuse,  make  a  hole  in  the  end  of  the  cartridge  after  unfolding  the 
paper  shell,  or  in  the  side  of  the  cartridge  near  one  end,  with  a  small  pointed 
stick  about  the  diameter  of  a  lead  pencil.  This  hole  should  not  be  much 
larger  in  diameter  than  the  blasting  cap,  for  an  air  space  around  it  always 
detracts  from  the  force  of  the  shock  that  a  detonating  blasting  cap  gives  the 
explosive  surrounding  it.  The  best  results  will  be  obtained  if  the  blasting 
cap  is  pointed  straight  down  into  the  primer  cartridge. 

"  When  the  blasting  cap  has  been  put  in  the  end  of  the  cartridge,  the  paper 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING  143 

must  be  folded  carefully  about  the  safety  fuse,  and  tied  securely  with  a  piece 
of  string.  When  it  is  inserted  in  the  side  of  the  cartridge  near  the  end,  the 
safety  fuse  is  held  in  position  by  tying  it  to  the  cartridge  with  a  double  loop  of 
string. 

"If  the  work  is  wet,  cover  the  safety  fuse  where  it  enters  the  blasting  cap 
with  soap  or  tallow  to  prevent  water  getting  into  the  blasting  cap.  Oil  or 
thin  grease  should  never  be  used  for  this  purpose,  as  they  may  penetrate  the 
safety  fuse,  and  destroy  the  efficiency  of  the  powder  in  it. 

**The  correct  way  to  prime  a  high  explosive  cartridge  with  an  electric  fuze 
is  to  follow  the  same  method  as  when  fuse  and  blasting  cap  are  used.  The 
common  custom  of  taking  one  or  more  loops,  or  half  hitches,  around  the 
cartridge  with  the  wires  themselves,  after  inserting  the  electric  fuze  cap  in  a 
hole  made  diagonally  in  the  side  of  the  cartridge  near  one  end  is  always  to  be 
condemned.  The  principal  objection  is  that  the  looping  of  the  wires  is 
very  likely  to  break  the  insulation,  causing  short  circuits,  or  leakage  of  cur- 
rent in  wet  work.    Sometimes  the  wires  themselves  are  broken." 

When  charging,  the  sticks  of  dynamite  shoiild  be  pressed  firmly  into 
place  with  a  wooden  tamper,  having  no  metal  parts.  Where  the  holes 
are  practically  dry,  it  will  be  found  advantageous  to  put  a  few  slits  in 
the  side  of  the  dynamite  wrapper  so  that  the  cartridges  may  be  pressed 
into  the  hole  in  such  a  way  as  to  fill  it  completely.  If  the  holes  are  wet, 
the  cartridges  should  not  be  slit  unless  gelatin  dynamite  is  being  used. 
Care  should  be  taken  in  pushing  the  top  cartridge  into  place  not  to  dis- 
turb or  displace  the  exploder  or  damage  the  fuse  or  the  connecting  wires. 

Stemming  and  Tamping. — Explosives  containing  nitroglycerin, 
because  of  the  rapidity  of  their  action,  will  shatter  the  rock  on  which 
they  rest,  even  in  the  open  air.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  method  of 
blasting  by  ''mudcaps,''  or  dobe  blasting,  the  air  acting  as  an  anvil. 
To  secure  effective  results,  however,  in  the  blasting  of  drill  holes,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  dynamite  be  closely  confined  in  the  bottom  of  the 
hole  and  that  the  balance  of  the  hole  be  filled  with  soire  suitable  material, 
well  compacted  above  it.  The  process  of  compacting  both  the  dynamite 
and  superimposed  earth  is  called  "tamping,"  and  it  has  been  customary 
to  speak  of  the  earth  packing  also  as  "  the  tamping, "  "tamping  material " 
or  even  as  "tamping."  To  avoid  confusion,  the  United  States  Bureau 
of  Mines  ha<?  suggested  the  term  "stemming"  for  the  tamping  material, 
a  term  which  may  well  be  adopted. 

The  best  materials  for  stemming  are  moist  loam,  clay  or  sand.  In 
some  cases  it  has  been  found  advisable  to  use  plaster  of  Paris,  the  hole 
being  completely  filled  with  the  moist  plaster  which,  when  set,  forms  a 
very  hard  and  tight  stemming.  The  authors  have  used  for  stemming, 
in  holes  which  are  horizontal,  or  which  point  up,  molded  sticks  of  clay, 
dried  in  a  warm  room  after  molding,  similar  in  size  to  dynamite  car- 
tridges. These  are  readily  placed  in  the  holes,  pushed  into  position  and 
broken  up  by  moderate  pressure  on  the  tamping  sticks.    Tamping 


144  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE" 

bags  made  of  paper  in  which  the  stemming  can  be  placed  are  upon  the 
market. 

After  the  last  cartridge  has  been  pressed  into  position,  from  2  to  4  in. 
of  stemming  should  be  placed  in  the  holes  and  carefully  tamped  by  the 
use  of  gentle  pressure,  care  being  taken  not  to  injure  the  fuse  or  to  strip 
the  electric  wires.  After  about  6  in.  of  stemming  has  been  pressed 
securely  into  place  above  the  top  cartridge,  considerable  pressure  may 
be  used  in  tamping  the  stemming,  which  is  dropped  into  the  hole,  little 
by  little,  until  it  is  filled.  It  is,  however,  suflBcient  to  tamp  by  hand, 
any  additional  pressure  being  unnecessary  and  dangerous.  Tamping 
shoiild  never  be  done  with  any  metal  bar  or  a  wooden  bar  containing 
metal. 

Unloading  Holes. — Unfortunately,  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  re- 
move the  stemming  and  dynamite  from  loaded  holes  because  of  failure 
to  explode,  due  perhaps  to  broken  wires,  defective  caps  or  other  causes 
which  are  many  times  not  known.  In  such  cases,  the  cap  is  in  the  dyna- 
mite and  may  readily  be  fired  by  an  accidental  blow  and  it  is  also  possible 
to  ignite  the  dynamite  directly.  The  process  of  unloading  is,  therefore, 
a  delicate  one,  to  be  carried  out  only  with  the  greatest  care.  The  stem- 
ming should  be  carefully  removed  by  means  of  a  copper  spoon  until  the 
hole  has  been  cleaned  to  a  sufficient  depth  to  permit  placing  another 
cartridge  and  exploder  on  top  of  the  charge  already  in  the  hole.  The 
hole  should  then  be  refilled  and  tamped  and  fired.  The  firing  of  the 
upper  charge  wiU  almost  always  set  off  the  lower  one.  If  the  dynamite 
must  be  removed  from  the  hole  it  can  be  done  with  the  copper  spoon, 
but  it  is  a  dangerous  proceeding  and  should  never  be  attempted  if  it  can 
possibly  be  avoided. 

Disposal  of  Unexploded  Dynamite. — It  occasionally  happens  that 
unused  dynamite  must  be  disposed  of.  The  proper  method  of  doing 
this  is  to  split  the  cartridges,  spread  out  the  dynamite  in  a  thin  sheet 
and  burn  it  in  the  free  atmosphere.  This  can  be  done  with  comparative 
safety,  although  great  care  must  be  exercised  to  take  reasonable  pre- 
cautions. The  presence  of  an  exploder  in  dynamite  to  be  thus  burned 
may  prove  a  source  of  great  danger. 

Blasting  Machines. — Electric  fuzes  are  ignited  by  means  of  blasting 
machines,  commonly  called  "batteries,"  concerning  which  a  bulletin 
entitled  "  Blasting  Supplies, "  published  by  the  E.I.  du  Pont  de  Nemours 
Powder  Co.,  gives  much  valuable  practical  information.  Two  sizes  of 
batteries  are  made  by  this  company,  the  specifications  of  which  are  given 
in  Table  24. 

The  methods  of  construction  and  operation  of  these  batteries  are 
illustrated  in  Fig.  47.  This  battery  is  of  the  push-down  type,  which 
means  that  the  charge  of  electricity  is  released  and  sent  through  the 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING 


leading  wires  and  explodes  at  the  end  of  the  downward  stroke, 
battery  firii^  at  the  end  of  the  upward  stroke  is  also  made. 


Tabi 

E  24. — Data  Relating  to  Blastino  Machines 

1             Size  A               1               Size  B               | 

PoaU,  No. . . 
Capacity.... 
Dimensions. . 
Net  weiRht,. 

2only 

1  to  10  Electric  fuzes 

7  in.  X  8  in.  X  14  in, 

20  lb. 

2  unless  ordered  with  3 
1  to  30  Electric  fusea 
7  in.  X  10  in.  X  18  in. 

25  1b. 

"In  the  accompanying  illustration,  the  parts  marked  S  and  9  are  field 
magnets,  which  are  energized  by  the  current  from  the  revolving  armature  16. 
The  t«eth  of  the  armature  pinion  engage  with  the  rack  bar  1,  and  by  clutch- 
ing also  ei^age  "with  the  armature  shaft  on  the  downward  stroke  {only)  of 


Fig.  47. — Blasting  batteries  (du  Pont). 

the  rack  bar.  4  b  the  contact  spiing  which,  when  struck  by  the  bottom 
of  the  descending  rack  bar,  breaks  the  contact  between  two  small  platinum 
bearings,  one  on  the  upper  face  of  the  contact  spring  and  the  other  on  the 
under  aide  of  the  bridge  5,  and  in  this  way  throws  the  entire  current  through 
the  'outside'  circuit,  that  is,  leading  wire,  electric  fuies  and  connecting  wire; 
15  is  the  commutator. 

"To  operate  the  push-down  blasting  machine,  lift  up  the  rack  bar  by  the 
handle  34  to  its  full  extent,  and  with  one  quick,  hard  stroke  puah  it  down  to 
the  bottom  of  the  box  with  a  solid  thud.  As  the  rack  bar  approaches  the 
bottom,  it  becomes  more  difficult  to  operate,  because  of  the  'building  up'  of 
the  blasting  machine;  but  the  speed  of  the  thrust  should  not  be  diminished, 
because  the  finish  of  the  operation  is  just  as  important  as  the  start." 


146 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


The  fuzes  are  connected  in  series,  as  illustrated  by  Fig.  48,  and  the 
lead  wires  are  extended  to  the  point  where  the  battery  is  to  be  applied. 
Extreme  care  should  be  exercised  to  make  sure  that  all  connections  are 
bright  and  tightly  twisted  and  that  the  bare  wire  does  not  touch  the 
ground  or  that  one  bare  wire  does  not  touch  another.  Well  covered 
battery  wire  should  be  used  for  leading  wires  and  when  the  covering 
has  been  damaged,  new  wire  should  be  substituted  immediately  to  avoid 
short  circuits. 

The  two  free  ends  of  the  lead  wires  are  not  connected  with  the  battery 
until  the  last  thing,  after  all  persons  are  at  a  safe  distance,  and  immedi- 
ately before  firing.  The 
rack  bar  is  then  drawn 
up  to  its  full  height  and 
then  quickly  and  vigor- 
ously pushed  down,  thus 
causing  a  discharge  of 
electricity  of  high  poten- 
tial to  pass  through  the 
wires,  which  heats  the 
fine  platinum  wires  in 
the  fuzes  and  thus  ignites 
the  fulminate  of  mer- 
cury, which  explodes, 
detonating  the  charge 
of  dynamite. 

The  battery  should 
always  rest  securely  on 
a  substantial  footing  so 
that  it  will  not  move 
when  the  bar  is  pushed 
down  and  thus'  impair 
the  force  of  the  blow. 
The  bar  should  be 
pushed  down  by  a 
quick,  hard  blow,  so  as  to  generate  the  maximum  strength  of  current. 
A  batter}'  should  never  be  overloaded  by  connecting  too  many  holes 
with  it  or  by  using  unnecessarily  long  leads,  as  such  an  overload  may 
reduce  the  strength  of  the  current  sufficiently  to  prevent  the  firing  of 
some  or  all  of  the  charges. 

It  is  well  to  test  a  battery  at  frequent  intervals  to  make  sure  that  it  is 
in  good  working  condition,  and  incidentally  such  a  test  is  serviceable 
in  showing  the  operator  how  hard  a  blow  is  necessary  to  produce  the 
desired  strength  of  current.  A  very  convenient  and  satisfactory  method 
of  testing  is  to  insert  in  a  circuit  of  the  usual  length  and  size  of  wire  an 


Three-Bnt  Machine  ConnecM  wWi 

IWo  ljeadtn3 

WIrcft. 


'Thret-^«t  Machine  Connected  wHH 
Throe  Leading  Wire». 

Fig.  48. — Methods  of  connecting  battery 

(du  Pont). 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING  147 

electric  lamp  which  will  fail  to  hght  up  if  the  current  is  weak,  will  light 
only  faintly  if  the  current  is  moderately  strong,  but  will  become  momen- 
tarily white  if  the  current  is  strong  and  suitable  for  use.  The  battery 
may  be  tested  by  firing  a  number  of  exploders  buried  in  the  groimd  and 
wired  up  in  the  usual  way. 

The  battery  should  always  be  kept  in  the  best  of  repair  and  dry,  for 
every  failure  to  fire  is  a  source  of  danger  and  of  expense. 

Shipment  and  Storage  of  Explosives. — The  authors  are  indebted  to 
the  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Mines  for  the  following  sections,  written  by  Col. 
B.  W.  Dunn,  and  extracted  from  its  Bulletin  17: 

"Responsibility  to  Public. — A  responsibility  to  the  public  rests  upon  both 
manufacturers  and  common  carriers  to  secure  the  safe  delivery  at  destination 
of  explosives,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  owners  of  explosives  to  store  them 
safely. 

"Federal  Law  and  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  Regulations. — 
Under  authority  granted  by  Congress,  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission 
has  made  regulations  binding  upon  shippers  and  common  carriers,  for  the 
transportation  of  explosives  in  interstate  commerce,  and  the  penalty  of  a 
possible  fine  of  $2000  and  18  months'  imprisonment  is  prescribed  by  law  for  a 
violation  of  any  of  these  regulations. 

"The  shipper  must  know  and  certify  on  his  shipping  order  that  the 
explosive  offered  by  him  is  in  a  proper  condition  for  safe  transportation  and 
that  it  is  packed  and  marked  as  required  by  the  regulations.  To  perform 
this  duty  the  shipper  should  be  thoroughly  familiar  with  all  requirements 
pertaining  to  his  shipment.  A  copy  of  the  regulations  can  be  obtained  by 
application  to  the  railway  agent,  whose  duty  it  is  to  furnish  them  to  shippers. 

"Explosives  in  Baggage  or  Household  Goods. — Persons  are  sometimes 
tempted  to  pack  explosives  for  shipment  with  their  baggage  on  passenger 
cars,  or  with  their  household  goods  for  shipment  by  freight.  To  do  this 
is  a  criminal  act  that  endangers  the  lives  of  the  innocent  and  unsuspecting 
persons  who  have  to  handle  these  packages,  and  that  subjects  the  guilty 
shipper,  when  detected,  to  arrest  and  prosecution.  The  Federal  law 
(section  236)  prescribes  an  imprisonment  of  10  years  for  anyone  convicted 
of  this  crime  when  death  or  bodily  injury  results  from  the  illegal  transporta- 
tion of  explosives.  When  no  injury  results  the  maximum  is  18  months 
imprisonment  and  a  fine  of  S2000. 

"Magazine  Buildings. — Explosives  should  be  protected  as  far  as  practi- 
cable during  storage  against  heat,  moisture,  fire,  Ughtning,  projectiles,  and 
theft.  The  buildings  should  therefore  be  weatherproof,  covered  by  fireproof 
and  bulletproof  material,  well  ventilated,  in  secluded  locations,  and  not 
exposed  to  fire  risk  from  grass  or  underbrush.  Lightning  protectors  are 
best  placed  on  a  line  of  supports  encircling  the  building  and  20  to  30  ft. 
distant  from  it." 

Isolation  of  Magazines. — Bulletin  17  of  the  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Mines  also 
calls  attention  to  the  investigation  made  by  the  American  Railway 
Association  jointly  with  a  conmiittee  appointed  by  the  manufacturers 


148 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


of  explosives,  concerning  the  dangers  that  attend  the  location  of  storage 
magazines  in  too  close  proximity  to  railway  property.  Notwithstanding 
the  difficulties  experienced  in  getting  reliable  information,  they  succeeded 
in  collecting  notes  covering  130  explosions.  With  this  information 
platted  in  the  form  of  curves  they  determined  the  distances  by  which 
storage  magazines  should  be  separated  from  inhabited  dwellings  and 
railways.  For  such  magazines  as  are  guarded  by  an  efficient  barricade 
or  by  natural  protection,  the  distances  as  determined  by  this  committee 
are  as  shown  in  Table  25.  For  such  magazines  as  are  not  protected 
by  an  efficient  barricade  or  otherwise,  the  distances  shoiild  be  doubled. 


Table  25. — Minimum  Distances  between  Barricaded  Magazines  and 

Railways  or  Inhabited  Dwellings 


(From  Bulletin  17. 

Bureau  of  Mines,  ] 

p.  66) 

Quantity  of 

explosives 

stored  (lb.) 

Proposed  American 
distance  (ft.) 

Quantity  of 

explosives 

stored  (lb.) 

Proposed  American 
distance  (ft.) 

Inhabited 
buildings 

Public 
railway 

Inhabited 
buildings 

Public 
railway 

50 

120 

70 

10,000 

890 

535 

100 

180 

110 

20,000 

1,055 

635 

200 

260 

155 

30,000 

1,205 

725 

300 

320 

190 

40,000 

1,340 

805 

400 

360 

215 

50,000 

1,460 

875 

500 

400 

240 

60,000 

1,565 

940 

600 

430 

260 

70,000 

1,655 

995 

700 

460 

275 

80,000 

1,730 

1,040 

800 

490 

295 

90,000 

1,790 

1,075 

900 

510 

305 

100,000 

1,835 

1,100 

1,000 

530 

320 

200,000 

2,095 

1,255 

1,500 

600 

360 

300,000 

2,335 

1,400 

2,000 

650 

390 

400,000 

2,555 

1,535 

3,000 

710 

425 

500,000 

2,755 

1,655 

4,000 

750 

450 

600,000 

2,935 

1,760 

5,000 

780 

470 

700,000 

3,095 

1,855 

6,000 

805 

485 

800,000 

3,235 

1,940 

7,000 

830 

500 

900,000 

3,355 

2,015 

8,000 

850 

510 

1,000,000 

3,455 

2,075 

9,000 

870 

520 

"It  should  be  understood  that  the  proposed  distances  given  in  the  above 
table  have  not  yet  been  sanctioned  by  law.  Whenever  it  becomes  necessary, 
'  however,  for  a  court  to  decide  what  would  be  a  reasonable  distance  in  a 
locality  where  such  a  distance  is  not  specified  by  law,  common  practice  would 
require  resort  to  the  testimony  of  experts.  The  above  table  represents  the 
combined  judgment  of  the  best  experts  available,  after  an  honest  and  pro- 
longed study  of  all  available  data.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  table 
will  be  accepted  as  a  guide  and  that  any  person  maintaining  a  storage  maga- 


EXPLOSIVES  AND  BLASTING 


149 


zine  at  distances  less  than  those  prescribed  by  it  will  be  subject  to  successful 
prosecution  before  the  courts  for  the  maintenance  of  a  public  nuisance. 
It  will  be  advisable,  therefore,  for  all  interested  parties  to  see  at  the  earliest 
possible  moment  that  their  magazines  are  located  in  accordance  with  the 
above  table.  It  is  understood,  of  course,  that,  in  any  locality  where  the  law 
on  this  subject  is  now  specific,  the  law  must  be  the  guide. 

"Care  of  Magazines. — Magazines  should  be  kept  clean  and  in  thorough 
repair.  Grounds  around  them  should  be  kept  clear  of  leaves,  grass  or  other 
materials  that  might  feed  a  fire.  These  wprds  should  be  conspicuously 
posted  on  them:  ** Explosives — dangerous.  No  shooting  allowed.**  The 
sweepings  should  be  thrown  in  water  oi'  taken  to  a  safe  distance  and  de- 
stroyed. In  case  floors  become  stained  with  nitroglycerin,  cover  the  stains 
with  dry  sawdust,  sweep  up,  and  remove  the  sawdust.  Then  scrub  the 
stains  thoroughly  with  a  hard  brush  and  a  solution  of  one-half  pound  of 
sulphide  of  sodium  or  sulphide  of  potassium  in  l/2  gal.  of  wood 
alcohol.  Do  not  allow  in  the  magazine  any  tools  other  than  a  wooden 
mallet  and  wooden  wedge  or  a  phosphor-bronze  chisel,  and  a  screw  driver  to 
be  used  only  for  removing  screws. 

''Do  not  open  dynamite  boxes  with  a  nail  puller  or  powder  cans  with 
pick  axes.  Remove  all  explosives  from  a  magazine  before  repairing  it. 
Do  not  store  detonators  with  explosives.  Do  not  open  packages  of  ex- 
plosives in  a  magazine.  Issue  first  the  oldest  explosives  on  hand.  Do  not 
store  dynamite  boxes  on  end,  as  this  increases  the  danger  of  nitroglycerin 
leaking  from  the  cartridges.  Persons  receiving  packages  of  explosives  sent 
by  rail  should  examine  them  carefully  to  discover  ruptures  or  other  serious 
damage  received  during  transit.** 

Cost  of  Explosives. — ^The  cost  of  explosives  varies  greatly  in  different 
localities  and  at  different  times.  However,  to  give  the  reader  a  rough 
idea  of  such  cost.  Table  26  has  been  prepared  giving  net  prices  current 
in  Massachusetts  on  January  1,  1914,  and  Table  27  gives  a  similar  list 
of  electric  fuze  prices. 


Table  26. — Dynamite  Price  List  (per  100  lb.)  Applicable  to  Massa- 
chusetts, January  1,   1914 

(From  Geo.  H.  Sampson  Co.,  Boston) 


Quantity 

»20%       .        40%              50% 

60%       1      76%       1 

Car  load  lots 

$10.00 
12.00 
12.75 

$12.00 
14.00 
14.75 

$13.20 
15.20 
15.95 

$14.40 
16.40 
17.15 

$16.20 
18.20 
18.95 

2000  lb.  or  over 

Less  than  20001b.. 

*Low  freezing  dynamite  (nitroglyoorio). 

Nole. — For  team  deliveries  in  the  city  of  Boston,  Mass.,  and  its  suburbs 
in  lots  of  300  lb.  and  not  less  than  50  lb.  add  2c.  per  lb.  to  the  above. 


150 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Table  27. — Electric  Fdzb  Price  List  (per  100)  Applicable 

CHUBETTs,   January  1,   1914 

(From  Geo.  H.  Sampeon  Co.,  Boston) 


r 


>LICABLE 

TO  Mabba- 

Single 

Double 

strength 

strength 

$3.00 

13.50 

3.54 

4.04 

4.08 

4.58 

4.62 

5.12 

6.16 

5.66 

6.70 

6.20 

6.24 

6.74 

6.78 

7.28 

7.32 

7.82 

Cotton-covered  4  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  6  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  8  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  10  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  12  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  14  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  16  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  18  ft.  wires 
Cotton-covered  20  ft.  wires 


10  per  cent,  discount  on  orders  for  less  than  one  thousand.  15  per 
cent,  discount  on  orders  for  one  thousand  and  less  than  five  thousand.  25 
per  cent,  discount  on  orders  for  five  thousand  or  more. 

Terms  30  days  or  2  per  cent,  off  for  cash  in  10  days.  Freight  not 
allowed  on  exploders. 

Most  sewer  trenches  are  so  shallow  that  few  of  the  holes  are  deep  and 
most  of  them  require  (or  permit)  the  use  of  only  one  to  four  sticks,  or 
from  1  /2  to  2  lb.,  of  dynamite.  Therefore,  a  much  greater  number  of 
fuses,  or  exploders,  are  used  than  upon  work  permitting  the  use  of  deep 
holes  and  heavy  charges. 

Upon  the  excavation  of  about  4000  cu.  yd.  of  rock,  varying  from  soft 
and  seamy  schist  to  very  hard  and  brittle  granite  and  trap,  in  shallow 
and  narrow  sewer  trenches,  where  much  of  the  ledge  was  encountered 
some  distance  below  the  surface  of  the  street,  the  authors  used  from  1.76 
to  3.6  fuzes  per  cubic  yard  of  rock  excavated,  or  an  average  of  2.5,  equiva- 
lent to  1.25  to  2.57  (averaging  1.58)  fuzes  per  pound  of  dynamite  used. 
Upon  this  work,  an  average  of  1.58  lb.  of  dynamite  were  used  for  every 
cubic  yard  of  rock  excavated.  Assuming  that  40  per  cent,  dynamite 
was  used  and  that  it  cost  $16.75  per  100  lb.  (including  team  deliveries) 
and  that  four  double-strength  fuzes  were  used,  costing  $3.15  per  hun- 
dred, the  cost  of  explosives  per  cubic  yard  of  rock  excavated  would  be  as 
follows: 

Dynamite 1.58  lb.    at  $0.1675  =  $0.2645 

Fuzes 2.5  at    0.0315=    0.078 


Total $0,342 


CHAPTER  VII 
QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 

In  a  general  way  the  cost  of  a  trench  is  proportional  to  the  quantity 
of  material  excavated.  This,  however,  is  subject  to  many  qualifications. 
For  example,  the  cost  of  sheeting,  bracing  and  pumping  will  be  about  the 
same  whether  the  trench  is  of  the  exact  width  needed  or  a  foot  or  two 
wider.  The  cost  of  picking,  shovelling,  backfiUing,  and  hauling  surplus 
material  to  the  diunp,  however,  will  be  closely  proportional  to  the 
quantity  of  material  actually  excavated.  In  some  cases  it  may  prove 
economical  to  open  the  trench  wider  than  is  actually  necessary  for  the 
structure,  so  that  certain  types  of  machinery  may  be  employed.  Upon 
some  small  works,  also,  trenches  are  sometimes  made  so  narrow  that 
the  men  cannot  work  in  them  to  advantage. 

The  design  of  masonry  sewers  may  affect  the  cost  of  construction 
materially  by  requiring  wide  trenches;  this  is  the  case  where  some  of  the 
so-called  aqueduct  sections  are  used,  while  if  circular,  semi-elliptical 
or  rectangular  sections  are  employed,  the  quantity  of  excavation  may 
be  less.  Where  concrete  sewers  are  to  be  built  it  may  sometimes  prove 
economical  to  fill  in  some  extra  concrete  rather  than  to  dig  the  trench 
wide  enough  to  put  in  outside  forms. 

The  character  of  material  to  be  excavated  usually  has  a  marked  effect 
upon  the  width  of  the  trench.  In  hardpan  and  dry  clay,  the  banks 
may  stand  without  bracing,  thus  making  it  possible  to  dig  the  trench  of 
practically  the  width  of  the  structure  to  be  built,  while  the  same  sewer 
built  in  a  trench  in  quicksand,  running  sand,  or  gravel  may  require 
heavy  timbering.  To  form  a  conception  of  this  difference  let  it  be 
assumed  that  two  sewers  of  4  ft.  outside  diameter  are  required  in 
trenches  28  ft.  in  depth,  shown  in  Fig.  52,  and  that  one  is  to  be  built 
in  loose  gravel  and  the  other  in  hardpan  which  does  not  require  timber- 
ing. The  quantity  of  excavation  required  in  a  hardpan  trench, 
carried  down  with  vertical  banks,  will  be  112  cu.  ft.  per  linear  foot,  and 
the  extra  excavation  required  by  the  sheeting  and  bracing  in  the  gravel 
trench  will  be  25-1/3  cu.  ft.,  equivalent  to  an  increase  of  22.6  per  cent. 

In  rock  excavation  it  is  very  difficult  to  excavate  exactly  to  the  line 
theoretically  required.  Many  times  the  excess  of  excavation  will  be 
very  large,  on  account  of  the  inclination  of  the  strata  of  rock  excavated, 
and  the  tendency  of  this  rock  to  slide  into  the  trench  and  to  break 
wide. 

151 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Section  of  Trench  ftr  Sewer  and  Drain. 
Pio.  49. — "Lines  of  Excavatioa,"  Hope- 
dale  sewerage  system. 

the  drawing.    Such  a  specification  may 

"The  qufintity  of  earth  excava- 
tion to  be  paid  for  shall  be  the 
number  of  cubic  yards  of  material  , 
.  .  .  that  would  have  been  i  re- 
moved if  the  excavation  were  ex- 
actly to  the  depth  of  the  bottom 
of  the  masonry  or  barrel  of  the 
sewer  pipe,  and  to  the  width 
shown  on  the  drawings  by  the  hnea 
of  excavation." 


This  method  is  illustrated  by 
Figs.  49  and  50. 

Another  method  of  meeting 
this  situ&tion,  which  is  looked 
upon  with  much  favor  by  some 
engineers,  is  to  provide  in  the 
contract  that  earth  excavation 
shall  be  paid  for  par  linear  foot 
of  sewer  constructed.  This  ia 
an  excellent  method,  provided 
the  preliminary  engineering  has 
been  done  with  sufficient  care 
and  thoroughness  so  that  there 
is  no  possibility  of  a  change  in 
plana.  Under  this  method  prices 
are  not  usually  token  for  excava- 
tion at  different  depths,  as  where 
prices  are  taken  per  cubic  yard 
of  excavation,  although  there  is 


To  provide  for  these  uncer- 
tainties and  prevent  contro- 
versy as  to  the  quantity  of 
excavation  to  be  paid  for  on 
contract  work  it  is  customary 
to  prescribe  certain  limits  to 
which  the  quantity  to  be  paid 
for  shall  be  calculated,  but 
the  contractor  may,  if  neces- 
sary, excavate  beyond  these 
and  if  the  structure  can  be 
built  in  narrower  excavation 
he  is  not  required  to  excavate 
the  full  width  shown  upon 
be  worded  as  follows: 


Rock  Section.  |  Eorth  Section. 


Sectional  Plan  and  Elevation, 
Showing  Lines  of  Excavation. 

Fig.  50,— "Lines  of  Excavation' 
manhole,  Uopedale  sewerage  system, 


for 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION  153 

no  Tcaaon  why  this  precaution  could  not  be  taken  aa  an  alternative 
to  be  uaed  in  caae  of  changes  in  depth  or  width  of  excavation. 

Under  euch  contracts  as  those  described  it  makes  comparatively  little 
difference  what  limits  of  excavation  are  prescribed  provided  the  con- 
tractor understands  the  limits  in  advance  of  making  his  bid.  It  is  then 
flimply  a  matter  of  computation  to  determine  the  price  which  he  should 
bid  under  the  stipuJationa  of  the  contract,  for  the  quantity  of  excavation 
which  he  thinks  it  will  be  neceasary  to  remove.  This  adjustment, 
however,  is  a  matter  of  vital  importance  and  should  not  be  overlooked 
by  bidders,  or  by  engineers  who  are  making  estimates  of  the  probable 
cost  of  work. 

The  quantity  of  excavation  required  for  trenches  from  1  to  26  ft.  in 


depth,  suitable  for  sewera  from  6  to  24  in.  in  diameter  is  given  !n 
Table  28.  The  quantities  given  in  this  table  are  computed  for  the 
standard  trenches  shown  in  Fig.  110,  Chapter  XI. 

As  pointed  out  by  Marston  and  Anderson  and  discussed  in  Volume  I, 
page  331,  it  is  desirable  to  narrow  the  bottom  of  the  trench  to  the  width 
actually  required  for  tlie  pipe  and  jointing,  by  leaving  square  shoulders  on 
both  sides  to  carry  a  largo  portion  of  the  load  due  to  the  superimposed 
backfill,  thus  reducing  the  load  on  the  pipe.  This  reduction  in  excava- 
tion, however,  probably  will  not  be  accompanied  by  a  corresponding 
reduction  in  cost,  for  it  will  be  off-set  by  added  expense  due  to  shaping  the 
bottom  and  working  in  the  restricted  trench.  In  fact,  the  cost  may  be 
somewhat  increased  but  it  scema  probable  that  any  such  increase  will  be 


154 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


justified  by  the  reduced  d&oger  of  damage  to  the  sewer  from  excessive 
load. 

The  quantity  of  eicavation  required  for  trenches  for  masonry  sewere 
from  1  to  40  ft.  in  depth  and  from  4  to  20  ft.  in  width  may  be  obtained 
from  Figs.  51,  52  and  53.  These  dii^ams  are  based  upon  the 
aseuBiption  that  the  top  set  of  sheeting  will  be  1 1  or  12  ft.,  the  bottom 
set  13  ft.,  and  the  intermediate  set  12  ft.  in  length.    They  are  computed 


5     -S 
4     I 


y\ 

:::::::::::::::::4  = 

:::::::::::::::4z  " 

:::::::::::::4?$$z" 

m      il|^i!#M" 

;f:ff^^^'1''f 'f  ^  1 

i)t^y^  ^'^^P'^          1 

y^^!^^y^''^'' ''• ' 

-  "^^Ty^y^Y^  y*,.'' '  ^ 

-     +     ^J'/^w^^^^^^'  >*'y--'  1 

^^^^^S^>$^v$^T-t     ' » 

-r^W^Z-^^ii^^'Y'     '-""■■ 

^^%'yf.'Z^Y'^      \                             ' 

^^.''^'^^X'     '    1'^^      ^            ^ 

^^'''\T    " — "  '                  ' " 

5     E      '               9      1  1     II      IZ      13      1        15      16      1         1      3     : 1? 

for  heavy  trenches  using  10  X  lO-ln.  rangers  and  braces.     The  sheeting 
is  assumed  to  be  2  in.  in  thickness. 

The  quantities  of  excavation  obtained  by  the  use  of  those  diagrams 
should  bo  considcretl  as  approximate  only,  as  special  calculations  will  be 
necessary  for  each  individual  case  where  exact  quantities  are  to  be 
determined. 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


155 


OQ 


CO 

CI 


n 


s  ^ 

o  -< 

OS 
H 

% 
O 


O 


00 


3 


8. 


Q. 
O 


o 

o 


^ 


<    >k   0 


^ 


a 

o 


a 

o 


2    .  « 


00 


*»  d 


a 

o 

H 


6 
o 

o 


d 


2:  "5  • 
8  >».9 


H 


^   d 
3  £ 


S. 


o 
H 


a 

o 
o 


e 

CD 

Width  of            Excav. 
trench              cu.  yd. 

d 

.8. 

Q. 

0 

H 

a 

o 

0 

ioo^a»^0)^a>io^oou)ei90oer«»o^'^eeeoei9^io«ot^ 
^co^tot>*oooi-icoio«oaooe4eo>or«a»«-i<o>oi^a»^eoio 

•j  n  1  i  ninininininnin 
•ninnnnnnnnnnnn 

S^^tSSooa»8^SSSoooSeo>§Ka>oe^-4*««oo4 
dddddddi-4^«-«^«-«^mcie«c^e«e^eoeoeoeoe)9^^' 

■'nnnininn-nninnni 

ddddddd<-«^«-«<-««^<-^<-HC^c«cJe^e4cJcococoeocO'<«* 

•nnninnnfininniilil 
■-innnniininnnnnn 

dddddddd«-««-<<-<<-«<-««-t<-4e«c4e>icic9'e4cocoeoeoc<9 
dWcpcoPDcoPD««^»o«ph-Qpq»'^>-<p»:*c«co"^»Ofler*op« 

i-iMco^u5toh.aoO'-<c4^o«oo9i-ie4<^iot«a>oc4^«e 
dddddddd«-i'-<«-«<-«<-«i^<-«i-4cic<c4C4e^c<eoMcoco 

■^^  in  I  iiY^  'ui  in  innini 
•jnninnnnnnnnnni 

i-ie4co<«to<Di^ooa»o*^e4e<9^to«ot»Qoa»o-^c4c<0'^io« 


156  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

In  making  estimates,  due  allowance  should  be  made  for  the  fact  that 
trenches  do  not  always  conform  to  their  theoretical  dimensions.    This 


is  well  illustrated  by  comparing  Figs.  53  and  54.     Fig.  54  is  based 
upon  averages  of  actual  messuremeata  of  cross-sections  of  about  2h 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


157 


trenches  excavated  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  under  contracts  for  sewers  costing 
about  $2,400,000  and  built  between  1907  and  1912.  It  will  be  found 
by  comparing  these  diagrams  that  the  excess  excavation  in  Louisville,  for 
small  sewers  having  an  extreme  outside  width  of  6  ft.,  was  nearly  33  per 


•«i 

— 

n 

-1 

■" 

7 

"» IT                   J 

^    1 

/. 

^ 

t 

~} 

A 

7 

i 

f 

/ 

> 

»—  WtA-.S A 

"^ 

i 

r 

7 

J 

1 

-^ 

■— 

— 

> 

I 

A 

/ 

f 

y 

/_ 

\  ,..L  1 

— 

— 

— 

> 

/ 

/ 

7 

f 

A 

/ 

1 

■■■  Wi-\3Ji'-m 

1 

J 

r 

r 

7 

y 

J 

r 

/ 

Q             i 

— 

^-< 

-~ 

y 

/ 

"7 

A 

/^ 

^ 

r 

/ 

A 

/- 

/ 

i 

« 

jr 

— ' 

It 

•i.> 

4 

> 

A 

A 

/ 

t 

2 

A 

/ 

J 

i-Wt'./.e- 

1     - 

J 

§ 

^^ 

/ 

7 

E— 1 
/ 

A 

/ 

/ 

A 

J 

r 

/\ 

rV 

'/ 

/ 

A 

/ 

7 

A 

/ 

1            1 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

.•* 

r 

A 

/ 

/ 

A 

/ 

7 

/ 

A 

/ 

y 

j\ 

>  * 

\ 

/ 

/ 

J 

r 

J 

'} 

J 

> 

/ 

/ 

J 

0 

f 

aV 

J 

/ 

J 

T 

7 

— 

\ 

(j 

>1 

/ 

r 
i 

r 

/ 

/ 

/ 

1 

/ 

J 

r 

A 

/ 

A 

i^....W-'*i 

J. 

^S 

(/ 

n 

> 

f- 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

y 

> 

/ 

y 

r 

iV 

/, 

y. 

i 

/ 

/ 

/ 

j\ 

r 

J^\l 

1/ 

/ 

r 

/. 
y 

\ 

V 

/. 

/ 

/, 

/ 

/ 

y 

r 

/ 

^ 

7. 

\ 

y 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

y 

r 

/ 

/ 

r 

h\ 

I 

^ 

7 

^ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

y 

r 

/ 

/ 

^ 

^ 

/ 

fC 

9 

^ 
-? 

^ 
^ 

^ 

• 

a^. 

0 

/ 

/ 

y 

r 

4 

/ 

/ 

> 

/ 

/ 

A 

.<#Vi 

0\ 

y 

/ 

V 

/ 

/ 

A 

/ 

/ 

y 

r 

/ 

A 

16 

V 

/. 

0 

> 

y 

/ 

/ 

y 

r 

/ 

/ 

y 

1^ 

A 

/ 

/ 

^ 

f 

.  v 

^ 

> 

y 

y 

/ 

/ 

r- 
J 

/ 

A 

/ 

/ 

J 

/ 

/ 

/ 

w 

IS 

«'// 

^ 

y 

y 

/ 

J 

< 

/ 

/ 

y 

y 

/ 

^ 

/ 

^/* 

v^ 

6 

y 

/ 

r— 

> 

y 

/ 

/ 

> 

/ 

y 

/ 

14 

Vf 

'A 

^ 

y 

/ 

y 

y 

/ 

/ 

y 

r 

/ 

^ 

O 

yy 

y 

/ 

1  t 

y 

r~ 

r 

/ 

/ 

^ 

/ 

13 

J 

9 

^/. 

y/ 

Y 

'  t 
g 

/ 

r 

^ 

/ 

y 

r 

i 

% 

6 

/. 

V' 

// 

> 

/ 

/ 

/ 

y 

/ 

/ 

r 

12 

<^ 

z 

/. 

^y 

^y. 

y 

/ 

^ 

/ 

< 

/ 

/ 

^A 

^ 

% 

Ty 

/  ^ 

Yy 

y. 

/ 

A 

1 

« 

^ 

A 

V/. 

z 

'/ 

/ / 

y^ 

'^. 

/ 

f, 

V 

11 

v\ 

'/ 

'/, 

/. 

V 

y. 

/y 

/* 

^ 

/ 

' 

10 

f^/ 

a/ 

7. 

^ 

? 

y. 

y/ 

^ 

y<'< 

r6 

'^, 

y 

y. 

y<. 

/' 

9 

z 

:^i 

'fV. 

y, 

<; 

y 

/ 

i 

V'' 

'A 

'z 

^ 

e 

^ 

tf' 

'V, 

y 

S 

^i 

J'^ 

7 

^ 

y 

y 

... 

c 

L. 

1 

29 

2ft 

V 

2b 

25 

24 

23 

22 

•5 

21 

c 

.k. 

H- 

20 

H- 

O 

19 

1 

u: 

IB 

_ 

D 

« 

17 

C 

w 

16 

s. 

<A 

iS 

^ 

o 

>- 

14 

.^ 

^ 

3 

13 

o 

12 

II 

10 

9 

t 

5  10  15  20 

Max.  Width  of  Masonry  In  FMt-W. 

Fig.  54. — Average  excavation  in  about  25  trenches,  Louisville. 


cent.,  whereas  the  excess  excavation  for  large  sewers  from  12  to  16  ft. 
outside  diameter  varied  from  1  to  5  per  cent.,  thus  emphasizing  the 
lessened  importance  of  unnecessary  width  of  trench  upon  very  large 
work. 


158  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

It  should  not  be  assumed  from  Fig.  54  tht^t  the  trenches  actually 
excavated  were  of  such  regular  form  as  indicated  by  this  drawing,  which 
is  based  upon  the  average  of  a  relatively  large  number  of  cross-sections, 
some  of  which  corresponded  closely  with  the  theoretical  cross-section, 
and  others  were  very  much  wider  and  were  ill-shaped,  involving  a  large 
unnecessary  quantity  of  excavation,  as  illustrated  by  numerous  dia- 
grams in  Chapter  IX,  where  experience  with  a  variety  of  types  of  sheet- 
ing is  recorded. 

Measurement  of  EzcavatioiL — ^The  length  of  trench  or  sewer  is  usually 
measured  from  center  to  center  of  manholes  on  the  surface  of  the  ground 
parallel  to  the  trench  bottom  or  sewer.*  The  depths  of  excavation  are 
determined  from  the  record  profile,  being  the  difference  between  the 
elevations  of  the  surface  of  the  ground  and  the  sewer.  Sometimes 
it  is  specified  that  measurements  shall  be  made  to  a  point,  such  as  0.2  ft., 
below  the  pipe  invert  or  pipe  grade  line. 

Elevations  of  the  surface  should  be  taken  at  each  grade  board  or  at 
intervals  of  about  25  ft.  The  depth  of  the  sewer  as  shown  on  the  profile 
should  be  checked  at  each  manhole.  It  is  of  convenience  in  making 
computations  of  volume  to  be  able  to  compute  the  cross-sectional  area 
of  the  trench  at  uniform  intervals. 

Elevations  on  the  surface  of  rock  should  be  taken  before  blasting  at 
intervals  of  5  or  10  ft.,  depending  upon  the  character  of  the  surface,  and 
in  the  case  of  very  jagged  rock  surfaces,  at  such  other  points  as  may  be 
necessary  to  measure  the  rock  accurately. 

A  section  of  trench  may  be  considered  as  having  the  form  of  a  "  pris- 
moid,"  that  is,  a  solid  having  parallel  end  areas  and  composed  of  any 
combination  of  prisms,  wedges  or  pyramids  whose  bases  and  apices  lie 
in  the  end  areas. 

The  volume  of  a  prismoid  may  be  computed  by  the  following  formula, 
called  the  ''prismoidal  formula:" 

h 
f  =  g  {Ai  +  4A,n  +  A2). 

V  =  volume  of  prismoid  in  cubic  feet. 

h  =  length  or  altitude  of  prismoid  =  perpendicular  distance 
between  end  areas  in  feet. 
A  If  Am,  A  2  =  the  end  and  middle  areas  or  cross-sections  of  the  prismoid 

in  square  feet. 

*  Extract  from  Standard  Spocifications  for  Construction  of  Main  and  Branch  Sewers, 
Philadelphia:  "The  length  of  sewer  built  shall  be  reduced  to  and  paid  for  in  horisontal 
measure  of  City  District  standard  feet.  All  vertical  dimensions  are  given  and  are  to  be 
measured  in  the  United  States  standard  feet,  and  when  preceded  by  the  sign  +  or  —  re- 
spectively to  above  or  below  an  established  horisontal  plane  called  City  Datum,  which 
is  2.25  ft.  above  mean  high  water  and  7.50  ft.  above  mean  low  water  in  the  Delaware 
River  at  Philadelphia.  The  length  of  aewer  to  be  paid  for  will  include  the  space  taken 
up  by  manholes." 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION  159 

In  the  case  of  trenches  where  sections  are  taken  at  regular  intervals, 
each  alternate  section  may  be  considered  as  the  middle  section  and  the 
length  of  the  prismoid  as  twice  the  distance  between  sections.  In  this 
case  it  is  unnecessary  to  compute  each  prismoid  separately  as  they  may 
be  combined  in  one  formula  as  follows: 

F  =  3-^^-^(Ai  +  4^2  +  2^3  +  4^4  +  2^5+ An). 

V  =  volume  of  continuous  line  of  earthwork  in  cubic  yards. 
I  =  distance  between  cross-sections  in  feet. 

n  =  number  of  cross-sections,  always  an  odd  number. 
For  a  imiform  width  of  trench  w  the  formula  becomes 

V  =  —^  Wi  +  Ad,  +  2d,  +  4d4  +  2dfi  +    .    .    .    .  dn\ 

where  di,  dj,  ds,  etc.,  are  the  depths  of  trench  at  each  cross-section. 

Where  the  measurements  are  not  taken  at  regular  intervals  it  will  be 
necessary  to  compute  each  prismoid  separately. 

In  measuring  excavation  or  grading  over  extended  areas,  the  ground 
should  be  staked  out,  or  cross-sectioned,  in  equal  rectangles  or  squares, 
not  over  50  ft.  on  a  side,  of  such  size  that  the  surfaces  of  the  rectangles 
may  be  considered  as  planes.  Elevations  should  be  taken  at  each 
corner  stake.  After  the  earthwork  is  completed,  the  ground  should  be 
re-staked  on  the  same  points  as  before  and  the  final  elevations  at  the 
corner  stakes  taken.  The  differences  between  these  two  sets  of  eleva- 
tions will  give  the  depths  of  excavation  or  fill  at  the  corresponding 
corners.  The  volume  of  the  excavation  or  fill  may  be  computed  by  the 
following  formula: 

V  =  4-~27  (^^^  +  ^^^^  +  ^^^»  +  ^^'^*)- 

V  =  volume  of  earthwork  in  cubic  yards. 

A  =  horizontal  area  of  unit  rectangle  in  square  feet. 
Xhi  =  summation  of  corner  heights  which  have  one  rectangle  adjoin- 
ing.   The  subscripts  denote  the  number  of  adjoining  rectangles 
each  of  which  has  an  area  of  A. 

The  approximate  quantity  of  earthwork  may  also  be  calculated  from 
the  areas  enclosed  by  contour  lines,  these  areas  being  obtained  most 
readily  by  the  use  of  a  planimeter.  The  volume  is  calculated  by  the 
prismoidal  formula  previously  given  for  computing  a  continuous  line  of 
earthwork  in  trench,  the  prismoid  being  vertical  in  this  case  and  lying 
between  the  contour  planes. 

The  difference  in  the  results  obtained  by  the  prismoidal  method  and 
the  method  of  averages^  is  easily  indicated  by  an  example,  taking  a 
trench  3  ft.  wide  and  of  the  following  depths  at  25-ft.  intervals: 

1  SomctimeB  called  the  method  of  averaging  end  areas. 


160  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Station .• 0       0+25  0+60  0+75       1       1+25  1  +  50  1+75      2 

Depth 10     '12         14          16         14         12         10  12         16 

Station 2+25  2+50  2+75     3       3+25  3+50  3+76  4 

Depth 13        17         16        18         21        23          15  10 

The  average  depth  is  14.6  ft.  and  by  the  method  of  averages  the  volume 
would  therefore  be  14.6  X  3  X  400  +  27  =  648.9  cu.  yd. 
By  the  prismoidal  formula  the  volume  would  be 

25  X  3 

g--  ^  S  all  depths  =  657.4  cu.  yd. 

The  two  methods  are  about  1.3  per  cent,  apart.  Sometimes  there  is  a 
much  greater  variation,  and  as  in  several  states  courts  of  final  jurisdiction 
have  decided  that  the  prismoidal  method,  while  the  more  accurate,  is 
not  the  customary  method  of  computing  excavation,  it  is  always  well  to 
state  in  the  specifications  the  method  which  will  be  followed.  In  all 
questions  of  mensuration,  courts  usually  follow  local  custom  unless 
there  is  a  specific  agreement  in  the  contract  as  to  a  method. 

COST  OF  EXCAVATION  IN  GENERAL 

The  attempt  to  give  definite  information  concerning  the  cost  of 
excavation  is  apt  to  be  misleading  on  account  of  the  great  difference  in 
the  character  of  materials  encountered,  the  location  of  the  work,  and 
the  labor  and  machinery  available.  In  order  to  give  the  student  or  the 
young  engineer  some  conception  of  current  prices  prevailing  in  excava- 
tion work  the  following  statement  has  been  prepared,  which  is  to  be 
used  only  as  a  rough  guide  and  not  for  specific  application. 

In  ditching  and  building  shallow  canals  in  peaty  or  fibrous  alluvium, 
which  can  readily  be  handled  by  machine,  the  cost  has  been  found  to  be 
as  low  as  4  to  5  cents  per  cubic  yard.  The  handling  of  such  materials, 
together  with  some  sandy  material  and  sandy  or  alluvial  deposit  in 
river  dredging,  has  often  been  done  for  10  cents  more  or  less  per  cubic 
yard  where  the  material  could  be  handled  by  suction  or  other  type  of 
dredge  particularly  suited  to  it. 

In  the  case  of*  the  more  compact  and  sticky  materials  dredging  opera- 
tions have  generally  cost  from  20  to  30  cents  per  cubic  yard  in  the 
harbors  along  the  eastern  coast  of  the  United  States. 

In  making  dams  and  railroad  fills  by  the  hydraulic  sluicing  process, 
more  particularly  in  the  western  parts  of  the  United  States,  the  cost  is 
usually  about  15  cents  per  cubic  yard  where  the  water  is  pumped  and 
7  to  10  cents  where  water  can  be  diverted  from  a  nearby  creek,  both 
including  pipe  line  installation. 

Excavation  by  steam  shovel  has  generally  ranged  from  20  to  30  cents 
per  cubic  yard,  depending  upon  the  hardness  of  the  material  encountered; 
and  in  the  case  of  shale  or  other  rock  which  is  not  too  hard  to  be  readily 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION  161 

shaken  up  by  explosives  so  that  it  can  be  handled  by  steam  shovels, 
upon  heavy  work  prices  of  75  cts.  to  $1  per  cubic  yard  have  not  been 
uncommon.  The  cost  of  removing  the  spoil  is  often  a  very  important 
element  on  steam  shovel  work. 

Excavation  by  drag  or  wheel  scraper  may  cost  from  20  to  30  cents  per 
cubic  yard  as  against  25  to  40  cents  if  handled  by  hand  and  carts. 
Shallow  trench  excavation  by  hand  is  likely  to  cost  25  to  35  cents  in 
easy  soils,  and  in  the  harder  work,  40  to  50  cents  per  cubic  yard,  more 
or  less,  and  may  reach  considerably  higher  limits.  If  the  excavation 
goes  below  the  water  table  or  ground  water  line,  the  cost  will  increase 
rapidly  with  the  depth  to  which  the  excavation  is  carried,  reaching  in 
the  case  of  quicksands,  requiring  special  precaution  for  their  handling, 
such  as  sheeting  and  bracing  and  pumping,  prices  from  $2  to  $3  per 
cubic  yard. 

In  heavy  trench  excavation  for  large  sewers,  where  steam  shovels  or 
orange-peel  dredges  can  be  used,  the  cost  of  excavation  in  favorable  and 
reasonably  dry  materials,  is  likely  to  be  approximately  $1  per  cubic 
yard,  the  cost  increasing  with  the  difficulties  encountered,  particularly 
the  amount  of  water. 

The  cost  of  rock  excavation  also  varies  widely  upon  trench  work.  The 
shales  of  the  Middle  West  can  generally  be  handled  at  $1  to  S2  per 
cubic  yard,  the  harder  conglomerates,  granites  and  gneisses  of  the 
East  at  S 4  to  $5  per  cubic  yard,  in  shallow  trenches,  the  cost  of  rock  work 
increasing  materially  with  the  depth  of  the  trench  where  the  width  of  the 
trench  is  small. 

In  the  case  of  tunnel  work,  the  removal  of  the  rock  for  the  minimum 
bore,  approximately  two-thirds  of  a  cubic  yard  per  linear  foot  of  tunnel, 
may  be  figured  at  from  $15  per  cubic  yard  more  or  less  for  igneous  rocks 
to  about  $3  for  sedimentary  rocks,  and  the  additional  rock  excavation 
involved  in  any  desired  section  may  then  be  figured  at  the  smaller  cost  of 
enlarging  the  drift,  in  general  from  $6  per  cubic  yard  more  or  less  to 
perhaps  $2  per  cubic  yard,  depending  upon  the  character  of  the  rock,  but 
the  cost  will  vary  substantially  with  the  amount  of  work  to  be  done, 
material  encountered,  labor  and  machinery  available,  accessibility,  etc. 

Cost  of  Louisville  Sewerage  Project — The  Commissioners  of  Sew- 
erage of  Louisville,  Ky.,  kept  an  accurate  and  itemized  record  of  the 
costs  of  the  several  contracts  under  which  they  built  about  54  miles  of 
sewers  during  the  six  years  from  1907  to  1912.  As  such  complete 
records  upon  so  large  a  project  are  rarely  available  it  is  believed  that 
they  will  prove  of  sufficient  value  for  reference  to  warrant  their  publica- 
tion. A  portion  of  the  data  is  taken  from  the  final  report  of  the  Com- 
missioners, dated  March  31,  1913.  The  detailed  costs,  given  in 
Tables  33,  34  and  35,  have  been  computed  by  the  authors  from  data 

taken  from  the  original  files. 
11 


162 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


A  distribution  of  the  main  items  of  expense  on  contract  work  is  given 
in  Table  29.  The  total  cost  of  this  work  is  seen  to  have  been  over 
$3,700)000,  of  which  2.09  per  cent,  was  for  administration  and  9  per 
cent,  for  engineering.  All  of  the  contracts,  of  which  there  were  86, 
were  advertised,  with  one  exception.  Prior  to  the  opening  of  bids 
upon  each  contract,  the  engineer  prepared  a  preliminary  estimate  of  the 
cost  of  the  work  included  in  the  proposals  and  of  the  total  cost  of  the 
work.  A  comparison  of  these  estimates  with  the  amounts  of  lowest 
proposals  and  amounts  paid  contractors  may  be  made  from  the  data 
given  in  Table  30.  The  Chief  Engineer,  J.  B.  F.  Breed,  made  the  follow- 
ing comment  upon  these  estimates  and  bids: 

Table  29. — Distribution   op  Main  Items   of  Expense,  on  Contraqt 

Work,  to  January  31, 1913 


Item 


Total  cost 


Percentage 

of  total 
expenditures 


Administration 

Engineering 

Right  of  way 

Castings  and  other  metal  work  supplies 
Damage  suits  (exclusive  of  rights  of 

way) 

Amount  of  payments  to  contractors . . 


$78,025 .  03 

336,644 .  87 

12,319.36 

15,461 .  29 

8,307 .  52 
3,289,330 .  89 


2.09 
9.00 
0.33 
0.41 

0.22 

87.95 


.     $3,739,988 .  96 


100.00 


'^  While  the  bases  of  these  estimates  doubtless  varied  from  time  to  time, 
depending  on  market  conditions,  price  of  labor,  and  the  tendency  of  con- 
tractors to  bid  higher  or  lower  than  previously,  it  is  believed  that  these  varia- 
tions have  not  been  large.  Diagram  55  shows  graphically  the  relation 
between  the  Engineer's  estimates  and  the  lowest  bids  received.  It  will  be 
noticed  that  during  1907,  1908  and  the  first  six  months  in  1909,  the  proposals 
were  almost  invariably  below  the  Engineer's  estimate.  During  the  latter 
part  of  1909,  there  was  a  decided  tendency  toward  an  increase  in  contract 
prices  with  reference  to  the  Engineer's  estimates  and  in  1910  and  1911,  the 
prices  were  materially  higher  than  the  estimates.  This  decided  tendency 
toward  higher  prices  led  to  the  decision  to  do  some  of  the  work  by  day 
labor  in  cases  where  the  tenders  were  materially  in  excess  of  the  Engineer's 
estimate."     (1913  Rpt.,  p.  42.) 

Work  upon  the  first  sewer  to  be  built  by  day  labor  was  begun  in  the 
summer  of  1910  after  which  time  the  Commission  seriously  considered 
doing  by  day  labor  any  work  covered  by  proposals  which  exceeded 
the  engineer's  estimate  by  substantially  more  than  10  per  cent.  This 
policy  apparently  had  an  effect  in  reducing  somewhat  the  prices  bid. 

The  current  prices  of  labor  increased  considerably  during  the  time 


140 
190 

• 

|l20 

^  1  1  A 

T 

' 

* 

S- 

• 

\ 

2 

-^ 

\ 

te 

7" 

\ 

«. 

^ 

4 

~JI  10 

^  1  ««A 

IT 

\ 

-_ 

/ 

H^k 

C  lOO 

/| 

^ 

A 

7 

90 

8>  80 
§70 

\ 

/ 

^ 

-^ 

41 

2  '" 

AM 

2s 

g_ 

/ 

60 
50 

Au» 

9«p. 


|lO-< 

Aug. 

5^ 

Oct. 

NOML 

-— > 

Jqmi. 

Ittb. 

Hw. 

Mo, 

JUM 

Mi  - 

M 

3tP^ 

Oct. 

Nm 

Dtc 

140 
130  . 

170  E 
t 

no  p 

c 

hi 


80  f 
70  8 
60 


SO 


bidi^  LoukviUe. 


(ToeMf 


102) 


^  n  |i  , 


(sdi  -«N»wT  ..-■•■'tj"^)      -^.St;  .r. if 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


163 


Table 


30. — Engineer's  Estimates,  Proposals  and  Cost  of  Completed 

Contracts,  Louisville 


1 

Engineer's 

n  tract 

Amount  of 
lowest 

preliminary 

estimate  of 

cost  of  work 

Amount 
paid 

Engineer's 
preliminary 
estimate  of 

Total  cost  of 
completed 

^5 

proposal 

included  in 

contractor 

total  cost 

sewer 

1 

proposal 

$  25,641.02 

$27,650.00 

$  28,882.60 

$  30,279.89 

$  31,035.09 

2 

296,524.13 

353,145.00 

296,296.52 

351,261.61 

330,167.78 

3 

3,974.50 

4,138.72 

4,068.52 

4,654 .  89 

4,366.01 

4 

91,698.98 

121,529.00 

97,731 .  12 

110,535.97 

109,650.47 

5 

215,913.50 

280,074.00 

219,087.50 

257,309.97 

250,438.12 

6 

91,597.64 

134,782.90 

101,543.17 

112,489.01 

118,949.34 

7 

16,443 .  26 

21,773.20 

17,615.56 

19,818.11 

22,995.01 

8 

30,035.54 

36,299.60 

28,315.20 

35,661.98 

34,331 .  12 

9 

25,275.82 

31,032.59 

24,446.80 

30,085.87 

30,408.97 

10 

6,956.05 

6,873.68 

8,120.93 

8,021.47 

9,692.37 

11 

185,470.38  245,491.95 

139,227.68 

223,382.13 

165,133.43 

12 

7,058.86 

7,813.57 

7,688.85 

8,269.97 

9,372.39 

13 

12,009.71 

15,292.81 

13,133.22 

14,380.09 

15,604.08 

14 

106,471.52 

122,949.53 

107,742.81 

125,528.69 

127,269 .  43 

15 

8,984.89 

11,299.79 

9,520.10 

10,736.36 

10,794 .  16 

16 

35,124.15 

38,355.80 

32,656.68 

41,069.30 

36,383.29 

17 

18,352.46 

18,540.28 

20,078.82 

22,438.50 

22,185.39 

18 

27,251 .  76 

30,179.34 

27,083.24 

31,928.56 

29,310.93 

19 

12,246.34 

11,860.34 

15,525.64 

14,084.69 

17,686.35 

20 

70,554.28 

92,511.96 

71,865.61 

84,893.64 

80,168.05 

21 

1,746.83 

2,731.24 

2,804.89 

2,170.17 

3,278.00 

22 

6,350.94 

10,895.68 

7,474.24 

8,039.77 

8,671.52 

23 

2,347.66 

2,752.14 

4,130.96 

2,774.23 

4,510.66 

24 

2,781.90 

4,183.70 

4,490.27 

3,430.37 

5,744.33 

25 

79,156.20 

117,879.26 

81,121.93 

97,427.49 

95,647.82 

26 

16,035 .  76 

17,922.07 

13,544.37 

18,813.68 

15,846.77 

27 

12,148.55 

14,672 .  54 

15,567.61 

15,439.18 

17,902.05 

28 

37,784 .  10 

40,746.60 

46,851 .  54 

44,099.82 

53,515.10 

29 

85,428.98  106,771.93 

85,032.20 

101,978.63 

96,760.33 

30 

19,133.01 

21,421.53 

21,303.48 

22,453.35 

24,224.91 

31 

12,658.43    11,511.92 

11,511.40 

14,442.72 

14,162.67 

32 

10,086.63,  10,549.59 

9,265.16 

11,721.82 

10,959 .  40 

33 

8,136.70 

8,898.70 

8,641.63 

9,515.99 

9,906.86 

34 

2,674.47 

3,316.68 

3,688.64 

3,188.55 

4,014.08 

35 

30,670.30 

38,925.93 

32,601 .  16 

36,703.82 

39,953.34 

36 

137,525.04 

156,538.47 

137,984.23 

161,787.26 

162,845.43 

37 

4,828.34 

6,150.82 

6,401 .  77 

5,781 .  72 

7,136.79 

38 

1,992 .  18 

2,660.91 

2,531.82 

2,404.62 

2,758.89 

39 

2,176.37 

3,322.02 

2,655.83 

2,691.28 

2,897.46 

40 

5,967.66 

6,616 .  60 

5,765.71 

6,376.48 

6,523.08 

41 

69,575 .  88 

64,638.00 

80,210.82 

79,594 .  77 

85,025.13 

43 

27,385.68    25,860.86 

26,996.03 

31,394 .  12 

30,991.92 

44 

47,744.22    50,545.79 

36,372.60 

65,578.82 

43,531.45 

164 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


TabIjB  30. — Engineers'  Estimates,  Proposals  and  Cost  op  Completed 

Contracts,  Louisville. — (Continued) 


1 

0 

Engineer's 

intract 
iraber 

Amount  of 
lowest 

preliminary 

estimate  of 

cost  of  work 

Amount 
paid 

Engineer's 
preliminary 
estimate  of 

Total  ^ost  of 
completed 

proposal 

included  in 
proposal 

contractor 

total  cost 

sewer 

45 

78»011.00 

96,841 .  20 

94,027,16 

93,021.39 

101,682.01 

46 

12,809.51 

11,217.21 

15,502 . 22 

14,548.18 

16,831.77 

47 

4,588.69 

7,690.99 

5,104.40 

5,780.79 

5,619.77 

48 

61,484 .  65 

47,016 .  70 

51,298.78 

58,772.23 

57,940.96 

4*9 

43,965.45 

37,711.00 

43,525.36 

49,810.66 

62,698.59 

50 

20,071.88 

22,189.29 

17,669.03 

23,511.23 

20,859 . 24 

51 

87,055 .  23 

94,682.36 

90,066.93 

101,731.00 

99,082 .  19 

52 

11,984.51 

11,221.19 

10,538.16 

13,723.80 

12,094.94 

53 

144,557.75 

151,369.98 

135,059.87 

168,020.10 

149,096.15 

54 

80,064 .  72 

80,980.68 

79,622.38 

92,616.72 

84,565.04 

55 

79,504 .  80 

76,695.36 

75,008.33 

91,392.50 

85,434.31 

56 

(44,062.61) 

56,259.94 

41,204.29 

(50,251.20) 

43,974.22 

57 

5,095 .  10 

5,850.40 

5,608.06 

6,001.91 

6,626.74 

58 

32,355 .  08 

28,268.58 

32,280.86 

36,736.71 

35,850.56 

59 

30,113.40 

28,227.67 

32,146.57 

34,488.63 

35,955 .  76 

60 

34,226.22 

30,203.38 

-14,568.73 

(38,907 .  74) 

-1,347.69 

61 

54,040.39    40,719.63 

56,076 .  66 

60,351.93 

61,763.05 

62 

102,643.37 

143,922 .  18 

118,868.79 

124,951.31 

129,776 .  04 

63 

23,432 .  52 

21,029.20 

24,213.94 

26,692.05 

26,613.58 

64 

44,251.00 

36,101.29 

48,736.06 

49,846.71 

52,217  69 

65 

15,998.45 

14,693 .  25 

15,978.06 

18,275.90 

18,533 .  75 

66 

25,559 .  83 

18,438.66 

27,633.17 

28,417.82 

30,170.46 

67 

29,259 .  80 

23,087 .  40 

30,440.74 

32,838 . 35 

34,661 .  36 

68 

4,284.30 

4,886 .  56 

4,517.44 

5,041.72 

4,879.32 

69 

19,572.48 

15,073.16 

22,788.53 

21,908.82 

27,328.02 

70 

9,865 .  79 

12,078.10 

11,116.78 

11,737.89 

13,027.02 

72 

45,225 .  56 

40,807 . 15 

44,374 .  48 

51,550.67 

60,919.18 

73 

51,413.30 

57,299.99 

66,094.82 

59,508 .  57 

74 

^■^     ^^   m     ^^*   ^^»  ^^F      ■     ^b^    ^k^ 

18,787 .  70 

15,183.15 

20,389.23 

21,141.09 

22,069 .  02 

76 

21,337.00 

19,189.15 

20,236 .  32 

24,311.32 

23,867.61 

77 

31,161.30 

31,048.14 

34,174.06 

35,973 .  76 

39,203 . 74 

78 

2,307.60 

3,779.70 

2,779.30 

2,893.45 

3,212.90 

79 

3,510.43 

5,765 .  86 

4,192.88 

4,404.15 

4,840 .  90 

80 

10,559.20 

10,836 . 95 

10,793.94 

12,238.92 

14,163.40 

81 

18,892 .  57 

16,986.94 

19,263 .  38 

21,525.54 

26,948.37 

83 

7,479 . 89 

6,763 .  48 

8,055.62 

8,528.23 

9,111.29 

84 

29,340.03 

27,243.00 

28,191.79 

33,562.69 

33,747.00 

85 

23,126.31 

23,498.52 

'  22,684.30 

26,768.58 

27,001 .  32 

86 

13,580.17 

16,716.77 

14,852.90 

16,171.27 

17,642.07 

Total 

$3,233,437.601 

',83,289,330.89 

$3,767,104.60 

$3,740,869.69 

» S8.480.00  recovered  from  contractor  for  failure  to  complete  work.     Figures  in  paren- 
theees  Dot  included  in  total* 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


165 


the  Commission  was  doing  its  work. 
The  minimum  price  paid  for  common 
labor  in  1907  and  1908  was  SI  .35  per 
day,  while  during  the  last  three  years 
it  is  doubtful  if  any  material  amount 
of  labor  was  obtained  for  less  than 
$1.75,  and  in  many  cases  a  rate  as  high 
as  $2  per  day  was  paid.  It  does  not 
appear  that  the  prices  of  materials 
varied  as  much  as  the  price  of  labor, 
although  there  was  a  tendency  toward 
an  increase  in  price  during  the  period 
covered  by  the  work. 

A  comparison  of  the  cost  of  four 
sewers  built  by  day  labor  with  the 
amounts  of  the  lowest  proposals  can 
be  made  from  the  data  given  in  Table 
31.  These  data  appear  to  indicate 
that  the  Commissioners  made  a  ma- 
terial saving  by  doing  this  work  by  di- 
rect labor.  It  should  be  remembered, 
however,  that  the  proposals  for  this 
work  were  materially  higher  than  the 
Engineer's  preliminary  estimates.  It 
should  not  be  inferred  that  there  would 
have  been  a  similar  saving  or,  in  fact, 
any  economy  had  the  Commissioners 
undertaken  to  do  all  of  the  work  by 
direct  labor. 

In  Louisville,  as  in  many  other  cities, 
there  was  some  criticism,  perhaps  due 
in  part  to  local  pride,  because  the  work 
was  not  awarded  in  all  cases  to  local  con- 
tractors. The  Commissioners  adopted 
the  policy  of  advertising  the  contracts, 
which  resulted  in  445  bids  from  72  con- 
tractors, only  26  of  whom  were  resi- 
dents of  Louisville.  On  every  contract 
there  were  several  bids,  and  in  every 
instance  either  the  award  was  made  to 
the  lowest  bidder,  or,  if  the  lowest  pro- 
posal was  deemed  by  the  Commissioners 
to  be  too  high,  the  work  was  done  by 
direct  labor.     The   lowest  local  bids 


,^  fO  t*  *^     1 

lO 

^"2 

l>-   CO  00   CO 

c< 

«  Si 

•             •             •             « 

• 

S  «  ^ 

o  00  Cd  ud 

"^ 

^  ftiJ 

^  O  CO  -^ 

M 

• 

11* 

O  C^  CO  00 

««                       ^                       •«!.                       #S 

w 

00  CO  o  »o 

r^ 

"^  CO  -^  c^ 

■^ 

M 

1-H 

0 

f» 

iJ 

> 

lO  CO  "^  o 
W  CO  »o  o> 

m 

•            •            •            ■ 

►N 

•2  -a  .E?  ?  a 

oa  c<  lO  O 

D 
O 

.2  a  C  >  « 

(N  r*  o  ^ 

CO  r^  05  o 

*%        »k        •»        *^ 

CO  c<  oa  r^ 

9% 

•» 

« 

«• 

»0   (N 

o 

•w.     «-    - 

(N   CO 

9 

o  r^  »o  CO 

•         •         •         • 

»C  Q  C^   CO 
t»  u5  00  CO 
O   CO  CO   CO 

m^            mi^            ws,            m^ 

(§||2° 

oa  ^  OS  i>- 

-^   CO  CO   1-H 

6 

O   O   CO   -H 
^   l>»   CO   ^ 

^ 

o 

l1- 

^   iC  '^   ^ 
00   CO  CO  Q 

2)  -^  i^  56 

00 
CO 

Q 

2  o 

^  8  >> 

*«        •»        •»        »>» 

^  O   O  00 

"^   CO  CO   ^ 

c< 

Z  ft 

o  -^ 

1-H 

o 

.% 

1-H    UO 

m1 

I-;  i 

CO  00  »o  r* 

CO   U5  "^   lO 

^  -s 

CO   lO  "^   CO 

CO 

o 

4  i  ft 

^  o>  1-^  o> 

■^^ 

o  .« 

1 

■^    CV  ft 

00  tCic  oT 

»0  CO  -^  ^ 

CO 

0 

M 

pH 

O 

O 

O 

M 

o 

m     ^  *- 

,  Jd    ^        '  N    00    CO   In. 

< 

'fe  a  S  S  :S  -3  ^  ^  ^  ^. 

2 

2  S  S'^^'S  a*oO'^»Oco 
•a.5S®3o'^^coo 

< 

CO 

d  ©  -5  -g  -S  fe 
W  S.  s  i  .2  '^ 

CO  o 

CO   ^ 

s 

O  lO 
(N   00 

Ai 

*% 

2  2  5 
§  1  & 

•           •           •           • 

00 

"^  r^  ^  CO 

1 

6-  S. 
< 

0^           0s           »^           m^ 

00  CO  "^  Oi 
»0  CO  -^  «-< 

a 

'  w 

• 
1    ■ 

■             ■ 

CO 

1    • 

•             ■ 

H 

o 

or) 

iS  c 

.S  i 

0 

o 

OS    FZ4 

S 

JS  X   ^  TJ 

■ 

6 

c9 

t-^^^.-s 

CO 

Z 

O    rt  .^  5 

H 

03 

n3 

9 

<  PQ  5  Q 

•      mC 

H 

U     u     6C    O 

*  *  w  « 

1 

ra   »-H  lA  c<l  ~ 

aaquinj^        i  ^  t^  N-  oO 

166  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

upon  22  of  the  larger  contracts  aggregated  over  $575,000  more  than 
the  lowest  bids,  indicating  what  it  would  have  cost  the  city  to  have 
awarded  the  contracts  in  all  oases  to  local  bidders.  An  analysis  of  the 
cost  of  the  sewers  built  by  contract  is  given  in  Table  33,  from  which 
can  be  ascertained  the  amounts  paid  to  the  contractor  for  extra  work, 
the  bonus  for  completing  the  work  ahead  of  the  contract  time,  and  pay- 
ments on  account  of  claims.  This  table  also  shows  the  amounts  col- 
lected from  the  contractors  as  liquidated  damages  on  account  of  delay 
in  completing  the  work  within  the  time  specified. 

An  analysis  of  the  cost  of  building  the  Louisville  sewers  has  been  made 
by  the  authors,  the  data  thus  obtained  being  included  in  Tables  34 
and  35.  In  presenting  these  data,  an  effort  has  been  made  to  give  to 
the  reader  some  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  excavation  encountered,  the 
amount  and  character  of  pavement  taken  up  and  replaced  and  the 
quantity  of  rock  excavated.  The  contracts  provided  for  the  pa3rment 
for  earth  excavation  at  the  price  bid  per  linear  foot  of  sewer  constructed. 
These  prices  have  been  reduced  to  price  per  cubic  yard  of  excavation, 
which  in  turn  has  been  computed  for  an  assumed  trench  included 
between  vertical  planes  6  in.  on  each  side  outside  the  extreme  limits  of 
required  masonry  section.  In  studying  the  costs  given  in  these  tables, 
the  reader  should  bear  in  mind  that  a  very  large  proportion  of- the 
sewers  was  built  in  material  easily  excavated  and  that  water,  in 
amounts  requiring  pumping,  and  quicksand  were  encountered  in  only 
very  few  instances.  For  information  regarding  methods  of  excavation 
and  machinery  used,  reference  may  be  had  to  Table  37. 

Upon  these  Louisville  contracts,  the  linear  foot  price  was  paid, 
regardless  of  the  presence  of  rock.  The  computation  of  the  units  in  the 
last  two  columns  of  Table  34  was  based  on  the  entire  cross-section  of 
the  trench.  Where  rock  was  encountered  the  prices  given  in  Table  34 
were  paid  in  addition  to  the  linear-foot  prices.  Where  no  prices  are 
given  in  the  columns  relating  to  Pavement,  Concrete  Base  and  Rock, 
none  of  the  work  was  done.  In  studying  Table  35,  it  should  be  borne  in 
mind  that  on  nearly  all  of  the  Louisville  work,  the  concrete  was  mixed 
in  the  proportions  of  one  part  of  cement  to  seven  parts  of  aggregate 
composed  of  sand  and  river  sand  mixed  in  proportions  directed  on  the 
work.  The  reinforcement  was  mild  steel,  plain  or  deformed  bars,  the 
latter  being  used  in  most  cases. 

Cost  of  Excavation  and  Backfilling,  Denver,  Col. — In  some  localities 
in  the  middle  and  western  portions  of  the  country,  the  conditions  in 
suburban  districts  are  remarkably  favorable  to  inexpensive  excavation. 
The  soil  is  of  such  a  nature  that  comparatively  little  sheeting  and  brac- 
ing are  required,  there  are  few  subsurface  structures  crossing  the  streets, 
and  traffic  conditions  place  little  restriction  upon  the  use  of  the  streets 
by  sewer  builders. 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


167 


Table  32. — Actual  Cost  to  Conttbactor  op  EIxcavation  and 

Backfilling,  Dbnvbr,  Colo. 

(Orerhead  ChargOB  and  Profit  are  Assumed) 


Item 


Maohine 
work 


Hand 
work 


Sub- 
contract 


Total 


Linear  feet... . 
Cubic  yards , . 
Depth  cut,  ft. 
Width,  ft 


65,902 

64,347 

8.9 

2.5 


10,005 

5,591 

6.8 

2.0 


36,093 

26,080 

9.7 

2.0 


112,000 
86,017 
9.1 
2.29 


Machine  working 

Machine  idle 

Hand  trenching 

Backfilling 

Cleaning  up 

Sheeting 

General  service 

Equipment  (labor  expense). . 
Material  (labor  expense) .... 
Machine  (labor  expense) .... 

Repairs 

Oil 

Coal 

Equipment 

General  expense 

Team  expense 

Machine  expense 

Repairs  upon  machine  after 
completion 

Sub-total 

Overhead  expenses,    10  per- 
cent. . . .' 

Sub-total 

Profit,  16  per  cent 


Gents  per 
oa.  yd. 

2.21 
2.75 
1.79 
3.62 
0.45 
0.04 
2.03 
0.26 
0.32 
0.66 
3.03 
0.32 
1.84 
0.13 
0.08 
0.42 
1.42 

-8.30 

29.69 

2.96 

32.55 

4.88 


Cents  per 
cu.  yd. 


26.99 
4.29 
0.64 

6.60 
0.71 
0.90 


Cents  per 
cu.  yd. 


0.39 
0.21 
0.63 


Grand  total |    37.43 


39.36 

3.94 

43.30 
6.50 

49.80 


26.62 
4.07 
0.77 
0.03 
0.77 
0.09 
0.12 


0.34 
0.20 
0.09 


33.10 

3.31 

36.41 
6.46 

41.87 


Cents  per 
cu.  yd. 


18.74 
3.80 
0.66 
0.03 
1.89 
0.23 
0.30 


0.22 
0.12 
0.16 


6.20 

31.24 

3.12 

34.36 
6.16 

39.61 


Note. — Machine  constantly  employed  for  about  8  months.  Average  rate 
of  progress  of  machine,  320  ft.  per  day;  maximum,  about  1000  ft.  per 
day,  followed  by  3-1/2  days  out  of  commission  for  repairs. 

Data  furnished  through  the  courtesy  of  James  Collier,  of  the  National 
Concrete  Construction  Co.,  upon  the  actual  cost  to  the  company  of 
earthwork  incident  to  the  construction  of  112,000  ft.  of  8-in.  sewer  in 
Denver,  illustrate  the  low  cost  of  such  work  done  under  favorable  con- 
ditions and  the  advantage  of  the  use  of  excavating  machines  of  the  dig- 


168  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

ging  type.  The  contract  with  the  city  covered  the  building  of  a  sani- 
tary sewer  in  sub-district  8.  Construction  covered  10  months,  beginning 
with  the  fall  of  1908.  The  material  excavated  was  all  dry,  hard  clay; 
no  sheeting  was  required.  Labor  cost  $2  per  day  of  9  hours,  or  22-1  /2 
cents  per  hour.  A  part  of  the  work  was  done  with  the  aid  of  a  28-in.  by 
12-ft.  Buckeye  traction  digger  costing  $8000  at  Findlay,  Ohio,  plus 
freight  and  expenses  of  $2000.  Another  portion  was  done  by  hand^  while 
a  third  portion  was  sublet.  The  quantities  and  unit  costs  of  work  done 
in  these  three  ways,  and  the  totals,  are  given  in  Table  32.  To  the 
actual  costs  should  be  added  overhead  expenses,  here  estimated  at  10 
per  cent,  and  a  reasonable  profit,  which,  for  the  sake  of  arriving  at  a  total, 
has  been  assumed  at.  15  per  cent. 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


169 


t; 

« 

^ 

o 

«» 

O 
O 

>• 

N 

4- 
C 
3 
O 

E 

< 

§  1 

^5 

5 

5! 

1 

5J  ^ 

}  ft 

u 

§5 

5~  S"  ^  8J  Sf  C:  §  ►*  *^ 

.1 

PI 

»^ 

> 

2    ^ 

5    ^ 

5i    ^ 

IVj 

5 

■xcio\N«woV»i 

>.           >.                                         X          "V           N.           >. 

i-H 
• 

4- 
C 
D 

o 
£ 

< 

1 

8? 

r 

«4 

8{  t^ 

Si  S 

IS 

4 

J"  >r  1,-  «4*  eg-  «j-  V        < 

•e    £ 
1-5  2 

^ 

^      IT.,     O 

^  »i  o 

§5 
|5 

«5 

8 

^1 

Von 

^  $'  9\  $  0'  0  (vi  d  N  d  9vO  >t\i'6 
^0  <bQ9tQ9«3«0%0^0« 

8 

4- 

C 

O 

E 

< 

< 

K 

SJ5 

^           n    <V|    ft|    <    K 

O 

5 

MP 

^ 

Q6 

<  IS 

•1 

J5 

O 

E 

• 

< 
< 

} 

H 

nil 

^ 

N  «  C 
V  ^  ■^ 

<*> 

1 

>• 

• 

• 

4- 
C 

o 

E 

-< 

S  1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

<•   < 

5 
¥ 

• 

< 
< 

1 

t     %    §  s  s 

0 
H 

1 
o 

4- 
O 

2 

C 

o 

O 

4- 
C 

E 

o 
CO 

u 

Ss5 

O 

O 

E 

1 

CQ 

u 

p 

.  - 

^ 

V  -^  o 

-o  O   -i 

I           I 

t 
6  3 

% 

>  o  - 

-OCVI  ^ 

1      1 

CO 

4- 
C 
3 
O 

E 

1^ ' 

^5 

^ 
$ 

vT 

fc 

^ 

!? 

c 

5  5 

4 

5  ! 

0(    c 

vj    <S          >   >    OS   »    <6    < 

CO 

8 

S 

^ 

«     T-'O 

1    ^ 

I 

S5S 

1 

1 

c 

3 

o 

E 

< 

5  5 

t5C 

> 

5  : 

S"  •>"  Sf  5'  K  5^  i?-  -"  *" 

o     p     E 

'^  < 

v<   r^ 

>^ 

^ 

*0     N 

^     0^ 

<5>      ^ 

170 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


3 

o 


*-» 

o 
at 


W 

H 

P 

o 

«< 

H 
U 

•< 
« 
H 
J5 
O 
O 

n 

s 

P 

PQ 

S 
H 

Pf 
H 

CO 

fa 

o 

H 

O 

fa 
o 

CO 

M 

GQ 


^2 


CO 

CO 

s 


A- 

• 

^ 

o 
o 

S 

o 
o 

§ 

s 

o 

o 

Q 
O 

o 
o 

1 

Q 
Q 
Q 
Q 

o 
o 

s 

O 

c 
c 

o 

Q 

"s 

8 

Q 
C 

0 
Q 

o 
o 

i 

O 

o 

d 

Total    Cc 
of 
Sewer 

4- 
C 

O 

E 

< 

• 

o 

8^ 

• 

5" 

r\    OS 

h 

5-' 

58 

5 

1 

(W 

0) 
(VI 

• 

K 
CO 

5 

id 

8^ 

5? 

9 

O 

i 

Engineering 
Administration 
and  Incidentals 

&^ 

•J 

5 

5 

2 

5 

"V. 

5!    8 

M     «a 

"Si 

55 

s 

« 

^ 
^ 

O 

E 

< 

Si 

•s. 

(VI 

O 

1 

0  04 

N 
M 

si; 

so    (V 

11 

(Vi 

• 

(M 
O 

O 
K 

(VI 
CVJ 

N. 

^ 

1 

!8 

• 

3i 

VO 

Total  Payment 
to 

Contractor 

^ 

8 

i 

9i 

is 

1* 

J 

8 
1 

!^8 

NO 

NQN 

1^ 

8 

1 

$8 
Si 

N  O  ""s 

8 

• 

1 

88 

8 
1 

8S 

O  9< 

8;s 

5* 

8:: 

8 

d 

4- 
O 

E 

< 

s 

N 

• 

(VI 

t5 

1 

K 

5^ 

• 

•a 

(XI     V 

■                   • 

1 

OS 

5 

(VI 

flo 

* 

M 
00 

s 
t 

m 

N 

o 

VO 

to 

VO- 
•0 

K 
(VI 

o 

Payment  to 
Contractor  on 
Aa:ount of  Claims 
for  Damages 

S-S 

•6 

»0 

u 

i 

• 

ni 

•>- 

• 

O 

E 

s 

• 

(> 

s 

• 

§ 

e 

• 

? 

^ 

Liquidated 

Damages 

Charged  to 

Contractor 

^ 

5 

»4 

1 

■V. 

K 

5t 

do 

i55 

•Vs 

4- 

c  ■ 

3 
O 

E 

O 

o 

1 

§ 

1 

J  8 

O    C 

Si! 

> 

• 

8 

o 
o 

o 

8 

s 

IQ 

s 

ci 

1 

o 

4- 
O 

g 

4- 
C 

.3 

4- 
C 

E 

>^ 

c 
o 

GO 

1. 

5^ 

5 
* 

<0 

85J 

18^ 

o 

^2 

n5 

O 

E 

s 

id 

O 

8 

• 

s 

Ki 

•ft 

o 
o 

o 

8 

m 

O 

1 

5^ 

OC 

, 

5 

OOQ 

}t5 

«  IQ 

o 

• 

Its 

OQ 

55 

d  Q 

d  Q 

•on 

A4 

o 
d 

o 
6 

ON 

oo 

4- 
C 

O 

£ 

8 

• 

N 

■ 

- 

M 

• 

SO    ( 

?8} 

O 

o 
•o 

4 

> 

S 

1 

(vi 

5 
^ 

5 

5 

• 

Oi 

K 

(M 
•0 

N 

•o 

0» 

«0 

(VI 

8 

£ 

S 

3 
4c 

^ 

Si 

is, 

8^ 

8 

9) 
9\ 

^8 

5 

IS 

»8 

«ot 

Sis 

to 

Nv  «>  ^ 

C: 

i 

8s 

« 

8k 

S5 

5S 

i 

95 

5? 

o  ov 

4- 
C 

O 

E 
< 

■ 

o 

s 

• 

o 

* 

00 

?5 

?8 

rt  Oft 

ft* 

(VI 
(U 

5 

Pi 

5 

• 

(U 

t 

(Vf 

5 

«ft 

• 

1 

• 

1 

8; 

Con- 
tract 
Number 

(VJ 

00     0 

»0 

00 

»0 

> 

^^ 

> 

QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


171 


4- 

00  00/ 
OOOOf 

1 

T 

^2 

4- 
C 

O 

E 

< 

S^  if  ITIS  5^$' 8'?  "'Sf  i^^^i^S  S"!f  ^  ^^Jf 

cog 

I.!  J 

<  o 

d« 

^ 

N 

•                   • 

•               •                •              •               •              ••               ••               ■               •                               •               a               *               •!•               •              • 

rl 
S 

• 

+- 
c 

0 

E 

< 

■ 

0 

t   1. 

2     S 

^ 

8 

• 

o 
o 

58 

^82t8 

4- 

C 

O 

E 

(XI     ^ 

?  t:  ?5*  5^1?  KT  $^  "f  pf  1^^  f  If  5^  Jf  ?'  5^  8f  ^^ 

-IF 

5-5 

two 

O 

O 

O 

e 

•< 

« 

1 

§                % 

pq 

•^        Ok- 

4- 
C 

3 
O 

E 

id; 

is      S8SSS      S         S      S      § 

o 

4- 
o 

g 

•♦- 

C 

<3 

•f- 
C 

s 

GO 

u 

i£ 

a^. 

•      ■ 

1^ 

9i 

O 

s 

4- 

c 

3 
O 

E 

> 

> 

• 

S             S  8      S      8S 

S                   S   S        N         M>  C^ 

o 

O 

^ 

o 

•         • 

cJ         0 

>^  «  9,  «.  N  OK  loif>                                         ^iO*N            ^K  ft  t>0%^  i>t  0«            S> 

oocidcidod^                            oddd         dckdddododc!        6c> 

00 

S 

< 

• 

c 

3 
O 

E 

12  S 

S    c 

»          f 

I    : 

ct 

S 

■1- 

c 

^ 

9> 

*  • 

"O  •»  <V4  p 

Ok  >•  o  •< 

«  o  Oi  ffk«t  <»9t  Ojvs  o«ioo)O^MKo9t9k«        r^«vO)Sotat9kO««ioi9k« 

U 

4- 
C 
3 
O 

E 
< 

f  5^  8  5'  §'  }!f  ?  ?  •"'  ^  fi*  ►>"  Jf  S"  if  ;?  S"  55^  8 

f  ^! 

172 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


o     o     o 

o      o     o     o .   o 

o     o     o 

0     0 

9       0 

0 

■ 

o     o     o 

O      O      O      o      o 

o     o      o 

0     0 

9       0    . 

0 

Q 

^-^ 

o     o     o 

O       O       9       O       O 

o     o     o     o     o 

O       O        O 

§     S 

0       0 

9 

0 

4- 

o     o     o 

o     o     o 

9       9 

9 

9 

^-N 

4- 

K  g  S  ! 

b    N    (W    >«    «•    < 

c  lA  o  «o  rt  < 

i^^? 

t}!I|5 

?^^' 

1  IRg  5  J 

!l  S  (g  !i  g! 
r»  ?  «  *  oj  • 

^H 

l$i 

tiSS 

ft 

•is 

>^ 

E  1 V  f^"  K*  < 

?!fi!5l3  1?' 

■)  V  5- 

i8**>^t 

?s;tiS 

r 

g 

1 

b 

f 

O 

1    1        1       1 

CJ2 
o>o  o 

•ill 

wj-g 

<    0 

d^ 

%       «       « 

N       Vi       Jt 

«         «         V(         •!         «» 

^       ►i       N       55       fci 

•^    *^     5 

«     rv 
^     5 

•» 

* 

5 

K 

9 

5J 

f-^ 

05 

o 

4- 
C 

O 

«S    0)    ^    c 

5  ?   «M  r 

2  §  §  ^ 
R  k?   «^   K 

J  5  R  8  55 

^    (Vi    ^ 

Hi 

».    04    K    C 

> 

\ 

E 

f  «r  <*  h'  w)" 

h-^ 

N"   <   1 

• 

< 

• 

IT 

1 

£ 

t   ^ 

^ 

\o  d  ^  9  *A 

;k8$s 

tl8 

S 

e    t 

*»  -K  <  ^ 

■«»      ^      •x      ■«.      «» 

"S.          «» 

^    -*    ^ 

•>i  -K 

X 

o 

4- 

?  8R? 

?  2J  !!>  2*  J5  5 
f  «^  04  10  5  r 

^^^ 

l^\ 

!|  ^  ^ ; 

\ 

^         4- 

C 
O 

E 

< 

ti  S  !S  ? 
i«j  K  •s  ^ 

^"  2?  <^  ^ 

t2  s: 

ft*  d  ^ 

0*  ft?  ^-^  ( 

k4    «4    <    J 
l» 

> 

(-   tf 

\ 

^ 

^ 

e 

^ 

5>5 

• 
9 

o 

O 

E 

< 

C 

c 

\ 

> 

> 
> 

^ 

9 

^  M 

?> 

n 

"S-  °o 

^ 

►> 
»» 

•b  0 
(V4  AJ 

fN. 

g 

M 
P 

t 

• 

> 
> 

PQ 

3 
O 

E 

•< 

H 

*^  ^  N  IV*             « 

ff.  N  ^  p  in 

8S5 

<  9  d            9 

M 

C 
O 

CO 

5«^ 

K  *  0  N   iri 

K 
9 

o 

4- 

c 

o   ^         S 

^  S  8      %  ^ 

^  S  S 

s  s 

J     §               5 

\ 

L- 

3 

JO     lO            K 

D     Jo     P            lA    C 

s  ^  ^ 

Jf>  <: 

^  !;>       ^ 

\ 

H 

g 

u 

i£ 

E 

(MM         a 

'H  ^^ 

N    V 

>     N            \ 

\ 

4 

o 

u 
o 

^ 

O^  O  (U  *) 

66^                 c?d  V 

M  ie<\i  K  <o 

i« 

^♦^        5 

K 

h 

s 

">J  o  d  d  o 

M  n*  aj  «  « 
V  6  d  do 

0 
d 

090        d 

ci 

o 

4- 
C 

^ 

4- 
C 

«©  s  : 
S  T  •< 

^  IS            5  2 

? 

\    ^         ft 

> 
4 

c 
E 

3 
O 

E 

(U    ^    ^ 
ft* 

■   ^ 

^ 

«2 

N|tv  *h  gfU  J 
^,K  »>I0  >  «j  « 

N  *  O  K  --  O  ?>  *ff>2 

8^il^5 

?^5s;? 

5X 

P 

>s 

o 

^ 

V>  9^  V)  9\  V^  V  9V 

»o  H  o  »o  »  d|V  ^'  ftj  t> 

N  *  *)  *"o 

\B r.  <t(  «>N 

d  -^  -»  6  K 

""tJ'^B 

N  0 

N 
« 

CO 

£ 

13 

«»,N  AN  t)  %  t» 

(%0)9)«k^O4>«)^rv 

0  N  V»%  9) 

^)«^0 

^0 

CO 

^    N    »)    h 
+-      ^  V-   i5j    a 

3      jj   }o   o>    J 

o      00   K   S    « 

^     •*.     K>    ft4    «4    « 

tt    N    ^ 

S!8 ; 

^  ••^   0  0 

^ 

< 

2 

+- 
c 
o 

D     O    (U    H     «    C 

h    N   <r>  vo   K   « 

U  5i3  ^5 

1^    0    >. 

d   ro  vo 

^    «     Vk    V 

>?  ft4^  kT  5 

U     ft4     5J     J 

• 

> 

H 

4- 

E      10   <'  -»"  ^ 

f  !3  5^  S^  B" ' 

4 

h 

£ 

\           1  ^    C^    O    0 

J    N)    ^    ^    N    « 

0   <h   0 

^     N)     ^ 

J^    ir>    Vft 

=    1    

s    N    N    N    N    r 

•v    N    ^ 

«0     <^    0 

0  Qa   ^ 

. 

?? 


<f  <s 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


173 


sjoiioQ'p^no  j^d  U014. 

?; 

s 

R 

(to 

IQ 

9S 

-x)\x)0X3  q4Jog  ^4.503 

0         0 

ci 

0 

c> 

CJ 

^ 

^ 

-400J  J  ad 

w>         «o 

»ri 

^ 

•s. 

(Vl 

<V4 

»0 

UOl^OADDX^-SpAn^ 

(Vl              (V4 

(Vl 

CVJ 

(Vl 

Si 

CVj  ftj   «o  ^  Ci 

^  ^  ^ 
0  0  0 

^  N  fo 

$ 

(Tk   0 

s 

S 

^  K  v^  t|>  ^ 

!P  "^  JO 

o<;  (vi  «: 

lo' 

(^  ^ 

IT, 

ci 

M 

Sio||OQ 

•^    «>.      X.     ^     ^ 

(V|    04   (W 

'^     >^     "S. 

< 

X.   >» 

"S* 

.(Vl 

«%  »    &    t    » 

s    s    : 

s     s     s 

» 
« 

s 

1-1 

400^  jx>9Ui-\  jsd 

i^  :     :     s     8 

s     e     s 

:     r     s 

« 
w 

s     ^ 

1 

t 

Gi 

UOI+OMODX^ 

t:  s    s    s    » 

it: 

t     s'    5 

fi 

s 

S 

J 

^  «    «    «    s 

S      t       £ 

s     s     t 

2 

s     % 

t 

s 

s 

i-H 

44i»3  jP  4.TO3 

0  0  l>^  0  0 

^  «0  l\ 

^."^  >r  Of 

!3- 

1 

rs 

1 

• 

(«ij>|ioQ)-pA-n3 

M 

jdd  i\ooy  ^  4.S03 

> 

(spXno) 

•4 

o 

9C1DQ    94.9aO.UO3 

ft 
^0 

H^ 

(v»»j) 

s 

§§ 

S 

■< 

4.U9UJdAO^  ^  l^UQ-] 

. 

Y 

^^S 

o 

4>U9Ui9A10^ 

1 

•Jc    1 

•k 

< 

M 

1 

^ 
u 
« 

• 

^ 

H 

V. 

Y 

"? 

tiC 

1 

\» 

1 

8 

<^ 

^ 

•^ 

> 

> 

« 

UOI+OAOOX^ 

1 

1 

5 

1 

1 

1 

^ 

-< 

c^o 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

PS 

€iJin4.Y>(s| 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1    ' 

>4 

1 

1 

1 

1 

r 

1 

O 

1 

(+«»J) 

10 

h 

rn 

<to 

9^ 

«<^ 

0 

4.nQ    9BDJl9Ay 

w  S 

0^ 
10 

R 

S 

J5 

i( 

CO 

• 

N   v^   »0 
f^  ^    >0 
to  ^    «^ 

CN    lO   N 

vo  Jb  'O 

IS    ^    Ci 

^0 

13- 

0  To 

(vr<' 

(Vl 

$S^ 

s 

5 

*    »    « 

% 

»      »      « 

« 

%  « 

ft 

ft    ft 

ft 

V6  0    to 

Ci 

o^  \ft  K 

Ci 

K)  ^ 

0 

c^  0 

N 

H 

»o  •o  ^ 

Y 

*    %    » 
fo  ►)  fo 

(Vl    (V4 

(^ 

"V     V.     "X 

"V 

>*«>.>. 

■>: 

■N.     >. 

"S* 

>. 

92  1  9 

«     k    * 

«    «    « 

X     X 
%     • 

X 

ft 

X    X 
«     ft 

ft^ 

eg  to  ^ 

'to 

^  10  ^ 

0^ 

10,^ 

5^ 

.^.^ 

«o  5"  to 

►o 

»o  h  N 

(Vl 

(V4   (W 

(VJ 

«D  9^ 

^ 

■*v     "X     ^ 

>s 

>;  V.  >. 

>» 

•s.   >» 

>s 

Nk 

J9qiun^  4.3DLJ4.U03 

<VJ 

*o 

(V4 

VD 

o 
2 

eS 
■*^ 

•I 

a 
o 

■*■» 
ti 
o 

a 
a 

o 
o 


CD 

o 
o 

M 
C8 

o 


174 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


f€JD|(OQ*-pA'no  jad  uo|4.| 
-OA»W3i44JO330+«03 


•  ■ 


S 
ci 


N> 


to  lO 


& 


2f 


5 


'4.0 oj  J9d 
UO140ATOX3  'spA  -03 


? 


9^ 

<6 


04 


0\  o 
<«o 


•0 


J 


CI 

o 


P 

o 

O 

< 

o 
tf 

a 
-< 

» 

o 

CO 

O 

O 


4OOJ  JDQUn  -Idd 
U0l4.OAt>0X^ 

i^jD3  ^  4.SO0 


a:: 


S  10  K  ^  «6  N 

(  »  »  t     K  » 

k  »  %  &    s  » 

«  ft  c  %     »  s 


Q>  O  W^  Ci  O 

o  ^  n-  ^  ^ 

<h  N  rv  \j>  f*5 

%  :  X  s  s 

fi  s  s  t  » 

s  &  s  S  ft 


(sjoH0(i)pAn3 
a»d>poy^+so3 


ft 

K 
ft 


SI 


s 


s 


••^ 


vo  so 


QCDQ    849J3UO;) 


<0 


4U»ujaAxy  jo  44!du9~i 


^ 


S8 


4U9iueAD^ 


I 


I 

,3- 


U014DAD3X3 


I 


I 

Is 


e 


s 


I 
r 


I 


»0 

I 


<5 

1 
I 


4.n^  a&DjQAy 


s(S 

CM 


0^ 
ft4 


cw  >* 


V6 


(A.QOj)  q+BuQ"! 


Q      VD  <o     ^  N  c:> 


lO  "O 


»0  N  ^ 
•s.  <h  >0 

•>.  <r>  <r» 


o 

OJ 


CO 


«z»9 


VO  N> 


«     »     k 

Q  VD  C^ 


ft     « 


ft     %     % 
O  ^  ^ 


ft*<Js<r»     <hw^    c^rvN. 


ft   «   ft 

o  Ci  Ci 


X    X 

ft    ft 
sb  vo 


XXX 

ft    ft   ft 

0^0 


^0%       <^<h<h       Chio      ^NK 


o 


so 
N 


Ol 


^ 

^ 


jdC|Uia{s|  40DJ4.U03 


¥ 


to 


5 


9> 
ft4 


(VI 
SO 


^ 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


176 


•X3 


o 


M 

1-4 

o 

< 
O 

< 

o 

o 

P4 


o 

CO 

O 
O 


CO 
H 

5 


ciD|\0Q'*pX'noa»d  U014. 

n4 

S 

0 

Tv 

5 

0     vo 

-DA»ax3  q+jog^+so^ 

•«•» 

•«^ 

(U 

•s. 

<      Ci 

•4.OOJ  Jl9Ci 

h 

^ 

VD 

ff> 

VO       N 

uoi4jaA»ox3  •  cpX  'n^ 

«o 

0^ 

9> 

»o 

rrJ     so 

^ 

10     0  6  0"^ 

s 

io  ^ 

c>  0 

1^ 

»o     K  0  0 

N 

>»     ^  ^  0 

(I4  (W 

h  ^ 

K 

Qa     tvi  so  ci 

CJO||0Q 

v& 

v6     (vi   <  (6 

9|  ^ 

i     9 

S           S      »      £ 

^.oojjooui-iJdd 

§• 

$          S       5     C 

? 

s     s 

s    a 

» 

5           5*5 

4: 

2          S       5      t 

» 
m 

&     c 

s    » 

« 

t           S      «      S 

U0l4.OA100X"3 

1 

*                    ^             A           » 

t 

t     a 

s    s 

•ft                       »            m            « 
^                       »            %             « 

«    IUJD3  ^  4.SO0 

f^     <'  -<  <■ 

S! 

;?* 

^ 

•0 

< 

<. 

•^ 

<v*       <  In  >J 

(sjo\\o(3)pAn3 

§ 

§ 

jdd  v\oo^  jD  4.903 

•<> 

fi 

(cpAno) 

0 
0 

>tooy^X4.i4.uon{) 

l^ 

9CDg  a4.9a3U03 

6 

SO 

1 

0 

^ 

<* 

« 

^ 

^ 

1 

4.UdU49AD^ 

"S 

1 

"^  1 

1 

•1 

1 

ll 

^ 

1 

v. 

s 

U014.K>AOOX3 

5? 

1 
1 

1 

1 

j 

! 

1  1 

1  ^ 

1  "^ 

ejn4.Y3|s4 

1 

1  , 

1 

^ 

1 

1 

ji 

1 

1. 

1 

1  .^ 

4.03  9bY>j9Ay 

3t 

5' 

>• 

s  Si 

^ 

!>    ci  ^  0  U) 

Oj 

0 

CO  N 

0      ff^  -^ 

(4»9j)  4+5u91 

CVl       W)    «o  (Ui  % 

9> 

!? 

9i       ^  9\ 

S' 

t^"      <    ^^ 

fVj 

<vra; 

ft 

«         «      «     «      s 

ft 

ft 

«    ft 

*     ft  * 

9^ 

Vft       0    N)   Q   0) 

.^ 

.^ 

,N>5> 

^so     %>y> 

vo 

«D       ^    N   K   SO 

K 

SO 

so  so 

so     w^  so 

X 

X         X     K     H    K 

X 

X 

X    X 

X       XX 

«z»9 

« 

ft         %      ft     ft      « 

ft 

ft 

ft    ft 

•            '    -^  » 

^ 

>     <:>  K  Ci  0^ 

.<b 

Ci 

« 

.h5i 

^"  .^?^ 

rs.      qj    fs  K  V6 

SA 

SD 

so   SO 

so        1^    NO 

J9qain^  ^doj^uo^ 

(VI 

<»0 

^^    ^^ 

176 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


-DAX)0)Q  L|+J1D3  JO  4.603 


^ 

^ 


cvi 


5i 


'4.0OJ  Jdd 
UOI+DAT00X3  "spA  •  n-^ 


0^ 

o4 


^ 
•o 


04   >s 


v6 


4.oojaD3U|"\J9d 
U01+DMOOX3 

M4JID3  io  4-SOO 


1^  K 


ft 

00  04 


s     $     t 


a    £    5    c  tj 


5  ^ 


85  ? 


::^ 


15  ^ 


t      i 


M 

o  r^ 


S 


W 


51" 


(cjD|iog)pAn3 
jad  v(50^  jp  4.S03 


> 
to 

P 

< 

O 

< 

W 
o 

Q 

< 

O 

O 


(spAno) 
>\ooy^X4.i4.uDn() 


©STOq    d4.9JDU03 


^O 


VD 


sy 


(4.39  j) 
4.U9UJ9AOJ  JD  L|4buQ'^ 


04" 


•o 

s 


^ 


4.uduidAX>^ 


II 


I 


I 


Qjn4.D(\i 


I 
I 


I 
I 


^5 

I 


I 


I 


I 
1 


(+93j) 

4.03  oBoj^Ay 


*7 
04 


oj    n: 


S    04 


04 


N  9>       ^5 
0| 


(4©9j)4+6uaT 


04 


^  ^  ^  vo 
>  ^  H-  «o 


04^  < 


04   Q 

or 


04 


N  >       ^ 


5! 


CO 


9ZI9 


*     •     %  . 

W  vo  O   >5     X  *6 


"r!*! 


v& 


04 


04  «^     ^^ 
*o  04      > 


XX        XX 


04  « 


^    «0 


«o  Y     >  M    5^ 


\0 


ioqiun^  ptU4.uo3 


s 


!? 


^O 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


177 


CJD|l0Q*pA-a3i9dU0l4. 

s 

? 

-OAO0X3  44J102  ^  4.503 

(vi 

• 

■s. 

X 

■4.00J  j^ 

V. 

^           <V4    "^ 

^ 

f^ 

M 

Sfl- 

UO14.OADOX3  -spA  -n^ 

A4 

• 

^ 

»«\ 

•0 

ft 

VB  §  SD  0 
fS.    ^   (^   Ifj 

? 

^ 

•SJ»l|0(] 

•«  •*> 

^r  tS  <*)  <^ 

wi 

K 

ttj   t^ 

x^ 

k>    K  <6 

4.00J  jx>duq  jod 

1^    « 

«     s     t     » 

1       S       «       S 

a 

«      8 
B       t 

»       s    e 

s       s     s 

1 

UOj+OADOX^ 

t     s    s    s 

» 

e 

5      5 

ft 

«      t    t 

#si 

.s   * 

«       »       S      2 

s 

t 

«      t 

t 

»      t    t 

44J03  ;^  +S03 

0  o>  «  0 
^  oi  cvi  ^ 

■  s 

?> 

5ft 

!R 

's  S§ 

^H 

•\      ^  1^ 

N 

A4 

VO  0^ 

^- 

ftj  ^ 

1 

«!•<• 

<C 

I 

K 

vT 

<^<* 

s 

(SJDllOQ)pAn3 

§ 

$ 

§ 

§ 

^H 

add  )po^  JjO  4^03 

•0 

K 

V 

• 

M'^D) 

^ 

K 

"O 

^ 

>iOoy^A4.l4-uont) 

> 
>0 

N 

s 

asog  Q4.9J0UO3 

1 

M 

C^^^J)  ^ 

s 

g 

^ 

o 

^uauidAY^  ^0  440  ua^] 

5 

vo 

t^ 

§ 

1 

g 

% 

# 

4.U9Ui9Ar)^ 

1 

1 

1 

o 

1 

^ 

1 

^ 

< 

. 

^ 

■ 

o 

« 

1 

^ 

>< 

uoi+OAOox'g 

1 

& 

C 

r-^ 

^a 

^ 

o 

< 

9Jn4.D|s| 

1 

1 

1 
1 

1       . 
1 

1 
1 

1 
1 

1 
1 

E 

1^ 

^ 

!> 

1^ 

.^ 

1 

« 

Ci 

Vo 

0 

Cs 

Ci 

V» 

•< 

H 

(4«aj) 

• 

-^         VO  ft^ 

ftj 

^ 

> 

0 

§ 

4.03    d&DJQA^ 

5 

5 

(Vi 

g 

C^>  (V*   CXJ 

c^  rh  vo  ^ 

«D   0    <^ 

a\ 

N  tn  t^ 

^  <to 

«0     r<^  (VI  irt 

o 

(4.93J)  44Bu9-| 

h  N    •*. 
V  <^)   N 

vo  ^^  <^  ^. 

^r  0  oj 

V.   so   VD  ^  (^ 

^  h  r^  r^  f^ 

< 

(C 

f^' 

■ 

>^Nr 

• 

CO 

.^ 

2 

t     «      « 

N  ^)   CS 

•    «    «    • 

^  ^»  ^  cn 

•     *     • 

Vfi  »o  n 

X 

»    «    * 

0    y     V, 

•     • 

\i    V  \^  !^ 

oz»9 

•o  ^  ro 

so  '<^  >  »o 

»o 

jaqainjsi  4.ox>J4.u<r) 

0 

04 

5 

« 

12 


178 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


s 


K 


S 


^        « 


iS 


25 

•I   "N. 


'400J  J9d 


►> 
^ 


I. 

CI 


Ui 


< 
O 


o 

s 

Y 

I 

f 
W 

M 

5 


•«jioi|oa 

II4J03  io+«oo 


•  •      • 

•  s      « 

e    •      • 


11^ 

cvf  <-  cvf 


ft 
s 


25 


■      •        » 

s  s  « 
t  a  a 
s     »      s 

in 


s    a 


MS 


Q 
^ 


960g    d4AJ9U03      <« 


<6 


^ 


4U0U49AOJ  jjO  44J9ua-| 


^ 


^5 


4.U9ai9AD^ 


UO 1 4.0  A  00x3 

•  jn4.iotM 


I 


J 


4.03  obDjOAy 


? 


^ 
b 


1^    ^ 


(4.99J)  446  U  ©I 


(VI  >  ^ 


0^ 


«2ig 


*  «^  ^ 
«<i  ^  > 


E 


jaqainisi  4OLOJ4.UO3 


? 


!^ 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


179 


-400J  add 


<  tVJ   (>4 


i 


'to 


*©  N  N 

<     •     ■ 

^  <Xl  ^ 


CM 


«V4 


4.00J  aodui")  add 


5q  5>  lf> 

^5  0]  M 

.  *  •  * 

«o  ^  ^ 


ft 


s 

8 


I 


5 

a 


t 
I 


I 
t 
ft 

i 


^  Q  «^  Q  ^ 

r*^  ^  ?a    Ci  »«i 
ffi  K  ci    ^  < 


ft    •    ft 
t    ft    ft 

Jf>  fe  ^ 


ft    ft 
I    ft 


ft 

ft. 
ft 


§§    ^ 


K  c3 


ft 

ft 
ft 

5i> 


ft 

t 
ft 


(wjouo(i)-pA-no 
add  >po^^  4.603 


(Bp/(-no) 


9«DQ    94aJ0UO3 


k      ft 


«0 


^ 


4.u9iu8AKy  ^  44bu3i 


§ 


^$ 


$! 


4.uaui9ADj 


ll 


I 


I 


UO{4.DAX>3X2 

9an4.D|s| 


4.03  o&oaOAy 


4^j)ih6u8-i 


!S 


1 

I 


I 


! 


I 


I 


0^ 


N 

»4^ 


I 


I 


N  '^  «i^  Q  %  l<^  V) 
5.  (Vj  0>  K  h^  ^  ^ 
^  N  0>  *0     K  »o  ^ 


**^  i!>  ^ 

fVi   ^  K 


N  (Vj 


»«^  >   > 


oa^iJunN  43m4.u<y)  [  $ 


8{ 


S 


w^ 


180 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


siBiioQ'pXnojsd  uo!4. 

$ 

^ 

Ch 

•s. 

;?      a 

^ 

-DAODxg  L{4i03  ^  4.S03 

^ 

Qj 

< 

to            < 

>• 

•+00J  Jdd 

•b 

• 

• 

^        ^ 

^ 

uoi+toMoox3  'sp^  n^ 

OJ 

>s 

^ 

^          "^ 

'^ 

6^  -s.  vo 

^ 

."^  W>  Ci  <i 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  Jj> 

iO 

1 

fVj  >   ^r> 

^^ 

^  >^  ^U) 

^  ^  »<^  «:i  «^  ^ 

N 

•SJO||oa 

cvj  Jvj  tvi 

> 

>    »    a    t 

*     >    S     >     ft      5 

cvi 

2 

400J  aoaun  J9cl 

<§)  t  = 

•« 
M 

4    a    s   :t 

K    %     S     S      S      t 

» 

1. 

U014.OAD0X3 

S 

«    «    s    s 

5     »     t     ft 

t    £     a    s     &     « 

S     £      C     S      »      & 

d 

S 

tl^j02  i«  +SO0 

CV4   ^    (T) 

(\i  <0  CVi  %  (Vj  ^ 

^  to  oS  S  <s  5- 

S  ?  vS  f^  ^  € 

1 

^i. 

or 

^^ 

< 

<" 

V 

s 

(SiionoQ)p/in3 

§ 

Ci 
^ 

§ 

1-H 

Jdd  ^ooy  jb  4.90;) 

• 

^ 

^ 

V 

G3 

(spXno) 

^ 

i^ooyj.0  X+t+uonf) 

N 

1 

1-4 

9sog  a4.ajDU03 

H4 

(■4-a9j)  ^ 

Is 

1^ 

18 

o 

4.UaUJ9AD^J^  L|4.bU9'] 

»^ 

to               'o  ^ 

h) 

6      ! 

^ 

^ 

5 

o 

4.U9UJ19ADJ 

IJ 

1 

^                  1 
1             M^ 

1 

^ 

■>! 

% 

t) 

^ 

11 

UOI4OATOOX3 

o 

1 
1 

1 

1 

^        1 
1        1 

1 

< 

1 

1 

1 

1      ;!   1 

» 

(■^^A) 

u^ 

>» 

Oj 

(\j                   VO           ^1^ 

O 

4.03  aBojOA^^ 

<^ 

00 

<to  ^  c:> 

*<>  ?  b 

«f>'to 

*fil\l             04$>^^W^^N>». 

O 

(4.aaj)  4^6u9-i 

vo  vo  ^ 
>«.  i^  v» 

C\j   (\J   ^ 

^h  ^^  to 

rt< 

CO 

9 

*      • 

^  <:a  ^  ^ 

»    »    « 

k   «   k 

«   * 

•    •                «     «        ^   *^ 

^  -^  ^  ^ 

n 

f\i  <r>  vo 

0^  to  N 

to  9^ 

'^'^             vo  «a.  >| 

Eh 

®Z!S 

^  ro  to 

ho  »0  C\i 

V)\              'O  04      1    £ 

s     s     s     : 
N  V   cvi  Ci 

lO  fO  Oj  CXi   (VI  (VI 

jaqtunjvj  ^ooj+uo^ 

IS 

0 

to            ^       ^ 

1 

QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


181 


6JX)|lOQ''pA'(Oi9(i  UOI4. 


? 


$ 

^ 


»*i 


'4.00J  J9C) 

uo!4DAX)ox3'cpA'n9 


(Vi 


5 


•S 


4.00J  jr)9ui-\  Jdd 


^5  :^ 


(wonoQ)pA-n3 
J9d  >poy  JO  +S03 


JS  J«^  & 
(^  ^  »o 


ft 


ft 


«      S      B 
CSS 

c     :t    e 
b  N  * 


S  s  &  ess 

s  ^  »  s    s    s 

7  S  S  ft      S      S 

s  s  c  ess 


^ 

•^ 


s 
s 


§ 
^ 


<0 


g 

M 

o 

< 

o 

< 

M 
O 


(cpXno) 
>poyjoX+!+uonb 


^ 

!§ 


Qfiog  d49Jiouo3 


«    » 


<0 


^ 


4U9Ui9AG^  j.0  445U9-{ 


$ 


^ 


^1 


^  JO      N 

<•    cvT 


I 

< 

h 
O 

CO 

O 

O 


CO 

m 

5 


4.U9lJUdAX>J 


I 


II 


t5 


I 


^ 


^ 


UO14.DADOX3 


I 


I 

I 

I 


I 


I 
I 


s 


I 
I 

I 


I 
I 

I 


I 

I 
I 


403  9boj9Ay 


VO 


5 


cvi 


(4a3j)q46u3-i 


cvi  ro  ^    ^       ^ 
r«^  Oi  <5>    ro       >h 

04  a>    »o       w> 


>,  0^  >»  Cb 
kN  N  ^  ^ 
h)  1^  >  ^ 


>: 


5  s*  ?  S 

«Q   ^  N  rs 
^  >   >  *0 


Ci  to  ^  »<^ 
(Vj  Ui  N  ^O 

•*>  <V4  ^  ^ 


ezi  9 


Oi  ^   ^      >  ^ 
^  ^  ^M      (Vj  Nj 


*     *     «     « 

Mi   Ni   1^    ^ 
>0   ")   04   04 


10  N 


»     »     •     » 

>0  ^  ^  CV4 
ro  10  CV]  CVj 


N)  N  M>  «. 
►0  c\4  (M  (Vj 


j^qtunj^  POJ+U03 


to 


ftj 


Oi 


!^ 


^ 
^ 


0> 
«0 


182 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


SfD||0Q''fA'n3  j^d  U014. 

!3 

-OMOM^  4M^2  i^-VSOD 

<:>             ^ 

^' 

Q 

^-N 

'4.00J  jad 

•                              • 

CVi 

• 

'9 

5 

<5 

5» 

'^  "  Ci  ^     ^ 

W^ 

^ 

0                  M>  <i 

^ 

^^ 

^ 

N 

^        w^          ^f 

^ 

<:i 

<:i             tw  ^ 

■1 

1 

•«JOH0Q 

(Vi 

^ 

% 

cvj 

ft               S                   ft 

<vi 

ft 

ft 

ft                      s     ft 

400J  jiY>dun  Jdd 

<D 

e 

ft 

S               ft 

i 

ft 

ft 

ft                 ft    ft 

UO»4.»AOOX2 

<: 

1 

ft 
s 

ft         ft            : 
ft         ft            : 

ft 
ft 

s 
ft 

ft                 ft    ft 
t                t    ft 

1 

4^03  ^+so3 

^ 

1    I     ^ 

1 

s 

1^ 

(sjpijoQ)  pA  no 

% 

% 

s 

a»d  )po^  jb  4S03 

V 

cvi 

^ 

^ 

h 

• 

(spXno) 

8 

^ 
^ 

>looyjD^i4uon5 

^) 

IS 

< 

■X 

S 

9«iog  04dJiouo3 

(0  <ft      «0 

*•* 

§ 

$  s 

< 

^1  ll^  %% 

3 

« 

1 

%l 

1  « \ 

S 

H 

<< 

^ 

4.uaUJ9AO^ 

1  ^ 

11 

m 

II 

o 

•< 

5 

U 

^ 

^ 

O 

UOI4.DA100X3 

1 

J 

1 1 

< 

dJl04>O(sj 

1             ' 

1 

J 

^  1 

C 

S 

^ 

6          J 

r 

0 

1 

1 J 

^ 

(4»®J) 

N 

N 

■X 

^  h)         00 

O 

4.0^   9&OJ9Ay 

0 

OS 

§ 

N  <fi         K 

t^ 

oj  (vj  2: 

^  ^ 

>* 

v«  h)  ^  ^     > 

Y  ^ 

Qq 

(V|  ^ 

^  (Vi          ^  (Vj 

O 

U 
1 

(^9j)  446U9-| 

S^S  y  B  2^  25 
^  r^  (Vi  ^  ««i  ^^ 

^  >  >  C>     Q 
«i  >  ►^  «o     V 

0  N  ^ 

1^  »»>          A»  ^ 

1 

eo 

9 

«  *    « 

»   » 

« 

§  ^  ^  «0 

» 

'ft 

ft    ft 

«     «             ft     » 

9 

«^»s 

<&  «D  «*i  (U   ^ 

O4  'v   •»»•*«•   >• 

^ 

J  Si 

10  (VI 

n  tvi        oi  (Vi 

J9qUIA(^  401014^03 

S.„  - 

:s         C 

V 

^ 

§ 

<vi           <v3 

QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


183 


fiiD|10(]*'pA*ftOJt9d  U0{4. 
-PATOX3  H-MO^  ^  JgQJ 


r 


R 


5 


i5 


■400L]  aad 


(M 


.£±nj 


•s 


I. 

CI 


4.00J  jo9uq  Jdd 


i 


ft     ft       S     ft 
ft     «       ft     K 

ft     ft       ft     ft 

ft     ft       ft     ft 

^?5  5S 


»0  Jft  «i 

It  ft   ft 

ft  ft  ft 

ft  ft  ft 
ft  ft  ft 


•aD 


VD  ^  CVj 


Q  ^  ^  ^  Vc\ 

s;^  Q>  <i  <a  ^ 

0)  (\j  Oj  r»)  ^ 

ft  ft  ft  ft  ft 


ft   ft  ft  ft  ft 

ft    ft  ft  ft  K 

ft    ft  ft  ft  ft 

fa  in  cv)  <:^  <& 


ft  ft  ft    ft 

ft  ft  ft    ft 


ft  ft  ft    ft 


^ 
^ 

wS 


\4 


g 

P 

o 

-< 

z 
o 

M 

O 
P< 

Q 
Z 

< 

o 


(cpXn3) 
>poy^X4J4UDn)[) 


96Dg    94dJl3U0^ 


^ 


4U»ui»Aiy  JO  4t6uai 


I 


II  S5  1^  5 


§S 


n 


^ 

Ti 


4.U9UJQAD^ 


t.1 


UOI4.0AOOX3 


4 
I 


1 


1= 


k 


I 
I 


I 
I 


^1 


S^ 


4.03  96ojoAy 


« 


O 


(iaaj)  q+6u9-| 


CO 

9 


»2!S 


V.  K\  SI 


jaqoinisi  POJ+U03  I  gj 


5^ 


vo 


tvi 


S  !^ 


184 


AMERICAN  SSWEBAGS  PRACTICE 


I 
•S 


o 

I 

t-H 

ri. 

s 


& 


P 

o 
o 

e 

o 

< 

o 

O 
U 


CO 
H 

5 


cj»HO(i*-p^noj9d  uo!4. 

• 

R 

^ 

5 
^ 

•4.00J  -»9d 

0^ 

> 

• 

< 

4.00J  ao9un  J^d 

U0I+OA100X2 

4+J03  ^  4.600 

•       • 

^  ^  *^ 

to  Q<i    VO 
<  <S   <5J 

S      £      S 

a    a    s 

a  .  a     a 

^  <:i  <:>  ^    «i^  j:i 
vo  \o  (h  »*^    vo  *r> 

^  w^  MJ  v6    c5  ^ 

a     a     a     a      a     a 

a     a     a    a       a     a 
a     a     a     a      a     a 

a     a     a     a       a     a 

^  W^  K  ic)     ff>  ^ 
K  v<>  >^  »i>    h\  to 

-' ^ 

a    » 
a    a 
a    a 
a    a 
&  ^ 

(sioH0Q)-pA-n3 

. 

• 

96Dg    94.di3U03 

« 

4U9aidA1D^  ^  44J9U91 

0^ 

i^            Si 

nj               ft? 

or 

4.uQai9AOj 

* 

15 
4 

! 

^                1 

1 

UOI+OAOOX^ 

1 
1 

1 
1 

.^                 1 

1 
1 

4.03  9boa9Ay 

5 

(+994)  4+6u9-| 

c^  <r>  > 

<;i  u^  ts  iT)     ^  ^ 

r^  "^  ">.  ^     ^  ^ 

>  ^  C^     ^^  > 

(V»  K  ^  ^ 

V©  N  r^  a> 

NT 

<<)  -^  K  (Vj 
N)  ^  ^  CVJ 

®ziS 

*     * 

*    »    « 

tvj  ^  «^ 

^  «b  ^  ^ 

1  ^  ^  ^  Si  s 

5  5  5.5; 

»       »       5       « 

^S    ^   CVj   ^ 
V.    -Ni    >%    >% 

•     *     •     • 

«to  ^  <o  ^ 

C    a    a    a 

«       »      »       k 

J9c^uinfs|  4.oni4.uo^ 

ft 

? 

!2           ^ 

R 

QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


185 


sjoiloQ*'pA"m49duo!4 

§ 

RJ 

!3 

-DA0DX2  4*J03  JO  4^503 

>; 

• 

ci 

^                          < 

•400J  jad 

• 

Oj 

• 

"^                         5 

o 

UO!4.DAD0X^  SpA 'rtQ 

•«<. 

>* 
^ 

>* 

<\|                         > 

§ 

5^ 

ft 

i5     8    tS 

•«JDHOQ 

< 

^ 

ft 

<V4         CVi         ^ 
ft           ft           ft 

4.00J  joauQ  Jdd 

® 

» 

«    5 

ft 

»           ft           ft 

uo|4-o^oox3 

.1* 

ft 

ft    ft 

ft 

ft           ft           ft 

■ 

^ 

s 

ft    ft 

ft 

ft           ft           ft 

»-4 

14^03  ^o+soo 

1 

SI 

1^ 

N 

§         $         g 

tl 

*A^ 

V 

S 

(sjojioQ)  •pAn3 

§ 

tH 

Jl3d  ^OO^  ^  4.SOQ 

^ 

• 

M'^D) 

«5i 

)|ooy^oX+i+uon(3 

^h 

09Dg    9L4.9J3U03 

1 

§ 

{43di)    ^ 

5; 

^ 
Aj 

o 

4.U3Ui3AXy  ^  144DU9~1 

"i 

1-^1 

\i 

"^ 

S; 

•< 
O 

4U31U9ADJ 

^ 

1 

1 

1 

^ 

5 

•s 

u 

g 

• 

1 

<6 

M 

uoi+DAooyg 

1 

8 
P4 

>o 

§ 

1 

1 

*< 

^jn4.D(s| 

1 

1 

1 

5 

1 

1 

1 

1 

M 

(4^»J) 

> 

N* 

«^ 

^^ 

o 

4.03  sBojSAy 

<b 

<b 

oS 

^. 

fe 

IT)  >»  CVi  >^  v^ 

^    > 

^     ^ 

^Vr>^vri»rk^Wsl«^CVj| 

c 

(439J)  q46u91 

0^  ru  ^h  ^  0^ 
Vr>  -^  N^  r^  N 

-O   nT   ^^ 

^•^ 

0^  (Vi 

;>;  jn  oj  10  fV4  Qo  ^ 

CO 

• 

',1^ 

»     t     » 

ci  <:i  Ci 

'^^t 

vo  vo  vo 

Q 

•< 

©zi  9 

»      »      »      «  ■  » 

^    <fe    ^    Og    ^ 
C\|     "s.     >«     ■v.    ">. 

»       t 

«     « 

0^ 
> 

.       V    V    K   C^  ^ 
^  »     »     •      ^  "*•  *^ 

^  vo  <r> 
•    *    » 

n  >  XT 

jaqujn|y|  ^ddj^uo^ 

s 

R 

Mi 
»0 

• 

186 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


punoj  J9d 

1 

§ 

^ 

5 

• 

5 

^ 

a+sjouoQ  ^0 

J«^ 

^ 

<vi              ^     ^o 

v> 

^ 

«i 

u^ 

* 

•pAnD  jdd 

^ 

c\i 

0^            <    <;i 

«^ 

V. 

^ 

"*x 

c^ 

(Vl 

oi 

04                 CVi      cvi 

>» 

cvi 

V" 

y; 

p349  p  +S03 

^ 

o 

• 

(••spAno) 

cvj 

K 

> 

^ 
« 

^  ^  S 
*x  ^  > 

K  5S  00 

!8 

^ 

a^aiouoQ  ^  4S<y) 

® 

®  (g)            ®   ® 

® 

^^® 

® 

® 

S 

puD  A4.i4.uDn(D 

1 

1 

^             cvT    ^ 

>6 

Q   j^  JO 
-^    Vft   ^h 

^ 
^ 

^ 

Hi 

1 

t^^ 

•^•' 

'^^ 

'^ 

^^ 

h4 

P 

CO 

>^  <b.«^ 

">. 

»«>  -K  >.      N     W^ 

N 

> 

•pA'noj9d 
1994-9^0  9punoj 

!8Sfi 

;^ 

cvJ  K  K  •k^     <^ 
«>  «o  <b.    <^    ^ 

*0 

v& 

• 

NO 

• 

H 
03 

(azi^  40D9  jo^) 

_i 

?)$5 

3t 

^  ^  fVi      ^      <M  vo 

cvj  cvj  «<;   i«>   25  ^ 

«0 

«V4 

N 

C\4 

»— 

4OOJ  JDdUll  -'^^ 

1^^  X' 

• 

K 

■ 

^ 

US  vp 

7< 

[9d4§^spunoj 

Si  535 

5 

0^  JO  ^     1^     «^  o> 

'Jv 

*** 

«^ 

«V4 

M 

H 

CO 

H 
GO 

(azig  qpD9J0^) 

2>  ^  -- 

•o 

2^  ^  CVJ      ^      is  -^ 

N 

V, 

^ 

-.    P^ 

4.00JJD9UI']  J9d 

^  K  ^ 
(vi  (vi  (Vj 

<V4 

cvi  ^  <     >.     v:  ^ 

> 

•< 

a 

(4»^J  ) 

N    -^    iTi 

<o 

0>  ics  N    ^     vo  ^ 

25 

Co  Ni  N 

^ 

vo  J^ 

»; 

("T^  >#.  vo 

^ 

'o  qj  t«^     CV4     rei  r^ 

S5 

>  c^  «^ 

P 

^  w^ 

*< 

s 

q4.6u3-i 

»:>  <^  ^ 

CV4 

'^  IP  ^     '^     5*  '^ 
cvj  >x     ->:     CV4  ^ 

CV4 

!^ 

i 

^ 

« 

«?          «    ;^ 

4i: 

« 

« 

* 

5 

S               ^      § 

§ 

^ 

0 

O 

v3 

<5 

vo                 <o      ^ 

<o 

1 

1 

o 

IDUS+D|^ 

1 
1 

i 

1      1  1 

1     II 

1 

1 

i 

i 

i 

CO 

^  ^  ?*^ 

^ 
^ 

V 

> 

•^ 

*    *    *      %      %    » 

<^   Si   K^       ^       K^  \i 

••          ^          .k                 V                 ^          V 

5  5  5   5   ^  ^ 

* 
^ 

^ 

^ 

X     X     ?« 

X 

X     X     X        X        XX 

X 

XXX 

X 

X    X 

QZ!<5 

^    «    « 

cvj  ir>  :::: 

^    >    ^       £       »    « 

^  ''^  ^    ^    «^  ^ 

» 
^ 

0  ^  -5* 

« 

^ 

^55 

5 

»^  i*>  "Kj    cvi     cvi  cvi 

"Si 

«^  ^  ^ 

^ 

^ 

^0  «^ 

jdqujntg40DJ|u03 

cu 

^ 

0 

^ 

T" 
^ 

ja 

08 

■** 
m 

•*» 

d 

o 

a 

to 
S 

a 

o 


to 

& 

3. 


QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


187 


puno^  jad 

55 

10 

^ 

§ 

»0 

S5 

^"*N 

pa4Si0  4S03 

0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 

0 

• 

0 

0                     C> 
0                 o- 

"« 
V 

^ 

s 

■s 

Sipj^UOQ  ^ 

*o 

"^-^ 

«0 

3: 

to 

•0 

QO                            ^ 

1 

-pAno  jad 

>* 
3 

CM 

»o 
•0 

• 

(V4 

0                            »0 
N)                          CM 

O 

p»49  p  4.S03 

S. 

tM4 

<i 

^  5^ 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0                        pQ 

a> 

*0 

w>  "o 

0. 

S 

K 

Q 

*^                        *n^ 

(spAno) 

<6 

<^  CO 

K 

«^ 

0> 

VC> 

K                     OcJq^ 

^^ 

avQtiOUOQ  304503 

@i 

QjQ; 

& 

% 

<& 

(|>                    Q/^ 

9^ 
• 

puo  A4.i4UDnh 

0 

0  0 

!5 

0 

0 

>^ 

15 

-^  "♦ 

^- 

^ 

^ 

«\ 

vo                  >Ho 

R.1 

(C^- 

Kj 

V 

i*r 

<" 

to" 

94ajDuo3  jO 

>* 

10 

0^ 

9v 

N 

^ 

g 

'pA'nojad 

0\ 

• 

K 

»o 

»o 

p 

W) 

^          $ 

P 

o 

1994.9^  spunoj 

00 

^ 

C^ 

1^ 

«0 

1-4 

S 

(3215  4009  JO^) 

400JJD9U,qj9d 

5!?  IS 

0  M 

N.  0  k^ 
«o  «o  ^> 

5g 

^ 

«^  ^  Ci  M- 

(M  00  fs  CM     M 

•      •      • 

0  «\  »o 

c\i  2> 

(Vj  ooK 

»0 

0  vft 

K 

«c>  <  (6  "o    9^ 
•^  ^  <r>  «s    0 

[9a49^spunoj 

^  ^  0 
^  ^  >«• 

0^  > 

c^  r^  IS 

V^ 

OS  »o 

^ 

GQ 

(32!9  qooajo^) 

K.   VO  (V« 

c^  >h 

Ci  ^  «^ 

«ft 

Ci  •>. 

«c 

0    ^    ^  Q^       ««• 

4.oojjD9uq  jad 

fO  C^  M 

•         • 

ro  e^  N» 

•        •        • 

OS 

• 

• 

0  oo  N  rs    0 
•    •    ■    >      • 

ajayouo)  jospAi^ 

^    N.    *»» 

-^  0 

'K  ci  0 

c^ 

^  0 

Q> 

•^000    ^ 

(4WJ.) 
144.&U9-I 

VO  IS.  0 

N  V. 

to  K  "^ 

0 

rv  «o 

N 

5  5  04  to     0\ 
<Vi  CM  0^  ^      ^O 

g 

< 

13 

<Vl   ^  >^ 

>..  r>.  Qo 

•^  «\  «o 

•^    «H   «^ 

0 
*o 

M 
JO 

1 

1 

^ 

b 

1 

i     1 
1      1 

5 

^o 

<2 

^ 

^3 

<!             d 

U 

Jr 

|D|Jd+D^^ 

^ 

1 

'g 

^ 

^ 

! 

^              ^ 

o 

0 

1 

1 

1 

1 
1 

1 

"5             1 

o 

«    «    « 

%    »  • 

»      »      « 

%    * 

* 

*     *     «     »         » 

O 

C»  V6  0 

VO  ^ 

0  Qo  0 

0 

K>  0^ 

^ 

^  ro  0  0%    0 

• 

"1    *     » 
5;  ^  0^ 

^  rs  IS 

0^  « 

«0 

'flo  *^  "n  \o    *n 

eo 

QZIQ 

H    X    \ 

»<  \ 

\\  ^ 

H 

\   \ 

H 

H  H  \  ^     H 

H 

»     «      » 

«    • 

«    «   * 

* 

»     « 

» 

•    »    *    »      » 

000 

«  >D 

0  Qq  ^ 

^ 

10  9^ 

^ 

0  fo  ^  ^     00 

0 
< 

«     «     • 
C^  (Ti  CN 

«^'»o 

•»    *    * 

0  N  ts 

« 
K 

00  V> 

^ 

rs 

ft    %    «    «       « 
00  N  IS  VO     « 

H 

■>» 

aaquin^pDJiuOQ 

9i 

CM                           ^ 

188 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


punoj  jad 

»^ 

JD 

^ 

f^ 

^ 

CVi             10 

/~\ 

\W4S^0  4S03 

Qi 
^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 
^ 

^ 

^ 

1 

^ 

d^dJOUOQ  ^ 

N       ^J- 

<b 

*«^ 

^ 

> 

h 

K           »*^ 

g 

•pAfiDjad 

•                   • 

• 

• 

•                            • 

Cj 

r 

^      "0 

N 

(\4 

>s 

"S, 

h 

^           fO 

^*^ 

s--' 

19^45  JD  +S03 

'»^ 

1-1 

^0    Vr> 

''^     ?b  ^ 

'Si^a 

^^ 

S>   Qi 

5a 

^  5    io 

a 

^^^ 

«:i«\»    ru 

N      W^   ^ 

<b^ 

^   «i 

'<^ 

«;i  <:*     N 

UpA  no) 

$<^  <r; 

<^      <   N 

^tvj 

so  so 

'^  «<i 

<^ 

5<     sd 

s 

a+ajouoQ  ^0 1S03 

(S)g)  Q,' 

eg)     (^(^  Q;^  (5)  S) 

^C|) 

(^. 

(|)^    ^ 

■ 
• 
>4 

puD  A4.j4UDn([) 

^     B^ 

5  S: 

!^5? 

KJ 

JO  so     «i 

K  cvj      0^ 

(V4      N   Vr^ 

VO-s' 

<^  «^ 

!5 

vo 

0^           Oi 

»J 

n3 

•pXnojod 

<V4 

N 

so 

52 

<V4 

• 

N  SO 

P 

i 

|334.S:^O^P'jnOji 

N 

N 

^ 

Oi 

so  ^^    (\j 

4.0OJJD3UJ1  J9d 

0^     0^  ."^ 

»0 

!3 

SO 

fvj 

(V4    ^ 

•    •             •     _• 

K 

cvi 

K 

!<s 

•^  N     fvi 

pd45^spunoj 

<*o     vo  w^ 

^ 

(\i 

tvi 

^ 

(3215  H0D9J0^) 

I 

^     >  fu 

N     -^  r^ 

> 

so  N 

0  K) 

^   ^ 

CM  N     ^ 

o 

^OOjJDduq  J  90 

«0      Vx^  lO 

9^      N  N 

c\j 

>   > 

«^   to 

U^  M- 

^f  -^     > 

aiaaoucx}  ^spXnQ 

^      «5i  ^ 

•                 •           ■ 

• 

<i  ^ 

•            • 

•           • 

•          •         *     • 

P 

»4 
H 

(433J  ) 

Q      SO  ^0 

<i      0^  ;^ 

>»- 

»0  > 

<i  N 

tVj  N 

rs 

<b      h  S> 

«^    <<>  'Ji 

«M 

CM   ^^ 

CVJ   ^ 

>  N 

U4.t)ua-i 

^      «to  N 

(\J     -^  > 

"^ 

<i   N 

N   >^ 

.  ^  t^ 

N  >      ^i- 

I              1 

tvj 

CVI    OJ 

f^ 

CVI    -^ 

(V4 

■s. 

"S^  "«>.     (\l 

-< 

«      ^ 

§    . 

« 

«  ^ 

§     .. 

^ 

«        « 

H 
H 

r  ^ 

1     1 

s  "3  i 

§  1 

^ 

^ 
^ 

1  ^ 

Sz: 

o 

|DUS4Dl^ 

^     1 

vS      ^  so 

1 

1^ 

5; 

^ 

1    1 

1     1 

•5   s  -^ 

1 

ll 

1 

k 

§      1 

t  i  ^ 

^ 

s^ 

•1 1 

^ 

s      1 

O 

(^     (^ 

«^ 

« 

« 

«« 

cl 

■^      1 

0 

VO      «0  so 

* 

:-  so 

^  «^     so 

1/5 

% 

V,. 

V* 

V> 

»*^  CVi       > 

CO 

^ 

VO 

<;i 

H 

'3219 

\     \  \ 

.^      •^.'^ 

.'^••o 

'^V 

\  *^ 

ft                      K 

•J 

vo 

(VJ 

^  N     so 

•< 

*;       ^    • 

*•          'i      ^^ 

^ 

^ 

^        % 

«    >,       « 

H 

Vft       Vo    ^ 

\0       »<^    ^ 

^ 

^ 

u^  > 

>   CV4       > 

jdqLun|sjpixi4uo3 

•n       > 

rvj 

<»0 

> 

N            vo 

QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


189 


piinoj  jad 

V 

§ 

Vi 

!5! 

\ml;9^4S03 

^ 
^ 

■? 

a43iOUOQ  p 

>  «> 

^ 

^ 

> 

'pA-no  jdd 

<VJ   CM 

■ 

rs 

• 

r 

«V*  CM 

f\4 

^ 

•s. 

g 

139+9  p  +9<y) 

'^ 

N 

1^  ^ 

5^          <2> 

^ 

ca 

!8 

1-4 

•<>  <^ 

i<>       <:i 

Ci 

OS 

J 

(•«pA-no) 

4^- 

«>•       § 

sii 

si 

<b 

a+aiouoQ  ^  4.so^ 

®® 

®      ® 

® 

® 

® 

»-4 

puD  A4.j4.uDnJD 

5a        ^ 

1 

:§ 

• 

CV4 

oi       '<^ 

> 

> 

N* 

U^ 

1 

94aJ3UQ3  p 

^0   ^ 

^   (VI 

<^  ^ 

■pAnojad 

!§Cj 

>  ^' 

5i 

|9ai930  spunoj 

N  > 

•^^ 

(az!9  H0D3  jo>) 
4oajjD9U!i  J9d 

v6  (vi 

1^^ 

•          • 

N 
(vi 

m 

^ 

H 

[M+g^spuoo^ 

(VI  (M 

^  ^ 

CM 

C3Q 

(9Z!5  40D©JO^) 

N  0^  >  cu. 

>N  <b  «^ 

<0  >  N 

> 

vo  (M  vo  ro  N  ^ 

M 

400JJD3UI1  Jdd 

>  r^  r^  CV4 

>  >  N5  cu 

w>  w^  >. 

> 

W^  ^h  f)  f«^  (VI  >% 

N 

CO 

aiaouo}  jo'spXn^ 

<;>  <:^  ^  <:i 

Q  ^  ^  ^ 

^  ^  ^ 

^ 

^   ^   <5>   Ci   ^   ^ 

U> 

n3 

(■^»«J) 

!:;!^K5j 

O  >  ^  ^ 

VO   bK  (V4   > 

•o  ^  (VJ 
>   ^  (Vj 

^ 

'^  f^  S)  "^  >  !*> 

'K  VO  «  c^j  N  ^i 

L(4.&U9-] 

»0  >  <^  N 

CM 

N 

§ 

^  r^  r«^  N>  »r^  t«i 

Sz: 

«  ^         . 

* 

.5 

^ 

^ 

1    §   1   1 

1    1 

S  s  : 

1 

H 

'§  ^    E    § 

<o           § 

<3  1 

<o 

§ 

OS 

o 

o 

o 

|DUd+D^M 

^^•^"^ 

^  "^ 

15  '^ 

1 

'o 

s  S  s  ^ 

■si  5  -S 

1  1 

1  "^ 

1^" 

i 

o 

o 

VO  N  oo  C^ 

•     »    *    * 

OS    N    <^   0^ 

*      *      » 

« 
^ 

^  V  ^  oo  tM  ^ 

^ 

QZ|g 

NO    V^    "^    l*> 

NO  «c>  >  rvj 

"«o''o'^ 

^ 

•^ 

NO   »^    W^   >    >    t"^ 

•J 

5 

H 

^ 

jd^ujnigpDa+uoQ 

VO 

»0 

»0 

1^ 

190 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


puno^  J9cl 

5 

ci 

<S 

1 

943JOUOQ  ^0 

> 

■si 

• 

1. 

1-1 

CspAno) 
a^ajouoQ  ip  4S03 
pub  X4.t4UDn() 

5S 

Si 

Hi 

§  .      1 

9+9JDU(r)  p 

•pKnoj9d 
(934.9  pspunoj 

>• 
^0 

^ 

^ 
^ 

00 

3 

a 

(9219  ipD9  -lOf) 
400JJD3UI'(J9d 

[994.9  ^spuno^ 

>!»  ^  > 

fvi<bevj 

«*^  C\J  OJ 

N 

M 

laz!9  qoD9Jo^) 

4.00JJD9U!1  J9d 

a^axsuo^jDspXrto 

^  »^  ^ 

>»•  »^  CVJ 

^  (Vj  ^  ^  SO     ^  N 
>  r^  M  (\j  >•     >  cvj 

\0  >►  N 
1*^  1^  (\j 

cvj  N  ^^  (\4  ^    t-i 

>   (VJ   CVJ  (VI  ^       -^ 

1 

^  <:>  «:i 

^  <5J  CJ  ^  ^"      ^  ^* 

^  ^  ^ 

^  <^  ^  ^  ^    Q 

t3 

»^   C\4  }«^ 

\0   ^   »<^ 

(VI  ^0 

(Vj  >.  N  ^  Ci      ^  Ci 
Oi  N  ^  >  ^      0^  >* 
ca  ^  ^  »o  >     ^  ^ 

CM  >  > 

>  ^  ^  'o  ^    0 

g 

•< 
» 

o 
o 

IDIJ9+DV^ 

5» 

If 

1 

1 

1 

1              1 

^       1 

F4 

OQ 

O 

O 

H 

M 

Q2I9 

(\j  cvj  k)  0)  ^     ^  cvi 
K>  W^  >|.  h)  l«)      \o  > 

w^  Wi  > 

*     *     *    *     •       * 

>  <VJ  0^  VO  N      Th 

W^  >  r^  »^  (VI     10 

jaqiun|^43Duu03 

^ 

0>                             ^ 

> 

^ 

>* 

N                                   (V4 

QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


191 


_ 

puno^  jdd 
\ga4Si0  4S03 

• 

■1 

943J0U0Q  p 

'pA'nojad 
|9a+9  p  4.SO0 

csi 

1-1 

(spAno) 

a^OlOUOQ  fi  4SO3 
pUD  X4.!4-UDn([) 

!8       ^% 

® 

1 

» 
o 

•pX-noj«d 
1^4.5^  spunoj 

N 

5 

40cyiD3U!i  J9d 
|M49^9puno^ 

DQ 

(3Z15  ipDSJO^) 

^oojjoauq  jdd 

KJ  ^   ''H       ^   0^  0<^ 

>  r^  1^     >  >^  ^ 

•         •         •              •         •         • 

<^  ^  0     ^  ^  ^ 

r^  N  0^ 

K)    01    'K 

^  ^  ^ 

•          • 

• 

n   ^   >   0^  «Ci 
t*^  <Vj  04  "^  *^ 

•           ■           •           •           • 

^  <i   ^  ^  Ci 

H 

i44.6u9-i 

>^  >  0^     b  ^  'O 

r*>  ^   <      2"   JVJ  0? 
<  <- 

fe  K>  5 
55  fe  5* 

N  r^  «^ 

W^  »<^  C> 
CVj    <^   f^ 

^ 

^^   *VJ   ^    >»   CVj   VO 
^O    <    <0    f\4    ^    Cq 

w>  >  >  ^  >  ? 

-<1 

1 

o 

a 

h 
O 

|DU©4DJ^| 

i5» 

to 

1 

1 

C     ^      ^ 
^ 

1     '     ' 

1 

1 

1 

1 

O 

t 

eo 

a 

QZig 

•    •    *       •    •    • 

>   ^   kV       v»    K^   > 

W>  V  >      iO  »^  «v< 

«    *     % 

«o  «V4  e*> 

V  >  »o 

«      »      » 

^   (V4   ^ 

>  >  r^ 

a 
> 

^,     *     «     »     %     % 

^  <M  0^  r^  >  Y 
>  Y  f»)  0)  (Vi  cvi 

jdqLun|sjpmiU03 

55 

192 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


ifv 

puno^  jQd 

?5 

§ 

5 

_^_^ 

\W9  :^0  +503 

• 

<i; 

«b 

^ 

■B 

'*^ 

94»J0U0Q  ^0 

!!) 

^  . 

1 

•pAno  J9d 

> 

19349  jD  4.S03 

's 

»-4 

ir> 

Cb 

<:i 

"Ci 

^ 

f^ 

^                         Ci 

a 

fs 

^ 

NO 

^ 

0^ 

Vi 

^                 04 

,1 

TspAftQ^i 

K 
^ 

OS 

<^ 

§ 

$ 

OS 

cvJ                   <b 

8 

HOJOUOQ  ^  iSOQ 

® 

® 

® 

® 

® 

®  (§)                ®       1 

• 

puD  A+j+uonf) 

H5 

NO 

1 

^ 

CVi 

vo 

15             ^ 

NO                            > 

S 

94.ajouo3  ^ 

<^ 

^4 

CT) 

•pAnoaQd 

o^ 

N' 

o 

|W4-9iospunoj 

0^ 

c^ 

M 

s" 

(9219  43  D3  JO^) 

§ 

400JJD9UI1  JSd 

> 

> 

[994.9^  spunoj 

fvj 

CVI 

« 

(92!9  M^o^JO^) 

N   CVI 

N    > 

^J     >  0^  «o 

^fv  «^ 

»^  0^ 

<vj 

(vj  o^  u^  N^    ^«o>o 

rt 

4.00JJD9UI1  J9d 

«VJ    CV4 

CM   C\4 

CVj      04    v»    >s 

<Vj    V. 

(Vj    V. 

CV4 

CVJ  >»  •>.  ■**    ftj  ^  >• 

^    ^ 

<:i  <^ 

^    ^  <^  <:i 

^   Ci 

^  ^ 

^ 

^  ^  ^  ^    ^^0 

(4S«J) 

<:i  N 

?a  i^^j 

^    «o  ^  N 

f*^  ^ 

1*^  OJ 

<VJ 

c:*  >  k^  ^    f^hvo 

2>  ^ 

<b    cvi  cvj  ^ 

^  ^ 

^ 

•>.  N  N)  tvj    NjO^O 

L(4.6U3**1 

0^  > 

•^      >   >   N) 

9>   04 

>x 

*Vj    CVj   0^   <\J           CV4(r> 

-< 

O 

O 

O 

IDua+D^M 

.5: 

1 

1 

1 

•1 

11 

II 

II 

1 

i^  t    ft   »    *» 

§     S     5     6      b 

1  -  «  -  1 

o 

t 

5: 

.5; 

• 

1^ 

1^ 

5: 

-5 

$:  »  5  s  ^ 

00 

O 

O 

• 

<^  «;i  ^  ^ 

CO 

^-zxq 

«    « 

•     »     »       *     •     * 

N    0^    VO      0^    Kry  IS 

>  r«^  r*^    N^  r»^  cvj 

*^   CVJ 

^   CVj 

NO 

V.     V.     ^     V. 

1     R     ft      ft     ?^^ 

•■  •   »   * 

5 

• 

Vo   ^^    fs    > 

rrj   tr^   rv^  <V| 

jdqiun)g43nj4U03 

NO 

CVJ 

N 

vo 

rj 

VO 

QUANTITY  AND  COST  OF  EXCAVATION 


193 


1 

1. 

puno^  J9d 

9pJ0UOQ  ^ 

•pA*n>j9d 
JW+9P+S03 

»-4 

1 

rspAno) 
puD  A4.!4.uDn([) 

® 

% 
® 

15 

® 
1 

t^                   l\|                  Ki     ' 

•J 

p 

94AJ3UO;)  30 

•pX'nojod 

(994.930  9punoj 

(9219  4DD9  JOJ.) 
4.OOJ  JD9UI1  J9d 

l^+^30spunoj 

(8219  M0D9JO3) 
4.00JJD9UI']  JOd 

cvj  0^  ^0 
CVj  **  >* 

^  ^  ^ 

«V4  k> 

•         • 

0^«0^     C^»«>IO     ^^N 
">.>••>.     ^^Vfc's.     fVj>,<«.» 

^^^'     ^^^     ^^'^ 

5  55 

>  ?>  ^ 
•c>  N  Ki 

N)    »«>    > 

2f5 
*  > 

II^^^U?? 

•< 

in 

o 

a 
ft. 

o 

|DUd4.D|/>| 

1 

1 

1 

1     f    ^^ ' ' 

1      1      1 . , 

^          Q^          ii 

\  1 

CO 

^zig 

k     w     »  ~ 

so  "^  N 

K>   1^   (U 

so  > 

•^  ^  ^    '^  N  >     S 

n   CVj   (>j 

^  \:i  N 

jaqLun|g4QDJiu03 

^ 

i?                   ^                  ^ 
>                   '«>                  <^ 

13 


194 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


puno^  Jdd 

1 

• 

^ 
^ 

•pXno  jdd 

(VI 

T 

pa+g^+soQ 

•< 

1 
(spAno) 

K 

.<SD 

§ 

® 

K 
® 

® 

puD  A4.»+uDnJD 

^ 

^ 

5 

•V. 
v.. 

!Jl 

1^ 

g 

1 

•pAnoaod 

<0 

1394.9^0  spunoj 

^ 

(az!9  4003  aoj.) 

• 

^00JiD9U}1  J9d 

[994930  9puno^ 

CQ 

g 

H 

1 

OQ 

(9219  M^D9J0j.) 

^oojjDSuii  jad 
apiouoQ  jDspAn;) 

•                  ■ 

<b  ^  vo 

"^   •>.   -^ 

■           •      ^ * 

^   ^   ^ 

•V.     >* 

•           • 

h 

• 

N 

• 

N 

• 

44.Bu9-| 

2?  *^ 
•0  ^ 

&   ^   ^ 
^   ^   N 

Y   >   > 

N  N 

04 

^ 

§ 

5  ^  ^  't^  '<^  ^  *0 

•< 

g 

JDU3+Dl^ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 
•5 

O 
O 

1 

1 

i 

1 

1 

O 

• 

1^           ^  ^  <:i 

i6 

CO 

s 

03 

-SZIQ 

»  •  » 

<i  >  N 
r^  (Vi  oi 

(\4  CVi 

• 

« 

«V4 

•< 

H 

>                   K^    >    > 

j8qiun|g40D44U03 

(VI          M* 

«V4 

0^ 

.^ 

^ 

CHAPTER  VIII 

RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 

Upon  the  rates  of  progress  of  excavation,  placing  masonry  and  pipe 
laying  depend  largely  the  amount  of  overhead  and  supervisory  expense, 
interest  on  working  capital,  rentals  of  machinery  and  often  the  amount 
of  profit  or  loss  upon  the  contract.  Many  times,  the  cost  of  pump- 
ing is  nearly  proportionate  to  the  length  of  time  the  work  is  being 
prosecuted.  The  amount  of  inconvenience  to  the  public  may  also 
be  about  directly  proportionate  to  the  same  period.  In  drawing 
contracts,  it  is  important  for  the  engineer  to  form  an  accurate  judg- 
ment as  to  the  rate  of  progress  which  can  be  attained,  that  the  date 
of  completing  the  work  may  be  so  fixed  as  to  provide  a  reasonable 
length  of  time,  thus  making  it  unnecessary  to  collect  liquidated  damages 
for  delay  and  to  prevent  an  unreasonably  high  charge  on  accoimt  of 
bonus  for  completion  ahead  of  the  contract  date.  It  is  equally  impor- 
tant for  the  contractor  to  form  an  accurate  opinion  of  the  rate  of  prog- 
ress which  he  can  make,  in  order  that  he  may  make  an  intelligent 
estimate  of  the  cost  of  the  work  and  a  proposal  which  shall  be  low  and  at 
the  same  time  pro\dde  a  reasonable  profit. 

While  it  is  not  possible  to  give  the  reader  detailed  information  as  to 
conditions  existing  in  Louisville,  it  may  be  helpful  to  him  to  know  what 
rates  of  progress  were  attained  in  the  building  of  a  number  of  sewers. 
Accordingly,  such  data  as  are  capable  of  presentation  within  a  reasonable 
space  have  been  compiled  in  Table  37,  page  201. 

In  these  computations  the  number  of  working  days  has  been  calculated 
by  subtracting  the  Simdays  from  the  total  number  of  calendar  days  from 
the  date  of  breaking  the  ground  to  the  date  of  completion  of  excavation 
to  grade,  and  does  not  include  the  time  consumed  in  assembling  the 
plant  and  backfilling,  cleaning  up  and  repaving  after  excavation  was 
completed.  The  quantity  of  excavation  has  been  arbitrarily  assumed 
as  that  included  between  planes  6  in.  on  each  side  outside  the  extreme 
limits  of  the  required  masonry  section.  The  time  needed  for  placing 
the  concrete  was  reckoned  from  the  date  of  placing  the  first  masonry 
to  that  of  placing  the  last,  and  although  the  quantity  of  concrete  per 
linear  foot  given  in  the  table. is  that  required  for  the  sewer  barrel,  ac- 
cording to  the  cross-section  shown  on  the  plans,  the  quantity  of  masonry 
placed,  per  day,  is  computed  from  the  quantity  of  concrete  paid  for, 
including  that  in  manholes  and  other  additional  quantities. 

195 


196 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


a 

•< 

M 

PS 

IS 

H 
PS 
H 


O 

H 

P 

H 


03 

» 
PS 

o 
o 

£ 

O 
« 


CO 
CO 

n 


V 


S  d   M 


S.4J 


^  5.Sa 


3  ^  > 

O    d    •!  .O 

a  3 


•s  ^  S  S  -5 


5 

GQ 


:Sg 

»        •        ■ 

:     §  : 

t            ■            • 

■                        ■            ( 

■  —  « 

.        . 

t-i 

•  e«  F- 

• 

t-i 

•  •» 

.       .   fo 

•«* 

•   N 

■  t^ 

oo 

.  o 

.   lO 

cs 

•    »H 

•  ^^ 

o 

04 


00  <0 


to 


^ 


o 


CO 

to 
oo 

C4 


eo 

Oft 


-H 


CI 


•^CDOOON-^Sr*©© 

iHf-<i--tC)C4oe<icieoco 


coeocoeocoeo^^^^io        ^lO^ 


^  00 


.a 

00 

I 

CO 


00 

I 
CI 


•^  o 
00  •-< 

CO  CI 


00  » 


M 

00 

I 

CO 


O 

I 


5 


-2 


CO  '"' 

>«^ 

o 

n 

OS 

^ 

>  a 

«8    O 

O  -r! 

M    *» 

H 

d 
d 


« 
B 

55 


s 

§ 

93 
9 


d 
O 


5 


as 
o 


^  ^  d 

u  9  c9 

o  o  S 

PS  0^  O 


8 


p 


CL4  OS 


5 

d 


•a 

-g 

k> 

o 
o 

2 

"3 


00 

a 

00 


11 

,  d  JJ 


X  oo 


*«    ft)   ^ 


t  -V  M  M 


O    O    eS    b    u    p 

o   o  d  <  o  o 

"  PS  PS  CyW  PS  P:S 


rf2 


^   ■«*    kl 

o  a  A 


o 


> 

o 


o 
o 
e 


si 


*  • 

>  > 

d  d 

o  o 

00  • 

d  d 


d   o 


bfi 


a; 
d  13 

^    eS 


s « 

S'd 


^  d 

O     O     fl 

O    d    e8 


«8 


00 

X 


92 
»o 

X 

d 

00 


eS 


CI 


CI   N   -^f 

1^     9^     ir^ 

XXX 

iH    CI    © 


•^       cico^udcot^ooo) 


o 

^  ra  JS    V    O    O 

Ill  ills 

ffl  iz:  M  o  o  ^  jg 

»       «       •      •    -^       ■       > 


> 

o 


o  ^ 

OO 


s=  g 

o 
d 
■*» 


•2 


d  M 

O  ♦* 

d  S 

d  a 

O  W 


2=:  £ 
033 

«  «  e 


o 

d 


CI 


d    - 

Is 


S  >k 


d  .0 


o-t       cico^tovt^ooa}o<-«M 

tlt-l  iHiHiH*H<^iHiHiHCICICI 


CO  't  »o 

CI  C4   C4 


d 

•  mm 

OB 

-a 

s  *- 

X  % 
9 

CG 

d 

^^ 

CI 


o. 

O 

V 

5    *> 

a  CO 

o 
■»»       t^ 

H  d     • 

•S-3  W 

§S  ^ 
o* 

«  o  w 

CI 


RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


197 


•s 


I 

s 

< 


Q 

M 

o 
z 

•J 

H 


O 
O 

O 

g 


<0 
CO 

a 


1^^- 
^l|l 


if 


3  -s  -a  ^ 

aS    1^    >    a 
o    (]    aS  .O 


CO 


o 


S  -8  I  £  s 


M 


5 


OQ 


ri 

OQ 


08    o 


1 

o 


^H  04 


Oft 


O  O  <D 

«d  d  CO 


O  00         1-f 


M 


s 

« 


to 


V  O         O 


-*   CO 


04 


00  i-i 

ci^cl, 


CI 


M 
00 

I 

CO 


.a  ^ 

00   00 

CO  00 


Si 


.£3 
00 


Si 

1 

I 


O 


a 


'H       a» 


OS 


o 

Oft 


•a 


s 


a 

I 


-a 


M    « 

>»  • 
•a 


EQO 


s  a 


I 

s 


s 
s 

«8 
o 


S  o 


e 

o 

3 

0«Q 


S 


-  -a 

u  O 

00  e^ 


3 


I 


e  b 


o  (S  "^  ffl 


«8 


CO 
CO 


a    .a 


»  >»2 


d 

00 


•»<   00   ^ 
00      •   ^ 

^  l^  »- 


a  a 

CI  M 

00  00 

X  X 

1^  t- 


«8 


lO  ^ 


V    4* 


^    d 

M  —  _ 

•H    ,-1    "O 


C4 


•  ••*  ^^  iS    *' 


X 

CI 


•m  C4 


X  X^ 


d 

s 


d 
d 

9 


d 
H 

QQ 


d 
O 

V  d 

•d  d 

d  § 

CO  a  o 

*  d  5 


I" 


O    h 


03 


^ 


OO 
CI 


J<  ,-    - 
©  tJ  d 

05  "rt  "O 

2  •? 

s    "  kl 

«  <;  oi 


M 


*<2 


•1 


o 


a 

•a 


0 

•s 


1  a 

a  ^' 

H  2 

>>  d 

«  d 

i  ^ 

8 


IB 


B 
^ 


d 
d 
ec 

eS 

o 
O 


c 


•-»  d  .S 

^  d  J 
OD  h  ^ 


i-t         CI 

eo       CO 


CO 
CO 


^ 


d 

o 

CO 


« 

M 

u 

O 


o 
>  o 

u  a 

«  o 
^O 

^2 

o  *« 

•as 

ta  2  .- 
d  o  fc. 

ACQ 


5 

O 
If 


eo  CO 


IS 


z 

d 

d 
H 

JO 

ta 

CO 


«8 

d 

eS 

•s 


o 
S 


l'^-^ 


Si 

e8    •»  ^      •  •*»   ^ 

tt   4»  «*«    «a  '*'  «,H 


eS 
••• 

T3 


O  CO 


«     V 

d  a 
d   « 

d  o; 

•  OQ 
<0 

§     .d 

H  8  o 
2  ® 


-■I 

o 


o 

M 
08 
o 

M 

o 


^  E  § 


I- 


ii3 
•3 


r^   ^    ^  <   •« 

o  a  QQ        »i3  »< 


d  0^ 


^   CI 


9;i: 


K 

•9 

CD 

i 

"S 

'a 

M 

^ 

C 

h 

am 

S, 

d 
"e 

1 

M 

IM 

•5 

^a 

>»  ^ 

iJ 


198 


AMERICAN  SEWERAOE  PRACTICE 


S 

fH 

&  ^ 

a    -  "* 
W  2  *i" 

o  t^  ■* 

S  ^'  CO  ®  2  ra  «  .    • 

<^  2  -^^  fl  2  -^  2  -g  I  r  2  ;i  -^^  2  2  2  -  2  2  o  2  §  P 

W-S-g2^8^   Srj'l^S'^^'^'^eoeo2«o-1 

|H    HH  H  H  H  H  H  U  PcS  H  H  M  «  »  »  H  Pe)  M  M  H  H  H  M 

tf«^•o«^t*o6o>OrHNco•^»dcc>^«Iado)0»^c4co^lO 
^  csJNNNNNNWcoeocoeoeoeowcoco^^'*^^^ 
O 


CO 
H 

u 

Si 


CO  cooocococo  oooo  aoco« 

•»  .  —  .  »  *»  *  m  mt  »»  ^^ 

•  •..••  "  "»  »  WW  ^  »"™ 

^'  >       ►       «.'  .J  ».■       ^*  w'  ^H     p-«  ^^  kJ  " 

^        88o8>;        ►        ^   t        ^  0J0>  o>        2© 

i3     «»-iS     «     WW     «        8  8  8     b1 

■>.*.*«  a  CD«  a  gg  g  «o 

.2S  —  =  i{       *      JJ®       ®  «*6«  m.Sm 

»^""eococoeocopoeoeo«wcoeOeoeowcococoo6 

Ag  ftftaaaaAaaaQ,ftftftOiaa&o.aa 

S         SS$99$9C>©9OO0Po0OO00r-i 
S'322^^^^^»^5oaaa>aaoo>aaSa»ooaa 

0    .  d  d  d  13  d  d  d  d  d  d  si  d  d  d  q  d  d  d  d  fl  S 
a:     ddddddddddddddddddddr 

OnOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 
m3    l«MMlMMt«b0beMM&CbCt(IMMbilMMMMtfi 

d^ddddddddddddddddddddd 
»QQHHWHHHHWHHHHHHHHHHH»H 

*H   c4eQ'i«<io(or<^o6oid^'c«c<o^ud<diNlQOo>p'-<ej 


RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS  199 

The  importance  of  providing  machinery  best  adapted  to  the  work  is 
well  illustrated  by  the  progress  in  excavation  made  under  Contract  2. 
This  work  was  prosecuted  at  two  openings,  the  physical  conditions 
being  about  the  same  at  both,  except  that  Section  a  was  about  5  ft. 
deeper  than  Section  6.  The  machinery,  however,  was  quite  different. 
The  cableway  used  on  Section  a  was  very  heavy  and  did  not  prove  as 
well  adapted  to  the  work  as  the  stiff-legged  derricks  used  on  Section  b. 
The  quantity  of  excavation  on  Section  b  was  239.5  cu.  yd.  per  day  where- 
as on  Section  a  it  was  186  cu.  yd.,  the  rate  of  progress  being  10  ft.  and 
6.9  ft.  per  day,  respectively. 

James  Collier,  the  general  superintendent  of  the  National  Con- 
struction Co.,  gives  the  following  information  concerning  the  work  done 
'  by  a  Buckeye  trenching  machine  in  Denver,  Colo.  In  a  section  where 
the  average  cut  was  about  8-1/2  ft.  and  the  soil  was  a  sandy  loam 
requiring  no  bracing,  the  record  was  this: 

Trench,  linear  feet 18,196  ft. 

Distance  cut  by  machine,  ft 17,474  ft. 

Time  machine  in  operation,  hours 253 .  25  »  52  per  cent. 

Time  machine  idle,  shifting,  hours 46.00  =  9  per  cent. 

Time  machine  idle,  repairs,  hours 27 .25  »  6  per  cent. 

Time  machine  idle,  other  causes,  hours 159.50  =  33 percent. 

Total  working  hours 486 .00  —  100  per  cent. 

Ave.  lin.  ft.  cut  per  hr.  worked 69 .  00 

Ave.  lin.  ft.  cut  per  day  for  total  working  days.  323.00 

The  following  figures  are  given  for  a  section  where  the  average  cut  was 
from  6  to  8  ft.  and  the  soil  was  a  hard  clay: 

Distance  cut  by  machine,  ft 8,819 

Time  machine  in  operation,  hours 95 .  50  =«    35  per  cent 

Time  machine  idle,  shifting,  hours 17.50  =      7  per  cent. 

Time  machine  idle,  repairs,  hours 71 .25  »    26  per  cent. 

Time  machine  idle,  other  causes,  hours 86 .  75  —    32  per  cent. 

Total  working  hours 271 .00  =  100  per  cent. 

Ave.  lin.  ft.  cut  per  working  hour 92 .3 

Ave.  lin.  ft.  cut  per  day  for  total  working  days.  353.00 

Tunnels. — As  all  work  within  a  tunnel  must  be  done  by  artificial 
light,  it  can  be  prosecuted  as  well  by  night  as  by  day.  On  this  account, 
it  is  customary  to  employ  two  or  even  three  shifts  upon  such  work,  thus 
greatly  increasing  the  rate  of  progress.  Upon  relatively  small  tunnels, 
those  under  8  ft.  in  diameter,  a  rate  of  progress  of  driving  of  from  3  to 
10  ft.  per  shift  may  be  attained  in  a  single  heading,  the  average  for  such 
work  being  perhaps  5  ft.  If  two  shifts  per  day  are  employed  the  ex- 
cavation may  occupy  one  and  the  placing  of  masonry  the  other  so  that 
the  net  progress  per  shift  will  be  one-half  that  of  driving  the  tunnel,  or 


200  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

say  5  ft.  per  day  on  the  average.  The  information  relating  to  rate  of 
progress  in  tunneling  in  different  materials  which  is  given  in  Table  36 
has  been  obtained  from  many  som*ces.  An  inspection  of  the  table  will 
show  that  the  cost  as  well  as  rate  of  progress  depends  on  so  many  condi- 
tions that  even  an  experienced  engineer  will  be  reluctant  to  claim  close 
accuracy  for  his  estimates  of  what  a  tunnel  in  some  materials  or  under 
some  working  conditions  will  cost.  In  such  cases,  the  practice  of  the 
best  engineers  is  to  make  their  figures  decidedly  liberal,  and  then  hope 
the  actual  costs  will  not  overrun  them. 


RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


201 


O 
1^ 


00 

H 
QQ 

H 


UOI4.OAIOOX2 


UOl+OAOOX^ 


(cpXno) 

4.00J  aYMui*]  jdd 

UOI+DAOOX3 


2s 


^ 


ll 
it 


1 


«  tf 
M 


<5^ 

II 


tl 


I 

I 


I 


II 


«??»Q  «o 


§ 


53 


^ 


Si 


eg      N 


!5  S^ 


<Vi 


<V4 


tvi 


I- 


I 


E 


s 


K         t^         N    ki     ^ 

0?         S         V     h"     ««5 
'O         **)         •*>    fo     'o. 


(4Mj)4+uo|^uad 


> 

^ 


tV4 


9) 
^6 


58  ^ 


awj)4+uonj»d 
44Bu9'^   uinuiiXY)^ 


aod  J3M89  joq4£u9i 


^ 
^ 
^ 


Si 


(spAno) 
Xdq  6ui)iJoy^jdd 


■" 


»0 


ft 


R 


5 


§     rj 
>      N 


01 


N 
(VI 


N 


*6   ^'. 


s 


(VJ 
K 


CVJ- 
CV4 


CVl  CVI  >   ^      »c> 


VQ  \a  Q  >f.     >* 
<j^  0^  0^  va     ^ 


On  0^  vc     ^ 


^ 
^ 


2?  S?  ^ 
^  ^>  OS 


ON 


§ 


R 


^   -^  N 
VTk  vr>  > 


(+daj  )  M4.6udi 


c>  N  :^  ^ 
k>  <b  >  ^ 

«0    >   «0   9^ 

cvT      <^ 


tVi 

V 


<5> 


CM      N 

cvT    <' 


CVl 


^ 


CVj 


CVl 


OS 


CVj 


i5! 


921.9 


U01«iAlQ 


jaquin^y^  4.ODJ4.U0;) 


•    »    »    « 

vo  vo  ^  »^ 
"      »      »      » 

>K     \     >K     H 

CVl  cvi  »r>  ^ 

">    •    *    » 

'*i  «<^  5.  J^ 


<b 
5!^ 


^  o^  vo. 

\   \  \ 
*    •    > 

OO  v^  »*> 

b  ID  t^ 


5 

CVl 


^cvi  ^cvj  "cvj 

\  \  N 

a  »  • 

CVj  Vvi  CVj 


•      »    V    »      « 
CVl      ^  ^  %     *^ 


"cvj 


»      »      * 

^  On  «b 


^  -ft 


^  -ft 


-ft   ^ 


«Vi 


O       VQ 

CM 


5i 


Vi 

Y 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


§1 


4.00J  jDaui"!  jad 


U8J      f|S 


(■"irt 

+oojaoaui-|  jad 


S  m  § 


(ioaj)  q^Sua-i 


jaquiON  +50j;uo;) 


jrj: 


RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


203 


H 
1-1 

o 

1-^ 


PC 


O 

00 


5C 


T 


n 

U 
D 
« 
H 

QQ 

o 
O 

o 

cG 

00 

H 
K 
O 

O 


I. 

CO 


< 


^■■^ 

^^^ 

-5— " 

^^ 

if 

1 

4! 

-^ 

<^ 

V 

•ie 

Ci 

g 

1 

UOI4.0AOOX3 

1 

1- 

J-o 

1 

•^4 

■§ 

> 

:^ 

poH+si^ 

^ 

i 

♦: 

^ 

1 

1 

1 

i^" 

^ 

■^ 

c 

^ 

^s 

0 

1^ 

51: 

? 

■l 

">4 

^^ 

^ 

.s 

^ 

$ 

-1- 

Js 

(-QpAno) 

'O 

^*> 

^. 

i 

ru 

4 

^ 

> 

<n 

0^ 

1 

1 

vo 

81 

(Sp/OD) 

4.OOJ  JID9UI-J  Jdd 

1 

«^ 

K 

wi 

1 

oi 

«h 

UOI4.DADDXg 

"S 

^ 

' 

•< 

(4-»QJ  ) 

4 

5 

^h 

> 

"o 

goj 

5s 

jiOMog  ^  M4-daQ 

<V4 

SI 

8  *^ 

-1- 
1$  »> 

fVj  (\4  «^ 

1 

(4doj)44.uo|^j9d 

^ 

^ 

Je 
5 

(433j)l|4.U01^J9d 

J5 

0^ 

44&U9']   luniuixD^ 

^0 

>0  -2 

• 

•>* 

cvj 

1 

add  jdMdg  j044Jdu3'^ 

^ 

^r 

(spXno) 

^ 

::>  1 

Xd(J  Buivijoy^jdd 

5" 

^1 

< 

5 

R 

Xjuocd^  94aiouo3 

vo 

01  > 



"^ 
^**^ 

!^!2 

1 

C*qi)    _. 

*c^ 

5S 

■^ 

St 

400jjodui']  ji^ 

• 

* 
Hi 

*     •     % 
>•  ^  ^ 

^     1 

^ 

It 

•          • 

Q    (V) 

1 

png 

> 

5.. 

0> 

«b 

^  *«^ 

k  **^ 

^0  (VJ 

I 

(spA'no)  4J00J  jDdu  I  -] 

« 

^ 
^ 

5R 

S 

§1 

>• 

01 

<;i 

• 

v. 

ci  ^ 

^* 

Ci* 

^  ^ 

^ 

^  ^ 

ci  ^ 

"s 

N 

2>A 

»>  N>  r^ 

CVJ     g 

,^ 

VO  N 

c;> 

b  ^ 

vo   (Vi 

■« 

(+9aj)q+6ua-| 

<V4 

2} -5 
i 

>• 

01 

>   < 

1 

» 

« 

k     « 

> 

» 

• 

ft 

ft  ft 

ft 

^O 

^ 

t^    Ci 

<h 

<fe 

«n  ^ 

vo 

,«.v 

VO 

•b 

<b 

N   K 

VQ 

«o 

VQ    Vft 

VO 

*  <«, 

'^'•^ 

jiOAAOg    ^0 

\ 

\ 

H    \ 

v 

\ 

\  V 

ft 

•''  l1 

92»9 

• 

• 

rs 

ft 

ft     ft 

<Q  vo 

^4? 

"vo  v»^ 

"vo 

uoisiAin 

.       .        .Vi 

1 

J3quin|s4  4DDJ14.U03 

^ 

•<> 

> 

'^ 

^ 

fV4 

J 

204 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


>* 
» 


P 

o 

1^ 
z 

M 
CO 

03 
H 

H 
GQ 

H 

Pi 


O 

o 

< 


UOJ+OAOOX^ 


I 
I 


I 
1 


I 


I 
I 

I 


11 


u 

h 


I 


(spAno) 
Acq  6ui>{jo/\^jidd 

UOI+OAODX^ 


N     r^ 


^ 

»«^ 

>K  N 

<a  l«^ 

S^i 

V. 

K  t^ 

<;i  < 

h 

►^ 

CVj   (\) 

<b  Vo 

(•spAno) 
4.00J  aodui*]  ^9d 

UOI4.DADOX2 


«.•        •      •      ,•      •      ••      •.•  • 


ft4 


(4.Mij)n4-uo|^jdd 


CVJ       (Vi 


N  va 


(VJ  (VI 


CVJ 


Us 


5 

Oi 


o 

n 
o 

O 

P 


1—1 
Oi 

.i. 

O 

05 


§ 

VC 


^«^ 

^ 


5! 


I 


J9d  J9MdQ  jDl(4£u9'] 


55 


c^4 


(•spA-na) 
Acq  6ui>^ioy^jdd 


kS.  <v5 


«0   ^ 


z 

o 

o 
o 

ft* 

b 

O 


< 


« 

N 


cvi 


01      (Vi 


^  N 


CVJ  ryj 


(spX-no)  400J  jDdu  11 


vo  N  N 

>  >  > 
^  <s  ^• 


^  ^o  ^     ^  >^  "s. 
^  ^  «;i-     <:»  ^'  ^ 


CVJ  N 


N    pi   ^   CVJ 
^J-    Nj   Kj   (Vi 

^'   ^   ^   ^* 


(+oaj)m.6u3-i 


«*^  <<>  *<^ 

CVJ  1*^  o> 
cvT 


CVJ 


vo  N  ^      ^  V.  00 
<>>  ^  c\i     '^s  ^  vo 

>    '^   CVj       ^   >>.  (\j 


^5 


r^  CVJ 
-  V  ^ 


VO   ^  C^   N 

^  <;b  K  c\j 

«^   ^h   ^  N 


CO 


9719 


J  ^  vo 

«<s 


(VJ  (Vj 


C  ^  VO 


^   \h   >      S«^   CVJ       ^  ^h 


(Vj   0^ 


H    H    H 
%     »      « 

CVJ  vo  vo 


*f)  Ifi       VO    ^f.    \|. 


V'cvj 


^  vo 

•    « 


%    *    %    • 

*o  N  ^  <^ 

so  >«^  ^  »^ 


U0I5IAIQ 


•<i       ^   ^       ^  -<4 


Ji9qujn)s4  43DJ4.U03 


5 


vo 


vo 


RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


205 


P 

o 


g 

o 

CO 

< 


o 

e 

■< 


O 


00 

O 

O 

O 

OQ 

H 
O 

P^ 
o 

H 


CO 
H 


? 

.^ 

£ 

i 

■1 

.^ 

^ 

1 

^ 

UOI4.0AOOX3 

4 

1 

Si 

1 

i 

^^5 

Carson  Machine. 
Carson  Machine. 
5tiff  Leg  Derrick, 
hand. 

i^  ill 

^1 

11 

1 

■ 

CcpAno) 

(Vi    ^h  aj  N 

5I- 

1^ 

N 

N  N  <V4  ^ 

(vj  ■ 

^   ^;::  ^ 

<^ 

• 

Q^ 

u^  <v3.«<^  <o 

"^ 

UOj+DAOOX-g 

u^     ^  h  cvi 

> 

cvJ 

SO   ^    (Vi   ^ 

> 

(•spXno) 
4.00J  aD9ui-^  jdd 

CVJ     >  cvi  ^ 

>    s  s  ^ 

* 

vo  >^  *o  •*> 

VO 

UOJ4.DAD3X2 

(4-»9j) 

U^     N  VQ  (vj 

CVJ 

K 

V, 

^  r^  <\j  so 

<^ 

jQMdg  Jo  i|ida(] 

5 

S 

<b 

^  c6  ^  M^ 

CU    ^    <Vi    >N, 

<VJ 

(499J)  q4.uo^Jdd 

s 

^ 

S 

> 

^ 

i{4.6ud~(  uinLuiu![/^ 

!^ 

(^aj)4+uo|^J9d 

? 

0^ 

0^ 

(pay)  Xdq  BumoM 
Jdd  >idMdgjoi|4.bU9^ 

/ * V 

>*     ^  <b  ^^ 

>1 

o«> 

**>**>  0^  ^ 

'FT" 

fv3    ^*  so  o> 

:S 

S" 

CVJ 

$  «^  '^^  ^i 

^ 

(cpAno) 

vo     Kj  so  ^^ 

N 

N 

5:> 

^   0^   so  ^ 

c> 

ADQ  6ui>|jo^jad 

«f>      Ci  vo  > 

«0 

V. 

^ 

N   N   *0   *0 

so 

XjUOSO^  943J10UO3 

^     »«5  cvi  cv3 

K 

>■ 

^j:  rS  (\3  < 

^ 

?a  ^  !fe 

Q> 

S   N   N   N 

u^  «<>  u^ 

• 

h  ^^  r^  ►^ 

w  «<>  jvi 

CV)   (Vj   (U   <V) 

1034.9 

N^    -.    h^ 

(\4   (Xj    (\)   cq 

fapXno)400jJDdui-| 

^  N  V  <<>  ^ 
^  ^  ^  r^  (vj 

^"  cS  05  ^  <S 

0.56 
0.54 
017 

vo 

0.53 
0.39 
0./8. 

5 
^ 

^  >  >  ^ 
>  >  >  > 

^  ^  ^  <:$ 

soTv7 

S>  <^  h  IJi  ^ 

Ci  so  ^ 

V 

^  (Vi  <to  1*^ 

Sb  ^  »<^  "^^ 

►^  Vfs 

(4.a9j  )  m-6ua-| 

jj.  >.  (\i  oi  5. 
«Ci         vo  ^  N 

^fJ§ 

Nj  2>  <vj  r^ 

t>  <b  <:i  >i 
>  0^  *0  (Vj 

v!  vo 

J9M09     ^ 

*     «     »     •     » 

<:i  IS  c>  ^  Q> 

(Vj  ^  r»> 

so 

«    k    « 

^  ^l-  ^ 

OZI9 

vo  U)  «0  ^).  h) 

N  <o  1^ 

VO 

so  Vr^  N)  N) 

^  so  vo  so 

SC    ^Tk 

UO|?IAlQ 

^           ^     VJ    >J 

^ 

-^ 

^    -A      S)     '^ 

^ 

jdqtunjvj  4.odj4U03 

18 

< 

R 

206 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


U 


B 
o 
1^ 

z 
S 

H 
QQ 

» 


« 

1 

1 

H 

^ 

s 

UOt+OAOOX^ 

v3 

1 

v: 

1 

i-o 

S 
1 

1 

• 

1 

pOM+«W 

^ 

1 

^ 

^ 

5 

«e 

C«pXno) 

^ 

^ 

C^ 

f^ 

<a 

N 

w^ 

AVOQ  DUD^JO^Jdd 

K 

<b 

^ 

• 

'^  1 

UOI+DADOXg 

^ 

V. 

<Vi 

>v 

N 

> 

(spXnD) 

^ 

<0 

\> 

Ci 

N 

4.0OJ  JD9UI.1  jad 

> 

• 

• 

^0 

^ 

w^ 

ru 

^     1 

UOI4.DADOX2 

2 

(+»^J ) 

'^ 

■>» 

»«s 

»^ 

•^ 

C\J 

•^    1 

jaMog  ^0  H+cldQ 

C^ 

5    1, 

(4.aoj)44uo|^Jdd 

$ 

R 
^ 

^    1 

^ 
^ 
^ 

eg 

*«s. 

1 

J96  J9M99  JO  q4Jbu3~| 

^ 
< 

^0 

"^ 

^ 

> 

t 

»>  1 
^    4 

(spX  od) 

o> 

»^ 

V 

^ 

N 

> 

<h    1 

Xdq  6u|vti0^j»a 
Xjuo9d^  94daouo3 

• 

>• 

CVJ 

^    1 

(«90 

• ^d 

4.oojJD3un  J^d 

•^   i 

1394-9 

^    1- 

<i*  ^    -fc 

(qpX  no)  4.00J  JD9U 1 "] 

K)    K^    (\J 

<:i  c5  <S 

"FT 

0.4/ 
0.42 
0.33 

^ 

^ 

tT)    (\j    ^1    VQ   ^    VQ 

^h  r^  f»5  c\j  Oj  'sI 
c5  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^' 

«<^  m  O) 

^   XK 

>  (\j  -^ 

*^ 

»*>  »*s 

0>  N  K  v© 

«^  K    1 

(+93J  )  M+Bu^i 

^^  N   ^  ^>  U^ 
r^  r^  ^  fi  ^ 

vo  c:>  «o 

f^  <:i  '^  V 
^  ^  >  > 

■^  5    ^ 

» 

Jl9AA9g     J.O 

■>.  oo  rvj  cvi  ^ 

J  «^  Oi 

(Vi  (Vj  (\j  ir>  ^  ^ 

9219 

VT)  >   > 

^^    h^ 

,^  >  '^  '^ 

* 

'^  ^, 

W^  >  r^  rn 

vo  > 

1 

^ 

- 

UOI^IAIQ 

<i 

0 

Q 

'Q 

<5 

•<i 

jaqujnfsi  px)J4.uo3 

<^3 

^ 

0) 

RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


207 


^ 


H 


p 

O 


QQ 


PS 
O 


o  ^ 

o 
p 

OO 
O 

o 

o 

QQ 

» 
OS 

o 
o 
tt 

PL. 

h, 
O 

pa 


CO 


5 

H 


1 

-^ 

1 

• 

^ 

UOI4.0ADOX3 

1 

<5 
1^ 

J-o 

1 

1 

-*0 

poM+«W 

•  • 

1 

1 

• 

^ 

1 

1 

3 

^ 

^ 

CVj 

Q 

N            ^      > 

h 

N      90 

ACQ  6uiV|J0/\/y  Jdd 

^ 

<b 

;:^      2?  t? 

v. 

VO      Qo 

UOi+10ADDX"3 

^> 

CVJ 

•v 

n      n   fo 

*<> 

K^      VG 

(spAnD) 
4.oojaD9Ui^  Jdd 

^ 

N 

<V> 

^         'O     <;i 

•0 

>N      > 

^ 

(U 

vo 

UOl+DADOX^ 

(-<-«»J ) 

!5 

10 

<^            »«\      0^ 

h 

•^      ^. 

joMog  ^  H-i-cidQ 

V 

>> 

s 

^       ^    !5 

(VJ 

^  !5 

(4.a>j)q4.uoi^jad 

S} 

S 

L|^U91  lunujiuii^ 

>», 

?) 

s 

CVI 

■5 

VG 

5; 

^aj)  AoQ  Buj^JOM 

<vi 

~w 

CVJ 

vo            vo     k) 

^ 

»*)      Oi 

jidd  j9M99jOi44£u3~| 

J$ 

lij 

<>5 

<            <^     K 

K 

to    ^ 

(spAno) 

h 

'O 

»<^ 

0^          ^    S*^ 

<<> 

S  8} 

Adq  6uiv|Jo^uad 

«o 

10 

_• 

CVi 

Xjuo^d|/s1  aitdJOuoQ 

^ 

•^ 

^ 

CM          ai    ^ 

^ 

*c    mP 

(sSl) 

400J  jodui-]  jdd 

|9«4.g 

r^  ^  (\5 
^  ^  ^ 

0.42 
0.22 

tvj  ^  (\j  N  JK  ^   >   <V4 

^ 

^ 

h  "^^  fe 
>  »o  (o 

«;i  ^  ^' 

(4.99j)M+6ua-| 

W^  J^  (Vj 
>   N   ^ 

Si  ^ 

'  ^  »^  <  ^  ^<^  >:  <b 
^  tvj  to  ^o  ^^       ^ 

^ 
^ 

^ 

;*  (h  »o 
^*>  ^  < 

ja/sA39   ^9. 

•     •     •     * 

>  .>-  »c»  »<^ 

>   so 

*ift  N   VO  to  V>  a>  0>  ^ 

m 

•    «    % 

>  vt^  ^ 

9ZIQ 

•Ti  w^  > 

> 

'<^hh«^'o^h'o»o»o 

**^ 

'^^  V-  > 

UOISIAIQ 

<5 

-Q 

^ 

-^                            V)   "^ 

«       <i 

jaqujofsj  PDJ4U03 

^0 

208 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


i  ' 

• 

n 

• 

i£ 

d 

J 

i 

U014.OADOX3 

^ 

.« 

1 

s 

1 
1 

1 

1 

1 

Ga 

, 

1^^ 

1 

^ 

<0 

1 

(sp^no) 

lo  QD  N 

. — * — . 

Ci  ^  N 

•*^ 

^ 

^ 

>          ^ 

^  >- 

ADQ  Buiv^jo^jad 

<0  ^  M 

^h  ^  CO 

^ 

0^ 

^ 

<V4          <b 

VO^^ 

g 

UOj+DADOy^ 

"^ 

> 

^ 

<b 

h 

CVJ          ^ 

>*    "S. 

< 

(spAOD) 
4.00J  JD3U|-|  Jdd 

VO  N  N 

«^  ^  ^ 

>* 

"N 

c^ 

>^         VO 

XJ"   ^ 

*     «     > 
^  fg  *^ 

•     •     • 

(Vj    's.    •s. 

> 

* 

*            • 
CVl         ^ 

5 

UOI4.DADOX3 

SI 

J9M95  ^0  l{4.d3Q 

<»D  ro  ^ 

Oj  \h  w> 

<  «^  K 

N 

53 

0^         ^ 

<^   VO 

VO 

• 

vo 

go 

(4.93j)M+uoy^j9d 
illBud~\   ujnujjxio^ 

Id    S 

vo 

^ 

^ 

o^ 

awj)  Adq  6ui  vom 

VO   CVJ   W^ 

00  vo   ci 

«^ 

^ 

A. 

"S. 

^           CT^ 

^  <r> 

j9da9M99y)q46u9i 

!5$^ 

^'  tO  k: 

^ 

n 

!:5 

5     < 

§-:3 

o5J 

(spAno) 

Bo    ^    U> 

"^  ^  p 

<;i 

0^ 

h 

<<)         [Vj 

N  n- 

Adq  6ui>\joy\/^j9d 

<;i  <Xi  o> 

•        •        • 

vo  N  tvj 

»          %          * 

^ 

• 

"^      h 

VO  >» 

.Aft          % 

5 
p 

AiUOSD^  949JOU03 

<^  f^  ^ 

^    C5    -< 

5 

«0 

> 

•S      rtj 

<;  t\3 

CO 

c^qi) 

O 

400JJD9UI"]  J9d 

O 

19945 

^ 

O 

(■spAno^)4.oojjD3uii 
J9d  ^JuosD^  a49J0uo3 

^  ^  r^ 
^  ^  >* 
-J*  .1^  •«? 
<i  ^  ^ 

^  ^  ^ 

^  ^  cj 

J5V5 

H 
O 

(499J  )  44.6U9-| 

^  ^^  <;i 

20  «^  ^ 

^  2?  St 

tS    K^    <0 

15  IP  s 

•*>  N  r^ 

5 

vo  -s. 

0)  Us 
1*0  > 

BS 

<"  -c 

-sT 

o 

g 

J9Md5     J.O 

«      »      » 

."^  1:5  ^ 

«o  cvj  f^ 

»     «     » 

Qo  fVj  <^ 

• 

azig 

W^  r^  CV 

>  >  to 

^j.  ^^  r-i 

.> 

^K  ^ 

f^  ^  h  fU  rg  tVj 

UOlSlA}Q 

0  'Q    0 

^J    -Q     0 

<S 

'O          VJ 

>$   V 

(=9 

jaqtun^  PDJ4.U03 

A 

>• 

RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


209 


3 

o 


OQ 

H 
OQ 

H 


-< 
►* 


UO14.0A0OX3 


(spAno) 
uo'|4.bAD3xg 


(spAno) 

4.OOJ  JX)3Ul-|  jsd 
UOI^DAinX^ 


i 


I 


i 


I 


I 


N 


0^         ^ 
CVl         V. 


<o     ^o  ^    N  ***  ^     g 
*«i      **•  CVl      0^  N  *^       ^ 


o 

QQ 


•  •  •  •  •  *••%••» 

I*)  CV)        Oi        (\|        (U  ^IO'0<V)'N>^> 


J9M8Q  ^  44a9(] 


0^ 

% 


CVl 

tvj 


so 


N 


^      SO  <VJ      ^  >•  >•      (V4 

<o     k^  sS    <h  <  K     < 


•0 


!» 


§ 

> 


■^i^ 


us 
►.7 

P 

i 

CO 

Z 

o 
O 

O 

O 
O 
« 

h 
O 


I 


K 
0^ 


2> 


X 


i»d  ja/vNdQ  J044DU9'] 


0) 


«6 


^ 
^ 


^      ^   ^      *0  W>  CVl 


(spA-no) 


W5 


<vX 


cvj 


to      *<>  «!      0^  ^  'li 
^)      Q  SO      W)  K)  N 

<      h)  lO      CN]  (V)  < 


(•«qi)     . 

400JJD9Un  49a 


8 
X 


fmA'no)  40OJ  JD9U  i/i 


«V|  ft! 


(\jcvj(\iSi(V](i!(\iSi 


^  ci  cs  c; 


Si35 
^  ^'  ^ 


o>*«»vsoso*0'^*0 
•*>  ^  ***  ^'^ 


CO 


(4©aj)q+6uei 


$$ 
«>  ^ 


r>  HI 
10  ^ 


^  «i  'O  CVj      10  Q  O 

rt\  0^  N  Q     so  V.  so 

«VJ  VD  >.      ^  >  to 


j9AAdg   y> 

OZI9 


(V|V0      9>soC\]SO(UsO<U^ 
^•0     »0<0>»0^»^^»^ 


\^  '-«.  •-^  *        ■     •     • 

d)  0\  ^  Q      9)  H)  K 

Y  »0  "0  to     to  '0  <V| 


*0  ^ 


UOISIAJQ 


<<k   s>      <S  'O    SI 


jQqtunfvi  40DJ4.U03     5         ^ 


cu 


so 


»0 


SO 


14 


210 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


p 
o 

H 

H 
QQ 

H 


g 

O 
QQ 

< 


so 


62 

O 

p 

.  OD 

Z 

o 
O 

h 
O 

S 

n 
o 

O 


■< 


eo 


9 


UO  14.0  A  00x3 

1 
1 
II 

1 

* 

1 

1 

1 

(cpXno) 

Xdq  6uiv)J0^J9d 

uo!+bAX)3X"3 

ft)                    «9 

^  I. 

CVJ 

> 

^ 

(spXno) 

4.OOJ  JD^Ut-}  jod 
UOI^DAKXJXg 

'to 

• 

CV4 

CVJ      Vi 

cv5    > 

ai 

(+aaj)  ti+uoi^  J9d 

!5    ^' 

> 

5   « 

CVj 

^ 

•^ 

(49Sj)M+U0\^J9d 

§  1 

5  -? 

!5 

jod  J9M3gjoi44.Bu9-i 

'  1 

<to 

(spAno) 
Adq  Bui^jo^jdd 

CVJ 

••5 

4joojjt)dui-(  jsd 

190+5 

(spAno)  4J0OJ  jD©u  |-| 

tvi  ^  -f:  1  cvj 

<;»    Ci*  ^ 

55  5 

«i  ^  -^i 

^  <to  ^' 
oj  <:  < 

^  c>  ^ 

(4.99J)  4+6  U  91 

[5  Si  ^  '2  ^ 

^   ^.  c^  iS    ^ 

N  t*i  ^ 
N  >W 

«h  >  f*^  ^ 
^  N  r^  (VJ 

<VJ  04  o>  cv< 

tvj  r^  ^ 
K  »t^  ^ 

J0AA99     JP 
9219 

*     •                 » 

*    »     • 

VO   VO  N) 

r^  f»^  t^ 

%    %    •    * 

VO  1*0  f^  > 
t>^   N^   CVJ  «\4 

%    •    • 

0^  ^  M. 

*^  »0  CVj 

to  (Vj 

UOI«IAlQ 

^  -^ 

• 

-laquAnisj  4.DDJ4.U03 

N                      *0 

N. 

RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


211 


• 

>< 

M 

P 

s 

H 

UOI+DAOOy^ 
pOL|+3W 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

(spAno) 

UOJ+OAOOXg 

»2    "^ 

t\4 

5^^ 

1 

cv3 

•>* 

cv3 

ACT  OF  Masonry  / 
ontinued) 

(spXno) 
4.00J  aDdui*]  jdd 

UOl4DAt>OX3 

•           * 

»0 

a9Ma9  ^  m.d9Q 

0; 

^1 

0^ 

• 

•>* 

% 

(4a9j)H4.Lio^y|jsd 

10 

«i 

5 

1 

"4. 

-0 

K 

5 

>• 

^ 

? 

(4s»j)  Adq  Buivuom 
j^d  asMsgjD  i|4Jdu3-i 

^ 
^ 

•v 

<6 

/ ^ 

t5        ^ 

VO 

p  Construction 
190 

(spXno) 
Xdq  6u\">|io/^Jdd 

XjuOSO|/s1  948J3U03 

<v5 

't^ 
^ 

oj 

S 

< 

5 

3: 

SO 

400jao9un  jsd 

o 

3 
g 

1 

(spXno)  4D0J  JD3U  i"j 

VO  f*^  ^ 

cvj  (\j  <: 
^  ci  ^ 

S 
^ 

55 

0) 

^  ^  c5  QJ  <S 

555 

<i  cS  ^ 

(4.d9J  )  H4-£u3-| 

}^  ^  i"* 
k)  N  u^ 

h  ^  ^ 

H> 

> 

N  «^ 

S  ^  S^  "^ 
^  Oi  ^  N. 

so  ^  > 

5I3  5S 

'^^  cvl  ^h 

t 

CO 

*    »    » 

VO  t^  N 
N)  r^  CVj 

»    •    »    * 

^0  ^o  >  > 

'^  »0  CVj   (Vj 

*     % 

1^  f^ 

«        «     •  »        *        K 

Nj  r^  Ci  V  > 
f^  1^  1*^  CVj  tVj 

1^  N  ^ 
►^  (\j   CM 

s 

UOISIAIQ 

•<i          ^ 

<s 

•<i 

0 

^  <j 

^  <i 

0 

5 

jsquuni^  4.0DJ4.UO3 

^ 

fS 

so 

> 

5 

212 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


B 


H 
H 


o 

go 

2: 
o 

02 

•-2 
"7. 

|i 

O 
P 


cc 

O 

O 

O 

H 
OS 
O 
O 
« 

o 


CO 

pa 


1 
1. 

1! 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Hand. 
Hand. 

(•«pXnD) 

U0I4.DAO3X3 

0 

1§ 

N 

> 

<5> 

• 

C4 

^5 

(spAno) 
4.00J  jDQuifi  Jdd 

UOI+DADDX^ 

-1 

<      • 

VO 

• 

t 

N 

(V)  C)     cv) 
•    %       « 

JOM^g  ^  44-U9Q 

1     *■» 

IS  Mi 

OS 

% 

N  v©     N 
^— • — ' 

> 

^ 

> 

VO         (Xj 

^1 

1 

VO 

5f 

VO 

15 

5;       R 

VO         tVj 

(+»9j)  XoQ  6uivuo/v\ 
jdd  J3M3gjoq4.Dua~| 

5^1 

<6 

N 

Si 

0^ 

OS  VO      t 

(spXno) 
Adq  Bui>\i0^jacl 

XjUOSX)}^  94.aiDU03 

5^ 
^1 

(\4  VO 

^ 

>• 

4.oojat>9ui~|  jad 

1 

• 

^  <<>  K 

CVJ    -N.    v» 

^  cj  ^ 

5 

5^ 

55 

5~5 

05  ^     «S 

(4»9J  )  4+6u3-] 

N.    >^    N 

N  h  15 
vo  ^  r^ 

X5 

? 

t 

j9AAag    jo 

•    *    » 

»^  N  M- 
'O  CV4  (\j 

1^    CV4 

CM 

uoi«jAig 

^   ^ 

<J   -0 

jaquinfsi  4ODJU.U0;) 

Si 

Si 

RATE  OF  PROGRESS  IN  BUILDING  SEWERS 


213 


So 

O 


S 

H 
H 

0>« 


O 

QQ 


h  3 

O  !S 

•«* 

n  I 

H 

U 
P 

H 

O 

O 

CO 
00 
H 

O 
O 

o 

H 


00 

3 
3 


UOI+DAOOX3 

III      II  II 

1 
f 

|| 

111 

•«pAnD) 
Ar>Q  Bui^jjo^jidd 

UOI+DADOXg 

•^^    N                            Oj  va    ^    rv    ^ 

K    ci                            H  >    ^    <:i    J^ 
^    ro                           *<S  N^    5    ^^    ^ 

>         VO         N 

t>         C^         ^" 
•b         N>         "^ 

(spXno) 
4.00J  jiDdui-^  jad 

UOl  +  DAOOXg 

Oj      Qa      <o 
<      tvi      ^,: 

oOMOg  ^  q4.da(I 

-^      «<^      ^t 

'^S     <s     :J 

(49aj)t|4.UO|^J9d 

ft* 

(^saj)  M4.uo|^  J3d 

•0 

jidd  JdMdg  joi{4.bua~{ 

^ 

(spAno) 

^x)Q  6ui>[J0/\/yjad 

AiuosD^yj  a;ajouo3 

^     S     fS 
^     5     »^ 

(sqi) 

400jJD8ui-|  jad 

P34Q 

(•q3An'))4.oojjOQUj-j 

1^                                                                                       K 

^    ?}    s 

cS        <       < 

C4.39j)M4-6u01 

?^      ^     )0 

S5       5t       ^ 
cS       <^       f*** 

J9AA9q      J.O 
8ZIQ 

1 

- 1  ^^  .^  ^^  ^  .^  ^  ^^  e  1 

S 

if    1  fe  "S  1 

UOJSIAIQ 

^     0     1 

jsqujofyi  4.00J+U03 

CHAPTER  IX 

THE  SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  AND  TUNNELS 

The  shoring  of  trenches  consists  of  placing  braces  across  them  to  hold 
their  banks  in  normal  position,  and  often  involves  sheathing  the  banks 
with  plank,  conmionly  called  '' sheeting/'  held  in  place  by  longitudinal 
timbers  called  "rangers"  and  by  cross-braces. 

The  most  common  types  of  such  work  are  vertical  sheeting,  horizontal 
or  box  sheeting,  poling  boards,  stay-bracing  and  skeleton  sheeting,  which 
are  defined  on  pages  215,  232,  236  and  237. 

The  method  of  shoring  trenches  is  usually  left  to  the  judgment  of  a 
foreman  in  charge  of  the  work.  In  many  cases  it  is  inadequately  done, 
which  results  in  delay,  unnecessary  expense  and  damage.  The  subject 
is  here  treated  from  both  the  theoretical  and  practical  points  of  view, 
and  a  number  of  illustrations  are  given,  from  trenches  actually  con- 
structed, to  show  the  best  methods  adopted  in  practice  and  some  of  the 
results  of  lack  of  care  in  placing  the  sheeting  and  shoring. 

Necessity  for'  Shoring  Trenches. — ^Trenches  may  be  excavated  in 
most  materials  to  a  depth  of  3  to  6  ft.  without  much  danger  of  the 
banks  caving.  Sometimes  in  certain  materials,  such  as  hardpan, 
excavations  may  be  made  to  great  depths,  12  to  20  ft.,  without  much 
danger  of  accident.  Usually,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  shore  the 
banks  of  trenches  thoroughly  for  the  protection  of  the  workmen  and  to 
make  progress  possible.  As  sewers  are  generally  built  in  streets  where 
water  and  gas  pipes  and  other  underground  structures  have  already  been 
laid,  and  sometimes  in  paved  streets  in  which  there  are  car  tracks  and 
where  high  structures  follow  the  building  lines  without  break,  it  is 
necessary  to  prevent  the  caving  of  the  banks  and  the  settlement  of  the 
adjacent  ground,  because  of  the  danger  to  these  structures. 

Many  practical  sewer  builders  often  take  chances  on  this  part  of  the 
work,  to  reduce  cost,  trusting  that  they  will  not  meet  with  loss  of  life  or 
property.  Many  unfortunate  examples  have  proved  this  a  short- 
sighted policy.  In  one  instance,  a  contractor,  because  he  had  them  in 
stock,  used  6  X  6  in.  timbers  for  shoring  a  deep  and  treacherous  trench 
rather  than  go  to  the  expense  of  purchasing  the  larger  timbers  which 
were  needed  for  this  particular  work.  As  a  result,  the  timbers  gave 
way  during  a  heavy  rain,  the  banks  slumped  enough  to  cause  a  break  in 
an  adjacent  water-main,  and  the  whole  accident  resulted  in  a  loss  of 
several  hundred  dollars  more  than  the  extra  cost  of  shoring  the  trench 

214 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  215 

with  heavier  timbers  would  have  been.  Accidents  such  as  this,  however, 
are  much  more  often  due  to  the  improper  handling  of  the  work  than  to 
the  selection  of  improper  methods  and  too  light  timbering,  as,  for 
instance^  in  another  case  in  which  carelessness  in  holding  the  banks 
resulted  in  slight  settlement  which  caused  the  breaking  of  a  water-main  a 
few  feet  back  of  the  sheeting.  This  accident  resulted  in  the  i^nnecessary 
loss  of  about  $5000  and  several  weeks'  delay  to  the  work. 

It  is  well  to  have  a  trench  so  timbered  and  protected  as  to  be  safe 
at  all  times  and  to  anticipate  storms  which  may  cut  away  the  banks  and 
cause  damage  unless  the  shoring  is  in  good  condition.  For  this  reason 
it  is  well  to  place  a  low  bank  of  earth  along  the  side  and  across  the  ends 
of  the  trench,  to  prevent  surface  water  from  flowing  into  the  trench  and 
cutting  away  the  earth  behind  the  sheeting.  This  does  not  involve 
much  expense  and  may  result  in  avoiding  serious  loss. 

The  exercise  of  good  judgment,  acquired  by  ample  experience,  is 
required  to  determine  when  shoring  is  needed  and  what  method  should 
be  adopted.  There  are  no  rules  by  which  the  inexperienced  can  de- 
termine the  depth  to  which  a  trench  can  be  excavated  without  the  use  of 
sheeting,  or  before  sheeting  should  be  put  in  place.  It  is  not  unusual  to 
find  uneducated  superintendents  and  foremen  with  many  years  of 
practical  experience,  who  are  capable  of  rendering  judgment  upon  these 
subjects  superior  to  that  of  the  educated  engineer. 

TYPES  OF  SHEETING  AND  BRACING 

Vertical  Sheeting. — ^Vertical  sheeting,  although  usually  more  expen- 
sive where  other  methods  can  be  adopted  with  equal  safety,  is  the  type 
most  commonly  used  on  sewer  work  and  particularly  on  deep  and 
difficult  work,  and  in  trenches  in  dry  running  sands,  gravels,  and  quick- 
sand. Where  trenches  are  excavated  in  improved  streets  imder  condi- 
tions making  it  important  to  prevent  settlement  on  account  of  danger  to 
pipes  and  other  underground  structures,  pavements,  and  abutting 
buildings,  it  is  often  unwise  to  attempt  to  use  the  other  and  generally  less 
expensive  methods  of  shoring. 

It  is  desirable  to  excavate  the  trench  as  deep  as  possible  (usually  3 
to  6  ft.)  without  endangering  the  banks  before  placing  the  sheeting. 
When  the  trench  is  excavated  to  this  depth  the  first  set  of  rangers  (which 
should  usually  be  about  1  ft.  below  the  siu*face  of  the  ground)  and  if 
possible  the  second  set  are  put  in  position  against  planks  placed  vertically 
against  the  properly  trimmed  banks  at  each  end  and  in  the  center  of 
each  ranger.  The  end  planks  should  be  so  placed  as  to  come  flush  with 
the  ends  of  the  rangers.  Having  placed  the  rangers  in  position  and 
supported  them  temporarily,  the  braces  are  driven,  or  the  jacks  made 
up,  so  as  to  hold  the  two  opposite  rangers  in  their  proper  position. 


216  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Braces  should  be  cut  so  as  to  require  reasonably  hard  driving  and  to  set 
the  planks  back  slightly  into  the  bank,  as  otherwise  there  will  be  danger 
of  the  braces  becoming  loose  and  ineffective.  The  banks  should  then  be 
trimmed  plumb  and  to  a  line,  which  will  require  the  rest  of  the  sheeting 
to  be  driven  lightly,  to  get  it  down  between  the  banks  and  the  rangers  to 
the  bottom  of  the  excavation  thus  far  made.  Some  practical  sewer 
builders  maintain  that  it  is  better  to  hold  the  top  and  second  sets  of 
rangers  temporarily  in  place  until  all  the  sheeting  planks  have  been 
placed  behind  them  against  the  bank,  and  then  drive  the  braces  or  make 
up  the  jacks,  thus  securing  a  somewhat  tighter  hold  on  the  banks 
than  where  the  planks  are  slipped  in  behind  the  rangers  after  the  latter 
have  been  finally  braced.  The  former  method  will  generally  prove 
more  convenient  and  wiU  give  equally  good  results  if  care  is  taken  to  so 
trim  the  banks  that  each  plank  will  have  a  driving  fit. 

The  second  set  of  rangers  should  be  placed  as  soon  as  the  first  set  has 
been  secured  in  position,  or  better,  if  conditions  will  warrant,  at  the 
same  time  that  the  first  set  is  placed.  The  vertical  distance  between  the 
several  sets  of  rangers  wiU  depend  to  some  extent  upon  the  local  condi- 
tions and  the  character  of  material,  but  generally,  upon  work  of  moder- 
ate size,  they  should  be  spaced  about  4  ft.  on  centers.  The  rangers 
should  be  directly  over  one  another,  thus  allowing  the  sheeting  to  be 
dnven  plumb.  After  the  rangers  are  seciu-ely  braced,  lap  blocks  or 
cleats  made  of  2-ui.  lumber  the  width  of  the  braces  and  about  18  in.  in 
length,  should  be  placed  on  top  of  and  across  the  joints  between  the 
ends  of  the  braces  and  the  rangers  and  securely  nailed  to  the  braces  to 
prevent  them  from  falling  if  they  become  loosened.  In  some  cases  it 
may  be  convenient  to  attach  the  cleats  to  the  braces  before  the  latter  are 
driven,  thus  supporting  them  while  they  are  being  placed  between  the 
rangers  and  driven  into  their  final  position.  The  rangers  should  gener- 
ally be  placed  level,  although  in  side-hiU  work  where  the  excavation  is 
light  and  requires  the  use  of  only  one  or  two  sets  of  rangers,  it  may  be 
advantageous  to  place  them  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  street.  This 
should  never  be  done  upon  deep  excavations  or  where  the  trenches  are  in 
treacherous  material. 

Rangers  will  vary  in  length  according  to  the  character  of  the  work 
being  done  and  particularly  the  class  of  machinery  used  upon  the 
excavation.  Common  practice,  especially  in  the  eastern  part  of  the 
coimtry,  is  to  make  the  rangers  16  ft.  long,  thus  fixing  the  spacing  of  the 
braces  at  a  trifle  less  than  8  ft.  on  centers,  which  allows  for  the  con- 
venient use  of  certain  types  of  trench  machines.  Upon  heavy  work  it 
may  be  advisable  to  use  somewhat  longer  rangers,  thus  giving  more 
room  between  braces  for  the  operation  of  excavating  machinery. 

It  wiU  generally  be  found  advisable  to  use  three  braces  upon  each  set  of 
rangers,  one  at  the  center  and  one  at  each  end,  although  some  practical 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  217 

sewer  builders  use  but  a  single  brace  to  hold  the  ends  of  two  abutting 
sets  of  rangers,  a  2-in.  block  being  used  at  the  end  of  the  brace  to  cover 
the  joint  between  the  two  rangers.  By  the  former  method  each  section  of 
trench  will  act  independently  of  the  adjacent  sections,  whereas  if  the 
end  braces  engage  upon  the  abutting  sets  of  rangers,  a  slipping  of  one  set 
is  Hkely  to  affect  the  next  set.  Where  two  braces  are  used  at  the  joints 
between  rangers,  some  saving  in  lumber  may  be  effected  by  making  them 
of  somewhtkt  thinner  stock  than  the  center  braces,  as  for  example,  by 
using  4  X  &-in.  braces  at  the  ends  and  6  X  6-in.  braces  in  the  center. 

After  the  sheeting  has  been  placed  in  a  section  and  tapped  down  to 
the  bottom  of  the  excavation,  the  driving  is  commenced.  One  man, 
sometimes  called  the  "plank  lower,"  should  always  be  stationed  in  the 
trench  to  dig  out  for  and  guide  each  plank  as  it  is  being  driven.  He 
casts  the  dirt  to  the  center  of  the  trench  and  where  the  material  is  such 
as  to  permit,  digs  slightly  in  advance  of  the  plank.  After  the  plank  has 
been  driven  as  far  as  possible  (usually  in  good  digging  about  2  ft.  below 
the  normal  depth  of  the  trench  before  driving  began)  it  is  left  and  the 
next  one  is  treated  in  a  similar  manher. 

As  at  the  beginning  of  the  driving  the  sheeting  usually  stands  several 
feet  above  the  ground,  platforms  constructed  of  planks  loosely  laid  upon 
wooden  horses  are  provided  at  a  suitable  height  upon  which  the  plank 
drivers  may  stand  and  work  to  advantage.  These  horses  may  be  con- 
veniently made  about  6  ft.  high  with  horizontal  cleats  about  18  in.  apart, 
so  that  the  platform  may  be  lowered  from  cleat  to  cleat  as  the  planks  are 
driven. 

In  relatively  narrow  trenches,  as  those  from  3  to  8  ft.  in  width,  it  will 
often  be  found  advantageous  to  alternate  the  excavation  and  the 
placing  and  driving  of  the  sheeting  between  contiguous  sections  of  the 
trench,  as  the  room  in  the  trench  in  which  the  two  classes  of  workmen 
must  carry  on  their  labors  is  somewhat  restricted.  This  method  of 
procedure  involves  the  excavating  of  two  sections  of  trench  at  the  same 
time,  thus  lengthening  the  work,  which  in  some  cases  may  be  im- 
practicable. On  the  other  hand  it  often  happens,  especially  in  trenches 
in  loose  gravel  and  running  sand,  that  it  is  necessary  to  drive  planks  short 
distances  as  the  excavation  progresses,  in  which  case  the  driving  must  be 
done  in  connection  with  the  excavation. 

The  position  of  the  bottom  of  the  sheeting  relative  to  the  excavation 
depends  largely  upon  the  character  of  the  material  being  excavated.  If 
the  trench  is  in  hardpan  or  alluvium,  the  excavation  can  often  be 
carried  considerably  below  the  sheeting  without  endangering  the  stabil- 
ity of  the  banks.  In  sand  and  gravel  it  is  necessary  to  drive  the  sheet- 
ing down  at  least  as  low  as  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  and  in  many 
cases  several  inches  below.  In  such  cases  it  is  always  well  to  have  the 
"plank  lower"  dig  the  earth  away  from  the  ends  of  the  planks  as  they 


218  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

are  driven ,  thus  makiog  it  possible  to  keep  the  sheeting  at  all  times  Bome- 
what  below  the  general  elevation  of  the  bottom  of  the  trench.  In 
fairly  wide  trenches,  where  such  material  is  fairly  stable,  it  may  be 
possible  to  carry  the  excavation  in  the  central  part  of  the  trench  from  1 
to  2  ft,  below  the  sheeting,  care  being  taken  not  to  dig  too  close  to  the 


FiQ.  66. — Isometric  sketch  of  tj-pical  trench  sheeting. 

sheeting.     Tliia  aids  the  "plank  lower"  in  his  work  of  digging  the  earth 
away  from  the  planks  as  they  are  being  driven. 

The  general  method  of  shoring  by  means  of  vertical  sheeting,  is 
illustrated  by  Figs.  50  and  .57,  which  are  companion  drawings  of  a 
narrow  trench  carried  to  such  depth  as  to  require  three  sets  of  vertical 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


219 


Bheeting.  The  rangera  are  16  ft.  in  length  and  6  X  6  in.  in  crosB-aection, 
the  end  braces  being  4  X  6  in.  and  the  center  braces  6  X  6  in.  (see 
drawing).  The  first  or  top  set  of  sheeting  is  12  ft.  in  length,  the 
second  16  ft.,  and  the  third  as  required.  The  braces  are  shown  cleated, 
whic^  is  good  practice  upon  work  of  this  kind.  String  platforms  are 
shown  extendii^  half  way  and  all  the  way  across  the  trench,  as  both 
methods  are  commonly  used.  These  platforms  are  supported  by  the 
braces  or  timbers  laid  across  the  trench  on  the  rangers. 

The  most  common  practice  is  to  use  sheeting  planks  sharpened  with 
"chisel"  edges,  placed  with  the  beveled  side  toward  the  Inside  of  the 


Crs»  SKtIon.  Longitudinal  SMtion 

Fia.  57. — Typical  trench  sheeting. 

trench  as  shown  at  ^.  In  some  cases,  especially  in  difficult  work  where 
it  is  necessary  to  drive  the  sheeting  long  distances  ahead  of  the  excava- 
tion, the  planks  are  beveled  in  two  directions,  as  shown  at  B,  the  ob- 
ject being  that  the  planks  shall  drive  straight  and  that  they  shall  tend 
to  hold  tightly  against  the  planks  previously  driven. 

Figs.  56  and  57  are  conventional  representations  of  a  sheeted 
trench.  In  practice  the  rangers  are  rarely  spaced  with  exactness  or 
the  planks  driven  to  a  uniform  depth.  In  many  cases  lighter  rangera 
are  used,  as  4  X  6-in.  timbers,  and  occasionally  where  the  excavation  is 


220  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

not  to  be  deep,  2-m.  planks  are  used  for  rangers.  Upon  extensive  work, 
however,  where  the  depth  of  excavation  will  exceed  10  ft.  or  where  the 
material  to  be  excavated  is  such  as  to  make  it  necessary  to  shore  the 
banks  securely,  it  is  wise  to  use  rangers  at  least  as  heavy  as  4  X  6-in. 
timbers,  and  heavier  stock  as  may  appear  to  be  necessary  from  the  local 
conditions  encountered. 

As  the  upper  portion  of  the  trench,  supported  by  the  first  set  of 
sheeting,  is  the  widest,  it  is  wise  to  make  the  first  set  of  sheeting  the 
shortest,  thus  effecting  a  saving  in  excavation.  Furthermore,  the  use 
of  relatively  short  sheeting  for  the  first  section  avoids  the  necessity  of 
using  horses  to  any  great  extent,  in  connection  with  the  driving  of  the 
planks.  Stages  can  be  placed  upon  the  rangers  in  the  trench,  from 
which  the  second  and  third  sets  of  sheeting  can  be  conveniently  driven, 
even  though  they  are  relatively  long.  An  additional  advantage  in  using 
longer  sheeting  in  the  second  and  third  sets  is  that  by  the  use  of 
guard  rails,  planks  spiked  to  the  braces,  the  individual  planks  can 
be  held  fairly  rigid,  so  that  they  do  not  spring  when  hit  with  the  driving 
maul  as  ia  the  case  when  the  sheeting  used  for  the  first  set  projects  a  long 
distance  above  the  ground. 

In  many  cases  the  length  of  sheeting  adopted  for  the  several  sets  will 
be  governed  by  the  stock  of  lumber  on  hand  when  the  work  is  begun. 
If,  however,  new  lumber  is  to  be  purchased  the  dimensions  should  be 
specified  with  a  view  to  its  use,  and  care  should  be  taken  to  purchase 
only  those  sizes  which,  by  avoiding  waste,  will  be  economical.  While 
very  long  sheeting  is  sometimes  used,  it  is  common  practice  to  limit 
the  lengths  even  of  the  longer  sets  to  16-ft.  plank.  Braces  should 
ordinarily  be  of  the  same  depth  as  the  rangers. 

The  use  of  a  short  upper  set  and  a  longer  lower  set  of  sheeting  is 
illustrated  by  Fig.  59,  which  shows  a  trench  about  20  ft.  in  depth, 
shored  by  two  sets  of  vertical  sheeting.  The  material  excavated  was  a 
light  alluvium  easily  held  in  place,  which  accounts  for  its  being  possible 
to  drive  the  lower  set  of  sheeting  so  far  below  the  lowest  set  of  rangers, 
without  materially  endangering  the  stability  of  the  banks.  The  rangers 
and  brpces  used  upon  this  work  were  unnecessarily  heavy,  but  were 
utilized  because  they  were  on  hand.  Had  new  timbers  been  purchased 
it  is  not  likely  that  they  would  have  exceeded  6  X  6  in.  in  dimensions. 
The  sheeting  was  2  in.  in  thickness. 

Starting  Additional  Sets  of  Sheeting. — After  the  first  set  of  sheeting 
has  been  driven  to  the  full  depth  to  which  it  is  intended  to  extend,  guard 
rails  made  of  2  X  6-in.  planks  are  spiked  to  the  lowest  set  of  braces  at  a 
distance  from  the  rangers  approximately  equivalent  to  the  thickness  of 
the  sheeting.  The  second  set  of  sheeting  is  then  piissed  through  the 
space  between  the  guard  rail  and  the  adjacent  ranger  and  placed  in  its 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


221 


proper  position  ready  for  driving.    If  the  sheeting  is  long,  say  more 
than  10  ft.,  it  may  be  well  to  place  a  second  guard  rail  on  the  second  set  of 


"     ■fUiliWII'WUMi^  iipitij^iapji|;jii_. 


VWWfJIJii.^fWJIIHpUW 


a. 

I 

o 


o 

4: 
I 


r 


X 

V 

a 

4:" 
I 


^ 


>'  ¥''«*/  /« if^rj^t 


^^ 


.a 
v 

d 
2 


4) 
OQ 

g 

a 

.s 

O 

bfi 

o 

•s 


^ 

s 

c 

ji 

« 

-s 

.! 

i^ 

1  ^ 

< 

^S 

•*  5 

r 

li 

s§ 

-s* 

5| 

• 

8.| 

^4 

pl^ 

braces  above  the  first  guard  rail.     This  will  hold  the  upper  ends  of  the 
planks  rigidly  and  prevent  their  springing,  so  that  they  will  be  more 


222 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


2 


m  H 
S  ^ 

I  t^ 

SPQ 
^  o 

<S  § 
IS 

«  o  ^ 
s  (4  o 

(4    Ph   ^ 
C3Q    O    * 

PS 
H 

S  - 

0*02 


00 

CO 


3pi«q  JO 

■%i    bS  i9  J 


b  S3  'S  » 

DO)        a 

Oh  .S  -•  £ 


h  S  is 


V 

a 


O 
M 

a 
« 

Q 


Em 


00 


hi 

12 

braces 

T{Vivq  JO 
•>j  ba  ja J 

Per 
linear 
ft.  of 
trench 

■3  si 

h2  g 


•as 


N 


£ 


a 

eS 


-     .  j3 

O  CO    « 
h  -   i 


0 

0) 

g 

Xi 

3(uvq  JO 

•'H 

■bfi 

!J9J 

i< 

3 

6i 

4) 

fl 

P^ 

•5 

00    IH    ■n* 

M*  eo  ■^ 


CO  !>•    9 

CO  (O  o 

•  •           ■ 

N  0»    IH 

9  9^ 


f.   h-   !>. 

to   CO   '<• 


•*  lO  e>i 

»H    .H    d 


888 

•      •      • 
^1  ^^  ^ 

e^  e^  N 

000 


880 

Hi 

h-   t*   Q 

•CO   CO   00 

^§8 

^   OJ   W   1-1 

«    00    IH    -*J. 

ci  c^  CO  «>i< 

!>.   Q   »0   « 

CO  35  In.  00 

8h-  Q  h- 

O  O  M 

^  ci  «o  CO 

•H    1-1  OS    0& 

O    »-•  »H    CO 


8888 


00 
CO 


X  00  QO 
CO  <0  S 
h-   f.   !>. 


S888 


§82 


§S8 

CO 

■*  o>  c<i 

0   00   iH 

N   N    CO 

-* 

»0    CO   CO 
C>l   CO   00 

S 

M   CO   0 
^   -<<    ^ 

g 

8 

jo 


CO   CO   N 
CO  CO  »o 


00 


• 

•^ 

fl 

0 

•  v« 

^ 

w 

--  1 

E 

o 

-* 

fl 

c3 

h 

„ 

C^ 

CO 

s 

kl 

^ 

SSB8 

csi  C4  C4  ci 

,H    i-l    *H    <-) 
IQ    10    to    Ud 


8^82 

00  N  e<i  1-1 

C4  a  O)  ^ 

i-l    fM    IH    CO 


8 


CO   CO   O 
CO  CO   ^ 
.       •       •       • 
©  t«  CO  "5 

«  «  ®  ^ 


saqaat  'sjaSavj 
pn«  eaavjq  jo  azigj 


9daj  '(Vanaaqs 
10  apis^no)  mb^^oq 
%v  qo'pon  |o  q^ptM. 


^^ 

M 

n 

CO 

CO 

CO 

00 

X  X  X  X 

■^ 

« 

CO 

« 

I  Tf   Tf   00  N 


I  ^uwqjo 
'•^j-bsjaj 


(^ 
S 


00 


5 

O 


Pm 

CO 


b    iM 

ja 

%» 

tf    0 

u 

0 

« 

(J 

PLI 

fl  ^ 

S 

w 

3^1 


a  fl 


OS 

t. 

0 

rH 

kl 

*ti 

i 

rH 

.A 

3ia«<i 

1  JO 

•1J 

•Dsiaj 

h 
V 

S 

PLI 

fl 

£    2: 

-^ 

Hi     *» 

5  •-  fl 
H  »H  5 


•as 


« 


n 
O    bfi 

»H      fl 

OS 

kl 


10 

braces 

Jinoq  JO 

Per 
linear 

ft.  of 
trench 

O   CO    ® 

h  S  ^ 


.a  fl 

Q< 


kl 

o 

00    M 

fl 
e3 
k> 


OS 

C4     ^ 

rM      C» 
CO 

hi 

Xt 


iH  eo  CO 

•    •    • 

CO   CO   ^ 


to    CO 


O   CO  h" 
CI   CO   00 


8  8  8 


888 


S88 

'f      ^f      ^^ 


o 
o 


CO 
CO 


X   X   " 
^   ^   X 


o  Q  r«- 

O  O  <N 

ci  ci  CO 

«-l    u>  CO 

»H   CI  !>. 


to  a  t* 

N  -^  » 

.  •  . 

CO  CO  *# 


814  CO 
l>    IH 


14  CO 
l> 

h-  u)  at 
»H  e^  f. 

<.H     >H    i^ 

o  t^  o' 

O  O  CO 

C«   C9  CD 

t*    -«  CD 

X  O  X 

.-i^C«  CI 

a  o"o 

000 

•     «     • 

000 

XXX 
N  OJ  c« 


o 

o 


CO 
CO 


X   X   ^ 
^   ^  X 


o  o  r* 

O  O  C» 

C«  ci   CO 

•H  U3   CO 

^  C«  h- 


X 

0 

"'*<" 

w* 

"* 

t». 

CO 

CO 

-^ 

CO 

CO 

cs 

X 

X 

X 

ft 

X 

f-l 

0 

0 

»o 

•-H 

w* 

^.4 

CO 

CO 

X 

CO 

CO 

lii^ 

O} 

I— t 

0 

CI 

•* 

CO 

CO 

0 

8 

3 

c< 

N 

c« 

•c 

U5 

«c 

^.4 

Vi4 

r^ 

•M 

•-4 

»H 

0 

0 

r^ 

0 

0 

CD 

CO 

CO 

OJ 

2 

CO 

CO 

».H 

CO 

CO 

10 

• 

• 

• 

CO 

«o 

10 

O) 

s 

s 

-4 

ei 

n 

CO 

CO 

X 

XXX 

CO 

CO 

X 

<* 

X 

c< 

t-4 

c< 


c< 

OJ 


iftraq 

JO    "^J    'bS  J9J 


h    08  o  H 

Q>    Hi  fl 

On  2  *;  g 

13  '«-'  iS 


-^     •  .fl 

h2  S 


5 


2-3 

«    ft 


s 

-s 


'^     '  .fl 

**       fl 

h     -H      is 


fl  fl 

—    OS 


BO 

kl 

o 

C4     M 

^    fl 
08 


X   o 

<.H     c8 


O  C4 

-H  CO 


CO 
CO 


CO   CO    ^ 


93 

® 

X 

0 

«8 

Xi 

^nsq 

JO 

•1J  • 

be 

JOJ 

U     S 

'0 

U3 
0 

0)     0) 

fl 

&4^ 

• 

1 

If)  u)  -4 

!>.  C4  X 

X  Oft  CO 

■n*  «0  N 

1-1  ^  C« 


8  8  e5 


Q  X  w 
X  '^  X 

CO  10  »o 

■8  8"8 

*  •  • 

CO   CO   9 
CO   CO   CO 


000 
000 

CO  CO  •* 
N.  1^  N 
14   IQ   O 


8 


o  t* 


O  X  CO 

"t    O    05 

i-f   PO_X_ 
'Of    O 

^  OS 


a 


CO  CO  ^ 

»0  U5  C« 

!>.  C4  X 

■  •  « 

O  •"*  >o 

■^  io  1-1 

1-H  »-•  C« 


8  C4 


o 
o 

ci 

C4      . 

CI  c« 


Ui 


888 

CO  CO  CO 

CO  CO  CO 

O  u)  lO 

•-*  <.H  •-* 

88  8 

ft  ■  • 

CO  CO  ^ 

r*  h*  c« 

»o  »o  o 

8  8  C4 

d  X  CO 

"^  o  o> 

-H  CO  X 


>M    M    m 

CO  CO  X 

XXX 

CO  CO  X 


Tf  X  c« 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  223 

readily  driven  than  if  held  simply  by  the  guard  rail  near  the  bottom. 
Additional  sets  of  sheeting  should  be  started  in  the  same  manner. 

It  is  not  possible  to  place  and  drive  planks  in  a  second  set  of  sheeting 
immediately  under  the  braces  of  the  first  set.  Therefore,  as  the  excava- 
tion is  carried  down,  a  space  equivalent  to  the  width  of  the  braces  above 
will  be  left  imshored.  This  space,  sometimes  called  a  "window,"  is 
frequently  closed  by  placing  short  horizontal  planks  behind  the  adjacent 
vertical  planks.  In  cases  where  the  material  is  likely  to  run,  if  exposed 
for  a  short  vertical  distance,  notched  planks  are  used.  These  "notches " 
are  usually  made  of  12-in.  planks  by  eutting  out  about  6  in.  from  the 
upper  end  of  the  plank,  leaving  the  lower  portion,  about  4  ft.  in  length, 
the  full  width  of  12  in.  These  notches  are  placed  under  the  braces  and 
are  driven  like  the  other  planks.  As  they  are  driven  a  "window"  opens 
below  the  braces  which  must  be  closed  from  time  to  time  with  horizontal 
planks  set  in  behind  the  notches  or  vertical  poling  boards  fastened  to 
them.  Notched  planks  must  be  both  "rights"  and  "lefts"  so  they  may 
be  fitted  under  the  double  braces  from  both  sides. 

Scheme  of  Shoring  and  Quantity  of  Lumber  Used  upon  Light  Trench 
Work. — A  system  of  shoring  narrow  trenches,  from  8  to  24  ft.  in  depth,  is 
illustrated  by  Fig.  58.  This  system  has  been  used  upon  a  large  amount 
of  relatively  small  sewer  construction.  If  the  banks  are  extremely  heavy 
or  if  the  trenches  are  of  greater  width  it  may  be  necessary  to  increase  the 
sizes  of  the  rangers  and  braces.  In  this  system  the  rangers  are  assumed 
to  be  16  ft.  in  length  and  are  held  in  place  by  three  braces,  one  at  each 
end  and  one  in  the  middle  of  each  pair  of  rangers. 

In  this  sketch  the  rangers  have  been  placed  4  ft.  on  centers  vertically, 
except  the  lower  rangers  of  the  upper  set  and  the  upper  rangers  of  the 
lower  set,  which  are  2  ft.  3  in.  on  centers.  The  sheeting  is  shown  driven 
to  within  1  ft.  of  the  bottom  of  the  trench. 

The  quantity  of  lumber  required  for  the  sheeting  and  bracing  of 
trenches  from  8  to  24  ft.  in  depth,  by  the  system  illustrated  by  Fig.  58, 
is  given  in  Table  38,  which  also  gives  the  number  of  braces  and  rangers 
required,  and  is  based  upon  the  use  of  sheeting  2  in.  in  thickness.  A  bill 
of  material  for  such  trenches  is  given  in  the  four  parts  of  Table  39. 

Destruction  and  Loss  of  Lumber. — The  life  of  sheeting  depends 
upon  the  quality  of  lumber  used  and  the  care  with  which  it  is  handled. 
It  is  possible  to  destroy  the  best  quality  of  sheeting  planks  by  a  single 
use  where  the  driving  is  fairly  hard,  if  plank  caps  and  reasonable  care  are 
not  employed  to  protect  the  ends.  Where  care  is  used  to  protect  the 
ends  of  the  planks,  the  quahty  of  the  wood  is  good,  and  the  driving 
is  not  excessively  hard,  sheeting  may  be  used  a  large  number  of  times. 
Upon  h'ght  work,  sheeting  may  sometimes  be  used  from  10  to  15  times 
and  on  more  difficult  work  requiring  hard  driving,  it  may  not  be  possible 
to  use  it  more  than  2  or  3  times. 


224 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Upon  contract  work,  unless  the  contractor  is  reasonably  sure  of 
securing  additional  contracts,  it  is  probable  that  the  entire  cost  of  the 
sheeting  will  be  charged  to  the  contract  upon  which  it  is  first  used.  On 
the  other  hand,  where  work  is  done  by  a  municipal  department  by  day 
labor,  if  reasonable  care  is  taken  to  avoid  damaging  the  planks,  they 
may  be  used  over  and  over,  and  only  a  portion  of  the  cost  of  the  lumber 
charged  to  the  first  piece  of  work.  In  all  cases,  however,  there  is  a 
considerable  shrinkage  of  lumber  and  the  cost  of  resharpening  and 
trimming  the  old  lumber  is  substantial. 

Another  cause  of  shrinkage  in  lumber  is  theft,  which,  in  some  com- 
munities, is  a  serious  matter.  In  such  places,  if  there  is  a  consider- 
able stock  of  lumber  on  hand  it  tnay  be  economy  to  employ  a  watch- 
man primarily  for  the  purpose  of  conserving  it. 

Taking  into  consideration  all  the  causes  of  shrinkage  of  lumber  and  the 
various  classes  of  work  upon  which  it  is  used,  It  may  not  be  very  far  from 
correct,  on  the  average,  to  allow  for  a  shrinkage  of  20  per  cent,  of  the 
supply  necessary  for  shoring  the  trench  upon  a  single  piece  of  work 
3000  ft.  in  length. 

Rangers  and  braces  may  be  used  as  a  rule  for  a  much  longer  period 
than  the  sheeting,  although  upon  very  heavy  work  the  effect  of  excessive 
pressure  and  of  driving  may  make  it  impracticable  to  use  them  on  the 
average  more  than  5  or  6  times;  but  on  light  work  where  the  pressures 
are  not  excessive  and  the  driving  is  relatively  easy,  they  may  be  used 

Table  39  a. — Number  and  Length  of  Planks  Required  for  Sheeting 

A  Trench  96  Ft.  Long 


Depth  of 

trench, 

ft. 

Seto  of 
sheeting 

Length  of 

planks , 

ft. 

Width  of  planks,  ii 

D. 

7 

12 

10 

0 

8 

6 

Number  Number 

Number 

Number  Number]  Number] 

8 

First 

16 

96 

115 

128 

144 

164 

192 

12 

First 

12 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

16 

First 

16 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

16 

First 

16 

96 

115 

128 

144 

164 

192 

Second 

20 

96 

115 

128 

144 

164 

192 

18 

First 

16 

96 

115 

128 

144 

164 

192 

Second 

12 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

20 

First 

16 

96 

115 

128 

144 

164 

192 

Second 

14 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

22 

First 

12 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

Second 

12 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

24 

First 

12 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

Second 

14 

192 

230 

256 

288 

329 

384 

Note. — In  ordering  sheeting,  especially  where  a  second  set  will  be  re- 
quired, a  supply  of  assorted  sizes  should  be  provided  to  assist  in  fitting 
sheeting  to  pipes  or  braces  crossing  trench.  For  single  sheeting  about  5  % 
and  for  two  bets  about  20  %  of  number  of  planks  should  be  assorted  sizes. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


225 


Table  39  b. — Number  op  16-Ft.  Rangers  Required  for  Shoring  a 

Trench  96  Ft.  Long 


Width  of  trench  at 
bottom,  (outside 
of  2-in.  sheetinc),  ft. 

Sise  of  rangers, 
in. 

Wit 
of 

Depth  of  trenct] 

i,  ft. 
sets  of  sheet 

Lh  one  se^ 
sheeting 

With  two 

ting 

8    1    12 

16 

16        18        20 

22 

24 

3 

4X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

4 

4X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

4 

6X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

5 

6X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

6 

6X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

7 

6X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

8 

6X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

9 

6X6 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

10 

8X8 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

11 

8X8 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

12 

8X8 

24 

36 

48 

48 

60 

60 

72 

72 

Table  39  c. — Number  op  Pieces  and  Length  op  Timber  Required  for 
Bracing  a  Trench  96  Ft.  Long,  with  Single  Set  of  Sheeting 

(Stock  timber  assumed  to  be  12,  14,  16,  18  and  20  ft.  long) 


Width  of 

trench  at 

bottom, 

(outside  of 
2-in. 

sheeting),  ft. 

3 

4 
4 

Sise  of 

rangers, 

in. 

1 

Sise  of 

braced, 

in. 

Depth  of  trench 

8  ft. 

lift. 

16  ft. 

Number 

^^f  ^'  Number 

Length. 
,      ft. 

Number 

Length, 
ft. 

4X6 
4X6 
6X6 

4X6 
4X6 
4X6 

6 
9 
4 

12 
12 
16 

9 
9 
6 

12 
18 
16 

8 

16 

6X6 

2 

16 

3 

16 

4 

16 

5 

6X6 

4X6 

8 

12 

12 

12 

.    16 

12 

6X6 

4 

12 

6 

12 

8 

12 

6 

6X6 

4X6 

8 

14 

12 

14 

16 

14 

6X6 

4 

14 

6 

14 

8 

14 

7 

6X6 

4X6 

12 

12 

18 

12 

24 

12 

6X6 

6 

12 

9 

12 

12 

12 

8 

6X6 

4X6 

8 

20 

12 

20 

16 

20 

6X6 

4 

20 

6 

20 

8 

20 

9 

6X6 

4X6 

12 

16 

'18 

16 

24 

16 

6X6 

6 

16 

9 

16 

12 

16 

10 

8X8 

6X8 

12 

18 

18 

18 

24 

18 

8X8 

6 

18 

9 

18 

12 

18 

11 

8X8 

6X8 

12 

20 

18 

20 

24 

20 

8X8 

6 

20 

9 

20 

12 

20 

12 

8X8 

6X8 

24 

12 

36 

12 

48 

12 

8X8 

12 

12 

18 

12 

24 

12 

15 


226 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


o 


o 

■ 

CO    c: 
Cd    o 

H  O 

*<    03 
2  00 

is 


g[ 


S 


o  o 

»5  "^ 


u 


M 


00 


M  CO 


CO 


9 


•§•3  S 

o       t» 

^11 

£ 

"*             CB 

"* 

N 

M 

♦3   •«     B 

C         '5 

^  •  ja 

OB 

'qtSaaq 


o 


o 


a 


o. 

Q 


w 

N 


a  o  .a 


o 


CB 


o 
55 


o       -^^ 

S     «     4> 


o 


o 

C4 


■s-l 


•q-jSlnei 


o 


d  o  .5 

o  ■♦» 

«^  £   S 

*»  90 

I       I. 


•qipBaaq 


o 


First 

set  of 

sheeting 

*mau9'j 

m 

O 

Z 

d  o  .s 
o       ^ 

S     «    4) 


'X\'iSu9>J 


^   o  .5  'q^Snaq 

•  J3  '  O 

^1      5? 


^  S    . 
»  S  (3 

CO  Ji 


o  e 

OD   .J? 


II  6  o  .9 
^  ^  ?  .1  ^ 


<0«0C4M^^C4C4QO«D«000XOOe4C4 


c<c4ptoe>4e4^^«ocoooooooc4C4C4e>4 

f-4r>l^lHlHiH>HlHf-4rtiHiHC4CS|i-fi^lHf-t 


C9<DOft(OOOOiOOOaOO>OOOtOOO><DOO<000 


CDCDC«01^^C>IC400«0<OOOQOOOC4e4 


rH  ^4  ^4  rH  rH  fM  v-4  CO^^ 


<o«oc>ic4^-<<c«e<4pocO(Oooooopcie'i 


OJ   N   «-i   iH 


(0<OpOC4e>)-^^«OCOXWOOC4C4C4M 


rH  »H  »-4  r^  1-^  C^r^C^i-^ 


«DC0C4CI-<<<4<MC4OOcO«000Wpoe<IC^ 


r4  iH  ^4  «M  r^  r-4  iH  CO    t^ 


«ecoope<«c4'4*'<i«o««oooooic4C4N 


<OCO<DCOCi;DC^<&C4COC4«DC4CO^C^^e4 
^^  «^  «^  rH  »-•  P4«-4C4>-^ 


<D«OC4e«l^'<iC4MOOOCDOOaopOev|M 


CD<DPPC4M-^^<0C0a0WOpC4Oe<IM 


IH  ^4  *H  iH  1-4  C|i^C4^^ 


xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 


to  o  o 

XXX 

"^  ^  © 


(O 

X 

o 


X 

«o 


X 

to 


X 


X 

to 


00 

X 

GO 


00 

X 


X 


PO  ""f  ^ 


00 


o   .-• 


M 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


227 


from  15  to  20  times  with  very  little  waste.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
varying  widths  of  trench  in  any  piece  of  work  may  seriously  limit 
otherwise  possible  repeated  use  of  the  braces.  For  this  reason,  screw 
jacks  may  prove  less  expensive. 

Instances  of  Trench  Shoring  from  Practice. — ^The  following  illustra- 
tions of  shored  trenches,  Figs.  59  to  74  inclusive,  were  prepared  from 
measurements  of  actual  trenches  excavated  upon  sewerage  work  in 
Louisville,  Ky.  The  Louisville  sewers  constructed  under  the  direction 
of  J.  B.  F.  Breed,  as  Chief  Engineer,  and  one  of  the  writers  as 
Consulting  Engineer,  are  illustrative  of  recent  practice  in  this  class  of 
construction.     The  diagrams  were  prepared  under  the  immediate  direo- 


•"%*{8KWWP'5W' 


Fig.  59. — Vertical  sheeting  for 
5-ft.  sewer. 


Fig.  60. — Vertical  sheeting  for 
6-}-ft.  sewer. 


tion  of  Frank  C.  Williams,  Resident  Engineer,  who  has  also  furnished 
other  data  contained  in  this  chapter,  and  Howard  S.  Morse  and  Har- 
rison P.  Wires,  Resident  Engineers  uix)n  this  work.  It  is  important  to 
note  that  very  little  ground  water  was  encountered  in  most  of  this 
work,  even  in  the  deepest  trenches. 

In  Fig.  60  is  shown  the  timbering  used  to  support  the  banks  of  a 
trench  excavated  in  alluvium,  which  was  so  stable  that  the  planks  could 
be  driven  safely  without  bracing  to  a  depth  of  4  ft.  below  the  bottom 
rangers.  The  braces  were  all  6  X  6  in.  This  illustration  shows  two 
things  to  be  avoided ;  first  the  weakness  in  the  trench  shoring  between  the 


228 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


''   Strfngen 


second  and  third  rangers,  and  second,  the  use  of  braces  of  less  depth 
than  the  rangers.  While  under  the  conditions  encountered  on  this 
work,  the  shoring  shown  proved  satisfactory,  it  is  usually  wise  to  place 
the  lowest  rangers  on  the  first  set  of  sheeting  fairly  close  to  the  bot- 
tom    of     the    sheeting, 


allowing  the  latter  to  pro* 
ject  from  6  to  12  in.,  and 
to  keep  the  first  rangers 
on  the  lower  set  of  sheet- 
ing within  6  to  12  in.  of 
the  top  of  the  planks,  for 
the  reason  that  where  the 
banks  are  heavy  there  is  a 
tendency  for  the  sheeting 
to  give  way  between  these 
two  sets  of  rangers.  This 
trench  was  over  18  ft.  in 
depth. 

The  shoring  of  a  trench 
about  30  ft.  in  depth  in 
wet,  running,  sandy  <5lay, 
b  shown  in  Figs.  61  and 
62.  The  banks  of  this 
trench  were  of  such  a 
nature  that  the  pressure 
exerted  upon  the  timber- 
ing was  unusually  great, 
yet  no  distress  was  noted. 

The  bracing  used  to 
support  one  of  the  heavier 
trenches,  in  which  a  sewer 
14  ft.  by  13  ft.  8  in.  was 
constructed,  is  shown  id 
Fig.  63.  Three  sets  of 
sheeting  were  used,  12 
ft.,  16  ft.  and  16  ft.  in 
length  respectively.  The 
top  ranger  was  8X8  in., 
and  the  rangers  below  it 
on  the  first  and  second 
All  of  the  rangers  used  upon  the 
10  X  10-in.  timbers.     The 


e''\Under. 
drain 


emvelRemi^  k-/^'>j 


Fig.  61. — Trench  in  wet  clay  with  sand 

pockets. 


sets  of  sheeting  were  8  X  10  in. 

third  or  bottom  set  of  sheeting  were  of 

braces  were  of  the  same  dimensions  as  the  corresponding  rangers,  and 

each  brace  was  equipped  with  a  jack  at  one  end,  the  braces  being  placed 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  229 

against  the  rangers  on  one  aide  of  the  trench  and  held  in  position  by 
cleats,  until  the  other  ends  were  jacked  against  the  opposite  rangers. 

This  was  a  very  heavy  trench,  the  upper  portion  of  it  being  in  light 
alluvium  and  the  lower  portion  in  moist  fine  sand.  The  banks  exerted 
great  pressure  upon  the  timbering  and  some  settlement  resulted. 
Upon  a  portion  of  the  work  all  sheeting,  rangers  and  braces  were  left 


Fia.  62.— View  of  trench  shown  also  in  Fig.  61. 

in  place  after  the  work  was  completed,  as  it  was  feared  that  there  would 
bo  considerable  settlement  of  the  adjacent  street  and  possibly  of 
buildings,  if  the  timber  was  removed. 

Some  of  the  difficulties  encountered  upon  hea^-y  work  are  illustrated 
by  Fig.  64.  The  upper  8  ft.  of  this  trench  was  in  yellow  clay  or 
alluvium,  below  which  it  was  in  medium  fine  sand  and  fine  gravel. 
Mo  ground  water  was  encountered. 


230 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


There  was  considerable  settlement  of  the  banks  at  the  point  repre- 
sented by  this  sketchy  and  it  was  necessary  to  insert  an  extra  ranger  with 
braces,  as  shown  at  A,  Difficulties  of  this  kind  are  frequently  en- 
countered because  of  lack  of  care  in  bracing  the  trench  as  excavation 
progresses,  and  lack  of  a  sufficient  number  of  rangers.  It  also  seems 
probable  that  tighter  bracing  can  be  secured  by  the  use  of  wedges  than 
by  the  jack  screws  sometimes  used.  The  rangers  and  braces  upon  this 
work  were  originally  placed  level. 


Fia.  63.— Trench  for  sewer  13  ft. 
8  in.  by  14  ft. 


Fig.  64. — Trench  for  sewer  14  ft. 
6  in.  by  13  ft.  3  m. 


In  Fig.  65  are  shown  conditions  similar  to  those  illustrated  in 
Fig.  64. 

Fig.  66  is  a  sketch  of  the  cross-section  of  a  trench  in  which  a  12-ft. 
semi-elliptical  sewer  was  constructed.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  three 
braces  supporting  the  lowest  set  of  sheeting  came  in  the  way  of  the 
concrete.  The  concrete  of  this  sewer  was  placed  in  two  operations,  the 
invert  and  bench  walls  to  a  height  just  below  the  lowest  brace  being 
poured  in  one  operation,  and  the  arch  above  the  bench  walls  in  the 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


231 


second  operation.  After  the  concrete  of  the  invert  and  bench  walls  had 
been  poured  and  become  thoroughly  set,  the  last  two  sets  of  rangers  and 
braces  were  removed  and  the  concrete  of  the  arch  was  then  poured.  The 
upper  brace  of  the  lowest  set  of  sheeting  was  driven  up  enough  to 
permit  the  completion  of  the  arch  without  removing  this  brace.  The 
2-in.  blocks  shown  at  the  ends  of  the  braces  were  required  because  the 
braces  were  too  short.  This  is  an  expedient  often  adopted  when  braces 
are  short,  and  is  not  particularly  objectionable,  although  it  is  preferable 


Ikinftrs^ 


Fig.  65. — Sheeting  for  sewer  13 
ft.  3  in.  by  12  ft.  11  in. 


Fia.  66. — Sheeting  for  sewer  12 
ft.  by  12  ft. 


that  the  braces  be  of  such  a  length  as  to  avoid  the  use  of  blocks  other 
than  wedges. 

A  sketch  of  the  cross-section  of  a  trench  in  which  a  12  X  12-ft. 
semi-elliptical  concrete  sewer  was  constructed  is  shown  in  Fig.  67. 
There  was  considerable  settlement  of  the  banks  and  sheeting.  To 
avoid  the  slipping  of  the  rangers  and  braces  they  were  tied  together  by 
cleats,  as  shown.  The  upper  10  ft.  of  this  trench  was  in  alluvium,  below 
which  it  was  in  sand  and  gravel.  Jack  screws  were  not  used  upon  this 
bracing,  the  struts  being  cut  long  enough  to  require  hard  driving. 
Better  results  might  possibly  have  been  obtained  by  wedging  the  braces. 

In  Fig.  68  is  shown  the  cross-section  of  a  trench  in  which  a  12  X  12-ft. 


232 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


.  semi-elliptical  concrete  sewer  was  constructed.  This  sketch  shows  the 
position  of  the  Carson  trench  machine  used  for  hoisting  the  excavated 
material  from  the  trench.  This  machine  was  carried  on  tracks  laid  on 
10  X  10-in.  stringers,  supported  by  the  ground  on  either  side  of  the 
trench.  At  the  left  of  the  trench  machine  and  attached  to  it  wUl  be 
seen  the  frame  which  was  used  for  supporting  a  steam  plank-driving 
hammer  and  the  plank-pulling  apparatus.  It  was  necessary  to  re- 
move at  least  three  sets  of  rangers  and  braces  after  the  invert  and 
bench  walls  had  been  placed  and  become  thoroughly  set,  before  the 
arch  forms  could  be  placed. 


Rangers, 
IO'aIO' 


rzpr;:::;--nf L 


FiQ.  67. — Poor  sheeting  for 
sewer  12  ft.  by  12  ft. 


FiQ.  68. — Good  sheeting  for 
sewer  12  ft.  by  12  ft. 


Box  Sheeting. — Horizontal  sheeting,  sometimes  called  "box  sheeting," 
is  sometimes  used  where  the  material  excavated  is  such  that  the  banks 
will  stand  untimbered  for  a  considerable  length  of  time  without  great 
danger  of  their  caving.  With  it  less  care  need  be  taken  in  trimming  the 
banks  of  the  trench  plumb  than  in  the  case  of  vertical  sheeting,  as  it  is 
not  absolutely  necessary,  though  it  is  preferable,  that  each  plank  be 
placed  directly  under  the  one  above.  After  the  excavation  has  been 
carried  as  deep  as  practicable  without  bracing  (usually  the  width  of 
three  or  four  planks),  the  planks  are  placed  along  the  sides  of  the 
trench  and  held  in  position  by  2-in.  cleats  placed  vertically  at  each  end 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


233 


and  usually  in  the  center  of  the  planks.  These  cleats  are  in  turn  tightly 
braced  by  means  of  ordinary  wooden  braces,  with  or  without  the  use 
of  wedges,  or  extension  trench  braces.  As  the  width  of  the  trench 
between  the  opposite  planks  is  likely  to  vary,  extension  braces  are  to 
be  preferred  to  the  ordinary  driven  brace,  as  they  are  more  readily 
adjusted  and  by  their  use  the  trench  may  be  more  quickly  braced.  The 
extension  braces  are  also  preferable,  as  there  is  little  or  no  jar  in  con- 
nection with  placing  them,  while  if  driven  braces  are  used  the  jar 
resulting  from  the  driving  may  be  sufficient  to  endanger  the  banks. 


''gfS^S''' 


'i  Foling 


Fig.  69. — Box    sheeting    for 
45- in.  sewer. 


FiQ.  70. — Poling  boards  and  verti- 
cal sheeting  for  sewer  7  ft.  6  in.  by 
6ft.  Sin. 


Box  sheeting  has  been  used  in  some  cases  where  the  material  ex- 
cavated was  very  imstable,  such  as  coarse  gravel  and  dry  sand.  In 
such  cases  the  excavation  can  be  carried  only  deep  enough  to  accom- 
modate a  single  plank  at  a  time.  Each  set  of  planks  is  temporarily 
braced  until  the  trench  has  been  carried  deep  enough  to  accommodate 
uprights  supporting  three  or  four  planks,  after  which  the  uprights,  with 
one  or  two  braces  against  each  pair,  may  be  substituted  for  the  individual 
plank  braces.  In  this  class  of  material  box  sheeting  may  be  more 
expensive  and  troublesome  than  vertical  sheeting,  but  it  is  quite  useful 
under  certain  difficult  conditions,  as  for  example  in  trenches  between 


234  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

car  tracks  or  under  structures  which  interfere  with  the  phicing  of 
vertical  sheeting.  The  use  of  the  wooden  horses  and  temporary  stages 
required  by  plank  drivers  is  also  avoided  by  the  use  of  box  sheeting, 
which  is  often  advantageous,  especially  in  narrow  streets. 

Sometimes  the  first  few  feet  of  excavation  may  be  in  dry  clay,  alluvium 
or  other  material  which  will  stand  fairly  well,  while  beneath  this 
stratum  sand  or  gravel  may  be  encountered.  In  such  cases  a  combina- 
tion of  horizontal  sheeting  on  top  and  vertical  sheeting  below,  may  be 
used  with  success. 

Fig.  69  shows  a  trench  about  12  ft.  in  depth,  the  bsmks  of  which  were 
supported  by  two  sets  of  box  sheeting,  each  three  planks  in  depth. 
The  planks  used  were  2  in.  thick,  12  in.  wide,  and  18  ft.  in  length.  The 
cleats  were  2  X  12  in.  and  3  ft.  in  length.  Extension  braces  were  used, 
as  shown  in  the  sketch.  The  material  excavated  was  a  dry  alluvial 
clay. 

Poling  Boards. — This  method  of  timbering  is  similar  to  that  of 
vertical  sheeting,  except  that  short  planks  3  or  4  ft.  in  length  called  poling 
boards  are  used  and  the  sheeting  is  placed  against  the  banks  from  time 
to  time  as  the  excavating  proceeds  instead  of  being  driven.  The  planks 
are  placed  vertically  against  the  properly  trimmed  banks,  and  are 
supported  by  means  of  rangers  and  braces,  as  in  the  case  of  vertical 
sheeting.  In  some  cases  where  the  banks  stand  well  it  is  possible  to  get 
along  with  a  single  set  of  rangers  and  braces  for  one  set  of  poh'ng  boards, 
as  illustrated  in  Fig.  70.  This,  however,  is  not  as  safe  as  the  method 
shown  in  Fig.  71,  where  two  sets  of  rangers  and  braces  are  used  for 
each  set  of  poling  boards.  The  nature  of  the  material  in  which  the 
trench  illustrated  by  Fig.  70  was  excavated  was  such  that  a  space 
of  from  6  to  12  in.  could  be  safely  left  unsupported  between  the  bottom 
of  one  set  of  poling  boards  and  the  top  of  the  set  next  below. 

Where  this  method  of  sheeting  can  be  used,  economy  in  excavation 
will  result,  because  the  trench  will  be  of  the  same  width  from  top  to 
bottom,  regardless  of  depth.  Thus  with  a  trench  sufficiently  deep  to 
reqiure  three  sets  of  vertical  sheeting,  a  saving  of  about  3  ft.  in  width  at 
the  top  and  about  1.5  ft.  opposite  the  second  set  of  sheeting,  will  result 
from  the  use  of  poling  boards.  Short  pieces  of  plank  which  accumulate 
on  sewer  work  requiring  some  vertical  sheeting  can  be  advantageously 
used  for  poling  boards,  so  that  a  combination  of  poling  boards  and 
vertical  sheeting  often  proves  economical.  The  use  of  poling  boards 
has  the  same  advantages  as  the  use  of  box  sheeting,  in  that  they  do  not 
project  above  the  surface  of  the  ground  at  any  time. 

The  chief  disadvantage  in  the  use  of  poling  boards  lies  in  the  fact  that 
if  there  is  a  collapse  in  the  timbering  of  any  portion  of  the  excavated 
section,  resulting  from  the  running  out  of  the  material  behind  the 
sheeting,  serious  deformation  or  even  collapse  of  the  entire  timbering 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


235 


of  the  section  may  result.     The  danger  of  this  is  much  greater  with 
poling  boards  than  with  vertical  sheeting 

An  illustration  of  sheeting  by  means  of  sets  of  poling  boards  many  of 
which  were  braced  by  single  sets  of  rangers  and  braces,  is  shown  in 
Fig.  70.  The  upper  portion  of  the  trench,  to  a  depth  of  about  18  ft., 
was  in  dry  alluvial  clay,  the  lower  portion  in  sand.  The  poling  boards 
were  4  ft.  in  length  and  were  supported  by  6  X  8-in.  rangers  and 
driven  braces  of  the  same  dimensions.    Where  the  lower  portion  of  the 

Bnck 


S/f0et/ny 


\Sh9€Hng 


(VI 


14'  1 5heeHn^ 


V y_ 


Fig.  71. — Poling  boards  and  vertical 
sheeting  for  7-ft.  sewer. 


Fig.  72. — Trench  supported  by 
poling  boards  with  single  sets  of 
rangers  and  braces,  for  sewer  10  ft. 
1-i-in.  X  10  ft.  7  in. 


trench  is  shored  with  vertical  sheeting,  it  is  necessary  to  excavate  the 
upper  portion  sufficiently  wide  to  provide  for  placing  the  vertical  sheet- 
ing planks  inside  the  upper  rangers. 

Theoretically  there  may  be  some  advantage  In  placing  poling  boards 
in  a  slightly  inclined  position,  although  there  is  more  danger  of  the 
slipping  of  the  rangers  and  bracing.  This  method  is  illustrated  by 
Fig.  71.  The  upper  portion  of  the  trench  was  sheeted  by  means  of 
poling  boards  2  in.  in  thickness,  each  set  being  supported  by  two  sets  of 
rangers  and  braces.  The  poling  boards  were  inclined  into  the  trench 
at  the  top  and  out  at  the  bottom  and  the  bottom  of  each  set  was  slightly 


236 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


behind  and  below  the  top  of  the  next  lower  set.  Polmg  boards  set  this 
way  have  been  used  with  a  single  set  of  rangers  and  braces  on  the  theory 
that  the  bottoms  of  the  upper  set  of  boards  cannot  be  forced  in  while  the 
tops  of  the  planks  below  are  braced  against  them.  Fig.  72  illustrates 
the  method  of  supporting  the  banks  of  a  deep  trench  with  poling  boards. 
The  upper  portion  of  the  trench  was  excavated  to  a  depth  of  about 
10  ft.,  the  banks  being  sloped  at  an  angle  of  about  45^  and  unshored. 
Below  this  to  an  elevation  slightly  below  the  top  of  the  sewer,  the 

banks  of  the  trench  were  sup- 


— ^ SfreetSurface 


■'  I0'9 


20  kVbrfen 


\J        (Dead) 


— j:4 


Fig.  73. — Poling  boards  and  vertical 
sheeting  for  4r-J-ft.  sewer. 


ported  by  means  of  poling 
boards  about  4  ft.  in  length, 
each  set  of  which  was  sup- 
ported by  a  single  set  of  ran- 
gers and  braces.  Below  the 
lowest  set  of  poling  boards 
a  set  of  vertical  sheeting  was 
driven  and  supported  by  two 
sets  of  rangers  and  cross- 
braces. 

The  material  excavated 
from  this  trench  was  dry  allu- 
vial clay  for  a  depth  of  about 
16  ft.  from  the  surface,  below 
which  dry  clean  sand  was  en- 
countered for  a  depth  of 
about  25  ft.,  the  last  4  or  5 
ft.  being  in  water-bearing 
sand  containing  some  small 
gravel. 


Poling  boards  are  particularly  useful  when  it  is  necessary  to  excavate 
below  existing  structures  which  project  into  the  trench,  thus  preventing 
the  placing  of  vertical  sheeting.  In  Fig.  73  a  trench  of  this  kind 
is  illustrated,  in  which  a  20-in.  water  pipe  and  a  4-in.  gas  pipe  were 
encountered.  The  trench  was  opened  sufficiently  wide  to  expose  these 
two  pipes  and  to  permit  taking  out  the  gas  pipe.  Below  the  20-in. 
water  pipe,  although  the  width  of  the  trench  was  decreased,  the  face  of 
the  bank  was  under  the  pipe  so  that  it  was  not  practicable  to  support  it 
by  means  of  vertical  sheeting.  The  character  of  the  material  ex- 
cavated was  such  that  the  banks  would  stand  while  the  excavation  was 
being  carried  down  about  4  ft.  When  this  depth  was  reached  poling 
boards  were  placed  and  securely  braced.  The  lower  portion  of  the 
trench  was  shored  by  means  of  vertical  sheeting. 

Stay  Bracing. — When  the  excavation  is  in  hardpan,  dry  clay,  or  dry 
loam,  it  is  often  unnecessary  to  provide  close  sheeting,  although  some 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  237 

support  for  the  banks  may  be  needed.  In  such  cases  stay  bracing,  or 
skeleton  sheeting,  will  prove  economical.  The  simplest  form  of  stay 
bracing  involves  the  placing,  at  intervals  of  6  to  10  ft.,  of  pairs  of 
vertical  planks  braced  tightly  against  the  banks  of  the  trench.  The 
braces  may  conveniently  serve  as  supports  for  staging  platforms  in 
trenches  which  are  sufficiently  deep  to  require  that  the  material  be 
staged  out. 

If  a  trench  must  be  left  open  for  several  days,  the  use  of  stay  bracing  is 
not  to  be  recommended  unless  conditions  are  especially  favorable, 
as  heavy  rains  are  likely  to  soften  the  banks  and  cause  expensive  and 
dangerous  caving. 


Fia.  74. — Trench  in  alluvium;  stay  bracing. 

Fig.  74  clearly  shows  the  method  of  supporting  the  banks  of  a  trench 
by  means  of  stay  braces.  In  this  case,  each  pair  of  stay  braces  was 
supported  by  a  single  brace,  some  of  which  were  6  X  d-in.  timbers,  and 
others  consisted  of  two  2  X  6-in.  planks. 

Skeleton  Sheetibg. — In  some  cases  where  it  is  difficult  to  determine 
prior  to  the  completion  of  the  excavation,  whether  or  not  it  will  be 
necessary  to  use  vertical  sheeting,  skeleton  sheeting  Is  used.  This 
consists  of  the  usual  rangers  and  braces  with  pLanks  between  the  rangers 
and  the  banks  of  the  trench  opposite  the  braces.  By  putting  in  these 
frames,  it  is  possible  to  slip  planks  in  later  without  delay  wherever 


238  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

found  necessary.  It  is  often  desirable  to  place  such  planks  at  intervals 
of  2  or  3  ft.  where  it  is  unnecessary  to  provide  close  sheeting. 

Danger  Due  to  Previous  Excavations. — When  a  trench  is  excavated 
through  natural  ground  which  has  not  before  been  excavated,  the  banks 
are  not  likely  to  cave  until  excavation  has  reached  a  depth  of  3  to  5  ft. 
if  the  excavation  is  in  loam,  clay,  hardpan,  or  other  similar  material. 
If,  however,  the  ground  has  been  previously  excavated  and  refilled,  or 
if  a  trench  has  been  excavated  and  refilled  parallel  to  the  trench  under 
consideration,  the  banks  are  very  likely  to  cave  in  and  the  shoring  should 
be  placed  before  the  trench  has  been  carried  to  an  unsafe  depth.  For 
this  reason  the  excavation  of  trenches  in  the  older  city  streets  likely 
to  have  been  excavated  for  water  and  gas  pipes,  or  for  conduits,  is  more 
hazardous  than  similar  excavations  in  new  and  undeveloped  territory 
not  likely  to  have  been  disturbed  by  excavation.  Similarly,  excavation 
in  filled  land  is  always  treacherous  and  requires  bracing  and  sheeting. 

Bracing  Curves. — When  a  sewer  is  to  be  constructed  around  a  curve, 
the  trench  is  generally  laid  out  on  chords  of  a  length  dependent  upon 
the  degree  of  curvature.  The  ends  of  the  rangers  are  cut  on  radial  lines, 
thus  making  the  outer  rangers  longer  than  the  inner  rangers.  It  is 
desirable  to  have  the  braces  nearly  at  right  angles  to  the  rangers  but 
where  the  curve  is  very  sharp  this  is  not  always  practicable.  Whenever 
the  braces  are  not  placed  substantially  at  right  angles  to  the  rangers, 
cleats  or  short  planks  should  be  securely  spiked  against  the  rangers  on 
both  sides  of  each  brace  to  prevent  it  from  slipping.  In  some  cases 
where  the  banks  of  the  trench  are  not  very  heavy,  it  may  be  possible  to 
excavate  the  trench  on  the  line  of  the  curve  and  instead  of  heavy  timbers 
one  or  two  thicknesses  of  2-in.  planks  bent  to  the  curve  may  be  used  for 
ro^ngers.  In  such  cases  it  will  usually  be  helpful  to  scarf  with  a  saw  the 
inner  side  of  each  plank  at  intervals  of  4  to  8  in.  to  a  depth  of  from  1/4  to 
1/2  in.  to  aid  it  in  taking  the  curve  without  cracking  or  breaking,  the 
inner  side  referred  to  being  the  side  of  shorter  radius  of  curvature. 

Jetting. — Where  sheeting  must  be  driven  much  ahead  of  excavation, 
it  is  occasionally  found  impossible  to  make  substantial  progress  in 
the  driving  of  sheeting  by  ordinary  methods.  In  such  cases  a  jet  of 
water  may  be  forced  into  the  soil  just  below  the  bottom  of  the  plaDk 
so  that  as  the  soil  becomes  softened  the  plank  can  be  driven  with 
comparative  ease. 

In  some  cases  the  bottom  of  each  plank  is  fitted  with  a  special  ap- 
pliance by  means  of  which  the  jet  of  water  is  introduced  into  the  soil 
immediately  below  the  plank.  In  other  cases  the  water  may  be  con- 
veyed to  the  lower  end  of  the  sheeting  by  a  3/4-  or  1-in.  pipe,  inde- 
pendent of  the  sheeting  itself,  and  pushed  down  by  hand.  Where  the 
planks  are  fitted  with  special  jetting  shoes,  it  is  economical  to  drive  them 
a  considerable  distance  below  the  bottom  of  the  trench  at  one  operation. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  239 

The  efficiency  of  the  jetting  method  depends  upon  the  resulting 
increase  in  the  fluidity  of  the  material  into  which  the  sheeting  is  to  be 
driven. 

Pulling  Sheeting. — Pulling,  or  drawing,  wooden  sheeting  is  ordinarily 
a  quick  and  simple  matter  if  proper  appliances  are  at  hand.  If  the 
planks  are  long  or  if  steel  piles  are  used,  steam  or  electric  power  can  be 
advantageously  utilized  in  pulling  them.  In  such  cases  a  wire  cable  or 
chain  should  be  thrown  around  the  planks  as  low  down  as  possible  and 
attached  to  the  hoisting  rope  of  the  engine  with  which  they  are  to  be 
pulled.  Often  several  planks  can  be  drawn  in  this  manner  at  one 
operation.  Where  sheeting  is  pulled  by  hand  each  plank  is  withdrawn 
separately,  a  convenient  apparatus  for  this  being  a  lever  and  plank  clamp. 
Fig.  99,  page  262.  It  is  a  U-shaped  iron  casting,  the  length  of  the  U 
being  about  8  in.  and  the  width  varying  according  to  the  thickness  of  the 
sheeting  but  usually  being  2  in.  To  this  clamp  is  attached  an  iron  ring 
into  which  the  hook  on  the  end  of  the  lever  engages.  As  the  plank  is 
pulled  a  distance  of  about  a  foot,  the  lever  is  raised,  the  clamp  slipped 
down  and  a  new  hold  taken  upon  the  plank. 

Where  it  is  necessary  for  the  backfilling  to  be  thoroughly  tamped  and 
the  space  occupied  by  the  sheeting  to  be-refilled  to  reduce  the  danger  of 
settlement  to  a  minimum,  it  may  be  desirable  to  draw  the  sheeting  a  few 
feet  at  a  time  as  the  backfilling  progresses,  instead  of  pulling  it  entirely 
out  of  the  trench  after  the  backfilling  is  completed.  By  the  former 
method  a  better  opportunity  is  afforded  to  fill  completely  the  voids 
left  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  plank,  and  to  ram  the  material  thoroughly. 
In  cases  where  such  caro  is  imnecessary  the  sheeting  may  be  withdrawn 
and  the  voids  filled  with  fine,  relatively  dry  material  which  can  be 
consolidated  by  the  use  of  long,  narrow  rammers  or  by  water.  While 
in  most  cases  it  is  practicable  to  withdraw  the  sheeting  a  few  feet  at  a 
time,  it  is  always  inconvenient  to  do  so  and  it  adds  somewhat  to  the  cost 
of  the  work. 

LUMBER 

Kinds  of  Lumber. — The  kinds  of  lumber  used  for  shoring  trenches 
vary  in  different  parts  of  the  country.  In  the  East  the  use  of  spruce  was 
formerly  almost  universal,  although  the  scarcity  and  increased  cost  of 
this  kind  of  timber  in  recent  years  have  led  to  the  more  general  use 
of  long  leaf  yellow  pine.  Hemlock  has  been  used  in  some  communities, 
with  some  success,  although  it  has  generally  been  found  inferior  to 
either  spruce  or  pine.  In  the  Middle  West  and  South,  yellow  pine  is 
largely  used,  although  hard  wood,  such  as  oak,  is  used  in, many  places. 
Oregon  pine  is  generally  employed  in  trenches  on  the  Pacific  Coast. 
Ordinarily  the  first  cost  of  the  timber  is  an  important  if  not  the  chief 
consideration.    If  the  sheeting  requires  hard  driving,  it  is  advisable  to 


240  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

get  a  soft  tough  wood  or  a  hard  strong  wood.  For  this  purpose  spruce 
proves  very  satisfactory  and  oak  will  stand  driving  fairly  well.  Hem-, 
lock  is  likely  to  splinter  and  13  not  usually  satisfactory  where  hard 
driving  is  necessary.  Oak  is  likely  to  warp  and  prove  difficult  to  handle 
on  this  account,  and  is  also  heavy.  On  the  whole,  spruce  and  yellow 
pine  appear  to  be  the  most  satisfactory  kinds  of  lumber  for  the  bracing 
and  sheeting  of  trenches. 

Planks  for  sheeting  shoidd  not  be  over  10  in.  in  width,  except  notched 
planks,  nor  less  than  6  in.  It  requires  about  the  same  amount  of  labor 
to  drive  a  plank  4  in.  wide  as  one  8  in.  wide,  but  two  8  in.  planks  can 
ordinarily  be  driven  in  about  the  same  time  and  perhaps  with  less 
exertion  than  one  plank  12  in.  in  width.  It  is  considered  by  many, 
especially  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  country,  that  10  in.  is  the  most 
desirable  width  of  planks  for  ordinary  sewer  sheeting,  as  they  are  not  so 
wide  as  to  cause  difficulty  in  driving  and  there  are  not  so  many  to  be 
handled  as  if  narrower  planks  are  used. 

Dressing  Lumber. — The  lumber  used  for  sheeting  and  bracing 
trenches  is  generally  square  edged,  sawed  stock,  although  round 
timbers  may  be  used  for  braces  and  rangers.  Planks  for  poling  boards 
and  box  sheeting  require  no  dressing,  although  they  should  be  of  ap- 
proximately uniform  thickness  and  length.  Rangers  (commonly  16  ft. 
long)  should  be  of  uniform  length  so  that  the  braces  of  the  several  sets 
may  come  directly  under  each  other. 

If  it  is  practicable  to  saw  the  braces  to  the  desired  length  in  advance 
of  their  use,  it  will  be  found  that  the  bracing  will  be  done  more  expedi- 
tiously than  if  each  brace  is  cut  to  measure  as  required,  although  the 
latter  method  is  sometimes  necessary  upon  heavy  and  difficult  work. 
Braces  should  be  beveled  along  their  vertical  edges,  the  comers  about 
1  in.  each  way  being  cut  off.  This  will  facilitate  driving  and  alsb 
avoid  a  tendency  toward  splitting. 

Planks  for  vertical  sheeting  are  generally  beveled  for  a  distance  of 
about  6  in.  from  one  end.  They  should  not  be  beveled  to  a  sharp  edge 
but  the  thickness  should  be  made  about  1/2  in.  In  some  cases,  espe- 
cially where  the  planks  are  to  be  driven  a  considerable  distance  below 
the  bottom  of  the  excavation,  as  in  quicksand,  it  may  be  advantageous 
to  bevel  both  sides  of  the  lower  ends  of  the  planks,  thus  avoiding  the 
tendency  for  the  planks  to  be  forced  either  way  from  the  desired  line  of 
sheeting.  If  there  is  a  tendency  for  the  planks  to  separate  as  they  are 
driven  in  advance  of  excavation,  it  may  in  some  cases  be  overcome 
by  cutting  the  lower  ends  on  a  slant,  as  shown  at  B  in  Fig.  56.  When  a 
plank  is  cut  in  this  manner  the  tendency  is  for  it  to  be  forced  by  the 
ground  which  it  penetrates  tightly  against  the  plank  previously  driven 
adjacent  to  it. 

Vertical  sheeting,  especially  where  soft  lumber  like  spruce  or  pine  is 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


241 


used,  should  be  dressed  at  the  top  to  receive  plank  caps,  which  will 
protect  the  ends  from  brooming  under  the  driving  maul.  Care  should 
be  taken  to  dress  the  planks  sufficiently  so  that  the  cast-iron  caps  will  fit 
loosely  upon  them,  as  a  driving  fit  will  result  in  cracking  and  breaking  of 
the  caps. 

STEEL  SHEET  PILING 

In  recent  years  since  the  cost  of  lumber  has  become  so  high  and  the 
quantity  of  heavy  engineering  foundation  work  has  greatly  increased, 

A — 


,^B 


Type 


^^^^^^^MM^ 


Type    'B''. 
Fio.  75. — ^Lackawanna  steel  sheet  piling. 


inferior      of    CofFmrdatn 


V^aling    Strip 


'.'■•■  ^—',—'     Retained  Material,  Outside  of  Cofferdam 

Fig.  76. — ^Lackawanna  arched  web  piling. 

steel  sheet  piling  has  come  into  common  use,  particularly  upon  coffer- 
dams and  foundation  work  near  bodies  of  water.  Several  types  of 
steel  piling  are  shown  in  Figs.  75,  76,  77,  78  and  79.  Thus  far  com- 
paratively little  sheet  steel  piling  has  been  used  for  the  curbing  of  or- 

16 


242 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


dinary  sewer  trenches,  although  there  have  been  a  number  of  instances 
in  which  it  has  been  successfully  used  on  this  class  of  work.  Steel 
piling  is  not  as  easily  handled,  driven  or  pulled  as  plank,  but  its 


!^-^»^ 


IZ"x40lb5, 


-M    102- 


iox 


!#i 


^12" 


I 
— ->t 


I*J?>^«1J?« 


izi'xzeibs. 


-M     104.- 


I  ^  t*-~  — 


K- 


Tir" 
^32 


f^nr. ^ 


9"  X  I6/bs. 


7' 


i^^ 


a 


ytM 


-M     103- 

Kj^.::i::z:z:zz"|^:;™:::: 

Fig.  77. — United  States  steel  sheet  piling  (Carnegie  Steel  Co.) 


Ufe  is  obviously  much  longer,  as  upon  ordinary  work  it  can  be  used 
over  and  over  again  without  serious  depreciation. 

The  heavier  types  of  piling  must  be  driven  with  power  hammers  al- 
though some  of  the  lighter  types  may  be  driven  by  hand.  It  is  necessary 
in  most  cases,  to  withdraw  the  sheeting  by  power. 


^.^K 


'i»»iitn. 


Y>iiiinini>njtiiiJiiiijjij 


FiQ.  78. — ^Jones  &  Laughlin  steel  sheet  piling. 

The  dimensions  and  weights  of  steel  piling  made  by  the  Lackawanna 
Steel  Co.,  the  Carn^e  Steel  Co.,  the  Jones  &  Laughlin  Steel  Co.,  and 
the  Wemlinger  Steel  Piling  Co.  are  given  in  Tables  40  to  43. 

Fig.  80  illustrates  the  method  of  sheeting  a  trench  with  steel  piling. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


243 


Table  40. — Dikbksioks  and  Weights    op  Steel  Sheet  Piling  Made 

BY  Lackawanna  Steel  Co.,  1912  (Fig.   75) 


Type 

A 
A 
A 

B 

Center  to 

center  of  jaws 

in  inches 

Thiokness  of 
web  in  inches 

™.  .  ,  ^         ,.           Weight  per  square 
Weight  per  linear      .  "^    ;      Tr . 
...              J          foot  of  wall  in 
foot  in  pounds                        , 

pounds 

Width  of  joint 

over  all  in 

inches 

A 

7 

121 
12i 
15 

B 

i 

i 

i 

i 

12.54 
37 . 187 
42.5 
62.56 

21.5 
35.0 
40.0 
50*.  05 

c 

1  H 

3  tt 
3  tt 

6     i 

Table    41. — Dimensions,     Weights    and     Physical    Properties    op 

Wemlinger  Steel  Sheet  Piling  (Fig.  79) 


o 
55 


1 
2 
3 

4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 


Sheet-piling  with  short  clips' 


Physical 
properties 


1 : 

a 

1 

•3 

M 

Approximate  weight' 


sj|1 

—       o 


o   V 

«3  »  a 
.Sao 
t,  • 
Ok   o 


fc4        O 

Pk  * 


S<8    (D 
3  •*< 


:9   3 


A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

i 

B 

A 

B 

i 

B 

A 

B 

A 

C 

A 

C 

i 

C 

A 

5.0 

7.5 

8.5 

8.0 

9.5 

11.5 

13.5 

15.0 

19.0 

23.5 


5.0 

0.75 

7.5 

0.80 

8.5 

1.10 

8.0 

1.55 

9.5 

2.10 

11.5 

2.15 

13.5 

2.20 

24.0 

2.45 

30.0 

3.00 

36.0 

3.50 

12 
16 
16 
20 
24 
24 
24 
30 
40 
50 


O    tp 

a> 

^   a 

1     - 
-   § 

at" 


0.68 
0.69 
0.69 
0.88 
0.88 
0.88 
0.88 
1.41 
1.41 
1.41 


Section  modulus 

of  sheet  piling 

interlocked, 

inches' 

0.69 

0.87 

0.97 

1.12 

1.25 

1.46 

1.68 

3.42 

4.65 

5.84 


Fheet  piling  with  full  length  clip 


(Clip  not  in- 
cluded in  com- 
putations) 


11 

B 

A 

10.0 

12 

B 

i 

11.0 

13 

B 

A 

13.0 

14 

B 

A 

16.5 

15 

C 

A 

17.0 

16 

C 

i 

22.25 

17 

C 

A 

27.25 

18 

D 

A 

23.5 

19 

D 

i 

31.0 

20 

D 

A 

38.0 

20 
24 
24 
24 
30 
40 
50 
30 
40 
50 


0.88 
0.88 
0.88 
0.88 


I 


1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 


41 
41 
41 
41 
41 
41 


1.12 
1.25 
1.46 
1.68 
3.42 
4.65 
5.84 
5.64 
7.36 
9.10 


^  Types  A,  B,  and  C  are  furnished  with  one,  two,  three,  or  any  number  of  short  clips, 
as  desired. 

*  Corrugated  steel  sh(^et  piling,  being  made  from  plates,  is  subject  to  a  variation  in 
weight  of  2-1/2  per  cent,  above  or  below  the  theoretical  weight,  in  accordance  with  the 
Manufacturers'  Standard  Specifications.  In  all  cases,  the  weight  per  square  foot  is  given 
for  the  sheet  piling  interlocked  and,  therefore,  includes  the  overlap. 


244 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


"    S  t2  *" 

SI'S  S 

o 

^s 

&^i% 

>   .j3 

fc 

• 

h     -*a 

1 

•a 's  rfj  £ 

§ 

»0     t-H 

CO  c^ 

• 

OQ    S  ■©     9 

O 

^  ? 

ij 

» 

1 

•• 

00  -g 

s 

t^     t-H 

'*!< 

CO    rH 

O 

jQ 

H 

2 
^ 

o 

M 

"8 

8 

• 

9  ^ 

CO   f-H 

o 

0 
•M 

Tt< 

•^    rH 

o 

s 

Jz; 

M 

C3 

i4 

O 

9 
'S 

s 

05 

1^    CP 

H 

« 

a 

o 

o  o 

H 

'a 

H 

b 
•tj 

W 

9 

OQ 

h3 

S 

^fH 

»o  »o 

1-4  ja 

CO 

CO   ^ 

• 

00  i-« 

QQ 

•M 

CD 

1 

g 

< 

H 

M 

CO 

O  F^ 

CiQ 

0S    S 

CO 

csi  r* 

£  -^ 

• 

•         • 

0 

r-4 
t-H 

U 

Pei 

.o  ^ 

o 

— *  «»« 

l« 

5.g 

o 

00   CO 

£ 

•§,--3 

'*!< 

CO    fH 

^ 

a 

■^  s 

o 

^  s. 

Im 

■■"•» 

H 

V 

^ 

-"1 

Hw 

(N 

is-S 

C^ 

C^  o 

•^ 

^.9 

f-i 

^fH 

S 

n9 

9 

H 

g     H 

s 

ss 

.2 -2 

1-^    ^fH    rH 

s 

a 

« 

o 
o 

a 

i 


O 

I 

o 

N 

*C 

o 

.x] 

u 

K 

3 
3 

o 

a 

d 
o 

o 


OQ 


00 

6 


o 

a 


QQ 

Jz; 
o 

p 

00 


O 


H 
CO 


QQ 


CO 
H 

53 


» 

^  ^  O)  O)  O) 

^^^^        ^^^^         ^^^^        ^^^^         ^^^^ 

d  d  d  d  d 

o 

t-4   »-<   CO   CO   CO 

c^  c^  c^  c^  c^ 

d  d  d  d  d 

^ 

lO  to  ^   'd*   "^ 

CO  CO  t»  r^  r^ 

d  d  d  d  d 

» 

»o  »o  1^  t^  t* 

CO   CO   CO   CO    CO 

<6  c>  d>  (6  d> 

Q 

rJ4  r^  t^  ^  o 

CO  CO  CO  'T  *o 

<6  c>  <6  di  di 

O 

U3   lO   CO  CO  CO 

pq 

^  t^  WD  ^  t^ 
03   O  t>   00   00 

CO   CO   ^  ^   ^ 

-«J 

C^   C^   W5  »0  »C 

f-H    r-4    t-H    t-H    rH 

Weight  per 

(iquare  foot, 

pounds 

Q  »0  O  lO  U3 
O  N   M   1^   N 

to  d  t^  o  c^ 

CO   CO   CO   CO   ^ 

1 

d 

s 

U3   lO   CO  CO   CO 

X  X  X  X  X 

CSI  C^  lO  to  »o 

^fH    f-H    t-H    rH    t-H 

■ 

o 

t-4   C^    CO   rJ4   lO 

SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  243 


TypeD. 
Fio.  70. — Wemlinger  steel  sheet  piling. 


Flo.  80. — Steel  aheet  pUiog  with  timber  rangers  and  braces. 


246  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

It  will  be  aoticed  that  wooden  waling  pieces  and  braces  were  used  to 
shore  the  piling  aad  prevent  the  banks  from  caving.  One  of  the  dj^- 
culties  in  the  use  of  steel  sheeting  is  the  holding  of  the  rangers  in  the 
desired  position,  as  there  is  a  decided  tendency  for  them  to  slip  out  of 
place  because  of  the  lack  of  friction  between  the  steel  and  the  lumber. 


Fio.  81. — Driving  eteel  sheet  piling  with  stcarn  hammer. 

Tig.  SI  illustrates  the  method  of  driving  the  sheet  piling  with  a  steam 
hammer.  It  will  be  noticed  that  there  is  a  hole  through  each  pile  near 
one  end  into  which  a  hook  or  chain  can  be  inserted  for  the  purpose  of 
pulling  it  out  of  the  ground  at  the  end  of  the  work. 

Various  de\ices  have  been  used  to  facilitate  the  pulling  of  steel  sheet 
piling.  Several  of  these  are  illustrated  in  Figs.  82  and  83,  from 
"Steel  Sheet  Piling"  by  Carnegie  Steel  Company. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


247 


Ordinary  pile  drivers  are  used  witli  much  of  the  ateel  sheeting  sunk 
today  but  there  are  on  the  market  a  number  of  steam  operated  hammers 
which  have  been  succeaafully  used  for  tho  purpose.  Several  of  these 
hammers  are  illustrated  in  Fig.  84.  Table  44  gives  the  weights  and 
dimensions  of  the  Warrington  steam  hammers,  made  by  the  Vtilcan 


1 

f 

/■      1 

H>   .  -jtt    _\f  i       

...»-4    m 

I     H  ii 

Mh 

\^^^ 

\5i't?' 

^-C^^rXlilSS 

Dtrrk^Uockand  TSclilc. 


Fio.  82- 

Iron  Works,  and  of  the  sizes  of  piling  and  sheeting  for  which  they  may  be 
safely  used.  The  larger  sizes  were  developed  primarily  for  pile  driving, 
but  are  sometimes  required  for  steel  sheet  piling.  For  example  the 
No.  1  size  was  used  by  W.  A.  Fargo  in  driving  30-ft.  piles  through  sand 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Pile  Pulling  Clamp.  Grady    Pile   Pullec 

Fio.  83. — Clamps  for  pulling  steel  sheet  piling. 


McKieman-Temf         Ingtraoll-Rand 
Vulcan  Sheeting.  Sheeting,  Sheeting. 


Fia,  84. — Steam  hammers  for  driving   piles,   steel  sheet  piling  < 
sheeting. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


249 


and  gravel,  using  a  cast-iron  follower  on  the  top  of  the  pile,  then  a  wood 
block  about  20  in.  long  and  15  in.  in  diameter  and  then  a  l~3/8-in. 
circular  steel  plate  13  in.  in  diameter. 

Table  44. — Weights  and  Dimensions  op  Warrington  Steam  Pile 

Hammers  (Vulcan  Iron  Works) 


0 

1 

2 
3 

4 
5 


JD 

Dimensions  cylin- 

Pk 

s 

J3 

t 

* 

a 

Total    net    weig 
pounds 

i 
•s 

der, 

over  all 

1 
s. 

1 

Steam-boiler,  H. 
required 

o 

1 

•3 

Distance     betwi 
jaws,  inches 

••4 

B 

• 

o 

CO 

d 

a 

• 

ja 
■*> 

a 

* 

M 

■»» 

• 

6 

1 

Duty, 

■iae  of  piles 

or  piling  hammer  will 

drive 


16.000  7.500  180  ...  I ...  1 16i  48 
9.850  5.OOOI144  .  ..|...!l3i'42 
6,500 
3.800 
1,350 
800 


3.000,138  ......  lOi  36 


1.800 
550 


96 
84 
68| 


10 


10 


8  !30 

4   |24 
4   '   7j 


60 
70 
70 
80 
80 
300 


60 
40 
25 
18 
8 
10 


2i 
2 

1} 
li 
1 
1 


26 
20 
19 
18 
14 


9}    Heavy  concrete  piles 
S\   18  in.  sq.  or  rd.  piles 


7i 


14  in.  sq.  or  rd.  piles 


6}    10  in.  sq.  or  rd.  piles 


4J 


4  in.  X  12  in.  sheeting 
3  in.  X  12  in.  sheeting 


TIMBERING  TUNNELS 

In  some  kinds  of  material  as,  for  example,  hardpan,  it  is  possible  to 
excavate  a  tunnel  drift  for  some  distance  without  the  use  of  shoring,  in 
others  as,  for  example,  loose  gravel,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  drive 
sheeting  in  advance  of  the  excavation  in  order  to  prevent  the  sand  and 
stone  from  rolling  into  the  heading. 

The  material  immediately  overlying  the  tunnel  is  free  to  fall  into  it, 
but  the  arching  action  of  the  earth  above  prevents  the  sliding  of  a  large 
prism  of  earth  extending  from  the  tunnel  to  the  surface  of  the  ground,  as 
might  be  the  case  if  the  material  were  without  friction  and  there  were  no 
arching  effect.  Even  where  a  tunnel  is  driven  through  relatively  loose 
gravel,  which  runs  badly,  it  is  not  common  to  encounter  e^essive 
pressures,  though  the  gradual  running  of  the  gravel  may  cause  a  move- 
ment of  the  material  all  the  way  to  the  surface  of  the  ground.  On  the 
other  hand,  where  the  tunnel  is  driven  through  fine  sand  containing 
considerable  water,  or  through  a  wet  clay,  perhaps  containing  some 
sand,  the  pressures  exerted  upon  the  tunnel  shoring  are  often  very  great 
and  may  even  approximate  hydrostatic  pressures. 

As  in  the  bracing  of  trenches,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  prevent 
the  movement  of  the  material  immediately  outside  the  tunnel.  To 
accomplish  this  it  is  necessary  for  the  timbering  to  follow  the  excavation 
closely,  and  in  materials  which  are  likely  to  run,  the  planking  should 
be  driven  slightly  ahead  of  the  excavation. 

Most  tunnels  in  rock  require  little  or  no  timbering.  In  some  cases, 
however,  where  the  rock  is  rotten  or  where  there  are  scams  of  clay 


250  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

between  strata  of  rock,  it  may  be  necesaary  to  put  in  struts  to  prevent 
the  rock  from  slipping  into  the  excavation  and  it  may  even  be  ueceasary 
to  sheet  a  tunnel  if  the  rock  is  badly  disintegrated. 

Great  difficulty  is  encountered  in  ahoetbg  tunnels  driven  in  rock 
80  overlaid  with  soil  that  the  upper  portion  of  the  tunnel  is  in  earth. 
In  such  cases  the  upper  part  of  the  drift  is  first  carried  forward  in  the 
earth  and  securdy  timbered,  after  which  the  rock  is  drilled  and  blown. 
Great  care  is  required  in  this  latter  operation  to  prevent  blowing  out 


Fia,  85.— ^Worcester  sewer  tunnel  in  rock  with  roof  in  earth. 

braces   and  sheeting.     Some  of   the  difiiculties   encountered  in   this 
class  of  work  are  illustrated  in  Fig.  85. 

In  hardpan  it  la  usually  possible  to  excavate  with  safety  a  drift  5  or  6 
ft.  long  before  timbering  is  placed.  In  some  cases  the  masonry  may  be 
immediately  built  and  thus  the  necessity  of  timbering  the  drift  may  be 
avoided.  If,  however,  a  tunnel  even  in  hardpan  ia  to  stand  some  time 
before  the  masonry  is  constructed,  it  will  be  wise  to  provide  a  timber 
lining.  Such  a  tunnel  lined  with  poling  boards,  held  in  place  by  caps 
and  legs,  is  shown  in  Fig.  86.  Poling  boards  in  a  tunnel  are  horizontal 
while  in  a  trench  they  are  vertical. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  251 

This  tunnel  was  driven  in  sections  about  6  or  S  ft.  in  length  without 
the  use  of  shoring.  After  a  section  had  been  completed  the  caps  and 
legs,  which  were  of  6  X  6-in.  spruce  timber  and  2  ft.  6  in.  center  to 
center,  were  placed  in  position  and  short  poling  boards  slipped  in  Isehiild 
the  li^  and  over  the  cape.  The  caps  and  tegs  were  so  placed  that  it  was 
necessary  to  drive  the  poling  boards  sUghtly  to  force  them  into  their 
proper  positions,  thus  providing  a  firm  support  for  the  soil  outside  the 
sheeting.  The  legs  were  supported  on  footing  blocks  and  were  braced 
across  the  top  by  2-in.  plank,  spiked  to  the  underside  of  the  cap  pieces. 
This  tunnel  stood  for  several  months  before  the  masonry  lining  was 


Fio.  86, — Timbering  in  a  Worcester  sewer  tunnel  in  hardpan. 

constructed  and  showed  no  signs  of  excessive  pressure.  It  was  about 
6  ft.  high  and  6  ft.  wide  at  the  bottom  and  about  4  ft.  wide  at  the  top. 
Such  tunnels  are  sometimes  timbered  by  placing  caps  and  legs  closely 
together,  thus  avoidii^  the  use  of  poling  boards  or  sheeting. 

In  dry  clay  it  is  usually  possible  to  drive  tunnels  in  advance  of 
shoring,  as  in  hardpan,  but  if  the  clay  is  moist,  and  especially  if  it  con- 
tains veins  of  water-bearing  sand,  the  pressures  exerted  are  likely  to  be 
heavy  and  to  follow  very  quickly  aft<:r  the  drift  is  excavated.  The 
shoring  of  a  tunnel  in  such  clay  soils  should  be  strong  and  tightly  wedged 
in  order  that  the  drift  may  hold  its  shape  and  position  when  the  pres- 
sures become  fully  developed,  and  it  is  generally  necessary  to  drive  close 


252  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

sheeting  about  the  legs  and  caps.  The  work  should  be  performed  as 
rapidly  as  possible  because  the  continual  working  of  the  day  under  the 
feet  of  the  laborers  causes  it  to  assume  a  semi-fluid  condition,  which 
makes  it  very  difficult  to  so  place  and  support  the  legs  that  they 
will  withstand  the  pressures  put  upon  them.  Where  the  material  is 
bad,  it  may  be  helpful  to  provide  a  plank  flooring  upon  which  the 
laborers  can  walk  and  thus  prevent  the  constant  working  or  kneading  of 
the  clay.  The  legs  should  be  supported  on  ample  footing  blocks,  or 
stringers  running  entirely  across  the  heading,  and  in  some  cases  must 
be  sunk  into  holes  a  foot  or  more  below  the  bottom  of  the  tunnel  in 
order  to  provide  a  soil  footing  sufficiently  hard  to  withstand  the  pres- 
sure. While  these  precautions  are  all  important,  the  secret  of  success 
in  driving  small  tunnels  in  material  of  this  kind  lies  in  rapid  excavation 
and,  if  possible,  in  prompt  lining  of  the  tunnel  so  that  the  work  may  be 
completed  before  the  material  has  reached  the  semi-fluid  condition 
alluded  to. 

Timbering  Tunnels  in  Gravel  and  Sand. — In  gravel  and  sand  it  is 
necessary  to  drive  the  sheeting  as  fast  as  the  excavation  is  made  and  in 
some  cases  it  should  be  driven  ahead  of  the  excavation.  A  type  of 
timbering  often  used  in  small  tunnels  in  such  ground  is  described  in  an 
article  {Jour,  Assoc.  Eng.  Socs.,  1905)  written  by  Rufus  K.  Porter,  at 
that  time  Assistant  Engineer  in  the  city  of  Newton,  Mass.  This  type 
of  timbering  is  illustrated  by  Fig.  87  (made  up  from  Mr.  Porter's 
article)  and  Fig.  88  (Supt.  of  Sewers  Rpt.,  Worcester,  Mass.,  1899). 

Ordinarily  the  first  step  in  driving  a  tunnel  of  this  kind  is  to  put  down 
a  well-sheeted  shaft.  After  this  has  been  done,  the  method  of  procedure 
at  Newton  may  be  followed.  Two  lines  of  holes,  about  18  in.  apart  and 
covering  a  space  as  long  as  the  cap  piece,  were  bored  through  the  planks; 
each  plank  was  then  chiseled  out  and  a  1-in.  board  set  in  behind  it  and 
secured  by  wedges  to  prevent  the  face  of  the  bank  from  caving  in,  as 
illustrated  in  a,  Fig.  87.  The  first  frame,  consisting  of  a  cap  and  two 
legs,  securely  cleated,  as  shown  in  6,  Fig.  87,  was  then  set  in 
place  adjacent  to  but  not  quite  touching  the  sheeting.  The  roof  lagging 
pieces  were  then  set  up,  the  front  ends  resting  upon  the  cap  and  the  rear 
ends  upon  a  temporary  support,  the  center  passing  under  and  being 
wedged  down  from  a  heavy  timber  running  across  the  shaft,  which  in 
turn  was  braced  down  from  the  rangers  as  illustrated  by  c,  Fig.  87. 
The  breast  boards,  shown  in  a,  were  then  dropped  about  2  in.  and  the 
roof  lagging  was  driven  into  the  loose  dirt  behind  the  sheeting.  After 
the  roof  lagging  had  been  driven  far  enough  to  prevent  the  material  from 
running  from  behind  the  sheeting,  the  breast  boards  were  removed  and 
the  soil  behind  them  was  allowed  to  run  into  the  shaft  until  it  had  as- 
sumed its  natural  slope. 

The  upper  side  lagging  pieces,  one  on  each  side,  were  then  entered, 


SHEETING  AND  BRACINO  OF  TRENCHES  253 


Fia.  87. — Method  of  timbering  tunnel  through  fine,  wet  sand,  Newton,  Mass- 


254  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

beii^  wedged  in  the  same  manaer  as  the  roof  plank.  As  the  roof  was 
given  a  pitch  of  1-1/2  in.  to  the  foot,  the  upper  side  lagging  piece  on  each 
side  was  so  tapered  that  its  under  side  would  be  level  when  in  its 
proper  position,  as  illustrated  ia  d,  Fig.  87.  Where  the  material  waa 
very  wet  and  troublesome,  several  of  the  side  planks  were  so  tapered  as 
to  give  the  sides  a  distinct  downward  inclination. 

After  the  roof  lagging  had  been  driven  in  about  3  ft.  the  sand  was 
partially  excavated  and  a  temporary  cap  or  "horse-head"  wadset  up,  as 


Fig.  88. ^Timbering  in  tunnel  through  soft  ground,  Worcester. 

in  e,  Fig.  87,  to  prevent  the  plank  from  crowding  down.  The  dotted 
line  in  e  shows  the  extent  to  which  the  sand  was  excavated  before  this 
horse-head  was  inserted.  The  horse-head  waa  placed  by  first  removing 
the  djrt  immediately  under  the  roof  and  forcing  the  cap  piece  tightly 
against  the  under  side  of  the  roof  plank,  after  which  a  trench  was  cut  in 
the  center  of  the  heading  and  a  short  temporary  leg  and  prop  placed 
under  the  cap  piece.  As  the  excavation  proceeded  the  side  legs  were  set 
in  place  and  tightened  with  wedges. 

After  the  horse-head  had  been  set  and  thoroughly  wedged  against  the 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


255 


roof,  the  lagging  was  driven  to  its  full  length,  as  shown  in  f,  Fig.  87, 
which  also  gives  an  idea  of  the  extent  of  excavation  up  to  this  time.  The 
ground  was  then  carefully  cut  away  under  one  roof  plank  at  a  time  and 
an  IS-in.  breast  board  was  set  up  vertically  under  its  forward  end  to 
hold  the  earth  from  running  into  the  heading.  These  boards  were 
generally  set  on  a  footing  plank  and  secured  at  the  top  by  wedges,  thus 
helping  to  support  the  roof. 

The  next  cap  was  then  placed  against  the  breast  boards,  on  top  of 
which  were  placed  ^'chocking  blocks,"  7  in.  long,  2  in.  wide  and  3  in. 
thick.  On  top  of  these  blocks  was  set  a  waling  board  2  in.  thick  and  of 
the  same  length  as  the  cap. 

After  this  cap  piece  had  been  adjusted,  the  two  upper  side  lagging 
pieces  on  each  side  were  driven  in  flush  with  the  breast  and  wedged 
against  the  cap,  thus  securing  them  firmly  in  place.  A  temporary  center 
prop  was  next  inserted  under  the  cap,  a  narrow  trench  being  excavated 


2x6 Va///7^         .-'2 '^  ^  ^O'/TofffJ/wff/t^ 


Wallnq 


Fbot  Block,  y^ifx  18" 

Fig.  89. — Timbering  in  a  liouisville  sewer  tunnel. 

for  that  purpose.  The  prop  was  then  wedged  tightly  against  the  cap 
piece  which  in  turn'raised  the  waling  board  so  that  it  bore  tightly  against 
the  roof  and  supported  it  so  that  the  temporary  horse-head  could  be 
taken  out  when  it  interfered  with  the  work.  Two  timbers  about  10  ft. 
long,  called  "the  bars,"  were  then  placed  with  their  ends  under  the  cap 
butting  against  the  breast  boards  just  placed.  These  timbers  rested  on 
legs  having  a  solid  foundation  previously  prepared,  ^,  Fig.  87,  the  back 
ends  passing  under  and  being  wedged  down  from  the  cap  pieces  behind. 
The  center  prop  was  then  removed,  the  roof  being  supported  by  the  bars, 
and  the  whole  width  of  the  breast  was  cut  down  at  once.  As  the  material 
was  too  wet  to  stand  with  a  vertical  face  for  more  than  about  2 
min.,  the  excavation  had  to  be  done  very  quickly.  The  work  was 
begun  at  the  top  and  the  material  removed  for  a  depth  equal  to  the 
width  of  a  bulkhead  plank,  which  was  inserted  as  soon  as  the  excava- 
tion had  been  completed. 
As  it  was  unsafe  to  rely  upon  the  bars  for  the  support  of  the  roof  for  a 


256 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


very  long  time,  center  propa  were  placed  as  soon,  as  possible.  When  the 
material  had  been  excavated  as  far  forward  as  the  sheeting  would  permit, 
the  process  described  was  repeated. 

In  Louisville,  Ky.,  1909,  under  the  immediate  supervision  of  Howard 
S.  Morse,  Resident  Engineer,  a  portion  of  the  Beai^rasa  intereepter,  5  ft. 
2  in.  by  4  ft.  11  in.  in  size,  was  built  in  tunnel  driven  through  fine,  dry 
Band.  The  method  of  timberii^  this  tumiel  and  the  dimensions  of  the 
timbers  are  shown  in  Fig.  89. 


Hight  WiwSheKn  Ctntral  Bottom  Dnlf 
Lt/Hf/iK/ShewtUrTOrrthenSidtteSttlnlra 

for  Hb/I-Paft 


Timbering  Large  Tunnels. — The  timbering  required  to  support  the 
earth  about  large  tunnels  is  frequently  quite  complicated.  In  some 
oases  small  pilot  drifts  are  carried  ahead  of  the  main  portion  of  the 
tunnel  and  the  timbering  started  from  these  is  carried  around  the  tunnel 
until  the  entire  excavation  i»  made.  In  other  cases,  pilot  tunnels  are 
driven  at  the  sides  or  in  the  center  of  the  bottom  of  the  tunnel  and 
from  these  the  timbering  is  gradually  worked  out  untU  the  entire  section 
has  been  excavated  and  timbered.  Several  interesting  types  of  timbering 
for  large  tunnela  and  subway  excavations  are  given  by  J.  C.  Mcem 
(Trans.  Am.  Soc.  C.  E.,  vol,  Ix,  p.  20)  from  which  Fig.  90  is  taken  as 
illustrating  one  such  method.  This  is  that  known  as  the  "crown-bar" 
system,  in  which  "it  is  customary  to  drive  the  bottom  drift  ahead  of  all 


Fig.  92. — Arch  timbers  supporting  tunnel  roof. 


Outer  wooden  lining  to  carry  thrust  of  shield  jacks. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TUNNELS 


257 


other  work  and  follow  this  closely  with  a  top  drift.  The  bars  are 
placed  in  position  in  this  top  drift,  the  poling  boards  are  driven  off 
approximately  as  shown,  and  the  bracing  is  erected  as  the  excavation 
proceeds.  Where  this  type  of  bracing  is  used  in  rock  tunnels  it  is,  of 
course,  unnecessary  to  drive  a  bottom  drift,  and  the  arch  timber  bracing 
shown  on  the  left  is  usually  put  in  underneath. the  bars  as  soon  as  the 
depth  of  excavation  corresponding  to  the  springing  line  of  the  structure 
has  been  reached.  It  is  thus  seen,  Fig.  90,  that,  for  the  bar  system 
alone,  a  circular  funnel  of  the  size  shown  by  the  outer  ring  could  be 
constructed,  whereas  with  the  arch  timber  bracing  remaining  in  place,  a 
tunnel  no  larger  than  that  shown  by  the  inner  ring  could  be  built." 

The  author  points  out  the  impracticability  of  filling  voids  over  the 
masonry  when  this  type  of  timbering  is  adopted  and  the  danger  of 


JacJh- 


Fig.  94. — Section  of  tunnel  shield  and  lining,  Lawrence  Avenue,  Chicago. 

settlement  due  to  the  fact  that  the  poling  boards  do  not  finally  rest  in 
the  plane  at  which  they  were  started. 

Another  system  of  timbering  used  by  Mr.  Meem  is  shown  in  Fig.  91 
and  Fig.  92  (Trans.  Am.  Soc.  C.  E.,  vol.  Ix,  p.  22).  In  this  case  all  of  the 
timbering  except  the  sheeting  was  removed,  the  latter  bearing  directly 
on  the  brick-work. 

**In  this  type  the  arch  timbers  were  underpinned  from  the  masonry 
which  was  put  in  in  a  centrally  sheeted  and  braced  trench,  as  shown,  the 
entire  masonry  of  the  structure  being  built  in  three  successive  stages,  of 
which  the  first  is  that  noted  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench.  In  this  method 
the  outward  thrust  of  the  bottom  legs  of  the  arch,  or  segmental  timbers, 
precludes  almost  entirely  the  possibility  of  any  settlement  while  the  sheeting 
for  the  middle  trench  is  being  driven.  In  dry  ground  there  is  practically 
no  danger  of  any  settlement  to  be  caused  from  this  method  of  underpinning, 
and  the  writer  has  supervised  tunnels  built  safely  by  this  method,  where 
the  ground-water  level  was  normally  5  ft.  above  the  subgrade  and  had  to 
be  kept  down  by  constant  and  heavy  pumping  through  sand." 

17 


258  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Ttumeling  with  Aid  of  SUeld. — A  number  of  large  tunnels  through 
gravel  and  quicksand  have  been  driven  with  the  aid  of  strong  metal 
shields  forced  forward  by  jacks  into  the  soil  from  time  to  time  as 
desired,  a^  illustrated  by  Fig.  93  nnd  Fig.  94. 

In  some  cases  the  shield  ia  followed  up  immediately  with  the  masonry 
Uning  of  the  tunnel,  a  thin  steel  taU-plate  serving  to  prevent  the  settle- 
ment of  the  soil  between  the  rear  end  of  the  shield  and  the  front  end  of 
the  masonry. 


6  ft.  in 

In  otlier  cases  the  tunnel  has  been  lined  with  cast  iron  segments  as  the 
shield  was  moved  forward,  the  masonry  linii^  being  inserted  within  the 
cast  iron  lining  at  a  later  date. 

In  tlie  case  of  the  Lawrence  Avenue  Sewer,  Chic^o,  the  tunnel  was 
lined  with  8  X  8  in.  timber  against  which  the  shield  jacks  reacted, 
Fig.  93.     The  masonry  was  laid  inside  the  timber  lining. 

Tunneling  with  Compressed  Air. — In  subaqueous  tunnels  and 
sometimes  in  tunnels  through  very  treacherous  quicksands  located  in 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TUNNELS 


260  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

close  proximity  to  buildings,  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  apply  air 
pressure  to  the  tunnel  to  prevent  the  inflow  of  water  and  earth.  Such 
tunnels  have  been  shored  by  means  of  cast-iron  segmental  plates,  and 
in  some  cases  by  wooden  segments,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  95.  (Rept. 
Supt.  of  Sewers,  Worcester,  1899.) 

'The  tunnel  was  6  ft.  in  diameter,  and  "the  temporary  lining,  put  in  as  fast 
as  material  was  excavated,  consisted  of  wooden  rings  18  in.  long.  These 
rings  were  cut  into  eight  segments,  and  as  the  segments  had  to  be  put  in 
place  from  the  inside,  one  piece  was  cut  so  as  to  form  a  key,  wedging  as 


driven  into  position  from  the  inside,  and  the  segments  each  side  of  it  were 
cut  to  fit  this  key.  All  other  pieces  were  cut  on  the  radial  lines.  The 
segments  were  framed  of  2  X  3-in.  North  Carolina  pine,  being  pinned  together 
by  1/4-in.  carriage  boHa.  The  ribs  of  the  rings  were  cut  on  the  circle,  6  ft. 
indiameterontheoutside.  These  segmental  frames  werecovered  with  3/4-in. 
matched  spruce  sheathing,  which  was  stuck  curved  on  one  side  to  rest  tightly 
on  the  curved  frame.  The  frames  were  bored  by  template,  so  that  there  was 
no  delay  in  bolting  them  together  when  in  place.  Three  I/2-in.  bolte 
were  used  on  each  aide  and  two  of  the  same  size  on  each  end." 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TUNNELS  261 

This  tunnel  was  entered  throuRh  a  caisson  8  ft.  wide,  16  ft.  long  and 
7  ft.  high,  built  on  the  surface  of  the  ground  of  8  X  8  in.  spnioe  timbere, 
one  course  running  horizontally  and  the  other  verticaUy.  After  this 
caisson  was  built  the  earth  was  excavated  from  below  it  and  it  was 
gradually  forced  down  into  place.  The  caisson  with  the  bucket  and 
man  locks  is  illustrated  in  Figs.  96  and  97. 

The  use  of  cast  iron  rings  made  up  of  short  segments  is  shown  in 
Fig.  98,  which  was  prepared  from  a  photograph  taken  in  the  southern 


Fic.  98.— Cast  ir 

low  level  aewer  of  the  Main  Drainage  Works  of  London.  This  sewer  was 
built  in  tunnel  with  the  aid  of  compressed  air  and  the'  illustration  is 
typical  of  much  of  the  tunneling  which  has  been  done  through  bad 
ground  in  the  vicinity  of  London,  England.  ("Main  Drainage  of 
London,"  by  Sir  Maurice  Fitzmauricc.) 

TOOL^TiE  QUIRED 

While  sheeting  and  bracing  may  be  done  with  tools  found  upon  most 
kinds  of  construction  wGj:k,  it  is  desirable  and  economical  to  proWde  a 


262 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


few  specially  designed  implements.  A  cross  cut  saw  will  be  found 
advantageous  for  cutting  up  lumber,  and  an  adz  should  be  provided  for 
dressing  it.    Vertical  sheeting  can  be  conveniently  driven  with   a 


White  Oak  Lever  with  Norway  Iron  Hook. 


Norway 

Iron 
Sheeting 
Clamp. 


Fia.  99. — Sheeting  or  plank  clamp  and  lever. 

wooden  maul,  or  beetle,  made  of  a  tough  hard  wood,  such  as  elm,  and 
weighing  about  25  lb.  Such  a  maul  should  be  provided  with  iron  rings 
set  back  from  the  faces  of  the  hammer  and  securely  wedged  and  pinned 


K Ml'. 


^ 


^  Rounded "-ii 


\ 


fr%. 


c hi. 


K  /if  >f 


7^ — \    TH 


L 


.v_« 


'Ed^  6/ightfy  fhunded-^ 

le  Pounda.  23  Pounds, 

Fig.  100. — Large  and  small  bracing  hammers. 

to  it.  For  the  handle  of  a  maul  a  pick  handle  or  hammer  handle  is 
preferable  to  a  round  handle  as  there  is  less  tendency  for  the  maul  to 
turn  in  the  hands  of  the  driver,  resulting  in  striking  an  uneven  or 
glancing  blow. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES 


263 


A  cast-iron  plank  cap  should  be  provided  for  the  protection  of  the  ends 
of  the  planks  or  in  hard  driving  they  may  become  so  splintered  and 
broomed  that  they  can  be  used  but  once;  in  fact,  they  may  sometimes  be 
so  damaged  in  this  way  that  they  cannot  be  driven  to  the  required 
grade.  Upon  very  light  and  easy  work  it  may  not  be  always  nec- 
essary to  use  plank  caps,  but  they  should  always  be  at  hand.  Such 
caps  should  be  made  to  fit  the  prevailing  width  of  planks  which,  where 
practicable,  should  be  about  10  in. 

For  driving  braces  it  will  be  found  convenient  to  provide  special 
bracing  hammers,  Fig.  100,  weighing  about  16  lb.  These  hanmiers  are 
so  designed  that  the  blow  can  be  delivered  close  to  the  end  of  the  braces 
and  they  are  much  more  effective  than  an  ordinary  sledge  hammer.    A 


Also  Furnished  for  Use  wifH 

Timber  Strut. 


Also  Furnished  with  Iron  Pip^- 


Fig.  101. — ^Extensible  trench  braces. 

hammer  of  less  than  16  lb.  weight  is  not  desirable  for  bracing  and  it  has 
been  found  that  one  weighing  more  than  16  lb.  is  rather  clumsy  for  work 
in  ordinary  trenches,  although  for  heavy  bracing  a  hammer  weighing 
about  23  lb.  is  frequently  used. 

In  recent  years  metal  extensible  braces,  Fig.  101,  have  often 
been  substituted  upon  much  light  trench  work  for  the  wooden  braces 
formerly  generally  used.  These  braces  are  more  quickly  applied 
than  the  timber  struts  and  require  no  driving,  an  advantage  where  the 
banks  are  unstable  and  likely  to  cave  if  jarred.  These  braces  may  be 
provided  with  lugs  on  both  ends,  whieh  overhang  the  rangers  and  pre- 
vent them  from  falling,  with  danger  of  injuring  the  laborers  working 
below,  in  case  the  bank  yields  enough  to  loosen  them. 

This  type  of  brace  is  usually  fitted  with  lap-welded  wrought  iron  pipe 
and  the  length  of  brace  may  be  varied  by  substituting  different  lengths 


264 


»  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


of  pipe.  It  is  customary,  however,  in  departments  having  trench  work 
in  hand  at  all  times,  to  carry  in  stock  a  supply  of  braces  of  several 
lengths  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  changing  the  pipes. 

The  dimensions  of  extensible  trench  braces  which  can  usually  be 
obtained  from  stock  are  given  in  Table  45. 

Table  45. — Dimensions  of  Extensible  Sewer  Braces 


(Harold  L.  Bond  Co.,  Boston) 

I^ength  of  brace  closed 

Length  of  screw 

Diameter  of  screw 

Will  spread 

18  inches 

12  inches 

H  inches 

8  inches 

21  inches 

12  inches 

H  inches 

8  inches 

24  inches 

12  inches 

1^  inches 

8  inches 

27  inches 

12  inches 

IJ  inches 

8  inches 

30  inches 

12  inches 

1^  inches 

8  inches 

36  inches 

12  inches 

IJ  inches 

8  inches 

42  inches 

14  inches 

H  inches 

10  inches 

48  inches 

14  inches 

IJ  inches 

10  inches 

54  inches 

16  inches 

1}  inches 

12  inches 

60  inches 

16  inches 

IJ  inches 

12  inches 

66  inches 

18  inches 

li  inches 

12  inches 

72  inches 

18  inches 

IJ  inches 

12  inches 

60  inches 

18  inches 

1}  inches 

12  inches 

66  inches 

18  inches 

1|  inches 

12  inches 

72  inches 

18  inches 

11  inches 

12  inches 

84  inches 

18  inches 

If  inches 

12  inches 

Such  braces  are  sometimes  provided  with  fixed  or  ball  joint  shoes. 
Those  with  the  ball  joint  shoes,  however,  are  not  as  convenient  to 
handle  and  place  as  those  with  fixed  shoes.  It  has  also  been  found  that 
there  is  considerable  breakage  of  ball  joint  braces  on  account  of  the 
failure  of  the  ball  and  socket  joints,  which  are  not  usually  machined,  to 
seat  properly. 

It  is  desirable  in  some  cases  to  use  timber  braces  with  screws  on  one 
end.  In  such  cases  one  end  of  each  brace  is  bored  out  to  receive  the 
screw,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  101.  Such  braces  are  particularly  useful 
upon  wide  trenches  as  they  are  quickly  adjusted  and  require  no 
driving.  For  wide  trenches  and  heavy  banks,  many  sewer  builders 
prefer  to  use  timber  braces  and  wedge  them  against  the  rangers  with 
hardwood  wedges  driven  to  refusal. 


PRACTICAL  SUGGESTIONS  ON  TIMBERING 

Good  workmanship  is  essential  to  the  successful  timbering  of  trenches. 
If  it  is  desired  to  practise  strict  economy,  it  is  wiser  to  adopt  a  less  ex- 
pensive method  and  to  do  the  work  in  a  first  class  manner  than  to  adopt 
a  more  expensive  method  and  resort  to  careless  workmanship. 


SHEETING  AND  BRACING  OF  TRENCHES  265 

The  banks  should  be  carefully  trimmed  to  a  plane  surface  before 
placing  the  sheeting.  As  the  trench  is  deepened  the  material  of  the 
bank  should  not  be  permitted  to  run  out  or  ravel  or  be  trimmed  back  to 
allow  the  sheeting,  when  driven  down,  to  shp  over  it  without  friction, 
inasmuch  as  this  practice,  particularly  in  running  sand  or  gravel,  is 
likely  to  lead  the  workmen  to  carelessness  in  allowing  the  formation 
of  pockets  behind  the  sheeting.  Such  pockety  are  undesirable  not  only 
because  they  may  result  in  serious  settlement  of  the  ground  and  increase 
in  pressure  upon  th^  bracing,  but  because  they  are  likely  to  result  in 
deformation  of  the  finished  sewer  by  spreading  of  the  arch  when  the 
trench  is  backfilled. 

In  excavating  a  trench  in  loose  material,  hay  or  meadow  grass  will  be 
found  useful  to  prevent  the  material  from  running  through  the  cracks 
in  the  sheeting. 

The  banks  of  a  trench  should  never  be  allowed  to  move,  if  it  is  possible 
to  prevent  movement.  The  sheeting  and  bracing  should  be  placed  in 
the  trench  as  soon  as  practicable,  in  order  to  prevent  any  movement  of 
the  top  layers  of  the  soil.  The  sheeting  should  be  driven  as  fast  as  the 
excavation  proceeds  and  in  quicksand  it  is,  of  course,  necessary  to  drive 
the  sheeting  in  advance  of  the  excavation.  Great  care  should  be  taken 
to  prevent  the  banks  from  raveling  where  notches  or  "windows" 
are  required.  The  pressures  exerted  upon  timbering  increase  greatly  as 
the  soil  back  of  the  sheeting  becomes  cracked,  loosened,  or  in  any 
way  shifts  its  position.  Such  movements  of  the  banks  are  likely  to 
cause  the  breakage  of  adjacent  water  pipes  and  sewers,  resulting  in  the 
partial  or  complete  saturation  of  the  soil  with  the  water  leaking  from 
them,  and  producing  pressures  approaching  hydrostatic  pressure. 

Braces  should  always  be  tight.  Where  they  are  short  and  of  wood 
they  may  be  cut  to  correct  length,  and  drivenr,  but  where  they  are  long 
they  should  be  tightened  by  hard  wood  wedges  driven  to  refusal. 
Upon  the  lighter  work  extensible  screw  braces  will  be  found  more 
convenient  than  wooden  braces. 

Except  upon  very  heavy  and  expensive  work  it  will  generally  be 
found  more  convenient  to  use  rangers  and  braces  of  the  same  size  from 
the  top  to  the  bottom  of  the  excavation,  than  to  attempt  to  vary  their 
size  in  accordance  with  theory.  If ,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  it  seems 
desirable  to  increase  the  strength  of  the  timbering  toward  the  bottom  of 
the  excavation,  or  at  any  other  point,  this  can  be  done  by  decreasing  the 
space  between  the  rangers,  and  adding  braces. 

Trenches  should  always  be  braced  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  as 
much  room  as  is  possible  for  working  between  the  rangers  and  between 
the  braces.  For  this  reason,  as  well  as  to  reduce  the  quantity  of  excavar 
tion,  it  is  common  practice  to  use  rectangular  rangers  on  edge  or  with 
the  long  side  vertical.     While  this  is  not  the  most  economical  method 


266  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

of  utilizing  the  strength  of  the  timber,  it  does  save  room  within  the 
trench  and  makes  it  possible  to  construct  the  trench  sUghtly  narrower 
than  if  the  rangers  were  turned  so  that  the  long  side  would  be  horizontal. 
Moreover,  this  method  gives  greater  bearing  area  for  the  braces,  and, 
as  shown  in  the  next  chapter,  this  transverse  crushing  strength  may 
control  the  section. 

It  is  generally  desirable  to  use  two  braces  at  the  contiguous  ends  of  two 
sets  of  rangers,  so  that  each  set  may  act  independently  of  the  other  and  a 
sattlem^it  of  one  section  of  bracing  will  not  affect  the  adjacent  set. 
Center  braces  should  generally  be  of  the  same  size  as  the  rangers.  End 
braces  should  be  of  the  same  depth  as  the  rangers  but  may  generally  be 
somewhat  narrower,  because  \he  loads  put  upon  them  are  smaller  than 
those  put  upon  the  center  braces. 

All  braces  should  be  securely  cleated  to  the  adjacent  rangers  so  tliat 
they  will  not  fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  trench  in  case  the  banks- yield  and 
they  become  loosened. 


CHAPTER  X 

SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES 

Behavior  of  Different  Materials  with  Respect  to  the  Need  of 
Shoring. — The  necessity  for  shoring  and  the  methods  of  timbering  or 
sheeting  trenches  vary  according  to  the  character  of  soil  encoimtered,  the 
proximity  of  pavements,  pipe  lines,  buildings  and  other  structures 
likely  to  be  damaged  by  settlement  of  the  adjacent  ground,  and  the 
manner  in  which  the  earth  is  to  be  excavated. 

In  many  cases  in  hardpan,  little  or  no  shoring  may  be  required  in 
trenches  carried  to  a  considerable  depth.  Where  it  is  felt  that  there 
may  be  some  danger,  an  occasional  stay  brace,  or  skeleton  sheeting,  may 
be  used.  Hardpan  usually  caves  in  large  masses  and  does  not  ravel 
through  small  openings,  so  that  in  many  cases  the  alternate  planks  may 
be  left  out. 

In  trenches  in  clay,  it  is  usually  necessary  to  provide  close  sheeting 
and  heavy  timbers,  for  while  clay  stands  fairly  well  for  a  time  after  it  is 
first  excavated,  it  is  likely  to  swell  and  in  many  cases  water  will  gradually 
seep  toward  the  trench,  making  the  clay  a  treacherous  material  and  one 
which  may  impose  heavy  loads  upon  the  timbering. 

In  dry  alluvium,  sheeting  will  generally  be  required,  although  the 
banks  usually  stand  well  for  a  time.  In  some  cases  it  may  be  possible 
to  leave  spaces  between  the  planks,  as  this  material  is  not  likely  to 
ravel. 

In  trenches  in  gravel,  close  sheeting  is  almost  always  required,  because 
of  the  tendency  of  this  material  to  ravel  and  roll  through  small  openings. 
It  is  not  usually  possible  to  excavate  trenches  more  than  3  or  4  ft.  deep 
in  gravel,  before  putting  in  the  sheeting. 

Sand  acts  differently  in  different  cases,  dep>ending  largely  upon  its 

size  and  uniformity  and  the  amount  of  moisture  which  it  contains.    As  a 

rule,  it  is  necessary  to  close-sheet  trenches  in  sand,  and  it  is  not  generally 

wise  to  carry  the  excavation  more  than  3  to  5  ft.  deep  before  placing  the 

^  shoring. 

\  Where  the  sand  is  very  fine  and  contains  considerable  water,  high 

pressures  are  likely  to  be  exerted  upon  the  shoring.  In  some  cases 
these  pressures  may  approach,  and  perhaps  even  somewhat  exceed,  a 
corresponding  hydrostatic  pressure.  In  such  materials  the  sheeting 
must  be  close  and  strongly  braced,  and  the  planks  must  usually  be 
driven  a  considerable  distance  below  the  bottom  of  the  trench  to  help 

267 


268  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

hold  them  in  their  proper  position  below  the  lowest  ranger,  and  to 
prevent  the  sand  in  the  trench  from  being  forced  up  by  the  pressure  of 
the  soil  outside  the  sheeting. 

Trenches  in  rock  may  sometimes  be  safely  excavated  without  shoring. 
They  may  be  treacherous,  however,  when  the  rock  is  seamy  and  when 
the  seams  lie  at  an  angle  of  more  than  30^  with  the  horizon,  and  more 
especially  where  these  seams  are  filled  with  clay  or  other  material  upon 
which  the  rock  may  readily  slide.  It  is  often  difficult  to  determine  how 
far  back  from  the  face  of  the  bank  the  rock  has  been  shattered  or  cracked, 
and  sometimes  where  shoring  is  omitted  large  masses  suddenly  sUde 
into  trenches.  When  the  banks  are  very  treacherous  it  may  be  wise 
to  provide  close  sheeting,  but  with  trenches  of  moderate  depth  this  is 
not  generally  necessary,  as  frequent  stay-braces  or  skeleton  sheeting 
will  prevent  the  rock  from  sliding'.  The  shoring  of  rock  trenches,  and 
especially  trenches  in  rock  overlaid  With  earth,  is  likely  to  be  unsatis- 
factory and  expensive  because  of  the  derangement  of  braces  and 
shoring  by  blasting  operations.  It  is  difficult  to  avoid  this  trouble  by 
any  method  of  sheeting,  but  much  can  be  done  to  lessen  the  danger  of 
blowing  out  shoring  by  the  use  of  care  and  judgment  in  the  blasting. 

Angle  of  Repose  of  Soils. — "The  angle  of  repose,"  designated  as  </>, 
is  the  greatest  angle  above  the  horizontal  plane  at  which  the  material 
imder  consideration  will  he  without  slipping  or  sliding. 

The  angle  of  repose  of  various  kinds  of  earth  has  been  found  experi- 
mentally, but  varies  greatly  according  to  local  conditions.  Either 
increasing  or  decreasing  the  moisture  in  natural  soils  may  decrease  the 
angle  of  repose  and  increase  the  pressure  developed.  Rough  average 
values  of  the  angle  of  repose  and  weights  of  several  soils  are  given  in 
Table  46,  taken  from  "A  Treatise  on  Masonry    Construction"    by 

Baker,  to  which  have  been  added  the  values  of  i — ,—  .  — r*     These 
'  1  +  sm  <A 

values  are  of  little  practical  importance  but  are  given  to  show  the 
values  which  are  generally  used  in  discussions  of  the  theory  of  earth 
pressure,  and  to  give  a  general  idea  of  how  they  may  vary.  Where  the 
earth  pressure  is  applied  to  a  vertical  plane  and  the  surface  of  the  earth 
is  horizontal,  the  resultant  pressure  is  obtained  by  the  formula 

^      wh^       1  —  sin  0 
^        2     ^  1  -h  sin  0 

Where  P  =  resultant  pressure 

w  =  weight  of  1  cu.  ft.  of  earth 
h  =  height  of  bank 
0  =  angle  of  repose. 

According  to  this  formula  tlie  pressure  developed  by  a  soil  having  an 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  269 


angle  of  repose  of  15°  is  nearly  3-1/2  times  as  great  as  the  pressure 
developed  by  the  same  soil  if  its  angle  of  repose  were  45°. 

Table  46. — Angle  op  Repose  and  Weight  op   Dipperent  Kinds  of 

Earth 


Kind  of  earth 


Angle  of  repose       !i  -  8in0 


Alluvium. 


Clay,  dry. . 
Clay,  damp 
Clay,  wet . . 


Gravely  coarse 

Gravel,  graded  sizes 


Loam,  dry 

Loam,  moist 

Loam,  saturated 


Sand,  dry 

Sand,  moist. . . . 
Sand,  saturated. 


<t>  _ 
'lS° 

26° 
45'' 
15** 

30° 
40° 

40° 
45° 
30° 

35° 
40° 
30° 


Slope' 


1  -f  sin^ 


Weight, 

lb*  per 

cu.  ft. 


3  to  1 

2to  1 

1  to  1 

3.2  to  1 

1.7  to  1 
1.2  to  1 

1.2  to  1 

1  tol 

1.7  to  1 

1.4to  1 
1.2  to  1 
1.7  to  1 


0.53 

0.39 
0.17 
0.59 

0.33 
0.22 

0.22 
0.17 
0.33 

0.27 
0.22 
0.33 


90 

110 
120 
130 

110 
120 

80 

90 

110 

100 
110 
120 


^  Ratio  of  horizontal  to  vertical  dimension. 

Cohesion. — ^The  methods  ordinarily  used  for  calculating  earth  pres- 
sures disregard  the  cohesion  of  the  particles  of  soil.  This  quality  varies 
greatly  with  different  soils  and  also,  in  any  particular  soil,  with  its 
moisture  content  and  degree  of  compression.  Clean  dry  sand  and 
gravel  have  httle  cohesion.  In  clay  it  is  an  important  quality  factor.  It 
is  this  force  which  makes  it  possible  to  excavate  a  trench  to  a  consider- 
able depth  without  shoring.  In  clean,  loose,  dry  sand,  it  is  not  gener- 
ally possible  to  excavate  to  any  material  depth  without  causing  the 
banks  to  slide  or  roll  in,  but  if  the  sand  is  moist  the  excavation  may  be 
carried  to  a  depth  of  4  to  6  ft.  without  caving.  Alluvium,  hardpan 
and  clay  banks  from  10  to  15  ft.  high  will  often  stand  for  several  days 
and  even  in  some  instances  for  weeks  without  caving. 

It  is  frequently  observed  that  a  given  soil  will  have  different  cohesive 
qualities  when  under  different  pressures.  It  therefore  seems  logical  to 
assume  that  the  cohesive  qualities  of  a  soil  will  increase  with  the 
increase  in  depth  of  the  excavation,  and  also  to  assume  that  the  angle 
of  reposo  will  vary  in  a  corresponding  manner,  and  will  increase  with 
the  depth  of  the  trench.  An  increase  in  the  water  content  of  the  soil  is 
likely  to  be  encountered  as  the  excavation  is  carried  down,  however, 


270  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

with  a  corresponding  decrease  of  the  angle  of  repose  in  most  cases. 
These  assumptions  should  not  be  carried  too  far,  as  soils  rarely  are 
homogeneous  and  of  uniform  character  from  top  to  bottom  of  excava- 
tion, strata  of  different  sbils  being  frequently  encountered. 

Lack  of  Adhesion. — ^In  considering  earth  pressures  both  the  cohesive 
and  adhesive  qualities  of  the  soil  are  generally  included  under  the  term 
cohesion,  as  it  is  very  difficult  to  separate  them.  The  soil,  however, 
does  not  readily  establish  adhesive  qualities  as  distinguished  from 
cohesive  qualities.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  if  a  trench 
has  at  some  previous  time  been  excavated  parallel  and  relatively  near  to 
a  new  trench,  the  soil,  if  allowed  to  yield,  will  almost  always  crack  on 
or  cave  to  the  line  of  the  original  trench,  showing  that  practically  no 
adhesion  exists  between  the  original  virgin  soil  and  that  refilled  into  the 
old  trench.  This  condition  exists  even  after  the  trench  has  been  back- 
filled and  subjected  to  the  conditions  of  nature  for  many  years,  and  is 
one  which  must  always  be  taken  into  account  in  planning  for  the 
bracing  of  a  new  excavation.  In  many  cases,  it  is  necessary  to  sheet 
and  brace  trenches  solely  because  at  some  previous  time  the  soil  near 
them  has  been  excavated  and  the  bonds  of  cohesion  broken,  no  bonds  of 
adhesion  having  since  been  established.  For  these  reasons,  the  bracing 
and  shoring  of  trenches  in  virgin  soil  is  very  different  and  often  much 
simpler  than  similar  work  in  the  older  city  streets  which  have  been 
subject  to  frequent  excavation. 

Tendency  of  Soil  Conditions  to  Change. — ^There  is  a  tendency  for  the 
conditions  affecting  the  need  of  shoring  to  vary  from  time  to  time.  In 
most  cases  the  banks  will  be  found  quite  stable  and  apparently  exercising 
no  marked  lateral  pressure  when  first  excavated,  and,  except  in  gravel, 
the  excavation,  if  made  quickly,  may  usually  be  carried  to  a  considerable 
depth;  but  as  the  banks  are  allowed  to  stand,  it  will  be  noticed  that  the 
soil  gradually,  and  sometimes  rapidly,  changes  in  character,  expanding 
"from  release  of  pressure  or  other  cause,  showing  cracks  at  the  surface, 
raveling  and  flaking  off  in  small  pieces.  Some  of  these  changes  may 
be  due  to  drying  out  of  the  moisture  in  the  banks,  or  on  the  other  hand 
to  an  increase  in  moisture,  in  either  case  reducing  the  cohesive  qualities 
of  the  soil.  The  increase  in  moisture  often  results  from  the  gradual 
seepage  of  water,  from  water-bearing  strata  cut  by  the  excavation,  into 
the  soil  of  the  banks,  tending  to  soften  certain  strata  relatively  dry  before 
the  excavation  of  the  trench  changed  the  conditions.  In  cities  there  are 
often  leaks  in  water  pipes  and  sewers,  the  drainage  from  which  will 
work  toward  a  nearby  trench  and  cause  a  gradual  saturation  of  the 
lower  portions  of  the  banks.  Sudden  and  great  changes  are  often  caused 
by  rains,  which  in  a  short  time  may  saturate  from  top  to  bottom  a  bank 
which  had  bofore  contained  only  enough  moisture  to  assure  its  stability. 

While  the  tendency  toward  changed  conditions,  due  to  a  decrease  or 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  271 

increase  in  the  moisture  in  the  soil,  cannot  be  over-emphasized|  the 
changes  due  to  other  causes  are  equally  important  and  productive  of 
danger  to  life  and  property.  The  most  potent  of  these  is  the  failure  to 
sheet  and  brace  the  trench  properly,  thus  causing  voids  behind  the 
sheeting.  Such  voids,  once  formed,  permit  the  gradual  loosening  of  the 
soU,  from  the  vibration  caused  by  driving  the  sheeting  and  braces,  the 
operation  of  the  excavating  machinery  and  the  passing  of  cars  or  trains. 
It  \a  often  necessary  to  place  unusual  loads  upon  the  ground  close  to  the 
banks,  which  may  cause  the  soU  to  yield  if  there  are  voids  behind  the 
sheeting.  Movements  of  the  earth  due  to  any  of  these  causes  result 
in  changed,  and  often  greatly  increased,  pressures  and  loads  upon  the 
sheeting,  and  may  also  result  in  changing  the  point  of  application  of  the 
resultant  earth  pressure  upon  it. 

CALCULATION  OF  EARTH  PRESSURES 

Rankine's  Formula. — Methods  of  calculating  the  pressure  exerted 
by  the  earth  against  vertical  and  inclined  planes  have  been  evolved  by 
Coulomb,  Rankine  and  several  later  investigators.  Most  of 'these 
methods  are  based  upon  the  fundamental  assumptions  that  pressure  is 
exerted  laterally  by  a  wedge-shaped  prism  of  earth,  A5C,  Fig.  102,  which 
is  just  on  the  point  of  sliding  along  a  plane  of  rupture,  BC,  and  exerts  its 
greatest  pressure  at  the  toe.  Fig.  102  illustrates  a  trench  with  the 
surface  of  the  ground  horizontal  on  one  side  and  at  an  angle  e  with  the 
horizontal  plane  on  the  other.  The  symbols  used  in  the  figure  and  in  the 
formulas,  are  as  follows: 

w  =  weight  of  unit  volume  of  earth,  assumed  to  be  100  lb.  per  cubic 
foot. 

P  =  resultant  pressure  of  the  mass  of  earth,  prevented  from  shding 
by  sheeting. 

H  =  horizontal  component  of  P. 

^  =  the  angle  of  repose  DBE  of  a  particular  soil. 

e  =  angle,  DAF,  of  surface  of  surcharge,  with  the  horizontal  plane. 

h  a=  depth  at  any  point  below  surface. 

p  =  intensity  of  horizontal  pressure,  in  pounds  per  square  foot,  at 
any  depth,  A,  below  the  surface. 

This  theory  disregards  cohesion,  which  is  generally  an  active  force 
of  varying  amount  in  all  soil^. 

Rankine's  formula,  modified  for  special  problems,  is  convenient  for 
calculating  earth  pressures  and  is  typical  of  the  others.    This  formula  is 

„       wh^  ^  ^    cos  6  —  \/cos2  d  —  cos*  <t> 

P  =  -       cos  ex -    /  = 

2  cos  d  +  V  cos*  e  —  cos*  4> 

In  evolving  this  formula  it  is  assumed  that  the  plane  against  which 


272 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


\^  A'  A  A  Jk  U  n  A 


€  2|  |l 


I 


CVJ 


8 


iS 


g 


rvi 


s 

js 


N 


Vk 

^ 


I 


»0 


o 


|5 


o 

o 

* 


^ 

s 


fVi 


I 


«VJ 


o 


|5 


5 

^ 
5 


fin 


tr>- 


0-* 


1   ^ 


|S 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  273 

the  lateral  pressure  is  exerted,  or  the  sheeting,  is  vertical  and  that 
the  resultant  earth  pressure,  P,  is  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  ground. 
Ordinarily  in  cases  where  the  earth  is  sloped  away  and  up  from  the 
vertical  plane  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  angle  d  between  the  surface 
of  the  ground  and  the  horizontal  plane  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  repose  </>, 
in  which  case  the  formula  becomes, 

F  =    g-  cos  4> 

If  there  is  no  surcharge  and  the  surface  is  horizontal  e  will  equal  zero, 
and  the  formula  becomes, 

2        1  +  sm  «/» 

In  all  cases  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  direction  of  the  resultant  pressure 
P  is  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  ground 

H  =  P  cos  0 

If  the  angle  of  repose  is  reduced  to  zero,  as  in  the  case  of  a  liquid,  the 
fovmula  becomes, 

P  =  ^  =  f 

In  all  cases  P  varies  as  the  square  of  the  height  of  the  bank,  as  in  the 
case  of  a  liquid,  and  it  has  therefore  been  assumed  by  most  engineers 
that  the  resultant  earth  pressure,  P,  is  applied  to  the  sheeting  at  a  point 
one-third  the  height  from  the  bottom.  The  intensity  of  pressure  at 
any  point  may  be  found  by  the  formula, 

2P 

It  is  generally  pssumed  in  calculations  of  this  kind  that  the  angle  of 
repose  is  30**.    The  formula  then  becomes, 

p  =  H  =  t- 

o 
and 

wh 

p  =  3- 

These  last  formulas  are  simple  and  for  practical  purposes  are  aU  that 
need  be  used  to  obtain  a  general  idea  of  the  forces  which  sheeting  and 
bracing  are  likely  to  have  to  withstand. 

If  an  additional  load  is  placed  upon  the  banks,  other  than  that  due  to 
earth  cast  out  of  the  trench  which,  if  sloped  back  at  an  angle  equal  to 
the  angle  of  repose,  or  say  30**,  can  be  cared  for  by  the  formula,  the 

18 


274 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


weight  of  such  additional  load  should  be  calculated  and  reduced  to  an 
equivalent  depth  of  superimposed  earth,  thus  correspondingly  increasing 
H,  in  which  case  the  surface  should  be  assumed  to  be  horizontal.  In 
estimating  the  loads  hkely  to  come  upon  the  shoring,  due  consideration 


Table  47. — Intensity  of  Horizontal  Pressure  and  Total  Horizontal 

Pressure  of  Earth  at  Various  Depths 

(W=  100  pounds  per  cubic  foot;  4>  «  30**) 


Depth 

Elorizontnl  sui 
pounds 

rface                      ' 
H-P- 

h 
ft. 

1 

Surcharges:  9  ■» 
p  cos  e  => 

30® 

H  -  P  cos  e 

h 

ft. 
1 

pounds        1 

1  wh 

pounds 

75 

-  1  wh* 
pounds 

33 

17 

38 

2 

67 

67 

2 

150 

150 

3 

100 

150 

3 

225 

338 

4 

133 

267 

4 

300 

600 

5 

167 

417 

5 

375 

938 

6 

200 

600 

6 

4^0 

1,350 

7 

233 

817 

7 

525 

1,838 

8 

267 

1,067 

8 

600 

2,400 

9 

300 

1,350 

9 

675 

3,038 

10 

333 

1,667 

10 

750 

3,750 

11 

367 

2,017 

11 

825 

4,538 

12 

400 

2,400 

12 

900 

6,400 

13 

433 

2,817 

13 

975 

6,338 

14 

467 

3,267 

14 

1,050 

7,350 

15 

500 

3,750 

15 

1,125 

8,438 

16 

533 

4,267 

16 

1,200 

9,600 

17 

567 

4,817 

17 

1,275 

10,838 

18 

600 

5,400 

18 

1,350 

12,150 

19 

633 

6,017 

19 

1,425 

13,538 

20 

667 

6,667 

20 

1,500 

15,000 

21 

700 

7,350 

21 

1,575 

16,538 

22 

733 

8,067 

22 

1,650 

18,150 

23 

767 

8,817 

23 

1,725 

19,838 

24 

800 

9,600 

24 

1,800 

21,600 

25 

833 

10,417 

25 

1,875 

23,438 

26 

867 

1        11,267 

26 

1,950 

25,350 

27 

900 

12,150 

27 

2,025 

27,338 

28 

933 

13,067 

28 

2,100 

29,400 

29 

967 

14,017 

29 

2,175 

31,538 

30 

1,000 

15,000 

30 

2,250 

33,750 

SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  275 

should  be  given  to  vibration,  such  as  that  caused  by  passing  trains  or 
other  vehicles,  the  operation  of  excavating  machinery  and  the  driving  of 
piles.  The  effect  of  jar  cannot  be  calculated,  and  the  allowance  made 
for  it  must  be  a  matter  of  judgment. 

Table  47  gives  the  intensity  of  the  horizontal  pressure  in  pounds  per 
square  foot  and  the  total  horizontal  pressure  in  pounds  per  linear  foot  of 
trench  at  various  depths,  calculated  by  the  foregoing  formulas,  assuming 
the  angle  of  repose  to  be  30  deg.  in  all  cases  and  the  surface  of  the  earth 
horizontal,  and  also  rising  at  an  angle  of  30  deg. 

A  typical  trench  16  ft.  in  depth,  shored  with  a  single  set  of  sheeting,  is 
illustrated  in  Fig.  102.  The  sheeting  is  shown  driven  to  a  depth  of  only 
15  ft.,  or  to  a  point  1  ft.  above  the  bottom  of  the  trench.  Aa  more  or 
less  load  is  usually  placed  upon  the  banks,  it  has  been  assumed  in  the 
following  calculations  that  the  sheeting  must  also  support  a  surcharge 
equivalent  to  an  additional  depth  of  1  ft.  of  trench.  This  figure  and  the 
calculations  are  given  simply  to  illustrate  the  methods  and  not  as  sug- 
gestive of  actual  loads  likely  to  be  placed  upon  the  shoring. 

To  simpUfy  the  calculations  it  has  been  assumed  that  the  typical 
trench  is  sheeted  with  poling  boards  4  ft.  in  length,  and  that  each  brace 
must  carry  the  load  supported  by  the  set  of  poling  boards  against  which 
it  is  placed.  If  the  trench  were  sheeted  with  the  ordinary  vertical 
sheeting  the  pressure  would  be  somewhat  differently  distributed, 
because  the  sheeting  would  act  like  a  continuous  beam. 

The  results  of  these  calculations  by  the  Rankine  formula  are  given  in 
Col.  4,  Fig.  102.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  intensity  of  pressure  varies 
with  the  depth  of  trench,  as  does  also  the  total  pressure,  the  maximum 
load  being  upon  the  bottom  brace. 

Hydrostatic  Pressure  Sometimes  Exerted  on  Sheeting. — Occasionally 
conditions  are  such  that  water  will  accumulate  in  the  soil  back  of  the 
sheeting,  so  that  the  pressure  exerted  may  approximate  that  which 
would  be  due  to  an  equal  depth  of  water.  This  is  probably  the  most 
severe  condition  encountered  in  the  sheeting  of  trenches,  except  under 
extraordinary  circumstances  and  unless  it  can  be  conceived  that  a  bank 
of  sand  might  thus  be  converted  into  a  fluid  or  quicksand,  having  a 
weight  greater  than  that  of  a  corresponding  volume  of  water. 

Such  a  theory  must  be  based  upon  the  assumption  that  the  particles 
in  the  mass  of  earth,  held  in  position  by  the  sheeting,  are  devoid  of  cohe- 
sion and  free  to  move  as  are  the  particles  of  a  fluid,  and  that  the  pressure 
from  the  overlying  particles  may  be  transmitted  vertically  to  particles 
below,  and  laterally  through  them  to  the  sheeting,  in  other  words,  that 
the  earth,  if  permitted,  will  flow  like  a  fluid.  If  this  theory  were 
correct  in  all  respects  it  would  follow  that  the  pressure  of  the  soil  in  the 
banks  would  be  exerted  on  the  soil  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  causing 
it  to  flow  up  or  rise  within  the  sheeting  with  a  presstire  equal  to  that 


276  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

exerted  on  the  sheeting  at  the  bottom  of  the  bank.  Experience  indi- 
cates that  this  condition  rarely,  if  ever,  exists,  although  it  is  not  uncom- 
mon to  encoimter  expansion  in  soils  and  water-bearing  strata  of  fine 
sand  which  will  flow  through  cracks  in  the  sheeting  and  which  will  at 
times  boil  up  within  the  trench.  Such  flowing  sand,  however,  usually 
reaches  a  state  of  equilibrium  after  it  has  flowed  into  the  trench  to  a 
depth  of  a  few  feet  above  its  original  bottom.  This  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  even  under  these  conditions  the  material  is  not  free  to  act 
like  a  fluid,  else  the  trench  would  become  filled  with  the  quicksand.  It 
seems  probable  that  only  a  limited  quantity  of  the  sand  near  the  trench  is 
converted  to  a  fluid  condition  and  that  after  this  has  flowed  into  the 
trench  and  created  a  greater  pressure  within  than  formerly  existed, 
there  is  an  insuflicient  quantity  of  fluid  sand  to  continue  filling  the 
trench  and  conditions  for  a  time  become  similar  to  those  previously 
existing,  when  the  banks  of  the  trench  follow  the  laws  of  earth  rather 
than  of  fluids.  If,  however,  there  is  an  ample  supply  of  water  the 
sheeting  may  be  subject  to  pressures  closely  approaching  those  due  to  a 
similar  depth  of  water. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparing  the  hydrostatic  pressure  with  that 
which  may  be  developed  by  the  soil,  in  accordance  with  Rankine's 
theory,  the  hydrostatic  pressures  have  been  calculated  for  the  typical 
trench,  Fig.  102.  These  pressures  are  probably  very  rarely,  if  ever,  en- 
countered in  practice  unless  it  be  in  connection  with  subaqueous  work, 
but  they  may  be  helpful  as  indicating  the  extreme  limit  of  pressure 
which  may  be  encountered. 

It  has  been  assumed  in  making  these  calculations  that  the  height  of 
the  fluid  exerting  pressure  on  sheeting  was  the  same  as  the  height  of  the 
banks  of  the  trench  and  the  pressures  have  been  determined  as  follows*. 

h  =  the  height  of  fluid.  Fig.  102. 

w  =  weight  of  water,  62.5  lb.  per  cubic  foot. 

P  =  "2"  =  total  pressure  on  sheeting  for  a  trench  1  ft.  in  length. 

p  =  wh  =  intensity  of  pressure  at  any  point. 

Under  hydrostatic  conditions  the  resultant  pressure  would,  of  course, 
be  at  a  point  one-third  of  the  distance  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the 
trench. 

It  will  be  seen  by  comparing  Cols.  3  and  4,  Fig.  102,  that  the  Rankine 
formula  gives  pressures  which  are  approximately  half  as  great  as  the 
hydrostatic  pressures,  assuming  an  angle  of  repose  of  30  deg.,  the  weight 
of  earth  to  be  100  lb.  per  cubic  foot  and  the  surface  of  the  groimd  to  be 
horizontal. 

Meem's  Theory  of  Earth  Pressures. — In  a  valuable  article  upon  "The 
Bracing  of  Trenches  and  Tunnels,  with  Practical  Formulas  for  Earth 
Pressures,"  Transactions  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers,  vol.  Ix, 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  277 

p.  1,  J.  C.  Meem  preseQted  a  theory  of  the  action  of  the  banks  of  a 
trench  by  which  the  resultant  pressure  acts  at  a  point  two-thirds  the 
distance  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  instead  of  one-third,  as  proposed 
by  Rankine,  Coulomb  and  others.  While  this  theory  may  be  supported 
by  many  conditions  which  have  been  encountered  in  work  of  this 
kind,  experience  leads  us  to  say  a  word  of  caution,  because  there  have 
been  so  many  cases  in  which  the  pressures  have  increased  greatly  with 
apparent  lowering  of  the  point  of  application  of  the  resultant  pressure 
as  the  trench  stood  open.  Referring  to  Fig.  102  and  changing  the 
symbols  from  those  used  by  the  author  to  those  used  herein,  Mr.  Meem 
may  be  quoted  as  foUows: 

''In  all  his  experience,  the  writer  has  used  the  diagram  (Fig.  102)  for 
calculations  of  earth  pressure,  whether  applied  to  retaining  walls  or  to 
sheeting  and  bracing. 

*'U  AB  he  the  line  of  the  sheeting,  and  DB  the  natural  slope  of  the  earth, 
^  being  the  angle  of  repose,  then  the  mass  of  earth  causing  pressure  against  • 
the  line  AB  is  contained  within  the  triangle,  DAB, 

'^The  weight  of  the  earth  in  this  triangle  rests  on  Z>B,  and  its  thrast  is 
transmitted  to  AB,  not  through  the  toe  of  each  layer  at  the  foot  of  its  slope 
line,  but  by  the  arching  effect  of  this  earth  between  the  lines,  AB  and  DB. 

"For  purposes  of  calculation,  it  is  probably  not  far  from  correct  to  assume 
that  a  line,  CB,  bisecting  this  angle,.  A BD,  measures  with  AB  an  area  equiva- 
lent to  the  weight  transmitted  as  thrust  against  this  line,  AB.  Also,  it  is 
true  that  the  center  of  pressure  against  AB  \b  where  a  perpendicular  from 
the  center  of  gravity  of  the  triangle,  ACB,  meets  this  line. 

"The  writer  is  fully  aware  that  in  making  this  assumption  he  is  going 
contrary  to  the  general  theory,  which  assumes  that  earth  pressure  acts  along 
the  line  of  rupture  and  parallel  with  that  line,  and  is  therefore  greatest  at  the 
toe,  but  he  wishes  to  state  that  this  theory  is  not  borne  out  in  actual  practice, 
and  that  all  closely  sheeted  well-braced  trenches  invariably  show  a  heavier 
pressure  at  the  top  than  <U  the  bottom" 

Mr.  Meem  stated  that  if  particles  of  soil  were  absolutely  without  fric- 
tion and  if  their  weight  were  transmitted  cumulatively  entirely  and 
directly  to  the  bottom,  then  the  older  theory,  that  the  resultant  pressure 
acts  at  one-third  of  the  distance  from  bottom  to  top  of  the  bank,  would 
be  true.  He  does  not  believe  this  condition  to  exist  in  nature,  however, 
and  points  out  that  a  bank  seldom  exerts  much  lateral  pressure  at  the 
bottom  and  that  it  may  usually  be  imdercut  near  the  bottom  by  the 
use  of  poling  boards  and  very  light  bracing,  and  that  if  the  bracing  above 
has  been  poorly  done,  so  tliat  the  stability  of  the  mass  has  been  disturbed, 
the  pressure  of  the  soil  will  manifest  itself  "by  the  continual  dropping  of 
masses  of  material  from  above,  rather  than  as  a  constant  pressure,  as 
would  have  been  the  case  had  the  material  been  full  of  water  or  ab- 
solutely frictionless.  ...  It  may  be,  and  the  writer  has  frequently 
observed  also,  that  the  lower  part  of  a  trench  nmy  be  left  unshocted 
....  and  for  a  considerable  distance  longitudinally  in  clays  and 


278  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

moist  sandfly  without  disturbing  the  stability  of  the  face,  and  yet  more 
or  less  heavy  pressure  may  be  observed  in  the  bracing  above."  He 
stated  that  this  can  only  be  explained  on  the  theory  of  the  arching  effect 
of  the  material  above,  one  buttress  of  the  arch  being  the  sheeting  and 
the  other  the  plane  of  repose.  He  pointed  out  further  that  heavy  pres- 
sures are  frequently  developed  in  the  top  braces  and  rangers  while 
excavation  is  being  safely  done  beyond  the  limits  of  the  sheeting  at  the 
bottom  and  'Hhat  it  would  be  suicidal  to  remove  any  one  of  the  braces 
near  the  top  of  the  excavation,  particularly  after  the  ground  had  stood 
for  any  considerable  time." 

Changing  the  S3rmbols  and  referring  to  Fig.  102,  Mr.  Meem's  formula 
is  as  follows: 

If  4>  =  the  angle  of  repose, 
a  =  90**  -  0, 

c  =  ^  the  angle  between  the  line  of  rupture  and  the  sheeting, 

h  =  height, 

w  =  weight  of  1  cu.  ft.  of  earth. 

Then  the  area  ABC  = ^ — »  ^^^  *^®  weight  of  the  mass  of  earth 

.  „      wh^  tan  c 
causmg  pressure  on  AB  = « 

*'  The  resultant  pressure  of  this  mass  would  occur  at  two-thirds  of  the 
height. 

"In  the  case  of  a  well-sheeted  and  braced  bank,  there  would  be  no 
overturning  moment,  but  there  would  be  a  thrust,  represented  by  the 
general  tendency  of  the  triangle  ABC,  to  slide  along  the  line  BC,  and 
therefore  move  out  and  exert  pressure  in  a  horizontal  direction." 

In  summing  up  his  opinion,  Mr.  Meem  states  that  he  believes  that  the 
action  of  the  earth  pressure  in  properly  braced  trenches  is  more  closely 
allied  to  that  of  a  coherent  solid  than  to  that  of  an  aqueous  or  f  rictionless 
mass. 

If  Mr.  Meem's  theory  of  the  action  of  the  earth  in  causing  pressure 
upon  sheeting  is  correct,  the  pressure  at  or  near  the  bottom  of  the 
trench  would  be  much  lighter  than  that  near  the  top  and  it  would,  there- 
fore, be  logical  to  use  lighter  timbering  at  the  bottom  as  has  been  done 
by  Mr.  Meem  with  apparent  success.  The  conditions  which  he  points 
out  as  proving  that  the  pressure  at  the  bottom  of  a  trench  is  lighter 
than  at  the  top  are  certainly  worthy  of  consideration  because  they  are 
conmionly  observed.  It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that  they  are  due 
to  the  fact  that  the  bonds  of  cohesion  in  the  bottom  layers  of  the  soil 
have  not  been  broken  to  the  extent  that  they  have  been  severed  near 
the  top,  except  where  the  excavation  is  in  wet  material.  The  angle  of 
repose  of  the  soil  naturally  becomes  greater  the  deeper  the  excavation  is 
made,  and  the  cohesive  forces  are  undoubtedly  greater  because  of  the 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  279 

greater  compression  upon  the  soil.  These  assumptions,  if  well  founded, 
are  sufficient  reason  for  the  lack  of  pressure  so  often  noted  at  the  bottom 
of  trenches,  but  it  is  a  serious  question  if  these  assumptions  or  the 
conditions  actually  observed  in  practice  warrant  the  adoption  of  Mr. 
Meem's  theory.  As  has  been  herein  pointed  out  several  times,  the 
conditions  do  change  from  day  to  day  as  a  trench  remains  open,  and 
there  have  been  many  instances  where  a  bank  has  apparently  exerted 
little  or  no  pressure  at  the  bottom,  when  first  exposed,  but  where  condi- 
tions have  so  changed  that  very  great  pressure  has  been  exerted  upon 
the  bottom  timbering  before  the  excavation  was  refilled.  It  is  this 
change  in  conditions  w^hich  leads  most  practical  sewer  builders  to  adopt 
at  least  as  heavy  timber  for  the  bottom  as  the  top  of  their  trenches,  and 
most  engineers  to  the  adoption  of  the  Rankine  theory  of  earth  pressures. 
In  a  word,  it  may  be  said  that  Mr.  Meem's  theory  is  well  supported  by 
conditions  observed  when  trenches  are  first  excavated,  or  so  thoroughly 
well-braced  that  the  bonds  of  cohesion  are  not  severed  to  any  material 
extent,  but  that  conditions  approach  the  theory  of  a  frictionless  mass, 
after  Rankine,  as  these  bonds  of  cohesion  are  severed  and  the  banks 
change  their  physical  condition  and  position. 

Unfortunately,  relatively  little  timbering  is  so  well  done  that  no 
movements  or  changes  of  this  kind  take  place  and  trenches  must  con- 
tinue to  be  so  braced  as  to  be  safe  under  the  changed  conditions.  In  this 
connection  it  may  be  of  interest  to  cite  observations  made  during  the 
construction  of  a  large  well  described  in  an  article  by  Leonard  Metcalf 
entitled  "Difficulties  Encountered  in  Building  the  Storage  Well  for  the 
Sewerage  System  of  Concord,  Mass.,"  Jour.  Assoc.  Eng.  Socs.y  vol.  xxiv, 
page  277.  The  material  at  the  site  of  this  well  was  very  fine  sand  with 
sufficient  water  to  make  it  flow.  The  bracing  was  of  the  cellular,  fan- 
shaped  type.  When  the  sheeting  began  to  fail  because  of  the  movement 
of  the  material  and  the  changed  condition  of  it,  the  bottom  line  of 
10  X  10-in.  yellow-pine  timbers  was  reduced  to  6  in.  across  the  grain 
by  the  pressure  on  the  braces,  although  the  top  set  showed  no  such 
fatigue  or  crushing.  The  timber  structure  had  stood  for  months  before 
the  heavy  pressures  developed. 

In  the  discassion  following  the  presentation  of  Mr.  Meem*s  paper, 
many  points  were  brought  out,  some  of  which  may  be  briefly  quoted 
with  interest  to  the  reader: 

**  Quick  operation  spares  many  a  patient,  and  the  thought  persistently 
comes,  with  respect  to  attempts  at  formulating  probabilities,  that  what 
might  be  accurate,  allowable,  and  advisable  for  an  energetic  construction 
gang  with  a  clear  field  and  all  obstacles,  legal  and  official,  removed,  might 
be  questionable  wlion  the  above  agencies  have  full  play  for  a  considerable 
time  in  a  busy  street"  (Horace  J.  Howe,  p.  24). 

"The  properties  of  earth  with  respect  to  adhesion  and  friction  are  so 


280  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

variable  that  the  engineer  should  never  trust  to  tables  or  to  information 
obtained  from  books  to  guide  him  in  designing  earthworks,  when  he  has  it 
in  his  power  to  obtain  the  necessary  data  either  by  observation  of  existing 
earthworks  in  the  same  stratum,  or  by  experiments''  (Rankine,  quoted 
by  Howe,  p.  25). 

"The  experienced  man  will  probably  prefer  to  rely  on  his  own  judgment, 
as  every  case  has  to  be  studied  by  itself,  and  the  more  one  has  to  do  with 
earth  or  water  pressures  the  more  respect  he  has  for  their  power  and  the  less 
liberty  he  takes  with  them.  There  is  probably  not  an  experienced  founda- 
tion man  in  the  country  who  has  not  seen  cofferdam  bracing  collapse, 
sometimes  at  the  bottom,  sometimes  half  way  up,  and  elsewhere. 

''In  discussing  fluid  pressure,  the  author  doubts  if  the  full  hydrostatic 

pressure  would  be  foimd  at  the  bottom the  conclusion  is  that  in 

some  cases  the  full  pressure  does  not  occur,  in  many  it  does,  while  in  others 
the  pressure  is  much  greater  than  the  hydrostatic  head  would  call  for. 

''In  pneumatic  caissons  in  quicksand  in  New  York  City,  where  the  caissons 
are  sunk  with  as  little  disturbance  of  the  ground  as  possible,  it  is  found  nec- 
essary to  keep  the  air  pressure  almost  exactly  at  the  theoretical  water 
pressure.  Many  want  to  calculate  the  pressure  at  from  90  to  100  lb.  per 
cu.  ft.,  including  the  weight  of  water  and  sand"  (T.  Kennard  Thomson, 
p.  46). 

"Do  not  take  chances,  but  be  safe.  You  must  not  put  in  a  6  X  6-in. 
stick  because  theory'  says  it  will  hold,  but  double  the  size,  and  perhaps 
double  it  again,  unless  you  are  dead  sure  of  every  condition  surrounding 
the  work. 

"The  importance  of  driving  the  braces  tight  in  an  excavated  trench,  to 
prevent  as  far  as  possible  the  movement  of  earth  or  sand  back  of  the  sheath- 
ing, has  already  been  brought  out.  In  the  speaker's  opinion,  this  is  a  matter 
that  deserves  the  closest  attention,  for,  from  the  moment  the  movement  of 
the  material  commences,  the  trouble  begins"  (R.  A.  Shailer,  p.  49). 

"In  the  construction  of  the  Brooklyn  Subway,  with  which  the  writer  is 
connected,  it  was  necessary  to  excavate  a  trench  averaging  30  ft.  deep  and 
6000  ft.  long.  The  bank  was  composed  of  sand  and  gravel  with  some  few 
boulders.  The  bracing,  designed  by  Mr.  Meem,  had  the  larger  braces  at 
the  top  and  smaller  braces  when  approaching  the  bottom.  In  no  single 
instance  has  any  failure  of  the  lower  and  lighter  braces  been  observed. 
Many  instances  of  bending  of  the  upper  rangers,  however,  have  been 
noticed"  (H.  P.  Moran,  p.  49). 

"The  error  most  commonly  made  in  applying  theory  to  practice  is  the  as- 
sumption that  the  angle  of  repose  remains  constant,  no  matter  what 
the  depth;  this,  of  course,  is  not  tenable.  There  is  no  reason  why  it  should 
be  constant,  and  every  reason  why  it  should  not  be. 

"In  soil  that  has  stood  for  ages  in  its  original  condition,  the  lower  layers 
will  be  very  much  more  compacted  than  the  upper  ones,  by  reason  of  the 
pressure  of  the  earth  above.  If  excavation  is  carried  deep  enough,  it  is  found 
that  the  earth  is  almost  in  the  condition  of  rock,  it  is  so  compactly  consoli- 
dated. By  applying  sufficient  pressure  to  a  sample  of  earth,  say  in  a  hydro- 
static press,  it  would  be  possible  to  make  it  almost  as  firm  as  soft  rock. 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES         281 

''The  angle  of  repose,  therefore,  would  increase  with  the  depth  below  the 
surface  in  some  proportion  as  the  compactness  of  the  soil  increased.  This 
condition  would  apply,  not  only  to  clay  and  loam,  but  also  to  sand  when  not 
under  the  water  line"  (Eugene  W.  Stem,  p.  64). 

Mr.  Stern,  by  the  use  of  Coulomb's  formula  and  by  increasing  the 
angle  of  repose  as  the  trench  became  deeper,  reached  practically  the 
results  reached  by  Mr.  Meem  by  the  use  of  his  theory,  Mr.  Stem 
closed  his  discussion  with  the  statement  that  the  principles  enunciated 
by  Mr.  Meem  are  "radically  wrong." 

CALCULATION  OF  SIZES  OF  RANGERS  AND  BRACES 

The  load  on  the  rangers  may  be  calculated  with  the  aid  of  Rankine's 
formula.  The  results  of  such  a  calculation,  assuming  the  surface  of  the 
ground  to  be  horizontal,  the  angle  of  repose  to  be  30  deg.  and  the  weight 
of  the  soil  to  be  100  lb.  per  cubic  foot,  are  given  in  Table  49,  Col.  2. 
These  calculations  are  based  upon  the  typical  trench  illustrated  by  Fig. 
102,  assuming  that  it  is  10  ft.  wide  to  the  outside  of  the  sheeting.  In 
practice,  where  the  trench  is  in  cohesive  material  and  is  not  likely  to 
stand  open  a  long  time,  it  will  be  safe  to  assume  one-third  to  one-fourth 
of  the  earth  pressures  given,  and  in  cases  where  the  matericU  has  little 
cohesion  and  there  is  no  danger  of  hydrostatic  pressure,  it  will  be  safe  to 
assume  one-half  the  values  given. 

The  maximum  bending  moments  on  the  rangers,  spaced  as  indicated 
in  Fig.  102,  are  given  in  Col.  3. 

In  calculating  the  sizes  of  timbers  to  be  used,  the  allowable  stresses 
have  been  based  upon  the  values  given  for  spruce  in  Table  48,  taken 
from  the  Manual  of  the  American  Railway  Engineering  Association, 
1911.  The  working  unit  stresses  given  in  this  table  are  intended  for 
railroad  bridges  and  trestles  having  to  sustain  moving  loads  causing 
heavy  impact,  and  in  calculating  the  sizes  of  rangers  the  extreme  fiber 
stress  allowable  in  bending  has  been  increased  50  per  cent.,  or  to  1500  lb. 
per  square  inch,  as  the  load  upon  these  in  trench  work  more  closely 
follows  the  static  type  and  as  the  structure  is  shorter  lived  and  a  lower 
factor  of  safety  is  permissible. 

In  Col.  5,  Table  49,  are  given  the  sizes  of  rangers  required  to  withstand 
the  pressure  developed  by  the  earth,  as  given  in  CoL  2.  These  sizes 
are  based  upon  the  common  practice  of  using  rangers  with  their  wider 
sides  against  the  sheeting.  The  sizes  vary  from  6  X  6  in.  near  the 
top  to  8  X  12  in.  near  the  bottom  and  much  exceed  the  sizes  used 
under  ordinary  conditions. 

The  rangers  are  assumed  to  be  16  ft.  long  and  the  braces  spaced  8  ft. 
center  to  center  horizontally,  thereby  making  the  rangers  continuous 
over  one  support.    This  does  not  make  the  ranger  any  stronger  under  a 


282  AMERICAN   SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

uniformly  distributed  load,  but  does  make  it  stiffer  and  changes  the  re- 
actions and  shear.  The  reaction  on  the  end  brace  is  that  due  to  one 
ranger  only.  For  braces  where  a  butt  joint  in  the  ranger  occurs,  this 
amount  should  be  doubled.  If  the  rangers  are  only  8  ft.  long,  the 
reaction  on  the  end  support  and  the  maximum  shear  will  be  wl/2  in  each 
case. 

The  reaction  on  the  end  and  center  braces  is  given  in  Cols.  6  and  7. 
The  length  of  the  braces  varies  from  100  to  104  in.,  in  accordance  with 
the  size  of  the  rangers. 

The  size  of  the  braces  has  been  figured  by  the  following  formula: 

Working  stress  per  square  inch  =  1100  (1  —  K^)f  the  formula  for 

columns  having  a  length  in  excess  of  15  diameters. 
d  =  least  width  of  brace  in  inches 
I  =  unsupported  length  of  brace  in  inches. 

For  short  columns  the  working  stress  given  in  Col.  12  of  Table  48 
may  be  used  directly. 

The  sizes  of  the  end  and  center  braces  calculated  in  this  manner  are 
given  in  Cols.  9  and  10,  Table  49,  and  are  found  to  be  smaller  than  those 
ordinarily  used. 

The  maximum  shear  on  the  rangers,  given  in  Cols.  11  and  12,  is  found 
in  all  cases  to  be  less  than  the  average  ultimate  shear  given  in  Col.  7, 
Table  48,  but  greater  than  the  working  shear  given  in  Col.  8,  Table  48. 
It  is  probable,  however,  that  eVen  imder  conditions  which  might  make 
it  possible  for  the  earth  to  exert  the  pressures  indicated  in  Col.  2,  Table  49, 
rangers  of  the  sizes  indicated  in  Col.  5  will  be  sufficiently  strong  to 
withstand  the  shearing  stress  upon  work  of  such  temporary  nature. 

The  maximum  compressive  stresses  of  the  center  braces  upon  the 
rangers  are  given  in  Col.  13  and  from  them  have  been  calculated,  Col.  14, 
the  sizes  of  braces  which  are  large  enough  to  reduce  the  compressive 
stress  upon  the  rangers  to  300  lb.  or  less  per  square  inch.  By  comparing 
Cols.  10  and  14,  it  appears  that  the  required  size  of  a  brace  is  limited  by 
the  compressive  stress  exerted  upon  the  ranger,  rather  than  by  the 
compressive  stresses  in  the  braces  themselves.  This  fact  is  emphasized 
by  numerous  instances  in  the  experience  of  practical  sewer  builders, 
where  the  earth  pressures  have  been  sufficiently  heavy  to  cause  the 
braces  to  cut  into  the  rangers  to  an  appreciable  extent,  but  have  not  been 
sufficient  to  cause  distress  in  the  braces  themselves. 

As  has  already  been  pointed  out,  the  cohesive  qualities  of  soil  in  most 
cases  prevent  the  immediate  development  of  pressures  even  approaching 
those  indicated  by  the  use  of  the  Rankine  formula.  Sewers  are  usually 
constructed  with  sufficient  rapidity  so  that  the  trenches  are  not  allowed 
to  stand  open  for  long  periods  of  time  during  which  the  cohesive  qualities 
of  the  soil  are  subject  to  radical  change.    For  these  reasons,  it  is  probable 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES 


283 


< 


P 
o 

§^ 

OQ     ^ 

H  CO 

£  ^ 

55  w 

M 
03 
O 


OO 

H 
A 


(3 
O 

s 

hi 
A 

s 

o 
U 


a 

•c 

flS 

o 

J3 


bC 

a 
a 


A  •'3   St  ^ 
.2  ♦»  fl  «* 


^  » 


■e  o 


o   _ 


a  *  si- I 
I  ^J  §  ^  I 

00  "O 


SB  ^  •    M 

hi    e  "^  •-•  .9  8 

fe  ^  -5  ^  S  5 

8  I  ■  ?  " 


2  2 


p  a  u 


<    3 


s  -a 

'  .a 


I 


t  s 


BQ 


Hi 


2  fl 


V  .3 

<  3 
©at 


•S  TS  "r* 

5        3 


Q) 


I 


>c   o  o  o  o 


CO 


M 


■^     •*«>     Hd     »>^     ■>«•     la^  ny 

iiiTiTTiiiii 

<«iX  >^f   >^f    >m^    \m^    y.^  V^  V_«'  V,^  V^  S^^    \^^ 

8§8|§8i|8S|§ 


8« 


_  00  ^  S  CO  o  S 

9  Ob  00  to  OO  V  h* 


O 
CO 


N 


88888 

N  CO  i-t  o  -H 


8888 


at  'H 


CO 


Work- 
ing 
stress 

Elastic 
limit 

COCOCOCOCOdCOCOCOCOOCO 


OQOQQOQOQOOQ 
COC>|i-li-4^^C4Mi-4r-lC4^ 


000 


SM   "^  ©  t» 
10   CO   C4   CO 


80  O  Q 
^  t*  c5 

^   CO   '^   01 


OOOOOQOO 
00     •-•C«C0t»t»OOO 

^^  '  v^    w*    w*  iH    «-4    rH 


p»- 

» 

0 

2 

? 

08 

B 

i) 

••4 

> 

<*J 

< 

3 

U5 


NCOCO«-<i-<WMW 


t»o6t^ouScot»Soo?i 


opoooooo 
oc«>-40Qor«co  _ 
«t»t»^«iO(Ocoeo 


OOQOOOOOOQ 
iOCO^^C0i-<C«^00^ 


o 


o 


o 


i  £ 


o  til 


^1 

4-   CO 


M  <u 


>■  ■"*  -^ 

&  6 

<  3 


N 


o 


888|88i88888 

Mco>-Hooxo)^a»9aoi-<i 


cOtO»0'^V'^'*«0«»'*'*M3 


a 


d 


s 


(Si 


d 
a 


V 

d 


a 


o 

CO 


5  §  S   c 

^  §  S  i 


:§i?  8  2  S 


o 
o 

e 
« 

.d 

e 

2 


•0  2  -o 

MA 


1 


O 


s 


•s 


•5 


^ 


? 


4^  W 

■as? 


o  s  § 
f^  2.9 


2  d 


2-: 


l^f 


o  — 


.3 


$ 


a  ^ 


"S 


SI 


w  K 


284 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


CQ 
H 

m 
o 


•< 

M 

« 
o 

CD 
» 
O 

•< 

o 
J? 
-< 

« 
O 

iz: 
-< 

O 

OQ 

N 
CQ 


05 

9 


•^  CO  00  00 
X  X  X  X 

^  to  to  00 


O   CM 

©   00   '^   1^ 

X  X  X  X 

■*  «  o  o 


a    A  n    a    q 


o    > 


C    0. 


V 


->   Si  •-    c  w 


to  Q  to  X 
to  o  >c  <-> 

1^  iQ  to  u) 


g&^II^JL 


I 


C4  >0  U3  O 
i-t  C««  0>  CO 
CO  to  ©  tw 


-* 

o 

iH 

•M 

w 

■* 

X  X  X  X 

00 

00 

CO 

■* 

't 

N 

to 

a 

I'* 

s 

r^ 

00 

to 

kO 

M 

£  to  a 
ago 

■a  <  s 

9  2  2 
»S  "S  ■*• 


5    a    d 


3 


N 


i4    CX 


21 


1^  t*  ^  h. 

CO   to   O   Oi 


O   -4*   to   to 
to  O)  M   M 


*5     m 


'  CO 
^    CO 


d   d   N  "S 

5  i  -  .2 


^     C     oj     o 

d    cs    H  U3 


o  o 

t*   CO 

_  to   CO 

-^  ■^  ®    OS 


^f  t*'  M* 


■*  ■tj'  to  to 

X  X  X  X 

Tt<     ^     <^     to 

^  to   to  00 

X  X  X  X 

■^  ^  to  to 


•§1  <^  "S  8 
d  ^  g  h   o 


00 


.2. -2 
.5   d 

o   © 


O,   »    d 
§•>§ 


^     ^    ^    ^ 

■^  ^  ^  to 

X  X  X  X 

X  X  X  X 

(M    ^   ^   ^ 

■^  ■^  ^  ^ 

rH    1^    1^    <-^ 

o 

^  'q   to   to 

o  o  a>  O) 

1-H     1-^ 

s 

o 
to 
to 


o  o 

•^  o 
CO  to 


M   00   CO   « 


rS   d   o  -  ^ 


g     0<eQNO 


00   O   C4   00 


»o 


•5"  ©  u    « 

O  c  ©    © 

«  d  S«^ 

«  ft  PI    S 


lO 


«  to  »o 


gg 

> 


*»  M 


2 


p  2  ■«  g. 


C«    "xf    »0 


O  N 

to   •-•  00  *-< 

X  X  X  X 

to   to  00  00 


N   t*   ^   to 

o  o  •-*  *-* 

»-<  CO  »o  t* 


=3  d  d 


d.SSC^.^'^'S 


CO 


5    e8 


a  o      d  cj 

o   *-   *^   o   « 


a 


c^ 


d 

eS 


g 

d 

09 


2  - 

73 


o  o  o  o 

■*  O  O  CO 

lo  00  •-<  M 

»0  to  00  C6 

N  t»  N  ro 


o 
to 

94 


^  to 

CO  to 

CO    00 


O  O  Q  Q 

O  O  Q  O 

q  o  o  o 

U5   iC  »0  >0 

»-i  N  CO 


S"^ 


_  o   _ 

kO    >0    kC   iC 

»-r  ^  to  o 


O  O  '^ 

(O      ^H  f-4  l-H 

X  X  X  X 

to  X  o  o 


C4   to  Q  >0 

o  r«  «5  ^ 
•-)  ko  at  CO 


OO*  -"f  o  to 

^    ^    ^   CO 
1-t   N   CO 


SS8 

B5  >c  io 
.-T  Cii  CO 


.-•  N  CO  -* 


ii 
> 


qijva  aup^u^'a 


•-<  M  CO   -* 


c 

M 
eS 

hi 
o 


OJTlRfidjd  J9%V/^ 


lO   to  to 

-^   ^   « 


to 


SS2 


MO 

CO      _ 
^  U5   06 

to  ^  to 


o 

CO 


00  o  to 

XXX 

to  to  ■* 

■*  ^  -* 
XXX 

^J*     ^^     ^T* 


X 
X 


to  to 

O)  O) 


ss 


-^  N   CO   ^ 


0» 


o 

8 

o 

o 

CO 

^ 

•N 

CO 

1^ 

OO 

«•      ; 

N 

CO 

CO 

•^ 

CO 

CI 

1-H 

a> 

o 

CI 

to 

-11 

CO 

U5 

30 

to 

o> 

f-4 

w         ! 

o 

to 

rf 

1-4 

■^ 

o 

o 

1-H 

1-H 

1M 

«o 

X  X  X  X 

o 

o 

00 

CO 

^4 

•-■ 

M 

to 

N 

« 

<* 

w 

s 

|o 

M 

00 

^^ 

rH 

888 

§ 

00 

X 

CO 

o 

f* 

M 

•* 

1-^ 

M 

CO 

■* 

CO 

e>) 

1^ 

CO 

o 

S 

c** 

CO 

VH 

« 

N 

CO 

CO 

"* 

CO 

C4 

r-t 

bO 

h 
> 


qiJQS  masiv 


I- 

CO   ^ 

s  S 
e  to 

Mtd 

s 

J  d 

l<3 

d   **   k! 

Q>      ^       K 

QQ   ^  ^ 

^  ^  d 
d  £  g 
'♦SO 

•g  »  I 

o    eS    o 


2 

3 
O 

o 
+» 

-a 


C  *« 

0)     fi 

_   d   < 

5  g  e- 

d  «M   B 
o  o  8 

i  S  fi 

?  bO 

•  «;  d 

49     OB     2 

S"3j 

5  - 
•  Z  S 

0=3  8 
"^  S  ^ 

I     O.   O 


c 

d 


.d 

a 
« 

73 

o    d 

'^  S 

s  I 


M 


cS 
c   CI 

d 
« 


n    o 


o 


M 

d 
-2  o 


S 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES         286 

that  the  pressures  indicated  in  Col.  2,  Table  48,  are  much  in  excess  of 
those  which  will  be  encountered  in  ordinary  sewer  construction  and 
it  is  probable  that  the  unit  working  stresses  already  suggested  may  be 


! 

Deptti 
J       1 

0       15       20 

-h. 
25 

30 

. 

lAn   - 

1    ^ 

S^ 

—J 

Ivw 
7.QQ   - 

4^ 

^ 

;s 

A 

L 

^ 

^ 

§ 

?s 

V 

i. 

^S 

L. 

s. 

[*b 

Sv 

^i!! 

1 
AAA    - 

>*^ 

^ 

s 

s 

X 

«Cr 

^ 

\\ 

^; 

k 

-^ 

^, 

"" 

^ 

% 

g. 

^W 

"s^ 

f  > 

^ 

v> 

\ 

V 

S 

^ 

^ 

>d> 

\ 

\ 

N 

ikA 

"^> 

4 

■^ 

S5 

^ 

/ 

4r  fioo  - 

1 

fei 

Y 

0 

V 

s, 

^ 

s^ 

"^ 

V 

i\ 

1 

k-. 

T 

V 

^•v 

"^ 

40 

\ 

V- 

N 

r 

> 

«^ 

s 

v^ 

^ 

\ 

Sf 

>^ 

L 

N 

S& 

^S| 

V 

^ 

^  Aon  - 

> 

\ 

w 

V 

^ 

V 

..ii» 

\ 

;s 

> 

\ 

•V 

• 

V 

^ 

N 

"> 

\ 

■^ 

N 

1 "" 
1^ 

\ 

— 1 

i. 

^ 

^-J 

^ 

\ 

^ 

w 

\ 

^ 

\ 

i\ 

\ 

■  '^ 

V 

\ 

^ 

3               _ 

\ 

^ 

L 

S, 

■^^ 

S 

M 

\ 

\ 

^^ 

\ 

2  i9An  . 

^ 

^ 

— ^ 

V 

!■ 

X 

>^ 

^ 

\ 

ViCUU   " 

V 

V 

^ 

^ 

V 

if  * 

\ 

> 

f- 

S 

V 

N 

^ 

"^ 

V 

^ 

\  1 

\ 

> 

\ 

\ 

\ 

I40g  - 

^ 

1 
V 

N 

h. 

1  o 

1       « 

'    ■— 

> 

L 

N 

L  , 

\ 

ICAA  _ 

> 

\ 

V 

\ 

s 

IDOO  - 

\ 

\ 

^-J^  /2. 

\ 

IIUV)  _ 

— ^ 

V 

\ 

7 

V 

lOUv  - 

^ 

*9 

nl 

rL 

Un 

> 

^_ 

9fMA  ■ 

1  " 

to 

T3I 

IMI 

g 

rncii 
DOO  >| 

ZmHJD 

Jft 

ja 

^ 

la 

CUUv  "" 

\ 

v' 

^ 

7frt 

'ftl 

09i 

% 

'^Z 

?3 

I 

■i^ 

w44 

i      \ — 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 — I — « — 1 — 1 
U  Itl  mate  Strength : 

^-  1^    f^'^0  ^9^, 

« 

-\ 

\ 

S 

m 

wo 

fff  v{ 

nc 

'v 

— 

\ 

L 

t 

^ 

rjivifn 

Ht^  ^ 

:6M 

"^ 

ai 

^ 

<» 

— 

^-^1^     fO,000    SprucB^ 

t     1    1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1 

\ 

^ 

^ 

"^ 

s 

^.m. 

4- 

— 

B^^i^'i^fai'miSi^s 

i^ 

'^. 

"•A 

»ri 

v- 

TfS 

\ 

V 

^«i 

^ 

\ 

\ 

1 

^  ^5  • 

\ 

< 

^ 

V 

f 

\ 

\ 

^? 

'« 

r~ 

> 

V 

V 

\ 

A 

V 

\ 

> 

*- 

N 

^. 

\ 

0 

1 

\ 

\ 

L    ..- 

^ 

\ 

\, 

\ 

I 

■ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

J 

\ 

• 

ZOO 
400 

600  4: 


SCO 


<n 


1000-^ 


a 
«» 


IZOOfi 


1400 


1600 


1600 


1000 


1500 


41 


2000§ 


3 


2500 


3000 


Fio.  103. — Diagram  giving  thickness  of  wooden  sheeting. 


safely  substituted  for  these  loads,  thus  reducing  the  sizes  of  rangers 
required. 

It  is  customary  in  ordinary  sewer  construction  to  use  a  uniform 
size  of  rangers  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  the  trench  and  also  to  use 


286  AMERICAN  SEWEBAOE  PRACTICE 

braces  ha\'ing  the  same  depth  as  the  rangers  for  convenience  and 
interchangeability.  Center  braces  are  generally  of  the  same  size  ae  the 
rangers,  but  the  end  braces  are  frequently  made  smaller  as  they  have  to 


btreme  Fiber^iMi,  Lbs.persq.ln. 

Fio.  104. — Diagram  giving  sizes  of  wales  and  cross-braces. 

support  only  about  half  as  long  a  panel  of  sheeting  as  the  center  braces. 
From  Cols.  6  and  7,  Tabic  49,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  reaction  on  the 
center  braces  in  the  typical  trench,  Fig.  102,  is  3-1/3  times  as  great  as  that 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  287 

upon  one  of  the  end  braces.  For, example,  where  rangers  are  6  X  6-in. 
spruce  timbers,  the  center  braces  are  usually  6  X  6  in.  in  size  and  the 
end  braces  are  often  reduced  to  4  X  6  in.  in  size,  and  placed  with  the 
long  side  vertical. 

For  the  purpose  of  making  a  comparison  of  the  sizes  of  timbers  re- 
quired for  shoring  a  trench,  the  results  of  similar  calculations  for  water 
pressure  and  for  earth  pressure  in  accordance  with  Meem's  theory  are 
given  in  Table  49.  The  differences  between  the  results  obtained  by  the 
use  of  the  theories  of  Rankine  and  Meem  are  very  striking. 


f— 


'a* 


J4'8 


FiQ.  105, — Timbering  used  on  the  Cambridge  subway. 

Diagrams  for  Calculating  Thickness  of  Sheeting  and  Sizes  of  Rangers 
and  Braces. — In  an  article  published  in  Engineering-Contracting,  vol. 
xxxiv,  page  76,  Frank  H.  Carter  presents  two  diagrams  based  upon 
Rankine's  formula  by  means  of  which  the  thickness  of  sheeting  and 
the  sizes  of  rangers  and  braces  can  be  readily  determined.  In  preparing 
these  diagrams,  Fig.  103  and  Fig.  104,  Mr.  Carter  has  assumed  the  weight 
of  earth  to  be  110  lb.  per  cubic  foot,  and  that  the  angle  of  inclination  of 
surcharge  is  equal  to  zero  or  that  the  siuface  of  the  surcharge  is  level. 
He  suggests,  however,  that  the  earth  pressures  foimd  by  the  diagrams 
be  divided  by  2,  3,  or  4,  as  experience  and  judgment  may  dictate,  before 
applying  them  to  the  other  parts  of  the  diagram. 

The  author  may  be  quoted  as  follows: 


288 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


''In  dosing  the  writer  o£fers  the  following  example  (shown  in  Fig.  105) 
of  recent  trench  excavation  in  dry  sand  and  clay,  designed  and  built  by  the 
Hugh  Nawn  Contracting  Co.  for  the  Cambridge  Main  Street  Subway,  the 
timbers  of  which  had  been  holding  up  so  well  that  the  trench  foreman 
decided  to  economize  in  the  use  of  lumber,  notwithstanding  the  approach 
of  the  trench  to  a  four-story  brick  building  within  10  ft.  of  the  side  of  the 
trench.  Stringers  10  X  8  in.  and  cross  braces  10  ft.  on  center  longitudinally 
of  the  trench  and  4  ft.  on  center  vertically  had  been  used.  The  saving  was 
made  by  increasing  the  vertical  spacing  of  the  stringers  so  that  at  a  depth  of 
21  ft.  they  were  5  ft.  10  in.,  center  to  center.  This  would  have  stressed 
the  2-in.  plank  sheeting  up  to  250()  to  3000  lb.  per  square  inch,  and  the 

Table  50. — Wooden    Beams.    Bending    Moments  in  Thousand  Inch- 
pounds  FOR  a  FmER  Stress  of  1200  Pounds  per  Square  Inch 


Depth  in  inches  =  d 


.0]  4.0 
.0.16^ 

.8,  3.2 
.6   6.4 


5.0 
25.0 


5.0 
10.0 
.4'  9.615.0 
.212.820.0 
.016. 025.0 
.819.2,30.0 
.425.6,40.0 
.032. 050. Oj 
.638.460.0 
.244.870.0 
.851.280.0 


8.0    10.0 


64.0  100 

12.8|  20 
25.6  40 
38. 4|  60 
51.2  80 
36.0'  64.0100 
43.2'  76.8120 
57. 5' 102. 5, 160 
72. 0|l28. 0,200 


86.3153.5 
101.0179.0 
II5.O1205.O 


240 


12.0    14 
^144.0' 196 

.0'  28.8!  39 
.0'  57.6,  78 
.0;  86.4117 
.0115.2156 
.0'l44.0  196 
.0'l73.0|235 
.0|231.0313 
.0  288.0  392 
.  0  347.0470 
.0!405.0  548 


.0|  16.0 
.0  256.0 

.2  51.2 
.4102.4 
.6153.6 
.8  204.8 
.0256.0 
.0'307.0 
.0'410.0 
.0I512.O 


280 
320.0:462.0 


626 


.0 
.0 
.0 


615.0 
715.0 
820.0 


M  =»  bending  moment 
b  —  horizontal  width  of  ranger 
d  —  vertical  depth  of  ranger 

0 

(Reference,  Engineering  and  Contracting ,  July  27,  1910,  p.  76.) 

wales  to  about  the  same  figure,  by  the  usual  theories,  but  from  the  appear- 
ance of  the  timber  itself  there  is  scarcely  evidence  of  any  pressure  whatever. 
To  use  Fig.  103  on  the  example  given,  enter  the  upper  left-hand  comer 
of  the  diagram  with  a  depth  of  21  ft.  and  a  slope  of  0  =  40**,  reading  500 
lb.  pressure  per  square  foot,  thence  running  along  the  horizontal  line  to 
the  inclined  line  in  the  upper  right-hand  part  of  the  diagram  reading 
'Distance  between  wales  =  5  ft.'  read  19,000  in.-lb.  bending  moment, 
thence  following  down  the  19,000  line  to  the  inclined  line  in  the  lower  right- 
hand  part  of  the  diagram  read  2400  lb.  per  square  inch  stress  on  2-in. 
sheeting,  allowing    M  =  (m;^V8)12,  (an    assumption    excessively    on    the 


SIZES  OF  SHEETING,  RANGERS  AND  BRACES  289 


side  of  safety  except  for  the  last  span  in  a  series  of  continuous  spans). 
In  the  process  of  concfeting  the  side  walls,  the  rangers  are  removed, 
causing  the  2-in.  plank  to  span  8  ft.  for  a  short  time,  instead  of  4  ft.  as  com- 

Table  51. — Safe  Loads  for  Long-Leaf  Georgia  Yellow-pine  Columns 

OR    Braces.     (Pounds) 


Length,  ft. 

~      6 

8 

10 

12 

14 
16 
18 
20 

22 
24 
26 
28 

30 
32 
34 
36 


4  X  4  iD. 

12,000 

10,400 

8,950 

7,800 

6,900 
6,100 


6  X  6  in. 


33,000 

28,000 
25,800 
23,400 

21,300 
19,300 
17,600 
16,200 

15,000 
13,700 


8  X^8  in, 
58^00^ 

55,000 
51,200 
48,000 

44,500 
41,600 
38,800 
35,800 

33,600 
31,300 
29,400 
27,500 

25,900 
24,300, 


10  X  10  in. 


12  X  12  in. 


94,000 

89,000 
86,000 
82,000 

77,000 
73,000 
68,000 
65,000 

61,500 
57,500 
55,000 
51,500 

49,000 
47,000 
44,000 
42,000 


138,000 
134,000 
128,000 
124,000 

118,000 
112,000 
108,000 
103,000 

98,000 
93,500 
88,500 
85,000 

80,500 
77,000 
74,500 
70,500 


Based  on  formula  of  U.  S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Div.  of  Forestry 


.fL 


.) 


200  -f  15c 
700  -i-  15c  -h 
P  —  safe  load 

/  =  length  of  column  in  inches 
d  =  least  diameter  in  inches 
F  =  ultimate  crushing  strength  of  column  in  pounds  per  square 

inch 
C  =  l/d 
Factor  of  safetv  =  5 

(Reference,  Engineering  and  Conlractingf  July  27,  1910,  p.  77.) 

puted.  The  trench  was  dug  in  material  which  would  probably  assume  a 
slope  of  40**  when  exposed  to  the  weather,  but  the  work  w^as  done  quickly 
and  thoroughly  and  well  underdrained,  hence  we  may  assume  that  the 
earth  pressures  are  but  one-fourth  of  those  theoretically  developed.  Divid- 
ing 500  by  4  we  have  125  lb.  per  square  foot  pressure.  Entering  the  upper 
left-hand  part  of  the  diagram  with  a  pressure  of  125  lb.  per  square  foot  and 
running  along  the  horizontal  line  125  lb.  to  the  inclined  line  5  ft.  (distance 
between  wales)  we  find  a  bending  moment  of  5000  in.-lb.,  thence  running 
down  the  vertical  line  representing  5000  in.-lb.  to  the  inclined  line  in  the 

19 


290  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

lower  right-hand  corner  of  the  diagram,  we  find  a  stress  of  about  600  lb. 
per  square  inch  for  2-in.  plank  sheeting,  a  figure  probably  Hot  much  exceeded, 
if  at  all. 

"To  use  Fig.  104  with  the  same  problem,  entering  the  upper  left-hand 
comer  of  the  diagram  with  a  depth  of  21  ft.  and  a  slope  of  40°  we  find  as 
before  a  pressure  500  lb.  per  square  foot.  Running  along  the  horizontal  line 
to  its  intersection  with  the  inclined  line  in  the  upper  right-hand  comer  of  the 
diagram  marked  (by  interpolation)  *5  ft.  10  in.  between  wales/  we  find  a 
load  of  2900  lb.  per  linear  foot  of  wale  at  the  given  depth.  ,  Thence  running 
down  the  vertical  line  representing  2900  lb.  per  linear  foot  of  beam  to  its 
intersection  with  the  inclined  line  in  the  lower  right-hand  part  of  the  diagram 
marked  10  ft.  between  cross  bracing,  we  find  a  bending  moment  of  350,000 
in.-lb.,  assuming  M  =  I2wl^/10f  also  by  interpolation  we  read  about 
29,000  lb.  load  on  each  cross-brace  as  a  column.  Running  along  the  350,000 
lb.  horizontal  line  to  the  lower  left-hand  corner  of  the  diagram  to  10  X  8-in. 
wales  (outside  the  figure)  we  estimate  3200  lb.  stress  in  the  wale.  Assum- 
ing as  before  that  the  horizontal  earth  pressure  will  not  be  developed  by 
one-fourth  and  by  going  through  the  same  process  as  outlined  above  we 
find  a  stress  of  800  lb.  per  square  inch  in  the  wale,  a  figure  probably  not 
exceeded.  It  is  of  course  obvious  from  the  equation  of  /  =»  Swl^/2bh^ 
that  the  stress  in  the  extreme  fiber  is  directly  proportional  to  tt;,  hence  we 
might  have  divided  the  high  stress  found  from  the  theoretical  earth  pressure 
by  4. 

"Table  50  is  a  table  of  resisting  moments  in  wooden  beams  of  various 
sizes  and  Table  51  gives  safe  loads  on  w^ooden  posts,  as  developed  from  the 
formula  of  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Bureau  of  Forestry." 


CHAPTER  XI 

PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE 

Pipe  should  be  purchased  under  carefully  prepared  specifications. 
The  price  of  sewer  pipe  is  governed  by  standard  list  prices,  Table  52, 
from  which  varying  discounts  are  allowed  at  different  times  and  by 
different  dealers.  The  basic  discount  adopted  by  the  eastern  manu- 
facturers for  standard  2-ft.  lengths  of  pipe,  from  which  others  are 
computed,  is  75  per  cent. ;  2  per  cent,  additional,  or  77  per  cent,  total 
discouBt,  is  allowed  if  the  purchaser  accepts  the  pipe  as  delivered  and 
stands  the  losses  due  to  defective  quality  and  breakage.  On  large 
work,  if  the  pipe  is  bought  subject  to  inspection,  the  pipe  companies 
often  prefer  to  have  the  inspection  done  at  the  mill  before  shipment,  in 
order  to  save  the  losses  due  to  reshipment  of  rejected  pipe.  For  this 
purpose  they  sometimes  prefer  to  maintain  an  inspector  at  the  mill  at 
their  own  expense  during  the  manufacture  and  shipment  of  pipe.  Cities 
of  considerable  size,  which  are  large  regular  customers  of  pipe  companies, 
often  find  that  it  is  more  economical  for  them  to  buy  pipe  as  delivered,  thus 
receiving  the  2  per  cent,  additional  discount,  than  to  buy  pipe  subject  to 
inspection.  The  difference  between  75  and  77  per  cent,  off  this  list 
amounts  to  about  8  per  cent,  of  the  cost  of  the  pipe  at  75  per  cent,  off  the 
list.  Therefore,  to  make  this  plan  economical,  the  losses  due  to  breakage 
and  inspection  must  fall  within  this  8  per  cent. 

While  it  may  be  possible  to  take  advantage  of  this  additional  discount 
when  dealing  with  pipe  companies  known  to  be  absolutely  trust- 
worthy and  capable  of  turning  out  satisfactory  pipe,  and  thus  save 
money  under  the  2  per  cent,  rule,  it  is  hazardous  to  assume  that  this 
can  be  done  in  all  cases,  especially  when  dealing  with  untried  manu- 
facturers. It  is  seldom  safe  to  attempt  this  saving  when  lots  of  only 
one  or  a  few  carloads  are  required,  as  occasionally  large  portions  of  a 
carload  are  broken  or  it  is  necessary  to  reject  most  of  a  carload  of  pipe. 
Thus  the  losses  due  to  breakage  and  bad  quality  of  one  or  a  few  carloads 
may  often  nm  so  high  that  they  cannot  be  brought  within  the  8  per  cent, 
limit  when  averaged  withallthe  pipe  used  on  the  job.  Where  a  contract 
is  very  large,  losses  due  to  these  causes  ought  to  average  well  within 
this  amount. 

Pipe  should  be  inspected  on  the  cars  as  it  is  being  unloaded.  Technic- 
ally a  car  will  not  be  delivered  by  the  railroad  company  until  the  receipt 
for  it  is  signed  by  the  consignee,  the  railroad  at  the  same  time  having  a 

291 


292  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

rule  that  any  claims  for  damage  must  be  made  at  the  time  of  delivery. 
This  technicality  is  rarely  insisted  upon  by  a  railroad  agent,  for  it  is 
impossible  to  inspect  the  pipe  until  one  is  allowed  to  enter  and  unload 
the  car  and  look  over  its  contents.  Before  the  receipt  is  signed,  it  is 
advisable  to  show  the  freight  agent  the  memorandum  of  broken  and 
cracked  pipe,  a  copy  of  which  should  then  be  attached  to  the  receipt  and 
the  latter  returned  to  the  railroad.  This  may  save  future  correspondence 
and  even  disputes.  An  average  carload  of  from  12  to  15  tons  of  3-in. 
pipe  contains  about  3500  ft.  of  pipe,  4-in.  3000  ft.,  5-in.  2000  ft.,  6-in. 
1700  ft.,  8-in.  1100  ft.,  9-in.  1000  ft.,  10-in.  700  ft.",  12-in.  600  ft.,  15-in. 
450  ft.,  18-in.  310  ft.,  20-in.  234  ft.,  22-in.  190  ft.,  and  24-in.  160  ft. 
If  a  car  has  evidently  received  bad  usage  in  its  passage  over  the  railroad, 
its  condition  should  be  at  once  called  to  the  freight  agent's  attention 
before  the  receipt  is  signed,  and  its  condition  noted  thereon.  As  a  rule 
breakage  exceeding  5  per  cent,  of  a  carload  is  due  to  careless  handling 
of  the  car  by  the  railroad  company,  and  the  cost  of  the  damaged  pipe 
may  be  recovered. 

pipe  Prices. — Pipe  may  be  bought  in  2,  2-1/2  or  3-ft.  lengths.  The 
3-ft.  lengths,  based  on  the  standard  75  per  cent,  discount,  cost  about  3-1/2 
per  cent,  more  than  the  2-ft.  lengths.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  work- 
manship and  the  number  of  joints,  and  the  consequent  problem  of 
leakage,  3-ft.  lengths  are  much  to  be  desired,  their  extra  cost  being 
more  than  compensated  for  by  the  lessened  number  of  joints.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  manufacturers  unquestionably  have  somewhat  greater 
difficulties  in  delivering  pipe  of  this  length,  of  uniformly  satisfactory 
quahty,  because  of  the  tendency  toward  warping,  and  there  are  also 
somewhat  greater  possibihties  of  breakage. 

There  were  three  standard  price  lists  for  standard,  double-strength 
and  deep  and  wide  socket  pipe  in  the  United  States  in  1913.  These* 
were  known  as  the  eastern,  western  and  southern  lists  respectively. 
The  first  was  used  east  of  the  Illinois-Indiana  boundary  and  north  of  the 
Ohio  River.  The  southern  list  applied  to  all  states  south  of  the  eastern 
district  and  to  Louisiana  and  Texas.  There  are  now  (1914)  two 
western  lists,  the  old  and  the  new.  Manufacturers  at  St.  Louis,  Kansas 
City,  Denver  and  other  western  points  are  using  the  old  list  and  those 
in  Illinois,  Minnesota  and  Iowa  the  new  list.  While  the  list  prices  in 
the  new  western  schedule  are  much  lower  than  those  of  the  old  schedule 
the  discounts  bring  the  net  prices  about  the  same. 

The  manufacturers  of  vitrified  sewer  pipe  issue  from  time  to  time 
discount  sheets  based  on  the  standard  list.  For  example,  an  engineer  in 
the  eastern  district  in  1912  would  receive  quotations  in  the  following 
general  form:  The  basic  discount  from  the  eastern  list  for  1912  for 
standard,  straight  pipe  3  to  24  in.  in  diameter,  in  2-ft.  lengths  and 
carload  lots,  f,  o,  b.  Boston  or  other  New  England  shipping  point,  the 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LA  YING  SEWER  PIPE    293 

purchaser  to  stand  losses  from  breakage  and  inspection,  would  be,  say, 
75  per  cent.  The  discounts  on  other  classes  of  pipe  than  standard, 
when  the  standard  is  sold  at  75  per  cent,  off,  are  given  in  Table  53. 
If  the  current  discount  on  the  standard  was  higher  or  lower  than  75  per 
cent.,  the  tabulated  figures  would  be  increased  or  decreased  by  the 
number  of  points  which  the  current  discount  is  higher  or  lower  than  75 
per  cent.  The  same  discoimts  apply  to  the  list  prices  for  slants,  branches 
and  other  specials.  When  the  manufacturer  stands  the  losses  due  to 
breakage  and  inspection,  the  discoimts  are  decreased  uniformly  2 
points.  For  cash  pajrment  in  15  days,  2  per  cent,  may  be  deducted 
from  the  bill  after  paying  freight  charges.  It  should  be  repeated,  these 
discounts  are  given  merely  as  illustrations  of  the  use  made  of  the  table. 

InspectioiL — Vitrified  clay  pipe  should  be  carefully  inspected  to  make 
sure  that  it  is  of  the  quality  required  by  the  specifications  and  which 
the  manufacturer  agreed  to  furnish.  Some  manufacturers  are  suffi- 
ciently careful  with  their  mill  inspection  of  shipments  to  prevent  a 
material  number  of  rejections  by  the  consignee  on  account  of  inferior 
quality.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  it  is  usually  better  for  both  parties  if 
the  consignee  sends  an  inspector  to  the  factory  to  inspect  the  pipe  as 
loaded. 

Inspection  usually  consists  of  "ringing"  the  pipe  with  a  light  hammer 
to  see  that  it  is  not  cracked,  and  carefully  looking  it  over  to  see  that  it  is 


Table  52. — Standard   1913  List  Prices  op  Sewer  Pipe  and 

IN  THE  United  States 

(prices  subject  to  variable  discounts) 


Specials 


Inside 

diameter, 

inches 

St 
Eastern 

raight  p 
Wesi 

Old 

ipe;  per 

foot 

Cur 

Eastern 

ves  and  elbows;  < 

sach 

New 

Southern 

Western 

Southern 

Old 

New 

3.00 

$0.25 

$0.15  $0.10 

$0.75 

$0.50  $0.40 

4.00 

0.25 

0.20 

0.10 

$0.20 

0.75 

0.60 

0.40 

$0.65 

5.00 

0.40 

0.25 

0.15 

0.25 

1.20 

0.75 

0.60 

0.85 

6.00 

0.40 

0.30 

0.15 

0.30 

1.20 

1.00 

0.60 

1.10 

8.00 

0.55 

0.45 

0.25 

0.45 

1.65 

1.65 

1.00 

1.80 

9.00 

0.80 

0.50 

0.30 

2.40 

1.75 

1.20 

10.00 

0.80 

0.60 

0.35 

0.65 

2.40 

2.10 

1.40 

2.75 

12.00 

1.00 

0.75 

0.45 

0.85 

3.00 

2.75 

1.80 

3.50 

15.00 

1.35 

1.00 

0.65 

1.25 

4.05 

3.75 

2.60 

4.75 

18.00 

1.90 

1.50 

0.85 

1.70 

5.70 

4.76 

3.40 

6.50 

20.00 

2.25 

1.75 

1.00 

2.25 

6.75 

6.76 

4.00 

7.50 

22.00 

3.00 

2.10 

1.30 

9.00 

7.00 

5.20 

24.00 

3.25 

2.50 

1.50 

3.25 

9.75 

8.00 

6.00 

11.00 

27.00 

4.50 

3.25 

2.25 

4.25 

13.50 

16.25 

20.00 

30.00 

5.50 

4  00 

2.75 

5.50 

16.50 

20.00 

27.50 

36.00 

7.00 

6.00 

4.00 

7.00 

21.00 

30.00 

32.50 

294 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Table  52. — Standard  1913  List  Prices  op  Sewer  Pipe  and  Specials 

IN  THE  United  States. — (Continued) 


Eastern  List 

Y  OR  T  Branches 

Diameter,  inchee 

Length,  inches 

Inleta,  length,  inches 

Multiply  price  per  foot 
of  straight  pipe  of 
same  diameter  by. 

2  to  24 

8  to  36 

15  to  24 

27  to  36 

12  to  24 
30  or  36 
30  or  36 
30  or  36 

12  or  less 
12  or  less 
15  or  more 
15  or  more 

4 
5 
7 
6 

Double  Junctions 

24 

12  or  less 

5 

Reducers  and  Incrbasers 

4 

Slan' 

rs  (per  foot  or  less  measured  on  long  side) 

3 

Old  Western  1 

jist                 Y  OR  T  Branches 

3  to  24 

8  to  24 

27  to  42 

24 
30 
36 

4 

4J 
5 

Doi 
(50  per  cent. 

jble  Junctions 
more  than  single  junctions) 

Decreasers,  Slants 

Increasers, 

3  to  24 
27  to  42 

3 
5 

SotUhern  List 

Y  OR  T  Branches 

4  to  24 
24  to  36 

24 
30 

4i 
5 

Double  Junctions 
(50  per  cent,  more  than  single  junctions) 

Increasers,  Decreasers,  and  Slants 

4 

Table  53. — Typical  Discounts  from  Sewer  List  Prices 


Diameter, 
inches 

Standard  pipe 

Deep  and  wide 
socket  pipe 

Double  strength  with 
deep  and  wide  socket 

2  ft.          2J  or  3  ft. 

2  ft.       i  2i  or  3  ft. 

2  ft.          2|  or  3  ft. 

3  to  24 
15 

18 
20  to  24 
27  to  30 
33  to  36 

42 

75% 

74% 

.......  t 

74% 

73% 

70% 
69% 
68% 

69% 
68% 
67% 
59% 
54% 
47% 

• • 

67% 
62% 



not  excessively  warped  or  deformed,  that  the  bell  and  spigot  ends  are 
well  formed  and  that  it  otherwise  conforms  to  the  specifications.  An 
experienced  inspector  with  an  accurate  ear  can  ring  and  examine  pipe 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    295 

very  rapidly,  usually  as  fast  as  the  pipe  can  be  loaded  on  or  unloaded 
from  the  car.  For  inspection,  the  pipe  should  be  stood  on  end,  pref- 
erably the  bell  end,  on  the  floor  of  the  car.  A  single  light  tap  of  the 
hammer  will  then  instantly  disclose  a  crack  if  any  exists,  although  it 
may  be  practically  impossible  to  see  it.  If,  for  any  reason,  it  is  necessary 
to  find  the  crack,  this  can  usually  be  done  by  rubbing  the  inside  with  a 
piece  of  white  chalk,  afterward  wiping  the  chalk  around  and  at  the 
same  time  tapping  the  pipe  lightly  with  the  hammer.  The  crack  will 
then  be  easily  visible,  filled  with  white  chalk.  Many  a  dispute  has  been 
settled  in  this  way,  without  any  harsh  words.  A  record  should  be 
kept  of  the  number  of  pieces  of  pipe  and  specials  of  each  size  in  each  car 
received  and  of  the  number  rejected  and  the  reason  for  the  rejections. 
The  blank  form  used  for  this  purpose  should  have  spaces  to  receive  the 
number  of  the  car,  as  "57203  P.  R.  R.,"  the  general  title  of  its  contents,  as 
"8-in.  Akron  pipe,"  the  location  where  the  car  was  set,  as  "yard,"  the 
date  and  time  of  the  receipt  and  the  complete  unloading  of  the  car,  the 
name  of  the  teamster  taking  away  the  pipe,  a  complete  list  of  the 
contents  as  billed,  a  statement  of  the  place  of  their  delivery,  a  complete 
record  of  the  rejections,  the  name  of  the  man  accepting  the  record  and 
the  data  of  acceptance,  the  railroad  from  which  the  shipment  was 
received,  and  the  date  the  records  were  received  at  the  head  office  of  the 
sewer  department. 

Inspection  at  the  factory  cannot  wholly  take  the  place  of  inspection  at 
the  point  of  unloading,  and  in  fact  the  only  way  to  be  sure  that  cracked 
pipe  do  not  find  their  way  into  the  trenches  is  to  inspect  them  on  the 
ground  just  as  they  are  about  to  be  laid. 

Tests. — In  Illinois,  Iowa,  and  other  states  where  a  large  amount  of 
cement  pipe  is  used  annually,  attention  has  been  given  to  testing  pipe  as 
delivered,  and  several  inexpensive  and  light  machines  have  been  devised 
for  such  work.  One  was  designed  under  the  direction  of  Prof.  A.  N. 
Talbot  which  has  a  wood  frame  and  can  be  moved  readily  from  place 
to  place  along  the  trench,  if  the  pipes  are  cast  on  the  job  and  must  be 
tested  there.  A  lever  having  a  1 :  10  leverage  extends  out  from  the  frame 
and  its  end  is  gradually  loaded  with,  known  weights  until  the  pipe  is 
broken.  The  pipe  is  held  at  the  bottom  on  two  narrow  supports  about 
2  in.  apart  and  the  load  is  applied  along  a  single  line  at  the  top.  The 
difference  in  bending  moments  when  the  pipe  has  a  single  support  at 
the  bottom  or  two  supports  close  together  is.  so  small  that  Professor 
Talbot  regards  it  as  unimportant  in  most  practical  work.  C.  W.  Boyn- 
ton,  testing  engineer  of  the  Universal  Portland  Cement  Co.,  designed  a 
machine  for  field  testing  which  consists  of  a  frame  carrying  a  screw 
operated  through  gears  by  a  hand- wheel.  The  pipe  is  placed  between 
a  horizontal  chock  on  the  lower  end  of  the  screw  and  a  chair  resting  on  a 
platform  scale  supported  by  the  bottom  of  the  frame  carrying  the 


296  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

screw.  The  chair  has  two  half-round  irons  2  in.  apart  on  which  the 
pipe  rests.  The  chock  has  a  half-round  through  which  the  load  is 
applied  to  the  top  of  the  pipe.  When  the  pipe  has  been  placed  on  the 
chair  the  scale  beam  is  balanced;  on  the  end  of  the  beam  is  a  bucket 
into  which  water  is  admitted  from  a  tank  on  the  top  of  the  frame  as  the 
load  is  applied  by  the  hand-wheel. 

Where  the  Iowa  pipe  specifications  are  in  force,  which  require  the 
load  to  be  applied  to  the  top  quadrant  of  the  pipe  and  the  support  to 
extend  around  the  bottom  quadrant,  the  tests  are  made  by  machines 
designed  under  the  direction  of  Prof.  A.  Marston,  of  Ames,  Iowa,  who 
will  supply  detailed  blue-prints  from  which  any  good  tnechanic  can 
make  one.  There  are  three  sizes  of  these  machines.  The  Ames  Junior 
is  for  pipe  up  to  18  in.  and  in  it  the  load  is  applied  and  the  pipe  is  sup- 
ported by  sand  boxes.  Above  the  upper  sandbox  is  a  jackscrew  capable 
of  loading  the  pipe  with  a  total  pressure  of  6000  lb.,  which  is  as  much  as 
the  ordinary  scales  on  which  the  lower  sandbox  rests  will  carry  safely. 
The  Ames  Senior  machine  is  the  size  recommended  for  testing  large  pipe 
where  the  apparatus  must  be  shifted.  The  pressure  exerted  by  the 
jackscrew  is  transmitted  through  a  lever  to  platform  scales  and  the  reduc- 
tion in  pressure  due  to  the  leverage  has  enabled  the  machine  to  be  used 
successfully  in  testing  pipe  requiring  a  load  of  24,000  lb.  to  break  them. 
The  Ames  Standard  machine  has  the  same  capacity  but  is  not  portable. 

The  tests  made  under  the  Iowa  specifications  are  as  follows: 

Absorption  Test. — 1.  The  specimens  shall  be  approximately  3  in.  square, 
and  shall  extend  the  full  thickness  of  the  pipe  wall,  with  the  outer  skins 
unbroken. 

2.  Five  individual  tests  shall  constitute  a  standard  test,  the  average 
of  the  five  and  the  result  for  each  specimen  being  given  in  the  report  of  the 
test. 

3.  Each  specimen  shall  be  dried  in  an  oven,  or  by  other  application  of 
artificial  heat,  until  it  ceases  to  lose  further  appreciable  amounts  of  moisture 
when  repeatedly  weighed. 

4.  All  surfaces  of  the  specimens  shall  be  brushed  with  a  stiff  brush  before 
weighing  the  first  time. 

6.  The  specimens  shall  be  weighed  immediately  before  immersion,  on  a 
balance  or  scales  capable  of  accurately  indicating  the  weight  within  0.1 
per  cent. 

6.  The  water  employed  shall  be  pure  soft  water,  at  the  air  temperature  of 
a  room  which  is  artificially  heated  in  cold  seasons  of  the  year. 

7.  The  specimens  shall  be  completely  immersed  in  water  for  a  period  of 
24  hours. 

8.  Immediately  upon  being  removed  from  the  water,  the  specimens 
shall  be  dried  by  pressing  against  them  a  soft  cloth  or  a  piece  of  blotting 
paper.  There  shall  be  no  rubbing  or  brushing  of  the  specimen.  The 
reweighing  shall  be  done  immediately  with  a  balance  or  scales  capable  of 
accurately  indicating  the  weight  within  0.1  per  cent. 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    297 

9.  The  result  of  each  absorption  test  shall  be  calculated  by  taking  the 
difference  between  the  initial  dry  weight  and  the  final  weight,  and  dividing 
the  remainder  by  the  initial  dry  weight. 

Tests  of  Bearing  Strength. — 1.  The  specimens  shall  be  unbroken,  full-sized 
samples  of  the  pipe  to  be  tested.  They  shall  be  carefully  selected  so  as  to 
represent  fairly  the  quality  of  the  pipe. 

2-.  Five  individual  tests  shall  constitute  a  standard  test,  the  average  of 
the  five  and  the  result  for  each  specimen  being  given  in  the  report  of  the  test. 

3.  The  specimens  shall  be  dried  by  keeping  them  in  a  warm,  dry  room 
for  a  period  of  at  least  two  days  prior  to  the  test. 

4.  Each  dried  specimen  shall  be  weighed  on  reliable  scales  just  prior  to 
the  test. 

5.  E^ch  specimen  shall  be  accurately  marked,  with  pencil  or  crayon  lines, 
in  quarters,  prior  to  the  test.  Specimens  shall  be  carefully  bedded^  above  and 
below  in  sand  for  the  one-fourth  circumference  of  the  pipe,  measured  on 
the  middle  line  of  the  pipe  wall.  The  depth  of  bedding  above  and  below  the 
pipe  at  the  thinnest  point  shall  be  equal  to  one-fourth  the  diameter  of  the 
pipe,  measured  between  the  middle  lines  of  the  pipe  walls. 

6.  The  top  bearing  frame  shall  not  be  allowed  to  come  in  contact  with  the 
pipe  or  with  the  test  load.  The  upper  surface  of  the  sand  in  the  top  bearing 
shall  be  carefully  struck  level  with  a  straight  edge,  and  shall  be  carefully 
covered  with  a  heavy,  rigid  top  bearing,  with  lower  surface  a  true  plane, 
made  of  heaVy  timbers  or  other  rigid  material  capable  of  uniformly  distrib- 
uting the  test  load  without  appreciable  bending.  The  test  load  shall  be 
applied  at  the  exact  center  of  this  top  bearing  in  such  a  way  (either  by  the 
use  of  a  spherical  bearing,  or  by  the  use  of  two  rollers  at  right  angles)  as  to 
leave  the  bearing  free  to  move  in  both  directions.  In  case  the  test  is  made 
without  the  use  of  a  machine,  and  by  piling  on  weight,  the  weight  may  be 
piled  directly  on  a  platform  resting  on  the  top  bearing;  provided,  however, 
that  the  weight  is  piled  in  such  a  way  as  to  insure  uniform  distribution  of 
the  load  over  the  top  surface  of  the  sand. 

7.  The  frames  for  the  top  and  bottom  bearings  shall  be  composed  of  timbers 
so  heavy  as  to  avoid  appreciable  bending  by  the  side  pressure  of  the  sand. 
The  frames  shall  be  dressed  on  their  interior  surfaces.  No  frames  shall 
come  in  contact  with  the  pipe  during  the  test.  A  strip  of  soft  cloth  may  be 
attached  to  the  inside  of  the  upper  frame  on  each  side  along  the  lower  edge 
to  prevent  the  escape  of  sand  between  the  frame  and  the  pipe. 

8.  The  sand  used  for  bending  the  pipe  at  top  and  bottom  shall  be  washed 
sand  which  has  passed  a  No.  8  screen.  It  shall  be  dried  by  keeping  it  spread 
out  thin  in  a  warm,  dry  room. 

9.  The  test  load  shall  be  applied  gradually  and  without  shock  or  disturb- 
ance of  the  pipe.  The  application  of  the  load  shall  be  carried  on  continuously, 
and  the  pipe  shall  not  be  allowed  to  stand  any  considerable  length  of  time 
under  a  load  smaller  than  the  breaking  load. 

10.  The  total  breaking  load  shall  be  taken  as  equal  to  the  total  top  load, 
including  the  applied  load,  weight  of  top  frame,  sand  for  top  bearing,  top 
bearing  timbers,  etc.,  plus  five-eighths  of  the  weight  of  the  pipe.  This 
total  load  shall  be  divided  by  the  length  of  the  pipe  in  feet  so  as  to  give  the 


298  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

I 
bearing  strength  per  linear  foot  of  pipe.     In  testing  sewer  pipe  the  bells  shall 

be  bedded  and  loaded,  as  well  as  the  body  of  the  pipe,  and  the  length  over 
all  should  be  used  in  computing  the  bearing  strength  per  linear  foot. 

The  Modulus  of  Rupture, — The  modulus  of  rupture  of  drain  tile  and  sewer 
pipe  shall  be  computed  by  the  following  rule :  Divide  the  bearing  strength 
in  pounds  per  linear  foot  by  12,  and  multiply  by  the  radius  in  inches, 
measured  to  the  center  line  of  the  pipe  wall;  then  divide  this  product  by  the 
square  of  the  top  or  bottom  thickness  of  the  pipe  wall  in  inches.  The 
quotient  will  be  the  modulus  of  rupture,  in  pounds  per  square  inch.  •  The 
average  thickness  of  the  pipe  wall  shall  be  carefully  measured  at  the  top  of 
the  pipe,  and  also  at  the  bottom,  and  the  smaller  of  the  two  average  thick- 
nesses shall  be  used  in  the  computations. 

The  absorption  and  breaking  loads  of  vitrified  clay  and  cement  pipe 
tested  by  the  Iowa  methods  are  given  in  Volume  I. 

The  tests  of  sewer  pipe  made  by  the  Brooklyn  Bureau  of  Sewers  are 
carried  out  in  a  75,000-lb.  Riehl^  crushing  machine  large  enough  to 
receive  a  48-in.  pipe.  The  pipe  is  not  bedded  in  sand,  which  the 
Bureau  believes  increases  the  effect  of  the  bell  on  the  total  breaking 
strength  to  a  maximum.  According  to  G.  T.  Hammond  (Proc.  Am. 
Soc.  Test.  Mat.,  xi,  852),  "the  bell  adds  to  the  strength  of  the  bell-end 
of  a  pipe  exposed  to  a  crushing  load  and  the  effect  will  vary  with  the 
length  of  the  barrel  of  the  pipe  and  also  with  the  various  conditions 
involved  in  the  test.  The  effect  is  greatest  on  short  lengths  of  pipe ;  thus, 
a  24-in.  length  of  pipe  with  a  bell  will  give  a  higher  crushing  load  per 
foot  than  will  a  36-in.  length  with  a  bell,  the  barrel  portion  of  which  is  of 
equally  strong  material.  Again,  a  pipe  without  a  bell  will  break  under  a 
lower  crushing  load  than  a  pipe  of  the  same  size  of  no  better  and  no 
stronger  material  provided  with  a  bell."  The  load  is  applied,  in  the 
Brooklyn  tests,  through  a  strip  of  plaster  of  Paris  1  in.  wide,  placed  on 
the  pipe  between  two  wooden  strips,  into  which  the  "knife"  fits  and 
into  which  it  is  put  while  the  plaster  is  soft.  The  wood  strips  are 
removed  before  the  test  begins.  The  barrel,  but  not  the  bell,  of  the  pipe 
rests  on  a  bed  of  sand  which  appears  to  develop  a  reaction  over  about 
10  deg.  of  the  circumference  of  the  section.  There  has  been  some  talk 
of  abandoning  this  method  of  support  in  favor  of  a  knife  edge  at  the 
bottom  as  well  as  the  top,  not  only  because  this  is  believed  to  give  the 
greatest  uniformity  in  the  results  but  also  because  the  unit  strength  of  the 
material  can  be  more  easily  and  exactly  determined  from  the  test  results. 

At  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  both  cement  and  clay  pipe  are  regularly  tested 
(1913)  to  determine  if  they  comply  with  these  requirements: 

Hydrostatic  test:  Untreated  pipe  shall  show  no  percolation  up  to  10  lb. 
pressure  and  shall  resist  fracture  at  33  lb.  pressure  per  square  inch. 

Crushing  test:  When  supported  on  a  bed  of  sand,  so  that  an  even  bearing 
is  provided  throughout  the  length  of  the  pipe,  the  various  sizes  of  pipe  shall 
withstand  the  following  pressures  in  pounds  per  linear  foot  applied  at  the 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    299 

crown  uniformly  along  a  line  1  in.  wide  and  extending  the  whole  length  of 
the  pipe  exclusive  of  the  bell: 

Size,  inches &-8        9         10        12        15      18  21         24 

Pressures,  pounds .     1000     1050    1100     1150     1300     1450     1700    2000 

The  hydrostatic  test  is  conducted  in  an  apparatus  designed  to  prevent 
any  other  pressures  being  exerted  on  the  interior  of  the  pipe  than  those 
normal  to  the  shell.  In  the  apparatus  first  used  there  was  some  doubt 
whether  rupture  was  caused  by  true  water  pressure  on  the  shell  or  by  a 
wedge  action  of  the  head  used  for  closing  the  bell.  In  the  improved 
apparatus  both  ends  are  closed  by  heavy  rubber  cups  held  in  place  by  a 
frame,  described  in  Engineering  News,  March  20,  1913. 

HANDLING  AND  STORING  PIPE 

It  is  a  waste  of  money  to  inspect  pipe  and  then  by  careless  handling 
run  the  risk  of  breakage  before  they  are  finally  laid  in  the  trenches. 
Care  should  be  taken  in  imloading  and  piling,  and  pipe  should  always 
be  hauled  in  a  vehicle  provided  with  good  springs.  That  the  pipe  are 
brittle  and  easily  broken,  should  always  be  borne  in  mind  by  the  men 
handling  them.  The  men  should  be  required  to  load  the  pipe  carefully 
on  the  wagons,  not  only  so  as  to  reduce  the  danger  of  cracking  them  but 
also  to  insure  full  loads  for  teams.  With  a  two-horse  wagon  having  a 
body  about  12  X  4  ft.,  24  ft.  of  24-in.  pipe  will  be  a  load,  33  to  45  ft.  of 
20  and  22-in.,  60  to  66  ft.  of  15-in.,  90  ft.  of  12-in.,  114  ft.  of  10-in.,  150  ft. 
of  8-in.,  225  ft.  of  6-in.  and  375  ft.  of  4-in. 

Pipe  up  to  24  in.  in  diameter  are  usually  handled  from  the  cars  to 
wagons  by  hand.  For  sizes  larger  than  this,  which,  however,  are  not 
much  used  at  the  present  time,  an  ordinary  guy  derrick  is  convenient, 
although  not  absolutely  necessary,  as  it  is  possible,  by  means  of  chutes, 
to  handle  the  pipe  by  hand.  Large  cities  should  have  yards  for  the 
storage  of  pipe  and  temporary  yards  may  be  desirable  nearer  work  of  any 
magnitude.  The  pipe  should  be  stored  in  piles,  the  bells  of  one  row 
alternating  with  the  spigots  of  the  next  row  on  top,  so  that  the  different 
layers  of  pipe  maintain  a  generally  horizontal  position.  The  ends  of 
these  piles  must  be  sloped  well  back  and  blocked,  so  that  there  is  no 
possibility  of  starting  a  run  of  the  pipe  in  the  lower  rows,  which  would 
be  disastrous  to  the  whole  pile.  Branches  and  specials  are  stored  in 
somewhat  the  same  way,  but  it  is  usually  necessary  to  place  boards 
between  the  different  rows,  in  order  to  preserve  the  stability  and  shape  of 
the  pile. 

It  is  desirable  to  carry  through  the  winter  no  more  pipe  than  neces- 
sary, and  such  as  is  on  hand  should  be  so  piled  that  there  is  no  possibility 
of  the  lower  pipes  freezing  into  the  ground  or  holding  water  which  may 
freeze  and  thus  cause  breakage. 


300 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Pipe  should  not  be  stored  on  the  job  much  in  advance  of  the  needs  of 
the  work  being  carried  on.  Where  it  is  possible  to  store  pipe  in  con- 
venient yards,  generally  one  or  two  days*  supply  on  the  job  is  all  that  is 
desirable,  for  in  busy  streets  or  about  construction  work  there  is  a 
possibiUty  of  considerable  breakage. 

The  pipe  up  to  a  diameter  of  18  in.  and  possibly  24  in.  are  usually 
handled  at  the  trench  and  lowered  into  it  without  the  aid  of  machinery. 
A  three-legged  derrick,  such  as  is  used  for  lowering  water  pipe,  is  con- 
venient, however,  in  the  case  of  24-in.  and  essential  for  larger  sizes. 
A  pipe-laying  derrick  mounted  on  a  truck  with  wheels  resting  on  a 
plank  runway  on  each  side  of  the  trench  is  made  by  William  Heggie, 
Joliet,  111.  {Eng.  Neivs^  Feb.  20,  1913).  For  ordinary  sizes  of  pipe  a 
hook-rope  is  convenient,  having  a  hook  spHced  in  one  end  and  a  chain 
and  hook  spliced  in  the  other.  This  chain  is  passed  through  the  pipe 
and  the  hook  fastened  over  the  chain  at  the  spigot  end  of  the  pipe,  thus 


^ 


I  ti  tt  t  lit  I  ttttitt  fit 


Lifting    Hook. 


zyj^^^'^^f?mv^)in^^ 


'^■(■ 


Fig.  106. — Pipe  buggy  and  lifting  hook. 

forming  a  loop  in  which  the  pipe  hangs  as  it  is  lowered  into  the  trench. 
Where  some  one  of  the  jointing  compounds  is  used,  by  which  several 
pipe  are  put  together  on  the  bank,  it  is  possible  for  two  men  to  lower 
them  into  place,  each  one  holding  a  rope  looped  over  the  pipe,  one  at 
either  end,  although  it  is  better  to  pass  a  stiff  rod  through  the  pipe 
and  attach  a  hook  rope  to  each  end,  thus  avoiding  danger  of  the  pipe 
sagging  or  breaking  in  the  middle.  The  pole  should  have  an  eye  in  each 
end. 

After  being  lowered  into  the  trench,  the  pipe  is  usually  shoved  into 
place  by  the  pipe  layer,  his  helper  lifting  the  spigot  end  by  means  of  a 
wire  or  strap  passed  under  the  pipe,  although  in  this  case,  also,  some 
mechanical  devices  may  be  desirable  for  the  larger  sizes.  One  of  these 
devices,  Fig.  106,  consists  of  a  long  and  strong  hook  by  which  the  pipe 
may  be  lowered  in  a  horizontal  position,  and  the  spigot  inserted  in  the 
bell  of  the  preceding  pipe.  Still  another  of  these  devices  is  the  pipe 
buggy  shown  in  the  same  illustration,  which  is  handy  in  entering  the 
spigot  of  one  length  into  the  bell  of  another. 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    301 

The  bottom  of  the  trench  should  be  brought  as  near  as  possible  to 
subgrade,  and  a  hole  excavated  at  the  place  where  the  bell  of  the  pipe 
will  come,  large  enough  to  enable  the  workman  to  pass  his  hand  under 
the  pipe  in  order  to  calk  the  gasket  into  place  and  to  fill  the  joint  with 
cement,  in  case  it  is  used.  If,  when  the  pipe  is  in  place  and  tested  for' 
line  and  grade,  it  is  found  to  b^  slightly  too  high,  it  is  sometimes  possible, 
by  raising  and  pushing  it  down  or  lightly  tapping  it  on  top,  to  force  it 
down  to  grade,  but  if  it  is  much  too  high  it  is  necessary  to  lift  it  up  and 
scrape  the  earth  out  from  underneath.  If  the  bell  of  the  pipe  is  found 
to  be  too  low,  the  length  should  be  removed  and  earth  carefully  shoveled 
and  spread  into  place,  in  order  to  bring  it  up  to  grade.  Pieces  of  rock 
or  blocks  or  any  supports  of  like  character  should  never  be  placed  under 
a  vitrified  or  cement  pipe  in  order  to  raise  it  to  the  proper  grade,  because 
they  are  rigid  supports  and  when  the  trench  is  backfilled  the  pipe  may  be 
forced  to  act  as  a  beam,  which  is  a  dangerous  condition. 

LAYING  PIPE 

For  laying  pipe  of  ordinary  sizes,  three  or  four  men  are  required.  One 
handles  the  pipe  on  the  bank  and  lowers  it  into  the  trench;  another 
receives  the  pipe  and  places  it  in  position.  He  is  followed  by  a  third 
man,  who  makes  the  joint  and  carefully  tamps  the  earth  under  and 
around  the  sides,  filling  the  bell  hole  completely.  The  filling  around 
the  lower  portion  of  the  pipe  should  be  placed  uniformly  on  both  sides 
of  the  pipe  and  care  should  be  taken  not  to  force  the  pipe  out  of 
position  either  horizontally  or  vertically.  Where  the  work  is  being 
carried  forward  rapidly,  this  final  operation  may  be  done  by  a  fourth 
man. 

The  head  of  the  tamper  used  until  the  backfill  is  about  a  foot  over  the 
pipe  should  have  a  face  not  exceeding  1-1/2  X  5  in.  nor  weigh  more  than 
7  lb.  A  tamper  of  even  smaller  size  may  be  used  to  advantage  until  the 
filling  is  brought  well  up  above  the  springing  line  of  the  pipe.  Such  a 
tamper  may  have  a  face  about  4  in.  long,  a  thickness  of  1/2  in.  and  a 
handle  made  of  5/8-in.  iron.  The  head  should  be  canted  slightly  to  aid 
in  reaching  the  filling  well  under  the  pipe. 

In  ordinary  stable  ground  the  preparation  of  the  trench  for  the  pipe  is 
a  simple  matter,  and  the  bottom  should  be  shaped  as  nearly  as  possible 
to  fit  the  circumference  of  the  pipe,  bell-holes  being  excavated  at  the 
proper  places.  Where  the  trench  is  in  rock  it  is  generally  specified  that 
the  bottom  shall  be  excavated  6  in.  below  the  grade  of  the  invert  of  the 
sewer  and  the  space  refilled  with  gravel  or  fine  material  as  a  support  for 
the  pipe.  There  is  some  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the  extent  to  which 
the  trench  must  be  prepared  under  these  conditions.  Some  specifica- 
tions require  that  the  rock  shall  be  everywhere  at  least  6  in.  below  the 


302         ^  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

seww,  even  to  the  extent  of  requiring  that  the  rock  under  the  bells 
of  pipes  shall  be  blasted  out  to  greater  depth  than  under  the  body  of  the 
pipes.  Other  specifications  merely  insist  that  the  pipe  shall  have  a 
uniform  bearing. 

The  tests  upon  earth  pressures  made  by  Marston  and  Anderson,  de- 
scribed in  Volume  I,  indicate  the  desirability,  when  practicable,  of  nar- 
rowing the  trench  at  the  bottom  by  leaving  earth  shoulders  on  each  side, 
at  a  level  above  the  top  of  the  sewer  pipe,  to  increase  the  arching  action 
of  the  backfilling  and  thus  reduce  the  load  or  pressure  upon  the  pipe  due 
to  it. 

The  greatest  difficulties  in  laying  sewer  pipe  are  encountered  in  wet 
trenches.  Under  such  conditions  the  water  is  usually  carried  away 
by  means  of  underdrains.  These  are  usually  drain  tile  with  open  joints 
covered  by  strips  of  muslin  and  surrounded  by  coarse  gravel  laid  in  a 
subtrench  dug  in  advance  of  the  pipe  laying,  either  to  one  side  or 
directly  under  the  line  of  the  proposed  sewer.  The  size  of  the  drains  is 
something  to  be  determined  by  experience  and  judgment  rather  than  by 
rule.  These  underdrains  are  seldom  less  than  4  in.  in  diameter  or  more 
than  8  in.  Sometimes  water  enters  so  fast  that  it  is  impossible  for  it  to 
find  its  way  through  the  gravel  into  the  underdrain,  and  in  such  cases  it 
may  be  necessary  to  provide  a  small  sump  a  short  distance  in  advance  of 
the  pipe  laying,  from  which  the  water  may  be  constantly  pumped,  other 
sumps  being  dug  farther  along  as  the  work  progresses. 

In  very  wet  trenches  in  fine  sand,  the  bottom  sometime^  boils  up  and 
resembles  quicksand,  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  hold  the  bottom  down 
by  one  means  or  another.  Frequently  gravel  and  coarse  sand  will  be 
of  some  service;  straw,  brickbats,  broken  stone,  cinders  and  like  materials 
have  all  been  used  with  more  or  less  success  from  time  to  time.  The  best 
results  are  undoubtedly  obtained  when  concrete  is  used  in  the  bottom 
of  the  trench,  but  even  this  material  sometimes  is  insufficient  to  hold 
down  the  boiling  sand,  and  it  is  necessary  to  spread  a  platform  of  boards 
on  the  bottom  of  the  trench  before  dumping  concrete  there.  Where 
planks  are  used  in  this  way  they  should  be  worked  down  through  sand 
and  water  to  at  least  6  or  8  in.  below  the  bottom  of  the  sewer,  and  the 
water  and  sand  cleaned  off  above  them  as  thorouglily  as  possible  before 
putting  in  the  concrete. 

In  the  very  wet  trenches  of  the  Batavia,  N.  Y.,  sewerage  system,  for 
example,  particular  attention  was  paid  to  securing  a  rigid  foundation, 
according  to  Charles  Hoopes,  Resident  Engineer.  The  material  below 
the  invert  was  carefully  watched,  extra  excavation  and  refilling  with 
gravel  were  done  when  the  soft  material  was  shallow  and  sometimes 
when  it  was  deep  a  concrete  slab  was  put  in  below  the  invert.  From  30 
to  40  ft.  were  excavated  ahead  of  the  pipe  each  day  to  a  depth  of  9  to 
12  in.  below  the  invert,  and  a  dry  mixture  of  cement  and  gravel  was 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    303 

rammed  into  the  bottom  of  the  trench  to  a  grade  which  would  be  ap- 
proximately 2  in.  below  the  bell.  The  next  day  the  pipe  were  laid  on  this 
slab  by  raising  the  grade  with  this  same  dry  mixture,  and  after  the  pipe 
were  at  grade  and  jointed  each  pipe  was  rammed  to  the  springing  line 
with  the  mixture,  and  the  trench  was  then  backfilled  with  selected  earth 
in  the  usual  manner.  In  many  places  the  earth  pressure  and  the  depth 
of  soft  material  were  so  great  that  the  pipe  had  a  tendency  to  float.  Then 
7/8-in.  boards  4  to  6  ft.  long  were  nailed  together,  forming  a  lap  at  each 
seam,  and  driven  as  sheet  piling  to  a  depth  of  2  to  4  ft.  below  the  invert, 
depending  upon  the  width  of  trench.  Between  these  walls  of  sheet 
piling  the  concrete  was  deposited  and  pipe  laid,  this  7/8-in.  sheeting 
being  left  in  place.  After  two  years  no  deflections  appeared  in  sewers 
constructed  in  this  manner  even  in  the  softest  material  {Eng.  Record, 
Nov.  9,  1912). 

The  ^use  of  platforms  under  sewers  is  rather  frequent  and  they  may 
be  built  in  various  ways.  Some  engineers  prefer  a  single  plank  laid 
directly  under  the  sewer;  this  allows  the  water  running  over  the  bottom 
to  pass  along  either  side  without  undermining  the  sewer  itself,  but  there 
is  a  possibility  that  this  water  may  wash  and  cave  in  the  sides  of  the 
trench.  Other  engineers  prefer  to  build  a  cradle  of  timbers  laid  longi- 
tudinally a  few  inches  apart,  each  length  of  pipe  being  supported  by  a 
transverse  timber  near  each  end,  cut  to  conform  to  the  shape  of  the 
pipe.  By  this  method  the  water  flows  through  the  space  left  between  the 
longitudinal  timbers.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  possibility  that  if 
an  underdrain  has  been  previously  laid  the  water  flowing  directly  under 
the  sewer  and  over  the  underdrain  may  wash  the  material  into  the  under- 
drain and  cause  the  bottom  to  cave  in,  causing  settlement  of  the  sewer 
itself.  There  is  also  the  danger  of  cracking  the  pipe  on  account  of  the 
possible  lack  of  firm,  uniformly  distributed  support  below  it. 

In  some  kinds  of  material,  particularly  in  quicksand,  it  may  be 
almost  impossible  to  carry  the  bottom  of  the  trench  down  to  the  proper 
grade,  without  resort  to  various  expedients.  One  of  these  consists  of 
placing  two  planks  on  edge  and  far  enough  apart  to  include  the  pipe 
between  them,  thus  forming  a  sort  of  bottomless  box.  The  ends  of 
these  planks  are  fastened  together  in  such  a  way  as  to  keep  them  vertical, 
and  they  are  then  worked  down  into  the  quicksand  to  the  bottom  of  the 
trench  and  secured  there  to  the  trench  bracing.  Planks  cut  of  such  a 
size  as  to  form  a  bottom  for  this  box  are  then  put  in  place,  one  by  one, 
men  standing  on  each  plank  and  working  it  down  into  place  where  it  is 
fastened  by  cleats  at  cither  end. 

A  great  deal  of  such  work,  however,  may  be  obviated  by  careful 
handling  of  trench  work,  by  accurate  and  rapid  work  doing  away  as  far 
as  possible  with  any  unnecessary  passage  or  walking  over  the  material 
on  the  bottom  by  the  men,  for  material  of  bad  quality  will  sometimes 


304  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

stand  up  for  a  few  minutes  if  not  disturbed.  A  method  of  handling  siich 
work  by  draining  out  the  ground  water  is  described  in  an  article  by 
Leonard  Metcalf  in  Joum,  Assoc.  Eng,  Socs.j  vol.  xxiv,  page  277.  The 
drainage  is  usually  done  with  driven  wells. 

The  importance  of  proper  supports  for  sewers  is  shown  by  the  results 
of  an  investigation  of  the  Hoboken  sewerage  system  made  in  1912  by 
James  H.  Fuertes.  A  large  part  of  the  city  is  quite  flat,  and  the  streets 
have  generally  been  raised  to  their  present  elevation.  There  are  large 
areas  on  which  water  stands  throughout  the  year,  lying  from  1  to  3  ft. 
below  the  street  levels  and  at  about  the  mean  high-tide  elevation.  The 
surface  is  a  thin  stratum  of  loose,  porous  material  underlaid  by  soft 
muck  or  silt  of  great  depth.  All  permanent  structures,  even  one-story 
buildings,  have  to  be  placed  on  pile  foundations.  A  large  portion  of 
the  paved  istreets  were  much  lower  than  the  official  grades,  there  being 
many  intersections  where  the  difference  was  10  to  26  in.  No  informa- 
tion could  be  obtained  concerning  their  elevations  when  first  constructed. 
Owing  to  the  boggy  nature  of  the  ground,  the  sewers,  excepting  those 
on  a  firm  pile  foundation,  had  settled  out  of  line  and  grade  so  that,  in 
some  cases,  their  slopes  were  in  directions  the  opposite  of  those  originally 
laid  out.  In  some  cases  sewage  stood  above  the  top  of  the  sewer  in  the 
manholes  and  in  a  few  cases  appeared  even  in  the  catch  basins  at  street 
corners.  It  was  found,  however,  that  most  of  the  sewers  placed  on  piles 
were  in  fairly  good  condition  as  to  line  and  grade,  and  the  fact  that  the 
pile  foundation  prevented  a  distortion  of  the  sewers  was  shown  by  the 
presence  of  a  large  ridge  in  the  street  surfaces  above  the  sewers,  the 
street  elsewhere  having  settled  so  much  in  some  cases  as  to  throw  the 
fire  hydrants  far  out  of  plumb. 

Branches. — A  branch  should  be  set  in  the  sewer  at  every  house.  If 
the  house  is  provided  with  plumbing,  the  engineer  should  go  into  the 
cellar  and  see  where  the  main  soil  pipe  leaves  the  building;  the  branch 
should  be  set  slightly  down  the  line  of  sewer  from  this  point.  If  it  is  not 
possible  to  gain  admission  to  the  cellar,  or  if  the  house  is  not  provided 
with  plumbing,  the  engineer  should  decide  on  the  proper  location  for  the 
branch  from  the  general  api>earance  of  the  house.  The  branch  should 
usually  be  set  well  down  the  sewer  from  the  center  line  of  the  house  and 
occasionally  below  the  lower  line  of  the  house.  Branches  should  also  be 
provided  for  all  vacant  lots,  the  spacing  depending  upon  the  frontage  of 
the  lots.  Where  vacant  land  is  not  cut  up  into  house  lots  the  branches 
should  be  placed  at  frequent  intervals,  according  to  the  general  custom 
of  laying  out  lots  in  the  locality.  The  engineer  should  notify  the  foreman 
of  the  approximate  location  of  the  points  at  which  branches  are  to  be 
placed.  The  common  practice  is  to  have  branches  every  30  or  40  ft.  on 
each  side. 

When  the  branches  have  been  laid  they  should  be  referenced  as 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    305 

described  in  detail  on  page  38.  If  possible  the  engineer  should 
"locate"  the  branches  before  the  trench  is  backfilled.  If  he  is  not  on 
the  work  the  foreman  should  be  very  careful  to  have  a  pole  set  at  each 
branch  before  the  backfilling  is  done.  If  poles  long  enough  to  reach  to  the 
surface  of  the  street  are  not  available,  stakes  may  be  driven  opposite 
the  branches,  or  laths  may  be  tied  to  the  tops  of  the  poles.  Great  care 
should  be  taken  to  see  that  stakes  are  driven  or  poles  set  on  the  same  side 
of  the  trench  as  the  branch.  In  measuring  up  after  the  backfilling  is 
completed,  the  engineer  must  be  careful  to  make  an  accurate  record  as 
to  whether  the  branch  leaves  the  sewer  on  the  right  or  the  left. 

A  convenient  method  of  recording  the  location  of  manholes  is  to  refer 
them  to  the  next  lower  manhole.  For  example,  the  first  manhole  at  the 
lower  end  of  the  street  should  be  numbered  1,  and  the  successive  man- 
holes numbered  consecutively,  as  1,  2,  3,  etc.  The  first  manhole  will  be 
located  from  the  street  lines  in  both  directions,  as  shown  in  Fig.  107, 
from  a  Worcester  record.  The  first  has  a  depth  of  8.20  ft.  and  its  water 
line  is  at  El.  390.17.  It  is  36  ft.  southwest  of  manhole  2  on  Wigwam 
Ave.,  26  ft.  from  the  east  street  line,  and  0.6  ft.  north  from  the  south  line 
of  Wigwam  Ave.  The  sewer  has  an  18-in.  oval  concrete  section  ^and 
was  built  in  1904.  The  fifth  manhole  is  9.43  ft.  deep  and  its  water  line 
is  at  El.  401 .717.  It  is  180.4  ft.  south  from  manhole  4  on  Alvarado  Ave., 
26  ft.  from  the  east  side  of  the  avenue,  and  23.1  ft.  south  from  the  north 
line  of  Lake  View  St.  The  sewer  in  Alvarado  Aye.  at  manhole  5  is  a 
15-in.  oval  cement  section  built  in  1904,  and  is  joined  at  the  manhole 
by  a  12-in.  lateral  sewer  laid  in  Lake  View  St.  in  1912.  The  branches  for 
house  connections  are  recorded  as  shown  in  Fig.  108.  Jhis  shows  that 
there  is  a  6-in.  branch  on  the  west  side  of  the  sanitary  sewer  opposite  a 
vacant  lot,  at  20.6  ft.  south  from  manhole  1  and  27  ft.  from  the  east 
street  line.  There  is  also  a  6-in.  branch  on  the  east  side  of  the  sewer 
opposite  house  No.  33;  it  is  77  ft.  south  of  manhole  1,  23  ft.  from  the 
east  street  line,  and  13.4  ft.  south  from  the  north  line  of  the  house. 
Both  sets  of  records  are  kept  in  Kalamazoo  loose-leaf  binders  on  sheets 
measuring  about  12-1/2  X  18-1/4  in.  One  set  of  manhole  records  or 
two  sets  of  branch  records  can  be  kept  on  a  page. 

The  branches  are  provided  with  stoppers  to  close  the  side  outlets 
until  such  time  as  the  connection  is  desired.  These  stoppers  should  be 
put  in  plac^e  before  the  branch  is  lowered  into  the  trench,  and  should  be 
made  as  nearly  water-tight  as  possible.^ 

In  Worcester,  Mass.,  the  stoppers  are  inserted  at  the  yard  before  the 
branches  are  carried  to  the  work.  This  is  done  by  placing  a  number  of 
Y's  on  a  specially  designed  horse,  so  tliat  the  branch  openings  are  in  a 
horizontal  plane.  The  stoppers  are  then  placed  in  position,  jute  is 
calked  around  them.  Fig.  109,  and  considerable  cement  is  placed  around 
and  over  the  jute  and  stopper.    Then  a  piece  of  wood,  cut  in  the  form  of 

20 


306 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


m  ■ 

W 

o 


o 

Z 
Z 
< 

S 

la. 
O 

o 

K 
O 

o 

u 

K 


xiina 


WBXVM 
MOUVABia 


BB« 


-I 


xnina 


*»• 


*  X  s 


SMI-I  NOMJ 


Mouoima 


saMvxsia 


ann  i« 


i9NVxaio 


B 
t 


«N   H  N 


MOUdBMia 


a3ifviwa 


■Nil 
NOUVAB-n 


MMBO 


■ON  'H  -H 


1 


^1 


^ 


Ul   lu 


^ 


(O 


4 


N 


CO 


i: 

i 


I 


5 

^ 


ti 


I 


CO 


UJ 


to 


^4 


5 


\ 


B 


o 

0 


O 


O 


o 


s 


■NTIMOIM 


SHflUS 


satoasia 


OM^fl 


U4 


is 


NOuaaNNOS 


wanottdo 


moui 


«9NVlSa 


3Nn-Js 


■SNViSlQ 


■ON  'H  -N 
NOtU 


Houaaan 


■»ii«i«ia 


11 


&       rfoaoit 


NouaaNNoa 

JOaNIM 


CM 

M 


^ 


Vft 


U4 


K. 


CM 


^ 


Vfi 


VS 


U4 


ly 


>& 


Uj 


^ 


iu 


v& 


d 

o 
•^< 

oS 

a 

■s 


13 

o 


P^ 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE   307 


a  truncated  cone,  is  twisted  around  on  top  of  the  stopper.  This  forces 
the  cement  to  the  outside,  forms  a  circular  ring  of  cement  in  and  over  the 
joint,  and  leaves  the  central  part  of  the  stopper  clean.  Afterward,  when 
it  is  desired  to  make  a  connection  with  one  of  the  branches,  it  is  necessary 
only  to  break  the  central  part  of  the  stopper  with  a  hammer.  It  is  then 
easy  to  chip  out  the  remainder  of  the  stopper  and  the  mortar  joint  with  a 
cold  chisel.  A  generous  quantity  of  jute  should  be  used  in  making  the 
joint,  so  that  the  cement  will  not  fill  too  large  a  portion  of  the  space  be- 
tween the  stopper  and  the  bell  of  the  branch. 

Branches  stoppered  in  this  way  have  been  tested  on  many  occasions 
and  have  been  found  free  from  leakage.  It  is  a  great  advantage  to  put 
in  the  stoppers  either  in  the  store 
yard  before  the  branches  are  shipped 
to  the  job,  or  upon  the  bank  before 
they  are  put  into  the  trench,  as  they 
are  then  much  more  easily  accessible 
than  they  are  after  being  laid.  One 
man  can  put  in  about  100  of  these 
stoppers  in  a  day  of  8  hours. 

Iowa  Pipe-laying  Requirements. — 
The  requirementiS  of  the  state  drain- 
age and  engineering  associations  of 
Iowa  for  laying  pipe  in  that  state  are 
based  on  the  results  of  the  investiga- 
tion outlined  in  Volimie  I  under  sewer 
pipe,  and  are  so  imusual  that  they 
must  be  considered  by  themselves. 
The  specifications  issued  in  1913  provide  that  no  drain  tile  or  sewer 
pipe  not  strengthened  by  bedding  in  concrete  may  be  used  in  any 
part  of  a  ditch  where  the  average  bearing  strength  of  the  pipe,  as  de» 
termined  by  the  Iowa  standard  tests,  is  not  equal,  in  addition  to  the 
weight  of  the  pipes  themselves,  to  at  least  165  per  cent,  of  the  ordinary 
maximum  load  on  pipe  in  ditches,  as  given  in  Volume  I.  Drain  tile 
and  sewer  pipe  having  a  lower  bearing  strength  than  that  required,  if 
used,  must  be  strengthened  by  bedding  in  concrete.  No  sewer  pipe  may 
be  used  having  a  bearing  strength  less  than  1250  lb.  per  linear  foot  for 
sizes  under  15  in.,  1500  lb.  per  linear  foot  for  15  to  20-in.  pipe,  1900  lb . 
for  21  to  27-in.  pipe  and  2400  lb.  for  28  to  36-in.  pipe. 

The  average  diameter  of  the  pipe  is  not  permitted  to  be  2  per  cent, 
under  the  specified  diameter.  No  two  diameters  are  permitted  to 
differ  from  each  other  more  than  5  per  cent.  Adjacent  pipe  must 
match  truly,  which  must  be  tested  on  the  bank  before  the  pipe  are 
lowered  into  the  ditch. 

In  all  ordinary  pipe  laying  in  large  sewers,  the  contractor  is  required 


Fia.  109. — Stopper  in  branch  and 
former  for  sealing  it. 


308  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

to  shape  the  bottom  of  the  ditch  approximately  to  fit  the  lowest  90  deg. 
of  the  circumference  of  the  pii>e,  taking  pains  to  secure  an  extra  firm 
bearing  near  the  outer  edges  of  the  90-deg.  strip.  On  the  concave 
surface  prepared  in  this  way,  a  1  to  2-in.  layer  of  pulverized  soil  or  sand, 
free  from  pebbles  greater  than  1/4  in.,  must  be  laid,  and  the  pipe 
bedded  firmly  in  it,  truly  to  line  and  grade.  Where  the  bottom  of  the 
trench  is  so  wet  and  soft  as  to  enable  thorough  bedding  of  the  lowest 
90  deg.  of  the  pipe  without  the  use  of  pulverized  earth  or  sand  and  still 
is  firm  enough  to  afford  a  secure  support  to  the  pipe  and  the  backfilling, 
the  omission  of  the  layer  of  earth  or  sand  may  be  authorized,  but  this 
authorization  will  not  excuse  imperfections  of  bedding  of  the  lowest  90 
deg.  of  the  pipe  circumference. 

The  space  between  the  pipe  and  the  bottom  and  sides  of  the  ditch 
must  be  completely  packed  full,  by  hand,  with  selected  earth,  and 
tamped  with  a  light  tamper  as  fast  as  placed,  all  up  to  the  level  of  the  top 
of  the  pipe.  The  side  filling  must  be  carried  up  as  fast  on  one  side  of  the 
pipe  as  on  the  other.  The  pipe  must  then  be  covered  by  hand  with 
selected  earth  to  a  depth  of  at  least  18  in.  above  the  top  of  the  pipe. 

'Whenever  the  factor  of  safety  of  the  pipe,  as  calculated  from  the  tests 
of  strength  and  the  tabulated  load  imposed  by  the  backfilling,  exceeds 
2.5,  the  shaping  of  the  bottom  of  the  ditch  to  fit  more  than  45  deg.  of  the 
bottom  of  the  pipe  may  be  omitted,  together  with  the  bedding  in  an 
earth  or  sand  layer  and  the  special  tamping  of  the  side  filling  around  the 
pipe. 

In  all  parts  of  ditches  in  soil  where  the  pipe  must  be  strengthened  to 
carry  heavy  loads,  by  bedding  in  concrete,  the  Iowa  requirements 
call  for  work  done  substantially  as  follows:  The  bottom  of  the  ditch 
must  be  shaped  by  the  contractor  to  fit  approximately  the  lowest  90  deg. 
of  the  pipe  circumference.  On  the  concave  surface  so  prepared,  the 
contractor  must  spread  a  layer  of  at  least  2  in.  pf  soft  concrete  stiflF 
enough  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  pipe,  and  the  pipe  must  be  firmly 
bedded,  truly  to  line  and  grade,  in  this  concrete.  The  space  between  the 
pipe  and  the  bottom  and  sides  of  the  ditch  must  then  be  completely 
packed  full  of  soft  concrete  up  to  a  level  15  deg.  of  the  pipe  circumference 
above  the  mid-height.  The  thickness  of  the  concrete  must  not  at  any 
point  be  less  than  2  in.,  and  it  must  be  tamped  in  place  with  a  light 
tamper.  The  concrete  used  in  this  method  of  strengthening  pipe  must 
be  made  of  1  part  Portland  cement  and  8  parts  gravel,  or  1  part 
Portland  cement,  5  parts  sand  and  8  parts  broken  stone. 

In  all  parts  of  ditches  in  yielding  soils,  such  as  muck  and  quicksand, 
where  the  pipe  must  be  strengthened  to  carry  heavy  loads,  by  bedding  it 
in  concrete,  the  Iowa  specifications  require  the  work  to  be  done  in  the 
following  manner:  The  bottom  of  the  ditch  is  finished  approximately 
level,  with  slightly  rounded  comers,  and  on  this  is  spread  a  layer  of  soft 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    309 

concrete,  the  full  width  of  the  ditch,  in  which  the  pipe  are  firmly  bedded 
truly  to  line  and  grade.  The  thickness  of  concrete  below  the  lowest 
part  of  the  body  of  the  pipe  is  at  least  one-eighth  of  the  inside  diameter. 
Soft  concrete  is  then  built  up  on  each  side  of  the  pipe,  completely  filling 
all  the  space  under  and  up  to  it,  up  to  a  level  on  each  side  of  the  pipe 
about  15  deg.  of  the  pipe  circumference  above  the  mid-height.  The 
width  of  the  concrete  is  such  as  to  give  a  thickness  on  each  side  of  the 
pipe  at  its  mid-height  of  at  least  one-fifth  of  its  inside  diameter.  The 
concrete  is  tamped  with,  a  light  tamper,  and  is  mixed  in  the  proportion 
of  1  part  Portland  cement  and  5  parts  of  gravel,  or  1  part  cement,  3  parts 
sand,  and  5  parts  broken  stone. 

BACKFILLING 

One  of  the  most  important  steps  in  ther  laying  of  pipe  and  masonry 
sewers  is  backfiUing  the  material  excavated  from  the  trench.  The 
pipe  must  be  well  supported  on  its  lower  surface  and  the  earth  should  be 
thoroughly  consolidated  around  the  upper  half. 

The  material  for  filling  around  the  sewer,  especially  a  pipe  sewer, 
should  be  selected,  and  large  stones  or  hard  lumps  of  earth  excluded. 
The  fill  should  be  carried  up  equally  on  both  sides  of  the  sewer  and 
should  be  thoroughly  ranmied  in  thin  layers  as  fast  as  it  is  thrown  into 
the  trench.  For  this  purpose  an  iron  rammer,  having  a  face  about 
1/2  in.  wide  and  about  4  in.  long,  with  a  5/8-in.  iron  handle,  is  well 
adapted.  The  head  of  the  ranmier  should  be  slightly  canted  to  one 
side  so  that  it  may  be  readily  forced  in  under  the  pipe.  When  the  back- 
filling is  brought  up  about  to  the  springing  line  of  the  pipe  and  thoroughly 
tamped,  a  heavier  and  larger  ranmier  may  be  used.  This  should  be 
about  1-1/2  in.  thick  by  5  or  6  in.  long,  and  have  an  iron  handle  of  3/4-in. 
gas  pipe.  This  rammer  should  be  used  in  filling  a  trench  up  to  the  top 
of  the  pipe. ' 

The  backfilling  of  the  trench  above  this  point  is  of  much  importance, 
because  if  not  thoroughly  done  settlement  is  likely  to  take  place.  Only 
loose  dirt  should  be  placed  around  the  pipe  until  the  backfill  is  carried 
to  a  height  of  6  to  12  in.  above  the  crown  of  the  pipe,  or  higher  if  filling 
is  dumped  from  a  height  in  large  quantities,  as  from  a  bucket.  Above 
this  filling  the  coarser  material  may  be  used,  but  care  should  be  taken 
to  have  rocks  and  lumps  of  hard  material  completely  surrounded  with 
fine  material,  so  that  there  shall  be  no  large  voids.  Usually  one  rammer 
to  one  or  two  men  shoveling  the  earth  into  the  trench,  will  accomplish 
satisfactory  work. 

With  some  kinds  of  material  the  backfilling  may  be  consolidated  by 
the  use  of  water,  the  process  being  known  as  puddling.  Water  should 
usually  not  be  put  into  the  trench  until  the  backfilling  has  been  carried 


310  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

up  a  short  distance  above  the  top  of  the  pipe;  then  the  trench  should 
be  partly  filled  with  water  and  the  earth  thrown  into  it.  The  use  of 
water  is  particularly  well  adapted  to  materials  through  which  the  water 
can  be  readily  drained  away.  Water  should  not  be  used  in  clayey 
materials  which  will  hold  it  for  a  long  period  of  time  and  which  tend  to 
shrink  as  the  water  dries  out. 

By  thorough  ramming  it  may  be  possible  to  put  more  earth  into  a 
trench  than  by  puddling  with  water.  With  some  classes  of  material, 
such  as  loam,  it  is  possible  to  put  more  material  back  into  the  trench  than 
came  out  of  it,  and  with  sizes  of  pipe  up  to  15  in.  usually  all  such  material 
taken  out  can  be  put  back.  With  other  material,  such  as  gravel,  clay 
and  hardpan,  there  will  be  a  surplus  left  after  backfilling,  in  excess 
of  the  cubic  space  taken  up  by  the  pipe  and  manholes. 

It  is  often  desirable  to  fill  the  trench  completely  full  of  earth  or 
even  overfill  it  and  then  to  roll  it  with  a  steam  roller.  If  the  trench 
is  narrow  this  may  best  be  done  by  so  operating  the  roller  that  one  of 
the  rear  wheels  will  pass  over  the  trench  and  follow  the  backfilling 
down  below  the  surface  of  the  street.  If  sufficient  material  is  put  into 
and  over  the  trench  to  completely  fill  it  after  rolling,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  remove  a  portion  of  the  surface  to  make  room  for  the  macadam  or 
paving  to  be  put  back  later.  Where  a  roller  is  used  it  is  important 
to  take  care  not  to  hit  the  manholes,  as  the  frames  may  be  displaced 
and  the  brickwork  injured. 

It  is  generally  possible  and  in  most  cases  practicable  to  backfill  a 
trench  so  that  no  settlement  will  be  apparent  on  the  street  surface. 
In  a  loosely  backfilled  trench,  however,  settlement  is  almost  sure  to  take 
place.  If  pavement  is  laid  over  such  a  fill  the  settlement  may  not  take 
place  for  years.  In  some  cases  pavement  has  given  way  or  has  been 
taken  up  years  after  the  sewer  was  laid,  and  the  backfilling  was  found 
to  have  settled  considerably,  leaving  large  spaces  between  the  soil  and 
the  bottom  of  the  pavement,  an  unsafe  condition  because  of  the  danger 
of  the  pavement  breaking  through  under  loaded  vehicles. 

Care  should  be  taken  when  dumping  backfilling  into  the  trench  from 
bucket  machines  or  derricks  that  an  excessive  shock  or  load  be  not  placed 
upon  the  structure.  Filling  so  deposited  should  be  spread  sufficiently 
to  fill  all  spaces  in  the  trench. 

In  very  deep  and  wide  trenches  it  may  sometimes  be  less  expensive  to 
repair  the  street  after  settlement  than  to  go  to  the  expense  of  very 
thorough  tamping  during  construction.  The  engineer  in  drawing  his 
specifications  for  the  consolidation  of  backfilling  must  use  judgment 
as  to  the  expense  to  which  he  cares  to  go  to  have  the  backfilling  tamped 
or  puddled,  bfwing  his  judgment  upon  the  character  of  the  work  and  the 
nature  of  the  locality  through  which  the  sewer  is  to  be  built.  Where  it 
is  not  desired  to  spend  sufficient  money  to  thoroughly  tamp  the  back- 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    311 

filling  much  can  be  accomplished  with  little  labor  by  spreading  the 
dirt  to  make  sure  that  the  voids  around  the  stones  and  hard  lumps  of 
earth  are  filled.  The  use  of  water  in  puddling  is  generally  less  expensive 
than  tampftig  and  where  it  is  not  necessary  to  do  thorough  tamping, 
much  can  be  accomplished  by  the  judicious  use  of  water.  Upon  some 
large  work  it  is  not  practicable  to  fill  the  trench  with  water  and  throw 
the  material  into  it.  If  this  is  impracticable  considerable  good  can  be 
done  by  the  inteUigent  use  of  a  stream  of  water  from  a  hose. 

The  cost  of  backfilling  may  in  part  be  offset  by  the  saving  in  the 
amount  of  material  to  be  hauled  away.  Where  it  is  necessary  to  haul 
the  surplus  material  a  long  distance,  the  cost  of  hauling  may  be  fully 
as  great  as  the  cost  of  the  tamping  necessary  to  put  the  material  back 
into  the  trench. 

Backfilling  should  always  be  done  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  sewer 
is  built,  in  order  to  clean  up  the  street  and  prevent  inconvenience  to  the 
public  due  to  large  piles  of  dirt  left  in  the  street  unnecessarily  long. 
Where  there  is  a  surplus  of  material,  the  finer  material  and  that  which 
can  be  consolidated  to  best  advantage  should  be  used  for  backfilling,  the 
coarser  part  being  carried  to  the  dimip.  In  freezing  weather  it  is 
sometimes  difficult  to  get  enough  fine,  unfrozen  earth  for  backfilling 
immediately  around  the  sewer.  This  should  be  done,  however,  even  if 
necessary  to  thaw  the  earth  thrown  out  upon  the  bank  for  the  purpose. 
Filling  the  trench  with  frozen  earth  is  always  unsatisfactory  and  it  is 
never  possible  to  secure  a  well-compacted  fill  under  such  conditions. 
Settlement  follows  thawing  in  the  spring,  when  further  filling  becomes 
necessary.  Moreover,  the  integrity  of  the  sewer  pipe  may  be  endan- 
gered by  such  practice. 

Where  it  is  not  necessary  to  reopen  the  street  to  travel,  as  when  the 
sewer  is  built  through  open  fields,  the  amount  of  labor  devoted  to  tamp- 
ing may  sometimes  be  reduced  or  wholly  eliminated  and  the  fill  allowed 
to  settle  and  become  compacted  by  rains. 

Tamping  is  a  portion  of  the  work  which  is  very  likely  to  be  neglected. 
It  is  not  excessively  expensive  and  is  usually  well  worth  the  cost,  espe- 
cially in  city  streets.  The  cost  of  tamping  varies  greatly,  but  in  ordinary 
city  trenches  where  the  sewers  are  small,  it  may  be  done  by  from  one 
tamper  per  shoveler,  to  one  tamper  to  three  shovelers,  or  say  roughly 
from  $0.15  to  $0.05  per  cubic  yard. 

Trench  tamping  machines  are  used  in  a  few  places  for  consolidating  the 
backfill.  In  Wilmington,  Del.,  for  instance,  the  machine  made  by 
R.  H.  Staley  is  used.  This  has  an  80-lb.  steel  head  8  in.  square  fixed 
to  the  end  of  a  long  vertical  ram,  which  is  raised  and  then  allowed 
to  fall  by  its  own  weight.  The  ram  is  lifted  by  a  small  gasoline  engine 
driving  a  pair  of  cam  wheels.  These  wheels  butt  against  either  side  of 
the  ram,  which  is  fitted  with  wooden  contact  surfaces  to  allow  the  cams 


312  AMERICAN  SEWKRAGE  PRACTICE 

to  hit  and  lift  the  rod  with  its  80-lb.  weight.  The  cams  rotate  con- 
tinuously in  one  direction,  and  when  the  solid  part  of  the  rim  passes  the 
wooden  contact  surface  of  the  rod,  there  is  nothing  to  sustain  it  and  it 
falls  upon  the  material  to  be  consolidated.  The  machine  strikes  about 
54  blows  a  minute.  The  vertical  ram  is  mounted  on  a  framework  which 
can  be  swung  through  a  horizontal  arc,  thereby  covering  the  entire 
width  of  the  trench  at  one  setup.  As  the  work  progresses  the  tamper 
truck  is  moved  forward  on  its  own  wheels. 

Alexander  J.  Taylor,  Chief  Eng.  of  the  Wilmington  Street  & 
Sewer  Department,  wrote  to  the  authors  on  Dec.  10,  1913,  regarding 
the  machine  as  follows: 

"The  results  obtained  from  the  use  of  this  machine  have  been  satisfactory 
to  us.  We  have  no  definite  data  regarding  the  cost  of  its  operation,  but 
speaking  in  a  general  way  it  requires  two  men  for  its  proper  manipulation  and 
propulsion  along  the  trench.  The  amount  of  gasoline  consumed  has  varied 
from  1  gallon  for  a  run  of  4  hours  when  the  apparatus  was  new,  to  5  quarts 
for  the  same  length  of  time  at  present.  Using  as  a  basis  of  comparison  a 
ditch  in  which  the  backfilling  is  handled  by  employing  one  man  ramming 
to  one  man  shoveling,  I  would  say  that  the  tamper  will  pack  to  the  same 
degree  of  thoroughness  earth  thrown  in  by  approximately  six  men.  The 
degree  of  alertness  and  skill  of  the  operator  can  increase  or  decrease  this 
average.  We  have  not  had  any  trouble  with  the  work  done  by  the  machine, 
which  is  equipped  with  a  hammer  reaching  to  a  depth  of  6  ft.  Our  sewers 
are  built  generally  with  the  spring  line  9  ft.  below  the  surface  of  the  street. 
It  is  our  usual  practice  to  hand-tamp  the  first  2  to  2-1/2  ft.  of  the  backfilling 
before  the  machine  tamper  is  put  into  operation.  If  necessary  the  hammer 
may  be  lengthened.  We  have  made  a  number  of  examinations  of  terra 
cotta  pipe  laid  in  trenches  backfilled  in  this  manner,  and  have  not  yet 
found  any  broken  places." 

COST  OF  LAYING  PIPE 

Conditions  under  which  work  is  done  are  so  variable  that  the  cost 
of  laying  pipe  on  individual  jobs  is  not  of  much  general  value.  The 
exact  items  included  are  also  not  always  clear;  sometimes  the  cost  of 
laying  includes  work  of  backfilling  around  and  over  the  pipe,  while  in 
other  cases  it  includes  the  laying  alone.  The  curves  of  Fig.  110  are 
based  in  part  on  data  in  Table  54.  The  unit  prices  assumed  in  these 
data  are  those  gained  from  general  experience  in  this  class  of  work,  and 
the  actual  prices  for  different  sizes  of  sewers  and  different  depths  of 
trenches  are  calculated  from  these  unit  prices.  These  curves  were 
based  on  the  use  of  3-ft.  lengths  of  pipe.  In  this  connection  it  may  be 
said  that  the  cost  of  similar  work  with  2-1/2-ft.  lengths  of  pipe  would 
be  about  4  per  cent,  greater  and  with  2-ft.  lengths  of  pipe  about  8  per 
cent,  greater.    This  calculation  is  based  on  the  data  given  for  the  12-in. 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE   313 

pipe  and  on  the  assumption  that  the  only  differences  in  cost  are  those 
due  to  the  laying  of  the  pipe  and  to  the  amount  of  cement  and  sand  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  different  number  of  joints  with  the  different 
lengths  of  pipe  used.  It  is  further  assumed,  although  not  exactly  true, 
that  the  cost  of  laying  applies  entirely  to  the  work  on  the  joint,  that  is 
to  say,  with  a  3-ft.  length  of  pipe  this  amounts  to  9  cents  per  foot;  with 
a  2-1/2-ft.  pipe  to  10.8  cents;  with  a  2-ft.  pipe  to  13.5  cents  per  foot. 
With  regard  to  the  relative  cost  of  the  laying  with  different  kinds  of 
jointing  material,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  give  strictly  comparable 
figures.  It  will'be  found  that  bids  by  experienced  contractors  are  quite 
variable  in  this  respect,  some  bids  running  higher  for  cement  joints,  for 
instance,  than  for  joints  of  sulphur  and  sand.  While  the  materials  for 
special  jointing,  asphalt,  sulphur  and  sand,  G-K  Compound,  etc.,  cost 
more  than  cement,  the  ease  with  which  joints  may  be  made  up  with  them 
on  the  bank  and  in  the  trench  and  the  freedom  from  long-continued 
pumping  in  wet  trenches,  offset  to  a  considerable  extent  the  difference 
in  the  cost  of  the  materials.  This  is  particularly  the  case  if  the  work  is 
done  under  very  rigid  inspection  and  insistence  placed  on  thoroughly  well 
made  joints.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  actual  cost  of  pipe  laying 
is  but  a  small  percentage  of  the  total  cost  of  the  work,  so  that  a  few  cents 
variation  in  this  cost  but  slightly  affects  the  total. 

The  diagrams  given  in  Fig.  1 10  have  been  prepared  to  give  the  reader  a 
general  idea  of  the  cost  of  constructing  pipe  sewers  under  ordinary  condi- 
tions in  easy,  moderately  hard,  and  hard  digging.  The  cost  of  such 
work  varies  greatly  from  tim^  to  time,  with  the  cost  of  labor^  the  length  of 
day,  the  difficulties  surrounding  the  work,  as  rains  or  freezing  weather, 
and  a  multitude  of  other  conditions.  It  is  therefore  obvious  that  these 
estimates  of  cost  should  not  be  applied  too  literally,  but  should  be  used 
only  as  a  general  guide. 

If  the  engineer  will  compare  the  cost  of  all  work  of  this  sort  coming 
under  his  attention  with  the  "medium"  scale  as  standard,  obtaining  the 
coefficient  or  relative  cost  of  his  work  (the  ratio  of  his  cost  to  the  medium 
scale  cost),  he  will  soon  acquire  such  a  knowledge  of  relative  costs  as  it 
would  be  impossible  to  obtain  otherwise.  Under  such  procedure  it 
matters  little  if  the  standard  is  too  high  or  too  low,  provided  it  is  a  fairly 
consistent  scale  within  itself  and  provided  it  is  fixed,  so  that  the  engineer 
shall  always  use  the  same  reference  scale  for  his  comparison. 

Rate  of  Pipe  Laying. — The  rate  of  progress  in  pipe  laying  is  usually 
dependent  upon  the  rate  of  excavation  of  the  trench.  It  is  also  more 
or  less  dependent  upon  the  amount  of  excavation  and  backfilling 
required  of  the  pipe-laying  gang.  For  the  smaller  sizes  of  pipe,  say 
from  8  to  15  in.,  two  men  are  required  in  the  bottom  and  one  or  two  men 
on  top,  depending  on  the  arrangement  of  the  work  and  the  rate  of 
progress  required.     For  24-in.  pipe  two  men  will  be  required  in  the 


314  AMERICAN  SBWB£AGE  PRACTICE 

+OOJ  lOBwn  jea  j3m»9  jj3t=jD|ioau!)4.so3 


I  i 


'4i>cy  |03ui-iJad  Awa9p(uD||0Qu|)4SO3 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    315 


O 
O 

•< 
H 
S5 


H 
O 

•H 

H 

04 


O 

OD 
O 

o 


» 

5S 


CO       • 

00       •   (N   »0          O       •   O   CO  CO 

t^     • 

t^     • 

o 

S8     § 

•  00  c^  ^ 

a     • 

o     • 

1-H 

t-H    O    O 

»o     • 

1-H 

o     • 

o  o       o 

o  o  o 

1-4 



m    ' 

~CO 

CO 

00       • 

o 

Q 

c^        t^ 

»fl 

»o 

05 

o 

CO  t>-        c^ 

•  CO  C<l   »-H 

lo     • 

g3 

05 

^-t 

o  o      o 

.-<  o  o 

"^     • 

S    ' 

o 

o  o       o 

:  ^ 

~o 

o  o 

5 

t>- 

•  O  05         CS| 

>   X    CO 

c^     • 

t^ 

•  ic  »o        C<l 

.     lO     1-H     1-H 

CO       • 

g 

l>- 

o 

.  o  o       o 

■  -<  o  o 

1-H 

s 

^ 

s 

oc 

1 

o 

■  o  o       o 

'  o 

•  o  c 

) 

1-1 

^ 

•  C^   l^          t^ 

•  «/: 

1 

o     • 

00 

s. 

o 

:SS     S 

•     CO     1-<     1-H 

•WOO 

Oi      ■ 

SI 

o 

■  o  o       o 

■  o  o  o 

S   : 

f 

■C^XOOi          COCO(NCOO 

CO   Oi 

CO   kC 

I 

"«1<COCOCO            T-^    ^    1-i    r-*    1-* 

CQ   05 

IQ 

CO  cc 

I 

OOOO         00i-<00 

CO  »o 

o 

s* 

o 

o  o 
o  c^ 

o       ooooo 

s® 

o  c 

1 

c^ 

Tj<           O    »0   O   »-<   00 

^  9 

0) 
0) 

(N 

1 

§8§S     S8SS§ 

CO    »0 

T}4     Tt< 

03 

3 

8  = 

OOOO       ooooo 

8® 

CO   OC 

) 

t^»O00X           C5T}4»OOt>- 

o  »o 

o 

r-*    C 

> 

OOOO       ooooo 

00   CO 

CO  CO 

^H 

s  = 

» 

OOOO        o  c 

>  o  o  o 

*'0^05  CO 

si® 

1 

X  cc 

> 

o  a>  c^  c^       i^  Tf 

00 

1 
1 

OOOO      ooooo 

8* 

1-H    ^ 

> 

o  c 

~cO  ir. 

»  c 

o       ooooo 

)    05 

Oi           lO   C^    l«    05    Tj^ 

CO 

» 
1 

rH,-iOQ         QQ'«*<OQ 

OOOO       ooooo 

o  o 

s  = 

» 

OOOO       ooooo 

O   O 

ft      . 

•  »^ 

ft  : 

-t-3 

bL 

« 
.i<l 

ti 

S^ 

•  M 

o 

:3 

OQ 

a 

O 

13 

-d     • 

03 

• 

d 

o 

-d     • 

^o 

ca 

d 

-♦J 

o3 

o 

«*-■ 

(V 

o 

ft     • 

a 

o 

QQ 

•4^ 

o 

• 

i 

y 

HH 

fc 

m               ^ 

> 

E 

•   2   o       ^. 

c, 

00 

c5 
O 

c? 

0) 

c^ 

.   ti  ^        « 

•  §  8 

o 

o 

QQ 

§ 

T3    3    ••    " 

*o   ?> 

« 

0 

0) 

C2   ^  T3    a> 

■ "  1 

.    <4^     o3 

^   ft 

3    : 

OS 

Ipping  a: 
(1  mile; 
and  san 
and  wid 
ard 

73   ft 

^    : 

73 

is     . 

3    S3 

1 

3  « 

pe: 

Deep 

Stand 

0) 

Deep 

stand 

Loss,  sh] 

Hauling 

Cement 

Deep 

Stand 

Laying. 

Lights  a 

Liability 

2- 

s 

M 

n 

S.5 


ft  o*^ 

S  rt  9^ 

^  !:  ft 


»S 


CQ 


03  O 


r:^ 


o  •» 


316  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

trench  and  two  or  three  on  the  bank.    The  rate  of  progress  will  lie 
between  the  following  limits: 

8-in.  pipe,  60  to  150  ft.  per  day  of  8  hours 
24-in.  pipe,  20  to    60  ft.  per  day  of  8  hours 

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  rate  of  progress  depends 
upon  local  conditions.  In  some  cases  it  may  be  economical  to  make  the 
rate  of  progress  very  slow  and  require  considerable  excavation  and 
backfilling  of  the  pipe-laying  gang,  while  in  other  cases  it  may  be  wise  to 
have  them  do  very  little  excavation  and  backfilling  and  proceed  more 
rapidly  with  the  pipe  laying.  The  engineer  or  foreman  in  charge  of  the 
work  must  be  governed  by  the  local  conditions. 

LAYING  LARGE  CONCRETE  PIPE 

Large  concrete  pipe  are  so  heavy  that  special  equipment  for  handling 
them  is  necessary.  So  far  as  practicable  contractors  generally  endeavor 
to  utilize  in  this  way  a  locomotive  crane  which  can  be  employed  also 
in  excavating  the  trench.  For  example,  the  contractor  for  about  a 
mile  of  6-1/2  and  7-ft.  concrete  pipe  sewer  laid  in  Detroit  in  1910,  took 
out  the  top  6  ft.  of  the  trench,  which  was  11  ft.  wide,  with  a  Thew  shovel. 
The  remainder  of  the  16-ft.  depth  of  trench  was  taken  out  with  a  15-ton 
locomotive  crane,  and  the  bottom  of  the  trench  was  shaped  to  a  half 
circle,  a  little  higher  than  the  true  grade,  by  hand.  The  pipe,  which 
weighed  about  6  tons  each,  were  turned  over  on  their  sides,  after  the  molds 
were  removed,  in  order  to  be  rolled  to  the  trench;  they  were  turned  over 
at  first  by  means  of  a  gantry  crane,  with  an  I-beam  top  baV  supporting 
a  chain  block  hoist,  and,  later,  by  a  tripod  of  steel  pipe  attached  at 
the  top  to  a  short  I-beam;  the  tripod  proved  more  satisfactory  than  the 
gantry  crane. 

The  pipe  were  rolled  to  the  trench  by  teams.  At  the  trench  they  were 
picked  up  by  a  specially  designed  saddle  or  hook  having  a  large  bearing 
on  the  inner  surface  of  the  pipe,  which  was  hung  from  the  boom  of  the 
locomotive  crane.  This  saddle  fitted  below  the  top  of  the  shell  of  the 
pipe  as  it  rested  on  the  bank,  but  when  the  pipe  had  been  landed  on 
the  bottom  of  the  trench  it  was  customary  to  loosen  the  fall  a  little,  lift 
the  saddle  somewhat  to  one  side,  and  then  tighten  the  fall  just  enough  to 
roll  the  pipe  over  on  its  bed  without  changing  its  position  laterally  in 
the  trench.  In  this  way  the  weight  of  the  pipe  was  made  to  consolidate 
the  bed  and  secure  a  good  bearing  along  the  entire  length  of  the  bottom 
of  the  shell. 

In  the  case  of  the  Harbor  Brook  intercepting  sewer  at  Syracuse, 
N.  Y.,  built  under  the  direction  of  Glenn  P.  Holmes  in  1911,  42-in. 
Jackson  concrete  pipe  were  laid  with  a  three-leg  sulky  derrick  of  the 


PURCHASING,  HANDLINQ  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    317 

type  used  in  handling  targe  cast-iron  pipe,  Fig.  111.  For  laying  54-in. 
pipe  the  Reinforced  Concrete  Pipe  Co.  furnished  the  gantry  crane 
shown  in  Fig.  112,  In  both  parts  of  the  work  the  pipe  were  laid  on  a 
concrete  foundation  supported  by  a  single  row  of  piles  spaced  4  ft.  apart 
on  centers.  After  the  joints  had  been  cemented,  the  lower  part  of  the 
trench  was  filled  with  concrete  to  give  the  pipe  a  bearing  over  a  fourth 
of  its  circumference. 


End   eievQfion.  side  tIevaWon. 

FlO.  111. — Sulky  derrick  for  trench  work. 

LATING  CAST-IRON  PIPE 

The  handling  and  jointing  of  cast-iron  pipe  for  sewers  are  conducted 
like  similar  work  for  water  mains.  Where  curves  are  needed,  some 
engineers  allow  as  the  maximum  angle  permissible  in  each  joint  that 
which  is  represented  by  puUing  the  spigot  3/4  in,  back  on  one  side;  this 
is  an  angle  of  about  1  dcg.  Where  this  wiU  not  give  the  desired  curva- 
ture, special  castings  must  be  used. 

Large  pipe  are  often  laid  on  blocks  (see  Table  55)  placed  near 
each  end  of  each  length.  These  blocks  are  laid  across  the  trench  bottom 
and  must  be  firmly  supported,  and  the  pipe  are  held  on  them  by  wedges. 
Smaller  pipe  are  laid  on  the  earth  bottom,  a  hole  being  dug  for  the 
beU;itisnot  well  to  lay  them  directly  on  rock.     The  use  of  blocking  is  to 


318  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

be  avoided  where  practicable  on  account  of  the  danger  of  concentrating 
the  external  pressure  on  the  pipe. 

Table  55. — Supports   fob  Cast-iron  Pipe  (Board    op  Water  Scpplt, 

New  York) 
Size  of  pipe,  inches      16-24  30-36  42  48 

Blocking,  inches  2  X  10  X   2J     3  X  10  X    3     3  X  10  X  3j     3  X  12  >;    4 
Wedges,  inches     4X4X10        4X4X12     4X4X12      4X4X12 

When  two  lengths  of  pipe  are  In  place,  jute  packing  is  driven  into  the 
joint,  leaving  a  space  at  leaat  2  in.  deep  for  pipe  under  12  in.  in  diameter, 


Fio.  112. — Laying  54-inch  concrete  pipe  at  Syracuse. 

2-1/2  in.  deep  for  pipe  from  12  to  24  in.  in  diameter,  and  3  in.  deep  for 
lai^r  sizes.  The  outside  of  this  space  is  closed  by  a  yarn  and  wet  clay 
gasket  or  asbestos  jointer,  and  melted  lead  is  gradually  poured  into 
the  enclosed  space.  Only  one  pouring  should  be  made  for  each  joint 
and  dross  should  not  be  allowed  to  collect  in  the  melting  pot.  This 
lead  is  then  carefully  calked  with  a  hammer  and  tools  made  specially 
tor  the  purpose,  so  as  to  give  a  tight  joint  without  cracking  the  bell. 
Joints  have  been  made  on  some  water-works  mains  with  pneumatic 
hammers,  and  a  fibrous  form  of  lead  called  "lead  wool"  has  been  used 
occasionally  where  it  was  undesirable  to  melt  lead  in  the  usual  fashion. 
The  lead  wool  was  calked  cold  into  the  joints.  Not  enough  experience 
with  these  methods  has  been  had   as  yet   (1913)   to  furnish  definite 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    319 

information  concerning  them.  A  soft  lead  pipe  wrapped  several  times 
aromid  the  pipe  and  calked  into  the  joint  at  the  same  time  may  also  be 
used  in  wet  trenches. 

Pipe  up  to  8  in.  in  diameter  can  be  lowered  into  the  trench  by  a  rope 
sling  and  man  at  each  end.  Larger  sizes  are  b<sst  handled  by  a  derrick 
spanning  the  trench,  as  shown  in  Fig.  Ill  {Eng,  News,  vol.  xxxv,  p.  339). 
The  special  advantage  of  this  derrick  and  others  of  the  same  general 
type  is  that  it  can  be  readily  moved  on  its  own  wheels,  which  are  also  of 
service  in  handling  .the  pipe. 

In  what  are  known  as  solid  lead  joints,  only  one  strand  of  yam  is  used. 
The  entire  joint  must  be  run  at  a  single  pouring  and  it  is  necessary  with 
large  pipe  to  calk  the  inside  as  well  as  the  outside  of  the  joint. 

LAYING  STEEL  PIPE 

The  engineer  is  usually  more  apprehensive  of  injury  of  the  pipe  coating 
than  of  the  pipe  itself,  although  large  pipe  must  be  braced  by  interior 
struts  to  prevent  their  collapse.  The  contractor  has  sometimes  been 
required  to  cushion  all  bearing  surfaces  on  which  the  pipe  rests  with 
enough  layers  of  burlap  or  other  soft  material  to  prevent  scratching  of 
the  coating,  and  no  uncushioned  ropes,  chains,  levers  or  other  handling 
devices  were  permitted  in  handling  the  pipe.  On  the  Little  River 
works  of  Springfield,  Mass.,  a  covering  of  canvas  or  equivalent  material 
at  least  30  in.  wide  was  kept  on  top  of  the  pipe  in  the  trench  until 
backfilling  was  in  progress  on  the  spot,  and  no  person  was  permitted  on 
the  pipe  without  rubber  or  felt  soles  on  his  shoes.  This  was  unusually 
severe.  In  other  places  it  has  been  considered  necessary  merely  to 
forbid  persons  having  shoes  with  hob  nails  to  walk  on  or  in  the  pipe. 

In  a  trench  with  sandy  bottom,  it  is  customary  to  place  sand  under 
the  pipe  at  frequent  intervals  until  it  is  securely  in  line  and  grade.  In  a 
rock  trench  or  where  the  pipe  is  to  be  surrounded  with  concrete,  it  is 
usual  to  spread  about  6  in.  of  sand  over  the  rock. 

The  backfilling  must  be  done  with  regard  to  avoiding  injury  to  the 
pipe  coating  as  well  as  to  the  pipe.  The  material  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
trench  must  be  well  tamped;  the  backfill  on  top  of  the  pipe  should  begin 
in  the  middle  of  each  length,  leaving  the  field-riveted  joint  exposed  until 
the  test  for  tightness  has  been  passed.  A  5-ft.  pipe  should  be  braced  on 
the  inside  during  backfilling  and  when  the  braces  are  removed  there 
should  not  be  more  than  3  in.  difference  between  the  horizontal  and 
vertical  diameter. 

The  laying  of  riveted  steel  pipe  involves  the  handling  of  long  heavy 
sections  of  pipe,  and  an  attempt  should  be  made  in  such  cases  to  adopt 
a  plant  which  can  be  used  economically  for  other  purposes  than  lowering 
pipe.    In  laying  a  72-in.  steel  pipe  sewer  in  Jersey  City,  for  example,  a 


320  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

locomotive  crane  waa  made  to  do  double  service,  and  thus  keep  down 
the  machinery  charge  against  each  class  of  work.  It  was  employed  part 
of  the  time  in  excavating  the  trench  8-1/2  ft.  wide,  with  a  1-yd.  orange- 
peel  bucket,  and  this  was  rather  slow  in  hardpan,  which  was  reached  on  a 
part  of  the  work  at  a  depth  of  4  ft.  This  hardpan  was  loosened  with 
picks,  but  even  with  this  help  the  bucket  was  rarely  full.  Most  of  the 
excavated  material  was  backfilled  on  the  pipe  within  50  ft.  of  the  place 
where  it  was  taken  out,  as  an  attempt  was  made  to  keep  the  length  of 
open  trench  as  short  as  possible.  The  main  use  of  the  locomotive  crane 
was  handling  the  18-ft.  6-ton  lengths  of  riveted  pipe,  which  were  first 
taken  from  a  siding  to  a  storage  yard  and  then  delivered  as  needed. 

A  riveted  steel  pipe  line  was  laid  in  1907  for  the  St.  Louis  water  works,  y 
in  a  trench  which  averaged  from  10  to  28  ft.  in  depth.  The  lengths  of 
pipe  were  delivered  along  this  trench  by  an  electric  railway  operated 
by  the  city  for  delivering  supplies  to  pumping  stations  nearby.  The 
pipe  were  delivered  in  28-ft.  lengths  and  were  handled  into  the  trench, 
from  the  side  of  the  railway  where  they  had  been  delivered,  by  a  stiff- 
legged  derrick.  Each  length  had  a  line  attached  around  its  center,  a 
piece  of  rubber  hose  being  threaded  over  the  line  to  prevent  any  injury 
to  the  pipe  coating.  The  riveting  was  done  with  pneumatic  hammers 
supplied  with  air  by  two  electrically  driven  compressors,  which  took 
their  current  from  the  transmission  line  of  the  electric  railway.  The 
whole  equipment  was  very  compact,  and  but  little  trench  was  kept  open 
ahead  of  the  pipe-laying,  an  advantage  in  this  case  because  the  banks 
of  the  trench  stood  readily  with  very  little  bracing.  The  excavation 
in  the  deeper  parts  of  the  trench  was  made  by  a  20-ton  steam  shovel, 
mounted  on  a  platform  which  spanned  the  trench  and  could  be  rolled 
along  plank  runways  about  3  ft.  back  from  the  top  of  each  side  of  the 
excavation  (Eng,  Record^  Sept.  7,  1907). 

Riveted  steel  pipe  are  exposed  to  a  special  danger  on  account  of  their 
light  weight  in  comparison  with  their  diameter.  In  the  case  of  a  48-in. 
steel  main  at  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  for  example,  the  contractor  had  a  section 
of  pipe  1500  ft.  long  broken  in  two  after  it  had  been  riveted,  but  not 
backfilled,  owing  to  a  heavy  rain  that  flooded  the  trench  full  in  a  few 
minutes,  and  lifted  the  middle  of  the  pipe  in  a  long  vertical  curve. 
After  the  pipe  had  been  drained  it  was  found  that  a  vertical  rise  of  over 
2  ft.  in  the  center  of  the  pipe  was  held  up  by  dirt  which  had  settled 
below  it.  In  a  number  of  places  the  pipe  rose  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench, 
owing  to  the  rising  of  quicksand;  this  was  remedied  by  loading  the  pipe 
as  soon  as  it  was  coupled  up. 

SUBAQUEOUS  PIPE  LAYING 

Subaqueous  pipe  laying  is  mainly  required  on  sewerage  work  iu 
connection  with  outfall  sewers  and  inverted  siphons.    The  first  work  is 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    321 

usually  to  provide  a  foundation  for  the  pipe  when  laid.  Sometimes 
this  is  a  trestle  formed  by  driving  piles  in  the  bed  of  a  stream  and  then 
sawing  them  off  at  the  proper  height  by  means  of  a  submerged  circular 
saw.  Sometimes  wooden  blocking  at  a  few  low  points  of  the  bottom  will 
answer  all  purposes.  Sometimes  it  is  necessary  to  excavate  a  trench 
in  rock,  and  when  this  is  the  case  it  may  prove  desirable  to  lay  bare  the 
site  for  the  pipe,  so  far  as  practicable,  by  running  a  wing  dam  out  from 
the  shore,  where  there  is  sufficient  current  to  make  this  method  of  get- 
ting at  the  bottom  practicable.  If  the  water  is  shoal  for  any  distance  a 
cofferdam  may  be  run  out  and  a  trench  excavated  within  it.  As  a  ride, 
however,  the  usual  methods  of  excavation  under  water  are  preferred  by 
contractors,  that  is  to  say,  they  take  out  the  soft  material  by  orange-p)eel 
or  clam-shell  buckets  or  by  small  dipper  dredges.  Where  rock  has  to 
be  excavated,  the  holes  for  blasting  are  sometimes  drilled  by  a  percussion 
drill  mounted  on  blocks  held  by  vertical  stays  on  the  side  of  a  scow,  a 
method  of  mounting  which  has  become  standardized  for  drilling  work 
of  this  nature  for  harbor  improvements. 

The  pipe  are  laid  in  the  water  by  one  of  three  general  methods:  first, 
lowering  the  pipe  line  into  the  water  from  some  kind  of  support;  second, 
dragging  it  into  place  from  launching  chutes  on  shore  or  from  scows, 
or,  third,  by  floating  it  into  place.  The  different  methods  are  best 
explained  by  giving  examples  of  each. 

In  some  cases  where  the  bottom  of  a  stream  is  very  soft  so  that 
dredging  results  in  a  very  muddy  condition  of  the  water  and  considerable 
uncertainty  exists  as  to  what  kind  of  trench  is  actually  produced,  sub- 
merged pipe  laying  has  been  carried  on  by  means  of  a  sand  pump  or 
water  jet.  At  Michigan  City,  Ind.,  a  20-in.  line  was  lowered  about  4  ft. 
in  this  way  and  at  Hammond,  Ind.,  a  16-in.  riveted  pipe.  Where  this 
method  is  used  the  pipe  is  simply  laid  along  the  bottom,  with  the  ends 
disconnected  from  the  shore  line,  and  the  material  under  the  pipe  is 
gradually  worked  away  by  means  of  the  pump,  the  current  carrying 
away  tlie  silt  which  is  disturbed  in  this  process.  The  method  is,  of 
course,  an  expedient  which  is  only  rarely  practised. 

La3rmg  Pipe  from  Supports. — On  rare  occasions  submerged  pipe  lines 
can  be  put  together  on  top  of  a  sheet  of  ice  and  lowered  through  a  long 
gash  cut  in  it.  This  was  done  by  E.  C.  Cooke  at  Escanaba,  Mich.  The 
pipe  was  5  in.  in  diameter,  about  2000  ft.  long,  of  wrought  iron  with 
Converse  lock  joints.  After  the  pipe  was  lowered  to  the  bottom  by 
means  of  rope  slings  passing  over  timbers  laid  across  the  hole  in  the  ice, 
the  material  on  the  bottom  under  the  pipe  was  excavated  by  means  of  a 
water  jet,  allowing  the  pipe  to  settle  slowly. 

At  Austin,  Minn.,  where  150  ft.  of  cast-iron  pipe  were  laid  across  a 
river  in  the  winter  of  1911-12,  the  contractor,  the  J.  W.  Turner  Con- 
struction Co.,  placed  plank  horses  across  the  opening  in  the  ice  and  hung 

21 


322  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

the  pipe  from  these  in  a  vertical  curve  corresponding  to  the  profile  of  the 
river  bottom.  When  they  had  been  j ointed,  they  were  carefully  lowered, 
without  changing  the  curve,  untU  they  were  in  place.  Two  flexible 
joints  were  inserted  in  the  line,  but  the  contractor  found  them  a  hin- 
drance rather  than  an  aid,  because  of  the  necessity  for  preparing  special 
holes  in  the  river  bed  to  receive  them. 

About  430  ft.  of  36-in.  cast-iron  main  were  laid  as  a  single  length  at 
Milwaukee,  Wis.,  in  the  winter  of  1912-13.  The  river  at  the  crossing 
has  a  maximum  depth  of  12  ft.,  'and  the  trench  in  it  was  4  ft.  deep  at  the 
middle,  gradually  increasing  to  a  maximum  depth  of  12  ft.  near  the  shore. 
The  pipe  was  laid  from  a  trestle.  Piles  were  driven  10  ft.  apart  transverse 
to  the  trench  and  13  ft.  apart  along  its  length.  After  they  were  in  place 
the  trench  was  excavated  with  an  orange-peel  bucket  operated  from  a 
scow.  Timber  cross-pieces  were  placed  across  the  trench  between  the 
piles  just  above  the  water  level,  and  on  them  the  pipe  were  put  together 
and  jointed.  The  pile  bents  had  heavy  caps  which  were  pierced  by 
vertical  holes  through  which  long  threaded  iron  rods  1-1/2  in.  in  diameter 
were  passed.  They  had  a  hook  at  the  lower  end,  from  which  the  pipe 
was  slung,  and  at  the  upper  end  there  was  a  heavy  nut  which  bore  on  a 
6  X  6-in.  iron  plate  placed  on  top  of  the  cap.  A  man  was  stationed  at 
each  of  these  nuts  with  a  wrench  and  at  a  given  signal  they  gave  the 
nuts  a  half  turn.  The  rods  were  painted  every  6  in.  so  that  after  the 
line  was  submerged  there  would  be  no  question  about  its  sinking  into  the 
trench  in  a  fairly  horizontal  manner.  After  the  pipe  lay  on  the  bottom 
a  diver  blocked  it  up  at  the  low  points,  using  timber  wedges  to  make 
everything  fast.  The  ends  were  connected  with  the  shore  mains  in  the 
usual  way  by  the  use  of  cofferdams. 

A  more  difficult  pipe-laying  undertaking  carried  out  in  the  same 
general  manner  was  executed  in  connection  with  the  outfall  sewer  of 
Honolulu.  This  pipe  was  a  riveted  steel  main  24  in.  in  diameter,  con- 
structed on  shore  in  54-ft.  sections.  Each  section  was  encased  in  a 
4-in.  shell  of  concrete  before  it  was  laid.  In  order  to  carry  on  operations 
across  the  hard  coral  reef,  where  the  depth  of  water  varied  from  5  to  40 
ft.,  a  pile  trestle  carrying  a  26-in.  gage  track  was  built  on  each  side  of  the 
line  of  the  outfall,  the  distance  between  the  centers  of  the  two  trestles 
being  about  15  ft.  On  these  trestles  a  traveler  was  operated  to  carry 
the  sections  from  the  shore  to  the  place  where  they  were  laid;  each 
section  was  carried  in  four  slings.  The  total  length  of  the  outfall  con- 
structed in  this  way  was  about  1700  ft. 

This  method  was  employed  by  Loring  N.  Famum,  as  contractor,  in 
1904,  in  laying  a  20-in.  water  main  across  the  Kennebec  River  at  Water- 
ville.  Me.,  for  the  Kennebec  Water  District,  under  the  8uper\Tsion  of  one 
of  the  authors.  At  the  crossing  the  river  is  800  ft.  wide  and  averages 
8  ft.  in  depth  during  the  summer  and  autumn.    For  four-fifths  of  the 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    323 

distance  the  river  bed  is  coarse  gravel  and  the  remainder  is  shale.  Two 
rows  of  piles  18  ft.  apart  were  first  driven  across  the  river,  the  piles  in 
each  row  being  10  ft.  apart.  A  brace  pile  was  driven  on  the  downstream 
side  of  every  fourth  or  fifth  pile  in  the  downstream  row.  Each  row  was 
capped  with  two  6  X  10-in.  timbers  30  ft.  long,  bolted  together  through 
the  top  of  each  pile,  which  was  cut  to  form  a  tenon  6  in.  thick.  On  these 
caps  were  laid  8  X  12-in.  stringers  30  ft.  long,  placed  so  as  to  break 
joints  with  the  caps.  The  stringers  served  as  a  track  on  which  was  rolled 
a  platform  carrying  a  dredging  outfit  comprising  boiler,  hoisting  engine 
-and  orange-peel  excavator.  With  this  outfit  a  trench  3  to  5  ft.  deep  was 
dug.  The  pipe-laying  followed  the  dredgmg  closely.  Every  fourth 
joint  was  flexible,  of  the  R.  D.  Wood  &  Co.  pattern  of  the  Ward  type.  A 
number  of  lengths  were  jointed  above  water  by  suspending  them  from 
round  logs  laid  across  the  track  carried  by  the  piles  and  by  doing  the 
calking  from  the  deck  of  a  scow  on  which  the  lead  furnace  was  placed. 
All  but  the  forward  end  of  this  section  of  the  main  was  then  slowly 
lowered  into  the  trench.  When  it  was  on  the  bottom,  another  section 
was  jointed  and  lowered  in  the  same  way,  the  first  pipe  being  inserted 
in  the  bell  of  the  last  pipe  of  the  section  just  finished,  which,  as  before 
stated,  was  not  lowered  with  the  greater  part  of  its  section  but  was  kept 
above  the  water  until  the  rear  of  the  new  section  could  be  lowered  with 
it.  Two  flexible  joints  were  cracked  in  lowering  the  pipe,  which  shows 
the  need  of  great  care  in  such  work.  The  resident  engineer  on  the  work 
estimated  the  total  cost,  including  overhead  charges,  to  the  contractor 
at  $4.12  per  foot,  made  up  of  $2.22  for  the  trestle  and  cofferdam,  47  cents 
for  rock  excavation,  6  cents  for  hauling  pipe,  71  cents  for  laying  pipe 
and  66  cents  for  dredging. 

Where  there  is  an  unusual  range  to  the  tide,  it  is  preferable  at  times  to 
lay  the  pipe  from  scows  rather  than  from  trestles.  For  instance,  in  laying 
a  submerged  pipe  line  30  in.  in  diameter  and  2000  ft.  long,  forming  an 
inverted  siphon  on  the  outfall  sewer  at  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  a  pair  of 
25  X  60-ft.  scows  was  moored  along  the  line  of  the  trench  in  which  the 
pipe  were  to  be  laid.  This  trench  had  previously  been  dug  by  means  of 
a  small  dipper  dredge  and  what  rock  had  to  be  removed  wa3  drilled  with 
drills  mounted  on  wooden  blocks  which  slid  between  vertical  guides  on 
the  scows.  The  opening  between  the  scows  was  directly  over  the  trench. 
The  pipe  were  jointed  up  in  four  lengths  on  planks  laid  from  the  deck  of 
one  scow  to  the  deck  of  the  other.  When  the  joints  were  completed 
these  pipe  were  raised  by  tackle  hung  from  a  frame  over  the  center  of 
each  length,  the  planking  previously  supporting  them  was  removed,  and 
they  were  l(Jwered  to  the  bottom  of  the  trench  where  the  submerged 
joints  were  made  by  a  diver.  If  the  material  near  the  trench  had  been 
washed  into  it  enough  to  interfere  with  the  pipe  laying,  the  diver  blew 


324 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


it  out  with  a  hydraulic  jet,  and  if  the  trench  was  too  low  it  was  easy  to 
raise  the  pipe  by  means  of  wedges  and  blocks. 

The  method  of  laying  a  30-in.  cast-iron  outfall  sewer  at  Salem,  as 
described  by  W.  F.  Bates  in  Eng.  NewSy  May  28,  1908,  differs  some- 
what from  that  generally  employed  where  the  pipe  are  lowered  from 
scows.  The  contractor  used  a  steam  lighter  and  a  tug;  seven  lengths  of 
pipe  were  put  together  on  the  deck  of  the  lighter  and  the  joints  run  and 
calked  in  order  to  form  a  section  for  laying.  A  15-in.  I-beam  about 
75  ft.  long,  trussed  laterally  to  prevent  bending,  was  suspended  from  a 
block  on  the  derrick  boom  of  the  lighter  by  four  strands  of  wire  rope, 
as  shown  in  Fig.  113.  To  tliis  beam  the  section  of  pipe  was  strapped 
with  1/2-in.  wire  rope,  two  straps  to  each  length  except  the  end  lengths. 


Fig.  113. — ^Lowering  section  of  submerged  outfall,  Salem,  Mass. 

which  were  held  by  a  single  strap.  These  straps  were  connected  at  one 
end  by  shackles  with  pins  so  placed  that  they  could  be  easily  removed 
by  the  diver  and  the  straps  released  after  the  pipe  was  in  position. 
This  I-beam  was  used  during  the  entire  work  and  proved  a  satis- 
factory method  of  handling  the  section.  The  beam  with  a  full  sec- 
tion of  84  ft.  of  pipe  weighed  about  15  tons,  and  was  easily  handled 
by  the  derrick. 

In  this  case,  the  pipe,  after  being  lowered  into  the  trench,  which  was 
from  12  to  18  in.  below  grade  to  give  the  diver  plenty  of  room  for 
working,  was  blocked  up  to  the  required  grade  and  held  in  position  by 
wedges.  Guides  were  placed  on  the  bell  end  of  the  pipe  in  position;  these 
guides  projected  about  6  in.  bej'ond  the  end  and  were  made  so  as  to 
help  guide  the  spigot  into  the  joint,  and  at  the  same  time  protect  the  lead 
from  being  jammed.  The  jointing  of  the  special  joint  was  directed  by 
the  diver.  The  lighter  was  placed  and  the  guy  on  the  derrick  boom 
jaised  so  that  when  the  pipe  was  in  position,  by  slacking  the  guy  rope, 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    325 

the  whole  weight  was  brought  to  bear  and  pushed  the  spigot  home  with- 
out difficulty.  The  joint  made  imder  water  was  prepared  on  shore,  by 
turning  down  in  a  lathe  an  ordinary  spigot  end  to  a  slight  taper.  This 
spigot  was  inserted  into  a  bell,  the  joint  run  full  of  lead,  and  the  pipe 
then  disconnected,  leaving  the  lead  in  the  bell;  these  pipes  were  con- 
nected again  under  water  and  calked  by  the  diver. 

One  of  the  two  lines  of  60-in.  cast-iron  pipe  forming  the  outfall  sewer, 
3288  ft.  long,  of  the  intercepting  system  at  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  for 
which  the  authors  were  consulting  engineers,  was  laid  in  1913  in  much 
the  same  way.  The  contractor,  Patrick  McGovern,  first  dredged  the 
trench,  most  of  which  was  in  sand,  gravel  and  clay,  with  some  rock 
requiring  blasting.  The  trench  had  an  average  depth  of  8  ft.,  and  the 
price  for  it  was  65  cents  per  cubic  yard,  irrespective  of  material  encoun- 
tered. The  pipe  were  assembled  on  shore  in  48-ft.  sections,  each  weigh- 
ing about  30  tons  and  having  a  special  taper  joint  at  each  end  made  up  on 
shore,  as  described  in  the  notes  on  the  Salem  outfall  sewer.  The  section 
was  suspended  by  wire  ropes  from  a  steel  beam,  which  in  turn  was  sus- 
pended from  the  boom  of  a  derrick  scow,  thus  enabling  the  section  to  be 
towed  out  from  the  shore  and  lowered  into  place  without  serious  danger 
of  injuring  the  joints.  The  contract  price  for  this  work,  including  back- 
filling the  trench,  was  $16  per  linear  foot.  The  work  was  done  under 
William  F.  Williams,  at  that  time  city  engineer. 

Where  streams  must  be  crossed  in  deep  trenches  and  little  is  known 
regarding  the  character  of  the  bottom,  it  is  usually  considered  preferable 
to  drive  sheet  piling  and  excavate  under  its  protection,  rather  than  to 
allow  the  trench  to  be  dug  with  its  banks  at  the  natural  slope  of  the 
material.  For  example,  in  laying  a  48-in.  gas  main  across  the  Harlem 
River  at  New  York,  in  1910,  a  14-ft.  trench  was  dug  with  the  help  of 
Lackawanna  steel  sheet  piling.  The  channel  here  is  about  550  ft. 
wide,  and  only  half  of  it  could  be  closed  at  once,  since  the  river  is  used 
by  many  vessels.  The  trench  had  to  be  carried  down  at  places  more 
than  40  ft.  below  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  the  river  itself  had  a  maxi- 
mum depth  of  about  15  ft.  at  high  water.  The  permit  for  laying  the  pipe 
received  from  the  government  required  it  to  be  20  ft.  below  the  bed  of 
the  river.  As  soon  as  the  sheet  piling  was  driven,  the  sand  and  gravel 
within  the  piling  enclosure  were  removed  by  two  centrifugal  pumps 
mounted  on  a  scow.  A  diver  tended  the  suction  of  each  pump  and  kept 
the  material  stirred  up  by  means  of  a  3-in.  water  jet.  When  the  ma- 
terial had  been  excavated  to  the  full  depth  the  bottom  was  covered 
with  concrete  and  the  pipe  laid  on  it,  the  joints  being  made  under  water 
with  lead  wool  and  pneumatic  tools.  Two  lengths  of  pipe  were  laid 
at  a  time,  the  joint  between  them  being  made  up  on  the  scow  which 
lowered  the  lengths  into  place.  This  method  of  construction  was  also 
used  about  the  same  time  for  laying  a  line  of  36-in.  submerged  pipe. 


326  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

In  each  case  the  pipe  has  been  covered  with  a  longitudinal  cap  or  coping 
of  concrete,  to  prevent  injury  of  the  main  by  the  spuds  of  dredges, 
anchors  of  vessels  or  the  future  deepening  of  the  channel. 

Floating  Pipe. — Oil  barrels  have  been  utilized  many  times  in  sub- 
merged pipe  laying.  The  most  common  method  is  to  join  a  number 
of  them  together  in  two  rows,  each  row  covered  with  plank  and  support- 
ing cross  beams  or  cross  trestles  from  which  the  pipe  to  be  lowered 
are  slung  while  being  jointed,  and  then  lowered  into  a  trench  previously 
excavated  in  the  bottom  of  the  stream. 

An  experienced  layer  of  submerged  pipe  lines,  A.  L.  Holmes,  in  a 
paper  before  the  Central  States  Water  Works  Association  in  1902, 
made  the  following  statement  regarding  large  pipe: 

In  laying  24,  30  and  36- in.  pipe  in  deep  water  the  writer  has  oonnected 
40  ft.  with  lead  joints  in  the  usual  manner,  placing  on  each  end  of  this  sec- 
tion a  half  of  a  bolted  ball  joint  and  lowering  this  into  the  trench  prepared 
for  it,  holding  one  end  off  the  bottom  with  a  piece  of  wood  8  X  8  in.  placed 
under  the  hub  as  the  pipe  was  lowered  into  place.  The  next  section  pre- 
pared in  the  same  way  was  lowered  into  place,  and  while  in  the  slings  and 
held  just  clear  of  the  bottom  the  diver  entered  the  ball  into  the  bell  and  bolted 
it  up,  and  so  the  process  was  continued. 

The  pipe  could  all  be  put  in  shape  to  lower  to  the  bottom  in  a  harbor  or 
where  the  work  could  be  done  most  economically,  and  it  was  often  the  case 
that  500  ft.  of  large  pipe  were  laid  in  this  manner  daily,  which  means  that  the 
work  could  be  done  cheaply  and  well.  Bulkheads  were  placed  over  the  ends 
of  the  pipe  before  they  were  placed  in  the  water,  to  exclude  fish  and  rubbish 
while  lowering,  and  were  removed  by  the  diver  and  sent  up  for  use  again. 

Mr.  Holmes  did  not  advise  an  attempt  to  get  pipe  very  closely  in  line. 
If  it  zigzags  a  little  it  may  become  tighter  when  it  settles,  in  his  opinion. 
In  fact,  he  reconmiends  in  river  crossings  a  curve  upstream,  so  that  as 
the  material  washes  out  under  the  pipe  and  it  works  downstream,  it 
may  become  tighter,  if  anything,  at  the  joints. 

Two  60-in.  cast-iron  pipe  outfall  sewers  form  part  of  the  South 
Metropolitan  Sewerage  System  of  Boston  and  vicinity.  These  were 
laid  in  1902-1903  in  dredged  trenches.  The  pipe  were  12-ft.  bell 
and  spigot  lengths,  1-1/2  in.  thick  and  weighed  6  tons  per  length.  The 
bottom  of  the  pipe  has  an  average  depth  of  about  9  ft.  below  the  bed  of 
the  harbor,  and  the  trench  was  dredged  2  ft.  deeper,  to  a  maximum  of  53 
ft.  below  mean  high  water.  The  bottom  of  the  trench  was  10  ft.  wide  and 
the  sides  sloped  so  as  to  give  a  mean  top  width  of  about  30  ft.  Dredg- 
ing was  in  stiff  clay. 

In  this  trench  10-ft.  piles  were  driven  in  5-ft.  bents  of  two  piles  each 
at  intervals  of  6  ft.  These  were  capped  by  spruce  timbers  set  to  the 
required  grade,  thus  ensuring  two  points  of  support  for  each  pipe.  The 
piles  were  driven  with  the  assistance  of  a  vertical  telescopic  guide  box,  35 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE   327 

ft.  long  when  closed,  resting  upon  the  bed  of  the  harbor  and  capable  of 
adjustment  to  varying  depths  of  trench  and  conditions  of  tide.  In 
this  contrivance,  a  cylindrical  hammer  10  ft.  long  descended  upon  a  pile 
placed  within  the  inner  box.  A  75-ft.  lighter  was  used  for  the  pile 
driving  work. 

The  pipe  were  laid  in  48-ft.  sections,  consisting  of  three  lengths  of 
ordinary  spigot  and  socket  pipe  and  one  length  having  the  spigot  turned 
to  a  slight  taper  for  a  distance  of  5-1/2  in.  This  spigot  was  readily 
inserted  upon  the  wharf  into  the  bell  of  the  pipe  which  was  to  form  the 
leading  end  of  a  section,  and  the  vacant  space  entirely  filled  with  lead, 
but  without  calking.  The  spigot  was  then  withdrawn,  to  be  used  as  the 
rear  end  of  the  following  section. 

The  four  pipes  forming  a  section  were  then  arranged,  in  their  proper 
order,  on  a  floating  caisson  lashed  to  the  side  of  a  second  lighter,  the 
three  ordinary  joints  being  run  and  calked  in  the  usual  manner.  The 
caisson  was  a  heavy  timber  structure  of  a  special  design  patented  by  the 
contractor,  6  ft.  square  outside  and  52  ft.  long,  built  of  6-in.  hard  pine 
and  divided  by  eight  transverse  bulkheads  into  nine  compartments 
which  could  be  separately  flooded.  On  one  face  of  the  caisson  eight 
timber  saddles,  shaped  to  the  external  contour  of  the  pipe,  served  as  a 
resting  place  for  the  pipe  section,  which  was  firmly  secured  by  chains 
and  tumbuckles.  When  filled  with  water  the  caisson  was  sufficiently 
heavy  to  sink,  but  when  empty  its  flotation  was  sufficient  to  support  a 
section  weighing  about  24  tons.  On  being  released  from  the  lighter,  the 
section  immediately  turned  over,  so  that  the  pipe  were  suspended  from 
it  in  the  water.  Then,  through  openings  controlled  by  plugs,  the  com- 
partments were  sufficiently  flooded  to  sink  the  whole.  Arrived  at  the 
bottom,  still  attached  to  the  caisson,  the  pipe  were  adjusted  by  divers 
to  line  and  grade,  upon  the  caps,  and  the  tapered  spigot  was  drawn 
home  in  the  leaded  bell  of  the  preceding  section,  by  means  of  ratchet 
jacks  actuated  by  levers.  For  the  latter  purpose  the  leaded  bell  was 
temporarily  fitted  with  a  collar  provided  with  four  guides  to  ensure  the 
entry  of  the  tapered  spigot  without  damage  to  the  lead  mold.  When 
the  pipe  were  finally  secured  in  position -'by  wedges  spiked  to  the 
pile  caps,  the  caisson  was  filled  with  water,  thus  rendering  it  too  heavy 
to  float,  and  released  from  the  completed  section.  It  was  then  hauled 
to  the  surface  by  steam  winches  on  the  lighters  and  the  water  was  forced 
out  of  the  compartment  by  an  air  pump.  The  special  joint  between  the 
sections  was  calked  before  the  excavated  material  was  deposited  from 
the  scows  in  the  trench  and  over  the  pipe. 

A  riveted  steel  pipe,  6-1/4  ft.  in  diameter  and  about  2650  ft.  long,  is 
used  as  an  outfall  sewer  into  Lake  Erie,  at  the  end  of  the  main  inter- 
cepter  of  Cleveland.  The  pipe  was  delivered  in  50-ft.  lengths,  with  a 
heavy  angle  iron  flange  riveted  on  each  end.    These  lengths  were 


328  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

• 

assembled  into  sections  of  150  ft.  on  the  dock,  bulkheads  were  placed  on 
the  ends  of  these  sections,  and  they  were  then  towed  about  8  miles  to  the 
trench  excavated  in  the  bottom  of  the  lake  to  receive  them.  Openings 
were  thea  made  in  the  bulkheads,  and  the  pipe  were  allowed  to  fill 
slowly  and  settle  gradually  into  their  place  in  the  trench,  where  a  diver 
connected  the  sections  together  by  means  of  the  special  submarine  joint 
shown  in  Fig.  114  (Eng,  News,  March  28,  1912). 

The  lightness  of  large  steel  pipe  is  sometimes  an  objection  to  their  use, 
owing  to  the  possibility  that  unless  they  are  firmly  bedded  when  landed 
on  the  bottom  of  the  river  or  pond  in  which  they  are  laid,  the  waves 
may  roll  them  about.  In  order  to  avoid  anything  of  this  sort  in  the 
case  of  a  3-ft.  steel  pipe  600  ft.  long,  put  together  as  a  singly  length  and 
then  floated  into  position  at  Blackpool,  England,  transverse  steel  bed 

J        plates  were  riveted  to  the  pipe 

*......  9I-. >L..._5i._.>i/i'k       ^t  18-ft.  centers,  in  order  to  act 

ffg^/^  ^2— i     t    I       ^  ^^^*     ^^    particular  pipe 

inLJ^jnaarn        was  floated  3  miles    from  the 

iiiO^'-v^^^  P^^^®  ^'^®^®  ^*  ^^®  P^*  together 

"^4j^^4~h^  -Wy  ^^^^    on  the  shore,  to  its  final  position 

fiead^e:-:         Y^-     f  ^s  an  extension  of  an  old  out- 

i|   5  fall  sewer. 

"^^  *N^  Where  submerged  outfalls  ex- 

PiG.  I14.-Submerged  jdnt,  Cleveland  ^^^nd    a     considerable    distance 

outfall.  from  the  shore,  in  localities  ex- 

posed to  heavy  winds,  it  is  fre- 
quently desirable  to  provide  against  these  winds  in  drawing  up  the 
plans  for  construction.  For  instance,  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,  where  the 
sewage  is  discharged  through  a  24-in.  outfall,  3000  ft.  long,  and  a. 
20-in.  outfall  2700  ft.  long,  the  contractor  originally  provided  two 
lines  of  piles  along  the  trench  in  which  each  pipe  was  laid.  These 
lines  were  intended  to  act  as  anchors  for  the  pipe,  which  was  put  to- 
gether on  shore,  with  the  free  end  bulk-headed,  and  then  hauled  out 
slowly,  floating  out  into  the  bay  between  the  lines  of  piles.  The  con- 
tractor feared  that  the  pipe  line  would  not  float  and  attached  a  num- 
ber of  barrels  to  it.  These  became  entangled  with  the  piles,  and  even- 
tually the  contractor  took  up  a  large  number  of  the  piles.  -  After  this 
was  done  a  heavy  storm  arose  and  the  pipe  line,  having  no  piles  to  hold 
it  on  the  leeward  side,  floated  away,  and  a  number  of  the  joints  were  so 
strained  that  they  leaked  badly,  allowing  the  pipe  to  settle  to  the 
bottom. 

Pulling  Pipe  into  Place. — An  instance  of  the  method  of -laying  sub- 
merged pipe  by  hauling  them  out  from  the  shore,  was  afforded  by  two 
lines  of  18-in.  pipe  with  flexible  joints,  each  line  about  500  ft.  in  length, 
constructed  in  1910  at  Vancouver.    A  chute  was  first  constructed  on  one 


PURCHASING,  HANDLING  AND  LAYING  SEWER  PIPE    329 

shore  of  the  narrows  to  be  crossed.  This  was  built  of  3  X  12-in.  lumber 
supported  by  trestles,  and  was  as  long  as  the  main  to  be  submerged. 
The  inner  portion  of  the  chute  was  greased  like  the  ways  of  a  shipj'ard 
and  a  short  board  was  placed  under  the  beU  end  of  each  pipe  sui  it  was 
laid  in  the  trough.  This  pipe  was  furnished  in  9-ft.  lengths,  and  each 
flexible  joint  was  capable  of  a  deflection  of  19  deg.  After  the  entire 
line  of  pipe  had  been  made  up  in  this  way,  a  1-1/2-in.  steel  cable  was 
drawn  through  it  and  fastened  at  each  end  to  eye  bolts  of  2-in.  Norway 
iron  about  8  ft.  long.  These  bolts  passed  through  cast-iron  caps  at 
each  end  of  the  pipe.  The  rear  bolt  was  threaded  for  about  6  ft.  and  was 
drawn  taut  by  means  of  a  large  nut;  the  front  bolt  served  to  take  up  the 
strain  from  the  rear  bolt,  through  the  cable,  thus  holding  the  lengths 
of  pipe  together  and  preventing  much  strain  coming  on  the  flexible  joints. 
The  pipe  line  was  moved  by  three  1-1/2-in.  steel  hauling  cables  which  were 
fastened  to  the  pipe,  one  at  the  forward  eye  bolt,  one  .at  the  front  end  and 
one  a  third  of  the  distance  back  from  the  front  end.  The  hauling  cables 
were  carried  across  the  narrows  and  up  a  bank  on  the  other  side  to  five 
capstans,  operated  by  horses  and  transmitting  a  strain  of  about  180  tons 
to  the  hauling  cables.  In  order  to  prevent  water  entering  the  pipe  and 
thus  making  the  moving  more  difficult,  air  under  a  pressure  of  50  to  60 
lb.  to  the  square  inch  was  delivered  continuously  through  the  pipe  while 
it  was  being  moved. 

It  is  not  often  that  lengths  of  submerged  pipe  are  entirely  con- 
structed on  the  shore  before  they  are  hauled  across,  as  was  the  case 
at  Vancouver.  As  a  rule  a  few  lengths  are  coupled  together  at  the  end 
of  the  section  already  in  the  water.  This  section  is  buoyed  by  oil 
barrels  or  other  substantial  floats,  so  that  it  does  not  drag  along  the 
bottom  and  offer  resistance  in  this  way  to  being  hauled  acros3  the 
channel.  For  example,  when  E.  L.  Abbott  laid  a  10-in.  main  across  the 
Missouri  River  at  South  Bend,  Mo.,  he  built  a  cradle  of  two  12  X  12-in. 
timbers,  placed  9  in.  apart  in  the  clear  and  held  together  at  the  bottom 
by  2  X  10-in.  timbers.  This  was  built  on  the  bank  of  the  river  extend- 
ing out  to  deep  water,  and  was  long  enough  to  lay  and  joint  four  lengths 
of  pipe.  Three  empty  barrels  were  attached  to  each  length  of  pipe  with 
ropes  about  1  ft.  shorter  than  the  average  depth  of  water.  The  end 
of  the  pipe  in  the  river  was  plugged  to  keep  out  the  water  and  had  a  rope 
attached  to  it,  which  was  carried  across  the  river  and  made  fast  to  the 
drum  of  a  hoist  on  the  other  shore.  When  a  convenient  number  of 
lengths  of  pipe  had  been  prepared  on  the  cradle,  they  were  pidled  out 
into  the  stream  by  means  of  the  hobt  until  all  but  the  last  length  were 
under  water.  Additional  lengths  were  than  added  to  the  shore  end  and 
the  operation  was  repeated  until  the  crossing  was  completed.  Barrels 
floated  all  the  pipe  except  the  portion  resting  on  the  timber  cradle, 
where  the  friction  was  slight,  and  the  entire  line  was  easily  moved* 


CHAPTER  XII 

JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE 

Many  of  the  eariy  tile  drains  built  in  England  and  Germany  had  the 
joints  filled  with  clay.  Baldwin  Latham  says,  in  his  "Sanitary  Engineer- 
ing" published  in  1878,  "the  material  most  conunonly  used  for  jointing 
pipes  is  clay,  which  is  one  of  the  worst  materials  that  could  be  found  for 
the  piu-pose."  With  the  advent,  however,  of  separate  systems  of 
sewerage  and  particularly  of  treatment  plants,  the  matter  of  leakage 
became  important  and  precluded  the  use  of  such  unreliable  material  for 
jointing. 

Cement,  either  neat  or  mixed  with  sand,  was  early  employed,  and 
although  by  no  means  ideal  for  this  purpose,  its  use  has  become  very 
extensive.  It  is  very  difficult,  particularly  in  wet  trenches,  to  make 
cement  joints  reasonably  tight,  and  the  water,  especially  running  water, 
must  be  kept  down  below  the  cement  in  the  joints  until  the  mortar  has 


^^j^^^g^-.p 


<xpy///////'^///A 


'mw//M 


Fig.  115. — The  Stanford  joint. 

acquired  a  fairly  hard  set.  Furthermore,  the  rigidity  of  the  joint  after 
it  has  set  is  such  that  if  any  settlement  takes  place  the  pipe  is  likely  to 
break.  Consequently  it  is  only  natural  that  many  attempts  have  been 
made  to  overcome  the  defects  of  the  ordinary  cement  joint,  either  by 
varying  the  form  of  joint,  or  by  using  other  materials,  such  as  asphalt, 
sulphur  and  sand,  tar  and  various  patented  mixtures. 

The  Stanford  joint.  Fig.  115,  was  much  used  in  England  at  one  time, 
and  has  been  used  at  a  few  places  in  the  United  States.  It  is  made  by 
casting  on  the  spigot  and  in  the  socket  of  each  pipe,  rings  consisting  of  a 
mixture  of  sulphur,  tar  and  sand.  When  the  castings  have  hardened 
they  are  coated  with  oil  or  grease  and  the  pipes  shoved  together,  one 
ring  fitting  inside  the  other.  This  and  similar  types  were  developed  by 
Doulton  &  Co.,  of  London.  Other  forms  have  projections  cast  on  one 
side  of  the  spigot,  so  that  when  inserted  in  the  socket  this  projection 

330 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE  331 

rests  on  the  bottom  and  insures  a  correct  centering  of  the  pipe.  Still 
other  types  have  annular  spaces  cast  on  the  inside  of  the  socket,  and  after 
the  spigot  is  inserted  this  space  is  filled  with  liquid  cement  poured 
through  holes  in  the  socket. 

Pipe  other  than  the  simple  bell  and  spigot  type  have  never  been  much 
used  in  the  United  States,  but  various  jointing  materials  have  been 
employed  to  a  considerable  extent.  A  modification  of  the  Stanford 
composition,  consisting  of  heated  sulphur  and  sand  poured  into  the  joint 
space  in  a  way  similar  to  that  followed  in  making  lead  joints  for  cast-iron 
pif>e,  has  given  satisfaction  in  many  places.  Leadite,  a  patented  article 
having  a  somewhat  similar  composition  but  mixed  ready  for  use,  gives 
similar  results  and  seems  to  be  more  easily  manipulated  than  the  plain 
mixture  of  sulphur  and  sand.  Another  patented  sulphiu*  and  sand  com- 
position is  known  as  Pozite. 

A  preparation  of  a  somewhat  different  type,  known  as  Gr-K  Compound, 
has  been  used  at  a  number  of  places  in  the  United  States.  It  is  melted  at 
a  high  temperature  and  poured.  When  the  joints  are  made  with  this 
or  other  similar  material,  they  are  somewhat  flexible  and  are  claimed  to 
withstand  slight  settlement  without  fracture.  It  is  claimed  that  it  can 
be  used  successfully  when  the  pipe  are  wet  or  partly  under  water. 

Cement  Joints. — The  cement  for  joints  may  be  used  either  neat  or  in 
proportions  of  1  to  1  or  1  to  2  parts  of  sand,  although  the  more  cement 
there  is  in  the  mortar  the  more  easily  it  will  be  molded  and  forced  into 
place.  When  the  cement  is  used  neat  there  is  a  tendency  toward  shrink- 
age and  cracks  may  develop.  On  the  other  hand,  when  mixed  with  sand 
it  takes  a  somewhat  longer  time  for  it  to  set.  It  is  usual  before  inserting 
the  spigot  of  the  pipe  in  the  bell  of  the  previous  pipe,  to  place  a  gasket 
formed  of  a  piece  of  jute  or  oakum,  soaked  in  cement  grout,  aroimd  the 
spigot.  The  principal  object  of  this  gasket  is  to  keep  the  pipe  concentric 
and  prevent  the  squeezing  out  of  the  mortar  in  the  bottom  of  the  joint. 
When  no  gasket  is  used,  it  is  customary  to  place  some  mortar  in  the  lower 
part  of  the  bell  before  inserting  the  spigot  of  the  next  pipe.  The  func- 
tion of  this  mortar  is  to  hold  the  pipe  in  its  prof>er  position  while  making 
the  joint,  but  in  twisting  and  working  the  pipe  into  its  proper  position 
some  of  the  mortar  may  be  squeezed  out  and  the  joint  may  leak  at 
this  point. 

After  the  pipe  is  in  position,  a  man  provided  with  a  trowel  and  rubber 
gloves  fills  the  joint  carefully  with  mortar,  working  it  into  place  with  a 
wooden  calking  tool.  The  joint  is  usually  overfilled,  providing  a  bevel 
of  about  45  deg.,  and  the  joint  is  well  smoothed  off.  Tests  have  shown 
that  these  overfilled  joints  are  customarily  more  nearly  water-tight  than 
flush  joints.  In  some  cases  where  unusual  care  is  used,  the  joints  are 
at  first  only  partly  filled  with  mortar  and  then  another  gasket  is  rammed 
into  place  flush  with  the  outside  of  the  bell,  when  the  joint  is  overfilled 


332  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

with  mortar.  After  the  joint  is  made,  it  is  well  to  wrap  it  with  a  piece 
of  cheesecloth,  securely  tied  at  the  top,  thus  holding  the  mortar  in  place, 
for  there  is  a  tendency  for  the  mortar  to  sag  and  fall  out  of  and  away 
from  the  joint,  esjjecially  if  the  mortar  is  rather  wet.  The  use  of  cloth 
in  this  manner  makes  it  possible  to  use  a  rather  moist  mortar  with  which 
a  better  joint  can  generally  be  made  than  with  a  dry  stiff  mortar. 

The  trenches  in  which  the  sewers  of  Batavia,  N.  Y.,  were  laid  in  1912 
were  unusually  wet,  and  for  this  reason,  although  pumping  was  resorted 
to,  no  attempt  was  made  to  lay  pif>e  in  the  dry.  A  patent  gasket  was 
employed  for  making  the  joints  in  the  lower  part  of  the  pipe;  this  was  a 
series  of  pockets  of  muslin  cloth  dipped  in  glue,  the  pockets  between 
the  partitions  being  filled  with  cement  and  sand  mortar.  One  of  these 
gaskets  was  placed  in  the  invert  of  the  bell  of  the  last  pijje  laid.  The 
pipe  had  deep  and  wide  sockets;  the  spigot  of  the  next  pipe  was  entered 
into  the  bell  of  the  preceding  one  at  the  top  of  the  bell  and  then  dropped. 
Its  fall  broke  the  partitions  of  glue  in  the  gasket  and  made  a  ring  of 
cement  enclosed  in  muslin  in  the  invert,  which  the  pipe  layer  calked. 
The  rest  of  the  joint  was  made  with  oakum  and  cement  in  the  ordinary 
way.  Tliis  work  was  done  under  the  direction  of  Charles  Hoopes  {Eng. 
Record,  Nov.  19,  1912). 

Pipe  known  as  the  deep  and  wide  socket  type  have  many  advocates 
among  engineers,  but  it  is  a  matter  of  controversy  as  to  how  much  ad- 
vantage they  have  over  the  standard  bell  and  spigot  type.  Tests  made 
by  Freeman  C.  Coffin  and  others  indicate  that  deep  and  wide  sockets  are 
somewhat  more  likely  to  leak  than  standard  sockets,  owing  to  the  large 
space  which  must  be  filled  with  more  or  less  porous  cement  and  sand.  It 
is  probable,  on  the  whole,  that  the  standard  pipe  will  be  found  generally 
satisfactory,  provided  it  is  made  as  it  should  be,  with  the  bells  and 
spigots  uniformly  circular  and  of  standard  dimensions,  so  that  there  is 
everywhere  the  specified  space  for  joints.  Difficulties  with  standard 
pipe  are  largely  due  to  the  jointing  space  being  so  small  in  places  that 
it  is  impossible  to  get  the  gasket  and  mortar  into  it  properly. 

One  great  trouble  with  poorly  made  cement  joints  is  the  entrance  of 
roots  of  trees  into  the  sewer.  An  almost  capillary  opening  is  all  that  is 
necessary  to  allow  a  root  seeking  moisture  to  obtain  entrance,  and  after 
having  gained  an  entrance  it  sometimes  grows  very  rapidly,  filling  up 
the  sewer  and  forcing  the  mortar  out  of  the  joints.  When  making  a 
mortar  joint  in  a  wet  trench  it  is,  of  course,  desirable  to  keep  water  en- 
tirely away  from  the  joint  while  it  is  being  made,  either  by  pumping 
or  drainage  in  other  ways.  After  the  joint  has  been  made  earth  may  be 
carefully  tamped  under  and  around  it,  but  unless  the  joint  is  provided 
with  a  band  of  cheesecloth  tied  around  it  to  hold  the  mortar  in  place, 
there  is  always  danger  of  knocking  off  the  mortar  or  of  its  sagging  away 
from  the  joint. 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE 


333 


The  amount  of  mortar  required  for  making  joints  in  pipe  sewers  may 
be  estimated  roughly  with  the  aid  of  Table  56  compiled  from  Freeman 
C.  Coffin's  paper  on  "Tests  of  Cement  Joints  for  Pipe  Sewers"  (Jour. 
Assoc.  Eng.  Socs.,  1894).  These  tables  are  for  both  flush  and  overfilled 
or  beveled  joints  and  for  both  standard  and  deep-and-wide  sockets. 
Thicknesses  of  pipe  shells  and  of  cement  spaces  within  bells  differ,  a  nd 
consequently  no  table  can  be  more  than  approximately  correc  t. 


Table  53. — Cubic  Feet  of  Mortar  Required  for  100  Joints  in  Pipe 

Sewers 

(Freeman  C.  CoflSn) 


Diameter, 
inches 

4 

Joints  finished  flush 

Overfilled  joints 

Standard       \       Deep  socket 

Standard        |        Deep  socket 

0.45 

1.91 

1.13 

3.46 

5 

0.54 

2.34 

1.34 

4.00 

6 

0.65 

2.67 

1.95 

5.57 

8 

0.80 

3.32 

3.15 

7.62 

10 

1.00 

4.06 

3.93 

9.26 

12 

1.40 

4.78 

4.79 

10.93 

15 

2.20 

7.08 

6.40 

16.03 

18 

2.70 

8.45 

8.77 

19.05 

20 

3.00                    9.37 

14.43 

24.07 

24 

3.50                  14.52 

17.00 

33 .  12 

See  Table  50  for  quantity  of  materials  for  a  cubic  yard  of  mortar. 

Cement  pipe  sometimes  have  no  bells .  The  j  oints  are  made  with  bands 
or  rings,  one  end  of  each  length  having  an  inside  bevel  and  the  other 
an  outside  bevel,  such  as  were  used  with  some  vitrified  sewer  pipe  in 
England  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Such  pipe  have 
been  employed  extensively  in  the  vicinity  of  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  and  in 
Eng,  Rec,  May  6,  1911,  J.  Alden  Griffin,  assistant  engineer  in  the  ofi^ce 
of  the  city  engineer  of  Los  Angeles,  published  some  suggestions  regard- 
ing the  jointing  of  such  pipe.  As  with  the  usual  bell-and-socket  pipe, 
it  was  necessary  to  prepare  the  bed  of  the  trench  so  that  the  pipe  would 
rest  securely  along  their  entire  length  with  the  exception  of  the  holes 
cut  or  dug  under  each  pipe  joint  to  receive  the  band.  Special  care  had  to 
be  taken  in  adjusting  the  lengths  of  pipe  to  grade  to  prevent  the  work- 
men from  doing  this  by  using  clods  or  other  objects  which  would  not 
give  a  permanently  uniform  stable  support.  In  order  to  avoid  repairing 
future  leaks,  it  was  found  to  be  essential,  when  pipe  have  to  be  raised 
to  produce  a  good  grade,  to  throw  dirt  over  the  low  portions  of  the  trench 
and  tamp  it  thoroughly.  While  this  took  time,  digging  up  the  pipe 
was  a  far  more  tedious  operation. 

It  was  early  found  that  cement  pipe  could  never  be  laid  down  hill  and 
secure  a  satisfactory  job,  and  that  they  must  always  be  laid  up  hill  so 


334  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

that  the  shrinkage  of  the  joint  could  take  place  without  cracking  the 
band,  the  weight  of  the  pipe  being  on  the  joint  instead  of  pulling  from  it. 
In  the  climate  of  Los  Angeles  it  has  been  found  advisable  never  to  place 
dirt  on  a  new  band  in  order  to  shade  it,  because  the  dirt  absorbed  mois- 
ture from  the  mortar  and  rendered  it  practically  worthless.  The  new 
bands  were  best  shaded  from  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun  for  at  least  half 
an  hour  before  placing  any  backfill  on  them,  by  means  of  c^Mivas  or 
boards  laid  across  the  trench.  After  the  bands  had  set  for  half  an  hour 
it  was  found  desirable  {o  wet  them  and  then  add  the  backfilling.  Great 
care  was  necessary  in  the  backfilling  or  otherwise  the  joints  would  be 
cracked;  the  tendency  of  workmen  to  consolidate  the  filling  by  tramping 
on  it  had  to  be  guarded  against  continually. 

Where  joints  are  made  with  cement  mortar,  particularly  if  gaskets 
are  not  used,  there  is  danger  of  the  mortar  being  forced  into  the  interior 
of  the  pipe.  If  not  removed,  it  will  harden  and  form  obstructions.  It 
is  therefore  desirable  to  scrape  clean  the  inner  surface  of  the  sewer  as  laid, 
for  which  purpose  a  "go-devil"  has  proved  effective.  It  is  made  of  two 
round  wooden  disks  slightly  smaller  than  the  bore  of  the  pipe.  Each 
disk  is  made  of  two  thin  wooden  blocks  which  are  clamped  together 
securely  with  a  piece  of  cloth-insertion  rubber  packing  between  them, 
cut  to  fit  tightly  in  the  bore  of  the  pipe.  The  disks  are  fastened  to- 
gether about  2  ft.  apart  by  three  1  /4-in.  iron  rods.  A  3  /4-in.  Manila 
rope  passing  through  and  fastened  to  the  disks  is  threaded  through  the 
pipe  as  laid,  after  which  the  go-devil  is  pulled  along,  effectually  cleaning 
the  pipe  line.  A  poor  substitute  for  this  device  is  the  swab  or  "half- 
moon,  "  made  from  a  piece  of  board  cut  to  the  curve  of  the  interior  of 
the  pipe,  but  not  filling  it.  This  board,  fastened  to  a  stick  a  little 
longer  than  the  pipe,  is  drawQ  along  first  on  top  and  then  on  the  bottom, 
to  clean  the  completed  sewer. 

Tests  of  Cement  Joints. — Tests  of  cement  joints  were  made  by  Prof. 
Malverd  A.  Howe  at  the  Rose  Polytechnic  Institute  in  1892  {Jour. 
Assn.  Eng,  Socs.,  June,  1891).  They  were  made  on  the  ordinary  bell 
and  spigot  joint,  the  corrugated  bell  and  spigot,  ring  joint,  and  the 
"Archer  water-tight"  joint  made  in  England.  The  results  of  some  of 
these  tests  are  given  in  Volume  I. 

In  1894  Freeman  C.  Coffin  carried  out  experiments  on  cement  joints 
{Jour.  Assn.  Eng.  Socs.^  Dec,  1894),  with  Portland  and  Rosendale 
cement  as  jointing  material,  each  of  these  being  tried  with  and  without 
the  addition  of  sand.  Tests  were  made  under  a  uniform  head  of  5  ft. 
above  the  center  of  the  pipe,  which  was  considered  the  average  head  of 
ground  water  on  sewers.  The  pipe  used  were  6  in.  in  diameter  and  in 
lengths  of  1  ft.  Three  forms  of  joints  were  tested,  the  standard,  the 
deep  socket,  and  the  deep  socket  with  round-about  grooves  on  the  inside 
of  the  socket  and  outside  of  the  spigot  end  of  the  pipe.    Mr.  Coffin 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE  335 

expressed  the  opinion  that  with  joints  equally  well  made,  the  seepage 
would  vary  as  the  thickness  of  the  joint  and  inversely  as  the  depth,  and 
in  comparing  the  flush  with  the  overfilled  joints  a  decided  gain  from 
overfilhng  was  found,  although  there  was  a  greater  eccentricity  in  the 
results  of  the  overfilled  joints. 

In  the  tests  of  joints  made  with  Rosendale  cement  it  was  found  that 
the  neat  cement  made  a  poorer  record  than  either  a  1 : 1  or  1 : 2  sand  mix- 
ture. The  best  results  seemed  to  be  obtained  when  the  mortar  was  of 
such  consistency  that  the  largest  amount  would  stay  upon  a  trowel, 
neither  falling  apart  from  dryness  nor  running  from  moisture. 

Mr.  Coffin  summarizes  his  results  as  follows:  With  the  standard  joint 
the  small  amount  of  room  for  cement  made  it  exceedingly  difficult  to 
make  a  full  joint  in  the  trench,  and  while  the  tests  showed  fairly  good 
results  he  thought  it  impossible  to  approximate  to  such  results  in  actual 
practice  in  a  wet  trench.  For  this  reason  he  preferred  to  use  a  larger 
and  deeper  socket  where  tight  work  was  desirable.  With  such  sockets 
the  mortar  could  be  more  easily  put  into  the  joint  and  a  wooden  rammer 
of  sufficient  thickness  to  be  effective  in  compacting  the  mortar  could  be 
used.  The  greater  depth  of  the  joint  appeared  to  reduce  the  seepage 
and  to  render  it  more  likely  that  imperfectly  filled  portions  of  the  joints 
would  be  covered  by  better  compacted  portions.  It  also  gave  a  greater 
body  of  cement  to  resist  the  action  of  water  reaching  it  before  it  set; 
and  allowed  the  mortar  to  be  placed  within  the  joint  instead  of  outside 
it.  Mortar  applied  to  the  outside  of  joints  was  of  doubtful  value,  he 
thought,  in  a  trench  where  water  was  liable  to  reach  it  before  it  had  set. 
The  increased  length  of  the  joint  aided  very  materially  in  preventing 
the  pipe  from  moving  in  the  joint  and  thus  making  a  direct  passage  into 
it  for  the  water.  A  gasket  apparently  increased  the  leakage  by  reducing 
the  length  of  the  joint  and  also  the  resistance  to  the  passage  of  water; 
but  in  a  very  bad  trench,  where  the  water  was  likely  to  blow  or  wash 
the  cement  from  the  joint,  it  would  prevent  the  sand  from  entering  the 
pipe,  and,  if  thoroughly  saturated  in  a  grout  of  neat  cement,  might  aid 
in  preventing  the  passage  of  water. 

He  advocated  the  use  of  3-ft.  instead  of  2-ft.  lengths  of  pipe,  in  order 
to  reduce  the  number  of  joints,  and  also  that  two  or  more  joints  of  the 
pipe  should  be  put  together  on  the  bank  and  allowed  to  set  before  being 
placed  in  the  trench.  The  difficulty  in  making  joints  on  the  bank  was 
stated  to  lie  in  the  alignment  of  the  pijje.  The  ends  were  not  square 
and  true  and  could  not  be  depended  upon  to  give  projjer  alignment. 

F.  A.  Barbour,  in  connection  with  tests  on  the  strength  of  sewer  pipe, 
also  made  at  Brockton,  Mass.,  some  tests  of  the  joints  (Jour,  Assn. 
Eng,  Socs.f  Dec.,  1897).  He  found  the  most  notable  result  was  the 
small  leakage  in  shallow  joints.  He  explained  this  result  as  follows; 
In  the  shallow  joint  the  cement  was  perfectly  hard  and  compact,  follow. 


336  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

ing  well  the  outline  of  the  pipe,  while  in  the  deeper  joint  the  clinging  of 
the  cement  to  the  sides  made  it  difficult  to  fill  the  space  unless  the  width 
was  proportionally  increased,  or  efforts  out  of  all  comparison  with  actual 
practice  were  made.  Experimentally  a  joint  3/4  in.  deep  was  as  water- 
tight as  one  3  in.  deep  made  with  the  same  effort.  In  practice  the 
difficulty  of  keeping  the  green  cement  from  falling  out  of  a  shallow  joint 
made  the  allowable  minimum  depth  of  joint  greater  than  this.  The 
value  of  overfilling  was  very  considerable.  In  tests  of  1 : 1  and  1 : 2 
mortar  joints,  the  leakage  differed  but  httle  from  that  with  neat  joints, 
and  Mr.  Barbour  held  that  so  long  as  the  percentage  of  cement  was 
sufficient  to  fill  the  voids  in  the  sand,  the  leakage  through  mortar  made 
of  clean,  sharp  sand  and  cement  should  differ  little  from  that  through 
neat  cement.  He  concluded  that,  experimentally,  a  tight  joint,  under  a 
5-ft.  head,  could  be  made  by  using  dry  mortar  and  sufficient  tamping; 
that  from  joints  made  more  nearly  as  in  practice  little  information 
could  be  obtained;  that  all  joints  should  be  overfilled;  that  joints  less 
than  1/2  in.  wide  could  not  be  made  tight  without  undue  labor;  that 
the  difference  between  Rosendale  and  Portland  cement  joints  was  slight 
after  an  18-hr.  set;  that  an  overfilled  shallow  joint  was  as  tight  as  a 
deeper  joint,  unless  great  care,  seldom  taken  in  practice,  was  used  to 
fill  the  deeper  joint. 

Sulphur  and  Sand  Joints. — ^A  composition  of  sulphur,  tar  and  sand 
for  joints  has  been  used  for  a  long  time  in  England,  in  the  preparation 
of  the  so-called  Stanford  joint,  and  is  now  used,  without  the  tar,  to  a 
considerable  extent  in  the  United  States.  This  jointing  material  con- 
sists of  a  mixture  of  about  equal  parts  of  very  fine  sand  and  sulphur, 
heated  and  poured  like  lead  in  making  joints  for  cast-iron  pipe. 

There  are  some  difficulties  encountered  in  the  manipulation  of  this 
material.  The  sand  used  should  be  very  fine,  and  of  such  quality  that 
no  grit  is  felt  when  it  is  rubbed  between  the  fingers.  The  mixture  must 
not  be  made  too  hot,  for  if  it  is  it  changes  from  a  liquid  mass  to  a  semi- 
plastic  one  that  cannot  be  poured.  It  is,  however,  only  necessarj'^  to  cool 
it  off  to  the  proper  temperature  in  order  to  make  it  become  liquid 
again.  For  the  manipulation  of  this  material  a  gasoline  furnace  is  very 
desirable,  if  not  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to  be  able  to  regulate  the 
temperature  properly.  It  is  very  desirable  to  build  up  a  funnel  or  gate 
of  clay,  3  in.  or  more  in  height,  through  which  to  fill  the  joint,  as  this 
pouring  under  a  slight  head  or  pressure  fills  the  space  better  and  takes 
better  care  of  the  shrinkage.  The  neck  of  the  fimnel  should  be  at  least 
1/2  in.  in  diameter  to  prevent  chilling  of  the  liquid  as  it  is  poured. 

With  pipe  up  to  18  in.  in  diameter,  it  is  customary  to  joint  two  or  three 
lengths  of  pipe  on  the  bank,  which  is  a  great  advantage,  as  these  joints 
can  be  made  under  the  best  possible  conditions.  In  cold  weather  and 
with  large  pipe  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  get  the  material  to  fill  the 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE  337 

bottom  of  the  joint,  aa  it  cools  very  rapidly.  A  piece  of  jutie  thrown  over 
the  pipe  close  to  the  joint  and  lighted,  will  usually  provide  sufficient 
heat  to  prevent  this  difficulty.  The  use  of  sand  in  the  mixture  is  to 
hold  it  to  constant  volume  while  cooling  and  to  prevent  shrinkage, 
which  occurs  if  too  little  sand  is  used.  It  is  very  important  to  experi- 
ment in  order  to  get  the  proper  mixture,  for  it  is  found  that  with  luisuit- 
able  or  insufficient  sand  the  shrinkage  may  be  great  enough  to  allow  the 
sulphur  to  become  loose  from  the  pipes.  If  the  sand  is  too  coarse  the 
mixture  will  not  be  imiform,  for  the  sand  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  the 
heating  kettle. 

After  the  joints  are  poured  they  are  sometimes  painted  or  coated  with 
a  layer  of  roofing  pitch  to  insure  their  water-tightness. 

This  type  of  joint  has  been  used  for  many  years  at  Newton,  Mass., 
where  it  has  given  satisfaction.  It  is  claimed  that  no  cases  have  been 
found  where  roots  of  trees  have  obtained  an  entrance  to  sewers  through 
such  joints.  It  was  also  used  as  early  as  1900,  or  thereabouts,  for  the 
sewers  built  by  Alexander  Potter  for  a  number  of  municipalities  in  New 
Jersey.  He  employed  a  mixture  of  sulphur  and  sand  in  the  proportions 
of  1  to  1,  approximately,  heated  together  at  a  temperature  of  230**  F. 
and  poured  in  the  usual  manner.  He  reported  that  the  physical  and 
chemical  tests  of  the  mixture  showed  it  to  be  superior  in  all  respects  to 
Portland  cement  mortar,  both  neat  and  mixed  with  sand,  and  his  papers 
on  the  subject  first  called  general  attention  to  it  in  this  country.  Tests 
indicated  that  while  the  tensile  strength  of  pure  sulphur  was  about  100 
lb.  to  the  square  inch,  the  sulphur  and  sand  composition  had  a  tensile 
strength  of  400  to  700  lb.  to  the  square  inch.  Several  briquettes  tested 
2  hours  after  they  had  been  poured  broke  at  670  lb.  to  the  square  inch. 
He  had  samples  of  the  mixture  analyzed,  and  found  that  under  a  72- 
hour  test  the  composition  was  not  afifected  by  any  of  the  acids  or  alkaline 
liquors  to  which  the  samples  were  submitted  when  present  in  such  quan- 
tities as  are  likely  to  be  found  in  sewage.  The  tests  also  showed  that 
the  mixture  was  practically  impervious  to  water,  the  absorption  averag- 
ing 0.017  per  cent. 

The  tests  indicated  that  the  more  sand  the  sulphur  could  take  up  and 
yet  run  freely,  the  stronger  the  resultant  mixture  would  be.  They  also 
showed  that  the  finer  the  sand  the  more  satisfactory  the  results.  Coarse 
sand  precipitated  more  rapidly  and  was  practically  useless.  A  sand 
which  was  satisfactory  in  use  had  an  effective  size  of  0.135  mm.  Ex- 
periments were  made  with  fine  Long  Island  beach  sand,  but  this  was 
found  unsatisfactory. 

This  form  of  joint  had  the  further  advantage,  Mr.  Potter  said,  that 
water  could  be  allowed  to  rise  in  the  ditch  1  minute  after  the  joint  had 
been  made.  It  was  also  proof  against  the  intrusion  of  roots  into  the 
sewer.    He  found  that  under  the  conditions  usually  existing  in  sewer 

22 


338 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


work,  this  joint  would  cost  somewhat  more  than  cement  joints,  but  that 
if  a  reasonable  effort  was  made  to  secure  tight  sewers  with  cement  joints, 
the  cost  of  joints  of  sulphur  and  sand  would  be  no  greater.  The  rigidity 
of  joints  formed  of  this  material  made  it  almost  essential  to  deposit  con- 
crete under  the  haunches  of  the  large  pipe,  he  said.  Tests  were  made 
with  crude  Sicilian,  roll,  and  flour  sulphur,  the  last  being  the  most 
exf>ensive  of  the  three  but  the  most  satisfactory  and  easy  to  handle. 
The  most  serviceable  size  of  melting  pot  was  one  holding  enough  material 
for  at  least  three  joints  on  the  larger  pipe  and  a  dozen  on  the  small  pipe, 
at  one  time.  The  specific  gravity  of  the  melted  mixture  was  2.46,  Mr. 
Potter  said.     The  cost  of  the  joints  he  gave  in  Table  57. 


Table  57. — Approximate  Cost  of  Sulphur-sand  Joints 

(Potter) 


Diameter 

of  pipe, 

inches 

Mixture 

per  joint, 

pounds 

Cost  per  joint 

Cost  per  foot 
for  pipe  lengths  of 

3  ft.            2  ft. 

Mixture 

Gas- 
ket 

Fuel 

Labor 

Total 

8 

2.5 

$0,031 

$0.01 

$0.01 

$0.07 

$0,121  $0.04 

$0.06 

10 

3.3 

0.041 

0.01 

0.01 

0.08 

0.141 

0.045 

0.07 

12 

4.2 

0.052 

0.01 

0.01 

0.09 

0.162 

0.055 

0.08 

15 

5.5 

0.069 

0.01 

0.01 

0.10 

0.187 

0.065 

0.095 

18 

7.0 

0.087 

0.02 

0.02 

0.11 

0.247 

0.08 

0.12 

20 

8.0 

0.10 

0.02 

0.02 

0.12 

0.260|  0.09 

0.13 

22 

9.0 

0.1125 

0.02 

0.02 

0.13 

0.282    0.095 

0.14 

24 

10.0 

0.125 

0.02 

0.02 

0.13 

0.295   0.10 

0.15 

At  Louisville  (Report  Sewerage  Commission,  1907-1910)  sulphur-sand 
joints  were  used  in  laying  a  large  number  of  lateral  sewers.  In  the  pre- 
liminary stage  of  this  work  a  mixture  of  sulphur  and  sand  in  equal  parts 
was  tried,  a  very  fine  molding  sand  from  a  local  pit  being  used.  From 
the  first  this  mixture  gave  trouble,  several  radial  cracks  appearing  on 
each  joint  as  soon  as  the  joint  was  poured,  and  about  12  hours  after  being 
poured  the  joint  loosened,  permitting  the  easy  separation  of  pipe. 
Investigation  showed  that  the  sand  contained  a  considerable  percentage 
of  clay.  It  was  therefore  washed,  but  the  results  were  not  much  better. 
Finally  another  very  fine  sand  with  less  clay  in  it  was  used,  and  that 
was  found  to  work  satisfactorily,  particularly  in  a  mixture  of  6  parts 
molding  sand,  4  parts  Ohio  River  sand,  and  10  parts  sulphur.  It 
was  found  that  the  mixture  would  practically  melt  at  200°  F.,  and 
that  it  became  thin  and  suitable  for  pouring  at  about  260°  F.  If  the 
temperature  rose  more  than  25°  to  40°  higher,  however,  the  mixture 
would  become  thick  and  plastic  and  could  not  be  poured. 

After  the  joint  had  been  poured,  an  asbestos  jointer  being  used  for 
the  purpose,  and  while  it  was  warm,  it  was  coated  with  hot  tar  pitch 
as  a   further   precaution  against   leakage.    Within   5  minutes   after 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE  339 

the  joint  was  poured,  the  entire  length  of  three  or  four  pipe,  which 
had  been  put  together  on  the  bank,  could  be  removed  from  the  cradle 
and  placed  in  position  in  the  trench. 

When  water  was  encountered  in  the  work,  care  was  taken  to  hold  its 
level  below  the  pipe  joints,  as  otherwise  the  liquid  mixture  did  not 
enter  the  submerged  portion  of  the  j oint.  For  joints  formed  on  the  bank 
it  was  found  desirable  to  have  a  substantially  built  cradle  with  templets 
to  hold  the  pipe  accurately  in  alignment.  It  was  found  that  good 
briquettes  made  of  sulphur  and  sand  of  the  proportions  used  on  the  works 
showed  a  tensile  strength  of  from  520  to  640  lb.  per  square  inch. 

A  difficulty  with  this  kind  of  a  joint  is  that  it  is  absolutely  rigid.  As 
a  result,  unless  the  bottom  of  the  trench  conforms  accurately  to  the  shape 
of  the  pipe  or  if  the  backfilling  is  poorly  done,  the  pipe  are  likely  to  be- 
come broken.  This  difficulty  is  not  so  great  in  the  case  of  cement  joints, 
although  after  the  cement  is  set  the  joint  is  rigid.  Much  of  the  settle- 
ment and  adjustment  takes  place  before  this  occurs.  Numerous 
attempts  have  been  made  to  overcome  this  difficulty  by  the  use  of  the 
so-called  plastic  joints,  and  many  engineers  look  with  considerable 
favor  on  the  asphalt  joint. 

Asphalt  and  Tar  Joints. — Asphalt  joints  have  been  used  for  many 
years  in  German  cities,  apparently  with  success,  and  in  some  places  in 
the  United  States.  An  objection  to  the  material  is  that  it  melts  at 
a  rather  low  point,  which  prevents  its  successful  use  in  places  where 
large  quantities  of  hot  water  or  steam  find  their  way  into  the  sewers, 
as  is  the  case  in  some  large  cities.  In  Germany  the  engineers  advocate 
the  use  of  natural  asphalt,  but  there  is  among  American  engineers  a 
question  as  to  the  durability  of  this  material,  because  of  the  possibility 
of  its  deterioration  in  the  presence  of  water  and  chemical  agents.  Some 
coal-tar  products  may  possibly  be  better  adapted  to  this  purpose,  but 
there  are  no  data  of  value  on  this  subject. 

Carl  Henneking,  City  Engineer  of  Elberfeld,  Germany  (Eng.  Record, 
Dec.  25,  1909),  where  asphalt  has  been  used  successfully  for  many  years, 
gives  the  following  necessary  conditions  for  making  satisfactory  joints 
of  this  material: 

1.  The  surfaces  must  be  absolutely  dry  and  clean  before  pouring. 

2.  The  asphalt  must  be  free  from  impurities  which  would  tend  to  promote 
the  formation  of  bubbles. 

3.  The  asphalt  must  be  very  fluid. 

4.  The  pour  must  be  made  at  one  time  and  continued  until  the  asphalt 
reappears  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  pour  hole. 

6.  The  pipes  must  be  well  aligned  and  the  jute  calked  in  so  as  to  prevent 
the  asphalt  from  entering  the  inside  of  the  pipe. 

6.  The  melting  tank  must  be  kept  closed  so  as  to  prevent  the  escape  of 
the  light  oils. 


340  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

The  average  specific  gravity  of  the  asphalt  used  by  Mr.  Heimeking 
was  1.32;  it  began  to  soften  at  131°  F.,  at  356°  it  became  liquid,  and  at 
378°  it  was  ready  to  pour. 

About  2000  ft.  of  12-in.  sewer  were  laid  in  1908  at  Monmouth,  111., 
under  the  direction  of  John  S.  Bates,  who  used  an  asphalt  joint  on 
account  of  the  very  poor  character  of  the  cement  joints  made  in  the 
city  just  prior  to  that  time.  For  the  joint  he  used  a  preparation  made 
by  the  American  Asphaltum  &  Rubber  Co.,  known  as  Pioneer  Water- 
proofing Asphalt.  In  a  description  of  the  work  in  Eng.  Record,  Jan.  9, 
1909,  he  stated  that  he  used  only  enough  oakum  to  prevent  the  melted 
asphalt  from  running  through  to  the  inside  of  the  pipe.  A  jointer  made 
of  1-in.  square  duck  packing,  smeared  with  mud  to  prevent  the  filler 
from  sticking,  was  tamped  firmly  in  place,  care  being  taken  that  no 
water  was  left  in  the  joint  space  to  form  steam.  This  was  accomplished 
by  enlarging  the  bell  hole  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench  and  dipping  this 
hole  free  of  water  just  before  placing  the  next  pipe.  The  asphalt  was 
heated  in  a  kettle  near  the  works  and  enough  for  a  joint  was  easily 
handled  and  poured  by  one  man.  The  time  required  for  the  complete 
joint  was  a  Uttle  more  than  that  necessary  to  make  a  cement  joint. 
The  filler  required  about  5  minutes  to  cool  sufficiently  to  hold  its  shape 
and  permit  the  gasket  to  be  removed.  The  cooling  was  aided  by  pouring 
water  from  the  bell  hole  over  the  joint.  The  work  was  much  facilitated 
by  making  every  alternate  joint  on  the  top  of  the  bank,  and  thus  re- 
ducing the  amount  of  work  to  be  done  in  the  trench.  In  very  shallow 
trenches,  three  lengths  of  pipe  were  joined  on  the  bank,  but  this  made 
too  long  a  section  to  be  handled  easily  as  a  rule.  The  joints  made  on 
the  bank  were  made  by  standing  a  pipe  vertically  on  the  spigot  end  and 
placing  a  second  pipe  in  position  above  it,  so  as  to  enable  the  two  to  be 
accurately  centered  before  the  oakum  was  inserted  and  the  joint 
poured,  this  last  work  requiring  no  gasket. 

Information  relating  to  the  cost  of  asphalt  joints  at  North  Attle- 
borough,  Mass.,  was  given  in  Eng.  Record,  Nov.  18,  1911,  by  Frank  A. 
Barbour,  Consulting  Engineer  of  the  new  sewerage  system  of  that  place. 
The  sewers  were  in  three  sizes:  15  in.  diameter,  deep  and  wide  socket 
pipe  in  3-ft.  lengths,  12-in.  standard  pipe  in  3-ft.  lengths,  and  10-in. 
standard  pipe  in  3-ft.  lengths.  Two  brands  of  asphaltic  compound 
were  used,  the  Pioneer  Filler  asphalt,  furnished  by  the  American 
Asphaltum  &  Rubber  Co.,  at  $28.50  f  .o.b.  Chicago  per  gross  ton,  and 
Kiola  Asphalt  Sewer  Pipe  Composition,  furnished  by  Waldo  Brothers 
Co.,  at  $28  f.o.b.  Boston  per  gross  ton.  The  former  averaged  236  gal. 
per  ton,  making  the  weight  per  gallon  8.05  lb.  and  the  price  12.1  cents 
per  gallon.  The  latter  was  considerably  heavier,  running  145  gal.  to 
the  ton,  so  that  the  weight  per  gallon  was  15  lb.  and  the  price  19.3 
cents  per  gallon.    The  joints  were  made  by  using  three  strands  of  jute 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE  841 

gasket,  which  filled  the  joint  to  a  depth  of  about  3/4  in.,  the  remaining 
depth  to  the  face  of  the  bell  being  poured  with  hot  asphalt,  using  a 
regular  cast-iron  pipe  clip  and  overfilling  with  cement  mortar  on  the 
outside. 

For  the  16-in.  pipe  sewer,  from  3.37  to  5.7  lb.  of  asphalt  were  used 
per  joint,  and  the  cost  was  from  1.6  to  2.8  cents  per  foot  of  pipe.  The 
cost  of  laying,  including  cement,  was  from  11.8  to  10.5  cents  per  foot. 

On  the  12-in.  sewers  1.31  lb.  of  asphalt  per  joint  were  used,  and  the 
cost  of  laying,  without  cement,  was  8.9  cents  per  foot.  In  la3dng  the 
10-in.  pipe  from  1  to  1.95  lb.  of  asphalt  were  used  per  joint  and  the 
cost  of  laying,  without  cement,  was  from  8.1  to  11.3  cents  per  foot. 

E.  J.  Fort,  Chief  Eng.  of  Sewers,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  has  recently 
drawn  up  a  sf>ecification  for  bituminous  joints  which  reads  as  follows: 

''All  joints  of  the  sanitary  pipe  sewers  below  the  normal  water  table 
shall  be  made  with  a  compound  approved  by  the  chief  engineer.  The 
compound  shall  preferably  have  a  bituminous  base,  shall  adhere  firmly  to 
the  glazed  surface  of  the  pipe,  shall  melt  and  run  freely  at  a  temperature  as 
low  as  250^  F.,  and  when  set  shall  be  sufficiently  elastic  to  permit  of  a  slight 
movement  of  the  pipe  without  injury  to  the  joint  or  breaking  the  adhesion 
of  the  compound  to  the  pipe.  The  compound  shall  not  deteriorate  when 
submerged  in  fresh  or  salt  water  or  normal  domestic  sewage.  It  shall  also 
show  no  deterioration  of  any  kind  when  immersed  for  a  period  of  5  days 
in  a  1  per  cent,  hydrochloric  acid  solution,  nor  when  immersed  for  5  days 
in  a  5  per  cent,  solution  of  caustic  potash.  All  sanitary  pipe  sewers 
shall  be  laid  in  a  concrete  cradle,  as  shown  on  the  plans.  The  joints  shall 
be  carefully  centered  and  calked  in  the  usual  manner.  After  the  joint  is 
properly  calked,  a  suitable  runner  shall  be  placed  and  the  compound, 
heated  to  a  temperature  of  approximately  400*'  F.,  shall  be  poured  from  one 
side  so  that  it  shall  run  around  the  pipe  and  fill  the  annular  space  to  a  point 
1/2  in.  inside  the  outer  rim  of  the  bell  of  the  pipe.  After  the  joints  are  run 
and  the  concrete  cradle  placed,  that  part  of  the  joint  not  imbedded  in  the 
concrete  shall  be  further  protected  with  a  cement-mortar  casing  extending 
at  least  3  in.  from  the  face  and  outside  of  the  bell.  The  cement-mortar 
shall  be  made  of  1  part  cement  to  1  part  of  sand.'' 

Tar-cement  joints  were  used  on  a  section  of  the  East  Jersey  Joint 
Outlet  Sewer,  constructed  under  the  direction  of  Alexander  Potter  for 
11  different  municipalities.  This  section  was  about  17,000  ft.  long  and 
consisted  mainly  of  22  and  24-in.  vitrified  pipe.  About  half  of  its  length 
was  laid  in  very  wet  trenches,  and  the  liability  of  cement  joints  to 
permit  infiltration  of  ground  water  in  such  a  trench  was  the  cause  of 
the  adoption  of  tar-cement  joints.  These  were  made  by  using  strands 
of  jute  soaked  in  North  Carolina  tar  as  a  gasket.  This  gasket  was  well 
calked  into  the  annular  space,  the  inside  of  the  socket  and  the  outside 
of  the  spigot  of  the  pipe  fitted  together  having  been  previously  swabbed 
with  tar. 


342  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Into  a  bucket  full  of  Portland  cement,  North  Carolina  tar  was  poured 
and  kneaded  by  hand  with  the  cement  until  a  material  having  the 
consistency  of  rather  stiff  dough  was  secured.  This  substance  was 
then  rolled  on  a  board  to  a  sufficient  length  and  diameter,  and  placed 
in  the  annular  space  between  the  pipe  to  be  jointed,  where  it  was 
thoroughly  rammed  by  a  suitable  tool  and  hanmier  imtil  the  space 
was  filled  to  within  1/2  in.  of  the  end  of  the  socket.  The  usual  beveled 
cement-mortar  finish  was  then  given  the  joint.  In  filling  the  annular 
space  with  this  mixture  Mr.  Potter  found  that  the  weight  of  the  material 
was  often  enough  to  cause  the  tar-cement  to  flow  before  it  had  set, 
causing  it  to  drop  away  from  tl^e  lower  side  of  the  upper  portion  of  the 
bell.  Moreover,  unless  the  spigot  of  the  pipe  at  the  joint  was  supported 
on  some  solid  bearing,  such  as  a  small  chip  or  piece  of  vitrified  clay,  the 
weight  of  the  pipe  compressed  the  tar-cement  in  the  bottom  of  the 
joint  before  it  hardened,  causing  the  filling  material  in  the  upper  portion 
of  the  annular  space  to  be  drawn  away  from  contact  with  the  inside  of 
the  top  of  the  bell,  thus  giving  an  opportunity  for  leakage  in  water- 
bearing ground.  The  tar-cement  mixture  when  properly  made  becomes 
tough  and  hard  in  several  hours,  according  to  Mr.  Potter,  the  time 
depending  on  the  temperature  and  the  proportion  of  cement  incorporated 
into  the  mixture. 

Tar-cement  joints  were  later  used  extensively  along  the  New  Jersey 
coast  in  towns  where  water  and  quicksand  are  encountered.  Much  of 
this  work  has  been  done  under  the  direction  of  Alexander  Potter,  who 
states  that  while  there  will  be  some  leakage  between  the  successive 
batches  of  the  mixture  inserted  in  the  annular  space  of  a  pipe  joint,  the 
fact  that  this  space  is  filled  with  a  material  which  will  stay  there  makes 
it,  under  such  circimistances,  preferable  to  cement.  The  material  does 
not  shrink  and  in  small  pipe  the  creeping  which  makes  it  objectionable 
in  the  larger  sizes  does  not  prove  a  drawback  to  its  use.  When  reason- 
able restrictions  as  to  water-tightness  of  sewers  are  demanded,  Mr. 
Potter  believes  that  this  material  can  be  used  with  economy.  It  is  a 
slow  process  to  employ,  and  is  adapted  to  those  difficult  situations  where 
the  laying  of  a  few  pipe  constitutes  a  fair  day's  work. 

G-K  Compound. — This  product  is  described  by  the  producers,  the 
Union  Clay  Products  Co.,  as  "a  homogeneous  plastic  mass  composed 
largely  of  vulcanized  linseed  oil  and  a  binder  of  anhydrous  clay."  It 
is  furnished^  in  barrels  of  about  400  lb.;  the  stays  are  knocked  away 
leaving  the  compound  in  a  hard  firm  mass  which  is  broken  up  with  a 
hammer  or  hatchet  when  it  is  to  be  melted.  In  a  sewer  system  con- 
structed under  the  authors'  direction,  where  the  material  was  employed, 

1  A.  Elliott  Kimberly  informs  the  authors  that  on  three  sewerage  systems  with  which 
he  was  connected,  the  bids  for  Q-K  joints  averaged  21.  29  and  34  per  cent,  more  than 
those  for  cement  joints. 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE  343 

it  was  heated  by  the  contractor  in  a  galvanized  iron  pail  about  14  in. 
deep  and  15  in.  in  diameter.  This  pail  was  used  over  a  coke  fire  in  an 
ordinary  lead  furnace,  after  a  brief  experience  with  a  wood  fir^  showing 
that  the  latter  was  unsatisfactory,  because  the  flames  would  rise  above 
the  kettle  and  cause  the  compoimd  to  take  fire,  and  at  other  times  the 
temperature  became  altogether  too  low.  The  makers  of  the  compound 
advise  heating  it  on  a  gasoline  furnace  as  being  more  easily  regulated 
and  more  quick  in  melting  the  mass.  While  the  compound  is  first 
heated,  it  bubbles  and  foams  considerably,  but  after  it  has  been  melted 
for  15  to  30  min.  the  foaming  subsides  very  largely  and  the  compound  is 
being  ''cooked,"  ready  for  pouring.  The  cooking  must  be  repeated 
every  time  the  compound  is  reheated.  When  in  suitable  condition  for 
pouring  it  is  as  fluid  as  water,  and  the  surface  is  apparently  covered  with 
a  thin  film  of  oil.  It  must  be  kept  stirred  constantly,  for  otherwise 
air  bubbles  will  be  found  in  the  joint.  If  it  is  overheated  it  carbonizes 
and  becomes  entirely  unfit  for  use.  Experience  shows  that  just  before 
pouring  the  material  should  be  stirred  vigorously  for  a  few  minutes. 

The  inside  of  the  bell  and  outside  of  the  spigot  end  of  the  pipe  at  a 
joint  should  be  wiped  with  a  piece  of  cloth  or  jute  before  pouring  the 
compound.  Then  the  joint  is  calked  with  jute  in  order  to  prevent  the 
melted  compound  from  running  into  the  pipe.  This  is  quite  important 
because  as  much  as  a  handful  of  the  compound  has  sometimes  been 
taken  from  a  joint,  after  the  pouring,  which  indicates  the  amount  of 
leakage  that  may  occur  through  the  jute  into  the  interior  of  the  pipe. 
An  asbestos  gasket,  resembling  a  piece  of  canvas-covered  lawn  hose, 
except  that  it  is  not  hollow,  is  used  in  pouring  the  joint.  It  b  clamped 
at  the  top,  leaving  an  of>ening  through  which  the  compound  is  poured 
into  the  joint  space.  This  opening  should  be  slightly  off  center,  ac- 
cording to  the  Union  Clay  Products  Co.,  so  that  the  material  as  it 
flows  in  will  drive  out  any  water  before  it.*  The  pouring  should  be  done 
immediately  after  the  joint  is  calked  so  that  the  water  will  have  no 
time  to  swell  the  jute.  On  the  sewerage  work  done  under  the  direction 
of  the  authors,  already  mentioned,  a  number  of  joints  were  poured  with 
the  water  half-way  to  the  crown  of  the  pipe,  without  resulting  in  any 

1  A.  Elliott  Kimberly  informed  the  authors  that  he  had  much  trouble  in  following 
these  directions  in  jointing  standard  6-in.  pipe  in  2-ft.  lengths.  His  assistant  engineer, 
F.  D.  Stewart,  reported  that  with  the  small  annular  space  between  the  bell  and  spigot 
of  such  pipe,  the  compound  hardened  before  it  could  flow  entirely  around  the  pipe, 
even  though  it  was  in  a  state  of  apparently  maximum  fluidity  only  16  seconds  before  pour- 
ing. The  temperature  of  the  air  was  about  70^  F.  Mr.  Stewart  stated  that  he  tried 
forming  the  pouring  hole  directly  over  the  center  of  the  pipe,  so  that  the  melted  com- 
pound flowed  down  both  sides  at  the  same  time.  These  joints  were  not  entirely  satis- 
factory, owing  to  their  having  -unfilled  spaces  in  the  inverts  of  the  pipes  ranging  in 
width  from  H  to  H  in.  In  these  cases  the  joints  were  filled  completely  by  pouring 
melted  compound  through  a  cardboard  mold  banked  up  with  earth  on  the  bottom  and 
sides.  While  this  method  completely  filled  the  jointing  space,  it  was  exceedingly  waste- 
ful of  material. 


344  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

imperfection  in  the  joint  which  could  be  discovered  on  careful  inspection. 
They  do  not,  however,  advise  this  practice  under  ordinary  conditions. 
Apparent^ly  there  is  little  difference  in  the  behavior  of  the  compound  in 
hot  and  cold  weather.  The  manufacturers  state  that  about  0.6  lb.  of 
the  material  is  required  for  the  joint  in  a  6-in.  pipe  and  the  amount 
increases  up  to  0.9  lb.  per  joint  for  10-in.  pipe.  Experience  on  this  work 
indicates  that  these  figures  are  very  low,  although  it  is  possible,  of  course, 
that  with  greater  experience  the  contractor  would  have  employed  less 
material  to  obtain  equally  satisfactory  joints. 

The  work  was  done  with  one  man  to  attend  to  the  heating  and  to 
pour  half  of  the  joints,  those  made  on  the  bank,  and  to  carry  the  melted 
compound  to  the  pipe  layer  in  the  trench;  two  men  to  carry  the  jointed 
pipe  with  the  help  of  a  joist  and  lower  it  into  the  trench,  and  to  assist 
from  time  to  time  on  other  work  as  they  had  the  opportunity  to  do  so; 
two  pipe-layers  to  pour  joints  and  lay  pipe  in  the  trench.  In  making 
joints  on  the  bank,  the  pipe  is  placed  with  the  bell  end  up  and  care- 
fully plumbed,  the  spigot  end  of  a  second  section  is  inserted  in  this 
bell,  and  the  joint  calked  with  jute  and  filled  with  the  compound.  . 
In  carrying  on  work  on  the  bank,  experience  indicates  that  it  is  well  to 
insist  upon  all  pipe  being  carefully  plumbed.  Observation  of  the 
joints  poured  in  this  way  indicates  that  there  is  some  shrinkage  of 
the  compound  as  it  cools,  but  it  shoidd  be  added  that  other  engineers 
have  reported  that  no  shrinkage  could  be  discovered. 

A  test  of  a  6-in.  sewer  of  standard  2-ft.  pipe  with  (x-K  joints  was 
carried  out  by  A.  Elliott  Kimberly,  who  states  that  although  the 
hydrostatic  pressure  employed  was  only  5  lb.  per  square  inch  consid- 
erable leakage  was  apparent.  On  this  line  half  of  the  joints  were  made 
on  the  bank  and  half  in  the  ditch;  the  leakage  occurred  in  both  classes. 
Mr.  Kimberly's  experience  and  the  information  he  has  gathered  from 
contractors  have  led  him  to  draw  up  the  following  general  rules  for  using 
this  material  for  joints: 

**  1.  Break  up  the  material  into  comparatively  small  pieces  before  heating. 

**2,  Use  a  covered  kettle  to  minimize  volatilization  of  the  oil. 

"3.  Use  wood  as  fuel  and  heat  rapidly.  Preferably  there  should  be  de- 
signed a  special  furnace  arranged  to  prevent  the  bare  flames  from  coming 
in  contact  with  the  bottom  of  the  melting  pot. 

'^4.  Do  not  attempt  to  draw  off  material  from  the  kettle  through  the  pipe 
unless  the  valve  is  jacketed,  that  is,  is  inside  the  kettle,  especially  during 
cold  weather.     Otherwise  solidification  of  the  compound  will  ensue. 

"5.  Do  not  prepare  more  melted  compound  than  can  be  used  for  pouring 
one  set  of  joints,  vertical  and  ditch  joints  combined,  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
upon  prolonged  heating  the  material  carbonizes  in  possibly  a  half  hour  after 
ebullition  has  ceased.  Carbonization  may  be  avoided,  however,  if  fresh 
material  is  added  as  soon  as  all  joints  are  poured  that  are  ready  for  pouring. 


JOINTING  SEWER  PIPE  34  5 

''6.  Do  not  attempt  to  use  again  material  that  remains  in  the  kettle 
after  a  day's  work  is  over. 

"7.  Invariably  use  deep  and  wide  socket  pipe,  preferably  in  3-ft.  lengths/' 

Mr.  Kimberly  is  strongly  of  the  opinion  that  more  calking  material 
is  required  for  poured  joints  of  this  type  than  for  cement  joints.  There  is 
a  general  opinion  among  those  who  have  used  the  compound  that  more 
of  it  is  required  for  joints  than  is  indicated  by  the  figures  given  by 
the  makers,  and  the  explanation  of  this  discrepancy  which  Mr.Kim- 
berley  advances  is  that  an  unnecessarily  large  amount  of  jointing 
material  and  a  small  amount  of  jute  are  ordinarily  employed  now, 
although  in  view  of  his  experience  with  leaky  joints  made  with  this 
compound  it  would  hardly  seem  advisable  to  make  any  reduction  in 
the  quantity  of  the  material  upon  which  the  impermeability  of  the 
joints  def>ends  until  the  subject  has  received  further  investigation. 

Another  jointing  compound  of  the  same  general  type  is  Marbleoid 
composed  of  linseed  oil,  sulphur  and  marble  dust.  Still  other  plastic 
jointing  compounds  are  Jointite  and  Filtite,  the  latter  being  made  in 
several  grades  for  poured  joints  and  also  in  a  grade  which  is  so  stiff  that 
it  must  be  molded  and  pressed  into  the  joints,  a  property  claimed  to  be 
of  value  in  making  joints  under  water. 

Tests  of  Pipe  after  Laying. — It  is  not  customary  in  the  United  States 
to  specify  any  particular  tests  for  water-tightness  after  the  sewer  is  laid, 
reliance  being  placed  entirely  on  inspection  during  the  progress  of  the 
work.  In  England  and  Germany,  however,  it  is  quite  customary  to 
specify  hydrostatic  or  pneumatic  tests  of  sections  of  the  work  before 
backfilling  is  allowed.  The  Manchester  specifications  for  sewer  con- 
struction say: 

"The  whole  of  the  sewers  and  drains  must  be  made  thoroughly  water- 
tight and  stand  the  following  hydraulic  test,  appliances  for  which  shall  be 
supplied  by  the  contractor,  both  before  and  after  the  earth  is  filled  in  to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  manager.  The  lower  end  of  the  drain  will  be  closed 
by  a  properly  fitted  drain  plug  and  the  drain  filled  with  water  to  a  head  of 
4  ft.  Any  leaking  or  defective  joints  must  be  made  good  by  and  at  the 
expense  of  the  contractor." 

Details  of  carrying  out  such  tests  are  as  follows:  A  plug  is  inserted 
in  the  lower  end  of  the  section  imder  examination  and  at  the  upper  end  a 
right-angle  bend  facing  upward,  and  two  lengths  of  pipe  are  inserted. 
The  sewer  is  then  filled  with  water  up  to  the  top  of  the  temporary 
upright  pipes  at  the  upper  end.  The  rate  of  lowering  the  water  in  the 
upright  pipe  is  noted,  and  from  this  it  is  possible  to  compute  the  leakage 
per  foot  of  sewer  for  any  stated  period  of  time. 

The  amount  of  leakage  allowed  by  different  engineers  varies  greatly. 
Watson  ("Sewerage  Systems,"  p.  233)  says  that  "in  regard  to  9-in. 
sewers,  a  test  is  regarded  as  satisfactory  if  the  pipes  do  not  leak  at  a  rate 


346  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

exceeding  1100  (imp.)  gallons  per  mile  per  24  hours."  It  may  be  noted, 
however,  that  to  lay  sewers  in  such  a  way  that  the  leakage  would  not 
exceed  this  amount  requires  exceedingly  careful  as  well  as  expensive 
work.  At  Elberfeld,  Germany  {Eng.  Record^  Dec.  25,  1909),  before 
putting  the  sewers  into  service,  the  ends  are  closed  with  iron  plates 
fitted  with  rubber  packing  rings.  Air  pressure  is  then  appUed  with  a 
bicycle  pump;  if  the  pressure  remains  constant  at  3.7  lb.  for  19  minutes, 
the  pipe  is  passed. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS 

Usually  vitrified  pipe  is  the  most  practicable  material  for  the  con- 
struction of  sewers  less  than  24  in.  in  diameter,  and  sometimes  of  much 
larger  sewers.  Among  materials  which  may  be  used  for  the  construction 
of  large  sewers  are  wood,  stone,  brick,  concrete,  reinforced  concrete,  iron 
and  steel,  and  blocks  of  vitrified  clay  or  concrete.  Local  conditions  have 
an  important  bearing  on  the  selection  of  materials  for  the  construction 
of  large  sewers.  In  some  places  brick  may  be  economically  used, 
because  they  can  be  purchased  at  low  prices  and  an  ample  supply  of 
mason  labor  is  available  at  reasonable  prices,  whereas  their  use  in  other 
places  may  be  prohibitively  expensive.  Where  stone  may  be  had  at 
very  low  prices,  it  may  be  wise  to  use  it,  although  care  should  be  taken 
to  produce  a  smooth  inner  surface.  In  Paris  many  sewers  have  been 
built  of  rough  quarry  stone,  laid  in  mortar  and  rendered  inside  with 
cement  mortar,  thus  producing  a  smooth  surface.  Many  of  the  oldest 
sewers  in  this  country  were  constructed  of  wood  and  were  either  square 
or  round.  Some  of  these,  while  by  no  means  satisfactory,  have  served 
their  purpose  for  many  years.  As  a  temporary  expedient,  the  use  of 
wood  may  even  now  be  justified  under  rare  conditions.  Cast-iron  and 
steel  pipe  of  large  sizes  have  been  and  are  now  used  under  certain  condi- 
tions, as  for  example,  for  the  construction  of  inverted  siphons  and  for 
sewer  outlets. 

While  wood,  iron  and  steel  may  be  used  for  the  construction  of  large 
sewers,  in  special  cases,  some  kind  of  masonry  must  constitute  the  main 
reUance  of  the  sewer  builder.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  determine 
which  kind  is  most  economical,  and  the  decision  must  be  based  upon 
serviceability  and  durability,  as  well  as  upon  cost.  Where  the  servicea- 
bility and  durability  afforded  by  two  or  more  materials  are  substan- 
tially equal,  and  the  work  is  to  be  done  by  contract,  it  may  be  advisable 
to  take  bids  upon  the  use  of  the  several  materials,  finally  selecting  that 
which  proves  the  least  expensive.  Where  materials  are  thus  thrown 
into  competition,  it  is  important  to  place  all  on  an  equal  footing,  that  the 
comparison  of  prices  may  be  fair.  For  example,  if  it  is  considered  that 
brick  is  rougher  than  concrete,  and  therefore  has  less  carrying  capacity, 
but  is  otherwise  equally  desirable,  allowance  for  this  difference  should  be 
made  in  the  sizes.  In  such  cases  the  cost  of  extra  excavation,  as  well  as 
of  extra  masonry,  must  be  taken  into  consideration. 

347 


348  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

* 

Where  tests  are  to  be  applied,  they  should  be  so  specified  that  they 
will  require  of  one  material  no  qualities  which  are  not  possessed  by  the 
others,  which  perhaps  may  not  be  subject  to  the  test.  ReUance  should 
not  be  placed  upon  a  test  to  exclude  some  material,  wliich,  for  reasons 
not  covered  by  the  test,  is  not  considered  suitable  for  the  work  in  hand. 
It  is  also  important  to  specify  with  exactness  the  character  of  materials 
to  be  used  and  the  quality  of  workmanship  required  in  the  construction 
of  sewers  of  different  materials,  that  the  bidders  may  be  able  to  estimate 
with  accuracy  the  cost  of  building  the  structure,  and  that  these  costs 
may  be  compared  with  fairness  to  those  bidding  upon  different  materials. 

Quality  of  Workmanship. — When  it  is  considered  that  sewers  are 
built  for  at  least  a  generation,  and  perhaps  for  hundreds  of  years,  il  is 
evident  that  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  character  of  workman- 
ship employed.  It  is  idle  to  provide  specifications  for  elaborate  tests  of 
brick,  cement  and  reinforcing  steel,  and  to  disregard  the  quality  of 
workmanship  which  may  have  even  a  greater  bearing  upon  the  life 
and  usefulness  of  the  structure  than  the  quality  of  the  material  entering 
into  its  construction. 

Where  it  is  necessarj'  to  exclude  ground  water  from  the  sewers,  so  far 
as  possible,  they  are  logically  designed  to  provide  capacity  for  so  much 
ground  water  as  is  unavoidably  admitted  to  them.  How  absurd  it  is, 
then,  to  allow  them  to  be  constructed  carelessly,  with  poorly  filled  joints 
or  porous  concrete  which  will  permit  leakage  far  in  excess  of  that 
provided  for  in  the  original  calculations.  As  the  rougliness  of  the 
inner  surface  has  a  bearing  upon  the  carrying  capacity  and  upon  the 
formation  of  deposits,  it  is  important  to  provide  smooth  inner  surfaces. 

As  a  rule  it  is  practically  as  easy  and  it  involves  substantially  no  more 
expense  to  lay  brickwork  and  place  concrete  in.  a  workmanlike  manner 
than  in  a  careless  and  slovenly  manner.  It  does,  to  be  sure,  require 
some  knowledge  of  the  art  and  some  skill  on  the  part  of  the  masons  and 
the  concrete  foremen,  but  these  qualifications  may  be  reasonably 
expected  of  those  undertaking  the  work. 

For  the  construction  of  concrete  sewers  the  forms  must  be  well  made, 
water-tight,  smooth  and  of  accurate  dimensions.  Such  forms  may  cost  a 
few  cents  more  per  foot  of  sewer  to  be  built  than  rough,  ill-shaped  and 
leaky  forms,  but  the  difference  is  practically  negligible.  It  is  equally 
important  upon  concrete  work  that  the  foreman  knows  the  proper 
consistency  for  the  concrete  and  that  he  sees  that  it  Ls  so  handled  that  its 
components  are  not  segregated  and  that  it  is  sufficiently  spaded.  By 
giving  attention  to  these  points  and  exercising  the  proper  care  of  his 
forms,  it  will  be  found  as  easy  and  no  more  expensive  to  do  high-grade 
than  poor  work. 

Pipe  and  Masonry  Sewers,  When  Used. — ^Vitrified  pipe  is  commonly 
used  for  sewers  under  24  in.  in  diameter  and  may  be  had  as  large  as  36 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       349 

or  42  in.  in  diameter.  Concrete  pipe  is  more  or  less  commonly  used  for 
sewers  36  to  4S  in.  in  diameter  and  standard  forms  for  pipe  as  large  as 
84  in.  are  on  the  market.  For  the  construction  of  sewers  too  large  to  be 
economically  and  safely  built  of  pipe,  it  is  necessary  to  employ  masonry. 
By  far  the  largest  proportion  of  such  sewers  have  been  built  of  brick 
or  concrete,  either  plain  or  reinforced.  The  great  advantage  of  mono- 
lithic concrete  over  most  other  materials  used  for  masonry  sewers  Ues 
in  the  fact  that  the  thickness  of  the  barrel  may  be  varied  according  to 
requirements  for  strength.  Such  variations  may  be  afforded  to  a  Umited 
extent  by  brickwork  but  not  economically  and  conveniently  as  by  con- 
crete. Concrete  has  the  further  advantage  that  it  can  be  readily  re- 
■nforced  with  steel  as  required  to  meet  the  conditions  encountered. 

Where  pipe  is  equally  satisfactory  in  other  respects,  the  decision  as  to 
where  to  change  from  pipe  to  masonry  depends  upon  the  relative  cost. 
MonoUthic  unreinforced  concrete  has  been  used  in  successful  competi- 
tion with  vitrified  pipe  of  24-in.  diameter.  It  is  not  safe,  however,  to 
assume  that  either  brick  or  concrete  will  be  less  expensive  than  pipe,  but 
on  the  contrary,  after  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  local  conditions, 
careful  comparative  estimates  should  be  made,  or  competitive  bids 
should  be  obtained,  to  enable  the  engineer  to  make  an  intelUgent  decision 
between  the  two  classes  of  material. 

Cement  pipe  was  used  for  many  years  in  New  England  but  it  has  been 
supplanted  by  vitrified  clay  pipe,  which  experience  proved  to  be  more 
durable  and  uniform  in  quality,  although  somewhat  more  expensive. 
It  has  been  used  extensively  in  the  Borough  of  Brooklyn  in  recent  years 
under  rigid  specifications  and  inspoption;  the  method  of  manufacturing 
it  in  that  borough  is  d^cribed  in  Volume  I,  page  352.  West  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi a  large  amount  of  cement  pipe  is  used  in  sewerage  work.  Much 
complaint  about  its  quality  has  arisen,  but  specifications  for  it  are  now 
more  complete  and  tests  to  determine  the  character  of  the  product  are 
more  frequently  made,  so  that  an  improvement  in  quality  has  doubtr 
less  occurred.  As  is  evident  from  a  consideration  of  the  method  of  its 
manufacture,  described  in  Volume  I,  page  350,  such  pipe  must  be  care- 
fully and  intelligently  made  in  order  to  be  dense,  hard  and  uniform,  and 
it  lacks  the  vitrified  interior  which  is  a  leading  advantageous  feature  of 
clay  pipe.  At  present  (1914)  the  general  opinion  is  that  vitrified  pipe 
is  better  than  cement  pipe,  but  price  considerations  may  render  the 
latter  advisable. 

BRICK  SEWERS 

Quality  of  Sewer  Brick. — Engineers  have  so  long  specified  a  certain 
grade  of  brick  for  use  in  sewer  construction  that  the  term  "Sewer  Brick" 
has  come  to  be  recognized  by  the  trade  as  meaning  hard-burned 
brick  of  good  quality.    Formerly  when  the  kilns  were  made  by  hand  and 


360  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

the  fire  was  built  directly  in  an  opening  in  the  pile  of  brick,  there  were 
marked  differences  in  the  quality  of  briok  from  different  parts  of  the 
kiln,  those  in  the  outer  part  being  under-burned  and  consequently  soft, 
of  poor  quality  and  hght  colored.  Those  directly  over  the  fire,  known 
as  "arch  brick,"  were  over-burned,  often  ill  shaped,  extremely  hard 
and  brittle,  while  those  between  these  two  extremes  were  of  the  best 
quality.  With  the  more  modem  permanent  kilns  in  use,  the  differences 
are  not  so  great.  The  best  of  the  brick  should  be  selected,  or  specified, 
for  the  inner  ring,  and  upon  small  work  it  is  usually  best  to  accept  but 
one  quality.  They  should  be  hard,  regular  in  form  and  uniform  in  size. 
Upon  large  work  it  may  be  permissible  to  use  some  of  the  over-burned 
and  slightly  irregular  brick  for  backing,  if  such  a  course  will  result  in 
a  material  saving  in  cost. 

The  sizes  of  brick  vary  considerably  in  different  places,  and  even  those 
made  by  the  same  manufacturer  differ  somewhat  according  to  the  extent 
of  burning,  the  hard-burned  bricks  being  somewhat  smaller  than 
others.  In  1899  the  National  Brickmakers  Association  established 
2-1/4  X  4  X  8-1/4  in.  as  the  standard  size  for  common  brick,  although 
this  size  has  not  been  adopted  universally. 

The  importance  of  the  size  of  the  brick  is  not  always  fully  realized. 
Usually  there  are  brick  of  several  sizes,  from  which  those  to  be  used  may 
be  selected.  The  harder  brick  being  smaller,  it  is  necessary  to  balance 
the  advantages  of  the  hard-burned  smaller  brick  with  those  of  the 
somewhat  softer  but  larger  brick.  The  decision  should  not  be  based 
wholly  upon  size,  as  the  durability  of  the  sewer  is  a  matter  of  great 
importance.  ^ 

A  brick  which  is  8  in.  long  will  gain  in  laying  the  equivalent  of  nearly 
7  per  cent,  over  the  brick  which  is  7-1/2  m.  in  length.  Similarly,  the 
brick  which  is  2-1/4  in.  thick  will  gain  in  laying  about  12  per  cent,  over 
those  which  are  2  in.  thick.  Therefore,  a  saving  of  approximately  20  per 
per  cent,  in  the  cost  of  the  brick  may  be  effected  by  the  use  of  those  2-1/4 
in.  thick,  by  8  in.  long,  instead  of  those  2  in.  thick  by  7-1/2  in.  long.  In 
addition  to  this,  there  will  be  a  saving  due  to  less  mortar  and  labor 
required  for  laying  the  smaller  number  of  brick,  although  the  labor 
probably  cannot  be  reduced  in  proportion  to  the  reduction  in  the 
number  of  brick  required. 

Another  consideration,  although  one  which  is  more  difficult  to  reduce 
to  comparative  figures,  is  the  effect  of  the  width  of  the  brick.  Many 
sewer  brick  are  not  more  than  3-1/2  in.  in  width,  although  some  will 
run  4  in.  or  more  in  width.  The  thickness  of  wall  of  a  two-ring  sewer 
built  of  3-1/2-in.  brick  will  be  7-1/2  in.,  excluding  plaster,  whereas  the 
corresponding  thickness  of  barrel  built  of  4-in.  brick  would  be  8-1/2 
in.,  an  increase  of  over  14  per  cent.    If  the  two  brick  are  of  identi- 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       361 

oal  quality^  a  more  massive  structure  will  be  secured  with  the  use  of 
the  larger  brick,  with  corresponding  advantages. 

While  brick  masonry  is  often  computed  in  terms  of  cubic  yards,  it  is 
customary  in  'designing  and  considering  different  types  of  sewers  to 
consider  them  as  being  made  up  of  a  certain  number  of  rings  of  brick- 
work, rather  than  of  the  exact  thickness  of  masonry  to  be  obtained.  It  is 
therefore  wise,  when  specifying  that  payments  be  made  per  cubic  yard, 
to  specify  that  the  masonry  shall  be  assumed  to  be  of  the  required 
thickness  and  that  computations  will  be  based  upon  this  assumption, 
even  though  the  brick  used  may  provide  a  thickness  of  sewer  barrel 
sUghtly  more  or  less  than  that  stipulated. 

The  usual  tests  for  determining  the  quality  of  brick  are  to  determine 
the  uniformity  of  size,  texture,  and  absorption. 

It  is  usually  specified  that  brick  from  one  place  of  manufacture 
shall  not  vary  more  than  about  1/16  in.  in  thickness,  nor  more  than  1/8 
in.  in  width  and  length,  and  that  the  edges  shall  be  uniformly  straight 
and  parallel.  The  texture  should  be  fine  and  compact,  and  the  brick 
should  contain  no  fissures,  air  bubbles  or  pebbles,*  and  when  struck 
should  give  a  clear  ringing  sound.  The  water  absorbed  by  brick 
within  a  stated  period,  usually  24  hours,  is  an  indication  of  the  density 
and  the  extent  of  burning.  Softrbumed  brick  from  the  outside  of  the 
kiln  may  absorb  30  to  35  per  cent,  by  volume  of  water  in  24  hours, 
while  the  overbumed  partially  vitrified  arch  brick  may  absorb  only 
2  or  3  per  cent.  The  Umiting  amount  of  absorption  usually  speci- 
fied is  between  10  and  20  per  cent,  by  volume  in  24  hours,  equiva- 
lent to  about  one-half  these  quantities  if  calculated  on  the  weight  of  the 
brick.  The  specifications  of  the  New  York  Board  of  Water  Supply 
state  that  the  brick  may  be  rejected  if  the  absorption  is  over  16  per 
cent.  Those  of  the  City  of  Cincinnati  specify  not  over  12  nor  less 
than  2  per  cent,  by  weight  in  24  hours,  for  brick  broken  across  the 
middle.  Many  specifications  indicate  no  stated  tests,  but  have  a 
general  requirement  that  the  brick  shall  be  of  fine,  compact  texture  and 
uniform  size.  The  Metropolitan  Sewerage  Commission  of  Massachu- 
setts has  brick  on  exhibition  of  a  quahty  similar  to  that  required  when 
purchases  are  made. 

Tests  for  Sewer  Brick. — For  the  determination  of  the  quality  of 
brick  for  sewer  work,  such  simple  tests  as  listening  to  the  clearness  of 
the  ring  when  the  brick  are  struck,  estimating  the  relative  weights  of 
different  brick  by  lifting  them,  and  observing  the  color,  shape  and  size, 
are  usually  reUed  upon.  A  compact  brick  of  uniform  texture,  without 
fissures  and  air  bubbles,  will  give  a  clear,  ringing  sound  when  struck. 
Pale  color  in  brick  from  localities  where  the  clay  bums  red,  which  is 
generally  the  case,  signifies  underbuming.  On  the  other  hand,  very 
dark  colored  brick  are  often  overbumed  and  partly  vitrified.    Brick 


352  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

shrink  on  burning,  the  hard  dense  brick  being  somewhat  smaller  than 
underburned  brick  from  the  same  mold. 

Specifications  relating  to  uniformity  of  size  and  shape  have  already 
been  mentioned.  There  is,  however,  one  laboratory  test  sometimes 
required,  namely,  the  determination  of  the  percentage  of  absorption 
of  water  by  the  brick  within  a  specified  time.  The  results  of  such  a  test 
may  be  reported  as  a  percentage  by  weights  or  by  volumes.  In  the 
latter  case  the  percentage  is  an  indication  of  the  porosity  and  may, 
depending  on  the  specific  gravity  of  the  brick,  be  two  or  more  times  as 
much  as  the  absorption  by  weight.  This  test  is  an  indication  of  the 
efficiency  of  the  burning  of  the  brick,  for  soft  underburned  brick  are 
porous  and  absorb  a  large  amoimt  of  water,  while  hard  burned  vitrified 
brick  will  absorb  little. 

At  Worcester,  Mass.,  the  absorption  test  is  made  as  follows:  The 
brick  are  first  dried  by  placing  them  in  an  oven  at  100**  to  125°  F.  for 
a  sufficient  time  to  dry  them  completely.  A  test  of  the  thoroughness 
of  the  drying  may  be  made  by  weighing  the  brick  and  replacing  them 
in  the  oven  for  an  hour,  after  which  they  may  be  reweighed  to  determine 
if  there  is  any  further  loss.  After  complete  drying,  the  brick  are 
weighed  and  placed  in  a  small  brass  tank  filled  with  water  and  pro- 
vided with  a  gage  glass  which  has  a  scale  fixed  at  one  side.  The 
reading  on  the  scale  is  taken  and  after  24  hours  another  reading  of  the 
scale  is  taken  to  show  the  volume  of  water  absoi'bed.  The  brick  are 
taken  from  the  tank,  the  water  on  the  outside  removed  with  blotting 
paper,  and  the  brick  reweighed  as  a  check  on  the  direct  volume 
determination. 

Handling  Brick. — A  gang  of  five  men  will  unload  through  a  chute  to 
wagons,  a  car  of  12M  brick  in  about  4  hours.  When  the  brick  are 
deUvered  on  the  job,  they  should  be  immediately  culled  by  the  con- 
tractor and  rejected  brick  removed  from  the  vicinity  of  the  work,  so  as  to 
prevent  their  accidental  incorporation  therein.  It  is  sometimes  allowable 
to  use  a  certain  number  of  bats  or  half  brick  in  manholes;  it  is  said  that 
some  engineers  have  required  that  brick  for  manholes  be  broken  in  two 
before  laying,  in  order  that  the  inner  and  outer  surfaces  of  the  masonry 
may  conform  more  accurately  to  the  true  circular  form.  This  practice 
is  not  considered  good  by  some  engineers,  including  the  authors.  Unless 
immediately  required  in  the  work,  brick  delivered  upon  streets  subject  to 
traffic,  should  be  neatly  piled  in  suitable  locations  that  they  may  not 
obstruct  traffic  and  at  the  same  time  may  be  within  a  reasonable  distance 
from  the  work. 

The  method  of  passing  the  brick  into  the  trench  depends  entirely 
upon  local  conditions,  size  of  the  work,  depth  of  trench  and  congestion 
of  working  quarters.  Brick  are  often  lowered  into  the  trench  by  hand, 
the  load  being  made  up  of  two  parallel  rows  of  brick  18  to  30  in. high., 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       363 

enclosed  by  the  chain  of  a  chain  rope  of  suitable  length.  Such  a  rope  is 
convenient  for  many  uses  about  the  trench.  It  is  usually  a  3/4-in. 
Manila  rope  provided  with  a  hook  at  one  end  and  a  1/4-in.  twisted 
chain  7  ft.  long  at  the  other.  In  some  cases,  on  large  work  where  a 
derrick  is  available,  the  use  of  a  skip  may  be  desirable.  The  brick  for 
a  large  Chicago  sewer  were  wheeled  to  the  side  of  the  trench  in  wheel- 
barrows and  delivered  by  tossing  them,  usually  in  pairs,  from  man  to  man 
located  on  a  scaffolding. 

Before  placing  brick  in  the  work  they  should  be  thoroughly  wetted, 
otherwise  they  will  absorb  water  from  the  mortar  before  it  has  time  to 
set.  A  sufficient  number  of  tenders  should  be  provided  so  that  the 
masons  may  not  be  kept  waiting,  and  the  brick  and  mortar  should 
always  be  so  placed  that  the  masons  can  conveniently  reach  them,  as  the 
less  labor  required  of  the  mason  the  more  brick  he  should  lay. 

Mortar. — Mortar  for  brick  sewers  is  usually  mixed  by  hand  in  mortar 
boxes  placed  on  the  side  of  the  trench  close  to  the  work  and  is  lowered  to 
the  masons  in  galvanized  iron  buckets,  from  a  platform  placed  over  the 
trench. 

Many  specifications  contain  the  provision  that  sand  shall  be  clean, 
sharp  and  coarse.  The  idea  that  sand  for  concrete  should  be  sharp, 
that  is,  have  angular  grains,  appears  to  have  been  due  to  several  con- 
siderations, among  which  the  following  may  be  mentioned:  Certain 
experiments  have  indicated  that  mortar  formed  with  crushed  stone 
screenings  was  stronger  than  when  formed  with  natural  sand.  Also 
sand  which  contains  considerable  clay  or  organic  matter  or  is  extremely 
fine,  all  undesirable  qualities,  feels  smooth  as  compared  with  a  clean, 
coarse  sand.  Further  there  is  less  inclination  when  mortar  is  mixed 
very  wet,  for  sand  of  sharp  angular,  and  well-graded  grains  to  sink  to 
the  bottom  of  the  mass  than  is  .the  case  with  smooth  rounded  grains  of 
more  or  less  unifprm  size.  There  is  also  some  evidence  that  as  originally 
used  the  word  "sharpness"  did  not  refer  to  the  angularity  of  the  grains 
but  to  the  distinctively  "sharp"  sound  given  off  when  clean  sand  grains 
of  quartz  are  rubbed  together.  As  a  matter  of  fact  a  given  volume  of 
sand  with  rounded  grains  contains  less  voids  than  the  same  volume  of 
angular  grains  of  similar  character.  Screenings,  nevertheless,  are  often 
so  graded  as  to  form  a  more  dense  and  consequently  stronger  mortar 
than  some  natural  sands.  In  any  case,  whatever  virtue  sharp  sand  may 
have,  meaning  sand  with  angular  grains,  is  completely  obscured  by  the 
matter  of  voids  and  density,  the  proper  sand  to  use  being  composed  of 
such  graded  material,  whether  sharp  or  otherwise,  as  to  give  a  mortar  of 
greatest  density.  The  requirement  as  to  cleanness  and  freedom  from 
loam  and  clay  is  important.  Furthermore,  it  has  come  to  be  recognized 
as  desirable  to  test  the  mortar  made  of  the  sand  and  cement  it  is  pro- 

23 


354  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

posed  to  use,  as  it  is  sometimes  found  that  mortar  made  by  mixing  ap- 
parently good  sand  and  cement  lacks  strength  or  soundness. 

Brick  Laying. — ^The  brick  should  be  laid  by  shoving  or  forcing  them 
into  a  full  bed  of  mortar,  forming  full  joints  on  all  sides,  at  one  operation. 
In  the  United  States  brick  are  generally  laid  on  the  long  and  narrow 
side,  with  continuous  longitudinal  joints  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the 
sewer.  This  type  of  construction  is  known  as  the  "rowlock "  bond,  the 
only  bond  between  the  inner  and  outer  rings  being  that  due  to  the  ad- 
hesion of  the  cement  in  the  joints.  An  interesting  exception  to  the 
ordinary  method  of  building  sewer  arches  is  that  adopted,  at  Cleveland 
in  the  construction  of  the  Walworth  Run  Sewer  (Volume  I,  p.  428), 
which  has  been  described  as  follows: 

"For  greater  strength,  the  brick  composing  the  arch  were  arranged  in 
alternate  headers  and  stretchers  in  Flemish  bond,  and,  in  order  to  avoid 
excessively  thick  mortar  joints,  as  would  be  the  case  were  the  joints  to  con- 
tinue radially  from  intrados  to  extrados,  the  masonry  was  broken  up  in 
cylindrical  rings.  .  .  .  The  entire  arch  was  also  cut  into  a  certain  number 
of  segments  separated  by  radial  planes.  The  brick  composing  each  segment 
included  between  these  radial  planes  were  laid  up  in  rings,  the  inner  and  outer 
faces  of  which  are  parallel  with  the  inner  surface  of  the  completed  sewer. 
The  radial  distances  between  these  parallel  cylindrical  surfaces  are  either  9, 
13  or  17  in.  The  number  of  courses  required  to  build  one  of  these  cylindrical 
rings  for  any  particular  segment  is  one  more  than  the  number  contained  in 
the  next  inner  ring,  and  one  less  than  the  number  contained  in  the  next 
outer  ring.  By  this  means  mortar  joints  of  ordinary  thickness  are  obtained 
in  all  portions  of  the  arch,  even  to  the  extrados.  The  cylindrical  surfaces 
separating  the  inner  and  outer  ring;s  of  the  segments  are  plast-ered  smooth 
with  Portland  cement.  The  radial  thickness  of  each  cylindrical  ring  com- 
posing the  superimposed  segments  of  masonry  is  adjusted  so  as  to  break 
joint  in  adjoining  segments  by  at  least  4  in.  Tlius  the  completed  arch 
consists  of  brick  in  Flemish  masonry  interlocked  and  bonded  together  by 
broken  joints. 

"Apparently,  this  requirement  would  increase  the  cost  of  the  masonry  of 
the  arch,  but  it  was  found  by  experience  that  as  soon  as  the  masons  became 
familiar  with  the  method  of  construction  they  placed  in  the  wall  nearly  as 
many  brick  per  day  as  in  a  straight  wall  laid  in  English  bond."  (Walter 
Camp   Parmley,   Trans.   Am.  Soc.  C.  E.,  vol.  Iv,  p.  358.) 

The  longitudinal  face  joints  should  be  made  as  narrow  as  practicable 
and  usually  will  be  from  1/4  to  3/8  in.  in  thickness.  The  joints  between 
the  rings  should  also  be  made  thin,  not  exceeding  1/2  in.  unless  it  is 
desired  to  put  in  a  wide  joint  for  the  special  purpose  of  preventing 
infiltration.  The  exterior  of  the  arch  is  often  covered  with  a  plaster  of 
cement  mortar  1/2  in.  in  thickness.  Centers  used  for  the  temporary 
support  of  the  brickwork  are  often  drawn  as  soon  as  the  last  of  the  key 
has  been  laid  and  the  plastering  completed.    After  the  centers  have  been 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       355 

removed  the  interior  surface  of  the  sewer  should  be  cleaned  and  pointed 
as  smooth  as  possible.  In  some  cases  one  or  two  coats  of  cement  wash 
have  been  applied  to  the  inner  surface  for  the  purpose  of  reducing 
roughness. 

Where  the  trench  is  composed  of  suitable  material,  the  bottom  is 
trimmed  to  conform  to  the  desired  outside  surface  of  the  invert  masonry, 
and  each  brick  laid  directly  on  a  bed  of  mortar  placed  on  the  bottom. 
Templates,  commonly  caDed  "profiles"  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  country, 
built  and  set  as  described  in  Chapter  XV,  "Forms  and  Centers,"  are 
placed  in  position  and  a  mason's  line  tightly  drawn  between  them. 
Brick  are  then  laid  in  a  single  row  in  the  center  of  the  bottom  of  the  invert 
for  the  full  length  of  the  section,  about  12  ft.  The  several  rows  of  brick 
are  then  laid  on  either  side,  care  being  taken  to  lay  each  brick  accurately 
to  Hne  at  the  time  it  is  slid  into  place.  A  skillful  mason  will  rarely  touch 
the  brick  after  the  joint  is  made,  and  hammering  a  portion  of  the  wall 
to  bring  it  to  line  should  be  discouraged,  as  the  adhesion  of  mortar  to 
brick  may  be  destroyed  in  this  way.  Care  should  be  taken  to  see  that 
the  outside  ring  of  brick  is  well  supported  by  the  bank.  It  frequently 
happens  that  the  trench  cannot  be  excavated  exactly  to  the  line  of  the 
proposed  brickwork,  in  which  case  masons  will  often  fill  the  space  be- 
tween the  brickwork  and  the  bank  with  loose  material  insufficiently 
rammed.  In  fact  it  is  very  difficult  to  ram  the  material  filling  this  space 
without  injuring  the  green  masonry.  It  seems  probable  that  many  of 
the  cracks  which  have  been  found  in  brick  sewers  may  be  attributed 
to  loose  and  improper  fiUing  between  masonry  and  the  solid  bank  of  the 
trench.  Care  should  be  taken  in  la3ring  the  arch  rings  to  see  that  all 
joints  are  properly  filled  and  not  unnecessarily  thick.  The  key  should 
be  laid  by  an  experienced  mason  who  realizes  the  importance  of  tight 
joints  and  a  well-fitting  key  properly  forced  into  place,  that  there 
may  be  no  injury  to  nor  failure  of  the  arch  when  the  centers  are  struck. 

After  the  first  few  courses  in  the  invert  are  laid,  it  is  wise  to  provide 
a  few  loose  boards  or  planks  upon  which  the  masons  and  tenders  may 
walk,  thus  protecting  the  green  brickwork  from  injury,  due  to  move- 
ment of  the  brick  resulting  in  a  lack  of  adhesion  of  mortar  to  the  sur- 
face of  the  brick.  Upon  large  sewers  the  invert  may  become  so  high 
that  it  will  be  necessary  to  provide  a  working  platform  for  masons  and 
tenders.  In  building  such  platforms  care  should  be  taken  to  protect 
the  green  masonry  from  injury. 

In  trenches  in  wet  or  loose  material  when  the  soil  will  not  maintain 
any  given  shape,  the  brickwork  may  be  laid  in  a  cradle.  Such  a  cradle 
may  be  constructed  of  ribs  cut  to  the  shape  of  the  outside  of  the  invert, 
making  an  allowance  for  the  thickness  of  the  planks  which  are  to  form 
the  cradle  proper.  These  ribs  are  set  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench  at  the 
proper  elevation  and  2-in.  planks  are  nailed  to  them,  earth  being  carefully 


356  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

tamped  behind  each  one  as  it  is  put  in  place.  After  the  cradle  is  con- 
structed, the  process  of  laying  the  brick  is  similar  to  that  mentioned 
above.  Where  the  trench  is  in  unstable  material  the  sewer  may  be 
constructed  upon  a  concrete  foundation  laid  directly  upon  the  soil  or 
upon  a  wooden  platform,  this  part  of  the  sewer  being  constructed  ahead 
of  the  brickwork.  In  other  cases,  where  the  soil  has  Uttle  bearing 
power,  it  may  be  necessary  to  construct  the  sewer  on  a  pile  platform 
as  illustrated  in  Volume  I. 

The  number  of  brick  which  a  mason  can  lay  in  a  given  time  depends 
to  a  considerable  extent  on  the  size  of  the  sewer.  This  is  because  more 
time  is  required  to  lay  the  brick  in  the  face  or  inner  ring  of  the  invert, 
where  the  brick  should  be  laid  accurately  to  line  and  the  joints  made 
as  narrow  as  possible,  than  is  needed  for  laying  the  brick  in  the  other 
rings,  which  are  relatively  rough  work.  There  \a  a  similar  although 
much  less  marked  difference  in  the  time  required  for  laying  the  inner 
ring  and  the  other  rings  of  the  arch.  As  the  brick  forming  the  arch  are 
laid  upon  the  centers,  less  time  is  required  than  where  the  brick  are  laid 
to  Une,  as  in  the  invert.  Where  the  sewer  is  small,  the  working  space 
is  sometimes  so  restricted  that  the  mason  is  unable  to  work  to  the  best 
advantage.  Upon  such  sewers  the  proportion  of  face  work  is  much 
greater  than  upon  large  sewers.  Some  very  small  sewers  have  been 
built  of  a  single  ring  of  brickwork,  in  which  100  per  cent,  of  the  masonry 
is  face  work.  As  the  size  increases,  so  that  two  rings  are  required, 
the  proportion  of  face  work  is  reduced  50  per  cent.,  with  a  decrease  in 
the  care  required  and  difficulty  involved  in  laying  the  brick. 

In  an  investigation  for  the  Boston  Finance  Commission  (Report 
Boston  Finance  Commission,  vol.  iii,  1909),  it  was  found  that  on  the 
contract  work  of  the  Massachusetts  Metropolitan  Sewerage  Commis- 
sion, the  number  of  brick  laid  per  hour  per  mason  varied  from  384  on  a 
sewer  13  ft.  6  in.  by  11  ft.  3  in.  to  165  per  hour  on  a  36-in.  circular 
section.  There  is,  however,  a  great  chance  for  loss  of  time  in  this  class 
of  work,  unless  it  is  well  systematized.  For  instance,  in  the  investiga- 
tion mentioned,  it  was  found  that  on  certain  large  sewers  built  by  day 
labor  in  the  city  of  Boston,  the  number  of  brick  laid  per  mason  per  hour 
averaged  only  about  seventy.  This  appears  to  have  been  due  largely  to 
inability  to  keep  the  masons  properly  employed.  It  is  extremely  im- 
portant that  the  construction  be  so  conducted  as  to  provide  ample  work 
at  all  times  for  the  masons,  otherwise  the  cost  of  the  masonry  will  be 
greatly  increased. 

The  number  of  brick  per  cubic  foot  of  masonry  and  the  amount  of 
mortar,  etc.,  required  for  circular  and  egg-shaped  sewers  are  given  in 
Fig.  116  (by  Geo.  S.  Pierson,  Eng,  News,  May  17,  1900)  and  Table  58. 
The  amounts  of  cement  and  sand  required  per  cubic  yard  of  plastic 
mortar  are  given  in  Table  59  from  "Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced," 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       357 

by  Taylor  &  Thompson.  This  table  is  based  on  average  results  of  a 
large  number  of  actual  experiments,  but  at  best  can  be  considered  only 
approximate,  as  so  much  depends  on  the  quality  of  cement,  character  of 
the  sand  and  the  amount  of  water  used. 


£         3        4        5 

M»r.tic€il    Diameter  .(fe«t). 
FiQ.  116. — Quantities  for  egg-shaped  sewers. 


A  considerable  force  is  necessary  for  handling  the  materials  for  the 
masons.  On  a  sewer  at  Denver,  Colo.  (Gillette's  "Cost  Data,"  p.  42), 
6  to  8  ft.  in  diameter,  18  brick  layers  were  employed  in  three  gangs,  the 
total  force  amounting  to  80  men  equivalent  to  about  3-1/2  tenders 
per  mason.    Parts  of  this  sewer  were  composed  of  three  rings  of  brick- 


358 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


work.  In  portions  of  the  work  where  wet  trench  was  encountered, 
the  foundation  and  rough  work  of  the  invert  were  of  concrete  and  stone 
masonry.  The  rough  invert  was  lined  with  a  single  ring  of  brick  and 
the  arch  was  composed  of  three  rings  of  brick. 

Tablb  58. — Number  op  Brick  per  Foot  of  Sewer 

Size  of  brick,  2  X  3-1/2  X  7-1/2  in.;    Face  joints,  3/8  in.;    Ring  joints 

and  plaster,  1/2  in. 

(George  S.  Piereon) 


Diameter 

Circular  sewers 

Egg-shaped  sewers^ 
(referred  to  vertical  diameter) 

1  ring           2  rings        3  rings 

1  ring       1  2   rings 

3  rings 

2  ft.     0  in. 
2  ft.     3  in. 
2  ft.     6  in. 

2  ft.     9  in. 

3  ft.     0  in. 
3  ft.     3  in. 
3  ft.     6  in. 

3  ft.     9  in. 

4  ft.     0  in. 
4  ft,     3  in. 
4  ft.     6  in. 

4  ft.     9  in. 
6  ft.     0  in. 

5  ft.     3  in. 

5  ft.     6  in. 

6  ft.     9  in. 
6  ft.     0  in. 
6  ft.     3  in. 
6  ft.     6  in. 

6  ft.     9  in. 

7  ft.     0  in. 
7  ft.     3  in. 
7  ft.     6  in. 

7  ft.     9  in. 

8  ft.     0  in. 
8  ft.     3  in. 
8  ft.     6  in. 

8  ft.     9  in. 

9  ft.     0  in. 

48.38 
54.43 
60.47 
66.52 
72.57 
78.61 
84.66 

40.70 
45.79 
50.88 
65.97 
61.06 
66.15 
71.24 
76.33 
81.41 

161 . 24 

138.23 
148 . 41 
158.58 
168.76 
178.93 
189.11 
199.29 
209 . 46 
219 . 64 
229 . 81 
239.99 
250.17 
260 . 34 
270 . 52 
280 .  69 
290 . 87 
301.05 
311.22 
321.40 
331.57 
341.75 
351 . 93 
362 . 10 
372 . 28 
382 . 45 

173.34 
185.43 

90.70      197.52 

96.75 

209 . 61 
221.70 
233.80 
245 . 89 
257 . 99 
270.08 
282 . 18 
294.27 
306.37 
318.46 
330.56 
342 . 65 
354.75 
366.84 
378.94 
391 . 03 
403 . 13 
415.22 
427 . 32 
439 . 41 
451.51 

- 

411.19 
429.33 
447.47 
465 .  61 
483 . 75 
501 . 89 
520.03 
538 . 17 
556.31 
574.46 
592.60 
610.74 
628.88 
647.02 
665 . 16 
683 . 30 

353.65 
368.91 
384 . 18 
399.44 
414.70 
429.96 
445.23 
460.49 
475.75 
491.02 
506.28 
521.54 
536.81 
552 . 07 
567.33 
582 .  59 
597.86 

'   *   '  ' 

701 . 45 

*  Proportions  aa  shown  on  Fig.  116. 


The  number  of  men  per  mason  depends,  of  course,  largely  on  the 
working  conditions.  If  they  are  such  that  material  can  be  delivered 
close  to  the  trench,  at  the  points  required,  the  number  of  men  may  be 
reduced  considerably.    The  size  and  character  of  the  brickwork  also 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       369 

Table  59. — Volume  op  Plastic  Mortar  and  Quantities  op  Materials 

PER  Cubic  Yard 

(Reprinted  by  permissioil  from  "Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced,"  second  edition, 

Taylor  ft  Thompson) 


Cubic  feet  of  compacted  plastic 

1 

Relative 
proportions 

From  1  CI 

mortar 

Materials  for  1  cu.  yd.  compact 
plastic  mortar  based  on  barrel  of 

J.  ft. 

From  1  bbl. 

by 

cement 

cement 

volume! 

1 

Based  on  Portland 
cement  weighing 

CO 

• 
• 

9 

• 

CO 

d  on  barrel 
ntaining 

3.5  cu.  ft. 

3.8  cu.  ft.» 

4  cu.  ft. 

a 

9 

s 
c3 

Sand 

lOS  lb.  per 
cu.  ft. 

100  lb.  per 
cu.  ft. 

95  lb.  per 
cu.  ft. 

3.8  cu.  ft. 

■ 

• 

9 

Packed 
cement 

•o 

Packed 
cement 

Loose  sand 

Packed 
cement 

Loose  sand 

cu. 

cu. 

cu. 

bbl. 

yd. 

bbl. 

yd. 

bbl.      yd. 

0 

0.93 

0.86  0.80 

3.2 

3.2 

3.2  8.31 

■   ■   •   • 

8.31' 

■    •     «    ■ 

O.olj  .... 

1 

1.12 

1.06  1.02 

3.9 

4.0 

4.1  6.92 

0.46 

6.73 

0.47 

6.6r  0.49 

X 

1 

1.48 

1.42  1.38 

5.2 

5.4 

5.5 

5.22  0.68  5.01 

0.71 

4.88  0.72 

u 

1.84 

1.78 

1.74 

6.4 

6.7 

7.0 

4.20 

0.81 

4.00  0.84 

3.87 

0.86 

1 

2 

2.20 

2.14 

2.11 

7.7 

8.1 

8.4 

3.51 

0.91 

3.32 

0.93 

3.21 

0.95 

1 

2i 

2.56  2.50'  2.47 

9.0 

9.5 

9.9  3.01i 

0.98  -2.84 

1.00  2.74  1.01 

3 

2.92  2.86  2.83 

10.2 

10.9  11.31  2.64 

1.03.  2.48 

1.05;  2.39  1.06 

1     ,  3} 

3.28 

3.23 

3.19 

11.5 

12.2  12.8 

2.35 

1.06 

2.20 

1.08 

2.12 

1.10 

1        4 

3.64  3.59 

3.55 

12.8 

13.6 

14.2 

2.12 

1.10 

1.98 

1.11 

1.90 

1.13 

1     '  41 

4.01  3.95 

3.91 

14.0 

15.0 

15.6  1.92 

1.12j  1.80 

1.14  1.72'  1.15 

1        5 

4.37,  4.31  4.28  15.3 

16.4 

17.1  1.77, 

1.15  1.65 

1.16  1.58  1.17 

H 

4.73 

4.67 

4.64  16.6 

17.7 

18.5 

1.63 

1.16  1.52 

1.18  1.46  1.19 

1 

6 

5.09 

5.03 

1 
5.00  17.8 

19.1 

20.0^  1.52 

1.18  1.41 

1 

1.19  1.35  1.20 

6§ 

5.45  5.39  5.36  19.1 

20.5 

21.4  1.41 

1.19  1.32 

1.21   1.26  1.21 

7 

5.8l!  5,76  5.72  20.3 

21.9 

22.9  1.33 

1.21   1.23 

1.21   1.18  1.22 

7i 

6.18  6.13  B.08  21.6 

23.2 

24.3  1.25 

1.21   1.16 

1.22  1.11,  1.23 

8 

6.54  6.48  6.44  22.9 

24.6  25.8  1.18 

1.22  1.10 

1.24  1.05  1.24 

>  Cement  as  packed  by  manufacturer,  sand  loose. 
I  Use  these  columns  ordinarily. 

Note, — Variations  in  the  fineness  of  the  sand  and  the  cement,  and  in  the 
consistency  of  the  mortar  may  affect  the  values  by  10  per  cent,  in  either 
direction. 


have  a  considerable  influence.  On  small  sewers,  where  the  brick  masons 
cannot  work  as  rapidly  or  to  as  great  advantage  as  on  large  work,  the 
number  of  men  required  to  keep  them  busy  is  smaller  than  in  other  cases. 
Even  on  small  sewers,  however,  a  force  of  from  2  to  3  men  per  mason, 
is  required.    At  Cleveland  (Eng,  Rec,,  April  8,  1905),  on  a  sewer  12 


360  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

to  13-1/2  ft.  in  diameter,  2  masons  and  6  laborers  were  employed  in 
laying  a  double-ring  brick  lining  on  the  bottom. 

Rate  of  Progress. — ^The  rate  of  progress  in  the  construction  of  brick 
sewers  generally  depends  more  largely  upon  the  practicable  rate  of 
progress  of  excavation  than  upon  that  of  constructing  the  masonry. 
Disregarding  the  progress  of  excavation,  however,  the  rate  of  progress 
of  masonry  construction  is  limited  in  small  sewers  by  the  working  space, 
and  in  large  sewers  by  the  economic  problem  of  handling  large  quan- 
tities of  materials,  largely  by  hand  within  a  limited  space.  For  instance, 
on  a  7-ft.  sewer  at  Gary,  Ind.,  about  60  ft.  were  built  dajily.  This  in- 
volved the  employment  of  about  75  men  for  handling  upward  of  100  tons 
of  material  within  a  limited  space.  For  smaller  sewers,  say  3  to  4  ft.  in 
diameter,  3  masons  are  about  all  that  can  work  to  advantage  on  one 
section.  A  4-ft.  circular  sewer  built  of  two  rings  of  brickwork,  the 
brick  being  each  2  X  3-1/2  X  7-1/2  in.,  requires  209.61  brick  per  foot 
(see  Table  58).  If  each  of  the  masons  lays  on  the  average  2500  brick 
per  day,  3  can  build  about  36  ft.  of  sewer  per  day. 

Cost  of  Brick  Sewers. — ^The  cost  of  brick  sewers  depends  on  a  number 
of  local  factors  surrounding  the  work,  such  as  accessibility  and  re- 
stricted working  space  as  well  as  upon  the  length  of  day,  prices  of  labor 
and  materials  and  efficiency  of  the  force.  Given  certain  assumed  figures 
the  cost  of  brickwork  may  be  estimated  as  follows: 

Assuming  that  each  mason  will  lay  2500  brick  per  day  of  8  hours, 
that  3  laborers  will  be  required  per  mason  for  mixing  mortar,  handling 
brick,  and  moving  centers;  that  there  are  500  brick  per  cubic  yard  of 
masonry;  that  the  amount  of  1 : 2  mortar  required  is  0.3  cu.  yd.  per  cubic 
yard  of  masonry  requiring  approximately  1  bbl.  of  cement  and  0.28 
cu.  yd.  of  sand;  and  that  the  day's  work  of  1  mason  will  amount  to  5 
cu.  yd.,  the  cost  of  this  5  cu.  yd.  wiQ  be  as  follows: 

1  mason  at  $6.00 $6.00 

.3  laborers  at  $2.00 6.00 

2500  brick  at  $9.00  per  M 22.50 

6  bbl.  cement  at  $1.80 9.00 

1.4  cu.  yd.  sand  at  $1.00 1 .40 

Centers  at  $0.05  per  cu.  yd 0. 25 

$45.15 
Supervision,  lumber  and  tools,  15  per  cent 6.77 


$51.92 


This  is  about  $10.40  per  cubic  yard,  or  $20.80  per  1000  brick  laid. 
If  such  work  was  done  by  contract,  add  15  to  20  per  cent,  profit,  making 
about  $12  per  cubic  yard,  equivalent  to  $24  per  1000  brick  laid.  The 
cost  of  brickwork  in  sewers  is  in  general  between  $10  and  $14  per  cubic 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       361 

yard  (equivalent  to  $20toS28  per  1000  brick),  and  ia  great«r  in  small 
than  in  large  sewers. 

VXTRiriED  BLOCK  SEWERS 

A  vitrified  sewer  block  was  put  on  the  market  in  1911  by  the  Ameri- 
can Sewer  Pipe  Co.  for  uae  in  the  construction  of  sewers  from  30  to  108 
in.  in  diameter,     fig.  117  shows  such  asewer  under  construction.    The 
advantages  claimed  for  it  are  that  the  material  is  salt  glazed  vittified 
clay,  and  therefore  the  sewer  will  have  a  hard,  smooth  interior  surface; 
the  blocks  are  large,  thus  limiting  the  number  of  transverse  and  longi- 
tudinat  joints;  the  blocks  are  quickly  and  easily  laid  and  backfilUng 
can  follow  immediately  after  the  completion  of  the  barrel  of  the  sewer, 
thus  making  it  possible  to  prosecute  the  work  with  a  relatively  short 
open  trench.    One  of  the  objections  to  the  blocks  appears  to  be  the 
difficulty  of  making  water-tight 
end  joints.     If  the  blocks  are  so 
laid   as    to    allow   the   bottom 
openings  to  serve  as  eubdrains, 
which  is  cliumed  as  one  of  the 
advantages  of  this  type  of  con- 
struction, it  is  difficult  to  make 
a  water-tight  end  joint,  and  un- 
less special  oare  is  taken  these 
joints  will  not   be  water-tight. 
Less  difficulty  attends  the  mak- 
ing   of  the    longitudinal  joints 
water-tight,  because  of  the  length 
of  surface  which    ia  in  contact 
with  the  mortar,  and  because  of 

the  dovetailed  offset.     The  sides  ,,       ,,_     ,,.,  --...,    , 

,,,,,,  ,     ,  tio.  117.— Vitrified  block  sewer. 

01  the  blocks  arc  scratched,  or 

corrugated,  to  assiat  in  forming  a  tight  joint. 

The  blocks  are  made  in  three  types,  A  for  sewers  84  to  108  in.  in  diame- 
ter inclusive,  B  for  sewers  48  to  78  in.  and  C  for  sewers  24  to  45  in. 
They  are  shown  in  Fig.  118  and  in  Table  60  the  dimensions  of  types  B 
and  C  are  given.  The  end  overhang  of  the  outer  part  of  the  block  over 
the  inner  part  is  1-1/2  in.  in  all  sizes.  Thepriceof  the  blocks  in  1913  was 
S9  per  ton  net  at  the  factory  at  Akron.  Branch  blocks  are  made  to 
faciUtate  the  connection  of  lateral  and  house  sewers. 

The  blocks  are  laid  to  line  and  grade  in  the  invert  with  the  lud  of 
templates  like  those  used  in  building  brick  sewers.  The  arch  blocks 
can  be  laid  on  centers  like  brick,  but  the  American  Sewer  Pipe  Co, 
leases  a  special  center  for  this  purpose.  The  planks  forming  tho  lagging 
are  moved  in  and  out  by  an  eccentric  motion  when  a  handle  Is  turned. 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


the  continuous  longitudinal  joints  coming  on  the  planks.    Centers  are 
supplied  for  each  size  of  sewer.    The  transverse  joints  are  broken. 


Table  60 

—Dimensions  oi 

ViTBinBD  Sboment  Sewer  Block 

(Amerioao  Sewer  Pipe  Co.) 

Di>nl»- 
tei  oi 

Length 
of  block. 

Weight  ot 

oI  block 

Bloeks 

lo  circle, 

inebn 
~24~" 

JDcba 

pep  tool, 
pounda 

number 

A 

_1 

C    j    B    1    B 

'1  " 

H 

24 

23 

8 

"^ 

4 

« 

H  !  tt 

H  :  A 

T 

27 

24 

23 

9 

9A 

4 

H 

H 

H 

H 

A 

30' 

24 

23 

10 

9A 

li 

» 

H 

tt 

tt 

A 

H 

36 

24 

23 

12 

9A 

4i 

H 

H 

tt 

« 

A 

« 

39 

24 

27 

13 

9A 

5i 

H 

H 

1 

i 

A 

1 

42 

24 

27 

14 

9A 

5i 

H 

M 

1 

i 

A 

1 

4S 

24 

36 

14 

lOi 

6 

H 

H 

1 

t 

« 

1 

54 

24 

37 

16    llOA'  6 

K 

H 

« 

i 

H 

I 

flO 

24 

47 

16    jlOA'  71 

H 

H  ;i    I 

«  ;i    1 

72 

24 

46i 

20    llOHl  7A'l 

tt  I'ft  1 

1  'i    1 

Nole. — The  dimensions  in  this  table  an 
them  were  scaled  from  blue  prints  and  all  i 
dies  of  the  block  machines  become  worn. 


only  approximate,  as  some  ot 
e  Hubjeet  to  variation  as  the 


Fia.  118.— Types  of  vitri6ed  blocks  for 
COHCRETE  BLOCK  SEWERS 
Cast  concrete  blocks  have  been  used  to  some  extent  in  the  construc- 
tion of  sewers.  This  method  of  construction  has  been  developed  largely 
through  the  efforts  of  Walter  C.  Parmley,  who  holds  certain  patents 
covering  portions  of  his  process  of  manufacture.  Mr.  Parmley  states 
that  his  system  of  construction  consists  principally  in  placing  the  trans- 


Fia.  119.— Concrete  block  sewer  under  construction. 


Fia.  121. — Mixer  with  discharging  chute  (Ransome). 


Fio.  122. — Mixer  with  charger  (Koehring). 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       363 

verse  reinforcement  so  as  to  follow  the  regions  of  tension  throughout 
the  arch  or  ring,  together  with  various  other  transverse  and  longitudinal 
bars  so  combined  as  to  give  effective  reinforcement  for  both  primary 
and  secondary  stresses.  These  various  arrangements  of  bars  are  also 
combined  with  specially  molded  concrete  blocks  so  as  to  make  a  struc- 
ture, built  up  in  place,  of  unit  pieces  or  interlocking  sections  and  embed- 
ding an  effective  steel  reinforcement  skeleton.  The  segmental  block 
construction  has  been  used  for  circular  sewers  from  18  to  120  in.  in 
diameter  and  for  egg-shaped  sewers  up  to  56  X  S4  in.  in  size. 

Mr.  Parmley  claims  the  following  advantages  from  the  use  of  his 
83rstem:  1.  The  most  efficient  placing  of  steel  in  which  the  tensional 
regions  of  the  intrados  are  anchored  against  those  of  the  extrados  of 
the  arch.  2.  Efficient  reinforcement  with  a  minimum  quantity  of  steel. 
3.  In  construction  with  segmental  blocks  the  highest  quality  of  manu- 
factured concrete,  with  resulting  imperviousness.  4.  Practicability 
of  laying  segments  in  water  and  allowing  water  to  pass  at  once  over 
inverts  constructed  of  them.  5.  Practicability  of  backfilling  trenches 
immediately  after  completion  of  segmental  block  sewers.  6.  Blocks 
can  be  laid  without  centering,  or  with  only  skeleton  templates  for  sup- 
port, the  same  to  be  immediately  removed  after  the  key  block  has  been 
placed.  7.  Segmental  blocks  can  be  easily  placed  in  tunnels.  Another 
advantage  of  block  construction  is  the  rapidity  with  which  the  sewer  can 
be  laid.  There  is  no  delay  due  to  the  difficulties  in  placing  concrete  or 
to  the  time  required  for  the  setting  of  concrete  before  the  load  can  be 
applied  or  the  forms  removed. 

The  number  of  blocks  required  for  a  complete  ring  of  sewer  12  in.  in 
length  varies  with  the  size,  from  four  to  fourteen.  The  thickness  of 
blocks,  quantity  of  concrete,  the  quantity  and  size  of  steel,  and  the  weight 
of  each  ring  per  linear  foot,  for  the  several  sizes,  are  given  in  Table  61. 
The  heaviest  block  used  weighs  180  lb.  and  is  required  for  the  construc- 
tion of  a  sewer  48  in.  in  diameter.  The  usual  weight  of  block  varies 
from  100  to  125  lb.  The  invert  blocks  are  laid  end  to  end  without  any 
special  rabbet  or  other  provision  for  jointing.  After  the  blocks  are  laid, 
grout  is  poured  into  the  joints  until  they  are  completely  filled. 

The  concrete  blocks  are  cast  in  cast-iron  molds.  The  concrete  may  be 
made  either  wet  or  dry,  according  to  the  wishes  of  the  engineer;  it  is 
more  common  at  the  present  time  to  use  a  wet  mixture  containing  all  the 
water  the  concrete  will  hold  without  quaking.  Fig.  119  shows  a  con- 
crete block  sewer  under  construction,  the  invert  blocks  alone  being 
laid  in  the  foreground,  the  side  blocks  are  placed  in  the  middle  distance, 
and  in  the  background  the  arch  is  in  place  on  a  special  type  of  center 
used  with  these  blocks.  This  form  of  construction  is  used  for  lining 
tunnels  and  building  manholes,  and  can  be  employed  where  the  upper 
part  of  the  trench  must  be  kept  so  narrow  that  at  the  bottom  the  banks 
must  be  undercut  in  order  to  place  the  side  blocks  in  position. 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

n-3 


^^\ 


f-l 


1 1 

s  5 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  BRICK  AND  BLOCK  SEWERS       365 

It  is  claimed  that  little  labor  is  required  for  handling  and  placing  the 
blocks.  Upon  the  construction  of  a  72-in.  sewer,  in  tunnel,  in  Toledo, 
Ohio,  the  masonry  gang  consisted  of  only  three  men,  a  mason,  a  helper 
and  a  man  to  bring  the  blocks  and  mortar  from  the  foot  of  the  shaft  to 
the  heading.  From  20  to  25  lin.  ft.  of  sewer  were  constructed  by  this 
gang  in  an  8-hour  shift.  The  proprietor  of  this  process  will  act  either  as 
manufacturer  of  the  blocks  delivering  them  to  the  contractor,  or  as 
patentee,  conveymg  to  the  contractor  the  right  to  make  the  blocks  for 
the  work  in  hand. 

CONSTRUCTION   OF   MANHOLES 

Where  8-in  work  is  used,  the  brick  may  be  laid  as  headers  with  the 
long  sides  forming  radial  joints,  or  in  common  bond  with  several  courses 
forming  double  rows  of  stretchers  to  be  followed  by  a  course  of  headers 
laid  with  the  long  sides  making  radial  joints.  In  manholes  requiring  12 
in.  of  brickwork,  the  bond  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  if  the  joints 
are  made  radial  the  outer  portion  will  become  very  wide.  This  may  be 
obviated  by  laying  the  outer  rings  with  ordinary  3/8- or  1/2-in.  joints 
and  introducing  stretchers  or  headers,  as  the  case  may  be,  when  the 
opportunity  offers,  filling  in  the  gaps  with  broken  or  half  brick. 

A  good  mason  can  lay  the  brick  by  eye  so  as  to  conform  with  accuracy 
to  the  prescribed  line.  On  small  sewers  the  pipe  are  usually  left  out 
where  manholes  are  to  be  built.  A  foundation  of  concrete  or  brick  is 
first  laid  up  to  the  invert  of  the  sewer,  which  is  then  formed  either  with 
brick^  concrete  or  a  split  tile  of  the  same  diameter  as  the  sewer.  The 
shapes  of  the  floors  differ  somewhat,  and  illustrations  of  a  number  will 
be  found  in  Volume  I  imder  Manholes. 

Great  care  should  be  taken  in  the  construction  of  manholes  to  have 
all  joints  in  the  brickwork  well  filled  with  mortar.  A  fruitful  source 
of  leakage  is  the  joints  around  the  pipes  entering  the  manhole.  These 
should  be  filled  and  where  possible  the  hub  of  the  pipe  should  be  laid 
in  the  masonry,  forming  a  cut-off. 

By  the  use  of  Table  62  the  quantity  of  brickwork  in  a  3  X  4-ft. 
oval  or  4-ft.  circular  manhole  can  be  readily  calculated.  The  cost  of 
brick  manholes  may  be  analyzed  in  the  same  way  as  the  cost  of  brick 
sewers.  Many  masons  cannot  lay  as  many  brick  in  manholes  as  in  large 
sewers,  although  an  experienced  rapid  mason  may  accomplish  nearly 
as  much.    There  is  no  expense  for  providing  and  handling  forms. 

A  manhole,  having  a  depth  of  10  ft.  with  a  dome  of  3  ft.,  would, 
according  to  Table  62,  require  about  2.26  +  0.83  -+-  0.35  =  3.44  cu.  yd. 
of  masonry.  This  will  cost,  at  S10.40  percu.  yd.,  $35.80;  the  cover 
will  cost  $8.,  and  8  steps  at  20  cents  will  be  $1.60,  making  a  total  of 
$45.40.  Brick  manholes  without  covers  will  cost  from  $3.50  to  $4  per 
foot  to  depths  of  12  ft.,  and  from  $4  to  $6  per  foot  for  greater  depths. 


366 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


CO  N  Tf  »o  r*  Oi  0 

.^  CO  '«*<  "^  CO  r^ 

0     0  'rt 

1 

.  CO  CO  ci  CO  CO  CO  ''J^ 

^^^^     ^^^'     ^^^^     ^^^^     ^^^^     ^^^' 

'2    0  '5 

pC  p5     M 

0000000 

G  <6  ^  ci  <6  <6 

"•f^  A 

added 

.^4     .^     .VH      .^4      .^4 

ob  ol)  ol)  ol)  ob 

and  dome  figured  8  in 
d  inverts  6  in.  thick, 
red  to  outside  of  8-i] 
.  dianieter  at  top. 

1 

.>A     ,4^     .>A     .>A     4^ 

^"  >>  >^  >>  >^  >> 

IH     ^       ^       >H       H       >-<       ^ 

0  1;    0)    0)    3   0)   0) 
'  0   flj   >   >   >   >   > 

L^     OS     08     09     03     08 

1  ^^  ^  ^  ? 

g    t-4    W    1-H    1-H    1-H 

M.H.  fl 
8-in.  inv 
10-in.  in 
12-in.  in 
15-in.  in 
18-in.  in 
20-in.  in 

e 

S 

•  ^^             a^           ««           «^           0^           *«■ 
•             •             •             •             • 

pT.S  .3  .S  .9  .S 

•  T  (5  c5  »S  ob  6 

OO    1-1    1-1    1-1    iH    CM 

•§  >.>»>»>»  X  >. 

• 

>>>>>.>>>»>-. 

^    08    oS    o3    ^    o3    qS 

q3    q3    CQ    qS    08    q8 

di  e!i  c^  c^  c^  c<i 

fe    ^    fe    fe    fe    ^ 

;.— Walls 
0.4  ft.  an( 
verts  figu 
omes  2  ft 

CO  C^  CM  CM  CM  e!i 

CO 
H 

M 

•         •••••• 

.^^   -ts   ^   .^^   ~t^   .*^   •nt 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  4J 

S-i    ««H    ««H    ««-i    ««-i    «*-<    ««-i 

^Jl        ^5"        ^5"       ^^^        ^'^r         ^^P       ^^n 

^^^^        ^^^^        ^^^^         ^^^^        ^^^^        ^^^^ 

O 

XXX  X  X  X  X 

.  X  X  X  XXX 

Note 
loors  < 
tnd  in 
rail,  d 

14* 

'  ^  4J  ^  ^  4J  ^ 

S 

; 

^   CO   CO  CO   CO   CO   CO 

;  '^ 

■^    Tt<    ■^     '(f     ^ 

»*-4     ga    j> 

1 

10   1-t   «   CO   Tl<   ^    0 

CO  05  »-*  ^  r^  0  CO 

oc 

>  S£ 

» 

.cocoo5CM»cr^oco« 

.OOOi-lrH,-tCMCMCM 

« 

>  00 

/  ^i  1 

0 

0    0    *-t    »-4    fH    N    CQ 

cs 

1  c^ 

000000000 

/  LU 

M 

0  -c  — 

0 

-- 

y?4>  yi 

»•« 

v     1 

a 

Q  ^     . 

/     ' 

PQ 

1  d'd 

00  CO  0  -^  »-*  tr  CO 
u5  00  0  CO  CO  00  1-1 

c 

)  CO 

iCOiOOOTHCOCOO^FH-^ 

X   [ 

h 

•^ 

X 

ec 

'<* 

1  CO 

.OOO^^i-i^CMCM 

1 
t 
0 

CI 

0 

g 

-< 

0   0   '^    "H   »-•    t-4    c<i 

c^ 

1  M 

000000000 

.1 

■•J 

-^ 

1  c^ 

COClh»C0O5iOi-ir^CM 

1 

V                      1 

u 

u 

'*,iOi-ir>.cOOiTtiOcO 

c^ 

1   00 

OFHi-iCMCMC0Tt<'^»0 

\ 

0 

>  > 

iC 

>  0 

000000000 

\ 

Al 

0 

1  0 
'C 

• 

/M 

^H 

^ 

X  v_ 

CO 

ir\   hw   Oi   r<i   ■»«   K_   fli 

lOOCD»-<CD»Hh>»eMN. 

C4 

^iJooioocidiMco^ 

t^ 

CI 

OrHi-lC<ICMC0C0'<tl'«^ 

s 

1  ^"^ 

XiO»-I»-<C^C^C0C0"<^ 

'^ 

'  »o 

dddoddodd 

\ 

3 

w 

JO 

H 

1. 

1 

1  ' 

c9 

0 

■•j 

1 

'^lcoc^05W3»Hr>.coQ 

CO 

CM 

Tt<r>-i-iTt<oocMiooico 

L 

!.^ 

"*    cc 

)   t^    0    -^    00    »H    IC    05 

cs 

CO 

OO»h.HfhCMCMCMC0 

- 

0 

>  0  ^  »H   ^   C^   C^   C^ 

cc 

1    CO 

000000000 

^ 

»H 

CO 

cocoococoodcocood 

„O^J^J 

4s\  ^ 

cc 

c 

)   CD   05   N   CO   05   N   »0 

0: 

1   CM 

OOi-lrHi-I.HC^C^CV| 

\t7 

!x 

>    0    0    »-•    1-1    .H    C<l    N 

cs 

CO 

000000000 

^\^ 

, 

,»V 

-«. 

* 

00000000 

c 

>  0 

»HC^CO'«^»OCOl^00OS 

•r  ^ 

'HC^ICO-'^iOCOt^OO 

a 

>  0 

000000000 

» 

tH 

CHAPTER  XIV 

CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS 

Until  about  1900,  large  sewers  were  generally  constructed  of  brick, 
although  concrete  was  used  to  a  limited  extent,  particularly  in  Washing- 
ton, D.  C.  Since  1900,  the  use  of  brick  masonry  has  gradually  given  way 
to  that  of  concrete,  until  at  the  present  time  sewers  are  commonly  built 
of  concrete,  although  it  is  by  no  means  the  only  material  used.  At 
first  concrete  and  brick  masonry  were  frequently  combined;  the  concrete 
was  used  for  the  foundation  of  brick  sewers  or  for  reinforcing  or 
backing  up  brick  arches;  inverts  were  built  of  concrete  and  the  arches 
of  brick,  or  inverts  of  brick  and  arches  of  concrete;  or  the  structure  in 
part  or  in  whole  was  built  of  concrete  and  lined  with  brick.  Recently 
extensive  systeuLS  of  large  sewers  have  been  built  almost  exclusively  of 
concrete. 

In  a  broad  way  the  causes  for  this  change  are  similar  to  those  which 
have  operated  to  increase  the  use  of  concrete  for  all  construction  work. 
Greater  production  has  lessened  the  cost  of  Portland  cement,  while  the 
rising  cost  of  and  difficulties  with  mason  and  other  labor  have  also 
tended  to  increase  the  use  of  concrete.  With  this  increased  use,  improved 
machinery  and  appliances  for  mixing  and  placing  the  concrete  have  been 
provided,  which  have  proved  a  factor  of  considerable  importance  in 
building  large  sewers.  Concrete  possesses  some  advantages  over  brick- 
work under  most  conditions,  and  other  advantages  under  special  con- 
ditions. Likewise  brickwork  possesses  certain  advantages  over  concrete 
under  many  conditions  and  certain  advantages  under  special  conditions. 

Some  of  the  advantages  possessed  by  concrete  may  be  briefly  discussed. 
With  good  workmanship  it  is  generally  possible  to  secure  a  smoother 
inner  surface  than  with  brickwork,  although  where  the  latter  is  used 
much  can  be  accomplished  in  this  direction  by  carefully  pointing  the 
joints  and  washing  the  inner  surface  with  one  or  two  coats  of  Portland 
cement  grout.  Some  engineers  feel  that  the  increased  carrying  capacity 
of  a  well-built  concrete  sewer,  due  to  smoothness,  is  enough  greater  than 
that  of  a  brick  sewer  to  warrant  a  slight  reduction  in  size,  thus  tending 
to  reduce  the  cost  by  the  use  of  concrete. 

Under  many  conditions  a  concrete  sewer  can  be  built  at  less  cost  per 
cubic  yard  of  masonry  than  a  brick  sewer.  Perhaps  one  of  the  most 
important  advantages  of  concrete  over  brickwork  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
its  thickness  can  be  varied  gradually  so  as  to  provide  the  necessary 

367 


368  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

thickness  of  wall  at  all  points,  and  prevent  unnecessary  thickness  at 
any,  thus  greatly  reducing  the  quantity  of  masonry  required  for  the 
structure.  That  concrete  can  be  readily  reinforced  with  steel  fabric  or 
bars  is  also  an  important  advantage.  The  fact  that  machinery  and 
appUances  can  be  had  for  mixing  and  placing  concrete  makes  its  use 
particularly  advantageous  upon  large  sewers,  and  the  fact  that  little 
skilled  labor  is  required  makes  its  use  advantageous  upon  both  large 
and  small  sewers. 

While  concrete  has  not  been  used  upon  sewer  construction  for  a 
sufficiently  long  time  to  warrant  final  conclusions  as  to  its  durability, 
the  evidence  at  hand  indicates  that  the  life  of  well-made  concrete  will  be 
equal  to  that  of  ordinary  brickwork. 

It  has  been  maintained  by  some  engineers  that  it  is  easier  to  construct 
a  practically  impervious  sewer  of  brick  than  of  concrete,  because  of  the 
opportunities  of  breaking  joints  and  of  well  filling  the  joints  between  the 
rings  of  brick.  This  opinion  is  not  heard  so  frequently  now  that  the 
use  of  concrete  has  become  more  general,  and  it  is  probable  that  with  an 
equal  amount  of  care  the  concrete  sewer  can  be  made  at  least  equally 
impervious  to  infiltration.  Distinct  advantages  in  the  use  of  brickwork 
lie  in  the  facts  tliat  it  can  be  built  in  short  sections;  that  the  centers  and 
forms  may  be  removed  almost  immediately  after  the  brickwork  has  been 
placed;  and  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  keep  long  sections  of  the  trench 
open  for  considerable  periods  of  time,  which  is  the  case  where  the 
sewer  is  to  be  built  of  concrete.  In  restricted  trenches  where  it  is 
necessary  to  put  in  short  sections  from  time  to  time,  brickwork  generally 
possesses  a  distinct  advantage. 

The  decision  between  the  use  of  concrete  and  of  brick  masonry  depends 
largely  upon  local  conditions,  the  character  of  workmanship  which  can 
be  secured,  the  quality  and  cost  of  brick  and  other  materials  available, 
the  price  to  be  paid  for  masons  and  other  labor,  the  size  of  the  structure 
to  be  built,  and  the  necessity  of  working  in  very  short  sections.  All  of 
thede  conditions  and  many  other  facts  should  be  taken  into  consdderation 
before  deciding  which  material  to  use. 

Inverts. — Upon  relatively  steep  grades,  and  especially  where  sand  and 
gravel  are  likely  to  find  their  way  into  the  sewer,  ordinary  brickwork  is 
subject  to  erosion.  Concrete  appears  to  be  subject  to  about  the  same 
wear,  but  perhaps  is  not  quite  so  easily  repaired  as  the  brick  invert,  a 
single  course  of  which  can  be  removed  and  relaid  with  comparative 
ease.  The  removal  of  a  definite  portion  of  the  concrete  invert  is  a 
matter  of  considerable  difficulty.  In  some  cases,  however,  brick  inverts 
have  been  repaired  with  concrete  instead  of  relaying  the  inner  ring  of 
brick. 

For  reasons  stated  in  Volume  I,  under  conditions  of  high  velocity,  say 
in  excess  of  8  ft.  per  second,  and  where  the  sewers  carry  a  considerable 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  369 

amount  of  abrasive  material,  concrete  and  ordinary  brick  inverts  muist 
le  expected  to  show  considerable  wear  in  the  course  of  15  to  30  years. 
Under  such  conditions  vitrified  brick  may  be  used  to  advantage  for 
lining  the  invert. 

Disintegration  of  Concrete  by  Chemical  Action. — ^At  a  number  of 
places  in  Europe  and  America  concrete  as  well  as  brick  sewers  have 
disintegrated,  sometimes  to  an  extent  requiring  reconstruction.  Con- 
crete, being  of  a  calcarious  nature,  is  affected  by  acids,  some  of  which 
may  be  discharged  from  industrial  establishments  like  wire  drawing  and 
pickling  works,  or  they  may  be  formed  indirectly  by  the  decomp)osition 
of  sewage,  during  which  process  hydrogen  sulphide  may  be  generated 
and  given  off  into  the  air  in  the  sewer,  where  it  comes  in  intimate  con- 
tact with  the  concrete.  While  dry  hydrogen  sulphide  gas  does  not  ap- 
pear to  attack  concrete,  it  is  easily  oxidized  to  sulphuric  acid,  which  has 
a  very  deleterious  action.  Such  action  would  be  equally  injurious  to 
the  mortar  in  the  joints  of  brickwork,  but  brick  masonry  possesses  some 
advantage  over  concrete  in  that  these  joints,  if  taken  early,  can  be  raked 
out  and  repointed,  a  process  which  is  not  readily  applicable  to  a  concrete 
arch,  repairs  to  which  must  be  more  extensive  and  made  at  considerably 
greater  cost. 

At  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  an  outfall  sewer  was  built  in  1895,  portions 
consisting  of  wood-stave  pipe,  of  brick  and  of  brick  and  concrete.  The 
line  included  two  long  inverted  siphons  and  a  tunnel.  Soon  after  con- 
struction it  was  noticed  that  disintegration  of  the  mortar  of  the  brick- 
work was  taking  place.  This  action  was  most  noticeable  near  the 
outlet  of  the  inverted  siphons  and  at  another  point  where  the  sewage 
dropped  some  12  ft.,  thus  allowing  the  liberation  of  large  quantities  of 
gases. 

Under  normal  conditions  the  sewage  occupied  many  hours  in  travers- 
ing the  inverted  siphon  and  on  emer^ng  was  in  a  septic  condition. 
Investigations  by  Homer  Hamlin,  then  Chief  Deputy  and  later  City 
Engineer  {Eng.  NewSy  Nov.  8,  1900),  indicated  that  the  destructive 
agent  was  sulphuric  acid  created  by  the  oxidation  of  hydrogen  sulphide 
gas,  formed  by  the  putrefaction  of  organic  matter  in  the  sewage  and  lib- 
erated from  it.  The  gases  were  absorbed  by  drops  of  condensation 
hanging  from  the  arch,  and  the  acid  thus  came  in  intimate  contact  with 
the  masonry.  Thus  sulphuric  acid  attacked  the  cement,  forming  com- 
pounds which  crystallized  in  the  pores  of  the  cement  with  great  expansive 
force,  causing  disintegration  similar  to  that  due  to  freezing.  Analyses 
of  drops  of  water  attached  to  the  surface  of  the  masonry  showed  them  to 
be  strongly  acid.  Some  of  the  structures  connected  with  this  line  had  to 
be  rebuilt  and  some  years  afterward  the  whole  line  was  reconstructed 
in  a  new  location,  although  disintegration  of  the  masonry  was  only  one 
of  the  factors  which  resulted  in  the  new  construction. 

24 


370  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Similar  effects  have  been  noticed  in  some  septic  tanks  constructed  of 
concrete,  the  most  severe  action  taking  place  near  the  flow  line  of  the 
sewage. 

At  Great  FaDs,  Mont.,  a  sewer  constructed  of  Portland  concrete  pipe 
showed  so  much  deterioration  after  a  short  period  of  service  as  to 
necessitate  reconstruction  of  certain  portions  (Trans.  Am.  Soc.  C.  E., 
vol.  Ixiii).  It  appears  that  here,  instead  of  being  due  to  any  effect 
of  sewage  or  gas,  the  disintegration  was  caused  by  strongly  alkaline 
water  surrounding  the  outside  and  percolating  through  the  wall  of  the 
sewer.  The  action  was  similar  to  that  noted  in  other  places  where  water 
containing  large  quantities  of  sulphates  is  encountered,  such  as  sea 
water  or  water  from  arid  regions,  and  resulted  in  disintegration  by  the 
formation  of  compounds  accompanied  by  expansion  in  the  pores  of  the 
concrete. 

This  deterioration  is  by  no  means  imiversal,  even  when  conditions 
apparently  similar  to  the  above  are  encountered,  and  is  less  when  the 
concrete  is  dense,  thus  preventing  the  entrance  of  chemically  laden 
moisture  into  the  body  of  the  masonry.  In  fact,  the  best  precautions 
which  are  apparent  at  the  present  time  for  preventing  deterioration 
appear  to  be  the  use  of  dense  mixtures,  waterproofing  compounds,  or 
coatings  which  prevent  water  from  penetrating  beyond  the  surface 
of  the  concrete.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  attack  the  problem  from 
a  chemical  standpoint,  particularly  in  France,  where  some  of  the  cement 
companies  have  been  more  or  less  successful  in  producing  a  "non- 
decompwsable"  cement.  This  has  been  largely  done  by  reducing  so 
far  as  possible  the  percentage  of  alumina  in  the  cement,  as  it  is  to  the 
alumina  compounds  formed  by  the  chemical  action  of  the  sulphates  in 
the  water  that  the  expansion  and  consequent  disintegration  appear 
to  be  largely  due.  The  lime  in  the  cement  is  also  involved  in  the  action 
and  attempts  have  been  made  to  neutralize  its  effects  by  mixing  with 
the  cement  material  which  will  combine  with  the  free  lime  and  form 
insoluble  compounds. 

This  action  is  not  confined  to  mortar  and  concrete  alone  but  brick, 
underbumed  clay  tile,  and  even  stone  have  been  attacked  by  alkaline 
waters.  In  the  case  of  septic  sewage  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of 
hydrogen  sulphide  gas,  the  action  seems  to  be  more  energetic  when 
the  water  contains  quantities  of  mineral  sulphates,  the  production  of 
hydrogen  sulphide  alone  from  organic  compounds  being  insufficient  to 
produce  serious  results  in  most  cases. 

It  is  probable  that  the  injurious  effect  of  gases  upon  concrete  and 
mortar  will  be  more  evident  in  warm  climates,  because  of  the  more  vigor- 
ous decomposition  going  on  in  the  sewage  and  the  deposits  from  it. 
The  following  opinion  of  E.  P.  Richards,  City  Engineer's  office,  Madras, 
India,  is  pertinent: 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  371 

'' I  should  like  to  add  a  warning  on  this  danger.     We 

have  a  number  of  small  concrete  pipe  drains  and  sewers  in  Madras,  mostly 
6-in.,  9-in.,  and  12-in.  diameter.  They  have  been  laid  some  seven  or  eight 
years,  and  are  now  found  in  many  places  to  be  corroded  very  badly  indeed. 
The  disintegration  in  every  case  is  internal,  and  in  the  soffit.  In  some 
pipes  scarcely  any  thickness  is  left,  and  collapse  is  taking  place.  The 
sewage  has  a  high  temperature  here,  and  decomposes  rapidly;  and  these 
sewers  have  never  been  ventilated  properly.  The  pipes  themselves  appear 
to  be  of  quite  good  hard  concrete,  and  the  inverts  are  usually  as  good  as 
new.  We  attribute  the  corrosion  to  sewer  gas"  {Surveyor,  Apr.  5,  1912, 
p.  539). 

Finally  it  may  be  stated  that  great  quantities  of  concrete  have  been 
and  are  being  used  with  satisfactory  results,  even  in  places  where, 
according  to  the  isolated  cases  noted,  disintegration  might  be  expected. 
The  conditions  likely  to  produce  disintegration  of  the  concrete  or  of  the 
cement  mortar  in  the  brick  joints  are  the  presence  of  deleterious  chem- 
icals, porosity  of  the  concrete  or  mortar,  bad  ventilation,  strength  and 
staleness  of  the  sewage,  frost  action,  and  the  presence  of  salt  or  alkaline 
water  coupled  with  the  conditions  stated.  No  definite  conclusions 
can  be  drawn,  but  in  locations  where  disintegration  is  considered 
possible,  concrete  should  be  used  with  caution  and  steps  should  be 
taken  to  minimize  any  possible  serious  results. 

Use  of  Materials  Excavated  from  Trench. — ^In  some  localities  much 
of  the  sand  and  gravel  for  constructing  concrete  sewers  may  be  obtained 
from  the  trench  itself.  In  a  few  cases  the  sand  and  gravel  excavated 
have  been  of  such  quality  and  so  graded  that  they  were  used  without 
screening.  It  is  quite  unusual,  however,  to  find  the  combination  suoh 
that  the  requisite  proportions  of  each  can  be  obtained  without  an  undue 
amount  of  screening.  Sand  generally  predominates  to  such  an  extent 
that  it  is  cheaper  to  transport  the  gravel  from  a  distance  rather  than 
screen  the  large  amount  of  material  necessary  to  obtain  it  directly  from 
the  trench. 

In  the  construction  of  the  Bronx  Valley  sewer  (Eng,  ReCy  Oct.  22, 
1910)  part  of  the  sand  was  obtained  from  the  trench  but  required  wash- 
ing before  use.  This  was  accomplished  in  a  box  14  ft.  long,  14  in.  wide 
and  with  a  depth  varying  from  zero  to  4  ft.  A  weir  was  cut  in  one 
side  near  the  top,  for  the  discharge  of  dirty  water  and  fine  material. 
A  12-in.  perforated  pipe  was  laid  on  the  sloping  bottom  for  about  half 
the  length  of  the  box,  through  which  water  flowed  for  agitating  and  wash- 
ing the  material. 

When  the  trench  b  through  rook  it  may  be  economical  upon  large 
work,  where  the  demand  for  stone  is  great,  to  install  a  rock  crusher  and 
screens  for  manufacturing  the  concrete  aggregate.  In  building  a 
large  sewer  3000  ft.  long,  in  St.  Louis  {Eng.  News,  July  30,  1908),  the 


^ 


372  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

contractors  installed  a  No.  3  Gates  crusher  with  a  conveyor  for  elevating 
the  stone  to  screens  from  which  it  dropped  into  bins.  This  plant  was 
placed  near  a  railroad  siding  where  sand  and  cement  were  received 
and  where  the  concrete  mixer  was  located.  Materials  were  conveyed 
to  and  from  the  work  by  means  of  an  industrial  railway. 

This  piece  of  work  was  a  very  large  one,  involving  a  great  amount  of 
materials  to  be  delivered  within  a  distance  economically  and  practically 
reached  from  a  permanent  plant.  Portable  outfits  are,  however, 
available  for  smaller  work.  In  the  construction  of  the  Bronx  Valley 
sewer,  mentioned  above,  portable  Climax  crushers,  elevators  and  bin 
wagons  were  used  and  were  moved  from  place  to  place  where  rock  was 
being  excavated  from  the  trench. 

.  Quantities  of  Sand,  Stone  and  Cement — ^As  in  the  case  of  mortar  the 
quantities  of  ingredients  required  per  unit  volume  of  concrete  depend 
on  the  character  of  the  sand  and  stone,  the  percentage  of  voids  and  the 
density  as  affected  by  the  proportions  of  particles  of  different  sizes  in  the 
mixture.  The  general  laws  relating  to  volumes  and  voids  are  thus  stated 
by  Taylor  and  Thompson  in  their  "Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced," 
second  edition,  page  160: 

"  (1)  A  mass  of  equal  spheres,  if  symmetrically  piled  in  the  theoretically 
most  compact  manner,  would  have  26  per  cent,  voids  whatever  the  sixe  of 
the  spheres,  but  by  experiment  it  is  found  that  it  is  practically  impossible 
to  get  below  44  per  cent,  voids. 

"  (2)  If  a  dry  material  having  grains  of  uniform  shape  be  separated  by 
screens  into  grains  of  uniform  dimensions,  the  separated  sizes  (except  when 
finer  than  will  pass  a  No.  74  screen)  will  contain  approximately  equal  per- 
centages of  voids;  in  other  words,  a  dry  substance  consisting  of  large 
particles,  all  of  similar  size  and  shape,  will  contain  practically  the  same 
percentage  of  voids  as  a  substance  having  grains  of  the  same  shape  but  of 
uniformly  smaller  size. 

**  (3)  In  any  material  the  largest  percentage  of  voids  occurs  with  grains  of 
uniform  size,  and  the  smallest  percentage  of  voids  with  a  mixture  of  sizes 
so  graded  that  the  voids  of  each  size  are  filled  with  the  largest  particles  that 
will  enter  them. 

"  (4)  An  aggregate  consisting  of  a  mixture  of  coarse  stones  and  sand  has 
greater  density — ^that  is,  contains  a  smaller  ^percentage  of  voids — than  the 
sand  alone. 

"  (5)  By  Puller  and  Thompson's  experiments,  perfect  gradation  of  sizes 
of  the  aggregate  appears  to  occur  when  the  percentages  of  the  mixed  aggre- 
gate passing  different  sizes  of  sieves  are  defined  by  a  curve  which  approaches 
a  combination  of  an  ellipse  and  straight  line. 

"(6)  Materials  with  round  grains,  such  as  gravel,  contain  fewer  voids 
than  materials  with  angular  grains,  such  as  broken  stone,  even  though  the 
particles  in  both  may  have  passed  through  and  been  caught  by  the  same 
screens. 

''(7)  The  mixture  of  a  small  amount  of  water  with  dry  sand  increases 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  373 

its  bulk.  In  the  case  of  most  bank  sands  the  maximum  volume — and  hence 
the  smallest  amount  of  solid  matter  per  unit  of  volume,  that  is,  the  largest 
percentage  of  absolute  voids — ^is  reached  with  from  5  to  8  per  cent,  of 
water." 

In  practice  the  effort  is  to  obtain,  so  far  as  practicable,  both  for 
strength  and  impermeability,  the  densest  mixture  possible.  The  best 
experimental  work  on  this  subject  has  been  done  by  W.  B.  Fuller  and 
Sanford  E.  Thompson  (Trans.  Am.  Soc.  C.  E.,  vol.  lix,  and  Taylor  and 
Thompson,  "Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced,"  to  which  the  reader  is 
referred). 

Fuller  ^ves  detailed  directions  for  analyzing  aggregates  by  screening 
into  different  sizes,  making  analyses  of  these  different  sizes  and  com- 
bining, by  the  dd  of  curves  plotted  from  the  analyses,  the  different 
materials  in  such  proportions  as  to  obtain  a  curve  of  maximum  density. 
It  is  usually  impracticable  to  screen  the  aggregates  into  many  sizes  for 
the  purpose  of  recombining  them  in  proper  proportions,  but  often  by 
screening  to  three  or  even  two  sizes,  combinations  can  be  made  to 
fit  the  theoretical  mixture  surprisingly  well.  If  the  particular  sand  and 
gravel  to  be  used  are  already  determined,  Fuller  gives  the  following 
method  of  proportioning  by  trial  mixtures. 

''Having  determined  the  particular  sand  and  stone  which  are  to  be  used 
on  any  piece  of  work,  a  simple  and  accurate  way  of  determining  proportions 
is  by  actual  trial  batches  of  fresh  material.  For  this  it  is  only  necessary  to 
have  good  scales  and  a  strong  and  rigid  cylinder,  say,  a  piece  of  10-in. 
wrought-iron  pipe  capped  at  one  end.  Carefully  weigh  out  and  mix  to- 
gether on  a  piece  of  sheet  steel  or  other  non-absorbent  material  all  the 
ingredients,  having  the  consistency  the  same  as  is  intended  to  be  used  in 
the  work.  Place  these  in  the  pipe,  carefully  tamping  all  the  time,  and  note 
the  height  to  which  the  pipe  is  filled.  Weigh  the  pipe  before  filling  and  after 
being  filled,  thus  checking  the  weight  of  material  mixed.  Throw  this 
material  away  before  it  has  time  to  set,  and  clean  the  pipe.  Make  up 
another  batch,  using  the  same  weights  of  cement  and  water  and  the  same 
total  weight  of  sand  and  stone,  but  have  the  ratio  of  weights  of  the  sand 
and  stone  slightly  different  from  the  first.  Note  whether,  after  placing,  the 
height  in  the  cylinder  is  less  or  more  than  was  the  height  of  the  first  batch, 
and  this  will  be  a  guide  to  further  similar  mixes,  until  a  proportion  is  found 
which  gives  the  least  height  in  the  cylinder,  and  at  the  same  time  works  well 
while  mixing  and  looks  well  in  the  cylinder,  all  the  stones  being  covered 
with  mortar.  This  method,  if  carefully  followed,  will  give  very  accurate 
results,  but  of  course  does  not  indicate,  as  does  mechanical  analysis,  what 
other  changes  can  be  made  in  the  physical  sizes  of  the  sand  and  stones  so 
as  to  get  the  best  available  composition." 

To  what  extent  it  is  economical  to  go  in  the  proper  separation  and 
combining  of  aggregates  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  determine  ex- 
cept by  a  consideration  of  local  conditions.    It  may  be  stated,  how- 


374  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

ever,  that  under  certain  conditions  perfect  grading  of  the  mixture  may 
result  in  saving  1  /2  bbl.  or  more  of  cement  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete, 
and  equal  strength  will  be  attained. 

Methods  involving  the  determination  of  voids  by  running  water  into 
the  aggregates  give  erroneous  results  and  are  no  more  accurate  than  the 
arbitrary  selection  of  proportions  such  asl:2:4  or  1:3:6  parts  of  cement, 
sand  and  stone  respectively.  This  method  is  based  on  the  theory  that 
the  voids  in  the  stone  will  amount  on  an  average  to  50  per  cent., 
and  that  the  amount  of  mortar  should  be  slightly  in  excess  of  this  50 
per  cent.  The  general  laws  governing  the  relations  of  the  various 
constituents  are  thus  summarized  by  Taylor  and  Thompson: 

"The  strength  and  density  of  concrete  are  affected  but  slightly,  if  at  all, 
by  decreasing  the  quantity  of  the  medium  size  stone  of  the  aggregate  and 
increasing  the  quantity  of  the  coarsest  stone.  An  excess  of  stone  of  medium 
size,  on  the  other  hand,  appreciably  decreases  the  density  and  strength  of 
the  concrete. 

"The  strength  and  density  of  concrete  are  affected  by  the  variation  in 
the  diameter  of  the  particles  of  sand  more  than  by  variation  in  the  diameters 
of  the  stone  particles. 

"An  excess  of  fine  or  of  medium  sand  decreases  the  density  of  the  mixture, 
but  increases  the  strength,  although  in  a  slightly  smaller  ratio  than  the 
increase  in  the  ratio  of  cement. 

"The  substitution  of  cement  for  fine  sand  does  not  affect  the  density 
of  the  mixture  but  increases  the  strength,  although  in  a  slightly  smaller 
ratio  than  the  increase  in  the  ratio  of  cement. 

"It  follows  from  the  foregoing  conclusions  that  the  correct  proportioning 
of  concrete  for  strength  consists  in  finding,  with  any  percentage  of  cement, 
a  concrete  mixture  of  maximum  density,  and  increasing  or  decreasing  the 
cement  by  substituting  it  for  the  fine  particles  in  the  sand  or  vice  versa.^ 

"  In  ordinary  proportioning  with  a  given  sand  and  stone  and  a  given  per- 
centage of  cement,  the  densest  and  strongest  mixture  is  attained  when  the 
volume  of  the  mixture  of  sand,  cement  and  water  is  so  small  as  just  to  fill 
the  voids  in  the  stone.  In  other  words,  in  practical  construction,  use  as 
small  a  proportion  of  sand  and  as  large  a  proportion  of  stone  as  is  possible 
without  producing  visible  voids  in  the  concrete." 

As  indicating  the  amounts  of  materials  necessary  for  concrete,  under 
average  conditions  usually  obtaining  in  sewer  work.  Table  63  is  taken 
from  a  table  in  "Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced,"  by  Taylor  and 
Thompson: 

Mixing  Concrete  by  Hand. — Concrete  may  be  mixed  by  hand  or  by 
one  of  the  various  types  of  machine  mixers.  The  relative  economy  in 
cost  of  the  two  can  only  be  decided  by  a  consideration  of  the  size  of, 
and  conditions  surrounding,  the  work.    On  small  sewers  the  necessity 

1  Thifl  very  important  law  requires  further  tests  for  confirmation  outside  of  the  limits  of 
the  present  tests. 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS 


375 


> 

M 

»« 
O 

s 


d 
« 

O 

h 

.a 

•3 

> 


I 

a 


a 

s 

o 
0« 


a 

s 
I 

o 

CO 


CQ 


tit 


OQ 


i 


C3 


QQ 


s 


a 

o 


O    3  ? 


GO    **    ^ 


o|5 


ki 
a 


a  V  >t 


"13 


C3 
O 

kl 

o 
a 

o 


3^ 


W  »  N  lA  t-  5  N 

CO  CO  t^  t^  t^  00  00 

•  •••■■■ 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 


»oco®i^t>-t>-t>-oo»o®i^t>-i^ 

•  •■■••••■■•a         _■  •  V  w  ■  « 

oooooooooooooooooo 


K  »  O  N 

tsi  t^  00  00 


CM  O)  CO 

^  CO  CO 

^  ^  ^  ^  <:i  ^  ^ 


CO  »-i  oi  r* 

CO  CO  CM  CM 


Oil>''^CMi-iOil>'"^CMOil>.»C'^CM*-' 

COCOCOCOCOCM^^^COCOCOCOCOCO 

•  ■■••••••••a  _  •  •  •  •  ■  ■ 

OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 


Oi  »C  £3 
^j<    ^5<    n^ 


s 


00  t^  X  o  CO  t^ 

COCM»-ii-<OOiThCM 


00505»-i^OOCMOOCOCM»OOiCOOO'^OCOCO 
i-ii-iO0i0i0000*-'OOiO5000000l^t>- 

^i-i,-iOOOO»H^OOOOOOO 


CO    00    ^    ^    t^    05 

t>-  r*  00  ob  00  00 


coxcocooco»ooo 
cocot»t»oooooox 


OOCMiOOOi-i-^COOO 

coi>.t>-t^xooxoo 


ooooooooooooooooooooooooo 


•     •••••■ 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 


CM  05  CO  -^  CM  O 

^  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 


CM  Oi  »0  CM  Q 
*0  ^^  ^^  ''J'  '^ 


CO'^CM*-'X»OC0»-'Oir*»O"^ 
C0C0C0*O^'^^^C0C0  ,C0  CO 

■     •■••■■••••■•■•••• 

oooooooooooooooooo 


t-i  op  00  00  O  CO  ?p 
CO   "^   CO   CM   CM   *-•   O 


05ooc50cot^i-Jco»-i»-icoi>«*-<cocMr*coo 

'^COCMCMi-«OOOSOiCM»-i00050500XOO 


o  o 


o  o  o  o  o 


^  Oi   '•i'   Oi   CO  t^ 

r*  r*  00  X  05  Oi 

•  ••■••■ 

O  O  O  O  O  O  1-1 


00COOSC0l>'»-i'<1<r*O5C0XCMCOOiCM»Ot^O5 
COl^t^OOOOOJOSOSOit^t^XOOXOiOOaOS 

oooooooooooooooooo 


Oi  »0   CM   Q   t^   »0   CO 

^  ^    ^   ^    CO   CO   CO 

•  •••■.. 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 


COCMOSCO-^i-tOit^COiOCMOit* 


0    05    1^ 


_  .  '^  CO 

»o»0'^'^'ft<'^cococo»o»0'^'^"^"^'^coco 

•  •■••••■••■•■••■•• 

oooooooooooooooooo 


"T}ii-iQ*-iCM»0   000050»-i"<tl>'i-JCD^OCOl>«*-<»O^COCMOO 
tN.coiO'-tCOCMi-icO'^'^COCM'-Hi-iOOCOCM'-i'HOOOSOiOO 


o  o  o 


CO 

s 

28 

-* 
Oi 

§ 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

»-< 

rH 

Oc0CMt^CM»005CM»0l>.i-iC0O'^t^0iCM»C 
r*t>-XXOi050SOOt>-XX050iOi0500 

0000000-H^OOOOOOO»Ht-i 


•-•  r*  "^  CM   05  i>.  »c 

lO  ^   ^   Tji   CO   CO   CO 

■  •••••• 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 


"6o'  »c^xcocoi-iOix"i>''^'cM05t^'»ocoi-ia& 

lO»O»C'^"^Tj<Tt<C0C0«OiO»O^'^'^>Tj<'^C0 

oooooooooooooooooo 


^  X  t^  X  05  *-i  »o 
X   CO   »0   -^   CO   CO   CM 


CO   W3   CO  l>« 
CO  »o  '^ 


O    CO 


_     --t^CMl>'COXCMCO*-'CDi-it>. 
COcOCMf-if-iOcOCMCMi-if-iOOOiOi 


CO 


o  o 


o  r*  CO  X  CO  X  »-• 

X  X  Oi  Oi   O  O  *H 

•  •■•■■■ 

O  O    O    O    »-•    »H    *H 


COOcO»-iCO*-i»OX 


KXXOOiOC^C^i-iXXOiSob 
00000*Hi-i*-<*-<00000»H»H?Hi-^ 


X   CM   »0   Q?   »-• 
~    O  O  O  t-H 


CO    05    CO 

lo  "t  'ft^ 


5  5 

•  ■•■■•• 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 


CO  CO 


OQr*"^CMOil>.»C'^CM 

■  ■■■••■••■■■•■••■a 

oooooooooooooooooo 


i-jr*'*i-ixcO'^CM___      .-._.       .,., 

CO»0»0»0^"^"^"^"^cO»0»0»0"^Tj<'^"^"^ 


a  w. 


o 

a 


as    o 

C;    o 


c 


a    &) 


05   CO   lO   »0  t^   Oi   CM 
X   t^   CO   »0   ^   CO   CO 


CMCMCM'^r^O'^XC0CM'^XCMC0CMr*C005 
t>.CO»C"^COCOCM^»-i'^COeJCM*-'*-iOOOi 


a  Eo  ^ 


«0   lO  t^  *-•  I>-   CO  o 

t^  CD   »0  »0  -^  -^   ^ 


1>.»OCOQ'^01COCMOCOOO»HCOCMXICCMO 

xr*coco»0'^^"^'^t<.coco»o»0"^"^^'^ 


^  73 


73 

5 


p  § 


ProportionB  by          .    Proportiona  by 
parts                            volume 

i  aT      ^  CO 

M  eo 

CM 

»d 

CO 

• 

f-l 

• 

CO 

• 

1^ 

7.6  19.0 
7.6  20.9 
7.6'  22.8 
9.5  11.4 

9.5  13.3 
9.5,  15.2 

9.5  17.1 
9.5  19.0 
9.5  20.9 

X 

CM 
CM 

»C 

• 

CM 

d 

CO 

CD 
CM 

lO 

d 

CM  1-H  O  05  X  l>. 

»c  i>^  d  d  cm'  ""t 

1-1  ,-1  r-i  CM  CM  CM 

^^^^    ^^^*   ^^^^    ^^^^    ^^^^    ^^^" 

...... 

CO 
d 

CM 

00  d 

CM  CO 

1 3  ""^ 

CO  CO 

•    • 

• 

fH 

rH  »-< 

1 
CO 

»H  fi* 

»H 

fH 

rH  f-i4  tH  1-4 

1-^  rH 

y^    ^^    n^ 

*-• 

*-• 

Tl 

r^ 

?H  »-< 

CO  CO 

'^t^ 

lO  »C  CO  CO 

CO  Tj< 
CM  CM 

"t  iC  iO 

CO 

CO 

t^ 

Hn    He*    .^n 
^  -^  lO  »0  CO  CO 

h- 

t^  X 

•o 

1     ICM  CM 

CM 

*-4 

CM 

CM  CM  CM  CM 

*^w  ^^^^  ^^^^ 

CM  CM  CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 

co 

CO  CO 

rH  1-H 

a 

^-  1-i 

*-4   *-4 

1-i  ^H  ^H 

- 

f-H 

1-H 

«     M 

s  s 

•M     o 

ll 


18 

a  -^ 

11 

d  ca 
»  S 

^  & 

«i   o 

n 

\  ^ 

8 
E 


376  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

of  frequent  changes  in  the  location  of  the  mixer  generally  precludes  the 
use  of  charging  machinery,  by  which  some  economy  is  sometimes 
effected  on  large  work,  so  that  the  saving  in  labor  over  hand  mixing 
is  only  that  due  to  turning  and  mixing  the  concrete.  Against  this  must 
be  placed  the  interest  on  the  original  cost,  depreciation  and  operating 
expenses  of  the  machine  mixer.  Where  only  a  small  quantity  of  con- 
crete is  to  be  mixed  per  day,  these  charges  may  be  greater  than  the 
cost  of  mixing  by  hand. 

At  Harrisburg,  Pa.  {Eng,  Rec,,  Oct.  15,  1904),  experiments  with  a 
machine  mixer  in  a  section  requiring  0.34  cu.  yd.  of  concrete  per  foot 
showed  no  economy  by  the  use  of  a  machine.  At  Louisville,  Ky.,  where 
a  large  number  of  concrete  sections  varying  in  size  from  2  to  15  ft.  in 
diameter  were  built  in  1907  to  1910,  a  very  large  proportion  were  con- 
structed by  the  aid  of  concrete  mixers,  even  down  to  those  about  4  ft.  in 
diameter.  It  is  questionable,  however,  whether  on  these  smaller  sizes 
there  was  any  economy  over  hand  mixing.  As  a  rough  general  statement 
it  may  be  said  that  very  often  machine  mixers  may  be  found  economical 
where  the  amount  of  concrete  to  be  mixed  is  in  excess  of  20  cu.  yd.  per 
day.  This,  of  course,  assumes  that  working  spaces  are  sufficient  to 
permit  efficient  handling  of  the  machine. 

The  process  of  mixing  by  hand  may  be  performed  in  a  number  of 
different  ways.  Sand  and  cement  may  be  mixed  dry,  spread  upon  the 
stone  evenly  and  water  applied,  after  which  the  mixture  is  turned,  or 
the  cement  and  sand  may  be  made  into  mortar  which  is  spread  upon 
the  stone  and  the  mass  turned  and  mixed.  In  the  latter  case  the  mor- 
tar is  mixed  separately  in  the  mortar  bed,  the  cement  and  sand  being 
mixed  dry  until  they  are  thoroughly  incorporated  and  the  mixture  is 
of  an  even  color  throughout.  Water  is  then  added  and  the  mixture 
still  further  turned  over  with  shovels  or  stirred  with  long-handled 
hoes,  before  spreading  on  the  stone. 

For  measuring  the  materials  it  is  convenient  to  provide  bottomless 
boxes  of  proper  sizes,  handles  being  provided  at  the  corners  by  which 
they  may  be  lifted  after  being  filled.  Under  some  conditions,  however, 
it  may  be  possible  to  calibrate  the  wheelbarrows  and  thus  proportion 
the  amount  of  sand  and  stone  by  taking  a  specified  number  of  wheel- 
barrow loads  of  each.  The  batch  which  has  been  found  most  con- 
venient and  customary  to  mix  is  one  which  takes  a  barrel  of  cement 
and  amounts  to  20  cu.  ft.,  more  or  less.  It  is  not  usual  to  measure  the 
cement  separately,  but  the  amount  both  as  to  volume  and  weight 
which  a  barrel  is  assumed  to  contain  is  specified.  As  there  is  a  great 
variation  in  the  weights  of  cement  per  unit  of  volume,  depending  on 
whether  it  is  weighed  loose  or  packed,  it  is  customary  to  assiune  and 
specify  that  100  lb.  of  cement  equals  1  cu.  ft.,  and  that  one  barrel 
contains  3.8  cu.  ft.    . 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  377 

In  mixi^  the  concrete,  two  men  face  each  other  on  opposite  sides  of 
the  mixing  board  and  the  mase  is  spread  out  in  a  thin  layer  on  it.  Then 
with  square-pointed  shovels,  one  man  working  right-handed  and  the 
other  left-handed,  they  push  the  shovels  along  the  platform  under 
the  piles,  lift  a  shovelful  and  turn  it  over  with  a  spreading  motion, 
drawing  the  shovel  at  the  same  time  toward  themselves.  By  this 
method  of  operation  a  ridge  of  concrete  is  soon  formed  parallel  to  the 
original  mass  and  2  or  3  ft.  away  from  it.  This  ridge  is  then  Iiandled 
in  the  same  way  by  two  more  men,  thus  giving  it  a  second  turn.  After 
the  whole  mass  has  been  thus  turned  over  twice,  two  of  the  men  turn 
the  material  a  third  time  back  into  a  position  near  its  original  place. 
With  a  large  gang  a  pile  may  be  attacked  from  two  sides,  dght  men  thus 
bdng  occupied  in  mixing  the  material.  Usually  three  complete  turns 
of  the  whole  mass  by  skilful  men  are  sufficient  for  proper  mixing,  but 
not  when  the  work  is  done  without  proper  spreading  of  the  materials 
by  the  shovelers.  A  gang  of  about  16  men,  depending  on  the  distance 
the  material  must  be  wheeled,  the  difficulty  of  placing,  etc.,  will  mix 
and  place  about  25  cu.  yd.  per  day  ot  10  hours. 


Fia.  123,— Gasoline-driven  mixer  (Little  Wonder). 

Machine  Mixing. — Mechanical  concrete  mixers  are  of  two  general 
classes,  continuous  and  batch.  There  is  a  further  differentiation  as 
to  the  manner  of  mixing,  as  by  paddles,  gravity  or  rotation.  By  far 
the  greater  number  of  mixers  used  in  sewer  work  consist  of  the  rotary 
batch  type,  which  is  either  discharged  by  tilting  or  by  introducing  a 
chute  which  intercepts  the  falling  concrete  and  carries  it  out.  Fig,  120 
shows  one  of  the  tilting  mixers  and  Fig.  121  one  of  the  stationary 
mixers  with  dischar^ng  chute.  Another  tyjre  consists  of  a  cube  rotated 
so  that  a  line  through  two  opposite  comers  maint^na  a  horizontal 
position.    About  1910,  a  demand  for  small  mixers  arose  and  was  met 


378  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

by  a  number  of  light  machines,  one  of  which  is  shown  in  Fig.  123. 
It  weighs  only  1450  lb.  with  the  truck  and  2-1/2-h.p.  gasoline  engine 
and  mixes  5  cu.  ft.  of  concrete  in  a  batch. 

Mixers  of  the  batch  type  are  usually  charged  by  hand,  either  by  the 
use  of  runways  and  wheelbarrows  where  the  chaiiging  hopper  is  not 
too  high,  or  mechanically  by  filling  boxes,  Fig.  122,  which  are  lifted  from 
the  ground  and  dumped  into  the  mixer. 

Continuous  mixers  are  operated  by  paddles  which  stir  the  material 
in  a  trough  and  push  it  constantly  toward  one  end.  The  materials 
are  handled  either  by  being  spread  out  in  proper  proportion  on  a 
platform  and  then  shoveled  into  the  mixer,  or  by  men  shoveling  them 
in  proper  proportions,  from  piles  of  cement,  sand  and  stone,  that  is, 
a  1  to  2  to  4  mixture  would  require  one  man  shoveling  cement,  two 
sand  and  four  stone,  thus  maintaining  a  constant  proportion  of 
ingredients. 

In  one  tjrpe  of  gravity  mixer  the  materials,  previously  arranged  in 
layers  of  stone,  sand  and  cement,  are  shoveled  into  a  long  chute-like 
device  crossed  by  bars  at  intervals  for  breaking  up  the  materials, 
which  toss  them  about  and  against  the  sides,  water  being  introduced 
at  the  same  time.  In  another  type  cone-shaped  hoppers  with  openings 
closed  by  gates  are  located  one  above  the  other,  the  materials  being 
discharged  from  one  to  the  other  and  mixed  by  mingling  together  in 
their  passage. 

A  portable  gravity  mixer  known  as  the  Hains-Weaver  has  been  used 
to  some  extent  on  sewer  work.  This  consists  of  four  iron  hoppers  hung 
one  below  the  other  by  chains,  each  hopper  being  provided  with  a  gate 
at  the  bottom.  The  sand,  stone,  cement  and  water  are  placed  in  the  first 
hopper,  after  which  the  gate  is  opened,  allowing  the  contents  to  flow 
into  the  second  hopper,  its  gate  then  being  opened  and  so  on.  The 
action  of  the  mixer  is  somewhat  like  that  of  the  sand  in  an  hour  glass,  the 
materials  from  the  sides  flowing  toward  the  center  and  thence  downward. 
For  concrete  of  fairly  wet  consistency,  such  as  is  often  desirable  in  sewer 
work,  this  type  of  mixer  apparently  works  well.  When  too  much  water 
is  added  there  is  a  tendency  for  the  water  and  fine  material  to  run 
through  rapidly,  leaving  the  stone  to  follow.  For  dry  mixtures  the 
mixing  is  liable  not  to  be  as  complete  as  desirable. 

This  type  of  mixer  was  used  on  a  4  ft.  3  in.  by  5  ft.  sewer  in  Boston 
where  the  conditions  were  somewhat  unusual.  This  sewer  was  being 
built  through  a  narrow  alley  where  the  trench  took  up  practically  the 
full  working  space.  A  cableway  was  installed  with  the  towers  erected  in 
streets  at  the  ends  of  the  alley.  The  mixer  was  hung  from  an  elevated 
wooden  portable  platform  carried  by  a  framework  the  legs  of  which 
rested  on  the  trench  braces.  A  number  of  additional  hoppers  similar 
to  those  composing  the  mixer  but  provided  with  legs  so  that  they  could 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  379 

be  brought  to  rest  over  the  top  of  the  mixer,  were  used  for  traneporUng 
the  concrete  mflteriale,  including  water,  which  were  placed  in  them  in  the 
street  at  one  end  of  the  alley.  This  aewer  was  built  in  three  operations, 
and  two  frameworks  for  supporting  the  mixer  were  provided,  each  in  turn 
being  lifted  by  means  of  the  cableway  and  placed  about  15  ft.  forward  of 
the  one  in  use. 

Materials  may  be  measured  in  ordinary  steel  wheelbarrows  but 
barrows  with  high  aides, 
Fig.  124,  allow  of  more 
accuracy  of  measure- 
ment and  carry  larger 
quantities  of  wet  con- 
crete. The  ordinary 
barrow  holds  but  a  small 
quantity,  as  the  con-  , 
Crete,  when  very  wet, 
assumes  a  horizontal 
position    so    that    but 

small  space  is  available       Fig,  124.— Concrete  wheelbarrow  (Sterling), 
if  the  concrete  is  to  be 

prevented  from  running  over  the  ddes  and  ends  when  the  barrow  is 
Ufted. 

On  this  account  two-wheel  carts  with  high  sides,  F^g.  125,  are  some- 
times i^ed,  but  they  reqiure  a  wide  runway  and  may  be  too  heavy  when 
filled  unless  the  ground  or  runway  is  level. 
Under  some  conditions  an  industrial  railway  may  be  laid  beside  the 
trench  and  fade  dump  cars  of  the  type 
shown  in  Yig.  126  may  be  used,  dis- 
chai^ng  their  contents  into   chutes 
which  convey  it  to  the  forms.     Where 
a  single  permanent  mixing  plant  can 
be  made  to  serve  a  large  piece  of  work, 
narrow  gage  railwaj^  are  often  desir- 
able for  several  purposes,  and  in  ordec 
to  limit  the  variety  of  cars  needed  it 
may  be  advisable  to  use  flat  instead 
of  dump  cars  and  to  carry  the  concrete 
in  buckets,  which  can  be  handled  at 
the  trench  by  derricks  or  otherwise.    This  will  involve  more  labor  in 
handling  concrete  but  the  expense  of  shifting  a  chute  in  the  trench 
may  be  avoided. 

Where  the  concrete  is  delivered  by  derricks,  cranes  or  cableways,  it 
must  be  transported  in  buckets,  of  which  many  varieties  are  in  use. 
Some  of  them  are  emptied  by  tripping  a  catch,  which  allows  them  to  turn 


380  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

over,  discharging  the  concrete  with  a  wide-reaching  splash.  Where 
more  accurate  placing  of  the  concrete  is  required,  a  bucket  with  a 
hinged  bottom  is  used,  and  where  very  accurate  placing  is  needed,  as 
in  waUs,  the  form  shown  in  Fig.  127  is  particularly  serviceable,  as  the 


discharge  of  the  concrete  is  kept  under  close  control.  On  lai^e  work 
where  the  introduction  of  labor  saving  machinery  has  proved  economical 
and  Buffiaent  working  space  was  avdlable,  mush  ingeniuty  has  been 
expended  in  the  dedgn  of  concrete  mixing  and  transporting  machinery. 


FiQ.  128. — Concrete  plant  uver  trench,  Louisville. 

Aq  interesting  equipment  was  installed  upon  Section  B  of  the  South- 
ern outfall  Bcwer  at  Louisville,  Ky,  It  consisted,  primarily,  of  a  concrete 
mixer  mounted  upon  a  standard  gage  car,  and  a  locomotive  crane,  both 
being  moved  along  the  trench  as  the  work  progressed.    The  sand  and 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  381 

gravel  were  dumped  beside  the  trench,  shoveled  into  a  bucket  which  was 
hoisted  by  the  crane  and  discharged  into  suitable  hoppers,  mounted  on 
the  car  above  the  concrete  mixer.  A  water  tank  was  placed  on  the  car 
at  such  an  elevation  that  the  water  would  run  by  gravity  to  the  mixer, 
operated  by  a* steam  engine  which,  with  its  boiler,  was  also  mounted  on 
the  car.  At  one  end  of  the  car  an  enclosure  was  built  for  storing  cement. 
As  the  concrete  was  mixed  it  was  dumped  directly  into  a  hopper  from 
which  it  flowed  through  chutes  into  the  trench  where  required.  Upon 
Section  D  of  the  sewer,  a  car  spanning  the  trench  was  used  for  conveying 
the  concrete  mixing  machinery,  as  shown  in  Fig.  128.  This  car  also 
carried  a  house  in  which  the  cement  was  stored.  The  materials  were 
brought  to  the  mixer  in  wheelbarrows  and  after  the  concrete  was  mixed, 
it  was  discharged  into  a  hopper  and  through  troughs  into  the  forms. 

An  illustration  of  the  extent  to  which  special  equipment  and  machinery 
for  the  mixing  and  handling  of  concrete  may  be  used  upon  sewer  work  is 
furnished  by  the  construction  of  the  sewer  at  Classon  Point,  in  the 
Borough  of  the  Bronx,  New  York  City,  described  in  "Municipal  Jour- 
nal" vol.  XXXV,  p.  821.  At  the  upper  end  the  sewer  is  7  ft.  wide  and  at 
the  lower  end  of  the  single  barrel  structure  it  is  12  ft.  6  in.  wide.  Below 
this  point  the  sewer  is  a  double  barrel  structure,  each  barrel  ranging  in 
size  from  8  ft.  3  in.  to  11  ft.  3  in.  wide.  The  entire  length  of  the  sewer  is 
about  9100  ft.  Near  the  outlet  a  dock  was  provided  from  which  a 
construction  track  extended  throughout  the  length  of  the  work.  UpK)n 
the  dock  small  elevated  bins  for  sand  and  gravel  were  constructed. 
These  are  filled  by  means  of  a  derrick  from  scows  which  were  loaded  at 
the  gravel  bank  with  sand  and  gravel  in  the  proportions  required  for  the 
concrete.  The  materials  for  the  concrete  were  conveyed  from  the  dock 
to  the  work  in  buckets  upon  flat  cars.  The  cars  were  placed  under  the 
small  bins  from  which  charges  of  gravel  and  sand  were  drawn  and 
automatically  measured,  upon  which  ihe  necessary  quantity  of  cement 
was  placed.  Two  cars,  each  containing  six  buckets,  were  then  hauled  to 
the  work,  hoisted  and  discharged  into  a  Hains  gravity  mixer,  mounted 
upon  a  tower  built  upon  a  wide-gage  car.  After  the  concrete  had  passed 
through  the  mixer  into  a  bucket  placed  upon  the  ground,  it  was  raised  up 
a  steel  tower  on  the  same  car  to  the  necessary  height  and  discharged 
into  a  loading  hopper,  from  which  it  was  drawn  into  a  U-shaped  trough, 
through  which  it  flowed  to  a  second  hopper,  whence  it  was  discharged  by 
troughs  into  the  forms.  The  plant  was  so  arranged  that  the  discharging 
hoppers  could  be  placed  at  any  desired  height  and  the  concrete  dis- 
tributed over  a  considerable  area  by  means  of  swivel  joints  connecting 
the  two  chutes.  The  cars  carrying  the  engines  and  mixing  and  dis- 
charging towers  were  moved  along  the  side  of  the  trench  on  rails,  as  the 
work  progressed. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  estimate  carefully  the  quantity  of 


382  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

concrete  required,  the  expense  of  handling  it  by  difiPerent  methods  and 
the  cost  and  operating  charges  of  plant  before  deciding  what  equipment 
should  be  provided  for  a  given  undertaking.  While  mechanical  equip- 
ment will  prove  a'dvantageous  if  the  quantity  of  concrete  to  be  handled  is 
large  and  the  plant  can  be  kept  in  operation  a  relatively  large  proportion 
of  the  time,  it  is  easy  to  provide  a  plant  so  complicated  and  expensive 
that  its  operation  more  than  offsets  the  saving  in  cost  of  mixing  and 
placing  the  concrete  by  simpler  methods.  Upon  small  sewer  work,  it  is 
often  less  expensive  to  mix  and  place  the  concrete  by  hand  than  to 
employ  even  relatively  simple  machinery,  and  the  use  of  complicated 
handling  and  mixing  machinery  upon  small  work  is  rarely  justified. 
It  is  probably  true  also  upon  most  sewer  work  that  relatively  little 
money  is  made  or  lost  in  the  handling  of  concrete  in  comparison  with  that 
which  may  be  made  or  lost  in  the  handling  of  the  excavation. 

Placing  Concrete. — Upon  small  work,  where  excavations  are  shallow, 
it  will  usually  be  most  satisfactory  to  shovel  the  concrete  into  the  forms 
from  the  mixing  bed.  Where  the  work  is  deep  and  it  is  not  convenient 
to  place  the  mixing  bed  over  it,  the  concrete  can  be  conveyed  from  the 
mixing  bed  to  the  forms  through  chutes,  which  may  be  made  of  wood 
lined  with  sheet  iron,  or  preferably  entirely  of  sheet  iron.  Such  troughs 
are  frequently  U-shaped,  although,  and  especially  where  they  must  be 
placed  in  a  nearly  vertical  position,  they  may  be  made  nearly  cylindrical 
in  form.  In  either  case  they  should  be  so  constructed  as  to  telescope, 
the  lower  end  of  the  upper  trough  fitting  into  the  upp)er  end  of  the 
trough  below.  It  will  usually  be  found  convenient  to  provide  a  metal 
hopper  at  the  top,  into  which  the  concrete  may  be  thrown  or  dumped 
and  from  which  it  wiU  flow  into  the  troughs. 

Concrete  should  be  made  of  such  a  consistency  that  it  will  flow  readily 
through  a  trough  inclined  1  ft.  in  3  ft.,  and  at  least  this  inclination 
should  be  provided,  as  concrete  wiU  not  flow  readily  through  troughs 
laid  upon  a  flatter  slope.  It  is  necessary  many  times  to  hang  the 
troughs  or  pipes  upon  a  much  steeper  slope  and  difficulty  is  often 
experienced  when  the  angle  of  inclination  is  at  or  somewhat  more  than 
45  deg.  by  the  tendency  of  the  stone,  and  particularly  of  rounded  gravel, 
to  separate  from  the  mortar  in  passing  through  the  trough  or  pipe. 
Where  the  angle  of  inclination  is  nearly  vertical,  this  tendency  is  again 
reduced.  Where  there  is  a  decided  tendency  for  the  stone  to  separate 
from  the  mortar,  it  may  be  necessary  to  catch  the  concrete  in  a  box  and 
re-mix  it  before  Anally  placing  it  in  the  forms.  If  this  is  not  done,  care 
must  be  taken  to  prevent  "pockets"  of  cobbles  or  broken  stone  in  which 
there  is  insufficient  mortar  and  flne  aggregate. 

Concrete  is  now  usually  mixed  very  wet  and  does  not  require  tamping, 
but  does  need  more  or  less  spading  and  slicing  with  thin  metal  blades. 
These  are  of  assistance  in  working  the  concrete  through  reinforcement 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  383 

and  for  scraping  and  prying  the  larger  stones  away  from  the  fonns,  bo 
as  to  leave  a  good  mortar  finish  when  the  forma  are  removed.  Two  or 
more  men,  depending  on  the  size  of  the  work,  are  required  for  placing 
and  cutting  the  concrete,  and  one  man,  when  wheelbarrows  are  employed, 
to  assist  in  emptying  them  into  the  chutes. 

Careful  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  best  method  of  con- 
structing concrete  sewers.  Small  circular  sewers,  perhaps  up  to  a  di- 
ameter of  4  ft.,  can  in  many  cases  be  advantageously  built  in  one  opera- 
tion, full  cylindrical  forms  (described  in  Chapter  XV)  being  placed 
before  any  concrete  is  put  into  the  trench.  Upon  larger  sewers  there 
is  a  great  variety  of  forms  available  for  use,  some  being  made  of 
wood  and  others  of  steel.    Much  ingenuity  may  be  exercised  in  the 


Fio.  129. — Templates  to  which  invert  wEts  acreeded,  Louisville. 

design  of  large  forms  to  reduce  the  coat  of  labor  in  removing  and 
carrying  them  forward  and  resetting  them. 

Sewers  more  than  4  ft.  in  diameter  are  generally  built  in  two,  three, 
or  more  operations.  The  invert  is  firat  placed  for  a  considerable  distance. 
Upon  this  the  side  walls  are  built  and  after  these  become  set  the  arch 
is  turned.  This  method  of  progressive  construction  requires  that  a  con- 
siderable length  of  trench  be  kept  open  at  all  times  for  concreting,  and 
as  time  is  required  for  the  concrete  to  become  thoroughly  sot  and  acquire 
sufficient  strength  so  that  the  forms  may  be  removed,  it  is  a  source  of 
considerable  delay  which  should  be  taken  into  consideration  in  planning 
the  rate  of  progress  to  be  attained. 

Inverts  are  generally  laid  and  acreeded  to  templates.  In  some 
cases  the  concrete  is  placed  in  alternate  blocks,  from  8  to  10  ft,  in  length, 
between  bulkheads.    Where  the  concrete  is  placed  continuously  it  is 


384  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

necessary  to  provide  templates  at  frequent  intervals,  which  may  con- 
veniently be  constructed  of  1/2  X  1-1/2-in.  steel  on  edge  and  hung 
from  the  bracing  overhead,  Fig.  129.  As  the  concrete  is  screeded 
these  templates  are  moved  forward. 

Where  the  concrete  of  which  the  invert  is  constructed  is  very  wet  and 
contains  a  large  quantity  of  mortar,  it  may  be  possible  to  so  work  it  as 
to  bring  the  mortar  to  the  surface  and  provide  a  satisfactory  and 
smooth  invert  surface  by  screeding.  If  the  concrete  is  lean  or  dry  it 
may  be  necessary  to  use  a  small  quantity  of  mortar  to  secure  a  smooth 
finish,  usually  not  more  than  1/2  in.  This,  of  course,  should  be  applied 
before  the  concrete  has  acquired  its  initial  set. 

If  good  concrete  work  is  to  be  secured  it  is  absolutely  essential  to 
have  watertight,  well-made  and  accurate  forms,  and  to  mix  the  con- 
crete of  the  proper  consistency.  If  these  two  points  are  given  careful 
attention,  little  difficulty  should  be  experienced  in  providing  a  satis- 
factory concrete  structure. 

Placing  Reinforcement — In  the  construction  of  reinforced  concrete 
sewers,  placing  and  holding  the  reinforcement  in  its  proper  position  is  a 
troublesome  as  well  as  an  important  matter.  The  method  of  doing  this 
largely  depends  upon  the  position  of  the  metal  and  the  ingenuity  of  the 
constructor.  For  small  sewers,  3  ft.  or  less  in  diameter,  which  may  be 
built  in  one  operation,  as  described  in  Chapter  XV  upon  "Forms  and 
Centers,"  reinforcement  is  not  usually  required.  If,  however,  for  special 
reasons  reinforcement  is  necessary,  construction  in  a  single  operation  is 
generally  impracticable.  This  is  particularly  the  case  where  expanded 
metal  or  woven  fabrics  of  fairly  coarse  mesh  are  used.  The  fabric  acts 
as  a  screen,  preventing  the  free  flow  of  concrete  around  the  forms.  In 
such  cases,  as  with  larger  circular  sewers,  it  is  desirable  to  lay  part  of  the 
invert  under  the  more  inaccessible  part  of  the  form,  by  means  of  tem- 
plates and  screeds.  Part  of  the  reinforcing  material,  bent  to  shape  and 
extending  above  the  springing  line,  is  held  in  proper  position  by  fas- 
tening it  to  longitudinal  timbers  on  either  side  of  the  trench,  and,  if 
necessary,  it  is  also  supported  by  blocks  underneath  it,  removed  as 
the  concrete  reaches  them.  When  the  invert  is  more  or  less  flat,  the 
concrete  may  be  first  placed  up  to  the  position  of  the  steel,  which  is 
then  put  in  position  and  the  concreting  continued,  or  the  whole  system  of 
reinforcement  may  be  first  placed  in  position  and  held  by  blocking  and 
fastening  to  the  trench  braces,  before  any  concrete  is  placed.  This 
latter  method,  shown  in  Fig.  130,  assures  the  proper  location  of  the  steel. 
After  the  sewer  is  completed  to  the  springing  line  and  the  centers  placed, 
the  arch  steel  is  set  and  fastened  by  wiring  it  to  the  projecting  ends  of  the 
invert  steel,  a  proper  space  between  the  centers  and  the  steel  being  main- 
tained, if  necessary,  by  blocks  which  are  removed  as  the  concrete  reaches 
them. 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  385 

Much  of  the  success  in  the  proper  placing  of  the  reinforcing  steel 
depends  upon  bending  it  to  the  correct  shape  before  it  is  lowered  into  the 
trench.  This  may  be  done  on  the  bank  by  the  aid  of  templates  and  a 
bar  or  tire  bending  machine,  or,  in  case  of  large  quantities  of  a  particular 
shape,  the  steel  may  be  bent  at  the  mill  before  shipment.  In  the  con- 
struction of  a  concrete  sewer  in  the  Borough  of  Queens,  N.  Y.,  the  rods 
were  bent  on  the  bank  by  imskilled  labor.  A  heavy  platform  was 
provided,  to  which  were  nailed  pieces  of  4  X  4  in.  timbers  2  ft.  long. 
These  were  nailed  at  proper  points  determined  by  trial,  and  the  steel 
bent  around  them. 

When  the  arch  only  is  to  be  reinforced,  short  pieces  of  steel  may  be  left 
embedded  at  proper  points,  with  their  ends  projecting  above  the  invert 
masonry  at  the  springing  line,  to  which  the  arch  steel,  which  is  held  above 
the  centers  by  blocks  at  the  crown,  may  be  fastened.  In  the  sewer  con- 
struction mentioned  above,  holes  were  left  in  the  green  concrete  of  the 
side  walls,  into  which  the  ends  of  the  arch  steel  were  grouted  after  the 
arch  centers  had  been  placed. 

During  construction  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  while  the  steel 
may  be  easily  lifted  out  of  wet  concrete,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  force 
it  in.  Thus  in  forming  the  arch  when  flexible  material  is  used,  it  may  be 
easily  kept  away  from  the  inner  surface  by  lifting,  but  if  lifted  too  high 
it  is  almost  impossible  to  force  it  back  again  to  its  proper  location. 

WATERPROOFING 

Permeability  of  concrete  is  more  or  less  dependent  upon  a  number  of 
factors.  It  may  be  lessened  by  increasing  the  proportion  of  cement  to 
other  ingredients,  by  the  use  of  sand  and  gravel  rather  than  crushed  stone 
and  screenings,  by  proper  grading  of  the  aggregates,  by  making  the 
mixture  quite  wet,  and  by  increasing  the  thickness  of  the  concrete. 

It  is  neither  practicable  nor  .economical  to  make  sewers  wholly 
impervious  to  water,  as  is  sometimes  done  in  the  case  of  other  under- 
ground structures  which  are  not  used  for  carrying  water.  The  use  of 
carefully  graded  mixtures  rich  in  cement,  mixed  wet  and  efiPectively 
worked  and  spaded  into  place,  is  the  extent  to  which  it  is  generally 
considered  economical  to  go.  Such  precautions,  where  the  head  is  slight 
and  where  the  concrete  shell  is  of  considerable  thickness,  will  result  in 
practically  impervious  concrete.  Under  certain  conditions,  however, 
where  the  sewers  are  laid  in  wet  trenches  and  the  head  of  water  outside 
is  considerable,  and  particularly  where  the  concrete  section  is  a  thin  one, 
it  is  desirable  to  take  some  special  precautions  to  prevent  excessive 
leakage. 

At  Fitchburg,  Mass.  (report  of  David  A.  Hartwell,  Chief  Eng., 
Sewer  Commissioners,  1912)  where  the  intercepting  sewer  was  built  in  a 

26 


386  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

water-course,  the  concrete  walls  were  made  9  in.  instead  of  6  in.  thick 
and  reinforced  with  longitudinal  steel  rods  to  prevent  contraction 
cracks.  At  Louisville,  Ky.,  at  places  (report  Sewer  Commissioners, 
1910)  where  large  amounts  of  ground  water  were  encountered,  part  of 
the  sand  used  in  making  the  concrete  was  replaced  with  10  per  cent, 
of  fine  molding  sand  mixed  with  some  clay.  Tests  showed  that  this 
reduced  the  leakage  to  one-fifth  of  that  obtained  with  an  ordinary 
1:2:4  mixture,  and  below  that  obtained  with  a  mixture  graded  as 
perfectly  as  possible. 

Various  other  mixtures,  some  of  a  proprietary  character,  have  been 
used  to  decrease  permeabiUty.  Generally  these  consist  of  fine  earthy 
material  which  fills  the  interstices  in  the  concrete,  or  fine  material  which 
by  its  nature  repels  water,  or  a  combination  of  both.  The  fine  sand 
just  mentioned  belongs  to  the  first  type.  Clay  is  also  effective, 
particularly  with  lean  mixtures,  say  1  part  cement  to  3  parts  or 
more  of  sand.  With  richer  mixtures,  its  value  is  not  so  apparent 
and  it  decreases  the  strength  considerably,  as  in  this  case  the 
interstices  of  the  sand  are  already  well  filled  with  cement.  Alum 
and  soap,  mixed  in  the  proportion  of  1  part  alum  to  2.2  parts 
hard  soap,  reduce  permeabihty,  but  they  also  considerably  reduce 
the  strength  of  the  resulting  concrete.  The  alum  may  be  mixed 
with  cement  dry  and  the  soap  dissolved  in  the  water  to  be  used  for 
gaging.  Or  the  materials  may  be  dissolved  in  the  water  separately  and 
mixed  just  before  the  concrete  is  made.  As  water  will  only  dissolve 
about  3  per  cent,  by  weight  of  hard  soap,  the  proper  proportions  to  be 
mixed  with  the  water  are  1-1/2  per  cent,  alum  and  3  per  cent.  soap. 
Tests  show  that  this  mixture  may  reduce  the  strength  of  the  concrete 
about  20  per  cent.  Lime  and  soap  in  the  proportions  of  1  to  12,  or  1/4 
per  cent,  lime  to  3  per  cent,  soap,  to  the  weight  of  water,  have  also  been 
used  with  success.  Hydrated  Hme  (Eng,  Cord,,  July  15,  1908,  Sanford 
Thompson)  has  been  effectively  used  in  the  following  proportions: 

8  per  cent,  of  weight  of  cement,  1:2:4  concrete. 
12-1/2  per  cent,  of  weight  of  cement,  1  : 2-1/2  : 4-1/2  concrete. 
16  per  cent,  of  weight  of  cement,  1:3:5  concrete. 

Soap  and  alum  have  been  used  for  many  years  in  the  Sylvester  proc- 
ess of  ^'aterproofing  masonry  by  successive  alternate  surface  applications 
of  solutions  of  these  materials.  (Trans,  Am.  Soc.  C.  E.,  vol  i,  p.  203.) 
The  early  use  of  these  substances  as  ingredients  in  mortar  is  difficult  to 
trace.  In  1900  Gen.  W.  L.  Marshall  added  3/4  lb.  of  alum  to  each  cubic 
foot  of  sand  and  3/4  lb.  of  soft  soap  to  each  gallon  of  water  for  1 : 2-1/2 
mortar  for  work  in  New  York  harbor.  In  1903  the  subject  was  dis- 
cussed at  the  convention  of  the  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers. 

At  Louisville,  Ky.  (report  Commissioners  of  Sewerage,  1910)  experi- 
ments were  made  to  determine  the  most  effective  waterproofing  com- 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS 


387 


pound  to  use  on  certain  sewers  to  be  built  in  wet  ground.  Tests  were 
made  of  specimens  of  concrete  10  in.  in  diameter  and  4  in.  thick.  These 
blocks  were  placed  between  iron  castings,  bolted  firmly  together  in  such 
a  way  as  to  allow  the  application  of  water  under  different  pressures  to 
a  surface  6  in.  in  diameter.  One  sample  of  concrete  was  proportioned 
to  form  a  theoretically  perfectly  graded  mixture;  another  an  ordinary 
1:2:4  mixture,  and  another  a  1 :2  :4  mixture  to  which  varius  water- 
proofing compK>unds  of  a  proprietary  nature  were  added.  Table  64 
gives  the  results  of  these  tests. 

Table  64. — Seepage  in  7  Hours  through  Concrete   with   Various 
Waterproofing  Treatments,  under  16  Lb.  Pressure 

(Report  Commissioners  of  Sewerage,  X^ouisville,  Ky.,  1007—1910,  p.  87) 


Specimen 


Cubic 

inches  per 

square 

inch. 


Cubic 

centi- 
meters per 
square  cen- 
timeter.   ! 


Gallons 
per  square 
foot. 


Total  see- 
page in  cu- 
bic centi- 
meters 


Perfect  mixture 

Concrete,  1-2-4 

Concrete  with  6  per  cent,  clay . . 
Concrete  with  10  per  cent,  clay, 
Concrete  with  6  per  cent,  fine  sand 
Concrete  with   10  per  cent,  fine 

sand 

Concrete  with  4  per  cent,   hy- 

drated  lime 

Concrete    with  6  per  cent,  hy- 

drated  lime 

Concrete    with   8  per  cent,  hy- 

drated  lime 

Concrete  with  2  per  cent.  Medusa, 
Concrete  with  4  per  cent.  Medusa, 
Concrete  with  4  per  cent.  Maumee, 

Concrete  with  McCormick 

Concrete  with  Ceresit 

Concrete  with  4  per  cent.  Toxe- 

ment 


1.53 

3.99 

3.22 

6.30 

16.6 

13.85 

0.86 

2.20 

1.78 

0.12 

0.31 

0.25 

4.86 

12.65 

10.21 

1.20 

3.12 

2.51 

0.71 

1.83 

1.48 

0.24 

0.62 

0.60 

0.10 

0.27 

0.22 

0.92 

2.49 

2.01 

0.00 

0.00 

0.  00 

0.23 

0.61 

0.49 

0.17 

0.44 

0.36 

1.98 

5.03 

4.22 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

721 
3,000 

398 

56 

2,290 

565 

332 

112 

49 

450 

0.00 

110 

80 
928 

0.00 


Note. — Where  very  fine  sand  and  clay  were  used  they  replaced  an 
equal  amount  of  Ohio  River  sand.  Where  hydrated  lime,  Medusa,  Mau- 
mee and  Toxement  were  used,  the  amount  added  was  a  definite  propor- 
tion of  the  quantity  of  cement  used,  but  the  quantity  of  cement  was  not 
reduced.  The  McCormick  compound  was  furnished  already  mixed  with 
the  cement  and  was  said  to  have  been  mixed  just  before  grinding.  The 
Ceresit  was  substituted  for  a  portion  of  the  water  and  in  the  pfoportion 
of  one  to  twenty.  The  dry  waterproofing  compounds  and  the  lime  were 
added  to  and  thoroughly  mixed  with  the  cement  before  wetting. 


388 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Tab  LB  65. — Results   of   Tests    to    Determine    Effect   of  Watbe- 
PROOFiNQ  Materials  upon  the  Tensile  Strength  of  Neat  and 

Mortar  (1  :  3)  Briquettes 


Waterproofing  materiab 
added 


McCormick  "A,"  St 
Louis 

McCormick   "B," 
local 

Ceresite 

Molding  sand 

Molding  sand 

Hydrated  lime 

Hydrated  lime 

Clay 

Clay 

Clay... 


How  added 


Per 
cent, 
added 


Tensile  strength 


Neat 


Mortar  4-3 


7 
days 


28        7     I     28 
days    days  |  days 


Combined  with  cement 
at  mill 

Combined  with  cement 
at  mill 

In  place  of  water 


5.0 


In  place  of  sand^ 5.0 


In  place  of  sand 

Added  directly  to  dry 
cement. 

In  place  of  sand^ 

In  place  of  sand 


10.0 
5.0 

10.0 
2.5 
5.0 


In  place  of  sand 7.5 


797 

513 
642 
698 
636 
749 
608 
753 
718 
644 


740 

577 
669 
743 
642 
651 
635 
737 
912 
802 


205 

199 
311 
176 
177 
387 
371 
235 
221 
344 


307 

220 
375 
368 
510 
511 
505 
344 
401 
327 


*  In  the  case  of  the  neat  briquettes  the  amount  of  sand  and  day  added  were  percentages 
of  the  dry  cement. 

Testa  were  also  made  to  determine  the  effects  of  these  various  com- 
pounds on  the  strength  of  neat  cement  and  mortar,  with  the  results 
given  in  Table  65.  As  a  result  of  these  experiments  it  was  decided,  as 
mentioned  above,  to  use  10  per  cent,  of  fine  molding  sand  with  some  clay 
in  substitution  for  an  equal  amoimt  of  ordinary  sand. 

The  report  of  the  Committee  on  Waterproofing  Materials,  of  the 
American  Society  for  Testing  Materials  (1913),  states  the  following 
among  its  conclusions: 

"That  the  majority  of  patented  and  proprietary  integral  compounds 
tested  have  little  or  no  immediate  or  permanent  effect  on  the  permeability 
of  concrete  and  that  some  of  these  even  have  an  injurious  effect  on  the 
strength  of  mortar  and  concrete  in  which  they  are  incorporated. 

''That  the  permanent  effect  of  such  integral  waterproofing  additions,  if 
dependent  on  the  action  of  organic  compounds,  is  very  doubtful. 

"That  in  view  of  their  possible  effect,  not  only  upon  the  early  strength 
but  also  upon  the  durability  of  concrete  after  considerable  periods,  no 
integral  waterproofing  material  should  be  used  unless  it  has  been  subjected 
to  long-time  practical  tests  under  proper  observation  to  demonstrate  its 
value,  and  unless  its  ingredients  and  the  proportions  in  which  they  are 
present  are  known. 

That  in  general  more  desirable  results  are  obtained  from  inert  com- 
pounds acting  mechanically  than  from  active  chemical  compounds  whose 
efficiency  depends  on  change  of  form  through  chemical  action  after  addi- 
tion to  the  concrete. 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  389 

''That  void-filling  substances  are  more  to  be  relied  upon  than  those 
whose  value  depends  on  repellent  action. 

''That,  assuming  average  quality  as  to  size  of  aggregates  and  reasonably 
good  workmanship  in  the  mixing  and  placing  of  the  concretes,  the  addition 
of  from  10  to  20  per  cent,  of  very  finely  divided  void-filling  mineral  substances 
may  be  expected  to  result  in  the  production  of  concrete  which,  under  ordi- 
nary conditions  of  exposure,  will  be  found  impermeable,  provided  the 
work  joints  are  properly  bonded  and  cracks  do  not  develop  on  drying,  or 
through  change  in  volume  due  to  atmospheric  changes,  or  by  settlement. 

"So  far  the  committee  has  considered  only  concretes  of  the  usual  propor- 
tions, namely,  those  ranging  from  1  cement,  2  sand  and  4  stone  to  1  cement 
3  sand  and  6  stone.  It  has  been  suggested  that  impermeable  concretes 
could  be  assured  by  using  mixtures  considerably  richer  in  cement.  While 
such  practice  would  probably  result  in  an  inmiediate  impermeable  concrete, 
it  is  believed  by  many  that  the  advantage  is  only  temporary,  as  richer 
concretes  are  more  subject  to  check  cracking  and  are  less  constant  in  volume 
under  changes  of  conditions  of  temperature,  moisture,  etc.  Therefore,  the 
use  of  more  cement  in  mass  concrete  would  cause  increased  cracking,  unless 
some  means  of  controlling  the  expansion  and  contraction  be  discovered. 
With  reinforced  concretes  the  objection  is  not  so  great,  as  the  tendency  to 
cracking  is  more  or  less  counteracted  by  the  reinforcement.'' 

The  low-level  intercepting  sewer  at  Baltimore  was  waterproofed  by 
the  membrane  method  and  bituminous  material  was  generally  used 
in  making  the  joints  of  the  sanitary  sewers  leading  to  it,  in  order 
to  reduce  the  rate  of  infiltration  of  the  ground-water  into  the  system. 
All  the  sewage  collected  by  this  intercepter  must  be  pumped,  as  ex- 
plained in  Volume  I,  and  it  was  decided  that  the  additional  cost 
of  waterproofing  sewers  laid  in  very  wet  ground  was  justified  by  the 
probable  reduction  in  the  pumpage  resulting  from  it.  The  average  bid 
price  on  8-in.  sewers  with  bituminous  joints  was  about  5  cents  per  foot 
above  that  for  cement  joints.  The  intercepter  was  below  the  level  of 
mean  low  tide  for  12,035  ft.  and  was  generally  within  100  to  300  ft.  of 
the  harbor.  The  bottom  of  the  trench  was  in  water-bearing  gravel. 
No  leakage  test  of  the  entire  intercepter  was  ever  made,  but  on  a 
3600-ft.  section  from  74  to  84  in.  in  diameter,  the  infiltration  was 
practically  nil,  according  to  Chief  Eng.  Calvin  W.  Hendrick.  The 
general  method  of  waterproofing  the  sewer  was  as  follows: 

After  the  concrete  for  the  invert  and  sides  had  set  and  become  dry,  it 
was  covered  up  to  the  springing  line  of  the  arch  with  a  coating  of  hot 
pitch,  the  contractor  being  permitted  to  use  coal-tar  pitch,  refined 
natural  asphalt,  or  asphalt  made  from  petroleum.  On  this  pitch  a 
layer  of  burlap  was  laid  at  once  and  pressed  into  it  firmly,  so  as  to  insure 
a  good  bond.  The  burlap  was  required  to  weigh  10  oz.  per  square 
yard,  or  Siastex  waterproofing  fabric  weighing  12  lb.  per  100  sq.  ft. 
could  be  used  in  place  of  it.  This  layer  of  burlap  was  covered  with  hot 
pitchy  another  layer  of  burlap  laid,  and  another  coating  of  hot  pitch 


390 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


applied.  The  brick  lining  was  laid  on  this  membrane.  In  constructing 
the  arch,  a  single  ring  of  brickwork  was  iirst  laid,  its  back  was  water- 
proofed as  described  for  the  invert,  and  the  concrete  backing  placed. 
Burlap  was  left  projecting  from  the  walls  to  overlap  that  of  the  arch,  so 
as  to  keep  the  entire  membrane  integral. 


WORK  JOINTS 

Concrete  contracts  during  setting  and  also  expands  and  contracts 
with  temperature  and  moisture  changes.  In  thin  walls  this  property 
tends  toward  the  formation  of  cracks  about  every  30  ft.  If,  however, 
longitudinal  reinforcement  is  used,  these  cracks  may  be  prevented,  or 
rather  so  distributed  through  the  length  of  the  wall  as  to  be  invisible. 
In  some  concrete  structures  it  is  customary  to  leave  joints  at  specified 
intervals  which  will  open,  thus  preventing  the  formation  of  haphazard 


Fig.  132. — ^Types  of  joints  in  sewers. 

A'o(c. — In  tho  second  form  of  joint,  the  midface  or  longitucUnal  surface  of  the  joint,  be- 
tween the  two  circular  or  transverse  surfaces,  should  be  inclined  about  1  to  12,  giving  a 
slightly  conical  shape  to  this  part  of  the  joint,  in  order  to  prevent  any  injury  to  the  con- 
crete in  withdrawing  the  forms.  The  lap  should  be  less  than  the  thickness  of  the  half 
section. 

cracks.  In  structures  carrying  liquids  under  pressure  these  joints  should 
be  made  water-tight.  In  sewerage  work,  however,  the  location  of  joints 
is  not  governed  so  much  by  considerations  of  expansion  and  contraction 
as  by  the  exigencies  of  the  work  which  necessitate  the  formation  of 
joints  at  the  end  of  each  day's  run.  As  for  the  matter  of  permeability, 
it  is  generally  not  attempted  to  make  these  joints  in  sewers  absolutely 
water-tight,  as  is  sometimes  done  in  the  case  of  water  conduits  oper- 
ating under  internal  pressure  or  subways  subject  to  external  hydro- 
static pressure.  Reasonable  precautions  should  be  taken,  however,  to  pre- 
vent infiltration  and  such  measures  as  the  adoption  of  efifective  methods 
of  construction  and  the  securing  of  high-grade  workmanship  are  justified. 
Cracks  and  leaks  are  likely  to  develop  at  the  planes  where  old  and  new 
concrete  are  joined,  due  to  the  weakness  of  the  bond,  and  special  pre- 
cautions are  required  at  these  places.  Where  the  invert  and  arch  are 
built  separately,  it  is  customary  on  the  completion  of  concreting  the 
invert,  to  ram  into  the  green  concrete  slightly  beveled  strips  of  timber 
from  2  to  6  in.  wide,  depending  upon  the  width  of  the  joint,  which  on 
removal  leave  grooves.  These  pieces  should  be  braced  down  to  prevent 
them  from  floating.    Where  the  joint  plane  is  of  considerable  width  two 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  391 

parallel  grooves  may  be  thus  formed.  It  is  necessary  to  have  such 
timbers  beveled  smooth  and  well  lubricated,  so  that  they  may  be  re- 
moved without  injuring  the  partially  set  concrete. 

The  vertical  joints  may  be  similarly  formed,  by  fastening  pieces  of 
wood  to  the  bulkhead  placed  at  the  end  of  the  section.  In  some  cases  it 
may  be  desirable  to  fasten -these  pieces  lightly  to  the  bulkhead,  by 
bolts  or  nails  driven  in  from  the  outside,  so  that  the  bulkhead  may  be 
removed  first,  and  the  groove  formers  later.  Otherwise,  if  both  are 
moved  at  one  operation,  portions  of  the  concrete  may  be  broken  off. 
When  arch,  side  walls  and  inverts  are  constructed  separately,  the  end  of 
the  day's  fim,  or  the  joints,  should  be  brought  to  the  same  vertical 
plane,  otherwise  one  of  the  joints  may  open  and  a  crack  form  opposite 
it  all  the  way  around  the  sewer. 

A  scarf  joint  may  be  formed  by  building  up  the  end  of  the  sewer 
forms  so  as  to  make  an  inset  or  rabbet  when  the  form  is  removed,  con- 
crete being  forced  into  the  space  left  when  the  next  section  is  placed. 
On  the  aqueduct  constructed  by  the  Board  of  Water  Supply  of  the 
City  of  New  York,  where  great  precautions  were  taken  to  provide 
water-tight  work,  key  blocks  were  first  laid  at  specified  intervals  and 
coated  with  cold  water  paint,  to  prevent  adhesion  when  contraction  or 
expansion  of  the  invert  took  place.  Such  elaborate  precautions  are, 
however,  hardly  justified  in  ordinary  sewer  work.  Fig.  131  shows  the 
joint  in  a  large  Louisville  sewer,  and  Fig.  132  gives  three  types  of  joints. 

Care  must  be  taken  to  have  the  surface  of  the  old  concrete  clean  and 
rough  and  wetted,  before  placing  the  fresh  concrete  on  it.  A  thin  layer 
of  rich  mortar  placed  on  the  old  surface  just  before  concreting  is  started 
will  also  aid  in  forming  a  bond  to  the  old  work.  This  is  most  conunonly 
accomplished  by  thoroughly  washing  with  a  stream  of  water  under 
pressure  and  brushing  with  wire  brushes.  Sometimes  the  surface  of 
the  old  concrete  is  roughed  by  picking  or  pointing  and  under  excep- 
tional conditions  the  surface  of  the  concrete  may  be  roughened,  eaten  or 
etched  by  the  use  of  dilute  muriatic  acid.  Needless  to  say,  acid  must  be 
thoroughly  washed  off  before  any  additional  concrete  is  laid.  Fresh 
concrete  may  be  scratched  and  scored  with  a  sharp  tool  to  roughen  it, 
and  should  be  covered  with  boards  to  prevent  dirt  and  debris  from  the 
street  or  sides  of  the  trench  from  falling  into  it.  In  constructing 
sewers  in  San  Francisco  high  winds  carried  great  quantities  of  dust  into 
the  trench,  which  could  not  be  removed  from  the  fresh  concrete  by  the 
use  of  water  and  brooms  in  the  usual  way.  Various  expedients  were 
tried  and  finally  fire  hose  attached  to  a  nearby  hydrant,  operated  under 
fuD  pressure,  was  successful  in  cleaning  off  the  dirt. 

PLACING  CONCRETE  IN  FREEZING  WEATHER 

Natural  cement  concrete  may  be  ruined  by  freezing  before  it  has  set, 
but  experiments  indicate  that  Portland  cement  concrete  of  good  quality, 


392 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


which  has  been  frozen,  will  ultimately  obtain  full  strength  if  oppor- 
tunity is  given  it  to  set  after  thawing  and  before  attempting  to  remove 
the  forms.  It  does  not  set  any,  however,  while  frozen,  so  that  no  struc- 
ture of  frozen  concrete  should  be  loaded  nor  should  forms  and  supports 
be  removed  until  the  material  has  had  an  opportunity  to  thaw  and  set. 
For  this  reason  it  is  impracticable  to  build  sewers  in  cold  weather  unless 
precautions  are  taken  to  prevent  freezing  and  to  allow  the  concrete  to 
set  so  that  backfilling  may  be  placed  within  a  reasonable  time. 

At  Louisville,  Ky.,  no  concreting  was  allowed  at  temperatures  below 
24®  F.,  aU  materials  had  to  be  heated  when  the  temperature  was  between 
24°  and  32°  and  only  water  was  required  to  be  heated  when  the 
temperature  was  between  32°  and  35°. 


i  ,!i  U  WattrTank,  Jo 
I  «&  J  Capacity '976ahj^ 
'   Ij    oj  Kadiatfoti'tit^k^^     Sand  Capacity  SOcv.ydi.lhdkxtionXi 


L2'kZ''*K  ^^ 


Fire  End. 


Side    Elevation. 


Plan. 
Fig.  133. — Device  for  heating  concrete  materials. 


Concrete  made  of  heated  materials,  placed  quickly  in  forms,  covered 
with  boards  and  tarpaulin  or  straw,  will  set  satisfactorily  when  the 
temperature  is  a  number  of  degrees  below  freezing.  Where  steam  is 
available,  materials  may  be  heated  by  circulating  the  steam  through 
coils  of  pipe  over  and  around  which  sand  and  stone  may  be  placed, 
the  exhaust  being  discharged  into  water  barrels  to  heat  the  water. 
Or  the  sand  and  stone  may  be  .warmed  by  ordinary  steel  heaters.  A 
heater  of  this  type  {^Eng.  N&ws,  March  19,  1903)  with  an  attached 
provision  for  warming  the  water,  is  shown  in  Fig.  133. 

The  placing  of  concrete  in  freezing  weather  is  obviously  more  ex- 
pensive and  uncertain  than  in  warmer  weather.  Frozen  dirt  has  much 
the  same  appearance  as  set  concrete,  making  it  difficult  to  discriminate 
in  its  removal.    Even  if  the  materials  are  kept  from  freezing,  concrete 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  393 

gains  strength  only  slowly  in  cool  weather  and  it  is  necessary  to  keep  the 
forms  in  place  considerably  longer  than  in  warm  weather. 

Various  expedients  are  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the 
freezing  of  concrete.  One  of  the  common  methods  is  to  add  salt  to 
the  mixing  water,  which  lowers  its  freezing  point.  Experiments  have 
indicated  that  an  amount  of  salt  equal  to  5  or  10  per  cent,  of  the  weight 
of  the  water  used  for  mixing,  or  approximately  13  lb.  of  salt  to  a  barrel 
of  cement,  does  not  lower  the  ultimate  strength  of  the  concrete,  although 
the  time  of  setting  is  increased  and  the  strength  for  short  periods  is 
decreased.  Taylor  and  Thompson,  "Concrete,  Plain  and  Reinforced," 
recommend  2  lb.  of  salt  per  bag  of  cement,  or  8  lb.  per  barrel.  Concrete 
thus  formed  will  set  where  the  temperature  is  several  degrees  below 
the  freezing  point. 

RATE  OF  PROGRESS 

The  rate  of  progress  is  usually  governed  by  the  rate  of  excavation,  the 
number  of  forms  available,  the  permissible  length  of  open  trench,  and 
other  factors,  rather  than  by  the  rapidity  with  which  concrete  can  be 
mixed  and  placed.  For  instance,  if  it  be  required  to  keep  centers  in 
place  for  3  days,  forms  for  4  days'  work  must  be  provided  if  con- 
crete is  to  be  placed  each  day.  Unless  the  total  length  of  sewer  to 
be  built  is  considerable,  the  cost  of  providing  sufficient  forms  to  allow 
rapid  daily  progress  may  not  be  justified.  Similarly,  where  the  sewer  is 
built  in  several  operations,  invert,  side  \^alls  and  arch  separately,  the 
concreting  must  be  carried  on  in  the  same  section  of  trench  for  up- 
ward of  a  week.  If  a  high  rate  of  daily  progress  is  desired  a  very  long 
and  possibly  prohibitive  opening  of  the  trench  may  be  necessary.  In 
such  cases  it  will  often  prove  more  practicable  to  open  the  trench  at  two 
or  more  points  than  to  attempt  a  high  rate  of  progress  at  one  opening. 

In  the  construction  of  a  3-ft.  sewer  at  Louisville,  in  one  operation  (see 
Chapter  XV,  "Forms  and  Centers"),  94  ft.  6  in.  of  inside  forms,  and 
48  ft.  of  outside  forms  were  found  to  be  serviceable  for  about  1500  ft., 
and  cost  $180.84.  These  allowed  a  progress  of  about  48  ft.  per  day. 
As  the  sewer  was  only  1500  ft.  long,  a  greater  number  of  forms  would 
have  resulted  in  a  waste  of  material  and  the  discarding  of  forms  before 
they  were  used  up. 

Sewers  36  in.  in  diameter  have  been  built  at  rates  of  100  to  130  ft.  per 
day.  Under  average  conditions,  however,  the  rate  of  progress  is  more 
likely  to  be  from  25  to  50  ft.  per  day.  In  the  case  of  large  sewers  the 
rate  at  which  concrete  can  be  mixed  and  placed  is  a  factor  of  more 
importance,  although  even  upon  such  work  the  rate  of  progress  usiially 
depends  more  upon  the  rate  of  excavation  than  on  concreting.  At 
Louisville,  Section  B  of  the  Southern  Outfall  (15  ft.  2  in.  by  15  ft.  6  in.) 
required  2.99  cu.  yd.  of  concrete  per  foot  and  33  ft.  required  approxi- 


394 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


mately  100  cu.  yd.  of  concrete,  an  amount  which  might  be  difficult  to  mix 
and  place  in  1  day  in  congested  quarters  or  where  there  were  transpor- 
tation difficulties.  Such  large  sewers  are  constructed  in  several  opera- 
tions, the  invert,  side  walls  and  arches  being  constructed  separately  and 
involving  delays  in  preparing  for  the  different  portions.  The  usual 
progress  on  large  sewers  may  be  from  20  to  30  ft.  per  day.  If,  however, 
rainy  days,  dela3rs  owing  to  inefficient  organization  and  other  lost  time 
are  included,  or  if  the  average  progress  is  computed  upon  the  length  of 
time  from  the  beginning  of  the  work  until  its  completion,  the  daily 
progress  may  be  much  less  than  that  shown  by  the  above  figures. 

COST  OF  SEWERS 

The  cost  of  building  concrete  sewers  varies  greatly,  being  largely 
dependent  upon  the  size  of  the  structure  and  local  conditions.  The 
following  estimate  of  cost  is  given  merely  as  an  illustration  of  the 
method  of  computation  and    to  give  a  rough  idea  of  cost  of  such 


^s 


2 


e 

- 

v.. 

1 

, 

■ 

D 

<  * 

» 

> 

^-=i.. 

iwiA 

^ 

Issa 

nea 

m 

>   o 

o 

O 

Avi 

raq 

1 

t 

i  i 

7K 

— r— 1 
1//5/A 

4 

1  ^ 

••~. 

T7» 

^^3, 

icago 

i 

taw 

KflS 

' 

V) 

RJ 

t- 

0 

y. 

^ 

t 

>e 

( 

1 

! 

t 

e 

,af 

9 

o 

-T-         "T             1              '              ■              ' 

0  Louisville  Figures. 

D    Menyt4etTopolitanFigurei. 

u   MSwauk9p,aiicageSCkKiffnd Rgum, 

1  1        1        1        1        1 1 

0 

t 

4 

\ 

i 

> 

t 

1 

0 

1 

Z 

1 

4 

I 

6 

1 

B 

20 

Intemol  Diometor  cf  Sewer  in  Feat* 
FiQ.  134. — Cost  per  foot  of  internal  diameter  of  1  lin.  ft.  of  sewer. 

work.  The  sewer  is  assumed  to  be  48  in.  in  diameter.  Under  these 
circumstances  the  following  may  be  obtained:  9  men,  including  foremen, 
will  mix  and  place  about  12  cu.  yd.  of  concrete  per  10-hour  day;  12  yd.  of 
1:2:4  concrete  will  contain  (see  Table  59)  18.85  bbl.  of  cement,  5.28 
cu.  yd.  sand  and  10.06  cu.  yd.  stone.  The  cost  of  this  concrete  in  place 
will  be  about  as  follows: 


Labor,  8  days  at  $2.00 
Labor.  1  day  at  $3.00 
Cement.  18.85  bbl.  at  $1.80 
Sand,  5.28  cu.  yd  at  $1.00 
Stone,  10.06  ou.  yd.  at  $1.00 
Forms  (incl.  moving) 


Organisation,  tools,  water,  etc.,  15  per  cent. 


$16.00 

3.00 

33.03 

5.28 

10.06 

12.00 

80.27 
12.04 

$02.31 


Including  contractor's  profit,  say  $8.75  per  cubic  yard 


CONSTRUCTION  OF  CONCRETE  SEWERS  395 

■ 

If  reinforcement  is  used  the  oost  will  be  enhanced  to  the  extent  of  3 
or  4  cents  per  pound  of  steel  or  from  $1.50  to  $2  per  cubic  yard  in  addi- 
tion. On  large  work  the  cost  of  forms  is  less  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete, 
as  is  also  the  cost  of  placing.  At  Louisville,  Ky.,  the  prices  for  con- 
crete on  60  contracts  for  sewers  ranging  in  size  from  15  ft.  2  in.  by  15 
ft.  6  in.  to  24  in.  were  from  16  to  $12  per  cubic  yard. 

In  the  consideration  of  large  projects  it  is  often  desirable  to  obtain  an 
estimate  of  a  general  character  as  to  the  cost  of  long  Unes  or  a  general 
system  of  sewers.  In  Fig.  134  are  plotted  the  costs  of  sewers  at  various 
places  in  dollars  per  foot  of  diameter.  No  distinction  is  made  be- 
tween concrete  and  brick  and  many  of  the  examples  are  composed  of 
brick  with  concrete  foundations.  The  Louisville  figures  refer,  however, 
to  concrete  and  reinforced  concrete  only,  while  many  of  the  Chicago  ex- 
amples are  of  brick. 


CHAPTER  XV 

PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS 

Fonns  of  some  kind  are  needed  in  constructing  masonry  sewers 
whether  built  of  brick,  stone,  molded  blocks  or  monolithic  concrete. 
The  invert  must  be  laid  accurately  to  line  and  grade  and  must  have  the 
correct  shape,  and  the  arch  must  be  sustained  from  within  until  the  key 
is  in  place  and  the  mortar  or  concrete  has  set.  The  centering  required  to 
support  the  arch  is  usually  made  up  in  sections  composed  of  one,  two 
or  more  longitudinal  parts  and  each  length  of  8  or  .10  ft.  is  called  a 
"center."  "Profiles"  are  thin  strips  of  wood  the  shape  of  the  sewer, 
provided  with  nails  so  spaced  that  lines  tightly  drawn  from  one  of  them 
to  similarly  spaced  nails  in  another  profile  or  driven  into  the  joints  of  a 
completed  section  of  the  sewer  wiU  give  the  required  lines  to  which  the 
brick  should  be  laid.  Profiles  are  used  for  laying  brick,  stone  or  block 
inverts.  When  sewers  are  built  of  concrete,  molds  are  required  to  hold 
the  semi-fluid  mass  in  correcrt  position  until  it  has  set,  so  that  the 
structure  may  have  the  desired  shape  and  thickness.  Among  such 
forms  may  be  mentioned  centers,  outside  jackets  and  side  wall  molds, 
which  are  collectively  as  well  as  individually  called  "forms."  "Tem- 
plates" are  thin  strips  used  as  guides  in  laying  brick  or  stone  masonry 
or  for  shaping  and  screeding  concrete. 

Forms  may  be  made  of  wood,  of  wood  covered  with  sheet  metal, 
entirely  of  metal  or  of  metal  and  wood,  e.g.,  centers  with  steel  ribs 
covered  with  wooden  lagging,  or  wooden  ribs  covered  with  sheet 
metal. 

It  is  very  important  that  sewers  be  built  true  to  the  shapes  and  sizes 
called  for  in  the  design,  and  for  reasons  given  in  detail  in  Volume  I 
it  is  necessary  that  the  inner  surfaces  be  as  smooth  as  possible.  To  ac- 
complish these  results,  care  should  be  taken  in  laying  out  the  forms  to 
use  the  correct  dimensions,  and  the  forms  should  be  so  constructed  as 
to  be  strong  enough  to  withstand  all  operations  incidental  to  placing  the 
masonry  of  which  the  sewer  is  to  be  built  and  to  assure  a  smooth  finish 
on  the  inner  surface  of  the  sewer. 

CENTERS  AND  PROFILES  FOR  BRICK,  STONE  AND  BLOCK 

SEWERS 

When  sewers  are  to  be  constructed  of  brick,  stone  or  molded  blocks, 
profiles  are  used  to  aid  the  masons  in  laying  the  brick  of  the  invert  to 

396 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        397 

correct  grade  and  line.  A  profile  should  be  made  as  light  as  possible  and 
at  the  same  time  strong  and  rigid  enough  to  always  hold  its  true  shape. 
As  shown  in  Fig.  135,  nails  are  driven  in  the  profile,  properly  spaced  for 
the  several  courses.  The  mason  lays  the  brick  or  blocks  to  a  cord  tightly 
stretched  from  nails  driven  in  the  joints  of  the  work  behind  to  the  nails 
in  the  profile  ahead,  corresponding  to  the  same  courses.  Upon  large 
work  and  where  skilled  masons  are  employed,  two  or  sometimes  three 
or  more  courses  of  brick  may  be  laid  to  one  stretching  of  the  line.  This 
is  especially  true  upon  relatively  flat  inverts,  as  those  of  horseshoe- 
shaped  sewers.  Profiles  should  extend  high  enough  to  enable  the  mason 
to  carry  the  invert  one  or  two  courses  above  the  springing  line  to  allow 
room  for  the  centers  to  fall  after  being  "struck."  Two  profiles  are 
usually  spaced  16  ft.  apart  when  a  new  invert  is  begun,  and  thereafter 
one  profile  only  is  used 

and     it     is     generally    .  I*~'~T^^^'  ^! 

placed     about     16    ft.   *-'.    -    ,  ^  w    J    i  m 

ahead  of  the    finished         \  \  V  >        J  J    I         V 

work,  a  longer  spacing 

being  unwise  because  of  V"X!^V>  *^^  J^''/       '^''^' 

the  danger  that  the  line 
may  sag  between  the 
nails. 

The  dimensions  and 
method  of  constructing         Fig.  135. — ^Profile  for  36-in.  brick  sewer, 
a  profile  suitable  for  use 

in  building  a  two-ring  brick  sewer  36  in.  in  diamet'Cr,  are  shown  in  Fig. 
135.  Such  a  profile  should  be  made  preferably  of  clear  soft  stock,  such 
as  white  pine,  planed  on  both  sides  and  of  uniform  thickness.  Provision 
should  be  made  for  the  mortar  joint  between  the  outer  and  inner  rings 
and  the  nails  should  be  so  spaced  as  to  allow  for  joints  of  proper  thick- 
ness between  courses.  It  is  generally  well  to  send  the  profile  from  the 
shop  without  having  the  line  nails  driven,  so  that  the  mason  may  space 
them  to  conform  to  the  thickness  of  the  brick  actually  being  used.  The 
profile  represented  in  Fig.  135  is  designed  for  brick  4  in.  in  width  and  2 
in.  in  thickness. 

A  profile  may  be  secured  in  place  by  two  vertical  boards  nailed  to  its 
sides  and  to  a  trench  brace  or  other  support  above,  and  should  be 
accurately  set  to  fine  and  grade  and  carefully  leveled  before  any 
brick  are  laid. 

Arch  forms  or  centers,  generally  built  of  wood,  are  usually  8  or  10  ft. 
in  length.  It  is  common  practice  to  build  them  in  one  piece,  although 
some  prefer  to  have  them  in  two  or  more  segments  to  facilitate  handling, 
especially  inside  the  completed  sewer.  They  are  set  on  chairs  or  legs 
and  can  be  adjusted  to  the  proper  height  by  means  of  wedges.    After 


<^ 


398 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


the  arch  has  been  completed  and  the  forms  have  been  in  place  the 
required  length  of  time,  the  centers  are  struck  by  loosening  the  wedges. 
It  will  be  found  convenient  to  have  enough  centers  for  a  full  day's 
work,  the  length  required  varying  greatly,  but  commonly  ranging  from 
24  to  48  ft.  Arches  turned  one  day  may  generally  have  centering 
removed  the  next  morning;  in  fact,  centers  are  sometimes  struck  with- 
out apparent  injury  to  the  work  as  soon  as  the  masonry  is  completed 
and  backfilled  to  a  depth  of  1  or  2  ft.  above  the  crown.  Centers  are 
usually  set  as  soon  as  the  inverts  are  completed. 

The  size  of  the  lagging  and  thickness  and  spacing  of  the  ribs  are 
governed  by  the  size  of  the  sewer.  Centers  should  be  made  as  light 
as  possible  to  make  them  easy  to  handle,  but  they  must  be  strong  and 
rigid  enough  to  receive  and  support  the  masonry  without  deformation. 


K— ?/ 


— J    Supplementary 
r^,.  Key  Block. 


U 


A^«.  "^  ^-^^''       Spring  Un€' 


End  Elevation. 

Fig.  136. — Details  of  block  center. 


Section  A*6. 


When  sewers  are  constructed  in  tunnel,  block  centers  are  more  con- 
venient than  full  centers,  although  the  latter  may  be  used  if  very  short, 
say  3  or  4  ft.  in  length.  A  block  center  is  shown  in  detail  in  Fig.  136,  and 
derives  its  name  from  the  key  block.  The  two  large  segments  are  first 
set  in  position  and  through  the  space  at  the  top  between  them  the  brick 
and  mortar  are  passed  to  the  masons,  after  which,  as  the  work  progresses, 
the  short  key  blocks  are  placed  and  the  arch  is  completed. 


WOODEN  FORMS  FOR  CONCRETE  SEWERS 

Forms  and  centers  for  concrete  sewers  differ  from  those  required  for 
brick,  stone  or  block  sewers  in  that  they  should  have  smooth  surfaces 
and  be  practically  water-tight.  In  selecting  the  type  to  be  used  and 
the  material  of  which  it  is  to  be  built,  the  chief  considerations  are  Hght- 
ness  and  economy,  as  substantially  the  same  character  of  workmanship 
can  be  secured  with  the  several  types  and  materials  provided  the  forms 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        399 

are  properly  built  and  maintained.  The  first  cost,  cost  of  handling,  i.e., 
placing,  striking  or  collapsing,  and  pulling  ahead,  and  cost  of  upkeep,  are 
some  of  the  essentials  governing  the  selection. 

Of  the  three  types  of  forms  in  general  use  at  the  present  time — ^wooden 
forms,  wooden  forms  covered  with  metal,  and  steel  forms — ^it  is  not 
possible  to  state  arbitrarily  which  is  the  most  economical  to  use  as  this 
depends  largely  upon  local  conditions.  The  design  of  forms  which  can 
be  economically  and  conveniently  erected,  struck  and  moved  ahead  un- 
der the  varying  conditions  encountered  in  the  construction  of  sewers, 
especially  in  deep  trenches,  has  taxed  the  ingenuity  of  many  experienced 
sewer  builders. 

The  life  of  wooden  forms  is  comparatively  short.  In  many  instances 
after  being  used  eight  or  ten  times  they  have  to  be  practically  rebuilt, 
although  many  times  the  ribs  can  be  used  again,  the  lagging  only  being 
renewed.  When  new  and  nicely  built,  wooden  forms  give  a  smooth  and 
satisfactory  finish,  but  after  repeated  use,  patching  and  repatching, 
they  become  so  rough  that  the  interior  surface  of  the  concrete  is  likely 
to  be  rough  and  unsatisfactory. 

The  diversity  of  types  of  forms  used  upon  this  class  of  work  is  illus- 
trated by  a  number  of  drawings  of  forms  used  upon  the  construction  of 
the  new  sewerage  system  in  Louisville,  1907-1912,  with  which  work  one 
of  the  authors  was  intimately  associated  as  consulting  engineer,  J.  B.  F. 
Breed  having  been  the  chief  engineer. 

Forms  for  Sewer  10  ft  7  in.  by  10  ft  1-1/2  in.— Fig.  137  gives  the 
principal  dimensions  of  the  forms  used  by  the  Ferro  Concrete  Con- 
struction Co.  of  Cincinnati,  in  the  construction  of  a  horseshoe-shaped 
sewer  10  ft.  7  in.  by  10  ft.  1-1/2  in.,  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  1909. 

This  sewer  was  built  in  four  operations.  The  invert  concrete  was 
placed  first,  then  the  brick  paving  laid,  after  which  the  side  wall  concrete 
was  poured,  and  after  this  had  set  the  concrete  of  the  arch  was  placed. 
Usually  invert  concrete  placed  on  one  day  had  set  sufficiently  so  that  the 
brick  lining  could  be  laid  the  following  day.  The  laying  of  the  brick 
usually  consumed  a  full  day,  the  side  wall  forms  were  placed  in  position 
and  the  concrete  poured  the  following  day,  and  the  forms  allowed  to 
remain  2  days  for  the  setting  of  the  concrete,  after  which  the  centers 
were  set  and  the  arch  concrete  poured  and  usually  completed  the  same 
day.  The  centers  were  left  in  place  4  days  to  provide  for  the  setting 
of  the  concrete.  In  this  way  36  ft.  of  the  sewer  were  built  in  6  days,  or 
an  average  of  6  ft.  per  day. 

The  concrete  of  the  invert  was  laid  continuously  from  the  end  of  the 
old  work  to  a  bulkhead  placed  36  ft.  ahead  and  was  roughly  screeded  to 
overhead  wooden  templets.  Before  beginning  the  pouring  of  the  con- 
crete, bench  wall  forms  were  so  placed  on  each  side  and  supported  from 
the  trench  bracing  that  the  concrete  of  the  side  wall  could  be  poured  to  a 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        401 

height  of  about  2-1/2  in.  above  the  invert  line,  thus  forming  a  projection 
against  which  the  side  wall  forms  could  be  braced.  After  the  concrete 
of  the  invert  and  bench  walls  had  set,  the  bench  wall  forms  were  removed 
and  the  brick  invert  laid.  The  side  wall  forms  were  then  placed  directly 
upon  the  brick  invert  and  braced  into  position  against  the  bench  wall 
concrete,  and  securely  stayed  against  the  trench  sheeting.  After  the 
side  wall  concrete  had  set,  the  upper  portions  of  the  side  wall  forms,  A, 

« 

Fig.  137,  was  removed  and  the  centers  so  set  that  they  projected  below 
the  side  walls  about  6  in.  The  centers  were  wedged  and  supported  from 
the  lower  portions  of  the  sidewall  forms. 

The  centers  were  made  in  two  pieces  cut  through  the  crown  and  were 
fastened  together  either  by  allowing  the  ribs  to  project  and  nailing 
through  them  or  by  placing  headers  across  the  ribs  and  fastening  the 
two  abutting  headers  together.     (See  Fig.  139.) 

The  concrete  of  the  invert  and  side  walls  was  carried  to  the  sheeting, 
which  was  left  in  the  trench.  The  outside  jackets  were  in  sections  12  ft. 
long  and  3  ft.  6  in.  wide,  and  placed  as  shown  on  Fig.  137. 

The  forms  were  built  throughout  of  yellow  pine  lumber,  the  side 
wall  forms  and  centers  being  lagged  with  tongued  and  grooved  flooring. 
The  outside  forms  or  jackets  were  lagged  with  square-edged  boards. 

Fonns  for  Sewer  13  Ft  6  In.  by  13  Ft  3  In.— The  forms  used  in  1909 
by  The  Weber  Co.,  of  Chicago,  in  the  construction  of  a  reinforced  con- 
crete sewer  13  ft.  6  in.  by  13  ft.  3  in.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  are  shown  in 
Ilg.  138.  This  sewer  was  built  in  three  operations,  the  invert  including 
the  bench  wall  being  first  placed  and  screeded  to  templates,  then  the  side 
walls  were  poured,  and  finally  the  Arch  concrete  was  placed. 

This  sewer  was  built  in  sections  20  ft.  in  length  at  first,  but  later  the 
length  of  sections  was  increased  to  50  ft.  The  invert  concrete  was  placed 
and  finished  in  a  single  day.  The  side  wall  forms  were  placed  and  the 
side  walls  built  during  the  second  day,  the  side  wall  forms  being  kept  in 
place  2  days  after  the  concrete  had  been  poured,  to  provide  for  the 
setting  of  the  concrete,  after  which  the  centers  were  placed  and  the  con- 
crete of  the  arch  poured  in  a  single  day.  It  thus  required  5  days  to 
complete  the  construction  of  a  section  from  20  to  50  ft.  in  length.  The 
centers  were  in  general  allowed  to  remain  in  place  7  days  to  afford 
time  for  the  setting  of  the  concrete,  although  during  the  warm  portion  of 
the  year  this  time  was  somewhat  reduced. 

The  invert  was  placed  continuously  from  the  end  of  the  completed 
work  to  the  end  of  the  section  under  construction,  a  bulkhead  being 
provided  at  this  point  to  hold  the  concrete  in  position.  This  bulkhead, 
with  key  strip  and  notches  to  provide  for  projecting  longitudinal  steel 
reinforcing  bars,  is  shown  in  Fig.  138. 

Bench  wall  forms,  constructed  as  shown  in  Fig.  138,  were  placed  in 
position  and  securely  fastened  before  the  concrete  of  the  invert  was 

26 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

im 


A.. 


[<■■■? — vft".£- 


Bio.  139. — Wooden  centers  for  lai^  concrete  sewera,  Louisville,  Ky. 


Fig.  140. — Outaide  fomis  or  jackets  covering  frosh  coDcrcIc,  Liiulsville,  Ky. 

IFtdng  pagt  1021 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        403 

placed.  Usually  the  concrete  on  the  sides  of  the  invert  was  mixed 
somewhat  drier  than  that  in  the  center  so  that  the  weight  of  the  bench 
wall  concrete  did  not  force  the  invert  concrete  out  of  position.  In  some 
cases,  however,  the  invert  concrete  was  first  placed  the  entire  length  of 
the  section,  after  which  the  bench  wall  concrete  was  placed,  the  time 
intervening  being  sufficient  to  provide  for  the  partial  setting  of  the  invert 
concrete.  After  the  concrete  of  the  bench  walls  had  set,  the  bench  wall 
forms  were  removed  and  the  side  wall  forms  placed  in  position  and  braced 
against  the  completed  bench  walls. 

After  the  concrete  of  the  side  wall  had  set,  the  ribs  for  the  centers  were 
placed  in  position  and  supported  on  the  side  wall  forms.  These  ribs 
were  made  up  in  full  sections,  as  shown  by  the  drawing,  and  were  carried 
forward  without  difficulty  through  the  completed  sewer  under  the 
centering  in  place.  After  the  ribs  had  been  placed  in  position  the  panels 
of  lagging,  which  were  about  2-1/2  ft.  in  width,  were  placed  upon  the 
ribs  and  nailed  to  them  sufficiently  to  hold  them  in  place.  There  were 
seven  of  these  panels  for  each  complete  center  10  ft.  in  length. 

In  some  places  upon  this  work  the  trench  was  so  wide  that  to  have 
entirely  filled  the  space  between  the  side  wall  forms  and  the  trench 
sheeting  would  have  required  a  large  unnecessary  quantity  of  concrete. 
At  such  places  2  X  4-in.  strips  were  driven  into  the  ground,  braced 
against  the  sheeting  and  sheathed  on  the  side  next  the  sewer  with  3/4-in. 
boards,  thus  providing  an  outside  form  to  hold  the  concrete  in  its  proper 
place  and  restrict  its  dimensions  in  conformity  with  the  requirements. 
Above  the  top  of  the  side  wall,  outside  jackets  were  used  for  this  purpose. 
These  jackets,  Fig.  138,  were  in  sections  about  3  ft.  wide  and  10  ft.  long 
and  were  placed  in  position  as  the  concrete  of  the  arch  was  brought  up 
around  the  centers.    Similar  jackets  are  shown  in  Fig.  140. 

In  this  instance,  as  is  usually  the  case,  the  jackets  or  outside  forms  did 
not  come  clear  to  the  top  of  the  arch,  as  the  slope  near  the  top  was  so 
sUght  that  there  was  no  difficulty  in  holding  the  concrete  in  proper  posi- 
tion without  forms.  While  this  is  common  and  good  practice,  care 
should  be  taken  to  avoid  the  placing  of  an  unnecessary  surplus  of  con- 
crete along  the  top  of  the  sewer,  which  may  be  caused  by  leaving  the 
opening  between  the  jackets  too  wide,  and  by  lack  of  care  in  rounding 
off  the  concrete. 

METAL-COVERED  WOODEN  FORMS  FOR  CONCRETE  SEWERS 

A  sheet  metal  covering  over  wooden  forms  assures  to  the  concrete  a 
smooth  finish  and  also  prolongs  the  life  of  the  forms.  It  is  difficult  to 
make  the  metal  fit  perfectly  over  the  forms,  and  sometimes  it  is  so 
thin  and  fits  so  loosely  that  it  gives  to  the  finished  concrete  surface  a 
wavy  appearance.    Where  the  metal  is  of  suitable  thickness,  No.  18 


404  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

or  No.  20  gage  (0.05  in.  or  0.0375  in.  in  thickness,  2  lb.  or  1.5  lb. 
per  square  foot),  well  stretched  and  thoroughly  fastened,  this  uneven- 
ness  is  not  usually  sufficient  to  constitute  a  serious  defect. 

The  finish  obtained  by  using  metal-covered  forms  is  scarcely  better 
than  that  obtained  at  first  by  the  use  of  well-made  wooden  forms,  but 
after  the  latter  have  been  used  several  times  the  li^gging  becomes  frayed 
and  broken,  after  which  the  concrete  surfaces  are  likely  to  be  rough  and 
have  a  finish  much  inferior  to  that  obtained  with  metal-covered  forms. 

The  difference  between  the  first  cost  of  wooden  forms  and  wooden 
forms  covered  with  metal  is  due  principally  to  the  extra  cost  of  the  metal, 
the  labor  required  for  attaching  it  not  being  much  greater  than  that 
required  to  dress  and  perfect  the  surface  of  the  wooden  f ormjs,  which  cost 
is  saved  if  the  forms  are  covered.  The  cost  of  handling  metal-K^overed 
forms  is  about  the  same  as  that  of  handling  wooden  forms,  while  the  cost 
of  upkeep  is  generally  much  less,  as  the  wear  upon  the  wooden  lagging, 
which  necessitates  its  early  renewal,  is  avoided.  There  appears  on  the 
whole  to  be  little  difference  between  the  ultimate  cost  of  the  wooden  and 
the  metal-covered  forms,  although  if  the  sewer  to  be  constructed  is  long 
enough  to  require  the  use  of  the  forms  more  than  eight  or  ten  times  it  is 
likely  that  the  metal-covered  forms  will  prove  somewhat  less  expensive. 
Even  with  this  type  of  forms,  continued  use  generally  results  in  more  or 
less  breakage  or  deformation,  necessitating  repairs.  Where  the  sewer 
is  very  long  and  the  work  is  prosecuted  progressively  from  one  end  to  the 
other,  requiring  the  use  of  the  forms  many  times,  it  is  probable  that 
steel  forms  will  be  found  to  give  more  satisfactory  results  at  less  cost  than 
wooden  or  metal-covered  forms.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  believed, 
at  least  by  some  practical  sewer  builders,  that  wooden  forms  are  much 
more  economical  than  steel  forms  for  short  sewers,  say  sections  up  to 
1000  ft.  in  length. 

Forms  for  Sewer  12  Ft  by  12  Ft — The  forms  used  in  the  construction 
of  a  12  X  12-ft.  semi-elliptical  reinforced  concrete  sewer  at  Louisville, 
Ky.,  by  C.  T.  McCracken  &  Co.,  Columbus,  Ohio,  1909,  are  illustrated 
in  Fig.  141.  It  was  first  intended  to  build  this  sewer  in  three  operations — 
invert,  side  walls  and  arch — and  the  forms  were  built  with  that  method 
in  prospect.  It  was  later  decided  to  build  the  invert  and  bench  walls  to 
the  height  shown  on  the  drawing  in  one  operation,  after  which  the  arch 
was  to  be  poured.  The  supplementary  bench  wall  form,  A,  Fig.  141, 
was  therefore  provided,  but,  as  the  lower  portion  of  the  arch  form,  B, 
had  already  been  constructed,  it  was  used  throughout  the  work  although 
had  the  original  intention  been  to  pour  the  concrete  in  two  operations, 
this  portion  of  the  form  would  not  have  extended  more  than  2  to  4  in. 
below  the  top  of  the  bench  wall. 

The  bench  wall  forms  with  the  angle  iron  templates  attached  were 
first  placed  in  correct  position  as  to  line  and  grade,  the  forms  being  hung 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS 


406  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

from  the  trench  braces  above  by  means  of  chains  and  tumbuckles  and 
braced  from  the  sheeting.  The  concrete  was  laid  continuously,  and  as 
there  were  no  bulkheads  used,  except  at  the  end  of  the  day's  work, 
upon  which  the  longitudinal  reinforcing  bars  could  be  supported,  these 
bars  were  placed  upon  small  concrete  blocks  molded  and  placed  in 
proper  position  upon  the  ground.  The  transverse  bars  for  the  side 
walls  were  held  in  place  by  notched  scantlings,  to  which  they  were 
wired,  which  were  removed  before  the  concrete  was  poured  to  the 
height  of  them.  The  notches  shown  in  the  invert  bulkhead,  Fig. 
141,  were  cut  to  allow  the  longitudinal  rods  to  pass  through  the  bulk- 
head required  at  the  end  of  the  day's  work.  As  fast  as  the  invert 
concrete  was  placed,  screeded  and  floated,  the  angle  iron  templates 
were  removed  and  when  this  concrete  had  set  hard  enough  to  prevent 
its  being  forced  out  of  place  by  fluid  concrete  placed  upon  it,  the 
bench  walls  were  poured. 

After  the  invert  and  bench  wall  concrete  had  set,  the  forms  were 
removed,  the  lowest  two  trench  braces  were  taken  out  and  the  arch 
forms  were  set  in  proper  position.  These  forms  were  carried  down  to  and 
supported  by  blocking  resting  upon  the  finished  invert.  The  arch  forms 
were  in  three  pieces  as  shown  in  Fig.  141.  The  bolt  holes  in  the  braces, 
used  to  hold  the  lower  portions  of  the  arch  forms  in  correct  position,  and 
the  holes  in  the  end  ribs  of  these  forms,  were  slotted  so  that  the  forms 
could  be  readily  adjusted  to  slight  irregularities  in  the  concrete  bench 
wall  against  which  they  were  placed. 

The  braces  holding  the  bench  wall  forms  in  place  were  attached  to 
them  by  bolts,  so  that  they  could  be  easily  removed  and  the  forms  and 
braces  carried  ahead.  The  centers  were  dropped  by  knocking  out  the 
wedges  between  the  bottom  supporting  timbers  and  the  invert.  The  top 
braces  were  then  taken  off  the  lower  portions  of  the  centers,  and  the 
latter  placed  on  a  car,  after  which  the  top  piece  was  lowered  to  the  car 
and  the  whole  pushed  ahead  under  the  centers  still  in  place  supporting 
fresh  concrete. 

The  outside  forms  were  in  panels  of  convenient  size  for  handling,  and 
were  placed  in  position  from  time  to  time  as  the  concrete  was  carried  up 
around  the  centers.  They  were  supported  temporarily  by  wooden  struts 
or  spreaders,  wedged  against  the  centers,  which  struts  were  taken  out 
before  the  concrete  reached  them,  and  by  braces  driven  against  the 
sheeting,  the  latter  remaining  until  after  the  concrete  had  set. 

The  forms  were  lagged  with  7/8-in.  tongued-and-grooved  flooring  4 
in.  wide.  The  bench  wall  forms  and  lower  portions  of  the  centers  were 
covered  with  No.  18  sheet  iron,  and  the  upper  portion  of  the  centers 
with  stove  pipe  iron. 

The  sewer  was  built  in  sections  48  ft.  long.  The  invert  and  bench 
walls  were  poured  in  a  single  day,  and  the  bench  wall  forms  were  allowed 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        407 

to  remain  in  place  2  days  after  the  concrete  had  been  placed.  The 
arch  forms  were  set  and  the  concrete  poured  on  the  next  day.  Thus  a 
single  section  of  sewer,  48  ft.  in  length,  was  built  in  4  days,  making  the 
average  progress  12  ft.  per  day.  The  arch  forms,  before  being  struck, 
were  allowed  to  remain  in  place  5  days  after  the  concrete  had  been 
placed. 

STEEL  FORMS  FOR  CONCRETE  SEWERS 

There  are  several  types  of  patented  steel  forms  which  usually  are  ob- 
tained on  a  rental  basis,  generally  at  a  price  fixed  per  foot  of  forms 
rented.  In  estimating  the  cost  of  using  such  forms,  it  should  be  borne 
in  mind  that  the  lessee  is  required  to  pay  the  cost  of  unloading  and  load- 
ing the  forms  and  hauling  them  from  the  cars  to  the  work  and  from  the 
work  back  to  the  cars  at  the  end  of  the  job. 

The  finish  of  concrete  poured  against  good  steel  forms  is  usually  ex- 
cellent, although  at  times,  especially  in  cold  weather,  there  is  a  tendency 
toward  "peeling,"  which  is  more  prevalent  than  when  wooden  forms 
are  used.  This  "peeling,"  which  is  the  adhesion  of  a  thin  layer  of  the 
concrete  to  the  center  when  the  latter  is  removed,  may  be  caused  in 
some  instances  by  the  cooling  of  the  concrete  next  to  the  steel  forms  to 
such  an' extent  as  to  prevent  its  setting  within  the  length  of  time  the 
forms  are  allowed  to  remain  in  place. 

Forms  for  sewers  from  24  to  60  in.  in  diameter,  to  be  constructed 
either  in  one  or  two  operations,  may  often  be  obtained  from  stock,  but 
forms  for  larger  sewers  are  constructed  upon  orders  in  most  cases.  Most 
metal  forms  come  in  sections  5  ft.  in  length,  corresponding  to  the  width 
of  a  single  steel  plate,  although  when  in  use  the  smaller  forms  are 
fastened  together  in  trains  by  means  of  eyes  and  wooden  wedges. 
When  moving  invert  forms,  the  wedges  are  knocked  out  and  the  indi- 
vidual sections  are  carried  forward  and  reset.  The  arch  forms  are  moved 
in  trains  about  50  ft.  long  on  rollers.  Where  special  large  forms  are 
used,  the  individual  sections  are  bolted  together  in  trains  varying  in 
length,  but  usually  about  20  ft.  long,  and  are  carried  forward  on 
carriages. 

Steel  forms  have  been  extensively  made  by  the  Blaw  Steel  Construc- 
tion Co.,  of  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  others.  While  some  of  these  forms  have 
been  patented,  engineers  and  contractors  also  build  metal  forms  after 
their  own  designs. 

Some  of  the  smaller  steel  forms  have  a  certain  amount  of  adjustability, 
amounting  to  from  3  to  5  in.  in  the  diameter,  so  that,  for  example,  a 
48-in.  half-round  form  may  be  \ised  for  building  both  a  sewer  48  in. 
and  one  45  in.  in  diameter.  This  is  accomplished  by  rotating  tiu-n- 
buckles,  thus  making  the  forms  larger  or  smaller  as  desired  for  the  work 
in  hand. 


408 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


An  example  of  the  use  of  steel  forms  in  building  2000  ft.  of  sewer  may 
be  helpful  in  estimating  the  cost  of  steel  forms.  In  this  case  150  ft. 
of  half-round  forms  are  assumed  to  have  been  used.  The  arch  forms 
were  required  to  remain  in  place  48  hours  and  the  custom  was  to  remove 
the  invert  forms  in  24  hours  so  that  50  ft.  of  forms  were  used  for  invert, 
which  was  placed  each  day,  and  100  ft.  of  forms  for  arch,  which  was 
placed  once  in  two  days.  The  charge  for  150  ft.  of  forms  36  in.  in 
diameter,  based  upon  the  quotations  given  in  Table  70,  would  be  $225 
f  .o.b.  cars  in  the  city  in  which  the  work  was  to  be  done,  equivalent  to  a 
cost  of  11-1/4  cents  per  foot  for  the  2000  ft.  of  sewer  constructed. 

If  the  length  of  sewer  to  be  built  had  been  but  1000  ft.,  the  cost  given 
in  the  foregoing  illiistration  would  be  increased  to  22-1/2  cents  per  foot, 


Tumbueklt 


Iwnbvti^ 


Invert  Forms  in  Place. 


Invert  Forme  Released. 


Arch  Forms  in  Place.  Arch  Fbrms  Released, 

Fig.  142. — Steel  invert  and  arch  forms. 


provided  150  ft.  of  forms  were  leased.  Where  the  length  of  sewer  to 
be  built  is  less  than  1000  ft.  manufacturers  state  that  from  60  to  100  ft, 
of  forms  are  generally  used  with  a  corresponding  decrease  in  their  total 
cost.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  longer  sewer  is  to  be  built,  and  the  desired 
rate  of  progress  is  such  that  the  length  of  forms  used  need  not  be  more 
than  150  or  200  ft.,  the  cost  for  forms  per  Unear  foot  of  sewer  may  be 
greatly  reduced.  In  such  cases,  the  lengths  of  forms  required  will  de- 
pend upon  the  required  rate  of  progress  and  the  length  of  trench  which 
may  be  kept  open  ahead  of  the  placing  of  the  concrete. 

If  a  given  piece  of  work  requires  the  construction  of  two  sewers, 


Pia.  143— Releaa 


FiQ.   144. — Train  of  smalt  steel  forms  after  being  rolled  ahead. 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        409 

differing  in  diameter  but  about  3  in.,  as  for  example,  a  33-in.  and  a  36-in. 
sewer,  a  single  set  of  forms  is  usually  provided,  the  difference  in  size 
being  obtained  by  an  adjustment  of  the  tumbuckles.  Such  forms  for 
invert  and  arch  are  shown  in  Fig.  142,  in  position  to  receive  concrete 
and  after  being  released  and  ready  to  be  moved  forward.  The  tie  rod 
and  tumbuckle,  by  means  of  which  the  centers  are  extended  and  drawn 
in,  are  also  shown,  as  well  as  the  rollers  by  means  of  which  the  centers 
are  moved  by  rolling  them  along  stringers  supported  upon  cross  braces. 

Fig.  143  shows  a  number  of  sections  of  72-in,  half-round  Blaw  forms 
in  a  trench,  just  released  after  being  \ised  for  invert  construction. 

Fig.  144  shows  a  train  of  Blaw  forms  fastened  together  and  after 
being  moved  forward  on  rollers.  If  centers  are  to  be  moved  in  this  way 
they  can  only  be  moved  after  the  concrete  has  set,  which  limits  the 
frequency  of  placing  concrete  to  the  period  during  which  the  centers 
must  be  left  in  place.  If,  therefore,  the  train  of  centers  is  limited  to 
50  ft.,  and  the  centers  are  required  to  be  left  in  place  4  days,  the 
average  progress  of  the  arch  cannot  exceed  10  ft.  per  day.  Greater 
progress  will  require  the  use  of  a  greater  length  of  centers,  which  should 
be  broken  up  into  train  lengths  of  about  50  ft.,  for  economical  handling, 
one  train  after  another  being  moved  ahead. 

When  half  round  steel  forms  are  used  for  building  invert,  they  are 
usually  hung  from  the  trench  timbers  by  chains  spaced  every  5  or  8  ft. 
By  having  small  turnbuckles  in  these  hangers,  the  forms  can  be  adjusted 
to  the  proper  grade  in  a  very  short  time.  After  the  forms  are  in  place, 
they  should  be  braced  at  the  sides  to  prevent  any  sway,  and  also  a  ver- 
tical brace  should  be  placed  at  every  other  section  to  prevent  the  forms 
from  rising  while  the  concrete  is  being  placed.  After  the  invert  forms 
have  been  in  place  the  required  time,  they  are  either  turned  over  and 
used  for  the  arch,  or  are  pulled  ahead  and  used  for  another  invert. 
On  the  LouisviUe  sewers,  where  the  arch  forms  were  required  to  be  in 
place  4  days  and  the  invert  forms  2  days,  usually  100  ft.  of  arch 
forms  and  50  ft.  of  invert  forms  were  used.  After  the  invert  forms  have 
been  removed,  timbers  are  placed  across  the  invert  at  intervals  of  6  or 
8  ft.,  on  which  are  laid  longitudinal  timbers.  These  are  used  to  support 
the  centers  and  as  rails  on  which  to  roll  the  arch  forms  ahead  as  in  Fig. 
145.  By  means  of  a  windlass  and  block  and  tackle,  six  men  can  pull 
ahead  100  ft.  of  arch  forms  in  trains  of  50  ft.  and  place  them  ready  for 
concrete  in  about  3  hoiu«. 

When  the  small  semicircular  forms  used  for  building  inverts  are  moved 
they  are  generally  dragged  along  the  completed  invert,  without  the  use 
of  rollers.  The  manner  of  assembling  small  steel  forms  is  well  illustrated 
by  Fig.  146,  which  shows  the  angle  irons  to  which  the  tie  rods  are  at- 
tached, the  tie  rods  and  turnbuckles,  and  the  lugs  provided  for  fastening 
together  the  adjacent  sections.    This  figure  also  shows  the  manner  of 


410  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

constructing  a  complete  cylindrical  form.  The  angle  irons  placed  on 
either  side  of  the  upper  half  are  slotted  so  that  they  will  fit  down  over 
U  lugs  in  the  bottom  half.  After  the  upper  and  lower  halves  are  brought 
together  in  this  manner^  wedges  are  driven  through  the  U  lugs,  thus 
holding  the  two  parts  securely  in  place.  The  turnbuckles  are  then  taken 
up  to  bring  the  form  to  the  correct  dimensions. 

Forms  for  Sewer  16  Ft.  6  In.  by  16  Ft  2  In. — The  details  of  the  con- 
struction of  steel  forms  used  by  Chas.  F.  Fitch,  of  Louisville,  Ky., 
subcontractor  for  masonry  upon  the  construction  of  Section  B  of  the 
Southern  Outfall  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  1909,  are  shown  in  Fig.  147. 

This  sewer  was  built  in  three  op>eration8,  invert,  side  walls  and  arch. 
The  invert  and  bench  wall  concrete  was  usually  placed  in  a  single  day. 
The  following  day  the  side  wall  forms  were  placed  and  the  concrete 
poured,  after  which  the  side  wall  forms  were  required  to  be  left  in  place 
2  <iays.  The  arch  forms  were  then  placed  and  the  concrete  poured, 
which  was  usually  done  in  a  single  day,  after  which  the  centers  were 
required  to  be  left  in  place  7  days  before  being  removed.  The 
minimum  length  of  time  required  for  the  completion  of  a  section  of  this 
sewer,  which  varied  in  length  from  30  to  60  ft.,  was,  therefore,  5  days 
or  an  average  progress  of  from  6  to  12  ft.  per  day.  Greater  progress 
was  in  fact  made  by  working  at  several  openings,  which  is  common 
practice  upon  work  of  this  size.  It  was  usual  upon  this  work,  as 
^  upon  the  construction  of  most  of  the  other  large  sewers  in  Louisville, 
to  lay  the  invert  as  soon  as  the  trench  was  excavated  to  grade,  and 
it  frequently  happened  that  several  sections  of  invert  and  sometimes 
more  than  a  single  section  of  side  walls  were  placed  before  the  later 
operations  were  begun. 

The  forms  used  upon  this  section  are  shown  in  Fig.  147.  The  bench 
wall  forms  were  similar  to  those  used  upon  other  work  and  were  con- 
structed of  wood.  The  side  wall  forms  were  constructed  of  steel  and 
were  removed  before  the  centers  were  placed.  The  centers  at  first 
used  were  built  of  steel  and  were  not  collapsible.  They  were  braced 
by  means  of  struts,  as  shown  in  the  drawing,  and  moved  forward  in 
trains  about  20  ft.  in  length.  Later  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  rebuild 
the  center3  and  make  them  collapsible.  This  was  done  by  cutting  the 
channels  and  plates  at  the  crown  and  inserting  hinges;  at  the  same  time 
the  channels  were  reinforced  with  the  stiffeners  shown  in  the  drawing, 
after  which  the  diagonal  and  upper  horizontal  struts  were  not  used. 
After  remodeling  in  this  way,  the  forms  were  moved  ahead  by  lowering 
them,  drawing  them  in  and  carrying  them  forward  under  centers  in 
place. 

Forms  for  Sewer  14  Ft  by  13  Ft  8  In. — The  forms  used  in  the  con- 
struction of  a  reinforced-concrete  sewer  14  ft.  by  13  ft.  8  in.  in  size,  in 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        411 


puo  pt>9MM1"Q 


412  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Louisville,  1909,  by  the  American  Engineering  &  Construction  Co.,  of 
Chicago,  111.,  are  shown  in  detail  in  Fig.  148. 

This  sewer  was  built  in  three  operations,  the  invert  and  bench  walls 
being  first  poured,  then  the  side  walls  and  finally  the  arch.  The  placing 
and  finishing  of  the  concrete  of  the  invert  and  bench  walls  usually  con- 
siimed  one  day.  The  succeeding  day  the  side  wall  forms  were  placed 
and  the  concrete  was  poured.  These  forms  were  required  to  be  left  in 
place  2  days  after  the  concrete  had  been  poured,  after  which  the  cen- 
ters were  placed  and  the  arch  concrete  poured  in  a  single  day.  The  cen- 
ters were  required  to  be  left  in  place  5  days  after  the  pouring  of  the 
concrete.  The  length  of  time  required  to  complete  a  section  of  sewer, 
which  was  usually  about  25  ft.  in  length,  was,  therefore,  6  days, 
giving  an  average  rate  of  progress  of  5  ft.  per  day. 

The  bulkheads,  bench  wall  forms  and  outside  arch  forms  were  con- 
structed of  wood.  The  side  wall  forms  and  the  centers  were  constructed 
of  steel.  The  centers  were  hinged  at  the  crown  so  that  they  could  be 
drawn  in  and  moved  forward  through  other  centers  in  place  sustaining 
fresh  concrete.  The  bottom  struts  were  removed  from  the  centers  after 
the  concrete  had  been  poured,  so  that  the  centers  from  behind  could  be 
moved  forward  on  carriages,  as  shown  in  Fig.  148. 

These  carriages  were  equipped  with  jacks,  Fig.  149,  which  could  be 
fastened  to  the  form  ribs.  After  the  centers  had  been  moved  to  the 
proper  location  the  jacks  were  extended  until  the  forms  were  brought 
to  the  correct  line  and  grade.  Upon  some  of  the  Louisville  work,  the 
cars  with  attached  jacks  were  removed  after  the  centers  had  been  se- 
curely braced  to  hold  them  in  position.  In  other  cases  the  centers 
were  allowed  to  remain  supported  by  and  attached  to  the  jacks 
while  the  concrete  was  being  poured  and  until  it  had  acquired  sufficient 
strength  to  permit  the  removal  of  the  centers. 

Forms  without  Xntemal  Bracing. — In  some  cases  forms  have  been  used 
which  required  no  internal  bracing  for  their  support,  being  so  rigid  as  to 
be  self-supporting.  Such  forms  were  used  upon  a  13-1/2  X  14-f  t.  horse;- 
shoe  shaped  sewer  built  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  1909,  and  are  illustrated  by 
Fig.  160. 

Use  of  Steel  Forms  in  Tunneling. — Common  practice  in  Uning  tunnels 
with  concrete  is  to  use  rings  made  of  angle  or  channel  iron,  which  are 
carried  in  and' set  up  in  place  before  the  lagging  is  adjusted.  The  con- 
crete is  then,  or  may  previously  have  been,  placed  in  the  invert.  As  it 
is  brought  up  on  the  sides,  strips  of  lagging,  either  of  wood  or  of  steel, 
are  placed  against  the  rings,  thus  giving  access  at  all  times  to  the  concrete 
for  tamping  purposes.  When  it  is  necessary  to  close  the  arch  at  the 
crown,  the  concrete  is  shoveled  in  from  the  end  ring  and  thoroughly 
rammed.  To  make  this  practicable  it  is  necessary  to  have  the  rings 
placed  fairly  close  together  and  to  ua6  short  lagging.    The  steel  rings  or 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        413 


414  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

ribs  and  the  ribs  with  lagging  in  place,  are  illustrated  by  Figs.  151  and 
152,  prepared  from  photographs  taken  of  76-in.  tunnel  centering  used 
upon  work  for  the  Metropolitan  Water  Board,  Boston,  Mass.,  by  James 
Hanreddy,  Chicago,  111.,  contractor.  For  these  photographs  and  several 
others  used  in  this  chapter  the  authors  are  indebted  to  the  Blaw  Steel 
Construction  Co.,  of  Pittsburg,  which  has  made  a  specialty  of  collapsible 
steel  forms. 

FORMS  FOR  SEWERS  BUILT  OF  CONCRETE  AND 

BRICK  OR  BLOCKS 

Many  combinations  of  concrete  and  brick,  stone,  blocks  or  other  ma- 
terials have  been  used  in  sewer  construction  to  meet  various  conditions. 
Sewers  have  been  built  with  concrete  inverts  and  brick  arches,  brick 
inverts  and  concrete  arches,  and  both  concrete  and  brick  in  both  invert 
and  arch.  The  most  common  combination  is  the  concrete  invert  with 
brick,  stone  or  block  lining  and  concrete  arch.  Forms  for  sewers  built 
of  brick  and  concrete  are  similar  to  those  used  for  like  purposes  for  sewers 
built  entirely  of  either  one  of  these  materials.  When  the  invert  is  lined* 
with  brick,  allowance  must  be  made  in  building  the  forms  for  the  con- 
crete work,  for  the  thickness  of  the  brick  and  of  the  joint,  which  is  usually 
about  1/2  in.  thick,  between  the  brick  and  the  concrete.  If  allowance 
for  this  joint  is  neglected,  it  means  either  the  cutting  out  of  some  of  the 
concrete  or  the  chipping  of  the  brick  in  order  that  they  may  be  laid 
to  the  correct  line  and  grade. 

BUILDING  CONCRETE  SEWERS  IN  ONE  OR  MORE 

OPERATIONS 

Where  concrete  sewers  are  built  in  two  or  more  operations  there  is 
likely  to  be  more  or  less  trouble  in  securing  good  joints  between  the  hori- 
zontal sections  and  there  is  usually  some  finishing  required  because  of 
rough  concrete  due  to  the  failure  of  the  centers  to  fit  exactly  the  concrete 
of  the  invert.  It  has  therefore  been  found  advantageous  in  the  con- 
struction of  a  number  of  small  sewers  to  pour  the  concrete  of  both  invert 
and  arch  at  one  operation,  thus  reducing  to  a  minimum  the  cost  of  chip- 
ping, patching  and  finishing  the  inner  concrete  surface.  This  has  been 
successfully  done  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  upon  sewers  ranging  from  2  to  4  ft. 
in  diameter,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  it  will  prove  practicable  to  build  much 
larger  sewers  by  this  method. 

On  small  sewers  where  the  quantity  of  concrete  per  linear  foot  is  only 
a  small  fraction  of  a  cubic  yard,  the  cost  of  preparation  for  mixing  and 
pouring  concrete,  such  as  placing  mixing  boards,  hoppers,  and  chutes, 
wUch  is  a  considerable  item,  is  the  same  whether  half  or  the  whole  of  the 


traveler   through    other 


Fia,  150. — loterior  of  14-foot  BIsw  centers  without  inner  support  or  braces. 


Fio.   152, — Steel  ribs  supporting  lagging  and  concrete  tunnel  linii^. 


PROFILED,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        415 

sewer  is  built  at  one  time,  although  in  the  latter  case  the  quantity  of  con- 
crete placed  is  nearly  double  the  quantity  handled  in  the  former.  The 
cost  of  preparation  per  cubic  yard,  therefore,  is  only  about  half  as  much 
where  the  work  is  ail  done  at  one  time. 

By  completing  the  sewer  in  one  operation  the  length  of  open  trench 
required  is  somewhat  shorter  than  if  the  invert  is  first  laid  and  allowed  to 
set  before  the  arch  is  poured. 

It  has  also  been  found  somewhat  cheaper  to  handle  the  full  round 
forms  than  the  half  round  forms.  The  costs  of  erecting,  striking,  and 
moving  forms  upon  five  sewers  of  about  1000  ft.  length  each  are  given  in 
Table  66. 


Table  66* — Cost  of  Erecting,  Strikinq,  and  Moving  Full  Round  and 
Half  Round  Forms.     Per  Linear  Foot  of  Sewer  Built 


Type  of  forms                                36  in.      |      42  in.            48  in.            54  in.     | 

Full  round  wooden  forms 

Half  round  steel  forms 

$0.45 

$0.43 
0.70 

$0.45 

$0.79 

It  appears  that  the  cost  of  handling  the  full  round  forms  was  only 
about  60  per  cent,  as  much  as  the  cost  of  handling  the  half  round  forms, 
assuming  the  cost  of  handling  wood  and  steel  forms  to  be  the  same,  which 
seems  to  be  a  reasonable  assumption  for  forms  of  these  sizes. 

When  full  round  forms  are  used,  they  are  generally  supported  on  con- 
crete blocks.  These  blocks  are  made  about  14  in.  long,  the  length  being 
taken  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  the  sewer,  the  upper  surface  conform- 
ing to  the  inside  curvature  of  the  sewer.  The  depth  of  the  block  must 
not  be  less  than  the  required  thickness  of  the  concrete  of  the  sewer  invert, 
and  it  has  been  found  that  better  results  can  usually  be  obtained  if  it 
is  an  inch  or  two  greater.  The  width  of  the  block  parallel  to  the  axis 
of  the  sewer  is  about  8  in.,  thus  allowing  sufficient  bearing  for  the  forms. 
After  the  bottom  of  the  trench  has  been  properly  graded,  the  blocks  are 
set  carefully  to  line  and  grade,  and  the  forms  are  then  placed  upon  them 
and  are  securely  braced  at  the  sides  and  top  to  prevent  any  movement 
while  the  concrete  is  being  placed.  Especial  care  should  be  taken  to 
brace  the  forms  down,  as  otherwise  they  may  float  upon  the  fluid  con- 
crete and  be  thrown  out  of  alignment. 

Full  Round  Wooden  Fonns  for  Building  Concrete  Sewers  at  One 
Operation. — Figs.  153,  154  and  155  illustrate  the  wooden  forms  de- 
signed and  successfully  used  in  1911  by  F.  C.  Williams,  Division 
Engineer,  Commissioners  of  Sewer^e,  Louisville,  Ky.,  for  the  construc- 
tion of  a  sewer  3  ft.  in  diameter  and  about  3000  ft.  in  length.  This  type 
of  form  has  been  used  by  him  in  the  construction  of  several  other  sewers 
and  has  always  proved  economical  and  satisfactory  in  all  respects. 
Fig.  153  shows  the  cylindrical  forms  and  the  outside  jackets  in  place. 


416 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTKE 


The  sketch  also  indicates  how  these  forms  can  be  used  for  building  the 
sewer  in  two  operations,  if  for  any  reason  that  method  of  procedure  is 
desirable,  the  concrete  of  the  invert  being  shown  as  completed  for  a 
portion  of  the  distance,  and  the  bulkhead  being  shown  in  place  to  re- 
tain the  fluid  concrete  of  the  arch. 


Vertical 


ii«^^'* 


Isometric    View. 

Fig.  153. — Wooden  forms  for  building  circular  sewer  in  one  or  two  opera- 
tions, Louisville,  Ky. 


The  inner  forms  are  built  in  sections  7  ft.  10-1  /2  in.  long,  each  section 
consisting  of  four  panels,  shown  in  details  (r,  H  and  /,  Fig.  155.  A  skele- 
ton support  consisting  of  rings  held  together  by  two  stringers,  one  at  the 
top  and  one  at  the  bottom,  is  first  placed  in  position  in  the  trench.  The 
panels  are  placed  upon  and  attached  to  this  skeleton  support  as  shown  in 
Fig.  154. 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        417 


When  the  concrete  has  acqmred  a  sufficient  degree  of  hardness,  the 
top  and  bottom  stringers  holding  the  skeleton  ribs  in  place  are  removed, 
thus  allowing  the  ribs  and  panels  to  be  collapsed  and  carried  out  through 
other  forms  supporting  fresh  concrete.  It  will  be  noticed  that  there  is  no 
internal  bracing  required  by  these  forms,  so  that  the  space  inside  the 
skeleton  ribs  is  entirely  free  and  there  is  no  obstruction  to  interfere  with 
carrying  forms  through  them. 

For  the  construction  of  a  sewer  1100  ft.  in  length,  94  ft.  6  in.  of  inside 
forms  and  48  ft.  of  outside  forms  were  provided.    The  dimensions, 


B 


cdxi  i  I  i  'cell 


(  Upp9r  Quarter  of  Lagging  F^rttcvid  1o  Shew  Interior.) 


Crp55  Section  b-5* 
Fig.  154. — Full  round  wooden  forms,  Louisville,  Ky. 

quantity  of  lumber  and  number  of  sawed,  curved  pieces  required,  the  cost 
of  limiber  and  millwork  and  labor  entering  into  the  building  of  these 
forms,  are  given  in  Table  67.  All  curved  pieces  were  purchased  cut  to 
template  at  a  local  mill  so  that  the  waste  and  profit  are  included  in  the 
unit  prices. 

The  total  cost  of  the  forms  was  $180.84,  the  inside  forms  costing  $1.72 
and  the  outside  forms  38  cents  per  linear  foot.  The  total  cost  of  build- 
ing these  forms  was  16.4  cents  per  linear  foot  of  sewer  constructed. 

This  sewer  required  0.22  cu.  yd.  of  concrete  per  linear  foot,  upon  which 

27 


418 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


basis  the  first  cost  of  forms  was  74.5  cents  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete. 
The  forms  were  in  such  good  condition  at  the  end  of  the  work  that  they 
were  used  for  the  construction  of  another  sewer  700  ft.  in  length,  making 
a  total  of  1800  ft.  of  sewer  constructed  with  these  forms.  Upon  this 
basis  the  cost  of  forms  was  10  cents  per  foot  of  sewer  built  with  them,  or 
45.5  cents  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete.  The  forms  at  the  end  of  the  work 
were  in  such  condition  that  they  could  be  no  longer  used.  In  general,  it 
is  found  that  such  forms  can  be  used  for  the  construction  of  only  about 
1500  ft.  of  sewer. 

Table  67. — Actual  Cost  of  Full  Round  Forms  Required   for 
Concrete  Sewer  36-in.  in  Diameter,  LoinsviLLE,  Ky.,  1911 


Name  of  piece 


Number  and 

dimensions  of 

pieces 


Unit  coBt 


Cost  of 

lumber 

and  mill 

work 


Cost  of 

labor, 

erecting, 

fitting, 

etc. 


ToUl 
cost 


Cost  per 

foot  of 

forms 


Inside  forms 


Circles  for  skeleton 

144~lin.X23Jin. 

forms. 

72— i  in.  X  24*  in. 

144  - 1  in.  X 12  J  in. 

SO. 05 

$18.00 

$15.70 

$33.70 

$0.3538 

Panels — ribs, 

240-2  in.  X  23  i  in. 

jO.08 

19.20 

lagging 

9601  ft.  B.M.  3i 
in.  wide   (tongue 
not  incl.  in  B.M.) 

$29  per  M 

27.84 

51.50 

98.54 

1.0260 

Stringers 

12 — 2  in.  X  4  in. 

15  ft.— 6  in. 

SO.  24 

2.88 

1.30 

4.18 

0.0435 

Angle  irons 

144-A  in.  X  1  in. 

X  5  in.  X  5  in. 

0.15 

21.60 

0.2250 

Bolts 

144 — i  in. 

$1.20  per 
gross 

1.20 

0.0125 

Screws 

288 — 1  in. 

$0.48  per 
gross 

0.96 

0.0100 

\ails 

2.30 

0.0239 

Total 

$162.48 

$1.6947 

Outside  forms 


Panels — ribs, 

lagging 


60—2  in.  X  31  in. 

288  ft.  B.M.  1  in. 

X  4  in. 


$0.10 
$20.  per  M 


6.00 
5.76 


6.60 


Grand  total 


18.361      0.3825 


$180.84 


1  Flooring — tongued  and  grooved.    3}  in.   flooring  was  sometimes  used  when  narrower 
stock  could  not  be  obtained  although  3^  in.  strips  are  too  wide  for  a  30  in.  sewer. 
«  For  48  ft. 

Note. — There  were  94  ft.  6  in.  of  inside  and  48  ft.  of  outside  forms  built 
in  accordance  with  Figs.  153,  154  and  155. 


When  full  round  wooden  forms  are  used,  they  should  be  thoroughly 
water-soaked  before  being  placed  in  the  trench,  otherwise  the  water 
in  the  concrete  will  cause  them  to  swell  and  crack  the  sewer  the 
whole  length  of  the  run.    These  cracks  usually  appear  on  each  side 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        419 

of  the  arch  near  the  top  of  the  outside  jacket.  When  they  were  first 
noticed  at  Louisville,  it  was  thought  that  the  key  strip  that  is  always 
placed  along  the  top  of  the  forms  after  they  are  erected,  was  too  tight, 
but  it  was  afterward  proved  that  the  lagging  itself  had  swelled  about 
1/16  in.,  thus  causing  the  fracture  in  the  concrete.  Wooden  forms,  espe- 
cially when  new,  should  be  protected  from  the  sun,  otherwise  they  will 
dry  out,  causing  the  joints  to  open  so  that  when  the  concrete  is  poured 
the  thin  mortar  will  run  into  and  through  them  giving  to  the  concrete  a 


AnqklronVxI'xr^S 

Hot9'-    i'Hohs5pace2'&4'fromAn9h^ 


Bcfts,ix2i' 

Scmvs, 
No.l6¥lbod 
Scrgm,  Z'hnq. 

Fig.  F. 


3 


u 


V  L.  / 


Details  of  Circles 

— 2Z". -w 


7» 


F/g.6. 


Fig,H. 


Detail  of  Panei  Rfbs, 


a 


1— ^ 


U 


34"-  No./ Common 


n 


-f- 


r.&6.Fk)on'ngrN.C.P\  I 


1^' 


m 


■tf>  >•■■*■  '^w*«  ^**a  *  saasavk^^^a  ■  *'■ 


Fig.L 
Plan  of  Panels.. 


Details  of   Panels. 
Fig.  155. — Details  of  full  roimd  forms,  Louisville,  Ky. 

rough  surface  which  must  be  chipped,  pointed  and  smoothed,  involving 
much  expense  and  producing  results  which  are  not  as  satisfactory  as 
those  produced  by  tight  forms.  After  being  used  once  or  twice  the 
forms  give  no  further  trouble  on  account  of  swelling.  After  the  forms 
have  been  struck  they  should  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and  oiled  before 
being  used  agam. 


420  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Two-Stage  Operations. — It  is  usually  necessary  to  construct  sewers 
and  drains  having  fiat  bottoms  in  at  least  two  operations,  because  of 
difficulty  encountered  in  getting  the  required  smooth  finish  on  the  invert, 
if  the  concrete  for  both  invert  and  arch  is  poured  at  one  time. 

In  Louisville  a  12  ft.  X  12-ft.  semi-eUiptical  sewer,  Fig.  141,  was  very 
successfully  built  in  two  operations.  The  invert  and  side  walls,  26  in. 
high,  were  run  first,  the  concrete  extending  back  to  the  sheeting  thus 
avoiding  the  use  of  outside  forms.  The  lowest  set  of  trench  timbers, 
which  came  4  in.  above  these  walls,  was  removed  48  hours  later,  the 
concrete  thereafter  serving  to  brace  the  sheeting.  Four  days  after  the 
arch  was  poured  the  centers  were  collapsed  and  moved  ahead,  through 
other  forms  in  place,  and  set  up  ready  for  another  run. 

When  a  sewer  is  so  large  that  it  cannot  be  built  in  two  operations 
because  the  trench  braces  cannot  be  removed  without  endangering  the 
stability  of  the  banks,  the  structure  must  be  built  in  three  or  more  opera- 
tions, I.6.,  invert,  side  walls  and  arch.  This  is  also  true  where  the  design 
of  the  sewer  requires  the  construction  of  walls  which  are  straight  or 
nearly  straight,  as  in  horse-shoe  shaped  sewers,  and  it  may  also  apply  to 
remforced  concrete  sewers  where  it  is  necessary  to  place  certain  portions 
of  the  steel  from  time  to  time  as  the  concrete  is  placed.  Occasionally 
large  sections  are  built  in  one  operation,  as  was  the  case  on  the  17-ft. 
Kensico  aqueduct  of  the  Catskill  system  of  the  New  York  water  works 
(see  Eng,  Record,  May  3,  1913). 

SPECIAL  FORMS 

Fonns  for  Manholes. — It  is  entirely  practicable  to  build  satisfactory 
manholes  of  concrete,  although  in  many  cases  it  is  probably  cheaper  and 
more  convenient  to  build  them  of  brick.  Fig.  156  shows  the  forms 
necessary  for  constructing  a  concrete  manhole  upon  a  sewer  13  ft.  6  in. 
in  diameter.  These  forms  provide  for  a  manhole  on  the  side  of  the 
sewer,  which  is  the  best  location  on  large  sewers.  The  manhole  is  4  ft. 
in  internal  diameter  at  its  base,  and  2  ft.  2  in.  at  its  top  (an  unusually 
large  manhole).  The  lower  portion  is  cylindrical  and  can  be  carried  up 
to  any  desired  height  so  that  the  same  conical  forms  can  be  used  for 
pouring  manholes  of  different  depths.  These  forms  are  collapsible,  it 
being  necessary  only  to  remove  the  cleats  holding  the  rib  segments 
together  when  the  lagged  segments  can  be  taken  out,  the  strips  of  lagging 
over  the  joints  not  being  rigidly  nailed  to  the  ribs. 

Fig.  157  shows  the  forms  necessarj'^  for  building  a  concrete  base  for  a 
brick  manhole  on  a  concrete  sewer  36  in.  in  diameter.  The  section 
in  that  illustration  shows  the  inside  manhole  form  in  place,  attached  to 
the  sewer  forms,  after  pouring  both  the  concrete  of  the  sewer  and  the 
concrete  of  the  manhole  base. 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES.  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        421 


[41 f 

n 

: 

\4 

:' 

l-y 

^'' 

422  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


X^sZtion^L"^^ 


ElsvoHon  oF  IniltK  Fsnn*  (or  Bi 
Cro»«    Section. 

Fig.  157. — Form  of  manliole  base,  Louisville,  Ky. 


Fio.  158. — Wooden  junction  form  for  5-ft.  and  S-ft,  connecting  aewere. 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        423 


424  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Fonns  for  Curves  and  Junctions. — ^Where  concrete  is  used  for  the  con- 
struction of  sewers  it  is  probable  that  in  many  cases  the  special  struc- 
tures can  be  built  more  cheaply  of  brick,  as  much  less  form  work  will 
be  necessary.  It  is  practicable  to  build  such  structures  of  concrete, 
however,  if  found  to  be  economical.  Fig.  158  shows  the  inside  forms 
used  for  the  construction  of  a  junction  between  two  sewers,  6  and  3  ft. 
in  size,  respectively,  the  sewer  below  the  junction  being  5  ft.  in  diameter. 
Fig.  159  gives  the  dimensions  of  the  forms  required  for  this  junction. 
As  in  most  cases  such  forms  can  be  used  but  once,  they  may  be  built 
in  a  less  permanent  and  durable  manner  than  forms  which  are  to  be  used 
over  and  over.  If  care  is  used  in  laying  out  the  ribs  and  in  lagging  them, 
a  satisfactory  finish  and  curvature  may  be  obtained.  It  will  be  found 
that  thin  strips  of  lagging,  from  1/2  to  3/4  in.  in  thickness,  will  be 
amply  strong  for  the  smaller  sizes,  say  up  to  8  ft.  in  diameter,  and  the 
curves  can  be  made  much  more  satisfactorily  than  with  thicker  lagging. 
In  many  cases,  especially  where  the  trenches  are  deep,  it  may  be  found 
desirable  to  put  the  ribs  together  and  erect  and  lag  them  in  the  trench, 
as  it  will  be  found  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  lower  forms  already 
lagged  and  in  large  pieces  into  the  trench  on  account  of  the  large  number 
of  braces  across  it. 

KIND  AND  QUALITY  OF  LUMBER  FOR  WOODEN  FORMS 

In  an  article  entitled  "Inspection  of  Forms  and  Centering"  {Eng, 
and  ConL,  vol.  xxxvii,  p.  201)  Jerome  Cochran  gives  many  valuable 
suggestions  pertaining  to  the  making  and  use  of  forms  for  concrete 
construction.  Many  of  these  suggestions  are  applicable  to  forms  used 
for  the  construction  of  concrete  sewers.  With  reference  to  the  kind 
of  lumber  to  be  used  he  states: 

"The  kind  of  lumber  to  be  used  for  forms  depends  upon  the  desired  results 
and  price.  White  pine,  yellow  pine,  spruce,  Oregon  pine  and  redwood  are 
suitable  for  forms.  Yellow  pine  lumber  is  found  to  be  excellent  for  forms; 
owing  to  the  large  amount  of  pitch  contained,  it  absorbs  water  slowly  and 
holds  its  shape.    Norway  pine  and  fir  lumber  are  also  suitable  for  forms  for  a 

similar  reason For  ordinary  work,  however,  even  for  panels, 

white  pine  is  generally  apt  to  be  too  expensive,  and  other  lumber  should  be 
substituted  for  it.  Hemlock  is  unreliable  and  should  be  used  only  when 
absolutely  necessary  and  then  only  in  the  roughest  kind  of  work.  Oak  is 
hard  to  nail,  expensive  and  imprints  grain  marks  on  the  concrete  even  when 
the  form  is  thoroughly  wetted. 

" .  .  .  .  The  lumber  must  not  be  so  dry  that  when  soaked  by  the 
concrete  it  will  swell  so  as  to  bulge  and  distort  the  forms,  nor  so  green  that  it 
will  shrink  so  as  to  leave  open  joints  that  will  show  plainly  on  the  face  of 
the  work.  A  slight  tendency  of  this  kind,  however,  may  be  checked  by 
keeping  the  boards  thoroughly  wet  with  water  until  the  concrete  is  placed. 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        426 

Kiln-dried  lumber,  therefore,  is  not  suitable  for  form  construction  because 
of  its  tendency  to  swell  when  soaked  by  the  concrete,  and  green  lumber  is 
undesirable  on  account  of  liability  to  check  and  warp.  Partly  seasoned 
lumber  is  therefore  the  best.  When  it  comes  to  a  choice  between  green  and 
dry  lumber,  green  lumber  is  preferable  because  it  is  less  affected  by  the 
water  in  the  concrete. 

" .  .  .  .  The  form  boards  used  on  all  exposed  surfaces  should  be  of 
dressed  lumber  and  closely  fitted  in  order  to  secure  the  best  results  in  appear- 
ance and  surface  finish  of  the  work.  The  lumber  for  face  work  should  be 
surfaced  on  one  side  and  two  edges  and  dressed  on  the  face  side  to  even 
thickness,  and  may  be  tongue-and-groove  flooring  or  similar  lagging. 
Tongue-and-groove  boards,  however,  are  more  expensive  than  boards  sur- 
faced on  one  side  and  on  the  edges,  which  will  generally  answer  for  most 
work.  A  principal  objection  to  the  use  of  tongue-and-groove  lagging  is 
that  there  is  no  opportunity  for  it  to  expand,  and,  again,  the  planks  are 
particularly  hard  to  place  a  second  time. 

"For  backing  and  other  rough  work  undressed  lumber  may  be  used. 
Undressed  lumber  should  be  used  where  the  concrete  is  to  be  plastered.  In 
other  words,  forms  for  non-exposed  surfaces  may  be  rough  lumber  but  should 
be  water-tight." 

COST  OP  WOODEN  FORMS 


There  are  a  large  number  of  varied  elements  which  enter  into  the  cost 
of  the  forms  required  for  building  concrete  sewers,  among  which  may 
be  mentioned  the  rate  of  progress  and  the  resulting  length  of  forms 
required  to  complete  the  work  in  the  prescribed  time,  the  length  of  period 
which  must  elapse  after  concrete  ia  poured  and  before  forms  may  be 
struck,  the  amount  of  special  form  work  which  can  be  used  but  once, 
such  as  forms  for  junction  chambers  and  curves,  and  the  length  and 
number  of  different  sizes  of  sewers  to  be  built  under  a  given  contract. 

Table  68. — Cost  of  Labor  and  Materials   Required  por   Building 

Wooden  Centers  at  Worcester 


Size 

No.  of  centers 

Cost  per  foot  of  center 

24  in. 

6 

$0,225 

28  in. 

6 

0.347 

27X40  in. 

4 

0.473 

48  in. 

5 

0.718 

60  in. 

8 

0.768 

69  in. 

12 

0.948 

The  cost  of  building  centers  suitable  either  for  brickwork  or  for  con- 
crete sewers  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  from  1902  to  1905,  varjdng  from  24 
to  69  in.  in  diameter,  is  given  in  Table  68. 

The  cost  of  wooden  forms  varying  in  size  from  36  in.  in  diameter  to 
6  ft.  by  9  ft.  10  in.,  are  given  in  Table  69.    These  costs  are  merely 


426  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

given  for  illustrative  purposes  and  should  not  be  used  without  care- 
ful checking  against  local  conditions,  for  in  addition  to  diversity  in 
cost  of  labor  and  materials  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  difference 
in  prices  may  result  from  a  variation  in  the  length  of  sewer  to  be  built 
with  a  given  set  of  forms  and  the  quantity  of  concrete  per  linear  foot 
of  sewer.  If  the  sewer  is  of  massive  construction,  requiring  a  large 
quantity  of  concrete  per  linear  foot,  the  cost  of  forms  per  cubic  yard  of 
concrete  will  be  relatively  low,  whereas  if  the  sewer  is  of  thin  section,  the 
cost  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete  for  forms  will  be  relatively  high. 

In  building  the  sQwer  at  Kalamazoo,  Mich.,  item  4,  the  invert  was  formed 
by  means  of  templets,  to  which  the  concrete  was  screeded.  After  the 
concrete  had  set,  the  arch  forms  were  placed  and  the  remainder  of  the  con- 
crete poured. 

The  South  Bend  sewer,  item  5,  was  built  by  placing  vertical  lagging  along 
the  sides  in  line  with  the  outside  lines  of  the  sewer,  carrying  it  as  high  as 
the  springing  line  of  the  arch.  Invert  templets  equal  in  length  to  about 
one-third  of  the  circle  were  set  to  Une  and  grade  and  spaced  3  ft.  apart. 
The  invert  was  then  completed  to  a  point  about  18  in.  above  the  grade  line. 
Side  forms  for  the  invert  were  then  set,  extending  up  to  the  spring  line. 
After  these  forms  were  filled,  the  centers,  made  in  two  pieces,  were  set,  to- 
gether with  jackets  or  outside  forms,  extending  up  on  either  side  about  45 
deg.  from  the  springing  line. 

The  sewer  built  in  Waterbury,  Conn.,  item  6,  had  vertical  side  walls  and 
was  formed  by  first  laying  down  the  invert  and  then  placing  forms  upon  it. 
The  centers  were  composed  of  two  sections,  the  first,  20  in.  high,  formed  the 
side  walls,  and  was  rectangular  in  section.  The  center  rested  on  top  of  this 
and  outside  forms  were  placed  reaching  about  45  deg.  from  the  springing 
line. 

At  Worcester,  the  sewers  were  built  by  setting  "formers,"  or  ribs,  to  line 
and  grade.  The  concrete  forming  the  bottom  of  the  invert  was  then  roughly 
placed  and  2-in.  planks,  shaped  to  conform  to  the  curvature  of  the  ribs  and 
the  sewer,  were  placed  between  the  concrete  and  the  under  side  of  the  ribs. 
After  the  bottom  concrete  was  placed,  these  planks  were  brought  up  on  the 
side,  as  fast  as  the  concrete  was  poured.  After  the  invert  built  in  this  man- 
ner had  set  sufficiently,  centers  were  placed  and  the  concrete  of  the  arch 
poured,  the  concrete  being  held  in  position  on  the  outside  by  "arch  formers" 
similar  to  those  used  in  forming  the  invert. 

The  water  works  conduit  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  item  11,  was  built  in  one  opera- 
tion. The  forms  were  open  at  the  bottom  for  about  one-sixth  of  the  circle, 
and  this  portion  of  the  invert  was  shaped  and  screeded  by  hand.  The  out- 
side forms  consisted  of  steel  angles,  bent  to  the  shape  of  the  conduit  and 
held  at  the  bottom  by  stakes  driven  in  the  ground.  The  tops  of  these  angles 
were  held  together  by  1/2-in.  tie  rods.  These  angles  had  small  lugs  bolted 
onto  them  at  intervals,  which  held  2-in.  plank,  slipped  down  as  the  concrete 
progressed. 

It  may  be  said,  in  a  general  way,  that  wooden  forms  required  for 
building  small  concrete  sewers,  from  24  in.  to  6  ft.  in  diameter,  will 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS 


427 


CO 
PS 
H 

> 

» 
PS 

o 
O 

o 

00 

PS 

o 

O 
O 


O 

O 

O 


CO 

H 

5 


^ 

& 


•^l?a«-S 


S  5  ®  o 
Of  ° 


«    (3    O 


S 

1 

o 


g  o  g 


^     O 


IS 

.   0, 


3  ««-<    -S 
g    O    £ 

®  ^  9 


5  o  g 


^  s 


B 

9 


o 
O 


g    O    £ 

ft.    >»  o 


^    o 


s 


lO  CO  CD  CO   i-< 

«  0>  CO   CO  Ol  t^ 

CO  C^  C^   05  lO   CO 

•  ••••• 

o  o  o  o  o  o 


CO   ^ 


N-  U3  05 

t>-   CO  00 


Si 


M    CO    O    »H    O 


CQ   ^   Tt<   CO 

05  b-  «  r* 


CO 
CO 


Q  O  O  O  O  O 


Oi  00   'tf   IC   «0   CO 

^  Tj4    O    "^    l^    '^ 

•  ••••• 

^  *H  c^  o  o  o 


CO  CO  00  CO  »o  «o 

^J1      ^^      ^^      ^5^      ^^      ^^ 


^ 


o  o  o  o  o 


00  ^  CO 
W5  W5  »H 


^ 


O    *H 


N   CO  N- 

c^  ^  c^ 


s. 


o  o 


01  CQ  p 

CO    Tt<    ^ 


P4  Od  CO 
CO  *o  ^ 


s 


o  o  o  o  o 


00 


01 

00 


CO 

CO 


00 


CO 


01  N. 

oi  »o 


O  O  "^ 


CO 


rt<01C5O»Ot^C0C005»-«0001 
01'-<OC0C0»-<»-<'-<01»-<'-<01 


OOOOOOOOOOOo 


.(J   .tJ    .tJ   .*d   .tJ 


^     .4^     .^     .^     .^     .^     ^ 
<«U    *«^    **H    **^    **m    *^.i    «4H 


01  r^  i^  o  Q  -^ 
^  o  01  01  »o  ob 

01   CO  CO  O   00  tH 
*-l    CO 


00 


o 


.s 

CO 


2       ^ 


01 


.3     -pH     •"«     ^     'H       V^    •"<     •-<     '"H     •3     "pH        Ji^ 

i^J-^COwCO      -O^OICOCOCO    T 


»o 


CO       ;S 


00  — ' 

o  o 
S  c 

w    C 


*-ioico'^u3cot>»oooao^cico 

^    ^    i-H    »H 


la         CO  O 

5             r^    w^ 

O          Oi  Oi 

^.    ^H    ^^ 

8 

"S  S    -    - 

1 

O      4»          •          • 

>»  >k  >»  >k       «  «  e 

•d  -d  -d  -d  J4  3   o  ,o 

^ 

•d-d-d-doi-sOO 

>^ 

M 

•    •    •    .  §  «S  ^  ^ 

o    iK 

n    n    «a    oD 

•*«   ••■ 

S    S    9    S    (3 

o   o 

0    0    0    0    o 

h     d 

•5  -3  -5  -5  -5 

V    o 

c8    «8    (S    «    08 

r« 

fca        li«       b       ttf        C 

^5 

o  o  o  o  o 

O    O    C4    C4    rl 

S  S  S2  2    -a  «  o 

^•-<f-if-i-g^,-<»H 

§ 

•d 

a 

^ 
•« 

*    *    f    •  2 

9 

Q? 

.      •      .      -    O            >i 

S 

Ai 

Mukh-*»S)^-2 

• 

o 

t^  00  oa  o  ^       e«  M 

Z 

^^    rH             w^    r-^ 

-*»■*»<*» 

8      S      3 

o         o         u 

Reference 
jwcr 

.2 .2 .2      M      £      jS 

•Ili|3j5.j3 

M   M   M     a         ■         a 

a  a  a  g       t        a 

o   o 

o    o    o    O         O         0 

t*    c 

•5  "5  'S  '5        "5        *3 

V    o 

eS    fl9    «    eS          d          c9 

h      b      b      k               U               U 

§1 

S.S.S.S.     s.     s. 

1  2 

o  o  o  o     o     o 

90 

—   ^   ^   M          CO 

e< 

w*    y^    y^    Ci              tO 

*H    ^H    v4    O             O 

0   0)^0          0> 

^4      ^4     T^      l-l                 ^^ 

a 

■1                                        M 

^ 

c        "d         d 

•« 

r    r    r-,5        a        o 

a 

>,  >,  >»^       •"•       o 

sS 

s 

^  ^  ^   a                -S 

11  *i  -3     ^      « 

• 

^^^«       &       ^ 

^  C4  C9  ^         lO         « 

o 

0 

o 
o 

o 


o 
> 

3 

o 


•d 

s 

m 

£ 


O 

OB 


o 


o 


•d 

d 


428  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

usually  cost  from  75  cents  to  S2.50  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete,  and 
from  25  cents  to  SI. 00  per  linear  foot  of  sewer. 

COST  OF  STEEL  FORMS 

As  in  the  case  of  wooden  forms,  the  cost  of  steel  forms  varies  greatly 
with  local  conditions,  among  which  may  be  mentioned  as  particularly 
important  the  length  of  sewer  which  is  to  be  built  with  a  given  set 
of  forms  and  the  type  of  forms  to  be  used,  whether  standard  or  special. 

In  all  parts  of  the  United  States  east  of  the  Mississippi  River  standard 
prices  can  be  secured  for  standard  apparatus,  by  which  is  meant  forms  for 
circular  sewers  of  relatively  small  sizes.  If  the  sewers  are  of  large  size 
or  special  design  requiring  the  construction  of  forms  for  the  particular 
work  in  hand,  the  prices  may  considerably  exceed  those  quoted  for 
standard  forms. 

To  assist  in  making  preliminary  estimates  of  cost,  prices  of  centers 
from  20  to  72  in.  in  diameter,  which  may  be  assimied  to  approximate  the 
prices  which  can  be  obtained  from  manufacturers  for  centers  to  be  used 
east  of  the  Mississippi  River,  are  given  in  Table  70.  These  prices  should 
be  used  with  caution  as  quotations  may  vary  materially  from  time 
to  time. 

Table  70. — Approximate    Rental    Pbices  of   Patent   Semicibcular 

Steel  Forms  20  to  72  In.  in  Diameter 


Siae 

Price  per  linear  foot  of  form 

20  in.  to  30  in. 

11.00 

36  in.  to  48  in. 

1.60 

51  in.  to  60  in. 

2.00 

63  in.  to  66  in. 

2.50 

72  in.  to  84  in. 

4.00 

Note. — The  prices  given  cover  the  use  of  centers  for  a  period  of  9  months 
and  include  all  freight  charges  so  that  the  only  additional  expense  to  the 
contractor  is  that  involved  in  unloading,  hauling  between  the  cars  and  the' 
work  and  reloading  the  forms  when  the  work  is  finished.  For  points 
west  of  the  Mississippi  freight  rates  from  the  eastern  shipping  points 
must  be  added  to  standard  prices. 

Most  manufacturers  usually  send  erecting  foremen  to  superintend 
first  erection  and  to  instruct  the  user  in  the  economical  handling  of  the 
forms.  In  some  cases  where  this  is  impracticable  an  additional  charge 
is  made  if  the  user  desires  the  assistance  of  an  expert. 

CLEANING  FORMS  PREPARATORY  TO  POURING  CONCRETE 

Forms  should  not  only  be  made  sufficiently  strong  to  carry  the  loads 
imposed  upon  them,  but  they  should  be  so  made  as  to  assure  to  the  oon* 


PROFILES,  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS        429 

Crete  a  suitable  surface.  The  inside  surface  of  a  sewer  should  be  as 
smooth  as  it  is  practicable  to  obtain,  and  for  this  purpose  the  forms  should 
be  made  smooth  and  water-tight.  The  outside  surfaces  need  not  be 
smooth,  and  therefore  the  forms  may  be  made  of  rough  lumber  and  need 
not  be  water-tight,  although  they  should  not  allow  any  material  quaAtity 
of  water  to  run  away  from  the  mass  of  concrete. 

The  requirements  of  the  contracts  under  which  the  Louisville  sewers 
were  built,  from  1908  to  1911,  stipulated  that  the  forms  must  be  so  con- 
structed as  to  insure  a  true  and  very  smooth  interior  surface  on  the 
finished  concrete,  that  the  designs  for  the  forms  should  be  submitted 
to  the  engineer  for  approval  before  they  were  built,  that  care  should 
be  taken  to  prevent  shavings,  sawdust  and  other  wastes  resulting  from 
the  making  of  forms  and  centers  from  becoming  embedded  in  the  con- 
crete, that  forms  should  be  thoroughly  cleaned  of  cement  and  dirt  and  so 
prepared,  or  covered,  that  they  might  be  readily  removed,  leaving  the 
concrete  with  a  smooth,  presentable  surface,  and  that  they  should  be 
substantially  water-tight. 

Just  before  and  after  setting  centers  and  forms  such  as  those  for  side 
waUs  in  order  to  complete  a  structure  already  partly  built,  particular 
care  should  be  taken  to  clean  the  concrete  surfaces  upon  which  fresh 
concrete  is  to  be  placed.  Sticks,  chips,  shavings,  oil  and  dirt  of  all  kinds 
accumulate  on  such  surfaces  during  the  placing  of  the  forms.  Sand, 
clay  or  other  substances  may  fall  from  the  banks  or  from  hoisting  and 
conveying  apparatus,  or  it  may  be  washed  into  the  trench  in  times  of 
storm.  Concrete  surfaces,  particularly  where  reinforcement  is  used,  are 
often  hard  to  get  at,  shaded  so  as  to  be  difficult  to  see,  and  in  many 
ways  hard  to  clean  and  inspect.  Nevertheless  they  must  be  scrupu- 
lously cleaned  if  a  good  bond  is  to  be  secm-ed.  The  authors  have  found 
sand  pockets  several  inches  long  and  thick  and  deep  enough  to  permit 
running  the  hand  several  inches  into  the  concrete  at  the  junction  of 
the  side  wall  and  arch.  Under  such  conditions,  it  matters  little  upon 
what  theories  the  design  of  the  sewer  is  based. 

LUBRICATION  OF  FORMS 

There  is  a  tendency  for  concrete  to  adhere  to  the  forms  and  for  a 
thin  layer  of  it  to  break  away  from  the  structure,  thus  causing  more 
or  less  roughness  of  the  surface.  To  obviate  this  defect  as  far  as  pos- 
sible, all  the  surfaces  of  forms  which  come  in  contact  with  concrete 
should  be  well  oiled  before  the  concrete  is  placed.  Paraffine  oil  was 
generally  used  upon  the  work  done  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  gave  satis- 
factory results,  especially  with  wooden  forms. 

During  the  cold  winter  months,  when  there  is  a  tendency  toward 
"peeling"  where  steel  forms  are  used,  it  may  prove  desirable  to  use 


430  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

heavier  oil,  which  will  reduce  this  trouble.  The  use  of  such  oil,  however, 
is  somewhat  unsatisfactory  as  it  adheres  to  the  surface  of  the  concrete 
after  the  forms  are  removed,  making  work  inside  the  sewer  dirty  and 
disagreeable.  Many  different  kinds  of  oil  were  used,  with  var3ring 
degrees  of  success,  but  it  was  found  that  the  best  results  were  obtained 
with  cup  grease  where  it  was  necessary  to  use  a  heavy  lubricant. 

On  the  Metropolitan  Sewer  Sjrstem  in  Boston,  where  wooden  forms 
covered  with  galvanized  iron  have  been  extensively  employed,  kerosene 
or  coal  oil  has  been  used  with  satisfactory  results. 

Soap  is  sometimes  used  for  lubricating  forms,  and  is  particularly  useful 
in  smoothing  up  forms  for  junction  chambers  and  other  special  struc- 
tures, w^here  there  are  numerous  angles  and  comers.  Soft  soap  is  well 
adapted  for  ordinary  lubrication,  and  hard  soap  may  be  used  to  advan- 
tage in  filling  small  spaces  and  irregularities  in  the  forms. 

Cochran  suggests  the  use  of  petrolatum  cut  down  with  three  parts  of 
hot  kerosene,  for  the  ordinary  oiling  of  forms.  He  also  suggests  that 
where  forms  are  to  be  used  repeatedly  it  may  prove  advantageous  to  oil 
them  when  new  with  three  coats  of  boiled  linseed  oil,  and  where  forms 
are  for  surfaces  that  are  to  be  whitewashed,  grouted,  or  plastered,  a  treat- 
ment with  boiled  soap  applied  hot  may  be  preferable  to  treatment  with 
oil  or  grease,  as  the  soap  will  prevent  adhesion  of  the  concrete  to  the 
forms  and  will  not  injure  the  surface  or  diminish  the  strength  of  the 
concrete  {Eng.  and  ConL,  vol.  xxxvii,  p.  201). 

LENGTH  OF  TIME  FORMS  SHOULD  BE  LEFT  IN  PLACE 

There  is  some  difference  of  opinion  among  engineers  and  practical 
sewer  builders  as  to  the  length  of  time  forms  should  be  left  in  place. 
This  period  depends  upon  temperature,  humidity,  the  setting  time  of  the 
cement,  the  size  and  character  of  the  structure  and  the  load  to  be  placed 
upon  it.  During  hot  summer  weather  concrete  ordinarily  sets  rapidly, 
and  a  period  of  from  24  to  36  hours  will  in  most  cases  be  sufficient  for 
invert  and  side  wall  forms  and  48  hours  for  arch  forms.  The  time 
required  for  the  concrete  to  acquire  suflScient  strength  to  permit  the 
removal  of  the  forms  with  safety  will  be  shorter  in  summer  than  in  winter 
when  the  concrete  sets  much  more  slowly.  Centers  should,  of  course, 
never  be  removed  while  the  concrete  is  frozen.  Forms  used  for  large 
sewers  and  other  similar  structures  should  remain  in  place  a  greater 
length  of  time  than  forms  for  small  sewers  under  similar  conditions.  In 
all  cases  and  at  all  seasons  of  the  year  the  trench  should  be  backfilled 
to  a  height  somewhat  above  the  top  of  the  sewer,  probably  2  ft.,  before 
the  arch  forms  are  struck.  This  filling  should  be  placed  in  relatively 
thin  layers,  uniformly  on  both  sides  of  the  arch,  and  thoroughly  tamped. 

The  contracts  under  which  the  Louisville  sewers  were  constructed 


PROFILES y  TEMPLATES,  FORMS  AND  CENTERS       431 

specified  that  the  centers  should  not  be  struck  until  the  backfilling  had 
been  completed  to  the  height  of  a  horizontal  plane  2  ft.  above  the  top  of 
the  completed  masonry,  and  that  the  centers  should  never  be  struck 
without  the  consent  of  the  engineer  upon  the  work.  The  length  of  time 
the  centers  were  required  to  be  left  in  place  was  varied  according  to  the 
size  of  the  sewer  in  question.  For  the  larger  sewers,  ranging  from  10  to 
15.5  ft.  in  diameter,  it  was  stipulated  that  the  centers  should  remain  in 
place  7  days.  Upon  smaller  work,  this  time  was  reduced,  the  minimum 
for  sewers  from  2  to  6  ft.  in  diameter  being  4  days.  As  a  result  of  the 
Louisville  experience,  it  is  felt  by  the  engineers  upon  this  work  that  the 
length  of  time  the  centers  were  required  to  be  kept  in  place  might  have 
been  somewhat  reduced  under  most  conditions,  without  danger  of  injury 
to  the  concrete. 

The  side  wall  forms,  which  were  used  only  upon  the  larger  work,  were 
required  to  be  left  in  place  until  the  concrete  had  acquired  a  hard  set, 
which  was  usually  from  24  to  48  hours  after  it  had  been  poured. 

In  response  to  an  inquiry  regarding  the  practice  of  the  Board  of  Water 
Supply  of  the  City  of  New  York  in  removing  forms  used  in  the  construc- 
tion of  the  cut-and-cover  aqueduct,  Alfred  D.  Flinn,  Dep.  Chief  Eng. 
states: 

"The  specifications  stipulate: 

"Directions  as  to  the  time  of  removing  forms  shall  be  strictly  followed 
and  this  work  shall  be  done  with  great  care  so  as  to  avoid  injury  to  the  con- 
crete." 

In  general,  directions  were  not  given,  the  contractors  not  beingrequired 
but  allowed  to  remove  forms,  the  average  minimum  time  being  after 
24  hours  during  hot  and  favorable  weather  to  72  hours  at  the  end  of  the 
season.  Exceptions  to  this  occurred,  however,  particularly  in  the  case 
of  slow-hardening  and  sticky  cement,  72  hours  being  the  average  mini- 
mum time.  This  time  for  removing  forms  permitted  desired  prog- 
ress with  a  minimum  number  of  forms  and  made  the  work  of  finishing, 
where  required,  easier.'' 

In  December,  1908,  Albert  C.  Lehman,  Manager  of  the  Blaw  Steel 
Construction  Co.,  of  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  pubhshed  {En^,  Record^  vol. 
Iviii,  p.  664)  the  opinions  of  engineers  upon  the  length  of  time  that 
centering  should  be  left  in  place  in  concrete  sewers.  In  giving  their 
views,  the  engineers  were  requested  to  leave  out  of  consideration  differ- 
ences in  cement,  the  percentage  of  reinforcement  and  the  depth  of  back- 
filling, that  the  replies  might  be  as  nearly  comparable  as  possible.  Sixty 
replies  were  received,  the  results  of  which  appear  in  Table  71. 

In  Chicago,  on  a  heavy  concrete  sewer  8-1/2  ft.  in  diameter,  backfilling 
was  permitted  in  24  to  36  hours  after  placing  concrete.  Forms  were  re- 
moved in  from  2  to  4  days.  In  Baltimore,  centers  12  ft.  3  in.  in  diameter 
were  removed  in  48  hours,  and  earlier  on  some  occasions. 


432 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Table  71. — Opinions  of  Engineers  as  to  Necessary  Period  of  Time 
BETWEEN  Pouring  of  Concrete  and  Striking  of  Centers  upon 

Sewer  Construction 


Diameter    of    sewer 

Period  of  time  in  hours                                         | 

Max.       Min. 

2  to  5  ft 

6  to  9  ft 

10  to  12  ft 

16  to  20  ft 

96 
96 

144 
240 

12 
24 

48 
48 

90  per  cent,  of  reports  in  36  hours 
60  per  cent,  of  reports  in  48  hours 
30  per  cent,  of  reports  in  72  hours 
90  per  cent,  of  reports  in  72  hours 
60  per  cent,  of  reports  in  72  hours 
30  per  cent,  of  reports  in  96  hours 

HANDLING  FORMS 

Wooden  forms  are  usually  made  to  collapse  in  sections  8  or  10  ft.  in 
length.  There  is  so  little  room  for  a  man  to  work  in  sewers  30  in.  or 
less  in  diameter  that  it  has  been  found  cheaper  to  remove  the  forms  from 
the  rear  rather  than  try  to  take  them  ahead  through  other  forms  in 
place.  A  low  flat  car  about  8  ft.  in  length  and  12  in.  in  width,  with  a- 
rope  attached  to  each  end,  can  readily  be  drawn  back  and  forth  as  fast 
as  the  forms  can  be  loaded  and  unloaded.  This  is  quicker,  cheaper, 
and  keeps  .the  forms  in  better  condition  than  trying  to  drag  them  out,  one 
on  top  of  the  other,  as  is  often  done.  In  flat  bottom  sewers,  5  ft.  in 
diameter  or  larger,  the  forms  may  be  carried  out  on  cars  run  on  tempo- 
rary tracks. 

When  steel  centering  is  used,  special  carriages  or  travelers.  Fig.  160, 
are  usually  designed  for  canying  them  ahead,  as  already  described. 
These  carriages  may  be  provided  with  vertical  jacks  and  collapsing  side 
arms  which  are  attached  to  the  sides  of  the  sections  for  pulling  them  in 
and  away  from  the  concrete.  In  operating  the  carriage  for  moving  the 
forms,  the  vertical  jacks  are  first  run  up  until  the  yoke  end  of  the  jack 
engages  the  top  hinge  rod,  the  side  arms  then  being  swung  into  position 
and  fastened  to  flanges  near  the  springing  line  of  the  centers.  The  side 
arms  are  then  drawn  in  and  the  vertical  jacks  lowered  until  the  forms 
have  assumed  a  position  which  will  permit  them  to  pass  through  the 
sections  that  are  in  place  ahead. 

The  cost  of  handling  forms  in  trench  is  a  substantial  portion  of  the 
cost  of  the  masonry,  a  fact  which  should  be  borne  clearly  in  mind  when 
the  forms  are  being  designed,  as  the  type  of  forms  may  have  a  very 
important  influence  upon  this  item  of  cost.  The  cost  of  handling  forms, 
including  erection,  taking  down,  cleaning,  and  moving  forward,  varies 
greatly,  but  upon  relatively  small  work,  such  as  sewers  from  2  to  6  ft. 
in  diameter,  it  may  be  estimated  at  from  $0.50  to  SI  per  foot  of  sewer. 
Further  data  upon  this  subject  are  given  in  Table  69  and  the  accompany- 
ing text. 


Fig.  160.— Traveler  used  in  movii^  Blaw  centers,  Louisville,  Ky. 


Fio.  161. — Roots  removed  from  undcrdraina,  Newton,  Mass. 

iFacing  pagi  432} 


CHAPTER  XVI 

CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS 

The  construction  of  extensive  municipal  works  is  generally  carried 
on  by  contract  in  order  that  the  operations  may  be  conducted  by  men 
who,  it  is  assumed,  are  specialists  in  directing  workmen  and  using 
machinery  so  as  to  accomplish  the  desired  ends  with  a  minimum  ex- 
pense. It  is  also  usually  assumed  that  there  is  not  enough  municipal 
work  going  on  regularly  to  keep  a  large  force  of  city  workmen  employed 
in  an  efficient  way,  and  it  is  quite  generally  held  that  politics  so  interfere 
with  the  management  of  work  carried  on  by  the  city  itself  that  efficiency 
is  impossible  and  even  the  quality  of  the  work  suffers.  The  authors  do 
not  hold  such  an  extreme  position,  and  after  considerable  experience 
in  executing  large  and  small  sewerage  work  both  by  day  labor  imder 
their  direct  charge  and  by  contract,  they  have  found  such  advantages 
and  disadvantages  in  both  systems  that  the  choice  between  the  two  in 
any  given  case  should  not,  in  their  opinion,  be  determined  without  a 
careful  consideration^of  local  conditions.  Where  the  difficulties  of  con- 
struction are  certain  to  be  numerous  or  there  must  be  frequent  changes 
in  some  of  the  details  of  foundations,  underdrains  and  the  like  to  meet 
changes  in  the  ground  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  an  experienced  fore- 
man with  a  force  of  good  muncipal  laborers  will  probably  build  a  better 
small  sewer  than  a  contractor  will  construct.  Where  the  work  is  with- 
out serious  difficulty  and  the  city  is  without  experienced  men  to  act  as 
foremen,  a  contractor  will  probably  build  a  good  system  at  less  expense 
than  the  city.  Between  these  limiting  conditions  are  many  combina- 
tions of  circumstances  which  it  would  be  a  waste  of  time  to  attempt  to 
enumerate  and  discuss. 

If  a  contractor  is  to  be  engaged,  it  is  desirable  to  prepare  a  form  of 
contract,  a  set  of  specifications  and  enough  plans  to  make  perfectly 
clear  just  what  the  city  wishes  and  the  contractor  agrees  to  do.  Un- 
fortunately the  English  language  is  sometimes  used  so  poorly  that  the 
meaning  of  a  clause  in  a  contract  cannot  be  understood  by  city  or  con- 
tractor, and  this  meaning  must  then  be  determined  by  judge  or  jury. 
For  this  reason,  therefore,  clearness  of  wording  and  correctness  in 
drafting  arc  highly  desirable. 

Even  when  a  requirement  is  perfectly  clear,  a  controversy  may  arise 
over  its  legality  or  equity.  The  city  of  New  York  has  endeavored  to 
avoid  such  disputes  by  writing  into  its  general  form  of  contract  a  clause 
28  433 


434  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

meeting  every  litigated  case  in  which  it  has  been  a  loser  through  an 
adverse  judicial  interpretation  of  contract  requirements.  The  resulting 
mass  of  legal  verbiage  is  almost  incomprehensible  to  a  layman,  and  as  it 
has  not  been  copied  elsewhere  its  necessity  is  doubtful.  The  legality  of 
a  contract  of  importance  should  always  be  passed  upon  by  a  lawyer, 
for  he  is  generally  more  familiar  than  the  engineer  with  the  forms  of 
wording  which  have  been  adjudicated  and  have  a  definite  meaning 
in  consequence.  The  engineer,  however,  will  do  well  to  follow  as  closely 
as  possible  all  suits  which  will  throw  light  on  the  proper  wording  of 
contracts  and  specifications,  for  if  well  informed  he  can  do  much  toward 
rendering  litigation  over  a  contract  a  waste  of  time. 

These  two  sources  of  controversy  over  a  contract  and  its  accompanying 
plans  and  specifications  should  be  kept  in  mind  when  preparing  such 
documents.  The  relations  between  all  parties  and  their  respective 
duties  should  be  made  definite  in  every  detail.  The  work  to  be  done 
should  be  clearly  explained.  If  the  surface  of  a  concrete  wall  is  to  be  left 
perfectly  smooth  and  free  from  checks,  pits,  scars  and -stains,  this  should 
be  stated,  for  the  requirement  that  the  wall  shall  be  built  in  a  work- 
manlike manner  satisfactory  to  the  engineer  is  not  definite.  If  a  machine 
is  desired,  those  parts  and  features  which  are  really  needed  should  be 
described,  leaving  the  rest  to  the  manufacturer,  for  it  is  not  a  good  de- 
scription to  say  that  the  machine  shall  be  of  somebody's  make,  or  equal. 
These  loose  expressions  are  fast  disappearing  from  the  si>ecifications  of 
leading  engineers,  as  it  is  becoming  appreciated  that  there  is  a  great 
difference  between  a  description  prepared  to  explain  in  a  general  way 
the  purpose  and  design  of  a  public  work  and  a  description  of  what  a 
contractor  must  supply  and  do.  Fairness  to  both  owner  and  con- 
tractor demands  a  complete,  precise  and  clear  description,  either  in 
words  or  by  drawings,  of  every  detail  of  the  undertaking  which  is  not 
left  to  the  contractor's  judgment.  By  following  this  policy  and  by 
requiring  inspectors  to  be  fair  and  not  harsh  in  enforcing  contract 
requirements,  a  city  gains  a  reputation  for  enlightened  business  methods 
which  results  in  low  prices  from  responsible  contractors. 

Essentials  of  a  Contract — ^The  essential  elements  of  all  contracts 
have  been  very  clearly  outlined  by  John  Cassan  Wait  in  his  "Engineer- 
ing and  Architectural  Jurisprudence:" 

''Every  binding  contract  must  contain  four  essential  elements,  via.: 
1.  Two  parties  with  capacity  to  contract.  2.  A  lawful  consideration;  a 
something  in  exchange  for  its  legal  equivalent;  a  quid  pro  quo,  3.  A  lawful 
subject-matter,  whether  it  be  a  promise,  an  act,  or  a  material  object.  4. 
Mutuality :  a  mutual  assent,  a  mutual  understanding,  and  a  meeting  of  the 
minds^  of  the  parties.    These  elements  of  a  simple  contract  are  of  the 

'  Where  there  is  some  error  or  omission  in  the  plans  or  specifications,  there  can  have 
been  no  "  meeting  of  the  minds  "  of  owner  and  contractor  on  this  point.     Frequently  an 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       435 

foundation  of  the  English  common  law,  and  no  agreement,  so-called,  is  a 
binding  contract  unless  it  embodies  each  and  all  of  these  essentials.  With- 
out them  our  courts  decline  to  recognize  the  binding  effect  of  the  agree- 
ment and  the  parties  are  free  to  fulfil  their  obligations  or  not  at  their 
pleasure." 

Capt.  D.  L.  Hough,  in  a  paper  on  "The  Relations  of  Engineers  and 
Contractors,"  presented  before  the  First  American  Road  Congress,  at 
Richmond,  Va.,  Nov.  21,  1911,  expressed  himself  as  follows: 

"The  very  essence  of  a  contract  is  mutuality;  and  the  more  this  most 
important  principle  of  a  contract  is  kept  before  our  minds,  the  more  faith- 
fully will  the  contract  be  carried  out  and  the  less  will  be  the  friction  develo[>ed. 

In  fact if  the  mutuality  of  a  contract  is  kept  always  before 

us,  and  it  is  understood  that  when  a  contract  is  once  signed  the  parties 
thereto  have  equal  rights  thereunder,  are  on  an  equal  footing,  and  that  there 
is  nothing  in  contractual  relations  that  places  the  party  who  pays  with  his 
money  on  a  higher  plane  than  the  party  who  pays  with  his  materials  and 
services,  or  vice  versa,  and  if  the  engineer  considers  himself  a  non-partisan 
arbitrator,  there  is  nothing  l^ft  to  be  desired. 

''In  so  far  as  the  engineer  lays  out,  directs  and  inspects  the  character 
of  materials  and  workmanship,  he  is  properly  the  representative  of  the 
principal;  but  under  the  terms  of  those  clauses  where  he  is  made  the  arbi- 
trator, interpreter  and  estimator,  he  is  the  representative  of  both  parties 
and  should  be  absolutely  non-partisan. 

"Actually,  therefore,  the  engineer,  in  so  far  as  he  is  the  arbitrator,  that 
is,  is  made  the  final  court  of  appeal  under  the  terms  of  the  contract  by  both 
contractee  and  contractor,  he  is  the  employee  of  both  and  must  not  be  parti- 
san; and  if  he  is  partisan,  he  is  not  faithful  to  the  trust  reposed  in  him  by 
the  other  party,  however  shocking  this  statement  may  sound  to  those 
obsessed  by  the  present  practice." 

In  order  to  facilitate  its  use,  that  portion  of  the  contract  which  treats 
of  the  work  involved,  in  which  all  the  details  are  specifically  mentioned, 
is  usually  segregated  and  submitted  as  "Specifications,"  either  within  the 
body  of  the  contract  or  supplementary  to  it.  There  is  no  general  agree- 
ment in  regard  to  the  items  that  should  be  included  within  the  speci- 
fications as  distinguished  from  the  main  contract.  If  the  specifications 
are  submitted  separately  there  should  be  a  clause  in  the  contract  calling 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  specifications  and  the  plans  explanatory  of 

attempt  is  made  to  bridge  over  such  a  difficulty  by  a  general  clause  that  where  such 
cases  are  of  minor  importance  both  parties  agree  to  accept  the  engineer's  decision,  but 
this  clause  is  of  no  real  importance  in  case  of  controversy  because  it  does  not  indicate 
who  shall  decide  whether  the  importance  of  the  point  at  issue  is  "minor."  It  is  much 
better,  when  an  error  or  omission  is  discovered,  to  prepare  a  brief  memorandum,  dated 
and  signed  by  both  parties,  stating  that  it  is  mutually  agreed  that  the  meaning  of  the 
specifications  shall  be  interpreted  in  a  certain  way,  or  that  a  sketch  firmly  attached  to 
the  agreement  shall  be  considered  a  satisfactory  substitute  for  a  detail  on  the  original 
drawings.  If  the  error  or  omission  involves  work  of  a  clam  for  which  no  unit  price  was 
bid,  it  is  highly  desirable  to  have  a  written  agreement  concerning  the  price  before  it  is 
undertaken. 


436  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

them  mujst  be  considered  as  part  of  the  contract.  In  such  a  case  the 
plans  and  specifications  must  be  so  described  in  the  contract  that  in  case 
of  litigation  oral  testimony  to  identify  them  will  not  be  necessary. 
Claims  for  extras  can  be  kept  down  in  this  way. 

Although  contingencies  are  a  proper  subject  of  contract,  yet  it  has 
been  held  by  the  courts  that  they  must  be  clearly  referred  to  in  the  con- 
tract, as  a  contractor  is  not  bound  to  assume  a  risk  not  mentioned  in  the 
agreement.  Where  specifications  are  obscure  or  when  several  parts  of 
them  are  in  conflict,  "custom"  will  be  held  by  the  courts  to  govern  in 
such  cases.  The  determination  of  "custom"  usually  costs  far  more  and 
is  less  satisfactory  to  everybody  than  a  little  more  expense  in  making 
the  contract  requirements  clear  and  harmonious. 

Blanket  clauses  have  probably  been  the  source  of  as  much  controversy 
in  the  execution  of  contracts  as  any  other  provision,  and  should  be 
avoided  so  far  as  possible.  In  contracts  requiring  a  long  period  of  years 
for  execution,  it  is  difficult  to  anticipate  aU  conditions  to  be  met.  Labor 
and  market  conditions  change,  and  modifications  in  the  laws  and  ordi- 
nances existing  at  the  time  of  contract  often  occur.  The  contract  and 
specifications  must,  therefore,  be  sufficiently  flexible  to  care  for  these, 
without  bringing  undue  hardship  upon  either  party  to  the  work.  Where 
blanket  clauses  are  required  to  cover  such  emergencies,  it  is  of  impor- 
tance that  anticipated  contingencies  be  mentioned  and  that  as  definite 
provision  be  made  for  their  settlement  as  is  possible. 

One  danger  of  any  alterations  in  a  contract  as  the  work  progresses 
is  that  they  may  operate  to  reheve  a  surety  from  his  responsibility  in 
case  the  contractor  fails  to  execute  the  work.  Where  the  surety  bond 
is  an  integral  part  of  a  contract,  there  are  really  three  parties  to  it, 
and  all  three  must  agree  to  any  changes.  This  has  led  some  lawyers 
making  a  speciality  of  engineering  relations  to  advise  preparing  supple- 
mentary contracts  whenever  changes  are  necessary,  or  drawing  up  written 
agreements  that  certain  features  of  the  contract  shall  be  interpreted 
as  having  carefully  defined  meanings.  It  is  wise  for  the  engineer  and 
his  entire  staff  to  avoid  very  carefully  making  any  oral  statement  which 
may  be  construed  as  altering  any  contract  or  specification  requirement, 
for  such  a  statement  made  in  the  presence  of  witnesses  may  be  used 
to  prove  the  inadequacy  or  imperfection  of  the  written  agreement 
should  the  contractor  wish  to  withdraw  from  it.  In  short,  a  contract 
is  a  very  important  obhgation,  and  there  are  the  best  of  reasons  for  the 
old  rule  that  no  alterations  in  it  shall  be  made  except  in  writing,  with 
legal  advice,  and  no  orders  shall  be  given  for  work  to  be  done  under 
blanket  clauses  or  provisions  for  extras,  except  in  writing,  carefully 
worded  and  completely  defining  the  extent  of  the  work. 

"Some  contractors  exhibit  an  unusual  willingness  to  carry  out  the  most 
erratic  directions  of  the  engineer.    This  is  done  in  order  to  break  away 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS        437 

from  the  contract  and  set  up  a  claim  that,  by  reason  of  change  of  plan, 
the  contract  has  been  annulled  and  a  new  basis  of  compensation  is  necessary. 
This  is  chicanery,  to  be  sure,  but  the  engineer  should  be  able  to  recognize  it. 
Claims  against  public  corporations  have  many  times  been  treated  with 
excessive  liberality,  and  they  should  not  be  allowed  to  succeed  without  the 
engineer's  approval." — Albert  J.  Himes,  Trans.  Am.  Soc.  C.  E.,  vol.  Ivi, 
p.  104. 

Arbitration. — It  \s  generally  desirable  that  the  contract  should  provide 
for  a  means  of  settling  such  disputes  as  may  arise  under  it  without 
recourse  to  the  courts,  except  as  a  last  resort.  There  has  been  much  dis- 
cussion about  whom  these  disputes  should  be  referred  to,  because  most 
contracts  provide  that  such  questions  shall  be  referred  to  the  engineer. 
Contractors  look  upon  most  engineers  as  interested  parties  or  as 
employees  of  the  party  of  the  first  part,  and  have  a  feeling  that,  as 
such,  the  engineer  is  bound  to  cater  to  the  interests  of  his  employer 
and  cannot,  therefore,  give  an  unbiased  opinion.  Contractors  fre- 
quently express  the  opinion  that  engineers,  in  interpreting  the  provi- 
sions of  contracts  drawn  by  themselves,  are  likely  to  be  biased  by  this 
fact,  especially  if  the  sufficiency  of  the  contract  is  at  issue.  On  the 
other  hand,  no  other  person  than  the  engineer  can  have  such  complete 
and  intimate  knowledge  of  the  details  of  the  proposed  undertaking 
and  the  provisions  of  the  contract. 

In  interpreting  the  requirements  or  intent  of  any  contract  the  engineer 
ceases  to  be  the  agent  of  the  owner  and  becomes  a  judge  with  the  owner 
and  contractor  at  bar.  If  the  engineer's  decisions  be  strictly  judicial, 
difficulties  which  come  up  in  the  progress  of  the  construction  work  will 
often  be  readily  and  satisfactorily  settled  without  need  of  further 
arbitration. 

The  appointment  of  an  arbitrator,  or  a  board  of  arbitrators  selected 
from  absolutely  disinterested  parties,  has  been  suggested  frequently 
as  a.  panacea  for  such  disputes,  but  the  following  are  some  of  the  diffi- 
culties in  the  way  of  securing  satisfactory  results  by  this  method.  First, 
cost;  second,  the  difficulty  of  acquainting  the  arbitrator  with  all  the 
facts,  conditions,  and  influences  surrounding  a  given  contract,  knowl- 
edge of  which  is  necessary  for  rendering  an  impartial  judgment;  third, 
the  law  will  not  compel  the  carrying  out  of  the  provision,  therefore  the 
surety  which  is  implied  by  the  clause  may  be  misleading  either  to  the 
contractor  or  the  contractee.  This  has  been  clearly  expressed  by 
John  C.  Wait,  in  his  "  Notes  on  the  Law  of  Contracts,"  published  jointly 
with  "Specifications  and  Contracts"  by  J.  A.  L,  Waddell  in  1908: 

"The  writer's  experience  with  contract  clauses  providing  for  arbitration 
is  that  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  when  controversies  have  arisen,  one  or  the 
other  of  the  parties  wiU  refuse  to  carry  out  the  provisions  for  arbitration. 


438  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

This  they  may  do  with  impunity,  as  there  is  no  means  of  compelling  them, 
under  the  ordinary  provisions  of  the  contract,  to  carry  out  the  terms  of  the 
submission  to  arbitration;  and  they  may,  without  generally  subjecting 
themselves  to  any  damages  whatever,  decline  either  to  appoint  arbitrators 
or  to  attend  an  arbitration.  If,  however,  they  do  take  part  and  the  award 
be  made  and  served  upon  the  parties,  they  are  irrevocably  bound  by  such  an 
arbitration.  The  trouble  is  and  will  be  that  they  will  refuse  either  to  ap- 
point arbitrators  or  to  attend  or  take  any  part  whatever;  or  one  of  the 
parties  will  seek  to  limit  the  scope  of  the  arbitration  to  those  matters  and 
things  in  which  he  feels  the  stronger,  eliminating  and  refusing  to  arbitrate 
matters  which  are  apparently  against  him. 

''Owing  to  this  fact  the  use  of  the  arbitration  clause  might  as  well  be 
omitted,  as  the  parties,  if  willing  to  arbitrate,  can  at  any  time  come  to  terms 
of  an  arbitration  for  the  settlement  of  their  controversies,  and  the  use  of  the 
clause  under  the  circumstances  deceives  and  misguides  the  contractor  and 
sometimes  the  owner  in  the  belief  that  he  can  require  the  other  party  to 
submit  their  differences  to  a  board  of  arbitrators  to  be  selected  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  terms  of  the  contract. 

"Neither  party  to  an  arbitration  can  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  arbi- 
trators when  it  is  once  made  and  communicated  to  the  parties.  No  appeal 
can  be  had  by  either  party  to  the  courts,  unless  gross  fraud  and  collusion 
are  shown  between  the  arbitrators  and  one  of  the  parties  or  the  engineer 
and  architect.  The  award  by  arbitrators  is  final  and  conclusive  upon  the 
parties,  without  appeal,  if  the  award  was  fairly  and  honestly  made." 

Nevertheless,  serious  disputes  have  sometimes  been  satisfactorily 
settled  by  reference  to  single  referee,  an  engineer  of  sound  and  ripe 
judgment,  judicial  temperament,  and  good  standing. 

While  arbitration  clauses  in  contracts  are  not  very  common,  they 
have  been  used  in  some  cases  and  are  of  interest  to  engineers  preparing 
contracts  and  may  be  helpful  to  those  who  feel  that  arbitration  should 
not  be  confined  to  the  engineer  in  charge  of  the  work.  Several  such 
clauses  follow. 

Jersey  City  Water  Supply  Co.,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  1902.  (Completion  of 
Main  Dam  at  Storage  Reservoir  at  Boon  ton,  N.  J.,  Contract  3.) 

(p.  13)  "Art.  3.  Engineer  the  Referee. — All  the  work  under  this  contract 
shall  be  done  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Engineer,  who  shall  in  all  cases  de- 
termine the  amount,  quality,  acceptability  and  fitness  of  the  several  amounts 
of  work  and  materials  which  are  to  be  paid  for  hereunder,  and  shall  decide 

all  questions  which  may  arise 

and  his  determination  and  decision  thereon  shall  be  final  and  conclusive, 
subject  only  to  revision  by  arbitration  as  provided  under  Art.  26." 

(p.  48)  "Art.  26.  Arbitration. — In  the  event  of  disagreement  between 
the  Company  and  the  Contractor,  they  shall  submit  the  matter  to  arbitra- 
tion, the  Company  choosing  one  arbitrator,  and  the  Contractor  one,  and  the 
two  thus  chosen  to  select  a  third.  The  decision  of  such  arbitrators,  or  a 
majority  of  them,  shall  be  made  in  writing  to  both  parties,  and  when  so  made 


CONTRACTS, SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       439 

shall  be  binding  on  the  parties  thereto.  The  entire  expense  of  such  arbitra- 
tion shall  be  borne  by  the  party  against  whom  the  decision  is  rendered,  or  in 
event  of  a  compromise  decision,  shall  be  borne  by  both  parties  in  such  pro- 
portion as  the  arbitrators  may  decide.  Such  arbitration  is  intended  to  avoid 
litigation  and  a  written  offer  to  submit  thereto  by  either  party,  followed  by 
such  arbitration  (if  said  offer  is  accepted  and  acted  upon  within  twenty  (20) 
days  after  the  same  is  made),  shall  be  a  condition  precedent  to  any  action  at 
law  by  either  party  under  this  contract." 

PUi^mrghy  Pa.,  Department  of  Public  Works,  Bureau  of  Filtration,  Con- 
tract 1  (1905)  for  Filters,  Basins  and  Appurtenances.  (The  Director  ex- 
ercises throughout  the  authority  usually  vested  in  the  Engineer.) 

(p.  557)  "Right  of  Appeal. — It  is  expressly  covenanted  and  agreed  that 
in  case  any  question  or  dispute  shall  arise  between  the  parties  imder  said 
Contract,  or  touching  the  quantity,  quality  or  value  of  any  work  done  or 
materials  furnished  thereunder,  the  same  shall  be  referred  to  the  Director  of 
the  Department  of  Public  Works,  whose  decision  thereon  shall  be  final  and 
conclusive;  unless  either  or  both  parties  shall,  within  ten  (10)  days  thereafter, 
appeal  from  said  decision  in  writing  and  shall  notify  both  the  Director  and 
the  other  party  of  such  appeal,  in  which  case  the  said  question  or  dispute  shall 
be  referred  to  two  (2)  arbitrators,  one  (1)  to  be  selected  by  the  Contractor 
and  the  other  by  the  Mayor  of  the  City  of  Pittsburgh,  and  both  paities 
shall  waive  and  release  all  right  of  action  and  suit  at  law  or  otherwise. 

"In  case  of  appeal,  the  party  appealing  shall  file  with  the  said  Director  a 
written  statement  of  all  matters  in  dispute  and  specify  the  particulars  ob- 
jected to,  and  the  said  appellant  shall,  with  his  or  its  appeal,  state  in  writing 
the  name  of  the  arbitrator  selected  by  him  or  it,  and  the  other  party  shall, 
within  ten  (10)  days  of  the  notice  of  such  appeal,  notify  the  said  Director  in 
writing  of  his  or  its  selection  of  an  arbitrator,  whereupon  the  said  two  arbi- 
trators shall,  after  notice,  proceed  without  delay  to  hear  and  determine  the 
question  or  dispute  in  case  they  agree,  render  a  decision  thereon  in  writing, 
which  decision  shall  be  final  and  conclusive;  or,  if  they  fail  to  agree,  then  they 
shall  select  a  third  arbitrator  and  the  three  (3)  arbitrators  shall  proceed  to 
hear  and  determine  the  question  or  dispute  and  render  a  decision  thereon  in 
writing,  and  their  decision  or  that  of  a  majority  of  them,  shall  be  final  and 
conclusive. 

"In  case  the  party  appealing  shall  not  so  name  his  or  its  arbitrator,  the 
appeal  shall  not  be  considered.  If  the  other  party  shall,  within  ten  (10)  days 
after  date  of  notice  of  such  appeal,  fail  to  appoint  his  or  its  arbitrator,  then 
the  party  appealing  may  apply  to  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  No.  2,  of 
Allegheny  County,  Pennsylvania,  for  the  appointment  of  an  arbitrator  for 
such  party  in  default,  or  by  Bill  in  Equity,  in  the  nature  of  a  specific  per- 
formance of  the  duty.  If  the  two  (2)  arbitrators  fail  to  agree  upon  a  third 
arbitrator,  then  the  persons  constituting  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  No.  2, 
of  Allegheny  Coimty,  Pennsylvania,  or  a  majority  of  them,  may  make  said 
appointment  and  in  case  the  persons  constituting  said  Court  of  Common 
Pleas,  No.  2,  shall  fail  or  refuse  upon  application  to  so  appoint,  the  Mayor  of 
the  City  of  Pittsburgh  shall  make  said  appointment. 

"When  there  are  but  two  arbitrators,  if  they  shall  agree,  their  decision 
shall  be  final  and  conclusive.    When  there  are  three  arbitrators,  the  decision 


440  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

of  a  majority  of  them  shall  be  final  and  conclusive.  The  expense  of  such  ar- 
bitration shall  be  paid  by  the  City  of  Pittsburgh  and  one-half  (1/2)  of  such 
sum  shall  be  deducted  from  the  amoimts  due  or  to  become  due  the  party  of 
the  second  part." 

Cincinnati^  Ohio,  Contract  86  (1906).  "Proposab  for  the  Construction 
of  a  Head  House,  Chemical  House,  Filter  House,  Valve  Houses,  and  of  a 
Wash  Water  Reservoir,  and  other  miscellaneous  work  in  connection  there- 
with" for  the  Board  of  Trustees,  (IbmmissionerB  of  Water  Works. 

(p.  65)  ''Arbitration. — It  is  agreed  that  in  the  event  that  said  Trustees 
shall  have  ordered  any  alteration  or  modification  of  the  within  contract,  and 
said  Contractor  and  said  Trustees  cannot  agree  upon  the  price  to  be  paid  for 
the  work  or  materials  under  such  altered  or  modified  contract,  they  shall 
thereupon  submit  the  matter  to  arbitration,  the  Trustees  choosing  one  arbi- 
trator and  the  Contractor  one,  and  the  two  thus  chosen  to  select  a  third; 
and  the  award  of  such  arbitrators,  or  a  majority  of  them,  as  to  the  prices  to 
be  paid,  shall  be  made  in  writing  and  entered  on  the  minutes  of  said  Trus- 
tees, and  when  so  entered  shall  be  binding  on  the  parties  hereto.  And  it 
is  expressly  imderstood  and  agreed  that,  in  case  of  any  alterations  or  modi- 
fications, so  much  of  this  agreement  as  is  not  necessarily  affected  by  such 
alterations  and  modifications  shall  remain  in  full  force  upon  the  parties 
hereto.  And  the  said  Contractor  hereby  agrees  not  to  claim  or  bring  suit 
for  any  damages,  whether  for  loss  of  profits  or  otherwise,  on  account  of  not 
being  allowed  to  do  such  work  or  furnish  materials  as  agreed  upon  prior  to 
such  alterations  or  modifications." 

"All  the  work  under  this  contract  shall  be  done  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
said  Trustees,  who  shall  in  all  cases  determine  the  amount,  quality,  accepta- 
bility, and  fitness  of  the  several  kinds  of  work  and  materials 

and  such  determination  and  decision,  in  case  any  question  shall  arise,  shall 
be  a  condition  precedent  to  the  right  of  the  contractor  to  receive  any  money 
hereunder." 

London  County  Council,  Contract  3  (1907),  for  Low  Level  Sewer  2, 
North  Side. 

(p.  23)  "Arbitration  Clause. — ^Lastly,  if  at  any  time  before  completion  of 
the  work,  any  question,  dispute  or  difference  shall  arise  between  the  Council 
or  the  Engineer  on  their  behalf  and  the  Contractor  as  to  the  construction  of 
this  Contract,  or  as  to  any  matter  or  thing  arising  under  or  out  of  this  Con- 
tract, then  such  question,  dispute  or  difference  (unless  it  relate  to  matters 
and  things  which  are  under  the  terms  of  this  Contract  left  to  the  final  deci- 
sion, requisition,  certificate  or  order  of  the  Engineer)  shall  be  referred  to  the 
determination  of  the  Engineer,  whose  decision  shall  be  abided  by  until  the 
completion  of  the  work,  when  such  questions,  differences  and  disputes  may 
as  hereinafter  provided  for  be  referred  to  the  decision  of  the  arbitrator. 

"If  on  completion  of  the  work  there  shall  remain  any  question,  difference 
or  dispute  upon  any  of  the  matters  or  things  referred  to  or  specified  in  the 
first  part  of  this  Clause,  or  as  to  payments  to  be  made  to  the  Contractor,  the 
same  shall  be  referred  to  the  award  and  decision  of  some  person  to  be  mutu- 
ally agreed  upon,  or  failing  agreement  to  some  engineer  to  be  appointed  by 
the  President  for  the  time  being  of  the  Institution  of  Civil  Engineersi  whose 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       441 

decision  shall  be  final  and  conclusive  between  the  parties.    The  provisions  of 
the  Arbitration  Act,  1889,  shall  apply  to  any  arbitration  under  this  clause." 

GENERAL  FORM  OF  ENGINEERING  CONTRACTS 

The  general  method  of  contracting  for  engineering  work  is  to  invite 
proposals,  either  by  means  of  a  general  advertisement  or  by  solicitation. 
As  announcements  generally  state  that  only  that  proposal  which  is  con- 
sidered most  advantageous  to  the  owner  will  be  accepted,  while  the  right 
is  reserved  to  reject  any  or  all  proposals,  contractors  are  induced  to 
figure  their  proposals  as  low  as  possible,  thereby  securing  to  the  owner 
the  benefit  of  close  competition.  In  order  that  all  proposals  may  be  in 
such  form  as  to  be  readily  compared  it  is  desirable  that  bidders  be  re- 
quired to  submit  their  proposals  on  a  form  furnished  by  the  owner. 
It  is  also  desirable  that  a  complete  statement  should  be  made  by  the 
owner  setting  forth  the  general  scope  and  requirements  of  the  work, 
in  order  that  all  contractors  who  bid  upon  the  work  may  have  a  clear 
conception  of  it  and  bid  upon  the  same  thing.  This  should  be  fur- 
nished under  the  caption,  "Information  to  Bidders." 

Advertisement  of  Contract — ^Although  notice  of  impending  work 
may  be  given  to  the  contractors  through  an  advertisement  in  the 
public  press,  the  expense  of  advertising  will  prohibit  the  giving  therein 
of  all  information  needed  by  the  bidder.  It  is  therefore  sufficient  to 
cover  in  the  advertisement  a  general  statement  of  the  work  to  be  done, 
its  location,  the  time  and  place  of  canvassing  the  bids,  and  of  beginning 
and  completing  the  work,  the  security  required  for  its  performance, 
the  place  where  plans  and  complete  specifications,  including  full  infor- 
mation to  bidders  and  proposal  blanks,  may  be  obtained,  the  name  of 
the  party  inviting  the  proposal,  and,  if  the  work  be  of  a  public  nature, 
the  act  or  ordinance  by  virtue  of  which  the  work  is  undertaken. 

The  Information  for  Bidders  should  contain  the  facts  covered  by  the 
advertisement  and  all  of  the  information  essential  to  the  contractor 
for  a  general  understanding  of  the  requirements  of  the  contract.  The 
following  subjects  should  be  covered: 

First,  time,  place  and  manner  of  submitting  and  withdrawing  proposal. 
Second,  reference  to  use  of  blank  forms  furnished  by  the  owners  for 
submitting  bids.  Third,  the  surety  required,  and  the  form  of  bidder's 
bond  or  certified  check,  the  amount  and  character  of  surety  required, 
method  of  draft,  payment  and  return.  Fourth,  the  name  or  names  of 
the  surety  to  be  offered,  in  case  of  award  of  contract.  Fifth,  the  methods 
to  be  adopted  for  the  notification  of  the  successful  bidder.  Sixth, 
general  description  and  location  of  the  work  involved,  statement  of 
the  quantity  involved  in  each  of  the  several  subdivisions.  Seventh, 
quantities  are  approximate  only  and  are  given  to  serve  as  the  basis  for 


442  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

comparison  of  bids,  and  the  owner  reserves  the  right  to  increase  or 
decrease  the  amount  of  any  class  or  portion  of  the  work,  preferably 
within  stated  limits.  Eighth,  bidders  are  required  to  satisfy  themselves 
by  personal  examination  of  the  conditions  existing  and  the  materials 
to  be  encountered  at  the  site  of  the  work.  Ninth,  qualifications  required 
of  the  bidder  as  to  experience,  capacity,  and  financial  resources.  Tenth, 
reservation  of  right  to  reject  any  and  all  bids.  Eleventh,  such  other 
requirements  as  local  conditions  may  demand.  Twelfth,  statement  that 
aU  bids  submitted  on  blanks,  other  than  those  furnished  by  the  owner, 
and  all  bids  in  which  the  conditions  on  the  owner's  blanks  have  been 
modified,  may  be  rejected. 

Form  of  Proposal. — The  proposal  should  be  made  upon  a  printed  form 
furnished  by  the  owner,  the  object  being  to  secure  all  the  proposals 
in  exactly  the  same  form  and  to  make  sure  that  all  prices  are  submitted 
in  the  same  units,  otherwise  it  will  be  difficult  to  compare  the  bids. 
The  proposals  must  be  delivered  at  the  place  designated  to  bidders  at  or 
before  the  hour  named  therein.  They  should  be  sealed  and  should 
not  be  opened  until  the  time  specified,  and  then  generally,  and  pref- 
erably, in  public.  They  should  all  be  self-explanatory,  and  no  oppor- 
tunity should  be  given  for  oral  explanation.  Bids  should  generally 
not  be  allowed  to  be  withdrawn  or  modified  after  the  time  set  for  the 
opening  of  the  bids. 

The  following  form  has  been  found  satisfactory  by  the  authors : 

To  the of  the  Town  of 

For  the  construction  of  sewers  in 

The  undersigned  as  bidder ,  declare that  the  only  parties  interested  in  this 

proposal  as  principals  are  named  herein ;  that  this  proposal  is  made  without  collusion  with 
any  other  person,  firm  or  corporation,  that  no  officer  of  the  Town  or  any  person  in   the 

employ  of  the  Town  is  directly  or  indirectly  interested  in  this  bid;  that    he. . . . 

ha carefully  examined  the  location  of  the  proposed  work,  the  annexed  proposed 

form  of  contract  and  the  plans  and  specifications  therein  referred  to  and he 

propose and  agree  . . .  that  if  this  proposal  is  accepted . .   he . . .  will  contract  with  the 

in  the  form  of  the  copy  of  the  contract  deposited  in  the  ofiSce  of  said 

and  attached  hereto,  to  provide  all  necessary  machinery,  tools,  apparatus 

and  other  means  of  construction,  and  do  all  the  work  and  furnish  all  the  materials  specified 
in  this  contract  in  the  manner  and  time  therein  prescribed  and  according  to  the  requirements 
of  the  Engineer  as  therein  set  forth,  and  that  he  will  take  in  full  payment  therefor  the  follow- 
ing sums  to  wit: — 

Item  la.  For  all  earth  excavation,  etc 

Item  17.  For  extra  work,  if  any,  performed  in  accordance  with  Article  XXII  of  the  (annexed 
form  of  contract,  the  reasonable  cost  of  the  work  as  determined  by  the  Engineer,  whoso 
determination  shall  be  final,  plus  fifteen  per  cent.  (15%)  of  such  cost. 

If  this  proposal  shall  be  accepted  by  the and  the  undersigned  shall  fail  to 

contract  as  aforesaid,  and  to  give  a  bond  in  the  sum  of  five  thousand  dollars  ($5,000),  with 

surety  satisfactory  to  the ,  within  six  days  (not  including  Sunday  or  a  legal 

holiday)  from  the  date  of  the  mailing  of  a  notice  from  the to  him,  according  to 

the  address  given  herewith,  that  the  contract  is  ready  for  signature,  then  the 

may  at  their  option  determine  that  the  bidder  has  abandoned  the  contract  and  thereupon 
the  proposal  and  acceptance  shall  be  null  and  void,  and  the  certified  check  for  five  hundred 
dollars  ($500)  accompanying  this  proposal  shall  become  the  property  of  the  Town  of 
, , ;  otherwise  the  accompanying  check  shall  be  returned  to  the  undersigned. 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       443 

Fonn  of  Bidder's  Bonds. — Each  bid  must  be  accompanied  either  by  a 
certified  check  drawn  for  the  stated  amount  or  by  a  bidder's  bond  given 
by  an  acceptable  surety  company,  providing  that  if  the  contract,  for 
which  proposal  is  made,  shall  be  awarded  to  the  bidder,  the  bidder  will 
enter  into  the  contract  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  proposal 
and  will  give  bond  for  the  amount  stated  in  the  information  to  bidders  for 
the  faithful  performance  of  the  contract;  and,  to  that  end,  that  the  said 
surety  company  shall,  in  case  the  bidder  shall  fail  to  execute  the  contract 
and  furnish  bond,  pay  to  the  owner  as  liquidated  damages  the  amount 
stated  in  the  information  to  bidders. 

Contract — The  contract  must  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  terms 
of  the  Advertisement,  Information  for  Bidders,  and  Proposal,  and  al- 
though these  are  not  embodied  within  the  limits  of  the  formal  contract 
it  should  be  stated  in  the  contract  that  they,  together  with  the  speci- 
fications and  surety  bond,  shall  be  considered  as  integral  parts  of  the 
formal  contract.  No  changes  should  be  made  either  in  the  form  of  con- 
tract or  in  the  items  which  appear  in  either  the  Advertisement,  Infor- 
mation for  Bidders,  or  Proposal  as  submitted  by  the  bidders,  in  making 
out  the  contract,  as  by  so  doing  the  bidder  may  be  relieved  from  the 
obligation  of  entering  into  a  contract  with  the  owner,  on  the  ground 
that  his  offer  was  not  accepted  in  its  original  terms  and  that  there  is 
therefore  no  binding  contract. 

Bond. — The  form  of  bond  printed  after  the  t3rpical  contract 
reproduced  later  in  this  chapter  has  been  found  to  meet  the  general 
requirements  of  sewerage  work.     (See  page  462.) 

mSURANCE 

The  old  theory  of  employers'  liability  is  rapidly  giving  way  to  the 
more  modern  theory  of  workmen's  compensation.  There  follows  a 
transcript  from  the  1912  Year  Book  of  the  New  International  En- 
cyclopedia, which  gives  a  statement  of  the  present  status  of  these 
two  theories, 

"Workmen's  Compensation. — This  is  a  term  used  to  designate  that  form 
of  compensation  for  industrial  accidents  which  has  come  to  replace  employers' 
liability.  Under  the  older  system  the  employer  was  required  to  com- 
pensate a  workman  injured  while  in  employment  only  when  the  employee 
could  show  in  a  suit  at  law  that  the  employer  had  been  grossly  negligent, 
that  the  worker  had  not  been  negligent,  and  that  the  accident  was  not  due 
to  the  carelessness  of  a  fellow  employee.  Under  the  common  law  the 
employer  was  securely  entrenched  behind  the  rules  of  assumed  risks,  con- 
tributory negligence,  and  the  fellow-servant  doctrine.  Employers'  liability 
laws  gradually  reduced  the  employer's  security  by  modifying  these  doctrines 
in  various  respects,  but  still  imposing  on  the  injured  worker  the  necessity 


444  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

of  bringing  suit  in  court.  The  employers  at  the  same  time  insured  them- 
selves against  such  suits  in  employers'  liability  insurance  companies,  which 
assumed  the  obligation  of  fighting  the  employees'  suits  and  of  paying  penal- 
ties imposed .  Thus  the  worker  was  forced  to  assimie  the  costs  of  repeated  law 
suits  before  he  could  secure  any  damages.  Statistics  showed  that  not  more 
than  45  per  cent,  of  the  premiums  paid  by  employers  to  insurance  companies 
were  finally  paid  to  injured  workers.  Moreover,  actual  statistical  investiga- 
tion showed  that  between  60  per  cent,  and  70  per  cent,  of  injured  workers 
received  no  compensation  whatever.  Even  when  compensation  was  se- 
cured, the  expenses  involved  so  reduced  it  that  the  remainder  was  wholly 
inadequate  to  offset  the  economic  loss  involved  in  the  injury  itself.  Thus 
many  families  were  permanently  reduced  to  a  lower  standard,  even  to 
permanent  poverty,  by  industrial  accidents.  The  compensation  principle 
introduced  into  England  and  continental  countries  15  to  20  years  ago  has 
within  the  past  2  years  found  extensive  adoption  in  the  United  States. 

''The  advantages  of  the  compensation  principle  may  be  briefly  sum- 
marized as  follows:  (1)  It  furnishes  certain,  prompt,  and  reasonable  com- 
pensation to  injured  workers  and  their  dependents;  (2)  it  removes  from  the 
courts  the  numerous  cases  growing  out  of  employers'  liability  litigation; 

(3)  it  relieves  charity  of  the  poverty  due  to  uncompensated  accidents; 

(4)  it  is  more  economical,  since  the  costs  of  lawyers,  witnesses,  insurance 
companies,  and  court  trials  are  eliminated,  and  because  it  gives  to  the  worker 
a  much  larger  proportion  of  the  cost  to  employers;  (5)  it  increases  good  will 
and  stimulates  accident  prevention;  (6)  it  furnishes  a  basis  for  accurate 
statistical  knowledge  of  phases  of  industrial  suid  social  life  heretofore 
neglected." 

Liability  Insurance. — ^Liability  insurance  is  usually  written  under 
one  of  four  principal  heads,  employers'  liability,  public  liability,  team 
insurance,  and  automobile  insurance. 

In  employers'  liability  insurance  the  insurer  agrees  to  indemnify  the 
insured  against  loss  by  reason  of  liability  imposed  by  law  upon  him  for 
damages  on  account  of  bodily  injuries,  including  death,  at  any  time 
resulting  therefrom,  accidentally  suffered  by  reason  of  the  prosecution 
of  the  work,  at  the  places  described  in  the  policy  and  under  the  classi- 
fication covering  an  employee  of  the  assured. 

Public  liability  insurance  differs  from  the  above  only  in  the  fact 
that  it  insures  against  injuries  sustained  by  other  parties  than  those 
employed  by  the  assured,  that  is,  the  public. 

By  team  insurance  the  insurer  indemnifies  the  assured  against  loss 
by  reason  of  liability  for  damages  on  account  of  bodily  injuries  to  his 
drivers  and  to  the  public  caused  by  means  of  draught  or  driving  animals 
or  vehicles  in  the  service  of  the  assured,  while  in  the  charge  of  the  assured 
or  his  employees.  Automobile  insurance  applies  to  automobiles  in 
much  the  same  way  as  team  insurance  applies  to  animal-drawn  vehicles. 

Liability  insurance  premiums  are  based  upon  the  amount  of  pay  rolls. 
When  the  policy  is  issued  the  contractor  estimates  the  probable  amount 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       445 

« 

of  his  pay  roll  during  the  term  of  the  policy,  and  a  certain  percentage 
of  this  pay  roU  is  charged  as  a  premium,  this  percentage  varying  with 
the  hazard  of  the  work.  At  the  end  of  the  period  for  which  the  policy 
is  drawn,  the  insurance  company  calls  for  an  audit  of  the  contractor's 
pay  rolls,  in  order  to  determine  the  exact  amount  of  those  pay  rolls 
upon  which  the  premimn  estimated  is  adjusted.  Although  in  a  general 
way  the  foregoing  is  the  method  adopted,  modifications  are  made  to 
fit  each  particular  case. 

The  cost  of  liability  insurance  covering  bodily  injury  depends  upon 
the  laws  regulating  the  liability  of  the  contractor  directly,  and  indirectly 
that  of  the  liability  insurance  company. 

Sewer  construction  is  generally  classed  as  more  hazardous  than  much 
other  contract  work.  The  1913  insurance  rates  in  Massachusetts, 
under  the  compensation  act,  were  as  follows: 

For  work  less  than  7  ft.  in  depth, 

Insurance  of  laborers $4 .  87  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

Insurance  of  public 2 .  00  per  $100  of  pay  roll 


Total  insurance  of  employees  and  public  $6.87 

For  trenches  7  ft.  or  more  in  depth, 

Insurance  of  contractor's  employees. . .  $6. 75  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

Insurance  of  public 3 .  00  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

Total $9. 75  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

Masonry  structures $3 .  75  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

Insurance  of  public 1 .  25  per  $100  of  pay  roll 


Total $5.00  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

For  employees  handling  explosives $18.75  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

of  such  employees 
Insurance  of  public $5 .  00  per  $100  of  pay  roll 

The  foregoing  rates  for  insurance  of  contractor's  employees  cover 
the  payments  required  by  the  workingmen's  compensation  act.  The 
rates  on  insurance  covering  the  public  guarantee  the  payment  to  injured 
persons  of  such  sums  as  may  be  paid  by  the  Insurance  Company  in 
voluntary  settlement  of  claims,  or  as  may  be  awarded  by  the  court. 
The  liability  in  such  cases  largely  governs  the  payments  and  is  not 
covered  by  the  workingmen's  compensation  act. 

In  some  cases  the  question  has  been  raised  whether  a  contractor 
shall  have  an  allowance  for  premiums  paid  on  liability  insurance,  where 
extra  work  is  being  performed  and  paid  for  at  cost  plus  a  percentage  or 
fixed  sum.  It  has  been  held  by  some  attorneys  that  the  contractor 
cannot  recover  for  such  expense,  in  cases  where  there  is  no  workingmen's 


446  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

compensation  act,  unless  specifically  mentioned  in  the  contract  because 
it  covers  simply  injuries  due  to  the  negligence  of  the  contractor,  which 
is  not  a  legitimate  portion  of  the  expense  of  carrying  out  the  work. 
While  there  seems  to  be  ample  justification  legally  for  this  opinion,  such 
a  course  would  undoubtedly  work  a  hardship  to  most  prudent  contrac- 
tors, who  feel  that  liability  insurance  is  an  absolute  necessity.  To 
avoid  disputes  on  this  point  and  provide  a  perfectly  fair  basis  of  adjust- 
ment of  cost,  contracts  should  specifically  state  whether  or  not  the  cost 
of  hability  insurance  will  be  included  in  the  cost  of  work  paid  for  upon  a 
cost  plus  percentage  or  fixed  sum  basis. 

KINDS  OF  CONTRACTS 

There  is  a  variety  of  contracts  due  to  the  different  methods  of  deter- 
mining the  compensation  of  the  contractor.  Among  them  may  be 
mentioned:  (a)  the  unit  price,  (6)  the  lump  sum,  (c)  cost  plus  a  percent- 
age, (d)  cost  with  a  guaranteed  limit,  plus  a  percentage,  (e)  cost  plus  a 
fixed  sum,  and  (/)  cost  plus  a  fixed  sum,  with  a  bonus  if  the  cost  is  less 
and  a  deduction  if  it  is  greater  than  a  fixed  amount. 

Unit  Price  Contract — The  unit  price  contract  is  probably  more 
used  than  any  other  in  sewerage  work  because  of  its  provision  for  changes 
in  the  amounts  of  different  classes  of  work  which  cannot  be  determined 
accurately  in  advance  of  construction.  Where  this  system  is  employed, 
the  engineer  estimates  as  accurately  as  possible  the  amount  of  each 
class  of  work  and  the  contractor  bids  a  unit  price  on  each  class.  The 
amount  of  his  proposal  is  obtained  by  figuring  the  total  cost  of  each 
class  of  work  on  the  contractor's  bid  and  then  adding  these  totals 
together.  It  is  impossible  for  the  engineer  to  estimate  accurately  all 
of  these  quantities,  and  the  Invitation  to  Bidders  should  always  contain 
a  statement  that  the  owner  does  not  guarantee  the  accuracy  of  such 
estimates  nor  that  the  borings  represent  accurately  the  quality  of  the 
materials  to  be  excavated,  and  prospective  bidders  should  be  required 
to  ascertain  the  working  conditions  by  personal  investigation  of  the 
site.  The  importance  of  this  is  shown  by  the  following  notes  of  a  suit 
over  a  unit  price  contract. 

The  Commissioners  of  Sewerage  of  Louisville  advertised  for  bids  for 
the  construction  of  a  sewer  and  awarded  the  contract  to  the  lowest  of 
the  four  bidders,  each  of  whom  bid  a  given  price  per  item.  The  success- 
ful bidder  formally  executed  the  contract  and  offered  a  bonding  company 
as  surety  in  the  sum  of  $8000,  accepted  by  the  commissioners.  The 
contractor  prosecuted  work  for  several  months,  when  he  abandoned  the 
contract.  The  Commissioners  of  Sewerage  then  advertised  for  new 
bids  and  relet  the  contract  to  the  lowest  of  the  new  bidders,  at  an  alleged 
loss  of  $20,353.33.    The  commissioners  brought  action  against  the 


r 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       447 

original  contractor  to  recover  this  loss,  which  was  the  difference  between 
the  lattei^s  bid  upon  the  estimated  quantities  of  work  to  be  done, 
excluding  the  amount  of  work  already  done  by  the  first  contractor,  and 
the  bid  of  the  party  to  whom  the  contract  was  awarded  the  second  time. 
The  bonding  company  was  made  a  party  defendant.  The  defendants 
resisted  recovery,  on  the  ground  that  the  contract  should  be  cancelled 
because  of  a  mutual  mistake  of  the  parties  to  it. 

The  case  was  carried  to  the  Kentucky  Court  of  Appeals,  where  the 
final  decision  contained  the  following  comments  on  this  important 
feature  of  such  contracts: 

"The  plans  upon  which  bids  were  invited  showed  borings  indicating 
that  the  material  to  be  encountered,  through  which  the  sewer  would  nm, 
was  blue  clay,  whereas  it  was  claimed  to  be  something  else;  the  plans 
represented  that  the  material  to  be  encountered  in  the  trench  was  solid, 
whereas  it  weis  soft  and  semi-fluid.  In  the  approximate  quantities,  it  was 
estimated  by  the  engineer  that  4100  ft.  of  timber  foundation  would  be 
required,  whereas,  in  fact,  about  22,000  ft.  of  timber  foundation  was  used. 
It  is  claimed  by  argument  that  this  miscalculation  caused  the  defendant 
to  bid  less  on  another  item,  to  wit,  excavation,  than  it  would  otherwise  have 
done.  .    .    . 

''Appellant  .  .  .  agreed  to  do  the  construction  work  according  to  certain 
plans  and  specifications.  Prior  to  the  letting  of  the  contract,  appelees 
had  taken  samples  of  the  subsoil  by  means  of  a  hand-auger,  at  points  along 
the  line  of  the  work  about  200  ft.  apart.  The  locations  of  these  borings  are 
shown  on  certain  blue-prints.  .  .  .  The  material  parts  of  the  *  Information 
for  Bidders*  are  as  follows: 

"  'The  following  is  an  approximate  statement  of  the  extent  of  the  work 
required,  based  upon  the  estimate  of  the  engineer;  the  several  bids  will  be 
computed,  tested  and  canvassed  by  the  quantities  of  work  given  in  the  state- 
ment, viz.,  .  .  .  (the  various  items  of  the  contract).  .  .  .  These  quanti- 
ties are  based  upon  the  construction  of  the  sewer  in  open  cut,  are  approximate 
only,  being  given  as  a  basis  for  the  comparison  of  bids,  and  the  Commissioners 
of  Sewerage  do  not  expressly  or  by  implication  agree  that  the  actual  amount 
of  work  will  correspond  therewith,  but  reserve  the  right  to  increase  or  decrease 
the  amount  of  any  class  or  portion  of  the  work  as  may  be  deemed  necessary 
by  the  engineer.   .    .    . 

''  ^As  the  above  mentioned  quantities,  though  stated  with  as  much  accu- 
racy as  is  practicable  in  advance,  are  approximate  only,  bidders  are  required 
to  submit  their  estimates  upon  the  following  express  conditions,  which 
shall  apply  to  and  become  part  of  every  bid  received,  viz.,  bidders  must 
satisfy  themselves,  by  personal  examination  of  the  location  of  the  proposed 
work,  and  by  such  other  means  as  they  may  prefer,  as  to  the  actual  condi- 
tions and  requirements  of  the  work  and  the  accuracy  of  the  foregoing 
estimates  of  the  engineer,  and  shall  not,  at  any  time  after  the  submission  of 
an  estimate  of  the  engineer,  dispute  or  complain  of  such  statement  or 
estimate,  nor  assert  that  there  was  any  misunderstanding  in  regard  to  the 
nature  or  amount  of  work  to  be  done. 


448  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

"  'The  excavation,  the  masonry  and  other  parts  of  the  work  have  been 
divided  into  classes  and  items  in  order  to  enable  the  bidder  to  bid  for  the 
different  portions  of  the  work  in  accordance  with  his  estimate  of  their  costs, 
so  that  in  the  event  of  an  increase  or  decrease  in  the  quantities  of  any  par- 
ticular class  of  work  the  actual  quantities  executed  may  be  paid  for  at  the 
price  bid  for  that  particular  class  of  work.' 

"  Reduced  to  its  final  analysis,  appellant's  complaint  is  that  he  encountered 
difficulties  in  excavation  that  he  did  not  anticipate.  By  the  express  terms 
of  his  contract,  this  was  a  risk  that  he  assumed.  The  appellees  not  only 
furnished  him  with  all  the  information  that  they  had  on  the  subject,  but 
put  him  on  notice  that  in  the  event  he  encountered  imforeseen  difficulties, 
he  could  make  no  claim  on  that  account.  Having  taken  the  work  upon 
a  unit  basis  as  to  prices,  and  it  not  being  within  the  power  of  either  party 
to  foretell  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  the  character  of  difficulties  to  be 
encountered,  the  contract  was  a  chancing  bargain,  and  the  fact  that  he  met 
with  greater  or  less  difficulty  than  was  anticipated  by  the  parties  would 
not  entitle  either  to  a  cancellation  of  the  contract.  .    .   ." 

Lump-sum  Contract. — Under  the  lump-sum  contract  the  contractor 
agrees  to  furnish,  for  a  definite  lump  sum  of  money,  all  labor  and  materials 
necessary  to  complete  a  certain  definite  piece  of  work  to  be  built  upon 
the  detailed  plans  and  specifications  submitted  or  bid  upon. 

This  method  of  contracting  has  the  advantage  that  the  owner  should 
know  from  the  start  how  much  money  will  be  involved  by  the  work  as 
planned.  If  changes  arc  made  in  the  plan,  detail,  or  method  of  construc- 
tion of,  or  in  the  kind  or  quality  of  materials  required  for,  the  work, 
modifications  in  contract  price  may  and  generally  do  result,  with  the 
possibility  of  disagreement  and  expensive  litigation.  Therefore  more 
careful  preliminary  study  of  conditions  is  necessary  in  this  form  of  con- 
tract than  where  the  others  are  employed.  Moreover,  in  this  form  of 
agreement,  the  contractor  is  likely  to  figure  into  his  bid  a  safe  margin  to 
cover  unforeseen  difficulties,  which  the  owner  is  obliged  to  pay,  whether 
such  hazards  arise  or  not.  If  these  hazards  do  not  arise,  the  contractor 
may  make  a  sum  in  excess  of  his  normal  and  desired  profit;  and  if  the 
work  does  not  prove  to  be  hazardous,  but  especially  favorable,  a  still 
further  profit  is  secured.  In  any  event,  the  element  of  uncertainty  is 
likely  to  be  given  greater  weight  in  preparing  a  bid  than  with  the  unit 
price  type  of  contract. 

Percentage  Contract — In  order  that  the  owner  may  assume  all  risk 
and  per  contra  obtain  full  advantage  of  especially  favorable  circum- 
stances, the  percentage  form  of  contract  and  its  various  modifications 
have  been  devised. 

Under  the  percentage  form  the  contractor  agrees  to  furnish  all  labor 
and  materials  necessary  to  complete  the  entire  undertaking  at  its  actual 
cost  plus  an  agreed  and  stipulated  percentage  of  such  cost.  A  serious 
disadvantage  of  the  percentage  form  of  contract  is  that  there  may  be  no 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       449 

spur  to  the  contractor  to  do  the  work  as  expeditiously  as  possible  and  to 
keep  the  labor  force  and  purchase  of  materials  within  limits  most  eco- 
nomical for  the  owner.  To  avoid  this  contingency  the  cost  plus  fixed 
sum  form  of  contract  has  been  used. 

A  form  of  contract  was  introduced  in  New  Orleans  in  1914  by  George 
G.  Earl  to  secure  some  of  the  special  advantages  of  construction  by  day 
labor  without  abandoning  the  services  of  a  contractor,  which  were 
practically  required  by  local  laws.  Under  it  the  contractor  offers  to 
furnish  the  labor  and  ''such  tools,  material  or  equipment  as  may  be 
needed,"  in  addition  to  those  supplied  by  the  city,  at  cost  plus  a  per- 
centage. Non-resident  labor,  skilled  or  unskilled,  cannot  be  supplied 
under  such  a  contract  so  long  as  any  resident  laborers  are  ready,  wiUing 
and  able  to  do  the  work.  The  city  furnishes  the  inspectors,  foremen, 
timekeef)ers  and  pay-roll  clerks.  It  has  full  supervision  over  this  labor, 
*  'including  the  right  to  require  the  contractor  to  discharge  any  who  are 
found  unsatisfactory  in  quantity  or  character  of  work  performed  or 
insubordinate,  and  the  right  to  fix  their  maximum  rate  of  compensation, 
either  per  task  or  per  diem,  for  each  particular  character  of  work  or  class 
of  labor. "  An  obvious  danger  in  such  a  contract  is  met  by  the  following 
provision: 

"The  labor  furnished  by  the  Contractor  shall  at  all  times  consist  of 
the  most  experienced  men  available  at  the  rate  of  pay  approved  by  the 
Sewerage  and  Water  Board  for  each  character  of  employment,  and  so 
long  as  any  laborer  already  employed  is  willing  to  retain  his  position  at 
said  rate  of  pay  and  is  satisfactory  to  the  Supervisor  furnished  by  the 
Board,  he  shall  be  retained  by  the  Contractor  so  long  as  his  services  arc 
needed,  and  inexperienced  men  or  men  not  heretofore  engaged  upon 
work  of  a  similar  character,  shall  only  be  employed  by  the  Contractor 
when  no  men  of  satisfactory  record  and  experience  are  available  at  the 
rate  of  compensation  offered." 

This  form  of  contract  was  first  tried  for  sewer  and  water  main  exten- 
sions and  services  and  house  drains  late  in  1914.  After  extensive  ad- 
vertising but  one  bid,  amounting  to  $748,579.90,  was  received  for 
carrying  out  this  work  in  the  usual  manner.  On  the  percentage  basis 
just  described,  five  bids  were  received,  ranging  from  3.9  to  6.9  per  cent. 
The  work  of  putting  in  house  drains  and  services  is  so  cut  up  and  the 
extent  of  the  work  on  each  job  is  so  uncertain  in  advance  of  its  prosecu- 
tion, that  there  are  manifest  disadvantages  in  executing  it  on  a  unit 
price  basis.  The  lowest  bid  on  the  percentage  basis  came  to  $492,487.02, 
or  $256,092.88  less  than  the  only  bid  under  the  usual  system. 

Co8t-plu8-fized-sum  Contract — Under  this  form  of  contract  the 
contractor  agrees  to  furnish  labor  and  materials  and  complete  the  entire 
undertaking  at  its  actual  cost  plus  a  fixed  and  stated  sum  to  cover  the 
contractor's  profit  and  perhaps  other  specified  items.    Apparently  it  is 

29 


450  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

for  the  contractor's  interest  to  execute  the  work  as  quickly  as  possible  in 
order  that  he  may  earn  his  commission  or  profit  within  the  shortest 
practicable  time,  but  actually,  where  the  contractor  is  carrying  on  several 
operations  of  this  sort,  the  incentive  to  make  speed  may  be  trifling. 

Under  this  plan  the  owner  may  regulate  the  class  and  amount  of  labor 
employed,  the  methods  of  execution,  and  the  kind  and  quality  of  material 
to  be  purchased,  and  if  he  cares  to  he  can  regulate  the  entire  rate  of 
expenditures  and  thus  indicate  the  speed  desired  in  the  execution  of  the 
work.  It  is  to  the  contractor's  interest,  in  view  of  possible  future  work, 
that  this  work  be  done  in  the  most  satisfactory  and  efficient  manner; 
his  self-interest  is  involved  in  that  of  the  owner,  provided  the  owner  is 
likely  to  have  the  placing  of  another  job,  which  should  induce  expedi- 
tious and  economical  work. 

The  legal  status  of  contracts  of  this  character  has  not  been  estabhshed 
by  courts  of  final  jurisdiction  as  yet  (1914).  The  general  opinion 
is  that  the  contractor  becomes  some  sort  of  agent,  but  until  the  subject 
has  been  thoroughly  reviewed  judicially,  no  definite  statement  can  be 
made.  In  a  suit  under  such  a  contract,  which  did  not  go  beyond  the 
trial  court,  one  phase  of  such  an  agreement  was  shown  to  be  important. 
The  owner  discharged  the  contractor  before  the  work  was  finished,  and 
was  sued  for  the  full  "fixed  sum"  and  a  large  additional  amount,  the 
contractor  claiming  that  he  had  estimated  the  fixed  sum  at  10  per  cent, 
of  the  cost  of  an  undertaking  which  the  owner  subsequently  quadrupled. 
The  attitude  of  the  court  was  that  if  this  could  be  proved  to  the  satis- 
faction of  the  jury,  the  latter  should  increase  the  sum  due  to  the  con- 
tractor beyond  that  stipulated  in  the  contract.  It  was  also  stated  by 
the  contractor  in  his  testimony  that  he  was  able,  from  his  experience, 
to  estimate  the  cost  of  work  very  accurately  in  advance  and  that  his 
**fixed  sum"  was  figured  just  as  in  lump-sum  contracts  except  for  the 
omission  of  all  expenses  he  would  incur  for  financing  his  work  under 
the  latter  form,  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  his  testimony  being 
that  the  owner  gained  nothing  financially  by  the  cost-plus-fixed-sum 
agreement. 

Cost-plus-fized-sum  with  Guaranteed  Limit  Contract — To  make  it 
appear  to  the  owner  that  the  cost  of  his  work  may  not  exceed  a  certain 
limit,  some  contracts  have  been  drawn  up  on  the  cost-plus-fixed-sum 
ba^is  with  a  guaranteed  limit  of  total  cost.  At  first  sight  this  form 
would  seem  to  give  to  the  owner  the  security  which  its  name  implies. 
The  real  effect  is,  however,  to  wipe  out  the  good  features  of  the  cost- 
plus-fixod-sum  contract  in  which  the  relation  between  the  owner  and 
the  contractor  is  perfectly  free  and  co-operative,  tending  to  place  the 
contractor  in  a  position  antagonistic  to  the  introduction  of  work,  either 
in  the  form  of  labor  or  materials,  that  was  not  definitely  contemplated 
at  the  outset,  in  order  to  prevent  the  actual  cost  from  exceeding  the 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       451 

guaranteed  limit.    This  form  of  contract  is  subject  to  some  of  the 
disadvantages  of  the  lump-sum  contract. 

Cost-plus-fized-sum,  with  Bonus  if  Less  and  Penalty  if  Greater 
than  a  Stated  Amount  Contract. — ^If  it  is  feasible  to  formulate  a  definite 
plan  before  the  award  of  the  contract,  so  that  comparatively  accurate 
estimates  of  the  costs  of  the  work  may  be  made,  and  if  it  is  probable 
that  but  little  variation  from  the  original  plan  will  be  necessary,  this 
form  of  contract  may  be  desirable  for  creating  a  further  incentive  to 
decrease  the  cost  of  the  work,  and  at  the  same  time  increase  the  con- 
tractor's profit  without  increasing  the  total  costs  to  the  owner. 

LIQUIDATED  DAMAGES  AND  BONUS  CLAUSES 

Nearly  all  sewerage  contracts  contain  provisions  for  the  payment  by 
the  contractor  of  liquidated  damages  for  failure  to  complete  the  work 
within  the  time  stipulated.  Such  a  payment  should  not  be  in  any  sense 
a  penalty  or  a  fine  for  mere  failure  to  conform  to  the  requirements,  but 
should  be  made  for  the  purpose  of  reimbursing  the  party  of  the  first 
part  for  damages  actually  sustained.  These  cannot  ordinarily  be  as- 
certained with  precision  either  before  or  after  the  award  of  the  contract, 
for  they  are  composed  of  many  elements  incapable  of  precise  computa- 
tion, such  as  the  damage  resulting  from  the  lack  of  use  of  the  sewer  for 
the  period  of  delay,  or  that  due  to  the  contractor's  occupancy  of  the 
street  in  which  the  sewer  is  being  built.  These  might  be  arrived  at  by 
an  analysis  of  conditions,  but  in  any  event  they  would  be  matters  of 
judgment,  upon  which  wide  differences  in  opinion  might  reasonably  be 
expected.  Another  clement,  which  is  capable  of  closer  estimate,  is 
the  actual  additional  expense  of  engineering  and  supervision  due  to  the 
delay,  but  even  the  cost  of  these  items  cannot  be  known  in  advance 
and  their  determination,  after  the  work  is  finished,  is  always  a  difficult 
matter  and  usually  largely  dependent  upon  assumptions  as  to  the  proper 
method  of  accounting,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  apportionment 
of  overhead  and  general  charges.  For  these  reasons,  it  is  customary 
for  the  two  parties  to  agree  in  advance  upon  a  per  diem  sum  to  cover 
such  damages  and  to  stipulate  in  the  contract  that  they  are  to  be  liqui- 
dated upon  this  basis. 

Unless  there  are  statutory  provisions  in  the  state  in  which  the  work  is 
being  done,  as  in  New  York,  for  example,  there  appears  to  be  no  legal 
requirement  for  incorporating  in  the  contract  the  bonus  clause  simply 
because  provision  is  made  for  the  payment  of  liquidated  damages. 
The  requirement  that  the  work  be  finished  at  a  fixed  time  appears  to  be 
no  different  in  principle  from  any  of  the  other  requirements  of  the  con- 
tract, and  it  seems  to  be  one  properly  subject  to  agreement  between  the 
parties  to  the  contract.    Many  engineers  and  contractors,  on  the  other 


452  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

hand,  feel  that  equity  requires  a  bonus  for  completion  ahead  of  time 
where  liquidated  damages  are  provided  for  delay.  The  authors  do  not 
concur  in  this  opinion  as  applied  to  contracts  carried  out  under  ordinary 
conditions  but  the  advantages  of  having  the  work  finished  ahead  of 
time  are  often  as  great  as  those  resulting  from  avoiding  a  corresponding 
delay. 

One  advantage  of  the  bonus  and  liquidated  damages  clauses  which  is 
not  often  given  the  consideration  it  merits,  is  that  they  furnish  an  in- 
centive to  the  contractor  to  push  his  work  to  early  completion,  which 
almost  invariably  inures  to  his  benefit  by  reducing  his  overhead  expenses, 
rentals  on  machinery  and  cost  of  pumping  and  incidentals,  such  as  the 
wages  of  watchmen,  timekeepers,  water  boys  and  other  employees  not 
actually  engaged  in  excavation,  pipe  laying,  placing  of  masonry  and  other 
activities  which  may  properly  be  classed  as  productive  work.  ^  The 
amount  of  bonus,  or  of  bonus  and  saved  liquidated  damages  combined, 
may  be  sufficient  to  enable  the  contractor  to  rent  additional  machinery 
and  furnish  improved  organization  so  that  the  work  can  be  done  more 
expeditiously  and  at  reduced  cost  to  him. 

Upon  the  work  done  by  the  Conmiissioners  of  Sewerage  at  Louisville, 
Ky.,  the  first  four  contracts  were  drawn  without  the  bonus  clause,  the 
other  eighty-two  contracts  providing  for  both  bonus  and  liquidated 
damages.  Upon  this  work  the  bonus  and  liquidated  damages  were 
fixed  at  $25  per  day,  which  sum  was  intended  to  cover  with  reasonable 
accuracy  the  cost  of  engineering  and  supervision  due  to  delay.  This 
sum  was  relatively  small,  especially  on  the  larger  contracts,  and  in  no 
wise  covered  all  damages  sustained,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  a  larger  sum 
would  have  resulted  in  a  net  gain  to  the  city.  The  amounts  of  bonus 
and  liquidated  damages  paid  and  collected  under  the  several  contracts 
and  their  relation  to  the  total  amount  paid  to  the  contractor  and  of  the 
total  cost  of  each  sewer  will  be  found  in  Table  33,  Chapter  VII  (Quantity 
and  Cost  of  Excavation).  The  bonus  paid  on  all  contracts  was  $26,900, 
amounting  to  0.82  per  cent,  of  the  total  payments  to  the  contractor 
and  0.72  per  cent,  of  the  total  cost  of  the  sewers  built.  The  aggregate 
amount  of  damages  was  $66,614,  amounting  to  2.02  per  cent,  of  the 
total  payments  to  the  contractor  and  1.78  per  cent,  of  the  total  cost 
of  the  sewers. 

The  clauses  in  the  Louisville  contracts  relating  to  the  extension  of 
the  contract  time,  liquidated  damages  and  bonus  were  as  follows: 

"The  contractor  shall  not  be  entitled  to  any  allowance  by  way  of  damages 

on  account  of  any  delay  on  the  part  of  the  commission but 

in  case  of  such  delay  or  delay  on  account  of ,  orof  extra  work,  the 

contractor  shall  be  entitled  to  so  much  additional  time  wherein  to  perform 
and  complete  the  whole  or  any  portion  of  the  work  required  under  this 
contract  on  his  part  as  the  engineer  shall  certify  in  writing  to  be  just." 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       453 

''The  time  in  which  the  various  portions  and  the  whole  of  this  contract 
are  to  be  performed  and  the  work  is  to  be  completed  is  of  the  essence  of  this 
agreement,  and  for  failure  by  the  Contractor  to  satisfactorily  complete  the 
whole  of  the  work  contemplated  and  provided  herein  within  the  time  set, 
the  commission  shall  deduct  from  the  payments  due  to  the  contractor  the 
sum  of  twenty-five  dollars  ($25)  for  each  day  of  the  delay,  which  sum  is 
agreed  upon,  not  as  a  penalty,  but  as  fixed  and  liquidated  damages  for 
each  day  of  each  such  delay,  to  be  paid  in  full  and  subject  to  no  deduction. 
If  the  payments  due  the  contractor  are  less  than  the  amount  of  such  liqui- 
dated damages,  the  contractor  and  his  surety  shall  pay  the  balance  to  said 
commission. 

''The  contractor  will  be  paid  a  premium  of  twenty-five  dollars  ($25) 
per  day  for  each  day  that  the  whole  work  called  for  in  this  contract  is 
completed  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  engineer  prior  to  the  contract  time  of 
completion." 

In  drawing  contracts  carrying  bonus  and  liquidated  damages  clauses, 
it  is  important  to  provide  for  a  reasonable  extension  of  the  time  allowed 
for  completing  the  work,  to  provide  for  delays  resulting  from  changes 
in  the  plan  and  in  the  quantity  of  work  required,  and  from  delay  of 
the  party  of  the  first  part  in  furnishing  plans,  materials  and  access 
to  rights-of-way  and  other  premises.  In  the  decision  of  the  Court  of 
Appeals  of  New  York,  in  the  case  of  Mosler  Safe  Co.  vs.  Maiden  Lane 
Safe  Deposit  Co.,  the  court  stated  that  "where  the  parties  are  mutually 
responsible  for  the  delays  because  of  which  the  date  fixed  by  the  con- 
tractor for  completion  is  passed,  the.  obligation  for  liquidated  damages 
is  annulled  and  in  the  absence  of  some  provision  under  which  another 
date  can  be  substituted,  it  cannot  be  revived."  N.  Y.  Rep.,  Ct.  Appeals, 
199,  479.  The  court  offered  the  suggestion,  however,  that  the  right 
to  liquidated  damages  might  be  preserved  by  a  provision  allowing  for 
extension  of  the  time  for  delays  not  the  fault  of  the  contractor. 

Clauses  providing  for  the  collection  of  liquidated  damages  and  the 
payment  of  bonus,  like  many  other  provisions  of  a  contract,  make  it  of 
the  utmost  importance  that  the  drawings  and  specifications  be  made 
clear  and  complete  and  that  they  be  based  upon  a  well-matured  study 
of  the  work  to  be  done,  that  there  may  be  little  or  no  change  in  require- 
ments after  the  contract  is  awarded. 

CONTRACT  DRAWINGS 

Contract  drawings  should  show  what  work  is  to  be  done  and  not 
attempt  to  be  record  drawings,  such  as  are  sometimes  prepared  after 
construction  is  completed.  It  is  out  of  the  question  to  foresee,  in  every 
case,  how  deep  piling  should  be  driven,  how  wide  and  deep  footings 
of  special  structures  should  be  made  where  foundation  conditions  are 


454  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

poor,  or  how  deep  the  shaft  of  each  manhole  must  be  made.  There 
must  be  certain  dimensions  in  many  classes  of  work  which  are  subject 
to  frequent  change,  and  it  is  better  to  show  this  in  every  case  on  the 
contract  drawings  than  to  show  a  "typical  structure"  without  any 
indication  of  the  dimensions  subject  to  change. 

All  ''lines  of  excavation"  and  similar  indications  of  limits  afifecting 
payment  should  be  showij  carefully,  and  all  information  necessary 
to  make  their  use  clear  should  be  lettered  on  the  drawings.  All  standard 
castings  and  other  supplies  to  be  furnished  under  the  contract  should  be 
shown  clearly  and  completely. 

Where  all  features  of  a  structure  or  device,  with  a  few  exceptions,  can 
be  shown  with  satisfactory  clearness  on  a  small  scale,  but  a  much  larger 
scale  is  needed  to  bring  out  the  details  of  these  exceptional  features, 
the  most  satisfactory  results  are  usually  obtained  by  drawing  the  whole 
structure  to  the  small  scale  and  indicating  the  special  details  conven- 
tionally; then  these  details  can  usually  be  drawn  on  a  much  larger  scale 
on  the  same  sheet.  There  is  a  tendency  to  make  drawings  far  larger 
than  is  desirable,  in  order  that  the  details  of  a  few  features,  often 
unimportant,  can  be  shown  clearly  on  the  scale  of  the  whole  drawing. 

In  some  offices  it  is  now  customary  to  make  all  drawings  on  such  a 
scale  that  they  can  be  reduced  by  photography  to  a  much  smaller  size 
and  still  remain  perfectly  clear.  To  be  successful  in  preparing  drawings 
for  this  purpose,  the  draftsman  must  keep  in  mind  constantly  the 
appearance  his  drawing  will  present  when  the  spacing  between  lines, 
the  thickness  of  lines,  and  the  size  of  letters  and  figures  are  reduced  to 
the  small  scale.  In  the  case  of  lettering  it  is  not  wise  to  attempt  to 
have  the  reduced  size  of  the  letters  less  than  one  millimeter.  If  the 
drawing  is  to  be  reduced  to  a  fourth  of  the  size  of  the  original,  the 
"lower  case"  or  small  letters  on  the  latter  should  be  4  millimeters 
high.  Moreover,  all  the  lettering  on  a  drawing,  except  headings,  titles 
and  emphasized  words,  should  be  of  the  same  height,  if  the  drawing  is 
to  be  reduced  photographically;  if  this  is  not  the  case  the  differences 
in  size  of  the  letters  make  a  bad  appearance  on  a  photo-reduced  copy. 

When  the  specifications  have  been  completed,  they  should  always 
be  checked  with  the  drawings,  to  make  sure  that  everything  is  given 
on  the  latter  which  is  stated  in  the  former  to  be  there,  and  vice  versa. 
There  is  not  so  much  opportunity  for  standardization  of  design  in 
sewerage  work  as  in  some  other  branches  of  engineering;  nevertheless 
there  is  a  tendency  in  all  drafting  rooms  toward  the  repetition  of 
designs,  even  when  the  new  use  is  not  so  appropriate  as  that  for  which 
the  plans  were  originally  drawn,  and  this  final  comparison  of  specifica- 
tions and  drawings  acts  as  a  check  on  too  much  of  this  reduplication. 

The  authors  have  found  that  the  pamphlets  containing  "Information 
for  Bidders,   Contract   and  Specifications  for  Sewer  Construction" 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS        465 

can  be  printed  most  quickly  at  reasonable  expense  if  the  type  used  is 
a  standard  newspaper  size  set  on  a  typesetting  machine.  These  sizes 
are  usually  what  are  known  as  6-point  or  8-point,  the  former  being  em- 
ployed in  this  volume  for  the  typical  specifications  on  page  464,  and  the 
latter  for  the  quotations  on  page  447.  The  main  headings  in  the 
pamphlet  are  set  entirely  in  capitals,  centered  in  the  column,  and  the 
subheads,  which  are  also  centered,  and  the  side  heads  at  the  beginning 
of  paragraphs,  are  set  in  capitals  and  lower  case  letters.  The  con- 
venience of  the  reader  of  such  small  type  makes  it  desirable  to  have  the 
text  set  in  ordinary  newspaper  column  width,  which  is  about  2-1/4  in. 
(See  page  463.)  If  a  page  of  such  type  is  given  a  length  of  4-1/2  in., 
it  has  a  good  appearance  on  a  sheet  of  paper  4  X  6-1/2  in.  in  size,  the 
margins  around  the  type  are  large  enough  for  notes  and  alterations,  and 
the  pamphlet  is  of  convenient  size  for  the  pocket.  The  pamphlets  are 
bound  in  board  covers,  using  wire  for  stitching,  and  a  strip  of  black 
cambric  is  pasted  on  the  back  to  strengthen  the  fold.  Pamphlets  of  this 
style  can  probably  be  produced  with  the  maximum  rapidity  attainable 
in  a  job  printing  office,  and  this  speed  is  sometimes  quite  important. 
If  the  work  is  done  in  a  hurry,  the  maximum  charge  for  an  edition 
of  100  should  not  exceed  SI  per  page,  both  blank  and  text,  the  bind- 
ing and  covers  not  being  charged  for;  if  several  days'  time  is  allowed 
for  a  pamphlet  of  64  pages  or  more,  the  price  should  be  much  lower. 
In  asking  for  prices  on  such  work,  it  is  usually  desirable  to  request 
bidders  to  suggest  methods  of  reducing  the  cost,  for  sometimes  useful 
suggestions  can  be  obtained  in  this  manner. 

A  TYPICAL  FORM  OF  CONTRACT  USED  BY  THE  AUTHORS 

THIS  AGREEMENT,  made  and  entered  into  thia day  of in  the  year  One 

Thouaand  Nine  Hundred  and  Fourteen,  by  and  between, and 

Board  of  Selectmen,  duly  constituted  and  elected,  heroin  acting  for  the 

Town  of and  without  pecsonal  liability  to  themselves,  party  of  the  first  part, 

and part ....  of  the  second  part, 

WITNESSETH,  That  the  parties  to  these  presents,  each  in  consideration  of  the  under- 
takings, promises  and  agreements  on  the  part  of  the  other  herein  contained,  have  undertaken, 
promised  and  agreed,  and  do  hereby  undertake,  promise  and  agree,  the  party  of  the  first  part 

for  itself,  its  successors  and  assigns,  and  the  part. . .  of  the  second  part  for 

and heirs,  executors  and  administrators  or 

successors,  as  follows: 

Art.  I.  Wherever  the  words  defined  in  this  article,  or  pronouns  used  in  their  stead,  occur 
in  this  contract  and  the  specifications  herein,  they  shall  have  the  meanings  herein  given. 

The  words  Party  of  the  First  Part,  above  designated,  shall  include  any  board,  ofiicer  or 
agents  properly  authorised  to  act  for  said  party  in  the  execution  of  the  work  oalled  for  in  this 
contract.  [If  it  is  desired  to  designate  the  party  of  the  firat  part  specifically,  as  the  Town 
or  the  Selectmen,  these  words  should  be  defined.  It  is  often  preferable  to  do  so  where  many 
contracts  are  made  for  the  same  party.] 

The  word  Engineer  shall  mean  the  Engineers  for  the  party  of  the  first  part,  Metcalf  & 
Eddy,  of  Boston,  Mass.,  cither  acting  directly  or  through  their  properly  authorised  agents, 
such  agents  acting  within  the  scope  of  the  particular  duties  intrusted  to  them. 

Wherever  in  the  specifications  or  upon  the  drawings  the  words  "as  directed,'*  "as  re- 


456  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

quired,"  "aa  permitted,"  or  words  of  like  import  are  used  it  shall  be  understood  that  the 
direction,  requirement  or  permission  of  the  Engineer  is  understood,  and  similarly  the  words 
"approved,"  "acceptable,"  "satisfactory"  or  words  of  like  import  shall  mean  approved  by 
or  acceptable  and  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer. 

The  word  Contractor  shall  mean  the  party  of  the  second  part,  above  designated,  or  the 
legal  representative  of  said  party  or  the  agent  appointed  to  act  for  said  party  in  the  per^ 
formance  of  the  work. 

The  figures  given  in  the  contract  and  specifications  or  upon  the  drawings  after  the  word 
elevation  or  abbreviation  of  it  shall  mean  the  distance  in  feet  above  the  datum  adopted  by 
the  Engineer. 

Art.  II.  To  prevent  disputes  and  litigations,  the  Engineer  shall  in  all  cases  determine  the 
amount,  quality,  acceptability  and  fitness  of  the  several  kinds  of  work  and  materials  which 
are  to  be  paid  for  under  this  contract;  shall  determine  all  questions  in  relation  to  said  work 
and  the  construction  thereof,  and  shall  in  all  cases  decide  every  question  which  may  arise 
relt»ttve  to  the  fulfillment  of  this  contract  on  the  part  of  the  Contractor.  His  estimate  and 
decision  shall  be  final  and  conclusive  upon  said  Contractor,  and  in  case  any  question  shall 
arise  between  the  parties  hereto,  touching  this  contract,  such  estimate  and  decision  shall  be  a 
condition  precedent  to  the  right  of  the  Contractor  to  receive  any  money  under  this  contract. 
Art.  III.  The  Engineer  shall  make  all  necessary  explanations  as  to  the  meaning  and  inten- 
tion of  the  specific^ations,  shall  give  all  orders  and  directions  contemplated  therein  or  thereby 
and  in  every  case  in  which  a  difficult  or  unforeseen  condition  shall  arise  in  the  perform- 
ance of  the  work  required  by  this  contract. 

Any  differences  or  conflicts  which  may  arise  between  the  Contractor  and  other  contract- 
ors of  the  party  of  the  first  part  in  regard  to  their  work  shall  be  adjusted  and  determined  by 
the  Engineer. 

Art.  IV.  The  Contractor  shall  do  all  the  work  and  furnish  all  the  materials,  tools  and 
appliances  necessary  or  proper  for  performing  and  completing  the  work  required  by  this  con- 
tract, in  the  manner  and  within  the  time  hereinafter  specified.  He  shall  complete  the  entire 
work  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Engineer,  and  in  accordance  with  the  specifications  and  draw- 
ings herein  mentioned,  at  the  prices  herein  agreed  upon  and  fixed  therefor.  All  the  work, 
labor  and  materials  to  be  done  and  furnished  under  this  contract  shall  be  done  and  furnished 
strictly  pursuant  to,  and  in  conformity  with,  the  attached  specifications  and  the  directions  of 
the  Engineer  as  given  from  time  to  time  during  the  progress  of  the  work  under  the  terms  of 
this  contract,  and  also  in  accordance  with  the  contract  drawings,  which  said  specifications 
and  drawings  form  parts  of  this  agreement.  The  Information  for  Bidders  hereto  attached 
and  the  Proposal  submitted  by  the  Contractor  are  also  made  parts  of  this  contract. 

The  Contractor  shall  conduct  his  work  so  as  to  interfere  as  little  as  possible  with  private 
business  and  public  travel.  He  shall,  at  his  own  expense,  wherever  necessary  or  required, 
maintain  fences,  provide  watchmen,  maintain  red  lights  and  take  such  other  precautions  as 
may  be  necessary  to  protect  life  and  property,  and  shall  be  liable  for  all  damages  occasioned 
in  any  way  by  his  act  or  neglect,  or  that  of  his  agents,  employees  or  workmen. 

Art.  V.  No  night  work  requiring  the  presence  of  an  engineer  or  inspector  will  be  per- 
mitted, except  in  case  of  emergency,  and  then  only  to  such  an  extent  as  is  absolutely  neces- 
sary, and  with  written  permission  of  the  Engineer,  provided  that  this  clause  shall  not 
operate  in  case  of  a  gang  organised  for  regular  and  continuous  night  work,*  and  on  work 
which  can  be,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Engineer,  satisfactorily  performed  at  night. 

No  Sunday  work  will  be  permitted,  except  in  case  of  great  emergency,  and  then  only  with 
written  consent  of  the  Engineer,  and  to  such  extent  as  be  may  judge  to  be  necessary. 

Art.  VI.  Whenever  the  Contractor  is  not  present  on  any  part  of  the  work  where  it  may  be 
desired  to  give  directions,  orders  may  be  given  by  the  Engineer,  and  shall  be  received  and 
obeyed  by  the  superintendent  or  foreman  who  may  have  charge  of  the  particular  work  in 
reference  to  which  orders  are  given. 

Art.  VII.  The  plans  and  specifications  are  intended  to  be  explanatory  of  each  other,  but 
should  any  discrepancy  appear  or  any  misunderstanding  arise  as  to  the  import  of  anything 
contained  in  either,  the  explanation  of  the  Engineer  shall  be  final  and  binding  on  the  Con- 
tractor. Any  correction  of  errors  or  omissions  in  drawings  and  specifications  may  be  made 
by  the  Engineer  when  such  correction  is  necessary  for  the  proper  fulfilment  of  their  intention 
as  construed  by  him. 

Art.  VIII.  Necessary  sanitary  conveniences  for  the  use  of  laborers  on  the  work,  properly 
secluded  from  public  observation,  shall  be  constructed  and  maintained  by  the  Contractor  in 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       457 

Buch  manner  and  at  such  points  as  shall  be  approved,  and  their  use  shall  be  strictly  enforced. 

Art.  IX.  The  Contractor  shall  not  permit  nor  suffer  the  introduction  or  use  of  intoxi- 
cating liquors  upon  or  about  the  works  embraced  in  this  contract. 

Art.  X.  The  Contractor  shall  commence  work  within  10  days  after  the  execution  of  this 
contract  by  the  board  at  such  points  as  the  Engineer  may  approve  and  shall  thereafter  con- 
tinue it  at  such  points  and  in  such  order  of  precedence  as  the  Engineer  may  from  time  .to  time 
approve. 

The  rate  of  progress  shall  be  such  that  the  whole  work  shall  be  performed  in  accordance 
with  the  terms  of  this  contract  on  or  before 

In  case  the  Contractor  fails  to  satisfactorily  complete  the  entire  work  contemplated  and 

provided  for  under  this  contract,  on  or  before the  party  of  the  first  part  shall 

deduct  from  the  payments  due  to  the  Contractor  the  sum  of  ten  dollars  (|10)  for  each  cal- 
endar day  of  delay,  which  sum  is  agreed  upon  not  as  a  penalty  but  as  fixed  and  liquidated 
damages  for  each  day  of  such  delay,  to  be  paid  in  full  and  subject  to  no  deduction.  If  the 
paymentfr-due  the  Contractor  are  less  than  the  amount  of  such  liquidated  damages,  said 
damages  shall  be  deducted  from  sny  other  moneys  due  or  to  become  due  the  Contractor,  and 
in  case  said  damages  shall  exceed  the  amount  of  all  moneys  due  or  to  become  due  the  Con- 
tractor, then  the  Contractor  or  his  surety  shall  pay  the  balance  to  the  party  of  the  first  part. 

The  rate  of  progress  herein  required  has  been  purposely  made  low  enough  to  allow  for  the 
ordinary  delays  incident  to  construction  work  of  this  character.  No  extension  of  time  will 
be  made  for  ordinary  delays  and  accidents,  and  the  occurrence  of  such  will  not  relieve  the 
Contractor  from  the  necessity  of  maintaining  these  rates  of  progress. 

The  time  in  which  this  contract  is  to  be  performed  and  the  work  is  to  be  completed  is  of  the 
essence  of  this  agreement. 

Art.  XI.  The  party  of  the  first  part  and  the  Engineer,  agents  and  employees  of  the  party 
of  the  first  part  may,  for  purposes  already  specified  and  for  any  other  purpose,  enter  upon  the 
work  and  the  premises  used  by  the  Contractor,  and  the  Contractor  shall  provide  safe  and 
proper  facilities  therefor.  Other  contractors  of  the  party  of  the  first  part  may  abo,  for  all 
the  purposes  which  may  be  required  by  their  contracts,  enter  upon  the  work  and  the 
premises  used  by  the  Contractor. 

The  Engineer  shall  be  furnished  with  every  reasonable  facility  for  ascertaining  that  the 
work  is  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  and  intention  of  this  contract,  even  to  the  extent 
of  uncovering  or  taking  down  portions  of  finished  work. 

Art.  XII.  The  inspection  of  the  work  shall  not  relieve  the  Contractor  of  any  of  his  obli- 
gations to  fulfil  his  contract  as  herein  prescribed,  and  defective  work  shall  be  made  good  and 
unsuitable  materials  may  be  rejected,  notwithstanding  that  such  work  and  materials  have 
been  previously  overlooked  by  the  Engineer  and  accepted  or  estimated  for  payment.  If  the 
work  or  any  part  thereof  shall  be  found  defective  at  any  time  before  the  final  acceptance  of 
the  whole  work,  the  Contractor  shall  forthwith  make  good  such  defect,  in  a  manner  satis- 
factory to  the  Engineer,  and  if  any  material  brought  upon  the  ground  for  use  in  the  work,  or 
selected  for  the  same,  shall  be  condemned  by  the  Engineer  as  unsuitable  or  not  in  conformity 
with  the  specification,  the  Contractor  shall  forthwith  remove  such  materials  from  the  vicinity 
of  the  work.  Nothing  in  this  contract  shall  be  construed  as  vesting  in  the  Contractor  any 
right  of  property  in  the  materials  used  after  they  have  been  attached  or  affixed  to  the  work  or 
the  soil,  but  all  such  materials  shall,  upon  being  so  attached  or  affixed,  become  the  property 
of  the  party  of  the  first  part. 

Art.  X  III .  The  Contractor  shall  employ  enough  competent  men  to  do  the  work.  If,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  Engineer,  the  Contractor  is  not  employing  sufficient  labor  to  complete  this 
contract  within  the  time  specified,  said  Engineer  may,  after  giving  written  notice,  require 
said  Contractor  to  employ  such  additional  labor  as  may  be  necessary  to  enable  said  work  to 
properly  progress. 

Art.  XIV.  The  Contractor  shall  employ  only  competent  men  to  do  the  work,  and  when- 
ever the  Engineer  shall  notify  the  Contractor  in  writing  that  any  man  on  the  work  is,  in  his 
opinion,  incompetent,  unfaithful,  disorderly  or  otherwise  unsatisfactory,  or  not  employed  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Article  XV,  such  mat  shall  be  discharged  from  the  work, 
and  shall  not  again  be  employed  on  it,  except  with  the  consent  of  the  Engineer.  If,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  Engineer,  the  Contractor  is  not  emplojring  sufficient  labor  to  complete  this 
contract  within  the  time  specified,  said  Engineer  may,  after  giving  written  notice,  require 
said  Contractor  to  employ  such  additional  labor  as  may  be  necessary  to  enable  said  work  to 
properly  progress.     The  judgment  of  the  Engineer  as  to  whether  said  work  is  progressing  at 


468  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Buch  a  rate  as  to  enable  it  to  be  completed  at  the  time  herein  specified  shall  be  final  and 
binding.  Any  action  of  the  Engineer  under  this  Article  shall  not  affect  the  right  of  the  party 
of  the  first  part  to  annul  this  contract  as  provided  in  Article  XX. 

Art.  XV.  The  Contractor  shall  keep  himself  fuHy  informed  of  all  existing  and  future 
State  and  National  laws  and  local  ordinances  and  regulations  in  any  manner  affecting  those 
engaged  or  employed  in  the  work,  or  the  materials  used  in  the  work,  or  in  any  way  affecting 
the  conduct  of  the  work,  and  of  all  such  orders  and  decrees  of  bodies  or  tribunals  having  any 
jurisdiction  or  authority  over  the  same;  and  shall  protect  and  indemnify  the  party  of  the  first 
part  and  their  officers  and  agents  against  any  claim  or  liability  arising  from  or  based  on 
the  violation  of  any  such  law,  ordinance,  regulation,  order  or  decree,  whether  by  himself  or 
his  employees. 

Art.  X.VI     The  Contractor,  in  the  constmotion  of  the  worir^  shall  give  preference  in 

employment  to  citisens  of  the  Town  of ,  and  where  oitisens  of  said  Town  are  not 

available,  shall  give  preference  to  citisens  of  the  State  of (In  some  states, 

municipal  contracts  are  required  to  contain  quotations  from  laws  regarding  employment 
of  labor.     These  should  be  inserted  here.     For  private  contracts,  this  article  can  be  omitted.] 

Art.  XVII.  The  Contractor  shall  give  his  personal  attention  constantly  to  the  faithful 
prosecution  of  the  work,  shall  keep  the  same  under  his  personal  control  and  shall  not  as- 
sign by  power  of  attorney  or  otherwise,  nor  sublet,  the  work  or  any  part  thereof,  without  the 
previous  written  consent  of  the  party  of  the  first  part,  and  shall  not.either  legally  or  equitably, 
assign  any  of  the  moneys  payable  under  this  agreement,  or  his  claim  thereto,  unless  by  and 
with  the  like  consent  of  the  party  of  the  first  part. 

Art.  XVIII.  The  Engineer  may  make  alterations  in  the  line,  grade,  plan,  form,  dimensions 
or  materials  of  the  work,  or  any  part  thereof,  either  before  or  after  the  commencement  of 
construction;  if  such  alterations  diminish  the  quantity  of  work  to  be  done,  they  shall  not 
warrant  any  claim  for  damages  or  for  anticipated  profits  on  the  work  that  may  be  dispensed 
with;  if  they  increase  the  amount  of  work,  such  increase  shall  be  paid  for  according  to  the 
quantity  actually  done  and  at  the  prices  stipulated  for  such  work  under  this  contract. 

Art.  XIX.  The  Contractor  shall  take  all  responsibility  for  the  work,  and  take  all  pre- 
cautions for  preventing  injuries  to  persons  and  property  in  or  about  the  work;  shall  bear  all 
losses  resulting  to  him  on  account  of  the  amount  or  character  of  the  work,  or  because  the 
nature  of  the  land  in  or  on  which  the  work  is  done  is  different  from  what  was  estimated  or 
expected,  or  on  account  of  the  weather,  elements  or  other  cause;  and  he  shall  assume  the 
defense  of,  and  indemnify  and  save  harmless  the  party  of  the  first  part  and  their  officers 
and  agents,  from  all  claims  relating  to  labor  and  materials  furnished  for  the  work ;  to  inven- 
tions, patents  and  patent  rights  used  in  doing  the  work;  to  injuries  to  any  person  or  corpor- 
ation received  or  sustained  by  or  from  the  Contractor  and  his  employees  in  doing  the  work,  oi 
in  consequence  of  any  improper  materials,  implements  or  labor  used  therein;  and  to  any  act, 
omission  or  neglect  of  the  Contractor  and  his  employees  therein. 

The  Contractor  shall  carry  liability  insurance  or  workmen's  compensation  insurance,  and 
also  public  liability  insurance,  together  covering  bodily  injuries  to  his  employees  and  the 
public  received  as  a  consequence  of  the  performance  of  work  under  this  contract. 

Art.  XX.  If  the  work  to  be  done  under  this  contract  shall  be  abandoned,  or  if  this 
contract  or  any  part  thereof  shall  be  sublet  without  the  previous  written  consent  of  the 
party  of  the  first  part,  or  if  the  contract  or  any  claim  thereunder  shall  be  assigned  by  the 
Contractor  otherwise  than  as  herein  specified,  or  if  at  any  time  the  Engineer  shall  be  of  the 
opinion,  and  shall  so  certify  in  writing  to  the  party  of  the  first  part,  that  the  conditions  herein 
specified  as  to  the  rate  of  progress  are  not  fulfilled,  or  that  the  work  or  any  part  thereof 
is  unnecessarily  or  unreasonably  delayed,  or  that  the  Contractor  has  violated  any  of  the  x>ro- 
visions  of  this  contract,  the  party  of  the  first  part  may  notify  the  Contractor  to  discontinue 
all  work  or  any  part  thereof;  and  thereupon  the  Contractor  shall  discontinue  such  work  or 
such  part  thereof  as  the  party  of  the  first  part  may  designate  and  the  party  of  the  first  part 
may  thereupon,  by  contract  or  otherwise  as  they  may  determine,  complete  the  work,  or  such 
part  thereof,  and  charge  the  entire  expense  of  so  completing  the  work  or  part  thereof  to  the 
Contractor;  and  for  such  completion  the  party  of  the  first  part  for  themselves  or  their  con- 
tractors may  take  possession  of  and  use  or  cause  to  be  used  in  completion  of  the  work  or  part 
thereof  any  of  such  materials,  animals,  machinery,  implements  and  tools  of  every  description 
as  may  be  found  at  the  location  of  said  work. 

All  expenses  charged  under  this  Article  shall  be  deducted  and  paid  by  the  party  of  the  first 
part  out  of  any  moneys  then  due  or  to  become  due  to  the  Contractor  under  this  contract,  or 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       459 

any  i>art  thereof;  and  in  such  accounting  the  x>arty  of  the  first  part  shall  not  be  held  to  obtain 
the  loweet  figures  for  the  work  of  completing  the  contract  or  any  part  thereof,  or  for  insuring 
its  proper  completion,  but  all  sums  actually  paid  therefor  shall  be  charged  to  the  Contractor. 
In  case  the  expenses  so  charged  are  less  than  the  sum  which  would  have  been  payable 
under  this  contract  if  the  same  had  been  completed  by  the  Contractor,  the  Contractor 
shall  be  entitled  to  receive  the  difference:  and  in  case  such  expenses  shall  exceed  the  said 
sum,  the  Contractor  shall  pay  the  amount  of  the  excess  to  the  party  of  the  first  part. 

Art.  XXI.  •  The  Contractor  shall  pay  to  the  party  of  the  first  part  all  expenses,  losses  and 
damages,  as  determined  by  the  Engineer,  incurred  in  consequence  of  any  defect,  omission  or 
mistake  of  the  Contractor  or  his  employees,  or  the  making  good  thereof. 

Art.  XXII.  The  Contractor  shall  do  any  work  not  herein  otherwise  provided  for,  when  and 
as  ordered  in  writing  by  the  Engineer  or  his  agents  specially  authorised  thereto  in  writing, 
and  shall,  when  requested  by  the  Engineer  so  to  do,  furnish  itemised  statements  of  the  cost  of 
the  work  ordered  and  give  the  Engineer  access  to  accounts,  bills  and  vouchers  relating  thereto. 
If  the  Contractor  claims  compensation  for  extra  work  not  ordered  as  aforesaid,  or  for  any 
damages  sustained,  he  shall,  within  one  week  after  the  beginning  of  any  such  work  or  of  the 
sustaining  of  any  such  damage,  make  a  written  statement  of  the  nature  of  the  work  performed 
or  damage  sustained,  to  the  Engineer,  and  shall,  on  or  before  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month 
succeeding  that  in  which  any  such  extra  work  shall  have  been  done  or  any  such  damage  shall 
have  been  sustained,  file  with  the  Engineer  an  itemised  statement  of  the  details  and  amount 
of  any  such  work  or  damage;  and  unless  such  statements  shall  be  made  as  so  required,  his 
claim  for  compensation  shall  be  forfeited  and  invalid,  and  be  shall  not  be  entitled  to  payment 
on  account  of  any  such  work  or  damage. 

For  all  such  extra  work,  the  Contractor  shall  receive  the  reasonable  cost  of  said  work,  plus 
fifteen  per  cent,  of  such  cost,  in  accordance  with  Item  17.  [The  references  to  Items  are  to 
paragraphs  under  Art.   XXIV]. 

The  decision  of  the  Engineer  shall  be  final  upon  all  questions  of  the  amount  and  value  of 
extra  work,  and  he  shall  include  in  such  value  the  cost  to  the  Contractor  of  all  materiaLs  used, 
of  all  labor,  common  and  skilled,  of  foremen  and  teams,  and  the  fair  rental  of  all  machinery 
used  upon  the  extra  work,  for  the  period  of  such  use,  which  was  upon  the  work  before  or  which 
shall  be  required  by  or  used  upon  the  work  after  the  extra  work  is  done.  If  said  extra  work 
requires  the  use  of  machinery  not  upon  the  work  or  to  be  used  upon  the  work,  then  the  cost 
of  transportation  of  such  machinery  to  and  from  the  work  shall  be  added  to  the  fair  rental, 

but  said  transportation  shall  not  cover  a  distance  exceeding miles.     He  shall  include  in 

the  value  of  extra  work  the  cost  to  the  Contractor  of  employers*  liability  insurance  or  work- 
men's compensation  insurance,  and  also  public  liability  insurance,  together  covering  bodily 
injuries  to  his  employees  and  the  public  resulting  from  the  extra  work.  The  Engineer 
shall  not  include  in  the  value  of  extra  work  any  cost  or  rental  of  small  tools,  buildings  or 
any  portion  of  the  time  of  the  Contractor  or  his  Superintendent,  or  any  allowance  for  use  of 
capital,  these  items  being  considered  as  being  covered  by  the  fifteen  per  cent,  added  to 
the  reasonable  cost. 

Art.  XXIII.  The  party  of  the  first  part  may  keep  any  moneys  which  would  otherwise  be 
payable  at  any  time  hereunder,  and  apply  the  same  or  so  much  as  may  be  necessary  therefor, 
to  the  payment  of  any  expensfw,  losses  or  damages  incurred  by  the  party  of  the  first  part,  and 
determined  as  herein  provided,  and  may  retain,  until  ail  claims  are  settled,  so  much  of  such 
moneys  as  the  party  of  the  first  part  shall  be  of  the  opinion  will  be  required  to  settle  all  claims 
against  the  party  of  the  first  part  and  their  officers  and  agents,  and  all  claims  for  labor  on  the 
work,  and  also  all  claims  for  materials  used  in  the  work  or  the  party  of  the  first  part  may  make 
such  settlements  and  apply  thereto  any  moneys  retained  under  this  contract.  If  the  moneys 
retained  under  this  contract  are  insufficient  to  pay  the  sums  found  by  the  party  of  the  first 
part  to  be  due  under  the  claims  for  labor  and  materials,  the  party  of  the  first  part  may,  at 
their  discretion,  pay  the  same  and  the  Contractor  and  surety  shall  repay  to  the  i>arty  of  the 
first  part  the  sums  so  paid  out.  The  party  of  the  first  part  may  also,  with  the  written  con- 
sent of  the  Contractor,  use  any  moneys  retained,  due  or  to  become  due  under  this  contract  for 
the  purpose  of  paying  for  both  labor  and  materials  for  the  work,  for  which  claims  have  not 
been  filed  in  the  office  of  the  party  of  the  first  part.  While  it  is  understood  that  the  security 
required  to  be  given  by  the  Contractor  is  furnished  by  the  Contractor  by  his  giving  the  bond 
accompanying  this  contract,  the  party  of  the  first  part  may,  nevertheless,  if  they  shall  deem 
it  just  and  equitable  so  to  do,  cause  any  moneys  retained,  due  or  to  become  due,  to  be  held 
and  applied  to  the  payment  for  labor  or  materials  furnished  or  supplied  by  said  Contractor 


460  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

for  whloh  he  has  aot  made  payment  in  full.  The  Contractor  shall  at  such  times  as  monejrs  are 
payable  hereunder,  deliver  to  the  Engineer  a  sworn  statement,  showing  as  of  that  date  the 
amount  owing  by  him  for  materials  and  labor  performed. 

Art.  XXIV.  The  Town  shall  pay  and  the  Contractor  shall  receive  as  full  compensation 
for  everything  furnished  and  done  by  the  Contractor  under  this  contract,  including  all  work 
required  but  not  specifically  mentioned  in  the  following  items,  and  also  for  all  loss  or  damage 
arising  out  of  the  nature  of  the  work  aforesaid,  or  from  the  action  of  the  elements,  or  from 
any  unforeseen  obstruction  or  difficulty  encoimtered  in  the  prosecution  of  the  work,  and  for 
all  risks  of  every  description  connected  with  the  work,  and  for  all  expenses  incurred  by  or  in 
consequence  of  the  suspension  or  discontinuance  of  the  work  as  herein  specified,  and  for  well 
and  faithfully  completing  the  work  as  herein  provided,  as  follows: 

Item  la.  For  all  earth  excavation  for  pump  well,  and  earth  excavation  in  trench  from 
surface  to  depth  of  not  over  six  (6)  feet  for  sewers,  manholes,  and  other  appurtenances, 
including  all  sheeting,  bracing,  pumping,  back-filling,  resurfacing,  etc.,  and  the  care  of  exist- 
ing structures,  precautionary  measures  and  all  other  work  incidental  thereto,  as  required  by 
the  specifications,  but  not  including  the  earth  excavation  for  that  part  of  the  Harborside 
sewer  to  be  constructed  of  cast-iron  pipe,  the  sum  of ($....)  per  cubic  yard. 

Item  lb.  For  all  earth  excavation  in  trench  below  six  (6)  feet  for  sewers,  etc.  (as  above 
stated)  the  sum  of ($....)  per  cubic  yard. 

The  items  inserted  here  but  not  reprinted  correspond  with  those  in  the  "  Information  for 
Bidders"  and  the  "  Bid  or  Proposal. "] 

Item  17.  For  extra  work,  if  any,  performed  in  accordance  with  Article  XXII  of  this  con- 
tract, the  reasonable  cost  of  the  work  as  determined  by  the  Engineer,  whose  determination 
shall  be  final,  plus  fifteen  per  cent.  (16%)  of  such  cost. 

Art.  XXV.  The  Engineer  shall,  once  in  each  month,  make  an  estimate  in  writing  of  the 
total  amount  of  the  work  done  to  the  time  of  such  estimate  and  the  value  thereof.  The 
party  of  the  first  part  shall  retain  fifteen  per  cent,  of  such  estimated  value  as  part  security 
for  the  fulfilment  of  this  contract  by  the  Contractor,  and  shall  monthly  pay  to  the  Contractor 
while  carrying  on  the  work,  the  balance  not  retained  as  aforesaid,  after  deducting  therefrom 
all  previous  payments  and  all  sums  to  be  kept  or  retained  under  the  provisions  of  this  con- 
tract. No  such  estimate  or  payment  shall  be  required  to  be  made  when,  in  the  judg- 
ment of  the  Engineer,  the  total  value  of  the  work  done  since  the  last  estimate  amounts  to 
less  than  three  hundred  dollars  .(|300).  Payment  may  at  any  time  be  withheld  if  the  work 
is  not  proceeding  in  accordance  with  the  contract.  The  party  of  the  first  part  may,  if 
they  deem  it  expedient  so  to  do,  cause  estimates  to  be  made  more  frequently  than  once  in 
each  month,  and  they  may  cause  payments  to  be  made  more  frequently  to  the  Contractor. 
The  party  of  the  first  part  may  at  their  option  retain  temporarily  or  permanently  a 
smaller  amount  than  is  aforesaid,  and  may  cause  the  Contractor  to  be  paid  temporarily 
or  permanently  from  time  to  time  during  the  progress  of  the  w^ork,  such  portion  of  the 
reserve  as  they  deem  prudent. 

The  Engineer  shall,  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the  completion  of  this  contract,  make  a  final 
estimate  of  the  amount  of  work  done  thereunder,  and  the  value  of  such  work,  and  the  party 
uf  the  first  part  shall,  within  sixty  days  after  such  final  estimate  is  so  made  and  is  approved 
by  the  party  of  the  first  part,  pay  the  entire  sum  so  found  to  be  due  hereunder  after  deducting 
therefrom  all  previous  payments  and  all  amoimts  to  be  kept  and  all  amounts  to  be  retained 
under  the  provisions  of  this  contract,  including  the  two  per  cent,  of  the  amount  of  the  con- 
tract to  be  retained  as  hereinafter  provided  for  the  making  of  repairs.  All  prior  partial 
estimates  and  payments  shall  be  subject  to  correction  in  the  final  estimate  and  payment. 

It  is  distinctly  agreed  and  understood  that  any  changes  made  in  the  plans  and  specifica- 
tions for  this  work,  whether  such  changes  increase  or  decrease  the  amount  thereof  or  any 
change  in  the  manner,  time  or  amounts  of  payments  made  by  the  party  of  the  first  part  to  the 
Contractor,  whether  before  or  after  the  time  for  completion  specified  in  this  contract,  shall 
in  no  wise  annid,  release,  or  in  any  way  affect  the  liability  and  surety  on  the  bond  given  by 
the  Contractor. 

The  Contractor  guarantees  the  work  done  under  this  contract,  and  that  the  materials  used 
in  the  construction  of  the  same  are  free  from  defects  or  flaws,  and  this  guaranty  is  for  a  term 
of  nine  months  from  and  after  the  date  upon  which  the  final  estimate  of  the  Engineer  is 
formally  approved  by  the  party  of  the  first  part. 

It  is  hereby,  however,  specially  agreed  and  understood  that  this  guaranty  shall  not  include 
any  repairs  made  necessary  by  any  cause  or  causes  other  than  defective  work  or  materiala  in 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       461 

the  construction  of  the  sewera.  The  Contractor  shall  at  all  times  within  said  term  of  nine 
hiontbs  keep  the  surface  of  the  ground  over  this  work,  or  adjacent  thereto,  in  the  position  and 
condition  required  by  this  contract,  and  refill  any  settlement  or  erosion  in  the  back- filling  or 
any  surface  graded  by  him  due  to  any  cause  whatsoever,  when  so  directed  by  the  Engineer; 
should  he  fail  to  do  so,  the  party  of  the  first  part  may  have  said  work  done  as  described 
below. 

Art.  XXVI.  The  party  of  the  first  part  may  retain  out  of  the  monejrs  payable  to  the 
Contractor  under  this  contract  the  sum  of  two  per  cent,  on  the  amount  thereof,  and  may 
expend  the  same  in  the  manner  hereinafter  provided  for  in  making  such  repairs  of  said  work 
as  the  Engineer  may  deem  expedient.  If,  at  any  time  within  the  said  term  of  nine  months, 
any  part  of  the  work  contemplated  in  this  contract  shall,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Engineer  re- 
quire repairing,  the  Engineer  may  notify  the  Contractor  in  writing,  to  make  the  required 
repairs.  If  the  Contractor  shall  neglect  to  make  such  repairs  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Engi- 
neer within  three  days  from  the  date  of  giving  or  mailing  such  notice,  then  the  Engineer  may 
employ  other  persons  to  make  the  same.  The  party  of  the  first  part  shall  pay  the  expense 
of  the  same  out  of  the  sum  retained  for  that  purpose.  Upon  the  expiration  of  the  said  term 
of  nine  months,  provided  that  the  work  at  that  time  shall  be  in  good  order,  the  Contractor 
shall  be  entitled  to  receive  the  whole  or  such  part  of  the  sum  last  aforesaid  as  may  remain  after 
the  expense  of  making  said  repairs,  in  the  manner  aforesaid,  shall  have  been  paid  there- 
from, but  if  said  expense  is  in  excess  of  the  sum  of  2  per  cent,  retained,  the  Contractor  shall 
pay  to  the  Town  the  amount  of  the  excess. 

It  is,  however,  agreed  that  the  party  of  the  first  part  may  apply  or  keep  the  sujn  so  retained 
to  or  for  payment  of  other  claims  arising  and  made  payable  by  the  Contractor  under  the  pro- 
visions of  this  contract  but  remaining  unsatisfied. 

Art.  XXVII.  Neither  the  inspection  of  the  party  of  the  first  part,  or  Engineer,  or  any  of 
their  employees,  nor  any  order,  measurement  or  certificate  by  the  Engineer,  nor  any  order  by 
the  party  of  the  first  part  for  the  payment  of  money,  nor  any  payment  for,  nor  acceptance  of, 
the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  work  by  the  Engineer  or  party  of  the  first  part,  nor  any  extension 
of  time  nor  any  possession  taken  by  the  party  of  the  first  part  or  their  employees,  shall 
operate  as  a  waiver  of  any  provision  of  this  contract,  or  of  any  power  herein  reserved  to  the 
party  of  the  first  pait,  or  any  right  to  damages  herein  provided;  nor  shall  any  wpiver  of  any 
breach  of  this  contract  be  held  to  be  a  waiver  of  any  other  or  subsequent  breach.  Any 
remedy  provided  in  this  contract  shall  be  taken  and  construed  as  cumulative,  that  is,  in 
addition  to  each  and  every  other  remedy  herein  provided,  and  the  party  of  the  first  part 
shall  also  be  entitled  as  of  right  to  a  writ  of  injunctionr  against  any  breach  of  any  of  the  pro- 
visions of  this  contract. 

Art.  XXVIII.  No  person  or  corporation,  other  than  the  signer  of  this  contract  as  Con- 
tractor, now  has  any  interest  hereunder,  and  no  claim  shall  be  made  or  be  valid,  and  neither 
the  party  of  the  first  part,  nor  any  agent  thereof,  shall  be  liable  for,  or  be  held  to  pay  any 
money,  except  as  provided  in  Articles  XX,  XXII,  XXIII,  XXIV,  XXV  and  XXVI.  The 
acceptance  by  the  Contractor  of  the  last  payment  made  as  aforesaid  under  the  provisions 
of  Article  XXV,  shall  operate  as  and  shall  be  a  release  to  the  party  of  the  first  part  and 
every  agent  thereof,  from  all  claims  and  liability  to  the  Contractor  for  anything  don6  or 
furnished  for,  or  relating  to,  the  work,  or  for  any  act  or  neglect  of  the  party  of  the  first  part 
or  of  any  person  relating  to  or  affecting  the  work,  except  the  claim  against  the  party  of  the 
first  part  for  the  remainder,  if  any  there  be,  of  the  amounts  kept  or  retained  as  provided  in 
Articles  XXIII  and  XXVI. 

Art.  XXIX.  The  Contractor,  by  accepting  and  signing  this  contract,  hereby  expressly 
releases  and  discharges  the  individual  members  of  the  party  of  the  first  part  and  each  and 
every  employee  or  agent  thereof,  from  any  and  all  personal 'liability  of  every  name  and 
nature. 

Art.  XXX.  The  address  given  in  the  bid  or  proposal  upon  which  this  contract  is 
founded  is  hereby  designated  as  the  place  where  notices,  letters  and  other  communications  to 
the  Contractor  shall  be  certified,  mailed  or  delivered.  The  delivering  at  the  above  named 
place  or  depositing  in  a  post-paid  wrapper  directed  to  the  above  place,  in  any  postoflSce  box 
regularly  maintained  by  the  Postoffice  Department  of  any  notice,  letter  or  other  communica- 
tion to  the  Contractor,  shall  be  deemed  sufficient  service  thereof  upon  the  Contractor.  Such 
address  may  be  changed  at  any  time  by  an  instrument  in  writing,  executed  and  acknowledged 
by  the  Contractor  and  delivered  to  the  party  of  the  first  part.     Nothing  herein  contained 


462  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

shall  be  deemed  to  preclude  or  render  inoperative  the  aervioe  of  any  notice,  letter  or  other 
communication  upon  the  Contractor  personally. 

In  witness  whereof,  the  said 

party  of  the  first  part  have  hereunto  set  their  hands  and  seals  and  the  Contractor  has  also 
hereunto  set  his  hand  and  seal,  and  the  party  of  the  first  part  and  Contractor  have  executed 
this  agreement  in  duplicate,  one  part  to  remain  with  the  party  of  the  first  part  and  one  part 
to  be  delivered  to  the  Contractor  this day  of in  the  year  one  thou- 
sand nine  hundred  and  fourteen.                                       Town  of by 

(Seal) 

(Seal) 

BOARD  OF  SELECTMEN 

(Seal) 

(Seal) 

A  TYPICAL  FORM  OF  CONTRACTOR'S  BOND 

Know  all  men  by  these  presents, 

That  we as  principal:  and 

as     surety, 

are  held  and  firmly  bound  unto  the  Town  of in  the  sum  of  Five  Thousand 

Dollars  ($5000)  lawful  money  of  the  United  States  of  America,  to  be  paid  to  the  Town  of 

or  to  its  attorney,  successors  or  assigns,  for  which  payment,  well  and  truly  to  be 

made,  we  bind  ourselves,  our  successors  and  our  several  and  respective  heirs,  executors  and 
administrators,  jointly  and  severally,  firmly  by  these  presents. 

WHEREAS,  the  above  boupden 

has  made  a  contract  with  the  Town  of ,  bearing  date  the day  of 

1914,  to  furnish  material  and  labor  for,  and  in  good,  suflicient  and  work- 
manlike manner,  construct  sewers  in  the  Town  of ,  together  with  all  the  work 

incidental  thereto: 

NOW.  THEREFORE,  the  condition  of  this  obligation  is  such  that  if  the  said  principal 
shall  well  and  truly  keep  and  perform  all  the  agreements,  terms  and  conditions  of  said  con- 
tract on part  to  be  kept  and  performed,  and  shall  also  pay  for  all  labor  per- 
formed or  furnished,  and  for  all  materials  used,  in  the  carrying  out  of  said  contract,  then  this 
obligation  shall  be  void;  otherwise  it^hall  remain  in  full  force  and  virtue. 

In  witness  whereof,  the  said of 

has   hereto   set hand   and    seal   and    the    said 

of 

has  caused  these  presents  to  be  executed  by  its  duly  authorised  ofiicers  and  its  corporate  seal 

to  be  hereto  affixed  this day  of 1914. 

(Seal) 

CX)NTRACTOR. 
(Seal) 

Signed  and  sealed  in  the  presence  of 

TYPICAL  GENERAL  SPECIFICATIONS 

It  is  the  practice  of  the  authors  to  print  a  descriptive  head  over 
each  numbered  clause  in  both  the  general  and  technical  specifications 
prepared  in  their  offices.  Their  purpose  is  indicated  by  a  note  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Contract,  stating  that  such  headings  in  the  pamphlet 
containing  the  Information  for  Bidders,  Contract  and  Specifications 
are  intended  only  for  convenience  of  reference,  and  do  not  form  a  part 
of  either  the  Contract  or  Specifications.  These  headings  are  omitted 
in  the  following  specifications,  as  each  engineer  will  probably  prefer 
to  prepare  his  own,  but  they  should  always  be  inserted  on  account  of 


CONTRACTS,  SPECIFICATIONS  AND  DRAWINGS       463 

the  assistance  they  give  in  finding  rapidly  the  requirements  relating 
to  any  subject.  For  the  same  reason,  a  good  index  to  the  specifica- 
tions is  very  desirable.  The  authors  prefer  to  use  Roman  numerals 
to  designate  the  clauses  of  the  general  specifications  and  Arabic  num- 
erals for  the  technical  specifications.  The  clauses  of  a  general  nature 
which  are  given  here  must  be  considered  merely  as  illustrative  of 
the  class  of  information  appropriate  under  such  a  head,  and 'not  as 
models  to  be  copied. 


CONTRACT 

Art.  III.  The  Engineer  shall  make 
all  necessary  explanations  as  to  the 
meaning  and  intention  of  the  specifi- 
cations, shall  give  aU  orders  and  di- 


GENERAL  SPECIFICATIONS 

Order  of  Work 

Section  IV.  The  order  or  sequence  of 
execution  of  the  work  and  the  general 
conduct  of  the  work  shall  be  subject  to 
the  approval  and  direction  of  the  Engineer, 


VITRIFIED  PIPE 

Item? 

Description  of  Pipe 

Section  7. 1 .  The  vitrified  clay  pipe  used 
on  the  work  shall  be  made  of  satisfactory 
material,  thoroughly  vitrified,  well  and 
evenly  salt  glazed  both  inside  and  out- 
side, free  from  cracks,  warps,  fire  cracks. 


Excerpts  from  specifications  illustrating  typographical  style  and  method 
of  numbering  clauses. 

I.  The  work  herein  apocified  to  be  done  consista  of  furniflhing  materials  for  and  the 
construction  of  sewers  in  the  village  of ,   Town  of ,   Maine. 

II.  The  Contractor  shall  furnish  and  do  everything,  except  as  herein  otherwise  provided, 
necessary  to  complete  the  work  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  this  contract  and  with  the 
requirements  of  the  Engineer  thereunder.  He  is  to  make  the  requisite  excavations  for 
building  the  various  structures;  to  do  all  ditching,  pumping,  bailing  and  draining,  all  sheet- 
ing, shoring,  bracing,  cofTerdamming  and  supporting,  all  fencing,  lighting  and  watching; 
to  make  all  provisions  necessary  to  maintain  and  to  protect  existing  structures  of  whatever 
kind;  to  repair  all  damage  done  to  such  structures;  to  construct  all  brick,  concrete,  and 
stone  work;  to  set  in  place  ironwork;  to  refill  excavations  as  required;  to  dear  away  all 


464  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

rubbish  and  surplus  material,  and  to  furnish  all  materials,  all  tools,  implements  and  labor 
required,  and  to  do  all  other  work  necessary  for  the  completion  of  this  contract. 

III.  All  materials  furnished  and  work  done  by  the  Contractor  shall  be  subject  to  the 
inspection  of  the  Engineer,  and  defective  materials  shall  be  removed  from  the  site  of  the  work 
and  defective  work  repaired  or  replaced  by  order  of  the  Engineer.  Facilities  for  the  handling 
and  inspection  of  materials  and  work  shall  at  all  times  be  furnished  by  the  Contractor  and 
delasrs  in  handling  the  materials  involving  storage  charges  shall  be  at  the  expense  of  the  Con- 
tractor, who  shall  provide  suitable  and  adequate  storage  room  for  materials  during  the  prog- 
ress of  the  work  and  be  responsible  for  any  loss  of  or  damage  to  materials  furnished  by  him 
until  the  final  acceptance  of  the  completed  work. 

IV.  The  order  or  sequence  of  execution  of  the  work  and  the  general  conduct  of  the  work 
shall  be  subject  to  the  approval  and  direction  of  the  Engineer,  which  approval  or  direction 
shall,  however,  in  no  wise  affect  in  the  conduct  of  the  work  the  responsibility  of  the  Con- 
tractor. 

V.  All  necessary  lines,  levels  and  grades  shall  be  given  to  the  Contractor,  who  shall 
provide  at  his  own  expense  such  forms,  materials  and  assistance  as  may  be  required  by  the 
Engineer. 

VI.  All  work  shall  conform  during  its  progress  or  on  its  completion  truly  to  the  lines, 
levels  and  grades  given  by  the  Engineer  and  shall  bo  built  in  a  thoroughly  substantial  and 
workmanlike  manner,  in  accordance  with  the  plans  and  directions  given  from  time  to  time  by 
him,  subject  to  such  modifications  and  additions  as  shall  be  deemed  necessary  by  him  during 
its  execution,  and  in  no  case  shall  any  work  in  excess  of  the  plan  requirements  and  speci- 
fications be  paid  for  unless  ordered  in  writing  by  said  Engineer. 

All  work  done  without  lines,  levels  and  instructionshaving  been  given  therefor  by  the  Engi- 
neer, or  done  during  the  absence  of  an  assistant  or  inspector,  will  not  be  estimated  or  paid  for 
except  when  such  work  is  authorized  by  the  Engineer  in  writing.  Work  so  done  may  be 
ordered  removed  and  replaced  at  the  Contractor's  sole  cost  and  expense. 

VII.  The  pipe  grade  line,  or  pipe  water  line,  so  called,  is  assumed  herein  to  mean  the 
bottom  of  the  inside  of  the  pipe,  whether  laid  directly  upon  the  ground  or  otherwise  supported, 
and  measurements  of  the  depth  of  excavation  (excepting  rock  excavation)  shall  be  to  a 
depth  of  two-tenths  (0.2)  of  a  foot  below  this  grade  line  except  where  a  concrete  cradle  is 
constructed,  in  which  cose  it  shall  be  to  a  depth  of  five-tenths  (0.5)  of  a  foot  below  said 
grade  line.  In  the  case  of  rock  excavation  the  measurements  shall  be  to  a  depth  of  five-tenths 
(0.5)  of  a  foot  below  said  grade  line,  except  where  a  concrete  cradle  is  constructed,  in  which 
case  it  shall  be  to  a  depth  of  thirty-three  hundredths  (0.33)  of  a  foot  below  said  grade  line. 

VIII.  The  trench  lines  ;;^ferred  to  herein  are  the  traces  of  the  vertical  planes  between 
which  the  pipe  is  to  be  laid.  They  shall  be  assumed  to  be  three  (3)  feet  apart,  that  is,  a 
trench- width  of  three  (3)  feet  shall  be  assumed  whatever  the  actual  dimensions  may  be. 

IX.  The  Contractor  shall  not  (except  after  consent  from  the  proper  parties)  enter  or 
occupy  with  men,  tools  or  material,  any  land  outside  the  property  of  the  Town. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS 

Specifications  must  not  only  describe  accurately  and  cleariy  the 
classes  of  materials,  character  of  work  and  other  features  of  the  obliga- 
tions assumed  by  the  Contractor,  but  must  present  this  information 
in  such  a  way  that  it  explains  just  what  must  be  furnished  by  the 
Contractor  for  the  price  named  under  each  item  of  his  "bid  or  proposal." 
Some  engineers  prefer  to  include  all  excavation,  bracing,  bailing,  pipe 
and  specials,  pipe  laying  and  backfilling  under  a  single  item,  obtaining 
a  unit  price  per  foot  of  completed  sewer  for  each  size  of  pipe;  others 
prefer  to  buy  their  pipe  and  specials  under  a  separate  contract,  and  to 
pay  the  contractor  for  trench  work  in  one  item  and  pipe  laying  and  joint- 
ing in  another.  Consequently  the  actual  form  of  many  parts  of  speci- 
fications intended  to  cover  sewers  of  exactly  similar  character  may  vary 
widely  on  accoimt  of  this  difference  of  opinion  regarding  the  best  sub- 
division of  the  work  for  purposes  of  payment.  Again,  some  engineers 
prefer  to  give  a  contractor  a  much  wider  range  of  choice  in  the  methods 
of  construction  than  other  engineers  consider  advisable,  and  this  differ- 
ence of  opinion  is  strongly  shown  in  a  comparison  of  some  specifications 
for  the  same  class  of  structures  built  under  the  same  conditions. 

The  form  of  the  authors'  specifications  is  now  based  on  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  items  in  the  "bid  or  proposal."  In  the  case  of  the  contract 
cited  in  Chapter  XVI,  for  example,  the  items  were:  1.  Earth  excavation; 
2.  rock  excavation;  3.  concrete  masonry;  4.  brick  masonry,  and  so  on. 
The  specifications  were  arranged  with  the  general  clauses  relating  to 
the  location  and  nature  of  the  work,  the  inspection,  the  lines  and  grades 
and  such  matters,  at  the  beginning,  each  of  these  clauses  having  a  Roman 
number.  The  technical  clauses  came  next,  arranged  in  the  order  of 
the  items  in  the  bid.  Under  earth  excavation,  for  example,  there  were 
13  clauses,  each  of  which  was  designated  by  a  decimal  number.  The 
fact  that  a  clause  related  to  the  first  item  was  indicated  by  the  number 
1  preceding  the  decimal  point,  while  the  number  12  following  the 
decimal  point  indicated  that  the  clause  was  the  twelfth  relating  to 
earth  excavation.  This  arrangement  and  numbering  is  decidedly 
helpful  in  keeping  the  relations  of  the  bid  and  the  specifications  clearly 
in  view  at  all  times.  But  such  an  arrangement  is  not  necessarily  the 
most  convenient  for  a  general  study  of  the  technical  features  of  specifica- 
30  465 


466  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

tioDs,  and  in  what  follows  each  subject  has  accordingly  been  taken  up 
as  an  independent  article,  with  its  clauses  numbered  consecutively. 

The  following  general  requirements  for  sewers  are  based  primarily 
on  the  specifications  prepared  by  the  authors  in  collaboration  with  J.  B. 
F.  Breed,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Commissioners  of  Sewerage  at  Louis- 
ville, Ky.,  under  which  about  85  contracts  were  executed  and  about 
$3,300,000  spent,  without  any  successful  attack  being  made  on  them. 
As  some  of  the  contracts  were  taken  at  low  unit  prices,  it  is  reasonable 
to  assume  that  the  stipulations  were  scrutinized  minutely  by  numerous 
competent  critics  searching  for  every  point  of  attack  where  there  was 
any  prospect  of  success.  In  addition  to  these  Louisville  specifications, 
the  specifications  prepared  by  E.  J.  Fort,  Rudolph  Hering  and  A.  J. 
Provost,  Jr.,  which  were  printed  in  the  1912  "Proceedings"  of  the 
American  Society  of  Municipal  Improvements,  and  the  "Standard 
Specifications  for  Construction  of  Main  and  Branch  Sewers"  of  the 
Philadelphia  Bureau  of  Surveys  have  received  special  study,  and  the 
requirements  of  a  number  of  cities  regarding  certain  features  have  been 
obtained.  It  is  believed  that  the  following  techical  specifications  reflect 
as  well  as  practicable  the  present  state  of  the  art  of  American  sewerage 
practice. 

There  are  certain  omissions  which  will  be  evident  at  once  to  the  ex- 
perienced engineer.  .One  of  these  omissions  is  the  absence  of  any  cast- 
iron  pipe  specifications,  which  is  due  to  the  p)ossible  revision  of  the 
specifications  of  the  New  England  Water  Works  Association  and 
American  Water  Works  Association  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  them 
into  practically  complete  harmony.  Neither  are  there  any  specifica- 
tions for  pavements  laid  over  sewer  trenches  after  the  latter  are  filled, 
because  such  specifications  have  to  be  drawn  in  most  cases  to  meet  the 
local  conditions  of  every  street.  The  most  important  thing  to  specify 
is  the  thorough  consolidation  and  rolling  of  the  subgrade,  so  as  to 
prevent  any  settlement  of  the  backfilling  after  the  pavement  has  been 
relaid.  As  the  torn-up  pavements  are  usually  somewhat  worn,  it 
will  be  impracticable  in  most  cases  to  replace  them  with  a  strip  of  pave- 
ment of  the  original  height  of  the  old  work,  as  that  would  leave  a  ridge 
running  along  the  roadway.  The  authors'  experience  leads  them  to 
believe  that  usually  the  safest  way  to  avoid  controversy  is  to  require  the 
contractor  to  "reconstruct"  torn-up  curbing  and  roadways  in  accord- 
ance with  the  drawings  and  the  lines  and  grades  given  by  the  Engineer. 
To  emphasize  further  that  reconstruction  is  contemplated,  the  authors 
require  the  contractor  to  replace  or  replenish  with  new  materials  of 
similar  kind  and  of  a  quahty  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer  all  pa\ang 
materials  and  curbing  lost  or  damaged  in  handling  or  insufficient  in 
quantity  to  complete  the  reconstruction  of  any  block  between  adjacent 
streets.    In  case  a  new  pavement  is  desired,  the  local  specifications 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  467 

should  be  uaed  if  the  Street  Department  so  desires;  otherwise  the  stand- 
ard specifications  of  the  American  Society  of  Municipal  Inprovements 
may  be  studied  with  profit. 

The  authors  repeat  that  in  some  respects  the  following  specifications 
are  not  those  used  in  their  own  practice,  but  are  believed  to  be  repre- 
sentative of  the  general  opinion  of  sewerage  specialists  in  1914,  so  far 
as  it  can  be  learned. 

ART.  I.— EXCAVATION 

1.  No  trench  shall  be  opened  more  than  200  ft.  in  advance  of  the  completed  sewer,  with" 
out  the  written  permission  of  the  Engineer.  Every  trench  in  rock  must  be  fully  opened  at 
least  30  ft.  in  advance  of  any  place  where  masonry  or  pipe  is  being  laid.  In  bad  ground, 
sueh  as  running  sand,  the  work  must  be  prosecuted  vigorously  night  and  day  without 
interruption,  when  ordered  by  the  Engineer.  Trenches  for  house  drains  shall  not  be 
opened  on  both  sides  of  the  street  at  the  same  time  unless  permission  has  been  previously 
obtained  to  close  the  street.  Unless  otherwise  directed,  each  trench  for  street  inlet  or  catch- 
basin  connections  and  house  drains  shall  be  excavated  for  its  entire  length  within  the  street 
lines  before  any  pipe  are  laid  in  it. 

2.  The  "  lines  of  excavation  "  of  trenches  in  earth  and  rock  for  pipe  sewers,  connections  with 
street  inlets  and  catch-basins,  and  house  drains,  not  over  18  in.  in  diameter,  shall  be  such  as  to 
give  a  clearance  of  at  least  6  in.  on  each  side  of  the  barrel  of  the  pipe,  and  a  clearance  of  at 
least  8  in.  on  each  side  of  the  barrel  of  the  pipe  when  the  latter  has  an  inside  diameter  exceed- 
ing 18  in.  All  trenches  shall  have  a  clear  width  between  "lines  of  excavation"  equal  to  the 
maximum  widths  of  the  cradles  of  the  sewers  laid  in  them  when  such  cradles  are  wider  than 
the  widths  stated  in  the  last  preceding  sentence.  The  "lines  of  excavation"  of  trenches  in 
earth  and  rock  for  sewers  other  than  pipe  sewers  shall  be  separated  by  a  distance  equal  to  the 
greatest  external  width  of  the  structures  to  be  built  in  them,  including  the  necessary  forms. 

3.  Trenches  shall  be  excavated  to  the  depths  required  for  the  foundations  of  the  sewers 
and  appurtenances  shown  on  the  drawings,  and,  where  conditions  make  it  necessary,  to  such 
additional  depths  as  may  be  directed  by  the  Engineer.  In  no  case  shall  earth  be  plowed, 
scraped  or  dug  by  machinery  nearer  than  6  in.  to  the  finished  subgrade;  the  last  6  in.  shaU 
be  removed  with  pick  and  shovel  just  before  placing  the  masonry. 

4.  Excavations  directed  to  be  made  below  the  masonry,  pipe  or  underdrain  shall  be 
refilled  with  gravel,  broken  stone  or  other  approved  material,  spread  in  layers  not  more  than 
4  in.  thick,  and  thoroughly  moistened  and  tamped.  The  measurement  of  this  refilling  shall 
be  in  place  in  the  work,  and  the  price  agreed  upon  under  Item  .  .  .  shall  include  the  cost  of 
furnishing,  placing  and  consolidating  the  material  and  all  other  work  incidental  to  it. 

5.  The  minimum  dimensions  of  the  excavation  in  earth  for  a  manhole,  catch-basin, 
receiving  basin,  riser,  street  inlet  or  other  special  structure  shall  be  those  of  a  prism  with 
vertical  sides  and  a  horizontal  section  equal  to  the  smallest  section  which  will  include  such 
special  structure  and  its  foundations  and,  in  the  case  of  concrete  structures,  space  not  exceed- 
ing 6  in.  in  width  for  the  proper  placing  and  removal  of  the  necessary  forms. 

6.  Rock,  wherever  used  as  the  name  of  an  excavated  material,  shall  mean  boulders 
exceeding  1/2  cu.  yd.  in  volume  or  solid  ledge  rock  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Engineer, 
requires  for  its  removal  drilling  and  blasting,  or  wedging,  or  sledging  or  barring.  No  soft 
or  disintegrated  rock  which  can  be  removed  with  a  pick,  no  loose,  shaken  or  previously 
blasted  rock,  no  broken  stone  in  rock  fillings  or  elsewhere,  and  no  rock  which  may  fall  into  the 
trench  from  outside  the  limits  of  excavation  shown  on  the  drawings  will  be  measured  or 
allowed. 

7.  In  rock  the  trench  shall  be  carried  6  in.  below  the  invert  grade  of  a  pipe  sewer  when  no 
underdrain  is  required;  if  an  underdrain  is  required  the  trench  shall  be  carried  to  the  depth 
and  width  required  by  the  underdrain  and  gravel  or  broken  stone  refilling,  as  shown  in  the 
drawings.  In  the  case  of  masonry  sowers  the  rock  shall  be  excavated  to  the  depths  required 
for  the  foundations  and  to  a  width  6  in.  greater  on  each  side  than  that  of  the  masonry.  The 
minimum  dimensions  of  the  excavation  in  rock  for  a  manhole,  catch-basin,  flush-tank  or 
other  special  structure  shall  be  those  of  a  prism  with  vertical  sides  and  a  horisontal  section 


468  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

6  in.  wider  on  each  side  than  the  smallest  rectangle  which  will  enclose  such  structure  and 
its  foundation. 

8.  Rock  shall  be  stripped  in  sections  which,  unless  otherwise  permitted,  shall  be  not  less 
than  50  ft.  in  length,  and  the  Engineer  shall  then  be  notified  in  order  that  he  may  measure  it. 
Rock  blasted  before  such  measurement  is  made  will  not  be  paid  for. 

9.  Wherever  a  branch  for  a  proposed  sewer  or  extension  of  a  sewer  is  built  in  rock,  the 
required  trench  shall  be  excavated  for  a  distance  of  not  leas  than  5  ft.  beyond  the  end  of  such 
branch,  in  the  direction  of  the  proposed  sewer  or  extension. 

10.  All  existing  gas  pipes,  water  pipes,  steam  pipes,  electric  conduits,  sewers,  drains,  fire 
dsterns  and  hydrants,  railway  tracks  and  other  structures  which  do  not,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  Engineer,  require  to  be  changed  in  location,  shall  be  carefully  supported  and  protected 
from  injury  by  the  Contractor,  and  in  case  of  injury  they  shall  be  restored  by  him,  without 
additional  compensation,  to  as  good  condition  as  that  in  which  they  are  found.  Where 
pipes,  conduits  or  sewers  are  removed  from  the  trench,  leaving  dead  ends  in  the  ground,  such 
ends  shall  be  carefully  plugged  or  bulkheaded  with  brick  and  mortar  by  the  Contractor, 
without  additional  compensation. 

11.  Whenever  it  becomes  necessary,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Engineer,  to  change  the  loca- 
tion of  any  sewer,  drain  or  other  structure,  not  otherwise  provided  for  in  these  specifications, 
the  Contractor  shall  do  the  whole  of  the  work  of  making  such  changes,  or  such  i>ortions  of  it 
as  the  Engineer  may  direct,  and  the  work  will  be  paid  for  as  ex^ra  work. 

12.  The  Contractor  shall  provide  without  additional  compensation  suitable  temporary 
channels  for  the  water  that  may  flow  along  or  across  the  site  of  the  work. 

13.  If  the  bottom  of  any  excavation  is  taken  out  beyond  the  limits  shown  on  the  plans  or 
prescribed  by  the  Engineer,  it  shall  be  refilled  at  the  Contractor's  expense  with  concrete  or 
other  acceptable  material  in  such  manner  as  the  Engineer  may  direct. 

14.  It  is  the  intention  to  leave  all  paved  surfaces  over  or  adjacent  to  the  sewer  at  the  close 
of  the  work  in  good  condition,  and  to  that  end  the  Contractor  will  be  required  to  remove 
carefully  and  conserve  free  from  any  admixture  of  other  materials  all  surfacing  and  paving 
materials  and  curbing  disturbed,  and  to  replace  the  same  as  directed  in  Article  ....  [This 
article  should  contain  the  local  specifications,  with  any  needed  changes,  for  the  classes  of 
pavements  used  on  the  streets  in  which  cuts  are  made;  these  requirements  are  so  varied  that 
even  a  summary  of  them  would  be  out  of  place  here.]  When  the  removed  paving  materials 
or  curbing  are  lost,  damaged  or  insufficient  in  quantity  to  complete  the  reconstruction  of  the 
pavement,  they  shall  be  replaced  or  supplemented  with  new  materials  of  similar  kind  and  of 
a  quality  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer. 

15.  Unless  permission  is  given  to  the  contrary,  the  material  excavated  from  the  trench 
and  the  materials  of  construction  shall  be  so  deposited  and  the  work  shall  be  so  conducted  as 
to  leave  open  and  free  for  pedestrian  traffic  all  crosswalks,  a  space  on  each  sidewalk  not  less 
than  one-third  of  the  width  of  the  sidewalk  and  not  less  than  3  ft.  in  width,  and  for  vehicular 
traffic  a  roadway  not  less  than  8  ft.  in  width.  All  street  hydrants,  water  gates,  fire  alarm 
boxes  and  letter,  boxes  shall  be  kept  accessil^le  for  use.  Not  more  than  .  .  .  lin.  ft.  of  side- 
walk shall  be  used  at  any  thne  for  storage  of  materials  from  any  one  trench.  During  the 
progress  of  the  work  the  Contractor  shall  maintain  crosswalks,  sidewalks,  and  roadways  in 
satisfactory  condition,  and  the  work  shall  at  all  times  be  so  conducted  as  to  cause  a  minimum 
of  inconvenience  to  public  travel,  and  to  permit  safe  and  convenient  access  to  private  and 
public  property  along  the  Line  of  the  work. 

16.  Lawns  on  which  excavated  material  is  placed  or  walls  which  support  it  must  bo 
protected  by  planks  or  canvas. 

1 7.  If  all  excavated  material  cannot  be  stored  on  the  street  in  such  a  manner  as  to  main- 
tain the  traffic  conditions  specified  in  clause  15  of  this  article,  the  surplus  shall  be  removed 
from  the  work  and  stored.  After  the  construction  of  the  sewer,  so  much  of  this  material  as 
is  of  satisfactory  quality  and  necessary  for  the  purpose  shall  be  brought  back  and  used  for 
backfilling  the  trench. 

18.  When  directed,  in  built-up  districts  and  in  streets  where  traffic  conditions  render  it 
necessary,  the  material  excavated  from  the  first  ...  ft.  of  trenches  shall  be  removed  by  the 
Contractor  as  soon  as  excavated,  and  the  material  subsequently  excavated,  if  suitable  for  the 
purpose,  shall  be  used  to  backfill  the  trenches  in  which  the  sewers  have  been  built,  and 
neither  the  excavated  material  nor  materials  of  construction  shall  be  stored  on  the  roadways 
or  sidewalks. 

19.  When  required  by  the  Engineer,  suitable  fences  shall  be  placed  along  the  mdea  and 
ends  of  the  trenches  to  keep  the  streets  safe  for  traffic. 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  469 

20.  Tunneling  will  not  be  allowed  without  the  approval  of  the  Engineer,  and  the  method 
of  tunneling  and  the  location  of  all  shaf  ts*  portals  and  mechanical  plant  uaed  in  the  tunneling 
operations  shall  also  be  subject  to  his  approval.  All  tunnels  shall  be  equipped  with  a  suffi- 
cient number  of  lights  to  insure  proper  work  and  inspection.  A  supply  of  fresh  air  sufficient 
for  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  workmen  and  engineers  shall  be  provided  at  all  times  through- 
out the  length  of  any  tunnel  and  especially  at  the  headings.  Additional  lights  and  ventila- 
tion shall  be  supplied  whenever  directed  by  the  Engineer.  Headings  are  to  be  driven  in  both 
directions  from  the  shafts,  unless  otherwise  directed  by  the  Engineer. 

21.  When  earth  excavation  is  paid  for  by  the  linear  foot,  the  length  to  be  paid  for,  whether 
in  trench  or  tunnel  (except  where  tunnel  excavation  is  paid  for  under  a  special  item)  shall  be 
the  actual  length  in  linear  feet  of  the  sewer  constructed  between  the  stations  defining  the 
limits  of  the  portions  included  in  the  item  for  such  excavation. 

22.  When  earth  excavation  is  paid  for  by  the  cubic  yard,  the  quantity  to  be  paid  for  shall 
be  the  number  of  cubic  yards  of  material,  exclusive  of  that  paid  for  as  rock  excavation  under 
Item  .  .  . ,  that  would  have  been  removed  if  the  excavation  were  everywhere  in  trench  and 
exactly  to  the  depth  of  the  bottom  of  the  masonry,  or  of  the  platform  under  the  masonry,  or 
of  the  barrel  of  the  sewer  pipe,  and  were  carried  to  the  "lines  of  excavation"  shown  on  the 
drawings  and  defined  in  Clause  2  of  this  Article. 

23.  When  so  designated,  the  excavation  for  special  structures  shall  be  paid  for  by  the 
lump  sum. 

24.  The  prices  agreed  upon  for  earth  and  rock  excavation  and  refill  under  Items  .  .  .  and 
.  .  .  shall  include  the  cost  of  all  excavation  and  refilling,  the  removal  of  and  delay  or  damage 
occasioned  by  any  timber  or  masonry  structures  or  other  obstacles  (whether  shown  on  the 
drawings  or  not),  the  disposal  of  excavated  material  by  removal  or  by  refilling  trenches  (in- 
cluding rolling,  ramming  and  watering  this  material  where  required),  refilling  in  tunnel  with 
concrete,  sand  or  gravel;  sheeting  and  bracing  in  open  cut  and  in  tunnel,  timbering  left  in 
place  in  tunnel,  bridging  and  fencing  and  removal  of  same,  coffer  damming,  diking,  pumping 
and  bailing  and  other  methods  of  disposing  of  water  and  sewage  in  or  alongside  the  trench, 
protection  and  restoration  of  buildings,  fences,  existing  conduits  and  pipes  with  their  appur- 
tenances, reconstruction  of  street  pavements,  sidewalks  and  grass  plots,  provision  for  the 
accommodation  and  protection  of  travel,  and  all  other  work  incidental  to  the  excavation, 
except  that  earth  excavation  and  gravel  refilling  in  trench  below  masonry,  in  accordance  with 
Clause  4  of  this  Article,  shall  be  included  in  and  paid  for  under  Items  .    .   .  and  .... 

25.  The  quantity  of  rock  excavation  to  be  paid  for  under  Item  .  .  . ,  shall  be  the  number  of 
cubic  yards  of  ledge  rock  or  boulders,  in  place  as  if  measured  before  excavation,  that  would 
have  been  removed  if  the  excavation  had  been  made  everywhere  exactly  to  the  depth  of  the 
bottom  of  the  concrete  masonry  and  to  the  limits  stated  in  Clause  7  of  this  Article.  The 
quantity  of  excavation  in  tunnel  to  be  paid  for  under  Items  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  shall  be  the  earth  or 
rock  lying  within  the  "lines  of  excavation"  indicated  on  the  drawings.  Wherever  deemed 
necessary  by  the  Engineer  and  ordered  in  writing,  additional  rock  excavation  shall  be  i)er- 
f ormed  and  will  be  measured  to  the  lines  stipulated  by  the  Engineer  and  paid  for  at  the  prioe 
stated  in  Item  .... 

ART.  2.— SHORING 

1.  The  Contractor  shall  furnish,  put  in  place  and  maintain  such  sheeting,  bracing,  etc., 
as  may  be  required  to  support  the  sides  and  roof  of  the  excavation  and  to  prevent  any  move- 
ment which  can  in  any  way  injure  the  masonry,  diminish  the  necessary  width  of  the  exca- 
vation, or  otherwise  injure  or  delay  the  work  or  endanger  adjacent  pavements,  buildings  or 
other  structures.  If  the  Engineer  is  of  tne  opinion  that  at  any  points,  sufficient  or  proper 
supports  have  not  been  provided,  he  may  order  additional  supports  put  in  at  the  expense 
of  the  Contractor,  and  the  compliance  with  such  orders  shall  not  release  the  Contractor  from 
his  resfKinsibility  for  the  sufficiency  of  such  supports.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  voids 
outside  of  the  sheeting,  but  if  voids  are  formed  they  shall  be  immediately  filled  and  rammed 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Engineer. 

2.  The  Contractor  shall  leave  in  place  to  be  imbedded  in  the  backfill  of  the  trench  all 
sheeting,  bracing,  etc.,  not  so  shown  on  the  plans  which  the  Engineer  may  direct  in  writing 
to  be  left  in  place.  The  Engineer  may  direct  that  timber  used  for  sheeting  and  bracing  in 
trench  be  cut  off  at  any  specified  elevation,  in  which  case  the  Contractor  shall  be  paid  for  an 
amount  equivalent  to  what  would  have  been  left  in  the  ground  had  the  sheetiug  been  cut  off 
»t  an  elevation  2  ft.  higher,  provided  that  this  higher  elevation  does  not  carry  into  the  neit 


470  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

higher  Bet  of  sheeting,  in  which  latter  caae  payment  will  be  made  only  for  the  sheeting  below 
the  top  of  the  set  in  which  the  cutting  is  made. 

3.  For  the  purpose  of  preventing  injury  to  persons,  corporations  or  property,  whether 
public  or  private,  the  liability  for  damages  on  account  of  which  is  to  be  assumed  entirely  and 
solely  by  the  Contractor  under  this  contract,  he  may  also  leave  in  place  to  be  imbedded  in  the 
backfill  of  the  trench  any  and  all  sheeting,  bracing,  etc.,  in  addition  to  that  shown  on  the 
drawings  or  ordered  in  writing  by  the  Engineer  to  be  left  in  place,  except  that  no  sheeting 
and  braping  which  is  within  4  ft.  of  the  surface  of  the  street  may  be  left  in  place  in  the  trench 
without  written  permission  from  the  Engineer. 

4.  All  sheeting  and  bracing  which  may  not  be  left  in  place  under  the  foregoing  provisions 
of  this  agreement  shall  be  removed  in  such  manner  as  not  to  endanger  the  constructed  sewer 
or  other  structures,  utilities  or  property,  whether  public  or  private.  All  voids  left  or  caused 
by  the  withdrawal  of  sheeting  shall  be  immediately  refilled  with  sand,  by  ramming  with  tools 
specially  adapted  to  that  purpose,  by  watering  or  otherwise  as  may  be  directed. 

5.  All  sheeting  and  bracing  used  in  tunnel  shall  be  left  in  place  except  when  removed  by 
permission  of  the  Engineer. 

6.  The  right  of  the  Engineer  to  order  sheeting  and  bracing  left  in  place  shall  not  be  con- 
strued as  creating  any  obligation  on  his  part  to  issue  such  orders,  and  his  failure  to  exercise 
his  right  to  do  so  shall  not  relieve  the  Contractor  from  liability  for  damages  to  persons  or 
property  occurring  from  or  upon  the  work  of  constructing  the  sower  occasioned  by  negligence 
or  otherwise,  growing  out  of  a  failure  on  the  part  of  the  Contractor  to  leave  in  place  in 
the  trench  suflScient  sheeting  and  bracing  to  prevent  any  caving  or  moving  of  the  ground 
adjacent  to  the  banks  of  the  trench. 

7.  For  the  sheeting  and  bracing  which  is  shown  upon  the  drawings  to  bo  left  in  place 
either  in  tunnel  or  in  trench,  the  Contractor  shall  receive  no  payment,  it  being  understood 
and  agreed  that  his  compensation  therefor  is  included  in  the  price  to  be  paid  for  excavation 
and  refill. 

For  all  -timber  used  for  sheeting,  bracing  and  coffer  damming  actually  left  in  the  trench, 
which  is  not  shown  upon  the  plans  to  be  left  in  place,  but  which  shall  be  ordered  by  the  Engi- 
neer in  writing  to  be  left  in  place  to  be  imbedded  in  the  backfill  at  any  time  during  the  pro- 
gress of  the  work,  the  Contractor  shall  be  paid  the  sum  of  $  .  .  .  per  thousand  feet  B.M.; 
this  does  not  include  any  timber  in  tunnel  under  Item  .    .    . 

For  all  timber  used  for  sheeting,  bracing,  etc.,  which  is  not  shown  upon  the  drawings  to  be 
left  in  place  and  which  shall  not  be  ordered  by  the  Engineer  in  writing  to  be  left  in  place  dur- 
ing the  progress  of  the  work,  but  which  shall  be  actually  left  in  the  trench  for  the  conven- 
ience or  to  subserve  the  interests  of  the  Contractor,  the  Contractor  shall  receive  no  payment, 
it  being  understood  and  agreed  that  his  compensation  therefor  is  included  in  the  price  to  be 
paid  for  excavation  and  refill. 

For  none  of  the  sheeting,  bracing,  etc,,  which  shall  be  removed  from  the  trench  nor  for  the 
cost  of  removing  the  same  shall  any  payment  be  made,  it  being  understood  and  agreed  that 
the  compensation  therefor  is  included  in  the  price  to  be  paid  for  excavation  and  refill. 

ART.  3.— BLASTING 

1.  All  blasting  operations  shall  bo  conducted  in  strict  accordance  with  existing  ordinances 
and  regulations  relative  to  rock  blasting  and  the  storage  and  use  of  explosives.  Any  rock 
excavation  within  5  ft.  of  a  water  or  gas  main  less  than  36  in.  in  diameter  and  within  10  ft. 
of  a  water  or  gas  main  36  in.  or  more  in  diameter  shall  be  done  with  very  light  charges  of 
explosive,  and  the  utmost  care  shall  be  used  to  avoid  disturbing  the  main. 

2.  All  exposed  sewers  and  special  structures  shall  be  carefully  protected  from  the  effects 
of  blasts,  and  any  damage  done  to  them  by  blasting  shall  be  promptly  repaired  by  the  Con- 
tractor at  his  own  expense.  Sufficient  warning  shall  be  given  to  all  persons  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  work  before  blasting.  The  site  of  the  blast  shall  be  covered  with  heavy  timbers,  blast- 
ing mats  or  other  devices  to  prevent  damage  by  flying  rock.  The  time  of  blasting  and 
the  number  and  size  of  charges  must  be  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer.  The  blasting  shall 
be  done  only  by  experienced  men. 

3.  Where  there  arc  no  local  ordinances  governing  blasting  and  the  storage  of  explosives, 
all  blasting  supplies  must  be  stored  in  a  manner  approved  by  the  Engineer,  and  a  watchman 
must  be  stationed  at  all  times  at  the  places  of  storage.  In  no  case  shall  caps  or  other  ex- 
ploders be  kept  at  the  place  where  dynamite  or  other  explosive  is  stored. 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  471 

ART.  4.— PUMPING,  BAILING  AND  DRAINING 

1.  The  Ccntractor  shall  remove  by  pumping,  bailing  or  otherwiae  any  water  which  may 
accumulate  or  be  found  in  the  trenches  and  other  excavations  made  under  this  contract,  and 
shall  form  all  dams,  flumes  or  other  works  necessary  to  keep  them  entirely  clear  of  water 
while  the  sewers  and  their  foundations,  if  any,  are  being  constructed.  Newly  laid  masonry 
shall  be  protected  from  injury,  resulting  from  the  un watering  work  and  plant,  by  the  use  of 
canvas,  tar  paper  or  by  such  other  sufficient  methods,  as  may  be  approved.  The  Contractor 
shall  at  all  times  have  upon  the  works  sufficient  pumping  machinery  ready  for  immediate  use. 

2.  When  directed  by  the  Engineer,  the  Contractor  shall  lay  a  terra-cotta  pipe  with  oi)en 
joints,  bedded  in  small  gravel  or  stone  crushed  fine,  in  the  trench  below  the  foundation  of  the 
sewer  for  sub-soil  drainage.  Unless  otherwise  ordered,  this  pipe  shall  be  5  in.  in  diameter; 
the  laying  of  these  underdrains  shall  be  paid  for  at  the  prices  named  in  Item  .    .    . 

3.  Water  from  the  trenches  and  excavations  shall  be  disposed  of  in  such  a  manner  as  will 
not  cause  injury  to  the  public  health  nor  to  public  or  private  property,  nor  to  the  work  com- 
pleted or  in  progress,  nor  to  the  surface  of  the  streets,  nor  cause  any  interference  with  the  use 
of  the  same  by  the  public. 

4.  Whenever  so  directed  by  the  Engineer,  the  Contractor  shall  excavate  a  trench  from 
either  or  both  ends  of  the  sewer  to  a  natural  water-course,  whether  the  excavation  be  in  earth 
or  rock.  The  work  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  grades  and  dimensions  furnished  by  the 
Engineer,  and  the  Contractor  shall  be  paid  therefor  at  the  prices  stated  in  Items  .  .  . 
and  .    . 

ART.  5.— BACKFILLING 

1.  Unless  otherwise  directed,  all  trenches  and  excavations  shall  be  l>ackfilled  as  soon  as 
the  cement  in  the  structures  placed  therein  has  acquired  a  suitable  degree  of  hardness,  and 
the  work  shall  be  prosecuted  expeditiously  after  it  has  been  commenced. 

2.  For  a  depth  of  at  least  2  ft.  over  the  top  of  sewers,  basin  connections,  house  connec- 
tions and  other  drains,  the  material  used  for  backfilling  trenches  shall  be  clean  earth,  sand  or 
rock  dust.  In  the  case  of  pipe  sewers,  the  space  between  the  pipe  and  the  bottom  and  sides 
of  the  trench  shall  be  packed  full  by  hand  and  thoroughly  tamped  with  a  shovel  or  light  tam- 
per, as  fast  as  placed,  up  to  the  level  of  the  top  of  the  pipe.  The  filling  shall  be  carried  up 
evenly  on  both  sides.  The  pipe  shall  then  be  covered  by  hand  to  a  depth  of  at  least  2  ft. 
above  its  top,  and  at  least  one  man  engaged  in  tamping  shall  be  provided  for  each  man  shov- 
eling filling  into  the  trench.  The  material  must  be  deposited  carefully  in  the  trench  to 
avoid  injuring  the  sewer,  and  in  case  it  is  placed  in  layers  these  must  not  exceed  6  in.  in 
thickness  and  each  must  bo  carefully  and  solidly  tamped  with  appropriate  tools  in  such  a 
manner  aa  to  avoid  injuring  or  disturbing  the  completed  sewer.  In  the  case  of  masonry 
sewers  the  backfilling  below  an  elevation  2  ft.  above  the  top  of  the  sewer  shall  be  deposited 
in  layers  not  over  6  in.  thick,  each  layer  being  levele<l^  wet  if  required,  and  thoroughly 
tamped  before  the  next  is  placed,  care  being  taken  not  to  disturb  or  injure  the  sewer. 

3.  The  remainder  of  the  trench,  above  an  elevation  2  ft.  higher  than  the  crown  of  the 
sewer,  shall  be  backfilled  with  approved  material  free  from  organic  matter,  no  layer  to  be 
more  than  1  ft.  thick  and  each  layer  to  be  thoroughly  tamped  with  rammers  weighing  not  less 
than  20  lb.  before  another  is  deposited.  Where  the  trench  is  not  in  a  paved  street,  at  least 
one  man  tamping  shall  be  provided  for  every  two  men  shoveling.  Where  the  trench  is  in  a 
macadamised  or  paved  street,  the  material  shall  be  spread  in  layers  not  over  6  in.  thick,  and 
thoroughly  rammed,  there  being  provided  one  man  ramming  for  each  man  shoveling.  Un- 
less otherwise  shown  on  the  drawings,  trenches  shall  be  backfilled  to  the  height  of  the  surface 
of  the  ground  as  it  existed  at  the  commencement  of  the  work.  Should  there  be  a  deficiency 
of  proper  material  for  the  purpose,  the  contractor  shall  furnish  and  place  such  additional 
material  as  may  be  required. 

4.  No  heavy  rock  shall  be  dropped  into  the  trench  until  there  b  at  least  3  ft.  of  fill  over 
the  top  of  the  sewer,  and  in  depositing  rock  in  the  sewer,  care  must  be  taken  that  the  rock 
does  not  injure  the  structure.  All  spaces  between  pieces  of  rock  shall  be  filled  with  earth  to 
insure  there  being  no  voids. 

6.  Where  the  backfilling  ran  be  compacted  in  a  suitable  manner  by  flooding  or  puddling 
with  water,  the  Contractor  will  be  permitted  to  do  so,  but  he  shall  furnish  the  water  at  his 
own  expense. 


472  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

6.  When  aheeting  is  drawn,  all  cavities  remaining  in  or  adjoining  the  trenoh  shall  be 
solidly  filled.  When  sheeting  is  left  in  place,  all  cavities  behind  such  sheeting  shall  be  solidly 
filled. 

7.  Backfilling  within  2  ft.  of  manholes,  catch-basins,  flush-tanks  and  other  special  struo- 
tures  shall  be  of  the  same  quality  as  that  specified  in  Clause  2  of  this  section.  It  shall  bo 
uniformly  deposited  on  all  sides  and,  unless  otherwise  permitted,  solidly  tamped  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  avoid  injuring  the  structures  or  producing  unequal  pressures  on  them. 

8.  Where  the  crown  of  the  sewer  comes  close  to  the  surface  of  the  ground  or  extends 
above  it,  it  shall  be  covered  by  an  embankment  at  least  3  ft.  thick  over  the  top  and  sides  of 
the  sewer,  with  side  slopes  of  at  least  1  on  1- 1/2  to  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Where  such  slopes 
would  extend  into  or  obstruct  a  natural  water-course,  street  or  private  property,  the  Con- 
tractor shall  retain  the  slopes  by  rubble  masonry  walls,  and  when  ordered  by  the  Engineer 
the  sewer  shall  be  covered  to  a  depth  of  G  in.  with  concrete  and  plastered  with  Portland  ce- 
ment mortar.  All  manholes  are  to  be  protected,  if  necessary,  by  an  embankment  at  least 
3  ft.  thick  around  the  shaft  to  an  elevation  at  least  3  ft.  above  the  top  of  the  sewer. 

ART.  6.— PILING 

1.  Piles  to  carry  a  platform  or  cradle  shall  be  driven  in  all  soft  or  marshy  soil  where  directed 
by  the  Engineer  or  shown  on  the  drawings.  They  are  to  be  driven  to  refusal,  or  as  may 
be  otherwise  directed,  with  a  hammer  weighing  at  least  2000  lb.,  subject  to  the  approval  of 
the  Engineer.  Refusal  in  general  will  be  indicated  by  a  penetration  not  exceeding  1  in.e  pr 
blow  under  the  last  six  blows  of  a  2000-lb.  hammer  falling  15  ft.  If  steam-hammer  pile- 
drivers  are  used,  the  piles  shall  be  driven  so  that  their  bearing  power  shall  be  not  less  than 
that  of  piles  driven  as  before  specified.  A  water  jet  may  be  used  in  pile  driving,  if  authorised 
by  the  Engineer  in  writing.  The  tops  are  to  be  sawed  off  triily  at  the  required  elevation. 
Where  it  is  necessary  to  cut  off  the  heads  of  the  piles  below  water  no  extra  compensation  shall 
be  made  for  such  cutting.  The  spaces  around  the  piles  and  caps  up  to  the  under  side  of  the 
planks  of  the  platform  shall  be  filled  with  good  earth  thoroughly  rammed  or  puddled,  unless 
otherwise  directed.  Pile  heads  imbedded  in  concrete  shall  have  the  bark  removed  from  the 
surface  of  contact. 

2.  All  piles  shall  be  straight,  sound  yellow  pine  or ,  not  less  than  6  in.  in  diameter 

at  the  small  ends  and  not  less  than  the  diameters  shown  in  the  accompanying  Table  of  Mini- 
mum Cut-off  Diameters,  where  cut  off,  or  of  other  dimensions  shown  on  the  drawings, 
hooped  and  shod  if  required.  All  dimensions  are  to  be  measured  exclusive  of  the  bark. 
The  point  of  each  pile  shall  be  trimmed  to  a  4-in.  square  end  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the 
pile,  unless  otherwise  directed. 

Table  of  Minimum  Cut-off  Diameters  for  Piles  of  Different  Lengths 

BELOW  Cut-off 


Length,  feet 

»20 

20-25 

25-36 

36-45 

«46 

Diameter,  inches 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

3.  Piles  that  do  not  bring  up  satisfactorily,  or  are  too  short,  or  are  out  cf  line  must  b« 
replaced  by  others  of  length  and  alignment  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer.  Piles  badly  split 
in  driving  shall  either  be  replaced  with  others  or  repaired  with  wrought  iron  rings  or  screw 
bolts,  as  may  be  directed.  When  the  Engineer  considers  that  a  pile  head  has  become  so 
broomed  as  to  be  unfit  for  further  driving,  the  broomed  portion  shall  be  sawed  or  adsed  off 
before  the  driving  is  continued.  The  heads  of  all  piles  must  be  protected  against  damage  by 
the  blows  of  the  hammer,  by  wrought  iron  rings.  Piles  shall  be  driven  without  the  use 
of  a  follower  unless  specially  permitted. 

4.  Where  shown  on  the  drawings,  brace,  batter,  or  spur  piles  shall  be  driven  at  the  inclina- 
tions shown  or  directed,  and  the  tops  shall  be  framed,  bolted  or  strapped  to  adjoining  pile^  or 
to  each  other,  as  shown  on  the  drawings. 

5.  The  amount  of  piles  to  be  paid  for  will  be  the  total  length  below  the  cutoff  of  all  pUes 
remaining  in  the  works  in  accordance  with  the  drawings  or  directions,  and  the  total  length 

1  The  cut-off  diameter  of  piles  less  than  20  ft.  shall  be  at  least  10  in. 
*  14  in.  is  the  maximum  size  required  at  the  cut-off  of  any  pile. 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  473 

of  all  piles  lued  only  aa  test  piles.  Piles  driven  for  temporary  use  will  not  be  paid  for.  The 
contract  price  for  piles  shall  cover  the  cost  of  all  labor  and  materials  required  to  furnish,  drive 
and  cut  o£F  the  same  as  specified,  of  fastening  brace  piles,  and  of  furnishing  and  placing  all 
aho^,  bands,  bars,  straps,  bolts  and  other  fastenings  required. 

6.  Concrete  piles  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer  may  be  required  under  certain  portions  of 
the  work,  and  when  ordered  by  the  Engineer  in  writing  they  shall  be  placed  in  the  positions 
and  in  the  manner  directed  by  him.  The  contractor  shall  furnish  all  labor  and  materials  and 
provide  and  use  such  machinery  as  may  be  necessary  to  do  this  work  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  Engineer,  and  he  will  be  paid  for  the  same  as  extra  work,  under  Item  17. 

ART.  7.— FOUNDATIONS 

1.  Where  piles  cannot  be  driven  more  than  7  ft.  below  the  cut-off,  a  platform  only  may  be 
required;  or  masonry  foundations,  without  a  platform,  extending  to  a  suitable  bottom  shall 
be  substituted  if  directed  by  the  Engineer.  The  word  "platform"  shall  be  understood  to 
include  both  capping  and  planking. 

2.  All  timber  and  planking  for  foundations  shall  be  of  good   quality  sawed,  long-leaf 

yellow  pine  or ,  straight,  sound,  free  from  shakes,  large,  loose  or  decayed  knots  and 

other  imperfections  impairing  its  strength  and  durability.  All  sises  under  9  in.  shall  show 
some  heart  the  entire  length  of  one  side  and  sises  of  9  in.  or  more  shall  show  some  heart  the 
entire  length  of  two  opposite  sides.  Wane  may  be  allowed  one-eight  of  the  width  of  the 
piece,  measured  across  the  face  of  wane,  and  extending  one-fourth  of  the  length  of  the  piece 
on  one  corner,  or  its  equivalent  on  two  or  more  comers,  provided  that  not  more  than  10 
per  cent,  of  the  pieces  of  any  one  sise  show  such  wane. 

3.  The  caps  shall  be  8  X  8-in.  timber  unless  otherwise  directed.  The  planks  shall 
generally  be  18  ft.  long  and  at  least  8  in.  wide;  the  joints  are  to  be  broken  at  least  6  ft.  and 
must  be  on  caps.  Holes  shall  be  bored  for  the  spikes.  The  spikes  are  to  be  wrought  iron  or 
steel  wharf  spikes,  square  in  section  and  of  a  length  at  least  twioe  the  thickness  of  the  timber 
through  which  they  are  to  be  driven.  Spikes  8  to  12  in.  long,  inclusive,  are  to  be  1/2  in. 
square:  14  and  16  in.  long,  5/8  in.  square;  18  in.  long,  3/4  in.  sqyare;  20  and  22  in.  long, 
7/8  in.  square;  24  in.  long,  1  in.  square. 

4.  Platform  laid  directly  on  the  ground  shall  have  a  smooth,  firm  bearing  throughout 

ART.  8.— CEMENT 

1.  All  cement  shall  be  dry  Portland  cement  free  from  lumps;  it  shall  be  the  finely  pul- 
verised product  resulting  from  calcination  to  incipient  fusion  of  an  intimate  mixture  of 
properly  proportioned  argillaceous  and  calcareous  materials  to  which  no  addition  greater 
than  3  per  cent,  has  been  made  subsequent  to  calcination. 

2.  It  shall  be  delivered  in  strong  cloth  or  canvas  bags  containing  94  lb.  net  or  in  sound, 
paper-lined  barrels  containing  376  lb.  net.  Each  package  shall  be  clearly  marked  with  the 
brand  and  manufacturer's  name. 

3.  The  Contractor  shall  submit  the  cement  and  afford  every  facility  for  inspection 
and  testing,  at  least  12  days  before  desiring  to  use  it,  and  the  Engineer  shall  be  notified 
at  once  of  the  receipt  of  each  shipment  at  the  work. 

4.  The  cement  shall  be  protected  in  a  suitable  building  having  a  wooden  floor  raised  above 
the  ground  or  be  placed  on  a  wooden  platform  and  properly  protected  with  canvas.  Each 
shipment  shall  be  stored  separately  and  each  lot  marked  with  an  indentification  number  and 
the  date  of  receipt. 

ft.  The  failure  of  a  shipment  of  cement  on  any  work  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the 
spool firations  shall  justify  the  prohibition  of  further  use  of  the  same  brand  on  that  work. 
Cement  may  be  inspected  either  at  the  place  of  manufacture  or  on  the  work.  Cement 
failing  to  meet  the  7-day  requirements  may  be  held  awaiting  the  results  of  the  28-day 
tests  b(*fore  rejection.  All  tests  shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  methods  recom* 
mended  by  the  Committee  on  Uniform  Tests  of  Cement  of  the  American  Society  of  Civil 
Engineers,  presented  to  that  society  on  January  21,  1903,  with  all  subsequent  amendments. 
The  acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  cement  shall  be  based  on  the  following  requirements: 
[These  are  the  technical  requirements  in  the  standard  specifications  for  Portland  cement 
adopted  by  the  American  Society  for  Testing  Materials  on  Aug.  16,  1909.] 


474  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

6.  The  specific  gravity  of  cement  shall  not  be  less  than  3.10.  Should  the  test  of  cement 
as  received  fall  below  this  requirement,  a  second  test  may  be  made  upon  a  sample  ignited  at  a 
low  red  heat.     The  loss  in  weight  of  the  ignited  cement  shall  not  exceed  4  i)er  cent. 

7.  It  shall  leave  by  weight  a  residue  of  not  more  than  8  per  cent,  on  the  No.  100,  and  not 
more  than  25  per  cent,  on  the  No.  200  sieve. 

8.  It  shall  not  develop  initial  set  in  less  than  30  minutes;  and  must  develop  hard  set  in 
not  less  than  1  hour  nor  more  than  10  hours. 

9.  The  minimum  requirements  for  tensile  strength  for  briquettes  1  sq.  in.  in  cross-section 
shall  be  as  follows,  and  the  cement  shall  show  no  retrogression  in  strength  within  the  periods 
specified: 

Neat  Cement 
Age  Strength 

24  hours  in  moist  air 175  lb. 

7  days  (1  day  in  moist  air,  6  days  in  water) 500  lb. 

28  days  (1  day  in  moist  air,  27  days  in  water) 600  lb. 

One  Pari  Cement,  Three  Porta  Standard  Ottawa  Sand 

7  days  (1  day  in  moist  air,  6  days  in  water) 200  lb. 

28  days  (1  day  in  moist  air,  27  days  in  water) 275  lb. 

10.  Pats  of  neat  cement  about  3  in.  in  diameter,  1/2  in.  thick  at  the  center  and  tapering  to  a 
thin  edge,  shall  be  kept  in  moist  air  for  a  period  of  24  hours,  (a)  A  pat  is  then  kept  in  air 
at  normal  temperature  and  observed  at  intervals  for  at  least  28  days,  (b)  Another  pat  is 
kept  in  water  maintained  as  near  70°  F.  as  practicable,  and  observed  at  intervals  for  at  least 
28  days,  (c)  A  third  pat  is  exposed  in  any  convenient  way  in  an  atmosphere  of  steam,  above 
boiling  water,  in  a  loosely  closed  vessel  for  5  hours. 

1 1 .  These  pats,  to  pass  the  requirements  satisfactorily,  shall  remain  firm  and  hard,  and 
show  no  signs  of  distortion,  checking,  cracking,  or  disintegrating. 

12.  The  cement  shall  not  contain  more  than  1.75  per  cent,  of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid 
(SOi),  nor  more  than  4  per  cent,  of  magnesia  (MgO). 

ART.  9.— SAND,  GRAVEL  AND  BROKEN  STONE 

1.  The  sand  shall  be  clean  and  sharp,  free  from  dirt,  loam,  mica  and  organic  matter,  and 
shall  contain  not  more  than  8  per  cent,  by  volume  of  clay,  and  no  clay  shall  be  artificially 
added.  On  the  7-day  test  the  sand  shall  be  of  such  a  quality  that  the  tensile  strength  of  tho 
briquettes  made  in  the  laboratory,  of  1  part  of  cement  and  3  parts  of  sand,  shall  not  be  less 
than  65  per  cent,  of  the  strength  of  similar  briquettes  made  of  the  same  material  and 
Ottawa  sand. 

2.  Gravel  shall  be  composed  of  clean,  hard  stone,  free  from  dirt,  loam,  mica,  clay  and 
organic  matter,  and  unless  otherwise  ordered  in  writing  by  the  Engineer,  shall  be  separated 
by  screening  into  the  sizes  specified  for  broken  stone  in  Clause  3  of  this  Article. 

3.  Broken  stone  for  concrete  shall  bo  hard,  sound  and  durable,  and  shall  not  contain  loam, 
clay,  organic  matter  or  objectionable  quantities  of  dust  or  other  materials  considered  unde- 
sirable by  the  Engineer.  The  broken  stone  shall  be  separated  into  three  grades  by  means  of  a 
screen  with  circular  openings  1,  1-1/2,  and  2  in.  in  diameter  and  a  screen  with  openings  1/4  in. 
in  diameter,  which  last-mentioned  diameter  is  that  of  the  smallest  pieces  of  stone  which  will 
be  accepted. 

4.  If  permitted  in  writing  by  the  Engineer,  gravel  and  broken  stone  may  be  mixed. 
The  purpose  of  grading  the  gravel  and  broken  stone  into  three  sizes  is  to  enable  a 
mixture  to  be  produced  from  them  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Engineer,  will  make  the  most 
suitable  concrete.  The  material  must  be  washed,  if  ordered  by  the  Engineer,  and  the  Con- 
tractor must  maintain  an  acceptable  plant  with  adequate  storage  facilities  for  the  di£Ferent 
grades  of  gravel,  broken  stone,  or  both,  so  that  they  may  be  combined  readily  in  the  pro- 
portions dcHignatcd  by  the  Engineer. 

5.  Samples  of  sand,  gravel  and  broken  stone  which  the  Contractor  proposes  to  use  shall  be 
submitted  to  the  Engineer,  if  so  required  by  him,  for  examination  at  least  two  weeks  beforo 
the  Contractor  commences  to  deliver  the  materials  at  the  site  of  the  works.  Materials  shall 
not  be  delivered  until  the  samples  shall  have  been  approved,  and  as  delivered  they  shaA 
in  all  respects  be  equal  to  the  approved  samples.     Samples  of  sand,  of  about   1  quart,  shall 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  475 

be  submitted  in  giaas  jars  with  stoppers  and  samples  of  not  less  than  1  cu.  ft.  of  gravel  or 
of  broken  stone  in  suitable  boxes  or  other  receptacles.  All  samples  shall  be  plainly  labeled 
with  the  name  of  the  place  from  which  they  were  taken,  where  it  is  proposed  to  use  them, 
and  the  name  of  the  collector  and  date  of  collection. 

6.  In  these  specifications  the  word   "Ballast"  signifies  the  mixture  of  graded  sisea  of 
gravel,  broken  stone  or  both  which  is  designated  for  use  by  the  Engineer. 


ART.  10.— MORTAR 

1.  All  mortar,  unless  otherwise  specified,  shall  be  composed  of  1  volume  of  cement  and  2 
volumes  of  sand.  Mortar  used  in  the  haunch  walls  of  brick  sewers  shall  be  composed  of  1 
volume  of  cement  and  3  volumes  of  sand.  For  purposes  of  measurement  a  barrel  of  cement 
shall  be  considered  to  contain  3 . 8  cu.  ft.  and  a  bag  of  cement  0.05  cu.  ft. 

2.  The  water  used  in  preparing  mortar  must  be  clean  and  free  from  sewage.  Salt  water 
shall  be  used  as  directed  by  the  Engineer  when  it  is  necessary  to  construct  masonry  in  f reel- 
ing weather. 

3.  The  ingredients  must  first  be  thoroughly  mixed  dry  in  a  suitable  tight  box,  after  which 
the  proper  quantity  of  clean  water  shall  be  gradually  added  and  then  the  materials  shall  be 
hoed  or  worked  until  a  uniform  mixture  is  secured.  No  greater  quantity  of  mortar  is  to  be 
prepared  than  is  required  for  immediate  use  and  it  shall  be  worked  over  constantly  with  hoe 
or  shovel  until  used;  any  that  has  set  shall  not  be  retempered  or  used  in  any  way,  and  no 
mortar  shall  be  used  more  than  1-1/2  hours  after  mixing. 

4.  Mortar  taken  from  the  mixing  troughs  and  molded  into  briquettes  1  in.  square  in 
cross-section  must  have  an  ultimate  tensile  strength  of  125  lb.  per  square  inch  after  one  day 
in  the  air  and  six  day«  in  water,  and  175  lb.  after  one  day  in  air  and  27  days  in  water. 

ART.    II.— BILLET-STEEL  CONCRETE  REINFORCEMENT  BARS 

[Adopted  by  the  American  Society  for  Testing  Materials  on  August  25.  1013,  and 
reprinted  by  permission.  Slight  modifications  have  been  made  to  fit  the  requirements 
to  the  conditions  existing  on  sewerage  contracts.] 

1.  (a)  These  specifications  cover  three  classes  of  billet^teel  concrete  reinforcement  bars, 
namely,  plain,  deformed  and  cold-twisted,  and  the  classes  to  be  furnished  under  this  con- 
tract are  those  whose  prices  are  stipulated  in  Item  ....  (6)  Plain  and  deformed  bars 
are  of  two  grades,  namely,  structural  steel  and  hard. 

2.  (a)  The  hard  grade  will  be  used  only  when  specified.  (6)  If  desired  cold-twisted  bars 
may  be  purchased  on  the  basis  of  tests  of  hot-rolled  bars  before  twisting,  in  which  case  such 
teats  shall  govern  and  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  specified  for  plain  bars  of  structural 
steel  grade. 

3.  (a)  The  steel  may  be  made  by  the  Bessemer  or  the  open-hearth  process:  (b)  The 
bars  shall  be  rolled  from  new  billets;  no  rerollcd  material  will  be  accepted. 

4.  Cold- twisted  bars  shall  be  twisted  cold  with  one  complete  twiat  in  a  length  not  over  12 
times  the  thickness  of  the  bar. 

5.  The  steel   shall  conform  to  the  following  requirements  as  to  chemical  composition: 


{ 


_,.        .  .  Bessemer not  over  0.10  pericent. 

Phosphorus  <^.^.  *oo-^ 

'  Open-hearth not  over  O.Oo  per  cent. 


■6.  An  analysis  to  determine  the  percentage  of  carbon,  manganese,  phosphorous  and  sul- 
phur shall  be  made  by  the  manufacturer  from  a  test  ingot  taken  during  the  pouring  of  each 
melt,  a  copy  of  which  shall  be  given  to  the  purchaser  or  his  representative.  This  analysis 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  specified  in  Clause  5  of  this  Article. 

7.  Analyses  may  be  made  by  the  purchaser  from  finished  bars  representing  each  melt  of 
open-hearth  steel,  and  each  melt  or  lot  of  10  tons  of  Bessemer  steel,  in  which  case  an  excess 
of  25  per  cent,  above  the  requirements  specified  in  Clause  5  shall  be  allowed. 

8.  (n)  The  bars  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  stated  in  the  accompanying  Table  of 
Tensile  Properties: 


476 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Table  of  Tensile  Properties  Required  in  Bars 


Properties 
considered 

Plain  bars 

Deformed  bars 

Cold- 
twisted 
bars 

Structural 
steel 
grade 

Hard 
grade 

Structural 
steel  grade 

Hard 
grade 

Tensile  strength,  lb. 
oer  so.  in 

65,000- 
70,000 

33,000 
1,400,000* 

80.000 
Minimum 

50.000 
1.200,0001 

65,000- 
70,000 

33.000 
1.250.0001 

80.000 
Minimum 

50,00p 
1.000.000» 

Recorded 
only 

65,000 
5 

Yield  point,  min.,  lb. 
per  sq.  in 

Elongation  in  8  in., 
min.,  per  cent 

Tens.  str. 

Tens.  str. 

Tens,  str, 

Tens.  str. 

1  See  Clause  9. 

(6)  The  yield  point  shall  be  determined  by  the  drop  of  the  beam  of  the  testing  machine. 

9.  (a)  For  plain  and  deformed  bars  over  3/4  in.  in  thickness  or  diameter,  a  deduction  of  1 
from  the  percentages  of  elongation  specified  in  Clause  8  (a),  shall  be  made  for  each  increase  of 
1/8  in.  in  thickness  or  diameter  above  3/4  in.  (b)  For  plain  and  deformed  bars  under  7/16  in. 
in  thickness  or  diameter  a  deduction  of  1  from  the  i)ercentages  of  elongation  specified  in  Sec- 
tion 8  (a),  shall  be  made  for  each  decrease  of  1/16  in.  in  thickness  or  diameter  below  7/16  in. 

10.  The  test  specimen  shall  bend  cold  around  a  pin  without  cracking  on  the  outside  of  the 
bent  portion,  as  stated  in  the  accompanying  Table  of  Bend  Test  Requirements. 


Table  of  Bend  Test  Requirements 


Thickness  or   diam- 
eter of  bar 

Plain  bars 

Deformed  bars 

Cold- twisted 
bars 

Structural 
steel  grade 

Hard  grade 

Structural 
steel  grade 

High  grade 

Under  f  in 

180  deg. 

d  »  t 
180  deg. 

d  -»  t 

180  deg. 
d  -  3( 
90  deg. 
d  "Zt 

180  deg. 

d  ->  t 

90  deg. 

d  ^  2t 

180  deg. 
d  »  At 
90  deg. 
d  -»  4< 

180  deg. 

d  »  2f 
180  deg. 

d  -  3( 

i  in.  or  over 

Explanatory  Note:  d 


■  the  diameter  of  pin  about  which  the  specimen  is  bent. 
>  the  thickness  or  diameter  of  the  specimen. 


11.  (a)  Tension  and  bend  test  specimens  for  plain  and  deformed  bars  shall  be  taken  from 
the  finished  bars,  and  shall  be  of  the  full  thickness  or  diameter  of  material  as  rolled,  except 
that  the  specimens  for  deformed  bars  may  be  machined  for  a  length  of  at  least  9  in.,  if  deemed 
necessary  by  the  manufacturer  to  obtain  uniform  cross-section.  (&)  Tension  and  bend  test 
specitnens  for  cold-twisted  bars  shall  be  taken  from  the  finished  bars,  without  further  treat- 
ment, except  as  specified  in  Clause  2  (6)  of  this  Article. 

12.  (a)  One  tension  and  one  bend  test  shall  be  made  from  each  melt  of  open-hearth 
steel  and  from  each  melt  or  lot  of  10  tons  of  Bessemer  steel;  except  that  if  material  from  one 
melt  differs  3/8  in.  or  more  in  thickness  or  diameter  one  tension  and  one  bend  test  shall  be 
made  for  both  the  thickest  and  the  thinnest  material  rolled.  (&)  If  any  test  specimen  shows 
defective  machining  or  develops  flaws,  or  if  a  tension  test  specimen  breaks  outside  the  middle 
third  of  the  gage  length,  it  may  be  discarded  and  another  specimen  substituted. 

13.  The  weight  of  any  lot  of  bars  shall  not  var^  more  than  5  per  cent,  from  the  theoretical 
weight  of  that  lot. 

14.  A  finished  bar  shall  be  free  from  injurious  defects  and  shall  have  a  workmanlike 
finish. 

15.  The  Inspector  representing  the  Purchaser  shall  have  free  entry,  at  all  times  while 
work  on  the  contract  of  the  Purchaser  is  being  performed,  to  all  parts  of  the  Manufacturer's 
works  which  concern  the  manufacture  of  the  bars  ordered.  The  Manufacturer  shall  afford 
the  Inspector,  free  of  cost,  all  reasonable  facilities  to  satisfy  him  that  the  bars  are  being  fur* 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS 


477 


niahed  in  accordance  with  the  speeifioationB.  All  tests  (except  the  check  analyses)  and  in- 
spections shall  be  made  at  the  place  of  manufacture  prior  to  shipment,  unless  otherwise 
specified,  and  shall  be  so  conducted  as  not  to  interfere  unnecessarily  with  the  operation 
of  the  works. 

16.  (a)  Unless  otherwise  specified,  any  rejection  based  on  tests  made  in  accordance  with 
Clause  7  of  this  Article  shall  be  reported  within  fiye  working  days  from  the  receipt  of  sample, 
(b)  Bars  which  show  injurious  defects  subsequent  to  their  acceptance  at  the  Manufacturer's 
works  will  be  rejected,  and  the  Manufacturer  shall  be  notified. 

17.  Samples  tested  in  accordance  with  Clause  7  of  this  Article,  which  represent  rejected 
bars,  shall  be  preserved  for  two  weeks  from  the  date  of  the  test  report.  In  case  of  dissatis- 
faction with  the  results  of  the  tests,  the  Manufacturer  may  make  claim  for  a  rehearing 
within  that  time. 


ART.  12.— RAIL-STEEL  CONCRETE  REINFORCEMENT  BARS 

[Adopted  by  the  American  Society  for  Testing  Materials  on  August  25,  1913,  and 
reprinted  by  permission.  Slight  modifications  have  been  made  to  fit  the  requirements  to  the 
conditions  existing  on  sewerage  contracts.] 

1.  These  specifications  cover  three  classes  of  raU-steel  concrete  reinforcement  bars, 
namely,  plain,  deformed,  and  hot-twisted,  and  the  classes  to  be  furnished  under  this  con- 
tract are  those  whose  prices  are  stipiilated  in  Item 

2.  The  bars  shall  be  rolled  from  standard-section  Tee  rails. 

3.  Hot-twisted  bars  shall  have  one  complete  twist  in  a  length  not  over  12  times  the  thick- 
ness of  the  bar. 

4.  (a)  The  bars  shall  conform  to  the  accompanying  Table  of  Minimum  Required  Tensile 
Properties: 

Table  op  Minimum  Required  Tensile  Properties 


Properties  considered 

Plain  bars 

Deformed  and  hot- 
twisted  bars 

Tensile  strength,  lb.  per  sq.  in 

Yield  Doint.  lb.  Dcr  so.  in 

80.000 
50,000 
1,200.000» 

Tens.  str. 

80,000 
50.000 
1.000.0001 

Tens.  str. 

Elongation  in  8  in.,  per  cent 

1  See  Clause  5. 

(6)  The  yield  point  shall  be  determined  by  the  drop  of  the  beam  of  the  testing  machine. 

5.  (a)  For  bars  over  3/4  in.  in  thickness  or  diameter,  a  deduction  of  1  from  the  percentages 
of  elongation  specified  in  Clause  4  (a)  shall  be  made  for  each  increase  of  1/8  in.  in  thickness  or 
diameter  above  3/4  in.  (b)  For  bars  under  7/16  in  in  thickness  or  diameter,  a  deduction  of  1 
from  the  i>erccntage8  of  elongation  specified  in  Clause  4  (a)  shall  be  made  for  each  decrease  of 
1/16  in.  in  thickness  or  diameter  below  7/16  in. 

6.  The  test  specimen  shall  bend  cold  around  a  pin  without  cracking  on  the  outside  of  the 
bent  portion,  as  stated  in  the  accompanying  Table  of  Bend  Test  Requirements: 


Table  of  Bend  Test  Requirements  for  Rail-steel  Bars 


Thickness  or  diameter  of  bar 

Plain  bars 

Deformed  and  hot- 
twisted  bars 

Under  |  in 

180  deg. 
d  -  31 
90  deg. 
d  -  3< 

180  deg. 
d~  Ai 
90  deg. 
d~  At 

f  in.  or  over 

Explanatory  Note:  d  >■  the  diameter  of  pin  about  which  the  specimen  is  bent. 

t  ■"  the  thickness  or  diameter  of  the  specimen. 


478 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


7.  (a)  Tension  and  bend  test  specimens  for  plain  and  deformed  bars  shall  be  taken  from 
the  finished  bars,  and  shall  be  the  full  thickness  or  diameter  of  bars  as  rolled;  except  that  the 
specimens  for  deformed  bars  may  be  machined  for  a  length  of  at  least  9  in.,  if  deemed  neces- 
sary by  the  Manufacturer  to  obtain  uniform  cross-section.  (6)  Tension  and  bend  test 
specimens  for  hot-twisted  bars  shall  be  taken  from  the  finished  bars,  without  fuither  treat- 
ment. 

8.  (a)  One  tension  and  one  bend  test  shall  be  made  from  each  lot -of  10  tons  or  less  of  each 
mse  of  bar  rolled  from  rails  varying  not  more  than  10  lb.  per  yard  in  nominal  weight.  (6) 
If  any  test  specimen  shows  defective  machining  or  develops  flaws,  or  if  a  tension  test  speci- 
men breaks  outside  the  middle  third  of  the  gage  length,  it  may  be  discarded  and  another 
specimen  substituted. 

9.  The  weight  of  any  lot  of  bars  shall  not  vary  more  than  5  per  cent,  from  the  theoretical 
weight  of  that  lot. 

10.  The  finished  bars  shall  be  free  from  injurious  defects  and  shall  iiave  a  workmanlike 
finish. 

11.  The  inspector  representing  the  Purchaser  shall  htfve  free  entry,  at  all  times  while  the 
work  of  the  contract  with  the  Purchaser  is  being  performed,  to  all  parts  of  the  Manufactur- 
er's works  which  concern  the  manufacture  of  the  bars  ordered.  The  Manufacturer  shall 
afford  the  Inspector,  free  of  cost,  all  reasonable  facilities  to  satisfy  him  that  the  bars  are  being 
furnished  in  accordance  with  these  specifications.  All  tests  and  inspections  shall  be  made  at 
the  place  of  manufacture  prior  to  shipment,  unless  otherwise  specified,  and  shall  be  so  con- 
ducted as  not  to  interfere  unnecessarily  with  the  operation  of  the  works. 

12.  Bars  which  show  injurious  defects  subsequent  to  their  acceptance  at  the  Manufac- 
turer's works  will  be  rejected,  and  the  Manufacturer  shall  be  notified. 


ART.  13.— IRON  CASTINGS 

1.  All  castings  required  in  the  execution  of  this  contract  shall  be  made  by  the  cupola  pro- 
cess, unless  furnace  iron  is  specified. 

2.  The  castings  shall  be  known  as  '^lighf'when  they  have  any  section  less  than  1/2  in. 
thick,  "heavy"  when  no  section  is  lees  than  2  in.  thick,  and  "medium"  when  they  are  in 
neither  the  light  nor  heavy  class. 

3.  The  metal  of  the  castings  must  meet  the  reqturements  of  the  accompanying  Table  of 
Required  Qualities  of  Gray-iron  Castings. 


Table  of  Required  Qualities  of 

Gray-iron  Castings 

Quality  or  property 

Light 
castings 

Medium 
castings 

Heavy 
castings 

Maximum  sulphur  content,  per  cent 

Minimum  breaking  stren^h  of  Arbitration  Bar^  under 
transverse  load*  lb 

0.08 

2.500 

0.10 

18.000 

0.10 

2.900 

*       0.10 

21.000 

0.12 

3.300 

0.10 

24.000 

Minimum  deflection  of  Arbitration  Bar.  in 

Minimum  tensile  strength,  lb.  per  sq.  in 

1  The  Arbitration  Bar  is  1-1/4  in.  in  diameter  and  15  in.  long,  and  is  placed  on  supports  12 
in.  apart  and  loaded  in  the  middle  at  a  rate  which  will  produce  a  deflection  of  0.10  in.  in  20 
to  40  seconds.     Two  sets  of  two  bars  each  are  cast  from  each  20  tons  of  a  heat. 

4.  Castings  shall  be  true  to  pattern,  free  from  cracks,  flaws  and  excessive  shrinkage. 
They  shall  have  their  faces  machined  to  true  surfaces  wherever  required  on  the  drawings. 

They  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and  then  painted  with or 

approved  substitute. 

ART.  14.— BRICK  MASONRY 


1.  None  but  whole,  sound,  thoroughly  burned,  straight,  hard  brick,  uniform  in  structure 
with  true,  even  faces,  shall  be  used.  All  brick  shall  meet  such  requirements  as  to  specific 
gravity,  absorption,  abrasion  and  crushing  strength  as  the  Engineer  shall  deem  necessary. 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  479 

iThis  eentenoe  is  based  on  the  Philadelphia  general  specifioationfl  and  should  be  adopted 
only  where  the  quality  of  acceptable  brick  is  known  to  contractors  through  experience  in  the 
city  under  the  same  engineer;  otherwise  it  is  better  to  state  in  the  specifications  just  what 
properties  the  brick  must  possess.)  Hard-burned  brick,  less  perfect  than  those  required  for 
the  sewer,  and  half  brick,  all  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer,  may  be  used  in  the  manholes.  All 
brick  shall  be  sorted,  when  delivered  upon  the  ground,  by  men  furnished  to  the  Inspector  by 
and  at  the  expense  of  the  Contractor,  and  all  brick  condemned  shall  be  immediately  removed 
from  the  work. 

2.  Vitrified  shale  brick  shall  be  tough,  homogeneous,  of  a  compact  structure,  and  burned 
uniformly  throughout.  They  shall  be  free  from  laminations,  fire  cracks  or  checking  of 
more  than  a  superficial  character,  free  from  lime  or  other  soluble  matter,  and  must  show  no 
signs  of  spalling  or  pitting  after  three  days'  immersion  in  water. 

.  3.  The  Contractor  shall  furnish  to  the  Engineer  at  least  six  samples  of  the  brick  which  he 
wishes  to  iise  in  the  work,  at  least  one  month  before  delivery  of  material  on  the  ground. 
These  samples  shall  be  subjected  to  such  tests  as  the  Engineer  shall  designate  under  Clause 
1  of  this  Article. 

4.  All  brick  shall  be  thoroughly  wetted  immediately  before  being  laid,  either  by  immer^ 
sion  or  in  such  other  manner  as  is  acceptable  to  the  Engineer.  Old  brickwork  shall  be 
cleaned  and  wetted  before  laying  new  work  on  it. 

5.  Every  brick  is  required  to  be  laid  in  a  full  and  dose  joint  of  Portland  cement  mortar 
composed  of  1  part  cement  and  2  parts  sand,  on  its  bed,  end  and  side  at  one  operation.  The 
joints  on  the  inside  face  of  work  shall  not  exceed  1/4  in.  in  thickness  and  in  no  case  shall  mortar 
be  slushed  in  afterward.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  have  every  joint  full  of  mortar.  Upon 
removal  of  the  centers,  if  any  open  joints  are  found  they  shall  be  pointed.  Special  care 
shall  be  taken  to  make  the  face  of  the  brickwork  smooth,  and  all  joints  on  the  interior  surface 
of  the  invert  of  the  sewer  shall  be  carefully  struck  with  the  point  of  the  trowel,  or  pointed  to 
the  entire  satisfaction  of  the  Engineer.  The  work  in  all  cases  shall  be  well  and  thoroughly 
bonded,  and  if  the  manner  is  specified  or  shown  on  the  drawings  it  shall  be  done  in  close 
adherence  to  them.  Brickwork  as  it  progresses  may  be  toothed,  but  when  ordered  it  shall 
be  racked  back  in  courses. 

6.  All  inverts  or  bottom  curves  shall  be  worked  from  templets,  accurately  made  according 
to  the  dimensions  of  the  sewer,  and  correctly  set  according  to  lines  and  grades  furnished. 
When  specified  upon  the  drawings  or  schedules,  the  invert  of  sewers  shall  be  of  granite  or 
trap  rock  blocks,  as  specified  under  Stone  Masonry,  Article  15,  Clause  9,  or  of 
vitrified  shale  brick  as  specified  in  Clause  2  of  this  Article,  to  the  height  shown  upon  the 
drawings. 

7.  The  extrados  of  the  arch  shall  be  neatly  plastered,  at  least  1/2  in.  thick,  with  mortar 
of  the  same  quality  as  that  used  in  the  brickwork. 

8.  The  centers  upon  which  the  arches  are  formed  must  be  made  strong,  and  according  to 
the  sixes  and  shapes  required;  arches  on  curves  shall  be  constructed  on  centers  of  proper 
curvature.  No  center  shall  be  removed  until  the  work  upon  it  has  set  and  the  refilling 
has  progressed  up  to  the  crown  of  the  arch,  if  so  ordered.  All  centers  must  be  struck  and 
drawn  with  care,  so  as  not  to  crack  and  injure  the  work. 

0.  All  fresh  work  must  be  protected  from  injury.  Newly  laid  inverts  shall  be  protected 
from  wash  by  canvas  covering  or  tar  paper,  and  should  the  regular  continuity  of  the  arch  or 
invert  be  destroyed  at  any  time,  either  from  irregular  settlement  or  from  the  centers  being 
improperly  fixed,  or  from  any  other  cause,  the  Contractor  shall  remove  such  portions  and 
correct  the  irregularity  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  All  new  work,  unless  immediately  covered 
with  earth,  shall  be  kept  moist  until  the  mortar  has  become  hard  and  will  not  crack  in  the  sun. 

10.  The  quantity  of  brick  masonry  to  be  paid  for  in  Item  . . .  shall  be  determined  by 
measurement  or  by  estimate  of  the  number  of  cubic  yards  actually  built,  as  required  by  the 
drawings  and  directions  furnished  from  time  to  time  by  the  Engineer.  The  price  agreed 
upon  shall  include  the  furnishing  of  brick,  cement,  sand,  templets  and  centers,  and  all  work, 
including  the  setting  of  inlets,  necessary  for  the  building  of  brick  masonry. 

ART.  15.— STONE  MASONRY 

1.  All  stones  must  be  of  good  quality,  hard,  clean,  of  good  bed  and  build,  and  not  less 
than  0  in.  thick,  unless  for  trimming  or  closing.     Each  stone  must  have  a  firm  and  solid 


480  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

bearing,  and.be  laid  on  its  broadest  bed,  in  full  bed  of  fresh  1 : 2  Portland  cement  mortar,  with 
which  all  joints  shall  be  thoroughly  filled. 

2.  Stone  masonry  shall  be  laid  true  and  by  line,  and  built  of  the  exact  dimensions  and 
character  shown  on  the  drawings.  It  shall  be  well  and  thoroughly  bonded,  and  the  courses 
shall  be  roughly  leveled  up.  When  the  laying  of  rubble  masonry  in  mortar  is  interrupted, 
the  tops  of  the  courses  shall  be  left  unplastered.  No  dressing  or  tooling  shall  be  done  on  or 
upon  any  stone  after  it  is  in  place.  No  rubble  masonry  laid  in  mortar  shall  be  constructed  in 
freesing  weather. 

3.  When  the  faces  of  rubble  masonry  laid  in  mortar  will  be  exposed  to  view  in  the  finished 
work,  the  joints  in  such  faces  shall  be  raked  out  to  a  depth  of  not  less  than  1  in.  and  neatly 
pointed  with  mortar.  The  tops  of  walls  where  other  finish  is  not  required  shall  be  plastered 
and  floated  to  a  smooth  finish. 

4.  No  masonry  shall  be  built  on  concrete  before  it  is  thoroughly  set. 

5.  Before  building  upon  old  masonry,  its  surface  shall  be  cleaned  of  old  mortar  and  dirt 
and  thoroughly  wetted;  stones  removed  from  the  old  work  and  allowed  to  be  used  shall  be 
similarly  treated. 

6.  The  face  stones  shall  be  well  scabbled  and  closely  set.  Unless  otherwise  directed  they 
shall  be  two-man  stones;  they  shall  be  bonded  so  that  there  are  about  twice  as  many  stretch- 
ers as  headers.  When  rubble  masonry  is  built  as  cradling  and  foundations  for  brick  arches,  it 
shall  consist  of  one-  and  two-man  stones  unless  a  larger  sise  is  called  for  on  the  drawings. 

7.  In  dry  walls  without  mortar,  one-  and  two-man  stones  shall  be  generally  used.  Each 
shall  be  laid  by  hand,  settled  with  hammer,  and  have  a  fair  and  even  bearing;  all  joints 
and  crevices  shall  be  thorougly  pinned  and  wedged,  and  the  courses  well  ,bonded.  Riprap 
shall  be  laid  by  hand,  or  if  a  great  quantity  is  furnished  it  shall  be  dumped  in  place,  as 
directed. 

8.  Coping  stones  shall  be  sound  stones  of  approved  kind  and  quality,  as  indicated  on  the 
drawings.  The  shapes  and  dimensions  given  shall  be  truly  adhered  to,  and  they  shall  be 
dressed  and  hammered  in  a  manner  and  after  the  pattern  required  by  the  drawings,  with  a 
smooth  top  surface  and  a  close  joint.     They  shall  be  well  and  truly  laid  to  line  and  grade. 

0.  Where  stone  block  invert  is  required  it  shall  consist  of  granite  or  trap  rock  blocks,  with 
true  square  heads  and  sides  not  warped,  6  to  7  in.  deep,  10  to  14  in.  long,  3-1/2  to  5  in.  wide. 
They  shall  be  sorted  at  the  quarries  and  delivered  in  uniform  sizes.  They  shall  be  truly 
rectangular  and  free  from  irregularities  exceeding  1/4  in.  Blocks  of  equal  width  shall  be 
laid  in  a  continuous  course.     Worn  paving  blocks  must  not  be  used. 

ART.  i6.— CONCRETE,  PLAIN  AND  REINFORCED 

1.  Unless  otherwise  specified  on  the  drawings  or  directed  by  the  Engineer  the  concrete 
shall  be  composed  of  one  volume  of  cement  and  seven  volumes  of  such  mixture  of  sand  and 
ballast  as  shall  be  required  by  the  Engineer.  If  the  sand  and  ballast  are  stored  in  piles  at 
any  time,  they  must  be  placed  on  a  platform  or  other  hard,  clean  surface,  to  avoid  any  admix- 
ture of  dirt  with  them. 

2.  Cement,  sand  and  ballast,  shall  be  measured  (not  estimated)  in  the  given  proportions, 
and  mixed  in  a  proper  box,  or  on  a  floor,  and  in  no  case  on  the  ground.  Mixing  of  materials 
shall  be  done  thoroughly  by  machine  wherever  practicable,  and  always  in  batches.  When 
mixed  by  hand,  the  cement  and  sand  shall  be  first  thoroughly  mixed  dry  until  the  color  of 
the  material  is  uniform  in  tint,  and  then  made  into  a  soft  mortar  by  gradually  adding  clean 
water  and  hoeing  or  otherwise  working  until  a  uniform  homogeneous  mixture  is  obtained. 
The  stone  shall  be  spread  upon  a  suitable  floor  to  a  depth  of  about  6  in.  and  thoroughly 
wetted,  and  the  mortar  spread  evenly  over  it.  The  whole  mass  shall  then  be  turned  with 
square-end  shovels  until  it  shall  become  mixed  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Engineer.  The 
concrete  shall  be  kept  in  motion  until  deposited  in  place;  should  any  be  permitted  to  set 
before  it  is  placed  and  tamped,  it  shall  be  removed  and  not  used  again.  Hand-mixed 
batches  shall  not  be  larger  than  1  cu.  yd.  in  volume.  The  concrete  shall  not  be  mixed  in 
larger  quantity  than  b  required  for  immediate  use. 

3.  When  sewers  are  built  of  concrete  or  reinforced  concrete,  the  longitudinal  sections  of 
the  side  walls  shall  be  constructed  without  interruption  from  bottom  to  top,  and  each  longi- 
tudinal section  of  the  roof  or  arch  shall  be  constructed  its  full  thickness  without  interruption, 
so  as  to  form  a  monolith  in  each  case,  the  length  of  each  section  to  be  such  as  to  permit 
completing  it  within  the  working  hours  of  a  day. 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  481 

4.  The  oonorete  shall  be  deposited  in  layers  of  the  thickness  required,  and  shall  be  thor- 
oughly oompaoted  by  working  it  with  a  straight  shovel  or  slicing  tool,  kept  moving  up  and 
down  until  all  the  ingredients  have  settled  into  their  place  by  gravity  and  the  surplus 
water  has  been  forced  to  the  surface.  The  concrete  shall  be  thoroughly  worked  about 
pipes,  reinforcing  bars  and  other  metal  work,  so  as  to  obtain  a  complete  bond  everywhere 
on  the  surfaces  of  contact  between  the  metal  and  concrete.  Care  must  be  taken  to  keep 
the  forms  moist  and  to  work  the  materials  well  with  shovels  or  other  tools  in  the  spaces 
between  the  forms,  so  as  to  obtain  smooth  surfaces.  When  a  fresh  layer  of  concrete  is  to  be 
put  on  one  which  has  set  or  partly  set,  the  surface  shall  be  roughened,  thoroughly  cleansed 
of  foreign  material  and  laitanoe,  using  a  stiff  wire  brush  and  a  stream  of  water,  if  reqmred, 
and  shall  then  be  slushed  with  a  mortar  consisting  of  1  part  Portland  cement  and  2  parts  of 
sand.  When  the  placing  of  concrete  is  suspended,  all  necessary  grooves  for  joining  future 
work  shall  be  made  before  the  concrete  has  had  time  to  set.  Expansion  joints  of  the  type 
indicated  on  the  drawings  or  as  directed  shall  be  constructed  wherever  ordered  by  the  Engin- 
eer, and  only  at  such  places  as  the  Engineer  may  approve. 

5.  No  concrete  shall  be  laid  in  water,  nor  shall  water  be  permitted  to  rise  on  it  within  24 
hours  after  it  is  placed,  nor  shall  water  be  allowed  to  run  over  completed  masonry  before  4 
dajra.  No  wheeling,  walking  or  working  on  finished  surfaces  will  be  allowed  for  24  hours 
after  they  are  completed.  Immediately  after  the  face  forms  are  removed,  which  shall  be 
before  the  concrete  has  completely  hardened,  if  practicable,  the  surface  shall  be  freed  from 
inequalities  and  projections.  All  voids  shall  be  filled  by  floating  with  cement  mortar,  and 
the  entire  surface  shall  be  brushed  or  broomed  with  a  thin  wash  composed  of  equal  parts  of 
cement  and  fine  sand.  Unsatisfactory  concrete  shall  be  taken  down  and  replaced,  if  directed 
by  the  Engineer. 

6.  Except  during  the  colder  months,  the  Contractor  shall  keep  all  concrete  masonry  wet 
by  sprinkling  with  water  or  covering  with  wet  cloths,  until  it  shall  have  become  thoroughly 
set  and  hard  enough  to  prevent  its  drying  and  cracking.  Sufficient  tarpaulin  or  other  cover- 
ing shall  be  provided  to  protect  fresh  work  from  the  action  of  the  elements. 

7.  The  Contractor  shall  furnish  on  the  site  of  the  work  a  sufficient  number  of  centers, 
forms,  molds,  or  templates  for  its  expeditious  prosecution.  The  forms  shall  be  made  in  such 
a  way  and  of  such  material  as  will  insure  a  true  and  very  smooth  surface  on  the  finished  con- 
crete. The  design  of  the  forms  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Engineer  for  approval  before  work 
on  them  is  commenced.  The  Engineer  shall,  at  all  reasonable  times,  have  access  to  the  shop 
or  other  place  where  the  centers  and  forms  are  being  made,  and  shall  bo  furnished  with  every 
facility  for  inspecting  them,  and  materials,  centers  and  forms  rejected  by  him  shall  not  be 
used  on  the  work.  The  insi)ection  of  forms  by  the  Engineer  during  or  after  the  process  of 
construction,  or  any  suggestion  or  assistance  furnished  by  the  Engineer,  shall  not  be  con- 
strued as  relieving  the  Contractor  of  the  entire  or  any  part  of  the  responsibility  for  the  accu- 
racy or  sufficiency  of  any  of  the  forms  or  for  the  satisfactory  completion  of  the  masonry  to 
any  extent  dependent  thereon. 

8.  The  centers  and  forms  of  all  surfaces  shall  be  carefully  cleaned  and  prepared  or  covered 
in  a  satisfactory  manner,  so  that  they  may  be  readily  removed  and  leave  the  concrete  with  a 
smooth  presentable  surface.  All  centers  and  forms  shall  be  substantially  water-tight  and  of 
sufficient  strength  and  so  well  placed  that  they  will  maintain  their  proper  place  and  position 
during  the  placing  and  ramming  of  the  concrete.  No  center  or  form  shall  be  used  which  is 
not  clean,  of  approved  shape  and  strength,  and  in  every  way  suitable.  Deformed,  broken  or 
defective  centers  or  forms  shall  be  removed  from  the  work.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  prevent 
shavings,  sawdust  and  other  wastes  from  the  making  of  wooden  forms  and  centers  from  be- 
coming imbedded  in  the  masonry. 

9.  Forms  and  centers  shall  be  left  in  place  until  the  concrete  has  set  sufficiently  to  permit 
their  removal  without  danger  to  the  structure,  and  until  so  much  of  the  backfilling  or  em- 
bankment as  may  be  directed  has  been  put  in  place.  Unless  otherwise  ordered,  no  center 
shall  be  struck  until  the  backfilling  over  it  has  been  completed  to  the  elevation  of  a  horisontal 
plane  2  ft.  above  the  top  of  the  completed  masonry.  In  no  case  shall  forms  or  centers  be 
struck  or  removed  until  permission  to  do  so  has  been  given  by  the  Engineer. 

10.  Rubble  concrete  shall  consist  of  concrete  of  the  proportions  stated  in  Clause  1  of  this 
article,  with  large  stones  imbedded  therein.  The  imbedded  stones  shall  be  hard,  sound  and 
firm,  roughly  cubical  in  shape  if  practicable,  and  of  such  sises  as  may  be  deemed  suitable  for 
the  mass  in  which  they  are  to  be  used.  They  shall  be  laid  on  their  largest  sides  and  be  so 
placed  in  the  work  that  they  will  not  be  nearer  than  9  in.  to  the  bottom  of  a  footing,  to  aa 

31 


482  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

ezpanaioD  joint,  or  to  any  surface  or  to  each  other.  The  stones,  after  having  been  thoroughly 
cleaned  and  wetted,  shall  be  firmly  bedded  in  the  concrete.  The  joints  shall  then  be  filled 
and  the  stones  covered  with  concrete  to  such  a  depth  that  the  spacings  specified  will  be 
obtained.  The  stones  shall  not  be  placed  directly  on  any  concrete  which  has  acquired  its 
initial  set. 

1 1.  Where  a  granolithic  mixture  is  to  be  used  it  shall  be  composed  of  one  part  cement,  one 
part  sand  or  gravel,  and  1  \  parts  granolithic  grit,  by  volume,  and  the  necessary  amount  of 
water  to  make  a  thick  mortar.  This  shall  be  deposited  by  skilled  workmen  in  a  manner 
satisfactory  to  the  Engineer,  as  the  work  progresses.  Where  granolithic  finish  is  specified 
on  horixontal  surfaces  of  sewers,  the  mixture  shall  be  deposited  on  top  of  the  concrete  to  a 
thickness  of  at  least  \\  in.,  immediately  after  the  latter  has  been  rammed  and  before  it  has 
set,  so  as  to  be  incorporated  into  and  form  part  of  the  main  mass  of  the  concrete.  The 
upper  surface  shall  be  brought  to  the  required  shape,  dimensions  and  grades  shown  on  the 
drawings,  by  means  of  screeds,  and  floated  and  troweled  to  a  smooth  surface,  free  from  all 
stones.  A  drier  mix  in  the  proportions  of  1  part  sand  and  2  parts  cement,  by  volume,  shall 
then  be  sprinkled  in  a  dry  state  over  the  surface,  and  be  floated  and  troweled.  This  treat- 
ment shall  bo  repeated  three  times.  On  all  other  exposed  surfaces  of  sewers,  the  mixture 
shall  be  deposited  against  the  face  forms,  with  a  thickness  of  at  least  1  in.,  as  the  placing 
of  the  concrete  proceeds,  and  thus  be  built  into  and  form  part  of  the  body  of  the  concrete. 

12.  Steel  bars  for  reinforcing  concrete  shall  be  of  such  shape  as  to  afford  an  approved 
mechanical  bond  with  the  concrete,  and  to  insure  intimate  contact  between  the  steel  and 
concrete.  Plain  bars  may  be  used  only  as  shown  on  the  plans.  Reinforcement  bars  will  be 
rejected  if  the  actual  weight  varies  more  than  5  per  cent,  from  the  theoretical  weight  as  shown 
by  the  manufacturer's  tables.  All  bars  must  conform  to  the  requirements  given  in  Article 
11.  They  shall  be  protected  at  all  times  before  being  placed  in  the  concrete  from  mechan- 
ical injury  and  from  the  weather,  and  when  placed  in  the  work  they  shall  be  free  from  dirt, 
scale,  loose  or  scaly  rust,  paint  and  oil.  Bars  which  are  to  be  imbedded  in  concrete  but  which 
remain  exposed  for  some  time  after  being  placed  in  the  work,  shall,  if  directed,  be  immediately 
coated  with  a  thin  grout  of  equal  parts  of  cement  and  sand. 

13.  Bars  shall  bo  bent  to  the  shape  shown  on  the  drawings,  and  in  conformity  with 
approved  templets.  W^hen  bars  are  cut  and  bent  on  the  work,  the  Contractor  shall  employ 
competent  men  and  provide  the  necessary  appliances  for  the  purpose. 

14.  All  bars  shall  be  as  long  as  can  be  conveniently  used,  accurately  bent,  placed,  spaced 
and  jointed  as  shown  on  the  drawings  or  directed,  and  shall  be  securely  held  in  their  position 
by  approved  devices  until  the  concrete  has  been  placed  around  them.  Where  more  than  one 
bar  is  necessary  to  complete  a  required  length,  they  shall  be  fastened  together  by  ap- 
proved clamps  which  will  develop  the  full  strength  of  the  bars,  or  by  linking  the  ends  of  the 
bars  around  each  other  in  such  a  manner  as  to  produce  and  maintain  tension  on  the  joints 
during  construction,  or  by  lapping  the  ends  of  the  bars,  as  directed,  and  wiring  them  to- 
gether in  an  approved  manner,  or  the  ends  of  the  bars  shall  be  lapped  for  a  distance  of  30 
times  their  nominal  diameter,  for  deformed  bars,  and  50  times  their  nominal  diameters,  for 
plain  bars,  and  with  a  space  not  less  than  2  in.  between  them.  Joints  in  longitudinal  bars 
shall  be  staggered  as  directed. 

15.  The  price  bid  in  Item  ....  for  steel  reinforcing  bars  shall  include  the  cost  of  all  labor 
and  material  where  required  to  furnish,  clean,  cut,  bend,  place,  join,  secure  and  protect  the 
same,  and  to  furnish  all  test  pieces  and  samples.  The  weight  of  steel  reinforcement  bars 
paid  for  as  such  will  be  the  weight  computed  from  the  lengths  and  theoretical  net  sections  of 
the  steel  reinforcement  bars  placed  in  the  work  in  accordance  with  the  drawings  or  direc- 
tions, except  such  steel  reinforcement  bars  shown  on  the  drawings  as  part  of  structures  for 
which  there  are  contract  prices. 

16.  The  quantity  of  concrete  masonry  to  be  paid  for  under  the  various  items  covering 
such  work  shall  be  that  deposited  in  place  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  draw- 
ings and  of  the  Engineer.  The  prices  stated  in  Item  . . .  include  the  cost  of  all  centers  and 
forms,  and  placing  and  removing  them;  of  furnishing  all  materials;  of  mixing,  placing  and 
finishing  the  concrete,  and  all  expenses  incidental  thereto. 

ART.  17.— VITRIFIED  PIPE  AND  SPECIALS 

1.  All  pipe  and  specials  shall  be  first  quality,  salt-glazed  vitrified  clay  or  stoneware,  of  the 
dimensions  stated  in  the  accompanjring  Table  of  Minimum  Dimensions  in  Inches  of  Vitrified 
Pil>e. 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS 


483 


Table  of  Minimum  Dimensions  in  Inches  of  Vitrified  Pipe 


Siie 

4 

6 

8 

10 

12 

15 

18 

20 

22 

24 

27 

.30 

33 

36 

Standard 

Double  strength 

Deep  and  wide  socket           { 

Thickness 

A 

2 

2i 

2h 

Depth  of 
bell 

Thickness 

Depth  of 
beU 

Thickness 

Depth  of 
boll 

IH 

21 

2i 

2 

3 

3 

3i 

3i 

3i 

4 

Annular 
space 

i 
1 
i 
i 

1 

li 
u 
ii 
11 
u 

U 
2 

2i 

2i 

2i 

2f 

3 

3 

3} 

4 

4 

5 

5 

u 
ij 
11 

ij 

2 

2i 

2i 

21 

21 

21 

2J 

3 

3 

31 

4 

4 

5 



5 

1 

2.  The  Engineer  shall  designate  where  standard,  double-strength  or  deep-and-wide- 
Bocket  pipe  shall  be  used.  In  general,  standard  pipe  shall  be  used  for  underdrains;  doubte- 
strength  for  the  larger  sises  of  sewers;  and  deep-and-wide-socket  pipe  for  sewers  which  carry 
only  sanitary  or  house  sewage. 

3.  The  pipe  shall  be  manufactured  at  a  temperature  producing  a  tough  vitreous  material 
without  cracks,  warps,  fire  cracks,  blisters  or  other  imperfections  which,  in  the  judgment 
of  the  Engineer,  render  them  unsuited  for  use.  They  shall  be  fully  and  smoothly  salt- 
glased  over  the  entire  inner  and  outer  surfaces,  except  that  the  inside  of  the  bell  and  the 
outside  of  the  spigot  may  be  unglaaed  for  two-thirds  the  depth  of  the  bell.  On  all  other 
portions  of  the  pipe  the  glasing  shall  completely  cover  and  form  an  integral  part  of  the  pipe 
body.  If  left  glased,  the  inside  of  the  bell  and  the  outside  of  the  spigot  shall  \>e  scored  in 
three  parallel  lines  extending  completely  around  the  circumference.  When  broken,  vitrified 
pipe  shall  show  dense  and  solid  material,  without  detrimental  laminations;  it  shall  be  of  such 
quality  that  it  can  be  cut  with  a  chisel  and  hammer,  and  shall  have  a  metallic  ring  when 
struck  with  a  hammer. 

4.  Any  diameter  of  the  pipe  shall  not  vary  more  than  3  per  cent,  above  or  below  the  stand- 
ard diameter,  and  the  excess  of  the  longest  diamet«r  over  the  shortest  in  the  same  pipe  shall 
not  be  more  than  3  per  cent.  No  pipe  shall  deviate  more  than  1/4  in.  from  a  straight  line  in 
its  length,  and  the  ends  of  the  barrel  shall  be  at  right  angles  to  its  axis. 

5.  All  pipe  will  be  inspected  upon  delivery,  and  such  as  do  not  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  this  contract  will  be  rejected  and  must  be  immediately  removed  by  the  Contractor, 
who  shall  furnish  all  labor  necessary  to  assist  the  Inspector  in  inspecting  the  material. 

6.  The  entire  product  of  any  factory  may  be  rejected  when,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
Engineer,  the  methods  of  manufacture  fail  to  guarantee  uniform  results,  or  where  the  mate- 
rials u8(h1  are  such  as  to  produce  inferior  pipe,  as  indicated  by  repeated  failure  to  comply  with 
requirements  similar  to  those  of  this  contract. 

7.  The  prices  agreed  upon  under  Item  . . . ,  shall  include  the  entire  cost  of  furnishing  and 
delivering  all  vitrified  pipe,  branohes,  bends,  stoppers  and  other  fittings.  Payments  will  be 
made  for  all  accepted  branches  and  fittings  set  in  the  pipe  lino  or  its  appurtenances  in  accord- 
ance with  the  price  list  of  Item  . . .  and  the  discount  therein  stated.  The  quantity  of  pii>e 
for  which  payments  will  be  made  will  bo  based  on  measurements  of  the  length  of  the  invert 
lines  of  the  sewers,  the  length  of  the  manhole  inverts  and  the  lengths  of  branches  and  other 
fittings  being  deducted  from  said  measurements.  [There  is  a  great  variety  in  the  methods 
of  paying  for  pipe  sewers,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  methods  best  suited  for  large  work 
may  not  be  most  desirable  for  small  work  in  short,  independent  sections.] 


484 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


ART.  i8.— CEMENT  CONCRETE  SEWER  PIPE 

[These  requirements  are  substantially  those  recommended  in  1913  to  the  American  So- 
ciety of  Municipal  Improvements  by  a  committee  consisting  of  £.  J.  Fort,  Rudolph  Bering 
and  A.  J.  Provost,  Jr.] 

1.  Cement  concrete  sower  pipe,  without  reinforcement,  shall  be  of  the  hub  and  spigot 
type,  conforming  in  dimensions  to  the  standard  drawings.  Variations  not  greater  than  1/2 
per  cent,  from  such  dimensions  will  be  permitted.  The  minimum  lengths,  thicknesses, 
depths  of  hub  and  annular  spaces  for  the  several  sixes  of  cement  concrete  pipe,  shall  be  as 
stated  in  the  accompanying  Table  of  Leading  Dimensions  of  Cement  Concrete  Pipe.  Egg- 
shaped  sections  for  12-in.  and  larger  sixes  shall  have  flat  bases  and  shall  be  equal  in  quality 
to  samples  to  be  seen  at  the  office  of  the  Engineer. 

Table  of  Leading  Dimensions  op  Cement  Concrete  Pipe 


Diameter, 

Length, 

Thickness, 

Depth  of 

Minimum  annular 

inches 

feet 

inches 

socket,  inches 

space,  inches 

6 

2 

i 

2i 

i 

8 

3 

i 

2J 

i 

10 

3 

1 

2i 

i 

12 

3 

li 

2i 

f 

15 

3 

li 

2! 

i 

18 

3 

li 

3 

i 

20 

3 

2 

3 

i 

22 

3 

•    2i 

3i 

i 

24 

3 

2J 

3J 

1 

2.  The  concrete  used  in  the  manufacture  of  cement  concrete  pipe  shall  be  composed  of  a 
mixture  of  Portland  cement,  sand,  and  broken  stone  or  gravel,  suitably  graded  and  equal  in 
quality  to  similar  material  specified  in  Articles  8  and  9.  When  concrete  pipe  is  broken  it 
shall  appear  homogeneous,  be  entirely  free  from  cracks  or  voids  and  generally  uniform, 
showing  pieces  of  fractured  stone  or  gravel  firmly  imbedded  in  the  mortar. 

3.  The  materials  used  in  its  manufacture,  the  process  of  manufacture,  and  the  marking 
and  dating  of  pipe  shall  be  subject  to  inspection  at  the  factory  by  inspectors  designated  by 
the  Engineer.  All  pipe  shall  have  the  Manufacturer's  name  and  the  date  of  molding  clearly 
impressed  on  the  outer  surface,  as  an  identification  mark.  Methods  of  molding,  trimming 
and  seasoning  cement  concrete  pipe  are  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  Manufacturer.  As 
furnished  it  shall  be  without  warps;  cracks  or  imperfections,  and  shall  present  smooth  inner 
and  outer  surfaces  with  no  stones  visible. 

4.  After  having  been  thoroughly  dried  and  then  immersed  in  water  for  24  hours,  sample 
pieces  of  cement  concrete  pipe  of  about  10  sq.  in.  superficial  area,  with  broken  edges,  ^all 
not  absorb  more  than  7-1/2  per  cent,  of  their  weight  of  water. 

5.  No  pipe  shall  be  delivered  on  the  work  or  used  within  . . .  days  after  manufacture. 

6.  The  manner  of  forming  and  joining  spurs  and  branches  with  hubs  of  standard  dimen- 
sions to  cement  concrete  pipe  shall  be  such  as  to  insure  a  tight  union  of  ample  strength  to 
meet  the  requirements  of  the  work. 

ART.  19.— LAYING  VITRIFIED  AND  CEMENT  CONCRETE  PIPE 


1.  The  pipe  lines  shall  be  constructed  of  pipes  of  such  sizes  and  laid  to  such  lines  and 
grades  as  are  shown  on  the  drawings,  or  as  directed  by  the  Engineer.  Unless  otherwise 
directed,  the  joints  shall  be  made  ss  required  in  Clause  6  of  this  article. 

2.  When  the  sewer  is  to  be  laid  without  a  cradle,  the  earth  forming  the  bed  shall  be  care- 
fully freed  of  stones.  The  pipe  shall  then  be  evenly  bedded  in  the  earth  over  the  lower  third 
of  its  circumference,  great  care  being  taken  to  remove  only  enough  of  the  earth  to  leave  a 
ttiufonn  support  for  the  entire  length  of  the  pipe,  except  the  bell,  under  which  a  recess  shall 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  486 

be  excavated  to  a  sufficient  depth  to  relieve  it  of  any  load  and  to  allow  ample  space  for  mak- 
ing the  joint.  In  case  the  bed  trimmed  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench  in  too  low,  earth  must  be 
thrown  into  the  bottom  and  thoroughly  rammed,  and  a  new  bed  trimmed  for  the  pipe.  It  is 
forbidden  to  raise  the  grade  of  the  pipe  by  ramming  earth  beneath  it.  When  the  pipe  has 
been  bedded  satisfactorily  and  the  joint  made,  the  recess  under  the  bell  shall  be  refilled  with 
earth  and  enough  earth  shall  be  refilled  and  tamped  on  each  side  of  the  pipe  to  hold  it  securely 
in  place,  care. being  taken  not  td  disturb  the  position  of  the  pipe  during  this  process. 

3.  The  concrete  cradle  shall  have  a  thickness  of  at  least  6  in.,  unless  otherwise  directed; 
in  rock  excavation  the  amount  of  concrete  shall  be  sufficient  to  fill  the  space  about  the  pipe. 
The  concrete  for  the  full  width  of  the  cradle  shall  be  deposited  continuously  to  the  height  of 
the  outside  bottom  of  the  pipe.  Before  this  concrete  has  set  the  pipe  shall  be  evenly  bedded 
therein,  so  as  to  have  a  uniform  support  for  its  entire  length,  and  the  remainder  of  the  con- 
crete shall  be  immediately  deposited  and  carefully  tamped  in  such  a  manner  as  to  avoid 
changing  the  position  of  the  pipe. 

4.  Where  the  sewer  is  to  be  laid  in  a  gravel  or  broken-stone  cradle,  the  latter  shall  con- 
sist of  gravel  or  broken  stone  passing  a  1-in.  mesh  and  retained  on  a  1/8-in.  screen.  This 
shall  be  deposited  and  tamped  for  the  full  width  of  the  trench  to  the  height  of  the  outside 
bottom  of  the  pipe.  The  pipe  shall  then  be  bedded  on  this  material  and  the  remainder  of 
the  gravel  deposited  and  carefully  tamped  so  as  to  avoid  disturbing  the  pipe  but  giving 
a  uniform  support  to  its  entire  length. 

5.  All  pipe,  previous  to  being  lowered  into  the  trench,  shall  be  fitted  together  dry  on  the 
surface  and  matched,  so  that  when  jointed  in  the  trench  they  shall  form  a  true  line  of  tubes. 
Each  pipe  shall  be  laid  so  as  to  form  a  close  joint  with  the  next  adjoining  pipe,  and  bring  the 
inverts  continuously  to  the  required  line  and  grade. 

6.  Cement  joints  shall  be  made  as  nearly  water-tight  as  possible  and  in  the  fc^owing  man- 
ner: A  closely  twisted  gasket  of  hemp  or  jute,  of  suitable  diameter  to  bring  the  pipe  into 
their  pro]>er  relative  position  but  in  no  case  less  than  3/4  in.,  and  long  enough  to  pass  around 
the  pipe,  shall  be  soaked  in  neat  Portland  cement  grout  and  then  rammed  into  the  annular 
space  between  the  bell  and  hub  with  suitable  calking  tools.  The  remainder  of  the  joint 
shall  then  be  filled  with  cement  mortar  applied  with  the  hands  protected  by  rubber  mittens; 
this  mortar  shall  be  \ised  as  soon  as  mixed  and  shall  be  composed  of  equal  parts  of  Portland 
cement  and  sand,  mixed  dry  with  enough  water  added  subsequently  to  give  to  it  the  proper 
consistency.  This  mortar  shall  be  well  pressed  and  calked  into  place,  after  which  the  joint 
shall  be  beveled  off  with  mortar  for  a  distance  of  2  in.  from  the  outer  edge  of  the  bell.     The 

■  joint  shall  be  wrapped  in  unbleached  cotton  cloth,  securely  tied  to  prevent  the  mortar  from 
slipping  or  being  otherwise  injured.  No  surplus  mortar  or  other  foreign  substance  shall 
project  into  the  pipe  from  the  joints,  and,  if  necessary,  they  shall  be  cleaned  with  a 
go-devil  or  disk  swab  attached  to  a  rope  or  rod  sufficiently  long  to  pass  two  joints  from  the 
eitd  of  the  pipe  last  laid  and  pulled  forward  as  the  work  progresses,  or  in  some  other  manner 
satisfactory  to  the  Engineer.  The  joints  on  the  inside  of  all  pipe  sewers  larger  than  15  in.  in 
diameter  shall  be  carefully  filled  with  mortar  and  wiped  smooth  and  flush  with  the  surface  of 
the  pipe. 

7.  Where  plastic  joints  are  specified,  they  shall  be  thoroughly  calked  with  a  closely 
twisted  gasket  uf  dry  hemp  or  jute,  long  enough  to  go  around  the  pipe  and  of  sufficient  thick- 
ness to  hold  the  pipe  securely  in  their  proper  relative  positions.     The  plastic  compound  to 

be  used  in  jointing  the  pipes  shall  be  that  known  as  the manufactured  by 

the of ,  or  other  plastic  jointing  mate- 
rial satisfactory  to  the  Engineer.  The  compound  shall  be  heated  in  a  gasoline  or  other  suit- 
able furnace  to  a  temperature  slightly  above  that  at  which  it  can  be  poured  rapidly  and 
smoothly,  and  it  shall  be  kept  at  this  temperature  until  used.  After  the  pipe  joint  has  been 
calked,  the  melted  compound  shall  be  poured  into  the  joints  with  the  aid  of  a  joint  runner  or 
gasket,  in  the  same  way  that  lead  joints  are  poured.  In  case  the  pipe  joint  is  not  com- 
pletely filled,  the  unfilled  part  of  the  joint  shall  be  poured  again  with  hot  material  so  as  to 
form  a  complete  water-tight  joint.  Wherever  permitted  sections  composed  of  two  or  three 
pipe  may  be  jointed  at  the  side  of  the  trench  provided  the  pipe  are  held  firmly  in  correct 
alignment.  In  lowering  the  sections  so  made  into  the  trench,  a  piece  of  timber  shall  be  run 
through  the  pipe  to  support  their  weight  and  prevent  the  joints  or  bells  from  being  broken. 

8.  Plain  mortar  joints  shall  be  made  as  follows:  Before  a  pipe  is  laid,  the  lower  half  of  the 
bell  of  the  preceding  pipe  shall  bo  plastered  on  the  inside  with  stiff  mortar  of  equal  parts  of 
Portland  cement  and  sand,  of  sufficient  thickness  to  bring  the  inner  bottoms  of  the  abutting 


486  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

pipe  flush  and  even.     After  the  pii)e  is  laid,  the  remainder  of  the  bell  shall  be  tborou^hly 
filled  with  similar  mortar,  and  the  joint  wiped  inside  and  finished  to  a  smooth  bevel  outside. 

9.  The  mouth  of  the  pipe  shall  be  carefully  protected  from  all  blasts,  and  rock  excavation 
shall  be  fully  completed  at  least  30  ft.  in  advance  of  the  laying  of  the  pipe.  In  all  cases  the 
mouth  of  the  pipe  shall  be  protected  by  a  board  or  other  stopper  fitted  to  the  pipe  so  as  to 
prevent  earth  and  other  substances  from  entering. 

10.  In  no  case  shall  water  be  allowed  to  rise  in  or  about  the  pipe  before  the  mortar  of  the 
Joint  has  become  thoroughly  set.  No  walking  on  or  working  over  the  pipe  after  they  are 
laid,  except  as  may  be  necessary  in  tamping  the  earth  and  refilling,  will  be  permitted  until 
they  are  covered  with  earth  to  a  depth  of  12  in. 

11.  Branch  pipe  shall  be  provided  and  laid  as  and  where  directed.  Open  ends  of  pipe 
and  branches  shall  be  sealed  with  stoneware  stoppers,  cemented  into  place  in  an  acceptable 
manner.  The  branches  shall  be  laid  so  that  the  tap  is  on  an  angle  of  30  degrees  above  the 
horixontal. 

12.  The  prices  agreed  upon  under  Item.  . .  shall  include  the  entire  cost  of  laying  the 
pipe,  branches  and  fittings,  sealing  their  ends  and  supplying  the  stoppers  for  the  seals,  and 
supplying  the  materials  and  all  labor  for  making  the  joints.  Payments  will  be  based  on 
measurements  of  the  length  of  the  invert  lines  of  the  sewers,  the  length  of  the  manhole 
inverts  being  deducted  from  said  measurements.  Concrete  cradles  shall  bo  paid  for  at  the 
stated  price  per  cubic  yard  in  Item .  .  .  and  gravel  or  broken  stone  cradles  at  the  stated  price 
per  cubic  yard  in  Item .... 

ART.  20.— LAYING  CAST-IRON  PIPE 

1.  The  materials  shall  be  distributed  by  the  Contractor  as  required,  and  care  shall  be 
exercised  to  prevent  any  injury  in  handling.  Proper  tools  and  implements  satisfactory  t^ 
the  Engineer  for  safely  handling  the  pipe  and  other  materials  shall  be  provided  by  the  Con- 
tractor, and  particular  care  shall  be  exercised  to  prevent  the  abrasion  of  the  pipe  coating. 
Wherever  the  coating  shall  be  found  to  have  been  rubbed  off  to  an  unusual  extent,  the  part 
shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and  recoated  by  the  Contractor,  with  Smith's  Durable  Metal 
Coating  or  other  paint  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer,  and  the  Contractor  shall  keep  on  hand  a 
suitable  supply  for  such  purpose. 

2.  All  specials  and  other  appurtenances  required  for  the  pipe  line  shall  be  set  by  the  Con- 
tractor as  directed  by  the  Engineer  without  additional  compensation. 

3.  Every  pipe  shall  be  cleared  of  all  debris,  stone,  dirt,  etc.,  and  inspected  for  cracks  before 
being  laid,  and  if  found  cracked  the  cracked  portion  shall  be  cut  off  by  the  Contractor  before 
laying.  The  bell  of  the  pipe  shall  be  wiped  out  before  inserting  into  it  the  clean  spigot  of  the 
next  pipe,  which  latter  shall  then  be  shoved  home  firmly  against  the  bottom  of  the  bell  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  prevent  the  pipe  becoming  displaced  after  the  joints  are  poured  with  lead. 
The  pipe  shall  be  laid  to  line  and  grade  as  required. 

4.  Only  good  sound  hemp  yarn  or  jute  packing,  braided  or  twisted,  cut  off  in  lengths  as 
necessary  and  tightly  driven  home,  shall  be  used.  Said  yarn  shall  be  furnished  b/  the  Con- 
tractor. 

5.  The  depth  of  the  lead  joints  shall  be  about  2  in.,  measured  from  the  face  of  bell  after 
calking  to  the  back  side  of  the  groove.  The  lead  shall  be  furnished  by  the  Contractor,  and 
shall  be  of  the  best  quality,  pure  and  soft  and  suitable  for  calking.  The  lead  melting  pot 
shall  be  at  all  times  kept  within  easy  reach  of  the  joint,  at  a  distance  of  not  over  50  ft.,  so 
that  the  lead  shall,  under  no  circumstances,  be  chilled  in  being  carried  from  the  melting  pot 
to  the  pipe.  The  joint  shall  invariably  be  run  at  one  pouring,  using  such  ladles  as  may  be 
necessary,  and  shall  thereafter  be  calked  by  skilled  mechanics,  using  at  least  two  sets 
besides  the  small  set  or  chisel,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  a  permanently  tight  joint  flush 
with  the  end  of  the  bell,  without  straining  either  the  pipe  or  bell. 

6.  The  length  of  pipe  to  be  paid  for  will  be  based  upon  the  measurements  taken  along  the 
center  lino  of  the  pipe,  including  specials  and  other  appliances  measured  along  their  center 
lines. 

7.  The  price  per  linear  foot  agreed  upon  under  Item .  .  .  shall  include  the  cost  of  furnish- 
ing  the  yarn,  lead  and  all  other  materials  used  for  laying  and  jointing  the  pipe,  together  with 
all  cutting  of  the  pipe  and  other  labor  necessary  for  the  same. 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  487 

ART.  21.— INLET  AND  CATCH-BASINS 

1.  Inlets  and  catch-basinB  shall  be  built  wherever  shown  on  the  drawings  and  at  such 
other  places  as  may  be  ordered  by  the  Engineer  during  the  progress  of  the  work. 

2.  Inlets  and  catch-basins  shall  conform  in  every  respect  to  the  drawings;  they  shall  be 
made  perfectly  water-tight  by  plastering  the  walls  with  cement  mortar  1/2  in.  in  thick- 
ness and  grouting  any  joints  where  the  Engineer  considers  this  necessary.  They  shall  be 
furnished  with  cast-iron  covers  when  required  by  the  drawings  and  connected  with  the  sewers 
by  vitrified  pipe  and  such  bends  and  slants  as  may  be  required.  All  stones  shall  be  cut 
smoothly  and  accurately  to  the  dimensions  and  shapes  shown  on  the  drawings.  Where  the 
trap  is  formed  by  stones,  they  shall  have  perfect  joints  made  water  tight  with  cement  mortar. 

3.  If  flagstones  are  used  in  inlets  and  catch-basins  they  shall  be  soiind,  of  uniform  thick- 
ness throughout,  and  free  from  imperfections.  They  shall  be  dressed  smooth  on  the  edges  so 
as  to  make  close-fitting  joints,  have  square  comers,  and  be  of  the  dimensions  shown  on  the 
drawings. 

4.  When  inlets  and  oMch-basins  are  to  be  rebuilt,  the  contract  price  stated  in  Item  .  . . 
shall  include  taking  out  the  old  inlets,  rebuilding  them  anew  at  the  same  or  such  other  loca- 
tion as  may  be  ordered,  but  at  no  greater  distance  away  than  the  nearest  street.  The  Con- 
tractor must  supply  all  the  labor  and  materials  required  to  build  them  anew,  in  accordance 
with  the  drawings  for  now  structures.  All  castings  set  or  reset  in  connection  with  the 
rebuilding  of  inlets  and  catch-basins  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  standard  drawings.  The 
old  castings  shall  become  the  property  of  the  Contractor.  The  Contractor  shall  furnish 
and  set  the  curb  in  the  gap  formed  by  the  removal  of  an  old  inlet  that  has  been  recon- 
structed at  another  location,  without  additional  charge.  When  it  is  necessary  to  lay  a 
new  pipe  connection  in  the  rebuilding  of  an  inlet  or  catch-basin,  payment  will  be  made 
for  the  pipe  used  at  the  price  stated  in  Item  .  . .  When  an  old  inlet  or  catch-basin,  un- 
suitable for  rebuilding,  becomes  unnecessary  by  reason  of  the  construction  of  a  new  struc- 
ture, the  Contractor  shall  remove  the  old  structure  without  additional  compensation  and 
the  old  material  shall  become  his  property. 

5.  In  building  or  rebuilding  inlets  and  catch-basins,  unless  otherwise  ordered,  the  Con- 
tractor shall  supply  any  materials  and  labor  necessary  to  pave  or  repave  the  roadway  and 
sidewalk  in  a  manner  which  will  restore  them  to  their  condition  before  the  work  began,  in 
the  judgment  of  the  Engineer.  All  sidewalk  paving  or  repaving  and  all  roadway  paving  or 
repaving  on  a  gravel  base  shall  be  done  without  extra  compensation.  All  roadway  paving  or 
repaving  on  a  concrete  base  will  be  paid  for  at  the  price  fixed  in  Item ....  The  price  paid  for 
each  new  inlet  and  catch-basin  shall  include  a  length  of  not  more  than  25  lin.  ft.  of  vitrified 
pipe  in  place,  complete,  for  connection  with  the  sewer;  any  excess  will  be  paid  for  at  the  price 
of  vitrified  pipe  stated  under  Item  .  . .,  the  price  of  excavation  stated  under  Item . .  . ,  and 
the  price  of  pipe  lasdng  stated  under  Item . . .  Where  existing  inlets  or  catch-basins  are  to 
be  reconnected  to  a  new  sewer,  the  connection  shall  be  made  entirely  new  from  the  inlet  or 
basin  to  the  sewer,  in  accordance  with  the  drawings.  Any  necessary  repairs  or  alterations 
to  the  inlet  or  basin  shall  be  made  by  the  Contractor  without  additional  cost. 

6.  When  telephone  or  telegraph  posts,  gas  lamp  posts  or  electric  light  posts  must  be 
moved,  the  Contractor  shall  employ  the  company  or  municipal  department  owning  them  to 
move  them,  and  he  will  be  reimbursed  for  this  expenditure,  the  amount  to  bo  shown  by  pre- 
senting the  receipted  bills  for  the  work. 

7.  The  price  agreed  upon  under  Item .  . .  shall  include  in  addition  to  the  charges  for  the 
work  and  material  enumerated  in  Clause  6,  the  cost  of  furnishing  materials  for  and  placing 
the  concrete  and  brick  masonry,  the  cost  of  furnishing  and  placing  all  dimension  stones,  the 
cost  of  setting  the  cast-iron  frame  and  cover,  and  the  cost  of  excavation,  backfilling  and 
grading  about  the  structures. 

ART.  22.— MANHOLES  AND  WELLHOLES 

1.  Manholes  of  every  type  shall  be  built  into  the  sewers  of  the  sise,  form,  thickness  and 
in  the  positions  shown  in  the  drawings,  and  they  must  be  carried  up  to  within.  .  .  in.  of  the 
established  grade  or  to  some  other  elevation,  as  directed.  When  not  built  up  to  within .  . . 
in.  of  the  established  grade  of  the  street,  the  masonry  or  concrete  shall  be  covered,  when  so 
directed,  with  blueatones  not  less  than  5  in.  thick  or  with  an  approved  reinforced  concrete 
slab  to  support  the  head. 


488  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

2.  On  all  oval  or  circular  aewers  of  less  than  3  ft.  horUontal  diameter,  constructed  in  any 
other  than  hard  rock  excavation,  the  manholes  must  have  a  foundation  as  shown  in  the  draw- 
inss.  In  hard  rock,  the  manholes  may  be  founded  at  the  springing  line  of  the  sewer,  but 
the  rock  must  be  shaped  out  to  receive  the  masonry. 

,  3.  Brick  manholes  must  be  built  from  templets  placed  at  top  and  bottom  to  guide  the 
work,  with  not  less  than  eight  lines  drawn  between  them,  unless  the  Engineer  authorisea 
the  omission  of  their  use.  The  connection  with  the  arch  must  be  true  and  secure,  and  in  the 
manner  shown  on  the  drawings.  The  joints  are  to  be  neatly  struck  and  pointed  on  the  inside, 
and  the  outside  of  the  brickwork  must  be  neatly  plastered  with  cement  mortar  as  the  work 
progresses.     An  approved  proportion  of  brickbats  may  be  used  in  manholes. 

4.  Concrete  manholes  shall  be  built  of  the  sixes  and  dimensions  shown  on  the  drawings. 
The  concrete  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Article  16.  If  permitted  by  the  Engineer, 
the  shaft  of  the  manholes  may  be  constructed  of  reinforced  concrete  pipe,  in  which  case 
great  care  must  be  taken  to  secure  tight  joints. 

5.  Iron  steps  of  the  dimensions  shown  in  the  drawings  are  to  be  built  into  the  brickwork 
or  concrete  15  in.  apart  vertically,  imless  otherwise  indicated  in  the  drawings.  They  shall 
be  galvanised,  or  coated  with  red  lead  paint  or  coal  tar  varnish. 

6.  Unless  otherwise  indicated  on  the  drawings,  every  manhole  shall  be  provided  with  a 
cast-iron  frame  and  cover  of  the  dimensions  shown  in  the  drawings.  The  covers  shall  be 
free  from  imperfections,  thoroughly  cleaned  and  coated  with  coal  tar  varnish  of  approved 
quality,  and  if  so  ordered  be  provided  with  a  galvanized  bucket  of  the  dimensions  shown  in 
the  drawings.  The  weights  of  the  castings  shall  be  certified  by  the  foundry  furnishing  them 
to  be  as  follows:  Ventilating  cover  and  frame,  complete,.  .  .  lb.;  dosed  cover  and  frame, 
complete, ...  lb.  The  castings  shall  conform  as  to  quality  to  the  requirements  of  Article 
13.  The  cover  must  have  a  continuous  and  even  bearing  on  the  frame,  and  be  properly  set  to 
avoid  rocking.  All  inequalities,  projections  or  roughness  on  abutting  surfaces  of  the  cover 
and  the  frame  must  bo  removed,  and  the  cover  fitted  into  the  frame  as  neatly  as  possible 
without  jamming. 

7.  Wellholos  shall  have  brick  walls  13  in.  thick,  unless  otherwise  shown  on  the  drawings, 
with  such  openings,  slants  and  bullseyes  as  may  be  required.  The  foundation  shall  be  built 
of  stone  masonry  or  concrete,  upon  a  hard  approved  bottom  or  upon  the  sewer  cradling 
extended  as  may  bo  directed.  Upon  it  flagstones  or  granite  block  pavement  not  less  than  4 
in.  thick  shall  bo  laid  to  the  proper  grade  and  well  bedded  in  cement  mortar,  forming  a  rec- 
tangular surface,  the  smaller  side  of  which  shall  not  be  less  than  the  exterior  diameter  of  the 
wellhole.  The  brickwork  shall  be  built  on  this  foundation  from  templets  to  guide  the 
work.  The  inside  joints  shall  be  carefully  pointed  and  the  outside  of  the  brickwork  shall  be 
plastered  with  cement  mortar  as  the  work  progresses.  The  connection  with  the  sewer  must 
be  true  and  secure,  and  at  an  angle  of  45  deg.  in  the  direction  of  flow  in  the  sewer  in  case  the 
wellhole  does  not  rise  from  the  side  walls  of  the  sewer. 

8.  Drip  stones  of  flagstone  or  very  hard  concrete  shall  be  built  into  the  brickwork  every 
6  ft.,  reckoned  from  the  top  of  the  foundation,  but  no  drip  stone  shall  be  located  at  a  distance 
less  than  5  ft.  from  the  bottom  of  the  sower  connecting  with  the  wellhole.  They  shall  pro- 
ject half-way  across  the  wellhole  and  alternate  in  their  position,  so  as  to  break  the  fall  of  the 
sewage,  and  shall  be  not  less  than  4  in.  thick  and  in  length  equal  to  the  interior  diameter  plus 
0  in.  and  in  minimum  width  4  in.  greater  than  half  the  inside  diameter  of  the  wellhole. 

0.  The  top  of  the  wellhole  shall  be  drawn  in  all  around  to  within  3  ft.  of  the  confirmed 
grade  and  to  a  diameter  of  not  less  than  2  ft.,  and  then  covered  with  a  flagstone  or  concrete 
•lab  0  in.  thick,  or  the  brickwork  may  be  extended  to  the  confirmed  grade  and  provided  with 
a  manhole  frame  and  cover,  as  may  be  directed. 

10.  The  price  per  cubic  yard  agreed  upon  in  Item.  .  .  is  for  the  entire  cost  of  construc- 
tion of  the  manholos,  of  furnishing  all  materials  except  the  steps,  and  of  placing  all  materials, 
including  all  metal  work. 


ART.  23.— CURBING,  GUTTERS  AND  SIDEWALKS 

1.  In  Roncral,  all  curbing  and  sidewalk  paving  disturbed  in  the  execution  of  this  con- 
tract niuflt  bo  relaid  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  municipal  department  in 
charge  of  atroot  work.  The  Engineer  shall  determine  whether  the  Contractor  shaU  restore 
the  curbing  and  sidewalk  paving  to  its  condition  immediately  before  the  beginning  of  work 


TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  489 

under  this  contract  or  ahall  carry  out  the  work  in  accordance  with  the  latest  local  specifica- 
tions for  new  curbing  and  sidewalks  of  tfafe  same  general  class.  [In  case  work  of  the  latter 
nature  is  desired,  it  should  be  definitely  specified  and  unit  prices  for  it  required  from  the 
bidders.) 

2.  Gutters  of  dirt,  macadam,  telford  or  gravel  roadways  shall  be  paved  where  directed 
with  cobbles,  field  or  random  stoues  of  satisfactory  quality,  none  of  which  shall  be  less-  than 
5  in.  in  any  dimension  and  all  of  which  shall  be  at  least  8  in.  in  two  dimensions.  The  stones 
shall  be  carefully  laid  by  hand  to  line  and  grade,  well  bedded  in  fine  gravel  or  sand  and  thor- 
oughly rammed.  The  joints  shall  be -filled  with  sand.  Payment  for  all  materials  and  labor 
required  for  gutter  paving  will  be  made  under  Item .  .  .  Should  such  pavement,  with  its 
joints  filled  with  Portland  cement  grout  or  sand,  settle  or  become  displaced,  or  should  there 
be  any  defective  work  of  any  kind,  such  work  must  be  removed  at  once  and  replaced  by  the 
Contractor  in  a  satisfactory  manner  without  additional  compensation. 

3.  Curved  stone  curbing  shall  be  in  lengths  of  at  least  5  ft.  and  straight  curbing  6  ft. 

It  shall  be  of  first  quality at  least  8  in.  wide  on  top  and  10  in.  on  the  base  and  24  in. 

deep.  No  closure  shall  bo  less  than  4  ft.  in  length,  and  there  shall  be  no  ofiFset  in  the  finished 
curb,  unless  called  for  by  the  drawings  or  by  the  Engineer.  Where  stone  curb  is  set  adja- 
cent to  a  grate-top  inlet  or  where  a  grate-top  inlet  is  built  or  rebuilt  adjacent  to  curb  already 
set,  the  curb  shall  be  dressed  the  entire  depth,  so  as  to  allow  the  casting  to  fit  closely  to  it. 

4.  Curbstones  shall  be  cut  to  bevel  with  the  side  walls  of  catch-basins  and  inlets,  if  so 
required  by  the  drawings,  and  be  dressed  on  the  ends,  if  necessary,  to  fit  the  cast-iron  covers, 
which  shall  conform  to  the  general  level  of  the  sidewalk  and  be  set  a  sufficient  distance  from 
the  edge  of  the  curb  to  prevent  displacement  or  injury  by  passing  vehicles.  Where  curbs 
upon  which  the  casting  is  to  rest  are  out  of  line  or  grade,  or  too  short  for  the  purpose,  they 
shall  be  reset  and  adjusted  as  directed,  without  extra  charge. 

5.  Concrete  curbing  shall  be  composed  of  a  mixture  of  one  part  of  Portland  cement  and 
six  parts  of  sand  and  ballast,  in  the  absence  of  other  directions,  and,  unless  required  by  the 
drawings  to  be  of  a  different  cross-section,  shall  be  6  in.  wide  on  top,  18  in.  deep,  with  a  ver- 
tical face  and  a  back  sloped  1  to  5.  The  lumber  for  forms  shall  be  dressed  on  the  edges  and 
on  the  side  next  the  concrete,  and  be  set  securely  so  that  the  curbing,  when  completed,  shall 
conform  accurately  to  line  and  grade.  After  the  concrete  has  been  deposited,  it  must  be 
spaded  back  from  the  face  of  the  form  to  a  depth  of  at  least  8  in.,  and  to  a  width  of  not  less 
than  3/4  in.  at  the  top.  The  space  thus  formed  shall  be  filled  with  a  mixture  of  1  part  of  Port- 
land cement  and  1-1/2  parts  of  sand,  by  volume,  and  the  concrete  and  mortar  shall  then  be 
thoroughly  spaded  and  tamped.  A  top  layer  of  the  same  mortar  3/4  in.  thick  shall  be  applied 
immediately  and  thoroughly  troweled  to  a  smooth,  uniform  finish,  special  care  being  taken 
to  produce  a  perfect  bond  between  the  mortar  and  concrete.  After  the  forms  have  been 
removed,  all  faults  of  any  sort  shall  be  filled  with  mortar  and  smoothed,  so  that  the  top  and 
the  face  for  a  depth  of  8  in.  shall  be  free  from  defects.  The  fresh  concrete  shall  be  sprinkled 
and  protected  from  the  weather  as  directed  by  the  Engineer. 

6.  Where  an  open  or  covered  cross  gutter  or  pipe  drainage  channel  exists  in  the  surface 
of  the  roadway,  which  will  be  rendered  iiseless  by  the  construction  of  a  storm  inlet,  the  Con- 
tractor will  be'requircd  to  remove  the  whole  ot  it  and  lay  or  relay  the  pavement  to  the  grade 
and  surface  designated  by  the  Engineer.  This  work  shall  be  done  without  extra  charge,  and 
all  iron  pipe  and  gutter  covers  removed  shall  remain  the  property  of  the  city. 

7.  Where  granolithic  sidewalk  is  required,  the  site  shall  be  excavated  and  graded  to  the 
width  directed,  to  a  subgrado  18  in.  below  and  parallel  to  the  top  of  the  finished  pavement 
where  the  excavation  is  in  earth.  The  bed  shall  be  thoroughly  compacted  by  ramming  to  the 
prescribed  lines.  If  the  excavation  be  in  solid  rock  that  requires  blasting,  the  subgrade 
shall  be  not  less  than  8  in.  below  the  finished  top.  On  the  subgrade  so  prepared,  a  founda- 
tion of  clean  cinders  shall  be  placed  in  two  layers,  which  shall  each  be  well  consolidated  by 
ramming  with  a  rammer  weighing  at  least  75  lb.  The  cinders  shall  be  well  watered  during 
ramming,  and  the  top  surface  shall  be  brought  to  a  height  4  in.  below  and  parallel  to  tho 
finished  surface,  which  shall  have  a  transverse  grade  1/4  in,  per  foot  upward  from  the  curb. 
On  this  cinder  foundation  shall  be  placed  3  in.  of  cement  concrete  thoroughly  compacted, 
which  shall  be  cut  by  joints  into  blocks  not  larger  than  5  ft.  square,  the  joints  to  extend  clear 
through  the  concrete.  On  this  base,  before  the  concrete  has  attained  its  initial  set.  shall  be 
placed  tho  wearing  course, consisting  of  a  stiff  mortar  of  1  part  cement  and  sand  and  1-1/2  parts 
of  crushed  granite  or  other  stone  approved  by  the  Engineer,  the  largest  particles  of  which 
shall  pass  through  a  1/2-in.  ring  and  the  smallest  be  retained  on  a  1/4-in.  screen,  free  from  dust, 
loam  or  earthy  and  organic  substances.     This  mortar  shall  be  laid  to  a  full  depth  of  1  in.. 


490  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

carefully  floated,  and  troweled  to  a  smooth,  even  surface.  A  drier  made  of  equal  parts  of 
sand  and  cement,  well  mixed,  shall  be  sprinkled  in  a  dry  state  over  the  surface,  and  then 
floated  and  troweled.  Joints  shall  be  made  clear  through  the  wearing  surface,  directly  over 
the  joints  in  the  concrete  base,  troweled  with  a  small  jointer,  and  the  entire  surface  indented 
in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer.  When  the  pavement  is  completed  it  shall  be  ke^ 
covered  for  3  days,  and  shall  be  kept  moist  by  sprinkling  and  thoroughly  protected  against 
freesing. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

OPERATION  AIVD  MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 

The  investment  in  sewerage  83r8tem8  in  this  country  amounts,  roughly, 
to  from  SIO  to  $40  per  capita  of  population  residing  in  the  sewered 
cities.  According  to  the  special  report  on  "Statistics  of  Cities,  1908," 
issued  by  the  U.  S.  Bureau  of  the  Census,  the  replacement  value  of 
such  systems  in  cities  of  30,000  inhabitants,  or  over,  aggregates  over 
$550,000,000,  not  including  the  systems  of  several  large  and  a  number  of 
smaller  cities. 

In  view  of  this  investment,  it  is  remarkable  that  so  little  attention  has 
been  given  to  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  sewerage  systems. 
The  public,  and  particularly  City  Councils  and  Mayors,  realize  that 
money  must  be  furnished  for  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  pumping 
stations,  but  they  are  slow  to  understand  the  necessity  of  expenditures 
for  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  sewers.  In  fact,  few  citizens 
or  councilmen  have  the  slightest  conception  of  the  network  of  sewers 
beneath  the  streets,  or  of  the  difficulties  encountered  by  the  Sewer 
Maintenance  Departments.  When  a  sewer  fails  to  perform  its  work, 
however,  there  is  likely  to  be  serious  complaint  and  the  criticism  of 
those  in  charge  is  often  unfriendly,  to  say  the  least.  One  of  the  im- 
portant duties  of  those  responsible  for  the  operation  of  these  systems  is 
to  enlighten  the  proper  authorities  upon  the  necessity  of  properly  caring 
for  them,  keeping  them  clean,  repaired  and  ready  at  all  times  to  serve 
their  purpose.  With  sewers,  as  with  most  other  structures,  it  is  less 
expensive  to  make  minor  repairs  from  time  to  time  when  necessary  than 
to  allow  the  defects  to  await  a  more  convenient  time  for  repair.  Serious 
damage  may  often  be  avoided  if  inspections  are  frequent  and  small 
repairs  are  made  promptly. 

Inspection. — A  knowledge  of  the  physical  condition  of  sewers  is 
necessary  for  their  proper  operation.  As  sewers  are  below  the  surface 
of  the  ground  and  never  seen  except  at  times  of  cleaning,  repair,  or  special 
inspection,  it  is  evident  that  such  knowledge  must  generally  be  obtained 
through  inspection. 

Special  structures,  such  as  regulators,  tide-gates  and  inverted  siphons, 
should  be  inspected  at  frequent  and  regular  intervals.  For  example, 
regulators  ought  to  be  examined  nearly  every  day  and  siphons  about  once 
each  month,  while  flush  tanks  require  inspection  at  least  once  each  week. 
Severs  in  which  considerable  quantities  of  detritus  accumulate  should 

491 


492  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

be  examined  three  or  four  times  a  year  and  a  general  inspection  should 
be  made  of  the  entire  system  once  annually.  The  small  sewers  at  the 
upper  ends  of  systems  and  all  sewers  having  exceptionally  flat  grades 
should  be  examined  whenever  flushed  by  hand,  the  interval  between 
such  inspections  varying  with  local  conditions  but  usually  not  exceed- 
ing one  or  two  months,  where  systematic  and  thorough  flushing  is 
practised. 

The  gei\eral  annual  inspection  is  a  continuation  of  the  monthly 
inspections  of  the  small  sewers  requiring  flushing.  Most  of  this  work 
should  be  done  during  the  warmer  portion  of  the  year,  when  the  manhole 
covers  are  accessible  and  easily  removed.  The  masonry  sewers  large 
enough  to  permit  of  direct  internal  inspection  may  be  examined  during 
the  winter,  when  the  temperature  and  quality  of  air  in  the  sewers  are 
more  favorable  than  during  hot  weather. 

The  annual  inspection  should  be  sufficiently  thorough  to  reveal  any 
defects  in  the  masonry  of  manholes  or  large  sewers  and  to  detect  the 
presence  of  unusual  deposits.  This  may  generally  be  done  by  merely 
noticing  the  stream  of  flowing  sewage  at  the  manholes.  If  there  is 
obstruction,  it  will  be  evident  at  the  manhole  next  above,  where  the 
sewage  will  be  found  to  be  backing  up.  Occasionally,  a  more  thorough 
examination  should  be  made  to  learn  of  the  condition  of  the  smaller  pipe 
sewers.  This  can  be  done  by  looking  through  the  sewers  from  manhole 
to  manhole,  often  without  artificial  light  or  reflectors.  Where  necessary, 
mirrors  may  be  used  for  throwing  a  pencU  of  light  through  the  pipe  or 
candles  may  be  placed  on  floats  which  are  sent  through  the  sewers.  By 
means  of  such  light,  it  will  be  possible  to  detect  any  serious  defects  in 
the  pipe,  although  small  cracks  are  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  see  at  a 
distance  from  the  manhole.  Such  thorough  inspection  need  not  be 
made  annually,  but  should  be  made  often  enough  to  give  the  superin- 
tendent a  clear  knowledge  as  to  the  general  condition  of  the  sewer 
system. 

Careful  and  complete  records,  conveniently  indexed,  should  be  made 
of  all  inspections.  Where  repairs  are  found  to  be  necessary,  even 
though  they  be  slight,  like  the  pointing  of  the  brickwork  above  the  frost 
line  in  manholes,  they  should  be  promptly  made. 

When  a  sewer  is  to  be  entered  or  a  lighted  lamp  or  candle  is  to  be 
lowered  into  it,  great  care  should  be  exercised  to  avoid  danger  of  explo- 
sion. Men  accustomed  to  this  work  will  quickly  perceive  the  presence 
of  illuminating  gas  or  gasoline  vapor  by  the  odor.  This  is  the  safest 
method  of  testing  the  air,  but  the  observer  should  be  careful  to  note 
whether  the  air  is  entering  or  emerging  from  the  manholes,  otherwise 
he  is  likely  to  mistake  the  absence  of  odor  for  the  absence  of  gas  in  the 
sewer.  If  it  is  necessary  to  enter  the  manhole  to  determine  the  pres- 
ence of  gas,  this  should  be  done  without  a  light/  unless  it  be  an  electric 


/ 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  493 

lamp,  and  the  man  entering  should  wear  a  life  belt  with  a  line  leading 
to  his  helpers  at  the  top  of  the  manhole.  Although  sbldom  done,  it 
is  always  wise  to  open  several  manholes  on  the  sewer  to  be  entered 
some  httle  time  before  the  entrance  is  to  be  made,  in  order  to  provide  a 
change  of  air  within  the  sewer. 

An  inspection  in,  or  even  very  close  to  a  manhole,  should  never  be 
attempted  by  one  man  alone;  the  inspector  should  have  at  least  one 
helper  both  for  his  protection  and  that  of  the  public,  and  usually  more 
than  one.  The  helper  should  remain  standing  at  the  top  of  the  manhole 
to  warn  approaching  persons  of  the  opening.  Where  the  inspector  is 
to  go  from  manhole  to  manhole  through  the  sewer  a  second  helper  should 
precede  him  to  the  manhole  below  that  at  which  he  enters.  When  the 
inspector  has  reached  the  second  manhole,  the  second  helper  signals  the 
one  at  the  first  manhole,  who  replaces  the  lid  and  passes  on  to  the 
third  manhole,  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  inspector  at  this  point.  Three 
men  constitute  the  minimum  safe  size  of  gang  for  such  inspection 
and  preferably  two  men  should  go  together  through  the  sewer. 

Deposits  in  Sewers. — Deposits  which  are  found  in  sewers  may  be 
subdivided  into  two  classes,  first,  heavy  deposits  consisting  of  sand, 
gravel  or  road  detritus,  which  require  scraping  or  some  similar  process 
for  their  removal,  and,  second,  deposits  of  light  organic  substances 
which  may  be  flushed  along  the  sewer  until  they  reach  a  point  beyond 
which  there  is  sufficient  velocity  and  depth  of  flow  to  carry  them  along. 
If  the  heavy  deposits  are  allowed  to  accumulate,  the  capacity  of  the 
sewer  will  be  materially  reduced  and  dams  are  likely  to  be  formed  behind 
which  the  sewage  will  be  impounded  and  the  organic  matter  will  settle 
and  decompose,  giving  off  offensive  odors.  In  the  smaller  and  flat 
sewers,  especially  at  the  upper  end  of  a  system,  organic  matter  is  likely 
to  accumulate,  due  to  lack  of  sufficient  depth  of  flow  and  velocity  to  carry 
it  along. 

Much  has  been  said  about  different  means  of  flushing,  and  while 
attention  should  be  given  to  this  subject,  the  authors  are  inclined  to  the 
view  that  there  has  been  a  tendency  in  some  cases  to  overestimate  the 
ill  effects  of  comparatively  slight  accumulations.  It  is  certain  that 
little  flushing  is  done  in  the  larger  cities,  with  comparatively  few 
resulting  stoppages  and  without  complaint  of  objectionable  odors. 

The  deposits  found  in  the  larger  combined  sewers  and  storm  drains 
consist  of  sand  and  road  detritus,  the  character  and  amount  of  which 
depend  to  some  extent  upon  the  natural  soil  and  the  street  surfaces, 
as  well  as  upon  the  slope  of  the  surface  of  the  land  in  general.  Where 
organic  deposits  are  covered  with  water  decomposition  is  accompanied 
by  disintegration  and  the  coarse  material  which  was  deposited  passes 
away  as  finely  divided  suspended  matter,  or  is  carried  to  the  surface  in 
masses  by  entrained  gases  and  borne  along  by  the  flowing  sewage. 


494  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

Heavy  oils  and  tars  mixed  with  detritus  form  a  sort  of  cemented 
deposit  which  will  not  be  scoured  or  flushed  out  of  the  sewer  by  ordinary 
velocities  of  flow.  Such  deposits  are  often  found  below  connections 
from  gas  works,  unless  special  precautions  are  taken  to  prevent  the 
discharge  of  tar.  Even  where  provision  is  made  for  recovering  tar 
from  the  gas  wastes,  quantities  of  it  and  of  heavy  oil  are  likely  to  pass 
away  from  the  plant  and  find  their  way  into  the  sewer,  unless  some 
sort  of  filter  beds  are  provided  which  will  remove  such  substances  from 
the  water. 

Grease  from  hotels  and  restaurants  is  a  cause  of  frequent  partial  or 
complete  clogging  of  sewers.  The  large  quantities  of  hot  water  con- 
taining the  grease  are  not  sufficiently  cooled  for  the  grease  to  be  inter- 
cepted by  the  traps  and  it  accordingly  is  deposited  on  the  walls  of  the 
house  connections  and  sewers.  E.  S.  Dorr,  head  of  the  Boston 
sewerage  work  for  many  years,  reports  that  this  trouble  became  so 
important  in  the  localities  near  large  restaurants  that  he  made  continu- 
ous efforts  to  have  satisfactory  grease  traps  installed  to  prevent  grease 
from  getting  into  the  sewers.  The  largest  traps  made  by  manufacturers 
of  plumbers'  supplies  were  entirely  too  small  for  this  purpose.  The 
quantity  of  hot  water  being  received  all  the  time  kept  them  constantly 
heated  and  allowed  the  grease  to  be  carried  through  to  the  sewers. 
One  large  restaurant  made  an  effort  to  solve  the  difficulty  by  a  basin 
4  X  10  ft.  in  plan  by  4  ft.  deep,  which  was  crossed  by  several  baffles. 
This  improved  conditions  so  that  where  formerly  they  removed  about 
175  lb.  of  grease  per  week,  they  now  succeed  in  getting  on  the  average 
about  900  lb.  As  much  of  this  may  be  sold  for  5  cents  a  pound,  the  trap 
will  eventually  pay  for  itself,  although  in  this  particular  case  the  original 
cost  was  about  $800. 

An  interesting  instance  of  accumulations  in  a  sewer  in  Lynn,  Mass., 
was  described  before  the  Sanitary  Section  of  the  Boston  Society  of 
Civil  Engineers,  by  A.  C.  Townsend  {Jour.  Assoc,  Eng,  Socs.,  1904, 
p.  239).  In  this  case  a  large  tank  of  boiling  soap  was  accidentally  dis- 
charged into  a  36-in.  brick  sewer  having  a  slight  grade.  The  weather 
at  the  time  was  cold  and  for  300  or  400  ft.  the  soap  congealed  and 
nearly  filled  the  sewer.  It  was  necessary  to  send  men  in  and  actually 
cut  out  the  soap. 

Most  of  the  Manhattan  sewers,  the  mouths  of  which  are  tide-locked 
and  the  bottoms  of  which  lie  below  high  tide,  were  found  by  the  Metro- 
politan Sewerage  Commission  to  contain  considerable  deposits  of  silt 
and  sewage  solids  forming  as  a  rule  a  dense  mass  difficult  to  remove  with- 
out the  use  of  tools.  In  neighborhoods  where  considerable  grease 
escapes  with  the  sewage  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  tides  has  coated  the 
sides  and  tops  of  the  sewers  with  congealed  grease,  in  some  cases  as 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  495 

much  as  a  foot  in  thickness.  In  the  sewers  where  steam  and  hot  water 
entered  the  odors  from  the  cooked  sewage  are  unusually  disagreeable. 
A  description  of  conditions  found  inside  a  large  sewer  in  Colimibus, 
Ohio,  was  given  by  Julian  Griggs,  formerly  chief  engineer  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Public  Service  of  that  city,  in  Engineering  NewSj  vol.  xliv, 
p.  443.  The  deposit  is  described  as  being  mostly  road  detritus  mixed 
and  stratified  with  layers  of  tar  from  1  /8  to  1  /4  in.  thick,  and  from  1 
to  2  in.  apart.  The  following  description  of  growths  in  the  sewers  is 
of  particular  interest:  ^ 

**  Toad  stools  up  to  3-1/2  in.  in  diameter  in  all  stages  of  growth  and  decay 
were  found  on  the  sides  and  top  of  the  sewer  in  abundance,  and  under  the 
part  having  a  cover  of  40  ft.  .  .  .  The  mycelium  of  a  fungus  common  in 
coal  mines,  which  resembles  the  tough  fibrous  roots  of  a  tree,  was  found  9  in. 
in  length,  growing  in  patches  from  the  top  of  the  sewer;  and  in  one  place  a 
thick  bunch  or  cluster  20  in.  in  diameter  and  30  in.  in  length,  was  attached 
to  the  side  of  the  sewer  above  the  spring  line.'' 

A  description  of  stoppages  in  a  sewer  system  was  given  in  Jour.  Assoc. 
Eng.  Socs.,  vol.  xxxiii,  1904,  p.  227,  by  F.  Herbert  Snow,  Chief  Eng. 
of  the  State  Department  of  Health  of  Pennsylvania,  as  follows: 

'^  During  the  year,  in  the  street  mains  and  connections,  there  were  482 
ordinary  stoppages  and  134  more  on  private  property,  making  a  grand  total 
of  616  stoppages  chargeable  to  the  operating  account  of  the  sewer  system. 
In  analyzing  the  causes  of  these  stoppages  it  was  found  that 

Grease  caused  19  in  mains  and  8  in  outside  connections 
Sand  caused  25  in  mains  and  26  in  outside  connections 
Rags  caused  83  in  mains  and  47  in  outside  connections 
Breaks  caused  16  in  mains  and  21  in  outside  connections 
Misc.  caused  79  in  mains  and  128  in  outside  connections 

''The  222  stoppages  in  the  mains  cost  $1063,  or  $4.79  per  stoppage. 
The  260  stoppages  in  the  outside  connections  cost  $594,  or  $2.28  per  stop- 
page. The  total  cost  of  each  one  of  the  above  causes  according  to  the  classi- 
fication in  the  table  was  as  follows :  grease  $189,  sand  $208,  rags  $444,  breaks 
$139,  miscellaneous  $677.  But  most  of  the  miscellaneous  stoppages  were 
caused  by  the  accumulation  of  grease  between  the  street  line  and  the  sewer 
main,  and  about  one-half  of  the  inside  stoppages  originated  from  this  source." 

A  description  of  conditions  in  Newton,  Mass.,  is  given  in  the  same 
place  by  Dana  Libby,  deputy  street  commissioner  in  charge  of  sewers 
of  that  city: 

"The  streets  of  Newton  are  lined  with  shade  trees,  and  their  roots  readily 
follow  down  through  the  less  compact  earth  in  the  sewer  trench  and  find  de- 
fective joints  if  any  exist.  The  underdrains  become  clogged  with  these  root? 
much  more  frequently  than  the  sewers,  as  they  are  laid  with  open  joints,  but 


496  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

the  number  of  stoppages  in  sewer  pipe,  due  to  an  accumulation  of  roots,  has 
been  far  greater  than  was  ever  anticipated. '^ 

In  the  same  discussion  it  was  stated  that  in  1903  there  were  15 
stoppages  in  main  sewers  in  Waltham,  Mass.  Of  these  8  were  in  6-in. 
pipes,  6  in  8-in.  pipes  and  1  in  a  10-in.  pipe.  Roots  from  trees  caused 
8  stoppages,  a  brick  one,  sticks  two,  ribs  of  an  umbrella  one,  paper  one, 
ice  one,  and  one  by  a  cause  undetermined.  The  average  number  of 
stoppages  for  four  years  was  14.  At  Brockton,  Mass.,  stoppages  in 
separate  sewers  were  said  to  be  practically  unknown,  perhaps  four  or 
five  in  eight  years.  In  1903  there  was  one  stoppage  in  1700  house 
connections,  the  standard  size  being  5  in.  A  shoe  factory  employing 
about  2500  persons  was  served  by  one  5-in.  connection. 

Particular  attention  should  be  given  to  the  condition  of  sewers  in  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  industrial  plants  such  as  gas  works,  packing  houses 
and  tanneries,  from  which  large  quantities  of  suspended  matter  likely 
to  be  deposited  may  be  discharged.  Many  cities  have  adopted  ordi- 
nances sufficiently  broad  to  prevent  the  discharge  of  material  which  will 
prove  injurious  to  the  sewers  or  interfere  with  their  successful  operation. 
While  the  enforcement  of  such  ordinances  may  be  difficult,  it  furnishes  a 
means  of  avoiding  the  trouble  and  expense  resulting  from  such  deposits. 

Flushing  Sewers. — Sanitary  sewers  and  the  small  laterals  of 
combined  sewer  systems  are.  generally  cleaned,  if  at  all,  by  flushing. 
There  are  several  methods  of  doing  this  work.  Some  have  held  that 
small  lateral  sewers  should  be  flushed  daily,  on  the  theory  that  none  of 
the  organic  suspended  matter  should  be  allowed  to  accumulate  in  them 
and  remain  to  putrefy.  To  provide  for  daily  flushing  many  types  of 
flush-tanks  have  been  designed,  some  of  which  are  illustrated  in  Volume 
I.  Much  trouble  has  been  caused  by  the  clogging  of  the  aperture 
through  which  water  enters  the  tank  so  that  in  some  places  it  has  been 
found  necessary  to  inspect  the  tanks  almost  daily  to  make  sure  that  they 
were  operating  with  the  desired  frequency.  This  has  taken  so  much 
time  that  some  engineers  have  substituted  for  each  tank  a  simple  water 
connection,  from  which  a  properly  located  manhole  can  be  filled  when 
desired  by  temporarily  closing  its  outlet,  which  is  opened  as  soon  as 
the  desired  quantity  of  water  has  been  stored.  In  some  cases  it 
has  taken  little  more  time  to  flush  the  sewers  in  this  manner  than  to 
attend  to  the  automatic  flush- tanks.  It  has  the  advantage  of  requiring 
water  only  while  flushing  is  actually  going  on  and  if  conditions  do  not 
require  daily  flushings  a  saving  in  water  is  likely  to  result. 

Still  another  method  is  to  flush  the  sewer  by  means  of  a  direct  water 
connection  of  good  size,  about  1  in.  when  a  good  pressure  is  available. 
Such  a  connection  is  opened  by  a  long-handle  socket  wrench,  and  the 
sewer  can  be  thoroughly  flushed  in  the  time  a  manhole  can  be  filled 
and  discharged.    This  scheme  has  met  with  some  favor  because  it 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  497 

avoids  the  trouble  sometimes  experienced  in  temporarily  closing  a  sewer 
while  the  flushing  manhole  is  being  filled. 

Many  of  the  older  and  larger  systems  are  flushed  with  a  large  stream 
from  a  fire  hose  attached  to  a  hydrant.  For  such  flushing  the  hose  is 
earned  upon  a  reel  in  a  wagon  from  street  to  street,  making  a  circuit  of 
the  city.  At  least  three  men  are  required  and  it  is  usually  more 
economical  to  provide  four.  One  objection  to  this  method  may  come 
from  the  water  department  or  company,  which  may  object  to  having 
the  sewer  employees  operating  the  hydrants.  A  good  method  of 
meeting  this  objection  is  to  allow  the  water  department  to  furnish  a 
man  to  attach  the  hose  to  the  hydrant  and  to  attend  to  operating  the 
gate.  Where  this  is  not  done  a  memorandum  should  be  made  of  all 
hydrants  opened,  which  should  immediately  be  turned  over  to  the  water 
department  so  that  they  may  be  inspected.  By  adopting  the  former 
method  this  inspection  is  made  unnecessary. 

Much  discussion  has  arisen  over  the  propriety  of  charging  sewer 
departments  for  water  used  for  flushing  or  other  purposes.  Whatever 
the  final  decision  may  be,  in  any  case  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
quantity  of  water  so  used  should  be  measured  by  meter  and  made  a 
matter  of  record,  otherwise  there  will  be  a  tendency  toward  waste,  and 
the  water  department  will  have  no  record  of  the  purpose  for  which  this 
quantity  which  has  been  furnished  to  the  city  has  been  used.  Pipes 
supplying  flush-tanks  and  flushing  manholes  should  be  metered  in  the 
usual  way.  Where  flushing  is  done  by  hose  a  portable  meter  mounted 
on  a  short  plank  provided  with  handles  should  be  used.  It  can  be  kept 
attached  to  the  hose  at  a  point  near  the  end  to  be  attached  to  the 
hydrant,  thus  avoiding  the  necessity  of  connecting  and  disconnecting 
the  hose  with  it  each  time. 

Where  sewers  are  flushed  by  the  hose  method  the  system  is  usually 
given  a  thorough  cleaning  each  spring  and  fall,  and  a  less  complete  flush- 
ing at  intervals  during  the  summer.  It  is  usually  impracticable  to  do 
such  flushing  during  the  winter  in  the  northern  part  of  this  country. 

In  a  discussion  of  methods  of  sewer  cleaning,  published  in  the  Journal 
of  the  Association  of  Engineering  Societies,  vol.  xxxiii,  Bertram  Brewer 
stated  that  a  thorough  cleaning  was  given  the  sewers  at  Waltham,  Mass., 
every  spring  and  fall  and  that  they  were  flushed  on  the  average  five 
times  during  the  summer  season,  at  a  cost  of  $6.56  per  mile  for  the  entire 
system.  At  Waltham,  as  at  Newton  and  Medford,  Mass.,  pipes  from 
the  water  mains  discharged  into  summit  manholes  which  were  at  a 
long  distance  from  hydrants.  Flap  gates  held  back  the  water  until  the 
manholes  became  filled.  There  were  about  38  miles  of  sewers  in  Waltham 
with  104  flushing  manholes  and  117  manholes  for  2-1/2  in.  hose 
flushing,  or  221  places  which  were  regularly  flushed.  C.  R.  Felton 
stated  that  all  summit  manholes  in  Brockton,  Mass.,  were  connected 

32 


498  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

with  the  water  mains,  some  with  1-in.  pipe  and  others  with  1-1/2-in. 
pipe,  under  60  lb.  pressure.  At  Concord,  Mass.,  W.  .D.  Hubbard 
reported  $20  to  $25  per  mile  per  year  was  spent  for  cleaning  a  separate 
system  of  7.53  miles.  The  dead  ends  of  the  system  were  provided 
with  320-gal.  automatic  flush-tanks  discharging  daily.  Mr.  Hubbard 
thought  these  tanks  were  effective  for  a  distance  of  about  500  ft.  Where 
no  flush-tanks  were  provided,  the  manhole  was  filled  by  hose,  the 
sewer  being  closed  by  pushing  into  it  a  plug  made  of  sheet  rubber, 
backed  with  canvas  and  packed  between  two  circular  pieces  of  wood  of 
about  half  an  inch  less  diameter  than  the  pipe.  Sewers  requiring 
this  method  were  flushed  twice  a  year. 

Dana  Libby  stated  that  there  were  96  miles  of  sewers,  80  of  which 
were  8-in.  pipe,  in  Newton,  Mass.,  in  1904.  Two  men  with  a  three- 
wheel  push-cart  attended  to  the  flushing  and  cleaning  throughout  the 
year,  covering  the  entire  system  in  from  four  to  five  weeks.  The 
system  was  provided  with  flushing  manholes  equipped  with  1-1/2-in. 
water  connections.  Rubber-bound  wooden  plugs,  made  of  the  right 
size  to  fit  the  outlet,  were  used  to  stop  the  sewers  imtil  the  manholes 
were  filled,  when  they  were  drawn  out  and  the  water  allowed  to  flow 
through  the  sewer,  giving  it  a  satisfactory  flushing. 

At  Melrose,  Mass.,  according  to  W.  D.  Hunter,  a  separate  system  of 
about  35  miles  was  cared  for  as  follows:  Starting  at  the  summit  the 
laterals  were  flushed  or  cleaned  toward  the  mains  and  then  the  mains 
were  cleaned,  sweeping  everything  down  to  the  sump,  where  the  local 
sewer  connected  with  the  metropolitan  intercepter  and  any  deposits 
could  be  readily  removed.  The  cleaning  or  scraping  was  done  by  a 
steel  hoe  having  the  shape  of  the  pipe  with  a  joint  or  hinge  so  that  in 
pushing  it  backward,  it  partly  collapsed  or  shut  up.  Back  of  this  hoe 
was  a  follower,  consisting  of  a  bag  or  bundle  of  bags  made  into  a  roll 
2  or  3  ft.  long  and  wound  with  a  small  rope  so  as  to  fill  the  smaller  pipe 
entirely.  The  follower  tended  to  hold  back  the  water  and  when  pulled 
into  the  manhole  there  was  a  rush  of  sewage  tending  to  flush  the  solid 
matter  along.  Any  heavy  material  which  remained  in  the  manhole  was 
removed  and  carried  to  the  dump.  The  same  method  of  cleaning  was 
followed  in  the  larger  pipe,  except  that  the  bag  or  follower  did  not 
entirely  fill  the  sewer.  It  was  kept  on  the  bottom  by  being  weighted 
or  filled  with  sand.  The  cleaning  was  done  once  each  year,  usually  in 
the  winter.  The  annual  cost  of  flushing  or  cleaning"  the  system  was 
equivalent  to  $17  per  mile  of  sewer,  including  labor,  teams  and  all 
incidental  expense. 

George  A,  Wetherbee  stated  that  Maiden,  Mass.,  had  47  miles  of 
separate  sewers  ranging  from  6  in.  to  3  ft.  in  diameter.  The  cleaning 
cost  a  little  less  than  $5  per  mile  per  year.  The  end  manholes  in  small 
sewers  were  provided  with  2-1  /2-in.  water  pipe  connections.    When  a 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  499 

sewer  was  to  be  flushed,  the  outlet  from  the  manhole  was  stopped  by 
means  of  a  tin  form  put  into  the  sewer.  The  manhole  was  then  filled 
with  water  after  which  the  tin  form  was  removed  and  the  sewer  flushed. 

E.  W.  Branch  reported  the  cost  of  flushing  and  cleaning  sewers  in 
Quincy,  Mass.,  at  $1500  annually,  the  system  comprising  40  miles  of 
separate  sewers.  The  cost  was,  therefore,  about  $37.50  per  mile  of 
sewer.  The  sewers  were  flushed  about  once  in  six  weeks  from  flushing 
manholes  at  the  sunmiits,  of  which  there  were  about  125.  A  fungus 
growth  appeared  in  some  of  the  sewers,  which  was  removed  by  means  of 
a  rattan  brush.  This  fungus  grew  below  the  surface  of  the  sewage  and 
clung  to  the  sides  of  the  pipe,  in  some  places  leaving  only  a  narrow 
channel  in  the  center  for  the  flow. 

At  Springfield,  Mass.,  where  the  sewer  system  comprised  about  25 
miles  of  masonry  and  75  miles  of  pipe  sewers,  A.  A.  Adams  reported 
that  the  flushing  was  done  by  means  of  direct  connections  to  the  water 
system  at  all  terminal  and  some  intermediate  manholes.  The  system 
was  flushed  systematically  once  in  four  to  six  weeks,  which  proved 
sufficiently  often. 

In  the  report  of  the  Massachusetts  State  Board  of  Health  for  1898, 
page  674,  is  a  description  of  the  trouble  caused  by  the  growth  of  the 
fungus  lepiomitus  in  the  main  sewer  of  Westboro,  Mass.  This  organism 
grew  on  the  inside  of  the  sewer  and  was  present  at  times  in  such  quanti- 
ties that  the  sewer  was  clogged  and  it  was  necessary  to  remove  the 
growth  by  scraping.  The  organism  was  found  only  in  the  portion  of  the 
sewer  in  which  leakage  occurred  and  its  growth  appeared  to  be  in  some 
way  associated  with  the  presence  of  large  quantities  of  ground  water. 

Removing  Roots  from  Sewers. — Much  trouble  has  been  caused  in 
some  cities  by  the  growth  of  roots  within  sewer  pipes.  In  such  cases,  a 
fine,  hair-like  root  finds  its  way  through  an  imperfect  joint,  and  after 
reaching  the  inside  of  the  pipe  this  root  branches  and  grows,  sometimes 
forming  an  enormous  mass  of  hair-like  filaments,  illustrated  by  Fig.  161, 
from  a  photograph  kindly  furnished  by  Edwin  H.  Rogers,  city  engineer, 
Newton,  Mass.  Some  engineers  hold  that  it  is  useless  to  remove  such 
roots  from  time  to  time,  as  they  will  soon  grow  again,  and  that  it  is 
wiser  to  spend  sufficient  money  to  dig  up  and  repair  the  sewer,  thus 
preventing  the  admission  of  roots. 

A  spring  root  cutter  was  designed  and  used  at  Newton,  Mass.,  by 
C.  W.  Ross,  street  commissioner.  This  cutter  is  shown  in  Fig.  162,  and 
less  distinctly  in  Fig.  161.  It  is  made  of  spring  steel  1/4  in.  thick  and 
about  3/4  in.  wide,  with  the  outer  edge  sharpened  like  a  knife.  The 
ends  of  the  springs,  being  small,  are  easily  pulled  into  a  bunch  of  roots 
and  the  cutting  action  caused  by  pulling  the  spring  backward  and  for- 
ward is  sufficient  to  loosen  a  very  compact  mass.  The  cutting  spring 
is  sometimes  provided  with  a  helical  inner  spring  instead  of  the  chain 


600 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


shown  in  Fig.  163,  to  draw  the  cutting  spring  b&ck  to  its  proper  position 
after  it  has  been  stretched  by  being  pulled. 

W.  D.  Hubbard  stated  that  at  Concord,  Mass.,  if  there  was  a  joint 
in  the  sewers  in  which  there  was  a  bole  as  large  as  a  knitting  needle,  a 
root  would  enter  it  and  grow  from  5  to  10  ft.  long.    For  removing  such 


Fio.  162. — Ross  root  cutter. 

roots,  he  used  a  wire  brush  made  of  thin  strips  of  flexible  steel.  Upon 
being  drawn  through  the  sewer  the  brush  tore  off  the  root  where  it 
entered  the  pipe. 

Removal  of  Heavy  Deposits  from  Sewers. — Separate  sewers  may  be 
laid  on  vety  flat  grades  without  danger  of  serious  trouble  from  deposits. 


Fia    163  — Sewer  cleaning  device,  W  alsall 

Combined  sewers  and  storm  drains,  on  the  other  hand,  must  have  within 
them  a  velocity  of  at  least  2-1  /2  ft.  per  second  when  half  full,  to  prevent 
such  deposits.  This  fact  is  probably  more  clearly  understood  to-day 
than  50  years  ago  when  many  of  the  older  combined  sewers  in  this 
country  were  designed.    There  should,  therefore,  be  relatively  fewer 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  501 

future  deposits  in  places  where  ample  grades  oan  be  provided. 
There  are,  however,  cases  where  sufficient  grade  to  prevent  deposit 
can  only  be  obtained  by  pumping  the  sewage,  and  in  some  such  cases  it 
may  be  more  economical  to  remove  such  deposits  from  time  to  time 
than  to  provide  for  continuous  pmnping  of  sewage  and  the  occasional 
piunping  of  storm  water  in  very  large  quantities.  It  is,  therefore, 
important  to  consider  methods  for  removing  such  deposits,  both 
because  those  in  old  sewers  must  be  removed  from  time  to  time,  and 
because  in  all  probability  in  many  places  it  will  be  necessary  in  the 
future  to  build  sewers  with  such  flat  grades  that  deposits  will  occur  at 
certain  points. 

A  sewer  cleaner,  Fig.  163,  used  at  Walsall,  England,  was  described  by 
R.  G.  Anvel  in  Engineering  News^  Nov.  16, 1899.  This  device,  weighing 
about  550  lb.  consisted  of  wrought-iron  claws,  ten  on  each  side,  working 
on  a  common  axis  which  permitted  them  to  pass  over  irregularities  in 
the  invert.  The  bars  above  the  axle  prevented  the  claws  from  doub- 
ling over  backward.  The  device  was  pulled  backward  and  forward 
through  the  sewer,  by  means  of  two  steam  plowing  engines  and  wire 
ropes. 

An  interesting  piece  of  sewer  cleaning  was  described  by  J.  N.  Ambler 
in  Engineering  News,  June  25,  1908;  this  was  done  on  a  24-in.  pipe 
sewer  2200  ft.  long  at  Winston,  N.  C.  It  was  about  half  full  of  sand 
and  filth,  cemented  by  gas  tar  and  almost  entirely  obstructed  in  places 
by  growths  of  roots.  A  tool  made  of  steel  bands  bent  aroimd  hoops, 
Fig.  164,  was  used  to  loosen  the  upper  part  of  the  compacted  material 
and  to  cut  the  roots.  Water  was  admitted  to  the  upper  manhole, 
and  as  the  cleaner  was  pulled  backward  and  forward,  the  sediment  thus 
loosened  was  flushed  to  the  lower  manhole  where  it  settled  in  the  water 
impounded  behind  a  temporary  dam.  While  this  apparatus  gave 
excellent  results  in  loosening  the  obstructing  material,  the  apparatus 
illustrated  in  Fig.  165,  called  the  "butterfly,"  proved  more  effective  in 
forcing  it  to  the  lower  manhole.  As  the  butterfly  was  dragged  down 
the  sewer,  the  wings  opened,  taking  a  considerable  quantity  of  sedi- 
ment with  it.  WheD  being  drawn  back,  the  wings  closed,  thus  reducing 
to  a  minimmn  the  interference  with  the  deposit.  A  stream  of  water 
was  also  used  while  the  butterfly  was  being  drawn  down  the  sewer.  Both 
the  cutter  and  the  butterfly  did  more  effective  work  when  weighted  to 
hold  them  down  in  the  deposit.  The  wire  cable  for  drawing  the  apparatus 
was  drawn  back  and  forth  by  means  of  windlasses. 

The  sewer  was  thoroughly  cleaned  and  put  in  service  in  two  months. 
The  foreman  was  paid  $55  per  month  and  laborers  $1.50  per  day  of 
ten  hours.  Two  to  three  laborers  were  employed,  the  total  cost  of 
labor  being  $144.39  and  of  foremen,  $110.  The  estimated  cost  of 
cleaning  devices  and  supplies  was  $20,    The  total  cost  of  the  work  was 


502 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


S250.39equivalenttoabout  11.5  centa  per  foot.  The  estimated  quantity 
of  material  removed  from  the  sewer  waa  62  ou.  yd.  The  cost  per  cubic 
yard  is  estimated  at  $4.10. 

The  cleaning  of  a  sewer  at  Columbus,  Ohio,  is  described  in  Engineer- 
ing News  of  Dec.  27,  1900,  by  Julian  Gri^s.  The  sewer  was  large 
enough  so  that  men  could  enter  and  shovel  the  material  into  bucketa 
placed  in  a  flat-bottomed  boat  2  ft.  wide  by  10  ft.  long,  c&pable  of 
holding  ten  bucketa.  The  boat  when  full  was  floated  to  the  nearest 
manhole  and  the  loaded  buckets  raised  to  the  street  and  emptied. 
The  cost  of  cleaning  was  about  SI. 75  per  cubic  yard  of  material  removed. 


Fio.  164. — Hoop  cleaner. 


Fig,  165. — Butterfly  cleaner. 


The  Turbine  Sewer  Cleaner  is  an  apparatus  consisting  of  a  barrel 
provided  with  four  runners,  Fig,  166,  on  which  it  rides  when  moving 
through  the  sewer,  and  carrying  a  water  motor,  the  shaft  of  which  ex- 
tends out  from  the  front  end  and  carries  a  scries  of  hook-shaped  cutting 
blades.  The  motor  is  operated  by  water  from  a  hydrant,  dehvered  to 
one  end  of  the  cleaner  through  a  fire  hose.  Tlie  cleaner  is  hauled  through 
the  sewer  between  manholes  by  means  of  windlasses  and  is  said  to  have 
cleaned  an  18-in.  sewer  371  ft.  long  at  a  coat  of  $2.52  per  foot.  The 
apparatus  is  made  by  the  Turbine  Sewer  Renovating  Machine  Co.,  of 
Milwaukee. 

A  description  of  the  cleaning  of  sewers  of  hea\'y  detritus  is  given  by 
Frederick  L.  Ford  in  his  annual  report  of  1905  as  city  engineer  of  Hart- 
ford, Conn.    Sewers  3, 4  and  6  ft.  in  diameter,  respectively,  were  cleaned, 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  503 

the  first  by  the  use  of  pails,  and  the  second  and  third  by  the  use  of  wheel- 
barrows. The  length  of  sewer  cleaned,  the  quantity  of  detritus  removed 
and  cost  per  load  and    per  foot  of  sewer  are  given  in  Table  72, 


6iK 

t»w«.ft. 

Len,tbof«w«. 

Lowli  removHl 

Cat  pBt  load 

r.zr 

3 
4 
6 

1916 
2225 

5128 

107 

61 
107 

M.36 
3.99 
3.62 

$0,243 

0.109 
0,075 

The  average  distance  cleaned  per  man  per  day  was  as  follows:  3-ft. 
sewer,  9  ft-;  4-ft.  sewer,  33  ft.;'6-ft.  sewer,  32  ft. 

The  Thompson  Sewer  Cleaning  Machine  Co.,  of  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  has 
brought  out  the  machine  shown  in  Fig.  167.    By  using  a  snatch  block  at 


Fio.  166. — Turbine  aewer  cleaner. 

one  end,  the  drawing  cable  can  be  slipped  out  of  the  block  when  the 
cable  has  reached  the  manhole,  thus  making  it  poesible  to  pull  up  the 
scraper  with  its  load  and  dump  it  into  a  cart  or  wheelbarrow.  Such  a 
scraper  may  be  drawn  backward  and  forward  by  meana  of  hand  wind- 
lasses or,  upon  large  work,  by  hoisting  or  traction  engines.  It  engines 
are  used,  groat  care  should  be  exercised  to  prevent  damaging  the  sewer 
by  getting  the  scraper  caught  and  then  exerting  undue  pull  upon  the 
rope. 

An  apparatus  used  for  scraping  sewers  in  the  Borough  of  Brooklyn, 
New  York,  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  168.  The  portable  derrick  is  operated 
by  a  gasoline  engine.  The  bucket  and  method  of  operation  are  described 
in  a  tetter  to  the  authors  by  E.  J.  Fort,  Chief  En g.  of  Sewers,  as  follows: 

"This  bucket  has  been  somewhat  modified  since  it  was  first  designed. 
It  is  fitted  with  a  gate  at  each  end,  of  the  same  design.    This  goto  opens 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Fig.  167. — Thompson  sewer  cleaner. 


FiQ,  168. — Brooklyn  sewer  cleaning  equipment. 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 


505 


toward  the  inside  of  the  bucket  automatically.  It  opens  outwardly  when 
a  latch  is  opened  after  it  has  been  placed  in  position  for  dumping.  .  .  .  One 
man  is  stationed  on  the  street  at  the  manhole  and  guides  the  bucket  in  or  out 
of  the  manhole  as  the  engineer  raises  or  lowers  it.  One  man  is  located  at 
the  bottom  of  the  manhole  and  throws  the  cable  on  or  off  a  pulley  as  the 
bucket  enters  the  sewer  or  leaves  it.  Two  men  who  superintend  the  filling 
of  the  bucket  carry  it  back  into  the  sewer  and  place  it  in  position  for  filling. 
The  hoisting  engine  is  then  started  and  the  bucket  is  allowed  to  scrape  along 


Fig.  169. — Healey  sewer  cleaning  machine. 

the  bottom  until  it  is  full.  As  it  approaches  the  manhole  where  it  is  taken 
out,  the  cable  is  thrown  off  the  pulley  or  snatch  block  and  it  is  hoisted  out 
of  the  hole." 

A  scraper  which  has  been  used  to  some  extent  in  the  eastern  part  of 
the  country,  known  as  the  Healey  Sewer  Cleaning  Machine,  is  illustrated 
in  Fig.  169. 

Various  other  types  of  scrapers  have  been  used,  one  of  which  is  illus- 
trated by  Fig.  170.  This  scraper  is  provided  with  a  rod  connecting  the 
two  doors,  so  that  when  it  is  being  pulled  in  one  direction  the  rear  door 


Fig.  170. — Scraper  used  at  Quincy. 

is  held  tightly  closed  and  when  being  pulled  in  the  other  direction  the 
opposite  door  is  similarly  closed.  The  difficulty  with  this  and  most 
other  semicircular  scrapers  is  to  keep  them  right  side  up,  as  there  seems 
to  be  a  decided  tendency  for  them  to  overturn.  In  this  respect  the  full 
cylindrical  scraper  is  perhaps  somewhat  more  satisfactory.  There  is 
some  tendency  for  all  scrapers  to  ride  over  the  deposit,  especially  if  it 
is  very  much  compacted  or  cemented  with  tar. 

Any  sewer  which  is  large  enough  for  men  to  work  in  and  in  which  the 
flow  is  not  so  deep  as  to  prevent  their  standing  on  the  bottom,  can  be 
most  readily  and  economically  cleaned  by  shoveling  the  deposit  into 
buckets  and  handing  them  back  from  man  to  man,  or  shoveling  it 


506 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


directly  into  boats  or  placing  the  loaded  buckets  in  boats  and  floating 
the  load  back  to  the  manhole,  through  which  it  is  to  be  removed. 

In  some  cases  it  has  been  necessary  to  clean  relatively  large  sewers 
while  they  were  in  operation  at  nearly  their  full  capacity.  This  has 
been  successfully  and  economically  done  by  means  of  full  cylindrical 
scrapers  hauled  back  and  forth  by  hoisting  engines. 

It  often  happens  that  deposits  are  formed  in  relatively  short  lengths 
of  sewers  beyond  which  the  grades  are  such  as  to  provide  self-cleansing 
velocities.  In  such  cases  it  may  not  be  necessary  actually  to  remove 
the  grit  from  the  sewer,  but  simply  to  stir  it  up  and  flush  it  along  to 
the  point  beyond  which  the  velocity  is  sufficient  to  carry  it  to  the  outlet. 
Many  devices  for  this  work  have  been  used,  two  of  which  are  illustrated 
by  Fig.  171. 


Fig.  171. — Flashers  used  at  Newton. 


Another  device  for  accomplishing  this  purpose  is  a  ball  of  slightly  less 
diameter  than  the  sewer.  Such  a  ball  is  thrust  into  the  sewer  at  the 
upper  manhole  and  allowed  to  work  its  way  toward  the  lower  end. 
The  natural  flow  of  sewage  is  under  and  around  the  ball,  scouring  for- 
ward the  deposit.  This  method  of  cleaning  involves  little  expense  and 
where  conditions  have  been  favorable,  it  has  proved  quite  satisfactory. 
However,  there  is  always  some  apprehension  on  the  part  of  those  in 
charge  lest  the  ball  become  securely  lodged  in  the  sewer,  causing  a  stop- 
page which  wiU  require  digging  it  up. 

Where  sewers  connect  with  intercepters  leading  to  pumping  stations 
and  treatment  works,  there  may  be  little  gained  by  stirring  up  and 
flushing  along  such  deposits.  E.  S.  Dorr,  head  of  the  Boston  Sewer 
Division  for  many  years,  has  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  use  of 
scrapers  with  cutting  edges  for  stirring  up  the  deposit  and  carrying  it 
along  the  sewer  is  not  very  practicable  for  that  city,  as  the  material  is 
simply  carried  along  to  the  intercepters  or  other  places  further  down  the 
line,  from  which  it  must  ultimately  be  removed.    For  this  reason,  when 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 


507 


the  sewers  are  cleaned  the  material  is  generally  taken  out  at  the  nearest 
manhole  below. 

One  of  the  most  useful  tools  for  cleaning  sewers  is  the  jointed  rod. 
Formerly  the  rods  used  for  this  purpose  were  made  of  4-ft.  lengths  of 
1/2-in.  gas  pipe  threaded  at  each  end.  These  pipes  were  taken  into  the 
manhole  and  coupled  up  as  fast  as  they  were  pushed  into  the  sewer. 
Later  a  much  more  convenient  type  of  rod,  with  patent  coupling  for 
quick  connection,  has  been  used.  Two  types  of  such  couplings  are  illus^ 
trated  in  Fig.  172.  Both  rods  are  made  of  wood,  the  couplings  being 
securely  attached  to  either  end. 

An  idea  of  the  kit  of  tools  required  by  a  sewer  cleaning  gang  is  given 
by  Figs.  173  and  174,  showing  some  of  the  tools  used  upon  this  work  in 


TB5" 


\jlliiii/fmm'f''''''''-' 


\ 


\\\\\^^ \\\\U\\\\\\»\V\Ui««. 


Felton. 
Fig.  172. — Couplings  for  sewer  rods. 

Providence,  R.  I.,  from  photographs  kindly  furnished  by  Allen  Aldrich, 
Superintendent  of  Maintenance  Dept.  It  will  be  noticed  that  most  of 
the  tools  have  been  improvised  for  the  work  in  hand,  which  will  generally 
be  found  necessary,  although  there  are  a  few  stock  articles,  like  cleaning 
rods  and  root  cutters,  which  can  be  had  from  supply  houses. 

A  compilation  of  the  number  of  miles  of  sewers  and  the  cost  of  clean- 
ing them  in  the  Borough  of  Manhattan  was  given  in  Municipal  Journal, 
vol.  xxxviii,  page  287,  from  which  Table  73  was  taken.  It  is  inter- 
esting to  note  from  a  comparison  of  columns  2  and  3  of  this  table  that 
there  has  been  a  very  large  increase  in  the  proportion  of  the  sewer 
systems  cleaned.  From  1886  to  1888  less  than  5  per  cent,  of  the  sewers 
was  cleaned,  whereas  in  1908  and  1909,  between  40  and  50  per  cent,  of 
the  total  mileage  was  cleaned. 


508 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Table 


73. — Data  Relating  to  Cleaninq  of  Sewers  in  the  Borottqh 

or  Manhattan,  New  York 


Year 

Miles  of 

Miles 

Cost  per 

Year 

MUeeof 

Miles 

Cost  per 

sewers 

cleaned 

mile 

sewera 

cleaned 

mile 

1886 

414.20 

10.6 

12,050 

1898 

484.35 

43.8 

640 

1887 

421.51 

15.2 

1,210 

1899 

489.05 

44.4 

1,520 

1888 

429.09 

19.3 

1,370 

1900 

494 . 57 

56.6 

980 

1889 

433.73 

30.5 

1,000 

1901 

496.94 

66.2 

980 

1890 

437.89 

45.6 

810 

1902 

500.59 

85.6 

690 

1891 

444.29 

25.2 

690 

1903 

505.08 

124.5 

470 

1892 

449 . 37 

14.7 

760 

1904 

507.64 

132.6 

470 

1893 

455 . 80 

17.6 

750 

1905 

511.36 

99.7 

660 

1894 

461 . 52 

14.9 

640 

1906 

513.77 

144.8 

510 

1895 

468.20 

12.0 

630 

1907 

517.97 

205.6 

490 

1896 

472 . 18 

36.5 

780 

1908 

521.67 

218.7 

440 

1897 

483 . 06 

47.6 

710 

1909 

523 . 34 

248.8 

360 

The  cost  of  removing  deposit  from  sewers  is  generally  very  high 
because  of  the  great  difficulties  under  which  the  work  is  performed. 
Where  the  deposit  consists  of  mineral  matter  and  it  is  removed  from 
small  pipes,  the  work  is  necessarily  slow,  as  the  material  has  to  be  re- 
moved by  scrapers  unless  it  is  possible  to  use  some  mechanical  flushing 
device.  Upon  the  larger  sewers,  where  boats  and  pails  may  be  used  to 
advantage,  the  cost  may  be  greatly  reduced. 

In  Worcester,  Mass.,  a  regular  cleaning  gang  is  engaged  upon  work  of 
this  kind  throughout  the  year,  cleaning  large  and  small  sewers  as 
necessity  arises.  During  Bome  winters  additional  help  has  been  put 
on  the  cleaning  of  large  sewers.  The  average  cost  per  cubic  yard  of 
removing  deposits  from  sewers,  from  1903  to  1912  inclusive,  has  ranged 
from  f3.88  to  $9.74,  as  shown  by  Table  74.  Obviously,  the  cost  of  re- 
moving material  from  small  pipes  has  been  much  in  excess  of  these  figures 
and  the  cost  of  similar  work  upon  large  sewers  has  been  materially  less. 

Table  74. — Sewer  Cleaning  in  Worcester,  Mass. 


Year 

Miles  of  sowers  in 
system 

Quantity  deposit  re- 
moved, cu.  yd. 

Cost  of  removing 
deposit  per  cu.  yd. 

1903 

169 

1352 

16.56 

1904 

173 

1393 

4.89 

1905 

177 

1484 

3.88 

1906 

180 

972 

6.54 

1907 

183 

665 

9.74 

1908 

188 

1909 

5.84 

1909 

192 

.  ^825 

7.28 

1910 

199 

1580 

7.82 

1911 

205 

635 

7.14 

1912 

213 

728 

5.35 

^  Including  sediment  removed  from  regulators. 


Fio.  174. — Providence  sewer  flushing  equipment. 


Fta.  175. — Motor  truck  for  cleaning  catch -basins,  Fawtucket. 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  609 

Cleaning  and  Care  of  Catch-basins. — Most  of  the  cities  in  this  country 
provided  with  combined  sewers  or  storm  drains  have  built  large  numbers 
of  catch-basins  for  retaining  heavy  road  detritus,  so  that  it  will  not  enter 
the  sewers  and  form  deposits  where  the  velocities  of  flow  are  relatively 
low.  The  care  given  to  these  basins  varies  greatly  in  different  cities. 
In  some  places  they  are  examined  at  frequent  intervals  and  are  cleaned 
whenever  the  deposit  has  aocmnulated  to  such  an  extent  that  their 
capacity  is  so  reduced  that  they  will  not  be  likely  to  provide  ample  storage 
for  the  sediment  to  be  deposited  from  one  or  more  subsequent  storms. 
In  other  cities,  catch-basins  are  cleaned  only  when  they  are  practically 
full.  Still  other  maintenance  departments  do  not  attempt  to  clean 
basins  until  they  are  reported  as  being  stopped,  a  condition  indicated  by 
the  pooling  or  ponding  of  water  in  the  gutters  at  the  inlets. 

Where  catch-basins  are  cleaned  only  when  they  become  stopped,  or 
where  the  silt  is  allowed  to  accimiulate  in  them  to  such  a  point  that  it 
will  be  carried  over  into  the  sewers,  they  become  of  little  use,  for  the 
quantity  of  silt  retained  in  them  is  usually  only  a  very  small  proportion 
of  the  quantity  entering  them,  the  larger  jjortion  being  carried  over  into 
the  sewers.  On  the  other  hand,  basins  so  cared  for  are  objectionable  as 
furnishing  pools  of  stagnant  water  and  filth,  causing  the  escape  of  offen- 
sive odors  and  causing  pooling  of  water  in  the  gutters  at  the  inlets. 
Therefore,  it  would  seem  preferable,  if  the  basins  are  not  to  be  properly 
cared  for,  to  remove  them  altogether  and  substitute  for  them  inlets 
discharging  all  silt  directly  into  the  sewers. 

The  quantity  and  character  of  material  deposited  in  catch-basins 
varies  according  to  the  nature  and  slope  of  the  surface  of  the  street  in 
which  they  are  placed.  Where  the  natural  soil  is  of  a  sandy  or  gravelly 
nature,  and  slopes  are  steep  and  unpaved,  large  quantities  of  relatively 
clean  sand  and  gravel  are  carried  into  the  basin  and  are  retained  therein. 
Under  similar  conditions,  if  the  soil  is  of  a  clayey  nature,  very  little 
material  may  be  deposited  in  the  basin,  as  it  settles  so  slowly  that  it 
is  carried  with  the  storm  water  through  the  basins  into  the  sewers. 

Where  streets  are  paved,  the  quantity  of  material  that  is  washed  into 
and  retained  in  the  basins  is  relatively  small  and  consists  largely  of 
organic  matter,  which  becomes  quite  offensive  as  it  undergoes  putre- 
faction. The  sandy  deposits  are  usually  relatively  free  from  odor,  and 
when  the  water  is  bailed  out  of  the  basins,  they  can  be  removed  without 
creating  objectionable  conditions.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  basins  are 
in  paved  streets,  the  material  remaining  after  bailing  out  as  much  water 
as  ia  practicable  is  soft  and  offensive  and  cannot  be  thrown  out  on  the 
street  without  causing  objectionable  conditions.  Where  deposits  of 
the  former  are  to  be  removed  and  the  basins  are  of  proper  size,  the  most 
practical  method  is  to  have  a  man  enter  the  basin  and  throw  the  material 
out  of  it  onto  the  surface  of  the  street.    For  such  work  two  men  should 


610  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

go  together,  one,  the  ''bottom  man/'  to  do  the  work  in  the  basin,  the 
other  to  "bank  oflF"  the  material  thrown  out  and  help  load  it  into  the 
cart.  For  economical  work,  several  such  crews  should  go  together  and 
be  supervised  by  a  foreman.  Where  three  or  more  crews  are  working 
together,  it  will  probably  be  wise  to  have  two  or  more  men  precede  the 
"bottom  men,"  bailing  out  the  water  and  getting  the  basins  ready  for 
them.  Some  of  the  material  to  be  removed  from  the  basin  is  soft  and 
contains  much  putrid  organic  matter.  It  cannot  be  thrown  out  onto  the 
streets  during  the  busy  working  hours  of  the  day.  It  may,  tmder  some 
conditions,  be  so  handled  during  the  night  time.  In  some  cities,  how- 
ever, it  is  found  preferable  to  dip  the  material  out  of  the  basins  with 
long  dippers  or  pails,  emptying  it  directly  into  carts. 

Where  material  is  thrown  out  onto  the  surface  of  the  street,  or  where 
the  basins  contain  putrid  organic  matter,  the  street  should  be  thoroughly. 
Washed  down  and  the  basins  filled  with  clean  water  and  a  liberal  quantity 
of  disinfectant  sprinkled  about  to  reduce-  to  a  minimum  the  offensive 
conditions. 

At  Pawtucket,  R.  I.,  the  motor  truck  shown  in  Fig.  175  has  been 
used  in  cleaning  catch-basins.  City  Engineer  Geo.  A.  Carpenter  states 
that  in  248  consecutive  days  in  1914,  of  which  208  were  working  days, 
the  truck  worked  113  days  or  1071  hours.  The  four  men  employed 
with  the  truck  are  paid  $1.06|  per  hour.  During  this  time  821  of  the 
1151  catch-basins  in  the  city  were  cleaned,  some  of  them  more  than  once. 
The  total  number  of  cleanings  was  950.  The  truck  removed  1474.62 
cu.  yd.  of  material,  equivalent  to  1.8  cu.  yd.  per  basin  cared  for  and 
1.55  cu.  yd.  per  basin  cleaned.  The  haul  was  500  to  15,000  ft.  The 
truck  can  carry  2.6  cu.  yd.     The  cost  of  the  work  was  as  follows: 

Labor 11,144.63 

Gasoline 112.00 

Oil  and  grease 14 .  70 

Hydraulic  oil 24.50 

Tires 188,72 

Interest 126.00 

Depreciation 136 .  00 

Total 11,746.55 

This  amounts  to  $1,185  per  cubic  yard.  The  tire  exp)en8e  is  figured 
on  the  basis  of  a  set  of  rear  tires  annually  and  a  set  of  front  tires  every 
2  years.  The  interest  charge  is  4  per  cent,  on  $4200  for  9  months. 
The  depreciation  is  on  the  basis  of  10  full  years  of  work.  If  there 
were  enough  basins  to  keep  the  truck  busy  all  the  time,  the  cost  of  clean- 
ing would  be  about  $1.20  per  cubic  yard,  Mr.  Carpenter  estimates. 

A  marked  advantage  of  the  truck  is  its  availability  to  respond  in- 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  511 

stantly  to  emergency  demands  for  catch-basin  cleaning,  and  the  work  is 
done  so  easily  that  better  cleaning  results.  ''When  a  sudden  and 
severe  storm  has  visited  the  city,"  Mr.  Carpenter  stated,  "our  catch- 
basins  have  been  able  to  take  the  water  at  each  inlet  and  it  has  not  run 
by  plugged  basins,  as  formerly,  to  reach  low  places  which  had  no  outlet, 
except  through  the  sewers,  with  disastrous  results.  By  assuring  that 
the  numerous  inlets  provided  for  storm  water  are  kept  clear  and  in 
working  order,  the  capacity  of  the  sewers  has  been  increased,  practically.^' 

Much  work  is  caused  during  the  fall  of  the  year  by  large  quantities  of 
leaves  washed  into  the  basins,  in  many  cases  causing  clogging  of  the 
traps.  This  trouble  will  be  reduced  to  a  minimum  by  systematic, 
thorough  cleaning  of  the  streets  during  this  time.  While  this  involves 
some  expense,  it  saves  considerable  cost  caused  by  the  accumulation  of 
leaves  in  the  catch-basins,  and  the  net  cost  to  the  city  may  be  no  greater 
than  if  the  leaves  are  allowed  to  be  washed  into  the  basins. 

Another  fruitful  source  of  trouble  is  the  freezing  of  basins  during  the 
winter.  Where  basins  are  connected  with  combined  sewers,  the  air  in 
the  latter  is  usually  warm  enough  to  prevent  freezing  except  where  basins 
are  located  in  very  exposed  localities.  Where  connected  with  storm 
drains,  however,  the  air  in  the  drains  is  not  warm  enough  to  prevent 
freezing,  and  much  trouble  has  been  experienced  from  this  cause  in  a 
number  of  the  northern  cities,  in  some  of  which  the  number  of  basins 
frozen  has  been  s6  large  as  to  warrant  providing  portable  boilers  for 
furnishing  hot  water,  which  is  pumped  under  pressure  through  a  small 
flexible  pipe  into  the  basins  and  into  the  traps  for  thawing  the  ice.  Such 
thawing  is  usually  followed  by  placing  salt  in  the  trap  to  prevent  further 
freezing.  This  precaution,  however,  is  only  serviceable  until  there  is 
further  run-off  from  the  streets,  after  which  another  application  of  salt 
is  necessary. 

Basins  containing  large  quantities  of  putrid  or  organic  matter  some- 
times become  quite  offensive  between  storms.  In  such  cases  they  should 
be  flushed  from  a  hydrant,  thus  changing  the  water,  although  if  there  is 
a  large  accumulation  in  the  basins  it  will  be  better  to  remove  it,  afterward 
filling  the  basins  with  clean  water. 

Many  different  kinds  of  traps  have  been  built  in  catch-basins,  several 
of  which  are  illustrated  in  Volume  I.  In  selecting  a  trap,  it  is  well  to 
bear  in  mind  that  water  standing  above  the  deposit  in  the  basin  must  be 
bailed  out  and  discharged  either  into  the  street  gutter,  carried  to  a 
neighboring  manhole  or  basin,  or  poured  into  a  trap  in  the  basin  being 
cleaned.  The  last  method  is  by  far  the  most  economical  and  satis- 
factory, and  a  trap  suitable  for  such  use  should  be  provided. 

The  great  quantity  of  detritus  removed  from  the  sewer  systems  of 
some  cities  is  illustrated  by  data  contained  in  Table  75,  from  a  report 
of  the  Sewer  Maintenance  Department  of  Providence,  for  the  year 


512 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


ending  Sept.  30,  1913.  At  this  time  the  population  of  Providence  was 
about  235,000  and  the  total  length  of  sewers  was  about  230  iniles. 
During  this  year  nearly  9000  catch-basins  were  cleaned  and  18,233  cu. 
yd.  of  deposits  were  removed  from  them.  A  total  of  nearly  22,500  cu. 
yd.  of  deposit  was  removed  from  the  trunk  sewers  and  catch-basins. 
It  is  the  practice  to  examine  the  basins  once  each  month. 

The  data  given  in  Table  76  afford  a  good  idea  of  the  amount  of  work 
involved  in  caring  for  catch-basins  in  a  hilly  city  of  moderate  size,  having 
a  large  number  of  streets  built  of  gravel  or  water-bound  macadam. 
Worcester  has  had  a  fairly  uniform  rate  of  gfowth  and  the  sewer  system 


0  S  10  15  to  1 025  aSO  0.75  1.00 

|<- Number  of  Loads  per  8hr.  Day. ->|<- Cost  per  Lood ,  Dollars. — ->| 

Fig.  176. — Effect  of  length  of  haul  on  cost  of  teaming  in  cleaning  catch- 
basins. 

has  increased  in  size  accordingly.  This  is  reflected  in  the  gradual  in- 
crease in  number  of  catch-basins.  It  will  be  seen  that  in  a  general  way 
the  basins  average  uwo  cleanings  annually.  This  is  not  strictly  correct, 
however,  as  some  basins  which  retain  very  little  deposit  are  not  cleaned 
oftener  than  once  a  year  and  others,  located  on  or  at  the  foot  of  steep 
hillsides,  require  cleaning  frequently,  sometimes  as  often  as  after  each 
severe  storm.  The  quantity  of  deposit  removed  from  the  basins  has 
varied  from  4  to  8.5  cu.  yd.  for  every  basin  in  the  system.  The  average 
quantity  removed  at  each  cleaning  is  approximately  3  cu.  yd.  The 
increase  in  cost  of  cleaning  in  recent  years  has  resulted  largely  from  the 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 


513 


o 
z 

p 


H 

U 

Si: 

Q 

g-: 

H  CO 


PS 

H 
OQ 

H 
GQ 


H 
g 

S 

PS 
H 

n 

Q 
H 

o 

h 

PS 

H 

PL^ 

M 
Pi 
O 


BpjvX  siqno  'poAoin 


09 

I 

o 


spiViC  oiqno 
'pOAOoiaj  ^raodsQ 


d    ^H    ^H    r^ 


fH    VH    M    C4    C<l    d     iH 


• 

to 

• 

^4 

• 

00 

• 

• 

i 

• 

»>i 

• 

CO 

«H 

CO 

CO 

« 

e<i 

r>« 

<o 

s 

(N 

ti 

CO 

a» 

^ 

fH 

^H 

^ 

d 

^ 

a» 

a» 

a 

ti 

1H 

1H 

• 

• 
fH 

* 

1-1 

VH 

poovoio  iaquinj)^    C4  oo 


paniaxvzo 
Bduzi^  jaqiuiiftj 


C4   O)   ^  *-• 

^!  S  ^  S 


o  g  »-•  N  CO  «o 

h*  OD  0&  QQ  CO  O) 
O  h*  t^  00  Ob  (O 


SSSSSS8S8SSS 
aaaaaaoaaaaa 
OOOOOOOOOOOO 


e 

c2i 


epna  pvoQ 


spjViC  oiqno 
'paAoiuoj  ^raodoQ 


%99)  ux  i{%Su9ri 


CO 


8 


Q   iO   «0   ^   «0   C4   ^ 
Ci  vH    vH   CO 


V  o  o  u5  5  o 

OS     Tf«    ^    0»    ©  "* 

*         *         »         »         •  » 

CO  o»  ^  t^  ^ 


.b«'-iOaOC00>0aMC0b«>0 

aaqoinj^    eoioe4aOh«<Hi-i«-i^e<cooi 


s 

OQ 


spjViC  oiqno 

'pOAOOIdJ  ^tflOdOQ 


joqaznf^ 


W5 

H 

3 


o 

O 


S 

.a 

o 


epjViC  OTqna 
'poAomaj  ^nodoQ 


^09|  ni  i;)9aoq 


MOaoO^CO-<4«OCOaO«OtOh« 

oo^^^*^^<9^!f^ooco 
ociova>ioc<>ooQcou^a& 
eocooie^tHeic4<HC404^i-4 


g»e<|i0^e<|aA^iQ^f-tOC0 

^e«ioiesie<ifHeif-4«-ioifHvH 


to 


to 


ioqaxn^i    eo 


gpjViC  oiqno 

'pOAOUIdJ  ^IBOddQ 


00 


a 

-a 


j8quin|v[ 


^BpjvX  oiqno 
'poAOuiaj  ^iBodaQ 


CD 
CO 


)oa|  ai  q^Saaq 


o 
»o 


jaquin|v[  C4 


a 

o 


8 
8 


»0  ^  Q 

•H  CO  O 

•  •  •• 

«  ^  ^ 

lO  ^  ^ 


CO  8  8 

^  »o  ^ 


•H    M    ^ 


8 


Cl 


o  S  S  S 


CO 


o 
00 


w 


•^        V        M 


CO 

CO 


CO 


e«4 


8 


« 


(O 


N 


0) 

0 


iO 

lO 

to 


M 


CO 
CO 

C4 

00 


CO 

on 
go 


M 


Q»0      •^0»0      •M»0«*      -Q 

O 

»o 

• 

a)ooo><Hcocor«cotoQQ^ 
cor«oo^coMO<H^ti30^ 

cocdoQiotoade^dt^oicQ^I 

CO 


00 
IO 


»o 
»o 

e<i 

00 

C4 


CO 

oa 

i 

eo 


•o 


o 

Ol 


t 


CI 


o 
co 


>► 


|5 


jo  S  ^  «?  a  j7  9  a 
U*  A  <  A  1-^  1-^ 


<  ^ 


s 

o 


33 


614 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


increased  distance  the  refuse  must  be  hauled  to  find  asuitable.dumping 
ground.  The  refuse  is  shoveled  out  of  the  basins  onto  the  surface  of  the 
street,  which  accounts  in  a  measure  for  the  lower  cost  per  cubic  yard  for 
doing  this  work  in  Worcester  than  in  some  other  cities. 

The  effect  of  the  length  of  haul  on  the  number  of  loads  per  team  per 
day  and  on  the  cost  of  team  work  in  cleaning  catch-basins  is  shown  in 
the  curves  of  Fig.  176,  prepared  from  records  of  actual  experience  in 
Worcester,  furnished  by  Matthew  Gault,  Superintendent  of  Sewers  of 
that  city.  The  records  are  based  on  an  estimated  average  size  of  load 
of  1.2  cu.  yd.,  weighing  3240  lb.,  and  they  cover  a  period  of  87-1  /2  team- 
days.  They  are  representative  of  all  work  of  this  kind  done  in  that  city 
about  1907.  The  silt  was  the  detritus  from  ordinary  water-bound 
macadam;  it  was  thrown  out  on  the  surface  of  the  street  by  the  bottom 
men  and  shoveled  into  ordinary  tip  carts. 

Table  76. — Number  op    Catch-basins    Cleaned    and    Quantity    op 
Deposit  Removed  at  Worcester,  Mass.,  1902-1912 


Year 

Total  number  of 

catoh-barins  in 

system 

Number  of  clean- 
ings during  year 

Deposit^  removed 

per  basin  per  year, 

cu.  yd. 

Cost  of  cleaning 

per  cubic  yard 

deposit  removed 

1902 
1903 

2526 
2603 

8.5 
7.9 

$0.46 
0.41 

5549 

1904 

2694 

5886 

8.0 

0.50 

1905 
1906 

2748 
2818 

7.5 
6.5 

0.41 
0.57 

4652 

1907 

2902 

4804 

6.1 

0.81 

1908 

3014 

5053 

4.6 

0.81 

1909 

3138 

5142 

4.0 

0.81 

1910 

3251 

6094 

4.9 

0.74 

1911 

3322 

7035 

5.1 

0.69 

1912 

3413 

6783 

5.1 

0.85 

*  The  total  number  of  basins  in  ssrstem  is  used  in  computing  this  unit. 

NoU. — The  minimum  wage  was  |1.S6  for  8  hours  from  1902  to  10 11  and  |2  in  1912.  The 
"bottom  man,"  however,  was  paid  from  |2.10  to  |2.25  per  8-hour  day.  Teams  cost  |5  per 
day. 

In  Engineering  and  Contracting ,  March  23,  1910,  there  was  published 
a  table  from  the  annual  report  for  the  year  ending  Dec.  31,  1909,  of 
Edwin  J.  Fort,  Chief  Eng.  of  Sewers  for  the  Borough  of  Brooklyn, 
giving  data  relating  to  the  cleaning  of  catch-basins  in  that  borough, 
which  are  reproduced  in  Table  77. 

Relatively  dry,  clean  deposits  may  be  hauled  from  the  basins  to  the 
dump  in  an  ordinary  tip  cart  with  high  sides.  Special  care  should  be 
taken  to  have  the  tail  boards  fit  tightly  so  as  to  prevent  the  material 
from  flowing  through  crevices  and  falling  to  the  street.  If  the  deposit 
is  soft  and  wet,  it  is  better  to  provide  a  tight  cart  with  a  cover,  such  as 
that  shown  in  Fig.  177,  of  which  several  varieties  of  the  same  general 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  515 

type  are  on  the  market.  Such  carts  are  difficult  to  handle  on  soft 
dumps,  where  the  wheels  cut  in,  as  they  settle  down  so  far  that  the  body 
is  likdy  to  touch  the  ground  and  prevent  convenient  dumping. 

Table  77. — Catch-basin  CLBANmo  ik  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1905-1909 


No  ai 

No 

Soilr^ 

C«l 

Com 

buini 

■miMd 

deuwd 

™.yd. 

buUD 

«u..7d. 

of  ■QDW 

1906 

9,257 

40,242 

17,254 

25,512 

Jl.79 

SI.  23 

14.375 

1906 

9,537 

49,768 

25,S86 

33,423 

1.65 

1.26 

6,999 

1907 

9,979 

42,327 

24,389 

35,272 

1.63 

1.12 

9.674 

1908 

10,127 

47,933 

30,693 

44,476 

1.60 

1.10 

8,423 

1909 

10.285 

54,530 

30,619 

36,699 

1.541 

1.35 

6,615 

(11  mo.) 

FiQ.  177. — Covered  tip-cart  for  catcb-bosin  refuse. 

Table  78. — Cost  or  Cleaning  Catch-babinb  in  American 
Cities,  1910 


Frequency  at 

Cort  pec  year 

Con  per  oleuina 

Cort  POT  ™.yd. 

N0.0I 

citie* 

Mu. 

Min. 

Mew 

Mu. 

Min. 

Meu 

Mu 

MiD. 

M»D 

■e>il«l 

WhBD  luU,  oeffiHury. 

110.00 

»3.00 

ts.oo 

H.OO 

w.aa 

•  1.71 

11.80 

•  1.08 

•  1.S4 

7 

M 

4-Q  times  per  yw 

3.36 

3,38 

4^03 

1.21 

0.30 

0.9B 

\'M 

M™    th«.    12    lime. 

13.90 

3.00 

•" 

ToUl     cities     n- 

The  results  of  an  inquiry  made  by  Municipal  Engineering,  ob  to  the 
practice  of  various  cities  in  cleaning  catch-basins,  are  shown  in  Table 
78;  66  cities  reported.    It  will  be  seen  that  21,  or  practically  one-third 


516  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

of  the  cities,  clean  the  basins  only  when  full  or  offensive.  The  average 
cost  of  cleaning  per  year  varied  from  $1.34  to  $8.15. 

Recently  the  city  of  Washington  has  established  the  custom  of 
thoroughly  flushing  out  the  catch-basins  at  intervals  of  two  weeks,  and 
then  of  dosing  the  contents  of  the  basin  with  mosquito  oil  during  the 
breeding  season.  The  area  of  the  water  surface  in  the  catch-basins,  of 
which  there  are  5000,  is  approximately  12  sq.  ft.  each,  and  the  quantity 
of  oil  applied  to  each  basin  at  a  single  oiling  is  approximately  1  gill. 
The  average  corft  of  each  treatment  is  said  to  be  6  cents,  which  of  course 
does  not  include  the  cost  of  cleaning.  The  basins  are  regularly  cleaned 
at  intervals  of  four  weeks  throughout  the  year. 

Repairs. — The  repairs  required  by  a  sewer  83rstem  depend  on  its 
age  and  the  amount  of  such  work  done  from  year  to  year.  One  of  the 
most  common  repairs  is  the  changing  of  elevations  of  manhole  covers. 
Covers  placed  to  conform  to  a  macadamized  street  are  soon  found  to 
project  above  the  surface  because  the  pavement  has  worn.  It  soon 
becomes  necessary,  therefore,  to  lower  the  covers  and  when  the  street 
has  worn  to  such  an  extent  that  it  has  to  be  rebuilt,  it  again  becomes 
necessary  to  change  the  manhole  covers,  this  time  raising  them  to 
conform  to  the  new  elevation  of  the  street.  The  cover  illustrated  by 
Fig.  238,  Volume  I,  is  designed  to  meet  these  conditions  as  economically 
as  possible. 

Catch-basins  or  inlets  are  frequently  required  before  streets  are  paved 
or  provided  with  sidewalks.  When  the  streets  are  improved  it  is  usually 
found  that  changes  in  grade  and  alignment  require  the  alteration  of  the 
catch-basin  inlets.  While  such  changes  and  those  affecting  manhole 
covers  must  be  paid  for  by  the  municipality,  they  form  a  fruitful  source 
of  contention  between  the  different  departments  to  determine  which 
should  more  properly  pay  for  the  changes.  Whatever  decision  may  be 
reached  in  this  matter,  it  is  certain  that  the  cost  of  such  work  should 
be  carried  as  a  separate  item  in  the  accounts. 

It  will  be  found  occasionally  that  brick  and  masonry  sewers  have  be- 
come cracked  or  the  inverts  have  become  worn.  Such  minor  repairs  as 
are  required  to  put  the  sewers  i^to  first-class  condition  should  be  made 
promptly.  Little  difficulty  will  be  experienced  in  making  repairs  in  the 
larger  storm  drains  and  in  combined  sewers.  In  the  latter  case,  when 
the  invert  is  to  be  repaired,  the  sewage  must  be  dammed  and  carried 
over  the  section  under  repair  in  Humes  or  pipes.  Diaphragm  pump 
hose  has  often  served  for  carrying  sewage  under  such  conditions  and  is 
particularly  well  adapted  for  this  work. 

The  use  of  a  cast  lining  for  repairing  the  inverts  of  brick  sewers  at 
Hempstead,  England,  is  described  in  the  Surveyor  for  Aug.  16,  1912. 
The  invert  blocks  were  2  in.  thick  and  2  ft.  long.  They  were  built  of 
reinforced  concrete,  lowered  through  the  manhole  and  laid  in  cement. 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 


517 


A  corbel  was  placed  on  each  side  at  the  top  of  the  mvert  and  set  into  the 
original  masonry.  The  offset  formed  by  this  corbel  was  smoothed  back 
with  cement  mortar.  Fig.  178  shows  a  cross-section  of  a  sewer  repaired 
in  this  manner. 

Regulators  and  Inverted  Siphons. — ^Where  regulators  are  provided  to 
control  the  flow  of  combined  sewers  into  intercepters,  they  should  be 
inspected  at  frequent  intervals,  preferably  once  each  day,  to  make  sure 
that  they  are  in  proper  adjustment  and  in  good  working  condition.  The 
metal  work  should  be  carefuUy  examined  from  time  to  time,  worn  parts 
removed,  and  if  the  parts  are  of  iron  they  should  be  kept  well  painted 
with  red  lead  and  oil. 

It  was  formerly  thought  that  inverted  siphons  required  much  attention 
and  cleaning,  but  this  has  proved  incorrect  in  most  cases.  Such  struc- 
tures, however,  should  be  examined  at  frequent  intervals,  preferably 


-    ,  .  ,..,.  Cement 
Corbel -VJ^  J 


ffeinforced 
Concnfte- 


Crofts  Section.  Longitudinal  Section. 

FiQ.  178. — ^Lining  blocks  for  repairing  sewer  inverts. 


once  each  month,  to  make  certain  that  they  are  in  good  condition,  and  if 
found  to  require  cleaning  or  .flushing  they  should  be  given  prompt  atten- 
tion. 

Records. — It  is  very  desirable  that  records  be  systematically  kept  in 
accordance  with  a  general  plan  so  laid  out  as  to  present  the  data  in  most 
convenient  form  and  most  easily  accessible. 

The  form  prepared  by  the  Sanitary  Section  of  the  Boston  Society 
of  Civil  Engineers  for  a  Sunamary  of  Sewerage  Statistics  has  been 
adopted  in  part  by  the  Bureau  of  the  Census  of  the  U.  S.  Department 
of  Commerce.  It  has  also  been  adopted  by  a  number  of  sewer  depart- 
ments and  the  data  printed  in  their  annual  reports.  A  committee  of 
the  Sanitary  Section  of  the  Boston  Society  of  Civil  Engineers  compiled 
data  in  accordance  with  this  summary  and  presented  reports,  published 
in  the  Journal  of  the  AssocicUion  of  Engineering  SocietieSy  vols,  xl  and 
xlii.  A  copy  of  the  blank  form,  "Summary  of  Sewerage  Statistics," 
omitting  the  portions  relating  to  the  details  of  sewage  treatment,  is 
given  on  pages  518  to  521  inclusive. 


618  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

SUMMARY  OF  SEW£RAG£  STATISTICS 

(In  fonn  reoommended  by  Sanitary  Section  of  Boston  Society  of  Civil 

Engineers) 

For  the  ye«r  ending i  19 


(City  or  Town.)  (State.) 

Is  this  form  used  in  preparing  the  annual  report  of  your  department? 


(Name,  official  title  and  addrees  of  person  furnishing  information) 

General 

Population  by  census  of  19 

Total  area  of  city  or  town square  miles 

Area  served  by  sewerage  system "      " 

For  sewage  only miles 

Collection  System  {  For  sewage  ietnd  surface  water miles 

For  surface  water  only miles 


Method  of  disposal 


Collection 

MAINS  (everything  BUT  HOUSE  AND  CATCH-BAfilN  CONNBCTIONS) 


For  sewage      For  sewltge  and         For  eurfaoe 
only  Burf  aoe  water  water  only 


«         •         •         •  ■•■•• 


•  • 


1.  Linear  feet  stone 

2.  "         "    brick  .    . 

3.  "         "     concrete. 

4.  "        "    pipe 

5.  "        "    extended  during  year 

6.  Number  of  inverted  siphons  .    . 

7.  "         "    manholes 

8.  Method  of  flushing 


•   ••••■ 


9.  Method  of  cleaning 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 


619 


Collection. — Continued 


For  sewage     For  Mwace  and 
only  surfaoe  water 


For  surface 
water  only 


10.  Number  of  automatic  flushing 
tankfl 

11.  Number  of  direct  oomiections 
with  water  mains  for  flushing  . 

12.  Number  of  flushings  of  entire 
system  during  year    .   . 

13.  Ck>st  of  flushing  per  mile 

14.  Number  of  miles  cleaned 

15.  Cost  of  cleaning  per  mile 

16.  Number  of  stoppages .    . 

17.  Miles  of  permanent  underdrains 

18.  Number  of  storm  overflows  .    . 

19.  Method  of  ventilation   .... 

20.  Cost  of  maintaining  sewer  sys- 
tem exclusive  of  disposal  works 
(including  cost  of  flushing  and 
cleaning  sewers;  cost  of  cleaning 
catch-basins;  administration 
and  imclassified  expense)  .    .    . 


«   •  •   •  • 


HOUSE  CONNECnONB 

21.  By  whom  made 

22.  Sizes 

23.  Number  made  during  year 

24.  Linear  feet  laid  during  year 

25.  Linear  feet  discontinued  during 

year 

26.  Total  miles  in  use 

27.  Average  cost  per  ft.,  connec- 
tions made  during  year 

28.  Number  of  stoppages  coming  to 
attention  of  department 

CATCH-BASINS 

29.  Number     .    .    . 

30.  Number  cleaned 

31.  Av.  amount  material  removed  per  catch- 

32.  Cost  of  removing  material  per  cubic  yard . 

33.  "    "        "  "        "  catch-basin  per 


•       • 


»       •       « 


•       • 


year 


.«..•.. 


... 


620  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


Discharge  of  Sewage 

34.  Estimated  population  using  sewer  system   . 

35.  Number  of  buildings  connected 


Average  Maximum  Minimum 

(gallons)  (gallons)  (gallons) 

36.  Daily  discharge  for  year 

37.  "  "  "    each  user 

38.  "     quantity  of  factory  waste     

39.  "    leakage  into  sewers 

40.  "         "        per  mile  of  sewer     

41.  Are  quantities  given  under  36  and  38  estimated  or  measured? 


Pumping 
42.  Description  of  plants 


•   •   ■   •   •   •    •■•••••■«••••■•••••■ 


•  •••••••••■a 


43.  Description  of  fuels  or  power  used: — 

A.  Coal. 
(a)  Kind   .    . 

(&)  Brand 

(c)  Av.    cost    per   gross    ton 

delivered $. . . . 

{d)  Percentage  of  ash 

B.  Ftiel  for  internal  combustion  engines, 
(e)  Kind  and  grade     

(/)  Av.  cost $. . . . 

C.  Electricity. 

(g)  Av.  cost  per  kw.  hr.  .    .    .  I 

44.  Amount  of  fuel  or  power  consumed  for  the  year 

45.  Total  pumpage  for  year  -»:+i.j.„x  allowance  for  slip gals. 

46.  Av.  static  head  against  which  pump  works ft. 

47.  Av.  dynamic  head  against  which  pump  works ft. 

48.  No.  of  gallons  raised  one  foot  per  unit  of  fuel  or  power 

49.  Cost  of  pumping  figured  on  pumping  station  expenses  per  million  gallons 
raised  one  foot  (dynamic),  not  including  fixed  charges  .  $ 

50.  Describe  screens 


*•«•••••*•■•■» 


MAINTJ^NANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 


521 


Receipla 

86.  Balance  of  previous 
year 9 

87.  Bonds  issued    .    . 

88.  Appropriation.    . 

89.  Assessments.    .    . 
00.  House  connections 
91.  Other  sources  .    . 

92.  Totel, 


Financial 

CONSTRUCTION 

Expenditures 

93.  Collection  works: 

(a)  mains 

(b)  house   connec- 
tions    

94.  Disposal  and  purifi- 
cation works    .    .    . 

95.  Balance 

96.  Total, 

MAINTENANCE  AND  OPERATION 


$ .  .  .  . 


•    •    •    • 


Receiple 

97.  Balance  of  previous 
year 

98.  Appropriation 

99.  Assessments 

100.  Rentals     .    .    . 

101.  Other  sources  . 


102.  Total, 


Expenditures 

103.  Administration    .    . 

104.  Repairs* 

105.  Cleaning  sewers  .    . 

106.  "      catch-basins 

107.  Flushing  sewers  .    . 

108.  Pumping 

109.  Disposal  or  purifica- 
tion^       

110.  Unclassified  ex- 
penses*  

111.  Balance 

112.  Total, 

113.  Interest  on  bonds  . 

114.  Sinking  fund    .    .    . 


GENERAL 

115.  Total  cost  of  collecting  mains S 

116.  "       "       "  pumping  system 

117.  "      "      '' disposal  works 

118.  "      "      "works  to  date 

119.  Bonded  debt  at  date 

120.  Value  of  sinking  fund  at  date 

121.  Average  rate  of  interest  on  bonds per  cent. 

122.  Proportion  of  cost  of  system  assessed  on  abutters ... 

123.  Yearly  assessment  for  maintenance 

124.  Method  of  assessing  abutters  and  rate  of  assessment  . 


$ 

i 

1  Including  payment  for  maintenance  of  joint  disposal  works. 
*  State  what  "Repairs"  and  "Unclassified  expenses"  include. 


522  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

While  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  all  sewer  departments  will  incorpo- 
rate this  summary  of  sewerage  statistics  into  their  annual  reports,  it 
is  very  desirable  that  they  begin,  if  possible,  to  keep  their  records  in 
such  form  that  they  will  provide  the  data  required  for  this  summary, 
particularly  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  information  is  called  for  by  the 
Bureau  of  the  Census. 

Cost  of  Operation  and  Maintenance  of  Sewerage  Systems. — ^The 
cost  of  operation  and  maintenance  of  a  sewerage  system  will  depend 
upon  its  extent,  age,  the  number  of  special  features  such  as  catch-basins, 
inverted  siphons,  automatic  regulators,  tide  gates  and  pumping  stations; 
the  character  of  design  and  construction;  the  topography,  character  of 
soil  and  extent  of  development  of  the  community;  the  attention  given 
to  the  care  of  the  works;  the  degree  of  efficiency  of  the  several  features 
of  the  system;  and  the  efficiency  of  the  operating  and  maintenance 
organization. 

It  should  not  cost  much  to  maintain  a  sewer  if  it  is  allowed  to  go  com- 
pletely out  of  use,  as  has  been  the  case  in  some  instances  known  to  the 
authors.  One  such  instance  was  an  intercepting  sewer  which  had  been 
allowed  to  become  partly  filled  with  detritus.  Finally  a  hole  was  broken 
in  it  near  its  upper  end.  The  sewage  was  collected  from  about  one-half 
the  city  and  allowed  to  find  its  way  against  the  grade  of  the  intercepter, 
out  at  the  upper  end  into  the  river,  and  then  finally  flow  downstream 
past  the  city,  a  condition  which  the  intercepter,  built  at  an  expense  of 
over  $160,000  was  intended  to  prevent. 

The  most  complete  records  of  maintenance  with  which  the  authors 
are  familiar,  covering  a  long  period  of  years,  have  been  printed  in  the 
reports  of  the  Superintendent  of  Sewers  of  Worcester,  Mass.,  and  the 
data  from  this  source  in  Table  79  cover  the  period  from  1877  to  1912 
inclusive.  It  is  not  practicable  to  give  sufficient  information  about  the 
Worcester  sewerage  system  to  enable  the  reader  to  understand  in  detail 
the  meaning  of  these  expenditures,  but  a  few  notes  may  enable  him  to 
use  the  data  as  a  guide  in  preparing  similar  statistics  and  to  make 
rough  but  helpful  comparisons. 

This  system  was  originally  built  upon  the  combined  plan  without 
pumping  stations  and  discharged  at  numerous  points  into  Mill  Brook, 
a  creek  of  about  3,000,000  gal.  daily  dry-weather  flow,  largely  drawn 
from  storage.  The  general  topography  is  moderately  rugged,  although 
slopes  in  excess  of  5  per  cent,  are  rare  and  there  are  many  lines  of  sewers 
laid  on  flat  grades.  The  soil  varies  in  character  in  different  parts  of  the 
city,  including  sand,  gravel,  loam,  and  hardpan.  In  1912  there  were 
23.54  miles  of  paved  streets,  76.38  miles  of  water-bound  macadam,  and 
113.97  miles  of  natural  earth  or  gravel  streets,  making  a  total  of  213.89 
miles.  There  were  213.09  miles  of  sewers  and  storm  drains.  About 
1890  the  city  began  the  construction  of  separate  sewers  and  storm 


MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS  523 

drains  in  certain  portions  of  the  city,  continuing'  the  construction  of 
combined  sewers  in  others.  In  1897  work  was  begun  on  intercepting 
sewers  and  the  paralleling  of  combined  sewers  with  separate  sewers  in 
a  large  area  comprising  about  one-third  of  the  sewered  portion  of  the  city. 
At  the  close  of  the  year  1912  there  were  13  inverted  siphons,  32  auto- 
matic regulators,  3413  catch-basins  and  7528  manholes.  The  lengths 
of  sewers  and  drains  were: 

Separate  sewers 93 .  320  miles 

Combined  sewers 66 .  053  miles 

Storm  drains 63 .  714  miles 

Total 213.087  miles 

There  are  now  four  small  pumping  stations,  two  using  centrifugal  pumps 
and  two  Shone  ejectors. 

The  cost  of  maintenance  of  the  sewer  system  for  each  year  from  1877 
to  1912  inclusive  covers  the  cost  of  cleaning  sewers,  catch-basins,  in- 
verted siphons  and  regulators,  of  keeping  the  entire  system  in  repair, 
of  readjusting  manholes  and  catch-basins  to  conform  to  lines  and  grades 
of  streets  as  required  by  construction  and  reconstruction  by  street 
department,  of  operation  of  pumping  stations,  regulators,  etc.  The 
system  of  accounts  has  been  so  kept  for  about  15  years  that  the  Sewer 
Maintenance  Department  has  borne  its  proper  portion  of  the  mam 
office  and  overhead  charges.  The  repairs  to  sewers,  when  in  the  nature 
of  upkeep,  appear  in  the  maintenance  account  but  when  reconstruction 
is  necessary  it  is  charged  to  construction. 

At  the  end  of  1912  the  books  showed  the  cost  of  the  system  to  be 
$5,400,791.21  equivalent  to  about  $25,350  per  mile.^  The  maintenance 
cost,  including  pumping,  for  that  year  was  $29,744.78,  equivalent  to 
to  0.55  per  cent,  upon  the  book  value.  If  the  cost  of  pumping  and 
alterations  due  to  changes  made  by  street  department  and  a  small 
sum  paid  in  damages  are  omitted,  the  true  maintenance  cost,  i.e., 
for  repairs  and  cleaning,  would  become  $22,002.57  equivalent  to  0.4 
per  cent,  of  the  book  value. 

The  annual  sums  expended  upon  strictly  maintenance  work  from  1902 
to  1912  inclusive  are  given  in  Table  80,  from  which  it  will  be  seen  that  the 
cleaning  of  catch-basins  is  by  far  the  largest  item. 

To  arrive  at  a  clear  conception  of  the  meaning  of  these  expenditures, 
they  have  been  reduced  to  units  of  cost  per  mile  of  sewers  and  drains, 
per  catch-basin  and  per  regulator,  Table  81,  With  the  increase  in 
the  proportion  of  separate  sewers,  there  has  been  a  reduction  of  cost  of 
cleaning,  because  the  removal  of  sand  and  road  detritus  is  only  necessary 
from  the  combined  sewers  and  storm  drains,  the  separate  sewers  simply 

*  I  Deluding  the  conatruction  of  a  atone  masonry  conduit  for  Millbrook,  the  lower  portion 
of  which  is  13  X  18  ft. 


524 


AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 


requiring  flushing.  As  only  a  very  few  miles  of  sewers  require  cleaning, 
these  costs,  if  reduced  to  units  per  mile  of  sewer  actually  cleaned,  would 
be  very  high.  The  cost  of  cleaning  catch-basins  is  largely  dependent 
upon  the  distance  the  refuse  must  be  hauled  for  disposal,  which  in  the 
larger  cities  is  likely  to  gradually  increase  as  the  natural  dumps  become 
filled.    It  should  be  noted  that  the  cost  of  catch-basin  cleaning  has 


Table  79. — Total  and  Unit  Costs  of  Maintenance  and  Operation 
OF  Sewerage  System  at  Worcester,  Mass.,  1877-1912 


Date 

Miles  sewers  and 
drains 

Net  expenses 

Cost  per  mile 

1877 

36.17 

S7,775.44 

$314.97 

1878 

37.26 

6,657.59 

176.26 

1879 

37.38 

6,307 . 16 

168.73 

1880 

37.88 

6,937 .  43 

183.14 

1881 

40.40 

6,379.10 

157.90 

1882 

42.90 

7,490.01 

174 .  59 

1883 

45.63 

8,421.88 

184.56 

1884 

48.00 

9,132.05 

190.25 

1885 

50.94 

8,656 .  86 

169.94 

1886 

56.41 

10,843.23 

192 . 22 

1887 

62.89 

12,819.53 

203.84 

1888 

68.02 

12,989 .  12 

190.96 

1889 

a. 39 

13,995 .  65 

196.04 

1890 

76.59 

14,686 .  38 

191.75 

1891 

80.94 

13,435.66 

165.99 

1892 

85.44 

13,488.24 

157 . 86 

1893 

90.04 

15,423.38 

171.29 

1894 

95.42 

16,302.97 

170.85 

1895 

99.29 

17,518.17 

176.43 

1896 

102.69 

15,925 .  38 

155.08 

1897 

112.01 

14,504.06 

129.48 

1898 

121.97 

13,475.08 

110.47 

1899 

134.14 

16,234.00 

121.02 

1900 

151.09 

19,488.55 

128 . 98 

1901 

158.47 

19,730.69 

124.50 

1902 

162 . 75 

22,715.75 

139 . 57 

1903 

169.13 

26,300.89 

155.51 

1904 

172.97 

26,962.84 

155.88 

1905 

176.81 

27,973.29 

158.21 

1906 

179 . 56 

30,063 .  50 

167.42 

1907 

183.04 

29,999.02 

163 . 89 

1908 

187.73 

29,084 .  42 

159.43 

1909 

192.25 

30,645 .  92 

159.41 

1910 

198 . 66 

29,326.99 

147.62 

1911 

205 . 32 

29,729 .  91 

144 . 80 

1912 

213.09 

29,744.78 

139 . 59 

MAINTENANCE  OF  SEWERAGE  SYSTEMS 


525 


Table  80. — Itemized  Total  Cobts  of  Repairs,   Changes,  Cleaning 

Sewers,  Cleaning  Catch-basins  and  Maintaining  Automatic. 

Regulators  at  Worcester,  Mass.,  1902-1912 


Year 

Repairs  of 
sewers, 
catch- 
basins, 
manholes 
and  other 
structures 

Changes  1 

in 
manholes 
and  catch- 
basins 

Cleaning 
sewers 

Cleaning 
catch- 
basins 

Main- 
taining 
regulators 

Total 

1902 
1903 
1904 
1905 
1906 
1907 
1908 
1909 
1910 
1911 
1912 

$4,879 
5,355 
4,646 
5,917 
5,634 
4,553 
4,142 
3,995 
660 
2,040 
1,366 

$7,356 

9,019 
6,802 
6,754 
6,391 
6,478 
5,306 
6,007 
4,535 
4,533 
3,899 

$12,146 

8,414 

10,845 

8,390 

10,360 

11,908 

11,118 

*10,101 

n  1,527 

n2,334 

n4,829 

$   130 

41 
1,162 
1,718 
2,407 
2,480 
3,188 
2,062 
1,988 
1,729 
1,909 

$24,511 
22,829 
24,665 
22,666 
26,914 
26,117 
24,312 
23,212 
22,243 
22,554 
23,164 

1,110 

876 
1,122 
700 
658 
1,047 
3,533 
1,918 
1,161 

^  Changes 

*  Includes 

respectively. 


due  to  alterations  in  street  lines  and  grades  by  street 
costs  of  freeing  trap»— 1104,  $495,  $604  and  $1603 


department. 

for  years  1009  to  1012. 


Table  81. — Itemized    Unit    Costs    op    Repairs,    Cleaning     Sewers 
Cleaning  Catch-basins  and  Maintaining  Automatic  Regulators 

at  Worcester,  Mass.,  1902-1912 


Year 

Repairs  of  sewers, 
catch-basins,  man- 
holes and  other 
structures  per 
mile  of  Hystpm 

Cleaning  sewers 

per  mile  of 

system 

Cleaning 

catch-basins 

per  basin^ 

Maintaining 

regulators 
per  regulator 

1902 

$30 

$45 

$4.81 

$4.06 

1903 

32 

54 

3.23 

1.28 

1904 

27 

39 

4.03 

36.31 

1905 

33 

33 

3.06 

53.69 

1906 

31 

36 

3.68 

75.22 

1907 

25 

35 

4.10 

77.50 

1908 

22 

28 

3.69 

99.62 

1909 

21 

31 

3.22 

64.44 

1910 

3 

23 

3.55 

62.13 

1911 

10 

22 

3.71 

54.03 

1912 

6 

1             18 

4 .  35 

59.66 

1  Based  on  whole  number  of  basins  and  not  on  number  actually  cleaned. 

ranged  from  S3.06  to  $4.81  per  basin  per  year.  While  these  costs  are 
greater  than  they  would  be  in  cities  where  grades  are  less  steep  and  the 
soil  of  such  a  nature  that  it  will  not  be  retained  to  so  great  an  extent 


526  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

in  the  catch-basins,  nevertheless  the  probable  cost  of  such  cleaning  is 
one  of  the  things  which  should  be  carefully  considered  before  deciding 
whether  to  put  in  catch-basins  or  direct  inlets.  In  some  cases  it  may 
even  be  wise  to  take  out  existing  basins. 

From  the  footnote  to  Table  80  it  will  be  seen  that  the  cost  of  keeping 
catch-basin  traps  free  from  obstruction,  largely  ice,  is  considerable. 

The  cost  of  cleaning  catch-basins  per  cubic  yard  of  material  removed 
from  1909  to  1912  ranged  from  $0.70  to  $0.80,  exclusive  of  cost  of  freeing 
traps.  The  average  annual  cost  of  cleaning  the  sewers,  per  cubic  yard 
of  material  removed,  during  the  last  ten  years  has  ranged  from  about 
$4  to  nearly  $10,  the  range  in  cost  of  cleaning  individual  sewers  being 
much  greater,  however.  It  is  evident  that  it  is  much  less  expensive  to 
remove  material  from  the  catch-basins  than  from  the  sewers.  Similarly, 
it  will  be  found  far  less  expensive  to  remove  sand  and  detritus  from  the 
street  gutters  than  from  the  basins.  Therefore  in  places  where  detritus 
will  settle  and  accumulate  in  sewers,  it  may  be  economical  to  use  catch- 
basins  and  it  will  be  economical  to  make  every  effort  to  keep  the  streets 
clean  that  the  quantity  of  detritus  to  be  removed  from  basins  and  sewers 
may  be  reduced  to  a  minimum.  Catch-basins  should  be  put  in  only 
as  a  result  of  careful  and  intelligent  consideration  of  all  local  conditions. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

EXPLOSIONS  m  SEWERS 

ExploeionB  in  sewers,  which  occurred  at  rare  intervals  for  many 
years,  have  recently  become  common  occurrences.  The  disastrous 
results  of  some  of  them  and  an  appreciation  of  the  serious  character  of 
this  source  of  danger  is  leading  to  much  study  of  their  causes  and  methods 
of  preventing  them. 

Sources  of  Inflammable  Gases  and  Explosions. — Many  explosions 
have  occurred  in  sewers,  due  to  the  ignition  of  explosive  mixtures  of 
air  with  illuminating  gas,  naphtha  vapor  or  possibly  other  gases.  Illu- 
minating gas  leaking  from  a  defective  main  may  find  its  way  through  the 
ground  and  into  a  sewer  in  sufficient  quantity  to  cause  an  explosive 
mixture.  Most  sewer  maintenance  superintendents  have  had  experi- 
ences of  this  kind,  although  probably  in  relatively  few  have  there  been 
explosions.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  find  the  source  of  such  gas,  as  it 
may  travel  a  considerable  distance  from  the  point  where  it  enters  the 
sewer  to  the  place  where  it  is  detected.  During  recent  years  trouble 
has  frequently  resulted  from  the  discharge  of  gasoline  into  sewers, 
largely  from  automobUe  garages.  Gasoline  vapor  is  considerably  heavier 
than  air  and  therefore  is  not  always  readily  distinguished  by  odor 
when  the  observation  is  made  from  the  top  of  the  manhole.  This 
new  source  of  danger  has  necessitated  ordinances  preventing  the  dis- 
charge of  gasoline  into  sewers  and  requiring  lighting  appliances  for  the 
use  of  inspectors  and  laborers  whDe  working  within  the  sewers. 

An  explosive  mixture  may  result  from  the  decomposition  of  the 
organic  matter  in  the  deposits.  By  such  decomposition  marsh  gas, 
or  methane,  may  be  produced  in  coDsiderable  quantities,  and  if  there  is 
not  an  adequate  circulation  of  air  to  provide  ventilation,  it  is  conceivable 
that  the  proportion  of  this  gas  to  the  oxygen  in  the  air  in  the  sewer  may 
be  sufficient  to  provide  an  explosive  mixture.  While  it  must  be  ac- 
knowledged that  this  is  a  possibility  in  a  few  badly  ventDated  sewers 
in  which  extensive  deposits  of  organic  matter  are  present,  experience 
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  this  can  be  the  cause  of  explosions  in  very 
few  cases. 

In  a  paper  entitled  "The  Discharge  of  Inflammable  Wastes  into 
Sewerage  Systems  and  the  Problem  of  Prevention,"  by  N.  S.  Sprague, 
Superintendent  of  the  Bureau  of  Construction,  Department  of  Public 
Works,  Pittsburg,  presented  to  the  annual  convention  in  1914  of  the 

527 


528  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

American  Society  of  Municipal  Improvements,  he  points  out  a  possi- 
bility of  the  leakage  of  gasoline  from  storage  tanks  which  are  placed 
underground,  usually  pursuant  to  requirements  of  municipal  ordinances; 
this  gasoline  may  find  its  way  into  sewers.  Furthermore  these  tanks 
are  often  laid  directly  on  the  ground  and  covered  with  earth,  under 
which  circumstances  erosion,  breakage  of  joints  and  even  electrolytic 
action  may  result  in  leakage. 

Waste  inflammable  liquors  are  discharged  in  small  quantities  from 
many  households,  private  garages,  stores  and  shops,  but  the  greater 
danger  probably  arises  from  the  discharge  of  much  larger  quantities  of 
such  liquids  from  public  garages,  dry-cleaning  establishments,  paint 
works,  oil  refineries,  gas  works  and  other  industrial  establishments. 
Mr.  Sprague  points  out  that  prior  to  the  use  of  motor  vehicles  there 
were  many  industrial  and  business  establishments  using  inflanunable 
and  volatile^  wastes,  such  as  dry-cleaning  shops,  paint  manufactories 
and  gas  works,  and  that  notwithstanding  this  fact,  explosions  in 
sewers  caused  by  the  ignition  of  gasoline  or  other  similar  vapors  were 
uncommon.  This  fact,  he  concludes,  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the 
great  increase  in  the  use  of  gasoline  due  to  the  rapidly  increasing  num- 
bers of  motor  vehicles  has  been  responsible  for  many  of  the  recent 
sewer  explosions,  a  conclusion  in  which  most,  if  not  all,  recent  investi- 
gators of  this  problem  appear»to  concur. 

Summarizing  the  investigations  which  have  been  made,  it  appears 
that  explosive  mixtures  in  sewers  are  most  likely  to  be  caused  by  inflam- 
mable liquids,  of  which  gasoline  is  a  type  and  the  one  most  commonly  en- 
countered; that  natural  or  artificial  gas  undoubtedly  has  been  a  cause  of 
some  explosions;  and  that  in  rare  instances  marsh  gas,  or  other  similar 
gas,  may  be  generated  in  the  organic  deposits  in  sewers  in  sufficient 
quantities  to  produce  explosive  mixtures  under  certain  conditions.' 

Pittsburg  Explosion.— On  Nov.  25,  1913,  probably  the  most  disas- 
trous sewer  explosion  up  to  that  time  occurred  in  Pittsburg.  A  detailed 
account  of  this  accident  was  printed  in  Engineering  News,  Jan.  1, 
1914.  In  this  case  the  main  trunk  combined  sewer  serving  a  population 
of  50,000  and  varying  in  diameter  from  8  to  10  ft.  was  disrupted,  more 
or  less  completely,  for  a  distance  of  5300  ft.  The  damage  included  the 
destruction  of  brick  vork  and  manholes,  breaking  of  windows  in  factories, 
caving  in  of  streets,  and  damage  to  laterals  leading  to  the  main  sewer 
at  many  points.  At  the  time  of  the  explosion  the  outlet,  which  was 
nearby,  was  submerged  to  within  1-1  /2  ft.  of  the  top.  It  is  estimated 
that  90  per  cent,  of  the  public  garages  of  the  city  are  located  within 
the  tributary  area  of  this  sewer  as  well  as  a  number  of  dry-cleaning 
establishments  and  paint  manufactories.  This  explosion  cost  the  city 
down  to  October,  1914,  about  $300,000,  which  may  be  increased  by 
decisions  in  possible  damage  suits.     A  second  but  less  disastrous  ex- 


EXPLOSIONS  IN  SEWERS  529 

plosion  occurred  in  this  sewer  on  July  28,  1914.  That  this  explosion 
was  caused  by  ignition  of  a  mixture  of  air  and  gasoline  vapor  seems 
well  established,  for  on  the  day  it  occurred  city  employees  were  working 
in  the  sewer,  and,  when  a  strong  odor  of  gasoline  was  noticed  were 
ordered  out  of  the  sewer  only  15  minutes  before  the  explosion  occurred 
(Eng.  Record,  Aug.  8,  1914). 

New  York  Explosions. — ^A  series  of  spectacular  explosions  in  New 
York  on  Oct.  7,  1909,  was  described  by  A.  A.  Breneman  in  Engineering 
NewSj  Dec.  2,  1909.  At  4.40  P.  M.  there  was  a  violent  explosion 
in  the  sewer  at  48th  St.  and  10th  Ave.  A  few  seconds  later,  there  was 
an  explosion  considerably  farther  south  in  10th  Ave.,  following  which 
there  was  a  series  of  explosions,  some  running  continuously  for  distances 
along  10th  Ave.  or  the  intersecting  side  streets,  and  some  separated 
by  considerable  intervals  of  time.  Roughly,  the  explosions  are  said 
to  have  affected  an  area  more  than  a  half  mile  square  and  probably 
lifted  over  a  hundred  heavy  iron  covers. 

Upon  investigation  Mr.  Breneman  reached  the  conclusion  that  illu- 
minating gas  did  not  cause  these  explosions.  In  discussing  the  proba- 
bility of  vapors  from  volatile  liquids  as  the  cause,  he  stated  that  there 
were  many  garages  in  the  region  adjacent  to  the  explosion  area,  and  while 
at  each  garage  more  or  less  gasoline  was  stored  in  tanks  in  such  a  way 
as  to  prevent  any  leakage  from  them  into  the  sewers,  gasoline  was  used 
extensively  in  washing  machinery  about  the  vehicles,  for  dissolving 
heavy  oils  adhering  to  them,  and  for  washing  the  hands  of  hundreds  of 
employees.  It  was  also  used  where  heavy  oDs  had  to  be  removed  from 
floors  or  other  parts  of  the  building.  The  difficulty  of  disposing  of  this 
impure  gasoline  except  by  way  of  the  street  gutters  or  sewers  was 
obvious.  About  one  week  after  the  explosion  an  inspection  of  the  sewers 
in  which  the  accident  occurred  disclosed  the  odor  of  gasoline  in  all  but 
one  of  the  manholes  opened.  During  these  explosions  in  all  cases  the 
burst  of  flame  fron;i  the  manhole  was  followed  by  dense  black  smoke, 
indicating  a  volatile  oil,  because  such  smoke  would  not  be  produced  by 
mixtures  of  illuminating  gas  and  air.  The  conclusion,  therefore, 
seemed  to  be  justified  that  these  explosions  were  due  to  gasoline  vapor. 

Another  explosion  occvu-red  in  a  sewer  on  Sept.  21,  1914,  being 
the  third  in  that  vicinity  within  a  year.  This,  explosion  appears  to 
have  been  caused  by  the  ignition  of  an  explosive  gas  within  the  sewer 
by  sparks  from  the  underground  conduit  of  the  street  raDway  on  42nd 
Street.  This  conduit,  carrying  the  electric  conductor,  is  connected 
to  the  sewer  by  drains,  and  it  is  through  these  openings  that  the  ex- 
plosive gases  are  assumed  to  have  made  their  way  into  the  conduit, 
in  which  they  are  thought  to  have  been  ignited  by  electric  sparks 
from  the  conductor  in  the  cotiduit,  from  which  the  cars  obtain  their 
current. 

34 


530  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

New  Haven  Explosions  and  Investigations. — H.  J.  Kellogg,  Assistant 
City  Engineer,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  carried  on  investigations  for  about 
a  year  to  determine  the  causes  of,  and  to  find  means  for  preventing, 
explosions  in  sewers.  He  reported  some  of  the  results  of  these  inves- 
tigations in  a  paper  abstracted  in  Engineering  and  CoTdr acting,  vol.  xli, 
page  250,  from  which  the  following  notes  and  comments  are  taken: 

In  1886  there  was  an  explosion  in  a  New  Haven  sewer  60  in.  in  diameter. 
The  arch  was  thrown  completely  off  for  about  100  ft.  No  one  knows  what 
combustible  wrought  the  destruction,  nor  how  it  was  ignited.  No  one  was 
injured.  About  1894  a  54-in.  circular  brick  sewer  was  being  cleaned  by 
four  men  when  an  explosion  occurred.  The  men  escaped  with  difficulty, 
two  of  them  being  disabled  for  six  months  or  more.  The  cause  of  the 
explosion  appears  to  have  been  illuminating  gas  ignited  by  lanterns  which 
the  men  carried.  In  1913  a  42-in.  egg-shaped  brick  sewer  in  New  Haven  was 
being  cleaned  when  an  explosion  occurred,  burning  the  men  about  their 
hands  and  faces.  The  cause  of  this  explosion  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
definitely  ascertained,  although  a  slight  odor  of  gasoline  was  noticed  before 
the  men  entered  the  sewer.  If  gasoline  was  the  cause  of  the  explosion  it 
probably  came  from  a  manufacturing  plant,  the  drain  from  which  entered 
the  sewer  close  to  the  point  at  which  the  explosion  occurred.  Very  small 
quantities  of  gasoline  were  used  at  this  plant. 

At  Philadelphia  an  explosion  in  which  several  men  were  injured  was 
attributed  to  gasoline  vap>or.  Mr.  Kellogg  quoted  from  a  letter  from 
George  S.  Webster,  Chief  Eng.,  Bureau  of  Sewers,  as  foUows: 

"A  suspicious  smell  was  noticed  upon  opening  a  sewer  manhole,  and  a 
blazing  paper  thrown  in  resulted  in  a  column  of  flame,  about  40  ft.  in  height, 
due  to  gasoline  from  a  nearby  factory." 

Two  men  were  killed  in  a  Philadelphia  sewer  explosion  about  1912.  The 
cause  is  said  to  have  been  illuminating  gas  from  a  leaky  main  which  ran 
parallel  to  the  sewer.  At  a  later  date  a  man  was  burned  by  an  explosion 
resulting  from  gasoline  discharged  from  a  dry  cleaning  shop. 

Explosions  in  sewers  were  reported  from  Providence,  R.  I.,  Buffalo, 
N.  Y.,  Washington,  D.  C,  Fall  River,  Mass.,  Detroit,  Mich.,  Brooklyn,  N.Y., 
Cleveland,  O.,  Worcester,  Mass.,  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Kansas  City,  Mo., 
Duluth,  Minn.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  Savannah,  Ga.,  Baltimore,  Md.,  Hart- 
ford, Conn.,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  San  Francisco,  Cal., 
Louisville,  Ky.,  and  Charleston,  S.  C. 

The  cause  of  explosion  in  a  majority  of  these  places  was  reported  as 
illuminating  gas. 

George  H.  Norton,  Deputy  Engineer  Commissioner,  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
described  a  new  gas  found  in  sewers  as  follows: 

"  It  may  be  interesting  to  know  that  for  three  years  past  at  periods  follow- 
ing thawing  weather,  after  frost  and  heavy  snow,  we  have  had  serious 
complaint  from  gas  odor  in  some  of  our  sewers.    This  has  been  traced  down 


EXPLOSIONS  IN  SEWERS  631 

and  found  to  be  due  to  the  use,  by  the  railroads,  of  what  is  called  a  hydro- 
carbon oil,  which  is  used  by  Miem  to  prevent  freezing  of  their  switches  and 
interlocking  plants  in  their  passenger  station  yards,  and  at  other  congested 
points.  An  examination  was  made  by  the  city  chemist  and  he  reports  that 
at  low  temperatures  this  oil  will  crystallize,  that  such  crystals  are  soluble  in 
water,  and  for  this  reason  he  thinks  that  the  odors  or  gases  have  passed  the 
ordinary  vent  sewer  trap.  The  gases  arising  from  this  oil  are,  apparently, 
highly  explosive  and  could  readily  be  the  cause  of  a  serious  explosion.  This 
oil  is  a  by-product  from  the  Pintsch  gas  product  used  for  car  lighting." 

Roscoe  M.  Clark,  City  Engineer  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  gave  the  fol- 
lowing information: 

''I  have  no  recollection  of  any  explosions  in  the  sewers  previous  to  1913. 
In  1913  we  had  two  serious  explosions  in  the  Park  River  interoepter.  The 
first,  occurring  in  January,  lifted  one  manhole  head  and  threw  several  covers 
in  the  air,  and  also  shattered  windows  in  adjoining  houses.  The  second 
occurred  in  May  when  the  East  side  Pumping  Station  and  its  connection 
with  the  Park  River  intercepting  sewer  were  in  process  of  construction.  The 
most  damage  was  done  to  the  station  and  adjoinitLg  houses.  Both  of  the 
explosions  took  place  in  the  vicinity  of  the  works  of  the  Hartford  City  Gas 
Light  Company.  Suits  brought  by  property  owners  and  the  contractor 
for  the  pumping  station  are  now  pending  in  court.'' 

Robert  Adamson,  Fire  Commissioner  of  the  Borough  of  Manhattan, 
New  York  City,  reported  that  there  were  eleven  sewer  explosions 
between  June  5,  1912,  and  the  date  of  his  letter,  probably  about  a  year 
later.  He  stated  that  the  probable  causes  of  explosion  in  New  York 
are  gasoline,  illuminating  gas,  and  calcium  carbide.  He  stated  further 
that  prior  to  the  regulation  requiring  the  installation  of  oil  separators 
in  garages,  the  majority  of  sewer  explosions  was  limited  to  what  is  known 
as  the  ''garage  zone.''  Since  their  installation  the  number  of  explo- 
sions has  been  greatly  reduced.  The  following  quotation  is  from  Mr. 
Adamson's  letter: 

"The  illuminating  gas  enters  the  sewer  from  ruptured,  corroded  or  broken 
gas  mains,  or  from  leaky  joints,  and  when  mixed  in  the  proper  proportions 
with  air  forms  an  explosive  mixture.  Calcium  carbide,  which  is  used  in 
garages  for  generating  lights,  may  be  thrown  into  the  sewer  and  when  in 
contact  with  water  generates  acetylene  gas,  which  is  an  intense  explosive 
and  is  further  auto-combustible,  so  that  in  many  instances  it  may  be  ignited 
by  its  own  heat  generated  in  evolving  the  acetylene.  The  vapors  of  gasoline 
and  illuminating  gas  require  an  open  flame  to  ignite  them,  but  whether  this 
occurs  in  sewers  it  is  impossible  to  tell.  In  vaults  and  in  conduits  the  igniting 
spark  is  furnished  in  a  number  of  cases  by  electrical  apparatus,  such  as 
switchboards,  sump  pumps,  short  circuiting,  etc.  Some  relation  exists 
between  sewer  explosions  and  flooding  of  the  sewers,  and  further  when  the 
sewers  become  tideboimd  these  explosions  are  more  frequent,  such  as  follow- 
ing an  unusual  shower  of  heavy  rain  or  a  fall  of  snow  or  thawing  of  ice. 


632  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

This  causes  a  condensation  of  the  gases  within  the  sewer.  There  are  no 
casualties  on  record  resulting  from  these  explosions  but  considerable  damage 
to  property  often  occurs.  In  relation  to  places  where  oil  is  stored,  the  oil 
/separator  is  the  only  method  at  present  under  the  regulations  of  preventing 
volatile  inflammable  oil  from  discharging  into  the  sewer." 

Mr.  Kellogg  stated  that  one  volume  of  gasoline  oil  produces  141  equal 
volumes  of  gas  or  vapor,  as  figured  by  Prof.  A.  L.  Dean,  who  gave  as  the 
computed  best  mixture  for  complete  combustion:  1  part  of  gas  to  62-1/2 
parts  of  air.  In  gas  engines,  especially  in  automobile  driving,  an  excess  of 
air  is  said  to  give  better  practical  results.  The  following  figures  lead  up 
to  a  knowledge  of  the  amount  of  gas  likely  to  be  in  a  sewer  from  a  given 
amount  of  oil:  1  gal.  gasoline  gives  141  gal.  of  gas;  141  gal.  gas  equals  about 
18.8  cu.  ft.  of  gas;  18.8  cu.  ft.  of  gas  with  1175  cu.  ft.  of  air,  best  explosive 
mixture.  There  is  a  broad  variation  in  the  proportions  of  this  gas  and  air 
that  will  form  combustible  mixtures.  Now  aUowing  8  cu.  ft.  as  the  available 
space  for  1  lin.  ft.  of  a  42-in.  sewer  in  New  Haven,  1  gal.  of  gasoline  could 
have  furnished  a  prime  mixture  for  about  150  lin.  ft.  of  that  sewer.  A  leaner 
but  still  dangerous  mixture  might  more  than  double  the  danger  lone. 
Although  the  rate  of  flow  in  the  sewer,  the  time  it  would  take  to  vaporize 
the  oil,  the  draft  in  the  sewer  and  perhaps  other  factors,  complicate  the  prob- 
lem, the  above  figures  show  that  a  comparatively  small  quantity  of  gasoline 
is  capable  of  making  trouble.  Mr.  Kellogg  also  stated  that  about  1  part  of 
illuminating  gas  to  about  7  parts  of  air  is  computed  to  be  the  best  mixture 
for  complete  explosive  combustion. 

Boston  Explosion. — A  fatal  explosion  occurred  on  June  1,  1914,  at 
the  Chelsea  Street  pumping  station  of  the  sewerage  system  of  the 
Metropolitan  Water  and  Sewerage  Board,  Boston,  Mass.  This  explo- 
sion occurred  in  the  screen  house  which  adjoins  the  pumping  station. 
The  screen  house  was  wrecked,  the  brick  walls  being  blown  out  and  the 
reinforced  concrete  and  tile  roof  being  blown  to4)ieces.  The  pumping 
station  was  badly  damaged  and  three  of  the  four  pumps  were  seriously 
injured.  The  explosion  caused  the  death  of  six  men  and  the  serious 
injury  of  three  others.  Early  estimates  placed  the  property  damage 
at  about  $50,000.  The  explosion  is  said  to  have  been  caused  by  gaso- 
line vapor  which  it  has  been  suggested  may  have  been  present  in  greater 
quantity  than  usual  because  of  the  large  amount  of  work  done  in  auto- 
mobile garages  during  Memorial  Day  which  came  on  the  day  preceding 
the  explosion.     {Engineering  News,  June  4,  1914.) 

Behavior  of  Gasoline  in  Sewers. — A  study  of  gasoline  explosions 
in  sewers  was  made  in  August,  1914,  for  the  consulting  engineer  of  the 
Borough  of  Manhattan,  E.  P.  Goodrich,  by  O.  Hufeland,  assistant 
engineer  in  the  sewerage  division  of  the  Borough.  A  review  of  all  of 
the  available  e\adence  led  to  the  conclusion  that  one  volume  of  gasoline 
will  produce  from  141  to  171  volumes  of  vapor.  This  vapor  begins  to 
form  an  explosive  compound  with  air  when  the  mixture  contains  1.2 


EXPLOSIONS  IN  SEWERS  633 

per  cent,  of  vapor,  or  perhaps  a  little  less.  In  such  a  mixture  a  flame  will 
apparently  just  travel  along.  With  a  1.5  per  cent,  mixture  the  flame 
travels  much  more  rapidly  and  burns  brightly.  With  2  per  cent,  of 
vapor,  the  movement  becomes  so  fast  that  the  combustion  will  be  explo- 
sive and  this  increases  until  the  amount  of  vapor  in  the  mixture  is  about 
2.6  per  cent.  The  violence  of  the  explosion  decreases  as  the  amount 
of  vapor  increases,  and  when  about  5  per  cent,  of  vapor  is  present, 
the  mixture  apparently  burns  quietly  and  there  is  little  danger  of  an 
explosion.  No  record  of  spontaneous  combustion  has  been  foimd, 
but  very  slight  sparks  will  cause  an  explosion  of  mixtures  containing 
certain  proportions  of  vapor.  For  instance,  investigations  of  alleged 
spontaneous  explosions  in  dry  cleaning  establishments  have  shown 
that  the  spark  was  caused  by  the  friction  of  the  materials  in  the  tank  of 
gasoline.  One  example  of  this  occurred  when  the  materials  in  the  tank 
were  wool  and  silk,  and  another  instance  when  leather  was  being 
treated.  The  addition  of  a  little  soap  to  the  gasoline  removed  the 
danger  apparently. 

The  only  instances  of  serious  destruction  of  sewers,  caused  by  explo- 
sions of  this  nature,  which  Mr.  Huf eland  could  find,  were  in  Manhattan 
in  1906,  and  in  Pittsburg  in  1913,  already  described  in  this  chapter. 

Sewer  explosions  generally  consist  of  a  series  of  upheavals  of  manhole 
covers,  which  are  blown  out  with  measurable  periods  of  time  between 
the  explosions  at  successive  points.  An  explanation  of  this  condition 
is  that  the  vapor  does  not  collect  in  large  amounts  at  any  one  point 
and  that  when  it  is  ignited  its  explosive  force  is  slight  and  the  flame  fol- 
lows along  the  course  of  the  sewer,  without  doing  much  damage. 

The  gasoline  vapor  is  heavier  than  air  and  accordingly  tends  to 
accumulate  over  the  surface  of  the  flowing  sewage.  Its  weight  will 
also  tend  to  make  it  flow  downward  with  the  sewage,  toward  lower 
levels,  and  if  these  are  outlets,  the  vapor  will  escape  into  the  open 
air  there,  provided  the  outlets  are  not  trapped  by  the  rise  of  tide  or 
some  equivalent.  An  element  of  danger  is  introduced  into  such  a 
condition  by  the  possible  presence  of  illuminating  gas.  This  tends  to 
rise,  and  if  present  in  a  quantity  making  a  combustible  mixture  with 
the  air  in  a  sewer,  it  might  lead  a  flame,  if  it  were  ignited,  back  to  the 
explosive  mixture  of  gasoline  vapor  and  air.  It  is  also  suggested -that 
methane  might  have  some  influence  on  such  explosions.  Mr.  Hufe- 
land  reports  that  it  is  rather  frequently  found  in  Manhattan  in  small 
quantities  in  pockets  in  which  sediment  has  decomposed,  which  when 
stirred  up  by  a  passing  workman  gives  off  gas  that  has  occasionally 
flashed  up  and  singed  the  hair  and  eyebrows  of  the  man,  although 
no  serious  injury  is  known  to  have  resulted  from  this  cause. 

The  extent  of  the  danger  of  gasoline  in  sewers  is  indicated  by  the 
fact  that  between  2500  and  3000  garages  are  estimated  to  be  in  use 


634  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

in  New  York  and  a  large  number  of  cleaning  establishments.  In  47 
garages,  within  a  total  of  307  working  days,  the  oil  separators  which 
are  required  to  be  used  yielded  70-1/4  barrels  of  a  mixture  of  heavy  oil, 
kerosene  and  gasoline.  A  test  of  3000  gallons  of  such  collected  material 
showed  that  it  contained  40  per  cent,  of  gasoline.  In  another  case 
250  barrels  of  such  a  mixture  were  collected  from  50  garages  between 
May  2  and  July  18,  1913,  and  43  barrels  were  collected  from  a  large 
taxicab  garage  between  May  2  and  July  16.  No  information  could  be 
obtained  concerning  the  amount  of  waste  gasoline  from  dry  cleaning 
establishments.  A  very  large  number  of  the  garages  are  in  rather  re- 
stricted districts,  so  that  the  quantity  of  this  waste  there  is  large.  In 
spite  of  drastic  reg^ations  prohibiting  the  discharge  of  this  refuse  into 
the  sewers,  and  the  existence  of  companies,  which  buy  the  wastes  to 
refine  them,  the  explosions  are  continuing,  although  with  less  frequency. 
The  sense  of  smell  also  shows  that  much  gasoline  still  reaches  the  sewers. 
It  is  Mr.  Hufeland's  opinion  that  the  existing  regulations  would 
absolutely  prevent  such  explosions  if  they  were  enforced.  He  was 
unable  to  find  any  field  test  of  the  presence  of  gasoline  which  was  simple 
enough  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  sewer  workmen,  and  he  advised 
restricting  the  work  of  sewer  exploration  in  districts  where  danger  from 
gasoline  exits  to  men  who  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  subject 
and  will  obey  and  enforce  the  precautions  which  experience  indicates 
to  be  necessary. 

Causes  of  Ignition. — Doubtless  explosive  mixtures  of  gas  are  present 
in  sewers  a  great  many  times  when  no  explosions  occur.  Two  condi- 
tions are  necessary  to  create  an  explosion,  the  presence  of  an  explosive 
mixture  of  gases  and  the  ignition  of  these  gases.  Until  within  the  last 
20 'years  probably  most  of  the  explosions  were  set  off  by  the  use 
of  free  flames  for  lighting  purposes  by  men  employed  in  inspecting  or 
cleaning  sewers.  Since  the  advent  of  electric  traction  and  lighting, 
the  electric  spark  is  more  likely  to  be  the  cause  of  ignition  than  it  was 
in  earlier  years.  In  many  cases  the  sparks  are  above  the  surface  of  the 
street,  and  there  is  but  a  remote  possibility  of  their  causing  the  ignition 
of  gases  in  sewers,  although  if  they  are  generated  close  to  manhole  or 
inlet  covers  there  is  a  possibility  of  ignition  from  them.  In  other  cases 
the  sparks  are  generated  in  underground  conduits,  as  is  thought  to  have 
been  the  case  when  the  explosion  took  place  in  New  York  on  September 
21,  1914.  There  are  many  other  opportunities  for  the  ignition  of  gases 
in  sewers,  such  as  by  lighted  matches  thrown  or  dropped  into  manholes 
or  inlets,  cinders  and  sparks  frotn  fire  engines,  locomotives  and  heating 
kettles,  and  possibly  from  spontaneous  combustion  by  phosphine  gas, 
as  suggested  by  Prof.  W.  P.  Mason  in  connection  with  the  explosion  of 
one  of  the  Saratoga  septic  tanks.  {Jatar.  New  England  Water  Works 
Assoc.,  1907,  p.  23.) 


EXPLOSIONS  IN  SEWERS  635 

Prevention  of  Explosions. — How  to  prevent  explosions  in  sewers 
appears  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  and  perplexing  problems  before 
sewerage  engineers  today.  The  conditions  surrounding  the  causes  are 
such  that  the  solution  of  the  problem  bids  fair  to  be  expensive  and  to 
involve  restrictions  which  will  prove  more  or  less  onerous  to  persons 
using  inflammable  liquids  and  which  wiU  arouse  criticism  and  unpleasant 
comments  regarding  engineers  and  others  having  in  charge  the  enforce- 
ment of  the  necessary  regulations. 

A  small  percentage  of  gasoline  vapor  in  air  is  sufficient  to  form  an 
explosive  mixture.  It  may  be  possible  in  some  cases  to  provide  sufficient 
ventilation  in  sewers  to  assure  a  dissipation  and  dilution  of  the  vapor 
great  enough  to  reduce  the  danger  of  explosion  to  a  minimum.  Whether 
or  not  much  can  be  accomplished  in  this  way,  it  appears  wise  to  secure 
as  good  ventilation  as  possible  in  the  sewers. 

It  may  perhaps  be  desirable  to  give  more  attention  to  designing  sewers 
so  as  to  provide  self-cleaning  velocities  and  thus  avoid  deposits  of  organic 
matter  which  may  give  off  combustible  gases,  although  this  seems  to 
be  a  remedy  of  minor  importance. 

Gasoline  is  readily  volatilized  at  temperatures  above  50**  F.  It  is 
well  known  that  large  quantities  of  hot  water,  exhaust  steam  and 
sometimes  live  steam  are  discharged  into  sewers  from  public  and  private 
buildings.  This  is  particularly  true  in  northern  climates  during  the 
winter,  when  heating  sjrstems  are  being  forced,  and  it  is  not  infrequent 
in  cities  to  find  manhole  covers  so  hot  that  the  naked  hand  can  hardly 
be  kept  upon  them.  Under  such  conditions  volatile  liquors  like  gasoline 
are  quickly  converted  into  vapor.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  air  in  the 
sewer  is  cool  and  the  temperature  of  the  sewage  is  normal,  the  tendency 
toward  volatilization  will  be  much  reduced.  While  this  condition 
will  not  assure  safety,  the  danger  of  explosion  can  be  reduced  by  pre- 
venting the  discharge  of  hot  water  and  steam  in  large  quantities  into 
the  sewers.  This  hot  water  is  very  objectionable  from  several  other 
points  of  view. 

Something  can  be  done  to  reduce  the  danger  of  ignition  of  gases. 
Greater  care  can  and  should  be  exercised  by  those  entering  and  working 
in  the  sewers  to  avoid  throwing  matches  into  manholes  and  to  use 
electric  lamps  in  place  of  open-flame  lanterns.  Greater  care  can  also 
be  exercised  in  avoiding  an  opportunity  for  the  communication  of  electric 
sparks  to  sewers.  Whatever  may  be  done  in  this  direction,  however, 
cannot  overcome  the  danger  of  ignition  and  for  a  complete  solution  of 
the  problem  it  will  be  necessary  to  turn  to  a  restriction  of  the  discharge 
of  inflammable  fluids  into  the  sewers,  in  addition  to  other  preventive 
measures. 

The  evidence  at  hand  appears  to  indicate  conclusively  that  a  more 
serious  effort  should  be  made  in  all  cities  to  prevent  the  discharge  of 


536  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

inHammable  inateri&Ia  into  sewers,  and  this  appears  at  the  present  time 
to  be  the  most  fruitful  field  of  endeavor  to  prevent  sewer  explosions. 
Many  cities  are  now  provided  with  ordinances  which,  although  not 
drawn  expressly  to  prevent  the  discharge  of  gasoline  and  other  inflam- 
mable liquids,  are  sufficiently  broad  to  prevent  such  discharge  if  enforced. 
Some  cities  have  recently  adopted  new  ordinances  governing  the  dis- 
charge of  inflammable  liquids.  Such  an  ordinance  is  given  on  page 
358  to  serve  as  a  guide  to  those  who  are  drafting  similar  rules. 

It  is  probable  that  the  quantities  of  gasoline  discharged  from  private 
residences  and  private  garages  is  not  generally  sufficient  to  cause  explo- 
sions under  ordinary  conditions,  although  there  is  a  possibility  that 


Fio.  179. — Paragon  gasoline  and  oil  separator. 

explosive  mixtures  may  be  caused  even  by  the  small  amount  from  such 
sources. 

An  important  step  has  been  taken  In  a  number  of  cities  in  requiring 
sewer  connections  serving  garages  and  other  buildings  in  which  inflam- 
mable fluids  are  used  to  be  equipped  with  oil  separators,  of  which  several 
different  types  have  been  designed.  Their  utility  is  based  upon  the 
fact  that  oil  and  gasoline  are  lighter  than  water  and  consequently  will 
float  upon  its  surface  if  given  a  suitable  opportunity,  which  it  is  sought 
to  provide  by  means  of  these  devices. 

The  Paragon  gasoline  and  oil  separator  is  an  apparatus  which  has 
been  put  upon  the  market  by  the  Ansonia  Manufacturing  Company  of 


EXPLOSIONS  IN  SEWERS 


637 


New  York,  to  meet  the  regulations  just  quoted.  In  it,  as  indicated  in 
Fig.  179,  by  taking  advantage  of  the  difference  in  specific  gravity,  the 
oil  and  gasoline  are  allowed  to  overflow  into  an  oil  chamber  while 
the  water  passes  through  the  trap  and  out  into  the  sewer.  From  time 
to  time,  as  oil  and  gasoline  accmnulate  in  the  chamber,  they  are  drawn 
off  or  pumped  out. 

Where  separators  are  used,  the  regulations  or  ordinances  of  the  city 
should  provide  for  regular  and  frequent  inspection  of  them  and  for  the 
removal  of  the  oil  contained  in  them  by  the  owners,  contractors,  or, 
preferably,  the  municipality.  If  this  is  not  done  effectively,  the  separa- 
tors will  faD  to  serve  the  purpose  for  which  they  are  installed. 

Safety  Precautions. — ^The  occasional  presence  of  illuminating  gas  in 
sewers  has  been  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  for  a  great  many  years. 


-a- 


-b- 


FiQ.  180. — Electric  head  light  and  electric  lantern. 

It  does  not  seem  that  there  is  at  present  any  tendency  toward  an  increase 
of  this  sort  of  trouble,  and  so  far  as  the  authors  know  there  are  no  means 
of  preventing  its  occasional  occurrence.  It  is  usually  discovered  and 
reported  before  an  explosion  occurs.  When  reported,  every  effort 
should  be  made  to  immediately  ventilate  the  sewer  in  which  it  is  found 
and  to  locate  the  leak  in  the  main  which  is  permitting  the  gas  to 
e8ca])e.  The  trouble  arising  from  gasoline  vapor  in  sewers  appears  to 
have  increased  greatly  in  the  last  few  years  with  the  larger  number 
of  giiHolinc  engines  and  automobiles  in  use.  Something  toward  decreas- 
ing the  danger  can  be  accomplished  by  means  of  oil  separating  traps, 
thoroughly  well  ventilated,  to  prevent  the  escape  of  gasoline  into  sewers. 


538  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

This  does  not  seem  to  have  met  with  general  application,  however,  and 
great  care  should  be  exercised  by  those  entering  sewers  to  avoid  igniting 
explosive  mixtures  of  gas  which  may  be  encountered  therein.  One 
of  the  best  means  of  accomplishing  this  is  to  substitute  the  electric 
lantern  for  lamps  with  open  flames  for  use  in  inspecting  or  working  in 
sewers. 

An  instructive  discussion  by  D.  B.  Rushmore  of  safety  lamps  and  a 
new  electric  light  for  miners  appeared  in  Engineering  News,  Aug.  15, 
1912.  The  eleetric  lamp,  made  by  the  General  Electric  Co.,  is  a  com- 
bination of  the  hand-lantern  and  headlight,  consisting  of  a  miniature 
tungsten  lamp-unit  operated  from  a  light  storage  battery.  The  battery 
has  a  capacity  of  5  amp.-hr.,  and  is  of  sufficient  size  to  operate  a  lamp 
from  12  to  14  hr.  When  used  as  a  headlight  the  lamp  is  fastened  to 
the  miner's  cap  and  connected  by  a  flexible  cord  to  the  battery,  which  is 
flat,  6-1/2.  X  4-5/8  X  1-1/8  in.,  weighing  3  lb.  and  is  carried  on  a  belt  as 
shown  by  Fig.  180a.  When  used  as  a  hand  lantern.  Fig.  180b,  the  lamp 
socket  is  removed  from  the  cap  receptacle  and  inserted  in  the  receptacle 
on  the  side  of  the  battery,  simply  taking  the  place  of  the  cable-attaching 
plug. 

Ordinances  and  Regulations  Governing  Discharge  of  Inflammable 
Liquids. — The  following  ordinance  from  Washington,  D.  C,  appears 
to  provide  as  ample  protection  as  is  possible  by  law: 

.  *'Sec.  18.  No  persons  shall  make  or  maintain  any  connection  with  any 
public  sewer  or  appurtenance  thereof  whereby  there  may  be  conveyed  into 
the  same  any  hot,  suffocating,  corrosive,  inflammable  or  explosive  liquid,  gas, 
vapor,  substance  or  material  of  any  kind;  and  no  persons  shall  cause  to  enter 
or  flow  into  any  public  sewer  or  appurtenance  thereof  any  hot,  corrosive, 
suffocating,  inflammable  or  explosive  liquid,  gas,  vapor,  substance  or 
material  of  any  kind;  provided,  that  the  provision  of  this  paragraph  shall 
not  apply  to  water  from  ordinary  hot-water  boilers  of  residenoes." 

The  special  regulations  adopted  in  Washington  to  carry  out  this 
ordinance  read  as  follows: 

"1.  Every  garage  or  other  structure  for  the  housing,  sale  or  repair  of 
automobiles,  which  is  provided  with  a  water  supply  of  either  a  temporary  or 
permanent  character,  or  in  which  automobiles  are  washed,  cleaned  or  re- 
paired, shall  be  provided  with  proper  means  for  draining  the  floors  and  repair 
pits,  in  such  a  manner  that  no  drainage  therefrom  shall  flow  over  any  street, 
alley,  or  paved  approach. 

"2.  Any  drain  in  the  floor  or  repair  pits  of  any  garage  or  other  structure 
for  the  housing,  sale  or  repair  of  automobiles,  whether  required  to  be  provided 
under  paragraph  1  of  this  section  or  not,  shall  have  a  special  sewer  connec- 
tion separate  from  other  waste  or  soil  connections,  and  shall  discharge  into 
an  intercepting  trap  which  shall  be  located  outside  of  the  building  and  con- 
nected with  the  house  sewer  between  the  building  walls  and  the  public  sewer. 

''3.  This  trap  shall  be  so  arranged  as  to  intercept  all  oils,  gasoline,  or  other 


EXPLOSIONS  IN  SEWERS  639 

inflammable  fluids,  as  well  as  sand,  silt  and  other  solids,  for  the  purpose  of 
excluding  same  from  the  sewerage  system.  It  shall  be  water-tight,  of  sub- 
stantial masonry  construction,  so  located  as  to  be  easily  accessible  for  clean- 
ing and  inspection,  shall  be  provided  with  a  standard  Sewer  Department  cast- 
iron  manhole  frame  and  cover,  except  that  in  locations  within  yards  and 
where  not  subject^x)  traffic  a  suitable  lighter  cover  may  be  used,  shall  be  of 
design  approved  by  the  Engineer  Commissioner,  and  shall  have  a  depth  of 
not  less  than  2  ft.  below  the  grade  of  the  drain  pipe,  with  a  net  capacity 
of  6  cu.  ft.  where  the  storage  capacity  does  not  exceed  three  (3)  automo- 
biles; where  the  storage  capacity  exceeds  three  (3)  automobiles  1  cu.  ft.  in 
net  capacity  shall  be  added  for  each  additional  automobile. 

''4.  Such  traps  shall  have  the  accumulated  oils  and  other  inflammable 
fluids  puniped  or  otherwise  removed  therefrom  at  regular  intervals,  and  shall 
be  so  maintained  as  to  insure  the  exclusion  of  the  same  from  the  sewerage 
system.  They  shall  also  be  kept  free  of  sand,  silt  and  other  solids,  and 
will  be  subject  to  a  periodical  inspection  by  the  Superintendent  of  Sewers. 

''5.  Every  existing  garage  or  other  structure  used  for  the  housing,  sale  or 
repair  of  automobiles  shall  be  provided  with  a  floor  drain  and  garage  inter- 
cepting trap  in  accordance  with  this  section,  within  sixty  (60)  days  after 
notice  from  the  Commissioners.'' 

A  type  of  trap  said  to  be  approved  under  these  regulations  is  a  brick 
or  concrete  basin  into  which  the  drain  from  the  garage  discharges. 
The  outlet  pipe  is  provided  with  a  90-deg.  elbow  pointing  downward, 
into  the  lower  end  of  which  is  fastened  a  short  length  of  pipe.  The 
elevation  of  the  outlet  pipe  is  such  that  the  elbow  and  short  pipe  at- 
tached to  it  effectually  trap  the  basin,  the  normal  minimum  seal  being 
6  in. 

On  Jan.  3,  1912,  the  Municipal  Explosives  Commission  of  New  York 
adopted  a  code  of  r^ulations,  some  of  which  bear  directly  upon  the 
admission  of  inflammable  oils  to  the  public  sewers,  and  are  here  quoted 
as  of  interest  to  those  having  in  charge  the  operation  and  maintenance 
of  sewers. 

''Sec.  289.  It  shall  be  unlawful  for  any  person  to  connect  an  oil  storage 
plant  with  any  public  drain  or  sewer,  or  to  permit  any  liquid  product  of 
petroleum  to  escape  into  any  such  drain  or  sewer  within  the  City  of  New 
York. 

''Sec.  376.  No  garage  permit  authorising  the  storage  of  volatile  inflamma- 
ble oil  shall  be  issued  for  any  premises  which  are  not  provided  with  an  oil 
separator,  trap  or  other  similar  apparatus  attached  to  the  house  drain  for 
the  purpose  of  preventing  volatile  inflammable  oils  from  flowing  into  the 
sewer;  provided,  however,  that  the  Fire  Commissioner  may,  upon  the  rec- 
ommendation of  the  Municipal  Explosives  Commission,  exempt  from  the 
requirements  of  this  section  a  garage  draining  into  a  short  sewer  line. 

"Sec.  396.  Each  oil  separator  installed  in  a  garage  shall  be  connected  to 
the  house  drain,  and  shall  be  so  arranged  as  to  separate  all  oils  from  the  drain- 
age of  the  garage. 


540  AMERICAN  SEWERAGE  PRACTICE 

*'8ec.  397.  The  oil  receptacle  of  an  oil  separator  shall  not  exceed  50  gal. 
capacity,  and  shall  be  emptied  as  often  as  may  be  necessary  to  prevent  the 
oil  from  overflowing;  and  such  oils  as  are  recovered  from  the  separator  shall 
be  removed  from  the  garage  within  24  hours  after  being  taken  from  the 
separator. 

''Sec.  435.  It  shall  be  unlawful  for  any  person  to  discharge  any  volatile 
inflammable  oil  into  any  public  drain  or  sewer. 

"Sec.  444.  The  holder  of  a  permit  to  maintain  and  operate  a  dry  cleaning 
or  dry  dyeing  establishment  shall  not  be  required  to  obtain  a  permit  to  con- 
duct the  business  of  sponging.'' 

It  is  comparatively  easy  to  draft  ordinances  and  regulations  which, 
if  strictly  enforced,  would  prevent  the  discharge  into  the  sewers  of 
most  of  the  inflammable  liquids  now  finding  their  way  into  them,  and 
in  most  cities  it  is  probably  possible  to  secure  the  passage  of  them. 
It  is  not  so  easy,  however^  to  enforce  such  laws,  and  the  chief  difficulty 
with  this  line  of  attack  on  dangerous  sewer  explosions  will  come  in  the 
enforcement.  In  the  larger  cities,  probably,  much  difficulty  will  be 
encountered,  for  many  of  the  owners  of  garages  and  industrial  establish- 
ments will  oppose  restrictions  which  may  appear  to  them  to  be  unfair. 
The  repetition  of  such  explosions  as  have  recently  occurred  in  Pittsburg, 
New  York  and  other  cities  will  do  much  toward  creating  a  public  senti- 
ment which  will  assist  city  officials  in  enforcing  regulations. 

Other  Dangers. — ^Even  though  the  danger  of  explosion  is  avoided,  in 
exceptional  cases  gases  may  be  present  in  sufficient  quantities  and  of  the 
proper  kind  to  endanger  the  men  working  in  the  sewer.  Illuminating 
gas,  while  most  common,  may  usually  be  detected  by  its  odor.  If 
however,  there  are  some  gas  works  wastes  in  the  sewage  which  impart 
odor  to  the  air  and  yet  are  not  dangerous,  the  men  may  gradually  come 
upon  a  quantity  of  illuminating  gas  without  noticing  the  difference  in 
odor  and  be  overcome,  with  dangerous  results.  There  is  also  danger 
from  marsh  gas  formed  in  decomposing  deposits  and  liberated  in  large 
quantities  when  these  deposits  are  disturbed,  as  by  being  shoveled  or 
walked  upon.  Hydrogen  sulphide  may  also  be  formed  under  similar 
conditions,  especially  where  the  sewage  contains  sulphates,  as  from  very 
hard  water  or  sea  water.  An  illustration  of  such  conditions  is  furnished 
at  the  gate  chamber  at  the  end  of  the  Los  Angeles  outfall,  mentioned  in 
Volume  I. 

Another  illustration  is  afforded  by  the  death  of  three  experienced 
sewer  workmen  at  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  on  April  10, 1914.  A  section  of 
an  intercepting  sewer  had  been  closed  by  a  bulkhead  in  order  that  the 
portion  below  the  bulkhead  might  be  put  in  use  while  that  above  was 
being  completed.  The  men  entered  the  sewer  at  a  manhole  500  ft. 
above  the  bulkhead.  They  adopted  none  of  the  precautions  advised  in 
this  chapter.  About  8  hours  later,  their  bodies  were  found  by  a  searching 
party  under  conditions  which  indicated  that  they  had  probably  worked 


EXPLOSIONS  IN  SEWERS  541 

their  way  well  down  toward  the  bulkhead,  when  they  discovered  the 
presence  of  gas.  One  of  them  escaped  to  within  100  ft.  of  the  manhole 
and  then  fell  over  with  hia  face  in  a  little  trickle  of  water  on  the  invert, 
in  which  he  was  practically  drowned.  The  others  did  not  get  nearer  than 
300  ft.  to  the  manhole;  their  bodies  were  found  against  the  wall  of  the 
sewer,  the  arm  of  one  through  that  of  another  in  a  way  indicating  that 
he  was  helping  the  latter  along  when  both  collapsed. 

The  only  practicable  way  in  which  to  avoid  danger  of  beic^  overcome 
by  such  gases  as  may  be  found  in  sewers  under  exceptional  circimi- 


FiG.  181. — Draeger  breathing  apparatus. 

stances  appears  to  be  to  provide  liberal  ventilation  before  entering  and 
while  working  in  them.  Care  should  also  be  exercised  to  provide 
young  and  vigorous  men  for  such  work,  to  see  that  there  arc  sufficient 
men  in  the  party  to  provide  necessary  assistance  in  case  of  need,  and 
to  require  that  life  belts  be  used  when  the  men  are  in  particular  danger. 
For  emei^cncies  the  breathing  apparatus  used  in  mine  rescue  work  and 
for  entering  burning  buildings  may  prove  useful.  Such  apparatus  is 
described  in  Miners'  Circular  4,  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Mines.  One  type  is 
illustrated  by  Fig.  ISl.  It  consists  essentially  of  a  cylinder  of  oxygen,  a 
breathing  bag  and  a  regenerator  or  device  for  removing  the  carbon 
dioxide  from  the  exhaled  air.  The  operator  breathes  through  the  mouth 
from  a  tube  leading  from  the  breathing  bag  wluch  constitutes  the  reser- 
voir of  air,  the  oxygen  in  which  is  kept  at  the  proper  proportion  by  the 
supply  from  the  oxygen  cylinder.  The  exhaled  air  after  being  re- 
generated is  used  over  and  over. 


/ 


INDEX 


INDEX  TO  TABLES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS 


Index 

TO  Tables 

No. 

0   1 

1   1 

2 

3 

4      5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

0 

11 

14 

21 

53 

62 

72 

72 

74 

86 

10 

97 

103 

104 

105 

108 

109 

114 

115 

122 

123 

20 

124 

125 

127 

135 

145 

148 

149 

150 

155 

162 

30 

103 

165 

167 

169 

173 

186 

198 

201 

222 

224 

40 

243 

243 

244 

244 

249 

264 

269 

274 

283 

284 

50 

288 

289 

293 

294 

315 

318 

333 

338 

358 

359 

60 

362 

364 

366 

375 

387 

388 

415 

418 

425 

427 

70 

428 

432 

503 

508 

508 

513 

514 

515 

515 

524 

80 

525 

525 

■ 

Index  to 

Illustrations 

No. 

0 

1 

2   1 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

0 

7 

8 

9 

10 

13 

14 

19 

23 

26 

10 

41 

46 

47 

51 

»64 

68 

70 

71 

73 

77 

20 

80 

80 

•   84 

84 

90 

91 

92 

92 

92 

93 

30 

95 

96 

99 

106 

il08 

ao8 

110 

111 

112 

112 

40 

117 

119 

120 

126 

140 

140 

141 

145 

146 

152 

50 

152 

153 

154 

156 

157 

tl62 

218 

219 

221 

227 

60 

227 

228 

229 

230 

230 

231 

231 

232 

232 

233 

70 

233 

235 

235 

236 

237 

241 

241 

242 

242 

245 

80 

245 

246 

247 

248 

248 

250 

251 

253 

254 

255 

90 

256 

256 

i256 

i257 

257 

258 

259 

260 

261 

202 

100 

262 

263 

272 

285 

286 

287 

300 

306 

306 

307 

110 

314 

317 

318 

324 

328 

330 

357 

361 

362 

t362 

120 

»362 

i363 

t363 

377 

379 

379 

380 

380 

380 

383 

130 

v388 

i389 

390 

392 

394 

397 

398 

399 

402 

i402 

140 

1402 

405 

408 

»408 

i408 

i409 

»409 

411 

413 

i4l4 

150 

1414 

t415 

i415 

416 

417 

410 

421 

422 

422 

423 

160 

»432 

1432 

500 

500 

502 

502 

503 

504 

504 

505 

170 

505 

50' 

507 

i508 

t508 

i509 

512 

515 

517 

536 

180 

537 

541 

The  number  of  the  table  or  illustration  is  to  be  found  by  taking  its  unit  figure  in  the  hori- 
xontal  line  at  the  top  of  each  table  and  the  tens  and  hundreds  figures  in  the  left-hand  column. 
In  the  space  corresponding  to  the  intersection  of  the  vertical  and  horizontal  lines  will  be  found 
the  page  on  which  the  table  or  illustration  appears.  For  example,  Fig.  113  is  on  page  324. 
The  letter  t  shows  that  the  illustration  is  on  an  inserted  sheet  and  faces  the  page  stated. 


544 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


Abemdoned  work,  458 
Absorption,  brick;  351,  352 

pipe,  test,  296,  484 
Accidents,  contractor's  responsibility,  458 

falling  trenc^  braces,  263 

frosen  dynamite,  138 

gases  in  sewers,  540 

riveted  pipe  floated,  320 

rock  slides  in  trenches,  268 

shoring.  214,  234,  271,  280 

trench  machines.  83 

unloading  holes,  144 

wind  blows  floated  pipe,  328 
Acetj'lene,  cause  of  explosions  in  sewers,  531 
Acid,  cleaning  concrete  with,  391 

hastens  settling  of  washed  samples,  1 1 
Adams,  A.  A.;  cleaning  sowers.  499 
Adarason,  Robert;  causes  of  explosions   in 

sewers,  631 
Adhesion,  in  earth,  270 
Adminbtration,  expenses  at  Louisville,  169 

organisation  at  Louisville,  23 
Advertisement  of  contracts,  441 
Aftercooler,  on  compressed  air  plant,  122 
Aggregates,  374 

gravel,  372 

specifications,  474 

stone,  broken,  474 
inspection,  33 
Air,  compressed,  121 

advantages  in  drilling,  109 

cooling  and  reheating,  122 

drills.  105 

tunneling,  258 
Air  compressors,  126 

locks  on  sewer  tunnel  under  pressure, 
259 
Aldrich,  Allen;  sewer-cleaning  tools,  507 
Alkalies,  action  on  concrete,  370 
Alluvium,  angle  of  repose,  269 

shoring  trenches  in,  267 

stay-bracing  trenches  in^  237 
Alterations  in  contract  quantities,  458 
Alum  and  soap  for  making  concrete  imper- 
vious, 386 
Alvord  A  Burdick ;  classification  of  excava- 
tion, 56 
Ambler,  J.  N.;  sewer  cleaning,  501 
American  Engineering  A  Construction  Co., 

steel  forms,  412 
Ammonia  powder,  134 


Angle  of  repose,  268 

increased  by  compression,  278 
Anvel,  R.  G.;  cleaning  sewers,  501 
Arbitration,  bars,  478 

cannot  be  made  compulsory,  437 

clauses,  438 

engineer's  duty  under  contract  agree- 
ments, 435 
Arching  of  backfilling,  153 
Arch-timbering  of  tunnels,  257 
Areas,  averaging  end,  159 
Asphalt  joints.  339 

Asphyxia  from  fumes  of  explosives,  137 
Atlas  powder,  132 
Augers,  for  sampling  earth,  7,  14 
Austrian  method  of  tunneling,  66 
Automobile  insurance,  444 

for  cleaning  catch-basins.  510 
Auxiliary  valve  for  drills,  106 


B 


Backfilling,  arching  produced  by  narrowed 
bottom  of  trench,  153 

frosen  material  unsuitable,  311 

inspection.  35 

Iowa  specifications,  309 

methods.  309 

no  adhesion  to  bank,  270 

puddling.  309,  311 

rock  in.  128 

rolling.  310 

specifications,  471 
Bags  for  mortar  for  joints,  332 
Bailing,  67 

specifications,  471 
Baker,  Ira  O.;  angle  of  repose,  268 
Ballast,  475 

Balls  for  cleaning  sewers,  506 
Baltimore,    Md.;    condensing    water    from 
underdrains,  78 

waterproofing  concrete  sewers,  389 
Barbour,  Frank  . . .  ,()asphait  joints  for  pipe 
sewers,  340 

classification  of  excavation,  56 

pipe  joints,  335 
Bars,  arbitration,  478 

reinforcing.  384.  406.  475.  477,  482 

slicing,  for  tamping  around  steel,  382 

to  support  roof  in  tunneling,  255 
Batavia,  N.  Y.;  foundations  in  wet  trenches, 
302 

joints  in  wet  trenches,  332 


35 


545 


546 


INDEX 


Batch  concrete  mixers,  377 

Bates,    John    S.;    asphalt    joints    for    pipe 

sewers,  340 
Bates,  W.   F.;  laying    subaqueous  outfall, 

324 
Batter  boards,  on  piles  along  outfall  sewers, 
30 
transferring  line  and  grade,  26 
Batteries,  blasting,  144 
Bearing  strength,  vitrified  pipe,  297 
Beetle,  for  driving  sheeting,  262 
Belgian  method  of  tunneling,  65 
Belb,  Coffin's  study  of  their  shape,  335 

specifications,  483 
Bench  marks,  located  by  preliminary  sur- 
veys, 3 
position  for  giving  sewer  grades,  27 
Bench  wall  forms,  399,  401,  404,  400,  411 
Beveling  sheeting,  219,  240 
Bidders,  information  for,  441 

bonds,  443 
Bids,  form  of  proposal,  442 

where    alternative    materials    may    be 
used,  347 
Bill  of  material  for  shoring  trenches,  224, 
225,  226 
full  round  wood  forms,  418 
Bits  for  drilling 

hand  drilling.  102 
steam  and  air  drilling 
length,  107 
sharpening,  116,  120 
tempering,  119 
Bituminous  joints,  339 
Blanket  clauses,  436 
Blanks  for  records,  branches,  305 
force  account,  46,  47 
general  and  overhead  charges,  49 
labor  on  pipe  laying,  44,  50 
manholes,  305 
materials  and  supplies  for  pipe  laying, 

45 
sewerage  statistics,  517 
toolb,  equipment  and  repairs   in   pipe 

laying,  48 
total  cost  of  pipe  laying,  48 
Blasting,    care   necessary   in    trench    work, 
129,  268 
cleaning  holes,  142 
cost  in  trenches,  150 
cut  and  brcaking-in  shots,  67 
fumes,  137 
machines,  144 
priming  cartridges,  142 
spacing  holes,  103 
specifications,  470 

using  different  explosives  in  a  hole,  135 
wet  holes,  138 
Blaw  Steel  Construction  Co.;  steel  forms 
for  concrete,  407 


Block  sewers,  vitrified,  361 

concrete,  362 
Block-holing,  113 
Blocking  pipe,  317 

Blocks  to  lengthen  trench  braces,  231 
Board    of   Local    Improvements,    Chicago, 

rock  excavation  specifications,  57 
Board  of  Water  Supply,  New  York;  con- 
struction of  concrete  invert,  391 

leveling  requirements,  3 

requirements  for  brick,  351 
Boilers,  steam  drilling,  107 
Bond,  in  brickwork,  354 
Bonus  payments,  451 

Louisville  sewerage  construction  exper- 
ience, 169,  452 
Borings,  auger,  7,  14 

core  drill,  15 

frequency  of  holes,  16 

punch,  6 

recording  materiab  on  profiles,  14,  21 

wash,  8 
Boston,  brick  laying  performance,  356 

explosions  in  sewers,  532 

grease  in  sewers,  494 
Boston  Society  of  Civil  Engineers;  summary 

of  sewerage  statistics,  517 
Bowlders,  dobe  blasting,  143 

measurement,  55 
Boxes  for  thawing  dynamite,  141 
Box  sheeting,  232 

Boynton,  C.  W.;  pipe-testing  machine,  295 
Braces,  trench,  blocks  to  lengthen,  231 

extension.  233,  263 

placing,  vertical  sheeting,  216,  265 

presence    affects    concrete    operations, 
420 

quantity  of  lumber  needed,  222,  226 

sise,  222,  240.  281,  286 

spacing,  216 

times  used,  224 
Bracing,  on  curves,  238 

stay,  236 
Branch,  E.  W. ;  cleaning  sewers,  499 
Branches,  location,  39,  304 

records,  38,  306 

stoppers,  307 

specifications  for  placing,  486 
Breakage,  vitrified  pipe,  291,  29^ 
Breathing  apparatus,  541 
Breed,  J.  B.  F.;  engineer's  estimates  and 
contract  costs,  162 

shoring  Louisville  sewers,  227 

specifications,  466 
Breneman,  A.  A.:  explosions  in  sewers,  529 
Brewer,  Bertram;  flushing  sewers,  497 
Brick,  advantages  and  disadvantages,  347. 
349,  367 

broken,  in  manholes,  352 

cost  of  brick  sewers,  360 


INDEX 


547 


Brick,  handling,  358 

inspection,  33 

lasdng,  354 

use  of  profile,  307 
specifications,  478 

plastering,  479 

quality,  350 

rate  of  progress,  360 

sixe,  350  , 

si>ecification8,  478 

tests,  351,  352 

vitrified.  369 
Brockton,  Mass.;  flushing  sewers,  497 
Bronx  Valley  sewer,  using  materials  from 

trench,  371 
Brooklyn,  Borough    of;    bituminous   joints 
for  pipe  sewers,  341 

cleaning  catch-basins,  514 

cleaning  sewers,  503 

tests  of  vitrified  pipe,  298 
Brown,  N.  A.;  wash  borings,  12 
Brunton  bit,  118 
Buckets,  bottom-dump,  380 

concrete,  379 

cost  of  excavation,  161 

excavating,  98,  320,  322,  323 
Buckeye  traction  ditcher,  95 

cost  of  excavation,  Denver,  167 

performance  at  Denver,  199 
Buffalo,  N.  Y.;  explosions  in  sewers,  530 
Buggy,  concrete,  379 

pipe.  300 
Buildinga,  measurements  where  settlement 
may  occur.  81 

records  taken  on  preliminary  survesrs, 
4,22 

records  taken  during  construction.  35 
Bulkhead  at  end  of  construction  section,  401 
Burns  &  McDonnell;  classification  of  exca- 
vation, 57 
Butterfly  valve  for  drills,  106 


Cabloway,  use  on  sewer  trenches.  93 

Caisson  on  sewer  tunnel  under  air.  250 

Calcium  carbide,  source  of  explosive 
531 

Canals,  cost,  160 

Caps  for  explosives,  142 
storage,  149 
for  sheeting  planks,  263 

Car  for  concrete,  380,  381 

Carbonite,  132 

Carbons  for  core  drills,  15.  16 

Car-load,  feet  of  pipe  in.  292 

Carpenter.     George     A.;     cleaning    catch- 
basins.  510 

Carson-Trainor  hoister  and  conveyor,  93 

Carson  trench  machine,  83.  232 


Carter,   Frank   H.:  thickness  of  sheeting, 

rangers  and  braces,  287 
Carts  for  catch-basin  refuse,  514 

automobile,  510 
Cartridges,  dynamite,  134 

priming,  142 
Casting  earth  in  excavation,  60 
Castinga,  iron,  478 
Catch-basins,  cleaning,  509,  525 
freezing,  511 
location,  526 

oiling  to  kill  mosquitoes,  516 
specifications,  487 
Cattell,  W.  A.;  classification  of  excavation, 

56 
Catskill  Aqueduct:  brick  requirements,  351 
construction  of  invert,  391 
leveling  requirements,  3 
time  forms  were  in  place,  431 
Cellars,  effect  of  underdrains,  75 

preliminary  records  of  depths,  4,  22 
Cement,  inspection,  31 

joints  in  pipe  sewers.  331 
non-decomposable,  370 
specifications,  473 

testing  with  sand  to  be  used,  32,  354 
volume,  376 

wash  on  brick  sewers,  355 
weight,  376 
Centers,  block,  398 ' 

brickwork,  construction,  397 
specifications,  479 
withdrawing.  354.  398 
concrete,  cleaning,  428 
curves  and  junctions,  424 
handling,  432 
length,  409 
lubrication,  420 
lumber  for,  424 
metal-covered  wooden,  403 
peeling,  407,  429 
prevention  of  swelling,  418,  424 
specifications,  48 
steel,  404,  407 

cost,  428 
time  in  place,  430 
wooden,  398,  404 
cost,  425 
Centrifugal  pumps,  68 
Chain  rope,  300,  353 
Changes  in  soil  conditions,  270 
in  contracts.  435,  436,  460 
Charges  for  engineering  services,  53 
Chicago,    Lawrence  Ave.  tunnel  shield  and 

lining,  257 
Childs,  Stephen;  underdrainage  at  Newton, 

76 
Chocking  blocks,  in  tunneling,  255 
Chum  drilling.  101 
Chutes,  concrete,  381 


548 


INDEX 


Cincinnati,  Ohio;  sewer  brick  requirements. 
351 

topographic  map,  20 

underground  survey,  2 
Clam-shell  buckets,  08 
Clamp,  friction,  for  drawing  boring  rod,  7 

pulling  steel  sheet  piles,  247,  248 

sheeting,  262 
Classification  of  excavated  materiids,  55 
Clay,  and  linseed  oil  joint  compound,  342 

angle  of  repose,  269 

for  making  impervious  concrete,  386 

joints  in  pipe  sewers,  330 

shoring  trenches  in,  267 

tunneling  through,  251 
Cleaning,  catch-basins,  500 

centers  and  forms,  428 

concrete  before  resuming  lajring,  391, 
429 

driU  holes,  105,  108,  113,  142 

pipe  after  laying,  334 

sewers,  501 

underdrains,  78 
Cleats  on  trench  braces,  216 
Cleveland,   Ohio;  submerged  steel  outfall, 

327 
Cloth  wrapping  on  pipe  joints,  332 
Cochran,  Jerome;  lumber  for  wood  forms, 
424 

lubricating  forms,  430 
Cofl&n,  Freemim  C. ;  tests  of  pipe  joints,  334 
Cohesion,  effect  on  earth  pressures,  269 
Cold  weather,  concrete  work  in,  391 
CoUier,  James;  machine  and  hand  excava- 
tion, 167 

rate  of  progress  on  construction,  199 
Colors,  for  maps,  21 

red  for  main  results  in  computation,  41 

used  in  contrasting  weekly  and  monthly 
records,  51 
Columbus,  Ohio;  barges  used  in  sewer  clean- 
ing, 502 

deposits  in  sewers,  495 
Commission  on  Additional   Water   Supply, 

New  York;  wash  borings,  11 
Compensation,  workmen's,  443 
Competitive  bids  on  alternative  materials, 

347 
Compressed  air,  121 

advantages  in  drilling,  109 

cooling  and  reheating,  122 

drills,  105 

requirements  for  1  or  more  drills,  121 

transmission,  122 

tunneling,  258 
Compressors,  air,  126 
Computation  sheets,  preservation,  40 
Concord,  Mass.;  heavy  earth  pressures  in 
storage  well,  279 

flushing  sewers,  498 


Concord,  Mass. ;  roots  in  sewers,  500 
Concrete,   advantages   and   disadvantages, 
347,  349,  367 
block  sewers,  362 
cleaning  before  resuming  la3ang,  391, 

429,  481 
cost,  factors  affecting,  414 

Louisville,  186 
cracks  caused  by  swelling  centers,   418 
cradles  for  pipe,  302,  308,  317 
disintegration  by  chemical  action,  369 
extra  amount  to  avoid  using  outside 

forms,  157 
maximum  density  desirable,  373 
mixing,  hand,  374 

in  restricted  space,  378 
machine,  377 

relative  economy  of  hand  and  ma- 
chine, 376 
specifications,  480 
placing,  382,  481 

affected  by  trench  bracing,  420 
in  freesing  weather,  391 
Louisville,  393 
proportions    of    sand,    stone    and  ce- 
ment, 372 
quantity  in  Loubville  sewers,  186 
rate  of  progress  in  Louisville  sewers, 

201 
rubble,  481 

spading  and  slicing,  382,  481 
specifications,  480 
surfaces,  keeping  stone  from, -383,  481 

granolithic,  482 
transporting,  379 
wet  mixtures  needed,  382 
work  joints,  390,  414 
Condensing  water  from  underdrains,  78 
Conduits,  record  of  location  in  streets,  3 
Conglomerates,  cost  of  excavation,  161 
Contingencies,  providing  for,  in  contracts, 

436 
Continuous  concrete  mixers,  378 
Contours,    intervals    for    preliminary    sur- 
veys, 4,  20 
on  Cincinnati  maps,  20 
Contractors,  address  given  in  contract,  461 
examination  of  conditions  before  sub- 
mitting bids,  58 
favoring  local,  165 
inspection  does  not  relieve  contractors 

of  responsibility,  457,  461 
insurance,  458 
must  afford  facilities  to  others  on  same 

imdertaking,  457 
powder,  131 

relations  with  engineers,  37 
Contracts,  advertisement,  441 
ambiguity  and  illegality,  432 
blanket  clauses,  436 


/ 


INDEX 


549 


Contraots,  changes  in.  435,  430,  460 

compared  with  force  account  work,  433 
contingencies  to  be  provided  for,  436 
coat  plus  fixed  sum,  440 

with  guaranteed  limit,  450 
essentials,  434 
general  form  of  engineering,  441 

authors'  form,  455 
lump  sum,  448 

must  agree  with  advertisement,  infor- 
mation for  bidders  and  proposal, 
443 
New  York  precautions  in  drawing,  433 
oral  statements  modifying,  436 
percentage,  448 

on  labor  and  materials,  449 
preparation,  22 
printing,  455,  463 
restricted  to  local  bidders,  165 
should  be  clearly  expressed,  434 
surety's  interest  in  changes,  436 
unit  price,  446 
Coping  stones,  480 

Copper  spoon  for  unloading  blast  holes,  144 
Core  drilling,  15,  105 
Cost-keeping  methods,  43 
Cost  plus  fixed  sum  contracts,  440 
Costs,  administration,  53 
backfilling,  tamping,  311 
Buckeye  traction  ditcher,  97 
core  drilling,  16 

Denver  sewers,  machine  and  hand  exca- 
vation, 167 
diaphragm  pumps,  68 
ditching,  160 
dredging,  160 
dynamite,  140 
electric  fuse,  150 
engineering  and  supervision,  52 
explosives  in  rock  trenches,  150 
forms  and  centers,  306 
full-round  wood,  417 

erecting,  striking  and  moving,  415 
handling,  415,  432 
steel,  408.  428 
wood,  425 
hand  drilling,  102 
joints,  asphalt,  341 

sulphur-eand,  338 
Louisville  sewerage  sjrstem,  162 
concrete  and  steel,  186 
contract  work,  160 
earth  and  rock  excavation,  173 
engineering  and  administration,  53, 
160 
manholes,  365 
operation  and  maintenance  of  sewerage 

systems,  522 
pipe,  jointing,  313 
laying,  312 


Costs,  subaqueous  pipe  lasring,  323 
rook  excavation,  104 
sewers,  brick,  360 
cleaning,  408,  501 
concrete  in,  304,  414 
influence  of  different  factors,  195 
per  foot  of  diameter  of  1  lin.  ft.  of 
sewer,  394 
soundings  in  earth  and  hardpan,  7 
steam  shovel  excavation,  160 

iq  trench,  94 
topographic  surveying  and  mapping,  21 
trenching  by  hand  and  machine,  82,  167 
tunneling,  63 
vitrified  segments,  361 
wash  borings,  12,  13,  14 

rig.  10 
work  of  Carson  trench  machine,  89 
Couplings  for  sewer  rods,  607 
Cracks  in  concrete.  390,  391 

due  to  swelling  centers,  418 
Cradles,  brick  sewers,  355 

pipe  sewers,  303,  308,  317 
specifications,  485 
Cranes,  gantry,  for  pipe  lasring,  318 

traveling,  on  trench  excavation,  98,  320 
Crown-bar  timbering,  256 
Curbing,  specifications,  488 
Curtis  puller  for  steel  sheet  piling,  247 
Curves,  bracing  trenches  on,  238 

Carson  excavating  machine  on,  89 


Damages   due   to   alterations   in    contract 
quantities,  458 
liquidated,    451 

experience  at  Louisville,  169,  452 
suits  at  LouiBville,  162 
Dana,  Richard  T.;  explosives,  130,  135 
Darlington,    Dr.    Thomas.;    treatment    of ' 

asphyxiation  by  fumes,  137 
Day  labor,  compared  with    contract  work, 
433 
cost  keeping.  46,  47 
experience  at  Louisville,  162,  165 
Deaths  in  sewers,  540 

Denver,  Colo.:  cost  of  machine  and  hand 
excavation,  167 
labor  on  brick  sewers,  357 
rate  of  progress  on  construction,  199 
Deposits  in  sewers,  493 

removal,  500 
Derrick  for  trench  excavation,  98 
handling  vitrified  pipe,  300 
scow,  324 

sulky,  for  pipe  laying,  317 
Detonation,  nature  of,  130 
Detroit,  laying  large  concrete  pipe,  816 
Diamond  drills,  15 


650 


INDEX 


Diaphragm  pumps,  67 
Di£ferential  valve  for  drill,  106 
Discounts,  pipe  list  prices,  291 
Disintegration  of  concrete,  369 
Distance  of  magasines  from  buildings  and 

railways,  148 
Ditches,  Buckeye  traction  ditchers,  95 

cost,  160 
Dobe  blasting,  143 
Dolly  used  in  sharpening  bits,  12t 
Dopes,  in  explosives,  131 
Dorr,  E.  S.;  grease  in  sewers,  494 

use  of  scrapers  in  sewer  cleaning,  606 
Drag  scrapers  for  trench  work,  98 

cost   of  excavation,  161 
Drainage,  69,  468 

specifications,  471 

underdrains,  75 

with  driven  wells,  69 
Drawings,  checking  old,  5 

contract,  22,  42,  453 

mapping,  19 

record,  41 
Dredging,  cost,  160 
Dressing  lumber,  240,  425 
Drifts,  definition,  65 

use,  66,  250.  256 
Drill  steel,  hand  drilling,  102 

steam  drilling,  length,  107,  116 
sharpening.  116,  120 
tempering,  119 
Drilling,  core,  15 

hand,  101 
churn,  101 

jet,  8 

limitations  of  different  methods,  114 

scow,  323 

spacing  holes,  103 

steam  and  compressed  air,  105,  115 
boiler  capacity,  108 
compressed  air  needed,  121 
piping  for,  107 
Drills,  electric-air,  110 

hammer.  111 

percussion,  sises  for  sewer  work,  109 
types,  106 

wheel  mounting,  110 
Drip  stones,  specifications,  488 
Driving  caps  for  sheeting  planks,  263 
Dropping  rock  in  backfilling,  471 
Dualin,  132 
Dunn.  Col.  B.  W.;  shipment  and  storage  of 

explosives,  147 
du  Pont  do  Nemours  Powder  Co.,  E.  I.; 
blasting  machines,  144 

priming  cartridges,  142 

thawing  dynamite,  139 
Dynamite,  amount  for  trench  excavation, 
104,  105 

cartridges,  134 


Dynamite,  composition,  131,  136 
cost,  149 

disposing  of  unused,  144 
f  reeling,  138 
priming,  142 
rating  strength,  134 


E 


Earl,  George  G.;  contract  for  labor  and 
materiab  on  percentage  basis,  449 
Earth,  adhesion,  270 
angle  of  repose,  268 
changes  in  character,  270 
cohesion,  269 

determination  of  character  by  sound- 
ing, drilling  and  boring,  6 
excavation,  54 

cost  at  Louisville,  173 
pressures,  271 

Carter's  diagram,  287 

hydrostatic  conditions  approximated, 

275 
Meem*s  theory,  277 
Rankine's  formula,  271 
selection  for  backfilling,  311 
shrinkage.  310 
tunneling  in,  65 
Earthwork,  measurement,  158,  469 

shrinkage,  310 
Elberfeld;  asphalt   joints  in   pipe    sewers, 
339 
tests  of  pipe  sewers,  346 
Electric-air  drill,  110 
Electric  current,  voltage  for  tunnels,  64 
Emergency  work,  456 
Emerson  steam  vacuum  pump,  72 
End  areas,  averaging,  for  quantities,  159 
Engineering,  cost,  52 
Louisville,  169 
department  for  construction,  22 
diagram  of  Louisville  organisation,  23 
work  during  construction,  25 
Engineers,  arbitrators,  435 
charges  for  services,  53 
decision  regarding  workmanship    and 

materials,  456,  459 
may  require  discharge  of  men,  457 
relations  with  contractors,  37,  456 
English  method  of  tunneling,  66 
Equipment,  cost  keeping,  48 
Estimates,  concrete  in  sewer,  394 
final,  460 
for  bidders,  446 
frequency,  39 

Fuller's  rule  for  concrete,  39 
monthly,  460 
Examination,  local  conditions  by  contract- 
ors before  bidding,  58 
sewers,  492 


INDEX 


551 


Excavation,    below    grade    prevented    by 

inspector,  35 
below  pipe  in  rock  trench,  66,  128,  464 
bottom  of  trench,  Iowa  specifications, 

308 
authors*  specifications,  464 
cable  way,  91 
Carson-Trainor  hoister  and  conveyor, 

03 
Carson  trench  machine,  83,  232 
classification  of  materials,  55 
cost,  different  methods,  160 

Louisville,  173 
danger  due  to  previous,  238 
derricks  and  cranes,  98 
drag  scrapers,  98 
endless  chain  machines,  93 
excavating  buckets,  98 
frosen  material,  59 
general  discussion  of  subject,  54 
giving  grades,  29,  464 
hand,  58 
hydraulic,  325 
inspection,  34 
lines  of,  152,  454,  464,  467 
measurement,  469 
near  bottom  of  trench  with  machinery, 

99 
Potter  hoister  and  9onveyor,  90 
quantity,  151 
quicksand,  81 
rate  of  progress,  Denver,  199 

Louisville,  201 
special  structures,  467 
specifications,  467 
steam  shovel,  93 
Exploders,  142 
storage,  149 
Explosions  in  sewers,  492 
Boston,  532 
Buffalo,  530 
causes  of  ignition,  534 
Hartford.  531 
Manhattan,  529,  531 
New  Haven,  530 
ordinances  and  regulations  to  prevent, 

538 
Philadelphia.  530 
Pittsburg.  528 
prevention,  535 
sources  of  inflammable  gases,  527,  531, 

533 
Explosives,  ammonia  powder,  134 
cartridges,  134 

cause  of  disruptive  effect,  130 
composition    of   numerous   explosives, 

132 
contractors*  and  Judson  powder,  131, 

133 
dopes,  131 


Explosives,  dynamite,  131 

gelatin,  134 

gunpowder  (black  powder),  130 

magasines,  147 

nitroglycerin,  131 

rapidity  of  action,  135 

selection  for  economy,  136 

shipment,  147 

strength  rating,  134 

two  grades  in  a  hole,  135 

wet-hole  explosives,  138 
Extension  braces,  263 
Extra  payments,  contract  clauses,  459 

Louisville  sewerage  extras,  169 


Farnum,  Loring  N.;  subaqueous  pipe  laying, 

322 
Felton,  C.  R.;  fl\ishing  sewers,  407 
Fences  on  trenches.  456,  468 
Ferro  Concrete  Co.;  wooden  forms  for  large 

sewer,  399 
Filtite  jointing  compound,  345 
Fitch,  Charles  F.;  steel  forms,  410 
Flinn,  Alfred  D.;  time  forms  are  in  place,  431 
Floating  pipe,  826 
Flushing,  methods,  496 

necessity,  493 
Flush-tanks,  inspection,  491 
Force    account,    compared    with    contract 
work,  433 

cost  keeping,  46,  47 

experience  at  Louisville,  162,  165 
Forcite,  133 

Ford,  F.  L.;  sewer  cleaning,  502 
Form  of  contract,  455 

of  proposal,  442 
Forms  (construction),  brickwork,  397 

cleaning,  428 

cost  of  handling  small,  415 

curves  and  junctions,  424 

full  round,  415 

good  workmanship  needed,  348 

handling.  432 

length.  409 

lubricating,  429 

lumber  for,  424 

manholes,  420 

metal-covered  wooden,  403 

outside,  omitted  by  use  of  extra  con- 
crete, 151 

peeling,  407,  429 

specifications,  479,  481 

steel.  404.  407 
cost.  428 

time  in  place.  430 

wooden  for  concrete,  398,  404,  415 
cost,  425 
Forms  (records),  branches,  305 


552 


INDEX 


Forms    (recordfl),    force     account,     daily, 
46.  47 
general  and  overhead  charges,  40 
labor  on  pipe  laying,  44,  50 
manholes,  305 
materials  and  supplies  for  pipelajring, 

45 
sewerage  statistics,  517 
tools,  equipment  and  repairs  in  pipe 

laying,  48 
total  cost  of  pipe  laying,  48 
Fort,   E.    J.;    bituminous   joints   for   pipe 
sewers,  341 
cleaning  catch-basins,  514 
sewers,  503 
Foundations,  in  wet  trenches,  302 
specifications,  473 
value  at  Hoboken,  304 
Freeiing,  catch-basins,  511 

condensation  in  compressed  air  plants, 

122 
dynamite,  138 

guarding  concrete  against,  391 
Friction  in  compressed  air  pipes,  124,  125 
Frosen  earth,  excavation,  59 

backfilling,  311 
Fuertes,  James  H.;  foundations  of  Hoboken 

sewers,  304 
Fuller,  George  W.;  classification  of  excava- 
tion, 56 
Fuller,  Wm.  B.;  approximate  rule  for  con- 
crete nuxtures,  39 
test  for  concrete  of  maximum  density, 
373 
Fumes  from  blasting,  effect  of,  137 
Fungus  growths  in  sewers,  495,  499 
Fuse,  priming  with  safety,  142 
Fuze,  connecting,  146 
electric,  142 


G 


Gaging    stations,    should    be    established 

early,  5 
Gantry  crane  for  pipe  laying,  318 
Garage  traps,  539 
Gases  in  sewers,  527 
Gaskets,  318,  331,  335 
Gasoline,  extent  of  danger  from  1  gal.,  532 

nature  of  explosions,  533 

separator,  536 

source  of  dangerous  gases,  627,  528 
Gault,  Matthew;  cleaning  catch-basins,  514 

sharpening  bits  by  machines,  120 
Gelatin  dynamite,  134 
Gelignite,  133 
Geological  Survey  maps,  2 
German  method  of  tunneling,  66 
Giant  powder,  132 
GUlette,  U.  P.;  composition  of  explosives,  132 


Gillette,  H.  P. ;  labor  on  brick  masonry,  357 

rock  excavation,  103,  104 
G-K  compound,  342 
Gneiss,  cost  of  excavating,  161 
Go-devil  for  cleaning  pipe,  334 
Grades  of  sewers,  checking  records,  4 

grade  pole,  26 

notebook  used  in  staking  out,  41 

transferring  line  and  grade  to  sewer,  26, 
31 
Grading  material  around  undei drains,  77 

concrete  aggregates,  373 
Grady  puller  for  steel  sheet  piling,  248 
Granite,  cost  of  excavation,  161 

drilling  holes  in,  103 
Granolithic  finish,  482 
Gravel,  angle  of  repose,  269 

inspection,  33 

screening  and  recombining,  373 

shoring  trenches  in,  267 

specifications,  474 

using,  from  trench,  371 

voids,  372 

washing,  371 
Gravity  concrete  mixers,  378,  381 
Grease  for  lubricating  forms,  430 

deposits  in  sewers,  494 

traps,  494 
Great  Falls,  Mont.;  disintegration  of  con- 
crete pipe  by  alkaline  water,  370 
Griffin,  J.  Alden;  jointing  cement  pipe,  333 
Griggs,    Julian;    barges    used    in    cleaning 
sewers,  502 

deposits' in  Columbus  sewers,  495 
Grooves  for  joints  in  concrete,  391 
Ground,  settlement,  79 

water,  effect  on  cost  of  excavation,  161 
leakage  into  sowers,  gaging,  5 
permissible  amount,  36 
records  of  elevation,  17,  40 
removal  from  trenches,  67 
stimulated  fungus  growth,  499 
Guaranty  by  contractor,  460 
Guard  rails,  220 
Guarding  trenches,  466 
Gunning  drill  holes,  108 
Gunpowder,  130 
Gutters,  specifications,  488 


H 


Half-moon  for  cleaning  pipe,  334 

Hamlin,     Homer;     disintegration     of    Los 

Angeles  outfall,  369 
Hammer,  bracing,  262 

drills.  111 

hand  drilling,  101 

steam,  246,  248.  249 
Hammond,  G.  T.;  tests  of  vitrified  pipe,  298 
Hand  excavation,  58 


INDEX 


553 


Hand  excavation,  cost,  161 

driUing,  101 

mixing,  concrete,  374 
Handling,  materials,  brick,  352 

earth,  83 

forms,  432 

mortar,  353 

pipe,  299 

rock,  127 
Hanreddy,  James;  steel  forms,  414 
Hardness  of  rock  as  basis  of  clasaifioation,  57 
Hardpan,  shoring  trenches  in,  267 
Hartford,  Conn.;  cleaning  sewers,  502 
Haul,  effect  of  length  on  cost  of  cleaning 

basins,  512 
Havana,  Cuba,  wheeled  trench  drills,  110 
Hasen,  Allen;  classification  of  excavation,  56 
Heading,  definition,  65 
Healey  sewer  cleaning  machine,  506 
Heating  concrete  materials  in  cold  weather, 

392 
Hempstead,  Eng.;  lining  worn  inverts,  516 
Hendrick,  Calvin  W.;  waterproofing  Balti- 
more sewers,  389 
Hercules  powder,  133 
Hcnneking,    Carl;   asphalt   joints   in    pipe 

sewers,  339 
Bering  &  Fuller;  classification  of  excavation, 

56 
Hering  &  Gregory;  classification  of  excava- 
tion, 56 
High-center  bit,  118 

Himes,  Albert  J.;  breaking  contracts.  437 
Hoboken,  N.  J.;  foundations  for  sewers,  304 
Holes,  cleaning  drill  holes,  105,  108,  113 
with  steam,  142 

driU,  103.  106 

explosives  for  wet,  138,  143 

loading  with  explosives,  141 

unloading,  144 
Holmes,  A.  L.;  subaqueous  pipe-laying,  326 
Honolulu,  H.  I.;  laying  subaqueous  outfall, 

822 
Hook,  lifting,  300 

rope,  300,  353 
Hoopes,   Charles;      foundations     in      wet 
trenches,  302 

pipe  joints  in  wet  trenches,  332 
Hopedale,  Mass.:  performance  of  drills  in 
quartsite,  116 

lines  of  excavation,  152 
Horisontal  sheeting  for  trenches,  232 
Horner,  W.  W.:  soundingn  in  earth,  7 
Horse-head,  in  tunneling,  254 
Horsley  powder,  133 
Hose,  by-passing  inverts  under  repair,  516 

for  diaphragm  pumps,  68 

life  differs  with  steam  and  air,  109 
Hough,  Capt.  D.  L.;  mutuality  of  contracts, 
436 


Howe,  Malverd  A. ;  tests  of  pipe  joints,  334 
Hubbard,  W.  D.;  cleaning  sewers,  498 
Huf eland,  O.;  explosions  in  sewers,  532 
Hunter,  W.  D.;  cleaning  sewers,  498 
Hydrants,  access  during  excavation,  468 

records  of  location,  3 
Hydrated  lime  for  making  concrete  imper- 
vious, 386 
Hydraulic  sluicing,  cost,  160 
Hydrogen  sulphide,  influence  of  water  con- 
taining sulphates,  370 

presence  dangerous  to  concrete,  369 
Hydrostatic  pressures  on  sheeting,  275 


Illuminating  gas  in  sewers,  527,  532 
Industrial  wastes,  regulations  regarding  dis- 
charge, 496 
Information  for  bidders,  441 

judicial  opinion  regarding  its  character, 
446 
Inlets,  487 
Inspection,  brick,  33 
cement,  31 
construction,  25,  464 
cost,  52 

cost-keeping,  47 
does  not  relieve  contractor  of  responsi- 

bUity,  457,  461 
duties  of  inspector,  30 
excavation,  84 
final,  36 
maintenance,  491 

precautions  for  safety,  637 
pipe,  casi-iron,  31 
vitrified  pipe,  293 
sewers,  345 
sand,  32 

steel  for  reinforcing,  33 
stone  and  gravel,  33 
Institution  of    Civil    Engineers,    president 
appoints    arbitrator    of    disputed 
contracts,  440 
Insurance,  443,  458 
Intoxicants  on  work,  457 
Inverted  siphons,  inspection,  517 
Inverts,  early  construction,  383,  399,  401, 
403,  406 
lining  worn.  616 
specifications,  479,  480 
wear,  368 
Iowa  pipe-laying  requirements,  307 
Iron  castings,  specifications,  478 
Italian  method  of  tunneling,  66 


Jackhammer  drill.  111 


554 


INDEX 


Jersey  City,  N.  J.;    arbitration    clause    in 
contract  for  waterworks,  438 

laying  steel  pipe,  319 
Jet,  water,  cleaning  dredged  trench,  324 

drilling  jigs,  8 

driving  sheeting,  238 

looeening  material  for  suction  dredge, 
325 
sheeting,  35 

lowering  submerged  pipe,  321 
Joint    Outlet    Sewer,    N.    J.;    tar-cement 

joints,  341 
Jointite  jointing  compound,  345 
Joints,  asphalt,  339 

bituminous,  341 

brickwork,  354,  397 

cement,  75,  331 
specification,  485 

clay,  330 

filtite,  345 

flexible,  321,  323,  326 

G-K  compound,  342 
specification,  485 

jointite.  345 

lead.  318,  486 

leadite,  331 

marbleoid,  345 

overfilled,  334,  336 

plain  mortar,  485 

Stanford,  330 

subaqueous,  325,  328 

sulphur-sand,  336 

tar,  339 

tar-cement,  342 

work,  390 
Jones  &  Laughlin  steel  sheet  piling,  242,  244 
Judson  powder,  131,  133 
Jute,  burnt  to  heat  pipe,  337 

gaskets,  318,  331,  335 


K 


Kansas  City,  Mo.;  steel  pipe  laying,  320 

tests  of  8ew«r  pipe,  298 
Kellogg,  H.  J.;  explosions  in  sewers,  530 
Kensico  Aqueduct,  17-ft.    section   built  in 

single  operation,  420 
Kerosene  for  lubricating  forms,  430 
Kettles  for  thawing  dynamite,  139 
Kieselguhr,  131 
Kimberly,  A.  Elliott;  G-K  compound  joints, 

342,  343,  344 


Labor,  assigning  tasks  in  hand  excavation, 
58 
Carson  trench  machine,  88,  89 
cleaning  catch-basins,  510 
cleaning  sewers,  501.  505 


Labor,  contract  requirements.  457 

cost  keeping,  44,  50 

favoring  local,  458 

flushing  sewers,  497 

G-K  compound  joints,  344 

hand  drilling,  101.  102 

inspecting  sewers,  493 

laying  sewer  brick,  356,  357,  360 
vitrified  pipe,  301,  313 

management  highly  important  on  exca- 
vation, 54 

mixing  concrete,  377 

preliminary  estimates  of  cost,  18 

pulling  steel  forms,  409 

shoveling  material  from  trenches,  60 

soundings  with  punch  rods,  7 

steam  drilling,  108 

tamping  backfilling,  309 

wash  boring.  10.  13 
Lackawanna  steel  sheet  piling.  241,  243 
Lawns,  protected  before  excavated  material 

is  placed  on  them,  468 
Laying  brick,  354,  397 

concrete  in  freezing  weather,  391 

pipe,  cast  iron,  317 
large  concrete,  316 
specifications,  484 
steel,  319 
subaqueous,  320 
vitrified,  291,  307 
Lead  wool,  318 
Leadite,  331 
Leakage  of  ground-water,  gaging.  5 

inspection,  37,  348 

permissible  amount,  36 

through  tar-cement  joints,  342,  345 
Leaves  in  catch-basins,  511 
Ledge,  classification,  56 

excavation,  101 

hammer  drills  for  shallow  holes,  113 

measurements  and  records.  21,  38,  158 
Lehman,  Albert  C;  time  forms  are  left  in 

place,  431 
Length  of  sewers,  measurement,  158 
Leptomitus,  fungus  in  sewers,  499 
Lettering  drawings  for  photographic  reduc- 
tion, 454 
Leveling,  cost,  21 

preliminary  surveys,  3 

quantity  surveys,  158 
Lever  and  plank  clamp.  262 
Leyner  drill  sharpener,  120 
Liability  insurance,  44 
Libby,  Dana;  cleaning  sewers,  498 

obstructions  in  sewers,  495 
Life  belt,  for  men  inspecting  sewers,  493 
Lighting,  interior  of  sewers  for  examination, 
5,  637 

trenches,  456 

tunneling  operations,  64 


INDEX 


555 


Lime,  hydrated,  for  making  concrete  imper- 

viouB,  386 
Limestone,  drilling  holes  in,  103 
Line  and  grade,  given  by  engineer  to  con- 
tractor, 464 
transferring  to  sewer,  26 
Lines  of  excavation,  15^,  454 
Lining  tunnels,  268,  412 

worn  inverts,  517 
Liquidated  damages,  451 

experience  on  Louisville  sewerage  work, 
160.  452 
Loading  oars  with  vitrified  pipe,  292 
drill  holes,  141 

wagons  with  vitrified  pipe,  299 
Loam,  angle  of  repose,  269 
Local  contractors,  favoring,  165 

workmen,  favoring,  458 
Locks,  air,  on  tunnel  under  pressure,  259 
Locomotive,  cranes,  98,  320 

electric,  for  tunneling,  64 
London,  arbitration  clause  in  contract,  440 
cast-iron  lining  of  pneumatic  tunnel,  261 
Los  Angeles,  Cal.;  cement  pipe  joints,  333 
disintegration  of  mortar  joints  of  out* 
fall.  369 
Louisville,  Ky.;  cleaning  forms,  429 
concrete  mixing  plant,  380 
cost  of  borings  on  preliminary  investi- 
gations, 14 
of  concrete,  395 

and  steel  in  sewers,   186 
of  earth  and  rock  excavation,  173 
of  sewers  built  by  contract,  169 
cross-sections  of  trenches,  227.  228,  229, 

230,  231,  232,  233.  235,  237 
day  labor  construction  costs,  165 
distribution    of    expense    of    sewerage 

system,  53 
full-round  wood  forms,  415 
judicial  decision  regarding  character  of 

*' information  for  bidders,"  446 
laying  concrete  in  cold  weather.  392 
liquidated  damages  and  bonus  clauses, 

164.  452 
local  contractors'  bids,  165 
metal-covered  wooden  forms,  404 
organisation  of  staff.  23 
quantity  of  excavation  in  trenches,  aver- 
age. 107 
rate  of  progress  in  placing  concrete,  195, 

201,  393 
specifications,  466 
steel  forms,  409,  410,  412 
steam  shovel  on  construction,  93 
sulphur-snnd  joints.  338 
timbering  of  tunnel,  255,  256 
time  forms  were  in  place,  431 
waterproofing  exi>eriments.  386 
wooden  formst  399,  401 


Low  center  bit,  118 
Lubrication  of  forms,  429 
Lumber,  bill  of  material  for  trench  shoring, 
224,  225.  226 

for  wood  forms,  424 

kinds  used  for  shoring,  239 

losses,  223 
Lump  sum  eontracts,  448 
Lynn;  grease  in  sewers,  494 


M 


Machines  for  cleaning  sewera,  502 
for  digging  trenches,  99 

Buckeye  traction  ditcher,  96,  97.  199 

cost  of  work  at  Denver,  167 
cable  way,  91 
Carson,  83 

Carson-Trainor     hoister     and     con- 
veyor, 93 
drag  scrapers,  98 
endless  chain  machines,  95 
excavating  buckets,  98 
Potter,  90,  91 
for  mixing  concrete,  377 
for  tamping  backfilling,  311 
for  testing  pipe,  Boynton,  295 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  298 
Iowa,  296    • 
Talbot,  295 
Madras,   India;  disintegration  of  concrete 

sewers.  370 
Magasines  for  explosives.  147 
Maintenance,  cleaning  and  care  of  catch- 
basins,  509 
cost  of  operation  and  maintenance  of 

sewerage  systems,  522 
deposits  in  sewers,  493 
flushing  sewers,  496 
'      importance,  491 
inspection.  492 
records,  517 

regulators  and  inverted  siphons,  517 
removing  heavy  deposits  from  sewers, 
500 
roots  from  sewers,  499 
repairs,  516 
Maiden,  Mass.;  cleaning  sewers.  498 
Manchester.  Eng.;  tests  of  pipe  sewers,  345 
Manholes,  broken  brick  in,  352 
castings,  488 
concrete,  forms,  420 
construction,  365 
excavation  for,  467 
Hopedalc,  lines  of  excavation,  152 
moving  covers,  516 
quantities,  366 
recording  position,  305 
reference  marks  for  locating,  25 
specifications,  487 


556 


INDEX 


Manure  pits  for  dynamite,  141 

Maps,  for  preliminary  investigations,  2 

street,  18 
Marbleoid  jointing  compound,  345 
Af  arsh  gas  in  sewers,  527 
Marshall,  Gen.  W.  L.;  waterproofing  con- 
crete, 386 
Marston,  Prof.  Anson;  narrowed  bottom  of 
trench,  153 

pipe  testing  machines,  296 
Masonry  specifications,  brick,  478 

stone,  470 
Materials,  bill  of,  shoring  trenches.  224,  225, 
226 

bill  of,  full  round  wood  forms,  418 

choice  for  large  sewers,  367 

cost  keeping,  45 

from  trench,  use  of,  371 

depositing  so  as  to  leave  passages,  468 

list  for  preliminary  estimates,  18 
Maul  for  driving  sheeting,  262 
McCracken  &.  Co.,   C.   T.;   metal-covered 

wooden  forms,  404 
McGovem,  Patrick;  subaqueous  pipe  laying, 

325 
McKiernan-Terry  Drill  Co.;   core  drilling, 
15 

sheeting  hammer,  248 
Measurements,  brickwork,  351 

concrete  materials,  376 

excavation,  158,  464,  467,  460, 

final,  38 

length  of  sewers,  158 

monthly,  39,  52 

preliminary,  38 

rock,  55 
Meem,  J.  C;  theory  of  earth  pressures,  277 

timbering  large  tunnels,  256 
Melrose,  Mass.;  cleaning  sewers,  498 
Membrane  method  of  waterproofing,  389 
Metal-covered  wooden  centers,  403 
Metcalf  &  Eddy;  classification  of  ezeav» 
tion,  58 

contractor's  bond,  462 

contract  form,  455 

genet  al  specifications,  463 
Metcalf,  Leonard;  earth  pressures.  Concord, 

279 
Methane  in  sewers,  527,  533 
Metropolitan  Sewerage  Commission,   New 

York ;  grease  in  sewers,  494 
Metropolitan    Sewerage    System,     Boston; 
oiling  forms,  430 

rate  of  brick  laying,  356 

southern  outfall  construction,  326 
Milwaukee,  Wis.;  subaqueous  pipe  laying, 

322 
Mirrors  for  examining  sewer  interiors,  5 
Mixing  concrete,  hand,  374 

machine,  377 


Mixing  concrete,  relative  cost  of  hand  and 

machine  mixing,  376 
Modulus  of  rupture,  pipe,  298 
Monmouth,    111.;    asphalt    joints    on    pipe 

sewers,  340 
Moran,  H.  P. ;  earth  pressures,  280 
Morse,  Howard  S.;  timbering  a  Louisville 

tunnel,  256 
Mortar,  compoctition  for  best  results,  32,  343 
joints  in  pipe  sewers,  331 
masonry,  353 

materials  per  cubic  yard,  359 
on  inner  surface  of  concrete  sewers,  384 
specifications,  475 
Mosquitoes,  oil  catch-basins  to  kill,  516 
Motor    trucks   for   cleaning    catch-basins, 

510 
Mudcaps,  143 


N 


Newark,  N.  J.;  cost  of  forms  for  aqueduct, 

426 
New  Bedford,  Mass.;  deaths  in  sewer,  540 
failure  of  cofferdam,  81 
subaqueous  pipe  laying,  325 
New  Haven,  Conn.;   explosions  in   sewers, 

530 
New  Orleans;  percentage  contract  for  labor 

and  materials,  449 
New  Rochelle,   N.   Y.;  submerged  outfal^ 

323 
Newton,  Mass.;  obstructions  in  sewers  and 
underdrains,  495 
cleaning  sewers,  498,  606 
removing  roots,  499 
sulphur  and  sand  joints,  337 
tunnel  in  sand,  252 
underdrains,  76 
New  York,    N.    Y.;    cleaning    Manhattan 
sewers,  508 
explosions  in  sewers,  529,  531 
general  form  of  contract,  433 
grease  in  Manhattan  sewers,  494 
regulations  regarding  explosive  liquids, 
539 
Night  work,  456 
Nitroglycerin,  131 

use  in  wet  holes,  138 
Nobel   and    Abel;    temperatures   of  explo- 
sions of  gunpowder,  130 
North  Attleboro,  Mass.;   asphalt  joints  in 

pipe  sewers,  340 
Norton,  Geo.  H. ;  explosions  in  sewers,  630 
Notches  for  sheeting  trenches,  223 
Notes  should  be   initialed  by  a  note-taker 
40 
note-books,  41 
Numbering  clauses  in  specifications,  465 
Nye  steam  vacuum  pump,  71 


INDEX 


557 


o 


Oakum  gaskets,  318,  331*  335 
Obstruction  of  sewers,  detection,  402 
Office  work,  branch  records,  305 

computations,  40 

cost  keeping.  43 

drawings,  41 

manhole  records,  305 

mapping,  18 

profiles,  21 
Ogden,  H.  N.;  rock  excavation,  103 
Oiling  forms,  429 
Oil  in  sewage  cements  deposits,  494 

separator,  536 

to  kill  mosquitoes  in  catch-basins,  516 
Operation  of  sewerage  system,  cost,  522 
Orange-peel  buckets,  98,  99 
Ordinance  against  inflammable  liquids,  538 
O'Shaughnessy,    M.    M.;    classification    of 

excavation,  56 
Outfall  sewers,  profiles,  14 

surveys  for,  29 
Overfilling  asphalt  joints,  341 

cement  joints,  331 

tar-cement  joints,  342 
Overhead  charges,  recorded  in  cost-keeping, 
46,  49 


Paraffine  oil  for  lubricating  forms,  429 
Parmley,  Walter  C;  bond  in  brickwork,  354 

concrete  block  sewers,  362 
Pavements,  preserving  materials,  60, 466, 468 

reconstructing,  466,  468 

records,  3,  17 

removing,  60 

replacing     temporarily     where    settle- 
ment is  anticipated,  36,  310 
Pawtucket,  R.  I.;  cleaning  catch-basins,  510 
Payments,  brickwork,  479 

catch-basins  and  inlets,  487 

concrete,  482 

contract  clauses,  459 

excavation,  469 

lajring  pipe,  486 

manholes,  488 

piling,  472 

reinforcement  bars,  482 

shoring,  470 

vitrified  pipe,  483 
Peeling,  with  metal  forms,  407,  429 
Ppnsacola,  laying  outfall,  328 
Percentage  contracts,  448 
Percussion  drills,  105 
Petrolatum  for  oiling  forms,  430 
Philadelphia;  explosions  in  sewers,  530 

specification  for  measurement  of  sew- 
ers, 158 


Phoephine,  auto-combustible  gas,  534 
Photographs,  desirability,  43,  81 
contract  drawings,  454 
preserving,  43 
taken  by  inspectors,  35 
Pierson,  Geo.  S.;  brick  and  mortar  required 

for  sewers,  357 
Piles,  cutting  off,  under  water,  321 

maintain  grade  of  sewers  in  settling 

streeto,  304 
refusal  in  driving,  472 
specifications,  472 
under  oast-iron  outfall,  326 
under  concrete  pipe  sewer,  317 
Pile  drivers,  extension  leads,  326 

steam,  246 
Piling,  steel  sheet,  241 
Pipe,  broken,  215 
buggy,  300 
oast-iron,  inspection,  31 

laying,  317,  323.  328 
specifications,  486 
cement,  349 

jointing,  333 

specifications,  484 
concrete,  349 

laying,  316 
floating,  326 
for  percussion  drills,  107 
friction  with  compressed  air,  124,  125 
grade  line  defined,  464 
heating  by  burning  jute,  337 
joints,  asphalt,  339 

cement,  331 

clay,  330 

filtite.  345 

flexible,  321,  323,  326 

G-K  compound,  342 

jointite,  345 

leadite,  331 

marbleoid,  345 

Stanford,  330 

subaqueous,  325,  328 
<  sulphur-sand,  336 

tar,  339 

tar-cement,  342 
laying,  cast  iron,  317 

cost,  312 

cost-keeping,  44 

Iowa  requirements,  307 

large  concrete,  316 

rate  of.  313 

hpecifications,  484 

steel,  319 

subaqueous,  320 

vitrified,  291 
locating  by  test  pits,  5 
pulling  into  place,  328 
record  of  location,  3 
steel,  319,  322,  327,  328 


558 


INDEX 


Pipe,  subaqueous,  320 
vitrified,  291 
discounts,  292 
handling  and  sorting,  299 
inspection,  293 
jointing.  330 
laying,  301,  485 
lengths  in  carioad,  292 

in  wagon  load,  299 
sockets.  332 
specifications,  482 
tests.  295 
when  used  for  sewers,  348 
Pittsburg,  Pa.;  arbitration  clause  in  con- 
tract. 439 
explosions  in  sewers,  528 
Plank  cap,  263 
clamp,  262 
lower,  217 
Plans,  checking  old,  5 
contract,  22,  42,  453 
mapping,  19 
record,  41 
Plant,  cost  keeping,  48 
selection,  382 

tendency  to  use  too  much,  54 
Plaster  of  Paris  for  stemming,  143 
Plastering   exterior   of    brick    sewer,    354, 

479 
Platforms,  staging,  219 
under  sewers,  303 
specifications,  473 
Plowing  street  surfaces,  59 
Plug  and  feathers,  101 
Pneumatic  tunneling,  methods,  258 

when  needed,  63 
Poling  boards,  trench  bracing,  234 

tunneling,  250 
Population,  records  needed,  17 
Porter,  Rufus  K.;  driving  tunnel  in  loose 

sand,  252 
Poet  route  mapsr  2 

Potter,  Alexander,  sulphur  and  sand  joints, 
337 
tar-cement  joints,  341 
Prelini,  Charles;  explosives,  130 

methods  of  tunneling,  65 
Potter  excavator  and  conveyor,  91 

hoister  and  conveyor,  90 
Powder,  ammonia,  134 
Atlas,  132 

black  or  gunpowder,  130 
contractors'  or  Judson,  131,  133 
Giant.  132 
Horsley,  133 
Preliminary     investigations     for     sewerage 
design,  1 
field  work,  3 
maps,  2 
office  work  preliminary  to  design,  18 


Preliminary,  organisation  of  engineering  de- 
partment for  construction,  22 
Pressures,  earth,  271 
Priming  dynamite  cartridges.  142 
Printing  contracts  and  specifications,  455 
Prismoidal  formula.  158 
Profiles,  brick-Uying,  355,  396,  397 

for  payments,  38 

information  to  be  shown  on,  21 

preliminary  surveys,  4,  17 

record,  42 

Rochester  outfall  sewer,  14 
Progress,  brick  sewer  masonry,  360 

contract  requirements,  457 

effect  on  costs,  54 

keeping  records,  51 

length  of  centers  affects  rate  of  progress, 
409 

pipe-laying,  313 

placing  concrete,  393,    399,    401.    406, 
410 

rates  attained  in  building  sewers,  195 
Property  lines,  records,  3 
Proposal,  form  for,  442 
Proske,  T.  H.;  sharpening  drill  bits,  116 
Providence,    R.    I.;   cleaning  catch-basins, 
512,  513 

sewer  cleaning  tools,  507 
Puddling  backfilling,  309,  311 
Pulling  pipe.  328 

sheeting,  239 

steel  sheet  piling,  246.  247 
Pulsator  for  electric-air  drill,  110 
Pulsometer,  70 
Pumps,  centrifugal,  68 

diaphragm,  67 

reciprocating,  69 

sand,  on  wash  drill  rod,  13 

steam  vacuum,  69 
Emerson,  72 
Nye,  71 
pulsometer,  70 
Pumping,  specifications.  471 
Punch  boring,  6 


Q 


Quantities,  alteration  of,  in  contract,  458 

brickwork,  351,  357 

concrete,  372 

trench  excavation,  153 
Quartsite,  drilling  115 
Quicksand,  276 

bottom  work  in  trenches  in.  302,  303 

sheeting  trenches  in,  81 
Quincy.  Mass.;  cleaning  sewers,  499,  505 


R 


Rags  in  sewers,  495 


INDEX 


559 


Rails,  guard,  220 
Railwaj'S,  industrial,  370 

street,  location  records,  3 
Rainfall,  effect  on  trenches,  270 

records  needed,  18 
Rammers  for  tamping  backfilling,  300 
Rangers,  214 

btracing,  216 

difficult   to   hold   against   steel   sheet 
piles,  246 

length,  216 

placing,  215.  228,  265 

quantity  required,  222,  225 

sise.  210.  222,  281,  286 

times  used,  224 
Rankine,  W.  J.  M.;  earth  pressures,  280 

formula  for  earth  pressures,  271 
Rate  of  progress  on  construction,  105 

brick  sewer  masonry,  360 

contract  requirements,  457 

effect  on  costs,  54 

keeping  records,  51 

length  of  centers  affects  rate  of  prog- 
ress, 400 

pipe-laying,  313 

placing  concrete,  303,  300,  401, 406,  410 

rates  attained  in  building  sewers,  105 
Reaming  edge  of  drill  bit,  116 
Reciprocating  drills,  105 

pumps,  60 
Records,  borings,  17 

branches,  305 

drawings.  41 

manholes,  305 

preliminary  survey,  3 

sewerage  system,  Boston  Society,  517 

taken  during  sewer  construction,  40 

vitrified  pipe  receipts,  205 
Reference  marks,  for  trenches,  25 
Refilling  trench  below  pipe,  467,  468 
Regulations  against  discharge  of  inflamma- 
ble liquids  into  sewers,  538 
Regulators,  inspection,  401,  517 
Reinforcement,  placing,  384,  406 

specifications,  billet-steel,  475> 
rail  steel,  477 
placing,  482 
Rendrock,  132 
Repose,  angle  of,  268 
Repairs,  by  maintenance  force,  516 

contractor's  resiMnsibility.  460 
Richards,  E.  P.;  disintegration  of  concrete 

sewers,  370 
Rivers,  data  furnished  by  preliminary  inves- 
tigations, 5,  17 

surveying  across,  20 

subaqueous  pipe  laying,  321 
Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  profile  of  outfall  sewer,  14 

wash  borings,  12 
Rock,  excavation  defined,  55,  467 


Rook,  from  trench  used  in  concrete,  371 

handling  in  trenches,  127 

in  backfilling,  128,  310.  471 

lines  of  excavation,  152 

measurement,  158 

steps,  cost,  161.  70,  268 

stripping,  468 
Rods,   copper   spoon,   for   unloading  blast 
holes,  144 

for  determining  grades  of  sewers,  4 

leveling,  3 

sewer  cleaning,  507 

sounding,  for  ascertaining  soil  oharac- 
teristios,  6 

transferring  grades  in  trenches,  28 
Rolling  backfilUng,  310 
Roots,  in  sewers,  332.  405,  400 

in  underdrains,  75,  405 

removing,  400,  501 
Rope,  hook,  300,  353 
Rosette  bit,  110 
Roes,  C.  W.;  root  cutter,  400 
Rotary  drills,  15,  105 
Round  edge  bit,  118 
Rubble  concrete,  481 

masonry,  480 
Run-off,  records  desired,  5 
Rupture,  modulus  of  pipe,  208 


S 


Salem,  Mass.;  subaqueous  outfall,  324 
Salt  in  water  for  concrete,  303 
San  Francisco,  Cal. ;  classification  of  excava- 
tion, 56 
Sand,  angle  of  repose,  260 

deposits  in  sewers,  405 

determination  of  organic  matter,  33 

fine,  for  waterproofing  concrete,  386 

inspection,  32 

pump  on  wash-drill  rod,  13 

qualities  desired  for  mortar,  32.  353 

running  or  quicksand,  276 

sharp,  353 

shoring  trenches  in,  267 

specifications,  474 

sulphur   and   sand   jointing    mixtures, 
336,  338 

using,  from  trench,  371 

voids,  372 

washing,  371 
Sanitary  conveniences  on  work,  456 
Saunders,  W.  L.;  explosives,  130,  135 
Scale,  mill,  removal,  34 
Scales,  Geological  Survey  maps,  2 

Post  Office  maps,  2 

record  drawings,  42 

underground  structures  map,  18 

topographic  maps,  20 
Schist,  drilling  holes  in,  103 


560 


INDEX 


Scranton,  Pa.;  map  of  underground  struc- 
tures, 10 
Scrapers,  drag,  cost  of  excavation,  161 

for  trench  work, -98 

aewer,  501 

wheel,  cost  of  excavation,  161 
Screediag  inverts,  384,  396,  399 
Screenings,  in  mortar,  353 
Sedimentation,  acid  xised  to  hasten,  11 
Separators,  gasoUne,  536 
Settlement  of  ground  and  buildings,  cause 
and  prevention,  79 

inspector  should  guard  against,  34 

instances,  229,  230,  304 
Sewers,  brick,  349 

choice  of  materials,  348,  367,  414 

cleaning,  501 

concrete,  367 
block,  362 

construction  in  narrow  alley,  378 

cost  of  operation  and  maintenance,  522 

deposits,  493 

examination  of,  5,  17,  492 
dangers  of,  492 

explosions  in,  492 

flushing,  496 

grades,  26,  41 

investment  in  American  cities  in,  401 

joints  in  pipe,  330 

length,  measurement,  158 

obstructions,  492 

outfall,  322,  323,  324,  325,  326,  327,  328 

pipe,  construction,  291,  330 

rates  of  progress,  in  building,  195 

smoothing  inner  surfaces,  335,  384 

transferring  line  and  grade,  26 

vitrified  block,  361 

waterproofing,  385 
Shafts,  tunnel,  64 

Shale,  excavation  by  steam  shovels,  160 
Sharp,  quality  in  some  sands,  353 
Sheeting,  bevel  edges,  219,  240 

box,  232 

clamp,  262 

depth  relative  to  bottom  of  trench,  217 

driving,  217,  241,  248 

excavating  below  end,  217 

for  wet  trenches,  79 

horisontal,  232 

jotting,  238 

length,  220 

lumber,  239 

amount  required,  222 

necessity  for,  214 

notches,  223 

poling  boards,  234 

pulling,  239 

removal,  innpeotion  during,  35 

skeleton,  237 

specifications,  469 


Sheeting,  thickness,  285 

times  used,  223 

vertical,  215 

widths,  240,  263 
Sheet  piling,  steel,  241 

driving,  247,  248 

pulling,  246,  247,  248 

used  for  deep  trench  in  water,  325 
Shield  tunneling,  258 
Shoring,  box  sheeting,  232 

necessity  in  trenching,  214 

poling  boards,  234 

practical  suggestions,  264 

requirements  of  different  materials,  267 

skeleton  sheeting,  237 

specifications,  469 

stay  bracing,  236 

tunnels,  251 

vertical  sheeting,  218 
Shot  drills,  15 

Shoulders  in  bottom  of  trench,  153 
Shoveling  from  trenches,  60 

staging  platforms,  219 
Shovels,  steam,  93 

cost  of  excavation,  160 
Sidewalks,    keeping  passages  clear  during 
excavation,  468 

specifications,  488 
Siphons,  inverted;  inspection,  491,  517 
Skeleton  sheeting,  237 
Sieves,  round  holes  corresponding  to  square 

meshes,  32,  33 
Simmons  bit,  118 

Snelling,  Dr.  Walter  O.;  selection  of  explo- 
sives, 136 
Snow,  F.  Herbert;  stoppages  in  sewers,  495 
Soap  and  alum  for  making  concrete  imper- 
vious, 386 

used  on  forms,  430 
Sockets,  Coffin's  study  of  shape,  335 
Soil,  adhesion,  270 

angle  of  repose,  268 

calculation  of  pressures,  271 

changes  in  character,  270 

cohesion,  269 

investigations  of  character,  6 

records  of  character,  40 
Sounding  with  rods  to  ascertain  soil  charac- 
teristics, 6 
South  Bend,  Ind.,  cost  of  centers,  426 
Spacing  drill  holes,  103,  106 
Specifications,  absorption  by  vitrified  pipe, 
296 

backfilling,  471 

bearing  strength  of  vitrified  pipe,  297 

billet  steel  reinforcement  bars,  475 

bituminous  joints  for  pipe  sewers,  841 

blasting,  470 

castings,  478 

catch-baoin,  487 


INDEX 


561 


Specifications,  cement.  473 
pipe,  484 

cleaning  forms,  420 

concrete,  plain  and  reinforced,  480 

curbing,  gutters  and  sidewalks,  488 

earth  excavation,  measurement,  152 

engineer's  rulings  govern,  450 

excavation,  467 

foundations,  473 

general,  463 

inlets,  487 

lajring  cast-iron  pipe,  486 
vitrified  pipe,  484 

length  of  sewers,  158 

manholes,  487 

masonry,  brick,  478 
stone,  470 

mortar,  475 

piling,  472 

pipe  laying,  307,  484,  486 
sewers,  345 
vitrified,  482 

preparation  of,  22,  435,  465 

printing,  455,  463,  465 

pumping,  bailing  and  draining,  471 

rail  steel  reinforcement  bars,  477 

reinforcement,  475.  477 

shoring,  460 

steel  reinforcement,  475,  477 

technical,  466 

tunneling,  460 

wellholes,  487 
Spoon,  cleaning  drill  holes,  105 

copper,  for  unloading  blast  holes.  144 
Sprague,  N.  S.,  Jr.;  explosions  in  sewers,  527 
Springfield,  Mass.;  cleaning  sewers.  400 

laying  steel  pipe,  310 
Square  cross  bit,  118 

St.  Louis,    Mo.;    cable  way  used    on    sewer 
trenches,  03 

crushing  rock  from  trench  for  concrete, 
371 

soundings  in  earth,  shale  and  hardpan, 
7 

steel  pipe  laying,  320 
Stadia,  use  on  surveys  of  outfall  sewers,  30 
Staging  platforms,  210 
Statistics  of  sewerage  systems,  form,  518 
Stay  bracing.  236 
Steam,  cleaning  drill  holes  with,  142 

drills,  105 

hammers,  246 

shovels,  03 

cost  of  excavation  by,  160 

thawing  frosen  ground,  50 

vacuum  pumps,  60 
Steel,  reinforcing,  inspection,  33 
placing,  384 
specifications,  482 

quantity  and  cost,  Louisville  sewers,  186 
86 


Steel,  sheet  piling,  241 

specifications,  billet-steel,  475 
rail  steel,  477 
Stemming  for  blast  holes,  143 
Stem,  Eugene  W.;  earth  pressures.  281 
Stone,  crushed,  inspection,  33 
specifications,  474 
masonry,  specification,  470 
Stonite,  132 
Stoping  drill,  112 
Stoppage  of  sewers,  detection,  402 
Stoppers  for  branches,  307 
Storage,  excavated  material,  468 

pipe,  200 
Street  railways,  records  of  location,  3 
Streets,  loosening  surface,  50 
maps,  2 
passages  to  be  left  during  excavation, 

468 
pavements,    preserving   materials,    60, 
466,  468 
reconstructing,  466,  468 
records,  3,  17 
removing,  60 

replacing  temporarily,  36,  310 
records  of  sections,  4 
Subaqueous  pipe  laying,  321 

rock  excavation,  321,  323 
Sulky  derricks,  317 
Sullivan  Machinery  Co.;   core  drilling,  15, 

16 
Sulphur-sand  mixtures,  336 
Sumps  in  trenches,  78 
Supervision,  30 

cost,  52 
Supplies,  cost  keeping,  50 
Surety,  interest  in  changes  in  contract,  436 
Surveys,  character  of  soil,  6 

grades  for  excavation  of  areas,  20,  38,  30 
note-book  for  staking  out  sewer  grades, 

41 
preliminary,  3 
quantity,  158 
sewers,  25 
Sylvester  waterproofing  process,  386 
Syracuse,  N.  Y.;  laying  large  concrete  pipe, 
316 


Talbot,  A.  N. ;  pipe  testing  machine.  205 
Tamping  blast  holes,  143 

backfilling.  301,  300,  311 
specifications,  471 
Tappet  valve  for  drills,  106 
Tar  binds  deposits  in  sewers,  404 

joints  in  pipe  sewers,  330 
Tar-cement  joints  in  pipe  sewers,  342 
Taylor,  Alexander,  J.;   tamping  backfilling 
by  machine,  312 


562 


INDEX 


Taylor  A  Thompson;   materials  for  strong 
concrete,  374 

proportions  for  strong  concrete,  374 

quantities  of  sand,  stone  and  cement, 
372 

salt  in  water  for  concrete,  303 
Team  insurance,  444 

Temperature  of  explosions  of  powder,  130 
Tempering  bits,  119 

Templates  for  screeding  inverts,  383,  306 
Testa,  brick,  351 

cement,  473 

density  of  concrete,  373 

general  principles  of  specifying,  348 

iron  castings,  478 

pipe  sewers,  345 

reinforcing  steel,  476,  477 

vitrified  pipe,  295 
Thawing,  dynamite,  139 
Thompson  sewer  cleaning  machine,  503 
Thomson,  T.  Kennard;  earth  pressures,  280 
Timber,  bill  of  materials  for  shoring,    224, 
225,  226 

bill  of  materials  full-round  forms,  418 

for  wood  forms,  424 

kinds  used  for  shoring,  239 

losses,  223 
Timbering  tunnels.  249,  264 
Time  forms  should  be  in  place,  430 
Toad-stools  in  sewers,  495 
Tools  for  cleaning  sowers,  507 

cost  keeping,  48 

sheeting,  bracing  and  timbering,  261 
Topography,  map  of  Cincinnati,  20 

preliminary  surveys,  4,  21 
Townsend,  A.  C;  grease  in  sewers,  494 
Tracings,  care  of,  42 
Transportation,  concrete,  379,  381 

explosives,  147 

vitrified  pipe,  292 
Trap,  gasoline,  536 

rock,  drilling  holes  in,  103 
Treatment  works,  laying  out,  29 

measurement  of  excavation,  39 
Trenches,  bottom  narrowed,  153,  302 

backfilling,  309 

blasting  in,  150 
cost,  151 

casting  material  from,  60 

changes  in  sides  on  exposure,  270 

cross-sections,  Hopedale,  152 
Louisville,  227  to  237 

depth  at  Louisville,  173.  201 

where  machine  excavation  becomes 

advisable,  82 
where  tunneling  is  preferable,  62 

difiSculties  in  soft  bottoms,  302 

draining,  67,  302 

excavation  below  pipe  in  rock  cut,  56, 
128,  301 


Trenches,  hand  excavation  in  bottom  where 
machines  are  used,  99,  467 
lajing  out,  25 
length  opened,  467 

with  concrete  sewers,  383 
lighting  and  guarding,  456 
materials  from,  in  concrete,  371 
machines  for  excavating,  83 
must  be  dry  for  cement  jointing,   75, 

332,  486 
no  ■  adhesion  between   backfilling  and 

bank,  270 
puddling,  309 
refilling  below  pipe,  467 
rolling  backfilling,  310,  311 
shaping  bottom,  301,  307 

specification,  485 
sheeting  below  underground  structures, 
236 

depth  to  be  driven,  217 

different  methods,  214,  264 

for  steam  shovel  work,  94 

in  different  materials,  267 

on  curves,  238 

pressures,  271 

quicksand,  81,  276 

rock  cuts,  268 

wet  trenches,  79 
spacing  blast  holes,  105 
specifications,  467 
starting  work,  59 
steam  drills  in,  107 
width,  affected  by  material,  151 

for  machine  excavation,  82 
Trestles,  subaqueous  pipe  laying,  322 
Triangulation,  cost,  21 

purpose,  3 
Troughs,  concrete,  381,  382 
Tunnels,  cost  in  different  materials,  63,  196 
drill  mountings,  108,  113 
effect  of  fumes  from  explosives,  137 
handling  materials,  64 
in  sand  and  gravel,  252 
lighting,  64 
lining,  67,  258 

forms,  412 

inspection,  36 

where  used,  61 
pneumatic  work,  63,  258 
rate  of  progress,  196 
shafts,  64 

steam  drills  used  on  short  tunnels,  110 
timbering,  249 
ventilating,  64 
Turbine  sewer  cleaner,  502 


U 


Underdralns,  75 

grading  material  around,  77 


INDEX 


563 


Underdrains,  sise,  76,  302 

specifications,  471 
Underground  surveys,  maps  of,  18 

sewers,  5 

soil,  6 
Unit  prices,  advantages  in  rock  and  earth 
trenches,  57 

contracts  based  on,  446 
Unloading  dynamite  from  holes,  144 
U.  S.  Geological  Survey  maps,  2 
U.  S.  steel  sheet  piling,  242,  244 
U.  S.  Weather  Bureau  records,  18 


Valves  for  percussion  drills,  106 
Vancouver,  B.  C;  pulling  pipe  into  place, 

328 
Velocities  to  prevent  solids  settling,  500 
Ventilation,  tunnels,  64 
Vertical  sheeting  for  trenches,  218 
Vigorite  powder,  133 
Vitrified  brick,  specifications,  470 
Voids  in  sand  and  gravel,  372 
Vulcan  sheeting  hammer,  248 
Vulcanite  powder,  133 


W 


Wagon-load  of  pipe,  299 
Wait,  John  Cassan;  arbitration  clauses  in 
contracts,  437 

essentials  of  a  contract,  434 
Waito,  Henry  M.,  topographic  maps,  20 

underground  survey  of  Cincinnati,  2 
Waling  boards,  in  tunneling,  255 
Walsall,  England;  sewer  cleaner,  500 
Waltham,  Mass.;  flushing  sewers,  497 

obstructions  of  sewers,  406 
Warrington  steam  hammer,  248 
Wash  boring,  acid  used  to  hasten  precipita- 
tion of  samples,  1 1 

N.  Y.  Commission  on  Additional  Water 
Supply,  10 

U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  8 
Washing  brick  sewers  with  cement,  355 

concrete  before  resuming  laying,  391 

sand  and  gravel,  371 
Washington,    D.    C;    cleaning    and    oiling 
catch-basins,  516 

ordinance  against  inflammable  liquids, 
538 
Wastes,    industrial,    regulations    r^arding 

discharge,  496 
Watchmen,  456 
Water,  consumption,  records,  18 

effect  on  cohesion  of  earth,  260 

for  flushing  sewers,  497 

in  drill  holes,  138,  142 


Water,  leakage  into  sewers,  gaging,  5 
inspection,  37.  348 
permissible  amount,  36 
through  tar-oement  joints,  342,  345 
Water  jet,  cleaning  dredged  trench,  324 
drilling  rigs,  8 
driving  sheeting,  238 
loosening  material  for  suction  dredge, 
325 
sheeting,  35 
lowering  submerged  pipe,  321 
Waterbury,  Conn.;  cost  of  wood  forms,  426 
Waterproofing,  385 
Watson,  Hugh  8. ;  leakage  in  pipe   sowers, 

345 
Weber  Co.;  wooden  forms  for  large  concrete 

sewer,  401 
Webster,   Geo.    S.;    explosions  in    sewers, 

530 
Wedges  for  quarrsdng  by  plug  and  feathers, 

101 
Wellholes,  specifications,  487 
Wells,  jetting  apparatus  and  methods,  9 
Wemlinger  steel  sheet  piling,  243,  245 
Westboro,  Mass. ;  fungus  in  sewers,  499 
Wotherbee,  George  A.;  cleaning  sewers,  498 
Wheelbarrows  for  concrete,  379 
Wheel  scrapers,  cost  of  excavation,  161 
Williams,  Frank  C;  full-round  wood  forms, 
415 
sections  of  Louisville  trenches,  227 
Williams,  William  F.;  submerged  outfall  at 

New  Bedford,  325 
Wilmington,  Del.;  tamping  backfilling  by 

machinery,  311 
Windows  in  sheeting  trenches,  223 
Wing  dams,  321 

Winston,  N.  C;  sewer  cleaning,  501 
Wiring,  blasting  holes,  146 
Wooden  forms  for  sewers,  397,  399 

metal-covered,  403 
Worcester,  Mass.;  absorption  tests  of  sewer 
brick,  352 
air  looks  of  pneumatic  tunnel,  259,  260 
cleaning  catch-basins,  512 

sewers,  508 
cost  of  operation  and  maintenance  of 
sewerage  system,  522 
of  wood  forms,  425,  426 
electric  tunnel  locomotive,  64 
exi>erience    with    Carson    trench    ma- 
chines, 89 
recording   location    of    manholes    and 

branches,  305 
rock  tunnel  with  earth  roof,  250 
tunnel  in  hard  clay,  251 
use  of  drill  sharpeners,  120 
wooden  lining  of  pneumatic  tunnel,  258 
Work,  abandoned,  458 


564  INDEX 

Work,  emergency  and  night,  456  X 

extra,  469  ^_j^.^   j^g 

Workmanship,  first  class  and  poor,  38,  348 

good,  essential  on  timbering,  264  Y 

inspection,  34  Y-bit.  118 

Workmen's  compensation,  443 

Wrapping  cloth  about  pipe  joints,  332 

Z-bit,  119 


Z     ' 


61066102523 


b89088902623a 


,/ 


;   1 


«-uC 


.^tc      <^ 


'  r 


■{ 


n^cZCzt^.i.-..-.    ^-'^ 


;     I 


I 


W    7 


