NONRESIDENT 
TRAINING 
COURSE 

SEPTEMBER  1998 


Navy  Electricity  and 
Electronics  Training  Series 

Module  2 — Introduction  to 
Alternating  Current  and 
Transformers 

NAVEDTRA  14174 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  A:  Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  is  unlimited. 


Although  the  words  "he,"  "him,"  and 
"his"  are  used  sparingly  in  this  course  to 
enhance  communication,  they  are  not 
intended  to  be  gender  driven  or  to  affront  or 
discriminate  against  anyone. 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  A:  Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  is  unlimited. 


PREFACE 


By  enrolling  in  this  self-study  course,  you  have  demonstrated  a  desire  to  improve  yourself  and  the  Navy. 
Remember,  however,  this  self-study  course  is  only  one  part  of  the  total  Navy  training  program.  Practical 
experience,  schools,  selected  reading,  and  your  desire  to  succeed  are  also  necessary  to  successfully  round 
out  a  fully  meaningful  training  program. 

COURSE  OVERVIEW:  To  introduce  the  student  to  the  subject  of  Alternating  Current  and 
Transformers  who  needs  such  a  background  in  accomplishing  daily  work  and/or  in  preparing  for  further 
study. 

THE  COURSE:  This  self-study  course  is  organized  into  subject  matter  areas,  each  containing  learning 
objectives  to  help  you  determine  what  you  should  learn  along  with  text  and  illustrations  to  help  you 
understand  the  information.  The  subject  matter  reflects  day-to-day  requirements  and  experiences  of 
personnel  in  the  rating  or  skill  area.  It  also  reflects  guidance  provided  by  Enlisted  Community  Managers 
(ECMs)  and  other  senior  personnel,  technical  references,  instructions,  etc.,  and  either  the  occupational  or 
naval  standards,  which  are  listed  in  the  Manual  of  Navy  Enlisted  Manpower  Personnel  Classifications 
and  Occupational  Standards,  NAVPERS  18068. 

THE  QUESTIONS:  The  questions  that  appear  in  this  course  are  designed  to  help  you  understand  the 
material  in  the  text. 

VALUE:  In  completing  this  course,  you  will  improve  your  military  and  professional  knowledge. 
Importantly,  it  can  also  help  you  study  for  the  Navy-wide  advancement  in  rate  examination.  If  you  are 
studying  and  discover  a  reference  in  the  text  to  another  publication  for  further  information,  look  it  up. 


1998  Edition  Prepared  by 
DSC  Ray  A.  Jackson 


Published  by 
NAVAL  EDUCATION  AND  TRAINING 
PROFESSIONAL  DEVELOPMENT 
AND  TECHNOLOGY  CENTER 


NAVSUP  Logistics  Tracking  Number 
0504-LP-026-8270 


i 


Sailor's  Creed 


"I  am  a  United  States  Sailor. 

I  will  support  and  defend  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  of 
America  and  I  will  obey  the  orders 
of  those  appointed  over  me. 

I  represent  the  fighting  spirit  of  the 
Navy  and  those  who  have  gone 
before  me  to  defend  freedom  and 
democracy  around  the  world. 

I  proudly  serve  my  country's  Navy 
combat  team  with  honor,  courage 
and  commitment. 

I  am  committed  to  excellence  and 
the  fair  treatment  of  all." 


ii 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  PAGE 

1.  Concepts  of  Alternating  Current   1-1 

2.  Inductance   2-1 

3.  Capacitance   3-1 

4.  Inductive  and  Capacitive  Reactance   4-1 

5.  Transformers   5-1 

APPENDIX 

I.  Glossary   AI-1 

H.  Greek  Alphabet   AII-1 

III.  Square  and  Square  Roots   AIII-1 

IV.  Useful  AC  Formulas   AIV-1 

V.  Trigonometric  Functions   AV-1 

VI.  Trigonometric  Tables   AVI-1 

INDEX    INDEX- 1 


iii 


NAVY  ELECTRICITY  AND  ELECTRONICS  TRAINING 

SERIES 


The  Navy  Electricity  and  Electronics  Training  Series  (NEETS)  was  developed  for  use  by  personnel  in 
many  electrical-  and  electronic-related  Navy  ratings.  Written  by,  and  with  the  advice  of,  senior 
technicians  in  these  ratings,  this  series  provides  beginners  with  fundamental  electrical  and  electronic 
concepts  through  self-study.  The  presentation  of  this  series  is  not  oriented  to  any  specific  rating  structure, 
but  is  divided  into  modules  containing  related  information  organized  into  traditional  paths  of  instruction. 

The  series  is  designed  to  give  small  amounts  of  information  that  can  be  easily  digested  before  advancing 
further  into  the  more  complex  material.  For  a  student  just  becoming  acquainted  with  electricity  or 
electronics,  it  is  highly  recommended  that  the  modules  be  studied  in  their  suggested  sequence.  While 
there  is  a  listing  of  NEETS  by  module  title,  the  following  brief  descriptions  give  a  quick  overview  of  how 
the  individual  modules  flow  together. 

Module  1,  Introduction  to  Matter,  Energy,  and  Direct  Current,  introduces  the  course  with  a  short  history 
of  electricity  and  electronics  and  proceeds  into  the  characteristics  of  matter,  energy,  and  direct  current 
(dc).  It  also  describes  some  of  the  general  safety  precautions  and  first-aid  procedures  that  should  be 
common  knowledge  for  a  person  working  in  the  field  of  electricity.  Related  safety  hints  are  located 
throughout  the  rest  of  the  series,  as  well. 

Module  2,  Introduction  to  Alternating  Current  and  Transformers,  is  an  introduction  to  alternating  current 
(ac)  and  transformers,  including  basic  ac  theory  and  fundamentals  of  electromagnetism,  inductance, 
capacitance,  impedance,  and  transformers. 

Module  3,  Introduction  to  Circuit  Protection,  Control,  and  Measurement,  encompasses  circuit  breakers, 
fuses,  and  current  limiters  used  in  circuit  protection,  as  well  as  the  theory  and  use  of  meters  as  electrical 
measuring  devices. 

Module  4,  Introduction  to  Electrical  Conductors,  Wiring  Techniques,  and  Schematic  Reading,  presents 
conductor  usage,  insulation  used  as  wire  covering,  splicing,  termination  of  wiring,  soldering,  and  reading 
electrical  wiring  diagrams. 

Module  5,  Introduction  to  Generators  and  Motors,  is  an  introduction  to  generators  and  motors,  and 
covers  the  uses  of  ac  and  dc  generators  and  motors  in  the  conversion  of  electrical  and  mechanical 
energies. 

Module  6,  Introduction  to  Electronic  Emission,  Tubes,  and  Power  Supplies,  ties  the  first  five  modules 
together  in  an  introduction  to  vacuum  tubes  and  vacuum-tube  power  supplies. 

Module  7,  Introduction  to  Solid-State  Devices  and  Power  Supplies,  is  similar  to  module  6,  but  it  is  in 
reference  to  solid-state  devices. 

Module  8,  Introduction  to  Amplifiers,  covers  amplifiers. 

Module  9,  Introduction  to  Wave-Generation  and  Wave-Shaping  Circuits,  discusses  wave  generation  and 
wave-shaping  circuits. 

Module  10,  Introduction  to  Wave  Propagation,  Transmission  Lines,  and  Antennas,  presents  the 
characteristics  of  wave  propagation,  transmission  lines,  and  antennas. 


iv 


Module  11,  Microwave  Principles,  explains  microwave  oscillators,  amplifiers,  and  waveguides. 
Module  12,  Modulation  Principles,  discusses  the  principles  of  modulation. 

Module  13,  Introduction  to  Number  Systems  and  Logic  Circuits,  presents  the  fundamental  concepts  of 
number  systems,  Boolean  algebra,  and  logic  circuits,  all  of  which  pertain  to  digital  computers. 

Module  14,  Introduction  to  Microelectronics,  covers  microelectronics  technology  and  miniature  and 
microminiature  circuit  repair. 

Module  15,  Principles  of  Synchros,  Servos,  and  Gyros,  provides  the  basic  principles,  operations, 
functions,  and  applications  of  synchro,  servo,  and  gyro  mechanisms. 

Module  16,  Introduction  to  Test  Equipment,  is  an  introduction  to  some  of  the  more  commonly  used  test 
equipments  and  their  applications. 

Module  17,  Radio-Frequency  Communications  Principles,  presents  the  fundamentals  of  a  radio- 
frequency  communications  system. 

Module  18,  Radar  Principles,  covers  the  fundamentals  of  a  radar  system. 

Module  19,  The  Technician's  Handbook,  is  a  handy  reference  of  commonly  used  general  information, 
such  as  electrical  and  electronic  formulas,  color  coding,  and  naval  supply  system  data. 

Module  20,  Master  Glossary,  is  the  glossary  of  terms  for  the  series. 

Module  21,  Test  Methods  and  Practices,  describes  basic  test  methods  and  practices. 

Module  22,  Introduction  to  Digital  Computers,  is  an  introduction  to  digital  computers. 

Module  23,  Magnetic  Recording,  is  an  introduction  to  the  use  and  maintenance  of  magnetic  recorders  and 
the  concepts  of  recording  on  magnetic  tape  and  disks. 

Module  24,  Introduction  to  Fiber  Optics,  is  an  introduction  to  fiber  optics. 

Embedded  questions  are  inserted  throughout  each  module,  except  for  modules  19  and  20,  which  are 
reference  books.  If  you  have  any  difficulty  in  answering  any  of  the  questions,  restudy  the  applicable 
section. 

Although  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  use  simple  language,  various  technical  words  and  phrases  have 
necessarily  been  included.  Specific  terms  are  defined  in  Module  20,  Master  Glossary. 

Considerable  emphasis  has  been  placed  on  illustrations  to  provide  a  maximum  amount  of  information.  In 
some  instances,  a  knowledge  of  basic  algebra  may  be  required. 

Assignments  are  provided  for  each  module,  with  the  exceptions  of  Module  19,  The  Technician's 
Handbook;  and  Module  20,  Master  Glossary.  Course  descriptions  and  ordering  information  are  in 
NAVEDTRA  12061,  Catalog  of  Nonresident  Training  Courses. 


v 


Throughout  the  text  of  this  course  and  while  using  technical  manuals  associated  with  the  equipment  you 
will  be  working  on,  you  will  find  the  below  notations  at  the  end  of  some  paragraphs.  The  notations  are 
used  to  emphasize  that  safety  hazards  exist  and  care  must  be  taken  or  observed. 


WARNING 


AN  OPERATING  PROCEDURE,  PRACTICE,  OR  CONDITION,  ETC.,  WHICH  MAY 
RESULT  IN  INJURY  OR  DEATH  IF  NOT  CAREFULLY  OBSERVED  OR 
FOLLOWED. 


CAUTION 


AN  OPERATING  PROCEDURE,  PRACTICE,  OR  CONDITION,  ETC.,  WHICH  MAY 
RESULT  IN  DAMAGE  TO  EQUIPMENT  IF  NOT  CAREFULLY  OBSERVED  OR 
FOLLOWED. 


NOTE 


An  operating  procedure,  practice,  or  condition,  etc.,  which  is  essential  to  emphasize. 


vi 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  TAKING  THE  COURSE 


ASSIGNMENTS 

The  text  pages  that  you  are  to  study  are  listed  at 
the  beginning  of  each  assignment.  Study  these 
pages  carefully  before  attempting  to  answer  the 
questions.  Pay  close  attention  to  tables  and 
illustrations  and  read  the  learning  objectives. 
The  learning  objectives  state  what  you  should  be 
able  to  do  after  studying  the  material.  Answering 
the  questions  correctly  helps  you  accomplish  the 
objectives. 

SELECTING  YOUR  ANSWERS 

Read  each  question  carefully,  then  select  the 
BEST  answer.  You  may  refer  freely  to  the  text. 
The  answers  must  be  the  result  of  your  own 
work  and  decisions.  You  are  prohibited  from 
referring  to  or  copying  the  answers  of  others  and 
from  giving  answers  to  anyone  else  taking  the 
course. 

SUBMITTING  YOUR  ASSIGNMENTS 

To  have  your  assignments  graded,  you  must  be 
enrolled  in  the  course  with  the  Nonresident 
Training  Course  Administration  Branch  at  the 
Naval  Education  and  Training  Professional 
Development  and  Technology  Center 
(NETPDTC).  Following  enrollment,  there  are 
two  ways  of  having  your  assignments  graded: 
(1)  use  the  Internet  to  submit  your  assignments 
as  you  complete  them,  or  (2)  send  all  the 
assignments  at  one  time  by  mail  to  NETPDTC. 

Grading  on  the  Internet:  Advantages  to 
Internet  grading  are: 

•  you  may  submit  your  answers  as  soon  as 
you  complete  an  assignment,  and 

•  you  get  your  results  faster;  usually  by  the 
next  working  day  (approximately  24  hours). 

In  addition  to  receiving  grade  results  for  each 
assignment,  you  will  receive  course  completion 
confirmation  once  you  have  completed  all  the 


assignments.  To  submit  your  assignment 
answers  via  the  Internet,  go  to: 

http  ://courses.cnet.na  vy.mil 

Grading  by  Mail:  When  you  submit  answer 
sheets  by  mail,  send  all  of  your  assignments  at 
one  time.  Do  NOT  submit  individual  answer 
sheets  for  grading.  Mail  all  of  your  assignments 
in  an  envelope,  which  you  either  provide 
yourself  or  obtain  from  your  nearest  Educational 
Services  Officer  (ESO).  Submit  answer  sheets 
to: 

COMMANDING  OFFICER 
NETPDTC  N331 
6490  SAUFLEY  FIELD  ROAD 
PENSACOLA  FL  32559-5000 

Answer  Sheets:  All  courses  include  one 
"scannable"  answer  sheet  for  each  assignment. 
These  answer  sheets  are  preprinted  with  your 
SSN,  name,  assignment  number,  and  course 
number.  Explanations  for  completing  the  answer 
sheets  are  on  the  answer  sheet. 

Do  not  use  answer  sheet  reproductions:  Use 

only  the  original  answer  sheets  that  we 
provide — reproductions  will  not  work  with  our 
scanning  equipment  and  cannot  be  processed. 

Follow  the  instructions  for  marking  your 
answers  on  the  answer  sheet.  Be  sure  that  blocks 
1,  2,  and  3  are  filled  in  correctly.  This 
information  is  necessary  for  your  course  to  be 
properly  processed  and  for  you  to  receive  credit 
for  your  work. 

COMPLETION  TIME 

Courses  must  be  completed  within  12  months 
from  the  date  of  enrollment.  This  includes  time 
required  to  resubmit  failed  assignments. 


vii 


PASS/FAIL  ASSIGNMENT  PROCEDURES 

If  your  overall  course  score  is  3.2  or  higher,  you 
will  pass  the  course  and  will  not  be  required  to 
resubmit  assignments.  Once  your  assignments 
have  been  graded  you  will  receive  course 
completion  confirmation. 

If  you  receive  less  than  a  3.2  on  any  assignment 
and  your  overall  course  score  is  below  3.2,  you 
will  be  given  the  opportunity  to  resubmit  failed 
assignments.  You  may  resubmit  failed 
assignments  only  once.  Internet  students  will 
receive  notification  when  they  have  failed  an 
assignment— they  may  then  resubmit  failed 
assignments  on  the  web  site.  Internet  students 
may  view  and  print  results  for  failed 
assignments  from  the  web  site.  Students  who 
submit  by  mail  will  receive  a  failing  result  letter 
and  a  new  answer  sheet  for  resubmission  of  each 
failed  assignment. 

COMPLETION  CONFIRMATION 

After  successfully  completing  this  course,  you 
will  receive  a  letter  of  completion. 

ERRATA 

Errata  are  used  to  correct  minor  errors  or  delete 
obsolete  information  in  a  course.  Errata  may 
also  be  used  to  provide  instructions  to  the 
student.  If  a  course  has  an  errata,  it  will  be 
included  as  the  first  page(s)  after  the  front  cover. 
Errata  for  all  courses  can  be  accessed  and 
viewed/downloaded  at: 

http://www.advancement.cnet.navy.mil 

STUDENT  FEEDBACK  QUESTIONS 

We  value  your  suggestions,  questions,  and 
criticisms  on  our  courses.  If  you  would  like  to 
communicate  with  us  regarding  this  course,  we 
encourage  you,  if  possible,  to  use  e-mail.  If  you 
write  or  fax,  please  use  a  copy  of  the  Student 
Comment  form  that  follows  this  page. 


For  subject  matter  questions: 

E-mail:  n315.products@cnet.navy.mil 
Phone:      Comm:  (850)  452-1001,  ext.  1728 
DSN:  922-1001,  ext.  1728 
FAX:  (850)452-1370 
(Do  not  fax  answer  sheets.) 
Address:    COMMANDING  OFFICER 
NETPDTC  N315 
6490  SAUFLEY  FIELD  ROAD 
PENSACOLA  FL  32509-5237 

For  enrollment,  shipping,  grading,  or 
completion  letter  questions 

E-mail :     fleetservices  @  cnet .  navy .  mil 

Phone:      Toll  Free:  877-264-8583 

Comm:  (850)452-1511/1181/1859 
DSN:  922-1511/1181/1859 
FAX:  (850)452-1370 
(Do  not  fax  answer  sheets.) 

Address:    COMMANDING  OFFICER 
NETPDTC  N331 
6490  SAUFLEY  FIELD  ROAD 
PENSACOLA  FL  32559-5000 

NAVAL  RESERVE  RETIREMENT  CREDIT 

If  you  are  a  member  of  the  Naval  Reserve,  you 
will  receive  retirement  points  if  you  are 
authorized  to  receive  them  under  current 
directives  governing  retirement  of  Naval 
Reserve  personnel.  For  Naval  Reserve 
retirement,  this  course  is  evaluated  at  10  points. 
(Refer  to  Administrative  Procedures  for  Naval 
Reservists  on  Inactive  Duty,  BUPERSINST 
1001.39,  for  more  information  about  retirement 
points.) 


viii 


Student  Comments 


NEETS  Module  2 

Course  Title:  Introduction  to  Alternating  Current  and  Transformers 
NAVEDTRA:      14174  Date: 


We  need  some  information  about  you: 

Rate/Rank  and  Name:    SSN:    Command/Unit   

Street  Address:    City:    State/FPO:    Zip 

Your  comments,  suggestions,  etc.: 


Privacy  Act  Statement:  Under  authority  of  Title  5,  USC  301,  information  regarding  your  military  status  is 
requested  in  processing  your  comments  and  in  preparing  a  reply.  This  information  will  not  be  divulged  without 
written  authorization  to  anyone  other  than  those  within  POD  for  official  use  in  determining  performance.  


NETPDTC  1550/41  (Rev  4-00) 


ix 


CHAPTER  1 

CONCEPTS  OF  ALTERNATING  CURRENT 


LEARNING  OBJECTIVES 

Upon  completion  of  this  chapter  you  will  be  able  to: 

1 .  State  the  differences  between  ac  and  dc  voltage  and  current. 

2.  State  the  advantages  of  ac  power  transmission  over  dc  power  transmission. 

3.  State  the  "left-hand  rule"  for  a  conductor. 

4.  State  the  relationship  between  current  and  magnetism. 

5.  State  the  methods  by  which  ac  power  can  be  generated. 

6.  State  the  relationship  between  frequency,  period,  time,  and  wavelength. 

7.  Compute  peak-to-peak,  instantaneous,  effective,  and  average  values  of  voltage  and  current. 

8.  Compute  the  phase  difference  between  sine  waves. 


CONCEPTS  OF  ALTERNATING  CURRENT 

All  of  your  study  thus  far  has  been  with  direct  current  (dc),  that  is,  current  which  does  not  change 
direction.  However,  as  you  saw  in  module  1  and  will  see  later  in  this  module,  a  coil  rotating  in  a  magnetic 
field  actually  generates  a  current  which  regularly  changes  direction.  This  current  is  called 
ALTERNATING  CURRENT  or  ac. 


AC  AND  DC 

Alternating  current  is  current  which  constantly  changes  in  amplitude,  and  which  reverses  direction  at 
regular  intervals.  You  learned  previously  that  direct  current  flows  only  in  one  direction,  and  that  the 
amplitude  of  current  is  determined  by  the  number  of  electrons  flowing  past  a  point  in  a  circuit  in  one 
second.  If,  for  example,  a  coulomb  of  electrons  moves  past  a  point  in  a  wire  in  one  second  and  all  of  the 
electrons  are  moving  in  the  same  direction,  the  amplitude  of  direct  current  in  the  wire  is  one  ampere. 
Similarly,  if  half  a  coulomb  of  electrons  moves  in  one  direction  past  a  point  in  the  wire  in  half  a  second, 
then  reverses  direction  and  moves  past  the  same  point  in  the  opposite  direction  during  the  next 
half-second,  a  total  of  one  coulomb  of  electrons  passes  the  point  in  one  second.  The  amplitude  of  the 
alternating  current  is  one  ampere.  The  preceding  comparison  of  dc  and  ac  as  illustrated.  Notice  that  one 
white  arrow  plus  one  striped  arrow  comprise  one  coulomb. 


1-1 


COMPARING  DC  &  AC  CURRENT  FLOW  IN  A  WIRE 

1ST  HALF  SECOND 

REFERENCE       ONE  ARROW  =\ 
POINT  1/2  COULOMB  / 

2ND  HALF  SECOND 

i 

 i  

Ql.    Define  direct  current. 
Q2.    Define  alternating  current. 


DISADVANTAGES  OF  DC  COMPARED  TO  AC 

When  commercial  use  of  electricity  became  wide-spread  in  the  United  States,  certain  disadvantages 
in  using  direct  current  in  the  home  became  apparent.  If  a  commercial  direct-current  system  is  used,  the 
voltage  must  be  generated  at  the  level  (amplitude  or  value)  required  by  the  load.  To  properly  light  a  240- 
volt  lamp,  for  example,  the  dc  generator  must  deliver  240  volts.  If  a  120-volt  lamp  is  to  be  supplied  power 
from  the  240-volt  generator,  a  resistor  or  another  120-volt  lamp  must  be  placed  in  series  with  the  120-volt 
lamp  to  drop  the  extra  120  volts.  When  the  resistor  is  used  to  reduce  the  voltage,  an  amount  of  power 
equal  to  that  consumed  by  the  lamp  is  wasted. 

Another  disadvantage  of  the  direct-current  system  becomes  evident  when  the  direct  current  (I)  from 
the  generating  station  must  be  transmitted  a  long  distance  over  wires  to  the  consumer.  When  this  happens, 
a  large  amount  of  power  is  lost  due  to  the  resistance  (R)  of  the  wire.  The  power  loss  is  equal  to  I2R. 
However,  this  loss  can  be  greatly  reduced  if  the  power  is  transmitted  over  the  lines  at  a  very  high  voltage 
level  and  a  low  current  level.  This  is  not  a  practical  solution  to  the  power  loss  in  the  dc  system  since  the 
load  would  then  have  to  be  operated  at  a  dangerously  high  voltage.  Because  of  the  disadvantages  related 
to  transmitting  and  using  direct  current,  practically  all  modern  commercial  electric  power  companies 
generate  and  distribute  alternating  current  (ac). 


1-2 


Unlike  direct  voltages,  alternating  voltages  can  be  stepped  up  or  down  in  amplitude  by  a  device 
called  a  TRANSFORMER.  (The  transformer  will  be  explained  later  in  this  module.)  Use  of  the 
transformer  permits  efficient  transmission  of  electrical  power  over  long-distance  lines.  At  the  electrical 
power  station,  the  transformer  output  power  is  at  high  voltage  and  low  current  levels.  At  the  consumer 
end  of  the  transmission  lines,  the  voltage  is  stepped  down  by  a  transformer  to  the  value  required  by  the 
load.  Due  to  its  inherent  advantages  and  versatility,  alternating  current  has  replaced  direct  current  in  all 
but  a  few  commercial  power  distribution  systems. 

Q3.    What  is  a  disadvantage  of  a  direct-current  system  with  respect  to  supply  voltage? 

Q4.    What  disadvantage  of  a  direct  current  is  due  to  the  resistance  of  the  transmission  wires? 

Q5.    What  kind  of  electrical  current  is  used  in  most  modern  power  distribution  systems? 


VOLTAGE  WAVEFORMS 


You  now  know  that  there  are  two  types  of  current  and  voltage,  that  is,  direct  current  and  voltage  and 
alternating  current  and  voltage.  If  a  graph  is  constructed  showing  the  amplitude  of  a  dc  voltage  across  the 
terminals  of  a  battery  with  respect  to  time,  it  will  appear  in  figure  1-1  view  A.  The  dc  voltage  is  shown  to 
have  a  constant  amplitude.  Some  voltages  go  through  periodic  changes  in  amplitude  like  those  shown  in 
figure  1-1  view  B.  The  pattern  which  results  when  these  changes  in  amplitude  with  respect  to  time  are 
plotted  on  graph  paper  is  known  as  a  WAVEFORM.  Figure  1-1  view  B  shows  some  of  the  common 
electrical  waveforms.  Of  those  illustrated,  the  sine  wave  will  be  dealt  with  most  often. 


+V 


OV   TIME 


(A)  DIRECT  VOLTAGE 


SIGN  WAVE 
(B)  ALTERNATING  VOLTAGE 


Figure  1-1. — Voltage  waveforms:  (A)  Direct  voltage;  (B)  Alternating  voltage. 


1-3 


ELECTROMAGNETISM 


The  sine  wave  illustrated  in  figure  1-1  view  B  is  a  plot  of  a  current  which  changes  amplitude  and 
direction.  Although  there  are  several  ways  of  producing  this  current,  the  method  based  on  the  principles 
of  electromagnetic  induction  is  by  far  the  easiest  and  most  common  method  in  use. 

The  fundamental  theories  concerning  simple  magnets  and  magnetism  were  discussed  in  Module  1 , 
but  how  magnetism  can  be  used  to  produce  electricity  was  only  briefly  mentioned.  This  module  will  give 
you  a  more  in-depth  study  of  magnetism.  The  main  points  that  will  be  explained  are  how  magnetism  is 
affected  by  an  electric  current  and,  conversely,  how  electricity  is  affected  by  magnetism.  This  general 
subject  area  is  most  often  referred  to  as  ELECTROMAGNETISM.  To  properly  understand  electricity  you 
must  first  become  familiar  with  the  relationships  between  magnetism  and  electricity.  For  example,  you 
must  know  that: 

•  An  electric  current  always  produces  some  form  of  magnetism. 

•  The  most  commonly  used  means  for  producing  or  using  electricity  involves  magnetism. 

•  The  peculiar  behavior  of  electricity  under  certain  conditions  is  caused  by  magnetic  influences. 


In  1819  Hans  Christian  Oersted,  a  Danish  physicist,  found  that  a  definite  relationship  exists  between 
magnetism  and  electricity.  He  discovered  that  an  electric  current  is  always  accompanied  by  certain 
magnetic  effects  and  that  these  effects  obey  definite  laws. 

MAGNETIC  FIELD  AROUND  A  CURRENT-CARRYING  CONDUCTOR 

If  a  compass  is  placed  in  the  vicinity  of  a  current-carrying  conductor,  the  compass  needle  will  align 
itself  at  right  angles  to  the  conductor,  thus  indicating  the  presence  of  a  magnetic  force.  You  can 
demonstrate  the  presence  of  this  force  by  using  the  arrangement  illustrated  in  figure  1-2.  In  both  (A)  and 
(B)  of  the  figure,  current  flows  in  a  vertical  conductor  through  a  horizontal  piece  of  cardboard.  You  can 
determine  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  force  produced  by  the  current  by  placing  a  compass  at  various 
points  on  the  cardboard  and  noting  the  compass  needle  deflection.  The  direction  of  the  magnetic  force  is 
assumed  to  be  the  direction  in  which  the  north  pole  of  the  compass  points. 


MAGNETIC  FIELDS 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  Fl  ELD  (CLOCKWISE) 
(A) 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELD  (COUNTERCLOCKWISE) 


(B) 


Figure  1-2. — Magnetic  field  around  a  current-carrying  conductor. 


1-4 


In  figure  1-2  (A),  the  needle  deflections  show  that  a  magnetic  field  exists  in  circular  form  around  the 
conductor.  When  the  current  flows  upward  (see  figure  1-2(A)),  the  direction  of  the  field  is  clockwise,  as 
viewed  from  the  top.  However,  if  you  reverse  the  polarity  of  the  battery  so  that  the  current  flows 
downward  (see  figure  1-2(B)),  the  direction  of  the  field  is  counterclockwise. 

The  relation  between  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  around  a  conductor  and  the 
direction  of  electron  current  flow  in  the  conductor  may  be  determined  by  means  of  the  LEFT-HAND 
RULE  FOR  A  CONDUCTOR:  if  you  grasp  the  conductor  in  your  left  hand  with  the  thumb  extended  in 
the  direction  of  the  electron  flow  (current)  (-  to  +),  your  fingers  will  point  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic 
lines  of  force.  Now  apply  this  rule  to  figure  1-2.  Note  that  your  fingers  point  in  the  direction  that  the  north 
pole  of  the  compass  points  when  it  is  placed  in  the  magnetic  field  surrounding  the  wire. 

An  arrow  is  generally  used  in  electrical  diagrams  to  denote  the  direction  of  current  in  a  length  of 
wire  (see  figure  1-3(A)).  Where  a  cross  section  of  a  wire  is  shown,  an  end  view  of  the  arrow  is  used.  A 
cross-sectional  view  of  a  conductor  that  is  carrying  current  toward  the  observer  is  illustrated  in  figure 
1-3(B).  Notice  that  the  direction  of  current  is  indicated  by  a  dot,  representing  the  head  of  the  arrow.  A 
conductor  that  is  carrying  current  away  from  the  observer  is  illustrated  in  figure  1-3(C).  Note  that  the 
direction  of  current  is  indicated  by  a  cross,  representing  the  tail  of  the  arrow.  Also  note  that  the  magnetic 
field  around  a  current-carrying  conductor  is  perpendicular  to  the  conductor,  and  that  the  magnetic  lines  of 
force  are  equal  along  all  parts  of  the  conductor. 


1-5 


MAGNETIC 
FIELDS  ARE 
PERPENDICULAR 
TO  CONDUCTOR 


DOT 


MAGNETIC 
FIELDS  ARE 
PARALLEL  TO 
EACH  OTHER 


CURRENT  FLOWING  OUT 

(B) 


CROSS 


CURRENT  FLOWING  IN 

(C) 

Figure  1-3. — Magnetic  field  around  a  current-carrying  conductor,  detailed  view. 

When  two  adjacent  parallel  conductors  are  carrying  current  in  the  same  direction,  the  magnetic  lines 
of  force  combine  and  increase  the  strength  of  the  field  around  the  conductors,  as  shown  in  figure  1-4(A). 
Two  parallel  conductors  carrying  currents  in  opposite  directions  are  shown  in  figure  1-4(B).  Note  that  the 
field  around  one  conductor  is  opposite  in  direction  to  the  field  around  the  other  conductor.  The  resulting 
lines  of  force  oppose  each  other  in  the  space  between  the  wires,  thus  deforming  the  field  around  each 
conductor.  This  means  that  if  two  parallel  and  adjacent  conductors  are  carrying  currents  in  the  same 
direction,  the  fields  about  the  two  conductors  aid  each  other.  Conversely,  if  the  two  conductors  are 
carrying  currents  in  opposite  directions,  the  fields  about  the  conductors  repel  each  other. 


1-6 


Figure  1-4. — Magnetic  field  around  two  parallel  conductors. 

Q6.    When  placed  in  the  vicinity  of  a  current-carrying  conductor,  the  needle  of  a  compass  becomes 
aligned  at  what  angle  to  the  conductor? 

Q7.    What  is  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  field  around  a  vertical  conductor  when  (a)  the  current  flows 
upward  and  (b)  the  current  flows  downward. 

Q8.    The  "left-hand  rule"  for  a  conductor  is  used  for  what  purpose 

Q9.    In  what  direction  will  the  compass  needle  point  when  the  compass  is  placed  in  the  magnetic  field 
surrounding  a  wire? 

Q10.    When  two  adjacent  parallel  wires  carry  current  in  the  same  direction,  the  magnetic  field  about 
one  wire  has  what  effect  on  the  magnetic  field  about  the  other  conductor? 

Qll.  When  two  adjacent  parallel  conductors  carry  current  in  opposite  directions,  the  magnetic  field  about 
one  conductor  has  what  effect  on  the  magnetic  field  about  the  other  conductor? 

MAGNETIC  FIELD  OF  A  COIL 


Figure  1-3  (A)  illustrates  that  the  magnetic  field  around  a  current-carrying  wire  exists  at  all  points 
along  the  wire.  Figure  1-5  illustrates  that  when  a  straight  wire  is  wound  around  a  core,  it  forms  a  coil  and 
that  the  magnetic  field  about  the  core  assumes  a  different  shape.  Figure  1-5(A)  is  actually  a  partial 
cutaway  view  showing  the  construction  of  a  simple  coil.  Figure  1-5(B)  shows  a  cross-sectional  view  of 
the  same  coil.  Notice  that  the  two  ends  of  the  coil  are  identified  as  X  and  Y. 


1-7 


Figure  1-5. — Magnetic  field  produced  by  a  current-carrying  coil. 

When  current  is  passed  through  the  coil,  the  magnetic  field  about  each  turn  of  wire  links  with  the 
fields  of  the  adjacent  turns.  (See  figure  1-4(A)).  The  combined  influence  of  all  the  turns  produces  a  two- 
pole  field  similar  to  that  of  a  simple  bar  magnet.  One  end  of  the  coil  is  a  north  pole  and  the  other  end  is  a 
south  pole. 

Polarity  of  an  Electromagnetic  Coil 

Figure  1-2  shows  that  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  field  around  a  straight  wire  depends  on  the 
direction  of  current  in  that  wire.  Thus,  a  reversal  of  current  in  a  wire  causes  a  reversal  in  the  direction  of 
the  magnetic  field  that  is  produced.  It  follows  that  a  reversal  of  the  current  in  a  coil  also  causes  a  reversal 
of  the  two-pole  magnetic  field  about  the  coil. 

When  the  direction  of  the  current  in  a  coil  is  known,  you  can  determine  the  magnetic  polarity  of  the 
coil  by  using  the  LEFT-HAND  RULE  FOR  COILS.  This  rule,  illustrated  in  figure  1-6,  is  stated  as 
follows: 


^T-  (A)  ») 

Figure  1-6. — Left-hand  rule  for  coils. 

Grasp  the  coil  in  your  left  hand,  with  your  fingers  "wrapped  around"  in  the  direction  of  the  electron 
current  flow.  Your  thumb  will  then  point  toward  the  north  pole  of  the  coil. 


1-8 


Strength  of  an  Electromagnetic  Field 

The  strength  or  intensity  of  a  coil's  magnetic  field  depends  on  a  number  of  factors.  The  main  ones 
are  listed  below  and  will  be  discussed  again  later. 

•  The  number  of  turns  of  wire  in  the  coil. 

•  The  amount  of  current  flowing  in  the  coil. 

•  The  ratio  of  the  coil  length  to  the  coil  width. 

•  The  type  of  material  in  the  core. 

Losses  in  an  Electromagnetic  Field 

When  current  flows  in  a  conductor,  the  atoms  in  the  conductor  all  line  up  in  a  definite  direction, 
producing  a  magnetic  field.  When  the  direction  of  the  current  changes,  the  direction  of  the  atoms' 
alignment  also  changes,  causing  the  magnetic  field  to  change  direction.  To  reverse  all  the  atoms  requires 
that  power  be  expended,  and  this  power  is  lost.  This  loss  of  power  (in  the  form  of  heat)  is  called 
HYSTERESIS  LOSS.  Hysteresis  loss  is  common  to  all  ac  equipment;  however,  it  causes  few  problems 
except  in  motors,  generators,  and  transformers.  When  these  devices  are  discussed  later  in  this  module, 
hysteresis  loss  will  be  covered  in  more  detail. 

Q12.    What  is  the  shape  of  the  magnetic  field  that  exists  around  (a)  a  straight  conductor  and  (b)  a  coil? 

Q13.    What  happens  to  the  two-pole  field  of  a  coil  when  the  current  through  the  coil  is  reversed? 

Q14.    What  rule  is  used  to  determine  the  polarity  of  a  coil  when  the  direction  of  the  electron  current  flow 
in  the  coil  is  known? 

Q15.    State  the  rule  whose  purpose  is  described  in  Q14. 


BASIC  AC  GENERATION 

From  the  previous  discussion  you  learned  that  a  current-carrying  conductor  produces  a  magnetic 
field  around  itself.  In  module  1 ,  under  producing  a  voltage  (emf)  using  magnetism,  you  learned  how  a 
changing  magnetic  field  produces  an  emf  in  a  conductor.  That  is,  if  a  conductor  is  placed  in  a  magnetic 
field,  and  either  the  field  or  the  conductor  moves,  an  emf  is  induced  in  the  conductor.  This  effect  is  called 
electromagnetic  induction. 

CYCLE 

Figures  1-7  and  1-8  show  a  suspended  loop  of  wire  (conductor)  being  rotated  (moved)  in  a  clockwise 
direction  through  the  magnetic  field  between  the  poles  of  a  permanent  magnet.  For  ease  of  explanation, 
the  loop  has  been  divided  into  a  dark  half  and  light  half.  Notice  in  (A)  of  the  figure  that  the  dark  half  is 
moving  along  (parallel  to)  the  lines  of  force.  Consequently,  it  is  cutting  NO  lines  of  force.  The  same  is 
true  of  the  light  half,  which  is  moving  in  the  opposite  direction.  Since  the  conductors  are  cutting  no  lines 
of  force,  no  emf  is  induced.  As  the  loop  rotates  toward  the  position  shown  in  (B),  it  cuts  more  and  more 
lines  of  force  per  second  (inducing  an  ever-increasing  voltage)  because  it  is  cutting  more  directly  across 
the  field  (lines  of  force).  At  (B),  the  conductor  is  shown  completing  one-quarter  of  a  complete  revolution, 
or  90° ,  of  a  complete  circle.  Because  the  conductor  is  now  cutting  directly  across  the  field,  the  voltage 


1-9 


induced  in  the  conductor  is  maximum.  When  the  value  of  induced  voltage  at  various  points  during  the 
rotation  from  (A)  to  (B)  is  plotted  on  a  graph  (and  the  points  connected),  a  curve  appears  as  shown  below. 

CONDUCTORS  MOVING  PARALLELTO  LINES 
OF  FORCE,  EMF  MINIMUM 


DIRECTION  OF         CONDUCTORS  CUTTING  DIRECTLY  ACROSS         CONDUCTORS  CUTTING  DIRECTLY  ACROSS 
CURRENT  FIELD,  EMF  IS  MAXIMUM  POSITIVE  FIELD,  EMF  IS  MAXIMUM  NEGATIVE 


Figure  1-7. — Simple  alternating-current  generator. 

As  the  loop  continues  to  be  rotated  toward  the  position  shown  below  in  (C),  it  cuts  fewer  and  fewer 
lines  of  force.  The  induced  voltage  decreases  from  its  peak  value.  Eventually,  the  loop  is  once  again 
moving  in  a  plane  parallel  to  the  magnetic  field,  and  no  emf  is  induced  in  the  conductor. 

The  loop  has  now  been  rotated  through  half  a  circle  (one  alternation  or  180° ).  If  the  preceding 
quarter-cycle  is  plotted,  it  appears  as  shown  below. 

When  the  same  procedure  is  applied  to  the  second  half  of  rotation  (180°  through  360°  ),  the  curve 
appears  as  shown  below.  Notice  the  only  difference  is  in  the  polarity  of  the  induced  voltage.  Where 
previously  the  polarity  was  positive,  it  is  now  negative. 

The  sine  curve  shows  the  value  of  induced  voltage  at  each  instant  of  time  during  rotation  of  the  loop. 
Notice  that  this  curve  contains  360°  ,  or  two  alternations.  TWO  ALTERNATIONS  represent  ONE 
complete  CYCLE  of  rotation. 

CONDUCTORS  MOVING  PARALLEL  TO  LINES 

OF  FORCE,  EMF  MINIMUM  DIRECTION  OF 

ROTATION  CURRENT  ROTATION 


Figure  1-8. — Basic  alternating-current  generator. 


1-10 


Assuming  a  closed  path  is  provided  across  the  ends  of  the  conductor  loop,  you  can  determine  the 
direction  of  current  in  the  loop  by  using  the  LEFT-HAND  RULE  FOR  GENERATORS.  Refer  to  figure 
1-9.  The  left-hand  rule  is  applied  as  follows:  First,  place  your  left  hand  on  the  illustration  with  the  fingers 
as  shown.  Your  THUMB  will  now  point  in  the  direction  of  rotation  (relative  movement  of  the  wire  to  the 
magnetic  field);  your  FOREFINGER  will  point  in  the  direction  of  magnetic  flux  (north  to  south);  and 
your  MIDDLE  FINGER  (pointing  out  of  the  paper)  will  point  in  the  direction  of  electron  current  flow. 


AN  EASY  WAY  TO  REMEMBER  WHICH  FINGER 
POINTS  TO  WHAT  QUANTITY  IS  TO  USE  THE 
MEMORY  AID:  MY  FINE  CLOTHES. 
MY=  M,  DIRECTION  OF  MOVEMENT 
FINE  =  F,  DIRECTION  OF  FLUX  N^-S 
CLOTHES  =  C,  DIRECTION  OF  ELECTRON 
CURRENT  FLOW 


Figure  1-9. — Left-hand  rule  for  generators. 

By  applying  the  left-hand  rule  to  the  dark  half  of  the  loop  in  (B)  in  figure  1-8,  you  will  find  that  the 
current  flows  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  heavy  arrow.  Similarly,  by  using  the  left-hand  rule  on  the 
light  half  of  the  loop,  you  will  find  that  current  therein  flows  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  two  induced 
voltages  in  the  loop  add  together  to  form  one  total  emf.  It  is  this  emf  which  causes  the  current  in  the  loop. 

When  the  loop  rotates  to  the  position  shown  in  (D)  of  figure  1-8,  the  action  reverses.  The  dark  half  is 
moving  up  instead  of  down,  and  the  light  half  is  moving  down  instead  of  up.  By  applying  the  left-hand 
rule  once  again,  you  will  see  that  the  total  induced  emf  and  its  resulting  current  have  reversed  direction. 
The  voltage  builds  up  to  maximum  in  this  new  direction,  as  shown  by  the  sine  curve  in  figure  1-8.  The 
loop  finally  returns  to  its  original  position  (E),  at  which  point  voltage  is  again  zero.  The  sine  curve 
represents  one  complete  cycle  of  voltage  generated  by  the  rotating  loop.  All  the  illustrations  used  in  this 
chapter  show  the  wire  loop  moving  in  a  clockwise  direction.  In  actual  practice,  the  loop  can  be  moved 
clockwise  or  counterclockwise.  Regardless  of  the  direction  of  movement,  the  left-hand  rule  applies. 

If  the  loop  is  rotated  through  360°  at  a  steady  rate,  and  if  the  strength  of  the  magnetic  field  is 
uniform,  the  voltage  produced  is  a  sine  wave  of  voltage,  as  indicated  in  figure  1-9.  Continuous  rotation  of 
the  loop  will  produce  a  series  of  sine -wave  voltage  cycles  or,  in  other  words,  an  ac  voltage. 


1-11 


As  mentioned  previously,  the  cycle  consists  of  two  complete  alternations  in  a  period  of  time. 
Recently  the  HERTZ  (Hz)  has  been  designated  to  indicate  one  cycle  per  second.  If  ONE  CYCLE  PER 
SECOND  is  ONE  HERTZ,  then  100  cycles  per  second  are  equal  to  100  hertz,  and  so  on.  Throughout  the 
NEETS,  the  term  cycle  is  used  when  no  specific  time  element  is  involved,  and  the  term  hertz  (Hz)  is  used 
when  the  time  element  is  measured  in  seconds. 

Q16.    When  a  conductor  is  rotated  in  a  magnetic  field,  at  what  points  in  the  cycle  is  emf  (a)  at  maximum 
amplitude  and  (b)  at  minimum  amplitude? 

Ql  7.    One  cycle  is  equal  to  how  many  degrees  of  rotation  of  a  conductor  in  a  magnetic  field? 

Q18.    State  the  left-hand  rule  used  to  determine  the  direction  of  current  in  a  generator. 

Q19.    How  is  an  ac  voltage  produced  by  an  ac  generator? 

FREQUENCY 

If  the  loop  in  the  figure  1-8  (A)  makes  one  complete  revolution  each  second,  the  generator  produces 
one  complete  cycle  of  ac  during  each  second  (1  Hz).  Increasing  the  number  of  revolutions  to  two  per 
second  will  produce  two  complete  cycles  of  ac  per  second  (2  Hz).  The  number  of  complete  cycles  of 
alternating  current  or  voltage  completed  each  second  is  referred  to  as  the  FREQUENCY.  Frequency  is 
always  measured  and  expressed  in  hertz. 

Alternating-current  frequency  is  an  important  term  to  understand  since  most  ac  electrical  equipments 
require  a  specific  frequency  for  proper  operation. 

Q20.    Define  Frequency. 

PERIOD 

An  individual  cycle  of  any  sine  wave  represents  a  definite  amount  of  TIME.  Notice  that  figure  1-10 
shows  2  cycles  of  a  sine  wave  which  has  a  frequency  of  2  hertz  (Hz).  Since  2  cycles  occur  each  second,  1 
cycle  must  require  one-half  second  of  time.  The  time  required  to  complete  one  cycle  of  a  waveform  is 
called  the  PERIOD  of  the  wave.  In  figure  1-10,  the  period  is  one-half  second.  The  relationship  between 
time  (t)  and  frequency  (f)  is  indicated  by  the  formulas 

1  1 
t=-  and  f  =  - 
f  t 

where  t  =  period  in  seconds  and 
f  =  frequency  in  hertz 


1-12 


PERIOD 


AMPLITUDE 


Figure  1-10. — Period  of  a  sine  wave. 

Each  cycle  of  the  sine  wave  shown  in  figure  1-10  consists  of  two  identically  shaped  variations  in 
voltage.  The  variation  which  occurs  during  the  time  the  voltage  is  positive  is  called  the  POSITIVE 
ALTERNATION.  The  variation  which  occurs  during  the  time  the  voltage  is  negative  is  called  the 
NEGATIVE  ALTERNATION.  In  a  sine  wave,  these  two  alternations  are  identical  in  size  and  shape,  but 
opposite  in  polarity. 

The  distance  from  zero  to  the  maximum  value  of  each  alternation  is  called  the  AMPLITUDE.  The 
amplitude  of  the  positive  alternation  and  the  amplitude  of  the  negative  alternation  are  the  same. 

WAVELENGTH 

The  time  it  takes  for  a  sine  wave  to  complete  one  cycle  is  defined  as  the  period  of  the  waveform.  The 
distance  traveled  by  the  sine  wave  during  this  period  is  referred  to  as  WAVELENGTH.  Wavelength, 
indicated  by  the  symbol  X  (Greek  lambda),  is  the  distance  along  the  waveform  from  one  point  to  the  same 
point  on  the  next  cycle.  You  can  observe  this  relationship  by  examining  figure  1-11.  The  point  on  the 
waveform  that  measurement  of  wavelength  begins  is  not  important  as  long  as  the  distance  is  measured  to 
the  same  point  on  the  next  cycle  (see  figure  1-12). 


  PERIOD  (TIME)  H 

I 
I 

WAVELENGTH  (DISTANCE)  -I 


Figure  1-11. — Wavelength. 


1-13 


h — WAVELENGTH— H 


I— WAVELENGTH— J 
I 

j  I 
I— WAVELENGTH— J 


Figure  1-12. — Wavelength  measurement. 

Q21.    What  term  is  used  to  indicate  the  time  of  one  complete  cycle  of  a  waveform? 
Q22.    What  is  a  positive  alternation? 

Q23.    What  do  the  period  and  the  wavelength  of  a  sine  wave  measure,  respectively? 


ALTERNATING  CURRENT  VALUES 

In  discussing  alternating  current  and  voltage,  you  will  often  find  it  necessary  to  express  the  current 
and  voltage  in  terms  of  MAXIMUM  or  PEAK  values,  PEAK-to-PEAK  values,  EFFECTIVE  values, 
AVERAGE  values,  or  INSTANTANEOUS  values.  Each  of  these  values  has  a  different  meaning  and  is 
used  to  describe  a  different  amount  of  current  or  voltage. 

PEAK  AND  PEAK-TO-PEAK  VALUES 

Refer  to  figure  1-13.  Notice  it  shows  the  positive  alternation  of  a  sine  wave  (a  half-cycle  of  ac)  and  a 
dc  waveform  that  occur  simultaneously.  Note  that  the  dc  starts  and  stops  at  the  same  moment  as  does  the 
positive  alternation,  and  that  both  waveforms  rise  to  the  same  maximum  value.  However,  the  dc  values 
are  greater  than  the  corresponding  ac  values  at  all  points  except  the  point  at  which  the  positive  alternation 
passes  through  its  maximum  value.  At  this  point  the  dc  and  ac  values  are  equal.  This  point  on  the  sine 
wave  is  referred  to  as  the  maximum  or  peak  value. 


Figure  1-13. — Maximum  or  peak  value. 


1-14 


During  each  complete  cycle  of  ac  there  are  always  two  maximum  or  peak  values,  one  for  the  positive 
half-cycle  and  the  other  for  the  negative  half-cycle.  The  difference  between  the  peak  positive  value  and 
the  peak  negative  value  is  called  the  peak-to-peak  value  of  the  sine  wave.  This  value  is  twice  the 
maximum  or  peak  value  of  the  sine  wave  and  is  sometimes  used  for  measurement  of  ac  voltages.  Note  the 
difference  between  peak  and  peak-to-peak  values  in  figure  1-14.  Usually  alternating  voltage  and  current 
are  expressed  in  EFFECTIVE  VALUES  (a  term  you  will  study  later)  rather  than  in  peak-to-peak  values. 


PEAK 

TO 
PEAK 
VALUF 


PE 
VA 

AK  \ 
LUE  \ 

Figure  1-14. — Peak  and  peak-to-peak  values. 

Q24.    What  is  meant  by  peak  and  peak-to-peak  values  of  ac? 

Q25.    How  many  times  is  the  maximum  or  peak  value  of  emf  or  current  reached  during  one  cycle  of  ac? 

INSTANTANEOUS  VALUE 

The  INSTANTANEOUS  value  of  an  alternating  voltage  or  current  is  the  value  of  voltage  or  current 
at  one  particular  instant.  The  value  may  be  zero  if  the  particular  instant  is  the  time  in  the  cycle  at  which 
the  polarity  of  the  voltage  is  changing.  It  may  also  be  the  same  as  the  peak  value,  if  the  selected  instant  is 
the  time  in  the  cycle  at  which  the  voltage  or  current  stops  increasing  and  starts  decreasing.  There  are 
actually  an  infinite  number  of  instantaneous  values  between  zero  and  the  peak  value. 

AVERAGE  VALUE 


The  AVERAGE  value  of  an  alternating  current  or  voltage  is  the  average  of  ALL  the 
INSTANTANEOUS  values  during  ONE  alternation.  Since  the  voltage  increases  from  zero  to  peak  value 
and  decreases  back  to  zero  during  one  alternation,  the  average  value  must  be  some  value  between  those 
two  limits.  You  could  determine  the  average  value  by  adding  together  a  series  of  instantaneous  values  of 
the  alternation  (between  0°  and  180°  ),  and  then  dividing  the  sum  by  the  number  of  instantaneous  values 
used.  The  computation  would  show  that  one  alternation  of  a  sine  wave  has  an  average  value  equal  to 
0.636  times  the  peak  value.  The  formula  for  average  voltage  is 

Eavg  —  0.636  X  Emax 

where  Eavg  is  the  average  voltage  of  one  alternation,  and  ^  is  the  maximum  or  peak  voltage.  Similarly, 
the  formula  for  average  current  is 


1-15 


avg 


=  0.636  x  I 


max 


where  Iavg  is  the  average  current  in  one  alternation,  and  Imax  is  the  maximum  or  peak  current. 

Do  not  confuse  the  above  definition  of  an  average  value  with  that  of  the  average  value  of  a  complete 
cycle.  Because  the  voltage  is  positive  during  one  alternation  and  negative  during  the  other  alternation,  the 
average  value  of  the  voltage  values  occurring  during  the  complete  cycle  is  zero. 

Q26.    If  any  point  on  a  sine  wave  is  selected  at  random  and  the  value  of  the  current  or  voltage  is 
measured  at  that  one  particular  moment,  what  value  is  being  measured? 

Q27.    What  value  of  current  or  voltage  is  computed  by  averaging  all  of  the  instantaneous  values  during 
the  negative  alternation  of  a  sine  wave? 

Q28.    What  is  the  average  value  of  all  of  the  instantaneous  currents  or  voltages  occurring  during  one 
complete  cycle  of  a  sine  wave? 

Q29.    What  mathematical  formulas  are  used  to  find  the  average  value  of  current  and  average  value  of 
voltage  of  a  sine  wave? 

Q30.    IfEmax  is  115  volts,  what  is  Eavg? 

Q31.    If  IaVg  is  1.272  ampere,  what  is  Imax? 

EFFECTIVE  VALUE  OF  A  SINE  WAVE 

Emaxj  Eavg,  I  max,  and  Iavg  are  values  used  in  ac  measurements.  Another  value  used  is  the  EFFECTIVE 
value  of  ac  This  is  the  value  of  alternating  voltage  or  current  that  will  have  the  same  effect  on  a  resistance 
as  a  comparable  value  of  direct  voltage  or  current  will  have  on  the  same  resistance. 

In  an  earlier  discussion  you  were  told  that  when  current  flows  in  a  resistance,  heat  is  produced.  When 
direct  current  flows  in  a  resistance,  the  amount  of  electrical  power  converted  into  heat  equals  I2R  watts. 
However,  since  an  alternating  current  having  a  maximum  value  of  1  ampere  does  not  maintain  a  constant 
value,  the  alternating  current  will  not  produce  as  much  heat  in  the  resistance  as  will  a  direct  current  of  1 
ampere. 

Figure  1-15  compares  the  heating  effect  of  1  ampere  of  dc  to  the  heating  effect  of  1  ampere  of  ac. 


DC 

I  max  =  1  ampere 


AC 

I  max=1  ampere 


(A) 


(B) 


Figure  1-15. — Heating  effect  of  ac  and  dc. 


1-16 


Examine  views  A  and  B  of  figure  1-15  and  notice  that  the  heat  (70.7°  C)  produced  by  1  ampere  of 
alternating  current  (that  is,  an  ac  with  a  maximum  value  of  1  ampere)  is  only  70.7  percent  of  the  heat 
(100°  C)  produced  by  1  ampere  of  direct  current.  Mathematically, 


The  heating  effect 
of  1  maximum 

a.  c.  ampere  _70.7°C 


=  0.707 


The  heating  effect     100°  C 
of  lmaximum 
d.c.  ampere 


Therefore,  for  effective  value  of  ac  (Iefr)  =  0.707  x  Imax. 

The  rate  at  which  heat  is  produced  in  a  resistance  forms  a  convenient  basis  for  establishing  an 
effective  value  of  alternating  current,  and  is  known  as  the  "heating  effect"  method.  An  alternating  current 
is  said  to  have  an  effective  value  of  one  ampere  when  it  produces  heat  in  a  given  resistance  at  the  same 
rate  as  does  one  ampere  of  direct  current. 

You  can  compute  the  effective  value  of  a  sine  wave  of  current  to  a  fair  degree  of  accuracy  by  taking 
equally-spaced  instantaneous  values  of  current  along  the  curve  and  extracting  the  square  root  of  the 
average  of  the  sum  of  the  squared  values. 

For  this  reason,  the  effective  value  is  often  called  the  "root-mean-square"  (rms)  value.  Thus, 


Stated  another  way,  the  effective  or  rms  value  (Ieff)  of  a  sine  wave  of  current  is  0.707  times  the 
maximum  value  of  current  (Imax).  Thus,  I  eff  =  0.707  x  Imax.  When  I  eff  is  known,  you  can  find  lmax  by  using 
the  formula  Imax  =  1.414  X  Ieff.  You  might  wonder  where  the  constant  1.414  comes  from.  To  find  out, 
examine  figure  1-15  again  and  read  the  following  explanation.  Assume  that  the  dc  in  figure  1 -15(A)  is 
maintained  at  1  ampere  and  the  resistor  temperature  at  100°  C.  Also  assume  that  the  ac  in  figure  1-1 5(B) 
is  increased  until  the  temperature  of  the  resistor  is  100°  C.  At  this  point  it  is  found  that  a  maximum  ac 
value  of  1.414  amperes  is  required  in  order  to  have  the  same  heating  effect  as  direct  current.  Therefore,  in 
the  ac  circuit  the  maximum  current  required  is  1.414  times  the  effective  current.  It  is  important  for  you  to 
remember  the  above  relationship  and  that  the  effective  value  (I  efl)  of  any  sine  wave  of  current  is  always 
0.707  times  the  maximum  value  (Imax). 

Since  alternating  current  is  caused  by  an  alternating  voltage,  the  ratio  of  the  effective  value  of 
voltage  to  the  maximum  value  of  voltage  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  effective  value  of  current  to  the 
maximum  value  of  current.  Stated  another  way,  the  effective  or  rms  value  (E  eff)  of  a  sine -wave  of  voltage 
is  0.707  times  the  maximum  value  of  voltage  (Emax), 


1-17 


Thus, 

E^j  =  .^Average  of  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  E 


iret 


or, 

=0.707xE_ 

and, 

EmaK=l.^xEet( 


When  an  alternating  current  or  voltage  value  is  specified  in  a  book  or  on  a  diagram,  the  value  is  an 
effective  value  unless  there  is  a  definite  statement  to  the  contrary.  Remember  that  all  meters,  unless 
marked  to  the  contrary,  are  calibrated  to  indicate  effective  values  of  current  and  voltage. 

Problem:  A  circuit  is  known  to  have  an  alternating  voltage  of  120  volts  and  a  peak  or  maximum 
current  of  30  amperes.  What  are  the  peak  voltage  and  effective  current  values? 


Given: 

=  120V 

E 

man 

=  30  A 

Solution: 

E 

man 

=  1.414xEeff 

EfTOH 

=  1.414x120  volts 

E 

man 

=  169.68  volts 

=  0.707xl_ 

=  0.707x30  amperes 

=  21.21arnperes 

Figure  1-16  shows  the  relationship  between  the  various  values  used  to  indicate  sine -wave  amplitude. 
Review  the  values  in  the  figure  to  ensure  you  understand  what  each  value  indicates. 


1-18 


50- 
40- 
30- 
20- 
10- 
0- 


z 

LU 
O 

ttr 

UJ 
CL 


o 


PEAK 


1 


PEAK 
TO 
PEAK 


T 


Figure  1-16. — Various  values  used  to  indicate  sine-wave  amplitude. 


Q32.    What  is  the  most  convenient  basis  for  comparing  alternating  and  direct  voltages  and  currents? 
Q33.    What  value  of  ac  is  used  as  a  comparison  to  dc? 

Q34.    What  is  the  formula  for  finding  the  effective  value  of  an  alternating  current? 

Q35.    If  the  peak  value  of  a  sine  wave  is  1, 000  volts,  what  is  the  effective  (Ee$  value? 

Q36.    IfLff  =  4.25  ampere,  what  is  Imax? 

SINE  WAVES  IN  PHASE 

When  a  sine  wave  of  voltage  is  applied  to  a  resistance,  the  resulting  current  is  also  a  sine  wave.  This 
follows  Ohm's  law  which  states  that  current  is  directly  proportional  to  the  applied  voltage.  Now  examine 
figure  1-17.  Notice  that  the  sine  wave  of  voltage  and  the  resulting  sine  wave  of  current  are  superimposed 
on  the  same  time  axis.  Notice  also  that  as  the  voltage  increases  in  a  positive  direction,  the  current 
increases  along  with  it,  and  that  when  the  voltage  reverses  direction,  the  current  also  reverses  direction. 
When  two  sine  waves,  such  as  those  represented  by  figure  1-17,  are  precisely  in  step  with  one  another, 
they  are  said  to  be  IN  PHASE.  To  be  in  phase,  the  two  sine  waves  must  go  through  their  maximum  and 
minimum  points  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  direction. 


1-19 


Figure  1-17. — Voltage  and  current  waves  in  phase. 

In  some  circuits,  several  sine  waves  can  be  in  phase  with  each  other.  Thus,  it  is  possible  to  have  two 
or  more  voltage  drops  in  phase  with  each  other  and  also  be  in  phase  with  the  circuit  current. 

SINE  WAVES  OUT  OF  PHASE 

Figure  1-18  shows  voltage  wave  E  i  which  is  considered  to  start  at  0°  (time  one).  As  voltage  wave  Ei 
reaches  its  positive  peak,  voltage  wave  E2  starts  its  rise  (time  two).  Since  these  voltage  waves  do  not  go 
through  their  maximum  and  minimum  points  at  the  same  instant  of  time,  a  PHASE  DIFFERENCE  exists 
between  the  two  waves.  The  two  waves  are  said  to  be  OUT  OF  PHASE.  For  the  two  waves  in  figure  1-18 
the  phase  difference  is  90° . 


Figure  1-18. — Voltage  waves  90°  out  of  phase. 


1-20 


To  further  describe  the  phase  relationship  between  two  sine  waves,  the  terms  LEAD  and  LAG  are 
used.  The  amount  by  which  one  sine  wave  leads  or  lags  another  sine  wave  is  measured  in  degrees.  Refer 
again  to  figure  1-18.  Observe  that  wave  E2  starts  90°  later  in  time  than  does  wave  Ei.  You  can  also 
describe  this  relationship  by  saying  that  wave  Ei  leads  wave  E  2  by  90° ,  or  that  wave  E2  lags  wave  E  i  by 
90°  .  (Either  statement  is  correct;  it  is  the  phase  relationship  between  the  two  sine  waves  that  is 
important.) 

It  is  possible  for  one  sine  wave  to  lead  or  lag  another  sine  wave  by  any  number  of  degrees,  except  0° 
or  360°  .  When  the  latter  condition  exists,  the  two  waves  are  said  to  be  in  phase.  Thus,  two  sine  waves 
that  differ  in  phase  by  45°  are  actually  out  of  phase  with  each  other,  whereas  two  sine  waves  that  differ  in 
phase  by  360°  are  considered  to  be  in  phase  with  each  other. 

A  phase  relationship  that  is  quite  common  is  shown  in  figure  1-19.  Notice  that  the  two  waves 
illustrated  differ  in  phase  by  1 80°  .  Notice  also  that  although  the  waves  pass  through  their  maximum  and 
minimum  values  at  the  same  time,  their  instantaneous  voltages  are  always  of  opposite  polarity.  If  two 
such  waves  exist  across  the  same  component,  and  the  waves  are  of  equal  amplitude,  they  cancel  each 
other.  When  they  have  different  amplitudes,  the  resultant  wave  has  the  same  polarity  as  the  larger  wave 
and  has  an  amplitude  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  amplitudes  of  the  two  waves. 


Figure  1-19. — Voltage  waves  180"  out  of  phase. 

To  determine  the  phase  difference  between  two  sine  waves,  locate  the  points  on  the  time  axis  where 
the  two  waves  cross  the  time  axis  traveling  in  the  same  direction.  The  number  of  degrees  between  the 
crossing  points  is  the  phase  difference.  The  wave  that  crosses  the  axis  at  the  later  time  (to  the  right  on  the 
time  axis)  is  said  to  lag  the  other  wave. 

Q37.    When  are  the  voltage  wave  and  the  current  wave  in  a  circuit  considered  to  be  in  phase? 
Q38.    When  are  two  voltage  waves  considered  to  be  out  of  phase? 

Q39.    What  is  the  phase  relationship  between  two  voltage  waves  that  differ  in  phase  by  360°  ? 

Q40.    How  do  you  determine  the  phase  difference  between  two  sine  waves  that  are  plotted  on  the  same 
graph? 


1-21 


OHM'S  LAW  IN  AC  CIRCUITS 


Many  ac  circuits  contain  resistance  only.  The  rules  for  these  circuits  are  the  same  rules  that  apply  to 
dc  circuits.  Resistors,  lamps,  and  heating  elements  are  examples  of  resistive  elements.  When  an  ac  circuit 
contains  only  resistance,  Ohm's  Law,  Kirchhoff  s  Law,  and  the  various  rules  that  apply  to  voltage,  current, 
and  power  in  a  dc  circuit  also  apply  to  the  ac  circuit.  The  Ohm's  Law  formula  for  an  ac  circuit  can  be 
stated  as 


1^=1*  or  i  =£ 
R  R 

Remember,  unless  otherwise  stated,  all  ac  voltage  and  current  values  are  given  as  effective  values. 
The  formula  for  Ohm's  Law  can  also  be  stated  as 

F  17 

I     =  -JUL  or  I  =  ^ 
R  R 


^  peat-  to- peat 


F 

peat-  to-peali 

R 


The  important  thing  to  keep  in  mind  is:  Do  Not  mix  ac  values.  When  you  solve  for  effective  values, 
all  values  you  use  in  the  formula  must  be  effective  values.  Similarly,  when  you  solve  for  average  values, 
all  values  you  use  must  be  average  values.  This  point  should  be  clearer  after  you  work  the  following 
problem:  A  series  circuit  consists  of  two  resistors  (Rl  =  5  ohms  and  R2  =  15  ohms)  and  an  alternating 
voltage  source  of  120  volts.  What  is  Iavg? 


Given:  Rl=    5  ohms 

R2=  15  ohms 
Ej  =  120  ohms 


Solution:  Fust  solve  for  total  resistance  RT. 


RT  =R1  +  R2 

RT  =  5  ohms  +  15  ohms 

RT  =  20  ohms 


The  alternating  voltage  is  assumed  to  be  an  effective  value  (since  it  is  not  specified  to  be  otherwise). 
Apply  the  Ohm's  Law  formula. 


1-22 


l     =  120  volts 
20  ohms 
1^=6  amperes 

The  problem,  however,  asked  for  the  average  value  of  current  (Iavg).  To  convert  the  effective  value 
of  current  to  the  average  value  of  current,  you  must  first  determine  the  peak  or  maximum  value  of  current, 

Imax- 

I       =  1.414  x  I 

maw  eff 

1^   =  1.414  x  6 amperes 
1^   =  8.434  amperes 

You  can  now  find  Iavg.  Just  substitute  8.484  amperes  in  the  Iavg  formula  and  solve  for  Iavg. 

U-  0-636x1™, 

1^  =  0.636x8.484  amperes 

I    =5.4  amperes  (rounded  off  to  one  decimal  place) 


Remember,  you  can  use  the  Ohm's  Law  formulas  to  solve  any  purely  resistive  ac  circuit  problem. 
Use  the  formulas  in  the  same  manner  as  you  would  to  solve  a  dc  circuit  problem. 

Q41.    A  series  circuit  consists  of  three  resistors  (Rl  =  10  Q  R2  =  20  Q  R3  =  15Q)  and  an  alternating 
voltage  source  of  100  volts.  What  is  the  effective  value  of  current  in  the  circuit? 

Q42.    If  the  alternating  source  in  Q41  is  changed  to  200  volts  peak-to-peak,  what  is  Iavg? 

Q43.    IfEeffis  130  volts  and Ieffis  3  amperes,  what  is  the  total  resistance  (RT)  in  the  circuit? 


SUMMARY 

Before  going  on  to  chapter  2,  read  the  following  summary  of  the  material  in  chapter  1.  This  summary 
will  reinforce  what  you  have  already  learned. 

DC  AND  AC — Direct  current  flows  in  one  direction  only,  while  alternating  current  is  constantly 
changing  in  amplitude  and  direction. 

ADVANTAGES  AND  DISADVANTAGES  OF  AC  AND  DC— Direct  current  has  several 
disadvantages  compared  to  alternating  current.  Direct  current,  for  example,  must  be  generated  at  the 
voltage  level  required  by  the  load.  Alternating  current,  however,  can  be  generated  at  a  high  level  and 


1-23 


stepped  down  at  the  consumer  end  (through  the  use  of  a  transformer)  to  whatever  voltage  level  is  required 
by  the  load.  Since  power  in  a  dc  system  must  be  transmitted  at  low  voltage  and  high  current  levels,  the 
I2R  power  loss  becomes  a  problem  in  the  dc  system.  Since  power  in  an  ac  system  can  be  transmitted  at  a 
high  voltage  level  and  a  low  current  level,  the  I2R  power  loss  in  the  ac  system  is  much  less  than  that  in  the 
dc  system. 

VOLTAGE  WAVEFORMS — The  waveform  of  voltage  or  current  is  a  graphical  picture  of  changes 
in  voltage  or  current  values  over  a  period  of  time. 


+V 


OV 


TIME 


(A)  DIRECT  VOLTAGE 


+V 
OV  - 

-V- 


+v 


T 


•TIME 


OV 


VIA 


TIME 


RECTANGULAR  WAVE 
+V 


SAWTOOTH  WAVE 


SINE  WAVE 
(B)  ALTERNATING  VOLTAGE 


TIME 


ELECTROMAGNETISM — When  a  compass  is  placed  in  the  vicinity  of  a  current-carrying 
conductor,  the  needle  aligns  itself  at  right  angles  to  the  conductor.  The  north  pole  of  the  compass 
indicates  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  field  produced  by  the  current.  By  knowing  the  direction  of  current, 
you  can  use  the  left-hand  rule  for  conductors  to  determine  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELD  (CLOCKWISE! 


1-24 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELD 
(COUNTERCLOCKWISE ) 

(B) 


COMPASS 
NEEDLE 


Arrows  are  generally  used  in  electrical  diagrams  to  indicate  the  direction  of  current  in  a  wire.  A  cross 
(+)  on  the  end  of  a  cross-sectional  view  of  a  wire  indicates  that  current  is  flowing  away  from  you,  while  a 
dot  (•)  indicates  that  current  is  flowing  toward  you. 

When  two  adjacent  parallel  conductors  carry  current  in  the  same  direction,  the  magnetic  fields 
around  the  conductors  aid  each  other.  When  the  currents  in  the  two  conductors  flow  in  opposite 
directions,  the  fields  around  the  conductors  oppose  each  other. 


CURRENT  FLOWING  IN  CURRENT  FLOWING  IN 

THE  SAME  DIRECTION  OPPOSITE  DIRECTION 

(A)  (B) 


MAGNETIC  FIELD  OF  A  COIL— When  wire  is  wound  around  a  core,  it  forms  a  COIL.  The 
magnetic  fields  produced  when  current  flows  in  the  coil  combine.  The  combined  influence  of  all  of  the 
fields  around  the  turns  produce  a  two-pole  field  similar  to  that  of  a  simple  bar  magnet. 

When  the  direction  of  current  in  the  coil  is  reversed,  the  polarity  of  the  two-pole  field  of  the  coil  is 
reversed. 

The  strength  of  the  magnetic  field  of  the  coil  is  dependent  upon: 

•  The  number  of  turns  of  the  wire  in  the  coil. 

•  The  amount  of  current  in  the  coil. 

•  The  ratio  of  the  coil  length  to  the  coil  width. 


1-25 


•    The  type  of  material  in  the  core. 

BASIC  AC  GENERATION— When  a  conductor  is  in  a  magnetic  field  and  either  the  field  or  the 
conductor  moves,  an  emf  (voltage)  is  induced  in  the  conductor.  This  effect  is  called  electromagnetic 
induction. 

A  loop  of  wire  rotating  in  a  magnetic  field  produces  a  voltage  which  constantly  changes  in  amplitude 
and  direction.  The  waveform  produced  is  called  a  sine  wave  and  is  a  graphical  picture  of  alternating 
current  (ac).  One  complete  revolution  (360° )  of  the  conductor  produces  one  cycle  of  ac.  The  cycle  is 
composed  of  two  alternations:  a  positive  alternation  and  a  negative  alternation.  One  cycle  of  ac  in  one 
second  is  equal  to  1  hertz  (1  Hz). 

CONDUCTORS  MOVING  PARALLEL  TO  LINES 

OF  FORCE,  EMF  MINIMUM  DIRECTION  OF 


FREQUENCY— The  number  of  cycles  of  ac  per  second  is  referred  to  as  the  FREQUENCY.  AC 
frequency  is  measured  in  hertz.  Most  ac  equipment  is  rated  by  frequency  as  well  as  by  voltage  and 
current. 

PERIOD — The  time  required  to  complete  one  cycle  of  a  waveform  is  called  the  PERIOD  OF  THE 
WAVE. 

Each  ac  sine  wave  is  composed  of  two  alternations.  The  alternation  which  occurs  during  the  time  the 
sine  wave  is  positive  is  called  the  positive  alternation.  The  alternation  which  occurs  during  the  time  the 
sine  wave  is  negative  is  called  the  negative  alternation.  In  each  cycle  of  sine  wave,  the  two  alternations 
are  identical  in  size  and  shape,  but  opposite  in  polarity. 

The  period  of  a  sine  wave  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  frequency;  e.g.,  the  higher  the  frequency, 
the  shorter  the  period.  The  mathematical  relationships  between  time  and  frequency  are 

t  =  -  and  f  =  - 

f  t 


1-26 


WAVELENGTH — The  period  of  a  sine  wave  is  defined  as  the  time  it  takes  to  complete  one  cycle. 
The  distance  the  waveform  covers  during  this  period  is  referred  to  as  the  wavelength.  Wavelength  is 
indicated  by  lambda  (k)  and  is  measured  from  a  point  on  a  given  waveform  (sine  wave)  to  the 
corresponding  point  on  the  next  waveform. 


PERIOD (TIME) 


WAVELENGTH  (DISTANCE) 


PEAK  AND  PEAK-TO-PEAK  VALUES — The  maximum  value  reached  during  one  alternation  of 
a  sine  wave  is  the  peak  value.  The  maximum  reached  during  the  positive  alternation  to  the  maximum 
value  reached  during  the  negative  alternation  is  the  peak-to-peak  value.  The  peak-to-peak  value  is  twice 
the  peak  value. 


1-27 


INSTANTANEOUS  VALUE — The  instantaneous  value  of  a  sine  wave  of  alternating  voltage  or 
current  is  the  value  of  voltage  or  current  at  one  particular  instant  of  time.  There  are  an  infinite  number  of 
instantaneous  values  between  zero  and  the  peak  value. 

AVERAGE  VALUE — The  average  value  of  a  sine  wave  of  voltage  or  current  is  the  average  of  all 
the  instantaneous  values  during  one  alternation.  The  average  value  is  equal  to  0.636  of  the  peak  value. 
The  formulas  for  average  voltage  and  average  current  are: 

Eavg=  0.636xEmffl 
Iwg  =  0.636xlmax 


Remember:  The  average  value  (Eavg  or  I  avg)  is  for  one  alternation  only.  The  average  value  of  a  complete 
sine  wave  is  zero. 

EFFECTIVE  VALUE — The  effective  value  of  an  alternating  current  or  voltage  is  the  value  of 
alternating  current  or  voltage  that  produces  the  same  amount  of  heat  in  a  resistive  component  that  would 
be  produced  in  the  same  component  by  a  direct  current  or  voltage  of  the  same  value.  The  effective  value 
of  a  sine  wave  is  equal  to  0.707  times  the  peak  value.  The  effective  value  is  also  called  the  root  mean 
square  or  rms  value. 

The  term  rms  value  is  used  to  describe  the  process  of  determining  the  effective  value  of  a  sine  wave 
by  using  the  instantaneous  value  of  voltage  or  current.  You  can  find  the  rms  value  of  a  current  or  voltage 
by  taking  equally  spaced  instantaneous  values  on  the  sine  wave  and  extracting  the  square  root  of  the 
average  of  the  sum  of  the  instantaneous  values.  This  is  where  the  term  "Root-Mean-Square"  (rms)  value 
comes  from. 

The  formulas  for  effective  and  maximum  values  of  voltage  and  current  are: 

Etf  =0.707xEma; 
Emffi=  1.414  xEtf 
I  eff    =  0.707  xlmax 

Imat  =1.414xlrff 


1-28 


SINE  WAVES  IN  PHASE — When  two  sine  waves  are  exactly  in  step  with  each  other,  they  are  said 
to  be  in  phase.  To  be  in  phase,  both  sine  waves  must  go  through  their  minimum  and  maximum  points  at 
the  same  time  and  in  the  same  direction. 


SINE  WAVES  OUT  OF  PHASE — When  two  sine  waves  go  through  their  minimum  and  maximum 
points  at  different  times,  a  phase  difference  exists  between  them.  The  two  waves  are  said  to  be  out  of 
phase  with  each  other.  To  describe  this  phase  difference,  the  terms  lead  and  lag  are  used.  The  wave  that 
reaches  its  minimum  (or  maximum)  value  first  is  said  to  lead  the  other  wave.  The  term  lag  is  used  to 
describe  the  wave  that  reaches  its  minimum  (or  maximum)  value  some  time  after  the  first  wave  does. 
When  a  sine  wave  is  described  as  leading  or  lagging,  the  difference  in  degrees  is  usually  stated.  For 
example,  wave  Ej  leads  wave  E  2  by  90° ,  or  wave  E2  lags  wave  E !  by  90° .  Remember:  Two  sine  waves 
can  differ  by  any  number  of  degrees  except  0°  and  360°  .  Two  sine  waves  that  differ  by  0°  or  by  360°  are 
considered  to  be  in  phase.  Two  sine  waves  that  are  opposite  in  polarity  and  that  differ  by  180°  are  said  to 
be  out  of  phase,  even  though  they  go  through  their  minimum  and  maximum  points  at  the  same  time. 


1-29 


OHM'S  LAW  IN  AC  CIRCUIT— All  dc  rules  and  laws  apply  to  an  ac  circuit  that  contains  only 
resistance.  The  important  point  to  remember  is:  Do  not  mix  ac  values.  Ohm's  Law  formulas  for  ac  circuits 
are  given  below: 


=  E 
R 
_  Eeff 

E 

m  =  — 
E 

max 

Pedc-to-PesV 


■PeaV-to-PeaV 
R 


1-30 


ANSWERS  TO  QUESTIONS  Ql.  THROUGH  Q43. 

Al.    An  electrical  current  which  flows  in  one  direction  only. 

A2.    An  electrical  current  which  is  constantly  varying  in  amplitude,  and  which  changes  direction  at 
regular  intervals. 

A3.    The  dc  voltage  must  be  generated  at  the  level  required  by  the  load. 
A4.    The  I 2R  power  loss  is  excessive. 
A5.    Alternating  current  (ac). 

A6.    The  needle  aligns  itself  at  right  angles  to  the  conductor. 
A7.    (a)  clockwise  (b)  counterclockwise. 

A8.    It  is  used  to  determine  the  relation  between  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines  of force  around  a 
conductor  and  the  direction  of  current  through  the  conductor. 

A9.    The  north  pole  of  the  compass  will  point  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines  of force. 

A 10.    It  combines  with  the  other  field. 

All.    It  deforms  the  other  field. 

A12.    (a)  The  field  consists  of  concentric  circles  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  wire  (b)  the  field  of  each 
turn  of  wire  links  with  the  fields  of  adjacent  turns  producing  a  two-pole  field  similar  in  shape  to 
that  of  a  simple  bar  magnet. 

A13.    The  polarity  of  the  two-pole  field  reverses. 

A14.    Use  the  left-hand  rule  for  coils. 

A15.    Grasp  the  coil  in  your  left  hand,  with  your  fingers  "wrapped  around"  in  the  direction  of  electron 
flow.  The  thumb  will  point  toward  the  north  pole. 

A16.    (a)  When  the  conductors  are  cutting  directly  across  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  (at  the  90°  and 
270°  points),  (b)  When  the  conductors  are  moving  parallel  to  the  magnetic  lines  of force  (at  the 
0° ,  180°,  and  360°  points). 

All.  360°. 

A 18.    Extend  your  left  hand  so  that  your  thumb  points  in  the  direction  of  conductor  movement,  and  your 
forefinger  points  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  flux  (north  to  south).  Now  point  your  middle 
finger  90°  from  the  forefinger  and  it  will  point  in  the  direction  of  electron  current  flow  in  the 
conductor. 

A 19.    Continuous  rotation  of  the  conductor  through  magnetic  fines  of force  produces  a  series  of  cycles 
of  alternating  voltage  or,  in  other  words,  an  alternating  voltage  or  a  sine  wave  of  voltage. 

A20.    Frequency  is  the  number  of  complete  cycles  of  alternating  voltage  or  current  completed  each 
second. 


1-31 


A21.  Period. 

A22.  A  positive  alternation  is  the  positive  variation  in  the  voltage  or  current  of  a  sine  curve. 

A23.  The  period  measures  time  and  the  wavelength  measures  distance. 

A24.  The  peak  value  is  the  maximum  value  of  one  alternation;  the  peak-to-peak  value  is  twice  the 
maximum  or  peak  value. 

A25.  Twice. 

A26.  The  instantaneous  value  (Einst  or  Iimt) 

A27.  Average  value  (Eavg  or  Iavg) 

A28.  Zero 
A29. 


1^  =  0.636  x1^ 


E^=  0.636  xE_ 


A30. 


E^  =  0.636*  115  vols 


E^  =73.14  vols 


A31. 


If  I     =1*0. 636  then  L.   -  ^ 


■a*    -m.   —  0.636 

Thus., 

1272 

Im^=  0636  ampere  =  2amper6S 

A32.    The  power  (heat)  produced  in  a  resistance  by  a  dc  voltage  is  compared  to  that  produced  in  the 
same  resistance  by  an  ac  voltage  of  the  same  peak  amplitude. 

A33.    The  effective  value. 

A34. 

1^=0.707x  1^ 


1-32 


A35. 


=  0.707  xEma£ 
=  0.707xEma; 
=  0.  707x  1,000  volts 
E^  =707  volts 

A36. 

W  =  1.414  x^ff 

=  1.414  x  4.25  amperes 
=  6  amperes. 

(Remember:  Unless  specified  otherwise,  the  voltage  or  current  value  is  always  considered  to  be 
the  effective  value.) 

A3  7.    When  the  two  waves  go  through  their  maximum  and  minimum  points  at  the  same  time  and  in  the 
same  direction. 

A38.    When  the  waves  do  not  go  through  their  maximum  and  minimum  points  at  the  same  time,  a  PHASE 
DIFFERENCE  exists,  and  the  two  waves  are  said  to  be  out  of  phase.  (Two  waves  are  also 
considered  to  be  out  of  phase  if  they  differ  in  phase  by  180°  and  their  instantaneous  voltages  are 
always  of  opposite  polarity,  even  though  both  waves  go  through  their  maximum  and  minimum 
points  at  the  same  time). 

A39.    They  are  in  phase  with  each  other. 

A40.    Locate  the  points  on  the  time  axis  where  the  two  waves  cross  traveling  in  the  same  direction.  The 
number  of  degrees  between  these  two  points  is  the  phase  difference. 

A41. 

T        100     9  99 

1^  =  =  2.22ampers 

45 

A42.    Iavg  =  0.636  xlmax  =  1.41  amperes. 
A43.    43.3  ohms. 


1-33 


CHAPTER  2 

INDUCTANCE 

LEARNING  OBJECTIVES 

Upon  completion  of  this  chapter  you  will  be  able  to: 

1 .  Write  the  basic  unit  of  and  the  symbol  for  inductance. 

2.  State  the  type  of  moving  field  used  to  generate  an  emf  in  a  conductor. 

3.  Define  the  term  "inductance." 

4.  State  the  meanings  of  the  terms  "induced  emf  and  "counter  emf." 

5.  State  Lenz's  law. 

6.  State  the  effect  that  inductance  has  on  steady  direct  current,  and  direct  current  that  is  changing 
in  magnitude. 

7.  List  five  factors  that  affect  the  inductance  of  a  coil,  and  state  how  various  physical  changes  in 
these  factors  affect  inductance. 

8.  State  the  principles  and  sequences  involved  in  the  buildup  and  decay  of  current  in  an  LR  series 
circuit. 

9.  Write  the  formula  for  computing  one  time  constant  in  an  LR  series  circuit. 

1 0.  Solve  L/R  time  constant  problems. 

1 1 .  State  the  three  types  of  power  loss  in  an  inductor. 

12.  Define  the  term  "mutual  inductance." 

13.  State  the  meaning  of  the  term  "coupled  circuits." 

14.  State  the  meaning  of  the  term  "coefficient  of  coupling." 

15.  Given  the  inductance  values  of  and  the  coefficient  of  coupling  between  two  series-connected 
inductors,  solve  for  mutual  inductance,  M. 

16.  Write  the  formula  for  the  "total  inductance"  of  two  inductors  connected  in  series-opposing. 

17.  Given  the  inductance  values  of  and  the  mutual  inductance  value  between  two  coils  connected  in 
series-aiding,  solve  for  their  combined  inductance,  LT. 


2-1 


INDUCTANCE 


The  study  of  inductance  presents  a  very  challenging  but  rewarding  segment  of  electricity.  It  is 
challenging  in  the  sense  that,  at  first,  it  will  seem  that  new  concepts  are  being  introduced.  You  will  realize 
as  this  chapter  progresses  that  these  "new  concepts"  are  merely  extensions  and  enlargements  of 
fundamental  principles  that  you  learned  previously  in  the  study  of  magnetism  and  electron  physics.  The 
study  of  inductance  is  rewarding  in  the  sense  that  a  thorough  understanding  of  it  will  enable  you  to 
acquire  a  working  knowledge  of  electrical  circuits  more  rapidly. 


Inductance  is  the  characteristic  of  an  electrical  circuit  that  opposes  the  starting,  stopping,  or  a  change 
in  value  of  current.  The  above  statement  is  of  such  importance  to  the  study  of  inductance  that  it  bears 
repeating.  Inductance  is  the  characteristic  of  an  electrical  conductor  that  OPPOSES  CHANGE  in 
CURRENT.  The  symbol  for  inductance  is  L  and  the  basic  unit  of  inductance  is  the  HENRY  (H).  One 
henry  is  equal  to  the  inductance  required  to  induce  one  volt  in  an  inductor  by  a  change  of  current  of  one 
ampere  per  second. 

You  do  not  have  to  look  far  to  find  a  physical  analogy  of  inductance.  Anyone  who  has  ever  had  to 
push  a  heavy  load  (wheelbarrow,  car,  etc.)  is  aware  that  it  takes  more  work  to  start  the  load  moving  than  it 
does  to  keep  it  moving.  Once  the  load  is  moving,  it  is  easier  to  keep  the  load  moving  than  to  stop  it  again. 
This  is  because  the  load  possesses  the  property  of  INERTIA.  Inertia  is  the  characteristic  of  mass  which 
opposes  a  CHANGE  in  velocity.  Inductance  has  the  same  effect  on  current  in  an  electrical  circuit  as 
inertia  has  on  the  movement  of  a  mechanical  object.  It  requires  more  energy  to  start  or  stop  current  than  it 
does  to  keep  it  flowing. 

Ql.    What  is  the  basic  unit  of  inductance  and  the  abbreviation  for  this  unit? 

ELECTROMOTIVE  FORCE  (EMF) 

You  have  learned  that  an  electromotive  force  is  developed  whenever  there  is  relative  motion  between 
a  magnetic  field  and  a  conductor. 

Electromotive  force  is  a  difference  of  potential  or  voltage  which  exists  between  two  points  in  an 
electrical  circuit.  In  generators  and  inductors  the  emf  is  developed  by  the  action  between  the  magnetic 
field  and  the  electrons  in  a  conductor.  This  is  shown  in  figure  2- 1 . 


CHARACTERISTICS  OF  INDUCTANCE 


Figure  2-1. — Generation  of  an  emf  in  an  electrical  conductor. 


2-2 


When  a  magnetic  field  moves  through  a  stationary  metallic  conductor,  electrons  are  dislodged  from 
their  orbits.  The  electrons  move  in  a  direction  determined  by  the  movement  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  flux. 
This  is  shown  below: 


\ — *  1 


\ 


\ 


^DIRECTION  OF  I 
MOVEMENT  OF  FLUX 

\  \  \ 


CONDUCTOR 


\ 


-MAGNETIC 
FLUX  LINE 


The  electrons  move  from  one  area  of  the  conductor  into  another  area.  The  area  that  the  electrons 
moved  from  has  fewer  negative  charges  (electrons)  and  becomes  positively  charged.  The  area  the 
electrons  move  into  becomes  negatively  charged.  This  is  shown  below: 


The  difference  between  the  charges  in  the  conductor  is  equal  to  a  difference  of  potential  (or  voltage). 
This  voltage  caused  by  the  moving  magnetic  field  is  called  electromotive  force  (emf). 

In  simple  terms,  the  action  of  a  moving  magnetic  field  on  a  conductor  can  be  compared  to  the  action 
of  a  broom.  Consider  the  moving  magnetic  field  to  be  a  moving  broom.  As  the  magnetic  broom  moves 
along  (through)  the  conductor,  it  gathers  up  and  pushes  electrons  before  it,  as  shown  below: 


2-3 


The  area  from  which  electrons  are  moved  becomes  positively  charged,  while  the  area  into  which 
electrons  are  moved  becomes  negatively  charged.  The  potential  difference  between  these  two  areas  is  the 
electromotive  force  or  emf 

Q2.  An  emf  is  generated  in  a  conductor  when  the  conductor  is  cut  by  what  type  of field? 

SELF-INDUCTANCE 

Even  a  perfectly  straight  length  of  conductor  has  some  inductance.  As  you  know,  current  in  a 
conductor  produces  a  magnetic  field  surrounding  the  conductor.  When  the  current  changes,  the  magnetic 
field  changes.  This  causes  relative  motion  between  the  magnetic  field  and  the  conductor,  and  an 
electromotive  force  (emf)  is  induced  in  the  conductor.  This  emf  is  called  a  SELF-INDUCED  EMF 
because  it  is  induced  in  the  conductor  carrying  the  current.  The  emf  produced  by  this  moving  magnetic 
field  is  also  referred  to  as  COUNTER  ELECTROMOTIVE  FORCE  (cemf).  The  polarity  of  the  counter 
electromotive  force  is  in  the  opposite  direction  to  the  applied  voltage  of  the  conductor.  The  overall  effect 
will  be  to  oppose  a  change  in  current  magnitude.  This  effect  is  summarized  by  Lenz's  law  which  states 
that:  THE  INDUCED  EMF  IN  ANY  CIRCUIT  IS  ALWAYS  IN  A  DIRECTION  TO  OPPOSE  THE 
EFFECT  THAT  PRODUCED  IT. 

If  the  shape  of  the  conductor  is  changed  to  form  a  loop,  then  the  electromagnetic  field  around  each 
portion  of  the  conductor  cuts  across  some  other  portion  of  the  same  conductor.  This  is  shown  in  its 
simplest  form  in  figure  2-2.  A  length  of  conductor  is  looped  so  that  two  portions  of  the  conductor  lie  next 
to  each  other.  These  portions  are  labeled  conductor  1  and  conductor  2.  When  the  switch  is  closed,  current 
(electron  flow)  in  the  conductor  produces  a  magnetic  field  around  ALL  portions  of  the  conductor.  For 
simplicity,  the  magnetic  field  (expanding  lines  of  flux)  is  shown  in  a  single  plane  that  is  perpendicular  to 
both  conductors.  Although  the  expanding  field  of  flux  originates  at  the  same  time  in  both  conductors,  it  is 
considered  as  originating  in  conductor  1  and  its  effect  on  conductor  2  will  be  explained.  With  increasing 
current,  the  flux  field  expands  outward  from  conductor  1,  cutting  across  a  portion  of  conductor  2.  This 
results  in  an  induced  emf  in  conductor  2  as  shown  by  the  dashed  arrow.  Note  that  the  induced  emf  is  in 
the  opposite  direction  to  (in  OPPOSITION  to)  the  battery  current  and  voltage,  as  stated  in  Lenz's  law. 


2-4 


DIRECTION  OF 
MAGNETIC  FIELD 

DIRECTION  OF  RELATIVE  i 


Figure  2-2. — Self-inductance. 

The  direction  of  this  induced  voltage  may  be  determined  by  applying  the  LEFT-HAND  RULE  FOR 
GENERATORS.  This  rule  is  applied  to  a  portion  of  conductor  2  that  is  "lifted"  and  enlarged  for  this 
purpose  in  figure  2-2(A).  This  rule  states  that  if  you  point  the  thumb  of  your  left  hand  in  the  direction  of 
relative  motion  of  the  conductor  and  your  index  finger  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  field,  your  middle 
finger,  extended  as  shown,  will  now  indicate  the  direction  of  the  induced  current  which  will  generate  the 
induced  voltage  (cemf)  as  shown. 

In  figure  2-2(B),  the  same  section  of  conductor  2  is  shown  after  the  switch  has  been  opened.  The  flux 
field  is  collapsing.  Applying  the  left-hand  rule  in  this  case  shows  that  the  reversal  of  flux  MOVEMENT 
has  caused  a  reversal  in  the  direction  of  the  induced  voltage.  The  induced  voltage  is  now  in  the  same 
direction  as  the  battery  voltage.  The  most  important  thing  for  you  to  note  is  that  the  self-induced  voltage 
opposes  BOTH  changes  in  current.  That  is,  when  the  switch  is  closed,  this  voltage  delays  the  initial 
buildup  of  current  by  opposing  the  battery  voltage.  When  the  switch  is  opened,  it  keeps  the  current 
flowing  in  the  same  direction  by  aiding  the  battery  voltage. 

Thus,  from  the  above  explanation,  you  can  see  that  when  a  current  is  building  up  it  produces  an 
expanding  magnetic  field.  This  field  induces  an  emf  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  actual  flow  of  current. 


2-5 


This  induced  emf  opposes  the  growth  of  the  current  and  the  growth  of  the  magnetic  field.  If  the  increasing 
current  had  not  set  up  a  magnetic  field,  there  would  have  been  no  opposition  to  its  growth.  The  whole 
reaction,  or  opposition,  is  caused  by  the  creation  or  collapse  of  the  magnetic  field,  the  lines  of  which  as 
they  expand  or  contract  cut  across  the  conductor  and  develop  the  counter  emf. 

Since  all  circuits  have  conductors  in  them,  you  can  assume  that  all  circuits  have  inductance. 
However,  inductance  has  its  greatest  effect  only  when  there  is  a  change  in  current.  Inductance  does  NOT 
oppose  current,  only  a  CHANGE  in  current.  Where  current  is  constantly  changing  as  in  an  ac  circuit, 
inductance  has  more  effect. 

Q3.   Define  inductance. 

Q4.    What  is  meant  by  induced  emf?  By  counter  emf? 
Q5.   State  Lenz's  law. 

Q6.    What  effect  does  inductance  have  (a)  on  steady  direct  current  and  (b)  on  direct  current  while  it  is 
changing  in  amplitude? 

To  increase  the  property  of  inductance,  the  conductor  can  be  formed  into  a  loop  or  coil.  A  coil  is  also 
called  an  inductor.  Figure  2-3  shows  a  conductor  formed  into  a  coil.  Current  through  one  loop  produces  a 
magnetic  field  that  encircles  the  loop  in  the  direction  as  shown  in  figure  2 -3(A).  As  current  increases,  the 
magnetic  field  expands  and  cuts  all  the  loops  as  shown  in  figure  2-3(B).  The  current  in  each  loop  affects 
all  other  loops.  The  field  cutting  the  other  loop  has  the  effect  of  increasing  the  opposition  to  a  current 
change. 


(A)  (B) 

Figure  2-3. — Inductance. 

Inductors  are  classified  according  to  core  type.  The  core  is  the  center  of  the  inductor  just  as  the  core 
of  an  apple  is  the  center  of  an  apple.  The  inductor  is  made  by  forming  a  coil  of  wire  around  a  core.  The 
core  material  is  normally  one  of  two  basic  types:  soft-iron  or  air.  An  iron-core  inductor  and  its  schematic 
symbol  (which  is  represented  with  lines  across  the  top  of  it  to  indicate  the  presence  of  an  iron  core)  are 
shown,  in  figure  2-4(A).  The  air-core  inductor  may  be  nothing  more  than  a  coil  of  wire,  but  it  is  usually  a 
coil  formed  around  a  hollow  form  of  some  nonmagnetic  material  such  as  cardboard.  This  material  serves 
no  purpose  other  than  to  hold  the  shape  of  the  coil.  An  air-core  inductor  and  its  schematic  symbol  are 
shown  in  figure  2-4(B). 


2-6 


__rWYW^  

INDUCTOR,  IRON  CORE 


 /YVTVT\  

INDUCTOR,  AIR  CORE 


(A) 


(B) 


Figure  2-4. — Inductor  types  and  schematic  symbols. 


Factors  Affecting  Coil  Inductance 

There  are  several  physical  factors  which  affect  the  inductance  of  a  coil.  They  include  the  number  of 
turns  in  the  coil,  the  diameter  of  the  coil,  the  coil  length,  the  type  of  material  used  in  the  core,  and  the 
number  of  layers  of  winding  in  the  coils. 

Inductance  depends  entirely  upon  the  physical  construction  of  the  circuit,  and  can  only  be  measured 
with  special  laboratory  instruments.  Of  the  factors  mentioned,  consider  first  how  the  number  of  turns 
affects  the  inductance  of  a  coil.  Figure  2-5  shows  two  coils.  Coil  (A)  has  two  turns  and  coil  (B)  has  four 
turns.  In  coil  (A),  the  flux  field  set  up  by  one  loop  cuts  one  other  loop.  In  coil  (B),  the  flux  field  set  up  by 
one  loop  cuts  three  other  loops.  Doubling  the  number  of  turns  in  the  coil  will  produce  a  field  twice  as 
strong,  if  the  same  current  is  used.  A  field  twice  as  strong,  cutting  twice  the  number  of  turns,  will  induce 
four  times  the  voltage.  Therefore,  it  can  be  said  that  the  inductance  varies  as  the  square  of  the  number  of 
turns. 


The  second  factor  is  the  coil  diameter.  In  figure  2-6  you  can  see  that  the  coil  in  view  B  has  twice  the 
diameter  of  coil  view  A.  Physically,  it  requires  more  wire  to  construct  a  coil  of  large  diameter  than  one  of 
small  diameter  with  an  equal  number  of  turns.  Therefore,  more  lines  of  force  exist  to  induce  a  counter  emf 


(B) 


Figure  2-5. — Inductance  factor  (turns). 


2-7 


in  the  coil  with  the  larger  diameter.  Actually,  the  inductance  of  a  coil  increases  directly  as  the  cross- 
sectional  area  of  the  core  increases.  Recall  the  formula  for  the  area  of  a  circle:  A  =  7tr2.  Doubling  the 
radius  of  a  coil  increases  the  inductance  by  a  factor  of  four. 


(A)  (B) 

Figure  2-6. — Inductance  factor  (diameter). 

The  third  factor  that  affects  the  inductance  of  a  coil  is  the  length  of  the  coil.  Figure  2-7  shows  two 
examples  of  coil  spacings.  Coil  (A)  has  three  turns,  rather  widely  spaced,  making  a  relatively  long  coil.  A 
coil  of  this  type  has  few  flux  linkages,  due  to  the  greater  distance  between  each  turn.  Therefore,  coil  (A) 
has  a  relatively  low  inductance.  Coil  (B)  has  closely  spaced  turns,  making  a  relatively  short  coil.  This 
close  spacing  increases  the  flux  linkage,  increasing  the  inductance  of  the  coil.  Doubling  the  length  of  a 
coil  while  keeping  the  same  number  of  turns  halves  the  value  of  inductance. 


(A) 


(B) 


Figure  2-7.— Inductance  factor  (coil  length).  CLOSELY  WOUND 

The  fourth  physical  factor  is  the  type  of  core  material  used  with  the  coil.  Figure  2-8  shows  two  coils: 
Coil  (A)  with  an  air  core,  and  coil  (B)  with  a  soft-iron  core.  The  magnetic  core  of  coil  (B)  is  a  better  path 
for  magnetic  lines  of  force  than  is  the  nonmagnetic  core  of  coil  (A).  The  soft-iron  magnetic  core's  high 


2-8 


permeability  has  less  reluctance  to  the  magnetic  flux,  resulting  in  more  magnetic  lines  of  force.  This 
increase  in  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  increases  the  number  of  lines  of  force  cutting  each  loop  of  the  coil, 
thus  increasing  the  inductance  of  the  coil.  It  should  now  be  apparent  that  the  inductance  of  a  coil  increases 
directly  as  the  permeability  of  the  core  material  increases. 


(A)  AIR  CORE  (B)  SOFT-IRON  CORE 

Figure  2-8. — Inductance  factor  (core  material). 

Another  way  of  increasing  the  inductance  is  to  wind  the  coil  in  layers.  Figure  2-9  shows  three  cores 
with  different  amounts  of  layering.  The  coil  in  figure  2-9(A)  is  a  poor  inductor  compared  to  the  others  in 
the  figure  because  its  turns  are  widely  spaced  and  there  is  no  layering.  The  flux  movement,  indicated  by 
the  dashed  arrows,  does  not  link  effectively  because  there  is  only  one  layer  of  turns.  A  more  inductive  coil 
is  shown  in  figure  2-9(B).  The  turns  are  closely  spaced  and  the  wire  has  been  wound  in  two  layers.  The 
two  layers  link  each  other  with  a  greater  number  of  flux  loops  during  all  flux  movements.  Note  that  nearly 
all  the  turns,  such  as  X,  are  next  to  four  other  turns  (shaded).  This  causes  the  flux  linkage  to  be  increased. 


Figure  2-9. — Coils  of  various  inductances. 


2-9 


A  coil  can  be  made  still  more  inductive  by  winding  it  in  three  layers,  as  shown  in  figure  2-9(C).  The 
increased  number  of  layers  (cross-sectional  area)  improves  flux  linkage  even  more.  Note  that  some  turns, 
such  as  Y,  lie  directly  next  to  six  other  turns  (shaded).  In  actual  practice,  layering  can  continue  on  through 
many  more  layers.  The  important  fact  to  remember,  however,  is  that  the  inductance  of  the  coil  increases 
with  each  layer  added. 

As  you  have  seen,  several  factors  can  affect  the  inductance  of  a  coil,  and  all  of  these  factors  are 
variable.  Many  differently  constructed  coils  can  have  the  same  inductance.  The  important  information  to 
remember,  however,  is  that  inductance  is  dependent  upon  the  degree  of  linkage  between  the  wire 
conductor(s)  and  the  electromagnetic  field.  In  a  straight  length  of  conductor,  there  is  very  little  flux 
linkage  between  one  part  of  the  conductor  and  another.  Therefore,  its  inductance  is  extremely  small.  It 
was  shown  that  conductors  become  much  more  inductive  when  they  are  wound  into  coils.  This  is  true 
because  there  is  maximum  flux  linkage  between  the  conductor  turns,  which  lie  side  by  side  in  the  coil. 

Q7- 

a.  List  five  factors  that  affect  the  inductance  of  a  coil. 

b.  Bending  a  straight  piece  of  wire  into  a  loop  or  coil  has  what  effect  on  the  inductance  of  the 
wire? 

c.  Doubling  the  number  of  turns  in  a  coil  has  what  effect  on  the  inductance  of  the  coil? 

d.  Decreasing  the  diameter  of  a  coil  has  what  effect  on  the  inductance  of  the  coil? 

e.  Inserting  a  soft-iron  core  into  a  coil  has  what  effect  on  the  inductance  of  the  coil? 

f    Increasing  the  number  of  layers  of  windings  in  a  coil  has  what  effect  on  the  inductance  of  the 
coil? 

UNIT  OF  INDUCTANCE 

As  stated  before,  the  basic  unit  of  inductance  (L)  is  the  HENRY  (H),  named  after  Joseph  Henry,  the 
co-discoverer  with  Faraday  of  the  principle  of  electromagnetic  induction.  An  inductor  has  an  inductance 
of  1  henry  if  an  emf  of  1  volt  is  induced  in  the  inductor  when  the  current  through  the  inductor  is  changing 
at  the  rate  of  1  ampere  per  second.  The  relationship  between  the  induced  voltage,  the  inductance,  and  the 
rate  of  change  of  current  with  respect  to  time  is  stated  mathematically  as: 

AI 

Emd=L  — 


where  Eind  is  the  induced  emf  in  volts;  L  is  the  inductance  in  henrys;  and  AI  is  the  change  in  current  in 
amperes  occurring  in  At  seconds.  The  symbol  A  (Greek  letter  delta),  means  "a  change  in       The  henry  is 
a  large  unit  of  inductance  and  is  used  with  relatively  large  inductors.  With  small  inductors,  the  millihenry 
is  used.  (A  millihenry  is  equal  to  1  x  10"3  henry,  and  one  henry  is  equal  to  1 ,000  millihenrys.)  For  still 
smaller  inductors  the  unit  of  inductance  is  the  microhenry  (uH).  (A  uH  =  1  x  10  "6H,  and  one  henry  is 
equal  to  1,000,000  microhenrys.) 

GROWTH  AND  DECAY  OF  CURRENT  IN  AN  LR  SERIES  CIRCUIT 

When  a  battery  is  connected  across  a  "pure"  inductance,  the  current  builds  up  to  its  final  value  at  a 
rate  determined  by  the  battery  voltage  and  the  internal  resistance  of  the  battery.  The  current  buildup  is 


2-10 


gradual  because  of  the  counter  emf  generated  by  the  self-inductance  of  the  coil.  When  the  current  starts  to 
flow,  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  move  outward  from  the  coil.  These  lines  cut  the  turns  of  wire  on  the 
inductor  and  build  up  a  counter  emf  that  opposes  the  emf  of  the  battery.  This  opposition  causes  a  delay  in 
the  time  it  takes  the  current  to  build  up  to  a  steady  value.  When  the  battery  is  disconnected,  the  lines  of 
force  collapse.  Again  these  lines  cut  the  turns  of  the  inductor  and  build  up  an  emf  that  tends  to  prolong  the 
flow  of  current. 

A  voltage  divider  containing  resistance  and  inductance  may  be  connected  in  a  circuit  by  means  of  a 
special  switch,  as  shown  in  figure  2- 10(A).  Such  a  series  arrangement  is  called  an  LR  series  circuit. 


S2  CLOSES  THE 
INSTANT  S1  OPENS 


GROWTH  DECAY 

(B)  (C) 

Figure  2-10. — Growth  and  decay  of  current  in  an  LR  series  circuit. 

When  switch  Si  is  closed  (as  shown),  a  voltage  Es  appears  across  the  voltage  divider.  At  this  instant 
the  current  will  attempt  to  increase  to  its  maximum  value.  However,  this  instantaneous  current  change 
causes  coil  L  to  produce  a  back  EMF,  which  is  opposite  in  polarity  and  almost  equal  to  the  EMF  of  the 
source.  This  back  EMF  opposes  the  rapid  current  change.  Figure  2-1 0(B)  shows  that  at  the  instant  switch 
Si  is  closed,  there  is  no  measurable  growth  current  (ig),  a  minimum  voltage  drop  is  across  resistor  R,  and 
maximum  voltage  exists  across  inductor  L. 

As  current  starts  to  flow,  a  voltage  (eR)  appears  across  R,  and  the  voltage  across  the  inductor  is 
reduced  by  the  same  amount.  The  fact  that  the  voltage  across  the  inductor  (L)  is  reduced  means  that  the 


2-11 


growth  current  (ig)  is  increased  and  consequently  eR  is  increased.  Figure  2- 10(B)  shows  that  the  voltage 
across  the  inductor  (eL)  finally  becomes  zero  when  the  growth  current  (ig)  stops  increasing,  while  the 
voltage  across  the  resistor  (eR)  builds  up  to  a  value  equal  to  the  source  voltage  (Es). 

Electrical  inductance  is  like  mechanical  inertia,  and  the  growth  of  current  in  an  inductive  circuit  can 
be  likened  to  the  acceleration  of  a  boat  on  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  boat  does  not  move  at  the  instant  a 
constant  force  is  applied  to  it.  At  this  instant  all  the  applied  force  is  used  to  overcome  the  inertia  of  the 
boat.  Once  the  inertia  is  overcome  the  boat  will  start  to  move.  After  a  while,  the  speed  of  the  boat  reaches 
its  maximum  value  and  the  applied  force  is  used  up  in  overcoming  the  friction  of  the  water  against  the 
hull. 

When  the  battery  switch  (Si)  in  the  LR  circuit  of  figure  2-1 0(A)  is  closed,  the  rate  of  the  current 
increase  is  maximum  in  the  inductive  circuit.  At  this  instant  all  the  battery  voltage  is  used  in  overcoming 
the  emf  of  self-induction  which  is  a  maximum  because  the  rate  of  change  of  current  is  maximum.  Thus 
the  battery  voltage  is  equal  to  the  drop  across  the  inductor  and  the  voltage  across  the  resistor  is  zero.  As 
time  goes  on  more  of  the  battery  voltage  appears  across  the  resistor  and  less  across  the  inductor.  The  rate 
of  change  of  current  is  less  and  the  induced  emf  is  less.  As  the  steady-state  condition  of  the  current  is 
approached,  the  drop  across  the  inductor  approaches  zero  and  all  of  the  battery  voltage  is  "dropped" 
across  the  resistance  of  the  circuit. 

Thus  the  voltages  across  the  inductor  and  the  resistor  change  in  magnitude  during  the  period  of 
growth  of  current  the  same  way  the  force  applied  to  the  boat  divides  itself  between  the  effects  of  inertia 
and  friction.  In  both  examples,  the  force  is  developed  first  across  the  inertia/inductive  effect  and  finally 
across  the  friction/resistive  effect. 

Figure  2- 10(C)  shows  that  when  switch  S2  is  closed  (source  voltage  Es  removed  from  the  circuit),  the 
flux  that  has  been  established  around  the  inductor  (L)  collapses  through  the  windings.  This  induces  a 
voltage  eL  in  the  inductor  that  has  a  polarity  opposite  to  Es  and  is  essentially  equal  to  Es  in  magnitude. 
The  induced  voltage  causes  decay  current  (id)  to  flow  in  resistor  R  in  the  same  direction  in  which  current 
was  flowing  originally  (when  Si  was  closed).  A  voltage  (eR)  that  is  initially  equal  to  source  voltage  (Es)  is 
developed  across  R.  The  voltage  across  the  resistor  (eR)  rapidly  falls  to  zero  as  the  voltage  across  the 
inductor  (eL)  falls  to  zero  due  to  the  collapsing  flux. 

Just  as  the  example  of  the  boat  was  used  to  explain  the  growth  of  current  in  a  circuit,  it  can  also  be 
used  to  explain  the  decay  of  current  in  a  circuit.  When  the  force  applied  to  the  boat  is  removed,  the  boat 
still  continues  to  move  through  the  water  for  a  while,  eventually  coming  to  a  stop.  This  is  because  energy 
was  being  stored  in  the  inertia  of  the  moving  boat.  After  a  period  of  time  the  friction  of  the  water 
overcomes  the  inertia  of  the  boat,  and  the  boat  stops  moving.  Just  as  inertia  of  the  boat  stored  energy,  the 
magnetic  field  of  an  inductor  stores  energy.  Because  of  this,  even  when  the  power  source  is  removed,  the 
stored  energy  of  the  magnetic  field  of  the  inductor  tends  to  keep  current  flowing  in  the  circuit  until  the 
magnetic  field  collapse. 

Q8. 

a.  When  voltage  is  first  applied  to  a  series  LR  circuit,  how  much  opposition  does  the  inductance 
have  to  the  flow  of  current  compared  to  that  of  the  circuit  resistance? 

b.  In  a  series  circuit  containing  a  resistor  (R  i)  and  an  inductor  (L j),  what  voltage  exists  across 
R  i  when  the  counter  emf  is  at  its  maximum  value? 

c.  What  happens  to  the  voltage  across  the  resistance  in  an  LR  circuit  during  current  buildup  in 
the  circuit,  and  during  current  decay  in  the  circuit? 


2-12 


L/R  Time  Constant 


The  L/R  TIME  CONSTANT  is  a  valuable  tool  for  use  in  determining  the  time  required  for  current  in 
an  inductor  to  reach  a  specific  value.  As  shown  in  figure  2-11,  one  L/R  time  constant  is  the  time  required 
for  the  current  in  an  inductor  to  increase  to  63  percent  (actually  63.2  percent)  of  the  maximum  current. 
Each  time  constant  is  equal  to  the  time  required  for  the  current  to  increase  by  63.2  percent  of  the 
difference  in  value  between  the  current  flowing  in  the  inductor  and  the  maximum  current.  Maximum 
current  flows  in  the  inductor  after  five  L/R  time  constants  are  completed.  The  following  example  should 
clear  up  any  confusion  about  time  constants.  Assume  that  maximum  current  in  an  LR  circuit  is  10 
amperes.  As  you  know,  when  the  circuit  is  energized,  it  takes  time  for  the  current  to  go  from  zero  to  10 
amperes.  When  the  first  time  constant  is  completed,  the  current  in  the  circuit  is  equal  to  63.2%  of  10 
amperes.  Thus  the  amplitude  of  current  at  the  end  of  1  time  constant  is  6.32  amperes. 


Figure  2-11. — L/R  time  constant. 


During  the  second  time  constant,  current  again  increases  by  63.2%  (.632)  of  the  difference  in  value 
between  the  current  flowing  in  the  inductor  and  the  maximum  current.  This  difference  is  10  amperes 
minus  6.32  amperes  and  equals  3.68  amperes;  63.2%  of  3.68  amperes  is  2.32  amperes.  This  increase  in 
current  during  the  second  time  constant  is  added  to  that  of  the  first  time  constant.  Thus,  upon  completion 
of  the  second  time  constant,  the  amount  of  current  in  the  LR  circuit  is  6.32  amperes  +  2.32  amperes  = 
8.64  amperes. 

During  the  third  constant,  current  again  increases: 

10 amperes  -  8.64  amperes  =  1.36  amperes 

1,36 amperes  x  ,632  =  0,860 ampere 
8.64  amperes  +0,860 ampere  =  9,50 amperes 

During  the  fourth  time  constant,  current  again  increases: 

10 amperes  -  9,50 amperes  =  0.5 ampere 
0,5 ampere  x  ,632  =  0,316 ampere 
9,50  amperes  +  0,316 ampere  =  9.82  amperes 


2-13 


During  the  fifth  time  constant,  current  increases  as  before: 


10 amperes  -  9,82 amperes  =  0,18 ampere 

0.18 ampere  x  ,632  =  0.114 ampere 
9,82  amperes  +  ,114  ampere  =  9,93  amperes 


Thus,  the  current  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  time  constant  is  almost  equal  to  10.0  amperes,  the  maximum 
current.  For  all  practical  purposes  the  slight  difference  in  value  can  be  ignored. 

When  an  LR  circuit  is  deenergized,  the  circuit  current  decreases  (decays)  to  zero  in  five  time 
constants  at  the  same  rate  that  it  previously  increased.  If  the  growth  and  decay  of  current  in  an  LR  circuit 
are  plotted  on  a  graph,  the  curve  appears  as  shown  in  figure  2-11.  Notice  that  current  increases  and  decays 
at  the  same  rate  in  five  time  constants. 

The  value  of  the  time  constant  in  seconds  is  equal  to  the  inductance  in  henrys  divided  by  the  circuit 
resistance  in  ohms. 


L  (in  henrys) 
R  (in  ohms) 


The  formula  used  to  calculate  one  L/R  time  constant  is: 
Time  Cons  tant  (TC)  in  s  e  c  o  nds  = 

Q9.     What  is  the  formula  for  one  L/R  time  constant? 
Q10. 

a.  The  maximum  current  applied  to  an  inductor  is  1.8  amperes.  How  much  current  flowed  in  the 
inductor  3  time  constants  after  the  circuit  was  first  energized? 

b.  What  is  the  minimum  number  of  time  constants  required  for  the  current  in  an  LR  circuit  to 
increase  to  its  maximum  value? 

c.  A  circuit  containing  only  an  inductor  and  a  resistor  has  a  maximum  of  12  amperes  of  applied 
current  flowing  in  it.  After  5  L/R  time  constants  the  circuit  is  opened.  How  many  time 
constants  is  required  for  the  current  to  decay  to  1.625  amperes? 

POWER  LOSS  IN  AN  INDUCTOR 

Since  an  inductor  (coil)  consists  of  a  number  of  turns  of  wire,  and  since  all  wire  has  some  resistance, 
every  inductor  has  a  certain  amount  of  resistance.  Normally  this  resistance  is  small.  It  is  usually  neglected 
in  solving  various  types  of  ac  circuit  problems  because  the  reactance  of  the  inductor  (the  opposition  to 
alternating  current,  which  will  be  discussed  later)  is  so  much  greater  than  the  resistance  that  the  resistance 
has  a  negligible  effect  on  the  current. 

However,  since  some  inductors  are  designed  to  carry  relatively  large  amounts  of  current, 
considerable  power  can  be  dissipated  in  the  inductor  even  though  the  amount  of  resistance  in  the  inductor 
is  small.  This  power  is  wasted  power  and  is  called  COPPER  LOSS.  The  copper  loss  of  an  inductor  can  be 
calculated  by  multiplying  the  square  of  the  current  in  the  inductor  by  the  resistance  of  the  winding  (I2R). 


2-14 


In  addition  to  copper  loss,  an  iron-core  coil  (inductor)  has  two  iron  losses.  These  are  called 
HYSTERESIS  LOSS  and  EDDY-CURRENT  LOSS.  Hysteresis  loss  is  due  to  power  that  is  consumed  in 
reversing  the  magnetic  field  of  the  inductor  core  each  time  the  direction  of  current  in  the  inductor 
changes. 

Eddy-current  loss  is  due  to  heating  of  the  core  by  circulating  currents  that  are  induced  in  the  iron 
core  by  the  magnetic  field  around  the  turns  of  the  coil.  These  currents  are  called  eddy  currents  and 
circulate  within  the  iron  core  only. 

All  these  losses  dissipate  power  in  the  form  of  heat.  Since  this  power  cannot  be  returned  to  the 
electrical  circuit,  it  is  lost  power. 

Qll.     State  three  types  of  power  loss  in  an  inductor. 

MUTUAL  INDUCTANCE 

Whenever  two  coils  are  located  so  that  the  flux  from  one  coil  links  with  the  turns  of  the  other  coil,  a 
change  of  flux  in  one  coil  causes  an  emf  to  be  induced  in  the  other  coil.  This  allows  the  energy  from  one 
coil  to  be  transferred  or  coupled  to  the  other  coil.  The  two  coils  are  said  to  be  coupled  or  linked  by  the 
property  of  MUTUAL  INDUCTANCE  (M).  The  amount  of  mutual  inductance  depends  on  the  relative 
positions  of  the  two  coils.  This  is  shown  in  figure  2-12.  If  the  coils  are  separated  a  considerable  distance, 
the  amount  of  flux  common  to  both  coils  is  small  and  the  mutual  inductance  is  low.  Conversely,  if  the 
coils  are  close  together  so  that  nearly  all  the  flux  of  one  coil  links  the  turns  of  the  other,  the  mutual 
inductance  is  high.  The  mutual  inductance  can  be  increased  greatly  by  mounting  the  coils  on  a  common 
iron  core. 


(A)  INDUCTORS  CLOSE  -  LARGE  M 


(B)  INDUCTORS  FAR  APART  -  SMALL  M 


/    /  / 


(  C)  INDUCTOR  AXES  PERPENDICULAR  -  NO  M 


Figure  2-12. — The  effect  of  position  of  coils  on  mutual  inductance  (M). 


2-15 


Two  coils  are  placed  close  together  as  shown  in  figure  2-13.  Coil  1  is  connected  to  a  battery  through 
switch  S,  and  coil  2  is  connected  to  an  ammeter  (A).  When  switch  S  is  closed  as  in  figure  2- 13(A),  the 
current  that  flows  in  coil  1  sets  up  a  magnetic  field  that  links  with  coil  2,  causing  an  induced  voltage  in 
coil  2  and  a  momentary  deflection  of  the  ammeter.  When  the  current  in  coil  1  reaches  a  steady  value,  the 
ammeter  returns  to  zero.  If  switch  S  is  now  opened  as  in  figure  2- 13(B),  the  ammeter  (A)  deflects 
momentarily  in  the  opposite  direction,  indicating  a  momentary  flow  of  current  in  the  opposite  direction  in 
coil  2.  This  current  in  coil  2  is  produced  by  the  collapsing  magnetic  field  of  coil  1. 


Figure  2-13. — Mutual  inductance. 

Q12.     Define  mutual  inductance. 

FACTORS  AFFECTING  MUTUAL  INDUCTANCE 

The  mutual  inductance  of  two  adjacent  coils  is  dependent  upon  the  physical  dimensions  of  the  two 
coils,  the  number  of  turns  in  each  coil,  the  distance  between  the  two  coils,  the  relative  positions  of  the 
axes  of  the  two  coils,  and  the  permeability  of  the  cores. 

The  COEFFICIENT  OF  COUPLING  between  two  coils  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  flux  cutting  one 
coil  to  the  flux  originated  in  the  other  coil.  If  the  two  coils  are  so  positioned  with  respect  to  each  other  so 
that  all  of  the  flux  of  one  coil  cuts  all  of  the  turns  of  the  other,  the  coils  are  said  to  have  a  unity  coefficient 
of  coupling.  It  is  never  exactly  equal  to  unity  (1),  but  it  approaches  this  value  in  certain  types  of  coupling 
devices.  If  all  of  the  flux  produced  by  one  coil  cuts  only  half  the  turns  of  the  other  coil,  the  coefficient  of 
coupling  is  0.5.  The  coefficient  of  coupling  is  designated  by  the  letter  K. 

The  mutual  inductance  between  two  coils,  L!  and  L2,  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  inductance  of  each 
coil  and  the  coefficient  of  coupling  K.  As  a  formula: 


2-16 


where:     M=  Mutual  inductance  in  he  rays 
K=  Coefficient  of  coupling 
L],  L2  =  Inductance  of  coil  in  henry  5 


Example  problem: 

One  1 0-H  coil  and  one  20-H  coil  are  connected  in  series  and  are  physically  close  enough  to  each 
other  so  that  their  coefficient  of  coupling  is  0.5.  What  is  the  mutual  inductance  between  the  coils? 


Use  the  formula:    M  =  K^/L  jL 2 

M  =  0.57(10H)(20H) 

M  =  0.5V200H 
M  =  0.5  x  UUH 
M  =  7.07H 

Q13.    When  are  two  circuits  said  to  be  coupled? 

Q14.    What  is  meant  by  the  coefficient  of  coupling? 

SERIES  INDUCTORS  WITHOUT  MAGNETIC  COUPLING 

When  inductors  are  well  shielded  or  are  located  far  enough  apart  from  one  another,  the  effect  of 
mutual  inductance  is  negligible.  If  there  is  no  mutual  inductance  (magnetic  coupling)  and  the  inductors 
are  connected  in  series,  the  total  inductance  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  individual  inductances.  As  a 
formula: 

LT  =l,  +L?  +U+..U 


where  LT  is  the  total  inductance;  L  i,  L2,  L3  are  the  inductances  of  Li,  L2,  L3;  and  Ln  means  that  any 
number  (n)  of  inductors  may  be  used.  The  inductances  of  inductors  in  series  are  added  together  like  the 
resistances  of  resistors  in  series. 

SERIES  INDUCTORS  WITH  MAGNETIC  COUPLING 

When  two  inductors  in  series  are  so  arranged  that  the  field  of  one  links  the  other,  the  combined 
inductance  is  determined  as  follows: 

LT  =  Li  +  L-2  ±2M 

where:      LT  =  The  total  inductance 

LjL2  =  The  inductances  of  Lj  L2 

M  =  The  mutual  inductance  between 
the  two  inductors 


2-17 


The  plus  sign  is  used  with  M  when  the  magnetic  fields  of  the  two  inductors  are  aiding  each  other,  as 
shown  in  figure  2-14.  The  minus  sign  is  used  with  M  when  the  magnetic  field  of  the  two  inductors  oppose 
each  other,  as  shown  in  figure  2-15.  The  factor  2M  accounts  for  the  influence  of  L!  on  L2  and  L2  on  Lx. 


o 

 O-  O  1|||||  

Figure  2-14. — Series  inductors  with  aiding  fields. 


1  •      'I'I'I  ' 

Figure  2-15. — Series  inductors  with  opposing  fields. 

Example  problem: 

A  10-H  coil  is  connected  in  series  with  a  5-H  coil  so  the  fields  aid  each  other.  Their  mutual 
inductance  is  7  H.  What  is  the  combined  inductance  of  the  coils? 

Use  the  formula:  LT=L1+L2+2M 

LT  =10  H  +  5H  +  2(7  H) 
LT  =29  H 

Q15.    Two  series-connected  7-H  inductors  are  adjacent  to  each  other;  their  coefficient  of  coupling  is 
0. 64.  What  is  the  value  of  M? 


2-18 


Q16.    A  circuit  contains  two  series  inductors  aligned  in  such  a  way  that  their  magnetic  fields  oppose 
each  other.  What  formula  should  you  use  to  compute  total  inductance  in  this  circuit? 

Ql  7.    The  magnetic  fields  of  two  coils  are  aiding  each  other.  The  inductance  of  the  coils  are  3  H  and 
5  H,  respectively.  The  coils'  mutual  inductance  is  5  H.  What  is  their  combined  inductance? 

PARALLEL  INDUCTORS  WITHOUT  COUPLING 

The  total  inductance  (LT)  of  inductors  in  parallel  is  calculated  in  the  same  manner  that  the  total 
resistance  of  resistors  in  parallel  is  calculated,  provided  the  coefficient  of  coupling  between  the  coils  is 
zero.  Expressed  mathematically: 

J—=J-  +  J-  +  A_  +  1 
LT     Ll     L2     L3  LN 


SUMMARY 

The  important  points  of  this  chapter  are  summarized  below.  Study  this  information  before 
continuing,  as  this  information  will  lay  the  foundation  for  later  chapters. 

INDUCTANCE — The  characteristic  of  an  electrical  circuit  that  opposes  a  change  in  current.  The 
reaction  (opposition)  is  caused  by  the  creation  or  destruction  of  a  magnetic  field.  When  current  starts  to 
flow,  magnetic  lines  of  force  are  created.  These  lines  of  force  cut  the  conductor  inducing  a  counter  emf  in 
a  direction  that  opposes  current. 


INDUCTANCE  OPPOSES  ANY  CHANGE 
IN  CIRCUIT  CURRENT 

+ 

WHEN  THE 
CURRENT 
INCREASES, 
INDUCTANCE 
TRIES  TO  HOLD 
IT  DOWN 

0 

+ 

0 

WHEN  THE 
CURRENT 
DECREASES, 
INDUCTANCE 
TRIES  TO  HOLD 
IT  UP 

2-19 


SELF-INDUCTANCE — The  process  by  which  a  circuit  induces  an  emf  into  itself  by  its  own 
moving  magnetic  field.  All  electrical  circuits  possess  self-inductance.  This  opposition  (inductance), 
however,  only  takes  place  when  there  is  a  change  in  current.  Inductance  does  NOT  oppose  current,  only  a 
CHANGE  in  current.  The  property  of  inductance  can  be  increased  by  forming  the  conductor  into  a  loop, 
hi  a  loop,  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  affect  more  of  the  conductor  at  one  time.  This  increases  the  self- 
induced  emf. 


INDUCTANCE  OF  A  COIL — The  property  of  inductance  can  be  further  increased  if  the  conductor 
is  formed  into  a  coil.  Because  a  coil  contains  more  loops,  more  of  the  conductor  can  be  affected  by  the 
magnetic  field.  Inductors  (coils)  are  classified  according  to  core  type.  The  core  material  is  normally  either 
air  or  soft  iron. 


2-20 


(A)  (B) 


FACTORS  AFFECTING  COIL  INDUCTANCE— The  inductance  of  a  coil  is  entirely  dependent 
upon  its  physical  construction.  Some  of  the  factors  affecting  the  inductance  are: 

•    The  number  of  turns  in  the  coil.  Increasing  the  number  of  turns  will  increase  the  inductance. 


•    The  coil  diameter.  The  inductance  increases  directly  as  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  coil 
increases. 


2-21 


(A) 


(B) 


The  length  of  the  coil.  When  the  length  of  the  coil  is  increased  while  keeping  the  number  of 
turns  the  same,  the  turn-spacing  is  increased.  This  decreases  the  inductance  of  the  coil. 


(A)  WIDELY  SPACED 


(B)  CLOSELY  WOUND 


The  type  of  core  material.  Increasing  the  permeability  of  the  core  results  in  increasing  the 
inductance  of  the  coil. 


(A)  air  CORE 


(B)  SOFT-IRON  CORE 


Winding  the  coil  in  layers.  The  more  layers  used  to  form  a  coil,  the  greater  effect  the  magnetic 
field  has  on  the  conductor.  By  layering  a  coil,  you  can  increase  the  inductance. 


2-22 


UNIT  OF  INDUCTANCE— Inductance  (L)  is  measured  in  henrys  (H).  An  inductor  has  an 
inductance  of  one  henry  (H)  if  an  emf  of  one  volt  is  induced  in  the  inductor  when  the  current  through  the 
inductor  is  changing  at  the  rate  of  1  ampere  per  second.  Common  units  of  inductance  are  henry  (H), 
millihenry  (mH)  and  the  microhenry  (uH). 

GROWTH  AND  DECAY  OF  CURRENT  IN  AN  LR  CIRCUIT— The  required  for  the  current  in 
an  inductor  to  increase  to  63.2  percent  of  the  maximum  current  or  to  decrease  to  36.8  percent  of  the 
maximum  current  is  known  as  the  time  constant.  The  letter  symbol  for  an  LR  time  constant  is  L/R.  As  a 
formula: 


L 
R ' 

As  a  formula: 


h  ■,     L  (in  henrys) 
t  (in  seconds)  =  zr±. — : — Lr-L 
R  (in  ohms) 


or 


t  (in  microseconds)  =  L  (in  rnicrohenrvs) 
R  (in  ohms) 


2-23 


The  time  constant  of  an  LR  circuit  may  also  be  defined  as  the  time  required  for  the  current  in  the  inductor 
to  grow  or  decay  to  its  final  value  if  it  continued  to  grow  or  decay  at  its  initial  rate.  For  all  practical 
purposes,  the  current  in  the  inductor  reaches  a  maximum  value  in  5  "Time  Constants"  and  decreases  to 
zero  in  5  "Time  Constants". 

POWER  LOSSES  IN  AN  INDUCTOR— Since  an  inductor  (coil)  contains  a  number  turns  of  wire, 
and  all  wire  has  some  resistance,  the  inductor  has  a  certain  amount  of  resistance.  This  resistance  is  usually 
very  small  and  has  a  negligible  effect  on  current.  However,  there  are  power  losses  in  an  inductor.  The 
main  power  losses  in  an  inductor  are  copper  loss,  hysteresis  loss,  and  eddy-current  loss.  Copper  loss  can 
be  calculated  by  multiplying  the  square  of  the  current  by  the  resistance  of  the  wire  in  the  coil  (I2R). 
Hysteresis  loss  is  due  to  power  that  is  consumed  in  reversing  the  magnetic  field  of  the  core  each  time  the 
current  direction  changes.  Eddy-current  loss  is  due  to  core  heating  caused  by  circulating  currents  induced 
in  an  iron  core  by  the  magnetic  field  of  the  coil. 

MUTUAL  INDUCTANCE— When  two  coils  are  located  so  that  the  flux  from  one  coil  cuts  the 
turns  of  the  other  coil,  the  coils  have  mutual  inductance.  The  amount  of  mutual  inductance  depends  upon 
several  factors:  the  relative  position  of  the  axes  of  the  two  coils;  the  permeability  of  the  cores;  the 
physical  dimensions  of  the  two  coils;  the  number  of  turns  in  each  coil,  and  the  distance  between  the  coils. 
The  coefficient  of  coupling  K  specifies  the  amount  of  coupling  between  the  coils.  If  all  of  the  flux  from 
one  coil  cuts  all  of  the  turns  of  the  other  coil,  the  coefficient  of  coupling  K  is  1  or  unity.  If  none  of  the 
flux  from  one  coil  cuts  the  turns  of  the  other  coil,  the  coefficient  of  coupling  is  zero.  The  mutual 
inductance  between  two  coils  (Lj  and  L2)  may  be  expressed  mathematically  as: 


2-24 


(A)  INDUCTORS  CLOSE  —  LARGE  M 


(B)  INDUCTORS  FAR  APART  --  SMALL  M 

L'tl'))) )  rrr  , 

(0  INDUCTOR  AXES  PERPENDICULAR  ~  NO  M 


COMPUTING  THE  INDUCTANCE  OF  A  CIRCUIT— When  the  total  inductance  of  a  circuit  is 
computed,  the  individual  inductive  values  are  treated  the  same  as  resistance  values.  The  inductances  of 
inductors  in  series  are  added  like  the  resistances  of  resistors  in  series.  That  is, 

LT  =L1+L2+L3....+L, 

The  inductances  of  inductors  in  parallel  are  combined  mathematically  like  the  resistances  of  resistors 
in  parallel.  That  is, 


LT  = 


1 


Ll    L2    L3  LTI 


Both  of  the  above  formulas  are  accurate,  providing  there  is  no  mutual  inductance  between  the 
inductors. 


2-25 


ANSWERS  TO  QUESTIONS  Ql.  THROUGH  Q17. 

Al.     The  henry,  H. 
A2.     Magnetic  field. 

A3.     Inductance  is  the  property  of  a  coil  (or  circuit)  which  opposes  any  CHANGE  in  current. 

A4.     Induced  emf  is  the  emf  which  appears  across  a  conductor  when  there  is  relative  motion  between 
the  conductor  and  a  magnetic  field;  counter  emf  is  the  emf  induced  in  a  conductor  that  opposes 
the  applied  voltage. 

A5.     The  induced  emf  in  any  circuit  is  in  a  direction  to  oppose  the  effect  that  produced  it. 
A6. 

a.  No  effect. 

b.  Inductance  opposes  any  change  in  the  amplitude  of  current. 


A7. 


A8. 


a. 

1.  The  numbers  of  turns  in  a  coil. 

2.  The  type  of  material  used  in  the  core. 

3.  The  diameter  of  the  coil. 

4.  The  coil  length. 

5.  The  number  of  layers  of  windings  in  the  coil. 

b.  Increases  inductance. 

c.  Increases  inductance. 

d.  Decreases  inductance. 

e.  Increases  inductance. 

f.  Increases  inductance. 


a.  Inductance  causes  a  very  large  opposition  to  the  flow  of  current  when  voltage  is  first  applied 
to  an  IR  circuit;  resistance  causes  comparatively  little  opposition  to  current  at  that  time. 

b.  Zero. 

c.  During  current  buildup,  the  voltage  across  the  resistor  gradually  increases  to  the  same 
voltage  as  the  source  voltage;  and  during  current  decay  the  voltage  across  the  resistor 
gradually  drops  to  zero 


2-26 


A9. 

=  L 
~  R 

AlO. 

a.  1.71  amperes. 

b.  5  time  constants. 

c.  2  time  constants. 

All.     Copper  loss;  hysteresis  loss;  eddy-current  loss. 

A12.     Mutual  inductance  is  the  property  existing  between  two  coils  so  positioned  that  flux  from  one  coil 
cuts  the  windings  of  the  other  coil. 

A13.     When  they  are  arranged  so  that  energy  from  one  circuit  is  transferred  to  the  other  circuit. 

A14.     The  ratio  of  the  fines  of force  produced  by  one  coil  to  the  lines  of force  that  link  another  coil.  It  is 
never  greater  than  one. 

A15. 

448  H  (b ecause  M  =  KjM  x  7H  =  0.64  x  7H  =  448H) 

A16. 

LT  =L!+L2  -2M 

All. 

L  j  =  18  H  (because  LT  =Ll  +  Lz  +2M 

LT  =3H  +  5H  +  2(5H)  =  18H) 


2-27 


CHAPTER  3 

CAPACITANCE 


LEARNING  OBJECTIVES 

Upon  completion  of  this  chapter  you  will  be  able  to: 

1.  Define  the  terms  "capacitor"  and  "capacitance." 

2.  State  four  characteristics  of  electrostatic  lines  of  force. 

3.  State  the  effect  that  an  electrostatic  field  has  on  a  charged  particle. 

4.  State  the  basic  parts  of  a  capacitor. 

5.  Define  the  term  "farad". 

6.  State  the  mathematical  relationship  between  a  farad,  a  microfarad,  and  a  picofarad. 

7.  State  three  factors  that  affect  the  value  of  capacitance. 

8.  Given  the  dielectric  constant  and  the  area  of  and  the  distance  between  the  plates  of  a  capacitor, 
solve  for  capacitance. 

9.  State  two  types  of  power  losses  associated  with  capacitors. 

10.  Define  the  term  "working  voltage"  of  a  capacitor,  and  compute  the  working  voltage  of  a  capacitor. 

1 1 .  State  what  happens  to  the  electrons  in  a  capacitor  when  the  capacitor  is  charging  and  when  it  is 
discharging. 

12.  State  the  relationship  between  voltage  and  time  in  an  RC  circuit  when  the  circuit  is  charging  and 
discharging. 

13.  State  the  relationship  between  the  voltage  drop  across  a  resistor  and  the  source  voltage  in  an  RC 
circuit. 

14.  Given  the  component  values  of  an  RC  circuit,  compute  the  RC  time  constant. 

15.  Use  the  universal  time  constant  chart  to  determine  the  value  of  an  unknown  capacitor  in  an  RC 
circuit. 

16.  Calculate  the  value  of  total  capacitance  in  a  circuit  containing  capacitors  of  known  value  in  series. 

17.  Calculate  the  value  of  total  capacitance  in  a  circuit  containing  capacitors  of  known  value  in 
parallel. 

18.  State  the  difference  between  different  types  of  capacitors. 

19.  Determine  the  electrical  values  of  capacitors  using  the  color  code. 


3-1 


CAPACITANCE 


In  the  previous  chapter  you  learned  that  inductance  is  the  property  of  a  coil  that  causes  electrical  energy 
to  be  stored  in  a  magnetic  field  about  the  coil.  The  energy  is  stored  in  such  a  way  as  to  oppose  any  change  in 
current.  CAPACITANCE  is  similar  to  inductance  because  it  also  causes  a  storage  of  energy.  A 
CAPACITOR  is  a  device  that  stores  electrical  energy  in  an  ELECTROSTATIC  FIELD.  The  energy  is  stored 
in  such  a  way  as  to  oppose  any  change  in  voltage.  Just  how  capacitance  opposes  a  change  in  voltage  is 
explained  later  in  this  chapter.  However,  it  is  first  necessary  to  explain  the  principles  of  an  electrostatic  field 
as  it  is  applied  to  capacitance. 

Ql.    Define  the  terms  "capacitor"  and  "capacitance. " 


THE  ELECTROSTATIC  FIELD 

You  previously  learned  that  opposite  electrical  charges  attract  each  other  while  like  electrical  charges  repel  each 
other.  The  reason  for  this  is  the  existence  of  an  electrostatic  field.  Any  charged  particle  is  surrounded  by  invisible  lines 
of  force,  called  electrostatic  lines  of  force.  These  lines  of  force  have  some  interesting  characteristics: 

•  They  are  polarized  from  positive  to  negative. 

•  They  radiate  from  a  charged  particle  in  straight  lines  and  do  not  form  closed  loops. 

•  They  have  the  ability  to  pass  through  any  known  material. 

•  They  have  the  ability  to  distort  the  orbits  of  tightly  bound  electrons. 

Examine  figure  3-1.  This  figure  represents  two  unlike  charges  surrounded  by  their  electrostatic  field. 
Because  an  electrostatic  field  is  polarized  positive  to  negative,  arrows  are  shown  radiating  away  from  the 
positive  charge  and  toward  the  negative  charge.  Stated  another  way,  the  field  from  the  positive  charge  is 
pushing,  while  the  field  from  the  negative  charge  is  pulling.  The  effect  of  the  field  is  to  push  and  pull  the 
unlike  charges  together. 


Figure  3-1. — Electrostatic  field  attracts  two  unlike  charged  particles. 

In  figure  3-2,  two  like  charges  are  shown  with  their  surrounding  electrostatic  field.  The  effect  of  the 
electrostatic  field  is  to  push  the  charges  apart. 


Figure  3-2. — Electrostatic  field  repels  two  like  charged  particles. 


3-2 


If  two  unlike  charges  are  placed  on  opposite  sides  of  an  atom  whose  outermost  electrons  cannot  escape 
their  orbits,  the  orbits  of  the  electrons  are  distorted  as  shown  in  figure  3-3.  Figure  3-3(A)  shows  the  normal 
orbit.  Part  (B)  of  the  figure  shows  the  same  orbit  in  the  presence  of  charged  particles.  Since  the  electron  is  a 
negative  charge,  the  positive  charge  attracts  the  electrons,  pulling  the  electrons  closer  to  the  positive  charge. 
The  negative  charge  repels  the  electrons,  pushing  them  further  from  the  negative  charge.  It  is  this  ability  of 
an  electrostatic  field  to  attract  and  to  repel  charges  that  allows  the  capacitor  to  store  energy. 


Figure  3-3. — Distortion  of  electron  orbital  paths  due  to  electrostatic  force. 

Q2.    State  four  characteristics  of  electrostatic  lines  of  force. 

Q3.    An  electron  moves  into  the  electrostatic  field  between  a  positive  charge  and  a  negative  charge. 
Toward  which  charge  will  the  electron  move? 

THE  SIMPLE  CAPACITOR 

A  simple  capacitor  consists  of  two  metal  plates  separated  by  an  insulating  material  called  a  dielectric, 
as  illustrated  in  figure  3-4.  Note  that  one  plate  is  connected  to  the  positive  terminal  of  a  battery;  the  other 
plate  is  connected  through  a  closed  switch  (SI)  to  the  negative  terminal  of  the  battery.  Remember,  an 
insulator  is  a  material  whose  electrons  cannot  easily  escape  their  orbits.  Due  to  the  battery  voltage,  plate  A  is 
charged  positively  and  plate  B  is  charged  negatively.  (How  this  happens  is  explained  later  in  this  chapter.) 
Thus  an  electrostatic  field  is  set  up  between  the  positive  and  negative  plates.  The  electrons  on  the  negative 
plate  (plate  B)  are  attracted  to  the  positive  charges  on  the  positive  plate  (plate  A). 


3-3 


PLATE  A- 


0 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

0 

© 

© 

© 

0 

0 

© 

PLATE  B 


7 


ELECTRON 
NUCLEUS 

DISTORTED 
ORBIT 


NORMAL 
ORBIT 


Figure  3-4. — Distortion  of  electron  orbits  in  a  dielectric. 

Notice  that  the  orbits  of  the  electrons  in  the  dielectric  material  are  distorted  by  the  electrostatic  field. 
The  distortion  occurs  because  the  electrons  in  the  dielectric  are  attracted  to  the  top  plate  while  being  repelled 
from  the  bottom  plate.  When  switch  SI  is  opened,  the  battery  is  removed  from  the  circuit  and  the  charge  is 
retained  by  the  capacitor.  This  occurs  because  the  dielectric  material  is  an  insulator,  and  the  electrons  in  the 
bottom  plate  (negative  charge)  have  no  path  to  reach  the  top  plate  (positive  charge).  The  distorted  orbits  of 
the  atoms  of  the  dielectric  plus  the  electrostatic  force  of  attraction  between  the  two  plates  hold  the  positive 
and  negative  charges  in  their  original  position.  Thus,  the  energy  which  came  from  the  battery  is  now  stored 
in  the  electrostatic  field  of  the  capacitor.  Two  slightly  different  symbols  for  representing  a  capacitor  are 
shown  in  figure  3-5.  Notice  that  each  symbol  is  composed  of  two  plates  separated  by  a  space  that  represents 
the  dielectric.  The  curved  plate  in  (B)  of  the  figure  indicates  the  plate  should  be  connected  to  a  negative 
polarity. 

Hh- 


(A) 


(B) 

Figure  3-5. — Circuit  symbols  for  capacitors. 

Q4.    What  are  the  basic  parts  of  a  capacitor? 
THE  FARAD 


Capacitance  is  measured  in  units  called  FARADS.  A  one -farad  capacitor  stores  one  coulomb  (a  unit  of 
charge  (Q)  equal  to  6.28  x  1018  electrons)  of  charge  when  a  potential  of  1  volt  is  applied  across  the  terminals 
of  the  capacitor.  This  can  be  expressed  by  the  formula: 

Q  (coulombs) 
C(faIadS)°  Efrfc) 


3-4 


The  farad  is  a  very  large  unit  of  measurement  of  capacitance.  For  convenience,  the  microfarad 
(abbreviated  uF)  or  the  picofarad  (abbreviated  uF)  is  used.  One  (1.0)  microfarad  is  equal  to  0.000001  farad 
or  1  x  10"6  farad,  and  1.0  picofarad  is  equal  to  0.000000000001  farad  or  1.0  x  10  12  farad.  Capacitance  is  a 
physical  property  of  the  capacitor  and  does  not  depend  on  circuit  characteristics  of  voltage,  current,  and 
resistance.  A  given  capacitor  always  has  the  same  value  of  capacitance  (farads)  in  one  circuit  as  in  any  other 
circuit  in  which  it  is  connected. 

Q5.    Define  the  term  "farad.  " 

Q6.    What  is  the  mathematical  relationship  between  a  farad,  a  microfarad,  and  a  picofarad. 
FACTORS  AFFECTING  THE  VALUE  OF  CAPACITANCE 
The  value  of  capacitance  of  a  capacitor  depends  on  three  factors: 

•  The  area  of  the  plates. 

•  The  distance  between  the  plates. 

•  The  dielectric  constant  of  the  material  between  the  plates. 

PLATE  AREA  affects  the  value  of  capacitance  in  the  same  manner  that  the  size  of  a  container  affects 
the  amount  of  water  that  can  be  held  by  the  container.  A  capacitor  with  the  large  plate  area  can  store  more 
charges  than  a  capacitor  with  a  small  plate  area.  Simply  stated,  "the  larger  the  plate  area,  the  larger  the 
capacitance". 

The  second  factor  affecting  capacitance  is  the  DISTANCE  BETWEEN  THE  PLATES.  Electrostatic 
lines  of  force  are  strongest  when  the  charged  particles  that  create  them  are  close  together.  When  the  charged 
particles  are  moved  further  apart,  the  lines  of  force  weaken,  and  the  ability  to  store  a  charge  decreases. 

The  third  factor  affecting  capacitance  is  the  DIELECTRIC  CONSTANT  of  the  insulating  material 
between  the  plates  of  a  capacitor.  The  various  insulating  materials  used  as  the  dielectric  in  a  capacitor  differ 
in  their  ability  to  respond  to  (pass)  electrostatic  lines  of  force.  A  dielectric  material,  or  insulator,  is  rated  as 
to  its  ability  to  respond  to  electrostatic  lines  of  force  in  terms  of  a  figure  called  the  DIELECTRIC 
CONSTANT.  A  dielectric  material  with  a  high  dielectric  constant  is  a  better  insulator  than  a  dielectric 
material  with  a  low  dielectric  constant.  Dielectric  constants  for  some  common  materials  are  given  in  the 
following  list: 


3-5 


Material 


Constant 


Vacuum  1.0000 

Air  1.0006 

Paraffin  paper  3.5 

Glass  5  to  10 

Mica  3  to  6 

Rubber  2.5  to  35 

Wood  2.5  to  8 

Glycerine  (15°C)  56 

Petroleum  2 

Pure  water  8 1 


Notice  the  dielectric  constant  for  a  vacuum.  Since  a  vacuum  is  the  standard  of  reference,  it  is  assigned  a 
constant  of  one.  The  dielectric  constants  of  all  materials  are  compared  to  that  of  a  vacuum.  Since  the 
dielectric  constant  of  air  has  been  determined  to  be  approximately  the  same  as  that  of  a  vacuum,  the 
dielectric  constant  of  AIR  is  also  considered  to  be  equal  to  one. 

The  formula  used  to  compute  the  value  of  capacitance  is: 

KA 

C=  0.2249  (—) 
d 

Where  C=  capacitance  in  picofarads 


A=  area  of  one  plate,  in  square  inches 

d  =  distance  betwe  en  the  plates, in  inches 

K  =  dielectric  constant  of  the  insulating 
material 

0.2249  =  a  constant  resulting  from  conversion 
from  Metric  to  English  units, 


Example:  Find  the  capacitance  of  a  parallel  plate  capacitor  with  paraffin  paper  as  the  dielectric. 


3-6 


Given:  K 
d 
A 

Solution:  C 

C 
C 

By  examining  the  above  formula  you  can  see  that  capacitance  varies  directly  as  the  dielectric  constant 
and  the  area  of  the  capacitor  plates,  and  inversely  as  the  distance  between  the  plates. 

Q7.    State  three  factors  that  affect  the  capacitance  of  a  capacitor. 

Q8.    A  parallel  plate  capacitor  has  the  following  values:  K  —  81,  d  —  .025  inches,  A  —  6  square  inches. 
What  is  the  capacitance  of  the  capacitor? 


VOLTAGE  RATING  OF  CAPACITORS 

In  selecting  or  substituting  a  capacitor  for  use,  consideration  must  be  given  to  (1)  the  value  of 
capacitance  desired  and  (2)  the  amount  of  voltage  to  be  applied  across  the  capacitor.  If  the  voltage  applied 
across  the  capacitor  is  too  great,  the  dielectric  will  break  down  and  arcing  will  occur  between  the  capacitor 
plates.  When  this  happens  the  capacitor  becomes  a  short-circuit  and  the  flow  of  direct  current  through  it  can 
cause  damage  to  other  electronic  parts.  Each  capacitor  has  a  voltage  rating  (a  working  voltage)  that  should 
not  be  exceeded. 

The  working  voltage  of  the  capacitor  is  the  maximum  voltage  that  can  be  steadily  applied  without 
danger  of  breaking  down  the  dielectric.  The  working  voltage  depends  on  the  type  of  material  used  as  the 
dielectric  and  on  the  thickness  of  the  dialectic.  (A  high-voltage  capacitor  that  has  a  thick  dielectric  must 
have  a  relatively  large  plate  area  in  order  to  have  the  same  capacitance  as  a  similar  low-voltage  capacitor 
having  a  thin  dielectric.)  The  working  voltage  also  depends  on  the  applied  frequency  because  the  losses,  and 
the  resultant  heating  effect,  increase  as  the  frequency  increases. 

A  capacitor  with  a  voltage  rating  of  500  volts  dc  cannot  be  safely  subjected  to  an  alternating  voltage  or 
a  pulsating  direct  voltage  having  an  effective  value  of  500  volts.  Since  an  alternating  voltage  of  500  volts 
(rms)  has  a  peak  value  of  707  volts,  a  capacitor  to  which  it  is  applied  should  have  a  working  voltage  of  at 
least  750  volts.  In  practice,  a  capacitor  should  be  selected  so  that  its  working  voltage  is  at  least  50  percent 
greater  than  the  highest  effective  voltage  to  be  applied  to  it. 


CAPACITOR  LOSSES 

Power  loss  in  a  capacitor  may  be  attributed  to  dielectric  hysteresis  and  dielectric  leakage.  Dielectric 
hysteresis  may  be  defined  as  an  effect  in  a  dielectric  material  similar  to  the  hysteresis  found  in  a  magnetic 
material.  It  is  the  result  of  changes  in  orientation  of  electron  orbits  in  the  dielectric  because  of  the  rapid 
reversals  of  the  polarity  of  the  line  voltage.  The  amount  of  power  loss  due  to  dielectric  hysteresis  depends 
upon  the  type  of  dielectric  used.  A  vacuum  dielectric  has  the  smallest  power  loss. 


=  3.5 

0.05  inch 
:  12  square  inches 
KA 

0.2249  (—) 
d 

0.2249  (^) 
0.05 

=  189  picofarads 


3-7 


Dielectric  leakage  occurs  in  a  capacitor  as  the  result  of  LEAKAGE  CURRENT  through  the  dielectric. 
Normally  it  is  assumed  that  the  dielectric  will  effectively  prevent  the  flow  of  current  through  the  capacitor. 
Although  the  resistance  of  the  dielectric  is  extremely  high,  a  minute  amount  of  current  does  flow.  Ordinarily 
this  current  is  so  small  that  for  all  practical  purposes  it  is  ignored.  However,  if  the  leakage  through  the 
dielectric  is  abnormally  high,  there  will  be  a  rapid  loss  of  charge  and  an  overheating  of  the  capacitor. 

The  power  loss  of  a  capacitor  is  determined  by  loss  in  the  dielectric.  If  the  loss  is  negligible  and  the 
capacitor  returns  the  total  charge  to  the  circuit,  it  is  considered  to  be  a  perfect  capacitor  with  a  power  loss  of 
zero. 

Q9.    Name  two  types  of  power  losses  associated  with  a  capacitor. 
Q10. 

a.  Define  the  term  "working  voltage"  of  a  capacitor. 

b.  What  should  be  the  working  voltage  of  a  capacitor  in  a  circuit  that  is  operating  at  600  volts? 

CHARGING  AND  DISCHARGING  A  CAPACITOR 

CHARGING 

In  order  to  better  understand  the  action  of  a  capacitor  in  conjunction  with  other  components,  the  charge 
and  discharge  actions  of  a  purely  capacitive  circuit  are  analyzed  first.  For  ease  of  explanation  the  capacitor 
and  voltage  source  shown  in  figure  3-6  are  assumed  to  be  perfect  (no  internal  resistance),  although  this  is 
impossible  in  practice. 

In  figure  3-6(A),  an  uncharged  capacitor  is  shown  connected  to  a  four-position  switch.  With  the  switch 
in  position  1  the  circuit  is  open  and  no  voltage  is  applied  to  the  capacitor.  Initially  each  plate  of  the  capacitor 
is  a  neutral  body  and  until  a  difference  of  potential  is  impressed  across  the  capacitor,  no  electrostatic  field 
can  exist  between  the  plates. 


3-8 


(A) UNCHARGED 


(IX 


r 


1  


— M2) 

(3) 

ELECTRON  - 


14) 


FLOW 


c  O 
+ 


(B)  CHARGING 

Figure  3-6. — Charging  a  capacitor. 

To  CHARGE  the  capacitor,  the  switch  must  be  thrown  to  position  2,  which  places  the  capacitor  across 
the  terminals  of  the  battery.  Under  the  assumed  perfect  conditions,  the  capacitor  would  reach  full  charge 
instantaneously.  However,  the  charging  action  is  spread  out  over  a  period  of  time  in  the  following 
discussion  so  that  a  step-by-step  analysis  can  be  made. 

At  the  instant  the  switch  is  thrown  to  position  2  (fig.  3-6(B)),  a  displacement  of  electrons  occurs 
simultaneously  in  all  parts  of  the  circuit.  This  electron  displacement  is  directed  away  from  the  negative 
terminal  and  toward  the  positive  terminal  of  the  source  (the  battery).  A  brief  surge  of  current  will  flow  as 
the  capacitor  charges. 

If  it  were  possible  to  analyze  the  motion  of  the  individual  electrons  in  this  surge  of  charging  current, 
the  following  action  would  be  observed.  See  figure  3-7. 


Figure  3-7. — Electron  motion  during  charge. 


3-9 


At  the  instant  the  switch  is  closed,  the  positive  terminal  of  the  battery  extracts  an  electron  from  the 
bottom  conductor.  The  negative  terminal  of  the  battery  forces  an  electron  into  the  top  conductor.  At  this 
same  instant  an  electron  is  forced  into  the  top  plate  of  the  capacitor  and  another  is  pulled  from  the  bottom 
plate.  Thus,  in  every  part  of  the  circuit  a  clockwise  DISPLACEMENT  of  electrons  occurs  simultaneously. 

As  electrons  accumulate  on  the  top  plate  of  the  capacitor  and  others  depart  from  the  bottom  plate,  a 
difference  of  potential  develops  across  the  capacitor.  Each  electron  forced  onto  the  top  plate  makes  that 
plate  more  negative,  while  each  electron  removed  from  the  bottom  causes  the  bottom  plate  to  become  more 
positive.  Notice  that  the  polarity  of  the  voltage  which  builds  up  across  the  capacitor  is  such  as  to  oppose  the 
source  voltage.  The  source  voltage  (emf)  forces  current  around  the  circuit  of  figure  3-7  in  a  clockwise 
direction.  The  emf  developed  across  the  capacitor,  however,  has  a  tendency  to  force  the  current  in  a 
counterclockwise  direction,  opposing  the  source  emf.  As  the  capacitor  continues  to  charge,  the  voltage 
across  the  capacitor  rises  until  it  is  equal  to  the  source  voltage.  Once  the  capacitor  voltage  equals  the  source 
voltage,  the  two  voltages  balance  one  another  and  current  ceases  to  flow  in  the  circuit. 

In  studying  the  charging  process  of  a  capacitor,  you  must  be  aware  that  NO  current  flows  THROUGH 
the  capacitor.  The  material  between  the  plates  of  the  capacitor  must  be  an  insulator.  However,  to  an 
observer  stationed  at  the  source  or  along  one  of  the  circuit  conductors,  the  action  has  all  the  appearances  of 
a  true  flow  of  current,  even  though  the  insulating  material  between  the  plates  of  the  capacitor  prevents  the 
current  from  having  a  complete  path.  The  current  which  appears  to  flow  through  a  capacitor  is  called 
DISPLACEMENT  CURRENT. 

When  a  capacitor  is  fully  charged  and  the  source  voltage  is  equaled  by  the  counter  electromotive  force 
(cemf)  across  the  capacitor,  the  electrostatic  field  between  the  plates  of  the  capacitor  is  maximum.  (Look 
again  at  figure  3-4.)  Since  the  electrostatic  field  is  maximum  the  energy  stored  in  the  dielectric  is  also 
maximum. 

If  the  switch  is  now  opened  as  shown  in  figure  3-8(A),  the  electrons  on  the  upper  plate  are  isolated. 
The  electrons  on  the  top  plate  are  attracted  to  the  charged  bottom  plate.  Because  the  dielectric  is  an 
insulator,  the  electrons  can  not  cross  the  dielectric  to  the  bottom  plate.  The  charges  on  both  plates  will  be 
effectively  trapped  by  the  electrostatic  field  and  the  capacitor  will  remain  charged  indefinitely.  You  should 
note  at  this  point  that  the  insulating  dielectric  material  in  a  practical  capacitor  is  not  perfect  and  small 
leakage  current  will  flow  through  the  dielectric.  This  current  will  eventually  dissipate  the  charge.  However, 
a  high  quality  capacitor  may  hold  its  charge  for  a  month  or  more. 


3-10 


(!)• 


(A)  CHARGED 


UK 


(B)  DISCHARGING 

Figure  3-8. — Discharging  a  capacitor. 

To  review  briefly,  when  a  capacitor  is  connected  across  a  voltage  source,  a  surge  of  charging  current 
flows.  This  charging  current  develops  a  cemf  across  the  capacitor  which  opposes  the  applied  voltage.  When 
the  capacitor  is  fully  charged,  the  cemf  is  equal  to  the  applied  voltage  and  charging  current  ceases.  At  full 
charge,  the  electrostatic  field  between  the  plates  is  at  maximum  intensity  and  the  energy  stored  in  the 
dielectric  is  maximum.  If  the  charged  capacitor  is  disconnected  from  the  source,  the  charge  will  be  retained 
for  some  period  of  time.  The  length  of  time  the  charge  is  retained  depends  on  the  amount  of  leakage  current 
present.  Since  electrical  energy  is  stored  in  the  capacitor,  a  charged  capacitor  can  act  as  a  source  emf. 

DISCHARGING 


To  DISCHARGE  a  capacitor,  the  charges  on  the  two  plates  must  be  neutralized.  This  is  accomplished 
by  providing  a  conducting  path  between  the  two  plates  as  shown  in  figure  3-8(B).  With  the  switch  in 
position  (4)  the  excess  electrons  on  the  negative  plate  can  flow  to  the  positive  plate  and  neutralize  its  charge. 
When  the  capacitor  is  discharged,  the  distorted  orbits  of  the  electrons  in  the  dielectric  return  to  their  normal 
positions  and  the  stored  energy  is  returned  to  the  circuit.  It  is  important  for  you  to  note  that  a  capacitor  does 
not  consume  power.  The  energy  the  capacitor  draws  from  the  source  is  recovered  when  the  capacitor  is 
discharged. 

Qll.    State  what  happens  to  the  electrons  in  a  capacitor  circuit  when  (a)  the  capacitor  is  charging  and 
(b)  the  capacitor  is  discharging. 


CHARGE  AND  DISCHARGE  OF  AN  RC  SERIES  CIRCUIT 

Ohm's  law  states  that  the  voltage  across  a  resistance  is  equal  to  the  current  through  the  resistance  times 
the  value  of  the  resistance.  This  means  that  a  voltage  is  developed  across  a  resistance  ONLY  WHEN 
CURRENT  FLOWS  through  the  resistance. 


3-11 


A  capacitor  is  capable  of  storing  or  holding  a  charge  of  electrons.  When  uncharged,  both  plates  of  the 
capacitor  contain  essentially  the  same  number  of  free  electrons.  When  charged,  one  plate  contains  more  free 
electrons  than  the  other  plate.  The  difference  in  the  number  of  electrons  is  a  measure  of  the  charge  on  the 
capacitor.  The  accumulation  of  this  charge  builds  up  a  voltage  across  the  terminals  of  the  capacitor,  and  the 
charge  continues  to  increase  until  this  voltage  equals  the  applied  voltage.  The  charge  in  a  capacitor  is  related 
to  the  capacitance  and  voltage  as  follows: 

Q  =  CE, 

in  which  Q  is  the  charge  in  coulombs,  C  the  capacitance  in  farads,  and  E  the  emf  across  the  capacitor  in 
volts. 

CHARGE  CYCLE 

A  voltage  divider  containing  resistance  and  capacitance  is  connected  in  a  circuit  by  means  of  a  switch, 
as  shown  at  the  top  of  figure  3-9.  Such  a  series  arrangement  is  called  an  RC  series  circuit. 


t0  t,  to  tl 


Figure  3-9. — Charge  of  an  RC  series  circuit. 

In  explaining  the  charge  and  discharge  cycles  of  an  RC  series  circuit,  the  time  interval  from  time  t0 
(time  zero,  when  the  switch  is  first  closed)  to  time  ti  (time  one,  when  the  capacitor  reaches  full  charge  or 
discharge  potential)  will  be  used.  (Note  that  switches  S 1  and  S2  move  at  the  same  time  and  can  never  both 
be  closed  at  the  same  time.) 

3-12 


When  switch  SI  of  the  circuit  in  figure  3-9  is  closed  at  t0,  the  source  voltage  (Es)  is  instantly  felt  across 
the  entire  circuit.  Graph  (A)  of  the  figure  shows  an  instantaneous  rise  at  time  t0  from  zero  to  source  voltage 
(Es  =  6  volts).  The  total  voltage  can  be  measured  across  the  circuit  between  points  1  and  2.  Now  look  at 
graph  (B)  which  represents  the  charging  current  in  the  capacitor  (ic).  At  time  to,  charging  current  is 
MAXIMUM.  As  time  elapses  toward  time  ti,  there  is  a  continuous  decrease  in  current  flowing  into  the 
capacitor.  The  decreasing  flow  is  caused  by  the  voltage  buildup  across  the  capacitor.  At  time  ti,  current 
flowing  in  the  capacitor  stops.  At  this  time,  the  capacitor  has  reached  full  charge  and  has  stored  maximum 
energy  in  its  electrostatic  field.  Graph  (C)  represents  the  voltage  drop  (e)  across  the  resistor  (R).  The  value 
of  er  is  determined  by  the  amount  of  current  flowing  through  the  resistor  on  its  way  to  the  capacitor.  At  time 
t0  the  current  flowing  to  the  capacitor  is  maximum.  Thus,  the  voltage  drop  across  the  resistor  is  maximum  (E 
=  IR).  As  time  progresses  toward  time  ti,  the  current  flowing  to  the  capacitor  steadily  decreases  and  causes 
the  voltage  developed  across  the  resistor  (R)  to  steadily  decrease.  When  time  ti  is  reached,  current  flowing 
to  the  capacitor  is  stopped  and  the  voltage  developed  across  the  resistor  has  decreased  to  zero. 

You  should  remember  that  capacitance  opposes  a  change  in  voltage.  This  is  shown  by  comparing  graph 
(A)  to  graph  (D).  In  graph  (A)  the  voltage  changed  instantly  from  0  volts  to  6  volts  across  the  circuit,  while 
the  voltage  developed  across  the  capacitor  in  graph  (D)  took  the  entire  time  interval  from  time  t0  to  time  t]  to 
reach  6  volts.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  in  the  first  instant  at  time  t0,  maximum  current  flows  through  R  and 
the  entire  circuit  voltage  is  dropped  across  the  resistor.  The  voltage  impressed  across  the  capacitor  at  t0  is 
zero  volts.  As  time  progresses  toward  tb  the  decreasing  current  causes  progressively  less  voltage  to  be 
dropped  across  the  resistor  (R),  and  more  voltage  builds  up  across  the  capacitor  (C).  At  time  ti,  the  voltage 
felt  across  the  capacitor  is  equal  to  the  source  voltage  (6  volts),  and  the  voltage  dropped  across  the  resistor 
(R)  is  equal  to  zero.  This  is  the  complete  charge  cycle  of  the  capacitor. 

As  you  may  have  noticed,  the  processes  which  take  place  in  the  time  interval  t0  to  ti  in  a  series  RC 
circuit  are  exactly  opposite  to  those  in  a  series  LR  circuit. 

For  your  comparison,  the  important  points  of  the  charge  cycle  of  RC  and  LR  circuits  are  summarized  in 
table  3-1. 


3-13 


Table  3-1. — Summary  of  Capacitive  and  Inductive  Characteristics 


TIME  ZERO 
(t0) 

TIME  BETWEEN 
t0  AND  tj 

TIME  ONE 

CIRCUIT 
CURRENT 

VOLTAGE 
DEVELOPED 
ACROSS  THE 
RESISTOR 

VOLTAGE 

DEVELOPED 

ACROSS 

CAPACITOR/ 

INDUCTOR 

i 

T 

MAXIMUM 

DECREASING 

ZERO 

ZERO 

INCREASING 

MAXIMUM 

1 

T 

MAXIMUM 

DECREASING 

ZERO 

ZERO 

INCREASING 

MAXIMUM 

i 

T 

ZERO 

INCREASING 

MAXIMUM 

MAXIMUM 

DECREASING 

ZERO 

DISCHARGE  CYCLE 

In  figure  3-10  at  time  t0,  the  capacitor  is  fully  charged.  When  SI  is  open  and  S2  closes,  the  capacitor 
discharge  cycle  starts.  At  the  first  instant,  circuit  voltage  attempts  to  go  from  source  potential  (6  volts)  to 
zero  volts,  as  shown  in  graph  (A).  Remember,  though,  the  capacitor  during  the  charge  cycle  has  stored 
energy  in  an  electrostatic  field. 


3-14 


31 


■  R 


I 


Ec  6V 


O  I  DISCHARGE 
32        I  CURRENT 


CIRCUIT 


DISCHARGE 


— U© 


(A) 


■«— S2— ► 

OPEN 

\*   S2 

CLOSED 

"1 

J 

J 

J 
1 

(B) 


to  ti 


to  ti 


(C) 


t  t 


i  i 
i  i 
i  i 


(D)f 


to  ti 


i  i 
i  i 
i  i 


Figure  3-10. — Discharge  of  an  RC  Series  circuit. 


Because  S2  is  closed  at  the  same  time  SI  is  open,  the  stored  energy  of  the  capacitor  now  has  a  path  for 
current  to  flow.  At  t0,  discharge  current  (id)  from  the  bottom  plate  of  the  capacitor  through  the  resistor  (R)  to 
the  top  plate  of  the  capacitor  (C)  is  maximum.  As  time  progresses  toward  ti,  the  discharge  current  steadily 
decreases  until  at  time  ti  it  reaches  zero,  as  shown  in  graph  (B). 

The  discharge  causes  a  corresponding  voltage  drop  across  the  resistor  as  shown  in  graph  (C).  At  time  to, 
the  current  through  the  resistor  is  maximum  and  the  voltage  drop  (er)  across  the  resistor  is  maximum.  As  the 
current  through  the  resistor  decreases,  the  voltage  drop  across  the  resistor  decreases  until  at  ti  it  has  reached 
a  value  of  zero.  Graph  (D)  shows  the  voltage  across  the  capacitor  (ec)  during  the  discharge  cycle.  At  time  t0 
the  voltage  is  maximum  and  as  time  progresses  toward  time  ti,  the  energy  stored  in  the  capacitor  is  depleted. 
At  the  same  time  the  voltage  across  the  resistor  is  decreasing,  the  voltage  (e)  across  the  capacitor  is 
decreasing  until  at  time  ti  the  voltage  (ec)  reaches  zero. 

By  comparing  graph  (A)  with  graph  (D)  of  figure  3-10,  you  can  see  the  effect  that  capacitance  has  on  a 
change  in  voltage.  If  the  circuit  had  not  contained  a  capacitor,  the  voltage  would  have  ceased  at  the  instant 
SI  was  opened  at  time  t0.  Because  the  capacitor  is  in  the  circuit,  voltage  is  applied  to  the  circuit  until  the 
capacitor  has  discharged  completely  at  ti.  The  effect  of  capacitance  has  been  to  oppose  this  change  in 
voltage. 

Q12.    At  what  instant  does  the  greatest  voltage  appear  across  the  resistor  in  a  series  RC  circuit  when  the 
capacitor  is  charging? 

Q13.    What  is  the  voltage  drop  across  the  resistor  in  an  RC  charging  circuit  when  the  charge  on  the 
capacitor  is  equal  to  the  battery  voltage  ? 


3-15 


RC  TIME  CONSTANT 


The  time  required  to  charge  a  capacitor  to  63  percent  (actually  63.2  percent)  of  full  charge  or  to 
discharge  it  to  37  percent  (actually  36.8  percent)  of  its  initial  voltage  is  known  as  the  TIME  CONSTANT 
(TC)  of  the  circuit.  The  charge  and  discharge  curves  of  a  capacitor  are  shown  in  figure  3-11.  Note  that  the 
charge  curve  is  like  the  curve  in  figure  3-9,  graph  (D),  and  the  discharge  curve  like  the  curve  in  figure  3-9, 
graph  (B). 


100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0' 


HARGE 

SCHARG 

■M  C 

■M   DIS 

E   ► 

'  99-tf 

^86.5 

^63.2 

^36.8 

1RC      2RC     3RC  4RC 


5RC 


TIME- 


Figure  3-11. — RC  time  constant. 

The  value  of  the  time  constant  in  seconds  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  circuit  resistance  in  ohms  and 
the  circuit  capacitance  in  farads.  The  value  of  one  time  constant  is  expressed  mathematically  as  t  =  RC. 
Some  forms  of  this  formula  used  in  calculating  RC  time  constants  are: 


t  (in  seconds) 
t  (in  seconds) 

t  (in  microseconds) 
t  (in  microseconds) 


R (in ohms)  x  c(in 
farads) 

R (in megohms)  x  C(in 
microfarads) 

R (in ohms)  x  C(in 
micr  ofarads) 

R (in megohms)  x  C(rn 
picofarads) 


Q14.    What  is  the  RC  time  constant  of  a  series  RC  circuit  that  contains  a  12-megohm  resistor  and  a 
12-microfarad  capacitor? 


UNIVERSAL  TIME  CONSTANT  CHART 

Because  the  impressed  voltage  and  the  values  of  R  and  C  or  R  and  L  in  a  circuit  are  usually  known,  a 
UNIVERSAL  TIME  CONSTANT  CHART  (fig.  3-12)  can  be  used  to  find  the  time  constant  of  the  circuit. 
Curve  A  is  a  plot  of  both  capacitor  voltage  during  charge  and  inductor  current  during  growth.  Curve  B  is  a 
plot  of  both  capacitor  voltage  during  discharge  and  inductor  current  during  decay. 


3-16 


LU 

en 
en 

o 
cn 
o 

LU 

1 
o 
> 

LL 
O 
LU 

s 


LU 
O 

cn 

LU 
D. 


100 

90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 

20 
10 


0.5 


8? 

9< 

10 

9£ 

D 

✓ 

86 

■> 

/ 

/ 

\ 

n\  i 

D 

\nr 

>i  ir 

■ 

1 

1  NT 

/ 

A 

CAPACITOR  VOLTAGE 
ON  CHARGE 

INDUCTOR  CURRENT 
OR  RESISTOR  VOLTAGE 
ON  BUILD-UP 

0 

/ 

\ 

1 

B 

CAPACITOR  VOLTAGE 
ON  DISCHARGE 

RESISTOR  VOLTAGE  OR 
CAPACITOR  CURRENT 
ON  CHARGE  OR 

INDUCTOR  CURRENT 
OR  RESISTOR  VOLTAGE 
ON  DECAY 

INDUCTOR  VOLTAGE 
ON  BUILD-UP  OR  DECAY 

> 

/ 

\ 

/ 

18 

\ 

-t 

R 

u 

\i>L 

HA 

\ 

/- 

1c 

3 

0£ 

0 

■ 

,0 

~™l 

0.5 


2  3 
TIME  IN  TIME  CONSTANTS 


Figure  3-12. — Universal  time  constant  chart  for  RC  and  RL  circuit. 

The  time  scale  (horizontal  scale)  is  graduated  in  terms  of  the  RC  or  L/R  time  constants  so  that  the 
curves  may  be  used  for  any  value  of  R  and  C  or  L  and  R.  The  voltage  and  current  scales  (vertical  scales)  are 
graduated  in  terms  of  percentage  of  the  maximum  voltage  or  current  so  that  the  curves  may  be  used  for  any 
value  of  voltage  or  current.  If  the  time  constant  and  the  initial  or  final  voltage  for  the  circuit  in  question  are 
known,  the  voltages  across  the  various  parts  of  the  circuit  can  be  obtained  from  the  curves  for  any  time  after 
the  switch  is  closed,  either  on  charge  or  discharge.  The  same  reasoning  is  true  of  the  current  in  the  circuit. 

The  following  problem  illustrates  how  the  universal  time  constant  chart  may  be  used. 

An  RC  circuit  is  to  be  designed  in  which  a  capacitor  (C)  must  charge  to  20  percent  (0.20)  of  the 
maximum  charging  voltage  in  100  microseconds  (0.0001  second).  Because  of  other  considerations,  the 
resistor  (R)  must  have  a  value  of  20,000  ohms.  What  value  of  capacitance  is  needed? 

Given:    Percent  of  charge  =  20%  (.20) 

t=  lOO^s 
R=  20,000  Q 


Find:  The  capacitance  of  capacitor  C. 

Solution:  Because  the  only  values  given  are  in  units  of  time  and  resistance,  a  variation  of  the  formula  to  find 
RC  time  is  used: 


3-17 


RC=  R  x  C 


where:  1  RC time  constant  =  R  x  C 
and  R  is  known. 

Transpose  the  formula  to: 
C=RC 
R 

Find  the  value  of  RC  by  referring  to  the  universal  time  constant  chart  in  figure  3-12  and  proceed  as 
follows: 

•  Locate  the  20  point  on  the  vertical  scale  at  the  left  side  of  the  chart  (percentage). 

•  Follow  the  horizontal  line  from  this  point  to  intersect  curve  A. 

•  Follow  an  imaginary  vertical  line  from  the  point  of  intersection  on  curve  A  downward  to  cross  the 
RC  scale  at  the  bottom  of  the  chart. 

Note  that  the  vertical  line  crosses  the  horizontal  scale  at  about  .22  RC  as  illustrated  below: 


I 

1 

.22 


The  value  selected  from  the  graph  means  that  a  capacitor  (including  the  one  you  are  solving  for)  will 
reach  twenty  percent  of  full  charge  in  twenty-two  one  hundredths  (.22)  of  one  RC  time  constant.  Remember 
that  it  takes  100  us  for  the  capacitor  to  reach  20%  of  full  charge.  Since  100  us  is  equal  to  .22  RC  (twenty- 
two  one-hundredths),  then  the  time  required  to  reach  one  RC  time  constant  must  be  equal  to: 

100 /is 

-1-  x  100  ^ 

.22 

100  jis 
.22 

454.54  ^s  (rounded  off  to  455  ^s) 
455  ^s 


.22  RC  = 
RC  = 

RC  = 

RC  = 
RC  = 


3-18 


Now  use  the  following  formula  to  find  C: 


C=^ 
R 


455  fis 


C- 

20,000  ohms 
C=  0.0227  ptF 
C=.023/iF 

To  summarize  the  above  procedures,  the  problem  and  solution  are  shown  below  without  the  step  by 
step  explanation. 

Given:   Percent  of  charge  =  20%  (.20) 

t  =  100^5 

R  =  20,000  ohms 

Transpose  the  RC  time  constant  formula  as  follows: 

R  x  C  =  RC 

R 

Find:  RC 

.22  RC  =  100 
RC=  100^ 
.22 

RC=  455^5 

Substitute  the  R  and  RC  values  into  the  formula: 

R 

„    455 ^s 

C=  —  ohms 

20,000 

C=.023p:5 

The  graphs  shown  in  figure  3-11  and  3-12  are  not  entirely  complete.  That  is,  the  charge  or  discharge  (or 
the  growth  or  decay)  is  not  quite  complete  in  5  RC  or  5  L/R  time  constants.  However,  when  the  values  reach 
0.99  of  the  maximum  (corresponding  to  5  RC  or  5  L/R),  the  graphs  may  be  considered  accurate  enough  for 
all  practical  purposes. 

Q15.    A  circuit  is  to  be  designed  in  which  a  capacitor  must  charge  to  40  percent  of  the  maximum 

charging  voltage  in  200  microseconds.  The  resistor  to  be  used  has  a  resistance  of 40,000  ohms. 
What  size  capacitor  must  be  used?  (Use  the  universal  time  constant  chart  in  figure  3-12.) 


3-19 


CAPACITORS  IN  SERIES  AND  PARALLEL 


Capacitors  may  be  connected  in  series  or  in  parallel  to  obtain  a  resultant  value  which  may  be  either  the 
sum  of  the  individual  values  (in  parallel)  or  a  value  less  than  that  of  the  smallest  capacitance  (in  series). 

CAPACITORS  IN  SERIES 

The  overall  effect  of  connecting  capacitors  in  series  is  to  move  the  plates  of  the  capacitors  further  apart. 
This  is  shown  in  figure  3-13.  Notice  that  the  junction  between  CI  and  C2  has  both  a  negative  and  a  positive 
charge.  This  causes  the  junction  to  be  essentially  neutral.  The  total  capacitance  of  the  circuit  is  developed 
between  the  left  plate  of  CI  and  the  right  plate  of  C2.  Because  these  plates  are  farther  apart,  the  total  value 
of  the  capacitance  in  the  circuit  is  decreased.  Solving  for  the  total  capacitance  (CT)  of  capacitors  connected 
in  series  is  similar  to  solving  for  the  total  resistance  (RT)  of  resistors  connected  in  parallel. 


 — K  

+  ./"  +./" 

IV  IV 

CI  C2 

|l            ES  Ij 
^  III!  - 

Figure  3-13. — Capacitors  in  series. 
Note  the  similarity  between  the  formulas  for  RT  and  CT: 

1  

JL  +  A.  +  _i_ 

Rl      R2  Rn 
1  

J_  +  X+  JL 

a    C2  c„ 

If  the  circuit  contains  more  than  two  capacitors,  use  the  above  formula.  If  the  circuit  contains  only  two 
capacitors,  use  the  below  formula: 


1     CI  +  C2 

Note:  All  values  for  CT,  CI,  C2,  C3,...  C  n  should  be  in  farads.  It  should  be  evident  from  the  above 
formulas  that  the  total  capacitance  of  capacitors  in  series  is  less  than  the  capacitance  of  any  of  the  individual 
capacitors. 

Example:  Determine  the  total  capacitance  of  a  series  circuit  containing  three  capacitors  whose  values 
are  0.01  uF,  0.25  uF,  and  50,000  pF,  respectively. 


3-20 


Given:  Q  =  0.01  p  5 

C2  =  0.25  ^ 


C3  =  50,000  pF 


Solution 


1 


a    C2  C3 


1 


1           1  1 
+    + 


.01  ,25^F      50,000  pF 

1  1  1  ' 

 *-  +   _  +   _ 


C 


lxl0"s    25xl0"s  5x10 

 1  

100xl0e+^xl0G+20xl0e 
1 


F 


124xlOe 
CT  =  0.008  jtF 

The  total  capacitance  of  0.008(jF  is  slightly  smaller  than  the  smallest  capacitor  (0.01(jF). 

CAPACITORS  IN  PARALLEL 

When  capacitors  are  connected  in  parallel,  one  plate  of  each  capacitor  is  connected  directly  to  one 
terminal  of  the  source,  while  the  other  plate  of  each  capacitor  is  connected  to  the  other  terminal  of  the 
source.  Figure  3-14  shows  all  the  negative  plates  of  the  capacitors  connected  together,  and  all  the  positive 
plates  connected  together.  CT,  therefore,  appears  as  a  capacitor  with  a  plate  area  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  the 
individual  plate  areas.  As  previously  mentioned,  capacitance  is  a  direct  function  of  plate  area.  Connecting 
capacitors  in  parallel  effectively  increases  plate  area  and  thereby  increases  total  capacitance. 


Figure  3-14. — Parallel  capacitive  circuit. 

For  capacitors  connected  in  parallel  the  total  capacitance  is  the  sum  of  all  the  individual  capacitances. 
The  total  capacitance  of  the  circuit  may  by  calculated  using  the  formula: 


3-21 


CT  =C1+C2  +  C3+  Cn 


where  all  capacitances  are  in  the  same  units. 

Example:  Determine  the  total  capacitance  in  a  parallel  capacitive  circuit  containing  three  capacitors 
whose  values  are  0.03  uF,  2.0  uF,  and  0.25  uF,  respectively. 


Given: 

CI- 

=  o,03^f 

C2  = 

=  2fiF 

C3  = 

=  0.25  piF 

Solution: 

Cf 

=  C1  +  C2+C3 

Cf 

=  0.03  jttF  +  2.0 /tF  +  0.25 pF 

Cf 

=  2.28  pF 

Q16.    What  is  the  total  capacitance  of  a  circuit  that  contains  two  capacitors  ( 10  pF  and  0. 1  pF)  wired 
together  in  series? 

Q17.    What  is  the  total  capacitance  of  a  circuit  in  which  four  capacitors  (10  pF,  21  pF,  0.1  pF  and  2 
pF)  are  connected  in  parallel? 

FIXED  CAPACITOR 

A  fixed  capacitor  is  constructed  in  such  manner  that  it  possesses  a  fixed  value  of  capacitance  which 
cannot  be  adjusted.  A  fixed  capacitor  is  classified  according  to  the  type  of  material  used  as  its  dielectric, 
such  as  paper,  oil,  mica,  or  electrolyte. 

A  PAPER  CAPACITOR  is  made  of  flat  thin  strips  of  metal  foil  conductors  that  are  separated  by  waxed 
paper  (the  dielectric  material).  Paper  capacitors  usually  range  in  value  from  about  300  picofarads  to  about  4 
microfarads.  The  working  voltage  of  a  paper  capacitor  rarely  exceeds  600  volts.  Paper  capacitors  are  sealed 
with  wax  to  prevent  the  harmful  effects  of  moisture  and  to  prevent  corrosion  and  leakage. 

Many  different  kinds  of  outer  covering  are  used  on  paper  capacitors,  the  simplest  being  a  tubular 
cardboard  covering.  Some  types  of  paper  capacitors  are  encased  in  very  hard  plastic.  These  types  are  very 
rugged  and  can  be  used  over  a  much  wider  temperature  range  than  can  the  tubular  cardboard  type.  Figure 
3-15(A)  shows  the  construction  of  a  tubular  paper  capacitor;  part  3-15(B)  shows  a  completed  cardboard- 
encased  capacitor. 


3-22 


INSULATOR 


(B) 

Figure  3-15. — Paper  capacitor. 

A  MICA  CAPACITOR  is  made  of  metal  foil  plates  that  are  separated  by  sheets  of  mica  (the  dielectric). 
The  whole  assembly  is  encased  in  molded  plastic.  Figure  3- 16(A)  shows  a  cut-away  view  of  a  mica 
capacitor.  Because  the  capacitor  parts  are  molded  into  a  plastic  case,  corrosion  and  damage  to  the  plates  and 
dielectric  are  prevented.  In  addition,  the  molded  plastic  case  makes  the  capacitor  mechanically  stronger. 
Various  types  of  terminals  are  used  on  mica  capacitors  to  connect  them  into  circuits.  These  terminals  are 
also  molded  into  the  plastic  case. 

Mica  is  an  excellent  dielectric  and  can  withstand  a  higher  voltage  than  can  a  paper  dielectric  of  the 
same  thickness.  Common  values  of  mica  capacitors  range  from  approximately  50  picofarads  to  0.02 
microfarad.  Some  different  shapes  of  mica  capacitors  are  shown  in  figure  3-16(B). 


TERMINAL 


(A)  (B) 
Figure  3-16. — Typical  mica  capacitors. 

A  CERAMIC  CAPACITOR  is  so  named  because  it  contains  a  ceramic  dielectric.  One  type  of  ceramic 
capacitor  uses  a  hollow  ceramic  cylinder  as  both  the  form  on  which  to  construct  the  capacitor  and  as  the 
dielectric  material.  The  plates  consist  of  thin  films  of  metal  deposited  on  the  ceramic  cylinder. 


3-23 


A  second  type  of  ceramic  capacitor  is  manufactured  in  the  shape  of  a  disk.  After  leads  are  attached  to 
each  side  of  the  capacitor,  the  capacitor  is  completely  covered  with  an  insulating  moisture-proof  coating. 
Ceramic  capacitors  usually  range  in  value  from  1  picofarad  to  0.01  microfarad  and  may  be  used  with 
voltages  as  high  as  30,000  volts.  Some  different  shapes  of  ceramic  capacitors  are  shown  in  figure  3-17. 


Figure  3-17. — Ceramic  capacitors. 


Examples  of  ceramic  capacitors. 


An  ELECTROLYTIC  CAPACITOR  is  used  where  a  large  amount  of  capacitance  is  required.  As  the 
name  implies,  an  electrolytic  capacitor  contains  an  electrolyte.  This  electrolyte  can  be  in  the  form  of  a  liquid 
(wet  electrolytic  capacitor).  The  wet  electrolytic  capacitor  is  no  longer  in  popular  use  due  to  the  care  needed 
to  prevent  spilling  of  the  electrolyte. 

A  dry  electrolytic  capacitor  consists  essentially  of  two  metal  plates  separated  by  the  electrolyte.  In  most 
cases  the  capacitor  is  housed  in  a  cylindrical  aluminum  container  which  acts  as  the  negative  terminal  of  the 
capacitor  (see  fig.  3-18).  The  positive  terminal  (or  terminals  if  the  capacitor  is  of  the  multisection  type)  is  a 
lug  (or  lugs)  on  the  bottom  end  of  the  container.  The  capacitance  value(s)  and  the  voltage  rating  of  the 
capacitor  are  generally  printed  on  the  side  of  the  aluminum  case. 


3-24 


Figure  3-18. — Construction  of  an  electrolytic  capacitor. 

An  example  of  a  multisection  electrolytic  capacitor  is  illustrated  in  figure  3-1 8(B).  The  four  lugs  at  the 
end  of  the  cylindrical  aluminum  container  indicates  that  four  electrolytic  capacitors  are  enclosed  in  the  can. 
Each  section  of  the  capacitor  is  electrically  independent  of  the  other  sections.  It  is  possible  for  one  section  to 
be  defective  while  the  other  sections  are  still  good.  The  can  is  the  common  negative  connection  to  the  four 
capacitors.  Separate  terminals  are  provided  for  the  positive  plates  of  the  capacitors.  Each  capacitor  is 
identified  by  an  embossed  mark  adjacent  to  the  lugs,  as  shown  in  figure  3-18(B).  Note  the  identifying  marks 
used  on  the  electrolytic  capacitor  are  the  half  moon,  the  triangle,  the  square,  and  no  embossed  mark.  By 
looking  at  the  bottom  of  the  container  and  the  identifying  sheet  pasted  to  the  side  of  the  container,  you  can 
easily  identify  the  value  of  each  section. 

Internally,  the  electrolytic  capacitor  is  constructed  similarly  to  the  paper  capacitor.  The  positive  plate 
consists  of  aluminum  foil  covered  with  an  extremely  thin  film  of  oxide.  This  thin  oxide  film  (which  is 
formed  by  an  electrochemical  process)  acts  as  the  dielectric  of  the  capacitor.  Next  to  and  in  contact  with  the 
oxide  is  a  strip  of  paper  or  gauze  which  has  been  impregnated  with  a  paste-like  electrolyte.  The  electrolyte 
acts  as  the  negative  plate  of  the  capacitor.  A  second  strip  of  aluminum  foil  is  then  placed  against  the 
electrolyte  to  provide  electrical  contact  to  the  negative  electrode  (the  electrolyte).  When  the  three  layers  are 
in  place  they  are  rolled  up  into  a  cylinder  as  shown  in  figure  3- 18(A). 

An  electrolytic  capacitor  has  two  primary  disadvantages  compared  to  a  paper  capacitor  in  that  the 
electrolytic  type  is  POLARIZED  and  has  a  LOW  LEAKAGE  RESISTANCE.  This  means  that  should  the 
positive  plate  be  accidentally  connected  to  the  negative  terminal  of  the  source,  the  thin  oxide  film  dielectric 
will  dissolve  and  the  capacitor  will  become  a  conductor  (i.e.,  it  will  short).  The  polarity  of  the  terminals  is 
normally  marked  on  the  case  of  the  capacitor.  Since  an  electrolytic  capacitor  is  polarity  sensitive,  its  use  is 
ordinarily  restricted  to  a  dc  circuit  or  to  a  circuit  where  a  small  ac  voltage  is  superimposed  on  a  dc  voltage. 
Special  electrolytic  capacitors  are  available  for  certain  ac  applications,  such  as  a  motor  starting  capacitor. 
Dry  electrolytic  capacitors  vary  in  size  from  about  4  microfarads  to  several  thousand  microfarads  and  have  a 
working  voltage  of  approximately  500  volts. 

The  type  of  dielectric  used  and  its  thickness  govern  the  amount  of  voltage  that  can  safely  be  applied  to 
the  electrolytic  capacitor.  If  the  voltage  applied  to  the  capacitor  is  high  enough  to  cause  the  atoms  of  the 


3-25 


dielectric  material  to  become  ionized,  arcing  between  the  plates  will  occur.  In  most  other  types  of  capacitors, 
arcing  will  destroy  the  capacitor.  However,  an  electrolytic  capacitor  has  the  ability  to  be  self-healing.  If  the 
arcing  is  small,  the  electrolytic  will  regenerate  itself.  If  the  arcing  is  too  large,  the  capacitor  will  not  self-heal 
and  will  become  defective. 

OIL  CAPACITORS  are  often  used  in  high-power  electronic  equipment.  An  oil-filled  capacitor  is 
nothing  more  than  a  paper  capacitor  that  is  immersed  in  oil.  Since  oil  impregnated  paper  has  a  high 
dielectric  constant,  it  can  be  used  in  the  production  of  capacitors  having  a  high  capacitance  value.  Many 
capacitors  will  use  oil  with  another  dielectric  material  to  prevent  arcing  between  the  plates.  If  arcing  should 
occur  between  the  plates  of  an  oil-filled  capacitor,  the  oil  will  tend  to  reseal  the  hole  caused  by  the  arcing. 
Such  a  capacitor  is  referred  to  as  a  SELF-HEALING  capacitor. 

VARIABLE  CAPACITOR 

A  variable  capacitor  is  constructed  in  such  manner  that  its  value  of  capacitance  can  be  varied.  A  typical 
variable  capacitor  (adjustable  capacitor)  is  the  rotor-stator  type.  It  consists  of  two  sets  of  metal  plates 
arranged  so  that  the  rotor  plates  move  between  the  stator  plates.  Air  is  the  dielectric.  As  the  position  of  the 
rotor  is  changed,  the  capacitance  value  is  likewise  changed.  This  type  of  capacitor  is  used  for  tuning  most 
radio  receivers.  Its  physical  appearance  and  its  symbol  are  shown  in  figure  3-19. 


ROTOR 


Figure  3-19. — Rotor-stator  type  variable  capacitor. 

Another  type  of  variable  capacitor  (trimmer  capacitor)  and  its  symbol  are  shown  in  figure  3-20.  This 
capacitor  consists  of  two  plates  separated  by  a  sheet  of  mica.  A  screw  adjustment  is  used  to  vary  the  distance 
between  the  plates,  thereby  changing  the  capacitance. 


MICA 

DIELECTRIC 


Figure  3-20. — Trimmer  capacitor. 


3-26 


Q18. 

a.  An  oxide-film  dielectric  is  used  in  what  type  of  capacitor? 

b.  A  screw  adjustment  is  used  to  vary  the  distance  between  the  plates  of  what  type  of  capacitor? 

COLOR  CODES  FOR  CAPACITORS 

Although  the  capacitance  value  may  be  printed  on  the  body  of  a  capacitor,  it  may  also  be  indicated  by  a 
color  code.  The  color  code  used  to  represent  capacitance  values  is  similar  to  that  used  to  represent  resistance 
values.  The  color  codes  currently  in  use  are  the  Joint  Army-Navy  (JAN)  code  and  the  Radio  Manufacturers' 
Association  (RMA)  code. 

For  each  of  these  codes,  colored  dots  or  bands  are  used  to  indicate  the  value  of  the  capacitor.  A  mica 
capacitor,  it  should  be  noted,  may  be  marked  with  either  three  dots  or  six  dots.  Both  the  three-  and  the  six- 
dot  codes  are  similar,  but  the  six-dot  code  contains  more  information  about  electrical  ratings  of  the 
capacitor,  such  as  working  voltage  and  temperature  coefficient. 

The  capacitor  shown  in  figure  3-21  represents  either  a  mica  capacitor  or  a  molded  paper  capacitor.  To 
determine  the  type  and  value  of  the  capacitor,  hold  the  capacitor  so  that  the  three  arrows  point  left  to  right 
(>).  The  first  dot  at  the  base  of  the  arrow  sequence  (the  left-most  dot)  represents  the  capacitor  TYPE.  This 
dot  is  either  black,  white,  silver,  or  the  same  color  as  the  capacitor  body.  Mica  is  represented  by  a  black  or 
white  dot  and  paper  by  a  silver  dot  or  dot  having  the  same  color  as  the  body  of  the  capacitor.  The  two  dots  to 
the  immediate  right  of  the  type  dot  indicate  the  first  and  second  digits  of  the  capacitance  value.  The  dot  at 
the  bottom  right  represents  the  multiplier  to  be  used.  The  multiplier  represents  picofarads.  The  dot  in  the 
bottom  center  indicates  the  tolerance  value  of  the  capacitor. 


3-27 


DIRECTION  OF 
READING  DOTS 


1ST  DIGIT  2ND  DIGIT 


TYPE 


^>  ^> 


o     o  o 


CHARACTERISTIC 
OR  CLASS   


TOLERANCE  MULTIPLIER 
  « 


J 


TYPE 

COLOR 

1ST 
DIGIT 

2ND 
DIGIT 

MULTIPLIER 

TOLERANCE 
■  (PERCENT) 

CHARACTERISTIC 
OR  CLASS 

JAN j  MICA 

BLACK 

0 

0 

1.0 

±20 

APPLIES  TO 

BROWN 

1 

1 

10 

TEMPERATURE 

RED 

2 

2 

100 

±  2 

COEFFICIENT 

ORANGE 

3 

3 

1,000 

t  3 

OR  METHODS 

YELLOW 

4 

4 

10,000 

±  4 

OF  TESTING 

GREEN 

5 

5 

100,000 

±  5 

BLUE 

6 

6 

1,000,000 

±  6 

VIOLET 

7 

7 

10,000,000 

±  1 

GRAY 

8 

8 

100,000,000 

±  8 

EIA,  MICA 

WHITE 

9 

9 

1,000,000,000 

+  9 

GOLD 

.1 

MOLDED  PAPER 

SILVER 

.01 

±10 

BODY 

±20 

Figure  3-21. — 6-dot  color  code  for  mica  and  molded  paper  capacitors. 


3-28 


Example  of  mica  capacitors. 
RED  BLUE 


O 

<Q  <9  <9 


RED  BROWN  WHITE 

Example  of  mica  capacitors. 

To  read  the  capacitor  color  code  on  the  above  capacitor: 
1 .    Hold  the  capacitor  so  the  arrows  point  left  to  right. 


2.    Read  the  first  dot. 


f 

o> 

o> 

o> 

o 

o 

o 

WHITE 

o> 

o> 

O 

>- 

o 

o 

V.liite  =  mica 


3-29 


3.    Read  the  first  digit  dot. 


BROWN 


RO\ 


o>  6>  o> 


O     O  O 

Brown  =  1 

4.    Read  the  second  digit  dot  and  apply  it  to  the  first  digit. 

RED 


o>  o>  6> 


o    o  o 


Red  =  2  ^  12 


5.    Read  the  multiplier  dot  and  multiply  the  first  two  digits  by  multiplier.  (Remember  that  the 
multiplier  is  in  picofarads). 


o>   o>  o> 


o  o 


X 

RED 


Red  =100         12  x  100=  1200  pF 


6.    Lastly,  read  the  tolerance  dot. 


o>  o>  o> 


BLUE 


Blue  =  ±6% 


3-30 


According  to  the  above  coding,  the  capacitor  is  a  mica  capacitor  whose  capacitance  is  1200  pF  with  a 
tolerance  of  ±6%. 


The  capacitor  shown  in  figure  3-22  is  a  tubular  capacitor.  Because  this  type  of  capacitor  always  has  a 
paper  dielectric,  the  type  code  is  omitted.  To  read  the  code,  hold  the  capacitor  so  the  band  closest  to  the  end 
is  on  the  left  side;  then  read  left  to  right.  The  last  two  bands  (the  fifth  and  sixth  bands  from  the  left)  represent 
the  voltage  rating  of  the  capacitor.  This  means  that  if  a  capacitor  is  coded  red,  red,  red,  yellow,  yellow, 
yellow,  it  has  the  following  digit  values: 


red 
red 
red 

yellow 
yellow 
yellow 


2 
2 

x  100  pF 

±40% 

4 

4 


1ST  DIGIT - 


•  2ND  DIGIT 


CAPACITANCE 


1ST  DIGIT 
2ND  DIGIT 


VOLTAGE 


COLOR 

CAPACITANCE 

VOLTAGE 

RATING 

1ST  DIGIT 

2ND  DIGIT 

MULTIPLIER 

TOLERANCE 
(PERCENT) 

1ST  DIGIT 

2ND  DIGIT 

BLACK 

0 

0 

1 

±20 

0 

0 

BROWN 

1 

1 

10 

1 

1 

RED 

2 

2 

100 

2 

2 

ORANGE 

3 

3 

1,000 

±30 

3 

3 

YELLOW 

4 

4 

10,000 

±40 

4 

4 

GREEN 

5 

5 

100,000 

+  5 

5 

5 

BLUE 

6 

6 

1,000,000 

6 

6 

VIOLET 

7 

7 

7 

7 

GRAY 

8 

8 

8 

8 

WHITE 

9 

9 

±10 

9 

9 

Figure  3-22. — 6-band  color  code  for  tubular  paper  dielectric  capacitors. 


3-31 


The  six  digits  indicate  a  capacitance  of  2200  pF  with  a  +40  percent  tolerance  and  a  working  voltage  of 
44  volts. 

The  ceramic  capacitor  is  color  coded  as  shown  in  figure  3-23  and  the  mica  capacitor  as  shown  in  figure 
3-24.  Notice  that  this  type  of  mica  capacitor  differs  from  the  one  shown  in  figure  3-21  in  that  the  arrow  is 
solid  instead  of  broken.  This  type  of  mica  capacitor  is  read  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  shown  in  figure 
3-21,  with  one  exception:  the  first  dot  indicates  the  first  digit.  (Note:  Because  this  type  of  capacitor  is  always 
mica,  there  is  no  need  for  a  type  dot.) 


E 

CERAMIC  DISC  CAPACITOR  MARKING 


TOLERANCE 

COLOR 

1ST 
DIGIT 

2ND 
DIGIT 

MULTIPLIER 

MORE  THAN 

10pf 
(IN  PERCENT) 

LESS  THAN 
10pf 
(IN  pf) 

TEMPERATURE 
COEFFICIENT* 

BLACK 

0 

0 

1.0 

±20 

±2.0 

0 

BROWN 

1 

1 

10 

±1 

-30 

RED 

2 

2 

100 

+  2 

-80 

ORANGE 

3 

3 

1,000 

-150 

'  YELLOW 

4 

4 

10,000 

-220 

GREEN 

5 

5 

±5 

+  0.5 

-330 

BLUE 

6 

6 

-470 

|  VIOLET 

7 

7 

-750 

1  GRAY 

8 

8 

.01 

+  0.25 

+30 

1  WHITE 

9 

9 

.1 

+10 

+  1.0 

+120  TO -750  (El A) 
+500  TO  -330  (JAN) 
+100  (JAN) 

1  SILVER 

BYPASS  OR  COUPLING 

GOLD 

(EIA) 

*  PARTS  PER  MILLION  PER  DEGREE  CENTIGRADE 


Figure  3-23. — Ceramic  capacitor  color  code. 


3-32 


VOLTAGE  RATING   NO  COLOR 


1ST  DIGIT 


TOLERANCE 


2ND  DIGIT 


MULTIPLIER 


OR 


MULTIPLIER 
2ND  DIGIT 


TOLERANCE 


ISTOIGIT 


NO  COLOR 
VOLTAGE  RATING 


COLOR 

1ST  DIGIT 

2ND  DIGIT 

MULTIPLIER 

TOLERANCE 
(PERCENT) 

VOLTAGE 
RATING 

BLACK 

0 

0 

1.0 

BROWN 

1 

I 

10 

±  1 

100 

RED 

2 

2 

100 

±  2 

200 

ORANGE 

3 

3 

1,000 

±3 

300 

YELLOW 

4 

4 

10,000 

±4 

400 

GREEN 

5 

5 

100,000 

±5 

500 

BLUE 

6 

6 

1,000,000 

±6 

600 

VIOLET 

7 

7 

10,000,000 

+  7 

700 

GRAY 

8 

8 

100,000,000 

±8 

800 

WHITE 

9 

9 

1,000,000,000 

±9 

900 

GOLD 

.1 

1000 

SILVER 

.01 

±10 

2000 

BODY 

±20 

*  WHERE  NO  COLOR  IS  INDICATED/THE  VOLTAGE  RATING  MAYBE  AS  LOW  AS  300  VOLTS. 
Figure  3-24. — Mica  capacitor  color  code. 


Q19.  Examine  the  three  capacitors  shown  below.  What  is  the  capacitance  of  each? 

BLACK  VIOLET 

f 

(3) 


(1) 


WHITE  RED  BLUE 

i>  i>  Q> 

Q     O  O 


(2) 


RED  BLUE  BROWN  WHITE 

Ji  ,1.1  ■!■ 


1 


T 

ORANGE 


WHITE  RED  YELLOW 


WHITE  BLUE  RED 


SUMMARY 

Before  going  on  to  the  next  chapter,  study  the  below  summary  to  be  sure  that  you  understand  the 
important  points  of  this  chapter. 

THE  ELECTROSTATIC  FIELD — When  a  charged  body  is  brought  close  to  another  charged  body, 
the  bodies  either  attract  or  repel  one  another.  (If  the  charges  are  alike  they  repel;  if  the  charges  are  opposite 
they  attract).  The  field  that  causes  this  effect  is  called  the  ELECTROSTATIC  FIELD.  The  amount  by  which 
two  charges  attract  or  repel  each  other  depends  upon  the  size  of  the  charges  and  the  distance  between  the 
charges.  The  electrostatic  field  (force  between  two  charged  bodies)  may  be  represented  by  lines  of  force 


3-33 


drawn  perpendicular  to  the  charged  surfaces.  If  an  electron  is  placed  in  the  field,  it  will  move  toward  the 
positive  charge. 


(B) 


CAPACITANCE— Capacitance  is  the  property  of  a  circuit  which  OPPOSES  any  CHANGE  in  the 
circuit  VOLTAGE.  The  effect  of  capacitance  may  be  seen  in  any  circuit  where  the  voltage  is  changing. 
Capacitance  is  usually  defined  as  the  ability  of  a  circuit  to  store  electrical  energy.  This  energy  is  stored  in  an 
electrostatic  field.  The  device  used  in  an  electrical  circuit  to  store  this  charge  (energy)  is  called  a 
CAPACITOR.  The  basic  unit  of  measurement  of  capacitance  is  the  FARAD  (F).  A  one -farad  capacitor  will 
store  one  coulomb  of  charge  (energy)  when  a  potential  of  one  volt  is  applied  across  the  capacitor  plates.  The 
farad  is  an  enormously  large  unit  of  capacitance.  More  practical  units  are  the  microfarad  (uF)  or  the 
picofarad  (pF). 


3-34 


CAPACITANCE  OPPOSES  ANY 
CHANGE  IN  CIRCUIT  VOLTAGE 


WHEN  THE 
VOLTAGE 
INCREASES, 
CAPACITANCE 
TRIES  TO  HOLD 
IT  DOWN 


WHEN  THE 

VOLTAGE 
DECREASES, 
CAPACITANCE 
TRIES  TO  HOLD 
IT  UP 


CAPACITOR — A  capacitor  is  a  physical  device  consisting  of  two  pieces  of  conducting  material 
separated  by  an  insulating  material.  This  insulating  material  is  referred  to  as  the  DIELECTRIC.  Because  the 
dielectric  is  an  insulator,  NO  current  flows  through  the  capacitor.  If  the  dielectric  breaks  down  and  becomes 
a  conductor,  the  capacitor  can  no  longer  hold  a  charge  and  is  useless.  The  ability  of  a  dielectric  to  hold  a 
charge  without  breaking  down  is  referred  to  as  the  dielectric  strength.  The  measure  of  the  ability  of  the 
dielectric  material  to  store  energy  is  called  the  dielectric  constant.  The  dielectric  constant  is  a  relative  value 
based  on  1.0  for  a  vacuum. 


PLATE  A- 


-  DIELECTRIC 


0 

© 

© 

©  © 

0 

0 

0 

0 

© 

©  © 

© 

© 

PLATE  B 


T 


ELECTRON 
NUCLEUS 

DISTORTED 
ORBIT 


NORMAL 
ORBIT 


CAPACITORS  IN  A  DC  CIRCUIT— When  a  capacitor  is  connected  to  the  terminals  of  a  battery, 
each  plate  of  the  capacitor  becomes  charged.  The  plate  connected  to  the  positive  terminal  loses  electrons. 
Because  this  plate  has  a  lack  of  electrons,  it  assumes  a  positive  charge.  The  plate  connected  to  the  negative 
terminal  gains  electrons.  Because  the  plate  has  an  excess  of  electrons,  it  assumes  a  negative  charge.  This 
process  continues  until  the  charge  across  the  plates  equals  the  applied  voltage.  At  this  point  current  ceases  to 
flow  in  the  circuit.  As  long  as  nothing  changes  in  the  circuit,  the  capacitor  will  hold  its  charge  and  there  will 
be  no  current  in  any  part  of  the  circuit.  If  the  leads  of  the  capacitor  are  now  shorted  together,  current  again 


3-35 


flows  in  the  circuit.  Current  will  continue  to  flow  until  the  charges  on  the  two  plates  become  equal.  At  this 
point,  current  ceases  to  flow.  With  a  dc  voltage  source,  current  will  flow  in  the  circuit  only  long  enough  to 
charge  (or  discharge)  the  capacitor.  Thus,  a  capacitor  does  NOT  allow  dc  current  to  flow  continuously  in  a 
circuit. 


t 


(2) 
(3) 


f<4) 


10V 


(A)  UNCHARGED 


{})• 


(B)  CHARGING 


-±.  ELECTRON 


CIRCUIT 
CHARGE 


(A) 


(O. 


•-SI- 
OPEN 


■si 


CLOSED 


1 


s  i 


(B) 


[X 


Ji  'o 


i  l 
i  i 
i  i 

J  L 


to 


t  i 
t  i 
1  H 


FACTORS  AFFECTING  CAPACITANCE— There  are  three  factors  affecting  capacitance.  One 
factor  is  the  area  of  the  plate  surfaces.  Increasing  the  area  of  the  plate  increases  the  capacitance.  Another 


3-36 


factor  is  the  amount  of  space  between  the  plates.  The  closer  the  plates,  the  greater  will  be  the  electrostatic 
field.  A  greater  electrostatic  field  causes  a  greater  capacitance.  The  plate  spacing  is  determined  by  the 
thickness  of  the  dielectric.  The  third  factor  affecting  capacitance  is  the  dielectric  constant.  The  value  of  the 
dielectric  constant  is  dependent  upon  the  type  of  dielectric  used. 

WORKING  VOLTAGE — The  working  voltage  of  a  capacitor  is  the  maximum  voltage  that  can  be 
steadily  applied  to  the  capacitor  without  the  capacitor  breaking  down  (shorting).  The  working  voltage 
depends  upon  the  type  of  material  used  as  the  dielectric  (the  dielectric  constant)  and  the  thickness  of  the 
dielectric. 

CAPACITOR  LOSSES — Power  losses  in  a  capacitor  are  caused  by  dielectric  leakage  and  dielectric 
hysteresis.  Dielectric  leakage  loss  is  caused  by  the  leakage  current  through  the  resistance  in  the  dielectric. 
Although  this  resistance  is  extremely  high,  a  small  amount  of  current  does  flow.  Dielectric  hysteresis  may  be 
defined  as  an  effect  in  a  dielectric  material  similar  to  the  hysteresis  found  in  a  magnetic  material. 

RC  TIME  CONSTANT— The  time  required  to  charge  a  capacitor  to  63.2  percent  of  the  applied 
voltage,  or  to  discharge  the  capacitor  to  36.8  percent  of  its  charge.  The  time  constant  (t)  is  equal  to  the 
product  of  the  resistance  and  the  capacitance.  Expressed  as  a  formula: 

t  =  RC 

where  t  is  in  seconds,  R  is  in  ohms,  and  C  is  in  farads. 


CAPACITORS  IN  SERIES — The  effect  of  wiring  capacitors  in  series  is  to  increase  the  distance 
between  plates.  This  reduces  the  total  capacitance  of  the  circuit.  Total  capacitance  for  series  connected 
capacitors  may  be  computed  by  the  formula: 

CT  =  1  

Cl  +  C2  +C3+'  '  'c^ 


3-37 


If  an  electrical  circuit  contains  only  two  series  connected  capacitors,  CT  may  be  computed  using  the 
following  formula: 

C1C2 


C1  +  C2 


CAPACITORS  IN  PARALLEL — The  effect  of  wiring  capacitors  in  parallel  is  to  increase  the  plate 
area  of  the  capacitors.  Total  capacitance  (CT)  may  be  found  using  the  formula: 

CT  =C1  +  C2.  .  .  +C„ 


TYPES  OF  CAPACITORS — Capacitors  are  manufactured  in  various  forms  and  may  be  divided  into 
two  main  classes-fixed  capacitors  and  variable  capacitors.  A  fixed  capacitor  is  constructed  to  have  a  constant 
or  fixed  value  of  capacitance.  A  variable  capacitor  allows  the  capacitance  to  be  varied  or  adjusted. 


3-38 


ANSWERS  TO  QUESTIONS  Ql.  THROUGH  Q19. 


Al. 


a. 


A  capacitor  is  a  device  that  stores  electrical  energy  in  an  electrostatic  field. 


b. 


Capacitance  is  the  property  of  a  circuit  which  opposes  changes  in  voltage. 


A2. 


a.  They  are  polarized  from  positive  to  negative. 

b.  They  radiate  from  a  charged  particle  in  straight  lines  and  do  not  form  closed  loops. 

c.  They  have  the  ability  to  pass  through  any  known  material. 

d.  They  have  the  ability  to  distort  the  orbits  of  electrons  circling  the  nucleus. 
A3.     Toward  the  positive  charge. 

A4.     Two  pieces  of  conducting  material  separated  by  an  insulator. 

A5.     A  farad  is  the  unit  of  capacitance.  A  capacitor  has  a  capacitance  of  1  farad  when  a  difference  of  1 
volt  will  charge  it  with  1  coulomb  of  electrons. 


A6. 


a. 


One  microfarad  equals  10  6  farad. 


b. 


One  picofarad  equals  10  farad. 


A7. 


a. 


The  area  of  the  plates. 


b. 


The  distance  between  the  plates. 


c. 


The  dielectric  constant  of  the  material  between  the  plates. 


A8. 


C=  4372  (Roimded  off) 


3-39 


A9. 


a. 


Hysteresis 


b. 


Dielectric  leakage 


A10. 


a.    It  is  the  maximum  voltage  the  capacitor  can  work  without  risk  of  damage. 


a.  When  the  capacitor  is  charging,  electrons  accumulate  on  the  negative  plate  and  leave  the 
positive  plate  until  the  charge  on  the  capacitor  is  equal  to  the  battery  voltage. 

b.  When  the  capacitor  is  discharging,  electrons  flow  from  the  negatively  charged  plate  to  the 
positively  charged  plate  until  the  charge  on  each  plate  is  neutral. 


A12.     At  the  instant  of  the  initiation  of  the  action. 

A13.  Zero. 

A14. 

144  seconds 

t=  R  (megohms)  x  C (microfarads) 
t  =  12  x  12 
t=  144  seconds 

A15. 

.01  microfarads  40%  from  the  graph  =  .5 


b. 


900  volts. 


All. 


RC 


200 


RC 


.5 

400  microseconds 


C 


C 


R 

400/<5 


C 


40,000  Q 

.01  fiF  =  10,000  pF 


3-40 


A16. 


A17. 


A18. 


A19. 


C 


l^F 

C{CZ 


T 


C1  +  C2 


„  10x0.1  _ 
L>t  =  lib 

10  +  0.1 

Ct  =  —3—  uF 
1  10.1 

CT  =.099fiFoi  0.1/iF 


33.1^F 

CT  =  C1+C2  +  C3  +  C4 

CT  =10  ^F  +  21/iF  +  0.1/iF  +  2/iF 

CT  =  33.1p;F 

a.  Electrolytic  capacitor 

b.  Trimmer  capacitor 

a.  26  fiF  or  260,000 pF 

b.  630  pF 

c.  9600  pF 


CHAPTER  4 

INDUCTIVE  AND  CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE 


LEARNING  OBJECTIVES 

Upon  completion  of  this  chapter  you  will  be  able  to: 

1 .  State  the  effects  an  inductor  has  on  a  change  in  current  and  a  capacitor  has  on  a  change  in  voltage. 

2.  State  the  phase  relationships  between  current  and  voltage  in  an  inductor  and  in  a  capacitor. 

3.  State  the  terms  for  the  opposition  an  inductor  and  a  capacitor  offer  to  ac 

4.  Write  the  formulas  for  inductive  and  capacitive  reactances. 

5.  State  the  effects  of  a  change  in  frequency  on  X  L  and  Xc. 

6.  State  the  effects  of  a  change  in  inductance  on  X  L  and  a  change  in  capacitance  on  Xc. 

7.  Write  the  formula  for  determining  total  reactance  (X);  compute  total  reactance  (X)  in  a  series 
circuit;  and  indicate  whether  the  total  reactance  is  capacitive  or  inductive. 

8.  State  the  term  given  to  the  total  opposition  (Z)  in  an  ac  circuit. 

9.  Write  the  formula  for  impedance,  and  calculate  the  impedance  in  a  series  circuit  when  the  values 
of  Xc,  X  l,  and  R  are  given. 

10.  Write  the  Ohm's  law  formulas  used  to  determine  voltage  and  current  in  an  ac  circuit. 

1 1 .  Define  true  power,  reactive  power,  and  apparent  power;  state  the  unit  of  measurement  for  and  the 
formula  used  to  calculate  each. 

12.  State  the  definition  of  and  write  the  formula  for  power  factor. 

13.  Given  the  power  factor  and  values  of  X  and  R  in  an  ac  circuit,  compute  the  value  of  reactance  in 
the  circuit,  and  state  the  type  of  reactance  that  must  be  connected  in  the  circuit  to  correct  the 
power  factor  to  unity  (1). 

14.  State  the  difference  between  calculating  impedance  in  a  series  ac  circuit  and  in  a  parallel  ac 
circuit. 

INDUCTIVE  AND  CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE 

You  have  already  learned  how  inductance  and  capacitance  individually  behave  in  a  direct  current 
circuit.  In  this  chapter  you  will  be  shown  how  inductance,  capacitance,  and  resistance  affect  alternating 
current. 


4-1 


INDUCTANCE  AND  ALTERNATING  CURRENT 


This  might  be  a  good  place  to  recall  what  you  learned  about  phase  in  chapter  1 .  When  two  things  are 
in  step,  going  through  a  cycle  together,  falling  together  and  rising  together,  they  are  in  phase.  When  they 
are  out  of  phase,  the  angle  of  lead  or  lag-the  number  of  electrical  degrees  by  which  one  of  the  values  leads 
or  lags  the  other-is  a  measure  of  the  amount  they  are  out  of  step.  The  time  it  takes  the  current  in  an 
inductor  to  build  up  to  maximum  and  to  fall  to  zero  is  important  for  another  reason.  It  helps  illustrate  a 
very  useful  characteristic  of  inductive  circuits-the  current  through  the  inductor  always  lags  the  voltage 
across  the  inductor. 

A  circuit  having  pure  resistance  (if  such  a  thing  were  possible)  would  have  the  alternating  current 
through  it  and  the  voltage  across  it  rising  and  failing  together.  This  is  illustrated  in  figure  4-1  (A),  which 
shows  the  sine  waves  for  current  and  voltage  in  a  purely  resistive  circuit  having  an  ac  source.  The  current 
and  voltage  do  not  have  the  same  amplitude,  but  they  are  in  phase. 

hi  the  case  of  a  circuit  having  inductance,  the  opposing  force  of  the  counter  emf  would  be  enough  to 
keep  the  current  from  remaining  in  phase  with  the  applied  voltage.  You  learned  that  in  a  dc  circuit 
containing  pure  inductance  the  current  took  time  to  rise  to  maximum  even  though  the  full  applied  voltage 
was  immediately  at  maximum.  Figure  4- 1  (B)  shows  the  wave  forms  for  a  purely  inductive  ac  circuit  in 
steps  of  quarter-cycles. 


4-2 


4-3 


With  an  ac  voltage,  in  the  first  quarter-cycle  (0°  to  90° )  the  applied  ac  voltage  is  continually 
increasing.  If  there  was  no  inductance  in  the  circuit,  the  current  would  also  increase  during  this  first 
quarter-cycle.  You  know  this  circuit  does  have  inductance.  Since  inductance  opposes  any  change  in 
current  flow,  no  current  flows  during  the  first  quarter-cycle.  In  the  next  quarter-cycle  (90°  to  180°  )  the 
voltage  decreases  back  to  zero;  current  begins  to  flow  in  the  circuit  and  reaches  a  maximum  value  at  the 
same  instant  the  voltage  reaches  zero.  The  applied  voltage  now  begins  to  build  up  to  maximum  in  the 
other  direction,  to  be  followed  by  the  resulting  current.  When  the  voltage  again  reaches  its  maximum  at 
the  end  of  the  third  quarter-cycle  (270° )  all  values  are  exactly  opposite  to  what  they  were  during  the  first 
half-cycle.  The  applied  voltage  leads  the  resulting  current  by  one  quarter-cycle  or  90  degrees.  To 
complete  the  full  360°  cycle  of  the  voltage,  the  voltage  again  decreases  to  zero  and  the  current  builds  to  a 
maximum  value. 

You  must  not  get  the  idea  that  any  of  these  values  stops  cold  at  a  particular  instant.  Until  the  applied 
voltage  is  removed,  both  current  and  voltage  are  always  changing  in  amplitude  and  direction. 

As  you  know  the  sine  wave  can  be  compared  to  a  circle.  Just  as  you  mark  off  a  circle  into  360 
degrees,  you  can  mark  off  the  time  of  one  cycle  of  a  sine  wave  into  360  electrical  degrees.  This 
relationship  is  shown  in  figure  4-2.  By  referring  to  this  figure  you  can  see  why  the  current  is  said  to  lag 
the  voltage,  in  a  purely  inductive  circuit,  by  90  degrees.  Furthermore,  by  referring  to  figures  4-2  and 
4- 1(A)  you  can  see  why  the  current  and  voltage  are  said  to  be  in  phase  in  a  purely  resistive  circuit.  In  a 
circuit  having  both  resistance  and  inductance  then,  as  you  would  expect,  the  current  lags  the  voltage  by  an 
amount  somewhere  between  0  and  90  degrees. 


0°        90°       180°      270°  360° 
90° 


Figure  4-2. — Comparison  of  sine  wave  and  circle  in  an  inductive  circuit. 

A  simple  memory  aid  to  help  you  remember  the  relationship  of  voltage  and  current  in  an  inductive 
circuit  is  the  word  ELI.  Since  E  is  the  symbol  for  voltage,  L  is  the  symbol  for  inductance,  and  I  is  the 
symbol  for  current;  the  word  ELI  demonstrates  that  current  comes  after  (Lags)  voltage  in  an  inductor. 

Ql.    What  effect  does  an  inductor  have  on  a  change  in  current? 


4-4 


Q2.    What  is  the  phase  relationship  between  current  and  voltage  in  an  inductor? 

INDUCTIVE  REACTANCE 

When  the  current  flowing  through  an  inductor  continuously  reverses  itself,  as  in  the  case  of  an  ac 
source,  the  inertia  effect  of  the  cemf  is  greater  than  with  dc.  The  greater  the  amount  of  inductance  (L),  the 
greater  the  opposition  from  this  inertia  effect.  Also,  the  faster  the  reversal  of  current,  the  greater  this 
inertial  opposition.  This  opposing  force  which  an  inductor  presents  to  the  FLOW  of  alternating  current 
cannot  be  called  resistance,  since  it  is  not  the  result  of  friction  within  a  conductor.  The  name  given  to  it  is 
INDUCTIVE  REACTANCE  because  it  is  the  "reaction"  of  the  inductor  to  the  changing  value  of 
alternating  current.  Inductive  reactance  is  measured  in  ohms  and  its  symbol  is  XL. 

As  you  know,  the  induced  voltage  in  a  conductor  is  proportional  to  the  rate  at  which  magnetic  lines 
of  force  cut  the  conductor.  The  greater  the  rate  (the  higher  the  frequency),  the  greater  the  cemf.  Also,  the 
induced  voltage  increases  with  an  increase  in  inductance;  the  more  ampere -turns,  the  greater  the  cemf. 
Reactance,  then,  increases  with  an  increase  of  frequency  and  with  an  increase  of  inductance.  The  formula 
for  inductive  reactance  is  as  follows: 

Where: 

XL  is  inductive  reactance  in  ohms, 

2  x  is  a  constant  in  which  the  Gr  eek letter  %, 

called  "pi"  represents  3.1416  and 2  x  %  = 

6.28  approximately, 
f     is  frequency  of  the  alternating  current  in  Hz. 
L     is  inductance  in  henrys, 

The  following  example  problem  illustrates  the  computation  of  XL. 

Grcen:         f  =  60  Hi 
L  =  20H 
Solution:    XL  =  2  TtfL 

XL  =6.28x60  Hz  x  20  H 

X  L  =  7,536  Q 

Q3.    What  is  the  term  for  the  opposition  an  inductor  presents  to  ac? 
Q4.    What  is  the  formula  used  to  compute  the  value  of  this  opposition? 
Q5.    What  happens  to  the  value  ofXL  as  frequency  increases? 
Q6.    What  happens  to  the  value  ofXL  as  inductance  decreases? 


4-5 


CAPACITORS  AND  ALTERNATING  CURRENT 


The  four  parts  of  figure  4-3  show  the  variation  of  the  alternating  voltage  and  current  in  a  capacitive 
circuit,  for  each  quarter  of  one  cycle.  The  solid  line  represents  the  voltage  across  the  capacitor,  and  the 
dotted  line  represents  the  current.  The  line  running  through  the  center  is  the  zero,  or  reference  point,  for 
both  the  voltage  and  the  current.  The  bottom  line  marks  off  the  time  of  the  cycle  in  terms  of  electrical 
degrees.  Assume  that  the  ac  voltage  has  been  acting  on  the  capacitor  for  some  time  before  the  time 
represented  by  the  starting  point  of  the  sine  wave  in  the  figure. 


MAXIMUM 
POSITIVE 

X*^~~  VOLTAGE 
/  CURRENT 

ZERO 

MAXIMUM 
NEGATIVE 

i               i               i  i 

TIME  ( 

o            90°  180° 

270° 

360° 
Fl  04003a 

(A) 


MAXIMUM 
POSITIVE 

7 

^     "^S^—  VOLTAGE 

ZERO 

MAXIMUM 
NEGATIVE 

TIME 

C 

Nj«  CURRENT 

v_ 

■      i      i  i 

90°          180°  270° 

360° 

(B) 


180°         270°  360° 


(C) 


180°  270° 


360 c 


(D) 

Figure  4-3. — Phase  relationship  of  voltage  and  current  in  a  capacitive  circuit. 


4-6 


At  the  beginning  of  the  first  quarter-cycle  (0°  to  90°)  the  voltage  has  just  passed  through  zero  and  is 
increasing  in  the  positive  direction.  Since  the  zero  point  is  the  steepest  part  of  the  sine  wave,  the  voltage  is 
changing  at  its  greatest  rate.  The  charge  on  a  capacitor  varies  directly  with  the  voltage,  and  therefore  the 
charge  on  the  capacitor  is  also  changing  at  its  greatest  rate  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  quarter-cycle.  In 
other  words,  the  greatest  number  of  electrons  are  moving  off  one  plate  and  onto  the  other  plate.  Thus  the 
capacitor  current  is  at  its  maximum  value,  as  part  (A)  of  the  figure  shows. 

As  the  voltage  proceeds  toward  maximum  at  90  degrees,  its  rate  of  change  becomes  less  and  less, 
hence  the  current  must  decrease  toward  zero.  At  90  degrees  the  voltage  across  the  capacitor  is  maximum, 
the  capacitor  is  fully  charged,  and  there  is  no  further  movement  of  electrons  from  plate  to  plate.  That  is 
why  the  current  at  90  degrees  is  zero. 

At  the  end  of  this  first  quarter-cycle  the  alternating  voltage  stops  increasing  in  the  positive  direction 
and  starts  to  decrease.  It  is  still  a  positive  voltage,  but  to  the  capacitor  the  decrease  in  voltage  means  that 
the  plate  which  has  just  accumulated  an  excess  of  electrons  must  lose  some  electrons.  The  current  flow, 
therefore,  must  reverse  its  direction.  Part  (B)  of  the  figure  shows  the  current  curve  to  be  below  the  zero 
line  (negative  current  direction)  during  the  second  quarter-cycle  (90°  to  180°). 

At  1 80  degrees  the  voltage  has  dropped  to  zero.  This  means  that  for  a  brief  instant  the  electrons  are 
equally  distributed  between  the  two  plates;  the  current  is  maximum  because  the  rate  of  change  of  voltage 
is  maximum.  Just  after  180  degrees  the  voltage  has  reversed  polarity  and  starts  building  up  its  maximum 
negative  peak  which  is  reached  at  the  end  of  the  third  quarter-cycle  (180°  to  270°).  During  this  third 
quarter-cycle  the  rate  of  voltage  change  gradually  decreases  as  the  charge  builds  to  a  maximum  at  270 
degrees.  At  this  point  the  capacitor  is  fully  charged  and  it  carries  the  full  impressed  voltage.  Because  the 
capacitor  is  fully  charged  there  is  no  further  exchange  of  electrons;  therefore,  the  current  flow  is  zero  at 
this  point.  The  conditions  are  exactly  the  same  as  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter-cycle  (90°)  but  the  polarity 
is  reversed. 

Just  after  270  degrees  the  impressed  voltage  once  again  starts  to  decrease,  and  the  capacitor  must 
lose  electrons  from  the  negative  plate.  It  must  discharge,  starting  at  a  minimum  rate  of  flow  and  rising  to  a 
maximum.  This  discharging  action  continues  through  the  last  quarter-cycle  (270°  to  360°)  until  the 
impressed-voltage  has  reached  zero.  At  360  degrees  you  are  back  at  the  beginning  of  the  entire  cycle,  and 
everything  starts  over  again. 

If  you  examine  the  complete  voltage  and  current  curves  in  part  D,  you  will  see  that  the  current 
always  arrives  at  a  certain  point  in  the  cycle  90  degrees  ahead  of  the  voltage,  because  of  the  charging  and 
discharging  action.  You  know  that  this  time  and  place  relationship  between  the  current  and  voltage  is 
called  the  phase  relationship.  The  voltage -current  phase  relationship  in  a  capacitive  circuit  is  exactly 
opposite  to  that  in  an  inductive  circuit.  The  current  of  a  capacitor  leads  the  voltage  across  the  capacitor  by 
90  degrees. 

You  realize  that  the  current  and  voltage  are  both  going  through  their  individual  cycles  at  the  same 
time  during  the  period  the  ac  voltage  is  impressed.  The  current  does  not  go  through  part  of  its  cycle 
(charging  or  discharging),  stop,  and  wait  for  the  voltage  to  catch  up.  The  amplitude  and  polarity  of  the 
voltage  and  the  amplitude  and  direction  of  the  current  are  continually  changing.  Their  positions  with 
respect  to  each  other  and  to  the  zero  line  at  any  electrical  instant-any  degree  between  zero  and  360 
degrees-can  be  seen  by  reading  upwards  from  the  time -degree  line.  The  current  swing  from  the  positive 
peak  at  zero  degrees  to  the  negative  peak  at  180  degrees  is  NOT  a  measure  of  the  number  of  electrons,  or 
the  charge  on  the  plates.  It  is  a  picture  of  the  direction  and  strength  of  the  current  in  relation  to  the  polarity 
and  strength  of  the  voltage  appearing  across  the  plates. 


4-7 


At  times  it  is  convenient  to  use  the  word  "ICE"  to  recall  to  mind  the  phase  relationship  of  the  current 
and  voltage  in  capacitive  circuits.  I  is  the  symbol  for  current,  and  in  the  word  ICE  it  leads,  or  comes 
before,  the  symbol  for  voltage,  E.  C,  of  course,  stands  for  capacitor.  This  memory  aid  is  similar  to  the 
"ELI"  used  to  remember  the  current  and  voltage  relationship  in  an  inductor.  The  phrase  "ELI  the  ICE 
man"  is  helpful  in  remembering  the  phase  relationship  in  both  the  inductor  and  capacitor. 

Since  the  plates  of  the  capacitor  are  changing  polarity  at  the  same  rate  as  the  ac  voltage,  the  capacitor 
seems  to  pass  an  alternating  current.  Actually,  the  electrons  do  not  pass  through  the  dielectric,  but  their 
rushing  back  and  forth  from  plate  to  plate  causes  a  current  flow  in  the  circuit.  It  is  convenient,  however,  to 
say  that  the  alternating  current  flows  "through"  the  capacitor.  You  know  this  is  not  true,  but  the 
expression  avoids  a  lot  of  trouble  when  speaking  of  current  flow  in  a  circuit  containing  a  capacitor.  By  the 
same  short  cut,  you  may  say  that  the  capacitor  does  not  pass  a  direct  current  (if  both  plates  are  connected 
to  a  dc  source,  current  will  flow  only  long  enough  to  charge  the  capacitor).  With  a  capacitor  type  of 
hookup  in  a  circuit  containing  both  ac  and  dc,  only  the  ac  will  be  "passed"  on  to  another  circuit. 

You  have  now  learned  two  things  to  remember  about  a  capacitor:  A  capacitor  will  appear  to  conduct 
an  alternating  current  and  a  capacitor  will  not  conduct  a  direct  current. 

Q7.   What  effect  does  the  capacitor  have  on  a  changing  voltage? 

Q8.    What  is  the  phase  relationship  between  current  and  voltage  in  a  capacitor? 

CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE 

So  far  you  have  been  dealing  with  the  capacitor  as  a  device  which  passes  ac  and  in  which  the  only 
opposition  to  the  alternating  current  has  been  the  normal  circuit  resistance  present  in  any  conductor. 
However,  capacitors  themselves  offer  a  very  real  opposition  to  current  flow.  This  opposition  arises  from 
the  fact  that,  at  a  given  voltage  and  frequency,  the  number  of  electrons  which  go  back  and  forth  from 
plate  to  plate  is  limited  by  the  storage  ability-that  is,  the  capacitance-of  the  capacitor.  As  the  capacitance 
is  increased,  a  greater  number  of  electrons  change  plates  every  cycle,  and  (since  current  is  a  measure  of 
the  number  of  electrons  passing  a  given  point  in  a  given  time)  the  current  is  increased. 

Increasing  the  frequency  will  also  decrease  the  opposition  offered  by  a  capacitor.  This  occurs 
because  the  number  of  electrons  which  the  capacitor  is  capable  of  handling  at  a  given  voltage  will  change 
plates  more  often.  As  a  result,  more  electrons  will  pass  a  given  point  in  a  given  time  (greater  current 
flow).  The  opposition  which  a  capacitor  offers  to  ac  is  therefore  inversely  proportional  to  frequency  and 
to  capacitance.  This  opposition  is  called  CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE.  You  may  say  that  capacitive 
reactance  decreases  with  increasing  frequency  or,  for  a  given  frequency,  the  capacitive  reactance 
decreases  with  increasing  capacitance.  The  symbol  for  capacitive  reactance  is  Xc. 

Now  you  can  understand  why  it  is  said  that  the  Xc  varies  inversely  with  the  product  of  the  frequency 
and  capacitance.  The  formula  is: 

27rfC 


4-8 


Where: 

Xc  is  capacitive  reactance  in  ohms 
f  is  frequency  in  Hertz 
C  is  capacitance  in  farads 
7i  is  6.28  (2x3.1416) 

The  following  example  problem  illustrates  the  computation  of  Xc. 

Given:  f  =  100  Hz 

C=  50^F 


Solution:      X  ^ 


6.28xl00Hzx50^F 


L  .0314 
Xc  =31.8Q  or  32  Q 

Q9.  What  is  the  term  for  the  opposition  that  a  capacitor  presents  to  ac? 

Q10.  What  is  the  formula  used  to  compute  this  opposition? 

Qll.  What  happens  to  the  value  ofXc  as  frequency  decreases? 

Q12.  What  happens  to  the  value  ofXc  as  capacitance  increases? 


REACTANCE,  IMPEDANCE,  AND  POWER  RELATIONSHIPS  IN  AC  CIRCUITS 

Up  to  this  point  inductance  and  capacitance  have  been  explained  individually  in  ac  circuits.  The  rest 
of  this  chapter  will  concern  the  combination  of  inductance,  capacitance,  and  resistance  in  ac  circuits. 

To  explain  the  various  properties  that  exist  within  ac  circuits,  the  series  RLC  circuit  will  be  used. 
Figure  4-4  is  the  schematic  diagram  of  the  series  RLC  circuit.  The  symbol  shown  in  figure  4-4  that  is 
marked  E  is  the  general  symbol  used  to  indicate  an  ac  voltage  source. 


4-9 


R 


©, 


Figure  4-4. — Series  RLC  circuit. 


REACTANCE 


The  effect  of  inductive  reactance  is  to  cause  the  current  to  lag  the  voltage,  while  that  of  capacitive 
reactance  is  to  cause  the  current  to  lead  the  voltage.  Therefore,  since  inductive  reactance  and  capacitive 
reactance  are  exactly  opposite  in  their  effects,  what  will  be  the  result  when  the  two  are  combined?  It  is  not 
hard  to  see  that  the  net  effect  is  a  tendency  to  cancel  each  other,  with  the  combined  effect  then  equal  to 
the  difference  between  their  values.  This  resultant  is  called  REACTANCE;  it  is  represented  by  the  symbol 
X;  and  expressed  by  the  equation  X  =  XL  -  Xc  or  X  =  Xc  -  X  L.  Thus,  if  a  circuit  contains  50  ohms  of 
inductive  reactance  and  25  ohms  of  capacitive  reactance  in  series,  the  net  reactance,  or  X,  is  50  ohms  -  25 
ohms,  or  25  ohms  of  inductive  reactance. 

For  a  practical  example,  suppose  you  have  a  circuit  containing  an  inductor  of  100  uH  in  series  with  a 
capacitor  of  .001  uF,  and  operating  at  a  frequency  of  4  MHz.  What  is  the  value  of  net  reactance,  or  X? 


Given:  f  =  4MHz 
L  -100/iH 
C=.001^F 


Solution:   XL  =  2t&~L 

XL  =  6.28  M  MHz  xl(%H 
XL  =  2512Q 
1 


X 


C 


27ifC 

Xr  =■ 


6,28x4  MHz  x  .001p;F 

Xc  =  —^—Q 
.02512 

X  c  =  39.8  Q 
X  =  XL  -Xrj 
X  =  2512  Q- 39.8  Q 
X  =  2472.2  Q  (inductive) 


Now  assume  you  have  a  circuit  containing  a  100  -  uH  inductor  in  series  with  a  .0002-uF  capacitor, 
and  operating  at  a  frequency  of  1  MHz.  What  is  the  value  of  the  resultant  reactance  in  this  case? 


4-10 


Given:  f  =  lMHz 

L  =  100/iH 
C=,0002/iF 

SoluUon:    XT.  =  2jtfL 

6,28  x  1MHz  x  100 
628  Q 
1 

2xfC 

 1  

6.28  x  1MHz  x  .0002 


.001256 
796  Q 

Xc  ~XL 
796  Q- 628  Q 
168  fl  (capacitive) 

You  will  notice  that  in  this  case  the  inductive  reactance  is  smaller  than  the  capacitive  reactance  and 
is  therefore  subtracted  from  the  capacitive  reactance. 

These  two  examples  serve  to  illustrate  an  important  point:  when  capacitive  and  inductive  reactance 
are  combined  in  series,  the  smaller  is  always  subtracted  from  the  larger  and  the  resultant  reactance  always 
takes  the  characteristics  of  the  larger. 

Q13.   What  is  the  formula  for  determining  total  reactance  in  a  series  circuit  where  the  values  ofXc  and 
XL  are  known? 

Q14.    What  is  the  total  amount  of  reactance  (X)  in  a  series  circuit  which  contains  an  XL  of  20  ohms  and 
an  Xc  of  50  ohms?  (Indicate  whether  X is  capacitive  or  inductive) 

IMPEDANCE 

From  your  study  of  inductance  and  capacitance  you  know  how  inductive  reactance  and  capacitive 
reactance  act  to  oppose  the  flow  of  current  in  an  ac  circuit.  However,  there  is  another  factor,  the 
resistance,  which  also  opposes  the  flow  of  the  current.  Since  in  practice  ac  circuits  containing  reactance 
also  contain  resistance,  the  two  combine  to  oppose  the  flow  of  current.  This  combined  opposition  by  the 
resistance  and  the  reactance  is  called  the  IMPEDANCE,  and  is  represented  by  the  symbol  Z. 

Since  the  values  of  resistance  and  reactance  are  both  given  in  ohms,  it  might  at  first  seem  possible  to 
determine  the  value  of  the  impedance  by  simply  adding  them  together.  It  cannot  be  done  so  easily, 
however.  You  know  that  in  an  ac  circuit  which  contains  only  resistance,  the  current  and  the  voltage  will 
be  in  step  (that  is,  in  phase),  and  will  reach  their  maximum  values  at  the  same  instant.  You  also  know  that 
in  an  ac  circuit  containing  only  reactance  the  current  will  either  lead  or  lag  the  voltage  by  one-quarter  of  a 
cycle  or  90  degrees.  Therefore,  the  voltage  in  a  purely  reactive  circuit  will  differ  in  phase  by  90  degrees 
from  that  in  a  purely  resistive  circuit  and  for  this  reason  reactance  and  resistance  are  rot  combined  by 
simply  adding  them. 


XL  = 
XL  = 

xc  = 
xc  = 

xc  = 

xc  = 
x  = 
x  = 
x  = 


4-11 


When  reactance  and  resistance  are  combined,  the  value  of  the  impedance  will  be  greater  than  either. 
It  is  also  true  that  the  current  will  not  be  in  step  with  the  voltage  nor  will  it  differ  in  phase  by  exactly  90 
degrees  from  the  voltage,  but  it  will  be  somewhere  between  the  in-step  and  the  90-degree  out-of-step 
conditions.  The  larger  the  reactance  compared  with  the  resistance,  the  more  nearly  the  phase  difference 
will  approach  90° .  The  larger  the  resistance  compared  to  the  reactance,  the  more  nearly  the  phase 
difference  will  approach  zero  degrees. 

If  the  value  of  resistance  and  reactance  cannot  simply  be  added  together  to  find  the  impedance,  or  Z, 
how  is  it  determined?  Because  the  current  through  a  resistor  is  in  step  with  the  voltage  across  it  and  the 
current  in  a  reactance  differs  by  90  degrees  from  the  voltage  across  it,  the  two  are  at  right  angles  to  each 
other.  They  can  therefore  be  combined  by  means  of  the  same  method  used  in  the  construction  of  a  right- 
angle  triangle. 

Assume  you  want  to  find  the  impedance  of  a  series  combination  of  8  ohms  resistance  and  5  ohms 
inductive  reactance.  Start  by  drawing  a  horizontal  line,  R,  representing  8  ohms  resistance,  as  the  base  of 
the  triangle.  Then,  since  the  effect  of  the  reactance  is  always  at  right  angles,  or  90  degrees,  to  that  of  the 
resistance,  draw  the  line  XL,  representing  5  ohms  inductive  reactance,  as  the  altitude  of  the  triangle.  This 
is  shown  in  figure  4-5.  Now,  complete  the  hypotenuse  (longest  side)  of  the  triangle.  Then,  the  hypotenuse 
represents  the  impedance  of  the  circuit. 


90c 


L 


Xl=5  0HMS 


R=8  0HMS 


Figure  4-5. — Vector  diagram  showing  relationship  of  resistance,  inductive  reactance,  and  impedance  in  a  series 

circuit. 

One  of  the  properties  of  a  right  triangle  is: 

(hypotenuse)2  =  (base)2  +  (altitude) 2 
or, 

hypotenuse  =  <^(base)2  +  (altitude) 2 
Applied  to  impedance,  this  becomes, 
(impedance)  =  (resis  tance)  +  (reactance) 

or, 

impedance  =  ^/(resistance) 2  +  (reactance)2 

or, 

Z  =  -Jp,2+X2 

Now  suppose  you  apply  this  equation  to  check  your  results  in  the  example  given  above. 


4-12 


Given:  R  =  8  Q 

XL  =  5Q 


Solution:  Z  =  ^R2  +  XL2 

Z  =  7(8Q)2  +  (5Q)2 
Z  =  ^  +  25  Q 

Z  =  -JfflQ       C366  the  Appendix  III 

for  a  square  Root 
Z-MG  Tab!,) 


When  you  have  a  capacitive  reactance  to  deal  with  instead  of  inductive  reactance  as  in  the  previous 
example,  it  is  customary  to  draw  the  line  representing  the  capacitive  reactance  in  a  downward  direction. 
This  is  shown  in  figure  4-6.  The  line  is  drawn  downward  for  capacitive  reactance  to  indicate  that  it  acts  in 
a  direction  opposite  to  inductive  reactance  which  is  drawn  upward.  In  a  series  circuit  containing 
capacitive  reactance  the  equation  for  finding  the  impedance  becomes: 


2+  xc2 


R  5.8  OHMS 


Xc=  5  OHMS 


Figure  4-6. — Vector  diagram  showing  relationship  of  resistance,  capacitive  reactance,  and  impedance  in  a  series 

circuit. 

In  many  series  circuits  you  will  find  resistance  combined  with  both  inductive  reactance  and 
capacitive  reactance.  Since  you  know  that  the  value  of  the  reactance,  X,  is  equal  to  the  difference  between 
the  values  of  the  inductive  reactance,  XL,  and  the  capacitive  reactance,  Xc,  the  equation  for  the  impedance 
in  a  series  circuit  containing  R,  XL,  and  Xc  then  becomes: 

Z=VR2  +  <Xl-Xc)2 

or, 

z  =  Vr2  +  X2 


4-13 


(Note:  The  formulas  Z  =  ^R2  +  XL2, 

Z  =  ^/r2  +  Xc2,  and  Z  =  Vr2  +  X2  canbe 
used  to  calculate  Z  only  if  the  resistance  and 
reactance  are  connected  in  series.) 

i 

In  figure  4-7  you  will  see  the  method  which  may  be  used  to  determine  the  impedance  in  a  series 
circuit  consisting  of  resistance,  inductance,  and  capacitance. 

XL=100HMS 


i 

x=xc|xl=io  ohms 


Xc  =  20  OHMS 

Figure  4-7. — Vector  diagram  showing  relationship  of  resistance,  reactance  (capacitive  and  inductive),  and 

impedance  in  a  series  circuit. 

Assume  that  10  ohms  inductive  reactance  and  20  ohms  capacitive  reactance  are  connected  in  series 
with  40  ohms  resistance.  Let  the  horizontal  line  represent  the  resistance  R.  The  line  drawn  upward  from 
the  end  of  R,  represents  the  inductive  reactance,  XL.  Represent  the  capacitive  reactance  by  a  line  drawn 
downward  at  right  angles  from  the  same  end  of  R.  The  resultant  of  XL  and  Xc  is  found  by  subtracting  XL 
from  Xc.  This  resultant  represents  the  value  of  X. 

Thus: 

X  =XC - XL 
X  =10  ohms 

The  line,  Z,  will  then  represent  the  resultant  of  R  and  X.  The  value  of  Z  can  be  calculated  as  follows: 

Given:  XL=10Q 
X  c  =  20  Q 
R  =  40  Q 


R  =  40  OHMS 


4-14 


Solution:  X=XC-XL 

X  =  20Q  -  10  Q 
X=10Q 

z  =  Vr2  +  x2 

z  =  ^(mo.)2  +  (10  q2) 

z  =  Vieoo  +  100  Q 

Z  =  V1700Q 
Z  =  41.2  Q 


Q15.   What  term  is  given  to  total  opposition  to  ac  in  a  circuit? 

Q16.   What  formula  is  used  to  calculate  the  amount  of  this  opposition  in  a  series  circuit? 
Ql  7.   What  is  the  value  of  Z  in  a  series  ac  circuit  where  XL  =  6  ohms,  Xc  =  3  ohms,  and R  =  4  ohms? 
OHMS  LAW  FOR  AC 

In  general,  Ohm's  law  cannot  be  applied  to  alternating-current  circuits  since  it  does  not  consider  the 
reactance  which  is  always  present  in  such  circuits.  However,  by  a  modification  of  Ohm's  law  which  does 
take  into  consideration  the  effect  of  reactance  we  obtain  a  general  law  which  is  applicable  to  ac  circuits. 
Because  the  impedance,  Z,  represents  the  combined  opposition  of  all  the  reactances  and  resistances,  this 
general  law  for  ac  is, 


this  general  modification  applies  to  alternating  current  flowing  in  any  circuit,  and  any  one  of  the  values 
may  be  found  from  the  equation  if  the  others  are  known. 

For  example,  suppose  a  series  circuit  contains  an  inductor  having  5  ohms  resistance  and  25  ohms 
inductive  reactance  in  series  with  a  capacitor  having  15  ohms  capacitive  reactance.  If  the  voltage  is  50 
volts,  what  is  the  current?  This  circuit  can  be  drawn  as  shown  in  figure  4-8. 


Figure  4-8. — Series  LC  circuit. 


4-15 


Given:       R  =  5Q 
XL  =  25Q 
X  c  =  15  Q 
E  =  50V 

Solution:  X=XL-XC 

X  =  25  Q  -  15  Q 
X  =  10Q 

z  =  Vr2  +  X2 

Z  =  -J{5Q)2  +  (10  Q)2 
Z  =  ^25  +  100  Q 
Z  =  V125  Q 
Z  =  11.2  Q 

Z 

50V 

~  11.2  a 

I  =  4A6  A 


Now  suppose  the  circuit  contains  an  inductor  having  5  ohms  resistance  and  1 5  ohms  inductive 
reactance  in  series  with  a  capacitor  having  10  ohms  capacitive  reactance.  If  the  current  is  5  amperes,  what 
is  the  voltage? 


4-16 


Given:        R  =  5  Q 
XL  =15Q 
X  c  =  10  Q 
I  =  5A 


Solution:      X  =  XL-XC 
X  =  15  Q  -  10  Q 
X=  SQ 

z  =  -Jr2  +  x2 

Z  =  -J[5Q)2  +  (5Q)2 

Z  =  V25  +  25  Q 

Z  =  V50Q 
Z  =  7.07Q 
E  =  IZ 

E  =  5A  x  7.07  Q 
E  =  35.35  V 

g7S.    Wza?  ore  //ze  Ohm's  law  formulas  used  in  an  ac  circuit  to  determine  voltage  and  current? 

POWER  IN  AC  CIRCUITS 

You  know  that  in  a  direct  current  circuit  the  power  is  equal  to  the  voltage  times  the  current,  or 
P  =  E  x  I.  If  a  voltage  of  100  volts  applied  to  a  circuit  produces  a  current  of  10  amperes,  the  power  is 
1000  watts.  This  is  also  true  in  an  ac  circuit  when  the  current  and  voltage  are  in  phase;  that  is,  when  the 
circuit  is  effectively  resistive.  But,  if  the  ac  circuit  contains  reactance,  the  current  will  lead  or  lag  the 
voltage  by  a  certain  amount  (the  phase  angle).  When  the  current  is  out  of  phase  with  the  voltage,  the 
power  indicated  by  the  product  of  the  applied  voltage  and  the  total  current  gives  only  what  is  known  as 
the  APPARENT  POWER.  The  TRUE  POWER  depends  upon  the  phase  angle  between  the  current  and 
voltage.  The  symbol  for  phase  angle  is  6  (Theta). 

When  an  alternating  voltage  is  impressed  across  a  capacitor,  power  is  taken  from  the  source  and 
stored  in  the  capacitor  as  the  voltage  increases  from  zero  to  its  maximum  value.  Then,  as  the  impressed 
voltage  decreases  from  its  maximum  value  to  zero,  the  capacitor  discharges  and  returns  the  power  to  the 
source.  Likewise,  as  the  current  through  an  inductor  increases  from  its  zero  value  to  its  maximum  value 
the  field  around  the  inductor  builds  up  to  a  maximum,  and  when  the  current  decreases  from  maximum  to 
zero  the  field  collapses  and  returns  the  power  to  the  source.  You  can  see  therefore  that  no  power  is  used 
up  in  either  case,  since  the  power  alternately  flows  to  and  from  the  source.  This  power  that  is  returned  to 
the  source  by  the  reactive  components  in  the  circuit  is  called  REACTIVE  POWER. 

In  a  purely  resistive  circuit  all  of  the  power  is  consumed  and  none  is  returned  to  the  source;  in  a 
purely  reactive  circuit  no  power  is  consumed  and  all  of  the  power  is  returned  to  the  source.  It  follows  that 
in  a  circuit  which  contains  both  resistance  and  reactance  there  must  be  some  power  dissipated  in  the 
resistance  as  well  as  some  returned  to  the  source  by  the  reactance.  In  figure  4-9  you  can  see  the 
relationship  between  the  voltage,  the  current,  and  the  power  in  such  a  circuit.  The  part  of  the  power  curve 
which  is  shown  below  the  horizontal  reference  line  is  the  result  of  multiplying  a  positive  instantaneous 


4-17 


value  of  current  by  a  negative  instantaneous  value  of  the  voltage,  or  vice  versa.  As  you  know,  the  product 
obtained  by  multiplying  a  positive  value  by  a  negative  value  will  be  negative.  Therefore  the  power  at  that 
instant  must  be  considered  as  negative  power.  In  other  words,  during  this  time  the  reactance  was  returning 
power  to  the  source. 


The  instantaneous  power  in  the  circuit  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  applied  voltage  and  current 
through  the  circuit.  When  the  voltage  and  current  are  of  the  same  polarity  they  are  acting  together  and 
taking  power  from  the  source.  When  the  polarities  are  unlike  they  are  acting  in  opposition  and  power  is 
being  returned  to  the  source.  Briefly  then,  in  an  ac  circuit  which  contains  reactance  as  well  as  resistance, 
the  apparent  power  is  reduced  by  the  power  returned  to  the  source,  so  that  in  such  a  circuit  the  net  power, 
or  true  power,  is  always  less  than  the  apparent  power. 

Calculating  True  Power  in  AC  Circuits 

As  mentioned  before,  the  true  power  of  a  circuit  is  the  power  actually  used  in  the  circuit.  This  power, 
measured  in  watts,  is  the  power  associated  with  the  total  resistance  in  the  circuit.  To  calculate  true  power, 
the  voltage  and  current  associated  with  the  resistance  must  be  used.  Since  the  voltage  drop  across  the 
resistance  is  equal  to  the  resistance  multiplied  by  the  current  through  the  resistance,  true  power  can  be 
calculated  by  the  formula: 


POWER 


VOLTAGE 


Figure  4-9. — Instantaneous  power  when  current  and  voltage  are  out  of  phase. 


True  Power  =  (IR)  R 


mere: 


True  Power  is  measured  in  watts 


IE  is  resistive  current  in  amperes 
Ris  resistance  in  ohms 


For  example,  find  the  true  power  of  the  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-10. 


4-18 


-AAA/ 

R  =  60n. 


(£)E=500V 


Figure  4-10. — Example  circuit  for  determining  power. 


Given: 


R  =  60Q 
XL  =30  Q 
Xc  =  110Q 

E  =  500V 


Solution:      X  =  XC-XL 

X  =  110Q  -  30  Q 
X  =  80Q 

z  =  Vr2  +  X2 

Z  =  7(60Q)2  +  (80  Q)2 
Z  =  V3600  +  6400  Q 
Z  =  710,000  Q 
Z=  100  fi 


I: 


Z 

500  V 


100  Q 
I  =  5A 


Since  the  current  in  a  series  circuit  is  the  same  in  all  parts  of  the  circuit: 

TruePower  =(IE)£R 

TruePower  =(5  A) 2  x  60  Q 
True  Power  =  1500watt5 


4-19 


Q19.   What  is  the  true  power  in  an  ac  circuit? 

Q20.   What  is  the  unit  of  measurement  of  true  power? 

Q21.    What  is  the  formula  for  calculating  true  power? 

Calculating  Reactive  Power  in  AC  Circuits 

The  reactive  power  is  the  power  returned  to  the  source  by  the  reactive  components  of  the  circuit. 
This  type  of  power  is  measured  in  Volt-Amperes-Reactive,  abbreviated  var. 

Reactive  power  is  calculated  by  using  the  voltage  and  current  associated  with  the  circuit  reactance. 

Since  the  voltage  of  the  reactance  is  equal  to  the  reactance  multiplied  by  the  reactive  current,  reactive 
power  can  be  calculated  by  the  formula: 

Reactive  Power  =  (IX)2X 
Where:  Reactive  power  is  me  a  sure  din  volt  - 
amperes  -reactive. 

Ix  is  reactive  current  in  amperes. 

Xis  total  reactance  in  ohms. 

Another  way  to  calculate  reactive  power  is  to  calculate  the  inductive  power  and  capacitive  power  and 
subtract  the  smaller  from  the  larger. 

Reactive  Power  =  (IL)2XL  -  (I  c ) 2 X  c 

or 

(IC)2XC-  (iL)2xL 

Wher  e:    Re  active  power  is  rnea  sur  ed  in  volt- 
arnperes  -  reactive. 

I  cis  capacitive  current  in  amperes. 
Xc  is  capacitive  reactance  in  ohms. 

I I  is  inductive  current  in  amperes. 

XL  is  inductive  reactance  in  ohms. 

Either  one  of  these  formulas  will  work.  The  formula  you  use  depends  upon  the  values  you  are  given 
in  a  circuit. 


4-20 


For  example,  find  the  reactive  power  of  the  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-10. 

Given:  XL=30Q 
Xc  =  110  £3 
X  =  80Q 
I  =  5  A 

Since  this  is  a  series  circuit,  current  (I)  is  the  same  in  all  parts  of  the  circuit. 

Solution:      Reactive  power  =  X 

Reactive  power  =  (5  A) 2  x  80  Q 
Re  active  power  =  2,000  var 

To  prove  the  second  formula  also  works, 
Reactive  power  =(IC)2XC  -  (IL)2XL 
Reactive  power  =(5  A) 2  x  110  Q  -  (5 A) 2  x  30  Q 
Reactive  power  =  2,750  var  -  750  var 
Reactive  power  =  2000  var 

Q22.   What  is  the  reactive  power  in  an  ac  circuit? 

Q23.   What  is  the  unit  of  measurement  for  reactive  power? 

Q24.   What  is  the  formula  for  computing  reactive  power? 

Calculating  Apparent  Power  in  AC  Circuits. 

Apparent  power  is  the  power  that  appears  to  the  source  because  of  the  circuit  impedance.  Since  the 
impedance  is  the  total  opposition  to  ac,  the  apparent  power  is  that  power  the  voltage  source  "sees." 
Apparent  power  is  the  combination  of  true  power  and  reactive  power.  Apparent  power  is  not  found  by 
simply  adding  true  power  and  reactive  power  just  as  impedance  is  not  found  by  adding  resistance  and 
reactance. 

To  calculate  apparent  power,  you  may  use  either  of  the  following  formulas: 


4-21 


Apparent  power  =  (IZ)  Z 

Where:       Apparent  power  is  measured  in 
VA  (volt- amperes) 

1 2  is  impedance  current  in 
amperes. 

Z  is  impedanc  e  in  ohms . 
or 

Apparent  power  =  -/(True  power)2  +  (reactive  power)2 
For  example,  find  the  apparent  power  for  the  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-10. 

Given:         Z  =  100  Q 
I  =  5  A 

Recall  that  current  in  a  series  circuit  is  the  same  in  all  parts  of  the  circuit. 
Solution: 

Apparent  Power  =  (I2)  Z 
Apparent  power  =  (5  A)2  x  100  Q 
Apparent  power  =  2500  VA 
or 


Given: 

True  power  =1500  V/ 
Reactive  power  =  2000  var 

Apparent  power  =  -^(True  power)2  +  (reactive  power)' 

Apparent  power  =  -/(1500  V/)2  +  (2000  var) 2 

Apparent  power  =        x  10*  VA 
Apparent  power  =  2500  VA 


Q25.   What  is  apparent  power? 

Q26.  What  is  the  unit  of  measurement  for  apparent  power? 
Q27.    What  is  the  formula  for  apparent  power? 


4-22 


Power  Factor 

The  POWER  FACTOR  is  a  number  (represented  as  a  decimal  or  a  percentage)  that  represents  the 
portion  of  the  apparent  power  dissipated  in  a  circuit. 

If  you  are  familiar  with  trigonometry,  the  easiest  way  to  find  the  power  factor  is  to  find  the  cosine  of 
the  phase  angle  (6).  The  cosine  of  the  phase  angle  is  equal  to  the  power  factor. 

You  do  not  need  to  use  trigonometry  to  find  the  power  factor.  Since  the  power  dissipated  in  a  circuit 
is  true  power,  then: 

Apparent  Power  x  PF  =  True  Power, 


■ru    f  ct7      True  Power 

Therefore,  PF  =  - 


Appar  ent  Power 

If  true  power  and  apparent  power  are  known  you  can  use  the  formula  shown  above. 

Going  one  step  further,  another  formula  for  power  factor  can  be  developed.  By  substituting  the 
equations  for  true  power  and  apparent  power  in  the  formula  for  power  factor,  you  get: 

Uz)2z 


Since  current  in  a  series  circuit  is  the  same  in  all  parts  of  the  circuit,  IR  equals  Iz.  Therefore,  in  a 
series  circuit, 

PF-* 

z 

For  example,  to  compute  the  power  factor  for  the  series  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-10,  any  of  the 
above  methods  may  be  used. 

Given: 


True  Power  =  1500V 
Apparent  Power  =  2500  VA 


Solution:  PF  =  - 


PF; 


Another  method: 


True  Power 
Apparent  Power 
1500  V/ 


2500  VA 
PF=  .6 


4-23 


Given:  R  =  60  Q 

Z  =100  Q 


Solution:       PF  =  — 
Z 

pF-  60  Q 
100  Q 

PF=  .6 

If  you  are  familiar  with  trigonometry  you  can  use  it  to  solve  for  angle  6  and  the  power  factor  by 
referring  to  the  tables  in  appendices  V  and  VI. 

Given:  R  =  60  Q 

X  =  80  Q 


Solution:       tan  8  =  — 
R 

tan  8  =  

60  Q 

tan  8  =  1.333 
8  =  53.1° 
PF=  cos  8 
PF=  .6 

NOTE:  As  stated  earlier  the  power  factor  can  be  expressed  as  a  decimal  or  percentage.  In  this 
example  the  decimal  number  .6  could  also  be  expressed  as  60%. 

Q28.   What  is  the  power  factor  of  a  circuit? 

Q29.   What  is  a  general  formula  used  to  calculate  the  power  factor  of  a  circuit? 

Power  Factor  Correction 

The  apparent  power  in  an  ac  circuit  has  been  described  as  the  power  the  source  "sees".  As  far  as  the 
source  is  concerned  the  apparent  power  is  the  power  that  must  be  provided  to  the  circuit.  You  also  know 
that  the  true  power  is  the  power  actually  used  in  the  circuit.  The  difference  between  apparent  power  and 
true  power  is  wasted  because,  in  reality,  only  true  power  is  consumed.  The  ideal  situation  would  be  for 
apparent  power  and  true  power  to  be  equal.  If  this  were  the  case  the  power  factor  would  be  1  (unity)  or 
100  percent.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  this  condition  can  exist.  (1)  If  the  circuit  is  purely  resistive  or 
(2)  if  the  circuit  "appears"  purely  resistive  to  the  source.  To  make  the  circuit  appear  purely  resistive  there 
must  be  no  reactance.  To  have  no  reactance  in  the  circuit,  the  inductive  reactance  (XL)  and  capacitive 
reactance  (X  c)  must  be  equal. 


4-24 


Remember:       X  =  XL-XC 
Ther  ef  or  e,  when 

Xl=XCj  X  =  0 

The  expression  "correcting  the  power  factor"  refers  to  reducing  the  reactance  in  a  circuit. 

The  ideal  situation  is  to  have  no  reactance  in  the  circuit.  This  is  accomplished  by  adding  capacitive 
reactance  to  a  circuit  which  is  inductive  and  inductive  reactance  to  a  circuit  which  is  capacitive.  For 
example,  the  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-10  has  a  total  reactance  of  80  ohms  capacitive  and  the  power  factor 
was  .6  or  60  percent.  If  80  ohms  of  inductive  reactance  were  added  to  this  circuit  (by  adding  another 
inductor)  the  circuit  would  have  a  total  reactance  of  zero  ohms  and  a  power  factor  of  1  or  100  percent. 
The  apparent  and  true  power  of  this  circuit  would  then  be  equal. 

Q30.  An  ac  circuit  has  a  total  reactance  of  10  ohms  inductive  and  a  total  resistance  of  20  ohms.  The 
power  factor  is  .89.  What  would  be  necessary  to  correct  the  power  factor  to  unity? 


SERIES  RLC  CIRCUITS 

The  principles  and  formulas  that  have  been  presented  in  this  chapter  are  used  in  all  ac  circuits.  The 
examples  given  have  been  series  circuits. 

This  section  of  the  chapter  will  not  present  any  new  material,  but  will  be  an  example  of  using  all  the 
principles  presented  so  far.  You  should  follow  each  example  problem  step  by  step  to  see  how  each 
formula  used  depends  upon  the  information  determined  in  earlier  steps.  When  an  example  calls  for 
solving  for  square  root,  you  can  practice  using  the  square -root  table  by  looking  up  the  values  given. 

The  example  series  RLC  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-1 1  will  be  used  to  solve  for  XL,  Xc,  X,  Z,  IT,  true 
power,  reactive  power,  apparent  power,  and  power  factor. 

The  values  solved  for  will  be  rounded  off  to  the  nearest  whole  number. 

First  solve  for  XL  and  Xc. 


4-25 


Given:        f  =  60  Hz 
L  =  27  mH 
C  =  380  fiF 

Solution:    XL  =  2xfl 

XL  =  6  .  28  x  60 Hz  x  27mH 
XL  =10  Q 
1 


X 

Xr  = 


2  xfc 

1 


6  .  28  x  60 Hz  x  3Q0y,F 

Xc  =  — Q 

L    0  .  143 

Xc  =  7Q 


JWVr 
R 

4A 


(~)E  =  110V 
^  f  =60  Hz 


L 

27mH 

C 

T380julF 


Figure  4-11. — Example  series  RLC  circuit 


Now  solve  for  X 


Given: 


Xc  =  7  Q 
XL  =10  Q 


Solution:  X  =  XL-XC 

X  =  10  Q  -  7  Q 
X  =  3  Q  (Inductive) 


4-26 


Use  the  value  of  X  to  solve  for  Z. 


Given: 


Solution: 


X  =  3  Q 
R  =  4  Q 

Z  =7x2  +  R2 

Z  =  J(3Q)2  +  (4Q) 

Z  =J9  +  16  Q 

Z  =^25~Q 
Z  =  5Q 


This  value  of  Z  can  be  used  to  solve  for  total  current  (IT). 


Given:         Z  =     5  Q 
E=  110  V 

Solution:      I T 

It 
It 


=  E_ 

Z 

=  110  V 
5Q 
=  22  A 


Since  current  is  equal  in  all  parts  of  a  series  circuit,  the  value  of  IT  can  be  used  to  solve  for  the 
various  values  of  power. 


4-27 


Given:  I T  =  22  A 

R=  4Q 
X  =  3Q 
Z=  5Q 


Solution: 


True  Power  =  (IR)2R 
True  Power  =(22 A) 2  x^Q 
True  Power  =1936  W 


Reactive  p  ower  =  (I  % ) 2  X 
Reactive  power  =(22  A) 2  x  3Q 
Reactive  power  =1452  var 


App  ar  ent  power  =  (I  ^  )  Z 

Apparent  Power  =  (22  A) 2  x  5Q 
Apparent  Power  =  2420  VA 


The  power  factor  can  now  be  found  using  either  apparent  power  and  true  power  or  resistance  and 
impedance.  The  mathematics  in  this  example  is  easier  if  you  use  impedance  and  resistance. 

Given:  R  =  4Q 

Z  =  5Q 


Solution:  PF  =  — 

Z 


PF=.8or80% 


PARALLEL  RLC  CIRCUITS 

When  dealing  with  a  parallel  ac  circuit,  you  will  find  that  the  concepts  presented  in  this  chapter  for 
series  ac  circuits  still  apply.  There  is  one  major  difference  between  a  series  circuit  and  a  parallel  circuit 
that  must  be  considered.  The  difference  is  that  current  is  the  same  in  all  parts  of  a  series  circuit,  whereas 
voltage  is  the  same  across  all  branches  of  a  parallel  circuit.  Because  of  this  difference,  the  total  impedance 
of  a  parallel  circuit  must  be  computed  on  the  basis  of  the  current  in  the  circuit. 


4-28 


You  should  remember  that  in  the  series  RLC  circuit  the  following  three  formulas  were  used  to  find 
reactance,  impedance,  and  power  factor: 


X=XL  -  Xc  orX=Xc  -  XL 

Z  =  V(Ir)2  +X2 

PF=* 
Z 

When  working  with  a  parallel  circuit  you  must  use  the  following  formulas  instead: 

Ix  =IL  -  Ic  or  Ix  =  IC  -  IL 

h=ih)2  +  cix)2 

PF=k 
h 

(The  impedance  of  a 
parallel  circuit  is  found 
E 

by  the  formula  Z  =  — ) 
h 

NOTE:  If  no  value  for  E  is  given  in  a  circuit,  any  value  of  E  can  be  assumed  to  find  the  values  of  IL, 
Ic,  Ix,  Ir,  and  Iz.  The  same  value  of  voltage  is  then  used  to  find  impedance. 

For  example,  find  the  value  of  Z  in  the  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-12. 


Given:       E  =  300  V 
R  =100  fi 
XL  =  50  Q 
Xc  =150  Q 


The  first  step  in  solving  for  Z  is  to  calculate  the  individual  branch  currents. 


4-29 


Solution:    I  R  = 


In  = 


U  = 


II 
Ic 

Ic 
Ic 


E 

R 

300V 
100  £3 
3  A 

E 


X, 


300  V 
50  Q 
6  A 

E 


Xc 

300  V I 

150  Q 

2  A 


0 


E=300V 


>10Qn 


Ir 


L}XL=50n 

Xc=i50nC=C 


Figure  4-12. — Parallel  RLC  circuit. 

Using  the  values  for  IR,  IL,  and  Ic,  solve  for  Ix  and  I  z. 


Ix 
Ix 


II-  Ic 

6  A  -  2A 


I  x  =  4  A  (inductive) 

h=ih)2  +  dx)2 

Iz  =V(3A)2  +(^A)2 

Iz  =  V25A 
I7  =5A 


4-30 


Using  this  value  of  Iz,  solve  for  Z. 

Z=^ 
h 

=  300  V 
5A 
Z  =60Q 

If  the  value  for  E  were  not  given  and  you  were  asked  to  solve  for  Z,  any  value  of  E  could  be 
assumed.  If,  in  the  example  problem  above,  you  assume  a  value  of  50  volts  for  E,  the  solution  would  be: 

Given:       R  =100  Q 
XL  =  50  Q 
Xc  =150  Q 
E  =  50  V  (a55urned) 

First  solve  for  the  values  of  current  in  the  same  manner  as  before. 

Solution:         Ip  = 


In  = 


L 


I 


C 


C 


E 

R 
50  V 


100  Q 
5 

E 


IE=  ,5A 


I 


50  V 


50  Q 
IL  =  1A 

E 


50  V 


150  Q 
I  c  =  .33  A 


4-31 


Solve  for  Ix  and  Iz. 


Solve  for  Z. 


Ii-Il  "  h 
Ix  =1A  -  .  33A 

I  x  =  .  67  A  (Inductive) 

Iz  =7(0  .  5A)2  +  (0.  61  A)2 

Iz  =  V0.  6989 A 
1 7  =  0  .  836  A 


h 

50  V 


836  A 
Z  =  60  Q  (rounded  off) 

When  the  voltage  is  given,  you  can  use  the  values  of  currents,  I R,  Ix,  and  Iz,  to  calculate  for  the  true 
power,  reactive  power,  apparent  power,  and  power  factor.  For  the  circuit  shown  in  figure  4-12,  the 
calculations  would  be  as  follows. 


To  find  true  power, 


Gr/en:        R  =  100  Q 
Ir=  3A 


Solution: 


True  Power  =  (IE)2X 
True  Power  =  (3  A) 2  x  75  Q 
True  Power  =  900  W 


To  find  reactive  power,  first  find  the  value  of  reactance  (X). 


4-32 


Given:  E  =  300V 

IK=    4  A  (Inductive) 


To  find  apparent  power, 


E 

Solution:        X  =  ■ 


Ix 

„    300  V 

X  =  

4A 

X  =  75  Q  (Inductive) 
Reactive  power  =  (I  s)  X 
Reactive  power  =  (4A)2  x75  Q 
Reactive  power  =  1200  var 


Given:  Z  =  60  Q 

h  =  5A 

Solution: 

■.2 


Apparent  Power  =(IZ)  Z 

Apparent  Power  =(5  A) 2  x 
Apparent  Power  =1500  VA 


The  power  factor  in  a  parallel  circuit  is  found  by  either  of  the  following  methods. 


4-33 


Given: 

True  Power 
Apparent  Power 


=  900  V/ 
=  1500  VA 


Solution: 


Given: 


Solution: 


Q31.   What  is  the  difference  between  calculating  i 
circuit? 


true  power 

PF  =  

apparent  power 

PF  =  

1500  VA 

PF=  .  6 


or 

h 

=  3  A 

h 

=  5  A 

PF 

h 

PF 

3  A 

5  A 

PF 

=  .  6 

ipedance  in  a  series  ac  circuit  and  in  a  parallel  ac 


SUMMARY 

With  the  completion  of  this  chapter  you  now  have  all  the  building  blocks  for  electrical  circuits.  The 
subjects  covered  from  this  point  on  will  be  based  upon  the  concepts  and  relationships  that  you  have 
learned.  The  following  summary  is  a  brief  review  of  the  subjects  covered  in  this  chapter. 

INDUCTANCE  IN  AC  CIRCUITS — An  inductor  in  an  ac  circuit  opposes  any  change  in  current 
flow  just  as  it  does  in  a  dc  circuit. 

PHASE  RELATIONSHIPS  OF  AN  INDUCTOR— The  current  lags  the  voltage  by  90°  in  an 
inductor  (ELI). 

INDUCTIVE  REACTANCE— The  opposition  an  inductor  offers  to  ac  is  called  inductive 
reactance.  It  will  increase  if  there  is  an  increase  in  frequency  or  an  increase  in  inductance.  The  symbol  is 
XL,  and  the  formula  is  XL  =  2rcfL. 


4-34 


B 


CAPACITANCE  IN  AC  CIRCUITS — A  capacitor  in  an  ac  circuit  opposes  any  change  in  voltage 
just  as  it  does  in  a  dc  circuit. 

PHASE  RELATIONSHIPS  OF  A  CAPACITOR— The  current  leads  the  voltage  by  90°  in  a 
capacitor  (ICE). 

CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE — The  opposition  a  capacitor  offers  to  ac  is  called  capacitive 
reactance.  Capacitive  reactance  will  decrease  if  there  is  an  increase  in  frequency  or  an  increase  in 
capacitance.  The  symbol  is  Xc  and  the  formula  is 

C  2nfC 


4-35 


MAXIMUM 
POSITIVE 


ZERO 


MAXIMUM 
NEGATIVE 


TIME 


MAXIMUM 
POSITIVE 


ZERO 

MAXIMUM 
NEGATIVE 
TIME 


VOLTAGE 

^-CURRENT 
-  . —  


90"  180° 

A 


270°  360° 


-CURRENT 


90°        180°       270°  360* 


MAXIMUM 
POSITIVE 

ZERO 

MAXIMUM 
NEGATIVE 
TIME 


TOTAL  REACTANCE — The  total  reactance  of  a  series  ac  circuit  is  determined  by  the  formula 
X  =  XL  -  Xc  or  X  =  Xc  -  X  L.  The  total  reactance  in  a  series  circuit  is  either  capacitive  or  inductive 
depending  upon  the  largest  value  of  Xc  and  XL.  In  a  parallel  circuit  the  reactance  is  determined  by 


X 


where  Ix  =  Ic  - 1  l  or  Ix  =  II  -  Ic-  The  reactance  in  a  parallel  circuit  is  either  capacitive  or  inductive 
depending  upon  the  largest  value  of  IL  and  Ic. 


4-36 


IMPEDANCE  -  The  total  opposition  to  a.c.  is 
called  impedance.  The  symbol  is  Z  In  a  series 

circuit  Z  =  -J?,2  +  X2 .  In  a  parallel  circuit 

XL=10  0HMS 
 1 

X=XC|XL=10  OHMS 


R  =  40  OHMS 


T 


Xc  =  20  0HMS 


PHASE  ANGLE — The  number  of  degrees  that  current  leads  or  lags  voltage  in  an  ac  circuit  is  called 
the  phase  angle.  The  symbol  is  6. 

OHM'S  LAW  FORMULAS  FOR  AC— The  formulas  derived  for  Ohm's  law  used  in  ac  are:  E  =  IZ 
and  I  =  E/Z. 

TRUE  POWER — The  power  dissipated  across  the  resistance  in  an  ac  circuit  is  called  true  power.  It 
is  measured  in  watts  and  the  formula  is:  True  Power  =  (IR)  2R. 

REACTIVE  POWER — The  power  returned  to  the  source  by  the  reactive  elements  of  the  circuit  is 
called  reactive  power.  It  is  measured  in  volt-amperes  reactive  (var).  The  formula  is:  Reactive  Power  = 
(Ix)2X. 

APPARENT  POWER — The  power  that  appears  to  the  source  because  of  circuit  impedance  is 
called  apparent  power.  It  is  the  combination  of  true  power  and  reactive  power  and  is  measured  in  volt- 
amperes  (VA).  The  formulas  are: 


Apparent  Power  =  (Iz  )2Z 

Apparent  Power  =  -J (true  power)2  +  (reactive  power) 1 


4-37 


VOLTAGE  j  P 

B 

/POWER 

current/ 

/ 

POWER  FACTOR — The  portion  of  the  apparent  power  dissipated  in  a  circuit  is  called  the  power 
factor  of  the  circuit.  It  can  be  expressed  as  a  decimal  or  a  percentage.  The  formulas  for  power 


true  power       ^  n 
iactor  are  PF  =  ;  orPF=co5t?.  Ina 


appar  ent  power 
R 
Z 


series  circuit,  PF  =  —  .  In  a  parallel  circuit,  Pf  =  — 

I  7 


POWER  FACTOR  CORRECTION— To  reduce  losses  in  a  circuit  the  power  factor  should  be  as 
close  to  unity  or  100%  as  possible.  This  is  done  by  adding  capacitive  reactance  to  a  circuit  when  the  total 
reactance  is  inductive.  If  the  total  reactance  is  capacitive,  inductive  reactance  is  added  in  the  circuit. 


ANSWERS  TO  QUESTIONS  Ql.  THROUGH  Q31. 

Al.  An  inductor  opposes  a  change  in  current. 

A2.  Current  lags  voltage  by  90°  (ELI). 

A3.  Inductive  reactance. 

A4.  Xl  =  2j$L. 

A5.  XL  increases. 

A6.  XL  decreases. 


4-38 


A  7.  The  capacitor  opposes  any  change  in  voltage. 

A8.  Current  leads  voltage  by  90°  (ICE). 

A9.  Capacitive  reactance. 
AW. 

2xfC 

All.  Xc  increases. 

A 12.  Xc  decreases. 

A13.  X  =  XL-XcorX  =  Xc-XL 

A14.  30  Q  (capacitive). 

A15.  Impedance. 
A16. 

Z  =  ^R2  +  X2. 

A17.  Z  =  5Q. 
A 18. 


E  =  IZ 


A 19.  True  power  is  the  power  dissipated  in  the  resistance  of  the  circuit  or  the  power  actually  used  in 
the  circuit. 

A20.  Watt. 

All.   True  Power  =  (Ir)  2 R. 

A22.  Reactive  power  is  the  power  returned  to  the  source  by  the  reactive  components  of  the  circuit. 

A23.  var. 

A24. 

Reactive  Power  =  (I  s)  X  or 
(IC)2XC-(IL)2XL  or 
(IL)2XL  -  (IC)2XC. 


4-39 


A25.   The  power  that  appears  to  the  source  because  of  circuit  impedance,  or  the  combination  of  true 
power  and  reactive  power. 

A26.   VA  (volt-amperes). 

A27. 

Apparent  power  =       Z  or 

■^(true  power)2  +  (reactive  power) 2 

A28.  PF  is  a  number  representing  the  portion  of  apparent  power  actually  dissipated  in  a  circuit. 
A29. 

true  power 

PF=  -  or  PF=  co5  6. 

apparent  power 

A 30.  Add  10  ohms  of  capacitive  reactance  to  the  circuit. 

A31.  In  a  series  circuit  impedance  is  calculated  from  the  values  of  resistance  and  reactance.  In  a 

parallel  circuit,  the  values  of  resistive  current  and  reactive  current  must  be  used  to  calculate  total 
current  (impedance  current)  and  this  value  must  be  divided  into  the  source  voltage  to  calculate  the 
impedance. 


4-40 


CHAPTER  5 

TRANSFORMERS 


LEARNING  OBJECTIVES 

Upon  completion  of  this  chapter  you  will  be  able  to: 

1 .  State  the  meaning  of  "transformer  action." 

2.  State  the  physical  characteristics  of  a  transformer,  including  the  basic  parts,  common  core 
materials,  and  main  core  types. 

3.  State  the  names  given  to  the  source  and  load  windings  of  a  transformer. 

4.  State  the  difference  in  construction  between  a  high-  and  a  low- voltage  transformer. 

5.  Identify  transformer  symbols  as  to  the  type  of  transformer  each  symbol  represents  and  the  method 
used  to  denote  transformer  phasing. 

6.  State  the  meaning  of  a  "no-load  condition"  and  "exciting  current"  relative  to  a  transformer. 

7.  State  what  causes  voltage  to  be  developed  across  the  secondary  of  a  transformer  and  the  effect  of 
cemf  in  a  transformer. 

8.  State  the  meaning  of  leakage  flux  and  its  effect  on  the  coefficient  of  coupling. 

9.  Identify  a  transformer  as  step  up  or  step  down  and  state  the  current  ratio  of  a  transformer  when 
given  the  turns  ratio. 

10.  Solve  for  primary  voltage,  secondary  voltage,  primary  current  and  number  of  turns  in  the  secondary 
given  various  transformer  values. 

1 1 .  State  the  mathematical  relationship  between  the  power  in  the  primary  and  the  power  in  the 
secondary  of  a  transformer  and  compute  efficiency  of  a  transformer. 

12.  State  the  three  power  losses  in  a  transformer. 

13.  State  the  reason  a  transformer  should  not  be  operated  at  a  lower  frequency  than  that  specified  for 
the  transformer. 

14.  List  five  different  types  of  transformers  according  to  their  applications. 

15.  State  the  standard  color  coding  for  a  power  transformer. 

16.  State  the  general  safety  precautions  you  should  observe  when  working  with  transformers  and  other 
electrical  components. 


5-1 


TRANSFORMERS 


The  information  in  this  chapter  is  on  the  construction,  theory,  operation,  and  the  various  uses  of 
transformers.  Safety  precautions  to  be  observed  by  a  person  working  with  transformers  are  also  discussed. 

A  TRANSFORMER  is  a  device  that  transfers  electrical  energy  from  one  circuit  to  another  by 
electromagnetic  induction  (transformer  action).  The  electrical  energy  is  always  transferred  without  a  change 
in  frequency,  but  may  involve  changes  in  magnitudes  of  voltage  and  current.  Because  a  transformer  works 
on  the  principle  of  electromagnetic  induction,  it  must  be  used  with  an  input  source  voltage  that  varies  in 
amplitude.  There  are  many  types  of  power  that  fit  this  description;  for  ease  of  explanation  and 
understanding,  transformer  action  will  be  explained  using  an  ac  voltage  as  the  input  source. 

In  a  preceding  chapter  you  learned  that  alternating  current  has  certain  advantages  over  direct  current. 
One  important  advantage  is  that  when  ac  is  used,  the  voltage  and  current  levels  can  be  increased  or 
decreased  by  means  of  a  transformer. 

As  you  know,  the  amount  of  power  used  by  the  load  of  an  electrical  circuit  is  equal  to  the  current  in  the 
load  times  the  voltage  across  the  load,  or  P  =  EI.  If,  for  example,  the  load  in  an  electrical  circuit  requires  an 
input  of  2  amperes  at  10  volts  (20  watts)  and  the  source  is  capable  of  delivering  only  1  ampere  at  20  volts, 
the  circuit  could  not  normally  be  used  with  this  particular  source.  However,  if  a  transformer  is  connected 
between  the  source  and  the  load,  the  voltage  can  be  decreased  (stepped  down)  to  10  volts  and  the  current 
increased  (stepped  up)  to  2  amperes.  Notice  in  the  above  case  that  the  power  remains  the  same.  That  is,  20 
volts  times  1  ampere  equals  the  same  power  as  10  volts  times  2  amperes. 

Ql.  What  is  meant  by  "transformer  action?" 


BASIC  OPERATION  OF  A  TRANSFORMER 

In  its  most  basic  form  a  transformer  consists  of: 

•  A  primary  coil  or  winding. 

•  A  secondary  coil  or  winding. 

•  A  core  that  supports  the  coils  or  windings. 

Refer  to  the  transformer  circuit  in  figure  5-1  as  you  read  the  following  explanation:  The  primary 
winding  is  connected  to  a  60  hertz  ac  voltage  source.  The  magnetic  field  (flux)  builds  up  (expands)  and 
collapses  (contracts)  about  the  primary  winding.  The  expanding  and  contracting  magnetic  field  around  the 
primary  winding  cuts  the  secondary  winding  and  induces  an  alternating  voltage  into  the  winding.  This 
voltage  causes  alternating  current  to  flow  through  the  load.  The  voltage  may  be  stepped  up  or  down 
depending  on  the  design  of  the  primary  and  secondary  windings. 


5-2 


>1 


PRIMARY 


1 '  n»    /  * 


LOAD 

SECONDARY 


Figure  5-1. — Basic  transformer  action. 

Q2.  What  are,  the  three  basic  parts  of  a  transformer? 


THE  COMPONENTS  OF  A  TRANSFORMER 

Two  coils  of  wire  (called  windings)  are  wound  on  some  type  of  core  material.  In  some  cases  the  coils  of 
wire  are  wound  on  a  cylindrical  or  rectangular  cardboard  form.  In  effect,  the  core  material  is  air  and  the 
transformer  is  called  an  AIR-CORE  TRANSFORMER.  Transformers  used  at  low  frequencies,  such  as  60 
hertz  and  400  hertz,  require  a  core  of  low-reluctance  magnetic  material,  usually  iron.  This  type  of 
transformer  is  called  an  IRON-CORE  TRANSFORMER.  Most  power  transformers  are  of  the  iron-core  type. 
The  principle  parts  of  a  transformer  and  their  functions  are: 

•  The  CORE,  which  provides  a  path  for  the  magnetic  lines  of  flux. 

•  The  PRIMARY  WINDING,  which  receives  energy  from  the  ac  source. 

•  The  SECONDARY  WINDING,  which  receives  energy  from  the  primary  winding  and  delivers  it  to 
the  load. 

•  The  ENCLOSURE,  which  protects  the  above  components  from  dirt,  moisture,  and  mechanical 
damage. 

CORE  CHARACTERISTICS 

The  composition  of  a  transformer  core  depends  on  such  factors  as  voltage,  current,  and  frequency.  Size 
limitations  and  construction  costs  are  also  factors  to  be  considered.  Commonly  used  core  materials  are  air, 
soft  iron,  and  steel.  Each  of  these  materials  is  suitable  for  particular  applications  and  unsuitable  for  others. 
Generally,  air-core  transformers  are  used  when  the  voltage  source  has  a  high  frequency  (above  20  kHz). 
Iron-core  transformers  are  usually  used  when  the  source  frequency  is  low  (below  20  kHz).  A  soft-iron-core 
transformer  is  very  useful  where  the  transformer  must  be  physically  small,  yet  efficient.  The  iron-core 
transformer  provides  better  power  transfer  than  does  the  air-core  transformer.  A  transformer  whose  core  is 
constructed  of  laminated  sheets  of  steel  dissipates  heat  readily;  thus  it  provides  for  the  efficient  transfer  of 
power.  The  majority  of  transformers  you  will  encounter  in  Navy  equipment  contain  laminated-steel  cores. 
These  steel  laminations  (see  figure  5-2)  are  insulated  with  a  nonconducting  material,  such  as  varnish,  and 
then  formed  into  a  core.  It  takes  about  50  such  laminations  to  make  a  core  an  inch  thick.  The  purpose  of  the 
laminations  is  to  reduce  certain  losses  which  will  be  discussed  later  in  this  chapter.  An  important  point  to 


5-3 


remember  is  that  the  most  efficient  transformer  core  is  one  that  offers  the  best  path  for  the  most  lines  of  flux 
with  the  least  loss  in  magnetic  and  electrical  energy. 


Figure  5-2. — Hollow-core  construction. 

Q3.  What  are  three  materials  commonly  used  as  the  core  of  a  transformer? 

Hollow-Core  Transformers 

There  are  two  main  shapes  of  cores  used  in  laminated-steel-core  transformers.  One  is  the  HOLLOW- 
CORE,  so  named  because  the  core  is  shaped  with  a  hollow  square  through  the  center.  Figure  5-2  illustrates 
this  shape  of  core.  Notice  that  the  core  is  made  up  of  many  laminations  of  steel.  Figure  5-3  illustrates  how 
the  transformer  windings  are  wrapped  around  both  sides  of  the  core. 


Figure  5-3. — Windings  wrapped  around  laminations. 
5-4 


Shell-Core  Transformers 


The  most  popular  and  efficient  transformer  core  is  the  SHELL  CORE,  as  illustrated  in  figure  5-4.  As 
shown,  each  layer  of  the  core  consists  of  E-  and  I-shaped  sections  of  metal.  These  sections  are  butted 
together  to  form  the  laminations.  The  laminations  are  insulated  from  each  other  and  then  pressed  together 
to  form  the  core. 


^-  LAMINATED  CORE 


Figure  5-4. — Shell-type  core  construction. 

Q4.  What  are  the  two  main  types  of  cores  used  in  transformers? 

TRANSFORMER  WINDINGS 

As  stated  above,  the  transformer  consists  of  two  coils  called  WINDINGS  which  are  wrapped  around 
a  core.  The  transformer  operates  when  a  source  of  ac  voltage  is  connected  to  one  of  the  windings  and  a 
load  device  is  connected  to  the  other.  The  winding  that  is  connected  to  the  source  is  called  the  PRIMARY 
WINDING.  The  winding  that  is  connected  to  the  load  is  called  the  SECONDARY  WINDING.  (Note:  In 
this  chapter  the  terms  "primary  winding"  and  "primary"  are  used  interchangeably;  the  term:  "secondary 
winding"  and  "secondary"  are  also  used  interchangeably.) 

Figure  5-5  shows  an  exploded  view  of  a  shell-type  transformer.  The  primary  is  wound  in  layers 
directly  on  a  rectangular  cardboard  form. 


5-5 


CARD- 
BOARD 
FORM 


E  LAMINATION 


INSULATING 
PAPER 


I  LAMINATION 


Figure  5-5. — Exploded  view  of  shell-type  transformer  construction. 

In  the  transformer  shown  in  the  cutaway  view  in  figure  5-6,  the  primary  consists  of  many  turns  of 
relatively  small  wire.  The  wire  is  coated  with  varnish  so  that  each  turn  of  the  winding  is  insulated  from 
every  other  turn.  In  a  transformer  designed  for  high- voltage  applications,  sheets  of  insulating  material, 
such  as  paper,  are  placed  between  the  layers  of  windings  to  provide  additional  insulation. 


Figure  5-6. — Cutaway  view  of  shell-type  core  with  windings. 

When  the  primary  winding  is  completely  wound,  it  is  wrapped  in  insulating  paper  or  cloth.  The 
secondary  winding  is  then  wound  on  top  of  the  primary  winding.  After  the  secondary  winding  is 
complete,  it  too  is  covered  with  insulating  paper.  Next,  the  E  and  I  sections  of  the  iron  core  are  inserted 
into  and  around  the  windings  as  shown. 

The  leads  from  the  windings  are  normally  brought  out  through  a  hole  in  the  enclosure  of  the 
transformer.  Sometimes,  terminals  may  be  provided  on  the  enclosure  for  connections  to  the  windings.  The 
figure  shows  four  leads,  two  from  the  primary  and  two  from  the  secondary.  These  leads  are  to  be 
connected  to  the  source  and  load,  respectively. 


5-6 


Q5.  Which  transformer  windings  are  connected  to  an  ac  source  voltage  and  to  a  load,  respectively? 

Q6.  A  transformer  designed  for  high-voltage  applications  differs  in  construction  in  what  way  from  a 
transformer  designed  for  low-voltage  applications  ? 


SCHEMATIC  SYMBOLS  FOR  TRANSFORMERS 

Figure  5-7  shows  typical  schematic  symbols  for  transformers.  The  symbol  for  an  air-core 
transformer  is  shown  in  figure  5-7(A).  Parts  (B)  and  (C)  show  iron-core  transformers.  The  bars  between 
the  coils  are  used  to  indicate  an  iron  core.  Frequently,  additional  connections  are  made  to  the  transformer 
windings  at  points  other  than  the  ends  of  the  windings.  These  additional  connections  are  called  TAPS. 
When  a  tap  is  connected  to  the  center  of  the  winding,  it  is  called  a  CENTER  TAP.  Figure  5-7(C)  shows 
the  schematic  representation  of  a  center-tapped  iron-core  transformer. 


Figure  5-7. — Schematic  symbols  for  various  types  of  transformers. 

Q7.  Identify  the  below  schematic  symbols  of  transformers  by  labeling  them  in  the  blanks  provided. 


o.   b.   c 


5-7 


HOW  A  TRANSFORMER  WORKS 


Up  to  this  point  the  chapter  has  presented  the  basics  of  the  transformer  including  transformer  action, 
the  transformer's  physical  characteristics,  and  how  the  transformer  is  constructed.  Now  you  have  the 
necessary  knowledge  to  proceed  into  the  theory  of  operation  of  a  transformer. 

NO-LOAD  CONDITION 

You  have  learned  that  a  transformer  is  capable  of  supplying  voltages  which  are  usually  higher  or 
lower  than  the  source  voltage.  This  is  accomplished  through  mutual  induction,  which  takes  place  when 
the  changing  magnetic  field  produced  by  the  primary  voltage  cuts  the  secondary  winding. 

A  no-load  condition  is  said  to  exist  when  a  voltage  is  applied  to  the  primary,  but  no  load  is  connected 
to  the  secondary,  as  illustrated  by  figure  5-8.  Because  of  the  open  switch,  there  is  no  current  flowing  in 
the  secondary  winding.  With  the  switch  open  and  an  ac  voltage  applied  to  the  primary,  there  is,  however, 
a  very  small  amount  of  current  called  EXCITrNG  CURRENT  flowing  in  the  primary.  Essentially,  what 
the  exciting  current  does  is  "excite"  the  coil  of  the  primary  to  create  a  magnetic  field.  The  amount  of 
exciting  current  is  determined  by  three  factors:  (1)  the  amount  of  voltage  applied  (Ea),  (2)  the  resistance 
(R)  of  the  primary  coil's  wire  and  core  losses,  and  (3)  the  XL  which  is  dependent  on  the  frequency  of  the 
exciting  current.  These  last  two  factors  are  controlled  by  transformer  design. 


This  very  small  amount  of  exciting  current  serves  two  functions: 

1.  Most  of  the  exciting  energy  is  used  to  maintain  the  magnetic  field  of  the  primary. 

2.  A  small  amount  of  energy  is  used  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  the  wire  and  core  losses  which 
are  dissipated  in  the  form  of  heat  (power  loss). 

Exciting  current  will  flow  in  the  primary  winding  at  all  times  to  maintain  this  magnetic  field,  but  no 
transfer  of  energy  will  take  place  as  long  as  the  secondary  circuit  is  open. 

Q8.  What  is  meant  by  a  "no-load  condition"  in  a  transformer  circuit? 

PRODUCING  A  COUNTER  EMF 

When  an  alternating  current  flows  through  a  primary  winding,  a  magnetic  field  is  established  around 
the  winding.  As  the  lines  of  flux  expand  outward,  relative  motion  is  present,  and  a  counter  emf  is  induced 
in  the  winding.  This  is  the  same  counter  emf  that  you  learned  about  in  the  chapter  on  inductors.  Flux 
leaves  the  primary  at  the  north  pole  and  enters  the  primary  at  the  south  pole.  The  counter  emf  induced  in 


10  V 


Figure  5-8. — Transformer  under  no-load  conditions. 


5-8 


the  primary  has  a  polarity  that  opposes  the  applied  voltage,  thus  opposing  the  flow  of  current  in  the 
primary.  It  is  the  counter  emf  that  limits  exciting  current  to  a  very  low  value. 

Q9.  What  is  meant  by  "exciting  current"  in  a  transformer? 

INDUCING  A  VOLTAGE  IN  THE  SECONDARY 

To  visualize  how  a  voltage  is  induced  into  the  secondary  winding  of  a  transformer,  again  refer  to 
figure  5-8.  As  the  exciting  current  flows  through  the  primary,  magnetic  lines  of  force  are  generated. 
During  the  time  current  is  increasing  in  the  primary,  magnetic  lines  of  force  expand  outward  from  the 
primary  and  cut  the  secondary.  As  you  remember,  a  voltage  is  induced  into  a  coil  when  magnetic  lines  cut 
across  it.  Therefore,  the  voltage  across  the  primary  causes  a  voltage  to  be  induced  across  the  secondary. 

Q10.  What  is  the  name  of  the  emf  generated  in  the  primary  that  opposes  the  flow  of  current  in  the 
primary? 

Qll.  What  causes  a  voltage  to  be  developed  across  the  secondary  winding  of  a  transformer? 

PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  PHASE  RELATIONSHIP 

The  secondary  voltage  of  a  simple  transformer  may  be  either  in  phase  or  out  of  phase  with  the 
primary  voltage.  This  depends  on  the  direction  in  which  the  windings  are  wound  and  the  arrangement  of 
the  connections  to  the  external  circuit  (load).  Simply,  this  means  that  the  two  voltages  may  rise  and  fall 
together  or  one  may  rise  while  the  other  is  falling. 

Transformers  in  which  the  secondary  voltage  is  in  phase  with  the  primary  are  referred  to  as  LIKE- 
WOUND  transformers,  while  those  in  which  the  voltages  are  180  degrees  out  of  phase  are  called 
UNLIKE-WOUND  transformers. 

Dots  are  used  to  indicate  points  on  a  transformer  schematic  symbol  that  have  the  same  instantaneous 
polarity  (points  that  are  in  phase). 

The  use  of  phase-indicating  dots  is  illustrated  in  figure  5-9.  In  part  (A)  of  the  figure,  both  the  primary 
and  secondary  windings  are  wound  from  top  to  bottom  in  a  clockwise  direction,  as  viewed  from  above  the 
windings.  When  constructed  in  this  manner,  the  top  lead  of  the  primary  and  the  top  lead  of  the  secondary 
have  the  SAME  polarity.  This  is  indicated  by  the  dots  on  the  transformer  symbol.  A  lack  of  phasing  dots 
indicates  a  reversal  of  polarity. 


5-9 


B 


Figure  5-9. — Instantaneous  polarity  depends  on  direction  of  winding. 

Part  (B)  of  the  figure  illustrates  a  transformer  in  which  the  primary  and  secondary  are  wound  in 
opposite  directions.  As  viewed  from  above  the  windings,  the  primary  is  wound  in  a  clockwise  direction 
from  top  to  bottom,  while  the  secondary  is  wound  in  a  counterclockwise  direction.  Notice  that  the  top 
leads  of  the  primary  and  secondary  have  OPPOSITE  polarities.  This  is  indicated  by  the  dots  being  placed 
on  opposite  ends  of  the  transformer  symbol.  Thus,  the  polarity  of  the  voltage  at  the  terminals  of  the 
secondary  of  a  transformer  depends  on  the  direction  in  which  the  secondary  is  wound  with  respect  to  the 
primary. 

Q12.  What  is  the  phase  relationship  between  the  voltage  induced  in  the  secondary  of  an  unlike-wound 
transformer  and  the  counter  emfof  the  primary  winding? 

Q13.  Draw  dots  on  the  below  symbol  to  indicate  the  phasing  of  the  transformer. 


COEFFICIENT  OF  COUPLING 

The  COEFFICIENT  OF  COUPLING  of  a  transformer  is  dependent  on  the  portion  of  the  total  flux 
lines  that  cuts  both  primary  and  secondary  windings.  Ideally,  all  the  flux  lines  generated  by  the  primary 
should  cut  the  secondary,  and  all  the  lines  of  the  flux  generated  by  the  secondary  should  cut  the  primary. 
The  coefficient  of  coupling  would  then  be  one  (unity),  and  maximum  energy  would  be  transferred  from 
the  primary  to  the  secondary.  Practical  power  transformers  use  high-permeability  silicon  steel  cores  and 
close  spacing  between  the  windings  to  provide  a  high  coefficient  of  coupling. 

Lines  of  flux  generated  by  one  winding  which  do  not  link  with  the  other  winding  are  called 
LEAKAGE  FLUX.  Since  leakage  flux  generated  by  the  primary  does  not  cut  the  secondary,  it  cannot 
induce  a  voltage  into  the  secondary.  The  voltage  induced  into  the  secondary  is  therefore  less  than  it  would 
be  if  the  leakage  flux  did  not  exist.  Since  the  effect  of  leakage  flux  is  to  lower  the  voltage  induced  into  the 


5-10 


secondary,  the  effect  can  be  duplicated  by  assuming  an  inductor  to  be  connected  in  series  with  the 
primary.  This  series  LEAKAGE  INDUCTANCE  is  assumed  to  drop  part  of  the  applied  voltage,  leaving 
less  voltage  across  the  primary. 

Q14.  What  is  "leakage  flux?" 

Q15.  What  effect  does  flux  leakage  in  a  transformer  have  on  the  coefficient  of  coupling  (K)  in  the 
transformer? 

TURNS  AND  VOLTAGE  RATIOS 

The  total  voltage  induced  into  the  secondary  winding  of  a  transformer  is  determined  mainly  by  the 
RATIO  of  the  number  of  turns  in  the  primary  to  the  number  of  turns  in  the  secondary,  and  by  the  amount 
of  voltage  applied  to  the  primary.  Refer  to  figure  5-10.  Part  (A)  of  the  figure  shows  a  transformer  whose 
primary  consists  of  ten  turns  of  wire  and  whose  secondary  consists  of  a  single  turn  of  wire.  You  know 
that  as  lines  of  flux  generated  by  the  primary  expand  and  collapse,  they  cut  BOTH  the  ten  turns  of  the 
primary  and  the  single  turn  of  the  secondary.  Since  the  length  of  the  wire  in  the  secondary  is 
approximately  the  same  as  the  length  of  the  wire  in  each  turn  in  the  primary,  EMF  INDUCED  INTO  THE 
SECONDARY  WILL  BE  THE  SAME  AS  THE  EMF  INDUCED  INTO  EACH  TURN  IN  THE 
PRIMARY.  This  means  that  if  the  voltage  applied  to  the  primary  winding  is  10  volts,  the  counter  emf  in 
the  primary  is  almost  10  volts.  Thus,  each  turn  in  the  primary  will  have  an  induced  counter  emf  of 
approximately  one-tenth  of  the  total  applied  voltage,  or  one  volt.  Since  the  same  flux  lines  cut  the  turns  in 
both  the  secondary  and  the  primary,  each  turn  will  have  an  emf  of  one  volt  induced  into  it.  The 
transformer  in  part  (A)  of  figure  5-10  has  only  one  turn  in  the  secondary,  thus,  the  emf  across  the 
secondary  is  one  volt. 


Figure  5-10. — Transformer  turns  and  voltage  ratios. 

The  transformer  represented  in  part  (B)  of  figure  5-10  has  a  ten-turn  primary  and  a  two-turn 
secondary.  Since  the  flux  induces  one  volt  per  turn,  the  total  voltage  across  the  secondary  is  two  volts. 
Notice  that  the  volts  per  turn  are  the  same  for  both  primary  and  secondary  windings.  Since  the  counter 
emf  in  the  primary  is  equal  (or  almost)  to  the  applied  voltage,  a  proportion  may  be  set  up  to  express  the 
value  of  the  voltage  induced  in  terms  of  the  voltage  applied  to  the  primary  and  the  number  of  turns  in 
each  winding.  This  proportion  also  shows  the  relationship  between  the  number  of  turns  in  each  winding 
and  the  voltage  across  each  winding.  This  proportion  is  expressed  by  the  equation: 


5-11 


EP  NP 

Where: 

N  p  =  number  of  turns  in  the  primary 
Ep  =  voltage  applied  to  the  primary 
Ej  =  voltage  induced  in  the  secondary 
N  s  =  number  of  turns  in  the  s  ec  ondary 


Notice  the  equation  shows  that  the  ratio  of  secondary  voltage  to  primary  voltage  is  equal  to  the  ratio 
of  secondary  turns  to  primary  turns.  The  equation  can  be  written  as: 

EpNs  =  EsNp 

The  following  formulas  are  derived  from  the  above  equation: 


Transposing  for  Es :  ES=^M£. 


EoNp 

Transposing  for  EP :     EP  = 


N 


If  any  three  of  the  quantities  in  the  above  formulas  are  known,  the  fourth  quantity  can  be  calculated. 
Example.  A  transformer  has  200  turns  in  the  primary,  50  turns  in  the  secondary,  and  120  volts  applied  to 
the  primary  (Ep).  What  is  the  voltage  across  the  secondary  (Es)? 


Given: 

NP 

=  200  turns 

Ns 

=  50  turns 

EP 

=  120  volts 

Es 

=  ?  volts 

Solution:         E«  =  ^ 


Substitution:      Es  = 


NP 

120  volts  x  50  turns 


200  turns 
Es  =30  volts 


Example.  There  are  400  turns  of  wire  in  an  iron-core  coil.  If  this  coil  is  to  be  used  as  the  primary  of  a 
transformer,  how  many  turns  must  be  wound  on  the  coil  to  form  the  secondary  winding  of  the  transformer 
to  have  a  secondary  voltage  of  one  volt  if  the  primary  voltage  is  five  volts? 


5-12 


Given:  NP 
EP 

ES 
Ns 

Solution:  EPNS 

Transposing  for  Ns: 
Ns 

Substitution:  Ns 
Ns 

Note:  The  ratio  of  the  voltage  (5:1)  is  equal  to  the  turns  ratio  (400:80).  Sometimes,  instead  of 
specific  values,  you  are  given  a  turns  or  voltage  ratio.  In  this  case,  you  may  assume  any  value  for  one  of 
the  voltages  (or  turns)  and  compute  the  other  value  from  the  ratio.  For  example,  if  a  turn  ratio  is  given  as 
6: 1,  you  can  assume  a  number  of  turns  for  the  primary  and  compute  the  secondary  number  of  turns 
(60:10,  36:6,  30:5,  etc.). 

The  transformer  in  each  of  the  above  problems  has  fewer  turns  in  the  secondary  than  in  the  primary. 
As  a  result,  there  is  less  voltage  across  the  secondary  than  across  the  primary.  A  transformer  in  which  the 
voltage  across  the  secondary  is  less  than  the  voltage  across  the  primary  is  called  a  STEP-DOWN 
transformer.  The  ratio  of  a  four-to-one  step-down  transformer  is  written  as  4:1.  A  transformer  that  has 
fewer  turns  in  the  primary  than  in  the  secondary  will  produce  a  greater  voltage  across  the  secondary  than 
the  voltage  applied  to  the  primary.  A  transformer  in  which  the  voltage  across  the  secondary  is  greater  than 
the  voltage  applied  to  the  primary  is  called  a  STEP-UP  transformer.  The  ratio  of  a  one-to-four  step-up 
transformer  should  be  written  as  1:4.  Notice  in  the  two  ratios  that  the  value  of  the  primary  winding  is 
always  stated  first. 

Q16.  Does  1:5  indicate  a  step-up  or  step-down  transformer? 

Q17.  A  transformer  has  500  turns  on  the  primary  and  1500  turns  on  the  secondary.  If  45  volts  are 

applied  to  the  primary,  what  is  the  voltage  developed  across  the  secondary?  (Assume  no  losses) 

Q18.  A  transformer  has  a  turns  ratio  of  7:1.  If  5  volts  is  developed  across  the  secondary,  what  is  the 
voltage  applied  to  the  primary?  (Note:  Es  is  given,  what  is  EP  ?) 

Q19.  A  transformer  has  60  volts  applied  to  its  primary  and  420  volts  appearing  across  its  secondary.  If 
there  are  800  turns  on  the  primary,  what  is  the  number  of  turns  in  the  secondary? 

EFFECT  OF  A  LOAD 

When  a  load  device  is  connected  across  the  secondary  winding  of  a  transformer,  current  flows 
through  the  secondary  and  the  load.  The  magnetic  field  produced  by  the  current  in  the  secondary  interacts 
with  the  magnetic  field  produced  by  the  current  in  the  primary.  This  interaction  results  from  the  mutual 
inductance  between  the  primary  and  secondary  windings. 


=  400  turns 
=    5  volts 
=    1  volt 
=  ?  turns 

=  ESNP 

=  EsNp 
EP 

_  lvolt  x  4QQ  turns 

5  volts 
=  80  turns 


5-13 


MUTUAL  FLUX 


The  total  flux  in  the  core  of  the  transformer  is  common  to  both  the  primary  and  secondary  windings. 
It  is  also  the  means  by  which  energy  is  transferred  from  the  primary  winding  to  the  secondary  winding. 
Since  this  flux  links  both  windings,  it  is  called  MUTUAL  FLUX.  The  inductance  which  produces  this 
flux  is  also  common  to  both  windings  and  is  called  mutual  inductance. 

Figure  5-11  shows  the  flux  produced  by  the  currents  in  the  primary  and  secondary  windings  of  a 
transformer  when  source  current  is  flowing  in  the  primary  winding. 

PRIMARY 


FLUX 

Figure  5-11. — Simple  transformer  indicating  primary-  and  secondary-winding  flux  relationship. 

When  a  load  resistance  is  connected  to  the  secondary  winding,  the  voltage  induced  into  the 
secondary  winding  causes  current  to  flow  in  the  secondary  winding.  This  current  produces  a  flux  field 
about  the  secondary  (shown  as  broken  lines)  which  is  in  opposition  to  the  flux  field  about  the  primary 
(Lenz's  law).  Thus,  the  flux  about  the  secondary  cancels  some  of  the  flux  about  the  primary.  With  less 
flux  surrounding  the  primary,  the  counter  emf  is  reduced  and  more  current  is  drawn  from  the  source.  The 
additional  current  in  the  primary  generates  more  lines  of  flux,  nearly  reestablishing  the  original  number  of 
total  flux  lines. 

TURNS  AND  CURRENT  RATIOS 

The  number  of  flux  lines  developed  in  a  core  is  proportional  to  the  magnetizing  force  (IN  AMPERE- 
TURNS)  of  the  primary  and  secondary  windings.  The  ampere-turn  (I  x  N)  is  a  measure  of  magnetomotive 
force;  it  is  defined  as  the  magnetomotive  force  developed  by  one  ampere  of  current  flowing  in  a  coil  of 
one  turn.  The  flux  which  exists  in  the  core  of  a  transformer  surrounds  both  the  primary  and  secondary 
windings.  Since  the  flux  is  the  same  for  both  windings,  the  ampere-turns  in  both  the  primary  and 
secondary  windings  must  be  the  same. 


5-14 


Therefore: 


IpNp  =ISNS 

Where: 

IPNp  =  ampere  -turns  in  the  primary  winding 
ISNS  =  ampere -turns  in  the  secondary 
winding 

By  dividing  both  sides  of  the  equation  by  IPNS,  you  obtain: 


NP  _ 

Is 

lp 

Es  _ 

Ns 

Ep 

NP 

EP 

NP 

ES 

n7 

EP 

Is 

ES 

IP 

Since: 

Then:  ^  = 
And: 


Where: 

EP  =  voltage  applied  to  the  primary  in  volts 
Es  =  voltage  across  the  secondary  in  volts 
I P  =  curr  ent  in  the  primary  in  amper  es 
I  s  =  currentinthe  secondary  in  amperes 

Notice  the  equations  show  the  current  ratio  to  be  the  inverse  of  the  turns  ratio  and  the  voltage  ratio. 
This  means,  a  transformer  having  less  turns  in  the  secondary  than  in  the  primary  would  step  down  the 
voltage,  but  would  step  up  the  current.  Example:  A  transformer  has  a  6: 1  voltage  ratio.  Find  the  current  in 
the  secondary  if  the  current  in  the  primary  is  200  milliamperes. 


5-15 


Given:  Ep  =  6  V(assumed) 

ES=1V 

IP  =200mAor  0.  2A 
Is"? 

E  I 
Solution:         —  =  — 

ES  IP 

Transposing  for  I s : 

t  _  ^-p1  p 

Substitution: 

Is 
Is 

The  above  example  points  out  that  although  the  voltage  across  the  secondary  is  one-sixth  the  voltage 
across  the  primary,  the  current  in  the  secondary  is  six  times  the  current  in  the  primary. 

The  above  equations  can  be  looked  at  from  another  point  of  view.  The  expression 

is  called  the  transformer  TURNS  RATIO  and  may  be  expressed  as  a  single  factor.  Remember,  the  turns 
ratio  indicates  the  amount  by  which  the  transformer  increases  or  decreases  the  voltage  applied  to  the 
primary.  For  example,  if  the  secondary  of  a  transformer  has  two  times  as  many  turns  as  the  primary,  the 
voltage  induced  into  the  secondary  will  be  two  times  the  voltage  across  the  primary.  If  the  secondary  has 
one-half  as  many  turns  as  the  primary,  the  voltage  across  the  secondary  will  be  one-half  the  voltage  across 
the  primary.  However,  the  turns  ratio  and  the  current  ratio  of  a  transformer  have  an  inverse  relationship. 
Thus,  a  1:2  step-up  transformer  will  have  one-half  the  current  in  the  secondary  as  in  the  primary.  A  2:1 
step-down  transformer  will  have  twice  the  current  in  the  secondary  as  in  the  primary. 

Example:  A  transformer  with  a  turns  ratio  of  1:12  has  3  amperes  of  current  in  the  secondary.  What  is 
the  value  of  current  in  the  primary? 

Given:        Np  =  1  turn  (assumed) 
Ns  =  12  turns 
IS=3A 
LP=? 

„/■         Np  Is 
Solution:      —  =  — 

Ns  IP 


_  6  V  x  Q,  2A 

IV 
-1.  2A 


5-16 


Transposing  for  Ip : 


Substitution:  Ip 


NP 

12  turns  x  3  A 


ltum 
IF  =36  A 


Q20.  A  transformer  with  a  turns  ratio  of  1:3  has  what  current  ratio? 

Q21.  A  transformer  has  a  turns  ratio  of  5:1  and  a  current  of  5  amperes  flowing  in  the  secondary.  What 
is  the  current  flowing  in  the  primary?  (Assume  no  losses) 

POWER  RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  WINDINGS 

As  just  explained,  the  turns  ratio  of  a  transformer  affects  current  as  well  as  voltage.  If  voltage  is 
doubled  in  the  secondary,  current  is  halved  in  the  secondary.  Conversely,  if  voltage  is  halved  in  the 
secondary,  current  is  doubled  in  the  secondary.  In  this  manner,  all  the  power  delivered  to  the  primary  by 
the  source  is  also  delivered  to  the  load  by  the  secondary  (minus  whatever  power  is  consumed  by  the 
transformer  in  the  form  of  losses).  Refer  again  to  the  transformer  illustrated  in  figure  5-11.  The  turns  ratio 
is  20: 1 .  If  the  input  to  the  primary  is  0. 1  ampere  at  300  volts,  the  power  in  the  primary  is  P  =  E  x  I  =  30 
watts.  If  the  transformer  has  no  losses,  30  watts  is  delivered  to  the  secondary.  The  secondary  steps  down 
the  voltage  to  15  volts  and  steps  up  the  current  to  2  amperes.  Thus,  the  power  delivered  to  the  load  by  the 
secondary  isP  =  ExI  =  15  volts  x  2  amps  =  30  watts. 

The  reason  for  this  is  that  when  the  number  of  turns  in  the  secondary  is  decreased,  the  opposition  to 
the  flow  of  the  current  is  also  decreased.  Hence,  more  current  will  flow  in  the  secondary.  If  the  turns  ratio 
of  the  transformer  is  increased  to  1:2,  the  number  of  turns  on  the  secondary  is  twice  the  number  of  turns 
on  the  primary.  This  means  the  opposition  to  current  is  doubled.  Thus,  voltage  is  doubled,  but  current  is 
halved  due  to  the  increased  opposition  to  current  in  the  secondary.  The  important  thing  to  remember  is 
that  with  the  exception  of  the  power  consumed  within  the  transformer,  all  power  delivered  to  the  primary 
by  the  source  will  be  delivered  to  the  load.  The  form  of  the  power  may  change,  but  the  power  in  the 
secondary  almost  equals  the  power  in  the  primary. 

As  a  formula: 

PS=PP-PL 

Where: 

Ps  =  power  delivered  to  the  load  by  the 
secondary 

PP  =  power  delivered  to  the  primary  by  the 
source 

PL  =  power  losses  in  the  transformer 


TRANSFORMER  LOSSES 

Practical  power  transformers,  although  highly  efficient,  are  not  perfect  devices.  Small  power 
transformers  used  in  electrical  equipment  have  an  80  to  90  percent  efficiency  range,  while  large, 
commercial  powerline  transformers  may  have  efficiencies  exceeding  98  percent. 


5-17 


The  total  power  loss  in  a  transformer  is  a  combination  of  three  types  of  losses.  One  loss  is  due  to  the 
dc  resistance  in  the  primary  and  secondary  windings.  This  loss  is  called  COPPER  loss  or  I2R  loss.  The 
two  other  losses  are  due  to  EDDY  CURRENTS  and  to  HYSTERESIS  in  the  core  of  the  transformer. 
Copper  loss,  eddy-current  loss,  and  hysteresis  loss  result  in  undesirable  conversion  of  electrical  energy 
into  heat  energy. 

Q22.  What  is  the  mathematical  relationship  between  the  power  in  the  primary  (PP)  and  power  in  the 
secondary  (Ps)  of  a  transformer? 

Copper  Loss 

Whenever  current  flows  in  a  conductor,  power  is  dissipated  in  the  resistance  of  the  conductor  in  the 
form  of  heat.  The  amount  of  power  dissipated  by  the  conductor  is  directly  proportional  to  the  resistance  of 
the  wire,  and  to  the  square  of  the  current  through  it.  The  greater  the  value  of  either  resistance  or  current, 
the  greater  is  the  power  dissipated.  The  primary  and  secondary  windings  of  a  transformer  are  usually 
made  of  low-resistance  copper  wire.  The  resistance  of  a  given  winding  is  a  function  of  the  diameter  of  the 
wire  and  its  length.  Copper  loss  can  be  minimized  by  using  the  proper  diameter  wire.  Large  diameter  wire 
is  required  for  high-current  windings,  whereas  small  diameter  wire  can  be  used  for  low-current  windings. 

Eddy-Current  Loss 

The  core  of  a  transformer  is  usually  constructed  of  some  type  of  ferromagnetic  material  because  it  is 
a  good  conductor  of  magnetic  lines  of  flux. 

Whenever  the  primary  of  an  iron-core  transformer  is  energized  by  an  alternating-current  source,  a 
fluctuating  magnetic  field  is  produced.  This  magnetic  field  cuts  the  conducting  core  material  and  induces 
a  voltage  into  it.  The  induced  voltage  causes  random  currents  to  flow  through  the  core  which  dissipates 
power  in  the  form  of  heat.  These  undesirable  currents  are  called  EDDY  CURRENTS. 

To  minimize  the  loss  resulting  from  eddy  currents,  transformer  cores  are  LAMINATED.  Since  the 
thin,  insulated  laminations  do  not  provide  an  easy  path  for  current,  eddy-current  losses  are  greatly 
reduced. 

Hysteresis  Loss 

When  a  magnetic  field  is  passed  through  a  core,  the  core  material  becomes  magnetized.  To  become 
magnetized,  the  domains  within  the  core  must  align  themselves  with  the  external  field.  If  the  direction  of 
the  field  is  reversed,  the  domains  must  turn  so  that  their  poles  are  aligned  with  the  new  direction  of  the 
external  field. 

Power  transformers  normally  operate  from  either  60  Hz,  or  400  Hz  alternating  current.  Each  tiny 
domain  must  realign  itself  twice  during  each  cycle,  or  a  total  of  120  times  a  second  when  60  Hz 
alternating  current  is  used.  The  energy  used  to  turn  each  domain  is  dissipated  as  heat  within  the  iron  core. 
This  loss,  called  HYSTERESIS  LOSS,  can  be  thought  of  as  resulting  from  molecular  friction.  Hysteresis 
loss  can  be  held  to  a  small  value  by  proper  choice  of  core  materials. 

TRANSFORMER  EFFICIENCY 

To  compute  the  efficiency  of  a  transformer,  the  input  power  to  and  the  output  power  from  the 
transformer,  must  be  known.  The  input  power  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  voltage  applied  to  the  primary 
and  the  current  in  the  primary.  The  output  power  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  voltage  across  the 
secondary  and  the  current  in  the  secondary.  The  difference  between  the  input  power  and  the  output  power 


5-18 


represents  a  power  loss.  You  can  calculate  the  percentage  of  efficiency  of  a  transformer  by  using  the 
standard  efficiency  formula  shown  below: 

Efficiency  (in  %)= -5^1  x  100 


Where: 

P^  =  total  output  power  delivered  to  the  load 
P^  =  total  input  power 

Example.  If  the  input  power  to  a  transformer  is  650  watts  and  the  output  power  is  610  watts,  what  is 
the  efficiency? 

Solution: 

Efficiency  =  ^  x  100 
610W 

Efficiency  =   x  100 

;    650  W 

Efficiency  =  93.  8% 

Hence,  the  efficiency  is  approximately  93.8  percent,  with  approximately  40  watts  being  wasted  due 
to  heat  losses. 

Q23.  Name  the  three  power  losses  in  a  transformer. 

Q24.  The  input  power  to  a  transformer  is  1,000  watts  and  the  output  power  is  500  watts.  What  is  the 
efficiency  of  the  transformer,  expressed  as  a  percentage? 


TRANSFORMER  RATINGS 

When  a  transformer  is  to  be  used  in  a  circuit,  more  than  just  the  turns  ratio  must  be  considered.  The 
voltage,  current,  and  power-handling  capabilities  of  the  primary  and  secondary  windings  must  also  be 
considered. 

The  maximum  voltage  that  can  safely  be  applied  to  any  winding  is  determined  by  the  type  and 
thickness  of  the  insulation  used.  When  a  better  (and  thicker)  insulation  is  used  between  the  windings,  a 
higher  maximum  voltage  can  be  applied  to  the  windings. 

The  maximum  current  that  can  be  carried  by  a  transformer  winding  is  determined  by  the  diameter  of 
the  wire  used  for  the  winding.  If  current  is  excessive  in  a  winding,  a  higher  than  ordinary  amount  of 
power  will  be  dissipated  by  the  winding  in  the  form  of  heat.  This  heat  may  be  sufficiently  high  to  cause 
the  insulation  around  the  wire  to  break  down.  If  this  happens,  the  transformer  may  be  permanently 
damaged. 

The  power-handling  capacity  of  a  transformer  is  dependent  upon  its  ability  to  dissipate  heat.  If  the 
heat  can  safely  be  removed,  the  power-handling  capacity  of  the  transformer  can  be  increased.  This  is 


5-19 


sometimes  accomplished  by  immersing  the  transformer  in  oil,  or  by  the  use  of  cooling  fins.  The  power- 
handling  capacity  of  a  transformer  is  measured  in  either  the  volt-ampere  unit  or  the  watt  unit. 

Two  common  power  generator  frequencies  (60  hertz  and  400  hertz)  have  been  mentioned,  but  the 
effect  of  varying  frequency  has  not  been  discussed.  If  the  frequency  applied  to  a  transformer  is  increased, 
the  inductive  reactance  of  the  windings  is  increased,  causing  a  greater  ac  voltage  drop  across  the  windings 
and  a  lesser  voltage  drop  across  the  load.  However,  an  increase  in  the  frequency  applied  to  a  transformer 
should  not  damage  it.  But,  if  the  frequency  applied  to  the  transformer  is  decreased,  the  reactance  of  the 
windings  is  decreased  and  the  current  through  the  transformer  winding  is  increased.  If  the  decrease  in 
frequency  is  enough,  the  resulting  increase  in  current  will  damage  the  transformer.  For  this  reason  a 
transformer  may  be  used  at  frequencies  above  its  normal  operating  frequency,  but  not  below  that 
frequency. 

Q25.  Why  should  a  transformer  designed  for  400  hertz  operation  not  be  used  for  60  hertz  operation? 


TYPES  AND  APPLICATIONS  OF  TRANSFORMERS 

The  transformer  has  many  useful  applications  in  an  electrical  circuit.  A  brief  discussion  of  some  of 
these  applications  will  help  you  recognize  the  importance  of  the  transformer  in  electricity  and  electronics. 

POWER  TRANSFORMERS 

Power  transformers  are  used  to  supply  voltages  to  the  various  circuits  in  electrical  equipment.  These 
transformers  have  two  or  more  windings  wound  on  a  laminated  iron  core.  The  number  of  windings  and 
the  turns  per  winding  depend  upon  the  voltages  that  the  transformer  is  to  supply.  Their  coefficient  of 
coupling  is  0.95  or  more. 

You  can  usually  distinguish  between  the  high-voltage  and  low-voltage  windings  in  a  power 
transformer  by  measuring  the  resistance.  The  low-voltage  winding  usually  carries  the  higher  current  and 
therefore  has  the  larger  diameter  wire.  This  means  that  its  resistance  is  less  than  the  resistance  of  the  high- 
voltage  winding,  which  normally  carries  less  current  and  therefore  may  be  constructed  of  smaller 
diameter  wire. 

So  far  you  have  learned  about  transformers  that  have  but  one  secondary  winding.  The  typical  power 
transformer  has  several  secondary  windings,  each  providing  a  different  voltage.  The  schematic  symbol  for 
a  typical  power-supply  transformer  is  shown  in  figure  5-12.  For  any  given  voltage  across  the  primary,  the 
voltage  across  each  of  the  secondary  windings  is  determined  by  the  number  of  turns  in  each  secondary.  A 
winding  may  be  center-tapped  like  the  secondary  350  volt  winding  shown  in  the  figure.  To  center  tap  a 
winding  means  to  connect  a  wire  to  the  center  of  the  coil,  so  that  between  this  center  tap  and  either 
terminal  of  the  winding  there  appears  one-half  of  the  voltage  developed  across  the  entire  winding.  Most 
power  transformers  have  colored  leads  so  that  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  between  the  various  windings  to 
which  they  are  connected.  Carefully  examine  the  figure  which  also  illustrates  the  color  code  for  a  typical 
power  transformer.  Usually,  red  is  used  to  indicate  the  high-voltage  leads,  but  it  is  possible  for  a 
manufacturer  to  use  some  other  color(s). 


5-20 


BLACK 
110  VOLTS 

BLACK 


GREEN  | 

6.3  VOLTS 

GREEN  I 


RED 


350  VOLTS 

I 


YELLOW 
'AND  RED 
STRIPED 


,  700  VOLTS 
350  VOLTS 
I  RED 


YELLOW 


5  VOLTS 


YELLOW 


Figure  5-12. — Schematic  diagram  of  a  typical  power  transformer. 

There  are  many  types  of  power  transformers.  They  range  in  size  from  the  huge  transformers 
weighing  several  tons-used  in  power  substations  of  commercial  power  companies-to  very  small  ones 
weighing  as  little  as  a  few  ounces-used  in  electronic  equipment. 

AUTOTRANSFORMERS 


It  is  not  necessary  in  a  transformer  for  the  primary  and  secondary  to  be  separate  and  distinct 
windings.  Figure  5-13  is  a  schematic  diagram  of  what  is  known  as  an  AUTOTRANSFORMER.  Note  that 
a  single  coil  of  wire  is  "tapped"  to  produce  what  is  electrically  a  primary  and  secondary  winding.  The 
voltage  across  the  secondary  winding  has  the  same  relationship  to  the  voltage  across  the  primary  that  it 
would  have  if  they  were  two  distinct  windings.  The  movable  tap  in  the  secondary  is  used  to  select  a  value 
of  output  voltage,  either  higher  or  lower  than  EP,  within  the  range  of  the  transformer.  That  is,  when  the  tap 
is  at  point  A,  Es  is  less  than  EP;  when  the  tap  is  at  point  B,  Es  is  greater  than  EP. 


Figure  5-13. — Schematic  diagram  of  an  autotransformer. 


5-21 


AUDIO-FREQUENCY  TRANSFORMERS 


Audio-frequency  (af)  transformers  are  used  in  af  circuits  as  coupling  devices.  Audio-frequency 
transformers  are  designed  to  operate  at  frequencies  in  the  audio  frequency  spectrum  (generally  considered 
to  be  15  Hz  to  20kHz).  They  consist  of  a  primary  and  a  secondary  winding  wound  on  a  laminated  iron  or 
steel  core.  Because  these  transformers  are  subjected  to  higher  frequencies  than  are  power  transformers, 
special  grades  of  steel  such  as  silicon  steel  or  special  alloys  of  iron  that  have  a  very  low  hysteresis  loss 
must  be  used  for  core  material.  These  transformers  usually  have  a  greater  number  of  turns  in  the 
secondary  than  in  the  primary;  common  step-up  ratios  being  1  to  2  or  1  to  4.  With  audio  transformers  the 
impedance  of  the  primary  and  secondary  windings  is  as  important  as  the  ratio  of  turns,  since  the 
transformer  selected  should  have  its  impedance  match  the  circuits  to  which  it  is  connected. 

RADIO-FREQUENCY  TRANSFORMERS 

Radio-frequency  (rf)  transformers  are  used  to  couple  circuits  to  which  frequencies  above  20,000  Hz 
are  applied.  The  windings  are  wound  on  a  tube  of  nonmagnetic  material,  have  a  special  powdered-iron 
core,  or  contain  only  air  as  the  core  material.  In  standard  broadcast  radio  receivers,  they  operate  in  a 
frequency  range  of  from  530  kHz  to  1550  kHz.  In  a  short-wave  receiver,  rf  transformers  are  subjected  to 
frequencies  up  to  about  20  MHz  -  in  radar,  up  to  and  even  above  200  MHz. 

IMPEDANCE-MATCHING  TRANSFORMERS 

For  maximum  or  optimum  transfer  of  power  between  two  circuits,  it  is  necessary  for  the  impedance 
of  one  circuit  to  be  matched  to  that  of  the  other  circuit.  One  common  impedance-matching  device  is  the 
transformer.  To  obtain  proper  matching,  you  must  use  a  transformer  having  the  correct  turns  ratio.  The 
number  of  turns  on  the  primary  and  secondary  windings  and  the  impedance  of  the  transformer  have  the 
following  mathematical  relationship: 


Because  of  this  ability  to  match  impedances,  the  impedance-matching  transformer  is  widely  used  in 
electronic  equipment. 

Q26.  List  five  different  types  of  transformers  according  to  their  applications. 

Q27.  The  leads  to  the  primary  and  to  the  high-voltage  secondary  windings  of  a  power  transformer 
usually  are  of  what  color? 

SAFETY 

EFFECTS  OF  CURRENT  ON  THE  BODY 

Before  learning  safety  precautions,  you  should  look  at  some  of  the  possible  effects  of  electrical 
current  on  the  human  body.  The  following  table  lists  some  of  the  probable  effects  of  electrical  current  on 
the  human  body. 


5-22 


AC  60  Hz  (mA) 

DC  (mA) 

Effects 

0-1 

0-4 

Perception 

1-4 

4-15 

Surprise 

4-21 

1  £f  OA 

15-80 

Reflex  action 

21-40 

80-160 

Muscular  inhibition 

40-100 

160-300 

Respiratory  failure 

Over  100 

Over  300 

Usually  fatal 

Note  in  the  above  chart  that  a  current  as  low  as  4  mA  can  be  expected  to  cause  a  reflex  action  in  the 
victim,  usually  causing  the  victim  to  jump  away  from  the  wire  or  other  component  supplying  the  current. 
While  the  current  should  produce  nothing  more  than  a  tingle  of  the  skin,  the  quick  action  of  trying  to  get 
away  from  the  source  of  this  irritation  could  produce  other  effects  (such  as  broken  limbs  or  even  death  if  a 
severe  enough  blow  was  received  at  a  vital  spot  by  the  shock  victim). 

It  is  important  for  you  to  recognize  that  the  resistance  of  the  human  body  cannot  be  relied  upon  to 
prevent  a  fatal  shock  from  a  voltage  as  low  as  1 15  volts  or  even  less.  Fatalities  caused  by  human  contact 
with  30  volts  have  been  recorded.  Tests  have  shown  that  body  resistance  under  unfavorable  conditions 
may  be  as  low  as  300  ohms,  and  possibly  as  low  as  100  ohms  (from  temple  to  temple)  if  the  skin  is 
broken.  Generally  direct  current  is  not  considered  as  dangerous  as  an  equal  value  of  alternating  current. 
This  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  reasonably  safe  "let-go  currents"  for  60  hertz,  alternating  current,  are  9.0 
milliamperes  for  men  and  6.0  milliamperes  for  women,  while  the  corresponding  values  for  direct  current 
are  62.0  milliamperes  for  men  and  41.0  milliamperes  for  women.  Remember,  the  above  table  is  a  fist  of 
probable  effects.  The  actual  severity  of  effects  will  depend  on  such  things  as  the  physical  condition  of  the 
work  area,  the  physiological  condition  and  resistance  of  the  body,  and  the  area  of  the  body  through  which 
the  current  flows.  Thus,  based  on  the  above  information,  you  MUST  consider  every  voltage  as  being 
dangerous. 

ELECTRIC  SHOCK 

Electric  shock  is  a  jarring,  shaking  sensation  you  receive  from  contact  with  electricity.  You  usually 
feel  like  you  have  received  a  sudden  blow.  If  the  voltage  and  resulting  current  are  sufficiently  high,  you 
may  become  unconscious.  Severe  burns  may  appear  on  your  skin  at  the  place  of  contact;  muscular  spasms 
may  occur,  perhaps  causing  you  to  clasp  the  apparatus  or  wire  which  caused  the  shock  and  be  unable  to 
turn  it  loose. 

RESCUE  AND  CARE  OF  SHOCK  VICTIMS 

The  following  procedures  are  recommended  for  rescue  and  care  of  electric  shock  victims: 

1.   Remove  the  victim  from  electrical  contact  at  once,  but  DO  NOT  endanger  yourself.  You  can  do 
this  by: 

•  Throwing  the  switch  if  it  is  nearby 

•  Cutting  the  cable  or  wires  to  the  apparatus,  using  an  ax  with  a  wooden  handle  while  taking 
care  to  protect  your  eyes  from  the  flash  when  the  wires  are  severed 


5-23 


•   Using  a  dry  stick,  rope,  belt,  coat,  blanket,  shirt  or  any  other  nonconductor  of  electricity,  to 
drag  or  push  the  victim  to  safety 

2.  Determine  whether  the  victim  is  breathing.  If  the  victim  is  not  breathing,  you  must  apply 
artificial  ventilation  (respiration)  without  delay,  even  though  the  victim  may  appear  to  be 
lifeless.  DO  NOT  STOP  ARTIFICIAL  RESPIRATION  UNTIL  MEDICAL  AUTHORITY 
PRONOUNCES  THE  VICTIM  DEAD. 

3.  Lay  the  victim  face  up.  The  feet  should  be  about  12  inches  higher  than  the  head.  Chest  or  head 
injuries  require  the  head  to  be  slightly  elevated.  If  there  is  vomiting  or  if  facial  injuries  have 
occurred  which  cause  bleeding  into  the  throat,  the  victim  should  be  placed  on  the  stomach  with 
the  head  turned  to  one  side  and  6  to  12  inches  lower  than  the  feet. 

4.  Keep  the  victim  warm.  The  injured  person's  body  heat  must  be  conserved.  Keep  the  victim 
covered  with  one  or  more  blankets,  depending  on  the  weather  and  the  person's  exposure  to  the 
elements.  Artificial  means  of  warming,  such  as  hot  water  bottles  should  not  be  used. 

5.  Drugs,  food,  and  liquids  should  not  be  administered  if  medical  attention  will  be  available  within 
a  short  time.  If  necessary,  liquids  may  be  administered.  Small  amounts  of  warm  salt  water,  tea 
or  coffee  should  be  used.  Alcohol,  opiates,  and  other  depressant  substances  must  never  be 
administered. 

6.  Send  for  medical  personnel  (a  doctor  if  available)  at  once,  but  do  NOT  under  any  circumstances 
leave  the  victim  until  medical  help  arrives. 

For  complete  coverage  of  administering  artificial  respiration,  and  on  treatment  of  burn  and  shock 
victims,  refer  to  Standard  First  Aid  Training  Course,  NAVEDTRA  10081  (Series). 

SAFETY  PRECAUTIONS  FOR  PREVENTING  ELECTRIC  SHOCK 

You  must  observe  the  following  safety  precautions  when  working  on  electrical  equipment: 

1.  Never  work  alone.  Another  person  may  save  your  life  if  you  receive  an  electric  shock. 

2.  Work  on  energized  circuits  ONLY  WHEN  ABSOLUTELY  NECESSARY.  Power  should  be 
tagged  out,  using  approved  tagout  procedures,  at  the  nearest  source  of  electricity. 

3.  Stand  on  an  approved  insulating  material,  such  as  a  rubber  mat. 

4.  Discharge  power  capacitors  before  working  on  deenergized  equipment.  Remember,  a  capacitor 
is  an  electrical  power  storage  device. 

5.  When  you  must  work  on  an  energized  circuit,  wear  rubber  gloves  and  cover  as  much  of  your 
body  as  practical  with  an  insulating  material  (such  as  shirt  sleeves).  This  is  especially  important 
when  you  are  working  in  a  warm  space  where  sweating  may  occur. 

6.  Deenergize  equipment  prior  to  hooking  up  or  removing  test  equipment. 

7.  Work  with  only  one  hand  inside  the  equipment.  Keep  the  other  hand  clear  of  all  obstacles  that 
may  provide  a  path,  such  as  a  ground,  for  current  to  flow. 

8.  Wear  safety  goggles.  Sparks  could  damage  your  eyes,  as  could  the  cooling  liquids  in  some 
components  such  as  transformers  should  they  overheat  and  explode. 


5-24 


9.   Keep  a  cool  head  and  think  about  the  possible  consequences  before  performing  any  action. 
Carelessness  is  the  cause  of  most  accidents.  Remember  the  best  technician  is  NOT  necessarily 
the  fastest  one,  but  the  one  who  will  be  on  the  job  tomorrow. 

Q28.  What  is  the  cause  of  most  accidents? 

Q29.  Before  working  on  electrical  equipment  containing  capacitors,  what  should  you  do  to  the 
capacitors? 

Q30.  When  working  on  electrical  equipment,  why  should  you  use  only  one  hand? 


SUMMARY 


As  a  study  aid  and  for  future  reference,  the  important  points  of  this  chapter  have  been  summarized 
below. 

BASIC  TRANSFORMER — The  basic  transformer  is  an  electrical  device  that  transfers  alternating- 
current  energy  from  one  circuit  to  another  circuit  by  magnetic  coupling  of  the  primary  and  secondary 
windings  of  the  transformer.  This  is  accomplished  through  mutual  inductance  (M).  The  coefficient  of 
coupling  (K)  of  a  transformer  is  dependent  upon  the  size  and  shape  of  the  coils,  their  relative  positions, 
and  the  characteristic  of  the  core  between  the  two  coils.  An  ideal  transformer  is  one  where  all  the 
magnetic  lines  of  flux  produced  by  the  primary  cut  the  entire  secondary.  The  higher  the  K  of  the 
transformer,  the  higher  is  the  transfer  of  the  energy.  The  voltage  applied  to  the  primary  winding  causes 
current  to  flow  in  the  primary.  This  current  generates  a  magnetic  field,  generating  a  counter  emf  (cemf) 
which  has  the  opposite  phase  to  that  of  the  applied  voltage.  The  magnetic  field  generated  by  the  current  in 
the  primary  also  cuts  the  secondary  winding  and  induces  a  voltage  in  this  winding. 


TRANSFORMER  CONSTRUCTION— A  TRANSFORMER  consists  of  two  coils  of  insulated 
wire  wound  on  a  core.  The  primary  winding  is  usually  wound  onto  a  form,  then  wrapped  with  an 
insulating  material  such  as  paper  or  cloth.  The  secondary  winding  is  then  wound  on  top  of  the  primary 
and  both  windings  are  wrapped  with  insulating  material.  The  windings  are  then  fitted  onto  the  core  of  the 
transformer.  Cores  come  in  various  shapes  and  materials.  The  most  common  materials  are  air,  soft  iron, 
and  laminated  steel.  The  most  common  types  of  transformers  are  the  shell-core  and  the  hollow-core  types. 
The  type  and  shape  of  the  core  is  dependent  on  the  intended  use  of  the  transformer  and  the  voltage 
applied  to  the  current  in  the  primary  winding. 


5-25 


o 


EXCITING  CURRENT — When  voltage  is  applied  to  the  primary  of  a  transformer,  exciting  current 
flows  in  the  primary.  The  current  causes  a  magnetic  field  to  be  set  up  around  both  the  primary  and  the 
secondary  windings.  The  moving  flux  causes  a  voltage  to  be  induced  into  the  secondary  winding, 
countering  the  effects  of  the  counter  emf  in  the  primary. 

PHASE — When  the  secondary  winding  is  connected  to  a  load,  causing  current  to  flow  in  the 
secondary,  the  magnetic  field  decreases  momentarily.  The  primary  then  draws  more  current,  restoring  the 
magnetic  field  to  almost  its  original  magnitude.  The  phase  of  the  current  flowing  in  the  secondary  circuit 
is  dependent  upon  the  phase  of  the  voltage  impressed  across  the  primary  and  the  direction  of  the  winding 
of  the  secondary.  If  the  secondary  were  wound  in  the  same  direction  as  the  primary,  the  phase  would  be 
the  same.  If  wound  opposite  to  the  primary,  the  phase  would  be  reversed.  This  is  shown  on  a  schematic 
drawing  by  the  use  of  phasing  dots.  The  dots  mean  that  the  leads  of  the  primary  and  secondary  have  the 
same  phase.  The  lack  of  phasing  dots  on  a  schematic  means  a  phase  reversal. 


B 


TURNS  RATIO— The  TURNS  RATIO  of  a  transformer  is  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  turns  of  wire 
in  the  primary  winding  to  the  number  of  turns  in  the  secondary  winding.  When  the  turns  ratio  is  stated, 
the  number  representing  turns  on  the  primary  is  always  stated  first.  For  example,  a  1:2  turns  ratio  means 


5-26 


the  secondary  has  twice  the  number  of  turns  as  the  primary.  In  this  example,  the  voltage  across  the 
secondary  is  two  times  the  voltage  applied  to  the  primary. 


POWER  AND  CURRENT  RATIOS— The  power  and  current  ratios  of  a  transformer  are  dependent 
on  the  fact  that  power  delivered  to  the  secondary  is  always  equal  to  the  power  delivered  to  the  primary 
minus  the  losses  of  the  transformer.  This  will  always  be  true,  regardless  of  the  number  of  secondary 
windings.  Using  the  law  of  power  and  current,  it  can  be  stated  that  current  through  the  transformer  is  the 
inverse  of  the  voltage  or  turns  ratio,  with  power  remaining  the  same  or  less,  regardless  of  the  number  of 
secondaries. 

TRANSFORMER  LOSSES— Transformer  losses  have  two  sources-copper  loss  and  magnetic  loss. 
Copper  losses  are  caused  by  the  resistance  of  the  wire  (I2R).  Magnetic  losses  are  caused  by  eddy  currents 
and  hysteresis  in  the  core.  Copper  loss  is  a  constant  after  the  coil  has  been  wound  and  therefore  a 
measureable  loss.  Hysteresis  loss  is  constant  for  a  particular  voltage  and  current.  Eddy-current  loss, 
however,  is  different  for  each  frequency  passed  through  the  transformer. 

TRANSFORMER  EFFICIENCY— The  amplitude  of  the  voltage  induced  in  the  secondary  is 
dependent  upon  the  efficiency  of  the  transformer  and  the  turns  ratio.  The  efficiency  of  a  transformer  is 
related  to  the  power  losses  in  the  windings  and  core  of  the  transformer.  Efficiency  (in  percent)  equals 
Pout/Pin  x  100.  A  perfect  transformer  would  have  an  efficiency  of  1.0  or  100%. 

POWER  TRANSFORMER — A  transformer  with  two  or  more  windings  wound  on  a  laminated  iron 
core.  The  transformer  is  used  to  supply  stepped  up  and  stepped  down  values  of  voltage  to  the  various 
circuits  in  electrical  equipment. 


5-27 


BLACK 


110  VOLTS 


BLACK 


GREEN 


6.3  VOLTS 


GREEN 


YELLOW 
''AND  RED 
STRIPED 


YELLOW 


5  VOLTS 


YELLOW 


AUTOTRANSFORMER — A  transformer  with  a  single  winding  in  which  the  entire  winding  can  be 
used  as  the  primary  and  part  of  the  winding  as  the  secondary,  or  part  of  the  winding  can  be  used  as  the 
primary  and  the  entire  winding  can  be  used  as  the  secondary. 


AUDIO-FREQUENCY  TRANSFORMER— A  transformer  used  in  audio-frequency  circuits  to 
transfer  af  signals  from  one  circuit  to  another. 

RADIO-FREQUENCY  TRANSFORMER— A  transformer  used  in  a  radio-frequency  circuit  to 
transfer  if  signals  from  one  circuit  to  another. 

IMPEDANCE-MATCHING  TRANSFORMER— A  transformer  used  to  match  the  impedance  of 
the  source  and  the  impedance  of  the  load.  The  mathematical  relationship  of  the  turns  and  impedance  of 
the  transformer  is  expressed  by  the  equation: 

Ns  T|ZS 


5-28 


ANSWERS  TO  QUESTIONS  Ql.  THROUGH  Q30. 


Al.  The  transfer  of  energy  from  one  circuit  to  another  circuit  by  electromagnetic  induction. 

A2.  Primary  winding;  secondary  winding;  core. 

A3.  Air;  soft  iron;  steel. 

A4.  Hollow-core  type;  shell-core  type. 

A5.  Primary  to  source;  secondary  to  load. 

A6.  Additional  insulation  is  provided  between  the  layers  of  windings  in  the  high-voltage  transformer. 


a.  air-core  transformer 

b.  iron-core  transformer 

c.  iron-core  center  tapped  transformer 

A8.     A  voltage  is  applied  to  the  primary,  but  no  load  is  connected  to  the  secondary. 

A9.     Exciting  current  is  the  current  that  flows  in  the  primary  of  a  transformer  with  the  secondary 
open  (no  load  attached). 

A10.     Self-induced  or  counter  emf 

All.     The  magnetic  lines  generated  by  the  current  in  the  primary  cut  the  secondary  windings  and 
induce  a  voltage  into  them. 

All.  In  phase.  Remember,  the  cemf  of  the  primary  is  180  degrees  out  of  phase  with  the  applied 
voltage.  The  induced  voltage  of  the  secondary  of  an  unlike-wound  transformer  is  also  180 
degrees  out  of  phase  with  the  primary  voltage. 


A7. 


A13. 


c 


OR 


+ 


* 


+ 


Note:  Remember  the  dots  indicate  areas  of  like  polarity,  NOT  a  particular  polarity. 


A14.     Lines  of  flux  generated  by  one  winding  which  do  not  link  the  other  winding. 


A15.     It  causes  K  to  be  less  than  unity  (1). 


A16.     Step  up. 


5-29 


A17. 


A18. 


A19. 


A20. 


All. 


'  -    J  or 


EP  NP 

_  EPNS  _  45  V  x  1500  turns  =Bg  y 
•      NP      ~"   500  turns 


EP  NP 


E  Ml-7tutnsx5V-35V 
r      Ns  ltum 


EP  NP 
—  =  — -  or 

IP  _  420  V 


„     ESNP    420  V  x  800  turns  t 
N  s  =  — - — -  =  =  5^00  turns 


Np    Is     1    „  ,         ,  « 
—  =  —  =  -  =  3  :  1  current  ratio 

Ns    IP  3 

(Turns  r  atio  and  cur r  ent  ratio  have  an  inver  se 
relationship.) 


NP  Is 
—  =  —  or 
Ns  IP 

I  _NsIs  _lturnx  5Aj1A 
P     NP         5  turns 


A22. 

A23.     Copper  loss,  eddy-current  loss,  and  hysteresis  loss. 


5-30 


A24. 


Port  ..  _  500^ 


Eff(in%)=-2SL  x  100  = 


?h  1000 w 

x  100  =  0.  5  x  100  =  50% 

A25.     r/je  inductive  reactance  at  60  hertz  would  be  too  low.  The  resulting  excessive  current  would 
probably  damage  the  transformer. 

A26. 

a.  Power  transformer 

b.  Autotransformer 

c.  Impedance-matching  transformer 

d.  Audio-frequency  transformer 

e.  Radio-frequency  transformer 

A27.     Primary  leads-black;  secondary  leads-red. 
A28.  Carelessness. 

A29.     Discharge  them  by  shorting  them  to  ground. 

A30.     To  minimize  the  possibility  of  providing  a  path  for  current  through  your  body. 


5-31 


APPENDIX  I 

GLOSSARY 


AIR-CORE  TRANSFORMER — A  transformer  composed  of  two  or  more  coils,  which  are  wound 
around  a  non-metallic  core. 

ALTERNATING  CURRENT — An  electrical  current  which  constantly  changes  amplitude  and  changes 
polarity  at  regular  intervals. 

APPARENT  POWER — That  power  apparently  available  for  use  in  an  ac  circuit  containing  a  reactive 
element.  It  is  the  product  of  effective  voltage  times  effective  current  expressed  in  voltamperes.  It 
must  be  multiplied  by  the  power  factor  to  obtain  true  power  available. 

AVERAGE  VALUE  OF  AC — The  average  of  all  the  instantaneous  values  of  one -half  cycle  of 
alternating  current. 

CAPACITANCE — The  property  of  an  electrical  circuit  that  opposes  changes  in  voltage. 

CAPACITOR — An  electrical  device  capable  of  storing  electrical  energy  in  an  electrostatic  field. 

CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE— The  opposition  offered  to  the  flow  of  an  alternating  current  by 
capacitance,  expressed  in  ohms.  The  symbol  for  capacitive  reactance  is  Xc. 

CHARGE  CYCLE — The  period  of  time  that  a  capacitor  in  an  electrical  circuit  is  storing  a  charge. 

COIL — An  inductive  device  created  by  looping  turns  of  wire  around  a  core. 

COPPER  LOSS  (I2R  LOSS) — The  power  lost  due  to  the  resistance  of  the  conductors.  In  transformers 
the  power  lost  due  to  heating  because  of  current  flow  (I)  through  the  resistance  (R)  of  the  windings. 

CORE — Any  material  that  affords  a  path  for  magnetic  flux  lines  in  a  coil. 

COUNTER  EMF — Counter  electromotive  force;  an  electromotive  force  (voltage)  induced  in  a  coil  that 
opposes  the  applied  voltage. 

COUPLING,  COEFFICIENT  OF— An  expression  of  the  extent  to  which  two  inductors  are  coupled  by 
magnetic  lines  of  force.  This  is  expressed  as  a  decimal  or  percentage  of  maximum  possible  coupling 
and  represented  by  the  letter  K. 

CYCLE — One  complete  positive  and  one  complete  negative  alternation  of  a  current  or  voltage. 

DIELECTRIC — An  insulator;  a  term  applied  to  the  insulating  material  between  the  plates  of  a  capacitor. 

DIELECTRIC  CONSTANT — The  ratio  of  the  capacitance  of  a  capacitor  with  a  dielectric  between  the 
electrodes  to  the  capacitance  of  a  capacitor  with  air  between  the  electrodes. 

DIELECTRIC  HYSTERESIS  LOSS — Power  loss  of  a  capacitor  due  to  the  changes  in  orientation  of 
electron  orbits  in  the  dielectric  caused  by  rapid  reversal  in  polarity  of  line  voltage.  The  higher  the 
frequency,  the  greater  the  loss. 


AI-1 


DIELECTRIC  LEAKAGE — Power  loss  of  a  capacitor  due  to  the  leakage  of  current  through  the 
dielectric.  Also  relates  to  leakage  resistance,  the  higher  the  leakage  resistance,  the  lower  the 
dielectric  leakage. 

DISPLACEMENT  CURRENT— The  current  which  appears  to  flow  through  a  capacitor. 

EDDY  CURRENT — Induced  circulating  currents  in  a  conducting  material  that  are  caused  by  a  varying 
magnetic  field. 

EDDY  CURRENT  LOSS — Losses  caused  by  random  current  flowing  in  the  core  of  a  transformer. 
Power  is  lost  in  the  form  of  heat. 

EFFECTIVE  VALUE— Same  as  root-mean-square. 

ELECTROMAGNETIC  INDUCTION— The  production  of  a  voltage  in  a  coil  due  to  the  change  in  the 
number  of  magnetic  lines  of  force  (flux  linkage)  passing  through  the  coil. 

ELECTROMAGNETISM — The  generation  of  a  magnetic  field  around  a  current  carrying  conductor. 

ELECTROMOTIVE  FORCE  (emf)— The  force  (voltage)  that  produces  an  electric  current  in  a  circuit 

ELECTROSTATIC  FIELD— The  field  of  influence  between  two  charged  bodies. 

EXCITING  CURRENT — The  current  that  flows  in  the  primary  winding  of  a  transformer,  which 
produces  a  magnetic  flux  field.  Also  called  magnetizing  current. 

FARAD — The  basic  unit  of  capacitance.  A  capacitor  has  a  capacitance  of  1  farad  when  a  voltage  change 
of  1  volt  per  second  across  it  produces  a  current  of  1  ampere. 

FLUX — Electrostatic  or  magnetic  lines  of  force. 

FREQUENCY  (f) — The  number  of  complete  cycles  per  second  existing  in  any  form  of  wave  motion; 
such  as  the  number  of  cycles  per  second  of  an  alternating  current. 

HENRY  (H) — The  electromagnetic  unit  of  inductance  or  mutual  inductance.  The  inductance  of  a  circuit 
is  1  henry  when  a  current  variation  of  1  ampere  per  second  induces  1  volt.  It  is  the  basic  unit  of 
inductance.  In  radio,  smaller  units  are  used  such  as  the  millihenry  (mH),  which  is  one -thousandth  of 
a  henry  (H)  and  the  microhenry  (  uH)  hich  is  onemillionth  of  a  henry. 

HERTZ  (Hz) — The  basic  unit  of  frequency  equal  to  one  cycle  per  second. 

HYSTERESIS — The  time  lag  of  the  magnetic  flux  in  a  magnetic  material  behind  the  magnetizing  force 
producing  it,  caused  by  the  molecular  friction  of  the  molecules  trying  to  align  themselves  with  the 
magnetic  force  applied  to  the  material. 

HYSTERESIS  LOSS — The  power  loss  in  an  iron-core  transformer  or  other  alternating-current  device  as 
a  result  of  magnetic  hysteresis. 

IMPEDANCE — The  total  opposition  offered  to  the  flow  of  an  alternating  current.  It  may  consist  of  any 
combination  of  resistance,  inductive  reactance,  and  capacitive  reactance.  The  symbol  for  impedance 
is  Z. 

IN  PHASE — Applied  to  the  condition  that  exists  when  two  waves  of  the  same  frequency  pass  through 
their  maximum  and  minimum  values  of  like  polarity  at  the  same  instant. 


AI-2 


INDUCTANCE — The  property  of  a  circuit  which  tends  to  oppose  a  change  in  the  existing  current  flow. 
The  symbol  for  inductance  is  L. 

INDUCTIVE  COUPLING — Coupling  of  two  coils  by  means  of  magnetic  lines  of  force.  In  transformers, 
coupling  applied  through  magnetic  lines  of  force  between  the  primary  and  secondary  windings. 

INDUCTIVE  REACTANCE — The  opposition  to  the  flow  of  an  alternating  current  caused  by  the 
inductance  of  a  circuit,  expressed  in  ohms.  Identified  by  the  letter  XL. 

INSTANTANEOUS  VALUE — The  magnitude  at  any  particular  instant  when  a  value  is  continually 
varying  with  respect  to  time. 

LAG — The  amount  one  wave  is  behind  another  in  time;  expressed  in  electrical  degrees. 

LAMINATED  CORE — A  core  built  up  from  thin  sheets  of  metal  insulated  from  each  other  and  used  in 
transformers. 

LEAD — The  opposite  of  lag.  Also  a  wire  or  connection. 

LEAKAGE  FLUX — Magnetic  flux  lines  produced  by  the  primary  winding  which  do  not  link  the  turns  of 
the  secondary  winding. 

LEAKAGE  RESISTANCE — The  electrical  resistance  which  opposes  the  flow  of  current  through  the 
dielectric  of  a  capacitor.  The  higher  the  leakage  resistance  the  slower  the  capacitor  will  discharge  or 
leak  across  the  dielectric. 

LEFT-HAND-RULE  FOR  GENERATORS— A  rule  or  procedure  used  to  determine  the  direction  of 
electron  current  flow  in  the  windings  of  a  generator. 

LENZ'S  LAW — The  current  induced  in  a  circuit  due  to  its  motion  in  a  magnetic  field  or  to  a  change  in 
its  magnetic  flux  in  such  a  direction  as  to  exert  a  mechanical  force  opposing  the  motion  or  to  oppose 
the  change  in  flux. 

MAGNETIC  FIELD — Region  in  which  the  magnetic  forces  created  by  a  permanent  magnet  or  by  a 
current-carrying  conductor  or  coil  can  be  detected. 

MAGNETIC  LINES  OF  FORCE — Imaginary  lines  used  for  convenience  to  designate  the  direction  in 
which  magnetic  forces  are  acting  as  a  result  of  magneto-motive  force. 

MUTUAL  FLUX — The  total  flux  in  the  core  of  a  transformer  that  is  common  to  both  the  primary  and 
secondary  windings.  The  flux  links  both  windings. 

MUTUAL  INDUCTANCE — A  circuit  property  existing  when  the  relative  position  of  two  inductors 

causes  the  magnetic  lines  of  force  from  one  to  link  with  the  turns  of  the  other.  The  symbol  for  mutual 
inductance  is  M. 

NEGATIVE  ALTERNATION— The  negative  half  of  an  ac  waveform 

NO-LOAD  CONDITION — The  condition  that  exists  when  an  electrical  source  or  secondary  of  a 
transformer  is  operated  without  an  electrical  load. 

PEAK-TO-PEAK — The  measure  of  absolute  magnitude  of  an  ac  waveform,  measured  from  the  greatest 
positive  alternation  to  greatest  negative  alternation. 


AI-3 


PEAK  VALUE — The  maximum  instantaneous  value  of  a  varying  current,  voltage,  or  power.  It  is  equal 
to  1.414  times  the  effective  value  of  a  sine  wave. 

PERIOD  TIME — The  time  required  to  complete  one  cycle  of  a  waveform. 

PHASE — The  angular  relationship  between  two  alternating  currents  or  voltages  when  the  voltage  or 
current  is  plotted  as  a  function  of  time.  When  the  two  are  in  phase,  the  angle  is  zero,  and  both  reach 
their  peak  simultaneously.  When  out  of  phase,  one  will  lead  or  lag  the  other;  at  the  instant  when  one 
is  at  its  peak,  the  other  will  not  be  at  peak  value  and  (depending  on  the  phase  angle)  may  differ  in 
polarity  as  well  as  magnitude. 

PHASE  ANGLE — The  number  of  electrical  degrees  of  lead  or  lag  between  the  voltage  and  current 
waveforms  in  an  ac  circuit. 

PHASE  DIFFERENCE — The  time  in  electrical  degrees  by  which  one  wave  leads  or  lags  another. 

POLARIZATION — The  magnetic  orientation  of  molecules  in  a  magnetizable  material  in  a  magnetic 
field,  whereby  tiny  internal  magnets  tend  to  line  up  in  the  field. 

POSITIVE  ALTERNATION— The  positive  half  of  an  ac  waveform. 

POWER  FACTOR — The  ratio  of  the  actual  power  of  an  alternating  or  pulsating  current,  as  measured  by 
a  wattmeter,  to  the  apparent  power,  as  indicated  by  ammeter  and  voltmeter  readings.  The  power 
factor  of  an  inductor,  capacitor,  or  insulator  is  an  expression  of  their  losses 

POWER  LOSS — The  electrical  power  supplied  to  a  circuit  that  does  no  work,  usually  dissipated  as  heat. 

PRIMARY  WINDINGS — The  winding  of  a  transformer  connected  to  the  electrical  source. 

Q — Figure  of  merit  of  efficiency  of  a  circuit  or  coil.  Ratio  of  inductive  reactance  to  resistance  in  servos. 
Relationship  between  stored  energy  (capacitance)  and  rate  of  dissipation  in  certain  types  of  electric 
elements,  structures,  or  materials. 

RADIO  FREQUENCY  (RF) — Any  frequency  of  electrical  energy  capable  of  propagation  into  space. 

RATIO — The  value  obtained  by  dividing  one  number  by  another,  indicating  their  relative  proportions. 

RC  CONSTANT — Time  constant  of  a  resistor-capacitor  circuit;  equal  in  seconds  to  the  resistance  value 
in  ohms  multiplied  by  the  capacitance  value  in  farads. 

REACTANCE — The  opposition  offered  to  the  flow  of  an  alternating  current  by  the  inductance, 
capacitance,  or  both,  in  any  circuit. 

RESONANCE — The  condition  existing  in  a  circuit  when  the  values  of  inductance,  capacitance,  and  the 
applied  frequency  are  such  that  the  inductive  reactance  and  capacitive  reactance  cancel  each  other. 

RLC  CIRCUIT — An  electrical  circuit  which  has  the  properties  of  resistance,  inductance,  and 
capacitance. 

RMS — Abbreviation  of  Root  Mean  Square. 

ROOT  MEAN  SQUARE  (RMS) — The  equivalent  heating  value  of  an  alternating  current  or  voltage,  as 
compared  to  a  direct  current  or  voltage.  It  is  0.707  times  the  peak  value  of  a  sine  wave. 

SECONDARY— The  output  coil  of  a  transformer. 


AI-4 


SELF-INDUCTION — The  production  of  a  counter-electromotive  force  in  a  conductor  when  its  own 
magnetic  field  collapses  or  expands  with  a  change  in  current  in  the  conductor 

SINE  WAVE — The  curve  traced  by  the  projection  on  a  uniform  time  scale  of  the  end  of  a  rotating  arm, 
or  vector.  Also  known  as  a  sinusoidal  wave. 

THETA — The  greek  letter  (0)  used  to  represent  phase  angle. 

TIME  CONSTANT — The  time  required  to  charge  a  capacitor  to  63.2  percent  of  maximum  voltage  or 
discharge  to  36.8  percent  of  its  final  voltage.  The  time  required  for  the  current  in  an  inductor  to 
increase  to  63.2  percent  of  maximum  current  or  decay  to  36.8  percent  of  its  final  current. 

TRANSFORMER — A  device  composed  of  two  or  more  coils,  linked  by  magnetic  lines  of  force,  used  to 
transfer  electrical  energy  from  one  circuit  to  another. 

TRANSFORMER  EFFICIENCY— The  ratio  of  output  power  to  input  power,  generally  expressed  as  a 
percentage. 


Efficiency  =  ^  x  100 

TRANSFORMER,  STEP-DOWN — A  transformer  so  constructed  that  the  number  of  turns  in  the 
secondary  winding  is  less  than  the  number  of  turns  in  the  primary  winding.  This  construction  will 
provide  less  voltage  in  the  secondary  circuit  than  in  the  primary  circuit. 

TRANSFORMER,  STEP-UP — A  transformer  so  constructed  that  the  number  of  turns  in  the  secondary 
winding  is  more  than  the  number  of  turns  in  the  primary  winding.  This  construction  will  provide 
more  voltage  in  the  secondary  circuit  than  in  the  primary  circuit. 

TRUE  POWER — The  power  dissipated  in  the  resistance  of  the  circuit,  or  the  power  actually  used  in  the 
circuit. 

TURN — One  complete  loop  of  a  conductor  about  a  core. 

TURNS  RATIO — The  ratio  of  number  of  turns  in  the  primary  winding  to  the  number  of  turns  in  the 
secondary  winding  of  a  transformer. 

UNIVERSAL  TIME  CONSTANT  CHART— A  chart  used  to  find  the  time  constant  of  a  circuit  if  the 
impressed  voltage  and  the  values  of  R  and  C  or  R  and  L  are  known. 

WAVEFORM — The  shape  of  the  wave  obtained  when  instantaneous  values  of  an  ac  quantity  are  plotted 
against  time  in  rectangular  coordinates. 

WAVELENGTH  (k) — The  distance,  usually  expressed  in  meters,  traveled  by  a  wave  during  the  time 
interval  of  one  complete  cycle.  It  is  equal  to  the  velocity  of  light  divided  by  the  frequency. 

WORKING  VOLTAGE — The  maximum  voltage  that  a  capacitor  may  operate  at  without  the  risk  of 
damage. 

VAR — Abbreviation  for  Volt-Amperes  Reactive. 

VECTOR — A  line  used  to  represent  both  direction  and  magnitude. 


AI-5 


APPENDIX  II 

GREEK  ALPHABET 


iName 

Upper 
Case 

Lower 
Case 

Tl  on  cm  o  to  c 

uesignaies 

Alpha  

A 

CL 

Angles. 

Beta  

B 

B 

r 

Angles,  flux  density. 

Gamma 

r 

T 

Conductivity. 

Delta 

A 

6 

Variation  of  a  quantity,  increment. 

Epsilon 

E 

s 

Base  of  natural  logarithms  (2.71828). 

Zeta  

Z 

£ 

Impedance,  coefficients,  coordinates. 

Eta  

H 

Hysteresis  coefficient,  efficiency,  magnetizing  force. 

Theta 

0 

0 

Phase  angle. 

Iota  

I 

L 

Kappa  

K 

% 

Dielectric  constant,  coupling  coefficient,  susceptibility. 

Lambda 

A 

I 

Wavelength. 

Mu  

M 

LI 

Permeability,  micro,  amplification  factor. 

Nu 

N 

y 

Relucti  vitv 

Xi 

S 

Omirrnn 

\.J  llll^lv/ll  .... 

o 

0 

11 

7T 

3.1410 

Rho  

p 

P 

Resistivity. 

Sigma  

I 

a 

Tau  

T 

T 

Time  constant,  time-phase  displacement. 

Upsilon 

Y 

x> 

Phi  

0> 

4> 

Angles,  magnetic  flux. 

Chi  

X 

X 

Psi  

V 

Dielectric  flux,  phase  difference. 

Omega. . . 

Q 

(V 

Ohms  (upper  case),  angular  velocity  (2  n  f)  (lower  case). 

AIM 


APPENDIX  III 

SQUARE  AND  SQUARE  ROOTS 


\3 

n 

N2 

9  N 

N2 

N 

N2 

1 

i  nnn 

A  1 
41 

1681 

6.4031 

81 

6561 

9 . 0000 

2 

4 

1.414 

42 

1764 

6.4807 

82 

6724 

9.0554 

3 

9 

1.732 

43 

1849 

6.5574 

83 

6889 

9.1104 

/, 

4 

1  A 

10 

7  nnn 
z.  >  uuu 

A  A 
4  4 

17JW 

6. 6332 

84 

7056 

9. 1652 

5 

Z_> 

0    9  1A 

a  *; 

9fl9  *\ 

ft  70ft? 

85 

7225 

9.2195 

6 

Jo 

9    /.  AO 
Z  4  447 

/A 

40 

9  1  1  A 

k  7R9 

86 

7396 

9.2736 

7 

49 

2.646 

47 

2209 

6.8557 

87 

7569 

'9.3274 

8 

64 

2.828 

48 

2304 

6.9282 

88 

7744 

9.3808 

a 
7 

ol 

i  nnn 

AO 

?  Am 

Z,  4UX 

7 . 0000 

89 

7921 

9 . 4340 

10 

1UU 

"S    1  AO 

Z  JUU 

7   f*71  1 

QO 

ri  no 

9,4868 

11 

lzl 

■a  Tit*. 
J . J 10  0 

t;  i 
jl 

Z.0U1 

7    1  Al  A 
/ *  14X4 

Ql 

71 

R9»l 

9 . 5394 

12 

144 

3.4641 

52 

2704 

7.2111 

92 

8464 

9.5917 

13 

169 

3.6056 

53 

2809 

7.2801 

93 

8649 

9.6437 

14 

19  o 

J . / Hi / 

=;A 

_>4 

■501  A 
Z?lO 

OOJV 

9.6954 

15 

1    Q  ~J1f\ 
J  »  0  /  JU 

jj 

JUZ.  J 

7    A  1  A? 
/  «  4  lOZ. 

9^ 

9025 

9. 7468 

10 

7  ^A 

a  nnnn 

JO 

11  1A 

7 . 4833 

96 

9216 

9 . 7980 

17 

289 

4.1231 

57 

3249 

7.5498 

97 

9409 

9.8489 

18 

324 

4.2426 

58 

3364 

7.6158 

98 

9604 

9.8995 

J01 

4 .  j  joy 

SQ 

J40X 

/  .Doll 

7  7 

9801 

9.9499 

Ann 

A    A79  1 
4  ■  4 i  LX 

AO 

7  7460 

/  t  /  4  v  V 

100 

10000 

10 . 0000 

9  1 
Z,l 

AA1 

A  SJR9A 
4 • JOZO 

Dl 

"*79  1 

J  /  Z.X 

7 . 8102 

101 

10201 

10.0499 

22 

484 

4.6904 

62 

3844 

7.8740 

102 

10404 

10.0995 

23 

529 

4.7958 

63 

3969 

7.9373 

103 

10609 

10.1489 

z*f 

^7k 

A  ftQQH 

AA 

AflQ  A 

104 

10816 

10.1980 

2.T 

t>z  J 

j  *  UUuu 

A^ 

A99  ^ 
4ZZ  J 

ft  flA9  ^ 
O  .  UDZ -5 

105 

J.J.VJZ  J 

10.2470 

1  £ 
ZD 

£7£ 

c  noon 

AA 

4- J_)D 

ft   10  Afl 

1  flA 

1UO 

1  1  9 

in  9956 

27 

729 

5.1962 

67 

4489 

8.1854 

107 

11449 

10.3441 

28 

784 

5.2915 

68 

4624 

8.246? 

108 

11664 

10.3923 

29 

841 

5.3852 

69 

4761 

8.3066 

109 

11881 

10.4403 

30 

900 

5.4772 

70 

4900 

8.3666 

110 

12100 

10.4881 

31 

961 

5.5678 

71 

5041 

8.4261 

111 

12321 

10.5357 

32 

1024 

5.6569 

72 

5184 

8.4853 

112 

12544 

10.5830 

33 

1089 

5.7447 

73 

5329 

8.5440 

113 

12769 

10.6301 

34 

1156 

5.8310 

74 

5476 

8.6023 

114 

12996 

10.6771 

35 

1225 

5.9161 

75 

5625 

8.6603 

115 

13225 

10.7238 

36 

1296 

6.0000 

76 

5776 

8.7178 

116 

13456 

10.7703 

37 

1369 

6.0828 

77 

5929 

8.7750 

117 

13689 

10.8167 

38 

1444 

6.1644 

78 

6084 

8.8318 

118 

13924 

10.8628 

39 

1521 

6.2450 

79 

6241 

8.8882 

119 

14161 

10.9087 

40 

1600 

6.3246 

80 

6400 

8.9443 

120 

14400 

10.9545 

For  numbers  up  to  120.     For  larger  numbers  divide  into  factors  smaller  than  120. 


Examples:    VIST  and    VI 6200 


225  =    5  x  45  16200  =      100  x  81  x  2 

V22T=  vTx  v/4T  Vum  =  *T00  x  V&Tx  vT 

V22T=    2.236  x6.7082  >/16200  =      10  x  9  x  1.414 

V22T=     15  1/16250  =  127.26 


AIII-1 


PERIOD  TIME  (t) 


1 


FREQUENCY  (f) 


f  = 


APPENDIX  IV 
USEFUL  AC  FORMULAS 

L/R  TIME  CONSTANT  (TC) 

TC(mseconds)  =  ^Z!l 
R(ohrns) 

MUTUAL  INDUCTANCE  (M) 


AVERAGE  VOLTAGE  OR  CURRENT 


Ewg  =  0.636  x  Ema£ 
Iwg  =  0.  636  x  lmac 


EFFECTIVE  VALUE  OF  VOLTAGE  OR 
CURRENT 

E^  =0.707  xEM 
1^=  0.  707  x  lmac 

MAXIMUM  VOLTAGE  OR  CURRENT 


I      =  1  414  x  I 


eft 


E       =1  /IWxEji 


OHM'S  LAW  OF  AC  CIRCUIT 
CONTAINING  ONLY  RESISTANCE 


Jeff  ~ 


1  avg 


'Tin  ax 


■eff 


R 

u  avg 


R 


TOTAL  INDUCTANCE  (LT)  Series  without 
magnetic  coupling 

LT  =Lj  +  L2  +  L3.  .  .  L, 
with  magnetic  coupling 
LT  =  Lj  +  L2  ±  2M 

TOTAL  INDUCTANCE  (LT)  PARALLEL 

(No  magnetic  coupling) 


17 


i  i  i 
—  +  —  +  — 

Ll       L2  L3 


1 


CAPACITANCE  (C) 

Q  (coulombs) 


C  (far  ads) 


E  (volts) 
KA 


C=0.  2249 

d 

RC  TIME  CONSTANT  (t) 

t  (in  seconds)  =  R(ohrns)  x  C (far ads) 
t  (in  seconds)  =  R(Mohrns)  x  C(^F) 
t(^s)  =  R(ohrns)  x  C(jiF) 
t(/is)  =  R(Mohms)  x  C(pF) 


AIV-l 


TOTAL  CAPACITANCE  (CT)  SERIES 
1 


Ct=x+± 

Cj  +  c 


1 


2 


Ct  — 


^1  x  &2 

c,  +  c3 


TOTAL  CAPACITANCE  (CT)  PARALLEL 

CT  =  Cj  +c2  +c3 ,  ,  ,  Cfl 

INDUCTIVE  REACTANCE  (XL) 
XL  =  2xfL 

CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE  (Xc) 

L    2  xfC 
IMPEDANCE  (Z) 

z  =  Vr2  +x2 

OHM'S  LAW  FOR  REACTIVE  CIRCUITS 


T  E  E 
I  =  or  I  =  ■ 


X, 


OHM'S  LAW  FOR  CIRCUITS 
CONTAINING  RESISTANCE  AND 
REACTANCE 


Z 


REACTIVE  POWER 


APPARENT  POWER 


=  i/z 


=  ~J( true  power)2  +  (reactive  power)1 


POWER  FACTOR  (PF) 


PF  = 


VOLTAGE  ACROSS  THE  SECONDARY 

(Es) 

t(  

Ns 

VOLTAGE  ACROSS  THE  PRIMARY  (Ep) 


N 


CURRENT  ACROSS  THE  SECONDARY 

(Is) 


Ip  =■ 


Eel 


CURRENT  ACROSS  THE  PRIMARY  (Ip) 

j  ESIS 

i  p  

P  EP 

TRANSFORMER  EFFICIENCY 


_  r(JUt 


x  100 


AIV-2 


APPENDIX  V 

TRIGONOMETRIC  FUNCTIONS 


In  a  right  triangle,  there  are  several  relationships  which  always  hold  true.  These  relationships  pertain 
to  the  length  of  the  sides  of  a  right  triangle,  and  the  way  the  lengths  are  affected  by  the  angles  between 
them.  An  understanding  of  these  relationships,  called  trigonometric  functions,  is  essential  for  solving 
problems  in  a-c  circuits  such  as  power  factor,  impedance,  voltage  drops,  and  so  forth. 

To  be  a  RIGHT  triangle,  a  triangle  must  have  a  "square"  corner;  one  in  which  there  is  exactly  90° 
between  two  of  the  sides.  Trigonometric  functions  do  not  apply  to  any  other  type  of  triangle.  This  type  of 
triangle  is  shown  in  figure  V-l. 

By  use  of  the  trigonometric  functions,  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  UNKNOWN  length  of  one  or 
more  sides  of  a  triangle,  or  the  number  of  degrees  in  UNKNOWN  angles,  depending  on  what  is  presently 
known  about  the  triangle.  For  instance,  if  the  lengths  of  any  two  sides  are  known,  the  third  side  and  both 
angles  0  (theta)  and  <3>  (phi)  may  be  determined.  The  triangle  may  also  be  solved  if  the  length  of  any  one 
side  and  one  of  the  angles(#  or  O  in  fig.  V- 1 )  are  known. 


The  first  basic  fact  of  triangles  is  that  IN  ANY  RIGHT  TRIANGLE,  THE  SUM  OF  THE  THREE 
ANGLES  FORMED  INSIDE  THE  TRIANGLE  MUST  ALWAYS  EQUAL  180°  .  If  one  angle  is  always 
90°  (a  right  angle)  then  the  sum  of  the  other  two  angles  must  always  be  90°  . 


0  +  <£  =  9O° 
9O°+0-k£s18O0 


Figure  V-l. — A  right  triangle. 


6  +  <J>  = 


90° 


and 


90 0  +  6  +  0  = 


180° 


or 


90°  +  90° 


180° 


thus,  if  angle  0  is  known,  <[>  may  be  quickly  determined. 


For  instance,  if  0  ;  is  30°  m  what  is  $  ? 


A  V-l 


90°  +  30°  +  <t>  =  1S0° 


Transposing    0=180°  -  90°  -  30° 
*=  60° 


Also,  if  0  is  known,  <[>  may  be  determined  in  the  same  manner. 

The  second  basic  fact  you  must  understand  is  that  FOR  EVERY  DIFFERENT  COMBINATION  OF 
ANGLES  IN  A  TRIANGLE,  THERE  IS  A  DEFINITE  RATIO  BETWEEN  THE  LENGTHS  OF  THE 
THREE  SIDES.  Consider  the  triangle  in  figure  V-2,  consisting  of  the  base,  side  B;  the  altitude,  side  A; 
and  the  hypotenuse,  side  C.  (The  hypotenuse  is  always  the  longest  side,  and  is  always  opposite  the  90° 
angle.) 


If  angle  0  is  30°  ,  0>  must  be  60°  .  With  0  equal  to  30°  ,  the  ratio  of  the  length  of  side  B  to  side  C  is 
0.866  to  1.  That  is,  if  the  hypotenuse  is  1  inch  long,  the  side  adjacent  to  0,  side  B,  is  0.866  inch  long. 
Also,  with  0  equal  to  30°  ,  the  ratio  of  side  A  to  side  C  is  0.5  to  1.  That  is,  with  the  hypotenuse  1  inch 
long,  the  side  opposite  to  0  (side  A)  is  0.5  inch  long.  With  0  still  at  30°  ,  side  A  is  0.5774  of  the  length  of 
B.  With  the  combination  of  angles  given  (30°  -60°  -90°  )  these  are  the  ONLY  ratios  of  lengths  that  will 
"fit"  to  form  a  right  triangle. 

Note  that  three  ratios  are  shown  to  exist  for  the  given  value  of  0:  the  ratio  B\C  which  is  always 
referred  to  as  the  COSINE  ratio  of  0,  the  ratio  A\C,  which  is  always  the  SINE  ratio  of  0,  and  the  ratio 
A\B,  which  is  always  the  TANGENT  ratio  of  0.  If  0  changes,  all  three  ratios  change,  because  the  lengths 
of  the  sides  (base  and  altitude)  change.  There  is  a  set  of  ratios  for  every  increment  between  0°  and  90°  . 
These  angular  ratios,  or  sine,  cosine,  and  tangent  functions,  are  listed  for  each  degree  and  tenth  of  degree 
in  a  table  at  the  end  of  this  appendix.  In  this  table,  the  length  of  the  hypotenuse  of  a  triangle  is  considered 
fixed.  Thus,  the  ratios  of  length  given  refer  to  the  manner  in  which  sides  A  and  B  vary  with  relation  to 
each  other  and  in  relation  to  side  C,  as  angle  0  is  varied  from  0°  to  90°  . 

The  solution  of  problems  in  trigonometry  (solution  of  triangles  is  much  simpler  when  the  table  of 
trigonometric  functions  is  used  properly.  The  most  common  ways  in  which  it  is  used  will  be  shown  by 
solving  a  series  of  exemplary  problems. 


0.966  INCH 
B 


Figure  V-2. — A  30°  -60°  -90°  triangle. 


AV-2 


Problem  1:  If  the  hypotenuse  of  the  triangle  (side  C)  in  figure  V-3  is  10  inches  long,  and  angle  0  is 
33°  ,  how  long  are  sides  B  and  A? 


Figure  V-3. — Problem  1. 

Solution:  The  ratio  B/C  is  the  cosine  function.  By  checking  the  table  of  functions,  you  will  find  that 
the  cosine  of  33°  is  0.8387.  This  means  that  the  length  of  B  is  0.8387  the  length  of  side  C.  If  side  C  is  10 
inches  long,  then  side  B  must  be  10  x  0.8387,  or  8.387  inches  in  length.  To  determine  the  length  of  side 
A,  use  the  sine  function,  the  ratio  A\C.  Again  consulting  the  table  of  functions,  you  will  find  that  the  sine 
of  33°  is  0.5446.  Thus,  side  A  must  be  10  x  0.5446,  or  5.446  inches  in  length. 

Problem  2:  The  triangle  in  figure  V-4  has  a  base  74.2  feet  long,  and  hypotenuse  100  feet  long.  What 
is  0,  and  how  long  is  side  A? 


74.2  FEET 
B 


Figure  V4. — Problem  2. 

Solution:  When  no  angles  are  given,  you  Must  always  solve  for  a  known  angle  first.  The  ratio  B\C  is 
the  cosine  of  the  unknown  angle  0;  therefore  74.2/100  or  0.742,  is  the  cosine  of  the  unknown  angle. 
Locating  0.742  as  a  cosine  value  in  the  table,  you  find  that  it  is  the  cosine  of  42. 1°  .  That  is,  0  =  42. 1°  . 
With  0  known,  side  A  is  solved  for  by  use  of  the  sine  ratio  A/C.  The  sine  of  42.1°  ,  according  to  the  table, 
is  0.6704.  Therefore,  side  A  is  100  x  0.6704,  or  67.04  feet  long. 


AV-3 


Problem  3:  In  the  triangle  in  figure  V-5,  the  base  is  3  units  long,  and  the  altitude  is  4  units.  What  is  0, 
and  how  long  is  the  hypotenuse? 

Solution:  With  the  information  given,  the  tangent  of  0  may  be  determined.  Tan  0  =  A/B  =  4/3  =  1.33. 


3  UNITS 
B 


Figure  V-5. — Problem  3. 

Locating  the  value  1.33  as  a  tangent  value  in  the  table  of  functions,  you  find  it  to  be  the  tangent  of 
53.1°  .  Therefore,  0-  53.1°  .  Once  #is  known,  either  the  sine  or  cosine  ratio  may  be  used  to  determine  the 
length  of  the  hypotenuse.  The  cosine  of  53.1°  is  0.6004.  This  indicates  that  the  base  of  3  units  is  0.6004, 
the  length  of  the  hypotenuse.  Therefore,  the  hypotenuse  is  3/0.6004,  or  5  units  in  length.  Using  the  sine 
ratio,  the  hypotenuse  is  4/0.7997,  or  5  units  in  length. 

In  the  foregoing  explanations  and  problems,  the  sides  of  triangles  were  given  in  inches,  feet,  and 
units.  In  applying  trigonometry  to  a-c  circuit  problems,  these  units  of  measure  will  be  replaced  by  such 
values  given  in  ohms,  amperes,  volts,  and  watts.  Angle  0  will  be  the  phase  angle  between  (source)  voltage 
and  circuit  current.  However,  the  solution  of  these  a-c  problems  is  accomplished  in  exactly  the  same 
manner  as  the  foregoing  problems.  Only  the  units  and  some  terminology  are  changed. 


AV-4 


APPENDIX  VI 

TRIGONOMETRIC  TABLES 


AVI-l 


deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

0.0 

0.0000 

1.0000 

0.00000 

90.0 

4.0 

0 

6976 

0.9976 

0 

6993 

140.301 

86.0 

0.1 

0.0175 

1.0000 

0.00175 

573.0 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

7150 

0.9974 

0 

7168 

130.951 

0.9 

0.2 

0.0349 

1.0000 

0.00349 

286.5 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

7324 

0.9973 

0 

7344 

130.617 

0.8 

0.3 

0.0524 

1.0000 

0.00524 

191.0 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

7498 

0.9972 

0 

17519 

130.30 

0.7 

0.4 

0.0698 

1.0000 

0.00698 

143.24 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

7672 

0.9971 

0 

7695 

120.996 

0.6 

0.5 

0.0873 

1.0000 

0.00873 

114.59 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

7846 

0.9969 

0 

7870 

120.706 

0.5 

0.6 

0.1047 

0.9999 

0.10147 

95.49 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

8020 

0.9968 

0 

8046 

120.429 

0.4 

0.7 

0.1222 

0.9999 

0.01222 

81.85 

0.3 

0.7 

0 

8194 

0.9966 

0 

8221 

120.163 

0.3 

0.8 

0.1396 

0.9999 

0.01396 

71.62 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

8368 

0.9965 

0 

8397 

110.909 

0.2 

0.9 

0.1571 

0.9999 

0.01571 

63.66 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

8542 

0.9963 

0 

8573 

110.664 

0.1 

1.0 

0.1745 

0.9998 

0.1746 

570.20 

89.0 

5.0 

0 

8716 

0.9962 

0 

8749 

110.430 

85.0 

0.1 

0.1920 

0.9998 

0.1920 

520.8 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

8889 

0.9960 

0 

89215 

110.205 

0.9 

0.2 

0.2094 

0.9998 

0.2095 

470.74 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

9063 

0.9959 

0 

9101 

10.988 

0.8 

0.3 

0.2269 

0.9997 

0.2269 

440.7 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

9237 

0.9957 

0 

9277 

10.780 

0.7 

0.4 

0.2443 

0.9997 

0.2444 

40.92 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

9411 

0.9956 

0 

9453 

10.579 

0.6 

0.5 

0.2618 

0.9997 

0.2619 

380.19 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

9585 

0.9954 

0 

9629 

10.385 

0.5 

0.6 

0.2792 

0.9996 

0.2793 

350.80 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

9758 

0.9952 

0 

9805 

10.199 

0.4 

0.7 

0.2967 

0.9996 

0.2968 

330.69 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

9932 

0.9951 

0 

9981 

10.19 

0.3 

0.8 

0.3141 

0.9995 

0.3143 

310.82 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

10106 

0.9949 

0 

10158 

90.845 

0.2 

0.9 

0.3316 

0.9995 

0.3317 

30.14 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

10279 

0.9947 

0 

10334 

90.677 

0.1 

2.0 

0.3490 

0.9994 

0.3492 

280.64 

88.0 

6.0 

0 

10453 

0.9945 

0 

10510 

90.514 

84.0 

0.1 

0.3664 

0.9993 

0.3667 

270.27 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

10626 

0.9943 

0 

10687 

90.357 

0.9 

0.2 

0.3839 

0.9993 

0.3842 

260.3 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

1080 

0.9942 

0 

10863 

90.205 

0.8 

0.3 

0.4013 

0.9992 

0.4016 

240.90 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

10973 

0.9940 

0 

11040 

90.58 

0.7 

0.4 

0.4188 

0.9991 

0.4191 

230.86 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

11147 

0.9938 

0 

11217 

80.915 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4362 

0.9990 

0.4366 

220.90 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

11320 

0.9936 

0 

11394 

80.777 

0.5 

0.6 

0.4536 

0.9990 

0.4541 

220.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

11494 

0.9934 

0 

11570 

80.643 

0.4 

0.7 

0.4711 

0.9989 

0.4716 

210.20 

0.3 

0.7 

0 

11667 

0.9932 

0 

11747 

80.513 

0.3 

0.8 

0.4885 

0.9988 

0.4891 

20.45 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

11840 

0.9930 

0 

11924 

80.386 

0.2 

0.9 

0.5059 

0.9987 

0.5066 

190.74 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

12014 

0.9928 

0 

12101 

80.264 

0.1 

3.0 

0.5234 

0.9986 

0.5241 

190.81 

87.0 

7.0 

0 

12187 

0.9925 

0 

12278 

80.144 

83.0 

0.1 

0.5408 

0.9985 

0.5416 

180.464 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

12360 

0.9923 

0 

12456 

80.28 

0.9 

0.2 

0.5582 

0.9984 

0.5591 

170.886 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

12533 

0.9921 

0 

12633 

70.916 

0.8 

0.3 

0.5756 

0.9983 

0.5766 

170.343 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

12706 

0.9919 

0 

12810 

70.806 

0.7 

0.4 

0.5931 

0.9982 

0.5941 

160.832 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

12880 

0.9917 

0 

12988 

70.70 

0.6 

0.5 

0.6105 

0.9981 

0.6116 

160.350 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

13053 

0.9914 

0 

13165 

70.596 

0.5 

0.6 

0.6279 

0.9980 

0.6291 

150.895 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

13226 

0.9912 

0 

13343 

70.495 

0.4 

0.7 

0.6453 

0.9979 

0.6467 

150.464 

0.3 

0.7 

0 

13399 

0.9910 

0 

13521 

70.396 

0.3 

0.8 

0.6627 

0.9978 

0.6642 

150.56 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

13572 

0.9907 

0 

13698 

70.30 

0.2 

0.9 

0.6802 

0.9977 

0.6817 

140.669 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

13744 

0.9905 

0 

13876 

70.207 

0.1 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

AVI-2 


dee 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

dee 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

8.0 

0 

13917 

0.9903 

0 

14054 

70.115 

82.0 

12.0 

0.2079 

0.9781 

0.2126 

40.705 

78.0 

0.1 

0 

14090 

0.990 

0 

14232 

70.26 

0.9 

0.1 

0.2096 

0.9778 

0.2144 

40.665 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

14263 

0.9898 

0 

14410 

60.940 

0.8 

0.2 

0.2133 

0.9774 

0.2162 

40.625 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

14436 

0.9895 

0 

14588 

60.855 

0.7 

0.3 

0.2130 

0.9770 

0.2180 

40.586 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

14608 

0.9893 

0 

14767 

60.772 

0.6 

0.4 

0.2147 

0.9767 

0.2199 

40.548 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

14781 

0.9890 

0 

14945 

60.691 

0.5 

0.5 

0.2164 

0.9763 

0.2217 

40.511 

0.5 

0.6 

0 

14954 

0.9888 

0 

15124 

60.612 

0.4 

0.6 

0.2181 

0.9759 

0.2235 

40.474 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

15126 

0.9885 

0 

15302 

60.535 

0.3 

0.7 

0.2198 

0.9755 

0.2254 

40.437 

0.3 

0.8 

0 

15299 

0.9882 

0 

15481 

60.460 

0.2 

0.8 

0.2215 

0.9751 

0.2272 

40.402 

0.2 

0.9 

0 

15471 

0.9880 

0 

15660 

60.386 

0.1 

0.9 

0.2233 

0.9748 

0.2290 

40.366 

0.1 

9.0 

0 

15643 

0.9877 

0 

15836 

60.314 

81.0 

13.0 

0.2250 

0.9744 

0.2309 

40.331 

77.0 

0.1 

0 

15816 

0.9874 

0 

16017 

60.243 

0.9 

0.1 

0.2267 

0.9740 

0.2327 

40.297 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

15988 

0.9871 

0 

16196 

60.174 

0.8 

0.2 

0.2284 

0.9736 

0.2345 

40.264 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

16160 

0.9869 

0 

16376 

60.107 

0.7 

0.3 

0.230 

0.9732 

0.2364 

40.230 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

16333 

0.9866 

0 

16555 

60.41 

0.6 

0.4 

0.2317 

0.9728 

0.2382 

40.198 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

16505 

0.9863 

0 

16734 

50.976 

0.5 

0.5 

0.2334 

0.9724 

0.2401 

40.165 

0.5 

0.6 

0 

16677 

0.9860 

0 

16914 

50.912 

0.4 

0.6 

0.2351 

0.9720 

0.2419 

40.134 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

16849 

0.9857 

0 

17093 

50.850 

0.3 

0.7 

0.2368 

0.9715 

0.2438 

40.102 

0.3 

0.8 

0 

17021 

0.9854 

0 

17273 

50.789 

0.2 

0.8 

0.2385 

0.9711 

0.2456 

40.71 

0.2 

0.9 

0 

17193 

0.9851 

0 

17453 

50.730 

0.1 

0.9 

0.2402 

0.9707 

0.2475 

40.41 

0.1 

10.0 

0 

1736 

0.9848 

0 

1763 

50.671 

80.0 

14.0 

0.2419 

0.9703 

0.2493 

40.11 

76.0 

0.1 

0 

1754 

0.9845 

0 

1781 

50.614 

0.9 

0.1 

0.2436 

0.9699 

0.2512 

30.981 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

1771 

0.9842 

0 

1799 

50.558 

0.8 

0.2 

0.2453 

0.9694 

0.2530 

30.952 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

1788 

0.9839 

0 

1817 

50.503 

0.7 

0.3 

0.2470 

0.9680 

0.2549 

30.923 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

1805 

0.9836 

0 

1835 

50.449 

0.6 

0.4 

0.2487 

0.9686 

0.2568 

30.895 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

1822 

0.9833 

0 

1853 

50.396 

0.5 

0.5 

0.2504 

0.9681 

0.2586 

30.867 

0.5 

0.6 

0 

1840 

0.9829 

0 

1871 

50.343 

0.4 

0.6 

0.2521 

0.9677 

0.2605 

30.839 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

1857 

0.9826 

0 

1890 

50.292 

0.3 

0.7 

0.2538 

0.9673 

0.2623 

30.812 

0.3 

0.8 

0 

1874 

0.9823 

0 

1908 

50.242 

0.2 

0.8 

0.2554 

0.9668 

0.2642 

30.785 

0.2 

0.9 

0 

1891 

0.9820 

0 

1926 

50.193 

0.1 

0.9 

0.2571 

0.9664 

0.2661 

30.758 

0.1 

11.0 

0 

1908 

0.9816 

0 

1944 

50.145 

79.0 

15.0 

0.2588 

0.9659 

0.2679 

30.732 

75.0 

0.1 

0 

1925 

0.9813 

0 

1962 

50.97 

0.9 

0.1 

0.2605 

0.9655 

0.2698 

30.706 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

1942 

0.9810 

0 

1980 

50.50 

0.8 

0.2 

0.2622 

0.9650 

0.2717 

30.681 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

1959 

0.9806 

0 

1998 

50.5 

0.7 

0.3 

0.2639 

0.9646 

0.2736 

30.655 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

1977 

0.9803 

0.2016 

40.959 

0.6 

0.4 

0.2656 

0.9641 

0.2754 

30.630 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

1994 

0.9799 

0.2035 

40.915 

0.5 

0.5 

0.2672 

0.9636 

0.2773 

30.606 

0.5 

0.6 

0.2011 

0.9796 

0.2053 

40.872 

0.4 

0.6 

0.2689 

0.9632 

0.2792 

30.582 

0.4 

0.7 

0.2028 

0.9792 

0.2071 

40.829 

0.3 

0.7 

0.2706 

0.9627 

0.2811 

30.558 

0.3 

0.8 

0.2045 

0.9789 

0.2089 

40.787 

0.2 

0.8 

0.2723 

0.9622 

0.2830 

30.534 

0.2 

0.9 

0.2062 

0.9785 

0.2107 

40.745 

0.1 

0.9 

0.2740 

0.9617 

0.2849 

30.511 

0.2 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

AVI-3 


deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

dee 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

16.0 

0.2756 

0.9613 

0.2867 

30.487 

74.0 

20.0 

0.3420 

0.9397 

0.3640 

20.747 

70.0 

0.1 

0.2773 

0.9608 

0.2886 

30.465 

0.9 

0.1 

0.3437 

0.9391 

0.3659 

20.733 

0.9 

0.2 

0.2790 

0.9603 

0.2905 

30.442 

0.8 

0.2 

0.3453 

0.9385 

0.3679 

20.718 

0.8 

0.3 

0.2807 

0.9598 

0.2924 

30.420 

0.7 

0.3 

0.3469 

0.9379 

0.3699 

20.703 

0.7 

0.4 

0.2823 

0.9593 

0.2943 

30.398 

0.6 

0.4 

0.3486 

0.9373 

0.3719 

20.689 

0.6 

0.5 

0.2840 

0.9588 

0.2962 

30.376 

0.5 

0.5 

0.3502 

0.9367 

0.3739 

20.675 

0.5 

0.6 

0.2857 

0.9583 

0.2981 

30.354 

0.4 

0.6 

0.3518 

0.9361 

0.3759 

20.660 

0.4 

0.7 

0.2874 

0.9578 

0.300 

30.333 

0.3 

0.7 

0.3535 

0.9354 

0.3779 

20.646 

0.3 

0.8 

0.2890 

0.9573 

0.3019 

30.312 

0.2 

0.8 

0.3551 

0.9348 

0.3799 

20.633 

0.2 

0.9 

0.2907 

0.9568 

0.3038 

30.291 

0.1 

0.9 

0.3567 

0.9342 

0.3819 

20.619 

0.1 

17.0 

0.2924 

0.9563 

0.3067 

30.271 

73.0 

21.0 

0.3584 

0.9336 

0.3839 

20.605 

69.0 

0.1 

0.2940 

0.9558 

0.3076 

30.271 

0.9 

0.1 

0.360 

0.9330 

0.3859 

20.592 

0.9 

0.2 

0.2957 

0.9553 

0.3096 

30.230 

0.8 

0.2 

0.3616 

0.9323 

0.3879 

20.578 

0.8 

0.3 

0.2974 

0.9548 

0.3115 

30.211 

0.7 

0.3 

0.3633 

0.9317 

0.3899 

20.565 

0.7 

0.4 

0.2990 

0.9542 

0.3134 

30.191 

0.6 

0.4 

0.3649 

0.9311 

0.3919 

20.552 

0.6 

0.5 

0.307 

0.9537 

0.3153 

30.172 

0.5 

0.5 

0.3665 

0.9304 

0.3939 

20.539 

0.5 

0.6 

0.3024 

0.9532 

0.3172 

30.152 

0.4 

0.6 

0.3681 

0.9298 

0.3959 

20.526 

0.4 

0.7 

0.3040 

0.9527 

0.3191 

30.133 

0.3 

0.7 

0.3697 

0.9291 

0.3979 

20.513 

0.3 

0.8 

0.3057 

0.9521 

0.3211 

30.115 

0.2 

0.8 

0.3714 

0.9285 

0.400 

20.50 

0.2 

0.9 

0.3074 

0.9516 

0.3230 

30.96 

0.1 

0.9 

0.3730 

0.9278 

0.4020 

20.488 

0.1 

18.0 

0.3090 

0.9511 

0.3249 

30.78 

72.0 

22.0 

0.3746 

0.9272 

0.4040 

20.475 

68.0 

0.1 

0.3107 

0.9505 

0.3269 

30.60 

0.9 

0.1 

0.3762 

0.9265 

0.4061 

20.463 

0.9 

0.2 

0.3123 

0.950 

0.3288 

30.42 

0.8 

0.2 

0.3778 

0.9259 

0.4081 

20.450 

0.8 

0.3 

0.3140 

0.9494 

0.3307 

30.24 

0.7 

0.3 

0.3795 

0.9252 

0.4101 

20.438 

0.7 

0.4 

0.3156 

0.9489 

0.3327 

30.6 

0.6 

0.4 

0.3811 

0.9245 

0.4122 

20.426 

0.6 

0.5 

0.3173 

0.9483 

0.3346 

20.989 

0.5 

0.5 

0.3727 

0.9239 

0.4142 

20.414 

0.5 

0.6 

0.3190 

0.9478 

0.3365 

20.971 

0.4 

0.6 

0.3843 

0.9232 

0.4163 

20.402 

0.4 

0.7 

0.3206 

0.9472 

0.3385 

20.954 

0.3 

0.7 

0.3859 

0.9225 

0.4183 

20.391 

0.3 

0.8 

0.3223 

0.9466 

0.3404 

20.937 

0.2 

0.8 

0.3875 

0.9219 

0.4204 

20.379 

0.2 

0.9 

0.3239 

0.9461 

0.3424 

20.921 

0.1 

0.9 

0.3891 

0.9212 

0.4224 

20.367 

0.1 

19.0 

0.3256 

0.9455 

0.3443 

20.904 

71.0 

23.0 

0.3907 

0.9205 

0.4245 

20.356 

67.0 

0.1 

0.3272 

0.9449 

0.3463 

20.888 

0.9 

0.1 

0.3923 

0.9198 

0.4265 

20.344 

0.9 

0.2 

0.3289 

0.9444 

0.3482 

20.872 

0.8 

0.2 

0.3939 

0.9191 

0.4286 

20.333 

0.8 

0.3 

0.3305 

0.9438 

0.3502 

20.856 

0.7 

0.3 

0.3955 

0.9184 

0.4307 

20.322 

0.7 

0.4 

0.3322 

0.9432 

0.3522 

20.840 

0.6 

0.4 

0.3971 

0.9178 

0.4327 

20.311 

0.6 

0.5 

0.3338 

0.9426 

0.3541 

20.824 

0.5 

0.5 

0.3987 

0.9171 

0.4348 

20.30 

0.5 

0.6 

0.3355 

0.9421 

0.3561 

20.808 

0.4 

0.6 

0.403 

0.9164 

0.4369 

20.289 

0.4 

0.7 

0.3371 

0.9415 

0.3581 

20.793 

0.3 

0.7 

0.4019 

0.9157 

0.4390 

20.278 

0.3 

0.8 

0.3387 

0.9409 

0.360 

20.778 

0.2 

0.8 

0.4035 

0.9150 

0.4411 

20.267 

0.2 

0.9 

0.3403 

0.9403 

0.3620 

20.762 

0.1 

0.9 

0.4051 

0.9143 

0.4431 

20.257 

0.1 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

AVI-4 


deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

24.0 

0.4067 

0.9135 

0.4452 

20.246 

66.0 

28.0 

0.4695 

0.8829 

0.5317 

10.881 

62.0 

0.1 

0.4083 

0.9128 

0.4473 

20.236 

0.9 

0.1 

0.4710 

0.8821 

0.5340 

10.873 

0.9 

0.2 

0.4099 

0.9121 

0.4494 

20.225 

0.8 

0.2 

0.4726 

0.8813 

0.5362 

10.865 

0.8 

0.3 

0.4115 

0.9114 

0.4515 

20.215 

0.7 

0.3 

0.4741 

0.8805 

0.5384 

10.857 

0.7 

0.4 

0.4131 

0.9107 

0.4536 

20.204 

0.6 

0.4 

0.4756 

0.8796 

0.5407 

10.849 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4147 

0.910 

0.4557 

20.194 

0.5 

0.5 

0.4772 

0.8788 

0.5430 

10.842 

0.5 

0.6 

0.4163 

0.9092 

0.4578 

20.184 

0.4 

0.6 

0.4787 

0.8780 

0.5452 

10.834 

0.4 

0.7 

0.4179 

0.9085 

0.4599 

20.174 

0.3 

0.7 

0.4802 

0.8771 

0.5475 

10.827 

0.3 

0.8 

0.4195 

0.9078 

0.4621 

20.164 

0.2 

0.8 

0.4818 

0.8763 

0.5498 

10.819 

0.2 

0.9 

0.4210 

0.9070 

0.4642 

20.154 

0.1 

0.9 

0.4833 

0.8755 

0.5520 

10.811 

0.1 

25.0 

0.4226 

0.9063 

0.4663 

20.145 

65.0 

29.0 

0.4848 

0.8746 

0.5543 

10.804 

61.0 

0.1 

0.4242 

0.9056 

0.4684 

20.135 

0.9 

0.1 

0.4863 

0.8738 

0.5566 

10.797 

0.9 

0.2 

0.4258 

0.9048 

0.4706 

20.125 

0.8 

0.2 

0.4879 

0.8729 

0.5589 

10.789 

0.8 

0.3 

0.4274 

0.9041 

0.4727 

20.116 

0.7 

0.3 

0.4894 

0.8721 

0.5612 

10.782 

0.7 

0.4 

0.4289 

0.9033 

0.4748 

20.106 

0.6 

0.4 

0.4909 

0.8712 

0.5635 

10.775 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4305 

0.9028 

0.4770 

20.97 

0.5 

0.5 

0.4924 

0.8704 

0.5658 

10.767 

0.5 

0.6 

0.4321 

0.9018 

0.4791 

20.87 

0.4 

0.6 

0.4939 

0.8695 

0.5681 

10.760 

0.4 

0.7 

0.4337 

0.9011 

0.4813 

20.78 

0.3 

0.7 

0.4955 

0.8686 

0.5704 

10.753 

0.3 

0.8 

0.4352 

0.903 

0.4834 

20.69 

0.2 

0.8 

0.4970 

0.8678 

0.5726 

10.746 

0.2 

0.9 

0.4368 

0.8996 

0.4856 

20.59 

0.1 

0.9 

0.4985 

0.8669 

0.5750 

10.739 

0.1 

26.0 

0.4384 

0.8988 

0.4877 

20.50 

64.0 

30.0 

0.500 

0.8660 

0.5774 

10.7321 

60.0 

0.1 

0.4399 

0.8980 

0.4899 

20.41 

0.9 

0.1 

0.5015 

0.8652 

0.5797 

10.7251 

0.9 

0.2 

0.4415 

0.8973 

0.4921 

20.32 

0.8 

0.2 

0.5030 

0.8643 

0.5820 

10.7162 

0.8 

0.3 

0.4431 

0.8965 

0.4942 

20.23 

0.7 

0.3 

0.5045 

0.8634 

0.5844 

10.7113 

0.7 

0.4 

0.4446 

0.8957 

0.4964 

20.14 

0.6 

0.4 

0.5040 

0.8625 

0.5867 

10.7045 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4462 

0.8949 

0.4986 

20.6 

0.5 

0.5 

0.5075 

0.8616 

0.5890 

10.6977 

0.5 

0.6 

0.4478 

0.8942 

0.508 

10.997 

0.4 

0.6 

0.5090 

0.8607 

0.5914 

10.6909 

0.4 

0.7 

0.4493 

0.8934 

0.5029 

10.988 

0.3 

0.7 

0.5105 

0.8599 

0.5938 

10.6842 

0.3 

0.8 

0.4509 

0.8926 

0.5051 

10.980 

0.2 

0.8 

0.5120 

0.8590 

0.5961 

10.6715 

0.2 

0.9 

0.4524 

0.8918 

0.5073 

10.971 

0.1 

0.9 

0.5135 

0.8581 

0.5985 

10.6709 

0.1 

27.0 

0.4540 

0.8910 

0.5095 

10.963 

63.0 

31.0 

0.5150 

0.8572 

0.609 

10.6643 

59.0 

0.1 

0.4555 

0.8902 

0.5117 

10.954 

0.9 

0.1 

0.5165 

0.8643 

0.6032 

10.6577 

0.9 

0.2 

0.4571 

0.8894 

0.5139 

10.946 

0.8 

0.2 

0.5180 

0.8554 

0.6056 

10.6512 

0.8 

0.3 

0.4586 

0.8886 

0.5161 

10.937 

0.7 

0.3 

0.5195 

0.8545 

0.6080 

10.6447 

0.7 

0.4 

0.4602 

0.8878 

0.5184 

10.929 

0.6 

0.4 

0.5210 

0.8536 

0.6104 

10.6383 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4617 

0.8870 

0.5206 

10.921 

0.5 

0.5 

0.5225 

0.8526 

0.6128 

10.6319 

0.5 

0.6 

0.4633 

0.8862 

0.5228 

10.913 

0.4 

0.6 

0.5240 

0.8517 

0.6152 

10.6255 

0.4 

0.7 

0.4648 

0.8854 

0.5250 

10.905 

0.3 

0.7 

0.5255 

0.8508 

0.6176 

10.6191 

0.3 

0.8 

0.4664 

0.8846 

0.5272 

10.897 

0.2 

0.8 

0.5270 

0.8499 

0.620 

10.6128 

0.2 

0.9 

0.4679 

0.8838 

0.5295 

10.889 

0.1 

0.9 

0.5284 

0.8490 

0.6224 

10.6066 

0.1 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

AVI-5 


deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

32.0 

0 

5299 

0 

8480 

0 

6249 

10.603 

58.0 

36.0 

0 

5878 

0 

8090 

0 

7265 

10.3764 

54.0 

0.1 

0 

5314 

0 

8471 

0 

6273 

10.5941 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

5892 

0 

8080 

0 

7292 

10.3713 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

5329 

0 

8462 

0 

6297 

10.5880 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

5906 

0 

8070 

0 

7319 

10.3663 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

5344 

0 

8453 

0 

6322 

10.5818 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

5920 

0 

8059 

0 

7346 

10.3613 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

5358 

0 

8443 

0 

6346 

10.5757 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

5934 

0 

8049 

0 

7373 

10.3564 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

5373 

0 

8434 

0 

6371 

10.5697 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

5948 

0 

8039 

0 

740 

10.3514 

0.5 

0.6 

0 

5388 

0 

8425 

0 

6395 

10.5637 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

5962 

0 

8028 

0 

7427 

10.3465 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

5402 

0 

8415 

0 

6420 

10.5577 

0.3 

0.7 

0 

5976 

0 

8018 

0 

7454 

10.3416 

0.3 

0.8 

0 

5417 

0 

8406 

0 

6445 

10.5517 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

5990 

0 

807 

0 

7481 

10.3367 

0.2 

0.9 

0 

5432 

0 

8396 

0 

6469 

10.5458 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

604 

0 

7997 

0 

7508 

10.3319 

0.1 

33.0 

0 

5446 

0 

8387 

0 

6494 

10.5399 

57.0 

37.0 

0 

6018 

0 

7986 

0 

7536 

10.3270 

53.0 

0.1 

0 

5461 

0 

8377 

0 

6519 

10.5340 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

6032 

0 

7976 

0 

7563 

10.3222 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

5476 

0 

8368 

0 

6544 

10.5282 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

6046 

0 

7965 

0 

7590 

10.3175 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

5490 

0 

8358 

0 

6569 

10.5224 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

6060 

0 

7955 

0 

7518 

10.3127 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

5505 

0 

8348 

0 

6594 

10.5166 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

6074 

0 

7944 

0 

7646 

10.3079 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

5519 

0 

8339 

0 

6619 

10.5108 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

6088 

0 

7934 

0 

7673 

10.3032 

0.5 

0.6 

0 

5534 

0 

8329 

0 

6644 

10.5051 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

6101 

0 

7923 

0 

7701 

10.2985 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

5548 

0 

8320 

0 

6669 

10.4994 

0.3 

0.7 

0 

6115 

0 

7912 

0 

7729 

10.2938 

0.3 

0.8 

0 

5563 

0 

8310 

0 

6694 

10.4938 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

6129 

0 

7902 

0 

7757 

10.2892 

0.2 

0.9 

0 

5577 

0 

830 

0 

6720 

10.4882 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

6143 

0 

7891 

0 

7785 

10.2846 

0.1 

34.0 

0 

5592 

0 

8290 

0 

6745 

10.4826 

56.0 

38.0 

0 

6157 

0 

7880 

0 

7813 

10.2799 

52.0 

0.1 

0 

5606 

0 

8281 

0 

6771 

10.4770 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

6170 

0 

7869 

0 

7841 

10.2753 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

5621 

0 

8271 

0 

6796 

10.4715 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

6184 

0 

7859 

0 

7869 

10.2708 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

5635 

0 

8261 

0 

6822 

10.4659 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

6198 

0 

7848 

0 

7898 

10.2662 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

5650 

0 

8251 

0 

6847 

10.4605 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

6211 

0 

7837 

0 

7926 

10.2617 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

5664 

0 

8241 

0 

6873 

10.4550 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

6225 

0 

7826 

0 

7954 

10.2572 

0.5 

0.6 

0 

5678 

0 

8231 

0 

6899 

10.4496 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

6239 

0 

7815 

0 

7983 

10.2527 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

5693 

0 

8221 

0 

6924 

10.4442 

0.3 

0.7 

0 

6252 

0 

7804 

0 

8012 

10.2482 

0.3 

0.8 

0 

5707 

0 

8211 

0 

6950 

10.4388 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

6266 

0 

7793 

0 

8040 

10.2437 

0.2 

0.9 

0 

5721 

0 

8202 

0 

6970 

10.4335 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

6280 

0 

7782 

0 

8069 

10.2393 

0.1 

35.0 

0 

5736 

0 

8192 

0 

702 

10.4281 

55.0 

39.0 

0 

6293 

0 

7771 

0 

8098 

10.2349 

51.0 

0.1 

0 

5750 

0 

8181 

0 

7028 

10.4229 

0.9 

0.1 

0 

6307 

0 

7760 

0 

8127 

10.2305 

0.9 

0.2 

0 

5764 

0 

8171 

0 

7054 

10.4176 

0.8 

0.2 

0 

6320 

0 

7749 

0 

8156 

10.2261 

0.8 

0.3 

0 

5779 

0 

8161 

0 

7080 

10.4124 

0.7 

0.3 

0 

6334 

0 

7738 

0 

8185 

10.2218 

0.7 

0.4 

0 

5793 

0 

8151 

0 

7107 

10.4071 

0.6 

0.4 

0 

6347 

0 

7727 

0 

8214 

10.2174 

0.6 

0.5 

0 

5807 

0 

8141 

0 

7133 

10.4019 

0.5 

0.5 

0 

6361 

0 

7716 

0 

8243 

10.2131 

0.5 

0.6 

0 

5821 

0 

8131 

0 

7159 

10.3968 

0.4 

0.6 

0 

6474 

0 

7705 

0 

8273 

10.2088 

0.4 

0.7 

0 

5835 

0 

8121 

0 

7186 

10.3916 

0.3 

0.7 

0 

6388 

0 

7694 

0 

8302 

10.2045 

0.3 

0.8 

0 

5850 

0 

8111 

0 

7212 

10.3865 

0.2 

0.8 

0 

6401 

0 

7683 

0 

8332 

10.202 

0.2 

0.9 

0 

5864 

0 

810 

0 

7239 

10.3814 

0.1 

0.9 

0 

6414 

0 

7672 

0 

8361 

10.1960 

0.1 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

AVI-6 


deg 

sin 

COS 

tan 

cot 

dee 

sin 

cos 

tan 

cot 

40.0 

0.6428 

0.7660 

0.8291 

10.1918 

50.0 

43.0 

0.6820 

0.7314 

0.9325 

10.724 

47.0 

0.1 

0.6441 

0.7649 

0.8421 

10.1875 

0.9 

0.1 

0.6833 

0.7302 

0.9358 

10.686 

0.9 

0.2 

0.6455 

0.7638 

0.8451 

10.1833 

0.8 

0.2 

0.6845 

0.7290 

0.9391 

10.649 

0.8 

0.3 

0.6468 

0.7627 

0.8481 

10.1792 

0.7 

0.3 

0.6858 

0.7278 

0.9424 

10.612 

0.7 

0.4 

0.6481 

0.7615 

0.8511 

10.1750 

0.6 

0.4 

0.6871 

0.7266 

0.9457 

10.575 

0.6 

0.5 

0.6494 

0.7604 

0.8541 

10.1708 

0.5 

0.5 

0.6884 

0.7254 

0.9490 

10.538 

0.5 

0.6 

0.6508 

0.7593 

0.8571 

10.1667 

0.4 

0.6 

0.6896 

0.7242 

0.9523 

10.501 

0.4 

0.7 

0.6521 

0.7581 

0.8601 

10.1626 

0.3 

0.7 

0.6909 

0.7230 

0.9556 

10.464 

0.3 

0.8 

0.6534 

0.7570 

0.8632 

10.1585 

0.2 

0.8 

0.6921 

0.7218 

0.9590 

10.428 

0.2 

0.9 

0.6547 

0.7559 

0.8662 

10.1544 

0.1 

0.9 

0.6934 

0.7206 

0.9623 

10.392 

0.1 

41.0 

0.6561 

0.7547 

0.8693 

10.1504 

49.0 

44.0 

0.6947 

0.7193 

0.9657 

10.355 

46.0 

0.1 

0.6574 

0.7536 

0.8724 

10.1463 

0.9 

0.1 

0.6959 

0.7181 

0.9691 

10.319 

0.9 

0.2 

0.6587 

0.7524 

0.8754 

10.1423 

0.8 

0.2 

0.6972 

0.7169 

0.9725 

10.283 

0.8 

0.3 

0.660 

0.7513 

0.8785 

10.1383 

0.7 

0.3 

0.6984 

0.7157 

0.9759 

10.247 

0.7 

0.4 

0.6613 

0.7501 

0.8816 

10.1343 

0.6 

0.4 

0.6997 

0.7145 

0.9793 

10.212 

0.6 

0.5 

0.6626 

0.7490 

0.8847 

10.1303 

0.5 

0.5 

0.709 

0.7133 

0.9827 

10.176 

0.5 

0.6 

0.6639 

0.7478 

0.8878 

10.1263 

0.4 

0.6 

0.7022 

0.7120 

0.9861 

10.141 

0.4 

0.7 

0.6652 

0.7466 

0.8910 

10.1224 

0.3 

0.7 

0.7034 

0.7108 

0.9896 

10.105 

0.3 

0.8 

0.6665 

0.7455 

0.8941 

10.1184 

0.2 

0.8 

0.6794 

0.7337 

0.9260 

10.799 

0.2 

0.9 

0.6678 

0.7443 

0.8972 

10.1145 

0.1 

0.9 

0.6807 

0.7325 

0.9293 

10.761 

0.1 

42.0 

0.6691 

0.7431 

0.904 

10.1106 

48.0 

45.0 

0.7071 

0.7071 

1.0000 

1.0000 

45.0 

0.1 

0.6704 

0.7420 

0.9036 

10.1067 

0.9 

0.2 

0.6717 

0.7408 

0.9067 

10.1028 

0.8 

0.3 

0.6730 

0.7396 

0.9099 

10.990 

0.7 

0.4 

0.6743 

0.7385 

0.9131 

10.951 

0.6 

0.5 

0.6756 

0.7373 

0.9163 

10.913 

0.5 

0.6 

0.6769 

0.7361 

0.9195 

10.875 

0.4 

0.7 

0.6782 

0.7349 

0.9228 

10.837 

0.3 

0.8 

0.6794 

0.7337 

0.9260 

10.799 

0.2 

0.9 

0.6807 

0.7325 

0.9293 

10.761 

0.1 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

cos 

sin 

cot 

tan 

deg 

AVI-7 


MODULE  2  INDEX 


A 

A.c.  and  d.c,  alternating  current  electricity,  1-1 
A.c.  formulas,  useful,  AIV-1  to  AIV-2 
A.c.  generation,  basic,  1-8  to  1-12 

cycle,  1-8  to  1-12 

frequency,  1-11 

period,  1-11 

wavelength,  1-12 
Alternating  current  and  capacitors,  4-6  to  4-9 
Alternating  current  and  inductance,  4-2  to  4-4 
Alternating  current  values,  1-13  to  1-20 

average  value,  1-14 

effective  value  of  a  sine  wave,  1-15 

instantaneous  value,  1-14 

peak  and  peak-to-peak  values,  1-13 

sine  waves  in  phase,  1-18 

sine  waves  out  of  phase,  1-19  to  1-20 
Apparent  power  in  a.c.  circuits,  calculating, 

4-21,4-22 
Audiofrequency  transformers,  5-22 
Autotransformers,  5-21 
Average  value,  1-14 

C 

Capacitance,  3-2  to  3-34 

capacitor  losses,  3-7  to  3-1 1 
charging,  3-8  to  3-11 
discharging,  3-11 
capacitors  in  series  and  parallel,  3-20  to 
3-26 

color  codes,  3-27  to  3-33 
fixed  capacitor,  3-22  to  3-26 
in  parallel,  3-21 
in  series,  3-20 
variable  capacitor,  3-26 
charge  and  discharge  of  an  RC  series 
circuit,  3-11  to  3-15 

charge  cycle,  3-12  to  3-13 
discharge  cycle,  3-14  to  3-15 
electrostatic  field,  3-2,  3-3 

factors  affecting  the  value  of 

capacitance,  3-5  to  3-7 
farad,  3-4 


Capacitance — Continued 

simple  capacitor,  3-3 

RC  time  constant,  3-16 

summary,  3-33  to  3-38 

universal  time  constant  chart,  3-16  to  3-19 

voltage  rating  of  capacitors,  3-7 
Capacitive  reactance,  4-8 
Capacitor  losses,  3-7  to  3-1 1 

charging,  3-8  to  3-11 

discharging,  3-11 
Capacitors  in  series  and  parallel,  3-20  to  3-22 

color  codes,  3-27  to  3-34 

fixed  capacitor,  3-22  to  3-26 

in  parallel,  3-21 

in  series,  3-20 

variable  capacitor,  3-26 
Coefficient  of  coupling,  transformers,  5-10 
Coil,  magnetic  field,  1-6  to  1-8 

losses,  1-8 

polarity,  1-7 

strength,  1-8 
Color  codes  for  capacitors,  3-27  to  3-34 
Concepts  of  alternating  current  electricity,  1-1 
to  1-32 

a.c.  and  d.c,  1-1 

alternating  current  values,  1-13  to  1-20 
basic  a.c.  generation,  1-9  to  1-14 

cycle,  1-8  to  1-10 

frequency,  1-11 

period,  1-11 

wavelength,  1-12 
disadvantages  of  d.c.  compared  to  a.c,  1-2 
electromagnetism,  1-4 
magnetic  fields,  1-4  to  1-8 
around  a  current-carrying  conductor,  1-4  to 
1-6 

of  a  coil,  1-6  to  1-8 

Ohm's  law  in  a.c.  circuits,  1-21 

summary,  1-22  to  1-29 

voltage  waveforms,  1-3 
Copper  loss,  transformer,  5-18 
Core  characteristics,  transformers,  5-3  to  5-4 

hollow-core,  5-4 

shell-core,  5-5 


INDEX- 1 


Counter  emf,  producing,  transformers,  5-8 
Current-carrying  conductor,  magnetic  fields, 

1-4  to  1-6 
Cycle,  a.c.  generation,  1-8  to  1-11 

D 

Disadvantages  of  d.c.  compared  to  a.c,  1-2 

E 

Eddy-current  loss,  transformer,  5-18 
Effective  value  of  a  sine  wave,  1-15  to  1-17 
Effects  of  current  on  the  body,  5-22 
Efficiency,  transformer,  5-18 
Electric  shock,  5-23  to  5-24 

preventing  electric  shock,  5-24  to  5-25 

safety,  5-22 
Electromagnetism,  1-4 
Electromotive  force  (emf),  2-2 
Electrostatic  field,  3-2  to  3-7 

factors  affecting  the  value  of  capacitance, 
3-5  to  3-7 

farad,  3-4 

simple  capacitor,  3-3 
F 

Farad,  capacitance,  3-5 
Fixed  capacitor,  3-22  to  3-26 
Frequency,  a.c.  generation,  1-11 

G 

Glossary,  AI-1  to  AI-5 
Greek  alphabet,  AII-1 

Growth  and  decay  of  current  in  an  LR  series 
circuit,  2-10  to  2-14 
L/Rtime  constant,  2-13  to  2-14 

H 

Hollow-core  transformers,  5-4 
Hysteresis  loss,  transformer,  5-18 

I 

Impedance,  a.c.  circuits,  4-11  to  4-15 


Impedance-matching  transformers,  5-22 
Inducing  a  voltage  in  the  secondary, 

transformers,  5-9 
Inductance,  2-1  to  2-23 

characteristics,  2-2  to  2-19 

electromotive  force  (emf),  2-2 
factors  affecting  mutual  inductance, 
2-16 

growth  and  decay  of  current  in  an  LR 

series  circuit,  2-10  to  2-14 
mutual  inductance,  2-15 
parallel  inductors  without  coupling, 
2-19 

power  loss  in  an  inductor,  2-14 
self-inductance,  2-4  to  2-12 
series  inductors  with  magnetic 

coupling,  2-17 
series  inductors  without  magnetic 

coupling,  2-17 
unit  of  inductance,  2-10 
summary,  2-19  to  2-25 
Inductive  and  capacitive  reactance,  4-2  to  4-34 
capacitors  and  alternating  current,  4-6  to 
4-8 

capacitive  reactance,  4-8 
inductance  and  alternating  current,  4-2  to 
4-4 

inductive  reactance,  4-5 
parallel  RLC  circuits,  4-28  to  4-34 
reactance,  impedance,  and  power 

relationships  in  a.c.  circuits,  4-9  to  4-25 
impedance,  4-11  to  4-15 
Ohms  law  for  a.c,  4-15 
power  in  a.c.  circuits,  4-17  to 

4-22 
reactance,  4-9 
series  RLC  circuits  4-25  to  4-28 
summary,  4-34  to  4-38 
Inductive  reactance,  4-5 
Instantaneous  value,  1-14 

L 

Learning  objectives,  1-1,2-1,3-1,4-1,5-1 
capacitance,  3-2 

concepts  of  alternating  current  electricity, 
1-1 


INDEX-2 


Learning  objectives — Continued 
inductance,  2-2 

inductive  and  capacitive  reactance,  4-1 

transformers,  5-1 
Load,  effect  of,  transformers,  5-13 
Losses,  transformer,  5-17  to  5-18 

copper  loss,  5-18 

eddy-current  loss,  5-18 

hysteresis  loss,  5-18 
L/R  time  constant,  2-13  to  2-14 

M 

Magnetic  fields,  1-4  to  1-8 

around  a  current-carrying  conductor,  of  a 
coil,  1-6  to  1-8 
Mutual  flux,  transformers,  5-14 
Mutual  inductance,  2-15 

N 

Navy  Electricity  and  Electronics  Training 

Series,  iv-vi 
No-load  condition,  transformer,  5-8 

O 

Ohm's  law  for  a.c,  4-15 

Ohm's  law  in  a.c.  circuits,  1-21,  1-22 

P 

Parallel  inductors  without  coupling,  2-19 

Parallel  RLC  circuits,  4-28  to  4-34 

Peak  and  peak-to-peak  values,  1-13  to  1-15 

Period,  a.c.  generation,  1-11 

Power  factor,  a.c.  circuits,  4-23 

Power  factor  correction,  a.c.  circuits,  4-24 

Power  in  a.c.  circuits,  4-17  to  4-22 

calculating  apparent  power  in  a.c.  circuits, 
4-21,4-22 

calculating  reactive  power  in  a.c.  circuits, 
4-20 

calculating  true  power  in  a.c.  circuits,  4-18 
power  factor,  4-23 
power  factor  correction,  4-24 
Power  loss  in  an  inductor,  2-14 


Power  relationship  between  primary  and 
secondary  windings,  transformers,  5-17 

Power  transformers,  5-20 

Primary  and  secondary  phase  relationship, 
transformers,  5-9 

R 

Radiofrequency  transformers,  5-22 

Ratings,  transformers,  5-19 

RC  series  circuit,  charge  and  discharge,  3-11  to 

3-  14 

charge  cycle,  3-8  to  3-1 1 

discharge  cycle,  3-11 
RC  time  constant,  3-16 
Reactance,  a.c.  circuits,  4-9 
Reactive  power  in  a.c.  circuits,  calculating, 

4-  20 

RLC  circuits,  4-25  to  4-28,  4-28  to  4-34 
parallel,  4-28  to  4-34 
series,  4-25  to  4-28 

S 

Safety,  transformers,  5-22  to  5-24 
Schematic  symbols  for  transformers,  5-7 
Self-inductance,  2-4  to  2-13 

factors  affecting  coil  inductance,  2-7  to 
2-12 

Series  inductors  with  magnetic  coupling,  2-17 
Series  inductors  without  magnetic  coupling, 
2-17 

Series  RLC  circuits,  4-25  to  4-28 

Shell-core  transformers,  5-5 

Shock  victims,  rescue  and  care,  5-23 

Simple  capacitor,  3-3 

Sine  waves  in  phase,  1-18 

Sine  waves  out  of  phase,  1-19  to  1-20 

Square  and  square  roots,  AIII-1 

T 

Transformers,  5-1  to  5-28 
basic  operation,  5-2 
components,  5-3  to  5-5 

core  characteristics,  5-3  to  5-5 
transformer  windings,  5-5  to  5-6 


INDEX-3 


Transformers — Continued 

how  a  transformer  works,  5-8  to  5-19 
coefficient  of  coupling,  5-10 
effect  of  a  load,  5-13 
inducing  a  voltage  in  the  secondary, 
5-9 

mutual  flux,  5-14 

no-load  condition,  5-8 

power  relationship  between  primary 

and  secondary  windings,  5-17 
primary  and  secondary  phase 

relationship,  5-9 
producing  a  counter  emf,  5-8 
transformer  efficiency,  5-18  to  5-19 
transformer  losses,  5-17 
turns  and  current  ratios,  5-14  to  5-16 
turns  and  voltage  ratios,  5-11 
ratings,  5-19 
safety,  5-22  to  5-24 

effects  of  current  on  the  body, 
5-22 

electric  shock,  5-23 

precautions  for  preventing  electric 

shock,  5-24  to  5-25 
rescue  and  care  of  shock  victims, 

5-23 

schematic  symbols  for  transformers, 
5-7 

summary,  5-25  to  5-28 
types  and  applications,  5-20  to  5-22 
audiofrequency  transformers, 
5-22 


Transformers — Continued 

auto  transformers,  5-21 
impedance-matching 
transformers,  5-22 
power  transformers,  5-20 
radiofrequency  transformers,  5-22 
Trigonometric  functions,  AV-1  to  AV-4 
Trigonometric  tables,  AVI-1  to  AVI-7 
True  power  in  a.c.  circuits,  calculating,  4-18 
Turns  and  current  ratios,  transformers,  5-14  to 
5-16 

Turns  and  voltage  ratios,  transformers,  5-11  to 
5-13 


U 


Unit  of  inductance,  2-10 

Universal  time  constant  chart,  3-16  to  3-19 


Variable  capacitor,  3-26 
Voltage  rating  of  capacitors,  3-7 
Voltage  waveforms,  1-3 

W 

Wavelength,  a.c.  generation,  1-12 
Windings  transformer,  5-5  to  5-6 


INDEX-4 


Assignment  Questions 


Information;  The  text  pages  that  you  are  to  study  are 
provided  at  the  beginning  of  the  assignment  questions. 


ASSIGNMENT  1 

Textbook  assignment:  Chapter  1,  "Concepts  of  Alternating  Current,"  pages  1-1  through  1-33. 


1  - 1 .    Alternating  current  can  be  defined  as 
current  that  varies  in 

1 .  amplitude  and  direction 

2.  magnitude  and  phase 

3.  amplitude  and  time 

4.  time  and  phase 

1-2.    Before  a  120-volt  dc  source  can  be  used 
to  power  a  12-volt  load,  the  voltage 
must  be  reduced.  Which  of  the 
following  methods  can  be  used? 

1 .  A  resistor  placed  in  parallel  with  the 
load 

2.  A  resistor  placed  in  series  with  the 
load 

3 .  A  step-down  transformer  placed  in 
series  with  load 

4.  A  step-down  transformer  placed  in 
parallel-with  the  load 

1-3.    Alternating  current  has  replaced  direct 
current  in  modern  transmission  systems 
because  it  has  which  of  the  following 
advantages? 

1 .  Ac  can  be  transmitted  with  no  line 
loss 

2.  Ac  can  be  transmitted  at  higher 
current  levels 

3.  Ac  can  be  transmitted  at  lower 
voltage  levels 

4.  Ac  can  be  readily  stepped  up  or 
down 

1-4.    A  waveform  is  a  graphic  plot  of  what 
quantities? 

1 .  Current  versus  time 

2.  Amplitude  versus  time 

3.  Voltage  versus  amplitude 

4.  Magnitude  versus  amplitude 


1-5.    Which  of  the  following  properties 

surrounds  a  current-carrying  conductor? 

1 .  A  magnetic  field 

2.  A  repulsive  force 

3.  An  attractive  force 

4.  An  electrostatic  field 


Figure  1A. — Conductors,  cross-sectional  view. 

IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  1-6  AND  1-7, 
REFER  TO  FIGURE  1A. 

1  -6.    The  direction  of  the  magnetic  field  is 
correctly  depicted  by  which  of  the 
followings 

1.  AandB 

2.  B  and  D 

3.  AandC 

4.  B  and  C 

IN  ANSWERING  QUESTION  1-7,  REFER  TO 
FIGURE  1 A  AND  IGNORE  THE  MAGNETIC 
FIELD  ARROWS  SHOWN  IN  THE  FIGURE. 

1-7.    In  which  conductors  will  the  magnetic 
fields  (a)  aid,  and  (b)  oppose  each  other? 

1.  (a)  AandC,  (b)CandD 

2.  (a)  A  and  D,  (b)  B  and  C 

3.  (a)  AandC,  (b)BandD 

4.  (a) AandB,  (b)AandD 


1 


+  c 

B 

Figure  IB. — A  magnetic  field  surrounding  a  current- 
carrying  conductor. 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  1-8,  REFER 
TO  FIGURE  IB. 

1-8.    In  figure  IB,  the  direction  of  the 
magnetic  field  surrounding  the 
conductor  is  correctly  indicated  by  what 
arrow? 

1.  A 

2.  B 

3.  C 

4.  D 

1-9.    Which  of  the  following  statements 

accurately  describes  the  magnetic  field 
surrounding  a  current-carrying 
conductor? 

1 .  It  is  parallel  to  and  equal  along  all 
parts  of  the  conductor 

2.  It  is  parallel  to  and  maximum  at  the 
most  negative  part  of  the  conductor 

3.  It  is  perpendicular  to  and  equal 
along  all  parts  of  the  conductor 

4.  It  is  perpendicular  to  the  conductor 
and  maximum  at  the  most  negative 
point  of  the  conductor 


1-10.    Which  of  the  following  factors 

determine(s)  the  intensity  of  a  magnetic 
field  surrounding  a  coil? 

1 .  The  amount  of  current  flow  through 
the  coil 

2.  The  type  of  core  material 

3 .  The  number  of  turns  in  the 
conductor 

4.  All  of  the  above 

1-11.    When  you  grasp  a  coil  in  your  left  hand 
with  your  thumb  pointing  in  the 
direction  of  the  north  pole,  your  fingers 
will  be  wrapped  around  the  coil  in  the 
direction  of  the 

1 .  voltage  potential 

2.  magnetic  field 

3.  current  flow 

4.  south  pole 

1-12.    The  power  consumed  in  a  conductor  in 
realigning  the  atoms  which  set  up  the 
magnetic  field  is  known  as  what  type  of 
loss? 

1 .  Hysteresis  loss 

2.  Magnetic  loss 

3.  Field  loss 

4.  Heat  loss 

1-13.    The  magnetic  field  surrounding  a 

straight  conductor  is  (a)  what  shape,  and 
(b)  is  in  what  position  relative  to  the 
conductor? 

1 .  (a)  Linked  oblong 
(b)  Parallel 

2.  (a)  Concentric  circles 
(b)  Parallel 

3 .  (a)  Linked  oblong 
(b)  Perpendicular 

4.  (a)  Concentric  circles 
(b)  Perpendicular 


2 


1-14.    Why  is  a  two-pole  magnetic  field  set  up 
around  a  coil? 

1 .  Because  separate  lines  of  magnetic 
force  link  and  combine  their  effects 

2.  Because  concentric  lines  of  force 
cross  at  right  angles  and  combine. 

3.  Because  lines  of  force  are  separated 
and  bent  at  the  coil  ends 

4.  Because  separate  lines  of  force  are 
attracted  to  the  two  poles  of  the  coi 

1-15.    When  a  conductor  is  moving  parallel  to 
magnetic  lines  of  force,  (a)  what  relative 
number  of  magnetic  lines  are  cut,  and 
(b)  what  relative  value  of  emf  is 
induced? 

1 .  (a)  Minimum,  (b)  maximum 

2.  (a)  Minimum,  (b)  minimum 

3.  (a)  Maximum,  (b)  maximum 

4.  (a)  Maximum,  (b)  minimum 

1-16.    When  the  induced  voltage  in  a 

conductor  rotating  in  a  magnetic  field  is 
plotted  against  the  degrees  of  rotation, 
the  plot  will  take  what  shape? 

1 .  A  circle 

2.  A  sine  curve 

3.  A  square  wave 

4.  A  straight  line 

1-17.    When  a  loop  of  wire  is  rotated  through 
360°  in  a  magnetic  field,  the  induced 
voltage  will  be  zero  at  which  of  the 
following  points? 

1.  45° 

2.  90° 

3.  180° 

4.  270° 


1-18.    When  a  loop  of  wire  is  rotated  360°  in  a 
magnetic  field,  at  what  points  will  the 
induced  voltage  reach  its  maximum  (a) 
positive,  and  (b)  negative  values? 

1.  (a)  0°,  (b)  180° 

2.  (a)  0°,  (b)270° 

3.  (a)  90°,  (b)  180° 

4.  (a)  90°,  (b)270° 

1-19.    When  a  coil  of  wire  makes  eight 

complete  revolutions  through  a  single 
magnetic  field,  (a)  what  total  number  of 
alternations  of  voltage  will  be  generated 
and,  (b)  what  total  number  of  cycles  of 
ac  will  be  generated? 

1.  (a)  32,  (b)  16 

2.  (a)  16,  (b)  8 

3.  (a)  8,  (b)  4 

4.  (a)  4,  (b)  2 

1-20.    According  to  the  left-hand  rule  for 

generators,  when  your  thumb  points  in 
the  direction  of  rotation,  your  (a) 
forefinger  and  (b)  your  middle  finger 
will  indicate  the  relative  directions  of 
what  quantities? 

1 .  (a)  Current, 

(b)  Magnetic  flux,  south  to  north 

2.  (a)  Current, 

(b)  Magnetic  flux,  north  to  south 

3 .  (a)  Magnetic  flux,  south  to  north, 
(b)  Current 

4.  (a)  Magnetic  flux,  north  to  south, 
(b)  Current 

1-21.    Continuous  rotation  of  a  conductor 
through  magnetic  lines  of  force  will 
produce  what  type  of  (a)  voltage  and 
(b)  waveform? 

1 .  (a)  Ac,  (b)  sine  wave 

2.  (a)  Dc,  (b)  continuous  level 

3.  (a)  Ac,  (b)  sawtooth 

4.  (a)  Dc,  (b)  pulsating  wave 


3 


1  -22.    What  is  the  term  for  the  number  of 

complete  cycles  of  ac  produced  in  one 
second? 

1 .  Period 

2.  Waveform 

3.  Frequency 

4.  Wavelength 


1  -23 .    What  is  the  unit  of  measurement  for 
frequency? 


Figure  1C. — Components  of  a  sinewave. 


1.  Cycle 

2.  Hertz 

3.  Period 

4.  Maxwell 

1  -24.    A  loop  of  wire  rotating  at  60  rpm  in  a 
magnetic  field  will  produce  an  ac 
voltage  of  what  frequency? 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  1-27 
THROUGH  1-36,  REFER  TO  FIGURE  1C. 
IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  1-27 
THROUGH  1-31,  SELECT  FROM  COLUMN 
B  THE  COMPONENT  THAT  IS  DESCRIBED 
BY  THE  TERM  IN  COLUMN  A. 

A.  TERM  B.  COMPONENT 


1.       1  Hz 

1-27. 

Period 

1. 

a 

2.     60  Hz 

1-28. 

Negative 

2. 

b 

3.    120  Hz 

alternation 

3. 

c 

4.    360  Hz 

1-29. 

Wavelength 

4. 

d 

1-30. 

One-half  cycle 

An  ac  voltage  of  250  hertz  has  a  period 

1-31 

Postive 

of 

alternation 

1-26. 


1.  0.004  second 

2.  0.025  second 

3.  0.4  second 

4.  2.5  seconds 

What  is  the  approximate  frequency  of  an 
ac  voltage  that  has  a  period  of  .0006 
second? 


1-32.    Component  a  is  a  measure  of  what 
quantity? 

1 .  Frequency 

2.  Polarity 

3.  Amplitude 

4.  Time 


L        6  Hz  1-33.    Component  a  differs  from  component  b 

2.  16.67  Hz  in  which  of  the  following  characteristics 

3.  600  Hz 

4.  1667  Hz  1.  Frequency 

2.  Polarity 

3.  Amplitude 

4.  Period 


4 


1-34.  Component  c  would  represent  what 
quantities  if  it  were  expressed  as  (a) 
physical  distance,  and  (b)  time? 


1 .  (a)  Frequency 

2.  (a)  Period 

3.  (a)  Frequency 
4  (a)  Wavelength 


(b)  period 
(b)  wavelength 
(b)  wavelength 
(b)  period 


1  -39.    While  the  value  of  an  ac  voltage  may  be 
expressed  as  one  of  several  values,  the 
accepted  practice  is  to  express  it  as  what 
type  value? 

1 .  Average  value 

2.  Instantaneous  value 

3.  Peak-to-peak  value 

4.  Effective  value 


1-35.    The  combined  values  of  components  a 
and  b  represent  what  ac  value? 

1 .  Peak-to-peak  value 

2.  Average  value 

3.  Effective  value 

4.  Instantaneous  value 

1-36.    A  peak  voltage  is  represented  by  which 
of  the  following  components? 

1.  a 

2.  c 

3.  d 

4.  e 

1-37.    An  ac  voltage  has  a  frequency  of  350 
Hz.  In  two  seconds,  what  total  number 
of  times  will  the  peak  value  of  voltage 
be  generated? 

1.  350  times 

2.  700  times 

3.  1400  times 

4.  2800  times 

1-38.    The  value  of  current  of  an  ac  waveform 
taken  at  any  particular  moment  of  time 
is  what  type  of  value? 

1 .  Average  value 

2.  Effective  value 

3.  Instantaneous  value 

4.  Peak-to-peak  value 


1-40. 


1-41. 


The  total  of  ten  instantaneous  values  of 
an  alternation  divided  by  ten  is  equal  to 
what  value? 

1 .  The  peak  value 

2.  The  average  value 

3.  The  instantaneous  value 

4.  The  effective  value 

Which  of  the  following  mathematical 
formulas  is  used  to  find  the  average 
value  of  voltage  for  an  ac  voltage? 


1. 

F  = 

0.707  x  Emax 

2. 

F  = 

1.414  xEeff 

3. 

F  = 

0.636  x  E^ 

4. 

F  = 

0.226  x  Eeff 

1-42.    What  is  the  average  value  of  all  of  the 
instantaneous  voltages  occurring  during 
one  cycle  of  an  ac  waveform  with  a 
peak  value  of  60  volts? 

1.  0  volts 

2.  38  volts 

3.  76  volts 

4.  128  volts 

1-43.    If  an  ac  voltage  has  an  Emax  of  220  volts, 
what  is  Eavg? 

1.  50  volts 

2.  140  volts 

3.  156  volts 

4.  311  volts 


5 


1-44.    If  an  ac  waveform  has  a  peak-to-peak 
value  of  28  volts,  what  is  E  avg? 


1.  40  volts 

2.  20  volts 

3.  18  volts 

4.  9  volts 

1-45.    If  an  ac  waveform  has  a  peak  value  of 
4.5  amperes,  what  is  its  average  value? 

1.  2.9  amperes 

2.  3.2  amperes 

3.  5.7  amperes 

4.  6.4  amperes 

1-46.    If  the  average  value  of  current  of  an  ac 
waveform  is  1 .2  amperes,  what  is  its 
maximum  value  of  current? 


1-49. 


1-50. 


What  value  will  result  by  squaring  all 
values  for  Einst,  averaging  these  values, 
and  then  taking  the  square  root  of  that 
average? 


^avg 


1. 

2  F 

3-  Eeff 

4.  Em 

The  accepted,  nominal  value  for 
household  power  in  the  United  States  is 
120-volts,  60  Hz.  What  is  the  value  of 
maximum  voltage? 

1.  170  volts 

2.  120  volts 

3.  85  volts 

4.  76  volts 


1-47. 


1-48. 


1.  0.8  amperes 

2.  0.9  amperes 

3.  1.7  amperes 

4.  1.9  amperes 

The  value  of  alternating  current  that  will 
heat  a  resistor  to  the  same  temperature 
as  an  equal  value  of  direct  current  is 
known  as 

1 .  Iavg 

2.  Ieff 


1-51.    An  ac  voltmeter  is  usually  calibrated  to 
read  which  of  the  following  ac  values? 

1 .  Average 

2.  Effective 

3.  Peak 

4.  Peak-to-peak 

1  -52.    If  the  maximum  value  for  an  ac  voltage 
is  known,  the  Eeff  can  be  found  by  using 
which  of  the  following  formulas? 


3.  Iin 

1. 

Eeff- 

Emax/.636 

4  I 

~-  Amax 

2. 

Eeff  = 

Emax/.707 

3. 

Eeff  = 

Emax  x  .707 

The  rms  value  for  an  ac  voltage  is  equal 

4. 

Eeff  = 

Emaxx  1.414 

to  what  other  ac  value? 


1. 

2. 

^max 

3. 

Eeff 

4. 

F 

1-53.    If  the  Ieff  of  an  ac  waveform  is  3.25 
amperes,  what  is  Imax? 

1.  4.6  amperes 

2.  2.3  amperes 

3.  2.1  amperes 

4.  1.6  amperes 


6 


1-54.    If  the  rms  value  of  the  voltage  of  an  ac 
waveform  is  12.4  volt  what  is  its 
average  value?  (Hint:  compute  Emax 
first.) 


1-58 


1.  8  volts 

2.  1 1  volts 

3.  15  volts 

4.  18  volts 


1-59 


Figure  ID. — Phase  relationship  of  sinewaves. 


1-60 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  1-55 
THROUGH  1-60,  REFER  TO  FIGURE  ID. 

1  -55.    What  two  waveforms  are  in  phase?  1  -6 1 

1.  AandB 

2.  AandC 

3.  CandD 

4.  BandC 

1-56.    What  is  the  phase  difference,  if  any, 
between  waveform  B  and  C? 

1.  Bis  225°  out  of  phase  with  C  1-62 

2.  B  is  1 80°  out  of  phase  with  C 

3.  Bis  90°  out  of  phase  with  C 

4.  None;  they  are  in  phase 

1-57.    What  is  the  phase  difference,  if  any, 
between  waveform  A  and  D? 

1.  A  is  270°  out  of  phase  with  D 

2.  A  is  1 80°  out  of  phase  with  D 

3.  A  is  90°  out  of  phase  with  D 

4.  None;  they  are  in  phase 


If  the  voltage  represented  by  waveform 
A  is  summed  to  the  voltage  represented 
by  waveform  D,  what  is  the  resultant 
voltage? 

1.  20  volts 

2.  15  volts 

3.  10  volts 

4.  0  volts 

What  is  Eu,  at  90°  that  results  from 
adding  waveform  B  to  waveform  D? 

1.  +7.5  volts 

2.  +2.5  volts 

3.  -7.5  volts 

4.  -10  volts 

What  is  the  phase  difference  between 
waveform  A  and  waveform  C? 

1.  A  lags  C  by  90° 

2.  A  leads  C  by  90° 

3.  A  leads  C  by  180° 

4.  A  lags  C  by  180° 

Which  of  the  following  is  an  important 
rule  to  remember  when  using  Ohm's 
Law  to  solve  ac  circuit  problems? 

1 .  Always  solve  for  resistance  first 

2.  Give  the  answer  as  effective  value 

3.  Never  mix  values 

4.  Convert  all  given  values  to  effective 
before  attempting  to  solve 

An  ac  circuit  is  composed  of  three  20- 
ohm  resistors  connected  in  parallel.  The 
average  voltage  supplied  to  this  circuit 
is  62-volts  ac.  What  is  the  maximum 
current? 

1.  9.3  amperes 

2.  14.6  amperes 

3.  17.5  amperes 

4.  22.5  amperes 


7 


1-63.    If  the  ac  source  in  question  1-62  is 

raised  to  an  average  value  of  120  volts, 
what  is  the  Ieff? 


1.  1 1.48  amperes 

2.  12.70  amperes 

3.  20.01  amperes 

4.  25.52  amperes 


1  -64.    If  Eeff  is  1 50  volts  and  Imax  is  4.5 

amperes,  what  is  the  total  resistance  (RT) 
of  a  circuit? 


1.  21.2Q 

2.  23.6Q 

3.  33.3Q 

4.  47.1Q 


8 


ASSIGNMENT  2 

Textbook  assignment:  Chapter  2,  "Inductance,"  pages  2-1  through  2-27. 


2-1.    The  property  of  inductance  offers 

opposition  to  which  of  the  following 
quantities? 

1 .  Constant  current 

2.  Constant  voltage 

3.  Changes  in  current 

4.  Changes  in  voltage 

2-2.    What  is  the  symbol  for  inductance? 

1.  L 

2.  H 

3.  XL 

4.  IND 

2-3.    What  is  the  unit  of  measurement  for 
inductance? 

1.  Ohm 

2.  Rel 

3.  Farad 

4.  Henry 

2-4.    If  9  volts  are  induced  in  a  conductor 
when  the  current  changes  by  4.5 
amperes  in  one  second,  what  is  the  total 
inductance  of  the  circuit? 

1 .  1.5  henries 

2.  2.0  henries 

3.  13.5  henries 

4.  40.0  henries 

2-5.    What  physical  property  is  similar  to 
inductance? 

1.  Mass 

2.  Motion 

3.  Velocity 

4.  Inertia 


2-6.    The  difference  in  potential  across  a 

resistor,  created  by  current  through  the 
resistor  is  an  example  of  which  of  the 
following  forces? 

1.  Resistive 

2.  Inertia 

3.  Inductive 

4.  Electromotive 

2-7.    When  a  magnetic  field  moves  through  a 
stationary  conductor,  the  electrons  in 
orbit  are  affected  in  what  manner? 

1 .  They  are  dislodged  from  orbit 

2.  They  move  closer  to  their  nucleus 

3.  They  move  closer  to  other  orbiting 
electrons 

4.  They  bunch  up  on  one  side  of  the 
nucleus 

2-8.    When  electrons  are  moved  in  a 

conductor  by  a  magnetic  field,  a  force 
known  by  which  of  the  following  terms 
is  created? 

1 .  Voltage 

2.  Electromotive 

3.  Potential  difference 

4.  All  of  the  above 

2-9.  Self -induced  emf  is  also  known  as  what 
force? 

1 .  magnetic  force 

2.  Inertial  force 

3.  Electromotive  force 

4.  Counter  electromotive  force 


9 


2-10.    According  to  Lenz's  Law,  the  induced 
emf  produced  by  a  change  in  current  in 
an  inductive  circuit  tends  to  have  what 
effect  on  the  current? 

1 .  It  aids  a  rise  in  current  and  opposes 
fall  in  current 

2.  It  aids  a  fall  in  current  and  opposes  a 
rise  in  current 

3.  It  opposes  either  a  rise  or  a  fall  in 
current 

4.  It  aids  either  a  rise  or  fall  in  current 

2-11.    The  direction  of  the  induced  voltage  in 
an  inductor  may  be  found  by  application 
of  which  of  the  following  rules? 

1 .  The  left-hand  rule  for  inductors 

2.  The  left-hand  rule  for  generators 

3.  The  right-hand  rule  for  conductors 

4.  The  right-hand  rule  for  motors 

2-12.    The  left-hand  rule  for  generators  states 
that  the  thumb  of  the  left  hand  points  in 
the  direction  of  motion  of  the 

1.  conductor 

2.  magnetic  field 

3.  generator  poles 

4.  induced  current 

2-13.    When  source  voltage  is  removed  from  a 
current-carrying  conductor,  a  voltage 
will  be  induced  in  the  conductor  by 
which  of  the  following  actions? 

1.  The  decreasing  voltage 

2.  The  collapsing  magnetic  field 

3.  The  reversal  of  current 

4.  The  reversing  electrical  field 

2-14.    The  property  of  inductance  is  present  in 
which  of  the  following  electrical 
circuits? 

1 .  An  ac  circuit 

2.  A  dc  circuit 

3.  A  resistive  circuit 

4.  Each  of  the  above 


2-15.    How  are  inductors  classified? 

1 .  By  core  type 

2.  By  conductor  type 

3.  By  the  number  of  turns 

4.  By  the  direction  of  the  windings  on 
the  core 

2-16.    Normally,  most  coils  have  cores 
composed  of  either  air  or 

1 .  copper 

2.  carbon 

3.  soft  iron 

4.  carbon  steel 

2-17.    The  hollow  form  of  nonmagnetic 

material  found  in  the  center  of  an  air- 
core  coil  has  what  purpose? 

1 .  To  focus  the  magnetic  flux 

2.  To  support  the  windings 

3.  To  act  as  a  low  resistance  path  for 
flux 

4.  To  serve  as  a  container  for  the  core 

2-18.    Which  of  the  following  factors  will 

NOT  affect  the  value  of  inductance  of  a 
coil? 

1 .  Number  of  coil  turns 

2.  Diameter  of  the  coil 

3.  Conductor  tensility 

4.  Core  materials  used 

2-19.    When  the  number  of  turns  is  increased 
in  a  coil  from  2  to  4,  the  total  inductance 
will  increase  by  a  factor  of 

1.  eight 

2.  two 

3.  six 

4.  four 


10 


2-20. 


Why  do  large  diameter  coils  have 
greater  inductance  than  smaller  diameter 
coils,  all  other  factors  being  the  same? 


2-24. 


An  increase  in  the  permeability  of  the 
core  of  a  coil  will  increase  which  of  the 
following  coil  characteristics? 


1 .  Large  diameter  coils  have  more  wire 
and  thus  more  flux 

2.  Large  diameter  coils  have  less 
resistance 

3.  Small  diameter  coils  have  less 
resistance 

4.  Small  diameter  coils  have  large 
cemfs  which  oppose  current  flow 

2-21.    If  the  radius  of  a  coil  is  doubled,  its 

inductance  is  increased  by  what  factor? 

1.  One 

2.  Two 

3.  Eight 

4.  Four 

2-22.    If  the  length  of  a  coil  is  doubled  while 
the  number  of  turns  is  kept  the  same, 
this  will  have  (a)  what  effect  on 
inductance  and  (b)  by  what  factor? 

1.  (a)  Decrease,  (b)  by  1/4 

2.  (a)  Decrease,  (b)  by  1/2 

3.  (a)  Increase,  (b)  by  2  times 

4.  (a)  Increase,  (b)  by  4  times 

2-23.    A  soft  iron  core  will  increase  inductance 
because  it  has  which  of  the  following 
characteristics? 


1. 

Low  permeability  and  low 

reluctance 

2. 

Low  permeability  and  high 

reluctance 

3. 

High  permeability  and  high 

reluctance 

4. 

High  permeability  and  low 

reluctance 

1 .  Magnetic  flux 

2.  Reluctance 

3.  Resistance 

4.  Conductance 

2-25.    If  a  coil  is  wound  in  layers,  its 

inductance  will  be  greater  than  that  of  a 
similar  single-layer  coil  because  of  a 
higher 

1 .  permeability 

2.  flux  linkage 

3.  reluctance 

4.  conductance 

2-26.    Regardless  of  the  method  used, 

inductance  of  a  coil  can  ONLY  be 
increased  by  increasing  what  coil 
characteristic? 

1 .  Transconductance 

2.  Reluctance 

3.  Flux  linkage 

4.  Conductance 

2-27.    What  is  the  symbol  used  to  denote  the 
basic  unit  of  measurement  for 
inductance? 

1.  L 

2.  H 

3.  I 

4.  F 

2-28.    What  does  the  Greek  letter  Delta  signify 
as  in  "AT  or  "At"? 

1 .  The  values  are  constant 

2.  The  values  are  average 

3.  The  values  are  changing 

4.  The  values  are  effective 


11 


2-29.    An  electrical  circuit  contains  a  coil. 

When  the  current  varies  2.5  amperes  in 
one  second,  7.5  volts  are  induced  in  the 
coil.  What  is  the  value  of  inductance  of 
the  coil? 

1.  1  henry 

2.  2.2  henries 

3.  3.3  henries 

4.  4  henries 

2-30.    An  ac  electrical  current  varies  1.5 

amperes  in  one  second  and  is  applied  to 
a  10-henry  coil.  What  is  the  value  of  the 
emf  induced  across  the  coil? 

1.  1.0  volt 

2.  1.5  volts 

3.  11.5  volts 

4.  15.0  volts 

2-31.    If  a  coil  is  rated  at  10  henries,  what  is  its 
value  in  (a)  millihenries  and  (b) 
microhenries? 


S2  CLOSES  THE  INSTANT  SI  OPENS  ANO 
S2  OPENS  THE  INSTANT  SI  CLOSES 

SI 


S2 


SI  POSITIONS 

SI  SI 
OPEN  I— CLOSED — J 


r 

B 

I  1  0 

D 

,  1  0 

F 

 1  0 

r 

H 

 1  0 

S2  POSITIONS 

S2  S2 
0PENU-CL0SED  — 


71 


Figure  2A. — LR  circuit  characteristics. 


1.  (a)  10,000  mH,  (b)  10,000,000  uH 

2.  (a)  10,000  mH,  (b)   1,000,000  uH 

3.  (a)  1,000  mH,  (b)   1,000,000  uH 

4.  (a)  1,000  mH,  (b)     100,000  uH 


THIS  SPACE  LEFT  BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  2-32 
THROUGH  2-40,  REFER  TO  FIGURE  2A. 

2-32.    What  waveform  is  an  illustration  of  the 
voltage  (Es)  present  across  the  voltage 
divider  when  switch  SI  is  closed? 

1.  B 

2.  C 

3.  E 

4.  G 


2-33.    The  voltage  dropped  across  R  when 

switch  S 1  is  closed  is  depicted  in  which 
of  the  following  waveforms? 


1.  G 

2.  H 

3.  F 

4.  C 


12 


2-34.    The  voltage  developed  across  L  when 
switch  S 1  is  closed  is  depicted  in  what 
waveform? 

1.  A 

2.  B 

3.  E 

4.  H 

2-35.    Which  of  the  following  waveforms 

depicts  growth  current  (I  g)  through  the 
coil  (L)7 

1.  A 

2.  D 

3.  E 

4.  H 

2-36.    What  waveform  depicts  the  voltage 

developed  across  R  when  switch  S2  is 
closed? 

1.  E 

2.  F 

3.  H 

4.  D 

2-37.  During  the  first  instant  when  switch  S 1 
is  closed,  maximum  voltage  is  dropped 
across 

1 .  the  battery 

2.  the  resistor 

3.  the  coil 

4.  both  the  coil  and  resistor 

2-38.    During  the  first  instant  when  switch  S 1 
is  closed,  current  is  maximum  in  which, 
if  any,  of  the  following  parts  of  the  h 
circuit? 

1 .  The  battery 

2.  The  coil 

3.  The  resistor 

4.  None  of  the  above 


2-39.    In  the  first  instant  when  switch  SI  is 

closed,  the  entire  battery-voltage  is  used 
to  overcome  the 

1 .  resistance  of  R 

2.  resistance  of  L 

3.  emf  developed  in  R 

4.  emf  developed  in  L 

2-40.    When  switch  S2  is  closed,  energy  is 
supplied  to  the  circuit  by  the 

1.  battery  through  S2 

2.  battery  through  Si 

3.  collapsing  magnetic  field  of  Li 

4.  expanding  magnetic  field  of  Li 

2-41.    One  L/R  time  constant  is  equal  to  the 
time  required  for  the  current  in  an 
inductor  to  reach  what  portion  of  its 
maximum  value? 

1.  63.2% 

2.  37.8% 

3.  25.2% 

4.  12.8% 

2-42.  Maximum  current  will  flow  in  an  LR 
circuit  after  a  minimum  of  how  many 
time  constants  have  elapsed? 

1.  One 

2.  Five 

3.  Three 

4.  Four 

2-43.    The  maximum  current  in  an  LR  circuit 
is  20  amperes.  What  total  current  will  be 
flowing  in  the  circuit  at  the  end  of  the 
second  time  constant  of  the  charge 
cycle? 

1 .  20.0  amperes 

2.  17.3  amperes 

3.  12.6  amperes 

4.  amperes 


13 


2-44.    Refer  to  the  circuit  described  in  question 
2-43.  Circuit  current  will  increase  by 
what  amount  during  the  second  time 
constant? 

1.  17.3  amperes 

2.  12.6  amperes 

3.  7.6  amperes 

4.  4.7  amperes 

2-45.    An  LR  circuit  has  a  maximum  current  of 
30  mA.  At  the  end  of  the  first  time 
constant  of  the  discharge  cycle,  what 
total  current  will  be  flowing  in  the 
circuit? 

1.  11  mA 

2.  19  mA 

3.  26  mA 

4.  28  mA 

2-46.    An  LR  circuit  contains  a  150-ohm 

resistor  and  a  2-henry  coil.  What  is  the 
time  value  of  one  L/R  time  constant? 

1.  7.5  seconds 

2.  .75  seconds 

3.  1.33  seconds 

4.  .0133  seconds 

2-47.    An  LR  circuit  has  a  time  constant  of  .05 
second  and  an  inductor  with  a  value  of 
.60  henry.  What  value  of  resistor  is 
required? 

1.  5  ohms 

2.  12  ohms 

3.  24  ohms 

4.  64  ohms 

2-48.    An  LR  circuit  is  composed  of  a  coil  of 
.5  henry  and  a  10-ohm  resistor.  The 
maximum  current  in  the  circuit  is  5 
amperes.  After  the  circuit  is  energized, 
how  long  will  it  take  for  the  current  to 
reach  maximum  value? 

1 .  1.0  second 

2.  0.05  second 

3.  0.25  second 

4.  5.0  seconds 


2-49.    Inductors  experience  copper  loss  for 
what  reason? 

1.  Because  of  flux  leakage  in  the 
copper  core 

2.  Because  the  reactance  of  an  inductor 
is  greater  than  the  resistance  of  an 
inductor 

3.  Because  all  inductors  have 
resistance  which  dissipates  power 

4.  Because  the  inertia  of  the  magnetic 
field  must  be  overcome  every  time 
the  direction  of  current  changes 

2-50.    Copper  loss  of  an  inductor  can  be 

calculated  by  the  use  of  which  of  the 
following  formulas? 

1.  P  =  I2R         3.  p=E 

2.  p=I2E  4.  _^ 

2-5 1 .  What  term  applies  to  the  power  loss  in 
an  iron  core  inductor  due  to  the  current 
induced  in  the  core? 

1 .  Iron  loss 

2.  Heat  loss 

3.  Hysteresis  loss 

4.  Eddy-current  loss 

2-52.    Power  consumed  by  an  iron  core 

inductor  in  reversing  the  magnetic  field 
of  the  core  is  termed  as  what  type  of 
loss? 

1 .  Iron  loss 

2.  Heat  loss 

3.  Hysteresis  loss 

4.  Eddy-current  loss 


14 


2-53.    When  does  mutual  inductance  occur  2-57. 
between  inductors? 

1.  Whenever  eddy-currents  do  not 
exist 

2.  Whenever  the  flux  of  one  inductor 
causes  an  emf  to  be  induced  in 
another  inductor 

3.  Whenever  the  effect  of  one  inductor 
is  aided  by  another  inductor 

4.  Whenever  the  effect  of  one  inductor 
is  opposed  by  another  inductor 

2-58. 

2-54.    Mutual  inductance  between  two  coils  is 
affected  by  which  of  the  following 
factors? 

1 .  Material  of  the  windings 

2.  Physical  dimensions  of  the  coils 

3.  Direction  of  the  coil  windings 

4.  Hysteresis  characteristics  of  the 
coils 

2-55.    The  coefficient  of  coupling  between  two  2-59. 
coils  is  a  measure  of  what  factor? 

1 .  The  turns  ratio  of  the  coils 

2.  The  distance  between  the  coils 

3.  The  relative  positive  of  the  coils 

4.  The  magnetic  flux  ratio  linking  the 
coils 

2-56.    Two  coils  have  a  coefficient  of  coupling 
of  .7  and  are  rated  at  12  uH  and  3  uH 
respectively.  What  is  their  total  mutual 
inductance? 

1.  4.2  uH 

2.  5.2  uH 

3.  7.0  uH 

4.  10.5  uH 


An  electrical  circuit  contains  four  non- 
coupled  inductors  in  a  series 
configuration.  The  inductors  have  the 
following  values:  2  uH,  3.5  uH,  6  uH, 
and  1  uH.  What  is  the  total  inductance 
(LT)  of  the  circuit? 

1.  45.0  uH 

2.  42.5  uH 

3.  12.5  uH 

4.  11.5  uH 

Two  inductors  of  3.6  uH  and  7.3  uH  are 
wired  together  in  series  and  they  aid 
each  other.  The  mutual  inductance  for 
the  circuit  is  3.6uH.  What  is  the  total 
inductance  (LT)  Of  the  circuit? 

1.  17.5  uH 

2.  18.1  uH 

3.  24.8  uH 

4.  34.4  uH 

An  electrical  circuit  contains  three  non- 
coupled  inductors  of  3.3  uH,  4.5  uH, 
and  2.0  uH  wired  in  parallel.  What  is  the 
total  inductance  of  the  circuit? 

1.  9.8  uH 

2.  3.6  uH 

3.  0.98  uH 

4.  0.28  uH 


15 


ASSIGNMENT  3 

Textbook  assignment:  Chapter  3,  "Capacitance,"  pages  3-1  through  3-41. 


3-1 .    Capacitance  and  inductance  in  a  circuit 
are  similar  in  which  of  the  following 
ways? 

1 .  Both  oppose  current 

2.  Both  aid  voltage 

3.  Both  cause  the  storage  of  energy 

4.  Both  prevent  the  storage  of  energy 

3-2.    Capacitance  is  defined  as  the  property  of 
a  circuit  that 

1 .  opposes  a  change  in  voltage 

2.  aids  a  change  in  voltage 

3.  opposes  a  change  in  current 

4.  aids  a  change  in  current 

3-3.    A  capacitor  is  a  device  that  stores 
energy  in  a/an 

1 .  electrostatic  field 

2.  electromagnetic  field 

3.  induced  field 

4.  molecular  field 

3-4.    Electrostatic  fields  have  what  effect  on 
(a)  free  electrons,  and  (b)  bound 
electrons? 

1 .  (a)  Attracts  them  to  the  negative 

charges 

(b)  Frees  them  from  their  orbits 

2.  (a)  Attracts  them  to  the  positive 

charges 

(b)  Frees  them  from  their  orbits 

3.  (a)  Attracts  them  to  the  negative 

charges 
(b)  Distorts  their  orbits 

4.  (a)  Attracts  them  to  the  positive 

charges 
(b)  Distorts  their  orbits 


3-5.    The  influence  of  a  charge  on  an  electron 
orbit  is  correctly  depicted  by  which  of 
the  following  illustrations? 


2  4 


3-6.    Electrostatic  lines  of  force  radiate  from 
a  charged  particle  along  what  type  of 
lines? 

1 .  Straight  lines 

2.  Curved  lines 

3.  Elliptical  lines 

4.  Orbital  lines 


THIS  SPACE  LEFT  BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 


16 


:'  A 

 »»- 

B  j 

  ». 



© 

© 

3-9.    Which  of  the  following  combinations 
describe(s)  a  simple  capacitor? 

1 .  Two  copper  plates  separated  by  an 
iron  plate 

2.  Two  copper  plates  separated  by  a 
sheet  of  mica 

3.  Two  iron  plates  separated  by  an  air 
gap 

4.  Both  2  and  3  above 


Figure  3A. — Electron  and  proton  entering  an 
electrostatic  field. 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTION  3-7,  REFER  TO 
FIGURE  3A. 

3-7.    When  the  illustrated  electron  and  proton 
enter  the  electrostatic  field,  toward  what 
plate(s),  will  the  (a)  electron  and,  (b) 
proton  be  deflected? 

1.  (a)  A  (b)B 

2.  (a)B  (b)A 

3.  (a)  A  (b)A 

4.  (a)B  (b)B 


3-10.    A  capacitor  that  stores  6  coulombs  of 
electrons  when  a  potential  of  2  volts  is 
applied  across  its  terminals  has  what 
total  value  of  capacitance? 

1.  12  farads 

2.  8  farads 

3.  3  farads 

4.  6  farads 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  3-11 
THROUGH  3-14,  MATCH  THE  TERMS  IN 
COLUMN  B  WITH  THEIR 
MATHEMATICAL  VALUES  IN  COLUMN  A. 


Figure  3B. — Effect  of  electrostatic  lines  of  force. 

IN  ANSWERING  QUESTION  3-8,  REFER  TO 
FIGURE  3B. 

3-8.    If  the  charges  on  the  two  plates  are 
reversed,  what  will  happen  to  the 
electrons? 

1 .  They  will  dislodge  from  the  atom 

2.  They  will  stay  where  they  are 

3.  They  will  go  back  to  circular  orbits 

4.  They  will  distort  in  the  opposite 
direction 


3-11. 
3-12. 
3-13. 
3-14. 


A.  VALUES 


.000001  F 
1  x  10"12F 
1  x  10~6F 
1  x  10°  F 


B.  TERMS 

Farad 

Microfarad 

Picofarad 


3-15.    A  capacitor  of  .0069  microfarad  has 
which  of  the  following  capacitance 
values  when  measured  in  picofarads? 

1.  .000069  pF 

2.  6900  pF 

3.  6.9xlO"9pF 

4.  Both  2  and  3  above,  individually, 
are  correct 


17 


3-16.    Which  of  the  following  characteristics 
of  a  capacitor  can  be  varied  WITHOUT 
altering  its  capacitance? 

1 .  Area  of  the  plates 

2.  Thickness  of  the  dielectric 

3.  Material  of  the  dielectric 

4.  Thickness  of  the  plates 

3-17.    Which  of  the  following  actions  will 

increase  the  capacitance  of  a  capacitor? 

1 .  The  plates  are  moved  closer 
together 

2.  The  plates  are  moved  farther  apart 

3.  The  dielectric  constant  is  decreased 

4.  Both  2  and  3  above 

3-18.    Two  capacitors  are  identical  with  the 
exception  of  the  material  used  for  the 
dielectric.  Which  of  the  following 
combinations  of  dielectric  material  will 
cause  capacitor  (b)  to  have  a  larger 
capacitance  than  capacitor  (a)? 

1 .  (a)  Glass  (b)  Paraffin  paper 

2.  (a)  Glycerine  (b)  Pure  water 

3.  (a)  Petroleum  (b)Air 

4.  (a)  Paraffin  paper  (b)  Petroleum 

3-19.    Two  capacitors  are  identical  with  the 
exception  of  the  material  used  for  the 
dielectric.  Which  of  the  following 
combinations  of  dielectric  materials  will 
cause  the  capacitors  to  have  almost  the 
same  capacitance? 

1 .  Glass,  paraffin  paper 

2.  Mica,  petroleum 

3.  Vacuum,  air 

4.  Petroleum,  rubber 


3-20.    A  capacitor  is  composed  of  two  plates. 
Each  plate  has  an  area  of  7  square 
inches.  The  plates  are  separated  by  a  2- 
inch  thick  paraffin  paper  dielectric. 
What  is  its  capacitance? 

1.  2.76  uF 

2.  2.76  pF 

3.  5.51  uF 

4.  5.51  pF 

3-21.    The  maximum  voltage  that  can  be 

applied  to  a  capacitor  without  causing 
current  flow  through  the  dielectric  is 
called 

1 .  breaking  voltage 

2.  limiting  voltage 

3.  conduction  voltage 

4.  working  voltage 

3-22.    A  capacitor  with  a  working  voltage  of 
300  volts  would  normally  have  what 
maximum  effective  voltage  applied  to 
it? 

1.  200  volts 

2.  250  volts 

3.  300  volts 

4.  350  volts 

3-23.    An  ac  voltage  of  350  volts  effective  can 
be  safely  applied  to  a  capacitor  with 
which  of  the  following  working 
voltages? 

1.  550  volts 

2.  400  volts 

3.  350  volts 

4.  250  volts 

3-24.    Which,  if  any,  of  the  following 

conditions  may  cause  a  capacitor  to 
suffer  power  losses? 

1 .  Dielectric  hysteresis 

2.  Plate  loading 

3.  Plate  heating 

4.  None  of  the  above 


18 


3-25.    Rapid  reversals  in  the  polarity  of  the  line 
voltage  applied  to  a  capacitor  will  cause 
what  type  of  capacitor  power  loss? 

1 .  Dielectric-leakage 

2.  Dielectric -hysteresis 

3.  Plate-loading 

4.  Plate-leakage 

3-26.    What  type  of  dielectric  is  LEAST 

sensitive  to  power  dielectric-hysteresis 
losses? 

1 .  Pure  water 

2.  Air 

3.  Vacuum 

4.  Mica 

3-27.    As  the  current  through  a  capacitor 

increases,  which  of  the  following  types 
of  capacitor  losses  will  increase? 

1 .  Dielectric -hysteresis 

2.  Dielectric-leakage 

3.  Plate-leakage 

4.  Plate -breakdown 


I 

2  • 


IT*' 

PLATE 

A  

PLAT^^ 

ov 


Figure  3C. — Simple  capacitor  circuit. 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  3-28 
THROUGH  3-33,  REFER  TO  FIGURE  3C. 


3-28.    Assume  that  the  switch  has  been  moved 
from  position  4  to  the  position  shown. 
Which  of  the  following  conditions  now 
exists? 

1 .  An  electrostatic  field  exists  between 
the  capacitor's  plates 

2.  No  potential  difference  exists  across 
the  capacitor 

3.  Current  flow  is  at  its  maximum 

4.  Energy  is  being  stored  in  the 
capacitor's  electrostatic  field 

3-29.    To  charge  the  capacitor,  the  switch  must 
be  in  what  position? 

1.  1 

2.  2 

3.  3 

4.  4 

3-30.    Which  of  the  following  are  paths  for 
current  flow  when  the  capacitor  is 
charging? 

1 .  Plate  A,  Plate  B,  Batt  (+)  and  -Batt  (-), 
Plate  A 

2.  Batt  (+)  and  -Batt  (-),  Plate  A 
Batt  (-)  and  Batt  (+),  Plate  B 

3 .  Batt  (-),  Plate  A  and  Plate  B , 
Batt  (+),  Batt  (-) 

4.  Batt  (+),  Plate  B  and  Plate  A, 
Batt  (-),  Batt  (+) 

3-31.    When  the  switch  is  placed  in  position  4, 
after  being  in  position  2,  which  of  the 
following  conditions  exits  within  the 
circuit? 

1 .  Ec  is  increasing 

2.  Lc  is  increasing 

3.  Electrical  energy  is  stored  in  the 
capacitor 

4.  Stored  energy  is  returned  to  the 
circuit 


19 


3-32.    With  S 1  in  position  4,  which  of  the 

following  is  the  path  for  current  flow? 


3-34.    The  greatest  rate  of  change  in  current 
occurs  between  what  two  times? 


1 .  Plate  B,  Plate  A,  S 1 ,  Plate  B 

2.  Plate  A,  Plate  B,  S 1 ,  Plate  A 

3.  Plate  A,  SI,  Plate  B 

4.  Plate  B,  SI,  Plate  A 

3-33.    If  the  illustrated  capacitor  has  a  value  of 
50  pF  and  a  potential  difference  of  300 
volts  exists  across  its  plates,  what  is  the 
total  number  of  coulombs  it  contains? 

1.  0.015 

2.  0.15 

3.  1.50 

4.  15.0 


(CIRCUIT  IS  ENERGIZED  AT  TIME  ZERO. ) 


>RZ0Sl 


■  CI5|if 


DECAY  CURVES 


1.  T,-T2 

2.  T2-T3 

3.  T4-T5 

4.  To-Tj 

3-35.    At  what  instant  does  the  maximum 
voltage  appear  across  the  resistor? 

1.  T, 

2.  T2 

3.  T5 

4.  T0 

3-36.    When  the  charge  on  the  capacitor  is 
equal  to  100  volts,  what  is  the  voltage 
drop  across  the  resistor? 

1.  100  volts 

2.  63  volts 

3.  27  volts 

4.  0  volts 

3-37.    After  the  capacitor  has  reached  full 

charge,  SI  is  placed  in  position  2.  The 
greatest  rate  of  change  in  current  is 
between  what  two  times? 

1.  T,-T2 

2.  T2-T3 

3.  T4-T5 

4.  To-Tj 

3-38.    The  capacitor  will  be  completely 
discharged  at  what  minimum  time 
interval? 


Figure  3D. — RC  charge  and  discharge  circuits. 

IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  3-34 
THROUGH  3-41,  REFER  TO  FIGURE  3D. 


1.  T, 

2.  T5 

3.  T3 

4.  T4 


20 


3-39.    What  is  the  RC  time  constant  for  the 
circuit? 

1.  300  sec 

2.  35  sec 

3.  300  usee 

4.  35  usee 

3-40.    What  total  time  will  it  take  the  capacitor 
to  charge  to  98  volts?  (You  may  use 
figure  3-11  of  your  text,  or  figure  3 
located  on  this  page.) 

1.  140  usee 

2.  1200  usee 

3.  140  sec 

4.  1200  sec 

3-41 .    After  the  capacitor  has  reached  full 

charge,  SI  is  moved  to  position  2.  What 
total  number  of  RC  time  constants  will  it 
take  for  the  capacitor  to  discharge  to  5 
volts? 

1.  One 

2.  Two 

3.  Three 

4.  Four 


Figure  3E. — Universal  time  constant  chart  for  RC  and 
RL  circuit. 

IN  ANSWERING  QUESTION  3-42,  REFER 
TO  FIGURE  3E  ABOVE. 


3-42.    An  RC  circuit  is  designed  in  which  a 
capacitor  must  charge  to  55  percent 
(.55)  of  the  maximum  charging  voltage 
in  200  microseconds.  The  resistor  has  a 
value  of  30,000  ohms.  What  value  of 
capacitance  is  needed? 

1.  0.0089  pF 

2.  89.0  pF 

3.  0.0089  uF 

4.  89.0  uF 


MATCH  THE  CAPACITOR 
CONFIGURATION  IN  COLUMN  B  WITH 
THE  CHARACTERISTICS  IN  COLUMN  A. 

A.  CHARACTERISTICS  B.  CONFIGURATION 

3-43.     Increases  total  1.      Capacitors  in  parallel 

capacitance 

3-44.     Effectively  moves  plates      2.      Capacitors  in  series 

further  apart 
3-45.     Increases  plate  area 
3-46.     Total  capacitance  is  found 

by  adding  all  capacitances 
3-47.     Decreases  total 

capacitance 
3-48.      Similar  to  resistors  in 

parallel 


3-49.    A  circuit  contains  four  parallel- 
connected  capacitors  of  33  uF  each. 
What  is  the  total  capacitance  of  the 
circuit? 

1.  8.3  uF 

2.  33.0  uF 

3.  183.0  uF 

4.  132.0  uF 

3-50.  A  circuit  contains  two  series-connected 
capacitors  of  15  uF,  and  1500  pF.  What 
is  the  total  capacitance  of  the  circuit? 

1.  0.0015  pF 

2.  150.0  pF 

3.  0.0015  uF 

4.  0.1500  uF 


21 


3-51.    A  circuit  contains  two  1 0  uF  capacitors 
wired  together  in  a  parallel 
configuration.  The  two  parallel-wired 
capacitors  are  wired  in  series  with  a  20 
uF  capacitor  and  a  20  K  ohm  resistor. 
Which  of  the  following  expresses  the 
RC  time  constant  for  this  circuit? 

1 .  .2  sec 

2.  2  sec 

3.  20,000  sec 

4.  Both  2  and  3  above 

3-52.    How  are  fixed  capacitors  classified? 

1 .  By  their  plate  size 

2.  By  their  dielectric  materials 

3.  By  the  thickness  of  their  dielectric 
materials 

4.  By  the  thickness  of  their  conductors 

3-53.  Which  of  the  following  types  of 
capacitors  are  referred  to  as  self- 
healing? 

1 .  Ceramic 

2.  Paper 

3.  Oil 

4.  Mica 


MATCH  THE  CAPACITOR  TYPE  IN 
COLUMN  B  WITH  THE  CHARACTERISTIC 
IN  COLUMN  A. 


A.  CHARACTERISTIC 

B.  TYPE 

3-54. 

Has  an  oxide  film 

1. 

Electrolytic 

dielectric 

3-55. 

Can  be  adjusted  by  a 

2. 

Trimmer 

screw  setting 

3-56. 

A  polarized  capacitor 

3. 

Mica 

3-57. 

Has  a  waxed  paper 

4. 

Paper 

dielectric 

3-58. 

An  adjustable  capacitor 

with  a  mica  dielectric 

BLUE  YELLOW 


A  B 


C  D 


Figure  3F. — Types  of  capacitors. 

IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  3-59 
THROUGH  3-63,  REFER  TO  FIGURE  3F 
AND  TO  THE  ASSOCIATED  PAGES  IN 
YOUR  TEXTBOOK. 

3-59.    Capacitor  A  is  what  type  of  capacitor? 

1 .  Electrolytic 

2.  Ceramic 

3.  Paper 

4.  Mica 

3-60.    Capacitor  B  is  what  type  of  capacitor? 

1 .  Mica 

2.  Paper 

3.  Ceramic 

4.  Electrolytic 

3-61.    What  is  the  capacitance  of  capacitor  B? 

1.  2,200,000  pF 

2.  2,200,000  uF 

3.  72,000  pF 

4.  72,000  uF 


22 


3-62.    What  is  the  (a)  temperature  coefficient 
and  (b)  multiplier  of  capacitor  C? 


3-63.    What  is  the  (a)  capacitance,  and  (b) 
voltage  rating  of  capacitor  D? 


1. 

(a)  -30 

(b)  100 

1. 

(a)     4800  uF 

2. 

(a)  -30 

(b) 1000 

2. 

(a)     4800  pF 

3. 

(a)  -330 

(b)  100 

3. 

(a)  98,000  uF 

4. 

(a)  -330 

(b) 1000 

4. 

(a)  980,000  pF 

(b)  200  volts 
(b)  200  volts 
(b)  800  volts 
(b)  800  volts 


23 


ASSIGNMENT  4 


Textbook  assignment:  Chapter  4,  "Inductive  and  Capacitive  Reactance,"  pages  4-1  through  4-40.  Chapter 

5,  "Transformers,"  pages  5-1  through  5-31. 


4-1 .    Inductance  has  what  effect,  if  any,  on  a 
change  in  (a)  current,  and  (b)  voltage? 


4-2. 


4-3. 


4-4. 


4-5. 


1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 


(a)  No  effect 
(a)  Aids  it 
(a)  Opposes  it 
(a)  No  effect 


(b)  aids  it 
(b)  no  effect 
(b)  no  effect 
(b)  opposes  it 


Voltage  leads  current  in  which  of  the 
following  types  of  circuits? 

1 .  Resistive 

2.  Capacitive 

3.  Both  1  and  2  above 

4.  Inductive 

Opposition  to  the  flow  of  current  by  a 
coil  in  an  ac  circuit  is  represented  by 
what  symbol? 

1.  R 

2.  XL 

3.  L 

4.  H 

What  is  the  opposition  offered  by  a  coil 
to  (a)  the  flow  of  alternating  current  and 
(b)  a  change  in  current? 


1 .  (a)  Resistance 

2.  (a)  Reactance 

3.  (a)  Reactance 

4.  (a)  Resistance 


(b)  Inductance 
(b)  Counterreactance 
(b)  Inductance 
(b)  Reactance 


4-6.    An  inductive  circuit  contains  a  200-uH 
coil  and  the  ac  voltage  applied  is  at  a 
frequency  of  120  Hz.  What  is  the  value 
of  reactance  for  the  circuit? 

1.  0.15  Q 

2.  1.50  Q 

3.  7.50  Q 

4.  75.0  Q 

4-7.    If  the  frequency  applied  to  a  circuit  with 
a  200-uH  coil  is  increased  from  120  Hz 
to  50  kHz,  what  will  be  the  value  of 
reactance  for  the  circuit? 

1.  1.0.75  Q 

2.  2.7.5  Q 

3.  3.62.8  Q 

4.  628.0  Q 

4-8.  A  capacitor  will  (a)  conduct  what  type 
of  current,  and  (b)  block  what  type  of 
current? 


1.  (a)Dc 

2.  (a)  All  ac 

3.  (a)Dc 

4.  (a)  Ac  above  60  Hz 


THIS  SPACE  LEFT  BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 


(b)  All  ac 
(b)  Dc 

(b)  Ac  above  60  Hz 
(b)  Dc 


The  formula  27tfL  is  used  to  determine 
what  electrical  quantity? 

1 .  Resistance 

2.  Inductance 

3 .  Counterreaction 

4.  Inductive  reactance 


24 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  4-9 
THROUGH  4-13,  SELECT  FROM  COLUMN 
B  THE  PROPERTY  THAT  CAUSES  THE 
ELECTRICAL  EFFECT  IN  COLUMN  A. 


4-9.      Opposition  to  ac 

but  not  dc 
4-10.      Causes  a  phase 

shift  between 

voltage  and 

current 
4-11.      Increases  with  an 

increase  in 

frequency 
4-12.      Causes  current  to 

lead  voltage  by 

90° 

4-13.      Decreases  with  an 
increase  in 
frequency. 


1. 

2. 


Inductive 
reactance 
Capacitive 
reactance 


Both  1  and  2 
above 

Resistance 


4-14.    An  electrical  circuit  contains  a  25-liF 
capacitor  and  operates  from  a  60-Hz  ac 
source.  What  is  the  value  of  capacitive 
reactance  of  the  circuit? 

1.  0.00106  Q 

2.  0.0106  Q 

3.  10.6  Q 

4.  106.2  Q 


THIS  SPACE  LEFT  BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  4-15  AND 
4-16  USE  THE  FOLLOWING 
INFORMATION:  A  SERIES  CIRCUIT  HAS 
AN  INDUCTIVE  REACTANCE  OF  56Q,  A 
CAPACITIVE  REACTANCE  OF  25Q,  AND 
OPERATES  AT  A  FREQUENCY  OF  400  HZ. 

4-15.    What  formula  should  you  use  to 

determine  the  total  reactance  for  the 
circuit? 


4-16. 


4-17. 


1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 


X  =  2ttiL 
1 


X=- 


27rfC 

x  =  xL - xc 

X  =  X  c  -  XL 


What  is  the  total  value  of  reactance  for 
the  circuit? 

1.  31  Q 

2.  81  Q 

3.  1,400  Q 

4.  14,067  Q 

What  term  is  used  to  express  the  total 
opposition  to  ac  in  an  electrical  circuit? 

1 .  Reactance 

2.  Impedance 

3.  Resistance 

4.  Conductance 


4-18.    A  series  ac  circuit  has  the  following 

values:  XL  =  5Q,  Xc  =  6Q,  and  R  =  7Q. 
What  is  the  value  of  Z? 


1.  Q 

2.  3.03  Q 

3.  7.07  Q 

4.  14.14  Q 


25 


4-19.    A  series  circuit  contains  an  inductor 
having  12  ohms  of  resistance  and  30 
ohms  of  inductive  reactance  in  series 
with  a  capacitor  having  21  ohms  of 
capacitive  reactance.  The  applied 
voltage  is  100  volts.  What  is  the  value  of 
current  for  the  circuit? 

1.  6.6  amps 

2.  8.4  amps 

3.  15.0  amps 

4.  25.6  amps 

4-20.    A  series  circuit  contains  an  inductor 
having  12  ohms  of  resistance  and  64 
ohms  of  inductive  reactance  in  series 
with  a  capacitor  having  69  ohms  of 
capacitive  reactance.  If  the  current 
through  the  circuit  is  6.5  amperes,  what 
is  the  value  of  the  voltage  applied  to  the 
circuit? 

1.  26.5  volts 

2.  55.5  volts 

3.  75.5  volts 

4.  84.5  volts 

4-2 1 .    True  power  in  a  circuit  is  dissipated  in 
what  circuit  element? 

1 .  Resistance 

2.  Reactance 

3.  Capacitance 

4.  Inductance 

4-22.    In  a  purely  reactive  circuit,  what 
happens  to  power? 

1 .  It  is  dissipated  across  the  reactive 
loads 

2.  It  is  cancelled  by  the  reactive 
elements 

3.  It  is  stored  in  the  reactive  elements 

4.  It  is  returned  to  the  source 

4-23 .    True  power  is  measured  in  what  unit? 

1.  Watt 

2.  Volt-ampere 

3.  Var 

4.  Pt-watt 


4-24.    An  ac  series  circuit  has  the  following 
characteristics:  R  =  8  ohms,  Xc  =  100 
ohms,  XL  =  70  ohms,  and  E  =  220  V. 
What  is  the  value  of  true  power  for  the 
circuit? 

1.  46  W 

2.  57  W 

3.  268  W 

4.  402  W 

4-25 .    What  is  the  unit  of  measurement  for 
reactive  power? 

1.  Watt 

2.  Var 

3.  Volt-ampere 

4.  Volt-ohm 

4-26.    An  ac  series  circuit  has  the  following 

values:  I  =  7.5  amps,  XL  =  80Q,  and  Xc 
=  35Q.  What  is  the  value  of  reactive 
power  for  the  circuit? 

1.  2531  var 

2.  1567  var 

3.  1283  var 

4.  861  var 

4-27.    Apparent  power  in  an  ac  circuit  is  a 

combination  of  which  of  the  following 
factors? 

1 .  Applied  power  and  true  power 

2.  Reactive  power  and  true  power 

3 .  Applied  power  and  the  power 
returned  to  the  source 

4.  Reactive  power  and  the  power 
returned  to  the  source 

4-28.    What  is  the  unit  of  measurement  for 
apparent  power? 

1.  Watt 

2.  Var 

3.  Volt-ampere 

4.  Volt-ohm 


26 


4-29. 


4-30. 


4-31. 


An  ac  circuit  dissipates  800  watts  across 
its  resistance  and  returns  600  var  to  the 
source.  What  is  the  value  of  the  apparent 
power  of  the  circuit? 

1.  200  VA 

2.  500  VA 

3.  1000  VA 

4.  1400  VA 

The  portion  of  apparent  power 
dissipated  in  an  ac  circuit  can  be 
calculated  by  which  of  the  following 
formulas? 


L      PF-(IE)2R  3- 


PF  = 


(.hfz 


2. 


A  series  ac  circuit  has  a  Xc  of  1 10 
ohms,  an  XL  of  30  ohms,  and  a  circuit 
resistance  of  22  ohms.  What  is  the 
power  factor  of  this  circuit? 

1.  .91 

2.  .27 

3.  .20 

4.  .13 


An  RLC  series  a.c.  circuit  has  the 
following  values: 

E  =  65  volts 

f  =  120  Hz 

R  =12  ohms 

L=30  rnH 

C=450  fiF 


Figure  4A. — Circuit  characteristics. 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  4-32 
THROUGH  4-36,  REFER  TO  FIGURE  4A. 

4-32.    What  is  the  value  of  X? 


4-33. 


4-34. 


4-37. 


1. 

19.7  Q 

2. 

27.8  Q 

3. 

31.6Q 

4. 

42.3  Q 

What  is  the 

1. 

23  Q 

2. 

28  Q 

3. 

33  Q 

4. 

38  Q 

What  is  the 

1. 

1.8  A 

2. 

2.8  A 

3. 

3.4  A 

4. 

4.4  A 

What  is  the 

1. 

67  W 

2. 

83  W 

3. 

94  W 

4. 

125  W 

What  is  the 

1. 

.46 

2. 

.52 

3. 

.73 

4. 

.88 

When  impedance  is  calculated  for  a 
parallel  ac  circuit,  an  intermediate  value 
must  first  be  calculated.  The 
intermediate  value  must  then  be  divided 
into  the  source  voltage  to  derive 
impedance.  What  is  this  intermediate 
value? 

1 .  Reactance 

2.  Resistance 

3.  Power  factor 

4.  Total  current 


27 


4-38.    Which  of  the  following  defines 
transformer  action? 

1 .  The  transfer  of  energy  from  one 
circuit  to  another  through 
electromagnetic  action 

2.  The  transfer  of  energy  from  one 
circuit  to  another  through 
electrostatic  action 

3.  The  development  of  counter 
electromotive  force  where  a 
magnetic  field  cuts  a  coil 

4.  The  development  of  a  voltage  across 
a  coil  as  it  cuts  through  a  magnetic 
field 

4-39.    Which  of  the  following  is  NOT  a 
necessary  element  in  a  basic 
transformer? 

1 .  A  core 

2.  A  primary  winding 

3.  A  secondary  winding 

4.  A  magnetic  shield 

4-40.    What  three  materials  are  most 

commonly  used  for  transformer  cores? 

1 .  Copper,  soft  iron,  and  air 

2.  Copper,  soft  iron,  and  steel 

3.  Air,  copper,  and  steel 

4.  Air,  soft  iron,  and  steel 

4-4 1 .    The  two  types  of  transformer  cores  most 
commonly  used  are  the  shell-core  and 
the 


4-42.    What  is  the  major  difference  between 

the  primary  and  secondary  windings  of  a 
transformer? 

1 .  The  primary  has  more  turns  than  the 
secondary 

2.  The  secondary  has  more  insulation 
than  the  primary 

3.  The  primary  is  connected  to  the 
source;  the  secondary  is  connected 
to  the  load 

4.  The  primary  is  connected  to  the 
load;  the  secondary  is  connected  to 
the  source 

4-43.    What  is  the  principal  difference  between 
a  high-voltage  transformer  and  a  low- 
voltage  transformer? 

1 .  A  high- voltage  transformer  has 
more  turns  of  wire  than  a  low- 
voltage  transformer 

2.  A  high-voltage  transformer  uses  a 
hollow-core,  while  a  low-voltage 
transformer  uses  a  shell-type  core 

3.  A  high-voltage  transformer  uses  a 
shell-type  core,  while  a  low-voltage 
transformer  uses  a  hollow-core 

4.  A  high- voltage  transformer  has 
more  insulation  between  the  layers 
of  windings  than  does  a  low-voltage 
transformer 


THIS  SPACE  LEFT  BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 


1 .  I-core 

2.  E-core 

3.  hollow-core 

4.  laminated-core 


28 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  4-44 
THROUGH  4-46,  SELECT  FROM  COLUMN 
B  THE  TRANSFORMER 
CHARACTERISTICS  THAT  ARE 
IDENTIFIED  IN  THE  TRANSFORMER 
SCHEMATICS  IN  COLUMN  A. 


4-48.    What  term  applies  to  the  current  in  the 
primary  of  a  transformer  that  creates  the 
magnetic  field? 

1 .  Exciting  current 

2.  Primary  current 

3.  Magnetizing  current 

4.  Counter  current 


A.  SCHEMATIC 


4-44. 


4-45. 


4-46. 


□ 

:  ) 

B.  TRANSFORMER 
TYPE 

1 .  Air-core 

2.  Iron-core 

3.  Center-tapped 

4.  Iron-core  with 
center  tap 


4-49.    In  the  primary  of  a  transformer,  what 
opposes  the  current  from  the  source? 

1 .  The  impedance 

2.  The  forward  emf 

3.  The  self-induced  emf 

4.  The  exciting  current 

4-50.    What  is  the  source  of  the  magnetic  flux 
that  develops  secondary  voltage  in  a 
transformer? 

1 .  Primary  emf 

2.  Secondary  counter  emf 

3.  Primary  exciting  current 

4.  Secondary  exciting  current 


4-47.    When  the  secondary  of  a  transformer  is 
NOT  connected  to  a  circuit,  the 
transformer  is  said  to  be  operating  under 
which  of  the  following  conditions? 

1 .  Uncoupled 

2.  No-load 

3.  Loaded 

4.  Open 


Figure  4B. — Transformer  polarity. 

IN  ANSWERING  QUESTION  4-51,  REFER 
TO  FIGURE  4B. 


4-5 1 .    The  illustrated  transformer  is  (a)  what 
type,  and  (b)  in  what  direction  is  the 
current  flowing  in  the  secondary? 


1 .  (a)  Like-wound    (b)  | 

2.  (a)  Unlike-wound  (b)  | 

3.  (a)  Like-wound    (b)  I 

4.  (a)  Unlike-wound  (b)  j 


29 


4-52.    Which  of  the  following  terms  applies  to 
the  flux  from  the  primary  that  does  NOT 
cut  the  secondary 

1 .  Lost  flux 

2.  Leakage  flux 

3.  Uncoupled  flux 

4.  Coefficient  flux 

4-53 .    What  is  the  main  cause  for  the 

coefficient  of  coupling  of  a  transformer 
being  less  than  unity? 

1 .  Counter  emf 

2.  Induced  emf 

3.  Uncoupled  flux 

4.  Leakage  flux 

4-54.    A  transformer  has  a  source  voltage  of  50 
volts  ac,  with  a  turns  ratio  of  1 :6.  The 
coefficient  of  coupling  is  1.0.  What  is 
the  voltage  of  the  secondary  winding? 

1.  150 

2.  300 

3.  500 

4.  600 

4-55.    A  transformer  has  a  unity  coefficient  of 
coupling  with  a  5: 1  turns  ratio;  20  volts 
are  induced  in  the  secondary.  What  is 
the  primary  voltage? 

1.  100  volts 

2.  50  volts 

3.  10  volts 

4.  4  volts 


4-57.    A  transformer  secondary  has  20  amperes 
of  current  flowing  at  60  volts  potential. 
The  applied  voltage  is  10  volts.  What  is 

(a)  the  turns  ratio  of  the  transformer  and 

(b)  what  total  current  is  flowing  in  the 
primary? 

1.  (a)  6:1,  (b)     3.3  amperes 

2.  (a)  1:6,  (b)  120  amperes 

3.  (a)  1:2,  (b)   10  amperes 

4.  (a)  2:1,  (b)  120  amperes 

4-58.    A  2: 1  transformer  delivers  30  watts  to 
the  load  and  3  watts  of  power  are  lost  to 
internal  losses.  What  total  power  is 
drawn  from  the  source? 

1 .  63  watts 

2.  57  watts 

3.  33  watts 

4.  27  watts 

4-59.    What  is  the  efficiency  of  the  transformer 
described  in  question  4-58? 

1.  33% 

2.  46% 

3.  53% 

4.  91  % 


THIS  SPACE  LEFT  BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 


4-56.    A  transformer  has  a  unity  coefficient  of 
coupling.  Thirty-five  volts  applied  to  its 
primary  induces  105  volts  in  its 
secondary.  The  secondary  is  composed 
of  99  turns.  What  is  the  number  of  turns 
in  the  primary? 


1 .  11  turns 

2.  22  turns 

3.  33  turns 

4.  44  turns 


30 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  4-60 
THROUGH  4-62,  SELECT  FROM  COLUMN 
B  THE  TERM  THAT  DESCRIBES  THE  TYPE 
OF  POWER  LOSS  IN  COLUMN  A. 

A.  LOSS  TYPE  B.  TERMS 


IN  ANSWERING  QUESTIONS  4-64 
THROUGH  4-67,  SELECT  THE 
TRANSFORMER  TYPE  FROM  COLUMN  B 
THAT  PERFORMS  THE  TASK  OR  HAS  THE 
CHARACTERISTICS  DESCRIBED  IN 
COLUMN  A. 


4-60.     Power  lost  in 

realigning 

domains 
4-6 1 .    Power  dissipated 

by  the  resistance 

of  the  windings 
4-62.    Power  loss  caused 

by  random  core 

currents 


1 .    Copper  loss 


Eddy-current 
loss 


3. 


Hysteresis 
loss 


4.    Leakage  Loss 


A.  TASK 

4-64.     Used  above  20 
kHz 

4-65.     The  secondary  is 
a  tapped  primary 

4-66.     Used  to  deliver 
voltage  from  a 
source  to  a  load 

4-67.     Can  be  used  to 

match  impedance 
in  a  sound  system 


B.  TRANSFORMER 
TYPE 

1 .  Power 

2.  Auto  transformer 

3.  Audio-Frequency 


4.  Radio-Frequency 


4-63.    A  transformer  designed  for  a  low 

frequency  will  NOT  be  damaged  when 
used  at  higher  frequencies.  What  change 
within  the  transformer,  limits 
transformer  current  to  a  safe  value  at 
higher  frequencies? 

1 .  Increased  hysteresis  loss 

2.  Increased  inductive  reactance 

3 .  Increased  leakage  flux 

4.  Increased  eddy-current  loss 

THIS  SPACE  LEFT  BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 


4-68.    What  wire  colors  conventionally 

identify  the  secondary  center  tap  of  a 
power  transformer? 

1 .  Black  and  yellow 

2.  Red  and  white 

3.  Black  and  red 

4.  Red  and  yellow 

4-69.    Before  starting  to  work  on  any  electrical 
equipment,  you  should  first  determine 
that  the  equipment  is  in  which  of  the 
following  conditions? 


1 .  Connected 

2.  Deenergized 

3.  Energized 

4.  Operational 


31 


4-70.    A  person  is  working  on  electrical 

equipment.  The  power  is  secured  and 
tagged.  The  technician  receives  a  shock 
on  the  hand.  What  safety  precaution  was 
overlooked? 

1 .  The  technician  was  not  standing  on 
approved  rubber  matting 

2.  The  technician  had  not  discharged 
the  equipment's  capacitors 

3.  The  technician  was  working  on 
energized  equipment 

4.  The  technician  had  two  hands  in  the 
equipment 


4-7 1 .    When  working  on  electrical  equipment, 
why  should  you  use  only  one  hand? 

1 .  The  free  hand  can  be  used  to  turn 
off  the  power  in  case  of  shock 

2.  The  free  hand  can  be  used  to  pull 
the  other  hand  free  in  case  of  muscle 
contraction  from  shock 

3.  The  free  hand  will  ensure  that  you 
are  properly  grounded 

4.  The  free  hand  will  minimize  the 
possibility  of  creating  a  low 
resistance  path  to  ground  through 
your  body 


32 


