
NONRESIDENT 
TRAINING 
COURSE 

SEPTEMBER 1998 




Navy Electricity and 
Electronics Training Series 

Module 3 — Introduction to Circuit 
Protection, Control, and Measurement 

NAVEDTRA 14175 



DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 



Although the words "he," "him," and 
"his" are used sparingly in this course to 
enhance communication, they are not 
intended to be gender driven or to affront or 
discriminate against anyone. 



DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 



PREFACE 



By enrolling in this self-study course, you have demonstrated a desire to improve yourself and the Navy. 
Remember, however, this self-study course is only one part of the total Navy training program. Practical 
experience, schools, selected reading, and your desire to succeed are also necessary to successfully round 
out a fully meaningful training program. 

COURSE OVERVIEW: To introduce the student to the subject of Circuit Protection, Control, and 
Measurement who needs such a background in accomplishing daily work and/or in preparing for further 
study. 

THE COURSE: This self-study course is organized into subject matter areas, each containing learning 
objectives to help you determine what you should learn along with text and illustrations to help you 
understand the information. The subject matter reflects day-to-day requirements and experiences of 
personnel in the rating or skill area. It also reflects guidance provided by Enlisted Community Managers 
(ECMs) and other senior personnel, technical references, instructions, etc., and either the occupational or 
naval standards, which are listed in the Manual of Navy Enlisted Manpower Personnel Classifications 
and Occupational Standards, NAVPERS 18068. 

THE QUESTIONS: The questions that appear in this course are designed to help you understand the 
material in the text. 

VALUE: In completing this course, you will improve your military and professional knowledge. 
Importantly, it can also help you study for the Navy-wide advancement in rate examination. If you are 
studying and discover a reference in the text to another publication for further information, look it up. 



1998 Edition Prepared by 
FCC(SW) James L. Hicks 



Published by 
NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER 



NAVSUP Logistics Tracking Number 
0504-LP-026-8280 



i 



Sailor's Creed 



"I am a United States Sailor. 

I will support and defend the 
Constitution of the United States of 
America and I will obey the orders 
of those appointed over me. 

I represent the fighting spirit of the 
Navy and those who have gone 
before me to defend freedom and 
democracy around the world. 

I proudly serve my country's Navy 
combat team with honor, courage 
and commitment. 

I am committed to excellence and 
the fair treatment of all." 



ii 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER PAGE 

1. Circuit Measurement 1-1 

2. Circuit Protection Devices 2-1 

3. Circuit Control Devices 3-1 

APPENDIX 

I. Glossary AI-1 

II. Laws of Exponents AII-1 

HI. Schematic Symbols AIII-1 

IV. Cross Reference of Military and Commercial Fuse Designations AIV-1 

INDEX INDEX- 1 



iii 



NAVY ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS TRAINING 

SERIES 



The Navy Electricity and Electronics Training Series (NEETS) was developed for use by personnel in 
many electrical- and electronic-related Navy ratings. Written by, and with the advice of, senior 
technicians in these ratings, this series provides beginners with fundamental electrical and electronic 
concepts through self-study. The presentation of this series is not oriented to any specific rating structure, 
but is divided into modules containing related information organized into traditional paths of instruction. 

The series is designed to give small amounts of information that can be easily digested before advancing 
further into the more complex material. For a student just becoming acquainted with electricity or 
electronics, it is highly recommended that the modules be studied in their suggested sequence. While 
there is a listing of NEETS by module title, the following brief descriptions give a quick overview of how 
the individual modules flow together. 

Module 1, Introduction to Matter, Energy, and Direct Current, introduces the course with a short history 
of electricity and electronics and proceeds into the characteristics of matter, energy, and direct current 
(dc). It also describes some of the general safety precautions and first-aid procedures that should be 
common knowledge for a person working in the field of electricity. Related safety hints are located 
throughout the rest of the series, as well. 

Module 2, Introduction to Alternating Current and Transformers, is an introduction to alternating current 
(ac) and transformers, including basic ac theory and fundamentals of electromagnetism, inductance, 
capacitance, impedance, and transformers. 

Module 3, Introduction to Circuit Protection, Control, and Measurement, encompasses circuit breakers, 
fuses, and current limiters used in circuit protection, as well as the theory and use of meters as electrical 
measuring devices. 

Module 4, Introduction to Electrical Conductors, Wiring Techniques, and Schematic Reading, presents 
conductor usage, insulation used as wire covering, splicing, termination of wiring, soldering, and reading 
electrical wiring diagrams. 

Module 5, Introduction to Generators and Motors, is an introduction to generators and motors, and 
covers the uses of ac and dc generators and motors in the conversion of electrical and mechanical 
energies. 

Module 6, Introduction to Electronic Emission, Tubes, and Power Supplies, ties the first five modules 
together in an introduction to vacuum tubes and vacuum-tube power supplies. 

Module 7, Introduction to Solid-State Devices and Power Supplies, is similar to module 6, but it is in 
reference to solid-state devices. 

Module 8, Introduction to Amplifiers, covers amplifiers. 

Module 9, Introduction to Wave-Generation and Wave-Shaping Circuits, discusses wave generation and 
wave-shaping circuits. 

Module 10, Introduction to Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines, and Antennas, presents the 
characteristics of wave propagation, transmission lines, and antennas. 



iv 



Module 11, Microwave Principles, explains microwave oscillators, amplifiers, and waveguides. 
Module 12, Modulation Principles, discusses the principles of modulation. 

Module 13, Introduction to Number Systems and Logic Circuits, presents the fundamental concepts of 
number systems, Boolean algebra, and logic circuits, all of which pertain to digital computers. 

Module 14, Introduction to Microelectronics, covers microelectronics technology and miniature and 
microminiature circuit repair. 

Module 15, Principles of Synchros, Servos, and Gyros, provides the basic principles, operations, 
functions, and applications of synchro, servo, and gyro mechanisms. 

Module 16, Introduction to Test Equipment, is an introduction to some of the more commonly used test 
equipments and their applications. 

Module 17, Radio-Frequency Communications Principles, presents the fundamentals of a radio- 
frequency communications system. 

Module 18, Radar Principles, covers the fundamentals of a radar system. 

Module 19, The Technician's Handbook, is a handy reference of commonly used general information, 
such as electrical and electronic formulas, color coding, and naval supply system data. 

Module 20, Master Glossary, is the glossary of terms for the series. 

Module 21, Test Methods and Practices, describes basic test methods and practices. 

Module 22, Introduction to Digital Computers, is an introduction to digital computers. 

Module 23, Magnetic Recording, is an introduction to the use and maintenance of magnetic recorders and 
the concepts of recording on magnetic tape and disks. 

Module 24, Introduction to Fiber Optics, is an introduction to fiber optics. 

Embedded questions are inserted throughout each module, except for modules 19 and 20, which are 
reference books. If you have any difficulty in answering any of the questions, restudy the applicable 
section. 

Although an attempt has been made to use simple language, various technical words and phrases have 
necessarily been included. Specific terms are defined in Module 20, Master Glossary. 

Considerable emphasis has been placed on illustrations to provide a maximum amount of information. In 
some instances, a knowledge of basic algebra may be required. 

Assignments are provided for each module, with the exceptions of Module 19, The Technician's 
Handbook; and Module 20, Master Glossary. Course descriptions and ordering information are in 
NAVEDTRA 12061, Catalog of Nonresident Training Courses. 



v 



Throughout the text of this course and while using technical manuals associated with the equipment you 
will be working on, you will find the below notations at the end of some paragraphs. The notations are 
used to emphasize that safety hazards exist and care must be taken or observed. 



WARNING 



AN OPERATING PROCEDURE, PRACTICE, OR CONDITION, ETC., WHICH MAY 
RESULT IN INJURY OR DEATH IF NOT CAREFULLY OBSERVED OR 
FOLLOWED. 



CAUTION 



AN OPERATING PROCEDURE, PRACTICE, OR CONDITION, ETC., WHICH MAY 
RESULT IN DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT IF NOT CAREFULLY OBSERVED OR 
FOLLOWED. 



NOTE 



An operating procedure, practice, or condition, etc., which is essential to emphasize. 



vi 



INSTRUCTIONS FOR TAKING THE COURSE 



ASSIGNMENTS 

The text pages that you are to study are listed at 
the beginning of each assignment. Study these 
pages carefully before attempting to answer the 
questions. Pay close attention to tables and 
illustrations and read the learning objectives. 
The learning objectives state what you should be 
able to do after studying the material. Answering 
the questions correctly helps you accomplish the 
objectives. 

SELECTING YOUR ANSWERS 

Read each question carefully, then select the 
BEST answer. You may refer freely to the text. 
The answers must be the result of your own 
work and decisions. You are prohibited from 
referring to or copying the answers of others and 
from giving answers to anyone else taking the 
course. 

SUBMITTING YOUR ASSIGNMENTS 

To have your assignments graded, you must be 
enrolled in the course with the Nonresident 
Training Course Administration Branch at the 
Naval Education and Training Professional 
Development and Technology Center 
(NETPDTC). Following enrollment, there are 
two ways of having your assignments graded: 
(1) use the Internet to submit your assignments 
as you complete them, or (2) send all the 
assignments at one time by mail to NETPDTC. 

Grading on the Internet: Advantages to 
Internet grading are: 

• you may submit your answers as soon as 
you complete an assignment, and 

• you get your results faster; usually by the 
next working day (approximately 24 hours). 

In addition to receiving grade results for each 
assignment, you will receive course completion 
confirmation once you have completed all the 



assignments. To submit your assignment 
answers via the Internet, go to: 

http ://courses.cnet.na vy.mil 

Grading by Mail: When you submit answer 
sheets by mail, send all of your assignments at 
one time. Do NOT submit individual answer 
sheets for grading. Mail all of your assignments 
in an envelope, which you either provide 
yourself or obtain from your nearest Educational 
Services Officer (ESO). Submit answer sheets 
to: 

COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N331 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 

Answer Sheets: All courses include one 
"scannable" answer sheet for each assignment. 
These answer sheets are preprinted with your 
SSN, name, assignment number, and course 
number. Explanations for completing the answer 
sheets are on the answer sheet. 

Do not use answer sheet reproductions: Use 

only the original answer sheets that we 
provide — reproductions will not work with our 
scanning equipment and cannot be processed. 

Follow the instructions for marking your 
answers on the answer sheet. Be sure that blocks 
1, 2, and 3 are filled in correctly. This 
information is necessary for your course to be 
properly processed and for you to receive credit 
for your work. 

COMPLETION TIME 

Courses must be completed within 12 months 
from the date of enrollment. This includes time 
required to resubmit failed assignments. 



vii 



PASS/FAIL ASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES 

If your overall course score is 3.2 or higher, you 
will pass the course and will not be required to 
resubmit assignments. Once your assignments 
have been graded you will receive course 
completion confirmation. 

If you receive less than a 3.2 on any assignment 
and your overall course score is below 3.2, you 
will be given the opportunity to resubmit failed 
assignments. You may resubmit failed 
assignments only once. Internet students will 
receive notification when they have failed an 
assignment— they may then resubmit failed 
assignments on the web site. Internet students 
may view and print results for failed 
assignments from the web site. Students who 
submit by mail will receive a failing result letter 
and a new answer sheet for resubmission of each 
failed assignment. 

COMPLETION CONFIRMATION 

After successfully completing this course, you 
will receive a letter of completion. 

ERRATA 

Errata are used to correct minor errors or delete 
obsolete information in a course. Errata may 
also be used to provide instructions to the 
student. If a course has an errata, it will be 
included as the first page(s) after the front cover. 
Errata for all courses can be accessed and 
viewed/downloaded at: 

http://www.advancement.cnet.navy.mil 

STUDENT FEEDBACK QUESTIONS 

We value your suggestions, questions, and 
criticisms on our courses. If you would like to 
communicate with us regarding this course, we 
encourage you, if possible, to use e-mail. If you 
write or fax, please use a copy of the Student 
Comment form that follows this page. 



For subject matter questions: 

E-mail: n315.products@cnet.navy.mil 
Phone: Comm: (850) 452-1001, ext. 1728 
DSN: 922-1001, ext. 1728 
FAX: (850)452-1370 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 
Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N315 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32509-5237 

For enrollment, shipping, grading, or 
completion letter questions 

E-mail : fleetservices @ cnet . navy . mil 

Phone: Toll Free: 877-264-8583 

Comm: (850)452-1511/1181/1859 
DSN: 922-1511/1181/1859 
FAX: (850)452-1370 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 

Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N331 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 

NAVAL RESERVE RETIREMENT CREDIT 

If you are a member of the Naval Reserve, you 
will receive retirement points if you are 
authorized to receive them under current 
directives governing retirement of Naval 
Reserve personnel. For Naval Reserve 
retirement, this course is evaluated at 5 points. 
(Refer to Administrative Procedures for Naval 
Reservists on Inactive Duty, BUPERSINST 
1001.39, for more information about retirement 
points.) 



viii 



Student Comments 



NEETS Module 3 

Course Title: Introduction to Circuit Protection, Control, and Measurement 



NAVEDTRA: 14175 Date: 



We need some information about you : 

Rate/Rank and Name: SSN: Command/Unit 



Street Address: City: State/FPO: Zip 

Your comments, suggestions, etc.: 



Privacy Act Statement: Under authority of Title 5, USC 301, information regarding your military status is 
requested in processing your comments and in preparing a reply. This information will not be divulged without 
written authorization to anyone other than those within POD for official use in determining performance. 



NETPDTC 1550/41 (Rev 4-00) 



ix 



CHAPTER 1 

CIRCUIT MEASUREMENT 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

Learning objectives are stated at the beginning of each chapter. These learning objectives serve as a 
preview of the information you are expected to learn in the chapter. The comprehensive check questions 
are based on the objectives. By successfully completing the NRTC, you indicate that you have met the 
objectives and have learned the information. The learning objectives are listed below. 

Upon completion of this chapter you will be able to: 

1. State two ways circuit measurement is used, why in-circuit meters are used, and one advantage of 
out-of-circuit meters. 



2. State the way in which a compass reacts to a conducting wire including the compass reaction to 
increasing and decreasing dc and ac high and low frequencies. 

3. State how a d'Arsonval meter movement reacts to dc. 

4. State the purpose of a rectifier as used in ac meters. 

5. State the meaning of the term "damping" as it applies to meter movements and describe two 
methods by which damping is accomplished. 

6. Identify average value as the value of ac measured and effective value (rms) as the ac value 
indicated on ac meter scales. 

7. Identify three meter movements that measure dc or ac without the use of a rectifier. 

8. State the electrical quantity measured by an ammeter, the way in which an ammeter is connected 
in a circuit, and the effect of an ammeter upon a circuit. 

9. Define ammeter sensitivity. 

10. State the method used to allow an ammeter to measure different ranges and the reason for using 
the highest range when connecting an ammeter to a circuit. 

1 1 . List the safety precautions for ammeter use. 

12. State the electrical quantity measured by a voltmeter, the way in which a voltmeter is connected 
in a circuit, the way in which a voltmeter affects the circuit being measured, and the way in which 
a voltmeter is made from a current reacting meter movement. 

13. Define voltmeter sensitivity. 

14. State the method used to allow a voltmeter to measure different ranges and the reason for using 
the highest range when connecting a voltmeter to a circuit. 



1-1 



15. Identify the type of meter movement that reacts to voltage and the most common use of this 
movement. 

16. List the safety precautions for voltmeter use. 

17. State the electrical quantity measured by an ohmmeter, the second use of an ohmmeter, and the 
way in which an ohmmeter is connected to a resistance being measured. 

18. State the method used to allow an ohmmeter to measure different ranges and the area of an 
ohmmeter scale that should be used when measuring resistance. 

19. State the two types of ohmmeters and the way in which each can be identified. 

20. List the safety precautions for ohmmeter use. 

21. State the primary reason for using a megger and the method of using it. 

22. Identify normal and abnormal indications on a megger. 

23. List the safety precautions for megger use. 

24. State how a multimeter differs from other meters, the reason a multimeter is preferred over 
separate meters, and the way in which a multimeter is changed from a voltage measuring device 
to a current measuring device. 

25. State the reason the ac and dc scales of a multimeter differ, the reason for having a mirror on the 
scale of a multimeter, and the proper way of reading a multimeter using the mirror. 

26. List the safety precautions for multimeter use. 

27. State the purpose of a hook-on type voltameter. 

28. State the electrical quantity measured by a wattmeter and a watt-hour meter. 

29. Identify the two types of frequency meters. 

30. Identify the type of meter and interpret the meter reading from scale presentations of an ammeter; 
a voltmeter; an ohmmeter; a megger; a multimeter (current, voltage, and resistance examples); a 
wattmeter; a watt-hour meter; and a frequency meter (vibrating reed and moving-disk types). 



CIRCUIT MEASUREMENT 

This chapter will acquaint you with the basics of circuit measurement and some of the devices used 
to measure voltage, current, resistance, power, and frequency. There are other quantities involved in 
electrical circuits, such as capacitance, inductance, impedance, true power, and effective power. It is 
possible to measure any circuit quantity once you are able to select and use the proper circuit measuring 
device. You will NOT know all there is to know about circuit measuring devices (test equipment) when 
you finish this chapter. That is beyond the scope of this chapter and even beyond the scope of this training 
series. However, more information on test equipment is provided in another portion of this training series. 

A question which you might ask before starting this chapter is "Why do I need to know about circuit 
measurement?" 



1-2 



If you intend to accomplish anything in the field of electricity and electronics, you must be aware of 
the forces acting inside the circuits with which you work. Modules 1 and 2 of this training series 
introduced you to the physics involved in the study of electricity and to the fundamental concepts of 
direct and alternating current. The terms voltage (volts), current (amperes), and resistance (ohms) were 
explained, as well as the various circuit elements; e.g., resistors, capacitors, inductors, transformers, and 
batteries. 

In explaining these terms and elements to you, schematic symbols and schematic diagrams were 
used. In many of these schematic diagrams, a meter was represented in the circuit, as shown in figure 1-1. 

As you recall, the current in a dc circuit with 6 volts across a 6-ohm resistor is 1 ampere. The 
©(UPPERCASE A) in figure 1-1 is the symbol for an ammeter. An ammeter is a device that measures 
current. The name "ammeter" comes from the fact that it is a meter used to measure current (in amperes), 
and thus is called an AMpere METER, or AMMETER. The ammeter in figure 1-1 is measuring a current 
of 1 ampere with the voltage and resistance values given. 




Figure 1-1. — A simple representative circuit. 

In the discussion and explanation of electrical and electronic circuits, the quantities in the circuit 
(voltage, current, and resistance) are important. If you can measure the electrical quantities in a circuit, it 
is easier to understand what is happening in that circuit. This is especially true when you are 
troubleshooting defective circuits. By measuring the voltage, current, capacitance, inductance, impedance, 
and resistance in a circuit, you can determine why the circuit is not doing what it is supposed to do. For 
instance, you can determine why a radio is not receiving or transmitting, why your automobile will not 
start, or why an electric oven is not working. Measurement will also assist you in determining why an 
electrical component (resistor, capacitor, inductor) is not doing its job. 

The measurement of the electrical parameters quantities in a circuit is an essential part of working on 
electrical and electronic equipment. 



INTRODUCTION TO CIRCUIT MEASUREMENT 

Circuit measurement is used to monitor the operation of an electrical or electronic device, or to 
determine the reason a device is not operating properly. Since electricity is invisible, you must use some 
sort of device to determine what is happening in an electrical circuit. Various devices called test 
equipment are used to measure electrical quantities. The most common types of test equipment use some 
kind of metering device. 



1-3 



IN-CIRCUIT METERS 



Some electrical and electronic devices have meters built into them. These meters are known as in- 
circuit meters . An in-circuit meter is used to monitor the operation of the device in which it is installed. 
Some examples of in-circuit meters are the generator or alternator meter on some automobiles; the 
voltage, current, and frequency meters on control panels at electrical power plants; and the electrical 
power meter that records the amount of electricity used in a building. 

It is not practical to install an in-circuit meter in every circuit. However, it is possible to install an in- 
circuit meter in each critical or representative circuit to monitor the operation of a piece of electrical 
equipment. A mere glance at or scan of the in-circuit meters on a control board is often sufficient to tell if 
the equipment is working properly. 

While an in-circuit meter will indicate that an electrical device is not functioning properly, the cause 
of the malfunction is determined by troubleshooting. Troubleshooting is the process of locating and 
repairing faults in equipment after they have occurred . Since troubleshooting is covered elsewhere in this 
training series, it will be mentioned here only as it applies to circuit measurement. 

OUT-OF-CIRCUIT METERS 

In troubleshooting, it is usually necessary to use a meter that can be connected to the electrical or 
electronic equipment at various testing points and may be moved from one piece of equipment to another. 
These meters are generally portable and self-contained, and are known as out-of-circuit meters . 

Out-of-circuit meters are more versatile than in-circuit meters in that the out-of-circuit meter can be 
used wherever you wish to connect it. Therefore, the out-of-circuit meter is more valuable in locating the 
cause of a malfunction in a device. 

Ql. What are two ways that circuit measurement is used? 
Q2. Why are in-circuit meters used? 

Q3. What is one advantage of an out-of-circuit meter when it is compared with an in-circuit meter? 



BASIC METER MOVEMENTS 

The meter movement is, as the name implies, the part of a meter that moves. A meter movement 
converts electrical energy into mechanical energy. There are many different types of meter movements. 
The first one you will learn about is based upon a principle with which you are already familiar. That 
principle is the interaction of magnetic fields. 

COMPASS AND CONDUCTING WIRE 

You know that an electrical conductor in which current flows has a magnetic field generated around 
it. If a compass is placed close to the conductor, the compass will react to that magnetic field (fig. 1-2). 



1-4 




Figure 1-2. — Compass and conductor with direct current. 

If the battery is disconnected, the north end of the compass needle will point to magnetic north, as 
illustrated in figure 1-2(A) by the broken-line compass needle pointing to the right. When the battery is 
connected, current flows through the circuit and the compass needle aligns itself with the magnetic field 
of the conductor, as indicated by the solid compass needle. The strength of the magnetic field created 
around the conductor is dependent upon the amount of current. 

In figure 1-2(A), the resistance in the circuit is 6 ohms. With the 6-volt battery shown, current in the 
circuit is 1 ampere. In figure 1-2(B), the resistance has been changed to 12 ohms. With the 6-volt battery 
shown, current in the circuit is 1/2 or .5 ampere. The magnetic field around the conductor in figure 1-2(B) 
is weaker than the magnetic field around the conductor in figure 1-2(A). The compass needle in figure 1- 
2(B) does not move as far from magnetic north. 

If the direction of the current is reversed, the compass needle will move in the opposite direction 
because the polarity of the magnetic field has reversed. 

In figure 1-2(C), the battery connections are reversed and the compass needle now moves in the 
opposite direction. 

You can construct a crude meter to measure current by using a compass and a piece of paper. By 
using resistors of known values, and marking the paper to indicate a numerical value, as in figure 1-3, you 
have a device that measures current. 



1-5 




I 1 
1 I 





w 


1/2 












^ ^1/4 










E 


r-^/2 
1 I 



Figure 1-3. — A simple meter from a compass. 

This is, in fact, the way the first GALVANOMETERS were developed. A galvanometer is an 
instrument that measures small amounts of current and is based on the electromagnetic principle. A 
galvanometer can also use the principles of electrodynamics, which will be covered later in this topic. 

The meter in figure 1-3 is not very practical for electrical measurement. The amount the compass 
needle swings depends upon the closeness of the compass to the conductor carrying the current, the 
direction of the conductor in relation to magnetic north, and the influence of other magnetic fields. In 
addition, very small amounts of current will not overcome the magnetic field of the Earth and the needle 
will not move. 

Q4. How does a compass react when placed close to a current carrying conductor? 

Q5. If the amount of current in the conductor changes, what happens to the magnetic field around the 
conductor? 

Q6. How does the compass needle react to a decreased magnetic field? 

PERMANENT-MAGNET MOVING-COIL MOVEMENT 

The compass and conducting wire meter can be considered a fixed-conductor moving-magnet device 
since the compass is, in reality, a magnet that is allowed to move. The basic principle of this device is the 
interaction of magnetic fields-the field of the compass (a permanent magnet) and the field around the 
conductor (a simple electromagnet). 

A permanent-magnet moving-coil movement is based upon a fixed permanent magnet and a coil of 
wire which is able to move, as in figure 1-4. When the switch is closed, causing current through the coil, 
the coil will have a magnetic field which will react to the magnetic field of the permanent magnet. The 
bottom portion of the coil in figure 1-4 will be the north pole of this electromagnet. Since opposite poles 
attract, the coil will move to the position shown in figure 1-5. 



1-6 




Figure 1-4. — A movable coil in a magnetic field (no current). 




Figure 1-5. — A movable coil in a magnetic field (current). 

The coil of wire is wound on an aluminum frame, or bobbin, and the bobbin is supported by jeweled 
bearings which allow it to move freely. This is shown in figure 1-6. 




Figure 1-6. — A basic coil arrangement. 



1-7 



To use this permanent-magnet moving-coil device as a meter, two problems must be solved. First, a 
way must be found to return the coil to its original position when there is no current through the coil. 
Second, a method is needed to indicate the amount of coil movement. 

The first problem is solved by the use of hairsprings attached to each end of the coil as shown in 
figure 1-7. These hairsprings can also be used to make the electrical connections to the coil. With the use 
of hairsprings, the coil will return to its initial position when there is no current. The springs will also tend 
to resist the movement of the coil when there is current through the coil. When the attraction between the 
magnetic fields (from the permanent magnet and the coil) is exactly equal to the force of the hairsprings, 
the coil will stop moving toward the magnet. 




Figure 1-7. — Coil and hairsprings. 

As the current through the coil increases, the magnetic field generated around the coil increases. The 
stronger the magnetic field around the coil, the farther the coil will move. This is a good basis for a meter. 

But, how will you know how far the coil moves? If a pointer is attached to the coil and extended out 
to a scale, the pointer will move as the coil moves, and the scale can be marked to indicate the amount of 
current through the coil. This is shown in figure 1-8. 




Figure 1-8. — A complete coil. 

Two other features are used to increase the accuracy and efficiency of this meter movement. First, an 
iron core is placed inside the coil to concentrate the magnetic fields . Second, curved pole pieces are 



1-8 



attached to the magnet to ensure that the turning force on the coil increases steadily as the current 
increases. 

The meter movement as it appears when fully assembled is shown in figure 1-9. 



HORSESHOE 




ASSEMBLED ARRANGEMENT 



Figure 1-9. — Assembled meter movement. 

This permanent-magnet moving-coil meter movement is the basic movement in most measuring 
instruments. It is commonly called the d'Arsonval movement because it was first employed by the 
Frenchman d'Arsonval in making electrical measurements. Figure 1-10 is a view of the dArsonval meter 
movement used in a meter. 



SCALE 




Figure 1-10. — A meter using d'Arsonval movement. 

Q7. What type of meter movement is the d'Arsonval meter movement? 



1-9 



Q8. What is the effect of current flow through the coil in a d'Arsonval meter movement? 



Q9. What are three functions of the hairsprings in a d'Arsonval meter movement? 

COMPASS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT 

Up to this point, only direct current examples have been used. What happens with the use of 
alternating current? Figure 1-11 shows a magnet close to a conductor carrying alternating current at a 
frequency of 1 hertz. 




Figure 1-11. — Compass and conductor with ac. 

The compass needle will swing toward the east part of the compass (down) as the current goes 
positive, as represented in figure 1-1 1(A). (The sine wave of the current is shown in the lower portion of 
the figure to help you visualize the current in the conductor.) 

In figure 1-1 1(B), the current returns to zero, and the compass needle returns to magnetic north 
(right). As the current goes negative, as in figure 1-1 1(C), the compass needle swings toward the west 
portion of the compass (up). The compass needle returns to magnetic north as the current returns to zero 
as shown in figure 1-1 1(D). 

This cycle of the current going positive and negative and the compass swinging back and forth will 
continue as long as there is alternating current in the conductor. 

If the frequency of the alternating current is increased, the compass needle will swing back and forth 
at a higher rate (faster). At a high enough frequency, the compass needle will not swing back and forth, 
but simply vibrate around the magnetic north position. This happens because the needle cannot react fast 
enough to the very rapid current alternations. The compass (a simple meter) will indicate the average 
value of the alternating current (remember the average value of a sine wave is zero) by vibrating around 
the zero point on the meter (magnetic north). This is not of much use if you wish to know the value of the 
alternating current. Some device, such as a rectifier, is needed to allow the compass to react to the 
alternating current in a way that can be useful in measuring the current. 



1-10 



RECTIFIER FOR AC MEASUREMENT 

A rectifier is a device that changes alternating current to a form of direct current. The way in which 
this is done will be covered later in this training series. For now, it is necessary to know only the 
information presented in figure 1-12. 



A A / 


RECTIFIER 


AAAA 


v/V 





Figure 1-12. — Rectifier action. 

Figure 1-12 shows that an alternating current passed through a rectifier will come out as a "pulsating 
direct current." 

What happens to the compass now? Figure 1-13 answers that question. 











RECTIFIER 










Figure 1-13. — Compass and conductor; rectified ac. 

When the compass is placed close to the wire and the frequency of the alternating current is high 
enough, the compass will vibrate around a point that represents the average value of the pulsating direct 
current, as shown in figure 1-13. 

Q10. How would a compass react when placed close to a conductor carrying alternating current at a 
low frequency? 

Qll. How would the compass react if the alternating current through the conductor was a high 
frequency? 

Q12. What is the purpose of a rectifier in a meter? 



1-11 



By connecting a rectifier to a d'Arsonval meter movement, an alternating current measuring device is 
created. 

When ac is converted to pulsating dc, the d'Arsonval movement will react to the average value of the 
pulsating dc (which is the average value of one-half of the sine wave). Another characteristic of using a 
rectifier concerns the fact that the d Arsonval meter movement is capable of indicating current in only one 
direction. If the d Arsonval meter movement were used to indicate alternating current without a rectifier, 
or direct current of the wrong polarity, the movement would be severely damaged. The pulsating dc is 
current in a single direction, and so the d Arsonval meter movement can be used as long as proper polarity 
is observed. 

DAMPING 

A problem that is created by the use of a rectifier and d Arsonval meter movement is that the pointer 
will vibrate (oscillate) around the average value indication. This oscillation will make the meter difficult 
to read. 

The process of "smoothing out" the oscillation of the pointer is known as DAMPING. There are two 
basic techniques used to damp the pointer of a d Arsonval meter movement. 

The first method of damping comes from the d Arsonval meter movement itself. In the dArsonval 
meter movement, current through the coil causes the coil to move in the magnetic field of the permanent 
magnet. This movement of the coil (conductor) through a magnetic field causes a current to be induced in 
the coil opposite to the current that caused the movement of the coil. This induced current will act to 
damp oscillations. In addition to this method of damping, which comes from the movement itself, most 
meters use a second method of damping. 

The second method of damping used in most meter movements is an airtight chamber containing a 
vane (like a windmill vane) attached to the coil (fig. 1-14). 




Figure 1-14. — A typical meter damping system. 



1-12 



As the coil moves, the vane moves within the airtight chamber. The action of the vane against the air 
in the chamber opposes the coil movement and damps the oscillations. 

Q13. How can a d'Arsonval meter movement be adapted for use as an ac meter? 

Q14. What is damping? 

Q15. What are two methods used to damp a meter movement? 

Q16. What value does a meter movement react to (actually measure) when measuring ac? 

Q17. What value is indicated on the scale of an ac meter? 

An additional advantage of damping a meter movement is that the damping systems will act to slow 
down the coil and help keep the pointer from overshooting its rest position when the current through the 
meter is removed. 

INDICATING ALTERNATING CURRENT 

Another problem encountered in measuring ac is that the meter movement reacts to the average value 
of the ac . The value used when working with ac is the effective value (rms value). Therefore, a different 
scale is used on an ac meter. The scale is marked with the effective value, even though it is the average 
value to which the meter is reacting. That is why an ac meter will give an incorrect reading if used to 
measure dc. 

OTHER METER MOVEMENTS 

The d Arsonval meter movement (permanent-magnet moving-coil) is only one type of meter 
movement. Other types of meter movements can be used for either ac or dc measurement without the use 
of a rectifier. 

When galvanometers were mentioned earlier in this topic, it was stated that they could be either 
electromagnetic or electrodynamic. Electrodynamic meter movements will be discussed at this point. 

ELECTRODYNAMIC METER MOVEMENT 

An electrodynamic movement uses the same basic operating principle as the basic moving-coil meter 
movement, except that the permanent magnet is replaced by fixed coils (fig. 1-15). A moving coil, to 
which the meter pointer is attached, is suspended between two field coils and connected in series with 
these coils. The three coils (two field coils and the moving coil) are connected in series across the meter 
terminals so that the same current flows through each. 



1-13 




Figure 1-15. — Electrodynamic meter movement. 



Current flow in either direction through the three coils causes a magnetic field to exist between the 
field coils. The current in the moving coil causes it to act as a magnet and exert a turning force against a 
spring. If the current is reversed, the field polarity and the polarity of the moving coil reverse at the same 
time, and the turning force continues in the original direction. Since reversing the current direction does 
not reverse the turning force, this type of meter can be used to measure both ac and dc if the scale is 
changed. While some voltmeters and ammeters use the electrodynamic principle of operation, the most 
important application is in the wattmeter. The wattmeter, along with the voltmeter and the ammeter, will 
be discussed later in this topic. 

MOVING- VANE METER MOVEMENTS 

The moving-vane meter movement (sometimes called the moving-iron movement) is the most 
commonly used movement for ac meters. The moving- vane meter operates on the principle of magnetic 
repulsion between like poles (fig. 1-16). The current to be measured flows through a coil, producing a 
magnetic field which is proportional to the strength of the current. Suspended in this field are two iron 
vanes. One is in a fixed position, the other, attached to the meter pointer, is movable. The magnetic field 
magnetizes these iron vanes with the same polarity regardless of the direction of current flow in the coil. 
Since like poles repel, the movable vane pulls away from the fixed vane, moving the meter pointer. This 
motion exerts a turning force against the spring. The distance the vane will move against the force of the 
spring depends on the strength of the magnetic field, which in turn depends on the coil current. 



1-14 




Figure 1-16. — Moving-vane meter movement. 

These meters are generally used at 60-hertz ac, but may be used at other ac frequencies. By changing 
the meter scale to indicate dc values rather than ac rms values, moving-vane meters will measure dc 
current and dc voltage. This is not recommended due to the residual magnetism left in the vanes, which 
will result in an error in the instrument. 

One of the major disadvantages of this type of meter movement occurs due to the high reluctance of 
the magnetic circuit. This causes the meter to require much more power than the D 'Arson val meter to 
produce a full scale deflection, thereby reducing the meters sensitivity. 

HOT-WIRE AND THERMOCOUPLE METER MOVEMENTS 

Hot-wire and thermocouple meter movements both use the heating effect of current flowing through 
a resistance to cause meter deflection. Each uses this effect in a different manner. Since their operation 
depends only on the heating effect of current flow, they may be used to measure both direct current and 
alternating current of any frequency on a single scale. 

The hot-wire meter movement deflection depends on the expansion of a high-resistance wire caused 
by the heating effect of the wire itself as current flows through it. (See fig. 1-17.) A resistance wire is 
stretched taut between the two meter terminals, with a thread attached at a right angle to the center of the 
wire. A spring connected to the opposite end of the thread exerts a constant tension on the resistance wire. 
Current flow heats the wire, causing it to expand. This motion is transferred to the meter pointer through 
the thread and a pivot. 



1-15 




Figure 1-17. — Hot-wire meter movement. 

The thermocouple meter consists of a resistance wire across the meter terminals, which heats in 
proportion to the amount of current. (See fig. 1-18.) Attached to this wire is a small thermocouple 
junction of two unlike metal wires, which connect across a very sensitive dc meter movement (usually a 
d'Arsonval meter movement). As the current being measured heats the heating resistor, a small current 
(through the thermocouple wires and the meter movement) is generated by the thermocouple junction. 
The current being measured flows through only the resistance wire, not through the meter movement 
itself. The pointer turns in proportion to the amount of heat generated by the resistance wire. 



POINTER 




WIRE 



Figure 1-18. — A thermocouple meter. 

Q18. List three meter movements that can measure either ac or dc without the use of a rectifier. 
Q19. What electrical property is used by all the meter movements discussed so far? 
AMMETERS 

An ammeter is a device that measures current. Since all meter movements have resistance, a resistor 
will be used to represent a meter in the following explanations. Direct current circuits will be used for 
simplicity of explanation. 



1-16 



AMMETER CONNECTED IN SERIES 



In figure 1-19(A), R t and R 2 are in series. The total circuit resistance is R 2 + R 2 and total circuit 
current flows through both resistors. In figure 1-19(B), Ri and R 2 are in parallel. The total circuit 
resistance is 



1 | 1 
Rj R 2 



and total circuit current does not flow through either resistor. 




Figure 1-19. — A series and a parallel circuit. 

If Ri represents an ammeter, the only way in which total circuit current will flow through the meter 
(and thus be measured) is to have the meter (Ri) in series with the circuit load (R 2 ), as shown in figure 
1-19(A). 



In complex electrical circuits, you are not always concerned with total circuit current. You may be 
interested in the current through a particular component or group of components. In any case, an ammeter 
is always connected in series with the circuit you wish to test. Figure 1-20 shows various circuit 
arrangements with the ammeter(s) properly connected for measuring current in various portions of the 
circuit. 



1-17 



LOAD 

-AAV 



SOURCE 



(A) SERIES CIRCUIT 



SOURCE 
+ »- 




R| > LOAD >R 2 



(B) PARALLEL CIRCUIT 



SOURCE 



+ »- 



(C) PARALLEL CIRCUIT 




SOURCE 



+ * 




(D) PARALLEL CIRCUIT 



I T = IR 1 + IR 2 



SOURCE 



+ •- 



R 3 




A) 1 ^ (A) I R2 




(E) SERIES PARALLEL CIRCUIT 



Figure 1-20. — Proper ammeter connections. 

Connecting an ammeter in parallel would give you not only an incorrect measurement, it would also 
damage the ammeter, because too much current would pass through the meter. 

EFFECT ON CIRCUIT BEING MEASURED 

The meter affects the circuit resistance and the circuit current. If Ri is removed from the circuit in 
figure 1-19(A), the total circuit resistance is R 2 . Circuit current 



(I) equals — , 

with the meter (Ri) in the circuit, circuit resistance is Ri + R 2 and circuit current 



(I) 



R 2 + R-2 



The smaller the resistance of the meter (R[ ), the less it will affect the circuit being measured. (R, 
represents the total resistance of the meter; not just the resistance of the meter movement.) 



1-18 



AMMETER SENSITIVITY 



Ammeter sensitivity is the amount of current necessary to cause full scale deflection (maximum 
reading) of the ammeter. The smaller the amount of current, the more "sensitive" the ammeter. For 
example, an ammeter with a maximum current reading of 1 milliampere would have a sensitivity of 
1 milliampere, and be more sensitive than an ammeter with a maximum reading of 1 ampere and a 
sensitivity of 1 ampere. Sensitivity can be given for a meter movement, but the term "ammeter 
sensitivity" usually refers to the entire ammeter and not just the meter movement. An ammeter consists of 
more than just the meter movement. 

AMMETER RANGES 

If you have a meter movement with a sensitivity of 1 milliampere, you can connect it in series with a 
circuit and measure currents up to 1 milliampere. But what do you do to measure currents over 1 
milliampere? 

To answer this question, look at figure 1-21. In figure 1-21(A), 10 volts are applied to two resistors 
in parallel. Ri is a 10-ohm resistor and R 2 is a 1.1 1-ohm resistor. Since voltage in parallel branches is 
equal- 



I R1 = ^- = 1A 



■R2 



10V 
1.1 ]Q 



9A 



— 10V 



-R1 



10ft 
= 1A 



1.11ft 

I R2 =9A 



J^100V 



-R1 



"1 
10ft 
= 10A 



I TOTAL = 10A 



1.11 ft 



I TOTAL = 100 A 



(A) 



50V 



-R1 



10ft* 
5A' 



1.11ft . 
I R2 = 45A 



I TOTAL = 50A 



(C) 



Figure 1-21. — Current in a parallel circuit. 

In figure 1-21(B), the voltage is increased to 100 volts. Now, 



1-19 



I Rl = — — = 1 OA 



■R2 



10£2 

1QOV 
1.1 1Q 



= 90A 



In figure 1-21(C), the voltage is reduced from 100 volts to 50 volts. In this case, 



R1 



■R2 



50V 
]QQ 

50V 
11 1Q 



5A 

= 45A 



Notice that the relationship (ratio) of I R1 and I R2 remains the same. I R2 is nine times greater than I R1 
and I R1 has one -tenth of the total current. 

If Ri is replaced by a meter movement that has 10 ohms of resistance and a sensitivity of 10 
amperes, the reading of the meter will represent one -tenth of the current in the circuit and R 2 will carry 
nine-tenths of the current. R 2 is a SHUNT resistor because it diverts, or shunts, a portion of the current 
from the meter movement (Ri). By this method, a 10-ampere meter movement will measure current up to 
100 amperes. By adding a second scale to the face of the meter, the current can be read directly. 

By adding several shunt resistors in the meter case, with a switch to select the desired resistor, the 
ammeter will be capable of measuring several different maximum current readings or ranges. 

Most meter movements in use today have sensitivities of from 5 microamperes to 1 milliampere. 
Figure 1-22 shows the circuit of meter switched to higher ranges, the shunt an ammeter that uses a meter 
movement with a sensitivity of 100 microamperes and shunt resistors. This ammeter has five ranges (100 
microamperes; 1, 10, and 100 milliamperes; 1 ampere) selected by a switch. 



1-20 




100 A 
* 



+ I 



Figure 1-22. — An ammeter with internal shunt resistors. 

By adding several shunt resistors in the meter case, with a switch to select the desired resistor, the 
ammeter will be capable of measuring several different maximum current readings or ranges. 

Most meter movements in use today have sensitivities of from 5 microamperes to 1 milliampere. 
Figure 1-22 shows the circuit of meter switched to higher ranges, the shunt an ammeter that uses a meter 
movement with a sensitivity of 100 microamperes and shunt resistors. This ammeter has five ranges (100 
microamperes; 1,10, and 100 milliamperes; 1 ampere) selected by a switch. 

With the switch in the 100 microampere position, all the current being measured will go through the 
meter movement. None of the current will go through any of the shunt resistors. If the ammeter is 
switched to the 1 milliampere position, the current being measured will have parallel paths of the meter 
movement and all the shunt resistors (R t , R 2 , R3, and R 4 ). Now, only a portion of the current will go 
through the meter movement and the rest of the current will go through the shunt resistors. When the 
meter is switched to the 10-milliampere position (as shown in fig. 1-22), only resistors R u R 2 , and R 3 
shunt the meter. Since the resistance of the shunting resistance is less than with R 4 in the circuit (as was 
the case in the 1 -milliampere position), more current will go through the shunt resistors and less current 
will go through the meter movement. As the resistance decreases and more current goes through the shunt 
resistors. As long as the current to be measured does not exceed the range selected, the meter movement 
will never have more than 100 microamperes of current through it. 

Shunt resistors are made with close tolerances. That means if a shunt resistor is selected with a 
resistance of .01 ohms (as R t in fig. 1-22), the actual resistance of that shunt resistor will not vary from 
that value by more than 1 percent. Since a shunt resistor is used to protect a meter movement and to allow 
accurate measurement, it is important that the resistance of the shunt resistor is known very accurately. 

Figure 1-22 represents an ammeter with internal shunts. The shunt resistors are inside the meter case 
and selected by a switch. For limited current ranges (below 50 amperes), internal shunts are most often 
employed. 



1-21 



For higher current ranges (above 50 amperes) ammeters that use external shunts are used. The 
external shunt resistor serves the same purpose as the internal shunt resistor. The external shunt is 
connected in series with the circuit to be measured and in parallel with the ammeter. This shunts 
(bypasses) the ammeter so only a portion of the current goes through the meter. Each external shunt will 
be marked with the maximum current value that the ammeter will measure when that shunt is used. Figure 
1-23 shows an ammeter that is designed to use external shunts and a d'Arsonval meter movement. Figure 
1 -23(A) shows the internal construction of the meter and the way in which the external shunt is connected 
to the meter and to the circuit being measured. Figure 1 -23(C) shows some typical external shunts. 



SCALE CALIBRATED IN AMPERES 




(A) 

INTERNAL CONSTRUCTION 
AND CIRCUIT 



COPPER BLOCKS 




TYPICAL EXTERNAL 
AMMETER SHUNTS 



Figure 1-23. — An ammeter employing the d'Arsonval principle and external shunts. 

A shunt resistor is nothing more than a resistor in parallel with the meter movement. To measure 
high currents, very small resistance shunts are used so the majority of the current will go through the 
shunt. Since the total resistance of a parallel circuit (the meter movement and shunt resistor) is always less 
than the resistance of the smallest resistor, as an ammeter's range is increased, its resistance decreases. 
This is important because the load resistance of high-current circuits is smaller than the load resistance of 
low-current circuits. To obtain accurate measurements, it is necessary that the ammeter resistance be 
much less than the load resistance, since the ammeter is connected in series with the load. 

Q20. What electrical property does an ammeter measure? 



1-22 



Q21. How is an ammeter connected to the circuit under test? 

Q22. How does an ammeter affect the circuit being measured? 

Q23. How is the ammeter's effect on the circuit being measured kept to a minimum? 

Q24. What is ammeter sensitivity? 

Q25. What is used to allow an ammeter to measure different ranges? 
Range Selection 

Part of the correct use of an ammeter is the proper use of the range selection switch. If the current to 
be measured is larger than the scale of the meter selected, the meter movement will have excessive 
current and will be damaged. Therefore, it is important to always start with the highest range when you 
use an ammeter. If the current can be measured on several ranges, use the range that results in a reading 
near the middle of the scale . Figure 1-24 illustrates these points. 




250 mA 
50 mA 
10 mA 
5 mA 




250 mA 
50 mA 
10 mA 
5 mA 




(B) 



250 mA 
50 mA 
10 mA 
5 mA 



Figure 1-24. — Reading an ammeter at various ranges. 

Figure 1 -24(A) shows the initial reading of a circuit. The highest range (250 milliamperes) has been 
selected and the meter indication is very small. It would be difficult to properly interpret this reading with 
any degree of accuracy. Figure 1 -24(B) shows the second reading, with the next largest range (50 
milliamperes). The meter deflection is a little greater. It is possible to interpret this reading as 5 
milliamperes. Since this approximation of the current is less than the next range, the meter is switched as 



1-23 



shown in figure 1-24(C). The range of the meter is now 10 milliamperes and it is possible to read the 
meter indication of 5 milliamperes with the greatest degree of accuracy. Since the current indicated is 
equal to (or greater than) the next range of the ammeter (5 milliamperes), the meter should NOT be 
switched to the next range. 

AMMETER SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 

When you use an ammeter, certain precautions must be observed to prevent injury to yourself or 
others and to prevent damage to the ammeter or the equipment on which you are working. The following 
list contains the MINIMUM precautions to observe when using an ammeter. 

• Ammeters must always be connected in series with the circuit under test. 

• Always start with the highest range of an ammeter. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before you connect or disconnect the ammeter. 

• In dc ammeters, observe the proper circuit polarity to prevent the meter from being damaged. 

• Never use a dc ammeter to measure ac. 

• Observe the general safety precautions of electrical and electronic devices. 
Q26. Why should you use the highest range of an ammeter for the initial measurement? 
Q27. What range of an ammeter is selected for the final measurement? 

Q28. List the six safety precautions for the use of ammeters. 

Q29. Why will an ammeter be damaged if connected in parallel with the circuit to be measured? 
VOLTMETERS 

All the meter movements discussed so far react to current, and you have been shown how ammeters 
are constructed from those meter movements. It is often necessary to measure circuit properties other than 
current. Voltage measurement, for example, is accomplished with a VOLTMETER. 

VOLTMETERS CONNECTED IN PARALLEL 

While ammeters are always connected in series, voltmeters are always connected in parallel . Figure 
1-25 (and the following figures) use resistors to represent the voltmeter movement. Since a meter 
movement can be considered as a resistor, the concepts illustrated are true for voltmeters as well as 
resistors. For simplicity, dc circuits are shown, but the principles apply to both ac and dc voltmeters. 



1-24 



—25V 
+ 



10n> 



E R1 = 25V 
(METER) 



I R1 = 2,5A> I R2 = 1.67A> 



E R2 = 25V 
(LOAD) 



— 25V 
+ 



I RT = 4.17A 

E RT = 25V 



(A) 



I R1 = 1A 

e r1 J 1 = iuv 

(METER) 



15Q < * 

I R2 = 1fl < 
E R2 = 15V 

(LOAD) 



R T = 25Q 

(B) 



Figure 1-25. — Current and voltage in series and parallel circuits. 

Figure 1 -25(A) shows two resistors connected in parallel. Notice that the voltage across both 
resistors is equal. In figure 1-25(B) the same resistors are connected in series. In this case, the voltage 
across the resistors is not equal. If R t represents a voltmeter, the only way in which it can be connected to 
measure the voltage of R 2 is in parallel with R 2 , as in figure 1-25(A). 

LOADING EFFECT 



A voltmeter has an effect on the circuit being measured. This is called LOADING the circuit. Figure 
1-26 illustrates the loading effect and the way in which the loading effect is kept to a minimum. 



1-25 



— 25V 



— ft/A 

R 1 15G 
I R1 =1A 

ER1 = 1W 



10Q 
I R2 =1A 

E R2 =10V 



— Wy 

R* isn 

I R1 = 125A 



R1 



18. 75V 



(A) 



-25V 

+ I R2 

E R2 = 6.25 V 



*2 

ion 

= .625A 



^R3 
: R3 



R 3- 
10Q 
= .625A 

= 6.25V 



(B) 



_RN 
-RN 



I 

= 125A^ 



6.25 V 



I 



Wv 

R 1 15Q 

I R1 = 1.0004A 
E R1 = 15.006V 



±_25V 



+■ I 



R2 



10O 
= .9994A 



E R2 = 9394V 



R 4 

10KG 

^R4 = 
.9994mA 

E R4 = 
9J994V 



y ^ 9U J Er„ = 9.994 V 



< 
I 
I 
I 



(C) 



Figure 1-26. — The loading effect. 

In figure 1-26(A), a series circuit is shown with Ri equaling 15 ohms and R 2 equaling 10 ohms. The 
voltage across R 2 (E R2 ) equals 10 volts. If a meter (represented by R 3 ) with a resistance of 10 ohms is 
connected in parallel with R 2 , as in figure 1-26(B), the combined resistance of R 2 and R 3 (R n ) is equal to 5 
ohms. The voltage across R 2 and R 3 is now 6.25 volts, and that is what the meter will indicate. Notice that 
the voltage across R! and the circuit current have both increased. The addition of the meter (R 3 ) has 
loaded the circuit. 



In figure 1 -26(C), the low-resistance meter (R 3 ) is replaced by a higher resistance meter (R 4 ) with a 
resistance of 10 kilohms. The combined resistance of R 2 and R 4 (R n ) is equal to 9.99 ohms. The voltage 
across R 2 and R 4 is now 9.99 volts, the value that will be indicated on the meter. This is much closer to 
the voltage across R 2 , with no meter (R 3 or R 4 ) in the circuit. Notice that the voltage across R, and the 
circuit current in figure 1 -26(C) are much closer to the values in 1 -26(A). The current (I R4 ) through the 
meter (R 4 ) in figure 1 -26(C) is also very small compared to the current (I R2 ) through R 2 . In figure 1 -26(C) 
the meter (R 4 ) has much less effect on the circuit and does not load the circuit as much. Therefore, a 
voltmeter should have a high resistance compared to the circuit being measured, to minimize the loading 
effect. 



1-26 



Q30. What electrical quantity is measured by a voltmeter? 



Q31. How is a voltmeter connected to the circuit to be measured? 

Q32. What is the loading effect of a voltmeter? 

Q33. How is the loading effect of a voltmeter kept to a minimum? 

MAKING A VOLTMETER FROM A CURRENT SENSITIVE METER MOVEMENT 

The meter movements discussed earlier in this chapter have all reacted to current. Various ways have 
been shown in which these movements can be used in ammeters. If the current and resistance are known, 
the voltage can be calculated by the formula E = IR. A meter movement has a known resistance, so as the 
movement reacts to the current, the voltage can be indicated on the scale of the meter. 

In figure 1 -27(A), a voltmeter (represented by R 2 ) connected across a 10-ohm resistor with 10 volts 
applied. The current through the voltmeter (R 2 ) is .1 milliamperes. In figure 1-27(B), the voltage is 
increased to 100 volts. Now, the current through the voltmeter (R 2 ) is 1 milliampere. The voltage has 
increased by a factor of 10 and so has the current. This illustrates that the current through the meter is 
proportional to the voltage being measured. 



— 10V 10fK 

i R1 = ia£ 

E R1 =10V 
(LOAD) 



100KQ< 
1^2= .ImA? 

(METER) 



(A) 



~ 100 V 



-R1 



R 1? 
10Q 
= 10A 



E R i = 100V 
(LOAD) 



R 2 
100KQ 



P2 



100 V 



(NETER) 



(B) 



Figure 1-27. — Current and voltage in parallel circuit. 
SENSITIVITY OF VOLTMETERS 

Voltmeter sensitivity is expressed in ohms per volt (QJV). It is the resistance of the voltmeter at the 
full-scale reading in volts. Since the voltmeter's resistance does not change with the position of the 
pointer, the total resistance of the meter is the sensitivity multiplied by the full-scale voltage reading. The 
higher the sensitivity of a voltmeter, the higher the voltmeter's resistance. Since high resistance voltmeters 



1-27 



have less loading effect on circuits, a high-sensitivity meter will provide a more accurate voltage 
measurement. 

To determine the sensitivity of a meter movement, you need only to divide 1 by the amount of 
current needed to cause full-scale deflection of the meter movement. The manufacturer usually marks 
meter movements with the amount of current needed for full-scale deflection and the resistance of the 
meter. With these figures, you can calculate the sensitivity 

( i ) 

full-scale current 

and the full-scale voltage reading full-scale current (full-scale current x resistance). 

For example, if a meter has a full-scale current of 50uA and a resistance of 960Q., the sensitivity 
could be calculated as: 

1 

Sensitivity = 

full-scale current 

1 

Sensitivity = 

1 50^A 

Sensitivity = 20kQ /volt 

The full-scale voltage reading would be calculated as: 

Full-scale voltage reading = full-scale current x resistance 

Full-scale voltage reading = 50uA x 960£2 

Full-scale voltage reading = 48mV 

RANGES 

Table 1-1 shows the figures for most meter movements in use today. 

Table 1-1. — Meter Movement Characteristics 



CURRENT TO 
DEFLECT FULL 
SCALE 


RESISTANCE 


SENSITIVITY 


VOLTAGE FULL 
SCALE 


1mA 


100 ft 


1 k ft/VOLT 


.1 V 


50 uA 


960 ft 


20 k ft/VOLT 


.048 V 


5 uA 


5750 ft 


200 k ft/VOLT 


.029 V 



Notice that the meter movements shown in table 1-1 will indicate .029 volts to .1 volt at full scale, 
and the sensitivity ranges from 1000 ohms per volt to 200,000 ohms per volt. The higher sensitivity 



1-28 



meters indicate smaller amounts of voltage. Since most voltage measurements involve voltage larger than 
. 1 volt, a method must be used to extend the voltage reading. 



Figure 1-28 illustrates the method of increasing the voltage range of a voltmeter. 



R 1 

" iov Iri = ioa; 

+ E R1 = 10V* 
(LOAD) 



1KQ 
I R2 =.01A 
E R2 = 10V 
(NE TE R> 



(A) 



~ 100V 



R1 



R1 



id * 

100A 
100V 



(LOAD) 



k 2 I 
11 A ^ 



I R2 = .01A 
E R2 = 10V 
(HE TER) 



R3 



R 3 
9K d 

.oiA*r 
oov£ 



R3 
(RANGE 
RE SIS TOR) 



(B) 



Figure 1-28. — A voltmeter and a range resistor. 



In figure 1 -28(A), a voltmeter with a range of 10 volts and a resistance of 1 kilohm (R 2 ) is connected 
in parallel to resistor R { . The meter has .01 ampere of current (full-scale deflection) and indicates 10 
volts. In figure 1 -28(B), the voltage has been increased to 100 volts. This is more than the meter can 
measure. A 9 kilohm resistor (R 3 ) is connected in series with the meter (R 2 ). The meter (R 2 ) now has .01 
ampere of current (full-scale deflection). But since R 3 has increased the voltage capability of the meter, 
the meter indicates 100 volts. R 3 has changed the range of the meter. 

Voltmeters can be constructed with several ranges by the use of a switch and internal resistors. 
Figure 1-29 shows a voltmeter with a meter movement of 100 ohms and 1 milliampere full-scale 
deflection with 5 ranges of voltage through the use of a switch. In this way a voltmeter can be used to 
measure several different ranges of voltage. 



1-29 




Figure 1-29. — A voltmeter with internal range resistors. 



The current through the meter movement is determined by the voltage being measured. If the voltage 
measured is higher than the range of the voltmeter, excess current will flow through the meter movement 
and the meter will be damaged. Therefore, you should always start with the highest range of a voltmeter 
and switch the ranges until a reading is obtained near the center of the scale. Figure 1-30 illustrates these 
points. 



1-30 




Figure 1-30. — Reading a voltmeter at various ranges. 

In figure 1-30(A) the meter is in the 1000-volt range. The pointer is barely above the position. It is 
not possible to accurately read this voltage. In figure 1-30(B) the meter is switched to the 250 volt range. 
From the pointer position it is possible to approximate the voltage as 20 volts. Since this is well below the 
next range, the meter is switched, as in figure 1 -30(C). With the meter in the 50-volt range, it is possible 
to read the voltage as 22 volts. Since this is more than the next range of the meter (10 volts), the meter 
would not be switched to the next (lower) scale. 

Q34. How is it possible to use a current sensitive meter movement to measure voltage ? 
Q35. What is voltmeter sensitivity? 

Q36. What method is used to allow a voltmeter to have several ranges? 

Q37. Why should you always use the highest range when connecting a voltmeter to a circuit? 

ELECTROSTATIC METER MOVEMENT 

The final meter movement covered in this chapter is the ELECTROSTATIC METER MOVEMENT. 
The other meter movements you have studied all react to current , the electrostatic meter movement reacts 
to voltage . 

The mechanism is based on the repulsion of like charges on the plates of a capacitor. The 
electrostatic meter movement is actually a large variable capacitor in which one set of plates is allowed to 



1-31 



move. The movement of the plates is opposed by a spring attached to the plates. A pointer that indicates 
the value of the voltage is attached to these movable plates. As the voltage increases, the plates develop 
more torque. To develop sufficient torque, the plates must be large and closely spaced. A very high 
voltage is necessary to provide movement, therefore, electrostatic voltmeters are used only for HIGH 
VOLTAGE measurement. 

VOLTMETER SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 

Just as with ammeters, voltmeters require safety precautions to prevent injury to personnel and 
damage to the voltmeter or equipment. The following is a list of the MINIMUM safety precautions for 
using a voltmeter. 

• Always connect voltmeters in parallel. 

• Always start with the highest range of a voltmeter. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before connecting or disconnecting the 
voltmeter. 

• In dc voltmeters, observe the proper circuit polarity to prevent damage to the meter. 

• Never use a dc voltmeter to measure ac voltage. 

• Observe the general safety precautions of electrical and electronic devices. 
Q38. What type of meter movement reacts to voltage rather than current? 

Q39. What is the only use for the voltage sensitive meter movement? 
Q40. List the six safety precautions for the use of voltmeters. 
OHMMETERS 

The two instruments most commonly used to check the continuity (a complete circuit), or to measure 
the resistance of a circuit or circuit element, are the OHMMETER and the MEGGER (megohm meter). 
The ohmmeter is widely used to measure resistance and check the continuity of electrical circuits and 
devices. Its range usually extends to only a few megohms. The megger is widely used for measuring 
insulation resistance, such as between a wire and the outer surface of the insulation, and insulation 
resistance of cables and insulators. The range of a megger may extend to more than 1,000 megohms. 

The ohmmeter consists of a dc ammeter, with a few added features. The added features are: 

1. A dc source of potential (usually a 3-volt battery) 

2. One or more resistors (one of which is variable) 

3. A simple ohmmeter circuit is shown in figure 1-31. 

The ohmmeter 's pointer deflection is controlled by the amount of battery current passing through the 
moving coil. Before measuring the resistance of an unknown resistor or electrical circuit, the test leads of 
the ohmmeter are first shorted together, as shown in figure 1-31. With the leads shorted, the meter is 
calibrated for proper operation on the selected range. While the leads are shorted, meter current is 
maximum and the pointer deflects a maximum amount, somewhere near the zero position on the ohms 



1-32 



scale. Because of this current through the meter with the leads shorted, it is necessary to remove the test 
leads when you are finished using the ohmmeter. If the leads were left connected, they could come in 
contact with each other and discharge the ohmmeter battery. When the variable resistor (rheostat) is 
adjusted properly, with the leads shorted, the pointer of the meter will come to rest exactly on the zero 
position. This indicates ZERO RESISTANCE between the test leads, which, in fact, are shorted 
together. The zero reading of a series-type ohmmeter is on the right-hand side of the scale, where as the 
zero reading for an ammeter or a voltmeter is generally to the left-hand side of the scale. (There is another 
type of ohmmeter which is discussed a little later on in this chapter.) When the test leads of an ohmmeter 
are separated, the pointer of the meter will return to the left side of the scale. The interruption of current 
and the spring tension act on the movable coil assembly, moving the pointer to the left side (<») of the 
scale. 



USING THE OHMMETER 

After the ohmmeter is adjusted for zero reading, it is ready to be connected in a circuit to measure 
resistance. A typical circuit and ohmmeter arrangement is shown in figure 1-32. 




Figure 1-31. — A simple ohmmeter circuit. 



1-33 




Figure 1-32. — Measuring circuit resistance with an ohmmeter. 



The power switch of the circuit to be measured should always be in the OFF position. This prevents 
the source voltage of the circuit from being applied across the meter, which could cause damage to the 
meter movement. 

The test leads of the ohmmeter are connected in series with the circuit to be measured (fig. 1-32). 
This causes the current produced by the 3-volt battery of the meter to flow through the circuit being 
tested. Assume that the meter test leads are connected at points a and b of figure 1-32. The amount of 
current that flows through the meter coil will depend on the total resistance of resistors Ri and R 2 , and the 
resistance of the meter. Since the meter has been preadjusted (zeroed), the amount of coil movement now 
depends solely on the resistance of R t and R 2 . The inclusion of R { and R 2 raises the total series resistance, 
decreasing the current, and thus decreasing the pointer deflection. The pointer will now come to rest at a 
scale figure indicating the combined resistance of Ri and R 2 . If Ri or R 2 , or both, were replaced with a 
resistor(s) having a larger value, the current flow in the moving coil of the meter would be decreased 
further. The deflection would also be further decreased, and the scale indication would read a still higher 
circuit resistance. Movement of the moving coil is proportional to the amount of current flow. 

OHMMETER RANGES 

The amount of circuit resistance to be measured may vary over a wide range. In some cases it may 
be only a few ohms, and in others it may be as great as 1,000,000 ohms (1 megohm). To enable the meter 
to indicate any value being measured, with the least error, scale multiplication features are used in most 
ohmmeters. For example, a typical meter will have four test lead jacks-COMMON, R x 1, R x 10, and 
R x 100. The jack marked COMMON is connected internally through the battery to one side of the 
moving coil of the ohmmeter. The jacks marked R x 1, R x 10, and R x 100 are connected to three 
different size resistors located within the ohmmeter. This is shown in figure 1-33. 



1-34 




Figure 1-33. — An ohmmeter with multiplication jacks. 



Some ohmmeters are equipped with a selector switch for selecting the multiplication scale desired, 
so only two test lead jacks are necessary. Other meters have a separate jack for each range, as shown in 
figure 1-33. The range to be used in measuring any particular unknown resistance (R x in figure 1-33) 
depends on the approximate value of the unknown resistance. For instance, assume the ohmmeter in 
figure 1-33 is calibrated in divisions from to 1,000. If R x is greater than 1,000 ohms, and the R x 1 range 
is being used, the ohmmeter cannot measure it. This occurs because the combined series resistance of 
resistor R x 1 and R x is too great to allow sufficient battery current to flow to deflect the pointer away 
from infinity (°°). (Infinity is a quantity larger than the largest quantity you can measure.) The test lead 
would have to be plugged into the next range, R x 10. With this done, assume the pointer deflects to 
indicate 375 ohms. This would indicate that R x has 375 ohms x 10, or 3,750 ohms resistance. The change 
of range caused the deflection because resistor R x 10 has about 1/10 the resistance of resistor R x 1. 
Thus, selecting the smaller series resistance permitted a battery current of sufficient amount to cause a 
useful pointer deflection. If the R x 100 range were used to measure the same 3,750-ohm resistor, the 
pointer would deflect still further, to the 37.5-ohm position. This increased deflection would occur 
because resistor R x 100 has about 1/10 the resistance of resistor R x 10. 

The foregoing circuit arrangement allows the same amount of current to flow through the meter's 
moving coil whether the meter measures 10,000 ohms on the R x 10 scale, or 100,000 ohms on the 
R x 100 scale. 

It always takes the same amount of current to deflect the pointer to a certain position on the scale 
(midscale position for example), regardless of the multiplication factor being used. Since the multiplier 
resistors are of different values, it is necessary to ALWAYS "zero" adjust the meter for each 
multiplication fact or selected. 

You should select the multiplication factor (range) that will result in the pointer coming to rest as 
near as possible to the midpoint of the scale . This enables you to read the resistance more accurately, 
because the scale readings are more easily interpreted at or near midpoint. 



1-35 



Q41. What electrical quantity is measured by an ohmmeter? 
Q42. What other measurement can an ohmmeter make? 

Q43. How is a series-type ohmmeter connected to the circuit being measured? 

Q44. What is used to provide the ohmmeter with several ranges? 

Q45. What area of an ohmmeter scale should be used when measuring circuits? 

SHUNT OHMMETER 

The ohmmeter described to this point is known as a series ohmmeter, because the resistance to be 
measured is in series with the internal resistors and the meter movement of the ohmmeter. Another type of 
ohmmeter is the SHUNT OHMMETER. In the shunt ohmmeter, the resistance to be measured shunts (is 
in parallel with) the meter movement of the ohmmeter. The most obvious way to tell the difference 
between the series and shunt ohmmeters is by the scale of the meter. Figure 1-34 shows the scale of a 
series ohmmeter and the scale of a shunt ohmmeter. 




(B) 



(A) SERIES OHMMETER (B) SHUNT OHMMETER 

Figure 1-34. — Series and shunt ohmmeter scales. 

Figure 1 -34(A) is the scale of a series ohmmeter. Notice "0" is on the right and is on the left. 
Figure 1 -34(B) is the scale of a shunt ohmmeter. In the shunt ohmmeter is on the right and "0" is on 
the left. A shunt ohmmeter circuit is shown in figure 1-35. 

In figure 1-35, Ri is a rheostat used to adjust the oo reading of the meter (full-scale deflection). R 2 , 
R 3 , and R 4 are used to provide the R x 1, R x 10, and R x 100 ranges. Points A and B represent the meter 
leads. With no resistance connected between points A and B the meter has full-scale current and indicates 



1-36 



°°. If a resistance is connected between points A and B, it shunts some of the current from the meter 
movement and the meter movement reacts to this lower current. Since the scale of the meter is marked in 
ohms, the resistance of the shunting resistor (between points A and B) is indicated. Notice that the switch 
has an OFF position, as well as positions for R x 1, R x 10, and R x 100. This is provided to stop current 
flow and prevents the battery from being discharged while the meter is not being used. 



+ - 



3V 



R 2 
r — \W 

R A R x 10 



OFF 

R x 1 



1 — VvV 



Rx 100 



Figure 1-35. — A shunt ohmmeter with internal range resistors. 

The shunt ohmmeter is connected to the circuit to be measured in the same way the series ohmmeter 
is connected. The only difference is that on the shunt ohmmeter the °° reading is adjusted, while on the 
series ohmmeter the reading is adjusted. Shunt ohmmeters are not commonly used because they are 
limited generally to measuring resistances from 5 ohms to 400 ohms. If you use a shunt ohmmeter, be 
certain to switch it to the OFF position when you are finished using it. 

Q46. What are the two types of ohmmeters? 

Q47. What is the most obvious difference between the two types of ohmmeters? 

Q48. List the four safety precautions observed when using ohmmeters. 

OHMMETER SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 

The following safety precautions and operating procedures for ohmmeters are the MINIMUM 
necessary to prevent injury and damage. 

• Be certain the circuit is deenergized and discharged before connecting an ohmmeter. 

• Do not apply power to a circuit while measuring resistance. 

• When you are finished using an ohmmeter, switch it to the OFF position if one is provided and 
remove the leads from the meter. 

• Always adjust the ohmmeter for (or °° in shunt ohmmeter) after you change ranges before 
making the resistance measurement. 



1-37 



MEGOHMMETER 



An ordinary ohmmeter cannot be used for measuring resistance of multimillions of ohms, such as in 
conductor insulation. To adequately test for insulation break down, it is necessary to use a much higher 
potential than is furnished by the battery of an ohmmeter. This potential is placed between the conductor 
and the outside surface of the insulation. 

An instrument called a MEGOHMMETER (MEGGER) is used for these tests. The megger (fig. 
1-36) is a portable instrument consisting of two primary elements: (1) a hand-driven dc generator, G, 
which supplies the high voltage for making the measurement, and (2) the instrument portion, which 
indicates the value of the resistance being measured. The instrument portion is of the opposed-coil type, 
as shown in figure 1 -36(A). Coils a and b are mounted on the movable member c with a fixed relationship 
to each other, and are free to turn as a unit in a magnetic field. Coil b tends to move the pointer 
counterclockwise, and coil a tends to move the pointer clockwise. 



HAND-DRIVEN 




Figure 1-36. — A megger internal circuit. 

Coil a is connected in series with R 3 and the unknown resistance, R x , to be measured. The 
combination of coil, R 3 , and R x forms a direct series path between the positive (+) and negative (-) 
brushes of the dc generator. Coil b is connected in series with R 2 and this combination is also connected 
across the generator. There are no restraining springs on the movable member of the instrument portion of 
the megger. Therefore, when the generator is not operated, the pointer floats freely and may come to rest 
at any position on the scale. 



1-38 



The guard ring intercepts leakage current. Any leakage currents intercepted are shunted to the 
negative side of the generator. They do not flow through coil a; therefore, they do not affect the meter 
reading. 

If the test leads are open-circuited, no current flows in coil a. However, current flows internally 
through coil b, and deflects the pointer to infinity, which indicates a resistance too large to measure. 
When a resistance such as R x is connected between the test leads, current also flows in coil a, tending to 
move the pointer clockwise. At the same time, coil b still tends to move the pointer counterclockwise. 
Therefore, the moving element, composed of both coils and the pointer, comes to rest in a position at 
which the two forces are balanced. This position depends upon the value of the external resistance, which 
controls the relative amount of current in coil a. Because changes in voltage affect both coil a and coil b 
in the same proportion, the position of the moving system is independent of the voltage. If the test leads 
are short-circuited, the pointer rests at zero because the current in coil a is relatively large. The instrument 
is not damaged under these circumstances because the current is limited by R 3 . 

The external view of one type of megger is shown in figure 1-36(B). 

Navy meggers are usually rated at 500 volts. To avoid excessive test voltages, most meggers are 
equipped with friction clutches. When the generator is cranked faster than its rated speed, the clutch slips 
and the generator speed and output voltage are not permitted to exceed their rated values. When 
extremely high resistances-for example, 10,000 megohms or more-are to be measured, a high voltage is 
needed to cause sufficient current flow to actuate the meter movement. For extended ranges, a 1,000-volt 
generator is available. 

When a megger is used, the generator voltage is present on the test leads. This voltage could be 
hazardous to you or to the equipment you are checking. Therefore, NEVER TOUCH THE TEST 
LEADS WHILE THE MEGGER IS BEING USED and isolate the item you are checking from the 
equipment before using the megger. 

Using the Megger 

To use a megger to check wiring insulation, connect one test lead to the insulation and the other test 
lead to the conductor, after isolating the wiring from the equipment. Turn the hand crank until the slip 
clutch just begins to slip and note the meter reading. Normal insulations should read infinity. Any small 
resistance reading indicates the insulation is breaking down. 

Megger Safety Precautions 

When you use a megger, you could be injured or damage equipment you are working on if the 
following MINIMUM safety precautions are not observed. 

• Use meggers on high-resistance measurements only (such as insulation measurements or to 
check two separate conductors on a cable). 

• Never touch the test leads while the handle is being cranked. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before connecting a megger. 

• Disconnect the item being checked from other circuitry, if possible, before using a megger. 
Q49. What is the primary use of a megger? 



1-39 



Q50. What is the procedure for using a megger to check the insulation of a conductor? 
Q51. What is a normal indication on a megger when checking insulation? 
Q52. List the four safety precautions observed when using a megger. 
MULTIMETER 

A MULTIMETER is the most common measuring device used in the Navy. The name multimeter 
comes from MULTIple METER, and that is exactly what a multimeter is. It is a dc ammeter, a dc 
voltmeter, an ac voltmeter, and an ohmmeter, all in one package. Figure 1-37 is a picture of a typical 
multimeter. 




Figure 1-37. — A typical multimeter. 



1-40 



The multimeter shown in figure 1-37 may look complicated, but it is very easy to use. You have 
already learned about ammeters, voltmeters, and ohmmeters; the multimeter is simply a combination of 
these meters. 

Most multimeters use a d 'Arson val meter movement and have a built-in rectifier for ac measurement. 
The lower portion of the meter shown in figure 1-37 contains the function switches and jacks (for the 
meter leads). 

The use of the jacks will be discussed first. The COMMON or -jack is used in all functions is 
plugged into the COMMON jack. The +jack is used for the second meter lead for any of the functions 
printed in large letters beside the FUNCTION SWITCH (the large switch in the center). The other jacks 
have specific functions printed above or below them and are self-explanatory (the output jack is used with 
the dB scale, which will not be explained in this chapter). To use one of the special function jacks, except 
+10 amps, one lead is plugged into the COMMON jack, and the FUNCTION SWITCH is positioned to 
point to the special function (small letters). For example, to measure a very small current (20 
microamperes), one meter lead would be plugged into the COMMON jack, the other meter lead would be 
plugged into the 50A AMPS jack, and the FUNCTION SWITCH would be placed in the 50V/IA AMPS 
position. To measure currents above 500 milliamperes, the +10A and -10A jacks would be used on the 
meter with one exception. One meter lead and the FUNCTION SWITCH would be placed in the 
10MA/AMPS position. 

MULTIMETER CONTROLS 

As described above, the FUNCTION SWITCH is used to select the function desired; the -DC, 
+DC, AC switch selects dc or ac (the rectifier), and changes the polarity of the dc functions. To measure 
resistance, this switch should be in the +DC position. 

The ZERO OHMS control is a potentiometer for adjusting the reading on ohmmeter functions. 
Notice that this is a series ohmmeter. The RESET is a circuit breaker used to protect the meter movement 
(circuit breakers will be discussed in chapter 2 of this module). Not all multimeters have this protection 
but most have some sort of protection, such as a fuse. When the multimeter is not in use, it should have 
the leads disconnected and be switched to the highest voltage scale and AC. These switch positions are 
the ones most likely to prevent damage if the next person using the meter plugs in the meter leads and 
connects the meter leads to a circuit without checking the function switch and the dc/ac selector. 

MULTIMETER SCALES 

The numbers above the uppermost scale in figure 1-38 are used for resistance measurement. If the 
multimeter was set to the R x 1 function, the meter reading would be approximately 12.7 ohms. 



1-41 




FUNCTION 
SWITCH 


-D.C./+D.C. 
A.C. 


iMnif^fiTinM 

1 NUIl^rt 1 ILIIN 


5000 V 


+ d.c. 


+ 2420.00Vd.c. 


1000 V 


- d.c. 


- 482.00Vd.c. 


250 V 


+ d.c. 


+ 121.00Vd.c. 


50 V 


a.c. 


24.90Va.c. 


10 V 


a.c. 


4.99Va.c. 


2.5 V 


a.c. 


1.28Va.c. 


10 A 


+ d.c. 


4.82Ad.c. 


500 mA 


a.c. 


249 .00mA a.c. 


100 mA 


a.c. 


49 .90mA a.c. 


10mA 


+ d.c. 


4.82mAd.c. 


50^.A 


+ d.c. 


24.20|iAd.c. 


Rx 100 


+ d.c. 


1.27kD 



Figure 1-38. — A multimeter scale and reading. 

The numbers below the uppermost scale are used with the uppermost scale for dc voltage and direct 
current, and the same numbers are used with the scale just below the numbers for ac voltage and 
alternating current. Notice the difference in the dc and ac scales. This is because the ac scale must indicate 
effective ac voltage and current. The third scale from the top and the numbers just below the scale are 
used for the 2.5-volt ac function only. The lowest scale (labeled DB) will not be discussed. The 
manufacturer's technical manual will explain the use of this scale. 

The table in figure 1-38 shows how the given needle position should be interpreted with various 
functions selected. 

As you can see, a multimeter is a very versatile measuring device and is much easier to use than 
several separate meters. 



1-42 



Q53. What is a multimeter? 

Q54. Why is a multimeter preferred over separate meters? 

Q55. How is a multimeter changed from a voltage measuring device to a resistance measuring device? 

Q56. Why is the dc scale on a multimeter different than the ac scale? 

Table 1-2 illustrates an interesting point about multimeters. It was mentioned earlier in this chapter 
that both voltmeters and ammeters have an effect upon the circuits they measure. 



Table 1-2. — Multimeter Movements 



CURRENT TO 

DEFLECT 
FULL SCALE 


METER 
MOVEMENT 
RESISTANCE 


VOLTMETER 
SENSITIVITY 


VOLTAGE 
FULL 
SCALE 


SHUNT 
RESISTOR 


OVERALL 
RESISTANCE 


1mA 


100 ft 


1 k ft /VOLT 


.1 V 


NA 


100 ft 


50 uA 


960 ft 


20 k ft /VOLT 


.048 V 


50.5 ft 


48 ft 


5 uA 


5750 ft 


200 k ft/VOLT 


.029 V 


29.146ft 


28.999 ft 



To keep this effect to a minimum, it is necessary that the voltmeter have a high resistance (sensitivity 
expressed in ohms per volt) and the ammeter have a low resistance compared to the circuit being 
measured. 

Table 1-2 shows the figures associated with three meter movements available for use in multimeters. 
The last two columns indicate the value of shunt resistance and the overall resistance of the shunt and 
meter movement necessary to compensate all three movements to an ammeter sensitivity (full-scale 
current) of 1 milliampere. Notice that as the voltmeter sensitivity increases, the resistance of the ammeter 
decreases. This shows how a meter movement used in a voltmeter will have a high effective resistance 
and the same meter movement used in an ammeter will have a low effective resistance because of the 
shunt resistors. 

PARALLAX ERROR 

Most multimeters (and some other meters) have a mirror built into the scale. Figure 1-39 shows the 
arrangement of the scale and mirror. 



1-43 




Figure 1-39. — A multimeter scale with mirror. 



The purpose of the mirror on the scale of a meter is to aid in reducing PARALLAX ERROR. Figure 
1-40 will help you understand the idea of parallax. 

Figure 1 -40(A) shows a section of barbed wire fence as you would see it from one side of the fence. 
Figure 1 -40(B) shows the fence as it would appear if you were to look down the fine of fence posts and 
were directly in line with the posts. You see only one post because the other posts, being in line, are 
hidden behind the post you can see. Figure 1 -40(C) shows the way the fence would appear if you moved 
to the right of the line of posts. Now the fence posts appear to the right of the post closest to you. Figure 
1 -40(D) shows the line of fence posts as you would see them if you moved to the left of the front post. 
This apparent change in position of the fence posts is called PARALLAX. 




(C) (D) 



Figure 1-40. — Parallax illustration (barbed-wire fence). 



1-44 



Parallax can be a problem when you are reading a meter. Since the pointer is slightly above the scale 
(to allow the pointer to move freely), you must look straight at the pointer to have a correct meter reading. 
In other words, you must be in line with the pointer and the scale. Figure 1-41 shows the effect of parallax 
error. 




(B) 



Figure 1-41. — A parallax error in a meter reading. 

Figure 1-41 (A) shows a meter viewed correctly. The meter reading is 5 units. Figure 1-41(B) shows 
the same meter as it would appear if you were to look at it from the right. The correct reading (5) appears 
to the right of the pointer because of parallax. 

The mirror on the scale of a meter, shown in figure 1-39, helps get rid of parallax error. If there is 
any parallax, you will be able to see the image of the pointer in the mirror. If you are looking at the meter 
correctly (no parallax error) you will not be able to see the image of the pointer in the mirror because the 
image will be directly behind the pointer. Figure 1-42 shows how a mirror added to the meter in figure 
1-41 shows parallax error. Figure 1 -42(A) is a meter with an indication of 5 units. There is no parallax 
error in this reading and no image of the pointer is seen in the mirror. Figure 1 -42(B) shows the same 
meter as viewed from the right. The parallax error is shown and the image of the pointer is shown in the 
mirror. 



1-45 















^^MIRROR 




(A) 








IMAGE\/\gK 


MIRROR 




(B) 



Figure 1-42. — A parallax error on a meter with a mirrored scale. 

MULTIMETER SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 

As with other meters, the incorrect use of a multimeter could cause injury or damage. The following 
safety precautions are the MINIMUM for using a multimeter. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before connecting or disconnecting a 
multimeter. 

• Never apply power to the circuit while measuring resistance with a multimeter. 

• Connect the multimeter in series with the circuit for current measurements, and in parallel for 
voltage measurements. 

• Be certain the multimeter is switched to ac before attempting to measure ac circuits. 

• Observe proper dc polarity when measuring dc. 

• When you are finished with a multimeter, switch it to the OFF position, if available. If there is 
no OFF position, switch the multimeter to the highest ac voltage position. 

• Always start with the highest voltage or current range. 

• Select a final range that allows a reading near the middle of the scale. 

• Adjust the "0 ohms" reading after changing resistance ranges and before making a resistance 
measurement. 

• Be certain to read ac measurements on the ac scale of a multimeter. 

• Observe the general safety precautions for electrical and electronic devices. 



1-46 



Q57. What is the reason for having a mirror on the scale of a multimeter? 



Q58. How is the mirror on a multimeter used? 
Q59. List the 11 safety precautions for multimeters. 
OTHER METERS 

In addition to the ammeter, voltmeter, ohmmeter, and multimeter, you will probably use many other 
types of measuring devices. Many of those measuring devices (test equipment) are discussed later in this 
training series. The following brief discussion of a few additional meters will introduce you to some of 
common measuring devices you will use in working on electrical and electronic circuits. 

HOOK-ON TYPE VOLTAMMETER 

The hook-on ac ammeter consists essentially of a current transformer with a split core and a rectifier- 
type instrument connected to the secondary. The primary of the current transformer is the conductor 
through which the current to be measured flows. The split core permits the instrument to be "hooked on" 
the conductor without disconnecting it. Therefore, the current flowing through the conductor may be 
measured safely and easily, as shown in figure 1-43. 




CURRENT OR VOLTAGE 
READING 



Figure 1-43. — A hook-on type voltammeter. 

The instrument is usually constructed so that voltages also may be measured. However, in order to 
read voltage, the meter switch must be set to VOLTS, and leads must be connected from the voltage 
terminals on the meter to terminals across which the voltage is to be measured. 



1-47 



WATTMETER 



Electric power is measured by means of a wattmeter. This instrument is of the electrodynamic type. 
It consists of a pair of fixed coils, known as current coils, and a movable coil known as the potential coil. 
(See fig. 1-44.) The fixed coils are made up of a few turns of a comparatively large conductor. The 
potential coil consists of many turns of fine wire. It is mounted on a shaft, carried in jeweled bearings, so 
that it may turn inside the stationary coils. The movable coil carries a needle which moves over a suitably 
marked scale. Spiral coil springs hold the needle to a zero position. 




(B) 



Figure 1-44. — A simplified electrodynamic wattmeter circuit. 

The current coil (stationary coil) of the wattmeter is connected in series with the circuit (load), and 
the potential coil (movable coil) is connected across the line. When line current flows through the current 
coil of a wattmeter, a field is set up around the coil. The strength of this field is proportional to the line 
current and in phase with it. The potential coil of the wattmeter generally has a high-resistance resistor 
connected in series with it. This is for the purpose of making the potential-coil circuit of the meter as 
purely resistive as possible. As a result, current in the potential circuit is practically in phase with line 
voltage. Therefore, when voltage is applied to the potential circuit, current is proportional to and in phase 
with the line voltage. 



1-48 



The actuating force of a wattmeter comes from the field of its current coil and the field of its 
potential coil. The force acting on the movable coil at any instant (tending to turn it) is proportional to the 
instantaneous values of line current and voltage. 

The wattmeter consists of two circuits, either of which will be damaged if too much current is passed 
through them. This fact is to be especially emphasized in the case of wattmeters, because the reading of 
the instrument does not serve to tell the user that the coils are being overheated. If an ammeter or 
voltmeter is overloaded, the pointer will be indicating beyond the upper limit of its scale. In the 
wattmeter, both the current and potential circuits may be carrying such an overload that their insulation is 
burning, and yet the pointer may be only part way up the scale. This is because the position of the pointer 
depends upon the power factor of the circuit as well as upon the voltage and current. Thus, a low power- 
factor circuit will give a very low reading on the wattmeter even when the current and potential circuits 
are loaded to the maximum safe limit. This safe rating is generally given on the face of the instrument. A 
wattmeter is always distinctly rated, not in watts but in volts and amperes. Figure 1-45 shows the proper 
way to connect a wattmeter in various circuits. 



WITH ETER 



SOURCE 



CURRENT COIL 



POTENTIAL COIL 



LOAD 



(C) 



VWTTMETER 



(B) 



SOURCE 



SINGLE PHASE CIRCUIT 



VWTTM ETER 



CURRENT COIL 

°WtW^ 



POTENTIAL COIL 



CURRENT COIL 



POTENTIAL COIL 



POTENTIAL COIL 



CURRENT COIL 



5 



<S3 



LOAD 



LOAD 



SOURCE 



LOAD 



VWTTM ETER 



POTENTIAL COIL 



CURRENT COIL 



VWTTMETER 



THREE WIRE SYSTEM 
SINGLE PHASE 



TW04>HASE SVSTEM 



Figure 1-45.— A wattmeter connected in various circuits. TWO-PHASE SYSTEM 

WATT-HOUR METER 

The watt-hour meter is an instrument for measuring energy. Since energy is the product of power and 
time, the watt-hour meter must take into consideration both of these factors. 

In principle, the watt-hour meter is a small motor whose instantaneous speed is proportional to the 
POWER passing through it. The total revolutions in a given time are proportional to the total ENERGY, 
or watt-hours, consumed during that time. 

The following directions should be followed when reading the dials of a watt-hour meter. The meter, 
in this case, is a four-dial type. 



1-49 



The pointer on the right-hand dial (fig. 1-46) registers 1 kilowatt-hour, or 1,000 watt-hours, for each 
division of the dial. A complete revolution of the hand on this dial will move the hand of the second dial 
one division and register 10 kilowatt-hours, or 10,000 watt-hours. A complete revolution of the hand of 
the second dial will move the third hand one division and register 100 kilowatt-hours or 100,000 
watt-hours, and so on. 




Figure 1-46. — Watt-hour meter. 



Accordingly, you must read the hands from left to right, and add three zeros to the reading of the 
lowest dial to obtain the reading of the meter in watt-hours. The dial hands should always be read as 
indicating the figure which they have LAST PASSED, and not the one they are approaching. 

Q60. Why would you use a hook-on voltameter instead of a multimeter? 

Q61. What electrical quantity is measured by a wattmeter? 

Q62. What electrical quantity is measured by a watt-hour meter? 

Q63. What is the quantity shown on the watt-hour meter in figure 1-46? 

FREQUENCY METERS 

All alternating voltage sources are generated at a set frequency or range of frequencies. A frequency 
meter provides a means of measuring this frequency. Two common types of frequency meters are the 
vibrating-reed frequency meter and the moving-disk frequency meter. 

Vibrating-Reed Frequency Meter 

The vibrating-reed frequency meter is one of the simplest devices for indicating the frequency of an 
ac source. Vibrating-reed frequency meters are usually in-circuit meters. They are used on power panels 



1-50 



to monitor the frequency of ac. A simplified diagram of one type of vibrating-reed frequency meter is 
shown in figure 1-47. 




(C) 

INDICATOR 
DIAL 



Figure 1-47. — Simplified disc of a vibrating-reed frequency meter. INDICATOR DIAL 



The current whose frequency is to be measured flows through the coil and exerts maximum 
attraction on the soft-iron armature TWICE during each cycle (fig. 1 -47(A)). The armature is attached to 
the bar, which is mounted on a flexible support. Reeds having natural vibration frequencies of 1 10, 112, 
1 14, and so forth, up to 130 hertz are mounted on the bar (fig. 1-47 (B)). The reed having a frequency of 
1 10 hertz is marked 55 hertz; the one having a frequency of 1 12 hertz is marked 56 hertz; the one having 
a frequency of 120 hertz is marked 60 hertz; and so forth. 

When the coil is energized with a current having a frequency between 55 and 65 hertz, all the reeds 
are vibrated slightly; but, the reed having a natural frequency closest to that of the energizing current 
(whose frequency is to be measured) vibrates more. 

The frequency is read from the scale value opposite the reed having the greatest vibration. 

In some instruments the reeds are the same lengths, but are weighted by different amounts at the top 
so that they will have different natural rates of vibration. 

An end view of the reeds is shown in the indicator dial of figure 1 -47(C). If the current has a 
frequency of 60 hertz per second, the reed marked "60" hertz will vibrate the amount, as shown. 



1-51 



Moving-Disk Frequency Meter 



Moving-disk frequency meters are most commonly out-of-circuit meters. They can be used to spot 
check the frequency of power sources or equipment signals. 

A moving-disk frequency meter is shown in figure 1-48. One coil tends to turn the disk clockwise, 
and the other, counterclockwise. Magnetizing coil A is connected in series with a large value of 
resistance. Coil B is connected in series with a large inductance and the two circuits are supplied in 
parallel by the source. 




Figure 1-48. — Simplified diagram of a moving-disk frequency meter. 

For a given voltage, the current through coil A is practically constant. However, the current through 
coil B varies with the frequency. At a higher frequency the inductive reactance is greater and the current 
through coil B is less; the reverse is true at a lower frequency. The disk turns in the direction determined 
by the stronger coil. 

A perfectly circular disk would tend to turn continuously. This is not desirable, and so the disk is 
constructed so that it will turn only a certain amount clockwise or counterclockwise about the center 
position, which is commonly marked 60 hertz on commercial equipment. To prevent the disk from 
turning more than the desired amount, the left half of the disk is mounted so that when motion occurs, the 
same amount of disk area will always be between the poles of coil A. Therefore, the force produced by 
coil A to rotate the disk is constant for a constant applied voltage. The right half of the disk is offset, as 
shown in the figure. When the disk rotates clockwise, an increasing area will come between the poles of 
coil B; when it rotates counterclockwise, a decreasing area will come between the poles of coil B. The 
greater the area between the poles, the greater will be the disk current and the force tending to turn the 
disk. 

If the frequency applied to the frequency meter should decrease, the reactance offered by L would 
decrease and the field produced by coil B would increase. The field produced by coil A would remain the 
same. Thus, the force produced by coil B would tend to move the disk and the pointer counterclockwise 



1-52 



until the area between the poles was reduced enough to make the two forces equal. The scale is calibrated 
to indicate the correct frequency. 

If the frequency is constant and the voltage is changed, the currents in the two coils-and therefore the 
opposing forces-change by the same amount. Thus, the indication of the instrument is not affected by a 
change in voltage. 

Q64. What are two types of frequency meters? 

Q65. What type of meter is shown and what is the value of the quantity being measured for each meter in 
figurel-49? 




Figure 1-49. — Meter recognition. 

Q66. What meter reading is shown on each multimeter in each part of figure 1-50? 

Q67. Which part offigurel-50 shows the switch positions the multimeter should be left in when the meter 
is secured? 



1-53 




ABC 




D 




E 




F 



Figure 1-50. — Multimeter reading practice. 

Q68. What type of meter is shown and what is the value of the quantity being measured for each meter in 
figure 1-51? 

Q69. If the insulation of a conductor was being measured in figure 1-51 (A), would the reading indicate a 
good insulation? 



1-54 



Figure 1-51. — Meter reading practice. 

Q70. What type of frequency meter is shown and what is the value indicated for each meter in figure 
1-52? 




Figure 1-52. — Frequency meter reading. 

1-55 



SUMMARY 



The important points of this chapter are summarized in the following summary. You should be 
familiar with these points before continuing with the study of electricity. 

CIRCUIT MEASUREMENT is used to monitor the operation of a piece of electrical or electronic 
equipment and determine the reason the equipment is not functioning properly. In-circuit meters monitor 
the operation of equipment and out-of -circuit meters can be used on more than one device. 

A compass will react to the magnetic field around a conducting wire. As the current increases, the 
compass movement increases. If the current decreases, the compass movement is less. If the current 
direction changes, the compass movement changes direction. PERMANENT-MAGNET 
MOVING-COIL meter movement (d Arsonval movement) uses the interaction of magnetic fields to 
produce movement. 




1-56 



HORSESHOE 




ASSEMBLED ARRANGEMENT 



If a compass is placed close to a conductor with ac, the compass will follow the current alternations 
if the ac is of low frequency. A rectifier will allow the compass to react to the average value of the ac. 




1-57 




E 



DAMPING is used to smooth out the vibration and to help prevent overshooting of the meter 
pointer. Damping in a d'Arsonval meter movement is accomplished by the emf caused by the coil 
movement. A second damping system uses a vane attached to the coil in an airtight chamber. A meter 
movement reacts to the average value of ac, but the scale is calibrated to read the effective (rms) value. 




There are meter movements that will measure either ac or dc without the use of a rectifier. They are 
the ELECTRODYNAMIC, MOVING- VANE, and HOT-WIRE or THERMOCOUPLE movements. 

Electrodynamic meter movements are usually used in wattmeters. They operate much like a 
d Arsonval meter movement, except field coils are used instead of a permanent magnet. 



1-58 





The hot-wire movement is only used to measure current. It is based on the expansion of a wire 
heated by current through the wire. 




1-59 



The thermocouple movement uses the current being developed in a thermocouple when the heat of a 
resistive wire is transferred to the thermocouple. The developed current is measured by a very sensitive dc 
ammeter. This movement will measure only current. 



POINTER 




WIRE 

An AMMETER measures current. It is always connected in series with the circuit being measured. 
An ammeter should have a small resistance so the effect of the ammeter on the circuit will be kept to a 
minimum. Ammeter sensitivity is the amount of current that causes full scale deflection of the ammeter. 
Shunt F resistors are used to provide an ammeter's ranges. 

The following SAFETY PRECAUTIONS should be observed when using an ammeter. 

• Always connect an ammeter in series. 

• Always start with the highest range. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit before connecting or disconnecting an ammeter. 

• Never use a dc ammeter to measure ac. 

• In dc ammeters, observe the proper polarity. 



1-60 




VOLTMETERS are used to measure voltage. They are always connected in parallel with the circuit 
being measured. A voltmeter should have a high resistance compared to the circuit being measured to 
minimize the loading effect . Since the resistance of a meter movement is constant, a voltmeter can be 
made from a current-sensitive meter movement by the use of range resistors and an appropriate scale. 
Voltmeter sensitivity is expressed in ohms per volt. 

An electrostatic meter movement reacts to voltage rather than current and is used only for high- 
voltage measurements. The following SAFETY PRECAUTIONS should be observed when using a 
voltmeter. 

• Always connect a voltmeter in parallel. 

• Always start with the highest range. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit before connecting or disconnecting the voltmeter. 

• Never use a dc voltmeter to measure an ac voltage. 

• On a dc voltmeter, observe the proper polarity. 



1-61 




OHMMETERS are used to measure resistance and to check continuity. An ohmmeter is connected 
in series with the resistance being measured. The ohmmeter range which allows a midscale indication 
should be selected. Resistors are used to allow an ohmmeter to have several ranges. In a SERIES 
OHMMETER the resistors are used in series with the resistance being measured. Series ohmmeters have 
the indication on the right side of the scale. 




A SHUNT OHMMETER's internal range resistors are in parallel with the resistance being 
measured. A shunt ohmmeter will have the indication on the left side of the scale. 



1-62 



The following SAFETY PRECAUTIONS should be observed when using an ohmmeter. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit before connecting an ohmmeter. 

• Do not apply power while measuring resistance. 

• Switch ohmmeters OFF, if a setting is provided, or to the highest range and remove the meter 
leads from the meter when finished measuring resistance. 

• Adjust the ohmmeter after changing ranges and before measuring resistance. 



A MEGOHMMETER (MEGGER) is used to measure very large resistances, such as the insulation 
of wiring. To use a megger, isolate the resistance being measured from other circuits, connect the meter 
leads, turn the hand crank, and note the meter indication. Normal insulation will indicate infinity. 

The following SAFETY PRECAUTIONS should be observed when using a megger. Use meggers 
for high-resistance measurements only. 

• Never touch the test leads while the handle is being cranked. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before connecting a megger. 

• Disconnect the item being checked from other circuitry, if possible, before using megger. 




Bji 



1-63 




A MULTIMETER is a single meter that combines the functions of a dc ammeter, a dc voltmeter, an 
ac ammeter, an ac voltmeter, and an ohmmeter. It is more convenient to have one meter with several 
functions than several meters each with a single function. The various functions of a multimeter are 
selected by use of the appropriate function switch positions, jacks, and meter scales. A mirror may be 
used on the scale of a multimeter to eliminate parallax error. 

The following SAFETY PRECAUTIONS should be observed when using a multimeter. 

• Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before connecting a multimeter. 

• Never apply power to the circuit while measuring resistance with a multimeter. 

• Connect the multimeter in series with the circuit for current measurements and in parallel for 
voltage measurements. 



Be certain the multimeter is switched to ac before attempting to measure ac circuits. 



Observe proper dc polarity when measuring dc circuits. 



When you are finished with a multimeter, switch it to the OFF position, if available. If there is 
no OFF position, switch the multimeter to the highest ac voltage position. 



Always start with the highest voltage or current range. 



Select a final range that allows a reading near the middle of the scale. 



Adjust the "0 ohms" reading after changing resistance ranges and before making a resistance 
measurement. 



1-64 



• Be certain to read ac measurements on the ac scale of a multimeter. 




A HOOK-ON TYPE VOLTAMETER allows you to measure current safely and easily (with no 
need to disconnect the wiring of the circuit). A hook-on type voltameter uses a split-core transformer to 
measure current. 



1-65 




CURRENT OR VOLTAGE 
READING 



A WATTMETER is usually an electrodynamic meter and is used to measure power. 




CURRENT 
K COIL 



™ i tri i ihl j ' j 

COIL OLOAD O 



(A) 




1-66 



A WATT-HOUR METER is basically a small motor whose instantaneous speed is proportional to 
the power through the motor. The total revolutions in a given time are proportional to the total energy, or 
watt-hours, used during that time. Watt-hour meters measure energy. 




FREQUENCY METERS are used to measure the frequency of an ac signal. The two basic types 
are the vibrating-reed frequency meter which is usually used as an in-circuit meter, and the moving-disk 
frequency meter which is usually used as an out-of-circuit meter. 



1-67 



SOFT-IRON 
COIL ARJWVTURE 



55 
HERTZ 



CURRENT WHOSE 

FREQUENCY IS 
TO BE MEASURED 
C 




REED 
JAR 

FLEXIBLE 
SUPPORT 



(A) 

CIRCUIT 



REED VIBRATING 
GREATEST AMOUNT 




GO 
HERTZ 
t 



65 
HERTZ 



REEDS 



BAR 



(B) 

REEDS 



VIBRATING 
REED 



(C) 

INDICATOR 
DIAL 



COIL A 




1 — Wsr- 

R 



T 



L 



1-68 



ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS Ql. THROUGH Q70. 

Al. Circuit measurement is used to (1) monitor the operation of a piece of electrical or electronic 
equipment and (2) determine the reason a piece of electrical or electronic equipment is not 
functioning properly. 

A2. In-circuit meters are used to monitor the operation of electrical or electronic devices. 

A3. Out-of-circuit meters can be used on more than one electrical or electronic device. 

A4. The compass needle swings away from magnetic north and aligns itself with the magnetic field 
around the conductor. 

A5. If the current increases the magnetic field increases; if the current decreases the magnetic field 
decreases. 

A6. The compass needle will not be deflected as far from magnetic north. 

A7. A permanent-magnet moving-coil meter movement used in most electrical and electronic meters. 

A8. A magnetic field is generated around the coil and the attraction of this field with the permanent 
magnet causes the coil to move. 

A9. To return the pointer to its rest position when there is no current flow; to oppose the coil movement 
when there is current flow; to provide electrical connections for the coil. 

A10. The compass needle would swing back and forth as the current changed from positive to negative. 

All. The compass needle would vibrate rapidly around the zero-current point ac meter (magnetic 
north). 

A12. A rectifier changes alternating current to pulsating direct current and allows a dc meter to 
measure ac. 

A13. By the use of a rectifier 

A14. The process of "smoothing out" the oscillation in a meter movement. 

A15. As the coil moves through the field of the permanent magnet, a current is induced in the coil 

opposing the movement of the coil; and a vane can be attached to the coil and placed in the airtight 
chamber so that the movement of the vane opposes the movement of the coil. 

A16. Average value. 

A17. Effective value (rms). 

A18. Electrodynamic, moving vane, and hot-wire or thermocouple. 

A19. Current. 

A20. Current. 

A21. In series. 



1-69 



A22. Since the ammeter is a resistor in series with the load, it increases the resistance of the circuit and 
lowers circuit current. 

A23. The resistance of the ammeter must be much smaller than the circuit load. 

A24. The amount of current that will cause full-scale deflection. 

A25. Shunt resistors ( internal or external). 

A26. To prevent damage to the meter movement from excessive current. 
A27. A range that allows a meter reading near the center of the scale. 
A28. 

a. Always connect an ammeter in series. 

b. Always start with the highest range. 

c. In dc ammeters, observe the proper polarity. 

d. Deenergize and discharge the circuit before connecting or disconnecting the ammeter. 

e. Never use a dc ammeter to measure ac current. 

f. Observe the general safety precautions of electric and electronic devices. 

A29. Since the ammeter has a small resistance compared to the load, it will have very high current if it 
is connected in parallel. This high current will damage the meter. 

A30. Voltage. 

A31. In parallel. 

A32. The connection of a voltmeter adds a resistance in parallel with the circuit changing the total 
circuit resistance, and loads the circuit. 

A33. A voltmeter must have a high resistance compared to the circuit being measured. 

A34. Since the resistance of a meter movement remains the same as the pointer is deflected, the amount 
of current through the movement is proportional to the voltage applied. Therefore, only the scale of 
the movement must be changed. 

A3 5. It is an indication of the resistance of the meter expressed in ohms per volt. The total resistance of 
the meter is the sensitivity multiplied by the full-scale voltage. 

A36. The use of resistors in series with the meter movement. 

A37. To prevent excess current through the meter movement. 

A38. Electrostatic. 

A3 9. High-voltage measurement. 



1-70 



A40. 

a. Always connect a voltmeter in parallel. 

b. Always start with the highest range. 

c. Deenergize and discharge the circuit before connecting or disconnecting the voltmeter. 

d. In a dc voltmeter, observe the proper polarity. 

e. Never use a dc voltmeter to measure ac voltage. 

f. Observe the general safety precautions of electric and electronic devices. 
A41. Resistance. 

A42. Circuit continuity. 

A43. The ohmmeter is connected in series with the resistance to be measured. 

A44. An ohmmeter has several internal range resistors and a switch or a series of jacks to select the 
proper range. 

A45. The middle of the scale. 

A46. Series and shunt. 

A47. Series ohmmeters have on the right end of the scale and oo on the left end of the scale. Shunt 
ohmmeters are the opposite. 

A48. 

a. Deenergize and discharge the circuit before connecting an ohmmeter. 

b. Do not apply power to a circuit while measuring resistance. 

c. Switch ohmmeters to the OFF position, if provided, or to highest range and remove meter 
leads from the meter when finished measuring resistance. 

d. Adjust the ohmmeter after changing resistance range and before measuring reading indicates 
the resistance. 

A49. To measure high resistance. 

A50. Connect one lead to the insulation and one lead to the conductor. Turn the handcrank until it starts 
to slip. Note the reading. 

A51. Infinity. 



1-71 



A52. 

a. Use meggers for high-resistance measurement only. 

b. Never touch the test leads when the handle is being cranked. 

c. Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before connecting a megger. 

d. Disconnect the item being checked from other circuitry, if possible, before using a megger. 

A53. A single measuring device capable of performing the functions of a dc voltmeter and ammeter, an 
ac voltmeter and ammeter, and an ohmmeter. 

A54. It is much more convenient to have one meter with several functions than several meters each with 
a single function. 

A55. By changing the position of the function switch. 

A56. The meter movement reacts to average ac voltage and current and the effective value is desired. 
A57. To stop parallax error 

A58. Make sure no image of the pointer is visible in the mirror when reading the meter. 
A59. 

a. Deenergize and discharge the circuit completely before connecting or disconnecting a 
multimeter. 

b. Never apply power to the circuit while measuring resistance with a multimeter. 

c. Connect the multimeter in series with the circuit for current measurements, and in parallel for 
voltage measurements. 

d. Be certain the multimeter is switched to ac before attempting to measure ac circuits. 

e. Observe proper dc polarity when measuring dc. 

f. When you are finished with a multimeter, switch it to the OFF position, if available. If there is 
no OFF position, switch the multimeter to the highest ac voltage position. 

g. Always start with the highest voltage or current range. 

h. Select a final range that allows a reading near the middle of the scale. 

i. Adjust the "O ohms " reading after changing resistance ranges and before making a resistance 
measurement. 

j. Be certain to read ac measurements on the ac scale of a multimeter. 

k. Observe the general safety precautions for electrical and electronic devices. 
A60. To measure current safely and easily ( with no need to disconnect the wiring of the circuit). 
A61. Power. 



1-72 



A62. Energy. 

A63. 5.945 megawatt-hours, or 5,945 kilowatt-hours, or 5,945, 000 watt- hours. 

A64. Vibrating reed and moving disk. 

A65. 

a. A dc ammeter, 90 mA dc 

b. A dc voltmeter, 200 V dc 

c. An ac voltmeter, 4.6 Vac 

d. An ohmmeter, 400 ohms 

A66. (A) 410 mA dc; (B) 3.9 mA ac; (C) -22 V dc; (D) 600 Vac; (E) 1.4 Vac; (F) 1.9kohms (1900 Q). 
A67. Figure 1 -50(D). 

A68. (A) Megger (megohmmeter), infinity; (B) Wattmeter, 9.5 kilowatts (9,500 watts). (C) Watt-hour 
meter, 2.693 megawatt- hours 2,693 kilowatt-hours) (2,693,000 watt-hours). 

A69. Yes. 

A70. (A) Vibrating-reed, 60Hz. (B) Moving-disk, 58 Hz. 



1-73 



CHAPTER 2 

CIRCUIT PROTECTION DEVICES 



LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

Upon completion of this chapter you will be able to: 

1. State the reasons circuit protection is needed and three conditions requiring circuit protection. 

2. Define a direct short, an excessive current condition, and an excessive heat condition. 

3. State the way in which circuit protection devices are connected in a circuit. 

4. Identify two types of circuit protection devices and label the schematic symbols for each type. 

5. Identify a plug-type and a cartridge-type fuse (open and not open) from illustrations. 

6. List the three characteristics by which fuses are rated and state the meaning of each rating. 
Identify a plug-type and a cartridge-type fuse (open and not open) from illustrations. 

7. List the three categories of time delay rating for fuses and state a use for each type of time -delay 
rated fuse. 

8. List the three categories of time delay rating for fuses and state a use for each type of time -delay 
rated fuse. Identify fuses as to voltage, current, and time delay ratings using fuses marked with 
the old military, new military, old commercial, and new commercial systems. List the three 
categories of time delay rating for fuses and state a use for each type of time -delay rated fuse. 

9. Identify a clip-type and a post-type fuse holder from illustrations and identify the connections 
used on a post-type fuse holder for power source and load connections. 

10. List the methods of checking for an open fuse, the items to check when replacing a fuse, the 
safety precautions to be observed when checking and replacing fuses, and the conditions to be 
checked for when conducting preventive maintenance on fuses. 

1 1 . Select a proper replacement and substitute fuse from a listing of fuses. 

12. List the five main components of a circuit breaker and the three types of circuit breaker trip 
elements. 

13. Describe the way in which each type of trip element reacts to excessive current. 

14. Define the circuit breaker terms trip-free and nontrip-free and state one example for the use of 
each of these types of circuit breakers. 

15. List the three time delay ratings of circuit breakers. 

16. Define selective tripping, state why it is used, and state the way in which the time delay ratings 
of circuit breakers are used to design a selective tripping system. 

17. Identify the factors used in selecting circuit breakers. 



2-1 



18. List the steps to follow before starting work on a circuit breaker and the items to be checked 
when maintaining circuit breakers. 



CIRCUIT PROTECTION DEVICES 

Electricity, like fire, can be either helpful or harmful to those who use it. A fire can keep people 
warm and comfortable when it is confined in a campfire or a furnace. It can be dangerous and destructive 
if it is on the loose and uncontrolled in the woods or in a building. Electricity can provide people with the 
light to read by or, in a blinding flash, destroy their eyesight. It can help save people's lives, or it can kill 
them. While we take advantage of the tremendous benefits electricity can provide, we must be careful to 
protect the people and systems that use it. 

It is necessary then, that the mighty force of electricity be kept under control at all times. If for some 
reason it should get out of control, there must be a method of protecting people and equipment. Devices 
have been developed to protect people and electrical circuits from currents and voltages outside their 
normal operating ranges. Some examples of these devices are discussed in this chapter. 

While you study this chapter, it should be kept in mind that a circuit protection device is used to keep 
an undesirably large current, voltage, or power surge out of a given part of an electrical circuit. 

INTRODUCTION 

An electrical unit is built with great care to ensure that each separate electrical circuit is fully 
insulated from all the others. This is done so that the current in a circuit will follow its intended path. 
Once the unit is placed into service, however, many things can happen to alter the original circuitry. Some 
of the changes can cause serious problems if they are not detected and corrected. While circuit protection 
devices cannot correct an abnormal current condition, they can indicate that an abnormal condition exists 
and protect personnel and circuits from that condition. In this chapter, you will learn what circuit 
conditions require protection devices and the types of protection devices used. 

CIRCUIT CONDITIONS REQUIRING PROTECTION DEVICES 

As has been mentioned, many things can happen to electrical and electronic circuits after they are in 
use. Chapter 1 of this module contains information showing you how to measure circuit characteristics to 
help determine the changes that can occur in them. Some of the changes in circuits can cause conditions 
that are dangerous to the circuit itself or to people living or working near the circuits. These potentially 
dangerous conditions require circuit protection. The conditions that require circuit protection are direct 
shorts, excessive current, and excessive heat. 

Direct Short 

One of the most serious troubles that can occur in a circuit is a DIRECT SHORT. Another term used 
to describe this condition is a SHORT CIRCUIT. The two terms mean the same thing and, in this chapter, 
the term direct short will be used. This term is used to describe a situation in which some point in the 
circuit, where full system voltage is present, comes in direct contact with the ground or return side of the 
circuit. This establishes a path for current flow that contains only the very small resistance present in the 
wires carrying the current. 

According to Ohm's law, if the resistance in a circuit is extremely small, the current will be 
extremely large. Therefore, when a direct short occurs, there will be a very large current through the 
wires. Suppose, for instance, that the two leads from a battery to a motor came in contact with each other. 
If the leads were bare at the point of contact, there would be a direct short. The motor would stop running 



2-2 



because all the current would be flowing through the short and none through the motor. The battery would 
become discharged quickly (perhaps ruined) and there could be the danger of fire or explosion. 

The battery cables in our example would be large wires capable of carrying heavy currents. Most 
wires used in electrical circuits are smaller and their current carrying capacity is limited. The size of wire 
used in any given circuit is determined by space considerations, cost factors, and the amount of current 
the wire is expected to carry under normal operating conditions. Any current flow greatly in excess of 
normal, such as there would be in the case of a direct short, would cause a rapid generation of heat in the 
wire. 

If the excessive current flow caused by the direct short is left unchecked, the heat in the wire will 
continue to increase until some portion of the circuit burns. Perhaps a portion of the wire will melt and 
open the circuit so that nothing is damaged other than the wire involved. The probability exists, however, 
that much greater damage will result. The heat in the wire can char and burn the insulation of the wire and 
that of other wires bundled with it, which can cause more shorts. If a fuel or oil leak is near any of the hot 
wires, a disastrous fire might be started. 

Excessive Current 

It is possible for the circuit current to increase without a direct short. If a resistor, capacitor, or 
inductor changes value, the total circuit impedance will also change in value. If a resistor decreases in 
ohmic value, the total circuit resistance decreases. If a capacitor has a dielectric leakage, the capacitive 
reactance decreases . If an inductor has a partial short of its winding, inductive reactance decreases. Any 
of these conditions will cause an increase in circuit current. Since the circuit wiring and components are 
designed to withstand normal circuit current, an increase in current would cause overheating (just as in 
the case of a direct short). Therefore, excessive current without a direct short will cause the same 
problems as a direct short. 

Excessive Heat 

As you have read, most of the problems associated with a direct short or excessive current concern 
the heat generated by the higher current. The damage to circuit components, the possibility of fire, and the 
possibility of hazardous fumes being given off from electrical components are consequences of excessive 
heat. It is possible for excessive heat to occur without a direct short or excessive current. If the bearings 
on a motor or generator were to fail, the motor or generator would overheat. If the temperature around an 
electrical or electronic circuit were to rise (through failure of a cooling system for example), excessive 
heat would be a problem. No matter what the cause, if excessive heat is present in a circuit, the possibility 
of damage, fire, and hazardous fumes exists. 

Ql. Why are circuit protection devices necessary? 

Q2. What are the three conditions that require circuit protection? 

Q3. What is a direct short? 

Q4. What is an excessive current condition? 

Q5. What is an excessive heat condition? 

CIRCUIT PROTECTION DEVICES 

All of the conditions mentioned are potentially dangerous and require the use of circuit protection 
devices. Circuit protection devices are used to stop current flow or open the circuit. To do this, a circuit 
protection device must ALWAYS be connected in series with the circuit it is protecting. If the protection 



2-3 



device is connected in parallel, current will simply flow around the protection device and continue in the 
circuit. 

A circuit protection device operates by opening and interrupting current to the circuit. The opening 
of a protection device shows that something is wrong in the circuit and should be corrected before the 
current is restored. When a problem exists and the protection device opens, the device should isolate the 
faulty circuit from the other unaffected circuits, and should respond in time to protect unaffected 
components in the faulty circuit. The protection device should NOT open during normal circuit operation. 

The two types of circuit protection devices discussed in this chapter are fuses and circuit breakers. 
Fuses 

A fuse is the simplest circuit protection device. It derives its name from the Latin word "fusus," 
meaning "to melt." Fuses have been used almost from the beginning of the use of electricity. The earliest 
type of fuse was simply a bare wire between two connections. The wire was smaller than the conductor it 
was protecting and, therefore, would melt before the conductor it was protecting was harmed. Some 
"copper fuse link" types are still in use, but most fuses no longer use copper as the fuse element (the part 
of the fuse that melts). After changing from copper to other metals, tubes or enclosures were developed to 
hold the melting metal. The enclosed fuse made possible the addition of filler material, which helps to 
contain the arc that occurs when the element melts. 

For many low power uses, the finer material is not required. A simple glass tube is used. The use of a 
glass tube gives the added advantage of being able to see when a fuse is open. Fuses of this type are 
commonly found in automobile lighting circuits. 

Figure 2-1 shows several fuses and the symbols used on schematics. 




RIBBON TYPE CARTRIDGE TYPE 




COPPER FUSE LINK 




-nzn> -^v 

SCHEMATIC 
SYMBOLS 




PLUG TYPE WITH 
RIBBON FUSE LINK 



Figure 2-1. — Typical fuses and schematic symbols. 



2-4 



Circuit Breakers 

While a fuse protects a circuit, it is destroyed in the process of opening the circuit. Once the problem 
that caused the increased current or heat is corrected, a new fuse must be placed in the circuit. A circuit 
protection device that can be used more than once solves the problems of replacement fuses. Such a 
device is safe, reliable, and tamper proof. It is also resettable, so it can be reused without replacing any 
parts. This device is called a CIRCUIT BREAKER because it breaks (opens) the circuit. 

The first compact, workable circuit breaker was developed in 1923. It took 4 years to design a device 
that would interrupt circuits of 5000 amperes at 120 volts ac or dc. In 1928 the first circuit breaker was 
placed on the market. A typical circuit breaker and the appropriate schematic symbols are shown in figure 
2-2. 




SCHEMATIC SYMBOLS 



Figure 2-2. — Typical circuit breaker and schematic symbols. 

Q6. How are circuit protection devices connected to the circuit they are intended to protect and why 
are they connected in this way? 

Q7. What are the two types of circuit protection devices? 

Q8. Label the schematic symbols shown in figure 2-3 below. 




(B) 

Figure 2-3. — Schematic symbols. 



2-5 



FUSE TYPES 

Fuses are manufactured in many shapes and sizes. In addition to the copper fuse link already 
described, figure 2-1 shows other fuse types. While the variety of fuses may seem confusing, there are 
basically only two types of fuses: plug-type fuses and cartridge fuses. Both types of fuses use either a 
single wire or a ribbon as the fuse element (the part of the fuse that melts). The condition (good or bad) of 
some fuses can be determined by visual inspection. The condition of other fuses can only be determined 
with a meter. In the following discussion, visual inspection will be described. The use of meters to check 
fuses will be discussed later in this chapter. 

PLUG-TYPE FUSE 



The plug-type fuse is constructed so that it can be screwed into a socket mounted on a control panel 
or electrical distribution center. The fuse link is enclosed in an insulated housing of porcelain or glass. 
The construction is arranged so the fuse link is visible through a window of mica or glass. Figure 2-4 
shows a typical plug-type fuse. 




FUSE LINK 

SPRING- 
CONTACT- 
AND 
SOLDER POT 




(A) 



PLUG type wrrH 
RIBBON FUSE LINK 




(B) 




Figure 2-4. — Plug-type fuses: 

Figure 2-4, view A, sows a good plug-type fuse. Notice the construction and the fuse link. In figure 
2-4, view B, the same type of fuse is shown after the fuse link has melted. Notice the window showing the 
indication of this open fuse. The indication could be either of the ones shown in figure 2-4, view B. 

The plug-type fuse is used primarily in low-voltage, low-current circuits. The operating range is 
usually up to 150 volts and from 0.5 ampere to 30 amperes. This type of fuse is found in older circuit 
protection devices and is rapidly being replaced by the circuit breaker. 



CARTRIDGE FUSE 



The cartridge fuse operates exactly like the plug-type fuse. In the cartridge fuse, the fuse link is 
enclosed in a tube of insulating material with metal ferrules at each end (for contact with the fuse holder). 
Some common insulating materials are glass, bakelite, or a fiber tube filled with insulating powder. 



2-6 



Figure 2-5 shows a glass-tube fuse. In figure 2-5, view A, notice the fuse link and the metal ferrules. 
Figure 2-5, view B, shows a glass-tube fuse that is open. The open fuse link could appear either of the 
ways shown in figure 2-5, view B. 




RIBBON 
FUSE LINK 



CARTRIDGE TYPE 
WITH GLASS TUBE AND 
WIRE FUSE LINK 



(A) 





(B) 



Figure 2-5. — Cartridge-tube fuse. 

Cartridge fuses are available in a variety of physical sizes and are used in many different circuit 
applications. They can be rated at voltages up to 10,000 volts and have current ratings of from 1/500 
(.002) ampere to 800 amperes. Cartridge fuses may also be used to protect against excessive heat and 
open at temperatures of from 165° F to 410°F (74°C to 210°C). 

Q9. Label the fuses shown in figure 2-6 according to type. 

Q10. Identify the open fuses shown in figure 2-6. 




Figure 2-6. — Fuse recognition. 



2-7 



FUSE RATINGS 



You can determine the physical size and type of a fuse by looking at it, but you must know other 
things about a fuse to use it properly. Fuses are rated by current, voltage, and time-delay characteristics to 
aid in the proper use of the fuse. To select the proper fuse, you must understand the meaning of each of 
the fuse ratings. 

CURRENT RATING 

The current rating of a fuse is a value expressed in amperes that represents the current the fuse will 
allow without opening. The current rating of a fuse is always indicated on the fuse. 

To select the proper fuse, you must know the normal operating current of the circuit. If you wish to 
protect the circuit from overloads (excessive current), select a fuse rated at 125 percent of the normal 
circuit current. In other words, if a circuit has a normal current of 10 amperes, a 12.5-ampere fuse will 
provide overload protection. If you wish to protect against direct shorts only, select a fuse rated at 150 
percent of the normal circuit current. In the case of a circuit with 10 amperes of current, a 15 ampere fuse 
will protect against direct shorts, but will not be adequate protection against excessive current. 

VOLTAGE RATING 

The voltage rating of a fuse is NOT an indication of the voltage the fuse is designed to withstand 
while carrying current. The voltage rating indicates the ability of the fuse to quickly extinguish the arc 
after the fuse element melts and the maximum voltage the open fuse will block. In other words, once the 
fuse has opened, any voltage less than the voltage rating of the fuse will not be able to "jump" the gap of 
the fuse. Because of the way the voltage rating is used, it is a maximum rms voltage value. You must 
always select a fuse with a voltage rating equal to or higher than the voltage in the circuit you wish to 
protect. 

TIME DELAY RATING 

There are many kinds of electrical and electronic circuits that require protection. In some of these 
circuits, it is important to protect against temporary or transient current increases. Sometimes the device 
being protected is very sensitive to current and cannot withstand an increase in current. In these cases, a 
fuse must open very quickly if the current increases. 

Some other circuits and devices have a large current for short periods and a normal (smaller) current 
most of the time. An electric motor, for instance, will draw a large current when the motor starts, but 
normal operating current for the motor will be much smaller. A fuse used to protect a motor would have 
to allow for this large temporary current, but would open if the large current were to continue. 

Fuses are time delay rated to indicate the relationship between the current through the fuse and the 
time it takes for the fuse to open. The three time delay ratings are delay, standard, and fast. 

Delay 

A delay, or slow-blowing, fuse has a built-in delay that is activated when the current through the fuse 
is greater than the current rating of the fuse. This fuse will allow temporary increases in current (surge) 
without opening. Some delay fuses have two elements; this allows a very long time delay. If the over- 
current condition continues, a delay fuse will open, but it will take longer to open than a standard or a fast 
fuse. 

Delay fuses are used for circuits with high surge or starting currents, such as motors, solenoids, and 
transformers. 



2-8 



Standard 

Standard fuses have no built-in time delay. Also, they are not designed to be very fast acting. 
Standard fuses are sometimes used to protect against direct shorts only. They may be wired in series with 
a delay fuse to provide faster direct short protection. For example, in a circuit with a 1 -ampere delay fuse, 
a 5-ampere standard fuse may be used in addition to the delay fuse to provide faster protection against a 
direct short. 



A standard fuse can be used in any circuit where surge currents are not expected and a very fast 
opening of the fuse is not needed. A standard fuse opens faster than a delay fuse, but slower than a fast 
rated fuse. 

Standard fuses can be used for automobiles, lighting circuits, or electrical power circuits. 

Fast 

Fast fuses are designed to open very quickly when the current through the fuse exceeds the current 
rating of the fuse. Fast fuses are used to protect devices that are very sensitive to increased current. A fast 
fuse will open faster than a delay or standard fuse. 

Fast fuses can be used to protect delicate instruments or semiconductor devices. 

Figure 2-7 will help you understand the differences between delay, standard, and fast fuses. Figure 
2-7 shows that, if a 1 -ampere rated fuse had 2 amperes of current through it, (200% of the rated value), a 
fast fuse would open in about .7 second, a standard rated fuse would open in about 1.5 seconds, and a 
delay rated fuse would open in about 10 seconds. Notice that in each of the fuses, the time required to 
open the fuse decreases as the rated current increases. 



h" 400 
Z 

□J 300 

* 200 
o 



100 



Q 
LU 
I- 
< 




.001 



100 1000 10000 



FAIL-TIME IN SECONDS 



Figure 2-7. — Time required for fuse to open. 

Qll. In what three ways are fuses rated? 
Q12. What does the current rating of a fuse indicate? 
Q13. What does the voltage rating of a fuse indicate? 
Q14. What are the three time delay ratings of fuses? 

Q15. Give an example of a device you could protect with each type of time delay fuse. 



2-9 



IDENTIFICATION OF FUSES 



Fuses have identifications printed on them. The printing on the fuse will identify the physical size, 
the type of fuse, and the fuse ratings. There are four different systems used to identify fuses. The systems 
are the old military designation, the new military designation, the old commercial designation, and the 
new commercial designation. All four systems are presented here, so you will be able to identify a fuse no 
matter which designation is printed on the fuse. 

You may have to replace an open fuse that is identified by one system with a good fuse that is 
identified by another system. The designation systems are fairly simple to understand and cross-reference 
once you are familiar with them. 

OLD MILITARY DESIGNATION 

Figure 2-8 shows a fuse with the old military designation. The tables in the lower part of the figure 
show the voltage and current codes used in this system. The upper portion of the figure is the explanation 
of the old military designation. The numbers and letters in parentheses are the coding for the fuse shown 
in figure 2-8. 




_F 

f 

FUSE 



(G) (1R0O) (A) 
t 



VOLTAGE RATING 
LETTER VALUE OF 
MAXIMUM VOLT- 
AGE TAKEN FROM 
TABLE. 



/ 

CHARACTERISTIC 
TIME DELAY RATING 
A= STANDARD 
B = DE LAV 
C = FAST 



STYLE - SAME AS NEW 



MILITARY TYPE DESIGNATION 



CURRENT RATING 
NOMINAL CURRENT IN 
AMPERES. R = DECIMAL 
POINT. 



VOLTAGE CODE 


VOLTAGE 




CURRENT 


CURRENT 


LETTER 


(VOLTS OR LESS ] 




CODE 


(AMPERES) 


A 


32 




R002 


.002 = 1/500 


B 


52 




R005 


.005 = 1/200 


C 


90 




R010 


.010 = 1/100 


□ 


125 




R031 


.031 = 1/32 


G 


250 




R750 


.750 = 3/4 


H 


500 




1 R50 


1.500 = 1 1/2 


J 


1,000 








K 


2,500 








N 


5,000 








P 


10,000 









VOLTAGE CODE (OLD) CURRENT CODE (OLD) 



Figure 2-8. — Old type military fuse designation. 

The old military designation always starts with "F," which stands for fuse. Next, the set of numbers 
(02) indicates the style. Style means the construction and dimensions (size) of the fuse. Following the 
style is a letter that represents the voltage rating of the fuse (G). The voltage code table in figure 2-8 
shows each voltage rating letter and its meaning in volts. In the example shown, the voltage ratings is G, 



2-10 



which means the fuse should be used in a circuit where the voltage is 250 volts or less. After this is a set 
of three numbers and the letter "R," which represent the current rating of the fuse. The "R" indicates the 
decimal point. In the example shown, the current rating is 1R00 or 1.00 ampere. Some other examples of 
the current rating are shown in the current code table of figure 2-8. The final letter in the old military 
designation (A) indicates the time delay rating of the fuse. 

While the old military designation is still found on some fuses, the voltage and current ratings must 
be "translated," since they use letters to represent numerical values. The military developed the new 
military designations to make fuse identification easier. 

NEW MILITARY DESIGNATION 

Figure 2-9 is an example of a fuse coded in the new military designation. The fuse identified in the 
example in figure 2-9 is the same type as the fuse used as an example in figure 2-8. 



FUSE 



MANUFACTURER -NAME OF COMMERCIAL 
FIRM THAT MADE FUSE (NOT PART OF 
MILITARY TYPE DESIGNATION). 




F (02) (A) (250)V 1(A) 




T 



7 



CHARACTERISTIC 
TIME DELAY RATING 
A= STANDARD 
D = DELAY 
C = FAST 



CURRENT RATHG 
NOMINAL CURRENT IN 
AMPERES FOLLOWED 
DY LETTER "A" 



STYLE - TWO DIGIT 
NUMBER DENOTING 
FUSE CONSTRUCTION, 
DIMENSION 



VOLTAGE RATING 
NUMERICAL VALUE 
OF MAXIMUM 
VOLTAGE FOLLOWED 
DY LETTER "V - 



S = SILVE RELATED 
NO IDENTIFICATION 
FOR OTHER PLATINGS 



Figure 2-9. — New type military fuse designation. 

The new military designation always start with the letter "F," which stands for fuse. The set of 
numbers (02) next to this indicates the style. The style numbers are identical to the ones used in the old 
military designation and indicate the construction and dimensions of the fuse. Following the style 
designation is a single letter (A) that indicates the time delay rating of the fuse. This is the same time 
delay rating code as indicated in the old military designation, but the position of this letter in the coding is 
changed to avoid confusing the "A" for standard time delay with the "A" for ampere. Following the time 
delay rating is the voltage rating of the fuse (250) V. In the old military designation, a letter was used to 
indicate the voltage rating. In the new military designation, the voltage is indicated by numbers followed 
by a "V," which stands for volts or less. After the voltage rating, the current rating is given by numbers 
followed by the letter "A." The current rating may be a whole number (1A), a fraction (1/500 A), a whole 
number and a fraction (1 1/2A), a decimal (0.250A), or a whole number and a decimal (1.50A). If the 
ferrules of the fuse are silver-plated, the current rating will be followed by the letter "S." If any other 
plating is used, the current rating will be the last part of the fuse identification. 



2-11 



As you can see, the new military designation is much easier to understand than the old military 
designation. 

You may find a fuse coded in one of the commercial designations. The commercial designations are 
fairly easy to understand and figure 2-10 shows the old and new commercial designations for the same 
type of fuse that was used in figures 2-8 and 2-9. 



C5 
« I 




DENOTES FUSE CONSTRUC- 
TION AND DIMENSIONS 
3=1 1fl" LENGTH X 1/4" DIAM 
G = GLASS EODY 




250V 

~7 — 



VOLTAGE RATING 
NUMERICAL VALUE 
OF MAXIMUM VOLTAGE 
FOLLOWED BY LETTER 
"V 

CURRENT RATING - NOMINAL CURRENT 
IN AMPERES MAY BE WHOLE NUMBER, 
DECIMAL OR FRACTION 



(A) OLD COMMERCIAL DESIGNATIONS 



I 1*1 
4 | 




DENOTES FUSE CONSTRUC- 
TION AND DIMENSIONS 
C = 1 1/4" LENGTH X 1*1" DIAM. 
G = GLASS BODY 



CURRENT RATING 
IN AMPERES MAY 
DECIMAL OR FRACTION 



250V 

VOLTAGE RATING 
NUMERICAL VALUE 
OF MAXIMUM VOLTAGE 
FOLLOWED BY LETTER 

nyii 

- NOMINAL CURRENT 
BE WHOLE NUMBER, 



(B) NEW COMMERCIAL DESIGNATIONS 



Figure 2-10. — Commercial designations for fuses: 

OLD COMMERCIAL DESIGNATION 

Figure 2-10, view A, shows the old commercial designation for a fuse. The first part of the 
designation is a combination of letters and numbers (three in all) that indicates the style and time delay 
characteristics. This part of the designation (3AG) is the information contained in the style and time delay 
rating portions of military designations. 

In the example shown, the code 3AG represents the same information as the underlined portions of 
F02 G 1R00 A from figure 2-8 (Old Military Designation) and F02A 250VIAS from figure 2-9 (New 
Military Designation). The only way to know the time delay rating of this fuse is to look it up in the 
manufacturer's catalog or in a cross-reference listing to find the military designation. The catalog will tell 
you the physical size, the material from which the fuse is constructed, and the time delay rating of the 
fuse. A 3AG fuse is a glass-bodied fuse, 1/4 inch x 1 1/4 inches (6.35 millimeters X 31.8 millimeters) and 
has a standard time delay rating. 



2-12 



Following the style designation is a number that is the current rating of the fuse (1). This could be a 
whole number, a fraction, a whole number and a fraction, a decimal, or a whole number and a decimal. 
Following the current rating is the voltage rating; which, in turn, is followed by the letter "V," which 
stands for volts or less (250V). 

NEW COMMERCIAL DESIGNATION 

Figure 2-10, view B, shows the new commercial designation for fuses. It is the same as the old 
commercial designation except for the style portion of the coding. In the old commercial system, the style 
was a combination of letters and numbers. In the new commercial system, only letters are used. In the 
example shown, 3AG in the old system becomes AGC in the new system. Since "C" is the third letter of 
the alphabet, it is used instead of the "3" used in the old system. Once again, the only way to find out the 
time delay rating is to look up this coding in the manufacturer's catalog or to use a cross-reference listing. 
The remainder of the new commercial designation is exactly the same as the old commercial designation. 

Q16. What are the voltage, current, and time delay ratings for a fuse with the designation 



(a) F02DIR50B? 

(b) F02A250V-A? 

8 



Q17. What are the voltage and current ratings for a fuse designated 



(a) 3AG— 125V? 

16 

(b) FNA— 250V? 

100 



Q18. What is the new military designation for a fuse with the old military designation F05A20ROB? 
FUSEHOLDERS 

For a fuse to be useful, it must be connected to the circuit it will protect. Some fuses are "wired in" 
or soldered to the wiring of circuits, but most circuits make use of FUSEHOLDERS. A fuseholder is a 
device that is wired into the circuit and allows easy replacement of the fuse. 

Fuseholders are made in many shapes and sizes, but most fuseholders are basically either clip-type or 
post-type. Figure 2-11 shows a typical clip-type and post-type fuseholder. 



2-13 




CLIP TYPE HOLDER 




POST TYPE HOLDER 



Figure 2-11. — Typical fuseholders. 

CLIP-TYPE FUSEHOLDER 

The clip-type fuseholder is used for cartridge fuses. The ferrules or knife blade of the fuse are held 
by the spring tension of the clips. These clips provide the electrical connection between the fuse and the 
circuit. If a glass-bodied fuse is used, the fuse can be inspected visually for an open without removing the 
fuse from the fuse holder. Clip-type fuseholders are made in several sizes to hold the many styles of fuses. 
The clips maybe made for ferrules or knife blade cartridge fuses. While the base of a clip-type fuseholder 
is made from insulating material, the clips themselves are conductors. The current through the fuse goes 
through the clips and care must be taken to not touch the clips when there is power applied. If the clips are 
touched, with power applied, a severe shock or a short circuit will occur. 

POST-TYPE FUSEHOLDERS 

Post-type fuseholders are made for cartridge fuses. The post-type fuseholder is much safer because 
the fuse and fuse connections are covered with insulating material. The disadvantage of the post-type 
fuseholder is that the fuse must be removed to visually check for an open. The post-type fuseholder has a 
cap that screws onto the body of the fuseholder. The fuse is held in this cap by a spring-type connector 
and, as the cap is screwed on, the fuse makes contact with the body of the fuseholder. When the cap and 
fuse are removed from the body of the fuseholder, the fuse is removed from the circuit and there is no 
danger of shock or short circuit from touching the fuse. 

Post-type fuseholders are usually mounted on the chassis of the equipment in which they are used. 
After wires are connected to the fuseholder, insulating sleeves are placed over the connections to reduce 
the possibility of a short circuit. Notice the two connections on the post-type fuseholder of figure 2-11. 
The connection on the right is called the center connector. The other connector is the outside connector. 
The outside connector will be closer to the equipment chassis. (The threads and nut shown are used to 
fasten the fuseholder to the chassis.) The possibility of the outside connector coming in contact with the 
chassis (causing a short circuit) is much higher than the possibility of the center conductor contacting the 
chassis. The power source should always be connected to the center connector so the fuse will open if the 
outside connector contacts the chassis. If the power source were connected to the outside connector, and 
the outside connector contacted the chassis, there would be a direct short, but the fuse would not open. 



2-14 



Q19. Label the fuseholders in figure 2-12. 



Q20. Which connector should you use to connect the (a) power source and (b) load to the fuse holder 
shown in figure 2-1 2(A)? 



CHECKING AND REPLACEMENT OF FUSES 

A fuse, if properly used, should not open unless something is wrong in the circuit the fuse is 
protecting. When a fuse is found to be open, you must determine the reason the fuse is open. Replacing 
the fuse is not enough. 

Before you look for the cause of an open fuse, you must be able to determine if the fuse is open. 

CHECKING FOR AN OPEN FUSE 

There are several ways of checking for an open fuse. Some fuses and fuseholders have indicators 
built in to help you find an open fuse; also, a multimeter can be used to check fuses. The simplest way to 
check glass-bodied fuses, and the method you should use first, is visual inspection. 

Visual Inspection 

An open glass-bodied fuse can usually be found by visual inspection. Earlier in this chapter, figures 
2-4 and 2-5 showed you how an open plug-type and an open glass-bodied cartridge-type fuse would look. 
If the fuse element is not complete, or if the element has been melted onto the glass tube, the fuse is open. 

It is not always possible to tell if a fuse is open by visual inspection. Fuses with low current ratings 
have elements that are so small, it is sometimes not possible to know if the fuse link is complete simply 
by looking at it. If the fuse is not glass-bodied, it will not be possible to check the fuse visually. Also, 
sometimes a fuse will look good, but will, in fact, be open. Therefore, while it is sometimes possible to 
know if a fuse is open by visual inspection, it is not possible to be sure a fuse is good just by looking at it. 

Fuse Indicators 

Some fuses and fuseholders have built-in indicators to show when a fuse is open. Examples of these 
open-fuse indicators are shown in figure 2-13. Figure 2-13, view A, shows a cartridge-type fuse with an 
open-fuse indicator. The indicator is spring loaded and held by the fuse link. If the fuse link opens, the 
spring forces the indicator out. Some manufacturers color the indicator so it is easier to see in the 
open-fuse position. 





Figure 2-12. — Fuseholder identification. 



2-15 




Figure 2-13. — Open fuse indicators: Clip- type fuseholder with an indicating lamp. 

Figure 2-13, view B, shows a plug-type fuseholder with an indicating lamp in the fuse cap. If the 
fuse opens, the lamp in the fuse cap will light. Figure 2-13, view C, shows a clip-type fuseholder with an 
indicating lamp. 

Just as in visual checking, the indicator can show an open fuse. Since the indicator may not always 
work, you cannot be sure a fuse is good just because there is no open-fuse indication. 

Checking Fuses with a Meter 

The only sure method of determining if a fuse is open is to use a meter. An ohmmeter can be used to 
check for an open fuse by removing the fuse from the circuit and checking for continuity through the fuse 
(0 ohms). If the fuse is not removed from the circuit, and the fuse is open, the ohmmeter may measure the 
circuit resistance. This resistance reading might lead you to think the fuse is good. You must be careful 
when you use an ohmmeter to check fuses with small current ratings (such as 1/32 ampere or less), 
because the current from the ohmmeter may be larger than the current rating of the fuse. For most 
practical uses, a small current capacity fuse can be checked out of the circuit through the use of a resistor. 
The ohmic value of the resistor is first measured and then placed in series with the fuse. The continuity 
reading on the ohmmeter should be of the same value, or close to it, as the original value of the resistor. 
This method provides protection for the fuse by dropping the voltage across the resistor. This in turn 
decreases the power in the form of heat at the fuse. Remember, it is heat which melts the fuse element. 

A voltmeter can also be used to check for an open fuse. The measurement is taken between each end 
of the fuse and the common or ground side of the line. If voltage is present on both sides of the fuse (from 
the voltage source and to the load), the fuse is not open. Another method commonly used, is to measure 
across the fuse with the voltmeter. If NO voltage is indicated on the meter, the fuse is good, (not open). 



2-16 



Remember there is no voltage drop across a straight piece of wire. Some plug-type fuseholders have test 
points built in to allow you to check the voltage. To check for voltage on a clip-type fuseholder, check 
each of the clips. The advantage of using a voltmeter to check for an open fuse is that the circuit does not 
have to be deenergized and the fuse does not have to be removed. 

WARNING 

PERSONNEL MAY BE EXPOSED TO HAZARDOUS VOLTAGE 

Safety Precautions When Checking a Fuse 

Since a fuse has current through it, you must be very careful when checking for an open fuse to 
avoid being shocked or damaging the circuit. The following safety precautions will protect you and the 
equipment you are using. 

• Turn the power off and discharge the circuit before removing a fuse. 

• Use a fusepuller (an insulated tool) when you remove a fuse from a clip-type fuseholder. 

• When you check a fuse with a voltmeter, be careful to avoid shocks and short circuits. 

• When you use an ohmmeter to check fuses with low current ratings, be careful to avoid opening 
the fuse by excessive current from the ohmmeter. 

Q21. What are three methods for determining if a fuse is open? 

Q22. You have just checked a fuse with an ohmmeter and find that the fuse is shorted. What should you 
do? 

Q23. You have just checked a 1/500-ampere fuse with an ohmmeter and find it is open. Checking the 
replacement fuse shows the replacement fuse is open also. Why would the replacement fuse 
indicate open? 

Q24. How could you check a 1/500-ampere fuse with an ohmmeter? 

Q25. List the safety precautions to be observed when checking fuses. 

REPLACEMENT OF FUSES 

After an open fuse is found and the trouble that caused the fuse to open has been corrected, the fuse 
must be replaced. Before you replace the fuse, you must be certain the replacement fuse is the proper type 
and fits correctly. 

Proper Type of Replacement Fuse 

To be certain a fuse is the proper type, check the technical manual for the equipment. The parts list 
will show you the proper fuse identification for a replacement fuse. Obtain the exact fuse specified, if 
possible, and check the identification number of the replacement fuse against the parts list. 

If you cannot obtain a direct replacement, use the following guidelines: 

• Never use a fuse with a higher current rating, a lower voltage rating, or a slower time delay 
rating than the specified fuse. 



2-17 



• The best substitution fuse is a fuse with the same current and time delay ratings and a higher 
voltage rating. 



• If a lower current rating or a faster time delay rating is used, the fuse may open under normal 
circuit conditions. 

• Substitute fuses must have the same style (physical dimensions) as the specified fuse. 

Proper Fit of Replacement Fuses 

When you have obtained a proper replacement fuse, you must make certain it will fit correctly in the 
fuseholder. If the fuseholder is corroded, the fuse will not fit properly. In addition, the corrosion can cause 
increased resistance or heating. Clean corroded terminals with fine sandpaper so that all corrosion is 
removed. Do NOT lubricate the terminals. If the terminals are badly pitted, replace the fuseholder. Be 
certain the replacement fuseholder is the correct size and type by checking the parts list in the technical 
manual for the equipment. 

After you check for and correct any corrosion problems, be certain the fuse fits tightly in the 
fuseholder. When you insert the fuse in the cap of a plug-type fuseholder, the fuse should fit tightly. A 
small amount of pressure should be needed to insert the fuse and cap into the fuseholder body. 

In clip-type fuseholders, the clips can be easily bent out of shape. This causes an incorrect fit, which 
in time could cause an equipment malfunction. Figure 2-14 shows examples of correct and incorrect fuse 
contacts for clip-type fuseholders used with knifeblade and ferrule cartridge fuses. The clips shown in the 
left picture of each row have the correct contact. The three pictures on the right of each row show 
incorrect contact. Notice how the clips are not contacting completely with the knifeblade or ferrules. This 
incomplete contact can. cause corrosion at the contacts, which in turn can create a high resistance and 
drop some of the circuit voltage at this point. 



If the fuse clips do not make complete contact with the fuse, try to bend the clips back into shape. If 
the clips cannot be repaired by bending, replace the fuseholder or use clip clamps. Clip clamps are shown 
in figure 2-15. 




CORRECT INCORRECT 




CORRECT 



INCORRECT 



Figure 2-14. — Contact between clips and fuses. 



2-18 



Figure 2-15. — Clip clamps. 

Safety Precautions When Replacing Fuses 

The following safety precautions will prevent injury to personnel and damage to equipment. These 
are the MINIMUM safety precautions for replacing fuses. 

• Be sure the power is off in the circuit and the circuit is discharged before replacing a fuse. 

• Use an identical replacement fuse if possible. 

• Remove any corrosion from the fuseholder before replacing the fuse. 

• Be certain the fuse properly fits the fuseholder. 

PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF FUSES 

Preventive maintenance of fuses consists of checking for the following conditions and correcting any 
discrepancies. 

1. IMPROPER FUSE. Check the fuse installed against that recommended in the technical manual 
for the equipment. If an incorrect fuse is installed, replace it with the correct fuse. 

2. CORROSION. Check for corrosion on the fuseholder terminals or the fuse itself. If corrosion is 
present, remove it with fine sandpaper. 

3. IMPROPER FIT. Check for contact between the fuse and fuseholder. If a piece of paper will fit 
between the fuse and the clips on a clip-type fuseholder, there is improper contact. If the fuse is 
not held in the cap of a plug-type fuseholder, the contacts are too loose. 

4. OPEN FUSES. Check fuses for opens. If any fuse is open, repair the trouble that caused the open 
fuse and replace the fuse. 



2-19 



Q26. You have removed an open fuse from afuseholder and repaired the cause of the fuse opening. The 

parts list specifies a fuse coded F02Bl25WiA. There are no fuses available with that identification. 
In the following list, indicate if the fuse is a direct replacement, a good substitute, or not 
acceptable. For the fuses that are good substitutes, number them in order of preference and explain 
why they are numbered that way. If the fuse is not acceptable, explain why. 



(a) 


F03BI25V/2A 


(b) 


F02BI25V%A 


(c) 


F02GR500B 


(d) 


F02B32V'/iA 


(e) 


F02DR500B 


if) 


F02A250V%A 


(g) 


F02AI25V/2A 



Q27. What two things should you check before replacing a fuse? 
Q28. List the safety precautions to be observed when replacing a fuse. 

Q29. What conditions should you check for when conducting preventive maintenance on fuses? 

CIRCUIT BREAKERS 

A circuit breaker is a circuit protection device that, like a fuse, will stop current in the circuit if there 
is a direct short, excessive current, or excessive heat. Unlike a fuse, a circuit breaker is reusable. The 
circuit breaker does not have to be replaced after it has opened or broken the circuit. Instead of replacing 
the circuit breaker, you reset it. 

Circuit breakers can also be used as circuit control devices. By manually opening and closing the 
contacts of a circuit breaker, you can switch the power on and off. Circuit control devices will be covered 
in more detail in the next chapter. 

Circuit breakers are available in a great variety of sizes and types. It would not be possible to 
describe every type of circuit breaker in use today, but this chapter will describe the basic types of circuit 
breakers and their operational principles. 

Circuit breakers have five main components, as shown in figure 2-16. The components are the frame, 
the operating mechanism, the arc extinguishers and contacts, the terminal connectors, and the trip 
elements. 



2-20 




Figure 2-16. — Circuit breaker components. 

The FRAME provides an insulated housing and is used to mount the circuit breaker components (fig. 
2-17). The frame determines the physical size of the circuit breaker and the maximum allowable voltage 
and current. 

The OPERATING MECHANISM provides a means of opening and closing the breaker contacts 
(turning, the circuit ON and OFF). The toggle mechanism shown in figure 2-17 is the quick-make, 
quick-break type, which means the contacts snap open or closed quickly, regardless of how fast the 
handle is moved. In addition to indicating whether the breaker is ON or OFF, the operating mechanism 
handle indicates when the breaker has opened automatically (tripped) by moving to a position between 
ON and OFF. To reset the circuit breaker, the handle must first be moved to the OFF position, and then to 
the ON position. 



2-21 



TERMINAL 
MOUNTING 




Figure 2-17. — Circuit breaker construction. 

The ARC EXTINGUISHER confines, divides, and extinguishes the arc drawn between contacts each 
time the circuit breaker interrupts current. The arc extinguisher is actually a series of contacts that open 
gradually, dividing the arc and making it easier to confine and extinguish. This is shown in figure 2-18. 
Arc extinguishers are generally used in circuit breakers that control a large amount of power, such as 
those found in power distribution panels. Small power circuit breakers (such as those found in lighting 
panels) may not have arc extinguishers. 




Figure 2-18. — Arc extinguisher action. 

TERMINAL CONNECTORS are used to connect the circuit breaker to the power source and the 
load. They are electrically connected to the contacts of the circuit breaker and provide the means of 
connecting the circuit breaker to the circuit. 

The TRIP ELEMENT is the part of the circuit breaker that senses the overload condition and causes 
the circuit breaker to trip or break the circuit. This chapter will cover the thermal, magnetic, and thermal- 



2-22 



magnetic trip units used by most circuit breakers. (Some circuit breakers make use of solid-state trip units 
using current transformers and solid-state circuitry.) 

THERMAL TRIP ELEMENT 

A thermal trip element circuit breaker uses a bimetallic element that is heated by the load current. 
The bimetallic element is made from strips of two different metals bonded together. The metals expand at 
different rates as they are heated. This causes the bimetallic element to bend as it is heated by the current 
going to the load. Figure 2-19 shows how this can be used to trip the circuit breaker. 




CONTACTS 
OPEN 



METAL HEATS 
AND BENDS TO 
OPEN CONTACTS 
OH OVERLOAD 



"BIMETALLIC 
ELEMENT 



(B) 



Figure 2-19. — Thermal trip element action: A. Trip element with normal current; B. Contacts open. 

Figure 2-19, view A, shows the trip element with normal current. The bimetallic element is not 
heated excessively and does not bend. If the current increases (or the temperature around the circuit 
breaker increases), the bimetallic element bends, pushes against the trip bar, and releases the latch. Then, 
the contacts open, as shown in figure 2-19, view B. 

The amount of time it takes for the bimetallic element to bend and trip the circuit breaker depends on 
the amount the element is heated. A large overload will heat the element quickly. A small overload will 
require a longer time to trip the circuit breaker. 

MAGNETIC TRIP ELEMENT 

A magnetic trip element circuit breaker uses an electromagnet in series with the circuit load as in 
figure 2-20. With normal current, the electromagnet will not have enough attraction to the trip bar to 
move it, and the contacts will remain closed as shown in figure 2-20, view A. The strength of the 
magnetic field of the electromagnet increases as current through the coil increases. As soon as the current 
in the circuit becomes large enough, the trip bar is pulled toward the magnetic element (electromagnet), 
the contacts are opened, and the current stops, as shown in figure 2-20, view B. 



2-23 



MAGNETIC ELEMENT 




LOAD 



(A) 




MAGNETIC ELEMENT 
CLOSED GAP AND 
OPENS CONTACTS 



CONTACTS 
OPEN 



Figure 2-20. — Magnetic trip element action; Closed contacts; 

The amount of current needed to trip the circuit breaker depends on the size of the gap between the 
trip bar and the magnetic element. On some circuit breakers, this gap (and therefore the trip current) is 
adjustable. 

THERMAL-MAGNETIC TRIP ELEMENT 

The thermal trip element circuit breaker, like a delay fuse, will protect a circuit against a small 
overload that continues for a long time. The larger the overload, the faster the circuit breaker will trip. 
The thermal element will also protect the circuit against temperature increases. A magnetic circuit breaker 
will trip instantly when the preset current is present. In some applications, both types of protection are 
desired. Rather than use two separate circuit breakers, a single trip element combining thermal and 
magnetic trip elements is used. A thermal-magnetic trip element is shown in figure 2-21. 



2-24 



MAGNETIC ELEMENT 




Figure 2-21. — Thermal-magnetic element action: 

In the thermal-magnetic trip element circuit breaker, a magnetic element (electromagnet) is 
connected in series with the circuit load, and a bimetallic element is heated by the load current. With 
normal circuit current, the bimetallic element does not bend, and the magnetic element does not attract the 
trip bar, as shown in figure 2-21, view A. 

If the temperature or current increases over a sustained period of time, the bimetallic element will 
bend, push the trip bar and release the latch. The circuit breaker will trip as shown in figure 2-21, view B. 

If the current suddenly or rapidly increases enough, the magnetic element will attract the trip bar, 
release the latch, and the circuit breaker will trip, as shown in figure 2-21, view C. (This circuit breaker 
has tripped even though the thermal element has not had time to react to the increased current.) 

Q30. What are the five main components of a circuit breaker? 

Q31. What are the three types of circuit breaker trip elements? 

Q32. How does each type of trip element react to an overload? 

TRIP-FREE/NONTRIP-FREE CIRCUIT BREAKERS 

Circuit breakers are classified as being trip free or nontrip free. A trip-free circuit breaker is a circuit 
breaker that will trip (open) even if the operating mechanism (ON-OFF switch) is held in the ON 
position. A nontrip-free circuit breaker can be reset and/or held ON even if an overload or excessive heat 
condition is present. In other words, a nontrip-free circuit breaker can be bypassed by holding the 
operating mechanism ON. 

Trip-free circuit breakers are used on circuits that cannot tolerate overloads and on nonemergency 
circuits. Examples of these are precision or current sensitive circuits, nonemergency lighting circuits, and 
nonessential equipment circuits.Nontrip-free circuit breakers are used for circuits that are essential for 
operations. Examples of these circuits are emergency lighting, required control circuits, and essential 
equipment circuits. 



2-25 



TIME DELAY RATINGS 



Circuit breakers, like fuses, are rated by the amount of time delay. In circuit breakers the ratings are 
instantaneous, short time delay, and longtime delay. The delay times of circuit breakers can be used to 
provide for SELECTIVE TRIPPING. 

Selective tripping is used to cause the circuit breaker closest to the faulty circuit to trip. This will 
remove power from the faulty circuit without affecting other, nonfaulty circuits. Figure 2-22 should help 
you understand selective tripping. 



CB 4 



INCOMING _ 
LINE 300 A 




20 A 



CB S 




10 A 



LOAD 2 




LOAD 7 



Figure 2-22. — Use of circuit breakers in a power distribution system. 

Figure 2-22 shows a power distribution system using circuit breakers for protection. Circuit breaker 
1 (CB1) has the entire current for all seven loads through it. CB2 feeds loads 1, 2, 3, and 4 (through CB4, 
CB5, CB6, and CB7), and CB3 feeds loads 5, 6, and 7 (through CB8, CB9, and CB10). If all the circuit 
breakers were rated with the same time delay, an overload on load 5 could cause CB1, CB3, and CB8 to 
trip. This would remove power from all seven loads, even though load 5 was the only circuit with an 
overload. 



Selective tripping would have CB1 rated as long time delay, CB2 and CB3 rated as short time delay, 
and CB4 through CB10 rated as instantaneous. With this arrangement, if load 5 had an overload, only 
CB8 would trip. CB8 would remove the power from load 5 before CB1 or CB3 could react to the 
overload. In this way, only load 5 would be affected and the other circuits would continue to operate. 

PHYSICAL TYPES OF CIRCUIT BREAKERS 

All the circuit breakers presented so far in this chapter have been physically large, designed to 
control large amounts of power, and used a type of toggle operating mechanism. Not all circuit breakers 
are of this type. The circuit breaker in figure 2-23 is physically large and controls large amounts of power; 
but the operating mechanism is not a toggle. Except for the difference in the operating mechanism, this 
circuit breaker is identical to the circuit breakers already presented. 



2-26 



FLEXIBLE 
CONNECTION 




OVERCURRENT TRIP 
ELEMENTS 



Figure 2-23. — Circuit breaker with an operating handle. 

Circuit breakers used for low power protection, such as 28-volt dc, 30 amperes, can be physically 
small. With low power use, arc extinguishers are not required, and so are not used in the construction of 
these circuit breakers. Figure 2-24 shows a low power circuit breaker of the push-button or push-pull 
type. This circuit breaker has a thermal trip element (the bimetallic disk) and is nontrip-free. The push 
button is the operating mechanism of this circuit breaker. 



2-27 



BREAKER CLOSED 



BREAKER OPEN 



Figure 2-24. — Push-button circuit breaker. 

You will find other physical types of circuit breakers as you work with electrical circuits. They are 
found in power distribution systems, lighting panels, and even on individual pieces of equipment. 
Regardless of the physical size and the amount of power through the circuit breaker, the basic operating 
principles of circuit breakers apply. 

Q33. What is a trip-free circuit breaker? 

Q34. What is a nontrip-free circuit breaker? 

Q35. Where should you use a trip-free circuit breaker? 

Q36. Where should you use a nontrip-free circuit breaker? 

The magnetic trip element makes use of a magnetic element (electromagnet). If current reaches a 
preset quantity, the magnetic element attracts the trip bar and releases the latch. 

The thermal-magnetic trip element combines the actions of the bimetallic and magnetic elements in a 
single trip element. If either the bimetal element or the magnetic element reacts, the circuit breaker will 
trip. 

Q37. What are the three time delay ratings for circuit breakers? 
Q38. What is selective tripping and why is it used? 

Q39. If the power distribution system shown in figure 2-22 uses selective tripping, what is the time delay 
rating for each of the circuit breakers shown? 

Q40. What factors are used to select a circuit breaker? 

Q41. What type of circuit breaker is used on a multimeter? 

CIRCUIT BREAKER MAINTENANCE 

Circuit breakers require careful inspection and periodic cleaning. Before you attempt to work on 
circuit breakers, check the applicable technical manual carefully. When you work on shipboard circuit 
breakers, the approval of the electrical or engineering officer must be obtained before starting work. Be 
certain to remove all power to the circuit breaker before you work on it. Tag the switch that removes the 
power to the circuit breaker to ensure that power is not applied while you are working. 

Once approval has been obtained, the incoming power has been removed, the switch tagged, and you 
have checked the technical manual, you may begin to check the circuit breaker. Manually operate the 
circuit breaker several times to be sure the operating mechanism works smoothly. Inspect the contacts for 



2-28 



pitting caused by arcing or corrosion. If pitting is present, smooth the contacts with a fine file or number 
00 sandpaper. Be certain the contacts make proper contact when the operating mechanism is ON. 

Check the connections at the terminals to be certain the terminals and wiring are tight and free from 
corrosion. Check all mounting hardware for tightness and wear. Check all components for wear. Clean the 
circuit breaker completely. 

When you have finished working on the circuit breaker, restore power and remove the tag from the 
switch that applies power to the circuit. 



Q42. What steps are to be taken before beginning work on a circuit breaker? 
Q43. What items are you to check when working on a circuit breaker? 



SUMMARY 

This chapter has provided the information to enable you to have a basic understanding of circuit 
protection devices. The following is a summary of the main points in this chapter. 

CIRCUIT PROTECTION DEVICES are needed to protect personnel and circuits from hazardous 
conditions. The hazardous conditions can be caused by a direct short, excessive current, or excessive heat. 
Circuit protection devices are always connected in series with the circuit being protected. 

A DIRECT SHORT is a condition in which some point in the circuit, where full system voltage is 
present, comes in direct contact with the ground or return side of the circuit. 

EXCESSIVE CURRENT describes a condition that is not a direct short but in which circuit current 
increases beyond the designed current carrying ability of the circuit. 

EXCESSIVE HEAT describes a condition in which the heat in or around a circuit increases to a 
higher than normal level. 

FUSES and CIRCUIT BREAKERS are the two types of circuit protection devices discussed in this 
chapter. 



2-29 




RIBBON TYPE CARTRIDGE TYPE 




SCHEMATIC PLUG TYPE WITH 

SYMBOLS RIBBON FUSE LINK 




SCHEMATIC SYMBOLS 



PLUG-TYPE FUSES are used in low-voltage, low-current circuits. This type fuse is rapidly being 
replaced by the circuit breaker. 

CARTRIDGE FUSES are available in a wide range of physical sizes and voltage and current 
ratings. This type fuse is the most commonly used fuse. 



2-30 



The CURRENT RATING of a fuse is a value expressed in amperes that represents the amount of 
current the fuse will allow to flow without opening. 



The VOLTAGE RATING of a fuse indicates the ability of the fuse to quickly extinguish the arc 
after the fuse element melts and the maximum voltage the open fuse will block. 

The TIME DELAY RATING of a fuse indicates the relationship between the current through the 
fuse and the time it takes for the fuse to open. The three time delay ratings for fuses are DELAY, 
STANDARD, and FAST. 



h" 400 
Z 

□J 300 

* 200 

o 



100 



Q 
LU 
I- 
< 



V 
























































s 

























.001 .01 .1 



1 



100 1000 10000 



FAIL-TIME IN SECONDS 



DELAY FUSES allow surge currents without opening. They are used to protect motors, solenoids, 
and transformers. 

STANDARD FUSES have neither a time delay nor a fast acting characteristic. They are used in 
automobiles, lighting circuits and electrical power circuits. 

FAST FUSES open very quickly with any current above the current rating of the fuse. They are used 
to protect delicate instruments or semiconductor devices. 

The OLD MILITARY FUSE DESIGNATION is a system of fuse identification that uses coding to 
represent the current, voltage, and time -delay rating of the fuse. New fuses purchased by the Navy will no 
longer use this designation. 



2-31 



F 

t 




(1R00) (A) 



FUSE 



VOLTAGE RATING 
LETTER VALUE OF 
MAXIMUM VOLT- 
AGE TAKEN FROM 
TABLE. 



/ 

CHARACTERISTIC 
TIME DELAY RATING 
A= STANDARD 
B = DE LAY 
C = FAST 



STYLE - SAME AS NEW 



MILITARY TYPE DESIGNATION 



CURRENT RATING 
NOMINAL CURRENT IN 
AMPERES. R= DECIMAL 
POINT. 



VOLTAGE CODE 


VOLTAGE 




CURRENT 


CURRENT 


LETTER 


(VOLTS OR LESS) 




CODE 


(AMPERES) 


A 


32 




R002 


.002 = 1/500 


B 


52 




R005 


.005 = 1/200 


C 


90 




R010 


.010 = 1/100 


D 


125 




R031 


.031 = 1/32 


G 


250 




R750 


.750 = 3/4 


H 


500 




1 R50 


1.500 = 1 1/2 


J 


1,000 








K 


2,500 








H 


5,000 








P 


10,000 









VOLTAGE CODE (OLD) CURRENT CODE (OLD) 



The NEW MILITARY FUSE DESIGNATION is the system used to identify fuses purchased by 
the Navy at the present time. The coding of current and voltage ratings has been replaced with direct 
printing of these ratings. 



2-32 



FUSE 



MANUFACTURER -NAME OF COMMERCIAL 
FIRM THAT MADE FUSE (HOT PART OF 
MILITARY TYPE DESIGNATION). 





















U) 







(02) (A) 

T 




(2S0)V 1(A) 

7 



CHARACTERISTIC 
TIME DELAY RATIHG 
A= STAHDARD 
B = DELAY 
C = FAST 



CURRENT RATtIG 
NOMINAL CURRENT IN 
AMPERES FOLLOWED 
BY LETTER "A" 



STYLE - TWO DIGIT 
NUMBER DENOTING 
FUSE COHSTRUCTIOH, 
DIMENSION 



VOLTAGE RATIHG 
NUMERICAL VALUE 
OF MAXIMUM 
VOLTAGE FOLLOWED 
BY LETTER "V 



S = SILVER-PLATED 
NO IDENTIFICATION 
FOR OTHER PLATINGS 



The OLD COMMERCIAL FUSE DESIGNATION was used by the fuse manufacturers to identify 
fuses. The current and voltage ratings are printed on the fuse, but the time delay rating is contained in the 
style coding of the fuse. 



2-33 



250V 

~7 — 

VOLTAGE RATING 
NUMERICAL VALUE 
DENOTES FUSE CONSTRUC- / OF MAXIMUM VOLTAGE 

TION AND DIMENSIONS / FOLLOWED BY LETTER 




3=1 1/1" LENGTH X 1/4" DIAM. 
G = GLASS BODY 



"V" 

CURRENT RATING - NOMINAL CURRENT 
IN AMPERES MAY BE WHOLE NUMBER, 
DECIMAL OR FRACTION 



(A) OLD COMMERCIAL DESIGNATIONS 



I* 



hi 
In 




DENOTES FUSE CONSTRUC- 
TION AND DIMENSIONS 
C = 1 1/4" LENGTH X 1/4" DIAM 
G = GLASS BODY 



CURRENT RATING 
IN AMPERES MAY 
DECIMAL OR FRACTION 



250V 

VOLTAGE RATING 
NUMERICAL VALUE 
OF MAXIMUM VOLTAGE 
FOLLOWED BY LETTER 
"V" 

- NOMINAL CURRENT 
BE WHOLE NUMBER, 



(B) NEW COMMERCIAL DESIGNATIONS 



The NEW COMMERCIAL FUSE DESIGNATION is currently used by fuse manufacturers to 
identify fuses. It is similar to the old commercial fuse designation with the difference being in the style 
coding portion of the designation. 

FUSEHOLDERS are used to allow easy replacement of fuses in a circuit. 




CLIP TYPE HOLDER 




POST TYPE HOLDER 



2-34 



The CLIP- TYPE has clips to connect the ferrules or knifeblades of the fuse to the circuit. The 
POST-TYPE is an enclosed fuseholder. The center connection of the post type should be connected to the 
power source and the outside connector should be connected to the load. 

OPEN FUSES can be found by VISUAL INSPECTION, FUSE INDICATORS, or by the use of a 
METER. The following SAFETY PRECAUTIONS should be observed when checking a fuse: 

• Turn the power off and discharge the circuit before removing a FUSE. 

• Use a fusepuller when you remove a fuse from clip-type fuseholders. 

• When you check a fuse with a voltmeter, be careful to avoid shocks and short circuits. 

• When you use an ohmmeter to check fuses with low current ratings, be careful to avoid opening 
the fuse by excessive current. 




REPLACEMENT FUSES must be of the proper type. Check the technical manual parts list to find 
the identification of the proper fuse. If a substitute fuse must be used, the following guidelines should be 
followed: 

• Never use a fuse with a higher current rating, a lower voltage rating, or a slower time delay 
rating than the specified fuse. 

• The best substitution fuse is a fuse with the same current and time delay ratings and a higher 
voltage rating. 



2-35 



• If a lower current rating, or a lower time delay rating is used, the fuse may open under normal 
circuit conditions. Substitute fuses must have the same style (physical dimensions) as the 
specified fuse. 

PROPER FIT between the fuse and fuseholder is essential. If the clips on clip-type fuseholders are 
sprung, the clips should be reformed, or clip clamps should be used. Any corrosion on fuses or 
fuseholders must be removed with fine sandpaper. 

4X31 X 

CORRECT INCORRECT 

CORRECT INCORRECT 

PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE of fuses involves checking for the proper fuse, corrosion, proper 
fit, and open fuses; and correcting any discrepancies. 

CIRCUIT BREAKERS have five main components: The frame, the operating mechanism, the arc 
extinguisher, the terminal connectors, and the trip element. 




2-36 



A THERMAL TRIP ELEMENT uses a bimetallic element that is heated by load current and bends 
due to this heating. If current (or temperature) increases above normal, the bimetallic element bends to 
push against a trip bar and opens the circuit. 



TRIP BAR 



LATCH 




CONTACTS 
CLOSED 



BIMETALLIC 
ELEMENT 



(A) 




CONTACTS 
OPEN 



METAL HEATS 
AND DEHDS TO 
OPEN CONTACTS 
OH OVERLOAD 



"BIMETALLIC 
ELEMENT 



(B) 



A MAGNETIC TRIP ELEMENT uses an electromagnet in series with the load current to attract 
the trip bar and open the circuit if excessive current is present. 



2-37 



MAGNETIC ELEMENT 



TRIP BAR 
LATCH 




LOAD 



CONTACTS 
CLOSED 



(A) 




MAGNETIC ELEMENT 
CLOSED GAP AND 
OPENS CONTACTS 



CONTACTS 
OPEN 



Eg LINE 



A THERMAL-MAGNETIC TRIP ELEMENT combines the thermal and magnetic trip elements 
into a single unit. A TRIP-FREE circuit breaker will trip (open) even if the operating mechanism is held 
in the ON position. A TRIP-FREE circuit breaker would be used on non-essential circuits. 



MAGNETIC ELEMENT 




A NONTRIP-FREE circuit breaker can be bypassed by holding the operating mechanism ON. A 
NONTRIP-FREE circuit breaker would be used for emergency or essential equipment circuits. 



2-38 



The TIME DELAY RATINGS of circuit breakers are INSTANTANEOUS, SHORT TIME 
DELAY, and LONG TIME DELAY. 



SELECTIVE TRIPPING is used to cause the circuit breaker closest to the faulty circuit to trip, 
isolating the faulty circuit without affecting other nonfaulty circuits. This is accomplished by using an 
instantaneous circuit breaker close to the load, a short time delay circuit breaker at the next junction, and a 
long time delay circuit breaker at the main junction box. 



CB 4 



C B 1 
INCOMING j- — ^_ 

LINE 300 A 



CB^2 
200 A 



CB 3 
100 A 



100 A 
CB 5 



50 A 
CB 6 



30 A 
CB 7 



iLOAD 2 



HQ 



20 A 



CBS 



JLOAD 4 



60 A 
CB 9 



30 A 
CB 10 



jLOAD 6 I 



10 A 



The FACTORS used to select a circuit breaker are the power requirements of the circuit and the 
physical space available. 

When WORKING ON CIRCUIT BREAKERS, the following items should be done BEFORE 
working on the circuit breaker: Check the applicable technical manual, obtain the approval of the 
electrical or engineering officer (for shipboard circuit breakers), remove power from the circuit breaker, 
and tag the switch that removes power from the circuit breaker. The following items should be checked 
and discrepancies corrected when working on circuit breakers: Check the operating mechanism for 
smooth operation, check the contacts for pitting, check the terminals for tightness and corrosion, check 
the mounting hardware for tightness and wear, check all components for wear, and check the entire circuit 
breaker for cleanliness. 



ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS Ql. THROUGH Q43. 

Al. To protect people and circuits from possible hazardous conditions. 
A2. A direct short, excessive current, and excessive heat. 

A3. A condition in which some point in the circuit where full system voltage is present comes in 
contact with the ground or return side of the circuit. 

A4. A condition that is not a direct short but in which circuit current increases beyond the designed 
current carrying ability of the circuit. 

A5. A condition in which the heat in or around the circuit increases to a higher than normal level 



2-39 



A6. In series, so total current will be stopped when the device opens. 

A7. Fuses and circuit breakers. 

A8. 

a. circuit breaker 

b. fuse. 

A9. 

a. cartridge 

b. plug 

c. plug 

d. cartridge. 
AW. A, C. 

All. Current, voltage, and time delay. 

A12. The amount of current the fuse will allow without opening. 

A13. The ability of the fuse to quickly extinguish the arc after the fuse element melts and the maximum 
voltage that cannot jump across the gap of the fuse after the fuse opens. 

A14. Delay, standard, and fast. 

A15. Delay-Motors, solenoids, or transformers. Standard-Automobiles, lighting or electrical power 
circuits. Fast-Delicate instruments or semiconductor devices. 

A16. 

a. 125 volts or less, 1.5 amperes, delay 

b. 250 volts or less, 1/8 ampere standard 



A17. 

a. 125 volts or less, 1/16 ampere 

b. 250 volts or less, .15 ampere 
A18. F05B32V20A. 

A19. 

a. Post-type fuseholder 

b. Clip-type fuseholder 



2-40 



A20. 

a. Center connector 

b. Outside connector 

A21. Visual inspection, indicators, and using a meter. 

A22. Put it back in the circuit. A good fuse will have zero ohms of resistance. 

A23. The ohmmeter causes more than 1/500 ampere through the fuse when you check the fuse, thus it 
opens the fuse. 

A24. Use a resistor in series with the fuse when you check it with the ohmmeter. 

A25. Turn the power off and discharge the circuit before you remove fuses. Use a fuse puller (an 

insulated tool) when you remove fuses front clip-type fuse holders. When you check fuses with a 
voltmeter, be careful to avoid shocks and short circuits. 

A26. 



a. 


Not acceptable-wrong style 


b. 


Substitute #3-smaller current rating 


c. 


Substitute #1 -identical, except higher voltage rating 


d. 


Not acceptable-lower voltage rating 


e. 


Direct replacement 


f- 


Not acceptable-higher current rating 


8- 


Substitute #2-Faster time delay rating 



A27. Check for the proper type of replacement fuse and proper fit. 

A28. Be sure the power is off in the circuit and the circuit is discharged before replacing a fuse. Use an 
identical replacement fuse if possible. Remove any corrosion from the fuseholders before 
replacing the fuses. 

A29. Improper fuse, corrosion, improper fit, and open fuse. 

A30. Frame, operating mechanism, arc extinguishers, terminal connectors, and trip element. 
A31. Thermal, magnetic, and thermal-magnetic. 

A32. The thermal trip element makes use of a bimetallic element that bends with an increase in 
temperature or current. The bending causes the trip bar to be moved releasing the latch. 

A3 3. A circuit breaker that will trip even if the operating mechanism is held ON. 

A34. A circuit breaker that can be overridden if the operating mechanism is held ON. 

A35. In current sensitive or nonemergency systems. 



2-41 



A36. In emergency or essential circuits. 

A3 7. Instantaneous, short time delay, and long time delay. 

A3 8. It is the use of time delay ratings to cause the circuit breaker closest to the faulty circuit to trip. 
This isolates the faulty circuit without affecting other circuits. 

A39. CBl-long time delay; CB2, CB3-short time delay; CB4 through CBlO-instantaneous. 

A40. The power requirements of the circuit and the physical space available. 

A41. A push button or push-pull circuit breaker (small size, low power). 

A42. Check the applicable technical manual, obtain the approval of the electrical or engineering officer 
(for shipboard circuit breakers), remove power from the circuit breaker, and tag the switch that 
supplies power to the circuit breaker. 

A43. Check the operating mechanism for smooth operation, check the contacts for pitting, check the 

terminals for tightness and corrosion, check the mounting hardware for tightness and wear, check 
all components for wear, and check the entire circuit breaker for cleanliness. 



2-42 



CHAPTER 3 

CIRCUIT CONTROL DEVICES 

LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

Upon completion of this chapter you will be able to: 

1. State three reasons circuit control devices are used and list three general types of circuit control 
devices. 

2. Identify the schematic symbols for a switch, a solenoid, and a relay. 

3. State the difference between a manual and an automatic switch and give an example of each. 

4. State the reason multicontact switches are used. 

5. Identify the schematic symbols for the following switches: 

• Single-pole, double-throw 

• Double -pole, single -throw 

• Double -pole, double-throw 

• Single-break 

• Double -break 

• Rotary 

• Wafer 

6. State the characteristics of a switch described as a rocker switch. 

7. State the possible number of positions for a single -pole, double-throw switch. 

8. Identify a type of momentary switch. 

9. State the type of switch used to prevent the accidental energizing or deenergizing of a circuit. 

10. State the common name for an accurate snap-acting switch. 

1 1 . State the meaning of the current and voltage rating of a switch. 

12. State the two types of meters you can use to check a switch. 

13. Select the proper substitute switch from a list. 

14. State the conditions checked for in preventive maintenance of switches. 



3-1 



15. State the operating principle and one example of a solenoid. 

16. State the ways in which a solenoid can be checked for proper operation. 

17. State the operating principle of a relay and how it differs from a solenoid. 

18. State the two types of relays according to use. 

19. State the ways in which a relay can be checked for proper operation and the procedure for 
servicing it. 

CIRCUIT CONTROL DEVICES 



Circuit control devices are used everywhere that electrical or electronic circuits are used. They are 
found in submarines, computers, aircraft, televisions, ships, space vehicles, medical instruments, and 
many other places. In this chapter you will learn what circuit control devices are, how they are used, and 
some of their characteristics. 

INTRODUCTION 

Electricity existed well before the beginning of recorded history. Lightning was a known and feared 
force to early man, but the practical uses of electricity were not recognized until the late 1 8th century. The 
early experimenters in electricity controlled power to their experiments by disconnecting a wire from a 
battery or by the use of a clutch between a generator and a steam engine. As practical uses were found for 
electricity, a convenient means for turning power on and off was needed. 

Telegraph systems, tried as early as the late 1700s and perfected by Morse in the 1830s, used a 
mechanically operated contact lever for opening and closing the signal circuit. This was later replaced by 
the hand-operated contact lever or "key." 

Early power switches were simple hinged beams, arranged to close or open a circuit. The blade-and- 
jaw knife switch with a wooden, slate, or porcelain base and an insulated handle, was developed a short 
time later. This was the beginning of circuit control devices. 

Modern circuit control devices can change their resistance from a few milliohms (when closed) to 
well over 100,000 megaohms (when open) in a couple of milliseconds. In some circuit control devices, 
the movement necessary to cause the device to open or close is only .001 inch (.025 millimeters). 

NEED FOR CIRCUIT CONTROL 

Circuit control, in its simplest form, is the application and removal of power. This can also be 
expressed as turning a circuit on and off or opening and closing a circuit. Before you learn about the types 
of circuit control devices, you should know why circuit control is needed. 

If a circuit develops problems that could damage the equipment or endanger personnel, it should be 
possible to remove the power from that circuit. The circuit protection devices discussed in the last chapter 
will remove power automatically if current or temperature increase enough to cause the circuit protection 
device to act. Even with this protection, a manual means of control is needed to allow you to remove 
power from the circuit before the protection device acts. 

When you work on a circuit, you often need to remove power from it to connect test equipment or to 
remove and replace components. When you remove power from a circuit so that you can work on it, be 



3-2 



sure to "tag out" the switch to ensure that power is not applied to the circuit while you are working. When 
work has been completed, power must be restored to the circuit. This will allow you to check the proper 
operation of the circuit and place it back in service. After the circuit has been checked for proper 
operation, remove the tag from the power switch. 

Many electrical devices are used some of the time and not needed at other times. Circuit control 
devices allow you to turn the device on when it is needed and off when it is not needed. 

Some devices, like multimeters or televisions, require the selection of a specific function or circuit. 
A circuit control device makes possible the selection of the particular circuit you wish to use. 

TYPES OF CIRCUIT CONTROL DEVICES 

Circuit control devices have many different shapes and sizes, but most circuit control devices are 
either SWITCHES, SOLENOIDS, or RELAYS. 

Figure 3-1 shows an example of each of these types of circuit control devices and their schematic 
symbols. 





Figure 3-1.— Typical circuit control devices: RELAY COIL TERMINALS 

Figure 3-1, view A, is a simple toggle switch and the schematic symbol for this switch is shown 
below it. Figure 3-1, view B, is a cutaway view of a solenoid. The schematic symbol below the solenoid 



3-3 



is one of the schematic symbols used for this solenoid. Figure 3-1, view C, shows a simple relay. One of 
the schematic symbols for this relay is shown next to the relay. 

Ql. What are three reasons circuit control is needed? 

Q2. What are the three types of circuit control devices? 

Q3. Label the schematic symbols shown in figure 3-2. 




(B) (C) 

Figure 3-2. — Schematic symbol recognition. 

SWITCH TYPES 

There are thousands and thousands of switch applications found in home, industry, and the Navy. 
Hundreds of electrical switches work for you everyday to perform functions you take for granted. Some 
switches operate by the touch of a finger and many others are operated automatically. 

Switches are used in the home to turn off the alarm clock, to control the stove, to turn on the 
refrigerator light, to turn on and control radios and televisions, hair dryers, dishwashers, garbage 
disposals, washers and dryers, as well as to control heating and air conditioning. A typical luxury 
automobile with power seats and windows might have as many as 45 switches. 

Industry uses switches in a wide variety of ways. They are found in the business office on computers, 
copy machines, electric typewriters, and other equipment. A factory or shop may use thousands of 
switches and they are found on almost every piece of machinery. Switches are used on woodworking 
machinery, metal working machinery, conveyors, automation devices, elevators, hoists, and lift trucks. 

The Navy uses switches in a number of ways. A typical aircraft could have over 250 switches to 
control lights, electronic systems, and to indicate whether the landing gear is up or down. Ships, fire 
control systems, and missile launchers are also controlled by electrical switches. In fact, almost all 
electrical or electronic devices will have at least one switch. 

Switches are designed to work in many different environments from extreme high pressure, as in a 
submarine, to extreme low pressure, as in a spacecraft. Other environmental conditions to consider are 
high or low temperature, rapid temperature changes, humidity, liquid splashing or immersion, ice, 
corrosion, sand or dust, fungus, shock or vibration, and an explosive atmosphere. 



3-4 



It would not be possible to describe all the different switches used. This chapter will describe the 
most common types of switches. 

MANUAL SWITCHES 

A manual switch is a switch that is controlled by a person. In other words, a manual switch is a 
switch that you turn on or off. Examples of common manual switches are a light switch, the ignition 
switch on a motor vehicle, or the channel selector on a television. You may not think of the channel 
selector as a switch that you use to turn something on or off, but that is what it does. The channel selector 
is used to turn on the proper circuit and allows the television to receive the channel you have selected. 

AUTOMATIC SWITCH 

An automatic switch is a switch that is controlled by a mechanical or electrical device. You do not 
have to turn an automatic switch on or off. Two examples of automatic switches are a thermostat and the 
distributor in a motor vehicle. The thermostat will turn a furnace or air conditioner on or off by 
responding to the temperature in a room. The distributor electrically turns on the spark plug circuit at the 
proper time by responding to the mechanical rotation of a shaft. Even the switch that turns on the light in 
a refrigerator when the door is opened is an automatic switch. 

Automatic switches are not always as simple as the examples given above. Limit switches, which 
sense some limit such as fluid level, mechanical movement, pressure (altitude or depth under water), or an 
electrical quantity, are automatic switches. Computers use and control automatic switches that are 
sometimes quite complicated. 

Basically, any switch that will turn a circuit on or off without human action is an automatic switch. 

MULTICONTACT SWITCHES 

Switches are sometimes used to control more than one circuit or to select one of several possible 
circuits. An example of a switch controlling more than one circuit is the AM/FM selector on a radio. This 
switch enables you to control either the AM or FM portion of the radio with a single switch. An example 
of a switch that selects one of several circuits is the channel selector of a television set. These switches are 
called MULTICONTACT switches because they have more than one contact or MULTI(ple) 
CONTACTS. 

Number of Poles and Number of Throws 

Multicontact switches (other than rotary switches, which will be covered later) are usually classified 
by the number of POLES and number of THROWS. Poles are shown in schematics as those contacts 
through which current enters the switch; they are connected to the movable contacts. Each pole may be 
connected to another part of the circuit through the switch by "throwing" the switch (movable contacts) to 
another position. This action provides an individual conduction path through the switch for each pole 
connection. The number of THROWS indicates the number of different circuits that can be controlled by 
each pole. By counting the number of points where current enters the switch (from the schematic symbol 
or the switch itself), you can determine the number of poles. By counting the number of different points 
each pole can connect with, you can determine the number of throws. 

Figure 3-3 will help you understand this concept by showing illustrations of various multicontact 
switches and their schematic symbols. 



3-5 




(C) (D) 

Figure 3-3. — Multicontact switches. 

Figure 3-3(A) shows a single -pole, double -throw switch. The illustration shows three terminals 
(connections) on this switch. The schematic symbol for the switch is also shown. 

The center connection of the schematic symbol represents the point at which current enters the 
switch. The left and right connections represent the two different points to which this current can be 
switched. From the schematic symbol, it is easy to determine that this is a single-pole, double -throw 
switch. 

Now look at figure 3-3(B). The switch is shown with its schematic symbol. The schematic symbol 
has two points at which current can enter the switch, so this is a double-pole switch. Each of the poles is 
mechanically connected (still electrically separate) to one point, so this is a single-throw switch. Only one 
throw is required to route two separate circuit paths through the switch. 

Figure 3-3(C) shows a double -pole, double -throw switch and its schematic symbol. Figure 3-3(D) 
shows a four-pole, double-throw switch and its schematic symbol. 

It might help you to think of switches with more than one pole as several switches connected 
together mechanically. For example, the knife switch shown in figure 3-3(D) could be thought of as four 
single -pole, double-throw switches mechanically connected together. 

Q4. What is the difference between a manual and an automatic switch? 

Q5. What is one example of a manual switch? 

Q6. What is one example of an automatic switch? 

Q7. Why are multicontact switches used? 



3-6 



Q8. Label the schematic symbols shown in figure 3-4 as to number of poles and number of throws. 



cr ; o 


\_J \_J \_J 

(C) 


o 
o 


or j o 


<S o 




o 


cr^ ! o 


(A) 


(D) 


o 


^\ 
cr i o 


o cr 10 




o 


Cr , O 


i 

o cr^ o 


• b° 

o cr o 


o 




(B) 


(E) 




(F) 



Figure 3-4. — Schematic symbols of switches. 

Single-Break and Double-Break Switches 

Switches can also be classified as SINGLE-BREAK or DOUBLE-BREAK switches. This refers to 
the number of places in which the switch opens or breaks the circuit. All of the switches shown so far 
have been single -break switches. A double-break switch is shown in figure 3-5. The schematic symbol 
shown in figure 3-5(A) shows that this switch breaks the circuit in two places (at both terminals). The 
upper part of the schematic symbol indicates that these contacts are in the open position and the circuit 
will close when the switch is acted upon (manually or automatically). The lower symbol shows closed 
contacts. These contacts will open the circuit when the switch is acted upon. 



\ o O 

o o 



(A) (B) 

Figure 3-5. — Double-break pushbutton switch. 

Figure 3-5(B) is a picture of the switch. This switch is called a pushbutton switch because it has a 
button that must be pushed to change the switch contact connections. Notice that the switch has four 
terminals. The schematic symbol in figure 3-5(A) shows that when one set of contacts is open, the other 
set of contacts is closed. This switch is a double-pole, single-throw, double-break switch. 




3-7 



The number of poles in a switch is independent of the number of throws and whether it is a single or 
double break switch. The number of throws in a switch is independent of the number of poles and 
whether it is a single or double break switch. In other words, each characteristic of a switch (poles, 
throws, break) is not determined by either of the other characteristics. Figure 3-6 shows the schematic 
symbols for several different switch configurations. 



SINGLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
SINGLE -BREAK 



SINGLE-POLE 

SINGLE-THROW 

SINGLE-BREAK 



SINGLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
DOUBLE-BREAK 



n I a 



SINGLE-POLE 

DOUBLE-THROW 

DOUBLE-BREAK 



DOUBLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
SINGLE -BREAK 



A, 

DOUBLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
DOUBLE-BREAK 



o ^ 

DOUBLE-POLE 

DOUBLE-THROW 

SINGLE-BREAK 

• I • 

I 

n i fi 

O O 

DOUBLE-POLE 

DOUBLE-THROW 

DOUBLE-BREAK 



Figure 3-6. — Schematic symbols of switch configurations. 

Rotary Switches 

A rotary switch is a midcontact switch part of the schematic with the contacts arranged in a full or 
partial circle. Instead of a pushbutton or toggle, the mechanism used to select the contact moves in a 
circular motion and must be turned. Rotary switches can be manual or automatic switches. An automobile 
distributor, the ignition switch on a motor vehicle, and the channel selector on some television sets are 
rotary switches. 

The automobile distributor cap and rotor are an example of the simplest form of an automatic rotary 
switch. Figure 3-7 shows a portion of an automobile ignition system with the distributor cap and rotor 
shown. The rotor is the portion of this switch that moves (rotates) and selects the circuit (spark plug). The 
rotor does not actually touch the contacts going to the spark plugs, but the signal (spark) jumps the gap 
between the rotor and the contacts. This switch has one input (the rotor) and six positions (one for each 
spark plug). The schematic diagram for this rotary switch is shown below the illustration of the distributor 
cap. 



3-8 




Figure 3-7. — Rotary switch in automobile ignition system. 

The rotor in the distributor rotates continually (when in use) in one direction and makes a complete 
circle. This is not true for all rotary switches. The ignition switch in an automobile is also a rotary switch. 
It usually has four positions (accessory, off, on, start). Unlike the rotor, it does not rotate continually 
when in use, can be turned in either direction, and does not move through a complete circle. 

Some rotary switches are made with several layers or levels. The arrangement makes possible the 
control of several circuits with a single switch. Figure 3-8 is an illustration of a rotary switch with two 
layers. Each layer has a selector and 20 contacts. As this switch is rotated, both layers select a single 
circuit (contact) of the 20. 




Figure 3-8. — Two-layer rotary switch. 



The channel selector on some television sets is a multilayer rotary switch. It is also called a WAFER 
SWITCH. In a wafer switch, each layer is known as a wafer. 

The schematic of the wafer is always drawn to represent the wafer as it would look if viewed from 
opposite the operating handle or mechanism. If the wafer has contacts on both sides, two drawings are 
used to show the two sides of the wafer. The two drawings are labeled "front" and "rear." The drawing 
labeled "front" represents the side of the wafer closest to the operating mechanism. 



3-9 



Figure 3 -9(A) shows one wafer of a wafer switch and its schematic symbol. Contact 1 is the point at 
which current enters the wafer. It is always connected to the movable portion of the wafer. With the wafer 
in the position shown, contact 1 is connected to both contact 5 and 6 through the movable portion. If the 
movable portion was rotated slightly clockwise, contact 1 would only be connected to contact 5. This 
arrangement is known as MAKE BEFORE BREAK because the switch makes a contact before breaking 
the old contact. 




Figure 3-9. — Wafer switch. 

Figure 3 -9(B) is an illustration of the entire switch and its schematic symbol. Since the switch has 
two wafers mechanically connected by the shaft of the switch, the shaft rotates the movable portion of 
both wafers at the same time. This is represented on the schematic symbol by the dotted line connecting 
the two wafers. 

The upper wafer of the schematic symbol is the wafer closest to the control mechanism, and is 
identical to the wafer shown in figure 3-9(A). When switches have more than one wafer, the first wafer 
shown is always the wafer closest to the operating mechanism. The lower wafer on the schematic diagram 
is the wafer farthest away from the operating mechanism. Contact 9 of this wafer is connected to the 
movable portion and is the point at which current enters the wafer. In the position shown, contact 9 is 
connected to both contact 13 and 16. If the switch is rotated slightly clockwise, contact 9 would no longer 
be connected to contact 13. A further clockwise movement would connect contact 9 to contact 12. This 
arrangement is called BREAK BEFORE MAKE. Contact 9 will also be connected to contact 15 at the 
same time as it is connected to contact 12. 

Q9. Label the switch schematics shown in figure 3-10A through 3-10G. 



3-10 



(A) 



(B) 



6 

(C) 



jQ_I_D 

o o 
(D) 



o 

D *-* 



(E) 




(G) 



Figure 3-10. — Switch schematic symbols. 



OTHER TYPES OF SWITCHES 



You have learned that switches are classified by the number of poles, throws, and breaks. There are 
other factors used to describe a switch such as the type of actuator and the number of positions. In 
addition, switches are classified by whether the switch has momentary contacts or is locked into or out of 
position and whether or not the switch is snap-acting. 

Type of Actuator 

In addition to the pushbutton, toggle, and knife actuated switches already described, switches can 
have other actuators. There are rocker switches, paddle switches, keyboard switches and mercury 
switches (in which a small amount of mercury makes the electrical contact between two conductors). 

Number of Positions 

Switches are also classified by the number of positions of the actuating device. Figure 3-11 shows 
three toggle switches, the toggle positions, and schematic diagrams of the switch. Figure 3-1 1(A) is a 
single-pole, single -throw, two-position switch. The switch is marked to indicate the ON position (when 
the switch is closed) and the OFF position (when the switch is open). Figure 3-1 1(B) is a single -pole, 
double-throw, three -position switch. The switch markings show two ON positions and an OFF position. 
When this switch is OFF, no connection is made between any of the terminals. In either of the ON 
positions, the center terminal is connected to one of the outside terminals. (The outside terminals are not 
connected together in any position of the switch.) Figure 3-1 1(C) is a single-pole, double -throw, 
two-position switch. There is no OFF position. In either position of this switch, the center terminal is 
connected to one of the outside terminals. 



3-11 





POSITION [^5^ 




THREE j^SC^i 
POSITION iil^J 


OH 
1 2 


d. 

OFF 

Cr~"~" 3 
1 2 


POSITION ^^^^ 


A. A d. 

OH OFF OH 

o o- — ^5 o 1 o cj— -o o 
123 123 123 

(B) 


2l ^ 

OH OH 

? 2 3° ? 2 ^ 

(C) 



Figure 3-11. — Two- and three-position switches. 

Momentary and Locked Position Switches 

In some switches, one or more of the switch positions are MOMENTARY. This means that the 
switch will only remain in the momentary position as long as the actuator is held in that position. As soon 
as you let go of the actuator, the switch will return to a non-momentary position. The starter switch on an 
automobile is an example of a momentary switch. As soon as you release the switch, it no longer applies 
power to the starter. 

Another type of switch can be LOCKED IN or OUT of some of the switch positions. This locking 
prevents the accidental movement of the switch. If a switch has locked-in positions, the switch cannot be 
moved from those positions accidentally (by the switch being bumped or mistaken for an unlocked 
switch). If the switch has locked-out positions, the switch cannot be moved into those positions 
accidentally. Figure 3-12 shows a three-position, locking switch. 



3-12 




Figure 3-12. — Three-position locking switch. 

Snap-Acting Switches 

A SNAP-ACTING switch is a switch in which the movement of the switch mechanism (contacts) is 
relatively independent of the activating mechanism movement. In other words, in a toggle switch, no 
matter how fast or slow you move the toggle, the actual switching of the circuit takes place at a fixed 
speed. The snap-acting switch is constructed by making the switch mechanism a leaf spring so that it 
"snaps" between positions. A snap-acting switch will always be in one of the positions designed for that 
switch. The switch cannot be "between" positions. A two-position, single -pole, double-throw, snap-acting 
switch could not be left in an OFF position. 

Accurate Snap-Acting Switches 

An ACCURATE SNAP-ACTING SWITCH is a snap-acting switch in which the operating point is 
pre-set and very accurately known. The operating point is the point at which the plunger causes the switch 
to "switch." The accurate snap-acting switch is commonly called a MICROS WITCH. A microswitch is 
shown in figure 3-13. 



NORMALLY 
CLOSED COMMON 
PLUNGER COVER SPRING CONTACT CONTACT 




Figure 3-13. — Accurate snap-acting switch (microswitch). 

The full description of the microswitch shown in figure 3-13 is a two-position, single-pole, 
double -throw, single-break, momentary-contact, accurate, snap-acting switch. Notice the terminals 



3-13 



marked C, NO, and NC. These letters stand for common, normally open, and normally closed. The 
common terminal is connected to the normally closed terminal until the plunger is depressed. When the 
plunger is depressed, the spring will "snap" into the momentary position and the common terminal will be 
connected to the normally open terminal. As soon as the plunger is released, the spring will "snap" back 
to the original condition. 

This basic accurate snap-acting switch is used in many applications as an automatic switch. Several 
different methods are used to actuate this type of switch. Some of the more common actuators and their 
uses are shown in figure 3-14. 



C 



ROLLER LEAF 
LOW-FORCE, LARGE 
MOVEMENT 
ACTUATION 



PANEL -MOUNT ROLLER 
PLUNGER 

ACTUATION BY CAMS 




LEVER 

VERY LOW FORCE, 
CAMS AND SLIDES 



3 



PIN PLUNGER 
IN-LINE MOTION 



OVERTRAVEL PLUNGER 
IN-LINE APPLICATIONS 
REQUIRING ADDITIONAL 
OVERTRAVEL 



LEAF 

LOW-FORCE, 
SLOW MOVING 
CAMS OR SLIDES 



ROLLER LEVER 
VERY LOW FORCE 



ft 



PANEL-MOUNT PLUNGER 
HEAVY-DUTY IN-LINE 
APPLICATIONS 



Figure 3-14. — Common actuators and their uses for accurate snap-acting switches. 

Q10. What classification of a switch is used when you describe it as a rocker switch? 

Qll. In describing a switch by the number of positions of the actuator, what are the two possible 
configurations for a single-pole, double-throw switch? 

Q12. What type of switch should be used to control a circuit that requires a temporary actuation 
signal? 

Q13. What type of switch is used if it is necessary to guard against a circuit being accidentally turned 
on or off? 



Q14. What is the common name used for an accurate snap-acting switch? 



3-14 



SWITCH RATING 

Switches are rated according to their electrical characteristics. The rating of a switch is determined 
by such factors as contact size, contact material, and contact spacing. There are two basic parts to a switch 
rating-the current and voltage rating. For example, a switch may be rated at 250 volts dc, 10 amperes. 
Some switches have more than one rating. For example, a single switch may be rated at 250 volts dc, 10 
amperes; 500 volts ac, 10 amperes; and 28 volts dc, 20 amperes. This rating indicates a current rating that 
depends upon the voltage applied. 

CURRENT RATING OF A SWITCH 

The current rating of a switch refers to the maximum current the switch is designed to carry. This 
rating is dependent on the voltage of the circuit in which the switch is used. This is shown in the example 
given above. The current rating of a switch should never be exceeded. If the current rating of a switch is 
exceeded, the contacts may "weld" together making it impossible to open the circuit. 

VOLTAGE RATING OF A SWITCH 

The voltage rating of a switch refers to the maximum voltage allowable in the circuit in which the 
switch is used. The voltage rating may be given as an ac voltage, a dc voltage, or both. The voltage rating 
of a switch should never be exceeded. If a voltage higher than the voltage rating of the switch is applied 
to the switch, the voltage may be able to "jump" the open contacts of the switch. This would make it 
impossible to control the circuit in which the switch was used. 

Q15. What is the current rating of a switch? 

Q16. What is the voltage rating of a switch? 

MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT OF SWITCHES 

Switches are usually a very reliable electrical component. This means, they don't fail very often. 
Most switches are designed to operate 100,000 times or more without failure if the voltage and current 
ratings are not exceeded. Even so, switches do fail. The following information will help you in 
maintaining and changing switches. 

CHECKING SWITCHES 

There are two basic methods used to check a switch. You can use an ohmmeter or a voltmeter. Each 
of these methods will be explained using a single -pole, double-throw, single -break, three-position, 
snap-acting, toggle switch. 

Figure 3-15 is used to explain the method of using an ohmmeter to check a switch. Figure 3-15(A) 
shows the toggle positions and schematic diagrams for the three switch positions. Figure 3- 15(B) shows 
the ohmmeter connections used to check the switch while the toggle is in position 1. Figure 3-15(C) is a 
table showing the switch position, ohmmeter connection, and correct ohmmeter reading for those 
conditions. 



3-15 



2l A J. 

a o — o o a**^ o o o o 

1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 

POSmON 1 POSITION 2 POSITION 3 



(A) SWITCH POSfTION 




1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 



(B) OHMMETER CONNECTION 



SWITCH 


OHIWIETER 
CONNECTION 


CORRECT 


1 


1-2 


OO 


1 


2-3 





1 


1-3 


OO 


2 


1-2 


OO 


2 


2-3 


OO 


2 


1-3 


OO 


3 


1-2 





3 


2-3 


OO 


3 


1-3 


OO 


(CJ TABLE OF CORRECT READINGS 

Figure 3-15. — Table of correct readings. 



With the switch in position 1 and the ohmmeter connected to terminals 1 and 2 of the switch, the 
ohmmeter should indicate (oo). When the ohmmeter is moved to terminals 2 and 3, the ohmmeter should 
indicate zero ohms. With the ohmmeter connected to terminals 1 and 3, the indication should be (oo). 

As you remember from chapter 1 , before the ohmmeter is used, power must be removed from the 
circuit and the component being checked should be isolated from the circuit. The best way to isolate the 
switch is to remove it from the circuit completely. This is not always practical, and it is sometimes 
necessary to check a switch while there is power applied to it. In these cases, you would not be able to use 
an ohmmeter to check the switch, but you can check the switch by the use of a voltmeter. 

Figure 3- 16(A) shows a switch connected between a power source (battery) and two loads. In figure 
3- 16(B), a voltmeter is shown connected between ground and each of the three switch terminals while the 
switch is in position 1. Figure 3- 16(C) is a table showing the switch position, voltmeter connection, and 
the correct voltmeter reading. 



3-16 



1 2 3 
id n — I — I rill 



load| -± 
1 



LOAD 



1 I J 

r 1 i 



1 2 ^3 
LOAD -±r LOAD 



CI P 

IAD -4- LOAD 



1 2 3 



1 T 2 1 T 2 

tIt tII 



(2) 

(A) SWITCH POSITION 



(3) 



LOAD 
1 



I 

i 



LOAD 
2 

"X 



2 3 



LOAD 
1 



i 
i 



LOAD 
2 



LOAI 
1 



i 



LOAD 
2 



(B) VOLTNETER CONNECTION 



SWITCH 
POSITION 


VOLTMETER 
CONNECTION 


CORRECT 
READING 


1 


1 


OV 








2 


1 


OV 


2 


2 


VOLTAGE 


2 


3 


OV 


3 


1 


VOLTAGE 


3 


2 


VOLTAGE 


3 


3 


OV 



(C) TABLE OF CORRECT READINGS 



Figure 3-16. — Table of correct readings. 

With the switch in position 1 and the voltmeter connected between ground and terminal 1, the 
voltmeter should indicate no voltage (OV). When the voltmeter is connected to terminal 2, the voltmeter 
should indicate the source voltage. With the voltmeter connected to terminal 3, the source voltage should 
also be indicated. The table in figure 3- 16(C) will show you the correct readings with the switch in 
position 2 or 3. 

REPLACEMENT OF SWITCHES 

When a switch is faulty, it must be replaced. The technical manual for the equipment will specify the 
exact replacement switch. If it is necessary to use a substitute switch, the following guidelines should be 
used. The substitute switch must have all of the following characteristics. 

• At least the same number of poles. 

• At least the same number of throws. 

• The same number of breaks. 

• At least the same number of positions. 



3-17 



• The same configuration in regard to momentary or locked positions. 

• A voltage rating equal to or higher than the original switch. 

• A current rating equal to or higher than the original switch. 

• A physical size compatible with the mounting. 

In addition, the type of actuator (toggle, pushbutton, rocker, etc.) should be the same as the original 
switch. (This is desirable but not necessary. For example, a toggle switch could be used to replace a 
rocker switch if it were acceptable in all other ways.) 

The number of poles and throws of a switch can be determined from markings on the switch itself. 
The switch case will be marked with a schematic diagram of the switch or letters such as SPST for 
single -pole, single -throw. The voltage and current ratings will also be marked on the switch. The number 
of breaks can be determined from the schematic marked on the switch or by counting the terminals after 
you have determined the number of poles and throws. The type of actuator, number of positions, the 
momentary and locked positions of the switch can all be determined by looking at the switch and 
switching it to all the positions. 

PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHES 

As already mentioned, switches do not fail very often. However, there is a need for preventive 
maintenance of switches. Periodically switches should be checked for corrosion at the terminals, smooth 
and correct operation, and physical damage. Any problems found should be corrected immediately. Most 
switches can be inspected visually for corrosion or damage. The operation of the switch may be checked 
by moving the actuator. When the actuator is moved, you can feel whether the switch operation is smooth 
or seems to have a great deal of friction. To check the actual switching, you can observe the operation of 
the equipment or check the switch with a meter. 

Q17. What two types of meters can be used to check a switch? 

Q18. If a switch must be checked with power applied, what type of meter is used? 

Q19. A double-pole, double-throw, single-break, three-position, toggle switch is faulty. This switch has 
a momentary position 1 and is locked out opposition 3. The voltage and current ratings for the 
switch are 115 volt dc, 5 amperes. No direct replacement is available. From switches A through I, 
in table 3-1, indicate if the switch is acceptable or not acceptable as a substitute. Of the 
acceptable switches, rank them in order of choice. If the switch is unacceptable, give the reason. 

Q20. What should you check when performing preventive maintenance on a switch? 



3-18 



Table 3-1. — Replacement Switches and Their Characteristics 





POLES 


THROWS 


BREAKS 


NUMBER OF 
POSITIONS 


MOMENTARY 
POSITIONS 


LOCKED 
POSITIONS 


ACTUATOR 


RATING 


A 


2 


1 


1 


2 






PUSH 
BUTTON 


115Vdc 
5A 


B 


2 


2 


2 


3 


1 


OUT-3 


TOGGLE 


150Vdc 
5A 


C 


2 


2 


1 


3 


1 


OUT-3 


ROCKER 


115Vdc 
10A 


D 


1 


2 


1 


3 


1 


OUT-3 


TOGGLE 


115Vdc 
5A 


E 


2 


2 


1 


3 


— 


OUT-3 


ROCKER 


150Vdc 
10A 


F 


2 


2 


1 


3 


1 


OUT-3 


TOGGLE 


150Vdc 
10A 


G 


2 


2 




3 


1 


IN-3 


TOGGLE 


115Vdc 
10A 


H 


2 


2 




3 


1 


OUT-3 


ROCKER 


115Vdc 
3A 


I 


2 


2 




3 


1 


OUT-3 


ROCKER 


28Vdc 
5A 



SOLENOIDS 

A SOLENOID is a control device that uses electromagnetism to convert electrical energy into 
mechanical motion. The movement of the solenoid may be used to close a set of electrical contacts, cause 
the movement of a mechanical device, or both at the same time. 

Figure 3-17 is a cutaway view of a solenoid showing the solenoid action. A solenoid is an 
electromagnet formed by a conductor wound in a series of loops in the shape of a spiral. Inserted within 
this coil is a soft-iron core and a movable plunger. The soft-iron core is pinned or held in an immovable 
position. The movable plunger (also soft iron) is held away from the core by a spring when the solenoid is 
deenergized. 

When current flows through the conductor, it produces a magnetic field. The magnetic flux produced 
by the coil results in establishing north and south poles in both the core and the plunger. The plunger is 
attracted along the lines of force to a position at the center of the coil. As shown in figure 3-17, the 
deenergized position of the plunger is partially out of the coil due to the action of the spring. When 
voltage is applied, the current through the coil produces a magnetic field. This magnetic field draws the 
plunger within the coil, resulting in mechanical motion. When the coil is deenergized, the plunger returns 
to its normal position because of spring action. The effective strength of the magnetic field on the plunger 
varies according to the distance between the plunger and the core. For short distances, the strength of the 
field is strong; and as distances increase, the strength of the field drops off quite rapidly. 



3-19 



CORE 




Figure 3-17. — Solenoid action. 

While a solenoid is a control device, the solenoid itself is energized by some other control device 
such as a switch or a relay. One of the distinct advantages in the use of solenoids is that a mechanical 
movement can be accomplished at a considerable distance from the control device. The only link 
necessary between the control device and the solenoid is the electrical wiring for the coil current. The 
solenoid can have large contacts for the control of high current. Therefore, the solenoid also provides a 
means of controlling high current with a low current switch. For example, the ignition switch on an 
automobile controls the large current of a starter motor by the use of a solenoid. Figure 3-18 shows a 
cutaway view of a starter motor-solenoid combination and a section of the wiring for the solenoid. Notice 
that the solenoid provides all electrical contact for current to the starter motor as well as a mechanical 
movement of the shift lever. 



3-20 



SOLENOID 




STARTER MOTOR 

Figure 3-18. — Starter motor and solenoid. 

MAINTENANCE OF SOLENOIDS 

If you suspect that a solenoid is not working properly, the first step in troubleshooting it is a good 
visual inspection. Check the connections for poor soldering, loose connections, or broken wires. The 
plunger should be checked for cleanliness, binding, mechanical failure, and improper alignment. The 
mechanism that the solenoid is connected to (actuates) should also be checked for proper operation. 

The second step is to check the energizing voltage with a voltmeter. If the voltage is too low, the 
result is less current flowing through the coil and a weak magnetic field. A weak magnetic field can result 
in slow or poor operation. Low voltage could also result in chatter or no operation at all. If the energizing 
voltage is too high, it could damage the solenoid by causing overheating or arcing. In either case, the 
voltage should be reset to the proper value so that further damage or failure of the solenoid will not result. 

The solenoid coil should then be checked for opens, shorts, and proper resistance with an ohmmeter. 
If the solenoid coil is open, current cannot flow through it and the magnetic field is lost. A short results in 
fewer turns and higher current in the coil. The net result of a short is a weak magnetic field. A high- 
resistance coil will reduce coil current and also result in a weak magnetic field. A weak magnetic field 



3-21 



will cause less attraction between the plunger and the core of the coil. This will result in improper 
operation similar to that caused by low voltage. If the coil is open, shorted, or has changed in resistance, 
the solenoid should be replaced. 

Finally, you should check the solenoid to determine if the coil is shorted to ground. If a short to 
ground is found, the short should be removed to restore the solenoid to proper operation. 

Q21. What is the operating principle of a solenoid? 

Q22. What is one example of the use of a solenoid? 

Q23. If a solenoid is not operating properly, what items should be checked? 

RELAYS 

The RELAY is a device that acts upon the same fundamental principle as the solenoid. The 
difference between a relay and a solenoid is that a relay does not have a movable core (plunger) while the 
solenoid does. Where multipole relays are used, several circuits may be controlled at once. 

Relays are electrically operated control switches, and are classified according to their use as POWER 
RELAYS or CONTROL RELAYS. Power relays are called CONTACTORS; control relays are usually 
known simply as relays. 

The function of a contactor is to use a relatively small amount of electrical power to control the 
switching of a large amount of power. The contactor permits you to control power at other locations in the 
equipment, and the heavy power cables need be run only through the power relay contacts. 

Only lightweight control wires are connected from the control switches to the relay coil. Safety is 
also an important reason for using power relays, since high power circuits can be switched remotely 
without danger to the operator. 

Control relays, as their name implies, are frequently used in the control of low power circuits or 
other relays, although they also have many other uses. In automatic relay circuits, a small electric signal 
may set off a chain reaction of successively acting relays, which then perform various functions. 

In general, a relay consists of a magnetic core and its associated coil, contacts, springs, armature, and 
the mounting. Figure 3-19 illustrates the construction of a relay. When the coil is energized, the flow of 
current through the coil creates a strong magnetic field which pulls the armature downward to contact CI, 
completing the circuit from the common terminal to CI. At the same time, the circuit to contact C2, is 
opened. 



3-22 



ARMATURE 



COMMON TERMINAL — *~ & 



PIVOT 




RELAY COIL TERMINALS 



Figure 3-19. — Relay construction. 

A relay can have many different types of contacts. The relay shown in figure 3-19 has contacts 
known as "break-make" contacts because they break one circuit and make another when the relay is 
energized. Figure 3-20 shows five different combinations of relay contacts and the names given to each. 



FORM A 
"MAKE" 



FORM B 
"BREAK" 



FORM C 
"BREAK-MAKE" 



FORM D 
'MAKE-BEFORE- 
BREAK" 



FORM E 
"BREAK -MAKE 
BEFORE-BREAK' 



Figure 3-20. — Contact combinations. 

A single relay can have several different types of contact combinations. Figure 3-21 is the contact 
arrangement on a single relay that has four different contact combinations. (The letters next to the 
contacts are the "forms" shown in figure 3-20.) 



3-23 



^MAKE SPRINGS 

i— BREAK SPRINGS 

-ARMATURE SPRINGS 




SPRING 
BUFFERS 



ARMATURE 
BUSHING 

ARMATURE 
iELPIECE 



Figure 3-21. — Relay contact arrangement. 

One type of relay with multiple sets of contacts is the clapper relay shown in figure 3-22. As the 
circuit is energized, the clapper is pulled to the magnetic coil. This physical movement of the armature of 
the clapper forces the pushrod and movable contacts upward. Any number of sets of contacts may be built 
onto the relay; thus, it is possible to control many different circuits at the same time. This type of relay 
can be a source of trouble because the motion of the clapper armature does not necessarily assure 
movement of all the movable contacts. Referring to figure 3-22, if the pushrod were broken, the clapper 
armature might push the lower movable contact upward but not move the upper movable contact. 




Figure 3-22. — Clapper-type relay. 

3-24 



Some equipment requires a "warm-up" period between the application of power and some other 
action. For example, vacuum tubes (covered later in this training series) require a delay between the 
application of filament power and high voltage. A time -delay relay will provide this required delay. 

A thermal time-delay relay (fig. 3-23) is constructed to produce a delayed action when energized. Its 
operation depends on the thermal action of a bimetallic element similar to that used in a thermal circuit 
breaker. A heater is mounted around or near the element. The movable contact is mounted on the element 
itself. As the heat causes the element to bend (because of the different thermal expansion rates), the 
contacts close. 




Figure 3-23. — A thermal time-delay relay. 



Relays can be described by the method of packaging; open, semisealed, and sealed. Figure 3-24 
shows several different relays and illustrates these three types of packaging. 

Figure 3-24 (E), (G) and (H) are open relays. The mechanical motion of the contacts can be observed 
and the relays are easily available for maintenance. Figure 3-24 (A), (B) and (C) are semisealed relays. 
The covers provide protection from dust, moisture, and other foreign material but can be removed for 
maintenance. 



3-25 



F 



G 



Figure 3-24. — Relay enclosures. 

The clear plastic or glass covers provide a means of observing the operation of the relay without 
removal of the cover. Figure 3-24 (D) and (F) are examples of a hermetically sealed relay. These relays 
are protected from temperature or humidity changes as well as dust and other foreign material. Since the 
covers cannot be removed, the relays are also considered to be tamper-proof. With metal or other opaque 
covers, the operation of the relay can be "felt" by placing your finger on the cover and activating the 
relay. 

Q24. What is the operating principle of a relay? 
Q25. How does a relay differ from a solenoid? 
Q26. What are the two classifications of relays? 



3-26 



MAINTENANCE OF RELAYS 



The relay is one of the most dependable electromechanical devices in use, but like any other 
mechanical or electrical device, relays occasionally wear out or become inoperative. Should an inspection 
determine that a relay is defective, the relay should be removed immediately and replaced with another of 
the same type. You should be sure to obtain the same type relay as a replacement. Relays are rated in 
voltage, amperage, type of service, number of contacts, and similar characteristics. 

Relay coils usually consist of a single coil. If a relay fails to operate, the coil should be tested for 
open circuit, short circuit, or short to ground. An open coil is a common cause of relay failure. 

During preventive maintenance you should check for charred or burned insulation on the relay and 
for darkened or charred terminal leads. Both of these indicate overheating, and the likelihood of relay 
breakdown. One possible cause for overheating is that the power terminal connectors are not tight. This 
would allow arcing at the connection. 

The build-up of film on the contact surfaces of a relay is another cause of relay trouble. Although 
film will form on the contacts by the action of atmospheric and other gases, grease film is responsible for 
a lot of contact trouble. Carbon build-up which is caused by the burning of a grease film or other 
substance (during arcing), also can be troublesome. Carbon forms rings on the contact surfaces and as the 
carbon rings build-up, the relay contacts are held open. 

When current flows in one direction through a relay, a problem called "cone and crater" may be 
created at the contacts. The crater is formed by transfer of metal from one contact to the other contact, the 
deposit being in the shape of a cone. This condition is shown in figure 3-25(A). 




(A) 




(B) 

Figure 3-25. — Relay contacts. 

Some relays are equipped with ball-shaped contacts and, in many applications, this type of contact is 
considered superior to a flat surface. Figure 3-25(B) shows a set of ball-shaped contacts. Dust or other 
substances are not as readily deposited on a ball-shaped surface. In addition, a ball-shaped contact 
penetrates film more easily than a flat contact. When you clean or service ball-shaped relay contacts, be 
careful to avoid flattening or otherwise altering the rounded surfaces of the contacts, YOU could damage 



3-27 



a relay if you used sandpaper or emery cloth to clean the contacts. Only a burnishing tool, shown in figure 
3-26 should be used for this purpose. 




Figure 3-26. — Burnishing tool. 



You should not touch the surfaces of the burnishing tool that are used to clean the relay contacts. 
After the burnishing, tool is used, it should be cleaned with alcohol. 

Contact clearances or gap settings must be maintained in accordance with the operational 
specifications of the relay. When a relay has bent contacts, you should use a point bender (shown in figure 
3-27) to straighten the contacts. The use of any other tool could cause further damage and the entire relay 
would have to be replaced. 




Figure 3-27. — Point bender. 

Cleanliness must be emphasized in the removal and replacement of covers on semi sealed relays. 
The entry of dust or other foreign material can cause poor contact connection. When the relay is installed 
in a position where there is a possibility of contact with explosive fumes, extra care should be taken with 
the cover gasket. Any damage to, or incorrect seating of the gasket increases the possibility of igniting the 
vapors. 



3-28 



Q27. How can you determine if a relay is operating (changing from one position to the other)? 

Q28. What items should be checked on a relay that is not operating properly? 

Q29. What is used to clean the contacts of a relay? 

Q30. What tool is used to set contact clearances on a relay? 



This chapter has provided you with basic information on circuit control devices. The following is a 
summary of the main points in this chapter. 

CIRCUIT CONTROL DEVICES are used to apply or remove power and to select a function or 
circuit within a device. 

A SWITCH is one type of circuit control device. Switches are classified in many different ways. 



A MANUAL SWITCH must be tuned ON or OFF by a person. An AUTOMATIC SWITCH will 
turn a circuit ON or OFF without the action of a person by using mechanical or electrical devices. 

MULTICONTACT SWITCHES make possible the control of more than one circuit or the 
selection of one of several possible circuits with a single switch. 



SUMMARY 





TOGGLE SWITCH 




3-29 



The POLES of a switch are the points at which current can enter the switch. The number of 
THROWS is the number of possible circuits that can be connected to each pole. The number of BREAKS 
is the number of points at which the switch breaks the circuit. 



SINGLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
SINGLE BREAK 



SINGLE-POLE 

SINGLE-THROW 

SINGLE-BREAK 



SINGLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
DOUBLE-BREAK 



SINGLE-POLE 
DOUBLE THROW 
DOUBLE-BREAK 



DOUBLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
SINGLE BREAK 



DOUBLE-POLE 

DOUBLE-THROW 

SINGLE-BREAK 



o I o 

i 

o i a 



DOUBLE-POLE 
SINGLE -THROW 
DOUBLE-BREAK 



DOUBLE-POLE 
DOUBLE THROW 
DOUBLE-BREAK 



A ROTARY SWITCH is a multicontact switch with contacts arranged in a circular or semicircular 
manner. 




A WAFER SWITCH is a rotary switch in which the contacts are on wafers. The wafers are 
mechanically connected by the shaft of the switch. 



3-30 




The ACTUATOR of a switch is the portion of the switch which is moved to cause the switch to 
change contact positions. The actuator could be a toggle, a pushbutton, a rocker, or, in the case of a rotary 
switch, a shaft and handle. 

The NUMBER OF POSITIONS of a switch refers to the number of points at which the actuator can 
select a contact configuration. 



3-31 




A MOMENTARY POSITION of a switch is one in which the actuator will only stay as long as 
force is applied to the actuator. When the force is removed, the actuator (and switch) will return to a non- 
momentary position. 

A LOCKED POSITION of a switch is used to prevent the accidental movement of the actuator to 
or from a specific position. 




A SNAP-ACTING SWITCH is one in which the movement of the switch contacts is relatively 
independent of the actuator movement. This is accomplished by using a leaf spring for the common 
contact of the switch. 



A MICROSWITCH is an accurate snap-acting switch and the operating point is preset and very 
accurately known. 



3-32 



NORMALLY 
CLOSED COMMON 
PLUNGER COVER SPRING CONTACT CONTACT 




The VOLTAGE RATING of a switch is the maximum voltage the switch is designed to control. A 
voltage higher than the voltage rating may be able to "jump" the open contacts of the switch. 

The CURRENT RATING of a switch is the maximum current the switch is designed to carry; it is 
dependent on the voltage rating. Any current higher than the current rating may cause the contacts of the 
switch to melt and "weld" together. 

The contacts of a switch can be checked with an ohmmeter if power is removed or with a voltmeter 
if power is applied to the switch. To check a switch, the actuator should be checked for smooth and 
correct operation, the terminals should be checked for evidence of corrosion, and the physical condition 
of the switch should be determined. If a substitute switch must be used to replace a faulty switch, the 
substitute must have all of the following: 




— 



LOAD 



I __6 a — a— 1 

L LOA0 
1 



r 



LOAD 



2 3 



LOAD 



i t: 



r-0- 



LOAD 



I LOAD 



At least the same number of poles, throws, and positions; the same number of breaks and an identical 
configuration in regard to momentary and locked positions; and a voltage and current rating equal to or 
higher than the original switch. In addition, the substitute must be of a physical size compatible with the 
mounting, and must have the same type actuator as the original switch. 



3-33 



A SOLENOID is a control device that uses electromagnetism to convert electrical energy into a 
mechanical motion. The magnetic field of the coil and core will attract the plunger of a solenoid when 
current flows through the coil. When current is removed, the spring attached to the plunger will cause the 
plunger to return to its original position. 

If a solenoid fails to operate, check the terminal connections, the plunger and attached mechanism 
for smooth operation, the energizing voltage, and the coil of the solenoid. 




DEENERGIZED 



A RELAY is an electromagnetic control device that differs from the solenoid in that the solenoid 
uses a movable core (plunger) while the relay has fixed core. Relays are classified as CONTROL 
RELAYS, which control low power COMMON circuits and POWER RELAYS or CONTACTORS 
which control high power circuits. 



3-34 



ARMATURE 




RELAY COIL TERMINALS 



CLAPPER RELAYS use a clapper (armature) to move contact positions and accomplish the 
switching of circuits. 



PUSH ROD 




N ON MOVABLE 
CONTACTS 



MOVABLE 
CONTACT 

ARMATURE 



HEEL PIECE 



CLAPPER 



Relays are described by the type of enclosure. A relay may be OPEN, SEMISEALED, or SEALED. 



3-35 




If a relay fails to function, the movement of the contacts should be observed; the coil should be 
checked for opens or shorts; the terminal leads should be checked for burned or charred insulation; and 
the contact surfaces should be checked for carbon, arcing, and contact spacing. 

A BURNISHING TOOL is used to clean the contacts of a relay. Files, sandpaper, and emery cloth 
should NOT be used. 




3-36 



A POINT BENDER is used to adjust contact spacing of a relay. No other tool should be used. 



Al. To remove power from a malfunctioning device; to remove power from a device you wish to work 
on and restore power when the work is completed; to turn devices on and off as the device is 
needed; to select the function or circuit desired within a device. 

A2. Switches, solenoids, and relays. 

A3. 

a. Solenoid. 

b. Switch. 

c. Relay. 

A4. A manual switch must be turned on or off by a person. An automatic switch turns a circuit on or 
off without the action of a person (by using mechanical or electrical devices). 

A5. A light switch, an ignition switch, television channel selector, etc. 

A6. A thermostat, an automobile distributor, a limit switch, etc. 

A7. Multicontact switches make possible the control of more than one circuit or the selection of one of 
several possible circuits with a single switch. 




ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS Ql. THROUGH Q30. 



3-37 



A8. 

a. Three-pole, single-throw (triple-pole, single-throw) 

b. Double-pole, double-throw 

c. Single-pole, double-throw 

d. Single-pole, single-throw 

e. Double-pole, triple-throw 

f. Six-pole, double-throw 

A9. 

a. Single-pole, single-throw, single-break 

b. Single-pole, double-throw, single-break 

c. Single-pole, single-throw, double-break 

d. Single-pole, double-throw, double-break 

e. Rotary 

f. Wafer 

g. Double-pole, double-throw, double-break 
A10. The type of actuator. 

All. Two-position and three-position. 
A12. A momentary switch. 
A13. A locked-position switch. 
A14. A microswitch. 

A15. The maximum current a switch is designed to carry. 

A16. The maximum voltage allowable in the circuit in which the switch is installed. 
Al 7. An ohmmeter and a voltmeter. 
A18. A voltmeter. 



3-38 



A19. 

a. Not acceptable-single throw. 

b. Not acceptable-double break. 

c. Acceptable-choice #2 ( different actuator). 

d. Not acceptable-single pole. 

e. Not acceptable-no momentary position. 

f. Acceptable-choice #1 (higher rating). 

g. Not acceptable-locked position incorrect. 

h. Not acceptable-current rating too low. 

i. Not acceptable-voltage rating too low. 

A20. The switch operation for smooth and correct operation, the terminals for corrosion, and the 
physical condition of the switch. 

A21. The magnetic field created in a coil of wire and core will attract a soft iron plunger when current 
flows through the coil. 

A22. A starter motor and solenoid. 

A23. The connections, the plunger, the mechanism that the solenoid actuates, the energizing voltage, 
and the coil of the solenoid. 

A24. The magnetic field created in a coil of wire will attract aft armature causing a movement in sets of 
contacts. 

A25. The solenoid provides a mechanical movement of a plunger (a moveable core) while the core of a 
relay is fixed. 

A26. Control relays and power relays ( contactors). 

A27. By observing the movement of the contacts if the relay is open or sealed with a transparent cover. 
If the relay has an opaque cover, you can "feel" the operation of the relay by placing your finger 
on the cover. 

A28. The coil should be checked for opens, shorts, or a short to ground; terminal leads should be 

checked for charred or burned insulation; the contact surfaces should be checked for film, carbon, 
arcing, and contact spacing. 

A29. A burnishing tool. 

A30. A point bender 



3-39 



APPENDIX I 

GLOSSARY 



ACTUATOR — The part of a switch that is acted upon to cause the switch to change contact connections; 
e.g., toggle, pushbutton, and rocker. 

AMMETER — A meter used to measure current. 

ARC EXTINGUISHER — The part of a circuit breaker that confines and divides the arc that occurs 
when the contacts of the circuit breaker open. 

ARMATURE — In a relay, the movable portion of the relay. 

BREAK — In a switch, the number of breaks refers to the number of points at which the switch opens the 
circuit; e.g., single break and double break. 

BURNISHING TOOL — A tool used to clean and polish contacts on a relay. 

CONTINUITY — An uninterrupted, complete path for current. 

DAMPING — The process of smoothing out oscillations. In a meter, damping is used to keep the pointer 
of the meter from overshooting the correct reading. 

D'ARSONVAL METER MOVEMENT— A name used for the permanent-magnet moving-coil 
movement used in most meters. 

DIRECT SHORT — A connection between two points in a circuit, such as between a component and 
ground. 

ELECTRODYNAMIC METER MOVEMENT— A meter movement using fixed field coils and a 
moving coil; usually used in wattmeters. 

ELECTROMAGNETISM— The relationship between magnetism and electricity. 

ELECTROSTATIC METER MOVEMENT— A meter movement that uses the electrostatic repulsion 
of two sets of charged plates (one fixed and the other movable). This meter movement reacts to 
voltage rather than to current and is used to measure high voltage. 

FERRULES — The cylindrical metallic ends of a cartridge fuse. 

FREQUENCY METER — A meter used to measure the frequency of an ac signal. 

GALVANOMETER — A meter used to measure small values of current by electromagnetic or 
electrodynamic means. 

HOT WIRE METER MOVEMENT— A meter movement that uses the expansion of a heated wire to 
move the pointer of a meter; measures dc or ac. 

IN-CIRCUIT METER — A meter permanently installed in a circuit; used to monitor circuit operation. 



AI-1 



LOADING EFFECT — The effect of a voltmeter upon the circuit being measured which results in an 
inaccurate measurement. Loading effect is minimized by using a voltmeter with an internal 
resistance many times higher than the resistance of the circuit being measured. 

MAGNETIC TRIP ELEMENT — A circuit breaker trip element that uses the increasing magnetic 
attraction of a coil with increased current to open the circuit. 

MEGGER — Common name for a megohmmeter. 

MEGOHMMETER — A meter that measures very large values of resistance; usually used to check for 
insulation breakdown in wires. 

METER — A device used to measure an electrical quantity; e.g., current, voltage, and frequency. 

METER MOVEMENT— The part of a meter that moves. 

MOVING-IRON METER MOVEMENT— Same as moving-vane meter movement. 

MOVING- VANE METER MOVEMENT — A meter movement that uses the magnetic repulsion of the 
like poles created in iron vanes by current through a coil of wire; most commonly used movement 
for ac meters. 

MULTIMETER — A single meter combining the functions of an ammeter, a voltmeter, and an 
ohmmeter. 

NONTRIP-FREE CIRCUIT BREAKER— A circuit breaker that can be held ON during an overcurrent 
condition. 

OHMMETER — A meter used to measure resistance. 

OUT-OF-CIRCUIT METER — A meter which is not permanently installed in a circuit. Usually portable 
and self-contained, these meters are used to check the operation of a circuit or to isolate troubles 
within a circuit. 

PARALLAX ERROR — The error in meter readings that results when you look at a meter from some 
position other than directly in line with the pointer and meter face. A mirror mounted on the meter 
face aids in eliminating parallax error. 

POINT BENDER — A tool used to adjust the contact spacing on a relay. 

POLE — (1) One end of a magnet. (2) The number of points at which current can enter a switch; e.g., 
single pole, double pole, and three pole. 

POLE PIECE — A piece of ferromagnetic material used to control the distribution of magnetic lines of 
force; i.e., concentrate the lines of force in a particular place or evenly distribute the lines of force 
over a wide area. 

RANGES — The several upper limits a meter will measure as selectable by a switch or by jacks; e.g., a 
voltmeter may have ranges of 1 volt, 2.5 volts, 10 volts, 25 volts, and 100 volts. 

RECTIFIER — A device used to convert ac to pulsating dc. 

RELAY — An electromagnetic device with one or more sets of contacts which changes position by the 
magnetic attraction of a coil to an armature. 



AI-2 



RELUCTANCE — The resistance of a magnetic path to the flow of magnetic lines of force through it. 

ROTARY SWITCH — A multicontact switch with contacts arranged in a circular or semi-circular 
manner. 

SENSITIVITY — (1) For an ammeter: the amount of current that will cause full-scale deflection of the 
meter. (2) For a voltmeter: the ratio of the voltmeter resistance divided by the full-scale reading of 
the meter, expressed in ohms-per-volt. 

SHORT CIRCUIT — An unintentional current path between two components in a circuit or between a 
component and ground which is usually caused by a malfunction in the circuit. 

SHUNT RESISTOR — A resistor in parallel. In an ammeter, shunt resistors are used to provide range 
capability. 

SNAP-ACTINGS — Changing position quickly with the aid of a spring. 

SOLENOID — An electromagnetic device that changes electrical energy into mechanical motion; based 
upon the attraction of a movable iron plunger to the core of an electromagnet. 

SWITCH — A device used to open or close a circuit. 

TEST EQUIPMENT — A general term applied to devices used to test electrical and electronic circuits. 

THERMAL TRIP ELEMENT — A circuit breaker trip element that uses the increased bending of a 
bimetallic strip caused by increased current to open a circuit. 

THERMAL-MAGNETIC TRIP ELEMENT— A single circuit breaker trip element that combines the 
action of a thermal and a magnetic trip element. 

THERMOCOUPLE METER MOVEMENT— A meter movement that uses the current induced in a 
thermocouple by the heating of a resistive element to measure the current in a circuit; used to 
measure ac or dc. 

THROW — In a switch, the number of different circuits each pole can control; e.g., single throw and 
double throw. 

TRIP-ELEMENT — The part of a circuit breaker that senses any overload condition and causes the 
circuit breaker to open the circuit. 

TRIP-FREE CIRCUIT BREAKER— A circuit breaker that will open a circuit even if the operating 5 
mechanism is held in the ON position. 

TROUBLESHOOTING — The process of locating and repairing faults in electrical or electronic 
equipment. 

VOLTMETER — A meter used to measure voltage. 

WAFER SWITCH — A rotary switch in which the contacts are arranged on levels. Each level is 
electrically independent but mechanically connected by the shaft of the switch. 

WATT-HOUR METER — A meter used to measure electrical energy. 

WATTMETER — A meter used to measure electrical power. 



AI-3 



APPENDIX II 

LAWS OF EXPONENTS 



The International Symbols Committee has adopted prefixes for denoting decimal multiples of units. 
The National Bureau of Standards has followed the recommendations of this committee, and has adopted 
the following list of prefixes: 



i 1 Lll 1 1 L.'V_- 1 lj 


Powprs 

A VJ VV w 1 lj 

of ten 


Prpfi vpc 




1,000,000,000,000 


1012 


tera 


T 


1,000,000,000 


109 


giga 


G 


1,000,000 


106 


mega 


M 


1,000 


103 


kilo 


k 


100 


102 


hecto 


h 


10 


10 


deka 


da 


.1 


10-1 


deci 


d 


.01 


10-2 


centi 


c 


.001 


10-3 


milli 


m 


.000001 


10-6 


micro 


u 


.000000001 


10-9 


nano 


n 


.000000000001 


10-12 


Pico 


P 


.000000000000001 


10-15 


femto 


f 


.000000000000000001 


10-18 


Atto 


a 



To multiply like (with same base) exponential quantities, add the exponents. In the language of 
algebra the rule is a m x a n = a m+n 



10* x 10 2 =10" +2 =10 6 
0.003 x 825.2 = 3 x 10 3 x S.252 x 10 2 
= 24756 x 10 1 =2.4756 

To divide exponential quantities, subtract the exponents. In the language of algebra the rule is 

^ = a — or 1^-=10 G 
a" 10 2 

M^ = E*" 3 ) -2x10^-200,000 
0.015 (1.5 xlO -2 ) 



AIM 



To raise an exponential quantity to a power, multiply the exponents. In the language of algebra 
<x'V = x"' : . 

(ioY = 10 3 ^ = 10 12 

2,500 2 =(2.5 xl0 3 ) 2 =6.25xlO e =6,250,00 
Any number (except zero) raised to the zero power is one. In the language of algebra x° = 1 

x 3 

— = 1 

x 3 

10 A , 
— r = 1 

Any base with a negative exponent is equal to 1 divided by the base with an equal positive exponent. 
In the language of algebra x a = l/x a 

i«r»- 1 1 



io 2 100 

(6a)-' -J- 
6a 

To raise a product to a power, raise each factor of the product to that power. 

(2 xlO) 2 =2 2 xlO 2 

3,000 =(3 xlO 3 ) 3 =27xl0 3 

To find the nth root of an exponential quantity, divide the exponent by the index of the root. Thus, 
the nth root of a m = a m . 



X 6 =X2 =X 3 



64 xlO 3 =4x 10 = ^0 



AII-2 



APPENDIX III 

SCHEMATIC SYMBOLS 



AIII-l 



Contacts, Switches, Contactors, and Relays 



Switching Function 



(break) 



Conducting, closed contact 



4- 



(make) 



Nonconducting, open contact 



Application: transfer 

i i x 



r 



Electric*! Contact 



Fixed contact 

Fixed contact for jack, key, 
relay, switch, etc 



H2 



O 

OR 



Fixed contact with momen- 
tary contact (automatic return) 



NOTE When this symbol (rep- 

resenting a contact with automatic return) is 
used on a diagram for international use, the 
convention should be so noted o n the dia- 
gram or associated documentation. 1EC 



$ Sleeve 



I « L. 



Moving Contact 



t The broken line indicates where line 

connection to a symbol is made and is not part 
of the symbol. 



Adjustable or sliding contact 
for resistor, inductor, etc 



OR 



Locking 



Nonlocking 



Segment; bridging contact 



OR 
fZ3 

Vibrator reed 



Vibrator split reed 



and brush 



Rotating contact (slip ring) 



-o 



Basic Contact Assemblies 

The standard method of showing a con- 
tact is by a symbol indicating the circuit 
condition it produces when tne actuating 
device is in the deenergized or nonoper- 
ated position. The actuating device may 
be or a mechanical, electrical, or other 
nature, and a clarifying note may be nec- 
essary with the symbol to explain the 
proper point at which the contact func- 
tions; for example, the point where a 
contact closes or opens as a function of 
changing pressure, level, flow, voltage, 
current, etc. In cases where it is desirable 
to show contacts in the energized or op- 
erated condition and where confusion 
may result, a clarifying note shall be 
added to the drawing. 

Auxiliary switches or contacts for circuit 
breakers, etc, may be designated as fol- 
lows: 

(a) Closed when device is energized 
or operated position. 

(b) Closed when device is in deener- 
gized or nonoperated position. 

(aa) Closed when operating mecha- 
nism of main device is in energized or 
operated position. 

(bb) Closed when operated mecha- 
nism of main device is in deenergized or 
nonoperated position. 

See American National Standard Manual 
and Automatic Station Control, Supervi- 
sory, and Associated Telemetering 



Equipment, C37. 2-1970, for further 
details. 

In the parallel-line contact symbols 
shown below, the length of the parallel 
lines shall be approximately Hi times the 
width of the gap 



Closed contact (make) 

« * 

OR 



Open contact (break) 
_ 1 

1EC 

" T 

OR 

Tec | 




I EC 



m ^ 

Make-before-break 



FT1 



Application: open contact with 
time closing (TC) or time-delay closing 
(TDC) feature 



1 

T 

T 

OR 
1 

Tl 

T 



AIII-2 



Contacts, Switches, Contactors, and Relays 



Application: closed contact with 
time opening (TO) or time-delay open- 
ing (TDO) feature 



Time sequential closing 



11 -H 

Multiway transfer switch 
Two-position switch ( 90" step ) 



step) 




Three-position switch ( 120° 



Four-position switch (45° step) 

i 

t Magnetic Blowout Coil 



I I 
|sj OR <j> 



Operating Coil 
Relay Coil 



t The broken line indicates where line 

connection to a symbol is made and is not part 
of the symbol. 



NOTE The asterisk ii not part of 

the symbol. Always replace the asterisk by a 
device designation. 



I EC 



I EC 



OR 

t 

OR 

<> 
OR 



Semicircular dot indicates inner 
end of winding 



-0- 

OR 

It 



Application: multiwinding coil (2 
windings shown) 

NOTE The ends of a given winding 

shall be shown directly opposite each other on 
opposite sides of the core, or adjacent to each 
other on the same side of the core. 



See Note 

Electromagnetic actuator 
(solenoid), with mechanical linkage 
shown 

NOTE The mechanical linkage may 

be omitted if the intent is clear. 




Switch 

See also FUSE 



Fundamental symbols for contacts, me- 
chanical connections, etc, may be used 
for switch symbols. 



The standard method of showing 
switches is in a position with no operat- 
ing force applied. For switches that may 
be in any of two or more positions with 
no operating force applied, and for 
switches actuated by some mechanical 
device (as in air-pressure, liquid-level, 
rate-of-flow, etc, switches), a clarifying 
note may be necessary to explain the 
point at which the switch functions. 

When the basic switch symbols 

are shown in the 
closed position on a diagram, terminals 
must be added for clarity. 

Single-throw, general 

IEC / 

Double-throw, general 

-r- 

Application: 2-pole double- 
throw switch with terminals shown 

o — lo 
I 

o o — 'o 
Knife switch , general 



Application: 3-pole double-throw 
knife switch with auxiliary contacts and 
terminals 



cHho <HH>i 




Application: 2-pole field-dis- 
charge knife switch with terminals and 
discharge resistor 

NOTE The asterisk is not part of the 

symbol. Always add identification within or ad- 
jacent to the rectangle. 

O O 



*See Note 



Switch with horn gap 



Sector switch 



AIII-3 



Contacts, Switches, Contactors, and Relays 



Pushbutton Momentary or 

Spring-Return 

Circuit closing (make) 

J_ 
o o 

Circuit opening (break) 

Cj_|_0 

Two-circuit 

cj_0 



Two-Circuit, Maintained or Not 
Spring-Return 



Nonlocking Switch, Momentary or 
Spring-Return 



The symbols to the left are commonly 
used for spring buildups in key switches, 
relays, and jacks. 

The symbols to the right are commonly 
used for toggle switches. 

Circuit closing (make) 

° | 0R Tec 

Circuit opening ( break ) 

|^ or — Tec 

Two-circuit 

t 

OR 

t 

OR 

o 1 n 

Transfer 



o— — i- OR 



Make-before-break 

M jj 
Locking Switch 

The symbols to the left are commonly 
used Tor spring buildups in key 
switches and jacks. 

The symbols to the right arc com- 
monly used for toggle switches. 

Circuit closing (make) 

I 



OR <»»0> 
V ^ 

Circuit opening (break) 
o- 



T 



OR 5 



Transfer, 2-position 
O | v OR 

Transfer, 3-positinn 
o 

( 

o 

Make-before-break 



Combination Locking and Nonlock- 
ing Switch 

Commonly used for toggle switches 

3-position, 1-pole: circuit closing 
(make), off, momentary circuit closing 
( make ) 



3-position, 2-pole: circuit closing 
(make), off, momentary circuit closing 
( make ) 



o 1 ^ *_ 

Key-Type Switch 
Lever Switch 

2-position with locking transfer 
and break contacts 



*7T 



3-position with nonlocking 
transfer and locking break contacts 

o— i-A 

OR 

I 

3-position, multicontact combi- 



nation 



°— x -v a vy-e 



O j y 



tl 



2-position, half of key switch 
normally operated, multicontact combi- 
nation 



t 



Selector or Multiposition Switch 

The position in which the switch is 
shown may be indicated by a note or 
designation of switch position. 

General (for power and control 
diagrams) 

Any number of transmission paths may 
be shown. 



^0 


OR 

°~ \ < 



AIII-4 



If specific type identification is 
required: circuit closing 



V 



Contacts, Switches, Contactors, and 

Opens on increase in flow 

T 



Kelays 



Switches with Time-Deity Feature 

NOTE The point of Ibe nrrow indi. 

c«tei the direction of twitch operation in which 
contact action it deUyed, 

Open switch with time-delay 
closing (TDC) feature 



V 

roc 

OR 



See Note 



Closed switch with time-delay 
opening (TDO) feature 



T 



See Note 

Open switch with time-delav 
opening (TDO) feature 

TOO 
OR 



V 



See Note 

Closed switch with time-delay 
closing (TDC) feature 



o- — tr 

TOC 



Sec Note 
Flow-Actuated Switch 

Closes on increase in flow 
o 



Liquid-Level-Actuated Switch 

Closes on rising level 
o 



n rising 

7 



Opens on rising level 



Pressure- or Vacuum-Actuated 
Switch 

Closes on rising pressure 
o 



Opens on rising pressure 

r 

Temperature-Actuated Switch 

Closes on rising temperature 
Ci. 



Opens on rising temperature 




Thermostat 

NOTE The t* symbol shall be shown 
or be replaced by data giving the nominal or 
specific operating temperature of the device. 

NOTE If clarification of direction of 

contact operation is needed, a directional eutow 
may be added. The arrowhead shall point in 
the direction of rising temperature operation. 
A directional arrow shall always be shown for 
central-off (neutral) position devices. 

Closes on rising temperature 



See Note 



clarified 



With contact-motion direction 

See Note 

Opens on rising temperature 
t" 



See Note 
Transfers on rising temperature 
If 



^7 



See Note 



Transfer, with intended centml- 
off (neutral) position 

See Notes 



typical 



Application : multifunction, 

See Notes 

With integral heater and trans- 
fer contiicts 

Use only if essential to indicate integral 
heater details. 




See Notes 

Application: with operating 
temperatures indicated 

Sec Notes 

Flasher 

Self-Interrupting Switch 



AIII-5 



Contacts, Switches, Contactors, and Relays 



Foot-Operated Switch 
Foot Switch 

Opens by foot pressure 

a* 

Closes by foot pressure 

Switch Operated by Shaft Rotation 
and Responsive to Speed or Direction 

Speed 

Plugging: to stop drive after it 
has come practically to rest 

<: 

Anti-plugging: to prevent plug- 
ging of drive 

o-ru 

<!> 

0-4-0. 

Centrifugal switch (opening on 
increasing speed) 



4v 



i 

Switches with Specific Features 
Hook switch 



Telephone dial ( switch ) 




Switch in evacuated envelope, 
1-pole double-throw 




Mushroom-head safety feature 

Application to 2-circuit pushbutton 
switch. 



o o 

Key-operated lock switch 

Use appropriate standard symbol and 
add key designation or other information 
in note. 

Telegraph Key 

Simple 



Simple with shorting switch 




Open-circuit or pole-changing 

A. 



Covernor (Contact-making) 
Speed Regulator 

Contacts open or closed as required 
( shown here as closed ) , 



Vibrator, Interrupter 



Typical shunt drive (with ter- 
minals shown) 



Show contacts as required. 



n 



J! 



Typical separate drive (with 
terminals shown) 



Show contacts as required. 



n 



Contactor 
See also CIRCUIT BREAKER 



Fundamental symbols for contacts, coils, 
mechanical connections, etc, are the basis 
of contactor symbols and should be used 
to represent contactors on complete dia- 
grams. Complete diagrams of contactors 
consist of combinations of fundamental 
symbols for control coils, mechanical con- 
nections, etc, in such configurations as to 
represent the actual device. Mechanical 
interlocking should be indicated by notes. 



tactor 



Manually operated 3-pole con- 

_ 111 
" T-T-T 



Electrically operated 1-pole 
contactor with series blowout coil 



OR 

4 



Electrically operated 3-pole 
contactor with series blowout coils; 2 
open and 1 closed auxiliary contacts 
(shown smaller than the main contacts) 







11 



jvljsljvJ 

TTTTT 

OR 

M^ii 

TTTTT 



AIII-6 



Contacts, Switches, Contactors, and Relays 



Electrically operated l-pole 
contactor with shunt blowout coil 

i 

OR 

i 

Relay 

See OPERATING COIL; RELAY COIL 



Fundamental symbols for contacts, me- 
chanical connections, coils, etc, are the 
basis of relay symbols and should be used 
to represent relays on complete diagrams. 

The following letter combinations or 
symbol elements may be used with relay 
symbols. The requisite number of these 
letters or symbol elements may be used 
to show what special features a relay pos- 
sesses. 

The terms "slow" and "fast" are relative, 
and the degree is not to be noted by a 
multiplicity of the same relay symbol on 
a diagram. Relays that aTe direct-current 
operated are not marked to indicate do 
operation. 



IEC gT" 



3 AC Alternating-current or 
ringing relay 
D Differential 
DB Double-biased (biased 

in both directions) 
DP Dashpot 
EF Electrically polarized 
FO Fast-operate 
FR Fast-release 
L Latching 
MG Marginal 

ML Magnetic-latching (re- 
manent) 
NB No bias 
NR Nonreaclive 
J P Magnetically polarized 
using biasing spring, 
or having magnet bias 
SA Slow-opera te and slow- 
release 
J SO Slow-operate 
] SR Slow-release 

SW Sandwich- wound to 
improve balance to 
longitudinal currents 



The proper poling for a polarized re- 
lay shall be shown by the use of + and 
— designations applied to the winding 
leads. The interpretation of this shall be 



EE 



that a voltage applied with the polarity 
as indicated shaft caU se the armature to 
move toward th e contact shown nearer 

* e " a 0I) 'i* dia ? ram ' If Ae reIa y " 

red terminals, the 
proper terminal numbers shall also be 
shown. 



Basic 







contacts 



Application: relay with transfer 



IEC 



IEC 



OR 
OR 





OR 
,1 




Application: polarized relay 
with transfer contacts (two typical 
types shown) 



TT 



Application : polarized ( no bias ) 
marginal relay with transfer contacts 



+ 1 I- 

Relay, thermally operated 

Activating device for ther- 
mally operated relay 

Time of delay may be shown. 

Contacts may be shown separately from 
the operating device. 



He f^"l 



With normally open con- 
tacts shown (two typical types) 



With transfer contacts shown 
iEC 



Thermal relay, one-time type, 
not reusable 

Normally open contact type shown. 



'i 



Inertia Switch (operated by sud- 
den deceleration) 



NOTE This symbol is commonly 

used on diagrams for aerospace applications. 



Mercury Switch 
Leveling 
Three terminal 



o I o 

CD Hs Sc 



Four terminal 



With acceleration cutoff 
(four terminal) 



AIII-7 



Circuit Protectors 



Fuse (one-time thermal current-over- 
load device ) 

Ceneral 



1 

T 



Fuse, supply side indicated by 
a thick line 



Fuse with alarm contact 

NOTE When fuse blows, alarm bus A 

is connected to power supply bus S. The letters 
S (supply}, L (load), and A (alarm circuit) 
are for explanation only, and are not part of the 
symbol. 



1EC 

4 _». L. 



See Note 



Isolating fuse-switch; high-volt- 
age primary fuse cutout, dry 



out, oil 



High-voltage primary fuse cut- 



OR 



switching 



Isolating fuse-switch for on-load 



TSfc 



Current Limiter (for power cable) 
The arrowheads in this case are filled. 



NOTE Use appropriate number of 

single-line diagram symbols. 



-X- 



See Note 



Lightning Arrester 

Arrester (electric surge, etc) 

Gap 



General 



Carbon block; telephone protector 

block 

The sides of the rectangle shall be ap- 
proximately in the ratio of 1 to 2 and the 
space between rectangles shall be ap- 
proximately equal to the width of a rec- 
tangle. 

— OCK 

Electrolytic or aluminum cell 

This symbol is not composed of arrow- 
heads. 




Protective gap 
These triangles shall not be filled. 



Sphere gap 



Valve or film element 



Multigap, general 



Application: gap plus valve plus 
ground, 2-pole 



— HlHi- 



Circuit Breaker 



-Hlh 



HIH 



If it is desired to show the condition 
causing the breaker to trip, the relay pro- 
tective-function symbols in item 9.5.1 
may be used alongside the breaker sym- 
bol. 

General 



Air circuit breaker, if distinction 
is needed; for alternating-current circuit 
breakers rated at 1,500 volts or less and 
for all direct-current circuit breakers 



Network protector 



Circuit breaker 



The symbol in the right column is for a 
3-pole breaker. 

NOTE On a power diagram, the sym- 

bol may be used without other identification. On 
a composite drawing -where confusion with tie 
general circuit element symbol ( item 16.1 ) may 
result, add the identifying letters CB inside or 
adjacent to the square. 



1EC 



See Note 



AIII-8 



Circuit Protectors 



Application: 3-pole circuit breaker 
with thermal-overload device in all 3 
poles 



1EC 



Application: 3-pole circuit 
breaker with magnetic-overload device in 
all 3 poles 



ft' 



Application: 3-pole circuit 
breaker, drnwotit type 

I All 

) !£S [Ml 

T TTT 

Protective Relay 

Fundamental symbols for contacts, coils, 
mechanical connections, etc, are tbe basis 
of relay symbols and should be used to 
represent relays on complete diagrams. 

See BELAY COIL; OPERATING COIL 
and RELAY 

Relay protective functions 

The following symbols may be used to 
indicate protective functions, or 
device-function numbers may be 
placed in the circle or adjacent to the 
basic symbol (see American National 
Standard for Manual and Automatic 
Station Control, Supervisory, and 
Associated Telemetering Equipments, 
C37. 2-1970). 



Over, general 



Under, general 
> < 



Direction, general ; directional 



Balance, general 



Differential, general 



Pilot wire, general 



-PW 



Carrier current, general 



-CC 



Operating quantity 

The operating quantity is indicated by 
the following letters or symbols placed ei- 
ther on or immediately above the relav 
protective-function symbols shown above. 



C 

Z 

F 

CP 

* 

w 
s 

T 
V 



'Current 
Distance 
Frequency 
Gas pressure 
Phase 
Power 
Synchronism 
Temperature 
Voltage 



* The use of the letter may be omitted 
in the case of current, and the absence of 
such letter presupposes that the relay op- 
erates on current. 

Ground relays 
Relays operative on residual current only 
are so designated by attaching the ground 
symbol — ■ — |l' to the relay protective- 
function symbol. Note that the zero 
phase-sequence designation given beiow 
may be used instead when desirable. 

Phase-sequence quantities 
Operations on phase-sequence quantities 
may be indicated by the use of the con- 
ventional subscripts 0, 1, and i after the 
letter indicating the operating quantity. 

Applications 
Overcurrent 



Directional overcurrent 



Directional residual overci; 



rent 
■lh- 



Undervoltoge 



>— * < 



Power directional 



Balanced current 



Differential current 



Distance 



Directional distance 



Overfrequency 



Overtemperature 



Phase balance 



Phase sequence 



Pilot wire, differential-cur 



PW 

Pilot wire, directional-com- 



parison 

-V* 

^ PW 

Carrier pilot 



-CC 



dervoltage 



Positive phase-sequence un- 



overcurrent 

- op 



Negative phase-sequence 



Gas-pressure (Buchholz) 



Out-of-step 



AIII-9 



Meter 
Instrument 

NOTE The asterisk is not part of the 

symbol. Alwayj replace the asterisk by one of the 
following letter combinations, depending on the 
function of the meter or instrument, unless some 
other identification is provided in the circle and 
explained on the diagram. 

© 

•See Note 



A Ammeter H£ 

AH Ampere-hour meter 
C Coulombmeter 
CMA Contact-making (or breaking) 
ammeter 

CMC Contact-making (or breaking) 
clock 

CMV Contact-making (or breaking) 

voltmeter 
CRO Oscilloscope 

Cathode-ray oscillograph 
DB DB (decibel) meter 

Audio level/meter 
DBM DBM (decibels referred to 

1 milliwatt) meter 
DM Demand meter 
DTF Demand-totalizing relay 
F Frequency meter 

GD Ground detector 
I Indicating meter 

INT Integrating meter 
jiA or 

UA Microammeter 
MA Milliammeter 
NM Noise meter 
OHM Ohmmeter 
OP Oil pressure meter 
OSCG Oscillograph, string 
PF Power factor meter 
PH Phasemeter 
PI Position indicator 

RD Recording demand meter 
REC Recording meter 
RF Reactive factor meter 
SY Synchroscope 
t" Temperature meter 

THC Thermal converter 
TLM Telemeter 
TT Total time meter 

Elapsed time meter 

V Voltmeter Tec 
VA Volt-ammeter 
VAR Varmeter 
VARH Varhour meter 

VI Volume indicator 
Audio-level meter 

VU Standard volume indicator 

Audio-level meter 
W Wattmeter Tkc 

WH Watthour meter 



Readout Devices 

Galvanometer 



IE 

OR 

Electromagnttically Operated 

Counter 
Message Register 

General , 




With make contact 



AIII-10 



APPENDIX IV 

CROSS REFERENCE OF MILITARY AND 
COMMERCIAL FUSE DESIGNATIONS 



OLD MILITARY 


NEW MILITARY 


OLD COMMERCIAL 


NEW COMMERCIAL 


F02GR010A 


F02A 250V 1/100A 


3AG 1/100 250V 


AGC 1/100 250V 


F02GR031A 


F02A 250V 1/32A 


3AG 1/32 250V 


AGC 1/32 250V 


F02GR062A 


F02A 250V 1/16A 


3AG 1/16 250V 


AGC 1/16 250V 


F02G1R50A 


F02A 250V 1 1/2A 


3AG 1 1/2 250V 


AGC 1 1/250V 


F02G2R00A 


F02A 250V 2A 


3AG 2 250V 


AGC 2 250V 


F02GR010B 


F02B 250V 1/100A 


3AG 1/100 250V 


MDL 1/100 250V 


F02GR031B 


F02B 250V 1/32A 


3AG 1/32 250V 


MDL 1/32 250V 


F02GR375B 


F02B 250V 3/8A 


3AG 3/8 250V 


MDL 3/8 250V 


F02D1R50B 


F02B 125 V 1 1/2A 


3AG 1 1/2 125V 


MDL 1 1/2 125V 


F02D2R00B 


F02B 125V 2 A 


3AG 2 125V 


MDL 2 125V 


F03G1R00A 


F03A 250V 1A 


3AB 1 250V 


ABC 1 250V 


F03G3R00A 


F03A 250V 3A 


3AB 3 250V 


ABC 3 250V 


F03G10R0A 


F03A 250V 10A 


3AB 10 250V 


ABC 10 250V 


F03G12R0A 


F03A 250V 12A 


3AB 12 250V 


ABC 12 250V 


F03D20R0A 


F03A 125V 20A 


3AB 20 125V 


ABC 20 125V 


F03D30R0A 


F03A 125V 30A 


3AB 30 125V 


ABC 30 125V 


F04A10R0A 


F02A 32V 10A 


3AG 10 32V 


AGC 10 32V 


F04A15R0A 


F02A 32V 15 A 


3 AG 15 32V 


AGC 15 32V 


F04A5R00B 


F02B 32V 5A 


3AG 5 32V 


MDL 5 32V 


F04A10R0B 


F02B 32V 10A 


3 AG 10 32V 


MDL 10 32V 


F05A10R0A 


F05A 32V 10A 


4AG 10 32V 


AGS 10 32V 


F05A15R0A 


F05A 32V 15 A 


4AG 15 32V 


AGS 15 32V 


F05A10R0B 


F05B 32V 10A 


4AG 10 32V 


MDM 10 32V 


F05A15R0B 


F05B 32V 15A 


4AG 15 32V 


MDM 15 32V 


F06G1R00A 


F06A 250V 1A 


4AB 1 250V 


ABS 1 250V 


F06G2R00A 


F06A 250V 2A 


4AB 2 250V 


ABS 2 250V 


F07A5R00A 


F07A 32V 5A 


5AG 5 32V 


AGU 5 32V 


F07A10R0A 


F07A 32V 10A 


5AG 10 32V 


AGU 10 32V 


F07A5R00B 


F07B 32V 5A 


5AG 5 32V 


MDR 5 32V 


F07A10R0B 


F07B 32V 10A 


5 AG 10 32V 


MDR 10 32V 


F08G1R00A 


F07A 250V 1A 


5AG 1 250V 


AGU 1 250V 


F08G2R00A 


F07A 250V 2A 


5AG 2 250V 


AGU 2 250V 


F08G1R00B 


F09B 250V 1A 


5AG 1 250V 


FNM 1 250V 


F08G2R00B 


F09B 250V 2A 


5AG 2 250V 


FNM 2 250V 



AIV-1 



MODULE 3 INDEX 



Ammeters, 1-16 to 1-23 

connected in series, 1-17, 1-18 
effect on circuit being measured, 1-18 
ranges, 1-19 to 1-23 
range selection, 1-23, 1-24 
safety precautions, 1-24, 1-25 
sensitivity, 1-19 

Automatic switch, 3-5 



Basic meter movements, 1-4 to 1-16 

compass and alternating current, 1-10, 
1-11 

compass and conducting wire, 1-4 to 1-6 
damping, 1-12, 1-13 
electrodynamic meter movement, 1-13 
hot-wire and thermocouple meter 

movements 1-15, 1-16 
indicating alternating current, 1-13 
moving vane meter movements, 1-14 
permanent-magnet moving-coil movement, 

1-6 to 1-10 
rectifier for ac measurement, 1-11, 1-12 



Cartridge fuse, 2-6, 2-7 
Circuit breakers, 2-20 to 2-29 

magnetic trip element, 2-23, 2-24 

maintenance, 2-28, 2-29 

physical types, 2-26, 2-27 

thermal-magnetic trip element, 2-24, 2-25 

thermal trip element, 2-23, 2-24 

time delay rating, 2-26 

trip-free/nontrip free, 2-25, 2-26 
Circuit control devices, 3-2 to 3-31 

maintenance and replacement of switches, 
3-15 to 3-18 

relays, 3-22 to 3-27 

solenoids, 3-19 to 3-22 

switch ratings, 3-15 

switch types, 3-4 to 3-16 



Circuit measurement, 1-2 to 1-58 

ammeters, 1-16 to 1-24 

basic meter movements 1-4 to 1-16 

meters, others, 1-47 to 1-56 

multimeter, 1-40 to 1-47 

ohmmeter, 1-32 to 1-40 

voltmeters, 1-24 to 1-32 
Circuit protection, 2-2 to 2-29 

checking and replacement of fuses, 2-15 to 
2-19 

circuit breaker maintenance, 2-28, 2-29 

circuit breakers, 2-20 to 2-29 

fuseholders, 2-13 to 2-15 

fuse ratings, 2-8 to 2-10 

fuse types, 2-6 to 2-8 

identification of fuses, 2-10 to 2-13 
Commercial designation, fuses, 2-12 to 2-13 

new, 2-13 

old, 2-12, 2-13 
Compass and alternating current, 1-10, 1-11 
Compass and conducting wire, 1-4 to 1-6 
Cross reference of military and commercial 

fuse designations, AIV-1, AIV-2 
Current rating, fuse, 2-8 



Damping, 1-12, 1-13 



Electrodynamic meter movement, 1-13 



Frequency meters, 1-50 to 1-53 

moving-disk, 1-52, 1-53 

vibrating-reed, 1-50 
Fuseholders, 2-13 to 2-15 

clip-type, 2-14 

post-type, 2-14 
Fuses, 2-4 to 2-20 

checking and replacement of, 2-15 to 2-19 

identification of, 2-10 to 2-13 

ratings, 2-8 to 2-10 



INDEX- 1 



Fuses — Continued 
types, 2-6 to 2-8 

G 

Glossary, AI-1 to AI-3 
H 

Hook-on type voltameter, 1-47 
Hot-wire and thermocouple meter movements, 
1-15, 1-16 



In-circuit meters, 1-4 

Indicating alternating current, 1-13 

L 

Laws of exponents, AII-1, AII-2 
M 

Maintenance and replacement of switches, 3-15 
to 3-18 

checking switches, 3-15 to 3-18 
preventive maintenance of switches, 3-18 
replacement of switches, 3-17, 3-18 

Manual switches, 3-5 

Megohmmeter, 1-38 to 1-40 
safety precautions, 1-39 
using, 1-39 

Meter movements, basic, 1-4 to 1-16 

compass and alternating current, 1-10, 
1-11 

compass and conducting wire, 1-4 to 1-6 
damping, 1-12, 1-13 
electrodynamic meter movement, 1-13 
hot-wire and thermocouple meter 

movements, 1-15, 1-16 
indicating alternating current, 1-13 
moving-vane meter movements, 1-14 
permanent-magnet moving-coil 1-6 to 1-10 
rectifier for ac measurement, 1-11, 1-12 

Military designation, fuses, 2-10 to 2-12 
new, 2-11, 2-12 
old, 2-10,2-11 

Moving-disk frequency meter, 1-52, 1-53 



Moving-vane meter movements, 1-14 
Multicontact switches, 3-5 to 3-7 
Multimeter, 1-40 to 1-48 

function switches, 1-41 

multimeter safety precautions, 1-46, 1-47 

parallax error, 1-43 to 1-46 

scales, 1-41 to 1-43 

O 

Ohmmeters, 1-33 to 1-41 

ranges, 1-34 to 1-36 

safety precautions, 1-37, 1-38 

shunt ohmmeter, 1-36, 1-37 

using, 1-33, 1-34 
Out-of-circuit meters, 1-4 



Permanent-magnet moving-coil movement, 1-6 

to 1-10 
Plug-type fuses, 2-6 

R 

Ratings, fuse, 2-8 to 2-10 

current rating, 2-8 

time delay rating, 2-8 

voltage rating, 2-8 
Rating, switch, 3-15 

current rating, 3-15 

voltage rating, 3-15 
Rectifier for ac measurement, 1-11, 1-12 
Relays, 3-22 to 3-30 

Replacement and maintenance of switches, 

3-15 to 3-18 
Replacement of fuses, 2-17 to 2-19 



Schematic symbols, AIII-1 to AIII-10 
Shunt ohmmeter, 1-36, 1-37 
Solenoids, 3-19 to 3-22 
Switch types, 3-4 to 3-16 

automatic, 3-5 

manual, 3-5 

multicontact, 3-5 to 3-7 



INDEX-2 



Switch types — Continued 
other types, 3-11 to 3-15 



Type of fuses, 2-6 to 2-8 
cartridge, 2-6, 2-7 
plug, 2-6 

Time delay rating, fuse, 2-8 



Voltmeters — Continued 

electrostatic meter movement, 1-31, 1-32 
loading effect, 1-25 to 1-27 
making a voltmeter from a current 
sensitive meter movement, 1-27 
ranges, 1-28 to 1-31 
safety precautions, 1-32 
sensitivity, 1-27 



W 



Vibrating-reed frequency meter, 1-50 
Voltage rating, fuse, 2-8 
Voltmeters, 1-24 to 1-32 

connected in parallel, 1-24, 1-25 



Watt-hour meter, 1-49, 1-50 
Wattmeter, 1-48, 1-49 



INDEX-3 



Assignment Questions 



Information : The text pages that you are to study are 
provided at the beginning of the assignment questions. 



ASSIGNMENT 1 

Textbook assignment: Chapter 1, "Circuit Protection Devices," pages 1-1 through 1-73. 



1 - 1 . Circuit measurement is used for which of 
the following purposes? 

1 . To find the weight of a circuit 

2. To increase the power used in a circuit 

3. To discover the length and width of a 
circuit 

4. To determine the reason a circuit is not 
functioning properly 

1 -2. An in-circuit meter is used for which of 
the following purposes? 

1 . To reduce circuit losses 

2. To monitor circuit operation 

3. To control power to a circuit 

4. To prevent circuit overload conditions 

1 -3 . Out-of-circuit meters have which of the 
following advantages over in circuit 
meters? 

1 . They can be used on more than one 
device 

2. They are lighter weight 

3. They are more rugged 

4. All of the above 




E 



Figure 1-A. — Compass and wire (dc). 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 1-4 THROUGH 
1-6, REFER TO FIGURE 1-A. 



1-4. When SI is closed, the compass needle 
will align itself in which of the following 
manners? 

1 . With magnetic north 

2. With geographic north 

3. Parallel to the conductor 

4. With the magnetic field around the 
wire 

1-5. If the current through the conductor is 
decreased, what happens to the magnetic 
field around the conductor? 

1 . It reverses 

2. It decreases 

3. It increases 

4. It oscillates 

1 -6. When the current through the conductor 
decreases, the compass needle will react in 
which of the following manners? 

1 . Point more to magnetic north 

2. Move farther away from magnetic 
north 

3 . Swing back and forth from east to 
west 

4. Vibrate rapidly back and forth around 
magnetic north 

1-7. The dArsonval meter movement is based 
on which of the following principles? 

1 . Moving vane 

2. Electrostatic 

3. Electrodynamic 

4. Permanent-magnet moving-coil 



1 



1-8. Current through a meter results in the 
pointer. In d'Arsonval meter movement, 
what force produces this deflection? 

1 . Thermocouple action 

2. Electrostatic repulsion 

3. Mechanical spring tension 

4. The interaction of magnetic fields 

1-9. The hairsprings in a d'Arsonval meter 

movement perform which of the following 
functions? 

1 . They keep the pointer in the position 
of the last indication when current is 
removed 

2. They aid the movement of the pointer 
when there is current through the 
meter 

3. They make electrical connections to 
the meter movement 

4. All of the above 




E 



Figure 1-B.Compass and wire (ac). 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 1-10 AND 1-11, 
REFER TO FIGURE 1-B. 



1-10. If the frequency of the ac source is 5 Hz, 
how will the compass needle react when 
SI is closed? 

1 . It will swing back and forth 

2. It will point directly at the wire 

3. It will point directly away from the 
wire 

4. It will vibrate rapidly around magnetic 
north 

1-11. If the frequency of the ac source is 200 
Hz, how will the compass needle react 
when SI is closed? 

1 . It will swing back and forth 

2. It will point directly at the wire 

3. It will point directly away from the 
wire 

4. It will vibrate rapidly around magnetic 
north 

1-12. What device allows a dArsonval meter 
movement to measure ac by converting ac 
to pulsating dc? 

1 . A pulsator 

2. A modulator 

3 . A rectifier 

4. A converter 

1-13. What is meant by the term "meter 
damping"? 

1 . Moistening the felt pads 

2. Smoothing the oscillations of the 
pointer 

3. Preventing excessive current through 
the coil 

4. Compensating for electromagnetic 
induced interference 

1-14. Which of the following methods is used to 
dampen a meter? 

1 . Mount the meter in a mu-metal case 

2. Install a fuse in one of the input leads 

3. Incorporate an airtight chamber 
containing a van 

4. Provide a fluid reservoir and sponge 
arrangement next to the pads 



2 



1-15. A d'Arsonval meter movement reacts to 
which of the following values of voltage? 

1. Peak 

2. Average 

3. Effective 

4. Peak-to-peak 

1-16. What value of ac is indicated by a meter 
scale? 

1. Peak 

2. Average 

3. Effective 

4. Peak-to-peak 

1-17. Which of the following meter movements 
will measure either ac or dc without the 
use of a rectifier? 

1. GMS 

2. dArsonval 

3. Electrostatic 

4. Electrodynamic 

1-18. What electrical property is reacted to by 
the electrodynamic, dArsonval, moving- 
vane, and thermocouple meter 
movements? 

1 . Power 

2. Current 

3. Voltage 

4. Resistance 

1-19. What electrical property is measured by an 
ammeter? 

1 . Power 

2. Current 

3. Voltage 

4. Resistance 

1 -20. How are ammeters connected in an 
electrical circuit? 

1 . In series with the load 

2. In parallel with the load 

3. In accordance with Lenz's Law 

4. In series-parallel with the load 



1-21. How does an ammeter affect the circuit 
being measured? 

1 . It acts as a resistances in series and 
lowers the circuit current 

2. It acts as a resistance in series and 
raises the circuit current 

3 . It acts as a resistance in parallel and 
lowers the circuit current 

4. It acts as a resistance in parallel and 
raises the circuit current 

1 -22. How is the effect that an ammeter 

produces in a circuit kept to a minimum? 

1 . By using a large resistor in series with 
the ammeter 

2. By using a large capacitor in parallel 
with the ammeter 

3 . By ensuring that the meter resistance 
is low compared to circuit resistance 

4. By ensuring that the meter resistance 
is high compared to circuit resistance 

1-23. The ammeter with the greatest sensitivity 
has which of the following characteristics? 

1 . The lowest amount of current for full- 
scale deflection indication 

2. The highest amount of current for full- 
scale deflection indication 

3 . A low ratio of internal resistance to 
full-scale deflection indication 

4. A high ratio of internal resistance to 
full-scale deflection indication 

1 -24. Ammeters measure various ranges through 
the addition of which of the following 
components? 

1 . Shunt resistors in series with the meter 
movement 

2. Shunt resistors in parallel with the 
meter movement 

3 . Capacitors in series with the meter 
movement 

4. Capacitors in parallel with the meter 
movement 



3 



1 -25. What range of an ammeter should you use 
for an initial measurement? 

1 . The lowest range 

2. The highest range 

3. The mid-scale range 

1-26. What portion of the ammeter scale should 
be used to take a final reading? 

1 . The upper half 

2. The lower half 

3. The mid-scale portion 

4. Anywhere on the meter face 

1 -27. When, if ever, can you use a dc ammeter 
to measure ac values? 

1 . When the ac is high frequency 

2. For low values 

3. Always 

4. Never 

1 -28. Which of the following safety precautions 
should be observed prior to connecting an 
ammeter into a circuit? 

1 . Switch to the highest range 

2. Observe proper dc polarity 

3. Deenergize the circuit 

4. All of the above 

1 -29. What electrical property is measured by a 
voltmeter? 

1 . Power 

2. Current 

3. Voltage 

4. Resistance 

1-30. A voltmeter should be connected in an 
electrical circuit in what manner? 

1 . In series with the load 

2. In parallel with the load 

3. In accordance with Lenz's Law 

4. In series-parallel with the load 



1-31. A voltmeter has an effect on the circuit 

being measured; what is this effect called? 

1 . Loading 

2. Damping 

3 . Rectification 

4. Eddy-current drag 

1-32. To keep the effect of a voltmeter on a 
circuit to a minimum, the internal 
resistance of the voltmeter must have 
which of the following relationships to the 
circuit load? 

1 . Equal to 

2. Lower than 

3 . Higher than 

4. In proportion to 

1-33. Which of the following types of meters 
can be made from a current sensitive 
meter movement? 

1 . Ammeter 

2. Ohmmeter 

3 . Voltmeter 

4. Each of the above 

1-34. A voltmeter has a high sensitivity when it 
has which of the following characteristics? 

1 . Low deflection indication 

2. High deflection indication 

3 . Low ratio of internal resistance to full- 
scale deflection indication 

4. High ratio of internal resistance to 
full-scale deflection indication 

1-35. Which of the following configurations 
extends the range of a voltmeter? 

1 . A resistor in series with the meter 
movement 

2. A resistor in parallel with the meter 
movement 

3 . A capacitor in series with the meter 
movement 

4. A capacitor in parallel with the meter 
movement 



4 



1 -36. What voltmeter range should be used for 
initial measurements? 

1 . The lowest 

2. The highest 

3. The mid-scale 

1-37. The electrostatic meter movement reacts 
to which of the following electrical 
properties? 

1 . Power 

2. Current 

3. Voltage 

4. Resistance 

1-38. Electrostatic meter movements are used to 
measure which of the following 
current/voltage values? 

1 . Low voltage 

2. Low current 

3. High voltage 

4. High current 

1-39. Which of the following safety precautions 
should be observed when a voltmeter is 
used? 

1 . Deenergize the circuit before 
connecting the meter 

2. Start with the lowest range of the 
meter 

3 . Connect the meter in series with the 
circuit 

4. All of the above 

1 -40. What electrical property is measured with 
an ohmmeter? 

1 . Power 

2. Current 

3. Voltage 

4. Resistance 



1-41. An ohmmeter is used to check for which 
of the following conditions? 

1 . Continuity 

2. Overheating 

3 . Overcurrent 

4. Undercurrent 

1 -42. How should an ohmmeter be connected in 
an electrical circuit? 

1 . In series with the load 

2. In parallel with the load 

3 . In parallel with the source 

4. In series-parallel with the load 

1 -43 . An ohmmeter can measure different 

ranges because of the use of which of the 
following components? 

1 . Range coils 

2. Range resistors 

3 . Range capacitors 

4. Range potentiometers 

1 -44. What area of an ohmmeter scale should be 
used when a measurement is taken? 

1 . Upper half 

2. Lower half 

3. Mid-scale portion 

4. Anywhere on the meter face 

1 -45. Ohmmeter are classified by type. What are 
the two types of ohmmeters? 

1 . Series and shunt 

2. Normal and reverse 

3 . Full- and half-scale 

1-46. What is the most obvious differences in 
the two types of ohmmeters? 

1 . The ranges of the meters 

2. The scales of the meters 

3 . The power sources of the meters 

4. The size of the test leads of the meters 



5 



1 -47. Which of the following safety precautions 
should be observed when an ohmmeter is 
used? 

1 . Always start with the highest scale of 
the meter 

2. Deenergize the circuit before 
connecting the meter 

3. Observe proper polarity 

4. All of the above 

1-48. Meggers (megohmmeters) are used to 
measure which of the following 
quantities? 

1 . Low voltage 

2. High voltage 

3. Low resistance 

4. High resistance 

1 -49. When a megger is used to check the 
insulation of a wire, which of the 
following indications should be considered 
normal? 

1 . °° 

2. 

3. 500 V 

4. 1000 V 

1-50. Which of the following safety precautions 
should be observed when a megger is 
used? 

1 . Do not use a dc megger to measure 
circuits that are powered by ac 

2. Always start with the highest scale 
selection of the meter 

3. Do not touch the meter leads when a 
measurement is being taken 

4. All of the above 

1-51. A multimeter can be used to measure 
which of the following electrical 
properties? 

1 . Voltage 

2. Current 

3. Resistance 

4. Each of the above 



1-52. The function switch on a multimeter does 
NOT perform which of the following 
functions? 

1 . Selection of the meter range 

2. Determination of the proper scale 

3. Selection of ac or dc capability 

4. Changing of the multimeter from an 
ammeter to a voltmeter 

1-53. One of the problems encountered in 
building a multimeter is that the meter 
movement gives different readings for the 
same values of ac and dc. Which of the 
following features of a multimeter will 
solve this problem? 

1 . A rectifier 

2. An ac/dc switch 

3. Separate scales for ac and dc 

4. A mirror on the face of the meter 

1-54. Why is there a mirror on the face of a 
multimeter? 

1 . To illuminate the meter face 

2. To aid in reducing parallax error 

3 . To reduce the friction between the 
pointer and the meter face 

4. To compensate for the difference in ac 
and dc measurements 

1-55. If the mirror on the face of a multimeter is 
used properly, where will the image of the 
pointer appear? 

1 . Hidden behind the pointer 

2. Barely visible on either side of the 
pointer 

3. Clearly visible to the left of the pointer 

4. Clearly visible to the right of the 
pointer 



6 



1-56. 



Which of the following safety precautions 1-59. Which of the following electrical 

does NOT apply to a multimeter? quantities is measured by a wattmeter? 



1 . Observe proper dc polarity when 
measuring dc 

2. Deenergize the circuit before 
connecting the meter 

3. Be sure the meter is switched to ac for 
ac measurements 

4. Never apply power to the circuit when 
measuring voltage with the meter 



1 . Power 

2. Energy 

3 . Voltage 

4. Current 



1-60. Which of the following electrical 

quantities is measured by a watt hour 
meter? 



1-57. If a multimeter has no OFF position, and it 1 . Power 

is returned to storage, on which of the 2. Energy 

following positions should the meter be 3 . Voltage 

set? 4. Current 



1 . +dc; highest voltage range 

2. -dc; higher resistance range 

3. Ac; highest voltage range 

4. Ac; highest current range 

1-58. When the current in a conductor is 

measured without the conductor being 
disconnected, which of the following 
meters could be used? 



1 . Multimeter 

2. Hook-on voltameter 

3. Induction wattmeter 

4. Transformer voltmeter 



7 



ASSIGNMENT 2 

Textbook assignment: Chapter 2, "Circuit Protection Devices," pages 2-1 through 2-42. 



2-1 . Circuit protection devices are used for 
which of the following purposes? 

1 . To protect people 

2. To protect circuits 

3. To guard against hazardous 
conditions 

4. All of the above 

2-2. Which of the following conditions does 
NOT require the use of a circuit 
protection device? 

1 . Direct short 

2. High resistance 

3. Excessive current 

4. Abnormal heating 

2-3. When a point in a circuit, where full 

system voltage is present, comes in direct 
contact with the ground or return side of 
the circuit, which of the following terms 
applies? 

1 . Direct short 

2. High resistance 

3. Excessive current 

4. Abnormal heating 

2-4. When circuit current increases beyond 
the designed current carrying capability 
of the circuit, which of the following 
terms applies? 

1 . Direct short 

2. High resistance 

3. Excessive current 

4. Abnormal heating 



2-5. If the bearings of a generator were to fail, 
which of the following circuit conditions 
would probably occur? 

1 . Direct short 

2. High resistance 

3. Excessive current 

4. Abnormal heating 

2-6. How are circuit protection devices 
connected to the circuit they are 
protecting? 

1 . Alongside 

2. In series 

3. In parallel 

4. In series-parallel 

2-7. Which of the following two are circuit 
protection devices? 

1 . Electrical plugs and C0 2 cartridges 

2. C0 2 cartridges and circuit breakers 

3. Fuses and circuit breakers 

4. Fuses and electrical plugs 

THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 



8 



A F 



- Hf- 

B G 




Figure 2-A. — Recognition practice. 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-8 
THROUGH 2-13, REFER TO FIGURE 2-A. 

2-8. Which of the following is the schematic 
symbol for a fuse? 

1. A 

2. B 

3. F 

4. G 

2-9. Which of the following is the schematic 
symbol for a circuit breaker? 

1. A 

2. B 

3. F 

4. G 

2-10. Which of the following is an illustration 
of an open cartridge fuse? 

1. C 

2. D 

3. E 

4. I 



2-11. Which of the following is an illustration 
of a good cartridge fuse? 

1. C 

2. D 

3. E 

4. I 

2-12. Which of the following is an illustration 
of a good plug-type fuse? 

1. C 

2. D 

3. E 

4. H 

2-13. Which of the following is an illustration 
of an open plug-type fuse? 

1. C 

2. D 

3. E 

4. H 

2-14. Which of the following factors is NOT 
used to rate fuses? 

1. Size 

2. Current 

3 . Voltage 

4. Time delay 

2-15. A fuse current rating has which of the 
following definitions? 

1 . The maximum current that can flow 
through a circuit without causing the 
circuit to overheat 

2. The maximum current that will flow 
through a circuit if there is a direct 
short 

3 . The maximum current that will flow 
through a fuse without opening the 
fuse 

4. The maximum current that will not 
"jump" an open fuse 



9 



2-16. A fuse voltage rating has which of the 
following definitions? 



2-22. What is the time -delay rating for a fuse 
with the designation F03 A20R0C? 



The maximum voltage that can exist 
in a circuit without causing the 
circuit to overheat 

The maximum voltage that can exist 
in a circuit if there is a direct short 
The maximum voltage across a fuse 
that will not cause the fuse to open 
The maximum voltage across a fuse 
that will not jump the open fuse 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-17 
THROUGH 2-19, MATCH THE TIME- 
DELAY RATING LISTED IN COLUMN B TO 
THE ELECTRICAL DEVICE LISTED IN 
COLUMN A. NOT ALL ITEMS IN COLUMN 
B WILL BE USED. 



A. ELECTRICAL 
DEVICES 



B. TIME-DELAY 
RATINGS 



2-17. Electric motor 1. Fast 

2-18. Lighting circuit 2. Delay 

2-19. Meter Movement 3. Standard 

4. Intermediate 



2-20. What is the voltage rating for a fuse with 
the designation F03D1R00B? 

1. 32 V or less 

2. 125 V or less 

3. 250 V or less 

4. 500 V or less 

2-2 1 . What is the current rating for a fuse with 
the designation F03B0R50B? 

1. 1/2 amp 

2. 1.5 amp 

3. 3 amp 

4. 50 amp 



1. Fast 

2. Delay 

3. Standard 

4. Intermediate 

2-23. What is the voltage rating for a fuse with 
the designation F02B250V10AS? 

1. 10 V or less 

2. 32 V or less 

3. 52 V or less 

4. 250 V or less 

2-24. What is the current rating for a fuse with 
the designation F03A125V5A? 

1. 125 amp 

2. 5 amp 

3. 3 amp 

4. 1/8 amp 

2-25. What is the time-delay rating for a fuse 
with the designation F04C125V2AS? 

1. Fast 

2. Delay 

3. Standard 

4. Intermediate 

2-26. What is the voltage rating for a fuse with 
the designation 3AG20125V? 

1. 20 V or less 

2. 90 V or less 

3. 125 V or less 

4. 250 V or less 

2-27. What is the current rating for a fuse with 
the designation 3 AG 1032V? 

1. 1 amp 

2. 2 amp 

3. 3 amp 

4. 10 amp 



10 



2-28. What is the voltage rating for a fuse with 
the designation AGC5125V? 

1. 12 V or less 

2. 25 V or less 

3. 51 V or less 

4. 125 V or less 

2-29. What is the current rating for a fuse with 
the designation AGC2125V? 

1. 1 amp 

2. 2 amp 

3. 3 amp 

4. 25 amp 

2-30. What is the new military designation for 
a fuse with the old, military designation 
F03D1R50B? 

1. F03A125V1.5A 

2. F02B125V1.5A 

3. F03A250V11/2A 

4. F03B125V1.5A 











A 




Figure 2-B. 


— Fuseholder identification. 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-31 
THROUGH 2-34, REFER TO FIGURE 2-B. 



2-3 1 . What type of fuseholder is shown in 
figure 2-B(A)? 

1. Clip 

2. Post 

3. Bayonet 

4. Spring-loaded 

2-32. What type of fuseholder is shown in 
figure 2-B(B)? 

1. Clip 

2. Post 

3. Bayonet 

4. Spring-loaded 



2-33. When you use the fuseholder shown in 
figure 2-B(B), which connector should 
be connected to the power source? 

1 . Ground 

2. Center 

3. Inside 

4. Outside 

2-34. When you use the fuseholder shown in 
figure 2-B(B), which connector should 
be connected to the load? 

1 . Ground 

2. Center 

3. Inside 

4. Outside 

2-35. Which of the following methods will 

provide an ABSOLUTE determination as 
to whether or not a fuse is open? 

1 . A visual inspection 

2. A check of the fuse indicator 

3 . A voltmeter check of the fuse 

4. A thermometer check of the 
temperature of the fuse 

2-36. A fuse is removed from a circuit, 

checked with an ohmmeter, and found to 
be shorted. What action should be taken? 

1 . Discard the fuse 

2. Check the fuse with a voltmeter 

3 . Put the fuse back in the circuit 

4. Return the fuse to the supply 
department 

2-37. Which of the following methods should 
be used to check a .002 ampere fuse? 

1 . Use a megger and place a capacitor 
in parallel with the fuse 

2. Use a megger and place a capacitor 
in series with the fuse 

3 . Use an ohmmeter and place a resistor 
in parallel with the fuse 

4. Use an ohmmeter and place a resistor 
in series with the fuse 



11 



2-38. What should you use to remove a fuse 
from a clip-type fuseholder? 

1 . A scribe 

2. A fusepuller 

3. A screwdriver 

4. A pair of pliers 

2-39. Which of the following is a safety 

precaution to be observed when a fuse is 
checked? 

1 . Turn the power off and discharge the 
circuit before the fuse is removed 

2. When you check a fuse with an 
ohmmeter, be careful to avoid short 
circuits 

3. When you use a voltmeter to check a 
low current fuse, be careful to avoid 
opening the fuse by excessive current 
from the voltmeter 

4. All of the above 



YOU HAVE FOUND AN OPEN FUSE IN A 
PIECE OF EQUIPMENT AND HAVE 
REPAIRED THE CASUALTY. THE 
TECHNICAL MANUAL FOR THE 
EQUIPMENT SPECIFIES A FUSE CODED 
F02A125V3A. NO FUSES WITH THAT 
DESIGNATION ARE AVAILABLE. THE 
FOLLOWING FUSES ARE CARRIED BY 
THE SUPPLY SYSTEM. 

A. F03D3R00A 

B. 3AG3250V 

C. F02A3R00B 

D. AGC3125V 

E. F02D3R00C 

F. AGC5250V 



Figure 2-C. — Fuse replacement problem. 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-40 
THROUGH 2-46, USE THE INFORMATION 
IN FIGURE 2-C. 



2-40. What fuse is a direct replacement? 

1. A 

2. C 

3. D 

4. E 

2-4 1 . What fuse is the best substitute? 



2-42. 



1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 



A 
B 
C 
F 



What fuse is the second best in the 
fuseholder substitute? 

1. A 

2. C 

3. E 

4. F 



2-43. What fuse is unacceptable because the 
physical size is incorrect? 

1. A 

2. C 

3. E 

4. F 

2-44. What fuse is unacceptable because of the 
current rating? 

1. B 

2. D 

3. E 

4. F 

2-45. What fuse is unacceptable because of the 
voltage rating? 

1. A 

2. B 

3. C 

4. D 



12 



2-46. 



What fuse is unacceptable because of the 2-5 1 . Which of the following is NOT a type 

time-delay rating? trip element for a circuit breaker? 



1. A 

2. C 

3. D 

4. E 



1 . Thermal 

2. Magnetic 

3. Mechanical 

4. Thermal-magnetic 



2-47. Before replacing a fuse, you should 



1 . Proper fit 

2. Proper fuse 

3. Both 1 and 2 above 

4. Proper input voltage 

2-48. Which of the following is NOT a safety 
precaution to be observed when a fuse is 
changed? 

1. Be sure to "tag out" the fuseholder 
when you remove the fuse 

2. Remove the power from a circuit 
before removing and replacing a fuse 

3. Remove any corrosion from the 
fuseholder before replacing a fuse 

4. Be sure the fuse fits properly in the 
fuseholder 

2-49. When you perform preventive 

maintenance on fuses, which of the 
following is NOT a condition you should 
check? 

1 . Corrosion 

2. Shorted fuse 

3. Improper fit 

4. Improper fuse 

2-50. What is the total number of main 
components in a circuit breaker? 



check for which of the following 
conditions? 



THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 



1 . Five 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 



13 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-52 
THROUGH 2-54, SELECT FROM COLUMN 
B THE TRIP ELEMENT THAT IS 
DESCRIBED BY THE ACTION LISTED IN 
COLUMN A. NOT ALL ITEMS IN COLUMN 
B WILL BE USED. 



A. ACTIONS 

2-52. An electromagnet is 
connected in series 
with the load 

2-53. A bimetallic strip is 
heated by the load 
current 

2-54. A bimetallic strip is 
heated by the load 
current and 
electromagnet is 
connected in series 
with the load 



B. TRIP ELEMENTS 
Thermal 

Magnetic 

Mechanical 



Thermal-magnetic 



2-55. A circuit breaker that will trip even if the 
operating mechanism is held ON is 
known as what type of circuit breaker? 



2-57. Which of the following is NOT a time- 
delay rating for a circuit breaker? 

1 . Long 

2. Short 

3. Standard 

4. Instantaneous 

2-58. Selective tripping is used to cause which 
of the following circuit breakers to trip 
when there is an overload? 

1 . The least expensive 

2. The most accessible 

3. The smallest current rating 

4. The closest to the fault 

2-59. Selective tripping is used to accomplish 
which of the following purposes? 

1 . To reduce wear and tear on circuit 
breakers 

2. To isolate a faulty circuit without 
affecting other circuits 

3. To simplify the task of resetting the 
circuit breaker 

4. To enable the application of power to 
emergency circuits during an 
overload 



1. Standard THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK 

2. Emergency INTENTIONALLY. 

3. Trip free 

4. Nontrip free 



2-56. What type of circuit breaker can be 

overridden if the operating mechanism is 
held ON? 



1 . Standard 

2. Emergency 

3. Trip free 

4. Nontrip free 



14 




TIME, 1 1 1— > 

0° 90° 180° 270° 360° 

B 

Figure 2-D. — Power distribution system using 
selective tripping. 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-60 
THROUGH 2-62, REFER TO FIGURE 2-D. 

2-60. Which of the following circuit breakers 
should have a long time delay? 

1. CB1 

2. CB2 

3. CB3 

4. CB4 



2-6 1 . Which of the following circuit breakers 
should have a short time delay? 

1. CB1 

2. CB2 

3. CB5 

4. CB4 

2-62. Which of the following circuit breakers 
should have an instantaneous time delay? 

1. CB1 

2. CB2 

3. CB3 

4. CB4 

2-63. The following actions must be taken 
prior to working on a circuit breaker. 
Arrange these items in the proper 
sequence, then select the choice below 
that lists the events in the proper 
sequence. 

A. Tag the power switch 

B. Obtain the approval of the 
electrical officer 

C. Remove power to the circuit 
breaker 

D. Check the applicable technical 
manual 

1. A,B, C,D 

2. C, B, D, A 

3. D, B, C, A 

4. B, A, D, C 

2-64. Which of the following items is NOT 

checked during maintenance on a circuit 
breaker? 

1 . Input power voltage 

2. Operating mechanism smoothness 

3. Terminal tightness and corrosion 

4. Contact surfaces for pitting 



15 



ASSIGNMENT 3 

Textbook assignment: Chapter 3, "Circuit Control Devices," pages 3-1 through 3-73. 



3-1 . Circuit control devices should NOT be 
used for which of the following reasons? 

1 . To adjust the power level of a device 

2. To remove power from a 
malfunctioning device 

3. To apply power to a device when 
work is completed on it 

4. To select the function or circuit 
desired within a device 

3-2. Which of the following are types of 
circuit control devices? 

1 . Relays 

2. Switches 

3. Solenoids 

4. All of the above 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-3 
THROUGH 3-5, MATCH THE SCHEMATIC 
SYMBOL SHOWN IN COLUMN B TO THE 
DEVICE LISTED IN COLUMN A. 

B . SCHEMATIC 
A. DEVICES SYMBOLS 



3-3. A switch 1. 



3-4. A relay 
3-5. A solenoid 

4 ^=?T 



3-6. Which of the following is a manual 
switch? 

1 . A light switch 

2. A limit switch 

3. A thermostat 

4. A distributor 

3-7. Which of the following is an automatic 
switch? 

1 . An ignition switch on a motor 
vehicle 

2. A switch that turns on a light in a 
refrigerator 

3. A channel selector on a television 

4. A dial or push button on a telephone 

3-8. Control or selection of one or more 
circuits is a function of which of the 
following switches? 

1 . A manual switch 

2. An automatic switch 

3. A multicontact switch 

4. A single contact switch 



THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 



16 





o 


A 


E 


cr o 


o^i 
cr^J o 

o< o 


B 


F 


o cr o 


o o^\J o 

O 0^ o 


c 


G 




3 


o 


D 


o 

H 



Figure 3-A. — Switch schematics. 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-9 
THROUGH 3-15, REFER TO FIGURE 3-A. 
SELECT THE SYMBOL THAT REPRESENTS 
THE TYPE OF SWITCH STATED IN EACH 
QUESTION. 

3-9. A single-pole, double -throw switch. 



3-12. A double -pole, single-throw switch. 

1. B 

2. C 

3. E 

4. H 

3-13. A single-pole, single-throw switch. 

1. A 

2. B 

3. C 

4. D 

3-14. A three-pole, double -throw switch. 

1. E 

2. F 

3. G 

4. H 

3-15. A single-pole, triple-throw switch. 

1. B 

2. D 

3. E 

4. G 



THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK 
INTENTIONALLY. 



1. A 

2. B 

3. C 

4. D 



3-10. A double -pole, double-throw switch. 



1. B 

2. E 

3. G 

4. H 



3-11. A single-pole, four-throw switch. 



1. B 

2. D 

3. F 

4. H 



17 





o I o 
o o 


A 


F 


Q | 
O | o 

! 


B 


s .Li 

G 


.'/. 

♦ • 


0^1 o 
<S 


c 


H 


o 


6 1 6 
I 


D 


1 


u 1 a 


o cr^ 1 1 o 
o o 


E 





Figure 3-B. — Switch schematics. 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-16 
THROUGH 3-24, REFER TO FIGURE 3-B. 
SELECT THE SYMBOL THAT REPRESENTS 
THE TYPE OF SWITCH STATED IN EACH 
QUESTION. 

3-16. A single-pole, single-throw, double- 
break switch. 

1. A 

2. C 

3. D 

4. E 

3-17. A double -pole, single-throw, double- 
break switch. 

1. F 

2. H 

3. I 

4. J 



3-18. A single-pole, double -throw, single- 
break switch. 

1. A 

2. D 

3. E 

4. F 

3-19. A single-pole, double -throw, double- 
break switch. 

1. E 

2. F 

3. H 

4. I 

3-20. A double -pole, single-throw, single- 
break switch. 

1. E 

2. H 

3. I 

4. J 

3-21. A double -pole, double-throw, double- 
break switch. 

1. B 

2. F 

3. H 

4. I 

3-22. A double -pole, double-throw, single- 
break switch. 

1. F 

2. H 

3. I 

4. J 

3-23. A rotary switch. 

1. C 

2. D 

3. H 

4. I 



18 



3-24. A wafer switch. 

1. D 

2. E 

3. G 

4. H 

3-25. A switch actuator is described by which 
of the following terms? 

1 . Momentary 

2. Two-position 

3. Toggle 

4. Four-position 

3-26. What is the maximum number of 

different single-pole, single throw switch 
positions possible? 

1. One 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

3-27. What is the maximum number of 
different single-pole, double throw 
switch positions possible? 

1. One 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

3-28. Control of a circuit requiring a temporary 
actuation signal is provided by which of 
the following switches? 

1 . Momentary 

2. Locked-in 

3. Locked-out 

4. Rotary 

3-29. To guard against the accidental actuation 
of a circuit, which of the following types 
of switches are used? 



3-30. To guard against the accidental turning 
off of a circuit, which of the following 
types of switches are used? 

1 . Momentary 

2. Locked-in 

3. Locked-out 

4. Rotary 

3-31. What is the common name for a accurate 
snap-acting switch? 

1 . Maxiswitch 

2. Multiswitch 

3. Miniswitch 

4. Microswitch 

3-32. Designation of switch current rating is 
based on which of the following current 
values? 

1 . Maximum 

2. Minimum 

3. Nominal 

4. Average 

3-33. Designation of switch voltage rating is 
based on which of the following voltage 
values? 

1 . Maximum 

2. Minimum 

3. Nominal 

4. Average 

3-34. Checking a switch with the circuit power 
NOT applied is accomplished by using 
which of the following meters? 

1 . Wattmeter 

2. Frequency meter 

3. Temperature meter 

4. Ohmmeter 



1 . Momentary 

2. Locked-in 

3. Locked-out 

4. Rotary 



19 



3-35. Checking a switch with the power 

applied is accomplished by using which 
of the following meters? 

1 . Megger 

2. Ohmmeter 

3. Wattmeter 

4. Voltmeter 



A THREE-POLE , DOUBLE-THROW, SINGLE-BREAK, 
THREE POSITION, ROCKER SWITCH IS FAULTY. 
THIS SWITCH HAS A MOMENTARY POSITION 3 
AND IS LOCKED INTO POSITION 1. THE VOLT- 
AGE AND CURRENT RATING FOR THE SWITCH ARE 
230 VOLTS, 3 AMPERES. THE FOLLOWING 
SWITCHES ARE AVAILABLE. 




A. 



A 



A 


4 


1 


1 


2 






TOGGLE 


1 15V 
3A 


B 


2 


2 


2 


3 


2 


OUT 


ROCKER 


400V 
1 A 


C 


4 


1 


1 


2 


3 


OUT 
1 


ROCKER 


2 30V 
3A 


D 


2 


2 


2 


3 


2 


IN 
1 


ROCKER 


1 15V 
6A 


E 


3 


3 


2 


3 


1 


IN 

2 


TOGGLE 


400V 
3A 


F 


3 


2 


1 


3 


3 


IN 
1 


ROCKER 


230V 
5A 


G 


3 


2 


1 


3 


3 


1 N 

1 


TOGGLE 


230V 
3A 


H 


3 


2 


1 


3 


1 


1 N 

2 


ROCKER 


230V 
I0A 





Figure 3-C. — Switch replacement problem. 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-36 
THROUGH 3-45, REFER TO FIGURE 3-C. 



3-37. What switch is the second best 
substitute? 

1. C 

2. F 

3. G 

4. H 

3-38. Which of the following switches is 

unacceptable because of the number of 
poles? 

1. A 

2. D 

3. F 

4. G 

3-39. Which of the following switches is 

unacceptable because of the number of 
throws? 

1. A 

2. B 

3. D 

4. E 

3-40. Which of the following switches is 

unacceptable because of the number of 
breaks? 

1. A 

2. C 

3. E 

4. G 

3-41. Which of the following switches is 

unacceptable because of the number of 
positions? 



3-36. What switch is the best substitute? 

1. C 

2. F 

3. G 

4. H 



1. C 

2. D 

3. E 

4. F 



20 



3-42. Which of the following switches is 

unacceptable because of the momentary 
position? 

1. C 

2. F 

3. G 

4. H 

3-43. Which of the following switches has the 
wrong locked position? 

1. B 

2. D 

3. F 

4. G 

3-44. Which of the following switches has an 
unacceptable voltage rating? 

1. B 

2. D 

3. E 

4. F 

3-45. Which of the following switches has an 
unacceptable current rating? 

1. B 

2. C 

3. D 

4. F 

3-46. When you perform preventive 

maintenance on a switch, which of the 
following items should be checked? 

1 . The terminals for corrosion 

2. The physical condition of the switch 

3. The switch operation for smooth and 
correct operation 

4. All of the above 



3-47. A solenoid is based upon which of the 
following principles? 

1 . A bimetallic strip bends when it is 
heated 

2. A thermocouple produces a current 
when heated 

3. A coil attracts a soft iron core when 
current flows in the coil 

4. A soft iron core moving in a 
magnetic field creates a current 

3-48. A solenoid is commonly used in which 
of the following devices? 

1 . A fuel quantity indicating system 

2. A shipboard lighting system 

3. A sound-powered telephone system 

4. A starter for a motor vehicle 

3-49. If a solenoid is not operating properly, 
which of the following items need NOT 
be checked? 

1. Coil 

2. Armature 

3. Plunger 

4. Energizing voltage 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-50 
THROUGH 3-54, MATCH THE DEVICE(S) 
LISTED IN COLUMN B TO THE 
STATEMENTS IN COLUMN A. THE 
DEVICES IN COLUMN B MAY BE USED 
MORE THAN ONCE. 





A. STATEMENTS 




B. DEVICES 


•50. 


An electromagnetic 


1. 


A switch only 




device 






•51. 


A device with a 


2. 


A solenoid only 




movable plunger 






•52. 


A device with a fixed 


3. 


A relay only 




core 






•53. 


A device classified as 


4. 


A relay and a 




power or control 




solenoid 


•54. 


A device containing an 








armature 







21 



3-55. If a relay is hermetically sealed with an 
opaque cover, which of the following 
methods should be used to determine 
whether the relay is operating? 

1 . Shake the relay and listen for loose 
parts 

2. Place your finger on the cover and 
feel the relay contact movement 

3. Remove the cover and visually 
observe the relay contacts when the 
relay is activated 

4. Activate the relay and observe 
whether a metal object is attracted by 
the magnetic field 

3-56. If a relay is NOT operating properly, 

which of the following items need NOT 
be checked? 

1 . The armature resistance 

2. The terminal leads 

3. The contact surfaces 

4. The contact spacing 



3-57. What should be used to clean the 
contacts of a relay? 

1 . Sandpaper 

2. Emery cloth 

3. A jeweler's file 

4. A burnishing tool 

3-58. What should be used to adjust contact 
clearances on a relay? 

1 . A point bender 

2. A burnishing tool 

3. A pair of pliers 

4. A pair of hemostats 



22 



