








Doc. r 
D 207,208/4: ij \ [aa 
El 2/2/module 





1/992 NAVEDTRA B72-01-00-92 
aval Educati: i and February 1992 Training Manual 
fraining Com:.iand 0507-LP-217-7300 (TRAMAN) 





avy Electricity 
and Electronics 
Training Series 





odule 1—Introduction to Matter, 
tnergy, and Direct Current 


ISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


onfederal government personnel wanting a copy of this document 
ust use the purchasing instructions on the inside cover. 


DEPOSITORY 
ih L 4a09 


eQsiry OF ILLINOIS 
INIVERSITY OF ILLUS 
WOVATCUTA AOC UNIVER OF EN 


0507LP2177300 


UNIVERSITY OF 
ILLINOIS LIBRARY 
AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 
BOOKSTACKS 


Although the words ‘‘he,’’ ‘‘him,’’ and ‘‘his’’ 
are used sparingly in this manual to enhance com- 


munication, they are not intended to be gender 
driven nor to affront or discriminate against 
anyone reading this text. 





DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


Nonfederal government personnel wanting a copy of this document must write to Superintendent of Documents, 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402 OR Commanding Officer, Naval Publications and Forms 
Directorate, Navy Aviation Supply Office, 5801 Tabor Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19120-5099, Attention: Cash Sales, 
for price and availability. 


PREFACE 


Introduction to Matter, Energy, and Direct Current and its associated 
nonresident training course form a self-study package which is part 
of the Navy Electricity and Electronics Training Series (NEETS). This 
module is written for the men and women of the U. S. Navy and Naval 
Reserve whose duties require them to have a knowledge of the fundamentals 
of electricity. It begins with a brief history of the growth and development 
of the modern technological age within the Navy. The need for a background 
in electricity and electronics for nearly everyone concerned with the 
operation and maintenance of modern Navy equipment is also explained. 
The study begins with an introduction to matter—its makeup and its 
behavior. The student will become familiar with the building blocks of 
nature (molecules, atoms, electrons, etc.), and the processes by which 
particles become electrified. This study will include magnetism and its 
effects on electricity, common means of producing electricity, discussions of 
how electrity works, and what affects the behavior of electricity. Each 
topic will conclude with a summary. The module closes with electrical safety 
precautions and first aid. 

This training manual and the nonresident training course (NRTC) were 
prepared by the Naval Education and Training Program Management 
Support Activity, Pensacola, Florida, for the Chief of Naval Education 
and Training. 


1992 Edition 


Stock Ordering No. 
0507-LP-217-7300 


Published by 
NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM 
MANAGEMENT SUPPORT ACTIVITY 


UNITED STATES 
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
WASHINGTON, D.C.: 1992 


THE UNITED STATES NAVY 


GUARDIAN OF OUR COUNTRY 


The United States Navy is responsible for maintaining control of the 
sea and is a ready force on watch at home and overseas, capable of 
strong action to preserve the peace or of instant offensive action to 
win in war. 


It is upon the maintenance of this control that our country’s glorious 
future depends; the United States Navy exists to make it so. 


WE SERVE WITH HONOR 
Tradition, valor, and victory are the Navy’s heritage from the past. To 
these may be added dedication, discipline, and vigilance as the 
watchwords of the present and the future. 


At home or on distant stations we serve with pride, confident in the 
respect of our country, our shipmates, and our families. 


Our responsibilities sober us; our adversities strengthen us. 


Service to God and Country is our special privilege. We serve with 
honor. 


THE FUTURE OF THE NAVY 


The Navy will always employ new weapons, new techniques, and 
greater power to protect and defend the United States on the sea, 
under the sea, and in the air. 


Now and in the future, control of the sea gives the United States her 
greatest advantage for the maintenance of peace and for victory in 
war. 


Mobility, surprise, dispersal, and offensive power are the keynotes of 
the new Navy. The roots of the Navy lie in a strong belief in the 
future, in continued dedication to our tasks, and in reflection on our 
heritage from the past. 


Never have our opportunities and our responsibilities been greater. 





CONTENTS 


TOPIC 


l. Matter, Energy,.and Electricity. « s.<-¢ «e+ s «bes 
a MEAT LOLI OS! Si dee he Sc Soe Se So ae Be eg ee 


9. (Digect Current s o.a.ek beeen ese Boa art SS ASS 


APPENDIX 


YT; Aglossaty. Sehok) fxs ha Sed oh ee ae Pe AS 
Ih... Baws Ob Exponemts: 55.5 ora Sean Goad WE eas 


HT. Square and. Squaré Roots oe. $.5. Goa eg osesesi we 9% 


IV. Comparison of Units in Electric and 
Magnetic Circuits; and Carbon Resistor Size 


Comparison by Wattage Rating ............ 


V. Useful Formulas for D.C. Circuits........... 


ill 


Page 


NAVY ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS 
TRAINING SERIES 


The Navy Electricity and Electronics Training 
Series (NEETS) was developed for use by 
personnel in many electrical and electronic related 
Navy ratings. Written by, and with the advice of, 
senior technicians in these ratings, this series 
provides beginners with fundamental electrical 
and electronic concepts through the medium of 
self-study. The presentation is not oriented to any 
specific rating structure. 

The series is divided into modules that contain 
related information organized in traditional paths 
of instruction. The first module in the series 
introduces you to the course with a short history 
of electricity and electronics, and proceeds into 
the characteristics of matter, energy, and direct 
current. Module 1 also describes some of the 
general safety precautions and first-aid procedures 
that should be common knowledge for a person 
working in the field of electricity. Related safety 
hints are located throughout the rest of the series. 
Module 2 is an introduction to alternating current 
and transformers. It discusses basic ac theory 
and the fundamentals of electromagnetism, 
inductance, capacitance, impedance, and trans- 
formers. Module 3 deals with circuit breakers, 
fuses, and current limiters used in circuit 
protection. This module also discusses the theory 
and use of meters as electrical measuring devices. 
Module 4 presents the use of conductors, the 
insulation used as wire covering, splicing, 
termination of wiring, soldering techniques, and 
reading electrical wiring diagrams. Module 5 is 
an introduction to generators and motors. It 
covers the uses of ac and dc generators and motors 
in the conversion of electrical and mechanical 
energy. Module 6 ties the first five modules 
together in an introduction to vacuum tubes and 
the vacuum-tube power supply. Module 7 does the 
same thing, using solid-state devices. The series 
continues into amplifiers (module 8) and wave- 
generation and wave-shaping circuits (module 9). 
Module 10 discusses the characteristics of wave 
propagation, transmission lines and antennas. 
Module 11, entitled Microwave Principles, 


iv 


explains microwave oscillators, amplifiers, and 
waveguides. The principles of modulation are dis- 
cussed in module 12. Module 13 presents the 
fundamental concepts of number systems, Boo- 
lean algebra, and logic circuits, which pertain to 
digital computers. Module 14 is devoted to the 
technology of microelectronics and the repair of 
miniature and microminiature circuits. The basic 
principles, operations, functions, and applications 
of synchro, servo, and gyro mechanisms are 
covered in module 15. The module on test equip- 
ment, module 16, introduces the beginner to some 
of the more commonly used pieces of test equip- 
ment and their applications. Module 17 presents 
the fundamentals of a radio-frequency communi- 
cation system. Module 18 covers the fundamentals 
of a radar system. Module 19 is called The 
Technician’s Handbook. Its purpose is to provide 
the technician with a handy reference of 
commonly used general information. It contains 
information, such as electrical and electronic 
formulas, color coding, and Navy supply system 
information. Module 20 is the master glossary of 
terms and index for the series. Module 21 
introduces the technician to alternative methods 
of performing electronics measurements. Module 
22 is an introduction to digital computers. Module 
23 is an introduction to the use and maintenance 
of magnetic recorders and the concepts of 
recording on magnetic tape and disks. 


An individual just becoming acquainted with 
electricity or electronics should study the modules 
in their suggested sequence. The series is designed 
to give a student small amounts of information 
that can be easily digested before advancing 
further into the more complex material. 


Comprehension check questions are dis- 
tributed throughout each of the modules, except 
for modules 19 and 20, which are used as 
references. If you have difficulty in answering the 
questions, you should restudy the applicable 
paragraph(s). Answers to the questions are given 
on the next even-numbered page. 


Although an attempt has been made to use 
simple language, various technical words and 
phrases have necessarily been included. These are 
explained both in the text and in the glossary 
provided at the end of each module. Specific terms 
are also defined in module 20, the Master Glossary 
and Index. 

Considerable emphasis has been placed 
on the use of illustrations to provide a 
maximum amount of information. In some 


instances, a knowledge of basic algebra may be 
required. 


A nonresident training course (NRTC ) is pro- 
vided for each module with the exceptions of The 
Technician’s Handbook (module 19) and The 
Master Glossary and Index (module 20). Course 
descriptions and ordering information are 
found in NAVEDTRA 12061, List of Training 
Manuals and Correspondence Courses. 


NAVY ELECTRICITY AND 


ELECTRONICS TRAINING SERIES 


Module 1 
Module 2 
Module 3 
Module 4 


Module 5 
Module 6 
Module 7 
Module 8 
Module 9 
Module 10 


Module 11 
Module 12 
Module 13 
Module 14 
Module 15 
Module 16 
Module 17 
Module 18 
Module 19 
Module 20 
Module 21 
Module 22 
Module 23 


Introduction to Matter, Energy, and Direct Current 
Introduction to Alternating Current and Transformers 
Introduction to Circuit Protection, Control, and Measurement 


Introduction to Electrical Conductors, Wiring Techniques, and 
Schematic Reading 


Introduction to Generators and Motors 

Introduction to Electronic Emission, Tubes, and Power Supplies 
Introduction to Solid-State Devices and Power Supplies 
Introduction to Amplifiers 

Introduction to Wave-Generation and Wave-Shaping Circuits 


Introduction to Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines, and 
Antennas 


Microwave Principles 

Modulation Principles 

Introduction to Number Systems and Logic Circuits 
Introduction to Microelectronics 

Principles of Synchros, Servos, and Gyros 
Introduction to Test Equipment 
Radio-Frequency Communications Principles 
Radar Principles 

The Technician’s Handbook 

Master Glossary and Index 

Test Methods and Practices 

Introduction to Digital Computers 


Magnetic Recording 


vi 


TOPIC 1 


MATTER, ENERGY, AND ELECTRICITY 


LEARNING OBJECTIVES 


Learning objectives are stated at the beginning of each topic. These learning 
objectives serve as a preview of the information you are expected to learn in 
the topic. The comprehensive check questions are based on the objectives. 
By successfully completing the NRTC, you indicate that you have 
met the objectives and have learned the information. The learning objectives 


are listed below. 


Upon completing this topic, you will be able to: 


. State the meanings of and the relationship 
between matter, element, nucleus, 
compound, molecule, mixture, atom, 
electron, proton, neutron, energy, valence, 
valence shell, and ion. 


. State the meanings of and the relationship 
between kinetic energy, potential energy, 
photons, electron orbits, energy levels and 
shells and subshells. 


. State, in terms of valence, the differences 
between a conductor, an insulator, and a 


semiconductor, and list some materials 
which make the best conductors and 
insulators. 


. State the definition of static electricity and 
explain how static electricity is generated. 


. State the meanings of retentivity, reluctance, 
permeability, ferromagnetism, natural 
magnet, and artificial magnet as used to 
describe magnetic materials. 


. State the Weber and domain theories of 
magnetism and list six characteristics of 
magnetic lines of force (magnetic flux), 
including their relation to magnetic 
induction, shielding, shape, and storage. 


10. 


iis 


hist 


' 7. State, using the water analogy, how a 


difference of potential (a voltage or an 
electromotive force) can exist. Convert volts 


to microvolts, to millivolts, and _ to 
kilovolts. 
. List six methods for producing a voltage 


(emf) and state the operating principles of 
and the uses for each method. 


. State the meanings of electron current, 


random drift, directed drift, and ampere, 
and indicate the direction that an electric 
current flows. 


State the relationship of current to voltage 
and convert amperes to milliamperes and 
microamperes. 


State the definitions of and the terms and 
symbols for resistance and conductance, and 
how the temperature, contents, length and 
cross-sectional area of a conductor affect its 
resistance and conductance values. 


the physical and _ operating 
characteristics of and the symbols, ratings, 
and uses for various types of resistors; use 
the color code to identify resistor values. 


INTRODUCTION 


The origin of the modern technical and 
electronic Navy stretches back to the beginning 
of naval history, when the first navies were no 
more than small fleets of wooden ships, using 
wind-filled sails and manned oars. The need for 
technicians then was restricted to a navigator 
and semiskilled seamen who could handle the 
sails. 

As time passed, larger ships that carried 
more sail were built. These ships, encouraging 
exploration and commerce, helped to establish 
world trade routes. Soon strong navies were 
needed to guard these sea lanes. Countries 
established their own navies to protect their 
citizens, commercial ships, and shipping lanes 
against pirates and warring nations. With the 
addition of mounted armament, gunners joined 
the ship’s company of skilled or semiskilled 
technicians. 

The advent of the steam engine signaled the 
rise of an energy source more practical than 
either wind and sails or manpower. With this 
technological advancement, the need _ for 
competent operators and technicians increased. 

However, the big call for operators and 
technicians in the U.S. Navy came in the early 
part of the 20th century, when power sources, 
means of communication, modes of detection, 
and armaments moved with amazing rapidity 
toward involved technical development. Electric 
motors and generators by then had become the 
most widely used sources of power. Telephone 
systems were well established on board ship, and 
radio was being used more and more to relay 
messages from ship to ship and from ship to 
shore. Listening devices were employed to 
detect submarines. Complex optical systems 


Ie2 


were used to aim large naval rifles. Mines and 
torpedoes became highly developed, effective 
weapons, and airplanes joined the Navy team. 

During the years after World War I, the Navy 
became more electricity and electronic minded. 
It was recognized that a better system of 
communications was needed aboard each ship, 
and between the ships, planes, submarines, and 
shore installations; and that weaponry advances 
were needed to keep pace with worldwide 
developments in that field. This growing 
technology carried with it the awareness that an 
equally skilled force of technicians was needed 
for maintenance and service duties. 

World War II proved that all of the expense 
of providing equipment for the fleet and of 
training personnel to handle that equipment 
paid great dividends. The U.S. Navy had the 
modern equipment and highly trained personnel 
needed to defeat the powerful fleets of the 
enemy. 

Today there is scarcely anyone on board a 
Navy ship who does not use electrical or 
electronic equipment. This equipment is needed 
in systems of electric lighting and power, 
intercommunications, radio, radar, sonar, loran, 
remote metering, weapon aiming, and certain 
types of mines and torpedoes. The Navy needs 
trained operators and technicians in this 
challenging field of electronics and electricity. It 
is to achieve this end that this module, and 
others like it, are published. 


MATTER, ENERGY, 
AND ELECTRICITY 


If there are roots to western science, they no 
doubt lie under the rubble that was once ancient 


Greece. With the exception of the Greeks, 
ancient people had little interest in the structure 
of materials. They accepted a solid as being just 
that—a continuous, uninterrupted substance. 
One Greek school of thought believed that if a 
piece of matter, such as copper, were 
subdivided, it could be done indefinitely and 
still only that material would be found. Others 
reasoned that there must be a limit to the 
number of subdivisions that could be made and 
have the material still retain its original 
characteristics. They held fast to the idea that 
there must be a basic particle upon which all 
substances are built. Recent experiments have 
revealed that there are, indeed, several basic 


particles, or building blocks within ll 
substances. 
The following paragraphs explain how 


substances are classified as elements and 
compounds, and are made up of molecules and 
atoms. This, then, will be a learning experience 
about protons, electrons, valence, energy levels, 
and the physics of electricity. 


MATTER 


Matter is defined as anything that occupies 
space and has weight; that is, the weight and 
dimensions of matter can be measured. 
Examples of matter are air, water, automobiles, 
clothing, and even our own bodies. Thus, we can 
say that matter may be found in any one of 
three states: SOLID, LIQUID, and GASEOUS. 


ELEMENTS AND COMPOUNDS 


An ELEMENT is a substance which cannot 
be reduced to a simpler substance by chemical 
means. Examples of elements with which you 
are in everyday contact are iron, gold, silver, 
copper, and oxygen. There are now over 100 
known elements. All the different substances we 
know about are composed of one or more of 
these elements. 

When two or more elements are chemically 
combined, the resulting substance is called a 
COMPOUND. A compound is a_ chemical 
combination of elements which can be separated 
by chemical but not by physical means. 
Examples of common compounds are water, 
which consists of hydrogen and oxygen, and 





1-3 


table salt, which consists of sodium and 
chlorine. A MIXTURE, on the other hand, is a 
combination of elements and compounds, not 
chemically combined, that can be separated by 
physical means. Examples of mixtures are air, 
which is made up of nitrogen, oxygen, carbon 
dioxide, and small amounts of several rare gases, 
and sea water, which consists chiefly of salt and 
water. 


Ql. What is matter, and in what three states 
is it found? 

Q2. What is an element? 

Q3. What is a compound? 

Q4. What is the difference between a 
compound and a mixture? 

MOLECULES 


A MOLECULE is a chemical combination of 
two or more atoms, (atoms are described in the 
next paragraph). In a compound the molecule is 
the smallest particle that has all the 
characteristics of the compound. 


Consider water, for example. Water is mat- 
ter, since it occupies space and has weight. 
Depending on the temperature, it may exist as a 
liquid (water), a solid (ice), or a gas (steam). 
Regardless of the temperature, it will still have 
the same composition. If we start with a 
quantity of water, divide this and pour out one 
half, and continue this process a_ sufficient 
number of times, we will eventually end up with 
a quantity of water which cannot be further 
divided without ceasing to be water. This 
quantity is called a molecule of water. If this 
molecule of water is divided, instead of two 


Al. Anything that occupies space and has 
weight. Solids, liquids, gases 


A2. A substance which cannot be reduced to 
a simpler substance by chemical means 


A3. A substance consisting of two or more 
elements 


A4. A compound is a chemical combination 
of elements that cannot be separated by 
physical means. A mixture is a physical 
combination of elements and 
compounds that are not chemically 
combined. 


parts of water, there will be one part of oxygen 
and two parts of hydrogen (H, O). 


ATOMS 


Molecules are made up of smaller particles 
called ATOMS. An atom is the smallest particle 
of an element that retains the characteristics of 
that element. The atoms of one element, 
however; differ from the atoms of all other 
elements. Since there are over 100 known 
elements, there must be over 100 different 
atoms, or a different atom for each element. 
Just as thousands of words can be made by 
combining the proper letters of the alphabet, so 
thousands of different materials can be made by 
chemically combining the proper atoms. 


Any particle that is a chemical combination 
of two or more atoms is called a molecule. The 
oxygen molecule consists of two atoms of 
oxygen, and the hydrogen molecule consists of 
two atoms of hydrogen. Sugar, on the other 
hand, is a compound composed of atoms of 
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. These atoms are 
combined into sugar molecules. Since the sugar 
molecules can be broken down by chemical 


means into smaller and simpler units, we cannot 
have sugar atoms. 

The atoms of each element are made up of 
electrons, protons, and, in most cases, neutrons, 
which are collectively called subatomic particles. 
Furthermore, the electrons, protons, and 
neutrons of one element are identical to those of 
any other element. The reason that there are 
different kinds of elements is that the number 
and the arrangement of electrons and protons 
within the atom are different for the different 
elements. 

The electron is considered to be a small 
negative charge of electricity. The proton has a 
positive charge of electricity equal and opposite 
to the charge of the electron. Scientists have 
measured the mass and size of the electron and 
proton, and they know how much charge each 
possesses. The electron and proton each have the 
same quantity of charge, although the mass of 
the proton is approximately 1837 times that of 
the electron. In some atoms there exists a 
neutral particle called a neutron. The neutron 
has a mass approximately equal to that of a 
proton, but it has no electrical charge. 
According to a popular theory, the electrons, 
protons, and neutrons of the atoms are thought 
to be arranged in a manner similar to a miniature 
solar system. The protons and neutrons form a 
heavy nucleus with a positive charge, around 
which the very light electrons revolve. 

Figure 1-1 shows one hydrogen and one 
helium atom. Each has a relatively simple 
structure. The hydrogen atom has only one 
proton in the nucleus with one electron rotating 
about it. The helium atom is a little more 
complex. It has a nucleus made up of two 
protons and two neutrons, with two electrons 
rotating about the nucleus. Elements are 
classified numerically according to the 
complexity of their atoms. The atomic number 
of an atom is determined by the number of 
protons in its nucleus. 

In a neutral state, an atom contains an equal 
number of protons and electrons. Therefore, an 
atom of hydrogen—which contains one proton 
and one electron—has an atomic number of 1; 
and helium, with two protons and two electrons, 
has an atomic number of 2. The complexity of 
atomic structure increases with the number of 
protons and electrons. 





HYDROGEN 


@ Protons 


PROTONS 


ELECTRONS 


NUCLEUS 


NEUTRON 






HELIUM 


€} NEUTRONS 


Figure 1-1.—Structures of simple atoms. 


Q5. What is a molecule? 

Q6. What are the three types of subatomic 
particles, and what are their charges? 

Energy Levels 


Since an electron in an atom has both mass 
and motion, it contains two types of energy. By 
virtue of its motion the electron contains 
KINETIC ENERGY. Due to its position it also 
contains POTENTIAL ENERGY. The total 
energy contained by an electron (kinetic plus 
potential) is the factor which determines the 
radius of the electron orbit. In order for an 
electron to remain in this orbit it must neither 
GAIN nor LOSE energy. 


It is well known that light is a form of 
energy, but the physical form in which this 
energy exists is not known. 


One accepted theory proposes the existence 
of light as tiny packets of energy called 
PHOTONS. Photons can contain various 


1-5 


quantities of energy. The amount depends upon 
the color of the light involved. Should a photon 
of sufficient energy collide with an orbital 
electron, the electron will absorb the photon’s 
energy, as shown in figure 1-2. The electron, 
which now has a greater than normal amount of 
energy, will jump to a new orbit farther from 
the nucleus. The first new orbit to which the 
electron can jump has a radius four times as 
large as the radius of the original orbit. Had the 
electron received a greater amount of energy, 
the next possible orbit to which it could jump 
would have a radius nine times the original. 
Thus, each orbit may be considered to represent 
one of a large number of energy levels that the 
electron may attain. It must be emphasized that 
the electron cannot jump to just any orbit. The 
electron will remain in its lowest orbit until a 
sufficient amount of energy is available, at 
which time the electron will accept the energy 
and jump to one of a series of permissible orbits. 
An electron cannot exist in the space between 
energy levels. This indicates that the electron 
will not accept a photon of energy unless it 
contains enough energy to elevate itself to one 
of the higher energy levels. Heat energy and 
collisions with other particles can also cause the 
electron to jump orbits. 


A chemical combination of two or more 
atoms 


A6. _ Electrons-negative, protons-positive, and 


neutrons-neutral 





NEW ORBIT 


ge a 
aa 


OLD OFB/ Y 





Figure 1-2.—Excitation by a photon. 


Once the electron has been elevated to an 
energy level higher than the lowest possible 
energy level, the atom is said to be in an excited 
state. The electron will not remain in this 
excited condition for more than a fraction of a 
second before it will radiate the excess energy 
and return to a lower energy orbit. To illustrate 
this principle, assume that a normal electron has 
just received a photon of energy sufficient to 
raise it from the first to the third energy level. In 
a short period of time the electron may jump 
back to the first level emitting a new photon 
identical to the one it received. 

A second alternative would be for the 
electron to return to the lower level in two 


jumps; from the third to the second, and then 
from the second to the first. In this case the 
electron would emit two photons, one for each 
jump. Each of these photons would have less 
energy than the original photon which. excited 
the electron. 

This principle is used in the fluorescent light 
where ultraviolet light photons, which are not 
visible to the human eye, bombard a phosphor 
coating on the inside of a glass tube. The 
phosphor electrons, in returning to their normal 
orbits, emit photons of light that are visible. By 
using the proper chemicals for the phosphor 
coating, any color of light may be obtained, 
including white. This same principle is also used 
in lighting up the screen of a television picture 
tube. 

The basic principles just developed apply 
equally well to the atoms of more complex 
elements. In atoms containing two or more 
electrons, the electrons interact with each other 
and the exact path of any one electron is very 
difficult to predict. However, each electron lies 
in a specific energy band and the orbits will be 
considered as an average of the electron’s 
position. 


Q7. 


What is energy of motion called? 


Q8. 


How is invisible light changed to visible 
light in a flourescent light? 


Shells and Subshells 


The difference between the atoms, insofar as 
their chemical activity and _ stability are 
concerned, is dependent upon the number and 
position of the electrons included within the 
atom. How are these electrons positioned within 


the atom? In general, the electrons reside in 


1-6 


groups of orbits called shells. These shells are 
elliptically shaped and are assumed to be located 
at fixed intervals. Thus, the shells are arranged in 
steps that correspond to fixed energy levels. The 
shells, and the number of electrons required to 


fill them, may be predicted by the employment 
of Pauli’s exclusion principle. Simply stated, this 
principle specifies that each shell will contain a 
maximum of 2n? electrons, where n corresponds 
to the shell number starting with the one closest 
to the nucleus. By this principle, the second 
shell, for example, would contain 2(2)? or 8 
electrons when full. 

In addition to being numbered, the shells are 
also given letter designations, as pictured in 
figure 1-3. Starting with the shell closest to the 
nucleus and progressing outward, the shells are 
labeled K, L, M, N, O, P, and Q, respectively. 
The shells are considered to be full, or complete, 
when they contain the following quantities of 
electrons: two in the K shell, eight in the L 
shell, eighteen in the M shell, and so on, in 
accordance with the exclusion principle. Each of 
these shells is a major shell and can be divided 
into subshells, of which there are four, labeled s, 
p, d, and f. Like the major shells, the subshells 
are also limited as to the number of electrons 
which they can contain. Thus, the ‘‘s” subshell is 
complete when it contains two Se aGie, the 


66.99 


p’ subshell when it contains six, the “d’’ 


LETTER DESIGNATION Jf 


f 


SHELL NUMBER 





Figure 1-3.—Shell designation. 


1-7 


subshell when it contains ten, and the “f” 
subshell when it contains fourteen electrons. 


Inasmuch as the K shell can contain no more 
than two electrons, it must have only one 
subshell, the s subshell. The M shell is composed 
of three subshells: s, p, and d. If the electrons in 
the s, p, and d subshells are added, their total is 
found to be 18, the exact number required to 
fill the M_ shell. Notice the electron 
configuration for copper illustrated in figure 1-4. 
The copper atom contains 29 electrons, which 
completely fill the first three shells and 
subshells, leaving one electron in the ‘‘s” 
subshell of the N shell. 


Valence 


The number of electrons in the outermost 
shell determines the valence of an atom. For this 
reason, the outer shell of an atom is called the 
VALENCE SHELL; and the electrons contained 
in this shell are called VALENCE ELECTRONS. 
The valence of an atom determines its ability to 
gain or lose an electron, which in turn 
determines the chemical and electrical properties 
of the atom. An atom that is lacking only one or 
two electrons from its outer shell will easily gain 
electrons to complete its shell, but a large 
amount of energy is required to free any of its 
electrons. An atom having a relatively small 


RN 


26 10,] 


Ail} 


Figure 1-4.—Copper atom. 


COPPER 


aluminum are materials with many free electrons 
and make good conductors. Silver is the best 
conductor, followed by copper, gold, and 
aluminum. Copper is used more often than silver 
because of cost. Aluminum is used where weight 
is a major consideration, such as in 
high-tension power lines, with long spans 
between supports. Gold is used where oxidation 
or corrosion is a consideration and a good 
conductivity is required. The ability of a 
conductor to handle current also depends upon 
its physical dimensions. Conductors are usually 
found in the form of wire, but may be in the 
form of bars, tubes, or sheets. 

Nonconductors have few free electrons. 
These materials are called INSULATORS. Some 
examples of these materials are rubber, plastic, 
enamel, glass, dry wood, and mica. Just as there 
is no perfect conductor, neither is there a 
perfect insulator. 

Some materials are neither good conductors 
nor good insulators, since their electrical 
characteristics fall between those of conductors 
and insulators. These in-between materials are 
classified as SEMICONDUCTORS. Germanium 
and silicon are two common semiconductors 
used in solid-state devices. 


What determines whether a substance is 
a conductor or an insulator? 


Qil. 


ELECTROSTATICS 


Electrostatics (electricity at rest) is a subject 
with which most persons entering the field of 
electricity. and electronics are somewhat 
familiar. For example, the way a person’s hair 
stands on end after a vigorous rubbing is an 
effect of electrostatics. While pursuing the study 
of electrostatics, you will gain a_ better 
understanding of this common occurrence. Of 
even greater significance, the study of 
electrostatics will provide you with the 
opportunity to gain important background 
knowledge and to develop concepts which are 
essential to the understanding of electricity and 
electronics. 


1-9 


Interest in the subject of static electricity 
can be traced back to the Greeks. Thales of 
Miletus, a Greek philosopher and 
mathematician, discovered that when an amber 
rod is rubbed with fur, the rod has the amazing 
characteristic of attracting some very light 
objects such as bits of paper and shavings of 
wood. 


About 1600, William Gilbert, an English 
Scientist, made a study of other substances 
which had been found to possess qualities of 
attraction similar to amber. Among these were 
glass, when rubbed with silk, and ebonite, when 
rubbed with fur. Gilbert classified all the 
substances which possessed properties similar to 
those of amber as electrics, a word of Greek 
origin meaning amber. 


Because of Gilbert’s work with electrics, a 
substance such as amber or glass when given a 
vigorous rubbing was recognized as being 
ELECTRIFIED, or CHARGED with electricity. 

In the year 1733, Charles Dufay, a French 
scientist, made an important discovery about 
electrification. He found that when a glass rod 
was rubbed with fur, both the glass rod and the 
fur became electrified. This realization came 
when he systematically placed the glass rod and 
the fur near other electrified substances and 
found that certain substances which were 
attracted to the glass rod were repelled by the 
fur, and vice versa. From experiments such as 
this, he concluded that there must be two 
exactly opposite kinds of electricity. 


Benjamin Franklin, American statesman, 
inventor, and philosopher, is credited with first 
using the terms POSITIVE and NEGATIVE to 
describe the two opposite kinds of electricity. 
The charge produced on a glass rod when it is 
rubbed with silk, Franklin labeled positive. He 
attached the term negative to the charge 
produced on the silk. Those bodies which were 
not electrified or charged, he called NEUTRAL. 


STATIC ELECTRICITY 


In a natural, or neutral state, each atom ina 
body of matter will have the proper number of 
electrons in orbit around it. Consequently, the 
whole body of matter composed of the neutral 
atoms will also be electrically neutral. In this 


A 9. The number of electrons in the outer 
shell 


A10. An atom with more or less than its 
normal number of electrons 


All. The number of valence electrons 


state, it is said to have a “zero charge.” 
Electrons will neither leave nor enter the 
neutrally charged body should it come in 
contact with other neutral bodies. If, however, 
any number of electrons are removed from the 
atoms of a body of matter, there will remain 
more protons than electrons and the whole body 
of matter will become ELECTRICALLY 
POSITIVE. Should the positively charged body 
come in contact with another body having a 
normal charge, or having a NEGATIVE (too 
many electrons) charge, an electric current will 
flow between them. Electrons will leave the 
more negative body and enter the positive body. 
This electron flow will continue until both 
bodies have equal charges. When two bodies of 
matter have unequal charges and are near one 
another, an electric force is exerted between 
them because of their unequal charges. However, 
since they are not in contact, their charges 
cannot equalize. The existence of such an 
electric force, where current cannot flow, is 
referred to as static electricity. (‘‘Static” in this 
instance means “‘not moving.”) It is also referred 
to as an electrostatic force. 


One of the easiest ways to create a static 
charge is by friction. When two pieces of matter 
are rubbed together, electrons can be “wiped 
off” one material onto the other. If the 
materials used are good conductors, it is quite 
difficult to obtain a detectable charge on either, 
since equalizing currents can flow easily between 
the conducting materials. These currents 
equalize the charges almost as fast as they are 
created. A static charge is more easily created 
between nonconducting materials. When a hard 


rubber rod is rubbed with fur, the rod will 
accumulate electrons given up by the fur, as 
shown in figure 1-5. Since both materials are 
poor conductors, very little equalizing current 
can flow, and an electrostatic charge builds up. 
When the charge becomes great enough, current 
will flow regardless of the poor conductivity of 
the materials. These currents will cause visible 
sparks and produce a crackling sound. 


Q12. How is a negative charge created in a 
neutral body? 


Q13. How are static charges created? 


Nature of Charges 


When in a natural, or neutral state, an atom 
has an equal number of electrons and protons. 
Because of this balance, the net negative charge 
of the electrons in orbit is exactly balanced by 
the net positive charge of the protons in the 
neucleus, making the atom electrically neutral. 


, =} CHARGES AND ELECTRONS 
ARE PRESENT IN EQUAL 

QUANTITIES 

the a ASS 4 a 






IN THE ROD AND FUR 






x 





ELECTRONS ARE TR 
FERRED FROM THE 
FUR TO THE ROD 


Figure 1-5.—Producing static electricity by friction. 


An atom becomes a positive ion whenever it 
loses an electron, and has an overall positive 
charge. Conversely, whenever an atom acquires 
an extra electron, it becomes a negative ion and 
has a negative charge. 

Due to normal molecular activity, there are 
always ions present in any material. If the 
number of positive ions and negative ions is 
equal, the material is electrically neutral. When 
the number of positive ions exceeds the number 
of negative ions, the material is positively 
charged. The material is negatively charged 
whenever the negative ions outnumber the 
positive ions. 

Since ions are actually atoms without their 
normal number of electrons, it is the excess or 
the lack of electrons in a substance that 
determines its charge. In most solids, the 
transfer of charges is by movement of electrons 
rather than ions. The transfer of charges by ions 
will become more significant when we consider 
electrical activity in liquids and gases. At this 
time, we will discuss electrical behavior in terms 
of electron movement. 


Q14. What is the electrical charge of an atom 
which contains 8 protons and 11 
electrons? 


Charged Bodies 


One of the fundamental laws of electricity is 
that LIKE CHARGES REPEL EACH OTHER 
and UNLIKE CHARGES ATTRACT EACH 
OTHER. A positive charge and negative charge, 
being unlike, tend to move toward each other. 
In the atom, the negative electrons are drawn 
toward the positive protons in the nucleus. This 
attractive force is balanced by the electron’s 
centrifugal force caused by its rotation about 
the nucleus. As a result, the electrons remain in 
orbit and are not drawn into the nucleus. 
Electrons repel each other because of their like 
negative charges, and protons repel each other 
because of their like positive charges. 

The law of charged bodies may be 
demonstrated by a simple experiment. Two pith 


(paper pulp) balls are suspended near one 
another by threads, as shown in figure 1-6. 


If a hard rubber rod is rubbed with fur to 
give it a negative charge and is then held against 
the right-hand ball in part (A), the rod will give 
off a negative charge to the ball. The right-hand 
ball will have a negative charge with respect to 
the left-hand ball. When released, the two balls 
will be drawn together, as shown in figure 
1-6(A). They will touch and remain in contact 
until the left-hand ball gains a portion of the 
negative charge of the right-hand ball, at which 
time they will swing apart as shown in figure 
1-6(C). If a positive or a negative charge is 
placed on both balls (fig. 1-6(B)), the balls will 
repel each other. 


Coulomb’s Law of Charges 
The relationship between attracting or 


repelling charged bodies was first discovered and 
written about by a French scientist named 






UNLIKE 
CHARGES 
ATTRACT 


(A) 


LIKE CHARGES 
REPEL 


io = we 
(B) (C) 


Figure 1-6.—Reaction between charged bodies. 


Al2. Through the accumulation of excess 
electrons 


Al13. By friction 


Al4. Negative 


Charles A. Coulomb. Coulomb’s Law states that 
CHARGED BODIES ATTRACT OR REPEL 
EACH OTHER WITH A FORCE THAT IS 
DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO THE 
PRODUCT OF THEIR INDIVIDUAL 
CHARGES, AND IS INVERSELY 
PROPORTIONAL TO THE SQUARE OF THE 
DISTANCE BETWEEN THEM. 


The amount of attracting or repelling force 
which acts between two electrically charged 
bodies in free space depends on two things—(1) 
their charges and (2) the distance between them. 


Electric Fields 


The space between and around charged 
bodies in which their influence is felt is called an 
ELECTRIC FIELD OF FORCE. It can exist in 
air, glass, paper, Or a Vacuum, 
ELECTROSTATIC FIELDS and DIELECTRIC 
FIELDS are other names used to refer to this 
region of force. 

Fields of force spread out in the space 
surrounding their point of origin and, in general, 
DIMINISH IN PROPORTION TO THE 
SQUARE OF THE DISTANCE FROM THEIR 
SOURCE. 

The field about a charged body is generally 
represented by lines which are referred to as 
ELECTROSTATIC LINES OF FORCE. These 
lines are imaginary and are used merely to 
represent the direction and strength of the field. 
To avoid confusion, the lines of force exerted by 
a positive charge are always shown leaving the 
charge, and for a negative charge they are shown 
entering. Figure 1-7 illustrates the use of lines to 
represent the field about charged bodies. 





ny EE 
ae  ¢ C= 


(A) 


e org 
(B) 


Figure 1-7.—Electrostatic lines of force. 


Figure 1-7(A) represents the repulsion of 
like-charged bodies and their associated fields. 
Part (B) represents the attraction of 
unlike-charged bodies and their associated fields. 


Q15. What is the relationship between charged 
bodies? 


Q16. What is an electrostatic field? 


Q17. In what direction are electrostatic lines 
of force drawn? 


MAGNETISM 


In order to properly understand the 
principles of electricity, it is necessary to study 
magnetism and the effects of magnetism on 
electrical equipment. Magnetism and electricity 
are so closely related that the study of either 
subject would be incomplete without at least a 
basic knowledge of the other. 

Much of today’s modern electrical and 
electronic equipment could not function 
without magnetism. Modern computers, tape 
recorders, and video reproduction equipment 
use magnetized tape. High-fidelity speakers use 
magnets to convert amplifier outputs into 
audible sound. Electrical motors use magnets to 
convert electrical energy into mechanical 
motion; generators use magnets to convert 
mechanical motion into electrical energy. 


Q18. What are some examples of electrical 
equipment which use magnetism? 


MAGNETIC MATERIALS 


Magnetism is generally defined as that 
property of a material which enables it to attract 
pieces of iron. A material possessing this 
property is known as a MAGNET. The word 
originated with the ancient Greeks, who found 
stones possessing this characteristic. Materials 
that are attracted by a magnet, such as iron, 
steel, nickel, and cobalt, have the ability to 
become magnetized. These are called magnetic 
materials. Materials, such as paper, wood, glass, 
or tin, which are not attracted by magnets, are 
considered nonmagnetic. Nonmagnetic materials 
are not able to become magnetized. 


Q19. What are magnetic materials? 


Ferromagnetic Materials 


The most important group of materials 
connected with electricity and electronics are 


the ferromagnetic materials. Ferromagnetic 
materials are those which are relatively easy to 
magnetize, such as iron, steel, cobalt, and the 
alloys Alnico and Permalloy. (An alloy is made 
from combining two or more elements, one of 
which must be a metal.) These new alloys can be 
very strongly magnetized, and are capable of 
obtaining a magnetic strength great enough to 
lift five hundred times their own weight. 


Natural Magnets 


Magnetic stones such as those found by the 
ancient Greeks are considered to be NATURAL 
MAGNETS. These stones had the ability to 
attract small pieces of iron in a manner similar 
to the magnets which are common today. 
However, the magnetic properties attributed to 
the stones were products of nature and not the 
result of the efforts of man. The Greeks called 
these substances magnetite. 

The Chinese are said to have been aware of 
some of the effects of magnetism as early as 
2600 B.C. They observed that stones similar to 
magnetite, when freely suspended, had a 
tendency to assume a nearly north and south 
direction. Because of the directional quality of 
these stones, they were later referred to as 
lodestones or leading stones. 

Natural magnets, which presently can be 
found in the United States, Norway, and 
Sweden, no longer have any practical use, for it 
is now possible to easily produce more powerful 
magnets. 


Q20. What characteristics do all ferromagnetic 
materials have in common? 


Artificial Magnets 


Magnets produced from magnetic materials 
are called ARTIFICIAL MAGNETS. They can 
be made in a variety of shapes and sizes and are 
used extensively in electrical apparatus. 
Artificial magnets are generally made from 
special iron or steel alloys which are usually 
magnetized electrically. The material to be 


be obtained by dipping a magnet into iron filings 
(fig. 1-8). It is found that many filings will cling 
to the ends of the magnet while very few adhere 
to the center. The two ends, which are the 
regions of concentrated lines of force, are called 
the POLES of the magnet. Magnets have two 
magnetic poles and both poles have equal 
magnetic strength. 


Law of Magnetic Poles 


If a bar magnet is suspended freely on a 
string, as shown in figure 1-9, it will align itself 
in a north and south direction. When this 
experiment is repeated, it is found that the same 
pole of the magnet will always swing toward the 
north geographical pole of the earth. Therefore, 
it is called the north-seeking pole or simply the 
NORTH POLE. The other pole of the magnet is 
the south-seeking pole or the SOUTH POLE. 

A practical use of the directional 
characteristic of the magnet is the compass, a 
device in which a freely rotating magnetized 
needle indicator points toward the North Pole. 
The realization that the poles of a suspended 


IRON FILINGS 


BAR MAGNET 





Figure 1-8.—Iron filings cling to the poles of a magnet. 





Figure 1-9.—A bar magnet acts as a compass. 


magnet always move to a definite position gives 
an indication that the opposite poles of a 
magnet have opposite magnetic polarity. 

The law previously stated regarding the 
attraction and replusion of charged bodies may 
also be applied to magnetism if the pole is 
considered as a charge. The north pole of a 
magnet will always be attracted to the south 
pole of another magnet and will show a 
repulsion to a north pole. The law for magnetic 
poles is: 


Like poles repel, unlike poles attract. 


Q23. How does the law of magnetic poles 


relate to the law of electric charges? 


The Earth’s Magnetic Poles 


The fact that a compass needle always aligns 
itself in a particular direction, regardless of its 


A21. A material that exhibits low reluctance, 
and high peremability, such as iron or 
soft steel 

A22. The ability of a material to retain 
magnetism 

A23.. They are very similar; like charges repel, 


unlike charges attract—like poles repel, 
unlike poles attract 


location on earth, indicates that the earth is a 
huge natural magnet. The distribution of the 
magnetic force about the earth is the same as 
that which might be produced by a giant bar 
magnet running through the center of the earth 
(fig. 1-10). The magnetic axis of the earth is 
located about 15° from its geographical axis 
thereby locating the magnetic poles some 





Figure 1-10.—The earth is a magnet. 


1-16 


distance from the geographical poles. The ability 
of the north pole of the compass needle to point 
toward the north geographical pole is due to the 
presence of the magnetic pole nearby. This 
magnetic pole is named the magnetic North Pole. 
However, in actuality, it must have the polarity 
of a south magnetic pole since it attracts the 
north pole of a compass needle. The reason for 
this conflict in terminology can be traced to the 
early users of the compass. Knowing little about 
magnetic effects, they called the end of the 
compass needle that pointed towards the north 
geographical pole, the north pole of a compass. 
With our present knowledge of magnetism, we 
know the north pole of a compass needle (a 
small bar magnet) can be attracted only by an 
unlike magnetic pole, that is, a pole of south 
magnetic polarity. 


Q24. A compass is located at the geographical 
North Pole. In which direction would its 


needle point? 


THEORIES OF MAGNETISM 
Weber’s Theory 


A popular theory of magnetism considers 
the molecular alignment of the material. This is 
known as Weber’s Theory. This theory assumes 
that all magnetic substances are composed of 
tiny molecular magnets. Any unmagnetized 
material has the magnetic forces of its molecular 
magnets neutralized by adjacent molecular 
magnets, thereby eliminating any magnetic 
effect. A magnetized material will have most of 
its molecular magnets lined up so that the north 
pole of each molecule points in one direction, 
and the south pole faces the opposite direction. 
A material with its molecules thus aligned will 
then have one effective north pole, and one 
effective south pole. An illustration of Weber’s 
Theory is shown in figure 1-11, where a steel bar 
is magnetized by stroking. When a steel bar is 
stroked several times in the same direction by a 
magnet, the magnetic force from the north pole 
of the magnet causes the molecules to align) 
themselves. | 


BAR MAGNETIZED 





Figure 1-11.—Molecular magnets. 


Q25. Using Weber’s molecular theory of 
magnetism, describe the polarity of the 
magnetic poles produced by stroking a 
magnetic material from right to left with 
the south pole of a magnet. 


Domain Theory 


A more modern theory of magnetism is 
based on the electron spin principle. From the 
study of atomic structure it is known that all 
matter is composed of vast quantities of atoms, 
each atom containing one or more orbital 
electrons. The electrons are considered to orbit 
in various shells and subshells depending upon 
their distance from the nucleus. The structure of 
the atom has previously been compared to the 
solar system, wherein the electrons orbiting the 
nucleus correspond to the planets orbiting the 
sun. Along with its orbital motion about the 
sun, each planet also revolves on its axis. It is 
believed that the electron also revolves on its 
axis as it orbits the nucleus of an atom. 


It has been experimentally proven that an 
electron has a magnetic field about it along with 
an electric field. The effectiveness of the 
magnetic field of an atom is determined by the 
number of electrons spinning in each direction. 
If an atom has equal numbers of electrons 
spinning in opposite directions, the magnetic 
fields surrounding the electrons cancel one 
another, and the atom is unmagnetized. 
However, if more electrons spin in one direction 
than another, the atom is magnetized. An atom 
with an atomic number of 26, such as iron, has 
26 protons in the nucleus and 26 revolving 
electrons orbiting its nucleus. If 13 electrons are 
spinning in a clockwise direction and 13 
electrons are spinning in a counterclockwise 
direction, the opposing magnetic fields will be 
neutralized. When more than 13 electrons spin 
in either direction, the atom is magnetized. An 
example of a magnetized atom of iron is shown 
in figure 1-12. 


Q26. What is the difference between the 
domain theory and Weber’s theory of 
magnetism? 


NUMBER OF 
ELECTRONS 
SPINNING 
COUNTER- 
CLOCKWISE 


NUCLEUS 


ve 


NUMBER OF 

ELECTRONS 

SPINNING 
Pe CLOCKWISE 


MN 
Sape doe 
| 
2 
| 


a 


SUBSHELL 
MOBILE \ / Mg 
ELECTRONS INCOMPLETE 


Figure 1-12.—Iron atom. 





A24. To the magnetic North Pole 


A25. South pole at the right, north pole at the 
left 

A26. The domain theory is based upon the 
electron spin principle; Weber’s theory 
uses the concept of tiny molecular 
magnets 

MAGNETIC FIELDS 


The space surrounding a magnet where 
magnetic forces act is known as the magnetic 
field. 

A pattern of this directional force can be 
obtained by performing an experiment with 
iron filings. A piece of glass is placed over a bar 
magnet and the iron filings are then sprinkled 
on the surface of the glass. The magnetizing 
force of the magnet will be felt through the glass 
and each iron filing becomes a temporary 
magnet. If the glass is now tapped gently, the 
iron particles will align themselves with the 
magnetic field surrounding the magnet just as 
the compass needle did previously. The filings 
form a definite pattern, which is a visible 
representation of the forces comprising the 
magnetic field. Examination of the arrangements 
of iron filings in figure 1-13 will indicate that 
the magnetic field is very strong at the poles and 
weakens as the distance from the poles increases. 
It is also apparent that the magnetic field 
extends from one pole to the _ other, 
constituting a loop about the magnet. 


Q27. Refer to figure 1-13. For what purpose 
would you sprinkle iron filings on the 
glass plate? 

Q28. Refer to figure 1-13. What pattern would 


be formed if sawdust was sprinkled on 
the glass instead of iron filings? 


1-18 





Figure 1-13.—Pattern formed by iron filings. 


Lines of Force 


To further describe and work with magnetic 
phenomena, lines are used to represent the force 
existing in the area surrounding a magnet (refer 
to fig. 1-14). These lines, called MAGNETIC 
LINES OF FORCE, do not actually exist but are 
imaginary lines used to illustrate and describe 
the pattern of the magnetic field. The magnetic 
lines of force are assumed to emanate from the 
north pole of a magnet, pass through the 
surrounding space, and enter the south pole. The 
lines of force then travel inside the magnet from 
the south pole to the north pole, thus 
completing a closed loop. 

When two magnetic poles are brought close 
together, the mutual attraction or repulsion of 
the poles produces a more complicated pattern 
than that of a single magnet. These magnetic 
lines of force can be plotted by placing a 
compass at various points throughout the 
magnetic field, or they can be roughly illustrated 
by the use of iron filings as before. A diagram of 
magnetic poles placed close together is shown in 
figure 1-15. 





Figure 1-14.—Bar magnet showing lines of force. 


Although magnetic lines of force are 
imaginary, a simplified version of many 
magnetic phenomena can be explained by 
assuming the magnetic lines to have certain real 
properties. The lines of force can be compared 
to rubber bands which stretch outward when a 
force is exerted upon them and contract when 
the force is removed. The characteristics of 
magnetic lines of force can be described as 
follows: 


1. Magnetic lines of force are continuous 
and will always form closed loops. 


2. Magnetic lines of force will never cross 
one another. 


3. Parallel magnetic lines of force traveling 
in the same direction repel one another. Parallel 
magnetic lines of force traveling in opposite 
directions tend to unite with each other and 
form into single lines traveling in a direction 
determined by the magnetic poles creating the 
lines of force. 


4. Magnetic lines of force tend to shorten 
themselves. Therefore, the magnetic lines of 


= —— SS 


IKE POLES REPEL 


Figure 1-15.—Magnetic poles in close proximity. 


force existing between two unlike poles cause 
the poles to be pulled together. 


5. Magnetic lines of force pass through all 
materials, both magnetic and nonmagnetic. 


6. Magnetic lines of force always enter or 
leave a magnetic material at right angles to the 
surface. 


Q29. What is a magnetic line of force? 


Q30. In what way do magnetic lines of force 
differ from electrostatic lines of force? 


MAGNETIC EFFECTS 


MAGNETIC FLUX. The total number of 
magnetic lines of force leaving or entering the 
pole of a magnet is called MAGNETIC FLUX. 





A27. To enable you to “see” the magnetic 
field 


A28. No specific pattern, sawdust is a 


nonmagnetic material 


A29. An imaginary line used to illustrate 
magnetic effects 


A30. Electrostatic lines of force do not form 
closed loops 


The number of flux lines per unit area is known 
as FLUX DENSITY. 

FIELD INTENSITY. The intensity of a 
magnetic field is directly related to the magnetic 
force exerted by the field. 

ATTRACTION/REPULSION. The 
intensity of attraction or repulsion between 
magnetic poles may be described by a law 
almost identical to Coulomb’s Law of Charged 
Bodies. The force between two poles is directly 
proportional to the product of the pole 
strengths and inversely proportional to the 
square of the distance between the poles. 


Magnetic Induction 


It has been previously stated that all 
substances that are attracted by a magnet are 
capable of becoming magnetized. The fact that a 
material is attracted by a magnet indicates the 
material must itself be a magnet at the time of 
attraction. 


With the knowledge of magnetic fields and 
magnetic lines of force developed up to this 
point, it is simple to understand the manner in 
which a material becomes magnetized when 
brought near a magnet. As an iron nail is 
brought close to a bar magnet (fig. 1-16), some 
flux lines emanating from the north pole of the 
magnet pass through the iron nail in completing 





a SSS ———— 


IZING A NAIL 








UNLIKE POLES ATTRACT 





Figure 1-16.—Magnetized nail. 


their magnetic path. Since magnetic lines of 
force travel inside a magnet from the south pole 
to the north pole, the nail will be magnetized in 
such a polarity that its south pole will be 
adjacent to the north pole of the bar magnet. 
There is now an attraction between the two 
magnets. 


If another nail is brought in contact with the 
end of the first nail, it would be magnetized by 
induction. This process could be repeated until 
the strength of the magnetic flux weakens as 
distance from the bar magnet increases. 
However, as soon as the first iron nail is pulled 
away from the bar magnet, all the nails will fall. 
The reason being that each nail becomes a 
temporary magnet, and as soon as _ the 
magnetizing force is removed, their domains 
once again assume a random distribution. 


Magnetic induction will always produce a 
pole polarity on the material being magnetized 
opposite that of the adjacent pole of the 
magnetizing force. It is sometimes possible to 
bring a weak north pole of a magnet near a 


strong magnet north pole and note attraction 
between the poles. The weak magnet, when 
placed within the magnetic field of the strong 
magnet, has its magnetic polarity reversed by the 
field of the stronger magnet. Therefore, it is 
attracted to the opposite pole. For this reason, 
you must keep a very weak magnet, such as a 
compass needle, away from a very strong 
magnet. 


Magnetism can be induced in a magnetic 
material by several means. The magnetic 
material may be placed in the magnetic field, 
brought into contact with a magnet, or stroked 
by a magnet. Stroking and contact both indicate 
actual contact with the material but are 
considered in magnetic studies as magnetizing by 
INDUCTION. 


Magnetic Shielding 


There is no known INSULATOR for 
magnetic flux. If a nonmagnetic material is 
placed in a magnetic field, there is no 


appreciable change in flux—that is, the flux 
penetrates the nonmagnetic material. For 
example, a glass plate placed between the poles 
of a horseshoe magnet will have no appreciable 
effect on the field although glass itself is a good 
insulator in an electric circuit. If a magnetic 
material (for example, soft iron) is placed in a 
magnetic field, the flux may be redirected to 
take advantage of the greater permeability of the 
magnetic material, as shown in figure 1-17. 
Permeability, as discussed earlier, is the quality 
of a substance which determines the ease with 
which it can be magnetized. 


The sensitive mechanisms of electric 
instruments and meters can be influenced by 
stray magnetic fields which will cause errors in 
their readings. Because instrument mechanisms 
cannot be insulated against magnetic flux, it is 
necessary to employ some means of directing 
the flux around the instrument. This is 
accomplished by placing a soft-iron case, called a 
MAGNETIC SCREEN or SHIELD, about the 
instrument. Because the flux is established more 
readily through the iron (even though the path is 
longer) than through the air inside the case, the 
instrument is effectively shielded, as shown by 
the watch and soft-iron shield in figure 1-18. 


1-21 





Figure 1-17.—Effects of a magnetic substance in a 
magnetic field. 


Hauge SY 
(nh gee) ae 
Wak Sug? 
= Y ‘ + e 





h 
SOFT IRON 
rk te 


Figure 1-18.—Magnetic shield. 


MAGNETIC SHAPES 


Because of the many uses of magnets, they 
are found in various shapes and sizes. However, 
magnets usually come under one of three general 
classifications: bar magnets, horseshoe magnets, 
or ring magnets. 


The bar magnet is most often used in schools 
and laboratories for studying the properties and 
effects of magnetism. In the preceding material, 
the bar magnet proved very helpful in 
demonstrating magnetic effects. 


Another type of magnet is the ring magnet, 
which is used for computer memory cores. A 
common application for a temporary ring 
magnet would be the shielding of electrical 
instruments. 


The shape of the magnet most frequently 
used in electrical and electronic equipment is 
called the horseshoe magnet. A_ horseshoe 
magnet is similar to a bar magnet but is bent in 
the shape of a horseshoe. The horseshoe magnet 
provides much more magnetic strength than a 
bar magnet of the same size and material 
because of the closeness of the magnetic poles. 
The magnetic strength from one pole to the 
other is_ greatly increased due to the 
concentration of the magnetic field in a smaller 
area. Electrical measuring devices quite 
frequently use horseshoe-type magnets. 


CARE OF MAGNETS 


A piece of steel that has been magnetized 
can lose much of its magnetism by improper 
handling. If it is jarred or heated, there will be a 
disalignment of its domains resulting in the loss 
of some of its effective magnetism. Had this 
piece of steel formed the horseshoe magnet of a 
meter, the meter would no longer be operable or 
would give inaccurate readings. Therefore, care 
must be exercised when handling instruments 
containing magnets. Severe jarring or subjecting 
the instrument to high temperatures will damage 
the device. 


A magnet may also become weakened from 
loss of flux. Thus, when storing magnets, one 
should always try to avoid excess leakage of 
magnetic flux. A horseshoe magnet should 
always be stored with a keeper, a soft iron bar 
used to join the magnetic poles. By using the 
keeper while the magnet is being stored, the 
magnetic flux will continuously circulate 
through the magnet and not leak off into space. 


When bar magnets are stored, the same 
principle must be remembered. Therefore, bar 


I-22 


magnets should always be stored in pairs with a 
north pole and a south pole placed together. 
This provides a complete path for the magnetic 
flux without any flux leakage. 


Q31. How should a delicate instrument be 
protected from a magnetic field? 
Q32. How should bar magnets be stored? 


ELECTRICAL ENERGY 


In the field of physical science, work must 
be defined as THE PRODUCT OF FORCE AND 
DISPLACEMENT. That is, the force applied to 
move an object and the distance the object is 
moved are the factors of work performed. 


It is important to notice that no work is 
accomplished unless the force applied causes a 
change in the position of a stationary object, or 
a change in the velocity of a moving object. A 
worker may tire by pushing against a heavy 
wooden crate, but unless the crate moves, no 
work will be accomplished. 


ENERGY 


In our study of energy and work, we must 
define energy as THE ABILITY TO DO WORK. 
In order to perform any kind of work, energy 
must be expended (converted from one form to 
another). Energy supplies the required force, or 
power, whenever any work is accomplished. 


One form of energy is that which is 
contained by an object of motion. When a 
hammer is set in motion in the direction of a 
nail, it possesses energy of motion. As the 
hammer strikes the nail, the energy of motion is 
converted into work as the nail is driven into the 
wood. The distance the nail is driven into the 
wood depends on the velocity of the hammer at 
the time it strikes the nail. Energy contained by 
an object due to its motion is called KINETIC 
ENERGY. Assume that the hammer is 


suspended by a string in a position one meter 
above a nail. As a result of gravitational 
attraction, the hammer will experience a force 
pulling it downward. If the string is suddenly 
cut, the force of gravity will pull the hammer 
downward against the nail, driving it into the 
wood. While the hammer is suspended above the 
nail it has ability to do work because of its 
elevated position in the earth’s gravitational 
field. Since energy is the ability to do work, the 
hammer contains energy. 

Energy contained by an object due to its 
position is called POTENTIAL ENERGY. The 
amount of potential energy available is equal to 
the product of the force required to elevate the 
hammer and the height to which it is elevated. 

Another example of potential energy is that 
contained in a tightly coiled spring. The amount 
of energy released when the spring unwinds 
depends on the amount of force required to 
wind the spring initially. 


Q33. What is the definition of energy? 

Q34. What type of energy does a rolling stone 
have? 

Q35. What kind of energy does the stone have 


if it is at rest at the top of a hill? 


Electrical Charges 


From the previous study of electrostatics 
you learned that a field of force exists in the 
space surrounding any electrical charge. The 
strength of the field is directly dependent on the 
force of the charge. 

The charge of one electron might be used as 
a unit of electrical charge, since charges are 
created by displacement of electrons; but the 
charge of one electron is so small that it is 
impractical to use. The practical unit adopted 
for measuring charges is the COULOMB, named 


1-23 


after the scientist Charles Coulomb. One 
coulomb is equal to the charge of 
6,280,000,000,000,000,000 (six quintillion two 
hundred and eighty quadrillion) or 
(6.28 x 10!®) electrons. 


When a charge of one coulomb exists 
between two bodies, one unit of electrical 
potential energy exists, which is called the 
difference of potential between the two bodies. 
This is referred to as ELECTROMOTIVE 
FORCE, or VOLTAGE, and the unit of measure 
is the VOLT. 


Electrical charges are created by the 
displacement of electrons, so that there exists an 
excess of electrons at one point, and a 
deficiency at another point. Consequently, a 
charge must always have either a negative or 
positive polarity. A body with an excess of 
electrons is considered to be negative, whereas a 
body with a deficiency of electrons is positive. 


A difference of potential can exist between 
two points, or bodies, only if they have different 
charges. In other words, there is no difference in 
potential between two bodies if both have a 
deficiency of electrons to the same degree. If, 
however, one body is deficient of 6 coulombs 
(representing 6 volts), and the other is deficient 
by 12 coulombs (representing 12 volts), there is 
a difference of potential of 6 volts. The body 
with the greater deficiency is positive with 
respect to the other. 


In most electrical circuits only the difference 
of potential between two points is of 
importance and the absolute potentials of the 
points are of little concern. Very often it is 
convenient to use one standard reference for all 
of the various potentials throughout a piece of 
equipment. For this reason, the potentials at 
various points in a circuit are generally measured 
with respect to the metal chassis on which all 
parts of the circuit are mounted. The chassis is 
considered to be at zero potential and all other 
potentials are either positive or negative with 
respect to the chassis. When used as the 
reference point, the chassis is said to be at 
GROUND POTENTIAL. 


Occasionally, rather large values of voltage 
may be encountered, in which case the volt 
becomes too small a unit for convenience. In a 


A31. By shielding or surrounding the 
instrument with a soft iron case, called a 
magnetic shield or screen 


A32. In pairs, with opposite poles together to 
provide a complete path for magnetic 
flux 


A33. The ability to do work 


A34. Kinetic energy 


A35. Potential energy 


situation of this nature, the kilovolt (kV), 
meaning 1,000 volts, is frequently used. As an 
example, 20,000 volts would be written as 
20 kV. In other cases, the volt may be too large 
a unit, as when dealing with very small voltages. 
For this purpose the millivolt (mV), meaning 
one-thousandth of a volt, and the microvolt (uV), 
meaning one-millionth of a volt, are used. For 
example, 0.001 volt would be written as 1 mV, 
and 0.000025 volt would be written as 25 pV. See 
Appendix II for exponential symbology. 


When a difference in potential exists 
between two charged bodies that are connected 
by a conductor, electrons will flow along the 
conductor. This flow is from the negatively 
charged body to the positively charged body, 
until the two charges are equalized and the 
potential difference no longer exists. 


An anology of this action is shown in the 
two water tanks connected by a pipe and valve 
in figure 1-19. At first the valve is closed and all 
the water is in tank A. Thus, the water pressure 
across the valve is at maximum. When the valve 
is opened, the water flows through the pipe 
from A to B until the water level becomes the 
same in both tanks. The water then stops 


TANK A TANK B 





Figure 1-19.—Water analogy of electric difference of 
potential. 


flowing in the pipe, because there is no longer a 
difference in water pressure between the two 
tanks. 

Electron movement through an electric 
circuit is directly proportional to the difference 
in potential or electromotive force (emf), across 
the circuit, just as the flow of water through the 
pipe in figure 1-19 is directly proportional to the 
difference in water level in the two tanks. 

A fundamental law of electricity is that the 
ELECTRON FLOW IS_' DIRECTLY 
PROPORTIONAL TO THE APPLIED 
VOLTAGE. If the voltage is increased, the flow 
is increased. If the voltage is decreased, the flow 
is decreased. 


Q36. What term describes voltage or emf? 


Q37. Convert 2.1 kV to volts. 


Q38. Express the following in more simple 
terms. (a) 250,000 volts, (b) 25,000,000 
microvolts, (c) 0.001 millivolt 


HOW VOLTAGE IS PRODUCED 


It has been demonstrated that a charge can 
be produced by rubbing a rubber rod with fur. 
Because of the friction involved, the rod ac- 
quires electrons from the fur, making it negative; 


the fur becomes positive due to the loss of 
electrons. These quantities of charge constitute a 
difference of potential between the rod and the 
fur. The electrons which make up this difference 
of potential are capable of doing work if a 
discharge is allowed to occur. 

To be a practical source of voltage, the 
potential difference must not be allowed to 
dissipate, but must be maintained continuously. 
As one electron leaves the concentration of 
negative charge, another must be immediately 
provided to take its place or the charge will 
eventually diminish to the point where no 
further work can be accomplished. A 
VOLTAGE SOURCE, therefore, is a device 
which is capable of supplying and maintaining 
voltage while some type of electrical apparatus is 
connected to its terminals. The internal action 
of the source is such that electrons are 
continuously removed from one _ terminal, 
keeping it positive, and simultaneously supplied 
to the second terminal which maintains a 
negative charge. 


Presently, there are six known methods for 
producing a voltage or electromotive force 
(emf). Some of these methods are more widely 
used than others, and some are used mostly for 
specific applications. Following is a list of the 
six known methods of producing a voltage. 


1. FRICTION—Voltage 
rubbing certain materials together. 


2. PRESSURE (piezoelectricity)—Voltage 
produced by squeezing crystals of certain 
substances. 


3. HEAT (thermoelectricity)—Voltage 
produced by heating the joint (junction) where 
two unlike metals are joined. 


4. LIGHT (photoelectricity)—Voltage 
produced by light striking photosensitive (light 
sensitive) substances. 


5. CHEMICAL ACTION-—-Voltage 
produced by chemical reaction in a battery cell. 


6. MAGNETISM—Voltage produced in a 
conductor when the conductor moves through a 
magnetic field, or a magnetic field moves 
through the conductor in such a manner as to 
cut the magnetic lines of force of the field. 


produced by 


1-25 


Voltage Produced by Friction 


The first method discovered for creating a 
voltage was that of generation by friction. The 
development of charges by rubbing a rod with 
fur is a prime example of the way in which a 
voltage is generated by friction. Because of the 
nature of the materials with which this voltage is 
generated, it cannot be conveniently used or 
maintained. For this reason, very little practical 
use has been found for voltages generated by 
this method. 

In the search for methods to produce a 
voltage of a larger amplitude and of a more 
practical nature, machines were developed in 
which charges were transferred from one 
terminal to another by ‘means of rotating glass 
discs or moving belts. The most notable of these 
machines is the Van de Graaff generator. It is 
used today to produce potentials in the order of 
millions of volts for nuclear research. As these 
machines have little value outside the field of 
research, their theory of operation will not be 
described here. 


Q39. A device which supplies a voltage is 
commonly referred to by what name? 


Voltage Produced by Pressure 


One specialized method of generating an emf 
utilizes the characteristics of certain ionic 
crystals such as quartz, Rochelle salts, and 
tourmaline. These crystals have the remarkable 
ability to generate a voltage whenever stresses 
are applied to their surfaces. Thus, if a crystal of 
quartz is squeezed, charges of opposite polarity 
will appear on two opposite surfaces of the 
crystal. If the force is reversed and the crystal is 
stretched, charges will again appear, but will be 
of the opposite polarity from those produced by 
squeezing. If a crystal of this type is given a 
vibratory motion, it will produce a voltage of 
reversing polarity between two of its sides. 
Quartz or similar crystals can thus be used to 
convert mechanical energy into electrical energy. 
This phenomenon, called the PIEZOELECTRIC 


A36. Difference of potential 

A37. 2100 volts 

A38. (a) 250 kV, (b) 25 V, (c) LuV 
A39. A voltage source 


EFFECT, is shown in figure 1-20. Some of the 
common devices that make use of piezoelectric 
crystals are microphones, phonograph cartridges, 
and oscillators used in radio transmitters, radio 
receivers, and sonar equipment. This method of 
generating an emf is not suitable for applications 
having large voltage or power requirements, but 
is widely used in sound and communications 
systems where small signal voltages can be 
effectively used. 


Crystals of this type also possess another 
interesting property, the “‘converse piezoelectric 
effect.” That is, they have the ability to convert 
electrical energy ifito mechanical energy. A 
voltage impressed across the proper surfaces of 





(A) 





MOLECULES OF CRYSTALLIZED MATTER 
(B) 


the crystal will cause it to expand or contract its 
surfaces in response to the voltage applied. 


Voltage Produced by Heat 


When a length of metal, such as copper, is 
heated at one end, electrons tend to move away 
from the hot end toward the cooler end. This is 
true of most metals. However, in some metals, 
such as iron, the opposite takes place and 
electrons tend to move TOWARD the hot end. 
These characteristics are illustrated in figure 
1-21. The negative charges (electrons) are 
moving through the copper away from the heat 
and through the iron toward the heat. They 
cross from the iron to the copper through the 
current meter to the iron at the cold junction. 
This device is generally referred to as a 
THERMOCOUPLE. 

Thermocouples have somewhat greater 
power capacities than crystals, but their capacity 
is still very small if compared to some other 
sources. The thermoelectric voltage in a 
thermocouple depends mainly on the difference 
in temperature between the hot and cold 
junctions. Consequently, they are widely used to 
measure temperature, and as heat-sensing devices 
in automatic temperature control equipment. 


QUARTZ CRYSTAL 
COMPRESSED 






ELECTRON 
FLOW 
(C) 


QUARTZ CRYSTAL 
gy? DECOMPRESSED 


ELECTRON 
FLOW 


ft 


Figure 1-20.—(A) Noncrystallized structure; (B) crystallized structure; (C) compression of a crystal; (D) decompression 
of a crystal. 


1-26 


HOT 
JUNCTION 


(( 





BURNER 


Figure 1-21.—Voltage produced by heat. 


Thermocouples generally can be subjected to 
much greater temperatures than ordinary 
thermometers, such as the mercury or alcohol 


types. 


Voltage Produced by Light 


When light strikes the surface of a substance, 
it may dislodge electrons from their orbits 
around the surface atoms of the substance. This 
occurs because light has energy, the same as any 
moving force. 

Some substances, mostly metallic ones, are 
far more sensitive to light than others. That is, 
more electrons will be dislodged and emitted 
from the surface of a highly sensitive metal, with 
a given amount of light, than will be emitted 
from a less senstive substance. Upon losing 
electrons, the photosensitive (light-sensitive) 
metal becomes positively charged, and an 
electric force is created. Voltage produced in 


this manner is referred to as a 
PHOTOELECTRIC VOLTAGE. 
The photosensitive materials most 


commonly used to produce a photoelectric 
voltage are various compounds of silver oxide or 
copper oxide. A complete device which operates 
on the photoelectric principle is referred to asa 
““photoelectric cell.’”” There are many different 
sizes and types of photoelectric cells in use, and 
each serves the special purpose for which it is 
designed. Nearly all, however, have some of the 
basic features of the photoelectric cells shown in 
figure 1-22. 


1-27 


The cell (fig. 1-22(A)) has a_ curved 
light-sensitive surface focused on the central 
anode. When light from the direction shown 
strikes the sensitive surface, it emits electrons 
toward the anode. The more intense the light, 
the greater the number of electrons emitted. 
When a wire is connected between the filament 
and the back, or dark side of the cell, the 
accumulated electrons will flow to the dark side. 
These electrons will eventually pass through the 
metal of the reflector and replace the electrons 
leaving the light-sensitive surface. Thus, light 
energy is converted to a flow of electrons, and a 
usuable current is developed. 

The cell (fig. 1-22(B)) is constructed in 
layers. A base plate of pure copper is coated 
with light-sensitive copper oxide. An extremely 
thin semitransparent layer of metal is placed 
over the copper oxide. This additional layer 
serves two purposes: 


1. It permits the penetration of light to the 
copper oxide. 


PHOTOSENSITIVE SILVER 
OXIDE SURFACE 








ELECTRONS EMITTED 
TOWARD ANODE 








LIGHT 
SOURCE 







LY 
1 
LECTRON 
FLOW (A) 
LIGHT SOURCE 


SEMITRANSPARENT 
LAYER PASSES 

LIGHT AND COLLECTS 
PHOTOELECTRONS 


ELECTRON FLOW 


Figure 1-22.—Voltage produced by light. 


2. It collects the electrons emitted by the 
copper oxide. 


An externally connected wire completes the 
electron path, the same as in the reflector-type 
cell. The photocell’s voltage is used as needed by 
connecting the external wires to some other 
‘device, which amplifies (enlarges) it to a usable 
level. 


The power capacity of a photocell is very 
small. However, it reacts to light-intensity 
variations in an extremely short time. This 
characteristic makes the photocell very useful in 
detecting or accurately controlling a great 
number of operations. For instance, the 
photoelectric cell, or some form of the 
photoelectric principle, is used in television 
cameras, automatic manufacturing process 
controls, door openers, burglar alarms, and so 
forth. 


Voltage Produced by 
Chemical Action 


Voltage may be produced chemically when 
certain substances are exposed to chemical 
action. 


If two dissimilar substances (usually metals 
or metallic materials) are immersed in a solution 
that produces a greater chemical action on one 
substance than on the other, a difference of 
potential will exist between the two. If a 
conductor is then connected between them, 
electrons will flow through the conductor to 
equalize the charge. This arrangement is called a 
primary cell. The two metallic pieces are called 
electrodes and the solution is called the 
electrolyte. The voltaic cell illustrated in figure 
1-23 is a simple example of a primary cell. The 
difference of potential results from the fact that 
material from one or both of the electrodes goes 
into solution in the electrolyte, and in the 
process, ions form in the vicinity of the 
electrodes. Due to the electric field associated 
with the charged ions, the electrodes acquire 
charges. 


1-28 


ZINC 
ELECTRODE 


GOPPER 
ELECTRODE 


- DIL 


OTE «= 
“= SULFURIC ACID 
~ ELECTROLYTE - 





Figure 1-23.—Voltaic cell. 


The amount of difference in potential 
between the electrodes depends principally on 
the metals used. The type of electrolyte and the 
size of the cell have little or no effect on the 
potential difference produced. 


There are two types of primary cells, the wet 
cell and the dry cell. In a wet cell the electrolyte 
is a liquid. A cell with a liquid electrolyte must 
remain in an upright position and is not readily 
transportable. An automotive battery is an 
example of this type of cell. The dry cell, much 
more commonly used than the wet cell, is not 
actually dry, but contains an electrolyte mixed 
with other materials to form a paste. Flashlights 
and portable radios are commonly powered by 
dry cells. 


Batteries are formed when several cells are 
connected together to increase electrical output. 


Voltage Produced by Magnetism 


Magnets or magnetic devices are used for 
thousands of different jobs. One of the most 
useful and widely employed applications of 


magnets is in the production of vast quantities 
of electric power from mechanical sources. The 
mechanical power may be provided by a number 
of different sources, such as gasoline or diesel 
engines, and water or steam turbines. However, 
the final conversion of these source energies to 
electricity is done by generators employing the 
principle of electromagnetic induction. These 
generators, of many types and sizes, are 
discussed in other modules in this series. The 
important subject to be discussed here is the 
fundamental operating principle of ALL such 
electromagnetic-induction generators. 


To begin with, there are three fundamental 
conditions which must exist before a voltage can 
be produced by magnetism. 


1. There must be a CONDUCTOR in which 
the voltage will be produced. 


2. There must be a MAGNETIC FIELD in 
the conductor’s vicinity. 


MAGNET 








ONDUCTOR 


INDUCED E.M.F. 
REVERSED 


Lr 


(A) OF MOTION 


© A] 
MOTION 


REVERSED 


3. There must be relative motion between 
the field and conductor. The conductor must be 
moved so as to cut across the magnetic lines of 
force, or the field must be moved so that the 
lines of force are cut by the conductor. 


In accordance with these conditions, when a 
conductor or conductors MOVE ACROSS a 
magnetic field so as to cut the lines of force, 
electrons WITHIN THE CONDUCTOR are 
propelled in one direction or another. Thus, an 
electric force, or voltage, is created. 

In figure 1-24, note the presence of the three 
conditions needed for creating an induced 
voltage. 


1. A magnetic field exists between the 
poles of the C-shaped magnet. 
2. There is a conductor (copper wire). 


3. There is a relative motion. The wire is 
moved back and forth ACROSS the magnetic 
field. 






NO INDUCED 
E.M.F 


NO 
MOTION 





Figure 1-24.—Voltage produced by magnetism. 


In figure 1-24(A), the conductor is moving 
TOWARD the front of the page and the 
electrons move from left to right. The 
movement of the electrons occurs because of the 
magnetically induced emf acting on _ the 
electrons in the copper. The right-hand end 
becomes negative, and the left-hand end 
positive. The conductor is stopped at (B), 
motion is eliminated (one of the three required 
conditions), and there is no longer an induced 
emf. Consequently, there is no longer any 
difference in potential between the two ends of 
the wire. The conductor at (C) is moving away 
from the front of the page. An induced emf is 
again created. However, note carefully that the 
REVERSAL OF MOTION has caused a 
REVERSAL OF DIRECTION in the induced 
emf. 

If a path for electron flow is provided 
between the ends of the conductor, electrons 
will leave the negative end and flow to the 
positive end. This condition is shown in part 
(D). Electron flow will continue as long as the 
emf exists. In studying figure 1-24, it should be 
noted that the induced emf could also have been 
created by holding the conductor stationary 
and moving the magnetic field back and forth. 

The more complex aspects of power 
generation by use of mechanical motion and 
magnetism are discussed later in this series, 
under the heading ‘“‘Generators and Motors’. 


Q40. Name the six methods of producing a 
voltage. 

Q41. The piezoelectric effect is an example of 
a voltage being produced by what 
method? 

Q42. A thermocouple is a_ device that 
produces voltage by what method? 

Q43. A battery uses what method to produce 
a voltage? 

Q44. A_ generator uses what method to 


produce a voltage? 


1-30 


ELECTRIC CURRENT 


It has been proven that electrons (negative 
charges) move through a conductor in response 
to an electric field. ELECTRON CURRENT 
FLOW will be used throughout this explanation. 
Electron current is defined as the directed flow 
of electrons. The direction of electron 
movement is from a region of negative potential 
to a region of positive potential. Therefore, 
electric current can be said to flow from 
negative to positive. The direction of current 
flow in a materia! is determined by the polarity 
of the applied voltage. NOTE: In some electrical/ 
electronic communities the direction of current flow 
is recognized as being from positive to negative. 


Q45. According to electron theory, an electric 
current flows from what potential to 


what potential? 


Random Drift 


All materials are composed of atoms, each of 
which is capable of being ionized. If some form 
of energy, such as heat, is applied to a material, 
some electrons acquire sufficient energy to move 
to a higher energy level. As a result, some 
electrons are freed from their parent atoms, 
which then becomes ions. Other forms of 
energy, particularly light or an electric field, will 
cause ionization to occur. 


The number of free electrons resulting from 
ionization is dependent upon the quanitity of 
energy applied to a material, as well as the 
atomic structure of the material. At room 
temperature some materials, classified as 
conductors, have an abundance of free electrons. 
Under a similar condition, materials classified as 
insulators have relatively few free electrons. 


In a study of electric current, conductors are 
of major concern. Conductors are made up of 
atoms that contain loosely bound electrons in 
their outer orbits. Due to the effects of 
increased energy, these outermost electrons 
frequently break away from their atoms and 
freely drift throughout the material. The free 


electrons, also called mobile electrons, take a 
path that is not predictable and drift about the 
material in a haphazard manner. Consequently, 
such a movement is termed RANDOM DRIFT. 


It is important to emphasize that the 
random drift of electrons occurs in all materials. 
The degree of random drift is greater in a 
conductor than in an insulator. 


Directed Drift 


Associated with every charged body there is 
an electrostatic field. Bodies that are charged 
alike repel one another and bodies with unlike 
charges attract each other. An electron will be 
affected by an electrostatic field in exactly the 
same manner as any negatively charged body. It 
is repelled by a negative charge and attracted by 
a positive charge. If a conductor has a difference 
in potential impressed across it, as shown in 
figure 1-25, a direction is imparted to the 
random drift. This causes the mobile electrons 
to be repelled away from the negative terminal 
and attracted toward the positive terminal. This 





Figure 1-25.—Directed drift. 


constitutes a general migration of electrons from 
one end of the conductor to the other. The 
directed migration of mobile electrons due to 
the potential difference is called DIRECTED 
DRIFT. 


The directed movement of the electrons 
occurs at a relatively low VELOCITY (rate of 
motion in a particular direction). The effect of 
this directed movement, however, is felt almost 
instantaneously, as explained by the use of 
figure 1-26. As a difference in potential is 
impressed across the conductor, the positive 
terminal of the battery attracts electrons from 
point A. Point A now has a deficiency of 
electrons. As a result, electrons are attracted 
from point B to point A. Point B has now 
developed an electron deficiency, therefore, it 
will attract electrons. This same effect occurs 
throughout the conductor and repeats itself 
from points D to C. At the same instant the 
positive battery terminal attracted electrons 
from point A, the negative terminal repelled 
electrons toward point D. These electrons are 
attracted to point D as it gives up electrons to 





Figure 1-26.—Effect of directed drift. 


used to measure current is called an AMMETER 
and will be discussed in detail in a later module. 


Q48. Convert 350mA to amperes. 


ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE 


It is known that the directed movement of 
electrons constitutes a current flow. It is also 
known that the electrons do not move freely 
through a conductor’s crystalline structure. 
Some materials offer little opposition to current 
flow, while others greatly oppose current flow. 
This opposition to current flow is known as 
RESISTANCE (R), and the unit of measure is 
the OHM. The standard of measure for one ohm 
is the resistance provided at zero degrees Celsius 
by a column of mercury having a cross-sectional 
area of one square millimeter and a length of 
106.3 centimeters. A conductor has one ohm of 
resistance when an applied potential of one volt 
produces a current of one ampere. The symbol 
used to represent the ohm is the Greek letter 
omega (Q2). 

Resistance, although an electrical property, 
is determined by the physical structure of a 
material. The resistance of a material is governed 
by many of the same factors that control 
current flow. Therefore, in a _ subsequent 
discussion, the factors that affect current flow 
will be used to assist in the explanation of the 
factors affecting resistance. 


Q49. What is the symbol for ohm? 


Factors That Affect Resistance 


The magnitude of resistance is determined in 
part by the “number of free electrons” available 
within the material. Since a decrease in the 
number of free electrons will decrease the 
current flow, it can be said that the opposition 
to current flow (resistance) is greater in a 


1-33 


material with fewer free electrons. Thus, the 
resistance of a material is determined by the 
number of free electrons available in a material. 

A knowledge of the conditions that limit 
current flow and, therefore, affect resistance can 
now be used to consider how the type of 
material, physical dimensions, and temperature 
will affect the resistance of a conductor. 


TYPE OF MATERIAL.—Depending upon 
their atomic structure, different materials will 
have different quantities of free electrons. 
Therefore, the various conductors used in 
electrical applications have different values of 
resistance. 

Consider a simple metallic substance. Most 
metals are crystalline in structure and consist of 
atoms that are tightly bound in the lattice 
network. The atoms of such elements are so 
close together that the electrons in the outer 
shell of the atom are associated with one atom 
as much as with its neighbor. (See fig. 1-27A.) 
As a result, the force of attachment of an outer 
electron with an individual atom is practically 
zero. Depending on the metal, at least one 





Figure 1-27.—Atomic spacing in conductors. 


A46. The speed of light (186,000 miles per 
second, 300,000,000 meters per second) 
A47. Current increases as voltage increases 
A48. 0.35 amperes 
2 


A49. 


electron, sometimes two, and, in a few cases, 
three electrons per atom exist in this state. In 
such a case, a relatively small amount of 
additional electron energy would free the outer 
electrons from the attraction of the nucleus. At 
normal room temperature materials of this type 
have many free electrons and are good 
conductors. Good conductors will have a low 
resistance. 

If the atoms of a material are farther apart, 
as illustrated in figure 1-27(B), the electrons in 
the outer shells will not be equally attached to 
several atoms as they orbit the nucleus. They 
will be attracted by the nucleus of the parent 
atom only. Therefore, a greater amount of 
energy is required to free any of these electrons. 
Materials of this type are poor conductors and 
therefore have a high resistance. 

Silver, gold, and aluminum are good 
conductors. Therefore, materials composed of 
their atoms would have a low resistance. 

The element copper is the conductor most 
widely used throughout electrical applications. 
Silver has a lower resistance than copper but its 
cost limits usage to circuits where a high 
conductivity is demanded. 

Aluminum, which is considerably lighter 
than copper, is used as a conductor when 
weight is a major factor. 


When would silver be used as a 


conductor in preference to copper? 


QS50. 


1-34 


EFFECT OF CROSS-SECTIONAL 
AREA.—Cross-sectional area greatly affects the 
magnitude of resistance. If the cross-sectional 
area of a conductor is increased, a greater 
quantity of electrons are available for movement 
through the conductor. Therefore, a_ larger 
current will flow for a given amount of applied 
voltage. An increase in current indicates that 
when the cross-sectional area of a conductor is 
increased, the resistance must have decreased. If 
the cross-sectional area of a conductor is 
decreased, the number of available electrons 
decreases and, for a given applied voltage, the 
current through the conductor decreases. A 
decrease in current flow indicates that when the 
cross-sectional area of a conductor is decreased, 
the resistance must have increased. Thus, the 


RESISTANCE OF A CONDUCTOR IS 
INVERSELY PROPORTIONAL TO ITS 
CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA. 

The diameter of conductors used in 


electronics is often only a fraction of an inch, 
therefore, the diameter is expressed in mils 
(thousandths of an inch). It is also standard 
practice to assign the unit circular mil to the 
cross-sectional area of the conductor. The 
circular mil is found by squaring the diameter, 
when the diameter is expressed in mils. Thus, if 
the diameter is 35 mils (0.035 inch), the circular 
mil area is equal to (35)? or 1225 circular mils. 
A comparison between a square mil and a 
circular mil is illustrated in figure 1-28. 





EFFECT OF CONDUCTOR LENGTH.— 
The length of a conductor is also a factor which 
determines the resistance of a conductor. If the 
length of a conductor is increased, the amount 
of energy given up increases. As free electrons 
move from atom to atom some energy is given 
off as heat. The longer a conductor is, the more 
energy is lost to heat. The additional energy loss 
subtracts from the energy being transferred 
through the conductor, resulting in a decrease in 
current flow for a given applied voltage. A 
decrease in current flow indicates an increase in 
resistance, since voltage was held constant. 
Therefore, if the length of a conductor is 
increased, the resistance increases. THE 
RESISTANCE OF A CONDUCTOR IS 
DIRECTLY PROPORTIONAL TO ITS 
LENGTH. 


A50. When the need for conductivity is great 


enough to justify the additional expense 


AS1. Wire B 

A52. Positive 

A53. Zero temperature coefficient 

Q54. What is the unit of conductance and 
what other term is sometimes used? 

Q55. What is the relationship between 


conductance and resistance? 


ELECTRICAL RESISTORS 


Resistance is a property of every electrical 
component. At times, its effects will be 
undesirable. However, resistance is used in many 
varied ways. RESISTORS are components 
manufactured to possess specific values of 
resistance. They are manufactured in many 
types and sizes. When drawn using its schematic 
representation, a resistor is shown as a Series of 
jagged lines, as illustrated in figure 1-29. 


Q56. What is schematic symbol for a resistor? 


Composition of Resistors 


One of the most common types of resistors 
is the molded composition, usually referred to as 
the carbon resistor. These resistors are 
manufactured in a variety of sizes and shapes. 


1-36 











TYPICAL 
RESISTOR FYPE SYMBOL 


A. FIXED 
CARBON 






FIXED 
B Ai WIREWOUND AR 
(TAPPED) 









ADJUSTABLE 
WIREWOUND 





Figure 1-29.—Types of resistors. 





POTENTIOMETER 


The chemical composition of the resistor 
determines its ohmic value and is accurately 
controlled by the manufacturer in the 
development process. They are made in ohmic 
values that range from one ohm to millions of 
ohms. The physical size of the resistor is related 
to its wattage rating, which is the ability of the 
resistor to dissipate heat caused by _ the 
resistance. 


Carbon resistors, as you might suspect, have 
as their principal ingredient the element carbon. 
In the manufacture of carbon resistors, fillers or 
binders are added to the carbon to obtain 
various resistor values. Examples of these fillers 
are clay, bakelite, rubber, and talc. These fillers 
are doping agents and cause the overall 
conduction characteristics to change. 


Carbon resistors are the most common 
resistors found because they are easy to 
manufacture, inexpensive, and have a tolerance 
that is adequate for most electrical and 
electronic applications. Their prime disadvantage 
is that they have a tendency to change value as 


they age. One other disadvantage of carbon 
resistors is their limited power handling 
capacity. 

The disadvantage of carbon resistors can be 
overcome by the use of WIREWOUND resistors 
(fig. 1-29 B and C). Wirewound resistors have 
very accurate values and possess a higher current 
handling capability than carbon resistors. The 
material that is frequently used to manufacture 
wirewound resistors is German silver which is 
composed of copper, nickel, and zinc. The 
qualities and quantities of these elements 
present in the wire determine the resistivity of 
the wire. (The resistivity of the wire is the 
measure or ability of the wire to resist current. 
Usually the percent of nickel in the wire 
determines the resistivity.) One disadvantage of 
the wirewound resistor is that it takes a large 
amount of wire to manufacture a resistor of high 
Ohmic value, thereby increasing the cost. A 
variation of the wirewound resistor provides an 
exposed surface to the resistance wire on one 
side. An adjustable tap is attached to this side. 
Such resistors, sometimes with two or more 
adjustable taps, are used as voltage dividers in 
power supplies and other applications where a 
specific voltage is desired to be “tapped” off. 


Q57. What does the wattage rating of a 
resistor indicate? 

Q58. What are the two disadvantages of 
carbon type resistors? 

Q59. What type resistor should be used to 
overcome the disadvantages of the 


carbon resistor? 


Fixed and Variable Resistors 


There are two kinds of resistors, FIXED and 
VARIABLE. The fixed resistor will have one 
value and will never change (other than through 
temperature, age, etc.). The resistors shown in A 


1-37 


and B of figure 1-29 are classed as fixed 
resistors. The tapped resistor illustrated in B has 
several fixed taps and makes more than one 
resistance value available. The sliding contact 
resistor shown in C has an adjustable collar that 
can be moved to tap off any resistance within 
the ohmic value range of the resistor. 

There are two types of variable resistors, one 
called a POTENTIOMETER and the other a 
RHEOSTAT (see views D and E of Fig. 1-29). 
An example of the potentiometer is the volume 
control on your radio, and an example of the 
rheostat is the dimmer control for the dash 
lights in an automobile. There is a slight 
difference between them. Rheostats usually have 
two connections, one fixed and the other 
moveable. Any variable resistor can properly be 
called a rheostat. The potentiometer always has 
three connections, two fixed and one moveable. 
Generally, the rheostat has a limited range of 
values and a high current-handling capability. 
The potentiometer has a wide range of values, 
but it usually has a limited current-handling 
capability. Potentiometers are always connected 
as voltage dividers. (Voltage dividers are 
discussed in Topic 3.) 


Q60. Describe the differences between the 
rheostat connections and those of the 
potentiometer. 

Q61. Which type of variable resistor should 


you select for controlling a large amount 
of current? 


Wattage Rating 


When a current is passed through a resistor, 
heat is developed within the resistor. The 
resistor must be capable of dissipating this heat 
into the surrounding air; otherwise, the 
temperature of the resistor rises causing a change 
in resistance, or possibly causing the resistor to 
burn out. 


The ability of the resistor to dissipate heat 
depends upon the design of the resistor itself. 
This ability to dissipate heat depends on the 


A54. The mho (v), siemans very large amounts of power (watts) are usually 
wirewound resistors. Wirewound resistors with 
wattage ratings up to 50 watts are not 
uncommon. Figure 1-30 shows some resistors 

ASS. They are reciprocals of each other which have different wattage ratings. Notice the 
relative sizes of the resistors. 


Standard Color Code System 
AS6. A/A/)A/N- 
In the standard color code system, four 
bands are painted on the resistor, as shown in 
figure 1-31. 
AS7. Its ability to dissipate heat 
The color of the first band indicates the 
value of the first significant digit. The color of 
the second band indicates the value of the 


A58. 1. Change value with age second significant digit. The third color band 
2. Limited power capacity represents a decimal multiplier by which the 
2 CARBON RESIST 
A59. The wirewound resistor , TP rie o- WATT 
ay |/2-WATT. 


A60. The rheostat may have two connections, 
one fixed and one moveable; the 
potentiometer always has_ three 
connections, one moveable and two 
fixed 





WIRE WOUND RESISTORS 


A61. The rheostat 





Figure 1-30.—Resistors of different wattage ratings. 
amount of surface area which is exposed to the 
air. A resistor designed to dissipate a large 
amount of heat must therefore have a large 
physical size. The heat dissipating capability of a ORANGE 
resistor is measured in WATTS (this unit will be 
explained later in topic 3). Some of the more 
common wattage ratings of carbon resistors 
are: one-eighth watt, one-fourth watt, one-half 
watt, one watt, and two watts. In some of the 
newer state-of-the-art circuits of today, much 
smaller wattage resistors are used. 
Generally, the type that you will be able to 
physically work with are of the values given. The 
higher the wattage rating of the resistor the 
larger is the physical size. Resistors that dissipate Figure 1-31.—Resistor color codes. 







TOLERANCE 
MULTIPLIER 
2nd SIGNIFICANT FIGURE 
181 SIGNIFICANT FIGURE 


1-38 


first two digits must be multiplied to obtain the 
resistance value of the resistor. The colors for 
the bands and their corresponding values are 
shown in Table 1-1. 


Use the example colors shown in figure 1-31. 
Since red is the color of the first band, the first 
significant digit is 2. The second band is violet, 
therefore the second significant digit is 7. The 
third band is orange, which indicates that the 
number formed as a result of reading the first 
two bands is multiplied by 1000. In this case 
27 x 1000 = 27,000 ohms. The last band on the 
resistor indicates the tolerance; that is, the 
manufacturer’s allowable deviation from the 
numerical value given on the resistor. In this 
instance its color is silver, and the tolerance is 10 
percent plus or minus of the value of the 
resistor. The allowed limit of variation in ohmic 
value of this particular resistor is 24,300 to 29,700 
ohms. 


When measuring resistors you will find 
situations in which the quantities to be 
measured may be extremely large, and the 
resulting number using the basic unit, the ohm, 
may prove too cumbersome. Therefore, a metric 
system prefix is usually attached to the basic 
unit of measurement to provide a more 
manageable unit. Two of the most commonly 
used prefixes are kilo and mega. Kilo is the 
prefix used to represent thousand and is 
abbreviated k. Mega is the prefix used to 
represent million and is abbreviated M. 


Table 1-1.—Standard Color Code for Resistors 


mute SIGNIFICANT | DECIMAL | RESISTANCE 
FIGURE MULTIPLIER | TOLERANCE 
0 1 
1 10 ] 
2 


RELIABILITY 
LEVEL PER 
1000 HRS. 


BLACK PERCENT 
BROWN 
RED 

ORANGE 
YELLOW 
GREEN 
BLUE 

VIOLET 


100 

1 000 

10,000 
100,000 
1,000,000 
10,000,000 
GRAY 100,000,000 
WHITE 1,000, 000,000 
GOLD re J 
SILVER . .O1 
NO COLOR 








1-39 


In the example given above, the 27,000-ohm 
resistor could have been written as 27 kilohms 
or 27 k®. Other examples are: 1,000 
ohms = 1 k®; 10,000 ohms 10 KQ; 
100,000 ohms 100 kQ. Likewise, 1,000,000 
ohms is written as 1 megohm or 1 MQ and 
10,000,000 ohms 10 MQ. 


A carbon resistor has a resistance of 50 
ohms, and a tolerance of 5 percent. What 
are the colors of bands one, two, three, 
and four, respectively? 


Q62. 


SIMPLIPYING. THE, COLOR 
CODE.—Resistors are the most common 
components used in electronics. The technician 
must identify, select, check, remove, and replace 
resistors. Resistors and resistor circuits are 
usually the easiest branches of electronics to 
understand. 

The resistor color code sometimes presents 
problems to a technician. It really should not, 
because once the resistor color code is learned, 
you should remember it for the rest of your life. 

Black, brown, red, orange, yellow, green, 
blue, violet, gray, white—this is the order of 
colors you should know automatically. There is 
a memory aid that will help you remember the 
code in its proper order. Each word starts with 
the first letter of the colors. If you match it up 
with the color code, you will not forget the 
code. 





Bad Boys Run Over Yellow Gardenias 

Behind Victory Garden Walls. 
or 

Black — Bad 

Brown — Boys 

Red — Run 

Orange _ Over 

Yellow — Yellow 

Green - Gardenias 

Blue - Behind 

Violet _ Victory 

Gray ~ Garden 

White _ Walls 


A62. The bands are green, black, black, and 


gold 


There are many other memory aid sentences 
that you might want to ask about from 
experienced technicians. You might find one of 
the other sentences easier to remember. 

There is still a good chance that you will 
make a mistake on a resistor’s color band. Most 
technicians do at one time or another. If you 
make a mistake on the first two significant 
colors, it usually is not too serious. If you make 
a miscue on the third band, you are in trouble, 
because the value is going to be at least 10 times 
too high or too low. Some important points to 
remember about the third band are: 


When the third band is.... 


Black, the resistor must be less than 100 
ohms. 


Red, the resistor must be in hundreds of 
ohms. 


Orange, the resistor must be in thousands of 
ohms. 


Yellow, the resistor must be in hundreds of 
thousands of ohms. 


Green, the resistor must be in megohms. 


Blue, the resistor must be 
megohms or more. 


in tens of 


Red, orange, and yellow are the most common 
colors for the third band. If this is kept in mind 
the selection of resistors from a parts bin, a lot 
of trouble can be avoided. 

The fourth band, which is the tolerance 
band, usually does not present too much of a 
problem. If there is no fourth band, it means 
that the resistor has a 20-percent tolerance, a 
silver fourth band has a 10-percent tolerance, 
and a gold fourth band has a 5-percent 
tolerance. In some cases, the third band will be 
silver or gold. It then becomes a multiplier, and 
you multiply the first two bands by 0.01 if it is 
silver, and 0.1 if it is gold. Resistors that 
conform to military specifications have an 


1-40 


additional fifth band. The fifth band indicates 
the reliability level per 1,000 hours as follows: 


Fifth band color Level 
Brown 1.0% 
Red 0.1% 
Orange 0.01% 
Yellow 0.001% 


In applying the reliability level table for a 
resistor color coded brown, the chance of failure 
will not exceed 1 percent for every 1,000 hours 
of operation of that resistor. In equipment such 
as the Navy’s complex computers this is very 
significant. In a piece of equipment containing 
10,000 orange fifth-band resistors, it means that 
no more than one resistor will fail during 1,000 
hours of operation. This is very good reliability. 
More information on resistors can be found in 
NEETS Module 19. 


Q63. A carbon resistor has the following color 
bands: The first band is yellow, followed 
by violet, yellow, and silver. What is the 


ohmic value of the resistor? 


Q64. The same resistor mentioned in question 
63 has a yellow fifth band. What does this 


signify? 


Q65. Aresistor is handed to you for identifica- 
tion with the following color code: first 
band is blue, followed by gray, green, 
gold, and brown. What is the resistor’s 


value? 


Some. resistors, both wirewound and 
composition, will not use the resistor color code. 
These resistors will have the ohmic value and 
tolerance imprinted on the resistor itself. 


SUMMARY OF TOPIC 1 


With the completion of this topic you now have gained the necessary 
information which is the foundation for the further study of electricity. The 
following is a summary of the important parts in the topic. 

In describing the composition of matter the following terms are 
important for you to remember: 


MATTER is defined as anything that occupies space and has weight. 


AN ELEMENT is a substance which cannot be reduced to a simpler 
substance by chemical means. 


A COMPOUND is a chemical combination of elements which can be 
separated by chemical means, but not by physical means. It is created by 
chemically combining two or more elements. 


A MIXTURE is a combination of elements or compounds that can be 
separated by physical means. 


A MOLECULE is the chemical combination of two or more atoms. In a 


compound, the molecule 


is the smallest particle that has all the 


characteristics of the compound. 


AN ATOM is the smallest 
particle of an element that 
retains the characteristics of 
that element. An atom is made 
up of electrons, protons, and 
neutrons. The number and 
arrangement of these 
subatomic particles determines 
the kind of element. 


PROTONS 


| ELECTRONS 
C\ 






NUCLEUS 


HYDROGEN HEUTROM HELIUM 


@ Protons ©} NeuTRONs 


AN ELECTRON is considered to be a negative 


charge of electricity. 


A PROTON is considered to be a positive charge 


of electricity. 


A NEUTRON is a neutral particle in that it has 


no electrical charge. 


1-41 


A63. 470,000 ohms (470 kilohms) 


A64. The resistor’s chance of failure is 0.001 
percent for 1000 hours of operation 


A65. 6,800,000 ohms (6.8 megohms), with 
5% tolerance, and a 1% reliability level 


ENERGY in an electron is of two types—kinetic 
(energy of motion) and potential (energy of 
position). 


NEW ORBIT 


ENERGY LEVELS of the electron exist because OLD ORBIT 
the electron has mass and motion. The motion eee, 
gives it kinetic energy and its position gives it 
potential energy. Energy balance keeps the 
electron in orbit and should it gain energy it will 
assume an orbit further from the center of the 
atom. It will remain at that level for only a 
fraction of a second before it radiates the excess 
energy and goes back to a lower orbit. 





SHELLS AND SUBSHELLS 
of electrons are the orbits of 
the electrons in the atom. 
Each shell contains a 
maximum of 2 times its 
number squared electrons. 
Shells are lettered K through 
Q, starting with K, which is 
the closest to the nucleus. The 
shell can be split into 4 
subshells labeled s, p, d, and f, 
which can contain 2, 6, 10, 
and 14 electrons, respectively. 


COPPER oul! ™ 
tare ; 
a\\)\\ 


“SHELL NUMBER 





VALENCE OF AN ATOM is determined by the 
number of eleci:ens in the outermost shell. The 
shell is referred to as the valence shell, and the 
electrons within it are valence electrons. An 
atom with few valence electrons requires little 
energy to free the valence electrons. 


1-42 


IONIZATION refers to the electrons contained 
in an atom. An atom with a positive charge has 
lost some of its electrons, and is called a positive 
ion. A negatively charged atom is a negative ion. 


CONDUCTORS, SEMICONDUCTORS, AND 


INSULATORS are categorized as such by the 
number of valence electrons in their atoms. The 
conductor normally has 3 or less valence 
electrons and offers little opposition to the flow 
of electrons (electric current). The insulator 
contains 5 or more valence electrons and offers 
high opposition to electron flow. The 
semiconductor usually has four valence electrons 
of conductivity and are in the midrange. The 
best conductors in order of conductance are 
silver, copper, gold, and aluminum. 


CHARGED BODIES affect each other as 
follows: When two bodies having unequal 
charges are brought close to each other, they 
will tend to attract each other in an attempt to 
equalize their respective charges. When two 
bodies, both having either positive or negative 
charges, are brought close together, they tend to 
repell each other as no equalization can occur. 
When the charge on one body is high enough 
with respect to the charge on an adjacent body, 
an equalizing current will flow between the 
bodies regardless of the conductivity of the 
material containing the bodies. 


A NEUTRAL BODY may be attracted to either 
a positively or negatively charged body due to 
the relative difference in their respective charges. 


1-43 


UNLIKE 
CHARGES 
ATTRACT 






LIKE CHARGES 
REPEL 


CHARGED BODIES will attract or repell each 
other with a force that is directly proportional 
to the product of their individual charges and 
inversely proportional to the square of the 
distance between the bodies. 


ELECTROSTATIC LINES of force are a graphic 
representation of the field around a charged 
body. These lines are imaginary. Lines from a 
positively charged body are indicated as flowing 
out from the body, while lines from a negatively 
charged body are indicated as flowing into the 
body. 


MAGNETISM is that property of a material 
which enables it to attract pieces of iron. A 
material with this property is called a magnet. 
Any material that is attracted to a magnet can 
be made into a magnet itself. 


FERROMAGNETIC MATERIALS are materials 
that are easy to magnetize, e.g., iron, steel, and 
cobalt. 


NATURAL MAGNETS, called magnitite, 
lodestones, or leading stones, were the first 
magnets to be studied. Most magnets in practical 
use are artificial or man-made magnets, and are 
made either by electrical means or by stroking a 
magnetic material with a magnet. 


RELUCTANCE is defined as the opposition of a 
material to being magnetized. 


PERMEABILITY is defined as the ease with 
which a material accepts magnetism. A material 
which is easy to magnetize does not hold its 
magnetism very long, and vice versa. 


RETENTIVETY is defined as the ability of a 
material to retain magnetism. 


1-44 


A MAGNETIC POLE is 
located at each end of a 
magnet. The majority of the 
magnetic force is concentrated 
at these poles and is 
approximately equal at both 
poles. 


MAGNETIC , -«— GEOGRAPHIC 
fi NORTH 


THE NORTH POLE, or north 
seeking pole, of a magnet 
freely suspended on a string 
always points toward the : wee 
north geographical pole. “ 4 if aoe 
-T ANS" MAGNETIC 

: —_. ~~ SOUTH 


ceocRAPHIC \S] (NORTHERN 
SOUTH * POLARITY) 





THE LIKE POLES of magnets 
repel each other, while the 
unlike poles attract each 
other. 


WEBER’S THEORY OF MAGNETISM assumes 
that all magnetic material is made up of 
magnetic molecules which, if lined up in north 
to south pole order, will be a magnet. If not 
lined up, the magnetic fields about the 
molecules will neutralize each other and no 
magnetic effect will be noted. 


NUMBER OF 

ELECTRONS 

SPINNING 
THE DOMAIN THEORY OF MAGNETISM OF OOKWISE 


states that if the electrons of the atoms in a NUCLEUS 
material spin more in one direction than in the 
other, the material will become magnetized. 


MOBILE d 
ELECTRONS INCOMPLETE 





1-45 


A MAGNETIC FIELD is said to exist in the 
space surrounding a magnet. 


MAGNETIC LINES OF FORCE are imaginary 
lines used to describe the patterns of the 
magnetic field about a magnet. These lines are 
assumed to flow externally from the north pole 
and into the south pole. 





MAGNETIC FLUX is the total number of 
magnetic lines of force leaving or entering the 
pole of a magnet. 





FLUX DENSITY is the number of flux lines per LIKE POLES REPELL 
unit area. 


FIELD INTENSITY or the intensity of a 
magnetic field is directly related to the magnetic 
force exerted by the field. 


1-46 


THE INTENSITY OF ATTRACTION/ 
REPULSION between magnetic poles may be 
described by a law almost identical to 
Coulomb’s Law of Charged Bodies, that is, the 
force between two poles is directly proportional 
to the product of the pole strengths and 
inversely proportional to the square of the 
distance between the poles. 


MAGNETIC SHIELDING can be accomplished 
by placing a soft iron shield around the object to 
be protected, thus directing the lines of force 
around the object. 


MAGNETS ARE CLASSIFIED BY SHAPE and 
include the bar magnet, the horseshoe magnet, 
and the ring magnet. The ring magnet is used in 
computer memory circuits; the horseshoe 
magnet in some meter circuits. 


ENERGY may be defined as the ability to do 
work. 


THE COULOMB (C) is the basic unit used to 
indicate an electrical charge. One coulomb is 
equal to a charge of 6.28x10!® electrons. 
When one coulomb of charge exists between two 
bodies, the electromotive force (or voltage) is 
one volt. 


VOLTAGE is measured as the difference of 
potential of two charges of interest. 


VOLTAGE MEASUREMENTS may _ be 
expressed in the following units: volts (V), 
kilovolts (kV), millivolts (mV), or microvolts 
(uV). 


For example: 
1 kV=1,000 V 


1 mV =0.001 V 
1 #V =0.000001 V 


1-47 











METHODS OF PRODUCING A VOLTAGE 
include: 


Friction 

Pressure (piezoelectricity) HOT 
Heat (thermoelectricity) JUNCTION 
Light (photoelectricity) 

Chemical action (battery) 

Magnetism (electromagnetic induction 
generator) 


DAARWN 


PHOTOSENSITIVE SILVER 
OXIDE SURFACE 







ELECTRONS EMITTED 
TOWARD ANODE 


> SA 
Hkec TRON 
FLOW (A) 


LIGHT 
SOURCE 





1-48 














a 


>} ELECTRON 
t - 4 FLOW 


BURNER 


QUARTZ CRYSTAL 
COMPRESSED 


ELECTRON 
FLOW 


4} — QUARTZ GRYSTAL 
=p DECOMPRESSED 


) ELECTRON 
FLOW 





LIGHT SOURCE 


SEMITRANSPARENT 
LAYER PASSES 
LIGHT AND COLLECTS 


ELECTRON FLOW 
PHOTOELECTRONS = 


= 


PHOTO SENSITIVE 
COPPER OXIDE 


PURE COPPER BASE LAYER — J 


“DILUTE 
~ SULFURIC ACID 
ELECTROLYTE 


GLASS JAR 


ELECTROMAGNETIC 
INDUCTION 
GENERATOR 


To produce voltage by use of 
magnetism, three conditions 
must be met: There must bea 
CONDUCTOR in which the 
voltage will be produced; there 
must be a MAGNETIC FIELD 
in the conductor’s vicinity; 
and there must be relative 
motion between the field and 
conductor. When _ these 
conditions are met, electrons 
WITHIN THE CONDUCTOR 
are propelled in one direction 
or another, creating an 
electromotive force, or 
voltage. 


the 
assumption that electron current flow is from 
negative to positive through a circuit. 


ELECTRON CURRENT is based on 


AN ELECTRIC CURRENT is a_ directed 


movement of electrons in a conductor or circuit. 


THE AMPERE is the basic unit used to indicate 
an electric current. A current of one ampere is 
said to flow when one coulomb of charge 
(6.28 x 10!® electrons) passes a given point in 
one second of time. Current measurements may 
be expressed in the following units: ampere (A), 
milliampere (mA), and microampere (uA). 
Current in a circuit increases in direct 
proportion to the voltage (emf) applied across 
the circuit. 


RESISTANCE is the opposition to current. The 
ohm is the basic unit of resistance and is 
represented by the Greek letter omega (Q2). A 
conductor is said to have one ohm of resistance 
when an emf of one volt causes one ampere of 
current to flow in the conductor. Resistance 
may be expressed in the following units: ohm 
(Q), kilohm (kQ), and megohms (MQ). For 
example, 1,000,000Q2 = 1,000 kQ = 1MQ. 









& Se 


MAGNET 






MAGNETIC 


NO INDUCED 


COPPER WIRE E.M.F 


CONDUCTOR 


Pie 
DIRECTION 


OF MOTION 


NO 
MOTION 


a INDUCED E.MF. 


+ MOTION 


REVERSED 


V 





1-49 


THE RESISTANCE OF A MATERIAL is 
determined by the type, the _ physical 
dimensions, and the temperature of the material; 
that is, 


1. A good conductor contains an 
abundance of free electrons. 

2. As the cross-sectional area of given 
conductor is increased, the resistance will 
decrease. 

3. As the length of a conductor is 
increased, the resistance will increase. 

4. In a material having a_ positive 
temperature coefficient, the resistance will 
increase as the temperature is increased. 


THE CONDUCTANCE OF A MATERIAL is the 
reciprocal of resistance. 


THE UNIT OF CONDUCTANCE is the mho and 
the symbol is v. 


THE RESISTOR is manufactured to provide a 
specific value of resistance. 


THE CARBON RESISTOR is made of carbon, 
with fillers and binders blended in to control the 
ohmic value. 


THE RESISTANCE OF A WIREWOUND 


RESISTOR is determined by the metal content 
of the wire and the wire’s length. Wirewound 
resistors may be tapped so two or more different 
voltage values may be taken off the same 
resistor. 


aE ed 2-WAIT 
~ I-WATT 






CARBON RESISTORS 


wIREWOUND 
(TAPPED) 


ADJUSTABLE 


WIREWOUND 





THE POTENTIOMETER AND _ THE 
RHEOSTAT are variable resistors and can be 
adjusted to any resistance value within their 
ohmic range. The rheostat is usually used for 
relatively high current applications and has two 
connections; the potentiometer has 3 
connections and is a relatively high-resistance, 
low-current device. 


THE WATTAGE RATING OF A RESISTOR is 
related to the resistor’s physical size, that is, the 
greater the surface area exposed to the air, the 
larger the rating. 


THE STANDARD COLOR CODE for resistors is 
used to determine the following: 


1. Ohmic value 
2. Tolerance 
3. Reliability level (on some resistors) 

























0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 

















2940 SIGNIFICANT FIGURE 
18 SIGNIFICANT FIGURE 


1-51 


— 


. Recognize 


TOPIC 2 


BATTERIES 


LEARNING OBJECTIVES 


Upon completing this topic you will be able to: 


. State the purpose of a cell. 
. State the purpose of the three parts of a cell. 


. State the difference between the two types 


of cells. 


. Explain the chemical process that takes 


place in the primary and secondary cells. 


and define the terms 
electrochemical action, anode, cathode, and 
electrolyte. 


. State the causes of polarization and local 


action and describe methods of preventing 
these effects. 


. Identify the parts of a dry cell. 


2-1 


8. 


10. 


12, 
13. 


Identify the various dry cells in use today 
and some of theircapabilities and limitations. 


. Identify the four basic secondary cells, their 


construction, capabilities, and limitations. 


Define a battery, and identify the three ways 
of combining cells to form a battery. 


. Describe general maintenance procedures for 


batteries including the use of the 
hydrometer, battery capacity, and rating and 
battery charging. 


Identify the five types of battery charges. 


Observe the safety precautions for working 
with and around batteries. 





INTRODUCTION 


The purpose of this topic is to introduce and 
explain the basic theory and characteristics of 
batteries. The batteries which are discussed and 
illustrated have been selected as representative of 
many models and types which are used in the Navy 
today. No attempt has been made to cover every 
type of battery in use, however, after completing 
this topic you will have a good working knowledge 
of the batteries which are in general use. 

First, you will learn about the building block of 
all batteries, the CELL. The explanation will expore 
the physical makeup of the cell and the methods used 
to combine cells to provide useful voltage, current, 
and power. The chemistry of the cell and how 
chemical action is used to convert chemical energy 
to electrical energy are also discussed. 

In addition, the care, maintenance, and 
operation of batteries, as well as some of the 
safety precautions that should be followed while 
working with and around batteries are discussed. 

Batteries are widely used as sources of 
direct-current electrical energy in automobiles, 
boats, aircraft, ships, portable electric/electronic 
equipment, and lighting equipment. In some 
instances, they are used as the only source of 
power; while in others, they are used as a 
secondary or standby power source. 

A battery consists of a number of cells 
assembled in a common container and 
connected together to function as a source of 
electrical power. 


THE CELL 


A cell is a device that transforms chemical 
energy into electrical energy. The simplest cell, 


known as either a galvanic or voltaic cell, is 
shown in figure 2-1. It consists of a piece of 
carbon (C) and a piece of zinc (Zn) suspended in 
a jar that contains a solution of water (H,0) and 
sulfuric acid (H, SO,) called the electrolyte. 

The cell is the fundamental unit of the 
battery. A simple cell consists of two electrodes 
placed in a container that holds the electrolyte. 

In some cells the container acts as one of the 
electrodes and, in this case is acted upon by the 
electrolyte. This will be covered in more detail 
later. 


ELECTRODES 


The electrodes are the conductors by which 
the current leaves or returns to the electrolyte. 


CARBON 
(C) 





Figure 2-1.—Simple voltaic or galvanic cell. 


In the simple cell, they are carbon and zinc 
strips that are placed in the electrolyte; while in 
the dry cell (fig. 2-2), they are the carbon rod in 
the center and zinc container in which the cell is 
assembled. 


ELECTROLYTE 


The electrolyte is the solution that acts upon 
the electrodes. The electrolyte, which provides a 
path for electron flow, may be a salt, an acid, or 
an alkaline solution. In the simple galvanic cell 
the electrolyte is in a liquid form. In the dry cell 
the electrolyte is a paste. 


CONTAINER 


The container which may be constructed of 
one of many different materials provides a 
means of holding (containing) the electrolyte. 
The container is also used to mount the 
electrodes. In the voltaic cell the container must 
be constructed of a material that will not be 
acted upon by the electrolyte. 


NEGATIVE TERMINAL (CATHODE) 
POSITIVE TERMINAL (ANODE) 





SEALING WAX 


ZINC CONTAINER 
AND NEGATIVE 
ELECTRODE 


WET (PASTE 
ELECTROLYTE 


CARBON ROD, OR 
POSTAVE 
ELECTRODE 


Figure 2-2.—Dry cell, cross-sectional view. 


Ql. What is the purpose of a cell? 


Q2. What are the three parts of a cell? 

Q3. What is the purpose of each of the three 
parts of a cell? 

PRIMARY CELL 


A primary cell is one in which the chemical 
action eats away one of the electrodes, usually 
the negative electrode. When this happens, the 
electrode must be replaced or the cell must be 
discarded. In the galvanic-type cell, the zinc 
electrode and the liquid electrolyte are usually 
replaced when this happens. In the case of the 
dry cell, it is usually cheaper to buy a new cell. 


SECONDARY CELL 


A secondary cell is one in which the 
electrodes and the electrolyte are altered by the 
chemical action that takes place when the cell 
delivers current. These cells may be restored to 
their original condition by forcing an electric 
current through them in the direction opposite 
to that of discharge. The automobile storage 
battery is a common example of the secondary 
cell. 


Q4. 


What are the two types of cells? 


What is the main difference between the 
two types of cells? 


QS. 


ELECTROCHEMICAL ACTION 


If a load (a device that consumes electrical 
power) is connected externally to the electrodes 


of a cell, electrons will flow under the influence 
of a difference in potential across the electrodes 
from the CATHODE (negative electrode), 
through the external conductor to the ANODE 
(positive electrode). 

A cell is a device in which chemical energy is 
converted to electrical energy. This process is 
called ELECTROCHEMICAL action. 

The voltage across the electrodes depends 
upon the materials from which the electrodes 
are made and the composition of the electrolyte. 
The current that a cell delivers depends upon the 
resistance of the entire circuit, including that of 
the cell itself. The internal resistance of the cell 
depends upon the size of the electrodes, the 
distance between them in the electrolyte, and 
the resistance of the electrolyte. The larger the 
electrodes and the closer together they are in the 
electrolyte (without touching), the lower the 
internal resistance of the cell and the more 
current the cell is capable of supplying to the 
load. 


Q6. What is electrochemical action? 

Q7. What is another name for the (a) positive 
electrode, and (b) the _ negative 
electrode? 

PRIMARY CELL CHEMISTRY 


When a current flows through a primary cell 
having carbon and zinc electrodes and a diluted 
solution of sulfuric acid and water (combined 
to form the electrolyte), the following chemical 
reaction takes place. 

The current flow through the load is the 
movement of electrons from the negative 
electrode of the cell (zinc) and to the positive 
electrode (carbon). This causes fewer electrons 
in the zinc and an excess of electrons in the 
carbon. Figure 2-1 shows the hydrogen ions 
(H,) from the sulfuric acid being attracted to 
the carbon electrode. Since the hydrogen ions 
are positively charged they are attracted to the 


negative charge on the carbon electrode. This 
negative charge is caused by the excess of 
electrons. The zinc electrode has a positive 
charge because it has lost electrons to the carbon 
electrode. This positive charge attracts the 
negative ions (SO,) from the sulfuric acid. The 
negative ions combine with the zinc to form 
zinc sulfate. This action causes the zinc 
electrode to be eaten away. Zinc sulfate is a 
greyish-white substance that is sometimes seen 
on the battery post of an automobile battery. 


The process of the zinc being eaten away 
and the sulfuric acid changing to hydrogen and 
zine sulfate is the cause of the cell discharging. 
When the zinc is used up, the voltage of the cell 
is reduced to zero. 


In figure 2-1 you will notice that the zinc 
electrode is labeled negative and the carbon 
electrode is labeled positive. This represents the 
current flow outside the cell from negative to 
positive. 


The zinc combines with the sufuric acid to 
form zinc sulfate and hydrogen. The zinc sulfate 
dissolves in the electrolyte (sulfuric acid and 
water) and the hydrogen appears as gas bubbles 
around the carbon electrode. As_ current 
continues to flow, the zinc gradually dissolves 
and the solution changes to zinc sulfate and 
water. The carbon electrode does not enter into 
the chemical changes taking place, but simply 
provides a return path for the current. 


Q8. In the primary cell, why are negative 
ions attracted to the negative terminal of 
the cell? 

Q9. How do electrons get from the negative 
electrode to the positive electrode? 

Q10. What causes the negative electrode to be 


eaten away? 


Al. 


A2. 


A3. 


A4. 


AS. 


A6. 


A7. 


A8. 


AY. 


Al10. 


A cell is a device that converts chemical 
energy to electrical energy. 


The electrodes, the electrolyte, and the 
container. 


The electrodes are the current 
conductors of the cell. The electrolyte is 
the solution that acts upon. the 
electrodes. The container holds the 
electrolyte and provides a means of 
mounting the electrodes. 


Primary and secondary. 


The secondary cell can be restored to its 
original condition by an electric current. 
The primary cell cannot. 


The process of converting chemical 
energy into electrical energy. 


(a) the anode, (b) the cathode. 


The positive charge caused by electrons 
leaving the negative electrode attracts 
the negative ions. 


By current flow through the load. 


The chemical action between the 
negative electrode and the electrolyte. 


SECONDARY CELL CHEMISTRY 


As stated before, the differences between 
primary and secondary cells are, the secondary 
cell can be recharged and the electrodes are 
made of different materials. The secondary cell 
shown in figure 2-3 uses sponge lead as the 
cathode and lead peroxide as the anode. This is 
the lead-acid type cell and will be used to 
explain the general chemistry of the secondary 
cell. Later in the topic, when other types of 
secondary cells are discussed you will see that 
the materials which make up the parts of a cell 
are different, but that the chemical action is 
essentially the same. 

Figure 2-3(A) shows a lead-acid secondary 
cell that is fully charged. The cathode is pure 


SULFURIC ACID E 


SULFURIC ACID f= 


DECREASING 


WATER 
INCREASING 


AND WATER H,0 = 


LEAD 
PEROXIDE 
PbOo 





(B) DISCHARGING 
DECREASING DECREASING 
SPONGE LEAD LEAD PEROXIDE 
INCREASING INCREASING 


A 
LEAD SULFATE LEAD SULFATE 
Pb+PbSO4 PbO + PbSOq 


MINIMUM 
SULFURIC ACID 


SULFURIC ACID 
INCREASING 


MAXIMUM 


DECREASING 





(D) CHARGING 

INCREASING INCREASING 
SPONGE LEAD LEAD PEROXIDE 
DECREASING DECREASING 
LEAD SULFATE LEAD SULFATE 
PbSOg+Pb =» PbSO4 + PbO» 


(C) DISCHARGED 

MINIMUM MINIMUM 
SPONGE LEAD LEAD PEROXIDE 
MAXIMUM MAXIMUM 

LEAD SULFATE LEAD SULFATE 
PbSO4+ Pb PbSO, + PbOo 


Hm LEAD PEROXIDE WB LEAD SULFATE 


Figure 2-3.—Secondary cell. 


sponge lead, the anode is pure lead peroxide, 
and the electrolyte is a mixture of sulfuric acid 
and water. 

Figure 2-3(B) shows the secondary cell 
discharging. A load is connected between the 
cathode and anode; current flows negative to 
positive as shown. This current flow creates the 
same process as was explained for the primary 
cell with the following exceptions. 


In the primary cell the zinc cathode was 
eaten away by the sulfuric acid. In the 
secondary cell the sponge-like construction of 
the cathode retains the lead sulfate formed by 
the chemical action of the sulfuric acid and the 
lead. In the primary cell the carbon anode was 
not chemically acted upon by the sulfuric acid. 
In the secondary cell the lead peroxide anode is 
chemically changed to lead sulfate by the 
sulfuric acid. 


When the cell is fully discharged it will be as 
shown in figure 2-3(C). The anode and cathode 
retain some lead peroxide and sponge lead but 
the amounts of lead sulfate in each is maximum. 
The electrolyte has a minimum amount of 
sulfuric acid. With this condition no further 
chemical action can take place within the cell. 


As you know, the secondary cell can be 
recharged. Recharging is the process of reversing 
the chemical action that occurs as the cell 
discharges. To recharge the cell, a voltage source, 
such as a generator, is connected as shown in 
figure 2-3(D). The negative terminal of the 
voltage source is connected to the cathode of 
the cell and the positive terminal of the voltage 
source is connected to the anode of the cell. 
With this arrangement the lead sulfate is 
chemically changed back to sponge lead in the 
cathode, lead peroxide in the anode, and sulfuric 
acid in the electrolyte. After all the lead sulfate 
is chemically changed, the cell is fully charged as 
shown in figure 2-3(A). Once the cell has been 
charged, the discharge-charge cycle may be 
repeated. 


Qll. Refer to figure 2-3(B). Why is the 


sulfuric acid decreasing? 


2-7 


Q12. Refer to figure 2-3(D). How is it possible 
for the sulfuric acid to be increasing? 

Q13. Refer to figure 2-3(D). When all the lead 
sulfate has been converted, what is the 
condition of the cell? 

POLARIZATION OF 

THE CELL 


The chemical action that occurs in the cell 
while the current is flowing causes hydrogen 
bubbles to form on the surface of the anode. 
This action is called POLARIZATION. Some 
hydrogen bubbles rise to the surface of the 
electrolyte and escape into the air, some remain 
on the surface of the anode. If enough bubbles 
remain around the anode, the bubbles form a 
barrier that increases internal resistance. When 
the internal resistance of the cell increases, the 
output current is decreased and the voltage of 
the cell also decreases. 

A cell that is heavily polarized has no useful 
output. There are several methods to prevent 
polarization or to depolarize the cell. 

One method uses a vent on the cell to permit 
the hydrogen to escape into the air. A 
disadvantage of this method is that hydrogen is 
not available to reform into the electrolyte 
during recharging. This problem is solved by 
adding water to the electrolyte, such as in an 
automobile battery. A second method is to use 
material that is rich in oxygen, such as 
manganese dioxide, which supplies free oxygen 
to combine with the hydrogen and form water. 

A third method is to use a material that will 
absorb the hydrogen, such as calcium. The 
calcium releases hydrogen during the charging 
process. All three methods remove enough 
hydrogen so that the cell is practically free from 
polarization. 


LOCAL ACTION 
When the external circuit is removed, the 


current ceases to flow, and, theoretically, all 
chemical action within the cell stops. However, 


All. The sulfuric acid is chemically acting 
upon the anode and cathode which 


creates a current flow through the load. 


A12. The charging currents causes the lead 
sulfate in the anode and cathode to be 
changed back to lead peroxide, sponge 
lead, and sulfuric acid. 

A13. Fully charged. 


commerical zinc contains many impurities, such 
as iron, carbon, lead, and arsenic. These 
impurities form many small electrical cells 
within the zinc electrode in which current flows 
between the zinc and its impurities. Thus, the 
chemical action continues even though the cell 
itself is not connected to a load. 

Local action may be prevented by using pure 
zinc (which is not practical), by coating the 
zinc with mercury, or by adding a _ small 
percentage of mercury to the zinc during the 
manufacturing process. The treatment of the 
zinc with mercury is called amalgamating 
(mixing) the zinc. Since mercury is many times 
heavier than an equal volume of water, small 
particles of impurities weighing less than 
mercury will float to the surface of the mercury. 
The removal of these impurities from the zinc 
prevents local action. The mercury is not readily 
acted upon by the acid. When the cell is 
delivering current to a load, the mercury 
continues to act on the impurities in the zinc. 
This causes the impurities to leave the surface of 
the zinc electrode and float to the surface of the 
mercury. This process greatly increases the 
storage life of the cell. 


Q14. Describe three ways to _ prevent 
polarization. 
Q15. Describe local action. 


2-8 


TYPES OF CELLS 


The development of new and different types 
of cells in the past decade has been so rapid that 
it is virtually impossible to have a complete 
knowledge of all the various types. A few recent 
developments are the silver-zinc, nickel-zinc, 
nickel-cadmium, silver-cadmium, organic and 
inorganic lithium and mercury cells. 


PRIMARY DRY CELL 


The dry cell is the most popular type of 
primary cell. It is ideal for simple applications 
where an inexpensive and noncritical source of 
electricity is all that is needed. 


The dry cell is not actually dry. The 
electrolyte is not in a liquid state, but is a moist 
paste. If it should become totally dry, it would 
no longer be able to transform chemical energy 
to electrical energy. 


Construction of a Dry Cell 


The construction of a common type of dry 
cell is shown in figure 2-4. These dry cells are also 
referred to as Leclanche’ cells. The internal parts 
of the cell are located in a cylindrical zinc con- 
tainer. This zinc container serves as the negative 
electrode (cathode) of the cell. The container is 
lined with a nonconducting material, such as 
blotting paper, to separate the zinc from the paste. 
A carbon electrode is located in the center, and 
it serves as the positive terminal (anode) of the 
cell. The paste is a mixture of several substances 
such as ammonium chloride, powdered coke, 
ground carbon, manganese dioxide, zinc chloride, 
graphite, and water. 


This paste, which is packed in the space 
between the anode and the blotting paper, also 
serves to hold the anode rigid in the center of 
the cell. When the paste is packed in the cell, a 
small space is left at the top for expansion of the 
electrolytic paste caused by the depolarization 
action. The cell is then sealed with a cardboard 
or plastic seal. 


Since the zinc container is the cathode, it 
must be protected with some insulating material 


POSITIVE 

TERMINAL 

RnOG ey ees). Rey hay 
NEGATIVE ee 7 = aa | 
TERMINAL [IQ os a 
(CATHODE) {|= 






ASPHALT 
| SATURATED 
PAPER GASKET 


ASPHALT 
SATURATED 


EXPANSION 
CHAMBER = 


INSULATING 
WASHER 


DEPOLARIZING 
MIX 


CARBON 
ELECTRODE 


| 


w 


ae PASTE COATED 
PULPBOARD 


ZINC CAN SEPARATOR 


= 


—+—— CHI PBOARD 
JACKET 





Sy 





| 


mate 6 


Figure 2-4.-Cutaway view of the general-purpose dry 
cell. 


to be electrically isolated. Therefore, it is 
common practice for the manufacturer to 
enclose the cells in cardboard and metal 
containers. 


The dry cell (fig. 2-4) is basically the same as 
the simple voltaic cell (wet cell) described 
earlier, as far as its internal chemical action is 
concerned. The action of the water and the 
ammonium chloride in the paste, together with 
the zinc and carbon electrodes, produces the 
voltage of the cell. Manganese dioxide is added 
to reduce polarization when current flows and 
zinc chloride reduces local action when the cell 
is not being used. 


A cell that is not being used (sitting on the 
shelf) will gradually deteriorate because of slow 
internal chemical changes (local action). This 
deterioration is usually very slow if cells are 
properly stored. If unused cells are stored in a 
cool place, their shelf life will be greatly 


2-9 


increased. Therefore, to minimize deterioration, 
they should be stored in refrigerated spaces. 

The blotting paper (paste-coated pulpboard 
separator) serves two purposes—(1) it keeps the 
paste from making actual contact with the zinc 
container and (2) it permits the electrolyte from 
the paste to filter through to the zinc slowly. 
The cell is sealed at the top to keep air from 
entering and drying the electrolyte. Care should 
be taken to prevent breaking this seal. 


Q16. What serves as the cathode of a dry cell? 
Q17. Why isa dry cell called a DRY cell? 
Q18. What does the term “shelf life’? mean? 


Mercuric-Oxide Zinc Cell 


The mercuric-oxide zinc cell (mercury cell) 
is a primary cell that was developed during 
World War II. Two important assets of the 
mercury cell are, its ability to produce current 
for a long period of time and a long shelf life 
when compared to the dry cell shown in figure 
2-4. The mercury cell also has a very stable 
output voltage and is a power source that can be 
made in a small physical size. 

With the birth of the space program and the 
development of small transceivers . and 
miniaturized equipment, a power source of small 
size was needed. Such equipment requires a 
small cell which is capable of delivering 
maximum electrical energy at a constant 
discharge voltage. The mercury cell, which is one 
of the smallest cells, meets these requirements. 

Present mercury cells are manufactured in 
three basic types as shown in figure 2-5. The 
wound-anode type, shown in figure 2-5(A), has 
an anode composed of a corrugated zinc strip 
with a paper absorbent. The zinc is mixed with 
mercury, and the paper is soaked in the 
electrolyte which causes it to swell and press 
against the zinc and make positive contact. This 


Al4. Vent the cell, add a material rich in 
oxygen, and use a material that will 
absorb hydrogen. 

A15. Current flow in a cell with no external 
load. 

Al6. The zinc container. 

A17. The electrolyte is not a liquid but is in 
the form of a paste. 

A18. The period that a cell can be stored and 
still be useable. 

process insures that the electrolyte makes 


contact with the anode. 

In the pressed-powder cells, shown in figure 
2-5(B) and (C), the zinc powder for the anode is 
mixed prior to being pressed into shape. The 
absorbent shown in the figure is paper soaked in 
the electrolyte. The space between the inner and 
outer containers provides passage for any gas 
generated by an improper chemical balance or 
impurities present within the cell. 

If the anode and cathode of a cell are 
connected together without a load, a SHORT 
CIRCUIT condition exists. Short circuits 
(shorts) can be very dangerous. They cause 
excessive heat, pressure, and current flow which 
may cause serious damage to the cell or be a 
safety hazard to personnel. 


DO NOT SHORT THE MERCURY CELL. 
SHORTED* \MERCURY CELLS HAVE 
EXPLODED WITH CONSIDERABLE FORCE. 


2-10 










DOUBLE CELL TOP CELL SEAL 


(GROMMET) 


ADAPTER 


OUTER CAN SLEEVE 


WOUND ZINC ANODE 
AND ABSORBENT RETAINING 
WITH ALKALINE RING 


ELECTROLYTE 


MERCURIC OXIDE 
DEPOLARIZER 
(CATHODE) 


INNER CAN 


(A) 














CELL SEAL 
(GROMMET ) 


INNER CAN ZINC ANODE 


ABSORBENT AND 
ALKALINE 
ELECTROLYTE 


BARRIER 


ADAPTER 
SLEEVE 


S MERCURIC OXIDE 
DEPOLARIZER 
(CATHODE ) 


FLAT PELLET STRUCTURE 


(B) 














Meee CELL SEAL 
DOUBLE (GROMMET) 


CELL TOP 


MERCURIC 
OXIDE 
DEPOLARIZER 
(CATHODE ) 


ADAPTER 
SLEEVE 


ABSORBENT 
SLEEVE 

ANDO ALKALINE 
ELECTROLYTE 


BARRIER 


ZINC OXIDE 
ANODE 


NEOPRENE 
DISK 
CYLINDRICAL STRUCTURE 
(Cc) 


Figure 2-5.—Mercury cells. 


Other Types of Cells 


There are many different types of primary 
cells. Because of such factors as cost, size, ease 
of replacement, and voltage or current needs, 


many types of primary cells have been 
developed. The following is a brief description 
of some of the primary cells in use today. 

The Manganese Dioxide-Alkaline-Zine Cell is 
similar to the zinc-carbon cell except for the 
electrolyte used. This type of cell offers better 
voltage stability and longer life than the zinc- 
carbon type. It also has a longer shelf life and can 
operate over a wide temperature range. The 
manganese dioxide-alkaline-zinc cell has a voltage 
of 1.5 volts and is available in a wide range of 
sizes. This cell is commonly referred to as the 
alkaline cell. 

The Magnesium-Manganese Dioxide Cell uses 
magnesium as the anode material. This allows a 
higher output capacity over an extended period 
of time compared to the zinc-carbon cell. This cell 
produces a voltage of approximately 2 volts. The 
disadvantage of this type of cell is the production 
of hydrogen during its operation. 

The Lithium-Organic Cell and the Lithium- 
Inorganic Cell, are recent developments of a new 
line of high-energy cells. The main advantages of 
these types of cells are, very high power, opera- 
tion over a wide temperature range, they are 
lighter than most cells, and have a remarkably 
long shelf life of up to 20 years. 


CAUTION 


Lithium cells contain toxic materials under 
pressure. Do not puncture, recharge, short-circuit, 
expose to excessively high temperatures, or in- 
cinerate. Use these batteries/cells only in approved 
equipment. Do not throw in trash. 


Q19. Why should a mercury cell NOT be shorted? 


Q20. What factors should be considered when 
selecting a primary cell for a power source? 


SECONDARY WET CELLS 


Secondary cells are sometimes known as wet cells. 
There are four basic type of wet cells, the lead-acid, 
nickel-cadmium, silver-zinc, and silver-cadmium. 


Lead-Acid Cell 


The lead-acid cell is the most widely used 
secondary cell. The previous explanation of the 


2-11 


secondary cell describes exactly the manner in 
which the lead-acid cell provides electrical 
power. The discharging and charging action 
presented in electrochemical action describes the 
lead-acid cell. 


You should recall that the lead-acid cell has 
an anode of lead peroxide, a cathode of sponge 
lead, and the electrolyte is sulfuric acid and 
water. 


Nickel-Cadmium Cell 


The nickel-cadmium cell (NICAD) is far 
superior to the lead-acid cell. In comparison to 
lead-acid cells, these cells generally require less 
maintenance throughout their service life in 
regard to the adding of electrolyte or water. The 
major difference between the nickel-cadmium 
cell and the lead-acid cell is the material used in 
the cathode, anode, and electrolyte. In the 
nickel-cadimum cell the cathode is cadmium 
hydroxide, the anode is nickel hydroxide, and 
the electrolyte is potassium hydroxide and 
water. 


The nickel-cadmium and lead-acid cells have 
capacities that are comparable at normal 
discharge rates, but at high discharge rates the 
nickel-cadmium cell can deliver a larger amount 
of power. In addition the nickel-cadmium cell 
can: 


1. Be charged in a shorter time. 

2. Stay idle longer in any state of charge 
and keep a full charge when stored for a longer 
period of time. 

3. Be charged and discharged any number 
of times without any appreciable damage. 


Due to their superior capabilities, 
nickel-cadmium cells are being used extensively 
in many military applications that require a cell 
with a high discharge rate. A good example is in 
the aircraft storage battery. 


Silver-Zinc Cells 


The silver-zinc cell is used extensively to 
power emergency equipment. This type of cell is 
relatively expensive and can be charged and 
discharged fewer times than other types of cells. 


A19. The danger of explosion. 


A20. Cost, size, ease of replacement, and 
voltage or current needs. 


When compared to the _ lead-acid or 
nickel-cadmium cells these disadvantages are 
overweighed by the light weight, small size, and 
good electrical capacity of the silver-zinc cell. 


The silver-zinc cell uses the same electrolyte 
as the nickel-cadmium cell (potassium hydroxide 
and water) but the anode and cathode differ 
from the nickel-cadmium cell. The anode is 
composed of silver oxide and the cathode is 
made of zinc. 


Silver-Cadmium Cell 


The silver-cadmium cell is a fairly recent 
development for use in storage batteries. The 
silver-cadmium cell combines some of the better 
features of the nickel-cadmium and silver-zinc 
cells. It has more than twice the shelf life of the 
silver-zinc cell, and can be recharged many more 
times. The disadvantages of the silver-cadmium 
cell are high cost and low voltage production. 

The electrolyte of the silver-cadmium cell is 
potassium hydroxide and water as in the 
nickel-cadmium and silver-zinc cells. The anode 
is silver oxide as in the silver-zinc cell and the 
cathode is cadmium hydroxide as in the nicad 
cell. You may notice that _ different 
combinations of materials are used to form the 
electrolyte, cathode, and anode of different 
cells. These combinations provide the cells with 
different qualities for many varied applications. 


Q21. What are the four basic types of 
secondary (wet) cells? 


Q22. What are the advantages of a nicad cell 
over a lead-acid cell? 


Q23. What type of cell is most commonly 
used for emergency systems? 


Q24. What three cells use the same 
electrolyte? 
BATTERIES 


A battery is a voltage source that uses 
chemical action to produce a voltage. In many 
cases the term battery is applied to a single cell, 
such as the flashlight battery. In the case of a 
flashlight that uses a battery of 1.5 volts, the 
battery is a single cell. The flashlight that is 
operated by 6 volts uses 4 cells in a single case 
and this is a battery composed of more than one 
cell. There are three ways to combine cells to 
form a battery. 


COMBINING CELLS 


In many cases, a battery-powered device 
may require more electrical energy than one cell 
can provide. The device may require either a 
higher voltage or more current, and in some 
cases both. Under such conditions it is necessary 
to combine, or interconnect, a sufficient number 
of cells to meet the higher requirements. Cells 
connected in SERIES provide a higher voltage, 
while cells connected in PARALLEL provide a 
higher current capacity. To provide adequate 
power when both voltage and _ current 
requirements are greater than the capacity of 
one cell, a combination SERIES-PARALLEL 
network of cells must be used. 


Series-Connected Cells 


Assume that a load requires a power supply 
of 6 volts and'a current capacity of 1/8 ampere. 
Since a single cell normally supplies a voltage of 
only 1.5 volts, more than one cell is needed. To 
obtain the higher voltage, the cells are connected 
in series as shown in figure 2-6. 








(B) 


6 VOLTS 


Figure 2-6.—(A) Pictorial view of series-connected cells; 
(B) Schematic of series connection. 


Figure 2-6(B) is a schematic representation 
of the circuit shown in figure 2-6(A). The load is 
shown by the resistance symbol and the battery 
is indicated by one long and one short line per 
cell. 


In a series hookup, the negative electrode 
(cathode) of the first cell is connected to the 
positive electrode (anode) of the second cell, the 
negative electrode of the second to the positive 
of the thrid, etc. The positive electrode of the 
first cell and negative electrode of the last cell 
then serve as the terminals of the battery. In this 
way, the voltage is 1.5 volts for each cell in the 
series line. There are four cells, so the output 
terminal voltage is 1.5.x 4, or 6 volts. When 
connected to the load, 1/8 ampere flows 
through the load and each cell of the battery. 
This is within the capacity of each cell. 
Therefore, only four series-connected cells are 
needed to supply this particular load. 


2-13 


CAUTION 


WHEN CONNECTING CELLS IN SERIES, 
CONNECT ALTERNATE TERMINALS 
TOGETHER (- to +, - to +, etc.) ALWAYS 
HAVE TWO REMAINING TERMINALS THAT 
ARE USED FOR CONNECTION TO THE 
LOAD ONLY. DO NOT CONNECT THE TWO 
REMAINING TERMINALS TOGETHER AS 
THIS IS A SHORT ACROSS THE BATTERY 
AND WOULD NOT ONLY QUICKLY 
DISCHARGE THE CELLS BUT COULD 
CAUSE SOME TYPES OF CELLS TO 
EXPLODE. 


Parallel-Connected Cells 


In this case, assume an electrical load 
requires only 1.5 volts, but will require 1/2 
ampere of current. (Assume that a single cell will 
supply only 1/8 ampere.) To meet this 
requirement, the cells are connected in parallel, 
as shown in figure 2-7(A) and schematically 
represented in 2-7(B). In a parallel connection, 
all positive cell electrodes are connected to one 
line, and all negative electrodes are connected to 
the other. No more than one cell is connected 
between the lines at any one point; so the 
voltage between the lines is the same as that of 
one cell, or 1.5 volts. However, each cell may 
contribute its maximum allowable current of 
1/8 ampere to the line. There are four cells, so 
the total line current is 1/8 x 4, or 1/2 ampere. 
In this case four cells in parallel have enough 
capacity to supply a load requiring 1/2 ampere 
at 1.5 volts. 


Series-Parallel-Connected Cells 


Figure 2-8 depicts a battery network 
supplying power to a load requiring both a 
voltage and current greater than one cell can 
provide. To provide the required 4.5 volts, 
groups of three 1.5-volt cells are connected in 
series. To provide the required 1/2 ampere of 
current, four series groups are connected in 
parallel, each supplying 1/8 ampere of current. 


A21. Lead-Acid, Nickel-Cadmium (NICAD), 
Silver-Zinc, and Silver-Cadmium. 


A22. Can be charged in a shorter time, can 
deliver a larger amount of power, and 
stays idle longer. 


A23.  Silver-Zinc cell. 


A24. Silver-Cadmium, 
Nickel-Cadmium. 


Silver-Zinc, and 








(B) 


Figure 2-7.—(A) Pictorial view of parallel-connected cells; 
(B) Schematic of parallel connection. 


2 
VOLTS | VOLTS | VOLTS} VOLTS 





Figure 2-8.—Schematic of series-parallel connected cells. 


The connections shown have been used to 
illustrate the various methods of combining cells 
to form a battery. Series, parallel, and 
series-parallel circuits will be covered in detail in 
the next topic, Direct Current. 

Some batteries are made from primary cells. 
When a primary-cell battery is completely 
discharged, the entire battery must be replaced. 
Because there is nothing else that can be done to 
primary cell batteries, the rest of the discussion 
on batteries will be concerned with batteries 
made of secondary cells. 


Q25. What does the term battery normally 
refer to? 


Q26. What are the three ways of combining 
cells, and what is each used for? 


BATTERY CONSTRUCTION 


Secondary cell. batteries are constructed 
using the various secondary cells already 
described. The lead-acid battery is one of the 
most common batteries in use today and will be 
used to explain battery construction. The 
nickel-cadmium battery is being used with 
increasing frequency and will also be discussed. 

Figure 2-9 shows the makeup of a lead-acid 
battery. The container houses the separate cells. 
Most containers are hard rubber, plastic, or some 












VENT 
PLUG 
FILLER OPENING 
IN CELL COVER TERMINAL 
POST 
= 
| TERMINAL 
CONNECTOR 


LINK 


CONNECTOR 

CONTAINER 

NEGATIVE POSITIVE 
PLATE PLATE 


SEPARATOR 


CASE SEDIMENT 


SPACE 
Figure 2-9.—Lead-acid battery construction. 


other material that is resistant to the electrolyte 
and mechanical shock, and will withstand 
extreme temperatures. The container (battery 
case) is vented through vent plugs to allow the 
gases that form within the cells to escape. The 
plates in the battery are the cathodes and anodes 
that were discussed earlier. In figure 2-10 the 
negative plate group is the cathode of the 


NEGATIVE 
PLATE 


POSITIVE 
PLATE 


SEPARATOR 





CELL ELEMENT 
PARTLY ASSEMBLED 


Figure 2-10.—Lead-acid battery plate arrangement. 


215 


individual cells and the positive plate group is 
the anode. As shown in the figure the plates are 
interlaced with a terminal attached to each 
plate group. The terminals of the individual cells 
are connected together by link connectors as 
shown in figure 2-9. The cells are connected in 
series in the battery and the positive terminal of 
one end cell becomes the positive terminal of 
the battery. The negative terminal of the 
opposite end cell becomes the negative terminal 
of the battery. 

The terminals of a lead-acid battery are 
usually identified from one another by their size 
and markings. The positive terminal, marked (+) 
is sometimes colored red and is physically larger 
than the negative terminal, marked (-). 

The individual cells of the lead-acid battery 
are not replaceable so in the event one cell fails 
the battery must be replaced. 

The nickel-cadmium battery is similar in 
construction to the lead-acid battery with the 
exception that it has individual cells which can 
be replaced. The cell of the nicad battery is 
shown in figure 2-11. 

The construction of secondary cell batteries 
is so similar, that it is difficult to distinguish 
the type of battery by simply looking at it. The 
type of battery must be known to properly 
check or recharge the battery. Each battery 
should have a nameplate that gives a description 
of its type and electrical characteristics. 


Q27. Other than the type of cel! used, what is 
the major difference between the 
construction of the lead-acid and nicad 
battery? 

Q28. How is the type of battery most easily 
determined? 

BATTERY MAINTENANCE 


The following information concerns the 
maintenance of secondary-cell batteries and is of 
a general nature. You must check the 


A25. <A voltage source in a single container 
made from one or more cells. 


A26. Series, to increase voltage but not 
current. Parallel, to increase current but 
not voltage. Series-Parallel, to increase 
both current and voltage. 


A27. The cells in the nicad battery can be 
replaced. 


A28. By looking at the name plate data. 


appropriate technical manuals for the specific 


type of battery prior to performing maintenance 


on any battery. 
The Hydrometer 


A HYDROMETER is the instrument used to 
measure the amount of active ingredients in the 
electrolyte of the battery. The hydrometer 
measures the SPECIFIC GRAVITY of the 
electrolyte. Specific gravity is the ratio of the 
weight of the electrolyte to the weight of the 
same volume of pure water. The active 
ingredient, such as sulfuric acid or potassium 
hydroxide, is heavier than water. Because the 
active ingredient is heavier than water, the more 
active ingredient there is in the electrolyte, the 
heavier the electrolyte will be; the heavier the 
electrolyte, the higher the specific gravity. 


A hydrometer, shown in figure 2-12, is a 
glass syringe with a float inside it. The float is a 
hollow glass tube weighted at one end and sealed 
at both ends, with a scale calibrated in specific 
gravity marked on the side. The electrolyte to be 
tested is drawn into the hydrometer by using the 
suction bulb. Enough electrolyte should be 
drawn into the hydrometer so that the float will 
rise; the hydrometer should not be filled to the 
extent that the float rises into the suction bulb. 


VENT AND 
FILLER CAP 








TERMINAL 


TERMINAL 


A 
man CASE 
SEPARATOR 
CONTACT 
TAB 
PL ATE 


Figure 2-11.—Nickel-cadmium cell. 


Since the weight of the float is at its base, the 
float will rise to a point determined by the 
weight of the electrolyte. If the electrolyte 
contains a _ large concentration of active 
ingredient, the float will rise higher than if the 
electrolyte has a small concentration of active 
ingredient. 

To read the hydrometer, hold it in a vertical 
position and take the reading at the level of the 
electrolyte. The manufacturer’s technical manual 
for battery specifications should be referred to 
for the correct specific gravity ranges. 


Note: Hydrometers should be flushed with 
fresh water after each use to prevent inaccurate 
readings. Storage battery hydrometers must not 
be used for any other purpose. 


Q29. What is the purpose of the hydrometer? 


Q30. Which electrolyte has more active 
ingredient? Electrolyte A, specific 
gravity 1.015? Electrolyte B, specific 
gravity 1.125 


A29. To measure the amount of active 


ingredient in the electrolyte. 


A30. Electrolyte B. It is heavier per unit 


volume. 


20-hour rate of discharge. That is, if a fully 
charged battery is completely discharged during 
a 20-hour period, it is discharged at the 20-hour 
rate. Thus, if a battery can deliver 20 amperes 
continuously for 20 hours, the battery has a 
rating of 20 amperesx20 hours, or 400 
ampere-hours. Therefore, the 20-hour rating is 
equal to the average current that a battery is 
capable of supplying without interruption for an 
interval of 20 hours. (Note: Aircraft batteries 
are rated according to a l-hour rate of 
discharge.) 

All standard batteries deliver 100 percent of 
their available capacity if discharged in 20 hours 
or more, but they will deliver less than their 
available capacity if discharged at a faster rate. 
The faster they discharge, the less ampere-hour 
capacity they have. 

The low-voltage limit, as specified by the 
manufacturer, is the limit beyond which very 
little useful energy can be obtained from a 
battery. This low-voltage limit is normally a test 
used in battery shops to determine the condition 
of a battery. 


Q31. When should safety precautions 
pertaining to batteries be observed? 

Q32. How long should a 200 ampere-hour 
battery be able to deliver 5 amperes? 

BATTERY CHARGING 


It should be remembered that adding the 
active ingredient to the electrolyte of a 


2-18 


discharged battery does not recharge the 
battery. Adding the active ingredient only 
increases the specific gravity of the electrolyte 
and does not convert the plates back to active 
material, and so does not bring the battery back 
to a charged condition. A charging current must 
be passed through the battery to recharge it. 

Batteries are usually charged in battery 
shops. Each shop will have specific charging 
procedures for the types of batteries to be 
charged. The following discussion will introduce 
you to the types of battery charges. 

The following types of charges may be given 
to a storage battery, depending upon the 
condition of the battery: 


Initial charge 
Normal charge 
Equalizing charge 
Floating charge 
Fast charge 


RW 


Initial Charge 


When a new battery is shipped dry, the 
plates are in an uncharged condition. After the 
electrolyte has been added, it is necessary to 
charge the battery. This is accomplished by 
giving the battery a long low-rate initial charge. 
The charge is given in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions, which are shipped 
with each battery. If the manufacturer’s 
instructions are not available, reference should 
be made to the detailed instructions for charging 
batteries found in current Navy directives. 


Normal Charge 


A normal charge is a routine charge that is 
given in accordance with the nameplate data 
during the ordinary cycle of operation to restore 
the battery to its charged condition. 


Equalizing Charge 


An equalizing charge is a special extended 
normal charge that is given periodically to 
batteries as part of a maintenance routine. It 
insures that all the sulfate is driven from the 
plates and that all the cells are restored to a 
maximum specific gravity. The equalizing charge 


is continued until the specific gravity of all cells, 
corrected for temperature, shows no change for 
a +hour period. 


Floating Charge 


In a floating charge, the charging rate is 
determined by the battery voltage rather than 
by a definite current value. The floating charge 
is used to keep a battery at full charge while the 
battery is idle or in light duty. It is sometimes 
referred to as a trickle charge and is 
accomplished with low current. 


Fast Charge 


A fast charge is used when a battery must be 
recharged in the shortest possible time. The 
charge starts at a much higher rate than is 
normally used for charging. It should be used 
only in an emergency, as this type charge may 
be harmful to the battery. 


Charging Rate 


Normally, the charging rate of Navy storage 
batteries is given on the battery nameplate. If 
the available charging equipment does not have 
the desired charging rates, the nearest available 
rates should be used. However, the rate should 
never be so high that violent gassing (explained 
later in this text) occurs. 


Charging Time 


The charge must be continued until the 
battery is fully charged. Frequent readings of 
specific gravity should be taken during the 
charge, and compared with the reading taken 
before the battery was placed on charge. 


Gassing 


When a battery is being charged, a portion of 
the energy breaks down the water in the 
electrolyte. Hydrogen is released at the negative 
plates and oxygen at the positive plates. These 
gases bubble up through the electrolyte and 
collect in the air space at the top of the cell. If 
violent gassing occurs when the battery is first 
placed on charge, the charging rate is too high. If 
the rate is not too high, steady gassing develops 
as the charging proceeds, indicating that the 
battery is nearing a fully charged condition. 


A MIXTURE OF HYDROGEN AND AIR CAN 
BE DANGEROUSLY EXPLOSIVE. NO 
SMOKING, ELECTRIC SPARKS, OR OPEN 
FLAMES SHOULD BE PERMITTED NEAR 
CHARGING BATTERIES. 


Q33. Can a battery be recharged by adding 
more electrolyte? 


Q34. If violent gassing occurs during a battery 
charge, what action should be taken? 


SUMMARY 


In this topic you learned that batteries are widely used as sources of 
direct-current. You were introduced to electrochemical action and the way it 
works in a cell, the cell itself, the type and parts of a cell, and how cells 
are connected together to form batteries. You learned the construction and 
maintenance of batteries and some of the safety precautions in handling and 
working with batteries. Several new terms were introduced in this topic. The 
following is a summary of the topic on batteries. 


A31. At all times. 


A32. Forty hours. 


A33. No, a current must be passed through 
the battery. 


A34. Reduce the charging rate. 


A CELL is a device that transforms chemical 
energy into electrical energy. The cell has three 
parts, the electrodes, the electrolyte, and the 
container. There are two basic cells, primary and 
secondary. 


THE ELECTRODES are the current conductors 
of the cell. ek 





_ THE ELECTROLYTE is the solution that acts 
upon the electrodes. 


THE CONTAINER holds the electrolyte and 
provides a means of mounting the electrodes. 


THE PRIMARY CELL is a cell in which the 
chemical action finally destroys one of the 
electrodes, usually the negative. The primary cell 
cannot be recharged. 


SECONDARY CELL CHEMISTRY is the 
process in which the electrolyte acts upon and 
chemically changes both electrodes. This process 
also depletes the amount of active material in 
the electrolyte. A charging current applied to 
the cell reverses the process and restores the cell 
to its original condition. 


POLARIZATION is the effect of hydrogen 
surrounding the anode of a cell which increases 
the internal resistance of the cell. Polarization 
can be prevented by venting the cell, adding a 
material rich in oxygen, or adding a material 
that will absorb hydrogen. 


LOCAL ACTION is the continuation of current 
flow within the cell when there is no external 
load. It is caused by irnpurities in the electrode 
and can be prevented by the use of mercury 
amalgamated with the material of the electrode. 


THE DRY CELL is the type commonly referred 
to as the “flashlight battery’. Since the 
electrolyte is not in liquid form, but is a paste, 
the term dry cell is used. In most dry cells the 
case is the cathode. 


SHELF LIFE is the period the cell may be 
stored and still be useable. 


ee 


POSITIVE 


Ghnees STEEL COVER 
Sup o5 
NEGATIVE (74 ; os | Ss 
temmaoce) I Sears 
i ——AQUL SATURATED 
EXPANSION “i, . PAPER GASKET 
CHAMBER = — aeuies 








SATURATED 
INSULATING 
WASHER 


DEPOLARIZING 
QL ooo” 


CARBON 
ELECTRODE 


H— PASTE COATED 
PULPBOARD 
ZINC CAN—HL SEPARATOR 


zy 


—+—7— CHIPBOARD 
JACKET 
—y 








THE SILVER-ZINC CELL is used mostly for 
emergency equipment. It is light, small, and has 
a large power capacity for its size. The anode is 
silver oxide, the cathode is zinc, and the 
electrolyte is potassium hydroxide and water. 


THE SILVER-CADMIUM CELL combines the 
better features of the nickel-cadmium and 
silver-zinc cells. The anode is silver-oxide, the 
cathode is cadmium hydroxide, and _ the 
electrolyte is potassium hydroxide. 


A BATTERY is a voltage source in a single 
container made from one or more cells. The cells 
can be combined in_ series, parallel, or 
series-parallel. 


SERIES CONNECTED CELLS provide a higher 
voltage than a single cell, with no increase in 
current. 


PARALLEL CONNECTED CELLS provide a 
higher current than a single cell, with no increase 
in voltage. 


2-24 













eve 
FILLER OPENING oe 
IN CELL COVER : TERMINAL 
ego <da POST 
» E TERMINAL 
erare | as = CONNECTOR 


LINK 
CONNECTOR 


NEGATIVE 
PLATE 


SEPARATOR 
CASE 


POSITIVE 
PLATE 


SEDIMENT 
SPACE 





6 VOLTS 





SERIES-PARALLEL _CONNECTED _CELLS 
provide a higher voltage and a higher current 
than a single cell. 


TYPES OF BATTERIES can be determined 
from nameplate data. 


HYDROMETER provides the means to check 
the specific gravity of the electrolyte. 


SAFETY PRECAUTIONS should always be 
‘followed when working with or around 
batteries. 


CAPACITY is an indication of the current 
supplying capability of the battery for a specific 
period of time; e.g., 400 ampere-hour. 


RATING is the capacity of the battery for a 
specific rate of discharge. In most batteries the 
rating is given for a 20 hour discharge cycle; e.g., 
20 amperes for 20 hours, 


BATTERY CHARGE is the process of reversing 
the current flow through the battery to restore 
the battery to its original condition. The 
addition of active ingredient to the electrolyte 
will not recharge the battery. There are five 
types of charges: 


Initial charge 
Normal charge 
Equalizing charge 
Floating charge 
Fast charge 


Mm BWhDLe 


GASSING is the production of hydrogen gas 
caused by a portion of the charge current 
breaking down the water in the electrolyte. 
Steady gassing is normal during the charging 
process. Violent gassing indicates that the charge 
rate is too high. 


2-25 








TOPIC 3 


DIRECT CURRENT 


LEARNING OBJECTIVES 


Upon completing this topic you will be able to: 


1. Identify the term schematic diagram and 
identify the components in a circuit from a 
simple schematic diagram. 

2. State the equation for Ohm’s law and 
describe the effects on current caused by 
changes in a circuit. 

3. Given simple graphs of current versus 
power and voltage versus power, determine the 
value of circuit power for a given current and 
voltage. 

4. Identify the term power and state three 
formulas for computing power. 

5. Compute circuit and component power 
in series, parallel, and combination circuits. 

6. Compute the efficiency of an electrical 
device. 

7.Solve for unknown quantities of 
resistance, current, and voltage in a series circuit. 

8. Describe how voltage polarities are 
assigned to the voltage drops across resistors 
when Kirchhoff’s voltage law is used. 

9. State the voltage at the reference point 
in a circuit. 

10. Define open and short circuits and 
describe their effects on a circuit. 


11. State the meaning of the term source 
resistance and describe its effect on a circuit. 


12. Describe in terms of circuit values the 
circuit condition needed for maximum power 
transfer. 


13. Compute efficiency of power transfer in 
a circuit. 


14.Solve for unknown quantities of 
resistance, current, and voltage in a parallel 
circuit. 

15. State the significance of the polarity 
assigned to a current when using Kirchhoff’s 
current law. 

16. State the meaning of the term equivalent 
resistance. 

17. Compute resistance, 
and power in voltage dividers. 

18. Describe the method by which a single 
voltage divider can provide both positive and 
negative voltages. 

19.Recognize the safety precautions 
associated with the hazard of electrical shock. 

20. Identify the first aid procedures for a 
victim of electrical shock. 


current, voltage, 


INTRODUCTION 


The material covered in this topic contains 
many new terms that are explained as you 
progress through the material. The basic d.c. 
circuit is the easiest to understand, so the topic 
begins with the basic circuit and from there 
works into the basic schematic diagram of that 
circuit. The schematic diagram is used in all your 
future work in electricity and electronics. It is 
very important that you become familiar with 
the symbols that are used. 

This topic also explains how to determine 
the total resistance, current, voltage, and power 
in a series, parallel, or combination circuit 
through the use of Ohm’s and Kirchhoff’s laws. 
The voltage divider network, series, parallel, and 
series-parallel practice problem circuits will be 
used for practical examples of what you have 
learned. 


THE BASIC ELECTRIC CIRCUIT 


The flashlight is an example of a basic elec- 
tric circuit. It contains a source of electrical energy 
(the dry cells in the flashlight), a load (the bulb) 
which changes the electrical energy into a more 
useful form of energy (light), and a switch to con- 
trol the energy delivered to the load. 

Before you study a schematic representation of 
the flashlight, it is necessary to define certain terms. 
The LOAD is any device through which an electrical 
current flows and which changes this electrical energy 
into a more useful form. Some common examples 
of loads are a lightbulb, which changes electrical 
energy to light energy, an electric motor, which 
changes electrical energy into mechanical energy; and 
the speaker into a radio, which changes electrical 


energy into sound. The SOURCE is the device 
which furnishes the electrical energy used by the 
load. It may consist of a simple dry cell (as ina 
flashlight), a storage battery (as in an 
automobile), or a power supply (such as a 
battery charger). The SWITCH, which permits 
control of the electrical device, interrupts the 
current delivered to the load. 


SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION 


The technician’s main aid in troubleshooting 
a circuit in a piece of equipment is the 
SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM. The - schematic 
diagram is a “picture” of the circuit that uses 
symbols to represent the various. circuit 
components; physically large or complex circuits 
can be shown on a relatively small diagram. 
Before studying the basic schematic, look at 
figure 3-1. This figure shows the symbols that 
are used in this topic. These, and others like 
them, are referred to and used throughout the 
study of electricity and electronics. 

The schematic in figure 3-2 represents a 
flashlight. Part A of the figure shows the 
flashlight in the off or deenergized state. The 
switch (S1) is open. There is no complete path 
for current (I) through the circuit, and the bulb 
(DS1) does not light. In figure 3-2(B), switch S1 
is closed. Current flows in the direction of the 
arrows from the negative terminal of the battery 
(BAT), through the switch (S1), through the 
lamp (DS1), and back to the positive terminal of 
the battery. With the switch closed the path for 
current is complete. Current will continue to 
flow until the switch (S1) is moved to the open 
position or the battery is completely discharged. 


WIRE LAMP 
“CRY ineanoeseewt 


aie aes 










Sa 





CONNECTED 


x CONNECTED 


| (POTENTIOMETER) 
a. GROUND ashe cll RHEOSTAT 


—t— CELL —o o— SWITCH 


jr 





ee 
WN FIXED 








VARIABLE 





NOT 
CONNECTED 












VOLTMETER 


= AMMETER 


Figure 3-1.—Symbols commonly used in electricity. 


BATTERY 








ir 






Oo 
DRY CELL | no FLASHLIGHT 
BAT 3 BULB 
DS1 


(A) DEENERGIZED 





(B) ENERGIZED 


A. Deenergized. 
B. Energized. 
Figure 3-2.—Basic flashlight schematic. 


3-3 


Ql. In figure 3-2, what part of the circuit is 


the (a) load and (b) source? 


Q2. What happens to the path for current 


when S1 is open as shown in figure 
3-2(A)? 


What is the name given to the “picture” 
of a circuit ‘such as the one shown in 
figure 3-2? 


Q3. 


OHM’S LAW 


In the early part of the 19th century George 
Simon Ohm proved by experiment that a precise 
relationship exists between current, voltage, and 
resistance. This relationship is called Ohm’s Law 
and is stated as follows: 


The current in a circuit is DIRECTLY 
proportional to the applied voltage and 
INVERSELY proportional to the circuit 
resistance. Ohm’s Law may be expressed as an 
equation: 


zm 


Where: I=current in amperes 


E = voltage in volts 


R = resistance in ohms 


As stated in Ohm’s law, current is inversely 
proportional to resistance. This means, as the 
resistance in a circuit increases, the current 
decreases proportionately. 


In the equation l= R if any two quantities 


are known, the third one can be determined. 


Al. (a) DS1, the flashlight bulb 
(b) BAT, the dry cell 
A2. The path for current is incomplete; or, 
there is no path for current with S1 open. 
A3. Aschematic diagram 


Refer to figure 3-2(B), the schematic of the 
flashlight. If the battery (BAT) supplies a 
voltage of 1.5 volts and the lamp (DSI) has a 
resistance of 5 ohms, then the current in the 
circuit can be determined. Using this equation 
and substituting values: 





If the flashlight were a two-cell flashlight, we 
would have twice the voltage, or 3.0 volts, 
applied to the circuit. Using this voltage in the 
equation: 


You can see that the current has doubled as the 
voltage has doubled. This demonstrates that the 
current is directly proportional to the applied 
voltage. 

If the value of resistance of the lamp is 
doubled, the equation will be: 


3.0 volts _ 


j= E=3-0volts _ 3 ampere 
R 10ohms ° P 


The current has been reduced to one-half of the 
value of the previous equation, or .3 ampere. 
This demonstrates that the current is inversely 
proportional to the resistance. Doubling the 
value of the resistance of the load reduces circuit 
current value to one-half of its former value. 


3-4 


APPLICATION OF OHM’S LAW 


By using Ohm’s law, you are able to find the 
resistance of a circuit, knowing only the voltage 
and the current in the circuit. 


In any equation, if all the variables 
(parameters) are known except one, that 
unknown can be found. For example, using 
Ohm’s law, if current (I) and voltage (E) are 
known, resistance (R) the only parameter not 
known, can be determined: 


1. Basic formula: I= 


al im 


2. Remove the divisor by multiplying both 
sides by R: 


-E,R 


3. Result of step 2: Rx I=E 


4. To get R alone (on one side of the 
equation) divide both sides by I: ve 


5. The basic formula, transposed for R, is: 


EE 
R= 


Refer to figure 3-3 where E equals 10 volts and I 
equals 1 ampere. Solve for R, using the equation 
just explained. 


Given: E= 10 volts 
I= 1 ampere 
Solution: 
Be 
R= 





Figure 3-3.—Determining resistance in a basic circuit. 


Insert the values of the known quantities: 


R= volts 
ampere 
R= 10 ohms 


The basic formula can also be used to solve 
for E. 


Take the basic formula: I = = 


<t 


multiply both sides by R: Ix R= 


len 


Results: E=IxR 


This equation can be used to find the voltage 
for the circuit shown in figure 3-4. 


Given: I = .5 ampere 


R= 45 ohms 
Solution: 
E=IxR 
E = .5 ampere x 45 ohms 
E = 22.5 volts 


Figure 3-4.—Determining voltage in a basic circuit. 


The Ohm’s law equation and its various 
forms may be obtained readily with the aid of 
figure 3-5. The circle containing E, I, and R is 
divided into two parts, with E above the line and 
with I and R below the line. To determine the 
unknown quantity, first cover that quantity 
with a finger. The position of the uncovered 
letters in the circle will indicate the 
mathematical operation to be performed. For 
example, to find I, cover I with a finger. The 
uncovered letters indicate that E is to be divided 


by R, or I= 5. To find the formula for E, cover 


E with your finger. The result indicates that I is 
to be multiplied by R, or E=IR. To find the 
formula for R, cover R. The result indicates that 


E is to be divided by I, or R= * 


You are cautioned not to rely wholly on the 
use of this diagram when you transpose the 
Ohm’s law formulas. The diagram should be 
used to supplement your knowledge of the 
algebraic method. Algebra is a basic tool in the 
solution of electrical problems. 


Q4. According the Ohm’s law, what happens 
to circuit current if the applied voltage 
(a) increases, (b) decreases? 


A4. (a) Current increases 


(b) Current decreases 


Figure 3-5.—Ohm’s law in diagram form. 


Q5. According to Ohm’s law, what happens 
to circuit current if circuit resistance (a) 
increases, (b) decreases? 

Q6. What is the equation used to find circuit 
resistance if voltage and current values 
are known? 

GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS OF 

THE BASIC CIRCUIT 


One of the most valuable methods of 
analyzing a circuit is by constructing a graph. No 
other method provides a more convenient or 
more rapid way to observe the characteristics of 
an electrical device. 

The first step in constructing a graph is to 
obtain a table of data. The information in the 
table can be obtained by taking measurements 
on the circuit under examination, or can be 
obtained theoretically through a series of Ohm’s 
law computations. The latter method is used 
here. 

Since there are three variables (E, I, and R) 
to be analyzed, there are three distinct graphs 
that may be constructed. 

To construct any graph of electrical 
quantities, it ic standard practice to vary one 
quantity in a specified way and note the changes 
which occur in a second quantity. The quantity 
which is intentionally varied is called the 
independent variable and is plotted on the 


3-6 


horizontal axis. The horizontal axis is known as 
the X-AXIS. The second quantity, which varies 
as a result of changes in the first quantity, is 
called the dependent variable and is plotted on 
the vertical, or Y-AXIS. Any other quantities 
involved are held constant. 

For example, in the circuit shown in figure 
3-6 if the resistance was held at 10 ohms and 










(Y-AX/S) 


I 
IN AMPERES 


10. 15 20 
IN VOLTS 
(X-AXIS) 


E 


Figure 3-7.—Volt-ampere characteristic. 


the voltage was varied, the resulting changes in 
current could then be graphed. The resistance is 
the constant, the voltage is the independent 
variable, and the current is the dependent 
variable. 

Figure 3-7 shows the graph and a table of 
values. This table shows R held constant at 10 
ohms as E is varied from 0 to 20 volts in 5-volt 
steps. Through the use of Ohm’s law, you can 
calculate the value of current for each value of 
voltage shown in the table. When the table is 
complete, the information it contains can be 
used to construct the graph shown in figure 3-7. 
For example, when the voltage applied to the 
10-ohm resistor is 10 volts, the current is 1 
ampere. These values of current and voltage 
determine a point on the graph. When all five 
points have been plotted, a smooth curve is 
drawn through the points. 

Through the use of this curve, the value of 
current through the resistor can be quickly 
determined for any value of voltage between 0 
and 20 volts. 

Since the curve is a straight line, it shows 
that equal changes of voltage across the resistor 
produce equal changes in current through the 
resistor. This fact illustrates an important 
characteristic of the basic law—the current varies 
directly with the applied voltage when the 
resistance is held constant. 

When the voltage across a load is held 
constant, the current depends solely upon the 
resistance of the load. For example, figure 3-8 
shows a graph with the voltage held constant at 


AMPERES 
iD). “¢ 






E=l2 VOLTS 
(CONSTANT) 


O 2 4 6 8 


10 12 OHMS (R) 


Figure 3-8.—Relation between current and resistance. 


3-7 


12 volts. The independent variable is the 
resistance which is varied from 2 ohms to 12 
ohms. The current is the dependent variable. 
Values for current can be calculated as: 


Given: 
E = 12 volts 
R= 2 ohms to 12 ohms 
Solution : _E 
R 
p= devel sy ampere 
12 ohms P 
= 12 volts... 
I= Woke” 1.2 amperes 
12 volts . 
[= = whims 1.5 amperes 
[= 12 volts _ 2 amperes 
6 ohms 


This process can be continued for any value 
of resistance. You can see that as the resistance 
is halved, the current is doubled; when the 
resistance is doubled, the current is halved. 

This illustrates another important 
characteristic of Ohm’s law—current varies 
inversely with resistance when the applied 
voltage is held constant. 


Q7. Using the graph in figure 3-7, what is the 
approximate value of current when the 


voltage is 12.5 volts? 


Q8. Using the graph in figure 3-8, what is the 
approximate value of current when the 


resistance is 3 ohms? 


POWER 


Power, whether electrical or mechanical, 
pertains to the rate at which work is being done. 
Work is done whenever a force causes motion. 
When a mechanical force is used to lift or move 


AS. (a) Current decreases 


(b) Current increases 


A6. R= 


— [tr 


A7. 1.25 amperes 


A8. 4 amperes 


a weight, work is done. However, force exerted 
WITHOUT causing motion, such as the force of 
a compressed spring acting between two fixed 
objects, does not constitute work. 

Previously, it.-was shown that voltage is an 
electrical force, and that voltage forces current 
to flow in a closed circuit. However, when 
voltage exists but current does not flow because 
the circuit is open, no work is done. This is 
similar to the spring under tension that 
produced no motion. When voltage causes 
electrons to move, work is done. The 
instantaneous RATE at which this work is done 
is called the electric power rate, and is measured 
in WATTS. 

A total amount of work may be done in 
different lengths of time. For example, a given 
number of electrons may be moved from one 
point to another in 1 second or in | hour, 
depending on the RATE at which they are 
moved. In both cases, total work done is the 
same. However, when the work is done in a 
short time, the wattage, or INSTANTANEOUS 
POWER RATE, is greater than when the same 
amount of work is done over a longer period of 
time. 


As stated, the basic unit of power is the 
watt. Power in watts is equal to the voltage 
across a circuit multiplied by current through 
the circuit. This represents the rate at any given 
instant at which work is being done. The symbol 
P indicates electrical power. Thus, the basic 





power formula is P= Ex I. Where E is voltage 
and I is current in the circuit. The amount of 
power changes when either voltage or current, or 
both voltage and current, are caused to change. 

In practice, the ONLY factors that can be 
changed are voltage and resistance. In explaining 
the different forms that formulas may take, 
current is sometimes presented as a quantity 
that is changed. Remember if current is changed 
it is because either voltage or resistance has been 
changed. 

Figure 3-9 shows a basic circuit using a 
source Of power that can be varied from 0 to 8 
volts and a graph that indicates the relationship 
between voltage and power. 

The resistance of this circuit is 2 ohms; this 
value does not change. Voltage (E) is increased 
(by increasing the voltage source), in steps of 1 
volt, from 0 volts to 8 volts. By applying Ohm’s 
law, the current (I) is determined for each step 
of voltage. For instance, when E is 1 volt, the 
current is: 


II 
plies 


Ee 1 volt 
2 ohms 





I= 0.5 ampere 


R (FIXED) 
2 OHMS 


VARIABLE 


POWER SUPPLY 
0-8 VOLTS 








8 E (VOLTS) 


Figure 3-9.—Graph of power related to changing voltage. 


Power (P), in watts, is determined by applying 
the basic power formula: 


P=ExI 
P= 1 volt x 0.5 ampere 
P =0.5 watt 


When E is increased to 2 volts: 





_ 

I=R 
Pe 2 volts 
2 ohms 


I= 1 ampere 
and 
P=ExJ 
P= 2 volts x 1 ampere 
P= 2 watts 


When E is increased to 3 volts: 


ll 
zm 


a 3 volts 
2 ohms 


I= 1.5 amperes 
and 
P=E x1 
P= 3 volts x 1.5 amperes 
P= 4.5 watts 
You should notice that when the voltage was 


increased to 2 volts, the power increased from .5 
watts to 2 watts or 4 times. When the voltage 


increased to 3 volts, the power increased to 4.5 
watts or 9 times. This shows that if the 
resistance in a circuit is held constant, the power 
varies directly with the SQUARE OF THE 
VOLTAGE. 

Another way of proving that power varies as 
the square of the voltage when resistance is held 
constant is: 


Since I 


I 
A|™ 


By substitution in: P=ExI 


You get: P=Ex S 

Or: P= oe 
E2 

Therefore: P= R 


Another important relationship may be seen 
by studying figure 3-10. Thus far, power has 
been calculated with voltage and current 
(P=ExI), and with voltage and resistance 


2 
(P= =>). Referring to figure 3-10, note that 


R (FIXED) 










E (VARIABLE POWER SUPPLY) 2 OHMS 
0-8 VOLTS 
P=EL 
P(WATTS) §/E=54 WATTS 
40 
35 32 
30 
25 
ns 18 
15 
10 8 
5 
2 
O75 4 15 2 25 3 35 4 Iiamps) 


Figure 3-10.—Graph of power related to changing 
current. 


power also varies as the square of current just as 
it does with voltage. Thus, another formula for 
power, with current and resistance as its factors, 
is P = I?R. This can be proved by: 


Since: E=IxR 
By substitution in: P=ExI 
You get: P=IxRxI 
Or: P=IxIxR 
Therefore: P=[?R 


Up to this point, four of the most important 
electrical quantities have been discussed. These 
are voltage (E), current (1), resistance (R), and 
power (P). You must understand the 
relationships which exist among. these 
quantities because they are used throughout 
your study of electricity. In the preceding 
paragraphs, P was expressed in terms of alternate 
pairs of the other three basic quantities E, I, and 
R. In practice, you should be able to express any 
one of these quantities in terms of any two of 
the others. 

Figure 3-11 is a summary of 12 basic 
formulas you should know. The four quantities 


De 
ae 


Figure 3-11.—Summary of basic formulas. 


E, I, R, and P are at the center of the figure. 
Adjacent to each quantity are three segments. 
Note that in each segment, the basic quantity is 
expressed in terms of two other basic quantities, 
and no two segments are alike. 

For example, the formula wheel in figure 
3-11 could be used to find the formula to solve 
the following problem: 


A circuit has a voltage source that delivers 6 
volts and the circuit uses 3 watts of power. What 
is the resistance of the load? 

Since R is the quantity you have been asked 
to find, look in the section of the wheel that has 

2 
R in the center. The segment i contains the 
quantities you have been given. The formula you 
2 


would use is R =F . The problem can now be 


solved. 
Given: E= 6 volts 
P= 3 watts 
2 
Solution: R= E 
P 
(6 volts)? 
3 watts 


R= =2= 12 ohms 


Q9. What is the term applied to the rate at 
which a mechanical or electrical force 
causes motion? 


10. How can the amount of current be 
changed in a circuit? 


Q1i1. What are the three formulas for electrical 
power? 


© 


POWER RATING 


Electrical components are often given a 
power rating. The power rating, in watts, 
indicates the rate at which the device converts- 
electrical energy into another form of energy, 
such as light, heat, or motion. An example of 
such a rating is noted when comparing a 
150-watt lamp to a 100-watt lamp. The higher 
wattage rating of the 150-watt lamp indicates it 


is capable of converting more electrical energy 
into light energy than the lamp of the lower 
rating. Other common examples of devices with 
power ratings are soldering irons and small 
electric motors. 

In some electrical devices the wattage rating 
indicates the maximum power the device is 
designed to use rather than the normal operating 
power. A 150-watt lamp, for example, uses 150 
watts when operated at the specified voltage 
printed on the bulb. In contrast, a device such as 
a resistor is not normally given a voltage or a 
current rating. A resistor is given a power rating 
in watts and can be operated at any combination 
of voltage and current as long as the power 
rating is not exceeded. In most circuits, the 
actual power used by a resistor is considerably 
less than the power rating of the resistor because 
a 50% safety factor is used. For example, if a re- 
sistor normally used 2 watts of power, a resistor 
with a power rating of 3 watts would be used. 

Resistors of the same resistance value are 
available in different wattage values. Carbon 
resistors, for example, are commonly made in 
wattage ratings of 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, 1, and 2 watts. 
The larger the physical size of a carbon resistor 
the higher the wattage rating. This is true 
because a larger surface area of material radiates 
a greater amount of heat more easily. 

When resistors with wattage ratings greater 
than 5 watts are needed, wirewound resistors are 
used. Wirewound resistors are made in values be- 
tween 5 and 200 watts. Special types of wirewound 
resistors are used for power in excess of 200 watts. 

As with other electrical quantities, prefixes 
may be attached to the word watt when express- 
ing very large or very small amounts of power. 
Some of the more common of these are the 
kilowatt (1000 watts), the megawatt (1,000,000 
watts), and the milliwatt (1/1,000 of a watt). 


Q12. What is the current in a circuit with 5 
ohms of resistance that uses 180 watts of 
power? (refer to figure 3-12) 

Q13. What type of resistor should be used in 
the circuit described in question 12? 

Q1i4. What is the power used in a circuit that 


has 10 amperes of current through a 10 
ohm resistor? 





Figure 3-12.—Circuit for computing electrical quantities. 


POWER CONVERSION 
AND EFFICIENCY 


The term power consumption is common in 
the electrical field. It is applied to the use of 
power in the same _ sense that gasoline 
consumption is applied to the use of fuel in an 
automobile. 


Another common term is power conversion. 
Power is used by electrical devices and is 
converted from one form of energy to another. 
An electrical motor converts electrical energy to 
mechanical energy. An electric light bulb 
converts electrical energy into light energy and 
an electric range converts electrical energy into 
heat energy. Power used by electrical devices is 
measured in watt-hours. This practical unit of 
electrical energy is equal to | watt of power 
used continuously for 1 hour. The term kilowatt 
hour (kWh) is used more extensively on a daily 
basis and is equal to 1000 watt-hours. 


The EFFICIENCY of an electrical device is 
the ratio of power converted to useful energy 
divided by the power consumed by the device. 
This number will always be less than one (1.00) 
because of the losses in any electrical device. If a 
device has an efficiency rating of .95, it 
effectively transforms 95 watts into useful 
energy for every 100 watts of input power. The 


A9. Power 


A10. By changing the circuit resistance or the 
voltage of the power source. 


E2 
All. P=ExI,P=7,P=PR 


Al2. 6 amperes 
Al3. A wirewound resistor 
Al4. 1 kilowatt 


other 5 watts are lost to heat, or other losses 
which cannot be used. 

Calculating the amount of power converted 
by an electrical device is a simple matter. You 
need to know the length of time the device is 
operated and the input power or horsepower 
rating. Horsepower, a unit of work, is often 
found as a rating on electrical motors. One 
horsepower is equal to 746 watts. Example: A 
3/4 hp motor operates 8 hours a day. How much 
power is converted by the motor per month? 
How many kWh does this represent? 


Given: t = 8 hrs x 30 days 


P = 3/4 hp 

Solution: Convert horsepower to watts 
P = hp x 746 watts 
P = 3/4 x 746 watts 


P= 559 watts 
Convert watts to watt-hours 
P = work x time 
P = 559 watts x 8 x 30 
P = 134,000 watt-hours per month 


(NOTE: These figures are rounded to the nearest 
1000.) 


3-12 


To convert to kWh 


_ Power in watt-hours 


P 1000 

p= 134,000 watt-hours 
, 1000 

P = 134 kWh 


If the motor actually uses 137 kWh per 
month, what is the efficiency of the motor? 


Given: Power converted = 134 kWh per month 
Power used = 137 kWh per month 


Solution: EFF =Lowerconverted 
Power used 
134 kWh per month 


ae 137 kWh per month 


EFF = .978 (Rounded to three 
figures) 


Q15. How much power is converted by a 1 
horsepower motor in 12 hours? 


Q16. What is the efficiency of the motor if it 
actually uses 9.5 kWh in 12 hours? 


SERIES D.C. CIRCUITS 


When two unequal charges are connected by 
a conductor, a complete pathway for current 
exists. An electric circuit is a complete 
conducting pathway. It consists not only of the 
conductor, but also includes the path through 
the voltage source. Inside the voltage source 
current flows from the positive terminal, 
through the source, emerging at the negative 
terminal. 





SERIES CIRCUIT 
CHARACTERISTICS 


A SERIES CIRCUIT is defined as a circuit 
that contains only ONE PATH for current flow. 
To compare the basic circuit that has been 
discussed and a more complex series circuit, 
figure 3-13 shows two circuits. The basic circuit 
has only one lamp and the series circuit has 
three lamps connected in series. 


Resistance in a Series Circuit 


Referring to figure 3-13, the current in a 
series circuit must flow through each lamp to 
complete the electrical path in the circuit. Each 
additional lamp offers added resistance. In a 
series circuit, THE TOTAL CIRCUIT 
RESISTANCE (Ry) IS EQUAL TO THE SUM 
OF THE INDIVIDUAL RESISTANCES. 


Asan equation: Ry, =R,+R2+R3+...R, 


NOTE: The subscript n denotes any number 
of additional resistances that might be in the 
equation. 





BASIC CIRCUIT 


SERIES CIRCUIT 


Figure 3-13.—Comparison of basic and series circuits. 


3-13 


Example: In figure 3-14 a series circuit 
consisting of three resistors; one of 10 ohms, 
one of 15 ohms, and one of 30 ohms; is shown. 
A voltage source provides 110 volts. What is the 
total resistance? 


Given: 
R, = 10 ohms 
R, = 15 ohms 
R3 = 30 ohms 
Solution: 


R;, =R, +R, +R; 
Ry = 10 ohms + 15 ohms + 30 ohms 


Ry = 55 ohms 


In some circuit applications, the total 
resistance is known and the value of one of the 
circuit resistors has to be determined. The 
equation Ry = R,; + R, + R3 can be transposed 
to solve for the value of the unknown resistance. 





Figure 3-14.—Solving for total resistance in a series cir- 
cuit. 


A15. 8,952 watt hours or 8.952 kWh 


Al6. .942 (rounded to 3 places) 


Example: In figure 3-15 the total resistance 
of a circuit containing three resistors is 40 ohms. 
Two of the circuit resistors are 10 ohms each. 
Calculate the value of the third resistor (R; ). 


_ Given: Ry = 40 ohms 
R, = 10 ohms 
R, = 10 ohms 

Solution: Ry =R, +R. + R3 


(Subtract R,; +R, from both sides of the 


equation) 


Ry = Ri Re = Rs 
R3; =R;, -R, -R, 
R3 = 40 ohms - 10 ohms - 10 ohms 
R3 = 40 ohms - 20 ohms 
R; = 20 ohms 

Current in a Series Circuit 


Since there is only one path for current in a 
series circuit, the same current must flow 
through each component of the circuit. To 
determine the current in a series circuit, only the 
current through one of the components need be 
known. 

The fact that the same current flows through 
each component of a series circuit can be 
verified by inserting meters into the circuit at 
various points, as shown in figure 3-16. If this 
were done, each meter would be found to 
indicate the same value of current. 


3-14 





Figure 3-15.—Calculating the value of one resistance ina 
series circuit. 





Figure 3-16.—Current in a series circuit. 


Voltage in a Series Circuit 


The voltage dropped across the resistor in a 
circuit consisting of a single resistor and a 
voltage source is the total voltage across the 
circuit and is equal to the applied voltage. The 
total voltage across a series circuit that consists 
of more than one resistor is also equal to the 


applied voltage, but consists of the sum of the 
individual resistor voltage drops. In any series 
circuit, the SUM of the resistor voltage drops 
must equal the source voltage. This statement 
can be proven by an examination of the circuit 
shown in figure 3-17. In this circuit a source 
potential (E;) of 20 volts is dropped across a 
series circuit consisting of two 5-ohm resistors. 
The total resistance of the circuit (Ry) is equal 
to the sum of the two individual resistances, or 
10 ohms. Using Ohm’s law the circuit current 
may be calculated as follows: 


Given: E, = 20 volts 
Ry = 10 ohms 
; _ EB 
Solution: lL; = tL 
T 
i= 20 volts 
T 10 ohms 


I; = 2 amperes 


Since the value of the resistors is known to be 5 
ohms each, and the current through the resistors 
is known to be 2 amperes, the voltage drops 





Figure 3-17.—Calculating individual voltage drops in a series 
circuit. 


3-15 


across the resistors can be calculated. The 
voltage (E; ) across R, is therefore: 


Given: I, = 2 amperes 
R,; = 5 ohms 
Solution: E,=1, xR, 


E, = 2 amperes x 5 ohms 
E, = 10 volts 


By inspecting the circuit, you can see that R, is 
the same ohmic value as R, and carries the same 
current. The voltage drop across R, is therefore 
also equal to 10 volts. Adding these two 10-volts 
drops together gives a total drop of 20 volts, 
exactly equal to the applied voltage. For a series 
circuit then: 
bee By Ee KBs Fi0 1 Be 

Example: A_ series circuit consists of three 
resistors having values of 20 ohms, 30 ohms, and 
50 ohms, respectively. Find the applied voltage 
if the current through the 30 ohm resistor is 2 
amps. (The abbreviation amp is commonly used 
for ampere.) 

To solve the problem, a circuit diagram is 
first drawn and labeled (fig 3-18). 


Given: 
R, = 20 ohms 
R, = 30 ohms 


R3 = 50 ohms 


I= 2 amps 
Solution: 
E, =E, + E, +E; 


E,=R, x1, (1, = The current through 
resistor R, .) 

E, =R,xI, 

E3 = R3 X I; 


Rq 





Figure 3-18.—Solving for applied voltage in a series cir- 
cuit. 


Substituting: 
Ey =(R, x1,)+(R, x1.) + (R3 x Is) 


E, = (20 ohms x 2 amps) + (30 ohms x 2 amps) 
+ (50 ohms x 2 amps) 


Ey, = 40 volts + 60 volts + 100 volts 


Ey; = 200 volts 


NOTE: When you use Ohm’s law, the 
quantities for the equation MUST be taken from 
the SAME part of the circuit. In the above 
example the voltage across R, was computed 
using the current through R, and the resistance 
of R3. 


The value of the voltage dropped by a 
resistor is determined by the applied voltage and 
is in proportion to the circuit resistances. The 
voltage drops that occur in a series circuit are in 
direct proportion to the resistances. This is the 
result of having the same current flow through 
each resistor—the larger the ohmic value of the 
resistor, the larger the voltage drop across it. 


3-16 


Q17. A _ series circuit consisting of three 
resistors has a current of 3 amps. If 
R, = 20 ohms, R,=60o0hms, and 
R; = 80 ohms, what is the (a) total 
resistance and (b) source voltage of the 
circuit? 


Q18. What is the voltage dropped by each 
resistor of the circuit described in 
question 17? 


Q19. If the current was increased to 4 amps, 
what would be the voltage drop across 
each resistor in the circuit described in 
question 17? 


Q20. What would have to be done to the 
circuit described in question 17 to 
increase the current to 4 amps? 


Power in a Series Circuit 
Each of the resistors in a series circuit 


consumes power which is dissipated in the form 
of heat. Since this power must come from the 





Figure 3-19.—Solving for total power in a series circuit. 


source, the total power must be equal to the 
power consumed by the circuit resistances. In a 
series circuit the total power is equal to the SUM 
of the power dissipated by the individual 
resistors. Total power (Py ) is equal to: 


Pe = Py + Ps # Py 352? 


n 


Example: A series circuit consists of three 
resistors having values of 5 ohms, 10 ohms, and 
15 ohms. Find the total power when 120 volts is 
applied to the circuit. (See fig. 3-19.) 


Given: 
R, = 5 ohms 
R, = 10 ohms 
R3; = 15 ohms 
E = 120 volts 


Solution: The total resistance is found first. 


Ry; = R, +R, +R; 


Ry = 5 ohms + 10 ohms + 15 ohms 


Ry = 30 ohms 


By using the total resistance and the applied 
voltage, the circuit current is calculated. 


p= Ex 
Ry 
i 120 volts 
30 ohms 
I = 4 amps 


By means of the power formulas, the power can 
be calculated for each resistor: 


For R,: 
P, =I? xR, 
P, =(4 amps)’ x 5 ohms 
P, = 80 watts 

For R,: 
P, =I?xR, 
P =(4 amps)? x 10 ohms 
P, = 160 watts 

For R;3: 


P; =I? xR; 
P =(4amps)* x 15 ohms 
P; = 240 watts 
To obtain total power: 
P, =P, +P, +P; 
P = 80 watts + 160 watts + 240 watts 
P, = 480 watts 


To check the answer, the total power delivered 
by the source can be calculated: 


Psource = I source x E source 
Pource = 4 amps x 120 volts 
P = 480 watts 


source 


The total power is equal to the sum of the 
power used by the individual resistors. 


SUMMARY OF CHARACTERISTICS 
The important factors governing the 


operation of a series circuit are listed below. 
These factors have been set up as a group of 


Al7. (a) 160 ohms 


(b) 480 volts 


Al8.  E, = 60 volts 
E, = 180 volts 


E; = 240 volts 


Al19._ E, = 80 volts 
E, = 240 volts 


E; = 320 volts 


A20. The source voltage would have to be in- 
creased to 640 volts 


rules so that they may be easily studied. These 
rules must be completely understood before the 
study of more advanced circuit theory is 
undertaken. 


Rules For Series D.C. Circuits 


1. The same current flows through each 
part of a series circuit. 

2. The total resistance of a series circuit is 
equal to the sum of the individual resistances. 

3. The total voltage across a series circuit is 
equal to the sum of the individual voltage drops. 

4. The voltage drop across a resistor in a 
series circuit is proportional to the ohmic value 
of the resistor. 

5. The total power in a series circuit is 
equal to the sum of the individual powers used 
by each circuit component. 


SERIES CIRCUIT ANALYSIS 


To establish a procedure for solving series 
circuits, the following sample problems will be 
solved. 


3-18 


Example: Three resistors of 5 ohms, 10 
ohms, and 15 ohms are connected in series with 
a power source of 90 volts as shown in figure 
3-20. Find the total resistance, circuit current, 
voltage drop of each resistor, power of each 
resistor, and total power of the circuit. 

In solving the circuit the total resistance will 
be found first. Next, the circuit current will be 
calculated. Once the current is known, the 
voltage drops and power dissipations can be 
calculated. 


Given: 
R, = 5 ohms 
R, = 10 ohms 
R; = 15 ohms 
Ey, = 90 volts 
Solution: 


Ry =R, + R2 + Rs 


Ry = 5 ohms + 10 ohms + 15 ohms 


Ry = 30 ohms 





Figure 3-20.—Solving for various values in a series circuit. 


1=& 
T 
[= 90 volts 
30 ohms 
I= 3 amps 
E, = IR, 


E, =3 amps x 5 ohms 


E, = 15 volts 


E, =IR, 
E, = 3 amps x 10 ohms 


E, = 30 volts 


E3 =IR3 
E3 = 3 amps x 15 ohms 


E; = 45 volts 


P, =IxE, 
P, =3 amps x 15 volts 


P, = 45 watts 


P, =I xE, 
P, = 3 amps x 30 volts 


P, = 90 watts 


P; =IxE; 
P3; = 3 amps x 45 volts 


P3 = 135 watts 


Py =E, xI 
Py = 90 volts x 3 amps 
P; = 270 watts 

or 


Py, =P, +P, +P¢ 


Py = 45 watts + 90 watts + 135 watts 
Py = 270 watts 
Example: Four resistors, R, = 10 ohms, 
R, = 10 ohms, R3 = 50 ohms, and 
R, =30o0hms, are connected in series with a 
power source as shown in figure 3-21. The 
current through the circuit is 1/2 ampere. 
a. What is the battery voltage? 


b. What is the voltage across each resistor? 


c. What is the power expended in each 
resistor? 


d. What is the total power? 





Figure 3-21.—Computing series circuit values. 


3-19 


Given: Solution (c): 


R, = 10 ohms P, =IE, 
R, = 10 ohms P, =0.5 amp x 5 volts 
P, = 2.5 watts 
R; = 50 ohms 
R, = 30 ohms P, = IE, 
P, =0.5 amp x 5 volts 
es P, = 2.5 watts 
Solution (a): P, = IE; 
E;, = IR; P; =0.5 amp x 25 volts 


Rr =Ri +R. +R3 +Ra P, = 12.5 watts 


Ry = 10 ohms + 10 ohms + 50 ohms + 30 ohms P, = IE, 
Ry = 100 ohms P, = 0.5 amp x 15 volts 
P, = 7.5 watts 


E, = 0.5 amp x 100 ohms 
Solution (d): 
Ey = 50 volts 
Py =P, +P, +P3 +P, 
Solution (b): 
P; = 2.5 watts + 2.5 watts + 12.5 watts + 7.5 watts 


E, =IR, 
P, = 25 tt 
E, = 0.5 amp x 10 ohms L Watts 
E, =5 volts or 
E, = 0.5 amp x 10 ohms P, = 0.5 amps x 50 volts 
E, = 5 volts Py = 25 watts 
E3 = IR3 or 
E; = 0.5 amp x 50 ohms P, = ee 
E, = 25 volts 
p,. = (50 volts)? 
T ~~ 100 ohms 
ete pre 2500 volts 
7 = eos 
E, = 0.5 amp x 30 ohms 100 ohms 
E, = 15 volts P, = 25 watts 


An important fact to keep in mind when 
applying Ohm’s law to a series circuit is to 
consider whether the values used are component 
values or total values. When the information 
available enables the use of Ohm’s law to find 
total resistance, total voltage, and total current, 
total values must be inserted into the formula. 
To find total resistance: 


Rr = pt 


To find total voltage: © 


Ey =I; x Ry 


To find total current: 


E 
Ir = Rt 


NOTE: I, is equal to I in a series circuit. 
However, the distinction between I and I| in the 
formula should be noted. The reason for this is 
that future circuits may have several currents, 
and it will be necessary to differentiate between 
I; and other currents. 


To compute any quantity (E, I, R, or P) 
associated with a single given resistor, the values 
used in the formula must be obtained from that 
particular resistor. For example, to find the 
value of an unknown resistance, the voltage 
across and the current through that particular 
resistor must be used. 


To find the value of a resistor: 
E 
R = 
ie 
To find the voltage drop across a resistor: 


Ep =Ip xR 


To find current through a resistor: 


3-21 


Q21. A series circuit consists of two resistors 
in series. R, = 25 ohms and 
R, = 30 ohms. The circuit current is 6 
amps. What is the (a) source voltage, (b) 
voltage dropped by each resistor, (c) 
total power, and (d) power used by each 
resistor? 


KIRCHHOFF’S VOLTAGE 
LAW 


In 1847, G. R. Kirchhoff extended the use 
of Ohm’s law by developing a simple concept 
concerning the voltages contained in a series 
circuit loop. Kirchhoff’s law states: 


“The algebraic sum of the voltage 
drops in any closed path in a circuit and 
the electromotive forces in that path is 
equal to zero.” 


To state Kirchhoff’s law another way, the 
voltage drops and voltage sources in a circuit are 
equal at any given moment in time. If the 
voltage sources are assumed to have one sign 
(positive or negative) at that instant and the 
voltage drops are assumed to have the opposite 
sign, the result of adding the voltage sources and 
voltage drops will be zero. 


NOTE: The terms electromotive force and 
emf are used when explaining Kirchhoff’s law 
because Kirchhoff’s law is used in alternating 
current circuits (covered in Module 2). In 
applying Kirchhoff’s law to direct current 
circuits, the terms electromotive force and emf 
apply to voltage sources such as batteries or 
power supplies. 


Through the use of Kirchhoff’s law, circuit 
problems can be solved which would be 
difficult, and often impossible, with knowledge 
of Ohm’s law alone. When Kirchhoff’s law is 
properly applied, an equation can be set up fora 
closed loop and the unknown circuit values can 
be calculated. 


POLARITY OF VOLTAGE 


To apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law, the 
meaning of voltage polarity must be understood. 


A21. (a) 330 volts 
(b) E, = 150 volts 
E, = 180 volts 


(c) 1.98 kilowatts 


(d) P, = 900 watts 
P, = 1.08 kilowatts 


In the circuit shown in figure 3-22, the current is 
shown flowing in a counterclockwise direction. 
Notice that the end of resistor R,, into which 
the current flows, is marked NEGATIVE (- ). 
The end of R, at which the current leaves is 
marked POSITIVE (+). These polarity markings 
are used to show that the end of R, into which 
the current flows is at a higher negative potential 
than the end of the resistor at which the current 
leaves. Point A is more negative than point B. 


Point C, which is at the same potential as 
point B, is labeled negative. This is to indicate 
that point C is more negative than point D. To 
say a point is positive (or negative) without 
stating what the polarity is based upon has no 
meaning. In working with Kirchhoff’s law, 
positive and negative polarities are assigned in 
the direction of current flow. 





Figure 3-22.—Voltage polarities. 


S22 


APPLICATION OF 
KIRCHHOFF’S VOLTAGE LAW 


Kirchhoff’s voltage law can be written as an 
equation, as shown below: 


n 


Bot E +E ES) 

where E,, E,, etc., are the voltage drops or 
emf’s around any closed circuit loop. To set up 
the equation for an actual circuit, the following 
procedure is used. 


1. Assume a direction of current through 
the circuit. (The correct direction is desirable 
but not necessary.) 

2. Using the assumed direction of current, 
assign polarities to all resistors through which 
the current flows. 

3. Place the correct polarities on any 
sources included in the circuit. 

4. Starting at any point in the circuit, trace 
around the circuit, writing down the amount 
and polarity of the voltage across each 
component in succession. The polarity used is 
the sign AFTER the assumed current has passed 
through the component. Stop when the point at 
which the trace was started is reached. 

5. Place these voltages, with their polarities, 
into the equation and solve for the desired 
quantity. 


Example: Three resistors are connected 
across a 50 volt source. What is the voltage 
across the third resistor if the voltage drops 
across the first two resistors are 25 volts and 15 
volts? 


Solution: First, a diagram, such as the one 
shown in figure 3-23, is drawn. Next, a direction 
of current is assumed (as shown). Using this 
current, the polarity markings are placed at each 
end of each resistor and also on the terminals of 
the source. Starting at point A, trace around the 
circuit in the direction of current flow, 
recording the voltage and polarity of each 
component. Starting at point A and using the 
components from the circuit: 


(+E, ) + (+E,) + (+E, ) + CE, )=0 





Figure 3-23.—Determining unknown voltage in a series 
circuit. 


Substituting values from the circuit: 
E, + 15 volts + 25 volts - 50 volts = 0 
E, - 10 volts =0 
E, = 10 volts 


The unknown voltage (E,) is found to be 10 
volts. 

Using the same idea as above, you can solve 
a problem in which the current is the unknown 
quantity. 

Example: A circuit having a source voltage 
of 60 volts contains three resistors of 5 ohms, 10 
ohms, and 15 ohms. Find the circuit current. 


Solution: Draw and label the circuit (fig. 
3-24). Establish a direction of current flow and 
assign polarities. Next, starting at any 
point—point A_ will be used in _ this 
example—write out the loop equation. 

Basic equation: 


E, +E, TE, +E; =0 


Since E = IR, by substitution: 


(Ix R,)+(1x R,) +E, +(1x R3)=0 


3-23 





Figure 3-24.—Correct direction of assumed current. 


Substituting values: 


(x 10 ohms) + (1 x 5 ohms) + (-60 volts) + (I x 15 ohms) = 0 


Combining like terms: 
(I x 30 ohms) + (-60 volts) = 0 


I x 30 ohms = 60 volts 


_ 60 volts 
30 ohms 


I=2 amps 


Since the current obtained in the above 
calculations is a positive 2 amps, the assumed 
direction of current was correct. To show what 
happens if the incorrect direction of current is 
assumed, the problem will be solved as before, 
but with the opposite direction of current. The 
circuit is redrawn showing the new direction of 
current and new polarities in figure 3-25. 
Starting at point A the loop equation is: 


E; +E, +E, +E, =0 


(Ix R3)+E, +(x R,) +(x R,)=0 





Figure 3-25.—Incorrect direction of assumed current. 


Substituting values: 
(I x 15 ohms) + 60 volts + (I x 5 ohms) + (I x 10 ohms) = 0 


Combining like terms: 


(I x 30 ohms) + 60 volts = 0 


I x 30 ohms = -60 volts 


j = 00 volts 
30 ohms 
]=-2 amps 


Notice that the AMOUNT of current is the 
same as before. The polarity, however, is 
NEGATIVE. The negative polarity simply 
indicates the wrong direction of current was 
assumed. Should it be necessary to use this 
current in further calculations on the circuit 
using Kirchhoff’s law, the negative polarity 
should be retained in the calculations. 


Series Aiding and Opposing Sources 


In many practical applications a circuit may 
contain more than one source of emf. Sources of 


3-24 


emf that cause current to flow in the same 
direction are considered to be SERIES AIDING 
and the voltages are added. Sources of emf that 
would tend to force current in opposite 
directions are said to be SERIES OPPOSING, 
and the effective source voltage is the difference 
between the opposing voltages. When two 
opposing sources are inserted into a circuit, 
current flow would be in a direction determined 
by the larger source. Examples of series aiding 
and opposing sources are shown in figure 3-26. 

A simple solution may be obtained for a 
multiple-source circuit through the use of 
Kirchhoff’s voltage law. In applying this 
method, the same procedure is used for the 
multiple-source circuit as was used above for the 
single-source circuit. This is demonstrated by the 
following. 


Example: Using’ Kirchhoff’s voltage 
equation, find the amount of current in the 
circuit shown in fig 3-27. 


Solution: As before, a direction of current 
flow is assumed and polarity signs are placed on 





SERIES OPPOSING 


(A) Series Aiding. 
(B) Series Opposing. 


Figure 3-26.—Aiding and opposing sources. 





Figure 3-27.—Solving for circuit current using Kirchhoff's 
voltage current. 


the drawing. The loop equation will be started at 
point A. 


E, +Ep, +E, +E; +Ep, =0 


20 volts + (I x 60 ohms) + (-180 volts) + 
40 volts + (I x 20 ohms) = 0 


20 volts - 180 volts + 40 volts + 
(I x 60 ohms) + (I x 20 ohms) = 0 


-120 volts + (I x 80 ohms) = 0 


I x 80 ohms = 120 volts 


ie 120 volts 
80 ohms 
I= 1.5 amps 


Q22. When using Kirchhoff’s voltage law, how 
are voltage polarities assigned to the 
voltage drops across resistors? 


Q23. Refer to figure 3-27, if R, was changed 
to a 40 ohm resistor, what would be the 
value of circuit current (I; )? 


Q24. Refer to figure 3-27. What is the 
effective source voltage of the circuit 
using the 40 ohm resistor? 


3-25 


CIRCUIT TERMS AND 
CHARACTERISTICS 


Before you learn about the types of circuits 
other than the series circuit, you should become 
familiar with some of the terms and 
characteristics used in electrical circuits. These 
terms and _ characteristics will be used 
throughout your study of electricity and 
electronics. 


REFERENCE POINT 


A reference point is an arbitrarily chosen 
point to which all other points in the circuit are 
compared. In series circuits, any point can be 
chosen as a reference and the electrical potential 
at all other points can be determined in 
reference to that point. In figure 3-28 point A 
shall be considered the reference point. Each 
series resistor in the illustrated circuit is of equal 
value. The applied voltage is equally distributed 


across each resistor. The potential at point B is 


25 volts more positive than at point A. Points C 
and D are 50 volts and 75 volts, more positive 
than point A respectively. 


D +75v 


E3= 25V 


C +50V 


E2=25V 


B +25V 


E, =25V 





Figure 3-28.—Reference points in a series circuit. 


A22. The point at which current enters the re- 
sistor is assigned a negative polarity and 
the point at which current leaves the re- 
sistor is assigned a positive polarity. 


A23. 2 amperes 


A24. 120 volts 


When point B is used as the reference, as in 
figure 3-29, point D would be positive 50 volts 
in respect to the new reference point. The 
former reference point, A, is 25 volts negative in 
respect to point B. 

As in the previous circuit illustration, the 
reference point of a circuit is always considered 
to be at zero potential. Since the earth (ground) 
is said to be at a zero potential, the term 
GROUND is used to denote a common electrical 
point of zero potential. In figure 3-30, point A is 
the zero reference, or ground, and the symbol 


D +50V 


E3 =25V 


C +25V 


Eo =25V 


Et =25V 





A -25V 


Figure 3-29.—Determining potentials with respect to a 
reference point. 


3-26 


GC +75V 


Eo =50v 


B +25V 


Ey =25V 





Figure 3-30.—Use of ground symbols. 


for ground is shown connected to point A. Point 
C is 75 volts positive in respect to ground. 

In most electrical equipment, the metal 
chassis is the common ground for the many 
electrical circuits. When each electrical circuit is 
completed, common points of a circuit at zero 
potential are connected directly to the metal 
chassis, thereby eliminating a large amount of 
connecting wire. The electrons pass through the 


Ry “y 


II 


~ 


orate 
¢ 


i 


wee een en ee e+ ---- +--+ ------- 


CONDUCTING CHASSIS 


Figure 3-31.—Ground used as a conductor. 


metal chassis (a conductor) to reach other points 
of the circuit. An example of a chassis grounded 
circuit is illustrated in figure 3-31. 


Most voltage measurements used to check 
proper circuit operation in electrical equipment 
are taken in respect to ground. One meter lead is 
attached to a grounded point and the other 
meter lead is moved to various test points. 
Circuit measurement is explained in more detail 
in NEETS Module 3. 


OPEN CIRCUIT 


A circuit is said to be OPEN when a break 
exists in a complete conducting pathway. 
Although an open occurs when a switch is used 
to deenergize a circuit, an open may also 
develop accidentally. To restore a circuit to 
proper operation, the open must be located, its 
cause determined, and repairs made. 


Sometimes an open can be located visually 
by a close inspection of the circuit components. 
Defective components, such as burned out 
resistors, can usually be discovered by this 
method. Others, such as a break in wire covered 
by insulation or the melted element of an 
enclosed fuse, are not visible to the eye. Under 
such conditions, the understanding of the effect 
an open has on circuit conditions enables a 
technician to make use of test equipment to 
locate the open component. 


In figure 3-32, the series circuit consists of 


two resistors and a fuse. Notice the effects on 
circuit conditions when the fuse opens. 


Current ceases to flow; therefore, there is no 
longer a voltage drop across the resistors. Each 
end of the open conducting path becomes an 
extension of the battery terminals and the 
voltage felt across the open is equal to the 
applied voltage (E, ). 


An open circuit has INFINITE resistance. 
INFINITY represents a quantity so large it 
cannot be measured. The symbol for infinity is 
eo, In an open circuit, Ry =. 





(A) NORMAL CIRCUIT (Normal 
Current) 





(B) OPEN CIRCUIT (Due to Excessive 
Current) 


Figure 3-32.—Normal and open circuit conditions. (A) 
Normal Current (B) Excessive Current. 


SHORT CIRCUIT 


A short circuit is an accidental path of low 
resistance which passes an abnormally high 
amount of current. A short circuit exists 
whenever the resistance of a circuit or the 
resistance of a part of a circuit drops in value to 
almost zero ohms. A short often occurs as a 
result of improper wiring or broken insulation. 


In figure 3-33, a short is caused by improper 
wiring. Note the effect on current flow. Since 
the resistor has in effect been replaced with a 
piece of wire, practically all the current flows 
through the short and very little current flows 
through the resistor. Electrons flow through the 
short (a path of almost zero resistance) and the 
remainder of the circuit by passing through the 
10-ohm resistor and the battery. The amount of 
current flow increases greatly because its 
resistive path has decreased from 10,010 ohms 
to 10 ohms. Due to the excessive current flow, 
the 10-ohm resistor becomes heated. As it 
attempts to dissipate this heat, the resistor will 
probably be destroyed. Figure 3-34 shows a 
pictorial wiring diagram, rather than a schematic 
diagram, to indicate how broken insulation 
might cause a short circuit. 


Ry 






10,0009 








EXCESSIVE CURRENT 
B 


Figure 3-33.—Normal and short circuit conditions. 


SHORT DUE TO 4 
\\ WORN INSULATION IF 
BARE WIRE 


INSULATED 
WIRE 


~ 





Figure 3-34.—Short due to broken insulation. 


SOURCE RESISTANCE 


A meter connected across the terminals of a 
good 1.5-volt battery reads about 1.5 volts. 
When the same battery is inserted into a 
complete circuit, the meter reading decreases to 
something less than 1.5-volts. This difference in 


3-28 


terminal voltage is caused by the INTERNAL 
RESISTANCE of the battery (the opposition to 
current offered by the electrolyte in the 
battery). All sources of electromotive force have 
some form of internal resistance which causes a 


drop _in_ terminal voltage as_current_ flows 
through the source. 


This principle is illustrated in figure 3-35, 
where the internal resistance of a battery is 
shown as R;. In the schematic, the internal 
resistance is indicated by an additional resistor 
in series with the battery. The battery, with its 
internal resistance, is enclosed within the dotted 
lines of the schematic diagram. With the switch 
open, the voltage across the battery terminals 
reads 15 volts. When the switch is closed, 
current flow causes voltage drops around the 
circuit. The circuit current of 2 amperes causes a 
voltage drop of 2 volts across R;. The 1 ohm 
internal battery resistance thereby drops the 
battery terminal voltage to 13 volts. Internal 
resistance cannot be measured directly with a 
meter. An attempt to do this would damage the 
meter. 


The effect of the source resistance on the 
power output of a d.c. source may be shown by 
an analysis of the circuit in figure 3-36. When 
the variable load resistor (R, ) is set at the zero 
ohm position (equivalent to a short circuit) 
current (I) is calculated using the following 
formula: 


_ E, _ 100 volts 
1 aha 


1 


= 20 amperes 


This is the maximum current that may be drawn 
from the source. The terminal voltage across the 
short circuit is zero volts and all the voltage is 
across the resistance within the source. 


If the load resistance (Ry; ) were increased 
(the internal resistance remaining the same), the 
current drawn from the source would decrease. 
Consequently, the voltage drop across the 
internal resistance would decrease. At the same 
time, the terminal voltage applied across the 





Figure 3-35.—Effect of internal resistance. 


load would increase and approach a maximum as 
the current approaches zero amps. 


POWER TRANSFER 
AND EFFICIENCY 


Maximum power is transferred from the 
source to the load when the resistance of the 
load is equal to the internal resistance of the 
source. This theory is illustrated in the table and 
the graph of figure 3-36. When the load 
resistance is 5 ohms, matching the source 
resistance, the maximum power of 500 watts is 
developed in the load. 


The efficiency of power transfer (ratio of 
output power to input power) from the source 
to the load increases as the load resistance is 
increased. The efficiency approaches 100 
percent as the load resistance approaches a 
relativeiy large value compared with that of the 
source, since less power is lost in the source. The 
efficiency of power transfer is only 50 percent 
at the maximum power transfer point (when the 
load resistance equals the internal resistance of 
the source). The efficiency of power transfer 


3-29 


approaches zero efficiency when the load 
resistance is relatively small compared with the 
internal resistance of the source. This is also 
shown on the chart of figure 3-36. 

The problem of a desire for both high 
efficiency and maximum power transfer is 
resolved by a compromise between maximum 
power transfer and high efficiency. Where the 
amounts of power involved are large and the 
efficiency is important, the load resistance is 
made large relative to the source resistance so 
that the losses are kept small. In this case, the 
efficiency is high. Where the problem of 
matching a source to a load is important, as in 
communications circuits, a strong signal may be 
more important than a high percentage of 
efficiency. In such cases, the efficiency of power 
transfer should be only about SO percent; 
however, the power transfer would be the 
maximum which the source is capable of 
supplying. 

You should now understand the basic 
concepts of series circuits. The principles which 
have been presented are of lasting importance. 
Once equipped with a firm understanding of 
series circuits, you hold the key to an 
understanding of the parallel circuits to be 
presented next. 








Eo: OPEN- CIRCUIT VOLTAGE OF SOURCE 
R ,=INTERNAL RESISTANCE OF SOURCE 
E ,=TERMINAL VOLTAGE 

R, = RESISTANCE OF LOAD 

P, =POWER USED IN LOAD 

I =CURRENT FROM SOURCE 

% EFF. = PERCENTAGE OF EFFICIENCY 


(A) (B) 
CIRCUIT AND SYMBOL DESIGNATIONS CHART 





0246810 20 30 40 50 
R, (OHMS) 


(C) 
GRAPH 


Figure 3-36.—Effect of source resistance on power output. 


3-30 


A25. 50 volts 
A26. Zero volts 


A27. A circuit where there is no longer a com- 
plete path for current flow 


A28. A accidental path of low resistance which 
passes an abnormally high amount of 
current 


A29. The internal (source) resistance of the 
battery will drop some of the voltage 


A30. When the load resistance equals the 
source resistance 


A31. 50 percent 


12.25 watts 


A32. 98 percent (13 & awatts 


x 100) 


voltage (E,). This can be expressed in equation 
form as: 


FE, = ER, =Ep2 


Voltage measurements taken across the 
resistors of a parallel circuit, as illustrated by 
figure 3-38, verify this equation. Each meter 
indicates the same amount of voltage. Notice 
that the voltage across each resistor is the same 
as the applied voltage. 





Figure 3-38.—Voltage comparison in a parallel circuit. 


Example: Assume that the current through a 
resistor of a parallel circuit is known to be 4.5 
milliamperes (4.5mA) and the value of the 
resistor is 30,000 ohms (30kQ2). Determine the 
source voltage. The circuit is shown in figure 
3-39. 

Given: 
R, = 30,000 ohms (30kQ2) 


IR2 = 4.5 milliamps (4.5mA or .0045 amps) 


Solution: 
E=IR 


Ep 2 = -0045 amp x 30,000 ohms 


Ep 2 = 135 volts 





Figure 3-39.—Example problem parallel circuit. 


Since the source voltage is equal to the voltage 
of a branch: 


E,= Er 
E, = 135 volts 


To simplify the math operation, the values can 
be expressed in powers of ten as follows: 


30,000 ohms= 30 x 10° ohms 
4.5mA= 4.5 x 10° amps 
Epo = (4.5 x 10°°) amps x (30 x 10°) ohms 
Epo = (4.5 x 30x 10° x 10°) volts 
(10°° x 10° = 10° * 3 = 10° = 1) 
Ep? = (4.5 x 30x 1) volts 
Ep? = 135 volts 
E,= Er 
E, = 135 volts 
If you are not familiar with the use of the 
powers of 10 or would like to brush up on it, 


Mathematics, Vol. 1, NAVEDTRA 10069-C, will 
be of great help to you. 


Q33. What would the source voltage (E,) in 
figure 3-39 be if the current through R, 
was 2 milliamps? 


Current in a Parallel Circuit 


Ohm’s law states that the current in a circuit 
is inversely proportional to the circuit resistance. 
This fact is true in both series and parallel 
circuits. 

There is a single path for current in a series 
circuit. The amount of current is determined by 
the total resistance of the circuit and the applied 


voltage. In a parallel circuit the source current 
divides among the available paths. 


3-33 


The behavior of current in parallel circuits 
will be shown by a series of illustrations using 
example circuits with different values of 
resistance for a given value of applied voltage. 

Part (A) of figure 3-40 shows a basic series 
circuit. Here, the total current must pass 
through the single resistor. The amount of 
current can be determined. 


Given: E, = 50 volts 
R, = 10 ohms 
Solution: I == 
ly =33 
ri 
[2 50 volts 
T 10 ohms 
I; = 5 amps 


Part (B) of figure 3-40 shows the same 
resistor (R,) with a second resistor (R2) of 





Figure 3-40.—Analysis of current in parallel circuit. 


A33. 60 volts 





equal value connected in parallel across the 
voltage source. When Ohm’s law is applied, the 
current flow through each resistor is found to be 
the same as the current through the single 
resistor in part (A). 


Given: E, = 50 volts 
R, = 10 ohms 
R, = 10 ohms 

Solution: [= . 

E,= Ep; =Ep2 
IR = Eri 

1 

_ 30 volts 


IRI 10 ohms 
Ip; = 5 amps 


E 
In? “Es 


ee 50 volts 
R2 ~~ 10 ohms 


Ip > = 5 amps 


It is apparent that if there is 5 amperes of 
current through each of the two resistors, there 
must be a TOTAL CURRENT of 10 amperes 
drawn from the source. 

The total current of 10 amperes, as 
illustrated in figure 3-40(B), leaves the negative 
terminal of the battery and flows to point a. 
Since point a is a connecting point for the two 
resistors, it is called a JUNCTION. At junction a, 
the total current divides into two currents of 5 
amperes each. These two currents flow through 


3-34 


their respective resistors and rejoin at junction b. 
The total current then flows from junction b 
back to the positive terminal of the source. The 
source supplies a total current of 10 amperes 
and each of the two equal resistors carries 
one-half the total current. 


Each individual current path in the circuit of 
figure 3-40(B) is referred to as a BRANCH. Each 
branch carries a current that is a portion of the 
total current. Two or more branches form a 
NETWORK. 


From the previous explanation, the 
characteristics of current in a parallel circuit can 
be expressed in terms of the following general 
equation: 

be Py Fie ts ly 

Compare part (A) of figure 3-41 with part 
(B) of the circuit in figure 3-40. Notice that 
doubling the value of the second branch resistor 
(R,) has no effect on the current in the first 
branch (Ip,), but does reduce the second 
branch current (Ip) to one-half its original 
value. The total circuit current drops to a value 





(B) 


Figure 3-41.—Current behavior in parallel circuits. 


equal to the sum of the branch currents. These 
facts are verified by the following equations. 





Given: E, = 50 volts 

R, = 10 ohms 

R, = 20 ohms 
Solution: [=4 

EB, ER i = Exe 
E 

I = 

R1 r 

hs 50 volts 

Rl 10 ohms 


Ip ; = 5 amps 


E 
In2 = - 
Ip . = 2 volts 
R2 ~~ 20 ohms 


Ip 2 = 2.5 amps 
Ir =Ip1 +Ip2 
I; = 5 amps + 2.5 amps 
I; = 7.5 amps 
The amount of current flow in the branch 
circuits and the total current in the circuit 


shown in figure 3-41(B) are determined by the 
following computations. 


Given: E, = 50 volts 
R,; = 10 ohms 
R, = 10 ohms 
R; = 10 ohms 


3-35 


Solution: j=E£ 
R 


E, = Ep; = Ep2 =Ep3 








Tp, = EBL 
1 
I _ 30 volts 
R110 ohms 
Ip 1 =5 amps 
E 
I = R2 
R2 : 
I _ 20 volts 
R210 ohms 
Ip 2 = 5 amps 
E 
lea RS 
Ip . = 20 volts 
R3 ~ 10 ohms 
Ip 3 = 5 amps 


Ir =Ip1 tIp2t+1p3 


I; = 5 amps + 5 amps + 5 amps 


I; = 15 amps 


Notice that the sum of the ohmic values of 
the resistors in both circuits shown in figure 
3-41 is equal (30 ohms), and that the applied 
voltage is the same value (50 volts). However, 
the total current in 3-41(B) (15 amps) is twice 
the amount in 3-41(A) (7.5 amps). It is 
apparent, therefore, that the manner in which 
resistors are connected in a circuit, as well as 
their actual ohmic values, affect the total 
current. 


The division of current in a parallel network 
follows a definite pattern. This pattern is 


described by KIRCHHOFF’S CURRENT LAW 
which states: 


“The algebraic sum of the currents 
entering and leaving any junction of 
conductors is equal to zero.” 


This law can be stated mathematically as: 


I,+1,+...1,=0 


where: I,, I,, etc., are the currents entering and 
leaving the junction. Currents ENTERING the 
junction are considered to be POSITIVE and 
currents LEAVING the junction are considered 
to be NEGATIVE. When solving a problem using 
Kirchhoff’s current law, the currents must be 
placed into the equation WITH THE PROPER 
POLARITY SIGNS ATTACHED. 

Example. Solve for the value of I, in figure 
3-42. 


Given: I, = 10 amps 


I, = 3 amps 


I, 5 amps 


Solution: Etio el =0 


n 


The currents are placed into the equation with 
the proper signs. 


I, +I, +1, +I, =0 
10 amps + (-3 amps) + I; + (-5 amps) = 0 
I; + 2 amps =0 


I, =-2 amps 


I; has a value of 2 amperes, and the negative 
sign shows it to be a current LEAVING the 
junction. 


3-36 





Figure 3-42.—Circuit for example problem. 


Example. Using figure 3-43 solve for the 
magnitude and direction of I. 


Given: 
I, =6 amps 
I, = 3 amps 
I, = 5 amps 
Solution: 


L th: +i..1,=0 

I, +1, +1; +I, =0 

6 amps + (-3 amps) + I, + (-5 amps) = 0 
I, + (-2 amps) =0 


I; =+2 amps 


I, is 2 amperes and its positive sign shows it 
to be a current entering the junction. 


I2=3A 





Figure 3-43.—Circuit for example problem. 


Q34. There is a relationship between total 
current and current through the 
individual components in a circuit. What 
is this relationship in a series circuit and 
a parallel circuit? 


Q35. In applying Kirchhoff’s current law, 
what does the polarity of the current 
indicate? 


Resistance in a Parallel Circuit 


In the example diagram, figure 3-44, there 
are two resistors connected in parallel across a 
5-volt battery. Each has a resistance value of 10 
ohms. A complete circuit consisting of two 
parallel paths is formed and current flows as 
shown. 


Computing the individual currents shows 
that there is one-half of an ampere of current 
through each resistance. The total current 
flowing from the battery to the junction of the 
resistors, and returning from the resistors to the 
battery, is equal to 1 ampere. 


The total resistance of the circuit can be 
calculated by using the values of total voltage 
(Ey ) and total current (I, ). 


10n 





Figure 3-44.—Two equal resistors connected in parallel. 


3-37 


NOTE: From this point on the abbreviations 
and symbology for electrical quantities will be 
used in example problems. 


Given: E; =5V 
Ir=1A 
Solution: R== 
mt 
Ry = 
T 
5: V 
Br TAK 
Ry =52 


This computation shows the total resistance to 
be 5 ohms; one-half the value of either of the 
two resistors. 


Since the total resistance of a parallel circuit 
is smaller than any of the individual resistors, 


total resistance of a parallel circuit is not the 


sum of the individual resistor values as was the 
case in a series circuit. The total resistance of 
resistors in parallel is also referred to as 
EQUIVALENT RESISTANCE (R,,). The terms 
total resistance and equivalent resistance are 
used interchangeably. 


There are several methods used to determine 
the equivalent resistance of parallel circuits. The 
best method for a given circuit depends on the 
number and value of the resistors. For the 
circuit described above, where all resistors have 
the same value, the following simple equation is 
used: 


oie 
Reg = 


Where: Reg = equivalent parallel resistance 
R = ohmic value of one resistor 
N = number of resistors 


This equation is valid for any number of parallel 
resistors of EQUAL VALUE. 


A34. Total current in a series circuit flows 
through every circuit component but in a 
parallel circuit total current divides 
among the available paths. 


A35. Whether the current is entering the junc- 
tion (+) or leaving the junction (-) 


Example. Four 40-ohm resistors are 
connected in parallel. What is their equivalent 
resistance? 


Given: R, = R, =R3 =R,y 
R, = 40 Q 
Solution: Rea = + 
_ 402 
Keg ae 
Reg = 102 


Figure 3-45 shows two resistors of unequal 
value in parallel. Since the total current is 


shown, the equivalent resistance can be 
calculated. 
Given: E, = 30°V 
Ip =15A 
ay Ve iE 
Solution: Reg =T* 
T 
_30V 
Rea = 154 
Rog =22 


The equivalent resistance of the circuit 
shown in figure 3-45 is smaller than either of the 


3-38 





Figure 3-45.—Example circuit with unequal parallel 
resistors. 


two resistors (R,, R,). An important point to 


remember is that the equivalent resistance of a 


parallel circuit is always less than the resistance 
of any branch. 

Equivalent resistance can be found if you 
know the individual resistance values and the 
source voltage. By calculating each branch 
current, adding the branch currents to calculate 
total current, and dividing the source voltage by 
the total current, the total can be found. This 
method, while effective, is somewhat lengthy. A 
quicker method of finding equivalent resistance 
is to use the general formula for resistors in 
parallel: 


If you apply the general formula to the 
circuit shown in figure 3-45, you will get the 
same value for equivalent resistance (222) as was 
obtained in the previous calculation that used 
source voltage and total current. 


Given: R, = 3 
R, = 62 
bs ics, ok 
Solution: i, = R, + R, 
ah og ase. SL 
Reg 3Q 62 


Convert the fractions to a common denominator. 


] Z 1 
— = —_—_— st 
oq OM 62 
oo oe, 
Reg 62 
aie i 
Be, 20 


Since both sides are reciprocals, (divided into 
one) disregard the reciprocal function. 


Reg = 22 


The formula you were given for equal 
resistors in parallel (Reg = *) is a simplification 


of the general formula for resistors in parallel 


] 1 ] ] l 
iS pee pe Fo a), There are other 
Ry, Ra eR R.) 
simplifications of the general formula for 
resistors in parallel which can be used to 
calculate the total or equivalent resistance in a 
parallel circuit. 


RECIPROCAL METHOD.—This method is 
based upon taking the reciprocal of each side of 
the equation. This presents the general formula 
for resistors in parallel as: 


This formula is used to solve for the 
equivalent resistance of a number of unequal 
parallel resistors. You must find the lowest 
common denominator in solving these problems. 
If you are a little hazy on finding the lowest 
common denominator, brush up on it in 
Mathematics Volume 1, NAVEDTRA 10069 
(Series). 


Example: Three resistors are connected in 
parallel as shown in figure 3-46. The resistor 
values are: R,=20o0hms, R, =30 ohms, 


3-39 





Figure 3-46.—Example parallel circuit with unequal 
branch resistors. 


R3 = 40 ohms. What is the equivalent resistance? 
(use the reciprocal method) 


Given: R, = 200 
R, = 302 
R; = 402 
1 
Solution: R.g= 1 1 
By Ro a 
1 
PSM Is ke aS 
202 * 302 * 402 
1 
Req = 
6 4 3 
1202 * 20m * i202 
1 
Msi 13g 
120 
_ 120 
Req = 9.23 


PRODUCT OVER THE SUM METHOD.—A 
convenient method for finding the equivalent, or 
total, resistance of two parallel resistors is by 
using the following formula. 


_R, xR, 


Req ~ Ry, +R, 


This equation, called the product over the 
sum formula, is used so frequently it should be 
committed to memory. 

Example. What is the equivalent resistance 
of a 20-ohm and a 30-ohm resistor connected in 
parallel, as in figure 3-47? 


Given: R, = 20 
R, = 30 
Solution: hg = Aree 
1 2 
Rae 202 x 302 
eq 200 + 302 
_ 600 
Req = 50 Q 
Req = 122 


Q36. Four equal resistors are connected in 
parallel, each resistor has an ohmic value 
of 100 ohms, what is the equivalent 
resistance? 


Q37. Three resistors connected in parallel have 
values of 12kQ2, 20k2, and 30kQ22. What 


is the equivalent resistance? 


Q38. Two resistors connected in parallel have 
values of 10k&2 and 30kQ22. What is the 
equivalent resistance? 


3-40 





Figure 3-47.—Parallel circuit with two unequal resistors. 


Power in a Parallel Circuit 


Power computations in a parallel circuit are 
essentially the same as those used for the series 
circuit. Since power dissipation in _ resistors 
consists of a heat loss, power dissipations are 
additive regardless of how the resistors are 
connected in the circuit. The total power is 
equal to the sum of the power dissipated by the 
individual resistors. Like the series circuit, the 
total power consumed by the parallel circuit is: 


Pp =P, +P, +...P 


n 


Example. Find the total power consumed by 
the circuit in figure 3-48. 


Given: R, = 102 
IR, =5A 
R, = 25 
igen a 
R3; = 502 
Ip3 =1A 
Solution: P=[?R 


Pep = Gap eR 
Pp, = A)? x 109 


Pp, = 250 W 





Figure 3-48.—Example parallel circuit. 


Pe =Upg)? RRe 
Pro =(2 A)? x 252 


Pp» = 100W 


Pr3 = (Ip 3)” x R3 
Pp3 = (1 A)? x 502 


Pp3=50W 


Pr = Pai tPpo +Pp3 
Pr = 250 W + 100 W+50W 


P; = 400 W 


Since the total current and source voltage 
are known the total power can also be computed 
by: 


Given: EB, ='30'¥ 
Ir =8A 
Solution: Py = E, x I> 
Pr =SOVx8A 
P; = 400 W 


3-4] 


Equivalent Circuits 


In the study of electricity, it is often 
necessary to reduce a complex circuit into a 
simpler form. Any complex circuit consisting of 
resistances can be redrawn (reduced) to a basic 
equivalent circuit containing the voltage source 
and a single resistor representing total resistance. 
This process is called reduction to an 
EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT. 

Figure 3-49 shows a parallel circuit with 
three resistors of equal value and the redrawn 
equivalent circuit. The parallel circuit shown in 
part A shows the original circuit. To create the 
equivalent circuit, you must first calculate the 
equivalent resistance. 


Given: R, = 450 
Ry = 45Q 
R3 = 452 

Solution: Reg -* 
45 
eg Bs 
Reg = 15 


Once the equivalent resistance is known, a 
new circuit is drawn consisting of a single 
resistor (to represent the equivalent resistance) 
and the voltage source, as shown in part B. 


Rules for Parallel D.C. Circuits 


1. The same voltage exists across each 
branch of a parallel circuit and is equal to the 
source voltage. 

2. The current through a branch of a 
parallel network is inversely proportional to the 
amount of resistance of the branch. 

3. The total current of a parallel circuit is 
equal to the sum of the individual branch 
currents of the circuit. 


The first step in solving this problem is for 
you to draw the circuit and indicate the known 
values as shown in figure 3-50. 

There are several ways to approach this 
problem. With the values you have been given 
you could first solve for R;, the power used by 
R,, or the voltage across R, which you know is 
equal to the source voltage and the voltage 
across each of the other resistors. Solving for Ry 
or the power used by R, will not help in solving 
for the other unknown values. 

Once the voltage across R, is known, this 
value will help you calculate other unknowns. 
Therefore the logical unknown to solve for is the 
source voltage (the voltage across R, ). 


Given: R, = 209 
IRpp =9A 
Ex, = E, 
Solution: E.=R, xIp1 
E,=9 Ax 202 
E, = 180 V 


Now that source voltage is known you can solve 
for current in each branch. 


Given: E.= 180°V 
R, = 302 
R3 = 18 
Ry = 1822 
Rs = 18Q 








Figure 3-50.—Parallel circuit problem. 


3-43 


Solution: E, 
IR2 = R, 
_ 180 V 
IR2 = 302 
Ip? =6A 
E 
he oR 
I 180 V 
R37 18 Q 
Since R3; = Rg = Rs and the voltage across each 


branch is the same: 


ie = 100A 


1OA 


IR 5 


Solving for total resistance. 


Given: R, = 202 
R, = 302 
R3 = 18 
Ry = 18Q 
Rs = 182 


Solution: 


Rr Req 
Ree are ee 
pce a en Pie 
Rog Ri Ro Rs Ra Rs 
eR pee ea ke lly eee 
Ry; 208 * 308 * 180 * Ta * TEN 
1 _9+6+10+10+102 
Ry 180 (LCD) 
_t _ 452 
R, 180 

_ 180 
Rr sa 
Ry = 4Q 


An alternate method for solving for Ry can 
be used. By observation, you can see that R3, 
R,, and R, are of equal ohmic value. Therefore 
an equivalent resistor can be substituted for 


these three resistors in solving for total 
resistance. 
Given: R3 = Ry = Rs, = 18 
Solution: Regi -* 

Ree 1B 

Regi = 62 


The circuit can now be redrawn using a resistor 
labeled Regi in place of R3, Ra, and Rs as 
shown in figure 3-51. 


3-44 





Figure 3-51.—First equivalent parallel circuit. 


An equivalent resistor can be calculated and 
substituted for R,; and R, by use of the product 
over the sum formula. 


Given: R, = 20 
R, = 300 
: R, xR 
Solution: R., =p 
olution ea R, + Ry 
_ 202 x 300 


Req2 = 309 + 302 


600 
Req2 = 59 2 
Reg2 = 122 


The circuit is now redrawn again using a resistor 
labeled Reg2 in place of R,; and R, as shown in 
figure 3-52. 


You are now left with two resistors in 
parallel. The product over the sum method can 
now be used to solve for total resistance. 


Given: Regi = 62 
Ry = Reg 





Figure 3-52.—Second equivalent parallel circuit. 


Solution: one = pik 
1 2 

Regi XR 
R. = eal eq2 
: eql + eq2 
R, = 2X 122 
TF 684122 

ae 
Rr = Tae 
Ry =4Q 


This agrees with the solution found by using the 
general formula for solving for resistors in 
parallel. 

The circuit can now be redrawn as shown in 
figure 3-53 and total current can be calculated. 


Given: FE, = 180 V 
Ry = 4Q 
Solution: I; = a 
T 
_ 180 V 
ewe 
I; =45 A 


3-45 


Es Req 


180V aia 


Figure 3-53.—Parallel circuit redrawn to final equivalent 
circuit. 


This solution can be checked by using the 
values already calculated for the branch currents. 


Given: Ip, =9A 
Ip2 =6A 
Ip3 =10A 
Ing =10A 
Ips =10A 


Solution: I; =Ip, tIlypot+.--Ipn 
Tr =9AtT+6At+IOA+IOAT+IOA 
Ip =45A 


Now that total current is known the next 
logical step is to find total power. 


Given: E, = 180 V 
Ir =45A 
Solution: P= EI 
Pry = E, xX I; 


Pr =180Vx45A 


Py; = 8100 Watts = 8.1 kW 


Solving for the power in each branch. 


Given: E, = 180 V 
IR, = YA 
Ip2= 6A 
Ip3 = 1O0A 
Ing = 10A 
Ips = LOA 

Solution: P=EI 


Pr, =E,xIpy 
Pp, =180Vx9A 


Pr, = 1620 W 


Pa2 =E, x IRo 
Pp, =180Vx6A 
Pp, = 1080 W 
Pr3 =E,xIp3 


Pr3 = 1800 W 
Since Ip 3 = wi = Ips then, 
Pr3 = Prp4 = Pps =1800W The previous 


calculation for total power can now be checked. 


Given: Pp, = 1620W 
Pr2 = 1080 W 
Pp3 = 1800 W 
Pr4 = 1800 W 


Pr5 = 1800 W 


Solution: 


Pr = Ppi + Pr2 + PR3 + Prag * PRs 

P; = 1620W + 1080W + 1800W + 1800W + 1800W 
Py = 8100W 

Py = &1kW 


Q39. What term identifies a single resistor that 
represents total resistance of a complex 
circuit? 


Q40. The total power in both series and 
parallel circuits is computed with the 
formula: Py, =P, +P, +P3+...P,. 
Why can this formula be used for both 
series and parallel circuits? 


Q41. <A _ circuit consists of three resistors 
connected in parallel across a voltage 
source. R, = 40, R, =300, R; = 40Q, 
and Pp 3; = 360 watts. Solve for R;, E,, 
and Ip . (Hint: Draw and label the 
circuit first.) 


SERIES-PARALLEL 
D.C. CIRCUITS 


In the preceding discussions, series and 
parallel d.c. circuits have been considered 
separately. The technician will encounter 
circuits consisting of both series and parallel 
elements. A circuit of this type is referred to as a 
COMBINATION CIRCUIT. Solving for the 
quantities and elements in a combination circuit 
is simply a matter of applying the laws and rules 
discussed up to this point. 


SOLVING COMBINATION- 
CIRCUIT PROBLEMS 


The basic technique used for solving d.c. 
combination-circuit probems is the use of 
equivalent circuits. To simplify a complex 
circuit to a simple circuit containing only one 


load, equivalent circuits are substituted (on 
paper) for the complex circuit they represent. 

To demonstrate the method used to solve 
combination circuits problems, the network 
shown in figure 3-54(A) will be used to calculate 
various circuit quantities, such as resistance, 
current, voltage, and power. 

Examination of the circuit shows that the 
only quantity that can be computed with the 
given information is the equivalent resistance of 
R, and R3. 


Given: R, =200 
R3 = 302 
Solution: R —~ R, x R3 (Product over 


eq] R, +R; the sum) 


R. = 202 x 302 
eql 202 + 302 
600 
Regi = @ 
Rei =13h 


Now that the equivalent resistance for R, 
and R3 has been calculated the circuit can be 
redrawn as a Series circuit as shown in figure 
3-54(B). 

The equivalent resistance of this circuit 
(total resistance) can now be calculated. 


Given: R, =8Q (Resistors 
in series) 
Regi = 122 
Solution: Reg = Ri + Regi 
Reg = 82 + 120 
Reg = 2022 
or 
Ry = 202 


3-47 








Es 


60 V 200 


C 


Figure 3-54.—Example combination circuit. 


The original circuit can be redrawn with a single 
resistor that represents the equivalent resistance 
of the entire circuit as shown in figure 3-54(C). 


To find total current in the circuit: 
Given: E, = 60 V 


Rr = 202 


A39. Equivalent resistor or R,, 


A40._ In both cases all the power used in the 
circuit must come from the source 


1 


1 1 1 
A41. Re = 122 Rr =a +Rt Ry 





Es =120V (Es = Er3 = VPp3 *R3) 
IR2 =4A § (Ip2 = RD 
Solution: ‘ “ee 
in Soy (Ohm’s law) 
Ir =3A 


To find total power in the circuit: 


Given: E. =60°V 
Ir = 3A 
Solution: Pr =E, x I; 


Py =60Vx3A 


P, = 180 W 


To find the voltage dropped across R,, R2, and 
R,; refer to figure 3-54(B). R.g1 Tepresents the 
parallel network of R, and R3. Since the voltage 
across each branch of a parallel circuit is equal, 
the voltage across Rog; (Eeq;) will be equal to 


3-48 


the voltage across R, (Ep>) and also equal to 
the voltage across R3 (Ep 3). 


Given: 1; =3A (Current through 
each part of a 
R, =8Q series circuit is 
equal to total 
Regi = 120 current. ) 
Solution: Fre, =, x Ry 
Er, =3 Ax 82 
Ey { =24°V 
ER2 = Ep 3 = Beg 
Feg1 rs Ir Xx Regi 


Feg1 =3AX 122 


Eel =36V 
Ep =36V 
Ep 3 =36V 


To find power used by R,: 


Given: Ee i = 24V 
I; = 3A 
Solution: Pep hei RAP 


Pei = 72 W 
To find the current through R, and R3, refer to 


the original circuit, figure 3-54(A). You know 
Ep 2 and Ep 3 from previous calculation. 


Given: Ep, =36V 
Ep; =36V 

R, = 202 

R3 = 302 





; E 
Solution: Ir2 =e (Ohm’s law) 
_36V 
IR2 = 200 
Ir2 = 18A 
E 
Ina = 
_ 36V 
In3 “309 
Ir 3 =12A 


To find power used by R, and R3, using values 
from previous calculations: 


Given: Er? =36V 

Ep 3 = 36V 

Ip2 =1.8A 

Ip3 =12A 
Solution: Pr. = Ep? X Ip? 


Pp2 =36VX18A 


Pr? = 64.8 W 


Pr3 =Ep3 x Ip3 
Pa3=36VX12A 


Pp3 = 43.2 W 


Now that you have solved for the unknown 
quantities in this circuit, you can apply what 
you have learned to any series, parallel, or 
combination circuit. It is important to 
remember to first look at the circuit and from 
observation make your determination of the 
type of circuit, what is known, and what you are 


3-49 


looking for. A minute spent in this manner may 
save you many unnecessary calculations. 

Having computed all the currents and 
voltages of figure 3-54, a complete description 
of the operation of the circuit can be made. The 
total current of 3 amps leaves the negative 
terminal of the battery and flows through the 
8-ohm resistor (R; ). In so doing, a voltage drop 
of 24 volts occurs across resistor R,. At point A, 
this 3-ampere current divides into two currents. 
Of the total current, 1.8 amps flows through the 
20-ohm resistor. The remaining current of 1.2 
amps flows from point A, down through the 
30-ohm resistor to point B. This current 
produces a voltage drop of 36 volts across the 
30-ohm resistor. (Notice that the voltage drops 
across the 20- and 30-ohm resistors are the 
same.) The two branch currents of 1.8 and 1.2 
amps combine at junction B and the total 
current of 3 amps flows back to the source. The 
action of the circuit has been completely 
described with the exception of power 
consumed, which could be described using the 
values previously computed. 

It should be pointed out that the 
combination circuit is not difficult to solve. The 
key to its solution lies in knowing the order in 
which the steps of the solution must be 
accomplished. 


Practice Circuit Problem 


Figure 3-55 is a typical combination circuit. 
To make sure you understand the techniques of 
solving for the unknown quantities, solve for 
Ep 1- 


It is not necessary to solve for all the values 
in the circuit to compute the voltage drop across 
resistor R, (Ep 1), First look at the circuit and 
determine that the values given do not provide 
enough information to solve for Ep ; directly. 


If the current through R, (Ip ,) is known, 


then Ep; can be computed by applying the 
formula: 


Eri = Ri X Ip, 


The following steps will be used to solve the 
problem. 


3002 100 nN 


1. The total resistance (Ry) is calculated by the 


R 3 use of equivalent resistance. 
Given: R, = 300Q 
R, = 1002 
Solution: Regi = Ri + Ro 


Req1 = 3002 + 1002 
Regi = 4002 


Redraw the circuit as shown in figure 3-55(B). 











Given: Regi = 4002 
R3 = 400Q 
Req 2 Solution: Regs = - (Equal resis- 
tors in parallel.) 
4000 
Req2 = 2 
Reg2 = 2002 


(C) 


Redraw the circuit as shown in figure 3-55(C). 





Given: Reg2 = 2002 
R, =1kQ 
Solution: Reg = Rega + Ra 
(D) 
Req = 2002 +1 kQ 
Figure 3-55.—Combination practice circuit. Req = 1.2 kQ 


3-50 


2. The total current (I; ) is now computed. 


Given: E, = 300 V 


Reg = 1.2 k& 


Solution: 


aoe 
Ir = hea 


1, =300.V 
Tr T2k 
I; = 250 mA 


3. Solve for the voltage dropped across R,,>. 
This represents the voltage dropped across the 
network R,, R,, and R; in the original circuit. 


Given: Re g2 = 2002 
I, = 250 mA 
Solution:  Epeg2 =Reg2 X Ir 


EReq2 = 2008 x 250 mA 
Ereq2 = 50 V 


4. Solve for the current through Regi. (Regi 
represents the network R, and R, in the 
original circuit.) Since the voltage across each 
branch of a parallel circuit is equal to the voltage 
across the equivalent resistor representing the 
circuit: 


ER eq? = EReq1 


Given: Ereqi = 20 V 
Regi = 4002 
Solution: regi = Fpeal 
eql 

Reql 4002 


Ineqi = 125mA 


5. Solve for the voltage dropped across R, (the 
quantity you were asked to find). Since R.g 
represents the series network of R, and R, and 
total current flows through each resistor in a 
series circuit, Ip 1 must equal Ipeq1- 


Given: Ip, = 125 mA 
R, = 3002 
Solution: Eri =Ip1 xR 


Ep 1 = 125 mA x 3002 


Eri =37.5V 


Q42. Refer to figure 3-55(A). If the following 
resistors were replaced with the values 
indicated: R, = 9002, R3; =1kQ2, what 
is the total power in the circuit? What is 


REDRAWING CIRCUITS 
FOR CLARITY 


You will notice that the schematic diagrams 
you have been working with have shown parallel 
circuits drawn as neat square figures, with each 
branch easily identified. 

In actual practice the wired circuits and 
more complex schematics are rarely laid out in 
this simple form. For this reason, it is important 
for you to recognize that circuits can be drawn 
in a variety of ways, and to learn some of the 
techniques for redrawing them into their 
simplified form. When a circuit is redrawn for 
clarity or to its simplest form the following steps 
are used. 


1. Trace the current paths in the circuit. 

2. Label the junctions in the circuit. 

3. Recognize points which are at the same 
potential. 

4. Visualize a rearrangement, “stretching” 
or “shrinking”, of connecting wires. 

5. Redraw the circuit into simpler form 
(through stages if necessary). 


A42. Pr = 60 W, Ep > =10V 


To redraw any circuit, start at the source, 
and trace the path of current flow through the 
circuit. At points where the current divides, 
called JUNCTIONS, parallel branches begin. 
These junctions are key points of reference in 
any circuit and should be labeled as you find 
them. The wires in circuit schematics are 
assumed to have NO RESISTANCE and there is 
NO VOLTAGE drop along any wire. This means 
that any unbroken wire is at the same voltage all 
along its length, until it is interrupted by a 
resistor, battery, or some other circuit 
component. In redrawing a circuit, a wire can be 
‘‘stretched” or “‘shrunk’’ as much as you like 
without changing any electrical characteristic of 
the circuit. 

Figure 3-56(A) is a schematic of a circuit 
that is not drawn in the box-like fashion used in 


(a) 





(A) 


(a) (a) (a) 





(B) 


Figure 3-56.—Redrawing a simple parallel circuit. 


previous illustrations. To redraw this circuit, 
start at the voltage source and trace the path for 
current to the junction marked (a). At this 
junction the current divides into three paths. If 
you were to stretch the wire to show the three 
current paths, the circuit would appear as shown 
in figure 3-56(B). 

While these circuits may appear to be 
different, the two drawings actually represent 
the same circuit. The drawing in figure 3-56(B) 
is the familiar box-like structure and may be 
easier to work with. Figure 3-57(A) is a 
schematic of a circuit shown in a box-like 
structure, but may be misleading. This circuit in 
reality is a series-parallel circuit that may be 
redrawn as shown in figure 3-57(B). The drawing 
in part (B) of the figure is a _ simpler 








(B) 


Figure 3-57.—Redrawing a simple series-parallel circuit. 


Q43. What is the total resistance of the circuit 
shown in figure 3-59? (Hint: Redraw the 
circuit to simplify and then use 
equivalent resistances to compute for 
R;.) 

Q44. What is the total resistance of the circuit 
shown in figure 3-60? 

Q45. What effect does the internal resistance 
have on the rest of the circuit shown in 
figure 3-60? 

EFFECTS OF OPEN 

AND SHORT CIRCUITS 


Earlier in this topic the terms open and short 
circuits were discussed. The following discussion 
deals with the effects on a circuit when an open 
or a short occurs. 

The major difference between an open in a 
parallel circuit and an open in a series circuit is 
that in the parallel circuit the open would not 
necessarily disable the circuit. If the open 
condition occurs in a series portion of the 
circuit, there will be no current because there is 
no complete path for current flow. If, on the 
other hand, the open occurs in a parallel path, 
some current will still flow in the circuit. The 
parallel branch where the open occurs will be 
effectively disabled, total resistance of the 
circuit will INCREASE and total current will 
DECREASE. 





Figure 3-59.—Simplification circuit problem. 


3-54 


4 





Figure 3-60.—Source resistance in a parallel circuit. 


To clarify these points figure 3-61 illustrates 
a series-parallel circuit. First the effect of an 
open in the series portion of this circuit will be 
examined. Figure 3-61(A) shows the normal 
circuit, Ry = 40 ohms and I; = 3 amps. In figure 
3-61(B) an open is shown in the series portion of 
the circuit. There is no complete path for 
current, and the resistance of the circuit is 
considered to be infinite. 


In figure 3-61(C) an open is shown in the 
parallel branch of R3. There is no path for 
current through R3. In the circuit, current flows 
through R, and R, only. Since there is only one 
path for current flow, R, and R, are effectively 
in series. 


Under these conditions Ry, =120Q and 
I; =l amp. As you can see, when an open 
occurs in a parallel branch, total circuit 
resistance increases and total circuit current 
decreases. 


A short circuit in a parallel network has an 
effect similar to a short in a series circuit. In 
general, the short will cause an increase in 
current and the possibility of component 
damage regardless of the type of circuit 
involved. To illustrate this point, figure 3-62 
shows a Series-parallel network in which shorts 
are developed. In figure 3-62(A) the normal 
circuit is shown. Ry = 40 ohms and I; = 3 amps. 

In figure 3-62(B), R, has shorted. Ry now 
has zero ohms of resistance. The total of the 
resistance of the circuit is now equal to the 
resistance of the parallel network of R, and R3, 
or 20 ohms. Circuit current has increased to 6 
amps. All of this current goes through the 
parallel network (R,, R3) and this increase in 





(B) 





Figure 3-61.—Series-parallel circuit with opens. 


current would most 
components. 

In figure 3-62(C), R3 has shorted. With R3 
shorted there is a short citcuit in parallel with 
R,. The short circuit routes the current around 
R,, effectively removing R, from the circuit. 
Total circuit resistance is now equal to the 
resistance of R,, or 20 ohms. 


likely damage the 


Figure 3-62.—Series-parallel circuit with shorts. 


As you know, R, and R; form a parallel 
network. Resistance of the network can be 
calculated as follows: 


Given: R, = 1002 


R3 = 022 





A43. 4 


A44. 252 


A45. Because of the 2 volt drop across the in- 
ternal resistance, only 48 volts is available 
for the rest of the circuit 





Solution: Rey = pe 
2 +R; 
a ~ 1002 x02 
€q 10022 + 0Q 
Reg = 02 


The total circuit current with R3 shorted is 
6 amps. All of this current flows through R, and 
would most likely damage R,. Notice that even 
though only one portion of the parallel network 
was shorted, the entire parallel network was 
disabled. 

Opens and shorts alike, if Occurring in a 
circuit, result in an overall change in the 
equivalent resistance. This can cause undesirable 
effects in other parts of the circuit due to the 
corresponding change in the total current flow. 
A short usually causes components to fail in a 
circuit which is not properly fused or otherwise 
protected. The failure may take the form of a 
burned-out resistor, damaged source, or a fire in 
the circuit components and wiring. 

Fuses and other circuit protection devices 
are installed in equipment circuits to prevent 
damage caused by increases in current. These 
circuit protection devices are designed to open if 
current increases to a predetermined value. 


Circuit protection devices are connected in series 


with the circuit or portion of the circuit that the 
device is protecting. When the circuit protection 
device opens, current flow ceases in the circuit. 

A more thorough explanation of fuses and 
other circuit protection devices will be presented 
in Module 3, /ntroduction to Circuit Protection, 
Control, and Measurement. 


Q46. What is the effect on total resistance and 
total current in a circuit if an open 
occurs in (a) a parallel branch, and (b) in 
a series portion? 


Q47. What is the effect on total resistance and 
total current in a circuit if a short occurs 
in (a) a parallel branch, and (b) in a 
series portion? 


Q48. If one branch of a parallel network is 
shorted, what portion of circuit current 
flows through the remaining branches? 


VOLTAGE DIVIDERS 


Most electrical and electronics equipment 
use voltages of various levels throughout their 
circuitry. 

One circuit may require a 90 volt supply, 
another a 150 volt supply, and still another a 
180 volt supply. These voltage requirements 
could be supplied by three individual power 
sources. This method is expensive and requires a 
considerable amount of room. The most 
common method of supplying these voltages is 
to use a single voltage source and a VOLTAGE 
DIVIDER. Before voltage dividers are explained, 
a teview of what was discussed earlier 
concerning voltage references may be of help. 

As you know, some circuits are designed to 
supply both positive and negative voltages. 
Perhaps now you wonder if a negative voltage 
has any less potential than a positive voltage. 
The answer is that 100 volts is 100 volts. 
Whether it is negative or positive does not affect 
the feeling you get when you are shocked. 

Voltage polarities are considered as being 
positive or negative in respect to a reference 
point, usually ground. Figure 3-63 will help to 
illustrate this point. 

Figure 3-63(A) shows a series circuit with a 
voltage source of 100 volts and four 50 ohm 
resistors connected in series. The ground, or 
reference point, is connected to one end of 
resistor R,. The current in this circuit as 
determined by Ohm’s law is .5 amp. Each 
resistor develops (drops) 25 volts. The five 


E +{00V 


D +75V 


C +S0V 


B +25V 





E +75V 


D +50V 


C +25V 


A -25V 





Figure 3-63.—Voltage polarities. 


3-57 


tap-off points indicated in the schematic are 
points at which the voltage can be measured. As 
indicated on the schematic, the voltage 
measured at each of the points from point A to 
point E starts at zero volts and becomes more 
positive in 25 volt steps to a value of positive 
100 volts. 


In figure 3-63(B), the ground, or reference 
point has been moved to point B. The current in 
the circuit is still .5 amp and each resistor still 
develops 25 volts. The total voltage developed in 
the circuit remains at 100 volts, but because the 
reference point has been changed, the voltage at 
point A is negative 25 volts. Point E, which was 
at positive 100 volts in figure 3-63(A), now has a 
voltage of positive 75 volts. As you can see the 
voltage at any point in the circuit is dependent 
on three factors; the current through the 
resistor, the ohmic value of the resistor, and the 


reference point in the circuit. 


A typical voltage divider consists of two or 
more resistors connected in series across a source 
voltage (E,). The source voltage must be as high 
or higher than any voltage developed by the 
voltage divider. As the source voltage is dropped 
in successive steps through the series resistors, 
any desired portion of the source voltage may be 
“tapped off’ to supply individual voltage 
requirements. The values of the series resistors 
used in the voltage divider are determined by the 
voltage and current requirements of the loads. 

Figure 3-64 is used to illustrate the 
development of a simple voltage divider. The 
requirement for this voltage divider is to provide 
a voltage of 25 volts and a current of 910 
milliamps to the load from a source voltage of 
100 volts. Figure 3-64(A) provides a circuit in 
which 25 volts is available at point B. If the load 
was connected between point B and ground you 
might think that the load would be supplied 
with 25 volts. This is not true since the load 
connected between point B and ground forms a 
parallel network of the load and resistor R,. 
(Remember that the value of resistance of a 
parallel network is always less than the value of 
the smallest resistor in the network.) 

Since the resistance of the network would 
now be less than 25 ohms, the voltage at point B 
would be less than 25 volts. This would not 
satisfy the requirement of the load. 


A46. (a) Total resistance increases, total 


current decreases 


(b) Total resistance becomes infinite, 
total current is equal to zero 


A47. (a) Total resistance decreases, total 
current increases 


(b) Total resistance decreases, total 
current increases 


A48. None 


C +{00V 
B +25V 
A OV 








To determine the size of resistor used in the 
voltage divider, a rule-of-thumb is used. The 


current in the divider resistor should equal 


approximately 10 percent of the load current. 


This current, which does not flow through any 


of the load devices, is called bleeder current. 
Given this information, the voltage divider 
can be designed using the following steps. 


1. Determine the load requirement and the 
available voltage source. 
E, = 100 V 
Eload= 25V 
I load = 910 mA 


2. Select bleeder current by applying the 
10% rule-of-thumb. 


Ir1 = 10% x I load 





Ini = -1x 910 mA 
Ir1 = 9] mA 
3. Calculate bleeder resistance. 
E 
R = R1 
; Ik 
25 ¥ 
Biota 
Ry = 274.732 


The value of R, may be rounded off to 275 
ohms: 


R, = 2752 


4. Calculate the total current (load plus 
bleeder). 


I, =I load + Ip 
I, =910 mA +91 mA 


I, = 1 A (rounded off) 


5. Calculate the resistance of the other 
divider resistor(s). 


Er2 = E,-Ep, 


Ep» = 100V-25V 


Eg» =75V 
R, = FR2 
T 
R, =a 
R, = 752 


The voltage divider circuit can now be drawn as 
shown in figure 3-64(B). 


Q49. What information must be known to 
determine the component values for a 


voltage divider? 


Q50. If a voltage divider is required for a load 
that will use 450 mA of current, what 


should be the value of bleeder current? 


Q51. 


If the load in question 50 requires a 
voltage of +90 V, what should be the 
value of the bleeder resistor? 


Q52. If the source voltage for the voltage 
divider in question 50 supplies 150 volts, 
what is the total current through the 


voltage divider? 


MULTIPLE-LOAD 
VOLTAGE DIVIDERS 


A multiple-loed voltage divider is shown in 
figure 3-65. An important point that was not 
emphasized before is that when using the 10% 


3=59 





Figure 3-65.—Multiple-load voltage divider. 


rule of thumb to calculate the bleeder current, 
you must take 10% of the total load current. 


Given the information shown in figure 3-65, 
you can calculate the values for the resistors 
needed in the voltage-divider circuits. The same 
steps will be followed as in the previous voltage 
divider problem. 


Given: Load 1: E= 90 V 


I= 10 mA 


Load 2: E=150 V 


I= 10mA 


Load 3: E=175 V 


30 mA 


E, = 285 V 


A49. Thesource voltage and load requirements 
(voltage and current). 


AS50. 45 mA (Rule-of-thumb) 
AS1. 2kQ 


AS2. 495 mA 


The bleeder current should be 10% of the total 
load current. 


Solution: 
Ipn1 = 10% x I (load total) 


Ip; = 10%x (10 mA+ 10 mA+ 30 mA) 
Ip1 =5mA 
Since the voltage across R, (Ep ; ) is equal to the 


voltage requirement for load 1, Ohm’s law can 
be used to calculate the value for R,. 


Solution: R, = ret 





Rl 
_90V 
RS mA 
R, = 18 k2 


The current through R,z (Ip) is equal to the 
current through R, plus the current through 
load 1. 


Solution: Ip2 =Ip 1 +1 load 1 


In2 =5mA+10mA 


Ip 2 =15mA 


The voltage across R, (Ep>) is equal to the 


difference between the voltage requirements of 


load 1 and load 2. 


Solution: Ep 2 = E load 2 - E load 1 
Ep 2 = 150V-90V 


Ohm’s law can now be used to solve for the 
value of R,. 





: E 
Solution: R, =7R2 
> Th 
= §0-V 
Re "15 mA 
R, =4k2Q 


The current through R; (Ip 3 ) is equal to the 
current through R, plus the current through 
load 2. 


Solution: In3 =Ip2 +1 load 2 


Ip3 =15mA+10mA 


Ip3 =25 mA 
The voltage across R3 (Ep3) equals the 
difference between the voltage requirement of 


load 3 and load 2. 


Solution: Ep 3 = E load 3 - E load 2 
Erp3 =175 V-150V 


Ex; = 25'V 


Ohm’s law can now be used to solve for the 
value of R3. 


Solution: 


_E 
Ge. 





_25V 
Ra = 35mA 
R; =1kQ 


The current through Ry (Ip4) is equal to the 
current through R3 plus the current through 
load 3. Ip 4 is equal to total circuit current (I, ). 


Solution: In4 =Ip3 +1 load 3 


Ing = 25mA+30mA 


Ing =55mA 
The voltage across Ry (Epq4) equals the 
difference between the source voltage and the 
voltage requirement of load 3. 


Solution: Er4 =E, -E load 3 


Ep4 = 285 V-175V 
Ep4 =110V 


Ohm’s law can now be used to solve for the 
value of Ry. 





, E 
Solution: R, =,84 
* 4  Th4 
_110V 
Ra = S5mA 
Rg =2 kQ 


With the calculations just explained, the 
values of the resistors used in the voltage divider 
are as follows: 


R, = 18k2 
R, = 4kQ 
R, = 1k2 
Ry, = 2kQ2 
POWER IN THE 
VOLTAGE DIVIDER 


Power in the voltage divider is an extremely 
important quantity. The power dissipated by the 
resistors in the voltage divider should be 
calculated to determine the power handling 
requirements of the resistors. Total power of the 
circuit is needed to determine the power 
requirement of the source. 

The power for the circuit shown in figure 
3-65 is calculated as follows: 


Given: Er 1 = 90 V 
y= SMA 
Solution: Pp 1 — Ep 1 X IR 1 


Pp, =~90VxSmA 


Pp, =-45W 


The power in each resistor is calculated just as 
for R,. When the calculations are performed the 
following results are obtained: 


Pro = .9W 
Pp3= .625W 


Pr4 = 6.05 W 


To calculate the power for load |: 


Given: E load 1 = 90 V 
Iload1=10mA 
Solution: P load 1= E load 1 x I load 1 


Pload 1=90 Vx 10mA 


P load 1 = .9W 


The power in each load is calculated just as for 
load 1. When the calculations are performed the 
following results are obtained. 


Pload 2=1.5 W 


P load 3 = 5.25 W 


Total power is calculated by summing the power 
consumed by the loads and the power dissipated 
by the divider resistors. The total power in the 
circuit is 15.675 watts. 

The power used by the loads and divider 
resistors is supplied by the source. This applies to 
all electrical circuits; power for all components 
is supplied by the source. 

Since power is the product of voltage and 
current, the power supplied by the source is 
equal to the source voltage multiplied by the 
total circuit current (E, x I;). 

In the circuit of figure 3-65 the total power 
can be calculated by: 


Given: E.=265°¥ 
I; = 55 mA (Ip 4) 
Solution: Pr =E, x Iy 
Pr = 285 Vx55mA 
Pr = 15.675 W 


3-62 


VOLTAGE DIVIDER WITH 
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE 
VOLTAGE REQUIREMENTS 


In many cases the load for a voltage divider 
requires both positive and negative voltages. 
Positive and negative voltages can be supplied 
from a single source voltage by connecting the 
ground (reference point) between two of the 
divider resistors. The exact point in the circuit at 
which the reference point is placed depends 
upon the voltages required by the loads. 

For example, a voltage divider can be 
designed to provide the voltage and current to 
three loads from a given source voltage. 


Given: 

Load 1: E=-25 V 
I= 300 mA 

Load 2: E=+50V 
1=50mA 

Load 3: E=+250V 
1=100mA 
,  s10V 


The circuit is drawn as shown in figure 3-66. 
Notice the placement of the ground reference 
point. The values for resistor R,, R3, and Rg are 
computed exactly as was done in the last 
example. Ip, is the bleeder current and can be 
calculated as follows: 


Solution: 
Ir1 = 10% xX I load total 


Ip1 = 10% x (300 mA + 50 mA + 100 mA) 


Ip} = 45 mA 








Figure 3-66.—Voltage divider providing both positive and 
negative voltages. 


Calculate the value of R,. 


Solution: R, = ERI 
R1 
Baw 
Ri = a5mA 
R, = 556Q 


Calculate the current through R, using Kir- 
choff’s current law. 
At point A: 
Ip, tI load 1+Ip,+I1 load 2 +I load 3=0 
45 mA + 300 mA +Ip,-50mA- 100 mA=0 
345mA+Ip,-150mA=0 
195 mA +Ip,=0 
IR2 =-195 mA 
(or 195 mA leaving point A) 


Since Ep »=Eload 2, you can calculate the 
value of R3. 
. E 

Solution: = —-R2 

Ry R2 

-, s50''V: 
BR 195 mA 
R, = 2562 


Calculate the current through R3. 


Solution: Ip 3 = Ip 2 + I load 2 
Ig 3 = 245 mA 


The voltage across R3; (Ep 3) equals the 
difference between the voltage requirement of 
load 3 and load 2. 
Solution: Er 3 = E load 3 -E load 2 
Er3 = 250 V-S50V 

Ep 3 = 200 V 


Calculate the value of R3. 





Solution: R;3 = FR 
R 3 
a. = 200V 
3 245 mA 
R3 = 8162 


Calculate the current through R,. 
Solution: Ing =Ip3 +1 load 3 

Ip 4 = 245mA+100mA 
Ipqg = 345mA 


The voltage across Ep 4 equals the source voltage 
(E,) minus the voltage requirement of load 3 


and the voltage requirement of load 1. 

Remember Kirchhoff’s voltage law which states 

that the sum of the voltage drops and emfs 

around any closed loop is equal to zero. 

Solution: Er4 = E, - E load 3-E load 1 
Epa = 35 V 


Calculate the value of Ry. 


Solution: Ry = ER4 
R4 

aay 

Ra = 345 mA 

R, = 101.42 


With the calculations just explained, the 
values of the resistor used in the voltage divider 
are as follows: 


R, = 5562 
R, = 2562 
R3 = 816Q 
R, = 1012 


From the information just calculated, any other 
circuit quantity, such as power, total current, or 
resistance of the load, could be calculated. 


PRACTICAL APPLICATION 
OF VOLTAGE DIVIDERS 


In actual practice the computed value of the 
bleeder resistor does not always come out to an 
even ‘alue. Since the rule-of-thumb for bleeder 
current is only an estimated value, the bleeder 
resistor can be of a value close to the computed 
value. (If the computed value of the resistance 
was 510 ohms, a 500 ohm resistor could be 
used.) Once the actual value of the bleeder 
resistor is selected, the bleeder current must be 


recomputed. The voltage developed by the 


bleeder resistor must be equal to the voltage 
requirement of the load in parallel with the 


bleeder resistor. 


The value of the remaining resistors in the 
voltage divider is computed from the current 
through the remaining resistors and the voltage 
across them. These values must be used to 
provide the required voltage and current to the 
loads. 


If the computed values for the divider 
resistors are not even values; series, parallel, or 
series-parallel networks can be used to provide 
the required resistance. 


Example: A voltage divider is required to 
supply two loads from a 199.5 volts source. 
Load 1 requires +45 volts and 210 milliamps; 
load 2 requires +165 volts and 100 milliamps. 

Calculate the bleeder current using the 
rule-of-thumb. 


Given: Iload 1= 210 mA 
Iload 2=100mA 
Solution: Ir} = 10% x (210 mA + 100 mA) 


Ini =31mA 


Calculate the ohmic value of the bleeder 
resistor. 


Given: Ep, = 45 VE load 1) 
Ip, =31 mA 
Solution: R,= 5 
ne 31 ne 
R, = 1451.62 


Since it would be difficult to find a resistor 
of 1451.6 ohms, a practical choice for R, is 


1500 ohms. 


Calculate the actual bleeder current using 
the selected value for R,. 


Given: Ep; =45V 
R, = 1.5kQ 
Solution: Ini = Fri 
1 
poe. 
Ri 15 kQ 
Ir1 =30mA 


Using this value for Ip,, calculate the 
resistance needed for the next divider resistor. 
The current (Ip 3) is equal to the bleeder current 
plus the current used by load 1. 


Given: Ip; =30mA 
Tload 1 = 210 mA 
Solution: In2 =Ip, +1 load 1 


Ip? =30mA+210 mA 


Ip2 = 240 mA 


The voltage across R, (Ep ) is equal to the 
difference between the voltage requirement of 
load 2 and load 1, or 120 volts. 

Calculate the value of R,. 


Given: Ep. =120V 
Ip2 = 240 mA 
Solution: R, = rR 
R2 
R, = 5002 


3-65 


The value of the final divider resistor is 
calculated with Ip3 (Ip2 +I load 2) equal to 
340 mA and Ep 3 (E, - E load 2) equal to 25.5V. 


Given: Ep 3 = 25.5 V 
Ip 3 = 340 mA 
Solution: R3 =7Ra 
R3 
os Sv 
3 340 mA 
Rg = 75Q 


A 75 ohm resistor may not be easily 
obtainable, so a network of resistors equal to 75 
ohms can be used in place of R3. 


Any combination of resistor values adding 
up to 75 ohms could be placed in series to 
develop the required network. For example, if 
you had two 37.5 ohm resistors, you could 
connect them in series to get a network of 75 
ohms. One 50 ohm and one 25 ohm resistor or 
seven 10 ohm and one 5 ohm resistor could also 
be used. 


A parallel network could be constructed 
from two 150 ohm resistors or three 225 ohm 
resistors. Either of these parallel networks would 
also be a network of 75 ohms. 


The network used in this example will be a 
series-parallel network using three 50 ohm 
resistors. 


With the information given, you should be 
able to draw this voltage divider network. 


Once the values for the various divider 
resistors have been selected, you can compute 
the power used by each resistor using the 
methods previously explained. When the power 
used by each resistor is known, the wattage 
rating required of each resistor determines the 
physical size and type needed for the circuit. 
This circuit is shown in figure 3-67. 





Figure 3-67.—Practical example of a voltage divider. 


Q53. 


Q54. 


Q55. 


Q56. 


Q57. 


In figure 3-67, why is the value of R, 
calculated first? 


In figure 3-67, how is (a) the current 
through R, and (b) the voltage drop 
across R, computed? 


In figure 3-67, what is the power 
dissipated in R, ? 


In figure 3-67, what is the purpose of the 
series-parallel network R3;, R,, and R;? 


In figure 3-67, what should be the 
minimum wattage ratings of R; and R; 


9 
e 


3-66 


Q58. If the load requirement consists of both 
positive and negative voltages, what 
technique is used in the voltage divider 
to supply the loads from a single voltage 


source? 


EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT 
TECHNIQUES 


The circuit solutions that you have studied 
up to this point have been obtained mainly 
through the use of formulas derived from Ohm’s 
law. As in many other fields of science, 
electricity has its share of special shortcut 
methods. Some of the special circuit analysis 
techniques are; THEVENIN’S THEOREM, 
which uses a process of circuit reduction to 
Thevenin’s equivalent circuit, and NORTON’S 
THEOREM which is reduction of a circuit to 
Norton’s equivalent. Another method is called 
LOOP ANALYSIS. This uses Kirchhoff’s voltage 
law to simultaneously solve problems in parallel 
branches of a circuit. The use of these methods 
should be reserved until you have become 
thoroughly familiar with the methods covered 
thus far in this topic. You may want to explore 
some of the special techniques later in your 
career. 


ELECTRICAL SAFETY 


Safety precautions must always be observed 
by persons working around electric circuits and 
equipment to avoid injury from electric shock. 
Detailed safety precautions are contained in 
NAVMAT P-5100, SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 
FOR SHORE ACTIVITIES and OPNAVINST 
5100-19, NAVY SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 
FOR FORCES AFLOAT. 

The danger of shock from a 450-volt a.c. 
electrical service system is well recognized by 
operating personnel. This is shown by the 
relatively low number of reports of serious 
shock received from this voltage, despite its 
widespread use. On the other hand, a number of 
fatalities have been reported due to contact with 
low-voltage circuits. Despite a fairly widespread, 
but totally unfounded, popular belief to the 
contrary, low-voltage circuits (115 volts and 


below) are very dangerous and can cause death 
when the resistance of the body is lowered. 
Fundamentally, current, rather than voltage, is 
the measure of shock intensity. The passage of 
even a very small current through a vital part of 
the human body can cause DEATH. The voltage 
necessary to produce the fatal current is 
dependent upon the resistance of the body, 
contact conditions, the path through the body, 
etc. For example, when a 60-hertz alternating 
current, is passed through a human body from 
hand to hand or from hand to foot, and the 
current is gradually increased, it will cause the 
following effects: At about 1 milliampere (0.001 
ampere) the shock can be felt; at about 10 
milliamperes (0.01 ampere) the shock is of 
sufficient intensity to prevent voluntary control 
of the muscles; and at about 100 milliamperes 
(0.1 ampere) the shock is fatal if it lasts for 1 
second or more. The above figures are the results 
of numerous investigations and are approximate 
because individuals differ in their resistance to 
electrical shock. It is most important to 
recognize that the resistance of the human body 
cannot be relied upon to prevent a fatal shock 
from 115 volts or less-FATALITIES FROM 
VOLTAGES AS LOW AS 30 VOLTS HAVE 
BEEN RECORDED. Tests have shown that 
body resistance under unfavorable conditions 
may be as low as 300 ohms, and possibly as low 
as 100 ohms from temple to temple if the skin is 
broken. 

Conditions aboard ship add to the chance of 
receiving an electrical shock. Aboard ship the 
body is likely to be in contact with the metal 
structure of the ship and the body resistance 
may be low because of perspiration or damp 
clothing. Extra care and awareness of electrical 
hazards aboard ship are needed. 

Short circuits can be caused by accidentally 
placing or dropping a metal tool, rule, flashlight 
case, or other conducting article across an 
energized line. The arc and fire which result, 
even on relatively low-voltage circuits, may 
cause extensive damage to equipment and 
serious injury to personnel. 

Since ship service power distribution systems 
are designed to be ungrounded, many persons 
believe it is safe to touch one conductor, since 
no electrical current would flow. This is not 
true, since the distribution system is not totally 


3-67 


isolated from the hull of the ship. If one 
conductor of an ungrounded electrical system is 
touched while the body is in contact with the 
hull of the ship or other metal equipment 
enclosure, a fatal electric current may pass 
through the body. ALL LIVE ELECTRIC 
CIRCUITS SHALL BE TREATED AS 
POTENTIAL HAZARDS AT ALL TIMES. 


DANGER SIGNALS 


Personnel should constantly be on the alert 
for any signs or indications which might indicate 
a malfunction of electric equipment. Besides the 
more obvious visual signs, the reaction of other 
senses, such as hearing, smell, and touch, should 
also make you aware of possible electrical 
malfunctions. Examples of signs which you must 
be alert for are: fire, smoke, sparks, arcing, or an 
unusual sound from an electric motor. Frayed 
and damaged cords or plugs; receptacles, plugs, 
and cords which feel warm to the touch; slight 
shocks felt when handling electrical equipment; 
unusually hot running electric motors and other 
electrical equipment; an odor of burning or 
overheated insulation; electrical equipment 
which either fails to operate or operates 
irregularly; and electrical equipment which 
produces excessive vibrations are also indications 
of malfunctions. When any of the above signs 
are noted, they are to be reported immediately 
to a qualified technician. DO NOT DELAY. Do 
not operate faulty equipment. Above all, do not 
attempt to make any repairs yourself if you are 
not qualified to do so. Stand clear of any 
suspected hazard and instruct others to do 
likewise. 


@ Warning Signs—They have been placed 
for your protection. To disregard them is to 
invite personal injury as well as possible damage 
to equipment. Switches and receptacles with a 
temporary warning tag, indicating work is veulg 
performed, are not to be touched. 


®e@ Working Near Electrical 
Equipment—When work must be performed in 
the immediate vicinity of electrical equipment, 
check with the technician responsible for the 
maintenance of the equipment so you can avoid 


A53. _ R, isthe bleeder resistor. Bleeder current 
must be known before any of the remain- 
ing divider resistor ohmic values can be 
computed. 


AS54. (a) By adding the bleeder current (Ip ; ) 
and the current through load 1 


(b) By subtracting the voltage of load 1 
from the voltage of load 2 


A55. 1.35 watts 


A56. The series-parallel network drops the re- 
maining source voltage and is used to 
take the place of a single resistor (75 
ohms) when the required ohmic value is 
not available in a single resistor. 


AS57. R3;=2 watts R, =6 watts 


A58. The ground (reference point) is placed in 
the proper point in the voltage divider so 
that positive and negative voltages are 
supplied. 





any potential hazards of which you may not be 
immediately aware. 


@ Authorized Personnel Only—Because of 
the danger of fire, damage to equipment, and 
injury to personnel, all repair and maintenance 
work on electrical equipment shall be done only 
by authorized persons. Keep your hands off of 
all equipment which you have not been 
specifically authorized to handle. Particularly 
stay clear of electrical equipment opened for 
inspection, testing, or servicing. 


@ Circuit Breakers and Fuses—Covers for 
all fuse boxes, junction boxes, switch boxes, and 
wiring accessories should be kept closed. Any 
cover which is not closed or is missing should be 
reported to the technician responsible for its 
maintenance. Failure to do so may result in 
injury to personnel or damage to equipment in 
the event accidental contact is made with 
exposed live circuits. 


ELECTRICAL FIRES 


Carbon dioxide (CO,) is used in fighting 
electrical fires. It is nonconductive and, 
therefore, the safest to use in terms of electrical 
safety. It also offers the least likelihood of 
damaging equipment. However, if the discharge 
horn of a CO, extinguisher is allowed to 
accidentally touch an energized circuit, the horn 
may transmit a shock to the person handling the 
ex tinguisher. 

The very qualities which cause CO, to be a 
valuable extinguishing agent also make it 
dangerous to life. When it replaces oxygen in the 
air to the extent that combustion cannot be 
sustained, respiration also cannot be sustained. 
Exposure of a person to an atmosphere of high 
concentration of CO, will cause suffocation. 


FIRST AID FOR 
ELECTRIC SHOCK 


A person who has stopped breathing is not 
necessarily dead, but is in immediate danger. 
Life is dependent upon oxygen, which is 
breathed into the lungs and then carried by the 
blood to every body cell. Since body cells 
cannot store oxygen, and since the blood can 
hold only a limited amount (and that only for a 
short time), death will surely result from 
continued lack of breathing. 

However, the heart may continue to beat for 
some time after breathing has stopped, and the 
blood may still be circulated to the body cells. 
Since the blood will, for a short time, contain a 
small supply of oxygen, the body cells will not 
die immediately. For a very few minutes, there 
is some chance that the person’s life may be 
saved. 








The process by which a person who has 
stopped breathing can be saved is called 
ARTIFICAL VENTILATION (RESPIRATION). 

The purpose of artificial ventilation is to 
force air out of the lungs and into the lungs, in 
rhythmic alternation, until natural breathing is 
reestablished. Artificial ventilation should be 
given only when natural breathing has stopped; 
it should NOT be given to any person who is 
breathing naturally. You should not assume that 
an individual who is unconscious due to 
electrical shock has stopped breathing. To tell if 
someone suffering from an electrical shock is 
breathing, place your hands on the person’s 
sides, at the level of the lowest ribs. If the victim 
is breathing, you will usually be able to feel the 
movement. Remember: DO NOT GIVE 
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION TO A PERSON 
WHO IS BREATHING NATURALLY. Records 
show that seven out of ten victims of electric 
shock were revived when artificial respiration 
was started in less than 3 minutes. After 3 
minutes, the chances of revival decrease rapidly. 


Once it has been determined that breathing 
has stopped, the person nearest the victim 
should start the artificial ventilation without de- 
lay and send others for assistance and medical 
aid. The only logical, permissible delay is that 
required to free the victim from contact with 
the electricity in the quickest, safest way. This 
step, while it must be taken quickly, must be 
done with great care; otherwise, there may be 
two victims instead of one. In the case of 
portable electric tools, lights, appliances, 
equipment, or portable outlet extensions, this 
should be done by turning off the supply switch 
or by removing the plug from its receptacle. If 
the switch or receptacle cannot be quickly 
located, the suspected electrical device may be 
pulled free of the victim. Other persons arriving 
on the scene must be clearly warned not to 
touch the suspected equipment until it is 
deenergized. Aid should be enlisted to unplug 
the device as soon as possible. The injured 
person should be pulled free of contact with 
stationary equipment (such as a bus bar) if the 
equipment cannot be quickly deenergized, or if 
considerations of military operation or unit 
survival prevent immediate shutdown of the 
circuits. 


3-69 


This can be done quickly and safely by 
carefully applying the following procedures: 

(a) Protect yourself with dry _ insulating 
material. 

(b) Use a dry board, belt, clothing, or other 
available nonconductive material to free the 
victim from electrical contact. DO NOT TOUCH 
THE VICTIM UNTIL THE SOURCE OF 
ELECTRICITY HAS BEEN REMOVED. 


Once the victim has been removed from the 
electrical source it should be determined if the 
person is breathing. If the person is not 
breathing a method of artificial ventilation is 
used. 

Sometimes victims of electrical shock suffer 
cardiac arrest (heart stoppage) as well as loss of 
breathing. Artificial ventilation alone is not 
enough in cases where the heart has stopped. A 
technique known as _ Cardio-pulminary 
Resuscitation (CPR) has been developed to 
provide aid to a person who has stopped 
breathing and suffered a cardiac arrest. Because 
you most likely will be working in the field of 
electricity, the risk of electrical shock is higher 
than most other Navy occupations. You should, 
at your earliest opportunity, learn the technique 
of CPR. 


CPR is relatively easy to learn and is taught 
in courses available from the American Red 
Cross, some Navy Medical Departments, and in 
the Navy Standard First Aid Training Course 
(NAVEDTRA 10081-D). 


Q59. Is it considered safe for a person to 
touch any energized low-voltage 
conductor with the bare hand? 


Q60. What should you do if you become 
aware of a possible malfunction in a 
piece of electrical equipment? 


Q61. Who should perform CPR? 


A59. NEVER! All energized electric circuits 
should be considered potentially danger- 
ous. 


A60. You should immediately report this con- 
dition to a qualified technician. 


A61. Only trained, qualified personnel 





SUMMARY OF TOPIC 3 


With the completion of this topic you have gained a basic understanding 
of d.c. circuits. The information you have learned will provide you with a 
firm foundation for continuing your study of electricity. The following is a 
summary of the important points in the topic. 


31 







oO 
DRY CELL re FLASHLIGHT 
BAT E BULB 
DS1 

A BASIC ELECTRIC CIRCUIT consists of a 
source of electrical energy connected to a load. 
The load uses the energy and changes it to a 
useful form. 

BAT 





(B) ENERGIZED 


LAMP 
INCANDESCENT 


CONDUCTORS 
CONNECTED 


RESISTORS 
= CONNECTED WW FIXED 


A SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM is a “picture” of a 
circuit, which uses symbols to represent 
components. The space required to depict an 


electrical or electronic circuit is greatly reduced ine ahs hee al eae 
by the use of a schematic. e 


NOT VARIABLE 


CONNECTED (POTENTIOMETER) 


ije BATTERY VULTMETER 


AMMETER 





3-70 


VOLTAGE (E) is the electrical force or pressure 
operating in a circuit. 


AN _AMPERE (A) represents the current flow 
produced by one volt working across one ohm 
of resistance. 


RESISTANCE (R) is the opposition to current. 
It is measured in ohms (22). One ohm of 
resistance will limit the current produced by one 
volt to a level of one ampere. 


THE OHM’S FORMULA can be transposed to 
find one of the values in a circuit if the other 
two values are known. You can transpose the 


Ohm’s law formula I == mathematically, or you 


can use the Ohm’s law figure to determine the 
mathematical relationship between R, E, and I. 


GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS of the relationship 
between R, E, and I can be studied by plotting 
these quantities on a graph. Such a graph is 
useful for observing the characteristics of an 
electrical device. 


POWER is the rate of doing work per unit of 
time. The time required to perform a given 
amount of work will determine the power 
expended. As a formula, P=EXI, where 
P= power in watts, E=voltage in volts, and 
I = current in amperes. 








1=£ r== 
KY 
(Y-AX/S) 
I 
IN AMPERES 
2.0 


10 15 20 
E IN VOLTS 


(X-AX/S) 


3-71 


THE FOUR BASIC ELECTRICAL 


QUANTITIES are P, I, E, R. Any single 
unknown quantity can be expressed in terms of 
any two of the other known quantities. The 
formula wheel is a simple representation of these 
relationships. 


POWER RATING in watts indicates the rate at 
which a device converts electrical energy into 
another form of energy. The power rating of a 
resistor indicates the maximum power the 
resistor can withstand without being destroyed. 


POWER USED by aan electrical device is 
measured in watt-hours. One watt-hour is equal 
to one watt used continuously for one hour. 


THE EFFICIENCY of an electrical device is 
equal to the electrical power converted into 
useful energy divided by the electrical power 
supplied to the device. 


HORSEPOWER is a unit of measurement often 
used to rate electrical motors. It is a unit of 
work. One horsepower is equal to 746 watts. 


A SERIES CIRCUIT is defined as a circuit that 
has only one path for current flow. 


3-72 


EFF = 


BASIC CIRCUIT 


Power converted 
Power used 





SERIES CIRCUIT 


RULES FOR SERIES D.C. CIRCUITS: 


@ The same current flows through each 
part of a series circuit. 


@ The total resistance of a series circuit is 
equal to the sum of the individual resistances. 


@ The total voltage across a series circuit is 
equal to the sum of the individual voltage drops. 


@ The voltage drop across a resistor in a 
series circuit is proportional to the ohmic value 
of the resistor. 


@ The total power in a Series circuit is 
equal to the sum of the individual power used 
by each circuit component. 


KIRCHHOFF’S VOLTAGE law states: The 
algebraic sum of the voltage drops in any closed 
path in a circuit and the electromotive forces in 
that path is equal to zero, of 
Boot Be PB ts. B= '0 


VOLTAGE POLARITIES must be used when 
applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law. The point at 
which current enters a load (resistor) is 
considered negative with respective to the point 
at which current leaves the load. 


3-73 





SERIES AIDING VOLTAGES cause current to 
flow in the same direction; thus the voltages are 
added. 


SERIES OPPOSING VOLTAGES tend to force 
current to flow in opposite directions; thus the 
equivalent voltage is the difference between the 
opposing voltages. 


A REFERENCE POINT is a chosen point in a 
circuit to which all other points are compared. 


AN OPEN CIRCUIT is one in which a break 
exists in the complete conducting pathway. 


A SHORT CIRCUIT is an accidental path of low 
resistance which passes an abnormally high 
amount of current. 


3-74 





SERIES AIDING 


| 
+ Pee 


| Ey 






SERIES OPPOSING 


D +50V 


Ez =25V 


C +25V 


Eo =25V 


Eq =25V 





A -25V 





INTERNAL RESISTANCE 


causes a drop in the terminal 
voltage of a source as current 
flows through the source. The 
decrease in terminal voltage is 
caused by the voltage drop 
across the internal resistance. 
All sources of electromotive 
force have some form of 
internal resistance. 


HIGH EFFICIENCY in a 
circuit is achieved when the 
resistance of the load is high 
with respect to the resistance 


of the source. 


POWER TRANSFER in a 
circuit is highest when the 
resistance of the load equals 


the resistance of the source. 





Ec= OPEN- CIRCUIT VOLTAGE OF SOURCE 
R j=INTERNAL RESISTANCE OF SOURCE 
E,=TERMINAL VOLTAGE 

Rie RESISTANCE OF LOAD 

P, =POWER USED IN LOAD 


I =CURRENT FROM SOURCE 
*” EFF = PERCENTAGE OF EFFICIENCY 


(A) 
CIRCUIT AND SYMBOL DESIGNATIONS 


e o 
100 20 
9 18 
8 I6 
70 14 
60 4 
50 10 
40 8 
30 6 
20 4 
10 2 


3-75 
















| olo [2 [lo [o | 
16.7 | 16.7{278.9 | 16.7 
| 2 | 28.6 | 14.31409 28.6 
11.1]492.8 
| 6 [54.51 9.1 [496.0 | 54.5 | 
| 7 | 58.3] 8.3 [483.9 | 58.3 
8 | ee (7.7 1474.3 | 61.6 
| 9 | 64.3]7.1 [456.5 | 64.3] 
66.7 
| 20/80 [4 [320 [80 | 
248.5 
195.6 | 88.9 
50 | 90.9 | 1.9 [172-7] 90.9) 

(B) 

CHART 





A PARALLEL CIRCUIT is a circuit having more 
than one current path connected to a common 
voltage source. 


RULES FOR PARALLEL D.C. CIRCUITS: 


@e The same voltage exists across each 
branch of a parallel circuit and is equal to the 
source voltage. 


@ The current through a branch of a 
parallel network is inversely proportional to the 
amount of resistance of the branch. 


@ The total current of a parallel circuit is 
equal to the sum of the currents of the 
individual branches of the circuit. 


e@ The total resistance of a parallel circuit is 
equal to the reciprocal of the sum of the 
reciprocals of the individual resistances of the 
circuit. 


@ The total power consumed in a parallel 
circuit is equal to the sum of the power 
consumptions of the individual resistances. 


THE -SOLUTION _OF- -A 
COMBINATION CIRCUIT is a 
matter of applying the laws 
and rules for series and parallel 
circuits as applicable. 





PATH 2 








202 


ALL PARALLEL CIRCUITS ARE 
COMBINATION CIRCUITS when the internal 
resistance of the source is taken into account. 


REDRAWING_ CIRCUITS 
POR . CLARY” “is 
accomplished in the following 
steps: 


Ll: “Trace the current 
paths in the circuit. 

2. Label the junctions in 
the circuit. 

3. Recognize points 
which are at the same 
potential. 

4. Visualize rearrange- 
ments, “stretching” or “shrink- 
ing’’, of connecting wires. 





5. Redraw the circuit 
into simpler form (through (B) (C) 
stages if necessary). 


EQUIPMENT PROTECTION from short-circuit 
current is accompished by use of fuses and 
other circuit protection devices. 


A VOLTAGE DIVIDER is a series circuit in 
which desired portions of the source voltage 
may be tapped off for use in equipment. Both 
negative and positive voltage can be provided to 
the loads by the proper selection of the 
reference point (ground). 





TT 


ELECTRICAL SAFETY PRECAUTIONS must 
be observed. A fatal shock can occur from 0.1 
ampere of current. Voltages as low as 30 volts 
have been recorded as causing sufficient current 
to be fatal. 


ALL LIVE ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS shall be 
treated as potential hazards at all times. 


ELECTRONIC OR ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 


discovered to be faulty or unsafe should be 
reported immediately to proper authority. 


ELECTRICAL OR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 


should be used and repaired by authorized 
personnel only. 


A CO, EXTINGUISHER should be used to 
extinguish electrical fires. 


FIRST AID FOR ELECTRICAL SHOCK 


includes the following actions: 


@ Remove the victim from the source of 
the shock. 


@ Check the victim to see if the victim is 
breathing. 


@ If the victim is not breathing, give 
artifical ventilation. The preferred method is 
mouth-to-mouth. 


@ CPR may be necessary if the heartbeat 
has stopped, but do not attempt this unless you 
have been trained in its use. OBTAIN MEDICAL 
ASSISTANCE AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. 


3-78 


APPENDIX | 


GLOSSARY 


AMMETER.—An instrument for measuring 
the amount of electron flow in amperes. 


AMPERE.—The unit of electrical 


current. 


basic 


ANODE.—A _ positive electrode of an 
electrochemical device (such as a primary or 
secondary electric cell) toward which th 
negative ions are drawn. ; 


ATTRACTION.—The force that tends to 
make two. objects approach each _ other. 
Attraction exists between two unlike magnetic 
poles (North and South) or between two unlike 
static charges (plus and minus). 


BATTERY.—A_ device for 
chemical energy into electrical energy. 


converting 


BATTERY CAPACITY.—The amount of 
energy available from a battery. Battery capacity 
is expressed in ampere-hours. 


BLEEDER CURRENT.—The _ current 
through a bleeder resistor. In a voltage divider, 
bleeder current is usually determined by the 10 
percent rule of thumb. 


BLEEDER RESISTOR.—A resistor which is 
used to draw a fixed current. 


BRANCH.—An individual current path in a 
parallel circuit. 


CATHODE.—The = general 
negative electrode. 


name for any 


Al-1 


CELL.—A _ single unit that transforms 
chemical energy into electrical energy. Batteries 
are made up of cells. 


CHARGE.—Represents electrical energy. A 
material having an excess of electrons is said to 
have a negative charge. A material having a 
deficiency of electrons is said to have a positive 
charge. 


CIRCUIT.—The complete path of an electric 
current. 


CIRCULAR MIL.—An area equal to that of 
a circle with a diameter of 0.001 inch. It is used 
for measuring the cross-sectional area of wires. 


COMBINATION CIRCUIT.—A series-parallel 
circuit. 


CONDUCTANCE.—The ability of a material 
to conduct or carry an electric current. It is the 
reciprocal of the resistance of the material, and 
is expressed in mhos or siemans. 


CONDUCTIVITY.—Ease with which 
substance transmits electricity. 


a 


CONDUCTOR.—(1) A material with a large 
number of free electrons. (2) A material which 
easily permits electric current to flow. 


COULOMB.—A measure of the quantity of 
electricity. One coulomb is equal to 6.28 x 1018 
electrons. 


COULOMB’S LAW.—Also called the law of 
electric charges or the law of electrostatic 
attraction. Coulomb’s Law states that charged 


bodies attract or repel each other with a force 
that is directly proportional to the product of 
their individual charges and_ inversely 
proportional to the square of the distance 
between them. 


CPR.—Cardio-Pulminary Resuscitation. 


CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA.—The area of a 
‘slice’? of an object. When applied to electrical 
conductors it is usually expressed in circular 
mils. 


CURRENT.—The flow of electrons past a 
reference point. The passage of electrons 
through a conductor. Measured in amperes. 


DEAD SHORT.—A 
minimum resistance. 


short circuit having 


DIELECTRIC FIELD.—The space between 
and around charged bodies in which their 
influence is felt. Also called Electric Field of 
Force or an Electrostatic Field. 


DIRECT CURRENT.—An electric current 
that flows in one direction only. 


DOMAIN THEORY.-—A ttheory of 
magnetism based upon the electron-spin 
principle. Spinning electrons have a magnetic 
field. If more electrons spin in one direction 
than another, the atom is magnetized. 


DRY CELL.—An electrical cell in which the 
electrolyte is not a liquid. In most dry cells the 
electrolyte is in the form of a paste. 


EFFICIENCY.—The ratio of output power 


to input power, generally expressed as a 
percentage. 

ELECTRIC CURRENT.—The flow of 
electrons. 


ELECTRICAL CHARGE.—Symbol Q, q. 
Electric energy stored on or in an object. The 
negative charge is caused by an excess of 
electrons; the positive charge is caused by a 
deficiency of electrons. 


action of 
electrical 


ELECTROCHEMICAL.—The 
converting chemical energy into 
energy. 


ELECTRODE.—The terminal at which 
electricity passes from one medium _ into 
another, such as in an electrical cell where the 
current leaves or returns to the electrolyte. 


ELECTROLYTE.—A solution of a substance 
which is capable of conducting electricity. An 
electrolyte may be in the form of either a liquid 
or a paste. 


ELECTROMAGNET.—An_ electrically 
excited magnet capable of exerting mechanical 
force, or of performing mechanical work. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC.—The_ term 
describing the relationship between electricity 
and magnetism. Having both magnetic and 
electric properties. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION.—The 
production of a voltage in a coil due to a change 
in the number of magnetic lines of force (flux 
linkages) passing through the coil. 


ELECTRON.—The elementary negative 
charge that revolves around the nucleus of an 
atom. 


ELECTRON SHELL.—A group of electrons 
which have a common energy level that forms 
part of the outer structure (shell) of an atom. 


ELECTROSTATIC.—Pertaining to 
electricity at rest, such as charges on an object 
(static electricity). 


ELEMENT.—A substance, in chemistry, that 
cannot be divided into simpler substances by 
any means ordinarily available. 


EMF.—(Electromotive Force) The force 
which causes electricity to flow between two 
points with different electrical charges or when 
there is a difference of potential between the 
two points. The unit of measurement in volts. 


ENERGY.—The ability or capacity to do 
work. 


EQUIVALENT RESISTANCE.—(R,,) A 
resistance that represents the total ohmic values 
of a circuit component or group of circuit 
components. Usually drawn as a single resistor 
when simplifying complex circuits. 


FERROMAGNETIC MATERIAL.—A highly 
magnetic material, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, 
or alloys, make up these materials. 


FIELD OF FORCE.—A term used to 
describe the total force exerted by an 
action-at-a-distance phenomenon such as gravity 
upon matter, electric charges acting upon 
electric charges, magnetic forces acting upon 
other magnets or magnetic materials. 


FIXED RESISTOR.—A resistor having a 
definite resistance value that cannot be adjusted. 


FLUX.—In electrical or electromagnetic 
devices, a general term used to designate 
collectively all the electric or magnetic lines of 
force in a region. 


FLUX DENSITY.—The number of magnetic 
lines of force passing through a given area. 


GAS.—One of the three states of matter 
having no fixed form or volume. (Steam is 
a gas.) 


GRAPH.—A pictorial presentation of the 
relation between two or more variable 
quantities, such as between an applied voltage 
and the current it produces in a circuit. 


GROUND POTENTIAL.—Zero potential 
with respect to the ground or earth. 
HORSEPOWER.—The_ English unit of 


power, equal to work done at the rate of 550 
foot-pounds per second. Equal to 746 watts of 
electrical power. 


HORSESHOE MAGNET.—A permanent 
magnet or electromagnet bent into the shape of 


Al-3 


a horseshoe or having a U-shape to bring the two 
poles near each other. 


HYDROMETER.—An instrument used to 
measure specific gravity. In_ batteries 
hydrometers are used to indicate the state of 
charge by the specific gravity of the electrolyte. 


INDUCED CHARGE.—An electrostatic 
charge produced on an object by the electric 
field that surrounds a nearby object. 


INDUCED CURRENT.—Current due to the 
relative motion between a conductor and a 
magnetic field. 


INDUCED ELECTROMOTIVE 
FORCE.—The electromotive force induced in a 
conductor due to the relative motion between a 
conductor and a magnetic field. 


INDUCED VOLTAGE.—See_ Induced 
Electromotive Force. 
INDUCTION.—The act or process of 


producing voltage by the relative motion of a 
magnetic field across a conductor. 


INFINITE.—(1) Extending indefinitely, 
endless. (2) Boundless having no limits. (3) An 
incaluculable number. 


INSULATION.—(1) A _ material used to 
prevent the leakage of electricity from a 
conductor and to provide mechanical spacing or 
support to protect against accidental contact. 
(2) Use of material in which current flow is 
negligible to surround or separate a conductor to 
prevent loss of current. 


INSULATOR.—(1) Material of such low 
conductivity that the flow of current through it 
can usually be neglected. (2) Device having 
high-electric resistance, used for supporting or 
separating conductors so as to prevent undesired 
flow of current from the conductors to other 
objects. 


IN VERSELY.—Inverted 
position or relationship. 


OF reversed in 


ION.—An electrically charged atom or group 
of atoms. Negative ions have an excess of 
electrons; positive ions have a deficiency of 
electrons. 


IONIZE.—To make an atom or molecule of 
an element lose an electron, as by X-ray 
bombardment, and thus be converted into a 
positive ion. The freed electron may attach itself 
to aneutral atom or molecule to form a negative 
ion. 


JUNCTION.—(1) The connection between 
two or more conductors. (2) The contact 
between two dissimilar metals or materials, as is 
in a thermocouple. 


KILO.—A prefix meaning one thousand. 


KINETIC ENERGY.—Energy which a body 
possesses by virtue of its motion. 


KIRCHHOFP’S LAWS.—(1) The algebraic sum 
of the currents flowing toward any point and the 
current flowing from that point in an electric net- 
work is zero. (2) The algebraic sum of the products 
of the current and resistance in each of the conduc- 
tors in any closed path in a network is equal to the 
algebraic sum of the electromotive forces in the path. 


LAW OF MAGNETISM.-—Like poles repel; 
unlike poles attract. 


LEAD-ACID CELL.—A cell in an ordinary 
storage battery, in which electrodes are grids of 
lead containing an active material consisting of 
certain lead oxides that change in composition 
during charging and discharging. The electrodes 
or plates are immersed in an electrolyte of 
diluted sulfuric acid. 


LINE OF FORCE.—A line in an electric or 
magnetic field that shows the direction of the 
force. 


LIQUID.—One of the three states of matter 
which has a definite volume but no definite 
form. (Water is a liquid.) 


LOAD.—(1) A device through which an 
electric current flows and which changes 


Al-4 


electrical energy into another form. (2) Power 
consumed by a device or circuit in performing 
its function. 


LOCAL ACTION.—A_ continuation of 
current flow within an electrical cell when there 
is no external load. Caused by impurities in the 
electrode. 


MAGNETIC FIELD.—The space in which a 
magnetic force exists. 


MAGNETIC POLES.—The section of a 
magnet where the flux lines are concentrated; 
also where they enter and leave the magnet. 


MAGNETISM.—The property possessed by 
certain materials by which these materials can 
exert mechanical force on neighboring masses of 
magnetic materials; and can cause currents to be 
induced in conducting bodies moving relative to 
the magnetized bodies. 


MATTER.—Any | physical 
possesses mass. 


entity which 


MEGA.—A prefix meaning one million, also 
Meg. 


MHO.—Unit of conductance; the reciprocal 
of the ohm. 


MICRO.—A prefix meaning one-millionth. 
MILLI.—A prefix meaning one-thousandth. 


NEGATIVE ELECTRODE.—A terminal or 
electrode having more electrons than normal. 
Electrons flow out of the negative terminal of a 
voltage source. 


NEGATIVE TEMPERATURE 
COEFFICIENT.—The temperature coefficient 
expressing the amount of reduction in the value 
of a quantity, such as resistance for each degree 
of increase in temperature. 


NETWORK.—A combination of electrical 
components. In a parallel circuit it is composed 
of two or more branches. 


NEUTRAL.-—In a normal condition, hence 
neither positive nor negative. A neutral object 
has a normal number of electrons. 


OHM.—The unit of electrical resistance. It is 
that value of electrical resistance through which 
a constant potential difference of 1 volt across 
the resistance will maintain a current flow of 1 
ampere through the resistance. 


OHMIC VALUE.— Resistance in ohms. 


OHM’S LAW.—The current in an electric 
circuit is directly proportional to the 
electromotive force in the circuit. The most 
common form of the law is E=IR, where E is 
the electromotive force or voltage across the 
circuit, I is the current flowing in the circuit, 
and R is the resistance of the circuit. 


OPEN CIRCUIT.—(1) The condition of an 
electrical circuit caused by the breaking of 
continuity of one or more conductors of the 
circuit; usually an undesired condition. (2) A 
circuit which does not provide a complete path 
for the flow of current. 


PARALLEL CIRCUIT.—Two or more 
electrical devices connected to the same pair of 
terminals so separate currents flow through 
each; electrons have more than one path to 
travel from the negative to the positive terminal. 


PERMEABILITY.—The measure of the 
ability of a material to act as a path for magnetic 
lines of force. 


PHOTOELECTRIC VOLTAGE.—A voltage 
produced by light. 


PICO.—A prefix adopted by the National 
Bureau of Standards meaning 107! ?. 


PIEZOELECTRIC EFFECT.—The effect of 
producing a voltage by placing a stress, either by 
compression, expansion, or twisting, on a crystal 
and, conversely, producing a stress in a crystal 
by applying a voltage to it. 


PLATE.—One of the electrodes in a storage 
battery. 


AI-5 


POLARITY.—(1) The condition in an 
electrical circuit by which the direction of the 
flow of current can be determined. Usually 
applied to batteries and other direct voltage 
sources. (2) Two opposite charges, one positive 
and one negative. (3) A quality of having two 
opposite magnetic poles, one north and the 
other south. 


POLARIZATION.—The effect of hydrogen 
surrounding the anode of a cell which increases 
the internal resistance of the cell. 


POTENTIAL ENERGY.—Energy due to the 
position of one body with respect to another 
body or to the relative parts of the same body. 


POTENTIOMETER.—A 3-terminal resistor 
with one or more sliding contacts, which 
functions as an adjustable voltage divider. 


POWER.-—The rate of doing work or the rate 
of expending energy. The unit of electrical 
power is the watt. 


PRIMARY CELL.—An electrochemical cell 
in which the chemical action eats away one of 
the electrodes, usually the negative electrode. 


RECIPROCAL.—The value obtained by 
dividing the number | by any quantity. 


REFERENCE POINT.—A point in a circuit 
to which all other points in the circuit are 
compared. 


RELUCTANCE.—A measure of the 
opposition that a material offers to magnetic 
lines of force. 


REPULSION.—The mechanical force 
tending to separate bodies having like electrical 
charges or like magnetic polarity. 


RESIDUAL MAGNETISM.—Magnetism 
remaining in a substance after removal of the 
magnetizing force. 


RESISTANCE.—(1) The property of a 
conductor which determines the amount of 
current that will flow as the result of the 


application of a given electromotive force. All 
conductors possess some resistance, but when a 
device is made especially for the purpose of 
limiting current flow, it is called a resistor. A 
resistance of 1 ohm will allow a current of 1 
ampere to flow through it when a potential of 1 
volt is applied. (2) The opposition which a 
device or material offers to the flow of current. 
The effect of resistance is to raise the 
temperature of the material or device carrying 
the current. (3) A circuit element designed to 
offer a predetermined resistance to current flow. 


RESISTOR.—The electrical component 
which offers resistance to the flow of current. It 
may be a coil of fine wire or a composition rod. 


RETENTIVITY.—The ability of a material 
to retain its magnetism. 


RHEOSTAT.—(1) A resistor whose value can 
be varied. (2) A variable resistor which is used 
for the purpose of adjusting the current in a 
circuit. 


SCHEMATIC CIRCUIT DIAGRAM.—A 
circuit diagram in which component parts are 
represented by simple, easily drawn symbols. 
May be called schematic. 


SCHEMATIC SYMBOLS.-—A letter, 
abbreviation, or design used to represent specific 
characteristics or components on a schematic 
diagram. 


SECONDARY CELL.—A cell that can be 
recharged by passing a current through the cell 
in a direction opposite to the discharge current. 


SERIES CIRCUIT.—An arrangement where 
electrical devices are connected so that the total 
current must flow through all the devices; 
electrons have one path to travel from the 
negative terminal to the positive terminal. 


SERIES-PARALLEL CIRCUIT.—A circuit 
that consists of both series and _ parallel 
networks. 


SHELF LIFE.—The period of time that a 
cell or battery may be stored and still be useful. 


AI-6 


SHIELDING.—A metallic covering used to 
prevent magnetic or electromagnetic fields from 
effecting an object. 


SHORT CIRCUIT.—A_ low resistance 
connection between two points of different 
potential in a circuit, usually accidental and 
usually resulting in excessive current flow that 
may cause damage. 


SIEMANS.—The new and preferred term for 
mho. 


SOLID.—One of the three states of matter 
which has definite volume and shape. (Ice is a 
solid.) 


SOURCE VOLTAGE.—The device which 
furnishes the electrical energy used by a load. 


SPECIFIC GRAVITY.—The ratio between 
the density of a substance and that of pure 
water at a given temperature. 


STATIC ELECTRICITY.—Stationary 
electricity that is in the form of a charge. The 
accumulated electric charge on an object. 


SWITCH.—A device to connect, disconnect, 
or change the connections in an electrical 
circuit. 


TAPPED RESISTOR.—A wire-wound, fixed 
resistor having one or more additional terminals 
along its length, generally for voltage-divider 
applications. 


TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT.—The 
amount of change of resistance in a material per 
unit change in temperature. 


TERMINAL.—An electrical connection. 


THERMOCOUPLE.—A _ junction of two 
dissimilar metals that produces a voltage when 
heated. 


TOLERANCE.—(1) The maximum error or 
variation from the standard permissible in a 
measuring instrument. (2) A maximum electrical 
or mechanical variation from specifications 


which can be tolerated without impairing the 
operation of a device. 


TOTAL RESISTANCE.-(R,) The 
equivalent resistance of an entire circuit. For a 


series circuit: Rp =R,; +R, +R3...R, For 
a Sk) see ee aa ot at 
parallel circuits: Ry Ri + R, + R, aie: <9 R, 


UNIDIRECTIONAL.—In one direction only. 


VALENCE.—The measure of the extent to 
which an atom is able to combine directly with 
other atoms. It is believed to depend on the 
number and arrangement of the electrons in the 
outermost shell of the atom. 


VALENCE SHELL.—The electrons 
form the outermost shell of an atom. 


that 


VARIABLE RESISTOR.—A wire-wound or 
composition resistor, the value of which may be 
changed. 


VOLT.—The unit of electromotive force or 
electrical pressure. One volt is the pressure 
required to send | ampere of current through a 
resistance of | ohm. 


VOLTAGE.—(1) The term used to signify 
electrical pressure. Voltage is a force which 
causes current to flow through an electrical 
conductor. (2) The voltage of a circuit is the 
greatest effective difference of potential 
between any two conductors of the circuit. 


AI-7 


VOLTAGE DIVIDER.—A series circuit in 
which desired portions of the source voltage 
may be tapped off for use in equipment. 


VOLTAGE DROP.—The difference in 
voltage between two points. It is the result of 
the loss of electrical pressure as a current flows 
through a resistance. 


WATT.—The practical unit of electrical 
power. It is the amount of power used when one 
ampere of d.c. flows through a resistance of one 
ohm. 


WATTAGE RATING.—A rating expressing 
the maximum power that a device can safely 
handle. 


WATT-HOUR.-—A practical unit of electrical 
energy equal to one watt of power for one hour. 


WEBER’S THEORY.-—A theory of 
magnetism which assumes that all magnetic 
material is composed of many tiny magnets. A 
piece of magnetic material that is magnetized 
has all of the tiny magnets aligned so that the 
north pole of each magnet points in one 
direction. 


WIRE.—A solid or stranded group of solid, 
cylindrical conductors having low resistance to 
current flow, with any associated insulation. 


WORK.-—The product of force and motion. 





APPENDIX II 


LAWS OF EXPONENTS 








The International Symbols Committee has 3,000 + 0.015 = (3 x 103) + (1.5 x 10-2) 
adopted prefixes for denoting decimal multi- 
ples of units. The National Bureau of Stand- = 2x 10° = 200, 000 
ards has followed the recommendations of 
this committee, and has adopted the following To raise an exponential quantity to a power, 
list of prefixes: multiply the exponents. In the language of 
algebra (x™)n = x mn, 
Powers | Pre- 
SEREE of ten | fixes |SYmbols (103)4 = 103%4 - 1912 
1, 000, 000, 000, 000 ~ 2, 5002 = (2.5 x 103)2 = 6,25 x 106 = 6, 250, 000 
1, 000, 000, 000 G* 
1, 000, 000 M* Any number (except zero) raised to the zero 
1, 000 k* power is one. In the language of algebra x0=1 
100 h 
10 da x3 2x31 
oe d 
01 c 104 + 104 =1 
.001 m* 
. 000001 u* Any base with a negative exponent is equal 
. 000000001 n to 1 divided by the base with an equal positive 
TOOUNOREODTR : y exponent. In the language of algebra xa 
. 000000000000000001 a Sy CID a 
EI eS? 00 
102 
To multiply like (with same base) expo- 5a-3 = >, 
nential quantities, add the exponents. In the a 
language of alegebra the rule is a™ x a? = (6a)-1 = aT. 
ean ae ee eee alii 
10°x 10° =10°°” = 10 
3 2 To raise a product to a power, raise each 


0.003 x 825.2 =3x10 ~ x 8.252 x 10 


= 24.756 x 10°! = 2.4756 


To divide exponential quantities, subtract 


factor of the product to that power. 


(2 x 10)2 = 22 x 102 


the exponents. In the language of algebra the 3, 000% = (3 x 103)3 = 27 x 109 
rule is 
To find the nth root of an exponential quantity, 
a ali=f oF divide the exponent by the index of the root. 
an Thus, the nth root of aM = qam/n, 
Vx6 = x6/2 = x3 


108 102 = 106 3 
64 x 103 = 4 x 10 =40 


*Generally used with electrical quantities. 


All-1 


APPENDIX Ill 


SQUARE AND SQUARE ROOTS 


1.000 9.0000 
1.414 9.0554 
1.732 9.1104 
2.000 9.1652 
2.236 9.2195 


2.449 9.2736 
2.646 ; 9.3274 
2.828 ; 9.3808 
3.000 9.4340 
3.162 9.4868 


3.3166 9.5394 
3.4641 9.5917 
3.6056 : 9.6437 
3.7417 9.6954 
3.8730 9.7468 


4.0000 9.7980 
4.1231 9.8489 
4.2426 9.8995 
4.3589 9.9499 
4.4721 10.0000 


4.5826 10.0499 
4.6904 10.0995 
4.7958 10.1489 
4.8990 10.1980 
5.0000 10.2470 


5.0990 10.2956 
5.1962 10.3441 
5.2915 10.3923 
5.3852 10.4403 
5.4772 10.4881 


5.5678 10.5357 
5.6569 10,5830 
5.7447 10.6301 
5.8310 10.6771 
5.9161 10,7238 


6.0000 10.7703 
6.0828 10.8167 
6.1644 10, 8628 
6.2450 10. 9087 
6.3246 10.9545 





For numbers up to 120. For larger numbers divide into factors smaller than 120. 


Examples: V225 and V16200 


225 = 5x45 16200 = 100x81x2 
V225 = V5 x V45_ V16200 = VY100 x V81 x V2 
V225 = 2.236 x 6.7082 V16200 = 10x 9x 1.414 
V225 = 15 V16200 = 127.26 


AIll-1 


APPENDIX IV 


COMPARISON OF UNITS IN ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC 
CIRCUITS; AND CARBON RESISTOR SIZE 
COMPARISON BY WATTAGE RATING 







Comparison of Units in Electric and Magnetic Circuits 


Electric circuit 


Volt, E, or e.m.f. 







Ampere, I 
Ohms, R 










Ohm's law, I == 
Volts per cm. of 
length. 


Current density— 
for example, 
amperes per em2, 





Magnetic circuit 


Gilberts, F, or m.m.f. 
Flux, @ , in maxwells 


Reluctance, R 


Rowland's law, ® = — 
H = #:207IN gilberts 


per centimeter of length. 


Flux density—for example, 
lines per cm.2 , or gausses. 


Carbon Resistor Size Comparison by Wattage Rating 


ip as 
= 
——_— 
—_ 
i — 


AIV-1 


1/8 WATT 


1/4 WATT 


72 WATT 


WATT 


2 WATT 


APPENDIX V 
USEFUL FORMULAS FOR D.C. CIRCUITS 


Ohm’s Law for D.C. Circuits Resistors in Parallel 


I Lakin dee + Ss JE Two resistors 
7 Ry iB R 
— RR, 
R==£ eke = E? Ry ~ 1 + 
I |? P 
More than two 
Ape. o 
E=IR= I yPR 


l 


l | l 
me +R tR Pee 
aye ee ch eas 
P =EI= eo °K Where R = resistance in ohms, 
. = current in amperes, 
Resistors in Series 


E = potential across R in volts, 
Ry =R, +R, +..-.R, P = power in watts 


OHM’S LAW FORMULAS FOR D.C. CIRCUITS 


Known 


Formulas for Determining Unknown Values of . . 


Values 








INDEX 


A 


Artifical magnets, 1-13, 1-14 
Atoms, matter, 1-4 to 1-8 


energy levels, 1-5 
ionization, 1-8 

shells and subshells, 1-6 
valence, 1-7 


Batteries, 2-3 to 2-25 


cell, 2-3, 2-4 
container, 2-4 
electrodes, 2-3 
electrolyte, 2-4 
primary cell, 2-4 
secondary cell, 2-4 


electrochemical action, 2-4 to 2-8 
local action, 2-7, 2-8 
polarization of the cell, 2-7 
primary cell chemistry, 2-5 
secondary cell chemistry, 2-6 


summary, 2-19 to 2-25 


types of cells, 2-8 to 2-19 
batteries, 2-12 
battery charging, 2-18, 2-19 
battery construction, 2-14, 2-15 
battery maintenance, 2-15 
capacity and rating of batteries, 2-17 
combining cells, 2-12 to 2-14 
primary dry, 2-8 to 2-11 
secondary wet, 2-11 to 2-12 


I-] 


Battery charging, 2-18, 2-19 
charging rate, 2-19 
charging time, 2-19 
equalizing, 2-18 
fast, 2-19 
floating, 2-19 
gassing, 2-19 
initial, 2-18 
normal, 2-18 


Cell, batteries, 2-3, 2-4 
Cells, types of, 2-8 to 2-19 
batteries, 2-12 
battery charging, 2-18, 2-19 
battery construction, 2-14, 2-15 
battery maintenance, 2-15 to 2-17 
hydrometer, 2-16 
other maintenance, 2-17 
safety precautions with batteries, 2-17 
capacity and rating of batteries, 2-17 
combining cells, 2-12 to 2-14 
primary dry, 2-8 to 2-11 
secondary wet, 2-11 to 2-12 
Charged bodies, electrostatics, 1-11 
Charges, electrical, 1-23, 1-24 — 
Circuit terms and characteristics, 3-25 to 3-31 
open circuit, 3-27 
power transfer and efficiency, 3-29 to 3-31 
reference point, 3-25 to 3-27 
short circuit, 3-27 
source resistance, 3-28 


Color code, simplifying, 1-39, 1-40 
Combination-circuit problems, solving, 
3-46 to 3-51 


Combining cells, 2-12 to 2-14 
series-connected cells, 2-12 
series-parallel-connected cells, 2-13, 2-14 


Composition of resistors, 1-36 

Conductors, semiconductors, and insulators, 1-8 
Container, cell, batteries, 2-4 

Coulomb’s Law of Charges, 1-11 

Current, electric, 1-30 to 1-32 


D 


Direct current, 3-2 to 3-78 
basic electric current, 3-2 
schematic representation, 3-2 
circuit terms and characteristics, 
3-25 to 3-31 
open circuit, 3-27 
power transfer and efficiency, 
3-29 to 3-31 
reference point, 3-25 to 3-27 
short circuit, 3-27 
source resistance, 3-28 
electrical safety, 3-66 to 3-68 
danger signals, 3-67 
electrical fires, 3-68 
equivalent circuit techniques, 3-66 
first aid for electric shock, 3-68 to 3-70 
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, 3-21 to 3-25 
application, 3-22 
polarity of voltage, 3-21 
Ohm’s law, 3-3 to 3-7 
application, 3-4 to 3-6 
graphical analysis of the basic 
circuit, 3-6, 3-7 
parallel d.c. circuits, 3-31 to 3-46 
parallel circuit characteristics, 
3-31 to 3-42 
solving parallel circuit problems, 
3-42 to 3-46 
power, 3-7 to 3-12 
power conversion and efficiency, 
3-11, 3-12 
power rating, 3-10, 3-11 
series d.c. circuits, 3-12 to 3-21 
analysis, 3-18 to 3-21 
characteristics, 3-13 
summary, 3-17 


I-2 


Direct current—Continued 
series-parallel d.c. circuits, 3-46 to 3-56 
effects of open and short circuits, 
3-54 to 3-56 
redrawing circuits for clarity, 
3-51 to 3-53 
solving combination-circuit problems, 
3-46 to 3-51 
summary, 3-70 to 3-78 
voltage dividers, 3-56 to 3-65 
multiple-load voltage dividers, 
3-59 to 3-61 
positive and negative voltage 
requirements, 3-62 to 3-64 
power, 3-61 
practical application, 3-64, 3-65 


Directed drift electric current, 1-31 


Domain Theory, magnetism, 1-17 


Electric current, basic, 3-2 
schematic representation, 3-2 


Electrical energy, 1-22 to 1-40 

conductance, 1-35 

electric current, 1-30 to 1-32 
directed drift, 1-31 
magnitude of current flow, 1-32 
measurement of current, 1-32 
random drift, 1-30 

electrical charges, 1-23 to 1-24 

electrical resistance, 1-33 to 1-35 
factors that affect resistance, 

1-33 to 1-35 

electrical resistors, 1-36 to 1-40 
composition of resistors, 1-36 
fixed and variable resistors, 1-37 
simplifying the color code, 1-39, 1-40 
standard color code system, 1-38 
wattage rating, 1-37 

how voltage is produced, 1-24 to 1-30 
by chemical action, 1-28 
by friction, 1-25 
by heat, 1-26 
by light, 1-27 
by magnetism, 1-28 to 1-30 
by pressure, 1-25 


Electrical safety, 3-66 to 3-68 
danger signals, 3-67 
electrical fires, 3-68 


Electrochemical action, 2-4 to 2-8 
local action, 2-7, 2-8 
polarization of the cell, 2-7 
primary cell chemistry, 2-5 
secondary cell chemistry, 2-6 


Electrodes, cell, batteries, 2-3 
Electrolyte, cell, batteries, 2-4 


Electrostatics, 1-9 to 1-12 
static electricity 1-9 to 1-12 
charged bodies, 1-11 
Coulomb’s Law of Charges, 1-11 
electric fields, 1-12 
nature of charges, 1-10 


F 


Ferromagnetic materials, 1-13 

First aid for electric shock, 3-68 to 3-70 
Fixed and variable resistors, 1-37 
Formulas, d.c. circuits, AV-1 


G 


Glossary, Al-1 to Al-6 


H 


Hydrometer, battery, 2-16 
K 


Kirchhoff’s voltage law, 3-21 to 3-25 


application, 3-22 
series aiding and opposing sources, 
3-24, 3-25 
polarity of voltage, 3-21 


L 


Law of exponents, AII-1 
Lead acid cell, 2-11 
Lines of force, magnetic fields, 1-18, 1-19 


M 


Magnetism, 1-13 to 1-22 
care of magnets, 1-22 
magnetic effects, 1-19 to 1-21 
magnetic induction, 1-20 
magnetic shielding, 1-21 
magnetic fields, 1-18, 1-19 
lines of force, 1-18, 1-19 
magnetic materials, 1-13 to 1-14 
artifical magnets, 1-13, 1-14 
ferromagnetic materials, 1-13 
natural magnets, 1-13 
magnetic poles, 1-14 to 1-16 
earth’s magnetic poles, 1-15, 1-16 
law of, 1-15 
magnetic shapes, 1-21 
theories of magnetism, 1-16, 1-17 
Domain Theory, 1-17 
Weber’s Theory, 1-16 
Magnitude of current flow, 1-32 
Matter, energy, and electricity, 1-2 to 1-51 
conductors, semiconductors, and 
insulators, 1-8 
electrical energy, 1-22 to 1-40 
conductance, 1-35 
electric current, 1-30 to 1-32 
electrical charges, 1-23, 1-24 
electrical resistance, 1-33 to 1-35 
electrical resistors, 1-36 to 1-40 
how voltage is produced, 1-24 to 1-30 
electrostatics, 1-9 to 1-12 
static electricity, 1-9 to 1-12 
magnetism, 1-13 to 1-22 
care of magnets, 1-22 
magnetic effects, 1-19 to 1-21 
magnetic fields, 1-18, 1-19 
magnetic materials, 1-13 to 1-14 
magnetic poles, 1-14 to 1-16 
magnetic shapes, 1-21 
theories of magnetism, 1-16, 1-17 
matter, 1-3 to 1-8 
atoms, 1-4 to 1-8 
molecules, 1-3 
summary, 1-41 to 1-51 
Measurement of current, 1-32 
Mercuric-oxide zinc cell, 2-9, 2-10 
Molecules, matter, 1-3 
Multiple-load voltage dividers, 3-59 to 3-61 


Natural magnets, 1-13 
Nickel-cadmium cell, 2-11 


O 


Ohm’s law, 3-3 to 3-7 
application, 3-4 to 3-6 
graphical analysis of the basic circuit, 
3-6, 3-7 
Open circuit, 3-27 


Parallel d.c. circuits, 3-31 to 3-46 
characteristics, 3-31 to 3-42 
current, 3-33 to 3-37 
equivalent circuits, 3-41 
power, 3-40 
resistance, 3-37 to 3-40 
rules, 3-41 
voltage, 3-31 to 3-33 
solving parallel circuit problems, 
3-42 to 3-46 
Polarization of the cell, 2-7 
Positive and negative voltage requirements, 
3-62 to 3-64 
Power, direct current, 3-7 to 3-12 
power conversion and efficiency, 3-11, 3-12 
power rating, 3-10, 3-11 
Power transfer and efficiency, circuit, 
3-29 to 3-31 
Power, voltage dividers, 3-61 
Primary dry cell, 2-8 to 2-11 
construction of a dry cell, 2-8 
mercuric-oxide zinc cell, 2-9 to 2-10 
other types, 2-10 
Primary cell, batteries, 2-4 
Primary cell, chemistry, 2-5 


R 


Random drift electric current, 1-30 
Redrawing circuits for clarity, 3-51 to 3-53 


1-4 


Reference point, circuit, 3-25 to 3-27 


Resistance, electrical, 1-33 to 1-35 


Secondary wet cells, 2-11 to 2-12 
lead-acid cell, 2-11 
nickel-cadmium cell, 2-11 
silver-cadmium cell, 2-12 
silver-zinc cells, 2-11 


Secondary cell, batteries, 2-4 
Secondary cell chemistry, 2-6 
Series-connected cells, 2-12 


Series d.c. circuits, 3-12 to 3-21 
analysis, 3-18 to 3-21 
characteristics, 3-13 to 3-17 

current, 3-14 

power, 3-16 

resistance, 3-13 

voltage, 3-14 to 3-16 
summary, 3-17 

rules for series, 3-18 


Series-parallel-connected cells, 2-13, 2-14 


Series-parallel d.c. circuits, 3-46 to 3-56 
effects of open and short circuits, 
3-54 to 3-56 
redrawing circuits for clarity, 3-51 to 3-53 
redrawing a complex circuit, 3-53 
solving combination-circuit problems, 
3-46 to 3-51 
practice circuit problem, 3-49 to 3-51 


Short circuit, 3-27 
Silver-cadmium cell, 2-12 


Silver-zinc cells, 2-11 

Source resistance, 3-28 

Square and square roots, AIII-1 
Standard color code system, 1-38 


V Voltage is produced—Continued 
by heat, 1-26 
by light, 1-27 


Voltage dividers, 3-56 to 3-65 by magnetism, 1-28 to 1-30 
multiple-load voltage dividers, 3-59 to 3-61 by pressure, 1-25 
positive and negative voltage requirements, 
3-62 to 3-64 
power, 3-61 W 


practical application, 3-64, 3-65 
Voltage is produced, 1-24 to 1-30 
by chemical action, 1-28 Wattage rating, 1-37 
by friction, 1-25 Weber’s Theory, magnetism, 1-16 


+ U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 19922— 6 31-080; 4010 3 


I-5 


STUDENT COMMENT SHEET 


THIS FORM MAY BE USED TO SUGGEST IMPROVEMENTS, REPORT COURSE 
ERRORS, OR TO REQUEST HELP IF YOU HAVE DIFFICULTY COMPLETING 


THE COURSE. 
Date 
FROM: SSN 
NAME (Last, first, M.I.) 
RANK, RATE, CIVILIAN 
STREET ADDRESS, APT # 
ZIP CODE 
CITY, STATE 
To: Naval Education and Training Program 


Management Support Activity (Code 0314) 
Pensacola, Florida 32509-5000 


Subj: NEETS MODULE 1, INTRODUCTION TO MATTER, ENERGY, AND DIRECT 
CURRENT, NAVEDTRA B72-01-00-92 


The following comments are hereby submitted: 


PRIVACY ACT STATEMENT 
Under authority of Title 5, USC 301, information regarding your military status is requested to assist in 


processing your comments and prepare a reply. This information will not be divulged, without written 
authorization, to anyone other than those within DOD for official use in determining performance. 


NETPMSA 1550/41 (Rev. 9-91) 


(Fold along dotted line and staple or tape) 


evooeeerereeoeer reese easesreooereereesre sees eoeaeseon eoeoeoevereereeoeeeerereeeaesrse eee reeeereerseeeve eevee 


(Fold along dotted line and staple or tape) 


eee ese nee eee eseereeese ers eae ee Geese Fee e Oe EFF FFeeFeeereseoeeere eee eeoeesrerenesesesesrenees 


DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY 


NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM 
MANAGEMENT SUPPORT ACTIVITY (Code 0314) 
PENSACOLA, FL 32509-5000 


OF FICIAL BUSINESS 
PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE, $300 


NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM 
MANAGEMENT SUPPORT ACTIVITY 


BUILDING 2435 (Code 0314) 
PENSACOLA, FL 32509-5000 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS-URBANA 


UIMENII 1) 


3 0112 105056466 


