
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



Digitized by 



Google 





Digitized by 



Google 



fiWH9er/f» t 
Libra' 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



COLLECTED PAPERS 
ON ACOUSTICS 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



JVttttamm G /* 4L**+> 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 






Digitized by 



Google 



COLLECTED PAPERS 
ON ACOUSTICS 



BY 

WALLACE CLEMENT SABINE 

LATE HOLLIS PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS AND NATURAL PHILOSOPHY 
IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY 



CAMBRIDGE 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD 
Oxford University Press 

1922 



Digitized by 



Google 



COPYRIGHT, 1922 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 



Digitized by 



Google 



* 



PREFACE 

1 his volume aims to contain all the important contributions to the 
subject of acoustics from the pen of the late Professor W. C. Sabine. 
The greater part of these papers appeared in a number of different 
architectural journals and were therefore addressed to a changing 
audience, little acquainted with physical science, and to whose mem- 
bers the subject was altogether novel. Under these circumstances a 

*J certain amount of repetition was not only unavoidable, but desirable. 

•J Little attempt has been made to reduce this repetition but in one 

* case an omission seemed wise. The material contained in the author's 

* earliest papers on acoustics, which appeared in the Proceedings of 

* the American Institute of Architects in 1898, is repeated almost 
completely in the paper which forms the first chapter of this volume; 
it has, therefore, been omitted from this collection with the exception 
of a few extracts which have been inserted as footnotes in the first 
chapter. 

No apology is made for the preservation of the paper from the 
. Proceedings of the Franklin Institute, for, though much of the ma- 

^ terial therein is to be found in the earlier chapters of this volume, the 

^ article is valuable as a summary, and as such it is recommended 

to the reader who desires to obtain a general view of the subject. 
£ In addition to the papers already in print at the time of the 

^ author's death the only available material consisted of the manu- 

> scripts of two articles, one on Echoes, the other on Whispering Gal- 

^ leries, and the full notes on four of the lectures on acoustics delivered 

at the Sorbonne in the spring of 1917. Of this material, the first 
paper was discarded as being too fragmentary; the second, after 
some slight omissions and corrections in the text made necessary by 
the loss of a few of the illustrations, forms Chapter 11 of this volume; 
an abstract of so much of the substance of the lecture notes as had 
not already appeared in print has been made, of which part is to be 
found in the form of an Appendix and part is contained in some of the 
following paragraphs. 

The reader may often be puzzled by reference to works about to be 
published but of which no trace is to be found in this volume. It is 



394822 



Digitized by 



Google 



vi PREFACE 

a melancholy fact that these papers were either never written or else 
were destroyed by their author; no trace of them can be found. The 
extent of the labors of which no adequate record remains may best be 
judged from the following extracts taken from the notes on the Paris 
lectures just mentioned. 

" On the one hand we have the problem (Reverberation) which we 
have been discussing up to the present moment, and on the other 
the whole question of the transmission of sound from one room to 
another, through the walls, the doors, the ceiling and the floors; and 
the telephonic transmission, if I may so call it, through the length of 
the structure. It is five years ago since this second problem was first 
attacked and though the research is certainly not complete, some 
ground has been covered. A quantitatively exact method has been 
established and the transmission of sound through about twenty 
different kinds of partitions has been determined. 

" For example : Transmission of sound through four kinds of doors 
has been studied; two of oak, two of pine, one of each kind was 
paneled and was relatively thin and light; one of each kind was very 
heavy, nearly four centimetres thick; through four kinds of windows, 
one of plate glass, one with common panes, one double with an air 
space of two centimetres between, one with small panes set in lead 
such as one sees in churches ; through brick walls with plaster on both 
sides; through walls of tile similarly plastered; through walls of a 
character not common in France and which we call gypsum block; 
through plaster on lath; through about ten different kinds of sound 
insulators, patented, and sold in quantities representing hundreds of 
thousands of dollars each year, yet practically without value, since 
one can easily converse through six thicknesses of these substances 
and talk in a low tone through three, while a single thickness is that 
ordinarily employed. The behavior of an air space has been studied, 
the effect of the thickness of this air space, and the result of filling 
the space with sand, saw-dust and asbestos. In spite of all this, the 
research is far from complete and many other forms of construction 
must be investigated before it will be possible to publish J:he results; 
these determinations must be made with the greatest exactness as 
very important interests are involved. . . . 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE vii 

" The research is particularly laborious because resonance has a 
special importance in a great number of forms of construction. It is a 
much greater factor in transmission than in absorption. 

" I shall not enlarge on this subject here for two reasons: first, I 
believe that it is not of special interest, at least, in its present state, 
and second, because it is not proper to present a formal discussion of 
this subject while the research is still unfinished." 

The last paragraph is characteristic. The severity of the criti- 
cism which Professor Sabine always applied to his own productions 
increased with time, and it is to this extreme self-criticism and re- 
pression that we must ascribe the loss of much invaluable scientific 
material. 

Thanks are due to The American Institute of Architects and to 
the editors of The American Architect, The Brickbuilder, The En- 
gineering Record, and The Journal of the Franklin Institute, for 
permission to reprint the articles which originally appeared in their 
respective Journals. 

The Editor is also greatly obliged to Dr. Paul Sabine and Mr. Clif- 
ford M. Swan for a great deal of valuable material, and to Mr. Frank 
Chouteau Brown for his assistance in seeing the book through the 
press. He is particularly indebted to his colleague Professor F. A. 
Saunders for his invaluable aid in all matters touching the correct 
presentation of the material of this volume. 

Theodore Lyman 

JEFFERSON PHYSICAL LABORATORY 

Harvard University 

June, 1921 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

1. Reverberation 3 

[The American Architect, 1900] 

2. The Accuracy of Musical Taste in Regard to Architectural 

Acoustics. The Variation in Reverberation with Variation in 
Pitch 69 

[Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Vol. xui, No. % June* 
1906] 

3. Melody and the Origin of the Musical Scale 107 

[Vice-Presidential Address, Section B, American Association for the Advancement 

of Science, Chicago, 1907] 

4. Effects of Air Currents and of Temperature 117 

[Engineering Record, June, 1910] 

5. Sense of Loudness 129 

[Contributions from the Jefferson Physical Laboratory, Vol. vin, 1910] 

6. The Correction of Acoustical Difficulties . . 131 

[The Architectural Quarterly of Harvard University, March, 1912] 

7. Theatre Acoustics 163 

[The American Architect, Vol. civ, p. 257] 

8. Building Material and Musical Pitch 199 

The Brickbuilder, Vol. xxm, No. 1, January, 1914] 

9. Architectural Acoustics 219 

[Journal of the Franklin Institute, January, 1915] 

10. Insulation Sound 237 

[The Brickbuilder, Vol. xxiv, No. 2, February, 1915] 

11. Whispering Galleries 255 

Appendix 277 

On the Measurement of the Intensity of Sound and on the Reaction of the Room 
upon the Sound 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



COLLECTED PAPERS 
ON ACOUSTICS 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



REVERBERATION 1 

INTRODUCTION 

1 he following investigation was not undertaken at first by choice, 
but devolved on the writer in 1895 through instructions from the 
Corporation of Harvard University to propose changes for remedy- 
ing the acoustical difficulties in the lecture-room of the Fogg Art 
Museum, a btulding that had jukt been completed. About two years 
were spent in experimenting on this room, and permanent changes 
were then made. Almost immediately afterward it became certain 
that a new Boston Music Hall would be erected, and the questions 
arising in the consideration of its plans forced a not unwelcome con- 
tinuance of the general investigation. 

No one can appreciate the condition of architectural acoustics — 
the science of sound as applied to buildings — who has not with a 
pressing case in hand sought through the scattered literature for 
some safe guidance. Responsibility in a large and irretrievable ex- 
penditure of money compels a careful consideration, and emphasizes 
the meagerness and inconsistency of the current suggestions. Thus 
the most definite and often repeated statements are such as the 
following, that the dimensions of a room should be in the ratio 

2 : 3 : 5, or according to some writers, 1:1:2, and others, 2:3:4; 
it is probable that the basis of these suggestions is the ratios of the 
harmonic intervals in music, but the connection is untraced and re- 
mote. Moreover, such advice is rather difficult to apply; should one 
measure the length to the back or to the front of the galleries, to the 
back or the front of the stage recess? Few rooms have a flat roof, 
where should the height be measured? One writer, who had seen the 
Mormon Temple, recommended that all auditoriums be elliptical. 
Sanders Theatre is by far the best auditorium in Cambridge and is 
semicircular in general shape, but with a recess that makes it almost 
anything; and, on the other hand, the lecture-room in the Fogg Art 

1 The American Architect and The Engineering Record, 1900. 
8 



Digitized by 



Google 



4 REVERBERATION 

Museum is also semicircular, indeed was modeled after Sanders 
Theatre, and it was the worst. But Sanders Theatre is in wood and 
the Fogg lecture-room is plaster on tile; one seizes on this only to be 
immediately reminded that Sayles Hall in Providence is largely 
lined with wood and is bad. Curiously enough, each suggestion is 
advanced as if it alone were sufficient. As examples of remedies, 
may be cited the placing of vases about the room for the sake of 
resonance, wrongly supposed to have been the object of the vases in 
Greek theatres, and the stretching of wires, even now a frequent 
though useless device. 

The problem is necessarily complex, and each room presents many 
conditions, each of which contributes to the result in a greater or less 
degree according to circumstances. To take justly into account these 
varied conditions, the solution of the problem should be quantitative, 
not merely qualitative; and to reach its highest usefulness it should 
be such that its application can precede, not follow, the construction 
of the building. 

In order that hearing may be good in any auditorium, it is neces- 
sary that the sound should be sufficiently loud; that the simultane- 
ous components of a complex sound should maintain their proper 
relative intensities; and that the successive sounds in rapidly mov- 
ing articulation, either of speech or music, should be clear and dis- 
tinct, free from each other and from extraneous noises. These three 
are the necessary, as they are the entirely sufficient, conditions for 
good hearing. The architectural problem is, correspondingly, three- 
fold, and in this introductory paper an attempt will be made to 
sketch and define briefly the subject on this basis of classification. 
Within the three fields thus defined is comprised without exception 
the whole of architectural acoustics. 

1. Loudness. — Starting with the simplest conceivable auditorium 
— a level and open plain, with the ground bare and hard, a single 
person for an audience — it is clear that the sound spreads in a hemi- 
spherical wave diminishing in intensity as it increases in size, pro- 
portionally. If, instead of being bare, the ground is occupied by a 
large audience, the sound diminishes in intensity even more rapidly, 
being now absorbed. The upper part of the sound-wave escapes un- 
affected, but the lower edge — the only part that is of service to an 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 5 

audience on a plain — is rapidly lost. The first and most obvious 
improvement is to raise the speaker above the level of the audience; 
the second is to raise the seats at the rear; and the third is to place a 
wall behind the speaker. The result is most attractively illustrated 
in the Greek theatre. These changes being made, still all the sound 
rising at any considerable angle is lost through the opening above, 
and only part of the speaker's efforts serve the audience. When to 
this auditorium a roof is added the average intensity of sound 
throughout the room is greatly increased, especially that of sustained 
tones; and the intensity of sound at the front and the rear is more 
nearly equalized. If, in addition, galleries be constructed in order to 
elevate the distant part of the audience and bring it nearer to the 
front, we have the general form of the modern auditorium. The 
problem of calculating the loudness at different parts of such an audi- 
torium is, obviously, complex, but it is perfectly determinate, and as 
soon as the reflecting and absorbing power of the audience and of the 
various wall-surfaces are known it can be solved approximately. 
Under this head will be considered the effect of sounding-boards, the 
relative merits of different materials used as reflectors, the refrac- 
tion of sound, and the influence of the variable temperature of 
the air through the heating and ventilating of the room, and similar 
subjects. 

2. Distortion of Complex Sounds: Interference and Resonance. — 
In discussing the subject of loudness the direct and reflected sounds 
have been spoken of as if always reinforcing each other when they 
come together. A moment's consideration of the nature of sound 
will show that, as a matter of fact, it is entirely possible for them to 
oppose each other. The sounding body in its forward motion sends 
off a wave of condensation, which is immediately followed through 
the air by a wave of rarefaction produced by the vibrating body as 
it moves back. These two waves of opposite character taken to- 
gether constitute a sound-wave. The source continuing to vibrate, 
these waves follow each other in a train. Bearing in mind this alter- 
nating character of sound, it is evident that should the sound travel- 
ing by different paths — by reflection from different walls — come 
together again, the paths being equal in length, condensation will 
arrive at the same time as condensation, and reenforce it, and rare- 



Digitized by 



Google 



6 REVERBERATION 

faction will, similarly, reinforce rarefaction. But should one path 
be a little shorter than the other, rarefaction by one and condensa- 
tion by the other may arrive at the same time, and at this point 
there will be comparative silence. The whole room may be mapped 
out into regions in which the sound is loud and regions in which it 
is feeble. When there are many reflecting surfaces the interference 
is much more complex. When the note changes in pitch the inter- 
ference system is entirely altered in character. A single incident 
will serve to illustrate this point. There is a room in the Jefferson 
Physical Laboratory, known as the constant-temperature room, 
that has been of the utmost service throughout these experiments. 
It is in the center of one wing of the building, is entirely under 
ground, even below the level of the basement of the building, has 
separate foundations and double walls, each wall being very thick 
and of brick in cement. It was originally designed for investiga- 
tions in heat requiring constant temperature, and its peculiar loca- 
tion and construction were for this purpose. As it was not so in 
use, however, it was turned over to these experiments in sound, and 
a room more suitable could not be designed. From its location and 
construction it is extremely quiet. Without windows, its walls, 
floor, and ceiling — all of solid masonry — are smooth and un- 
broken. The single door to the room is plain and flush with the 
wall. The dimensions of the room are, on the floor, 4.27 X 6.10 
meters; its height at the walls is 2.54 meters, but the ceiling is 
slightly arched, giving a height at the center of 3.17 meters. This 
room is here described at length because it will be frequently re- 
ferred to, particularly in this matter of interference of sound. While 
working in this room with a treble c gemshorn organ pipe blown by 
a steady wind-pressure, it was observed that the pitch of the pipe 
apparently changed an octave when the observer straightened up 
in his chair from a position in which he was leaning forward. The 
explanation is this: The organ pipe did not give a single pure note, 
but gave a fundamental treble c accompanied by several overtones, 
of which the strongest was in this case the octave above. Each note 
in the whole complex sound had its own interference system, which, 
as long as the sound remained constant, remained fixed in position. 
It so happened that at these two points the region of silence for one 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 7 

note coincided with the region of reinforcement in the other, and 
vice versa. Thus the observer in one position heard the fundamental 
note, and in the other, the first overtone. The change was exceed- 
ingly striking, and as the notes remained constant, the experiment 
could be tried again and again. With a little search it was possible 
to find other points in the room at which the same phenomenon 
appeared, but generally in less perfection. The distortion of the 
relative intensities of the components of a chord that may thus be 
produced is evident. Practically almost every sound of the voice 
in speech and song, and of instrumental music, even single-part 
music so-called, is more or less complex, and, therefore, subject to 
this distortion. It will be necessary, later, to show under what cir- 
cumstances this phenomenon is a formidable danger, and how it 
may be guarded against, and under what circumstances it is negli- 
gible. It is evident from the above occurrence that it may be a most 
serious matter, for in this room two persons side by side can talk 
together with but little comfort, most of the difficulty being caused 
by the interference of sound. 

There is another phenomenon, in its occurrence allied to inter- 
ference, but in nature distinct — the phenomenon of resonance. 
Both, however, occasion the same evil — the distortion of that nice 
adjustment of the relative intensities of the components of the 
complex sounds that constitute speech and music. The phenome- 
non of interference just discussed merely alters the distribution of 
sound in the room, causing the intensity of any one pure sustained 
note to be above or below the average intensity at near points. 
Resonance, on the other hand, alters the total amount of sound in 
the whole room and always increases it. This phenomenon is 
noticeable at times in using the voice in a small room, or even in 
particular locations in a large room. Perhaps its occurrence is most 
easily observed in setting up a large church organ, where the pipes 
must be readjusted for the particular space in which the organ is to 
stand, no matter with how much care the organ may have been 
assembled and adjusted before leaving the factory. The general 
phenomenon of resonance is of very wide occurrence, not merely in 
acoustics but in more gross mechanics as well, as the vibration of a 
bridge to a properly timed tread, or the excessive rolling of a boat 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 REVERBERATION 

in certain seas. The principle is the same in all cases. The follow- 
ing conception is an easy one to grasp, and is closely analogous to 
acoustical resonance: If the palm of the hand be placed on the 
center of the surface of water in a large basin or tank and quickly 
depressed and raised once it will cause a wave to spread, which, 
reflected at the edge of the water, will return, in part at least, to 
the hand. If, just as the wave reaches the hand, the hand repeats 
its motion with the same force, it will reinforce the wave traveling 
over the water. Thus reinforced, the wave goes out stronger than 
before and returns again. By continued repetition of the motion 
of the hand so timed as to reinforce the wave as it returns, the wave 
gets to be very strong. Instead of restraining the hand each time 
until the wave traveling to and fro returns to it, one may so time 
the motion of the hand as to have several equal waves following 
each other over the water, and the hand each time reenforcing the 
wave that is passing. This, obviously, can be done by dividing the 
interval of time between the successive motions of the hand by any 
whole number whatever, and moving the hand with the frequency 
thus defined. The result will be a strong reenf orcement of the waves. 
If, however, the motions of the hand be not so timed, it is obvious 
that the reSnf orcement will not be perfect, and, in fact, it is possible 
to so time it as exactly to oppose the returning waves. The appli- 
cation of this reasoning to the phenomenon of sound, where the air 
takes the place of the water and the sounding body that of the hand, 
needs little additional explanation. Some notes of a complex sound 
are reenforced, some are not, and thus the quality is altered. This 
phenomenon enters in two forms in the architectural problem: there 
may be either resonance of the air in the room or resonance of the 
walls, and the two cases must receive separate discussion; their 
effects are totally different. 

The word "resonance" has been used loosely as synonymous 
with "reverberation," and even with "echo," and is so given in 
some of the more voluminous but less exact popular dictionaries. 
In scientific literature the term has received a very definite and 
precise application to the phenomenon, wherever it may occur, of 
the growth of a vibratory motion of an elastic body under periodic 
forces timed to its natural rates of vibration. A word having this 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 9 

significance is necessary; and it is very desirable that the term 
should not, even popularly, by meaning many things, cease to mean 
anything exactly. 

3. Confusion: Reverberation, Echo and Extraneous Sounds. — 
Sound, being energy, once produced in a confined space, will con- 
tinue until it is either transmitted by the boundary walls, or is 
transformed into some other kind of energy, generally heat. This 
process of decay is called absorption. Thus, in the lecture-room of 
Harvard University, in which, and in behalf of which, this investi- 
gation was begun, the rate of absorption was so small that a word 
spoken in an ordinary tone of voice was audible for five and a half 
seconds afterwards. During this time even a very deliberate 
speaker would have uttered the twelve or fifteen succeeding sylla- 
bles. Thus the successive enunciations blended into a loud sound, 
through which and above which it was necessary to hear and dis- 
tinguish the orderly progression of the speech. Across the room 
this could not be done; even near the speaker it could be done only 
with an effort wearisome in the extreme if long maintained. With 
an audience filling the room the conditions were not so bad, but 
still not tolerable. This may be regarded, if one so chooses, as a 
process of multiple reflection from walls, from ceiling and from floor, 
first from one and then another, losing a little at each reflection 
until ultimately inaudible. This phenomenon will be called re- 
verberation, including as a special case the echo. It must be ob- 
served, however, that, in general, reverberation results in a mass of 
sound filling the whole room and incapable of analysis into its dis- 
tinct reflections. It is thus more difficult to recognize and impossible 
to locate. The term echo will be reserved for that particular case 
in which a short, sharp sound is distinctly repeated by reflection, 
either once from a single surface, or several times from two or more 
surfaces. In the general case of reverberation we are only concerned 
with the rate of decay of the sound. In the special case of the echo 
we are concerned not merely with its intensity, but with the interval 
of time elapsing between the initial sound and the moment it 
reaches the observer. In the room mentioned as the occasion of 
this investigation, no discrete echo was distinctly perceptible, and 
the case will serve excellently as an illustration of the more general 



Digitized by 



Google 



1© REVERBERATION 

type of 'Reverberation. After preliminary gropings, 1 first in the 
literature' and then with several optical devices for measuring the 
intensity of sound, both were abandoned, the latter for reasons that 
will be explained later. Instead, the rate of decay was measured by 
measuring what was inversely proportional to it — the duration of 
audibility of the reverberation, or, as it will be called here, the dura- 
tion of audibility of the residual sound. These experiments may be 
explained to advantage even in this introductory paper, for they 
will give more clearly than would abstract discussion an idea of the 
nature of reverberation. Broadly considered, there are two, and 
only two, variables in a room — shape including size, and materials 
including furnishings. In designing an auditorium an architect can 
give consideration to both; in repair work for bad acoustical con- 
ditions it is generally impracticable to change the shape, and only 
variations in materials and furnishings are allowable. This was, 
therefore, the line of work in this case. It was evident that, other 
things being equal, the rate at which the reverberation would dis- 
appear was proportional to the rate at which the sound was ab- 
sorbed. The first work, therefore, was to determine the relative 
absorbing power of various substances. With an organ pipe as a 
constant source of sound, and a suitable chronograph for recording, 
the duration of audibility of a sound after the source had ceased in 
this room when empty was found to be 5.62 seconds. All the cush- 
ions from the seats in Sanders Theatre were then brought over and 
stored in the lobby. On bringing into the lecture-room a number 
of cushions having a total length of 8.2 meters, the duration of 
audibility fell to 5.33 seconds. On bringing in 17 meters the sound 
in the room after the organ pipe ceased was audible for but 4.94 

1 The first method for determining the rate of decay of the sound, and therefore the amount 
of absorption, was by means of a sensitive manometric gas flame measured by a micrometer 
telescope. Later, photographing the flame was tried; but both methods were abandoned, for 
they both showed, what the unaided ear could perceive, that the sound as observed at any 
point in the room died away in a fluctuating manner, passing through maxima and minima. 
Moreover, they showed what the unaided ear had not detected, but immediately afterward 
did recognize, that the sound was often more intense immediately after the source ceased than 
before. All this was interesting, but it rendered impossible any accurate interpretation of the 
results obtained by these or similar methods. It was then found that the ear itself aided by 
a suitable electrical chronograph for recording the duration or audibility of the residual sound 
gave a surprisingly sensitive and accurate method of measurement. Proc. American Institute 
of Architects, p. 35, 1808. 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION 11 

seconds. Evidently, the cushions were st~- ..jents and 

rapidly improving the room, at least to the extent of diminishing the 
reverberation. The result was interesting and the process was con- 
tinued. Little by little the cushions were brought into the room, 
and each time the duration of audibility was measured. When all 
the seats (436 in number) were covered, the sound was audible for 
2.03 seconds. Then the aisles were covered, and then the platform. 
Still there were more cushions — almost half as many more. These 
were brought into the room, a few at a time, as before, and draped 
on a scaffolding that had been erected around the room, the dura- 
tion of the sound being recorded each time. Finally, when all the 
cushions from a theatre seating nearly fifteen hundred persons were 
placed in the room — covering the seats, the aisles, the platform, 
the rear wall to the ceiling — the duration of audibility of the resid- 
ual sound was 1.14 seconds. This experiment, requiring, of course, 
several nights' work, having been completed, all the cushions were 
removed and the room was in readiness for the test of other absorb- 
ents. It was evident that a standard of comparison had been 
established. Curtains of chenille, 1.1 meters wide and 17 meters in 
total length, were draped in the room. The duration of audibility 
was then 4.51 seconds. Turning to the data that had just been 
collected it appeared that this amount of chenille was equivalent to 
30 meters of Sanders Theatre cushions. Oriental rugs, Herez, 
Demirjik, and Hindoostanee, were tested in a similar manner; as 
were also cretonne cloth, canvas, and hair felt. Similar experi- 
ments, but in a smaller room, determined the absorbing power of 
a man and of a woman, always by determining the number of run- 
ning meters of Sanders Theatre cushions that would produce the 
same effect. This process of comparing two absorbents by actually 
substituting one for the other is laborious, and it is given here only 
to show the first steps in the development of a method that will be 
expanded in the following papers. 

In this lecture-room felt was finally placed permanently on par- 
ticular walls, and the room was rendered not excellent, but entirely 
serviceable, and it has been used for the past three years without 
serious complaint. It is not intended to discuss this particular case 
in the introductory paper, because such discussion would be prema- 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 REVERBERATION 

ture and logically incomplete. It is mentioned here merely to illus- 
trate concretely the subject of reverberation, and its dependence on 
absorption. It would be a mistake to .suppose that an absorbent is 
always desirable, or even when desirable that its position is a matter,, 
of no consequence. 1 

While the logical order of considering the conditions contributing 
to or interfering with distinct hearing would be that employed above, 
it so happens that exactly the reverse order is preferable from an 
experimental standpoint. By taking up the subject of reverberation 
first it is possible to determine the coefficients of absorption and 
reflection of various kinds of wall surface, of furniture and draperies, 
and of an audience. The investigation of reverberation is now, after 
five years of experimental work, completed, and an account will be 
rendered in the following papers. Some data have also been secured 
on the other topics and will be published as soon as rounded into 
definite form. 

This paper may be regarded as introductory to the general sub- 
ject of architectural acoustics, and immediately introductory to a 
series of articles dealing with the subject of reverberation, in which 
the general line of procedure will be, briefly, as follows: The absorb- 
ing power of wall-surfaces will be determined, and the law according 
to which the reverberation of a room depends on its volume will be 
demonstrated. The absolute rate of decay of the residual sound in 
a number of rooms, and in the same room under different conditions, 
will then be determined. In the fifth paper a more exact analysis 

1 There is no simple treatment that can cure all cases. There may be inadequate absorption 
and prolonged residual sound; in this case absorbing material should be added in the proper 
places. On the other hand, there may be excessive absorption by the nearer parts of the hall 
and by the nearer audience and the sound may not penetrate to the greater distances. Ob- 
viously the treatment should not be the same. There is such a room belonging to the Uni- 
versity, known locally as Sever 35. It is low and long. Across its ceiling are now stretched 
hundreds of wires and many yards of cloth. The former has the merit of being harmless, the 
latter is like bleeding a patient suffering from a chill. In general, should the sound seem 
smothered or too faint, it is because the sound is either imperfectly distributed to the audience, 
or is lost in waste places. The first may occur in a very low and long room, the second in one 
with a very high ceiling. The first can be remedied only slightly at best, the latter can be im- 
proved by the use of reflectors behind and above the speaker. On the other hand, should the 
sound be loud but confused, due to a perceptible prolongation, the difficulty arises from there 
being reflecting surfaces either too far distant or improperly inclined. Proc. American Insti- 
tute of Architects, p. 89, 1898. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF WALL-SURFACES 13 

will be given, and it will be shown that, by very different lines of 
attack, starting from different data, the same numerical results are 
secured. Tables will be given of the absorbing power of various 
wall-surfaces, of furniture, of an audience, and of all the materials 
ordinarily found in any quantity in an auditorium. Finally, in 
illustration of the calculation of reverberation in advance of con- 
struction, will be cited the new Boston Music Hall, the most interest- 
ing case that has arisen. 



ABSORBING POWER OF WALL-SURFACES 

In the introductory article the problem was divided into considera- 
tions of loudness, of distortion, and of confusion of sounds. Con- 
fusion may arise from extraneous disturbing sounds — street noises 
and the noise of ventilating fans — or from the prolongation of the 
otherwise discrete sounds of music or the voice into the succeeding 
sounds. The latter phenomenon, known as reverberation, results 
in what may be called, with accuracy and suggestiveness, residual 
sound. The duration of this residual sound was shown to depend 
on the amount of absorbing material inside the room, and also, of 
course, on the absorbing and transmitting power of the walls; and 
a method was outlined for determining the absorbing power of the 
former in terms of the absorbing power of some material chosen as 
a standard and used in a preliminary calibration. A moment's con- 
sideration demonstrates that this method, which is of the general 
type known as a "substitution method/' while effective in the de- 
termination of the absorbing power of furniture and corrective 
material, and, in general, of anything that can be brought into or 
removed from a room, is insufficient for determinating the absorb- 
ing power of wall-surfaces. This, the absorbing power of wall- 
surfaces, is the subject of the present paper; and as the method of 
determination is an extension of the above work, and finds its justi- 
fication in the striking*consistency of the results of the observations, 
a more elaborate description of the experimental method is desirable. 
A proof of the accuracy of every step taken is especially necessary 
in a subject concerning which theory has been so largely uncon- 
trolled speculation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 REVERBERATION 

Early in the investigation it was found that measurements of 
the length of time during which a sound was audible after the source 
had ceased gave promising results whose larger inconsistencies could 
be traced directly to the distraction of outside noises. On repeating 
the work during the most quiet part of the night, between half-past 
twelve and five, and using refined recording apparatus, the minor 
irregularities, due to relaxed attention or other personal variations, 
were surprisingly small. To secure accuracy, however, it was neces- 
sary to suspend work on the approach of a street car within two 
blocks, or on the passing of a train a mile distant. In Cambridge 
these interruptions were not serious; in Boston and in New York 
it was necessary to snatch observations in very brief intervals of 
quiet. In every case a single determination of the duration of the 
residual sound was based on the average of a large number of 
observations. 

An organ pipe, of the gemshorn stop, an octave above middle c 
(512 vibration frequency) was used as the source of sound in some 
preliminary experiments, and has been retained in subsequent work 
in the absence of any good reason for changing. The wind supply 
from a double tank, water-sealed and noiseless, was turned on and 
off the organ pipe by an electro-pneumatic valve, designed by Mr. 
George S. Hutchings, and similar to that used in his large church 
organs. The electric current controlling the valve also controlled 
the chronograph, and was made and broken by a key in the hands 
of the observer from any part of the room. The chronograph em- 
ployed in the later experiments, after the more usual patterns had 
been tried and discarded, was of special design, and answered well 
the requirements of the work — perfect noiselessness, portability, 
and capacity to measure intervals of time from a half second to ten 
seconds with considerable accuracy. It is shown in the adjacent 
diagram. The current whose cessation stopped the sounding of the 
organ pipe also gave the initial record on the chronograph, and the 
only duty of the observer was to make the record when the sound 
ceased to be audible. 

While the supreme test of the investigation lies in the consistency 
and simplicity of the whole solution as outlined later, three pre- 
liminary criteria are found in (1) the agreement of the observations 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF WALL-SURFACES 



15 



obtained at one sitting, (2) the agreement of the results obtained 
on different nights and after the lapse of months, or even years, by 
the same observer under similar conditions, and (3) the agreement 
of independent determinations by different observers. The first 
can best be discussed, of course, by the recognized physical methods 
for examining the accuracy of an extended series of observations; 




Fig. 1. Chronograph, battery, and air reservoir, the latter surmounted 
by the electro-pneumatic valve and organ pipe. 

and the result of such examination is as follows : Each determination 
being the mean of about twenty observations under conditions such 
th$t the audible duration of the residual sound was 4 seconds, the 
average deviation of the single observations from the mean was .11 
seconds, and the maximum deviation was .81. The computed 
"probable error" of a single determination was about .02 seconds; 
as a matter of fact, the average deviation of ten determinations 
from the mean of the ten was .OS seconds, and the maximum devi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 REVERBERATION 

ation was .05. The reason for this accuracy will be discussed in a 
subsequent paper. The probable error of the mean, thus calculated 
from the deviations of the single observations, covers only those 
variable errors as likely to increase as to decrease the final result. 
Fixed instrumental errors, and the constant errors commonly re- 
ferred to by the term "personal factors " are not in this way exposed. 
They were, however, repeatedly tested for by comparison with a 
clock beating seconds, and were very satisfactorily shown not to 
amount to more than .02 seconds in their cumulative effect. Three 
types of chronographs, and three kinds of valves between the organ 
pipe and the wind chest were used in the gradual development of 
the experiment, and all gave f olr the same room very nearly the same 
final results. The later instruments were, of course, better and more 
accurate. 

The second criterion mentioned above is abundantly satisfied by 
the experiments. Observations taken every second or third night 
for two months in the lecture-room of the Fogg Art Museum gave 
practically the same results, varying from 5.45 to 5.62 with a mean 
value of 5.57 seconds, a result, moreover, that was again obtained 
after the lapse of one and then of three years. Equally satisfactory 
agreement was obtained at the beginning and at the end of three 
years in Sanders Theatre, and in the constant-temperature room 
of the Physical Laboratory. 

Two gentlemen, who were already somewhat skilled in physical 
observation, Mr. Gilford LeClear and Mr. E. D. Densmore, gave 
the necessary time to test the third point. After several nights' 
practice their results differed but slightly, being .08 seconds and 
.10 seconds longer than those obtained by the writer, the total 
duration of the sound being 4 seconds. This agreement, showing 
that the results are probably very nearly those that would be ob- 
tained by any auditor of normal hearing, gives to them additional 
interest. It should be stated, however, that the final development 
of the subject will adapt it with perfect generality to either normal 
or abnormal acuteness of hearing. 

Almost the first step in the investigation was to establish the 
following three fundamentally important facts. Later work has 
proved these fundamental facts far more accurately, but the original 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF WALL-SURFACES 



17 



experiments are here given as being those upon which the conclu- 
sions were based. 

The duration of audibility of the residual sound is nearly the same 
in aU parts of an auditorium. — Early in the investigation an ex- 
periment to test this point was made in Steinert Hall, in Boston. 
The source of sound remaining on the platform at the point marked 





Fig. 2. Steinert Hall, Boston : position of air reservoir 
and organ pipe at 0; positions of observer 1-8. 

in the diagram, observations were made in succession at the points 
marked 1 to 8, with the results shown in the table: 

Station Duration Station Duration 

1 2.12 5 2.28 

2 2.17 6 2.27 

8 2.28 7 2.20 

4 2.20 8 2.26 

On first inspection these results seem to indicate that the duration 
of audibility is very slightly greater at a distance from the source, 
and it would be easy to explain this on the theory that at a distance 
the ear is less exhausted by the rather loud noise while the pipe is 
sounding; but, as a matter of fact, this is not the case, and the 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 



REVERBERATION 



variations there shown are within the limits of accuracy of the 
apparatus employed and the skill attained thus early in the in- 
vestigation. Numerous later experiments, more accurate, but not 
especially directed to this point, have verified the above general 
statement quite conclusively. 

The duration of audibility is nearly independent of the position of 
the source. — The observer remaining at the point marked in the 

diagram of the large lecture-room 
of the Jefferson Physical Labora- 
tory, the organ pipe and wind chest 
were moved from station to sta- 
tion, as indicated by the numbers 
1 to 6, with the results shown in 
the table: 




Station 

1 .. 

2 .. 

3 .. 

4 .. 

5 .. 

6 .. 



Duration 

.. 3.90 

.. 4.00 

.. 3.90 

.. 3.98 

. 3.95 

. 3.96 



Fig. 8. Lecture-room, Jefferson Physical 
Laboratory: position of observer at 0; 
positions of air reservoir and organ pipe 
1-6. 



The efficiency of an absorbent in 
reducing the duration of the residual 
sound is, under ordinary circum- 
stances, nearly independent of its 
position. — Fifty meters of cretonne cloth draped on a scaffolding 
under the rather low ceiling at the back of the lecture-room of 
the Fogg Museum, as shown in the next diagram, reduced the 
audible duration of the residual sound by very nearly the same 
amount, regardless of the section in which it hung, as shown in the 
following table, the initial duration being 5.57 seconds: 



Section 
1.. 
«.. 

3.. 

4.. 



Duration 
. 4.88 

. 4.83 
. 4.92 
. 4.85 



/>■ 



In some later experiments five and a half times as much cretonne 
draped on the scaffolding reduced the audible duration of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF WALL-SURFACES 19 

residual sound to 8.25 seconds; and when hung fully exposed in 
the high dome-like ceiling, gave 8.29 seconds, confirming the above 
statement. 

These facts, simple when proved, were by no means self-evident 
so long as the problem was one of reverberation, that is, of succes. 
sive reflection of sound from wall to 
wall. They indicated that, at least with 
reference to auditoriums of not too 
great dimensions, another point of view 
would be more suggestive, that of re- 
garding the whole as an energy problem 
in which the source is at the organ 
pipe and the decay at the walls and 
at the contained absorbing material. 
The above results, then, all point to 
the evident, but perhaps not appreci- 
ated, fact that the dispersion of sound 
between all parts of a hall is very rapid 
in comparison with the total time re- 
quired for its complete absorption, and 
that in a very short time after the 
source has ceased the intensity of the 
residual sound, except for the phenom- 
enon of interference to be considered 
later, is very nearly the same every- 
where in the room. 

This much being determined, the 
investigation was continued in the fol- 

lowing manner: Cushions from San- *&£££» JSJ2 
ders Theatre were transferred to the 0; potions of abaorbent at 1-4, 
lobby of the lecture-room of the Fogg 

Museum; a very few were brought into the room and spread along 
the front row of seats; the duration of audibility of the residual 
sound, diminished by the introduction of this additional absorbent, 
was determined, and the total length of cushion was measured. The 
next row of seats was then covered in the same manner and the two 
observations made — length of cushion and duration of residual 



Digitized by 



Google 



20 REVERBERATION 

sound. This was repeated till cushions covered all the seats. This 
work was at first undertaken solely with the intention of determin- 
ing the relative merits of different absorbing materials that might 
be placed in the room as a corrective for excessive residual sound, 
and the account of this application is given in the introductory 
paper. A subsequent study of these and similar results obtained in 
many other rooms has shown their applicability to the accurate 
determination of the absorbing power of wall-surfaces. This appli- 
cation may be shown in a purely analytical manner, but the expo- 
sition is greatly helped by a graphical representation. The manner 
in which the duration of the residual sound in the Fogg lecture- 
room is dependent on the amount of absorbing material present is 
shown in the following table: 

Louth Duration of 

of Cushion Residual Sound 

in Meten in Seconds 

5.61 

8 5.3S 

17 4.94 

28 4.56 

44 4.21 

63 -. 3.94 

88 8.49 

104 3.33 

128 3.00 

145 2.85 

162 2.64 

189 2.36 

213 2.33 

242 2.22 

This table, represented graphically in the conventional manner — 
length of cushion plotted horizontally and duration of sound verti- 
cally — gives points through which the curve may be drawn in the 
accompanying diagram. To discover the law from this curve we 
represent the lengths of cushion by x, and the corresponding dura- 
tions of sound, the vertical distances to the curve, by t. If we now 
seek the formula connecting x and t that most nearly expresses the 
relationship represented by the above curve, we find it to be 
(o + x)t = k, which is the familiar formula of a rectangular hyper- 
bola with its origin displaced along the axis of x 9 one of its asymp- 
totes, by an amount a. To make this formula most closely fit our 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF WALL-SURFACES 



21 



curve we must, in this case, give to the constant, a, the numerical 
value, 146, and to k the value, 813. The accuracy with which the 
formula represents the curve may be seen by comparing the dura- 
tions calculated by the formula with those determined from the 
curve; they nowhere differ by more than .04 of a second, and have, 
on an average, a difference of only .02 of a second. This is entirely 
satisfactory, for the calculated points fall off from the curve by 
scarcely the breadth of the pen point with which it was drawn. 

The determination of the absorbing power of the wall-surface 
depends on the interpretation of the constant, a. In the formula, 




Length of cushions in meters 

Fig. 5. Curve showing the relation of the duration of the residual 
sound to the added absorbing material. 

the position of a, indicating that a; is to be added to it, suggests 
that x and a are of a like nature, and that a is a measure of the 
absorbing power of the bare room; in order to determine the curve 
this was increased by the introduction of the cushions. This is 
even better shown by the diagram in which the portion of the curve 
experimentally determined is fitted into the curve as a whole, and 
a and x are indicated. Thus, the absorbing power of the room — 
the walls, partly plaster on stone, partly plaster on wire lath, the 
windows, the skylight, the floor — was equivalent to 146 running 
meters of Sanders Theatre cushions. 

The last statement shows the necessity for two subsidiary in- 
vestigations. The first, to express the results in some more perma- 
nent, more universally available, and, if possible, more absolute 



Digitized by 



Google 



22 



REVERBERATION 



unit than the cushions; the other, to apportion the total absorbing 
power among the various components of the structure. 

The transformation of results from one system of units to an- 
other necessitates a careful study of both systems. Some early 
experiments in which the cushions were placed with one edge pushed 
against the backs of the settees gave results whose anomalous 
character suggested that, perhaps, their absorbing power depended 
not merely on the amount present but also on the area of the sur- 
face exposed. It was then recalled that about two years before, 
at the beginning of an evening's work, the first lot of cushions 



10 






\ 






























\ 
























i: 






\ 




























1 




























\ 


Iv 






















|: 








\ 






























X 


x^ 
















































































1 


ar- 1 - 


iHT 


» 


li" 






4 


» 


400 


100 



Walk 



Cushions 



Fig. 6. Curve 5 plotted as part of its corresponding rectangular 
hyperbola. The solid part was determined experimentally; 
the displacement of this to the right measures the absorbing 
power of the walls of the room. 

brought into the room were placed on the floor, side by side, with 
edges touching, but that after a few observations had been taken 
the cushions were scattered about the room, and the work was 
repeated. This was done not at all to uncover the edges, but in 
the primitive uncertainty as to whether near cushions would draw 
from each other's supply of sound, as it were, and thus diminish 
each other's efficiency. No further thought was then given to these 
discarded observations until recalled by the above-mentioned dis- 
crepancy. They were sought out from the notes of that period, 
and it was found that, as suspected, the absorbing power of the 
cushions when touching edges was less than when separated. Eight 
cushions had been used, and, therefore, fourteen edges had been 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF WALL-SURFACES 23 

touching. A record was found of the length and the breadth of 
the cushions used, and, assuming that the absorbing power was 
proportional to the area exposed, it was possible to calculate their 
thickness by comparing the audible duration of the residual sound 
in the two sets of observations; it was thus calculated to be 7.4 
centimeters. On stacking up the same cushions and measuring 
their total thickness, the average thickness was found to be 7.2 
centimeters, in very close agreement with the thickness estimated 
from their absorption of sound. Therefore, the measurements of 
the cushions should be, not in running meters of cushion, but in 
square meters of exposed surface. 

For the purposes of the present investigation, it is wholly un- 
necessary to distinguish between the transformation of the energy 
of the sound into heat and its transmission into outside space. 
Both shall be called absorption. The former is the special accom- 
plishment of cushions, the latter of open windows. It is obvious, 
however, that if both cushions and windows are to be classed as 
absorbents, the open window, because the more universally acces- 
sible and the more permanent, is the better unit. The cushions, on 
the other hand, are by far the more convenient in practice, for it 
is possible only on very rare occasions to work accurately with the 
windows open, not at all in summer on account of night noises — 
the noise of crickets and other insects — and in the winter only 
when there is but the slightest wind; and further, but few rooms 
have sufficient window surface to produce the desired absorption. 
It is necessary, therefore, to work with cushions, but to express the 
results in open-window units. 

Turning now to the unit into which the results are to be trans- 
formed, an especially quiet winter night was taken to determine 
whether the absorbing power of open windows is proportional to 
the area. A test of the absorbing power of seven windows, each 
1.10 meters wide, when opened .20, .40, and .80 meter, gave results 
that are plotted in the diagram. The points, by falling in a straight 
line, show that, at least for moderate breadths, the absorbing 
power of open windows, as of cushions, is accurately proportional 
to the area. Experiments in several rooms especially convenient 
for the purpose determined the absorbing power of the cushions to 




Digitized by 



Google 



24 



REVERBERATION 





















/ 



























































































































































































































































































be .80 of that of an equal area of open windows. These cushions 
were of hair, covered with canvas and light damask. "Elastic 
Felt" cushions having been used during an investigation in a New 
York church, it was necessary on returning to Cambridge to deter- 
mine their absorbing power. This was accomplished through the 
courtesy of the manufacturers, Messrs. Sperry & Beale, of New 
York, and the absorbing power was found to be .73 of open-window 

10 

t 
• 

!• 
.I s 

*i 4 

I 3 
2 

1 

o .J> ahanirao 

Open window 

Fig. 7. The absorbing power of open windows plotted against the 
areas of the openings, showing them to be proportional. 

units — an interesting figure, since these cushions are of frequent 
use and of standard character. 

Hereafter all results, though ordinarily obtained by means of 
cushions, will be expressed in terms of the absorbing power of open 
windows — a unit as permanent, universally accessible, and as 
nearly absolute as possible. In these units the total absorbing 
power of the walls, ceiling, floor, windows and chairs in the lecture- 
room of the Fogg Museum is 75.5. 

Next in order is the apportionment of the total absorbing power 
among the various components of the structure. Let &i be the area 
of the plaster on tile, and ai its absorbing power per square meter; 
$t and a* the corresponding values for the plaster on wire lath; «s 
and Os for window surface, etc. Then 

ai8i + a*8i + a*sz + Oi 8*, etc. — 75.5, 
Su *u **> etc., are known, and a u (h> Q>z 9 etc. — the coefficients of 
absorption — are unknown, and are being sought. Similar equa- 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 



25 



tions may be obtained for other rooms in which the proportions 
of wall-surface of the various kinds are greatly different, until there 
are as many equations as there are unknown quantities. It is then 
possible by elimination to determine the absorbing power of the 
various materials used in construction. 

Through the kindness of Professor Goodale, an excellent oppor- 
tunity for securing some fundamentally interesting data was 
afforded by the new Botanical Laboratory and Greenhouse recently 
given to the University. These rooms — the office, the laboratory 
and the greenhouse — were exclusively finished in hard-pine sheath- 
ing, glass, and cement; the three rooms, fortunately, combined the 
three materials in very different proportions. They and the con- 
stant-temperature room in the Physical Laboratory — the latter 
being almost wholly of brick and cement — gave the following 
data: 





Area of 
Hard Pine 
Sheathing 


Area of Glam 


Area of Brick 
and Cement 


Combined 

Absorbing 

Power 


Office 


127.0 

84.8 

12.7 

2.1 


7 

6 

80 






30 

85 

124 


8.37 


Laboratory 

Greenhouse 


5.14 
4.64 


Constant-temperature room 


3.08 



This table gives for the three components the following coefficients 
of absorption: hard pine sheathing .058, glass .024, brick set in 
cement .028. 



APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 

In the preceding paper it was shown that the duration of the 
residual sound in a particular room was proportional inversely to 
the absorbing power of the bounding walls and the contained 
material, the law being expressed closely by the formula (a + x)t 
= k, the formula of a displaced rectangular hyperbola. In the 
present paper it is proposed to show that this formula is general, 
and applicable to any room; that in adapting it to different rooms 
it is only necessary to change the value of the constant of inverse 
proportionality k; that A: is in turn proportional to the volume of 



Digitized by 



Google 



26 



REVERBERATION 



the room, being equal to about .171V in the present experiments, 
but dependent on the initial intensity of the sound; and finally, 
that by substituting the value of k thus determined, and also the 



■a 



.9 

I 



•3 

a 









































































-«w 






















































































5^ 
































=i 
























^r; 


















































































































F 


1 

i 


SS45«Tt*l*U121S14 19 

Length of cushions in meters 

I. Curves showing the relation of the duration of the residual 
sound to the added absorbing material, — rooms 1 to 7. 








\ 






























\ 


































\ 


5* 


\ 






























^ 


^= 


?* 


-12. 




























































































































































































































K 


1 • 


i a 


> « 


» i 


9 • 


f 


81 


» M 


> 10 


11 


to u 


10 V 


10 14 


10 11 


10 



Length of cushions in meters 

Fig. 9. Curves showing the relation of the duration of the residual 
sound to the added absorbing material, — rooms 8 to 12. 

value of a, the absorbing power of the walls, and of x, the absorbing 
power of the furniture and audience, it is possible to calculate in 
advance of construction the duration of audibility of the residual 
sound. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 



27 



The truth of the first proposition — the general applicability 
of the hyperbolic law of inverse proportionality — can be satis- 
factorily shown by a condensed statement of the results obtained 
from data collected early in the investigation. These observations 
were made in rooms varying extremely in size and shape, from a 
small committee-room to a theatre having a seating capacity for 
nearly fifteen hundred. Figures' 8 and 9 give the curves experi- 
mentally determined, the duration of audibility of the residual 




Total absorbing material 

Fig. 10. The curves of Figs. 8 and 9 entered as parts of their corre- 
sponding rectangular hyperbolas. Three scales are employed for 
the volumes, by groups 1-7, 8-11, and 12. 

sound being plotted against running meters of cushions. Two 
diagrams are given in order to employ a smaller scale for the larger 
rooms, this scale being one-tenth the other; and even in this way 
there is shown but one-quarter of the curve actually obtained in 
rooms numbered 11 and 12, the Fogg Art Museum lecture-room 
and Sanders Theatre. In Fig. 10 each curve is entered as a part 
of its corresponding hyperbola referred to its asymptotes as axes. 
In this case three scales are employed in order to show the details 
more clearly, the results obtained in rooms 1 to 7 on one scale, 8 to 
11 on another, and 12 on a third, the three scales being proportional 
to one, three and nine. The continuous portions of the curves 
show the parts determined experimentally. Even with the scale 



Digitized by 



Google 



28 



REVERBERATION 



thus changed only a very small portion of the experimentally de- 
termined parts of curves 11 and 12 are shown. Figures 11 to 16, 
inclusive, all drawn to the same scale, show the great variation in 
size and shape of the rooms tested; and the accompanying notes 
give for each the maximum departure and average departure of the 
curve, experimentally determined, from the nearest true hyperbola. 
1. Committee-room, University Hall; plaster on wood lath, 
wood dado; volume, 65 cubic meters; original duration of residual 
sound before the introduction of any cushions, 2.82 seconds; maxi- 



BBI 



aj lib 



BnB 



m 



2 



4 



4fe 





If 6 7 

Fig. 11. 1. Committee-room. 2. Laboratory, Botanic Gardens. 3. Office, 
Botanic Gardens. 4. Recorder's Office. 5. Greenhouse. 6. Dean's 
Room. 7. Clerk's Room. 

mum departure of experimentally determined curve from the nearest 
hyperbola, .09 second; average departure, .03 second. 

2. Laboratory, Botanic Gardens of Harvard University; hard 
pine walls and ceiling, cement floor; volume, 82 cubic meters; 
original duration of the residual sound, 2.39 seconds; maximum 
departure from hyperbola, .09 second; average departure, .02 
second. 

3. Office, Botanic Gardens; hard pine walls, ceiling and floor; 
volume, 99 cubic meters; original duration of residual sound, 1.91 
seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .01 second; average 
departure, .00 second. 

4. Recorder's Office, University Hall; plaster on wood lath, 
wood dado; volume, 102 cubic meters; original duration of residual 
sound, 3.68 seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .10 
second; average departure, .04 second. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 



29 



5. Greenhouse, Botanic Gardens; glass roof and sides, cement 
floor; volume, 184 cubic meters; original duration of residual 



Fig. 12. Faculty-room. 

sound, 4.40 seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .08 
second; average departure, .03 second. 

6. Dean's Room, University Hall; plaster on wood lath, wood 
dado; volume, 166 cubic meters; original duration of residual 




Fig. IS. Lecture-room. 



sound, 3.38 seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .06 
second; average departure, .01 second. 

7. Clerk's Room, University Hall; plaster on wood lath, wood 
dado; volume, 221 cubic meters; original duration of residual 




0BBB00B 



Fig. 14. Laboratory. 

sound, 4.10 seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .10 
second; average departure, .02 second. 



Digitized by 



Google 



30 REVERBERATION 

8. Faculty-room, University Hall; plaster on wood lath, wood 
dado; volume, 1,480 cubic meters; original duration of residual 
sound, 7.04 seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .18 
second; average departure, .08 second. 

9. Lecture-room, Room 1, Jefferson Physical Laboratory; 
brick walls, plaster on wood lath ceiling; furnished; volume, 
1,630 cubic meters; original duration of residual sound, 3.91 



Fig. 15. Lecture-room. 

seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .10 second; average 
departure, .04 second. 

10. Large Laboratory, Room 41, Jefferson Physical Laboratory; 
brick walls, plaster on wood lath ceiling; furnished; volume, 
1,960 cubic meters; original duration of residual sound, 3.40 seconds; 
maximum departure from hyperbola, .03 second; average depar- 
ture, .01 second. 

11. Lecture-room, Fogg Art Museum; plaster on tile walls, 
plaster on wire-lath ceiling; volume, 2,740 cubic meters; original 
duration of residual sound, 5.61 seconds; maximum departure from 
hyperbola, .04 second; average departure, .02 second. The ex- 
periments in this room were carried so far that the original duration 
of residual sound of 5.61 seconds was reduced to .75 second. 

12. Sanders Theatre; plaster on wood lath, but with a great 
deal of hard- wood sheathing used in the interior finish; volume, 
9,300 cubic meters; original duration of residual sound, 3.42 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 



31 



seconds; maximum departure from hyperbola, .07 second; average 
departure, .02 second. 

It thus appears that the hyperbolic law of inverse proportion- 
ality holds under extremely diverse conditions in regard to the size, 
shape and material of the room. And as the cushions used in the 
calibration were placed about quite at random, it also appears that 
in rooms small or large, with high or low ceiling, with flat or curved 




Fig. 16. Sanders Theatre. 

walls or ceiling, even in rooms with galleries, the cushions, wherever 
placed — out from under the gallery, utider, or in the gallery — 
are nearly equally efficacious as absorbents. This merely means, 
however, that the efficacy of an absorbent is independent of its 
position when the problem under consideration is that of reverbera- 
tion, and that the sound, dispersed by regular and irregular reflec- 
tion and by diffraction, is of nearly the same intensity at all parts of 
the room soon after the source has ceased; and it will be the object 
of a subsequent paper to show that in respect to the initial distri- 
bution of the sound, and also in respect to discrete echoes, the posi- 
tion of the absorbent is a matter of prime importance. 



Digitized by 



Google 



32 



REVERBERATION 



Haying shown that the hyperbolic law is a general one, interest 
centers in the parameter, k 9 the constant for any one room, but vary- 
ing from room to room, as the following table shows: 



Boom 



Volume 


Absorbing Power of 
Walk, etc, - a 


Parmmete 


65 


4.76 


13.6 


82 


4.65 


11.1 


99 


8.08 


15.4 


102 


• 5.91 


21.8 


134 


5.87 


25.8 


166 


7.50 


25.4 


221 


10.6 


43.5 


1,480 


34.5 


243.0 


1,630 


69.0 


270.0 


1,960 


101.0 


345.0 


2,740 


P5<* 


425.0 


9,300 


4fo>.iJ ~ 


1,590.0 



1. Committee-room, University Hall.. . 

2. Laboratory, Botanic Gardens 

3. Office, Botanic Gardens 

4. Recorder's Office 

5. Greenhouse, Botanic Gardens 

6. Dean's Room 

7. Clerk's Room 

8. Faculty-room 

9. Lecture-room, Jefferson Physical Lab- 

oratory, 1 

10. Laboratory, Jefferson Physical Lab- 

oratory, 41 

11. Fogg Lecture-room 

12. Sanders Theatre 



The values of the absorbing power, a, and the parameter, k> are 

here expressed, not in terms of the cushions actually used in the 

experiments, but in terms of the open-window units, shown to be 

preferable in the preceding article. 

In the diagram, Figure 17, the values of k are plotted against the 

corresponding volumes of the rooms; here again three different 

scales are employed in order to magnify the results obtained in the 

smaller rooms. The resulting straight line shows that the value of 

k is proportional to the volume of the room, and it is to be observed 

that the largest room was nearly one hundred and fifty times larger 

than the smallest. By measurements of the coordinates of the line, 

k 
or by averaging the results found in calculating — for all the rooms 

it appears that k = .171 V. The physical significance of this nu- 
merical magnitude .171 will be explained later. 

This simple relationship between the value of k and the volume 
of the room — the rooms tested varying so greatly in size and 
shape — affords additional proof, by a rather delicate test, of the 
accuracy of the method of experimenting, for it shows that the ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 



33 



perimentally determined curves approximate not merely to hyper- 
bolas but to a systematic family of hyperbolas. It also furnishes a 
more pleasing prospect, for the laborious handling of cushions will 
be unnecessary. A single experiment in a room and a knowledge of 
the volume of the room will furnish sufficient data for the calcula- 
tion of the absorbing power of its components. Conversely, a 
knowledge of the volume of a room and of the coefficients of absorp- 
tion of its various components, including the audience for which it 
is designed, will enable one to calculate in advance of construction 
the duration of audibility of the residual sound, which measures 























A 




















too 










/ 


°u 


























/ 




mm vmm bm 


too 






1 


>y 




























/% 




























/% 






















60 








[46* UN MM MM MM ~Tft»" 




































4 
1_ 


5/ 































/% 


t 
ft 


10 


¥ 


» 


• 





ft 


10 


10 


•r 


tI 


vr 


Tl 


tr 



Volumes of rooms 

Fig. 17. The parameter, k, plotted against the volumes of the 
rooms, showing the two proportional. 

that acoustical property of a room commonly called reverberation. 
Therefore, this phase of the problem is solved to a first approxi- 
mation. 

The explanation of the fact that k is proportional to V is found 
in the following reasoning. Consider two rooms, constructed of 
exactly the same materials, similar in relative proportions, but one 
larger than the other. The rooms being empty, x, the absorbing 
power of the contained material, is zero, and we have a! t' = V 
and a" f = V. Since the rooms are constructed of the same 
materials the coefficients of absorption are the same, so that a! and 
a' are proportional to the surfaces of the rooms, that is, to the squares 



Digitized by 



Google 



34 REVERBERATION 

of the linear dimensions. Also, the residual sound is diminished a 
certain percentage at each reflection, and the more frequent these 
reflections are the shorter is the duration of its audibility; whence 
t' and f are inversely proportional to the frequency of the reflec- 
tions, and hence directly proportional to the linear dimensions. 
Therefore, k f and k" 9 which are equal to a' f and a" t", are propor- 
tional to the cubes of the linear dimensions, and hence to the 
volumes of the rooms. 

Further, when the shape of the room varies, the volume remain- 
ing the same, the number of reflections per second will vary. There- 
fore, k is a function not merely of the volume, but also of the shape 
of the room. But that it is only a slightly varying function, com- 
paratively, of the shape of the room for practical cases, is shown by 
the fact that the points fall so near the straight line that averages 

k 
the values of the ratio — - 

The value of k is also a function of the initial intensity of the 
sound; but the consideration of this element will be taken up in a 
following paper. 



RATE OF DECAY OF RESIDUAL SOUND 

In a subsequent discussion of the interference of sound it will be 
shown by photographs that the residual sound at any one point 
in the room as it dies away passes through maxima and minima, 
in many cases beginning to rise ip intensity immediately after the 
source has ceased; and that these maxima and minima succeed 
each other in a far from simple manner as the interference system 
shifts. On this account it is quite impossible to use any of the nu- 
merous direct methods of measuring sound in experiments on rever- 
beration. Or, rather, if such methods were used the results would 
be a mass of data extremely difficult to interpret. It was for this 
reason that attempts in this direction were abandoned early in the 
investigation, and the method already described adopted. In 
addition to the fact that this method only is feasible, it has the 
advantage of making the measurements directly in terms of those 
units with which one is here concerned — the minimum audible 



Digitized by 



Google 



RATE OF DECAY OF RESIDUAL SOUND 



35 



intensity. It is now proposed to extend this method to the deter- 
mination of the rate of decay of the average intensity of sound in 
the room, and to the determination of the intensity of the initial 
sound, and thence to the determination of the mean free path be- 
tween reflections, — all in preparation for the more exact solution 
of the problem. 

The first careful experiment on the absolute rate of decay was 
in the lecture-room of the Boston Public Library, a large room, 






» -\r 




























































4 V 






























i 






























V 






























s 


N, 














































































Mil 


IttWM , 


.UOIM. 


i am mm 






"1 


*-- 


— .. 




-U, 






• •„J 




•--- 







































Time in seconds 

Fig. 18. Decay of sound in the lecture-room of the Boston Public 
Library from the initial sound of one, two, three, and four organ 
pipes, showing only the last second. 

finished, with the exception of the platform, in material of very 
slight absorbing power — tile ceiling, plaster on tile walls, and 
polished cement floor. 1 The reverberation was very great, 8.69 
seconds. On the platform were placed four organ pipes, all of the 
same pitch, each on its own tafek or wind supply, and each having 
its own electro-pneumatic valve. All these valves, however, were 
connected to one chronograph, key, and battery, so that one, two, 
three, or all the pipes, might be started and stopped at once, and 
when less than four were in use any desired combination could be 
made. One pipe was sounded and the duration of audibility of the 
residual sound determined, of course, as always in these experi- 
ments, by repeated observations. The experiment was then made 

1 Terrazzo cement floor. 



Digitized by 



Google 



36 REVERBERATION 

with two organ pipes instead of one; then with three pipes; and, 
finally, with four. The whole series was then repeated, but begin- 
ning with a different pipe and combining different pipes for the two 
and three pipe sets. In this way the series was repeated four times, 
the combinations being so made that each pipe was given an equal 
weight in the determination of the duration of audibility of the 
residual sound under the four different conditions. It is safe to 
assume that with experiments conducted in this manner the average 
initial intensities of the sound with one, two, three, and four pipes 
were to each other as one, two; three and four. The corresponding 
durations of audibility shall be called t u U> U and U. The following 
results were obtained: 



ti = 8.69 seconds 


t% — U = .45 second 


U = 9.14 a 


U-ti = .67 * 


U = 9.36 a 


U-t x = .86 a 


U - 9.55 u 





It is first to be observed that the difference for one and two organ 
pipes, .45, is, within two-hundredths of a second, half that for one 
and four organ pipes, .86. This suggests that the difference is 
proportional to the logarithm of the initial intensity; and further 
inspection shows that the intermediate result with three organ 
pipes, .67, is even more nearly, in fact well within a hundredth of 
a second, proportional to the logarithm of three. This reinforces 
the very natural conception that however much the residual sound 
at any one point in the room may fluctuate, passing through max- 
ima and minima, the average intensity of sound in the room dies 
away logarithmically. Thus, if one plots the last part of the residual 
sound — that which remains after eight seconds have elapsed — 
on the assumption that the intensity of the sound at. any instant is 
proportional to the initial intensity, the result will be as shown in 
the diagram, Fig. 18. The point at which the diminishing sound 
crosses the line of minimum audibility in each of the four cases is 
known, the corresponding ordinates of the other curves being 
multiples or submultiples in proportion to the initial intensity. 
The results are obviously logarithmic. 

Let 7i be the average intensity of the steady sound in the room 
when the single organ pipe is sounding, i the intensity at any instant 



Digitized by 



Google 



RATE OF DECAY OF RESIDUAL SOUND 37 

during the decay, say t seconds after the pipe has ceased, then 

will be the rate of decay of the sound, and since the absorption 

dt 

of sound is proportional to the intensity 

di 

= A% where A is the constant of proportionality, 

eft 

the ratio of the rate of decay of the residual sound to the intensity 

at the instant. 

— log* i + C = At, 

a result that is in accord with the above experiments. The con- 
stant of integration C may be determined by the fact that when t is 
zero i is equal to I a whence 

C = log* Iu and the above equation becomes 
log* -7 = At. 

At the instant of minimum audibility t is equal to t u the whole 
duration of the residual sound, and i is equal to i\ — as the inten- 
sity of the least audible sound will hereafter be denoted. Therefore 

log* -J = Ah. 

This applied to the experiment with two, three and four pipes gives 
similar equations of the form 

log* — * - Atn, 

where n is the number of organ pipes in use. By the elimination of 

77 from these equations by pairing the first with each of the others, 
i 

A = ^ = 1.64, 
fc — h 

U — h 

a-^ = 1.61, 

H — *1 

A (average) * 1.59, 

where A is the ratio between the rate of decay and the average 
intensity at any instant. 



Digitized by 



Google 



38 



REVERBERATION 



It is possible also to determine the initial intensity, I u in terms 
of the minimum audible intensity, i\ 

log* -r f = At u 
x 

I\ = V log*' 1 At x = i' log' 1 (1.59 X 8.69) - 1,000,000 i\ 

With this value of the initial intensity it is possible to calculate 
the intensity i of the residual sound at any instant during the decay, 
by the formula log.h - iog.i - At, 

and the result when plotted is shown in Figure 19, the unit of in- 
tensity being minimum audibility. 

A practical trial early in the year had shown that it would be 
impossible to use this lecture-room as an auditorium, and the ex- 

1000,000 





ooolooo 






























i 

1800,000 




























■a 


i 

1 700,000 
















# 












J 


I 1 

1 600,000 




























*o 


\ 600,000 






•• 




















"8 


\ > 1 
1 400,000 


























s 


\LJ 

\ 100,000 












f 
















\ 


toojooo 












g 


















\ioo,oo 


> 










< 




























i 



















1 1 


1 1 


1 i 


1 i 


S ( 


1 1 


r i 


1 I 


1 


10 1 


i 1 


it i 


s i 


i IS 



Time in seconds 

Fig. 19. Decay of sound in the lecture-room of the Boston Public 
Library beginning immediately after the cessation of one organ 
pipe. 

periments described above, with others, were in anticipation of 
changes designed to remedy the difficulty. Hair felt, in consider- 
able quantities, was placed on the rear wall. The experiments with 
the four organ pipes were then repeated and the following results 
were obtained: 

h « 3.65 U - k = 20 .\ A = 3.41 

U = 3.85 U - h - .31 .\ A - 3.54 

U = 3.96 U - U = .42 /. A - 3.29 

U - 4.07 
I x - 250,000 t' 



-4 = 3.41 (average) 



Digitized by 



Google 



RATE OF DECAY OF RESIDUAL SOUND 



39 



A few nights later the apparatus was moved down to the attend- 
ant's reception-room near the main entrance — a small room but 
similar in proportions to the lecture-room. Here a careful experi- 
ment extending over several nights was carried on, and it gave the 
following results: 

H - 4.01 U - k - .19 /. A = 3.65 

U = 4.20 <»-<i = .28 .\ A = 3.90 

U = 4.29 U - h = .37 /. A - 3.75 

U - 4.38 A = 3.76 (average) 

Ix = 3,800,000 V 

The first interest lies in an attempt to connect the rate of decay, 
obtained by means of the four organ pipe experiments, with the 
absolute coefficient of absorption of the walls, obtained by the 
experiments with the open and closed windows; and to this end 
recourse will be had to what shall here be called "the mean free 
path between reflections.'^ The residual sound in its process of 
decay travels across the room from wall to wall, or ceiling, or floor, 
in all conceivable directions; some paths are the whole length of 
the room, some even longer, from one corner to the opposite, but 
in the main the free path between reflections is less, becoming even 
infinitesimally small at an angle or a corner. Between the two or 
three hundred reflections that occur during its audibility the residual 
sound establishes an average distance between reflections that de- 
pends merely on the dimensions of the room, and may be called 
"its mean free path." 

.171 V 

is the absorbing power of the room, measured in open-window units. 
Let 

s = surface. 

V = volume. 

A = rate of decay of the sound. 

v = velocity of sound, 342 /m. per second at 20 degrees C. 

p = length of the mean free path between reflections. 

Whence - = the average number of reflections per second, and 
- is the fraction absorbed at each reflection, — » A, 

8 8p 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 

and V 
path, p. 



REVERBERATION 



av 
At 



r.171 V 

Ash ' 



whence may be calculated the mean free 





V 


A 


• 


t 


V 


Boston Public Library Lecture-room, bare 

withfelt.. 
" u " Attendant's Room 


2,140.0 

2,140.0 

68.8 


1.59 
8.41 
8.76 


1,160 

1,160 

108 


8.69 
3.65 
4.01 


7.8 
8.8 
2.27 



The length of the mean free path in the lecture-room, bare or 
draped, ought to be the same, for the felt was placed out from 
the wall at a distance imperceptibly small in comparison with the 
dimensions of the room; but 7.8 and 8.8 differ more than the 
experimental errors justify. Again, the attendant's room had very 
nearly the same relative proportions as the lecture-room (about 
2 : 8 : 6), but each linear dimension reduced in the ratio 3.22 : 1. 
The mean free path, obviously, should be in the same ratio; but 
when the mean free path in the attendant's room, 2.27, is multiplied 
by 3.22 it gives 7.35, departing again from the other values, 7.8 and 
8.8, more than experimental errors justify. The explanation of 
this is to be found in the fact that the initial intensity of the sound 
in the rooms for the determination of U was not the same but had 
the values respectively, 1,000,000 i\ 250,000 %' and 3,800,000 i'. 
Since t\ has been shown proportional to the logarithms of the initial 
intensities, these three numbers, 7.8, 8.8 and 7.35, may be corrected 
in an obvious manner, and reduced to the comparable values they 
would have had if the initial intensity had been the same in all 
three cases. The results of this reduction are 7.8, 8.0 and 8.0, a 
satisfactory agreement. 

The length of the mean free path is, therefore, as was to be ex- 
pected, proportional to the linear dimensions of the room, and such 
a comparison is interesting. There is no more reason, however, for 
comparing it with one dimension than another. Moreover, most 
rooms in regard to which the inquiry might be made are too irregular 
in shape to admit of any one actual distance being taken as standard. 
Thus, in a semicircular room, still more in a horseshoe-shaped room 
such as the common theatre, it is indeterminable what should be 



Digitized by 



Google 



RATE OF DECAY OF RESIDUAL SOUND 41 

called the breadth or what the length. On account, therefore, of 
the complicated nature of practical conditions one is forced to the 
adoption of an ideal dimension, the cube root of the volume, V 1 '*, the 
length of one side of a cubical room of the same capacity. The above 

data give as the ratio of -*y the value, .62. 

It now becomes possible to present the subject by exact analysis, 
and free from approximations; but before doing so it will be well to 
review from this new standpoint that which has already been done. 

It was obvious from the beginning, even in deducing the hyper- 
bolic law, that some account should be taken of the reduction in 
the initial intensity of the sound as more and more absorbing 
material was brought into the room, even when the source of sound 
remained unchanged. Thus each succeeding value of the duration 
of the residual sound was less as more and more absorbing material 
was brought into the room, not merely because the rate of decay 
was greater, but also because the initial intensity was less. Had the 
initial intensity in some way been kept up to the same value through- 
out the series, the resulting curve would have been an exact hyper- 
bola. As it was, however, the curve sloped a little more rapidly on 
account of the additional reduction in the duration arising from the 
reduction in initial intensity of the sound. At the time, there was 
no way to make allowance for this. That it was a very small error, 
however, is shown by the fact that the departures from the true 
hyperbola that were tabulated are so small. 

Turning now to the parameter, k 9 it is evident that this also was 
an approximation, though a close one. In the first place, as just 
explained, the experimental curve of calibration sloped a little more 
rapidly than the true hyperbola. It follows that the nearest hyper- 
bola fitting the actual experimental results was always of a little 
too small parameter. Further, k depended not merely on the uni- 
formity of the initial intensity during the calibration of the room, 
but also on the absolute value of this intensity. Thus, k = atu and 
t\ is in turn proportional to the logarithm of the initial intensity. 
Therefore in order to fully define k we must adopt some standard of 
initial intensity. For this purpose we shall hereafter take as the 



Digitized by 



Google 



42 REVERBERATION 

standard condition in initial intensity, I = 1,000,000 i\ (7 = 10 6 %'), 
where V is the minimum audible intensity, as this is the nearest 
round number to the average intensity prevailing during these ex- 
periments. If, therefore, during the preceding experiments the 
initial intensity was above the standard, the value deduced for k 
would be a little high, if below standard, a little low. This variation 
of the parameter, k 9 would be slight ordinarily, for k is proportional 
to the logarithm, not directly to the value of the initial intensity. 
Slight ordinarily, but not always. Attention was first directed to 
its practical importance early in the whole investigation by an ex- 
periment in the dining-room of Memorial Hall — a very large room 
of 17,000 cubic meters capacity. During some experiments in Sanders 
Theatre the organ pipe was moved across to this dining-room, and 
an experiment begun. The reverberation was of very short duration, 
although it wtfuld have been long had the initial intensity been 
standard, for in rooms constructed of similar materials the rever- 
beration is approximately proportional to the cube roots of the 
volumes. There was no opportunity to carry the experiment farther 
than to observe the fact that the duration was surprisingly short, 
for the frightened appearance of the women from the sleeping- 
rooms at the top of the hall put an end to the experiment. Finally, 
A: is a function not merely of the volume but also of the shape of the 
room; that is to say, of the mean free path, as has already been 
explained. 

It was early recognized that with a constant source the average 
intensity of the sound in different rooms varies with variations in 
size and construction, and that proper allowance should be made 
therefor. The above results call renewed attention to this, and 
point the way. In the following paper the more exact analysis will 
be given and applied. 



Digitized by 



Google 



EXACT SOLUTION 43 



EXACT SOLUTION 

The present paper will carry forward the more exact analysis pro- 
posed in the last paper. 

For the sake of reference the nomenclature so far introduced is 
here tabulated. 

t = time after the source has ceased up to any instant whatever during 

the decay of the sound. 

t'y t* 9 1" = duration of the residual sound, the accents indicating a changed 

condition in the room such as the introduction or removal of 
some absorbent, the presence of an audience, or the opening of 
a window. 

<i> fe» • • • in ' = whole duration of the residual sound, the subscripts indicating the 
number of organ pipes used. 

T = duration of the residual sound in a room when the initial intensity 

has been standard. 

i = intensity of the residual sound at any instant. 

i' = intensity of minimum audibility. 

Iu h> • • • In = intensity of sound in the room just as the organ pipe or pipes stop, 
the subscripts indicating number of pipes. 

/ = standard initial intensity arbitrarily adopted, I = 1,000,000 i'. 

w = absorbing power of the open windows, minus their absorbing 

power when closed = area (1 — .024). 

a = absorbing power of the room. 

ai, 02, . . . a n B coefficients of absorption of the various components of the wall- 
surface. 

8 = area of wall (and floor) surface in square meters. 

*it *t> • • • *n = area of the various components of the wall-surface. 

V = volume of the room in cubic meters. 

k = hyperbolic parameter of any room. 

K = ratio of the parameter to the volume, aT = k = KV. 

A = rate of decay of the sound. 

p = length of mean free path between reflections. 

v = velocity of sound, 342 m. per second at 20° C. 

Let E denote the rate of emission of energy from the single 
organ pipe. 

E b the average interval of time between reflections. 
v 

? E = amount of energy emitted during this interval. 
?-E [l — -) = amount of energy left after the first reflection. 
Ee (l — -J = amount of energy left after the second reflection, etc. 



Digitized by 



Google 



44 REVERBERATION 

If the organ pipe continues to sound, the energy in the room con- 
tinues to accumulate, at first rapidly, afterwards more and more 
slowly, and finally reaches a practically steady condition. Two 
points are here interesting, — the time required for the sound to 
reach a practically steady condition (for in the experiments the 
organ pipes ought to be sounded at least this long), and second, the 
intensity of the sound in the steady and final condition. At any 
instant, the total energy in the room is that of the sound just issuing 
from the pipe, not having suffered any reflection, plus the energy of 
that which has suffered one reflection, that which has suffered two, 
that which has suffered three, and so on back to that which first 
issued from the pipe, as: 

?*[>+(>-?)+(-?)+(-?)+•••('-?)■]• 

where n is the number of reflections suffered by the sound that first 
issued from the pipe, and is equal to the length of time the pipe was 
blown divided by the average interval of time between reflections. 
The above series, which is an ordinary geometric progression, may 
be written 

Ze — )— 4- ; (i) 

- is by nature positive and less than unity. If n is very large or if 
( 1 — - J is small this may be written 

?_? = the total energy in the room in the steady condition. (%) 
va 

is the average intensity of sound in the room as the organ pipe 
stops. Substituting in this equation the values of a and p already 
found, 

KV IM\ 

va vKV , R . 



Digitized by 



Google 



EXACT SOLUTION 45 

T vKV T Es E 
we have U - 77^ ^^ ^ - 77? • (6) 

Also 



whence 



vKV T 
sAT KV 


Es 

vV 


E 
AV 


II = We' -4*1. 




E=VAlogl 


l At u 





(7) 
(8) 



where the unit of energy is the energy of minimum audibility in a 
cubic meter of air. 

It remains to determine K and a. To this end the four organ 
pipe experiments must be made in a room with the windows closed 
and with them open, and the values of A 1 and A" determined. The 
following analysis then becomes available: 



KV , . KV 

— 9 *nda + w = — > 



whence 





a r 

a + w T 




For standard conditions in regard to initial intensity 






A' T - A* T' - log. I - log. (10«) - 


18.8, 




T ' A ' » n AT> 13S 

---.andr --jr- 




Substituting these 


1 values, 

a A' K aT a 18.8 
a + w A" V A'V 




whence 








A'w 
a= A' -A'' 


(») 


and 








v 18.8w 

A = lr/ .. ... • 


(10) 



Or if if has been determined (9) may be written 

A'KV 

a = 9 

13.8 



(11) 



a useful form of the equation. 

From equation (1) and (2) we may calculate the rate of growth 
of sound in the room as it approaches the final steady condition. 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 REVERBERATION 

Thus, dividing (1) by (2), the result, 1 — ( 1 - -) , gives the in- 
tensity at any instant n? seconds after the sound has started, in 

v 

terms of the final steady intensity. Of all the rooms so far experi- 
mented on, the growth of the sound was slowest in the lecture-room 
of the Boston Public Library in its unfurnished condition. For this 

room - = .087, and p = 8.0 meters. The following table shows the 

8 

growth of the sound in this room, and the corresponding number of 
reflections which the sound that first issued from the pipe had 
undergone. 

Lecture-room, Boston Public Library 



n 


Time 


Average 
Intennty 


n 


Time 


Average 
Intensity 


1 


.02 


.04 


30 


.69 


.68 


5 


.11 


.17 


40 


.92 


.78 


10 


.23 


.31 


50 


1.15 


.85 


15 


.84 


.43 


100 


2.30 


.98 


20 


.46 


.53 


150 


3.45 


.997 








00 


00 


1.00 



It thus appears that in this particular room the organ pipe must 
sound for about three seconds in order that the average intensity 
of the sound may get within ninety-nine per cent of its final steady 
value. As throughout this work we are concerned only with the 
logarithm of the initial intensity, ninety-nine per cent of the steady 
condition is abundantly near. This consideration — the necessary 
length of time the organ pipe should sound — is carefully regarded 
throughout these experiments. It varies from room to room, being 
greater in large rooms, and less in rooms of great absorbing power. 

To determine the value of E, the rate of emission of sound by 
the pipe, formula (8), E = VA log^ 1 At\> is available. It is here to 
be observed that as this involves the antilogarithm of At x these 
quantities must be determined with the greatest possible accuracy. 
The first essential to this end is the choice of an appropriate room. 
Without giving the argument in detail here, it leads to this, that 
the best rooms in which to experiment are those that are large in 
volume and have little absorbing power. In fact, for this purpose, 
small rooms are almost useless, but the accuracy of the result in- 



Digitized by 



Google 



EXACT SOLUTION 47 

creases rapidly with an increase in size or a decrease in absorbing 
power. On this account the lecture-room of the Boston Public 
Library in its unfurnished condition was by far the best for this 
determination of all the available rooms. Inserting the numerical 
magnitudes obtained in this room in the equation, 

E=VA log? Ah = 2,140 X 1.59 log? (1.59 X 8.69) = 3,400,000,000. 

If the observations in the same room after the introduction of the 
felt, already referred to, are used in the equation the resulting value 
of E is 3,200,000,000. The agreement between the two is merely 
fortunate, for the second conditions were very inferior to the first, 
and but little reliance should be placed on it. In fact, in both re- 
sults the second figures, 4 and 2, are doubtful, and the round num- 
ber, 3,000,000,000, will be used. It is sufficiently accurate. 

The next equation of interest is that giving the value of K, 
number (10). It contains the expression, A n — A', the difference be- 
tween the rates of decay with the windows open and with them closed; 
A n and A* depend linearly on the difference in duration of the residual 
sound with four organ pipes and with one, and as both sets of dif- 
ferences are at best small, it is evident that these experiments also 
must be conducted with the utmost care and under the best con- 
ditions. The best conditions would be in rooms that are large, that 
have small absorbing power, and that afford window area sufficient 
to about double the absorbing power of the room. Practically this 
would be in large rooms that are of tile, brick, or cement walls, 
ceiling and floor, and have an available window area equal to about 
one-thirtieth of the total area. 

The lobby of the Fogg Art Museum, although rather small, best 
satisfied the desired conditions. Sixteen organ pipes were used, 
arranged four on each air tank and, therefore, near together. Thus 
arranged, the sixteen pipes had 7.6 times the intensity of one, as 
determined by a subsequent experiment in the Physical Laboratory. 
The following results were obtained: 

, _ log, 7.6 _ log. 7.6 _ 

fia-fi 5.26-4.59 ° m9 

and A ' " 3.43 - 3.00 " 4,7# 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 REVERBERATION 

v 1 3.810 13.8 X 1.85 tM 

K = V(A'-A>) = 96X1.7 " 156 - 

Here, however, it is easy to show by trial that errors of only one- 
hundredth of a second in the four determinations of the duration 
of the residual sound would, if additive, give a total error of twenty 
per cent in the result. 

It is impossible, especially with open windows, to time with an 
accuracy of more than one-hundtedth of a second, and, therefore, 
this formula, 

13.811? 



K 



V(A* - A') 



while analytically exact and attractive in its simplicity, is practi- 
cally unserviceable on account of the sensitive manner in which the 
observations enter into the calculations. 

The following analysis, however, results in an equation much 
more forbidding in appearance, it is true, but vastly better practi- 
cally, for it involves the data of difficult determination only logarith- 
mically, and then only as part of a comparatively small correcting 
term. For the room with the windows closed: 
A't\ = log 9 I' i; 

and for standard conditions in regard to initial intensity 
AT -log. I, 

whence 

T'a- KV, 

KV -t\a-±log 9 ^; 



hence 



and similar steps for the same room with the windows open give 

Multiplying the first of the last two equations by t"u and the 
second by t'u 

K " <Ti - fo v r ifi + v^ % -t — *—**• t)\ ' 



Digitized by 



Google 



EXACT SOLUTION 49 



By equation (5) 








a 

A' 


. ?2 
v : 


and similarly 








a + w 
A' 


= ?2 

V 



Substituting these values in the above equation, 



K = 



[ irfV t + ff( <* x lop e y 1 - *'i by. y 1 )] • 



fr-Wi" 1 * 1 ^ •v 1 "*" J ^^ J/J (i«) 



As an illustration of the application of the last equation, the 

case of the lobby of the Fogg Art Museum is here worked out at 

length. 

t\ - 4.59 

f x = 3.00 

V - 96 cu. m. 

* - 185 sq. m. 

t0 - 1.8* 

171 V 
a =» '-— — = 3.58 as a first approximation 

p - 2.8 

j^.E^. 8.8 Xl0«i' 

f(a + K?) V 

Substituting these values in the above equation, 

K - -^ [25.7 + 1.02 (6.53 - 8.1)] = .169 - .010 - .159, 
15x 

where the term .169 is the value of K that would be deduced dis- 
regarding the initial intensity of the sound, — .010 is the correction 
for this, and .159 is the corrected value of K. The magnitude as 
well as the sign of this correction depends on the intensity of the 
source of sound, the size of the room and the material of which it 
is constructed, and the area of the windows opened. This is illus- 
trated in the following table, which is derived from a recalculation 
of all the rooms in which the open-window experiment has been 
tried, and which exhibits a fairly large range in these respects: 



Digitized by 



Google 



50 



REVERBERATION 



Room 


V 


Vx 


w 


Uncor- 
rected 


Correc- 
tion 


K 


Lobby Fogg Museum 


96 

96 

202 

1,630 

1,960 


8,800,000 
67,000,000 

1,700,000 
390,000 
300,000 


1.86 
1.86 
5.10 
12.0 
14.6 


.169 
.191 
.164 
.150 
.137 


-.010 
-.027 
+.005 
+.017 

+.024 


.159 


Lobby Fogg Museum, 16 pipes . . . 
Jefferson Physical Laboratory 15 . 
Jefferson Physical Laboratory 1 . . 
Jefferson Physical Laboratory 41 . 


.164 
.169 
.167 
.161 



Average value of K = .164 



The value, K = .164, having been adopted, interest next turns 
to the determination of the absorbing power, a, of a room. For this 
purpose we have choice of three equations, two of which have 
already been deduced, (9) and (11), 



and 



a = 



A'w 
A" -A' 

A'KV 

13.8 



and a third equation may be obtained as follows: 
It has been shown that 



and 
Therefore 

and 



va I 



T'a - KV. 



at\- S -£log.^ = KV, 
v I 



° -£(*"+>•?)• 



(18) 



Of these three equations the first, (9), for reasons already pointed 
out in regard to a similar equation for K> while rigorously correct, 
yields a result of great uncertainty on account of its sensitiveness 
to slight errors in the several determinations of the duration of the 
residual sound. The second, (11), is very much better than the 
first, but still not satisfactory in this respect. The third, (18), is 
wholly satisfactory. It has the same percentage accuracy as t\, 



Digitized by 



Google 



EXACT SOLUTION 51 

and the only elements of difficult determination enter logarithmi- 
cally in a small correcting term. 

As an illustration of the application of these equations we may 
again cite the case of the lobby of the Fogg Art Museum: 

u *• /«\ 3-0 X 1.86 QQ 

by equation (9), a = 4>y - — = 3.3; 

, .. /11X 3.0 X .164 X 96 9A 
by equation (11), a = — = 3.4; 

by equation (13), a = — - (.164 X 96 + 1.02 X log* 8.8) = 3.8. 
4.59 

The first two are approximate only, the last, 3.8, is correct, with 
certainty in regard to the last figure. 

There is but one other subject demanding consideration in this 
way, — the calculation of the absorbing power of objects brought 
into the room, as cushions, drapery, chairs, and other furniture. 
This may be approached in two ways, either by means of the rate 
of decay of the sound and the four organ pipe experiment, or by 
open-window calibration and a single organ pipe. 

Let A tn be the rate of decay when the object is in the room, A 1 
being the rate when the room is empty. Then if a' is the absorbing 
power of the object : 

A'KV 



and 
Whence 



a + a' 



13.8 

A'" KV 



13.8 

KV 



•'-t^-^Ogs- (14) 

Or from the other point of view, equation (13), 

' -hi™ + **>'-?)■ 



whence 

KV 

"' r,f, "TV^T-f^T/ 5 (15) 



KV {t\-t"\) »p(l b I'i 1 ba 1 "'^). 



Digitized by 



Google 



52 REVERBERATION 

where 1\ and I n \ are to be calculated as heretofore by a preliminary 
and approximate estimate of a and a! . 

Here also it is easy to show a priori that the first equation, (14), 
while perfectly correct and analytically rigorous, is excessively 
sensitive to very slight errors of observation, and that on this ac- 
count equation (15) is decidedly preferable. For example, felt 
being brought into the lobby of the Fogg Lecture-room and placed 
on the floor, the values of A 1 " and t"\ were determined to be, re- 
spectively, 4.9 and 2.79. Borrowing from the preceding experiment, 
and substituting in equations (14) and (15) we have 

a' -(4.9 -3.0) ^5^ = *.*, 
, .164 X 96 (4.59 - 2.79) 1AO /l, QO 1, „ ,\ OA 

a very satisfactory agreement in view of the extreme sensitiveness 
of equation (14). 

Thus three equations have been deduced, number (12) for the 
calculation of the parameter, k 9 (18) for the absorbing power, a, of 
the wall-surface, and (15) for the absorbing power, a', of introduced 
material. Each has been verified by other equations analytically 
rigorous, and developed along very different lines of attack. In 
each case the agreement was satisfactory, especially in view of the 
extreme sensitiveness of the equations used as checks. 

In the succeeding paper will be deduced, by the method thus 
established, the coefficients of absorption of the materials that are 
used ordinarily in the construction and furnishing of an auditorium. 



THE ABSORBING POWER OF AN AUDIENCE, 
AND OTHER DATA 

In this paper will be given all the data ordinarily necessary in 
calculating the reverberation in any auditorium from its plans and 
specifications. In order to show the degree of confidence to which 
these data are entitled a very brief account will be given of the 
experiments by means of which they were obtained. Such an ac- 
count is especially necessary in the case of the determination of the 
absorbing power of an audience. This coefficient is, in the nature 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF AN AUDIENCE 53 

of things, a factor of every problem, and in a majority of cases it is 
one of the most important factors; yet it can be determined only 
through the courtesy of a large number of persons, and even then 
is attended with difficulty. 

The formulas that will be used for the calculation of absorbing 
power are numbers (18) and (15) in the preceding paper, the correct- 
ing terms being at times of considerable importance. The applica- 
tion of these formulas having been illustrated, the whole discussion 
here will be devoted to the conditions of the experiments and the 
results obtained. 

In every experiment the unavoidable presence of the observer 
increases the' absorbing power. In small rooms, and in large rooms 
if bare of furniture, the relative increase is considerable, and should 
always be subtracted from the immediate results of the experiment 
in order to determine the absorbing power of the room alone. The 
quantity to be subtracted is constant, provided the same clothes 
are always worn, and may be determined once for all. For this 
determination another observer made a set of experiments in a small 
and otherwise empty room before and after the writer had entered 
with a duplicate set of apparatus, — air tank, chronograph, and 
battery. In fact, two persons made independent observations, 
giving consistently the result that the writer, in the clothes and 
with the apparatus constantly employed, had an absorbing power 
of .48 of a unit. For the sake of brevity no further mention will be 
made of this, but throughout the work this correction is applied 
wherever necessary. 

In the second paper of this series a preliminary calculation was 
made of the absorbing power of certain wall-surfaces, and the object 
in so doing was to get an approximate value for the absorbing power 
of glass. It had been decided that the most convenient unit of 
absorbing power was a square meter of open window. It is evident, 
however, that the process of opening a window during the progress 
of an experiment is merely substituting the absorbing power of the 
open window for that of the same window closed, — a consideration 
of possible moment in the nicer development of the subject. This 
preliminary calculation was in anticipation of and preparation for 
the more close analysis in the fifth paper. If these coefficients are 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 REVERBERATION 

now calculated, using the corrected formulas of the fifth paper, we 
arrive at the following results: Cement, and brick set in cement, 
.025, glass, .027 and wood sheathing, .061. 

The experiments in the Boston Public Library gave results that 
are interesting from several points of view. The total absorbing 
power of the large lecture-room was found to be 88.9 units dis- 
tributed as follows : A platform of pine sheathing, exposing a total 
area of 70 square meters, had an absorbing power of 70 X .061=4.8; 
72 square meters of glass windows had an absorbing power of 
72 X .027 = 1.9; three large oil paintings, with a total area of 17.4 
square meters, had an absorbing power of 17.4 X .28 = 4.9; the 
remainder, 27.8 units, was that of the cement floor, tile ceiling, and 
plaster on tile walls, in total area 1,095 square meters. This gives 
as the coefficient of absorption for such construction .0254. A 
similar calculation of results obtained in the attendant's room in 
the same building — a room in which the construction of the floor, 
walls, and ceiling is similar to that in the lecture-room — gives for 
the value of the coefficient, .0255. The very close agreement of 
these results, and their agreement with the coefficient, .0251, for 
cement floor and solid walls of brick set in cement in the constant- 
temperature room, is satisfactory. However, a far more interest- 
ing consideration is the following: 

Heretofore in the argument it has been assumed, tacitly, that 
the total absorption of sound in a room is due to the walls, furniture 
and audience. There is one other possible absorbent, and only one 
— the viscosity of the vibrating air. It is now possible to present 
the argument that led to the conclusion that this, the viscosity of 
the air throughout the body of the room, is entirely negligible in 
comparison with the other sources of absorption. These two rooms 
in the Boston Public Library — the lecture-room and the attend- 
ant's room — had, in their bare and unfurnished condition, less 
absorbing power in the walls than any other rooms of their size yet 
found. Therefore, if the viscosity of the air is a practical factor it 
ought to have shown in these two rooms if ever. Fortunately, also, 
the two rooms differed greatly in size, the volume of one being about 
thirty-five times that of the other, while the ratio of the areas of 
the wall-surfaces was about twelve. That part of the absorption 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF AN AUDIENCE 55 

due to the walls was proportional to the areas of the walls, and the 
part due. to the viscosity of the air was proportional to the volumes 
of the rooms. As a matter of fact the experiments in these two 
rooms showed that the whole absorbing power was accurately pro- 
portional to the areas of the walk; how accurately is abundantly 
evidenced by the agreement of the two coefficients, .0254 and .0255, 
deduced on the supposition that the viscosity of the air was negli- 
gible. To express it more precisely, had the viscosity of the air 
been sufficient to produce one-fiftieth part of the absorption in the 
attendant's room, these two coefficients would have differed from 
each other by four per cent, an easily measurable amount. It is safe 
to conclude that in rooms as bare and nonabsorbent as these the 
viscosity of the air is inconsiderable, and that in a room filled with 
an audience it is certainly wholly negligible. Rooms more suitable 
for the demonstration of this point than these two rooms in the 
Boston Public Library could hardly be designed, and access to them 
was good fortune in settling so directly and conclusively this funda- 
mental question. 

The experiments to determine the absorbing power of plastered 
walls show it to be variable. If the plaster is applied directly to 
tile or brick the absorbing power of the resulting solid wall is uni- 
formly .025. But if the plaster is applied to lath held out from the 
solid wall by studding, the absorbing power is not nearly so constant, 
varying in different rooms. The investigation of this has not been 
carried far enough to show with absolute certainty the cause, al- 
though it probably arises from the different thickness in which the 
plaster is applied. For the examination of this point two modes of 
procedure are possible, — experimenting in a large number of 
rooms, or experimenting in one room and replastering in many 
different ways. The objection to the first method, which appears 
the more available, is that it is almost impossible to get accurate 
information in regard to the nature of a wall unless one has complete 
control of the construction. However, there are probably interest- 
ing variations that cannot be found in use, but that, if tried, would 
be fruitful in suggestions for future construction. The second 
method — experimenting in one room, plastering and replastering 
it with systematic variations and careful analysis of the construction 



Digitized by 



Google 



56 REVERBERATION 

in each case — would be the most instructive, but the expense of 
such procedure is, for the time being at least, prohibitive. Among 
the interesting possibilities, of which it can only be said that the 
experiments so far point that way, is that with time the plastered 
walls improve in absorbing power; how rapidly has not been shown. 
This change can be due, of course, only to some real change in the 
nature of the wall, and the most probable change would be its grad- 
ual drying out. Experiments in four rooms with plaster on wood 
lath gave as the average absorbing power per square meter .034 of 
a unit. Experiments in eight rooms with plaster on wire lath gave 
as the average coefficient of absorption .088. In both cases the 
variation among the different rooms was such that the figure in the 
third decimal place may be greater or less by three, possibly, though 
not probably, by more. The fact that a considerable part of the 
wall-surface of several of the rooms was of uncertain construction 
is partly responsible for this uncertainty in regard to the coefficient. 
For the sake of easy reference and comparison these results are 
tabulated, the unit being the absorbing power of a square meter of 
open-window area. 

Absorbing Power of Wall-Surfaces 

Open window 1.000 

Wood-sheathing (hard pine) 061 

Plaster on wood lath 034 

Plaster on wire lath OSS 

Glass, single thickness 027 

Plaster on tile 025 

Brick set in Portland cement 025 

Next in interest to the absorbing power of wall-surfaces is that 
of an audience. During the summer of 1897, at the close of a lecture 
in the Fogg Art Museum, the duration of the residual sound was 
determined before and immediately after the audience left. The 
patience of the audience and the silence preserved left nothing to 
be desired in this direction, but a slight rain falling on the roof 
seriously interfered with the observations. Nevertheless, the result, 
.87 per person, is worthy of record. The experiment was tried again 
in the summer of 1899, on a much more elaborate scale and under 
the most favorable conditions, in the large lecture-room of the 
Jefferson Physical Laboratory. In order to get as much data and 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF AN AUDIENCE 



57 



from as independent sources as possible, three chronographs were 
electrically connected with each other and with the electro-pneu- 
matic valve controlling the air supply of the organ pipe. One 
chronograph was on the lecture-table, and the others were on op- 
posite sides in the rear of the hall. The one on the table was in 
charge of the writer, who also controlled the key turning on and off 
the current at the four instruments. The two other chronographs 
were in charge of other observers, provision being thus made for 
three independent determinations. After a test had been made of 
the absorbing power of the whole audience — 157 women and 185 
men, sufficient to crowd the lecture-room — one-half, by request, 
passed out, 63 women and 79 men remaining, and observations 
were again made. On the following night the lecture was repeated 
and observations were again taken, there being present 95 women 
and 78 men. There were thus six independent determinations on 
three different audiences, and by three observers. In the following 
table the first column of figures gives the total absorbing power of 
the audience present; the second gives the absorbing power per 
person; the initials indicate the observer. 





Observer 


Total Absorbing 
Power 


Absorbing Power 
per Person 


First night, whole audience 

a u a u 

" half a 

u u a u 

Second u whole u 

u u u a 


w. c. s. 

G.LeC. 
W. C. S. 
G.LeC. 
W. C. S. 
E. D. D. 


123.0 
113.0 
58.3 
58.3 
66.2 
64.6 


.42 
.39 
.41 
.41 
.40 
.39 




.40 (3) 



In view of the difficulties of the experiment the consistency of the 
determination is gratifying. The average result of the six determi- 
nations is probably correct within two per cent. 

It is to be noted, however, that this value, .40, is the difference 
between the absorbing power of the person and the absorbing power 
of the settee and floor which, when the audience left the room, took 
its place as an absorbent. It is evident that the experiments de- 
termined the difference between the two, while in subsequent cal- 



Digitized by 



Google 



"> 



58 REVERBERATION 

dilations we shall be concerned with the absolute absorbing power 
of the audience. To determine this, on a following night all the 
settees were carried out of the room, observations being taken be- 
fore and after the change. From the data thus obtained the absorb- 
ing power of each settee accommodating five persons was found to 
be .039, or for a single seat .0077. Of necessity the floor still re- 
mained, but from a knowledge of its construction the absorbing 
power of as much of the floor as is covered by one person was cal- 
culated to be .030. Adding these together we get as the absorbing 
power of an audience, seated with moderate compactness, .44 per 
person. 

In some subsequent work it will be necessary to know the ab- 
sorbing power of an audience, not per person, but per square meter, 
the audience being regarded broadly as one of the bounding sur- 
faces of the room. As each person occupied on an average .46 of a 
square meter of floor area, it is evident that the absorbing power 
per square meter was .96 of a unit. 

Under certain circumstances the audience will not be compactly 
seated, but will be scattered about the room and more or less isolated, 
for example, in a council-room, or in a private music-room, and it is 
evident that under these conditions the individual will expose a 
greater surface to the room and his absorbing power will be greater. 
It is a matter of the greatest ease to distinguish between men and 
women coming into a small room, or even between different men. 
In fact, early in the investigation, two months' work — over three 
thousand observations — had to be discarded because of failure to 
record the kind of clothing worn by the observer. The coefficients 
given in the following table are averages for three women and for 
seven men, and were deduced from experiments in the constant- 
temperature room. 

Absorbing Poweb of an Audience 

Audience per square meter 96 

Audience per person .44 

Isolated woman 54 

Isolated man .48 

When an audience fills the hall one is but little concerned with 
the nature of the chairs — acoustically, but otherwise this becomes 



Digitized by 



Google 



ABSORBING POWER OF AN AUDIENCE 59 

a matter of considerable importance. The settees in the lecture- 
room of the Physical Laboratory, already mentioned, are of plain 
ash, and have solid seats, and vertical ribs in the back; they are 
without upholstering; and it is interesting, in order to note the 
agreement, to compare the absorbing power of such settees per single 
seat, .0077, with that of the "bent wood" chairs in the Boston 
Public Library, .0082, which are of similar character. In contrast 
may be placed the chairs and settees in the faculty-room, which 
have cushions of hair covered with leather on seat and back. In 
the same table will be entered the absorbing power of Sanders 
Theatre cushions, which are of hair covered with canvas and light 
damask, and of elastic-felt cushions — cotton covered with corduroy. 

Absorbing Power of Settees, Chairs, and Cushions 

Plain ash settees 039 

u u a per single seat 0077 

a a chairs "bent wood" 0082 

Upholstered settees, hair and leather 1.10 

" u per single seat 28 

" chairs similar in style 30 

Hair cushions per seat 21 

Elastic-felt cushions per seat 20 

A case has arisen even in the present paper where it is necessary 
to know the absorbing power of paintings on canvas, and the ques- 
tion may not infrequently arise as to how much service is secured 
— or injury incurred — acoustically by their use in particular 
rooms. The oil paintings in the faculty-room, 19 in number, with 
a total area, 19.9 square meters, gave opportunity for the determi- 
nation of the desired coefficient; but a question arises in regard to 
the method of reckoning the area. Thus, different coefficients are 
obtained according as one measures the canvas only, or includes 
the frames. The latter method, on the whole, seems best, although 
most of the absorption is probably by the canvas. 

The coefficient for house plants, which may be of passing, and 
possibly practical, interest, was even harder to express. A green- 
house, 140 cubic meters in volume, and in which plants occupied 
about one-quarter of the space, showed an absorbing power greater 
than that due to the walls and floor by 4 units, or .11 per cubic 
meter of plants. It would be of greater value to determine the 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 REVERBERATION 

absorbing power of such plants as are used, often very extensively, 
in decorating on festival occasions, but no opportunity has yet 
presented itself. 

Among the cloths used in decorations, cheesecloth and cretonne 
may be taken as types. The first is an American gauze, 48 grams 
to the square meter. The second is an ordinary cotton-print cloth, 
182 grams per square meter. Shelia, an extra quality of chenille, 
is a regular curtain material used only in permanent decorations. 

Linoleum and cork are commercial products, the first used as 
floor covering and the second in walls. Both were tested lying 
loosely on the floor; cemented in place, their values would probably 
be different. 

The carpet rug is a heavy pile carpet about .8 centimeter thick. 

In the following table the values are per square meter, except in 
the case of plants, where the coefficient is per cubic meter: 

Miscellaneous 

Oil paintings, inclusive of frames 28 

House plants r. 11 

Carpet nigs 20 

Oriental rugs, extra heavy 29 

Cheesecloth 019 

Cretonne cloth 15 

Shelia curtains 23 

Hairfelt, 2.5 cm. thick, 8 cm. from wall 78 

Cork, 2.5 cm. thick, loose on floor 16 

Linoleum, loose on floor 12 



CALCULATION IN ADVANCE OF CONSTRUCTION 

In the present paper it is the purpose to show the application of 
the preceding analysis and data, taking as an example the design 
of the new Boston Music Hall 1 now under construction, Messrs. 
McKim, Mead & White, architects. 

In the introductory paper the general problem of architectural 
acoustics was shown to be a fairly complicated one, and to involve 
in its solution considerations of loudness, of interference, of reso- 
nance, and of reverberation. All these points received considera- 
tion while the Hall was being designed, but it is proposed to discuss 

1 Boston Symphony Hall. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CALCULATION IN CONSTRUCTION 61 

here only the case of reverberation. In this respect a music hall is 
peculiarly interesting. In a theatre for dramatic performances, 
where the music is of entirely subordinate importance, it is desirable 
to reduce the reverberation to the lowest possible value in all ways 
not inimical to loudness; but in a music hall, concert room, or 
opera house, this is decidedly not the case. To reduce the rever- 
beration in a hall to a minimum, or to make the conditions such that 
it is very great, may, in certain cases, present practical difficulties 
to the architect — theoretically it presents none. To adjust, in 
original design, the reverberation of a hall to a particular and ap- 
proved value requires a study of conditions, of materials, and of 
arrangement, for which it has been the object of the preceding 
papers to prepare. 

It is not at all difficult to show a priori that in a hall for orches- 
tral music the reverberation should neither be very great, nor, on 
the other hand, extremely small. However, in this matter it was 
not necessary to rely on theoretical considerations. Mr. Gericke, 
the conductor of the Boston SymphonJfcOrchestra, made the state- 
ment that an orchestra, meaning by this a symphony orchestra, is 
never heard to the best advantage in a theatre, that the sound 
seems oppressed, and that a certain amount of reverberation is 
necessary. An examination of all the available plans of the halls 
cited as more or less satisfactory models, in the preliminary dis- 
cussion of the plans for the new hall, showed that they were such 
as to give greater reverberation than the ordinary theatre style of 
construction. While several plans were thus cursorily examined 
the real discussion was based on only two buildings — the present 
Boston Music Hall and the Leipzig Gewandhaus; one was familiar 
to all and immediately accessible, the other familiar to a number of 
those in consultation, and its plans in great detail were to be 
found in Das neue Gewandhaus in Leipzig, von Paul Gropvus und H. 
Schmieden. It should, perhaps, be immediately added that neither 
hall served as a model architecturally, but that both were used 
rather as definitions and starting points on the acoustical side of 
the discussion. The old Music Hall was not a desirable model in 
every respect, even acoustically, and the Leipzig Gewandhaus, 
having a seating capacity about that of Sanders Theatre, 1500, 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 REVERBERATION 

was so small as to be debarred from serving directly, for this if for 
no other reason. 

The history of the new hall is about as follows: A number of 
years ago, when the subject was first agitated, Mr. McKim prepared 
plans and a model along classical lines of a most attractive audi- 
torium, and afterwards, at Mr. Higginson's instance, visited 
Europe for the purpose of consulting with musical and scientific 
authorities in France and Germany. But the Greek Theatre as a 
music hall was an untried experiment, and because untried was re- 
garded as of uncertain merits for the purpose by the conductors 
consulted by Mr. Higginson and Mr. McKim. It was, therefore, 
abandoned. Ten years later, when the project was again revived, 
the conventional rectangular form was adopted, and the intention 
of the building committee was to follow the general proportions and 
arrangement of the Leipzig Gewandhaus, so enlarged as to increase 
its seating capacity about seventy per cent; thus making it a little 
more than equal to the old hall. At this stage calculation was first 
applied. 

The often-repeated statement that a copy of an auditorium 
does not necessarily possess the same acoustical qualities is not 
justified, and invests the subject with an unwarranted mysticism. 
The fact is that exact copies have rarely been made, and can haFdly 
be expected. The constant changes and improvements in the ma- 
terials used for interior construction in the lihe of better fireproofing 
— wire lath or the application of the plaster directly to tile walls — 
have led to the taking of liberties in what were perhaps regarded as 
nonessentials; this has resulted, as shown by the tables, in a 
changed absorbing power of the walls. Our increasing demands 
in regard to heat and ventilation, the restriction on the dimensions 
enforced by location, the changes in size imposed by the demands 
for seating capacity, have prevented, in different degrees, copies 
from being copies, and models from successfully serving as models. 
So different have been the results under what was thought to be 
safe guidance — but a guidance imperfectly followed — that the 
belief has become current that the whole subject is beyond control. 
Had the new Music Hall been enlarged from the Leipzig Gewandhaus 
to increase the seating capacity seventy per cent, which, proportions 
being preserved, would have doubled the volume, and then built, as 



Digitized by 



Google 



CALCULATION IN CONSTRUCTION 63 

it is being built, according to the most modern methods of fireproof 
construction, the result, unfortunately, would have been to con- 
firm the belief. No mistake is more easy to make than that of 
copying an auditorium — but in different materials or on a differ- 
ent scale — in the expectation that the result will be the same. 
Every departure must be compensated by some other — a change 
in material by a change in the size or distribution of the audience, 
or perhaps by a partly compensating change in the material used 
in some other part of the hall — a change in size by a change in 
the proportions or shape. For moderate departures from the 
model such compensation can be made, and the model will serve 
well as a guide to a first approximation. When the departure is 
great the approved auditorium, unless discriminatingly used, is 
liable to be a treacherous guide. In this case the departure was 
necessarily great. 

The comparison of halls should be based on the duration of the 
residual sound after the cessation of a source that has produced 
over the hall some standard average intensity of sound, — say one 
million times the minimum audible intensity, 1,000,000 i'. The 
means for this calculation was furnished in the fifth paper. The 
values of V and a for the three halls under comparison are shown 
on the next page. 

The length given for the Leipzig Gewandhaus, 38 meters, is 
measured from the organ front to the architecturally principal wall 
in the rear. On the floor and by boxes in the balconies the seats 
extend 3 meters farther back, making the whole length of the hall, 
exclusive of the organ niche, 41 meters. This increases the volume 
of the hall about 200 cubic meters, making the total volume 11,400 
cubic meters. 

The height given for the new Boston Music Hall, 17.9, is the 
average height from the sloping floor. The length is measured on 
the floor of the main part of the hall; above the second gallery it 
extends back 2.74 meters, giving an additional volume of 580 cubic 
meters. The stage, instead of being out in the room, is in a con- 
tracted recess having a depth of 7.9 meters, a breadth, front and 
back, of 18.3 and 13.6, respectively, and a height, front and back, 
of 13.4 and 10.6, respectively, with a volume of 1,500 cubic meters. 
The height of the stage recess is determined by the absolute re- 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 



REVERBERATION 



Dimensions of the Three Halls in Meters l 



Leipzig Gewandhaus 



Boston Music Hall, 
Old 



Boston Music Hall, 

New 



Length. 
Breadth 
Height . 

Volume . 



(38) 
19 
15.5 

(11,200) 



S9.2 
23.5 
20.0 

18,400 



(39.5) 
22.8 
17.9 

(16,200) 



quirements of the large organ to be built by Mr. George S. Hutch- 
ings. This organ will extend across the whole breadth of the stage. 
The total volume of the new Boston Music Hall is, therefore, 
18,300 cubic meters. 

In the following table of materials in the three halls no distinction 
is made between plaster on wire lath and plaster on wood lath, the 
experiments recorded in the preceding paper having shown no cer- 
tain difference in absorbing power. The areas of wall-surface are 
expressed in square meters. The number of persons in the audience 
is reckoned from the number of seats, no account being taken of 
standing room. 

1 Dimensions of the Three Halls in Feet 



Leipzig 
Gewandhaus 



Boston 
Music Hall, Old 



Boston 
Music Hall, New 



Length. 
Breadth 
Height. 

Volume. 



(124) 
62 
52 

(400,000) 



129 
77 
66 

656,000 



(130) 
75 
59 

(575,000) 



The length given for the Leipzig Gewandhaus, 124 feet, is measured from the organ front 
to the architecturally principal wall in the rear. On the floor and by boxes in the balconies 
the seats extend 10 feet farther back, making the total length of the hall, exclusive of the 
organ niche, 134 feet. This increases the volume 7,000 cubic feet, making the total volume 
407,000 cubic feet. 

The height given for the new hall, 59 feet, is the average height from the sloping floor. 
The length is measured on the floor of the main part of the hall; above the second gallery it 
extends back 9 feet, giving an additional volume of 20,000 cubic feet. The stage, instead of 
being out in the room, is in a contracted recess, having a depth of 26 feet, a breadth, front and 
back, of 60 feet and 45 feet, respectively, and a height, front and back, of 44 feet and 35 feet, 
respectively, with a volume of 54,000 cubic feet. The total volume of the new Music Hall is, 
therefore, 649,000 cubic feet. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CALCULATION IN CONSTRUCTION 



65 



Absorbing Material 



Leipzig 
Gewandhaut 



Bottom Music Hall, 
Old 



Boston Music Hall, 

New 



Plaster on lath . . 

Plaster on tile . . 

Glass 

Wood 

Drapery 

Audience: 

on floor 

in 1st balcony 
in 2d balcony . 

Total audience . . 

Orchestra 



2,206 



17 

80 

990 

494 

33 

1,517 

80 



3,030 



55 

771 

4 

1,251 
680 
460 

2,391 

80 



1,040 

1,830 

22 

625 



1,466 
606 
507 

2,579 

80 



The drapery in the Leipzig Gewandhaus will be rated as shelia, 
and in the old Music Hall as cretonne, to which it approximates in 
each case. It is an almost needless refinement to rate differently 
the orchestra and the audience merely because the members of the 
orchestra sit more or less clear of each other, but for the sake of a 
certain formal completeness it will be done. For the above materials 
the coefficients, taken from the preceding paper, are as follows: 

Coefficients of Absorption 

Plaster on lath 033 

Plaster on tile 025 

Glass 027 

Wood 061 

D f shelia 23 

^^ \ cretonne 15 

Audience per person 44 

Orchestra per man 48 

In the table (p. 67) is entered the total absorbing power con- 
tributed by each of these elements. As this is the first example of 
such calculation all the elements will be shown, although it will 
then be immediately evident that some are of wholly negligible 
magnitude. 



Digitized by 



Google 



.18 m. 

Fig. 20. The Leipzig Gewandhaus. 



•3 9.2 Ms 



Fig. 21. The Old Boston Music Hall. 



$9.5 m.- 



Fig. 22. The New Boston Music Hall. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CALCULATION IN CONSTRUCTION 



67 



Absorbing Poweb 





Leipsig 
Gewandhaus 


Boston Music Hall, 
Old 


Boston Music Hall, 

New 


Plaster on lath 


78 



0.4 

14 

18 

667 

88 


100 


1.5 
47 
0.6 
1,05* 
88 


84 


Plaster on tile 


46 


Gift** ... 


0.6 


Wood 


88 


Drapery 





Audience 


1,185 


Orchestra 


88 






Total = a 


810 


1,289 


1,292 







V and o being determined for each of the three halls, the dura- 
tion, T, of the residual sound after standard initial intensity can be 
calculated. 

The results, in seconds, are as follows: 

Leipzig Gewandhau8 2.80 

Old Boston Music Hall 2.44 

New Boston Music Hall 2.81 

In other words, the new hall, although having a seating capacity 
for over a thousand more than the Gewandhaus and nearly two 
hundred more than the old hall, will have a reverberation between 
the two, and nearer that of the Gewandhaus than that of the old 
hall. 

It is interesting to contrast this with the result that would have 
been obtained had the plan been followed of reproducing on an en- 
larged scale the Gewandhaus. Assuming perfect reproduction of 
all proportions with like materials, the volume would have been 
25,300 cubic meters, and the absorbing power 1,370, resulting in the 
value, T = 8.02. This would have differed from the chosen result 
by an amount that would have been very noticeable. 

The new Boston Music Hall is, therefore, not a copy of the 
Gewandhaus, but the desired results have been attained in a very 
different way. 

A few general considerations, not directly connected with rever- 
beration, may be of interest. The three halls are of nearly the same 
length on the floor; but in the old hall and in the Gewandhaus the 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 REVERBERATION 

platform for the orchestra is out in the hall, and the galleries extend 
along both sides of it; while in the new hall the orchestra is not out 
in the main body of the room, and for this reason is slightly farther 
from the rear of the hall; but this is more than compensated for in 
respect to loudness by the orchestra being in a somewhat contracted 
stage recess, from the side walls of which the reflection is better 
because they are nearer and not occupied by an audience. Also it 
may be noted that the new hall is not so high as the old and is not 
so broad. 

Thus is opened up the question of loudness, and this has been 
solved to a first approximation for the case of sustained tones. 
But as the series of papers now concluded is devoted to the question 
of reverberation, this new problem must be reserved for a subse- 
quent discussion. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 1 

INTRODUCTION 

Ihe problem of architectural acoustics requires for its complete 
solution two distinct lines of investigation, one to determine quan- 
titatively the physical conditions on which loudness, reverberation, 
resonance, and the allied phenomena depend, the other to determine 
the intensity which each of these should have, what conditions are 
best for the distinct audition of speech, and what effects are best for 
music in its various forms. One is a purely physical investigation, 
and its conclusions should be based and should be disputed only on 
scientific grounds; the other is a matter of judgment and taste, and 
its conclusions are weighty in proportion to the weight and unanimity 
of the authority in which they find their source. For this reason, 
these papers are in two series. The articles which appeared six 
years ago began the first, and the paper immediately following is 
the beginning of the second. 

Of the first series of papers, which have to do with the purely 
physical side of the problem, only one paper has as yet been pub- 
lished. This contained a discussion of reverberation, complete as 
far as one note is concerned. There is on hand considerable material 
for a paper extending this discussion to cover the whole range of the 
musical scale, and therefore furnishing a basis for the discussion of 
what has sometimes been called the musical quality of an audito- 
rium. There has also been collected a certain amount of data in 
regard to loudness, resonance, interference, echoes, irregularities of 
air currents and temperature, and the transmission of sound through 
walls and partitions, — all of which will appear as soon as a com- 
plete presentation is possible in each case. Each problem has been 
taken up as it has been brought to the writer's attention by an 
architect in consultation either over plans or in regard to a com- 
pleted building. This method is slow, but it has the advantage of 

1 Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, vol. xlii, no. 2, June, 1906. 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

making the work practical, and may be relied on to prevent the 
magnification to undue importance of scientifically interesting but 
practically subordinate points. On the other hand, there is the 
danger that it may lead to a fragmentary presentation. An effort 
has been made to guard against this, and the effort for completeness 
is the reason for delay in the appearance of some of the papers. 
Sufficient progress has been made, however, to justify the assertion 
that the physical side of the problem is solvable, and that it should 
be possible ultimately to calculate in advance of construction all 
the acoustical qualities of an auditorium. 

Thus far it is a legitimate problem in physics, and as such a 
reasonable one for the writer to undertake. 

The second part of the problem, now being started, the question 
as to what constitutes good and what constitutes poor acoustics, 
what effects are desirable in an auditorium designed for speaking, 
and even more especially in one designed for music, is not a question 
in physics. It is therefore not one for which the writer is especially 
qualified, and would not be undertaken here were it not in the first 
place absolutely necessary in order to give effect to the rest of the 
work, and in the second place were it not the plan rather to gather 
and give expression to the judgment of others acknowledged as 
qualified to speak, than to give expression to the taste and judg- 
ment of one. It is thus the purpose to seek expert judgment in 
regard to acoustical effects, and if possible to present the results in 
a form available to architects. This will be slow and difficult work, 
and it is not at all certain that it will be possible to arrive, even ulti- 
mately, at a finished product. It is worth undertaking, however, if 
the job as a whole is worth undertaking, for without it the physical 
side of the investigation will lose much of its practical value. Thus 
it is of little value to be able to calculate in advance of construction 
and express in numerical measure the acoustical quality which any 
planned auditorium will have, unless one knows also in numerical 
measure the acoustical quality which is desired. On the other hand, 
if the owner and the architect can agree on the desired result, and 
if this is within the limits of possibility considering all the demands 
on the auditorium, of utility, architecture, and engineering, this 
result can be secured with certainty, — at least there need be no 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACCURACY OF MUSICAL TASTE 71 

uncertainty as to whether it will or will not be attained in the com- 
pleted building. 

The papers following this introduction will be: The Accuracy of 
Musical Taste in regard to Architectural Acoustics, and Variation in 
Reverberation with Variation in Pitch. 



THE ACCURACY OF MUSICAL TASTE IN REGARD 
TO ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

PIANO MUSIC 

1 he experiments described in this paper were undertaken in order 
to determine the reverberation best suited to piano music in a music 
room of moderate size, but were so conducted as to give a measure of 
the accuracy of cultivated musical taste. The latter point is obvi- 
ously fundamental to the whole investigation, for unless musical 
taste is precise, the problem, at least as far as it concerns the design 
of the auditorium for musical purposes, is indeterminate. 

The first observations in regard to the precision of musical taste 
were obtained during the planning of the Boston Symphony Hall, 
Messrs. McKim, Mead, and White, Architects. Mr. Higginson, 
Mr. Gericke, the conductor of the orchestra, and others connected 
with the Building Committee expressed opinions in regard to a 
number of auditoriums. These buildings included the old Boston 
Music Hall, at that time the home of the orchestra, and the places 
visited by the orchestra in its winter trips, Sanders Theatre in 
Cambridge, Carnegie Hall in New York, the Academy of Music in 
Philadelphia, and the Music Hall in Baltimore, and in addition to 
these the Leipzig Gewandhaus. By invitation of Mr. Higginson, 
the writer accompanied the orchestra on one of its trips, made 
measurements of all the halls, and calculated their reverberation. 
The dimensions and the material of the Gewandhaus had been 
published, and from these data its reverberation also was calculated. 
The results of these measurements and calculations showed that the 
opinions expressed in regard to the several halls were entirely con- 
sistent with the physical facts. That is to say, the reverberation in 
those halls in which it was declared too great was in point of physi- 
cal measurement greater than in halls in which it was pronounced 



Digitized by 



Google 



72 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

too small. This consistency gave encouragement in the hope that 
the physical problem was real, and the end to be attained definite. 

Much more elaborate data on the accuracy of musical taste were 
obtained four years later, 1902, in connection with the new building 
of the New England Conservatory of Music, Messrs. Wheelwright 
and Haven, Architects. The new building consists of a large audi- 
torium surrounded on three sides by smaller rooms, which on the 
second and third floors are used for purposes of instruction. These 
smaller rooms, when first occupied, and used in an unfurnished or 
partially furnished condition, were found unsuitable acoustically, 
and the writer was consulted by Mr. Haven in regard to their final 
adjustment. In order to learn the acoustical condition which would 
accurately meet the requirements of those who were to use the 
rooms, an experiment was undertaken in which a number of rooms, 
chosen as typical, were varied rapidly in respect to reverberation by 
means of temporarily introduced absorbing material. Approval or 
disapproval of the acoustical quality of each room at each stage was 
expressed by a committee chosen by the Director of the Conserva- 
tory. At the close of these tests, the reverberation in the rooms was 
measured by the writer in an entirely independent manner as 
described in the paper on Reverberation (1900). The judges were 
Mr. George W. Chadwick, Director of the Conservatory, and Signor 
Oresti Bimboni, Mr. William H. Dunham, Mr. George W. Proctor, 
and Mr. William L. Whitney, of the Faculty. The writer suggested 
and arranged the experiment and subsequently reduced the results 
to numerical measure, but expressed no opinion in regard to the 
quality of the rooms. 

The merits of each room in its varied conditions were judged 
solely by listening to piano music by Mr. Proctor. The character 
of the musical compositions on which the judgment was based is a 
matter of interest in this connection, but this fact was not appre- 
ciated at the time and no record of the selections was made. It is 
only possible to say that several short fragments, varied in nature, 
were tried in each room. 

As will be evident from the descriptions given below, the rooms 
were so differently furnished that no inference as to the reverbera- 
tion could be drawn from appearances, and it is certain that the 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACCURACY OF MUSICAL TASTE 73 

opinions were based solely on the quality of the room as heard in 
the piano music. 

The five rooms chosen as typical were on the second floor of the 
building. The rooms were four meters high. Their volumes varied 
from 74 to 210 cubic meters. The walls and ceilings were finished in 
plaster on wire lath, and were neither papered nor painted. There 
was a piano in each room; in room 5 there were two. The amount 
of other furniture in the rooms varied greatly: 

In room 1 there was a bare floor, and no furniture except the 
piano and piano stool. 

Room 2 had rugs on the floor, chairs, a sofa with pillows, table, 
music racks, and a lamp. 

Room 3 had a carpet, chairs, bookcases, and a large number of 
books, which, overflowing the bookcases, were stacked along the 
walls. 

Room 4 had no carpet, but there were chairs and a small table. 

Room 5 had a carpet, chairs, and shelia curtains. 

Thus the rooms varied from an almost unfurnished to a reasonably 
furnished condition. In all cases the reverberation was too great. 

The experiment was begun in room 1. There were, at the time, 
besides the writer, five gentlemen in the room, the absorbing effect 
of whose clothing, though small, nevertheless should be taken into 
account in an accurate calculation of the reverberation. Thirteen 
cushions from the seats in Sanders Theatre, whose absorbing power 
for sound had been determined in an earlier investigation, were 
brought into the room. Under these conditions the unanimous 
opinion was that the room, as tested by the piano, was lifeless. Two 
cushions were then removed from the room with a perceptible change 
for the better in the piano music. Three more cushions were re- 
moved, and the effect was much better. Two more were then taken 
out, leaving six cushions in the room, and the result met unanimous 
approval. It was suggested that two more be removed. This being 
done the reverberation was found to be too great. The agreement 
was then reached that the conditions produced by the presence of 
six cushions were the most nearly satisfactory. 

The experiment was then continued in Mr. Dunham's room, 
number 2. Six gentlemen were present. Seven cushions were 



Digitized by 



Google 



74 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS . 

brought into the room. The music showed an insufficient rever- 
beration. Two of the cushions were then taken out. The change 
was regarded as a distinct improvement, and the room was satis- 
factory. 

In Mr. Whitney's room, number S, twelve cushions, with which 
it was thought to overload the room, were found insufficient even 
with the presence in this case of seven gentlemen. Three more 
cushions were brought in and the result declared satisfactory. 

In the fourth room, five, eight, and ten cushions were tried be- 
fore the conditions were regarded as satisfactory. 

In Mr. Proctor's room, number 5, it was evident that the ten 
cushions which had been brought into the room had overloaded it. 
Two were removed, and afterwards three more, leaving only five, 
before a satisfactory condition was reached. 

This completed the direct experiment with the piano. 

The bringing into a room of any absorbing material, such as these 
cushions, affects its acoustical properties in several respects, but 
principally in respect to its reverberation. The prolongation of 
sound in a room after the cessation of its source may be regarded 
either as a case of stored energy which is gradually suffering loss by 
transmission through and absorption by the walls and contained 
material, or it may be regarded as a process of rapid reflection from 
wall to wall with loss at each reflection. In either case it is called 
reverberation. It is sometimes called, mistakenly as has been ex- 
plained, resonance. The reverberation may be expressed by the 
duration of audibility of the residual sound after the cessation of a 
source so adjusted as to produce an average of sound of some stand- 
ard intensity over the whole room. The direct determination of 
this, under the varied conditions of this experiment, was impracti- 
cable, but, by measuring the duration of audibility of the residual 
sound after the cessation of a measured organ pipe in each room 
without any cushions, and knowing the coefficient of absorption of 
the cushions, it was possible to calculate accurately the reverbera- 
tion at each stage in the test. It was impossible to make these 
measurements immediately after the above experiments, because, 
although the day was an especially quiet one, the noises from the 
street and railway traffic were seriously disturbing. Late the f ollow- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACCURACY OF MUSICAL TASTE 



75' 



ing night the conditions were more favorable, and a series of fairly 
good observations was obtained in each room. The cushions had 
been removed, so that the measurements were made on the rooms in 
their original condition, furnished as above described. The appara- 
tus and method employed are described in full in a series of articles 
in the Engineering Record 1 and American Architect for 1900. 
The results are given in the accompanying table. 



2 



I 



t 



i i 



I 



Is 



,3 9 ~ 



li 



Remarks 



74 



5.0 



91 



6.3 

« I 



210 14.0 



133 



96 



8.3 



7.0 




5 





7 





4 




2.4 




2.9 





13 
11 
8 
6 
4 



7 
5 





12.8 
10.1 
7.3 
5.5 
3.6 






5.0 
7.4 
20.2 
17.5 
14.7 
12.9 
11.0 

6.3 
9.2 



6.4 1 15.6 
4.6 ' 13.8 









8.4 


o 


a 


12 


a 


15 








3.4 





u 


6 


a 


10 








1.9 





a 


10 


a 


8 


a 


5 



2.43 
1.64 
.60 
.70 
.83 
.95 
1.22 



Reverberation too great. 

Reverberation too great. 

Reverberation too little. 

Better. 

Better. 

Condition approved. 

Reverberation too great. 






14.0 





17.4 


11.0 


28.4 


13.7 


31.1 


o 


8.3 





11.7 


5.5 


17.2 


9.1 


20.8 





7.0 


o 


8.9 


9.1 


18.0 


7.3 


16.2 


4.6 


13.5 



{ 2.39 i Reverberation too great. 

1.95 | Reverberation too great. 

.95 i Reverberation too little. 
1.10 Condition approved. 

i 

2.46 | Reverberation too great. 

2.00 i Reverberation too great. 

1.21 ' Better. 

1.10 | Condition approved. 

2.65 | Reverberation too great. 

1.87 > Reverberation too great. 

1.26 ; Better. 

1.09 | Condition approved. 



I 



2.24 

1.76 

.87 

.98 

1.16 



Reverberation too great. 

Reverberation too great. 
' Reverberation too little. 
I Better. 
| Condition approved. 



1 The article in the Engineering Record is identical with the paper in the American 
Architect for 1900, reprinted in this volume as Part I. 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

The table is a record of the first of what, it is hoped, will be a 
series of such experiments extending to rooms of much larger dimen- 
sions and to other kinds of music. It may well be, in fact it is 
highly probable, that very much larger rooms would necessitate a 
different amount of reverberation, as also may other types of musical 
instruments or the voice. As an example of such investigations, as 
well as evidence of their need, it is here given in full. The following 
additional explanations may be made. The variation in volume of 
the rooms is only threefold, corresponding only to such music rooms 
as may be found in private houses. Over this range a perceptible 
variation in the required reverberation should not be expected. The 
third column in the table includes in the absorbing power of the 
room (ceiling, walls, furniture, etc.) the absorbing powers of the 
clothes of the writer, who was present not merely at all tests, but in 
the measurement of the reverberation the following night. From 
the next two columns, therefore, the writer and the effects of his 
clothing are omitted. The remarks in the last column are reduced 
to the form "reverberation too great," "too little," or "approved." 
The remarks at the time were not in this form, however. The room 
was pronounced "too resonant," "too much echo," "harsh," or 
"dull," "lifeless," "overloaded," expressions to which the forms 
adopted are equivalent. 

If from the larger table the reverberation in each room, in its 
most approved condition, is separately tabulated, the following is 
obtained: 

Booms Reverberation 
1 95 

% i.io 

8 1.10 

4 1.09 

5 1.16 

1.08 mean 

The final result obtained, that the reverberation in a music room 
'in order to secure the best effect with a piano should be 1.08, or in 
round numbers 1.1, is in itself of considerable practical value; but 
the five determinations, by their mutual agreement, give a numeri- 
cal measure to the accuracy of musical taste which is of great 
interest. Thus the maximum departure from the mean is .18 seconds, 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACCURACY OF MUSICAL TASTE 77 

and the average departure is .05 seconds. Five is rather a small 
number of observations on which to apply the theory of probabilities, 
but, assuming that it justifies such reasoning, the probable error is 
.02 seconds, — surprisingly small. 

A close inspection of the large table will bring out an interesting 
fact. The room in which the approved condition differed most from 
the mean was the first. In this room, and in this room only, was it 
suggested by the gentlemen present that the experiment should be 
carried further. This was done by removing two more cushions. 
The reverberation was then 1.22 seconds, and this was decided to 
be too much. The point to be observed is that 1.22 is further above 
the mean, 1.08, than .95 is below. Moreover, if one looks over the 
list in each room it will be seen that in every case the reverberation 
corresponding to the chosen condition came nearer to the mean than 
that of any other condition tried. 

It is conceivable that had the rooms been alike in all respects and 

required the same amount of cushions to accomplish the same re- £L 

suits, the experiment in one room might have prejudiced the ex- 
periment in the next. But the rooms being different in size and 
furnished so differently, an impression formed in one room as to the 
number of cushions necessary could only be misleading if depended ^— 

on in the next. Thus the several rooms required 6, 5, 15, 10, and 5 
cushions. It is further to be observed that in three of the rooms the 
final condition was reached in working from an overloaded con- 
dition, and in the other two rooms from the opposite condition, — <^\. -- 
in the one case by taking cushions out, and in the other by bringing 
them in. 

Before beginning the experiment no explanation was made of its 
nature, and no discussion was held as to the advantages and disad- 
vantages of reverberation. The gentlemen present were asked to 
express their approval or disapproval of the room at each stage of 
the experiment, and the final decision seemed to be reached with 
perfectly free unanimity. 

This surprising accuracy of musical taste is perhaps the explana- 
tion of the rarity with which it is entirely satisfied, particularly 
when the architectural designs are left to chance in this respect. 



Digitized by 



Google 




78 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

VARIATION IN REVERBERATION WITH 
VARIATION IN PITCH 

Six years ago there was published in the Engineering Record and 
the American Architect a series of papers on architectural acoustics 
intended as a beginning in the general subject. The particular phase 
of the subject under consideration was reverberation, — the continua- 
tion of sound in a room after the source has ceased. It was there 
shown to depend on two things, — the volume of the room, and the 
absorbing character of the walls and of the material with which the 
room is filled. It was also mentioned that the reverberation depends 
in special cases on the shape of the room, but these special cases were 
not considered. The present paper also will not take up these special 
cases, but postpone their consideration, although a good deal of 
material along this line has now been collected. It is the object 
here to continue the earlier work rather narrowly along the original 
lines. The subject was then investigated solely with reference to 
sounds of one pitch, C 4 512 vibrations per second. It is the inten- 
tion here to extend this over nearly the whole range of the musical 
scale, from Ci 64 to C 7 4096. 

It can be shown readily that the various materials of which the 
walls of a room are Constructed and the materials with which it is 
filled do not have the same absorbing power for all sounds regard- 
less of pitch. Under such circumstances the previously published 
work with C 4 512 must be regarded as an illustration, as a part of a 
much larger problem, — the most interesting part, it is true, be- 
cause near the middle of the scale, but after all only a part. Thus a 
room may have great reverberation for sounds of low pitch and very 
little for sounds of high pitch, or exactly the reverse; or a room may 
have comparatively great reverberation for sounds both of high and 
of low pitch and very little for sounds near the middle of the scale. 
In other words, it is not putting it too strongly to say that a room 
may have very different quality in different registers, as different 
as does a musical instrument; or, if the room is to be used for 
speaking purposes, it may have different degrees of excellence or 
defect for a whisper and for the full rounded tones of the voice, 
different for a woman's voice and for a man's — facts more or less 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 79 

well recognized. Not to leave this as a vague generalization the 
following cases may be cited. Recently, in discussing the acoustics 
of the proposed cathedral of southern California in Los Angeles 
with Mr. Maginnis, its architect, and the writer, Bishop Conaty , 
touched on this point very clearly. After discussing the general 1 
subject with more than the usual insight and experience, possibly 
in part because Catholic churches and cathedrals have great rever- 
beration, he added that he found it difficult to avoid pitching his 
voice to that note which the auditorium most prolongs notwith- 
standing the fact that he found this the worst pitch on which to 
speak. This brings out, perhaps more impressively because from 
practical experience instead of from theoretical considerations, the 
two truths that auditoriums have very different reverberation for 
different pitches, and that excessive reverberation is a great hin- 
drance to clearness of enunciation. Another incident may also serve, 
that of a church near Boston, in regard to which the writer has just 
been consulted. The present pastor, in describing the nature of its 
acoustical defects, stated that different speakers had different de- 
grees of difficulty in making themselves heard; that he had no diffi- 
culty, having a rather high pitched voice; but that the candidate 
before him, with a louder but much lower voice, failed of the ap- 
pointment because unable to make himself heard. Practical ex- 
perience of the difference in reverberation with variation of pitch 
is not unusual, but the above cases are rather striking examples. 
Corresponding effects are not infrequently observed in halls devoted 
to music. Its observation here, however, is marked in the rather 
complicated general effect. The full discussion of this belongs to 
another series of papers, in which will be taken up the subject of the 
acoustical effects or conditions that are desirable for music and for 
speech. While this phase of the subject will not be discussed here 
at length, a little consideration of the data to be presented will show 
how pronounced these effects may be and how important in the 
general subject of architectural acoustics. 

In order to show the full significance of this extension of the in- 
vestigation in regard to reverberation, it is necessary to point out 
some features which in earlier papers were not especially empha- 
sized. Primarily the investigation is concerned with the subject of 



Digitized by 



Google 



V\ 



80 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

reverberation, that is to say, with the subject of the continuation of 
a sound in a room after the source has ceased. The immediate effect 
of reverberation is that each note, if it be music, each syllable or 
part of a syllable, if it be speech, continues its sound for some time, 
and by its prolongation overlaps the succeeding notes or syllables, 
harmoniously or inharmoniously in music, and in speech always 
towards confusion. In the case of speech it is inconceivable that 
this prolongation of the sound, this reverberation, should have any 
other effect than that of confusion and injury to the clearness of the 
enunciation. In music, on the other hand, reverberation, unless in 
excess, has a distinct and positive advantage. 

Perhaps this will be made more clear, or at least more easily 
realized and appreciated, if we take a concrete example. Given a 
room comparatively empty, with hard wall-surfaces, for example 
plaster or tile, and having in it comparatively little furniture, the 
amount of reverberation for the sounds of about the middle register 
of the double-bass viol and for the sounds of the middle register of 
the violin will be very nearly though not exactly equal. If, how- 
ever, we bring into the room a quantity of elastic felt cushions, 
sufficient, let us say, to accommodate a normal audience, the effect 
of these cushions, the audience being supposed absent, will be to 
diminish very much the reverberation both for the double-bass viol 
and for the violin, but will diminish them in very unequal amounts. 
The reverberation will now be twice as great for the double-bass as 
for the violin. If an audience comes into the room, filling up the 
seats, the reverberation will be reduced still further and in a still 
greater disproportion, so that with an audience entirely filling the 
room the reverberation for the violin will be less than one-third that 
for the double-bass. When one considers that a difference of five 
per cent in reverberation is a matter for approval or disapproval on 
the part of musicians of critical taste, the importance of considering 
these facts is obvious. 

This investigation, nominally in regard to reverberation, is in 
reality laying the foundation for other phases of the problem. It 
has as one of its necessary and immediate results a determination of 
the coefficient of absorption of sound of various materials. These 
Coefficients of absorption, when once known, enable one not merely 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 81 

to calculate the prolongation of the sound, but also to calculate the 
average loudness of sustained tones. Thus it was shown in one of 
the earlier papers, though at that time no very great stress was laid 
on it, that the average loudness of a sound in a room is proportional 
inversely to the absorbing power of the material in the room. There- 
fore the data which are being presented, covering the whole range 
of the musical scale, enable one to calculate the loudness of different 
notes over that range, and make it possible to show what effect the 
room has on the piano or the orchestra in different parts of the 
register. 

To illustrate this by the example above cited, if the double-bass 
and the violin produce the same loudness in the open air, in the bare 
room with hard walls both would be reinforced about equally. The 
elastic felt brought into the room would decidedly diminish this re- 
enforcement for both instruments. It would, however, exert a much 
more pronounced effect in the way of diminishing the reinforcement 
for the violin than for the double-bass. In fact, the balance will be 
so affected that it will require two violins to produce the same vol- 
ume of sound as does one double-bass. The audience coming into ^ 
the room will make it necessary to use three violins to a double- 
bass to secure the same balance as before. 

Both cases cited above are only broadly illustrative. As a matter 
of fact the effect of the room and the effect of the audience in the 
room is perceptibly different at the two ends of the register of the 
violin and of the double-bass viol. 

There' is still a third effect, which must be considered to appre- 
ciate fully the practical significance of the results that are being 
presented. This is the effect on the quality of a sustained tone. -^ 
Every musical tone is composed of a great number of partial tones, 
the predominating one being taken as the fundamental, and its 
pitch as the pitch of the sound. The other partial tones are re- 
garded as giving quality or color to the fundamental. The musical 
quality of a tone depends on the relative intensities of the overtones. 
It has been customary, at least on the part of physicists, to regard 
the relative intensities of the overtones, which define the quality of t«f 
the sound, as depending simply on the source from which the sound N N 

originates. Of course, primarily, this is true. Nevertheless, while 




V 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 AROHTECTTIRAL ACOUSTICS 

the source defines the relative intensities of the issuing sounds, their 
actual intensities in the room depend not merely on that, but also, 
and to a surprising degree, on the room itself. Thus, for example, 
given an eight-foot organ pipe, if blown in an empty room, such as 
that described above, the overtones would be pronounced. If ex- 
actly the same pipe be blown with the same wind pressure in a room 
in which the seats have been covered with the elastic felt, the first 
upper partial will bear to the fundamental a ratio of intensity 
diminished over 40 per cent, the second upper partial a ratio to the 
fundamental diminished in the same per cent, the third upper 
partial a ratio diminished over 50 per cent, while the fourth upper 
partial will bear a ratio of intensity to the fundamental diminished 
about 60 per cent. Quality expressed numerically in this way 
probably does not convey a very vivid impression as to its real 
effect. It may signify more to say merely that the change in quality 
is very pronounced and noticeable, even to comparatively untrained 
ears. On the other hand, if one were to try the experiment with a 
six-inch instead of with an eight-foot organ pipe, the effect of 
bringing the elastic felt cushions into the room would be to increase 
the relative intensities of the overtones, and thus to diminish the 
purity of the tone. 

All tones below that of a six-inch organ pipe will be purified by 
bringing into the room elastic felt. All tones above and including 
that pitch will be rendered less pure. The effect of an audience 
coming into a room is still different. Assuming that the audience 
has filled the room and so covered all the elastic felt cushions, the 
effect of the audience is to purify all tones up to violin C 4 512, and 
to have very little effect on all tones from that pitch upward. On 
very low tones the effect of the audience in the room is more pro- 
nounced. For example, again take Ci 64, the effect of the audience 
will be to diminish its first overtone about 60 per cent relative to 
the fundamental and its second overtone over 75 per cent. 

The effect of the material used in the construction of a room, and 
the contained furniture, in altering the relative intensities of the 
fundamental and the overtones, is to improve or injure its quality 
according to circumstances. It may be, of course, that the tone 
desired is a very pure one, or it may be that what is wanted is a 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 83 

tone with, pronounced upper partials. Take, for example, the 
"night hotn" stop in a pipe organ. This is intended td have a very 
pure tone. The' room in contributing to its purity would improve 
its quality. On the other hand, the mixture stop in a pipe organ is 
intended to h^ve very pronounced overtones. , In fyct to this end 
not one but several pipes are sounded at qfice. The effect of the 
above room to emphasize the fundamental and to wipe out the 
overtones would be in opposition to the oipginal design of the stop. 
To determine what balance is desirable must lie of course with the 
musicians. The only object of the present series of papers is to 
point out the fundamental facts, and that our conditions may be 
varied in order to attain any desired end. One great thing needed 
is that the judgment of the musical authorities should be gathered 
in an available form; but that is another problem, and the above 
bare outline is intended only to indicate the importance of extend- 
ing the work to the whole range of the musical scale, — the work 
undertaken in the present paper. 

The method pursued in these experiments is not very unlike that 
followed in the previous experiments with C4 512. It differs in minor 
detail, but to explain these details would involve a great deal of 
repetition which the modifications in the method are not of sufficient 
importance to justify. 

Broadly, the procedure consists first in the determination of the 
rate of emission of the sound of an organ pipe for each note to be 
investigated. This consists in determining the durations of audibil- 
ity after the cessation of two sounds, one having four or more, but 
a known multiple, times the intensity of the other. From these 
results it is possible to determine the rate of emission by the pipes, 
each in terms of the minimum audibility for that particular tone. 
The apparatus used in this part of the experiment is shown in Fig. 1. 
Four small organs were fixed at a minimum distance of five meters 
apart. It was necessary to place them at this great distance apart 
because, as already pointed out, if placed near each other the four 
sounded together do not emit four times the sound emitted by one. 
This wide separation was particularly necessary for the large pipes 
and the low tones; a very much less separation would have served 
the purpose in the case of the high tones. 



Digitized by 



Google 



84 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

From the point where the four tubes leading to the small organs 
meet, a supply pipe ran, as shown on the drawing, to an air reservoir 
in the room below. This was fed from an electrically driven blower 
at the far end of the building. The chronograph was in another 
room. The experiments with this apparatus, like the experiments 



FlG.l 

heretofore recorded, were carried out at night between twelve and 
five o'clock. 

The rate of emission of sound by the several pipes having been 
determined, the next work was the determination of the coefficients 
of absorption. The methods employed having already been suffi- 
ciently described, only results will be given. 

In the very nature of the problem the most important data is the 
absorption coefficient of an audience, and the determination of this 
was the first task undertaken. By means of a lecture on one of 
the recent developments of physics, an audience was enveigled into 
attending, and at the end of the lecture requested to remain for the 
experiment. In this attempt the effort was made to determine the 
coefficients for the five octaves from C2 128 to C 6 2048, including 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 85 

notes E and G in each octave. For several reasons the experiment 
was not a success. A threatening thunder storm made the audience 
a small one, and the sultriness of the atmosphere made open win- 
dows necessary, while the attempt to. cover so many notes, thirteen 
in all, prolonged the experiment beyond the endurance of the audi- 
ence. While this experiment failed, another the following summer 
was more successful. In the year that had elapsed the necessity of 
carrying the investigation further than the limits intended became 
evident, and now the experiment was carried from Ci 64 to C7 4096, 
but including only the C notes, seven notes in all. Moreover, 
bearing in mind the experiences of the previous summer, it was 
recognized that even seven notes would come dangerously near over- 
taxing the patience of the audience. Inasmuch as the coefficient 
of absorption for C4 512 had already been determined six years be- 
fore in the investigations mentioned, the coefficient for this note 
was not redetermined. The experiment was therefore carried out 
for the lower three and the upper three notes of the seven. The 
audience, on the night of this experiment, was much larger than 
that which came the previous summer, the night was a more com- 
fortable one, and it was possible to close the windows during the 
experiment. The conditions were thus fairly satisfactory. In order 
to get as much data as possible and in as short a time, there were 
nine observers stationed at different points in the room. These ob- 
servers, whose kindness and skill it is a pleasure to acknowledge, 
had prepared themselves by previous practice for this one experi- 
ment. As in the work of six years ago, the writer's key controlled 
the organ pipes and started the chronograph, the writer and the 
other observers each had a key which was connected with the 
chronograph to record the cessation of audibility of the sound. The 
results of the experiment are shown on the lower curve in Fig. 2. 
This curve gives the coefficient of absorption per person. It is to 
be observed that one of the points falls clearly off the smooth curve 
drawn through the other points. The observations on which this 
point is based were, however, much disturbed by a street car pass- 
ing not far. from the building, and the departure of this observation 
from the curve does not indicate a real departure in the coefficient 
nor should it cast much doubt on the rest of the work, in view of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



circumstances under which it was secured. Counteracting the per- 
haps bad impression which this point may give, it is a considerable 
satisfaction to note how accurately the point for C 4 512, deter- 



1.0 














•tt 














.8 


i 












.7 


/ 












.6 


/ 












.6 


/ 


















.4 


f , - .„ 


s 










.3 


/ 












.a 


( 












a 















o» 



0. 0, 



Fig. 2. The absorbing power of an audience for different 
notes. The lower curve represents the absorbing power 
of an audience per person. The upper curve represents 
the absorbing power of an audience per square meter 
as ordinarily seated. The vertical ordinates are ex- 
pressed in terms of total absorption by a square meter 
of surface. For the upper curve the ordinates are thus 
the ordinary coefficients of absorption. The several 
notes are at octave intervals, as follows: Q64, &128, 
G (middle C) 356, C«513, C B 1034, C«3048, Ct4096. 

mined six years before by a different set of observers, falls on the 
smooth curve through the remaining points. In the audience on 
which these observations were taken there were 77 women and 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 87 

105 men. The courtesy of the audience in remaining for the ex- 
periment and the really remarkable silence which they maintained 
is gratefully acknowledged. 

The curve above discussed is that for the average person in an 
audience. An interesting form in which to throw the results is to 
regard the audience as one side of a room. We may then look at it 
as an extended absorbing surface, and determine the coefficient per 
square meter. Worked out on this basis the absorption coefficient 
is indicated in the higher curve. It is merely the lower curve multi- 
plied by a number which expresses the average number of people 
per square meter. It is interesting to note that the coefficient of 
absorption is about the same from C4 512 up, indicating over that 
range nearly complete absorption. Below that point there is a very 
great falling off, down to Ci 64. The curve is such as to permit of 
an extrapolation indicative of even less absorption and consequently 
greater reverberation for the still lower notes. Without entering 
into an elaborate discussion of this curve, two points may be noted 
as particularly interesting. The first is the nearly complete absorp- 
tion for the higher notes, a result which at first sight seems a little 
inconsistent with the results which will be shown later on in con- 
nection with the absorption by felt. The inconsistency, however, 
is only apparent. The greater absorption shown by an audience 
than that shown by thick felt arises from the fact that the surface 
of the audience is irregular and does not result in a single reflection, 
but probably, for a very large portion of the sound, of multiple re- 
flection before it finally emerges. The physical conditions are such 
that they obviously do not admit of analytic expression, but the 
explanation of the great absorption by an extended audience sur- 
face is not difficult to understand. In addition to the above there 
is another partial explanation which contributes to the results. 
The felt forms a perfectly continuous medium, and therefore offers 
a comparatively rigid reflecting surface. The comparatively light, 
thin, and porous nature of the clothing of women, perhaps more 
than of men, contributes to the great absorption of the high notes. 

The next experiment, taking them up chronologically, and per- 
haps next even from the standpoint of interest, was in regard to a 
brick wall-surface. This experiment was carried out in the constant- 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



temperature room mentioned in the previous papers. The arrange- 
ment of apparatus is shown in Fig. 3, where the air reservoir in the 
room above is shown in dotted lines. In many respects the constant- 
temperature room offered admirable conditions for the experiment. 




Fig. 3 

Its position in the center of the building and its depth underground 
made it comparatively free from outside disturbing noises, — so 
much so that it was possible to experiment in this room in the earlier 
parts of the evening, although not, of course, when any one else was 
at work in the building. While it possesses these advantages, its 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 



89 



arched ceiling, by placing it in the category of special cases, makes 
extra precaution necessary. Fortunately, at the beginning of the 
experiment the walls were unpainted. Under these conditions its 

.10 



•09 
•08 
.07 
.06 
.06 
.04 
.03 
.02 
.01 

























































































1^^^^^ 












^^^^^ 


» 





















c, o a 



ft 



Fig. 4. The absorbing power of a 45 cm. thick brick wall. 
The upper curve represents the absorbing power of an 
unpainted brick surface. The bricks were hard but not 
glazed, and were set in cement. The lower curve repre- 
sents the absorbing power of the same surface painted 
with two coats of oil paint. The difference between 
the two curves represents the absorption due to the 
porosity of the bricks. In small part, but probably only 
in small part, the difference is due to difference in super- 
ficial smoothness. C» (middle C) 256. 

coefficient of absorption for different notes was determined. It was 
then painted with an oil paint, two coats, and its coefficient of ab- 
sorption redetermined. The two curves are shown in Fig. 4. The 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

upper curve is for the unpainted brick; the lower curve is that ob- 
tained after the walls were painted. The difference between the 
two curves would, if plotted alone, be the curve of absorption due 
to the porosity of the brick. It may seem, perhaps, that the paint 
in covering the bare brick wall made a smoother surface, and the 
difference between the two results might be due in part to less sur- 
face friction. Of course this is a factor, but that it is an exceedingly 
small factor will be shown later in the discussion of the results on 
the absorption of sound by other bodies. The absorption of the 
sound after the walls are painted is, of course, due to the yielding of 
the walls under the vibration, to the sound actually transmitted 
bodily by the walls, and to the absorption in the process of trans- 
mission. It is necessary to call attention to the fact that the vertical 
ordinates are here magnified tenfold over the ordinates shown in the 
last curve. 

The next experiment was on the determination of the absorption 
of sound by wood sheathing. It is not an easy matter to find con- 
ditions suitable for this experiment. The room in which the absorp- 
tion by wood sheathing was determined in the earlier experiments 
was not available for these. It was available then only because the 
building was new and empty. When these more elaborate experi- 
ments were under way the room had become occupied, and in a 
manner that did not admit of its being cleared. Quite a little search- 
ing in the neighborhood of Boston failed to discover an entirely suit- 
able room. The best one available adjoined a night lunch room. 
The night lunch was bought out for a couple of nights, and the ex- 
periment was tried. The work of both nights was much disturbed. 
The traffic past the building did not stop until nearly two o'clock, 
and began again about four. The interest of those passing by on 
foot throughout the night, and the necessity of repeated explana- 
tions to the police, greatly interfered with the work. This detailed 
statement of the conditions under which the experiment was tried 
is made by way of explanation of the irregularity of the observa- 
tions recorded on the curve, and of the failure to carry this particular 
line of work further. The first night seven points were obtained for 
the seven notes Ci 64 to C7 4096. This work was done by means 
of a portable apparatus shown in Fig. 5. The reduction of these 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 



91 



results on the following day showed variations indicative of maxima 
and minima, which to be accurately located would require the de- 




Fig.5 



termination of intermediate points. The experiment the following 
night was by means of the organ shown in Fig. 6, and points were 



Digitized by 



Google 



92 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

determined for the E and G notes in each octave between Cj 128 and 
Ce 2048. Other points would have been determined, but time did 
not permit. It is obvious that the intermediate points in the lower and 



Fig. 6 



in the higher octave were desirable, but no pipes were to be had on 
such short notice for this part of the range, and in their absence the 
data could not be obtained. In the diagram, Fig. 7, the points lying 
on the vertical lines were determined the first night. The points 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 



93 



lying between the vertical lines were determined the second night. 
The accuracy with which these points fall on a smooth curve is 



ji 

JO 
.00 
.08 
.07 
.06 
.06 
.04 
.06 
.08 
.01 






c, 



4 



o* a 



Fig. 7. The absorbing power of wood sheathing, two centi- 
meters thick, North Carolina pine. The observations 
were made under very unsuitable conditions. The 
absorption is here due almost wholly to yielding of the 
sheathing as a whole, the surface being shellacked, 
smooth, and non-porous. The curve shows one point 
of resonance within the range tested, and the prob- 
ability of another point of resonance above. It is not 
possible now to learn as much in regard to the framing 
and arrangement of the studding in the particular room 
tested as is desirable. C» (middle C) 256. 



Digitized by 



Google 



94 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

perhaps all that could be expected in view of the difficulty under 
which the observations were conducted and the limited time avail- 
able. One point in particular falls far off from this curve, the point 
for C3 256, by an amount which is, to say the least, serious, and 
which can be justified only by the conditions under which the work 
was done. The general trend of the curve seems, however, estab- 
lished beyond reasonable doubt. It is interesting to note that there 
is one point of maximum absorption, which is due to resonance be- 
tween the walls and the sound, and that this point of maximum 
absorption lies in the lower part, though not in the lowest part, of 
the range of pitch tested. It would have been interesting to deter- 
mine, had the time and facilities permitted, the shape of the curve 
beyond C 7 4096, and to see if it rises indefinitely, or shows, as is far 
more likely, a succession of maxima. The scale employed in this 
curve is the same as that employed in the diagram of the unpainted 
and painted wall-surfaces. It may perhaps be noted in this con- 
nection that at the very least the absorption is four times that of 
painted brick walls. 

The experiment was then directed to the determination of the ab- 
sorption of sound by cushions, and for this purpose return was made 
to the constant-temperature room. Working in the manner indicated 
in the earlier papers for substances which could be carried in and 
out of a room, the curves represented in Fig. 8 were obtained. 
Curve 1 shows the absorption coefficient for the Sanders Theatre 
cushions, with which the whole investigation was begun ten years 
ago. These cushions were of a particularly open grade of packing, 
a sort of wiry grass or vegetable fiber. They were covered with 
canvas ticking, and that in turn with a very thin cloth covering. 
Curve 2 is for cushions borrowed from the Phillips Brooks House. 
They were of a high grade, filled with long curly hair, and covered 
with canvas ticking, which was in turn covered by a long nap plush. 
Curve 3 is for the cushions of Appleton Chapel, hair covered with a 
leatherette, and showing a sharper maximum and a more rapid 
diminution in absorption for the higher frequencies, as would be 
expected under such conditions. Curve 4 is probably the most 
interesting, because for more standard commercial conditions. It 
is the curve for elastic felt cushions as made by Sperry and Beale. 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 



95 



It is to be observed that all four curves fall off for the higher fre- 
quencies, all show a maximum located within an octave, and three 



1.0 



.8 
.7 
.6 
.6 
.4 
.3 
.9 
J 





















A 


\ 










N* 


\ 


\ 








2VV 




\ 








r\\ 




A 












V 














(y 


r 



































o, 



C, O, G« O s Q» Of 



Fig. 8. The absorbing power of cushions. Curve 1 is 
for "Sanders Theatre" cushions of wiry vegetable 
fiber, covered with canvas ticking and a thin cloth. 
Curve 2 is for "Brooks House" cushions of long hair, 
covered with the same kind of ticking and plush. 
Curve 3 is for " Appleton Chapel" cushions of hair, 
covered with ticking and a thin leatherette. Curve 4 
is for the elastic felt cushions of commerce, of elastic 
cotton, covered with ticking and short nap plush. The 
absorbing power is per square meter of surface. 
Ct (middle C) 256. 

of the curves show a curious hump in the second octave. This 
break in the curve is a genuine phenomenon, as it was tested time 
after time. It is perhaps due to a secondary resonance, and it is to 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



be observed that it is the more pronounced in those curves that have 
the sharper resonance in their principal maxima. 

Observations were then obtained on unupholstered chairs and 
settees. The result for chairs is shown in Fig. 10. This curve gives 
the absorption coefficient per single chair. The effect was surpris- 
ingly small; in fact, when the floor of the constant-temperature 
room was entirely covered with the chairs spaced at usual seating 
distances, the effect on the reverberation in the room was exceed- 



Fig. 9 




ingly slight. The fact that it was so slight and the consequent dif- 
ficulty in measuring the coefficient is a partial explanation of the 
variation of the results as indicated in the figure. Nevertheless it 
is probable that the variations there indicated have some real basis, 
for a repetition of the work showed the points again falling above 
and below the line as in the first experiment. The amount that 
these fell above and below the line was difficult to determine, and 
the number of points along the curve were too few to justify at- 
tempting to follow their values by the line. In fact the line is drawn 
on the diagram merely to indicate in a general way the fact that the 
coefficient of absorption is nearly the same over the whole range. A 
varying resonance phenomenon was unquestionably present, but so 
small as to be negligible; and in fact the whole absorption by the 
chairs is an exceedingly small factor. The chair was of ash, and its 
type is shown in the accompanying sketch, Fig. 9. 

The results of the observations on settees is shown in Fig. 11. 
Those plotted are the coefficients per single seat, there being five 
seats to the settee. The settees were placed at the customary dis- 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 



97 



tance. Here again the principal interest attaches to the fact that 
the coefficient of absorption is so exceedingly small that the total 
effect on the reverberation is hardly noticeable. Here also the 
plotted results do not fall on the line drawn, and the departure is 



•vo 
•02 
•01 


























i 


* 
- 


\ 




1 1 







Oi c, c a c, c, c. c, 

Fig. 10. The absorbing power of ash chairs shown in Fig. 9. 

due probably to some slight resonance. The magnitude of the de- 
parture, however, could not be determined with accuracy because of 
the small magnitude of the total absorption coefficient. For these 
reasons and because the number of points was insufficient, no at- 

.03 



.02 



.01 






c, 



c, c, c 4 c, 



c. 



c, 



Fig. 11. The absorbing power of ash settees shown in 
Fig. 9. The absorption is per single seat, the settee 
as shown seating five. 

tempt was made to draw the curve through the plotted points, but 
merely to indicate a plotted tendency. The settees were of ash, 
and their general style is shown in the sketch. 

An investigation was then begun in regard to the nature of the 
process of absorption of sound. The material chosen for this work 
was a very durable grade of felt, which, as the manufacturers 
claimed, was all wool. Even a casual examination of its texture 
makes it difficult to believe that it is all wool. It has, however, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



98 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

advantage of being porous, flexible, and very durable. Almost con* 
stant handling for several years has apparently not greatly changed 
its consistency. It is to be noted that this felt is not that mentioned 
in the papers of six years ago. That felt was of lime-treated cow's 
hair, the kind used in packing steam pipes. It was very much cheaper 
in price, but stood little handling before disintegrating. The felt 
employed in these experiments comes in sheets of various thick- 
nesses, the thickness here employed being about 1.1 cm. 

The coefficient of absorption of a single layer of felt was measured 
for the notes from C x 64 to C7 4096 at octave intervals. The experi- 
ment was repeated for two layers, one on top of the other, then for 
three, and so on up to six thicknesses of felt. Because the greater 
thicknesses presented an area on the edge not inconsiderable in 
comparison with the surface, the felt was surrounded by a narrow 
wood frame. Under such circumstances it was safe to assume that 
the absorption was entirely by the upper surface of the felt. The 
experiment was repeated a great many times, first measuring the 
coefficient of absorption for one thickness for all frequencies, and 
then checking the work by conducting experiments in the other 
order; that is, measuring the absorption by one, two, three, etc., 
thicknesses, for each frequency. The mean of all observations is 
shown in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13. In Fig. 12 the variations in pitch are 
plotted as abscissas, as in previous diagrams, whereas in Fig. 13 the 
thicknesses are taken as abscissas. The special object of the second 
method will appear later, but a general object of adopting this 
method of plotting is as follows: 

If we consider Fig. 12, for example, the drawing of the line through 
any one set of points should be made not merely to best fit those 
points, but should be drawn having in mind the fact that it, as a 
curve, is one of a family of curves, and that it should be drawn not 
merely as a best curve through its own points, but as best fits the 
whole set. For example, in Fig. 12 the curve for four thicknesses 
would not have been drawn as there shown if drawn simply with 
reference to its own points. It would have been drawn directly 
through the points for Q 64 and C2 128. Similarly the curve for 
five thicknesses would have been drawn a little nearer the point for 
C2 128, and above instead of below the point for Ci 64. Considering, 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 



99 



however, the whole family of curves and recognizing that each point 
is not without some error, the curves as drawn are more nearly 
correct. The best method of reconciling the several curves to each 



L0 



.8 

.7 



.6 
•3 































/*/ 












% 


y^ 


\^ 








>h 


1 






X 


/ 


■ 








/, 


A 


f J 


I 






y 


/ 










u* 

























o, 



o 4 c, 



c. 



Fio. 12. The absorbing power of felt of different thick- 
nesses. Each piece of felt was 1.1 cm. in thickness. 
Curve 1 is for a single thickness, curve 2 for two thick- 
nesses placed one on top of the other, etc. As shown 
by these curves, the absorption is in part by penetra- 
tion into the pores of the felt, in part by a yielding of 
the mass as a whole. Resonance in the latter process 
is clearly shown by a maximum shifting to lower 
and lower pitch with increase in thickness of the felt. 
C, (middle C) 256. 

other is to plot two diagrams, one in which the variations in pitch 
are taken as abscissa and one in which the variations in thickness 
of felt are taken as abscissas; then draw through the points the best 



Digitized by 



Google 



100 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

fitting curves and average the corresponding ordinates taken from 
the curves thus drawn; and with these average ordinates redraw 
both families of curves. The points shown on the diagram are of 
course the original results obtained experimentally. In general 
they fall pretty close to the curves, although at times, as in the 
points noted, they fall rather far to one side. 

The following will serve to present the points of particular in- 
terest revealed by the family of curves in Fig. 12, where the absorp- 
tion by the seVeral thicknesses is plotted against pitch for abscissas. 
It is to be observed that a single thickness scarcely absorbs the sound 
from the eight, four, and two-foot organ pipes, Ci 64, C 2 128, and 
C 3 256, and that its absorption increases rapidly for the next two 
octaves, after which it remains a constant. Two thicknesses absorb 
more — about twice as much — for the lower notes, the curve rising 
more rapidly, passing through a maximum between C 4 512 and 
C B 1024, and then falling off for the higher notes. The same is true 
for greater thicknesses. All curves show a maximum, each succeed- 
ing one corresponding to a little lower note. The maximum for six 
thicknesses coincides pretty closely to C 4 512. The absorption of 
the sound by felt may be ascribed to three causes, — porosity of 
structure, compression of the felt as a whole, and friction on the 
surface. The presence of the maximum must be ascribed to the 
second of these causes, the compression of the felt as a whole. As 
to the third of these three causes, it is best to consult the curves of 
the next figure. 

The following facts are rendered particularly evident by the 
curves of Fig. 13. For the tones emitted by the eight-foot organ 
pipe, Ci 64, the absorption of the sound is very nearly proportional 
to the thickness of the felt over the range tested, six thicknesses, 
6.6 cm. The curves for notes of increasing pitch show increasing 
value for the coefficients of absorption. They all show that were 
the thickness of the felt sufficiently great, a limit would be ap- 
proached — a fact, of course, self-evident — but for C B 1024 this 
thickness was reached within the range experimented on; and of 
course the same is true for all higher notes, Ce 2048 and C7 4096. 
The higher the note, the less the thickness of felt necessary to pro- 
duce a maximum effect- The curves of Ci 64, C 2 128, C 3 256, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 



101 



C< 512, if extended backward, would pass nearly through the origin. 
This indicates that for at least notes of so low a pitch the absorption 
















A 












7 












A 




"^V 












.* rf 


1 _> 


















7I 




/^g 


< 


>^r 




/ 






'* 




•9 '■' 1 


/) 






/o t 








\S *^r 








' / 


/ j^^ 


> 









3 



6 



Fio. IS. The absorbing power of felt of different thick- 
nesses. The data, Fig. 12, is here plotted in a slightly 
different manner — horizontally on plotted increasing 
thickness — and the curves are for notes of different 
frequency at octave intervals in pitch. Thus plotted 
the curves show the necessary thickness of felt for 
practically maximum efficiency in absorbing sound of 
different pitch. These curves also show that for the 
lowest three notes surface friction is negligible, at least 
in comparison with the other factors. For the high 
notes one thickness of felt was too great for the curves 
to be conclusive in regard to this point. C» (middle 
Q256. 

of sound would be zero, or nearly zero, for zero thickness. Since 
zero thickness would leave surface effects, the argument leads to 



Digitized by 



Google 



102 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

the conclusion that surface friction as an agent in the absorption of 
sound is of small importance. The curves plotted do not give any 
evidence in this respect in regard to the higher notes, C 6 1024, 
C« 2048, and C 7 4096. 

It is of course evident that the above data do not by any means 
cover all the ground that should be covered. It is highly desirable 
that data should be accessible for glass surfaces, for glazed tile sur- 
faces, for plastered and unplastered porous tile, for plaster on wood 
lath and plaster on wire lath, for rugs and carpets; but even with 
these data collected the job would be by no means completed. 
What is wanted is not merely the measurement of existing material 
and wall-surfaces, but an investigation of all the possibilities. A 
concrete case will perhaps illustrate this. If the wall-surface is to 
be of wood, there enter the questions as to what would be the effect 
of varying the material, — how ash differs from oak, and oak from 
walnut or pine or whitewood; what is the effect of variations in 
thickness; what the effect of paneling; what is the effect of the 
spacing of the furring on which the wood sheathing is fastened. If 
the wall is to be plaster on lath, there arises the question as to the 
difference between wood lath and wire lath, between the mortar 
that was formerly used and the wall of today, which is made of hard 
and impervious plaster. What is the effect of variations in thick- 
ness of the plaster ? What is the effect of painting the plaster in 
oil or in water colors ? What is the effect of the depth of the air 
space behind the plaster ? The recent efforts at fireproof construc- 
tion have resulted in the use of harder and harder wall-surfaces, 
and great reverberation in the room, and in many cases in poorer 
acoustics. Is it possible to devise a material which shall satisfy the 
conditions as to fireproof qualities and yet retain the excellence of 
some of the older but not fireproof rooms ? Or, if one turns to the 
interior furnishings, what type of chair is best, what form of cushions, 
or what form of upholstery ? There are many forms of auditorium 
chairs and settees, and all these should be investigated if one pro- 
poses to apply exact calculation to the problem. These are some of 
the questions that have arisen. A few data have been obtained 
looking toward the answer to some of them. The difficulty in the 
way of the prosecution of such work is greater, however, than ap- 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 103 

pears at first sight, the particular difficulties being of opportunity 
and of expense. It is difficult, for example, to find rooms whose 
walls are in large measure of glass, especially when one bears in 
mind that the room must be empty, that its other wall-surfaces 
must be of a substance fully investigated, and that it must be in a 
location admitting of quiet work. Or, to investigate the effect of 
the different kinds of plaster and of the different methods of plaster- 
ing, it is necessary to have a room, preferably an underground room, 
which can be lined and relined. The constant-temperature room 
which is now available for the experiments is not a room suitable 
to that particular investigation, and for best results a special room 
should be constructed. Moreover, the expense of plastering and 
replastering a room — and this process, to arrive at anything like 
a general solution of the problem, would have to be done a great 
many times — would be very great, and is at the present moment 
prohibitive. A little data along some of these lines have been se- 
cured, but not at all in final form. The work in the past has been 
largely of an analytical nature. Could the investigation take the 
form of constructive research, and lead to new methods and greater 
possibilities, it would be taking its more interesting form. 

The above discussion has been solely with reference to the deter- 
mination of the coefficient of absorption of sound. It is now pro- 
posed to discuss the question of the application of these coefficients 
to the calculation of reverberation. In the first series of papers, 
reverberation was defined with reference to C 4 512 as the continua- 
tion of the sound in a room after the source had ceased, the initial 
intensity of the sound being one million times minimum audible 
intensity. It is debatable whether or not this definition should be 
extended without alteration to reverberation for other notes than 
C 4 512. There is a good deal to be said both for and against its 
retention. The whole, however, hinges on the outcome of a physi- 
ological or psychological inquiry not yet in such shape as to lead to 
a final decision. The question is therefore held in abeyance, and 
for the time the definition is retained. 

Retaining the definition, the reverberation for any pitch can be 
calculated by the formula 

a 



Digitized by 



Google 



104 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



where V is the volume of the room, K is a constant depending on 
the initial intensity, and a is the total absorbing power of the walls 
and the contained material. K and V are the same for all pitch 



9 














8 














7 














6 














6 




























3 


k 














V 


>** 







































Oi c 0, 4 C, 0, ft 

Fig. 14. Curves expressing the reverberation in the large 
lecture-room of the Jefferson Physical Laboratory with 
(lower curve) and without (upper curve) an audience. 
These curves express in seconds the duration of the 
residual sound in the room after the cessation of 
sources producing intensities 10 s times minimum 
audible intensity for each note. The upper curve de- 
scribes acoustical conditions which are very unsatis- 
factory, as the hall is to be used for speaking purposes. 
The lower curve describes acoustically satisfactory 
conditions. Ci (middle C) 256. 

frequencies. K is .164 for an initial intensity 10 6 times minimum 
audible intensity. The only factor that varies with the pitch is a, 
which can be determined from the data given above. 



Digitized by 



Google 



VARIATION IN REVERBERATION 105 

In illustration, the curves in the accompanying Fig. 14 give the 
reverberation in the large lecture-room of the Jefferson Physical 
Laboratory. The upper curve defines the reverberation in the room 
when entirely empty; the lower curve defines this reverberation in 
the same room with an audience two-thirds filling the room. The 
upper curve represents a condition which would be entirely impracti- 
cal for speaking purposes; the lower curve represents a fairly satis- 
factory condition. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



i 



MELODY AND THE ORIGIN OF THE MUSICAL 

SCALE 1 

In the vice-presidential addresses of the American Association 
great latitude in the choice of subjects is allowed and taken, but 
there is, I believe, no precedent for choosing the review of a book 
printed fifty-five years before. Helmholtz' Tcmenemfindungen, pro- 
duced by a masterful knowledge of physiology, physics, and mathe- 
matics, and a scholar's knowledge of the literature of music, has 
warded off all essential criticism by its breadth, completeness, and 
wealth of detail. Since it was first published it has been added to 
by the author from time to time in successive editions, and greatly 
bulwarked by the scholarly notes and appendices of its translator, 
Dr. Alexander J. Ellis. The original text remains unchanged, and 
unchallenged, as far as physicists are concerned, in all important 
respects. In taking exception at this late day to the fundamental 
thesis of Part HI, I derive the necessary courage from the fact that 
should such exception be sustained, it will serve to restore to its 
full application that greater and more original contribution of Helm- 
holtz which he included in Part II. Having given a physical and 
physiological explanation of the harmony and discord of simul- 
taneous sounds, and, therefore, an explanation of the musical scale 
as used in modern composition, Helmholtz was met by an apparent 
anachronism. The musical scale, identical with the modern musi- 
cal scale in all essentials, antedated by its use in single-part melody 
the invention of chordal composition, or, as Helmholtz expressed 
it, preceded all experience of musical harmony. In seeking an ex- 
planation of this early invention of the musical scale, Helmholtz 
abandoned his most notable contribution, and relegated his expla- 
nation of harmony and discord to the minor service of explaining 
a fortunate, though of course an important use of an already in- 
vented system of musical notes. The explanation of the original 

1 Vice-Presidential Address, Section B, American Association for the Advancement of 
Science, Chicago, 1907. 

107 



Digitized by 



Google 



108 MELODY 

invention of the musical scale and its use in single-part music 
through the classical and the early Christian eras, he sought for 
in purely aesthetic considerations, — in exactly those devices from 
which he had just succeeded in rescuing the explanation of harmony 
and discord. 

The human ear consists of three parts, — in the nomenclature 
of anatomy, of the outer, middle, and inner ear. The outer and 
the inner ears are connected by a series of three small bones trav- 
ersing the middle ear and transmitting the vibrations of sound. 
The inner ear is a peculiarly shaped cavity in one of the hard bones 
of the skull. That part of the cavity with which we are here con- 
cerned is a long passage called from its resemblance to the interior 
of a snail shell the cochlea. The cavity has two windows which are 
closed by membranes. It is to the uppermost of these membranes 
that the train of three small bones, reaching from the drum of the 
outer ear, is attached at its inner end. It is to this upper membrane, 
therefore, that the vibration is communicated, and through it the 
vibration reaches the fluid which fills the inner cavity. As the 
membrane covering the upper window vibrates, the membrane 
covering the lower window yielding, also vibrates, and the motion 
of the fluid is in the nature of a slight displacement from one to 
the other window, to and fro. From between these windows a dia- 
phragm, dividing the passageway, extends almost the whole length 
of the cochlea. This diaphragm is composed in part of a great 
number of very fine fibers stretched side by side, transverse to the 
cochlea, and called after their discoverer, fibers of Corti. On this 
diaphragm terminate the auditory nerves. When the liquid vibrates, 
the fibers vibrate in unison, the nerve terminals are stimulated, and 
thus the sensation of sound is produced. These fibers of Corti are 
of different lengths and presumably are stretched with different 
tensions. They therefore have different natural rates of vibration 
and a sympathetic resonance for different notes. The whole has 
been called a harp of several thousand strings. 

Were these fibers of Corti very free in their vibration, each 
would respond to and would respond strongly only to that partic- 
ular note with whose frequency it is in unison* Because of the fact 
that they are in a liquid, and possibly also because of the manner 



Digitized by 



Google 



ORIGIN OF THE MUSICAL SCALE 109 

of their terminal connections, they are considerably damped. Be- 
cause of this their response is both less in amount and less selective 
in character. In fact, under these conditions, not one, but many 
fibers vibrate in response to a single pure note. A considerable 
length or area of the diaphragm is excited. So long as the exciting 
sound remains pure in quality, constant in pitch, and constant in 
intensity, the area of the diaphragm affected and the amplitude of 
its vibration remain unchanged. If, however, two notes are sounded 
of nearly the same pitch, the areas of the diaphragm affected by the 
two notes overlap. In the overlapping region the vibration is violent 
when the two notes are in the same phase, weak when they are in 
opposite phase. The result is the familiar phenomena of beats. 
Such beats when slow are not disagreeable and not without musical 
value. If the difference between the two notes is increased, the 
beats become more rapid and more disagreeable. To this violent 
disturbance, to the starting and stopping of the vibration of the 
fibers of Corti, Helmholtz ascribed the sense of roughness which we 
call discord. As the notes are more widely separated in pitch, the 
overlapping of the affected areas diminishes. Between pure notes 
the sense of discord disappears with sufficient separation in pitch. 
When the two vibrating areas exactly match, because the two notes 
are of exactly the same pitch, and when the two areas do not in the 
least overlap, because of a sufficiently wide separation in pitch, the 
result according to Helmholtz is harmony. Partial overlapping of 
the affected areas produces beats, and the roughness of beats is 
discord. Such, reduced to its fewest elements, is Helmholtz' expla- 
nation of the harmony and discord of tones which are pure. 

But no musical tone is simple. It always consists of a combina- 
tion of so-called partial tones which bear to each other a more or 
less simple relationship. Of these partial tones, one is called the 
fundamental, — so-called because it is the loudest or lowest or, 
better still, because it is that to which the other partial tones bear 
the simplest relation. A musical tone, therefore, affects not one, 
but, through its fundamental and upper partial tonetf, several areas 
of the diaphragm in the cochlea. Two musical tones, each with its 
fundamental and upper partials, therefore, affect areas of the dia- 
phragm which overlap each other in a more or less complicated 



Digitized by 



Google 



I1X) MELODY 

manner, depending on the relative frequencies of the fundamental 
tones and the relationships of their upper partials. . The exact 
matching of the areas affected by these two systems of partial tones, 
or the entire separation of the affected areas, give harmony. The 
overlapping of these affected areas, if great, produces discord, or, if 
slight in amount, modifications and color of harmony. 

In the great majority of musical tones the upper partials bear 
simple relationships to the fundamentals, being integral multiples 
in vibration frequency. Helmholtz showed that if of two such 
tones one continued to sound unchanged in pitch, and the other 
starting in unison was gradually raised in pitch, the resulting dis- 
cord would pass through maxima and minima, and that the minima 
would locate the notes of the pentatonic scale. Hie intermediate 
notes of the complete modern musical scale are determined by 
a repetition of this process starting from the notes thus deter- 
mined. 

If to this is added a similar consideration of the mutual inter- 
ference of the combinational tones which are themselves due to 
the interaction of the partial tones, we have the whole, though of 
course in the briefest outline, of Helmholtz' theory of the harmony 
and discord of simultaneously sounding musical tones. 

Having thus in Parts I and II developed a theory for the har- 
mony and discord of simultaneous sounds, and having developed 
a theory which explains the modern use of the musical scale in 
chords and harmonic music, Helmholtz pointed out, in Part III, 
that the musical scale in its present form existed before the inven- 
tion of harmonic music and before the use of chords. 

Music may be divided into three principal periods: — 

1. "Homophonic or Unison Music of the ancients," including the music 

of the Christian era up to the eleventh century, " to which also 
belongs the existing music of Oriental and Asiatic nations." 

2. "Polyphonic music of the middle ages, with several parts, but with- 

out regard to any independent musical significance of the har- 
monies, extending from the tenth to the seventeenth century." 

3. "Harmonic or modern music characterized by the independent 

significance attributed to the harmonies as such." 



Digitized by 



Google 



ORIGIN OF THE MUSICAL SCALE 111 

Polyphonic music was the first to call for the production of 
simultaneous sounds, and, therefore, for the hearing or the experi- 
ence of musical harmony. Homophonic music, that which alone 
existed up to the tenth or eleventh century, consisted in the pro- 
gression of single-part melody. Struck by this fact, Helmholtz 
recognized the necessity of seeking another explanation for the 
invention and the use of a scale of fixed notes in the music of this 
period. To borrow his own words, "scales existed long before 
there was any knowledge or experience of harmony." Again, else- 
where, he says in emphasizing the point: "The individual parts of 
melody reach the ear in succession. We cannot perceive them all 
at once; we cannot observe backwards and forwards at pleasure." 
Between sounds produced and heard in discrete succession, there 
can be neither harmony nor discord, there cannot be beats, or 
roughness or interruption of continuous vibrations. Regarding the 
sounds of a melody as not merely written in strict and non-over- 
lapping succession, but also as produced and heard in discrete suc- 
cession, Helmholtz sought another basis for the choice of the notes 
to constitute a scale for homophonic music. His explanation of 
this invention can be best presented by a few quotations: — 

Melody has to express a motion in such a manner that the hearer may 
easily, clearly, and certainly appreciate the character of that motion by 
immediate perception. This is only possible when the steps of this motion, 
their rapidity, and their amount, are also exactly measurable by immediate 
sensible perception. Melodic motion is change of pitch in time. To meas- 
ure it perfectly, the length of time elapsed and the distance between the 
pitches must be measurable. This is possible for immediate audition only 
on condition that the alterations both in time and pitch should proceed by 
regular and determinate degrees. 

Again Helmholtz says: — 

For a clear and sure measurement of the change of pitch, no means was 
left but progression by determinate degrees. This series of degrees is laid 
down in the musical scale. When the wind howls and its pitch rises or falls 
in insensible gradations without any break, we have nothing to measure 
the variations of pitch, nothing by which we can compare the later with the 
earlier sounds, and comprehend the extent of the change. The whole phe- 
nomenon produces a confused, unpleasant impression. The musical scale 
is as it were the divided rod, by which we measure progression in pitch, as 
rhythm measures progression in time. 



Digitized by 



Google 



112 MELODY 

Later he says: — 

Let us begin with the Octave, in which the relationship to the funda- 
mental tone is most remarkable. Let any melody be executed on any in- 
strument which has a good musical quality of tone, such as a human voice; 
the hearer mubt have heard not only the primes of the compound tones, but 
also their upper octaves, and, less strongly, the remaining upper partials. 
When, then, a higher voice afterwards executes the same melody an Octave 
higher, we hear again a part of what we heard before, namely the evenly 
numbered partial tones of the former compound tones, and at the same 
time we hear nothing that we had not previously heard. 

What is true of the Octave is true in a less degree for the Twelfth. 
If a melody is repeated in the Twelfth we again hear only what we had 
already heard, but the repeated part of what we heard is much weaker, 
because only the third, sixth, ninth, etc., partial tone is repeated, whereas 
for repetition in the Octave, instead of the third partial, the much stronger 
second and weaker fourth partial is heard, and in place of the ninth, the 
eighth and tenth occur, etc. 

For the repetition on the Fifth, only a part of the new sound is iden- 
tical with a part of what had been heard, but it is, nevertheless, the most 
perfect repetition which can be executed at a smaller interval than an 
Octave. 

Without carrying these quotations further they will suffice to 
illustrate the basis which Helmholtz would ascribe to homophonic 
music and early melodic composition. On this explanation the 
basis of melody is purely that of rhythm and rhythm based on a 
scale of intervals. The scale of intervals in turn is based on a 
recognition, conscious or subconscious, of the compound character 
of musical tones, and of the existence in tones of different pitch of 
partials of the same pitch. This calls for a degree of musical in- 
sight and discrimination which it is difficult to credit to a primitive 
art. It is in reality the skill of the highly trained musician, of a 
musician trained by long experience with sounds which are rich 
and accurate in quality. This power of analysis goes rather with 
supreme skill than with the early gropings of an art. 

After having developed a theory of harmony and discord based 
on elaborate experimental and mathematical investigations, which 
was remarkable in bringing together three such diverse fields as 
physics, physiology, and aesthetics, he relegated it to the minor 
application of explaining the use in modern music of an already 



Digitized by 



Google 



ORIGIN OF THE MUSICAL SCALE 113 

existing and highly developed musical scale, and sought an expla- 
nation of the earlier use of the scale in melody and its original in- 
vention in the principle which is very far from possessing either 
the beauty or the convincing quality of his earlier hypothesis. He 
was forced to this by a priority of melodic or homophonic compo- 
sition. He saw in melody only a succession of notes, no two exist- 
ing at the same time, and therefore incapable of producing harmony 
or discord in a manner such as he had been considering. 

It is true that melody is written as a pure succession of discrete 
notes, one beginning only when the other has ceased. It is true also 
that melody is so sung and so produced on a homophonic instru- 
ment, such as the voice, flute, reeds, or one-stringed instruments. 
This is peculiarly true of the voice, and it is with the voice that 
one naturally associates the earliest invention of the scale. But 
while it is true that the earliest song must have consisted of tones 
produced only in succession, it is not necessarily true that such 
sounds were heard as isolated notes. A sound produced in a space 
which is in any way confined continues until it is diminished by 
transmission through openings or is absorbed by the retaining walls/ 
or contained material to such a point that it is past the threshold 
of audibility, and this prolongation of audibility of sound is under 
many conditions a factor of no inconsiderable importance. In many 
rooms of ordinary construction the prolongation of audibility 
amounts to two or three seconds, and it is not exceedingly rare that 
a sound of moderate initial intensity should continue audible for 
eight, nine, or even ten seconds after the source has ceased. As a 
result of this, single-part music produced as successive separate 
sounds is, nevertheless, heard as overlapping, and at times as greatly 
overlapping tones. Each note may well be audible with appreciable 
intensity not merely through the next, but through several suc- 
ceeding notes. Under such conditions we have every opportunity, 
even with single-part music, for the production of all the phenomena 
of harmony and discord which has been discussed by Helmholtz in 
.explanation of the chordal use of the musical scale. In any ordi- 
narily bare and uncarpeted room, one may sing in succession a 
series of notes and then hear for some time afterward their full 
chordal effect. 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 MELODY 

All the arguments that Helmholtz advanced in support of his 
hypothesis, that the musical scale was devised solely from con- 
siderations of rhythm and founded on a repetition of faint upper 
partials, hold with equal force in the explanation here proposed. 
The identity of partial tones in compound tones with different 
fundamentals is one of the conditions of harmony, and the scale 
devised by considerations of the mutual harmony of the notes 
sounded simultaneously, would, in every respect, be the same as 
that of a scale based on repeated upper partials. In the one case 
the identity of upper partials is an act of memory, in the other it 
is determined by the harmony of sustained tones. All the argu- 
ments by Helmholtz based on historical considerations and on 
racial and national differences are equally applicable to the hy- 
pothesis of sustained tones. In fact, they take on an additional 
significance, for we may now view all these differences not merely 
in the light of differences in racial development and temperament, 
but in the light of physical environment. Housed or unhoused, 
dwelling in reed huts or in tents, in houses of wood or of stone, in 
houses and temples high vaulted or low roofed, of heavy furnish- 
ing or light, in these conditions we may look for the factors which 
determine the development of a musical scale in any race, which 
determine the rapidity of the growth of the scale, its richness, and 
its considerable use in single-part melody. 

The duration of audibility of a sound depends on its initial in- 
tensity and on its pitch, to a small degree on the shape of the con- 
fined space, and to a very large degree on the volume of the space 
and on the material of which the walls are composed. The duration 
of audibility is a logarithmic function of the initial intensity, and 
as the latter is practically always a large multiple of the minimum 
audible intensity, this feature of the problem may be neglected 
when considering it broadly. For this discussion we may also leave 
out of consideration the effect of shape as being both minor and too 
intricately variable. The pitch here considered will be the middle 
of the musical scale; for the extremes of the scale the figures would 
be very different. The problem then may be reduced to two factors, 
volume and material. It is easy to dispose of the problem reduced 
to these two elements. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ORIGIN OF THE MUSICAL SCALE 115 

The duration of audibility of a sound is directly proportional to 
the volume of a room and inversely proportional to the total ab- 
sorbing power of the walls and the contained material. The volume 
of the room, the shape remaining the same, is proportional to the 
cube, while the area of the walls is proportional to the square of 
the linear dimensions. The duration of audibility, proportional to 
the ratio of these two, is proportional to the first power of the linear 
dimension. Other things being equal, the duration of audibility, 
the overlapping of successive sounds, and, therefore, the experience 
of harmony in single-part music is proportional to the linear di- 
mensions of the room, be it dwelling house or temple. 

Turning to the question of material the following figures are 
suggestive: Any opening into the outside space, provided that 
outside space is itself unconfined, may be regarded as being totally 
absorbing. The absorbing power of hard pine wood sheathing 
of one-half inch thickness is 6.1 per cent; of plaster on wood lath, 
8.4 per cent; of single-thickness glass, 2.7 per cent; of brick in 
Portland cement, 2.5 per cent; of the same brick painted with oil 
paint, 1.4 per cent. Wood sheathing is nearly double any of the 
rest. On the other hand, a man in the ordinary clothing of today 
is equal in his absorbing power to nearly 48 per cent of that of a 
square meter of unobstructed opening, a woman is 54 per cent, and 
a square meter of audience at ordinary seating distance is nearly 
96 per cent. Of significance also in this connection is the fact that 
Oriental rugs have an absorbing power of nearly 29 per cent, and 
house plants of 11 per cent. 

Of course, the direct application of these figures in any accurate 
calculation of the conditions of life among different races or at dif- 
ferent periods of time is impossible, but they indicate in no uncer- 
tain manner the great differences acoustically in the environment 
of Asiatic races, of aboriginal races in central and southern Africa, 
of the Mediterranean countries, of northern Europe at different 
periods of time. We have explained for us by these figures why the 
musical scale has but slowly developed in the greater part of Asia 
and of Africa. Almost no traveler has reported a musical scale, 
even of the most primitive sort, among any of the previously un- 
visited tribes of Africa. This fact could not be ascribed to racial 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 MELODY 

inaptitude. If melody was, as Helmholtz suggested, but rhythm in 
time and in pitch, the musical scale should have been developed in 
Africa if anywhere. These races were given to the most rhythmical 
dancing, and the rhythmical beating of drums and tomtoms. 
Rhythm in time they certainly had. Moreover, failure to develop 
a musical scale could not be ascribed to racial inaptitude to feeling 
for pitch. Transported to America and brought in contact with 
the musical scale, the negro became immediately the most musical 
part of our population. The absence of a highly developed scale in 
Africa must then be ascribed to environment. 

Turning to Europe we find the musical scale most rapidly de- 
veloping among the stone-dwelling people along the shores of the 
Mediterranean. The development of the scale and its increased 
use kept pace with the increased size of the dwellings and temples. 
It showed above all in their religious worship, as their temples and 
churches reached cathedral size. The reverberation which accom- 
panied the lofty and magnificent architecture increased until even 
the spoken service became intoned in the Gregorian chant. It is 
not going beyond the bounds of reason to say that in those churches 
in Europe which are housed in magnificent cathedrals, the Catholic, 
the Lutheran, and Protestant Episcopal, the form of worship is in 
part determined by their acoustical conditions. 

This presents a tempting opportunity to enlarge on the fact 
that the alleged earliest evidence of a musical scale, a supposed 
flute, belonged to the cave dwellers of Europe. This and the im- 
pulse to sing in an empty room, and the ease with which even the 
unmusical can keep the key in simple airs under such conditions, 
are significant facts, but gain nothing by amplification. The same 
may be said of the fact that since music has been written for more 
crowded auditoriums and with harmonic accompaniment melody 
has become of less harmonious sequence. These and many other 
instances of the effect of reverberation come to mind. 

In conclusion, it may not be out of place to repeat the thesis 
that melody may be regarded not only as rhythm in time and 
rhythm in pitch, but also as harmony in sustained tones, and that 
we may see in the history of music, certainly in its early beginnings, 
rhtut possibly also in its subsequent development, not only genius 
and invention, but also the effect of physical environment. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 1 
EFFECTS OF AIR CURRENTS AND OF TEMPERATURE 

vJrdinarily there is not a close connection between the flow of 
air in a room and its acoustical properties, although it has been fre- 
quently suggested that thus the sound may be carried effectively 
to different parts. On the other hand, while the motion of the air 
is of minor importance, the distribution of temperature is of more 
importance, and it is on reliable record that serious acoustical diffi- 
culty has arisen from abrupt differences of temperature in an audi- 
torium. Finally, transmission of disturbing noises through the 
ventilation ducts, perhaps theoretically a side issue, is practically 
a legitimate and necessary part of the subject. The discussion will 
be under these three heads. 

The first of the above three topics, the possible effect of the mo- 
tion of the air on the acoustical property of a room, is the immediate 
subject. 

Ventilation 

It was suggested during the planning of the Boston Symphony 
Hall that its acoustical properties would be greatly benefited by 
introducing the air for ventilation at the front and exhausting at 
the back, thus carrying the sound by the motion of the air the length 
of the room. The same suggestion has been made to the writer by 
others in regard to other buildings, but this case will serve as suffi- 
cient example. The suggestion was unofficial and the gentleman 
proposing it accompanied it by a section of a very different hall from 
the hall designed by Mr. McKim, but as this section was only a 
sketch and without dimensions the following calculation will be 
made as if the idea were to be applied to the present hall. It will 
be shown that the result thus to be secured, while in the right 

1 Engineering Record, June, 1910. " 

117 



Digitized by 



Google 




118 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

direction, is of a magnitude too small to be appreciable. To make 
this the more decisive we shall assume throughout the argument 
the most favorable conditions possible. 

If a sound is produced in still air in open space it spreads in a 
spherical wave diminishing in intensity as it covers a greater area. 
The area of a sphere being proportioned to the square of the radius, 
we arrive at the common law that the intensity of sound in still air 
is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the 
source. If in a steady wind the air is moving uniformly at all alti- 
tudes, the sound still spreads spherically, but with a moving center, 




Fig. l 

the whole sphere being carried along. If the air is moving toward 
the observer, the sound reaches him in less time than it otherwise 
would, therefore spread over a less spherical surface and louder. 
If, on the other hand, the observer is to windward, the sound has 
had to come against the wind, has taken a longer time to reach him, 
is distributed over a greater surface, and is less loud. 

The three cases are represented in the accompanying diagram. 
The stationary source of sound being at S, a is the wave in still air 
arriving at both observers at the same time and with the same in- 
tensity. If the air is moving to the left, the center of the wave will 
be shifted by an amount d to the left while the wave has spread to 
Oi. On arrival it will have the size 6, less than a, and will be louder. 
On the other hand, while the wave is reaching 02, the observer to 
windward, the center will have been shifted to the left by an even 
greater amount d*. In this case the size of the wave will be c, larger 
than a, and the sound will be less. The loudness of the sound in the 
\ 1[hree cases is inversely as the three surfaces a, 6, and c. If the dis- 



Digitized by 



Google 



EFFECTS OF AIR CURRENTS 



119 



tance of the observer from S is denoted by r, the loudness of the 
sound in the three cases will be as 



1 



and- 



r* (r-*)« (r + d,)* 

The above result may be expressed in the following more simple 
and practical form. If, in the diagram, a is the wave in still air, its 
corresponding position when of the same size and, therefore, of the 
same intensity in moving air will be a', the movement of the air 
having been sufficient to carry the wave a distance d while it has 
expanded with the velocity of sound to a sphere of radius r. The 
distance d and the radius r are to each other as the velocity of wind 
and the velocity of sound. If the observers 0\ and <h move, the one 
away from the source and the other toward it, by a distance d, the 
sound will be of the same intensity to both as in their first positions 
in still air. 

In order to make application of this to the particular problem 
in hand, we shall assume a normal air supply to the room for ven- 
tilation purposes of one-seventieth of a cubic meter per person per 
second. This, if introduced all at one end and exhausted all at the 
other, in a room 17.9 meters high, 22.8 meters broad, and seating 
about 2600 persons, would produce a velocity of the air of 0.09 
meters per second, assuming the velocity to be the same at every 
point of a transverse section. Leaving out of account the ques- 
tionable merits of this arrangement from the ventilation standpoint, 
its acoustical value can be calculated readily. 

The velocity of sound under normal conditions being about 
340 meters per second, the time required to traverse a hall 40 meters 
long is only about one-ninth of a second. In this short interval of 
time the motion of the air in the room, due to the ventilation, would 
be sufficient to advance the sound-wave only 0.01 meters, or one cen- 
timeter. It would thus arrive at the back of the room as a sphere 
with its center one centimeter nearer than the source. That is to say, 
the beneficial effect of this proposed system of ventilation, greatest 
for the auditor on the rear seat, would to him be equivalent at the 
very maximum to bringing the stage into the room one centimeter 
further, or it would be equivalent to bringing the auditor on the 



Digitized by 



Google 



120 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

rear seat forward one centimeter. This distance is so slight that 
without moving in his seat, in fact, without moving his shoulders, 
a slight inclination of the head would accomplish an equivalent 
gain. Thus, while the effect is in the right direction, it is of entirely 
imperceptible magnitude. If we take into account the sound re- 
flected from walls and ceiling, the gain is even less. 

But the suggestion which is the text of the present paper was 
not made by one, but by several gentlemen, and is based on the 
well-recognized fact that one can hear better, often very much 
better, with the wind than against it, and better than in still air. 
Therefore, the suggestion is not groundless and cannot be disposed 
of thus summarily, certainly not without submitting to the same 
calculation the out-of-door experience that gave rise to the thought. 

In the nomenclature of the United States Weather Bureau a 
wind of from "1 to 5 miles an hour is called light, 6 to 14 miles 
fresh, 15 to 24 miles brisk, 25 to 37 miles high, and a wind of from 
40 to 59 miles is called a gale." Taking the case of a "high wind" 
as a liberal example, its average velocity is about 14 meters per 
second, or about one twenty-fifth the velocity of sound. In such 
a wind the sound 1000 meters to leeward would be louder than in 
still air only by an amount which would be equivalent to an ap- 
proach of 40 meters, or 8 per cent. Similarly, to windward the sound 
would be less loud by an amount equivalent to increasing the dis- 
tance from 1000 to 1040 meters. This is not at all commensurate 
with general experience. The difference in audibility, everyone will 
agree, is generally greater and very much greater than this. The 
discrepancy, however, can be explained. The discrepancy is not 
between observation and theory, but between observation and a 
very incomplete analysis of the conditions in the out-of-door ex- 
perience. Thus, the ordinary view is that one is merely hearing 
with or against the wind and this wind is thought of as steady and 
uniform. As a matter of fact, the wind is rarely steady, and partic- 
ularly is it of different intensity at different altitudes. Fortunately, 
the out-of-door phenomenon, which in reality is very complex, has 
been carefully studied in connection with fog signals. 

The first adequate explanation of the variation in loudness of a 
sound with and against the wind was by the late Sir George G. 



Digitized by 



Google 



EFFECTS OF AIR CURRENTS 121 

Stokes in an article "On the Effect of Wind on the Intensity of 
Sound/' in the Report of the British Association for the Advancement 
of Science for 1857. The complete paper is as follows: 

The remarkable diminution in the intensity of sound, which is produced 
when a strong wind blows in a direction from the observer toward the 
source of sound, is familiar to everybody, but has not hitherto been ex- 
plained, so far as the author is aware. At first sight we might be disposed 
to attribute it merely to the increase in the radius of the sound-wave which 
reaches the observer. The whole mass of air being supposed to be carried 
uniformly along, the time which the sound would take to reach the ob- 
server, and consequently the radius of the sound-wave would be increased 
by the wind in the ratio of the velocity of sound to the sum of the velocities 
of sound and of the wind, and the intensity would be diminished in the 
inverse duplicate ratio. But the effect is much too great to be attributable 
to this cause. It would be a strong wind whose velocity was a twenty- 
fourth part of that of sound; yet even in this case the intensity would be 
diminished by only about a twelfth part. 

The first volume of the Annates de Chimie (1816) contains a paper 
by M. Delaroche, giving the results of some experiments made on this 
subject. It appeared from the experiments, first, that at small distances 
the wind has hardly any perceptible effect, the sound being propagated 
almost equally well in a direction contrary to the wind and in the direction 
of the wind; second, that the disparity between the intensity propagated 
in these two directions becomes proportionally greater and greater as the 
distance increases; third, that sound is propagated rather better in a direc- 
tion perpendicular to the wind than even in the direction of the wind. The 
explanation offered by the author of the present communication is as 
follows : 

If we imagine the whole mass of air in the neighborhood of the source of 
disturbance divided into horizontal strata, these strata do not move with 
the same velocity. The lower strata are retarded by friction against the 
earth and by the various obstacles they meet with; the upper by friction 
against the lower, and so on. Hence, the velocity increases from the 
ground upward, conformably with observation. This increase of velocity 
disturbs the spherical form of the sound-wave, tending to make it some- 
what of the form of an ellipsoid, the section of which by a vertical diametral 
plane parallel to the direction of the wind is an ellipse meeting the ground 
at an obtuse angle on the side towards which the wind is blowing, and an 
acute angle on the opposite side. 

Now, sound tends to propagate itself in a direction perpendicular to the 
sound-wave; and if a portion of the wave is intercepted by an obstacle of 
larger size the space behind is left in a sort of sound-shadow, and the only 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

sound there heard is what diverges from the general wave after passing 
the obstacle. Hence, near the earth, in a direction contrary to the wind, 
the sound continually tends to be propagated upwards, and consequently 
there is a continual tendency for an observer in that direction to be left in 
a sort of sound-shadow. Hence, at a sufficient distance, the sound ought 
to be very much enfeebled; but near the source of disturbance this cause 
has not yet had time to operate, and, therefore, the wind produces no 
sensible effect, except what arises from the augmentation in the radius of 
the sound-wave, and this is too small to be perceptible. 

In the contrary direction, that is, in the direction towards which the 
wind is blowing, the sound tends to propagate itself downwards, and to be 
reflected from the surface of the earth; and both the direct and reflected 
waves contribute to the effect perceived. The two waves assist each other 
so much the better, as the angle between them is less, and this angle van- 
ishes in a direction perpendicular to the wind. Hence, in the latter direction 
the sound ought to be propagated a little better than even in the direction 
of the wind, which agrees with the experiments of M. Delaroche. Thus, 
the effect is referred to two known causes, — the increased velocity of the 
air in ascending, and the diffraction of sound. 

As a matter of fact, the phenomenon is much more complicated 
when one takes into consideration the fact that a wind is almost 
always of very irregular intensities at different altitudes. The 
phenomenon, in its most complicated form, has been investigated 
in connection with the subject of fog signals by Professor Osborn 
Reynolds and Professor Joseph Henry, but with this we are not at 
present concerned, for the above discussion by Professor Stokes is 
entirely sufficient for the problem in hand. 

The essence of the above explanation is, therefore, this, that the 

great difference in loudness of sound with and against the wind is 

not due to the fact that the sound has been simply carried forward 

/ or opposed by the wind, but rather to the fact that its direction has 

/ been changed and its wave front distorted. The application of this 

I consideration in the present architectural problem leads to the con- 

| elusion that the greatest benefit will come not from an attempt to 

! carry the sound by the ventilating movement of the air, but by 

using the motion of the air to incline the wave front forward and 

thus direct the sound down upon the audience. 

This can be done in either one of two ways, by causing the air 
to flow through the room from front to back, more strongly at the 



Digitized by 



Google 



EFFECTS OF AIR CURRENTS 



123 



ceiling than at the floor, or by causing the air to flow from the back 
to the front, more strongly at the floor than at the ceiling. The one 
process carrying the upper part of the wave forward, the other re- 
tarding the lower part of the wave, will tip the wave in the same 
way and by an equal amount. 

Again, taking an extreme case, the assumption will be made that 
the motion of the air is such that it is not moving at or near the floor, 
that it is moving with its maximum velocity at the ceiling, and that 
the increase in velocity is gradual from floor to ceiling. Keeping 
the same amount of air moving as in the preceding calculation, the 
velocity of the air under this arrangement would be twice as great 
as the average velocity at the ceiling; in the preceding case the 
wave was advanced one centimeter by the motion of the air while 
traveling the whole length of the hall. In this case, obviously, the 
upper part of the wave would be carried twice as far, two centime- 
ters, and the lower part not advanced at all. This would, therefore, 
measure the total forward tip of the wave. 

Fortunately, the acoustical value of this can be expressed in a 
very simple and practical manner. An inclination of the sound- 
wave is equivalent acoustically to an equal angular inclination of 
the floor in the opposite direction. The height of the hall being 
17.9 meters, the inclination forward of the sound-wave would be 
2 in 1790. The length of the hall being 40 meters, an equal incli- 
nation, and thus an equal acoustical effect would be produced by 
raising the rear of the floor about 5 centimeters. This considers 
only the sound which has come directly from the stage. It is ob- 
vious that if the reflection of the .sound from the ceiling and the side 
walls is taken into account, the gain is even less. 

It, therefore, appears that, using the motion of the air in the 
most advantageous way possible, the resulting improvement in thej 
acoustical property of the hall is of an amount absolutely negligible 
A negative result of this sort is perhaps not so interesting as if a\ 
positive advantage has been shown; but the problem of properly 
heating and ventilating a room is sufficiently difficult in itself, and 
the above considerations are worth while if only to free it from this 
additional complication. 



Digitized by 



Google 




124 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

Temperature 

The effect of raising the temperature of a room, involving as it 
does the contained air and all the reflecting walls and objects, is 
twofold. It is not difficult to show that, whether we consider the 
rise in temperature of the air or the rise in temperature of the walls 
and other reflecting surfaces, the effect of a change of temperature 
between the limits which an audience can tolerate is negligible, 
provided the rise in temperature is uniform throughout the room. 

The effect of uniformly raising the temperature of the air is to 
increase the velocity of propagation of sound in all directions. It 
is, therefore, essentially unlike the effect produced by motion of 
the air. In the case of a uniform motion of the air, the sound spreads 
spherically but with unchanged velocity, moving its center in the 
direction and with the velocity of the wind. Thus, when blown 
toward the observer, it reaches him as if coming from a nearer 
source. Blown away from the observer, it arrives as from a more 
distant source. An increasing temperature of the air increases the 
velocity, but does not shift the center. The sound reaches the ob- 
server coming from a source at an unchanged distance. A rise in 
temperature, therefore, provided it be uniform, neither increases 
nor decreases the apparent intensity of the sound. The intensity 
at all points remains wholly unaltered. 

The above is on the assumption that the temperature of the air 
at all points is the same. If the temperature of the air is irregular, 
the effect of such irregularity may be pronounced; for example, let 
us assume a room in which the temperature of the air at the upper 
levels is greater than at lower levels. In order to make the case as 
simple as possible, let us assume that the temperature increases 
uniformly from the floor to the ceiling. To make the case concrete, 
let us assume that the hall is the same as that described above, 
practically rectangular, 40 X 22.8 X 17.9 meters. The velocity of 
the sound at the ceiling, the air being uniform, is greater than it is 
at the floor. In traversing the room the sound-wave will thus be 
tipped forward. The effect is practically equivalent as before to an 
increased pitch of the floor or to an increased elevation of the plat- 
form. Without going irito the details of this very obvious calcula- 



Digitized by 



Google 



EFFECTS OF AIR CURRENTS 125 

tion, it is sufficient to say that in the case of the hall here taken as 
an example, a difference of temperature top and bottom of 10° C. 
would be equivalent to an increase in pitch of the floor sufficient to 
produce an increased elevation of the very back of 10 centimeters. 
A difference in temperature of 10° C. is not excessive, and it is obvi- 
ous that this has a greater effect than has that of the motion of the 
air. 

In the above discussion of the effects of motion and of tempera- 
ture on the acoustical quality of a room, it has been assumed that 
we are dealing solely with the sound which has come directly from 
the platform. The argument holds to a less degree for the sound 
reflected from the ceiling and from the walls. The above estimates, 
therefore, are outside estimates. The effect is on the whole cer- 
tainly less. It is safe to say that the total attainable result is not 
worth the effort that would be involved in altering the architectural 
features or in compromising the engineering plans. 

But, while uniform variation in the motion or in the temperature 
of the air in the room are on the whole negligible factors in its acous- 
tical character, this is by no means true of irregularities in the 
temperature of the air, such as would be produced by a column of 
warm air rising from a floor inlet. That this is a practical point is 
shown by the testimony of Dr. David B. Reid before the Committee 
of the Houses of Parliament published in its Report of 1835. This 
comntittee was appointed to look into the matter of the heating, 
ventilation and acoustics of the'" houses which were being designed 
to replace those burned ii* 1832. Of the gentlemen called before 
the committee, Dr. Reid gave by far the best testimony, part of 
which was as follows. 

Speaking of the hall temporarily occupied by the House of 
Commons, he said: "Another source of interruption which might 
be guarded against is the great body of air which I presume arises 
whenever the heating apparatus is in action below. In different 
buildings I have had occasion to remark that whenever the atmos- 
phere was preserved in a state of unity as much as possible, equal 
in every respect, the sound was most distinctly audible; it occurred 
to me that when the current of hot air rises from the large ap- 
paratus in the middle of the House of Commons it would very likely 



Digitized by 



Google 



126 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

interfere with the communication of sound. On inquiry, one of the 
gentlemen now present told me he had frequently observed it was 
impossible to hear individuals who were on the opposite side of this 
current, although those at a distance were heard distinctly where 
the current did not intervene." Elsewhere Dr. Reid said: "A cur- 
rent of hot air, rising in a broad sheet along the center of the House, 
reflected the sound passing from side to side and rendered the in- 
tonation indistinct. One of the members of the committee, when I 
explained this circumstance, stated that he had often noticed that 
he could not hear a member opposite him distinctly at particular 
times unless he shifted his seat along the bench, and on examining 
the place referred to, it was found that he had moved to a position 
where the hot air current no longer passed between him and the 
member speaking." 

A more recent instance of this sort of difficulty was mentioned 
to the writer by Mr. W. L. B. Jenney, of Chicago, as occurring in 
his practice, and later was described in detail in a letter from which 
the following is quoted: 

The building I referred to in my conversation was a court house at 
Lockport. No plans exist as far as I am aware. Note the sketch I made 
from remembrance. 

Note the passage across the room with stove in center. As the courts 
were held only during winter there was invariably a fire in that stove. 
When I examined the room the attendant that was with me informed me 
that the remarks made by the judge, lawyers and witness could not be 
heard by the audience on the opposite side of the passageway containing 
the stove. 

At that time, the court room not being occupied, there was no fire in 
the stove and the doors were closed. I experimented; put the attendant 
in the judge's stand and took position at "A." I could hear perfectly well. 
I spoke to him and he replied, "Why, I can hear you perfectly well." I 
reached this conclusion. That the heated air from the stove and the air 
supplied by the doors that were constantly fanning at each end of the 
passageway produced a stratum of air of different density from that of 
the other parts of the room, which acted like a curtain hanging between 
the speakers and the hearers. I made my report verbally to the committee 
that I left below and brought them with me to the room. The experiments 
were renewed and they accepted my theory. I recommended that the 
stove be moved and that the warm air should be let into the room from 
steam coils below at the the end "A" and taken out by exhaust ventilators 



Digitized by 



Google 



EFFECTS OF AIR CURRENTS 127 

at the end "B." This was done, and I was informed by the chairman of 
the committee that the result was very satisfactory. The other conditions 
of the room were quite usual, — plastering on wooden lath, wooden floors, 
reasonable height of ceiling. 

The above incidents seem to demonstrate fairly clearly that 
under certain circumstances abrupt irregularities in temperature 
may result in marked and, in general, unfavorable acoustical effects. 
The explanation of these effects in both cases is somewhat as follows: 

Whenever sound passes from one medium to another of different 
density, or elasticity, a portion of the sound is reflected. The sound 
which enters the second medium is refracted. The effects observed 
above were due to these two phenomena, acting jointly. 

The first of the two cases was under simpler conditions, and is, 
therefore, the easier to discuss. Essentially, it consisted of a large 
room with speaker and auditor facing each other at a comparatively 
short distance apart, but with a cylindrical column of hot air rising 
from a register immediately between. The voice of the speaker, 
striking this column of air, lost a part by reflection; a part of the 
sound passed on, entered the column of warm air, and came to the 
second surface, where a part was again reflected and the remainder 
went on to the auditor. Thus, the sound in traversing the column 
of hot air lost by reflection at two surfaces and reached the auditor 
diminished in intensity. It reached the auditor with diminished 
intensity for another reason. 

The column of warm air acted like a lens. The effect of the 
column of air was not like that of the ordinary convex lens, 
which would bring the sound to a focus, but rather as a diverging 
lens. The effect of a convex lens would have been obtained had the 
column of air been colder than that of the surrounding room. Be- 
cause the air was warmer, and, therefore, the velocity of sound 
through it greater, the effect was to cause the sound in passing 
through the cylindrical coluJmn to diverge even more rapidly and 
to reach the auditor very considerably diminished in intensity. 
Which of these two effects was the more potent in diminishing the 
sound, whether the loss by reflection or the loss by lens-like disper- 
sion was the greater, could only be determined if one knew the tem- 
perature of the air in the room, in the column, and the diameter of 



Digitized by 



Google 



128 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

the column. It is sufficient, perhaps, to point out on the authority 
of such eminent men as Dr. Reid and Mr. Jenney that the phenome- 
non is a real one and one to be avoided, and that the explanation is 
ready at hand and comparatively simple. 

It is, perhaps, worth while pointing out that in both of the above 
cases there was a good deal of reverberation in the room, so that 
any considerable diminution in the intensity of the sound coming 
directly from the speaker to the auditor resulted in its being lost 
in the general reverberation. Had the same conditions as to loca- 
tion of speaker, auditor, column of warm air and temperature 
occurred out of doors or in a room of very slight reverberation the 
effect would have been very much less noticeable. Nevertheless, 
great irregularity of temperature is to be avoided, as the above 
testimony fairly clearly shows. 

The above also suggests another line of thought. If, instead of 
having a single screen of great temperature difference between 
speaker and auditor, there were many such differences in tempera- 
ture, though slight in amount, the total effect might be great. This 
corresponds, in the effect produced, to what Tyndall calls a "floccu- 
lent condition of the atmosphere" in his discussion of the trans- 
mission of fog signals. Tyndall points out that if the atmosphere 
is in layers alternately warm and cold sound is transmitted with 
much more rapid diminution in intensity than when the atmosphere 
is of very uniform temperature. This phenomenon is, of course, 
much more important with such temperature differences as occur 
out of doors than in a room, but it suggests that, in so far as it is a 
perceptible effect, the temperature of a room should be homogeneous. 
This condition of homogeneity is best secured by that system of 
ventilation known as "distributed floor outlets." It has the addi- 
tional merit of being, perhaps, the most efficient system of ven- 
tilation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SENSE OF LOUDNESS 1 

It will be shown here that there is a sense of relative loudness, par- 
ticularly of equality of loudness, of sounds differing greatly in pitch, 
that this sense of loudness is accurate, that it is nearly the same for 
all normal ears, that it is independent of experience, and that, there- 
fore, it probably has a physical and physiological basis. This 
investigation has been incidental to a larger investigation on the 
subject of architectural acoustics. It has bearing, however, on 
many other problems, such, for example, as the standardization of 
noises, and on the physiological theory of audition. 

The apparatus used consisted of four small organs (Proc. Am. 
Acad, of Arts and Sciences, 1906) 2 so widely separated from each 
other as to be beyond the range of each other's influence. Each 
organ carried seven night-horn organ pipes at octave intervals in 
pitch, 64, 128, 256, . . . 4096 vibrations per second. The four organs 
were so connected electrically to a small console of seven keys that 
on pressing one key, any one, any two, any three or all four organ 
pipes of the same pitch would sound at once, — the combination of 
organ pipes sounding being adjusted by an assistant and unknown 
to the observer. 

In other parts of the investigation on architectural acoustics the 
loudness of the sound emitted by each of the twenty-eight organ 
pipes in terms of the minimum audible sound for the corresponding 
pitch had been determined. The experiment was conducted in the 
large lecture-room of the Jefferson Physical Laboratory, and, in 
the manner explained elsewhere, the computation was made for the 
loudness of the sound, taking into account the shape of the room 
and the materials employed in its construction. 

The experiment consisted in adjusting the number of pipes which 
were sounding or in choosing from among the pipes until such an 
adjustment was accomplished, that, to an observer in a more or less 
remote part of the room all seven notes, when sounded in succession, 
seemed to have the same loudness. As the pipes of the same pitch 

1 Contributions from the Jefferson Physical Laboratory, vol. viii, 1910. 
* See p. 84. 

129 



Digitized by 



Google 



130 SENSE OF LOUDNESS 

did not all have the same loudness, it was possible by taking various 
combinations to make this adjustment with considerable accuracy. 
This statement, however, is subject to an amendment in that all 
four pipes of the lowest pitch were not sufficiently loud and the 
faintest of the highest pitch was too loud. 

There were ten observers, and each observer carried out four in- 
dependent experiments. Speaking broadly, in the case of every 
observer, the four independent experiments agreed among them- 
selves with great accuracy. This was to the great surprise of every 
observer, each before the trial doubting the possibility of such adjust- 
ment. The results of all ten observers were surprisingly concordant. 

After the experiment with the first two observers, it seemed 
possible that their very close agreement arose from their familiarity 
with the piano, and that it might be that they were adjusting the 
notes to the " balance " of that particular instrument. The next 
observer, therefore, was a violinist. Among the observers there was 
also a 'cellist. Lest the feeling of relative loudness should come 
from some subconscious feeling of vocal effort, although it is diffi- 
cult to see how this could extend over so great a range as six octaves, 
singers were tried whose voices were of very different register. Two 
of the observers, including one of the pianists, were women. Two 
of the observers were non-musical, one exceedingly so. 

The accompanying table gives the results of the observations, 
the energy of each sound being expressed in terms of minimum 
audible intensity for that particular pitch, after making all correc- 
tions for the reinforcement of the sound by the walls of the room. 
The observations are recorded in order, the musical characteristic 
of the observer being indicated. 

Pitch Frequency 



Observers 


64 


128 


256 


512 


1024 


2048 


409 


1. Piano 


7.O(+)X10 1.7X104.4X10 8.0X1015.0X10 9.6X10 4.5(- 


2. Piano 


7.0+ 


1.7 


4.4 


11.2 


9.2 


12.0 


5.2- 


3. Non-musical 


7.0+ 


1.7 


3.6 


8.9 


6.3 


9.6 


4.5- 


4. Non-musical 


7.0+ 


1.7 


3.7 


7.7 


14.5 


14.4 


5.6- 


5. Violin 


7.0+ 


1.7 


3.5 


11.7 


13.9 


8.0 


3.5- 


6. Violin 


7.0+ 


1.7 


4.0 


11.4 


15.5 


15.2 


5.2- 


7. 'Cello 


7.0+ 


1.7 


4.2 


12.0 


13.4 


9.6 


5.1- 


8. Tenor 


7.0+ 


1.7 


3.9 


13.3 


13.5 


10.5 


4.0- 


9. Soprano 


7.0+ 


1.7 


4.7 


12.9 


17.0 


9.6 


5.4- 


10. Piano 


7.0+ 


1.7 


3.5 


13.2 


14.5 


8.0 


4.9- 



7.0(+) ' 1.7 4.0 11.0 13.3 10.6 4.8- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 1 

CORRECTION OF ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 

vJn the completion of the Fogg Art Museum in 1895, 1 was re- 
quested by the Corporation of Harvard University to investigate 
the subject of architectural acoustics with the end in view of cor- 
recting the lecture-room which had been found impracticable and 
abandoned as unusable. Later the planning of a new home for 
the Boston Symphony Orchestra in Boston widened the scope of 
the inquiry. Since then, over questions raised first by one building 
and then another, the subject has been under constant investigation. 

In 1900 a series of articles, embodying the work of the first five 
years and dealing with the subject of reverberation, was published 
in the American Architect and also in the Engineering Record. The 
next five years were devoted to the extension of this study over the 
range of the musical scale and the results were published in the Pro- 
ceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1906. 
Since then the investigation has been with reference to interference 
and resonance, the effects of peculiarities of form, and the causes 
of variation in audibility in different parts of an auditorium. These 
results will be published in another article during the ensuing year. 

The progress of this experimental investigation has been guided 
in practical channels and greatly enriched by the experience gained 
from frequent consultation by architects, either for purposes of 
correcting completed buildings or in the preparation of plans in 
advance of construction. Reserving for a later article the stimu- 
lating subject of advance planning, the present article is devoted 
to the problems involved in the correction of completed buildings. 
It is illustrated by a few examples which are especially typical. I 
desire to take this opportunity of expressing my appreciation of 
the very cordial permission to use this material given by the archi- 
tects, Messrs. McE3m, Mead & White, Messrs. Carr&re & Hastings, 
Messrs. Cram, Goodhue & Ferguson, and Messrs. Allen & Collens 

1 The Architectural Quarterly of Harvard University, March, 1912. 

131 



Digitized by 



Google 



132 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

— to these and to the other architects whose confidence in this work 
has rendered an extensive experience possible. 

The practical execution of this work of correction has recently 
been placed on a firmer basis by Mr. C. M. Swan, a former graduate 
student in the University and an associate in this work, who has 
taken charge of a department in the H. W. Johns-Manville Com- 
pany. I am under obligations to him and to this company for some 
of the- illustrations used below, and to the company, not merely for 
having placed at my disposal -their materials and technical experi- 
ence, but also for having borne the expense of some recent investi- 
gations looking toward the development of improved materials, 
with entire privilege of my making free publication of scientific 
results. 

It is proposed to discuss here only such corrective methods as 
can be employed without extensive alterations in form. It is not 
proposed to discuss changes of dimension, changes in the position 
of the wall-surfaces or changes in ceiling height. It is the purpose 
to discuss here medicinal rather than surgical methods. Such 
treatment properly planned and executed, while not always avail- 
able, will in the great majority of cases result in an entire remedy 
of the difficulty. 
, JS. Two old, but now nearly abandoned devices for remedying acous- 
tical difficulties are stretched wires and sounding-boards. The 
first is without value, the second is of some value, generally slight, 
though occasionally a perceptible factor in the final result. The 
stretching of wires is a method which has long been employed, and 
its disfiguring relics in many churches and court rooms proclaim a 
difficulty which they are powerless to relieve. Like many other 
traditions, it has been abandoned but slowly. The fact that it was 
wholly without either foundation of reason or defense of argument 
made it difficult to answer or to meet. The device, devoid on the 
one hand of scientific foundation, and on the other of successful 
experience, has taken varied forms in its application. Apparently 
it is a matter of no moment where the wires are stretched or in what 
amount. There are theatres and churches in Boston and New 
York in which four or five wires are stretched across the middle of 
the room; in other auditoriums miles on miles of wire have been 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 133 

stretched; in both it is equally without effect. In no case can one 
obtain more than a qualified approval, and the most earnest nega- 
tives come where the wires have been used in the largest amount. 
Occasionally the response to inquiries is that "the wires may have 
done some good but certainly not much," and in general when even 
that qualified approval is given the installation of the wires was 



Fig. 1. Ceiling of church, San Jose, California, showing an ineffective use of stretched wires. 

accompanied by some other changes of form or occupancy to which 
the credit should be given. How extensive an endeavor is sometimes 
made in the use of stretched wires is shown by the accompanying 
illustration which shows a small section of the ceiling of a church 
in San Jose, California. In this church between one and two miles 
of wire have been stretched with resulting disfigurement, and wholly 
without avail. The question is being taken up again by the church 
for renewed effort. 



Digitized by 



Google 



134 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

Aside from such cumulative evidence of ineffectiveness, it is not 
difficult to show that there is no physical basis for the device. The 
sound, whose echoes these wires are presumed to absorb, scarcely 
affects the wires, giving to them a vibration which at most is of 
microscopical magnitude. If the string of a violin were free from 
the body of the violin, if the string of a piano were free from the 



Fig. 2. Congregational Church, Naugatuck, Connecticut. McKim, Mead and White, Architects. 

sounding-board, if the string of a harp did not touch the thin sound- 
ing-board which faces its slender back, when plucked they would 
not emit a sound which could be heard four feet away. The sound 
which comes from each of these instruments is communicated to 
the air by the vibration of its special sounding-board. The string 
itself cuts through the air with but the slightest communication of 
motion. Conversely when the sound is in the room and the string 
at rest the vibrating air flows past it, to and fro, without disturbing 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 135 

it, and consequently without itself being affected by reaction either 
for better or worse. 

The sounding-board as a device for correcting acoustical diffi- 
culties has at times a value; but unless the sounding-board is to 
be a large one, the benefit to be expected from its installation may 
be greatly overrated. As this particular subject calls for a line of 



Fig. 3. Hall of the House of Representatives, Rhode Island State Capitol, Providence, R.I. 
McKim, Mead and White, Architects. 

argument very different from that of the main body of the present 
paper, it will be reserved for a discussion elsewhere, where, space 
permitting, it can be illustrated by examples of various forms 
accompanied by photographs and by a more or less exhaustive 
discussion of their relative merits. 

The auditorium in whose special behalf this investigation started 
seventeen years ago was the lecture-room of the Fogg Art Museum. 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

Although this room was in a large measure remedied, it will not be 
taken as an example. Its peculiarities of shape were such that its 
complete relief was inherently a complicated process. While this 
case was chronologically the first, it is thus not suitable for an 
opening illustration. 

Among a number of interesting problems in advance of con- 
struction the firm of McKim, Mead & White has brought some 



Fig. 4. Detail, Hall of the House of Representatives, Rhode Island State Capitol. 
McKim, Mead and White, Architects. 

interesting problems in correction, of which three will serve ad- 
mirably as examples because of their unusual directness. The first 
is that of the Congregational Church in Naugatuck, Connecticut, 
shown in the accompanying illustration. When built its ceiling 
was cylindrical, as now, but smooth. Its curvature was such as to 
focus a voice from the platform upon the audience, — not at a point, 
but along a focal line, for a cylindrical mirror is astigmatic. The 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 137 

difficulty was evident with the speaking, but may be described 
more effectually with reference to the singing. The position of the 
choir was behind the preacher and across the main axis of the 
church. On one line in the audience, crossing the church obliquely 
from right to left, the soprano voice could be heard coming even 
more sharply from the ceiling than directly from the singer. The 
alto starting nearer the axis of the church had for its focus a line 
crossing the church less obliquely. The phenomena were similar for 
the tenor and the bass yoices, but with focal lines crossing the 
church obliquely in opposite directions. The difficulty was in a 
very large measure remedied by coffering the ceiling, as shown in 
the illustration, both the old and the new ceiling being of plaster. 
Ideally a larger and deeper coffering was desirable, but the solution 
as shown was practical and the result satisfactory. 

The hall of the House of Representatives in the Rhode Island 
State Capitol illustrated another type of difficulty. In considering 
this hall it is necessary to bear in mind that the problem is an essen- 
tially different one from that of a church or lecture-room. In these 
the speaking is from a raised platform and a fixed position. In a 
legislative assembly the speaking is in the main from the floor, and 
may be from any part of the floor; the speaker stands on a level 
with his fellow members; he stands with his back to a part of the 
audience, and often with his back to the greater part of his audience; 
in different parts of the house the speaker directs his voice in dif- 
ferent directions, and against different wall-surfaces. In this hall 
the walls were of stone to approximately half the height of the 
room; above that they were of stone and plaster. The ceiling was, 
as shown, coffered. The difficulty in this room was with that part 
of the voice which, crossing the room transversely, fell on the side 
walls. With the speaker standing on the floor, the greater volume 
of his voice was directed upward. The sound striking the side wall 
was reflected across the room to the opposite wall and back again, 
to and fro, mounting gradually until it reached the ceiling. It was 
there reflected directly down upon the audience. The ceiling 
sloped, and had some curvature, but the curvature was not such 
as to produce a distinct focusing of the sound. During these re- 
flections the sound met only feebly absorbent surfaces and there- 
fore returned to the audience with but little loss of intensity. Its 



Digitized by 



Google 



138 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

return was at such an interval of time as to result in great confusion 
of speech. Only "the fact that the voice, rising at different angles, 
traveled different paths and therefore returned at varying inter- 
vals, prevented the formation of a distinct echo. The difficulty 
was remedied in this case by a change in material without change 



Fig. 5. Lecture-room, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. 
McKim, Mead and White, Architects. 

of form, by diminishing the reflecting power of the two side walls. 
This was done by placing a suitable felt on the plaster walls between 
the engaged columns, and covering it with a decorated tapestry. 
Fortunately, the design of the room admitted of a charming exe- 
cution of this treatment. It is interesting to note that this treat- 
ment applied to the lower half of the walls would not have been 
acoustically effective. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 139 

The lecture-room of the Metropolitan Museum of Art illus- 
trates the next step in complexity. This hall is a semi-circular 
auditorium, with the semi-circle slightly continued by short, 
straight walls. As shown in the illustrations the platform is nearly, 
though not wholly, within a broad but shallow recess. The body 



Fig. 6. Lecture-room, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. 
McKim, Mead and White, Architects. 

of the auditorium is surmounted by a spherical ceiling with short 
cylindrical extension following the straight side walls. In the 
center of the ceiling is a flat skylight of glass. In this room the re- 
verberation was not merely excessive, but it resolved itself by focus- 
ing into a multiple echo, the components of which followed each 
other with great rapidity but were distinctly separable. The 



Digitized by 



Google 



140 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

number distinguishable varied in different parts of the hall. Seven 
were distinguishable at certain parts. A detailed discussion of this 
is not appropriate in the present paper as it concerns rather the 
subject of calculation in advance of construction. To improve the 
acoustics the ceiling was coffered, the limiting depth and dimensions 
of this coffering being determined in large measure by the dimen- 
sions of the skylight. The semi-circular wall at the rear of the 
auditorium was transformed into panels which were filled with 
felt over which was stretched burlap as shown in the second illus- 
tration. The result was the result assured, — the reduction of the 
disturbance to a single and highly localized echo. This echo is 
audible only in the central seats — two or three seats at a time — 
and moves about as the speaker moves, but in symmetrically opposite 
direction. Despite this residual effect, and it should be noted that 
this residual effect was predicted, the result is highly satisfactory to 
Dr. Edward Robinson, the Director of the Museum, and the room is 
now used with comfort, whereas it had been for a year abandoned. 

It should be borne in mind that "perfect acoustics" does not 
mean the total elimination of reverberation, even were that possible. 
Loudness and reverberation are almost, though not quite, propor- 
tional qualities. The result to be sought is a balance between the 
two qualities, dependent on the size of the auditorium and the use 
to which it is to be applied. 

Geometrically the foregoing cases are comparatively simple. In 
each case the room is a simple space bounded by plane, cylindrical 
or spherical surfaces, and these surfaces simply arranged with refer- 
ence to each other. The simplicity of these cases is obvious. The 
complexity of other cases is not always patent, or when patent it is 
not obvious to a merely casual inspection how best the problem 
should be attacked. A large number of cases, however, may be 
handled in a practical manner by regarding them as connecting 
spaces, each with its own reverberation and pouring sound into and 
receiving sound from the others. An obvious case of this is the 
theatre, where the aggregate acoustical property is dependent on 
the space behind the proscenium arch in which the speaker stands, 
as well as on the space in front of it. In another sense and to a less 
degree, the cathedral, with its chancel, transept and nave may be 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 7. Design for St. Paul's Cathedral, Detroit. Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson, Architects. 



Digitized by 



Google 



142 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

regarded as a case of connected spaces. The problem certainly takes 
on a simpler aspect when so attacked. An extreme and purely hy- 
pothetical case would be a deep and wide auditorium with a very 
low ceiling, and with a stage recess deep, high and reverberant, in 
fact such a case as might occur when for special purposes two very 
different rooms are thrown together. In such a case the reverbera- 
tion calculated on the basis of a single room of the combined volume 
and the combined absorbing power would yield an erroneous value. 
The speaker's voice, especially if he stood back some distance from 
the opening between the two rooms, would be lost in the production 
of reverberation in its own space. The total resulting sound, in a 
confused mass, would be propagated out over the auditorium. Of 
course this is an extreme case and of unusual occurrence, but by its 
very exaggeration serves to illustrate the point. In a less degree 
it is not of infrequent occurrence. It was for this reason, or rather 
through the experience of this effect, although only as a nice refine- 
ment, that the Boston Symphony Orchestra has its special scenery 
stage in Carnegie Hall, and for this that Mr. Damrosch in addition 
moved his orchestra some little distance forward into the main 
auditorium for his concerts in the New Theatre. 

A cathedral is a good example of such geometrical complication, 
still further complicated by the variety of service which it is to 
render. It must be adapted to speaking from the pulpit and to 
reading from the lectern. It must be adapted to organ and vocal 
music, and occasionally to other forms of service, though generally 
of so minor importance as to be beyond the range of appropriate 
consideration. Most cathedrals and modern large churches have 
a reverberation which is excessive not only for the spoken but also 
for a large portion of the musical service. The difficulty is not 
peculiar to any one type of architecture. To take European ex- 
amples, it occurs in the Classic St. Paul in London, the Romanesque 
Durham, the Basilican Romanesque Pisa, the Italian Gothic Flor- 
ence, and the English Gothic York. 

The most interesting example of this type has been Messrs. Cram, 
Goodhue & Ferguson's charming cathedral in Detroit, especially 
interesting because in the process of correcting the acoustics it was 
possible to carry to completion the decoration of the original design. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fia. 8. St. Paul's Cathedral, Detroit. Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson, Architects. 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

The nave, moderately narrow in the clerestory, was broad below 
through its extension by side aisles. It might fairly be regarded 
as two simply connected spaces. The lower space, when there was 
a full audience, was abundantly absorbent; the clerestory, though 
with wood ceiling, was not absorbent. Although their combined 
reverberation was great, it was not so great as alone to produce the 
actual effect obtained. Absorbing material in the form of a felt, 
highly efficient acoustically, was placed in the panels on the ceiling. 
The original architectural design by Mr. Cram (Fig. 7) showed the 
ceiling decorated in colors, and this though not a part of the original 
construction was carried out on the covering of the felt, with a re- 
sult highly satisfactory both acoustically and architecturally. The 
transept, also high and reverberant, was similarly treated, as was 
also the central tower which was even higher than the rest of the 
church. As a matter of fact the results at first attained were satis- 
factory only with an audience filling at least three-quarters of the 
seats, the condition for which it was planned. The treatment was 
subsequently extended to the lower levels in order that the cathedral 
might be serviceable not merely for the normal but for the occa- 
sionally small audience. The chancel did not need and did not 
receive any special treatment. It was highly suitable to the musical 
service, and being at the back of both the pulpit and the lectern did 
not greatly affect that portion of the service which called for dis- 
tinctness of enunciation. 

It may be remarked in passing that the lectern is almost invari- 
ably a more difficult problem than the pulpit. This is in part be- 
cause reading, with the head thrown slightly forward, is more 
difficult than speaking; because, if the lectern is sufficiently high 
to permit of an erect position it screens the voice; because a speaker 
without book or manuscript, seeing his audience, realizes his dis- 
tance and his difficulties; and finally, because the pulpit is generally 
higher and against a column whereas the lectern stands out free and 
unsupported. 

The auditorium which has received the greatest amount of dis- 
cussion recently is the New Theatre in New York. Had it been a 
commercial proposition its acoustical quality would have received 
but passing notice. As an institution of large purpose on the part 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 145 

of the Founders it received a correspondingly large attention. As 
an institution of generous purpose, without hope or desire for finan- 
cial return, it was appropriated by the public, and received the 
persistent criticism which seems the usual reward for such under- 
takings. The writer was consulted only after the completion of 
the building, but its acoustical difficulties can be discussed ade- 
quately only in the light of its initial programme. 

It was part of the original programme submitted to Messrs. 
Carrere & Hastings that the building should be used, or at least 
should be adapted to use for opera as well as for drama. In this 
respect it was to bear to the Metropolitan the position which the 
Opera Comique in Paris bears to the Opera. This idea, with its 
corollary features, influenced the early design and shows in the 
completed structure. 

It was also a part of the initial plan that there should be two 
rows of boxes, something very unusual in theatre construction. 
This was a prodigal use of space and magnified the building in all 
its dimensions. Later, but not until after the building was nearly 
completed, the upper row of boxes was abandoned, and the gallery 
thus created was devoted to foyer chairs. As the main walls were 
by this time erected, the gallery was limited in depth to the boxes 
and their antechambers. It thus resulted that this level, which is 
ordinarily occupied by a gallery of great value, is of small capacity. 
Notwithstanding this the New Theatre seats twenty-three hun- 
dred, while the usual theatre seats but little more than two-thirds 
that number. 

The necessity of providing twenty-three commodious boxes, all 
in the first tier, of which none should be so near the stage as to be 
distinctly inferior, determined a large circle for their front and for 
the front of all the galleries. Thus not merely are the seats, which 
are ordinarily the best seats, far from the stage, but the great hori- 
zontal scale thus necessitated leads architecturally to a correspond- 
ingly great vertical scale. The row of boxes and the foyer balcony 
above not merely determined the scale of the auditorium, but also 
presented at the back of their shallow depth a concave wall which 
focused the reflected sound in the center of the auditorium. 

Finally, it should be borne in mind that while the acoustical 



Digitized by 



Google 



146 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

demands in a theatre are greater than in almost any other type of 
auditorium, because of the great modulation of the voice in dra- 
matic action, the New Theatre was undertaking an even more 
than usually difficult task, that of presenting on the one hand the 
older dramas with their less familiar and more difficult phrasing, 
and on the other the more subtle and delicate of modern plays. 



Fig. 9. Interior, the New Theatre, New York City. Carrere and Hastings, Architects. 

The conventional type of theatre construction is fairly, though 
only fairly, well adapted to the usual type of dramatic performance. 
The New Theatre, with a very difficult type of performance to 
present, was forced by the conditions which surrounded the project 
to depart from the conventional type far more radically than was 
perhaps at that time realized. 

Here, as usual in a completed building, structural changes and 
large changes of form were impossible, and the acoustical difficulties 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 147 

of the auditorium could be remedied only by indirection. The 
method by which a very considerable improvement was attained 
is shown by a comparison of the line drawing (Fig. 10) with the pho- 
tograph of the interior of the theatre as originally completed. The 
boxes were changed from the first to the second level, being inter- 
changed with the foyer chairs, while the excessive height of the 
main body of the auditorium was reduced by means of a canopy 
surrounding the central chandelier. This ingenious and not dis- 



Fig. 10. The New Theatre, New York City, showing Canopy and Changed Boxes. 

pleasing substitute for the recommended lowering of the ceiling was 
proposed by Mr. Hastings, although of course only as a means to 
an end. The canopy is oval in plan, following the outline of the 
oval panel in the ceiling, its longer axis being transverse. Its major 
and minor horizontal dimensions are 70 feet and 40 feet. Its 
effective lowering of the height of the ceiling is 20 feet. A moment's 
consideration will show that its effective area in preventing the 
ceiling echo is greater than its actual dimensions, particularly in 



Digitized by 



Google 



148 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

the direction of its minor axis. The improvement brought about 
by this was pronounced and satisfactory to the Founders. . The 
distances, however, were still too great, even visually, for the type 
of dramatic performance for which the theatre was primarily in- 
tended, and such use was therefore discontinued. The New Theatre 
is much better adapted to opera than to dramatic performances, 
and it will be a matter of great regret if, with its charming solution 
of many difficult architectural problems, it is not restored to such 
dignified purpose. 

The last and very satisfactory example is that of the Chapel of 
the Union Theological Seminary of Messrs. Allen & Collens. Its 
interesting feature is that the corrective treatment was applied in 
the process of construction. It is further interesting as an example 
of a treatment which is not merely inconspicuous, but is entirely 
indistinguishable. The photograph without explanation is the best 
evidence of this (p. 149). 

The above examples have been chosen from many score as typical 
of the principles involved. In each case the nature of the difficulty 
has been stated and the method employed in its correction, or at 
least its special feature very briefly described. The remainder of 
the paper will be devoted to a discussion of the principles involved 
in acoustical correction and in presenting the results of some recent 
experiments. 

In discussing the above examples, especially the first and the 
third, the Congregational Church in Naugatuck, and the lecture- 
room of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, consideration had to be 
given to the effect of the geometrical shape of the room. This 
aspect of the problem of architectural acoustics constitutes a sub- 
ject so large that a separate paper must be devoted to its adequate 
treatment. It involves not merely simple reflection but inter- 
ference and diffraction, as well as the far from simple subject of the 
propagation of sound parallel to or nearly parallel to the plane of 
an audience. It has been the object of special investigation during 
the past six years. This investigation has recently come to a suc- 
cessful issue and will probably be published in full during the en- 
suing year. It is suitable that it should receive separate publication 
for, as it concerns shape, it is of more value for calculation in ad- 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 11. Chapel, Union Theological Seminary, New York City. Allen and Collens, Architects. 



Digitized by 



Google 



150 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

vance of construction than in the correction of completed buildings. 
It must here suffice to merely indicate the nature of the results. 

When sound is produced in a confined auditorium it spreads 
spherically from the source until it reaches the audience, the walls, 
or the ceiling. It is there in part absorbed and in part reflected. 
The part which is reflected retraverses the room until it meets 
another surface. It is again in part absorbed and in part reflected. 
This process continues until, after a greater or less number of 
reflections, the sound becomes of negligible intensity. Thus at any 
one time and at any one point in the room there are many sounds 
crossing each other. In a very simple auditorium, such as a simple 
rectangular room with plain walls and ceiling, this process is not 
difficult to follow, either step by step, or by large, but entirely 
adequate, generalizations. When the conditions are more compli- 
cated it is more difficult to analyze; it is also more liable to be a 
vitally significant factor in the problem. That it has heretofore 
been inadequately discussed has arisen from the failure to take into 
consideration the phenomenon of diffraction in the propagation of 
a sound nearly parallel to an absorbing audience, the phenomenon 
of diffraction in reflection from an irregular surface, and, above all, 
the phenomenon of interference. The first of these three considera- 
tions is of primary importance in calculating the intensity of the 
sound which has come directly from the source, in calculating the 
effect of distance in the audience, and in calculating the relative 
loudness on the floor and in the gallery, and at the front and at the 
back of the gallery. The second consideration enters into the cal- 
culation of the path of the sound after reflection from any broken 
or irregular surfaces. The third is a factor of the utmost impor- 
tance when the sounds which are crossing at any point in the audi- 
torium are of comparable intensity and have traveled paths of so 
nearly equal length that they have originated from the same ele- 
ment. This latter calls for a more elaborate explanation. 

In both articulate speech and in music the source of sound is 
rapidly and in general, abruptly changing in pitch, quality, and 
loudness. In music one pitch is held during the length of a note. 
In articulate speech the unit or element of constancy is the syllable. 
Indeed, in speech it is even less than the length of a syllable, for the 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 151 

open vowel sound which forms the body of a syllable usually has a 
consonantal opening and closing. During the constancy of an ele- 
ment, either of music or of speech, a train of sound-waves spreads 
spherically from the source, just as a train of circular waves spreads 
outward from a rocking boat on the surface of still water. Different 
portions of this train of spherical waves strike different surfaces of 
the auditorium and are reflected. After such reflection they begin 
to cross each other's paths. If their paths are so different in length 
that one train of waves has entirely passed before the other arrives 
at a particular point, the only phenomenon at that point is pro- 
longation of the sound. If the space between the two trains of 
waves be sufficiently great the effect will be that of an echo. If 
there be a number of such trains of waves thus widely spaced, the 
effect will be that of multiple echoes. On the other hand if the two 
trains of waves have traveled so nearly equal paths that they over- 
lap, they will, dependent on the difference in length of the paths 
which they had traveled, either reinforce or mutually destroy each 
other. Just as two equal trains of water-waves crossing each other 
may entirely neutralize each other if the crest of one and the trough 
of the other arrive together, so two sounds, coming from the same 
source in crossing each other may produce silence. This phenom- 
enon is called interference and is a common phenomenon in all 
types of wave motion. Of course this phenomenon has its comple- 
ment. If the two trains of water-waves so cross that the crest of 
one coincides with the crest of the other and trough with trough, 
the effects will be added together. If the two sound-waves be simi- 
larly retarded, the one on the other, their effects will also be added. 
If the two trains of waves be equal in intensity, the combined in- 
tensity will be quadruple that of either of the trains separately, as 
above explained, or zero, depending on their relative retardation. 
The effect of this phenomenon is to produce regions in an audito- 
rium of loudness and regions of comparative or even complete silence. 
It is a partial explanation of the so-called deaf regions in an audi- 
torium. 

It is not difficult to observe this phenomenon directly. It is 
difficult, however, to measure and record the phenomenon in such 
a manner as to permit of an accurate chart of the result. Without 



Digitized by 



Google 



152 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

going into the details of the method employed the result of these 
measurements for a room very similar to the Congregational Church 
in Naugatuck is shown in the accompanying chart. The room 
experimented in was a simple rectangular room with plain side 



Fig. 12. Distribution of intensity on the head level in a room 
with a barrel-shaped ceiling, with center of curvature on the 
floor level. 

walls and ends and with a barrel or cylindrical ceiling. The ceiling 
of the room was smooth like the ceiling of the Naugatuck Church 
before it was coffered. The result is clearly represented in Fig. 12, 
in which the intensity of the sound has been indicated by contour 
lines in the manner employed in the drawing of the Geodetic Survey 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 153 

maps. The phenomenon indicated in these diagrams was not 
ephemeral, but was constant so long as the source of sound con- 
tinued, and repeated itself with almost perfect accuracy day after 
day. Nor was the phenomenon one which could be observed merely 
instrumentally. To an observer moving about in the room it was 
quite as striking a phenomenon as the diagrams suggest. At the 
points in the room indicated as high maxima of intensity in the 
diagram the sound was so loud as to be disagreeable, at other points 
so low as to be scarcely audible. It should be added that this dis- 
tribution of intensity is with the source of sound at the center of 
the room. Had the source of sound been at one end and on the axis 
of the cylindrical ceiling, the distribution of intensity would still 
have been bilaterally symmetrical, but not symmetrical about the 
transverse axis. 

As before stated a full discussion of this phase of the subject is 
reserved for another paper which is now about ready for publication. 

In the second, in the fourth, and in part in the third of the above 
examples the acoustical difficulty was that of excessive reverberation. 

If a sound of constant pitch is maintained in an auditorium, 
though only for a very brief time, the sound spreading directly 
from the source, together with the sound which has been reflected, 
arrives at a steady state. The intensity of the sound at any one 
point in the room is then the resultant of all the superposed sounds 
crossing at that point. As just shown, the mutual interference of 
these superposed sounds gives a distribution of intensity which 
shows pronounced maxima and minima. However, the probable 
intensity at any point, as well as the aggregate intensity over the 
room, is the sum of the components. Whatever the distribution of 
maxima and minima the state is a steady one so long as the source 
continues to sound. The steady condition in the room is such that 
the rate of absorption of the sound is equal to the rate of emission 
by the source. 

If after this steady state is established the source is abruptly 
checked, the different trains of waves will continue their journey, 
the maxima and minima shifting positions. Ultimately, the sound 
will cease to be audible, having diminished in intensity until it has 
passed below what aurists call the " threshold of audibility." The 



Digitized by 



Google 



154 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

duration of audibility after the source has ceased is thus dependent 
upon the initial intensity, upon the absorbing material, and upon 
the location of that absorbing material with reference to the several 
trains of waves. In special cases the position of the absorbing ma- 
terial is a matter of the utmost importance, but in many cases the 
aggregate result may be computed on the basis of the total absorbing 
power in the room. 

The prolongation of the sound in an auditorium after the source 
has ceased I have ventured to call reverberation, and to measure it 
numerically by the duration of audibility after the abrupt cessation 
of a source which has produced an average intensity of sound in the 
room equal to one million times minimum audible intensity. This 
is an ordinary condition in actual occurrence. 

In the 1900 papers published in the Engineering Record and the 
American Architect, this subject of reverberation was discussed at 
great length, and it was there shown how it might be measured and 
indeed, how it might be calculated in advance of construction. In 
addition to the formula many coefficients of absorption were de- 
termined, such data being absolutely necessary to the reduction of 
the subject to an exact science. This work related to sounds having 
a pitch an octave above middle C. 

But it was of course obvious that the acoustical quality of an 
auditorium is not determined by its character with reference to a 
single note. The next series of papers, published in 1906, therefore 
extended the investigation over the whole range of the musical scale 
giving data for many materials and wall-surfaces, and rendering a 
more complete calculation possible. At the conclusion of these 
papers it was shown how the reverberation of an auditorium should 
be represented by a curve in which the reverberation is plotted 
against the pitch and by way of illustration a particular case was 
shown, that of the large lecture-room in the Jefferson Physical 
Laboratory, both with and without an audience. This curve is 
reproduced in the accompanying diagram (Fig. 13). 

In the process of investigating an auditorium such a curve 
should be drawn as definitive of its initial condition and then in the 
determination of the treatment to be employed similar curves 
should be drawn representing the various alterations proposed and 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 



155 



taking into consideration the location of the surfaces, their areas 
and the nature of the proposed treatment. The diagram (Fig. 
14) shows the result of this computation for the more inter- 
esting of the above examples, St. Paul's Cathedral, Detroit. In 
this diagram curves are drawn plotting the reverberation of the 

10 



3 







































































































^ ^Q- 






























Oi 



o, 



0, 4 0, 6 0, 

Fig. IS. Curves showing the reverberation in the lecture- 
room of the Jefferson Physical Laboratory without an 
audience and with an audience filling all the seats. 

cathedral in its original condition, empty, and with a three-quarters 
audience, and with a full audience, and again after its acoustical 
correction also empty, with a three-quarters audience, and with a 
full audience. 

Reprints of the papers just mentioned were mailed at the time 
to all members of the American Institute of Architects. Duplicates 



Digitized by 



Google 



156 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



will gladly be sent to any one who may be interested in the further 
perusal of the subject. 

Brief mention has been made of the dependence, in special cases, 
of the efficiency of an absorbing material on its positions in an au- 
ditorium. For example, in the room whose distribution of intensity 

10 



0, Og 0, 4 0, 0; C, 

Fio. 14. Curves showing the reverberation in St. Paul's 
Cathedral, Detroit, before (1\ 2', 3', 4') and after (1, 2, 
3, 4) corrections, empty and with a one-quarter, one- 
half, three-quarter and full audience. 

was shown in Fig. 12, the absorbing material would have much 
greater efficiency in reducing the reverberation if placed so as to 
include maxima, than if so placed as to include minima. That this 
would be true is obvious. The magnitude of the effect, however, is 
not so clear, for the maxima and minima shift as the sound dies 















\ 
\ 












\ 
\ 
\ 

\ 


V 




* 


i 


X 


% X 


X 


4 

" 






> 
\ 

\ 
% 












1 




\ \ 

X \ 


• — — ^ ' 


„~~~ m 


•4^ 


*X 


\ \ \ 
\ * \ 

\ * ^ 
\ \ 


x x 


\ 


--x^" 








X*S 


-.-£>, 


_~-^ 


•4—- 










*N- 





















Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 



157 



away. It was therefore submitted to an accurate experimental 
investigation. The results are shown in the adjacent diagram. 













I 


/ 


\ 






/ 


\ 




1 ft 






/ 


\ 




.9 
.8 

.6 






/ 




\ 












\ 






/ 

8 
/ 






\ 








1 




\ 








L 


( 












f 


3 


s 


v 


.3 




i 


'// 






\ 






Ji 


1 






\ 




^ 


% 












<*.~* 


r 











o, o t 



o 4 a 



Fig. 15. Showing the relative efficiency of felt in differ- 
ent parts of a room having a barrel ceiling. Curve 1, 
normal absorbing power; Curve 2, absorbing power in 
the center of the room; Curve S, absorbing power at 
the side of the room. G is middle C, 256. 

Fig. 15. In this diagram the curve marked 1 shows by its vertical 
ordinates the normal efficiency of a very highly absorbent felt. If 



Digitized by 



Google 



158 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



so placed in the room as to include on its surface the maxima of 
intensity of the sound it had an effective absorbing power as shown 
in Curve 2, a truly remarkable increase over its normal value. 
Curve S shows the efficiency of the same felt when placed against 
the side wall. It there included more maxima than minima for the 

1.0 



.8 
.9 



m 



0, 0,0,0,0, 

Fig. 16. Absorbing power of various kinds of felt as de- 
fined in the text. G is middle C, 256. 

lower notes, but more minima than maxima for the higher notes, 
with a resulting efficiency curve which is very irregular. 

The following experiments were performed for the H. W. Johns- 
Manville Company in the search for an efficient absorbing material 
and an effective method of treatment. The absorbing efficiency of 
felt is dependent on the flexibility of the mass as a whole and on its 
porosity. It is not in large measure dependent on the material 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 



159 



employed, except in so far as the nature of that material determines 
the nature, and therefore the closeness, of the felting process. The 
same materials, therefore, might very well have either a very high 
or a very low absorbing efficiency, depending entirely upon the 
process of manufacture. The nature of the material is here specified, 

1.0 



.9 
.8 
.7 
.6 



.4 
.3 
.9 
.1 

































,<# 


*v 








k 


f 


^ 








J 


f 




\ 






1 






\ 




, 


r 










J 


f 








^ 


/ 










5=^2 













o, 



0, C 3 0« 0, 



Fig. 17. Effect of air space behind felt. Curve l v felt in 
contact with the wall; Curves 2, 3, and 4, felt at dis- 
tances of 2, 4, and 6 inches from the wall. 

not with the idea that it alone can determine the quality, but merely 
as an additional piece of information. In addition to this, in each 
case the ratio of the solid material to the free space is given; but 
even this does not define in full the essential conditions. The ab- 
sorbing power is determined not merely by the ratio of the air space 
to the solid material, but by the size of the pores and by the elas- 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



ticity and viscosity of the mass as a whole. In Fig. 16 Curve 1 is 
a hair felt, the one alluded to above as of exceptional efficiency. 
The fraction of its total volume, which is solid material, is 0.12. 
Curve 2 is a mixture of hair felt and asbestos, whose solid portion is 




Fig. 18. Curves showing the effect on absorbing power 
of membrane covering. Curve 1, felt; Curve 2, burlap 
cemented with silicate of soda; Curve 3, light mem- 
brane as described; Curve 4, heavy membrane as de- 
scribed; lower Curve 3, light membrane alone; lower 
Curve 4, heavy membrane alone. 

0.19 of its total volume. Curve S is a felt wholly of asbestos f " 
thickness, whose solid portion is 0.83 of its total volume. In this 
latter the asbestos fiber is felted to an asbestos cloth which serves 
to strengthen it greatly. Curve 4 is for an asbestos felt without 
reinforcement. That a considerable fraction of its absorbing power 



Digitized by 



Google 



ACOUSTICAL DIFFICULTIES 161 

is due to its elastic yielding as a whole is shown by its rather sharp 
maxima. 

The curves in Fig. 17 show the effect of holding the felt at differ- 
ent distances from the wall. In each case it was held on a wire 
grating. Curve 1 is when the felt is as near the wall as the grating 
would permit, perhaps within a quarter of an inch of the wall. 
Curve 2 is when the felt was held at a distance of two inches; Curve 
S at four inches; and Curve 4 at six inches from the wall. It is 
evident that there is a slight gain from an air space behind the felt, 
but it is also evident that this gain is so slight as to be entirely 
incommensurate with the cost of construction and its loss in dur- 
ability. 

The Curves in Fig. 18 show the efficiency of various coverings. 
Curve 1 is the normal exposed efficiency of the felt above referred 
to. Curve 2 is its efficiency when covered by burlap attached by 
silicate of soda. This covering was so sized as to be practically 
impervious, but was in contact with and a part of the felt. Curves S 
and 4 show the efficiency of coverings which are not in contact with 
the felt, but which are stretched. Both coverings are impervious, — 
3 relatively light, 4 heavy. Number 8 weighs 0.87 ounces to the 
square foot ; number 4 weighs 2.58 ounces to the square foot. The 
materials of which these coverings are made have no bearing on the 
question, and would be misleading if stated. The really significant 
factors are their weight, the tension with which they are stretched, 
their elasticity, and their viscosity. The weight of the several 
coverings has been stated; the other factors can be defined best by 
means of their independent absorbing powers. Lower curves 3 and 4 
indicate the absorbing power of the membrane coverings alone. 
It is interesting to note that the diaphragm which has by itself the 
least absorbing power has the greatest absorbing power when 
combined with the felt. This is by no means a paradox. It is 
exactly the result which could be predicted by application of the 
simplest of physical principles. 



Digitized by 



Google 



I 



o 
& 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 1 

Vitruvius, De Architecture, Liber V, Cap. VIII. (De locis con- 
sonantibus ad theatra eligendis.) 

" All this being arranged, we must see with even greater care that a 
position has been taken where the voice falls softly and is not so reflected 
as to produce a confused effect on the ear. There are some positions offer- 
ing natural obstructions to the projection of the voice, as for instance the 
dissonant, which in Greek are termed KariyxoBvres; the circumsonant, which 
with them are named wep^xovvres ; and again the resonant, which are termed 
avrrixovvres. The consonant positions are called by them awrjxofirres. 

The dissonant are those places in which the sound first uttered is carried 
up, strikes against solid bodies above, and, reflected, checks as it falls the 
rise of the succeeding sound. 

The circumsonant are those in which the voice spreading in all direc- 
tions is reflected into the middle, where it dissolves, confusing the case 
endings, and dies away in sounds of indistinct meaning. 

The resonant are those in which the voice comes in contact with some 
solid substance and is reflected, producing an echo and making the case 
terminations double. 

The consonant are those in which the voice is supported and strength- 
ened, and reaches the ear in words which are clear and distinct." 

This is an admirable analysis of the problem of theatre acoustics. 
But to adapt it to modern nomenclature, we must substitute for the 
word dissonance, interference; for the word circumsonance, rever- 
beration; for the word resonance, echo. For consonance, we have 
unfortunately no single term, but the conception is one which is fun- 
damental. 

It is possible that in the above translation and in the following 
interpretation I have read into the text of Vitruvius a definiteness of 
conception and an accord with modern science which his language 
only fortuitously permits. If so, it is erring on the better side, and is 
but a reasonable latitude to take under the circumstances. The only 
passage whose interpretation is open to serious question is that re- 

1 The American Architect, voL civ, p. 257. 
itt 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

lating to dissonant places. If Vitruvius knew that the superposition 
of two sounds could produce silence, and the expression "opprimit 
insequentis vocis elationem" permits of such interpretation, it must 
stand as an observation isolated by many centuries from the modern 
knowledge of the now familiar phenomenon of interference. 

Interference 

Interference is a phenomenon common to all types of wave motion. 
The best introduction to its discussion is by reference to water-waves 



Fig. 2. Greek Theatre at the University of California. Mr* John Galen Howard, Architect 

and in particular to an interesting example of tidal interference on 
the Tongking Peninsula. The tide of the Pacific Ocean enters the 
Chinese Sea through two channels, one to the north of the Philippine 
Islands, between Luzon and Formosa, and the other through the 
Sulu Archipelago between Mindanao and Borneo. The northern 
channel is short and deep; and the tide enters with very little re- 
tardation. The other channel, although broad, is shallow, tortuous, 
and broken by many small islands; and the tide in passing through 
is much retarded. The two tides thus entering the Chinese Sea pro- 
duce an effect which varies from point to point. At one port on the 
Tongking Peninsula, these tides are so retarded relatively to each 
other as to be six hours apart. It is high tide by one when it is low 
tide by the other. It also so happens that at this point the two tides 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 165 

are equal. Being equal and exactly opposite in phase, they neutralize 
each other. 

Because tidal waves are long in comparison with the bodies of 
water in which they are propagated, their interference phenomena 
are obscure except to careful analysis. When, however, the waves 
are smaller than the space in which they are being propagated, the 
interference system becomes more marked, more complicated, and 
more interesting. Under such circumstances, there may be regions 
of perfect quiet near regions of violent disturbance. 

Subjecting the parallel to a more exact statement, whenever two 
water-waves come together the resulting disturbance at any instant 
is equal to the algebraic sum of the disturbances which each would 
produce separately. If their crests coincide, the joint effect is equal 
to the sum of their separate effect. If crest and trough coincide, their 
joint effect is the difference between them. If their relative retarda- 
tion is intermediate, a wave results which is intermediate between 
their sum and their difference and whose time of maximum does not 
occur simultaneously with the maximum of either of the components. 

The phenomenon is one which may be produced accurately on 
any scale and with any type of wave motion. Thus sound consists 
of waves of alternate condensation and rarefaction in the air. If two 
trains of sound-waves cross each other so that at a given point con- 
densation in the two trains arrive simultaneously, the rarefactions 
will also arrive simultaneously, and the total disturbance is a train 
of waves of condensation and rarefaction equal to the sum of the two 
components. If one train is retarded so that its condensations coin- 
cide with the other's rarefactions, the disturbance produced is the 
difference between that which would be produced by the trains of 
waves separately. Just as a tidal wave, a storm wave, or a ripple 
may be made to separate and recross by some obstacle round which 
it diffracts or from which it is reflected, and recombining produce 
regions of violent and regions of minimum disturbances, so sound- 
waves may be diffracted or reflected, and recombining after travel- 
ling different paths, produce regions of great loudness and regions of 
almost complete silence. In general, in an auditorium the phenom- 
enon of interference is produced not by the crossing of two trains of 
waves only, but by the crossing of many, reflected from the various 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

walls, from the ceiling, from the floor, from any obstacle whatever 
in the room, while still other trains of waves are produced by the 
diffraction of the sound around columns and pilasters. 

A source of sound on whose steadiness one can rely is all that is 
necessary in order to make the phenomenon of interference obvious. 
A low note on a pure toned stop of a church organ will serve the 
purpose admirably. The observer can satisfy himself that the note 
is sounding steadily by remaining in a fixed position. As soon, how- 
ever, as he begins to move from this position by walking up and down 
the aisle he will observe a great change in loudness. Indeed, he may 
find a position for one ear which, if he closes the other, will give al- 
most absolute silence, and this not far from positions where the 
sound is loud to the extent of being disagreeable. The observer in 
walking about the church will find that the phenomenon is compli- 
cated. It is, however, by no means random in its character, but 
definite, permanent, and accurate in its recurrence, note for note. 
The phenomenon, while difficult, is by no means impossible of experi- 
mental investigation or of theoretical solution. Indeed, this has been 
done with great care in connection with the study of another prob- 
lem, — that of the Central Criminal Court Room in London known as 
Old Bailey. The full primary explanation of the methods and results 
of this general investigation would be inappropriately long in an 
article dealing with the acoustics of theatres; for while interference 
is a factor in every auditorium, it is on the whole not the most 
seriously disturbing factor in theatre design. 

The subject of interference would not have been given even so 
extended a discussion as this in a paper dealing with theatres were 
it not that recently there has been proposed in Germany a form of 
stage setting known as the Kuppel-horizont for sky and horizon 
effects, to accompany the Fortuny system of stage lighting, in which 
interference may be a not inconsiderable factor unless guarded 
against. The Fortuny system, which in the opinion of some com- 
petent judges is an effective form of stage lighting, consists primarily 
in the use of indirect illumination, softened and colored by reflection 
from screens of silk. As an adjunct to the system, and in an en- 
deavor to secure a considerable depth to the stage without either 
great height or an excessive use of sky and wing flies, a cupola is 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 



167 



recommended to go with the Fortuny lighting as shown in the ac- 
companying figures taken from the publications of the Berliner Atte~ 
gemeine Electrwitdts GeseUsehaft In Figs. 3 and 4, the cupola is 
shown in section and in plan. Lights A and B illuminate the interior 
of the cupola; C and E light the area of the stage on which the prin- 





PLAN 

Figs. 3 and 4. Section and plan of the Kuppel-Horizont 
with Fortuny system of lighting. 

cipal action occurs. Cloud effects, either stationary or moving, are 
projected on the surface of the cupola by a stereopticon. The great 
advantage claimed for this form of stage setting is the more natural 
arrangement of stage properties which it makes possible, and the 
elimination of numerous flies. On the other hand there is some criti- 
cism that this lighting results in an unnatural silhouetting. 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

So detailed an explanation of the diagrams and the purpose of the 
several parts is necessitated by the fact that it is as yet an unfamiliar 
device in this country. It has been introduced recently in a number 
of theiatres in Germany, although I believe not elsewhere, unless 
possibly in one theatre in England. It has been called to my atten- 
tion by Professor Baker as a possible equipment of the theatre which 



Fig. 5. Interference system for tenor C in the Kuppel-Horizont, 
having a thirty-six foot proscenium opening. The intensity 
of sound is represented by contour lines, the maximum vari- 
ation being forty-seven fold. 

is proposed for the dramatic department of Harvard University, and 
it is reasonable to regard it as a probable factor in theatre design in 
other countries than Germany. 

In Fig. 5 is plotted the interference system established in this 
space, on a standing head level of five feet from the floor of the stage, 
by a sustained note tenor C in pitch. The intensity of the sound is 
indicated by contour lines very much as land elevation is indicated 
on the maps of the Geodetic Survey. In this plot, account has been 
taken of the sound reflected from the cupola and from the floor. No 
account has been taken of the reflection from the walls of the main 
auditorium since this would be a factor only for sounds prolonged 
beyond the length of any single element in articulate speech. Even 
in the case of a very prolonged sound the modification of the inter- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 169 

f erence system of the stage and cupola by the rest of the auditorium 
would be very slight. 

The interference system on the stage in question being deter- 
mined wholly by the floor and cupola, it may be computed, and in 
the preparation of the chart was computed, by the so-called method 
of images. The sound reflected from the floor comes as from a virtual 
image as far beneath the floor as the mouth of the speaker is above 
it. Each of these produce real images by reflection from the interior 
of the cupola. Bearing in mind that these real images show the 
phenomenon of diffraction and some astigmatism, and taking into 
account the phase of the sound as determined by reflection and by 
distance, the calculation is laborious but not difficult. It involves 
but the most familiar processes of geometrical optics. 

The disturbing effect of this interference system is not so great 
when the speaker is well in front of the center of curvature of the 
cupola, and of course it is almost always more or less broken by the . 
stage properties, as indicated in Figs. 3 and 4. Nevertheless, it is 
well to bear in mind that the quarter sphere form, as indicated in the 
diagrams, is neither necessary from the standpoint of illumination 
nor desirable from the standpoint of acoustics. Acoustically a flatter 
back with sharper curvature above and at the sides is preferable. 

It should be repeated that the interference system is established 
only when the tones are sustained, in this case over one-tenth of a 
second, and is more of an annoyance to the actor on the stage than 
to the audience. With shorter tones it becomes an echo, and in this 
form is quite as annoying to the audience as to the actor. It should 
be added that the interference changes with change of pitch, but 
preserves extreme maxima and minima for a central position in a 
spherical or partly spherical surface. Finally in music, since sus- 
tained tones occur more than in speech, the interference is more dis- 
turbing. The effect of such spherical stage recesses on music is 
shown by those otherwise unusually excellent auditoriums, Orches- 
tra Hall in Chicago, and the Concert Hall at Willow Grove Park 
near Philadelphia. 



Digitized by 



Google 



170 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

Reverberation 

"Circumsonant places" were rare and almost wholly negligible 
difficulties in Greek and Roman theatres. However, they were com- 
mon in the temples, and were even more pronounced in some of the 
older Roman palaces. It must have been in the experience of such 
conditions, wholly foreign to the theatre of which he was writing, 
that Vitruvius made this portion of his analysis of the acoustical 
problem. Given the fundamental form of the Greek theatre, it re- 
quired no special consideration and little or no skill to avoid such 
difficulties. However, this is not true of the modern theatre, in which 
excessive reverberation is more often the defect than any other 
factor. 

If a sound be produced briefly in a wholly empty, wholly closed 
room, having perfectly rigid walls, it will be reflected at each inci- 
dence with undiminished intensity, and, travelling to and fro across 
the room, will continue audible almost indefinitely. Of course no 
theatre, ancient or modern, satisfies these conditions and the sound 
loses at each reflection, diminishing in intensity, until in the course of 
time it crosses what the experimental psychologist calls the "thresh- 
old of audibility/' In the Greek theatres the duration of audibility 
of the residual sound after the cessation of a source of ordinary loud- 
ness was never more than a few tenths of a second; in a modern 
theatre it may be several seconds. The rapidity with which the 
sound dies away depends on the size of the theatre, on its shape, on 
the materials used for its walls, ceiling, and furnishings, and on the 
size and distribution of the audience. The size and shape of the 
theatre determines the distance travelled by the sound between 
reflections, while the materials determine the loss at each reflec- 
tion. No actual wall can be perfectly rigid. Wood sheathing, 
plaster on wood lath, plaster on wire lath, plaster applied directly 
to the solid wall, yield under the vibrating pressure of sound and 
dissipate its energy. Even a wall of solid marble yields slightly, 
transmitting the energy to external space or absorbing it by its own 
internal viscosity. 

Absorptions by the walls and other objects in the process of reflec- 
tion, including in this transmission through all openings into outer 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 171 

space as equivalent to total absorption — boundary conditions in 
other words — are practically alone to be credited with the dissolu- 
tion of the residual sound. But Vitruvius* statement that the 
sound "is reflected into the middle, where it dissolves" challenges 
completeness and at least the mention of another factor, which, 
because of its almost infinitesimal importance, would otherwise be 
passed without comment. 

Assuming, what is of course impossible, a closed room of ab- 
solutely rigid and perfectly reflecting walls, a sound once started 
would not continue forever, for where the air is condensed by the 
passing of the wave of sound, it is heated, and where it is rarefied, it 
is cooled. Between these unequally heated regions and between 
them and the walls, there is a continual radiation of heat, with a re- 
sulting dissipation of available energy. In the course of time, but 
only in the course of a very long time, the sound would even thus 
cease to be of audible intensity. This form of dissipation might well 
be called in the language of Vitruvius "sotoena in medio"; but, in- 
stead of being an important factor, it is an entirely negligible factor 
in any actual auditorium. 

Practically the rapidity with which the sound is absorbed is de- 
pendent solely on the nature of the reflecting surfaces and the length 
of the path which the sound must traverse between reflections, the 
latter depending on the shape and size of the auditorium. It was 
shown in a series of papers published in The American Architect in 
1900, 1 and in another paper published in the Proceedings of the Amer- 
ican Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1906, 2 that, given the plans of 
an auditorium and the material of which it is composed, it is possible 
to calculate with a very high degree of accuracy the rate of decay of 
a sound in the room and the duration of its audibility. In the first of 
the above papers there was given the complete theory of the subject, 
together with tables of experimentally determined coefficients of ab- 
sorption of sound for practically all the materials that enter into 
auditorium construction, for sounds having a pitch one octave above 
middle C (vibration frequency 512). In the second of the above 
papers there were given the coefficients of absorption of building 
materials for the whole range of the musical scale. 

1 See page 09. * Ibid. 



Digitized by 



Google 



172 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

In the careful design of a room for musical purposes, the problem 
obviously must include the whole range of the musical scale, at least 
seven octaves. It is not so obvious that the study must cover so 
great a range when the primary use is to be with the spoken voice. 
The nearest study to architectural acoustics is the highly developed 
science of telephony, and in this it is apparently sufficient for much 
of the work to adapt the theory and design to the single frequency of 
800, approximately A in the second octave above middle C. But for 



Fig. 6. The Little Theatre, New York. Ingalls and Hoffman, Architects. 

some problems the investigation must be extended over a consider- 
able range of pitch. Similarly experience in the architectural prob- 
lem shows that with some of the materials entering into building con- 
struction there occurs a sharp resonance within a not great range of 
pitch. It is, therefore, necessary to determine the reverberation even 
for the speaking voice, not for a single pitch but for a considerable 
range, and the quality of a theatre with respect to reverberation will 
be represented by a curve in which the reverberation is plotted 
against the pitch. 

Without undertaking to give again a complete discussion of the 
theory of reverberation, and referring the reader to the earlier (1900) 
numbers of The American Architect, it will suffice to give a single 



Digitized by 



Google 




Fiqs. 7 and 8. Plan and Section of the Little Theatre, New York. 
Ingalls and Hoffman, Architects. 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

illustration. For this I have selected Mr. Winthrop Ames' "Little 
Theatre" in New York, designed by Messrs. Ingalls and Hoffman, 
because the purpose and use of this auditorium was defined from the 
beginning with unusual precision. The purpose was the production 
of plays which could be adequately rendered only by the most deli- 
cate shades of expression, which would be lost in considerable meas- 
ure if the conditions were such as to necessitate exaggeration of 
feature or of voice. The definition of its use was that it should seat 
just less than 300, and that all the seats were to be as nearly as 
possible of equal excellence, with the important assurance that every 
seat would be occupied at every performance. 

The final plan and section of the Little Theatre are shown in 
Figs. 7 and 8. The initial pencil sketch was of an auditorium differ- 
ing in many architectural details, acoustical considerations sharing 
in, but by no means alone dictating, the steps leading to the final 
solution of the problem. The first calculations, based on the general 
lines of the initial sketch, and assuming probable materials and plaus- 
ible details of construction (plaster on tile walls, plaster on wire lath 
ceiling, solid plaster cornices and moulding), gave a reverberation as 
shown in Curve 1 in Fig. 9. This would not have been in excess of 
that in many theatres whose acoustical qualities are not especially 
questioned. But the unusual requirements of the plays to be pre- 
sented in this theatre, and the tendency of the public to criticize 
whatever is unconventional in design, led both Mr. Ames and the 
architects to insist on exceptional quality. The floor was, therefore, 
lowered at the front, the ceiling was lowered, and the walls near the 
stage brought in and reduced in curvature, with, of course, corre- 
sponding changes in the architectural treatment. The rear wall, 
following the line of the rear seats, remained unchanged in curvature. 
The side walls near the stage were curved. The net effect of these 
changes was to give an auditorium 28 feet high in front, 23 feet high 
at the rear, 48 feet long and 49 feet broad, with a stage opening 18 
by 31, and having a reverberation as shown by Curve 2. In order to 
reduce still further the reverberation, as well as to break acoustically 
the curvature of the side and rear walls, "acoustic felt" was applied 
in panels. There were three panels, 6 feet by 13 feet, on each of the 
side walls, and seven panels, two 4 feet 5 inches by 13 feet, two 5 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 



175 



feet by 10 feet, two 2 feet by 4 feet, and one 8 feet by 7 feet, on the 
rear wall. The resulting reverberation is shown by Curve S in the 
diagram. Throughout, consideration was had for the actual path of 
the sound in its successive reflections, but the discussion of this 

10 
9 
8 
7 
6 





























































































-1 












"3 



















o, 



o, 



0. 



o« 



o, o. 



Fio. 9. Reverberation in seconds of the Little Theatre, 
for notes of different pitch, C% being Middle C, Curve 1 
for the first design, Curve 2 for the second, and Curve 
3 for the third and as built. 

phase of the general problem comes in the next section and will be 
illustrated by other theatres. 

It should be said, parenthetically but none the less emphatically, 
that throughout this paper by theatre is meant an auditorium for 
the spoken drama. 



Digitized by 



Google 



176 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

Echo 

When a source of sound is maintained constant for a sufficiently 
long time — a few seconds will ordinarily suffice — the sound be- 
comes steady at every point in the room. The distribution of the 
intensity of sound under these conditions is called the interference 



Fig. 10. Interior, the New Theatre, New York. Carrere and Hastings, Architects. 

system, for that particular note, of the room or space in question. 
If the source of sound is suddenly stopped, it requires some time for 
the sound in the room to be absorbed. This prolongation of sound 
after the source has ceased is called reverberation. If the source of 
sound, instead of being maintained, is short and sharp, it travels as 
a discrete wave or group of waves about the room, reflected from 
wall to wall, producing echoes. In the Greek theatre there was ordi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 177 

narily but one echo, " doubling the case ending," while in the modern 
theatre there are many, generally arriving at a less interval of time 
after the direct sound and therefore less distinguishable, but stronger 
and therefore more disturbing. 

This phase of the acoustical problem will be illustrated by two 
examples, the New Theatre, the most important structure of the 



Fig. 11 

kind in New York, and the plans of the theatre now building for the 
Scollay Square Realty Company in Boston. 

Notwithstanding the fact that there was at one time criticism of 
the acoustical quality of the New Theatre, the memory of which 
still lingers and still colors the casual comment, it was not worse in 
proportion to its size than several other theatres in the city. It is, 
therefore, not taken as an example because it showed acoustical de- 
fects in remarkable degree, but rather because there is much that 
can be learned from the conditions under which it was built, because 
such defects as existed have been corrected in large measure, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



178 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

above all in the hope of aiding in some small way in the restoration 
of a magnificent building to a dignified use for which it is in so many 
ways eminently suited. The generous purpose of its Founders, the 
high ideals of its manager in regard to the plays to be produced, and 
the perfection otherwise of the building directed an exaggerated and 
morbid attention to this feature. Aside from the close scrutiny which 



Fig. 12 

always centers on a semi-public undertaking, the architects, Messrs. 
Carrere and Hastings, suffered from that which probably every archi- 
tect can appreciate from some similar experience of his own, — an 
impossible program. They were called on to make a large "little 
theatre," as a particular type of institution is called in England; and, 
through a division of purpose on the part of the Founders and Ad- 
visers, for the Director of the Metropolitan Opera was a powerful 
factor, they were called on to make a building adapted to both the 
opera and the drama. There were also financial difficulties, although 
very different from those usually encountered, a plethora of riches. 
This necessitated the provision of two rows of boxes, forty-eight 
originally, equally commodious, and none so near the stage as to 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 179 

thereby suffer in comparison with the others. Finally, there was a 
change of program when the building was almost complete. The 
upper row of boxes was abandoned and the shallow balcony thus 
created was devoted to foyer chairs which were reserved for the 



Fig. 13. Plans and Section of the New Theatre, New York. 
Carrere and Hastings, Architects. 

annual subscribers. As will be shown later these seats were acousti- 
cally the poorest in the house. 

Encircling boxes are a familiar arrangement, but most of the 
precedents, especially those in good repute, are opera houses and 
not theatres, the opera and the drama being different in their acous- 
tical requirements. In the New Theatre this arrangement exerted a 
three-fold pressure on the design. It raised the balcony and gallery 12 
feet. It increased both the breadth and the depth of the house. And, 
together with the requirement that these boxes should not extend 



Digitized by 



Google 



180 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

near the stage, it led to side walls whose most natural architectural 
treatment was such as to create sources of not inconsiderable echo. 
The immediate problem is the discussion of the reflections from 
the ceiling, from the side walls near the stage, from the screen and 
parapet in front of the first row of boxes and from the wall at the 
rear of these boxes. To illustrate this I have taken photographs of 
the actual sound and its echoes passing through a model of the 



Fig. 14. Photograph of a sound-wave, WW, entering a model 
of the New Theatre, and of the echoes a\, produced by the 
orchestra screen, a 8 from the main floor, oj, from the floor 
of the orchestra pit, 04, the reflection from the orchestra 
screen of the wave a%, a* the wave originating at the edge of 
the stage. 

theatre by a modification of what may be called the Toeppler-Boys- 
Foley method of photographing air disturbances. The details of the 
adaptation of the method to the present investigation will be ex- 
plained in another paper. It is sufficient here to say that the method 
consists essentially of taking off the sides of the model, and, as the 
sound is passing through it, illuminating it instantaneously by the 
light from a very fine and somewhat distant electric spark. After 
passing through the model the light falls on a photographic plate 
placed at a little distance on the other side. The light is refracted by 
the sound-waves, which thus act practically as their own lens in pro- 
ducing the photograph. 

In the accompanying illustrations reduced from the photographs 
the enframing silhouettes are shadows cast by the model, and all 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 15 Fig. 18 



Fig. 16 ^a. 19 



Fig. 17 Fig. SO 

Two aeries of photographs of the sound and its reflections in the New Theatre, — 15 to 17 before, 18 to 20 after 
the installation of the canopy in the ceiling. The effect of the canopy in protecting the balcony, foyer chairs, 
boxes, and the orchestra chairs back of row L is shown by comparing Figs. 19 and 20 with Figs. 16 and 17. 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

within are direct photographs of the actual sound-wave and its 
echoes. For example, Fig. 14 shows in silhouette the principal longi- 
tudinal section of the main auditorium of the New Theatre. WW is 
a photograph of a sound-wave which has entered the main auditorium 
from a point on the stage at an ordinary distance back of the pros- 
cenium arch; a iy is the reflection from the solid rail in front of the 
orchestra pit, and a% 9 the reflection from the floor of the sound which 
has passed over the top of the rail; a 9 is the reflection from the floor 



Fig. 21. Photograph of the direct sound, WW, and of the 
echoes from the various surfaces; a»,i, a wave, or echo, due 
to the combination of two waves which originated at the 
orchestra pit; c\ from the oval panel in the ceiling; c a and 
Cx y from the ceiling mouldings and cornice over the prosce- 
nium arch; c 4 , a group from the moulding surrounding the 
panel; c§, from the proscenium arch; 61, 61, 6» from the 
screens in front, and the walls in the rear of the boxes, 
balcony and gallery. 

of the pit, and a 4 the reflection of this reflected wave from the rail; 
while a 6 originated at the edge of the stage. None of these reflections 
are important factors in determining the acoustical quality of the 
theatre, but the photograph affords excellent opportunity for show- 
ing the manner in which reflections are formed, and to introduce the 
series of more significant photographs on page 181. 

Figures 15, 16, and 17 show the advance of the sound through the 
auditorium at .07, .10, and .14 second intervals after its departure 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 183 

from the source. In Fig. 15, the waves which originated at the 
orchestra pit can be readily distinguished, as well as the nascent 
waves where the primary sound is striking the ceiling cornice imme- 
diately over the proscenium arch. The proscenium arch itself was 
very well designed, for the sound passed parallel to its surface. 
Otherwise reflections from the proscenium arch would also have 
shown in the photograph. These would have been directed toward 
the audience and might have been very perceptible factors in deter- 
mining the ultimate acoustical quality. 

The system of reflected waves in the succeeding photograph in 
the series is so complicated that it is difficult to identify the several 
reflections by verbal description. The photograph is, therefore, re- 
produced in Fig. 21, lettered and with accompanying legends. It is 
interesting to observe that all the reflected waves which originated 
at the orchestra pit have disappeared with the exception of waves 
a* and a*. These have combined to form practically a single wave. 
Even this combined wave is almost negligible. 

The acoustically important reflections in the vertical section are 
the waves Ci, c a , and c 8 . The waves 6i and 6 a from the screen in front 
of the boxes and from the back of the boxes are also of great impor- 
tance, but the peculiarities of these waves are better shown by photo- 
graphs taken vertically through a horizontal section. 

The waves c u c t , c 8 , and 6i and 6 a show in a striking manner the 
fallacy of the not uncommon representation of the propagation of 
sound by straight lines. For example, the wave c x is a reflection from 
the oval panel in the ceiling. The curvature of this panel is such 
that the ray construction would give practically parallel rays after 
reflection. Were the geometrical representation by rays an ade- 
quate one the reflected wave would thus be a flat disc equal in area 
to the oblique projection of the panel. As a matter of fact, however, 
the wave spreads far into the geometrical shadow, as is shown by 
the curved portion reaching well out toward the proscenium arch. 
Again, waves c a and c 8 are reflections from a cornice whose irregular- 
ities are not so oriented as to suggest by the simple geometrical 
representation of rays the formation of such waves as are here clearly 
shown. But each small cornice moulding originates an almost hemi- 
spherical wave, and the mouldings are in two groups, the position of 



Digitized by 



Google 



184 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

each being such that the spherical waves conspire to form these two 
master waves. The inadequacy of the discussion of the subject of 
architectural acoustics by the construction of straight lines is still 
further shown by the waves reflected from the screens in front of the 
boxes, of the balcony, and of the gallery. These reflecting surfaces 
are narrow, but give, as is clearly seen in the photograph, highly 
divergent waves. This spreading of the wave beyond the geometrical 
projection is more pronounced the smaller the opening or the reflect- 
ing obstacle and the greater the length of the wave. The phenom- 
enon is called diffraction and is, of course, one of the well-known 
phenomena of physics. It is more pronounced in the long waves of 
sound than in the short waves of light, and on the small areas of an 
auditorium than in the large dimensions of out-of-door space. It 
cannot be ignored, as it has been heretofore ignored in all discussion 
of this phase of the problem of architectural acoustics, with im- 
punity. The method of rays, although a fairly correct approximation 
with large areas, is misleading under most conditions. For example, 
in the present case it would have predicted almost perfect acoustics 
in the boxes and on the main floor. 

Figures 17 and 20 show the condition in the room when the main 
sound-wave has reached the last seat in the top gallery. The wave 
Ci has advanced and is reaching the front row of seats in the gallery, 
producing the effect of an echo. A little later it wilKenter the balcony, 
producing there an echo greater in intensity, more delayed, and 
affecting more than half the seats in the balcony, for it will curve 
under the gallery, in the manner just explained, and disturb seats 
which geometrically would be protected. Still later it will enter the 
foyer seats and the boxes. But the main disturbance in these seats 
and the boxes, as is well shown by the photograph, arises from the 
wave c 8 , and in the orchestra seats on the floor from the wave c 8 . 

In the summer following the opening of the theatre, a canopy, 
oval in plan and slightly larger than the ceiling oval, was hung from 
the ceiling surrounding a central chandelier. The effect of this in 
preventing these disturbing reflections is shown by a comparison, 
pair by pair, of the two series of photographs, Figs. 15 to 17 and 
Figs. 18 to 20. It is safe to say that there are few, possibly no 
modern theatres, or opera houses, equal in size and seating capacity, 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 22 



Fig. 25 



Fig. 23 



Fig. 26 



Fig. 24 



Fig. 27 



Photographs showing the reflections, in a vertical plane, from the sides of the proscenium 
arch, the plain wall below the actors' box, and the rail or screen in front of the boxes. 
The photographs taken in numerical sequence show the progress of a single sound-wave 
and its reflections. 



Digitized by 



Google 



186 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

which are so free from this particular type of disturbance as the New 
Theatre at the present time. 

In the study of the New Theatre, photographs were taken through 
several horizontal sections. It will be sufficient for the purposes of 
the present paper to illustrate the effect of curved surfaces in pro- 
ducing converging waves by a few photographs showing the propa- 
gation of sound through a single section in a plane passing through 
the parapet in front of the boxes. The reflected waves shown in 



Fig. 28. A photograph, one of many taken, showing 
in vertical section one stage of the reflection b% 
Fig. 21. These reflections were eliminated by the 
architects in the summer following the opening 
of the theatre, but have been in part restored by 
subsequent changes. 

Fig. 22 originating from the edge of the proscenium arch and from 
the base of the column can be followed throughout all the succeeding 
photographs. In Fig. 23 are shown waves originating from the plain 
wall beneath the actor's box and the beginning of some small waves 
from the curved parapet. It is easily possible, as it is also interesting 
and instructive, to follow these waves through the succeeding photo- 
graphs. In Fig. 25 the sound has been reflected from the rear of the 
parapet; while in Fig. 26 it has advanced further down the main 
floor of the auditorium, narrowing as it proceeds and gaining in in- 
tensity. The waves reflected from the parapet outside of the aisles 
are here shown approaching each other behind the wave which has 
been reflected from the parapet between the aisles. Waves are also 
shown in Fig. 26 emerging from the passages between the boxes. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 187 

Indeed, it is possible to trace the waves arising from a second reflec- 
tion from the proscenium arch of the sound which, first reflected 
from the corresponding surfaces on the other side, has crossed di- 
rectly in front of the stage. With a little care, it is possible also to 
identify these waves in the last photograph. 

Although many were taken, it will suffice to show a single photo- 
graph, Fig. 28, of the reflections in the plane passing through the 
back of the boxes. These disturbing reflections were almost entirely 
eliminated in the revision of the theatre by the removal of the boxes 
from the first to the second row and by utilizing the space vacated 
together with the anterooms as a single balcony filled with seats. 

An excellent illustration of the use of such photographs in plan- 
ning, before construction and while all the forms are still fluid, is to 
be found in one of the theatres now being built in Boston by Mr. 
C. H. Blackall, who has had an exceptionally large and successful 
experience in theatre design. The initial pencil sketch, Fig. 29, gave 
in the model test the waves shown in the progressive series of photo- 
graphs, Figs. 31 to 38. The ceiling of interpenetrating cylinders was 
then changed to the form shown in finished section in Fig. 30, with 
the results strikingly indicated in the parallel series of photographs, 
Figs. 34 to 36. It is, of course, easy to identify all the reflections in 
each of these photographs, — the reflections from the ceiling and the 
balcony front in the first; from the ceiling and from both the balcony 
and gallery front in the second; and in the third photograph of the 
series, the reflections of the ceiling reflection from the balcony and 
gallery fronts and from the floor. But the essential point to be ob- 
served, in comparing the two series pair by pair, is the almost total 
absence in the second series of the ceiling echo and the relatively 
clear condition back of the advancing sound-wave. 

Consonance 

Consonance is the process whereby, due to suitably placed reflect- 
ing walls, "the voice is supported and strengthened." It is the one 
acoustical virtue that is positive. It is also the characteristic virtue 
of the modern theatre, and that through which this complicated 
auditorium surmounts the attendant evils of interference, reverbera- 
tion, and echo. Yet such is our modern analysis of the problem that 



Digitized by 



Google 



188 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 



we do not even have for it a name. On the other hand, it is the virtue 
which the Greek theatre has in least degree. It is, therefore, all the 
more interesting that it should have been included in the analysis of 
Vitruvius, and should have received a name so accurately descriptive. 
Indeed, one can hardly make explanation of the phenomenon better 
than through the very type of theatre in which its lack is the one 
admitted defect. 

The Greek theatre enjoys a not wholly well-founded reputation 
for extremely good acoustics. In most respects it is deserved; but 




T_5 



Fig. 29. Section in pencil sketch of Scollay Square Theatre, Boston. 
Mr. C. H. Blackall, Architect. 

the careful classical scholar, however gratified he may be by this 
praise of a notable Greek invention, regards himself as barred by 
contemporaneous evidence from accepting for the theatre unquali- 
fied praise. Every traveler has heard of the remarkable quality of 
these theatres, and makes a trial wherever opportunity permits, be 
it at beautiful Taormina, in the steep sloped theatre at Pompeii, the 
great theatre at Ephesus, or the "little theatre" on the top of Tus- 
culum, — always with gratifying results and the satisfaction of hav- 
ing confirmed a well-known fact. Perhaps it is useless to try to 
traverse such a test. But there is not a theatre in Italy or Greece 
which is not in so ruined a condition today that it in no way what- 
ever resembles acoustically its original form. If its acoustics are 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 189 

perfect today, they certainly were not originally. Complete " scaena " 
and enclosing walls distinctly altered the acoustical conditions. The 
traveler has in general tested what is little more than a depression 
in the ground, or a hollow in a quiet country hillside. As a matter of 
fact, the theatre in its original form was better than in its ruined 
state. Still, with all its excellencies it was not wholly good. Its 
acoustical qualities were not wholly acceptable to its contemporaries, 



Fig. 80. finished section of Scollay Square Theatre, Boston.] Mr. C. H. Blackall, Architect 

and would be less acceptable in a modern theatre, and for modern 
drama. 

The difficulty with such casual evidence is that it is gathered 
under wholly abnormal conditions. Not only are the ruins but scant 
reminders of the original structure, but the absence of a large audi- 
ence vitiates the test, as it would vitiate a test of any modern theatre. 
But while in a modern auditorium the presence of an audience almost 
always, though not invariably, improves the acoustics, in the classical 
theatre the presence of an audience, in so far as it has any effect, is 



Digitized by 



Google 



190 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

disadvantageous. The effect of an audience is always twofold, — it 
diminishes the reverberation, and it diminishes the loudness or in- 
tensity of the voice. In general, the one effect is advantageous, the 
other disadvantageous. But in the Greek theatre, occupied or un- 
occupied, ruined or in its original form, there was very little rever- 
beration. In fact, this was its merit. On the other hand, the very 
fact that there was little reverberation is significant that there was 
very slight architectural reenforcement of the voice. One might well 
be unconvinced by such a priori considerations were there not ex- 
cellent evidence that these theatres were not wholly acceptable 
acoustically even in their day, and for drama written for and more 
or less adapted to them. Excellent evidence that there was insuffi- 
cient consonance is to be found in the megaphone mouthpieces used 
at times in both the tragic and the comic masks, and in the proposal 
by Vitruvius to use resonant vases to strengthen the voice. 

The doubt is not as to whether a speaker, turned directly toward 
the audience and speaking in a sustained voice, could make himself 
heard in remote parts of a crowded Greek theatre. It is almost cer- 
tain that he could do so, even in the very large and more nearly level 
theatres, such as the one at Ephesus. Better evidence of this than 
can be found in the casual test of a lonely ruin is the annual per- 
formance by the staff of the Com£die Frangaise in the theatre at 
Orange. But even this, the best preserved of either Greek or Roman 
theatres, is but a ruin, and its temporary adaptation for the annual 
performance is more modern than classical. A much better test is in 
the exercises regularly held in the Greek Theatre of the University of 
California, designed by Mr, John Galen Howard, of which President 
Wheeler speaks in most approving terms. The drama, especially 
modern drama, differs from sustained speech and formal address in 
its range of utterance, in modulation, and above all in the require- 
ment that at times it reaches the audience with great dynamic quality 
but without strain in enunciation. Mere distinctness is not sufficient. 
It was through a realization of this that the megaphone mouthpiece 
was invented, — awkward in use and necessarily destructive of many 
of the finer shades of enunciation. That it was only occasionally used 
proves that it was not a wholly satisfactory device, but does not de- 
tract its evidence of weakness in the acoustics of the theatre. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. SI Yiq. 34 



Fig. 32 Yiq. 35 



Fig. 33 Fig. 36 

Two series of photographs showing, Figs. 31-33, the reflections which would have resulted from the exe- 
cution of the first pencil sketch of the Scollay Square Theatre (Fig. 29), and, Figs. 34-36, from the 
execution of the second sketch by Mr. Blackall (shown in finished section in Fig. 30). 



Digitized by CjOOQLC 



192 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

The megaphone mouthpiece bears to the acoustics of the Greek 
theatre the same evidence, only in a reciprocal form, that the mask 
itself bears to the theatre's illumination. It was not possible to see 
in bright daylight, particularly in the bright sunlight of the Mediter- 
ranean atmosphere, with anything like the accuracy and detail pos- 
sible in a darkened theatre with illuminated stage. The pupil of the 
eye was contracted, and the sensitiveness of the retina exhausted by 
the brilliancy of the general glare. Add to this that the distance from 
the stage was very much greater in the Greek than in the modern 
theatre, audience for audience, and one can realize the reason for the 
utter impossibility of facial expression in Greek dramatization except 
by artificial exaggeration. The heaviness and inflexibility of these 
devices, and, therefore, their significance as proof of some inherent 
difficulty in dramatic presentation, is emphasized by the delicacy of 
line and fine appreciation of the human form shown in other con- 
temporaneous art. 

Not less significant in regard to the acoustics of the Greek theatre 
are the directions given by Vitruvius for the reSnf orcement of the 
voice by the use of resonant vases: 

" Accordingly bronze vessels should be made, proportional in size to the 
size of the theatre, and so fashioned that when sounded they produce with 
one another the notes of the fourth, the fifth, and so on to the double octave. 
These vessels should be placed in accordance with musical laws in niches 
between the seats of the theatre in such position that they nowhere touch 
the wall, but have a clear space on all sides and above them. They should 
be set upside down and supported on the side facing the stage by wedges not 
less than half a foot high. . . . With this arrangement, the voice, spreading 
from the stage as a center, and striking against the cavities of the different 
vessels, will be increased in volume and will wake an harmonious note in 
unison with itself/' 

There is good reason for believing that this device was but very 
rarely tried. This, and the fact that it could not possibly have ac- 
complished the purpose as outlined by Vitruvius, is not germane. 
The important point is that its mere proposal is evidence that the 
contemporaries of the Greek theatres were not wholly satisfied, and 
that the defect was in lack of consonance. 

It would be inappropriately elaborate and beyond the possible 
length of this paper to give in detail the method of calculating the 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 193 

loudness of sound in different parts of an auditorium. That subject 
is reserved for another paper in preparation, in which will be given 
not merely the method of calculation but the necessary tables for its 
simplification. It is, however, possible and proper to give a general 
statement of the principles and processes involved. 

In this discussion I shall leave out as already adequately discussed 
the phenomenon of interference, or rather shall dismiss the subject 
with a statement that when two sounds of the same pitch are super- 
posed in exact agreement of phase, the intensity of the sound is the 
square of the sum of the square roots of their separate intensities; 
when they are in opposite phases, it is the square of the difference of 
the square roots of their intensities; but when several sounds of the 
same pitch arrive at any point in the room with a random difference 
of phase their probable intensity is the simple numerical sum of their 
separate intensities. It is on the assumption of a random difference 
of phase and an average probable loudness that I shall here consider 
the question. This has the advantage of being the simpler and also a 
first approximation in an auditorium designed for articulate speech. 

When sound spreads from a spherically symmetrical source it 
diminishes as the square of the distance. When the sound is being 
propagated, still in space unrestricted by walls or ceiling, but over 
the heads ot a closely seated audience, the law of the diminution of 
the sound is more rapid than the law of the inverse square. This more 
rapid diminution of the sound is due to the absorption of the sound 
by the audience. It is a function of the elevation of the speaker and 
the angle of inclination of the floor, — in other words, the angle be- 
tween the sight lines. The diminution of the intensity of the sound 
due to distance is less the greater this angle. 

If the auditorium be enclosed by not too remote walls, the voice 
coming directly from the speaker is reenf orced by the reflection from 
the retaining walls. However, it is obvious that the sounds reflected 
from the walls and ceilings have traversed greater paths than the 
sound of the voice which has come directly. If this difference of path 
length is great, the sounds will not arrive simultaneously. If, how- 
ever, the path differences are not great, the reflected sounds will 
arrive in time to reinforce the voice which has come directly, each 
syllable by itself, or, indeed, in time for the self support of the sub- 



Digitized by 



Google 



194 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 



syllabic components. It is to this mutual strengthening of concur- 
rent sounds within each element of articulate speech that Vitruvius 
has given the name "consonance." 

Thus in the computation of the intensity of the voice which has 
come directly from the speaker across the auditorium, it is necessary 
to take into consideration not merely the diminution of intensity 
according to the law of the inverse square of the distance and the 
diminution of the intensity due to the absorption by the clothing of 




Fio. 37. The Harris Theatre, Minneapolis, first design. 
Chapman and Magney, Architects. 

the audience, but also, as a compensating factor for the latter, the 
diffraction of the sound from above which is ever supplying the loss 
due to absorption, while in computing the intensity of the sound re- 
flected from any wall or other surface one must take into considera- 
tion all this, and also the coefficient of reflection of the wall and the 
diffraction due to the restricted area of the reflecting element. 

Abstract principles are sometimes tedious to follow even when 
not difficult. In Fig. 38 is shown a photograph taken in an investiga- 
tion for the architects, Messrs. Chapman and Magney, of the Harris 
Theatre, to be erected in Minneapolis, which affords an excellent 
example of both favorable and unfavorable conditions in respect to 
consonance. The initial sketch for this theatre offered no problems 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 195 

either of interference or reverberation, and of echo only in the hori- 
zontal section. The only very considerable question presented by the 
plans was in respect to consonance and there in regard only to the 
more remote parts of the floor and of the balcony. The particular 
photograph here reproduced records the condition of the sound in 
the room at such an instant as to bring out this aspect of the problem 
in marked degree. 

The forward third of the balcony in this theatre affords an ex- 
cellent example of consonance, for the reflection from the ceiling 
arrives so nearly simultaneously with the sound which has come 



Fio. 88. Showing the consonance in the balcony of the Harris 
Theatre. This relates only to consonance in the vertical 
section. 

directly from the stage as to "strengthen and support " it and yet 
" leave the words clear and distinct." The interval between the two, 
the direct and the reflected voice, varies from .01 second to .08 
second. Back of the first third, however, the consonance from the 
ceiling gradually diminishes and is practically imperceptible beyond 
the middle of the gallery. Back of that point the direct voice di- 
minishes rapidly since it is passing in a confined space over the highly 
absorbent clothing of the audience. The loss of intensity at the rear 
of the gallery is increased by the carrying of the horizontal portion 
of the ceiling so far rearward. While the effect of this is to throttle 
the rear oi the gallery it obviously strengthens the voice in the for- 
ward third. Although there is thus some compensation, on the 
whole the forward part of the gallery does not need this service so 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 THEATRE ACOUSTICS 

much as the rear seats. The photograph shows this process clearly: 
the main sound-wave can be seen advancing after having passed the 
angle in the ceiling. The wave reflected from the ceiling can be seen 
just striking the gallery seats. It is evident that at the instant at 
which the photograph was taken the sound-wave was receiving the 
last of this support by the sound reflected from the ceiling. 

The photograph also shows how the sound after passing the ceil- 
ing angle spreads into the space above, thus losing for the moment 
thirty per cent of its intensity, a loss, however, to be regained in 
considerable part later. 

On the main floor the reflection from the ceiling strengthens the 
direct voice only for the long syllabic components. Nevertheless, in 
comparison with other theatres the forward part of the floor of this 
theatre will be excellent. There will be just a trace of echo immedi- 
ately under the front of the balcony, but this will be imperceptible 
beyond the first four rows of seats under the balcony. It is obvious 
from the photograph that there is no consonance in the rear of the 
main floor of the auditorium under the balcony. 

A not unnatural, certainly a not uncommon, inquiry is for some 
statement of the best height, the best breadth, and the best depth for 
a theatre, for a list of commended and a list of prohibited forms and 
dimensions. A little consideration, however, will show that this is 
neither a possible nor the most desirable result of such an inves- 
tigation. 

For a simple rectangular auditorium of determined horizontal 
dimensions there is a best height. When, however, the horizontal 
dimensions are changed the desirable height changes, although by no 
means proportionally. When the floor is inclined, when the walls are 
curved, when there are galleries and connection corridors, when the 
material of construction is varied in character, the problem becomes 
somewhat more intricate, the value of each element being dependent 
on the others. Moreover it is futile to attempt to formulate a stand- 
ard form even of a single type of auditorium. How greatly the 
design must vary is well illustrated in the four theatres which have 
been taken as examples, — the Little Theatre with all the seats on 
the main floor, the Harris Theatre, very long, very broad, and with 



Digitized by 



Google 



THEATRE ACOUSTICS 197 

but a single gallery, the Scollay Square Theatre with two galleries, 
and the New Theatre with two rows of boxes and two galleries. 
The fundamental conditions of the problem, not the entirely free 
choice of the architect, determined the general solution in each 
case. Acoustical quality is never the sole consideration; at best it 
is but a factor, introduced sometimes early, sometimes late, into 
the design. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 

BUILDING MATERIAL AND MUSICAL PITCH 1 

Ihe absorbing power of the various materials that enter into 
the construction and furnishing of an auditorium is but one phase 
in the general investigation of the subject of architectural acoustics 
which the writer has been prosecuting for the past eighteen years. 
During the first five years the investigation was devoted almost 
exclusively to the determination of the coefficients of absorption 
for sounds having the pitch of violin C (512 vibrations per second). 
The results were published in the American Architect and the En- 
gineering Record in 1900. 2 It was obvious from the beginning that 
an investigation relating only to a single pitch was but a preliminary 
excursion, and that the complete solution of the problem called for 
an extension of the investigation to cover the whole range in pitch 
of the speaking voice and of the musical scale. Therefore during 
the years which have since elapsed the investigation has been ex- 
tended over a range in pitch from three octaves below to three 
octaves above violin C. That it has taken so long is due to the fact 
that other aspects of the acoustical problem also pressed for solu- 
tion, such for example as those depending on form, — interference, 
resonance, and echo. The delay has also been due in part to the 
nature of the investigation, which has necessarily been opportunist 
in character and, given every opportunity, somewhat laborious and 
exhausting. Some measure of the labor involved may be gained 
from the fact that the investigation of the absorption coefficients 
for the single note of violin C required every other night from twelve 
until five for a period of three years. 

While many improvements have been made in the methods of 
investigation and in the apparatus employed since the first paper 
was published fourteen years ago, the present paper is devoted solely 
to the presentation of the results. I shall venture to discuss, al- 
though briefly, the circumstances under which the measurements 

1 The Brickbuilder, vol. xxiii, no. 1, January, 1914. * No. 1, p. 1. 

109 



Digitized by 



Google 



200 BUILDING MATERIAL 

were made, my object being to so interest architects that they will 
call attention to any opportunities which may come to their notice 
for the further extension of this work; for, while the absorbing 
powers of many materials have already been determined, it is 
evident that the list is still incomplete. For example, the coefficient 
of glass has been determined only for the note first studied, C, an 
octave above middle C. In 1898 the University had just com- 
pleted the construction of some greenhouses in the Botanical 
Gardens, which, before the plants were moved in, fulfilled admirably 
the conditions necessary for accurate experimenting. Glass formed 
a very large part of the area of the enclosing surfaces, all, in fact, 
except the floor, and this was of concrete whose coefficient of absorp- 
tion was low and had already been determined with accuracy. By 
this good fortune it was possible to determine the absorbing power 
of single-thickness glass. But at that time the apparatus was adapted 
only to the study of one note; and as the greenhouse was soon fully 
occupied with growing plants which could not be moved without 
danger, it was no longer available for the purpose when the scope 
of the investigation was extended. Since then no similar or nearly 
so good opportunity has presented itself, and the absorbing power 
of this important structural surface over the range of the musical 
scale has not as yet been determined. There was what seemed for 
the moment to be an opportunity for obtaining this data in an in- 
door tennis court which Messrs. McKim, Mead and White were 
erecting at Rhinebeck on the Hudson, and the architects undertook 
to secure the privilege of experimenting in the room, but inquiry 
showed that the tennis court was of turf, the absorption of which 
was so large and variable as to prevent an accurate determination 
of the coefficients for the glass. The necessary conditions for such 
experiments are that the material to be investigated shall be large 
in area, and that the other materials shall be small in area, low in 
power of absorption, and constant in character; while a contribut- 
ing factor to the ease and accuracy of the investigation is that the 
room shall be so located as to be very quiet at some period of the 
day or night. The present paper is, therefore, a report of progress 
as well as an appeal for further opportunities, and it is hoped that 
it will not be out of place at the end of the paper to point out some 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 201 

of the problems which remain and ask that interested architects 
call attention to any rooms in which it may be possible to complete 
the work. 

The investigation does not wholly wait an opportunity. A 
special room, exceptionally well adapted to the purpose in size, 
shape, and location, has been constantly available for the research 
in one form or another. This room, initially lined with brick set 
in cement, has been lined in turn with tile of various kinds, with 
plaster, and with plaster on wood lath, as well as finished from time 
to time in other surfaces. This process, however, is expensive, and 
carried out in completeness would be beyond what could be borne 
personally. Moreover, it has further limitations. For example, it 
is not possible in this room to determine the absorbing power of 
glass windows, for one of the essential features of a window is that 
the outside space to which the sound is transmitted shall be open 
and unobstructed. An inner lining of glass, even though this be 
placed several inches from the wall, would not with certainty repre- 
sent normal conditions or show the effect of windows as ordinarily 
employed in an auditorium. Notwithstanding these limitations, 
this room, carefully studied in respect to the effects of its pecu- 
liarities of form, especially such as arise from interference and reso- 
nance, has been of great service. 

Wall and Ceiling-Surfaces 

It is well to bear in mind that the absorption of sound by a wall- 
surface is structural and not superficial. That it is superficial is one 
of the most widespread and persistent fallacies. When this investi- 
gation was initially undertaken in an endeavor to correct the 
acoustics in the lecture-room of the Fogg Art Museum, one of the 
first suggestions was that the walls were too smooth and should be 
roughened. The proposal at that time was that the walls be re- 
plastered and scarred with the toothed trowel in a swirling motion 
and then painted, a type of decoration common twenty years ago. 
A few years later inquiries were received in regard to sanded sur- 
faces, and still later in regard to a rough, pebbly surface of un- 
troweled plaster; while within the past three years there have been 
many inquiries as to the efficiency of roughened brick or of rough 



Digitized by 



Google 



202 BUILDING MATERIAL 

hewn stone. On the general principle of investigating any proposal 
so long as it contained even a possibility of merit, these suggestions 
were put to test. The concrete floor of a room was covered with a 
gravel so sifted that each pebble was about one-eighth of an inch 
in diameter. This was spread over the floor so that pebble touched 
pebble, making a layer of but a single pebble in thickness. It 
showed not the slightest absorbing power, and there was no per- 
ceptible decrease in reverberation. The room was again tried with 
sand. Of course, it was not possible in this case to insure the thick- 
ness of a single grain only, but as far as possible this was accom- 
plished. The result was the same. The scarred, the sanded, the 
pebbly plaster, and the rough hewn stone are only infinitesimally 
more efficient as absorbents than the same walls smooth or even 
polished. The failure of such roughening of the wall-surfaces to 
increase either the absorption or the dispersion of sound reflected 
from it is due to the fact that the sound-waves, even of the highest 
notes, are long in comparison with the dimensions of the irregu- 
larities thus introduced. 

The absorption of sound by a wall is therefore a structural 
phenomenon. It is almost infinitely varied in the details of its 
mechanism, but capable of classification in a few simple modes. 
The fundamental process common to all is an actual yielding of the 
wall-surface to the vibrating pressure of the sound. How much the 
wall yields and what becomes of the motion thus taken up, depends 
on the nature of the structure. The simplest type of wall is obvi- 
ously illustrated by concrete without steel reenforcement, for in 
this there is the nearest approach to perfect homogeneity. The 
amount that this wall would yield would depend upon its dimen- 
sions, particularly its thickness, and upon the density, the elasticity, 
and the viscosity of the material. It is possible to calculate this 
directly from the elements involved, but the process would be 
neither interesting nor convincing to an architect. It is in every 
way more satisfactory to determine the absorbing power by direct 
experiment. A concrete wall was not available. In its stead, the 
next more homogeneous wall was investigated, an eighteen-inch 
wall of brick set in cement. This wall was a very powerful re- 
flector and its absorbing power exceedingly slight. Without going 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 203 

into the details of the experiment, it will suffice here to say that 
this wall absorbed one and one-tenth per cent of the lowest note 
investigated, a C two octaves below middle C, having a vibration 
frequency of sixty-four per second; one and two-tenths per cent 
of sounds an octave in pitch higher; one and four-tenths per cent 
of sounds of middle C; one and seven-tenths per cent for violin C; 
two per cent for sounds having a pitch one octave above; two and 
three-tenths for two octaves above; and two and one-half per cent 
for sounds having a pitch three octaves above violin C, that is to 
say, 4094 vibrations per second, the highest note investigated. 
These may be written as coefficients of absorption thus: 

Ci, .011; C*, .012; C 8 , .014; C 4 , .017; C 6 , .020; C«, .023; C 7 , .025. 

There is a graphical method of presenting these results which is 
always employed in physics, and frequently in other branches of 
science, when the phenomenon under investigation is simply pro- 
gressive and dependent upon a single variable. Whenever these 
conditions are satisfied — and they are usually satisfied in any 
well conducted investigation — the graphical representation of 
the results takes the form of a diagram in which the results of the 
measurements are plotted vertically at horizontal distances de- 
termined by the variable condition. Thus in the following diagram 
(Curve 1, Fig. 1) the coefficients of absorption are plotted vertically, 
the varying pitch being represented by horizontal distances along the 
base line. Such a diagrammatic representation serves to reveal the 
accuracy of the work. If the phenomenon is a continuous one, 
the plotted points should lie on a smooth curve; the nearness with 
which they do so is a measure of the accuracy of the work if the 
points thus plotted are determined by entirely independent experi- 
ments. This form of diagrammatic representation serves another 
purpose in permitting of the convenient interpolation for values 
intermediate between observed values. The coefficients for each 
type of wall-surface will be given both numerically and diagram- 
matically. In order to avoid confusion, the observed points have 
been indicated only on the curve for wood sheathing in Fig. 1. It 
will suffice to say merely that the other curves on this diagram 
are drawn accurately through the plotted observations. 



Digitized by 



Google 



204 



BUILDING MATERIAL 



The next wall-surface investigated was plaster on hollow terra 
cotta tile. The plaster coat was of gypsum hard plaster, the rough 
plaster being five-eighths of an inch in thickness. The result shows 
a slightly greater absorption due to the greater flexibility of a hollow 



10 



















































































































.3--— -5 


__ 4 


*ss 


^ 



c, a c, c« c A c« c 7 

Fig. 1. Absorbing power for sounds varying in pitch 
from C = 64 to C - 4,096: 1, brick wall; ft, plaster 
on terra cotta hollow tile; 8, plaster on wire lath; 
4, same with skim coat; 5, wood sheathing. 

tile wall rather than to any direct effect of the plaster. The differ- 
ence, however, is not great. The numerical results are as follows 
(Curve 2, Kg. 1): 

Ci, .012; Cb .013; C«, .015; C 4 , .020; C„ .028; C«, .040; Cr, .060. 

Ci is the lowest note, 64 vibrations per second; C7, the highest, 
4,096 per second; the other notes at octave intervals between. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 205 

Plaster on an otherwise homogeneous sustaining wall is a first 
step in the direction of a compound wall, but a vastly greater step 
is taken when the plaster instead of being applied directly to the 
sustaining wall is furred to a greater or less distance. In a homo- 
geneous wall, the absorption of sound is partially by communication 
of the vibration to the material of the wall, whence it is telephoned 
throughout the structure, and partly by a yielding of the wall as a 
whole, the sound being then communicated to outside space. In 
a compound wall in which the exposed surface is furred from the 
main structure of the wall, the former vibrates between the furring 
strips like a drum. Such a surface obviously yields more than would 
a surface of plaster applied directly to tile or brick. The energy 
which is thus absorbed is partly dissipated by the viscosity of the 
plaster, partly by transmission in the air space behind it, and partly 
through the furring strips to the main wall. The mechanism of 
this process is interesting in that it shows how the free standing 
plaster may absorb a great amount of sound and may present a 
greater possibility of resonance and of selective absorption in the 
different registers of pitch. It is obvious that we are here dealing 
with a problem of more complicated aspect. It is conceivable 
that the absorption coefficient should depend on the nature of the 
supporting construction, whether wood lath, wire lath, or expanded 
metal lath; on the distance apart of the studding, or the depth of 
the air space; or, and even more decidedly, on the nature of the 
plaster employed, whether the old lime plaster or the modern quick 
setting gypsum plaster. A start has been made on a study of this 
problem, but it is not as yet so far advanced as to permit of a system- 
atic correlation of the results. It must suffice to present here the 
values for a single construction. The most interesting case is that 
in which lime plaster was applied to wood lath, on wood studding 
at fourteen-inch spacing, forming a two-inch air space. The co- 
efficients of absorption before the finishing coat was put on were 
(CurveS, Fig. 1): 

Ci, .048; C 2 , .020; C«, .024; C 4 , .034; C„ .030; C* .028; Cr, .043. 

The values after the finishing coat was put on were as follows 
(Curve 4, dotted, Fig. 1): 

Ci, .036; C, .012; C t , .013; C 4 , .018; C .045; C«, .028; Cr, .055. 



Digitized by 



Google 



206 BUILDING MATERIAL 

It should be remarked that the determination of these coefficients 
was made within two weeks after the plaster was applied and also 
that the modern lime is not the same as the lime used thirty years 
ago, either in the manner in which it is handled or in the manner 
in which it sets and dries. It is particularly interesting to note in 
these observations, more clearly in the plotted curves, the phe- 
nomenon of resonance as shown by the maxima, and the effect of 
the increased thickness produced by the skim coat in increasing the 
rigidity of the wall, decreasing its absorbing power, and shifting the 
resonance. 

The most firmly established traditions of both instrumental and 
architectural acoustics relate to the use of wood and excite the 
liveliest interest in the effect of wood sheathing as an interior sur- 
face for auditoriums; nor are these expectations disappointed when 
the phenomenon is submitted to exact measurement. It was not 
easy to find satisfactory conditions for the experiment, for not 
many rooms are now constructed in which plaster on studding, and 
sufficiently thin, forms a very considerable factor. After long waiting 
a room suitable in every respect, except location, became available. 
Its floor, its whole wall, indeed, its ceiling was of pine sheath- 
ing. The only other material entering into its construction was 
glass in the two windows and in the door. Unfortunately, the room 
was on a prominent street, and immediately adjacent was an all- 
night lunch room. Accurate experiments were out of the question 
while the lunch room was in use, and it was, therefore, bought out 
and closed for a few nights. Even with the freedom from noise 
thus secured, the experiments were not totally undisturbed. The 
traffic past the building did not stop sufficiently to permit of any 
observations until after two o'clock in the morning, and began again 
by four. During the intervening two hours, it was possible to 
snatch periods for observation, but even these periods were dis- 
turbed through the curiosity of passers and the more legitimate 
concern of the police. 

Anticipating the phenomenon of resonance in wood in a more 
marked degree than in any other material, new apparatus was 
designed permitting of measurements at more frequent intervals 
of pitch. The new apparatus was not available when the work 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 207 

began and the coefficients for the wood were determined at octave 
intervals, with results as follows: 

Ci, .064; C* .098; C«, .112; C 4 , .104; C,, .081; C«, .082; C 7 , .113. 

These results when plotted showed clearly a very marked reso- 
nance. The more elaborate apparatus was hastened to completion 
and the coefficients of absorption determined for the intermediate 
notes of E and G in each of the middle four octaves. The results of 
both sets of experiments when plotted together give Curve 5 in 
Fig. 1. The accuracy with which these fourteen points fall on a 
smooth curve drawn through them is all that could be expected in 
view of the conditions under which the experiment was conducted 
and the limited time available. Only one point falls far from the 
curve, that for middle C (C 3 , 256). The general trend of the curve, 
however, is established beyond reasonable doubt. It is interesting 
to note the very great differences between this curve and those 
obtained for solid walls, and even for plastered walls. It is espe- 
cially interesting to note the great absorption due to the resonance 
between the natural vibration of the walls and the sound, and to 
observe that this maximum point of resonance lies in the lower part, 
although not in the lowest part, of the range of pitch tested. The 
pitch of this resonance is determined by the nature of the wood, its 
thickness, and the distance apart of the studding on which it is 
supported. The wood tested was North Carolina pine, five-eighths 
of an inch in thickness and on studding fourteen inches apart. It 
is, perhaps, not superfluous to add at this time that a denser wood 
would have had a lower pitch for maximum resonance, other con- 
ditions being alike; an increased thickness would have raised the 
pitch of the resonance; while an increased distance between the 
studding would have lowered it. Finally it should be added that 
the best acoustical condition both for music and for speaking would 
have been with the maximum resonance an octave above rather 
than at middle C. 

Even more interesting is the study of ceramic tile made at the 
request of Messrs. Cram, Goodhue, and Ferguson. The investiga- 
tion had for its first object the determination of the acoustical 
value of the tile as employed in the groined arches of the Chapel of 



Digitized by 



Google 



208 BUILDING MATERIAL 

the United States Military Academy at West Point. The investi- 
gation then widened its scope, and, through the skill and great 
knowledge of ceramic processes of Mr. Raphael Guastavino, led to 
really remarkable results in the way of improved acoustical effi- 
ciency. The resulting construction has not only been approved by 
architects as equal, if not better, in architectural appearance to 
ordinary tile construction, but it is, so far as the writer knows, the 
first finished structural surface of large acoustical efficiency. Its 
random use does not, of course, guarantee good acoustical quality 
in an auditorium, for that depends on the amount used and the 
surface covered. 

The first investigation was in regard to tile used at West Point, 
with the following result: 

Ci, .012; Cj, .018; C s , .018; C 4 , .0*9; Ci, .040; C 6 , .048; C 7 , .058. 

These are plotted in Curve 1, Fig. 2. The first endeavors to im- 
prove the tile acoustically had very slight results, but such as they 
were they were incorporated in the tile of the ceiling of the First 
Baptist Church in Pittsburgh (Curve 2, Fig. 2). 

Ci, .038; Cj, .080; C,, .088; C 4 , .058; C 5 , .080; C 6 , .102; Cr, .114. 

There was no expectation that the results of this would be more 
than a very slight amelioration of the difficulties which were to be 
expected in the church. In consequence of its use, the tile may be 
distinguished for purposes of tabulation as Pittsburgh Tile. With- 
out following the intermediate steps, it is sufficient to say that the 
experiments were continued nearly two years longer and ultimately 
led to a tile which for the conveniences of tabulation we will call 
Acoustical Tile, The resulting absorbent power is far beyond what 
was conceived to be possible at the beginning of the investigation, 
and makes the construction in which this tile is incorporated unique 
in acoustical value among rigid structures. The coefficients for this 
construction are as follows: 

Ci, .064; Cj, .068; C„ .117; C* .188; C* .250; Ce, .258; C7, .228, 

graphically shown in Curve 8, Fig. 2. It is not a panacea. There 
is, on the other hand, no question but that properly used it will very 
greatly ameliorate the acoustical difficulties when its employment 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 



209 



is practicable, and used in proper locations and amounts will render 
the acoustics of many auditoriums excellent which would otherwise 
be intolerable. It has over sixfold the absorbing power of any exist- 
ing masonry construction and one-third the absorbing power of the 



10 














9 














b 














7 








f 






6 








( 






6 






/ 








4 






J 








8 








,x 






2 














1 










7T- 
—I — 





O, O, 0, O, O, O, 0, 

Fia. 2. Absorbing power: 1, Wert Point tile; 4, Pitts- 
burgh tile; S, acoustical tile; 4, best felt. 

best known felt plotted on the same diagram for comparison (Curve 
4). It is a new factor at the disposal of the architect. 

Chairs and Audience 

Equally important with the wall and ceiling-surfaces of an 
auditorium are its contents, especially the seats and the audience. 

In expressing the coefficients of absorption for objects which are 
themselves units and which cannot be figured as areas, the coeffi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



210 



BUILDING MATERIAL 



cients depend on the system of measurement employed, Metric or 
English. While the international or metric system has become 
universal except in English speaking countries, and even in England 
and America in many fields, it has not yet been adopted by the 



10 














9 














8 














7 














6 














6 






^*^ 














4 














3 














2 






V& 








1 








, i 




"^ 



c, 



0, 0, 



o, 



4 C, Or 

Fro. 3. Absorbing power: 1, bent wood chairs; 2, 3, 4, 
and 5, various kinds of pew cushions as described in 
text; 6, audience per person. 

architectural profession and by the building trades, and therefore 
these coefficients will be given in both systems. 

Ash settees or chairs, such as are ordinarily to be found in a 
college lecture-room, have exceedingly small absorbing powers. 
Such furniture forms a very small factor in the acoustics of any 
auditorium in which it is employed. The coefficients for ash chairs 
are as follows (Curve 1, Fig. 3) : 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 211 

Metric 
Ci, .014; C, .014; C 8 , .015; C 4 , .016; C 8 , .017; C«, .019; C7, .081. 

English 
Ci, .15; Cj, .15; C 8 , .16; C 4 , .17; Cj, .18; Ce, .20; C 7 , 23. 

The coefficients for settees were also determined, but differ so little 
from those for chairs that this paper will not be burdened with 
them. When, however, the seats are upholstered, they immediately 
become a considerable factor in the acoustics of an empty, or par- 
tially empty, auditorium. Of course the chairs either upholstered 
or unupholstered are not a factor in the acoustics of the auditorium 
when occupied. The absorbing power of cushions depends in con- 
siderable measure upon the nature of the covering and upon the 
nature of the padding. The cushions experimented upon were such 
as are employed in church pews, but the coefficients are expressed 
in terms of the cushion which would cover a single seat. The co- 
efficients are as follows : 

Cushions of wiry vegetable fiber covered with canvas and a thin 
damask cloth (Curve 2, Fig. 8) : 

Metric 
Ci, .060; C 2 , .070; C s , .097; C 4 , .135; C 5 , .148; C«, .132; C7, .115. 

English 
Ci, .64; C 2 , .75; C s , 1.04; C 4 , 1.45; C 5 , 1.59; C«, 1.42; C 7 , 1.24. 

Cushions of long hair covered with canvas and with an outer 
covering of plush (Curve 3, Fig. 8) : 

Metric 
Ci, .080; C2, .092; C 8 , .105; C 4 , .165; C $ , .155; C«, .128; C 7 , .085. 

English 
Ci, .86; C2, .99; C 8 , 1.18; C 4 , 1.77; C 5 , 1.67; C 6 , 1.37; C 7 , .91. 

Cushions of hair covered with canvas and an outer covering of 
thin leatherette (Curve 4, Fig. 8) : 

Metric 
Ci, .062; C2, .105; C 8 , .118; C 4 , .180; C„ .118; C 6 , .068; C 7 , .040. 



Digitized by 



Google 



212 BUILDING MATERIAL 

English 
Ci, .67; Ci, 1.18; G, 1.27; C 4 , 1.93; C 1.27; C* .73; C* .48. 

Elastic felt cushions of commerce, elastic cotton covered with 
canvas and a short nap plush (Curve 5, Fig. S) : 

Metric 
Ci, .092; Cj, .155; C 8 , .175; C 4 , .190; C„ .258; C«, .182; Cy, 120. 

English 
Ci, .99; Cj, 1.66; C s , 1.88; C* 2.04; Ct, 2.77; C«, 1.95; Cr, 1.29. 

Of all the coefficients of absorption, obviously the most difficult 
to determine are those for the audience itself. It would not at all 
serve to experiment on single persons and to assume that when a 
number are seated together, side by side, and in front of one an- 
other, the absorbing power is the same. It is necessary to make the 
experiment on a full audience, and to conduct such an experiment 
requires the nearly perfect silence of several hundred persons, the 
least noise on the part of one vitiating the observation. That the 
experiment was ultimately successful beyond all expectation is due 
to the remarkable silence maintained by a large Cambridge audi- 
ence that volunteered itself for the purpose, not merely once, but 
on four separate occasions. The coefficients of absorption thus de- 
termined lie, with but a single exception, on a smooth curve (Curve 6, 
Fig. 8). The single exception was occasioned by the sound of a 
distant street car. Correcting this observation to the curve, the 
coefficients for an audience per person are as follows: 

Metric 
Ci, .160; C, .882; C,, .895; C 4 , .440; C„ .455; C«, .460; C 7 , .460. 

English 
Ci, 1.72; Ct,8.56; C 8 , 4.25; C 4 , 4.72; d, 4.70; C* 4.95; C 7 , 4.95. 

Fabrics 

It is evident from the above discussion that fabrics are high 
absorbents of sound. How effective any particular fabric may be, 
depends not merely on the texture of its surface and the material, 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 



213 



but upon the weave or felting throughout its body, and of course, 
also upon its thickness. An illuminating study of this question 
can be made by means of the curves in Fig. 4. In this figure are 
plotted the coefficients of absorption for varying thicknesses of felt. 
Curve 1 is the absorption curve for felt of one-half inch thickness. 

10 

































f* - *^^S v 










f ' /j / 


v^ 


^ 








/ * 

( ! 


( 




// 












y 


/ 


/ 


1 

/ 






y 


/ 


/ 


/ 






** 




y 


I 



















Oj 0, 0, 0* C, 0, o, 

Fig. 4. Absorbing power of felt of varying thickness, from 
one-half to three inches, showing by extrapolation the 
absorption by thin fabrics of the upper register only. 

Curve 2 of felt of one inch thickness, and so on up to Curve 6, which 
is for felt of three inches in thickness. It is interesting to contem- 
plate what the result of the process would be were it continued to 
greater thickness, or in the opposite direction to felt of less and less 
thickness. It is inconceivable that felt should be used more than, 
three inches in thickness and, therefore, extrapolation in this direc- 



Digitized by 



Google 



214 BUILDING MATERIAL 

tion is of academic interest only. On the other hand, felt with de- 
creasing thickness corresponds more and more to ordinary fabrics. 
If this process were carried to an extreme, it would show the effect 
of cheesecloth or bunting as a factor in the acoustics of an audito- 
rium. It is obvious that very thin fabrics absorb only the highest 
notes and are negligible factors in the range of either the speaking 
voice or of music. On the other hand, it is evident that great thick- 
ness of felt absorbs the lower register without increasing whatever 
its absorption for the upper register. Sometimes it is desirable to 
absorb the lower register, sometimes the upper register, but far more 
often it is desirable to absorb the sounds from C3 to Ce, but espe- 
cially in the octave between d and C5. 

The felt used in these experiments was of a durable nature and 
largely composed of jute. Because wool felt and ordinary hair felt 
are subject to rapid deterioration from moths, this jute felt was the 
only one which could be recommended for the correction of audi- 
toriums until an interested participator in these investigations de- 
veloped an especially prepared hair felt, which is less expensive than 
jute felt, but which is much more absorbent. Its absorption curve 
is plotted in Fig. 2. 

Location 

Such a discussion as this should not close without pointing out 
the triple relation between pitch, location, and apparent power of 
absorption. This is shown in Fig. 5. Curve 1 shows the true co- 
efficient of absorption of an especially effective felt. Curve 2 is its 
apparent absorption when placed in a position which is one of loud- 
ness for the lower register and of relative silence for the upper 
register. Curve 8 is the apparent coefficient of absorption of the 
same felt when placed in a position in the room of maximum loud- 
ness for all registers. It is evident from these three curves that in 
one position a felt may lose thirty per cent and over of its efficiency 
in the most significant register, or may have its efficiency nearly 
doubled. These curves relate to the efficiency of the felt in its effect 
on general reverberation. Its efficiency in the reduction of a dis- 
crete echo is dependent to an even greater degree on its location 
than on pitch. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 



215 



The above are the coefficients of absorption for most materials 
usually occurring in auditorium construction) but there are certain 
omissions which it is highly desirable to supply, particularly notice- 
able among these is the absorption curve for glass and for old plaster. 




Fig. 5. Doable dependence of absorbing power on pitch 
and on location, showing one of the sources of error 
which must be guarded against in the determination of 
coefficients of absorption and in the use of absorbing 
materials. 



Digitized by 



Google 



216 BUILDING MATERIAL 

It is necessary for such experiments that rooms practically free from 
furniture should be available and that the walls and ceiling of the 
room should be composed in a large measure of the material to be 
tested. The author would appreciate any opportunity to carry out 
such experiments. The opportunity would ordinarily occur in the 
construction of a new building or in the remodeling of an old one. 

It may be not wholly out of place to point out another modern 
acoustical difficulty and to seek opportunities for securing the neces- 
sary data for its solution. Coincident with the increased use of 
reinforced concrete construction and some other building forms 
there has come increased complaint of the transmission of sound 
from room to room, either through the walls or through the floors. 
Whether the present general complaint is due to new materials and 
new methods of construction, or to a greater sensitiveness to un- 
necessary noise, or whether it is due to greater sources of disturbance, 
heavier traffic, heavier cars and wagons, elevators, and elevator 
doors, where elevators were not used before, — whatever the cause 
of the annoyance there is urgent need of its abatement in so far as 
it is structurally possible. Moreover, several buildings have shown 
that not infrequently elaborate precautions have resulted disas- 
trously, sometimes fundamentally, sometimes through the oversight 
of details which to casual consideration seem of minor importance. 
Here, as in the acoustics of auditoriums, the conditions are so com- 
plicated that only a systematic and accurately quantitative investi- 
gation will yield safe conclusions. Some headway, perhaps half a 
year's work, little more than a beginning, was made in this investi- 
gation some years ago. Methods of measurements were developed 
and some results were obtained. Within the past month the use of 
a room in a new building, together with that of the room immedi- 
ately below it, has been secured for the period of two years. Be- 
tween these rooms the floor will be laid in reinforced concrete of two 
thicknesses, five inches and ten inches, in hollow tile, in brick arch, 
in mill construction, and with hung ceiling, and the transmission of 
sound tested in each case. The upper surface of the floor will be 
laid in tile, in hardwood, with and without sound-deadening lining, 
and covered with linoleum and cork, and its noise to the tread 
measured. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MUSICAL PITCH 217 

However, such experiments but lay the foundation. What is 
needed are tests of the walls and floors of rooms of various sizes, and 
of the more varied construction which occurs in practice, in rooms 
connecting with offsets and different floor levels, — the complicated 
condition- of actual building as against the simplified conditions of 
an orderly experiment. The one will give numerical coefficients, 
the other, if in sufficiently full measure, will give experience leading 
to generalization which may be so formulated as to be of wide value. 
What is therefore sought is the opportunity to experiment in rooms 
of varied but accurately known construction, especially where the 
insulation has been successful. Unfortunately, with modern build- 
ing materials acoustical difficulties of all sorts are very numerous. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 1 

.Because familiarity with the phenomena of sound has so far out- 
stripped the adequate study of the problems involved, many of them 
have been popularly shrouded in a wholly unnecessary mystery. 
Of none, perhaps, is this more true than of architectural acoustics. 
The conditions surrounding the transmission of speech in an en- 
closed auditorium are complicated, it is true, but are only such as 
will yield an exact solution in the light of adequate data. It is, in 
other words, a rational engineering problem. 

The problem of architectural acoustics is necessarily complex, 
and each room presents many conditions which contribute to the 
result in a greater or less degree, according to circumstances. To 
take justly into account these varied conditions, the solution of the 
problem should be quantitative, not merely qualitative; and to 
reach its highest usefulness and the dignity of an engineering science 
it should be such that its application can precede, not merely follow, 
the, construction of the building. 

In order that hearing may be good in any auditorium it is neces- 
sary that the sound should be sufficiently loud, that the simulta- 
neous components of a complex sound should maintain their proper 
relative intensities, and that the successive sounds in rapidly moving 
articulation, either of speech or of music, should be clear and distinct, 
free from each other and from extraneous noises. These three are 
the necessary, as they are the entirely sufficient, conditions for good 
hearing. Scientifically the problem involves three factors: rever- 
beration, interference, and resonance. As an engineering problem 
it involves the shape of the auditorium, its dimensions, and the 
materials of which it is composed. 

Sound, being energy, once produced in a confined space, will 
continue until it is either transmitted by the boundary walls or is 
transformed into some other kind of energy, generally heat. This 
process of decay is called absorption. Thus, in the lecture-room of 

1 The Journal of the Franklin Institute, January, 1015. 
810 



Digitized by 



Google 



220 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

Harvard University, in which, and in behalf of which, this investi- 
gation was begun, the rate of absorption was so small that a word 
spoken in an ordinary tone of voice was audible for five and a half 
seconds afterwards. During this time even a very deliberate speaker 
would have uttered the twelve or fifteen succeeding syllables. Thus 
the successive enunciations blended into a loud sound, through 
which and above which it was necessary to hear and distinguish the 
orderly progression of the speech. Across the room this could not 
be done; even near the speaker it could be done only with an effort 
wearisome in the extreme if long maintained. With an audience 
filling the room the conditions were not so bad, but still not tolerable. 
This may be regarded, if one so chooses, as a process of multiple re- 
flection from walls, from ceiling, and from floor, first from one and 
then another, losing a little at each reflection until ultimately in- 
audible. This phenomenon will be called reverberation, including, 
as a special case, the echo. It must be observed, however, that, in 
general, reverberation results in a mass of sound filling the whole 
room and incapable of analysis into its distinct reflections. It is 
thus more difficult to recognize and impossible to locate. The term 
"echo" will be reserved for that particular case in which a short, 
sharp sound is distinctly repeated by reflection, either once from a 
single surface, or several times from two or more surfaces. In the 
general case of reverberation we are concerned only with the rate of 
decay of the sound. In the special case of the echo we are concerned 
not merely with its intensity, but with the interval of time elapsing 
between the initial sound and the moment it reaches the observer. 
In the room mentioned as the occasion of this investigation no dis- 
crete echo was distinctly perceptible, and the case will serve ex- 
cellently as an illustration of the more general type of reverberation. 
After preliminary gropings, first in the literature and then with 
several optical devices for measuring the intensity of sound, all 
established methods were abandoned. Instead, the rate of decay 
was measured by measuring what was inversely proportional to it, 
— the duration of audibility of the reverberation, or, as it will be 
called here, the duration of audibility of the residual sound. These 
experiments may be explained to advantage here, for they will give 
more clearly than would abstract discussion an idea of the nature 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



221 



of reverberation. Broadly considered, there are two, and only two, 
variables in a room, — shape (including size) and materials (includ- 
ing furnishings). In designing an auditorium an architect can give 
consideration to both; in repair work for bad acoustic conditions it 
is generally impracticable to change the shape, and only variations 
in materials and furnishings are allowable. This was, therefore, 
the line of work in this case. It was evident that, other things being 
equal, the rate at which the reverberation would disappear was 
proportional to the rate at which the sound was absorbed. The 
first work, therefore, was to determine the relative absorbing power 




Length of cushions in meters 

Fig. 1. Curve showing the relation of the duration of the residual 
sound to the added absorbing material. 

of various substances. With an organ pipe as a constant source of 
sound, and a suitable chronograph for recording, the duration of 
audibility of a sound after the source had ceased in this room when 
empty was found to be 5.62 seconds. All the cushions from the 
seats in Sanders Theatre were then brought over and stored in the 
lobby. On bringing into the lecture-room a number of cushions, 
having a total length of 8.2 meters, the duration of audibility fell to 
5.8S seconds. On bringing in 17 meters the sound in the room after 
the organ pipe ceased was audible for but 4.94 seconds. Evidently 
the cushions were strong absorbents and rapidly improving the 
room, at least to the extent of diminishing the reverberation. The 
result was interesting and the process was continued. Little by 
little the cushions were brought into the room, and each time the 



Digitized by 



Google 



222 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



duration of audibility was measured* When all the seats (4S6 in 
number) were covered, the sound was audible for 2.0S seconds. 
Then the aisles were covered, and then the platform. Still there 
were more cushions, — almost half as many more. These were 
brought into the room, a few at a time, as before, and draped on a 
scaffolding that had been erected around the room, the duration of 
the sound being recorded each time. Finally, when all the cushions 
from a theatre seating nearly fifteen hundred persons were placed 
in the room — covering the seats, the aisles, the platform, the rear 
wall to the ceiling — the duration of audibility of the residual sound 

to 



.S 

1 







\ 




























\ 




























\ 




























1 

\ 




























\ 


tv 




























\ 












































































































L - 1 


*-■ 


i» 


K 


10 


t 


10 


4 


00 


400 


•00 



Walls 



Cushions 



Fig. 2. Curve 5 plotted as part of its corresponding rectangular 
hyperbola. The solid part was determined experimentally; 
the displacement of this to the right measures the absorbing 
power of the walls of the room. 

was 1.14 seconds. This experiment, requiring, of course, several 
nights' work, having been completed, all the cushions were removed 
and the room was in readiness for the test of other absorbents. It 
was evident that a standard of comparison had been established. 
Curtains of chenille, 1.1 meters wide and 17 meters in total length, 
were draped in the room. The duration of audibility was then 4.51 
seconds. Turning to the data that had just been collected, it ap- 
peared that this amount of chenille was equivalent to SO meters of 
Sanders Theatre cushions. Oriental rugs (Herez, Demirjik, and 
Hindoostanee) were tested in a similar manner, as were also cretonne 
cloth, canvas, and hair felt. Similar experiments, but in a smaller 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTUIIAL ACOUSTICS 223 

room, determined the absorbing power of a man and of a woman, 
always by determining the number of running meters of Sanders 
Theatre cushions that would produce the same effect. This process 
of comparing two absorbents by actually substituting one for the 
other is laborious, and it is given here only to show the first steps 
in the development of a method. Without going into details, it is 
sufficient here to say that this method was so perfected as to give 
not merely relative, but absolute, coefficients of absorption. 

In this manner a number of coefficients of absorption were de- 
termined for objects and materials which could be brought into 
and removed from the room, for sounds having a pitch an octave 
above middle C. In the following table the numerical values are 
the absolute coefficients of the absorption: 

Oil paintings, inclusive of frames 28 

Carpet rugs 20 

Oriental rugs, extra heavy 29 

Cheesecloth 019 

Cretonne cloth 15 

Shelia curtains 23 

Hair felt, 2.5 cm. thick, 8 cm. from wall 78 

Cork, 2.5 cm. thick, loose on floor 16 

Linoleum, loose on floor 12 

When the objects are not extended surfaces, such as carpets_or 

rugs, but essentially spacial units, it is not easy to express the 

absorption as an absolute coefficient. In the following table the 

absorption of each object is expressed in terms of a square meter of 

complete absorption: 

Audience, per person 44 

Isolated woman 54 

Isolated man 48 

Plain ash settees 039 

Plain ash settees, per single seat 0077 

Plain ash chairs, "bent wood" 0082 

Upholstered settees, hair and leather 1.10 

Upholstered settees, per single seat 28 

Upholstered chairs similar in style SO 

Hair cushions, per seat 21 

Elastic felt cushions, per seat 20 

Of even greater importance was the determination of , the co- 
efficient of absorption of floors, ceilings, and wall-surfaces. The 



Digitized by 



Google 



224 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



accomplishment of this called for a very considerable extension of 
the method adopted. If the reverberation in a room as changed 
by the addition of absorbing material be plotted, the resulting 
curve will be found to be a portion of an hyperbola with displaced 
axes. An example of such a curve, as obtained in the lecture- 
room of the Fogg Art Museum, in Cambridge, is plotted in the 
diagram, Fig. 1. If now the origin of this curve be displaced so 
that the axes of coordinates are the asymptotes of the rectangular 
hyperbola, the displacement of the origin measures the initial ab- 




Total absorbing material 

Fig. 3. The curves of Figs. 8 and entered as parts of their corre- 
sponding rectangular hyperbolas. Three scales are employed for 
the volumes, by groups 1-7, 8-11, and 12. 

sorbing power of the room, its floors, walls, and ceilings. Such 
experiments were carried out in a large number of rooms in which 
the different component materials entered in very different degrees, 
and an elimination between these different experiments gave the 
following coefficient of absorption for different materials: 

Open window 1.000 

Wood sheathing (hard pine) 061 

Plaster on wood lath 084 

Plaster on wire lath 088 

Glass, single thickness 027 

Plaster on tile 025 

Brick set in Portland cement 025 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



225 



If the experiments in these rooms are plotted in a single dia- 
gram, the result is a family of hyperbolae showing a very interesting 
relationship to the volumes of the rooms. Indeed, if from these 
hyperbolas the parameter, which equals the product of the co- 
ordinates, be determined, it will be found to be linearly propor- 
tional to the volume of the room. These results are plotted in 
Fig. 4, showing how strict the proportionality is even over a very 
great range in volume. We have thus at hand a ready method of 























A 






























/ 


»u 


























/ 




wmn imm ibno 


1M 










1 


V 


























/ 




4 




























2 






















It 








9^^^9 m^^^W mf^^^9 ^^M^P ^W^^P VBBw 








y 




























1. 


k 






























A 


% 

































* 


10 


u 


» 


si 


10 


ft 


10 


10 


00 


if 


U J 


tJ 


■r 



Volumes of rooms 

Fio. 4. The parameter, fc, plotted against the volumes of the 
rooms, showing the two proportionaL 

calculating the reverberation for any room, its volume and the 
materials of which it is composed being known. 

The first five years of the investigation were devoted to violin 
C, the C an octave above middle C, having a vibration frequency 
of 512 vibrations per second. This pitch was chosen because, in 
the art of telephony, it was regarded at that time as the character- 
istic pitch determining the conditions of articulate speech. The 
planning of Symphony Hall in Boston forced an extension of this 
investigation to notes over the whole range of the musical scale, 
three octaves below and three octaves above violin C. 

In the very nature of the problem, the most important datum 
is the absorption coefficient of an audience, and the determination 
of this was the first task undertaken. By means of a lecture on 



Digitized by 



Google 



226 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

one of the recent developments of physics, wireless telegraphy, an 
audience was thus drawn together and at the end of the lecture 
requested to remain for the experiment. In this attempt the effort 
was made to determine the coefficients for the five octaves from 
Gl£8 to C«2048, including notes £ and 6 in each octave. For 
several reasons the experiment was not a success. A threatening 
thunderstorm made the audience a small one, and the sultriness of 
the atmosphere made open windows necessary, while the attempt 
to cover so many notes, thirteen in all, prolonged the experiment 
beyond the endurance of the audience. While this experiment 
failed, another the following summer was more successful. In the 
year that had elapsed the necessity of carrying the investigation 
further than the limits intended became evident, and now the ex- 
periment was carried from Ci64 to Ct4096, but included only the 
C notes, seven notes in all. Moreover, bearing in mind the experi- 
ences of the previous summer, it was recognized that even seven 
notes would come dangerously near overtaxing the patience of the 
audience. Inasmuch as the coefficient of absorption for C 4 51£ had 
already been determined six years before, in the investigations 
mentioned, the coefficient for this note was not redetermined. The 
experiment was therefore carried out for the lower three and the 
upper three notes of the seven. The audience, on the night of this 
experiment, was much larger than that which came the previous 
summer, the night was a more comfortable one, and it was possible 
to close the windows during the experiment. The conditions were 
thus fairly satisfactory. In order to get as much data as possible, and 
in as short a time, there were nine observers stationed at different 
points in the room. These observers, whose kindness and skill it is 
a pleasure to acknowledge, had prepared themselves, by previous 
practice, for this one experiment. The results of the experiment 
are shown on the lower curve in Fig. 5. This curve gives the co- 
efficient of absorption per person. It is to be observed that one of 
the points falls clearly off the smooth curve drawn through the other 
points. 1 The observations on which this point is based were, how- 
ever, much disturbed by a street car passing not far from the build- 
ing, and the departure of this observation from the curve does not 

1 This point, evidently on the ordinate C&, is omitted in the original cut. — Editor. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



227 



indicate a real departure in the coefficient, nor should it cast much 
doubt on the rest of the work, in view of the circumstances under 
which it was secured. Counteracting the, perhaps, bad impression 



u> 














.9 














M 


i 












.7 


/ 












.6 


/ 












.6 


/ 




















.4 














.3 














.2 














a 















Oi 0,0, 0« C, 0« Of 

Fig. 5. The absorbing power of an audience for different 
notes. The lower curve represents the absorbing power 
of an audience per person. The upper curve represents 
the absorbing power of an audience per square meter 
as ordinarily seated. The vertical ordinates are ex- 
pressed in terms of total absorption by a square meter 
of surface. For the upper curve the ordinates are thus 
the ordinary coefficients of absorption. The several 
notes are at octave intervals, as follows: Q64, G128, 
Ct (middle C) 256, C<512, C,1034, C.2048, Q4096. 

which this point may give, it is a considerable satisfaction to note 
how accurately the point for C«512, determined six years before by 
a different set of observers, falls on the smooth curve through the 



Digitized by 



Google 



228 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

remaining points. In ,the audience on which these observations 
were taken there were 77 women and 105 men. The courtesy of 
the audience in remaining for the experiment and the really re- 
markable silence which they maintained are gratefully acknowl- 
edged. 

The next experiment was on the determination of the absorp- 
tion of sound by wood sheathing. It is not an easy matter to find 
conditions suitable for this experiment. The room in which the 
absorption by wood sheathing was determined in the earlier ex- 
periments was not available for these. It was available then only 
because the building was new and empty. When these more elabo- 
rate experiments were under way the room became occupied, and 
in a manner that did not admit of its being cleared. Quite a little 
searching in the neighborhood of Boston failed to discover an en- 
tirely suitable room. The best one available adjoined a night 
lunch room. The night lunch was bought out for a couple of 
nights, and the experiment was tried. The 'work of both nights 
was much disturbed. The traffic past the building did not stop 
until nearly two o'clock, and began again at four. The interest of 
those passing on foot throughout the night, and the necessity of 
repeated explanations to the police, greatly interfered with the 
work. This detailed statement of the conditions under which the 
experiment was tried is made by way of explanation of the irregu- 
larity of the observations recorded on the curve, and of the failure 
to carry this particular line of work further. The first night seven 
points were obtained for the seven notes Ci64 to Ct4096. The re- 
duction of these results on the following day showed variations 
indicative of maxima and minima, which, to be accurately located, 
would require the determination of intermediate points. In the 
experiment the following night points were determined for the £ 
and G notes in each octave between C*128 and C 6 2048. Other 
points would have been determined, but time did not permit. It 
is obvious that the intermediate points in the lower and in the 
higher octave were desirable, but no pipes were to be had on such 
short notice for this part of the range, and in their absence the data 
could not be obtained. In the diagram, Fig. 6, the points lying on 
the vertical lines were determined the first night. The points lying 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



229 



between the vertical lines were determined the second night. The 
accuracy with which these points fall on a smooth curve is, perhaps, 

Jft 

Jl 

JO 

.09 

.08 

.07 

.06 

.06 

.04 

.03 

.08 

.01 






o« 



o, 



Fig. 6. The absorbing power of wood sheathing, two centi- 
meters thick, North Carolina pine. The observations 
were made under very unsuitable conditions. The 
absorption is here due almost wholly to yielding of the 
sheathing as a whole, the surface being shellacked, 
smooth, and non-porous. The curve shows one point 
of resonance within the range tested, and the prob- 
ability of another point of resonance above. It is not 
possible now to learn as much in regard to the framing 
and arrangement of the studding in the particular room 
tested as is desirable. C (middle C) 256. 



Digitized by 



Google 



230 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

all that could be expected in view of the difficulty under which the 
observations were conducted and the limited time available. One 
point in particular falls far off from this curve, the point for C»256, 
by an amount which is, to say the least, serious, and which can be 
justified only by the conditions under which the work was done. 
The general trend of the curve seems, however, established beyond 
reasonable doubt. It is interesting to note that there is one point 
of maximum absorption, which is due to resonance between the 
walls and the sound, and that this point of maximum absorption 
lies in the lower part, though not in the lowest part, of the range of 
pitch tested. It would have been interesting to determine, had the 
time and facilities permitted, the shape of the curve beyond Ct4096, 
and to see if it rises indefinitely, or shows, as is far more likely, a 
succession of maxima. 

The experiment was then directed to the determination of the 
absorption of sound by cushions, and for this purpose return was 
made to the constant-temperature room. Working in the manner 
indicated in the earlier papers for substances which could be carried 
in and out of a room, the curves represented in Fig. 7 were obtained. 
Curve 1 shows the absorption coefficient for the Sanders Theatre 
cushions, with which the whole investigation was begun ten years 
ago. These cushions were of a particularly open grade of packing, 
a sort of wiry grass or vegetable fiber. They were covered with 
canvas ticking, and that, in turn, with a very thin cloth covering. 
Curve 2 is for cushions borrowed from the Phillips Brooks House. 
They were of a high grade, filled with long, curly hair, and covered 
with canvas ticking, which was, in turn, covered by a long nap 
plush. Curve 8 is for the cushions of Appleton Chapel, hair covered 
with a leatherette, and showing a sharper maximum and a more « 
rapid diminution in absorption for the higher frequencies, as would 
be expected under such conditions. Curve 4 is probably the most 
interesting, because for more standard commercial conditions ordi- 
narily used in churches. It is to be observed that all four curves 
fall off for the higher frequencies, all show a maximum located 
within an octave, and three of the curves show a curious hump in 
the second octave. This break in the curve is a genuine phenomenon, 
as it was tested time after time. It is perhaps due to a secondary 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 



231 



resonance, and it is to be observed that it is the more pronounced in 
those curves that have the sharper resonance in their principal 
maxima. 

1.0 



.9 
.8 
.7 
.6 
•6 



.3 



.a 

.1 





















A 


\ 








// 


\ 3 


\ 


\ 






4 


^ 


< 


\ 






/ 


\ 


\ 


k 


/ t 


<; 


V 


\ 




\ 


'J 


7 








\ 


1/ 


r 



































o, 



c o 4 



o. 



Flo. 7. The absorbing power of cushions. Curve 1 is 
for "Sanders Theatre" cushions of wiry vegetable 
fiber, covered with canvas ticking and a thin cloth. 
Curve 2 is for "Brooks House" cushions of long hair, 
covered with the same kind of ticking and plush. 
Curve 8 is for "Applet on Chapel" cushions of hair, 
covered with ticking and a thin leatherette. Curve 4 
is for the elastic felt cushions of commerce, of elastic 
cotton, covered with ticking and short nap plush. The 
absorbing power is per square meter of surface. 
Ct (middle C) 256. 

In both articulate speech and in music the source of sound is 
rapidly and, in general, abruptly changing in pitch, quality, and 
loudness. In music one pitch is held during the length of a note. 



Digitized by 



Google 



232 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

In articulate speech the unit or element of constancy is the syllable. 
Indeed, in speech it is even less than the length of a syllable, for 
the open vowel sound which forms the body of a syllable usually 
has a consonantal opening and closing. During the constancy of 
an element, either of music or of speech, a train of sound-waves 
spreads spherically from the source, just as a train of circular 
waves spreads outward from a rocking boat on the surface of still 
water. Different portions of this train of spherical waves strike 
different surfaces of the auditorium and are reflected. After such 
reflection they begin to cross each other's paths. If their paths 
are so different in length that one train of waved has entirely passed 
before the other arrives at a particular point, the only phenomenon 
at that point is prolongation of the sound. If the space between 
the two trains of waves be sufficiently great, the effect will be that 
of an echo. If there be a number of such trains of waves thus widely 
spaced, the effect will be that of multiple echoes. On the other 
hand, if two trains of waves have traveled so nearly equal paths 
that they overlap, they will, dependent on the difference in length 
of the paths which they had traveled, either reSnforce or mutually 
destroy each other. Just as two equal trains of water-waves cross- 
ing each other may entirely neutralize each other if the crest of one 
and the trough of the other arrive together, so two sounds, coming 
from the same source, in crossing each other may produce silence. 
This phenomenon is called interference, and is a common phenom- 
enon in all types of wave-motion. Of course, this phenomenon has 
its complement. If the two trains of water-waves so cross that the 
crest of one coincides with the crest of the other and trough with 
trough, the effects will be added together. If the two sound-waves 
be similarly retarded, the one on the other, their effects will also 
be added. If the two trains of waves be equal in intensity, the 
combined intensity will be quadruple that of either of the trains 
separately, as above explained, or zero, depending on their relative 
retardation. The effect of this phenomenon is to produce regions 
in an auditorium of loudness and regions of comparative or even 
complete silence. It is a partial explanation of the so-called deaf 
regions in an auditorium. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 233 

It is not difficult to observe this phenomenon directly. It is 
difficult, however, to measure and record the phenomenon in such 
a manner as to permit of an accurate chart of the result. Without 
going into the details of the method employed, the result of these 



Flo. 8. Distribution of intensity on the head level in a room 
with a barrel-shaped ceiling, with center of curvature on the 
floor level. 

measurements for a room very similar to the Congregational Church 
in Naugatuck, Connecticut, is shown in the accompanying chart. 
The room experimented in was a simple, rectangular room with 
plain side walls and ends and with a barrel or cylindrical ceiling. 
The result is clearly represented in Fig. 8, in which the intensity 



Digitized by 



Google 



234 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

of the sound has been indicated by contour lines in the manner 
employed in the drawing of the geodetic survey maps. The phenom- 
enon indicated in these diagrams was not ephemeral, but was con- 
stant so long as the source of sound continued, and repeated itself 
with almost perfect accuracy day after day. Nor was the phenom- 



Fio. Fig. 11 



Fig. 10 Fig. 12 

enon one which could be observed merely instrumentally. To an 
observer moving about in the room it was quite as striking a phenom- 
enon as the diagrams suggest. At the points in the room indicated 
as high maxima of intensity in the diagram the sound was so loud 
as to be disagreeable, at other points so low as to be scarcely audible. 
It should be added that this distribution of intensity is with the 
source of sound at the center of the room. Had the source of sound 
been at one end and on the axis of the cylindrical ceiling, the dis- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 235 

tribution of intensity would still have been bilaterally symmetrical, 
but not symmetrical about the transverse axis. 

When a source of sound is maintained constant for a sufficiently 
long time — a few seconds will ordinarily suffice — the sound becomes 
steady at every point in the room. The distribution of the intensity 



Fig. 13 Fio. 15 



Fig. 14 Fig. 16 

of sound under these conditions is called the interference system, 
for that particular note, of the room or space in question. If the 
source of sound is suddenly stopped, it requires some time for the 
sound in the room to be absorbed. This prolongation of sound after 
the source has ceased is called reverberation. If the source of sound, 
instead of being maintained, is short and sharp, it travels as a dis- 
crete wave or group of waves about the room, reflected from wall to 



Digitized by 



Google 



236 ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS 

wall, producing echoes. In the Greek theatre there was ordinarily 
but one echo, "doubling the case ending," while in the modern 
auditorium there are many, generally arriving at a less interval of 
time after the direct sound and therefore less distinguishable, but 
stronger and therefore more disturbing. 

The formation and the propagation of echoes may be admirably 
studied by an adaptation of the so-called schlieren-Methode device 
for photographing air disturbances. It is sufficient here to say that 
the adaptation of this method to the problem in hand consists in 
the construction of a model of the auditorium to be studied to 
proper scale, and investigating the propagation through it of a 
proportionally scaled sound-wave. To examine the formation of 
echoes in a vertical section, the sides of a model are taken off and, 
as the sound is passing through it, it is illuminated instantaneously 
by the light from a very fine and somewhat distant electric spark. 
In the preceding illustrations, reduced from the photographs, 
the enframing silhouettes are shadows cast by the model, and all 
within are direct photographs of the actual sound-wave and its 
echoes. The four photographs show the sound and its echoes at 
different stages in their propagation through the room, the particu- 
lar auditorium under investigation being the New Theatre in New 
York. It is not difficult to identify the master wave and the vari- 
ous echoes which it generates, nor, knowing the velocity of sound, 
to compute the interval at which the echo is heard. 

To show the generation of echoes and their propagation in a 
horizontal plane, the ceiling and floor of the model are removed and 
the photograph taken in a vertical direction. The photographs 
shown in Figs. 13 to 16 show the echoes produced in the horizontal 
plane passing through the marble parapet in front of the box. 

While these several factors, reverberation, interference, and 
echo, in an auditorium at all complicated are themselves compli- 
cated, nevertheless they are capable of an exact solution, or, at 
least, of a solution as accurate as are the architect's plans in actual 
construction. And it is entirely possible to calculate in advance of 
construction whether or not an auditorium will be good, and, if not, 
to determine the factors contributing to its poor acoustics and & 
method for their correction. 



Digitized by 



Google 



10 

THE INSULATION OF SOUND 1 

1 he insulation of sound as an unsolved problem in architectural 
acoustics was first brought to the writer's attention by the New 
England Conservatory of Music, immediately after its completion 
in 1904, and almost simultaneously in connection with a private 
house which had just been completed in New York. A few years 
later it was renewed by the Institute of Musical Art in New York. 
In the construction of all three buildings it had been regarded as 
particularly important that communication of sound from room to 
room should be avoided, and methods to that end had been em- 
ployed which were in every way reasonable. The results showed 
that in this phase of architectural acoustics also there had not been 
a sufficiently searching and practical investigation and that there 
were no experimental data on which an architect could rely. As 
these buildings were the occasion for beginning this investigation, 
and were both instructive and suggestive, they are, with the con- 
sent of the architects, discussed here at some length. 

The special method of construction employed in the New England 
Conservatory of Music was suggested to the architects by the Trus- 
tees of the Conservatory. The floor of each room was of semi-fire- 
proof construction, cement between iron girders, on this a layer of 
plank, on this paper lining, and on top of this a floor of hard pine. 
Between each room for violin, piano, or vocal lessons was a com- 
pound wall, constructed of two partitions with an unobstructed air 
space between them. Each partition was of two-inch plaster block 
set upright, with the finishing plaster applied directly to the block. 
The walls surrounding the organ rooms were of three such partitions 
separated by two-inch air spaces. In each air space was a con- 
tinuous layer of deadening cloth. The scheme was carried out con- 
sistently and with full regard to details, yet lessons conducted in 
adjacent rooms were disturbing to each other. 

1 The Brickbuilder, vol. xxiv, no. 8, February, 1015. 
tS7 



Digitized by 



Google 



238 THE INSULATION OF SOUND 

It is always easier to explain why a method does not work than 
to know in advance whether it will or will not. It is especially easy 
to explain why it does not work when not under the immediate neces- 
sity of correcting it or of supplying a better. This lighter role of the 
irresponsible critic was alone invited in the case of the New England 
Conservatory of Music, nor will more be ventured at the present 
moment. 

There is no question whatever that the fundamental considera- 
tion on which the device hinged was a sound one. Any discontinuity 
diminishes the transmission of sound; and the transition from 
masonry to air is a discontinuity of an extreme degree. Two solid 
masonry walls entirely separated by an air space furnish a vastly 
better sound insulation than either wall alone. On the other hand, 
the problem takes on new aspects if a masonry wall be replaced by 
a series of screen walls, each light and flexible, even though they 
aggregate in massiveness the solid wall which they replace. More- 
over, such screen walls can rarely be regarded as entirely insulated 
from each other. Granting that accidental communication has 
nowhere been established, through, for example, the extrusion of 
plaster, the walls are of necessity in communication at the floor, at 
the ceiling, at the sides, or at the door jambs; and the connection at 
the floor, at least, is almost certain to be good. Further, and of ex- 
treme importance, given any connection at all, the thinness of the 
screen walls renders them like drumheads and capable of large 
response to small excitation. 

It may seem a remote parallel, but assume for discussion two 
buildings a quarter of a mile apart. With the windows closed, no 
ordinary sound in one building could be heard in the other. If, 
however, the buildings were connected by a single metal wire 
fastened to the centers of window panes, it would be possible not 
merely to hear from within one building to within the other, but 
with care to talk. On the other hand, had the wires been connected 
to the heavy masonry walls of the two buildings, such communica- 
tion would have been impossible. This hypothetical case, though 
extreme, indeed perhaps the better because of its exaggeration, will 
serve to analyze the problem. Here, as in every case, the transmis- 
sion of sound involves three steps, — the taking up of the vibration, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 239 

the function of the nearer window pane, its transmission by the wire, 
and its communication to the air of the receiving room by the remote 
window. The three functions may be combined into one when a 
solid wall separates the two rooms, the taking up, transmitting, and 
emitting of the sound being scarcely separable processes. On the 
other hand, they are often clearly separable, as in the case of multiple 
screen walls. 

In the case of a solid masonry wall, the transmission from surface 
to surface is almost perfect; but because of the great mass and 
rigidity of the wall, it takes up but little of the vibration of the inci- 
dent sound. It is entirely possible to express by a not very compli- 
cated analytical equation the amount of sound which a wall of 
simple dimensions will take up and transmit in terms of the mass 
of the wall, its elasticity, and its viscosity, and the frequency of 
vibration of the sound. But such an equation, while of possible 
interest to physicists as an exercise, is of no interest whatever to 
architects because of the difficulty of determining the necessary 
coefficients. 

In the case of multiple screen walls, the communication from 
wall to wall, through the intermediate air space or around the edges, 
is poor compared with the face to face communication of a solid 
wall. But the vibration of the screen wall exposed to the sound, the 
initial step in the process of transmission, is greatly enhanced by its 
light and flexible character. Similarly its counterpart, the screen 
wall, which by its vibration communicates the sound to the receiv- 
ing room, is light, flexible, and responsive to relatively small forces. 
That this responsiveness of the walls compensates or more than 
compensates for the poor communication between them, is the 
probable explanation of the transmission between the rooms in the 
New England Conservatory. 

The Institute of Musical Art in New York presented interesting 
variations of the problem. Here also the rooms on the second and 
third floors were intended for private instruction and were designed 
to be sound proof from each other, from the corridor, and from the 
rooms above and below. The walls separating the rooms from the 
corridors were double, having connection only at the door jambs 
and at the floor, The screen wall next the corridor was of terra 



Digitized by 



Google 



240 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 



cotta block, finished on the corridor side with plaster applied directly 
to the terra cotta. The wall next the room was of gypsum block, 
plastered and finished in burlap. In the air space between the two 
walls, deadening sheet was hung. The walls separating the rooms 
were of gypsum block and finished in hard plaster and burlap. As 
shown on the diagram (Fig. 1), these walls were cellular, one 




Fig. 1. Details of Construction, Institute of Musical Art, 
New York, N. Y. 

of these cells being entirely enclosed in gypsum block, the others 
being closets opening the one to one room, the other to the other. 
The closets were lined with wood sheathing which was separated 
from the enclosing wall by a narrow space in which deadening sheet 
was hung in double thickness with overlapping joints. In the en- 
tirely enclosed cell, deadening sheet was also hung in double thick- 
ness. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 241 

It is not difficult to see, at least after the fact, why the deadening 
sheet in such positions was entirely without effect. The transverse 
masonry webs afforded a direct transmission from side to side of the 
compound wall that entirely overwhelmed the transmission through 
the air spaces. Had there been no necessity of closets, and therefore, 
no necessity of transverse web and had the two screen walls been 
truly insulated the one from the other, not merely over their area, 
but at the floor, at the ceiling, and at the edges, the insulation would 
have been much more nearly perfect. 

The means which were taken to secure insulation at the base of 
the screen walls and to prevent the transmission of sound from floor 
to floor are exceedingly interesting. The floor construction con- 
sisted in hollow terra cotta tile arches, on top of this cinder concrete, 
on this sawdust mortar, and on the top of this cork flooring. Below 
the reenf orced concrete arches were hung ceilings of plaster on wire 
lath. This hung ceiling was supported by crossed angle bars which 
were themselves supported by the I beams which supported the 
hollow terra cotta tile arches. In the air spaces between the tile 
arches and the hung ceilings, and resting on the latter, was deaden- 
ing sheet. This compound floor of cork, sawdust mortar, cinder 
concrete, terra cotta tile, air space, and hung ceiling, with deadening 
sheet in the air spaces, has the air of finality, but was not successful 
in securing the desired insulation. 

It is interesting to note also that the screen walls were separated 
from the floor arches on which they rested below and on which they 
abutted above by deadening sheet. It is possible that this afforded 
some insulation at the top of the wall, for the arch was not sustained 
by the wall, and the pressure at that point not great. At the bottom, 
however, it is improbable that the deadening sheet carried under the 
base offered an insulation of practical value. Under the weight of 
the wall it was probably compressed into a compact mass, whose 
rigidity was still further increased by the percolation through it of 
the cement from the surrounding concrete. 

Finally, after the completion of the building, Mr. Damrdsch, the 
director, had tried the experiment of covering the walls of one of the 
rooms to a depth of two inches with standard hair felt, with some, 
but almost negligible, effect on the transmission of sound. 



Digitized by 



Google 



242 THE INSULATION OF SOUND 

Deadening sheet has been mentioned frequently. All indication 
of the special kind employed has been purposely omitted, for the 
discussion is concerned with the larger question of the manner of its 
use and not with the relative merits of the different makes. 

The house in New York presented a problem even more interest- 
ing. It was practically a double house, one of the most imperative 
conditions of the building being the exclusion of sounds in the main 
part of the house from the part to the left of a great partition wall. 
This wall of solid masonry supported only one beam of the main 
house, was pierced by as few doors as possible — two — and by 
no steam or water pipes. The rooms were heated by independent 
fireplaces. The water pipes connected independently to the main. 
It had been regarded as of particular importance to exclude sounds 
from the two bedrooms on the second floor. The ceilings of the 
rooms below were, therefore, made of concrete arch; on top of this 
was spread three inches of sand, and on top of this three inches of 
lignolith blocks; on this was laid a hardwood floor; and finally, 
when the room was occupied, this floor was covered by very heavy 
and heavily padded carpets. From the complex floor thus con- 
structed arose interior walls of plaster on wire lath on independent 
studding, supported only at the top where they were held from the 
masonry walls by iron brackets set in lignolith blocks. Each room 
was, therefore, practically a room within a room, separated below 
by three inches of sand and three inches of lignolith and on all sides 
and above by an air space. Notwithstanding this, the shutting of a 
door in any part of the main house could be heard, though faintly, 
in either bedroom. In the rear bedroom, from which the best results 
were expected, one could hear not merely the shutting of doors in 
the main part of the house, but the working of the feed pump, the 
raking of the furnace, and the coaling of the kitchen range. In the 
basement of the main dwelling was the servants' dining room. Rap- 
ping with the knuckles on the wall of this room produced in the bed- 
room, two stories up and on the other side of the great partition wall, 
a sound which, although hardly, as the architect expressed it, magni- 
fied, yet of astonishing loudness and clearness. In this case, the 
telephone-like nature of the process was even more clearly defined 
than in the other cases, for the distances concerned were much 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 243 

greater. The problem had many interesting aspects, but will best 
serve the present purpose if for the sake of simplicity and clearness 
it be held to but one, — the transmission of sound from the servants' 
dining room in the basement along the great eighteen-inch partition 
wall up two stories to the insulated bedroom above and opposite. 

It is a fairly safe hazard that the sound on reaching the bedroom 
did not enter by way of the floor, for the combination of reinforced 
concrete, three inches of sand, three inches of lignolith block, and 
the wood flooring and carpet above, presented a combination of 
massive rigidity in the concrete arch, inertness in the sand and 
lignolith block, imperviousness in the hardwood floor, and absorp- 
tion in the padded carpet which rendered insulation perfect, if per- 
fect insulation be possible. No air ducts or steam or water pipes 
entered the room. The only conceivable communication, therefore, 
was through the walls or ceiling. The communication to the inner 
walls and ceiling from the surrounding structural walls was either 
through the air space or through the iron angle bars, which, set in 
lignolith blocks in the structural wall, retained erect and at proper 
distance the inner walls. Of the two means of communication, the 
air and the angle bars, the latter was probably the more important. 
It is interesting and pertinent to follow this line of communication, 
the masonry wall, the angle bars, and the screen walls, and to en- 
deavor to discover if possible, or at least to speculate on the reason 
for its exceptional though unwelcome efficiency. 

From the outset it is necessary to distinguish the transverse and 
the longitudinal transmission of sound in a building member, that 
is, to distinguish as somewhat different processes the transmission 
of sound from one room to an adjacent room through a separating 
wall or ceiling, from the transmission of sound along the floors from 
room to room, or along the vertical walls from floor to floor. Broadly, 
although the two are not entirely separable phenomena, one is 
largely concerned in the transmission of the sound of the voice, or 
the violin, or of other sources free from solid contact with the floor, 
and the other in the transmission of the sound of a piano or cello — in- 
struments in direct communication with the building structure — or 
of noises involved in the operation of the building, dynamos, eleva- 
tors, or the opening and closing of doors. In the building under con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



244 THE INSULATION OF SOUND 

sideration, the disturbing sounds were in every case communicated 
dfrectly to the structure at a considerable distance and transmitted 
along the walls until ultimately communicated through the angle 
bars, if the angle bars were the means of communication, to the thin 
plaster walls which constituted the inner room. The special features 
thus emphasized were the longitudinal transmission of vibration by 
walls, floors, and structural beams, and the transformation of these 
longitudinal vibrations into the sound-producing transverse vibra- 
tions of walls and ceilings bounding the disturbed room. Many 
questions were raised which at the time could be only tentatively 
answered. 

What manner of walls conduct the sound with the greater readi- 
ness ? Is it true, as so often stated, that modern concrete construc- 
tion has contributed to the recent prevalence of these difficulties ? 
If so, is there a difference in this respect between stone, sand, and 
cinder concrete ? In this particular building, the partition wall was 
of brick. Is there a difference due to the kind of brick employed, 
whether hard or soft ? Or does the conduction of sound depend on 
the kind of mortar with which the masonry is set ? If this seems 
trivial, consider the number of joints in even a moderate distance. 
Again, is it possible that sound may be transmitted along a wall 
without producing a transverse vibration, thus not entering the 
adjacent room ? Is it possible that in the case of this private house 
had there been no interior screen wall the sound communicated to 
the room would have been less ? We know that if the string of a 
string telephone passes through a room without touching, a conver- 
sation held over the line will be entirely inaudible in the room. Is 
it possible that something like this, but on a grand scale, may happen 
in a building ? Or, again, is it possible that the iron brackets which 
connected the great partition wall to the screen wall magnified the 
motion and so the sound, as the lever on a phonograph magnifies its 
motion ? These are not unworthy questions, even if ultimately the 
answer be negative. 

The investigation divides itself into two parts, — the one dealing 
with partition walls especially constructed for the test, the other 
with existing structures wherever found in interesting form. The 
experiments of the former type were conducted in a special room, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 245 

mentioned in some of the earlier papers (The Brickbuilder, January, 
1914), 1 and having peculiar merits for the work. For an under- 
standing of these experiments and an appreciation of the conditions 
that make for their accuracy, it is necessary that the construction of 
this room be explained at some length. The west wing of the Jeffer- 
son Physical Laboratory is in plan a large square in the center of 
which rises a tower, which, for the sake of steadiness and insulation 



Fig. 2. Testing Room and Apparatus 

from all external vibration, is not merely of independent walls but 
has an entirely separate foundation, and above is spanned without 
touching by the roof of the main building. The sub-basement room 
of this tower is below the basement of the main building, but the 
walls of the latter are carried down to enclose it. The floor of the 
room is of concrete, the ceiling a masonry arch. There is but one 
door which leads through a small anteroom to the stairs mounting 
to the level of the basement of the main building. Through the 

1 See page 109, chapter 8. 



Digitized by 



Google 



246 THE INSULATION OF SOUND 

ceiling there are two small openings for which special means of closing 
are provided. The larger of these openings barely permits the 
passage of an observer when raised or lowered by a block and tackle. 
It is necessary that there be some such entrance in order that obser- 
vations may be taken in the room when the door is closed by the wall 
construction undergoing test. 

Of prime importance, critical to the whole investigation, was the 
insulation between the rooms, otherwise than through the partition 
to be tested. The latter closed the doorway. Other than that the 
two rooms were separated by two eighteen-inch walls of brick, 
separated by a one-inch air space, not touching through a five-story 
height and carried down to separate foundations. Around the outer 
wall and around the antechamber was solid ground. It is difficult 
to conceive of two adjacent rooms better insulated, the one from 
the other, in all directions, except in that of their immediate con- 
nection. 

The arrangement of apparatus, changed somewhat in later experi- 
ments, consisted primarily, as shown in the diagram, of a set of 
organ pipes, winded from a bellows reservoir in the room above, 
this in turn being charged from an air pump in a remote part of the 
building, — remote to avoid the noise of operation. In the center 
of the room two reflectors revolved slowly and noiselessly on roller 
bearings, turned continuously by a weight, under governor control, 
in the room above. The chair of the observer was in a box whose 
folding lids fitted over his shoulders. In the box was the small organ 
console and the key of the chronograph. The organ and chrono- 
graph had also console and key connection with the antechamber. 
The details of the apparatus are not of moment in a paper written 
primarily for architects. 

Broadly, the method of measuring the transmission of sound 
through the partitions consisted in producing in the larger room a 
sound whose intensity in terms of threshold audibility was known, 
and reducing this intensity at a determinable rate until the sound 
ceased to be audible on the other side of the partition. The intensity 
of the sound at this instant was numerically equal to the reciprocal 
of the coefficient of transmission. This process involved several 
considerations which should at least be mentioned. 



Digitized by 



Google 



/ 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 247 

The sound of known intensity was produced by organ pipes of 
known powers of emission, allowance being made for the volume of 
the room, and the absorbing power of the walls. The method was 
fully explained in earlier papers. 1 It is to be borne in mind that 
there was thus determined merely the average of intensity. The 
intensity varied greatly in different parts of the room because of 
interference. In order that the average intensity of sound against 
the partition in a series of observations should equal the average 
intensity in the room, it was necessary to continuously shift the in- 
terference system. This was accomplished by means of revolving 
reflectors. This also rendered it possible to obtain a measure of 
average conditions in the room from observations taken in one 
position. Finally the observations in the room were always made 
by the observer seated in the box, as this rendered his clothing a 
negligible factor, and the condition of the room the same with or 
without his presence. Consideration was also given to the acoustical 
condition of the antechamber. 

Two methods of reducing the sound have been employed. In 
the one the sound was allowed to die away naturally, the source 
being stopped suddenly, and the rate at which it decreased deter- 
mined from the constants of the room. In another type of experi- 
ment the source, electrically maintained, was reduced by the addition 
of electrical resistance to the circuit. One method was suitable 
to one set of conditions, the other to another. The first was em- 
ployed in the experiments whose results are given in this paper. 

The first measurements were on felt, partly suggested by the ex- 
periments of Dr. Damrosch with felt on the walls of the Institute of 
Musical Art, partly because it offered the dynamically simplest prob- 
lem on which to test the accuracy of the method by the concurrence 
of its results. The felt used was that so thoroughly studied in other 
acoustical aspects in the paper published in the Proceedings of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1906. The door separat- 
ing the two rooms was covered with a one-half inch thickness of this 
felt. The intensity of sound in the main room just audible through 
the felt was 3.7 times threshold audibility. Another layer of felt 
of equal thickness was added to the first, and the reduction in the 

1 See Reverberation, page 1. 



Digitized by 



Google 



248 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 



intensity of sound in passing through the two was 7.8 fold. Through 
three-thickness, each one-half, the reduction was 15.4 fold, through 
four 30.4, five 47.5, and six 88.0. This test was for sounds having the 
pitch of violin C, first C above middle C, 512 vibrations per second. 
There is another way of stating the above results which is perhaps 
of more service to architects. The ordinary speaking intensity of 

10 



.8 



2 































































« 












% 












\ 


\l 






















3 


<J* 











Fig. 3 

the voice is — not exactly, of course, for it varies greatly — but 
of the order of magnitude of 1,000,000 times minimum audible in- 
tensity. Assume that there is a sound of that intensity, and of the 
pitch investigated, in a room in one side of a partition of half-inch 
felt. Its intensity on the other side of the partition would be 
270,000 times minimum audible intensity. Through an inch of felt 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 249 

its intensity would be 128,000. Through six layers of such felt, that 
is, through three inches, its intensity would be 11,400 times mini- 
mum audible intensity, — very audible, indeed. The diminishing 
intensity of the sound as it proceeds through layer after layer of 
felt is plotted in the diagram (Curve 1, Fig. 8), in which all the 
points recorded are the direct results of observations. The intensity 
inside the room is the full ordinate of the diagram. The curve drawn 
is the nearest rectangular hyperbola fitting the observed and calcu- 
lated points. The significance of this will be discussed later. It is 
sufficient for the present purpose to say that it is the theoretical 
curve for these conditions, and the close agreement between it and 
the observed points is a matter for considerable satisfaction. 

The next partition tested was of sheet iron. This, of course, is 
not a normal building material and it may therefore seem disap- 
pointing and without interest to architects. But it is necessary to 
remember that these were preliminary investigations establishing 
methods and principles rather than practical data. Moreover, the 
material is not wholly impractical. The writer has used it in recom- 
mendations to an architect in one of the most interesting and suc- 
cessful cases of sound insulation so far undertaken — that in an 
after-theatre restaurant extending underneath the sidewalk of Broad- 
way and 42d Street in New York. 

The successive layers of sheet iron were held at a distance, each 
from the preceding, of one inch, spaced at the edges by a narrow 
strip of wood and felt, and pressed home by washers of felt. After 
the practical cases cited at the beginning of the paper, it requires 
courage and some hardihood to say that any insulation is good. It 
can only be said that every care was taken to this end. The results 
of the experiments can alone measure the efficiency of the method 
employed, and later they will be discussed with this in view. 

The third series of experiments were with layers of sheet iron 
with one-half inch felt occupying part of the air space between them. 
The iron was that used in the second series, the felt that used in the 
first. The air space was unfortunately slightly greater than in the 
second series, being an inch and a quarter instead of an inch. The 
magnitude of the effect of this difference in distance was not 
realized at the time, but it was sufficient to prevent a direct corn- 



Digitized by 



Google 



250 THE INSULATION OF SOUND 

parison of the second and third series, and an attempt to deduce 
the latter from the former with the aid of the first. When this was 
realized, other conditions were so different as to make a repetition 
of the series difficult. 

In the following table is given the results of these three series of 
experiments in such form as to admit of easy comparison. To this 
end they are all reduced to the values which they would have had 
with an intensity of sound in the inner room of 1,000,000. In the 
first column each succeeding figure is the intensity outside an addi- 
tional half inch of felt. In the second column, similarly, each suc- 
ceeding figure is the intensity outside an additional sheet of iron. 
In the third column, the second figure is the intensity outside a 
single sheet of iron, and after that each succeeding figure is the 
intensity outside of an additional felt and iron doublet with air space. 



1,000,000 


1,000,000 


1,000,000 


270,000 


22,700 


23,000 


128,000 


8,700 


3,300 


65,000 


4,880 


700 


88,000 


8,150 


220 


21,500 


2,060 


150 


11,400 


1,520 


88 



The sound transmitted in the second and third series is so much 
less than in the first that when an attempt is made to plot it on the 
same diagram (Curves 2 and 3, Fig. 3) it results in lines so low as to 
be scarcely distinguishable from the base line. Magnifying the scale 
tenfold (Fig. 4) throws the first series off the diagram for the earlier 
values, but renders visible the second and third. 

The method of representing the results of an investigation 
graphically has several ends in view: it gives a visual impression of 
the phenomenon; it shows by the nearness with which the plotted 
values 1 lie to a smooth curve the accuracy of the method and of the 
work; it serves to interpolate for intermediate values and to ex- 
trapolate for points which lie beyond the observed region, forward 
or backward; finally, it reveals significant relations and leads to a 

1 In reproducing from the plotted diagrams for Figs. 3, 4, and 5, the dots, in some cases, 
which indicated the plotted values of the observed points, do not clearly appear in distinction 
on the lines. The greatest divergence, in any case, from the line drawn was not more than 
twice the breadth of the line itself. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 



251 



more effective discussion. It is worth while thus examining the 
three curves. 

Attention has already been called to the curve for felt, to its ex- 
trapolation, and to the close approximation of the observed points 
to an hyperbola. The latter fact indicates the simplest possible law 

10 



.09 
.08 

xn 

J06 
.05 

.04 
.03 
02 
.01 



12 3 4 6 6 

Fig. 4 

of absorption. It proves that all layers absorb the same proportion 
of the sound; that each succeeding layer absorbs less actual sound 
than the preceding, but less merely because less sound reaches it to 
be absorbed. In the case in hand the sound in passing through the 
felt was reduced in the ratio 1.88 in each layer, 8.58 in each inch. 
It is customary to test such curves by plotting them on a special 
kind of coordinate paper, — one on which, while horizontal dis- 



\l 



Digitized by 



Google 



252 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 



tances are uniformly scaled as before, vertical distances are scaled 
with greater and greater reduction, tenfold for each unit rise. On 
such coordinate paper the vertical distances are the power to which 
10 must be raised to equal the number plotted — in other words, it 
is the logarithm of the number. Plotted on such paper the curve for 

10* 



10 



10 



10 * 



10" 



10 



10 



10" 



10 



10 ' 



12 3 4 6 6 

Fig. 5 

felt will result in a straight line, if the curve in the other diagram 
was an hyperbola, and if the law of absorption was as inferred. How 
accurately it does so is shown in Curve 1, Fig. 5. 

When the observations for iron, and for felt and iron, are similarly 
plotted (Curves 2 and 3, Fig. 5), the lines are not straight, but 
strongly curved upward, indicating that the corresponding curves 
in the preceding diagram were not hyperbolas, and that the law of 











































A 








■ » • ^ 




,^1 


























2 












*\a 































Digitized by 



Google 



THE INSULATION OF SOUND 258 

constant coefficient did not hold. This must be explained in one or 
the other of two ways. Either there was some by-pass for the sound, 
or the efficiency of each succeeding unit of construction was less. 

The by-pass as a possible explanation can be quickly disposed of. 
Take, for example, the extreme case, that for felt and iron, and make 
the extreme assumption that with the completed series of six screens 
all the sound has come by some by-pass, the surrounding walls, the 
foundations, the ceiling, or by some solid connection from the inner- 
most to the outermost sheet. A calculation based on these assump- 
tions gives a plot whose curvature is entirely at the lower end and 
bears no relationship to the observed values. In the other case, that 
of the iron only, a similar calculation gives a similar result; more- 
over, the much lower limit to which the felt and iron screens reduced 
the sound wholly eliminates any by-pass action as a vital factor in 
the iron-only experiment. 

The other explanation is not merely necessary by elimination, 
but is dynamically rational. The screen walls such as here tested, 
as well as the screen walls in the actual construction described by 
way of introduction, do not act by absorption, as in the case of the 
felt; do not act by a process which is complete at the point, but 
rather by a process which in the first screen may be likened to re- 
flection, and in the second and subsequent screens by a process which 
may be more or less likened to reflection, but which being in a con- 
fined space reacts on the screen or screens which have preceded it. 
In fact, the process must be regarded not as a sequence of inde- 
pendent steps or a progress of an independent action, but as that of 
a structure which must be considered dynamically as a whole. 

When the phenomenon is one of pure absorption, as in felt, it is 
possible to express by a simple formula the intensity of the sound 1, 
at any distance x, in terms of the initial intensity Iq, 

I = I Rk- 

where R represents the factor of surface discontinuity, and k the 
ratio in which the intensity is reduced in a unit distance. In the case 
of the felt tested, R is .485 and k is 3;53, the distance into the 
felt being measured in inches. As an application of this formula, 
one may compute the thickness of felt which would entirely ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



254 THE INSULATION OF SOUND 

tinguish a sound of the intensity of ordinary speech, — 10.4 inches. 
It is not possible to express by such a formula the transmission of 
sound through either of the more complex structures. However, it 
is possible to extrapolate empirically and show that 10.4 inches of 
neither would accomplish this ideal result, although they are both 
far superior to felt for thicknesses up to three inches in one case and 
five and one-half inches in the other. 

A number of other experiments were tried during this preliminary 
stage of the investigation, such, for example, as increasing the 
distance between the screen walls, but it is not necessary to recount 
them here. Enough has already been given to show that a method 
had been developed for accurately measuring the insulating value of 
structures; more would but confuse the purpose. At this point the 
apparatus was improved, the method recast, and the investigation 
begun anew, thenceforward to deal only with standard forms of 
construction, and for sounds, not of one pitch only, but for the 
whole range of the musical scale. 



Digitized by 



Google 



11 

WHISPERING GALLERIES 

It is probable that all existing whispering galleries, it is certain that 
the six more famous ones, are accidents; it is equally certain that all 
could have been predetermined without difficulty, and like most 
accidents could have been improved upon. That these six, the 
Dome of St. Paul's Cathedral in London, Statuary Hall in the Capi- 
tol at Washington, the vases in the Salle des Cariatides in the Louvre 
in Paris, St. John Lateran in Rome, The Ear of Dionysius at Syra- 
cuse, and the Cathedral of Girgenti, are famous above others is in a 
measure due to some incident of place or association. Four are fa- 
mous because on the great routes of tourist travel, one because of 
classical traditions, and one, in an exceedingly inaccessible city and 
itself still more inaccessible, through a curious story perpetuated by 
Sir John W. Herschel in the Encyclopedia Metropolitana. However, 
all show the phenomenon in a striking manner and merit the interest 
which they excite, an interest probably enhanced by the mystery 
attaching to an unpremeditated event in the five more modern cases, 
and none the less enhanced in the other by the tradition of its inten- 
tional design and as evidence of a "lost art." 

The whispering gallery in the Capitol at Washington is of the 
simplest possible type. 

The Capitol as first built was but the central portion of the present 
building, the Senate Chamber and the Hall of the House of Repre- 
sentatives being at that time immediately adjacent to the rotunda. 
With the admission of new states, and with the general increase in 
population, the Senate and the House outgrew their quarters, and in 
1851 the great wings which now complete the building were con- 
structed for their accommodation. The old Hall of the House, which 
in its day must have been acoustically an exceedingly poor assembly 
room, was transformed into the present Hall of Statues and became, 
or rather remained, one of the most perfect of whispering galleries. 

The ceiling of the Hall of Statues, with the exception of a small 
circular skylight, is a portion of an exact sphere with its center very 

265 



Digitized by 



Google 






I 

if 

3 

i 



o 

s 



Digitized by 



Google 



WHISPERING GALLERIES 257 

nearly at head level. As shown in the illustrations the ceiling is cof- 
fered. As originally constructed, and as it remained until 1901, the 
ceiling was perfectly smooth, being of wood, papered and painted in 
a manner to represent coffering. In 1901, a fire in the Chamber of 
the Supreme Court, also in the Capitol, led to a general overhauling 
of the building, and among other dangerous constructions the ceiling 
of wood in the Hall of Statues was replaced by a fireproof construc- 
tion of steel and plaster. Instead of being merely painted, the new 
ceiling had recessed panels with mouldings and ribs in relief 
(Fig. 1). In consequence of this construction, the whispering 
gallery lost a large part of its unique quality. 

During the years preceding the remodeling of the ceiling, the 
whispering gallery had been of great interest to tourists and deep 
hollows were worn in the marble tile where the observers stood. The 
experiment was usually tried in either one of two ways. The visitor 
to the gallery was placed at the center of curvature of the ceiling and 
told to whisper, when the slightest sounds were returned to him 
from the ceiling. The effect was much more striking than one would 
suppose from this simple description. The slight lapse of time re- 
quired for the sound to travel to the ceiling and back, together with 
one's keen sense of direction, gave the effect of an invisible and mock- 
ing presence. Or the guide would place the tourists at symmetrical 
points on either side of the center, when they could with the help of 
the ceiling whisper to each other across distances over which they 
could not be heard directly. The explanation of this particular 
whispering gallery is exceedingly simple. 

Speech, whether whispered or full toned, consists of waves or 
trains of waves of greatly varied character. The study, to its last 
refinement, of whispering gallery phenomena involves a considera- 
tion of this complicated character of speech, but a rough study, and 
one which serves most purposes, can be made by following the path 
and the transformation of a single wave. This can be illustrated by 
two series of photographs. In the one (Fig. 2), the wave is shown in 
the different stages of its advance outward, — spherical, except 
where it strikes the floor, the wall, or the repressed transverse arch 
of the ceiling. In the second series of photographs (Fig. 8), the 
wave has struck the spherical ceiling everywhere at the same instant, 



Digitized by 



Google 



o 2 



Digitized by 



Google 



WHISPERING GALLERIES 259 

and, reversed in direction, gains in intensity as it gathers together 
toward the point from which it issued. The sound reflected from 
the other surfaces may be seen dividing and subdividing in multiple 
reflection and losing in intensity, while the sound reflected from the 
spherical ceiling gains through its rapid convergence. 

These and other similar photographs used in this investigation 
were taken in a small sectional model, one-sixteenth of an inch to 
the foot in scale, made of plaster of Paris or of other convenient ma- 
terial, and the impulsive report or wave was produced either by the 
explosion of fulminate of mercury or directly by an electric spark. 
The flash by which the exposure was taken had a duration of less 
than a millionth of a second. It is wholly unnecessary for the pur- 
poses of this present discussion to go into the details of this process. 
It is sufficient to state that the illustrations are actual photographs 
of real sound-waves in the air and reproduce not merely the main 
but the subordinate phenomena. 

In citing this gallery in an article on Whispering Galleries in Stur- 
gis' Dictionary of Architecture, the writer made the statement that 
"The ceiling, painted so that it appears deeply panelled, is smooth. 
Had the ceiling been panelled the reflection would have been irregu- 
lar and the effect very much reduced." A year or so after this was 
written the fire in the Capitol occurred, and in order to preserve the 
whispering gallery, which had become an object of unfailing interest 
to visitors to the Capitol, the new ceiling was made "to conform 
within a fraction of an inch" to the dimensions of the ceiling which 
it replaced. Notwithstanding this care, the quality of the room 
which had long made it the best and the best known of whispering 
galleries was in large measure lost. Since then this occurrence has 
been frequently cited as another of the mysteries of architectural 
acoustics and a disproof of the possibilities of predicting such phe- 
nomena. As a matter of fact, it was exactly the reverse. Only the part 
between the panels was reproduced in the original dimensions of the 
dome. The ceiling was no longer smooth, the staff was panelled in 
real recess and relief, and the result but confirmed the statement 
recorded nearly two years before in the Dictionary of Architecture. 

The loss of this fine whispering gallery has at least some compen- 
sation in giving a convincing illustration, not merely of the condi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



260 WHISPERING GALLERIES 

tions which make towards excellence in the phenomenon, but also of 
the conditions which destroy it. The effect of the paneling is obvi- 
ous. Each facet on the complex ceiling is the source of a wavelet and 
as these facets are of different depths the resulting wavelets do not 
conspire to form the single focusing wave that results from a per- 
fectly smooth dome. In a measure of course in this particular case 
the wavelets do conspire, for the reflecting surfaces are systemati- 
cally placed and at one or the other of two or three depths. The dis- 
persion of the sound, and the destruction of the whispering gallery is, 
therefore, not complete. 

An instructive parallel may be drawn between acoustical and 
optical mirrors: 

Almost any wall-surface is a much more perfect reflector of 
sound than the most perfect silver mirror is to light. In the former 
case, the reflection is over 96 per cent, in the latter case rarely 
over 90. 

On the surfaces of the two mirrors scratches to produce equally 
injurious effects must be comparable in their dimensions to the 
lengths of the waves reflected. Audible sounds have wave lengths 
of from half an inch to sixty feet; visible light of from one forty- 
thousandth to one eighty-thousandth of an inch. Therefore while 
an optical mirror can be scratched to the complete diffusion of the 
reflected light by irregularities of microscopical dimensions, an 
acoustical mirror to be correspondingly scratched must be broken 
by irregularities of the dimensions of deep coffers, of panels, of 
engaged columns or of pilasters. 

Moreover, just as remarkable optical phenomena are produced 
when the scratches on a mirror are parallel, equal, equal spaced, or of 
equal depth, as in mother of pearl, certain bird feathers, and in the 
optical grating, so also are remarkable acoustical phenomena pro- 
duced when, as is usually the case in architectural construction, the 
relief and recess are equal, equally spaced, or of equal depth. The 
panels in the dome of the Hall of Statues of course diminish to- . 
ward the apex of the dome and are thus neither equal nor equally 
spaced, but horizontally they are and produce corresponding phe- 
nomena. The full details of these effects are a matter of common 
knowledge in Physics but are not within the scope of the present 



Digitized by 



Google 



WHISPERING GALLERIES 261 

discussion. It is sufficient to say that the general result is a disper- 
sion or a distortion in the form of the focus and that the general 
effect is to greatly reduce the efficiency of the whispering gallery, 
but to by no means wholly destroy it, as would be the case with 
complete irregularity. 

By the term whispering gallery is usually understood a room, 
either artificial or natural, so shaped that faint sounds can be heard 
across extraordinary distances. For this the Hall of Statues was ill- 
adapted, partly because of a number of minor circumstances, but 
primarily because a spherical surface is accurately adapted only to 
return the sound directly upon itself. When the two points between 
which the whisper is to be conveyed are separated, the correct form 
of reflecting surface is an ellipsoid having the two points as foci. 
When the two points are near together, the ellipsoid resembles more 
and more a sphere, and the latter may be regarded as the limiting 
case when the two points coincide. On the other hand, when the 
two foci are very far apart the available part of the ellipsoid near one 
of the foci resembles more and more a paraboloid, and this may be 
regarded as the other extreme limiting case when one of the foci is at 
an infinite or very great distance. I know of no building a consider- 
able portion of whose wall or ceiling surface is part of an exact ellip- 
soid of revolution, but the great Mormon Tabernacle in Salt Lake 
City is a near approximation. Plans of this remarkable building do 
not exist, for it was laid out on the ground without the aid of formal 
drawings soon after the settlers had completed their weary pilgrim- 
age across the Utah desert and settled in their isolated valley. It was 
built without nails, which were not to be had, and held together 
merely by wooden pins and tied with strips of buffalo hide. Not- 
withstanding this construction, and notwithstanding the fact that it 
spans 250 feet in length, and 150 feet in breadth, and is without any 
interior columns of any sort, it has been free from the necessity of 
essential repair for over fifty years. As the photograph (Fig. 5) 
shows, taken at the time of building, the space between the ceiling 
and the roof is a wooden bridge truss construction. These photo- 
graphs, given by the elders of the church, are themselves inter- 
esting considering the circumstances under which they were taken, 
the early date and the remote location. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 4. Exterior, Mormon Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, Utah. 



Fig. 5. Photograph showing Construction, Mormon Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, Utah. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 6 



Digitized by 



Google 



264 WHISPERING GALLERIES 

It is difficult for an interior photograph of a smooth ceiling to give 
an impression of its shape. An idea of the shape of the interior of the 
Tabernacle may be obtained, however, from a photograph of its ex- 
terior. It obviously somewhat resembles an ellipsoid of revolution. 
It is equally obvious that it is not exactly that. Nevertheless there 
are two points between which faint sounds are carried with remark- 
able distinctness, — the reader's desk and the front of the balcony in 
the rear. 

The essential geometrical property of an ellipsoid of revolution is 
that lines drawn to any point of the surface from the two foci make 
equal angles with the surface. It follows that sound diverging 
from one focus will be reflected toward the other. The preceding 
photographs (Fig. 6) show the progress of a sound-wave in the 
model of an idealized whispering gallery of this type in which the 
reflecting surface is a portion of a true ellipsoid of revolution. 

The most notable whispering gallery of this type is that described 
by Sir John Herschel in one of the early scientific encyclopedias, the 
Encyclopedia Metropolitana as follows; 

In the Cathedral of Girgenti in Sicily, the slightest whisper is borne with 
perfect distinctness from the great western floor to the cornice behind the 
high altar, a distance of 250 feet. By a most unlucky coincidence the pre- 
cise focus of divergence at the former station was chosen for the place of the 
confessional. Secrets never intended for the public ear thus became known, 
to the dismay of the confessor and the scandal of the people, by the resort 
of the curious to the opposite point, which seems to have been discovered 
by accident. . . . 

Aside from the great distance between the foci, the circumstances 
related had many elements of improbability and the final discussion 
of this subject was postponed from year to year in the hope that the 
summer's work, which has usually been devoted to the study of Eu- 
ropean auditoriums, would carry the writer near Girgenti, an inter- 
esting but rather inaccessible city on the southwestern coast of 
Sicily. Finally, failing any especially favorable opportunity, a flying 
trip was made from the north of Europe with the study of this gallery 
and of the Ear of Dionysius at Syracuse as the sole objective. On 
the way down the perplexity of the case was increased by finding in 
Baedeker the statement that there is a noteworthy whispering gal* 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 7. Interior, Cathedral of Girgenti, Sicily. 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 WHISPERING GALLERIES 

lery between the west entrance of the Cathedral and "the steps of 
the high altar/* Such a whispering gallery is wholly inconceivable. 
The facts showed a whispering gallery between the foci as described 
by Herschel, although the accompanying story is rendered improb- 
able by the extreme inaccessibility of the more remote focus, and its 
very conspicuous position. Nor is the distance so great as stated by 
Herschel, being a little over 100 feet instead of 250 feet. However, 
the interest in this whispering gallery arises not because of any inci- 
dent attending its discovery, but because it illustrates, albeit rather 
crudely, the form of surface giving the best results for whispering 
between two very widely separated points. 

As already stated the strictly correct form of surface for a whisper- 
ing gallery is an ellipsoid of revolution whose foci coincide with the 
two points between which there is to be communication. In the 
whispering gallery in the Cathedral of Girgenti (Fig. 7), the focusing 
surface consists of a quarter of a sphere prolonged in the shape of a 
half cylinder forming the ceiling over the chancel. This is obviously 
not a true paraboloid, and, such as it is, it is interrupted by an arch 
of slight reveal where the cylinder joins the sphere; moreover, the 
two points of observation do not lie on the axis of revolution as they 
should for the best result. But a hemisphere and a continuing cylin- 
der make a fair approach to a portion of a paraboloid; and while the 
two points of observation are not on the axis of revolution, they are 
on a secondary axis, the station by the door being below, and the 
focus in the chancel being at a corresponding distance above the 
principal axis. 

In all the preceding galleries, there is but a single reflection be- 
tween the radiant and the receiving foci. There are others in which 
there are several such reflections. Well-known examples are the 
church of St. John Lateran in Rome and in the Salle des Cariatides 
in the Louvre. 

In the Church of St. John Lateran (Fig. 8), each bay in the great 
side aisles is a square having a ceiling which is approximately a por- 
tion of a sphere. At best, the approximation of the ceiling to a sphere 
is not close and the ceiling varies from bay to bay, not intentionally 
but merely as a matter of variation in construction. In one bay more 
closely than in the others the ceiling, regarded as an acoustical 



Digitized by 



Google 



V 

a 
3 



.3 

a 

3 






3 
M 






Digitized by 



Google 



268 WHISPERING GALLERIES 

mirror, has its foci nearly at head level. In consequence of this, two 
observers standing at opposite corners can whisper to each other 
with the ceiling as a reflecting surface. The curvature even in this 
bay is not ideal for the production of a whispering gallery, so that 
thus used the gallery is far from notable. It so happens, however, 
that the great square columns which form the corners of each bay 
have, instead of sharp corners, a reentering cove or fluting in the arc 
of a circle and over twelve inches across in opening. If the observers, 
instead of attempting to speak directly to the ceiling, turn back to 
back and face the columns standing close to them, this great fluting 
gathers the sound from the speaker and directs it in a concentrated 
cone to the ceiling; this returning from the ceiling to the opposite 
angle of the bay is concentrated by the opposite fluting on the other 
observer. In more scientific language, borrowed from the nomencla- 
ture of the makers of optical instruments, the flutings increase the 
angular aperture of the system. 

An almost exact duplicate of this whispering gallery is to be found 
in the vestibule of the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers in Paris. 
This vestibule, itself also an exhibition room but called since the dis- 
covery of its peculiar property La Salle-Echo, is square with rounded 
corners and a low domical ceiling. Here, as in St. John Lateran, the 
observers face the corners and the whisper undergoes three reflec- 
tions between the foci. The fact that the two observers are back to 
back diminishes the sound which would otherwise pass directly be- 
tween them and makes the whispering gallery more pronounced and 
the phenomenon much more striking. In both galleries it is the cus- 
tom for the observers to take their positions in a somewhat random 
manner. The correct position is at a distance from the concave 
cylindrical surface a little less than half the radius of curvature. 

In these whispering galleries the surfaces are not theoretically cor- 
rect and the phenomenon is far from perfect. This failure of loud- 
ness and distinctness in most of the multiple reflection galleries arises 
not from any progressive loss in the many reflections, for the loss of 
energy in reflection is practically negligible. Indeed, given ideally 
shaped surfaces, multiple reflection whispering galleries are capable 
of producing exceptional effect; for if two of the surfaces be very 
near the observers they may, even though they themselves be of 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig, 9, Salle des Cariatides, the Louvre, Paris. 



Digitized by 



Google 



270 WHISPERING GALLERIES 

small dimensions, gather into the phenomenon very large portions of 
the emergent and of the focused whisper. In both St. John Lateran 
and La Salle-Echo, the condensing mirrors are cylindrical and gather 
the sound horizontally only. In the vertical plane, they are wholly 
without effect. 

It is not difficult to determine the correct forms for the extreme 
mirrors. If the ceiling be flat, the reflecting surfaces near the two 
observers should be parabolic with the axis of the paraboloid di- 
rected toward the center of the ceiling, the correct position for the 
mouth of the speaker and the ear of the auditor being at the foci of 
the two paraboloids. If the ceiling be curved, the simplest design is 
when the first and last reflectors are portions of an ellipsoid, each 
with one focus at the center of the ceiling and the other at one of the 
foci of the system as a whole. Finally, if the ceiling be curved, there 
is still another theoretical shape for the end reflectors, determined by 
the curvature of the ceiling; in this case the ideal surface is not a 
conic surface, nor otherwise geometrically simple, but is such that the 
converging power of the end mirror with half the converging power 
of the middle mirror will give a plane wave. 

It is obvious that the accurate fulfilling of these conditions by acci- 
dent is improbable, but they are at least approached in the whisper- 
ing gallery in the Salle des Cariatides in the Louvre (Fig. 9). Along 
the axis of the room, and at no inconsiderable distance apart, are two 
large shallow antique vases. A whisper uttered a little within the rim 
of one is partially focused by it, is still further focused by the barrel- 
shaped ceiling, and is brought to a final focus symmetrically within 
the rim of the further vase. It is evident that the effect is dependent 
on only a portion of each vase, but this portion satisfies the necessary 
conditions to a first approximation in both longitudinal and in trans- 
verse section. When the correct foci are found this whispering gallery 
is very distinct in its enunciation. It would be even more distinct if 
the ceiling of the room were slightly lower, or, keeping the height the 
same, if its radius of curvature were slightly greater. It would be 
still better if the vases were slightly deeper. 

The whispering gallery which has received the greatest amount of 
discussion, and a discussion curiously inadequate in view of the emi- 
nence of the authorities engaged, is the circular gallery at the base of 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 10. Section through Dome of St. Paul's Cathedral, London. 



Digitized by 



Google 



272 WHISPERING GALLERIES 

the dome of St. Paul's Cathedral in London. This gallery was first 
brought into scientific consideration by Sir John Herschel, who in 
describing it stated that "the faintest sound is faithfully conveyed 
from one side to the other of the dome, but is not heard at any inter- 
mediate point.'' According to Lord Rayleigh, whose reference, how- 
ever, I am unable to verify, and either in page or edition must be in 
error, an early explanation of this was by Sir George Airy, the Astron- 
omer Royal, who " ascribed it to the reflection from the surface of the 
dome overhead." Airy could have been led into such error only by 
the optical illusion whereby a dome seen from within seems lower 
than it is in reality. A moment's inspection of the preceding 
illustration (Fig. 10), which the Clerk of the Works kindly had re- 
produced from an old engraving in the possession of the cathedral, 
shows that this explanation would be incorrect. The guide who does 
the whispering usually occupies the position marked "A"; the other 
focus is in the position marked " B." The focus accounted for by Airy 
would be high up in the dome. Lord Rayleigh taking exception both 
to the statement of fact by Herschel and the explanation by Airy 
wrote "I am disposed to think that the principal phenomenon is to be 
explained somewhat differently. The abnormal loudness with which 
a whisper is heard is not confined to the position diametrically oppo- 
site to that occupied by the whisperer, and therefore, it would appear, 
does not depend materially upon the symmetry of the dome. The 
whisper seems to creep around the gallery horizontally, not neces- 
sarily along the shorter arc, but rather along that arc toward which 
the whisperer faces. This is in consequence of the very unequal 
audibility of a whisper in front of and behind the speaker, a phe- 
nomenon which may easily be observed in the open air." Lord 
Rayleigh's explanation of the phenomenon in this case as due to the 
"creeping" of the sound around the circular wall immediately sur- 
rounding the narrow gallery accessible to visitors is unquestionably 
correct. It is but another way of phrasing this explanation to say 
that the intensification of the sound is due to its accumulation when 
turned on itself by the restraining wall. It is obvious that the main 
intensification arises from the curved wall returning on itself. Verti- 
cally, the sound spreads almost as it would were the curved wall 
developed on a plane. This vertical spreading of the sound is in a 



Digitized by 



Google 



WHISPERING GALLERIES 273 

measure restricted by the circular floor gallery and by the overhang- 
ing ledge of the cornice moulding. The cornice can be made to con- 
tribute most to the effect by making the curve of its lines below the 
principal projecting ledge, that which corresponds to the drip mould- 
ing of an exterior cornice, relatively smooth and simple. 

But even Lord Rayleigh's explanation does not fully account for 
the truly remarkable qualities of this whispering gallery. There are 
many circular walls as high, as hard, and as smooth as that in St. 
Paul's Gallery but in which the whispering gallery is not to be com- 
pared in quality. The rear walls of many semi-circular auditoriums 
satisfy these conditions without producing parallel results, for ex- 
ample in the Fogg lecture-room at Harvard University before it was 
altered, and in the auditorium just completed at Cornell University. 
A feature of the whispering gallery in St. Paul's, contributing not a 
little to its efficiency, is the inclination of its wall, less noticeable per- 
haps in the actual gallery than in the architectural " Section." The 
result is that all the sound which passes the quarter point of the 
gallery, the point half way around between the foci, is brought down 
to the level of the observer, and, combined with the reflection from 
the ledge which constitutes the broad seat running entirely around 
the gallery, confines and intensifies the sound. This feature is of 
course of unusual occurrence. 

It may not be out of place to give the dimensions of this gallery. 
The distance from focus to focus, if indeed in this type of gallery 
they can be called foci, is 150 feet. The wall has a height of 20 feet, 
and is not moulded in panels as shown in the engraving, but is smooth 
except for eight shallow niches. While the inclination of the wall in 
the gallery of St. Paul's is a contributing factor, an even more efficient 
wall would have been one very slightly, indeed almost imperceptibly, 
curved, the section being the arc of a circle struck from the center of 
the dome on a level with the observers. Such a gallery will be in the 
dome of the Missouri State Capitol, a gallery unique in this respect 
that it will have been planned intentionally by the architects. 1 

A discussion of noted whispering galleries would not be complete 

1 The building is now complete One of the architects, Mr. Edgerton Swartwout, reports 
that the whispering gallery in the dome exactly fulfills Professor Sabine's prediction, and 
has been the cause of much curiosity and astonishment. — Editor. 



Digitized by 



Google 



274 



WHISPERING GALLERIES 




without mention of the famous Ear of Dionysius at Syracuse. A 
mile out from the present city of Syracuse, on the slope of the terrace 

occupied by the Neapolis of 
the ancient city, are the re- 
mains of a quarry entered 
on one side on the level but 
cut back to perpendicular 
walls from a hundred to a 
hundred and thirty feet in 
height. This old quarry, 
now overgrown by a wild 
and luxurious vegetation, is 
known as the Latomia del 
Paradiso. At its western 
angle is a great grotto, 
shaped somewhat like an 
open letter S 9 210 feet in 
winding length, 74 feet high, 
35 feet in width at the base 
and narrowing rapidly to- 
ward the top. The inner- 
most end of this grotto is 
nearly circular, and the 
rear wall slopes forward as 
it rises preserving in revolu- 
tion the same contour that 
characterizes the two sides 
throughout their length. 
The top is a narrow channel 
of a uniform height and but 
a few feet in width. At the 
innermost end of this chan- 
nel, at the apex of the half 
cone which forms the inner 
end of the grotto, is a verti- 




Fig. 11. Plan and Elevation, with Sectional 
Indication, of Ear of Dionysius, Syracuse, 
Sicily. 



cal opening four or five feet square, scarcely visible, certainly not 
noticeable, from below. This opening is into a short passageway 



Digitized by 



Google 



Fig. 12. View of Outer Opening, the So-called Ear of Dionysius, Syracuse, Sicily. 



Digitized by 



Google 



276 WHISPERING GALLERIES 

which leads to a flight of steps and thence to the ground above (Fig. 
11). The grotto is noted for two somewhat inconsistent acoustical 
properties. When being shown the grotto from below, one's atten- 
tion is called to its very remarkable reverberation. When above, 
one's attention is called to the ability to hear what is said at any 
point on the floor. 

It is related that Tyrant Dionysius, the great builder of Syracuse, 
so designed his prisons that at certain concealed points of observation 
he could not merely see everything that was done, but, through re- 
markable acoustical design, could hear every word which was spoken, 
even when whispered only (Fig. 12). There is a tradition, dating 
back however only to the sixteenth century, that this grotto, since 
then called the Ear of Dionysius, was such a prison. Quarries were 
plausible prisons in which captives of war might have been com- 
pelled to work, and there are, surrounding this quarry, traces of a 
wall and sentry houses, but there is no direct evidence associating 
this grotto with Dionysius, unless indeed one regards its interesting 
acoustical properties taken in connection with classical tradition as 
such evidence. 

In its acoustical property this grotto resembles more a great ear 
trumpet than a whispering gallery in the ordinary sense of the word. 
It is, of course, in no sense a focusing whispering gallery of the type 
represented by the vases and curved ceiling in the Louvre. It more 
nearly resembles the gallery in St. Paul's Cathedral, but the sound 
is not spoken close to the deflecting wall, one of the essentially 
characteristic conditions of a true whispering gallery of that type, 
and the wall is not continuously concave. In fact, in other ways also 
its acoustical property is not very notable, for distinctness of enun- 
ciation is blurred by excessive reverberation. 

It is conceivable that whispering galleries should be of use and 
purposeful, but it is more probable that they will remain architectural 
curiosities. When desired, they may be readily woven into the design 
of many types of monumental buildings. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX 

NOTE ON MEASUREMENTS OF THE INTENSITY OF SOUND AND 
ON THE REACTION OF THE ROOM UPON THE SOUND 

Uuring one of the early lectures given at the Sorbonne in the spring 
of 1917, Professor Sabine referred to the difficulties inherent in ex- 
periments on sound intensities. The following is a free translation 
from the notes, in French, which he prepared for this lecture: 

In no other doman have physicists disregarded the conditions in- 
troduced by the surrounding materials, but in acoustics these do not 
seem to have received the least attention. If measurements are made 
in the open air, over a lawn, as was done by Lord Rayleigh in certain 
experiments, is due consideration given to the fact that the surface 
has an absorbing power for sound of from 40 to 60 per cent ? Or, if in- 
side a building, as in Wien's similar experiments, is allowance made 
for the fact that the walls reflect from 93 to 98 per cent of the sound? 
We need not be surprised if the results of such experiments differ 
from one another by a factor of more than a hundred. 

It would be no more absurd to carry out photometric measure- 
ments in a room where the walls, ceiling, and even the floor and tables 
consisted of highly polished mirrors, than to make measurements on 
the intensity, or on the quantitative analysis of sound, under the con- 
ditions in which such experiments have almost invariably been exe- 
cuted. It is not astonishing that we have been discouraged by the 
results, and that we may have despaired of seeing acoustics occupy 
the position to which it rightly belongs among the exact sciences. 

The length of the waves of light is so small compared with the 
dimensions of a photometer that we do not need to concern ourselves 
with the phenomena of interference while measuring the intensity of 
light. In the case of sound, however, it must be quite a different 
matter. 

In order to show this in a definite manner, I have measured the 
intensity of the sound in all parts of a certain laboratory room. For 
simplicity, a symmetrical room was selected, and the source, giving a 
very pure tone, was placed in the center. It was found that, near the 

S77 



Digitized by 



Google 



278 APPENDIX 

source, even at the source itself, the intensity was in reality less than 
at a distance of five feet from the source. And yet, the clever experi- 
menter, Wien, and the no less skillful psychologists Wundt and 
M iinsterberg have assumed under similar conditions the law of varia- 
tion of intensity with the inverse square of the distance. It makes 
one wonder how they were able to draw any conclusions from their 
measurements. 

Not only do the walls reflect sound in such a way that it becomes 
many times more intense than it otherwise would be; and not only 
does the interference of sound exist to such an extent that we find 
regions of maximum and regions of minimum of sound in a room; but 
even the total quantity of sound emitted by the source itself may be 
greatly affected by its position with regard to the interference system 
of the room. 

This will be more readily understood if illustrated by an incident 
drawn from the actual experiments. A special sort of felt, of strong 
absorbing power, was brought into the room and placed on the floor. 
The effect was two-fold. First, the introduction of the felt increased 
the absorption of the sound, and thus tended to diminish the total 
intensity of sound in the room, theoretically to a third of its previous 
value. But actually it had the contrary effect; the sound became 
much louder than before. The felt was so placed on the floor as to 
shift the interference system in the room, and thus the reaction of the 
sound vibrations in the room upon the source itself was modified. 
The source was a vibrating diaphragm situated at the base of a res- 
onating chamber. In its first location, the source was at a node of 
condensation, where the motion of the sound which had accumulated 
in the room coincided with that of the diaphragm. It was thus diffi- 
cult for the diaphragm to impart any additional motion to the air. 
In the second case, however, the vibrations of the two were opposite; 
the diaphragm was able to push upon the air, and although the am- 
plitude of its motion was somewhat reduced by the reaction of the air 
upon it, the emitted sound was louder. When under these conditions 
the diaphragm was forced to vibrate with the same amplitude as at 
first, the emitted sound became eight times louder. 

Naturally these two positions in the interference system were de- 
signedly selected, and they show exceptional reactions on the source. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX 279 

However, in the case of a very complex sound, a comparable diver- 
gence in the reaction of the room on the different components of the 
sound would be probable. 

It is thus necessary in quantitative research in acoustics to take 
account of three factors: the effect of reflection by the walls on the 
increase of the total intensity of sound in the room; the effect of inter- 
ference in greatly altering the distribution of this intensity; and the 
effect of the reaction of the sound vibrations in a room upon the 
source itself. . . . 

In choosing a source of sound, it has usually been assumed that a 
source of fixed amplitude was also a source of fixed intensity, e. g., a 
vibrating diaphragm or a timing fork electrically maintained. On the 
contrary, this is just the sort of source whose emitting power varies 
with the position in which it is placed in the room. On the other 
hand, an organ pipe is able within certain limits to adjust itself auto- 
matically to the reaction due to the interference system. We may 
say, simply, that the best standard source of sound is one in which the 
greatest percentage of emitted energy takes the form of sound. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PRINTED AT 

THE HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

CAMBRIDGE, MASS., U.S.A. 



WAP 2 3 1922 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 






Digitized by 



Google 



u? 



f 



mm 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



