Historic,  Archive  Document 

Do  not  assume  content  reflects  current 
scientific  knowledge,  policies,  or  practices. 


aSTc  H33 

. US' 
scs  > f 

^NATIONAL 
ENGINEERING 
HANDBOOK 


r 


U.S.DEPT.CF 

>J  AT"; 


n 


ULTURE 

3 -,pY 


SECTION  20 


SPECIFICATIONS  FOR 

| 

.CONSTRUCTION  CONTRACTS 


Chapter  1 
DISCUSSION 

Chapter  2 

GUIDE  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATIONS 
Chapter  3 

GUIDE  MATERIAL  SPECIFICATIONS 


. HV 

* SOIL  CONSERVATION  SERVICE  ' V 

UNITED  STATES  DEPARTMENT  OF  AGRICULTURE  *l~  3-a- 


V 


, \ 
4 


NATIONAL  ENGINEERING  HANDBOOK 


SECTION  20 

SPECIFICATIONS  FOR  CONSTRUCTION  CONTRACTS 
CONTENTS 

Subject  Page 

CHAPTER  1.  DISCUSSION 

General  1-1 

Terms  and  Definitions  1-1 

Applicability  1-2 

Guide  Specifications  1-3 

Guide  Construction  Specifications  1-3 

Guide  Material  Specifications  1-3 

Standard  Specifications  1-4 

Compilation  1-4 

Numbering  1-4 

Identifying  1-4 

Interim  Standard  Specifications  1-5 

Bid  Schedule  1-6 

Designating  the  Items  of  Work  1-6 

Pay  Items  1-7 

Example  1-1  1-7 

Contract  Specifications  1-8 

Preparing  Construction  Details  1-8 

Selecting  Appropriate  Standard  Specifications  1-11 

Procedure  for  Items  Not  Covered  by  Standard  Specifications  1-12 

CHAPTER  2.  GUIDE  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATIONS 

Site  Preparation 

1.  Clearing  2-1 

2.  Clearing  and  Grubbing  2-7 

3.  Structure  Removal  2-11 

8.  Mobilization  2-14-1 

10.  Water  for  Construction  2-14-5 

Foundation  Work 

11.  Removal  of  Water  2-15 

12.  Relief  Wells  2-19 

13.  Piling  2-27 

14.  Pressure  Grouting  2-36-1 

Earthwork 

21.  Excavation  2-37 

22. 

23.  Earth  Fill  2-47 


NEH  5/3/71  (Notice  20-32) 


Subject 


Page 


24.  Drain  Fill  2-59 

25.  Rock  Fill  2-65 

26.  Salvaging  and  Spreading  Topsoil  2-71 

Concrete  and  Reinforcement 

31.  Concrete  2-75 

32.  Concrete  for  Minor  Structures  2-99 

33.  Pneumatically  Applied  Mortar  2-111 

34.  Steel  Reinforcement  2-123 

Non-Metal  Pipe  Conduits  and  Drains 

41.  Reinforced  Concrete  Pressure  Pipe  Spillway  Conduits  2-131 

42.  Concrete  Pipe  Conduits  and  Drains  2-137 

43.  Clay  Pipe  Conduits  and  Drains  2-149 

44.  Asbestos -Cement  Pipe  Conduits  and  Drains  2-157 

45. 

46.  Tile  Drains  for  Land  Drainage  2-163 

Metal  Pipe  Conduits 

51.  Corrugated  Metal  Pipe  Conduits  2-169 

52.  Steel  Pipe  Conduits  2-175 

Riprap  and  Slope  Protection 

61.  Loose  Rock  Riprap  2-181 

Water  Control  Gates  and  Valves 

71.  Water  Control  Gates  2-187 

Miscellaneous  Structural  Work 

81.  Metal  Fabrication  and  Installation  2-193 

82.  Cleaning  and  Painting  Metal  Work  2-199  j 

83.  Timber  Fabrication  and  Installation  2-209 

84.  Painting  Woodwork  2-215 

Miscellaneous  Construction 

91.  Chain  Link  Fence  2-219 

92.  Farm  Field  Fences  2-223 


CHAPTER  3.  GUIDE  MATERIAL  SPECIFICATIONS 


Foundation  Materials 

511.  Steel  Piles  3-1 

512.  Wood  Piles  3-3 

513.  Precast  Concrete  Piles  3-5 

514.  Cast-in-Place  Concrete  Piles  with  Shells  3-9 

Aggregates  and  Rock 

521.  Aggregates  for  Drain  Fill  and  Filters  3-11 

522.  Aggregate  for  Portland  Cement  Concrete  3-13 

523.  Rock  for  Riprap  3-15 

Concrete  Materials 

531.  Portland  Cement  3-17 

532.  Air -Entraining  Admixtures  3-19 

533.  Water -Reducing  and  Set-Retarding  Admixtures  3-21 

534.  Curing  Compound  (for  Concrete)  3-23 

535.  Preformed  Expansion  Joint  Filler  3-25 

536.  Sealing  Compound  for  Joints  in  Concrete  and 

Concrete  Pipe  3-27 


t 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


Subject 


Page 


537.  Non-Metallic  Waters tops  3-29 

538.  Metal  Waterstops  3-35 

539.  Steel  Reinforcement  3-37 

Non-Metal  Pipe  and  Fittings 

541.  Reinforced  Concrete  Pressure  Pipe  3-39 

542.  Concrete  Culvert  Pipe  3-43 

543.  Concrete  Irrigation  Pipe,  Drainage  Pipe,  and 

Drain  Tile  3-45 

544.  Clay  Pipe  and  Clay  Drain  Tile  3-47 

545.  Asbestos -Cement  Pipe  3-49 

546.  Bituminized  Fiber  Pipe  3-51 

Metal  Pipe  and  Fittings 

551.  Zinc -Coated  Iron  or  Steel  Corrugated  Pipe  3-53 

552.  Aluminum  Corrugated  Pipe  3-55 

553.  Steel  Pipe  and  Fittings  3-57 

554.  Wrought  Iron  Pipe  and  Fittings  3-59 

Water  Control  Gates  and  Valves 

571.  Slide  Gates  (Sluice  Gates),  Metal,  Light  Duty  3-61 

572.  Slide  Gates  (Sluice  Gates),  Metal,  Moderate  Duty  3-65 

573.  Slide  Gates  (Sluice  Gates),  Metal,  Heavy  Duty  3-71 

574.  Flap  Gates,  Metal,  Light  Duty  3-77 

575.  Flap  Gates,  Metal,  Moderate  Duty  3-81 

576.  Flap  Gates,  Metal,  Heavy  Duty  3-85 

577.  Radial  Gates  (Tainter  Gates)  3-89 

Miscellaneous  Structural  Materials 

581.  Metal  3-91 

582.  Galvanizing  3-93 

583.  Coal  Tar -Epoxy  Paint  3-95 

584.  Structural  Timber  and  Lumber  3-103 

585.  Wood  Preservatives  and  Treatment  3-105 

Miscellaneous  Construction  Materials 

591.  Farm  Field  Fencing  Materials  3-107 


NEH  6/1/68 


(Notice  20-23) 


1-1 


NATIONAL  ENGINEERING  HANDBOOK 
SECTION  20 

SPECIFICATIONS  FOR  CONSTRUCTION  CONTRACTS 
CHAPTER  1.  DISCUSSION 
GENERAL 


The  body  of  a construction  contract  consists  of  the  general  provisions, 
bid  schedule,  specifications,  drawings  and,  when  applicable,  general 
conditions,  special  conditions  and  wage  rate  decisions.  The  general 
provisions  are  administrative  and  technical  requirements  that  apply  to 
all  items  of  construction  and  to  all  contracts.  In  SCS  practice  these 
general  provisions  are  furnished  in  preprinted  form  (Standard  Form  23 -A 
or  Form  SCS -43,  as  appropriate).  The  general  conditions  and  special 
conditions  are  administrative  instructions  and  requirements  that  apply 
to  the  specific  contract  and  are  prepared  by  the  responsible  administra- 
tive office.  The  bid  schedule  tabulates  the  items  of  work  for  which 
direct  payment  will  be  made,  shows  the  estimated  quantities  of  work  and 
the  units  of  measurement,  and  provides  space  for  the  entry  of  contract 
prices.  The  specifications  and  drawings  include  the  technical  details 
and  requirements  of  the  contract.  The  office  responsible  for  the  design 
of  the  works  must  concurrently  develop  the  drawings  and  specifications 
and,  in  cooperation  with  the  responsible  administrative  office,  the 
bid  schedule. 

Instructions  for  preparing  construction  drawings  are  contained  in 
Section  6 of  this  handbook  and  in  current  administrative  memorandums. 

It  is  the  purpose  of  this  section  to  establish  national  guide  specifi- 
cations and  procedures  for  preparing  contract  specifications  and  bid 
schedules . 


TERMS  AND  DEFINITIONS 

The  following  terms  and  definitions  are  established  for  use  in  all 
Service  documents,  publications  and  correspondence  relating  to  speci- 
fications for  construction  contracts: 

Construction  specifications  state  the  technical  and  workman- 
ship requirements  for  the  various  operations  required  in  the 
construction  of  the  works,  the  methods  of  measurement  and  the 
bases  of  payments. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-2 


Material  specifications  state  the  quality  of  materials  to 
be  incorporated  in  the  permanent  works . 

Guide  specifications,  containing  optional  clauses  where 
options  are  permissible,  are  issued  by  the  Engineering 
Division  for  use  by  the  states  and  units  as  a basis  for 
the  compilation  of  standard  construction  specifications 
and  standard  material  specifications. 

Standard  specifications  are  compiled  by  the  states  and 
units  through  selection  of  options  from  the  guide  specifi- 
cations, for  use  in  assembling  contract  specifications. 

They  contain  construction  specifications  and  material 
specifications  that  are  applicable  to  all  construction 
work  accomplished  in  the  area  and  are  usually  preprinted 
and  stocked  at  the  appropriate  design  offices. 

Interim  standard  specifications  are  specifications  prepared 
by  the  states  and  units  for  use  in  assembling  contract 
specifications  that  apply  to  construction  items  or  materials 
that  are  not  covered  by  national  guide  specifications. 

Construction  details  are  prepared  by  the  design  office  and 
state  the  special  requirements  peculiar  to  a specific  work 
of  construction.  They  may  take  the  form  of  written  addenda  to 
the  standard  construction  specifications  or  of  notes  on  the 
drawings . 

Contract  specifications  are  the  complete  specifications 
prepared  for  a specific  contract  and  will  normally  consist 
of  an  assembly  of  appropriate  standard  specifications 
supplemented  by  lists  and  descriptions  of  items  of  work 
and  by  construction  details. 

APPLICABILITY 

All  specifications  prepared  by  Service  personnel,  local  sponsoring 
organizations  or  consultants  for  contracts  financed  wholly  or  par- 
tially by  Flood  Prevention  (FP),  Watershed  Protection  and  Flood 
Prevention  (566),  or  Resource  Conservation  and  Development  (RC&D) 
funds,  except  contracts  for  basic  recreation  facilities  or  fencing 
and  seeding  contracts  that  are  not  part  of  the  prime  contract,  must 
conform  to  the  format  and  intent  of  the  guide  specifications  in 
order  to:  (1)  insure  adherence  to  laws  and  regulations;  (2)  prevent 
conflicts  within  the  specifications  and  between  the  specifications 
and  other  contract  requirements ; (3)  prevent  omission  of  essential 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-3 


elements;  (4)  prevent  inclusion  of  extraneous  materials;  (5)  provide 
a uniform  basis  for  interpretation;  and  (6)  insure  uniform  quality 
of  Service  project  works.  Deviation  from  this  procedure  will  be 
allowed  only  when  expressly  approved  by  the  Administrator. 

GUIDE  SPECIFICATIONS 


Guide  specifications  have  been  prepared  for  all  construction  operations 
and  all  construction  materials  normally  required  in  Service  projects. 

Guide  construction  specifications  are  contained  in  Chapter  2.  Guide 
material  specifications  are  contained  in  Chapter  3.  The  guide  specifi- 
cations will  be  modified  by  the  Engineering  Division  whenever  it  appears 
appropriate  to  do  so.  Suggestions  for  changes,  additions,  deletions  or 
corrections  should  be  submitted  to  the  Director  of  the  Engineering 
Division. 

GUIDE  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATIONS 

The  guide  construction  specifications  are  written  in  the  format  prescribed 
for  contract  specifications.  They  contain  optional  clauses  that  may  be 
selected  by  the  specification  writer,  as  needed,  to  adapt  the  standard 
specifications  to  regional  or  local  needs.  Each  of  the  guide  construc- 
tion specifications  is  supplemented  by  instructions  for  its  use.  These 
instructions  state  the  applicability  of  the  specification  and  discuss 
the  items  of  information  that  must  be  included  in  the  contract  specifi- 
cations and  drawings  in  order  to  completely  define  the  specified  item. 

They  also  discuss  the  conditions  under  which  it  may  be  appropriate  to 
use  any  of  the  various  options  listed  in  the  guide  specifications. 

These  supplementary  instructions  are  included  only  for  use  by  design 
personnel  and  will  not  be  included  in  standard  specifications  compiled 
by  use  of  the  guide  specifications. 

GUIDE  MATERIAL  SPECIFICATIONS 

Guide  material  specifications  have  been  prepared  for  those  materials 
whose  quality  must  be  uniform  in  all  areas  of  applicability.  They 
contain  no  optional  clauses  and  are  not  supplemented  by  instructions 
for  use.  Items  of  information  that  must  be  included  in  the  contract 
specifications  in  order  to  completely  describe  the  materials  required 
for  a specific  contract  are  listed  in  the  instructions  for  use  of  the 
construction  specifications  to  which  the  material  specifications  are 
complementary. 

Reference  to  material  specifications  may  be  accomplished  by  statements 
in  standard  specifications  or  in  construction  details  (either  written 
or  noted  in  the  contract  drawings). 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-?^ 


1-4 


STANDARD  SPECIFICATIONS 


Standard  construction  specifications  and  standard  material  specifi- 
cations should  be  compiled  by  all  states  engaged  in  continuing 
programs  of  construction.  In  order  to  attain  the  maximum  possible 
uniformity  in  specifications,  each  Engineering  and  Watershed  Planning 
Unit  shall  coordinate  the  compilation  of  standard  specifications  for 
use  by  the  states  within  its  area  of  responsibility. 

COMPILATION 

A standard  specification  must  conform  verbatim  to  the  parent  guide 
specification  except  that  in  any  clause  for  which  the  guide  specifi- 
cation offers  options  only  one  of  the  options  will  be  included  in 
that  clause  of  the  standard  specification.  The  options  selected 
must  be  compatible  with  one  another  and  with  the  conditions,  materials 
and  methods  prevalent  in  the  area  of  applicability  and  the  require- 
ments of  the  specified  structural  element. 

The  selection  of  more  than  one  option  in  any  clause  of  a specifica- 
tion is  allowable  only  in  the  measurement  and  payment  clauses  of 
certain  specifications  that  are  identified  in  the  instructions  for 
use  of  the  guide  specifications.  When  two  or  more  measurement  and 
payment  options  are  selected  they  shall  be  included  in  the  standard 
specification  as  numbered  methods  (such  as:  "Method  1,"  "Method  2," 

etc. ) . 

NUMBERING 

Each  standard  specification  shall  bear  the  same  number  as  that  of 
the  guide  specification  from  which  it  was  prepared.  When  several 
different  standard  construction  specifications  for  use  in  the  same 
geographical  area  are  prepared  by  selection  of  different  combinations 
of  options  from  the  same  guide  specification,  each  specification 
shall  bear  the  same  number  plus  a distinctive  letter  designation 
(such  as:  31A,  31B,  etc.).  The  date  of  compilation  shall  be  placed 
in  the  lower  right-hand  corner  of  each  page. 

IDENTIFYING 

The  title  of  each  standard  specification  shall  be  the  same  as  that 
of  the  parent  guide  specification  except  that  the  word  "(Guide)" 
shall  be  omitted.  The  word  "standard"  shall  not  be  used  in  the 
title.  The  geographical  area  of  application  of  each  standard  speci- 
fication must  be  identified  at  the  lower  left-hand  corner  of  each 
page  of  the  specification.  The  identifying  symbol  should  consist  of 
"SCS"  followed  by  the  name  of  the  state  or  area  concerned,  such  as: 
"SCS-Idaho,"  "SCS -Corn  Belt,"  "SCS -Northeast ,"  "SCS-Conn.,  R.I.,"  etc. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-5 


INTERIM  STANDARD  SPECIFICATIONS 


States  and  units  may  prepare  interim  standard  specifications  for  items 
not  covered  by  guide  specifications  (such  as  methods  or  materials  unique 
to  a given  locality)  if  there  is  a recurring  need  for  such  items  in 
local  contracts. 

Interim  standard  construction  specifications  must: 

1.  Conform  to  the  format  of  the  guide  specifications; 

2.  Be  numbered  consecutively  starting  with  the  number  200, 
and  be  dated  and  identified  as  prescribed  for  standard 
specifications ; 

3.  Contain  terms  and  definitions  that  are  compatible  with 
those  used  in  the  guide  specifications ; 

4.  Be  concise  and  free  from  ambiguous  clauses;  and, 

5.  Contain  measurement  and  payment  clauses  written  in  the 
same  manner  as  those  contained  in  the  guide  specifications. 

Interim  standard  material  specifications  must: 

1.  Conform  to  the  format  of  the  guide  specifications; 

2.  Be  numbered  consecutively  starting  with  the  number 
300,  and  be  dated  and  identified  as  prescribed  for 
standard  specifications; 

3.  Comply  with  laws  and  regulations  regarding  the  manda- 
tory use  of  Federal  Specifications  and  Standards. 

All  interim  standard  specifications  shall  be  submitted  to  the  Director 
of  the  Engineering  Division  (via  the  responsible  Engineering  and  Water- 
shed Planning  Unit)  for  approval  prior  to  their  use.  When  the  speci- 
fications for  a material  covered  by  an  existing  Federal  Specification 
or  Standard  contain  requirements  other  than  those  included  in  the 
Federal  Specification  or  Standard,  the  responsible  Engineering  and 
Watershed  Planning  Unit  shall  prepare  a written  justification  for  the 
deviation  and  submit  two  copies,  along  with  two  copies  of  the  specifi- 
cation, to  the  Director  of  the  Engineering  Division. 

Interim  standard  specifications  submitted  for  approval  will  be  considered 
for  inclusion  in  the  national  guide  specifications. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-6 


BID  SCHEDULE 

The  bid  schedule  forms  the  basis  for  payments  to  the  contractor  and 
must  list  all  items  of  work  for  which  direct  payment  will  be  made. 
Since  the  efficiency  of  contract  administration  may  be  directly 
affected  by  the  manner  in  which  the  schedule  is  organized,  the 
preparation  of  the  bid  schedule  requires  the  close  cooperation  of 
the  responsible  designer  and  the  responsible  administrative  officer. 
Operating  procedures  must  include  provision  for  administrative 
review  of  the  bid  schedule  in  the  early  stages  of  its  development 
as  well  as  on  completion. 

DESIGNATING  THE  ITEMS  OF  WORK 

Considerable  judgment  based  on  design,  construction  and  contracting 
experience  is  required  to  divide  the  work  into  items  for  inclusion 
in  the  bid  schedule.  On  the  one  hand  the  schedule  must  be  suffi- 
ciently comprehensive  to  allow  the  contractor  to  make  reasonably 
accurate  estimates  of  the  cost  of  doing  the  work  and  to  enable  the 
contracting  officer  to  keep  orderly  records  of  work  progress  and  to 
accurately  compute  payments  due;  on  the  other  hand,  the  number  of 
scheduled  items  should  be  held  to  the  minimum  necessary  to  accom- 
plish these  purposes.  The  practicable  extent  to  which  the  work 
should  be  divided  into  scheduled  items  must  be  judged  in  light  of 
the  quantities  of  work  involved,  customary  local  construction 
practices  and  other  mitigating  factors. 

Division  of  the  Work  into  Items 


For  maximum  efficiency  of  contract  administration  the  work  should  be 
divided  into  items  on  the  basis  of  the  following  principles: 

1.  The  work  should  be  divided  into  items  in  a manner  that 
will  insure  reasonable  refinement  of  unit  prices.  The 
cost  of  any  given  type  of  work  will  vary  according  to 
its  complexity  and  the  complicating  effects  of  the 
conditions  under  which  it  must  be  done.  Generally,  the 
scope  of  a bid  item  should  be  limited  to  a given  type 

of  work  of  a particular  order  of  complexity.  Exceptions 
to  this  rule  may  be  justified  on  small  jobs  involving 
relatively  small  quantities  of  work. 

2,  The  work  should  be  divided  into  items  in  a manner  that 
will  prevent  confusion  of  supplemental  job  requirements. 
Similar  types  of  work  may  involve  different  sizes  of 
components  or  different  qualities  of  materials.  To 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-7 


prevent  confusion,  each  variation  of  a given  type  of  work 
should  be  established  as  a separate  item  of  work.  Also, 
the  grouping  of  non-re lated  items  or  similar  components 
of  separate  works  of  improvement  should  be  avoided  (see 
Section  2603.3,  Watershed  Protection  Handbook). 

3 . The  work  should  be  divided  into  items  in  a manner  consis- 
tent with  the  cost  sharing  arrangements  established  in 
the  watershed  work  plan  and  the  project  agreement.  In 
many  PL  566  projects,  certain  works  of  improvement  may 
be  paid  for  entirely  or  partially  by  the  local  sponsoring 
organization.  To  facilitate  accounting  of  project  costs, 
the  work  for  such  improvements  should  be  established  as 
separate  items  of  work  in  the  bid  schedule,  whenever 
practicable. 

Numbering  and  Titling 

Bid  items  must  be  numbered  consecutively  beginning  with  the  number  one. 
Sub-item  numbers  shall  not  be  used.  Each  bid  item  shall  be  given  a 
descriptive  title  that  distinctly  identifies  the  work  to  be  done.  All 
items  that  involve  significant  quantities  of  work  (or  significant 
procurement  cost  in  the  case  of  prefabricated  units)  should  be  desig- 
nated as  bid  items. 


PAY  ITEMS 

Measurable  items  whose  quantities  may  be  subject  to  variation  should  be 
designated  for  payment  on  a unit  price  basis  and  the  estimated  quantity 
of  work  and  units  of  measurement  must  be  shown  in  the  schedule.  Items 
that  involve  significant  quantities  of  work  but  either  are  not  conven- 
iently measurable  or  whose  quantities  are  not  subject  to  variation 
should  be  designated  for  payment  on  a lump  sum  basis.  An  item  involving 
a relatively  insignificant  quantity  of  work  that  is  subject  to  only 
minor  variation  may  be  designated  as  a subsidiary  item,  compensation 
for  which  is  included  in  the  payment  for  another  item.  Subsidiary  items 
will  not  be  numbered  nor  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  but  must  be  desig- 
nated and  described  in  the  contract  specifications  as  prescribed  in  the 
instructions  for  preparing  construction  details. 

Units  of  measurement  must  be  compatible  with  the  measurement  and  payment 
clauses  of  the  specifications. 

EXAMPLE  1-1 

A typical  bid  schedule  format  is  demonstrated  by  the  following  example: 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-8 


Bid  Schedule 

Spec.  Unit 


Item 

Work 

No. 

Quantity 

Unit  Price  Amount 

1 

Clearing,  class  A 

1 

12.5 

ac. 

2 

Excavation,  common 

21 

300 

cu . yd . 

CONTRACT  SPECIFICATIONS 


Contract  specifications  shall  consist  of  an  assembly  of  the  appro- 
priate standard  (or  interim  standard)  material  specifications  and 
construction  specifications.  Each  construction  specification  will 
be  supplemented  by  a section  entitled:  "Items  of  Work  and  Construc- 

tion Details."  The  supplemental  section  of  each  construction 
specification  shall:  (1)  be  prepared  especially  for  each  invitation; 

(2)  designate  by  number  and  title  all  of  the  bid  items  (exactly  as 
numbered  and  titled  in  the  bid  schedule)  to  be  performed  in  confor- 
mance with  the  requirements  of  the  specification;  (3)  designate  all 
subsidiary  items  to  be  performed  in  conformance  with  the  requirements 
of  the  specification;  (4)  for  each  designated  item  of  work,  state 
such  supplemental  requirements  and  items  of  information  as  are 
needed  to  relate  the  standard  specification  to  the  job  at  hand;  (5) 
bear  the  number  that  is  next  in  sequence  after  the  number  of  the 
last  section  of  the  standard  specification;  and,  (6)  be  inserted 
into  the  contract  specifications  as  the  last  page  of  the  construc- 
tion specification. 

PREPARING  CONSTRUCTION  DETAILS 

The  construction  details  for  each  item  of  work  should  be  concise  and 
will  normally  contain  (see  instructions  for  use  of  construction 
specifications,  Chapter  2): 

1.  Such  definitions  and  descriptions  as  are  needed  to  define 
the  scope  of  the  work; 

2.  The  information  required  to  define  the  types  and  qualities 
of  materials  to  be  used  in  the  work; 

3.  Special  requirements  such  as  foundation  preparation, 
grading  tolerances,  provisions  for  coordinating  with 
other  work,  etc.  ; and 

4.  Other  items  of  instruction  necessary  to  define  the  con- 
struction requirements  peculiar  to  the  item  of  work. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-9 


The  construction  details  should  contain  only  such  information  and 
instructions  as  are  needed  to  relate  the  standard  construction  speci- 
fication to  the  job  at  hand.  It  is  neither  necessary  nor  desirable  to 
emphasize  or  attempt  to  interpret  provisions  of  the  standard  specifica- 
tion by  repetition  of  the  provisions  in  the  construction  details  in  the 
same  or  other  words. 

In  preparing  construction  details,  it  must  be  recognized  that  notes  on 
the  drawings  have  the  effect  of  specifications  in  defining  the  type  and 
quality  of  materials  to  be  furnished  and  in  defining  the  scope  of  the 
work.  Supplemental  information  or  requirements  that  are  directly 
related  to  details  shown  on  the  drawings  may  be  stated  in  notes  on  the 
drawings  rather  than  in  the  specifications  if  that  arrangement  will 
more  conveniently  and  effectively  convey  the  information  to  the  personnel 
who  will  use  it.  The  designer  must  use  good  judgment  in  deciding  where 
the  various  supplemental  data  should  be  placed  for  maximum  effectiveness. 
Usually,  information  shown  by  notes  on  the  drawings  need  not  be  repeated 
in  the  specifications;  however,  if  there  is  a compelling  reason  for  doing 
so,  great  care  must  be  taken  to  prevent  conflicts  between  the  notes  and 
the  specifications. 

Construction  details  may  not  conflict  with  or  interpret  the  general 
terms  and  conditions  of  the  contract  and  may  modify  the  standard  speci- 
fications only  to  the  extent  that  any  clause  that  is  associated  with 
the  phrase  "unless  otherwise  specified"  may  be  modified  as  needed. 

Example  1-2 

The  following  example  demonstrates  a typical  supplemental  section  for 
excavation  that  would  be  written  for  a specific  contract  and  inserted 
into  the  contract  specifications  as  the  last  page  of  Construction  Speci- 
fication 21: 

11.  ITEMS  OF  WORK  AND  CONSTRUCTION  DETAILS 

Items  of  work  to  be  performed  in  conformance  with  this 
specification  and  the  construction  details  therefor  are: 

a.  Bid  Item  7,  Excavation,  foundation,  common 

(1)  This  item  shall  consist  of  the  excavation 
of  unsuitable  materials  from  the  foundation 
of  the  main  dam  in  areas  that  are  located 
within  the  base  area  of  the  dam  but  outside 
the  limits  of  the  cutoff  trench. 


> 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-10 


(2)  The  depth  of  excavation  required  is  estimated 
to  be  about  5 feet  at  the  central  half  of  the 
base  area  of  the  dam  and  tapering  to  about  2 
feet  at  the  edges.  The  actual  depths  and 
extent  of  foundation  excavation  will  be 
determined  by  the  Engineer  after  his  exami- 
nation of  the  material  encountered. 

(3)  The  sides  of  all  foundation  excavations  shall 
be  not  steeper  than  3 feet  horizontal  to  1 foot 
vertical. 

(4)  Measurement  and  payment  shall  be  by  Method  1. 

b.  Bid  Item  8,  Excavation,  cutoff  trench,  common 

(1)  This  item  shall  consist  of  all  common 
excavation  required  within  the  limits  of  the 
cutoff  trench  as  shown  on  the  drawings. 

(2)  The  depth  of  excavation  required  is  estimated 
to  extend  generally  down  to  about  Elevation 
1105.  The  actual  depths  of  excavation  will 
be  determined  by  the  Engineer  after  his 
examination  of  the  materials  encountered. 

(3)  Measurement  and  payment  shall  be  by  Method  1. 

c.  Bid  Item  9,  Excavation,  cutoff  trench,  rock 

(1)  This  item  shall  consist  of  all  rock  excavation 
required  within  the  limits  of  the  cutoff  trench 
as  shown  on  the  drawings. 

(2)  Measurement  and  payment  shall  be  by  Method  1. 

d.  Bid  Item  10,  Excavation,  principal  spillway,  common 

(1)  This  item  shall  consist  of  all  common  exca- 
vation required  within  the  limits  shown  on 
the  drawings  for  the  installation  of  the  pipe 
conduit,  riser  footing,  and  outlet  structure, 
except  for  that  portion  of  the  excavation  lying 
within  the  limits  of  the  cutoff  trench  or  above 
the  lower  limit  of  foundation  excavation,  and 
shall  include  all  common  excavation  required 
for  the  installation  of  the  anti-seep  collars. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


(2)  Measurement  and  payment  shall  be  by  Method  1. 

e.  Bid  Item  11,  Excavation,  principal  spillway,  rock 

(1)  This  item  shall  consist  of  all  rock  excavation 
required  within  the  limits  shown  on  the  drawings 
for  the  installation  of  the  pipe  conduit,  riser 
footing,  outlet  structure  and  anti-seep  collars, 
except  for  that  portion  of  the  excavation  lying 
within  the  limits  of  the  cutoff  trench. 

(2)  Measurement  and  payment  shall  be  by  Method  2. 

f . Bid  Item  12,  Excavation,  emergency  spillway,  common 

(1)  This  item  shall  consist  of  all  common  excavation 
required  within  the  limits  shown  on  the  drawings 
for  the  construction  of  the  emergency  spillway. 

(2)  Measurement  and  payment  shall  be  by  Method  1. 

g.  Subsidiary  Item,  Excavation,  borrow,  common 

(1)  This  item  shall  consist  of  all  common  excavation 
required  for  obtaining  fill  materials  needed  for 
construction  of  the  permanent  works. 

(2)  All  borrow  pits  shall  be  graded  to  prevent  the 
ponding  of  water  in  the  pits. 

(3)  No  separate  payment  will  be  made  for  borrow 
excavation.  Compensation  for  borrow  excava- 
tion will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  earth 
fill.  Bid  Items  14  through  18,  as  appropriate. 

SELECTING  APPROPRIATE  STANDARD  SPECIFICATIONS 

The  type  of  work  to  be  done  or  the  type  of  structural  detail  required 
may  often  dictate  the  construction  method  or  sequence.  The  specifica- 
tion requirements  must  be  compatible  with  the  methods  that  must  be 
used.  The  specification  writer  must  also  make  sure  that  the  options 
selected  in  one  specification  are  compatible  with  those  selected  in 
another.  (For  example,  the  method  of  designating  pay  limits  for  earth 
fill.) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


1-12 


PROCEDURE  FOR  ITEMS  NOT  COVERED  BY  STANDARD  SPECIFICATIONS 

Specifications  for  work  not  covered  by  standard  specifications  and 
that  are  intended  for  one-time  use  only  in  a specific  contract  shall 
be  submitted  to  the  responsible  Engineering  and  Watershed  Planning 
Unit  for  approval  prior  to  their  use.  If  such  specifications  are 
later  considered  for  adoption  as  interim  standard  specifications, 
they  shall  be  submitted  for  approval  according  to  the  procedures 
prescribed  for  review  of  interim  standard  specifications. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


CHAPTER  2 


GUIDE  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATIONS 


* 


2-1 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  1 

CLEARING 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  1 is  applicable  to  the  clearing  of 

construction  sites  where  grubbing  is  not  required. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construc- 
tion Specification  1. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  When  the  areas  to  be  cleared  are  definable  on  the  site 
plan  the  limits  of  each  class  of  clearing  must  be  shown 
and  clearly  defined. 

b.  When  the  areas  to  be  cleared  are  not  definable  on  the 
site  plan  (such  as  for  many  channel  improvement  jobs) 

^ the  extent  of  each  class  of  clearing  required  must  be 

described  by  notes  and  designation  of  right-of-way 
boundaries  and  station  limits. 

c.  Areas  in  which  disposal  of  refuse  material  will  not  be 
allowed  or  areas  to  which  disposal  will  be  restricted, 
if  known. 

d.  Required  depth  of  cover  over  buried  material,  if 
applicable. 

e.  Required  surface  grading  over  buried  material,  if 
applicable. 

f.  Restrictions  on  blasting,  if  any. 

g.  Special  requirements  for  control  of  erosion,  water 
pollution,  and  air  pollution,  if  applicable. 

h.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment,  if  the  standard 
specification  includes  more  than  one  method. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  5,  Disposal 

> 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-2 


(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  piling  of  material 
cannot  be  tolerated  (such  as  within  the  limits  of  a 
flood  retarding  pool) . 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  piling  of 
material  may  be  allowable  (such  as  in  the  spoil 
bank  area  of  a drainage  channel) . 

b . Section  6,  Measurement  and  Payment 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  the  areas  to  be 
cleared  are  extensive  and  can  be  defined  in  units 
of  area  on  the  ground  and  on  the  drawings . A 
reservoir  area  is  a typical  example  of  this  type 
of  site. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  areas  to  be 
cleared  cannot  be  defined  in  units  of  area  but  may 
be  extensive.  A channel  right-of-way  is  a typical 
example  of  this  type  of  site. 

(3)  Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods 
in  standard  specifications.  In  this  case,  the 
provision  for  lump  sum  payment  may  be  designated 
as  a third  numbered  method.  If  numbered  methods 
are  used,  insert  the  following  paragraph  before 
the  last  paragraph  in  the  section: 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to 
all  methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20*27) 


# 


2-3 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 

1 .  CLEARING 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  the  clearing  and  disposal  of  trees,  snags, 
logs,  brush,  shrubs,  stumps  and  rubbish  from  the  designated  areas. 

2.  CLASSIFICATION 

Unless  otherwise  specified  in  Section  7,  clearing  will  be  classified 
according  to  the  following  definitions: 

Class  A clearing  requires  that  trees  and  other  woody 
vegetation  be  cut  off  flush  with  the  ground  surface. 

Class  B clearing  requires  that  trees  and  other  woody 
vegetation  be  so  cut  off  that  the  remaining  stumps 
extend  no  higher  than  12  inches  above  the  ground 
^ surface. 

3.  MARKING 

The  limits  of  the  areas  to  be  cleared  will  be  marked  by  means  of 
stakes,  flags,  tree  markings  or  other  suitable  methods.  Trees  to 
be  left  standing  and  uninjured  will  be  designated  by  special 
markings  placed  on  the  trunks  at  a height  of  about  six  feet  above 
the  ground  surface. 

4.  CLEARING 

All  trees  not  marked  for  preservation  and  all  snags,  logs,  brush, 
shrubs,  and  rubbish  shall  be  cleared  from  within  the  limits  of  the 
marked  areas . 

5.  DISPOSAL 

(Option  1)  All  materials  cleared  from  the  designated  areas  shall 
be  burned  or  buried  at  locations  approved  by  the  Engineer,  or 
otherwise  disposed  of  as  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

(Option  2)  All  materials  cleared  from  the  designated  areas  shall 
be  burned,  buried  or  piled  at  locations  approved  by  the  Engineer, 
or  otherwise  disposed  of  as  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

) 


(l-D 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-4 


6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 

(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  cleared  areas  will  be  measured 
to  the  nearest  0.1  acre.  Payment  for  clearing  will  be  made  at 
the  contract  unit  price  for  the  designated  class  and  shall  con- 
stitute full  compensation  for  all  labor,  equipment,  tools  and  all 
other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the 
work . 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  each  tree,  stump  and  snag  having  a 
diameter  of  4 inches  or  greater  and  each  log  having  a diameter 
of  4 inches  or  greater  and  a length  of  10  feet  or  greater  will 
be  measured  prior  to  removal.  The  size  of  each  tree  and  snag 
will  be  determined  by  measuring  its  trunk  at  breast  height  above 
the  natural  ground  surface.  The  size  of  each  log  will  be  deter- 
mined by  measuring  the  butt  and  by  measuring  its  length  from 
butt  to  tip.  The  size  of  each  stump  will  be  measured  at  the  top. 
Diameter  shall  be  determined  by  dividing  the  measured  circum- 
ference by  3.14. 

Payment  for  clearing  and  disposal  of  each  tree,  stump  and  snag 
having  a diameter  of  4 inches  or  greater  and  each  log  having  a 
diameter  of  4 inches  or  greater  and  a length  of  10  feet  or 
greater  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  its  size 
designation  as  determined  by  the  following  schedule: 


Measured  Diameter 


Size  Designation 


4 inches  to  8 inches 
Over  8 inches  to  12  inches 
Over  12  inches  to  24  inches 
Over  24  inches  to  36  inches 
Over  36  inches  to  60  inches 
Over  60  inches 


6-inch  size 
10-inch  size 
18-inch  size 
30-inch  size 
48-inch  size 
60-inch  size 


The  sum  of  such  payments  shall  constitute  full  compensation  for 
all  labor,  equipment,  tools  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  work  of  completely  clearing  the  designated 
areas,  including  clearing  and  disposal  of  smaller  trees,  stumps, 
snags  and  logs  and  brush,  shrubs  and  rubbish. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific 
lump  sum  prices  are  established  in  the  contract,  payment  for 
clearing  will  be  made  at  the  contract  lump  sum  prices.  Such 
payment  shall  constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor,  equip- 
ment, tools  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to 
completion  of  the  work. 

(1-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-5 


Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  7 of  this  specification. 


(1-3) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-7 


I) 

INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  2 
CLEARING  AND  GRUBBING 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  2 is  applicable  to  the  clearing  and 

grubbing  of  construction  sites. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construc- 
tion Specification  2. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  When  the  areas  to  be  cleared  and  grubbed  are  definable 
on  the  site  plan,  their  limits  must  be  shown  and  clearly 
defined. 

b.  When  the  areas  to  be  cleared  are  not  definable  on  the 
site  plan  (such  as  for  many  channel  improvement  jobs), 
the  extent  of  clearing  and  grubbing  required  must  be 
described  by  notes  and/or  designation  of  right-of-way 
boundaries  and  station  limits. 

c.  Areas  in  which  disposal  of  refuse  material  will  not  be 
allowed  or  areas  to  which  disposal  will  be  restricted 
should  be  shown  if  such  restrictions  are  necessary. 

d.  Special  requirements  for  depth  of  grubbing  when 
appropriate. 

e.  Required  depth  of  cover  over  buried  material,  if 
applicable. 

f.  Required  surface  grading  over  buried  material,  if 
applicable. 

g.  Restrictions  on  blasting,  if  any. 

h.  Special  requirements  for  control  of  erosion,  water 
pollution,  and  air  pollution,  if  applicable. 

i.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment,  if  the  standard 
specification  includes  more  than  one  method. 


* 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-8 


4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  5,  Measurement  and  Payment 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  the  areas  to  be 
cleared  and  grubbed  are  extensive  and  can  be 
defined  in  units  of  area  on  the  ground  and  on  the 
drawings.  A reservoir  area  is  a typical  example 
of  this  type  of  site. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  areas  to  be 
cleared  and  grubbed  cannot  be  defined  in  units  of 
area  but  may  be  extensive.  A channel  right-of-way 
where  the  kind  of  clearing  varies  in  different 
reaches  is  a typical  example  of  this  type  of  site. 

(3)  Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in 
standard  specifications.  In  this  case,  the  provision 
for  lump  sum  payment  may  be  designated  as  a third 
numbered  method.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last 
paragraph  in  the  section: 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  all 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


0 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 

2 .  CLEARING  AND  GRUBBING 


2-9 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  the  clearing  and  grubbing  of  designated 
areas  by  removal  and  disposal  of  trees,  snags,  logs,  stumps,  shrubs 
and  rubbish. 

2.  MARKING 

The  limits  of  the  areas  to  be  cleared  and  grubbed  will  be  marked 
by  means  of  stakes,  flags,  tree  markings  or  other  suitable  methods. 
Trees  to  be  left  standing  and  uninjured  will  be  designated  by 
special  markings  placed  on  the  trunks  at  a height  of  about  six 
feet  above  the  ground  surface. 

3.  REMOVAL 

All  trees  not  marked  for  preservation  and  all  snags,  logs,  brush, 
stumps,  shrubs  and  rubbish  shall  be  removed  from  within  the  limits 
of  the  marked  areas.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  stumps,  roots 
and  root  clusters  having  a diameter  of  one  inch  or  larger  shall  be 
grubbed  out  to  a depth  of  at  least  two  feet  below  subgrade  eleva- 
tion for  concrete  structures  and  one  foot  below  the  ground  surface 
at  embankment  sites  and  other  designated  areas. 

4.  DISPOSAL 

All  materials  removed  from  the  cleared  and  grubbed  areas  shall  be 
burned  or  buried  at  locations  approved  by  the  Engineer,  or  otherwise 
disposed  of  as  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

5 . MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  cleared  and  grubbed  areas  will  be 
measured  to  the  nearest  0.1  acre.  Payment  for  clearing  and  grubbing 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  and  shall  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  equipment,  tools  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work. 


(2-1) 

i 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-10 


(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  each  tree,  stump  and  snag  having  a 
diameter  of  4 inches  or  greater  and  each  log  having  a diameter 
of  4 inches  or  greater  and  a length  of  10  feet  or  greater  will 
be  measured  prior  to  removal.  The  size  of  each  tree  and  snag 
will  be  determined  by  measuring  its  trunk  at  breast  height  above 
the  natural  ground  surface.  The  size  of  each  log  will  be  deter- 
mined by  measuring  the  butt  and  by  measuring  its  length  from 
butt  to  tip.  The  size  of  each  stump  will  be  measured  at  the  top. 
Diameter  shall  be  determined  by  dividing  the  measured  circum- 
ference by  3.14. 

Payment  for  clearing  and  disposal  of  each  tree,  stump  and  snag 
having  a diameter  of  4 inches  or  greater  and  each  log  having  a 
diameter  of  4 inches  or  greater  and  a length  of  10  feet  or 
greater  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  its  size 
designation  as  determined  by  the  following  schedule: 


Measured  Diameter 


Size  Designation 


4 inches  to  8 inches 
Over  8 inches  to  12  inches 
Over  12  inches  to  24  inches 
Over  24  inches  to  36  inches 
Over  36  inches  to  60  inches 
Over  60  inches 


6-inch  size 
10-inch  size 
18-inch  size 
30-inch  size 
48-inch  size 
60-inch  size 


The  sum  of  such  payments  shall  constitute  full  compensation  for 
all  labor,  equipment,  tools  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  work  of  completely  clearing  and  grubbing  the 
designated  areas,  including  clearing,  grubbing  and  disposal  of 
smaller  trees,  stumps,  snags  and  logs  and  brush,  shrubs,  roots 
and  rubbish. 


(Use  with  Either  Option)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific 
lump  sum  prices  are  established  in  the  contract,  payment  for 
clearing  and  grubbing  will  be  made  at  the  contract  lump  sum 
price.  Such  payment  shall  constitute  full  compensation  for  all 
labor,  equipment,  tools  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  completion  of  the  work. 


Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  6 of  this  specification. 


(2-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


(f 


2-11 


%d 

INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  3 

STRUCTURE  REMOVAL 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  3 is  applicable  to  the  removal  of  all 
types  of  structures,  including  fencing,  from  construction  sites. 

2 . Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  3. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Prayings. 

The  location  and  type  of  each  structure  or  fence  to  be 
removed  or  the  limits  of  the  area  from  within  which 
structures  are  to  be  removed  must  be  shown  on  the  plan 
and  profiles  of  the  site.  If  structure  removal  is 
designated  by  area  limits,  the  location  and  type  of  all 
buried  structures  to  be  removed  must  be  shown  in  addi- 
tion to  the  area  limits.  All  known  information  regarding 
the  structures  must  be  shown  on  the  drawings. 

The  location  and  types  of  structures  or  fences  to  be 
preserved  in  place  or  to  be  salvaged  must  be  shown  on 
the  plan  and  profiles  of  the  site. 

The  required  extent  and  depth  of  removal. 

The  locations  of  storage  areas  for  salvaged  structural 
materials  must  be  shown  on  the  plan  or  indicated  by 
appropriate  notations . 

Areas  in  which  disposal  of  refuse  material  will  not  be 
allowed  or  areas  to  which  disposal  will  be  restricted, 
if  known.  If  refuse  materials  must  be  disposed  of  off 
the  right-of-way,  make  appropriate  notations. 

Structures,  including  fences,  to  be  removed  by  others. 

Required  depth  of  cover  over  buried  material,  if 
applicable. 


D 

b. 

c . 

d. 

e . 

f . 

g. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-12 


h.  Required  surface  grading  over  burled  material.  If 
applicable. 

1.  Restrictions  on  blasting.  If  any. 

j.  Special  requirements  for  control  of  erosion,  water 
pollution,  and  air  pollution,  if  applicable. 

k.  Note  that  a separate  bid  item  for  salvage  may  be  needed 
because  of  cost  sharing  arrangements.  (See  Chapter  1.) 

4.  Discussions  of  Options. 

a.  Section  2,  Marking 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  the  structures  to 
be  removed  are  of  significant  size  or  when  several 
widely  separated  structures  must  be  removed.  Whenever 
possible  this  option  should  be  used  in  preference  to 
Option  2. 

(2)  Option  2 may  be  used  when  many  small  structures, 
such  as  irrigation  turnouts,  check  structures  and 
lined  ditches,  are  located  within  the  limits  of 
construction  site. 

b.  Section  3,  Removal 

(1)  Option  1 is  compatible  with  Option  1,  Marking,  and 
must  be  used  in  specifications  where  Option  1, 

Marking,  is  selected. 

(2)  Option  2 is  compatible  with  Option  2,  Marking,  and 
must  be  used  in  specifications  where  Option  2, 

Marking,  is  selected. 

c.  Section  6.  Measurement  and  Payment 

The  first  two  paragraphs  may  be  designated  as 
numbered  methods  in  standard  specifications.  If 
number  methods  are  used,  insert  the  following 
paragraph  before  the  next  to  the  last  paragraph 
in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to 
both  methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-13 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
3 . STRUCTURE  REMOVAL  .. 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  the  removal,  salvage  and  disposal  of 
structures  (including  fences)  from  the  designated  areas. 

2.  MARKING 

(Option  1)  Each  structure  unit  to  be  removed  will  be  marked  by 
means  of  stakes,  flags,  painted  markers  or  other  suitable  methods. 

(Option  2)  The  limits  of  the  areas  from  which  structures  must  be 
removed  will  be  marked  by  means  of  stakes,  flags  or  other  suitable 
methods.  Structures  to  be  preserved  in  place  or  salvaged  will  be 
designated  by  special  markings. 

3.  REMOVAL 

(Option  1)  All  structures  designated  in  the  contract  for  removal 
shall  be  removed  to  the  specified  extent  and  depth. 

(Option  2)  Within  the  areas  so  marked  all  visible  structures  and 
attachments  and  all  buried  structures  located  and  identified  by 
survey  stakes  shall  be  removed  to  the  specified  extent  and  depth. 

4.  SALVAGE 


Structures  that  are  designated  to  be  salvaged  shall  be  carefully 
removed  and  neatly  placed  in  the  specified  storage  areas.  Salvaged 
structures  that  are  capable  of  being  disassembled  shall  be  disman- 
tled into  individual  members  or  sections.  Such  structures  shall 
be  neatly  matchmarked  with  paint  prior  to  disassembly.  All  pins, 
nuts,  bolts,  washers,  plates  and  other  loose  parts  shall  be  marked 
or  tagged  to  indicate  their  proper  locations  in  the  structure  and 
shall  be  fastened  to  the  appropriate  structural  member  or  packed 
in  suitable  containers.  Materials  from  fences  designated  to  be 
salvaged  shall  be  placed  outside  the  work  area  on  the  property 
from  which  they  were  removed.  Wire  shall  be  rolled  into  uniform 
rolls  of  convenient  size.  Posts  and  rails  shall  be  neatly  piled. 

(3-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-14 


5.  DISPOSAL  OF  REFUSE  MATERIALS 


Refuse  materials  resulting  from  structure  removal  shall  be  burned 
or  buried  at  locations  approved  by  the  Engineer  or  otherwise 
disposed  of  as  specified  or  as  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 

For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established 
in  the  contract,  payment  for  the  removal  of  each  structure  unit, 
except  fences,  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price.  Fences 
removed  or  removed  and  salvaged  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest 
linear  foot.  Payment  for  fence  removal  or  removal  and  salvage 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  prices  appropriate  to  each  type 
and  size  of  fence. 

For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  lump  sum  prices  are  estab- 
lished in  the  contract,  payment  for  structure  removal  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  lump  sum  price. 

Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor, 
equipment,  tools,  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to 
the  completion  of  the  work. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in 
Section  7 of  this  specification. 


(3-2) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-14-1 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  8 

MOBILIZATION 


1.  Applicability 

Construction  Specification  8 is  applicable  to  any  construction 
contract  that  contains  a bid  item  for  general  mobilization  of  the 
Contractor’s  personnel  and  equipment.  It  is  not  intended  to 
cover  mobilization  of  special  equipment  for  specific  items  of 
work,  such  as  grouting  equipment,  for  which  payment  for  mobiliza- 
tion is  provided  elsewhere  in  the  contract. 

2.  Material  Specifications 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  8. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings 

a.  Special  requirements  pertaining  to  mobilization,  if  any. 

b.  Any  particular  work  for  which  payment  will  or  will  not 
be  made  under  the  mobilization  item  if  not  adequately 
described  by  the  specification. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options 

No  options  are  included. 


V 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
8.  MOBILIZATION 


2-14-3 


1.  SCOPE 


The  work  shall  consist  of  the  mobilization  of  the  Contractor's 
forces  and  equipment  necessary  for  performing  the  work  required 
under  the  contract. 

It  shall  include  the  purchase  of  contract  bonds;  transportation 
of  personnel,  equipment,  and  operating  supplies  to  the  site; 
establishment  of  offices,  buildings,  and  other  necessary 
facilities  at  the  site;  and  other  preparatory  work  at  the  site. 

It  shall  not  include  mobilization  for  any  specific  item  of  work 
for  which  payment  for  mobilization  is  provided  elsewhere  in  the 
contract. 

The  specification  covers  mobilization  for  work  required  by  the 
contract  at  the  time  of  award.  If  additional  mobilization 
costs  are  incurred  during  performance  of  the  contract  as  a 
result  of  changed  or  added  items  of  work  for  which  the 
contractor  is  entitled  to  an  adjustment  in  contract  price, 
compensation  for  such  costs  will  be  included  in  the  price 
adjustment  for  the  items  of  work  changed  or  added. 

2.  PAYMENT 


Payment  will  be  made  as  the  work  proceeds,  after  presentation 
of  invoices  by  the  Contractor  showing  his  own  mobilization  costs 
and  evidence  of  the  charges  of  suppliers,  subcontractors,  and 
others  for  mobilization  work  performed  by  them.  If  the  total 
of  such  payments  is  less  than  the  contract  lump  sum  for 
mobilization,  the  unpaid  balance  will  be  included  in  the  final 
contract  payment.  Total  payment  will  be  the  lump  sum  contract 
price  for  mobilization,  regardless  of  actual  cost  to  the 
Contractor. 

Payment  will  not  be  made  under  this  item  for  the  purchase  costs 
of  materials  having  a residual  value,  the  purchase  costs  of 
materials  to  be  incorporated  in  the  project,  or  the  purchase 
costs  of  operating  supplies. 

Payment  of  the  lump  sum  contract  price  for  mobilization  will 
constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment, 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  completion  of 
the  work. 


(8-1) 

NEH  9/16/70  (Notice  20-30) 


♦ 


. 


( 


2-14-3 


D 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  10 
WATER  FOR  CONSTRUCTION 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  10  is  applicable  to  all  water  used  at  the 
construction  site.  It  is  to  be  used  when  a pay  item  for  water  is 
provided  in  the  contract.  A pay  item  for  water  should  be  provided 
when  the  cost  of  water  is  expected  to  be  a significant  part  of  the 
total  cost  of  the  items  of  work  in  which  it  is  to  be  used. 

If  the  water  is  to  be  furnished  free  to  the  Contractor  at  some  desig- 
nated source,  the  pay  item  should  cover  the  remaining  costs  of  trans- 
porting it  and  using  it  as  specified.  More  than  one  pay  item  may  be 
used  if  the  cost  of  water  is  expected  to  be  different  for  various 
purposes . 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  10. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  Bid  Schedule  and 
Special  Provisions. 

a.  Pay  item  for  water  and  estimated  quantity--in  the  Bid  Schedule. 

b.  Unit  price  to  be  paid  for  water--in  the  Bid  Schedule.  (A  fair 
price  is  to  be  predetermined  based  on  the  engineer's  estimate  of 
the  cost.) 

c.  Contract  amount  for  water ; i.e.,  the  estimated  quantity  times  the 
unit  price — in  the  "Amount"  column  of  the  Bid  Schedule. 

d.  A statement  in  the  Special  Provisions  that  (1)  the  quantity 
variations  clause  of  the  General  Provisions  or  the  Special  Provi- 
sions (depending  on  where  the  quantity  variations  clause  is 
located  in  the  particular  contract)  shall  not  apply  to  the  water 
item,  (2)  there  is  no  guarantee  as  to  the  quantity  of  water  that 
will  be  needed,  and  (3)  payment  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  regardless  of  the  amount  used. 

e.  Designated  source  of  water,  and  details  of  ownership  and  water 
rights,  if  applicable --in  the  Special  Provisions. 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-14-6 


t 

f.  Cost  to  the  Contractor  of  water  at  the  designated  source,  if 
applicable — in  the  Special  Provisions,  (It  may  be  advantageous 
to  contract  separately  with  the  owner  of  the  water  and  furnish 
it  to  the  Contractor  free  at  the  source.  This  should  be  done 
only  if  the  net  cost  to  the  Service  would  be  less.) 

g.  Special  requirements  pertaining  to  furnishing  and  using  water, 
including  water  quality  requirements  if  quality  may  be  a problem. 

h.  Details  of  what  water  will  be  included  in  the  pay  item  if 
exceptions  are  to  be  made  to  the  provisions  of  Section  6. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

No  options  are  included. 


* 


NEH  9/16/70  (Notice  20-20) 


* 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
10.  WATER  FOR  CONSTRUCTION 


2-14-7 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing,  transporting,  and  using  water 
for  construction  purposes  in  accord  with  the  applicable  specifica- 
tions . 

2.  FACILITIES  AND  EQUIPMENT 

The  Contractor  shall  build  and  maintain  such  access  and  haul  roads 
as  are  needed,  and  shall  furnish,  operate,  and  maintain  all  pumps, 
piping,  tanks,  and  other  facilities  needed  to  load,  transport,  and 
use  the  water  as  specified. 

These  facilities  shall  be  equipped  with  meters,  tanks,  or  other 
devices  by  which  the  volume  of  water  supplied  can  be  measured. 

3.  DUST  ABATEMENT  AND  HAUL  ROAD  MAINTENANCE 

Water  for  dust  abatement  and  haul  road  maintenance  shall  be  applied 
to  haul  roads  and  other  dust -producing  areas  as  needed  to  prevent 
excessive  dust  and  to  maintain  the  roads  in  good  condition  for 
efficient  operation  while  they  are  in  use. 

4.  EARTH  FILL,  DRAIN  FILL,  ROCK  FILL 

Water  for  earth  fill,  drain  fill,  or  rock  fill  shall  be  used  in  the 
fill  materials  as  specified  in  the  applicable  construction  specifi- 
cations . 

5.  CONCRETE,  MORTAR , GROUT 

Water  used  in  mixing  or  curing  concrete,  pneumatically  applied  mortar, 
or  other  portland  cement  mortar  or  grout  shall  meet  the  requirements 
of  the  applicable  construction  specifications  and  shall  be  used  in 
conformance  with  those  specifications. 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  water  items  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established  in 
the  contract,  the  volume  of  water  furnished  and  used  in  accordance 
with  the  specifications  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest  1000  gallons. 


(10-1) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-14-8 


Except  as  otherwise  specified,  the  measurement  for  payment  will  include 
all  water  needed  at  the  construction  site  to  perform  the  work  required 
under  the  contract  in  accordance  with  the  specifications  but  will  not 
include  water  wasted  or  used  in  excess  of  the  amount  needed.  It  will 
not  include  water  used  in  concrete  which  is  mixed  elsewhere  and  trans- 
ported to  the  site. 

Payment  for  water  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  which  shall 
be  the  price  per  1000  gallons  shown  in  the  Bid  Schedule.  Such  payment 
will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment, 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  furnishing,  transport- 
ing, and  using  the  water. 


(10-2) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-15 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  11 

REMOVAL  OF  WATER 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  11  is  applicable  to  the  temporary 

diversion  of  surface  water  and  dewatering  of  the  construction 

site  and  borrow  areas  during  the  construction  period. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construc- 
tion Specification  11. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Special  requirements  or  restrictions  applicable  to  the 
diversion  works  or  to  the  method  of  diverting  surface  water. 

b.  Special  requirements  for  dewatering  the  construction  site 
(such  as  a requirement  that  the  water  table  be  lowered 
before  excavation  is  begun,  or  that  it  be  maintained  at  a 
certain  level  below  the  bottom  of  the  excavation  during 
construction  operations). 

c.  Special  requirements  for  dewatering  borrow  areas  (such  as 
removal  of  surface  water  and  subsurface  drainage  to  keep 
the  borrow  material  at  a workable  moisture  content  during 
borrowing  operations.  A bid  item  for  dewatering  borrow 
areas  should  be  used  if  it  is  expected  to  require  a 
substantial  amount  of  work.) 

d.  Information  regarding  alternate  borrow  areas  that  may  be 
used  in  lieu  of  dewatering  the  primary  borrow  area  if 
applicable. 

e.  Special  requirements  for  control  of  erosion  and  water 
pollution  if  applicable. 

f.  Waiver  of  the  requirement  that  the  Contractor  furnish  his 
plan  for  diverting  surface  water  or  dewatering  the  construc- 
tion site,  if  his  plan  in  writing  is  not  wanted. 

g.  Items  of  work  may  be  separated  in  whatever  manner  is  deemed 
most  expedient  for  the  particular  contract.  Usually,  divert- 
ing surface  water  and  dewatering  should  be  established  as 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-16 


* 


separate  bid  items.  Dewatering  can  be  broken  down  into 
several  items  (such  as,  "Dewatering,  Core -Trench,"  or 
"Dewatering,  Borrow  Area  6")  if  better  administrative 
control  will  likely  result. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

No  options  are  included. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


( 


2-17 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
11.  REMOVAL  OF  WATER 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  the  removal  of  surface  water  and  ground 
water  as  needed  to  perform  the  required  construction  in  accordance 
with  the  specifications.  It  shall  include  (1)  building  and  main- 
taining all  necessary  temporary  impounding  works,  channels,  and 
diversions,  (2)  furnishing,  installing  and  operating  all  necessary 
pumps,  piping  and  other  facilities  and  equipment,  and  (3)  removing 
all  such  temporary  works  and  equipment  after  they  have  served 
their  purposes. 

2.  DIVERTING  SURFACE  WATER 

The  Contractor  shall  build,  maintain,  and  operate  all  cofferdams, 
channels,  flumes,  sumps,  and  other  temporary  diversion  and  pro- 
tective works  needed  to  divert  streamflow  and  other  surface  water 
through  or  around  the  construction  site  and  away  from  the  construc- 
tion work  while  construction  is  in  progress.  Unless  otherwise 
specified,  a diversion  must  discharge  into  the  same  natural  drain- 
ageway in  which  its  headworks  are  located. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  to  the 
Engineer,  in  writing,  his  plan  for  diverting  surface  water  before 
beginning  the  construction  work  for  which  the  diversion  is  required. 
Acceptance  of  this  plan  will  not  relieve  the  Contractor  of  respon- 
sibility for  completing  the  work  as  specified. 

3.  DEWATERING  THE  CONSTRUCTION  SITE 


Foundations,  cutoff  trenches  and  other  parts  of  the  construction 
site  shall  be  dewatered  and  kept  free  of  standing  water  or  exces- 
sively muddy  conditions  as  needed  for  proper  execution  of  the 
construction  work.  The  Contractor  shall  furnish,  install,  operate 
and  maintain  all  drains,  sumps,  pumps,  and  other  equipment  needed 
to  perform  the  dewatering  as  specified.  Dewatering  methods  that 
cause  a loss  of  fines  from  foundation  areas  will  not  be  permitted. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  to  the 
Engineer,  in  writing,  his  plan  for  dewatering  before  beginning 
the  construction  work  for  which  the  dewatering  is  required. 
Acceptance  of  this  plan  will  not  relieve  the  Contractor  of 
responsibility  for  completing  the  work  as  specified. 


(11-D 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-18 


4.  DEWATERING  BORROW  AREAS 

Unless  otherwise  specified  in  Section  7,  the  Contractor  shall 
maintain  the  borrow  areas  in  drainable  condition  or  otherwise 
provide  for  timely  and  effective  removal  of  surface  waters 
that  accumulate,  for  any  reason,  within  the  borrow  areas. 

5.  REMOVAL  OF  TEMPORARY  WORKS 

After  the  temporary  works  have  served  their  purposes,  the 
Contractor  shall  remove  them  or  level  and  grade  them  to  the 
extent  required  to  present  a sightly  appearance  and  to  prevent 
any  obstruction  of  the  flow  of  water  or  any  other  interference 
with  the  operation  of  or  access  to  the  permanent  works. 

Except  as  otherwise  specified,  pipes  and  casings  shall  be 
removed  from  temporary  wells  and  the  wells  shall  be  filled  to 
ground  level  with  gravel  or  other  material  approved  by  the 
Engineer. 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  lump  sum  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  payment  for  diverting  surface 
water,  dewatering  construction  sites,  and  dewatering  borrow 
areas  will  be  made  at  the  contract  lump  sum  prices.  Such 
payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor, 
equipment,  tools,  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental 
to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract 
but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the 
payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary. 
Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary 
are  identified  in  Section  7 of  this  specification. 


(11-2) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-19 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  12 

RELIEF  WELLS 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  12  is  applicable  to  the  construction  of 
pressure  relief  wells  in  foundations  of  structures. 

2.  Material  Specifications.  - 

Material  Specifications  521,  553  and  554  are  complementary  to 
Construction  Specification  12. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Plan  location  of  each  well; 

b.  Profile  along  the  line  of  wells  showing  the  spacing  and 
estimated  depths  of  the  wells; 

c.  Sectional  elevation  of  typical  wells  showing: 

(1)  The  location  of  the  well  screens; 

(2)  The  diameter  and  vertical  extent  of  the  filter; 

(3)  Details  of  the  outlet  at  the  upper  end  of  the 
filter ; 

(4)  Details  of  couplings  and  special  fittings  and 
appurtenances  such  as  tees,  check  valves,  caps 
and  appurtenant  housings. 

d.  Special  limits  on  time  of  installation.  For  example,  it 
may  be  required  that  the  relief  wells  be  installed  before 
any  structural  load  is  placed  on  the  foundation  or  prior 
to  a specific  phase  of  construction. 

e.  The  type  and  size  of  pipe. 

f.  The  type  and  size  of  well  screens  including  the  size  and 
pattern  of  screen  openings  or  slots. 

g.  The  grading  limits  of  the  filter  material. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-20 


4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Two  options  are  included  in  Sections  11  and  12.  These  options 
are  self-explanatory  but  it  must  be  noted  that  Options  1 and  2 
of  Section  11  are  respectively  complementary  to  Options  1 and 
2 of  Section  12. 


\ 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-21 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
12.  RELIEF  WELLS 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  installing  and  developing  relief  wells. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Well  screens  shall  be  of  the  specified  type  and  size,  and  the  size 
and  pattern  of  screen  openings  shall  conform  to  the  details  shown 
on  the  drawings.  Each  screen  shall  be  equipped  with  a bottom  plug 
of  the  same  material  as  the  screen. 

The  riser  pipe  and  fittings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specifications  553  or  554  for  the  specified  type  of  pipe. 
Filter  materials  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  521  and  shall  be  graded  as  specified. 

3.  LOCATION  AND  DEPTH  OF  WELLS 

The  plan  location  and  the  depth  of  each  well  shown  on  the  drawings 
are  based  on  design  estimates.  The  final  depth  and  location  of 
the  components  of  each  well  will  be  determined  by  the  Engineer  on 
the  basis  of  his  examination  of  the  well  log  and  samples  recovered 
during  drilling.  The  location  of  a well  will  be  changed  where 
obstructions  encountered  during  drilling  require  abandonment  of 
the  well. 

4.  DRILLING 


Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  wells  shall  be  drilled  vertically 
by  a rotary  drilling  method.  The  diameter  of  each  well  shall  be 
adequate  to  permit  the  placement  of  the  specified  thickness  of 
filter.  Drilling  methods  that  may  reduce  the  yield  of  the  well 
will  not  be  permitted. 

The  well  shall  be  cased  with  a temporary  casing  of  a type  that: 

a.  Shall  have  sufficient  thickness  to  retain  its  shape  and 
maintain  the  true  section  throughout  its  depth; 

b.  Shall  be  removable  in  a manner  that  will  not  disturb 
the  filter,  well  screen  or  riser  pipe. 


(12-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-22 


5 .  INSTALLING  RISER  PIPE  AND  SCREEN 


The  riser,  consisting  of  the  riser  pipe,  well  screens,  couplings 
and  fittings,  shall  be  measured  and  inspected  as  it  is  assembled 
and  placed  in  the  well.  Spiders,  or  other  centering  devices, 
shall  be  attached  to  the  assembled  riser  in  sufficient  numbers 
to  center  it  in  the  well  and  hold  it  securely  in  position  while 
the  filter  is  being  placed. 

Before  the  riser  is  placed,  filter  materials  shall  be  placed  at 
the  bottom  of  the  well  to  the  elevation  prescribed  by  the  Engineer 
for  the  bottom  of  the  well  screen.  The  riser  shall  be  placed  in 
the  well  in  such  a manner  as  to  avoid  shock  and  to  prevent  damage 
to  any  of  its  components.  The  relief  outlet  or  top  of  the  riser 
shall  be  held  at  the  designated  elevation  during  the  placement  of 
the  filter. 

6.  PLACING  FILTER 


The  filter  shall  be  placed  by  tremie  to  an  elevation  not  less  than 
one  foot  above  the  top  of  the  highest  well  screen.  At  the  start 
of  placement  the  tremie  shall  rest  on  the  bottom  of  the  well  and 
be  filled  with  filter  material.  The  tremie  and  the  temporary 
casing  shall  be  raised  in  increments  of  not  more  than  two  feet 
allowing  the  filter  material  to  flow  out  the  bottom  of  the  tremie. 
The  top  surface  of  the  filter  material  in  the  tremie  shall  be 
maintained  above  the  water  surface  at  all  times.  The  top  surface 
of  the  filter  material  in  the  well  shall  be  maintained  at  least 
2 feet  above  the  bottom  of  the  casing  as  the  casing  is  pulled. 

7.  DEVELOPING 


After  the  filter  is  placed  the  well  shall  be  developed  by  an 
approved  method.  Prior  to  development  the  Contractor  shall 
submit  his  plan  for  accomplishing  the  work  to  the  Engineer  for 
approval. 

All  materials  pulled  into  the  screen  during  development  shall  be 
removed.  Filter  material  shall  be  added  to  the  annular  space 
around  the  screen  as  needed  to  maintain  the  top  of  the  filter  at 
the  specified  elevation. 

Any  well  that  continues  to  produce  appreciable  amounts  of  fines 
after  development  for  four  hours  will  be  abandoned  and  relocated 
by  the  Engineer. 

(12-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-23 


8.  BACKFILLING 

After  the  well  has  been  developed  the  annular  space  around  the 
riser  pipe  above  the  filter  shall  be  filled  with  selected  moist 
impervious  earth  fill  or  portland  cement  concrete.  Backfill  shall 
be  placed  in  layers  not  over  12  inches  in  thickness  and  each  layer 
shall  be  tamped  firmly  into  place.  The  temporary  casing  shall  be 
withdrawn  in  increments  as  the  backfill  is  placed. 

9.  ABANDONED  WELLS 

All  abandoned  wells  shall  be  plugged  with  either  selected  moist 
impervious  earth  backfill  or  portland  cement  concrete.  When  a 
well  is  abandoned  after  development  the  well  screen  and  riser 
pipe  shall  be  salvaged  whenever  possible. 

10.  LOGGING  AND  SAMPLING 

The  Contractor  shall  do  the  drilling  in  such  a manner  that  the 
Engineer  may  take  representative  disturbed  samples  of  all  materials 
encountered. 

11.  MEASUREMENT 


(Option  1)  The  amount  of  well  drilling  will  be  measured  to  the 
nearest  foot  of  well  drilled  and  cased.  Wells  abandoned  for  causes 
other  than  the  fault  of  the  Contractor  will  be  included  in  the 
measurement  for  payment. 

The  amounts  of  filter  and  backfill  placed  will  be  computed  to  the 
nearest  0.1  cubic  yard  from  measurement  of  the  vertical  well  space 
occupied  by  each  and  the  outside  diameters  of  the  casing  and  riser. 
Filter  and  backfill  in  wells  abandoned  for  causes  other  than  the 
fault  of  the  Contractor  will  be  included  in  the  measurement  for 
payment. 

The  amounts  of  pipe  and  well  screen  installed  in  the  riser  and 
outlet  assembly  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest  linear  foot  at  the 
time  the  riser  is  assembled.  Pipe  and  well  screen  that  cannot  be 
salvaged  from  wells  abandoned  for  causes  other  than  the  fault  of 
the  Contractor  will  be  included  in  the  measurement  for  payment. 

The  number  of  couplings  and  special  fittings  and  appurtenances  will 
be  counted  at  the  time  the  riser  is  assembled.  Couplings  and  special 
fittings  and  appurtenances  that  cannot  be  salvaged  from  wells  aban- 
doned for  causes  other  than  the  fault  of  the  Contractor  will  be 
included  in  the  measurement  for  payment. 

(12-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-24 


The  time  required  to  develop  each  well  will  be  measured  to  the 
nearest  half  hour.  Time  required  to  develop  wells  abandoned  for 
causes  other  than  the  fault  of  the  Contractor  will  be  included 
in  the  measurement  for  payment. 

(Option  2)  The  amount  of  well  drilling  will  be  measured  to  the 
nearest  foot  of  well  drilled  and  cased.  Wells  abandoned  for 
causes  other  than  the  fault  of  the  Contractor  will  be  included 
in  the  measurement  for  payment. 

The  amount  of  each  grading  of  filter  placed  will  be  computed  to 
the  nearest  0.1  cubic  yard  from  measurement  of  the  vertical  well 
space  occupied  by  each  and  the  diameters  of  the  casing  and  riser. 
Filter  in  wells  abandoned  for  causes  other  than  the  fault  of  the 
Contractor  will  be  included  in  the  measurement  for  payment. 

The  amounts  of  pipe,  couplings,  fittings,  appurtenances  and  well 
screen  installed  in  the  riser  and  outlet  assembly  will  be  measured 
to  the  nearest  linear  foot  at  the  time  the  riser  is  assembled. 
Pipe,  couplings,  fittings,  appurtenances  and  well  screen  that 
cannot  be  salvaged  from  wells  abandoned  for  causes  other  than  the 
fault  of  the  Contractor  will  be  included  in  the  measurement  for 
payment . 

The  time  required  to  develop  each  well  will  be  measured  to  the 
nearest  half  hour.  Time  required  to  develop  wells  abandoned  for 
causes  other  than  the  fault  of  the  Contractor  will  be  included 
in  the  measurement  for  payment. 

Backfill  will  not  be  measured. 

12.  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  Payment  for  each  item  of  work  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other 
items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work 
included  in  the  item. 

Payment  for  drilling  and  casing  each  size  of  well  will  be  made  at 
the  contract  unit  price  for  that  size  of  well  and  will  include 
compensation  for  drilling,  casing,  pulling  casing  and  costs  of 
moving  on  and  off  the  work  site. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  filter  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  unit  price  for  that  grading  of  filter  material. 

(12-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-25 


Payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  backfill  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  unit  price. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  installing  each  type  and  size  of  pipe 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of 
pipe. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  installing  each  type  and  size  of  well 
screen  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and 
size  of  well  screen. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  installing  each  coupling  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of  coupling. 

Payment  for  each  special  fitting  or  appurtenance  will  be  made  at 
the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of  fitting  or 
appurtenance. 

Payment  for  developing  each  well  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  for  developing  that  size  of  well. 

(Option  2)  Payment  for  each  item  of  work  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other 
items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work 
included  in  the  item. 

Payment  for  drilling,  casing  and  backfilling  each  size  of  well 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  size  of  well  and 
will  include  compensation  for  drilling,  casing,  pulling  casing, 
and  backfilling. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  filter  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  unit  price  for  that  grading  of  filter  material. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  installing  each  type  and  size  of  pipe 
complete  with  all  couplings,  fittings  and  appurtenances  (except 
well  screens)  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that 
type  and  size  of  pipe. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  installing  each  type  and  size  of  well 
screen  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type 
and  size  of  well  screen. 

Payment  for  developing  each  well  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  for  developing  that  size  of  well. 

(12-5) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-26 


! 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  13  of  this  specifi- 
cation. 


(12-6) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


) 

2-27 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  13 

PILING 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  13  is  applicable  to  the  furnishing  and 
installing  of  timber  piles,  steel  piles,  precast  concrete  piles 
and  shells  for  cast-in-place  piles.  It  is  not  applicable  to  the 
installation  of  drilled,  cast-in-place  piles. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specifications  511,  512,  513,  and  514  are  complementary 
to  Construction  Specification  13. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Plan  showing  the  location  of  all  piles,  including  test 
piles,  if  any. 

b.  Foundation  profiles  and  sections  showing: 

(1)  Logs  of  borings,  including  penetration  test  results; 

(2)  Required  or  estimated  pile  penetration; 

(3)  Cutoff  elevations. 

c.  Required  bearing  capacities.  /Note:  Specify  (1)  required 

bearing  capacity  or  (2)  required  penetration  or  (3)  required 
bearing  capacity  and  minimum  penetration,  as  appropriate^/ 

d.  For  timber  piles  state  the  type,  class,  species  and  length 
of  piles  required.  For  Type  I piles,  also  state  where  the 
piles  will  be  inspected.  For  Type  II  piles,  also  state 
the  type  of  treatment  and  minimum  retention  of  preservative 
per  cubic  foot  of  pile. 

e.  Details  of  precast  or  cast-in-place  concrete  piles  including 
dimensions,  reinforcement  details,  class  of  concrete,  size 
of  aggregate,  type  of  cement  and  slump  required. 

f.  Nominal  size  and  weight  of  section  for  H bearing  piles. 

g.  Authorization  to  use  gravity  hammers,  if  appropriate. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-28 


h.  Details  of  load  tests  that  will  be  required,  if  appropriate. 

i.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment  if  the  standard  specifi- 
cation includes  more  than  one  method. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  12,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

(1)  Options  1,  2,  4,  and  5 are  intended  for  use  when  a 
considerable  number  of  piles  of  about  the  same  length 
are  required.  Option  1 requires  only  one  pay  item 
but  does  not  allow  for  payment  for  piles  furnished 
until  driving  is  completed.  Option  2 requires  two 
pay  items  and  allows  for  payment  for  piles  delivered 
and  stockpiled.  Options  4 and  5 differ  from  Options 

1 and  2,  respectively,  only  in  that  they  provide  for 
separate  payment  for  mobilization  and  demobilization 
of  equipment.  When  the  cost  of  moving  equipment  onto 
and  off  of  the  work  site  is  a major  cost  (in  relation 
to  the  number  of  piles  to  be  driven)  the  use  of 
Options  4 and  5 is  preferred. 

(2)  Options  3 and  6 may  be  used  when  the  lengths  of  piles 
required  may  be  quite  variable.  They  are  particularly 
suitable  where  the  cutoff  portions  of  the  piles  may 

be  salvaged  and  used  on  the  job,  such  as  when  steel 
bearing  piles  are  specified.  Option  6 differs  from 
Option  3 only  in  that  it  provides  for  separate  payment 
for  mobilization  and  demobilization  of  equipment. 

(3)  Option  7 may  be  used  for  sheet  pile  walls  when  the 
required  depth  of  penetration  is  known. 

(4)  Two  or  more  options  may  be  included  as  numbered 
methods  in  standard  specifications.  If  numbered 
methods  are  used,  insert  the  following  paragraph 
before  the  fourth  paragraph  from  the  end  of  the 
section : 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  all 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-29 


P 

CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
13 . PILING 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  driving  the  specified 
kinds  and  types  of  piles  at  the  locations  shown  on  the  drawings. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Piles  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specifications 
511,  512,  513,  or  514  as  appropriate  to  the  kinds  of  piles  specified. 

3.  SITE  PREPARATION 

All  excavation  within  the  area  to  be  occupied  by  bearing  piles 
shall  be  completed  before  the  piles  are  driven. 

4.  PROTECTION  OF  PILE  HEADS 

The  heads  of  all  piles  shall  be  protected  during  driving  by  suitable 
caps,  rings,  heads,  blocks,  mandrels  and  other  devices. 

The  heads  of  timber  piles  shall  be  fitted  into  a steel  head  block 
or  fitted  with  heavy  steel  or  wrought  iron  rings  or  wire  wrapping. 

The  heads  of  steel  piles  shall  be  cut  square  and  fitted  with  a 
steel  driving  cap. 

The  heads  of  precast  concrete  piles  and  casings  shall  be  fitted 
into  cushion  type  drive  caps  having  a rope  or  other  suitable 
cushion  next  to  the  pile  head  and  fitting  into  a casting  which  in 
turn  supports  a timber  shock  block. 

Driving  heads,  mandrels  and  other  devices  shall  be  provided  by  the 
Contractor  as  needed  for  special  types  of  piles  and  shall  conform 
to  the  recommendations  of  the  pile  manufacturer. 

5.  DRIVING  BEARING  PILES 


Piles  shall  be  driven  only  in  the  presence  of  the  Engineer. 

The  piles  shall  be  driven  to  the  position,  line  and  batter  speci- 
fied on  the  drawings.  Each  pile  shall  be  driven  continuously  and 
without  interruption  to  the  specified  depth  or  until  the  specified 


I 


(13-1) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-30 


bearing  capacity  is  obtained.  Deviation  from  this  procedure  will 
be  permitted  only  when  interruption  of  driving  is  caused  by 
conditions  that  could  not  reasonably  be  anticipated. 

Unless  otherwise  approved,  piles  shall  be  driven  with  steam,  air 
or  diesel  powered  hammers  or  a combination  of  hammers  and  water 
jets.  Water  jets  may  be  used  only  when  specifically  authorized 
by  the  Engineer.  Where  jetting  is  authorized,  the  jets  shall  be 
withdrawn  before  the  specified  depth  or  bearing  capacity  is 
reached  and  the  piles  shall  be  driven  with  the  hammer  to  the 
final  penetration. 

When  drop  hammers  are  permitted,  the  height  of  drop  shall  be  not 
more  than  8 feet  for  concrete  piles  or  12  feet  for  steel  or 
timber  piles. 

Piles  shall  not  be  driven  within  20  feet  of  concrete  less  than  7 
days  old,  including  concrete  placed  in  cast-in-place  piles  with 
or  without  predriven  shells  or  casings. 

The  driving  of  piling  with  followers  shall  be  allowed  only  when 
expressly  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

Diesel  hammers  shall  be  operated  with  throttles  fully  open  when 
blows  are  counted  for  determination  of  bearing  capacity  except 
that  throttle  adjustments  shall  be  made  as  necessary  to  prevent 
the  nonstriking  parts  of  the  hammer  from  rising  from  the  pile  on 
the  ram  upstroke. 

The  Contractor  shall  not  attempt  to  drive  piles  beyond  the  point 
of  refusal,  as  indicated  by  excessive  bouncing  of  the  hammer  or 
kicking  of  the  pile. 

6.  DRIVING  SHEET  PILING 


The  piling  shall  be  driven  in  such  a manner  as  to  insure  perfect 
interlocking  throughout  the  entire  length  of  each  pile.  The 
piles  shall  be  held  in  proper  alignment  during  driving  by  means 
of  assembling  frames  or  other  suitable  temporary  guide  structures. 
Temporary  guide  structures  shall  be  removed  when  they  have  served 
their  purpose. 

At  any  time  that  the  forward  edge  of  the  sheet  pile  wall  is  found 
to  be  out  of  correct  alignment:  (a)  the  piling  already  assembled 

and  partly  driven  shall  be  driven  to  the  required  depth,  and  (b) 
taper  piles  shall  then  be  driven  to  bring  the  forward  edge  into 

(13-2) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-31 


correct  alignment  before  additional  regular  piling  is  assembled 
and  driven.  The  maximum  permissible  taper  in  a single  pile  shall 
be  one-fourth  inch  per  foot  of  length. 

7.  ESTIMATING  BEARING  CAPACITY 


When  load  tests  are  not  required,  the  bearing  capacity  of  each  pile 
shall  be  estimated  by  use  of  one  of  the  following  formulas,  as 
appropriate : 


a.  For  gravity  hammers,  R 


2WH 

s+i; 


b.  For  single-acting  steam  or  air  hammers  and  for  diesel  hammers 

2WH 

having  unrestricted  rebound  of  the  ram,  R=  ; 

Si-0 . 1 

c.  For  double  acting  steam  or  air  hammers  and  diesel  hammers 

, . i , 0 2H  (W+AP ) _ 2E 

having  enclosed  rams,  R = — - or,  R = ; 

S+0.1  S+0.1 

where : 

R = safe  bearing  capacity  in  pounds, 

W = weight,  in  pounds,  of  striking  parts  of  hammer, 

H = height  of  fall  in  feet, 

A = area  of  piston  in  square  inches, 

P = pressure,  in  pounds  per  square  inch,  of  steam,  air 
or  other  gas  exerted  on  the  hammer  piston  or  ram, 

E = the  manufacturers  rating  for  foot-pounds  of  energy 
developed  by  double-acting  steam  or  air  hammers,  or 
90  percent  of  the  average  equivalent  energy,  in 
foot-pounds,  developed  by  diesel  hammers  having 
enclosed  rams  as  evaluated  by  gauge  and  chart 
readings . 

S = average  penetration,  inches  per  blow,  for  the  last 
5 to  10  blows  of  a gravity  hammer  or  the  last  10 
to  20  blows  for  steam,  air  or  diesel  powered  hammers. 

The  above  formulas  are  applicable  only  when: 

a.  The  hammer  has  a free  fall 

b.  The  head  of  the  pile  is  not  crushed 

c.  The  penetration  is  reasonably  quick  and  uniform 


(13-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-32 


d.  There  is  no  sensible  bounce  after  the  blow 

e.  A follower  is  not  used. 

Twice  the  height  of  the  bounce  shall  be  deducted  from  MH"  to 
determine  its  value  in  the  formula. 

In  case  water  jets  are  used  in  connection  with  the  driving, 
the  bearing  power  shall  be  determined  by  the  above  formulas 
from  the  results  of  driving  after  the  jets  have  been  removed. 

8.  LOAD  TESTS 

When  load  tests  are  specified,  the  test  loads  shall  be  applied 
gradually,  without  impact,  and  in  such  a way  that  no  lateral 
forces  are  applied  to  the  pile.  Load  testing  shall  not  be 
started  until  24  hours  after  driving  of  the  test  pile  is 
completed,  or  such  longer  time  as  is  specified.  Except  as 
otherwise  specified,  load  tests  shall  be  made  according  to 
the  following  procedure: 

The  total  test  load  shall  be  twice  the  specified  working  load 
and  shall  be  applied  to  the  pile  in  increments  equal  to  25  per- 
cent of  the  working  load.  Settlement  of  the  top  of  the  pile 
shall  be  measured  to  an  accuracy  of  0.01  inch  before  and  after 
the  application  of  each  load  increment  and  at  2,  4,  8,  15,  30, 
and  60  minutes  after,  and  then  every  2 hours  until  the  next 
load  increment  is  applied.  Additional  load  shall  not  be 
applied  until  the  rate  of  settlement  is  less  than  0.01  inch 
in  one  hour. 

The  total  test  load  shall  remain  on  the  pile  for  a period  of 
at  least  24  hours.  Settlement  shall  be  measured  at  6 -hour 
intervals  during  this  period  and  at  the  end  of  the  period,  at 
least  twice  during  removal  of  the  load,  and  immediately  after 
all  of  the  test  load  is  removed.  The  net  settlement  shall  be 
measured  approximately  24  hours  after  all  of  the  load  has  been 
removed. 

If  settlement  continues  in  excess  of  0.01  inch  per  hour  under 
less  than  the  total  test  load,  no  additional  load  shall  be 
applied,  but  the  load  that  has  been  applied  shall  remain  on 
the  pile  for  a period  of  at  least  24  hours,  and  settlement 
measurements  while  the  load  is  on  the  pile,  and  during  and 
after  removal  of  the  load  shall  be  made  as  if  it  were  the  total 
test  load. 

(13-4) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-33 


J> 


9.  CUTTING  OFF  PILES 


The  Contractor  shall  cut  the  piles  off  at  the  specified  eleva- 
tions. The  length  of  pile  cut  off  shall  be  sufficient  to 
permit  the  removal  of  all  damaged  material.  Steel  shells  or 
concrete  casings  for  cast-in-place  concrete  piles  shall  be  cut 
off  at  the  specified  elevation  before  being  filled  with 
concrete. 

Steel  bearing  piles  shall  be  cut  off  in  clean,  straight  lines 
as  shown  on  the  drawings.  Any  irregularities  shall  be  leveled 
off  with  deposits  of  weld  metal  or  by  grinding  before  place- 
ment of  bearing  caps. 

Precast  concrete  piles  and  concrete  casings  shall  be  cut  off 
in  a manner  such  as  to  prevent  damage  to  the  remaining  portion 
of  the  pile  or  casing  or  to  the  projecting  reinforcement 
required  for  connecting  the  piles  to  the  structure. 

Timber  piles  that  are  to  be  capped  shall  be  accurately  cut  off 
so  that  true  bearing  is  obtained  on  every  pile  without  the  use 
of  shims. 

10.  DEFECTIVE  PILES 


Any  pile  damaged  in  driving,  driven  out  of  its  proper  location, 
driven  below  the  specified  cut  off  elevation  or  inaccurately 
cut  off  shall  be  corrected  by  one  of  the  following  methods, 
whichever  is  approved  by  the  Engineer: 

a.  The  defective  pile  shall  be  pulled  and  replaced  or 
redriven; 

b.  A new  pile  shall  be  driven  adjacent  to  the  defective 
pile;  or, 

c.  The  defective  pile  shall  be  spliced  or  built  up  or  a 
sufficient  portion  of  the  footing  shall  be  extended  to 
properly  embed  the  pile. 

Pile  shells  abandoned  in  place  after  driving  shall  be  filled 
with  concrete  or  sand -cement  grout  as  appropriate  to  the  situ- 
ation. 

(13-5) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


)) 


2-34 


All  piles  pushed  up  by  the  driving  of  adjacent  piles  or  by 
any  other  cause  shall  be  driven  down  again. 

Any  sheet  pile  ruptured  in  the  interlock  or  otherwise  damaged 
during  driving  shall  be  pulled  and  replaced. 

11.  CORRECTING  SURFACE  HEAVE 


Any  excess  material  resulting  from  displacement  of  earth  by 
pile  driving  shall  be  removed.  Materials  disturbed  by  pile 
driving  shall  be  conditioned  and  compacted  to  a density 
equal  to  that  of  the  adjacent  undisturbed  material. 

12.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 

(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices 
are  established  in  the  contract,  the  number  of  each  type, 
kind  and  length  of  pile  driven  in  place  will  be  counted. 
Payment  for  furnishing  and  driving  each  type,  kind  and 
length  of  pile  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price. 

Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor, 
materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work  including  moving 
equipment  onto  and  off  of  the  work  site. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices 
are  established  in  the  contract,  the  number  of  each  type, 
kind,  and  length  of  pile  furnished,  accepted  and  stockpiled 
in  good  condition  at  the  site  of  the  work  will  be  counted. 
Payment  for  furnishing  each  type,  kind,  and  length  of  pile 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price.  Payment  for 
driving  each  type  and  kind  of  pile  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  unit  price.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all 
other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of 
the  work  including  moving  equipment  onto  and  off  of  the 
work  site. 

(Option  3)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices 
are  established  in  the  contract,  the  length  of  each  type 
and  kind  of  pile  driven  will  be  computed  to  the  nearest  foot 
as  the  difference  between  the  measured  length  of  pile  before 
driving  and  measured  length  of  pile  cut  off  after  driving. 
Payment  for  furnishing  and  driving  each  type  and  kind  of 
pile  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price.  Such  payment 
will  constitute  full  payment  for  all  labor,  materials,  equip- 
ment and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the 
completion  of  the  work,  including  moving  equipment  onto  and 
off  of  the  work  site. 

(13-6) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-35 


(Option  4)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices 
are  established  in  the  contract,  the  area  of  sheet  pile  walls, 
acceptably  placed,  will  be  computed  to  the  nearest  square 
foot  within  the  neat  lines  shown  on  the  drawings.  Payment 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  each  type,  kind, 
and  weight  of  piling.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  payment 
for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment,  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

(Use  with  All  Options)  The  measurement  of  the  number  of 
linear  feet  of  piles  (or  number  of  piles)  furnished  and  the 
number  of  piles  driven  shall  include  test  and  tension  piles 
specified  in  the  contract  but  not  those  furnished  and  driven  by 
the  Contractor  at  his  own  option.  No  payment  will  be  made  for 
furnishing  or  driving  piles,  including  test  piles,  to  replace 
piles  lost  or  damaged  prior  to  the  completion  of  the  contract 
while  in  stockpile  or  during  handling  and  driving. 

When  load  tests  are  specified,  payment  for  each  test  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  price  per  test.  Such  payment  will  consti- 
tute full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment,  and 
all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  making  the  test 
except  furnishing  and  driving  piling. 

When  splices  are  specified,  payment  for  each  splice  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  unit  price.  Such  payment  shall  constitute 
full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment,  and  all 
other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  completion  of  the  work. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  13  of  this  specification. 


(13-7) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


(fc 


2-36-1 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  14 

PRESSURE  GROUTING 


1.  Applicability 

Construction  Specification  14  is  applicable  to  the  drilling  and 

pressure  grouting  of  structure  foundations  with  portland  cement 

grout. 

2.  Material  Specifications 

Material  Specifications  522  and  531  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  14. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings 

a.  Plan  and  profile  of  the  grouting  layout.  (Include  region  to 
be  grouted,  location  and  spacing  of  lines  and  holes,  depth  of 
holes,  and  location  of  drill  holes  used  in  the  geologic 
investigation. ) 

b.  Inclination  of  holes  (angle  to  vertical)  if  inclined  holes  are 
required. 

c.  Location  and  depth  of  exploratory  holes  to  be  drilled. 

d.  Details  of  testing  and  sampling  in  overburden  if  required. 
(Include  method  of  measurement  and  payment.) 

e.  Location  and  placement  details  of  capping  concrete  if  required. 

f.  Method  of  grouting  (stage  or  packer). 

g.  Area  boundaries  and  depth  intervals  for  stage  grouting.  Depth 
intervals  for  packer  grouting. 

h.  Design  pressures  at  the  collar  for  various  grout  mixes  and 
various  depth  intervals. 

i.  Limitations  and  requirements  on  the  sequence  of  drilling  and 
grouting. 

j.  Minimum  distance  to  be  maintained  between  grouting  and 
drilling  operations,  and  minimum  age  of  grout  at  which  drilling 
in  grouted  holes  or  adjacent  to  grouted  holes  will  be  permitted. 


) 


NEH  5/3/71  (Notice  20-32) 


2-36-2 


k.  Minimum  distance  between  grouted  area  and  blasting  site  and 
minimum  permissible  age  of  grout  at  blasting  time,  if 
applicable. 

l.  Minimum  distance  of  grout  and  water  injections  to  concrete 
structures  and  drains. 

m.  Type  of  cement  to  be  used  in  grout. 

n.  Type  and  quality  of  admixtures. 

o.  Type  and  quality  of  bulk  fillers. 

p.  Pollution  prevention  measures,  such  as  lagoons  to  retain  grout 
from  leakages  and  from  flushing  of  lines  and  equipment  and  any 
other  measures  or  precautions  required  to  prevent  pollution  of 
natural  streams  or  other  bodies  of  water,  above  or  below  ground, 
with  grout,  toxic  dyes,  oil,  fuel,  or  other  substances  harmful 
to  humans,  wildlife,  or  plants. 

q.  A statement  in  the  Special  Provisions  that  (1)  the  quantity 
variations  clause  of  the  General  Provisions  or  the  Special 
Provisions  (depending  on  where  the  quantity  variations  clause 
is  located  in  the  particular  contract)  shall  not  apply  to  items 
of  work  under  Construction  Specification  14.  Pressure  Grouting, 
(2)  there  is  no  guarantee  as  to  the  quantities  of  such  items, 
and  (3)  payment  will  be  made  at  the  contract  prices  for  such 
items  regardless  of  the  quantities  of  the  items  actually  used  or 
performed. 


NEH  5/3/71  (Notice  20-32) 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
14.  PRESSURE  GROUTING 


2-36-3 


1.  SCOPE 


The  work  shall  consist  of  drilling  grout  holes  and  exploratory- 
holes,  pressure  testing,  and  injecting  portland  cement  grout  under 
pressure,  and  shall  include  furnishing  all  material,  labor,  and 
equipment  required  in  accomplishment  of  the  work. 

2.  EQUIPMENT 

All  drilling  and  grouting  equipment  shall  be  of  a type  and  capacity, 
and  in  condition,  to  carry  out  the  work  described. 

Drilling  Equipment.  For  exploratory  holes,  all  drilling  equipment 
used  in  rock  shall  be  of  the  rotary  type,  shall  be  equipped  with 
hydraulic  feed,  and,  when  specified,  shall  be  capable  of  drilling 
angle  holes  up  to  30  degrees  from  vertical. 

Cores  shall  be  drilled  with  standard  ball  bearing,  swivel  type, 
double  tube,  split  core  barrels,  or  non-split  barrels  of  the  "MM 
0 series. 

Equipment  for  drilling  grout  holes  may  be  of  the  rotary  type.  No 
core  recovery  will  be  required,  and  the  type  of  bit  used  shall  be 
optional.  Equipment  using  air  for  flushing  cuttings  shall  not  be 
used.  Percussion  drilling  equipment  using  water  for  flushing 
cuttings  may  be  used  if  approved  by  the  Contracting  Officer,  in 
which  case  the  lifting  rate  of  the  flushing  water  shall  be  not 
less  than  18  inches  per  second. 

Grouting  Equipment.  The  grouting  equipment  shall  be  capable  of 
mixing,  storing,  and  pumping  grout  as  specified. 

Pumps . Grout  pumps  shall  be  of  the  long  stroke,  multiple 
piston  or  the  helical  screw  type.  The  capacity  shall  be  not 
less  than  20  gpm  at  200  psi. 

Mixers . Mixers  shall  be  designed  to  mix  cement,  water,  and 
bulk  fillers  thoroughly  and  to  produce  a grout  of  uniform 
texture  at  the  specified  mix  ratios.  Mixers  shall  match  the 
capacity  of  the  pumping  plant. 


(14-1) 


NEH  5/3/71  (Notice  20-32) 


2-36-4 


Hold-over  Tank.  A hold-over  tank  shall  be  furnished  if  a 
single  compartment  mixer  is  used.  It  shall  be  equipped  with 
mechanical  agitators  to  prevent  segregation  of  the  grout,  and 
shall  have  sufficient  capacity  to  provide  a continuous  supply 
of  grout.  The  outflow  shall  pass  through  a No.  16  wire  mesh 
screen  if  the  grout  contains  particles  or  foreign  matter  that 
would  interfere  with  its  proper  flow  into  the  spaces  it  is 
intended  to  fill. 

Air  Supply.  The  air  supply  shall  meet  the  requirement  of  the 
pumps  and  shall  be  not  less  than  200  cubic  feet  per  minute  per 
plant. 

Water  Meter.  One  water  meter,  of  the  reset  type,  graduated  in 
tenths  of  gallons  or  hundredths  of  cubic  feet  shall  be  used 
with  each  mixer. 

Pressure  Gages.  One  pressure  gage  shall  be  installed  at  the 
pump  and  one  at  the  collar  of  the  hole.  Gages  shall  be  of  the 
nonclogging  type  or  shall  be  prevented  from  clogging  by  using 
gage-savers  or  grease.  Spare  gages  shall  be  at  hand  at  all 
times. 

Hoses,  Valves,  and  Fittings.  Hoses,  valves,  and  fittings  shall 
be  compatible  with  the  maximum  pressures  specified.  Hose  from 
pump  to  grout  header  and  return  shall  be  not  smaller  than  11/2 
inch  (ID) , and  the  pipe  between  header  and  packer  shall  be  not 
smaller  than  3/4  inch  (ID) . Double  or  single  packers  may  be 
required  for  grouting  and  pressure  testing.  Packers  shall  fit 
tightly  in  the  holes  at  all  testing  and  grouting  pressures. 

3.  ARRANGEMENT  OF  GROUTING  EQUIPMENT 

The  arrangement  of  grouting  equipment  shall  provide  a return  line 
from  the  header  back  to  the  pump  or  hold-over  tank,  permitting 
continuous  circulation  of  the  grout.  The  grout  pressure  shall  be 
• controlled  at  the  header  or  at  the  end  of  the  return  line. 

Each  hole  shall  be  equipped  with  a hole  shut-off  valve  below  the 
hand  coupling  union,  permitting  shut-off  at  refusal  pressure 
and  removal  of  the  header  to  another  hole  while  still  maintaining 
pressure  in  the  completed  hole. 

The  header  arrangement  shall  include  a blow-off  valve  and  a control 
valve,  to  be  used  to  check  back-pressure  in  the  hole  prior  to 


(14-2) 

NEH  5/3/71  (Notice  20-32) 


2-36-5 


removal  of  the  header  to  another  hole  while  still  maintaining  pres- 
sure in  the  completed  hole. 

The  header  arrangement  shall  include  a blow-off  valve  and  a control 
valve,  to  be  used  to  check  back-pressure  in  the  hole  prior  to  removal 
of  the  header,  and  a valve  in  the  return  line.  The  header  shall  be 
connected  to  the  supply  line  by  means  of  a U-shaped  pipe  arrangement 
which  prevents  fall-out  of  solids  into  the  hole  from  the  bypassing 
grout  when  the  rate  of  grout  acceptance  is  small. 

4.  COMMUNICATIONS 

A suitable  communications  system  between  individuals  at  the  pump 
units  and  the  holes  shall  be  maintained  by  the  Contractor. 

5.  MATERIALS 

Portland  Cement.  Portland  cement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  531  for  the  specified  type.  If  the  cement 
contains  lumps  or  foreign  material  which  would  clog  the  grouting 
equipment  or  interfere  with  grout  injection,  it  shall  be  screened 
through  a 100-mesh  screen.  Cement  shall  be  furnished  in  bags  (94 
lbs.)  unless  special  equipment  is  provided  for  storing,  handling, 
and  weighing  bulk  cement  as  specified  in  Section  2. 

Water.  Water  used  shall  be  clean  and  free  from  injurious  amounts 
of  oil,  acid,  organic  matter,  or  other  deleterious  substances.  The 
temperature  of  the  water  at  time  of  mixing  shall  be  above  50°F. 

Sand.  Sand  for  grout  shall  conform  to  Material  Specification  522 
except  that,  unless  specified  otherwise,  the  gradation  shall  be  as 
follows : 


Sand  included  in  the  mix  shall  be  measured  in  cubic  foot  boxes  un- 
less otherwise  approved  by  the  Engineer. 


Sieve  Designation 
(U.S.  Std.  Square  Mesh) 


Percent  Passing 
by  Weight 


16 

50 

100 

200 


100 

20-50 

10-30 

0-5 


(14-3) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-36-6 


Bulk  Fillers.  Bulk  fillers  other  than  sand  shall  be  of  the  type  and 
quality  specified  in  Section  18.  Bulk  fillers  included  in  the  mix 
shall  be  measured  in  cubic  foot  boxes  unless  otherwise  approved  by 
the  Engineer. 

Admixtures . Admixtures  shall  be  of  the  type  and  quality  specified 
in  Section  18. 

Storage  and  Supply.  A sufficient  quantity  of  all  materials  shall  be 
on  hand  to  insure  that  grouting  operations  will  not  be  interrupted 
or  delayed.  Materials  shall  be  stored  in  such  a manner  that  the 
quality  of  the  materials  is  maintained. 

6.  GROUT  MIXTURES 


Composition.  Grout  shall  consist  of  a mixture  of  portland  cement  and 
water.  Sand,  bulk  filler,  and  admixtures  shall  be  included  as  specified. 

Grout  mixes  and  sequences  of  changes  in  mix  ratio  or  composition  shall 
be  as  specified  in  Section  14  except  as  otherwise  directed  by  the  Engi- 
neer. 

Mix  Ratios.  Grout  mix  ratios  will  be  expressed  in  cubic  feet  of  water 
to  a bag  of  cement.  Bulk  fillers  will  be  expressed  in  cubic  feet  to  a 
bag  of  cement.  Other  additives  will  be  expressed  in  pounds,  gallons, 
or  pints  to  a bag  of  cement. 

7.  CAPPING  CONCRETE 


Concrete  for  grout  caps,  if  required,  shall  be  placed  as  shown  on  the 
drawings.  The  concrete  shall  be  a workable  mixture  of  portland  cement, 
fine  and  coarse  aggregates,  and  water,  containing  not  less  than  6 bags 
of  cement  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete,  and  not  more  than  6 gallons  of 
water  per  bag  of  cement,  including  the  free  moisture  in  the  aggregates. 

Portland  cement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specifi- 
cation 531  for  the  type  specified.  Aggregates  shall  consist  of  sound 
and  durable  particles  and  shall  conform  to  the  limitations  for  delete- 
rious substances  and  the  grading  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  C 
33.  Coarse  aggregates  shall  be  size  number  7,  67,  57,  or  467  as  defined 
in  ASTM  Specification  C 33. 

Batching,  mixing,  and  placing  shall  be  done  in  a manner  that  will  produce 
a uniform,  well-graded,  dense  concrete.  When  ready-mixed  concrete 


(14-4) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-36-7 


is  furnished,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  the  Engineer  a delivery 
ticket  showing  the  time  of  loading  and  the  quantities  of  materials 
used  for  each  load  of  concrete.  Concrete  shall  be  placed  within  1% 
hours  after  introduction  of  the  cement  to  the  aggregates. 

Surfaces  against  which  concrete  is  to  be  placed  shall  be  cleaned  of 
soil,  loose  rock,  and  other  loose  material  by  air-water  cutting, 
jetting,  or  other  means  as  necessary,  and  shall  be  moist  when  the 
concrete  is  placed. 

Concrete  shall  be  placed  only  when  the  Engineer  is  present. 

The  concrete  shall  be  prevented  from  drying  for  a curing  period  of 
at  least  5 days  after  it  is  placed.  Exposed  surfaces  shall  be  kept 
continuously  moist  for  the  entire  period,  or  shall  be  coated  with 
an  acceptable  curing  compound  as  soon  as  free  water  has  disappeared. 

8.  DRILLING  OVERBURDEN 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  holes  drilled  through  overburden  shall 
be_cased.  The  inside  diameter  of  the  casing  shall  be  not  less 
than  3 1/16  inches  for  exploratory  holes  or  2 1/2  inches  for  grout 
holes.  Casings  shall  be  removed  after  completion  of  the  grouting 
operations  unless  otherwise  approved  by  the  Engineer.  Holes  in 
overburden  shall  be  backfilled  with  grout  or  a sand-cement  mixture 
or  by  tamping  soil  into  the  holes  to  approximately  the  density  of 
the  surrounding  overburden,  unless  otherwise  specified  or  directed 
by  the  Engineer. 

9.  DRILLING  ROCK 


The  location,  inclination,  and  depth  of  holes  shall  be  as  shown  on 
the  drawings  except  as  otherwise  directed  by  the  Engineer. 

The  use  of  rod  dope,  grease,  and  other  solid  or  liquid  lubricants 
will  not  be  permitted. 

The  Contractor  shall  perform  such  exploratory  drilling  as  may  be 
required  to  determine  the  condition  of  the  rock  prior  to  grouting 
and  the  effectiveness  of  the  grouting  operation  as  the  work  pro- 
gresses. All  exploratory  holes  shall  be  cored  and  shall  be  pres- 
sure tested  when  directed  by  the  Engineer.  Exploratory  holes  shall 
have  a diameter  of  not  less  than  2.9  inches  and  a core  diameter  of 
not  less  than  2.1  inches  (NX).  Rock  core  samples  shall  be  carefully 
placed  in  correct  sequence  in  labeled  core  boxes  furnished  by 


(14-5) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-36-8 


the  Contractor,  and  shall  be  stored  at  the  job  site  where  they  will 
be  safe  and  readily  accessible  to  the  Contracting  Officer  for  his 
use  and  disposal. 

Grout  holes  shall  have  a diameter  of  not  less  than  1.4  inches  (EX). 

The  Contractor  shall  temporarily  discontinue  drilling  in  case  of  ex- 
cessive water  loss  and  shall  pressure  test  and/or  grout  the  hole  as 
directed  by  the  Engineer. 

10.  PRESSURE  TESTING 

In  holes  to  be  pressure  tested,  the  packer  or  packers  shall  be  set 
at  intervals  as  directed  by  the  Engineer.  Each  interval  shall  be 
tested  at  water  pressures  up  to  the  specified  design  grouting  pres- 
sure for  that  interval,  unless  otherwise  directed  by  the  Engineer. 
Pressures  exceeding  the  specified  design  pressures  shall  not  be 
applied  unless  specifically  authorized  by  the  Engineer. 

The  flow  shall  be  read  at  one-minute  intervals.  When  the  absorp- 
tion is  steady  for  at  least  three  consecutive  minutes  at  the  max- 
imum pressure  for  the  interval  being  tested,  the  shut-off  valve 
at  the  hole  shall  be  turned  off  and  the  pressure  drop  shall  be  ob- 
served. The  flow  readings  and  the  rate  of  pressure  drop  shall  be 
recorded. 

Pressure  test  equipment  shall  be  calibrated  at  the  site  to  deter- 
mine the  pressure  loss  in  the  equipment  at  various  flow  rates  and 
test  depths. 

Pressure  tests  and  calibration  of  pressure  test  equipment  shall 
be  performed  in  the  presence  of  the  Engineer. 

11.  STAGE  GROUTING 


Stage  grouting  shall  be  done  in  successive  depth  intervals  (stages) 
in  each  hole,  beginning  at  the  surface  and  progressing  to  the  deep- 
er stages.  All  of  the  holes  in  a specified  area  shall  be  drilled 
and  grouted  in  each  stage  before  grouting  of  the  succeeding  stage 
is  begun. 

The  stages  and  the  grouting  pressures  for  each  stage  shall  be  as 
specified,  except  as  otherwise  directed  by  the  Engineer. 

Washing  with  water  and  air  shall  precede  grouting  in  each  stage. 
Washing  under  pressure  or  pressure  testing  shall  be  performed  as 
specified  or  as  directed  by  the  Engineer. 

(14-6) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-36-9 


1 2 . PACKER  GROUTING 


If  packer  grouting  is  specified,  the  holes  shall  be  drilled 
to  the  specified  depths  and  shall  be  grouted  in  intervals 
starting  at  the  bottom. 

The  grouting  intervals  and  pressures  shall  be  as  specified, 
except  as  otherwise  directed  by  the  Engineer. 

Prior  to  grouting,  the  entire  hole  shall  be  washed  with  a 
mixture  of  water  and  air.  Washing  under  pressure  or  pres- 
sure testing  shall  be  performed  as  specified  or  as  directed 
by  the  Engineer. 

13.  GROUT  INJECTION 

Grout  pressures  shall  not  exceed  the  specified  design 
pressures  unless  specifically  authorized  by  the  Engineer. 

Grouting,  particularly  in  zones  near  the  surface,  shall 
be  done  with  extreme  caution  to  prevent  uplift  of  the  rock 
or  excessive  leakage  of  grout  at  the  surface. 

The  Contractor  shall  caulk  surface  leaks  which  cause  exces- 
sive loss  of  grout  or  prevent  reaching  required  grouting 
pressures.  Leaks  may  be  caulked  by  mechanical  means  or  with 
fast-setting  mortar.  If  necessary,  grouting  shall  be  tempo- 
rarily suspended  or  the  pressure  shall  be  reduced  to  permit 
the  caulking  of  leaks.  Accelerators  may  be  added  to  the 
grout  for  the  same  purpose  if  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

If  grout  injected  into  one  hole  appears  in  adjacent  holes, 
they  shall  be  plugged  temporarily  with  packers  set  just 
above  the  level  at  which  the  grout  is  entering  while  grout- 
ing of  the  particular  interval  of  the  first  hole  is  being 
completed. 

The  quantity  of  grout  prepared  in  advance  shall  be  kept  to 
a minimum.  Grout  which  has  been  kept  in  the  mixer  with  or 
without  agitation  for  longer  than  one  hour  shall  be  dis- 
carded. 

Grout  temperatures  shall  be  not  lower  than  50°F.  The  grouted 
soil,  rock,  or  concrete  shall  be  not  colder  than  40°F  when 
grout  is  injected  and  for  at  least  48  hours  thereafter.  In- 
sulative  protection  or  heat  shall  be  applied  to  the  surface 


(14-7) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2.-36-10 


for  24  hours  prior  and  48  hours  after  grouting  if  needed  to  keep  the 
soil,  rock,  or  concrete  at  the  required  temperature. 


1 4 . GROUTING  PROCEDURE 


The  procedures  described  below  are  general  guidelines  and  may  be 
altered  in  the  field  by  the  Engineer  to  suit  the  conditions  encoun- 
tered and  to  meet  the  design  objectives.  Changes  in  the  grout  mix 
and  grouting  procedure  shall  be  made  when  and  as  directed  by  the 
Engineer,  and  shall  not  be  made  without  the  approval  of  the  Engineer. 


Grouting  at  each  elevation  in  each  hole  shall  start  with  a 
5:1  mix  (5  cu.  ft.  water:  1 bag  cement).  If  the  specified 
design  pressure  cannot  be  reached  at  an  absorption  rate  of 
not  more  than  10  gpm,  the  mix  ratio  shall  be  changed  proJ 
gressively  to  thicker  mixes,  after  three  batches  of  5:1  mix 
(about  5.45  cu.  ft.  per  batch),  until  a ratio  has  been 
reached  at  which  the  hole  refuses  to  accept  grout  at  the 
specified  pressure. 

When  the  hole  shows  signs  of  refusal,  a thinner  mix  shall  be 
used  to  prevent  or  remove  clogging.  Preferably  the  last  mix 
ratio  prior  to  refusal  in  each  hole  shall  be  3:1  or  thinner. 

A hole  shall  be  considered  grouted  when  absorption  at  the 
design  pressure  is  less  than  5-7  gallons  of  grout  in  10  min- 
utes . 

If  a hole  continues  to  accept  grout  when  the  mix  has  been 
thickened  to  a ratio  of  1:1,  the  mix  shall  be  thickened  fur- 
ther with  sand  or  other  bulk  fillers  after  three  batches  of 
1:1  mix  have  been  injected. 

If  it  continues  to  accept  grout  after  a reasonable  amount  of 
the  thickest  workable  grout  mixture  has  been  injected,  the 
Engineer  may  specify  a reduced  pump  speed  and/or  the  use  of 
accelerators,  or  may  direct  that  the  pumping  be  halted  tem- 
porarily to  permit  the  grout  to  set. 

Grouting  shall  be  discontinued  in  holes  which  do  not  respond 
to  this  procedure  and  the  holes  shall  be  redrilled  and  re- 
grouted later,  or  the  area  of  high  grout  absorption  shall 
be  grouted  from  adjacent  holes  until  the  design  objective 
has  been  achieved. 


(14-8) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-36-11 


15.  RECORDS 

When  drilling  overburden  and  when  drilling  exploratory  holes  the 
Contractor  shall  keep  an  accurate  drilling  log  which  includes, 
where  applicable,  a record  of  the  ground  water  level  in  the  hole. 

The  Contractor  shall  keep  a complete  and  accurate  record  of  all 
grouting  operations.  This  record  shall  include  a time  log  of 
the  grout  mixes  and  admixtures  used  in  each  stage  or  interval 
of  each  hole,  the  related  pressures  and  absorption  rates,  back 
pressures,  and  observations  on  excessive  leakage  and  other  non- 
routine conditions. 

One  copy  of  the  records  shall  be  furnished  to  the  Engineer  at 
the  end  of  each  shift,  or  as  directed. 

16.  CLEANUP 

After  grouting  is  completed,  the  Contractor  shall  remove  the 
grouting  plant  and  all  related  parts,  equipment,  and  supplies 
from  the  site,  including  unused  materials  and  waste  that  is 
unsightly  or  would  interfere  with  efficient  operation  by  others. 

17.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  or  lump  sum 
prices  are  established  in  the  contract,  measurement  and  payment 
for  pressure  grouting  will  be  made  as  described  below.  Such 
payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials, 
equipment,  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the 
completion  of  the  work. 

Mobilization.  If  mobilization  for  pressure  grouting  is  shown 
as  a separate  item  of  work  in  the  contract,  payment  for  mobiliza- 
tion will  be  made  at  the  contract  lump  sum  price.  Such  payment 
will  include  compensation  for  moving  grouting  equipment  and 
supplies  to  the  site  of  the  work,  assembling  the  plant  at  the 
site,  moving  on  the  site  as  work  progresses,  and  removal  from 
the  site  upon  completion  of  the  work.  Sixty  percent  of  the  lump 
sum  price  will  be  paid  when  the  plant  is  assembled  at  the  site 
and  work  is  begun.  The  remaining  forty  percent  will  be  paid 
after  the  work  is  completed,  the  plant  is  removed  from  the  site, 
and  cleanup  is  completed. 


(14-9) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-36-12 


Drilling  Overburden.  Drilling  overburden  will  be  measured  by- 
determining,  to  the  nearest  foot,  the  total  linear  feet  of 
accepted  hole  drilled  in  the  overburden.  Payment  for  drilling 
overburden  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  which  will 
include  compensation  for  placing  and  removing  casings. 

Drilling  Rock.  Drilling  rock  will  be  measured  by  determining, 
to  the  nearest  foot,  the  total  linear  feet  of  accepted  hole  of 
each  size  drilled  in  rock  without  coring.  Payment  for  drilling 
rock  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  each  size  of 
hole. 

Coring  Rock.  Coring  rock  will  be  measured  by  determining,  to 
the  nearest  foot,  the  total  linear  feet  of  accepted  hole  of 
each  size  cored  in  rock.  Payment  for  coring  rock  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  each  core  size  which  will  include 
compensation  for  furnishing  and  handling  the  core  boxes,  storing 
cores  and  recording  observations  as  specified. 

Pressure  Tests.  Pressure  testing  will  be  measured  by  deter- 
mining the  total  time,  to  the  nearest  one-quarter  hour,  that 
pressure  is  applied  to  the  holes  in  making  the  required  tests. 
One-quarter  hour  will  be  added  for  setting  up  equipment  for 
each  test.  No  extra  payment  will  be  made  for  calibrating 
pressure  test  equipment.  Payment  for  pressure  tests  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  unit  price. 

Connections  to  Grout  Holes.  Connections  to  grout  holes  will 
be  measured  by  determining  the  number  of  connections  made  of 
the  grout  supply  hose  to  the  holes  to  be  grouted.  The  number 
of  connections  for  payment  will  not  exceed  one  per  hole  for 
packer  grouting  or  one  for  each  stage  for  stage  grouting,  ex- 
cept that  if  grouting  is  interrupted  to  permit  the  grout  to 
set,  one  additional  connection  will  be  measured  for  payment 
each  time  grouting  at  the  same  elevation  in  the  same  hole  is 
resumed.  Payment  for  connections  to  grout  holes  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price. 

Placing  Grout.  Grout  placed  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest 
cubic  foot  by  counting  the  number  of  batches  of  each  grout 
mixture  injected  in  the  holes  as  specified  and  multiplying 
by  the  number  of  cubic  feet  per  batch.  The  number  of  cubic 
feet  per  batch  for  each  grout  mixture  will  be  determined  as 
the  average  of  the  measured  volumes  of  at  least  three  (3) 
batches  of  the  mixture.  Payment  for  placing  grout  will  be 


(14-10) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-36-13 


made  at  the  contract  unit  price  which  will  include  compensation 
for  handling  all  materials  for  the  purpose  of  mixing  and  placing 
grout,  washing  the  holes  with  air  and  water,  sealing  surface 
leaks,  and  maintaining  grout  records.  Payment  will  not  be  made 
for  grout  lost  by  failure  of  the  Contractor  to  caulk  surface 
leaks  or  for  grout  otherwise  wasted  through  the  fault  of  the 
Contractor. 

Cement.  Cement  for  grout  will  be  measured  on  the  basis  of  the 
number  of  bags  of  cement  (94  lbs.)  or  equivalent  weight  of 
bulk  cement  used  in  the  grout.  Cement  used  in  concrete  for 
capping  or  other  purposes  will  not  be  included.  Payment  for 
cement  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price.  Payment  will 
not  be  made  for  cement  in  grout  wasted  because  of  mechanical 
failure  or  through  the  fault  of  the  Contractor. 

Sand  and  Bulk  Fillers.  Sand  and  bulk  fillers  will  be  measured 
by  volume  to  the  nearest  cubic  foot  of  each  used  in  the  grout- 
ing operation.  Payment  for  sand  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  price.  Payment  for  bulk  fillers  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  unit  price  for  each  type  of  bulk  filler  specified. 
Payment  will  not  be  made  for  sand  or  bulk  fillers  wasted 
because  of  mechanical  failure  or  through  the  fault  of  the 
Contractor. 

Admixtures.  Liquid  admixtures  will  be  measured  by  volume  to 
the  nearest  gallon.  Dry  admixtures  will  be  measured  by  weight 
to  the  nearest  pound.  Payment  for  admixtures  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  each  type  of  admixture  specified. 
Payment  will  not  be  made  for  admixtures  wasted  because  of 
mechanical  failure  or  through  the  fault  of  the  Contractor. 

Capping  Concrete.  Capping  concrete  will  be  measured  to  the 
nearest  0. 1 cubic  yard  by  determining  the  combined  weights  of 
cement,  aggregates,  and  water  used  in  concrete  mixed  and 
placed  as  specified,  and  dividing  by  a unit  weight  of  4000 
pounds  per  cubic  yard.  Payment  for  capping  concrete  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  unit  price  which  will  include  compensa- 
tion for  furnishing  and  handling  all  materials,  including 
cement,  and  for  mixing,  transporting,  placing,  and  curing  the 
concrete. 

Subsidiary  Items.  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described 
in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be 
included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is 
made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are 
made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  18  of  this  specifi- 
cation. 


(14-11) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-37 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  21 

EXCAVATION 


1.  Applicability, 

Construction  Specification  21  is  applicable  to  all  types  of  excava- 
tion. The  specification  defines  classes  of  excavation  and  includes 
special  requirements  for  certain  types  of  excavation  but  does  not 
establish  and  define  all  types  of  excavation.  It  is  intended  that 
the  types  of  excavation  be  established  on  a job  or  project  basis 
as  needed. 

The  n class11  of  excavation  defines  the  kind  of  material  to  be 
excavated.  The  ^tvpe”  of  excavation  defines  the  functional  purpose 
of  the  excavation.  Established  types  of  excavation  may  include 
(but  are  not  restricted  to)? 

a.  Foundation  Excavation  (or  Stripping)  ; 

b.  Cutoff  Trench  Excavation; 

c . Channel  Excavation; 

d.  Structure  Excavation; 

e.  Emergency  Spillway  Excavation; 

f.  Abutment  Shaping  Excavation. 

Any  of  the  established  types  may  include  excavation  of  materials 
in  either  class  or  may  be  unclassified.  However,  the  excavation 
of  a given  class  of  material  may  be  more  difficult  in  one  type  of 
excavation  than  in  another.  These  factors  must  be  carefully  con- 
sidered as  a basis  for  establishing  types  of  excavation  to  be 
designated  on  the  drawings  and  listed  in  the  bid  schedule. 

For  projects  involving  considerable  quantities  of  excavation  of 
different  classes  of  material  under  conditions  that  vary  in 
different  parts  of  the  works,  bids  must  be  asked,  and  payments 
made,  on  the  basis  of  both  type  and  class  of  excavation.  For  such 
projects  it  is  necessary  that  the  bid  schedule  be  set  up  in  terms 
of  both  type  and  class  of  excavation  (for  example:  Channel  Exca- 

vation, Common;  Channel  Excavation,  Rock) . 


i) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


< 

2-38 


For  projects  involving  only  one  type  of  excavation  and  for 
projects  involving  small  quantities  of  excavation  it  may  be 
sufficient  to  include  only  the  classes  of  excavation  in  the 
bid  schedule* 

2*  Material  Specifications* 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construc- 
tion Specification  21. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings* 

a*  The  horizontal  and  vertical  extent  of  each  type  of  excavation . 

b.  Designation  and  definition  of  types  of  excavation. 

c.  Excavation  pay  limits  when  Option  1,  Section  11,  is  used. 

d.  Surface  finish  requirements,  such  as  grading  tolerances. 

(This  may  be  especially  important  at  the  crest  of  a spillway.) 

e.  The  location  and  limits  of  all  borrow  areas. 

f.  The  location  and  limits  of  all  waste  areas. 

g.  Boring  logs  or  test  pit  logs  pertinent  to  all  areas  to  be 
excavated.  In  addition  to  descriptions  of  materials,  logs 
must  also  include  water  table  elevations  and  dates  of 
observation.  For  purposes  of  the  construction  drawings, 
no  indications  of  correlation  of  materials  between  logs 
shall  be  shown. 

h.  Existing  access  and  haul  roads. 

i.  Special  requirements  for  dewatering  and  keeping  the 
excavation  dry,  with  cross  reference  to  Construction 
Specification  11  where  applicable. 

j.  Special  requirements  for  control  of  blasting  if  applicable. 

k.  Special  requirements  for  control  of  erosion,  water  pollution 
and  air  pollution  if  applicable. 

l.  Requirements  for  control  of  the  size  gradation  of  excavated 
rock  where  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  material  of  a 
particular  gradation  for  rock  fill  or  riprap. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


♦ 


2-39 


i 


n.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment,  if  the  standard  speci- 
fication includes  more  than  one  method. 

m.  Requirements  for  concrete  to  fill  voids  from  overexcavation 

(refer  to  specification  31  or  32)  if  requirements  in 
Section  10  are  not  adequate. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  5,  Use  of  Excavated  Materials 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  the  quality,  condi- 
tion and  relative  location  of  significant  quantities 
of  the  materials  to  be  excavated  are  known  to  be 
suited  to  the  economic  construction  of  the  required 
fill,  and  particularly  where  alternate  sources  of 
material  are  less  desirable  or  do  not  exist. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  known  data 
indicate  that  the  use  of  alternate  sources  of  fill 
materials  may  result  in  more  economical  construction 
of  the  required  fill. 

b.  Section  6,  Disposal  of  Waste  Materials 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  areas  for  wasting 
fill  are  available  at  the  site,  when  the  waste  fill 
will  beneficially  supplement  the  function  of  the 
permanent  works  or  when  there  is  no  known  market  for 
the  sale  of  such  waste  materials  as  may  be  produced. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  areas  for  wasting 
fill  are  not  readily  available  at  the  site  or  when 
there  is  a known  market  for  the  sale  of  such  waste 
materials  as  may  be  produced. 

c.  Section  11,  Measurement  and  Payment 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  excavations  where  the  pay 
limits  can  best  be  defined  on  the  drawings. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  excavations  bounded  by 
simple  plane  surfaces  and  constant  or  gradually 
varying  cross  section  throughout. 

(3)  Option  3 is  intended  for  excavations  whose  lower 
limits  are  determinable  only  by  examination  of  the 
materials  encountered  and  where  the  lower  limits 
have  been  designated  on  the  drawings  as  approximate 

or  "to  be  determined  by  the  Engineer  during  construction." 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-40 


(4)  Option  4 is  intended  for  structure  excavation 
bounded  by  fairly  simple  plane  surfaces  where  pay 
limits  are  not  shown  on  the  drawings. 

(5)  Two  or  more  options  may  be  included  as  numbered 
methods  in  standard  specifications. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-41 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
21.  EXCAVATION 


1.  SCOPE 


The  work  shall  consist  of  the  excavation  required  by  the  drawings 
and  specifications  and  disposal  of  the  excavated  materials. 

2.  CLASSIFICATION 


Excavation  will  be  classified  as  common  excavation  or  rock 
excavation  in  accordance  with  the  following  definitions  or  will 
be  designated  as  unclassified. 

Common  excavation  shall  be  defined  as  the  excavation  of 
all  materials  that  can  be  excavated,  transported,  and 
unloaded  by  the  use  of  heavy  ripping  equipment  and  wheel 
tractor-scrapers  with  pusher  tractors  or  that  can  be 
excavated  and  dumped  into  place  or  loaded  onto  hauling 
equipment  by  means  of  excavators  having  a rated  capacity 
' of  one  cubic  yard  and  equipped  with  attachments  (such  as 

shovel,  bucket,  backhoe,  dragline  or  clam  shell)  appro- 
priate to  the  character  of  the  materials  and  the  site 
conditions . 

Rock  excavation  shall  be  defined  as  the  excavation  of  all 
hard,  compacted  or  cemented  materials  the  accomplishment 
of  which  requires  blasting  or  the  use  of  excavators 
larger  than  defined  for  common  excavation.  The  excavation 
and  removal  of  isolated  boulders  or  rock  fragments  larger 
than  one  cubic  yard  in  volume  encountered  in  materials 
otherwise  conforming  to  the  definition  of  common  excava- 
tion shall  be  classified  as  rock  excavation. 

Excavation  will  be  classified  according  to  the  above  definitions 
by  the  Engineer,  based  on  his  judgment  of  the  character  of  the 
materials  and  the  site  conditions. 

The  presence  of  isolated  boulders  or  rock  fragments  larger  than 
one  cubic  yard  in  size  will  not  in  itself  be  sufficient  cause  to 
change  the  classification  of  the  surrounding  material. 

For  the  purpose  of  this  classification,  the  following  definitions 
shall  apply: 

) 


(21-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-42 


i 


Heavy  ripping  equipment  shall  be  defined  as  a rear-mounted, 
heavy  duty,  single- tooth,  ripping  attachment  mounted  on  a 
tractor  having  a power  rating  of  200-300  net  horsepower 
(at  the  flywheel). 

Wheel  tractor-scraper  shall  be  defined  as  a self-loading 
(not.  elevating)  and  unloading  scraper  having  a struck  bowl 
capacity  of  12-20  yards. 

Pusher  tractor  shall  be  defined  as  a track  type  tractor 
having  a power  rating  of  200-300  net  horsepower  (at  the 
flywheel)  equipped  with  appropriate  attachements. 

3.  UNCLASSIFIED  EXCAVATION 

Items  designated  as  "Unclassified  Excavation"  shall  include 
all  materials  encountered  regardless  of  their  nature  or  the 
manner  in  which  they  are  removed.  When  excavation  is  unclassified, 
none  of  the  definitions  or  classifications  stated  in  Section  2 
of  this  specification  shall  apply. 

4.  BLASTING 

The  transportation,  handling,  storage,  and  use  of  dynamite  and 
other  explosives  shall  be  directed  and  supervised  by  a person 
of  proven  experience  and  ability  in  blasting  operations. 

Blasting  shall  be  done  in  such  a way  as  to  prevent  damage  to 
the  work  or  unnecessary  fracturing  of  the  foundation  and  shall 
conform  to  any  special  requirements  in  Section  12  of  this 
specification. 

5.  USE  OF  EXCAVATED  MATERIALS 

(Option  1)  To  the  extent  they  are  needed,  all  suitable  materials 
from  the  specified  excavations  shall  be  used  in  the  construction 
of  required  permanent  earth  fill  or  rock  fill.  The  suitability 
of  materials  for  specific  purposes  will  be  determined  by  the 
Engineer.  The  Contractor  shall  not  waste  or  otherwise  dispose 
of  suitable  excavated  materials. 

(Option  2)  Suitable  materials  from  the  specified  excavations  may 
be  used  in  the  construction  of  required  earth  fill  or  rock  fill. 

The  suitability  of  materials  for  specific  purposes  will  be 
determined  by  the  Engineer. 


(21-2) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-43 


y) 

6.  DISPOSAL  OF  WASTE  MATERIALS 

(Option  1)  All  surplus  or  unsuitable  excavated  materials  will  be 
designated  as  waste  and  shall  be  disposed  of  at  the  locations 
shown  on  the  drawings. 

(Option  2)  All  surplus  or  unsuitable  excavated  materials  will  be 
designated  as  waste  and  shall  be  disposed  of  by  the  Contractor 
at  sites  of  his  own  choosing  away  from  the  site  of  the  work. 

7.  BRACING  AND  SHORING 

Excavated  surfaces  too  steep  to  be  safe  and  stable  if  unsupported 
shall  be  supported  as  necessary  to  safeguard  the  work  and  workmen, 
to  prevent  sliding  or  settling  of  the  adjacent  ground,  and  to  avoid 
damaging  existing  improvements.  The  width  of  the  excavation  shall 
be  increased  if  necessary  to  provide  space  for  sheeting,  bracing, 
shoring,  and  other  supporting  installations.  The  Contractor  shall 
furnish,  place  and  subsequently  remove  such  supporting  installations. 

8.  STRUCTURE  AND  TRENCH  EXCAVATION 

Structure  or  trench  excavation  shall  be  completed  to  the  specified 
elevations  and  to  sufficient  length  and  width  to  include  allowance 
P for  forms,  bracing  and  supports,  as  necessary,  before  any  concrete 

or  earth  fill  is  placed  or  any  piles  are  driven  within  the  limits 
of  the  excavation. 

9.  BORROW  EXCAVATION 

When  the  quantities  of  suitable  materials  obtained  from  specified 
excavations  are  insufficient  to  construct  the  specified  fills, 
additional  materials  shall  be  obtained  from  the  designated  borrow 
areas.  The  extent  and  depth  of  borrow  pits  within  the  limits  of 
the  designated  borrow  areas  shall  be  as  directed  by  the  Engineer. 

Borrow  pits  shall  be  excavated  and  finally  dressed  in  a manner  to 
eliminate  steep  or  unstable  side  slopes  or  other  hazardous  or 
unsightly  conditions. 

10.  OVEREXCAVATION 


Excavation  in  rock  beyond  the  specified  lines  and  grades  shall  be 
corrected  by  filling  the  resulting  voids  with  portland  cement 
concrete  made  of  materials  and  mix  proportions  approved  by  the 
Engineer.  Concrete  that  will  be  exposed  to  the  atmosphere  when 


(21-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-44 


construction  is  completed  shall  contain  not  less  than  6 sacks 
of  cement  per  cubic  yard  of  concrete.  Concrete  that  will  be 
permanently  covered  shall  contain  not  less  than  4%  sacks  of 
cement  per  cubic  yard.  The  concrete  shall  be  placed  and  cured 
as  specified  by  the  Engineer. 

Excavation  in  earth  beyond  the  specified  lines  and  grades  shall 
be  corrected  by  filling  the  resulting  voids  with  approved 
compacted  earth  fill,  except  that,  if  the  earth  is  to  become 
the  subgrade  for  riprap,  rock  fill,  sand  or  gravel  bedding,  or 
drain  fill,  the  voids  may  be  filled  with  material  conforming  to 
the  specifications  for  the  riprap,  rock  fill,  bedding  or  drain 
fill. 

11.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 

For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established 
in  the  contract,  the  volume  of  each  type  and  class  of  excavation 
within  the  specified  pay  limits  will  be  measured  and  computed  to 
the  nearest  cubic  yard  by  the  method  of  average  cross-sectional 
end  areas.  Regardless  of  quantities  excavated,  the  measurement 
for  payment  will  be  made  to  the  specified  pay  limits,  except 
that  excavation  outside  the  specified  lines  and  grades  directed 
by  the  Engineer  to  remove  unsuitable  material  will  be  included, 
but  only  to  the  extent  that  the  unsuitable  condition  is  not  a 
result  of  the  Contractor's  operations. 

(Option  1)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  as  designated  on  the  drawings. 
(Option  2)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  defined  as  follows : 

a.  The  upper  limit  shall  be  the  original  ground  surface  as  it 
existed  prior  to  the  start  of  construction  operations  except 
that  where  excavation  is  performed  within  areas  designated 
for  previous  excavation  or  fill  the  upper  limit  shall  be 
modified  ground  surface  resulting  from  the  specified  previous 
excavation  or  fill. 

b.  The  lower  and  lateral  limits  shall  be  the  neat  lines  and 
grades  shown  on  the  drawings . 

(Option  3)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  defined  as  follows : 

a.  The  upper  limit  shall  be  the  original  ground  surface  as  it 
existed  prior  to  the  start  of  construction  operations  except 
that  where  excavation  is  performed  within  areas  designated 


(21-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


i 


2-45 


for  previous  excavation  or  fill  the  upper  limit  shall  be  the 
modified  ground  surface  resulting  from  the  specified 
previous  excavation  or  fill. 

b.  The  lower  and  lateral  limits  shall  be  the  true  surface  of 
the  completed  excavation  as  authorized  by  the  Engineer. 

(Option  4)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  defined  as  follows : 

a.  The  upper  limit  shall  be  the  original  ground  surface  as  it 
existed  prior  to  the  start  of  construction  operations  except 
that  where  excavation  is  performed  within  areas  designated 
for  previous  excavation  or  fill  the  upper  limit  shall  be  the 
modified  ground  surface  resulting  from  the  specified  previous 
excavation  or  fill. 

b.  The  lower  limit  shall  be  at  the  bottom  surface  of  the 
proposed  structure. 

c.  The  lateral  limits  shall  be  18  inches  outside  of  the  outside 
surfaces  of  the  proposed  structure  or  shall  be  vertical  planes 
18  inches  outside  of  and  parallel  to  the  footings,  whichever 
gives  the  larger  pay  quantity,  except  as  provided  in  d,  below. 

d.  For  trapezoidal  channel  linings  or  similar  structures  that 
are  to  be  supported  upon  the  sides  of  the  excavation  without 
intervening  forms,  the  lateral  limits  shall  be  at  the  under 
side  of  the  proposed  lining  or  structure. 

e.  For  the  purpose  of  the  definitions  in  b,  c,  and  d,  above,  any 
specified  bedding  or  drain  fill  directly  beneath  or  beside 

the  structure  will  be  considered  to  be  a part  of  the  structure. 

(Use  with  All  Options)  Payment  for  each  type  and  class  of  excava- 
tion will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and 
class  of  excavation.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensa- 
tion for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment,  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  performance  of  the  work,  except 
that  extra  payment  for  backfilling  required  overexcavation  will 
be  made  in  accordance  with  the  following  provisions: 

a.  Payment  for  backfilling  overexcavation,  as  specified  in 
SectionlO  of  this  specification,  will  be  made  only  if  the 
excavation  outside  specified  lines  and  grades  is  directed  by 
the  Engineer  to  remove  unsuitable  material  and  if  the  unsuit- 
able condition  is  not  a result  of  the  Contractor's  operations. 

(21-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-b6 


Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  12  of  this  specification. 


(21-6) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-47 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  23 

EARTH  FILL 


1.  Applicability 

Construction  Specification  23  is  applicable  to  all  types  of  earth 
fill  including  fill  constructed  of  rocky  soils  and  fill  construct- 
ed of  soft  or  friable  rock  which  is  expected  to  break  down  during 
compaction. 

2.  Material  Specifications 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  23. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  the  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings 

a.  Complete  plans  and  cross  sections  of  the  required  fills. 

b.  Pay  limits  where  applicable. 

c.  Borrow  areas  or  other  sources  of  material. 

d.  Designation  and  description  of  the  types  of  materials 
required  in  the  various  parts  of  the  work. 

e.  Maximum  allowable  size  of  rock  particles. 

f.  Special  requirements  for  foundation  preparation. 

g.  Maximum  layer  thickness  before  compaction,  (Table  A- 23 
may  be  used  as  a guide.  Table  A- 23  gives  upper  limits 
for  the  general  classes  of  material  listed.  The  specified 
maximum  layer  thickness  may  have  to  be  substantially  less 
than  the  tabulated  value  to  obtain  adequate  compaction.) 

h.  Maximum  layer  thickness  for  fill  compacted  by  manually  direct- 
ed power  tampers.  (The  maximum  thickness  that  can  be  adequate- 
ly compacted  depends  upon  the  tampers  and  upon  the  soil  being 
placed,  varying  from  about  4 inches  for  plastic  clays  to  about 
8 inches  for  coarse  grained  material  of  low  plasticity.) 

i.  Special  instructions  for  sectional  or  phase  construction  where 
applicable. 

j.  Allowable  range  of  moisture  content  for  each  item.  For  example: 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-48 


(1)  "The  moisture  content  of  the  fill  matrix  at  the 
time  of  compaction  shall  be  neither  less  than 

2 percent  below  optimum  moisture  content  nor  more 
than  2 percent  above  optimum  moisture  content." 

(2)  "The  moisture  content  of  the  fill  material  shall 
be  maintained  within  the  limits  required  to: 

(a)  prevent  bulking  or  dilatance  of  the  material 
under  the  action  of  the  hauling  or  compacting 
equipment;  (b)  prevent  the  adherence  of  the  fill 
material  to  the  treads  and  tracks  of  the  equip- 
ment; and  (c)  insure  the  crushing  and  blending 
of  the  soil  clods  and  aggregations  into  a 
reasonably  homogeneous  mass." 

k*  Compaction  class  for  each  item.  (Table  A-23  may  be  used 
as  a guide.) 

1#  For  Class  A compaction:  Compaction  test  method  and 

required  percent  of  maximum  density.  Typical  compaction 
test  results  if  applicable. 

m.  For  Class  B compaction:  Minimum  mass  density. 

n.  For  Class  C compaction:  Type  of  roller;  minimum  weight 
or  contact  pressure  of  roller;  minimum  vibrating  force 
and  frequency  for  vibrating  roller;  minimum  number  of 
passes . 

o.  Special  requirements  for  backfilling  and  compacting  adjacent 
to  structures  if  applicable,  including  instructions  regard- 
ing forms  or  other  supports  which  must  be  left  in  place 
until  the  concrete  attains  its  specified  28-day  strength. 

p.  Required  minimum  strength  of  concrete,  determined  according 
to  Section  6,  for  starting  compaction  of  backfill  adjacent 
to  structures,  if  applicable. 

q.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment  if  the  standard  specifi- 
cation includes  more  than  one  method. 

r.  Embedded  structures  whose  volume  will  be  excluded  from  the 
earth  fill  volume  for  payment.  (In  general,  the  embedded 
volume  of  conduits  over  48  inches  in  inside  diameter  and 
other  structures  of  comparable  size  should  be  deducted.) 

s.  Special  requirements  pertaining  to  furnishing  and  applying 
water,  including  designated  source  and  details  of  ownership 
and  water  rights  if  applicable,  and  including  water  quality 
requirements  if  quality  may  be  a problem. 


> 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-49 


s.  Special  requirements  for  control  of  erosion,  water 
pollution,  and  air  pollution,  if  applicable. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  9,  Measurement  and  Payment. 


(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  structure  backfill  and 
other  cases  where  pay  limits  can  best  be  shown 
on  the  drawings. 

(2)  The  selected  options  for  pay  limits  must  be 
compatible  with  those  selected  for  use  in 
Construction  Specification  21. 

(3)  Option  6 or  7 must  be  used  with  any  or  all  options 
1 through  5. 

(4)  Option  6 is  intended  for  use  when  no  separate 
payment  is  to  be  made  for  water. 

(5)  Option  7 is  intended  for  use  with  Construction 
Specification  10  when  the  Contractor  is  to  be 
paid  under  a separate  item  for  the  water  needed 
to  bring  the  fill  materials  to  the  specified 
moisture  content. 

(6)  Two  or  more  options  may  be  included  as  numbered 
methods  in  the  standard  specifications.  If 
numbered  methods  are  used,  insert  the  following 
paragraph  after  the  last  of  the  numbered  methods: 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to 
all  methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


TABLE  A-23 


2-50 


d 

o 

•H 

4-1 

O 

cd 

6 

o 


>■>  o 
cd 

t-0  CD 

B o 

3 <4-1 

B CD 
•h  pq 
X ^ 
cd 
£ 


o o 
o cd 

O 54 

o H 


60 

d 

•h  u 

4J  <D 
Cd  r-4 
U rH 
rO  O 

•h  pp; 

> 


• J-i 

E <D 

3 rH 
<1)  rH 

d o 

P4  PCS 


60 

d 54 

•H  Qj 
Pi  rH 
£ t-H 

cd  O 

H pci 


a) 

4- 4  d 

cd  o w 

•r4  *r4  Q) 

5- 4  4-1  CO 
d O CO 

o cd  cd 

54  P,  r— I 

ft  E U 
(ft.  o 
< o 


co 

O 

•r4 

4-1 

CO  i— I 
‘H  Cd 
54  -H 

cd  54 

4-1  <L) 
a 4-J 
cd  cd 

13s 

40  rH 
O > — I 
•H 
60  Pm 
d 
•H 
03 
cd 

54 

O 


CO 

a) 

d 

•H 

Pm 


O 

£5 


A 


4-1 


CM 


C3N 


ON 


LO 


54 

CL) 

> 

O 


i - 

I CM 

i i— i 


<1-  o 

CM  CO 


CM  60 


= I 

ON  » 


O 


<0  * 
PQ 


uo 


54 

a) 

03 

d 


uo 

co 


i 

o 


CM  CM 


CM  00 


ON  ON 


O 


PQ 


o 

UO 


uo 

CM 


<t 

CM  CM 


CM  00 


O 


pq 


uo 

CM 


I 

uo 


oo 


NO 

CO 


CM 


o 

«\ 

PQ 


uo 


54 

CD 

03 

d 

1=) 


uo 

vO 


CM 


00 


•0 

pq 


uo 


54 

<U 

> 

o 


00 


vO 

co 


<1- 

CM 


u 

pq 


uo 


5-4 

cd 

03 

d 

do 


uo 

vO 


uo 

CO 


54 

CD 

S 


S1I0S 


d 

O 

c 

d 

CO 

rH 

4-1 

03 

44 

rH 

O 

tH 

O 

no 

•H 

cd 

d 

rH 

44 

a 

o 

CO 

CD 

B 40 

•H 

•H 

4J 

o 

CO 

CO 

44 

CO 

a 

cd 

CD 

CO 

40 

54 

H 

E 

4-1 

o 

54 

d 

CD 

• 

o 

CD 

JC 

CO 

40 

44 

E 

4-1 

4-1 

4-1 

•H 

60 

CO 

o 

d 

cd 

d 

CD 

40 

d 

54 

o 

4-4 

44 

54 

54 

no 

rO 

O 

O 

4*1 

CD 

54 

44 

o 

d 

O 

CO 

o 

•H 

4-1 

4-1 

CO 

54 

B 

cd 

CO  * 

CO 

54 

54 

a 3?, 

CD 

44 

CD 

O 

4-1  <}} 

d 

O 

4-4 

40 

03 

4*5 

CD 

cd 

d ^ 

o 

CD 

TO 

rH 

o ft} 

•H 

N 

•H  ^ 

40 

•H 

<D 

i — ! 

4-J 

CO 

40 

cd 

a ft} 

•H 

cd  ^ 

54 

E 

4-1 

a 

P-  . 

CD 

d 

CO 

(D 

6 S' 

> 

E 

d 

a 

o g 

cd 

•H 

S 

CO 

o e 

rH 

cd 

E S 

E 

cl 

•H 

• 

X 

54 

O 

60 

cd 

CD 

CD 

no 

d d 

E 

43 

4<5 

O *H 

O 

4-1 

cd 

•H  4-1  60 

rH 

rH 

CD 

4-i  cd  d 

cd 

d 

54 

O > *H 

d 

o 

40 

CO  cd  4-1 

4-J 

rH 

a 

o o 

• 

Q 

t — 1 

d 

44 

CD  X cd 

4-1 

<C 

cd 

O 

40  CD  (ft. 

d 

•H 

CO 

4J  S 

CD 

4-1 

no 

CD 

CD  O 

B 

• 

d 

• 

d 

0) 

54  40  O 

a 

CO 

cd 

CO 

CD 

54 

CD  4-1 

•H 

4-J 

4-1 

CO 

a 

60  no  03 

d 

•H 

CO 

CD 

CD 

CD 

d 44  d 

cr1 

E 40 

d 

Q 

no 

d o cd 

CD 

•H 

d 4*5 

uy 

•H 

#\ 

54 

CD 

40 

co 

e\ 

CD 

40 

4-1 

CD 

CD 

a 

03 

d 

a >N 

54 

cd 

CD 

o 

d 

cd 

CD 

40 

4-» 

4-1 

E 

CO 

cd 

CO 

CD 

cd 

54 

03 

54 

rH 

rH 

CO 

60 

d 

cd 

cd 

cd 

CD 

cd 

°H 

CD 

4-J 

to 

CO 

54 

40 

40 

d 

CD 

CD 

4-1 

o 

•H 

4-J 

d 

4-J 

d 

CO 

44 

rH 

cd 

44 

CO 

•iH 

O 

cd 

E 

O 

03 

CO  • 

> 

CO 

CD 

d co 

rH 

•*  d 

n3 

CD 

cd 

CO 

CD  O 

<D 

> CM 

•H 

4-J 

4-1  4J 

4-1 

•H 

54 

CO 

•H  CO 

cd 

60  03 

CD 

•H 

d 4-i 

rH 

CD 

4-1 

40 

cd  . — i 

d 

cd 

CD 

cd 

O 

54  -H 

40 

a 

£ 

CO 

60  CO 

cd 

44 

X 

H 

O 

CD 

siviaaxvw 

soon  aaxvana 

-NX  ATNV3M 

H 

Q 

ao  <maHXvaM 

* 

G 


c 


L 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
23 . EARTH  FILL 


2-51 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  the  construction  of  earth  embankments 
and  other  earth  fills  required  by  the  drawings  and  specifications. 

2.  MATERIALS 

All  fill  materials  shall  be  obtained  from  required  excavations 
and  designated  borrow  areas.  The  selection,  blending,  routing 
and  disposition  of  materials  in  the  various  fills  shall  be 
subject  to  approval  by  the  Engineer. 

Fill  materials  shall  contain  no  sod,  brush,  roots  or  other  perish- 
able materials.  Rock  particles  larger  than  the  maximum  size 
specified  for  each  type  of  fill'- shall  be  removed  prior  to  compac- 
tion of  the  fill. 

The  types  of  materials  used  in  the  various  fills  shall  be  as 
listed  and  described  in  the  specifications  and  drawings. 

3 . FOUNDATION  PREPARATION 


Foundations  for  earth  fill  shall  be  stripped  to  remove  vegetation 
and  other  unsuitable  materials  or  shall  be  excavated  as  specified. 

Except  as  otherwise  specified,  earth  foundation  surfaces  shall  be 
graded  to  remove  surface  irregularities  and  shall  be  scarified 
parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  fill  or  otherwise  acceptably  scored 
and  loosened  to  a minimum  depth  of  2 inches.  The  moisture  content 
of  the  loosened  material  shall  be  controlled  as  specified  for  the 
earth  fill,  and  the  surface  materials  of  the  foundation  shall  be 
compacted  and  bonded  with  the  first  layer  of  earth  fill  as 
specified  for  subsequent  layers  of  earth  fill. 

Earth  abutment  surfaces  shall  be  free  of  loose,  uncompacted  earth 
in  excess  of  two  inches  in  depth  normal  to  the  slope  and  shall  be 
at  such  a moisture  content  that  the  earth  fill  can  be  compacted 
against  them  to  effect  a good  bond  between  the  fill  and  the 
abutments . 

Rock  foundation  and  abutment  surfaces  shall  be  cleared  of  all 
loose  materials  by  hand  or  other  effective  means  and  shall  be 

(23-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-52 


free  of  standing  water  when  fill  is  placed  upon  them.  Occa- 
sional rock  outcrops  in  earth  foundations  for  earth  fill, 
except  in  dams  and  other  structures  designed  to  restrain  the 
movement  of  water,  shall  not  require  special  treatment  if 
they  do  not  interfere  with  compaction  of  the  foundation  and 
initial  layers  of  the  fill  or  the  bond  between  the  foundation 
and  the  fill. 

Foundation  and  abutment  surfaces  shall  be  not  steeper  than  1 
horizontal  to  1 vertical  unless  otherwise  specified.  Test  pits 
or  other  cavities  shall  be  filled  with  compacted  earth  fill 
conforming  to  the  specifications  for  the  earth  fill  to  be 
placed  upon  the  foundation. 

4.  PLACEMENT 


Fill  shall  not  be  placed  until  the  required  excavation  and 
foundation  preparation  have  been  completed  and  the  foundation 
has  been  inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer.  Fill  shall 
not  be  placed  upon  a frozen  surface,  nor  shall  snow,  ice,  or 
frozen  material  be  incorporated  in  the  fill. 

Fill  shall  be  placed  in  approximately  horizontal  layers.  The 
thickness  of  each  layer  before  compaction  shall  not  exceed  the 
maximum  thickness  specified.  Materials  placed  by  dumping  in 
piles  or  windrows  shall  be  spread  uniformly  to  not  more  than 
the  specified  thickness  before  being  compacted.  Hand  compacted 
fill,  including  fill  compacted  by  manually  directed  power 
tampers , shall  be  placed  in  layers  not  more  than  4 inches  thick 
before  compaction. 

Adjacent  to  structures,  fill  shall  be  placed  in  a manner  which 
will  prevent  damage  to  the  structures  and  will  allow  the 
structures  to  assume  the  loads  from  the  fill  gradually  and 
uniformly.  The  height  of  the  fill  adjacent  to  a structure 
shall  be  increased  at  approximately  the  same  rate  on  all  sides 
of  the  structure. 

Earth  fill  in  dams,  levees  and  other  structures  designed  to 
restrain  the  movement  of  water  shall  be  placed  so  as  to  meet 
the  following  additional  requirements : 

a.  The  distribution  of  materials  throughout  each  zone  shall 
be  essentially  uniform,  and  the  fill  shall  be  free  from 
lenses,  pockets,  streaks  or  layers  of  material  differing 
substantially  in  texture  or  gradation  from  the  surrounding 
material. 


(23-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-53 


b.  If  the  surface  of  any  layer  becomes  too  hard  and  smooth  for 
proper  bond  with  the  succeeding  layer,  it  shall  be  scarified 
parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  fill  to  a depth  of  not  less  than 
2 inches  before  the  next  layer  is  placed. 

c.  The  top  surfaces  of  embankments  shall  be  maintained  approximately 
level  during  construction,  except  that  a crown  or  cross -slope  of 
not  less  than  2 percent  shall  be  maintained  to  insure  effective 
drainage,  and  except  as  otherwise  specified  for  drain  fill  zones. 
If  the  drawings  or  specifications  require  or  the  Engineer  directs 
that  fill  be  placed  at  a higher  level  in  one  part  of  an  embank- 
ment than  another,  the  top  surface  of  each  part  shall  be  main- 
tained as  specified  above. 

d.  Dam  embankments  shall  be  constructed  in  continuous  layers  from 
abutment  to  abutment  except  where  openings  to  facilitate  con- 
struction or  to  allow  the  passage  of  stream  flow  during 
construction  are  specifically  authorized  in  the  contract. 

e.  Embankments  built  at  different  levels  as  described  under  c or 
d above  shall  be  constructed  so  that  the  slope  of  the  bonding 
surfaces  between  embankment  in  place  and  embankment  to  be 
placed  is  not  steeper  than  3 feet  horizontal  to  1 foot  vertical. 
The  bonding  surface  of  the  embankment  in  place  shall  be  stripped 
of  all  loose  material,  and  shall  be  scarified,  moistened  and 
recompacted  when  the  new  fill  is  placed  against  it  as  needed  to 
insure  a good  bond  with  the  new  fill  and  to  obtain  the  specified 
moisture  content  and  density  in  the  junction  of  the  in  place  and 
new  fill. 

5.  CONTROL  OF  MOISTURE  CONTENT 


During  placement  and  compaction  of  fill,  the  moisture  content  of  the 
materials  being  placed  shall  be  maintained  within  the  specified  range. 

The  application  of  water  to  the  fill  materials  shall  be  accomplished 
at  the  borrow  areas  insofar  as  practicable.  Water  may  be  applied  by 
sprinkling  the  materials  after  placement  on  the  fill,  if  necessary. 
Uniform  moisture  distribution  shall  be  obtained  by  discing,  blading 
or  other  approved  methods  prior  to  compaction  of  the  layer. 

Material  that  is  too  wet  when  deposited  on  the  fill  shall  either  be 
removed  or  be  dried  to  the  specified  moisture  content  prior  to 
compaction. 

If  the  top  surface  of  the  preceding  layer  of  compacted  fill  or  a 
foundation  or  abutment  surface  in  the  zone  of  contact  with  the  fill 
becomes  too  dry  to  permit  suitable  bond  it  shall  be  scarified  and 
moistened  by  sprinkling  to  an  acceptable  moisture  content  prior  to 
placement  of  the  next  layer  of  fill. 

(23-3) 


NEH  1/28/69  (Notice  20-25) 


2-54 


6.  COMPACTION 

Earth  fill  shall  be  compacted  according  to  the  following 
requirements  for  the  class  of  compaction  specified: 

Class  A compaction.  Each  layer  of  fill  shall  be  compacted  as 
necessary  to  make  the  density  of  the  fill  matrix  not  less  than 
the  minimum  density  specified.  The  fill  matrix  is  defined  as 
the  portion  of  the  fill  material  finer  than  the  maximum  particle 
size  used  in  the  compaction  test  method  specified. 

Class  B compaction.  Each  layer  of  fill  shall  be  compacted  to  a 
mass  density  not  less  than  the  minimum  density  specified. 

Class  C compaction.  Each  layer  of  fill  shall  be  compacted  by  the 
specified  number  of  passes  of  the  type  and  weight  of  roller  or 
other  equipment  specified,  or  by  an  approved  equivalent  method. 
Each  pass  shall  consist  of  at  least  one  passage  of  the  roller 
wheel  or  drum  over  the  entire  surface  of  the  layer. 

Fill  adjacent  to  structures  shall  be  compacted  to  a density 
equivalent  to  that  of  the  surrounding  fill  by  means  of  hand 
tamping  or  manually  directed  power  tampers  or  plate  vibrators. 
Heavy  equipment  shall  not  be  operated  within  2 feet  of  any 
structure.  Vibrating  rollers  shall  not  be  operated  within  5 
feet  of  any  structure.  Compaction  by  means  of  drop  weights 
operating  from  a crane  or  hoist  will  not  be  permitted. 

The  passage  of  heavy  equipment  will  not  be  allowed:  (1)  over 

cast-in-place  conduits  prior  to  14  days  after  placement  of  the 
concrete;  (2)  over  cradled  precast  conduits  prior  to  7 days 
after  placement  of  the  concrete  cradle;  or  (3)  over  any  type  of 
conduit  until  the  backfill  has  been  placed  above  the  top  surface 
of  the  structure  to  a height  equal  to  one-half  the  clear  span 
width  of  the  structure  or  pipe  or  2 feet,  whichever  is  greater. 

Compacting  of  fill  adjacent  to  structures  shall  not  be  started 
until  the  concrete  has  attained  the  strength  specified  in  Section 
10  for  this  purpose.  The  strength  will  be  determined  by  compres- 
sion testing  of  test  cylinders  cast  by  the  Engineer  for  this 
purpose  and  cured  at  the  work  site  in  the  manner  specified  in 
ASTM  Method  C 31  for  determining  when  a structure  may  be  put 
into  service. 

When  the  required  strength  of  the  concrete  is  not  specified  as 
described  above,  compaction  of  fill  adjacent  to  structures  shall 
not  be  started  until  the  following  time  intervals  have  elapsed 
after  placement  of  the  concrete. 

(23-4) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-55 


Structure 


Time  Interval 


Retaining  walls  and  counterforts 


14  days 


Walls  backfilled  on  both  sides 
s imultaneous ly 


7 days 


Conduits  and  spillway  risers,  cast- 
in-nlace  (with  inside  forms  in  place) 

Conduits  and  spillway  risers,  cast-in- 
place (inside  forms  removed) 


14  days 

2 days 
1 day 


7 days 


Conduits,  precast,  cradled 
Conduits,  precast,  bedded 


Antiseep  collars  and  cantilever 
outlet  bents 


3 days 


7.  REMOVAL  AND  PLACEMENT  OF  DEFECTIVE  FILL 

Fill  placed  at  densities  lower  than  the  specified  minimum  density 
or  at  moisture  contents  outside  the  specified  acceptable  range  of 
moisture  content  or  otherwise  not  conforming  to  the  requirements 
of  the  specifications  shall  be  reworked  to  meet  the  requirements 
or  removed  and  replaced  by  acceptable  fill.  The  replacement  fill 
and  the  foundation,  abutment  and  fill  surfaces  upon  which  it  is 
placed  shall  conform  to  all  requirements  of  this  specification 
for  foundation  preparation,  approval,  placement,  moisture  control 
and  compaction. 


During  the  course  of  the  work,  the  Engineer  will  perform  such 
tests  as  are  required  to  identify  materials,  to  determine 
compaction  characteristics,  to  determine  moisture  content,  and 
to  determine  density  of  fill  in  place.  These  tests  performed  by 
the  Engineer  will  be  used  to  verify  that  the  fills  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  the  specifications.  Such  tests  are  not  intended 
to  provide  the  Contractor  with  the  information  required  by  him 
for  the  proper  execution  of  the  work  and  their  performance  shall 
not  relieve  the  Contractor  of  the  necessity  to  perform  tests  for 
that  purpose. 

Densities  of  fill  requiring  Class  A compaction  will  be  determined 
by  the  Engineer  in  accordance  with  ASTM  Method  D 1556  (or  by 
equivalent  methods),  except  that  the  volume  and  moist  weight  of 
included  rock  particles  larger  than  those  used  in  the  compaction 
test  method  specified  for  the  type  of  fill  will  be  determined  and 
deducted  from  the  volume  and  moist  weight  of  the  total  sample 
prior  to  computation  of  density.  The  density  so  computed  will 
be  used  to  determine  the  percent  compaction  of  the  fill  matrix. 


8.  TESTING 


(23-5) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-56 


9.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established 
in  the  contract,  the  volume  of  each  type  and  compaction  class  of 
earth  fill  within  the  specified  zone  boundaries  and  pay  limits 
will  be  measured  and  computed  to  the  nearest  cubic  yard  by  the 
method  of  average  cross-sectional  end  areas.  Unless  otherwise 
specified,  no  deduction  in  volume  will  be  made  for  embedded 
conduits  and  appurtenances. 

The  pay  limits  shall  be  as  defined  below,  with  the  further  pro- 
vision that  earth  fill  required  to  fill  voids  resulting  from 
overexcavation  of  the  foundation,  outside  the  specified  lines 
and  grades,  will  be  included  in  the  measurement  for  payment  only 
where  such  overexcavation  is  directed  by  the  Engineer  to  remove 
unsuitable  material  and  where  the  unsuitable  condition  is  not  a 
result  of  the  Contractor's  operations. 

(Option  1)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  as  designated  on  the  drawings. 

(Option  2)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  the  measured  surface  of  the 
foundation  when  approved  for  placement  of  the  fill  and  the  speci- 
fied neat  lines  of  the  fill  surface. 

(Option  3)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  the  measured  surface  of  the 
foundation  when  approved  for  placement  of  the  fill  and  the 
measured  surface  of  the  completed  fill. 

(Option  4)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  the  specified  pay  limits 
for  excavation  and  the  specified  neat  lines  of  the  fill  surface. 

(Option  5)  The  pay  limits  shall  be  the  specified  pay  limits  for 
excavation  and  the  measured  surface  of  the  completed  fill. 

(Use  option  6 or  7 with  all  options  1 through  5) 

(Option  6)  Payment  for  each  type  and  compaction  class  of  earth 
fill  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and 
compaction  class  of  fill.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other 
items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  performance  of  the  work. 

(Option  7)  Payment  for  each  type  and  compaction  class  of  earth 
fill  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and 
compaction  class  of  fill.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  com- 
pensation for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  performance  of  the  work,  except 
furnishing,  transporting,  and  applying  water  to  the  foundation 
and  fill  materials. 

(23-6) 

NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


(C 


Water  applied  to  the  foundation  and  fill  materials  will  be 
measured  and  payment  will  be  made  as  specified  in  Construction 
Specification  10. 

(Use  with  All  Options)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described 
in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included 
in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary. 
Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are 
identified  in  Section  10  of  this  specification. 


(23-7) 

NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


t 


4 


C 


) 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  24 


2-59 


> 


DRAIN  FILL 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  24  is  applicable  to  the  placing  of  drain 

fill  in  all  types  of  structure  drains  and  filters,  such  as: 

a.  Drainage  systems  installed  beneath  concrete  structures,  linings 
or  pavements ; 

b.  Wall  drains  for  concrete  structures ; 

c.  Embankment  drains  and  filter  zones; 

d.  Interceptor  drains  installed  adjacent  to  structures; 

e.  Foundation  drains. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specification  521  is  complementary  to  Construction  Speci- 
fication 24. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  The  location,  extent,  and  dimensions  of  each  drain  or  filter. 

b.  The  grading  limits  of  each  type  of  drain  fill. 

c.  The  source  of  drain  fill  materials,  when  applicable. 

d.  Specifications  for  control  of  moisture  if  required.  If  water  is 

to  be  added  and  is  to  be  included  in  a separate  pay  item  for 
water,  add  the  statement:  Water  applied  to  the  fill  material 

will  be  measured  and  payment  will  be  made  as  specified  in  Con- 
struction Specification  10. 

e.  Class  of  compaction.  Also  specify  the  weight  and  number  of 
passes  of  the  compacting  equipment  required,  if  more  than  the 
minimum  amounts  specified  in  Section  6.  (Class  A provides  for 
control  of  compaction  by  relative  density  of  the  fill.  Classes 
I,  II  and  III  specify  the  method  of  compaction.  Relative  density 
tests  during  construction  usually  should  be  made  in  connection 
with  the  method  specifications  to  evaluate  the  compaction  being 
accomplished.  Class  I is  intended  for  use  where  highest  densi- 
ties are  required,  Class  II  is  intermediate,  and  Class  III  may 

be  used  for  wall  drains  in  uncompacted  backfill  or  for  other 
applications  where  strength  is  not  important.) 


NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


2-60 


4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  2,  Materials. 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  in  specifications  for 
drains  that  are  required  to  function  throughout  the 
life  of  the  structure  or  to  function  as  filters  in 
relation  to  adjacent  materials  and  are  not  accessible 
for  maintenance  should  hazardous  malfunction  occur. 
Drains  and  drainage  blankets  under  concrete  struc- 
tures, foundation  trench  drains  and  embankment  drain- 
age blankets  often  fall  in  this  category. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  to  be  used  in  specifications  for 
drains  that  are  required  to  function  only  in  the  first 
phase  of  the  life  of  the  structure  or  that  are  not 
required  to  function  as  filters  in  relation  to  adja- 
cent materials.  Some  types  of  foundation  drains  and 
embankment  drainage  blankets  fall  in  this  category. 
This  option  may  also  be  used  for  permanent  drains 
when  the  quality  of  the  materials  has  previously 

been  determined  to  be  suitable  (by  adequate  sampling 
and  testing). 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-61 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
24.  DRAIN  FILL 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing,  placing  and  compacting 
drain  fill  required  in  the  construction  of  structure  drains  and 
filters . 

2.  MATERIALS 

(Option  1)  Drain  fill  materials  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  521 . At  least  30  days  prior  to  delivery 
of  the  materials  to  the  site  the  Contractor  shall  inform  the 
Contracting  Officer  in  writing  of  the  source  from  which  he  intends 
to  obtain  them.  The  Contractor  shall  provide  the  Engineer  free 
access  to  the  source  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  samples  for 
testing. 

(Option  2)  Drain  fill  materials  shall  be  sand,  gravel  or  crushed 
stone  or  mixtures  thereof  obtained  from  the  specified  sources. 

They  shall  be  selected  as  necessary  to  avoid  the  inclusion  of 
organic  matter,  clay  balls,  excessive  fine  particles  or  other 
substances  that  would  interfere  with  their  free-draining  properties. 

3.  BASE  PREPARATION 

Foundation  surfaces  and  trenches  shall  be  clean  and  free  of 
organic  matter,  loose  soil,  foreign  substances,  and  standing 
water  when  the  drain  fill  is  placed.  Earth  surfaces  upon  or 
against  which  drain  fill  will  be  placed  shall  not  be  scarified. 

4.  PLACEMENT 


Drain  fill  shall  not  be  placed  until  the  subgrade  has  been  inspected 
and  approved  by  the  Engineer.  Drain  fill  shall  not  be  placed  over 
or  around  pipe  or  drain  tile  until  the  installation  of  the  pipe  or 
tile  has  been  inspected  and  approved. 

Drain  fill  shall  be  placed  uniformly  in  layers  not  more  than  12 
inches  deep  before  compaction.  When  compaction  is  accomplished 
by  manually  controlled  equipment, the  layers  shall  be  not  more 
than  8 inches  deep.  The  material  shall  be  placed  in  a manner  to 
avoid  segregation  of  particle  sizes  and  to  insure  the  continuity 
and  integrity  of  all  zones.  No  foreign  materials  shall  be  allowed 
to  become  intermixed  with  or  otherwise  contaminate  the  drain  fill. 

(24-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-62 


Traffic  shall  not  be  allowed  to  cross  over  drains  at  random. 
Equipment  crossovers  shall  be  maintained,  and  the  number  and 
location  of  such  crossovers  shall  be  established  and  approved 
prior  to  the  beginning  of  drain  fill  placement.  Each  crossover 
shall  be  cleaned  of  all  contaminating  materials  and  shall  be 
inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer  before  additional  drain 
fill  is  placed. 

Any  damage  to  the  foundation  surface  or  to  the  sides  or  bottoms 
of  trenches  occurring  during  placement  of  drain  fill  shall  be 
repaired  before  drain  fill  placement  is  continued. 

The  upper  surface  of  drain  fill  constructed  concurrently  with 
adjacent  zones  of  earth  fill  shall  be  maintained  at  an  eleva- 
tion at  least  one  foot  above  the  upper  surface  of  the  adjacent 
fill. 

Drain  fill  over  or  around  pipe  or  drain  tile  shall  be  placed 
in  a manner  to  avoid  any  displacement  of  the  pipe  or  tile  in 
line  or  grade. 

5.  CONTROL  OF  MOISTURE 


The  moisture  content  of  drain  fill  materials  shall  be  controlled 
as  specified  in  Section  8.  When  the  addition  of  water  is 
required,  it  shall  be  applied  in  such  a way  as  to  avoid  exces- 
sive wetting  of  adjacent  earth  fill.  Except  as  specified  in 
Section  8,  control  of  the  moisture  content  will  not  be  required. 

6.  COMPACTION 


Drain  fill  shall  be  compacted  according  to  the  following  require- 
ments for  the  class  of  compaction  specified: 

Class  A compaction.  Each  layer  of  drain  fill  shall  be  compacted 
to  a relative  density  of  not  less  than  70  percent  as  determined 
by  ASTM  Method  D 2049 -64T. 

Class  I compaction.  Each  layer  of  drain  fill  shall  be  compacted 
by  at  least  2 passes,  over  the  entire  surface,  of  a steel-drum 
vibrating  roller  weighing  not  less  than  5 tons  and  exerting  a 
vertical  vibrating  force  of  not  less  than  20,000  pounds  at 
least  1200  times  per  minute,  or  by  an  approved  equivalent  method. 

Class  II  compaction.  Each  layer  of  drain  fill  shall  be  compacted 
by  one  of  the  following  methods  or  by  an  approved  equivalent 
method: 


(24-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-63 


a.  At  least  2 passes,  over  the  entire  surface,  of  a pneumatic- 
tired  roller  exerting  a pressure  of  not  less  than  75  pounds 
per  square  inch. 

b.  At  least  4 passes,  over  the  entire  surface,  of  the  track  of 
a crawler-type  tractor  weighing  not  less  than  20  tons. 

c.  Controlled  movement  of  the  hauling  equipment  so  that  the  entire 
surface  is  traversed  by  not  less  than  one  tread  track  of  the 
loaded  equipment. 

Class  III  compaction.  No  compaction  will  be  required  beyond  that 
resulting  from  the  placing  and  spreading  operations. 

When  compaction  other  than  Class  III  compaction  is  specified 
materials  placed  in  trenches  or  other  locations  inaccessible  to 
heavy  equipment  shall  be  compacted  by  means  of  manually  controlled 
pneumatic  or  vibrating  tampers  or  by  approved  equivalent  methods. 

7.  TESTING 


The  Engineer  will  perform  such  tests  as  are  required  to  verify 
that  the  drain  fill  materials  and  the  drain  fill  in  place  meet 
the  requirements  of  the  specifications.  These  tests  are  not 
intended  to  provide  the  Contractor  with  the  information  he  needs 
to  assure  that  the  materials  and  workmanship  meet  the  require- 
ments of  the  specifications,  and  their  performance  will  not 
relieve  the  Contractor  of  the  responsibility  of  performing  his 
own  tests  for  that  purpose. 

8.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established  in 
the  contract,  the  volume  of  drain  fill  within  the  neat  lines  shown 
on  the  drawings  or  limits  established  by  the  Engineer  will  be 
measured  and  computed  to  the  nearest  cubic  yard.  Where  the  Engineer 
directs  placement  of  drain  fill  outside  the  neat  lines  to  replace 
unsuitable  foundation  material,  the  volume  of  such  drain  fill  will 
be  included,  but  only  to  the  extent  that  the  unsuitable  condition  is 
not  a result  of  the  Contractor's  operations. 

Payment  for  drain  fill  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for 
each  type  of  drain  fill,  complete  in  place.  Except  as  otherwise 
specified  in  Section  9,  such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensa- 
tion for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  neces- 
sary and  incidental  to  the  performance  of  the  work. 


(24-3) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-64 


Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but  not 
listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the 
item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the 
items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  9 
of  this  specification. 


(24-4) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-65 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  25 

ROCK  FILL 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  25  is  applicable  to  rock  fill  constructed 
of  hard,  durable  rock  with  sufficiently  open  grading  to  drain  freely. 
It  does  not  apply  to  riprap  slope  protection  nor  to  earth  fill 
constructed  of  rocky  soils  or  of  soft  rock  which  is  expected  to 
break  down  during  compaction. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  25. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Complete  plans  and  cross  sections  of  the  required  fills. 

b.  Zoning  plans,  including  gradation  requirements  for  materials 
in  each  zone. 

c.  Specifications  for  bedding. 

d.  Pay  limits  where  applicable. 

e.  The  source  of  each  type  of  fill. 

f.  Screening  or  other  processing  requirements. 

g.  Specifications  for  wetting  during  placement  and  compaction  if 

required.  If  water  is  to  be  added  and  is  to  be  included  in  a 
separate  pay  item  for  water,  add  the  statement:  Water  applied 

to  the  fill  material  will  be  measured  and  payment  will  be  made 
as  specified  in  Construction  Specification  10. 

h.  Class  of  compaction.  Also  specify  more  passes  or  heavier 
equipment  if  test  fills  or  other  sources  of  information 
indicate  the  need  for  it.  (Class  I is  intended  for  use  where 
the  highest  degree  of  compaction  is  required.  Class  II  is 
intermediate,  and  Class  III  is  for  use  where  no  special  compac- 
tion is  needed.) 


NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


2-66 


4 


4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  5«  Placement* 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  whenever  the  grading 
of  materials  within  the  fill  is  not  a critical 
element  of  the  design. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  piping  or 
cracking  potential  of  the  core  zone  is  a critical 
element  of  the  design  or  when  the  percentage  of 
large  rock  is  relatively  low  and  special  slope 
protection  is  desired. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-67 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
25.  ROCK  FILL 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  the  construction  of  rock  fill  zones  of 
embankments  and  other  rock  fills  required  by  the  drawings  and 
specifications,  including  bedding  where  specified. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Materials  for  rock  fill  and  bedding  shall  be  obtained  from  the 
specified  sources.  They  shall  be  excavated,  selected,  processed, 
and  handled  as  necessary  to  conform  to  the  specified  grading 
limits . 

3.  FOUNDATION  PREPARATION 

Foundations  for  rock  fill  shall  be  stripped  to  remove  vegetation 
and  other  unsuitable  materials  or  shall  be  excavated  as  specified. 

Except  as  otherwise  specified,  earth  foundation  surfaces  shall  be 
graded  to  remove  surface  irregularities,  and  test  pits  or  other 
cavities  shall  be  filled  with  compacted  earth  fill  of  approximately 
the  same  kind  and  density  as  the  adjacent  foundation  material. 

Rock  foundation  surfaces  shall  be  cleared  of  all  loose  materials 
not  conforming  to  the  specifications  for  the  rock  fill. 

Abutments  for  rock  fill  zones  of  embankments  shall  be  prepared  as 
specified  above  for  foundations. 

4.  BEDDING 

When  a bedding  layer  beneath  rock  fill  is  specified,  the  bedding 
material  shall  be  spread  uniformly  on  the  prepared  subgrade  surfaces 
to  the  depth  indicated.  Compaction  of  the  bedding  will  not  be 
required  but  the  surface  of  such  layers  shall  be  finished  free 
from  mounds , dips  or  windrows . 

5 . PLACEMENT 


(Option  1)  No  fill  or  bedding  shall  be  placed  until  foundation 
preparation  is  completed  and  the  foundation  and  excavations  have 
been  inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

(25-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-68 


The  rock  shall  be  dumped  and  spread  into  place  in  approximately 
horizontal  layers  not  more  than  3 feet  in  thickness.  It  shall 
be  placed  in  a manner  to  produce  a reasonably  homogeneous  stable 
fill  that  contains  no  segregated  pockets  of  large  or  small 
fragments  or  large  unfilled  spaces  caused  by  bridging  of  the 
larger  fragments. 

(Option  2)  No  fill  or  bedding  shall  be  placed  until  foundation 
preparation  is  completed  and  the  foundation  and  excavations 
have  been  inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

The  rock  shall  be  dumped  and  spread  into  place  in  approximately 
horizontal  layers  not  more  than  3 feet  in  thickness.  The  rock 
shall  be  placed  so  that  the  completed  fill  shall  be  graded 
with  the  smaller  rock  fragments  placed  in  the  inner  portion 
of  the  embankment  and  the  larger  rock  fragments  placed  on  the 
outer  slopes.  It  shall  be  placed  in  a manner  that  will  produce 
a stable  fill  that  contains  no  large  unfilled  spaces  caused  by 
bridging  of  the  larger  fraction. 

6.  CONTROL  OF  MOISTURE 


The  moisture  content  of  rock  fill  materials  shall  be  controlled 
as  specified  in  Section  9.  When  the  addition  of  water  is 
required  it  shall  be  applied  in  such  a way  as  to  avoid  excessive 
wetting  of  adjacent  earth  fill.  Except  as  specified  in  Section 
9,  control  of  the  moisture  content  will  not  be  required. 

7 . COMPACTION 


Rock  fill  shall  be  compacted  as  described  below  for  the  class 
of  compaction  specified  or  by  an  approved  equivalent  method. 

Class  I compaction.  Each  layer  of  fill  shall  be  compacted  by 
at  least  4 passes,  over  the  entire  surface,  of  a steel-drum 
vibrating  roller  weighing  not  less  than  5 tons  and  exerting  a 
vertical  vibrating  force  of  not  less  than  20,000  pounds  at 
least  1200  times  per  minute. 

Class  II  compaction.  Each  layer  of  fill  shall  be  compacted  by 
at  least  4 passes,  over  the  entire  surface,  of  the  track  of  a 
crawler-type  tractor  weighing  not  less  than  20  tons. 

Class  III  compaction.  No  compaction  will  be  required  beyond 
that  resulting  from  the  placing  and  spreading  operations. 


(25-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-69 


8.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 

For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established 
in  the  contract,  the  volume  of  each  type  of  rock  fill,  including 
bedding,  within  the  zone  boundaries  and  limits  specified  on  the 
drawings  or  established  by  the  Engineer  will  be  measured  and  computed 
to  the  nearest  cubic  yard  by  the  method  of  average  cross-sectional 
end  areas. 

Payment  for  each  type  of  rock  fill  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  price  for  that  type  of  fill.  Except  as  otherwise  specified  in 
Section  9,  such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all 
labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  inci- 
dental to  the  performance  of  the  work,  including  furnishing  and 
placing  the  bedding. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but  not 
listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the 
item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the 
items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  9 
of  this  specification. 


) • 


(25-3) 

NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


( 


T 


2-71 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  26 
SALVAGING  AND  SPREADING  TOPSOIL 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  26  is  applicable  to  the  salvaging  and 
spreading  of  topsoil  to  parts  of  the  construction  site  for  the 
purpose  of  establishing  vegetative  cover  for  erosion  control  and 
aesthetic  improvement.  It  may  apply  to  final  dressing  of  slopes 
of  earth  fills,  borrow  areas,  channels  or  other  features.  It 
should  only  be  specified  where  the  surface  horizon  of  the  soil  is 
considered  more  suitable  for  supporting  plant  growth  than  the 
exposed  subsoil  or  fill  and  its  use  is  more  economical  than  other 
means  of  conditioning  the  exposed  subsoil  or  fill. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  26. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Limits  of  source  areas  for  obtaining  topsoil. 

b.  Limits  of  areas  on  which  topsoil  is  to  be  spread. 

c.  Depth  of  topsoil  layer  to  be  spread. 

d.  Limits  of  stockpile  areas,  if  critical. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

The  options  are  self-explanatory. 

Two  or  more  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods 
in  standard  specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph  in 
the  section: 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  all  methods  of 
measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1./28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-73 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
26.  SALVAGING  AND  SPREADING  TOPSOIL 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  salvaging  topsoil  from  borrow  pits  or 
required  excavations  and  spreading  it  on  the  areas  shown  on  the 
drawings  to  the  specified  depths. 

2.  QUALITY  OF  TOPSOIL 

Topsoil  shall  consist  of  friable  surface  soil  reasonably  free  of 
grass,  roots,  weeds,  sticks,  stones  or  other  foreign  materials. 

3.  EXCAVATION 

After  the  site  has  been  cleared  and  grubbed  the  topsoil  shall  be 
removed  from  the  designated  areas  and  shall  be  stockpiled  at  loca- 
tions approved  by  the  Engineer.  Objectionable  materials  encountered 
during  excavation  shall  be  removed  and  buried  at  locations  approved 
by  the  Engineer  or  otherwise  removed  from  the  construction  site. 

4.  SPREADING 


(Option  1)  Spreading  shall  not  be  done  when  the  ground  or  topsoil 
is  frozen,  excessively  wet  or  otherwise  in  a condition  detrimental 
to  the  work.  Surfaces  designated  to  be  covered  shall  be  lightly 
scarified  just  prior  to  the  spreading  operation. 

After  placement  is  completed  the  surface  of  the  topsoil  shall  be 
finished  to  a reasonably  smooth  surface. 

(Option  2)  Spreading  shall  not  be  done  when  the  ground  or  topsoil 
is  frozen,  excessively  wet  or  otherwise  in  a condition  detrimental 
to  the  work.  Surfaces  designated  to  be  covered  shall  be  lightly 
scarified  just  prior  to  the  spreading  operation.  Where  compacted 
fills  are  designated  to  be  covered  by  topsoil,  the  topsoil  shall 
be  placed  concurrently  with  the  fill  and  shall  be  bonded  to  the 
compacted  fill  with  the  compacting  equipment. 

After  placement  is  completed  the  surface  of  the  topsoil  shall  be 
finished  to  a reasonably  smooth  surface. 

(26-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-74 


5.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  The  total  area  of  the  surfaces  covered  by  topsoil 
will  be  computed  to  the  nearest  square  yard.  Payment  for 
salvaging  and  placing  topsoil  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  price.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation 
for  all  materials,  labor  and  equipment  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work, 
including  excavating,  stockpiling,  hauling,  and  spreading. 

(Option  2)  The  total  area  of  the  surfaces  covered  by  topsoil 
will  be  computed  to  the  nearest  square  yard  except  that  the 
areas  of  the  surfaces  of  embankments,  levees,  dikes  and  other 
earth  fills  will  not  be  included  for  payment.  Payment  for 
salvaging  and  placing  topsoil  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  price.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  payment  for  all 
materials,  labor  and  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary 
and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  including 
excavating,  stockpiling,  hauling,  and  spreading. 

Payment  for  topsoil  spread  on  the  surfaces  of  embankments, 
levees,  dikes  and  other  earth  fills  will  be  considered  as 
included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  earth  fill  under  which 
the  embankment,  levee,  dike  or  other  earth  fill  is  constructed. 

(Option  3)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  volume  of  topsoil  salvaged  and 
spread  will  be  measured  by  cross  section  surveys  of  the  stock- 
pile from  which  it  is  taken  if  it  is  stockpiled;  otherwise,  of 
the  area  from  which  it  is  borrowed;  and  will  be  computed  to  the 
nearest  cubic  yard  by  the  method  of  average  cross-sectional 
end  areas.  Payment  for  salvaging  and  spreading  topsoil  will 
be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price.  Such  payment  will  constitute 
full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all 
other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  performance  of  the 
work,  including  excavating,  stockpiling,  hauling,  and  spreading. 

(Use  with  All  Options)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  6 of  this 
specification. 


(26-2) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-75 


f) 

INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  THE  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  31 

CONCRETE 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  31  is  applicable  to  the  usual  types  of 
concrete  construction  entailed  in  Service  operations.  Supplemen- 
tary specifications  will  be  required  for  works  of  a special  nature, 
such  as : 

a.  Placing  concrete  under  water. 

b.  Pumping  concrete. 

c.  Concrete  exposed  to  sea  water. 

d.  Concrete  exposed  to  alkali  soils  or  alkaline  water. 

e.  Special  finishes. 

Good  examples  of  such  specifications  are  contained  in  Standard 
^ Specifications  for  Highway  Bridges,  AASHO. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

The  following  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  31: 

a.  Cement.  Specification  531 

b.  Aggregates . Specification  522 

c.  Curing  Compounds . Specification  534 

d.  Preformed  Joint  Filler.  Specification  535 

e.  Metal  Waterstops.  Specification  538 

f.  Metal.  Specification  581 

g.  Water -Reducing,  Set -Retarding  Admixtures.  Specification  533 

h.  Air -Entraining  Admixtures.  Specification  532 

i.  Non-Metallic  Waterstops.  Specification  537 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-76 


3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Complete  engineering  and  structural  detail  drawings  of  the 
structure.  (See  Section  6,  National  Engineering  Handbook.) 

b.  Type,  size  and  quality  of  joint  filler,  waterstops  and 
shear  plates. 

c.  Notation  of  the  type  and  quality  of  concrete,  including: 

(1)  Class  of  concrete. 

(2)  Type  of  cement. 

(3)  Nominal  size  of  coarse  aggregate;  or  specification 
for  aggregate  if  Material  Specification  522  does 
not  apply. 

(4)  Types  of  admixtures , if  any. 

(5)  Deviations,  if  any,  from  the  air  content  and  slump 
specified  in  Section  4.  (The  air  content  specified 
in  Section  4 may  not  be  reduced  for  structures  where 
the  average  annual  minimum  air  temperature  is  below 
20°F.  A map  showing  average  annual  minimum  tempera- 
tures for  the  mid -continental  states  may  be  found  in 
"Climate  and  Man,"  the  1941  Yearbook  of  Agriculture, 
p.  707.) 

d.  Deviations,  if  any,  from  specifications  requiring: 

(1)  Impervious  membrane  under  concrete  placed  on  drain 
fill. 

(2)  Placement  of  slab  concrete  in  a single  layer. 

(3)  Consolidation  of  concrete  with  vibrators. 

e.  Minimum  time  for  removal  of  inside  forms  for  spillway  riser  if 
less  than  14  days  and  if  option  1 is  used  in  Section  18.  (A 
minimum  time  less  than  14  days,  but  not  less  than  3 days,  may 
be  specified  for  a riser  or  portions  of  a riser  that,  with 
reasonable  certainty,  will  not  be  subjected  to  water  loading 
within  14  days  after  the  concrete  is  placed.) 

f.  Required  minimum  strength  of  concrete  when  forms  are  removed 
if  option  2 is  used  in  Section  18. 

g.  Notation  calling  for  carborundum  rubbing  or  similar  abrasive 
treatment  of  formed  surfaces  exposed  to  view,  if  desired. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  3,  Classes  of  Concrete 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


The  rubbing  shall  be  started  as  soon  as 
possible  after  the  forms  are  removed,  patch- 
ing is  finished,  and  the  patching  mortar  has 
set  thoroughly.  Rubbing  shall  be  continued 
until  all  form  marks,  projections  and  irreg- 
ularities have  been  removed  and  a uniform 
surface  has  been  obtained.  After  rubbing  is 
completed  the  surface  shall  be  washed  to 
remove  loose  powder  and  shall  be  left  free 
from  unsound  patches,  paste,  powder,  and 
objectionable  marks.") 

Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  3,  Classes  of  Concrete 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  strength  is  to 
be  used  as  one  of  the  criteria  for  acceptance  of 
the  concrete  and  the  Contractor  is  to  be  made 
responsible  for  the  mix. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  concrete  mix 
is  to  be  prescribed  by  the  Engineer  and  strength 
will  not  govern  acceptance  from  the  Contractor. 

b.  Section  5,  Design  of  the  Concrete  Mix 

(1)  Option  1 is  required  with  Option  1 in  Section  3. 

(2)  Option  2 is  required  with  Option  2 in  Section  3. 

c.  Section  15,  Construction  Joints 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  in  circumstances  where 
maximum  bond  between  old  and  new  concrete  is  desired. 
When  such  joint  treatment  is  specified  it  is  permis- 
sible to  design  horizontal  construction  joints  as 
flat  plane  surfaces  without  shear  keys  or  shear  plates 
Option  1 is  preferred  for  all  structures  that  are 
continuously  or  intermittently  exposed  to  water. 

Where  the  joint  will  be  subject  to  differential  water 
pressure,  a shear  plate  is  recommended. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  in  circumstances  where 
bond  between  old  and  new  concrete  is  not  a critical 
element.  When  such  joint  treatment  is  specified,  the 
design  of  horizontal  construction  joints  must  incor- 
porate shear  plates  if  differential  water  pressure 
can  possibly  exist  across  the  joint. 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-78 


d.  Section  18,  Removal  of  Forms 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  operations  are  not 
controlled  on  the  basis  of  results  of  tests  on  job- 
cured  test  cylinders. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  operations  are 
controlled  on  the  basis  of  results  of  tests  on 
job-cured  test  cylinders. 

e.  Section  25,  Measurement  and  Payment 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  the  design  and 
control  of  the  concrete  mix  is  the  responsibility 
of  the  Contractor  (that  is,  when  the  compressive 
strength  of  the  concrete  is  one  of  the  criteria 
determining  acceptability). 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  job  mix  is 
designed  and  controlled  by  the  Engineer. 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-79 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
31.  CONCRETE 


1.  SCOPE 


The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing,  forming,  placing,  finishing 
and  curing  portland  cement  concrete  as  required  to  build  the 
structures  named  in  Section  26  of  this  specification. 

2 . MATERIALS 


Portland  cement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  531  for  the  specified  type.  One  brand  only  of  any 
type  of  cement  shall  be  used  in  any  single  structure  as  defined 
in  Section  26. 

Aggregates  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specifi- 
cation 522  unless  otherwise  specified.  The  grading  of  coarse 
aggregates  shall  be  as  specified  in  Section  26. 

Water  used  in  mixing  or  curing  concrete  shall  be  clean  and  free 
from  injurious  amounts  of  oil,  salt,  acid,  alkali,  organic  matter 
or  other  deleterious  substances. 

Air-entraining  admixtures  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  532.  If  air-entraining  cement  is  used, 
any  additional  air-entraining  admixture  shall  be  of  the  same  type 
as  that  in  the  cement. 

Water-reducing,  set-retarding  admixtures  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  Material  Specification  533. 

Shear  plates  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Speci- 
fication 581  for  structural  quality  or  commercial  or  merchant 
quality  steel.  Structural  quality  shall  be  used  if  specifically 
designated  in  the  drawings  or  specifications. 

Preformed  expansion  joint  filler  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification 535. 

Waterstops  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specifi- 
cations 537  and  538  for  the  specified  kinds. 

Curing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  534* 


(31-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-80 


3.  CLASSES  OF  CONCRETE 
(Option  1) 

Concrete  shall  be  classified  according  to  the  required  compres- 
sive strength.  The  strength  of  the  concrete  at  28  days  shall 
equal  or  exceed  the  Minimum  Compressive  Strength  at  28  days 
tabulated  below  for  the  class  of  concrete  specified. 


Minimum 


4. 


Compressive 

Class  of  Concrete  at  28  days 

Strength 

(psi) 

5000 

5000 

4000 

4000 

3000 

3000 

2500 

2500 

(Option  2) 

Concrete  shall  be  classified  as  follows: 

Maximum  Net 

Minimum 

Class  of 

Water  Content 

Cement  Content 

Concrete 

(gallons /bag) 

(bags/cu.  yd.) 

5000X 

5 

7 

4000X 

6 

6 

3000X 

7 

5 

2500X 

8 

4 1/2 

AIR  CONTENT  AND 

CONSISTENCY 

Unless  otherwise 

specified  the  air  content  (by  volume)  of 

concrete  at  the 

time  of  placement  shall 

be: 

Maximum 

Size  Aggregate 

Air  Content  (7.) 

3/8  inch  to  1/2  inch 
Over  1/2  inch  to  1 inch 
Over  1 inch  to  2 1/2  inches 


6 to  9 
5 to  8 
4 to  7 


The  consistency  of  the  concrete  shall  be  such  as  to  allow  it  to 
be  worked  into  place  without  segregation  or  excessive  laitance. 
Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  slump  shall  be: 


(31-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-81 


Type  of  Structure  Slump  (inches) 

Massive  sections,  pavements,  footings  2 * 1/2 
Heavy  beams,  thick  slabs,  thick  walls 
(over  12  in.)  3 1 1/2 

Columns,  light  beams,  thin  slabs,  thin 
walls  (12  in.  or  less)  4 1 1 

5.  DESIGN  OF  THE  CONCRETE  MIX 

(Option  l)(For  use  with  Option  1 in  Section  3.) 

The  Contractor  will  be  responsible  for  the  design  of  the  concrete 
mixtures.  At  least  5 days  prior  to  any  placement  of  concrete  he 
shall  furnish  the  Contracting  Officer  a statement  of  the  materials 
and  mix  proportions  (including  admixtures,  if  any)  he  intends  to 
use  for  each  specified  class  of  concrete.  The  statement  shall 
include  evidence  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer  that  the  materials 
and  proportions  selected  will  produce  concrete  of  the  quality, 
consistency  and  strength  specified.  The  materials  and  proportions 
so  stated  shall  constitute  the  "job  mix."  After  a job  mix  has 
been  designated,  neither  the  source,  character  or  grading  of  the 
aggregates  nor  the  type  or  brand  of  cement  or  admixture  shall  be 
changed  without  prior  notice  to  the  Engineer. 

When  specified,  a water -reducing,  set-retarding  admixture  shall 
be  used.  When  conditions  are  such  that  the  temperature  of  the 
concrete  at  the  time  of  placement  is  consistently  above  75°F,  a 
water -reducing,  set-retarding  admixture  may  be  used,  at  the 
option  of  the  Contractor.  The  cement  content  shall  be  same  as 
that  required  in  the  mix  without  the  admixture. 

The  use  of  calcium  chloride  or  other  accelerators  or  antifreeze 
compounds  will  not  be  allowed. 

Before  placing  concrete  containing  a water-reducing,  set-retarding 
admixture,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  test  results  to  the 
Engineer  showing  that  its  performance  in  the  job  mix  meets  the 
requirements  of  Material  Specification  533,  Section  4. 

(Option  2) (For  use  with  Option  2 in  Section  3.) 

At  least  35  days  prior  to  any  placement  of  concrete  the  Contractor 
shall  inform  the  Contracting  Officer  in  writing  of  the  source  and 
grading  of  aggregates  and  the  brand  and  type  of  cement  and  the 
brand  and  type  of  admixture,  if  any,  he  proposes  to  use  for  each 
class  of  concrete,  and  shall  furnish  certifications  or  other 


(31-3) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-82 


evidence  satisfactory  to  the  Engineer  that  the  proposed 
materials  meet  the  requirements  of  the  specifications. 

When  acceptable  sources,  types  and  gradings  of  aggregates  are 
designated  in  the  contract,  certifications  for  such  aggregates 
will  not  be  required. 

Job  mix  proportions  and  batch  weights  will  be  determined  by 
the  Engineer.  During  the  course  of  the  work,  the  Engineer 
will  adjust  the  job  mix  proportions  and  batch  weights  when- 
ever necessary. 

After  the  job  mix  has  been  designated,  neither  the  source, 
character  or  grading  of  the  aggregates  nor  the  type  or  brand 
of  cement  or  admixture  shall  be  changed  without  prior  notice 
to  the  Engineer. 

If  such  changes  are  necessary,  no  concrete  containing  such  new 
or  altered  materials  shall  be  placed  until  the  Engineer  has 
designated  a revised  job  mix. 

When  specified,  a water  reducing,  set-retarding  admixture  shall 
be  used.  When  conditions  are  such  that  the  temperature  of  the 
concrete  at  the  time  of  placement  is  consistently  above  75°F,  a 
water -reducing,  set -retarding  admixture  may  be  used,  at  the 
option  of  the  Contractor.  The  cement  content  shall  be  same  as 
that  required  in  the  mix  without  the  admixture. 

The  use  of  calcium  chloride  or  other  accelerators  or  antifreeze 
compounds  will  not  be  allowed. 

When  it  is  anticipated  that  a water-reducing,  set-retarding 
admixture  will  be  used,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  to  the 
Engineer  a sample  of  the  admixture  he  proposes  to  use  sufficient 
for  the  tests  required  by  Material  Specification  533,  Section  4. 
Concrete  containing  the  admixture  shall  not  be  placed  until  test 
results  have  been  obtained  showing  that  its  performance  in  the 
job  mix  meets  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  533, 
Section  4. 

6 . INSPECTING  AND  TESTING 

The  following  tests  will  be  performed  by  the  methods  indicated: 


Test 


Method 

(ASTM  Designation) 


Sampling 
Slump  Test 


C 17  21 


C 143 


i 


(31-4) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-82a 


Test 


Method 

(ASTM  Designation) 


Air  Content 

Compression  Test  Specimens 
Compressive  Strength 
Unit  Weight 


C 23 l1  or  C 1731 
C 311  or  C 42 
C 392  or  C 42 
C 138 


1 Tests  of  a portion  of  a batch  may  be  made  on  samples 
representative  of  that  portion  for  any  of  the  following 
purposes : 


(1)  Determining  uniformity  of  the  batch. 

(2)  Checking  compliance  with  requirements  for  slump 
and  air  content  when  the  batch  is  discharged  over 
an  extended  period  of  time. 

(3)  Checking  compliance  of  the  concrete  with  the 
specifications  when  the  whole  amount  being  placed 
in  a small  structure,  or  a distinct  portion  of  a 
larger  structure,  is  less  than  full  batch. 

2 For  each  strength  test  of  specimens  made  according  to  ASTM 
Designation  C 31,  3 standard  test  specimens  shall  be  made. 
The  test  result  shall  be  the  average  of  the  strengths  of 
the  3 specimens,  except  that  if  one  specimen  in  the  test 
shows  manifest  evidence  of  improper  sampling,  molding  or 
testing,  it  shall  be  discarded  and  the  strengths  of  the 
remaining  2 specimens  shall  be  averaged.  Should  more 
than  one  specimen  representing  a test  show  such  defects, 
the  entire  test  shall  be  discarded. 


(31 -4a) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


- 


(W 


2-83 


The  Engineer  shall  have  free  entry  to  the  plant  and  equipment 
furnishing  concrete  under  the  contract.  Proper  facilities  shall 
be  provided  for  the  Engineer  to  inspect  materials,  equipment  and 
processes  and  to  obtain  samples  of  the  concrete.  All  tests  and 
inspections  will  be  conducted  so  as  not  to  interfere  unnecessarily 
with  the  manufacture  and  delivery  of  the  concrete. 

7.  HANDLING  AND  MEASUREMENT  OF  MATERIALS 


Aggregates  shall  be  stored  or  stockpiled  in  such  a manner  that 
separation  of  coarse  and  fine  particles  of  each  size  will  be 
avoided  and  that  various  sizes  will  not  become  intermixed  before 
proportioning.  Methods  of  handling  and  transporting  aggregates 
shall  be  such  as  to  avoid  contamination,  excessive  breakage, 
segregation  or  degradation,  or  intermingling  of  various  sizes. 

Scales  for  weighing  aggregates  and  cement  shall  be  beam  type  or 
springless  dial  type.  They  shall  be  accurate  within  1 percent 
under  operating  conditions.  All  exposed  fulcrums,  clevises  and 
similar  working  parts  of  scales  shall  be  kept  clean. 

The  quantities  of  cement  and  aggregates  in  each  batch  of  concrete, 
as  indicated  by  the  scales,  shall  be  within  the  following  percent- 
ages of  the  required  batch  weights: 

Cement  - plus  or  minus  1.0  percent 

Aggregates  - plus  or  minus  2.0  percent 

Measuring  tanks  for  mixing  water  shall  be  of  adequate  capacity  to 
furnish  the  maximum  amount  of  mixing  water  required  per  batch  and 
shall  be  equipped  with  outside  taps  and  valves  to  provide  for 
checking  their  calibration  unless  other  means  are  provided  for 
readily  and  accurately  determining  the  amount  of  water  in  the  tank. 

Cement  shall  be  measured  by  weight  or  in  bags  of  94  lbs.  each. 

When  cement  is  measured  by  weight,  it  shall  be  weighed  on  a scale 
separate  from  that  used  for  other  materials,  and  in  a hopper 
entirely  free  and  independent  of  the  hopper  used  for  weighing  the 
aggregates.  When  cement  is  measured  in  bags,  no  fraction  of  a bag 
shall  be  used  unless  weighed. 

Aggregates  shall  be  measured  by  weight.  Mix  proportions  shall  be 
based  on  saturated,  surface-dry  weights.  The  batch  weight  of  each 
aggregate  shall  be  the  required  saturated,  surface-dry  weight  plus 
the  weight  of  surface  moisture  it  contains. 

(31-5) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-84 


Mixing  water  shall  consist  of  water  added  to  the  batch,  ice 
added  to  the  batch,  water  occurring  as  surface  moisture  on  the 
aggregates  and  water  introduced  in  the  form  of  admixtures.  The 
added  water  shall  be  measured  by  weight  or  volume  to  an  accuracy 
of  1 percent  of  the  required  total  mixing  water.  Added  ice 
shall  be  measured  by  weight.  Wash  water  shall  not  be  used  as  a 
portion  of  the  mixing  water  for  succeeding  batches. 

Dry  admixtures  shall  be  measured  by  weight,  and  paste  or  liquid 
admixtures  by  weight  or  volume,  within  a limit  of  accuracy  of 
3 percent. 

8.  MIXERS  AND  MIXING 

Concrete  may  be  furnished  by  batch  mixing  at  the  site  of  the  work 
or  by  ready-mix  methods. 

Mixers  shall  be  capable  of  thoroughly  mixing  the  concrete  ingre- 
dients into  a uniform  mass  within  the  specified  mixing  time  and 
of  discharging  the  mix  without  segregation.  Each  mixer  or 
agitator  shall  bear  a manufacturer’s  rating  plate  indicating  the 
rated  capacity  and  recommended  speeds  of  rotation,  and  shall  be 
operated  in  accordance  with  these  recommendations. 

Concrete  shall  be  uniform  and  thoroughly  mixed  when  delivered  to 
the  work.  Variations  in  slump  of  more  than  1 inch  within  a 
batch  will  be  considered  evidence  of  inadequate  mixing  and  shall 
be  corrected  by  changing  batching  procedures,  increasing  mixing 
time,  changing  mixers  or  other  means.  Mixing  time  shall  be 
within  the  limits  specified  below  unless  the  Contractor  demon- 
strates by  mixer  performance  tests  that  adequate  uniformity  is 
obtained  by  different  times  of  mixing.  For  this  purpose  the 
testing  program  and  uniformity  requirements  shall  be  as  set 
forth  in  ASTM  Designation  C 94. 

No  mixing  water  in  excess  of  the  amount  called  for  by  the  job 
mix  shall  be  added  to  the  concrete  during  mixing  or  hauling  or 
after  arrival  at  the  delivery  point. 

Batch  mixing  at  the  site.  For  concrete  mixed  at  the  site  of  the 
work  with  paving  mixers  or  stationary  construction  mixers,  the 
time  of  mixing  after  all  cement  and  aggregates  are  in  the  mixer 
drum  shall  be  not  less  than  1%  minutes. 

The  batch  shall  be  so  charged  into  the  mixer  that  some  water 
will  enter  in  advance  of  the  cement  and  aggregates  and  all 

(31-6) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


<W 


2-85 


mixing  water  shall  be  introduced  into  the  drum  before  one-fourth 
of  the  mixing  time  has  elapsed. 

Controls  shall  be  provided  to  insure  that  the  batch  cannot  be 
discharged  until  the  required  mixing  time  has  elapsed. 

If  truck  mixers  are  used,  the  requirements  below  for  truck  mixers 
and  truck-mixed  concrete  shall  apply. 

Ready-mixed  concrete.  Ready-mixed  concrete  shall  be  mixed  and 
delivered  to  the  site  of  the  work  by  one  of  the  following  methods: 

a.  Truck-mixed  concrete — Mixed  completely  in  a truck  mixer. 

b.  Shrink-mixed  concrete — Mixed  partially  in  a stationary 
mixer,  and  the  mixing  completed  in  a truck  mixer. 

c.  Central -mixed  concrete — Mixed  completely  in  a stationary 
mixer  and  the  mixed  concrete  transported  to  the  point  of 
delivery  in  a truck  agitator  or  in  a truck  mixer  operating 
at  agitating  speed  or  in  nonagitating  equipment. 

Truck  mixers  and  agitators  shall  be  equipped  with  revolution 
counters  by  which  the  number  of  revolutions  of  the  drum  or  blades 
may  be  readily  verified. 

When  ready-mixed  concrete  is  furnished,  the  Contractor  shall 
furnish  the  Engineer  a statement-of-delivery  ticket  showing  the 
time  of  loading,  the  revolution  counter  reading  at  the  time  of 
loading  and  the  quantities  of  materials  used  for  each  load  of 
concrete . 

Truck-mixed  concrete.  When  concrete  is  mixed  in  a 
truck  mixer  loaded  to  its  maximum  capacity,  the 
number  of  revolutions  of  the  drum  or  blades  at 
mixing  speed  shall  be  not  less  than  70  nor  more 
than  100.  If  the  batch  is  at  least  1/2  cubic  yard 
less  than  maximum  capacity,  the  number  of  revolu- 
tions at  mixing  speed  may  be  reduced  to  not  less 
than  50.  Mixing  in  excess  of  100  revolutions  shall 
be  at  the  speed  designated  by  the  manufacturer  of 
the  equipment  as  agitating  speed.  The  mixing 
operation  shall  begin  within  30  minutes  after  the 
cement  has  been  added  to  the  aggregates  and  the 
water  shall  be  added  during  mixing.  When 


(31-7) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-86 


mixing  is  begun  during  or  immediately  after  charging, 
a portion  of  the  mixing  water  shall  be  added  ahead  of, 
or  with,  the  other  ingredients. 


Shrink-mixed  concrete.  When  concrete  is  partially 
mixed  at  a central  plant  and  the  mixing  is  completed 
in  a truck  mixer,  the  mixing  time  in  the  central  plant 
mixer  shall  be  the  minimum  required  to  intermingle  the 
ingredients  and  shall  be  not  less  than  30  seconds.  The 
mixing  shall  be  completed  in  a truck  mixer  and  the  num- 
ber of  revolutions  of  the  drum  or  blades  at  mixing 
speed  shall  be  not  less  than  50  nor  more  than  100. 
Mixing  in  excess  of  100  revolutions  shall  be  at  the 
speed  designated  by  the  manufacturer  of  the  equipment 
as  agitating  speed. 

Central-mixed  concrete.  For  central-mixed  concrete, 
mixing  in  the  stationary  mixer  shall  meet  the  same 
requirements  as  batching  mixing  at  the  site. 

When  an  agitator,  or  truck  mixer  used  as  an  agitator, 
transports  concrete  that  has  been  completely  mixed  in 
a stationary  mixer,  mixing  during  transportation  shall 
be  at  the  speed  designated  by  the  manufacturer  of  the 
equipment  as  agitating  speed. 

The  use  of  nonagitating  equipment  to  transport  concrete 
to  the  site  of  the  work  will  be  permitted  only  if  the 
consistency  and  uniformity  of  the  concrete  as  dis- 
charged at  the  point  of  delivery  meet  the  requirements 
of  this  specification.  Bodies  of  nonagitating  hauling 
equipment  shall  be  so  constructed  that  leakage  of  the 
concrete  mix,  or  any  part  thereof,  will  not  occur. 
Concrete  hauled  in  open-top  vehicles  shall  be  pro- 
tected against  access  of  rain,  and  against  exposure 
to  the  sun  of  more  than  20  minutes  when  the  air 
temperature  is  above  75°F. 

9 . FORMS 


Forms  shall  be  of  wood,  plywood,  steel  or  other  approved  material 
and  shall  be  mortar  tight.  The  forms  and  associated  falsework 
shall  be  substantial  and  unyielding  and  shall  be  constructed  so 
that  the  finished  concrete  will  conform  to  the  specified  dimen- 
sions and  contours.  Form  surfaces  shall  be  smooth  and  free  from 
holes,  dents,  sags  or  other  irregularities.  Forms  shall  be 
coated  with  a nonstaining  form  oil  before  being  set  into  place. 


(31-8) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-87 


Metal  ties  or  anchorages  within  the  forms  shall  be  equipped  with 
cones,  she-bolts  or  other  devices  that  permit  their  removal  to  a 
depth  of  at  least  one  inch  without  injury  to  the  concrete.  Ties 
designed  to  break  off  below  the  surface  of  the  concrete  shall 
not  be  used  without  cones. 

All  edges  that  will  be  exposed  to  view  when  the  structure  is 
completed  shall  be  chamfered,  unless  finished  with  molding  tools 
as  specified  in  Section  20. 

10.  PREPARATION  OF  FORMS  AND  SUBGRADE 


Prior  to  placement  of  concrete  the  forms  and  subgrade  shall  be  free 
of  chips,  sawdust,  debris,  water,  ice,  snow,  extraneous  oil,  mortar, 
or  other  harmful  substances  or  coatings.  Any  oil  on  the  reinforcing 
steel  or  other  surfaces  required  to  be  bonded  to  the  concrete  shall 
be  removed.  Rock  surfaces  shall  be  cleaned  by  air -water  cutting, 
wet  sandblasting  or  wire  brush  scrubbing,  as  necessary,  and  shall 
be  wetted  immediately  prior  to  placement  of  concrete.  Earth  sur- 
faces shall  be  firm  and  damp.  Placement  of  concrete  on  mud,  dried 
earth,  uncompacted  fill  or  frozen  subgrade  will  not  be  permitted. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  when  concrete  is  to  be  placed  over 
drain  fill,  the  contact  surface  of  the  drain  fill  shall  be  covered 
with  a layer  of  asphalt-impregnated  building  paper  or  polyvinyl 
sheeting  prior  to  placement  of  the  concrete.  Forms  for  weepholes 
shall  extend  through  this  layer  into  the  drain  fill. 

Items  to  be  embedded  in  the  concrete  shall  be  positioned  accurately 
and  anchored  firmly. 

Weepholes  in  walls  or  slabs  shall  be  formed  with  nonferrous  mate- 
rials . 

11.  CONVEYING 


Concrete  shall  be  delivered  to  the  site  and  discharged  into  the  forms 
within  1%  hours  after  the  introduction  of  the  cement  to  the  aggre- 
gates. In  hot  weather  or  under  conditions  contributing  to  quick 
stiffening  of  the  concrete,  or  when  the  temperature  of  the  concrete 
is  85°F  or  above,  the  time  between  the  introduction  of  the  cement 
to  the  aggregates  and  discharge  shall  not  exceed  45  minutes.  The 
Engineer  may  allow  a longer  time,  provided  the  setting  time  of  the 
concrete  is  increased  a corresponding  amount  by  the  addition  of  an 
approved  set-retarding  admixture.  In  any  case,  concrete  shall  be 
conveyed  from  the  mixer  to  the  forms  as  rapidly  as  practicable,  by 
methods  that  will  prevent  segregation  of  the  aggregates  or  loss  of 
mortar.  Concrete  shall  not  be  dropped  more  than  5 feet  vertically 
unless  suitable  equipment  is  used  to  prevent  segregation. 

12.  PLACING 


» 


Concrete  shall  not  be  placed  until  the  subgrade,  forms  and  steel 
reinforcement  have  been  inspected  and  approved. 

(31-9) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-88 


The  Contractor  shall  have  all  equipment  and  materials  required 
for  curing  available  at  the  site  ready  for  use  before  placement 
of  concrete  begins. 

No  concrete  shall  be  placed  except  in  the  presence  of  the  Engi- 
neer. The  Contractor  shall  give  reasonable  notice  to  the  Engi- 
neer each  time  he  intends  to  place  concrete.  Such  notice  shall 
be  far  enough  in  advance  to  give  the  Engineer  adequate  time  to 
inspect  the  subgrade,  forms,  steel  reinforcement  and  other 
preparations  for  compliance  with  the  specifications  before 
concrete  is  delivered  for  placing. 

The  concrete  shall  be  deposited  as  closely  as  possible  to  its 
final  position  in  the  forms  and  shall  be  worked  into  the  corners 
and  angles  of  the  forms  and  around  all  reinforcement  and  embedded 
items  in  a manner  to  prevent  segregation  of  aggregates  or  exces- 
sive laitance.  The  depositing  of  concrete  shall  be  regulated  so 
that  the  concrete  may  be  consolidated  with  a minimum  of  lateral 
movement . 

Internal  stays  and  braces,  serving  temporarily  to  hold  the  forms 
in  correct  shape  and  alignment  prior  to  placement  of  concrete  at 
their  locations,  shall  be  removed  when  the  concrete  has  been 
placed  to  an  elevation  such  as  to  render  their  service  unneces- 
sary. 

3.  LAYERS 


Unless  otherwise  specified,  slab  concrete  shall  be  placed  to 
design  thickness  in  one  continuous  layer.  Formed  concrete  shall 
be  placed  in  horizontal  layers  not  more  than  20  inches  thick. 
Hoppers  and  chutes,  pipes  or  "elephant  trunks"  shall  be  used  as 
necessary  to  prevent  splashing  of  mortar  on  the  forms  and  rein- 
forcing steel  above  the  layer  being  placed. 

Successive  layers  shall  be  placed  at  a fast  enough  rate  to  pre- 
vent the  formation  of  "cold  joints."  If  the  surface  of  a layer 
of  concrete  in  place  sets  to  the  degree  that  it  will  not  flow 
and  merge  with  the  succeeding  layer  when  vibrated,  the  Contractor 
shall  discontinue  placing  concrete  and  shall  make  a construction 
joint  according  to  the  procedure  specified  in  Section  15. 

If  placing  is  discontinued  when  an  incomplete  layer  is  in  place, 
the  unfinished  end  of  the  layer  shall  be  formed  by  a vertical 
bulkhead. 


(31-10) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-89 


14.  CONSOLIDATING 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  concrete  shall  be  consolidated  with 
internal  type  mechanical  vibrators  capable  of  transmitting  vibra- 
tion to  the  concrete  at  frequencies  not  less  than  6000  impulses 
per  minute. 

The  location,  manner  and  duration  of  the  application  of  the  vibra- 
tors shall  be  such  as  to  secure  maximum  consolidation  of  the 
concrete  without  causing  segregation  of  the  mortar  and  coarse 
aggregate,  and  without  causing  water  or  cement  paste  to  flush  to 
the  surface. 

The  Contractor  shall  provide  a sufficient  number  of  vibrators  to 
properly  consolidate  the  concrete  immediately  after  it  is  placed 
in  the  work.  Vibration  shall  be  applied  in  the  freshly  deposited 
concrete  by  slowly  inserting  and  removing  the  vibrator  at  points 
uniformly  spaced  and  not  farther  apart  than  twice  the  radius  over 
which  the  vibration  is  visibly  effective.  The  vibrator  shall 
extend  into  the  previously  placed  layer  of  fresh  concrete,  at  all 
points,  to  insure  effective  bond  between  layers. 

Vibration  shall  not  be  applied  directly  to  the  reinforcement  steel 
or  the  forms  nor  to  concrete  that  has  hardened  to  the  degree  that 
it  does  not  become  plastic  when  vibrated. 

The  use  of  vibrators  to  transport  concrete  in  the  forms  or  convey- 
ing equipment  will  not  be  permitted. 

Vibration  shall  be  supplemented  by  spading  and  hand  tamping  as 
necessary  to  insure  smooth  and  dense  concrete  along  form  surfaces, 
in  corners  and  around  embedded  items. 

15.  CONSTRUCTION  JOINTS 

Construction  joints  shall  be  made  at  the  locations  shown  on  the 
drawings.  If  construction  joints  are  needed  which  are  not  shown 
on  the  drawings,  they  shall  be  placed  in  locations  approved  by  the 
Engineer. 

Where  a feather  edge  would  be  produced  at  a construction  joint,  as 
in  the  top  surface  of  a sloping  wall,  an  insert  form  shall  be  used 
so  that  the  resulting  edge  thickness  on  either  side  of  the  joint 
is  not  less  than  6 inches. 

(31-11) 

* 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-90 


In  walls  and  columns  as  each  lift  is  completed,  the  top  surfaces 
shall  be  immediately  and  carefully  protected  from  any  condition 
that  might  adversely  affect  the  hardening  of  the  concrete. 

Steel  tying  and  form  construction  adjacent  to  concrete  in  place 
shall  not  be  started  until  the  concrete  has  cured  at  least  12 
hours.  Before  new  concrete  is  deposited  on  or  against  concrete 
that  has  hardened,  the  forms  shall  be  retightened.  New  concrete 
shall  not  be  placed  until  the  hardened  concrete  has  cured  at 
least  12  hours. 

(Option  1) 

Surfaces  of  construction  joints  shall  be  cleaned  of  all  unsatis- 
factory concrete,  laitance,  coatings,  stains  or  debris  by  either 
wet  sandblasting  after  the  concrete  has  gained  sufficient  strength 
to  resist  excessive  cutting,  or  air-water  cutting  as  soon  as  the 
concrete  has  hardened  sufficiently  to  prevent  the  jet  from  dis- 
placing the  coarse  aggregates,  or  both.  The  surface  of  the 
concrete  in  place  shall  be  cut  to  expose  clean,  sound  aggregate 
but  not  so  deep  as  to  undercut  the  edges  of  larger  particles  of 
the  aggregate.  After  cutting,  the  surface  shall  be  thoroughly 
washed  to  remove  all  loose  material.  If  the  surface  is  congested 
by  reinforcing  steel,  is  relatively  inaccessible,  or  it  is  consi- 
dered undesirable  to  disturb  the  concrete  before  it  is  hardened, 
cleaning  of  the  joint  by  air-water  jets  will  not  be  permitted  and 
the  wet  sandblasting  method  will  be  required  after  the  concrete 
has  hardened. 

(Option  2) 

Surfaces  of  construction  joints  shall  be  cleaned  of  all  unsatis- 
factory concrete,  laitance,  coatings,  stains,  or  debris  by  wash- 
ing and  scrubbing  with  a wire  brush  or  wire  broom  or  by  other 
means  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

(Use  with  Either  Option) 

The  surfaces  shall  be  kept  moist  for  at  least  one  hour  prior  to 
placement  of  new  concrete.  The  new  concrete  shall  be  placed 
directly  on  the  cleaned  and  washed  surface. 

16 . EXPANSION  AND  CONTRACTION  JOINTS 


Expansion  and  contraction  joints  shall  be  made  only  at  locations 
shown  on  the  drawings. 


(31-12) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-91 


Exposed  concrete  edges  at  expansion  and  contraction  joints  shall  be 
carefully  tooled  or  chamfered,  and  the  joints  shall  be  free  of  mortar 
and  concrete.  Joint  filler  shall  be  left  exposed  for  its  full  length 
with  clean  and  true  edges. 

When  open  joints  or  weakened  plane  'rdummyM  joints  are  specified,  the 
joints  shall  be  constructed  by  the  insertion  and  subsequent  removal 
of  a wood  strip,  metal  plate  or  other  suitable  template  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  comers  of  the  concrete  will  not  be  chipped  or  broken. 

The  edges  of  the  concrete  at  the  joints  shall  be  finished  with  an 

edging  tool  prior  to  removal  of  the  joint  strips. 

Preformed  expansion  joint  filler  shall  be  held  firmly  in  the  correct 
position  as  the  concrete  is  placed. 

17.  WATER ST OPS 

Waterstops  shall  be  held  firmly  in  the  correct  position  as  the  concrete 
is  placed.  Joints  in  metal  waterstops  shall  be  brazed  or  welded. 

Joints  in  rubber  or  plastic  waterstops  shall  be  cemented,  welded  or 
vulcanized  as  recommended  by  the  manufacturer. 

18.  REMOVAL  OF  FORMS 

Forms  shall  be  removed  only  when  the  Engineer  is  present  and  shall  not 

be  removed  without  his  approval.  Forms  shall  be  removed  in  such  a way 

as  to  prevent  damage  to  the  concrete.  Supports  shall  be  removed  in  a 
manner  that  will  permit  the  concrete  to  take  the  stresses  due  to  its 
own  weight  uniformly  and  gradually. 

(Option  1) 

Forms  shall  not  be  removed  sooner  than  the  following  minimum  times  after 
the  concrete  is  placed.  These  periods  represent  cumulative  number  of 
days  and  fractions  of  days,  not  necessarily  consecutive,  during  which 
the  temperature  of  the  air  adjacent  to  the  concrete  is  above  50°F. 


Element 


Time 


Beams,  arches  - supporting  forms  and  shoring 

Conduits,  deck  slabs  - supporting  (inside)  forms 
and  shoring 

Conduits  (outside  forms),  sides  of  beams,  small 
structures 


14  days 


7 days 


24  hours 


Columns,  walls,  spillway  risers  - with  side  or 
vertical  load 


7 days 


Columns,  walls,  spillway  risers  - with  no  side 
or  vertical  load: 


more  than  30  feet  of  wall 


7 days 


(31-13) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-92 


Element  Time 

Concrete  supporting  20  to  30  feet  of  wall  in 

place  above  it* 1  3 days 

Concrete  supporting  not  more  than  20  feet  in 

place  about  it1  24  hours 

1Age  of  stripped  concrete  shall  be  at  least  7 days  before  any  load 
other  than  the  weight  of  the  column  or  wall  itself  is  applied. 

(Option  2) 

Forms,  supports  and  housings  shall  not  be  removed  until  the  concrete 
has  attained  the  strength  specified  in  Section  26  for  this  purpose. 

The  strength  will  be  determined  by  compression  testing  of  test  cylin- 
ders cast  by  the  Engineer  for  this  purpose  and  cured  at  the  work  site 
in  the  manner  specified  in  ASTM  Method  C 31  for  determining  form 
removal  time. 

19.  FINISHING  FORMED  SURFACES 

All  concrete  surfaces  shall  be  true  and  even,  and  shall  be  free  from 
open  or  rough  spaces,  depressions  or  projections. 

Immediately  after  the  removal  of  forms: 

All  bulges,  fins,  form  marks  or  other  irregularities  which 
in  the  judgment  of  the  Engineer  will  adversely  affect  the 
appearance  or  function  of  the  structure  shall  be  removed. 

All  form  bolts  and  ties  shall  be  removed  to  a depth  at  least 

1 inch  below  the  surface  of  the  concrete.  The  cavities  pro- 
duced by  form  ties  and  all  other  holes  of  similar  size  and 
depth  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and,  after  the  interior 
surfaces  have  been  kept  continuously  wet  for  at  least  3 
hours,  shall  be  carefully  packed  with  a dry  patching  mortar 
(preshrunk)  mixed  not  richer  than  1 part  cement  to  3 parts 
sand. 

Holes  left  by  form  bolts  or  straps  which  pass  through  the 
wall  shall  be  filled  solid  with  mortar. 

Patching  mortar  shall  be  thoroughly  compacted  into  place  to 
form  a dense,  well-bonded  unit,  and  the  in-place  mortar  shall 
be  sound  and  free  from  shrinkage  cracks. 

All  patched  areas  shall  be  cured  as  specified  in  Section  21. 

20.  FINISHING  UNFORMED  SURFACES 

All  exposed  surfaces  of  the  concrete  shall  be  accurately  screeded 
to  grade  and  then  float  finished,  unless  specified  otherwise. 


(31-14) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-93 


Excessive  floating  or  troweling  while  the  concrete  is  soft  will 
not  be  permitted. 

The  addition  of  dry  cement  or  water  to  the  surface  of  the  screeded 
concrete  to  expedite  finishing  will  not  be  allowed. 

Joints  and  edges  on  unformed  surfaces  that  will  be  exposed  to  view 
shall  be  chamfered  or  finished  with  molding  tools. 

21.  CURING 


Concrete  shall  be  prevented  from  drying  for  a curing  period  of  at 
least  7 days  after  it  is  placed.  Exposed  surfaces  shall  be  kept 
continuously  moist  for  the  entire  period  or  until  curing  compound 
is  applied  as  specified  below.  Moisture  shall  be  maintained  by 
sprinkling,  flooding  or  fog  spraying,  or  by  covering  with  continu- 
ously moistened  canvas,  cloth  mats,  straw,  sand  or  other  approved 
material.  Wood  forms  (except  plywood)  left  in  place  during  the 
curing  period  shall  be  kept  wet.  Formed  surfaces  shall  be  tho- 
roughly wetted  immediately  after  forms  are  removed  and  shall  be 
kept  wet  until  patching  and  repairs  are  completed.  Water  or 
covering  shall  be  applied  in  such  a way  that  the  concrete  surface 
is  not  eroded  or  otherwise  damaged. 


Water  for  curing  shall  be  clean  and  free  from  any  substances  that 
will  cause  discoloration  of  the  concrete. 


Except  as  otherwise  specified  in  Section  24,  and  except  for  con- 
struction joint  surfaces,  concrete  may  be  coated  with  curing 
compound  in  lieu  of  the  continued  application  of  moisture. 

The  compound  shall  be  sprayed  on  the  moist  concrete  surfaces  as 
soon  as  free  water  has  disappeared,  but  shall  not  be  applied  to 
any  surface  until  patching,  repairs  and  finishing  of  that  surface 
are  completed. 

The  curing  compound  shall  be  thoroughly  mixed  immediately  before 
applying,  and  shall  be  applied  at  a uniform  rate  of  not  less  than 
one  gallon  per  150  square  feet  of  surface.  It  shall  form  a uni- 
form, continuous,  adherent  film  that  shall  not  check,  crack  or 
peel,  and  shall  be  free  from  pin  holes  or  other  imperfections. 

Curing  compound  shall  not  be  applied  to  surfaces  requiring  bond 
with  subsequently  placed  concrete,  such  as  construction  joints, 
shear  plates,  reinforcing  steel  and  other  embedded  items. 

(31-15) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-94 


Surfaces  subjected  to  heavy  rainfall  or  running  water  within  3 
hours  after  the  compound  has  been  applied,  or  surfaces  damaged 
by  subsequent  construction  operations  during  the  curing  period 
shall  be  resprayed  in  the  same  manner  as  for  the  original  appli- 
cation. 

22.  REMOVAL  OR  REPAIR 


When  concrete  is  honeycombed,  damaged  or  otherwise  defective, 
the  Contractor  shall  remove  and  replace  the  structure  or  struc- 
tural member  containing  the  defective  concrete,  or  correct  or 
repair  the  defective  parts.  The  Engineer  will  determine  the 
required  extent  of  removal,  replacement  or  repair. 

Prior  to  starting  repair  work  the  Contractor  shall  obtain  the 
Engineer's  approval  of  his  plan  for  making  the  repair.  Such 
approval  shall  not  be  considered  a waiver  of  the  Contracting 
Officer's  right  to  require  complete  removal  of  defective  work 
if  the  completed  repair  does  not  produce  concrete  of  the  required 
quality  and  appearance. 

Repair  work  shall  be  performed  only  when  the  Engineer  is  present. 

Repair  of  formed  surfaces  shall  be  started  within  24  hours  after 
removal  of  the  forms. 

Except  as  otherwise  approved  by  the  Engineer,  the  appropriate 
methods  described  in  Chapter  VII  of  the  Concrete  Manual,  Bureau 
of  Reclamation,  U.  S.  Department  of  the  Interior,  shall  be  used. 

If  approved  in  writing  by  the  Contracting  Officer,  proprietary 
compounds  for  adhesion  or  as  patching  ingredients  may  be  used. 

Such  compounds  shall  be  used  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's 
recommendations . 

Curing  as  specified  in  Section  21  shall  be  applied  to  repaired 
areas  immediately  after  the  repairs  are  completed. 

23.  CONCRETING  IN  COLD  WEATHER 

When  the  atmospheric  temperature  may  be  expected  to  drop  below 
40°F  at  the  time  concrete  is  delivered  to  the  work  site,  during 
placement,  or  at  any  time  during  the  curing  period,  the  following 
provisions  also  shall  apply: 

a.  The  temperature  of  the  concrete  at  time  of  placing  shall 
not  be  less  than  50°F  nor  more  than  90°F.  The  temperature 
of  neither  aggregates  nor  mixing  water  shall  be  more  than 
100°F  just  prior  to  mixing  with  the  cement. 

(31-16) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-95 


ft)  b. 

When  the  daily  minimum  temperature  is  less  than  40°F, 
concrete  structures  shall  be  insulated  or  housed  and 
heated  after  placement.  The  temperature  of  the  con- 
crete and  air  adjacent  to  the  concrete  shall  be 
maintained  at  not  less  than  50°F  nor  more  than  90°F 
for  the  duration  of  the  curing  period. 

c. 

Methods  of  insulating,  housing  and  heating  the 
structure  shall  conform  to  "Recommended  Practice 
for  Cold  Weather  Concreting,"  ACI  Standard  306. 

d. 

When  dry  heat  is  used  to  protect  concrete,  means  of 
maintaining  an  ambient  humidity  of  at  least  40  percent 
shall  be  provided  unless  the  concrete  has  been  coated 
with  curing  compound  as  specified  in  Section  21  or  is 
covered  tightly  with  an  approved  impervious  material. 

24.  CONCRETING  IN  HOT  WEATHER 

When  climatic  or  other  conditions  are  such  that  the  temperature  of 
the  concrete  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  exceed  90°F  at  the  time 
of  delivery  at  the  work  site,  during  placement,  or  during  the  first 
24  hours  after  placement,  the  following  provisions  also  shall  apply; 


a. 

ft 

The  Contractor  shall  maintain  the  temperature  of  the  concrete 
below  90°F  during  mixing,  conveying,  and  placing.  Methods 
used  shall  conform  to  "Recommended  Practice  for  Hot  Weather 
Concreting,"  ACI  Standard  605. 

b. 

The  concrete  shall  be  placed  in  the  work  immediately 
after  mixing.  Truck  mixing  shall  be  delayed  until  only 
time  enough  remains  to  accomplish  it  before  the  concrete 
is  placed. 

c. 

Exposed  concrete  surfaces  which  tend  to  dry  or  set  too 
rapidly  shall  be  continuously  moistened  by  means  of  fog 
sprays  or  otherwise  protected  from  drying  during  the  time 
between  placement  and  finishing,  and  after  finishing. 

d. 

Finishing  of  slabs  and  other  exposed  surfaces  shall  be 
started  as  soon  as  the  condition  of  the  concrete  allows 
and  shall  be  completed  without  delay. 

(31-17) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-96 


e.  Concrete  surfaces  exposed  to  the  air  shall  be  covered  as  soon 
as  the  concrete  has  hardened  sufficiently  and  shall  be  kept 
continuously  wet  for  at  least  the  first  24  hours  of  the  curing 
period,  and  for  the  entire  curing  period  unless  curing  compound 
is  applied  as  specified  in  subsection  g,  below. 


f.  Formed  surfaces  shall  be  kept  completely  and  continuously  wet 
for  the  duration  of  curing  period  (prior  to,  during  and  after 
form  removal)  or  until  curing  compound  is  applied  as  specified 
in  subsection  g,  below. 


g.  If  moist  curing  is  discontinued  before  the  end  of  the  curing 
period,  white  pigmented  curing  compound  shall  be  applied 
immediately,  following  the  procedures  specified  in  Section  21. 

25.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established  in 

the  contract,  concrete  will  be  measured  to  the  neat  lines  or  pay 

limits  shown  on  the  drawings,  and  the  volume  of  concrete  will  be 

computed  to  the  nearest  0.1  cubic  yard.  No  deduction  in  volume  will 

be  made  for  chamfers,  rounded  or  beveled  edges,  or  for  any  void  or 

embedded  item  that  is  less  than  five  cubic  feet  in  volume.  Where 

concrete  is  placed  against  the  sides  or  bottom  of  an  excavation 

without  intervening  forms,  drain  fill,  or  bedding,  the  volume  of 

concrete  required  to  fill  voids  resulting  from  overexcavation  out-  ^ 

side  the  neat  lines  or  pay  limits  will  be  included  in  the  measurement 

for  payment  where  such  overexcavation  is  directed  by  the  Engineer 

to  remove  unsuitable  foundation  material;  but  only  to  the  extent 

that  the  unsuitable  condition  is  not  a result  of  the  Contractor's 

operations . 

(Option  1) 

Payment  for  each  item  of  concrete  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  price  for  that  item.  The  payment  for  concrete  will  constitute 
full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment,  transporta- 
tion, tools,  forms,  falsework,  bracing  and  all  other  items  neces- 
sary and  incidental  to  completion  of  the  concrete  work,  such  as 
joint  fillers,  waterstops,  dowels  or  dowel  assemblies  and  shear 
plates,  but  not  including  reinforcing  steel  or  other  items  listed 
for  payment  elsewhere  in  the  contract. 

Measurement  and  payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  reinforcing 
steel  will  be  made  as  specified  in  Construction  Specification  34. 


(31-18) 

NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


(Option  2) 


Payment  for  each  item  of  concrete  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  for  that  item.  The  payment  for  concrete  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment,  transportation, 
tools,  forms,  falsework,  bracing  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  completion  of  the  concrete  work,  such  as  joint  fillers, 
waterstops,  dowels  or  dowel  assemblies,  and  shear  plates,  but  not 
including  furnishing  and  placing  reinforcing  steel  or  furnishing 
and  handling  cement  or  other  items  listed  for  payment  elsewhere  in 
the  contract. 

Measurement  and  payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  reinforcing  steel 
will  be  made  as  specified  in  Construction  Specification  34. 

Cement  will  be  measured  by  dividing  the  volume  of  concrete  accepted 
for  payment  by  the  yield  of  the  applicable  job  mix.  The  yield  will 
be  determined  by  the  procedure  specified  in  ASTM  Designation  C 138. 

If  the  amount  of  cement  actually  used  per  batch  exceeds  the  amount 
in  the  job  mix  specified  by  the  Engineer,  the  measurement  will  be 
based  on  the  latter.  One  barrel  of  cement  will  be  considered  equal 
to  4 bags  or  376  pounds.  Payment  for  each  type  of  cement  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  furnishing  and  handling  that 
type  of  cement  and  such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation 
for  all  materials,  labor,  equipment,  storage,  transportation  and 
all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  furnishing  and  handling 
the  cement. 

(Use  with  Either  Option) 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but  not 
listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the 
item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the 
items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  26 
of  this  specification. 


(31-19) 

NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


2-99 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  THE  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  32 
CONCRETE  FOR  MINOR  STRUCTURES 


» 


1.  Applicability 

Construction  Specification  32  is  applicable  to  minor  concrete 
structures  such  as  inlets  for  pipe  drops,  pipe  drainage  inlets, 
bases  for  CMP  risers,  pipe  supports,  thrust  blocks,  small  water 
control  structures  and  similar  structures,  in  which  the  quantity 
of  concrete  is  less  than  5 cubic  yards  per  structure,  and  where 
the  location  of  the  concrete  will  allow  economical  maintenance 
or  replacement. 

2 . Material  Specifications 

Material  Specifications  531,  522,  535,  537  and  538  are  comple- 
mentary to  Construction  Specification  32.  When  local  aggregates 
do  not  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  522 
but  are  known  to  produce  concrete  of  adequate  quality,  reference 
to  Interim  Standard  Material  Specifications  is  permissible,  or 
requirements  may  be  stated  in  the  construction  details. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings 

a.  Complete  engineering  and  structural  detail  drawings  of  the 
structure.  (See  Section  6,  National  Engineering  Handbook.) 

b.  Type,  size  and  quality  of  joint  filler,  waterstops  and 
shear  plates,  if  applicable. 

c.  Type  of  cement. 

d.  Nominal  size  of  coarse  aggregate;  or  specifications  for 
aggregate  if  Material  Specification  522  does  not  apply. 

e.  Types  of  admixtures,  if  any. 

f.  Special  slump  and  air  content  requirements,  if  applicable. 

g.  Special  note  if  a membrane  is  not  required  under  concrete  to 
be  placed  on  drain  fill. 

4 . Discussion  of  Options 

No  options  are  included.  However,  the  payment  clause  in  Section 
23  is  written  to  permit  either  unit  price  or  lump  sum  payment. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-101 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
32.  CONCRETE  FOR  MINOR  STRUCTURES 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing,  forming,  placing,  finishing 
and  curing  portland  cement  concrete  as  required  to  build  the 
structures  named  in  Section  24  of  this  specification. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Portland  cement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  531  for  the  specified  type. 

Aggregates  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specifi- 
cation 522  unless  otherwise  specified.  The  grading  of  coarse 
aggregates  shall  be  as  specified  in  Section  24. 

Water  shall  be  clean  and  free  from  injurious  amounts  of  oil,  salt, 
acid,  alkali,  organic  matter  or  other  deleterious  substances. 

Preformed  expansion  joint  filler  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  535. 

Waterstops  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specifi- 
cations 537  and  538  for  the  specified  kinds. 

3.  CLASS  OF  CONCRETE 

Concrete  for  minor  structures  shall  be  classified  as  follows: 

Maximum  Net  Minimum 

Class  of  Water  Content  Cement  Content 

Concrete  (gallons/bag)  (bags/cu.  yd.) 

3000M  7 6 

4.  AIR  CONTENT  AND  CONSISTENCY 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  slump  shall  be  2 to  4 inches.  If 
air  entrainment  is  specified,  the  air  content  by  volume  shall  be 
5 to  8 percent  of  the  volume  of  the  concrete.  When  specified  or 
when  directed  by  the  Engineer,  a water-reducing,  set-retarding 
admixture  approved  by  the  Engineer  shall  be  used. 

(32-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-102 


5.  DESIGN  OF  THE  CONCRETE  MIX 


The  proportions  of  the  aggregates  shall  be  such  as  to  produce  a 
concrete  mixture  that  will  work  readily  into  the  corners  and 
angles  of  the  forms  and  around  reinforcement  when  consolidated, 
but  will  not  segregate  or  exude  free  water  during  consolidation. 

Prior  to  placement  of  concrete,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish 
the  Engineer,  for  approval,  a statement  of  the  materials  and 
mix  proportions  (including  admixtures,  if  any)  he  intends  to 
use.  The  statement  shall  include  evidence  satisfactory  to  the 
Engineer  that  the  materials  and  proportions  will  produce  con- 
crete conforming  to  this  specification.  The  materials  and 
proportions  so  stated  shall  constitute  the  "job  mix."  After  a 
job  mix  has  been  approved,  neither  the  source,  character  or 
grading  of  the  aggregates  nor  the  type  or  brand  of  cement  or 
admixture  shall  be  changed  without  prior  notice  to  the  Engineer. 
If  such  changes  are  necessary,  no  concrete  containing  such  new 
or  altered  materials  shall  be  placed  until  the  Engineer  has 
approved  a revised  job  mix. 

6.  INSPECTION  AND  TESTING 


The  Engineer  shall  have  free  entry  to  the  plant  and  equipment 
furnishing  concrete  under  the  contract.  Proper  facilities  shall 
be  provided  for  the  Engineer  to  inspect  materials,  equipment  and 
processes  and  to  obtain  samples  of  the  concrete.  All  tests  and 
inspections  will  be  conducted  so  as  not  to  interfere  unneces- 
sarily with  manufacture  and  delivery  of  the  concrete. 

7.  HANDLING  AND  MEASUREMENT  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  shall  be  stockpiled  and  batched  by  methods  that  will 
prevent  segregation  or  contamination  of  aggregates  and  insure 
accurate  proportioning  of  the  ingredients  of  the  mix. 

Cement  shall  be  measured  by  weight  or  in  bags  of  94  pounds  each. 
When  cement  is  measured  in  bags,  no  fraction  of  a bag  shall  be 
used  unless  weighed. 

Aggregates  shall  be  measured  by  weight.  Mix  proportions  shall  be 
based  on  saturated,  surface -dry  weights.  The  batch  weight  of  each 
aggregate  shall  be  the  required  saturated,  surface -dry  weight  plus 
the  weight  of  surface  moisture  it  contains. 

(32-2) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-103 


ft 


ft 


Water  shall  be  measured,  by  volumne  or  by  weight,  to  an  accuracy 
within  one  percent  of  the  total  quantity  of  water  required  for 
the  batch. 

Admixtures  shall  be  measured  within  a limit  of  accuracy  of  three 
percent. 

8.  MIXERS  AND  MIXING 


Concrete  shall  be  uniform  and  thoroughly  mixed  when  delivered  to 
the  work.  Variations  in  slump  of  more  than  1 inch  within  a batch 
will  be  considered  evidence  of  inadequate  mixing  and  shall  be 
corrected  by  increasing  mixing  time  or  other  means. 

For  stationary  mixers,  the  mixing  time  after  all  cement  and  aggre- 
gates are  in  the  mixer  drum  shall  be  not  less  than  1%  minutes. 

When  concrete  is  mixed  in  a truck  mixer,  the  number  of  revolutions 
of  the  drum  or  blades  at  mixing  speed  shall  be  not  less  than  70 
nor  more  than  100. 

No  mixing  water  in  excess  of  the  amount  called  for  by  the  job  mix 
shall  be  added  to  the  concrete  during  mixing  or  hauling  or  after 
arrival  at  the  delivery  point. 

9.  FORMS 


Forms  shall  be  of  wood,  plywood,  steel  or  other  approved  material 
and  shall  be  mortar  tight.  The  forms  and  associated  falsework 
shall  be  substantial  and  unyielding  and  shall  be  constructed  so 
that  the  finished  concrete  will  conform  to  the  specified  dimen- 
sions and  contours.  Form  surfaces  shall  be  smooth  and  free  from 
holes,  dents,  sags  or  other  irregularities.  Forms  shall  be  coated 
with  a nonstaining  form  oil  before  being  set  into  place. 

Metal  ties  or  anchorages  within  the  forms  shall  be  equipped  with 
cones,  she-bolts  or  other  devices  that  permit  their  removal  to  a 
depth  of  at  least  one  inch  without  injury  to  the  concrete.  Ties 
designed  to  break  off  below  the  surface  of  the  concrete  shall 
not  be  used  without  cones. 

All  edges  that  will  be  exposed  to  view  when  the  structure  is 
completed  shall  be  chamfered,  unless  finished  with  molding  tools 
as  specified  in  Section  18. 

10.  PREPARATION  OF  FORMS  AND  SUBGRADE 


Prior  to  placement  of  concrete  the  forms  and  subgrade  shall  be 
free  of  chips,  sawdust,  debris,  water,  ice,  snow,  extraneous  oil, 
mortar,  or  other  harmful  substances  or  coatings.  Any  oil  on  the 
reinforcing  steel  or  other  surfaces  required  to  be  bonded  to  the 
concrete  shall  be  removed.  Rock  surfaces  shall  be  cleaned  by 

(32-3) 

NEH  1/28/70 (Notice  20-27) 


2-104 


air-water  cutting,  wet  sandblasting  or  wire  brush  scrubbing,  as 
necessary,  and  shall  be  wetted  immediately  prior  to  placement  of 
concrete.  Earth  surfaces  shall  be  firm  and  damp.  Placement  of 
concrete  on  mud,  dried  earth  or  uncompacted  fill  or  frozen  sub- 
grade will  not  be  permitted. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  when  concrete  is  to  be  placed  over 
drain  fill,  the  contact  surface  of  the  drain  fill  shall  be 
covered  with  a layer  of  asphalt-impregnated  building  paper  or 
polyvinyl  sheeting  prior  to  placement  of  the  concrete.  Forms 
for  weepholes  shall  extend  through  this  layer  into  the  drain 
fill. 

Items  to  be  embedded  in  the  concrete  shall  be  positioned  accu- 
rately and  anchored  firmly. 

Weepholes  in  walls  or  slabs  shall  be  formed  with  nonferrous 
materials . 

11.  CONVEYING 

Concrete  shall  be  delivered  to  the  site  and  discharged  into  the 
forms  within  1%  hours  after  the  introduction  of  the  cement  to 
the  aggregates.  In  hot  weather  or  under  conditions  contributing 
to  quick  stiffening  of  the  concrete,  the  time  between  the  intro- 
duction of  the  cement  to  the  aggregates  and  discharge  shall  not 
exceed  45  minutes.  The  Engineer  may  allow  a longer  time, 
provided  the  setting  time  of  the  concrete  is  increased  a corre- 
sponding amount  by  the  addition  of  an  approved  set-retarding 
admixture.  In  any  case,  concrete  shall  be  conveyed  from  the 
mixer  to  the  forms  as  rapidly  as  practicable  by  methods  that 
will  prevent  segregation  of  the  aggregates  or  loss  of  mortar. 
Concrete  shall  not  be  dropped  more  than  five  feet  vertically 
unless  suitable  equipment  is  used  to  prevent  segregation. 

12 . PLACING 


Concrete  shall  not  be  placed  until  the  subgrade,  forms  and 
steel  reinforcement  have  been  inspected  and  approved.  No  con- 
crete shall  be  placed  except  in  the  presence  of  the  Engineer. 
The  Contractor  shall  give  reasonable  notice  to  the  Engineer 
each  time  he  intends  to  place  concrete.  Such  notice  shall  be 
far  enough  in  advance  to  give  the  Engineer  adequate  time  to 
inspect  the  subgrade,  forms,  steel  reinforcement  and  other 
preparations  for  compliance  with  the  specifications  before 
concrete  is  delivered  for  placing. 

(32-4) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-105 


The  concrete  shall  be  deposited  as  closely  as  possible  to  its 
final  position  in  the  forms  and  shall  be  worked  into  the  comers 
and  angles  of  the  forms  and  around  all  reinforcement  and  embedded 
items  in  a manner  to  prevent  segregation  of  aggregates  or  exces- 
sive laitance.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  slab  concrete  shall 
be  placed  to  design  thickness  in  one  continuous  layer.  Formed 
concrete  shall  be  placed  in  horizontal  layers  not  more  than  20 
inches  thick.  Hoppers  and  chutes,  pipes  or  "elephant  trunks" 
shall  be  used  as  necessary  to  prevent  splashing  of  mortar  on  the 
forms  and  reinforcing  steel  above  the  layer  being  placed. 

Immediately  after  the  concrete  is  placed  in  the  forms,  it  shall  be 
consolidated  by  spading,  hand  tamping  or  vibration  as  necessary  to 
insure  smooth  surfaces  and  dense  concrete.  Each  layer  shall  be 
consolidated  to  insure  monolithic  bond  with  the  preceding  layer. 

If  the  surface  of  a layer  of  concrete  in  place  sets  to  the  degree 
that  it  will  not  flow  and  merge  with  the  succeeding  layer  when 
spaded  or  vibrated,  the  Contractor  shall  discontinue  placing  con- 
crete and  shall  make  a construction  joint  according  to  the  proce- 
dure specified  in  Section  13. 

If  placing  is  discontinued  when  an  incomplete  horizontal  layer  is 
in  place,  the  unfinished  end  of  the  layer  shall  be  formed  by  a 
vertical  bulkhead. 

13.  CONSTRUCTION  JOINTS 


Construction  joints  shall  be  made  at  the  locations  shown  on  the 
drawings.  If  construction  joints  are  needed  which  are  not  shown 
on  the  drawings,  they  shall  be  placed  in  locations  approved  by  the 
Engineer. 

Where  a feather  edge  would  be  produced  at  a construction  joint,  as 
in  the  top  surface  of  a sloping  wall,  an  insert  form  shall  be  used 
so  that  the  resulting  edge  thickness  on  either  side  of  the  joint 
is  not  less  than  6 inches. 

In  walls  and  columns,  as  each  lift  is  completed,  the  top  surfaces 
shall  be  immediately  and  carefully  protected  from  any  condition 
that  might  adversely  affect  the  hardening  of  the  concrete. 

Steel  tying  and  form  construction  adjacent  to  concrete  in  place 
shall  not  be  started  until  the  concrete  has  cured  at  least  12 
hours.  Before  new  concrete  is  deposited  on  or  against  concrete 
that  has  hardened,  the  forms  shall  be  retightened.  New  concrete 
shall  not  be  placed  until  the  hardened  concrete  has  cured  at  least 
12  hours. 


(32-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


& 

2-106 


Surfaces  of  construction  joints  shall  be  cleaned  of  all  unsatis- 
factory concrete,  laitance,  coatings  or  debris  by  washing  and 
scrubbing  with  a wire  brush  or  wire  broom  or  by  other  means 
approved  by  the  Engineer.  The  surfaces  shall  be  kept  moist  for 
at  least  one  hour  prior  to  placement  of  the  new  concrete. 

14.  EXPANSION  AND  CONTRACTION  JOINTS 


Expansion  and  contraction  joints  shall  be  made  only  at  locations 
shown  on  the  drawings . 

Exposed  concrete  edges  at  expansion  and  contraction  joints  shall 
be  carefully  tooled  or  chamfered,  and  the  joints  shall  be  free 
of  mortar  and  concrete.  Joint  filler  shall  be  left  exposed  for 
its  full  length  with  clean  and  true  edges. 

Preformed  expansion  joint  filler  shall  be  held  firmly  in  the 
correct  position  as  the  concrete  is  placed. 

When  open  joints  are  specified,  they  shall  be  constructed  by 
the  insertion  and  subsequent  removal  of  a wooden  strip,  metal 
plate  or  other  suitable  template  in  such  a manner  that  the 
corners  of  the  concrete  will  not  be  chipped  or  broken.  The 
edges  of  open  joints  shall  be  finished  with  an  edging  tool  prior 
to  removal  of  the  joint  strips. 

15.  WATERS TOPS 


Waterstops  shall  be  held  firmly  in  the  correct  position  as  the 
concrete  is  placed.  Joints  in  metal  waterstops  shall  be  sol- 
dered, brazed  or  welded.  Joints  in  rubber  or  plastic  waterstops 
shall  be  cemented,  welded  or  vulcanized  as  recommended  by  the 
manufacturer. 

16.  REMOVAL  OF  FORMS 

Forms  shall  not  be  removed  without  the  approval  of  the  Engineer. 
Forms  shall  be  removed  in  such  a way  as  to  prevent  damage  to  the 
concrete.  Supports  shall  be  removed  in  a manner  that  will  per- 
mit the  concrete  to  take  the  stresses  due  to  its  own  weight 
uniformly  and  gradually. 

17.  FINISHING  FORMED  SURFACES 


Immediately  after  the  removal  of  the  forms: 


(32-6) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-107 


a.  All  fins  and  irregular  projections  shall  be  removed  from 
exposed  surfaces. 

b.  On  all  surfaces,  the  holes  produced  by  the  removal  of 
form  ties,  cone-bolts,  and  she-bolts  shall  be  cleaned, 
wetted  and  filled  with  a dry-pack  mortar  consisting  of 
one  part  portland  cement,  three  parts  sand  that  will 
pass  a No.  16  sieve,  and  water  just  sufficient  to 
produce  a consistency  such  that  the  filling  is  at  the 
point  of  becoming  rubbery  when  the  material  is  solidly 
packed. 

18.  FINISHING  UNFORMED  SURFACES 

All  exposed  surfaces  of  the  concrete  shall  be  accurately  screeded 
to  grade  and  then  float  finished,  unless  specified  otherwise. 


Excessive  floating  or  troweling  of  surfaces  while  the  concrete  is 
soft  will  not  be  permitted. 

The  addition  of  dry  cement  or  water  to  the  surface  of  the  screeded 
concrete  to  expedite  finishing  will  not  be  allowed. 

Joints  and  edges  on  unformed  surfaces  that  will  be  exposed  to  view 
shall  be  chamfered  or  finished  with  molding  tools. 

19.  CURING 


Concrete  shall  be  prevented  from  drying  for  a curing  period  of  at 
least  7 days  after  it  is  placed.  Exposed  surfaces  shall  be  kept 
continuously  moist  for  the  entire  period,  or  until  curing  compound 
is  applied  as  specified  below.  Moisture  shall  be  maintained  by 
sprinkling,  flooding  or  fog  spraying  or  by  covering  with  continu- 
ously moistened  canvas,  cloth  mats,  straw,  sand  or  other  approved 
material.  Wood  forms  (except  plywood)  left  in  place  during  the 
curing  period  shall  be  kept  wet.  Formed  surfaces  shall  be  thor- 
oughly wetted  immediately  after  forms  are  removed  and  shall  be 
kept  wet  until  patching  and  repairs  are  completed.  Water  or 
covering  shall  be  applied  in  such  a way  that  the  concrete  surface 
is  not  eroded  or  otherwise  damaged. 

Concrete,  except  at  construction  joints,  may  be  coated  with  an 
approved  curing  compound  in  lieu  of  continued  application  of  mois- 
ture. The  compound  shall  be  sprayed  on  the  moist  concrete  surfaces 
as  soon  as  free  water  has  disappeared,  but  shall  not  be  applied  to 
any  surface  until  patching,  repairs  and  finishing  of  that  surface 

(32-7) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-108 


are  completed.  The  compound  shall  be  applied  at  a uniform  rate 
of  not  less  than  one  gallon  per  150  square  feet  of  surface  and 
shall  form  a continuous  adherent  membrane  over  the  entire 
surface.  Curing  compound  shall  not  be  applied  to  surfaces 
requiring  bond  to  subsequently  placed  concrete,  such  as  con- 
struction joints,  shear  plates,  reinforcing  steel  and  other 
embedded  items.  If  the  membrane  is  damaged  during  the  curing 
period,  the  damaged  area  shall  be  resprayed  at  the  rate  of 
application  specified  above. 

20.  REMOVAL  OR  REPAIR 


When  concrete  is  honeycombed,  damaged  or  otherwise  defective, 
the  Contractor  shall  remove  and  replace  the  structure  or  struc- 
tural member  containing  the  defective  concrete  or,  where 
feasible,  correct  or  repair  the  defective  parts.  The  Engineer 
will  determine  the  required  extent  of  removal,  replacement  or 
repair.  Prior  to  starting  repair  work  the  Contractor  shall 
obtain  the  Engineer’s  approval  of  his  plan  for  effecting  the 
repair.  The  Contractor  shall  perform  all  repair  work  in  the 
presence  of  the  Engineer. 

21.  CONCRETING  IN  COLD  WEATHER 


Concrete  shall  not  be  mixed  nor  placed  when  the  daily  minimum 
atmospheric  temperature  is  less  than  40°F  unless  facilities  are 
provided  to  prevent  the  concrete  from  freezing.  The  use  of 
accelerators  or  antifreeze  compounds  will  not  be  allowed. 

22.  CONCRETING  IN  HOT  WEATHER 

The  Contractor  shall  apply  effective  means  to  maintain  the 
temperature  of  the  concrete  below  90°F  during  mixing,  conveying 
and  placing. 

23.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established 
in  the  contract,  concrete  will  be  measured  to  the  neat  lines 
shown  on  the  drawings  and  the  volume  of  concrete  will  be 
computed  to  the  nearest  0.1  cubic  yard.  Measurement  of  concrete 
placed  against  the  sides  of  an  excavation  without  the  use  of 
intervening  forms  will  be  made  only  to  the  neat  lines  or  pay 
limits  shown  on  the  drawings.  No  deduction  in  volume  will  be 
made  for  chamfers,  rounded  or  beveled  edges  or  for  any  void  or 
embedded  item  that  is  less  than  3 cubic  feet  in  volume. 


(32-8) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-109 


Payment  for  each  item  of  concrete  for  minor  structures  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  unit  price  or  the  contract  lump  sum,  which- 
ever is  applicable,  for  that  item.  Such  payment  will  constitute 
full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment,  transpor- 
tation, tools,  forms,  falsework,  bracing  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  except 
items  listed  for  payment  elsewhere  in  the  contract. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  24  of  this  specification. 


(32-9) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


4r 


2-111 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  33 
PNEUMATICALLY  APPLIED  MORTAR  (PAM) 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  33  is  applicable  to  the  placement  of 
pneumatically  applied  mortar. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

The  following  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  33  : 

a.  Portland  Cement. 

Specification  531 

b.  Aggregates . 

Specification  522 

c.  Curing  Compounds. 

Specification  534 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Complete  engineering  drawings  and  structural  detail  drawings 
as  specified  in  Section  6,  National  Engineering  Handbook, 
including  as  a minimum: 

(1)  Plans  and  cross  sections  showing  the  surface  dimensions 
and  thickness  of  all  PAM  slabs,  walls  or  layers  and 
neat  pay  lines. 

(2)  Reinforcement  details  including  bar  placement  diagrams, 
details  of  welded  wire  fabric  reinforcement,  cover 
requirements . 

(3)  Finish  lines  and  grades. 

(4)  Joint  and  edge  details. 

b.  The  nature  of  subgrade  materials. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-112 


c.  Notes  as  necessary  to  indicate  special  placement  or  finishing 
requirements . 

d.  Type  of  cement. 

e.  Required  compressive  strength. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  17,  Measurement  and  Payment 

Option  1 is  intended  for  use  where  the  mortar  in  place  is 
to  be  of  reasonably  uniform  shape  and  thickness  so  that 
measurement  of  the  surface  area  will  be  feasible  and  will 
be  representative  of  the  amount  of  mortar  placed. 

Option  2 is  intended  for  use  where  measurement  of  the 
mortar  in  place  will  not  be  feasible  or  when  payment  by 
materials  used  rather  than  mortar  in  place  is  desirable 
for  other  reasons. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in 
standard  specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph 
in  the  section: 

Both  Methods . The  following  provisions  apply  to  both  methods 
of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


W 


2-113 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
33.  PNEUMATICALLY  APPLIED  MORTAR  (PA M) 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing,  mixing,  applying  and  curing 
pneumatically  applied  mortar.  Except  as  otherwise  specified,  a 
dry  mix  or  wet  mix  process  may  be  used. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Portland  cement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  531  for  the  specified  type. 

Aggregates  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specifi- 
cation 522  unless  otherwise  specified. 

Water  used  in  mixing  or  curing  pneumatically  applied  mortar  shall 
be  clean  and  free  from  injurious  amounts  of  oil,  salt,  acid,  alkali, 
organic  matter  or  other  deleterious  substances. 

Curing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Speci- 
fication 534. 

3.  STRENGTH  AND  QUALITY 

The  compressive  strength  of  pneumatically  applied  mortar  at  the 
age  of  28  days  shall  be  not  less  than  specified  in  Section  18  of 
this  specification. 

Pneumatically  applied  mortar  shall  be  uniform  and  dense,  free  from 
"drummy  " areas,  laminations,  voids  and  sand  pockets. 

4.  CONSISTENCY 


The  proportion  of  water  added  to  the  mixture  shall  be  accurately 
controlled  to  produce  thorough  and  uniform  hydration  of  the  mortar. 
The  consistency  of  the  mortar  shall  be  such  that  the  surface  of 
the  mortar  in  place  shall  have  a rich,  glossy  appearance  and  that 
the  mortar  shall  adhere  to  the  supporting  surface  without  flowing, 
slumping  or  sloughing.  For  application  to  vertical  or  overhanging 
surfaces  the  mix  proportions  shall  be  adjusted  so  that  the  placed 
mortar  will  adhere  to  a thickness  of  3/4  inch  without  sagging  or 
sloughing.  For  adjustment  of  consistency  the  addition  of  fly  ash 

(33-1) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-114 


or  diatomaceous  earth  conforming  to  ASTM  Specifications  C 618  to 
the  mixture  in  amounts  not  greater  than  3 percent  (by  weight)  of 
cement  in  the  mixture  will  be  permitted. 

5.  INSPECTION  AND  TESTING 


The  compressive  strength  of  the  mortar  will  be  determined  in 
accordance  with  ASTM  Method  C 42.  The  compression  test  specimens 
will  be  cores  not  less  than  3 inches  in  nominal  diameter  taken 
from  the  test  panels  described  below  or  from  the  structure. 

Before  pneumatically  applied  mortar  is  placed,  test  panels  simu- 
lating actual  job  conditions  shall  be  made  by  shooting  the  mortar 
against  a back  form  of  plywood  or  similar  material.  The  panels 
shall  be  not  less  than  30  inches  square  and  not  less  than  4 inches 
thick.  They  shall  be  made  by  the  nozzleman  who  will  be  applying 
the  mortar  on  the  job,  using  the  mix  proportions,  air  and  water 
pressures,  and  nozzle  settings  to  be  used  for  the  job.  A separate 

panel  shall  be  made  for  each  mix  and  for  each  shooting  position  to 

be  encountered  on  the  job.  Not  more  than  3 representative  shooting 
positions  will  be  required:  representing  (1)  horizontal  surfaces, 

(2)  vertical  or  sloping  surfaces,  and  (3)  overhead  surfaces. 

Similar  panels  not  less  than  12  inches  square  and  not  less  than 

4 inches  thick  shall  be  made  periodically  as  directed  by  the 

Engineer  during  the  progress  of  the  work. 

Test  panels  and  cores  will  be  handled  and  cured  according  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Method  C 31. 

For  each  strength  test,  3 cores  will  be  tested  in  compression. 

The  test  result  will  be  the  average  of  the  strengths  of  the  3 
specimens,  except  that  if  one  specimen  shows  manifest  evidence 
of  improper  sampling,  coring,  or  testing,  it  will  be  discarded 
and  the  strengths  of  the  remaining  2 specimens  will  be  averaged. 

If  more  than  one  specimen  representing  a test  shows  such  defects, 
the  entire  test  will  be  discarded. 

The  Contractor  shall  furnish  the  forms  and  make  the  required  test 
panels  and  shall  provide  such  facilities,  materials  and  assistance 
as  may  be  necessary  for  curing,  handling,  and  protecting  the 
panels.  Test  panels  shall  be  cast  only  when  the  Engineer  is 
present. 


(33-2) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27> 


\ 


2-115 


6.  MEASURING  MATERIALS 

The  proportions  of  the  mortar  mix  shall  be  controlled  on  the  basis 
of  the  weight  of  each  component  material  except  that  water  may  be 
measured  by  volume. 

7.  EQUIPMENT 

The  Contractor  shall  furnish  all  equipment  necessary  for  batching, 
mixing  and  placing  the  mortar.  Batching  and  mixing  equipment  shall 
include  weighing  equipment  accurate  to  within  0.4  percent  of  scale 
capacity,  a power  driven  mortar  mixer  capable  of  thoroughly  mixing 
the  materials  at  a rate  adequate  to  insure  uniform  feeding  of  the 
mixture  to  the  placing  equipment,  and  a feeding  apparatus  capable 
of  supplying  the  mixture  to  the  placing  equipment  at  an  adequate 
and  uniform  rate. 

The  placing  equipment  for  dry  mix  mortar  shall  be  designed  and 
equipped  to  receive  the  dry  mix,  introduce  it  into  a stream  of  com- 
pressed air,  convey  it  pneumatically  through  a delivery  hose  to  a 
nozzle  at  the  point  of  discharge,  inject  water  under  pressure  into 
the  suspended  stream  of  dry  sand  and  cement  within  the  nozzle,  and 
spray  the  resulting  mortar  mix  onto  the  surface  of  the  work  at  a 
uniform  rate  and  at  a controlled  velocity.  \The  placing  equipment 
shall  be  equipped  with  accurate  gages  to  indicate  the  air  pressure 
and  water  pressure  and  with  devices  capable  of  accurately  controlling 
the  air  pressure  at  any  level  between  35  p.s.i.  and  80  p.s.i.,  the 
water  pressure  at  any  level  between  50  p.s.i.  and  100  p.s.i.,  and 
the  rate  of  application  of  water  at  the  nozzle. 

The  placing  equipment  for  wet  mix  mortar  shall  be  designed  and 
equipped  to  receive  the  mortar  from  the  mixer,  convey  it  through  a 
delivery  hose  to  a nozzle  at  the  point  of  discharge,  accelerate  it 
in  the  nozzle  by  means  of  compressed  air,  and  spray  it  onto  the 
surface  of  the  work.  It  shall  be  capable  of  delivering  mortar  to 
the  nozzle  uniformly  and  continuously  and  discharging  it  from  the 
nozzle  at  a uniform  rate  and  at  a controlled  velocity  sufficient 
for  all  parts  of  the  work. 

The  length  of  the  discharge  hose  shall  not  exceed  350  feet. 

8.  MIXING 

For  dry  mix  mortar,  the  cement  and  sand  shall  be  mixed  by  at  least 
25  revolutions  of  the  mixer  drum  before  being  fed  into  the  placing 
equipment.  The  dry  mix  shall  be  used  promptly  after  mixing  and  any 
material  that  is  not  placed  within  45  minutes  after  mixing  shall  be 
wasted. 


(33-3) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-116 


i 


For  wet  mix  mortar,  the  cement,  sand,  and  water  shall  be  thoroughly 
mixed  in  the  mixer  drum  sufficiently  to  produce  mortar  of  the  required 
consistency  which  is  uniform  within  each  batch  and  uniform  from  batch 
to  batch  when  discharged  into  the  placing  equipment. 


The  entire  contents  of  the  mixer  shall  be  discharged  from  the  drum 
before  materials  for  a succeeding  batch  are  placed  therein. 


9.  FORMS 

Forms  shall  be  structurally  adequate  and  of  such  design  that  rebound 
or  accumulated  loose  sand  can  freely  escape  or  be  readily  removed. 
Shooting  strips  shall  be  used  at  corners,  edges,  and  on  surfaces 
where  necessary  to  obtain  true  lines  and  proper  thickness.  Where 
practicable,  ground  wires  shall  be  installed  as  guides  to  accurately 
establish  the  specified  contour  of  the  finished  surface  of  mortar. 
Ground  wires  shall  be  set  and  used  as  guides  for  templates  in  forming 
curved  and  molded  surfaces.  When  pneumatically  applied  mortar  is  to 
be  placed  on  horizontal  or  sloping  surfaces,  headers  and  ground  wires 
shall  be  provided  to  the  extent  necessary  to  insure  control  of  slab 
thickness.  Ground  wires  shall  be  tightened  and  kept  taut,  secure, 
and  true  to  line  and  plane  during  placement  of  mortar  and  shall  be 
removed  when  placement  of  mortar  is  completed. 


Header  boards  will  be  required  where  the  drawings  indicate  a square 
edge  and  at  required  joints.  Form  surfaces  shall  be  thoroughly 
cleaned  and  oiled  before  mortar  is  placed. 


10.  PREPARATION  OF  SURFACES  TO  RECEIVE  PAM 


All  surfaces  to  receive  or  support  pneumatically  applied  mortar  shall 
be  carefully  prepared  and  conditioned.  All  such  prepared  surfaces 
shall  be  inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer  prior  to  the  appli- 
cation of  mortar. 

Earth  surfaces  to  which  pneumatically  applied  mortar  is  to  be  applied 
shall  be  firmly  compacted  and  neatly  trimed  to  line  and  grade. 

Asphaltic  concrete  surfaces  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  of  any  growths 
earth,  or  any  other  material  that  would  affect  bond,  or  be  detrimental 
to  the  pneumatically  applied  mortar. 

Concrete,  mortar,  or  rock  surfaces  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  to 
remove  all  dirt,  laitance,  weak  or  unbonded  mortar,  loose  material, 
grease  or  other  deleterious  substances. 


(33-4) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-117 


Surfaces  on  which  the  pneumatically  applied  mortar  is  to  be  placed 
shall  be  sufficiently  rough  to  insure  the  adherence  of  the  mortar. 
Offsets  which  would  cause  an  abrupt  and  substantial  change  in  thick- 
ness of  the  mortar  shall  be  removed  or  tapered. 

All  surfaces  shall  be  maintained  in  a moistened  condition  for  three 
hours  before  application  of  pneumatically  applied  mortar.  Pneumati- 
cally applied  mortar  shall  not  be  applied  to  mud,  dried  earth, 
uncompacted  fill,  or  frozen  surfaces,  or  to  surfaces  on  which  free 
water  exists. 

11.  PLACING 


The  Contractor  shall  have  all  equipment  and  materials  required  for 
curing  available  at  the  site  and  ready  for  use  before  placement  of 
pneumatically  applied  mortar  begins. 

No  mortar  shall  be  placed  except  in  the  presence  of  the  Engineer. 

The  Contractor  shall  give  reasonable  notice  to  the  Engineer  each 
time  he  intends  to  place  mortar.  Such  notice  shall  be  far  enough 
in  advance  to  give  the  Engineer  adequate  time  to  inspect  the  surfaces 
to  which  the  mortar  is  to  be  applied,  the  forms,  steel  reinforcement, 
and  other  preparations  for  compliance  with  the  specifications  before 
placement  is  begun. 

During  placement  of  the  mortar  the  air  pressure  shall  be  adjusted  as 
required  to  control  rebound  and  density  of  mortar.  For  a given 
application,  once  the  optimum  operating  pressures  have  been  estab- 
lished they  shall  be  maintained  constant  throughout  the  application. 
For  dry  mix  mortar,  the  air  pressure  at  the  machine  shall  be  not  less 
than  35  p.s.i.  plus  5 p.s.i.  for  each  50  feet  of  length  of  the  dis- 
charge hose  and  the  water  pressure  at  the  nozzle  shall  be  not  less 
than  15  p.s.i.  greater  than  the  air  pressure  at  the  machine. 

The  placing  nozzle  shall  be  held  about  3 feet  from  and  approximately 
normal  to  the  surface  of  the  work.  Comers  shall  be  filled  first. 

When  coatings  one  inch  or  more  in  thickness  are  to  be  applied  to 
vertical  or  overhanging  surfaces,  the  pneumatically  applied  mortar 
shall  be  applied  in  two  or  more  layers  not  more  than  3/4  inch  in 
thickness.  On  horizontal  or  slightly  sloping  surfaces  the  thickness 
of  a single  layer  may  vary  from  one  inch  to  a maximum  of  3-1/2 
inches.  When  more  than  a single  layer  is  applied,  placement  of 
subsequent  layers  shall  be  delayed  long  enough  to  prevent  sloughing 
but  shall  be  accomplished  before  the  previously  placed  mortar  has 
completely  set.  When  pneumatically  applied  mortar  is  placed  on  a 
vertical  surface,  application  shall  be  started  at  the  bottom  and  be 
completed  at  the  top. 


(33-5) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-118 


In  any  case  when  the  placing  of  pneumatically  applied  mortar  is 
interrupted  for  more  than  one  hour,  the  edge  of  the  layer  shall 
be  sloped  off  at  an  angle  of  approximately  45  degrees  to  the 
surface  being  shot,  and  the  sloped  portion  shall  be  covered  with 
a double  layer  of  seven-ounce  burlap  and  kept  continuously  moist 
until  the  application  of  mortar  is  resumed.  Before  applying  new 
material,  the  sloped  portion  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and 
wetted  by  means  of  an  air  and  water  blast  or  equally  effective 
method  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

Material  that  rebounds  and  accumulates  on  forms,  subgrade  surfaces 
or  reinforcing  steel  ahead  of  the  mortar  being  placed  shall  be 
removed . 

In  no  case  shall  mortar  be  applied  over  rebound  debris.  Rebound 
debris  shall  not  be  reused  in  mortar  on  any  portion  of  the  work 
and  shall  be  disposed  of  as  the  work  progresses. 

12.  FINISHING 


Rebound  material  shall  be  carefully  swept  off  the  finished  mortar 
surface  before  it  becomes  too  hard  for  removal. 

Pneumatically  applied  mortar  shall  not  be  screeded.  After  the 
mortar  has  been  placed  to  the  depth  required  the  surface  shall  be 
checked  with  a straightedge  or  template  and  any  low  spot  shall  be 
brought  up  to  specified  grade  by  placing  additional  pneumatically 
applied  mortar.  Finishing  of  mortar  surfaces  by  means  of  floats 
or  trowels  will  not  be  permitted. 

13.  CURING 


Pneumatically  applied  mortar  shall  be  prevented  from  drying  for  a 
curing  period  of  at  least  7 days  after  it  is  placed.  Exposed 
surfaces  shall  be  kept  continuously  moist  for  the  entire  period 
or  until  curing  compound  is  applied  as  specified  below.  Moisture 
shall  be  maintained  by  sprinkling,  flooding  or  fog  spraying,  or 
by  covering  with  continuously  moistened  canvas,  cloth  mats,  straw, 
sand  or  other  approved  material.  Wood  forms  (except  plywood)  left 
in  place  during  the  curing  period  shall  be  kept  wet.  Formed 
surfaces  shall  be  thoroughly  wetted  immediately  after  forms  are 
removed  and  shall  be  kept  wet  until  patching  and  repairs  are  com- 
pleted. Water  or  covering  shall  be  applied  in  such  a way  that  the 
mortar  surface  is  not  eroded  or  otherwise  damaged. 

Water  for  curing  shall  be  clean  and  free  from  any  substances  that 
will  cause  discoloration  of  the  mortar  where  finished  surfaces 
will  be  exposed  to  view. 


(33-6) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-119 


Except  as  otherwise  specified  in  Section  16,  and  except  for  surfaces 
to  which  additional  mortar  is  to  be  applied,  pneumatically  applied 
mortar  may  be  coated  with  curing  compound  in  lieu  of  the  continued 
application  of  moisture. 

The  compound  shall  be  sprayed  on  the  moist  mortar  surfaces  as  soon 
as  rebound  has  been  removed  and  any  required  repairs  are  completed, 
or  as  soon  as  water  curing  is  discontinued. 

The  curing  compound  shall  be  thoroughly  mixed  immediately  before 
applying,  and  shall  be  applied  at  a uniform  rate  of  not  less  than 
one  gallon  per  150  square  feet  of  surface.  It  shall  not  check, 
crack  or  peel,  and  shall  be  free  from  pin  holes  or  other  imperfec- 
tions . 

Curing  compound  shall  not  be  applied  to  subgrade  surfaces  or  other 
surfaces  requiring  bond  with  subsequently  placed  mortar,  such  as 
construction  joints,  reinforcing  steel  and  other  embedded  items. 

Surfaces  subjected  to  heavy  rainfall  or  running  water  within  3 hours 
after  the  compound  has  been  applied,  or  surfaces  damaged  by  subsequent 
construction  operations  during  the  curing  period  shall  be  resprayed 
in  the  same  manner  as  for  the  original  applications. 

14.  REPLACEMENT  OR  REPAIR 

When  pneumatically  applied  mortar  has  "drummy"  areas,  voids,  sand 
pockets,  or  is  damaged  or  otherwise  defective,  the  Contractor  shall 
remove  and  replace  the  portion  of  the  structure  containing  the 
defective  mortar,  or  correct  or  repair  the  defective  parts.  The 
Engineer  will  determine  the  required  extent  of  removal,  replacement 
or  repair. 

Prior  to  starting  repair  work  the  Contractor  shall  obtain  the  Engi- 
neer's approval  of  his  plan  for  making  the  repair.  Such  approval 
shall  not  be  considered  a waiver  of  the  Contracting  Officer's  right 
to  require  complete  removal  of  defective  work  if  the  completed 
repair  does  not  produce  mortar  of  the  required  quality  and  appearance. 

Repair  work  shall  be  performed  only  when  the  Engineer  is  present. 

Repairs  shall  be  made  with  pneumatically  applied  mortar  conforming  to 
this  specification.  When  removal  of  defective  mortar  is  required, 
reinforcement  damaged  or  destroyed  shall  be  replaced  prior  to  replace- 
ment of  the  mortar.  At  the  edges  of  removed  sections  the  sound  mortar 
shall  be  carefully  trimmed  to  the  extent  required  to  expose  sufficient 
reinforcement  for  effecting  competent  splices.  The  sound  mortar  at 
the  edges  of  removed  sections  shall  be  trimmed  to  a slope  of  approxi- 
mately 45  degrees  with  the  surface  of  the  work  and  shall  be  thoroughly 
moistened  prior  to  placement  of  the  new  mortar. 

Any  portions  of  the  work  having  thicknesses  less  than  those  speci- 
fied may  be  repaired  by  the  placement  of  additional  layers  of 

(33-7) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-120 


pneumatically  applied  mortar,  provided  that  such  repair  is 
expressly  authorized. 

Surfaces  of  the  work  to  which  additional  pneumatically  applied 
mortar  is  to  be  applied  shall  be  prepared  as  required  by  Section 
10  of  this  specification. 

Curing  as  specified  in  Section  13  shall  be  applied  to  repaired 
areas  immediately  after  the  repairs  are  completed. 

15.  PLACING  IN  COLD  WEATHER 


When  the  atmospheric  temperature  may  be  expected  to  drop  below 
40°F  at  the  time  pneumatically  applied  mortar  is  placed,  or  at 
any  time  during  the  curing  period,  the  following  provisions  also 
shall  apply: 

a„  The  temperature  of  the  mortar  at  time  of  placing  shall  not 
be  less  than  50°F  nor  more  than  90°F.  The  temperature  of 
neither  aggregates  nor  mixing  water  shall  be  more  than 
100°F  just  prior  to  mixing  with  the  cement. 

b.  When  the  daily  minimum  temperature  is  less  than  40°F,  mortar 
shall  be  insulated  or  housed  and  heated  after  placement. 

The  temperature  of  the  mortar  and  air  adjacent  to  the  mortar 
shall  be  maintained  at  not  less  than  50°F  nor  more  than  90°F 
for  the  duration  of  the  curing  period. 

c.  Methods  of  insultating,  housing  and  heating  the  structure 
shall  conform  to  "Recommended  Practice  for  Cold  Weather 
Concreting,"  ACI  Standard  306. 

d.  The  use  of  accelerators  or  antifreeze  compounds  will  not  be 
allowed. 

e.  When  dry  heat  is  used  to  protect  mortar,  means  of  maintaining 
an  ambient  humidity  of  at  least  40  percent  shall  be  provided 
unless  the  mortar  has  been  coated  with  curing  compound  as 
specified  in  Section  13  or  is  covered  tightly  with  an  approved 
impervious  material. 

16.  PLACING  IN  HOT  WEATHER 


When  climatic  or  other  conditions  are  such  that  the  temperature 
of  pneumatically  applied  mortar  may  reasonably  be  expected  to 
exceed  90°F  at  the  time  of  placement,  or  during  the  first  24  hours 
after  placement,  the  following  provisions  also  shall  apply: 

(33-8) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-121 


a.  The  Contractor  shall  maintain  the  temperature  of  the  mortar 
below  90°F  during  mixing,  conveying,  and  placing.  Methods 
used  shall  conform  to  "Recommended  Practice  for  Hot  Weather 
Concreting,"  ACI  Standard  605. 

b.  Exposed  mortar  surfaces  which  tend  to  dry  or  set  too  rapidly 
shall  be  continuously  moistened  by  means  of  fog  sprays  or 
otherwise  protected  from  drying  immediately  after  placement. 

c.  Mortar  surfaces  exposed  to  the  air  shall  be  covered  as  soon 
as  the  mortar  has  hardened  sufficiently  and  shall  be  kept 
continuously  wet  for  at  least  the  first  24  hours  of  the  curing 
period,  and  for  the  entire  curing  period  unless  curing  compound 
is  applied  as  specified  in  subsection  d,  below. 

d.  If  moist  curing  is  discontinued  before  the  end  of  the  curing 
period,  white  pigmented  curing  compound  shall  be  applied 
immediately,  following  the  procedures  specified  in  Section  13. 

17.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  dimensions  of  the  exposed  surface 
of  the  pneumatically  applied  mortar  will  be  measured  to  the  neat 
lines  shown  on  the  drawings  and  the  surface  area  will  be  computed 
to  the  nearest  square  foot.  Payment  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  price  for  pneumatically  applied  mortar.  Such  payment  will 
constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  work,  including 
making  and  handling  test  panels  but  not  including  reinforcing  steel 
or  other  items  listed  for  payment  elsewhere  in  the  contract. 

Measurement  and  payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  reinforcing  steel 
will  be  made  as  specified  in  Construction  Specification  34. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  cement  and  aggregates  used  in  pneumati- 
cally applied  mortar  and  in  authorized  test  panels  will  be  measured 
by  the  batch  weights  of  the  materials  charged  into  the  mixer.  No 
deduction  will  be  made  for  normal  rebound;  however,  payment  will 
not  be  made  for  material  wasted  because  of  mechanical  failure  or 
improper  mixing  or  placing  or  because  the  in-place  mortar  does  not 
conform  to  the  specifications.  Payment  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  prices  for  cement  and  aggregates  for  pneumatically  applied 
mortar.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all 
labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  completion  of  the  work,  including  making  and  handling 
test  panels  but  not  including  reinforcing  steel  or  other  items  , 

listed  for  payment  elsewhere  in  the  contract. 


(33-9) 

NEH  3/13/70  (Notice  20-28) 


2-122 


Measurement  and  payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  reinforcing 
steel  will  be  made  as  specified  in  Construction  Specification  34. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  18  of  this 
specification. 


(33-10) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-123 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  34 

STEEL  REINFORCEMENT 


1 . Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  34  is  applicable  to  the  placement  of 
steel  bar  reinforcement  and  steel  welded  wire  fabric  reinforcement 
for  reinforced  concrete  or  pneumatically  applied  mortar. 

2 . Material  Specifications. 

The  following  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  34: 

a . Steel  Reinforcement. 

Specification  539 

b . Galvanizing . 

Specification  582 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Complete  placing  drawings.  (Detail  drawings  as  specified 
in  Section  6,  National  Engineering  Handbook.) 

b.  Steel  schedule  and  bar  list  and  bending  diagram  if  needed 
to  facilitate  the  placement  drawings.  These  are  usually 
needed  for  all  except  very  simple  structures. 

c.  Type  and  grade  of  steel  if  it  is  necessary  to  restrict 
Contractor^  choice  from  the  list  in  Material  Specifi- 
cation 539  . 

4.  Discussion  of  Options . 

Section  8,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  all  reinforcement 
is  measured  by  weight. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  bar  reinforcement 
is  measured  by  weight  and  welded  wire  fabric  rein- 
forcement is  measured  by  area. 

Both  options  may  be  Included  as  numbered,  methods  in 
standard  specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are 


t 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-124 


used,  insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last 
paragraph  in  the  section: 

Both  Methods . The  following  provisions  apply  to  both 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-125 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
34.  STEEL  REINFORCEMENT 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  placing  steel  reinforce- 
ment for  reinforced  concrete  or  pneumatically  applied  mortar. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Steel  reinforcement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  539.  Before  reinforcement  is  placed  the  surfaces 
of  the  bars  and  fabric  and  any  metal  supports  shall  be  cleaned  to 
remove  any  loose,  flaky  rust,  mill  scale,  oil,  grease  or  other 
coatings  or  foreign  substances.  After  placement  the  reinforcement 
shall  be  maintained  in  a clean  condition  until  it  is  completely 
embedded  in  the  concrete. 

3.  BAR  SCHEDULE,  LISTS  AND  DIAGRAMS 

Any  supplemental  bar  schedules,  bar  lists  or  bar-bending  diagrams 
required  to  accomplish  the  fabrication  and  placement  of  reinforce- 
ment shall  be  provided  by  the  Contractor.  Prior  to  placement  of 
reinforcement,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  three  prints  or  copies 
of  any  such  lists  or  diagrams  to  the  Contracting  Officer.  Accept- 
ance of  the  reinforcement  will  not  be  based  on  approval  of  these 
lists  or  diagrams  but  will  be  based  on  inspection  of  the  reinforce- 
ment after  it  has  been  placed. 

4.  BENDING 

Reinforcement  shall  be  cut  and  bent  in  compliance  with  the  require- 
ments of  the  American  Concrete  Institute  Standard  315.  Bars  shall 
not  be  bent  or  straightened  in  a manner  that  will  injure  the  mate- 
rial. Bars  with  kinks,  cracks  or  improper  bends  will  be  rejected. 

5 . SPLICING  BAR  REINFORCEMENT 


Unless  otherwise  specified  on  the  drawings,  splices  of  reinforcing 
bars  shall  provide  an  overlap  equal  to  at  least  30  times  the 
diameter  of  the  smaller  bar  in  the  splice  but  not  less  than  12 
inches . 


(34-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-126 


6.  SPLICING  WELDED  WIRE  FABRIC 


Welded  wire  fabric  shall  be  spliced  in  the  following  manner: 

a.  Adjacent  sections  shall  be  spliced  end  to  end  by  either: 

(1)  Overlapping  the  two  pieces  of  fabric  one  full  mesh 
(measured  from  the  ends  of  the  longitudinal  wires 
in  one  piece  to  the  ends  of  the  longitudinal  wires 
in  the  other  piece)  and  securing  the  two  pieces 
together  with  wire  ties  placed  at  intervals  of  18 
inches;  or, 

(2)  Overlapping  the  two  pieces  of  fabric  so  that  the 
end  crosswire  of  each  piece  comes  in  contact  with 
the  next-to-end  crosswire  of  the  other  piece  and 
securing  the  two  pieces  together  only  as  required 
to  keep  the  fabric  in  place  and  to  prevent  it 
from  curling. 

b.  Adjacent  sections  of  fabric  shall  be  spliced  side  to  side 

by  either : 

(1)  Placing  the  two  selvage  wires  (the  longitudinal 
wires  at  the  edges  of  the  fabric)  one  along  side 
and  overlapping  the  other  and  securing  the  two 
pieces  together  with  wire  ties  placed  at  intervals 
of  3 feet;  or, 

(2)  Placing  each  selvage  wire  in  the  middle  of  the 
first  mesh  of  the  other  section  of  fabric  and 
securing  it  to  the  other  section  at  intervals 
of  10  feet  by  means  of  wire  ties  placed  on  the 
selvage  wires  alternately  at  intervals  of  5 feet. 

(3)  Placing  each  selvage  wire  in  contact  with  the 
next-to-edge  longitudinal  wire  and  securing  them 
together  only  as  required  to  keep  the  fabric  in 
place  or  to  prevent  it  from  curling. 

7.  PLACING 

Reinforcement  shall  be  accurately  placed  and  secured  in  position 
in  a manner  that  will  prevent  its  displacement  during  the  place- 
ment of  concrete.  Tack  welding  of  bars  will  not  be  permitted. 
Metal  chairs,  metal  hangers,  metal  spacers  and  concrete  chairs 


(34-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-127 


may  be  used  to  support  the  reinforcement.  Metal  hangers,  spacers 
and  ties  shall  be  placed  in  such  a manner  that  they  will  not  be 
exposed  in  the  finished  concrete  surface.  The  legs  of  metal  chairs 
that  may  be  exposed  at  the  lower  face  of  slabs  or  beams  shall  be 
galvanized  as  specified  for  iron  and  steel  hardware  in  Material 
Specification  582.  Precast  concrete  chairs  shall  be  manufactured 
of  the  same  class  of  concrete  as  that  specified  for  the  structure 
and  shall  have  tie  wires  securely  anchored  in  the  chair  or  a 
V-shaped  groove  at  least  3/4  inch  in  depth  molded  into  the  upper 
surface  to  receive  the  steel  bar  at  the  point  of  support.  Precast 
concrete  chairs  shall  be  moist  at  the  time  concrete  is  placed. 

Reinforcement  shall  not  be  placed  until  the  prepared  site  has  been 
inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer.  After  placement  of  the 
reinforcement,  concrete  shall  not  be  placed  until  the  reinforcement 
has  been  inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

8.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  weight  of  reinforcement  placed  in 
the  concrete  in  accordance  with  the  drawings  will  be  determined  to 
the  nearest  pound  by  computation  from  the  placing  drawings.  Mea- 
surement of  hooks  and  bends  will  be  based  on  the  requirements  of 
ACI  Standard  315.  Computation  of  weights  of  reinforcement  will  be 
based  on  the  unit  weights  established  in  Tables  34-1,  34-2,  and  34-3. 
The  area  of  welded  wire  fabric  reinforcement  placed  in  the  concrete 
in  accordance  with  the  drawings  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest 
square  foot  by  computation  from  the  placing  drawings  with  no 
allowance  for  laps.  The  weight  of  steel  reinforcing  in  extra 
splices  or  extra-length  splices  approved  for  the  convenience  of 
the  Contractor  or  the  weight  of  supports  and  ties  will  not  be 
included  in  the  measurement  for  payment. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  reinforcing  steel  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other 
items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work 
including  preparing  and  furnishing  bar  schedules,  lists  or  diagrams; 
furnishing  and  attaching  ties  and  supports;  and  furnishing,  trans- 
porting, cutting,  bending,  cleaning  and  securing  all  reinforcement. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  weight  of  bar  reinforcement  placed 
in  the  concrete  in  accordance  with  the  drawings  will  be  determined 


(34-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-128 


to  the  nearest  pound  by  computation  from  the  placing  drawings. 
Measurement  of  hooks  and  bends  will  be  based  on  the  requirements 
of  ACI  Standard  315.  Computation  of  weights  of  bar  reinforcement 
will  be  based  on  the  unit  weights  established  in  Table  34-1.  The 
weight  of  steel  reinforcing  in  extra  splices  or  extra-length 
splices  approved  for  the  convenience  of  the  Contractor  or  the 
weight  of  supports  and  ties  will  not  be  included  in  the  measure- 
ment for  payment. 

The  area  of  welded  wire  fabric  reinforcement  placed  in  the  concrete 
in  accordance  with  the  drawings  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest 
square  foot  by  computation  from  the  placing  drawings  with  no 
allowance  for  laps. 

Payment  for  furnishing  and  placing  bar  reinforcing  steel  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  bar  reinforcement.  Payment 
for  furnishing  and  placing  welded  wire  fabric  reinforcing  steel 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  welded  wire  fabric 
reinforcement.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation 
for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary 
and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work  including  preparing 
and  furnishing  bar  schedules,  lists  or  diagrams;  furnishing  and 
attaching  ties  and  supports;  and  furnishing,  transporting,  cutting, 
bending,  cleaning  and  securing  all  reinforcement. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  de- 
scribed in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will 
be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is 
made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  items  to  which  they  are  made 
subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  9 of  this  specification. 


(34-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


TABLE  34-1.  STANDARD  REINFORCING  BARS 


2-129 


co 

r-H 

r-H 

co 

t—H 

• 

uo 

CO 

O 

o 

co 

r-H 

. 

Mf 

o 

o 

CT\ 

Mf 

. 

co 

o 

o> 

00 

vD 

• 

CM 

Mf 

Mf 

O 

. 

CM 

CM 

O 

vo 

LO 

• 

r-H 

co 

Mf 

LO 

o 

• 

t-H 

00 

vO 

vO 

• 

O 

vO 

co 

co 

• 

o 

o- 

VO 

CM 

T“ 1 

• 

o 

/^S 

• 

• 

o 

4-1 

ss 

M— 1 

<u 

• 

N 

•rH 

r-H 

CO 

u 

• 

Cd 

4J 

pq 

ts 

CM 

Mf 

co 

w 

p 

pq 

< 

H 


rO 

P 


4-1 

pH 


cf 

CO 


a 
•H  o 


4-) 

3:  u 

<U 

PM 


o 

•rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

O 

co 

t-H 

Mi- 

CM 

LO 

CO 

Mf 

vO 

O 4-1 

r—l 

iH 1 

rH 

i — 1 

rH 

O 

o 

o 

o 

r-H 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CO 

Mf 

vO 

t-M  cd 
to  Pi 
4-1  bO 

OV 

o 

rH 

1 

iH 

rH 

1 

CM 

rH 

1 

CM 

rH 

1 

CO 

1 

CM 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

, 

i 

CO  -H 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CNJ 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CQ 

Mf 

Mi- 

Mf 

Mf 

r-H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r-H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

t — 1 

rH 

CD 

P 

vO 

VO 

VO 

vO 

vO 

vO 

vO 

vO 

VO 

vO 

vO 

vO 

4J 

Pm 

MS  • 
P cr 
co 
d 

•H  O 

o 

• T — I 

4J 

<U 

PM 


Pm 

• 

P * 

P a* 
co 
d 

•h  o 
o 

• t—H 

4-1 

^ P4 

<u 

PM 


ci 

o 

•H 

<D  4J 

r-H  Ctf 

to  P! 


4-1 

CO 


bO 

•r4 

03 

a) 

P 


oons)-nhcohc4(^hocn  h <)■  cn  r>. 

CM  CM  i — I i — I i — I OV  i"*  00  O'  vO  vO  LO  lO  lO  Mf  CO  CM 


ONCM<^cT>i-McovOf-Mr^-mcMc^\r)cocor^. 

COCOvOLOLOMfCOCOCMCMCMrHrHiHcOCM 


o 

•iH 

rH 

CM 

vO 

o- 

00 

OV 

o 

iH 

O 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CNJ 

CM 

rH 

CM 

<D  4-1 

rH 

rH 

CM 

co 

Mf 

LO 

rH 

rH 

r — 1 

r-H 

rH 

rH 

t-H 

r — 1 

rH 

rH 

rH  Cd 

to  pi 

4-i  bo 

r-^ 

1 

00 

1 

1 

i 

1 

1 

VO 

1 

O' 

1 

00 

1 

00 

1 

ov 

1 

o 

rH 

r-H 

t-H 

1 

CM 

rH 

1 

o. 

1 

00 

1 

CO  *H 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CN 

CM 

00 

00 

w 

i — ! 

rH 

rH 

t — 1 

rH 

r-H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

Mf 

Mf 

<D 

Q 

CO 

CO 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

Mf 

\ocri<f<t-rNH[v^^(^csiivin<)’<t'vo 

r— i vo  <f  cm  oa^r^voioHoaor^vOLOMf 


st-vfmvOMXiaiOHstinvoNooa'O 
r— I o i — I CM  CO  Mf  LO  ' — I i — 1 O rH  CM  CO  Mf  LO  rH 
Mf  VO  N VO 

H 

I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 

<fCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMC\|CMCMCMCMCM 
CM  i- 1 r-H  rH  t— I i— I rH  r— 4 >— I rM  rH  i— I i— I t — I i— I r— I 

CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 


(34-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


Style  designation  is  defined  in  ACI  Standard  315  of  the  American  Concrete  Institute. 


2-130 


TABLE  34-3.  SQUARE  WELDED  WIRE  FABRIC1 


Style  Wt.  in  Lb.  Style  Wt.  in  Lb. 

Designation  Per  100  Sq.  Ft.  Designation  Per  100  Sq.  Ft. 


2x2 

- 

10/10 

60 

4x4 

- 

14/14 

11 

2x2 

- 

12/12 

37 

6x6 

- 

0/0 

107 

2x2 

- 

14/14 

21 

6x6 

- 

1/1 

91 

2x2 

- 

16/16 

13 

6x6 

- 

2/2 

78 

3x3 

- 

8/8 

58 

6x6 

- 

3/3 

68 

3x3 

- 

10/10 

41 

6x6 

- 

4/4 

58 

3x3 

- 

12/12 

25 

6x6 

- 

4/6 

50 

3x3 

- 

14/14 

14 

6x6 

- 

5/5 

49 

4x4 

- 

4/4 

85 

6x6 

- 

6/6 

42 

4x4 

- 

6/6 

62 

6x6 

- 

7/7 

36 

4x4 

- 

8/8 

44 

6x6 

- 

8/8 

30 

4x4 

- 

10/10 

31 

6x6 

- 

9/9 

25 

4x4 

- 

12/12 

19 

6x6 

- 

10/10 

21 

4x4 

- 

13/13 

14 

1 Style  designation  is  defined  in  ACI  Standard  315  of  the  American 
Concrete  Institute. 


(34-6) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-131 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  41 
REINFORCED  CONCRETE  PRESSURE  PIPE  SPILLWAY  CONDUITS 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  41  is  applicable  to  the  construction 
of  principal  spillway  conduits  appurtenant  to  earth  dams  using 
bedded  or  cradled  reinforced  concrete  pressure  pipe.  It  may  also 
be  applied  to  the  construction  of  any  type  of  reinforced  concrete 
pipe  conduit  that  crosses  under  or  through  an  earth  dam. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

The  following  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  41 : 

a.  Reinforced  Concrete  Pressure  Pipe. 

Specification  541 

b.  Joint  Sealing  Compound. 

Specification  536 

c.  Preformed  Expansion  Joint  Filler. 

Specification  535 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Line  and  grade  of  the  conduit. 

b.  Details  of  the  pipe  bedding  or  cradle,  including  joint 
details . 

c.  Excavation  and  backfill  requirements,  if  applicable. 

d.  Pay  limits  or  actual  limits  for  excavation. 

e.  Details  of  wall  fittings  and  other  special  pipe  fittings. 

f.  Special  requirements  for  foundation  preparation. 

g.  Type  of  pipe. 

h.  Size  of  pipe. 

i.  Strength  of  pipe  in  terms  of  three-edge  bearing  strength  and 
internal  pressure. 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-132 


j.  Maximum  allowable  offset  in  alignment  of  interior  pipe  surface  at 
joints,  if  tolerance  is  limited  by  cavitation  hazard. 

k.  Minimum  joint  length  and  minimum  limiting  angle  of  the 
joints  according  to  definitions  in  Material  Specification  541. 

l.  Type  and  class  of  expansion  joint  filler. 

m.  Class  of  concrete  for  bedding  or  cradle  and  support  blocks. 

n.  Statement  that  metal  strips  covering  the  joints  as  specified 
in  Section  4 are  not  required,  if  applicable.  (If  the  conduit 
rests  on  bedrock  so  no  appreciable  movement  will  take  place  at 
the  joints,  metal  cover  strips  generally  will  not  be  needed.) 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  3,  Laying  the  Pipe. 

(1)  Option  1 is  the  preferred  method  of  stating  the 
instructions  for  connecting  pipe  sections. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  special  problems 
are  anticipated  or  when  the  pipe  to  be  furnished 
requires  special  methods  of  connection. 

b . Section  5,  Pressure  Testing. 

(1)  Option  1 is  considered  adequate  for  principal  spillway 
conduits  that  will  operate  under  pressure  intermittently 
at  normal  frequencies. 

(2)  Option  2 may  be  required  for  principal  spillway  conduits 
that  will  operate  under  pressure  for  extended  periods  of 
time  or  at  very  frequent  intervals. 

c.  Section  6,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

(1)  Option  1 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment 

on  the  measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  the  conduit. 

(2)  Option  2 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment 

on  the  summation  of  the  nominal  laying  lengths  of  the 
pipe  sections  used. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in  standard 
specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are  used,  insert  the 
following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph  in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both  methods 
of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-133 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 

41.  REINFORCED  CONCRETE  PRESSURE  PIPE  SPILLWAY  CONDUITS 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  reinforced 
concrete  pressure  pipe,  fittings  and  accessories  in  principal 
spillway  conduits  appurtenant  to  earth  dams. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Reinforced  concrete  pressure  pipe,  fittings  and  accessories  shall 
conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  541. 

Portland  cement  concrete  for  bedding  and  cradles  shall  conform  to 
the  requirements  of  Construction  Specification  31  for  the  specified 
class  of  concrete. 

Joint  sealing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  536. 

Preformed  expansion  joint  filler  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  535. 

3.  LAYING  THE  PIPE 


The  pipe  shall  be  set  to  the  specified  line  and  grade  and  tempo- 
rarily supported  on  precast  concrete  blocks  or  wedges.  Bell  and 
spigot  pipe  shall  be  laid  with  the  bell  upstream. 

Just  before  each  joint  is  connected  the  connecting  surfaces  of 
the  bell  and  spigot  or  spigots  and  sleeve  shall  be  thoroughly 
cleaned  and  dried,  and  the  rubber  gasket  and  the  inside  surface 
of  the  bell  or  sleeve  shall  be  lubricated  with  a light  film  of 
soft  vegetable  soap  compound  (flax  soap).  The  rubber  gasket  shall 
be  stretched  uniformly  as  it  is  placed  in  the  spigot  groove  to 
insure  a uniform  volume  of  rubber  around  the  circumference  of  the 
pipe. 

(Option  1)  The  joint  shall  be  connected  by  means  of  a pulling  or 
jacking  force  so  applied  to  the  pipe  that  the  spigot  enters 
squarely  into  the  bell. 

(Option  2)  The  joint  shall  be  connected  in  accordance  with  the 
manufacturer's  instructions. 

(41-1) 

NEH  61/168  (Notice  20-23) 


(Use  with  Either  Option)  When  the  spigot  has  been  seated  to 
within  .1/2 -inch  of  ifs  final  position,  the  position  of  the  gasket 
in  the  joint  shall  be  checked  around  the  entire  circumference  of 
the  pipe  by  means  of  a metal  feeler  gage.  In  any  case  where  the 
gasket  is  found  to  be  displaced,  the  joint  shall  be  disengaged 
and  properly  reconnected.  After  the  position  of  the  gasket  has 
been  checked,  the  spigot  shall  be  completely  pulled  into  the  bell 
and  the  section  of  pipe  shall  be  adjusted  to  line  and  grade. 

4.  FILLING  JOINTS 


Before  the  placement  of  the  bedding  or  cradle,  the  exterior 
annular  space  between  the  ends  of  the  pipe  sections  shall  be 
cleaned  and  completely  filled  with  joint  sealing  compound.  Before 
the  compound  is  applied,  the  surfaces  against  which  it  is  to  be 
placed  shall  be  cleaned  of  all  dust,  lubricant  and  other  substances 
that  would  interfere  with  a bond  between  the  compound  and  the 
pipe.  If  recommended  by  the  manufacturer  of  the  compound,  the 
concrete  surfaces  shall  be  coated  with  a primer  in  accordance 
with  the  manufacturer's  recommendations.  Primers  shall  be  applied 
to  the  concrete  surfaces  only  and  shall  not  come  in  contact  with 
the  gasket  or  gasket  sealing  surfaces.  Unless  the  compound  or 
primer  is  specifically  recommended  for  use  on  moist  concrete, 
the  surfaces  shall  be  dry  when  it  is  applied. 

The  joint  sealing  compound  shall  be  allowed  to  cure  until  it  is 
sufficiently  firm  to  prevent  the  entry  of  concrete  or  earth  into 
the  joint  before  concrete,  bedding  or  backfill  is  placed  against 
it.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  where  bedding  or  backfill 
containing  particles  larger  than  one- fourth  inch  in  maximum 
dimension  is  to  be  placed  within  6 inches  of  the  joint  sealing 
compound,  the  compound  shall  be  covered  before  the  bedding  or 
backfill  is  placed  with  a strip  of  16-gage  to  24-gage  metal 
at  least  2 inches  wider  than  the  space  between  the  ends  of  the 
pipe  sections. 

5.  PRESSURE  TESTING 


(Option  1)  Pressure  testing  of  the  completed  conduit  will  not  be 
required. 

(Option  2)  Prior  to  the  placement  of  any  concrete  or  earth  fill 
around  the  conduit  or  filling  of  the  pipe  joints,  the  conduit 
shall  be  tested  for  leaks  in  the  following  manner:  The  ends  of 

the  conduit  shall  be  plugged  and  a standpipe  with  a minimum  diameter 
of  two  (2)  inches  shall  be  attached  to  the  upstream  plug.  The 
conduit  shall  be  braced  at  each  end  to  prevent  slippage.  The  conduit 
and  the  standpipe  shall  be  filled  with  water.  The  water  level  in 
the  standpipe  shall  be  maintained  by  continuous  pumping  a minimum  of 

(41-2) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-135 


10  feet  above  the  invert  of  the  upstream  end  of  the  conduit  for 
a period  of  not  less  than  two  hours.  Any  leaks  that  occur  during 
this  period  shall  be  repaired  by  a method  satisfactory  to  the 
Engineer.  After  repair,  the  conduit  shall  be  tested  again  as 
described  above  and  the  procedure  shall  be  repeated  until  the 
conduit  is  accepted  as  watertight  by  the  Engineer. 

The  pipe  joints  shall  show  no  leakage.  Damp  spots  developing  on 
the  surface  of  the  pipe  will  not  be  considered  as  leakage. 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  size,  type  and 
class  of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  0.1  foot  by  measure- 
ment of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  invert  centerline  of  the 
conduit.  Payment  for  each  size,  type  and  class  of  reinforced 
concrete  pressure  pipe  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for 
that  size,  type  and  class  of  pipe.  Such  payment  will  constitute 
full  compensation  for  furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the 
pipe  complete  in  place  including  accessories  such  as  wall  fittings, 
joint  gaskets,  coupling  bands,  sleeves  or  collars  and  all  other 
items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  size,  type  and 
class  of  pipe  will  be  determined  as  the  sum  of  the  nominal  laying 
lengths  of  the  pipe  sections  used.  Payment  for  each  size,  type 
and  class  of  reinforced  concrete  pressure  pipe  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  unit  price  for  that  size,  type  and  class  of  pipe.  Such 
payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  furnishing,  trans- 
porting and  installing  the  pipe  complete  in  place  including  acces- 
sories such  as  wall  fittings,  joint  gaskets,  coupling  bands, 
sleeves  or  collars  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental 
to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described 
in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included 
in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary. 
Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are 
identified  in  Section  7 of  this  specification. 


(41-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


< 


c 


f 


t 


2-137 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  42 
CONCRETE  PIPE  CONDUITS  AND  DRAINS 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  42  is  applicable  to  all  types  of  concrete 
pipe  conduits  except  principal  spillway  conduits  for  earth  dams.  It 
may  be  applied  to  culverts,  to  pipe  collector  systems  in  structure 
drains,  to  irrigation  pipelines,  or  to  portions  of  land  drainage 
systems . 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

The  following  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  42; 

a.  Reinforced  Concrete  Pressure  Pipe. 

Specification  541 

b.  Concrete  Culvert  Pipe. 

Specification  542 

c.  Concrete  Irrigation  Pipe,  Drainage  Pipe,  and  Drain  Tile. 
Specification  543 

d.  Joint  Sealing  Compound. 

Specification  536 

e.  Preformed  Expansion  Joint  Filler. 

Specification  535 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Line  and  grade  of  the  conduit. 

b.  Details  of  concrete  bedding  or  cradle,  including  class  of 
concrete,  joint  details,  and  type  of  expansion  joint  filler. 

c.  Details  of  earth,  sand,  or  gravel  bedding,  including 
description  and  grading  limits  of  the  bedding  material. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-138 


d.  Excavation  and  backfill  requirements,  if  applicable. 

e.  Pay  limits  or  actual  limits  for  excavation  and  backfill, 
if  required. 

f.  Special  requirements  for  foundation  preparation. 

g.  Kind  of  pipe  or  tile  by  name  and  class.  (See  appropriate 
reference  specifications.) 

h.  Size  of  pipe  or  tile. 

i.  Type  of  cement  for  pipe  or  tile  if  a certain  type  is 
necessary  because  of  soil,  water,  or  other  environmental 
conditions . 

j.  Strength  of  pipe,  if  not  covered  by  reference  specif i- 
cations,  in  terms  of  three -edge -bearing  load  and  internal 
pressure  as  appropriate. 

k.  Type  of  joint  and  details  of  banded  joints  or  other 
special  joints. 

l.  Details  of  wall  fittings  and  other  special  fittings  and 
appurtenances . 

m.  Test  pressure,  if  applicable. 

n.  Method  of  measurement  and  payment  if  the  standard 
specification  includes  more  than  one  method. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  5a,  Rubber  Gasket  Joint,  Pressure  Pipe. 

Option  1 is  the  preferred  method  of  stating  the  instruc- 
tions for  connecting  pipe  sections. 

Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  special  problems  are 
anticipated  or  when  the  pipe  to  be  furnished  requires 
special  methods  of  connection. 

b.  Section  9,  Pressure  Testing. 

The  options  are  self-explanatory.  The  choice  of  option  must 
be  consistent  with  the  function  of  the  conduit  and  the  required 
operating  pressure. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-139 


c.  Section  10,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

Option  1 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment 
on  the  measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  the  conduit. 

Option  2 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment 
on  the  summation  of  the  nominal  laying  lengths  of  the 
pipe  sections  used. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in  the 
standard  specification.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph 
in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


: 


c 


2-141 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 

42 . CONCRETE  PIPE  CONDUITS  AND  DRAINS 


1.  SCOPE 


The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  concrete  pipe 
or  concrete  drain  tile  and  the  necessary  fittings  as  shown  on  the 
drawings . 

2.  MATERIALS 


Reinforced  concrete  pressure  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  541  for  the  type  and  strength  specified. 

Concrete  culvert  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  542  for  the  kind  of  pipe  specified. 

Concrete  irrigation  pipe,  drainage  pipe  and  drain  tile  shall 
conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  543  for 
the  kind  of  pipe  or  tile  specified. 

Pipe  fittings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the  applicable 
pipe  specifications. 

Sealing  compound  for  filling  rubber  gasket  joints  shall  conform 
to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  536. 

Hot-pour  joint  sealer  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Federal  Specification  SS-S-169. 

Cold-applied  sealing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Federal  Specification  SS-S-168. 

Preformed  sealing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Interim  Federal  Specification  SS-S-00210. 

Joint  packing  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  HH-P-119  for  mastic  sealed  joints  and  Federal 
Specification  HH-P-117  for  cement  mortar  sealed  joints. 

Preformed  expansion  joint  filler  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  535 . 


(42-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-142 


3.  LAYING  AND  BEDDING 


Pipe  and  tile  shall  be  laid  to  the  line  and  grade  shown  on  the 
drawings.  Pipe  shall  be  laid  with  the  bell  or  groove  at  the 
upstream  end  of  each  section. 

a.  Concrete  Cradles  or  Bedding.  Pipe  to  be  cradled  or  bedded 
on  concrete  shall  be  set  to  the  specified  line  and  grade  and 
temporarily  supported  on  precast  concrete  blocks  or  wedges 
until  the  cradle  or  bedding  concrete  is  placed.  Concrete 
blocks  or  wedges  used  to  temporarily  support  the  pipe  during 
placement  of  bedding  or  cradle  shall  be  of  a class  of 
concrete  equal  to  or  better  than  that  used  in  the  bedding 

or  cradle. 

b.  Earth,  Sand,  or  Gravel  Bedding.  The  pipe  shall  be  firmly 
and  uniformly  bedded  throughout  its  entire  length  to  the 
depth  and  in  the  manner  specified  on  the  drawings.  The 
pipe  shall  be  loaded  sufficiently  during  backfilling  around 
the  sides  to  prevent  its  being  lifted  from  the  bedding. 

Perforated  pipe  shall  be  laid  with  the  perforations  down  and 
oriented  symmetrically  about  a vertical  centerline.  Perforations 
shall  be  clear  of  any  obstructions  when  the  pipe  is  laid. 

4.  JOINTS 

Pipe  joints  shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings 
and  to  the  requirements  of  Section  5 and  6 of  this  specification 
applicable  to  the  type  of  joint  specified.  Except  where  unsealed 
joints  are  indicated,  pipe  joints  shall  be  sound  and  watertight 
at  the  pressure  specified. 

5.  JOINING  BELL  AND  SPIGOT  PIPE 

a.  Rubber  Gasket  Joint,  Pressure  Pipe.  Just  before  the  joint  is 
connected  the  connecting  surfaces  of  the  spigot  and  the  bell 
or  coupling  band,  sleeve  or  collar  shall  be  thoroughly 
cleaned  and  dried,  and  the  rubber  gasket  and  the  inside 
surface  of  the  bell  or  coupling  band,  sleeve  or  collar  shall 
be  lubricated  with  a light  film  of  soft  vegetable  soap 
compound  (flax  soap).  The  rubber  gasket  shall  be  stretched 
uniformly  as  it  is  placed  in  the  spigot  groove  to  insure  a 
uniform  volume  of  rubber  around  the  circumference  of  the  pipe. 


(42-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-143 


(Option  1)  The  joint  shall  be  connected  by  means  of  a 
pulling  or  jacking  force  so  applied  to  the  pipe  that  the 
spigot  enters  squarely  into  the  bell. 

(Option  2)  The  joint  shall  be  connected  in  accordance 
with  the  manufacturer's  recommnedations . 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  When  the  spigot  has  been 
seated  to  within  1/2  inch  of  its  final  position,  the 
position  of  the  gasket  in  the  joint  shall  be  checked 
around  the  entire  circumference  of  the  pipe  by  means 
of  metal  feeler  gage.  In  any  case  where  the  gasket 
is  found  to  be  displaced,  the  joint  shall  be  disengaged 
and  properly  reconnected.  After  the  position  of  the 
gasket  has  been  checked,  the  spigot  shall  be  completely 
pulled  into  the  bell  and  the  section  of  the  pipe  shall 
be  adjusted  to  line  and  grade. 

b.  Rubber  Gasket  Joints,  Sewer  and  Culvert  Pipe  or  Irriga- 
tion Pipe.  The  pipe  shall  be  joined  in  accordance  with 
the  gasket  manufacturer's  recommendations  except  as 
otherwise  specified. 

c.  Mastic  Sealed  Joints.  At  the  time  of  assembly  the 
inside  surfaces  of  the  bell  and  the  outside  surfaces 
of  the  spigot  shall  be  clean,  dry  and  primed  as 
recommended  by  the  manufacturer  of  the  sealing 
compound.  A closely  twisted  gasket  of  joint  packing 
of  the  diameter  required  to  support  the  spigot  at 
the  proper  grade  and  to  make  the  joint  concentric 
shall  be  made  in  one  piece  of  sufficient  length  to 
pass  around  the  pipe  and  lap  at  the  top.  The  gasket 
shall  be  laid  in  the  bell  throughout  the  lower 
third  of  the  circumference.  The  end  of  the  spigot 
shall  be  laid  on  the  gasket  and  the  spigot  shall  be 
fully  inserted  into  the  bell  so  that  the  pipe  sections 
are  closely  fitted  and  aligned.  The  gasket  then  shall 
be  lapped  at  the  top  of  the  pipe  and  thoroughly  packed 
into  the  annular  space  between  the  bell  and  the  spigot. 

(1)  Hot-Pour  Joint  Sealer.  The  sealing  compound 

shall  be  heated  to  within  the  temperature  range 
recommended  by  the  manufacturer  and  shall  not  be 
overheated  or  subjected  to  prolonged  heating. 

After  the  joint  is  assembled,  with  the  pipe  in 
its  final  location,  a suitable  joint  runner  shall 

(42-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-144 


be  placed  around  the  joint  with  an  opening  left  at 
the  top.  Molten  sealing  compound  shall  be  poured 
into  the  joint  as  rapidly  as  possible  without 
entrapping  air  until  the  annular  space  between 
bell  and  spigot  is  completely  filled.  After  the 
compound  has  set,  the  runner  may  be  removed. 

Alternate  joints  may  be  poured  before  the  pipe  is 
lowered  into  the  trench.  In  this  case,  the  joint 
shall  be  poured  with  the  pipe  in  a vertical  posi- 
tion without  the  use  of  the  runner.  The  compound 
shall  have  thoroughly  set  before  the  pipe  is 
placed  in  the  trench,  and  the  pipe  shall  be 
handled  so  as  to  cause  no  deformation  of  the  joint 
during  placement. 

(2)  Cold-Applied  Sealing  Compound.  The  annular  space 
between  bell  and  spigot  shall  be  completely  filled 
with  the  sealing  compound.  The  compound  shall  be 
mixed  on  the  job  in  accordance  with  the  manufac- 
turer's recommendations  and  in  relatively  small 
quantities  so  that  setting  will  not  be  appreciable 
before  application. 

(3)  Preformed  Sealing  Compound.  Joint  packing  will 
not  be  required,  except  as  recommended  by  the 
manufacturer  of  the  sealing  compound.  Preformed 
strips  or  bands  of  the  sealing  compound  shall  be 
applied  to  the  bell  and  spigot  prior  to  assembly 
of  the  joint  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's 
recommendations.  Any  compound  extruded  from  the 
interior  side  of  the  joint  during  assembly  shall 
be  trimmed  even  with  the  interior  surface  of  the 
pipe. 

d.  Cement  Mortar  Sealed  Joints.  Cement  mortar  for  joints  shall 
consist  of  one  part  by  weight  of  port land  cement  and  two 
parts  by  weight  of  fine  sand  with  enough  water  added  to 
produce  a workable  consistency.  At  the  time  of  assembly 
the  inside  surface  of  the  bell  and  the  outside  surface  of 
the  spigot  shall  be  clean  and  moist. 

(1)  With  Packing.  A closely  twisted  gasket  of  joint 
packing  of  the  diameter  required  to  support  the 
spigot  at  the  proper  grade  and  to  make  the  joint 
concentric  shall  be  made  in  one  piece  of  sufficient 

(42-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-145 


length  to  pass  around  the  pipe  and  lap  at  the  top. 

The  gasket  shall  be  saturated  with  neat  cement 
grout,  laid  in  the  bell  throughout  the  lower  third 
of  the  circumference  and  covered  with  mortar.  The 
end  of  the  spigot  shall  be  fully  inserted  into  the 
bell  so  that  the  pipe  sections  are  closely  fitted 
and  aligned.  A small  amount  or  mortar  shall  be 
placed  in  the  annular  space  throughout  the  upper 
two-thirds  of  the  circumference.  The  gasket  then 
shall  be  lapped  at  the  top  of  the  pipe  and  thoroughly 
packed  into  the  annular  space  between  the  bell  and 
the  spigot.  The  remainder  of  the  annular  space  then 
shall  be  filled  completely  with  mortar  and  beveled 
off  at  an  angle  of  approximately  forty-five  (45) 
degrees  with  the  outside  of  the  bell.  If  the  mortar 
is  not  sufficiently  stiff  to  prevent  appreciable 
slump  before  setting,  the  outside  of  the  joint  thus 
made  shall  be  wrapped  with  cheesecloth.  After  the 
mortar  has  set  slightly,  the  joint  shall  be  wiped 
inside  the  pipe.  In  pipe  too  small  for  a man  to 
work  inside,  wiping  may  be  done  by  dragging  an 
approved  swab  through  the  pipe  as  the  work  pro- 
gresses . 

(2)  Without  Packing.  The  lower  portion  of  the  bell 
shall  be  filled  with  stiff  mortar  of  sufficient 
thickness  to  make  the  inner  surface  of  the  abutting 
sections  flush.  The  spigot  end  of  the  pipe  to  be 
joined  shall  be  fully  inserted  into  the  bell  so 
that  the  sections  are  closely  fitted  and  aligned. 

The  remaining  annular  space  between  the  bell  and 
spigot  shall  then  be  filled  with  mortar  and  the 
mortar  neatly  beveled  off  at  an  angle  of  approxi- 
mately forty-five  (45)  degrees  with  the  outside 
of  the  bell.  After  the  mortar  has  set  slightly, 
the  joint  shall  be  wiped  inside  the  pipe.  In 
pipe  too  small  for  a man  to  work  inside,  wiping 
may  be  done  by  dragging  an  approved  swab  through 
the  pipe  as  the  work  progresses. 

e.  Unsealed  Joints.  When  unsealed  joints  are  specified,  they 

shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings. 

6.  JOINING  TONGUE  AND  GROOVE  PIPE 


a.  Cement  Mortar  Sealed  Joint.  Mortar  shall  be  as  specified 
for  bell  and  spigot  joints.  The  tongue  end  of  the  section 


(42-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-146 


being  placed  shall  be  covered  with  mortar  and  firmly  pressed 
into  the  groove  of  the  laid  section  in  such  a manner  that 
the  tongue  fits  snugly  and  truly  in  the  groove  and  that 
mortar  is  squeezed  out  both  on  the  interior  and  exterior 
of  the  joint.  Care  shall  be  taken  that  no  mortar  falls 
from  the  groove  end  during  the  abutting  operation.  Imme- 
diately after  the  pipe  sections  have  been  abutted,  exposed 
external  surface  mortar  shall  be  pressed  into  the  joint 
and  any  excess  mortar  removed,  after  which  the  interior 
surface  of  the  joint  shall  be  carefully  pointed  and  brushed 
smooth,  and  all  surplus  mortar  removed. 

b.  Mastic  Sealed  Joints.  Strips  or  bands  of  preformed  sealing 
compound  shall  be  applied  to  the  tongue  and  groove  prior  to 
assembly  of  the  joint  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's 
recommendations.  Any  compound  extruded  from  the  interior 
side  of  the  joint  during  assembly  shall  be  trimmed  even 
with  the  interior  surface  of  the  pipe. 

c.  Rubber  Gasket  Joints.  The  pipe  shall  be  joined  in  accor- 
dance with  the  gasket  manufacturer's  recommendations  except 
as  otherwise  specified. 

d.  Unsealed  Joints.  When  unsealed  joints  are  specified,  they 
shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings. 

7 . BANDING 

When  external  mortar  bands  are  specified,  they  shall  conform  to 

the  details  shown  on  the  drawings. 

8.  CURING  MORTAR  JOINTS  AND  BANDS 


The  external  surfaces  of  mortar  joints  shall  be  covered  with  moist 
earth,  sand,  canvas,  burlap  or  other  approved  materials  and  shall 
be  kept  moist  for  10  days  or  until  the  pipe  is  backfilled. 

Water  shall  not  be  turned  into  the  conduit  within  24  hours  after 
the  joints  are  finished.  Hydrostatic  pressure  shall  not  be 
applied  to  the  conduit  prior  to  14  days  after  the  joints  are 
finished. 

9.  PRESSURE  TESTING 

(Option  1)  Pressure  testing  of  the  completed  conduit  will  not  be 
required. 

(42-6) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


t 


2-147 


(Option  2)  Prior  to  the  placement  of  concrete  or  earth  fill  around 
the  conduit,  the  conduit  shall  be  tested  for  leaks  in  the  following 
manner:  The  ends  of  the  conduit  shall  be  plugged  and  a standpipe 

with  a minimum  diameter  of  two  (2)  inches  shall  be  attached  to  the 
upstream  plug.  The  conduit  shall  be  braced  at  each  end  to  prevent 
slippage.  The  conduit  and  the  standpipe  shall  be  filled  with  water. 
The  water  level  in  the  standpipe  shall  be  maintained,  by  continuous 
pumping,  a minimum  of  10  feet  above  the  invert  of  the  upstream  end 
of  the  conduit  for  a period  of  not  less  than  two  hours.  Any  leaks 
shall  be  repaired  and  the  conduit  shall  be  retested  as  described 
above.  The  procedure  shall  be  repeated  until  the  conduit  is 
watertight. 

The  pipe  joints  shall  show  no  leakage.  Damp  spots  developing  on 
the  surface  of  the  pipe  will  not  be  considered  as  leaks. 

(Option  3)  Prior  to  the  placement  of  concrete  or  earth  fill  around 
the  conduit,  the  conduit  shall  be  tested  at  the  specified  test 

pressure  for  a period  of  at  least  2 hours.  Any  leaks  shall  be 

repaired  and  the  conduit  shall  be  retested.  The  procedure  shall 

be  repeated  until  the  conduit  is  watertight. 

The  pipe  joints  shall  show  no  leakage.  Damp  spots  developing  on 
the  surface  of  the  pipe  will  not  be  considered  as  leaks. 

10.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  kind,  size,  and 
class  of  pipe  or  tile  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  foot  by 
measurement  of  the  laid  length  along  the  invert  centerline  of  the 
conduit.  Payment  for  each  kind,  size,  and  class  of  pipe  or  tile 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  kind,  size,  and 
class.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  fur- 
nishing, transporting  and  installing  the  pipe  or  tile  complete  in 
place. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  kind,  size,  and 
class  of  pipe  or  tile  will  be  determined  as  the  sum  of  the  nominal 
laying  lengths  of  the  sections  used.  Payment  for  each  kind,  size, 
and  class  of  pipe  or  tile  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price 
for  that  kind,  size,  and  class.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe 
or  tile  complete  in  place. 

(42-7) 


% 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-148 


(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  11  of  this 
specification. 


(42-8) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-149 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  43 
CLAY  PIPE  CONDUITS  AND  DRAINS 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  43  is  applicable  to  all  types  of  clay 
pipe  conduits.  It  may  be  applied  to  pipe  collector  systems  in 
structure  drains  or  to  portions  of  land  drainage  systems. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

The  following  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  43 : 

a.  Clay  Pipe  and  Clay  Drain  Tile. 

Specification  544 

b.  Joint  Sealing  Compound. 

Specification  536 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Line  and  grade  of  the  conduit. 

b.  Details  of  the  bedding,  including  description  and 
grading  limits  of  the  bedding  material. 

c.  Excavation  and  backfill  requirements,  if  applicable. 

d.  Pay  limits  or  actual  limits  for  excavation  and  backfill, 
if  required. 

e.  Kind  and  class  of  pipe  or  tile. 

f.  Size  of  pipe  or  tile. 

g.  Type  of  joint  and  details  of  special  joints. 

h.  Details  of  wall  fittings  and  other  special  fittings  and 
appurtenances . 

i.  Pressure  test  requirements,  if  applicable. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-150 


j.  Method  of  measurement  and  payment  if  the  standard  specif ica 
tion  includes  more  than  one  method. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  6,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

Option  1 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment 
on  the  measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  the  conduit. 

Option  2 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment 
on  the  summation  of  the  nominal  laying  lengths  of  the 
pipe  sections  used. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in 
the  standard  specification.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph 
in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-151 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
43.  CLAY  PIPE  CONDUITS  AND  DRAINS 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  clay  pipe  or 
clay  drain  tile  and  the  necessary  fittings  as  shown  on  the  drawings. 

2.  MATERIALS 


Pipe,  drain  tile,  and  fittings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  544  for  the  kind  of  pipe  or  tile  specified. 

Sealing  compound  for  filling  rubber  gasket  joints  shall  conform  to 
the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  536 . 

Compression  joints  using  resilient  materials  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  C 425. 

Hot-pour  joint  sealer  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  SS-S-169. 


Cold-applied  sealing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Federal  Specification  SS-S-168. 


Preformed  sealing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Interim  Federal  Specification  SS-S-00210. 


Joint  packing  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
Specification  HH-P-119  for  mastic  sealed  joints 
Specification  HH-P-117  for  cement  mortar  sealed 


of  Federal 
and  Federal 
joints . 


3.  LAYING  AND  BEDDING 


Pipe  and  tile  shall  be  laid  to  the  line  and  grade  shown  on  the 
drawings.  Pipe  shall  be  laid  with  the  bell  at  the  upstream  end 
of  each  section. 

The  pipe  shall  be  firmly  and  uniformly  bedded  throughout  its  entire 
length  to  the  depth  and  in  the  manner  specified  on  the  drawings. 

The  pipe  shall  be  loaded  sufficiently  during  backfilling  around 
the  sides  to  prevent  its  being  lifted  from  the  bedding. 

(43-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-152 


Perforated  pipe  and  tile  shall  be  laid  with  the  perforations  down 
and  oriented  symmetrically  about  the  vertical  centerline.  Per- 
forations shall  be  clear  of  any  obstructions  when  the  pipe  is 
laid. 

4.  JOINTS 


Pipe  joints  shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings 
and,  except  where  unsealed  joints  are  indicated,  shall  be  sound 
and  watertight  at  the  pressures  specified. 

a.  Rubber  Gasket  Joints.  Rubber  gasket  joints  shall  be 
assembled  in  accordance  with  the  gasket  manufacturer's 
recommendations  except  as  otherwise  specified. 

b.  Compression  Joints.  Compression  joints  using  resilient 
materials  shall  be  assembled  in  accordance  with  the 
manufacturer's  recommendations. 

c.  Mastic  Sealed  Joints.  At  the  time  of  assembly  the  inside 
surfaces  of  the  bell  and  the  outside  surfaces  of  the  spigot 
shall  be  clean,  dry  and  primed  as  recommended  by  the  manu- 
facturer of  the  sealing  compound.  A closely  twisted  gasket 
of  joint  packing  of  the  diameter  required  to  support  the 
spigot  at  the  proper  grade  and  to  make  the  joint  concentric 
shall  be  made  in  one  piece  of  sufficient  length  to  pass 
around  the  pipe  and  lap  at  the  top.  The  gasket  shall  be 
laid  in  the  bell  throughout  the  lower  third  of  the 
circumference.  The  end  of  the  spigot  shall  be  laid  on 

the  gasket  and  the  spigot  shall  be  fully  inserted  into  the 
bell  so  that  the  pipe  sections  are  closely  fitted  and 
aligned.  The  gasket  then  shall  be  lapped  at  the  top  of 
the  pipe  and  thoroughly  packed  into  the  annular  space 
between  the  bell  and  the  spigot. 

(1)  Hot-Pour  Joint  Sealer.  The  sealing  compound  shall 
be  heated  to  within  the  temperature  range  recom- 
mended by  the  manufacturer  and  shall  not  be  over- 
heated or  subjected  to  prolonged  heating.  After 
the  joint  is  assembled,  with  the  pipe  in  its 
final  location,  a suitable  joint  runner  shall  be 
placed  around  the  joint  with  an  opening  left  at 
the  top.  Molten  sealing  compound  shall  be  poured 
into  the  joint  as  rapidly  as  possible  without 
entrapping  air  until  the  annular  space  between  bell 
and  spigot  is  completely  filled.  After  the  compound 


(43-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-153 


has  set,  the  runner  may  be  removed.  Alternate  joints 
may  be  poured  before  the  pipe  is  lowered  into  the 
trench.  In  this  case  the  joint  shall  be  poured  with 
the  pipe  in  a vertical  position  without  the  use  of  the 
runner.  The  compound  shall  have  thoroughly  set  before 
the  pipe  is  placed  in  the  trench,  and  the  pipe  shall 
be  handled  so  as  to  cause  no  deformation  of  the  joint 
during  placement. 

(2)  Cold-Applied  Sealing  Compound.  The  annular  space 
between  bell  and  spigot  shall  be  completely  filled 
with  the  sealing  compound.  The  compound  shall  be 
mixed  on  the  job  in  accordance  with  the  manufac- 
turer's recommendations  and  in  relatively  small 
quantities  so  that  setting  will  not  be  appreciable 
before  application. 

(3)  Preformed  Sealing  Compound.  Joint  packing  will  not 
be  required,  except  as  recommended  by  the  manufac- 
turer of  the  sealing  compounc.  Preformed  strips  or 
bands  of  the  sealing  compound  shall  be  applied  to 
the  bell  and  spigot  prior  to  assembly  of  the  joint 
in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  recommenda- 
tions. Any  compound  extruded  from  the  interior 
side  of  the  joint  during  assembly  shall  be  trimmed 
even  with  the  interior  surface  of  the  pipe. 

d.  Cement  Mortar  Sealed  Joints.  Cement  mortar  for  joints  shall 
consist  of  one  part  by  weight  of  portland  cement  and  two 
parts  by  weight  of  fine  sand  with  enough  water  added  to 
produce  a workable  consistency.  At  the  time  of  assembly 
the  inside  surface  of  the  bell  and  the  outside  surface  of 
the  spigot  shall  be  clean  and  moist. 

(1)  With  Packing.  A closely  twisted  gasket  of  joint 
packing  of  the  diameter  required  to  support  the 
spigot  at  the  proper  grade  and  to  make  the  joint 
concentric  shall  be  made  in  one  piece  of  sufficient 
length  to  pass  around  the  pipe  and  lap  at  the  top. 

The  gasket  shall  be  saturated  with  neat  cement 
grout,  laid  in  the  bell  throughout  the  lower  third 
of  the  circumference  and  covered  with  mortar.  The 
end  of  the  spigot  shall  be  fully  inserted  into  the 
bell  so  that  the  pipe  sections  are  closely  fitted 
and  aligned.  A small  amount  of  mortar  shall  be 
placed  in  the  annular  space  throughout  the  upper 


(43-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-154 


♦ 


two-thirds  of  the  circumference.  The  gasket  then  shall 
be  lapped  at  the  top  of  the  pipe  and  thoroughly  packed 
into  the  annular  space  between  the  bell  and  the  spigot. 
The  remainder  of  the  annular  space  then  shall  be  filled 
completely  with  mortar  and  beveled  off  at  an  angle  of 
approximately  forty-five  (45)  degrees  with  the  outside 
of  the  bell.  If  the  mortar  is  not  sufficiently  stiff 
to  prevent  appreciable  slump  before  setting,  the  out- 
side of  the  joint  thus  made  shall  be  wrapped  with 
cheesecloth.  After  the  mortar  has  set  slightly,  the 
joint  shall  be  wiped  inside  the  pipe.  In  pipe  too 
small  for  a man  to  work  inside,  wiping  may  be  done  by 
dragging  an  approved  swab  through  the  pipe  as  the  work 
progresses . 

(2)  Without  Packing.  The  lower  portion  of  the  bell  shall 
be  filled  with  stiff  mortar  of  sufficient  thickness  to 
make  the  inner  surface  of  the  abutting  sections  flush. 

The  spigot  end  of  the  pipe  to  be  joined  shall  be  fully 
inserted  into  the  bell  so  that  the  sections  are  closely 
fitted  and  aligned.  The  remaining  annular  space  between 
the  bell  and  spigot  shall  then  be  filled  with  mortar  and 
the  mortar  neatly  beveled  off  at  an  angle  of  approxi- 
mately forty-five  (45)  degrees  with  the  outside  of  the 
bell.  After  the  mortar  has  set  slightly,  the  joint 
shall  be  wiped  inside  the  pipe.  In  pipe  too  small  for 
a man  to  work  inside,  wiping  may  be  done  by  dragging 
an  approved  swab  through  the  pipe  as  the  work  progresses. 

e.  Unsealed  Joints.  When  unsealed  joints  are  specified,  they 

shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings. 

5.  CURING  MORTAR  JOINTS 


The  external  surfaces  of  mortar  joints  shall  be  covered  with  moist 
earth,  sand,  canvas,  burlap  or  other  approved  materials  and  shall 
be  kept  moist  for  10  days  or  until  the  pipe  is  backfilled. 

Water  shall  not  be  turned  into  the  conduit  within  24  hours  after 
the  joints  are  finished. 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  kind,  size,  and 
class  of  pipe  or  tile  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  foot  by 
measurement  of  the  laid  length  along  the  invert  centerline  of  the 

(43-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-155 


conduit.  Payment  for  each  kind,  size,  and  class  of  pipe  or  tile 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  kind,  size,  and 
class.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for 
furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe  or  tile  com- 
plete in  place. 

ion  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  kind,  size,  and 
class  of  pipe  or  tile  will  be  determined  as  the  sum  of  the 
nominal  laying  lengths  of  the  sections  used.  Payment  for  each 
kind,  size,  and  class  of  pipe  or  tile  will  be  made  at  the  contract 
unit  price  for  that  kind,  size,  and  class.  Such  payment  will 
constitute  full  compensation  for  furnishing,  transporting  and 
installing  the  pipe  or  tile  complete  in  place. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will 
be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is 
made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made 
subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  7 of  this  specifications. 


(43-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


I 


2-157 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  44 
ASBESTOS -CEMENT  PIPE  CONDUITS  AND  DRAINS 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specif ication  44  is  applicable  to  all  types  of  asbestos - 
cement  pipe  conduits.  It  may  be  applied  to  pipe  collector  systems 
in  structure  drains,  to  irrigation  pipelines,  or  to  portions  of 
land  drainage  systems. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specification  545  is  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  44. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Line  and  grade  of  the  conduit. 

b.  Details  of  concrete  bedding  or  cradle,  including  class  of 
concrete,  joint  details,  and  type  of  expansion  joint  filler. 

c.  Details  of  earth,  sand,  or  gravel  bedding,  including 
description  and  grading  limits  of  the  bedding  material. 

d.  Excavation  and  backfill  requirements,  if  applicable. 

e.  Pay  limits  or  actual  limits  for  excavation  and  backfill, 
if  required. 

f.  Kind  of  pipe  and  class  where  applicable. 

g.  Size  of  pipe. 

h.  Type  of  joint  and  details  of  special  joints. 

i.  Details  of  wall  fittings  and  other  special  fittings  and 
appurtenances . 

j.  Test  pressure, if  applicable. 

k.  Method  of  measurement  and  payment  if  the  standard 
specification  includes  more  than  one  method. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-158 


$ 


4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

a.  Section  5,  Pressure  Testing. 

The  options  are  self-explanatory.  The  choice  of  option  must 
be  consistent  with  the  function  of  the  conduit  and  the 
required  operating  pressure. 

b.  Section  6,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

Option  1 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment  on 
the  measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  the  conduit. 

Option  2 must  be  used  when  it  is  desired  to  base  payment  on 
the  summation  of  the  nominal  laying  lengths  of  the  pipe 
sections  used. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in  the 
standard  specification.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph 
in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both  methods 
of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-159 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 

44.  ASBESTOS -CEMENT  PIPE  CONDUITS  AND  DRAINS 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  asbestos  - 
cement  pipe  and  the  necessary  fittings  as  shown  on  the  drawings. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Pipe,  fittings,  and  gaskets  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  545  for  the  kind  of  pipe  specified. 

3.  LAYING  AND  BEDDING 

Pipe  shall  be  laid  to  the  line  and  grade  shown  on  the  drawings. 

a.  Concrete  Cradle  or  Bedding.  Pipe  to  be  cradled  or  bedded 
on  concrete  shall  be  set  to  the  specified  line  and  grade 
and  temporarily  supported  on  concrete  blocks  or  wedges 
until  the  cradle  or  bedding  concrete  is  placed. 

b.  Earth,  Sand,  or  Gravel  Bedding.  The  pipe  shall  be  firmly 
and  uniformly  bedded  throughout  its  entire  length  to  the 
depth  and  in  the  manner  specified  on  the  drawings.  The 
pipe  shall  be  loaded  sufficiently  during  backfilling  around 
the  sides  to  prevent  its  being  lifted  from  the  bedding. 

Perforated  pipe  shall  be  laid  with  the  perforations  down  and 
oriented  symmetrically  about  the  vertical  centerline.  Perforations 
shall  be  clear  of  any  obstructions  when  the  pipe  is  laid. 

4.  JOINTS 

Pipe  joints  shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings 
and,  except  where  unsealed  joints  are  indicated,  shall  be  sound 
and  watertight  at  the  pressures  specified. 

Pipe  shall  be  installed  and  joined  in  accordance  with  the  manufac- 
turer's recommendations  except  as  otherwise  specified. 

5.  PRESSURE  TESTING 


(Option  1)  Pressure  testing  of  the  completed  conduit  will  not  be 
required. 

(44-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-160 


1 

(Option  2)  Prior  to  the  placement  of  concrete  or  earth  fill 
around  the  conduit,  the  conduit  shall  be  tested  for  leaks  in  the 
following  manner:  The  ends  of  the  conduit  shall  be  plugged  and 

a standpipe  with  a minimum  diameter  of  two  (2)  inches  shall  be 
attached  to  the  upstream  plug.  The  conduit  shall  be  braced  at 
each  end  to  prevent  slippage.  The  conduit  and  the  standpipe 
shall  be  filled  with  water.  The  water  level  in  the  standpipe 
shall  be  maintained  by  continuous  pumping,  a minimum  of  10  feet 
above  the  invert  of  the  upstream  end  of  the  conduit  for  a period 
of  not  less  than  two  hours.  Any  leaks  shall  be  repaired  and  the 
conduit  shall  be  retested  as  described  above.  The  procedure 
shall  be  repeated  until  the  conduit  is  watertight. 

The  pipe  joints  shall  show  no  leakage.  Damp  spots  developing  on 
the  surface  of  the  pipe  will  not  be  considered  as  leaks. 

(Option  3)  Prior  to  the  placement  of  concrete  or  earth  fill  around 
the  conduit,  the  conduit  shall  be  tested  at  the  specified  test 
pressure  for  a period  of  at  least  2 hours.  Any  leaks  shall  be 
repaired  and  the  conduit  shall  be  retested.  The  procedure  shall 
be  repeated  until  the  conduit  is  watertight. 

The  pipe  joints  shall  show  no  leakage.  Damp  spots  developing  on 
the  surface  of  the  pipe  will  not  be  considered  as  leaks. 

k 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 

(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  kind,  size, 
and  class  of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  foot  by 
measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  invert  center- 
line  of  the  conduit.  Payment  for  each  kind,  size,  and  class  of 
pipe  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  kind,  size, 
and  class  of  pipe.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensa- 
tion for  furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe  complete 
in  place. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  kind,  size, 
and  class  of  pipe  will  be  determined  as  the  sum  of  the  nominal 
laying  lengths  of  the  pipe  sections  used.  Payment  for  each  kind, 
size,  and  class  of  pipe  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price 
for  that  kind,  size,  and  class  of  pipe.  Such  payment  will 
constitute  full  compensation  for  furnishing,  transporting  and 
installing  the  pipe  complete  in  place. 

(44-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 

i 


2-161 


(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  7 of  this  speci- 
fication. 


(44-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


<€ 


* 


2-163 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  46 
TILE  DRAINS  FOR  LAND  DRAINAGE 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  46  is  applicable  to  the  installation  of 
all  drain  tile  for  land  drainage. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

The  following  material  specifications  are  complementary  to 
Construction  Specification  46. 

a.  Clay  Tile  and  Clay  Pipe:  Specification  544 

b.  Concrete  Irrigation  or  Drainage  Pipe  and  Drain  Tile: 
Specification  543 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Line  and  grade. 

b.  Kind,  size  and  class  of  tile. 

c.  Typical  cross  sections,  including  typical  bedding  details. 

d.  Special  fittings,  appurtenances,  etc. 

e.  Maximum  and  minimum  trench  widths. 

f.  Procedures  to  use  where  unstable  soils  are  encountered. 

g.  Typical  pipe  outlets. 

h.  Details  of  appurtenances. 

i.  Location  and  details  of  any  special  tile  bedding  requirements. 

j.  Use  of  automatic  backfillers. 

k.  Location  of  required  compacted  backfill. 

l.  Details  of  any  special  fittings. 

ra.  Type  of  joint  required  (including  spacers  where  required). 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-164 


<r 

n.  Type,  kind  and  size  of  materials  to  be  used  to  cover  joint 
or  pipe. 

o.  Type  of  envelope  or  filter. 

p.  Gradation  of  sand-gravel  envelope  or  filter  material. 

q.  Directions  for  covering  pipe  with  envelope  or  filter  material. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Options  are  included  in  Sections  4,  5,  and  7.  The  options  are 
self-explanatory. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-165 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
46 . TILE  DRAINS  FOR  LAND  DRAINAGE 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  drain  tile  and 
necessary  fittings  and  appurtenances. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  drain  tile  and  fittings  shall 
conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  544  or  Material 
Specification  543,  whichever  is  applicable. 

3.  EXCAVATION 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  excavation  for  and  subsequent  instal- 
lation of  each  tile  line  shall  begin  at  the  outlet  end  and  progress 
upstream. 

The  trench  or  excavation  for  the  tile  shall  be  constructed  to  the 
depths  and  cross  sections  shown  on  the  drawings.  The  trench  width 
may  be  increased  above  the  top  of  the  tile,  at  the  option  of  the 
Contractor. 

Trench  shields,  shoring  and  bracing,  or  other  methods,  necessary  to 
safeguard  the  workmen  and  work,  and  to  prevent  damage  to  the  existing 
improvements  shall  be  furnished,  placed,  and  subsequently  removed  by 
the  Contractor. 

4.  PREPARING  THE  TILE  BED 


(Option  1)  In  stable  soils  the  tile  shall  be  firmly  and  uniformly 
bedded  throughout  its  entire  length  to  the  specified  depth  and  in 
the  specified  manner. 

If  the  bottom  of  the  trench  does  not  provide  a sufficiently  stable 
or  firm  foundation  for  the  drain  tile,  cradles  for  the  tile  (con- 
structed of  timber  or  fabricated  lumber  of  a cleat-and-rail  type 
construction),  a sand-gravel  mix  or  other  approved  materials  shall 
be  used  to  stablize  the  bottom  of  the  trench. 

Drain  tile  shall  not  be  laid  on  rock  foundation.  In  the  event  that 
boulders,  rocks  or  ledge  rock  or  cemented  materials  that  prevent 
satisfactory  bedding  are  encountered  at  the  required  grade,  the 

(46-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-166 


trench  shall  be  excavated  to  a depth  of  at  least  six  inches  below 
grade  and  backfilled  to  grade  with  a sand-gravel  mixture  or  other 
approved  material.  The  bedding  material  shall  be  compacted  and 
shaped  to  grade. 

(Option  2)  Tile  shall  be  bedded  as  shown  on  the  drawings  or  as 
specified  in  Section  10. 

5.  LAYING  TILE  AND  JOINT  COVERING 


(Option  1)  Gaps  between  tile  ordinarily  shall  be  from  one-eighth 
inch  to  one -quarter  inch  between  tile  in  clay,  clay  loam  and 
cohesive  soils;  and  with  tight  fit  in  sandy  soils  and  on  lines  to 
conduct  water  but  not  intended  to  provide  underdrainage. 

Where  tile  is  laid  with  the  width  of  opening  exceeding  the  limits 
stated  above  in  non-cohesive  silts,  and  in  fine  and  medium  sands, 
the  joint  shall  be  covered  with  a permanent  type  material  such  as 
coal  tar  pitch  treated  roofing  paper,  fiber  glass  sheet  or  mat, 
or  plastic  sheet. 

Where  the  gap  between  tile  on  the  outer  edge  of  a curved  tile  line 
exceeds  the  recommended  gap  for  the  type  of  soil  encountered,  it 
shall  be  covered  with  tile  bats  (broken  tile)  or  covering  material 
as  described  above.  The  tile  may  be  chipped  and  fitted  to  secure 
the  required  joint  opening. 

The  ends  and  inside  surfaces  of  all  tile  shall  be  kept  clean 
during  laying.  All  earth  or  other  extraneous  material  in  the 
tile  shall  be  removed  before  laying  the  next  tile.  At  the  end 
of  each  day’s  work  and  when  laying  has  been  temporarily  suspended, 
the  inlet  end  shall  be  blocked  so  that  earth  or  other  extraneous 
materials  will  not  enter  the  tile.  The  upper  end  of  each  tile 
line  shall  be  blocked  with  permanent  type  materials  on  completion 
of  the  line. 

(Option  2)  Tile  shall  be  laid  and  joints  shall  be  covered  in  the 
manner  shown  on  the  drawings  or  as  specified  in  Section  10. 

6 . CONNECTIONS 


Lateral  connections  will  be  made  with  manufactured  junctions 
comparable  in  strength  with  the  specified  tile  unless  otherwise 
specified. 

Where  existing  tile  lines  not  shown  on  the  drawings  are  crossed, 
they  shall  be  bridged  across  the  new  trench  or  they  shall  be 
connected  into  the  new  tile  lines,  as  directed  by  the  Engineer. 


(46-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-167 


7.  BLINDING  OR  FILTER  MATERIAL 

(Option  1)  As  soon  as  the  tile  are  placed,  they  shall  be  blinded 
by  covering  with  friable  topsoil  to  a depth  of  at  least  6 inches. 
Material  used  for  blinding  shall  not  be  frozen  and  shall  contain 
no  stones  large  enough  to  damage  the  tile  or  a specific  size  if 
specified.  Sandy  and  other  non-cohesive  soils  shall  not  be  used 
for  blinding  unless  the  joints  are  covered.  All  tile  placed  during 
any  day  shall  be  blinded  by  the  end  of  that  day's  work. 

(Option  2)  Tile  shall  be  covered  with  sand  and  gravel  meeting  gradation, 
quality,  quantities,  and  dimensions  and  installed  as  shown  on  the 
drawings  or  as  specified  in  Section  10.  Material  used  for  blinding 
shall  not  be  frozen  and  all  tile  placed  during  any  day  shall  be 
blinded  by  the  end  of  the  day's  work. 

(Option  3)  Unless  otherwise  specified,  tile  shall  be  covered  with 
material  from  the  trench. 

8.  BACKFILLING 

The  backfilling  of  the  trench  shall  be  completed  as  rapidly  as 
consistent  with  the  soil  conditions. 

Automatic  backfilling  machines  may  be  used  only  when  approved  by 
the  Engineer.  Backfill  shall  extend  above  the  ground  surface  and 
be  well  rounded  over  the  trench. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  where  drain  tile  are  laid  under  roads 
and  at  other  designated  locations  shown  on  the  drawings,  the 
backfill  shall  be  placed  in  successive  layers  of  not  more  than  six 
inches  and  each  layer  shall  be  tamped  before  the  next  layer  is 
placed. 

9.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are  established  in 
the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  kind,  size  and  class  of  tile  will 
be  determined  to  the  nearest  foot  of  length  along  the  centerline  of 
the  installed  tile.  Payment  for  each  kind,  size,  and  class  of  tile 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  kind,  size,  and 
class  of  tile.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for 
furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  tile,  including  excava- 
tion, shoring,  backfill  and  all  fittings,  appurtenances  and  other 
items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work.  Pay- 
ment for  appurtenances  listed  separately  in  the  bid  schedule  will 


(46-3) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-168 


be  made  at  the  contract  unit  prices  for  the  sizes  and  types  of 
appurtenances  listed. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  10  of  this  specification. 


(46-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-169 


9 

INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  51 
CORRUGATED  METAL  PIPE  CONDUIT 


1. 


2. 


3. 


Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  51  is  applicable  to  the  installation 
of  all  types  of  corrugated  metal  pipe  conduits. 

Material  Specifications. 

The  following  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  51: 

a.  Corrugated  Iron  or  Steel  Pipe. 

Specification  551 

b.  Corrugated  Aluminum  Pipe. 

Specification  552 

Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Line  and  grade  of  the  conduit. 

b.  Details  of  the  pipe  bedding  including  description  and 
grading  limits  of  the  bedding  material. 

c.  Details  of  wall  fittings,  joints  and  other  special  pipe 
fittings. 

d.  Details  of  struts  or  ties. 

e.  Pay  limits  or  actual  limits  for  excavation  and  backfill, 
if  required. 

f.  Applicable  material  specifications. 

g.  Class,  series,  shape,  size,  length  and  gage  of  pipe. 

h.  Type  of  couplings,  if  other  than  standard. 

i.  Close  riveting  or  double  riveting,  if  required. 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-170 


j.  Type  of  pipe  coating,  if  required. 

k.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment  if  the  standard 
specification  includes  more  than  one  method. 

l.  Backfill  requirements.  Compaction  requirements  should 
be  equal  to  requirements  for  the  adjacent  embankment 
for  principal  spillways  or  similar  installations. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  7,  Measurement  and  Payment 

(1)  The  options  are  self-explanatory. 

(2)  Two  or  more  options  may  be  included  as  numbered 
methods  in  standard  specifications.  However,  in 
any  single  specification,  the  methods  should  be 
limited  to  either  combinations  of  Options  1,  3, 
and  5 or  combinations  of  Options  2,  4,  and  6. 

If  numbered  methods  are  used,  insert  the  following 
paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph  in  the  section: 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  all 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
51.  CORRUGATED  METAL  PIPE  CONDUITS 


2-171 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  placing  circular,  arched 
or  eliptical  corrugated  metal  pipe  and  the  necessary  fittings. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Pipe  and  fittings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  551  or  Material  Specification  552,  whichever  is 
specified. 

3.  LAYING  AND  BEDDING  THE  PIPE 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  pipe  shall  be  installed  in  accor- 
dance with  the  manufacturer's  recommendations.  The  pipe  shall  be 
laid  with  the  outside  laps  of  circumferential  joints  pointing 
upstream  and  with  longitudinal  laps  at  the  sides  at  about  the 
vertical  midheight  of  the  pipe.  Field  welding  of  corrugated  gal- 
vanized iron  or  steel  pipe  will  not  be  permitted.  Unless  otherwise 
specified,  the  pipe  sections  shall  be  joined  with  standard  coupling 
bands.  The  pipe  shall  be  firmly  and  uniformly  bedded  throughout 
its  entire  length  to  the  depth  and  in  the  manner  specified  on  the 
drawings . 

Perforated  pipe  shall  be  laid  with  the  perforations  down  and 
oriented  symmetrically  about  a vertical  center  line.  Perforations 
shall  be  clear  of  any  obstructions  at  the  time  the  pipe  is  laid. 

The  pipe  shall  be  loaded  sufficiently  during  backfilling  around 
the  sides  to  prevent  its  being  lifted  from  the  bedding. 

4.  STRUTTING 


When  required,  struts  or  horizontal  ties  shall  be  installed  in  the 
manner  specified  on  the  drawings.  Struts  and  ties  shall  remain 
in  place  until  the  backfill  has  been  placed  to  a height  of  5 feet 
above  the  top  of  the  pipe,  or  has  been  completed  if  the  finished 
height  is  less  than  5 feet  above  the  top  of  the  pipe,  at  which 
time  they  shall  be  removed  by  the  Contractor. 

(51-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-172 


5.  HANDLING  THE  PIPE 

The  Contractor  shall  furnish  such  equipment  as  is  necessary  to 
place  the  pipe  without  damaging  the  pipe  or  coatings.  The  pipe 
shall  be  transported  and  handled  in  such  a manner  as  to  prevent 
bruising,  scaling  or  breaking  of  the  spelter  coating  or  bitumi- 
nous coating. 

6.  REPAIR  OF  DAMAGED  COATINGS 

Any  damage  to  the  zinc  coating  shall  be  repaired  by  thoroughly 
wire  brushing  the  damaged  area,  removing  all  loose  and  cracked 
coating,  removing  all  dirt  and  greasy  material  with  solvent,  and 
painting  with  two  coats  of  zinc  dust-zinc  oxide  primer  conforming 
to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification  TT -P-641,  Type  III. 
If  the  coating  is  damaged  in  any  individual  area  larger  than  12 
square  inches,  or  if  more  than  0.2  percent  of  a total  surface 
area  of  a length  of  pipe  is  damaged,  the  length  will  be  rejected. 

Breaks  or  scuffs  in  bituminous  coatings  that  are  less  than  36 
square  inches  in  area  shall  be  repaired  by  the  application  of  two 
coats  of  hot  asphaltic  paint  or  a coating  of  cold-applied  bitumi- 
nous mastic.  The  repair  coating  shall  be  at  least  0,05  inches 
thick  after  hardening  and  shall  bond  securely  and  permanently  to 
the  pipe.  The  material  shall  meet  the  physical  requirements  for 
bituminous  coatings  contained  in  the  references  cited  in  Material 
Specifications  551  and  552.  Whenever  individual  breaks  exceed  36 
square  inches  in  area  or  when  the  total  area  of  breaks  exceeds 
0.5  percent  of  the  total  surface  area  of  the  pipe,  the  pipe  will 
be  rejected. 

Bituminous  coating  damaged  by  welding  of  coated  pipe  or  pipe 
fittings  shall  be  repaired  as  specified  in  this  section  for 
breaks  and  scuffs  in  bituminous  coatings. 

7.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  0,1  foot 
by  measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  centerline  of 
the  pipe.  Payment  for  each  type,  class,  size  and  gage  of  pipe 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compen- 
sation for  furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe  and 
fittings  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the 
completion  of  the  work. 


(51-2) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


I 


2-173 


(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  determined  as  the  sum  of  the 
nominal  laying  lengths  of  the  pipe  sections  and  fittings  used. 
Payment  for  each  type,  class,  size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type,  class,  size  and  gage 
of  pipe.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for 
furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe  and  fittings 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion 
of  the  work. 

(Option  3)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  0.1  foot 
by  measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  centerline 
of  the  pipe.  Payment  for  each  type,  class,  size  and  gage  of  pipe 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compen- 
sation for  furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe  and 
fittings  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the 
completion  of  the  work  except  items  designated  as  "special 
fittings."  Payment  for  special  fittings  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  lump  sum  price  for  special  fittings  (CMP). 

(Option  4)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  determined  as  the  sum  of  the 
nominal  laying  lengths  of  the  pipe  sections  and  fittings  used. 
Payment  for  each  type,  class,  size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type,  class,  size  and  gage 
of  pipe.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for 
furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe  and  fittings 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion 
of  the  work  except  items  designated  as  "special  fittings." 

Payment  for  special  fittings  will  be  made  at  the  contract  lump 
sum  price  for  special  fittings  (CMP). 

(Option  5)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  0.1  foot 
by  measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  centerline  of 
the  pipe.  Payment  for  each  type,  class,  size  and  gage  of  pipe 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compen- 
sation for  furnishing,  transporting  and  installing  the  pipe, 
including  the  necessary  fittings  and  all  other  items  necessary 
and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work  except  the  special 


(51-3) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-174 


<r 


fittings  and  appurtenances  listed  separately  in  the  bid  schedule. 
Payment  for  each  special  fitting  and  appurtenance  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of  fitting  or 
appurtenance . 

(Option  6)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type,  class, 
size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  determined  as  the  sum  of  the 
nominal  laying  lengths  of  the  pipe  sections  used.  Payment  for 
each  type,  class,  size  and  gage  of  pipe  will  be  made  at  the 
contract  price  for  that  type,  class,  size  and  gage  of  pipe.  Such 
payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  furnishing,  trans- 
porting and  installing  the  pipe,  including  the  necessary  fittings 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of 
the  work  except  the  special  fittings  and  appurtenances  listed 
separately  in  the  bid  schedule.  Payment  for  each  special  fitting 
and  appurtenance  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that 
type  and  size  of  fitting  or  appurtenance. 

(Use  with  All  Options)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described 
in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included 
in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary. 
Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are 
identified  in  Section  8 of  this  specification. 


i 

(51-4) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-175 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  52 

STEEL  PIPE  CONDUITS 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  52  is  applicable  to  the  installation  of 

buried  steel  pipe  conduits  for  the  conveyance  of  water. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specifications  553  and  581  are  complementary  to  Construc- 
tion Specification  52. 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Line  and  grade  of  the  conduit. 

b.  Details  of  the  bedding,  including  description  and  grading 
limits  of  the  bedding  material. 

c.  Excavation  and  backfill  requirements,  if  applicable. 

d.  Pay  limits  or  actual  limits  for  excavation  and  backfill, 
if  required. 

e.  Kind  of  pipe.  Include  name,  type,  grade,  finish,  weight 
class,  and  wall  thickness  as  required.  (See  appropriate 
reference  specifications.) 

f.  Size  of  pipe. 

g.  Length  of  pipe. 

h.  Type  of  protective  coating,  if  required.  (Refer  to  AWWA 
Standard  C203  and  Construction  Specification  82  for 
detailed  information.) 

i.  Type  of  joint  and  details  of  special  joints. 

j.  Details  of  wall  fittings  and  other  special  fittings  and 
appurtenances . 

k.  Watertightness  or  pressure  test  requirements,  if  applicable. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-176 


4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  8,  Measurement  and  Payment 
The  options  are  self-explanatory. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in  standard 
specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are  used,  insert  the 
following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph  in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both  methods 
of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-177 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
52.  STEEL  PIPE  CONDUITS 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  steel  pipe 
complete  with  the  fittings  and  appurtenances  specified  on  the 
drawings . 

2.  MATERIALS 

Steel  pipe  and  fittings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  553. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  special  fittings  and  appurtenances 
shall  be  of  the  same  materials  as  the  pipe. 

Welding  electrodes  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  581. 

3.  LAYING  AND  BEDDING  THE  PIPE 

Pipe  shall  be  laid  to  the  line  and  grade  shown  on  the  drawings. 
Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  pipe  shall  be  installed  in 
accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  recommendations.  The  pipe 
shall  be  firmly  and  uniformly  bedded  throughout  its  entire 
length  to  the  depth  and  in  the  manner  specified  on  the  drawings. 

The  pipe  shall  be  loaded  sufficiently  during  backfilling  around 
the  sides  to  prevent  its  being  lifted  from  the  bedding. 

4.  JOINTS 


Pipe  joints  shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings 
and  shall  be  sound  and  watertight  at  the  pressures  specified. 

Welding  and  welded  joints  shall  conform  to  the  welding  procedure 
details  and  the  requirements  for  repair  of  welds  of  AWWA  Standard 
C206  for  Field  Welding  of  Steel  Water  Pipe  Joints  (AWS  D7.0). 
Field  welding  shall  be  done  in  such  a way  as  to  avoid  burning  the 
protective  coating  on  the  pipe  except  in  the  immediate  vicinity 
of  the  weld. 

The  ends  of  pipe  to  be  connected  with  mechanical  couplings  shall 
be  machined  so  as  to  allow  coupling  the  pipe  sections  without 


(52-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-178 


damaging  or  displacing  the  gaskets  and  to  insure  uniform  end 
separation  of  the  pipes.  Machined  ends  of  the  pipe  that  receive 
the  coupling  sleeves  shall  be  free  from  dents,  gouges,  rust, 
scale,  or  protective  coating  (except  coal  tar-epoxy  paint). 

The  pipe  and  couplings  shall  be  assembled  with  continuous 
rubber  ring  gaskets  conforming  to  the  dimensions  and  tolerances 
recommended  by  the  pipe  manufacturer.  Coupling  followers  shall 
be  drawn  up  evenly  to  insure  uniform  pressure  on  the  gaskets. 

5.  FIELD  COATING  AND  WRAPPING 


When  coal  tar  enamel  coated  pipe  is  specified,  joints  and 
couplings  shall  be  primed  and  coated  in  the  manner  specified  in 
AWWA  Standard  C203,  Section  4.  Joints  and  couplings  shall  be 
primed,  coated,  and  wrapped  where  wrapped  pipe  is  used.  The 
use  of  coal  tar  tapes,  applied  in  compliance  with  the  manufac- 
turer's instructions,  is  acceptable  for  coating  joints  and 
couplings  if  the  resulting  coating  is  equivalent  in  durability 
and  watertightness  to  the  coating  on  the  pipe. 

When  it  is  specified  that  the  pipe  be  coated  with  coal  tar-epoxy 
paint,  couplings  shall  be  coated  with  coal  tar-epoxy  paint  prior 
to  assembly.  Field  application  of  coal  tar-epoxy  paint  will  be 
limited  to  touchup  required  to  repair  damage  that  occurs  during 
assembly. 

6.  HANDLING  THE  PIPE 


The  Contractor  shall  furnish  such  equipment  as  is  necessary  to 
place  the  pipe  without  damaging  the  pipe  or  coating.  Coated 
pipe  shall  be  handled  in  the  manner  specified  in  AWWA  Standard 
C203,  Section  4. 

7.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices 
are  established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type  and 
size  of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  0.1  foot  by 
measurement  of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  centerline  of 
the  pipe.  Payment  for  each  type  and  size  of  pipe  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of  pipe.  Such 
payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  furnishing,  trans- 
porting and  installing  the  pipe,  including  the  necessary  fittings 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion 
of  the  work. 


(52-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


(# 


2-179 


ends  of  the  pipe  shall  be  plugged  and  braced  to  prevent  movement, 
and  backfill  around  the  pipe  between  joints  shall  be  placed  as 
required  to  prevent  movement.  All  joints  and  connections  shall 
be  completely  exposed  for  visual  inspection  during  the  test. 

If  the  amount  of  water  loss  exceeds  the  limit  specified,  the 
leaks  shall  be  repaired  and  the  conduit  shall  be  retested  as 
described  above.  The  procedure  shall  be  repeated  until  the 
amount  of  water  loss  is  within  the  specified  limit. 

8.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type  and  size 
of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  0.1  foot  by  measurement 
of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  centerline  of  the  pipe. 

Payment  for  each  type  and  size  of  pipe  will  be  made  at  the  con- 
tract unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of  pipe.  Such  payment 
will  constitute  full  compensation  for  furnishing,  transporting 
and  installing  the  pipe,  including  the  necessary  fittings  and 
all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of 
the  work. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type  and  size 
of  pipe  will  be  determined  to  the  nearest  0.1  foot  by  measurement 
of  the  laid  length  of  pipe  along  the  centerline  of  the  pipe. 

Payment  for  each  type  and  size  of  pipe  will  be  made  at  the  con- 
tract unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of  pipe.  Such  payment 
will  constitute  full  compensation  for  furnishing,  transporting 
and  installing  the  pipe,  complete  in  place,  including  the  neces- 
sary fittings  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to 
the  completion  of  the  work  except  the  special  fittings  and  appur- 
tenances listed  separately  in  the  bid  schedule.  Payment  for  each 
special  fittin^  and  appurtenance  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  for  that  type  and  size  of  fitting  or  appurtenance. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described 
in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included 
in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary. 
Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are 
identified  in  Section  9 of  this  specification. 


(52-3) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-181 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  61 

LOOSE  ROCK  RIPRAP 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  61  is  applicable  to  equipment -placed  or 
hand-placed  loose  rock  riprap,  filter  layers  and  bedding. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specifications  521  and  523  are  complementary  to  Construc- 
tion Specification  61. 


3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 


a. 

b. 


c. 


d. 


e. 


f. 


Complete  plans  and  cross-sections  of  the  required  riprap. 
Type  of  placement  (equipment- or  hand-placed). 

Pay  limits,  where  applicable. 

Class  of  subgrade  fill,  where  applicable. 

Foundation  preparation  requirements,  if  any. 

Gradation  requirements  for  materials. 


g.  Screening,  selection  or  other  processing  requirements, 
to  insure  obtaining  rock  of  the  required  quality  and 
grading. 

h.  Sources  of  materials,  if  the  sources  are  to  be  specified. 
When  sources  are  designated  in  the  contract,  the  available 
quantity  and  the  quality  of  usable  material  at  each  source 
must  be  determined  beforehand,  by  geologic  investigations 
and  (1)  adequate  sampling  and  testing  or  (2)  specific  case 
history  which  establishes  the  quality  by  satisfactory 
performance  under  comparable  conditions  of  use  and  exposure. 

i.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment  if  the  standard  speci- 
fication includes  more  than  one  method. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-182 


4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  7,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  where  filter  material 
or  bedding  is  a minor  item  and  payment  for  it  is 
to  be  included  in  the  payment  for  riprap. 

(2)  Options  2,  3,  and  4 provide  various  means  of  measure- 
ment and  are  intended  for  use  where  filter  material 
or  bedding,  if  any,  is  to  be  paid  for  as  a separate 
item. 

(3)  Two  or  more  options  may  be  included  as  numbered 
methods  in  standard  specifications.  If  numbered  methods 
are  used,  insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last 
paragraph  in  the  section: 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  all 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-183 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
61.  LOOSE  ROCK  RIPRAP 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  the  construction  of  loose  rock  riprap 
revetments  and  blankets,  including  filter  layers  or  bedding  where 
specified. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Rock  for  loose  rock  riprap  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  523  or,  if  so  specified,  shall  be  obtained 
from  designated  sources. 

Rock  from  designated  sources  shall  be  excavated,  selected  and 
handled  as  necessary  to  meet  the  quality  and  grading  requirements 
in  Section  8 of  this  specification.  The  rock  shall  conform  to  the 
specified  grading  limits  when  installed  in  the  riprap. 

Filter  material  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  521  unless  otherwise  specified. 

Bedding  shall  be  obtained  from  the  designated  sources  and  shall  be 
selected  to  meet  the  quality  and  grading  requirements  in  Section  8 
of  this  specification. 

At  least  30  days  prior  to  delivery  of  material  from  other  than 
designated  sources,  the  Contractor  shall  notify  the  Contracting 
Officer  in  writing  of  the  sources  from  which  he  intends  to  obtain 
the  material.  The  Contractor  shall  provide  the  Engineer  free 
access  to  the  sources  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  samples  for 
testing. 

3.  SUBGRADE  PREPARATION 


The  subgrade  surfaces  on  which  the  riprap  or  bedding  course  is  to 
be  placed  shall  be  cut  or  filled  and  graded  to  the  lines  and  grades 
shown  on  the  drawings.  When  fill  to  subgrade  lines  is  required,  it 
shall  consist  of  approved  materials  and  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  specified  class  of  fill. 

Riprap  shall  not  be  placed  until  the  foundation  preparation  is 
completed  and  the  subgrade  surfaces  have  been  inspected  and 
approved  by  the  Engineer. 

(61-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-184 


4.  EQUIPMENT -PLACED  ROCK  RIPRAP 

The  rock  shall  be  placed  by  equipment  on  the  surfaces  and  to  the 
depths  specified.  The  riprap  shall  be  constructed  to  the  full 
course  thickness  in  one  operation  and  in  such  a manner  as  to 
avoid  serious  displacement  of  the  underlying  materials.  The 
rock  shall  be  delivered  and  placed  in  a manner  that  will  insure 
that  the  riprap  in  place  shall  be  reasonably  homogeneous  with 
the  larger  rocks  uniformly  distributed  and  firmly  in  contact 
one  to  another  with  the  smaller  rocks  and  spalls  filling  the 
voids  between  the  larger  rocks. 

Riprap  shall  be  placed  in  a manner  to  prevent  damage  to  struc- 
tures. Hand  placing  will  be  required  to  the  extend  necessary 
to  prevent  damage  to  the  permanent  works. 

5 . HAND -PLACED  RIPRAP 


The  rock  shall  be  placed  by  hand  on  the  surfaces  and  to  the  depths 
specified.  It  shall  be  securely  bedded  with  the  larger  rocks 
firmly  in  contact  one  to  another.  Spaces  between  the  larger  rocks 
shall  be  filled  with  smaller  rocks  and  spalls.  Smaller  rocks 
shall  not  be  grouped  as  a substitute  for  larger  rock.  Flat  slab 
rock  shall  be  laid  on  edge. 

6.  FILTER  LAYERS  OR  BEDDING 


When  the  drawings  specify  filter  layers  or  bedding  beneath  riprap, 
the  filter  or  bedding  material  shall  be  spread  uniformly  on  the 
prepared  subgrade  surfaces  to  the  depth  specified.  Compaction 
of  filter  layers  or  bedding  will  not  be  required,  but  the  surface 
of  such  layers  shall  be  finished  reasonably  free  of  mounds,  dips 
or  windrows. 

7 . MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  volume  of  each  type  of  riprap, 
including  filter  layers  and  bedding,  will  be  measured  within 
the  specified  limits  and  computed  to  the  nearest  cubic  yard  by 
the  method  of  average  cross-sectional  end  areas.  Payment  for 
each  type  of  riprap,  including  filter  layers  and  bedding,  will 
be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  of  riprap. 

Such  payment  will  be  considered  full  compensation  for  all  labor, 
materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental 
to  the  completion  of  the  riprap,  filter  layers  and  bedding. 


(61-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-185 


8.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 

established  in  the  contract,  the  volume  of  each  type  of  riprap, 

including  filter  layers  and  bedding,  will  be  measured  within  the 
specified  limits  and  computed  to  the  nearest  cubic  yard  by  the 
method  of  average  cross-sectional  end  areas.  Payment  for  each 
type  of  riprap,  including  filter  layers  and  bedding,  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  of  riprap.  Such  payment 
will  be  considered  full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials, 
equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the 
completion  of  the  riprap,  filter  layers  and  bedding. 

(Option  2)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 

established  in  the  contract,  the  volume  of  each  type  of  riprap 

and  the  volume  of  each  type  of  filter  layer  or  bedding  will  be 
measured  within  the  specified  limits  and  computed  to  the  nearest 
cubic  yard  by  the  method  of  average  cross-sectional  end  areas. 
Payment  for  each  type  of  riprap  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  for  that  type  of  riprap.  Payment  for  each  type  of  filter 
or  bedding  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type 
of  filter  or  bedding.  Such  payment  will  be  considered  full  com- 
pensation for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  riprap, filter 
layers  and  bedding. 

(Option  3)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quantity  of  each  type  of  riprap 
placed  within  the  specified  limits  will  be  measured  to  the 
nearest  ton  by  actual  weight,  and  the  volume  of  each  type  of 
filter  layer  or  bedding  will  be  measured  within  the  specified 
limits  and  computed  to  the  nearest  cubic  yard  by  the  method  of 
average  cross-sectional  end  areas.  For  each  load  of  rock  placed 
as  specified,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  to  the  Engineer  a 
statement-of -delivery  ticket  showing  the  weight,  to  the  nearest 
0.1  ton,  of  rock  in  the  load. 

Payment  for  each  type  of  riprap  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  for  that  type  of  riprap.  Payment  for  each  type  of  filter 
or  bedding  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type 
of  filter  or  bedding.  Such  payment  will  be  considered  full  com- 
pensation for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  riprap,  filter 
layers  and  bedding. 

(Option  4)  For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  unit  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  the  quality  of  each  type  of  riprap 
placed  within  the  specified  limits  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest 
ton  by  actual  weight,  and  the  volume  of  each  type  of  filter 


(61-3) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-186 


material  or  bedding  delivered  and  placed  within  the  specified 
limits  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest  cubic  yard  by  measure- 
ment of  the  hauling  equipment.  For  each  load  of  material  placed 
as  specified,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish  to  the  Engineer  a 
statement-of-delivery  ticket  showing  the  weight,  to  the  nearest 
0.1  ton,  of  rock  in  the  load;  or  the  volume,  to  the  nearest  0.1 
cubic  yard,  of  filter  material  or  bedding  in  the  load. 

Payment  for  each  type  of  riprap  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit 
price  for  that  type  of  riprap.  Payment  for  each  type  of  filter 
or  bedding  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type 
of  filter  or  bedding.  Such  payment  will  be  considered  full  com- 
pensation for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items 
necessary  and  incidental  to  completion  of  the  riprap,  filter 
layers  and  bedding. 

(Use  with  All  Options)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described 
in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included 
in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary. 
Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are 
identified  in  Section  9 of  this  specification. 


(61-4) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-187 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  71 

WATER  CONTROL  GATES 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  71  is  applicable  to  the  installation 
of  gates  for  purposes  of  water  control,  including  slide  gates, 
flap  gates  and  radial  gates. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specifications  571,  572,  573,  574,  575,  576  and  577  are 
complementary  to  Construction  Specification  71.  Table  A-71  is  a 
guide  to  selection  of  metal  water  control  gates.  When  fabricated 
wooden  gates  are  required  for  special  applications,  a material 
specification  tailored  to  the  specific  job  is  usually  more  appro- 
priate. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Plans,  elevations  and  sections  showing  location  of  gates 
and  type  and  size  of  openings. 

b.  Types  of  gates  and  applicable  material  specifications. 

c.  Class  of  gate  (seating  and  unseating  heads  expressed  as 

a numerical  symbol).  Example:  Class  40-10. 

d.  Type  of  frame  (flat,  spigot,  flange,  flange  with  spigot) 

and  details  of  the  method  of  attaching  the  gate  to  the 
structure  or  pipe.  Include  thimble  details,  when 
required,  together  with  designation  of  type  of  thimble 
(Types:  E,  F,  C,  L,  Flange  and  Bell,  or  Flange  and 

Flare. ) 

e.  Special  gate  requirements  (self-contained,  non-rising 
stem,  flush-bottom  opening,  etc.);  include  material 
requirements  for  fabricated  metal  gates  if  other  than 
steel  is  required. 

f.  Type  and  capacity  of  gate  stems,  hoists,  lifts,  stem 
guides,  stem  housings,  couplings,  sleeves  and  other 
appurtenances . 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-188 


g.  Paint  systems  to  be  used  in  shop  and  field  painting. 
(Refer  to  Construction  Specification  82.) 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

No  options  are  included. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


TABLE  A-71.  GUIDE  TO  SELECTION  OF  METAL  WATER  CONTROL  GATES 


2-189 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
71.  WATER  CONTROL  GATES 


2-191 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  water  control 
gates  including  gate  stems,  hoists,  lifts  and  other  appurtenances. 

2.  MATERIALS 

The  gates  furnishes  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  specified 
in  Section  8 or  on  the  drawings.  All  gates  shall  be  furnished 
complete  with  hoisting  equipment  and  other  specified  appurtenances. 

3.  INSTALLING  GATES 


The  Contractor  shall  install  the  gates  in  a manner  that  will 
prevent  leakage  around  the  seats  and  binding  of  the  gates 
during  operation. 

Surfaces  of  metal  against  which  concrete  will  be  placed  shall  be 
free  from  oil,  grease,  loose  mill  scale,  loose  paint,  surface 
rust,  and  other  debris  or  objectionable  coatings. 

Anchor  bolts,  thimbles  and  spigot  frames  shall  be  secured  in 
true  position  in  the  forms  and  held  in  alignment  during  the 
placement  of  concrete. 

Concrete  surfaces  against  which  rubber  seals  will  bear  or 
against  which  flat  frames  or  plates  are  to  be  installed  shall 
be  finished  to  provide  a smooth  and  uniform  contact  surface. 

When  a flat  frame  is  installed  against  concrete,  a layer  of 
bedding  mortar  shall  be  placed  between  the  frame  and  the  concrete. 

When  a gate  is  attached  to  a wall  thimble,  a mastic  or  resilient 
gasket  shall  be  applied  between  the  gate  frame  and  the  thimble, 
in  accordance  with  the  recommendation  of  the  gate  manufacturer. 

For  radial  gates,  wall  plates,  sills  and  pin  brackets  shall  be 
adjusted  and  fastened  by  grouting  and  bolting  after  the  gates 
have  been  completely  assembled  in  place. 


(71-1) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-192 


4.  INSTALLING  HOISTS  AND  LIFTS 

Gate  stems,  stem  guides  and  gate  lifts  shall  be  carefully  aligned 
so  that  the  stem  shall  be  parallel  to  the  guide  bars  or  angles  on 
the  gate  frame  after  installation. 

Radial  gate  hoists  shall  be  installed  in  correct  alignment  with 
relation  to  the  gate  shaft. 

5.  ‘ RADIAL  GATE  SEALS 


The  rubber  seals  on  radial  gates  shall  be  installed  so  that  the 
seals  contact  the  walls  or  wall  plates  throughout  their  entire 
length  when  the  gates  are  closed. 

6.  OPERATIONAL  TESTS 


After  the  gate  and  hoist  (or  lift)  have  been  installed,  they 
shall  be  cleaned,  lubricated  and  otherwise  serviced  by  the  Con- 
tractor in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  instructions.  The 
Contractor  shall  test  the  gate  and  hoist  by  operating  the  system 
several  times  throughout  its  full  range  of  operation.  He  shall 
make  any  changes  and  adjustments  necessary  to  insure  satisfactory 
operation  of  the  gate  system. 

7 .  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


The  number  of  each  type,  size  and  class  of  gate  will  be  counted. 
Payment  for  furnishing  and  installing  each  type,  size  and  class 
of  gate  shall  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type, 
size  and  class  of  gate.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  macerials,  equipment  and  all  other 
items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work 
including  furnishing  and  installing  anchor  bolts  and  all  speci- 
fied appurtenances  and  fittings. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in 
Section  8 of  this  specification. 


(71-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-193 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  81 
METAL  FABRICATION  AND  INSTALLATION 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  81  is  applicable  to  the  construction  of 
items  of  metal  work  not  covered  by  other  specifications.  It  is 
applicable  to  such  items  as  trash  guards,  anti-vortex  hoods  and 
baffles,  flashboard  guides,  buildings  for  pumping  stations  or  gate 
control  stations,  and  similar  structures  or  parts.  It  is  not 
applicable  to  the  installation  of  concrete  reinforcing  steel, 
water  control  gates,  fences,  wells,  piles  or  pipe  conduits. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specifications  581  and  582  and  Construction  Specification 
82  are  complementary  to  Construction  Specification  81  . 

3 . Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Detailed  drawings  as  necessary  to  show  the  dimensions  and 
method  of  fabricating  and  erecting  the  item  or  structure. 

b.  For  aluminum,  the  alloy  to  be  used  in  the  work  if  other 
than  specified  in  Material  Specification  581.  Alloys 
specified  for  use  should  be  limited  to  those  for  which 
ASCE  Specifications  for  Structures  of  Aluminum  Alloy 
are  available.  Such  specifications  are  published  in 
Section  A of  the  Aluminum  Construction  Manual  of  The 
Aluminum  Association. 

c.  Type  of  steel  if  other  than  structural  quality.  Use 
"commercial"  or  "merchant"  quality  only  for  small 
parts  where  strength  is  not  important.  Examples: 

Non-critical  angles  and  other  shapes  less  than  3 
inches  in  maximum  dimension  of  section;  shear  plates 
for  construction  joints  in  concrete;  small  trash 
rack  parts. 

d.  Details  of  connections  showing  sizes  and  number  of 
bolts;  sizes,  kinds  and  dimensions  of  welds;  sizes 
and  number  of  rivets. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-194 


e.  Designation  of  items  to  be  galvanized  or  painted  and 

designation  of  paint  systems  to  be  used. 

f.  Ordering  data  listed  in  the  material  specifications, 

as  appropriate,  including  such  items  as: 

(1)  Type,  kind,  size  and  length  of  bolts. 

(2)  Class,  grade,  condition  and  finish  of  castings. 

(3)  Type,  composition,  hardness,  size  and  form  of 
other  materials. 

g.  Methods  of  measurement  and  payment,  if  the  standard  speci- 
fication includes  more  than  one  method. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  6,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  the  metalwork  is 

a minor  portion  of  the  contract  and  consists  largely 
of  items  that  would  normally  be  fabricated  by  the 
prime  contractor. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  the  metalwork  is 
a significant  portion  of  the  contract. 

(3)  Option  3 is  intended  for  use  when  the  metalwork 
includes  individual  items  of  significant  scope 
or  complexity  or  which  would  usually  be  procured 
from  a subcontractor. 

(4)  Two  or  more  options  may  be  included  as  numbered 
methods  in  standard  specifications.  If  numbered 
methods  are  used,  insert  the  following  paragraph  before 
the  last  paragraph  in  the  section: 

All  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  all 
methods  of  measurement  any  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-195 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 

81.  METAL  FABRICATION  AND  INSTALLATION 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing,  fabricating  and  erecting 
metalwork,  including  the  metal  parts  of  composite  structures. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  materials  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  Material  Specification  581.  Steel  shall  be  structural 
quality  unless  otherwise  specified.  Castings  shall  be  thoroughly 
cleaned  and  subjected  to  careful  inspection  before  installation. 
Finished  surfaces  shall  be  smooth  and  true  to  assure  proper  fit. 
Galvanizing  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Speci- 
fication 582. 

3.  FABRICATION 

Fabrication  of  structural  steel  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Section  1.23  of  the  "Specification  for  the  Design,  Fabrication 
and  Erection  of  Structural  Steel  for  Buildings  (Riveted,  Bolted 
and  Arc-Welded  Construction),"  American  Institute  of  Steel 
Construction. 

Fabrication  of  structural  aluminum  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments in  the  Muminum.  Construction  Manual,  ".Specifications  for 
Aluminum  Structures,"  Section  6 and  Section  7,  The  Aluminum 
Association,  November  1967. 

4.  ERECTION 


The  frame  of  metal  structures  shall  be  carried  up  true  and  plumb. 
Temporary  bracing  shall  be  placed  wherever  necessary  to  resist  all 
loads  to  which  the  structure  may  be  subjected,  including  those 
applied  by  the  installation  and  operation  of  equipment.  Such 
bracing  shall  be  left  in  place  as  long  as  may  be  necessary  for 
safety. 

As  erection  progresses  the  work  shall  be  securely  bolted  up,  or 
welded,  to  resist  all  dead  load,  wind  and  erection  stresses.  The 
Contractor  shall  furnish  such  fitting  up  bolts,  nuts  and  washers 
as  may  be  required. 

(81-1) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-196 


No  riveting  or  welding  shall  be  done  until  as  much  of  the  struc- 
ture as  will  be  stiffened  thereby  has  been  properly  aligned. 

Rivets  driven  in  the  field  shall  be  heated  and  driven  with  the 
same  care  as  those  driven  in  the  shop. 

All  field  welding  shall  be  done  in  conformance  to  the  requirements 
for  shop  fabrication,  except  those  that  expressly  apply  to  shop 
conditions  only. 

Galvanized  items  shall  not  be  cut,  welded  or  drilled  after  the 
zinc  coating  is  applied. 

5.  PROTECTIVE  COATINGS 

Items  specified  to  be  galvanized  shall  be  completely  fabricated 
for  field  assembly  before  the  application  of  the  zinc  coatings. 

Items  specified  to  be  painted  shall  be  painted  in  conformance  to 
the  requirements  of  Construction  Specification  82  for  the  speci- 
fied paint  systems. 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 

(Option  1)  The  work  will  not  be  measured.  Payment  for  metal 
fabrication  and  installation  will  be  made  at  the  contract  lump 
sum  price.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for 
all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  including  connectors 
and  appurtenances  such  as  rivets,  bolts,  nuts,  pins,  studs, 
washers,  hangers  and  weld  metal. 

(Option  2)  The  weight  of  metal  installed  complete  in  place  shall 
be  determined  to  the  nearest  pound.  Unless  otherwise  provided, 
the  weight  of  metal  shall  be  computed  by  the  method  specified  in 
Section  3 of  the  "Code  of  Standard  Practice  for  Steel  Buildings 
and  Bridges,"  American  Institute  of  Steel  Construction,  except 
that  the  following  unit  weights  shall  also  be  used,  as  appropriate, 
as  the  basis  of  computation: 


Material 


Unit  Weight 
Pounds  per  Cubic  Foot 


Aluminum  alloy 
Bronze  or  copper  alloy 
Iron,  malleable 
Iron,  wrought 


173.0 

536.0 

470.0 

487.0 


(81-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-197 


Payment  for  furnishing,  fabricating  and  installing  metalwork  will 
be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  the  specified  types  of 
metals.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all 
labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

(Option  3)  The  work  will  not  be  measured.  Payment  for  furnishing, 
fabricating  and  installing  each  item  of  metalwork  will  be  made  at 
the  contract  price  for  that  item.  Such  payment  will  constitute 
full  compensation  for  all  labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all 
other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work, 
including  connectors  and  appurtenances  such  as  rivets,  bolts,  nuts, 
pins,  studs,  washers,  hangers  and  weld  metal. 

(Use  with  All  Options)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described 
in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included 
in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary. 
Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are 
identified  in  Section  7 of  this  specification. 


(81-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


I 


2-199 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  82 
CLEANING  AND  PAINTING  METALWORK 


s 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  82  is  applicable  to  the  painting  of 
metalwork  including  structural  metal,  water  control  gates,  piping, 
pumps  and  other  machinery. 

The  durability  of  paint  films  on  metal  depends  upon  the  exposure 
condition,  the  types  of  paints  used,  the  thickness  of  the  coating 
and  the  method  of  preparing  the  metal  surface  prior  to  the  appli- 
cation of  paint.  To  a large  extent  the  type  of  paint  required  is 
dictated  by  the  exposure  condition  and  the  required  surface  prepa- 
ration is  dictated  by  the  type  of  paint  to  be  used.  Therefore,  to 
simplify  the  specification  of  cleaning  and  painting  methods,  nine 
standard  "paint  systems"  have  been  established  and  defined  in  the 
construction  specification.  Each  paint  system  specifies  the  method 
of  surface  preparation,  the  type  of  paint  and  the  number  of  coats 
or  minimum  dry  paint  film  thickness  required. 

The  paint  systems  are  not  equivalent  optional  methods.  Each  paint 
system  is  designed  for  a particular  exposure  condition  or  to  pro- 
duce a particular  finished  appearance  or  both.  The  criteria  for 
selection  of  the  appropriate  paint  system  are  summarized  in  Table 
A of  these  instructions. 

Where  only  a small  amount  of  painting  is  to  be  done,  which  is  not 
required  for  protection,  use  a simple  note  on  the  drawings  rather 
than  Construction  Specification  82  . 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specification  583,  Coal  Tar  Epoxy  Paint,  is  complementary 
to  Construction  Specification  82 . References  to  Federal  Specifi- 
cations covering  other  types  of  paints  are  included  in  the 
construction  specification. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Indicate  by  notes  the  surfaces  and  items  to  be  painted. 

b.  Designate  the  paint  system  (by  letter)  to  be  used  for 
cleaning  and  painting  each  indicated  item.  If  all  metal 
work  is  to  be  painted  by  the  same  paint  system,  one 
standard  note  to  that  effect  will  be  sufficient. 


NEH  61/168  (Notice  20-23) 


2-200 

c.  Instructions  for  painting  when  special  conditions  require 
painting  by  systems  or  methods  not  covered  by  the  standard 
specifications . 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

No  options  are  included. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


TABLE  A-82.  PAINT  SYSTEMS  FOR  METALWORK 


2-201 


co 

i 

54 

a 

CD 

o 

25 

l 

44 

r\ 

25  4-1 

A CL| 

d 

O 

54 

cd 

CO 

co  25 

CD 

O 

CO 

rH 

bO  O 

X) 

CO 

O 

<D 

44 

rH 

d co 

d 

CD 

X 

rH 

d 

cd 

•H 

o 

CJ 

2 

44 

cd 

r\ 

4-1 

X « 

o 

cd 

cd 

54 

m 

CO 

a) 

rH  CO 

44 

bO 

o 

c 

CD 

£ 

•H  54 

CD 

54 

CO 

d 

CD 

4-1 

25  CD 

54 

23 

25 

•H 

4-1 

cd 

ev 

42  44 

CD 

CO 

E 

44 

CO 

M 

bO 

co 

44 

> 

z 

I 

cd 

rH 

CD 

44  25 

CD 

54 

25 

54 

cd 

• 

rH 

CD 

X 

O bO 

CO 

O 

CD 

44 

a 

cd 

x 

•H 

•H 

r\ 

25 

CO 

44 

o 

•H 

25 

CO  « 

O 

54 

bO 

O 

CD 

CD 

•H 

r— 1 

bO 

CD  CO 

44 

CD 

2 

X 

a 

CO 

o d 

44 

•r- 

CD 

CD 

bO 

Cd  *H 

44 

X 

25 

> 

25 

CO 

EH 

O 

44  Cd 

CD 

CD 

•r- 

O 

54 

CO 

rH 

54  54 

CD 

• 

25  42 

rH 

<D 

x 

a 

25  "Cd 

•r- ) 

O 

54 

cd 

o 

42 

54 

o 

• 

CO 

42 

44 

O 

r\ 

}4 

£ 

cd 

44 

O 

r\ 

23 

<D 

CO 

>>  44 

CD 

25 

CO 

44 

54  £ 

CO 

54 

bO 

54 

d 

£ 

bO 

CD 

o o 

C\ 

O 

2 

CD 

o 

*\ 

•H  rH 

bO 

d 

•H 

•r 

d 

CJ 

<D 

42 

CO 

54  44 

d 

o 

54 

X 

•H 

bO 

CO 

CD 

CO 

CD  54 

•H 

•H 

CD 

i — 

4 

42 

CD 

X 

cd 

44 

bO 

44  a) 

a,  44 

44 

•F 

a 

44 

•H 

54 

cd 

O 

X > 

•H 

cd 

d 

25 

cd 

cd 

54 

H 

bO  r-H 

w o 

CO 

H 

42 

£ 

bO  42 

» 

X 

54 

54  CO 

•H 

<D 

<D  -H 

54 

44 

> 

d 

cd 

£ 

cd 

44 

•H 

23 

£ 

d 42 

d 

54 

• 

o 

d 

• 

•iH  bO 

CD 

•H 

O 

44 

•H 

•H 

X 

52 

•H 

CJ 

•H 

d 

54 

£ 

CD 

•H 

(D  i-4 

d 

CD 

54 

cd 

<D 

25 

54 

54  d 

CD 

54 

CD 

d 

42 

rH 

•H 

<D 

21  25 

bO 

23 

44 

•H 

25 

cd 

CO 

O 

CO  co 

54 

CO 

d 

£ 

CO 

<D 

d 

o 

CD 

O 

•H 

o 

o 

d 

X 

52 

(D 

25  CD 

£ 

25 

X 

£ 

cd 

o 

b 0 

X 54 

X 

X 

54 

CD 

44 

42 

CO 

54 

<D  <D 

25 

CD 

O 

54 

cd 

44 

•H 

<15 

-d 

CO 

25 

•H 

£ 

o £ 

O 

CD 

54 

54 

CO 

’’O 

42 

•H 

T— 1 

•H 

44 

CO 

O 

<D 

CO 

52 

25 

54  CD 

cd 

54 

cd 

•H 

•H 

42 

O 

o 

CO 

CD  54 

d 

CD 

£ 

54 

44 

rH 

CJ 

42  25 

o 

42 

•H 

44 

CD 

O 

bC 

CD 

44 

24  CO 

•H 

25  i — 1 

42 

44 

52 

co  O 

CO 

co 

o 

bO 

d 

CO 

42 

Sh 

CD 

o a 

cd 

O 

•H 

•H 

54 

bO 

p 

21 

£ X 

o 

£ 

X 

rH 

o 

CO 

cr 

44  a) 

o 

• 

44 

•H 

d 

54 

rH 

42 

O 

CD 

cd 

o 

CD 

cd 

£ 

23 

O 

o 

Ph 

54 

54 

rH 

23 

CO 

o 

X 

Ps 

44 

54  O 

X 

42 

54 

42 

54 

d 

w 

O 

d 

cd 

O 

CD 

O 

CD 

cd 

54 

•H  CD 

cd 

42 

•H 

54 

•H 

54 

O 

54  44 

o 

54 

! 1 

CD 

54 

(D 

X 

<D  cd 

44 

54 

CD 

CD 

42 

<D 

X 

CD 

CO 

44  £ 

d 

25 

44 

44 

£ 

44 

£ 

54 

25 

X -H 

cd 

X 

cd 

X 

•H 

O 

<U  i — 1 

d 

CO 

CD 

54 

CD 

CD 

CD 

25 

25 

CJ 

•rH 

•H 

CD 

54 

54 

cr1 

{2 

I — 1 

£ 

t-H 

X 

23 

rH 

21 

CD 

•H 

cd  x 

o 

54 

cd 

O 

CO 

cd 

CO 

54 

44 

£ -H 

XI 

CD 

E 

£ 

O 

£ 

O 

(2 

54  E 

CD 

44 

54 

25 

54 

25 

CD 

O 

O 23 

54 

cd 

O 

o 

X 

O 

X 

54 

U 

^ 42 

25 

£ 

£5 

44 

CD 

CD 

cd 

£ 

CD 

4-1 

CO 

< 

PQ 

CJ 

22 

CO 

X 

CD 

N 

Q)  *r4 
42  d 
44  Cd 
> 

U r-i 

O cd 
4-4  bO 

X 4-4 
<D  O 


D •>— I 

U 44 

cd  cd 

o 

CO  O 

£ <d 

CD  U 

4-1 

CO  5-4 

>•>  O 

CO 

5-4  • 

CD  *H  CO 

co  cd  £ 

<D  ft  CD 
42  CD  4J 

E-<  5-4  T-l 


co 

•H 

CO 

CO 

0 

t— 4 

WJ 

1 

•H 

£ 

CD 

CO 

CD 

U 

<D 

'i 

4J 

25 

X 


£ 

<D 

4-1 

CO 

CO 

• 

CO  X 
cd  <D 
5-i 
•r4 
CO 


CD 
£ 
cd  (D 
co  X 


a 

•H 

5-i 

CD 

42 

a 

CO 

o 

£ 

4- 1 

cd 

5- 1 
O 

•H 

54 

CD 

4-1 

52 

•H 

54 

O 

54 

O 

•H 

54 

CD 

4-1 

X • 

<D  <D 

54 

--I  25 

cd  co 


£ 

54 

O 


54 

CD 

4-1 

52 

•H 

CD 

CJ 

52 

<D 

bO 

54 

i 

42 

2> 

CO 


W 


pK 


O 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


TABLE  A-82  (continued) 


2-202 


PU 

■d 

B 

<U 

^ d 

co  bO 

rd 

is  a 

cu  o 

d 

O r-i 

4J  rH 

0) 

i — 1 *4_|  O 

cd  a 

E 

CU  O }-i 

bO  O 

E 

yo  4-i 

4-1 

o 

a)  d 

H CO  • 

o 

9\ 

co  d o 

o o 

cu 

d 

CO 

a -H  O 

54  *4-1 

54 

o 

E 

6 co 

4-J  bO  <U 

•H 

<D 

d -a 

d d 

CU 

4-1 

■P 

a j-i  d 

O *H  « 

54 

O 

H 

<D  cd 

O i— 1 CO 

cd 

d 

44  rX3 

•r4  d) 

54 

rH 

o d co 

54  a B 

CO 

4-1 

cd 

d w 

cu  d 

<D 

CO 

o 

co  cd 

4-J  rH  rH 

O 

d 

•H 

CL)  *»  O 

cd  cu  M-i 

d 

o 

& 

O Li  H 

IS  <u 

cu 

54 

o 

>•> 

td  o 'h 

4-J 

54 

o 

H 

4-)  O 

« CO  CO 

CU 

•H 

kO 

54  i-H  * 

co 

4-4 

54 

54 

d M-l  CO 

© 

■d  « d 

CU 

<D 

cd 

co  a) 

o 

5i  a)  cd 

54 

4J 

4-J 

>•> 

bO  4J 

4-1 

cd  a 4-i 

d 

•H 

E 

?-i  d d 

d) 

d -h 

bO 

H 

s — 1 

54 

O *H  i — 1 

bo  a - 

d 

•H 

< 

■h  y a. 

*\ 

CO 

•H 

44 

s 

54  cd 

CO 

d h u) 

£ 

O 

CD 

CU  U 0) 

* — 3 

CO  d)  T) 

o 

■d 

y2 

4-»  a)  co 

T— 1 

Cd  d)  *1-4 

rH 

d 

4-J 

X a cd 

CD 

54  -P  d 

rH 

r* 

cd 

CO 

W O yd 

IS 

B to  M 

o 

44 

d 

44 

c5 

CO 

O 

o 

4*2 

•H 

CU 

54 

54 

4-» 

4-1 

42 

O 

c 

cd 

o 

4-1 

a 

& 

i 

a 

•H 

CO  CO 

rH 

4-J 

44 

5-1 

rd 

<U  d) 

• 

fH 

•H 

54 

•H 

a)  x) 

CO  O 

E *H 

co 

<D 

t> 

cd 

o 

4J  d 

d)  4-1 

d)  . rl 

CU 

B 

54 

a 

cu 

cd  cd 

54 

54  Cd 

4-J  CU 

<u 

•H 

d 

o 

cu 

a 

IS 

<4-4  d) 

4-1  pt,  & 

54  f> 

4-1 

d 

o 

Q 

CO 

CO 

54 

Xo  H 

O *H 

•H 

aH 

•H 

d d 

d d 

<u  o d 

a co 

<u 

4-J 

rH 

A 

d 

•H  O 

•H  CO 

00 

co  cd 

TO 

54 

cd 

cd 

CO 

o 

•H 

o 

O r-J  54 

d 54 

cu 

E 

d 

54 

•H 

a)  4J 

aj  a 4-i  o 

cd  yo 

4-1 

CU 

cd 

d 

CU 

44 

o cd 

o X 

rd 

54  Cd 

cd 

54 

tH 

cd 

CU 

cd 

d o 

d a) 

cu  d co 

4-J 

o 

cd 

a 

S 

d 

•H 

d 

cu  o 

cu 

54  Cd  ru 

42 

a 

cu 

a 

o 

bO  rH 

bO  4-1 

d -h 

CO  4-1 

co 

p4 

bO 

bO 

o 

•H 

1-1 

54  d 

CO  Cd  O 

rH  -H 

4-4 

bO 

d 

d 

co 

44 

cu  -a 

<D  d) 

00  « 

cd  IS 

o 

d 

44 

•H 

w 

CO 

•H 

B -H 

E 4-J 

a o 

•H 

•H 

O 

54 

<3 

^ E 

^ 4J 

X co  ^ 

54  4-J 

4-J 

4-J 

CU 

44 

d 

d d 

d -h 

<u  i cd 

cu  a 

d 

cd 

d 

<U 

o 

CO 

o 

CO  rd  • 

co  E 

54 

4-J  cd 

cu 

o 

cd 

d 

o 

4-1 

54 

4-J  d cu 

cd  4-i 

E 

o 

cu 

*H 

CO 

54 

4-1  Bl  rC 

4-1  CU 

d <u  d 

B d 

cu 

54 

bO 

a 

o 

<D 

d O bO 

d 4J 

cu  cu  *h 

o 

a 

cu 

d 

d 

54 

IS 

54 

d)  *r4 

cu  d 

4-1  ^ S 

cu  u 

cd 

> 

pq 

w 

O 

d 

d &»rH 

d -h 

4-1  4-1 

> 

rH 

H 

O 

54 

CO 

cr>  s d 

cr 

•H  <U  (U 

•H 

a 

4-1 

e* 

cu 

o 

cu  cd  d 

d)  T3 

S d 4J 

CO  • 

o 

rH 

rH 

#* 

44 

a 

54  d co 

54  d 

54  w d 

cd  ^ 

bO 

cu 

cd 

cd 

> 

cd 

X 

44 

M-i  cd 

<u  t— 1 

5i  d 

d 

4-J 

d 

d 

H 

E£ 

w 

d o 

4—1  CL)  -r-4 

•a  -h 

•H 

o 

d 

d 

5-4  *H  4-1 

u u 

d 54  rd 

cd  is 

54 

54 

cd 

d 

o 

o <u 

M d 

d 

a 

jsj 

cd 

d)  d) 

4-1 

4-1  O 

O 54 

O 

a 

co  5-i  5-4 

co  cd 

cd  4-i 

4-J  O 

rH 

4-1 

4-1 

•H 

d d d 

d £ 

• M 

CO 

cd 

d 

d 

4-1 

54 

O co  co 

o 

4-J  CU  CU 

<U  54 

rH 

•H 

•rl 

•H 

54 

CU 

d o o 

d 4-i 

d ft  54 

54  cu 

cd 

o 

cd 

cd 

cd 

E 

dad. 

d r— 1 

bO  B d 

d 4-1 

•H 

cu 

Pk 

P4 

a 

<J 

•H  X X 

•h  cd 

•1-4  a)  CO 

co  cd 

54 

a 

4J  d)  d) 

4-1  CO 

rH  4-J  O 

O IS 

CU 

CO 

d 

d 

d a 

a 

4-1 

/— s 

o n o 

O 5-1 

d ft* 4 x 

* >*. 

cd 

d 

cd 

y=> 

o 

o o d 

u o 

co  O w 

W rO 

B 

cu 

'H 

V-/ 

V4 

6 

cu 

44 

CD 

4-1 

d 

4-1 

o 

•H 

CO 

W 

M 

cd 

PU 

CO 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-203 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
82.  CLEANING  AND  PAINTING  METALWORK 


1 . SCOPE 


The  work  shall  consist  of  cleaning  metal  surfaces  and  applying 
paints  and  protective  coatings. 

2,  PAINTS 


For  the  purposes  of  this  specification  paints  shall  be 
designated  by  types  as  defined  below: 

Type  1 paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-P-86,  Type  IV,  Red  Lead  Base  Paint. 

Type  2 paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-P-86,  Type  II  or  Type  III,  Red  Lead  Base 
Paint . 

Type  3 paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-P-86,  Type  I,  Red  Lead  Base  Paint. 

Type  4 paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-P-636,  Synthetic  Primer. 

Type  5 paint  shall  be  prepared  by  mixing  aluminum  paste 
conforming  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification 
TT-P-320,  Type  II,  Class  2 with  phenolic  resin  spar 
varnish  conforming  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-V-119  at  the  rate  of  two  pounds  of 
aluminum  paste  per  gallon  of  varnish.  The  paint  shall 
be  mixed  at  the  time  of  use. 

Type  6 paint  shall  be  prepared  by  mixing  aluminum  paste 
conforming  to  Federal  Specification  TT-P-320,  Type  II, 
Class  2 with  mixing  varnish  conforming  to  the  require- 
ments of  Federal  Specification  TT-V-81,  Type  II,  Class  B 
(Class  2)  at  the  rate  of  two  pounds  of  aluminum  paste 
per  gallon  of  varnish.  The  paint  shall  be  mixed  at  the 
time  of  use. 

Type  7 paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-E-489,  Class  A,  Alkyd  Gloss  Enamel. 


(82-1) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


2-204 


Type  8 paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-E-529,  Alkyd  Semi -Gloss  Enamel. 

Type  9 paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT -P-641,  Type  I or  Type  II,  Zinc  Dust -Zinc 
Oxide  Primer. 

Type  10  paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT -P-641,  Type  III,  Zinc  Dust -Zinc  Oxide 
Primer. 

Type  11  paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  583.  The  paint  shall  be  mixed  at  the  time  of 
use . 

Paints  of  Types  1,  2,  3,  5 and  6 may  be  thinned  with  mineral 
spirits  as  necessary  for  proper  application  but  the  amount  of 
thinner  used  shall  not  exceed  one  pint  per  gallon  of  paint. 
Other  paints  may  be  thinned  in  accordance  with  the  manufac- 
turer's instructions  only  if  such  thinning  is  approved  by  the 
Engineer. 

When  tinting  is  required,  it  shall  be  accomplished  by  the 
addition  of  pigment-in-oil  tinting  colors  conforming  to  the 
requirements  of  Federal  Specification  TT -P-381. 

Mineral  spirits  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal 
Specification  TT-T-291,  Grade  1,  Light  Thinner. 

3.  SURFACE  PERPARATION 


Surfaces  to  be  painted  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  prior  to  the 
application  of  the  paint.  For  the  purposes  of  this  specification 
methods  of  surface  preparation  shall  be  designated  as  defined 
below: 

Method  1 surface  preparation  shall  consist  of  the  removal  of 
all  grease  and  oil  by  means  of  steam  cleaning  or  solvent 
cleaning  methods  and  removal  of  all  dirt,  rust,  mill  scale 
and  other  coatings  by  means  of  sandblasting,  grit  blasting 
or  pickling.  The  finished  surface  shall  uniformly  expose 
the  base  metal  and  shall  present  an  etched,  but  not  polished 
or  peened,  appearance.  Not  more  than  5 percent  of  the 
surface  may  exhibit  very  light  shadows,  light  streaks,  or 
slight  discolorations  caused  by  rust  stain,  mill  scale 
oxides,  or  slight,  tight  residues  of  paint  or  coating. 


(82-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-205 


Method  2 surface  preparation  shall  consist  of  the  removal 
of  all  grease  and  oil  by  means  of  steam  cleaning  or  solvent 
cleaning  and  the  removal  of  all  dirt,  surface  rust  and 
loose  scale  by  means  of  wire  brushing,  flame  cleaning,  use 
of  rotary  abrading  tools  or  light  sandblasting. 

Method  3 surface  preparation  shall  consist  of  the  treatment 
of  the  surface  with  a dilute  acid  solution.  The  surface 
shall  be  thoroughly  wetted  with  a dilute  (about  5 percent 
strength)  phosphoric  acid  solution.  After  the  acid  has 
dried,  the  surface  shall  be  thoroughly  rinsed  with  clear 
water  and  allowed  to  dry.  Dirt,  grease  and  oil  shall  be 
removed  from  the  surface  by  solvent  cleaning  prior  to  the 
acid  treatment. 

Cleaning  solvent  shall  be  mineral  spirits.  Cleaning  cloths  and 
solvents  shall  be  discarded  before  they  become  contaminated  to  the 
extent  that  a greasy  film  would  remain  on  the  surface  being  cleaned. 
The  final  cleaning  and  wiping  shall  be  done  with  clean  solvent  and 
clean  cloths.  Grit  blasting  shall  be  accomplished  using  compressed 
air  blast  nozzles  and  grit  made  of  steel,  malleable  iron  or  cast 
iron  crushed  shot.  Abrasives  used  shall  have  a maximum  particle 
size  that  will  pass  the  No.  16  sieve  (U.  S.  Standard)  and  a minimum 
size  that  will  be  retained  on  the  No.  50  sieve  (U.  S.  Standard). 

The  equipment  used  for  sandblasting  shall  be  equipped  with  adequate 
separators  and  traps  to  insure  that  the  compressed  air  shall  be 
free  of  detrimental  amounts  of  water  and  oil.  Blast  cleaned  sur- 
faces shall  be  brushed,  blown  or  vacuum  cleaned  to  remove  any  trace 
of  blast  products  or  abrasives  prior  to  painting. 

Surfaces  that  are  not  to  be  painted  immediately  after  cleaning 
shall  be  treated  with  one  brush  coat  of  metal  conditioner  conforming 
to  the  requirements  of  Military  Specification  MIL-M-10578,  except 
that  surfaces  cleaned  by  pickling  in  phosphoric  acid  solution  shall 
not  require  such  treatment. 

Surfaces  shall  be  thoroughly  dry  when  paint  is  applied. 

No  field  coats  of  paint  shall  be  applied  until  the  prepared  surfaces 
have  been  inspected  and  approved  by  the  Engineer. 

4.  PAINT  SYSTEMS 


For  the  purposes  of  this  specification,  systems  of  preparing  and 
painting  metalwork  will  be  designated  as  defined  below: 

(82-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


Paint  System  A shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  1 and  the  application 
of  two  priming  coats  of  Type  1 paint  and  two  or  more 
top  coats  of  Type  5 paint  as  necessary  to  provide  a 
total  dry  paint  film  thickness  of  6 mils. 

Paint  System  B shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  1 and  the  application 
of  one  priming  coat  of  Type  1 paint  and  two  top  coats 
of  Type  5 paint. 

Paint  System  C shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  2 and  the  application 
of  one  priming  coat  of  Type  2,  Type  3 or  Type  4 paint 
and  two  top  coats  of  Type  6 paint. 

Paint  System  D shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  2 and  the  application 
of  one  priming  coat  of  Type  2 paint  and  two  top  coats 
of  Type  7 paint. 

Paint  System  E shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  2 and  the  application 
of  one  priming  coat  of  Type  2 paint  and  two  top  coats 
of  Type  8 paint. 

Paint  System  F shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  3 and  the  application 
of  two  coats  of  Type  9 paint. 

Paint  System  G shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  3 and  the  application 
of  two  coats  of  Type  10  paint. 

Paint  System  H shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  1 and  the  application 
of  four  or  more  coats  of  Type  1 paint  as  necessary  to 
provide  a total  dry  paint  film  thickness  of  6 mils. 

Paint  System  I shall  consist  of  the  preparation  of  the 
surfaces  to  be  painted  by  Method  1 and  the  application 
of  two  or  more  coats  of  Type  11  paint  as  necessary  to 
provide  a total  dry  paint  film  thickness  of  at  least 
16  mils. 


(82-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


I 


2-207 


5.  APPLICATION  OF  PAINT 


> 


Surfaces  shall  be  painted  immediately  after  preparation  (or  within 
two  days  after  preparation  and  treatment  with  metal  conditioner) 
with  at  least  one  coat  of  the  type  of  priming  paint  required  by 
the  specified  paint  system.  Surfaces  not  required  to  be  painted 
shall  be  protected  against  contamination  and  damage  during  the 
cleaning  and  painting  operation. 

Paints  shall  be  thoroughly  mixed  at  the  time  of  application. 

After  erection  or  installation  of  the  metalwork,  all  damage  to 
shop  applied  coats  shall  be  repaired  and  all  bolts,  nuts,  welds 
and  field  rivet  heads  shall  be  cleaned  and  painted  with  one  coat 
of  the  specified  priming  paint. 

Except  on  surfaces  accessible  only  to  spray  equipment,  initial 
priming  coats  shall  be  applied  by  brush.  All  other  coats  may  be 
applied  by  brush  or  spray.  Each  coat  shall  be  applied  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  produce  a paint  film  of  uniform  thickness  with  a rate 
of  coverage  within  the  limits  recommended  by  the  paint  manufacturer. 

The  drying  time  between  coats  shall  be  as  prescribed  by  the  manu- 
facturer of  the  paint  but  not  less  than  that  required  for  the  paint 
film  to  dry  through.  The  elapsed  time  between  the  application  of 
the  first  and  second  prime  coats  of  Paint  System  A shall  not  exceed 
60  hours.  In  the  application  of  Paint  System  I,  if,  for  any  reason, 
the  first  coat  dries  hard  before  the  second  coat  is  applied  or  the 
elapsed  time  between  coats  exceeds  48  hours,  the  method  of  appli- 
cation must  be  modified  in  any  of  the  following  ways:  (1)  the  first 

coat  must  be  wiped  down  with  MIBK  with  the  application  of  the  second 
coat  following  the  wipedown  by  not  more  than  6 feet;  or  (2)  the 
first  coat  must  be  lightly  brush  blasted  or  given  a fog  coat  of  the 
paint  before  application  of  the  full  second  coat;  or  (3)  a special 
bonding  additive  supplied  by  the  paint  manufacturer  must  be  mixed 
with  the  paint  applied  in  the  second  coat. 

The  finished  surface  of  each  coat  shall  be  free  from  runs,  drops, 
ridges,  laps  or  excessive  brushmarks  and  shall  present  no  variation 
in  color,  texture  and  finish. 

The  surface  of  each  dried  coat  shall  be  cleaned  as  necessary  before 
application  of  the  next  coat. 

Except  for  Paint  System  I,  the  first  coat  of  each  two-coat  system 
shall  be  tinted  for  contrast.  The  first  coat  of  red-lead  paint 
shall  be  tinted  by  the  addition  of  3 ounces  per  gallon  of  IB 

(82-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-208 


black  pigment.  The  first  coat  of  machinery  paint  shall  be 
tinted  off  color  with  3 ounces  per  gallon  of  a pigment  suitable 
to  the  color  of  the  paint. 

6.  ATMOS HPERIC  CONDITIONS 


Paint  shall  not  be  applied  when  the  temperature  of  the  item  to 
be  painted  or  of  the  surrounding  air  is  less  than  50°F.  For 
Paint  System  I,  the  temperature  of  the  coated  surface  must  be 
maintained  at  not  less  than  50°F  for  6 hours  after  the  applica- 
tion of  each  coat.  Painting  shall  be  done  only  when  the  humidity 
and  temperature  of  the  surrounding  air  and  the  temperature  of  the 
metal  surfaces  are  such  that  evaporation  rather  than  condensation 
will  result  during  the  period  of  time  required  for  application 
and  drying.  Surfaces  protected  from  adverse  atmospheric  condi- 
tions by  special  cover,  heating  or  ventilation  shall  remain  so 
protected  until  the  paint  is  dry. 

7.  TESTS 


Acceptance  of  dry  paint  film  thickness  for  Paint  Systems  A,  H, 
and  I will  be  based  on  the  measurement  of  paint  film  thickness 
by  means  of  an  Elcometer  or  other  suitable  dry  film  thickness 
gage. 

8 .  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  lump  sum  prices  are 
established  in  the  contract,  payment  for  painting  metalwork  will 
be  at  the  contract  lump  sum  price.  Such  payment  will  constitute 
full  compensation  for  furnishing,  preparing  and  applying  all 
materials  and  for  the  cleaning,  painting  and  coating  of  metalwork 
including  labor,  tools,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary 
and  incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  9 of  this  specification. 


(82-6) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-209 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  83 
TIMBER  FABRICATION  AND  INSTALLATION 


1.  Applicability, 

Construction  Specification  83  is  applicable  to  all  types  of  timber 
construction  (except  pile  driving  or  the  use  of  round  timber)  that 
are  normally  entailed  in  Service  operations.  Supplementary  speci- 
fications will  be  required  for  works  of  a special  nature,  such  as 
bridges  or  buildings. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specifications  584,  585,  582  and  5& L and  Construction  Specifi- 
cation 84  are  complementary  to  Construction  Specification  83. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Plans  and  dimensions  of  all  structural  elements. 

b.  Complete  details  of  all  connections  including  number, 
type  and  size  of  connectors;  location  of  bolts,  screws, 
pins;  number,  size  and  kind  of  nails  or  spikes  if  the 
design  requires  that  these  be  specified;  depth  of 
embedment  of  screws  and  pins,  etc. 

c.  For  lumber  and  timber,  specify: 

(1)  Stress  grade. 

(2)  Species  according  to  standard  commercial  name. 

(3)  Heartwood  requirements  or  other  special  requirements. 

(4)  Nominal  size  and  dress  requirements  (rough  or 
dressed) . 

(5)  Preservative  treatment,  if  required.  1 

(Refer  to  Federal  Specification  TT-W-571 
for  guidance  to  type  of  treatment.) 

(6)  Applicable  grading  rule,  including  the  name  of 

the  agency  that  sponsors  the  rule  (such  as  National 
Hardwood  Lumber  Association),  the  paragraph  number 
and  the  year  of  issue. 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-210 


d.  For  plywood,  specify: 

(1)  Number  of  plies,  width  and  length  of  sheet. 

(2)  Species  or  group  according  to  PS  1-66. 

(3)  Grade 

(4)  Type  (exterior,  interior) 

(5)  Finished  thickness 

(6)  Finish  requirements  (such  as  sanded  or  unsanded) 

e.  Designation  of  surfaces  to  be  painted. 

f.  Special  instructions  concerning  cutting  of  treated  lumber 
or  timber,  if  such  operations  are  to  be  allowed. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  6 , Measurement  and  Payment. 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  in  cases  where  the 
quantities  of  lumber  and  timber  are  large  and  the 
measurement  of  structural  elements  is  feasible. 

(2)  Option  2 is  considered  more  appropriate  for  struc- 
tures of  moderate  size. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in 
standard  specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph 
in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


# 


2-211 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 

83.  TIMBER  FABRICATION  AND  INSTALLATION 


1.  SCOPE 


The  work  shall  consist  of  the  construction  of  timber  structures 
and  timber  portions  of  composite  structures. 

2.  MATERIALS 


Structural  timber  and  lumber  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  584.  Treated  timber  and  lumber  shall  be 
impregnated  with  the  specified  type  and  quantity  of  preservative 
and  in  the  manner  specified  in  Material  Specification  585. 

Hardware,  except  cast  iron,  shall  be  galvanized  as  specified  for 
iron  and  steel  hardware  in  Material  Specification  582.  Unless 
otherwise  specified,  structural  steel  shapes,  plates  and  rods  shall 
not  be  galvanized.  Nuts,  driftbolts,  dowels  and  screws  shall  be 
either  wrought  iron  or  medium  steel. 

Steel  bolts  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification 
A 307.  When  galvanized  or  zinc-coated  bolts  are  specified,  the 
zinc  coating  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifica- 
tion A 153;  except  that  bolts  1/2  inch  or  less  in  diameter  may  be 
coated  with  electrodeposited  zinc  or  cadmium  coating  conforming  to 
the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 164,  Type  RS,  or  ASTM 
Specification  A 165,  Type  TS,  unless  otherwise  specified. 

Washers  shall  be  ogee  gray  iron  castings  or  malleable  iron  castings 
unless  washers  cut  from  medium  steel  or  wrought  iron  plate  are 
specified  on  the  drawings.  Cast  washers  shall  have  a thickness 
equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  bolt  and  a diameter  equal  to  four 
times  the  thickness.  For  plate  washers  the  thickness  shall  be 
equal  to  one-half  the  diameter  of  the  bolt,  and  the  sides  of  the 
square  shall  be  equal  to  four  times  the  diameter  of  the  bolt. 

Holes  in  washers  shall  be  not  more  than  one -eighth  inch  greater 
in  diameter  than  the  bolt.  Split  ring  connectors,  tooth  ring  con- 
nectors and  pressed  steel  shear  plate  connectors  shall  be  manu- 
factured from  hot-rolled,  low  carbon  steel  conforming  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Designation  A 273,  Grade  1015.  Malleable 
iron  shear  plate  connectors  and  spike  grid  connectors  shall  be 
manufactured  in  conformance  with  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Designa- 
tion A 47,  Grade  No.  35018.  All  connectors  shall  be  of  approved 
design  and  the  type  and  size  specified. 

(83-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


212 


Structural  shapes,  rods  and  plates  shall  be  structural  steel  con- 
forming to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  581.  No 
welds  will  be  permitted  in  truss  rods  or  other  main  members  of 
trusses  or  girders. 

WORKMANSHIP 


All  framing  shall  be  true  and  exact.  Timber  and  lumber  shall  be 
accurately  cut  and  assembled  to  a close  fit  and  shall  have  even 
bearing  over  the  entire  contact  surfaces.  No  open  or  shimmed 
joints  will  be  accepted.  Nails  and  spikes  shall  be  driven  with 
just  sufficient  force  to  set  the  heads  flush  with  the  surface  of 
the  wood.  Deep  hammer  marks  in  wood  surfaces  shall  be  considered 
evidence  of  poor  workmanship  and  sufficient  cause  for  rejection 
of  the  work. 

Holes  for  round  driftpins  and  dowels  shall  be  bored  with  a bit 
one -sixteenth  inch  smaller  in  diameter  than  that  of  the  driftpin 
or  dowel  to  be  used.  The  diameter  of  holes  for  square  driftpins 
or  dowels  shall  be  equal  to  one  side  of  the  driftpin  or  dowel. 
Holes  for  machine  bolts  and  rods  shall  be  bored  with  a bit  of  the 
same  diameter  as  that  of  the  bolt.  Holes  for  lag  screws  shall  be 
bored  with  a bit  not  larger  than  the  body  of  the  screw  at  the 
base  of  the  thread. 

Washers  shall  be  used  in  contact  with  all  bolt  heads  and  nuts 
that  would  otherwise  be  in  contact  with  wood.  Cast  iron  washers 
shall  be  used  when  the  bolt  will  be  in  contact  with  earth.  All 
nuts  shall  be  checked  or  burred  effectively  with  a pointed  tool 
after  being  finally  tightened. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  surfacing,  cutting  and  boring  of 
timber  and  lumber  shall  be  done  before  treatment.  If  cutting 
of  treated  timber  and  lumber  is  authorized,  all  cuts  and  abra- 
sions shall  be  carefully  trimmed  and  coated  with  not  less  than 
three  brush  coats  of  the  same  preservative  used  in  the  original 
treatment. 

All  recesses  and  holes  cut  or  bored  in  treated  timber  and  lumber 
shall  be  swabbed  with  not  less  than  three  coats  of  the  same 
preservative  used  in  the  original  treatment.  After  field  treat- 
ment any  unfilled  holes  shall  be  plugged  with  tightly  fitting 
wooden  plugs  treated  with  the  same  preservative  used  in  the 
original  treatment. 


(83-2) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-213 


4.  HANDLING  AND  STORING  MATERIALS 


All  timber  and  lumber  stored  at  the  site  of  the  work  shall  be 
neatly  stacked  on  supports  at  least  twelve  inches  above  the  ground 
surface  and  protected  from  the  weather  by  suitable  covering.  Un- 
treated material  shall  be  so  stacked  and  stripped  as  to  permit 
free  circulation  of  air  between  the  tiers  and  courses.  Treated 
timber  shall  be  close -stacked.  The  ground  underneath  and  in  the 
vicinity  of  all  stacks  shall  be  cleared  of  weeds  and  rubbish. 

The  use  of  cant  hooks,  peavies,  or  other  pointed  tools,  except 
end  hooks  will  not  be  permitted  in  the  handling  of  structural 
timber  or  lumber.  Treated  timber  shall  be  handled  with  rope 
slings  or  other  methods  that  will  prevent  the  breaking  or  bruising 
of  outer  fibers,  or  penetration  of  the  surface  in  any  manner. 

5.  PAINTING 


Except  as  otherwise  specified,  surfaces  designated  for  painting 
shall  be  painted  in  accordance  with  Construction  Specification  84  . 

6.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Opt  ion  1)  The  unit  of  measurement  of  lumber  and  timber  will  be 
the  number  of  thousand  feet  board  measure  (MBM)  of  each  type,  size, 
species  and  grade  of  lumber  and  timber  in  place  in  the  completed 
structure.  The  quantity  of  each  type,  size,  species  and  grade  will 
be  computed  from  the  nominal  dimensions  and  actual  lengths  of  the 
pieces  in  the  completed  structure  and  will  not  include  waste  timber 
used  for  erection  purposes  (such  as  falsework  or  temporary  sheeting 
and  bracing)  or  any  portion  of  any  pile  or  other  round  timber.  The 
total  quantity  of  lumber  and  timber  in  each  type,  size,  species  and 
grade  will  be  computed  to  the  nearest  0.01  MBM. 

The  unit  of  measurement  of  plywood  will  be  the  number  of  square 
feet  of  each  type,  species,  grade  and  thickness  in  place  in  the 
completed  structure. 

Payment  for  each  type,  size,  species  and  grade  of  lumber  and  timber 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type,  size,  species 
and  grade.  Payment  for  each  type,  species,  grade  and  thickness  of 
plywood  will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type, 
species,  grade  and  thickness.  Such  payment  will  be  considered  full 
compensation  for  all  labor,  equipment,  transportation  and  materials 
and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to  the  completion  of 
the  structure  in  place  including  hardware  and  accessories,  paint 
and  wood  preservatives. 

(83-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-214 


(Option  2)  No  measurement  of  material  quantities  will  be  made. 
Payment  for  each  structure,  complete  in  place,  will  be  made  at 
the  contract  lump  sum  price  for  that  structure.  Such  payment 
will  be  considered  full  compensation  for  all  labor,  transporta- 
tion, equipment  and  materials  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  7 of  this  speci- 
fication. 


(83-4) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-215 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  84 

PAINTING  WOODWORK 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  84  is  applicable  only  to  the  exterior 
painting  of  woodwork. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

There  are  no  material  specifications  complementary  to  Construction 
Specification  84. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Surfaces  to  be  painted. 

b.  Instructions  for  tinting  if  colors  other  than  white  are 
required. 

c.  Paint  to  be  used  if  other  than  specified  in  Section  2. 

d.  Number  of  coats  if  other  than  specified  in  Section  4. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

No  options  are  included. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
84.  PAINTING  WOODWORK 


2-217 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  cleaning  and  preparing  wood  surfaces  and 
applying  paints. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  painting  materials  shall  meet  the 
following  requirements: 

Exterior  paint  primer  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Federal  Specification  TT-P-25. 

Exterior  oil  paint  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Federal  Specification  TT -P-102.  Unless  otherwise  specified, 
the  color  shall  be  white.  The  second  coat  of  exterior  oil 
paint  may  be  thinned  with  mineral  spirits  conforming  to  the 
requirements  of  Federal  Specification  TT-T-295  or  with  pure 
gum  turpentine,  but  the  amount  of  thinner  used  shall  not 
exceed  one  pint  per  gallon  of  paint. 

When  tinting  is  required  it  shall  be  accomplished  by  the 
addition  of  pigment-in-oil  tinting  colors  conforming  to 
the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification  TT -P-381. 

3.  SURFACE  PREPARATION 

All  surfaces  to  be  painted  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  prior  to  the 
application  of  paint.  Pitch  pockets  and  knots  shall  be  scraped  and 
sealed  with  a shellac  varnish  conforming  to  the  requirements  of 
Federal  Specification  TT-S-300.  Previously  painted  surfaces  shall 
be  scraped  and  brushed  to  remove  any  checked  or  blistered  paint  and 
all  excess  chalk. 

4.  APPLICATION  OF  PAINT 


Surfaces  shall  be  clean  and  dry  when  paint  is  applied.  No  paint 
shall  be  applied  until  the  prepared  surfaces  have  been  inspected 
and  approved  by  the  Engineer. 


(84-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-218 


Surfaces  of  new  wood  shall  be  painted  with  one  brush  coat  of 
exterior  priming  paint  and  two  brush  coats  of  exterior  oil 
paint. 

Paints  shall  be  thoroughly  mixed  at  the  time  of  application. 

Each  coat  shall  be  applied  in  such  a manner  as  to  produce  a paint 
film  of  uniform  thickness  with  a finished  surface  free  from  runs, 
drops,  ridges,  laps  or  excessive  brushmarks.  The  drying  time 
between  coats  shall  be  as  prescribed  by  the  manufacturer  of  the 
paint  but  not  less  than  that  required  for  the  paint  film  to  dry 
through. 

The  surface  of  each  dried  coat  shall  be  cleaned  as  necessary 
before  application  of  the  next  coat. 

The  first  coat  of  exterior  oil  paint  shall  be  tinted  off  color  by 
the  addition  of  3 ounces  of  an  appropriate  tinting  color  per 
gallon  of  paint. 

5.  ATMOSPHERIC  CONDITIONS 


Paint  shall  not  be  applied  when  the  temperature  of  the  wood 
surface  or  of  the  surrounding  air  is  less  than  45°F  nor  when 
atmospheric  conditions  result  in  condensation  of  moisture  on  the 
surface  to  be  painted.  Surfaces  protected  from  adverse  atmo- 
spheric conditions  by  special  cover,  heating  or  ventilation  shall 
remain  so  protected  until  the  paint  is  dry. 

6.  PAYMENT 


For  items  of  work  for  which  specific  lump  sum  prices  are  estab- 
lished in  the  contract,  payment  for  painting  woodwork  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  lump  sum  price  and  such  payment  will  be  full 
compensation  for  furnishing,  preparing  and  applying  all  materials 
and  for  the  cleaning  and  painting  of  woodwork  including  labor, 
tools,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental  to 
the  completion  of  the  work. 

Compensation  for  any  item  of  work  described  in  the  contract  but 
not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule  will  be  included  in  the  payment 
for  the  item  of  work  to  which  it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items 
and  the  items  to  which  they  are  made  subsidiary  are  identified 
in  Section  ~j  of  this  specification. 

(84-2) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-219 


INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  91 

CHAIN  LINK  FENCE 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  91  is  applicable  to  the  installation  of 
chain  link  fences. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

No  material  specifications  are  complementary  to  Construction  Speci- 
fication 91 . 

3 . Supplemental  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and 
Drawings . 

a.  Plan  showing  the  location  and  extent  of  fences  including 
location  of  gates,  corners,  pull  posts  and  end  points. 

b.  Dimensions  of  the  fence  including  post  spacing,  clearance 
from  ground  and  height  of  fence. 

c.  Details  of  posts  and  assemblies. 

(1)  Types  of  post  (U,  H,  round  or  square). 

(2)  Line  post  detail  showing  height  of  post,  depth  of 
embedment. 

(3)  Details  of  corner  post  assembly,  pull  post,  end 
post, including  embedment,  top  rail  connections, 
tension  wire  detail,  braces,  trusses,  etc. 

(4)  Special  anchor  requirements,  if  any. 

d.  Dimensions  of  gate  openings  (clear  opening  between  inside 
faces  of  the  gate  posts). 

e.  Type  of  gates  (swing  or  sliding). 

f.  Required  appurtenances  such  as  locks,  barbed  wire  arms, 
barbed  wire,  post  tops. 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-220 


(t 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Under  "Measurement  and  Payment"  Option  1 is  intended  for  use 
when  gates  are  a minor  part  of  the  work  item.  Option  2 is 
intended  for  use  when  gates  form  a substantial  part  of  the  work 
item  or  when  gates  must  be  installed  in  existing  fences. 

Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in  standard 
specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are  used,  insert  the  following 
paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph  in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both  methods 
of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-221 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
91.  CHAIN  LINK  FENCE 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  chain  link 
fencing  complete  with  all  posts,  braces,  gates  and  all  other 
appurtenances . 

2.  MATERIALS 

Fence  posts,  gates  and  accessories  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  Federal  Specification  RR-F-183. 

Fencing,  chain  link  fabric  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Federal  Specification  RR-F-191  for  the  type  and  grade  specified. 
Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  fencing  shall  be  Class  1,  Coating 
A,  B,  or  C,  2-inch  mesh,  9 gage. 

Barbed  wire  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specifi- 
cation RR-F-221  for  4-point,  12%-gage  barbed  wire  with  Class  2 
zinc  coating. 

3.  INSTALLING  FENCE  POSTS 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  line  posts  shall  be  placed  at  intervals 
of  10  feet  measured  from  center  to  center  of  adjacent  posts.  In 
determining  the  post  spacing,  measurement  will  be  made  parallel 
with  the  ground  surface. 

Posts  will  be  set  in  concrete  backfill  in  the  manner  shown  on  the 
drawings. 

Posts  set  in  the  tops  of  concrete  walls  shall  be  grouted  into 
preformed  holes  to  a depth  of  12  inches. 

All  comer  posts,  end  posts,  gate  posts,  and  pull  posts  shall  be 
embedded,  braced  and  trussed  as  shown  on  the  drawings. 

4.  INSTALLING  WIRE  FABRIC 


Fencing  fabric  shall  not  be  stretched  until  at  least  4 days  after 
the  posts  are  grouted  into  walls  or  14  days  after  the  posts  are 
set  in  the  concrete  backfill. 

(91-1) 


I 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


2-222 


* 


Fencing  shall  be  installed  on  the  side  of  the  posts  designated 
on  the  drawings . 

The  fabric  shall  be  stretched  taut  and  securely  fastened,  by 
means  of  tie  clips,  to  the  posts  at  intervals  not  exceeding  15 
inches  and  to  the  top  rails  or  tension  wires  at  intervals  not 
exceeding  2 feet.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  equalize  the  tension 
on  each  side  of  each  post. 

Barbed  wire  shall  be  installed  as  shown  on  the  drawings  and  shall 
be  pulled  taut  and  fastened  to  each  post  with  tie  wires  or  metal 
tie  clips. 

5.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  The  length  of  fence  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest 
0.1  foot  along  the  fence,  including  gates.  Payment  will  be  made 
at  the  contract  unit  price  for  the  specified  height  of  fence. 

Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all  labor, 
materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and  incidental 
to  the  completion  of  the  work. 

(Option  2)  The  length  of  fence  will  be  measured  to  the  nearest 
0.1  foot  along  the  fence,  excluding  gate  openings.  Payment  will 
be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  the  specified  height  of 
fence.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all 
labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work  except  furnishing, 
fabricating  and  installing  gates.  Payment  for  furnishing, 
fabricating  and  installing  each  type  and  size  of  gate  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  size  of  gate. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  6 of  this  speci- 
fication. 


(91-2) 

NEH  1/2^70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-223 


D 

INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE  OF  CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  92 

FARM  FIELD  FENCES 


1.  Applicability. 

Construction  Specification  92  is  applicable  to  the  installation  of 
farm  field  fences  of  the  barbed  wire,  woven  wire  or  wire  netting 
types. 

2.  Material  Specifications. 

Material  Specification  591  is  complementary  to  Construction  Speci- 
fication 92. 

3.  Items  to  be  Included  in  Contract  Specifications  and  Drawings. 

a.  Plan  showing  the  location  and  extent  of  fences  including 
location  of  gates,  corners  and  end  points. 

b.  Dimensions  of  the  fence  including  post  spacing,  clearance 
from  ground  and  height  of  fence. 

c.  Details  of  concrete  posts,  if  required. 

d.  Details  of  posts  and  assemblies. 

(1)  Type  of  posts. 

(2)  Line  post  detail  showing  height  of  post,  depth 
of  embedment. 

(3)  Details  of  end  panel  assembly,  pull  post  assembly 
and  corner  assembly  including  types  of  posts, 
types  of  backfill,  types  and  dimensions  of  braces, 
gages  of  tension  wires  and  details  of  fastening 

of  tension  wires  to  posts. 

(4)  Special  anchor  requirements  for  posts  at  crossings 
over  depressions  or  waterways. 

e.  Details  of  gates. 

(The  details  listed  in  b,  c,  d,  and  e may  often  be  shown  on 
a standard  drawing  developed  for  use  in  all  projects  within  a 
given  area.) 


I 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-224 


f.  Type  and  kind  of  fencing. 

(1)  For  barbed  wire  fencing  specify  gage  of  wire,  zinc- 
coated  or  uncoated,  shape  and  spacing  of  barbs  and 
the  number  of  points  per  barb. 

(2)  For  woven  wire  fencing  specify  the  design  number 

(as  given  in  Federal  Specification  RR-F-  221).  J 

(3)  For  wire  netting  specify  the  height  of  netting, 
size  of  mesh  and  gage  of  wire. 

g.  Species  of  wood  posts. 

h.  Preservative  treatment  of  wood  posts  and  braces  as  applicable. 

i.  Protective  coating  (painted  or  zinc-coated)  for  steel  posts 

and  braces. 

4.  Discussion  of  Options. 

Section  10,  Measurement  and  Payment. 

(1)  Option  1 is  intended  for  use  when  gates  are  simple 
and  of  the  field  fabricated  type. 

(2)  Option  2 is  intended  for  use  when  gates  must  be  shop 
fabricated  or  when  gates  must  be  installed  in  exist- 
ing fences. 


Both  options  may  be  included  as  numbered  methods  in 
standard  specifications.  If  numbered  methods  are  used, 
insert  the  following  paragraph  before  the  last  paragraph 
in  the  section: 

Both  Methods.  The  following  provisions  apply  to  both 
methods  of  measurement  and  payment. 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


2-225 


CONSTRUCTION  SPECIFICATION  (GUIDE) 
92 . FARM  FIELD  FENCES 


1.  SCOPE 

The  work  shall  consist  of  furnishing  and  installing  farm  field 
fences,  including  gates  and  fittings. 

2.  MATERIALS 

Materials  for  farm  field  fences  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  591.  All  wooden  posts  shall  be  of  the 
same  species. 

3.  SETTING  POSTS 

Concrete  or  wood  posts  shall  be  set  in  holes  and  backfilled  with 
earth  except  where  otherwise  specified.  Steel  posts  shall  be 
driven  unless  otherwise  specified. 

Posts  holes  shall  be  at  least  6 inches  larger  than  the  diameter  or 
side  dimension  of  the  posts. 

Earth  backfill  around  posts  shall  be  thoroughly  tamped  in  layers 
not  thicker  than  4 inches  and  shall  completely  fill  the  post  hole 
up  to  the  ground  surface.  Concrete  backfill  around  posts  shall  be 
rodded  into  place  in  layers  not  thicker  than  12  inches  and  shall 
completely  fill  the  post  hole  up  to  the  ground  surface.  Backfill, 
either  earth  or  concrete,  shall  be  crowned  up  around  posts  at  the 
ground  surface. 

No  stress  shall  be  applied  to  posts  set  in  concrete  until  at  least 
24  hours  after  the  concrete  has  set. 

4.  CORNER  ASSEMBLY 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  corner  assemblies  shall  be  installed 
at  all  points  where  the  fence  alignment  changes  15  degrees  or  more 

5.  END  PANELS 

\ 

End  panels  shall  be  built  at  gates  and  fence  ends. 

6 . PULL  POST  ASSEMBLY 


Pull  post  assemblies  shall  be  installed  at  the  following  locations 

(92-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-226 


a.  In  straight  fence  sections,  at  intervals  of  no  more  than 
660  feet. 

b.  At  any  point  where  the  vertical  angle  described  by  two 
adjacent  reaches  of  wire  is  upward  and  exceeds  10  degrees 
(except  as  provided  in  Section  9 of  this  specification). 

c.  At  the  beginning  and  end  of  each  curve. 

7.  ATTACHING  FENCING  TO  POSTS 


The  fencing  shall  be  stretched  and  attached  to  posts  as  follows : 

a.  The  fencing  shall  be  placed  on  the  side  of  the  post  opposite 
the  area  being  protected,  except  on  curves. 

b.  The  fencing  shall  be  placed  on  the  outside  of  curves. 

c.  The  fencing  shall  be  fastened  to  each  end  post,  corner 
post  and  pull  post  by  wrapping  each  horizontal  strand 
around  the  post  and  tying  it  back  on  itself  with  not  less 
than  three  tightly  wound  wraps. 

d.  The  fencing  shall  be  fastened  to  wooden  line  posts  by  means 
of  staples.  Woven  wire  fencing  shall  be  attached  at  alter- 
nate horizontal  strands.  Each  strand  of  barbed  wire  shall 

be  attached  to  each  post.  Staples  shall  be  driven  diagonally 
with  the  grain  of  the  wood  and  at  a slight  downward  angle 
and  shall  not  be  driven  so  tightly  as  to  bind  the  wire 
against  the  post. 

e.  The  fencing  shall  be  fastened  to  steel  or  concrete  line 
posts  with  either  two  turns  of  14  gage  galvanized  steel  or 
iron  wire  or  the  post  manufacturer's  special  wire  clips. 

f.  Wire  shall  be  spliced  by  means  of  a Western  Union  splice 
having  not  less  than  8 wraps  of  each  end  about  the  other. 

All  wraps  shall  be  tightly  wound  and  closely  spaced. 

8.  STAYS 

Stays  shall  be  attached  to  the  fencing  in  a manner  to  insure  main- 
tenance of  the  proper  spacing  of  the  fence  wire  strands. 

9.  CROSSINGS  AT  DEPRESSIONS  AND  WATERCOURSES 


Where  fencing  is  installed  across  small  depressions  or  watercourses, 
either  of  the  following  methods  of  installation  shall  be  used: 


(92-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


2-227 


a.  If  the  fence  wire  is  installed  parallel  to  the  ground  surface, 
the  line  posts  subject  to  upward  pull  shall  be  anchored  by 
means  of  extra  embedment  or  by  special  anchors  as  detailed  on 
the  drawings. 

b.  If  the  wire  fence  is  installed  with  the  top  wire  straight  and 
parallel  to  the  ground  surface  on  either  side  of  the  depres- 
sion, extra  length  posts  shall  be  used  to  allow  normal  post 
embedment.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  excess  space  between 
the  bottom  of  the  fence  and  the  ground  shall  be  closed  with 
extra  strands  of  barbed  wire. 

10.  MEASUREMENT  AND  PAYMENT 


(Option  1)  The  length  of  each  type  and  kind  of  fence  will  be 
measured  to  the  nearest  foot  along  the  profile  of  the  fence, 
including  gate  openings.  Payment  for  each  type  and  kind  of  fence 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  kind  of 
fence.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all 
labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  performance  of  the  work  including  fabricating 
and  installing  gates. 

(Option  2)  The  length  of  each  type  and  kind  of  fence  will  be 
measured  to  the  nearest  foot  along  the  profile  of  the  fence, 
excluding  gate  openings.  Payment  for  each  type  and  kind  of  fence 
will  be  made  at  the  contract  unit  price  for  that  type  and  kind  of 
fence.  Such  payment  will  constitute  full  compensation  for  all 
labor,  materials,  equipment  and  all  other  items  necessary  and 
incidental  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  except  fabricating  and 
installing  gates.  Payment  for  each  type  and  size  of  gate  will  be 
made  at  the  contract  price  each  for  fabricating  and  installing 
that  type  and  size  of  gate. 

(Use  with  Either  Option)  Compensation  for  any  item  of  work 
described  in  the  contract  but  not  listed  in  the  bid  schedule 
will  be  included  in  the  payment  for  the  item  of  work  to  which 
it  is  made  subsidiary.  Such  items  and  the  items  to  which  they 
are  made  subsidiary  are  identified  in  Section  11  of  this  speci- 
fication. 


(92-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


% 


CHAPTER  3 


GUIDE  MATERIAL  SPECIFICATIONS 


3-1 


§) 

MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
511.  STEEL  PILES 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  type  and  quality  of  steel  piles. 

2.  BEARING  PILES 

Steel  bearing  piles  shall  be  structural  steel  H-piles  conforming 
to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 36. 

The  required  length  of  pile  may  be  fabricated  by  butt-welding 
shorter  lengths  of  pile  stock.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  the 
cross  section  of  each  pile  shall  be  constant  throughout  its 
length.  The  axis  of  the  pile  shall  be  straight  and  the  number 
of  welded  joints  in  the  length  of  the  pile  shall  be  as  few  as 
practicable.  Pieces  below  the  top  piece  shall  be  not  less  than 
10  feet  in  length. 

3.  SHEET  PILES 


Steel  sheet  piles  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM 
Specification  A 328. 

Sheet  piles  shall  be  the  standard  interlocking  type  having 
positive  interlocks,  effective  in  both  longitudinal  and  trans- 
verse directions,  that  are  continuous  throughout  the  length  of 
the  pile.  Fabrication  of  piles  from  shorter  lengths  of  pile 
stock  will  not  be  allowed. 


(511-1) 


I 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


m 


0 


3-3 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
512.  WOOD  PILES 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  wood  piles. 

2.  QUALITY  OF  PILES 

The  piles  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specifi- 
cation MM-P-371  for  the  specified  types  and  classes  of  piles. 

3.  TREATMENT 

Type  II  piles  shall  be  treated  with  the  specified  type  and  amount 
of  preservative  and  in  conformance  to  the  requirements  of  Material 
Specification  585 . 

4.  MARKING 


Each  Type  II  pile  delivered  to  the  job  site  shall  be  marked  as 
specified  in  Material  Specification  585 . 

No  marking  is  required  for  Type  I piles. 


I 


(512-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


# 


3-5 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
513.  PRECAST  CONCRETE  PILES 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  precast  concrete  piles. 

2.  GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

The  piles  shall  conform  to  the  details  shown  on  the  drawings.  The 
piles  shall  be  cast  of  portland  cement  concrete  mixed,  placed,  and 
cured  by  the  methods  specified  in  Construction  Specification  31. 
except  as  amended  in  this  specification.  The  finished  piles  shall 
be  true  to  line  with  smooth  surfaces  free  from  stone  pockets, 
honeycombs  or  other  defects. 

3.  CLASS  OF  CONCRETE 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  concrete  shall  be  Class  4000. 

4.  REINFORCEMENT 

Reinforcement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Construction 
Specification  34. 

5.  FORMS 

Forms  shall  be  built  of  plywood,  metal  or  dressed  lumber  and  shall 
have  one  inch  chamfer  strips  at  all  corners.  They  shall  be  mortar- 
tight,  true  to  line  and  supported  in  a manner  to  prevent  deforma- 
tion or  settlement  during  placement  of  the  concrete.  They  shall 
be  so  designed  as  to  be  removable  without  damaging  the  completed 
piles . 

6.  PLACING  CONCRETE 

The  concrete  shall  be  placed  in  each  pile  in  one  continuous 
operation.  The  concrete  shall  be  compacted  and  worked  into  the 
forms  and  around  the  reinforcement  by  the  methods  and  in  the 
manner  specified  in  Construction  Specification  31. 

7 . CURING 


The  piles  shall  be  cured  for  a period  of  not  less  than  14  days 
by  one  of  the  methods  specified  in  Construction  Specification  31. 

(513-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-6 


Test  cylinders  taken  for  the  purpose  of  determining  when  the 
piles  may  be  subjected  to  handling  stresses  shall  be  cured  by 
the  same  method,  at  the  same  location  and  under  the  same  condi- 
tions as  those  applied  to  the  piles. 

The  steam  curing  process  may  be  used  in  lieu  of  moist  curing  or 
membrane  curing.  The  piles  shall  be  cured  in  place  on  the  casting 
bed  by  the  introduction  of  steam  into  a steam-tight  housing  that 
completely  encloses  the  casting  bed.  The  first  application  of 
steam  shall  be  applied  after  the  concrete  has  undergone  initial 
set  but  in  no  case  sooner  than  2 hours  after  the  concrete  is 
placed  unless  a set-retarding  admixture  is  used  in  the  mix.  When 
a set-retarding  admixture  is  used  in  the  mix,  the  first  applica- 
tion of  steam  shall  be  applied  no  sooner  than  4 hours  after  the 
concrete  is  placed.  Moist  curing  methods  shall  be  applied  during 
the  interval  between  the  placement  of  the  concrete  and  the  appli- 
cation of  the  steam. 

The  steam  shall  be  at  100  percent  relative  humidity  and  shall  not 
be  applied  directly  on  the  concrete.  During  application  of  the 
steam,  the  ambient  air  temperature  within  the  housing  shall  be 
increased  at  a rate  of  not  more  than  40°F  per  hour  until  the 
maximum  temperature  is  reached.  The  temperature  within  the 
housing  shall  be  maintained  between  140°F  and  160°F  until  the 
concrete  has  reached  the  specified  strength.  In  discontinuing 
the  application  of  the  steam,  the  ambient  air  temperature  within 
the  housing  shall  be  decreased  at  a rate  of  not  more  than  40°F 
per  hour  until  the  temperature  within  the  housing  is  not  more 
than  20°F  above  the  ambient  air  temperature  outside  the  housing. 

The  concrete  shall  not  be  exposed  to  temperature  below  freezing 
for  at  least  6 days  after  placement. 

8.  REMOVING  FORMS 

Side  forms  shall  remain  in  place  at  least  24  hours. 

9.  HANDLING  AND  STORING  PILES 


The  Contractor  shall  handle  and  store  piles  by  methods  that  will 
not  cause  spalling,  cracking  or  other  damage  to  them.  The 
Contractor  shall  furnish  such  bridles,  slings  and  other  equipment 
as  are  necessary. 


(513-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-7 


Piles  shall  not  be  moved  until  the  tests  indicate  a compressive 
strength  of  at  least  80  percent  of  the  design  28-day  compressive 
strength.  They  shall  be  neither  transported  nor  driven  until 
the  field  cured  test  cylinders  indicate  a compressive  strength 
at  least  equal  to  the  design  28-day  compressive  strength. 

Piles  that  are  cracked,  spalled  or  otherwise  damaged  during 
handling  will  be  rejected. 


(513-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


* 


3-9 


1 

MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 

514.  CAST -IN-PLACE  CONCRETE  PILES  WITH  SHELLS 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  piles  formed  by  driving 
shells  to  the  required  bearing,  leaving  the  shells  permanently  in 
place,  and  filling  them  with  concrete. 

2.  GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

The  piles  may  have  constant  diameter  or  may  be  tapered.  In  diam- 
eter, a tapered  pile  shall  increase  uniformly,  or  in  uniformly 
sized  and  spaced  steps,  from  bottom  to  top.  Unless  otherwise 
specified,  the  average  diameter  of  each  pile  shall  be  not  less 
than  11  inches.  The  minimum  tip  diameter  of  a tapered  pile  shall 
be  eight  inches. 

3.  SHELL 

The  shell  shall  be  made  of  reinforced  concrete  or  steel.  It  shall 
have  sufficient  strength  and  rigidity  to  prevent  its  distortion 
during  driving  or  after  driving  by  soil  or  water  pressures  or 
pressures  caused  by  the  driving  of  adjacent  piles.  It  shall  be 
sufficiently  watertight  to  exclude  water  during  placement  of 
concrete.  Driven  shells  shall  be  clean  and  free  of  water  before 
reinforcing  steel  or  concrete  is  placed. 

4.  REINFORCEMENT 

When  internal  reinforcement  is  specified,  it  shall  conform  to  the 
details  on  the  drawings  and  to  the  requirements  of  Construction 
Specification  34. 

5.  CONCRETE 


Concrete  shall  not  be  placed  in  any  pile  until  the  driven  shell, 
with  the  reinforcement  in  place,  has  been  inspected  and  approved 
by  the  Engineer. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  concrete:  (1)  shall  conform  to 

the  requirements  of  Construction  Specif ication  31  and  shall  be 
Class  4000;  (2)  shall  be  placed  in  each  pile  in  one  continuous 
operation;  and  (3)  shall  be  placed  and  consolidated  into  the  shell 
in  conformance  to  the  requirements  of  Construction  Specification  31. 


t 


(514-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-11 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
521,  AGGREGATES  FOR  DRAIN  FILL  AND  FILTERS 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  mineral  aggregates  for 
the  construction  of  drain  fill  and  filters. 

2.  QUALITY 

Drain  fill  and  filter  aggregates  shall  be  sand,  gravel  or  crushed 
stone  or  mixtures  thereof.  They  shall  be  composed  of  clean,  hard, 
durable  mineral  particles  free  from  organic  matter,  clay  balls, 
soft  particles  or  other  substances  that  would  interfere  with  their 
free -draining  properties.  Not  more  than  15  percent,  by  weight, 
shall  be  flat,  elongated  particles. 


Unless  otherwise 
finer  than  a No. 


specified,  not  more  than  5 percent  of  the  material 
4 sieve  shall  be  crushed  limestone. 


When  tested  for  soundness  according  to  ASTM  Method  C 88,  the 
aggregates  shall  have  a weighted  average  loss  in  five  cycles  of 
not  more  than  12  percent  when  sodium  sulfate  is  used  or  18  percent 
when  magnesium  sulfate  is  used. 


3.  GRADING 


Drain  fill  and  filter  aggregates  shall  conform  to  the  specified 
grading  limits  after  being  placed  in  the  work,  and  after  being 
compacted  if  compaction  is  specified.  Grading  shall  be  determined 
by  ASTM  Method  C 136,  but  the  percentage  of  material  finer  than  a 
No.  200  sieve  shall  be  not  more  than  3 percent  when  determined  by 
ASTM  Method  C 117. 

4.  STORING  AND  HANDLING 


Drain  fill  and  filter  aggregates  shall  be  stored  and  handled  by 
methods  that  prevent  segregation  of  particle  sizes  or  contamination 
by  mixing  with  other  materials. 


(521-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


I 


I 


% 


I 


0 


3 -13 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
522.  AGGREGATE  FOR  PORTLAND  CEMENT  CONCRETE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  fine  aggregate  and  coarse 
aggregate  for  use  in  the  manufacture  of  Portland  cement  concrete. 

2.  QUALITY 

Aggregate  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification 
C-33  for  the  specified  sizes.  Aggregates  that  fail  to  meet  any 
requirement  may  be  accepted  only  when:  (1)  the  specified  alternate 

conditions  of  acceptance  can  be  proved  prior  to  the  use  of  the 
aggregates  on  the  job  and  within  a period  of  time  such  that  no 
work  under  the  contract  will  be  delayed  by  the  requirements  of 
such  proof;  or,  (2)  the  specification  for  concrete  expressly 
contains  a provision  of  special  mix  requirements  to  compensate 
for  the  effects  of  the  deficiencies. 

3.  REACTIVITY  WITH  ALKALIES 


The  potential  reactivity  of  aggregates  with  the  alkalies  in  cement 
shall  be  evaluated  by  petrographic  examination  and,  where  appli- 
cable, the  chemical  method  of  test,  ASTM  Designation  C 289,  or  by 
the  results  of  previous  tests  or  service  records  of  concrete  made 
from  similar  aggregates  from  the  same  source.  The  standards  for 
evaluating  potential  reactivity  shall  be  as  described  in  ASTM 
Specification  C 33,  Appendix  Al. 

Aggregates  indicated  by  any  of  the  above  to  be  potentially  reactive 
shall  not  be  used,  except  under  one  of  the  following  conditions: 

a.  Applicable  test  results  of  mortar  bar  tests,  made  accord- 
ing to  ASTM  Method  C 227,  are  available  which  indicate  an 
expansion  of  less  than  0.10  percent  at  six  months  in  mortar 
bars  made  with  cement  containing  not  less  than  0.8  percent 
alkalies  expressed  as  sodium  oxide;  or 

b.  Concrete  made  from  similar  aggregates  from  the  same  source 
has  been  demonstrated  to  be  sound  after  3 years  or  more  of 
service  under  conditions  of  exposure  to  moisture  and 
weather  similar  to  those  anticipated  for  the  concrete  under 
these  specifications. 

(522-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3 -14 


Aggregates  indicated  to  be  potentially  reactive,  but  within 
acceptable  limits  as  determined  by  mortar  bar  test  results  or 
service  records,  shall  be  used  only  with  "low  alkali"  cement, 
containing  less  than  0.60  percent  alkalies  expressed  as  sodium 
oxide. 

4.  STORING  AND  HANDLING 


Aggregate  of  each  class  and  size  shall  be  stored  and  handled  by 
methods  that  prevent  segregation  of  particle  sizes  or  contamina- 
tion by  intermixing  with  other  materials. 


(522-2) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3 -15 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
523.  ROCK  FOR  RIPRAP 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  rock  to  be  used  in  the 
construction  of  rock  riprap. 

2.  QUALITY 

Individual  rock  fragments  shall  be  dense,  sound  and  free  from 
cracks,  seams  and  other  defects  conducive  to  accelerated  weathering. 
The  rock  fragments  shall  be  angular  to  subrounded  in  shape.  The 
least  dimension  of  an  individual  rock  fragment  shall  be  not  less 
than  one-third  the  greatest  dimension  of  the  fragment. 

Except  as  provided  below,  the  rock  shall  have  the  following 
properties : 

a.  Bulk  specific  gravity  (saturated  surface-dry  basis)  not  less 
than  2.5. 

b.  Absorption  not  more  than  2 percent. 

c.  Soundness : Weight  loss  in  5 cycles  not  more  than  10 

percent  when  sodium  sulfate  is  used  or  15  percent  when 
magnesium  sulfate  is  used. 

The  bulk  specific  gravity  and  absorption  shall  be  determined  by 
ASTM  Method  C 127.  The  test  for  soundness  shall  be  performed 
according  to  the  procedure  for  ledge  rock  in  Federal  Specification 
SS-R-406c,  Method  203.01. 

Rock  that  fails  to  meet  the  requirements  stated  in  a,  b,  and  c 
above,  may  be  accepted  only  if  similar  rock  from  the  same  source 
has  been  demonstrated  to  be  sound  after  5 years  or  more  of  service 
under  conditions  of  weather,  wetting  and  drying,  and  erosive 
forces  similar  to  those  anticipated  for  the  rock  to  be  installed 
under  this  specification. 

3.  GRADING 


The  rock  shall  conform  to  the  specified  grading  limits  after  it 
has  been  placed  in  the  riprap. 

(523-1) 

NEH  1/2970  (Notice  20-27) 


% 


! 


3 -17 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
531.  PORTLAND  CEMENT 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  portland  cements. 

2.  QUALITY 

Portland  cement  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifi- 
cation C 150  for  the  specified  types  of  cement,  except  that,  when- 
ever Type  I portland  cement  is  specified,  portland  blast  furnace 
slag  cement  conforming  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification 
C 595  may  be  used  in  lieu  thereof. 

If  air-entraining  cement  is  to  be  used,  the  Contractor  shall  furnish 
the  manufacturer's  written  statement  giving  the  source,  amount  and 
brand  name  of  the  air -entraining  addition. 

3.  STORAGE  AT  THE  CONSTRUCTION  SITE 


Cement  shall  be  stored  in  such  a manner  as  to  be  protected  from 
weather,  dampness  or  other  destructive  agencies.  Cement  that  is 
partially  hydrated  or  otherwise  damaged  will  be  rejected. 


(531-1) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


3-19 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 

532.  AIR  -ENTRAINING  ADMIXTURES 
(FOR  CONCRETE) 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  air-entraining 
admixtures  for  concrete. 

2.  QUALITY 

Air-entraining  admixtures  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  ASTM  Specification  C 260,  except  that  the  relative 
durability  factor  in  the  freezing  and  thawing  test  shall 
be  not  less  than  95. 


# 


(532-1) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


3-21 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 

533.  WATER -REDUCING  AND  SET-RETARDING  ADMIXTURES 
FOR  PORTLAND  CEMENT  CONCRETE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  water-retarding  and  set- 
retarding  admixtures  for  port  land  cement  concrete. 

2.  QUALITY 

Water-reducing  and  set -retarding  admixtures  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  C 494,  except  that  resistance  to 
freezing  and  thawing  shall  be  determined  in  all  cases,  and  the 
minimum  relative  durability  factor  shall  be  95. 

3.  TYPES 

Admixtures  shall  be  Type  A,  Water -Reducing  or  Type  D,  Water -Reducing 
and  Retarding,  as  defined  in  ASTM  Specification  C 494. 

4.  PERFORMANCE  IN  THE  JOB  MIX 


When  added  in  the  manner  and  amount  recommended  by  the  manufacturer 
to  the  concrete  used  on  the  job,  with  no  change  in  the  cement  con- 
tent or  proportions  of  the  aggregates,  admixtures  shall  have  the 
following  effects  : 

Type  A or  Type  D:  The  water  content  at  the  required  slump  shall 

be  at  least  5 percent  less  with  the  admixture  than  without.  The 
air  content  shall  remain  within  the  range  specified,  but  shall  not 
exceed  8 percent  in  any  case. 

Type  D : The  time  of  initial  setting,  determined  as  prescribed  in 

ASTM  C 494,  shall  be  from  1 to  3 hours  longer  with  the  admixture 
than  without. 


(533-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


I 


* 


i. 


3-23 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
534.  CURING  COMPOUND  (FOR  CONCRETE) 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  liquid  membrane -forming 
compounds  suitable  for  spraying  on  concrete  surfaces  to  retard 
the  loss  of  water  during  the  curing  process. 

2.  QUALITY 

The  curing  compound  shall  meet  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifi- 
cation C 309. 

Unless  otherwise  specified  the  compound  shall  be  Type  2. 

3.  DELIVERY  AND  STORAGE 


All  curing  compound  shall  be  delivered  to  the  site  of  the  work  in 
the  original  container  bearing  the  name  of  the  manufacturer  and 
the  brand  name.  The  compound  shall  be  stored  in  a manner  to 
prevent  damage  to  the  containers  and  to  protect  water -emulsion 
types  from  freezing. 


(534-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


ft 


3-25 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
535.  PREFORMED  EXPANSION  JOINT  FILLER 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  preformed  expansion  joint 
fillers  for  concrete. 

2.  QUALITY 

Preformed  expansion  joint  filler  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  ASTM  Specification  D 1752,  Type  I,  Type  II  or  Type  III,  unless 
bituminous  type  is  specified.  Bituminous  type  preformed  expansion 
joint  filler  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifica- 
tion D 994. 


(535-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


* 


ki 


3-27 


material  specification 

536.  SEALING  COMPOUND  FOR  JOINTS  IN  CONCRETE  AMD  CONCRETE  PIPE 

1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  sealing  compound  for 
filling  joints  in  concrete  pipe  and  concrete  structures. 

2.  TYPE 


The  compound  shall  be  a cold-application  mastic,  single  component 
or  multiple  component  type. 

The  single  component  type  shall  be  a ready -mixed  nondrying 
compound  furnished  in  troweling  consistency  or  in  preformed  rope 
or  strip  form. 

The  multiple  component  type  shall  be  composed  of  two  or  more 
substances  that  are  to  be  mixed  prior  to  application. 

3.  QUALITY 

Sealing  compound  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  one  of 
the  following  specifications: 

ASTM  Specification  D 1850;  Concrete  Joint  Sealer, 
Cold-Application  Type.  Penetration,  determined  as 
specified  in  ASTM  D 1850,  shall  be  not  greater  than 
120. 

Federal  Specification  SS-S-00210;  Sealing  Compound, 

Preformed  Plastic,  for  Expansion  Joints  and  Pipe 
Joints. 

Federal  Specification  TT-S-227;  Sealing  Compound; 

Rubber  Base,  Two  Component  (For  Calking,  Sealing 
and  Glazing  in  Building  Construction),  Type  II. 

The  compound  shall  be  capable  of  being  applied  at  a temperature 
of  70°F  and  shall  be  of  such  nature  that  it  will  adhere  to  dry, 
dust  free  concrete  when  applied  either  directly  or  over  a 
suitable  primer.  After  curing  it  shall  be  a resilient, 
adhesive  material  that  is  capable  of  filling  joints  and  firm 
enough  to  prevent  the  entry  of  subsequently  placed  concrete 
or  of  earth  during  the  bedding,  cradling  or  backfilling 
operations. 


(536-1) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-28 


‘4.  COMPOSITION  AND  PROPERTIES 


The  compound,  if  used  for  pipe  having  rubber  gaskets,  shall 
have  a composition  such  that  it  will  not  cause  deterioration 
of  the  rubber  gaskets. 


(536-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-29 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
537.  NON-METALLIC  WATERSTOPS 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  non-metallic  waterstops  for  use  in  joints 
of  concrete  structures. 

2.  CLASSIFICATION 


a.  Classes . Non-metallic  waterstops  shall  be  of  the  following 
classes,  as  specified: 

Class  I shall  be  made  of  either  natural  or  synthetic 
rubber. 

Class  II  shall  be  made  of  vinyl  chloride  polymer  or 
copolymer. 

b.  Types . Non-metallic  waterstops  may  be  either  split  or 
solid  and  shall  conform  to  the  following  types,  as  specified 
(see  Figure  1)  : 

Type  A shall  have  ribbed  anchor  flanges  and  a smooth  web. 
Flanges  may  be  of  uniform  thickness  or  may  have  either 
a converging  or  a diverging  taper  toward  the  edges. 

Type  B shall  have  ribbed  anchor  flanges  and  a smooth  web 
containing  a hollow  tubular  center  bulb  having:  (1)  a 

wall  thickness  equal  to  at  least  one-half  the  web  thick- 
ness and  (2)  the  inside  diameter  (D)  specified  in  the 
contract.  Flanges  may  be  of  uniform  thickness  or  may 
have  either  a converging  or  a diverging  taper  toward 
the  edges. 

Type  C shall  have  a single,  circular,  bulb -type  anchor 
flange  at  each  edge  and  a smooth  web. 

Type  D shall  have  a single,  circular,  bulb-type  anchor 
flange  at  each  edge  and  a smooth  web  containing  a hollow 
tubular  center  bulb  having:  (1)  a wall  thickness  equal 

to  at  least  one -half  the  thickness  of  the  web  and  (2) 
the  inside  diameter  (D)  specified  in  the  contract. 


(537-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-30 


Type  E shall  have  ribbed  anchor  flanges  and  a web  molded 
or  extruded  in  the  form  of  a round  or  U-shaped  bulb  of 
the  dimensions  specified  in  the  contract.  The  web  bulb 
shall  be  connected  at  the  open  end  of  the  MUM  by  a thin 
membrane  (having  a thickness  of  not  less  than  1/64-inch 
or  more  than  1/5  the  web  thickness)  designed  to:  (1) 

prevent  infiltration  of  wet  concrete  into  the  bulb  and 

(2)  tear  when  expansion  of  the  joint  occurs.  Flanges  may 
be  of  uniform  thickness  or  may  have  either  a converging 
or  a diverging  taper  toward  the  edges.  Auxilliary 
positioning  or  nailing  flanges  may  be  provided  so  long 
as  they  do  not  interfere  with  the  functioning  of  the  web 
bulb. 

Type  F shall  have  ribbed  anchor  flanges  with  at  least 
two  extra  heavy  ribs  (designed  to  resist  displacement  of 
the  waterstop  during  placement  of  concrete)  on  each  flange 
and  a smooth  web  having  a positioning  or  nailing  flange 
attached  at  the  center. 

Type  G shall  be  of  special  design  conforming  to  the  details 
shown  on  the  drawings. 

c.  Sizes . Waterstops  of  Types  A through  F shall  be  of  the  sizes 
listed  herein,  as  specified  (see  Table  1).  Type  G waterstops 
shall  have  the  dimensions  shown  on  the  drawings. 

3.  PHYSICAL  REQUIREMENTS 

The  extruded  or  molded  materials  shall  exhibit  the  properties 
specified  herein  when  tested  by  the  methods  specified  in  Section  4 
of  this  specification. 

a.  Class  I Waterstops 

(1)  The  hardness  (Shore  A durometer)  shall  be  not  less 
than  60. 

(2)  The  specific  gravity  shall  be  not  more  than  1.2. 

(3)  The  tensile  strength  shall  be  not  less  than  2500 
pounds  per  square  inch. 

(4)  The  ultimate  elongation  shall  be  not  less  than 
450  percent. 

(537-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-31 


(5)  The  compression  set  shall  be  not  more  than 
30  percent. 

(6)  The  water  absorption  (by  weight)  shall  be  not 
more  than  5 percent. 

(7)  The  decrease  in  tensile  strength  and  ultimate 
elongation  after  aging  shall  be  not  more  than 
20  percent. 

(8)  There  shall  be  no  sign  of  failure  due  to 
brittleness  at  a temperature  of  minus  35°F. 

b.  Class  II  Waterstops 

(1)  The  hardness  (Shore  A durometer)  shall  be  not 
less  than  60. 

(2)  The  specific  gravity  shall  be  not  more  than  1.4. 

(3)  The  tensile  strength  shall  be  not  less  than 
1400  pounds  per  square  inch. 

(4)  The  ultimate  elongation  of  the  web  shall  be 
not  less  than  280  percent  and  that  of  the 
flanges  shall  be  not  less  than  200  percent. 

(5)  The  water  absorption  (by  weight)  shall  be  not 
more  than  one  percent. 

(6)  There  shall  be  no  sign  of  failure  due  to  flange 
brittleness  at  a temperature  of  0°F.  nor  of  web 
brittleness  at  a temperature  of  minus  35°F. 

(7)  The  decrease  in  either  tensile  strength  or 
ultimate  elongation  after  accelerated  extraction 
shall  be  not  greater  than  15  percent. 

(8)  As  a result  of  the  effects  of  alkalies: 

(a)  After  immersion  for  7 days,  the  sample  shall 
exhibit  no  loss  of  weight  and  not  more  than 
0.25  percent  increase  in  weight,  and  the 
hardness  (Shore  A)  of  the  treated  sample  shall 
differ  from  that  of  the  untreated  sample  by 
not  more  than  plus  5 points  or  minus  5 points. 

(537-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-32 


(b)  After  immersion  for  30  days,  the  sample 
shall  exhibit  no  loss  of  weight  and  not 
more  than  0.40  percent  increase  in 
weight,  and  the  dimensions  of  the  treated 
sample  shall  not  differ  from  those  of  the 
untreated  sample  by  more  than  one  percent. 

4.  TEST  METHODS 

Testing  shall  be  done  by  the  methods  cited  herein.  All  cited 
test  methods  are  included  in  Federal  Test  Method  Standard  No.  601. 

a.  Hardness  shall  be  determined  by  Method  3021. 

b.  Specific  gravity  shall  be  determined  by  Method  14011. 

c.  Tensile  strength  shall  be  determined  by  Method  4111. 

d.  Ultimate  elongation  shall  be  determined  by  Method  4121. 

e.  Compression  set  shall  be  determined  by  Method  3311. 

f.  Water  absorption  shall  be  determined  by  Method  6631. 

g.  Tensile  strength  and  ultimate  elongation  after  aging 
shall  be  determined  by  Method  7111. 

h.  Brittleness  shall  be  determined  by  Method  5311. 

i.  Accelerated  extraction  shall  be  accomplished  by  Method 
6111  under  the  following  conditions: 

(1)  Samples  shall  be  not  less  than  1/16-inch  nor 
more  than  1/8-inch  in  thickness; 

(2)  The  immersion  medium  shall  be  a solution  made 
by  dissolving  5 grams  of  chemically  pure  sodium 
hydroxide  and  5 grams  of  chemically  pure  potassium 
hydroxide  in  one  liter  of  distilled  water; 

(3)  The  samples  shall  be  immersed  in  the  medium  for 
14  days  at  a temperature  of  145°  1 5°F; 

(4)  During  the  immersion  period,  air  shall  be  gently 
bubbled  through  the  medium  from  a 1/4-inch  glass 
tube  at  a rate  of  about  one  bubble  per  second; 

(537-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-33 


(5)  Fresh  medium  shall  be  susbtituted  every  day; 

(6)  Samples  need  not  be  dipped  in  acetone. 

j.  The  effects  of  alkalies  shall  be  determined  by  Method  6251 

under  the  following  conditions : 

(1)  Samples  shall  be  not  more  than  1/4-inch  in 
thickness ; 

(2)  The  immersion  medium  shall  be  as  described  in 
(i),  above; 

(3)  Fresh  medium  shall  be  substituted  every  7 days. 

(4)  The  samples  shall  be  immersed  in  the  medium  for 
a period  of  30  days; 

(5)  Samples  need  not  be  dipped  in  acetone. 

5 . CONDITION 


Waterstops  shall  be  extruded  or  molded  in  such  a manner  that  the 
material  is  dense  and  homogeneous  throughout  and  free  from  voids, 
tears,  thins,  indentations,  or  other  imperfections.  Unless  other- 
wise specified,  waterstops  shall  be  syraetrical  in  shape  and  uniform 
in  dimensions  and  shall  be  furnished  in  continuous  strips  at  least 
50  feet  long.  Factory  splices  shall  have  a tensile  strength  equal 
to  at  least  one-half  that  of  the  unspliced  section. 

6.  PACKAGING  AND  STORING 


Waterstops  shall  be  package  and  stored  by  methods  that  will  protect 
them  from  prolonged  exposure  to  direct  sunlight  or  excessive  heat. 


(537-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-34 


TABLE  1.  SIZES  OF  WATERSTOPS 


Size 

Designation 


Web  Thickness  (T) 
(Inches) 


Width  (W) 
(Inches) 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 
23 


1/16 

5 

1/4 

3/32 

3 

3/4 

3/32 

4 

3/32 

5 

1/4 

3/32 

6 

1/8 

4 

1/8 

5 

1/4 

1/8 

6 

5/32 

4 

5/32 

4 

1/2 

5/32 

9 

3/16 

4 

3/16 

5 

3/16 

6 

3/16 

9 

1/4 

6 

1/4 

9 

3/8 

5 

3/8 

6 

3/8 

9 

1/2 

6 

1/2 

9 

1/2 

12 

(537-6) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3 -34a 


FIGURE  1 

TYPES  OF  NON-METALLIC  WATERSTOPS 


TYPE  A 


TYPE  B 


TYPE  C 


TYPE  D 


TYPE  F 


(537-7) 

NEH  12/4/68  (Notice  20-24) 


c 


3-35 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
538.  METAL  WATERSTOPS 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  materials  for  metal  water- 
stops  . 

2.  MATERIALS 

Metal  waters tops  shall  be  made  of  copper,  wrought  iron  or  galvanized 
steel  as  specified.  Waterstops  that  require  forming  of  the  metal 
involving  sharp  bends  shall  be  made  of  copper  which  shall  be  soft 
enough  to  stand  being  bent  cold  through  180  degrees  at  an  inside 
radius  equal  to  its  thickness  without  cracking. 

3.  QUALITY 

Metal  for  waterstops  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the 
applicable  ASTM  standard  specifications  below: 

Copper  - ASTM  Specification  B 152 

Wrought  iron  - ASTM  Specification  A 162 

Zinc-coated  (Galvanized)  wrought  iron  - ASTM  Specifi- 
cation A 163 

Zinc-coated  (Galvanized)  steel  - ASTM  Specification 
A 526 


(538-1) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


3-37 


V 

MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
539.  STEEL  REINFORCEMENT  (FOR  CONCRETE) 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  steel  reinforcement  for 
reinforced  concrete. 

2.  QUALITY 

All  reinforcement  shall  be  free  from  rust,  oil,  grease,  paint  or 
other  deleterious  matter. 

Steel  bars  for  concrete  reinforcement  requiring  bends  shall  be 
deformed  billet-steel  bars  conforming  to  ASTM  Specification  A 615, 
Grade  40. 

Straight  steel  bars  shall  be  deformed  bars  conforming  to  one  of  the 
following  specifications: 

Deformed  Billet-Steel  Bars  for  Concrete  Reinforcement 
(Grade  40  or  Grade  60)  - ASTM  Designation  A 615. 

Rail-Steel  Deformed  Bars  for  Concrete  Reinforcement 
(Grade  50  or  Grade  60)  - ASTM  Designation  A 616. 

Axle-Steel  Deformed  Bars  for  Concrete  Reinforcement 
(Grade  40  or  Grade  60)  - ASTM  Designation  A 617. 

Fabricated  steel  bar  mats  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
ASTM  Specification  A 184. 

Welded  steel  wire  fabric  reinforcement  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 185. 

Welded  deformed  steel  wire  fabric  for  concrete  reinforcement 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 497. 

Cold-drawn  steel  wire  reinforcement  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  ASTM  Specification  A 82. 

Deformed  steel  wire  for  concrete  reinforcement  shall  conform  to 
the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 496. 


(539-1) 

NEH  1/28/69  (Notice  20-25) 


3-38 


3.  DIMENSIONS  OF  WELDED  WIRE  FABRIC 


Gages,  spacing  and  arrangement  of  wires  in  welded  steel  wire 
fabric  shall  be  as  defined  in  ACI  Standard  315  of  the  American 
Concrete  Institute  for  the  specified  style  designations. 

4.  STORAGE 


Steel  reinforcement  stored  at  the  site  of  the  work  shall  be 
stored  above  the  ground  surface  on  platforms,  skids  or 
other  supports  and  shall  be  protected  from  mechanical  injury 
and  corrosion. 


(539-2) 

NEH  1/28/69  (Notice  20-25) 


3-39 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
541.  REINFORCED  CONCRETE  PRESSURE  PIPE 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  reinforced  concrete 
pressure  pipe  and  fittings. 

2.  DESIGN  AND  FABRICATION 


The  pipe  and  fittings  shall  be  designed  to  withstand  the  specified 
external  load  and  internal  pressure.  The  pipe,  the  materials  used 
in  its  manufacture,  and  the  methods  of  fabrication  shall  conform 
to  the  requirements  of  the  following  specifications  applicable  to 
the  specified  type  of  pipe. 


a.  Steel  Cylinder  Type,  Prestressed:  AWWA  Standard  C301  for 

Prestressed  Concrete  Pressure  Pipe,  Steel  Cylinder  Type, 
for  Water  and  Other  Liquids. 


b.  Steel  Cylinder  Type,  Not  Prestressed:  AWWA  Standard  C300, 

except  that  Section  2.6,  Steel  for  Cylinders,  paragraph 
W 2.6.1  shall  be: 


2.6.1  Steel  sheets  for  cylinders  may  be  in  coils 
or  cut  lengths,  and  shall  meet  the  requirements 
of  (1)  the  "Specification  for  Hot-Rolled  Carbon 
Steel  Sheets  and  Strip,  Commercial  Quality"  (ASTM 
Designation  A 569),  except  that  the  maximum  carbon 
content  may  be  0.25  percent  and  the  minimum  yield 
point  shall  be  27,000  psi  or  (2)  the  "Specification 
for  Hot-Rolled  Carbon  Steel  Sheets  and  Strip, 
Structural  Quality,"  Grade  B or  C (ASTM  Designation 
A 570). 


(541-1) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


3-40 


c.  Noncylinder  Type,  Not  Prestressed:  AWWA  Standard  C302; 

d.  Low  Head  Pressure  Pipe:  ASTM  Specifications  C 361. 

Sections  1.6  and  1.7  of  AWWA  Standards  C300,  C301  and  C302  shall 
not  apply. 

3.  STEEL  REINFORCEMENT 


The  steel  reinforcements  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
the  specifications  cited  in  Section  2 for  the  specified  type  of 
pipe,  except  that  elliptical  reinforcing  cages  or  other  rein- 
forcements that  require  special  orientation  of  the  pipe  during 
placement  will  not  be  allowed. 

4.  JOINTS 


The  pipe  joints  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the  appli- 
cable specification  for  the  pipe.  They  shall  be  bell-and-spigot 
type  or  double-spigot-and-s leeve  type  and  shall  have  a positive 
groove  in  the  spigot  to  contain  the  rubber  gasket.  The  size 
and  shape  of  the  groove  shall  be  such  that  it  will  prevent  dis- 
placement of  the  gasket  by  either  internal  or  external  water 
pressure  when  the  joint  is  in  any  position  within  the  required 
range  of  movement  capability.  Joint  sleeves,  also  referred  to 
as  "collars”  or  "coupling  bands,"  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments for  bell  rings  in  the  applicable  pipe  specification. 

The  joints  shall  be  constructed  so  as  to  permit  relative  movement 
of  the  adjoining  pipe  sections  with  no  reduction  of  watertightness. 
The  joint  length  and  the  limiting  angle  defining  the  required 
capability  of  relative  movement  at  each  joint  shall  be  no  less 
than  specified. 

Joint  length  refers  to  the  permissible  axial  movement  in  the 
joint,  and  is  defined  as  the  maximum  distance  through  which  the 
spigot  can  move,  relative  to  the  bell  or  sleeve,  from  the  fully 
engaged  to  the  fully  extended  condition  of  the  joint  when  the 
adjoining  pipe  sections  are  in  parallel,  concentric  alignment. 

The  joint  is  considered  to  be  fully  engaged  when  the  spigot  is 
inserted  as  far  as  it  will  go  into  the  bell  or  sleeve,  and 
fully  extended  when  it  is  inserted  the  least  amount  that  will 
insure  full  confinement  of  the  gasket  and  complete  watertight- 
ness. Joint  length  specified  for  double-spigot  joints  refers 
to  the  permissible  movement  in  each  of  the  spigot-to-s leeve 
connections,  not  the  sum  of  the  two. 


(541-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-41 


The  limiting  angle  of  the  joint  is  defined  as  the  maximum  deflec- 
tion angle  between  adjoining  pipe  sections  the  joint  will  permit 
before  the  outer  surface  of  the  spigot  comes  into  direct  contact 
with  inside  of  the  mating  bell  or  sleeve.  If  both  spigot-to-s leeve 
connections  of  a double -spigot  joint  permit  angular  movement,  the 
limiting  angle  of  the  joint  is  the  sum  of  the  two  deflection  angles 
permitted  by  the  two  connections. 

5.  GASKETS 

The  pipe  joint  gaskets  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the 
specifications  cited  in  Section  2 of  this  specification.  They  shall 
be  endless  rubber  gaskets  having  circular  cross  section.  The 
cross-sectional  diameter  of  the  gaskets  shall  conform  to  the  pipe 
manufacturer's  recommendation  for  the  type  and  size  of  pipe  furnished. 

6.  MARKING 

All  pipe  sections  and  special  fittings  shall  be  marked  by  the  manu- 
facturer with  the  manufacturer’s  name  or  trademark,  the  date  of 
manufacture,  the  nominal  size,  design  head,  design  external  load 
and  the  structure  site  for  which  it  was  designed  and  manufactured. 

7.  INSPECTION,  TESTING  AND  CERTIFICATION 

The  pipe  shall  be  inspected  by  methods  prescribed  in  the  specifi- 
cations cited  herein,  except  that  external  crushing  strength  tests 
required  as  a basis  for  certification  shall  be  performed  by  the 
three-edge  bearing  method  described  in  ASTM  Methods  C 497. 

The  three-edge  bearing  load  shall  be  defined  as: 

a.  For  pipe  conforming  to  ASTM  Specifications  C 361,  AWWA 
Standard  C300  for  AWWA  Standard  C302,  the  load  required 
to  produce  a 0.01-inch  crack  one  foot  long;  or, 

b.  For  pipe  conforming  to  AWWA  Standard  C301,  the  load 
required  to  produce  a 0.001-inch  crack  one  foot  long. 

The  material  certification  will  include: 

a.  The  pipe  manufacturer's  certified  statement  of  the  design 
strength  of  the  pipe,  consisting  of: 

(1)  For  types  of  pipe  for  which  design  curve  have 

been  approved  by  the  Soil  Conservation  Service, 

(a)  a copy  of  the  appropriate  design  curve  marked 

(541-3) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-42 


to  show  the  resultant  concrete  core  stress  and 
corresponding  three -edge  bearing  load  of  the  pipe 
furnished;  and  (b)  a specification  sheet  for  the 
pipe  furnished  showing  all  data  and  dimensions 
needed  to  compute  the  resultant  concrete  core 
stress;  or 

(2)  Results  of  typical  external  crushing  strength 
tests  performed  on  pipe  of  equivalent  size  and 
design  and  composed  of  equivalent  materials,  or 

(3)  Results  of  external  crushing  strength  tests 
performed  on  a specimen  (at  least  two  feet  in 
length)  of  pipe  identical  in  design  and  construc- 
tion to  the  pipe  furnished. 

b.  The  pipe  manufacturer's  certified  statement  of  results  of 
the  hydrostatic  tests  required  by  the  reference  specification 
appropriate  to  the  type  of  pipe  furnished. 

c.  The  pipe  manufacturer's  certified  statement  of  current 
typical  test  reports  on  steel  and  steel  wire  reinforcing 
and  compression  tests  of  the  concrete  used  in  the  manufac- 
ture of  the  pipe. 

d.  Such  drawings  and  descriptions  of  the  pipe  joint  as  may  be 
necessary  to  show  that  the  joint  conforms  to  the  specified 
requirements . 


(541-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-43 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
542.  CONCRETE  CULVERT  PIPE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  nonreinforced  and 

reinforced  concrete  culvert  pipe. 

2.  NONREINFORCED  PIPE 

Nonreinforced  concrete  culvert  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  ASTM  Specifications  C 14  for  the  class  of  pipe  specified. 

3.  REINFORCED  PIPE 

a.  Round  pipe.  Round  reinforced  concrete  culvert  pipe 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifications 
C 76  for  the  class  of  pipe  specified. 

b.  Arch  pipe.  Reinforced  concrete  arch  culvert  pipe  shall 
conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifications  C 506 
for  the  class  of  pipe  specified. 

c.  Elliptical  pipe.  Reinforced  concrete  elliptical  culvert 
pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Speci- 
fications C 507  for  the  class  of  pipe  specified. 

4.  RUBBER  GASKET  JOINTS 


When  rubber  gasket  joints  are  specified,  the  joints  and  gaskets 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifications  C 443. 


(542-5) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


£ 


1'  ( 


/ 


3-45 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 

542,  NONREINFORCED  CONCRETE  IRRIGATION  PIPE, 
DRAINAGE  PIPE  AND  DRAIN  TILE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  nonreinf orced  concrete 
irrigation  pipe,  drainage  pipe,  and  drain  tile. 

2.  IRRIGATION  PIPE 

Unless  rubber  gasket  joints  are  specified,  nonreinforced  concrete 
irrigation  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifi- 
cations C 118  for  Standard  Concrete  Irrigation  Pipe. 

3.  IRRIGATION  PIPE  WITH  RUBBER  GASKET  JOINTS 

Nonreinforced  concrete  irrigation  pipe  with  rubber  gasket  joints 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  C 505. 

4.  DRAINAGE  PIPE 

Nonreinforced  concrete  drainage  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  ASTM  Specifications  C 118  for  the  class  of  pipe  specified. 

5.  PERFORATED  PIPE 

Perforated  nonreinforced  concrete  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  require 
ments  of  ASTM  Specifications  C 444  for  the  class  of  pipe  specified. 

6.  DRAIN  TILE 

Concrete  drain  tile  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM 
Specifications  C 412  for  the  class  of  tile  specified. 


(543-1) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


( 


3-47 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
544„  CLAY  PIPE  AND  CLAY  DRAIN  TILE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  clay  pipe  and  clay  drain 
tile. 

2.  PIPE 

Standard  strength  clay  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
ASTM  Specifications  C 13.  Extra  strength  clay  pipe  shall  conform 
to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifications  C 200. 

3.  PERFORATED  PIPE 

Perforated  clay  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM 
Specifications  C 211  for  the  specified  class  of  pipe. 

4.  DRAIN  TILE 

Clay  drain  tile  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifi- 
cations C 4 for  the  specified  class  of  tile.  Perforated  clay  drain 
tile  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifications  C 498 
for  the  specified  class. 

5 . COMPRESSION  JOINT  MATERIALS 


Compression  joints  using  materials  having  resilient  properties 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  C 425. 


(543-1) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-49 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
545.  ASBESTOS-CEMENT  PIPE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  asbestos-cement  pipe 
and  fittings. 

2.  PRESSURE  PIPE 

Pressure  pipe  and  couplings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  ASTM  Specification  C 296  for  the  specified  class  and  type 
of  pipe.  Type  I or  Type  II  pipe  shall  be  furnished  unless 
otherwise  specified. 

Fittings  other  than  couplings  shall:  (1)  be  cast  iron  or  ductile 

iron  pressure  fittings  compatible  with  the  type  of  pipe  furnished, 
(2)  be  of  the  all-bell,  rubber -ring -connecting  type  with  gasket 
retainer  grooves  cast  or  machined  in  the  inner  surfaces  of  the 
bells,  and  (3)  otherwise  conform  to  the  requirements  of  AWWA 
Standard  C110  (American  National  Standard  A21.10).  Gaskets 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  D 1869. 

When  perforated  pressure  pipe  is  specified,  the  number,  size, 
location  and  spacing  of  perforations  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  C 508. 

3.  IRRIGATION  PIPE 

Irrigation  pipe  and  couplings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  ASTM  Specification  C 296,  except  that  lower  strength  will  be 
allowed,  as  follows:  The  rated  working  pressure  shall  be  not 

less  than  75  pounds  per  square  inch,  the  hydrostatic  proof 
pressure  shall  be  not  less  than  225  pounds  per  square  inch,  and 
the  flexural  proof  loads  and  minimum  crushing  strengths  shall  be 
as  tabulated  below.  Pipe  and  asbestos-cement  fittings  shall 
meet  the  chemical  requirements  for  Type  I or  Type  II  pipe  unless 
otherwise  specified. 


(545-1) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-50 


i 


Applied  Flexural 
Proof  Loads 


Minimum 
Crushing  Loads 


Nominal  Size 
inches 

Total  Applied 
Load,  lb. 

Nominal  Size 
inches 

Crushing  Strength 
per  Lin.  Ft. , lb. 

4 

1000 

4 

1900 

6 

2000 

6 

1400 

8 

3700 

8 

1650 

10 

1900 

12 

2200 

14 

2600 

16 

2750 

18 

2900 

20 

3100 

24 

3500 

30 

4100 

36 

5000 

4.  NONPRESSURE  PIPE 

Nonpressure  pipe  and  couplings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  ASTM  Specification  C 428  for  the  specified  class  and  type  of 
pipe.  Type  I or  Type  II  pipe  shall  be  furnished  unless  otherwise 
specified. 

Fittings  other  than  couplings  shall  meet  the  same  physical  and 
chemical  requirements  as  the  pipe  and  couplings. 


When  perforated  nonpressure  pipe  is  specified,  the  number,  size, 
location  and  spacing  of  perforations  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  ASTM  Specification  C 508. 


5.  PERFORATED  UNDERDRAIN  PIPE 


<f 


Perforated  underdrain  pipe,  couplings  and  fittings  shall  conform 
to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  C 508,  except  that 
flexible  couplings  recommended  by  the  pipe  manufacturer  will  be 
allowed  unless  otherwise  specified. 


(545-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-51 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
546.  BITUMINIZED  FIBER  PIPE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  bituminized  fiber  pipe 
and  fittings. 

2.  PIPE 

Bituminized  fiber  pipe  and  fittings  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  ASTM  Specifications  D 1861  or  D 1862. 

3.  PERFORATED  PIPE 


Perforated  bituminized  fiber  pipe  and  fittings  for  drainage  shall 
conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  D 2311,  D 2417, 
or  D 2418. 

Perforated  bituminized  fiber  pipe  and  fittings  for  septic  tank 
disposal  fields  shall  conform  to  ASTM  Specification  D 2312  or 
D 2313. 


(546-1) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


<4  ' 


3-53 


t) 

MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 

551.  ZINC -COATED  IRON  OR  STEEL  CORRUGATED  PIPE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  zinc-coated  iron  or 
steel  corrugated  pipe  and  fittings. 

2.  PIPE 

Zinc-coated  iron  or  steel  corrugated  pipe  and  fittings  shall  con- 
form to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification  WW-P-405  for  the 
specified  classes  and  shapes  of  pipe,  and  to  the  following 
additional  requirements : 

a.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  circumferential  shop  riveted 
seams  shall  have  a maximum  rivet  spacing  of  6 inches, 
except  that  6 rivets  will  be  sufficient  for  12-inch 
diameter  pipe; 

b.  When  close  riveted  pipe  is  specified:  (1)  the  pipe  shall 

be  fabricated  so  that  the  rivet  spacing  in  the  circumferential 
seams  shall  not  exceed  3 inches,  except  that  12  rivets  will 
be  sufficient  to  secure  the  circumferential  seams  in  12-inch 
pipe,  and  (2)  in  those  portions  of  the  longitudinal  seams 
that  will  be  covered  by  the  coupling  bands  the  rivets  shall 
have  finished  flat  heads  or  the  rivets  and  holes  shall  be 
omitted  and  the  seams  shall  be  connected  by  welding  to 
provide  a minimum  of  obstruction  to  the  seating  of  the 
coupling  bands. 

c.  Double  riveting  or  double  spot  welding  of  pipe  less  than 
42  inches  in  diameter  may  be  required.  When  double 
riveting  or  double  spot  welding  is  specified,  the  riveting 
or  welding  shall  be  done  in  the  manner  specified  for  pipe 
42  inches  or  greater  in  diameter. 

3 . COATINGS 


Coatings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Speci- 
fication WW-P-405  for  the  specified  types  of  coatings. 


% 


(551-1) 

NEH  1/28 /70(Notice  20-27) 


f 


3-55 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
552.  ALUMINUM  CORRUGATED  PIPE 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  aluminum  corrugated  pipe 
and  fittings. 

2.  PIPE 

Aluminum  corrugated  pipe  and  fittings  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  Federal  Specification  WW-P-402  for  the  specified  classes 
and  shapes  of  pipe,  and  to  the  following  additional  requirements: 

a.  When  close  riveted  pipe  is  specified:  (1)  the  pipe  shall 

be  fabricated  so  that  the  rivet  spacing  in  the  circumferen- 
tial seams  shall  not  exceed  3 inches,  except  that  12  rivets 
will  be  sufficient  to  secure  the  circumferential  seams  in 
12-inch  pipe;  and  (2)  in  those  portions  of  the  longitudinal 
seams  that  will  be  covered  by  the  coupling  bands  the  rivets 
shall  have  finished  flat  heads  or  the  rivets  and  holes 
shall  be  omitted  and  the  seams  shall  be  connected  by  welding 
to  provide  a minimum  of  obstruction  to  the  seating  of  the 
coupling  bands. 

b.  Double  riveting  of  pipe  less  than  42  inches  in  diameter  or 
double  spot  welding  of  pipe  less  than  30  inches  in  diameter 
may  be  required.  When  double  riveting  or  double  spot  welding 
is  specified,  the  riveting  or  welding  shall  be  done  in  the 
manner  specified  for  pipe  of  greater  diameter. 

3.  COATINGS 

Coatings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification 
WW-P-402  for  the  specified  types  of  coatings. 


(552-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-57 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
553.  STEEL  PIPE  AND  FITTINGS 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  steel  pipe  and  fittings. 

2.  PIPE 


Steel  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the  applicable 
specifications  listed  below  for  the  kind  of  pipe  and  the  type, 
weight,  grade,  and  finish  specified: 


Kinds  of  Pipe 

Welded  and  seamless  steel  pipe 
(Standard  Pipe) 

Electric-resistance-welded  pipe 
(30-inch  and  under) 

Arc -welded  pipe  (4 -inch  and  over) 

Arc-welded  steel  plate  pipe 
(16 -inch  and  over) 


ASTM  Specifications 


A 53  or  A 120 

A 135 
A 139 

A 134 


AWWA  Standard 

Fabricated  electrically  welded 

steel  water  pipe  C201 

Mill-type  steel  water  pipe  C202 

3.  FITTINGS 


Fittings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specifica- 
tion WW-P-521  for  the  types  and  kinds  specified. 


(553-1) 


NEH  12/4/68  (Notice  20-241 


3-59 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 


554.  WROUGHT  IRON  PIPE  AND  FITTINGS 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  wrought  iron  pipe  and 
fittings  for  use  with  wrought  iron  pipe. 

2.  PIPE 

Wrought  iron  pipe  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the 
applicable  ASTM  specifications  listed  below  for  the  kind  of  pipe 
and  the  weight  and  finish  specified: 


3.  FITTINGS 

Fittings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification 
WW-P-521  for  the  types  and  kinds  specified. 


Kinds  of  Pipe 


ASTM  Specifications 


Welded  wrought  iron  pipe 

Arc -welded  wrought  iron  plate  pipe 


A 72 
A 419 


(554-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


Q 


c- 


3-61 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 

571.  SLIDE  GATES  (SLUICE  GATES) , METAL,  LIGHT  DUTY 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  light  duty,  metal  slide 
gates  (sluice  gates)  for  water  control. 

2.  CLASS  AND  TYPE  OF  GATE 

The  class  of  gate  will  be  expressed  as  a numerical  symbol 
composed  of  the  seating  head  and  unseating  head  which  the  gate 
must  be  built  to  withstand.  The  two  numbers  will  be  separated 
by  a hyphen  with  the  seating  head  listed  first.  For  this 
purpose  the  heads  shall  be  expressed  in  terms  of  feet  of  water. 

The  gates  shall  be  of  the  specified  types  as  defined  below: 

Type  MLS-1  gates  shall  be  cast  iron  with  cast  iron 
seat  facings. 

Type  MLS- 2 gates  shall  be  fabricated  metal  gates. 

3.  QUALITY  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  in  slide  gates  and  appurtenances  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  the  applicable  specifications  listed  below  for 
the  alloy,  grade,  type,  or  class  of  material  and  the  condition 
and  finish  appropriate  to  the  structural  and  operational 
requirements. 

Material 


Cast  iron 


Structural  steel  shapes, 
plates,  and  bars 

Carbon  steel  bars 

Carbon  steel  sheets 

(571-1) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


Specification 

(ASTM) 

A 48,  Class  30,  or 
A 126,  Class  B 

A 36 

A 108  or  A 575 
A 569 


3-62 


Material 


Specification 

(ASTM) 


Carbon  steel  strip 


A 569 


Zinc-coated  carbon  steel  sheets 


A 526 


Cast  bronze  B 147 

Galvanizing  (zinc  coating)  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  582. 


4.  CAST  IRON  GATES 


The  frame  shall  be  cast  iron  and  of  the  specified  type.  The 
front  face  shall  be  machined  to  receive  the  gate  guides. 

The  gate  slide  shall  be  cast  iron  and  shall  be  built  to  with- 
stand the  seating  and  unseating  heads  expressed  by  the  gate 
class  designation,  as  defined  in  Section  2 of  this  specification. 


Grooves  shall  be  cast  on  the  vertical  sides  of  the  slide  to 
match  the  guide  angles. 

The  gate  guides  shall  be  galvanized  structural  steel  and  shall 
be  built  to  withstand  the  total  thrust  of  the  gate  slide  due  to 
water  pressure  and  wedge  action. 

Wedges  and  wedge  seats  shall  have  smooth  bearing  surfaces. 

Wedges  may  be  cast  as  integral  parts  of  the  slide.  Removable 
wedges  and  wedge  seats  shall  be  fastened  to  the  slide,  frame  or 
guides  by  means  of  suitable  studs,  screws,  or  bolts  and  shall  be 
i firmly  locked  in  place  after  adjustment.  Each  interacting  set  of 
wedge  and  wedge  seat  shall  be  adjustable  as  needed  to  insure 
accurate  and  effective  contact.  Adjusting  bolts  or  screws  shall 
be  bronze  or  galvanized  steel. 

Seat  facings  shall  be  machined  to  a smooth  finish  to  insure 
proper  watertight  contact. 

5.  FABRICATED  METAL  GATES 

Fabricated  metal  gates  shall  be  built  to  withstand  the  seating 
head  expressed  by  the  gate  class  designation.  Unless  otherwise 
specified,  the  gates  shall  be  galvanized  steel  with  flat -back 
frames. 


(571-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-63 


6.  YOKE 


When  a self-contained  gate  is  specified,  the  yoke  shall  be 
galvanized  structural  steel  and  of  such  design  as  to  capably 
withstand  the  loads  resulting  from  operation  of  the  gate. 

7.  GATE  STEM  AND  LIFT  (OR  HOIST) 

The  gate  stem  and  lift  (or  hoist)  shall  be  of  the  specified  type, 
size  and  capacity,  and  shall  be  capable  of  moving  the  gate  slide 
under  normal  conditions,  after  it  is  unseated  from  its  wedging 
device,  with  a pull  on  the  handwheel  or  crank  of  not  more  than 
25  pounds  with  the  specified  seating  or  unseating  head  of  water 
against  the  gate. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  stem  shall  be  carbon  steel  and 
shall  be  furnished  in  sections  as  necessary  to  permit  reasonable 
ease  in  installation.  Couplings  shall  be  bolted,  pinned  or  keyed 
to  the  stem.  The  stem  shall  be  furnished  with  rolled  or  machine- 
cut  right-hand  29°  Acme  threads  of  sufficient  length  to  completely 
open  the  gate.  The  threads  shall  be  smooth  and  of  uniform  lead 
and  cross  section,  such  that  the  nut  can  travel  the  full  length 
without  binding  or  excessive  friction. 

The  lift  shall  be  compatible  with  the  type  of  stem  furnished. 
Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  lift  nut  shall  be  cast  bronze  and 
shall  be  fitted  with  ball  or  roller  thrust  bearings  designed  to 
withstand  the  normal  thrust  developed  during  opening  and  closing 
of  the  gate  at  the  maximum  operating  heads.  All  gears,  sprockets 
and  pinions  shall  be  machine -cut,  with  ratios  and  strength  adequate 
to  withstand  operating  loads.  Sufficient  grease  fittings  shall  be 
provided  to  allow  lubrication  of  all  moving  parts.  An  arrow  and 
the  word  "open”  shall  be  cast  on  the  rim  of  the  handwheel  or  on 
the  lift  housing  to  indicate  the  direction  of  opening. 

Provision  shall  be  made  to  prevent  stem  rotation  at  the  connection 
with  the  gate  slide. 

Stop  collars  shall  be  provided  to  prevent  over-travel  in  opening 
and  closing  the  gate. 

8.  STEM  GUIDES 


Unless  otherwise  specified,  stem  guides  shall  be  cast  iron  and 
adjustable  in  two  directions. 


(571-3) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-64 


9.  FASTENERS 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  anchor  bolts  and  other  fasteners 
shall  be  galvanized  steel  or  bronze. 

10.  INSTALLATION  INSTRUCTIONS 

The  Contractor  shall  supply  the  manufacturer’s  complete  installa- 
tion data,  instructions  for  adjustments  and  drawings  or  templates 
showing  the  location  of  anchor  bolts  for  each  gate. 

11.  PAINTING 

When  specified,  gates  and  accessories  shall  be  painted  by  the 
designated  systems. 

12.  CERTIFICATION 


The  material  certification  shall  include  the  name  of  the  manu- 
facturer, the  manufacturer's  model  number  (for  standard  catalog 
items)  or  the  seating  and  unseating  heads  for  which  the  gate  is 
designed  together  with  such  drawings  and  specifications  as  may 
be  necessary  to  show  that  the  gate  conforms  to  the  requirements 
of  this  specification. 


(571-4) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-65 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 


572.  SLIDE  GATES  (SLUICE  GATES),  METAL,  MODERATE  DUTY 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  moderate  duty,  metal  slide 
gates  (sluice  gates)  for  water  control. 

2.  CLASS  AND  TYPE  OF  GATE 

The  class  of  gate  will  be  expressed  as  a numerical  symbol  composed 
of  the  seating  head  and  unseating  head  which  the  gate  must  be  built 
to  withstand.  The  two  numbers  will  be  separated  by  a hyphen  with 
the  seating  head  listed  first.  For  this  purpose  the  heads  shall 
be  expressed  in  terms  of  feet  of  water. 

The  gates  shall  be  of  the  specified  types  as  defined  below; 


Type  MMS-1  gates  shall  be  cast  iron  with  bronze  seat 
facings,  cast  iron  or  galvanized  structural  steel  guides, 
and  galvanized  steel,  bronze,  or  stainless  steel  fasteners. 

Type  MMS-2  gates  shall  be  cast  iron  with  bronze  seat  facings, 
cast  iron  or  stainless  steel  guides,  and  bronze  or  stainless 
steel  fasteners.  Guides  and  fasteners  shall„be  stainless 
steel  when  so  specified. 


3.  QUALITY  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  in  slide  gates  and  appurtenances  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  the  applicable  specifications  listed  below  for 
the  alloy,  grade,  type,  or  class  of  material  and  the  condition 
and  finish  appropriate  to  the  structural  and  operational  require- 


ments; 


Material 


Specification 
(A  STM) 


Cast  iron 


A 48,  Class  30,  or 
A 126,  Class  B 


Structural  steel  shapes, 
plates,  and  bars 


A 36 


Carbon  steel  bars 


A 108  or  A 575 


Stainless  steel 


A 276,  Type  302  or  304 


Naval  bronze 


B 21 


(572-1) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


3-66 


Material 


Specification 

(ASTM) 


Cast  bronze 


B 147 


Rubber  for  gaskets  and  seals 


D 2000,  AA805  material 


Galvanizing  (zinc  coating)  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
Material  Specification  582. 

4.  FRAME  (OR  SEAT) 

The  frame  shall  be  cast  iron  and  of  the  specified  type.  The  front 
face  shall  be  machined  to  receive  the  gate  guides  and  the  rear 
face  shall  be  machined  as  required  to  match  the  specified  attaching 
means . 

5.  GATE  SLIDE 

The  gate  slide  shall  be  cast  iron,  rectangular  in  shape  and  shall 
have  horizontal  and  vertical  stiffening  ribs  of  sufficient  section 
to  withstand  the  seating  and  unseating  heads  expressed  by  the  gate 
class  designation,  as  defined  in  Section  2 of  this  specification. 

Tongues  or  grooves  shall  be  cast  or  machined  on  the  vertical  sides 
of  the  slide  along  its  entire  height  to  match  the  guide  grooves 
or  angles. 

A nut  pocket  with  reinforcing  ribs  shall  be  integrally  cast  on  the 
vertical  centerline  and  above  the  horizontal  centerline  of  the 
slide.  The  pocket  shall  be  of  a shape  adequate  to  receive  a flat- 
backed  thrust  nut  or  stem  block  and  shall  be  built  to  withstand 
the  opening  and  closing  thrust  of  the  stem. 

6.  GATE  GUIDES 

The  gate  guides  shall  be  built  to  withstand  the  total  thrust  of  the 
gate  slide  due  to  water  pressure  and  wedge  action. 

Grooves  shall  be  machined  in  cast  iron  guides  to  receive  the 
tongue  on  the  gate  slide  throughout  the  entire  length  of  the  guide. 

The  guides  shall  be  of  such  length  as  to  retain  at  least  one-half 
the  height  of  the  gate  slide  when  the  gate  is  fully  opened. 

7.  WEDGES  AND  WEDGE  SEATS  (OR  BLOCKS) 

Pads  for  supporting  wedges,  wedge  seats  and  wedge  loops  (or  stirrups) 
shall  be  cast  as  integral  parts  of  the  slide,  frame  or  guides. 


(572-2) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-67 


Wedges  and  wedge  seats  shall  have  smooth  bearing  surfaces. 
Wedges  may  be  cast  as  integral  parts  of  the  slide.  Removable 
wedges  and  wedge  seats  shall  be  fastened  to  the  slide,  frame  or 
guides  by  means  of  suitable  studs,  screws,  or  bolts  and  shall 
be  firmly  locked  in  place  after  adjustment.  Each  interacting 
set  of  wedge  and  wedge  seat  shall  be  adjustable  as  needed  to 
insure  accurate  and  effective  contact. 

8.  SEAT  FACINGS 


Seat  facings  shall  be  machined  to  a smooth  finish  to  insure  proper 
watertight  contact.  Bronze  facings  shall  be  securely  attached  by 
welding  or  by  another  approved  method. 

9.  YOKE 


When  a self-contained  gate  is  specified,  the  yoke  shall  be 
galvanized  structural  steel  or  cast  iron  and  of  such  design  as  to 
capably  withstand  the  loads  resulting  from  operation  of  the  gate. 
Cast  iron  yokes  shall  be  provided  with  machined  pads  for  connecting 
to  the  ends  of  the  gate  guides  and  to  receive  the  stem  thrust  cap 
or  handwheel  lift. 

10.  GATE  STEM  AND  LIFT  (OR  HOIST) 

The  gate  stem  and  lift  (or  hoist)  shall  be  of  the  specified  type, 
size  and  capacity  and,  if  hand  operated,  shall  be  capable  of 
moving  the  gate  slide  under  normal  conditions,  after  it  is 
unseated  from  its  wedging  device,  with  a pull  on  the  handwheel 
or  crank  of  not  more  than  25  pounds  with  the  specified  seating 
or  unseating  head  of  water  against  the  gate. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  stem  shall  be  carbon  steel  and 
shall  be  furnished  in  sections  as  necessary  to  permit  reasonable 
ease  in  installation.  Couplings  shall  be  bolted,  pinned  or  keyed 
to  the  stem.  The  stem  shall  be  furnished  with  rolled  or  machine- 
cut  right-hand  29°  Acme  threads  of  sufficient  length  to  completely 
open  the  gate.  The  threads  shall  be  smooth  and  of  uniform  lead 
and  cross  section,  such  that  the  nut  can  travel  the  full  length 
without  binding  or  excessive  friction.  The  stem  shall  be  threaded 
for  connection  to  the  stem  block  or  thrust  nut  on  the  gate  slide. 

The  lift  shall  be  compatible  with  the  type  of  stem  furnished. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  lift  nut  shall  be  cast  bronze  and 
shall  be  fitted  with  ball  or  roller  thrust  bearings  designed  to 
withstand  the  normal  thrust  developed  during  opening  and  closing 


(572-3) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-68 


i 


of  the  gate  at  the  maximum  operating  heads.  All  gears,  sprockets 
and  pinions  shall  be  machine-cut,  with  ratios  and  strength  adequate 
to  withstand  operating  loads.  Sufficient  grease  fittings  shall  be 
provided  to  allow  lubrication  of  all  moving  parts.  An  arrow  and 
the  word  "open”  shall  be  cast  on  the  rim  of  the  headwheel  or  on 
the  lift  housing  to  indicate  the  direction  of  opening.  Unless 
otherwise  specified,  the  lift  for  a non- rising -stem  gate  shall  be 
provided  with  an  indicator  capable  of  showing  both  when  the  gate 
is  fully  open  and  when  it  is  fully  closed. 

Provision  shall  be  made  to  prevent  stem  rotation  within  the  thrust 
nut  at  the  connection  with  the  gate  slide. 

Stop  collars  shall  be  provided  on  rising  stems  to  prevent  over- 
travel in  opening  and  closing  the  gate. 

11.  STEM  GUIDES 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  stem  guides  shall  be  cast  iron  with 
bronze  bushed  collars  and  adjustable  in  two  directions. 

12.  WALL  THIMBLE 

When  a wall  thimble  is  specified  it  shall  be  cast  iron  and  of  the 
section,  type  and  depth  specified.  The  front  flange  shall  be 
machined  to  match  the  gate  frame  and  drilled  and  tapped  to  accu- 
rately receive  the  gate  attachment  studs. 

Gaskets  or  mastic  to  be  installed  between  the  thimble  and  the  gate 
frame  shall  conform  to  the  recommendation  of  the  gate  manufacturer 
and  shall  be  furnished  with  the  thimble. 

13.  FASTENERS 

All  anchor  bolts  and  other  fasteners  shall  be  galvanized  or 
stainless  steel  or  bronze,  according  to  the  type  of  gate  specified 
as  defined  in  Section  2 of  this  specification. 

14.  INSTALLATION  INSTRUCTIONS 

The  Contractor  shall  supply  the  manufacturer's  complete  installa- 
tion data,  instructions  for  adjustments  and  drawings  or  templates 
showing  the  location  of  anchor  bolts  for  each  gate. 

15.  PAINTING 

When  specified,  gates  and  accessories  shall  be  painted  by  the 
designated  systems. 

(572-4) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-69 


16.  CERTIFICATION 


The  material  certification  shall  include  the  name  of  the  manu- 
facturer, and  manufacturer's  model  number  (for  standard  catalog 
items)  or  the  seating  and  unseating  heads  for  which  the  gate  is 
designed  together  with  such  drawings  and  specifications  as  may- 
be necessary  to  show  that  the  gate  conforms  to  the  requirements 
of  this  specification. 


(572-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


i 


* 


t 


3-71 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 

573.  SLIDE  GATES  (SLUICE  GATES) , METAL,  HEAVY  DUTY 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  heavy  duty,  metal  slide 
gates  (sluice  gates)  for  water  control. 

2.  CLASS  AND  TYPE  OF  GATE 


The  class  of  gate  will  be  expressed  as  a numerical  symbol 
composed  of  the  seating  head  and  unseating  head  which  the  gate 
must  be  built  to  withstand.  The  two  numbers  will  be  separated 
by  a hyphen  with  the  seating  head  listed  first.  For  this  purpose 
the  heads  shall  be  expressed  in  terms  of  feet  of  water. 

Gates  shall  be  of  the  specified  types  as  defined  below: 

Type  MHS-1  gates  shall  have  gray  cast  iron  slides, 
frames,  guides  and  yokes  and  shall  be  fitted  with: 

(1)  naval  bronze  seat  facings,  (2)  manganese  bronze 
wedges  and  stem  blocks  or  thrust  nuts,  (3)  naval 
bronze  wedge  seat  facings  or  manganese  bronze  wedge 
blocks,  (4)  naval  bronze  or  stainless  steel  fasteners, 
and  (5)  cold  rolled  steel  stems,  except  that  stems 
shall  be  stainless  steel  where  so  specified. 

Type  MHS-2  gates  shall  have  gray  cast  iron  slides, 
frame,  guides,  and  yokes  and  shall  be  fitted  with: 

(1)  stainless  steel  seat  facings,  wedges,  wedge 
seat  facings,  stems  and  fasteners,  and  (2)  austenitic 
cast  iron  stem  blocks  or  thrust  nuts. 

Type  MHS-3  gates  shall  have  austenitic  gray  cast 
iron  slides,  frames,  guides  and  yokes  and  shall 
be  fitted  with:  (1)  nickel-copper  alloy  seat 

facings,  wedges,  wedge  seat  facings,  stems  and 
fasteners,  and  (2)  austenitic  cast  iron  stem 
blocks  or  thrust  nuts. 

3.  QUALITY  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  in  slide  gates  and  appurtenances  shall  conform  to 
the  requirements  of  the  applicable  specifications  listed 
below  for  the  alloy,  grade,  type,  or  class  of  material  and 
the  condition  and  finish  appropriate  to  the  structural  and 
operational  requirements: 


#) 


(573-1) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-72 


Material 


Specifications 
(ASTM,  except  as  noted) 


Gray  cast  iron 


Austenitic  gray  cast  iron 
Cold  rolled  steel 
Stainless  steel 


Naval  bronze 

Phosphor  bronze 

Manganese  bronze 

Silicon  bronze 

Nickel  “-copper  alloy  plate, 
sheet,  strip 

Nickel “copper  alloy  rod, 
bar 

Nickel -copper  alloy 
castings 

Rubber  for  gaskets  and 
seals 

4.  FRAME  (OR  SEAT) 


A 48,  Class  30,  or  A 126, 
Class  B 

A 436 

A 108 

A 276,  Type  302,  303  or 
304 

B 21 

B 103  or  B 139 
B 147 
B 98 

B 127 

B 164 

Federal  Specification 
QQ-N-288  * 

D 2000,  AA805  material 


The  frame  shall  be  cast  iron  and  of  the  specified  type  * The  front 
face  shall  be  machined  to  receive  the  gate  guides  and  the  rear 
face  shall  be  machined  as  required  to  match  the  specified  attaching 
means . A dovetailed  groove  shall  be  machined  on  the  perimeter  of 
the  front  face  to  receive  the  seat  facing. 

5„  GATE  SLIDE 


The  gate  slide  shall  be  cast  iron,  rectangular  in  shape  and  shall 
have  horizontal  and  vertical  stiffening  ribs  of  sufficient  section 


(573-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 

I 


3-73 


to  withstand  the  seating  and  unseating  heads  expressed  by  the 
gate  class  designation,  as  defined  in  Section  2 of  this 
specification.  A dovetailed  groove  shall  be  machined  on  the 
perimeter  of  the  slide  face  to  receive  the  seat  facing. 

Tongues  shall  be  machined  on  the  vertical  sides  of  the  slide 
along  its  entire  height  to  match  the  guide  grooves  with  a 
maximum  clearance  of  1/16  inch  for  gates  smaller  than  54  inches 
by  54  inches  and  1/8  inch  for  larger  gates. 

A nut  pocket  with  reinforcing  ribs  shall  be  integrally  cast  on 
the  vertical  centerline  and  above  the  horizontal  centerline  of 
the  slide.  The  pocket  shall  be  of  a shape  adequate  to  receive 
a flat-backed  thrust  nut  or  stem  block  and  shall  be  built  to 
withstand  the  opening  and  closing  thrust  of  the  stem. 

6.  GATE  GUIDES 

The  gate  guides  shall  be  cast  iron  and  shall  be  built  to  with- 
stand the  total  thrust  of  the  gate  slide  due  to  water  pressure 
and  wedge  action. 

Grooves  shall  be  machined  to  receive  the  tongue  on  the  gate  slide 
throughout  the  entire  length  of  the  guide. 

The  guides  shall  be  of  such  length  as  to  retain  at  least  one -half 
the  height  of  the  gate  slide  when  the  gate  is  fully  opened. 

7.  WEDGES  AND  WEDGE  SEATS  (OR  BLOCKS) 

Pads  for  supporting  wedges,  wedge  seats  and  wedge  loops  (or 
stirrups)  shall  be  cast  as  integral  parts  of  the  gate  frame, 
slide,  or  guides  and  shall  be  accurately  machined  to  receive 
those  parts. 

Wedges  and  wedge  seats  shall  have  machine  finished  bearing 
surfaces.  They  shall  be  fastened  to  the  gate  slide,  frame  or 
guides  by  means  of  suitable  studs,  screws,  or  bolts  and  shall 
be  firmly  locked  in  place  after  adjustment.  Each  interacting 
set  of  wedge  and  wedge  seat  shall  be  adjustable  as  needed  to 
insure  accurate  and  effective  contact. 

8.  SEAT  FACING 


Facings  shall  be  pressed  or  impacted  into  the  machined  dove- 
tailed grooves  on  the  gate  slide  and  frame  and  machined  to  a 
smooth  finish  to  insure  proper  watertight  contact. 

(573-3) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-74 


k 


9.  YOKE 

When  a self-contained  gate  is  specified,  the  yoke  shall  be  of 
such  design  as  to  capably  withstand  the  loads  resulting  from 
operation  of  the  gate.  The  yoke  shall  be  provided  with  machined 
pads  for  connecting  to  the  ends  of  the  gate  guides  and  to  receive 
the  stem  thrust  cap  or  handwheel  lift. 

10.  FLUSH  BOTTOM  SEAL 

When  a flush  bottom  sealing  gate  is  specified,  a solid,  square- 
corner  type  rubber  seal  shall  be  provided  at  the  bottom  of  the 
gate  opening.  It  shall  be  securely  fastened  either  to  the  bottom 
of  the  slide  or  to  the  frame.  Metal  surfaces  bearing  on  the 
rubber  seal  shall  be  smooth  and  rounded  as  necessary  to  prevent 
cutting  of  the  seal  during  gate  operation. 

11.  FASTENERS 

All  anchor  bolts,  assembly  bolts,  screws,  nuts,  and  other  fasteners 
shall  be  of  ample  section  to  withstand  the  forces  created  by 
operation  of  the  gate  while  subjected  to  the  specified  seating  and 
unseating  heads.  Quality  and  size  of  fasteners  shall  be  as 
recommended  by  the  gate  manufacturer.  Anchor  bolts  shall  be 
furnished  with  two  nuts  to  facilitate  installation. 

12.  GATE  STEM  AND  LIFT  (OR  HOIST) 

The  gate  stem  and  lift  (or  hoist)  shall  be  of  the  specified  type, 
size  and  capacity  and,  if  hand  operated,  shall  be  capable  of 
moving  the  gate  slide  under  normal  conditions,  after  it  is 
unseated  from  its  wedging  device,  with  a pull  on  the  handwheel 
or  crank  of  not  more  than  25  pounds  with  the  specified  seating 
or  unseating  head  of  water  against  the  gate. 

The  stem  shall  be  furnished  in  sections  as  necessary  to  permit 
reasonable  ease  in  installation.  Couplings  shall  be  bolted, 
pinned  or  keyed  to  the  stem.  The  stem  shall  be  furnished  with 
rolled  or  machine-cut  right-hand  29°  Acme  threads  of  sufficient 
length  to  completely  open  the  gate.  The  threads  shall  be  smooth 
and  of  uniform  lead  and  cross  section,  such  that  the  nut  can 
travel  the  full  length  without  binding  or  excessive  friction. 

The  stem  shall  be  threaded  for  connection  to  the  stem  block  or 
thrust  nut  on  the  gate  slide. 

The  lift  shall  be  compatible  with  the  type  of  stem  furnished. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  lift  nut  shall  be  cast  manganese 
bronze  and  shall  be  fitted  with  ball  or  roller  thrust  bearings 
designed  to  withstand  the  normal  thrust  developed  during  opening 

(573-4) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


* 


3-75 


and  closing  of  the  gate  at  the  maximum  operating  heads.  All  gears, 
sprockets  and  pinions  shall  be  machine-cut,  with  ratios  and 
strength  adequate  to  withstand  operating  loads.  Sufficient  grease 
fittings  shall  be  provided  to  allow  lubrication  of  all  moving  parts. 
An  arrow  and  the  word  "open"  shall  be  cast  on  the  rim  of  the  hand- 
wheel  or  on  the  lift  housing  to  indicate  the  direction  of  opening. 
Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  lift  for  a non-rising- stem  gate 
shall  be  provided  with  an  indicator  capable  of  showing  both 
when  the  gate  is  fully  open  and  when  it  is  fully  closed. 

Provision  shall  be  made  to  prevent  stem  rotation  within  stem  block 
or  thrust  nut  at  the  connection  with  the  gate  slide. 

Stop  collars  shall  be  provided  on  rising  stems  to  prevent  over- 
travel in  opening  and  closing  the  gate. 

13.  STEM  GUIDES 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  stem  guides  shall  be  cast  iron  with 
bronze  bushed  collars  and  fully  adjustable  in  two  directions. 

14.  WALL  THIMBLE 

When  a wall  thimble  is  specified,  it  shall  be  of  the  same  cast 
iron  used  in  the  gate  frame  and  of  the  section,  type,  and  depth 
specified.  The  front  flange  shall  be  machined  to  match  the  gate 
frame  and  drilled  and  tapped  to  accurately  receive  the  gate 
attachment  studs. 

Gaskets  or  mastic  to  be  installed  between  the  thimble  and  the 
gate  frame  shall  conform  to  the  recommendation  of  the  gate  manu- 
facturer and  shall  be  furnished  with  the  thimble. 

15.  INSTALLATION  INSTRUCTIONS 

The  Contractor  shall  supply  the  manufacturer’s  complete  installa- 
tion data,  instructions  for  adjustments  and  drawings  or  templates 
showing  the  location  of  anchor  bolts  for  each  gate. 

16.  PAINTING 


When  specified,  gates  and  accessories  shall  be  painted  by  the 
designated  systems. 


(573-5) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3 "76 

< 

17.  CERTIFICATION 


The  material  certification  shall  include  the  name  of  the  manu- 
facturer, the  manufacturer's  model  number  (for  standard  catalog 
items)  or  the  seating  and  unseating  heads  for  which  the  gate  is 
designed  together  with  such  drawings  and  specifications  as  may 
be  necessary  to  show  that  the  gate  conforms  to  the  requirements 
of  this  specification. 


(573-6) 

NEH  3.2/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


# 


3-77 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
574.  FLAP  GATES,  METAL,  LIGHT  DUTY 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  light  duty,  metal  flap 
gates  for  water  control. 

2.  CLASS  AND  TYPE  OF  GATE 

The  class  of  gate  will  be  expressed  as  the  numerical  value  of  the 
seating  head  which  the  gate  must  be  built  to  withstand.  For  this 
purpose,  the  head  shall  be  expressed  in  terms  of  feet  of  water. 

Gates  shall  be  of  the  specified  type  as  defined  below: 

Type  MLF-1  gates  shall  be  cast  iron  or  cast  steel  and 
shall  be  fitted  with  unbushed  linkage  systems  and 
galvanized  steel  fasteners,  or  with  bronze  bushed  linkage 
systems  and  bronze  or  stainless  steel  fasteners. 

3.  QUALITY  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  in  flap  gates  and  appurtenances  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  the  applicable  specifications  listed  below  for 
the  alloy,  grade,  type,  or  class  of  material  and  condition  and 
finish  appropriate  to  the  structural  and  operational  require- 
ments: 


Material 


Cast  iron 


Cast  steel 


Specification 

(ASTM) 

A 48,  Class  30 
or  A 126,  Class  B 

A 27  or  A 148 


Structural  steel  shapes, 
plates,  and  bars 

Carbon  steel  bars 

Carbon  steel  sheets 

Carbon  steel  strip 


A 36 

A 108  or  A 575 
A 569 
A 569 


(574-1) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-78 


4.  FRAME 

The  frame  shall  be  cast  iron  or  cast  steel  and  of  the  specified 
type. 

5.  FLAP 

The  flap  shall  be  cast  iron  or  cast  steel  and  shall  be  built  to 
withstand  the  seating  head  expressed  by  the  gate  class  designation, 
as  defined  in  Section  2 of  this  specification. 

6.  LINKAGE  SYSTEM 

The  linkage  system  by  which  the  flap  is  mounted  onto  the  frame 
shall  be  double  pivoted  type  for  gates  over  8 inches  in  diameter. 

It  shall  be  designed  to  prevent  the  flap  from  folding  inside  of 
the  seat  and  wedging  in  the  open  position. 

7.  SEAT  FACINGS 

All  facings  shall  be  machined  to  a smooth  finish” to  insure  proper 
contact. 

8.  GALVANIZING 

Cast  steel  and  fabricated  steel  parts  shall  be  galvanized  in 
accordance  with  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  582. 

9.  INSTALLATION  INSTRUCTIONS 

The  Contractor  shall  supply  the  manufacturers  complete  instal- 
lation data,  instructions  for  adjustments  and  drawings  or  templates 
showing  the  location  of  anchor  bolts  for  each  gate. 

10.  PAINTING 

When  specified,  gates  and  accessories  shall  be  painted  by  the 
designated  systems. 

11.  CERTIFICATION 


The  material  certification  shall  include  the  name  of  the  manufac- 
turer, the  manufacturer's  model  number  (for  standard  catalog  items) 
or  the  seating  head  for  which  the  gate  is  designed  together  with 
such  drawings  and  specifications  as  may  be  necessary  to  show  that 
the  gate  conforms  to  the  requirements  of  this  specification. 


(574-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-81 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
575.  FLAP  GATES,  METAL,  MODERATE  DUTY 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  moderate  duty,  metal 
flap  gates  for  water  control. 

2.  CLASS  AND  TYPE  OF  GATE 

The  class  of  gate  will  be  expressed  as  the  numerical  value  of 
the  seating  head  which  the  gate  must  be  built  to  withstand.  For 
this  purpose  the  head  shall  be  expressed  in  terms  of  feet  of 
water. 

Gates  shall  be  of  the  specified  type  as  defined  below: 

Type  MMF-1  gates  shall  be  cast  iron  or  cast  steel  and 
shall  be  fitted  with  bronze  seat  facings,  bronze  bushed 
linkage  systems  and  bronze  or  stainless  steel  fasteners. 

3.  QUALITY  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  in  flap  gates  and  appurtenances  shall  conform  to 
the  requirements  of  the  applicable  specifications  listed  below 
for  the  alloy,  grade,  type,  or  class  of  material  and  the  condi- 
tion and  finish  appropriate  to  the  structural  and  operational 
requirements : 


Material 
Cast  iron 
Cast  steel 

Structural  steel  shapes,  plates, 
and  bars 

Carbon  steel  bars 
Stainless  steel 

Naval  bronze 


Specifications 

(ASTM) 

A 48,  Class  30  or 
A 126,  Class  B 

A 27  or  A 148 
A 36 

A 108  or  A 575 

A 276,  Type  302 
or  304 

B 21 


(575-1) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


3-82 


Material 


Specification 

(ASTM) 


Cast  bronze 


B 147 


Red  brass 


B 43 


Rubber  for  gaskets  and 
seals 


D 2000,  AA805  material 


4.  FRAME 


The  frame  shall  be  cast  iron  or  cast  steel  and  of  the  specified 
type.  The  rear  face  shall  be  machined  as  required  to  match  the 
specified  attaching  means. 


5 .  FLAP 


The  flap  shall  be  cast  iron  or  cast  steel  and  shall  be  built  to 
withstand  the  seating  head  expressed  by  the  gate  class  designation, 
as  defined  in  Section  2 of  this  specification. 

6.  LINKAGE  SYSTEM 

The  linkage  system  by  which  the  flap  is  mounted  onto  the  frame 
shall  be  the  double  pivoted  type.  It  shall  be  designed  to  prevent 
the  flap  from  folding  inside  of  the  seat  and  wedging  in  the  open 
position.  The  top  pivot  shall  be  so  designed  as  to  allow  adjust- 
ment of  gate  alignment  and  sensitivity. 

7.  SEAT  FACINGS 

Seat  facings  shall  be  securely  attached  by  welding,  or  other 
approved  means,  and  machined  to  a smooth  finish  to  insure  proper 
contact. 

8.  WALL  THIMBLE 

When  a wall  thimble  is  specified,  it  shall  be  cast  iron  and  of 
the  section,  type  and  depth  specified.  The  front  flange  shall 
be  machined  to  match  the  gate  frame  and  drilled  and  tapped  to 
accurately  receive  the  gate  attachment  studs. 

Gaskets  or  mastic  to  be  installed  between  the  thimble  and  the  gate 
frame  shall  conform  to  the  recommendation  of  the  gate  manufacturer 
and  shall  be  furnished  with  the  thimble. 

9.  GALVANIZING 

Cast  steel  and  fabricated  steel  parts  shall  be  galvanized  in 
accordance  with  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  582. 


(575-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-83 


10.  INSTALLATION  INSTRUCTIONS 

The  Contractor  shall  supply  the  manufacturer's  complete 
installation  data,  instructions  for  adjustments  and  drawings 
or  templates  showing  the  location  of  anchor  bolts  for  each 
gate. 

11.  PAINTING 

When  specified,  gates  and  accessories  shall  be  painted  by  the 
designated  systems. 

12.  CERTIFICATION 

The  material  certification  shall  include  the  name  of  the 
manufacturer,  the  manufacturer's  model  number  (for  standard 
catalog  items)  or  the  seating  head  for  which  the  gate  is 
designed  together  with  such  drawings  and  specifications  as  may 
be  necessary  to  show  that  the  gate  conforms  to  the  requirements 
of  this  specification. 


(575-3) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


( 


4 


♦ 


3-85 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
576.  FLAP  GATES,  METAL,  HEAVY  DUTY 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  heavy  duty,  metal  flap 
gates  for  water  control. 

2.  CLASS  AND  TYPE  OF  GATE 


The  class  of  gate  will  be  expressed  as  the  numerical  value  of 
the  seating  head  which  the  gate  must  be  built  to  withstand.  For 
this  purpose  the  head  shall  be  expressed  in  terms  of  feet  of 
water. 

Gates  shall  be  of  the  specified  types  as  defined  below: 

Type  MHF-1  gates  shall  have  gray  cast  iron  frames 
and  flaps  and  shall  be  fitted  with  naval  bronze 
seat  facings,  gray  cast  iron  or  high-strength  bronze 
hinge  arms,  bronze  bushings,  bronze  hinge  pins,  and 
bronze  fasteners. 

Type  MHF-1R  gates  shall  be  the  same  as  Type  1 gates 
except  that  the  frame  shall  be  fitted  with 
a rubber  seat  facing  instead  of  a metal  seat  facing. 

Type  MHF-2  gates  shall  have  gray  cast  iron  frames 
and  flaps  and  shall  be  fitted  with  stainless  steel 
Beat  facings,  gray  cast  iron  or  stainless  steel 
hinge  arms,  and  stainless  steel  bushings,  hinge 
pins,  and  fasteners. 

Type  MHF-2R  gates  shall  be  the  same  as  Type  2 
gates  except  that  the  frame  shall  be  fitted 
with  a rubber  seat  facing  instead  of  a metal  seat 
facing. 

Type  MHF-3  gates  shall  have  austenitic  gray  cast  iron 
frames,  flaps  and  hinge  arms  and  shall  be  fitted  with 
nickel -copper  alloy  seat  facings,  bushings,  hinge  pins 
and  fasteners. 

Type  MHF-3R  gates  shall  be  the  same  as  Type  3 gates 
except  that  the  frame  shall  be  fitted  with 
a rubber  seat  facing  instead  of  a metal  seat  facing. 


(576-1) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-86 


3.  QUALITY  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  in  flap  gates  and  appurtenances  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  the  applicable  specifications  listed  below  for 
the  alloy,  grade,  type,  or  class  of  material  and  the  condition 
and  finish  appropriate  to  the  structural  and  operational 


requirements : 

Material 

Specification 
(ASTM,  except  as  noted) 

Gray  cast  iron 

A 48,  Class  30,  or 
A 126,  Class  B 

Austenitic  gray  cast  iron 

A 436 

Carbon  steel  bars 

A 108  or  A. 575 

Stainless  steel 

A 276,  Type  302,  303, 
or  304 

Naval  bronze 

B 21 

Phosphor  bronze 

B 103  or  B 139 

Manganese  bronze 

B 147 

Silicon  bronze 

B 98 

Red  brass 

B 43 

Nickel -copper  alloy  plate, 
sheet,  strip 

B 127 

Nickel -copper  alloy  rod,  bar  B 164 


Nickel-copper  alloy 
castings 

Federal  Specification 
QQ-N-288 

Rubber  gaskets  and 
seals 

4.  FRAME 

D 2000,  AA805  material 

The  frame  shall  be  of  the  specified  type.  The  rear  face  shall  be 
machined  as  required  to  match  the  specified  attaching  means. 

(576-2) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-87 


A groove  shall  be  machined  on  the  perimeter  of  the  front  face 
to  receive  the  seat  facing. 

5.  FLAP 

The  flap  shall  be  built  to  withstand  the  seating  head  expressed 
by  the  gate  class  designation,  as  defined  in  Section  2 of  this 
specification. 

A groove  shall  be  machined  on  the  perimeter  of  the  face  to 
receive  the  seat  facing. 

6.  LINKAGE  SYSTEM 

The  linkage  system  by  which  the  flap  is  mounted  onto  the  frame 
shall  be  the  double  pivoted  type.  It  shall  be  designed  to 
prevent  the  flap  from  folding  inside  of  the  seat  and  wedging  in 
the  open  position.  The  top  pivot  shall  be  so  designed  as  to 
allow  adjustment  of  gate  alignment  and  sensitivity. 

7.  SEAT  FACINGS 

Metal  facings  shall  be  pressed  or  impacted  into  machined  dove- 
tailed grooves  on  the  flap  and  frame  (or  securely  attached  in 
the  seat  grooves  by  means  of  studs,  set  screws  or  other  approved 
means)  and  machined  to  a smooth  finish  to  insure  proper  contact. 
Rubber  facings  shall  be  pressed  into  a dovetailed  groove  in  the 
frame., 

8.  WALL  THIMBLE 

When  a wall  thimble  is  specified,  it  shall  be  of  the  same  cast 
iron  used  in  the  gate  frame  and  of  the  section,  type,  and  depth 
specified.  The  front  flange  shall  be  machined  to  match  the 
gate  frame  and  drilled  and  tapped  to  accurately  receive  the  gate 
attachment  studs. 

Gaskets  or  mastic  to  be  installed  between  the  thimble  and  the  gate 
frame  shall  conform  to  the  recommendation  of  the  gate  manufacturer 
and  shall  be  furnished  with  the  thimble. 

9.  INSTALLATION  INSTRUCTIONS 


The  Contractor  shall  supply  the  manufacturer's  complete  instal- 
lation data,  instruction  for  adjustments  and  drawings  or  templates 
showing  the  location  of  anchor  bolts  for  each  gate. 

(576-3) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-88 


10.  PAINTING 

When  specified,  gates  and  accessories  shall  be  painted  by  the 
designated  systems. 

11.  CERTIFICATION 

The  material  certification  shall  include  the  name  of  the  manu- 
facturer, the  manufacturer’s  model  number  (for  standard  catalog 
items)  or  the  seating  head  for  which  the  gate  is  designed 
together  with  such  drawings  and  specifications  as  may  be 
necessary  to  show  that  the  gate  conforms  to  the  requirements 
of  this  specification. 


(576-4) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-89 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
577 . RADIAL  GATES  (TAINTER  GATES) 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  radial  gates  for  water 
control. 

2.  QUALITY  OF  MATERIALS 

Materials  in  radial  gates  and  appurtenances  shall  conform  to 
the  requirements  of  the  applicable  specifications  listed 
below  for  the  alloy,  grade,  type,  or  class  of  material  and 
the  condition  and  finish  appropriate  to  the  structural  and 
operational  requirements : 

Material  Specification 

(ASTM) 

Cast  iron  A 48,  Class  30, 

or  A 126,  Class  B 

Cast  steel  A 27  or  A 148 

Structural  steel  shapes,  plates 

and  bars  A 36 

Carbon  steel  bars  A 108  or  A 575 

Stainless  steel  A 276,  Type  302, 

or  304 

Zinc  coated  steel  sheets  A 526 

Naval  bronze  B 21 

Cast  bronze  B 147 

Galvanizing  (zinc  coating)  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Material  Specification  582. 


(577-1) 


NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


3-90 


3.  GATES 


Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  gates  shall  be  fabricated  from 
structural  steel  with  skin  plates  made  of  smooth  or  corrugated 
iron  or  steel  sheets.  They  shall  conform  to  the  dimensions 
shown  on  the  drawings  and  shall  be  built  to  withstand  the  speci- 
fied head.  The  curvature  of  the  skin  plate  shall  be  concentric 
with  the  pivot  pins  or  trunnions.  Gates  shall  be  supplied  com- 
plete with  pin  bearings,  pins,  hoist,  galvanized  hoisting  cable 
and  all  anchor  bolts.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  pin 
bearings  shall  be  cast  iron  and  of  the  embedded  type. 

4.  HOIST 


Hoists  shall  be  of  the  worm-gear  type  and  shall  be  equipped 
with  hand  crank  or  be  power  operated  as  specified  on  the  drawings. 
Hoists  shall  be  furnished  complete  with  all  lubricants,  anchor 
bolts  and  other  appurtenances  necessary  for  their  installation 
and  operation. 

5 .  RUBBER  SEALS 


Each  gate  shall  be  fitted  with  rubber  seals  along  the  side  and 
bottom  edges  of  the  gate  face.  The  seals  shall  be  of  the  belt 
type  or  "J"  type,  as  specified,  and  shall  be  designed  to  bear 
on  the  walls  and  bottom  of  the  structure  or  on  rubbing  plates 
and  sills  to  insure  a watertight  fit  when  the  gate  is  closed. 
When  specified,  a rubber  seal  shall  also  be  provided  at  the  top 
edge  of  the  gate. 

60  INSTALLATION  INSTRUCTIONS 


The  Contractor  shall  supply  the  manufacturer's  complete  installation  data, 
instructions  for  adjustments  and  drawings  or  templates  showing 
the  location  of  anchor  bolts  and  pin  bearings  for  each  gate. 

7 . PAINTING 


Gates  and  accessories  shall  be  galvanized  or  painted  by  the 
specified  systems. 

8.  CERTIFICATION 


The  material  certification  shall  include  the  manufacturer's  name 
and  the  head  for  which  the  gate  is  designed  together  with  such 
drawings  and  specifications  as  may  be  necessary  to  show  that  the 
gate  conforms  to  the  requirements  of  this  specification. 

(577-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-91 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
581.  METAL 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  steel  and  aluminum  alloys. 

2.  STRUCTURAL  STEEL 


Structural  steel  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifi- 
cation A 36. 


High-strength  low-alloy  structural  steel  shall  conform  to  ASTM 
Specification  A 242  or  A 588. 

Carbon  steel  plates  of  structural  quality  to  be  bent  or  formed  cold 
shall  conform  to  ASTM  Specification  A 283,  Grade  C. 

Carbon  steel  sheets  of  structural  quality  shall  conform  to  ASTM 
Specification  A 570,  Grade  D or  A 611,  Grade  D. 

Carbon  steel  strip  of  structural  quality  shall  conform  to  ASTM 
Specification  A 570,  Grade  C. 


3.  COMMERCIAL  OR  MERCHANT  QUALITY  STEEL 


Commercial  or  merchant  quality  steel  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  applicable  ASTM  specifications  listed  below: 

Product  ASTM  Specification 

Carbon  steel  bars  A 575,  Grade  M 1015  to 

Grade  M 1031 


Carbon  steel  sheets  A 569 
Carbon  steel  strip  A 569 
Zinc-coated  carbon  steel  sheets  A 526 


4.  ALUMINUM  ALLOY 


Aluminum  alloy  products  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the 
applicable  ASTM  specifications  listed  below.  Unless  otherwise 
specified,  Alloy  6061-T6  shall  be  used. 


(581-1) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


3-92 


Product 


ASTM  Specification 


Standard  structural  shapes 


B 308 


Extruded  structural  pipe  and  tube 


B 429 


Extruded  bars,  rods,  shapes  and  tubes 


B 221 


Drawn  seamless  tubes 


B 210 


Rolled  or  cold- finished  bars,  rods  and  wire 


B 211 


Sheet  and  plate 


B 209 


5.  BOLTS 

Steel  bolts  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specifi- 
cation A 307.  If  high-strength  bolts  are  specified  they  shall 
conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 325. 

When  galvanized  or  zinc-coated  bolts  are  specified,  the  zinc 
coating  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification 
A 153;  except  that  bolts  1/2  inch  or  less  in  diameter  may  be 
coated  with  electrodeposited  zinc  or  cadmium  coating  conforming 
to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 164,  Type  RS,  or 
ASTM  Specification  A 165,  Type  TS,  unless  otherwise  specified. 

6.  RIVETS 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  steel  rivets  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 502,  Grade  1. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  aluminum  alloy  rivets  shall  be  Alloy 
6061 -T6  conforming  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification 
B 316. 

7.  WELDING  ELECTRODES 

Steel  welding  electrodes  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
American  Welding  Society  specification  AWS  A5.1,  "Specification 
for  Mild  Steel  Covered  Arc -Welding  Electrodes,"  except  that 
they  shall  be  uniformly  and  heavily  coated  (not  washed)  and 
shall  be  of  such  a nature  that  the  coating  will  not  chip  or 
peel  while  being  used  with  the  maximum  amperage  specified  by 
the  manufacturer. 

Aluminum  welding  electrodes  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
American  Welding  Society  specification  AWS  A5.10,  "Specification 
for  Aluminum  and  Aluminum- Alloy  Welding  Rods  and  Bare  Electrodes. 


(581-2) 

NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-93 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
582.  GALVANIZING 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  zinc  coatings  applied  to 
iron  and  steel  products. 

2.  QUALITY 

Zinc  coatings  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the  following 
specifications . 

Zinc  coatings  on  products  fabricated  from  rolled,  pressed, 
and  forged  steel  shapes,  plates,  bars,  and  strip,  1/8  inch 
thick  and  heavier  shall  conform  to  ASTM  Specification  A 123. 

Zinc  coatings  on  assembled  steel  products  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 386  and  shall  be  applied 
in  conformance  with  the  Recommended  Practice  for  Providing 
High  Quality  Zinc  Coatings  (Hot-Dip)  on  Assembled  Products 
(ASTM  Designation  A 385). 

Zinc  coatings  on  iron  and  steel  hardware  shall  conform  to 
the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification  A 153  except  that 
bolts,  screws  and  other  fasteners  1/2  inch  or  less  in  dia- 
meter may  be  coated  with  electrodepo sited  zinc  or  cadmium 
coating  conforming  to  the  requirements  of  ASTM  Specification 
A 164,  Type  RS,  or  ASTM  Specification  A 165,  Type  TS,  unless 
otherwise  specified. 


(582-1) 

NEH  8/1/72  (Notice  20-33) 


m 


* U.  S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE  : 1972  O - 513-970  (20) 


3-95 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
583.  COAL  TAR-EPOXY  PAINT  (FORMULA  C-200) 


1.  SCOPE 


This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  a coal  tar  polyamide 
epoxy  paint  suitable  for  use  on  structural  steel  or  concrete. 
(Note:  Coatings  compounded  from  coal  tar  and  epoxy  resins  are 

the  subject  of  U.S.  Patent  No.  2,765,288  held  by  the  U.S.S. 
Chemicals,  a Division  of  United  States  Steel  Corporation, 
Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  15230.) 

2.  COMPOSITION  AND  PROCESSING 


a.  Composition.  The  paint  shall  be  a two-component  system 

containing  the  pitch,  filler  and  catalyst  in  one  component 
and  the  resin  in  another.  The  components  shall  contain 
the  following  types  and  proportions  of  ingredients: 

(1)  COMPONENT  A 

Gallons  (absolute) 


Ingredient 

% by  Wt. 

in  38.5  lb.  batch 

Coal  Tar  Pitch 

35.0 

1.28 

Polyamide  Resin 

11.5 

0.55 

Magnesium  Silicate 

31.0 

0.51 

Xylene 

18.7 

1.00 

Ethyl  Alcohol 

(95% -denatured) 

1.0 

0.06 

Gelling  Agent 

1.5 

0.04 

Catalyst 

1.3 

0.06 

100.0 

3.50  gallons 

(2)  COMPONENT  B 


Epoxy  Resin 

(100%  nonvolatile)  9.7  pounds  1.0  gallon 

b.  Processing.  Magnesium  silicate  and  gelling  agent  shall  be 
thoroughly  dispersed  in  Component  A by  means  of  grinding 
equipment  capable  of  developing  substantial  shear  values. 
Gellant  shall  be  mixed  with  an  equal  weight  of  magnesium 
silicate  and  then  dampened  by  stirring-in  all  of  the  alcohol; 

(583-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


the  resultant  mixture  shall  be  added  to  and  thoroughly  dispersed 
into  Component  A.  (The  viscosity  of  Component  A will  be 
markedly  influenced  by  the  degree  of  dispersion  of  gellant 
and  magnesium  silicate.) 

Quality  of  Ingredients.  Ingredient  materials  shall  exhibit 
the  following  properties: 

(1)  Coal  Tar  Pitch.  Coal  tar  pitch  shall  have  the  following 
characteristics : 

Minimum  Maximum 

B & R softening  point,  degree  C 70  75.0 

(Method  ASTM  D 36) 

Ash,  percent  by  weight  0.5 

(Method  ASTM  D 271) 

Benzene  insolubles,  percent  by  weight 
(Method  ASTM  D 367) 

Volatiles,  percent  by  weight 
Under  250  degrees  C 
Under  300  degrees  C 

(2)  The  Gellant.  The  gellant  or  thixothrophy-producing 
additive  for  coal  tar-epoxy  paint  shall  be  an  organic 
derivative  of  magnesium  montmoril Ionite  for  use  in  low 
polarity  hydrocarbons.  It  shall  be  a creamy  white 
powder  having  a bulking  value  of  15  + 0.2  lbs.  per 
gallon  and  water  content  of  3.0%  maximum  (Bentone  38, 
National  Lead  Company  has  these  properties.) 

(3)  The  Catalyst.  The  catalyst  shall  be  3,  4,  6 Tri- 
(Dimethylamino  methyl)  phenol.  (DMP-30  Rohm  and  Haas 
Company  is  such  a chemical.) 

(4)  Epoxy  Resin.  Epoxy  resin  shall  be  a diepoxide  conden- 
sation product  of  bisphenol  A and  epichlorohydrin  with 
terminal  epoxide  group  with  the  following  properties : 


Minimum 

Maximum 

Nonvolatile  content 

99 

Epoxide  equivalent 

180 

200 

(583-2) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


18.0 

0.0 

5.0 


3-97 


Minimum 


Maximum 


Color,  Gardner 

Viscosity,  25°C,  Brookfield,  Poises 
Specific  Gravity  25°C/25°C 


100 

1.15 


5 

160 

1.18 


(5)  Polyamide  Resin.  Polyamide  resin  shall  be  a condensation 
product  of  dimerized  fatty  acid  and  polyamines  with  the 
following  characteristics: 


Amine  Value  330-360 

Color,  Gardner  12  maximum 

Specific  Gravity  25°C/25°C  0.96-0.98 

Viscosity,  Poises,  75°C,  Brookfield  7-9 

Nonvolatile  content,  percent  97 


(6)  Xylene.  Xylene  shall  conform  to  Federal  Specification 
TT-X-916b,  "Xylene  (for  use  in  organic  coatings)." 

(7)  Ethyl  Alcohol.  Ethyl  alcohol  (95%  denatured)  shall 
conform  to  Federal  Specification  0-E-760b,  and  Amend- 
ment 2,  "Ethyl  Alcohol  (Ethanol);  Denatured  Alcohol; 
and  Proprietary  Solvent,"  Grade  III  or  IV. 

(8)  Magnesim  Silicate.  Magnesium  silicate  shall  conform 

to  Federal  Specification  TT-P-403,  "Pigment,  Magnesium 
Silicate,  Dry,"  Medium  Oil  Absorption. 


3.  PHYSICAL  REQUIREMENTS 

When  tested  by  the  methods  described  in  Section  4: 
a.  Component  A shall  exhibit  the  following  properties : 

(1)  Viscosity,  poises  (Brookfield)  160  maximum 

(2)  Nonvolatile  residue,  percent  78  minimum 


(583-3) 


NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-2.7) 


3-98 


b. 


c. 


The 

mixed  paint  shall  exhibit  the  following  properties: 

(1) 

Sag,  12  mil  wet  film 

None 

(2) 

Pot  life  at  77°  t 3°F,  hours 

4 minimum 

The 

cured  film  shall  exhibit  the  following 

properties : 

(1) 

Penetration,  200  grams,  5 seconds, 
77°F,  hundredth  centimeter  units 

3 maximum 

(2) 

Odor  after  48  hours  curing 

Pass  test 

(3) 

Flexibility  on  %-inch  mandrel 

Pass  test 

(4) 

Adhesion 

No  delamination 

4.  TEST  METHODS 


a.  Viscosity  of  Component  A.  Fill  a container  having  a diameter 
and  a height  of  not  less  than  3 and  3-3/4  inches  respectively 
to  a depth  of  not  less  than  3 inches  with  a representative 
sample  of  Component  A.  Set  up  a Model  RVT  or  RVF-100  Brook- 
field Synochro-Electric  Viscometer  with  a No.  7 spindle  and 
with  guard  removed.  Bring  the  sample  to  a temperature  of 
25°C  and  stir  vigorously  for  2 minutes  with  a stiff  spatula. 
Immediately  after  stirring,  lower  the  viscometer  until  the 
spindle  is  immersed  until  \ of  the  "neck"  mark  is  covered. 

Run  the  viscometer  at  100  r.p.m.  for  1 minute  and  take  a 
reading  of  the  position  of  the  pointer  on  the  dial.  If  the 
dial  reading  is  40  or  less,  the  viscosity  shall  be  considered 
to  be  160  Poises  or  less.  If  the  reading  is  over  40, 
immediately  start  the  motor  and  take  additional  readings  at 
1-minute  intervals.  If  no  readings  of  40  or  less  are 
obtained  out  of  10  readings,  taken  at  1 -minute  intervals,  the 
viscosity  of  the  material  shall  be  considered  to  be  over 

160  Poises. 

b.  Nonvolatile  Content  of  Component  A.  Place  a short  length  of 
stiff  wire  such  as  a partially-straightened  paper  clip  into 
a small  disposable  aluminum  dish  of  about  2 inches  diameter 
and  weigh  to  the  nearest  0.1  milligram.  As  rapidly  as 
possible,  place  between  2 and  3 grams  of  Component  A into 
the  dish  and  weigh  immediately  to  the  nearest  0.1  milligram. 
After  weighing,  spread  the  material  over  the  bottom  of  the 
dish.  Heat  the  dish,  wire  and  contents  in  a well-ventilated 


(583-4) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-99 


convection-type  oven  maintained  at  105°  2°C,  for  3 hours. 

After  the  material  has  been  in  the  oven  for  a few  minutes,  and 
periodically  thereafter,  stir  the  material.  Cool  in  a desic- 
cator, weigh  to  the  nearest  0.1  milligram  and  calculate  the 
percentage  nonvolatile. 

c.  Sag  Test  of  Coal  Tar-Epoxy  Paint.  Prepare  approximately  one 
pint  of  the  material  by  thoroughly  mixing  100  ml.  of  Component 
B into  350  ml.  of  Component  A.  Determine  its  viscosity  imme- 
diately after  mixing,  using  the  same  procedure  as  for  Component 
A above  but  employing  a No.  6 spindle.  If  the  material  pro- 
duces a scale  reading  of  more  than  80,  at  100  r.p.m.  after  5 
readings  taken  at  1-minute  intervals,  reduce  the  viscosity  by 
adding  xylene  in  small  increments  until  a reading  not  greater 
than  80  is  obtained.  Press  a strip  of  1-inch  masking  tape 
across  the  full  width  of  a solvent  cleaned  3"  x 6"  cold-rolled 
steel  panel.  The  tape  should  be  parallel  to  and  centered  on 
the  shorter  axis  of  the  panel.  Within  30  minutes  after  mixing, 
apply  the  material  to  the  panel  to  a wet  film  thickness  of  at 
least  12  mils  as  determined  by  an  Interchemical  wet  film 
thickness  gage.  The  application  may  be  made  with  a doctor 
blade  having  a gap  of  approximately  25  mils  or  by  brush.  Imme- 
diately after  applying  the  material,  carefully  remove  the 
masking  tape  and  stand  the  panel  in  a vertical  position  with 
the  bare  strip  horizontal.  Examine  the  panel  after  four  hours. 
Sagging  or  running  of  the  coating  into  the  bare  area  shall 
constitute  failure  of  the  material  to  pass  the  sag  test. 

d.  Penetration  Test  on  Coal  Tar-Epoxy  Film.  Select  and  solvent 
spray-clean  two  3"  x 6"  steel  panels  in  accordance  with  Method 
2011  of  Federal  Test  Method  Standard  141.  Draw  down,  in  accor- 
dance with  Method  2161,  a coat  of  the  paint  mixed  (including 
any  thinning)  for  the  sag  test.  Allow  the  film  to  dry  18  to 

24  hours  in  a horizontal  position  at  77°  ~t  3°F  and  at  a 
relative  humidity  of  not  over  607o.  Apply  a second  coat  over 
and  at  right  angles  to  the  first,  using  freshly  mixed  paint 
prepared  identically  to  that  used  for  the  first  coat.  The 
draw-down  applicator (s ) shall  be  such  as  to  provide  a total 
dry-film  thickness  for  the  two  coats  of  23  + 3 mils  and  the 
coats  shall  be  of  approximately  equal  thickness.  Allow  the 
second  coat  to  dry  in  a horizontal  position  for  120  hours  at 
77°  "t  3°F.  After  72  hours  of  curing,  and  daily  thereafter, 
clamp  the  panel  onto  the  table  of  a penetrometer  (ASTM  D5)  so 
that  the  needle  is  over  an  area  which  is  within  the  prescribed 
thickness  range  (as  measured  by  Method  6181)  and  determine 


(583-5) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-100 


the  penetration,  using  a total  load  of  200  grams  applied  for 
5 seconds  at  77°F.  The  average  of  the  3 lowest  out  of  5 
penetration  readings,  all  taken  within  a 1 centimeter  square, 
shall  not  exceed  3/100  of  a centimeter  after  120  hours  of 
curing. 

e.  Flexibility  of  Coal  Tar -Epoxy  Film.  Sandblast  3 steel  panels 
(similar  to  those  used  in  the  penetration  test)  at  low  pres- 
sure with  clean,  30  to  50  mesh,  non-metallic  abrasive  until 

a uniform,  gray-white  surface,  with  well  developed  anchor 
pattern,  is  achieved.  (Note:  It  may  be  necessary  to  blast 

both  sides  of  panel,  in  stages,  to  avoid  warping.)  Blow  off 
dust  with  a clean  air  blast.  Immediately  after  recoating  of 
the  penetration  test  panel,  apply  10  to  12  mils  (wet  thick- 
ness as  determined  with  an  Interchemical  gage)  of  the  same 
material  to  the  flexibility  test  panels  in  accordance  with 
Method  2161,  Federal  Test  Method  Standard  No.  141.  Allow 
the  film  to  cure  in  the  horizontal  position  for  120  hours  at 
77°  "t  3°F  or  for  a period  equal  to  that  required  to  reach  a 
penetration  of  3/100  centimeter  on  the  penetration  test 
panel,  whichever  occurs  first.  With  film  side  up,  and  in  a 
time  interval  of  approximately  1 second,  bend  each  of  the 
flexibility  panels  double  over  a 1/2-inch  diameter  mandrel. 
Cracks  in  any  of  the  panels  visible  to  the  naked  eye  shall 
constitute  failure  except  that  edge  cracks  extending  no 
further  than  1/2  inch  or  small  local  fissures  emanating  from 
air  bubbles,  craters  and  similar  imperfections  shall  be 
disregarded. 

f.  Adhesion  of  Coal  Tar -Epoxy  Film.  Test  the  adhesion  of  the 
coating  on  an  unbroken  area  of  the  flexibility  panel  with  a 
sharp  knife  after  the  panel  has  cured  120  hours.  It  shall 
strongly  resist  being  removed  from  the  metal.  Also,  test 
the  intercoat  adhesion  of  the  film  on  a penetration  panel 
after  120  hours  curing,  with  a knife.  Any  delamination  of 
the  two  coats  shall  constitute  failure. 

g.  Pot  Life  Test  of  Coal  Tar -Epoxy  Paint.  Mix  100  ml.  of 
Compound  "B"  into  350  ml.  of  Component  "A"  both  of  which  have 
been  brought  to  a temperature  of  77°  + 3°F  before  mixing. 

Pour  the  material  into  a pint  tin  can,  seal  tightly  and 
maintain  at  77°  "t  3°F.  Examine  the  material  in  four  hours 
from  the  time  it  was  mixed.  For  its  pot  life  to  be  consid- 
ered satisfactory,  the  mixed  material  must  still  be  in  a 
fluid  condition  and  when  thinned  with  no  more  than  100  ml. 

of  xylene  shall  be  lump-free  and  brushable. 


(583-6) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-101 


h.  Odor  of  Dried  Coal  Tar-Epoxy  Film.  Examine  the  paint  film 
or  one  of  the  flexibility  panels  for  odor  after  it  has  been 
cured  for  48  hours.  The  film  shall  be  free  of  any  odor 
except  for  a faint  odor  of  xylene. 

5 . PACKAGING 


Three  and  one-half  gallons  of  Component  A shall  be  packaged  in  a 
standard  5-gallon  container  with  a lug-type,  removable  lid. 
Component  B shall  be  packaged  to  the  full  mark  in  a one-gallon, 
friction-lid  container.  In  addition  to  other  labelling  require- 
ments, each  of  the  5 -gallon  containers  shall  bear  instructions 
for  properly  mixing  the  two  components  immediately  prior  to  use. 


(583-7) 


NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-103 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
584.  STRUCTURAL  TIMBER  AND  LUMBER 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  structural  timber,  lumber 
and  plywood. 

2.  GRADING 

Structural  timber  and  lumber  shall  be  graded  in  accordance  with  the 
grading  rules,  applicable  to  the  specified  species,  adopted  by  a 
lumber  grading  or  inspection  bureau  or  agency  recognized  as  being 
competent  and  that  conform  to  the  basic  principles  of  ASTM  Methods 
D 245.  The  material  supplied  according  to  the  commercial  grading 
rules  shall  be  of  equal  or  greater  stress  value  than  the  specified 
stress -grade. 

Plywood  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Product  Standard  PS  1-66 
for  the  grade,  species  or  group,  and  type  specified. 

3.  QUALITY 

All  materials  shall  be  sound  wood  free  from  decay.  No  boxed  heart 
pieces  of  Douglas  fir  or  redwood  shall  be  used  in  stringers,  floor 
beams,  caps,  posts,  sills  or  other  principal  structural  members. 

Boxed  heart  pieces  are  defined  as  timber  so  sawed  that  at  any  section 
in  the  length  of  a sawed  piece  the  pith  lies  entirely  inside  the  four 
faces . 

4.  HEARTWOOD  REQUIREMENTS 

All  timber  and  lumber  specified  for  use  without  preservative  treat- 
ment shall  contain  not  less  than  75  percent  heartwood  on  any  diameter 
or  on  any  side  or  edge,  measured  at  the  point  where  the  greatest 
amount  of  sapwood  occurs.  This  requirement  shall  not  apply  to 
timber  and  lumber  for  which  pressure  treatment  with  wood  preservative 
is  specified. 

5.  SIZES 


The  sizes  specified  are  nominal  sizes.  Unless  otherwise  specified 
the  material  shall  be  furnished  in  American  Standard  dressed  sizes. 

(584-1) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-104 


6.  MARKING 


Each  piece  of  timber  and  lumber  shall  be  legibly  stamped  or 
branded  with  an  official  grade  mark.  Plywood  shall  be  legibly 
stamped  with  an  official  mark  designating  the  grade,  type  and 
surface  finish  as  described  in  the  cited  Product  Standard. 


(584-2) 

NEH  6/1/68  (Notice  20-23) 


3-105 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
585.  WOOD  PRESERVATIVES  AND  TREATMENT 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  wood  preservatives 
and  methods  of  treatment  of  wood  products. 

2.  TREATING  PRACTICES 

Treating  practices  and  sampling,  inspection  and  test  procedures 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification 
TT-W-571,  "Wood  Preservation:  Treating  Practices." 

3.  PRESERVATIVES 

The  wood  shall  be  treated  with  the  specified  type  of  preserva- 
tive. Wood  preservatives  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of 
the  applicable  specifications  listed  in  Federal  Specification 
TT-W-571. 

4.  QUALITY  OF  TREATED  MATERIALS 

Treated  lumber,  timber,  piles,  poles,  or  posts  shall  be  free 
from  heat  checks,  water  bursts,  excessive  checking,  results  of 
chafing  or  from  any  other  damage  or  defects  that  would  impair 
their  usefulness  or  durability  for  the  purpose  intended.  The 
use  of  "s"  irons  will  not  be  permitted.  Holes  bored  for  tests 
shall  be  filled  with  tight  fitting  treated  plugs. 

5 . MARKING 


Each  treated  wood  item  delivered  to  the  job  site  shall  be  marked 
as  specified  in  Federal  Specification  TT-W-571  unless  otherwise 
specified. 


(585-1) 

NEH  1/28/70  (Notice  20-27) 


* 


3-107 


MATERIAL  SPECIFICATION 
591.  FARM  FIELD  FENCING  MATERIALS 


1.  SCOPE 

This  specification  covers  the  quality  of  materials  used  in  the 
construction  of  farm  field  fences. 

2.  WIRE  GAGE 

When  the  size  of  steel  wire  is  designated  by  gage  number,  the 
diameter  shall  be  as  defined  for  U.  S.  Steel  Wire  Gage. 


3.  FENCING 


Barbed  wire,  woven  wire  and  wire  netting  fencing  shall  conform 
to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specification  RR-F-221  for  the 
specified  types  and  styles  of  fencing.  Wire  shall  have  Class  2 
zinc  coating  unless  otherwise  specified. 


4.  STAYS,  BRACING  AND  TENSION  WIRE 

Stays  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Federal  Specifi- 
cation RR-F-221  unless  otherwise  specified.  Bracing  and 
tension  wires  shall  have  a tensile  strength  not  less  than 
58,000  pounds  per  square  inch.  Stays  and  bracing  and  tension 
wire  shall  be  zinc-coated  as  specified  for  the  fencing  wire. 


WOOD  FENCE  POSTS  AND  BRACES 


Wood  posts  shall  be  of  black  locust,  red  cedar,  osage  orange 
(Bois  d'Arc),  redwood,  pressure  treated  pine  or  other  wood  of 
equal  life  or  strength.  At  least  half  the  diameter  or  diagonal 
dimension  of  red  cedar  or  redwood  posts  shall  be  in  heartwood. 
Pressure  treatment  shall  conform  to  Material  Specification  585. 
The  posts  shall  be  sound,  new,  free  from  decay,  with  all  limbs 
trimmed  substantially  flush  with  the  body.  They  shall  be 
substantially  straight  throughout  their  length. 

Wood  braces  shall  be  of  material  equal  to  or  better  than 
construction  grade  Douglas  fir.  They  shall  be  pressure  treated 
in  conformance  with  Material  Specification  585. 


(591-1) 


NEH  12/18/70  (Notice  20-31) 


3-108 


6.  STEEL  FENCE  POSTS  AND  BRACES 

Steel  fence  posts  and  braces  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
of  Federal  Specification  RR-F-221.  Posts  with  punched  tabs 
for  fastening  the  wires  shall  not  be  used. 

7.  CONCRETE  FENCE  POSTS 

Concrete  fence  posts  shall  be  manufactured  to  the  specified 
requirements  of  size,  shape,  and  strength. 

8.  PANEL  GATES 

Panel  gates  shall  be  the  specified  types,  sizes,  and  quality  and 
shall  include  the  necessary  fittings.  The  fittings  shall  consist 
of  not  less  than  two  hinges  and  two  latches  or  galvanized  chains 
for  fastening.  Latches  shall  be  of  such  design  that  a padlock 
may  be  used  for  locking.  All  fittings  shall  be  equivalent  to  the 
gate  manufacturer's  standard. 

9.  WIRE  GATES 

Wire  gates  shall  be  the  type  shown  on  the  drawings,  constructed 
in  accordance  with  these  specifications  at  the  locations  and  to 
the  dimensions  shown  on  the  drawings.  The  materials  shall  conform 
to  the  kinds,  grades,  and  sizes  specified  for  new  fence,  and  shall 
include  the  necessary  fittings  and  stays. 

10.  STAPLES 

Staples  used  to  fasten  fence  wire  to  wood  posts  shall  be  9-gage 
galvanized  wire  with  a minimum  length  of  \\  inches  for  soft  woods 
and  a minimum  length  of  one  inch  for  close -grain  hardwoods. 

11.  GALVANIZING 

All  iron  and  steel  fencing  materials,  except  as  otherwise  specified, 
shall  be  zinc  coated  by  the  hot  dip  process,  except  that  clips, 
tie  wires,  bands  or  other  fabric  fasteners  may  be  protected  by 
electrodeposited  zinc  or  cadmium  coating.  Zinc  or  cadmium  coating 
shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Material  Specification  582. 


(591-2) 

NEH  l/28/70(Notice  20-27) 


USDA-SCS-HYATTSVILLE.  MD.  1971 


