
NONRESIDENT 

TRAINING 

COURSE 

November 1996 



Steelworker, V olume 1 

NAVEDTRA 14250 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 





Although the words “he,” “him,” and 
“his” are used sparingly in this course to 
enhance communication, they are not 
intended to be gender driven or to affront or 
discriminate against anyone. 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 





COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC 

6490 SAUFLEY FIELD RD 
PENSACOLA, FL 32509-5237 


ERRATA #1 


29 May 2001 


Specific Instructions and Errata for 
Nonresident Training Course 

STEELWORKER, VOLUME 1, NAVEDTRA 14250 

1. This errata supersedes all previous errata. No attempt has been made to 
issue corrections for errors in typing, punctuation, etc., that do not affect 
your ability to answer the question or questions. 

2. To receive credit for deleted questions, show this errata to your local 
course administrator (ESO/scorer). The local course administrator is directed 
to correct the course and the answer key by indicating the questions deleted. 

3. Assignment Booklet 

Delete the following questions, and leave the corresponding spaces blank 
on the answer sheets: 

Questions 


1-60 

2- 13 

3- 16 
3-17 
3-18 
3-47 


3-48 

3-50 

3-52 


5-2 




PREFACE 


By enrolling in this self-study course, you have demonstrated a desire to improve yourself and the Navy. 
Remember, however, this self-study course is only one part of the total Navy training program. Practical 
experience, schools, selected reading, and your desire to succeed are also necessary to successfully round 
out a fully meaningful training program. 

COURSE OVERVIEW: In completing this nonresident training course, you will demonstrate a 
knowledge of the subject matter by correctly answering questions on the following subjects: 

Properties and Uses of Metals 
Basic Heat Treatment 
Introduction to Welding 
Gas Cutting 
Gas Welding 

Soldering, Brazing, Braze Welding, and Wearfacing 
Shielded Metal-Arc Welding and Wearfacing 
Gas Shielded-Arc Welding 

THE COURSE: This self-study course is organized into subject matter areas, each containing learning 
objectives to help you determine what you should learn along with text and illustrations to help you 
understand the information. The subject matter reflects day-to-day requirements and experiences of 
personnel in the rating or skill area. It also reflects guidance provided by Enlisted Community Managers 
(ECMs) and other senior personnel, technical references, instructions, etc., and either the occupational or 
naval standards, which are listed in the Manual of Navy Enlisted Manpower Personnel Classifications 
and Occupational Standards , NAVPERS 18068. 

THE QUESTIONS: The questions that appear in this course are designed to help you understand the 
material in the text. 

VALUE: In completing this course, you will improve your military and professional knowledge. 
Importantly, it can also help you study for the Navy-wide advancement in rate examination. If you are 
studying and discover a reference in the text to another publication for further information, look it up. 


1996 Edition Prepared by 
SWCS Roger Talbert, USN 
and 

SWC(SCW) Roger D. Keeton, USN 


Published by 

NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER 


l 


NAVSUP Logistics Tracking Number 
0504-LP-026-8840 



Sailor’s Creed 


“I am a United States Sailor. 

I will support and defend the 
Constitution of the United States of 
America and I will obey the orders 
of those appointed over me. 

I represent the fighting spirit of the 
Navy and those who have gone 
before me to defend freedom and 
democracy around the world. 

I proudly serve my country’s Navy 
combat team with honor, courage 
and commitment. 

I am committed to excellence and 
the fair treatment of all.” 


11 










CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

IT1 Properties and Uses of Metal. 1 1-11 

|~2l Basic Heat Treatment. I 2-11 

|~3l Introduction to Welding. I 3-l| 

l~4l Gas Cutting. 1 .4-11 

GO Gas Welding. 1311 

l~6l Soldering, Brazing, Braze Welding, and Wearfacing. I 6-11 

ID Shielded Metal-Arc Welding and Wearfacing. I 7-11 

fa! Gas Shielded-Arc Welding. I 8-l| 

APPENDIX 

IT~I Glossary. I Al-ll 

nil References Used to Develop the TRAM AN. | Al 1-1 


IINDEXI . I .INDEX-11 


iii 
































SUMMARY OF 
STEELWORKER, VOLUME I 
TRAINING MANUALS 

VOLUME 1 

Steelworker , Volume 1, NAVEDTRA 14250, consists of chapters on the 
following subjects: Properties and Uses of Metal; Basic Heat Treatment; 
Introduction to Welding; Gas Cutting; Gas Welding; Soldering, Brazing, Braze 
Welding, and Wearfacing; Shielded Metal-Arc Welding and Wearfacing; and Gas 
Shielded-Arc Welding. 


VOLUME 2 

Steelworker , Volume 2, NAVEDTRA 14251, consists of chapters on the 
following subjects: Construction Administration and Support; Sheet Metal and 
Fiber Glass Duct Layout and Fabrication; Structural Steel and Pipe Layout and 
Fabrication; Fiber Line; Wire Rope; Rigging and Hoisting; Concrete Construction 
(Reinforcing Steel); Pre-engineered Buildings, Towers, and Antennas; 
Pre-engineered Storage Tanks; Pontoons; and SATS matting. 


iv 



INSTRUCTIONS FOR TAKING THE COURSE 


ASSIGNMENTS 

The text pages that you are to study are listed at 
the beginning of each assignment. Study these 
pages carefully before attempting to answer the 
questions. Pay close attention to tables and 
illustrations and read the learning objectives. 
The learning objectives state what you should be 
able to do after studying the material. Answering 
the questions correctly helps you accomplish the 
objectives. 

SELECTING YOUR ANSWERS 

Read each question carefully, then select the 
BEST answer. You may refer freely to the text. 
The answers must be the result of your own 
work and decisions. You are prohibited from 
referring to or copying the answers of others and 
from giving answers to anyone else taking the 
course. 

SUBMITTING YOUR ASSIGNMENTS 

To have your assignments graded, you must be 
enrolled in the course with the Nonresident 
Training Course Administration Branch at the 
Naval Education and Training Professional 
Development and Technology Center 
(NETPDTC). Following enrollment, there are 
two ways of having your assignments graded: 
(1) use the Internet to submit your assignments 
as you complete them, or (2) send all the 
assignments at one time by mail to NETPDTC. 

Grading on the Internet: Advantages to 
Internet grading are: 

• you may submit your answers as soon as 
you complete an assignment, and 

• you get your results faster; usually by the 
next working day (approximately 24 hours). 

In addition to receiving grade results for each 
assignment, you will receive course completion 
confirmation once you have completed all the 


assignments. To submit your assignment 
answers via the Internet, go to: 

http://courses.cnet.navy.mil 

Grading by Mail: When you submit answer 
sheets by mail, send all of your assignments at 
one time. Do NOT submit individual answer 
sheets for grading. Mail all of your assignments 
in an envelope, which you either provide 
yourself or obtain from your nearest Educational 
Services Officer (ESO). Submit answer sheets 
to: 

COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N331 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 

Answer Sheets: All courses include one 
“scannable” answer sheet for each assignment. 
These answer sheets are preprinted with your 
SSN, name, assignment number, and course 
number. Explanations for completing the answer 
sheets are on the answer sheet. 

Do not use answer sheet reproductions: Use 

only the original answer sheets that we 
provide—reproductions will not work with our 
scanning equipment and cannot be processed. 

Follow the instructions for marking your 
answers on the answer sheet. Be sure that blocks 
1, 2, and 3 are filled in correctly. This 
information is necessary for your course to be 
properly processed and for you to receive credit 
for your work. 

COMPLETION TIME 

Courses must be completed within 12 months 
from the date of enrollment. This includes time 
required to resubmit failed assignments. 


v 



PASS/FAIL ASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES 

If your overall course score is 3.2 or higher, you 
will pass the course and will not be required to 
resubmit assignments. Once your assignments 
have been graded you will receive course 
completion confirmation. 

If you receive less than a 3.2 on any assignment 
and your overall course score is below 3.2, you 
will be given the opportunity to resubmit failed 
assignments. You may resubmit failed 
assignments only once. Internet students will 
receive notification when they have failed an 
assignment-they may then resubmit failed 
assignments on the web site. Internet students 
may view and print results for failed 
assignments from the web site. Students who 
submit by mail will receive a failing result letter 
and a new answer sheet for resubmission of each 
failed assignment. 

COMPLETION CONFIRMATION 

After successfully completing this course, you 
will receive a letter of completion. 

ERRATA 

Errata are used to correct minor errors or delete 
obsolete information in a course. Errata may 
also be used to provide instructions to the 
student. If a course has an errata, it will be 
included as the first page(s) after the front cover. 
Errata for all courses can be accessed and 
viewed/downloaded at: 

http://www.advancement.cnet.navv.inil 

STUDENT FEEDBACK QUESTIONS 

We value your suggestions, questions, and 
criticisms on our courses. If you would like to 
communicate with us regarding this course, we 
encourage you, if possible, to use e-mail. If you 
write or fax, please use a copy of the Student 
Comment form that follows this page. 


For subject matter questions: 

E-mail: n314.products@cnet.navy.mil 

Phone: Comm: (850) 452-1001, Ext. 1826 

DSN: 922-1001, Ext. 1826 
FAX: (850)452-1370 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 

Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N314 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32509-5237 

For enrollment, shipping, grading, or 
completion letter questions 

E-mail: fleetservices@cnet.navy.mil 

Phone: Toll Free: 877-264-8583 

Comm: (850)452-1511/1181/1859 
DSN: 922-1511/1181/1859 
FAX: (850)452-1370 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 

Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N331 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 

NAVAL RESERVE RETIREMENT CREDIT 

If you are a member of the Naval Reserve, 
you may earn retirement points for successfully 
completing this course, if authorized under 
current directives governing retirement of Naval 
Reserve personnel. For Naval Reserve retire¬ 
ment, this course is evaluated at 9 points. (Refer 
to Administrative Procedures for Naval 
Reservists on Inactive Duty , BUPERSINST 
1001.39, for more information about retirement 
points.) 


vi 



Student Comments 


Course Title: Steelworker , Volume 1 

NAVEDTRA: 14250 _ Date: _ 

We need some information about you : 

Rate/Rank and Name: _ SSN: _ Command/Unit _ 

Street Address: _ City: _ State/FPO: _ Zip 

Your comments, suggestions, etc .: 


Privacy Act Statement: Under authority of Title 5, USC 301, information regarding your military status is 
requested in processing your comments and in preparing a reply. This information will not be divulged without 
written authorization to anyone other than those within POD for official use in determining performance. _ 


NETPDTC 1550/41 (Rev 4-00 


Vll 






CHAPTER 1 


PROPERTIES AND USES OF METAL 


In the seabees, Steelworkers are the resident 
experts on the properties and uses of metal. We lay 
airfields, erect towers and storage tanks, assemble 
pontoon causeways, and construct buildings. We use 
our expertise to repair metal items, resurface worn 
machinery parts, and fabricate all types of metal 
objects. To accomplish these tasks proficiently, one 
must possess a sound working knowledge of various 
metals and their properties. As we learn their different 
properties and characteristics, we can then select the 
right type of metal and use the proper method to 
complete the job. Steelworkers primarily work with 
iron and steel; however, we also must become familiar 
with the nonferrous metals coming into use more and 
more each day. As Steelworkers, we must be able to 
identify various metals and to associate their 
individual properties with their proper application or 
use. 

The primary objective of this chapter is to present 
a detailed explanation of some of the properties of 
different metals and to provide instruction on using 
simple tests in establishing their identity. 

METAL PROPERTIES 

There is no simple definition of metal; however, 
any chemical element having "metallic properties" is 
classed as a metal. "Metallic properties" are defined 
as luster, good thermal and electrical conductivity, and 
the capability of being permanently shaped or 
deformed at room temperature. Chemical elements 
lacking these properties are classed as nonmetals. A 
few elements, known as metalloids, sometimes behave 
like a metal and at other times like a nonmetal. Some 
examples of metalloids are as follows: carbon, 
phosphorus, silicon, and sulfur. 

Although Steelworkers seldom work with pure 
metals, we must be knowledgeable of their properties 
because the alloys we work with are combinations of 
pure metals. Some of the pure metals discussed in this 
chapter are the base metals in these alloys. This is true 
of iron, aluminum, and magnesium. Other metals 
discussed are the alloying elements present in small 
quantities but important in their effect. Among these are 
chromium, molybdenum, titanium, and manganese. 


An "alloy" is defined as a substance having metallic 
properties that is composed of two or more elements. 
The elements used as alloying substances are usually 
metals or metalloids. The properties of an alloy differ 
from the properties of the pure metals or metalloids that 
make up the alloy and this difference is what creates the 
usefulness of alloys. By combining metals and metal¬ 
loids, manufacturers can develop alloys that have the 
particular properties required for a given use. 

ITable 1-J is a list of various elements and their 
symbols that compose metallic materials. 


IT able 1-lJ— Symbols of Base Metals and Alloying Elements 


Element 

Symbol 

Aluminum. 

A1 

Antimony. 

Sb 

Cadmium . 

Cd 

Carbon. 

C 

Chromium. 

Cr 

Cobalt. 

Co 

Copper. 

Cu 

Iron. 

Fe 

Lead. 

Pb 

Magnesium . 

Mg 

Manganese. 

Mn 

Molybdenum. 

Mo 

Nickel. 

Ni 

Phosphorus. 

P 

Silicon. 

Si 

Sulfur. 

S 

Tin. 

Sn 

Thngsten. 

W 

Vanadium. 

V 

Zinc. 

Zn 

































1 


T 


SHEAR 


TORSION 


BENDING 

(IMPACT) 



t 


FATIGUE 


Figure 1-lJ -Stress applied to a material. 


Very rarely do Steelworkers work with elements 
in their pure state. We primarily work with alloys and have 
to understand their characteristics. The characteristics 
of elements and alloys are explained in terms of 
physical, chemical, electrical, and mechanical 
properties. Physical properties relate to color, density, 
weight, and heat conductivity. Chemical properties 
involve the behavior of the metal when placed in 
contact with the atmosphere, salt water, or other 
substances. Electrical properties encompass the 
electrical conductivity, resistance, and magnetic 
qualities of the metal. The mechanical properties 
relate to load-carrying ability, wear resistance, 
hardness, and elasticity. 

When selecting stock for a job, your main 
concern is the mechanical properties of the metal. 
The various properties of metals and alloys were 
determined in the laboratories of manufacturers and 
by various societies interested in metallurgical 
development. Charts presenting the properties of a 
particular metal or alloy are available in many 
commercially published reference books. The 
charts provide information on the melting point, 
tensile strength, electrical conductivity, magnetic 
properties, and other properties of a particular metal 
or alloy. Simple tests can be conducted to determine 
some of the properties of a metal; however, we 
normally use a metal test only as an aid for 
identifying apiece of stock. Some of these methods 
of testing are discussed later in this chapter. 

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES 

Strength, hardness, toughness, elasticity, plasticity, 
brittleness, and ductility and malleability are 
mechanical properties used as measurements of how 
metals behave under a load. These properties are 
descri bed i n terms of the types of force or stress that 
the metal must withstand and how these are resisted. 


Common types of stress are compression, tension, 
shear, torsion, impact, 1-2 or a combination of these 
stresses, such as fatigue. (Se d fig, l^ll ) 

Compression stresses develop within a material 
when forces compress or crush the material. A column 
that supports an overhead beam is in compression, and 
the internal stresses that develop within the column are 
compression. 

Tension (or tensile) stresses develop when a 
material is subject to a pulling load; for example, when 
using a wire rope to lift a load or when using it as a 
guy to anchor an antenna. 'Tensile strength" is defined 
as resistance to longitudinal stress or pull and can be 
measured in pounds per square inch of cross section. 
Shearing stresses occur within a material when 
external forces are applied along parallel lines in 
opposite directions. Shearing forces can separate 
material by sliding part of it in one direction and the 
rest in the opposite direction. 

Some materials are equally strong in compression, 
tension, and shear. However, many materials show 
marked differences; for example, cured concrete has a 
maximum strength of 2,000 psi in compression, but 
only 400 psi in tension. Carbon steel has a maximum 
strength of 56,000 psi in tension and compression but 
a maximum shear strength of only 42,000 psi; 
therefore, when dealing with maximum strength, you 
should always state the type of loading. 

A material that is stressed repeatedly usually fails 
at a point considerably below its maximum strength in 
tension, compression, or shear. For example, a thin 
steel rod can be broken by hand by bending it back and 
forth several times in the same place; however, if the 
same force is applied in a steady motion (not bent back 
and forth), the rod cannot be broken. The tendency of 
a material to fail after repeated bending at the same 
point is known as fatigue. 


1-2 





















[Table 1-2.1 -Mechanical Properties of Metals/Alloys 


TOUGHNESS 

BRITTLENESS 

DUCTILITY 

MALLEABILITY 

CORROSION 

RESISTANCE 

Copper 

White Cast Iron 

Gold 

Gold 

Gold 

Nickel 

Gray Cast Iron 

Silver 

Silver 

Platinum 

Iron 

Hardened Steel 

Platinum 

Aluminum 

Silver 

Magnesium 

Bismuth 

Iron 

Copper 

Mercury 

Zinc 

Manganese 

Nickel 

Tin 

Copper 

Aluminum 

Bronzes 

Copper 

Lead 

Lead 

Lead 

Aluminum 

Aluminum 

Zinc 

Tin 

Tin 

Brass 

Tungsten 

Iron 

Nickel 

Cobalt 

Structural Steels 

Zinc 


Iron 

Bismuth 

Zinc 

Tin 


Zinc 


Monel 

Tin 

Copper 

Iron 

Lead 


Magnesium 

Aluminum 

* Metals/alloys are ranked in descending order of having the property named in the column heading 


Strength 

Strength is the property that enables a metal to resist 
deformation under load. The ultimate strength is the 
maximum strain a material can withstand. Tensile 
strength is a measurement of the resistance to being 
pulled apart when placed in a tension load. 

Fatigue strength is the ability of material to resist 
various kinds of rapidly changing stresses and is ex¬ 
pressed by the magnitude of alternating stress for a 
specified number of cycles. 

Impact strength is the ability of a metal to resist 
suddenly applied loads and is measured in foot-pounds 
of force. 

Hardness 

Hardness is the property of a material to resist 
permanent indentation. Because there are several meth¬ 
ods of measuring hardness, the hardness of a material is 
always specified in terms of the particular test that was 
used to measure this property. Rockwell, Vickers, or 
B ri nel I are some of the methods of testi ng. Of these tests, 
Rockwell is the one most frequently used. The basic 
principle used in the Rockwell testis that a hard material 
can penetrate a softer one. We then measure the amount 
of penetration and compare it to a scale. For ferrous 
metals, which are usually harder than nonferrous metals, 
a diamond tip is used and the hardness is indicated by a 


Rockwell "C" number. On nonferrous metals, that are 
softer, a metal ball is used and the hardness is indicated 
by a Rockwell "B" number. To get an idea of the 
property of hardness, compare lead and steel. Lead can 
be scratched with a pointed wooden stick but steel 
cannot because it is harder than lead. 

A full explanation of the various methods used to 
determine the hardness of a material is available in 
commercial books or books located in your base library. 

Toughness 

Toughness is the property that enables a material to 
withstand shock and to be deformed without rupturing. 
Toughness may be considered as a combination of 
strength and plasticity TTable 1-2 shows the order of 
some of the more common materials for toughness as 
well as other properties. 

Elasticity 

When a material has a load applied to it, the load 
causes the material to deform. Elasticity is the ability of 
a material to return to its original shape after the load is 
removed. Theoretically, the elastic limit of a material is 
the limit to which a material can be loaded and still 
recover its original shape after the load is removed. 


1-3 


















Plasticity 


METAL TYPES 


Plasticity is the ability of a material to deform 
permanently without breaking or rupturing. This prop¬ 
erty is the opposite of strength. By careful alloying of 
metals, the combination of plasticity and strength is used 
to manufacture large structural members. For example, 
should a member of a bridge structure become over¬ 
loaded, plasticity allows the overloaded member to flow 
allowing the distribution of the load to other parts of the 
bridge structure. 

Brittleness 

Brittleness is the opposite of the property of plastic¬ 
ity. A brittle metal is one that breaks or shatters before 
it deforms. White cast iron and glass are good examples 
of brittle material. Generally, brittle metals are high in 
compressive strength but low in tensile strength. As an 
example, you would not choose cast iron for fabricating 
support beams in a bridge. 

Ductility and Malleability 

Ductility is the property that enables a material to 
stretch, bend, or twist without cracking or breaking. This 
property makes it possible for a material to be drawn out 
into a thin wire. In comparison, malleability is the 
property that enables a material to deform by compres¬ 
sive forces without developing defects. A malleable 
material is one that can be stamped, hammered, forged, 
pressed, or rolled into thin sheets. 

CORROSION RESISTANCE 

Corrosion resistance, although not a mechanical 
property, is important in the discussion of metals. Cor¬ 
rosion resistance is the property of a metal that gives it 
the ability to withstand attacks from atmospheric, 
chemical, or electrochemical conditions. Corrosion, 
sometimes called oxidation, is illustrated by the rusting 
of iron. 

I Table l-2l lists four mechanical properties and the 
corrosion resistance of various metals or alloys. The first 
metal or alloy in each column exhibits the best charac¬ 
teristics of that property. The last metal or alloy in each 
column exhibits the least. In the column labeled 'Tough¬ 
ness," note that iron is not as tough as copper or nickel; 
however, it is tougher than magnesium, zinc, and alumi¬ 
num. In the column labeled "Ductility," iron exhibits a 
reasonable amount of ductility; however, in the columns 
labeled "Malleability" and "Brittleness," it is last. 


The metals that Steelworkers work with are divided 
into two general classifications: ferrous and nonferrous. 
Ferrous metals are those composed primarily of iron and 
iron alloys. Nonferrous metals are those composed pri¬ 
marily of some element or elements other than iron. 
Nonferrous metals or alloys sometimes contain a small 
amount of iron as an alloying element or as an impurity. 

FERROUS METALS 

Ferrous metals include all forms of iron and steel 
alloys. A few examples include wrought iron, cast iron, 
carbon steels, alloy steels, and tool steels. Ferrous met¬ 
als are iron-base alloys with small percentages of carbon 
and other elements added to achieve desirable proper¬ 
ties. Normally, ferrous metals are magnetic and nonfer¬ 
rous metals are nonmagnetic. 

Iron 

Pure iron rarely exists outside of the laboratory. I ron 
is produced by reducing iron ore to pig iron through the 
use of a blast furnace. From pig iron many other types 
of iron and steel are produced by the addition or deletion 
of carbon and alloys. The following paragraphs discuss 
the different types of iron and steel that can be made 
from iron ore. 

PIG IRON.— Pig iron is composed of about 93% 
iron, from 3% to 5% carbon, and various amounts of 
other elements. Pig iron is comparatively weak and 
brittle; therefore, it has a limited use and approximately 
ninety percent produced is refined to produce steel. 
Cast-iron pipe and some fittings and valves are manu¬ 
factured from pig iron. 

WROUGHT IRON.— Wrought iron is made from 
pig iron with some slag mixed in during manufacture. 
Almost pure iron, the presence of slag enables wrought 
iron to resist corrosion and oxidation. The chemical 
analyses of wrought iron and mild steel are just about 
the same. The difference comes from the properties 
controlled during the manufacturing process. Wrought 
iron can be gas and arc welded, machined, plated, and 
easily formed; however, it has a low hardness and a 
low-fatigue strength. 

CAST IRON.— Cast iron is any iron containing 
greater than 2% carbon alloy. Cast iron has a high-com- 
pressive strength and good wear resistance; however, it 
lacks ductility, malleability, and impact strength. Alloy¬ 
ing it with nickel, chromium, molybdenum, silicon, or 
vanadium improves toughness, tensile strength, and 






hardness. A malleable cast iron is produced through a 
prolonged annealing process. 

INGOT IRON.— Ingot iron is a commercially pure 
iron (99.85% iron) that is easily formed and possesses 
good ductility and corrosion resistance. The chemical 
analysis and properties of this iron and the lowest carbon 
steel are practically the same. The lowest carbon steel, 
known as dead-soft, has about 0.06% more carbon than 
ingot iron. In iron the carbon content is considered an 
impurity and in steel it is considered an alloying ele¬ 
ment. The primary use for ingot iron is for galvanized 
and enameled sheet. 

Steel 

Of all the different metals and materials that we use 
in our trade, steel is by far the most important. When 
steel was developed, it revolutionized the American iron 
industry. With it came skyscrapers, stronger and longer 
bridges, and railroad tracks that did not collapse. Steel 
is manufactured from pig iron by decreasing the amount 
of carbon and other impurities and adding specific 
amounts of alloying elements. 

Do not confuse steel with the two general classes of 
iron: cast iron (greater than 2% carbon) and pure iron 
(less than 0.15% carbon). In steel manufacturing, con¬ 
trolled amounts of alloying elements are added during 
the molten stage to produce the desired composition. 
The composition of a steel is determined by its applica¬ 
tion and the specifications that were developed by the 
following: American Society for Testing and Materials 
(ASTM), the American Society of Mechanical Engi¬ 
neers (ASME), the Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE), and the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI). 

Carbon steel is a term applied to a broad range of 
steel that falls between the commercially pure ingot iron 
and the cast irons. This range of carbon steel may be 
classified into four groups: 

Low-Carbon Steel.0.05% to 0.30% carbon 

Medium-Carbon Steel.0.30%to0.45%carbon 

High-Carbon Steel.0.45%to0.75%carbon 

Very High-Carbon Steel.0.75% to 1.70% carbon 

LOW-CARBON STEEL.— Steel in this classifi¬ 
cation is tough and ductile, easily machined, formed, 
and welded. It does not respond to any form of heat 
treating, except case hardening. 

MEDIUM-CARBON STEEL.- These steels are 
strong and hard but cannot be welded or worked as 


easily as the low-carbon steels. They are used for crane 
hooks, axles, shafts, setscrews, and so on. 

HIGH-CARBON STEEL/VERY HIGH-CAR¬ 
BON STEEL.— Steel in these classes respond well to 
heat treatment and can be welded. When welding, spe¬ 
cial electrodes must be used along with preheating and 
stress-relieving procedures to prevent cracks in the weld 
areas. These steels are used for dies, cutting tools, mill 
tools, railroad car wheels, chisels, knives, and so on. 

LOW-ALLOY, HIGH-STRENGTH, TEM¬ 
PERED STRUCTURAL STEEL.— A special low- 
carbon steel, containing specific small amounts of 
alloying elements, that is quenched and tempered to get 
a yield strength of greater than 50,000 psi and tensile 
strengths of 70,000 to 120,000 psi. Structural members 
made from these high-strength steels may have smaller 
cross-sectional areas than common structural steels 
and still have equal or greater strength. Additionally, 
these steels are normally more corrosion- and abrasion- 
resistant. H igh-strength steels are covered by ASTM 
specifications. 

NOTE: This type of steel is much tougher than 
low-carbon steels. Shearing machines for this type of 
steel must have twice the capacity than that required for 
low-carbon steels. 

STAINLESS STEEL.- This type of steel is clas¬ 
sified by the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) 
into two general series named the 200-300 series and 
400 series. Each series includes several types of steel 
with different characteristics. 

The 200-300 series of stainless steel is known as 
AUSTENITIC. This type of steel is very tough and 
ductile in the as-welded condition; therefore, it is ideal 
for welding and requires no annealing under normal 
atmospheric conditions. The most well-known types of 
steel in this series are the 302 and 304. They are com¬ 
monly cal led 18-8 because they are composed of 18% 
chromium and 8% nickel. The chromium nickel steels 
are the most widely used and are normally nonmagnetic. 

The 400 series of steel issubdivided according to 
their crystalline structure into two general groups. One 
group is known as FERRITIC CHROMIUM and the 
other group as MARTENSITIC CHROMIUM. 

Ferritic Chromium.— This type of steel contains 
12% to 27% chromium and 0.08% to 0.20% carbon. 
These alloys are the straight chromium grades of stain¬ 
less steel since they contain no nickel. They are nonhar- 
denable by heat treatment and are normally used in the 
annealed or soft condition. Ferritic steels are magnetic 








and frequently used for decorative trim and equipment 
subjected to high pressures and temperatures. 

Martensitic Chromium.— These steels are mag¬ 
netic and are readily hardened by heat treatment. They 
contain 12% to 18% chromium, 0.15% to 1.2% carbon, 
and up to 2.5% nickel. This group is used where high 
strength, corrosion resistance, and ductility are required. 

ALLOY STEELS.— Steels that derive their prop¬ 
erties primarily from the presence of some alloying 
element other than carbon are called ALLOYS or AL¬ 
LOY STEELS. Note, however, that alloy steels always 
contain traces of other elements. Among the more com¬ 
mon alloying elements are nickel, chromium, vana¬ 
dium, silicon, and tungsten. One or more of these 
elements may be added to the steel during the manufac¬ 
turing process to produce the desired characteristics. 
Alloy steels may be produced in structural sections, 
sheets, plates, and bars for use in the “as-rolled" condi¬ 
tion. Better physical properties are obtained with these 
steels than are possible with hot-rolled carbon steels. 
These alloys are used in structures where the strength of 
material is especially important. Bridge members, rail¬ 
road cars, dump bodies, dozer blades, and crane booms 
are made from alloy steel. Some of the common alloy 
steels are briefly described in the paragraphs below. 

Nickel Steels.— These steels contain from 3.5% 
nickel to 5% nickel. The nickel increases the strength 
and toughness of these steels. Nickel steel containing 
more than 5% nickel has an increased resistance to 
corrosion and scale. Nickel steel is used in the manufac¬ 
ture of aircraft parts, such as propellers and airframe 
support members. 

Chromium Steels.— These steels have chromium 
added to improve hardening ability, wear resistance, and 
strength. These steels contain between 0.20% to 0.75% 
chromium and 0.45% carbon or more. Some of these 
steels are so highly resistant to wear that they are used 
for the races and balls in antifriction bearings. Chro¬ 
mium steels are highly resistant to corrosion and to 
scale. 

Chrome Vanadium Steel.— This steel has the 
maximum amount of strength with the least amount of 
weight. Steels of this type contain from 0.15% to 0.25% 
vanadium, 0.6%to 1.5%chromium, and 0.1%to0.6% 
carbon. Common uses are for crankshafts, gears, axles, 
and other items that require high strength. This steel is 
also used in the manufacture of high-quality hand tools, 
such as wrenches and sockets. 

Tungsten Steel.— This is a special alloy that has the 
property of red hardness. This is the ability to continue 


to cut after it becomes red-hot. A good grade of this steel 
contains from 13% to 19% tungsten, 1% to 2% vana¬ 
dium, 3%to 5%chromium, and 0.6%to 0.8%carbon. 
Because this alloy is expensive to produce, its use is 
largely restricted to the manufacture of drills, lathe tools, 
milling cutters, and similar cutting tools. 

Molybdenum.— This is often used as an alloying 
agent for steel in combination with chromium and 
nickel. The molybdenum adds toughness to the steel. It 
can be used in pi ace of tungsten to make the cheaper 
grades of high-speed steel and in carbon molybdenum 
high-pressure tubing. 

Manganese Steels.— The amount of manganese 
used depends upon the properties desired in the finished 
product. Small amounts of manganese produce strong, 
free-machining steels. Larger amounts (between 2% 
and 10%) produce a somewhat brittle steel, while still 
larger amounts (11% to 14%) produce a steel that is 
tough and very resistant to wear after proper heat treat¬ 
ment. 

NONFERROUS METALS 

Nonferrous metals contain either no iron or only 
insignificant amounts used as an alloy. Some of the more 
common nonferrous metals Steelworkers work with are 
as follows: copper, brass, bronze, copper-nickel alloys, 
lead, zinc, tin, aluminum, and Duralumin. 

NOTE: These metals are nonmagnetic. 

Copper 

This metal and its alloys have many desirable prop¬ 
erties. Among the commercial metals, it is one of the 
most popular. Copper is ductile, malleable, hard, tough, 
strong, wear resistant, machinable, weldable, and cor¬ 
rosion resistant. It also has high-tensile strength, fatigue 
strength, and thermal and electrical conductivity. Cop¬ 
per is one of the easier metals to work with but be careful 
because it easily becomes work-hardened; however, this 
condition can be remedied by heating it to a cherry red 
and then letting it cool. This process, called annealing, 
restores it to a softened condition. Annealing and sof¬ 
tening are the only heat-treating procedures that apply 
to copper. Seams in copper are joined by riveting, silver 
brazing, bronze brazing, soft soldering, gas welding, or 
electrical arc welding. Copper is frequently used to give 
a protective coating to sheets and rods and to make ball 
floats, containers, and soldering coppers. 




True Brass 

This is an alloy of copper and zinc Additional 
elements, such as aluminum, lead, tin, iron, manganese, 
or phosphorus, are added to give the alloy specific 
properties. Naval rolled brass (Tobin bronze) contains 
about 60% copper, 39% zinc, and 0.75% tin. This brass 
is highly corrosion-resistant and is practically impurity 
free. 

Brass sheets and strips are available in several 
grades: soft, 1/4 hard, 1/2 hard, full hard, and spring 
grades. Hardness is created by the process of cold roll¬ 
ing. All grades of brass can be softened by annealing at 
a temperature of 550°F to 600°F then allowing it to cool 
by itself without quenching. Overheating can destroy 
the zinc in the alloy. 

Bronze 

Bronze is a combination of 84% copper and 16% tin 
and was the best metal available before steel-making 
techniques were developed. Many complex bronze al¬ 
loys, containing such elements as zinc, lead, iron, alu¬ 
minum, silicon, and phosphorus, are now available. 
Today, the name bronze is applied to any copper-based 
alloy that looks like bronze. In many cases, there is no 
real distinction between the composition of bronze and 
that of brass. 

Copper-Nickel Alloys 

Nickel is used in these alloys to make them strong, 
tough, and resistant to wear and corrosion. Because of 
their high resistance to corrosion, copper nickel alloys, 
containing 70% copper and 30% nickel or 90% copper 
and 10% nickel, are used for saltwater piping systems. 
Small storage tanks and hot-water reservoirs are con- 
strutted of a copper-nickel alloy that is available in sheet 
form. Copper-nickel alloys should be joined by metal- 
arc welding or by brazing. 

Lead 

A heavy metal that weighs about 710 pounds per 
cubic foot. In spite of its weight, lead is soft and malle¬ 
able and is available in pig and sheet form. I n sheet form, 
it is rolled upon a rod so the user can unroll it and cut 
off the desired amount. The surface of lead is grayish in 
color; however, after scratching or scraping it, you can 
see that the actual color of the metal is white. Because 
it is soft, lead is used as backing material when punching 
holes with a hollow punch or when forming shapes by 
hammering copper sheets. Sheet lead is also used to line 


sinks or protect bench tops where a large amount of acid 
is used. Lead-lined pipes are used in systems that carry 
corrosive chemicals. Frequently, lead is used in alloyed 
form to increase its low-tensile strength. Alloyed with 
tin, lead produces a soft solder. When added to metal 
alloys, lead improves their machinability. 


CAUTION 

When working with lead, you must take 
proper precautions because the dust, fumes, or 
vapors from it are highly poisonous. 

Zinc 

You often see zinc used on iron or steel in the form 
of a protective coating called galvanizing. Zinc is also 
used in soldering fluxes, die castings, and as an alloy in 
making brass and bronze. 

Tin 

Tin has many important uses as an alloy. It can be 
alloyed with lead to produce softer solders and with 
copper to produce bronze. Tin-based alloys have a high 
resistance to corrosion, low-fatigue strength, and a com¬ 
pressive strength that accommodates light or medium 
loads. Tin, like lead, has a good resistance to corrosion 
and has the added advantage of not being poisonous; 
however, when subjected to extremely low tempera¬ 
tures, it has a tendency to decompose. 

Aluminum 

This metal is easy to work with and has a good 
appearance. Aluminum is light in weight and has a high 
strength per unit weight. A disadvantage is that the 
tensile strength is only one third of that of iron and one 
fifth of that of annealed mild steel. 

Aluminum alloys usually contain at least 90% alu¬ 
minum. The addition of silicon, magnesium, copper, 
nickel, or manganese can raise the strength of the alloy 
to that of mild steel. Aluminum, in its pure state, is soft 
and has a strong affinity for gases. The use of alloying 
elements is used to overcome these disadvantages; how¬ 
ever, the alloys, unlikethe pure aluminum, corrodes 
unless given a protective coating. Threaded parts made 
of aluminum alloy should be coated with an antiseize 
compound to prevent sticking caused by corrosion. 


1-7 



Table l-3.-Surface Colors of Some Common Metals 


Metals 

Color of unfinished, 
unbroken surface 

Color and structure of 
newly fractured surface 

Color of freshly 
filed surface 

White cast iron 

dull gray 

silvery white; crystalline 

silvery white 

Gray cast iron 

dun gray 

dark gray; crystalline 

light silvery gray 

Malleable iron 

dull gray 

dark gray; finely 
crystalline 

light silvery gray 

Wrought iron 

light gray 

bright gray 

light silvery gray 

Low-carbon and cast 
steel 

dark gray 

bright gray 

bright silvery gray 

High-carbon steel 

dark gray 

light gray 

bright silvery gray 

Stainless steel 

dark gray 

medium gray 

bright silvery gray 

Copper 

reddish brown to green 

bright red 

bright copper color 

Brass and bronze 

reddish yellow, 
yellow-green, or brown 

red to yellow 

reddish yellow to 
yellowish white 

Aluminum 

light gray 

white; finely crystalline 

white 

Monel metal 

dark gray 

light gray 

light gray 

Nickel 

dark gray 

off-white 

bright silvery white 

Lead 

white to gray 

light gray; crystalline 

white 


Duralumin 

One of the first of the strong structural aluminum 
alloys developed is called Duralumin. With the devel¬ 
opment of a variety of different wrought-aluminum 
alloys, a numbering system was adopted. The digits 
indicate the major alloying element and the cold-worked 
or heat-treated condition of the metal. The alloy, origi¬ 
nally called Duralumin, is now classified in the metal 
working industries as 2017-T. The letter T indicates that 
the metal is heat-treated. 

Alclad 

This is a protective covering that consists of a thin 
sheet of pure aluminum rolled onto the surface of an 
aluminum alloy during manufacture. Zinc chromate is 
a protective covering that can be applied to an aluminum 
surface as needed. Zinc chromate is also used as a primer 
on steel surfaces for a protective coating. 


Monel 

Monel is an alloy in which nickel is the major 
element. It contains from 64% to 68% nickel, about 30% 
copper, and small percentages of iron, manganese, and 
cobalt. Monel is harder and stronger than either nickel 
or copper and has high ductility. It resembles stainless 
steel in appearance and has many of its qualities. The 
strength, combined with a high resistance to corrosion, 
make Monel an acceptable substitute for steel in systems 
where corrosion resistance is the primary concern. Nuts, 
bolts, screws, and various fittings are made of Monel. 
This alloy can be worked cold and can be forged and 
welded. If worked in the temperature range between 
1200°F and 1600°F, it becomes “hot short" or brittle. 

K-Monel 

This is a special type of alloy developed for greater 
strength and hardness than Monel. In strength, it is 










comparable to heat-treated steel. K-monel is used for 
instrument parts that must resist corrosion. 

I nconel 

This high-nickel alloy is often used in the exhaust 
systems of aircraft engines. Inconel is composed of 
78.5% nickel, 14% chromium, 6.5% iron, and 1% of 
other elements. It offers good resistance to corrosion and 
retains its strength at high-operating temperatures. 


METAL IDENTIFICATION 

Many methods are used to identify a piece of metal. 
Identification is necessary when selecting a metal for 
use in fabrication or in determining its weldability. 
Some common methods used for field identification are 
surface appearance, spark test, chip test, and the use of 
a magnet. 

SURFACE APPEARANCE 

Sometimes it is possible to identify metals by their 
surface appearance. Table 1-3 indicates the surface col¬ 
ors of some of the more common metals. Referri ng to 
the table, you can see that the outside appearance of a 
metal helps to identify and classify metal. Newly frac¬ 
tured or freshly filed surfaces offer additional clues. 

A surface examination does not always provide 
enough information for identification but should give us 
enough information to place the metal into a class. The 
color of the metal and the distinctive marks left from 
manufacturing help in determining the identity of the 
metal. Cast iron and malleable iron usually show evi¬ 
dence of the sand mold. Low-carbon steel often shows 
forging marks, and high-carbon steel shows either forg¬ 
ing or rolling marks. Feeling the surface may provide 
another clue. Stainless steel is slightly rough in the 
unfinished state, and the surfaces of wrought iron, cop¬ 
per, brass, bronze, nickel, and Monel are smooth. Lead 
also is smooth but has a velvety appearance. 

When the surface appearance of a metal does not 
give enough information to allow positive identifica¬ 
tion, other identification tests become necessary. Some 
of these tests are complicated and require equipment we 
do not usually have; however, other tests are fairly 
simple and reliable when done by a skilled person. Three 
of these tests areas follows: the spark test, the chip test, 
and the magnetic tests. 



BUD BREAK ARROW 


I Figure 1-2.1 -Terms used in spark testing. 


SPARK TEST 

The spark test is made by holding a sample of the 
material against an abrasive wheel. By visually inspect¬ 
ing the spark stream, an experienced metalworker can 
identify the metals with considerable accuracy. This test 
is fast, economical, convenient, and easily accom¬ 
plished, and there is no requirement for special equip¬ 
ment. We can use this test for identifying metal salvaged 
from scrap. Identification of scrap is particularly impor¬ 
tant when selecting material for cast iron or cast steel 
heat treatment. 

When you hold a piece of iron or steel in contact 
with a high-speed abrasive wheel, small particles of the 
metal are torn loose so rapidly that they become red-hot. 
As these glowing bits of metal leave the wheel, they 
follow a path (trajectory) called the carrier line. This 
carrier line is easily followed with the eye, especial] y 
when observed against a dark background. 

The sparks given off, or the lack of sparks, aid in the 
identification of the metal. The length of the spark 
stream, the color, and the form of the sparks are features 
you should look for. lFiqure 1-2 I llustrates the terms used 
in referring to various basic spark forms produced in 
spark testing. 

Steels having the same carbon content but differing 
alloying elements are difficult to identify because the 
alloying elements affect the carrier lines, the bursts, or 
the forms of characteristic bursts in the spark picture, 
The effect of the alloying element may slow or acceler¬ 
ate the carbon spark or make the carrier line lighter or 
darker in color. Molybdenum, for example, appears as 
a detached, orange-colored spearhead on the end of the 
carrier line. Nickel appears to suppress the effect of the 
carbon burst; however, the nickel spark can be identified 










by tiny blocks of brilliant white light. Silicon suppresses 
the carbon burst even more than nickel. When silicon is 
present, the carrier line usually ends abruptly in a white 
flash of light. 

Spark testing may be done with either a portable or 
stationary grinder. In either case, the speed on the outer 
rim of the wheel should not be less than 4,500 feet per 
minute. The abrasive wheel should be rather coarse, 
very hard, and kept clean to produce a true spark 

To conduct a spark test on an abrasive wheel, hold 
the piece of metal on the wheel in a position that allows 
the spark stream to cross your line of vision. By trial and 
error, you soon discover what pressure is needed to get 
a stream of the proper length without reducing the speed 
of the gri nder. Excessive pressure i ncreases the tem¬ 
perature of the spark stream. This, in turn, increases the 
temperature of the burst and gives the appearance of a 
higher carbon content than actually is present. When 
maki ng the test, watch a poi nt about one third of the 
distance from the tail end of the spark stream. Watch 
only those sparks that cross your line of vision and try 
to forma mental image of the individual spark. Fix this 
spark image in your mind and then examine the whole 
spark picture. 

While on the subject of abrasive wheels, it is a good 
idea to discuss some of the safety precautions associated 
with this tool. 

• Never use an abrasive wheel that is cracked or 
out of balance because the vibration causes the wheel to 
shatter. When an abrasive wheel shatters, it can be 
disastrous for personnel standing in line with the wheel. 

• Always check the wheel for secure mounting and 
cracks before putting it to use. When you install a new 
wheel on a grinder, be sure that it is the correct size. 
Remember, as you increase the wheel radius, the periph¬ 
eral speed at the rim also increases, even though the 
driving motor rpm remains the same. Thus, if you should 
use an oversized wheel, there is a distinct danger the 
peripheral speed (and consequent centrifugal force) can 
become so great that the wheel may fly apart. Use 
wheels that are designed for a specific rpm. Guards are 
placed on grinders as protection in case a wheel should 
shatter. 

• Never use a grinder when the guards have been 
removed. When turning the grinder on, you should stand 
to one side. This places you out of line with the wheel 
in case the wheel should burst. 


• Never overload a grinder or put sideways pres¬ 
sure against the wheel, unless it is expressly built to 
withstand such use. 

• Always wear appropriate safety goggles or a face 
shield while using the grinder. Ensure that the tool rest 
(the device that helps the operator hold the work) is 
adjusted to the minimum clearance for the wheel. Move 
the work across the entire face of the wheel to eliminate 
grooving and to minimize wheel dressing. Doing this 
prolongs the life of the wheel. 

• Keep your fingers clear of the abrasive surface, 
and do not allow rags or clothing to become entangled 
in the wheel. 

• Do not wear gloves while using an abrasive 
wheel. 

• Never hold metal with tongs while grinding. 

• Never grind nonferrous metals on a wheel in¬ 
tended for ferrous metals because such misuse clogs the 
pores of the abrasive material. This buildup of metal 
may cause it to become unbalanced and fly apart. 

• Grinding wheels require frequent recondition¬ 
ing. Dressing is the term used to describe the process of 
cleaning the periphery. This cleaning breaks away dull 
abrasive grains and smooths the surface, removing all 
the grooves. The wheel dresser shown in i figure P is 
used for dressing grinding wheels on bench and pedestal 
grinders. For more information on grinding wheels, you 
should consui rchapteTl of NAVEDTRA 10085-B2 
(Too/s and Their Uses). 

Referring now Ito figure H -4, notice that in low- 
carbon steel (view A), the spark stream is about 70 
inches long and the volume is moderately large. In 
high-carbon steel (view B), the stream is shorter (about 
55 inches) and the volume larger. The few sparklers that 
may occur at any place in low-carbon steel are forked, 



I Figure 1-3.1 —Using a grinding wheel dresser. 













B 



SPARKS PRODUCED FROM HIGH - CARBON STEEL 


♦Ss \ 

^ TT 

—■ / 

'-J- ^ 

V • 


7 

r tzi 

7T 



SPARKS PRODUCED FROM GRAY CAST IRON 



SPARKS PRODUCED FROM MONEL AND NICKEL 



SPARKS PRODUCED FROM STAINLESS STEEL 



Figure 14.-Spark patterns formed by common metals. 


































I Table 1-4.1 —Metal Identification by Chip Test 


METALS 

CHIP CHARACTERISTICS 

WHITE CAST IRON 

Chips are small, brittle fragments. Chipped surfaces not smooth. 

GRAY CAST IRON 

Chips are about 1/8 inch in length. Metal not easily chipped; therefore, 
chips break off and prevent smooth cut. 

MALLEABLE IRON 

Chips vary from 1/4 to 3/8 inch in length (larger than chips from cast 
iron). Metal is tough and hard to chip. 

WROUGHT IRON 

Chips have smooth edges. Metal is easily cut or chipped, and a chip can 
be made as a continuous strip. 

LOW-CARBON AND CAST STEEL 

Chips have smooth edges. Metal is easily cut or chipped, and a chip can 
be taken off as a continuous strip. 

HIGH-CARBON STEEL 

Chips show a fine-grain structure. Edges of chips are lighter in color 
than chips of low-carbon steel. Metal is hard, but can be chipped in a 
continuous strip. 

COPPER 

Chips are smooth, with sawtooth edges where cut. Metal is easily cut 
as a continuous strip. 

BRASS AND BRONZE 

Chips are smooth, with sawtooth edges. These metals are easily cut, but 
chips are more brittle than chips of copper. Continuous strip is not easily 
cut. 

ALUMINUM AND ALUMINUM 
ALLOYS 

Chips are smooth, with sawtooth edges. A chip can be cut as continuous 
strip. 

MONEL 

Chips have smooth edges. Continuous strip can be cut. Metal chips 
easily. 

NICKEL 

Chips have smooth edges. Continuous strip can be cut. Metal chips 
easily. 

LEAD 

Chips of any shape may be obtained because the metal is so soft that it 
can be cut with a knife. 


and in high-carbon steel, they are small and repeating. 
Both metals produce a spark stream white in color. 

Gray cast iron (view C) produces a stream of sparks 
about 25 inches in length. The sparklers are small and 
repeating, and their volume is rather small. Part of the 
stream near the wheel is red, and the outer portion is 
straw-colored. 

Monel and nickel (view D) form almost identical 
spark streams. The sparks are small in volume and 
orange in color. The sparks form wavy streaks with no 
sparklers. Because of the similarity of the spark picture, 


these metals must be distinguished from each other by 
some other method. 

Stainless steel (view E) produces a spark stream 
about 50 inches in length, moderate volume, and with 
few sparklers. The sparklers are forked. The stream next 
to the wheel is straw-colored, and at the end, it is white. 

The wrought-iron spark test (view F) produces a 
spark stream about 65 inches in length. The stream has 
a large volume with few sparklers. The sparks appear 
near the end of the stream and are forked. The stream 
next to the wheel is straw-colored, and the outer end of 
the stream is a brighter red. 









One way to become proficient in spark testing fer¬ 
rous metals is to gather an assortment of samples of 
known metals and test them. Make all of the samples 
about the same size and shape so their identities are not 
revealed simply by the size or shape. Number each 
sample and prepare a list of names and corresponding 
numbers. Then, without looking at the number of the 
sample, spark test one sample at a time, calling out its 
name to someone assigned to check it against the names 
and numbers on the list. Repeating this process gives 
you some of the experience you need to become profi¬ 
cient in identifying individual samples. 

CHIP TEST 

Another simple test used to identify an unknown 
piece of metal is the chip test. The chip testis made by 
removing a small amount of material from the test piece 
with a sharp, cold chisel. The material removed varies 


from small, broken fragments to a continuous strip. The 
chip may have smooth, sharp edges; it maybe coarse¬ 
grained or fine-grained; or it may have sawlike edges. 
The size of the chip is important in identifying the metal. 
The ease with which the chipping can be accomplished 
should also be considered. The information given in 
I table 1-41 can help you identify various metals by the 
chip test. 

MAGNETIC TEST 

The use of a magnet is another method used to aid 
in the general identification of metals. Remember that 
ferrous metals, being iron-based alloys, normally are 
magnetic, and nonferrous metals are nonmagnetic. This 
test is not 100-percent accurate because some stainless 
steels are nonmagnetic. I n this instance, there is no 
substitute for experience. 







CHAPTER 2 


BASIC HEAT TREATMENT 


As Steelworkers, we are interested in the heat treat¬ 
ment of metals, because we have to know what effects 
the heat produced by welding or cutting has on metal. 
We also need to know the methods used to restore metal 
to its original condition. The process of heat treating is 
the method by which metals are heated and cooled in a 
series of specific operations that never allow the metal 
to reach the molten state. The purpose of heat treating is 
to make a metal more useful by changing or restoring 
its mechanical properties. Through heat treating, we can 
make a metal harder, stronger, and more resistant to 
impact. Also, heat treating can make a metal softer and 
more ductile. The one disadvantage is that no heat-treat¬ 
ing procedure can produce all of these characteristics in 
one operation. Some properties are improved at the 
expense of others; for example, hardening a metal may 
make it brittle. 


HEAT-TREATING THEORY 

The various types of heat-treating processes are 
similar because they all involve the heating and cooling 
of metals; they differ in the heating temperatures and the 
cooling rates used and the final results. The usual meth¬ 
ods of heat-treating ferrous metals (metals with iron) are 
annealing, normalizing, hardening, and tempering. 
Most nonferrous metals can be annealed, but never 
tempered, normalized, or case-hardened. 

Successful heat treatment requires close control 
over al I factors affecti ng the heati ng and cool i ng of a 
metal. This control is possible only when the proper 
equipment is available. The furnace must be of the 
proper size and type and controlled, so the temperatures 
are kept within the prescribed limits for each operation. 
Even the furnace atmosphere affects the condition of the 
metal being heat-treated. 

The furnace atmosphere consists of the gases that 
circulate throughout the heating chamber and surround 
the metal, as it is being heated. In an electric furnace, 
the atmosphere is either air or a controlled mixture of 
gases. I n a fuel-fired furnace, the atmosphere is the 
mixture of gases that comes from the combination of the 
air and the gases released by the fuel during combustion. 
These gases contain various proportions of carbon mon¬ 
oxide, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, 


water vapor, and other various hydrocarbons. Fuel-fired 
furnaces can provide three distinct atmospheres when 
you vary the proportions of air and fuel. They are called 
oxidizing, reducing, and neutral. 

STAGES OF HEAT TREATMENT 

Heat treating is accomplished in three major stages: 

• Stage I—Heating the metal slowly to ensure a 
uniform temperature 

• Stage 2—Soaking (holding) the metal at a given 
temperature for a given time and cooling the 
metal to room temperature 

• Stage 3—Cooling the metal to room temperature 

HEATING STAGE 

The primary objective in the heating stage is to 
maintain uniform temperatures. If uneven heating oc¬ 
curs, one section of a part can expand faster than another 
and result in distortion or cracking. Uniform tempera¬ 
tures are attained by slow heating. 

The heating rate of a part depends on several factors. 
One important factor is the heat conductivity of the 
metal. A metal with a high-heat conductivity heats at a 
faster rate than one with a low conductivity. Also, the 
condition of the metal determines the rate at which it 
may be heated. The heating rate for hardened tools and 
parts should be slower than unstressed or untreated 
metals. Finally, size and cross section figure into the 
heating rate. Parts with a large cross section require 
slower heating rates to allow the interior temperature to 
remain close to the surface temperature that prevents 
warping or cracking. Parts with uneven cross sections 
experience uneven heating; however, such parts are less 
apt to be cracked or excessively warped when the heat¬ 
ing rate is kept slow. 

SOAKING STAGE 

After the metal is heated to the proper temperature, 
it is held at that temperature until the desired internal 
structural changes take place. This process is called 
SOAKING. The length of time held at the proper 


m 




temperature is called the SOAKING PERIOD. The 
soaking period depends on the chemical analysis of the 
metal and the mass of the part. When steel parts are 
uneven in cross section, the soaking period is deter¬ 
mined by the largest section. 

During the soaking stage, the temperature of the 
metal is rarely brought from room temperature to the 
final temperature in one operation; instead, the steel is 
slowly heated to a temperature just below the point at 
which the change takes place and then it is held at that 
temperature until the heat is equalized throughout the 
metal. We call this process PREHEATING. Following 
preheat, the metal is quickly heated to the final required 
temperature. 

When apart has an intricate design, it may have to 
be preheated at more than one temperature to prevent 
cracking and excessive warping. For example, assume 
an intricate part needs to be heated to 1500°F for hard¬ 
ening. This part could be slowly heated to 600°F, soaked 
at this temperature, then heated slowly to 1200°F, and 
then soaked at that temperature. Following the final 
preheat, the part should then be heated quickly to the 
hardening temperature of 1500°F. 

NOTE: Nonferrous metals are seldom preheated, 
because they usually do not require it, and preheating 
can cause an increase in the grain size in these metals. 

COOLING STAGE 

After a metal has been soaked, it must be returned 
to room temperature to complete the heat-treating proc¬ 
ess. To cool the metal, you can place it in direct contact 
with a COOLING MEDIUM composed of a gas, liquid, 
solid, or combination of these. The rate at which the 
metal is cooled depends on the metal and the properties 
desired. The rate of cooling depends on the medium; 
therefore, the choice of a cooling medium has an impor¬ 
tant influence on the properties desired. 

Quenching is the procedure used for cooling metal 
rapidly in oil, water, brine, or some other medium. 
Because most metals are cooled rapidly during the hard¬ 
ening process, quenching is usually associated with 
hardening; however, quenching does not always result 
in an increase in hardness; for example, to anneal cop¬ 
per, you usually quench it in water. Other metals, such 
as air-hardened steels, are cooled at a relatively slow rate 
for hardening. 

Some metals crack easily or warp during quenching, 
and others suffer no ill effects; therefore, the quenching 
medium must be chosen to fit the metal. Brine or water 


is used for metals that require a rapid cooling rate, and 
oil mixtures are more suitable for metalsthat need a 
slower rate of cooling. Generally, carbon steels are 
water-hardened and alloy steels are oil-hardened. Non- 
ferrous metals are normally quenched in water. 


HEAT COLORS FOR STEEL 

You are probably familiar with the term red-hot as 
applied to steel. Actually, steel takes on several colors 
and shades from the time it turns a dull red until it 
reaches a white heat. These colors and the correspond¬ 
ing temperatures are listed i d table 2-l1 

During hardening, normalizing, and annealing, 
steel is heated to various temperatures that produce 
color changes. By observing these changes, you can 
determine the temperature of the steel. As an example, 
assume that you must harden a steel part at 1500°F. Heat 
the part slowly and evenly while watching it closely for 
any change in color. Once the steel begins to turn red, 
carefully note each change in shade. Continue the even 
heating until the steel is bright red; then quench the part. 

The success of a heat-treating operation depends 
largely on your judgment and the accuracy with which 
you identify each color with its corresponding tempera¬ 
ture. From a study of | table 2- 1] you can see that close 
observation is necessary. You must be able to tell the 
difference between faint red and blood red and between 
dark cherry and medium cherry. To add to the difficulty, 
your conception of medium cherry may differ from that 
of the person who prepared the table. For an actual 
heat-treating operation, you should get a chart showing 
the actual colors of steel at various temperatures. 


TYPES OF HEAT TREATMENT 

Four basic types of heat treatment are used today. 
They are annealing, normalizing, hardening, and tem¬ 
pering. The techniques used in each process and how 
they relate to Steelworkers are given in the following 
paragraphs. 

ANNEALING 

In general, annealing is the opposite of hardening, 
You anneal metals to relieve internal stresses, soften 
them, make them more ductile, and refine their grain 
structures. Annealing consists of heating a metal to a 
specific temperature, holding it at that temperature for 
a set length of time, and then cooling the metal to room 
temperature. The cooling method depends on the 


[23 








1 Table 2-1.1 -Heat Colors for Steel 


Temperature 

°F 

°C 

750 

399 

900 

482 

1050 

565 

1075 

579 

1250 

677 

1375 

746 

1550 

843 

1650 

899 

1725 

940 

1825 

996 

1975 

1079 

2200 

1204 

2350 

1288 


Color 


Faint red visible in dark 

Faint red. 

Blood red.. 

Dark cherry. 

Medium cherry . . . . 
Cherry or full red . . . 

Bright red. 

Salmon. 

Orange. 

Lemon. 

Light yellow. 

White. 

Dazzling white. 


Table 2-2.-Approximate Soaking Periods for Hardening, Annealing, and Normalizing Steel 


Thickness of Metal 
(inches) 

Time of heating to 

Reauired Temperature 
(hr) * 

Soaking lime 

(hr) 

Up to 1 

3/4 

1/2 

1 to 2 

1 1/4 

1/2 

2 to 3 

13/4 

3/4 

3 to 4 

21/4 

1 

4 to 5 

2 3/4 

1 

5 to 8 

3 1/2 

1 1/2 


metal and the properties desired. Some metals are 
furnace-cooled, and others are cooled by burying them 
in ashes, lime, or other insulating materials. 

Welding produces areas that have molten metal next 
to other areas that are at room temperature. As the weld 
cools, internal stresses occur along with hard spots and 
brittleness. Welding can actually weaken the metal. 
Annealing is just one of the methods for correcting these 
problems. 


Ferrous Metal 

To produce the maximum softness in steel, you heat 
the metal to its proper temperature, soak it, and then let 
it cool very slowly. The cooling is done by burying the 
hot part in an insulating material or by shutting off the 
furnace and allowing the furnace and the part to cool 
together. The soaking period depends on both the mass 
of the part and the type of metal. The approximate 
soaking periods for annealing steel are given in tabic 
2 - 2 . 































Steel with an extremely low-carbon content re¬ 
quires the highest annealing temperature. As the carbon 
content increases, the annealing temperatures decrease. 

Nonferrous Metal 

Copper becomes hard and brittle when mechani¬ 
cally worked; however, it can be made soft again by 
annealing. The annealing temperature for copper is be¬ 
tween 700°F and 900°F. Copper maybe cooled rapidly 
or slowly since the cooling rate has no effect on the heat 
treatment. The one drawback experienced in annealing 
copper is the phenomenon called "hot shortness." At 
about 900°F, copper loses its tensile strength, and if not 
properly supported, it could fracture. 

Aluminum reacts similar to copper when heat treat¬ 
ing. It also has the characteristic of "hot shortness." A 
number of aluminum alloys exist and each requires 
special heat treatment to produce their best properties. 

NORMALIZING 

Normalizing is a type of heat treatment applicable 
to ferrous metals only. It differs from annealing in that 
the metal is heated to a higher temperature and then 
removed from the furnace for air cooling. 

The purpose of normalizing is to remove the internal 
stresses induced by heat treating, welding, casting, forg¬ 
ing, forming, or machining. Stress, if not controlled, 
leads to metal failure; therefore, before hardening steel, 
you should normalize it first to ensure the maximum 
desired results. Usually, low-carbon steels do not re¬ 
quire normalizing; however, if these steels are normal¬ 
ized, no harmful effects result. Castings are usually 
annealed, rather than normalized; however, some cast¬ 
ings require the normalizing treatment ! Table 2-2l shows 
the approximate soaking periods for normalizing steel. 
Note that the soaking time varies with the thickness of 
the metal. 

Normalized steels are harder and stronger than an¬ 
nealed steels. In the normalized condition, steel is much 
tougher than in any other structural condition. Parts 
subjected to impact and those that require maximum 
toughness with resistance to external stress are usually 
normalized. In normalizing, the mass of metal has an 
influence on the cooling rate and on the resulting struc¬ 
ture. Thin pieces cool faster and are harder after normal¬ 
izing than thick ones. In annealing (furnace cooling), the 
hardness of the two are about the same. 


HARDENING 

The hardening treatment for most steels consists of 
heating the steel to a set temperature and then cooling it 
rapidly by plunging it into oil, water, or brine. Most 
steels require rapid cooling (quenching) for hardening 
but a few can be air-cooled with the same results. 
Hardening increases the hardness and strength of the 
steel, but makes it less ductile. Generally, the harder the 
steel, the more brittle it becomes. To remove some of 
the brittleness, you should temper the steel after hard¬ 
ening. 

Many nonferrous metals can be hardened and their 
strength increased by controlled heating and rapid cool¬ 
ing. In this case, the process is called heat treatment, 
rather than hardening. 

To harden steel, you cool the metal rapidly after 
thoroughly soaking it at a temperature slightly above its 
upper critical point. The approximate soaking periods 
for hardening steel are listed in ltable 2-2l The addition 
of alloys to steel decreases the cooling rate required to 
produce hardness. A decrease in the cooling rate is an 
advantage, since it lessens the danger of cracking and 
warping. 

Pure iron, wrought iron, and extremely low-carbon 
steels have very little hardening properties and are dif¬ 
ficult to harden by heat treatment. Cast iron has limited 
capabilities for hardening. When you cool cast iron 
rapidly, it forms white iron, which is hard and brittle. 
And when you cool it slowly, it forms gray iron, which 
is soft but brittle under impact. 

In plain carbon steel, the maximum hardness ob¬ 
tained by heat treatment depends almost entirely on the 
carbon content of the steel. As the carbon content in¬ 
creases, the hardening ability of the steel increases; 
however, this capability of hardening with an increase 
in carbon content continues only to a certain point. In 
practice, 0.80 percent carbon is required for maximum 
hardness. When you increase the carbon content beyond 
0.80 percent, there is no increase in hardness, but there 
is an increase in wear resistance. This increase in wear 
resistance is due to the formation of a substance called 
hard cementite. 

When you alloy steel to increase its hardness, the 
alloys make the carbon more effective in increasing 
hardness and strength. Because of this, the carbon con¬ 
tent required to produce maximum hardness is lower 
than it is for plain carbon steels. Usually, alloy steels are 
superior to carbon steels. 


2-4 







Carbon steels are usually quenched in brine or 
water, and alloy steels are generally quenched in oil. 
When hardening carbon steel, remember that you must 
cool the steel to below 1000°F in less than 1 second. 
When you add alloys to steel, the time limit for the 
temperature to drop below 1000°F increases above the 
l-second limit, and a slower quenching medium can 
produce the desired hardness. 

Quenching produces extremely high internal 
stresses in steel, and to relieve them, you can temper the 
steel just before it becomes cold. The part is removed 
from the quenching bath at a temperature of about 200°F 
and allowed to air-cool. The temperature range from 
200°F down to room temperature is called the "cracking 
range" and you do not want the steel to pass through it. 

I n the following paragraphs, we discuss the differ¬ 
ent methods of hardening that are commercially used. 

I n the Seabees, we use a rapid surface hardening com¬ 
pound called "Case" that can be ordered through the 
Navy supply system. Information on the use of "Case" 
is located in the Welding Materials Handbook, P-433. 

Case Hardening 

Case hardening produces a hard, wear-resistant sur¬ 
face or case over a strong, tough core. The principal 
forms of casehardening are carburizing, cyaniding, and 
nitriding. Only ferrous metals are case-hardened. 

Case hardening is ideal for parts that require a 
wear-resistant surface and must be tough enough inter¬ 
nally to withstand heavy loading. The steels best suited 
for case hardening are the low-carbon and low-alloy 
series. When high-carbon steels are case-hardened, the 
hardness penetrates the core and causes brittleness. I n 
case hardening, you change the surface of the metal 
chemically by introducing a high carbide or nitride 
content. The core remains chemically unaffected. When 
heat-treated, the high-carbon surface responds to hard¬ 
ening, and the core toughens. 

CARBURIZING.— Carburizing is a case-harden¬ 
ing process by which carbon is added to the surface of 
low-carbon steel. This results in a carburized steel that 
has a high-carbon surface and a low-carbon interior. 
When the carburized steel is heat-treated, the case be¬ 
comes hardened and the core remains soft and tough. 

Two methods are used for carburizing steel. One 
method consists of heating the steel in a furnace con¬ 
taining a carbon monoxide atmosphere. The other 
method has the steel placed in a container packed with 
charcoal or some other carbon-rich material and then 


heated in a furnace. To cool the parts, you can leave the 
container in the furnace to cool or remove it and let it 
air cool. In both cases, the parts become annealed during 
the slow cooling. The depth of the carbon penetration 
depends on the length of the soaking period. With to¬ 
day's methods, carburizing is almost exclusively done 
by gas atmospheres. 

CYANIDING.— This process is a type of case 
hardening that is fast and efficient. Preheated steel is 
dipped into a heated cyanide bath and allowed to soak. 
Upon removal, it is quenched and then rinsed to remove 
any residual cyanide. This process produces a thin, hard 
shell that is harder than the one produced by carburizing 
and can be completed in 20 to 30 minutes vice several 
hours. The major drawback is that cyanide salts are a 
deadly poison. 

NITRIDING.— This case-hardening method pro¬ 
duces the hardest surface of any of the hardening proc¬ 
esses. It differs from the other methods in that the 
individual parts have been heat-treated and tempered 
before nitriding. The parts are then heated in a furnace 
that has an ammonia gas atmosphere. No quenching is 
required so there is no worry about warping or other 
types of distortion. This process is used to case harden 
items, such as gears, cylinder sleeves, camshafts and 
other engine parts, that need to be wear resistant and 
operate in high-heat areas. 

Flame Hardening 

Flame hardening is another procedure that is used 
to harden the surface of metal parts. When you use an 
oxyacetylene flame, a thin layer at the surface of the part 
is rapidly heated to its critical temperature and then 
immediately quenched by a combination of a water 
spray and the cold base metal. This process produces a 
thin, hardened surface, and at the same time, the internal 
parts retain their original properties. Whether the proc¬ 
ess is manual or mechanical, a close watch must be 
maintained, since the torches heat the metal rapidly and 
the temperatures are usually determined visually. 

Flame hardening may be either manual or automat¬ 
ic. Automatic equipment produces uniform results and 
is more desirable. Most automatic machines have vari¬ 
able travel speeds and can be adapted to parts of various 
sizes and shapes. The size and shape of the torch de¬ 
pends on the part. The torch consists of a mixing head, 
straight extension tube, 90-degree extension head, an 
adjustable yoke, and a water-cooled tip. Practically any 
shape or size flame-hardening tip is available Rfia. 2-11 . 








I Figure 2-li -Proqressive hardening torch tip, 


Tips are produced that can be used for hardening flats, 
rounds, gears, cams, cylinders, and other regular or 
irregular shapes. 

In hardening localized areas, you should heat the 
metal with a standard hand-held welding torch. Adjust 
the torch flame to neutral (se d chapter 41) for normal 
heating; however, in corners and grooves, use a slightly 
oxidizing flame to keep the torch from sputtering. You 
also should particularly guard against overheating in 
comers and grooves. If dark streaks appear on the metal 
surface, this is a sign of overheating, and you need to 
increase the distance between the flame and the metal. 

For the best heating results, hold the torch with the 
tip of the inner cone about an eighth of an inch from the 
surface and direct the flame at right angles to the metal. 
Sometimes it is necessary to change this angle to obtain 
better results; however, you rarely find a deviation of 
more than 30 degrees. Regulate the speed of torch travel 
according to the type of metal, the mass and shape of the 
part, and the depth of hardness desired. 

In addition, you must select the steel according to 
the properties desired. Select carbon steel when surface 
hardness is the primary factor and alloy steel when the 
physical properties of the core are also factors. Plain 
carbon steels should contain more than 0.35% carbon 
for good results inflame hardening. For water quench¬ 
ing, the effective carbon range is from 0.40% to 0.70%. 
Parts with a carbon content of more than 0.70% are 
likely to surface crack unless the heating and quenching 
rate are carefully controlled. 

The surface hardness of a flame-hardened section is 
equal to a section that was hardened by furnace heating 
and quenching. The decrease in hardness between the 
case and the core is gradual. Since the core is not 
affected by flame hardening, there is little danger of 
spalling or flaking while the part is in use. Thus flame 


1 Figure 2-2.!^ Progressive hardening. 


hardening produces a hard case that is highly resistant 
to wear and a core that retains its original properties. 

Flame hardening can be divided into five general 
methods: stationary, circular band progressive, straight- 
line progressive, spiral band progressive, and circular 
band spinning. 

STATIONARY METHOD.- In this method the 
torch and the metal part are both held stationary. 

CIRCULAR BAND PROGRESSIVE METHOD.- 

This method is used for hardening outside surfaces of 
round sections. Usually, the object is rotated in front of 
a stationary torch at a surface speed of from 3 to 12 
inches per minute. The heating and quenching are done 
progressively, as the part rotates; therefore, when the 
part has completed one rotation, a hardened band encir¬ 
cles the part. The width of the hardened band depends 
upon the width of the torch tip. To harden the full length 
of a long section, you can move the torch and repeat the 
process over and over until the part is completely hard¬ 
ened. Each pass or path of the torch should overlap the 
previous one to prevent soft spots. 

STRAIGHT-LINE PROGRESSIVE METHOD.- 

With the straight-line progressive method, the torch 
travels along the surface, treating a strip that is about the 
same width as the torch tip. To harden wider areas, you 
move the torch and repeat the process ITTaure 2-2 is an 
example of progressive hardening. 

SPIRAL BAND PROGRESSIVE METHOD.— 

For this technique a cylindrical part is mounted between 
lathe centers, and a torch with an adjustable holder is 
mounted on the lathe carriage. As the part rotates, the 
torch moves parallel to the surface of the part. This travel 
is synchronized with the parts rotary motion to produce 
a continuous band of hardness. Heating and quenching 
occur at the same time. The number of torches required 
depends on the diameter of the part, but seldom are more 
than two torches used. 

CIRCULAR BAND SPINNING METHOD.— 

The circular band spinning method provides the best 


2-6 


















results for hardening cylindrical parts of small or me¬ 
dium diameters. The part is mounted between lathe 
centers and turned at a high rate of speed pasta station¬ 
ary torch. Enough torches are placed side by side to heat 
the entire part. The part can be quenched by water 
flowing from the torch tips or in a separate operation. 

When you perform heating and quenching as sepa¬ 
rate operations, the tips are water-cooled internally, but 
no water sprays onto the surface of the part. 

In flame hardening, you should follow the same 
safety precautions that apply to welding (se d chaoteFU . 
In particular, guard against holding the flame too close 
to the surface and overheating the metal. In judging the 
temperature of the metal, remember that the flame 
makes the metal appear colder than it actually is. 

TEMPERING 

After the hardening treatment is applied, steel is 
often harder than needed and is too brittle for most 
practical uses. Also, severe internal stresses are set up 
during the rapid cooling from the hardening tempera¬ 
ture. To relieve the internal stresses and reduce brittle¬ 
ness, you should temper the steel after it is hardened. 
Tempering consists of heating the steel to a specific 
temperature (below its hardening temperature), holding 
it at that temperature for the required length of time, and 
then cooling it, usually instill air. The resultant strength, 
hardness, and ductility depend on the temperature to 
which the steel is heated during the tempering process. 

The purpose of tempering is to reduce the brittleness 
imparted by hardening and to produce definite physical 
properties within the steel. Tempering always follows, 
never precedes, the hardening operation. Besides reduc¬ 
ing brittleness, tempering softens the steel. That is un¬ 
avoidable, and the amount of hardness that is lost 
depends on the temperature that the steel is heated to 
during the tempering process. That is true of all steels 
except high-speed steel. Tempering increases the hard¬ 
ness of high-speed steel. 

Tempering is always conducted at temperatures be¬ 
low the low-critical point of the steel. I n this respect, 
tempering differs from annealing, normalizing, and 
hardening in which the temperatures are above the upper 
critical point. When hardened steel is reheated, temper¬ 
ing begins at 212°F and continues as the temperature 
increases toward the low-critical point. By selecting a 
definite tempering temperature, you can predetermine 
the resulting hardness and strength. The minimum tem¬ 
perature time for tempering should bel hour. If the part 


is more than 1 inch thick, increase the time by 1 hour for 
each additional inch of thickness. 

N ormal Iy, the rate of cool i ng from the temperi ng 
temperature has no effect on the steel. Steel parts are 
usually cooled in still air after being removed from the 
tempering furnace; however, there are a few types of 
steel that must be quenched from the tempering tem¬ 
perature to prevent brittleness. These blue brittle steels 
can become brittle if heated in certain temperature 
ranges and allowed to cool slowly. Some of the nickel 
chromium steels are subject to this temper brittleness. 

Steel may be tempered after being normalized, pro¬ 
viding there is any hardness to temper. Annealed steel is 
impossible to temper. Tempering relieves quenching 
stresses and reduces hardness and brittleness. Actually, 
the tensile strength of a hardened steel may increase as 
the steel is tempered up to a temperature of about 450°F. 
Above this temperature it starts to decrease. Tempering 
increases softness, ductility, malleability, and impact 
resistance. Again, high-speed steel is an exception to the 
rule. High-speed steel increases in hardness on temper¬ 
ing, provided it is tempered at a high temperature (about 
1550°F). Remember, all steel should be removed from 
the quenching bath and tempered before it is complete] y 
cold. Failure to temper correctly results in a quick failure 
of the hardened part. 

Permanent steel magnets are made of special alloys 
and are heat-treated by hardening and tempering. Hard¬ 
ness and stability are the most important properties in 
permanent magnets. Magnets are tempered at the mini¬ 
mum tempering temperature of 212°F by placing them 
in boiling water for 2 to 4 hours. Because of this low- 
tempering temperature, magnets are very hard. 

Case-hardened parts should not be tempered at too 
high a temperature or they may loose some of their 
hardness. Usually, a temperature range from 212°F to 
400°F is high enough to relieve quenching stresses. 
Some metals require no tempering. The design of the 
part helps determine the tempering temperature. 

Color tempering is based on the oxide colors that 
appear on the surface of steel, as it is heated. When you 
slowly heat a piece of polished hardened steel, you can 
see the surface turn various colors as the temperature 
changes. These colors indicate structural changes are 
taking place within the metal. Once the proper color 
appears, the part is rapidly quenched to prevent further 
structural change. In color tempering, the surface of the 
steel must be smooth and free of oil. The part may be 
heated by a torch, in a furnace, over a hot plate, or by 
radiation. 


\M 






Table 2-3. -Oxide Colors for Tempering Steel 


Color 

Temperature - 

°F 

°c 

Pale yellow. 

428 

220 

Straw. 

446 

230 

Golden yellow. 

469 

243 

Brown. 

491 

255 

Brown dappled with purple. 

509 

265 

Purple. 

531 

277 

Dark blue . 

550 

288 

Bright blue. 

567 

297 

Pale blue. 

610 

321 


Cold chisels and similar tools must have hard cut¬ 
ting edges and softer bodies and heads. The head must 
be tough enough to prevent shattering when struck with 
shammer .The cutting edge must be more than twice as 
hard as the head, and the zone separating the two must 
be carefully blended to prevent a lineof demarcation. A 
method of color tempering frequently used for chisels 
and similar tools is one in which the cutting end is heated 
by the residual heat of the opposite end of the same tool. 
To harden and tempera cold chisel by this method, you 
heat the tool to the proper hardening temperature and 
then quench the cutting end only. Bob the chisel up and 
down in the bath, always keeping the cutting edge below 
the surface. This method air-cools the head while rapidly 
quenching the cutting edge. The result is a tough head, 
fully hardened cutting edge, and a properly blended 
structure. 

When the cutting end has cooled, remove the chisel 
from the bath and quickly polish the cutting end with a 
buff stick (emery). Watch the polished surface, as the 
heat from the opposite end feeds back into the quenched 
end. As the temperature of the hardened end increases, 
oxide colors appear. These oxide colors progress from 
pale yellow, to a straw color, and end in blue colors. As 
soon as the correct shade of blue appears, quench the 
entire chisel to prevent further softening of the cutting 
edge. The metal is tempered as soon as the proper oxide 
color appears and quenching merely prevents further 
tempering by freezing the process. This final quench has 
no effect on the body and the head of the chisel, because 
their temperature will have dropped below the critical 
point by the time the proper oxide color appears on the 


cutting edge. When you have completed the above de¬ 
scribed process, the chisel will be hardened and tem¬ 
pered and only needs grinding. 

During the tempering, the oxide color at which you 
quench the steel varies with the properties desired in the 
part i. Table~2| -3 lists the different colors and their corre¬ 
sponding temperatures. To see the colors clearly, you 
must turn the part from side to side and have good 
lighting. While hand tempering produces the same result 
as furnace tempering, there is a greater possibility for 
error. The slower the operation is performed, the more 
accurate are the results obtained. 


QUENCHING MEDIA 

The cooling rate of an object depends on many 
things. The size, composition, and initial temperature of 
the part and final properties are the deciding factors in 
selecting the quenching medium. A quenching medium 
must cool the metal at a rate rapid enough to produce 
the desired results. 

Mass affects quenching in that as the mass in¬ 
creases, the time required for complete cooling also 
increases. Even though parts are the same size, those 
containing holes or recesses cool more rapidly than solid 
objects. The composition of the metal determines the 
maximum cooling rate possible without the danger of 
cracking or warping. This critical cooling rate, in turn, 
influences the choice of the quenching medium. 

The cooling rate of any quenching medium varies 
with its temperature; therefore, to get uniform results, 























you must keep the temperature within prescribed limits. 
The absorption of heat by the quenching medium also 
depends, to a large extent, on the circulation of the 
quenching medium or the movement of the part. Agita¬ 
tion of the liquid or the part breaks up the gas that forms 
an insulating blanket between the part and the liquid. 

Normally, hardening takes place when you quench 
a metal. The composition of the metal usually deter¬ 
mines the type of quench to use to produce the desired 
hardness. For example, shallow-hardened low-alloy and 
carbon steels require severer quenching than deep-hard¬ 
ened alloy steels that contain large quantities of nickel, 
manganese, or other elements. Therefore, shallow-hard¬ 
ening steels are usually quenched in water or brine, and 
the deep-hardening steels are quenched in oil. Some¬ 
times it is necessary to use a combination quench, 
starting with brine or water and finishing with oil. In 
addition to producing the desired hardness, the quench 
must keep cracking, warping, and soft spots to a mini¬ 
mum. 

The volume of quenching liquid should be large 
enough to absorb all the heat during a normal quenching 
operation without the use of additional cooling. As more 
metals are quenched, the liquid absorbs the heat and this 
temperature rise causes a decrease in the cooling rate. 
Since quenching liquids must be maintained within 
definite temperature ranges, mechanical means are used 
to keep the temperature at prescribed levels during 
continuous operations. 

LIQUID QUENCHING 

The two methods used for liquid quenching are 
called still-bath and flush quenching. 

Instill-bath quenching, you cool the metal in a tank 
of liquid. The only movement of the liquid is that caused 
by the movement of the hot metal, as it is being 
quenched. 

For flush quenching, the liquid is sprayed onto the 
surface and into every cavity of the part at the same time 
to ensure uniform cooling. Flush quenching is used for 
parts having recesses or cavities that would not be 
properly quenched by ordinary methods. That assures a 
thorough and uniform quench and reduces the possibili¬ 
ties of distortion. 

Quenching liquids must be maintained at uniform 
temperatures for satisfactory results. That is particularly 
true for oil. To keep the liquids at their proper tempera¬ 
ture, they are usually circulated through water-cooled 



coils. Self-contained coolers are integral parts of large 
quench tanks. 

A typical portable quench tank is shown in | fiqurel 
1 2-3.1 This type can be moved as needed to various parts 
of the heat-treating shop. Some tanks may have one or 
more compartments. If one compartment contains oil 
and the other water, the partition must be liquid-tight to 
prevent mixing. Each compartment has a drain plug, a 
screen in the bottom to catch scale and other foreign 
matter, and a mesh basket to hold the parts. A portable 
electric pump can be attached to the rim of the tank to 
circulate the liquid. This mechanical agitation aids in 
uniform cooling. 

Water 

Water can be used to quench some forms of steel, 
but does not produce good results with tool or other alloy 
steels. Water absorbs large quantities of atmospheric 
gases, and when a hot piece of metal is quenched, these 
gases have a tendency to form bubbles on the surface of 
the metal. These bubbles tend to collect in holes or 
recesses and can cause soft spots that later lead to 
cracking or warping. 

The water in the quench tank should be changed 
daily or more often if required. The quench tank should 
be large enough to hold the part being treated and should 
have adequate circulation and temperature control. The 
temperature of the water should not exceed 65°F. 

When aluminum alloys and other nonferrous metals 
require a liquid quench, you should quench them in 
clean water. The volume of water in the quench tank 
should be large enough to prevent a temperature rise of 
more than 20°F during a single quenching operation. For 


2-9 










Table 2-4.—Properties and Average Cooling Abilities of Quenching Media 


Quenching Medium 

Cooling Rate 
Compared To 
Water 

Flash Point 
(°F) 

Fire Point 
(°F) 

Sodium Hydroxide (10%) 

2.06 



Brine (10%) at 65°F 

1.96 



Caustic Soda (10%) 

1.38 



Water at 65°F 

1.00 



Prepared Oil 

0.44 

365 

405 

Fuel Oil 

0.36 

205 

219 

Cottonseed Oil 

0.36 

610 

680 

Neatsfoot Oil 

0.33 

500 

621 

Sperm Oil 

0.33 

500 

581 

Fish Oil 

0.31 

401 

446 

Castor Oil 

0.29 

565 

640 

Machine Oil 

0.22 

405 

464 

Lard Oil 

0.19 

565 

685 

Circulated Air 

0.032 



Still Air 

0.0152 




heavy-sectioned parts, the temperature rise may exceed 
20°F, but should be kept as low as possible. For wrought 
products, the temperature of the water should be about 
65°F and should never exceed 100°F before the piece 
enters the liquid. 


Brine 

Brine is the result of dissolving common rock salt 
in water. This mixture reduces the absorption of atmos¬ 
pheric gases that, in turn, reduces the amount of bubbles. 
As a result, brine wets the metal surface and cools it 
more rapidly than water. In addition to rapid and uni¬ 
form cool i ng, the bri ne removes a large percentage of 
any scale that may be present. 

The brine solution should contain from 7% to 10% 
salt by weight or three-fourths pound of salt for each 
gallon of water. The correct temperature range for a 
brine solution is 65°F to 100°F. 

Low-alloy and carbon steels can be quenched in 
brine solutions; however, the rapid cooling rate of brine 


can cause cracking or stress in high-carbon or low-alloy 
steels that are uneven in cross section. 

Because of the corrosive action of salt on nonfer- 
rous metals, these metals are not quenched in brine. 

Oil 

Oil is used to quench high-speed and oil-hardened 
steels and is preferred for all other steels provided that 
the required hardness can be obtained. Practically any 
type of quenching oil is obtainable, including the vari¬ 
ous animal oils, fish oils, vegetable oils, and mineral 
oils. Oil is classed as an intermediate quench. It has a 
slower cooling rate than brine or water and a faster rate 
than air. The quenching oil temperature should be kept 
within a range of 80°F to 150°F. The properties and 
averag e cooling p owers of various quenching oils are 
given i n l table 2-4] 

Water usually collects in the bottom of oil tanks but 
is not harmful in small amounts. In large quantities it 
can interfere with the quenching operations; for exam¬ 
ple, the end of a long piece may extend into the water at 


2-10 











the bottom of the tank and crack as a result of the more 
rapid cooling. 

Nonferrous metals are not routinely quenched in oil 
unless specifications call for oil quenching. 

Caustic Soda 

A solution of water and caustic soda, containing 10 
percent caustic soda by weight, has a higher cooling rate 
than water. Caustic soda is used only for those types of 
steel that require extremely rapid cooling and is NEVER 
used as a quench for nonferrous metals. 

WARNING 

CAUSTIC SODA REQUIRES SPECIAL 
HANDLING BECAUSE OF ITS HARMFUL 
EFFECTS ON SKIN AND CLOTHING. 

DRY QUENCHING 

This type of quenching uses materials other than 
liquids. Inmost cases, this method is used only to slow 
the rate of cooling to prevent warping or cracking. 


Air 

Air quenching is used for cooling some highly 
alloyed steels. When you use still air, each tool or part 
should be placed on a suitable rack so the air can reach 
all sections of the piece. Parts cooled with circulated air 
are placed in the same manner and arranged for uniform 
cooling. Compressed air is used to concentrate the cool¬ 
ing on specific areas of a part. The airlines must be free 
of moisture to prevent cracking of the metal. 

Although nonferrous metals are usually quenched 
in water, pieces that are too large to fit into the quench 
tank can be cooled with forced-air drafts; however, an 
air quench should be used for nonferrous metal only 
when the part will not be subjected to severe corrosion 
conditions and the required strength and other physical 
properties can be developed by a mild quench. 

Solids 

The solids used for cooling steel parts include cast- 
iron chips, lime, sand, and ashes. Solids are generally 
used to slow the rate of cooling; for example, a cast-iron 
part can be placed in a lime box after welding to prevent 
cracking and warping. All solids must be free of mois¬ 
ture to prevent uneven cooling. 


2-11 








CHAPTER 3 


INTRODUCTION TO WELDING 


In the Navy as well as private industry, welding is 
widely used by metalworkers in the fabrication, main¬ 
tenance, and repair of parts and structures. While there 
are many methods for joining metals, welding is one of 
the most convenient and rapid methods available. The 
term welding refers to the process of joining metals by 
heating them to their melting temperature and causing 
the molten metal to flow together. These range from 
simple steel brackets to nuclear reactors. 

Welding, like any skilled trade, is broad in scope and 
you cannot become a welder simply by reading a book. 
You need practice and experience as well as patience; 
however, much can be gained through study. For in¬ 
stance, by learning the correct method or procedure for 
accomplishing a job from a book, you may eliminate 
many mistakes that otherwise would occur through trial 
and error. 

This chapter is designed to equip you with a back¬ 
ground of basic information applicable to welding in 
general. If you take time to study this material carefully, 
it will provide you with the foundation needed to be¬ 
come a skilled welder. 


WELDING PROCESSES 

Welding is not new. The earliest known form of 
welding, called forge welding, dates back to the year 
2000 B.C. Forge welding is a primitive process of 
joining metals by heating and hammering until the met¬ 
als are fused (mixed) together. Although forge welding 
still exists, it is mainly limited to the blacksmith trade. 

Today, there are many welding processes available. 

I Figure 3-H provides a list of processes used in modern 
metal fabrication and repair. This list, published by the 
American Welding Society (AWS), shows the official 
abbreviations for each process. For example, RSW 
stands for resistance spot welding. Shielded metal arc 
welding (SMAW) is an arc-welding process that fuses 
(melts) metal by heating it with an electric arc created 
between a covered metal electrode and the metals being 
joined. Of the welding processes listed ir i figure 3 31 
shielded metal arc welding, called stick welding, is the 


most common welding process. The primary differ¬ 
ences between the various welding processes are the 
methods by which heat is generated to melt the metal. 
Once you understand the theory of welding, you can 
apply it to most welding processes. 

The most common types of welding are oxyfuel gas 
welding (OFW), arc welding (AW), and resistance 
welding (RW). As a Steelworker, your primary concern 
is gas and arc welding. The primary difference between 
these two processes is the method used to generate the 
heat. 


GAS WELDING 

One of the most popular welding methods uses a gas 
flame as a source of heat. I n the oxyfuel gas welding 
proces ETfTq. 3-1 2). heat is produced by burning a com¬ 
bustible gas, such as MAPP (methyl acetyl ene-propadi- 
ene) or acetylene, mixed with oxygen. Gas welding is 
widely used in maintenance and repair work because of 
the ease in transporting oxygen and fuel cylinders. Once 
you learn the basics of gas welding, you will find the 
oxyfuel process adaptable to brazing, cutting, and heat 
treating all types of metals. You will learn more about 
gas welding in | chapter 5l 

ARC WELDING 

Arc welding is a process that uses an electric arc to 
join the metals being welded. A distinct advantage of arc 
welding over gas welding is the concentration of heat. 

I n gas welding the flame spreads over a large area, 
sometimes causing heat distortion. The concentration of 
heat, characteristic of arc welding, is an advantage be¬ 
cause less heat spread reduces buckling and warping. 
This heat concentration also increases the depth of pene¬ 
tration and speeds up the welding operation; therefore, 
you will find that arc welding is often more practical and 
economical than gas welding. 

All arc-welding processes have three things in com¬ 
mon: a heat source, filler metal, and shielding. The 
source of heat in arc welding is produced by the arcing 
of an electrical current between two contacts. The power 


3-1 













MASTER CHART OF WELDING AND ALLIED PROCESSES 



Figure 3-l.- Weldinq processes. 


m 





































































































































source is called a welding machine or simply, a welder. 
This should not be confined with the same term that is 
also used to describe the person who is performing the 
welding operation. The welder (welding machine) is 
either electric- or motor-powered. In the Naval Con¬ 
struction Force (NCF), there are two main types of 
arc-welding processes with which you should become 
familiar. They are shielded metal arc welding and gas 
shielded arc welding. 


Shielded Metal Arc Welding 
(SMAW) 

Shielded metal arc weldinq Rfia 3-31 is performed 
by striking an arc between a coated-metal electrode and 
the base metal. Once the arc has been established, the 
molten metal from the tip of the electrode flows together 
with the molten metal from the edges of the base metal 
to forma sound joint. This process is known as fusion. 
The coati ng from the electrode forms a coveri ng over 
the weld deposit, shielding it from contamination; 


I Figure 3-3.^ Shielded metal arc welding (SMAW). 


therefore the process is called shielded metal arc 
welding. The main advantages of shielded metal arc 
welding are that high-quality welds are made rapidly at 
a low cost. You will learn more about shielded metal arc 
welding in i chapter 71 


Gas Shielded Arc Welding 

The primary difference between shielded metal arc 
welding and gas shielded arc welding is the type of 
shielding used. In gas shielded arc welding, both the arc 
and the molten puddle are covered by a shield of inert 
gas. The shield of inert gas prevents atmospheric con¬ 
tamination, thereby producing a better weld. The pri¬ 
mary gases used for this process are helium, argon, or 
carbon dioxide. In some instances, a mixture of these 
gases is used. The processes used in gas shielded arc 
welding are known as gas tungsten arc welding 


m 










































1 Figure 3-4.1 -Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW). 

(GTAW) Kfiq. 3-4)1 and gas metal arc welding (GMAW) 
Kfiq. 3-5)| . You will also hear these called 'TIG" and 
"MIG." Gas shielded arc welding is extremely useful 
because it can be used to weld all types of ferrous and 
nonferrous metals of all thicknesses. 

Now that we have discussed a few of the welding 
processes available, which one should you choose? 
There are no hard-and-fast rules. In general, the control¬ 
ling factors are the types of metal you are joining, cost 
involved, nature of the products you are fabricating, and 
the techniques you use to fabricate them. Because of its 
flexibility and mobility, gas welding is widely used for 
maintenance and repair work in the field. On the other 
hand, you should probably choose gas shielded metal 
arc welding to repair a critical piece of equipment made 
from aluminum or stainless steel. 

No matter what welding process you use, there is 
some basic information you need to know. The remain¬ 
der of this chapter is devoted to this type of information. 
Study this information carefully because it allows you 
to follow welding instructions, read welding symbols, 
and weld various types of joints using the proper weld¬ 
ing techniques. 



I Figure 3-5.1 -Gas metal arc welding (GMAW). 

WELDING TERMINOLOGY 

To become a skilled welder, you first need to learn 
the technical vocabulary '(language) of welding. The 
sections in this chapter introduce you to some of the 
basic terms of the welding language. Once you under¬ 
stand the language of welding, you will be prepared to 
interpret and communicate welding information accu¬ 
rately. 

FILLER METALS 

When welding two pieces of metal together, you 
often have to leave a space between the joint. The 
material that you add to fill this space during the welding 
process is known as the filler metal, or material. Two 
types of filler metals commonly used in welding are 
welding rods and welding electrodes. 

The term welding rod refers to a form of filler metal 
that does not conduct an electric current during the 
welding process. The only purpose of a welding rod is 
to supply filler metal to the joint. This type of filler metal 
is often used for gas welding. 

I n electric-arc welding, the term electrode refers to 
the component that conducts the current from the elec¬ 
trode holder to the metal being welded. Electrodes are 


































classified into two groups: consumable and nonconsu¬ 
mable. Consumable electrodes not only provide a path 
for the current but they also supply fuller metal to the 
joint. An example is the electrode used in shielded 
metal-arc welding. Nonconsumable electrodes are only 
used as a conductor for the electrical current, such as in 
gas tungsten arc welding. The filler metal for gas tung¬ 
sten arc welding is a hand fed consumable welding rod. 

Additional information about filler rods and elec¬ 
trodes is covered in other chapters of this TRAMAN that 
deal with specific welding processes. 

FLUXES 

Before performing any welding process, you must 
ensure the base metal is clean. No matter how much the 
base metal is physically cleaned, it still contains impu¬ 
rities. These impurities, called oxides, result from oxy¬ 
gen combining with the metal and other contaminants 
in the base metal. Unless these oxides are removed by 
using a proper flux, a faulty weld may result. The term 
flux refers to a material used to dissolve oxides and 
release trapped gases and slag (impurities) from the base 
metal; thus the flux can be thought of as a cleaning agent. 

I n performing this function, the flux allows the filler 
metal and the base metal to be fused. 

Different types of fluxes are used with different 
types of metals; therefore, you should choose a flux 
formulated for a specific base metal. Beyond that, you 
can select a flux based on the expected soldering, braz¬ 
ing, or welding temperature; for example, when brazing, 
you should select a flux that becomes liquid at the 
correct brazing temperature. When it melts, you will 
know it is time to add the filler metal. The ideal flux has 
the right fluidity at the welding temperature and thus 
blankets the molten metal from oxidation. 

Fluxes are available in many different forms. There 
are fluxes for oxyfuel gas applications, such as brazing 
and soldering. These fluxes usually come in the form of 
a paste, powder, or liquid. Powders can besprinkled on 
the base metal, or the fuller rod can be heated and dipped 
into the powder. Liquid and paste fluxes can be applied 
to the filler rod and to the base metal with a brush. For 
shielded metal arc welding, the flux is on the electrode. 

I n this case, theflux combines with impurities in the 
base metal, floating them away in the form of a heavy 
slag which shields the weld from the atmosphere. 

You should realize that no single flux is satisfactory 
for universal use; however, there are a lot of good 
general-purpose fluxes for use with common metals. In 
general, a good flux has the following characteristics: 

• It is fluid and active at the melting point of the 
fuller metal. 


• It remains stable and does not change to a vapor 
rapidly within the temperature range of the weld¬ 
ing procedure. 

• It dissolves all oxides and removes them from the 
joint surfaces. 

• It adheres to the metal surfaces while they are 
being heated and does not ball up or blow away. 

• It does not cause a glare that makes it difficult to 
see the progress of welding or brazing. 

• It is easy to remove after the joint is welded. 

• It is available in an easily applied form. 

CAUTION 

Nearly all fluxes give off fumes that may 

be toxic. Use ONLY in well-ventilated spaces. 

It is also good to remember that ALL welding 

operations require adequate ventilation whether 

a flux is used or not. 

WELD J 01 NTS 

The weld joint is where two or more metal parts are 
joined by welding. The five basic types of weld joints 
are the butt, corner, tee, lap, and edge, as shown in lfiaurel 




C. TEE JOINT D * LAP JOINT 





Figure 3-6.-Basic weld joints. 


















fFiaure 3-7.- Root of joint. 



I Figure 3-8J -The groove face, root face, and root edge of joints. 


3-6 
























































GROOVE 

ANGLE 


BEVEL ANGLE 



11 Figure 3-9.1 -Bevel angle, groove angle, groove radius, and root opening of joints for welding. 


A butt joint is used to join two members aligned in 
the same olane Kfig. 3^61 view A). This joint is frequently 
used in plate, sheet metal, and pipe work. A joint of this 
type may be either square or grooved. Some of the 
variations of this joint are discussed later in this chapter. 

Corner and tee joints are used to join two members 
located at right angles to each other I (fig. 3-6J views B 
and C). In cross section, the corner joint forms an 
L-shape, and the tee joint has the shape of the letter T. 
Various joint designs of both types have uses in many 
types of metal structures. 

A lap joint, as the name implies, is made by lapping 
one piece of metal over another Kfig. 3-6,1 view D). This 
is one of the strongest types of joints available; however, 
for maximum joint efficiency, you should overlap the 
metals a minimum of three times the thickness of the 
thinnest member you arejoining. Lap joints are com¬ 
monly used with torch brazing and spot welding appli¬ 
cations. 

An edgejoint is used tojoin the edges of two or 
more members lying in the same plane. Inmost cases, 
one of the members is flanged, as shown in i figure 3^61 
view E. While this type of joint has some applications 
in platework, it is more fixquently used in sheet metal 
work An edgejoint should only be used for joining 
metals 1/4 inch or less in thickness that are not subjected 
to heavy loads. 

The above paragraphs discussed only the five basic 
types of joints; however, there are many possible vari¬ 
ations. Later in this chapter, we discuss some of these 
variations. 


PARTS OF J 01 NTS 

While there are many variations of joints, the parts 
of the joint are described by standard terms. The root of 
a joint is that portion of the joint where the metals are 
closest to each other. As shown ir l figure 3^71 the root 
may be a point, a line, or an area, when viewed in cross 
section. A groove Rfig. 3-8D is an opening or space 
provided between the edges of the metal parts to be 
welded. The groove face is that surface of a metal part 
included in the groove, as shown il l figure 311 view A. 
A given joint may have a root face or a root edge. The 
root face, also shown in view A, is the portion of the 
prepared edge of a part to be joined by a groove weld 
that has not been grooved. As you can see, the root face 
has relatively small dimensions. The root edge is basi¬ 
cally a root face of zero width, as shown in view B. As 
you can see in views C and D of the illustration, the 
groove face and the root face are the same metal surfaces 
in some joints. 

The specified requirements for a particular joint are 
expressed in such terms as be/el angle, groove angle, 
groove radius, and root opening. A brief description of 
each term is shown in i figure 3^9] 

The bevel angle is the angle formed between the 
prepared edge of a member and a plane perpendicular 
to the surface of the member. 

The groove angle is the total angle of the groove 
between the parts to be joined. For example, if the edge 
of each of two plates were beveled to an angle of 30 
degrees, the groove angle would be 60 degrees. This is 





















































ROOT 

PENETRATION 


£ 


JOINT PENETRATION 



ROOT 

PENETRATION 



JOINT 
PENETRATION 


JOINT 



ROOT 



Figure3-10.-Root penetration and joint penetration of welds. 



Figure 3-lL^ -Weld reinforcement. 


often referred to as the "included angle" between the 
parts to be joined by agroove weld. 

The groove radius is the radius used to form the 
shape of a J - or U-groove weld joint. It is used only for 
special groove joint designs. 

The root opening refers to the separation between 
the parts to be joined at the root of the joint. It is 
sometimes called the "root gap." 

To determine the bevel angle, groove angle, and root 
opening for a joint, you must consider the thickness of 
the weld material, the type of joint to be made, and the 
welding process to be used. As a general rule, gas 
welding requires a larger groove angle than manual 
metal-arc welding. 

The root opening is usually governed by the diame¬ 
ter of the filler material. This, in turn, depends on the 
thickness of the base metal and the welding position. 



Having an adequate root opening is essential for root 
penetration. 

Root penetration and joint penetration of welds are 
shown in figure 3-10. Root penetration refers to the 
depth that a weld extends into the root of the joint. Root 
penetration is measured on the center line of the root 
cross section. J oint penetration refers to the minimum 
depth that a groove (or a flange) weld extends from its 
face into a joint, exclusive of weld reinforcement. As 
you can see in the figure, the terms, root penetration and 
joint penetration, often refer to the same dimension. 
This is the case in views A, C, and E of the illustration. 
View B, however, shows the difference between root 
penetration and joint penetration. View D shows joint 
penetration only. Weld reinforcement is a term used to 
describe weld metal in excess of the metal necessary to 
fill a joint. (See l fia.l3-TT1 ) 


3-8 

















































SQUARE GROOVE WELD 



SQUARE GROOVE WELD 



SINGLE - BEVEL GROOVE WELD 



DOUBLE - BEVEL GROOVE WELD 



SINGLE - VEE GROOVE WELD 



DOUBLE - GROOVE WELD 


I Figure 3-13J -Standard groove welds. 


TYPES OF WELDS 

There are many types of welds. Some of the com¬ 
mon types you will work with are the bead, groove, 
fillet, surfacing, tack, plug, slot, and resistance. 

As a beginner, the first type of weld that you learn 
to produce is called a weld bead (referred to simply as 
a bead). A weld bead is a weld deposit produced by a 
single pass with one of the welding processes. An ex¬ 
ample of a weld bead is shown in i figure 3-121 A weld 
bead may be either narrow or wide, depending on the 
amount of transverse oscillation (side-to-side move¬ 
ment) used by the welder. When there is a great deal of 
oscillation, the bead is wide; when there is little or no 
oscillation, the bead is narrow. A weld bead made with¬ 
out much weaving motion is often referred to as a 
stringer bead. On the other hand, a weld bead made 
with side-to-side oscillation is called a weave bead. 

Groove welds are simply welds made in the groove 
between two members to be joined. The weld is adapt¬ 
able to a variety of butt joints, as shown in i figure 3^131 
Groove welds may be joined with one or more weld 
beads, depending on the thickness of the metal. If two 
or more beads are deposited in the groove, the weld is 
made with multiple-pass layers, as shown ir l figurel 
1 3-14J As a rule, a multiple-pass layer is made with 
stringer beads in manual operations. As a Steelworker, 
you will use groove welds frequently in your work. 

Another term you should be familiar with, when 
making a multiple-pass weld, is the buildup sequence, 
as shown in i figurel3-T51 Buildup sequence refers to the 


WELD BEADS 


\ 



WELD FACE 



I Figure 3-15i] -Weld layer sequence. 


order in which the beads of a multiple-pass weld are 
deposited in the joint. 

NOTE: Often welding instructions specify an in¬ 
terpass temperature. The interpass temperature refers 
to the temperature below which the previously 
deposited weld metal must be before the next pass may 
be started. 


m 


















































LAP FILLET TEE FILLET CORNER FILLET 



I Figure 3-17l -Surfacinq welds. 

After the effects of heat on metal are discussed, later 
in the chapter, you will understand the significance of 
the buildup sequence and the importance of controlling 
the interpass temperature. 

Across-sectional view of a fillet wel d (fig. 3-161) is 
triangular in shape. This weld is used to join two sur¬ 
faces that are at approximately right angles to each other 
in a lap, tee, or comer joint. 

Surfacing is a welding process used to apply a hard, 
wear-resistant layer of metal to surfaces or edges of 
worn-out parts. It is one of the most economical methods 
of conserving and extending the life of machines, tools, 
and construction equipment. As you can see in i figure! 
I3-17J a surfacing weld is composed of one or more 
stringer or weave beads. Surfacing, sometimes known 
as hardfacing or wearfacing, is often used to build up 
worn shafts, gears, or cutting edges. You will learn more 
about this type of welding in | chapter ~6l of this training 
manual. 

A tack weld is a weld made to hold parts of an 
assembly in proper alignment temporarily until the final 
welds are made. Although the sizes of tack welds are not 
specified, they are normally between 1/2 inch to 3/4 inch 
in length, but never more than 1 inch in length. In 
determining the size and number of tack welds for a 
specific job, you should consider thicknesses of the 
metals being joined and the complexity of the object 
being assembled. 

Plug and slot welds l (fig. 3-18D are welds made 
through holes or slots in one member of a lap joint. 
These welds are used to join that member to the surface 
of another member that has been exposed through the 


PLUG WELDS 



[Figure 3-ljp -Pluq and slot welds. 


hole. The hole may or may not be completely filled with 
weld metal. These types of welds are often used to join 
face-hardened plates from the backer soft side, to install 
liner metals inside tanks, or to fill up holes in a plate. 

Resistance welding is a metal fabricating process 
in which the fusing temperature is generated at the joint 
by the resistance to the flow of an electrical current. This 
is accomplished by clamping two or more sheets of 
metal between copper electrodes and then passing an 
electrical current through them. When the metals are 
heated to a melting temperature, forging pressure is 
applied through either a manual or automatic means to 
weld the pieces together. Spot and seam welding 
Kfiq. 3-19)1 are two common types of resistance welding 
processes. 

Spot welding is probably the most commonly used 
type of resistance welding. The material to be joined is 
placed between two electrodes and pressure is applied. 
Next, a charge of electricity is sent from one electrode 
through the material to the other electrode. Spot welding 
is especially useful in fabricating sheet metal parts. 

Seam welding is like spot welding except that the 
spots overlap each other, making a continuous weld 


3-10 





























SPOT WELD 


NUGGETS 


SEAM WELD 


1 Figure 3-lSQ -Spot and seam welds. 


FACE 






I Figure 3-2tiJ -Parts of a groove weld and fillet weld. 


seam. I n this process, the metal pieces pass between 
roller type of electrodes. As the electrodes revolve, the 
current is automatically turned on and off at the speed 
at which the parts are set to move. Seabees do not 
normally use seam welding, because this type of weld¬ 
ing is most often used in industrial manufacturing. 


PARTS OF WELDS 

For you to produce welds that meet the job require¬ 
ments, it is important that you become familiar with the 
terms used to describe a wel d. Fiqurfe 3-20 shows a 
groove weld and a fillet weld, 'he face is the exposed 


3-11 






































BUTT WELD REiNFORCEMANT 


I Figure 3-2E —Using a welding micrometer. 

surface of a weld on the side from which the weld was 
made. The toe is the junction between the face of the 
weld and the base metal. The root of a weld includes the 
points at which the back of the weld intersects the base 
metal surfaces. When we look at a triangular cross 
section of a fillet weld, as shown in view B, the leg is 
the portion of the weld from the toe to the root. The 
throat is the distance from the root to a point on the face 
of the weld along a line perpendicular to the face of the 
weld. Theoretically, the face forms a straight line be¬ 
tween the toes. 

NOTE: The terms leg and throat apply only to fillet 
welds. 

In determining the size of a groove weld I (fig. 3-201 
view A), such factors as the depth of the groove, root 
opening, and groove angle must be taken into consid¬ 
eration. The size of a fillet weld (view B) refers to the 



Figure 3-221 -Zones in a weld. 


length of the legs of the weld. The two legs are assumed 
to be equal in size unless otherwise specified. 

A gauge used for determining the size of a weld is 
known as a welding micrometei[rFTgure[T 23 shows 
how the welding micrometer is used to determine the 
various dimensions of a weld. 

Some other terms you should be familiar with are 
used to describe areas or zones of welds. As we dis¬ 
cussed earlier in the chapter, fusion is the melting to¬ 
gether of base and/or fuller metal. The fusion zone, as 
shown in | figure 3-22] is the region of the base metal that 
is actually melted. The depth of fusion is the distance 
that fusion extends into the base metal or previous 
welding pass. 

Another zone of interest to the welder is the heat- 
affected zone, as shown l in figure 3 -22. This zone in¬ 
cludes that portion of the base metal that has not been 
melted; however, the structural or mechanical properties 
of the metal have been altered by the welding heat. 
Because the mechanical properties of the base metal are 
affected by the welding heat, it is important that you 
learn techniques to control the heat input. One technique 
often used to minimize heat input is the intermittent 
weld. We discuss this and other techniques as we pro¬ 
gress through this chapter; but, first we will discuss 
some of the considerations that affect the welded joint 
design. 

WELDED j OINT DESIGN 

The details of a joint, which includes both the ge¬ 
ometry and the required dimensions, are called the joint 
design. J ust what type of joint design is best suited for 
a particular job depends on many factors. Although 
welded joints are designed primarily to meet strength 
and safety requirements, there are other factors that must 
be considered. A few of these factors areas follows: 


uan 
























































A. SQUARE BUTT JOINT 




B. SINGLE-V BUTT JOINT 



C.DOUBLE-V BUTT JOINT 



11 Figure 3-23l -Butt ioi nts. 


Whether the load will be in tension or compres¬ 
sion and whether bending, fatigue, or impact 
stresses will be applied 

• How a load will be applied; that is, whether the 
load will be steady, sudden, or variable 

• The direction of the load as applied to the joint 

• The cost of preparing the joint 

Another consideration that must be made is the ratio 
of the strength of the joint compared to the strength of 
the base metal. This ratio is called joint efficiency. An 
efficient joint is one that is just as strong as the base 
metal. 

Normally, thejoint design is determined by a de¬ 
signer or engineer and is included in the project plans 
and specifications. Even so, understanding thejoint 
design for a weld enables you to produce better welds. 

Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the five basic 
types of welded joints—butt, corner, tee, lap, and edge. 
While there are many variations, every joint you weld 
will be one of these basic types. Now, we will consider 


some of the variations of the welded joint designs and 
the efficiency of the joints. 

BUTT JOINTS 

The square butt joint is used primarily for metals 
that are 3/16 inch or less in thickness. Thejoint is 
reasonably strong, but its use is not recommended when 
the metals are subject to fatigue or impact loads. Prepa¬ 
ration of thejoint is simple, since it only requires match¬ 
ing the edges of the plates together; however, as with 
any other joint, it is important that it is fitted together 
correctly for the entire length of thejoint. It is also 
important that you allow enough root opening for the 
ioint. 1 Figure 3-23l shows an example of this type of joint. 

When you are welding metals greater than 3/16 inch 
in thickness, it is often necessary to use a grooved butt 
joint. The purpose of grooving is to give thejoint the 
required strength. When you are using a grooved joint, 
it is important that the groove angle is sufficient to allow 
the electrode into the joint; otherwise, the weld will lack 
penetration and may crack. However, you also should 
avoid excess beveling because this wastes both weld 
metal and time. Depending on the thickness of the base 
metal, thejoint is either single-grooved (grooved on one 
side only) or double-grooved (grooved on both sides). 
As a welder, you primarily use the single-V and double- 
V grooved joints. 

The single-V butt join ft (fig. 3-2B , view B) is for 
use on plates 1/4 inch through 3/4 inch in thickness. 
Each member should be beveled so the included angle 
for thejoint is approximately 60 degrees for plate and 
75 degrees for pipe. Preparation of thejoint requires a 
special beveling machine (or cutting torch), which 
makes it more costly than a square butt joint. It also 
requires more filler material than the square joint; how¬ 
ever, thejoint is stronger than the square butt joint. But, 
as with the square joint, it is not recommended when 
subjected to bending at the root of the weld. 

The double-V butt join t (fig. 3-23 , view C) is an 
excellent joint for all load conditions. Its primary use is 
on metals thicker than 3/4 inch but can be used on 
thinner plate where strength is critical. Compared to the 
single-V joint, preparation time is greater, but you use 
less filler metal because of the narrower included angle. 
Because of the heat produced by welding, you should 
alternate weld deposits, welding first on one side and 
then on the other side. This practice produces a more 
symmetrical weld and minimizes warpage. 

Remember, to produce good quality welds using the 
groove joint, you should ensure the fit-up is consistent 
for the entire length of the joint, use the correct groove 



























DOUBLE - BEVEL 




I Figure 3-24fl -Additional types of groove welds. 


angle, use the correct root opening, and use the correct 
root face for the joint. When you follow these principles, 
you produce better welds every time. Other standard 
grooved butt joint designs include the bevel groove, 

J -groove, and U-groove, as shown ir l figure lF2A\ 

CORNER j OINTS 

The flush corner i dint (fig. 1 3-25, view A) is de¬ 
signed primarily for welding sheet metal that is 12 gauge 
or thinner. It is restricted to lighter materials, because 
deep penetration is sometimes difficult and the design 
can support only moderate loads. 

The half-open corner join t (fig. 3-23 , view B) is 
used for welding materials heavier than 12 gauge. Pene¬ 
tration is better than in the flush corner joint, but its use 
is only recommended for moderate loads. 

The full-open corner join t (fig. 3-23 , view C) 
produces a strong joint, especially when welded on both 
sides. It is useful for welding plates of all thicknesses. 

TEE J OINTS 

The square tee join t (fig. 3-2l view A) requires a 
fillet weld that can be made on one or both sides. It can 
be used for light or fairly thick materials. For maximum 
strength, considerable weld metal should be placed on 
each side of the vertical plate. 



FLUSH CORNER JOINT 
A 



half-open corner joint 

B 



FULL-OPEN CORNER JOINT 

c 



3-14 






























SQUARE TEE JOINT 

A 


■a 

i 


SINGLE-BEVEL TEE JOINT 

B 



DOUBLE-BEVEL TEE JOINT 

C 




I Figure 3-26^ -T ee joints. 


' : 

& ■ 

■'. :>* - • \ 

a 

\ 

\ 


< ; I T* 

• -X y ■ e\ :■ V ■ /'. ■■.5.4 


A. SINGLE-FILLET LAP JOINT 


>'• 



I: 

Li 




B. DOUBLE-FILLET LAP JOINT 



I Figure 3-27j -Lao joints, 



I Figure 3-28j -Flanqed edge J oints. 


The single-bevel tee ioi HF (fig. 3-26 . view B) can 
withstand more severe loadings than the square tee joint, 
because of better distribution of stresses. It is generally 
used on plates of 1/2 inch or less in thickness and where 
welding can only be done from one side. 

The double-bevel tee joi fitlfiq. 3-2| 6, view C) is for 
use where heavy loads are applied and the welding can 
be done on both sides of the vertical plate. 


the seam. The strength of the weld depends on the size 
of the fillet. Metal up to 1/2 inch in thickness and not 
subject to heavy loads can be welded using this joint. 

When the joint will be subjected to heavy loads, you 
should use the double-fillet lap join t" fig. 3-271 . view 
B). When welded properly, the strength of this joint is 
very close to the strength of the base metal. 


LAP j OINTS 


EDGE J OINTS 


The single-fillet lap ioir ltTfiq. 3-27 , view A) is easy 
to weld, since the filler metal is simply deposited along 


The flanged edge io fnt [fig. 3 -28. view A) is suit¬ 
able for plate 1/4 inch or less in thickness and can only 


3-15 


































































AXIS OF WELD 



FLAT POSiTiON 




VERTICAL POSITION 



Figure 3-29^ -Welding positions-plate. 


sustain light loads. Edge preparation for this joint may 
be done, as shown in either views B or C. 

WELDING POSITIONS 

All welding is done in one of four positions: (1) flat, 
(2) horizontal, (3) vertical, or (4) overhead. Fillet or 


groove welds can be made in all of these positions. 

I Figure 3-29l shows the various positions used in plate 
welding. The American Welding Society (AWS) identi¬ 
fies these positions by a number/letter designation; for 
instance, the 1G position refers to a groove weld that is 
to be made in the flat position. Here the 1 is used to 












































5G HORIZONTAL FIXED POSITION 


2G VERTICAL POSITION 


6G INCLINED POSITION 


Figure 3-30—Welding position-pipe. 


indicate the flat position and the G indicates a groove 
weld. For a fillet weld made in the flat position, the 
number/letter designation is IF (F for fillet). These 
number/letter designations refer to test positions. These 
are positions a welder would be required to use during 
a welding qualification test. As a Steelworker, there is a 
good possi bi I i ty that someday you wi 11 be requi red to 
certify or perform a welding qualification test; therefore, 
it is important that you have a good understanding and 
can apply the techniques for welding in each of the test 
positions. 

Because of gravity, the position in which you are 
welding affects the flow of molten filler metal. Use the 
flat position, if at all possible, because gravity draws the 
molten metal downward into the joint making the weld¬ 
ing faster and easier. Horizontal welding is a little more 
difficult, because the molten metal tends to sag or flow 
downhill onto the lower plate. Vertical welding is done 
in a vertical line, usually from bottom to top; however, 
on thin material downhill or downhand welding may 
be easier. The overhead position is the most difficult 
position. Because the weld metal flows downward, this 
position requires considerable practice on your part to 
produce good quality welds. 

Although the terms flat , horizontal, vertical , and 
overhead sufficiently describe the positions for plate 
welding, they do not adequately describe pipe welding 
positions. In pipe welding, there are four basic test 
positions used (fig. 3-30). Notice that the position refers 
to the position of the pipe, not the position of welding. 


Test position 1G is made with the pipe in the hori¬ 
zontal position. In this position, the pipe is rolled so that 
the welding is done in the flat position with the pipe 
rotating under the arc. This position is the most advan¬ 
tageous of all the pipe welding positions. When you are 
welding in the 2G position, the pipe is placed in the 
vertical position so the welding can be done in the 
horizontal position. The 5G position is similar to the 1G 
position in that the axis of the pipe is horizontal. But, 
when you are using the 5G position, the pipe is not 
turned or rolled during the welding operation; therefore, 
the welding is more difficult in this position. When you 
are using the 6G position for pipe welding, the axis of 
the pipe is at a 45-degree angle with the horizontal and 
the pipe is not rolled. Since the pipe is not rolled, 
welding has to be done in all the positions— flat, verti¬ 
cal, horizontal, and overhead. If you can weld pipe in 
this position, you can handle all the other welding posi¬ 
tions. 

NOTE: There is no 3G or 4G test position in pipe 
welding. Also, since most pipe welds are groove welds, 
they are identified by the letter G. 

We will discuss more about the techniques used for 
welding in the various positions later in this training 
manual, but for now, let's talk about the effects of heat 
on metal. 

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION 

When apiece of metal is heated, the metal expands. 
Upon cooling, the metal contracts and tries to resume 
its original shape. The effects of this expansion and 



















TEMPERATURE BAR RESTRAINED RESTRAINED BAR 

BEFORE HEATING DURING HEATING AFTER COOLING 

& AFTER COOLING 

A BC 

Figure 3-3L]- Effects of expansion and contraction. 

contraction are shown ir i figure 3-3H . View A shows a 
bar that is not restricted in any way. When the bar is 
heated, it is free to expand in all directions. If the bar is 
allowed to cool without restraint, it contracts to its 
original dimensions. 

When the bar is clamped in a vise (view B) and 
heated, expansion is limited to the unrestricted sides of 
the bar. As the bar begins to cool, it still contracts 
uniformly in all directions. As a result, the bar is now 
deformed. It has become narrower and thicker, as shown 
in view C. 

These same expansion and contraction forces act on 
the weld metal and base metal of a welded joint; how¬ 
ever, when two pieces of metal are welded together, 
expansion and contraction may not be uniform through¬ 
out all parts of the metal. This is due to the difference in 
the temperature from the actual weld joint out to the 
edges of the joint. This difference in temperature leads 


to internal stresses, distortion, and warpage lTiqure 3-321 
shows some of the most common difficulties that you 
are likely to encounter. 

When you are welding a single-V butt ioint Kfiq.l 
I 3-32,1 view A), the highest temperature is at the surface 
of the molten puddle. The temperature decreases as you 
move toward the root of the weld and away from the 
weld. Because of the high temperature of the molten 
metal, this is where expansion and contraction are great¬ 
est. When the weld begins to cool, the surface of the 
weld joint contracts (or shrinks) the most, thus causing 
warpage or distortion. View B shows how the same 
principles apply to a tee joint. Views C and D show the 
distortions caused by welding a bead on one side of a 
plate and welding two plates together without proper 
tack welds. 

All metals, when exposed to heat buildup during 
welding, expand in the direction of least resistance. 
Conversely, when the metal cools, it contracts by the 
same amount; therefore, if you want to prevent or reduce 
the distortion of the weldment, you have to use some 
method to overcome the effects of heating and cooling. 

CONTROLLING DISTORTION 

You can control the distortion caused by expansion 
and contraction during welding by following the simple 
procedures listed below. 



C. FLAT WORK IS DRAWN INTO CURVE 


D. SPACING CLOSES 


Figure 3-32^ -Distortion caused by welding. 




































CHAIN INTERMITTENT FILLET WELD 


STAGGERED INTERMITTENT FILLET WELD 


INTERMITTENT FILLET WELDS 


1 

5 

6 

7 

A 




H 

i ^ 

999BK 

—:—-4 



max 


DIRECTION OF WELDING 


INTERMITTENT BUTT WELD 

[Figure 3-33^ 1 ntermittent welds. 



I Figure 3-341- Back-step welding. 


Proper Edge Preparation and Fit-up 

As discussed earlier in this chapter, proper edge 
preparation and fit-up are essential to good quality 
welds. By making certain the edges are properly beveled 
and spacing is adequate, you can restrict the effects of 
distortion. Additionally, you should use tack welds, 
especially on long joints. Tack welds should be spaced 
at least 12 inches apart and run approximately twice as 
long as the thickness of the weld. 

Control the Heat Input 

You should understand that the faster a weld is 
made, the less heat is absorbed by the base metal. As you 
gain welding experience, it will become easier for you 
to weld a seam with the minimum amount of heat by 
simply speeding up the welding process. 

Regardless of your experience, it is often necessary 
to use a welding technique designed to control heat 


input. An intermittent weld (sometimes called a skip 
weld) is often used instead of one continuous weld. 
When you are using an intermittent weld, a short weld 
is made at the beginning of the joint. Next, you skip to 
the center of the seam and weld a few inches. Then, you 
weld at the other end of the joint. Finally, you return to 
the end of the first weld and repeat the cycle until the 
weld is finished rFiqure 3-33l shows the intermittent 
weld. 

Another technique to control the heat input is the 
back-step meth od (fig. 3-1 34). When using this tech¬ 
nique, you deposit short weld beads from right to left 
along the seam. 

Preheat the Metal 

As discussed earlier, expansion and contraction 
rates are not uniform in a structure during welding due 
to the differences in temperature throughout the metal. 


3-19 


































INCORRECT 



CORRECT 


11 Figure 3-353- Weld passes. 


To control the forces of expansion and contraction, you 
preheat the entire structure before welding. After the 
welding is complete, you allow the structure to cool 
slowly. More about preheating and postheating is dis¬ 
cussed later in this training manual. 

Limit the Number of Weld Passes 



I Figure 3-36^ Allowinq for distortion. 


be considered. Later, we discuss additional techniques 
that you can apply to specific welding situations. 


You can keep distortion to a minimum by using as 
few weld passes as possible. You should limit the num¬ 
ber of weld passes to the number necessary to meet the 
requirements of the job. (Se j fig. 3-~35] ) 

UseJ igs and Fixtures 

Since holding the metal in a fixed position prevents 
excessive movements, the use of jigs and fixtures can 
help prevent distortion. A jig or fixture is simply a device 
used to hold the metal rigidly in position during the 
welding operation. 

Allow for Distortion 

A simple remedy for the distortion caused by expan¬ 
sion and contraction is to allow for it during fit-up. To 
reduce distortion, you angle the parts to be welded 
slightly in the opposite direction in which the contrac¬ 
tion takes place. When the metal cools, contraction 
forces pull the pieces back into position [Figure 3-361 
shows how distortion can be overcome in both the butt 
and tee joints. 

There is more to being a good welder than just being 
able to lay a good bead. There are many factors that must 


WELDING PROCEDURES 

There are many factors involved in the preparation 
of any welded joint. The detailed methods and practices 
used to prepare a particular weldment are cal led the 
welding procedure. A welding procedure identifies all 
the welding variables pertinent to a particular job or 
project. Generally, these variables include the welding 
process, type of base metal, joint design, welding posi¬ 
tion, type of shielding, preheating and postheating re¬ 
quirements, welding machine setting, and testing 
requirements. 

Welding procedures are used to produce welds that 
will meet the requirements of commonly used codes. 
The American Welding Society (AWS) produces the 
Structural Welding Code that is used for the design and 
construction of steel structures. Another code that is 
used for the construction of steam boilers and pressure 
vessels is published by the American Society of Me¬ 
chanical Engineers (ASME). These codes provide a 
standardized guide of proven welding practices and 
procedures. 

While you are not directly responsible for develop¬ 
ing welding procedures, you could be assigned to a 


3-20 



















welding job that requires you to follow them. For exam¬ 
ple, when a job is assigned to a Naval Construction 
Force unit, it is accompanied by a set of drawings and 
specifications. When there is welding required for the 
job, the specifications normally require it to be accom¬ 
plished according to a specific code requirement. For 
instance, if your unit is tasked to fabricate a welded steel 
structure, the specifications may require that all welding 
be accomplished according to AWS Dl.l (Structural 
Welding Cod^. The unit is then responsible for ensuring 
that the welders assigned to the job are qualified to 
produce the welds according to this welding procedure 
specification. As showr l in figure 3 -37, a welding pro¬ 
cedure specification is simply a document that provides 
details of the required variables for a specific welding 
application. 

For an NMCB, the welding procedure specification 
is normally prepared by the certified welding inspector 
at the local Naval Construction Training Center. Using 
the Structural Welding Cede, along with the project 
drawings and specifications, the welding inspector de¬ 
velops a welding procedure specification that meets the 
requirements of the job. The importance of this docu¬ 
ment is that it assures that each of the variables can be 
repeated by qualified welders. 

Once a welding procedure specification has been 
developed and qualified, welders are then required to 
perform a Welding Performance Qualification test. Af¬ 
ter the test is complete, the weld specimens are tested 
according to the requirements of the Welding Procedure 
Specification. You may use either destructive or nonde¬ 
structive tests. One example of a destructive test is the 
guided-bend test. An X-ray test is considered nonde¬ 
structive. Testing is discussed in greater detail later in 
this training manual. 

NOTE: When you are assigned to do a welding job, 
make a thorough examination of the drawings and speci¬ 
fications. Look carefully at the notes on the drawings 
and Section 5 (metals) of the specifications. If specific 
codes are cited, inform the project supervisor so that you 
can receive the training needed to perform the required 
welds. 

DRAWINGS 

Drawings or sketches are used to convey the ideas 
of an engineer to the skilled craftsman working in the 
shop. As a welder, you must be able to work from a 
drawing in order to fabricate metal parts exactly as the 
engineer has designed them. 


READING DRAWINGS 

To read a drawing, you must know how engineers 
use lines, dimensions, and notes to communicate their 
ideas on paper. In this section, we briefly discuss each 
of these drawing elements. For a more thorough discus¬ 
sion, refer to publications, such as Blueprint Reading 
and Sketching, NAVEDTRA 10077-F1, or to Engineer- 
ingAidB, NAVEDTRA 10696. 


Lines 

I Figure 3-~38l shows many of the different types of 
lines that are used in drawings. You can see that each 
line has a specific meaning you must understand to 
interpret a drawing correctly. Let's discuss a few of the 
most important types. A visible line (sometimes called 
object line) is used to show the edges of an object that 
are visible to the viewer. For example, if you look at one 
of the walls of the room you are in, you can see the 
outline of the walls and (depending on the wall you are 
looking at) the outline of doors and windows. On a 
drawing, these visible outlines or edges can be shown 
using visible lines that are drawn as described in 
I figure 3-381 

Now look at the wall again. Assuming that the 
wall is wood frame, you know that there are studs or 
framing members inside the wall that you cannot see. 
Also, the wall may contain other items, such as water 
pipes and electrical conduit, that you also cannot see. 
On a drawing, the edges of those concealed studs and 
other items can be shown using hidden lines Kfiq.l 
13-38)1 These lines are commonly used in drawings. As 
you can imagine, the more hidden lines there are, the 
more difficult it becomes to decipher what is what; 
however, there is another way these studs and other 
items can be "seen." I magi ne that you "cut away" the 
wall board that covers the wall and replace it with a 
sheet of clear plastic. That clear plastic can bethought 
of as a cutting or viewing plan d (fig. 3-38D through 
which the previously concealed studs, piping, and 
conduit are now visible. Now those items can be 
drawn using visible lines, rather than hidden lines. A 
view of this type is called a sectional view, and a 
drawing of the view is called a section drawing. 
Section drawings are commonly used to show the 
internal components of a complicated object. 

Many times, you will see lines drawn on the visible 
surfaces of a section drawing. These lines, called section 
lines, are used to show different types of materials. 
















QW-482 SUGGESTED FORMAT FOR WELDING PROCEDURE SPECIFICATIONS (WPS) 
(See QW-201.1, Section IX, ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code) 


Company USNAVY 

Wading Procedure Specification No 
Revision No., N/A _ 


1111 


D«. 4 /2 6/J&. 


By: M. KONSCAK 


.Supporting PQR No fd 1111—Al 




Welding Process(et) SjJlLA .W, 


Type(s> llAHlJAIi 


{Automatic, Manual, Machine, or Sami-Auto.) 


JOINTS (QW-402) 

Joint Design.BU~1_ 

Backing (Yes)- 


Backing Material (Type). 


TT72T 


(No )—X 


(Refer to both backing and retainers.) 


Q Meta! Q Nonfusing Meta! 

O Nonmetallic Q Other 

Sketches. Production Drawings, Weid Symbols or Written Description 
should show the general arrangement of the parts to be welded. Where 
applicable, the root spacing and the details of weld groove may be 
specified. 

(At the option of the Mfgr., sketches may be attached to illustrate joint 
design, weld layers and bead sequence, e.g. for notch toughness proce¬ 
dures, for multiple process procedures, etc.) 


BASE METALS (QW-403) 


P-Ne. 


Group No.. 


.to P-Ne.. 


OR 


Specification type and grad# ^jA—^^5— 

to Specification type and grade_ 

OR 

Chem. Analysis and Mech. Prop_ A=T 


to Chem. Analysis and Mech. Prop.— A=JL- 
Thickness Range: 

Base Metal: Groove. 3G 

Pipe Die. Range: Groove ? 4 n -4~TlTA 

Other___i_ 



•FILLER METALS (QW-404) 
s«ec. No. (SFA) 

1/8" E-6011 

SFA 5.1 

1"/8" E-/018-1 

SFA 5.5 

AWs no. (Class) . 

E-6011 

E-7018 

F-No 


F-4 

A*Nn 

L &=} 

A—1 

Size of Filler Metals 

1/8" 

1/8" 

Deoosired Weld Meta! 


6"-12 n 

Thickness Range; 

l/ai! j 

i/8” 

Groove 

OPEN V GROOVE i 

[JPEK V GROOVE - 

Filler 


. 1 A 

Electrode-Flux (Class) _ 

N/A 

N/A- - 

Flux Trade Name 

N/A 

Tff/X ” ~ 

Consumable Insert 

N/A 

N/A 

Other 

.. N/A 1 

N/A 


Each bate metal-flttar metal combination should be recorded Individually. 


This form (E00006) may be obtained from the Order Dept. ASME. 22 Law Drive. Box 2300. Fairfield. NJ 07007-2300 


I Figure 3-37T1 Welding procedure specification. 


3-22 




















































































QW-482 (Back/ 



ori«t*d. ate.) 


uiting arc. ate.) 


TECHNIQUE (QW-410! 

String or Weave Bead_ 

Orifice or Gas Cup Size 


imiiai ana interpass ueanmg itjrusmng, vjrmomg. etc.;. 


, M.CH Jt 


WITH WIRE BRUSH OP BTTRRFP 


Weld 

Laver(t) 

ProcMt 



1 

2 

3 

4 

SMAW 

SMAW 

SHAW 

SMAW 


E-6011I 1/8" 
3/32** 


E-7018 1/8** 


Other 

(e.g., Remarks, Com¬ 
ments. Hot Wire 
Addition. Technique. 
Torch Angie. Etc.) 


DCRP I 85-120 
DCRP 85-120 

DCRP 85-120 xy-zz 

DCRP 85=120 19-22 

DCRP 8S-190 IQ-99 


6 -10*[ N/A 



3-23 











































3-24 


Figure 3-38.”-Line characters and uses. 






















































































ZINC, LEAD, WHITE 
METAL. BABBITT, 
AND ALLOYS 



COPPER, BRASS, 
BRONZE, AND 
COMPOSITIONS 



CAST IRON, 
MALLEABLE IRON. 
GENERAL USE FOR 
ALL MATERIALS 



ALUMINUM 
AND ITS 
ALLOYS 


I Figure 3-39.- Section lines for various metals. 


Some of the types of section lines you are likely to 
encounter as a welder are shown ir l figure 3^391 

Another use of lines is to form symbols, such as 
welding symbols, that are discussed later in this chapter. 

Dimensions 

While engineers use lines to describe the shape or 
form of an object, they use dimensions to provide a 
complete size description. Dimensions used on draw¬ 
ings are of two types: size and location. As implied by 
their names, a size dimension shows the size of an 
object or parts of an object and a location dimension 
is used to describe the location of features. Examples 
of both size and location dimensions are shown in 
I figure 3-401 



3-251 








































































While on the subject of dimensions, it should be 
noted that large objects are seldom drawn to their true 
size. Instead, the engineer or draftsman reduces the size 
of the object "to scale." For example, when drawing a 
40-foot tower, the drawing may be prepared using a 
scale of 1/2"= l'-O". In this case, the height of the tower, 
on paper, is 20 inches. The scale used to prepare working 
drawings is always noted on the drawing. It maybe a 
fractional scale, such as discussed here, or a graphic 
scale, such as the one shown ir t figure 3^401 . I n the Navy, 
both numerical and graphic scales are usually shown on 
construction drawings. 

When you are using a drawing, the dimensions of 
an object should never be measured (scaled) directly 
from the drawing. These measurements are frequently 
inaccurate, si nee a change in atmospheric conditions 
causes drawing paper to shrink or expand. To ensure 
accuracy, always use the size and location dimensions 
shown on the drawing. If a needed dimension is not 
shown on the drawing, you should check the graphic 
scale, since it will always shrink or expand at the same 
rate as the drawing paper. 

Notes 

Drawing notes are used for different purposes and 
are either general or specific in nature. One example of 
how notes are used are the two notes shown in i fiqurel 
I 3-40 tl hat give the inside diameters of the holes. As you 
can see, these notes are used for size dimensioning. They 
are specific notes in that, by using a leader line, each 
note is referred to a specific hole or set of holes. 

A general note is used to provide additional infor¬ 
mation that does not apply to any one particular part or 
feature of the drawing. For example, the drawing shown 
in | figure 3-40 I could contain a general note saying: "All 
holes shall be reamed using a tolerance of ± 1/64 inch." 

Drawing Views 

Look at the drawing shown in i figure 3^411 This type 
of drawing is called a pictorial drawing. These draw¬ 
ings are frequently used to show how an object should 
appear after it is manufactured. Pictorial drawings are 
used as working drawings for a simple item, such as a 
metal washer. For a more complex object, as shown in 
I figure 3-41 , it becomes too difficult to provide a com¬ 
plete description in a pictorial drawing. In this case, it is 
common practice to prepare orthographic drawings to 
describe the object fully. 




I Figure 34fl -Three-view orth ographic draw ing of the steel part 
shown i ri figure 3-4ll 


Assume you are holding the object shown in |fiqure| 
1 3-41 il n your hands. When you hold the object so you are 
I ooki ng di recti y at the top face of the obj ect, the vi ew 
you see is the top view. A drawing of that view is called 
an orthographic drawing. 

Obviously, an orthographic drawing of only the top 
view of the object is insufficient to describe the entire 
object; therefore, additional orthographic drawings of 
one or more of the other faces of the object are necessary. 
The number of orthographic views needed to describe 
an object fully depends upon the complexity of the 
object. For example, a simple metal washer can be fully 
described using only one orthographic view; however, 
an extremely complex object may require as many as 





















































Handling and Care of Drawings 



I Figure 3-43J- Standard welding symbol. 


six views (top, front, left side, right side, back, and 
bottom). Most objects, such as the steel part shown in 
I figure 3-4l1 can be sufficiently described using three 
views: top, front, and right side. For the object shown in 
I figure 3-41] orthographic drawings of the top, front, and 
right-side views are shown ir | figure 3^2\ 

Notice the placement of the views shown in | figurel 
I 3-42.1 This is a standard practice that you should be 
aware of when reading orthographic drawings. By this 
standard practice, the top view is always placed above 
the front view and the right-side view is placed to the 
right of the front view. When additional views are 
needed, the left side is always drawn to the left of the 
front view and the bottom is drawn below the front view. 
Placement of the back view is somewhat flexible; how¬ 
ever, it is usually drawn to the left of the left-side view. 
When reading and understanding the different ortho¬ 
graphic views, you find it is sometimes helpful to pre¬ 
pare a pictorial sketch. You can find a discussion of 
sketching in Blueprint Reading and Sketching, 
NAVEDTRA 10077-F1 . 

Think of drawings as a form of communication. 
They are intended to help you understand all the neces¬ 
sary information you need to fabricate and assemble an 
object regardless of the complexity. It is important that 
you learn to read drawings. 


Special care should be exercised in the handling of 
drawings. When they are not being used, keep them on 
a rack or in another assigned place of storage. Drawings 
are valuable, and they may be difficult or impossible to 
replace if they are lost or damaged. 

Now, we will discuss some special symbols. These 
are symbols a welder must be able to read and to 
understand how they are used to convey information. 

WELDING SYMBOLS 

Special symbols are used on a drawing to specify 
where welds are to be located, the type of joint to be 
used, as well as the size and amount of weld metal to be 
deposited in the joint. These symbols have been stan¬ 
dardized by the American Welding Society (AWS). You 
will come into contact with these symbols anytime you 
do a welding job from a set of blueprints. You need to 
have a working knowledge of the basic weld symbols 
and the standard location of all the elements of a welding 
symbol. 

A standard welding symbol [(fig. 3-431 ) consists of a 
reference line, an arrow, and a tail. The reference line 
becomes the foundation of the welding symbol. It is 
used to apply weld symbols, dimensions, and other data 
to the weld. The arrow simply connects the reference 
linetothejoint or area to be welded. Thedirection of 
the arrow has no bearing on the significance of the 
reference line. The tail of the welding symbol is used 
only when necessary to include a specification, process, 
or other reference information. 

Weld Symbols 

The term weld symbol refers to the symbol for a 
specific type of weld. As discussed earlier, fillet, groove, 
surfacing, plug, and slot are all types of welds. Basic 
weld symbols are shown in i figure 3-44.1 The weld 


BASIC WELD SYMBOLS 

BEAO 

FILLET 

PLUG 

OR 

SLOT 

GROOVE OR BUTT 

SQUARE 

V 

BEVEL 

U 

j 

FLARE V 

FLARE 

BEVEL 



□ 

1 1 

Y/ 

1/ 

V 

V 

Yr 

\r 


[Figure 3-44^ -Basic weld symbols. 





































V 


F 


FILLET 


/ 


h 


/ 

BEVEL 


J-GROOVE 


FLARE-BEVEL 


f 


S 


CORNER FLANGE 


Figure 345.^ -Weld symbols applied to reference line. 


SYMBOL 


MEANING 








A. FILLET WELD, ARROW SIDE 



B. FILLET WELD, OTHER SIDE 



C. FILLET WELDS, BOTH SIDES 


Figure 3-46.^ -Specifying weld locations. 




Figure 347^ -Arrowhead indicates beveled plate. 


symbol is only part of the information required in the 
welding symbol. The term welding symbol refers to the 
total symbol, which includes all information needed to 
specify the weld(s) required. 


I Figure 3-45l shows how a weld symbol is applied to 
the reference line. Notice that the vertical leg of the weld 
symbol is shown drawn to the left of the slanted leg. 
Regardless of whether the symbol is for a fillet, bevel, 
J -groove, or flare-bevel weld, the vertical leg is always 
drawn to the left. 


I Figure 3-461 shows the significance of the positions 
of the weld symbols position on the reference line. I n 
view A the weld symbol is on the lower side of the 
reference line that is termed the arrow side. View B 
shows a weld symbol on the upper side of the reference 
line that is termed the other side. When weld symbols 
are placed on both sides of the reference line, welds must 
be made on both sides of the joint (view C). 

When only one edge of a joint is to be beveled, it is 
necessary to show which member is to be beveled. 
When such a joint is specified, the arrow of the welding 
symbol points with a definite break toward the member 
to be beveled. This is shown ir l figure 


I Figure 3-~48l shows other elements that may be 
added to a welding symbol. The information applied to 
the reference line on a welding symbol is read from left 
to right regardless of the direction of the arrow. 


Dimensioning 


I n lfigure 3-48,l notice there are designated locations 
for the size, length, pitch (center-to-center spacing), 
groove angle, and root opening of a weld. These loca¬ 
tions are determined by the side of the reference line on 
which the weld symbol is placed JTTgure 3-491 shows 
how dimensions are applied to symbols. 


3-28 








































































STANDARD LOCATION OF ELEMENTS OF A WELDING SYMBOL 



Groove angle or included angle 
of countersink for olug welds 


Length of weld in inches 


Pitch (c. to c. spacing) of welds 
in inches 


Field weld symbol 


Weia - aii - around symbol 


Arrow connecting reference iine 
to arrow side of joint (also points 
to grooved member in bevel and 
J grooved joints) 


Figure 3-48.-Elements of a welding symbol. 


\ 


/ 

IV- 5 

-1/ 

SIZE 

I/ 3 

LENGTH 


S LENGTH AND PITCH 

.\ 




1/2 (3/4) 

SIZE OF GROOVE 

AND EFFECTIVE THROAT 

ROOT OPENING 

\ 

. 

^60°^ 

GROOVE ANGLE 


I Figure 3-49^- Dimensions applied to weld symbols. 

































SYMBOL 


MEANING 



[Figure 3-50.- Dimensioninq of welds. 


CONTOUR 

FLUSH 

CONVEX 

CONCAVE 



W 

\ 

\ 

\ 

WELD- 

ALL- 

AROUND 

FIELD WELD 


t V 

z 0 

/ 


I Figure 3-51.f Supplementary symbols. 


I Figure 3-50l shows the meaning of various welding 
dimension symbols. Notice that the size of a weld is 
shown on the left side of the weld symbol |(fiq. 3-50 J 
view A). The length and pitch of a fillet weld are 
indicated on the right side of the weld symbol. View B 


shows a tee joint with 2-inch intermittent fillet welds 
that are 5 inches apart, on center. The size of a groove 
weld is shown in view C. Both sides are 1/2 inch, but 
note that the 60-degree groove is on the other side of the 
joint and the 45-degree groove is on the arrow side. 

Supplementary Symbols 

In addition to basic weld symbols, a set of supple¬ 
mentary symbols may be added to a welding symbol. 
Some of the most common supplementary symbols are 
shown in i figure 3-511 

Contour symbols are used with weld symbols to 
show how the face of the weld is to be formed. In 
addition to contour symbols, finish symbols are used to 
indicate the method to use for forming the contour of the 
weld. 

When a finish symbol is used, it shows the method 
of finish, not the degree of finish; for example, a C is 
used to indicate finish by chipping, an M means machin¬ 
ing, and a G indicates grindin g. Figure 3-521 shows how 
contour and finish symbols are applied to a weldng 
symbol. This figure shows that the weld is to be ground 
flush. Also, notice that the symbols are placed on the 
same side of the reference line as the weld symbol. 











































































Figure 3-53.—Specifying additional welding information. 

Another supplementary symbol shown in i fiqurel 
1 3-51 il s the weld-all-around symbol. When this symbol 
is placed on a welding symbol, welds are to continue all 
around the joint. 

Welds that cannot be made in the shop are identified 
as field welds. Afield weld symbol is shown in | fiqurel 
1 3-511 This symbol is a black flag that points toward the 
tail of the welding symbol. 

Specifying Additional Information 

It is sometimes necessary to specify a certain weld- 
i ng process, a type of el ectrode, or some type of refer¬ 
ence necessary to complete a weld. In this case, a note 
can be placed in the tail of the reference line. (See 




I Figure 3-5fl -Representinq multiple welds. 


i 



I Figure 3-55j -Example of welding symbol in use. 

I fig 3-53.1) If additional information is not needed, then 
the tail is omitted. 

Multiple-Weld Symbols 

When you are fabricating a metal part, there are 
times when more than one type of weld is needed on the 
same joint; for example, a joint may require both a bevel 
groove weld and a fillet weld. Two methods of illustrat¬ 
ing these weld symbols are shown ir l figure 3-541 Note 
that in each welding symbol, the bevel groove weld is 
to be completed first, followed by the fillet weld. 

Applying a Welding Symbol 

I Figure 3-~55l shows an example of how a welding 
symbol may appear on a drawing. This figure shows a 


3-31 










































steel pipe column that is to be welded to a baseplate. The 
symbol tells the welder that the pipe is to be beveled at 
a 30-degree angle followed by a bevel groove weld all 
around the joint. This is followed by a 1/2-inch fillet 
weld that is also welded all around thejoint. Finally, 
finish the fillet weld by grinding it to a flush contour. As 
the field weld symbol indicates, all welds are to be 
accomplished in the field. 

For additional information about welding symbols, 
refer to Symbols for Welding and Nondestructive Test¬ 
ing, ANSI/AWS A2.4-86. 

SAFETY 

Mishaps frequently occur in welding operations. In 
many instances, they result in serious injury to the 
welder or other personnel working in the immediate 
area. I n most cases, mishaps occur because of careless¬ 
ness, lack of knowledge, and the misuse of available 
equipment. Precautions that apply to specific welding 
equipment are pointed out in the chapters that cover that 
equipment. In this section we are particularly interested 
in such topics as protective clothing, eye protection 
devices, and practices applicable to the personal safety 
of the operator and personnel working nearby. 

Proper eye protection is of the utmost importance. 
This covers the welding operator and the other person¬ 
nel, such as helpers, chippers, or inspectors, who are in 


the vicinity of the welding and cutting operations. Eye 
protection is necessary because of the hazards posed by 
stray flashes, reflected glare, flying sparks, and globules 
of molten metal. Devices used for eye protection include 
helmets and goggles. 

NOTE: In addition to providing eye protection, 
helmets also provide a shield against flying metal and 
ultraviolet rays for the entire face and neck ] Figure 3-561 
shows several types of eye protection devices in com¬ 
mon use. 

Flash goggles (view A) are worn under the welder's 
helmet and by persons working around the area where 
welding operations are taking place. This spectacle type 
of goggles has side shields and may have either an 
adjustable or nonadjustable nose bridge. 

Eyecup or cover type of goggles (view B) are for 
use in fuel-gas welding or cutting operations. They are 
contoured to fit the configuration of the face. These 
goggles must befitted with a shade of filter lens that is 
suitable for the type of work being done. 

NOTE: The eyecup or cover type of goggles are 
NOT to be used as a substitute for an arc-welding 
hel met. 

For electric arc-welding and arc-cutting operations, 
a helmet having a suitable filter lens is necessary. The 
helmet shown in view C has an opening, called a 


3-32 












Table 3-1.-Recommended Filter Lenses for Various Welding Operations 


Shade No. 

Operation 

Up to 4. 

Light electric spot welding or for protection from stray 


light from nearby welding. 

5. 

Light gas cutting and welding. 

6-7. 

Gas cutting, medium gas welding, and arc welding up 


to 30 amperes. 

8-9 .. 

Heavy gas welding and arc welding and cutting, 30-75 


amperes. 

10-11. 

Arc welding and cutting, 76-200 amperes. 

12 . 

Arc welding and cutting, 201-400 amperes. 

13-14. 

Arc welding and cutting exceeding 400 amperes. 


window, for a flip-up filter lens 2 inches by 4 1/4 inches 
in size. The helmet shown in view D has a 4 1/2-inch by 
5 1/4-inch window. The larger window affords the 
welder a wider view and is especially useful when the 
welder is working in a confined place where head and 
body movement is restricted. When welding in locations 
where other welders are working, the welder should 
wear flash goggles beneath his helmet to provide pro¬ 
tect on from the fI ashes caused by the other wel ders' 
arcs. The flash goggles will also serve as eye protection 
when chipping the slag from a previous weld deposit. 

Helmets and welding goggles used for eye protec¬ 
tion are made from a nonflammable insulating material. 
They are fitted with a removable protective colored filter 
and a clear cover lens. 

NOTE: The purpose of the clear cover lens is to 
protect the filter lens against pitting caused by sparks 
and hot metal spatter. The clear lens must be placed on 
the outside of the filter lens. The clear lens should be 
replaced when it impairs vision. 

Filter lenses are furnished in a variety of shades, 
which are designated by number. The lower the number, 
the lighter the shade; the higher the number, the darker 
the shade ] Table 3-11 shows you the recommended filter 
lens shade for various welding operations. The filter lens 
shade number selected depends on the type of work and 
somewhat on the preference of the user. Remember, a 
filter lens serves two purposes. The first is to diminish 
the intensity of the visible light to a point where there is 
no glare and the welding area can be clearly seen. The 


second is to eliminate the harmful infrared and ultravio¬ 
let radiations coming from the arc or flame; conse¬ 
quently, the filter lens shade number you select must not 
vary mor e than two shades from the numbers recom¬ 
mended in i table 3-H 

Rule of thumb: When selecting the proper shade of 
filter lens for electric-arc welding helmets, place the lens 
in the helmet and look through the lens as if you were 
welding. Look at an exposed bare light bulb and see if 
you can distinguish its outline. If you can, then use the 
next darker shade lens. Repeat the test again. When you 
no longer seethe outline of the bulb, then the lens is of 
the proper shade. Remember that this test should be 
performed in the same lighting conditions as the welding 
operation is to be performed. Welding in a shop may 
require a shade lighter lens than if the same job were 
being performed in bright daylight. For field operations, 
this test may be performed by looking at a bright reflec¬ 
tive object. 

WARNING 

Never look at the welding arc without 
proper eye protection. Looking at the arc with 
the naked eye could lead to permanent eye 
damage. If you receive flash burns, they should 
be treated by medical personnel. 

A variety of special welder's clothing is used to 
protect parts of the body. The clothing selected varies 






















Figure 3-57^ -Welding gloves and mitts. 


with the size, location, and nature of the work to be 
performed. During any welding or cutting operation, 
you should always wear flameproof gauntlets. (Se dfial 
13-57J ) For gas welding and cutting, five-finger gloves 
like those shown in view A should be used. For electric- 
arc welding, use the two-finger gloves (or mitts) shown 
in view B. 

Both types of gloves protect the hands from heat and 
metal spatter. The two-finger gloves have an advantage 
over the five-finger gloves in that they reduce the danger 
of weld spatter and sparks lodging between the fingers. 
They also reduce finger chafing which sometimes oc¬ 
curs when five-finger gloves are worn for electric-arc 
welding. 

Many light-gas welding and brazing jobs require no 
special protective clothing other than gloves and 






SLEEVES coat 

Figure 3-58.^- Welder's protective clothing. 


3-34 





































goggles. Even here, it is essential that you wear your 
work clothes properly. Sparks are very likely to lodge in 
rolled-up sleeves, pockets of clothing, or cuffs of trou¬ 
sers or overalls. Sleeves should be rolled down and the 
cuffs buttoned. The shirt collar, also, should be fully 
buttoned. Trousers should not be cuffed on the outside, 
and pockets not protected by button-down flaps should 
be eliminated from the front of overalls and aprons. All 
other clothing must be free of oil and grease. Wear high 
top-safety shoes; low-cut shoes are a hazard because 
sparks and molten metal could lodge in them, especially 
when you are sitting down. 

Medium- and heavy-gas welding, all-electric weld¬ 
ing, and welding in the vertical or overhead welding 
position require special flameproof clothing made of 
leather or other suitable material. This clothing is de¬ 
signed to protect you against radiated heat, splashes of 
hot metal, or sparks. This clothing consists of aprons, 
sleeves, combination sleeves and bib, jackets, and over¬ 
alls. They afford a choice of protection depending upon 
the specific nature of the particular welding or cutting 
job. Sleeves provide satisfactory protection for welding 
operations at floor or bench level. 

The cape and sleeves are particularly suited for 
overhead welding, because it protects the back of the 
neck, top of the shoulders, and the upperpart of the back 


and chest. Use of the bib, in combination with the cape 
and sleeves, gives added protection to the chest and 
abdomen. The jacket should be worn when there is a 
need for complete all-around protection to the upperpart 
of the body. This is especially true when several welders 
are working in close proximity to one another. Aprons 
and overalls provide protection to the legs and are suited 
for welding operations on the floor. l Figure 3-58l shows 
some of the protective clothing available to welders. 

To prevent head burns during overhead welding 
operations, you should wear leather or flameproof caps 
under the helmet. Earplugs also should be worn to keep 
sparks or splatter from entering and burning the ears. 
Where the welder is exposed to falling or sharp objects, 
combination welding helmet/hard hats should be used. 
For very heavy work, fire-resistant leggings or high 
boots should be worn. Shoes or boots having exposed 
nailheads or rivets should NOT be worn. Oilskins or 
plastic clothing must NOT be worn in any welding 
operation. 

NOTE: If leather protective clothing is not avail¬ 
able, then woolen clothing is preferable to cotton. 
Woolen clothing is not as flammable as cotton and helps 
protect the operator from the changes in temperature 
caused by welding. Cotton clothing, if used, should be 
chemically treated to reduce its flammability. 


3-35 





CHAPTER 4 


GAS CUTTING 


The common methods used in cutting metal are 
oxygas flame cutting, air carbon-arc cutting, and 
plasma-arc cutting. The method used depends on the 
type of metal to be cut and the availability of equipment. 
As a Steelworker, oxygas or air carbon-arc equipment 
is the most common type of equipment available for 
your use. Oxygas equipment is explained in this chapter 
and air carbon-arc cutting is covered in i chapter 71 

The oxygas cutting torch has many uses in steel¬ 
work. At most naval activities, the Steelworker finds the 
cutting torch an excellent tool for cutting ferrous metals. 
This versatile tool is used for operations, such as bevel¬ 
ing plate, cutting and beveling pipe, piercing holes in 
steel plate, and cutting wire rope. 

When using the oxygas cutting process, you heat a 
spot on the metal to the kindling or ignition temperature 
(between MOOT and 1600°F for steels). The term for 
this oxygas flame is the PREHEATING FLAME. Next, 
you direct a jet of pure oxygen at the heated metal by 
pressing a lever on the cutting torch. The oxygen causes 
a chemical reaction known as OXIDATION to take place 
rapidly. When oxidation occurs rapidly, it is called 
COMBUSTION or BURNING. When it occurs slowly, 
it is known as RUSTING. 

When you use the oxygas torch method to cut metal, 
the oxidation of the metal is extremely rapid and part of 
the metal actually burns. The heat, liberated by the 
burning of the iron or steel, melts the iron oxide formed 
by the chemical reaction and accelerates the preheating 
of the object you are cutting. The molten material runs 
off as slag, exposing more iron or steel to the oxygen jet. 

I n oxygas cutting, only that portion of the metal that 
is in the direct path of the oxygen jet is oxidized. The 
narrow slit, formed in the metal as the cutting pro¬ 
gresses, is called the kerf. Most of the material removed 
from the kerf is in the form of oxides (products of the 
oxidation reaction). The remainder of the material is 
molten metal that is blown or washed out of the kerf by 
the force of the oxygen jet. 

The walls of the kerf formed by oxygas cutting of 
ferrous metals should be fairly smooth and parallel to 
each other. After developing your skills in handling the 
torch, you can keep the cut within close tolerances; 
guide the cut along straight, curved, or irregular lines; 


and cut bevels or other shapes that require holding the 
torch at an angle. 

Partial oxidation of the metal is a vital part of the 
oxygas cutting process. Because of this, metals that do 
not oxidize readily are not suitable for oxygas cutting. 
Carbon steels are easily cut by the oxygas process, but 
special techniques (described later in this chapter) are 
required for the cutting of many other metals. 

OXYGAS CUTTING EQUIPMENT 

An oxygas cutting outfit usually consists of a cylin¬ 
der of acetylene or MAPP gas, a cylinder of oxygen, two 
regulators, two lengths of hose with fittings, and a 
cutting torch with tios Kfia. 4T1 . An oxygas cutting 
outfit also is referred to as a cutting rig. 

I n addition to the basic equipment mentioned above, 
numerous types of auxiliary equipment are used in 
oxygas cutting. An important item is the spark igniter 
that is used to light the torch (fig. 4-2, view A). Another 
item you use is an apparatus wrench. It is similar in 
design to the one shown in figure 4-2, view B. The 
apparatus wrench is sometimes called a gang wrench 
because it fits all the connections on the cutting rig. Note 
that the wrench shown has a raised opening in the handle 
that serves as an acetylene tank key. 

Other common accessories include tip cleaners, cyl¬ 
inder trucks, clamps, and holding jigs. Personal safety 
apparel, such as goggles, hand shields, gloves, leather 
aprons, sleeves, and leggings, are essential and should 
be worn as required for the job at hand. I nformation on 
safety apparel is also contained ir l chapter 1 of this text. 

Oxygas cutting equipment can be stationary or port¬ 
able. A portable oxygas outfit, such as the one shown in 
I figure 4-31 is an advantage when it is necessary to move 
the equipment from one job to another. 

To conduct your cutting requirements, you must be 
able to set up the cutting equipment and make the 
required adjustments needed to perform the cutting op¬ 
eration. For this reason it is important you understand 
the purpose and function of the basic pieces of equip¬ 
ment that make up the cutting outfit. But, before discuss¬ 
ing the equipment, let's look at the gases most often used 
in cutting: acetylene, MAPP gas, and oxygen. 














Figure 4-l.^ Oxygas cutting outfit, 


RAISED 

OPENING 



Figure 4-2.-(A)Spark igniter; (B) apparatus wrench. 


4-2 





































Figure 4-3.-A portable oxygas cutting and welding outfit. 


ACETYLENE 

Acetylene is a flammable fuel gas composed of 
carbon and hydrogen having the chemical formula 
C 2 H 2 .Whenburned with oxygen, acetylene produces a 
hot flame, having a temperature between 5700°F and 
6300°F. Acetylene is a colorless gas, having a disagree¬ 
able odor that is readily detected even when the gas is 
highly diluted with air. When a portable welding outfit, 
similar to the one shown in lfiaure 4-~3~l s used, acetylene 
is obtained directly from the cylinder. I n the case of 
stationary equipment, similar to the acetylene cylinder 
bank shown in | figure 44] the acetylene can be piped to 
a number of individual cutting stations. 

Hazards 

Pure acetylene is self-explosive if stored in the free 
state under a pressure of 29.4 pounds per square inch 
(psi). A slight shock is likely to cause it to explode. 


WARNING 


Acetylene becomes extremely dangerous 
if used above 15 pounds pressure. 



A. Line valve 

B. Release valve 

C. Filler plug 

D. Header pipe 

E. Regulator 

F. Flash arrestor chamber 

G. Escape pipe 

H. Check valve and drain plug 

I. Acetylene cylinders 

I Figure 44.1 -Stationarv acetylene cylinder bank. 
Cylinder Design 

Acetylene can be safely compressed up to 275 psi 
when dissolved in acetone and stored in specially de¬ 
signed cylinders filled with porous material, such as 
balsa wood, charcoal, finely shredded asbestos, corn 
pith, portland cement, or infusorial earth. These porous 
filler materials aid in the prevention of high-pressure gas 
pockets forming in the cylinder. 

Acetone is a liquid chemical that dissolves large 
portions of acetylene under pressure without changing 
the nature of the gas. Being a liquid, acetone can be 
drawn from an acetylene cylinder when it is not upright. 
You should not store acetylene cylinders on their side, 
but if they are, you must let the cylinder stand upright 
for a minimum of 2 hours before using. This allows the 
acetone to settle to the bottom of the cylinder. 

NOTE : Acetone contaminates the hoses, regula¬ 
tors, torch, and disrupts the flame. 

Acetylene is measured in cubic feet. The most com¬ 
mon cylinder sizes are 130-, 290-, and 330-cubic-foot 
capacity. The standard size cylinder the Navy uses holds 

























































Figure 4^5.M Vcetylene cylinder. 


225 cubic feet of acetylene. J ust because a cylinder has 
a 225-cubic-foot capacity does not necessarily mean it 
has 225 cubic feet of acetylene in it. Because it is 
dissolved in acetone, you cannot judge how much acety¬ 
lene is left in a cylinder by gauge pressure. The pressure 
of the acetylene cylinder will remain fairly constant until 
most of the gas is consumed. 

An example of an acetylene cylinder is shown in 
I figure 4-51 These cvlinders are equipped with fusible 
plugs that relieve excess pressure if the cylinder is 
exposed to undo heat. The standard Navy acetylene 
cylinder contains 225 cubic feet of acetylene and weighs 
about 250 pounds. The acetylene cylinder is yellow, and 
all compressed-gas cylinders are color-coded for iden¬ 
tification. More on the color coding of cylinders is 
covered later in this chapter. 

MAPP GAS 

MAPP (methylacetylene-propadiene) is an all-pur¬ 
pose industrial fuel having the high-flame temperature 
of acetylene but has the handling characteristics of 
propane. Being a liquid, MAPP is sold by the pound, 
rather than by the cubic foot, as with acetylene. One 
cylinder containing 70 pounds of MAPP gas can accom¬ 
plish the work of more than six and one-half 225-cubic- 
foot acetylene cylinders; therefore, 70 pounds of MAPP 
gas is equal to 1,500 cubic feet of acetylene. 


Cylinder Design 

Total weight for a MAPP cylinder, which has the 
same physical size as a 225-cubic-foot acetylene cylin¬ 
der, is 120 pounds (70 pounds which is MAPP gas). 
MAPP cylinders contain only liquid fuel. There is no 
cylinder packing or acetone to impair fuel withdrawal; 
therefore, the entire contents of a MAPP cylinder can be 
used. For heavy-use situations, a MAPP cylinder deliv¬ 
ers more than twice as much gas as an acetylene cylinder 
for the same time period. 

MAPP Characteristics 

Because of its superior heat transfer characteristics, 
MAPP produces a flame temperature of 5300°F when 
burned with oxygen. MAPP equals, or exceeds, the 
performance of acetylene for cutting, heating, and braz¬ 
ing. 

MAPP is not sensitive to shock and is nonflamma¬ 
ble in the absence of oxygen. There is no chance of an 
explosion if a cylinder is bumped, jarred, or dropped. 
You can store or transport the cylinders in any position 
with no danger of forming an explosive gas pocket. 

The characteristic odor, while harmless, gives warn¬ 
ings of fuel leaks in the equipment long before a dan¬ 
gerous condition can occur. MAPP gas is not restricted 
to a maximum working pressure of 15 psig, as is acety¬ 
lene. In jobs requiring higher pressures and gas flows, 
MAPP can be used safely at the full-cylinder pressure 
of 95 psig at 70°F. Because of this, MAPP is an excellent 
gas for underwater work. 

Bulk MAPP Gas 

Bulk MAPP gas facilities, similar to liquid oxygen 
stations, are installed at some activities where large 
supplies of the gas are used. In bulk installations, MAPP 
gas is delivered through a piping system directly to the 
user points. Maximum pressure is controlled centrally 
for efficiency and economy. 

Cylinder-filling facilities are also available from 
bulk installations that allow users to fill their cylinders 
on site. Filling a 70-pound MAPP cylinder takes one 
man about 1 minute and is essentially like pumping 
water from a large tank to a smaller one. 

MAPP Gas Safety 

MAPP gas vapor is stable up to 600°F and 1,100 
psig when exposed to an 825°F probe. The explosive 
limits of MAPP gas are 3.4 percent to 10.8 percent in air 
or 2.5 percent to 80 percent in oxygen. As shown in 























PERCENT 




NON- 




EXPLOSIVE 







NON- 

EXPLOSIVE 















INCREASED 
EXPLOSIVE J 
LIMITS ^ 


PYDI n^l\/F 













/ 10.8% 




EXPLOSIVE 

3.4% 

mimxMmmmL 


MAPP GAS 



ACETYLENE 



80% 


2.5% 


I Figure 4^6.1 -Explosive limits of MAPP and acetylene in air. 

I figure 4-6 . you can see these limits are narrow in com¬ 
parison with that of acetylene. 

MAPP gas has a highly detectable odor. The smell 
is detectable at 100 ppm, or at a concentration of l/340th 
of its lower explosive limit. Small fuel-gas systems may 
leak 1 or 11/2 pounds of fuel or more in an 8-hour shift; 
bulk systems will leak even more. Fuel-gas leaks are 
often difficult to find and often go unnoticed; however, 
a MAPP gas leak is easy to detect and can be repaired 
before it becomes dangerous. 

MAPP toxicity is rated “very slight," but high con¬ 
centrations (5,000 ppm) may have an anesthetic effect. 
Local eye or skin contact with MAPP gas vapor causes 
no adverse effect; however, the liquid fuel can cause 
dangerous frostlike burns due to the cooling caused by 
the rapid evaporation of the liquid. 

The identification markings on a MAPP cylinder are 
a yellow body with band "B" colored orange and the top 
yellow. 

OXYGEN 

Oxygen is a colorless, tasteless, and odorless gas 
and is slightly heavier than air. It is nonflammable but 
supports combustion with other elements. I n its free 
state, oxygen is one of the more common elements. The 
atmosphere is made up of about 21 parts of oxygen and 
78 parts of nitrogen, the remainder being rare gases. 
Rusting of ferrous metals, discoloration of copper, and 



I Figure 4^7.1 -Typical oxygen cylinder. 


corrosion of aluminum are all due to the action of 
atmospheric oxygen. This action is known as oxidation. 

Oxygen is obtained commercially either by the 
liquid-air process or by the electrolytic process. In the 
liquid-air process, the air is compressed and then 
cooled to a point where the gases become liquid (ap¬ 
proximately -375°F). The temperature is then raised to 
above -321 'F, at which point the nitrogen in the air 
becomes gas again and is removed. When the tempera¬ 
ture of the remaining liquid is raised to -297°F, the 
oxygen forms gas and is drawn off. The oxygen is 
further purified and compressed into cylinders for use. 

The other process by which oxygen is produced— 
the electrolytic process—consists of running an electri¬ 
cal current through water to which an acid or an alkali 
has been added. The oxygen collects at the positive 
terminal and is drawn off through pipes to a container. 

Oxygen is supplied for oxyacetylene welding in 
seamless steel cylinders. A typical oxygen cylinder is 
shown in i figure 47] The color of a standard oxygen 
cylinder used for industrial purposes is solid green. 
Oxygen cylinders are made in several sizes. The size 
most often used in welding and cutting is the 244-cubic- 
foot capacity cylinder. This cylinder is 9 inches in di¬ 
ameter, 51 inches high, and weighs about 145 pounds 
and is charged to a pressure of 2,200 psi at 70°F. 







































You can determine the amount of oxygen in a com¬ 
pressed-gas cylinder by reading the volume scale on the 
high-pressure gauge attached to the regulator. 

REGULATORS 

You must be able to reduce the high-pressure gas in 
a cylinder to a working pressure before you can use it. 
This pressure reduction is done by a regulator or reduc¬ 
ing valve. The one basic job of all regulators is to take 
the high-pressure gas from the cylinder and reduce it to 
a level that can be safely used. Not only do they control 
the pressure but they also control the flow (volume of 
gas per hour). 

Regulators come in all sizes and types. Some are 
designed for high-pressure oxygen cylinders (2,200 
psig), while others are designed for low-pressure gases, 
such as natural gas (5 psig). Some gases like nitrous 
oxide or carbon dioxide freeze when their pressure is 
reduced so they require electrically heated regulators. 

Most regulators have two gauges: one indicates the 
cylinder pressure when the valve is opened and the other 
indicates the pressure of the gas coming out of the 
regulator. You must open the regulator before you get a 
reading on the second gauge. This is the delivery pres¬ 
sure of the gas, and you must set the pressure that you 
need for your particular job. 

The pressures that you read on regulator gauges is 
called gauge pressure. If you are using pounds per 
square inch, it should be written as psig (this acronym 
means pounds per square inch gauge). When the gauge 
on a cylinder reads zero, this does not mean that the 
cylinder is empty. In actuality, the cylinder is still full of 
gas, but the pressure is equal to the surrounding atmos¬ 
pheric pressure. Remember: no gas cylinder is empty 
unless it has been pumped out by a vacuum pump. 

There are two types of regulators that control the 
flow of gas from a cylinder. These are either single-stage 
or double-stage regulators. 

Single-Stage Regulators 

Regulators are used on both high- and low-pressure 
svstem fTTiqure 41 -8 shows two SINGLE-STAGE regu¬ 
lators: one for acetylene and one for oxygen. The regu¬ 
lator mechanism consists of a nozzle through which the 
gases pass, a valve seat to close off the nozzle, a dia¬ 
phragm, and balancing springs. These mechanisms are 
all enclosed in a suitable housing. Fuel-gas regulators 
and oxygen regulators are basically the same design. 
The difference being those designed for fuel gases are 



[Figure 4-8.- Single-stage regulators. 


not made to withstand the high pressures that oxygen 
regulators are subjected to. 

I n the oxygen regulator, the oxygen enters through 
the high-pressure inlet connection and passes through a 
glass wool falter that removes dust and dirt. Turning the 
adjusting screw IN (clockwise) allows the oxygen to 
pass from the high-pressure chamber to the low-pres¬ 
sure chamber of the regulator, through the regulator 
outlet, and through the hose to the torch. Turning the 
adjusting screw further clockwise increases the working 
pressure; turning it counterclockwise decreases the 
working pressure. 

The high-pressure gauge on an oxygen regulator is 
graduated from 0 to 3,000 psig and from 0 to 220 in 
cubic feet. This allows readings of the gauge to deter¬ 
mine cylinder pressure and cubic content. Gauges are 
calibrated to read correctly at 70°F. The working pres¬ 
sure gauge may be graduated in “psig" from 0 to 150, 
0 to 200, or from 0 to 400, depending upon the type of 
regulator used. For example, on regulators designed for 


4^6 











I Figure 4-9.^ Double-stage regulator. 


heavy cutting, the working pressure gauge is graduated 
from 0 to 400. 

The major disadvantage of single-stage regulators 
is that the working gas pressure you set will decrease as 
the cylinder pressure decreases; therefore, you must 
constantly monitor and reset the regulator if you require 
a fixed pressure and flow rate. Keeping the gas pressure 
and flow rate constant is too much to expect from a 
regulator that has to reduce the pressure of a full cylinder 
from 2,200 psig to 5 psig. This is where double-stage 
regulators solve the problem. 

Double-Stage Regulators 

The double-stage regulator is similar in principle to 
the one-stage regulator. The main difference being that 
the total pressure drop takes place in two stages instead 
of one. In the high-pressure stage, the cylinder pressure 
is reduced to an intermediate pressure that was prede¬ 
termined by the manufacturer. I n the low-pressure stage, 
the pressure is again reduced from the intermediate 
pressure to the working pressure you have chosen. A 
typical double-stage regulator is shown ir j figure 4^91 

Problems and Safety 

Regulators are precise and complicated pieces of 
equipment. Carelessness can do more to ruin a regulator 
than any other gas-using equipment. One can easily 
damage a regulator by simply forgetting to wipe clean 
the cylinder, regulator, or hose connections. When you 
open a high-pressure cylinder, the gas can rush into the 


regulator at the speed of sound. If there is any dirt 
present in the connections, it will be blasted into the 
precision-fitted valve seats, causing them to leak This 
results in a condition that is known as creep. Creep 
occurs when you shut of the regulator but not the cylin¬ 
der and gas pressure is still being delivered to the 
low-pressure side. 

Regulators are built with a minimum of two relief 
devices that protect you and the equipment in the case 
of regulator creep or high-pressure gas being released 
into the regulator all at once. All regulator gauges have 
blowout backs that release the pressure from the back 
of the gauge before the gauge glass explodes. Nowa¬ 
days, most manufacturers use shatterproof plastic in¬ 
stead of glass. 

The regulator body is also protected by safety de¬ 
vices. Blowout disks or spring-loaded relief valves are 
the two most common types of devices used. When a 
blowout disk ruptures, it sounds like a cannon. Spring- 
loaded relief valves usually make howling or shrieking 
like noises. I n either case, your first action, after you 
recover from your initial fright, should be to turn off the 
cylinder valve. Remove the regulator and tag it for repair 
or disposal. 

When opening a gas cylinder, you should just 
"crack" the valve a little. This should be done before 
attaching the regulator and every time thereafter. By 
opening the cylinder before connecting the regulator, 
you blow out any dirt or other foreign material that 
might be in the cylinder nozzle. Also, there is the 


4^7 








possibility of a regulator exploding if the cylinder valve 
is opened rapidly. 

WARNING 

Oil or other petroleum products must never 
be used around oxygen regulators because these 
products will either cause a regulator explosion 
or fire. 



HOSES 


Figure 4-10.-Types of twin welding hose. 


The hoses used to make the connections between 
the torch and the regulators must be strong, nonporous, 
light, and flexible enough to make torch movements 
easy. They must be made to withstand internal pressures 
that can reach as high as 100 psig. The rubber used in 
hose manufacture is specially treated to remove the 
sulfur that could cause spontaneous combustion. 

Welding hose is available in single- and double¬ 
hose lengths. Size is determined by the inside diameter, 
and the proper size to use depends on the type of work 
for which it is intended. Hose used for light work has a 
3/1 6 or 1/4 inch inside diameter and one or two plies of 
fabric. For heavy-duty welding and cutting operations, 
usea hose with an inside diameter of 5/1 6 inch and three 
to five plies of fabric. Single hose is available in the 
standard sizes as well as 1/2-, 3/4-, and 1-inch sizes. 
These larger sizes are for heavy-duty heating and for use 
on large cutting machines. 

The most common type of cutting and welding hose 
is the twin or double hose that consists of the fuel hose 
and the oxygen hose joined together side by side. They 
are joined together by either a special rib Kfiq. 4-l0| view 
A) or by clamps Ifiq. 4-10, 1 view B). Because they are 
joined together, the hoses are less likely to become 
tangled and are easier to move from place. 

The length of hose you use is important. The deliv¬ 
ery pressure at the torch varies with the length of the 
hose. A 20-foot, 3/16-inch hose maybe adequate for a 
job, but if the same hose was 50 feet long, the pressure 
drop would result in insufficient gas flow to the torch. 
Longer hoses require larger inside diameters to ensure 
the correct flow of gas to the torch. When you are having 
problems welding or cutting, this is one area to check 

The hoses used for fuel gas and oxygen are identical 
in construction, but they differ in color. The oxygen hose 
cover is GREEN, and the fuel-gas hose cover is RED. 
This color coding aids in the prevention of mishaps that 
could lead to dangerous accidents. 


All connections for welding and cutting hoses have 
been standardized by the Compressed Gas Association. 
Letter grades A, B, C, D, and E plus the type of gas used 
correspond directly with the connections on the regula¬ 
tors. A, B, and C are the most common size connections. 
A-size is for low-flow rates; B-size for medium-flow 
rates; and C-size is for heavy-flow rates. D and E sizes 
are for large cutting and heating torches. 

When ordering connections, you must specify the 
type of gas the hose will be carrying. This is because the 
connections will be threaded different y for different 
types of gas. Fuel gases use left-hand threads, while 
oxygen uses right-hand threads. The reason for this is to 
prevent the accidental hookup of a fuel gas to a life-sup- 
port oxygen system or vice versa. 

The basic hose connection consists of a nut and 
gland. The nut has threads on the inside that match up 
with the male inlet and outlet on the torch and regulator. 
The gland slides inside the hose and is held in place by 
a ferrule that has been crimped. The nut is loose and can 
be turned by hand or a wrench to tighten the threaded 
nut onto the equipment. 

Another important item that is often overlooked are 
check valves. These inexpensive valves prevent per¬ 
sonal injuries and save valuable equipment from flash¬ 
backs. When ordering, make sure you specify the type 
of gas, connection size, and thread design. The check 
valves should be installed between the torch connection 
and the hose. 

CUTTING TORCHES 

The equipment and accessories for oxygas cutting 
are the same as for oxygas welding except that you use 
a cutting torch or a cutting attachment instead of a 
welding torch. The main difference between the cutting 
torch and the welding torch is that the cutting torch has 


4-8 










1 Figure 4411 -One piece oxygas cutting torch. 



HIGH-PRESSURE 
CUTTING OXYGEN TUBE 



•90° HEAD 


CUTTING OXYGEN 
VALVE LEVER 

t 


OXYGEN NEEDLE 
VALVE 

TORCH HANDLE 


OXYGEN HOSE 
CONNECTION 


TIP 



75° HEAD 


GAS NEEDLE 
VALVE 



PREHEATING 

* i 



GAS TUBE 

TORCH HEAD 

1_' " 


GAS HOSE 
CONNECTION 


Figure 4-12.—Cutting attachment for combination torch. 


an additional tube for high-pressure cutting oxygen.The 
flow of high-pressure oxygen is controlled from a valve 
on the handle of the cutting torch. In the standard cutting 
torch, the valve may be in the form of a trigger assembly 
like the one in lfiaure 4-TT1 On most torches, the cutting 
oxygen mechanism is designed so the cutting oxygen 
can be turned on gradually. The gradual opening of the 
cutting oxygen valve is particularly helpful in opera¬ 
tions, such as hole piercing and rivet cutting. 

Torch Body 

Most welding torches are designed so the body of 
the torch can accept either welding tips or a cutting 
attachment. This type of torch is called a combination 
torch. The advantage of this type of torch is the ease in 
changing from the welding mode to the cutting mode. 
There is no need to disconnect the hoses; you just 


unscrew the welding tip and then screw on the cutting 
attachment. The high-pressure cutting oxygen is con¬ 
trolled by a lever on the torch handle, as shown in figure 
4-12. 

Cutting Torch Tips 

As in welding, you must use the proper size cutting 
tip if quality work is to be done. The preheat flames must 
furnish just the right amount of heat, and the oxygen jet 
orifice must deliver the correct amount of oxygen at just 
the right pressure and velocity to produce a clean cut. 
All of this must be done with a minimum consumption 
of oxygen and fuel gases. Careless workers and workers 
not acquainted with the correct procedures waste both 
oxygen and fuel gas. This does not seem important when 
you are working in a shop, but if you are deployed, it 

























































becomes critical due to the long lead time between 
resupply. 

Each manufacturer makes many different types of 
cutting tips. Although the orifice arrangements and the 
tip material are much the same among the manufactur¬ 
ers, the part of the tip that fits into the torch head often 
differs in design. Because of the way the Navy pur¬ 


chases its cutting and welding equipment, there is the 
possibility of having two or three different types of 
cutting torches in your kits. Make sure that the cutting 
tips match the cutting attachment and ensure that the 
cutting attachment matches the torch body. | Fiqurj 4-131 
shows the different styles of tips, their orifice arrange¬ 
ments, and their uses. The tips and seats are designed to 


4^10 
















































































































CONDITION 

I Figure 4^14.-l -Four cutting-tip conditions. 


127.376 


produce a even flow of gas and to keep themselves as 
cool as possible. The seats must produce leakproof 
joints. If the joints leak, the preheat gases could mix 
with the cutting oxygen or escape to the atmosphere, 
resulting in poor cuts or the possibility of flashbacks. 

To make clean and economical cuts, you must 
keep the tip orifices and passages clean and free of 
burrs and slag. If the tips become dirty or 
misshapened, they should be put aside for restoration. 

I Fiqure 4^14] shows four tips: one that is repairable, 
two that need replacing, and one in good condition. 
Since it is extremely important that the sealing 
surfaces be clean and free of scratches or burrs, store 
the tips in a container that cannot scratch the seats. 
Aluminum racks, plastic racks, and wood racks or 
boxes make ideal storage containers. 

TIP MAINTENANCE.— In cutting operations, 
the stream of cutting oxygen sometimes blows slag 
and molten metal into the tip orifices which partially 
clogs them. When this happens, you should clean the 
orifices thoroughly before you use the tip again. A 
small amount of slag or metal in an orifice will 
seriously interfere with the cutting operation. You 
should follow the recommendations of the torch 
manufacturer as to the size of drill or tip cleaner to 
use for cleaning the orifices. If you do not have a tip 
cleaner or drill, you may use a piece of soft copper 
wire. Do not use twist drills, nails, or welding rods for 
cleaning tips because these items are likely to enlarge 
and distort the orifices. 

Clean the orifices of the cutting torch tip in the 
same manner as the single orifice of the welding torch 
tip. Remember: the proper technique for cleaning the 


tips is to push the cleaner straight in and out of the 
orifice. Be careful not to turn or twist the cleaning 
wire j Figure 4-151 shows a typical set of tip cleaners. 

Occasionally the cleaning of the tips causes 
enlargement and distortion of the orifices, even when 
using the proper tip cleaners. If the orifices become 
enlarged, you will get shorter and thicker preheating 
flames; in addition, the jet of cutting oxygen will 
spread, rather than leave the torch, in the form of a 
long, thin stream. If the orifices become belled for a 
short distance at the end, you can sometimes correct 
this by rubbing the tip back and forth against emery 
cloth placed on a flat surface. This action wears down 
the end of the tip where the orifices have been belled, 
thus bringing the orifices back to their original size. 
Obviously, this procedure will not work if the damage 
is great or if the belling extends more than a slight 
distance into the orifice. 

After reconditioning a tip, you may test it by lighting 
the torch and observing the preheating flames. If the 



Ml 


I Figure 4-15.^ -Tip cleaners. 






















TYPE SP 


ONE PIECE (Tip Mix) 


CUTTING 

OXYGEN 


n-rrfTT 


® 



MAPP GAS 


TYPE FS 


TWO PIECE (Torch Mix) 




zzzz Tnunin. 


(D 


CUTTING 

OXYGEN 


rrTTTT 


MIXED 

GASES 


FRONT 

SPLINES 


Figure 446.h MAPP gas cutting tips. 


flames are too short, the orifices are still partially 
blocked. If the flames snap out when you close the 
valves, the orifices are still distorted. 

If the tip seat is dirty or scaled and does not properly 
fit into the torch head, heat the tip to a dull red and 
quench it in water. This will loosen the scale and dirt 
enough so you can rub it off with a soft cloth. 


MAPP GAS CUTTING TIPS.- Four basic types 
of MAPP gas cutting tips are used: two are for use with 
standard pressures and normal cutting speeds, and two 
are for use with high pressures and high cutting speeds. 
Only the standard pressure tips, types SP and FS, will 
be covered here since they are the ones that Steelwork¬ 
ers will most likely use. SP stands for standard pressure 
and FS for fine standard. 

The SP tip Kfiq. 4-16] view A) is a one-piece standard 
pressure tip. It is used for cutting by hand, especially by 
welders who are accustomed to one-piece tips. SP tips 
are more likely to be used in situations where MAPP gas 
is replacing acetylene as the fuel gas. 

The FS tip Kfiq. 4-l6| view B) is a two-piece, fine 
spline, standard pressure tip. It is used for cutting by 
hand as well as by machine. Welders accustomed to 
two-piece cutting tips will use them in hand cutting, 
especially when MAPP gas is replacing natural gas or 
propane as the fuel gas. The FS tips will produce heavier 
preheating flames and faster starts than the SP tips; 
however, two-piece tips will not take as much thermal 
or physical abuse as one-piece tips. But in the hands of 
skilled Steelworkers, they should last as long as one- 
piece tips. 

Recommended tip sizes and gas pressures for use in 
cutting different thicknesses of steel using MAPP gas as 
a fuel are given in ltable 4-il 


I Table 44.1 -Recommended MAPP Gas Tip Sizes and Oxyfuel Pressures 


Material Thickness 
inches 

(millimeters) 

Cutting Up 

Number 

Oxygen Cutting 
Pressure 
(psig) 

MAPP Gas 

Pressure 

(psig) 

1/8 (3) 

75 

40-50 

2-10 

3/16 (4.8) 

72 



1/4 (6.4) 

68 



1/2 (12.7) 

61 



3/4(19) 

56 



1 (25.4) 




1 1/4(31.8) 

54 

50-60 


1 1/2 (38) 




2 (50.8) 

52 



2 1/2 (63.5) 

48 


6-10 

JiZ6) 




4(101) 

46 

60-70 

























































OXYGAS CUTTING OPERATIONS 

Before you begin a cutting operation with an oxygas 
cutting torch, make a thorough inspection of the area. 
Ensure that there are no combustible materials in the 
area that could be ignited by the sparks or slag produced 
by the cutting operation. If you are burning into a wall, 
inspect the opposite side of the wall, and post a fire 
watch as required. 

EQUIPMENT SETUP 

Setting up the oxygas equipment and preparing for 
cutting must be done carefully and systematically to 
avoid costly mistakes. To ensure your own safety, as 
well as the safety of your coworkers and equipment, 
make sure the following steps are taken before any 
attempt is made to light the torch: 

• Secure the cylinders so they cannot be accidently 
knocked over. A good way to do this is to either put them 
in a corner or next to a vertical column and then secure 
them with a piece of line. After securing the cylinders, 
remove the protective caps. Cylinders should never be 
secured to a structural member of a building that is a 
current conductor. 

• Standing to one side, crack each cylinder valve 
slightly and then immediately close the valve again. This 
blows any dirt or other foreign matter out of the cylinder 
valve nozzle. Do not bleed fuel gas into a confined area 
because it may ignite. Ensure the valves are closed and 
wipe the connections with a clean cloth. 

• Connect the fuel-gas regulator to the fuel-gas 
cylinder and the oxygen regulator to the oxygen 
cylinder. Using a gang wrench, snug the connection nuts 
sufficiently to avoid leaks. 

• Back off the regulator screws to prevent damage 
to the regulators and gauges and open the cylinder 
valves slowly. Open the fuel-gas valve only one-half 
turn and the oxygen valve all the way. Some fuel-gas 
cylinders have a handwheel for opening the fuel-gas 
valve while others require the use of a gang wrench or 
T-handle wrench. Leave the wrench in place while the 
cylinder is in use so the fuel-gas bottle can be turned off 
quickly in an emergency. Read the high-pressure gauge 
to check the contents in each cylinder. 

• Connect the RED hose to the fuel-gas regulator 
and theGREEN hose to the oxygen regulator. Notice the 
left-hand threads on the fuel-gas connection. 

• To blow out the oxygen hose, turn the regulator 
screw in (clockwise) and adjust the pressure between 2 


and 5 psig. After the hose has been purged, turn the 
screw back out again (counterclockwise) to shutoff the 
oxygen. Do the same for the fuel-gas hose, but do it 
ONLY in a well-ventilated place that is free from sparks, 
flames, or other possible sources of ignition. 

• Connect the hoses to the torch. The RED 
(fuel-gas) hose is connected to the connection gland 
with the needle valve marked "FUEL."The GREEN 
(oxygen) hose is connected to the connection gland with 
the needle valve marked "OXY." 

• With the torch valves closed, turn both regulator 
screws clockwise to test the hose connections for leaks. 
If none are found, turn the regulator screws 
counterclockwise and drain the hose by opening the 
torch valves. 

• Select the correct cutting tip and install it in the 
cutting torch head. Tighten the assembly by hand, and 
then tighten with your gang wrench. 

• Adjust the working pressures. The fuel-gas 
pressure is adjusted by opening the torch needle valve 
and turning the fuel-gas regulator screw clockwise. 
Adjust the regulator to the working pressure needed for 
the particular tip size, and then close the torch needle 
valve. To adjust MAPP gas, you should set the gauge 
pressure with the torch valves closed. To adjust the 
oxygen working pressure, you should open the oxygen 
torch needle valve and proceed in the same manner as 
in adjusting the fuel-gas pressure. 

In lighting the torch and adjusting the flame, always 
follow the manufacturer's directions for the particular 
model of torch being used. This is necessary because the 
procedure varies somewhat with different types of 
torches and, in some cases, even with different models 
made by the same manufacturer. 

In general, the procedure used for lighting a torch is 
to first open the torch oxygen needle valve a small 
amount and the torch fuel-gas needle valve slightly 
more, depending upon the type of torch. The mixture of 
oxygen and fuel gas coming from the torch tip is then 
lighted by means of a spark igniter or stationary pilot 
flame. 

CAUTION 

NEVER use matches to light the torch; their 
length requires bringing the hand too close to 
the tip. Accumulated gas may envelop the hand 
and, upon igniting, result in a severe burn. Also, 
never light the torch from hot metal. 


4^13 




ABC 

CARBURIZING NEUTRAL OXIDIZING 

FLAME FLAME FLAME 


Figure 447j -MAPP-qas flames. 


After checking the fuel-gas adjustment, you can 
adjust the oxygas flame to obtain the desired charac¬ 
teristics for the work at hand, by further manipulating 
the oxygen and fuel-gas needle valves according to the 
torch manufacturer's direction. 

There are three types of gas flames commonly used 
for all oxygas processes. They are carburizing, neutral, 
and oxidizing. To ensure proper flame adjustment, you 
should know the characteristics of each of these three 
types of flam j. Figure 4-1 7 shows how the three differ¬ 
ent flames look when using MAPP gas as the fuel. 

A pure fuel-gas flame is long and bushy and has a 
yellowish color. It takes the oxygen it needs for combus¬ 
tion from the surrounding air. The oxygen available is 
not sufficient enough to burn the fuel gas completely; 
therefore, the flame is smokey and consists of soot. This 
flame is not suitable for use. You need to increase the 
amount of oxygen by opening the oxygen needle valve 
until the flame takes on a bluish white color, with a 
bright inner cone surrounded by a flame envelope of a 
darker hue. It is the inner cone that develops the required 
operating temperature. 

CARBURIZING FLAME.— The carburizing 
flame always shows distinct colors; the inner cone is 
bluish white, the intermediate cone is white, the outer 
envelope flame is light blue, and the feather at the tip of 
the inner cone is greenish. The length of the feather can 
be used as a basis for judging the degree of carburiza¬ 
tion. The highly carburizing flame is longer with yellow 
or white feathers on the inner cone, while the slightly 
carburizing flame has a shorter feather on the inner cone 
and becomes more white. The temperature of carburiz¬ 
ing flames is about 5400°F. 


Strongly carburizing flames are not used in cutting 
low-carbon steels because the additional carbon they 
add causes embrittlement and hardness. These flames 
are ideal for cutting cast iron because the additional 
carbon poses no problems and the flame adds more heat 
to the metal because of its size. 

Slightly carburizing flames are ideal for cutting 
steels and other ferrous metals that produce a large 
amount of slag. Although a neutral flame is best for most 
cutting, a slightly carburizing flame is ideal for produc¬ 
ing a lot of heat down inside the kerf. It makes fairly 
smooth cuts and reduces the amount of slag clinging to 
the bottom of the cut. 

NEUTRAL FLAME.— The most common preheat 
flame for oxygas cutting is the neutral flame. When you 
increase the oxygen, the carburizing flame becomes 
neutral. The feather will disappear from the inner flame 
cone and all that will be left is the dark blue inner flame 
and the lighter blue outer cone. The temperature is about 
5600°F. 

The neutral flame will not oxidize or add carbon to 
the metal you are cutting. In actuality, a neutral flame 
acts like the inert gases that are used in TIG and MIG 
welding to protect the weld from the atmosphere. When 
you hold a neutral preheat flame on one spot on the metal 
until it melts, the molten puddle that forms looks clear 
and lies very quietly under the flame. 

OXIDIZING FLAME.— When you add a little 
more oxygen to the preheat flame, it will quickly be¬ 
come shorter. The flame will start to neck down at the 
base, next to the flame ports. The inner flame cone 
changes from dark blue to light blue. Oxidizing flames 
are much easier to look at because they are less radiant 
than neutral flames. The temperature is about 6000°F. 

The oxidizing flame is rarely used for conventional 
cutting because it produces excessive slag and does not 
leave square-cut edges. Oxidizing flames are used in 
conjunction with cutting machines that have a high-low 
oxygen valve. The machine starts the cut with a oxidiz¬ 
ing flame then automatically reverts to a neutral flame. 
The oxidizing flame gives you fast starts when using 
high-speed cutting machines and is ideal for piercing 
holes in plate. Highly oxidizing flames are only used in 
cutting metal underwater where the only source of oxy¬ 
gen for the torch is supplied from the surface. 

CUTTING MILD-CARBON STEEL 

To cut mild-carbon steel with the oxygas cutting 
torch, you should adjust the preheating flames to neutral. 













CUTTING OXYGEN 



PREHEAT TO BRIGHT RED 
BEFORE STARTING TO CUT 


Figure 448.1 -Position of torch tip for starting a cut. 


Hold the torch perpendicular to the work, with the inner 
cones of the preheating flames about 1/16 inch above 
the end of the line to be cut |(fiq. 4-181 Hold the torch 
in this position until the spot you are heating is a bright 
red. Open the cutting oxygen valve slowly but steadily 
by pressing down on the cutting valve lever. 

When the cut is started correctly, a shower of sparks 
will fall from the opposite side of the work, indicating 
that the flame has pierced the metal. Move the cutting 
torch forward along the line just fast enough for the 
flame to continue to penetrate the work completely. If 
you have made the cut properly, you will get a clean, 
narrow cut that looks almost like it was made by a saw. 
When cutting round bars or heavy sections, you can save 
preheating time by raising a small burr with a chisel 
where the cut is to begin. This small raised portion will 
heat quickly, allowing you to start cutting immediately. 

Once you start the cut, you should move the torch 
slowly along the cutting mark or guide. As you move 
the torch along, watch the cut so you can tell how it is 
progressing. Adjust the torch as necessary. You must 
move the torch at the correct speed, not too fast and not 
too slow. If you go too slowly, the preheating flame 
melts the top edges along the cut and could weld them 
back together again. If you go too rapidly, the flame will 
not penetrate completely, as shown ir l figure 4-l9] When 
this happens, sparks and slag will blow back towards 
you. If you have to restart the cut, make sure there is no 
slag on the opposite side. 


H 


OXYGEN 


PREHEATING 

MIXTURE 



I Figure 449] -The effect of moving a cutting torch too rapidly 
across the work. 


t 



3 



I Figure OH -Recommended procedure for cutting thin steel. 
Notice that the two preheat flames are in line with the cut 
(kerf). 


Cutting Thin Steel 

When cutting steel 1/8 inch or less in thickness, use 
the smallest cutting tip available. In addition, point the 
tip in the direction the torch is traveling. By tilting the 
tip, you give the preheating flames a chance to heat the 
metal ahead of the oxygen jet, as shown ir l figure 4^201 
If you hold the tip perpendicular to the surface, you 
decrease the amount of preheated metal and the adjacent 
metal could cool the cut enough to prevent smooth 
cutting action. Many Steelworkers actually rest the edge 
of the tip on the metal during this process. If you use this 
method, be careful to keep the end of the preheating 
flame inner cone just above the metal. 

































































Figure 4-21 -Progress of a cut in thick steel. A. Preheat flames are 1/16 to 1/8 inch from the metal surface. Hold the torch in this spot 
until the metal becomes cherry red. B. Move the torch slowly to maintain the rapid oxidation, even though the cut is only partially 
through the metal. C. The cut is made through the entire thickness; the bottom of the kerf lags behind the top edge slightly. 


Cutting Thick Steel 

Steel, that is greater than 1/8 inch thick, can be cut 
by holding the torch so the tip is almost vertical to the 
surface of the metal. If you are right-handed, one method 
to cut steel is to start at the edge of the plate and move 
from right to left. Left-handed people tend to cut left to 
right. Either direction is correct and you may cut in the 
direction that is most comfortable for vou. l Figure 4-211 
shows the progress of a cut in thick steel. 

After heating the edge of the steel to a dull cherry 
red, open the oxygen jet all the way by pressing on the 
cutting lever. As soon as the cutting action starts, move 
the torch tip at a even rate. Avoid unsteady movement 
of the torch to prevent irregular cuts and premature 
stopping of the cutting action. 

To start a cut quicker in thick plate, you should start 
at the edge of the metal with the torch angled in the 
opposite direction of travel. When the edge starts to cut, 
bring the torch to a vertical position to complete the cut 
through the total thickness of the metal. As soon as the 
cut is through the metal, start moving the torch in the 
direction of travel. 

Two other methods for starting cuts are used. I n the 
first method, you nick the edge of the metal with a cold 
chisel at the point where the cut is to start. The sharp 
edges of the metal upset by the chisel will preheat and 
oxidize rapidly under the cutting torch, allowing you to 


start the cut without preheating the entire edge of the 
plate. In the second method, you place an iron filler rod 
at the edge of a thick plate. As you apply the preheat 
flames to the edge of the plate, the filler rod rapidly 
reaches the cherry red temperature. At this point, turn 
the cutting oxygen on and the rod will oxidize and cause 
the thicker plate to start oxidizing. 

CUTTING CAST IRON 

It is more difficult to cut cast iron than steel because 
the iron oxides in cast iron melt at a higher temperature 
than the cast iron itself. Before you cut cast iron, it is 
best to preheat the whole casting to prevent stress frac¬ 
tures. Do not heat thecasting to a temperature that is too 
high, as this will oxidize the surface and make cutting 


Trtruxcxir 


A. TORCH MOVEMENT FOR CUTTING 
THIN SECTIONS OF CAST IRON 



B. TORCH MOVEMENT FOR CUTTING 
HEAVY SECTIONS OF CAST IRON 


I Figure 4-22j -Torch movements for cutting cast iron. 

























ANGLE l" (2.5cm) 



II Figure ^fl -Typical gouging operation using a low-velocity 
cutting jet for better control of depth and width. 


more difficult. A preheat temperature of about 500°F is 
normally satisfactory. 

When cutting cast iron, adjust the preheating flame 
of the torch to a carburizing flame. This prevents the 
formation of oxides on the surface and provides better 
preheat. The cast-iron kerf is always wider than a steel 
kerf due to the presence of oxides and the torch move¬ 
ment. The torch movement is similar to scribing semi¬ 
circles along the cutting line Kfiq. 4-221 . As the metal 
becomes molten, trigger the cutting oxygen and use its 
force to jet the molten metal out of the kerf. Repeat this 
action until the cut is complete. 

Because of the difficulty in cutting cast iron with 
the usual oxygas cutting torch, other methods of cut¬ 
ting were developed. These include the oxygen lance, 
carbon-arc powder, inert-gas cutting, and plasma-arc 
methods. 

GOUGING MILD STEEL 

Cutting curved grooves on the edge or surface of a 
plate and removing faulty welds for rewelding are addi¬ 
tional uses for the cutting torch. The gist of groove 
cutting or gouging is based on the use of a large orifice, 
low-velocity jet of oxygen instead of a high-velocity jet. 
The low-velocity jet oxidizes the surface metal only and 
gives better control for more accurate gouging. By 
varying the travel speed, oxygen pressure, and the angle 
between the tip and plate, you can make a variety of 
gouge contours. 

A gouging tip usually has five or six preheat orifices 
that provide a more even preheat distribution. Automatic 
machines can cut grooves to exact depths, remove bad 



I Figure 4^ -Usinq angle iron to cut bevels on steel plate. 


spots, and rapidly prepare metal edges for welding. 

I Figure 4-23l shows a typical gouging operation. 

If the gouging cut is not started properly, it is possi¬ 
ble to cut accidently through the entire thickness of the 
plate. If you cut too shallow, you can cause the operation 
to stop. The travel speed of the torch along the gouge 
line is important. Moving too fast creates a narrow, 
shallow gouge and moving too slow creates the oppo¬ 
site; a deep, wide gouge. 

BEVELING MILD STEEL 

Frequently, you must cut bevels on plate or pipe to 
form joints for welding. The flame must actually cut 
through 2.8 i nches of metal to make a bevel cut of 45 
degrees on a 2-inch steel plate. You must take this into 
consideration when selecting the tip and adjusting the 
pressures. You use more pressure and less speed for a 
bevel cut than for a straight cut. 

When bevel cutting, you adjust the tip so the pre¬ 
heating orifices straddle the cut. Apiece of l-inch angle 
iron, with the angle up, makes an excellent guide for 
beveling straight edges. To keep the angle iron in place 
while cutting, you should use a heavy piece of scrap, or 
tack-weld the angle to the plate being cut. Move the 
torch along this guide, as shown ir l figure 4^241 

ELECTRIC DRIVE CUTTING 
TORCH CARRIAGE 

An improvement over mechanical guides is an elec¬ 
tric motor-driven cutting torch carriage. The speed of 
the motor can be varied allowing the welder to cut to 
dimensions and to cut at a specific speed. A typical 
motor driven carriage has four wheels: one driven by a 
reduction gear, two on swivels (castor style), and one 
freewheeling. The torch is mounted on the side of the 
carriage and is adjusted up and down by a gear and rack 


4-17 
























127.383 

1 Figure 4^25.1 —Electric motor-driven carriage being used to cut a circle in steel plate. 


The rack is a part of the special torch. The torch also can 
be tilted for bevel cuts. This machine comes with a 
straight two-groove track and has a radial bar for use in 
cutting circles and arcs. A motor-driven cutting torch 
cutting a circle is shown in | figure 4-25.1 The carriage is 



127.384 

Figure4-263 -Electric motor-driven carriage being used 
on straight track to cut a beveled edge on steel plate 


equipped with an off-and-on switch, a reversing 
switch, a clutch, and a speed-adjusting dial that is 
calibrated in feet per minute. 

I Figure 4-26l shows an electric drive carriage on a 
straight track being used for plate beveling. The 
operator must ensure that the electric cord and gas 
hoses do not become entangled on anything during the 
cutting operation. The best way to check for hose, 
electric cord, and torch clearance is to freewheel the 
carriage the full length of the track by hand. 

You will find that the torch carriage is a valuable 
asset during deployment. This is especially true if 
your shop is called upon to produce a number of 
identical parts in quantity. Such an assignment might 
involve the fabrication of a large supply of handhole 
covers for runway fixtures, or another assignment 
might be the production of a large quantity of thick 
base plates for vertical columns. When using the torch 
carriage, you should lay the track in a straight line 
along a line parallel to the edge of the plate you are 
going to cut. Next, you light the torch and adjust the 
flame for the metal you are cutting. Move the carriage 
so the torch flame preheats the edge of the plate and 
then open the cutting oxygen valve and turn on the 
carriage motor. The machine begins moving along the 
track and continues to cut automatically until the end 
of the cut is reached. When the cut is complete, 


nn 
















Figure 4-27.—Cutting pipe with an oxygas cutting torch. 

you should do the following: promptly turn off the 
cutting oxygen, turn off the current, and extinguish the 
flame-in that order. The cutting speed depends upon 
the thickness of the steel being cut e 

CUTTING AND BEVELING PIPE 

Pipe cutting with a cutting torch requires a steady 
hand to obtain a good bevel cut that is smooth and true. 
Do not attempt to cut and bevel a heavy pipe in one 
operation until you have developed considerable skill. 
First, you should cut the pipe off square, and ensure all 
the si ag i s removed from the i nsi de of the pi pe. N ext, 
you should bevel the pipe. This procedure produces a 
cleaner and better job; it is ideal for use by an inexperi¬ 
enced Steelworker. 

When cutting a piece of pipe, you should keep the 
torch pointed toward the center line of the pipe. Start the 
cut at the top and cut down one side. Then begin at the 
top again and cut down the other side, finishing at the 
bottom of the pipe. This procedure is shown in lfiqurel 
E22 

When you makeT and Y fittings from pipe, the 
cutting torch is a valuable tool. The usual procedure for 
fabricating pipe fittings is to develop a pattern like the 
one shown in i figure 4-28 J view A-l. 

After you develop the pattern, wrap it around the 
pipe, as shown ir l figure 4-~28] view A-2. Be sure to leave 
enough material so the ends overlap. Trace around the 
pattern with soapstone or a scribe. It is a good idea to 
mark the outline with a prick punch at 1/4-inch intervals. 
During the cutting procedure, as the metal is heated, the 
punch marks stand out and make it easier to follow the 
line of cut. Place the punch marks so the cutting action 
will remove them. If punch marks are left on the pipe, 
they could provide notches from which cracking may 
Start, 

An experienced Steelworker can cut and bevel pipe 
at a 45-degree angle in a single operation. A person with 
little cutting experience should do the job in two steps. 



In that case, the first step involves cutting the pipe at a 
90-degree angle. I n the second step, you bevel the edge 
of the cut to a 45-degree angle. With the two-step 
procedure, you must mark an additional line on the pipe. 
This second line follows the contour of the line traced 
around the pattern, but it is drawn away from the original 
pattern line at a distance equal to the thickness of the 
pipe wall. The first (90-degree) cut in the two-step 
procedure is made along the second line. The second 
(45-degree) cut is made along the original pattern line. 
The primary disadvantage of the two-step procedure is 
it is time consuming and uneconomical in oxygen and 
gas consumption. 

The one-step method of cutting and beveling pipe 
is not difficult, but it does require a steady hand and a 




























































great deal of experience to turn out a first-class job. An 
example of this method for fabricating a T is shown in 
I figure 4-29 . View A o f figure 4 : 2l 3 outlines the step-by- 
step procedures for fabricating the branch; view B 
shows the steps for preparing the main section of the T; 
and view C shows the assembled T, tack-welded and 
ready for final welding. 

Step 3 of view A shows the procedure for cutting the 
miter on the branch. You should begin the cut at the end 
of the pipe and work around until one half of one side is 
cut. The torch is at a 45-degree angle to the surface of 
the pipe along the line of cut. While the tip is at a 
45-degree angle, you should move the torch steadily 
forward, and at the same ti me, swi ng the butt of the torch 
upward through an arc. This torch manipulation is nec¬ 
essary to keep the cut progressing in the proper direction 
with a bevel of 45 degrees at all points on the miter. Cut 
the second portion of the miter in the same reamer as 
the first. 

The torch manipulation necessary for cutting the 
run o f theT is shown in Steps 3 and 4 of view B in lfiqurel 
14-28J Step 3 shows the torch angle for the starting cut 
and Step 4 shows the cut at the lowest point on the pipe. 
Here you change the angle to get around the sharp curve 
and start the cut in an upward direction. The completed 
cut for the run is shown in Step 5 Kfig. 4-28,1 view B). 

Before final assembly and tack welding of any of 
the parts of a fabricated fitting, you must clean the slag 
from the inner pipe wall and check the fit of the joint. 
The bevels must be smooth and have complete fusion 
when you weld the joint. 

PIERCING HOLES 

The cutting torch is a valuable tool for piercing 
holes in steel plate ! Figure 4-29l shows the steps you 
should use to pierce holes in steel plate. First, lay the 


12 3 4 



MELTING BEGINS RELEASE OSCILLATE 
OXYGEN* TIP 
OSCILLATE 
TIP 



LOWER TIP, 
ENLARGE 
HOLE TO 
SIZE 


I Figure 4-29l -Piercinq a hole with an oxygas cutting torch. 


plate out on firebricks or other suitable material so the 
flame does not damage anything when it burns through 
the plate. Next, hold the torch over the hole location with 
the tips of the inner cone of the preheating flames about 
1/4 inch above the surface of the plate. Continue to hold 
the torch in this position until a small spot has been 
heated to a bright red. Then open the cutting oxygen 
valve gradually, and at the same time, raise the nozzle 
slightly away from the plate. As you start raising the 
torch and opening the oxygen valve, rotate the torch 
with a slow spiral motion. This causes the molten slag 
to be blown out of the hole. The hot slag may fly around, 
so BE SURE that your goggles are tightly fitted to your 
face, and avoid placing your head directly above the cut. 

If you need a larger hole, outline the edge of the hole 
with a piece of soapstone, and follow the procedure 
indicated above. Begin the cut from the hole you pierced 
by moving the preheating flames to the normal distance 
from the plate and follow the line drawn on the plate. 
Round holes are made easily by using a cutting torch 
with a radius bar attachment. 

CUTTING RIVETS 

The cutting torch is an excellent tool for removing 
rivets from structures to be disassembled. Rivet cutting 
procedures are shown in i figure 4-~30l The basic method 
is to heat the head of the rivet to cutting temperature by 
using the preheating flames of the cutting torch. When 
the rivet head is at the proper temperature, turn on the 
oxygen and wash it off. The remaining portion of the 
rivet can then be punched out with light hammer blows. 
The step-by-step procedure is as follows: 

1. Use the size of tip and the oxygen pressure 
required for the size and type of rivet you are going to 
cut. 


2. Heat a spot on the rivet head until it is bright red. 

3. Move the tip to a position parallel with the 
surface of the plate and turn on the cutting oxygen 
slowly. 

4. Cut a slot in the rivet head like the screwdriver 
slot in a roundhead screw. When the cut nears the plate, 
draw the nozzle back at least 11/2 inches from the rivet 
so you do not cut through the plate. 

5. When cutting the slot through to the plate, you 
should swing the tip through a small arc. This slices half 
of the rivet head off. 

6. Swing the tip in an arc in the other direction to 
slice the other half of the rivet head off. 


4-20 





































I Figure 4-30] -Usinq a cutting torch to remove a rivet head, 


By the time the slot has been cut, the rest of the rivet 
head is at cutting temperature. J ust before you get 
through the slot, draw the torch tip back 1 1/2 inches to 
allow the cutting oxygen to scatter slightly. This keeps 
the torch from breaking through the layer of scale that 
is always present between the rivet head and the plate. 
It allows you to cut the head of the rivet off without 
damaging the surface of the plate. If you do not draw 
the tip away, you could cut through the scale and into 
the plate. 

A low-velocity cutting tip is best for cutting button- 
head rivets and for removing countersunk rivets. A 
low-velocity cutting tip has a cutting oxygen orifice with 
a large diameter. Above this orifice are three preheating 
orifices. Always place a low-velocity cutting tip in the 
torch so the heating orifices are above the cutting orifice 
when the torch is held in the rivet cutting position. 

CUTTING WIRE ROPE 

You can use a cutting torch to cut wire rope. Wire 
rope consists of many strands, and since these strands 
do not form one solid piece of metal, you could experi¬ 
ence difficulty in making the cut. To prevent the wire 


rope strands from unlaying during cutting, seize the wire 
rope on each side of the place where you intend to cut. 

Adjust the torch to a neutral flame and make the cut 
between the seizings. If the wire rope is going to go 
through sheaves, then you should fuse the strand wires 
together and point the end. This makes reeving the block 
much easier, particularly when you are working with a 
large-diameter wire rope and when reeving blocks that 
are close together. To fuse and point wire rope, adjust 
the torch to a neutral flame; then close the oxygen valve 
until you get a carburizing flame. With proper torch 
manipulation, fuse the wires together and point the wire 
rope at the same time. 

Wire rope is lubricated during fabrication and is 
lubricated routinely during its service life. Ensure that 
all excess lubricant is wiped off the wire rope before you 
begin to cut it with the oxygas torch. 

CUTTING ON CONTAINERS 

Never perform cutting or welding on containers that 
have held a flammable substance until they have been 
cleaned thoroughly and safeguarded. Cutting, welding, 
or other work involving heat or sparks on used barrels, 


























drums, tanks, or other containers is extremely dangerous 
and could lead to property damage or loss of life. 

Whenever available, use steam to remove materials 
that are easily volatile. Washing the containers with a 
strong solution of caustic soda or a similar chemical will 
remove heavier oils. 

Even after thorough cleansing, the container should 
be further safeguarded by falling it with water before any 
cutting, welding, or other hot work is done. In almost 
every situation, it is possible to position the container so 
it can be kept filled with water while cutting or other hot 
work is being done. Always ensure there is a vent or 
opening in the container for the release of the heated 
vapor inside the container. This can be done by opening 
the bung, handhole, or other fitting that is above water 
level. 

When it is practical to fill the container with water, 
you also should use carbon dioxide or nitrogen in the 
vessel for added protection. From time to time, examine 
the gas content of the container to ensure the concentra¬ 
tion of carbon dioxide or nitrogen is high enough to 
prevent a flammable or explosive mixture. The air-gas 
mixture inside any container can be tested with a suit¬ 
able gas detector. 

The carbon dioxide concentration should beat least 
50 percent of the air space inside the container, and 80 
percent or more when the presence of hydrogen or 
carbon monoxide is detected. When using nitrogen, you 
must ensure the concentration is at least 10 percent 
higher than that specified for carbon dioxide. 

Carbon dioxide or nitrogen is used in apparently 
clean containers because there may still be traces of oil 
or grease under the seams, even though the vessel was 
cleaned and flushed with a caustic soda solution. The 
heat from the cutting or welding operation could cause 
the trapped oil or grease to release flammable vapors 
that form an explosive mixture inside the container. 

A metal part that is suspiciously light maybe hollow 
inside; therefore, you should vent the part by drilling a 
hole in it before heating. Remember: air or any other gas 
that is confined inside a hollow part will expand when 
heated. The internal pressure created may be enough to 
cause the part to burst. Before you do any hot work, take 
every possible precaution to vent the air confined in 
jacketed vessels, tanks, or containers. 



POOR DRAG LINES 

(LONG. EXCESSIVELY CURVED) 


C 



LOSS OF CUT 




GOOD TOP EDGES 
(SHARP) 



POOR TOP EDGES 
(ROUNDED) 


Figure 4-31.—Effects of correct and incorrect cutting procedures. 


oxygas cut. In general, the quality of an oxygas cut is 
judged by four characteristics: 

1. The shape and length of the draglines 

2. The smoothness of the sides 

3. The sharpness of the top edges 

4. The amount of slag adhering to the metal 

DRAG LINES 


J UDGING CUTTING QUALITY 

To know how good of a cutting job you are doing, 
you must understand know what constitutes a good 


Drag lines are line markings that show on the sur¬ 
face of the cut. Good drag lines are almost straight up 
and down, as shown in i figure 4-311 view A. Poor drag 














































lines, as shown in | figure 4-311 view B, are long and 
irregular or curved excessively. Drag lines of this type 
indicate a poor cutting procedure that could result in the 
loss of the cut [fig 4-31,1 views B and C). Draglines are 
the best single indication of the quality of the cut made 
with an oxygas torch. When the draglines are short and 
almost vertical, the sides smooth, and the top edges 
sharp, you can be assured that the slag conditions are 
satisfactory. 


SIDE SMOOTHNESS 

A satisfactory oxygas cut shows smooth sides. A 
grooved, fluted, or ragged cut surface is a sign of poor 
quaility. 


TOP EDGE SHARPNESS 

The top edges resulting from an oxygas cut should 
be sharp and square l(fTa 4-31J view D). Rounded top 
edges, such as those shown in view E o fl figure 4-H] are 
not satisfactory. The melting of the top edges may result 
from incorrect preheating procedures or from moving 
the torch too slowly. 


SLAG CONDITIONS 

An oxygas cut is not satisfactory when slag adheres 
so tightly to the metal that it is difficult to remove. 


SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 

In all cutting operations, you must ensure that hot 
slag does not come in contact with combustible material. 
Globules of hot slag can roll along the deck for long 
distances. Do not cut within 30 to 40 feet of unprotected 
combustible materials. If you cannot remove the com¬ 
bustible materials, cover them with sheet metal or other 
flameproof guards. Keep the fuel gas and oxygen cylin¬ 
ders far enough away from the work so hot slag does not 
fall on the cylinders or hoses. 

Many of the safety precautions discussed in chap¬ 
ters 5 through 8 of this manual apply to cutting as well 
as to welding. Be sure you are completely familiar with 
all the appropriate safety precautions before attempting 
oxygas cutting operations. 


BACKFIRE AND FLASHBACK 

Improper operation of the oxygas torch can cause 
the flame to go out with a loud snap or pop. This is called 
a “backfire." Close the torch valves, check the connec¬ 
tions, and review your operational techniques before 
relighting the torch. You may have caused the backfire 
by touching the tip against the work, by overheating the 
tip, or by operating the torch with incorrect gas pres¬ 
sures. A backfire also may be caused by a loose tip or 
head or by dirt on the seat. 

A flashback occurs when the flame burns back 
inside the torch, usually with a shrill hissing or squealing 
noise. You should close the torch oxygen valve that 
controls the flame to stop the flashback at once. Then 
you should close the gas valve and the oxygen and gas 
regulators. Be sure you allow the torch to cool before 
relighting it. Also, blow oxygen through the cutting tip 
for a few seconds to clear out soot that may have 
accumulated in the passages. Flashbacks may extend 
back intothehoseor regulators. Flashbacks indicate that 
something is wrong, either with the torch or with the 
way it is being operated. Every flashback should be 
investigated to determine its cause before the torch is 
relighted. A clogged orifice or incorrect oxygen and gas 
pressures are often responsible. Avoid using gas pres¬ 
sures higher than those recommended by the manufac¬ 
turer. 

CYLINDERS 

Gas cylinders are made of high-quality steel. High- 
-pressure gases, such as oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and 
compressed air, are stored in cylinders of seamless 
construction. Only nonshatterable high-pressure gas 
cylinders may be used by ships or activities operating 
outside the continental United States. Cylinders for low- 
pressure gases, such as acetylene, may be welded or 
brazed. Cylinders are carefully tested, either by the 
factory or by a designated processing station, at pres¬ 
sures above the maximum permissible charging pres¬ 
sure. 

Identification of Cylinders 

Color warnings provide an effective means for 
marking physical hazards and for indicating the location 
of safety equipment. Uniform colors are used for mark¬ 
ing compressed-gas cylinders, pipelines carrying haz¬ 
ardous materials, and fire protection equipment. 

Five classes of material have been selected to rep¬ 
resent the general hazards for dangerous materials, 












Table 4-2.-I -Standard Colors 


Class 

Standard Color 

Class of Material 

a 

Ydlow, No. 13655 

FLAMMABLE MATERIALS. All materials known ordinarily as 
flammables or combustibles. Of the chromatic colors, it has the highest 
coefficient of reflection under white light and can be recognized under the 
poorest conditions of illumination. 

b 

Brown, No. 10080 

TOXIC AND POISONOUS MATERIALS. All materials extremely 
hazardous to life or health under normal conditions as toxics or poisons. 

c 

Blue, No. 15102 

ANESTHETICS AND HARMFUL MATERIALS. AH materials 
productive of anesthetic vapors and all liquid chemicals and compounds 
hazardous to life and property but not normally productive of dangerous 
quantities of fumes or vapors. 

d 

Green, No. 14260 

OXIDIZING MATERIALS. All materials which readily furnish oxygen for 
combustion and fire producers which react explosively or with the evolution 
of heat in contact with many other materials. 

e 

Gray, No. 16187 

PHYSICALLY DANGEROUS MATERIALS. All materials, not dangerous 
in themselves, which are asphyxiating in confined areas or which are 
generally handled in a dangerous physical state of pressure or temperature. 

f 

Red, No. 11105 

FIRE PROTECTION MATERIALS. All materials provided in piping 
systems or in compressed-gas cylinders exclusively for use in fire 
protection. 


TITLE 

LOCATION ON CYLINDER 

TOP A 

BAND B 

BAND C 

BODY 

ACETYLENE 

YELLOW 

YELLOW 

YELLOW 

YELLOW 

ARGON, OIL-FREE 

GRAY 

WHITE 

GRAY 

GRAY 

CARBON DIOXIDE 

GRAY 

GRAY 

GRAY 

GRAY 

CARBON DIOXIDE (Fire only) 

RED 

RED 

RED 

RED 

HELIUM, OIL-TOLERANT 

GRAY 

ORANGE 

GRAY 

GRAY 

METHYLE ACETYLENE PROPADIENE 
(MAPP) MIXTURE 

YELLOW 

ORANGE 

YELLOW 

YELLOW 

OXYGEN 

GREEN 

GREEN 

GREEN 

GREEN 


BAND B BAND C BODY 

t °p a j / * 



OSHA DECAL CONTENT TITLE 


1 Figure 4-327-l Titles and color codes for compressed-gas cylinders. 


4-24 





























while a sixth class has been reserved for fire protection 
equipment. A standard color has be en chosen to represent 
each of these cl asses and is shown in i table 4-21 

Since you work with fuel gas and oxygen, you must 
become familiar with the colors of the cylinders in which 
these gases are contained. The fuel-gas cylinder is yellow, 
and the oxygen cylinder is green. 

In addition to color coding, the exact identification of 
the material contained in a compressed-gas cylinder must 
be indicated by a written title that appears in two 
locations-diametrically opposite and parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the cylinder. Cylinders, having a 
background color of yellow, orange, or buff have the title 
painted black Cylinders, having a background color of red, 
brown, black, blue, gray, or green, have the title painted 
white. 

COLOR WARNINGS— The appearance on the 
body, top, or as a band(s) on compressed-gas cylinders of 
the six colors specified should provide a warning of danger 
from the hazard involved. 

CYLINDER COLOR BANDS.- Cylinder color 
bands appear upon the cylinder body and serve as color 
warnings when they are yellow, brown, blue, green, or 
gray. The bands also provide color combinations to 
separate and distinguish cylinders for convenience in 
handling, storage, and shipping. Color bands for 
segregation purposes will not be specified for new 
materials not presently covered by MIL-STD-101B. 

DECALS— Two decals may be applied on the 
shoulder of each cylinder. They should be diametrically 
opposite and at right angles to the titles. They should 
indicate the name of the gas, precautions for handling, and 
use. A background color corresponding to the primary 
warning color of the contents should be used. 

SHATTERPROOF CYLINDERS.- A shatter¬ 
proof cylinder should be stenciled with the phrase "NON- 
SHAT" longitudinally 90 degrees from the titles. Letters 
must be black or white and approximately 1 inch in size. 

SERVICE OWNERSHIP.- On cylinders owned 
by or procured for the Department of Defense, the 
bottom and the lower portion of the cylinder body 
opposite the valve end may be used for service 
ownership titles. 

The six colors identified in i table 4-2l are used on the 
body and top of, or as a band on, a compressed-gas cylinder 
to serve as a warning of the hazard involved in handling 
the type of materi al contai ned i n the cyl i nder. 

I Figure 4-32 I shows titles and color codes for 
compressed-gas cylinders most often found in a construction 



WHITE X / g reen/ 



BROWN 



RED 


GRAY 


GRAY 

BROWN 


HELIUM ( OIL PUMPED ) 


GRAY 


WHITE 


HELIUM-OXYGEN 


GREEN 


I 


HYDROGEN 


BLACK YELLOW 


c 


ACETYLENE 


YELLOW 



CARBON DIOXIDE 


GRAY 


CARBON DIOXIDE 
( FIRE ONLY ) 


RED 


C54.9 


I Figure 4-33.1 —Identifying color patterns for gas cylinders. 


battalion or in a public works department where Sea bee 
personnel are workinq | Figure 4331 shews how cylinders are 
identified by the overall painted color code and 











































by the stenciled name of the gas. For a complete listing 
of compressed-gas cylinders, refer to MIL-STD 101B, 
"Color Code for Pipelines and for Compressed-Gas 
Cylinders." 

NOTE: Ensure you have a manual with the latest 
up-to-date changes inserted, as changes may occur in 
MIL-STD 101B after this manual is published. It should 
be noted that the color code of cylinders shown in i fiqurel 
14-32 ife military only; the commercial industry does not 
necessarily comply with these color codes. 

Handling and Storing Gas Cylinders 

Each compressed-gas cylinder carries markings in¬ 
dicating compliance with I nterstate Commerce Com¬ 
mission (ICC) requirements. When the cylinders are at 
your work site, they become your responsibility. There 
are several things you should not do when handling and 
storing compressed-gas cylinders. 

• Never fill your own cylinders. It requires special 
training and special equipment. 

• Never alter or fix the safety devices on a cylinder. 
It is illegal and also stupid. The only personnel permitted 
to work on cylinder safety devices are the cylinder 
owners and suppliers. 

• Never store cylinders near a heat source or in 
direct sunlight. Heat causes the gas inside a cylinder to 
expand. This could result in cylinder failure or fire. 

• Never store cylinders in a closed or unventilated 
space. If one of the cylinders were to leak, it could cause 
an explosion or asphyxiate someone entering the space. 
Store cylinders in protected, well-ventilated, and dry 


spaces. Protect the cylinder valves and safety devices 
from ice and snow. A safety device may not work if it is 
frozen. 

• Never store fuel cylinders and oxidizers within 
the same space. Oxidizers must be stored at least 50 feet 
from fuel cylinders. Use fire-resistant partitions 
between cylinder storage areas. 

• Never mix empty cylinders with full cylinders. 
Do not mix cylinders that contain different gases. 
Always replace the cylinder cap and mark the cylinder 
"Empty" or "MT." Store the cylinders in a cool, dry 
place ready for pickup by the supplier. Even in storage, 
chain the cylinders when they are stored in the upright 
position. 

• Never drag a cylinder to move it. When available, 
use a cylinder truck. If at all possible, leave the cylinders 
on the hand truck and operate them from there; 
otherwise, tilt the cylinder slightly and roll it on the 
bottom edge. Always install the cylinder cap before 
movi ng the cyl i nder. N ever use si i ngs or magnets to 
carry cylinders. If you lift a cylinder upright by the cap, 
make sure that it is screwed on tightly. If the cylinder 
cap comes off, the cylinder could fall and either crush 
your foot or snap the valve off. If a cylinder is dropped 
and the valve breaks, it could launch itself like a rocket. 

When cylinders have been stored outside in freezing 
weather, they sometimes become frozen to the ground 
or to each other. This is true particularly in the antarctic 
and arctic areas. To free the cylinders, you can pour 
warm water (not boiling) over the frozen or icy areas. 
As a last resort, you can pry them loose with a prybar. 
If you use a prybar, never pry or lift under the valve cap 
or valve. 








CHAPTER 5 


GAS WELDING 


This chapter discusses equipment and materials 
used in gas welding. Information is provided on the 
operation and maintenance of oxyacetylene and oxy- 
MAPP equipment. Included are welding techniques and 
safety precautions associated with gas welding. 

Oxyacetylene and oxy-MAPP (methyl acetyl ene- 
propadiene) welding are two types of gas-welding proc¬ 
esses. They require a gas-fueled torch to raise the 
temperature of two similar pieces of metal to their fusion 
point that allows them to flow together. A filler rod is 
used to deposit additional metal. The gas and oxygen are 
mixed to correct proportions in the torch, and you can 
adjust the torch to produce various types of flames. 

A properly made gas weld is consistent in appear¬ 
ance, showing a uniform deposit of weld metal. Com¬ 
plete fusion of the sidewalls is necessary to forma good 
joint. Some of the factors you must consider when 
making a gas weld are as follows: edge preparation, 
spacing and alignment of the parts, temperature control 
(before, during, and after the welding process), size of 
the torch tip, size and type of the filler rod, flame 
adjustment, and rod and torch manipulation. In some 
cases, fluxes are needed to remove oxides and slag from 
the molten metal and to protect the puddle from atmos¬ 
pheric contamination. 

When you join sections of plate by gas welding, the 
edges of the plate at the joint are uniformly melted by 
the heat from the torch. When welding heavier sheets 
and plates, you have to use filler metals. The edges of 
the heavier plate are beveled to permit penetration to the 
base of the joint. Both the filler metal and the base metal 
are melted, and as they solidify, they form one continu¬ 
ous piece. For welding light sheet metal, filler metal is 
usually not necessary. The edges of light sheet metal are 
flanged at the joint so they flow together to form one 
solid piece when you melt them. 


OXYGAS WELDING EQUIPMENT 

An oxygas welding outfit is basically the same as 
an oxygas cutting outfit with the exception of the torch. 
The welding outfit usually consists of a cylinder of 
acetylene or MAPP gas, a cylinder of oxygen, two 
regulators, two lengths of hose with fittings, and a 


welding torch with tips Kfiq. 5 ^ . An oxygas welding 
outfit also is called a welding rig. 

In addition to the basic equipment mentioned, you 
also use the same auxiliary equipment that was dis¬ 
cussed in i chapter"?] This equipment consists of tip 
cleaners, cylinder trucks, clamps, and holding jigs. 
Safety apparel, which includes goggles, hand shields, 
gloves, leather aprons, sleeves and leggings, is essential 
and should be worn as required. Information on safety 
apparel is contained in i chapter 3] 

Oxygas welding equipment, like cutting equipment, 
may be stationary or portable. A portable oxygas outfit, 
as shown in lfiqure 5-Xl is an advantage when it becomes 
necessary to move the equipment. 

To perform your welding duties, you must be able 
to set up the welding equipment and make the adjust¬ 
ments required to perform the welding operation. Thus 
it is important that you understand the purpose and 
function of the basic pieces of equipment that makeup 
the welding outfit. The gases, cylinders, regulators, 
hoses, and safety equipment are covered ir t chapter \ If 
you have any questions, you should review l chapter 41 
before continuing. 

WELDING TORCHES 

The oxygas welding torch mixes oxygen and fuel 
gas in the proper proportions and controls the amount 
of the mixture burned at the welding tip. Torches have 
two needle valves: one for adjusting the oxygen flow 
and the other for adjusting the fuel gas flow. Other basic 
parts include a handle (body), two tubes (one for oxygen 
and another for fuel), a mixing head, and a tip. On some 
models the tubes are silver-brazed to the head and the 
rear end forgings, which are, in turn, fitted into the 
handle. Welding tips are made from a special copper 
alloy and are available indifferent sizes to handle a wide 
range of uses and plate thicknesses. 


5-1 


Two general types of welding torches are used: 

• Low pressure 

• Medium pressure 

















Figure 5-lj —An oxygas welding outfit. 


The low-pressure torch is also known as an injector 
torch. The fuel-gas pressure is 1 psi (pound per square 
inch) or less. The oxygen pressure ranges between 10 to 
40 pounds, depending on the size of the torch tip. A jet 
of relatively high-pressure oxygen produces the suction 
necessary to draw the fuel gas into the mixing head. The 
welding tips may or may not have separate injectors in 
the tip. Atypical mixing head for the low-pressure (or 
injector) torch is shown i i j figure 

Medium-pressure torches are often called balanced- 
pressure or equal-pressure torches because the fuel gas 
and the oxygen pressure are kept equal. Operating pres¬ 
sures vary, depending on the type of tip used. 


DANGER 


If acetylene is used as the fuel gas, the 
pressure must never be allowed to exceed 15 psi 
because acetylene becomes very dangerous at 
15 psi and self-explosive at 29.4 psi. 



I Figure 5-2.-I -A portable oxygas welding and cutting outfit, 


5-2 




























































OXYGEN 


FUEL GAS 



INJECTOR NOZZLE 


I Figure 5-3.^ Mixinq head for the low-pressure torch. 



I Figure 5-4,-l -Equal-pressure welding torch. 


A typical equal-pressure welding torch, also called 
a general-purpose torch, is shown i r | figure S4] The 
medium-pressure torch is easier to adjust than the low- 
pressure torch and, since equal gas pressures are used, 
you are less likely to get a flashback. (Flashbacks are 
covered in | chapter ~4| ) 


Welding TIPS and MIXERS are designed in several 
ways, depending on the manufacturer. Some torch de¬ 
signs have a separate mixing head or mixer for each tip 
size. Other designs have only one mixer for several tip 
sizes. Tips come in various types; some are one-piece 
hard-copper tips and others are two-piece tips that 


5-3 




























































































include an extension tube to make the connection be¬ 
tween the tip and the mixing head. When used with an 
extension tube, removable tips are made of hard copper, 
brass, or bronze. Tip sizes are designated by numbers, 
and each manufacturer has his own arrangement for 
classifying them. Tip sizes differ in the diameter of the 
hole. 

FILLER RODS 

The term filler rod refers to a filler metal used in gas 
welding, brazing, and certain electric welding processes 
in which the filler metal is not a part of the electrical 
circuit. The only function of the filler rod is to supply 
filler metal to the joint. Filler rod comes in wire or rod 
form that is often referred to as “welding rod.” 

As a rule, filler rods are uncoated except for a thin 
film resulting from the manufacturing process. Filler 
rods for welding steel are often copper-coated to protect 
them from corrosion during storage. Most rods are 
furnished in 36-inch lengths and a wide variety of di¬ 
ameters, ranging from 1/32 to 3/8 inch. Rods for weld¬ 
ing cast iron vary from 12 to 24 inches in length and are 
frequently square, rather than round. You determine the 
rod diameter for a given job by the thickness of the metal 
you are joining. 

Except for rod diameter, you select the filler rod 
based on the specifications of the metals being joined. 
These specifications may be federal, military, or Navy 
specifications. This means that they apply to all federal 
agencies, the Military Establishment, or the Navy, re¬ 
spectively. Filler metals are presently covered by one or 
more of these three types of specifications. Eventually, 
all Navy specifications will be rewritten as military 
(MIL) specifications. For that reason, some of the speci¬ 
fications for welding materials presented in this section 
may subsequently be published as military, rather than 
Navy specifications. 

Many different types of rods are manufactured for 
welding ferrous and nonferrous metals. In general, 
welding shops stock only a few basic types that are 
suitable for use in all welding positions. These basic 
types are known as general-purpose rods. 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 
OXYGAS EQUIPMENT 

This section discusses basic procedures involved in 
setting up oxygas equipment, lighting off, adjusting the 
flame, and securing the equipment. Information also is 
provided on the maintenance of oxygas welding equip¬ 
ment. 


SELECTING THE WELDING 
TORCH TIP SIZE 

Welding torch tip size is designated by a number 
stamped on the tip. The tip size is determined by the size 
of the orifice. There is no standard system of numbering 
welding torch tip sizes; each manufacturer has his own 
numbering system. I n this manual, the tip size is given 
in the number drill orifice size. Number drills consist of 
a series of 80 drills, number 1 through 80. The diameter 
of a number 1 drill is 0.2280 of an inch and the diameter 
of a number 80 drill is 0.0135 of an inch. 

NOTE: As the drill size number increases, the size 
of the drill decreases. 

Once you become familiar with the use of a specific 
manufacturer's torch and numbering system, it becomes 
unnecessary to refer to orifice number drill size. The 
orifice size determines the amount of fuel gas and oxy¬ 
gen fed to the flame; therefore, it determines the amount 
of heat produced by the torch. The larger the orifice, the 
greater the amount of heat generated. 

If the torch tip orifice is too small, not enough heat 
will be avail able to bring the metal to its fusion tempera¬ 
ture. If the torch tip is too large, poor welds result from 
the following: the weld is made too fast, control of the 
welding rod melting is difficult, and the appearance and 
quality of the weld is unsatisfactory. 

For practice purposes, using an equal-pressure 
torch, the welding rod sizes and the tip sizes shown in 
I table 5-11 should give satisfactory results. 

EQUIPMENT SETUP 

Setting up the oxygas equipment and preparing for 
welding is identical to setting up for oxygas cutting 
Kchapter 4 except for the selection of the torch tip. 
Select the correct tip and mixing head (depending on 
torch manufacturer), and connect them to the torch body. 
Tighten the assembly by hand, and then adjust to the 
proper angle. After the desired adjustment has been 
made, tighten the tip. On some types of equipment, the 
tip is tightened with a wrench, while on other types, only 
hand tightening is required. 

TORCH LIGHTING AND FLAME 
ADJ USTMENT 

When lighting the torch and adjusting the flame, you 
should always follow the manufacturer's directions for 
the particular model of torch being used. This is neces¬ 
sary because the procedure varies somewhat with 








Table 5-1.-Welding Rod Sizes and Tip Sizes Used to Weld Various Thicknesses of Metal 


Metal 

Diameter Welding 

lip Drill 

Pressures 

Thickness 

Rod* 

Size 

Oxygen-Fuel Gas 

1/16 

1/16-3/32 

60-69 

4 4 

1/8 

3/32-1/8 

54-57 

5 5 

1/4 

5/32-3/16 

44-52 

8 8 

3/8 

3/16-1/4 

40-50 

9 9 

* Sizes listed in this table are approximate and will give satisfactory results. The size of the piece welded will 
govern the choice. When welding small pieces, use the smaller tip and welding rod. When welding larger pieces, 

use the larger size tip and welding rod. 




different types of torches and, in some cases, even with 
different models made by the same manufacturer. 

After lighting the torch, you adjust the flame ac¬ 
cording to the type of metal being welded. I n-depth 
coverage of the different types of flames is covered i n 
I chapter 4| 

The carburizing flame is best used for welding 
high-carbon steels, for hardfacing, and for welding non- 
ferrous alloys, such as Monel. A neutral flame is the 
correct flame to use for welding most metals. When steel 
is welded with this flame, the puddle of molten metal is 
quiet and clear, and the metal flows without boiling, 
foaming, or sparking. The welding flame should always 
be adjusted to neutral before either the oxidizing or 
carburizing flame mixture is set. 

The oxidizing flame has a limited use and is harmful 
to many metals. When applied to steel, the oxidizing 
flame causes the molten metal to foam and produce 
sparks. The major use of the flame is that of the slightly 
oxidizing flame used to braze steel and cast iron. A 
stronger oxidizing flame is used for fusion welding 
brass and bronze. You determine the amount of excess 
oxygen to use by watching the molten metal. 

MAINTAINING THE EQUIPMENT 

For welding equipment to operate at peak efficiency 
and give useful service, you must perform the proper 
maintenance and upkeep on it. Your responsibilities 
involve the maintenance and care of oxygas welding 
equipment. You will not be required to make major 
repairs to welding equipment; but when major repairs 
are needed, it is your responsibility to see that the 
equipment is removed from service and turned in for 
repair. This section briefs you on some of the common 


types of maintenance duties that you will be required to 
perform, 

Torch Gas Leaks 


At times the needle valves may fail to shut off when 
hand tightened in the usual manner. When this happens, 
do not use a wrench to tighten the valve stem. I nstead, 
open the valve and try to blow the foreign matter off the 
valve seat, using the working gas pressure in the hose. 
If this fails, it will be necessary to remove the stem 
assembly and wipe the seat clean. Reassemble the valve 
and try closing it tightly by hand several times. If these 
measures fail to stop the leak, you should have the parts 
replaced or the valve body reseated. These repairs 
should be made only by qualified personnel. 

When there is leakage around the torch valve stem, 
you should tighten the packing nut or repack it if neces¬ 
sary. For repacking, you should use only the packing 
recommended by the manufacturer of the torch. DO 
NOT USE ANY OIL. If the valve stem is bent or badly 
worn, replace it with a new stem. 

Before you use a new torch for the first time, it is a 
good idea to check the packing nut on the valves to make 
sure it is tight. The reason is that some manufacturers 
ship torches with these nuts loose. 

Leaks in the mixing-head seat of the torch causes 
oxygen and fuel-gas leaks between the inlet orifices 
leading to the mixing head. This problem causes im¬ 
proper gas mixing and results in flashbacks. The prob¬ 
lem can be corrected by having the seat in the torch head 
reamed and by truing the mixing-head seat. Usually, you 
must send the equipment to the manufacturer for these 
repairs. 















1 Figure 5-5.- Weldina tip orifice cleaner. 



Welding Torch Tips 

Welding tips are subject to considerable abuse and 
you must keep the orifice smooth and clean if the tip is 
to perform satisfactorily. When cleaning a welding tip, 
you must be careful and ensure you do not enlarge or 
scar the orifice. Carbon deposits and slag must be re¬ 
moved regularly to ensure good performance. 

Avoid dropping a tip because the seat that seals the 
joint may be damaged. Also, the flame end of the tip also 
may receive damage if it is allowed to come in contact 
with the welding work, bench, or firebricks. This dam¬ 
age roughens the end of the tip and causes the flame to 
burn with a “fishtail." 

Special welding tip cleaners have been developed 
to remove the carbon or slag from the tip orifice. The 
cleaner consists of a series of broachlike wires that 
correspond in diameter to the diameter of the tip orifices 
Kfiq. 5-5)1 These wires are packaged in a holder, which 
makes their use safe and convenient ] Figure 5-~6l shows 
a tip cleaner in use. Some welders prefer to use a number 
drill the size of the tip orifice to clean welding tip 
orifices. A number drill must be used carefully so the 
orifice is not enlarged, bell-mouthed, reamed out of 
round, or otherwise deformed. 



The flame end of the tip must be clean and smooth. 
The surface must beat right angles to the centerline of 
the tip orifice to ensure a proper shaped flame. A 4-inch 
mill file or the file in the tip cleaner can be used to 
recondition the surface, as shown ir l figure 5^71 

Recondition the tip if it becomes rough and pitted 
or the orifice is bell-mouthed. An easy method to use 
involves placing apiece of emery cloth, grit side up, on 
a flat surface; hold the tip perpendicular to the emery 
cloth, and rub the tip back and forth just enough to true 
the surface and to bring the orifice back to its original 
diameter. 

Regulator Leaks 

With regulators, gas leakage between the regulator 
seat and nozzle is the most common type of trouble. You 
often hear this problem referred to as regulator creep. 
This problem can be detected by the gradual rise in 
pressure on the working-pressure gauge without mov¬ 
ing the adjusting screw. Frequently, this trouble is 
caused by worn or cracked seats. It also can be caused 
by foreign matter lodged between the seat and the noz¬ 
zle. It is important that you have leaking regulators 
repaired at once; otherwise, injury to personnel or equip¬ 
ment damage could result. This is particular y danger¬ 
ous with fuel-gas regulators because fuel gas at a high 
pressure in a hose becomes an explosive hazard. To 
ensure the safety of personnel and equipment, ensure 
that regulators with such leaks are removed from service 
and turned in for repair. 

OXYGAS WELDING TECHNIQUES 

Oxygas welding maybe done using either the fore¬ 
hand or the backhand method. Each of these techniques 
has special advantages and you should become skillful 
with both. The deciding factor that determines whether 
a technique is considered forehand or backhand is the 
relative position of the torch and rod during welding, not 





















































[Figure ^ -Backhand welding. 



Figure 5-8.lh Forehand welding. 


the direction of welding. The best method to use depends 
upon the type of joint, joint position, and the need for 
heat control on the parts to be welded. 

FOREHAND WELDING 

Forehand weldin ETfig. 51 8) is often called PUD¬ 
DLE or RIPPLE WELDING. In this method of welding, 
the rod is kept ahead of the flame in the direction in 
which the weld is being made. You point the flame in 
the direction of travel and hold the tip at an angleof 
about 45 degrees to the working surfaces. This flame 
position preheats the edges you are welding just ahead 
of the molten puddle. Move the rod in the same direction 
as the tip, and by moving the torch tip and the welding 
rod back and forth in opposite, semicircular paths, you 
can distribute the heat evenly. As the flame passes the 
welding rod, it melts a short length of the rod and adds 
it to the puddle. The motion of the torch distributes the 
molten metal evenly to both edges of the joint and to the 
molten puddle. 

The forehand method is used in all positions for 
welding sheet and light plate up to 1/8 of an inch thick. 
This method is ideal because it permits better control of 
a small puddle and results in a smoother weld. The 
forehand technique is not recommended for welding 
heavy plate due to its lack of base metal penetration. 

BACKHAND WELDING 

In backhand weldii ia (fia. 3 -9). the torch tip pre¬ 
cedes the rod in the direction of welding and the flame 
points back at the molten puddle and completed weld. 
The welding tip should make an angle of about 60 
degrees with the plates or joint being welded. The end 
of the welding rod is placed between the torch tip and 
the molten puddle. 


Less motion is used in the backhand method than in 
the forehand method. If you use a straight welding rod, 
you should rotate it so the end rolls from side to side and 
melts off evenly. You might have to bend the rod when 
working in confined spaces. If you do, it becomes diffi¬ 
cult to roll a bent rod, and to compensate, you have to 
move the rod and torch back and forth at a rather rapid 
rate. When making a large weld, you should move the 
rod so it makes complete circles in the molten puddle. 
The torch is moved back and forth across the weld while 
it is advanced slowly and uniformly in the direction of 
the welding. 

The backhand method is best for welding material 
more than 1/8 of an inch thick. You can use a narrower 
vee at the joint than is possible in forehand welding. An 
included angle of 60 degrees is a sufficient angle of 
bevel to get a good joint. The backhand method requires 
less welding rod or puddling as the forehand method. 

By using the backhand technique on heavier mate¬ 
rial, you can increase your welding speed, better your 
control of the larger puddle, and have more complete 
fusion at the weld root. If you use a slightly reducing 
flame with the backhand technique, a smaller amount of 
base metal is melted while welding the joint. When you 
are welding steel with a backhand technique and a 
slightly reducing flame, the absorption of carbon by a 
thin surface layer of metal reduces the melting point of 
the steel. This speeds up the welding operation, This 
technique is also used in surfacing with chromium-co¬ 
balt alloys. 

MULTILAYER WELDING is used in order to 
avoid carrying too large a puddle of molten metal when 
welding thick plate and pipe. Large puddles are difficult 
to control. Concentrate on getti ng a good weld at the 
bottom of the vee in the first pass e Then, in the next 


[O 


























layers, concentrate on getting good fusion with the sides 
of the vee and the previous layer. The final layer is easily 
controlled to get a smooth surface. This method of 
welding has an added advantage in that it refines the 
previous layer as the succeeding layer is made. In effect, 
it heat-treats the weld metal by allowing one layer to 
cool to a black heat before it is reheated This improves 
the ductility of the weld metal. If this added quality is 
desired in the last layer, an additional or succeeding 
layer is deposited and then machined off. 

JOINT EDGE PREPARATION 

Sheet metal is easily melted and does not require 
special edge preparation. In welding operations 
involving plate, joint edge preparation and proper spac¬ 
ing between edges are important factors. The thickness 
of the plates determines the amount of edge preparation 
required. The faces of square edges can be butted to¬ 
gether and welded You can use this type of joint on plate 
up to 3/16 of an inch thick. For plate 3/16 to 1/4 of an 
inch thick, a slight root opening between the parts is 
necessary to get complete penetration. Plate more than 
1/4 of an inch thick requires beveled edges and a root 
opening of 1/16 of an inch. For oxygas welding on plate 
more than 1/4 of an inch thick, bevel the edges at an 
angl e of 30 degrees to 45 degrees, maki ng the groove 
included angle from 60 degrees to 90 degrees. You can 
prepare the edges by flame cutting, shearing, flame 
grooving, machining, chipping, or grinding. In any case, 
the edge surfaces should be free of oxides, scale, dirt, 
grease, or other foreign matter. 

Plate from 3/8 to 1/2 of an inch thick can be welded 
from one side only, but thicker sections should be 
welded by preparing the edges on both sides. Generally, 
butt joints prepared on both sides permit easier welding, 
produce less distortion, and ensure better weld qualities. 

Heavy steel plate is rarely welded with oxygas 
unless other types of welding equipment are not avail¬ 
able. The welding of heavy plate is just not cost effective 
because of the amount of gas consumed and time used 
to complete a weld. If at all possible, use a form of 
electric arc welding because the joint can be welded 
faster, cheaper, and there is less heat distortion 

OXYGAS WELDING OF 
FERROUS METALS 

Low-carbon steel, low-alloy steel, cast steel, and 
wrought iron are easily welded by the oxygas process. 

A flux is not necessary with these metals because their 
oxides melt at a lower temperature than the base metal. 


During the welding process, you should enclose the 
molten puddle with the flame envelope to ensure the 
molten metal does not contact the air. If the metal is 
exposed to the air, it will oxidize rapidly. You also should 
avoid overheating the metal. 

The proper flame adjustment is required to make a 
good weld Adjust the flame to a neutral or slightly 
reducing (carburizing) flame. Do not use an oxidizing 
flame. Manipulate the torch and rod so the tip of the 
oxygas cone is about 1/16 to 1/8 of an inch from the 
surface of the metal. Melt the end of the filler rod in the 
puddle, not with the flame. The welding of low-carbon 
steels and cast steels presents no special problems other 
than the selection of the proper filler rod Low-alloy 
steels usually require prewelding and postwelding heat 
treatment. This heat treatment relieves the stresses de¬ 
veloped during the welding phase and produces the 
desired physical properties of the metal. 

As the carbon content of a steel increases, welding 
becomes more difficult. Steels whose carbon content is 
within the 0.3-percent to 0.5-percent range are welded 
with a slightly carburizing flame. These low-carbon 
steels require postwelding heat treatment to develop 
their best physical properties. 

High-carbon steel and tool steel require a slightly 
different technique. While protecting the parts from 
drafts, slowly preheat them to about 1000°F. Complete 
the weld as rapidly as possible using a carburizing flame 
and no flux. Do not manipulate either rod or torch and 
add the filler metal in small amounts, as it is needed. You 
should use a smaller flame and lower gas pressure than 
that used for low-carbon steel. This is to ensure you do 
not overheat the steel. You must heat-treat high-carbon 
steels and tool steels after welding to develop the physi¬ 
cal properties required. 

The procedure for oxygas welding of WROUGHT 
I RON is the same as that for low-carbon or mild steel; 
however, you should keep several points in mind. 
Wrought iron contains a slag that was incorporated in it 
during the manufacturing stage. This slag gives the 
surface of the molten puddle a greasy appearance. Do 
not confuse this greasy appearance with the appearance 
of actual fusion. Continue heating until the sidewalls of 
the joint break down into the puddle. Best results with 
wrought iron are obtained when the filler metal (usually 
mild steel) and base metal are mixed in the molten 
puddle with a minimum of agitation 

Oxygas welding of CAST IRON is not difficult, but 
does require a modification of the procedure used with 
steel. For material that does not exceed 3/16 of an inch 




in thickness, you do not need to make a V-groove. Metal 
that is between 3/16 of an inch and 3/8 of an inch should 
have a single V-butt joint with an included angle of 60 
degrees. For metal over 3/8 of an inch, use a double 
V-butt joint with 60-degree included angles. 

Before you begin welding, preheat the entire weld¬ 
ment to a temperature between 750°F and 900°F The 
welding should be done with a neutral flame using the 
backhand method. Use a cast-iron filler metal and the 
appropriate flux. The flux is necessary, but use it spar¬ 
ingly as needed Add filler metal by directing the inner 
cone of the flame against the rod instead of dipping the 
tip of the rod into the puddle. The filler metal should be 
deposited inlayers not exceeding 1/8 of an inch thick. 
Upon completion of the weld, you must stress relieve 
the weldment by heating it to a temperature between 
1100°F and 1150°F and then cool it slowly. Oxygas 
welding cast iron gives a good color match and good 
machinability; however, if color match is not essential, 
a cast-iron repair can be made more easily and economi¬ 
cally by braze welding. 

Oxygas welding can be used with some CHRO¬ 
MIUM-NICKEL STEELS (STAINLESS STEELS). As 
a rule, oxygas welding is used only for light sheet; 
heavier pieces of these steels are usually joined by one 
of the electric arc welding processes. On material 20 
gauge (0.040 of an inch) or less in thickness, a flange 
equal to the thickness of the metal is turned up and the 
weld is made without filler metal. Before welding, you 
should clean the joint surfaces of the metal with sand¬ 
paper or other abrasives and then apply a stainless steel 
flux. The torch tip used for welding stainless steel is 
usually one or two sizes smaller than the tip used to weld 
mild steel of the same thickness. Adjust the torch so you 
have a carburizing flame, as seen through your goggles, 
with an excess fuel-gas feather extending about 1/16 of 
an inch beyond the tip of the inner cone. Hold the torch 
so the flame makes an angle of 80 degrees to the surface 
of the sheet. The tip of the cone should almost, but not 
quite touch the molten metal. Make the weld in one pass, 
using a forehand technique. Do not puddle or retrace the 
weld. A uniform speed of welding is essential. If it is 
necessary to stop the welding process or reweld a sec¬ 
tion, wait until the entire weld has cooled. 

OXYGAS WELDING OF 
NONFERROUS METALS 

Although brazing and braze welding are used exten¬ 
sively to make joints in nonferrous metals, there are 
many situations in which oxygas welding is just as 
suitable. The joint designs are the same for nonferrous 


metals as for ferrous metals in most cases. Oxygas 
welding of nonferrous metals usually requires mechani¬ 
cal cleaning of the surfaces before welding and the use 
of flux during welding. Filler metals must be suitable 
for the base metal being welded A separate section on 
aluminum and aluminum alloys is included as part of 
this chapter since you may need more detailed instruc¬ 
tions in welding these materials. 

Copper 

Pure copper can be welded using the oxygas torch. 
Where high-joint strength is required you should use 
DEOXIDIZED copper (copper that contains no oxy¬ 
gen). A neutral flame is used and flux is required when 
welding copper alloys. Because of the high thermal 
conductivity of copper, you should preheat the joint area 
to a temperature ranging between 500°F to 800°F and 
use a larger size torch tip for welding. The larger size tip 
supplies more heat to the joint and thus makes it possible 
to maintain the required temperature at the joint. After 
welding is completed, cool the part slowly. Other than 
the extra volume of heat required, the technique for 
welding copper is the same as for steel. 

Copper-Zinc Alloy (Brasses) 

Copper-zinc alloys (brasses) can be welded using 
the same methods as deoxidized copper; however, a 
silicon-copper rod is used for welding brasses. The rods 
are usually flux-coated so the use of additional flux is 
not required. Preheat temperatures for these metals 
range between 200°F to 300°F. 

Copper-Silicon Alloy (Silicon Bronze) 

Copper-silicon alloy (silicon bronze) requires a dif¬ 
ferent oxygas welding technique from that used for 
copper and copper-zinc. You weld this material with a 
slightly oxidizing flame and use a flux having a high 
boric acid content. Add filler metal of the same compo¬ 
sition as the base metal; as the weld progresses, dip the 
tip of the rod under the viscous film that covers the 
puddle. Keep the puddle small so the weld solidifies 
quickly. A word of caution: when welding copper-zinc, 
you should safeguard against zinc poisoning by either 
doing all the welding outdoors or by wearing a respirator 
or by both, depending on the situation 

Copper-Nickel Alloy 

Oxygas welding of copper-nickel alloys requires 
surface preparation and preheating. The flux used for 


5-9 



this welding is a thin paste and is applied by brush to all 
parts of thejoint and to the welding rod. Adjust the torch 
to give a slightly carburizing flame; the tip of the inner 
cone should just touch the base metal. Do not melt the 
base metal any more than necessary to ensure good 
fusion. Keep the end of the filler rod within the protec¬ 
tive envelope of the flame, adding the filler metal with¬ 
out disturbing the molten pool of weld metal. If possible, 
run the weld from one end of the joint to the other 
without stopping. After you complete the weld, cool the 
part slowly and remove the remaining traces of flux with 
warm water. 

Nickel and High-Nickel Alloys 

Oxygas welding of nickel and high-nickel alloys is 
similar to that for copper-nickel alloys. Good mechani¬ 
cal cleaning of thejoint surfaces is essential. Thejoint 
designs are basically the same as steel of equivalent 
thickness. The included anglefor V-butt welds is ap¬ 
proximately 75 degrees. You may weld plain nickel 
without a flux, but high-nickel alloys require a special 
boron-free and borax-free flux. The flux is in the form 
of a thin paste and should be applied with a small brush. 
You should flux both sides of the seam, the top and 
bottom, and the filler rod. Adjust the torch to give a very 
slightly carburizing flame; the tip selected should be the 
same size or one size larger than for steel of the same 
thickness. The flame should be soft and the tip of the 
cone kept in contact with the molten pool. Use a rod 
suitable for the base metal, and always keep the rod well 
within the protective envelope of the flame. After the 
weld is completed, postheat the part and cool it slowly. 
Then remove the flux with warm water. 

Lead 

Oxygas welding of lead requires special tools and 
special techniques. Although you do not require a flux, 
you must ensure that the metal in thejoint area is 
scrupulously clean. You may accomplish this by shaving 
thejoint surfaces with a scraper and wire brushing them 
to remove oxides and foreign matter. In the flat-welding 
position, a square butt joint is satisfactory. I n other 
positions, a lap joint is used almost exclusively. When 
you use a lap joint, the edges should overlap each other 
from 1/2 of an inch to 2 inches, depending upon the 
thickness of the lead. 

To weld lead, use a special, lightweight, fingertip 
torch, with tips ranging from 68 to 78 in drill size. Adjust 
your torch to a neutral flame with the gas pressure 
ranging from 1 1/2 psig to 5 psig, depending on the 


thickness of the lead. The length of the flame varies from 
about 11/2 inches to 4 inches, depending upon the gas 
pressures used. When you are welding in the horizontal 
and flat positions, a soft, bushy flame is most desirable. 
But, when you are welding in the vertical and overhead 
positions, better results are obtained with a more pointed 
flame. 

For oxygas welding of lead, you should ensure that 
the filler metal has the same composition as the base 
metal. The molten puddle is controlled and distributed 
by manipulating the torch so the flame moves in a 
semicircular or V-shaped pattern. Each tiny segment of 
the weld is made separately, and the torch is flicked 
away at the completion of each semicircular or V-shaped 
movement. J oints are made in thin layers. Filler metal 
is not added during the first pass, but it is added on 
subsequent passes. 

When welding lead or lead alloys, you should wear 
a respirator of a type approved for protection against 
lead fumes. 

WARNING 

LEAD FUMES ARE POISONOUS. 

Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys 

When assigned to work with nonferrous metals, you 
can expect jobs that involve the welding of aluminum 
and aluminum alloys. Pure aluminum has a specific 
gravity of 2.70 and a melting point of 1210°F. Pure 
aluminum is soft and seldom used in its pure form 
because it is not hard or strong enough for structural 
purposes; however, the strength of aluminum can be 
improved by the addition of other elements to form 
aluminum alloys. 

Aluminum alloys are usually 90-percent pure. 
When elements, such as silicon, magnesium, copper, 
nickel, and manganese, are added to aluminum, an alloy 
stronger than mild steel results; whereas pure aluminum 
is only about one fourth as strong as steel. 

A considerable number of aluminum alloys are 
available. You may use some of the aluminum alloys in 
sheet form to make and repair lockers, shelves, boxes, 
trays, and other containers. You also may have to repair 
chairs, tables, and other items of furniture that are made 
of aluminum alloys. 

Oxygas welding of aluminum alloys is usually con¬ 
fined to materials from 0.031 of an inch to 0.125 of an 
inch in thickness. Also, thicker material can be welded 


5-10 



by the oxygas process if necessary; however, thinner 
material is usually spot or seam welded. 

MELTING CHARACTERISTICS.— Before at¬ 
tempting to weld aluminum alloy for the first time, you 
should become familiar with how the metal reacts when 
under the welding flame. 

A good example of how aluminum reacts when 
heated can be seen if you place a small piece of sheet 
aluminum on a welding table and heat it with a neutral 
flame. Hold the flame perpendicular to the surface of 
the sheet and bring the tip of the inner cone almost in 
contact with the metal. Observe that almost without 
warning the metal suddenly melts and runs away, leav¬ 
ing a hole in the sheet. Now repeat the operation with 
the torch held at an angle of about 30 degrees to the plane 
of the surface. With a little practice, you will be able to 
melt the surface metal without forming a hole. Now try 
moving the flame slowly along the surface of the sheet, 
melting a small puddle. Observe how quickly the puddle 
solidifies when the flame is removed. Continue this 
practice until you are able to control the melting. When 
you have mastered this, proceed by practicing actual 
welding. Start with simple flanged and notched butt 
joints that do not require a welding rod. Next, you should 
try using a welding rod with thin sheet and then with 
castings. 

WELDING RODS.— Two types of welding rods 
available for gas welding aluminum alloys are the 1100 
and 4043 rods. The 1100 rod is used when maximum 
resistance to corrosion and high ductility are of primary 
importance. The 1100 rod is used for welding 1100 and 
3003 type aluminum alloys only. The 4043 rod is used 
for greater strength and minimizes the tendency for 
cracking. It also is used for all other wrought aluminum 
alloys and castings. 

WELDING FLUXES.- The use of the proper flux 
in welding aluminum is extremely important. Alumi¬ 
num welding flux is designed to remove the aluminum 
oxide by chemically combining with it. In gas welding, 
the oxide forms rapidly in the molten metal. It must be 
removed or a defective weld will result. To ensure 
proper distribution, you should paint flux on the welding 
rod and the surface to be welded. 

Aluminum flux is usually in powder form and is 
prepared for use by mixing with water to form a paste. 
The paste should be kept in an aluminum, glass, or 
earthenware container because steel or copper contain¬ 
ers tend to contaminate the mixture. 

It is essential that plenty of flux be applied to the 
edges of flanged joints because no filler rod is used in 



I Figure 5-l(fl -Edqe preparation for gas-welding aluminum. 

these joints. In all cases, the flux should be applied to 
both the bottom and top sides of the sheet in the area of 
the weld. After you finish welding, it is important that 
you remove all traces of flux. You can do this by using 
a brush and hot water. If aluminum flux is left on the 
weld, it will corrode the metal. 

WELDING PREPARATION.- The thickness of 
the aluminum determines the method of edge prepara¬ 
tion. On material up to 0.062 of an inch, the edges should 
be formed to a 90-degree flange. The height of the flange 
should be about the same height, or a little higher, as the 
thickness of the material l (fig. 5-iq , view A). The only 
requirement for the flanges is that their edges be straight 
and square. If desired, material up to 0.125 of an inch 
can be welded with a flange joint. No filler rod is 
necessary if you flange the edges. 

Unbeveled butt welds can be made on thicknesses 
from 0.062 of an inch to 0.188 of an inch; but in these 
applications, it is necessary to notch the edges with a 
saw or cold chisel in a manner similar to that shown in 
view B of | figure 5-10.1 Edge notching is recommended 
in aluminum welding because it aids in getting full 
penetration and prevents local distortion. All butt welds 
made in material over 0.125 of an inch thick are usually 
notched in some manner. 










In welding aluminum more than 0.188 of an inch 
thick, bevel the edges and notch them, as shown in view 
C of lfiaure 5-10.I The included angle of bevel maybe 
from 90 to 120 degrees. 

After you have prepared the edges of the pieces 
properly, you should then clean the surfaces to be 
welded. If heavy oxide is present on the metal surface, 
you may have to use a stainless-steel wire brush to 
remove it. Dirt, grease, or oil can be removed by wiping 
the weld area with a solvent-soaked rag. 

Aluminum plate 1/4 of an inch thick or greater 
should be preheated to a temperature ranging between 
500°F to 700°F. This aids in avoiding heat stresses. 
Preheating also reduces fuel and oxygen requirements 
for the actual welding. It is important that the preheating 
temperature does exceed 700°F. If the temperature does 
go above 700°F, the alloy maybe severely weakened. 
High temperatures also could cause large aluminum 
parts to collapse under their own weight. Thin material 
should be warmed with the torch before welding. This 
slight preheat helps to prevent cracks. 

WELDING TECHNIQUES.— After preparing 
and fluxing the pieces for welding, you should pass the 
flame, in small circles, over the starting point until the 
flux melts. Keep the inner cone of the flame off the flux 
to avoid burning it. If the inner cone of the flame should 
burn the flux, it will be necessary to clean the joint and 
apply new flux. Next, scrape the rod over the surface at 
about 3- or 4-second intervals, permitting the rod to 
come clear of the flame each time. If you leave the rod 
in the flame too long, it melts before the parent metal 
does. The scraping action indicates when you can start 
welding without overheating the metal. Maintain this 
cycle throughout the course of welding except for allow¬ 
ing the rod to remain under the flame long enough to 
melt the amount of metal needed. With practice, the 
movement of the rod can be easily mastered. 

Forehand welding is usually preferred for welding 
aluminum alloys because the flame points away from 
the completed weld, and this preheats the edges to be 
welded that prevents too rapid melting. Hold the torch 
at a low angle when you are welding thin material. For 
thicknesses 0.188 of an inch and above, you should 
increase the angle of the torch to a near vertical position. 
Changing the angle of the torch according to the thick¬ 
ness of the metal minimizes the possibility of burning 
through the sheet during welding. 

When welding aluminum alloys up to 0.188 of an 
inch thick, you have little need to impart any motion to 
the torch other than moving it forward. On flanged 


material, care must betaken to break the oxide film as 
the flange melts down. This may be done by stirring the 
melted flange with a puddling rod. A puddling rod is 
essentially a paddle flattened and shaped from a 1/4- 
inch stainless steel welding rod. 

With aluminum alloys above 0.188 of an inch in 
thickness, you should give the torch a more uniform 
lateral motion to distribute the weld metal over the entire 
width of the weld. A slight back-and-forth motion assists 
the flux in its removal of oxides. Dip the filler rod in the 
weld puddle with a forward motion. 

The angle of the torch is directly related to the 
welding speed. Instead of lifting the flame from time to 
time to avoid melting holes in the metal, you will find it 
advantageous to hold the torch at a flatter angle to the 
work The welding speed should be increased as the 
edge of the sheet is approached. The inner cone of the 
flame should never be permitted to come in contact with 
the molten metal, but should beheld about 1/8 of an inch 
away from the metal. 

In the vertical position, the torch is given an up-and- 
down motion, rather than a rotating one. In the overhead 
position, alight back-and-forth motion is used the same 
as in flat welding. 

Heat-treatable alloys should be held in a jig for 
welding, whenever possible. This helps to eliminate the 
possi bi I ity of cracki ng. The I i kel i hood of cracki ng can 
also be reduced by the use of a 4043 filler rod. This rod 
has a lower melting range than the alloy being joined 
which permits the base metal to solidify before the weld 
puddle freezes. As the weld is the last area to solidify, 
all of the contraction strains are in the weld bead, rather 
than throughout the base metal. You may reduce weld 
cracking by tack welding the parts while they are in the 
jig and then loosening the clamps before completing the 
seam. 

As soon as the weld is completed and the work has 
had time to cool, you should thoroughly wash the weld. 
This can be done by vigorously scrubbing it with a stiff 
brush while hot water runs over it until all traces of the 
flux are removed. This is important, because if any flux 
is left on the weld, it can corrode the metal. If hot water 
is not available, you may use a diluted solution of 10 
percent sulfuric acid. The acid solution should then be 
washed off with cold, fresh water after using. 







1 Figure 5-ll3 -Weldinq operation with backhand technique. 


FUSION WELDING PIPE 

I n oxygas welding of pipe, many tests have proved 
that fusion welded pipe joints, when properly made, are 
as strong as the pipe itself. 

For success in oxygas welding of pipe, three essen¬ 
tial requirements must be met: there must be a conven¬ 
ient source of controlled heat available to produce rapid 
localized melting of the metal, the oxides present on the 
surface or edges of the joints must be removed, and a 
metal-to-metal union between the edges or surfaces to 
be joined must be made by means of molten metal. 

One method used for welding steel and wrought iron 
pipe is known as FUSION WELDING. This method 
involves melting the pipe metal and adding metal from 
a rod of similar composition. The welding operation 
performed at the top of a joint in a horizontal pipe is 
shown diagrammatically ir i figure 5-"H This shows the 
BACKHAND welding technique. The rod and flame are 
moved alternately toward and away from each other, as 
shown in i figure 5-"l2l Full strength oxygas welds can be 
made in any welding position. 

The cohesiveness of the molten metal, the pressure 
of the flame, the support of the weld metal already 
deposited, and the manipulation of the rod all combine 



I Figure 5-12.^ Flameand rod motion with backhand technique. 


to keep the molten metal in the puddle from running or 
falling. 

The soundness and strength of welds depend on the 
quality of the welding rod used. If you have any doubt 
about the qual ity of the rods or are not sure of the type 
to use, then it would be to your advantage to contact the 
manufacturer or one of his distributors. If the rod is 
supplied through the federal stock system, supply per¬ 
sonnel should be able to look up the information based 
on the federal stock number of the rod. 









































C. ELBOW CLAMP 




Figure 5-13.1 -Chain clamps quickly align pipe fittings of any description. 


The Linde Company has a method of fusion welding 
that is remarkably fast and produces welds of high 
quality. Anyone can use this process for welding pipe if 
they adhere to the following conditions: 

1. Use an excess fuel-gas flame. 

2. Use a welding rod containing deoxidizing 
agents. 

3. Use the backhand welding technique. 

The following is a brief explanation of the pre¬ 
viously mentioned conditions: 

1. EXCESS FUEL-GAS FLAME. The base metal 
surface, as it reaches white heat, absorbs carbon from 
the excess fuel-gas flame. The absorption of carbon 
lowers the melting point of steel, thereby the surface 
melts faster and speeds up the welding action. 

2. SPECIAL WELDING ROD. The deoxidizing 
agents in the recommended rod eliminates the 
impurities and prevents excess oxidation of carbon. 
Were it not for this action, considerable carbon, the most 
valuable strengthening element of steel, would be lost. 


Thus, even in high-carbon, high-strength pipe, the weld 
metal is as strong as, or stronger than the pipe material. 

3. BACKHAND TECHNIQUE. This technique 
produces faster melting of the base metal surfaces. Also, 
a smaller bevel can be used which results in a savings 
of 20 to 30 percent in welding time, rods, and gases. 

One of the most valuable tools you can use when 
welding pipe is the pi peel amp. Pipe clamps hold the 
pipe in perfect alignment until tack welds are placed. 
They are quick opening and you can move or attach a 
clamp quickly. 

I Figure 5-~l3l shows four different types of chain 
clamps that are used for pipe welding. If these clamps 
are not available, you can fabricate your own by welding 
two C-clamps to a piece of heavy angle iron. A piece of 
3/8-inch angle iron that is 4 inches by 4 inches by 12 
inches is usually suitable. When working with small-di¬ 
ameter pipe, you can lay it in apiece of channel iron to 
obtain true alignment for butt welding. When the pipe 
you are working on has a large diameter, you can use a 
wide flange beam for alignment purposes. 






































































CHAPTER 6 


SOLDERING, BRAZING, BRAZE WELDING, 
AND WEARFACING 


The information presented in i chapter 31 covered the 
joining of metal parts by the process of fusion welding. 
In this chapter, procedures that do not require fusion are 
addressed. These procedures are as follows: soldering, 
brazing, braze welding, and wearfacing. These proce¬ 
dures allow the joining of dissimilar metals and produce 
high-strength joints. Additionally, they have the impor¬ 
tant advantages of not affecting the heat treatment or 
warping the original metal as much as conventional 
welding. 


SOLDERING 

Soldering is a method of using a filler metal (com¬ 
monly known as solder) for joining two metals without 
heating them to their melting points. Soldering is valu¬ 
able to the Steelworker because it is a simple and fast 
means for joining sheet metal, making electrical connec¬ 
tions, and sealing seams against leakage. Additionally, 
it is used to join iron, nickel, lead, tin, copper, zinc, 
aluminum, and many other alloys. 

Soldering is not classified as a welding or brazing 
process, because the melting temperature of solder is 
below 800°F. Welding and brazing usually take place 
above 800°F. The one exception is lead welding that 
occurs at 621°F. Do not confuse the process of SI LVER 
SOLDERING with soldering, for this process is 


actually a form of brazing, because the temperature used 
is above 800°F. 

This chapter describes the following: equipment 
and materials required for soldering, the basic methods 
used to make soldered joints, and the special techniques 
required to solder aluminum alloys. 

EQUIPMENT 

Soldering requires very little equipment. For most 
soldering jobs, you only need a heat source, a soldering 
copper or iron, solder, and flux. 

Sources of Heat 

The sources of heat used for soldering vary accord¬ 
ing to the method used and the equipment available. 
Welding torches, blow-torches, forges, and furnaces are 
some of the sources of heat used. Normally, these heat¬ 
ing devices are used to heat the soldering coppers that 
supply the heat to the metal surfaces and thus melt the 
solder. Sometimes, the heating devices are used to heat 
the metal directly. When this is done, you must be 
careful to prevent heat damage to the metal and the 
surrounding material. 

SOLDERING COPPERS.— A soldering copper 
(usually called a soldering iron) consists of a forged 
copper head and an iron rod with a handle. (Se dfiq. 6-1] ) 



I Figure 6-l.]k Solderina irons. 











I Figure 6-2.f Soldering copper heads. 



1 Figure 6-3.-l -Filinq a soldering copper. 


The handle, which may be wood or fiber, is either forced 
or screwed onto the rod. 

Solderi ng heads are available in various shapes. 

I Figure 6-^1 shows three of the more commonly used 
types. The pointed copper is for general soldering work 
The stub copper is used for soldering flat seams that 
need a considerable amount of heat. The bottom copper 
is used for soldering seams that are hard to reach, such 
as those found in pails, pans, trays, and other similar 
objects. 

Nonelectrical coppers are supplied in pairs. This is 
done so one copper can be used as the other is being 
heated. The size designation of coppers refers to the 
weight (in pounds) of TWO copperheads; thus a refer¬ 
ence to a pair of 4-pound coppers means that each 
copper head weighs 2 pounds. Pairs of coppers are 
usually supplied in 1-pound, 1 1/2-pound, 3-pound, 
4-pound, and 6-pound sizes. Heavy coppers are de¬ 
signed for soldering heavy gauge metals, and light cop¬ 
pers are for thinner metals. Using the incorrect size of 
copper usually results in either poorly soldered joints or 
overheating. 

Filing and Tinning Coppers.— New soldering 
coppers must be tinned (coated with solder) before use. 



I Figure 6-4.1 -Tinning a copper (solder placed on cake of sal 
ammoniac). 


Also, coppers must be filed and retinned after overheat¬ 
ing or for any other reason that caused the loss of their 
solder coating. The procedure for filing and tinning a 
copper is as follows: 

1. Heat the copper to a cherry red. 

2. Clamp the copper in a vise, as shown in lfiqurel 

3. File the copper with a single-cut bastard file. 
Bear down on the forward stroke, and release pressure 
on the return stroke. Do not rock the file. Continue filing 
the tapered sides of the copper until they are bright and 
smooth. 

CAUTION 

Remember that the copper is hot! Do not 

touch it with your bare hands. 

4. Smooth off the poi nt of the copper and smooth 
off any sharp edges. 

5. Reheat the copper until it is hot enough to melt 
the solder. 

6. Rub each filed side of the copper back and forth 
across a cake of sal ammoniac, as shown ir | figure &4\ 

7. Apply solder to the copper until it is tinned. You 
may rub the solder directly onto the copper, or place it 
on the cake of sal ammoniac. Do not push the iron into 
thecakeof sal ammoniac, because this can split the cake. 

When sal ammoniac is not available, use powdered 
rosin instead. In this instance, place the powdered rosin 
on top of a brick. Rub the copper back and forth to pick 
up the rosin and then place the solder directly onto the 
copper. (Se j fig. 631 ) 

Commercially prepared soldering salts are also used 
in tinning soldering coppers. These salts are available in 


6-2 




















I Figure 6-5.-| -Tinninq a copper (solder placed directly on copper). 



I Figure 6-6.1 -Forging a soldering copper. 


powder form. Dissolve the powder in water according 
to the directions and dip the soldering copper into the 
solution and then apply the solder. 

Forging Soldering Coppers— Soldering coppers 
may be reshaped by forging when they become blunt or 
otherwise deformed. The procedure for forging a copper 
is as follows: 

1. File the copper to remove all old tinning and to 
smooth the surfaces. 

2. Heat the copper to a bright red. 

3. Hold the copper on an anvil and forge it to the 
required shape by striking it with a hammer. (See 

I fig. 6-6.D As you reshape the copper, a hollow will 
appear at the point. Keep this hollow to a minimum by 
striking the end of the copper. Do not shape too long a 
taper or sharp point, because this causes the copper to 
cool too rapidly. Turn the copper often to produce the 
necessary squared-off sides and reheat the copper as 
often as necessary during this part of the forging. 



[Figure 6-7.1- Presto-lite heating unit. 


4. Reheat the copper to a bright red, and use a 
flat-faced hammer to remove as many hollows as 
possible. 

5. File and tin the copper using the previously 
described procedure. 

ELECTRIC SOLDERING COPPERS.— Elec¬ 
tric soldering coppers, or soldering irons, as they some¬ 
times are cal led, are built with internal heating coils. The 
soldering heads are removable and interchangeable. 
Tinning is basically the same with the exception that the 
tip usually does not become cherry red. Forging or 
reshaping is not necessary, because the heads are easily 
replaced. 

Electric soldering irons are usually used for electri¬ 
cal work or other small jobs. They are especially suited 
for this type of work, because they do not require 
auxiliary heating and they can be manufactured as small 
as a pencil. 

GAS TORCHES.— Gas torches can be used in 
combination with soldering head attachments or as a 
direct heat source. The Presto-lite heating unit is ideal 
for soft soldering, because it delivers a small control¬ 
lable flame. It also may be used effectively to heat 
soldering coppers. A j figure S^TI shows, this heating unit 
includes a fuel tank regulator, hose, and torch. It burns 
acetylene or MAPP gas as fuel in the presence of oxy¬ 
gen. The torch tip (stem) is interchangeable with other 
tips that come with the unit. 


6-3 














































Soft Solder 

There are many different types of solder being used 
by industry. Solders are available in various forms that 
include bars, wires, ingots, and powders. Wire solders 
are available with or without a flux core. Because of the 
many types of solder available, this chapter only covers 
the solders most commonly used by Steelworkers. 

TIN-LEAD SOLDER.—The largest portion of all 
solders in use is solders of the tin-lead alloy group. They 
have good corrosion resistance and can be used for 
joining most metals. Their compatibility with soldering 
processes, cleaning, and most types of flux is excellent. 

I n describing solders, it is the custom of industry to state 
the tin content first; for example, a 40/60 solder means 
to have 40% tin and 60% lead. 

Tin-lead alloy melting characteristics depend upon 
the ratio of tin to lead. The higher the tin content, the 
lower the melting temperature. Tin also increases the 
wetting ability and lowers the cracking potential of the 
solder. 

The behavior of tin-lead solder is shown by the 
diagram in | figure ^^ This diagram shows that 100% 
lead melts at 621°F and 100% tin melts at 450°F. Solders 
that contain 19.5% to 97.5% tin remain a solid until they 
exceed 360°F. The eutectic composition for tin-lead 
solder is about 63% tin and 37% lead. ("Eutectic” means 
the point in an alloy system that all the parts melt at the 
same temperature.) A 63/37 solder becomes completely 
liquid at 361°F. Other compositions do not. Instead, they 
remain in the pasty stage until the temperature increases 
to the melting point of the other alloy. For instance, 
50/50 solder has a solid temperature of 361°F and a 
liquid temperature range of 417°F. The pasty tempera¬ 
ture range is 56°F—the difference between the solid and 
the liquid. 

Solders with lower tin content are less expensive 
and primarily used for sheet metal products and other 
high-volume solder requirements. High tin solders are 
extensively used in electrical work. Solders with 60% 
tin or more are called fine solders and are used in 
instrument soldering where temperatures are critical. 

TIN-ANTIMONY-LEAD SOLDER.- Antimony 
is added to a tin-lead solder as a substitute for some of 
the tin. The antimony, up to 6%, increases the strength 
and mechanical properties of the solder. A word of 
caution, solders having a high antimony content should 
not be used on aluminum, zinc, or zinc-coated materials. 
They form an intermetallic compound of zinc and anti¬ 
mony that causes the solder to become very brittle. 



I Figure 6-8.T -Tin-lead alloy constitutional diagram. 


TIN-ZINC SOLDER.— Several tin-zinc solders 
have come into use for the joining of aluminum alloys. 
The 91/9 and 60/40 tin-zinc solders are for higher tem¬ 
perature ranges (above 300°F), and the 80/20 and 70/30 
tin-zinc alloys are normally used as precoating solders. 

LEAD-SILVER SOLDER.- Lead-silver solders 
are useful where strength at moderately high tempera¬ 
tures is required. The reason lead by itself cannot be used 
is that it does not normally wet steel, cast iron, or copper 
and its alloys. Adding silver to lead results in alloys that 
more readily wet steel and copper. Flow characteristics 
for straight lead-silver solders are rather poor, and these 
solders are susceptible to humidity and corrosion during 
storage. The wetting and flow characteristics can be 
enhanced as well as an increased resistance to corrosion 
by introducing a tin content of 1%. 

Lead-silver solders require higher soldering tem¬ 
peratures and special fluxing techniques. The use of a 
zinc-chloride base flux or uncoated metals is recom¬ 
mended, because rosin fluxes decompose rapidly at high 
temperatures. 

TIN-ANTIMONY SOLDER.— Tin-antimony 
solders are used for refrigeration work or for joining 
copper to cast-iron joints. The most common one is the 
95/5 solder. 

TIN-SILVER SOLDER.- Tin-silver solder (96/4) 
is used for food or beverage containers that must be 
cadmium and lead-free. It also can be used as a replace¬ 
ment for tin-antimony solder (95/5) for refrigeration 
work 


6-4 





































Table 6-1.—Fluxes Used for Soldering Some Common Metals 


Metals 

Fluxes 

Brass, copper, tin . 

Lead. 

Iron, steel . 

Stainless steel and other nickel alloys. 

Galvanized iron. 

Zinc . 

Aluminum. 

Rosin 

Tallow, rosin 

Borax sal ammoniac 

Phosphenic acid 

Zinc chloride 

Zinc chloride 

Stearine, special flux 


These solders and the procedures for their use are 
also listed in the Welding Materials Handbook , 
NAVFAC, P-433. 

Fluxes 

Scale, rust, and oxides form on most metal surfaces 
when exposed to air, and heating accelerates this forma¬ 
tion. Solder will not adhere to or wet the metal unless 
these pollutants are removed. Fluxes are chemical com¬ 
pounds used to clean and maintain the metal surfaces 
during the soldering process. They also decrease the 
surface tension of the solder, making it abetter wetting 
agent. Fluxes are manufactured in cake, paste, liquid, or 
powder form and are classified as either noncorrosive 
or cor rosiv iT Table 9 -1 shows the fluxes that are nor¬ 
mally used for soldering common metals. 

NONCORROSIVE FLUXES.— Noncorrosive 
fluxes are for soldering electrical connections and for 
other work that must be free of any trace of corrosive 
residue. Rosin is the most commonly used noncorrosive 
flux. In the solid state, rosin is inactive and noncor¬ 
rosive. When heated, it melts and provides some fluxing 
action. Rosin is available in powder, paste, or liquid 
form. 

Rosin fluxes frequently leave a brown residue. This 
residue is nonconductive and sometimes difficult to 
remove. The removal problem can be reduced by adding 
a small amount of turpentine to the rosin. Glycerine is 
added to the rosin to make the flux more effective. 

CORROSIVE FLUXES.- Corrosive fluxes have 
the most effective cleaning action, but any trace of 
corrosive flux that remains on the work can cause cor¬ 
rosion later. For this reason, corrosive fluxes are not 
used on electrical connections or other work where 
corrosion would cause a serious problem. 


The most commonly used corrosive fluxes are sal 
ammoniac (ammonium chloride) and zinc chloride. 
These fluxes are frequently used in either solution or in 
paste form. The solvent, if present, evaporates as the 
work heats, leaving a layer of solid flux on the work. 
When the metal reaches the soldering temperature, this 
layer of flux melts, partially decomposes, and liberates 
hydrochloric acid. The hydrochloric acid dissolves the 
oxides from the work surfaces and the solder, making 
them ready for soldering. 

Zinc chloride (sometimes called CUT ACID or 
KILLED ACID) can be made in the shop as long as 
safety precautions are followed. To prepare zinc chlo¬ 
ride, pour a small amount of muriatic acid (the commer¬ 
cial form of hydrochloric acid) into a glass or 
acid-resistant container and then add small pieces of 
zinc. As you add the zinc, the acid boils and bubbles as 
a result of a chemical reaction that produces zinc chlo¬ 
ride and hydrogen gas. Keep adding small pieces of zinc 
to the mixture until the liquid no longer boils and bub¬ 
bles. At this point, the reaction is complete and you then 
dilute the liquid in the container with an equal amount 
of water. Make only enough as required and strain it 
before use. If any is leftover, store it in a tightly sealed 
glass container. 

WARNING 

When diluting the acid, you always add the 
acid to the water. Adding water to acid can result 
in an explosive reaction, resulting in serious 
injuries. 

Specific precautions must be taken when preparing 
zinc chloride. Rubber gloves, a full-face visor, and an 
apron are required. The fumes given off by muriatic acid 
or by the mixture of muriatic acid and zinc are a health 



















hazard as well as an explosive. Preparezincchloride 
under a ventilation hood, out in the open, or near open¬ 
ings to the outside to reduce inhalation of the fumes or 
the danger of explosion. It is essential that precautions 
be taken to prevent flames or sparks from coming in 
contact with the liberated hydrogen. 

Another type of corrosive flux in use is known as 
SOLDERING SALTS. Commercially prepared solder¬ 
ing salts are normally manufactured in a powder form 
that is water soluble that allows you to mix only the 
amount needed. 

After a corrosive flux has been used for soldering, 
you should remove as much of the flux residue as 
possible from the work. Most corrosive fluxes are water 
soluble; therefore, washing the work with soap and 
water and then rinsing thoroughly with clear water 
usually removes the corrosive residue. To lessen dam¬ 
age, you should ensure the work is cleaned immediately 
after the soldering. 

SOLDERING TECHNIQUES 

The two soldering methods most often used 
are soldering with coppers or torch soldering. The 
considerations that apply to these methods of soldering 
are as follows: 

1. Clean all surfaces of oxides, dirt, grease, and 
other foreign matter. 

2. Use the proper flux for the particular job. Some 
work requi res the use of corrosi ve fl uxes, whi Ie other 
work requires the use of noncorrosive fluxes. 
Remember, the melting point of the flux must be 
BELOW the melting point of the solder you are going 
to use. 

3. Heat the surfaces just enough to melt the solder. 
Solder does not stick to unheated surfaces; however, you 
should be very careful not to overheat the solder, the 
soldering coppers, or the surfaces to be joined. Heating 
solder above the work temperature increases the rate of 
oxidation and changes the proportions of tin and lead. 

4. After making a soldered joint, you should 
remove as much of the corrosive flux as possible. 

Sweat Soldering 

Sweat soldering is used when you need to make a 
joint and not have the solder exposed. You can use this 
process on electrical and pipe connections. To make a 
sweated joint, you should clean, flux, and tin each 
adjoining surface. Hold the pieces firmly together and 



I Fiqure6-9.V Soldering a seam. 


heat thejoint with a soldering copper or a torch until the 
solder melts and joins the pieces together. Remove the 
source of heat and keep the parts firmly in position until 
the solder has completely hardened. Cleaning any resi¬ 
due from the soldered area completes the job. 

Seam Soldering 

Seam soldering involves running a layer of solder 
along the edges of a joint. Solder seam joints on the 
inside whenever possible. The best method to use for 
this process is soldering coppers, because they provide 
better control of heat and cause less distortion. 

Clean and flux the areas to be soldered. If the seam 
is not already tacked, grooved, riveted, or otherwise held 
together, tack the pieces so the work stays in position. 
Position the piece so the seam does not rest directly on 
the support. This is necessary to prevent loss of heat to 
the support. After you have firmly fastened the pieces 
together, solder the seam. 

Heat the area by holding the copper against the 
work. The metal must absorb enough heat from the 
copper to melt the solder, or the solder will not adhere. 
Hold the copper so one tapered side of the head is flat 
against the seam, as shown in | figure &9\ When the 
solder begins to flow freely into the seam, draw the 
copper along the seam with a slow, steady motion. Add 
as much solder as necessary without raising the copper 
from the work. When the copper becomes cold, you 
should use the other copper and reheat the first one. 
Change coppers as often as necessary. Remember, the 
best soldered seams are made without lifting the copper 
from the work and without retracing completed work. 
Allow the joint to cool and the solder to set before 


6-6 


































II Figure 6-10j -Solderinq a riveted seam. 



1 Figure 6-lfl -Making solder beads. 


moving the joint. When you use a corrosive flux, clean 
the joint by rinsing it with water and then brushing or 
wiping it with a clean, damp cloth. 

Riveted seams are often soldered to make them 
watertigh t. Figure 6-lb shows the procedure for solder¬ 
ing a riveted seam. 

Solder beads, or solder shots, are sometimes used 
for soldering square, rectangular, or cylindrical bottoms. 
To make the solder beads, hold the solder against a hot 
copper and allow the beads to drop onto a clean surface, 
as shown in lfiqure 6 : TT] 

To solder a bottom seam with solder beads, you 
should first flux the seam before dropping one of the 
cold beads of solder into the container. PI ace the hot 
soldering copper against the seam, as shown in figure 


6-12. Hold the copper in one position until the solder 
starts to flow freely into the seam. Draw the copper 
slowly along the seam, turning the work as you go. Add 
more beads as you need them and reheat the copper as 
necessary. 

To heat an electric soldering copper, you merely 
plug it in. Otherwise, the procedure is much the same as 
that just described. Be very careful not to let an electric 
soldering copper overheat. Overheating can burn out the 
electrical element as well as damage the copper and 
tinning, 


Soldering Aluminum Alloys 

Soldering aluminum alloys is more difficult than 
soldering many other metals. The difficult y arises pri¬ 
marily from the layer of oxide that always covers alu¬ 
minum alloys. The thickness of the layer depends on the 
type of alloy and the exposure conditions. 

Using the proper techniques, many of the aluminum 
alloys can be successfully soldered. Wrought aluminum 
alloys are usually easier to solder than cast aluminum 
alloys. Heat-treated aluminum alloys are extremely dif¬ 
ficult to solder, as are aluminum alloys containing more 
than 1% magnesium. 

The solders used for aluminum alloys are usually 
tin-zinc or tin-cadmium alloys. They are generally 
called ALUMINUM SOLDERS. Most of these solders 
have higher melting points than the tin-lead solders used 
for ordinary soldering. Corrosive and noncorrosive 
fluxes are used for soldering aluminum. 


6-7 















The first step in soldering aluminum is to clean the 
surfaces and remove the layer of oxide. If a thick layer 
of oxide is present, you should remove the main part of 
it mechanically by filing, scraping, sanding, or wire 
brushing. A thin layer of oxide can often be removed by 
using a corrosive flux. Remember, remove any residual 
flux from the joint after the soldering is finished. 

After cleaning and fluxing the surfaces, you should 
tin the surfaces with aluminum solder. Apply flux to the 
work surfaces and to the solder. You can tin the surfaces 
with a soldering copper or with a torch. If you use a 
torch, do not apply heat directly to the work surfaces, to 
the solder, or to the flux. Instead, pi ay the torch on a 
nearby part of the work and let the heat conduct through 
the metal to the work area. Do not use more heat than is 
necessary to melt the solder and tin the surfaces. Work 
the aluminum solder well into the surfaces. After tinning 
the surfaces, the parts may be sweated together. 

Another procedure you can use for soldering alumi¬ 
num alloys is to tin the surfaces with an aluminum solder 
and then use a regular tin-lead solder to join the tinned 
surfaces. This procedure can be used when the shape of 
the parts prevents the use of the sweati ng method or 
demands a large amount of solder. When using tin-lead 
solder with aluminum solder, you do not have to use 
flux. 

After soldering is complete, you should clean the 
joints with a wire brush, soap and water, or emery cloth. 
Ensure that you remove all the flux from the joint since 
any flux left will cause corrosion. 


BRAZING 

Brazing is the process of joining metal by heating 
the base metal to a temperature above 800°F and adding 
a nonferrous filler metal that melts below the base metal. 
Brazing should not be confused with braze welding, 
even though these two terms are often interchanged. In 
brazing, the filler metal is drawn into the joint by capil¬ 
lary action and in braze welding it is distributed by 
tinning. Brazing is sometimes called hard soldering or 
silver soldering because the filler metals are either hard 
solders or silver-based alloys. Both processes require 
distinct joint designs. 

Brazing offers important advantages over other 
metal-joining processes. It does not affect the heat treat¬ 
ment of the original metal as much as welding does, nor 
does it warp the metal as much. The primary advantage 
of brazing is that it allows you to join dissimilar metals. 


EQUIPMENT 

Brazing requires three basic items. You need a 
source of heat, filler metals, and flux. In the following 
paragraphs these items are discussed. 

Heating Devices 

The source of heat depends on the type and amount 
of brazing required. If you are doing production work 
and the pieces are small enough, they can be put into a 
furnace and brazed all at once. Individual torches can be 
mounted in groups for assembly line work, or you can 
use individual oxyacetylene or Mapp-oxygen torches to 
braze individual items. 


Filler Metals 

Filler metals used in brazing are nonferrous metals 
or alloys that have a melting temperature below the 
adjoining base metal, but above 800°F. Filler metals 
must have the ability to wet and bond with the base 
metal, have stability, and not be excessively volatile. 
The most commonly used filler metals are the silver- 
based alloys. Brazing filler metal is available in rod, 
wire, preformed, and powder form. 

Brazing filler metals include the following eight 
groups: 

1. Silver-base alloys 

2. Aluminum-silicon alloys 

3. Copper 

4. Copper-zinc (brass) alloys 

5. Copper-phosphorus alloys 

6. Gold alloys 

7. Nickel alloys 

8. Magnesium alloys 

Fluxes 

Brazing processes require the use of a flux. Flux is 
the substance added to the metal surface to stop the 
formation of any oxides or similar contaminants that are 
formed during the brazing process. The flux increases 
both the flow of the brazing filler metal and its ability to 
stick to the base metal. It formsa strong joint by bringing 
the brazing filler metal into immediate contact with the 




adjoining base metals and permits the filler to penetrate 
the pores of the metal. 

You should carefully select the flux for each brazing 
operation. Usually the manufacturer's label specifies the 
type of metal to be brazed with the flux. The following 
factors must be considered when you are using a flux: 

• Base metal or metals used 

• Brazing filler metal used 

• Source of heat used 

Flux is available in powder, liquid, and paste form. 
One method of applying the flux in powdered form is to 
dip the heated end of a brazing rod into the container of 
the powdered flux, allowing the flux to stick to the 
brazing rod. Another method is to heat the base metal 
slightly and sprinkle the powdered flux over the joint, 
allowing the flux to partly melt and stick to the base 
metal. Sometimes, it is desirable to mix powdered flux 
with clean water (distilled water) to form a paste. 

Flux in either the paste or liquid form can be applied 
with a brush to the joint. Better results occur when the 
filler metal is also given a coat. 

The most common type of flux used is borax or a 
mixture of borax with other chemicals. Some of the 
commercial fluxes contain small amounts of phospho¬ 
rus and halogen salts of either iodine, bromine, fluorine, 
chlorine, or astatine. When a prepared flux is not avail¬ 
able, a mixture of 12 parts of borax and 1 part boric acid 
may be used. 

WARNING 

Nearly all fluxes give off fumes that may 

be toxic. Use them only in WELL-VENTI¬ 
LATED spaces. 

J OINT DESIGN 

In brazing, the filler metal is distributed by capillary 
action. This requires the joints to have close tolerances 
and a good fit to produce a strong bond. Brazing has 
three basic joint desians fTTra. 6-131 : lap, butt, and scarf. 
These joints can be found in flat, round, tubular, or 
irregular shapes. 

Lap J oints 

The lap joint is one of the strongest and most fre¬ 
quently used joint in brazing, especially in pipe work 
The primary disadvantage of the lap joint is the increase 


.001 TO .003 INCH 
ALLOY THICKNESS 





1 


LAP JOINT 

« 

.001 TO .003 INCH 

ALLOY THICKNESS 

1 

_k _i 

BUTT JOINT 

.001 TO .003 INCH 
ALLOY THICKNESS 

j 

V ^ 


SCARF JOINT 


I Figure 6-13.1 -Three types of common joint designs for brazing. 


in thickness of the final product. For maximum strength, 
the overlap should be at least three times the thickness 
of the metal. A 0.001-inch to 0.003-inch clearance be¬ 
tween the joint members provides the greatest strength 
with silver-based brazing filler metals. You should take 
precautions to prevent heat expansion from closing 
joints that have initial close tolerances. 


ButtJ oints 

Butt joints are limited in size to that of the thinnest 
section so maximum joint strength is impossible. Butt 
joint strength can be maximized by maintaining a joint 
clearance of 0.001 to 0.003 of an inch in the finished 
braze. The edges of the joint must be perfectly square to 
maintain a uniform clearance between all parts of the 
joint. Butt joints are usually used where the double 
thickness of a lap joint is undesirable. When double¬ 
metal thickness is objectionable and you need more 
strength, the scarf joint is a good choice. 


Scarf J oints 

A scarf joint provides an increased area of bond 
without increasing the thickness of the joint. The area of 
bond depends on the scarf angle cut for the joint. Usu¬ 
ally, an area of bond two to three times that of a butt joint 
is desirable. A scarf angle of 30 degrees gives a bond 
area twice that of a 90-degree butt joint, and an angle of 
19 1/2 degrees increases the bond area three times. 




















BUTT LAP 



MODIFIED BUTT 



MODIFIED LAP 





PIERCED MODIFIED BUTT-LAP BUTT-LAP 



PIERCED 


Figure 6-lA.j -J oints designed to produce good brazing results. 



11 Figure 6-15.1 -Some well-designed joints that have been prepared for brazing, and some poorly designed joints shown for comparison 


I Figure 6-141 shows some variations of butt and lap 
joints designed to produce good brazing results. A com¬ 
parison of good and bad designed joints is shown in 
I figure 6-151 

BRAZING PROCEDURES 

The procedure for brazing is very similar to braze 
and oxyacetylene welding. The metal needs to be 
cleaned by either mechanical, chemical, or a combina¬ 
tion of both methods to ensure good bonding. The two 
pieces must befitted properly and supported to prevent 


voids in the joint or accidental movement during brazing 
and cooling operations. 

Surface Preparation 

The surfaces of the metal must be cleaned for cap¬ 
illary action to take place. When necessary, chemically 
clean the surface by dipping it in acid. Remove the acid 
by washing the surface with warm water. For mechani¬ 
cal cleaning, you can use steel wool, a file, or abrasive 
paper. Do not use an emery wheel or emery cloth, 














































































































THROUGH THE COMPLETE 
THICKNESS 



I Figure 6-16] -Brazinq a butt joint. 


because abrasive particles or oil might become embed¬ 
ded in the metal. 


Work Support 

Mount the work in position on firebricks or other 
suitable means of support, and if necessary, clamp it. 
This is important because if the joint moves during the 
brazing process, the finished bond will be weak and 
subject to failure. 


Fluxing 

The method of application varies, depending upon 
the form of fl ux bei ng used and the type of metal you 
are brazing. Refer to the material on fluxes previously 
described. It is extremely important that the flux is 
suitable for your job. 


Brazing 

The next step is to heat the parts to the correct 
brazing temperature. Adjust the torch flame (oxygas) to 
a neutral flame because this flame gives the best results 
under normal conditions. A reducing flame produces an 
exceptionally neat-looking joint, but strength is sacri¬ 
ficed. An oxidizing flame will produce a strong joint but 
it has a rough-looking surface. 


The best way to determine the temperature of the 
joint, as you heat it, is by watching the behavior of the 
flux. The flux first dries out as the moisture (water) boils 
off at 212°F. Then the flux turns milky in color and starts 
to bubble at about 600°F. Finally, it turns into a clear 
liquid at about 1100°F. That is just short of the brazing 
temperature. The clear appearance of the flux indicates 
that it is time to start adding the filler metal. The heat of 
thejoint, not the flame, should melt the filler metal. 
When the temperature and alignment are proper, the 
filler metal spreads over the metal surface and into the 
joint by capillary attraction. For good bonding, ensure 
the filler metal penetrates the complete thickness of the 
metal l Figure 6-18 shows a good position for the torch 
and filler metal when brazing a butt joint. 

Stop heati ng as soon as the fi I ler metal has com¬ 
pletely covered the surface of the joint, and let the joint 
cool slowly. Do not remove the supports or clamps or 
move thejoint in any way until the surface is cool and 
the filler metal has completely solidified. 

Finally, clean thejoint after it has cooled suffi¬ 
ciently. This can be done with hot water. Be sure to 
remove all traces of the flux because it can corrode the 
metal. Excess metal left on thejoint can be filed smooth. 

The above described procedure is a general one, but 
it applies to the three major types of brazing: silver, 
copper alloy, and aluminum. The differences being the 
base metals joined and the composition of the filler 
metals. 


















1 Table 6-2.1 -Silver Brazing Filler Metal Alloys 


ASTM 

Percent 




Spec 

#B-73-29 

Silver 

Conner 

Zinc 

Cadmium 

Melts°F 

Hows°F 

Color 


9 

53 

38 


1450 

1565 


1 

10 

52 


.05 

1510 

1600 

Yellow 


*15 

80 


(5% Phos) 

1185 

1300 

Gray 

2 

20 

45 

35 

.05 

1430 

1500 

Yellow 

3 

20 

45 

30 

.05 

1430 

1500 

Yellow 


30 

38 

32 


1370 

1410 



**35 

26 

21 

18 

1125 

1295 

Almost white 


40 




1135 

1205 

Almost white 

4 

45 

30 

25 


1250 

1370 

Almost white 


**45 

15 

16 

24 

1125 

1145 

Almost white 

5 

50 

34 

16 


1280 

1425 

Almost white 


**50 

15,5 

16.5 

18 

1160 

1175 

Almost white 


**50 

15.5 

15.5 

16 (3% Ni) 

1195 

1270 

White 

6 

65 

20 

15 


1280 

1325 

White 

7 

70 

20 

10 


1335 

1390 

White 

8 

80 

16 

4 


1360 

1490 

White 

*-A special alloy containing phosphorus and used only on nonferrous metals 
**-Some special alloys of silver using a fairly high cadmium content 




Silver Brazing 

Often, you will be called on todoa silver brazing 
job. lTable 6-2| lists different types of silver brazing 
alloys and their characteristics. A popular way to apply 
silver brazing metal on a tubing is to use silver alloy 
rings, as shown in lfiqure6-17.| This is a practical and 
economical way to add silver alloy when using a pro¬ 
duction line system. Another method of brazing by using 
preplaced brazing shims is shown ir l figure 6-181 The 
requirements of each job varies; however, through ex¬ 
perience you can become capable of selecting the proper 
procedure to produce quality brazing. 

BRAZE WELDING 

Braze welding is a procedure used to join two 
pieces of metal. It is very similar to fusion welding 
with the exception that the base metal is not melted. 
The filler metal is distributed onto the metal surfaces 
by tinning. Braze welding often produces bonds that are 


comparable to those made by fusion welding without 
the destruction of the base metal characteristics. Braze 
welding is also called bronze welding. 

Braze welding has many advantages over fusion 
welding. It allows you to join dissimilar metals, to 
minimize heat distortion, and to reduce extensive pre¬ 
heating. Another side effect of braze welding is the 
elimination of stored-up stresses that are often present 
in fusion welding. This is extremely important in the 
repair of large castings. The disadvantages are the loss 
of strength when subjected to high temperatures and the 
inability to withstand high stresses. 


EQUIPMENT 

The equipment needed for braze welding is basi¬ 
cally identical to the equipment used in brazing. Since 
braze welding usually requires more heat than brazing, 
an oxyacetylene or oxy-mapp torch is recommended. 




















Figure 6-17.^ Silver-brazed joints designed to use preplaced silver alloy rings. The alloy forms almost 

perfect fillets, and no further finishing is necessary. 



I Figure 6-18J —A machining tool bit showing how the carbide insert is brazed to the tool bit body using 

preplaced brazing filler metal shims. 


6-13 









































































[tabl e 6-3.1 -Copper Alloy Brazing Filler Metals 



Copper 

Zinc 

Tin 

Fe 

Mn 

Si 

Ni 

P 


Melting 

Flow 


% 

% 

% 

% 

% 

% 

% 

% 

Use 

Temp °F 

Temp °F 

Brass Brazing Alloy 

60 

40 







Copper, Nickel, 
Alloy, Steel 

1650 

1660 

Naval Brass 

60 

39.25 

.75 






Copper, Steel, 
Nickel Alloys 

1630 

1650 

Tobin Bronze 

59 

40.5 

.50 






Steel, Cast Iron 

1625 


Manganese Bronze 

58.5 

39.25 

1.0 

1.0 

.25 




Steel 

1590 

1630 

Low Fuming Bronze 

57.5 

40.48 

.9 

1.0 

.03 

.09 



Cast Iron, 

1598 



52 

48 







Steel 

1570 

1595 


50 

50 








1585 

1610 

Nickel Silver 

55-65 

27-17 





18 


Steel, Nickel 
Alloys, Cast Iron 




48 

42 





10 


Steel, Nickel 
Alloys 

1690 

1715 

Copper Silicon 

98.25 




.25 

1.5 



Steel to Copper 

1981 


Phosphor Bronze 

98.2 


1.5 





.3 

Copper Alloys 

1922 



Filler Metal 

The primary elements of a braze welding rod are 
copper and zinc These elements improve ductility and 
high strength. Small amounts of iron, tin, aluminum, 
manganese, chromium, lead, nickel, and silicon are also 
added to improve the welding characteristics of the rod. 
They aid in deoxidizing the weld metal, increasing flow 
action, and decreasing the chances of fuminq JTable 6-31 
lists some copper alloy brazing filler metals and their 
use. The most commonly used are brass brazing alloy 
and naval brass. The selection of the proper brazing filler 
metal depends on the types of base metals. 

Flux 

Proper fluxing is essential in braze welding. If the 
surface of the metal is not clean, the filler metal will not 
flow smoothly and evenly over the weld area. Even after 
mechanical cleaning, certain oxides often remain and 
interfere with the flow of the filler metal. The use of the 
correct flux eliminates these oxides. 

Flux may be applied directly to the weld area, or it 
can be applied by dipping the heated end of the rod into 
the flux. Once the flux sticks to the rod, it then can be 
transferred to the weld area. A prefluxed braze welding 
rod is also available, and this eliminates the need to add 
flux during welding. 


BRAZE WELDING PROCEDURES 

Edge preparation is essential in braze welding. The 
edges of the thick parts can be beveled by grinding, 
machining, or filing. It is not necessary to bevel the thin 
parts (one-fourth inch or less). The metal must be bright 
and clean on the underside as well as on the top of the 
joint. Cleaning with a file, steel wool, or abrasive paper 
removes most foreign matter such as oil, greases, and 
oxides. The use of the proper flux completes the process 
and permits the tinning to occur. 

After you prepare the edges, the parts need to be 
aligned and held in position for the braze welding proc¬ 
ess. This can be done with clamps, tack welds, or a 
combination of both. The next step is to preheat the 
assembly to reduce expansion and contraction of the 
metals during welding. The method you use depends 
upon the size of the casting or assembly. 

Once preheating is completed, you can start the 
tinning process. Adjust the flame of the torch to a 
slightly oxidizing flame and flux the joint. Through 
experience, you will find that the use of more flux during 
the tinning process produces stronger welds. Apply heat 
to the base metal until the metal begins to turn red. Melt 
some of the brazing rod onto the surface and allow it to 
spread along the entire joint. You may have to add more 
filler metal to complete the tinninq. 1 Figure 6-19l shows 































FILLER METAL 




Figure 6-19.1 -Braze welding cast iron, using the backhand method. 


an example of tinning being used with the backhand 
method of welding. 

Temperature control is very important. If the base 
metal is too hot, the filler metal bubbles or runs around 
like beads of water on a hot pan. If the filler metal forms 
little balls and runs off the metal, then the base metal is 
too cold. 

After the base metal is tinned, you can start adding 
beads of filler metal to the joint. Use a slight circular 
motion with the torch and run the beads as you would 
in regular fusion welding. As you progress, keep adding 
flux to the weld. If the weld requires several passes, be 
sure that each layer is fused into the previous one. 

After you have completed the braze welding opera¬ 
tion, heat the area around the joint on both sides for 
several inches. This ensures an even rate of cooling. 
When the joint is cold, remove any excess flux or any 
other particles with a stiff wire brush or steel wool. 


WEARFACING 

WEARFACING is the process you use to apply an 
overlay of special ferrous or nonferrous alloy to the 
surface of new or old parts. The purpose is to increase 
their resistance to abrasion, impact, corrosion, erosion, 
or to obtain other properties. Also, wearfacing also can 
be used to build up undersized parts. It is often called 
hard-surfacing, resurfacing, surfacing, or hardfacing. 

As a Steelworker, there are times when you are 
required to build up and wear-face metal parts from 
various types of construction equipment. These parts 
include the cutting edges of scraper or dozer blades, 
sprocket gears, and shovel or clamshell teeth. You may 
even wear-face new blades or shovel teeth before they 


are put into service for the first time. There are several 
different methods of wearfacing; however, in this dis¬ 
cussion we only cover the oxygas process of wearfacing. 

Wearfacing provides a means of maintaining sharp 
cutting edges and can reduce wear between metal parts. 
It is an excellent means for reducing maintenance costs 
and downtime. These and other advantages of wearfac¬ 
ing add up to increased service life and high efficiency 
of equipment. 

Wearfacing with the oxygas flame is, in many re¬ 
spects, similar to braze welding. The wearfacing metals 
generally consist of high-carbon filler rods, such as high 
chromium or a Cr-Co-W alloy, but, in some instances, 
special surfacing alloys are required. In either event, 
wearfacing is a process in which a layer of metal of one 
composition is bonded to the surface of a metal of 
another composition. 

The process of hard-surfacing is suitable to all low- 
carbon alloy and stainless steels as well as Monel and 
cast iron. It is not intended for aluminum, copper, brass, 
or bronze, as the melting point of these materials pro¬ 
hibits the use of the hard-surfacing process. It is possible 
to increase the hardness of aluminum by applying a 
zinc-aluminum solder to the surface. Copper, brass, and 
bronze can be improved in their wear ability by the 
overlay of work-hardening bronze. Carbon and alloy 
tool steels can be surface-hardened, but they offer diffi¬ 
culties due to the frequent development of shrinkage and 
strain cracks. If you do surface these materials, they 
should be in an annealed, and not a hardened condition. 
When necessary, heat treating and hardening can be 
accomplished after the surfacing operation. Quench the 
part in oil, not water. 


6-15 


















WEARFACING MATERIALS 

A surfacing operation using a copper-base alloy 
filler metal produces a relatively soft surface. Work¬ 
hardening bronzes are soft when applied and give 
excellent resistance against frictional wear. Other types 
of alloys are available that produce a surface that is 
corrosion and wear resistant at high temperatures. Wear¬ 
facing materials are produced by many different manu¬ 
facturers; therefore, be sure that the filler alloys you 
select for a particular surfacing job meet Navy specifi¬ 
cations. 

Two types of hard-surfacing materials in general use 
in the Navy are iron-base alloys and tungsten carbide. 

Iron-Base Alloys 

These materials contain nickel, chromium, manga¬ 
nese, carbon, and other hardening elements. They are 
used for a number of applications requiring varying 
degrees of hardness. A Steelworker frequently works 
with iron-base alloys when he builds up and resurfaces 
parts of construction equipment. 

Tungsten Carbide 

You use this for building up wear-resistant surfaces 
on steel parts. Tungsten carbide is one of the hardest 
substances known to man. Tungsten carbide can be 
applied in the form of inserts or of composite rod. I nserts 
are not melted but are welded or brazed to the base 
metal, as shown in i figure 6-18J The rod is applied with 
the same surfacing technique as that used for oxygas 
welding; a slightly carburizing flame adjustment is nec¬ 
essary. 

WEARFACING PROCEDURES 

Proper preparation of the metal surfaces is an im¬ 
portant part of wearfacing operations. Make sure that 
scale, rust, and foreign matter are removed from the 
metal surfaces. You can clean the metal surfaces by 
grinding, machining, or chipping. The edges of grooves, 
corners, or recesses should be well rounded to prevent 
base metal overheating and to provide a good cushion 
for the wearfacing material. 

Weafacing material is applied so it forms a thin 
layer over the base metal. The thickness of the deposit 
is usually from one sixteenth to one eighth of an inch 
and is seldom over one fourth of an inch. It is generally 
deposited in a single pass. Where wear is extensive, it 
may become necessary to use a buildup rod before 


wearfacing. If in doubt as to when to use a buildup rod, 
you should check with your leading petty officer. 

Preheating 

Most parts that require wearfacing can be preheated 
with a neutral welding flame before surfacing. You 
should use a neutral flame of about 800°F. Do not 
preheat to a temperature higher than the critical tem¬ 
perature of the metal or to a temperature that can cause 
the formation of scale. 

Application 

In general, the torch manipulations and the wearfac¬ 
ing procedures are similar to brazing techniques. How¬ 
ever, higher temperatures (about 2200°F) are necessary 
for wearfacing, and tips of one or two sizes larger than 
normal are used. 

To begin, you heat a small area of the part with a 
sweeping torch movement until the surface of the base 
metal takes on a sweating or wet appearance. When the 
surface of the base metal is in this condition, bring the 
end of the surfacing alloy into the flame and allow it to 
melt. Do not stir or puddle the alloy; let it flow. When 
the surface area has been properly sweated, the alloy 
flows freely over the surface of the base metal. 

Being able to recognize a sweated surface is essen¬ 
tial for surfacing. Sweating occurs when you heat the 
steel with a carburizing flame to a white heat tempera¬ 
ture. This carburizes an extremely thin layer of the base 
metal, approximately 0.001 inch thick. The carburized 
layer has a lower melting point than the base metal. As 
a result, it becomes a liquid, while the underlying metal 
remains a solid. This liquid film provides the medium 
for flowing the filler metal over the surface of the base 
metal. The liquid film is similar to and serves the same 
purpose as a tinned surface in soldering and braze weld¬ 
ing. 

When you heat steel with a carburizing flame, it first 
becomes red. As heating continues, the color becomes 
lighter and lighter until a bright whiteness is attained. At 
this point, a thin film of liquid, carburized metal appears 
on the surface. Surfacing alloy added at this time flows 
over the sweated surface and absorbs the film of carbur¬ 
ized metal. This surface condition is not difficult to 
recognize, but you should make several practice passes 
before you try wearfacing for the first time. 

When you use an oxygas torch for surfacing with 
chromium cobalt, the torch flame should have an excess 
fuel-gas feather about three times as long as the inner 


frii 







Figure 6-20.—Grader blade with hardfacing material applied to cutting edge. 


cone. Unless the excess fuel-gas flame is used, the 
proper base metal surface condition cannot be devel¬ 
oped. Without this condition, the surfacing alloy does 
not spread over the surface of the part. 

I Figure 6-23 shows a grader blade with a deposit of 
hardfacing material applied along the cutting edge. A 


grader blade is usually wearfaced by the electric arc 
process. If the electric arc process is not available, you 
may use the oxygas torch. 

Welding Materials Handbook , NAVFAC P-433, is 
an excellent source of information for wearfacing con¬ 
struction equipment. 


6-17 



















CHAPTER 7 


SHIELDED METAL-ARC WELDING 
AND WEARFACING 


The shielded metal-arc welding process, referred to 
as metallic-arc welding, arc welding, or stick welding, 
is extensively used in welding ferrous and nonferrous 
metals. It has many applications for producing a vast 
assortment of metal products. Shielded metal-arc weld¬ 
ing is found in the ship building industry and in the 
construction industry for fabricating girders, beams, and 
columns. Because it is easy to use and portable, shielded 
metal-arc welding is universally used in the repair and 
servicing of equipment, machinery, and a host of other 
items. 


MANUAL SHIELDED METAL-ARC 
WELDING 

Arc welding provides you the ability to join two 
metals by melting them with an arc generated between 
a coated-metal electrode and the base metal. The tem¬ 
peratures developed by the arc can reach as high as 
10000°F. The arc energy is provided by a power source 
that generates either direct or alternating current. The 
electrodes that carry the current produce a gas that 
shields the arc from the atmosphere and supplies filler 
metal to develop the weld shape. 

ARC-WELDING EQUIPMENT 

A wide variety of welding equipment is available, 
and there are many differences between the makes and 
models of the equipment produced by the manufactur¬ 
ers. However, all types of arc-welding equipment are 
similar in their basic function of producing the high-am- 
perage, low-voltage electric power required for the 
welding arc. I n this discussion, we are primarily con¬ 
cerned with the typical items of arc-welding equipment, 
rather than the specific types. For specific information 
about the equipment your battalion or duty station has 
available, consult the manufacturer's instruction man¬ 
ual. For additional operational information and safety 
instruction, have your leading welding petty officer 
explain the operation to you. 

The basic parts of a typical shielded metal-arc weld¬ 
ing outfit include a welding machine, cables, electrode 
holder (stinger), and electrodes. The Steelworker also 


requires a number of accessories that include a combi¬ 
nation chipping hammer and wire brush, welding table 
(for shopwork), C-clamps, and protective apparel. 

Before we discuss the different types of welding 
machines, you must first have a basic knowledge of the 
electrical terms used with welding. 

Electrical Terms 

Many terms are associated with arc welding. The 
following basic terms are especially important. 

ALTERNATING CURRENT.- Alternating cur¬ 
rent is an electrical current that has alternating negative 
and positive values. In the first half-cycle, the current 
flows in one direction and then reverses itself for the 
next half-cycle. In one complete cycle, the current 
spends 50 percent of the time flowing one way and the 
other 50 percent flowing the other way. The rate of 
change in direction is called frequency, and it is indi¬ 
cated by cycles per second. I n the U nited States, the 
alternating current is set at 60 cycles per second. 

AMPERE.— Amperes, sometimes called “amps," 
refers to the amount of current that flows through a 
circuit. It is measured by an “amp" meter. 

CONDUCTOR.— Conductor means any material 
that allows the passage of an electrical current. 

CURRENT.— Current is the movement or flow of 
an electrical charge through a conductor. 

DIRECT CURRENT.— Direct current is an elec¬ 
trical current that flows in one direction only. 

ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT.- Electrical circuit is 
the path taken by an electrical current flowing through 
a conductor from one terminal of the source to the load 
and returning to the other terminal of the source. 

POLARITY.— Polarity is the direction of the flow 
of current in a circuit. Since current flows in one direc¬ 
tion only in a dc welder, the polarity becomes an impor¬ 
tant factor in welding operations. 

RESISTANCE.— Resistance is the opposition of 
the conductor to the flow of current. Resistance causes 
electrical energy to be changed into heat. 








127.517 

Figure 7-1— A 300 amp ac/dc portable welding 
machine. 


VOLT.— A volt is the force required to make the 
current flow in an electrical circuit. It can be 
compared to pressure in a hydraulic system. Volts are 
measured with a volt meter. 

Power Source 

The power source used in arc welding is called a 
welding machine or a welder. Three basic types of 
welding machines are presently in use: motor- 
generators, transformers, and rectifiers. 

MOTOR-GENERATOR WELDING MA¬ 
CHINES.— These types of welding machines are 
powered by electrical, gasoline, or diesel motors. The 
diesel and gasoline motors are ideal for use in areas 
where electricity is not available. Portable gas/diesel 
welding machines are part of the equipment 
allowance for Naval Mobile Construction Battalions. 
These machines usually have the capability of 
generating alternating or direct current. On the 
newer machines, when you are welding in the direct- 
current mode, the polarity can be changed by turning 
a switch. Some of the older machines require 
reversing the cable connections. One of the 
advantages of a direct-current (dc) welding generator 
is that you have the choice of welding with either 
straight or reverse po larity. The welding machine, as 
shown i n I figure 7^1] consists of a heavy-duty, acydc 
300 amp generator powered by a diesel engine. The 
generator is also capable of producing 3 kilowatts of 
60 cycle ac power. 

Welding machines are made in six standardized 
ratings for general purposes and are listed as follows: 



HIGH RANGE 
TAP 


Figure 7^1 —An ac arc-welding transformer. 


1. Machines rated 150 and 200 amperes—30 volts 
are for light-shielded metal-arc welding and for inert- 
gas arc welding. They are also for general-purpose 
jobs or shopwork. 

2. Machines rated 200,300, and 400 amperes—40 
volts are for general welding purposes by machine or 
manual application. 

3. Machines rated 600 amperes—40 volts are for 
submerged-arc welding or carbon-arc cutting. 

ALTERNATING-CURRENT TRANSFORMER 
WELDING MACHINES.— Practically all the 
alternating current (at) arc-welding machi nes in use 
are the static-transformer type, as shown in | figure T- 
|~2] These types of machines are the smallest, least 
expensive, and the lightest type of welders made. 
Industrial applications for manual operation use 
machines having 200, 300, and 400 ampere ratings. 
Machines with a 150-ampere rating are used in light 
industrial, garage, and job/shop welding. 

The transformers are usually equipped with arc- 
stabilizing capacitors. Current control is provided in 
several ways by the welding transformer 
manufacturers. One such method is an adjustable 
reactor that is set by turning a crank until the 
appropriate setting is found. Another method is by 
plugging the electrode cable into different sockets 
located on the front of the machine. 

One major advantage of ac transformers is the 
freedom from arc blow, which often occurs when welding 
with direct-current (dc) machines. Arc blow causes the arc 
to wander while you are welding in corners on heavy 
metal or using large coated electrodes. 


m 























Table 7-1.—Cable Size Selection Guide 


Current 

Amp 

50' 

75' 

Distance from welder 

(Total length of electrode and ground cables divided by two) 

100' 125' 150' 175' 200' 225' 250' 300' 

350' 

400' 

100 

4 

4 

2 

2 

i 

1/0 

1/0 2/0 2/0 3/0 

4/0 

4/0 

150 

4 

2 

1 

1/0 

2/0 

3/0 

3/0 4/0 4/0 



200 

2 

1 

1/0 

2/0 

3/0 

4/0 

4/0 



250 

i 

1/0 

2/0 

3/0 

4/0 





300 

1/0 

2/0 

3/0 

4/0 






350 

1/0 

2/0 

4/0 







400 

1/0 

3/0 

4/0 




Based on a 4-Volt Drop 



450 

2/0 

3/0 








500 

2/0 

4/0 








550 

3/0 









600 

3/0 










FINE SELECTOR SWITCH 



Figure 7-3.-| -Combination ac, dc transformer-rectifier arc welder. 


RECTIFIER WELDING MACHINES.— Recti¬ 
fier welders are single-phase or three-phase transform¬ 
ers that have selenium or silicon rectifiers added to 
rectify (change) the output current from alternating to 
direct current. Most of these machines have the capabil¬ 
ity of producing either ac or dc straight or reverse 


polarity current. By flicking a switch, the welder can 
select the current that best suits the job [ Figure 7-31 shows 
an example of a combination ac/dc rectifier. 

Cables 

Weldi ng cables carry the current to and from the 
workpiece. One of the cables runs from the welding 
machine to the electrode holder and the other cable 
connects the workpiece to the welding machine. The 
cable that connects the workpiece to the welding ma¬ 
chine is called the ground. When the machine is turned 
on and the operator touches the electrode to the work- 
piece, the circuit is completed, current begins to flow, 
and the welding process commences. 

The welding cables must be flexible, durable, well 
insulated, and large enough to carry the required current. 
Only cable that is specifically designed for welding 
should be used. A highly flexible cable must be used for 
the electrode holder connection. This is necessary so the 
operator can easily maneuver the electrode holder dur¬ 
ing the welding process. The ground cable need not be 
so flexible because once it is connected, it does not 
move. 

Two factors determine the size of welding cable to 
use: the amperage rati ng of the machi ne and the distance 
between the work and the machine. If either amperage 
or distance increases, the cable size also must increase. 
(Se d table 7Tl ) A cable that is too small for the amperage 
or the distance between the machine and the work will 
overheat. On the other hand, larger size cables are more 









































difficult to handle, especially if you are working on a 
structure that requires a lot of moving around. The best 
size cable is one that meets the amperage demand but is 
small enough to manipulate with ease. 

As a rule, the cable between the machine and the 
work should be as short as possible. Use one continuous 
length of cable if the distance is less than 35 feet. If you 
must use more than one length of cable, join the sections 
with insulated lock-type cable connectors. J oints in the 
cable should be at least 10 feet away from the operator. 

Electrode Holder 

An electrode holder, commonly called a stinger, is 
a clamping device for holding the electrode securely in 
any position. The welding cable attaches to the holder 
through the hollow insulated handle. The design of the 
electrode holder permits quick and easy electrode ex¬ 
change. Two general types of electrode holders are in 
use: insulated and noninsulated. The noninsulated hold¬ 
ers are not recommended because they are subject to 
accidental short circuiting if bumped against the work- 
piece during welding. For safety reasons, try to ensure 
the use of only insulated stingers on the jobsite. 

Electrode holders are made in different sizes, and 
manufacturers have their own system of designation. 
Each holder is designed for use within a specified range 
of electrode diameters and welding current. You require 
a larger holder when welding with a machine having a 
300-ampere rating than when welding with a 100-am¬ 
pere machine. If the holder is too small, it will overheat. 

Ground Clamps 

The use of a good ground clamp is essential to 
producing quality welds. Without proper grounding, the 
circuit voltage fails to produce enough heat for proper 
welding, and there is the possibility of damage to the 
welding machine and cables. Three basic methods are 
used to ground a welding machine. You can fasten the 
ground cable to the workbench with a C-clamo Rfig 7-1 
BJ, attach a spring-loaded clamo l (fia.T5l) directly onto 
the workpiece, or bolt or tack-weld the end of the ground 
cable to the welding bench | (fig. 7-6) . The third way 
creates a permanent common ground. 

Cleaning Equipment 

Strong welds require good preparation and proce¬ 
dure. The surface area of the workpiece must be free of 
all foreign material, such as rust, paint, and oil. A steel 
brush is an excellent cleaning tool and is an essential 



1 Figure 7-4.-1 -C-clamped ground cable. 



i Figure 7-5J -A spring-loaded ground clamp for the ground lead. 



Figure 7-6.-| -Bolted and tack-welded ground clamps. 


part of the welder's equipment. After initial cleaning and 
a weld bead has been deposited, the slag cover must be 
removed before additional beads are added. The chip¬ 
ping hammer was specifically designed for this task. 
The chipping operation is then followed by more brush¬ 
ing, and this cycle is repeated until the slag has been 
removed. When the slag is not removed, the result is 
porosity in the weld that weakens the weld joint. 

Cleaning can also be accomplished by the use of 
power tools or chemical agents. If these items are used, 
it is essential that all safety precautions are followed. 

Safety Equipment 

Arc welding not only produces a brilliant light, but 
it also emits ultraviolet and infrared rays that are very 
























dangerous to your eyes and skin. I n l chapter 3] personal 
safety items, such as helmets, lenses, and gloves, were 
covered. An important item that needs to be covered 
here is welding screens. The welder not only has to 
protect himself but he also must take precautions to 
protect other people who may be working close by. 
When you are welding in the field, you must install a 
welding screen around your work area. It can be an 
elaborate factory-manufactured screen or as simple as 
one constructed on site from heavy fire-resistant canvas. 

WARNING 

Never look at thes welding arc without 
proper eye protection. Looking at the arc with 
the naked eye could result in permanent eye 
damage. If you receive flash burns, they should 
be treated by medical personnel. 

Another area often overlooked is ventilation. Weld¬ 
ing produces a lot of smoke and fumes that can be 
injurious to the welder if they are allowed to accumulate. 
This is especially true if you are welding in a tank or 
other inclosed area. Permanent welding booths should 
be equipped with a exhaust hood and fan system for 
removal of smoke and fumes. 

EQUIPMENT OPERATION AND 
MAI NTE NANCE 

Learning to arc weld requires you to possess many 
skills. Among these skills are the abilities to set up, 
operate, and maintain your welding equipment. 

WELDING AREA REQUIREMENTS 

In most factory environments, the work is brought 
to the welder. I n the Seabees, the majority of the time 
the opposite is true. You will be cal led to the field for 
welding on buildings, earthmoving equipment, well 
drilling pipe, ship to shore fuel lines, pontoon cause¬ 
ways, and the list goes on. To accomplish these tasks, 
you have to become familiar with your equipment and 
be able to maintain it in the field. It would be impossible 
to give detailed maintenance information here because 
of the many different types of equipment found in the 
field; therefore, only the highlights will be covered. 

WELDING MACHINE OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE 

You should become familiar with the welding ma¬ 
chine that you will be using. Study the manufacturer's 


literature and check with your senior petty officer or 
chief on the items that you do not understand. Machine 
setup involves selecting current type, polarity, and cur¬ 
rent settings. The current selection depends on the size 
and type of electrode used, position of the weld, and the 
properties of the base metal. 

Cable size and connections are determined by the 
distance required to reach the work the size of the 
machine, and the amperage needed for the weld. 

Operator maintenance depends on the type of weld¬ 
ing machine used. Transformers and rectifiers require 
little maintenance compared to engine-driven welding 
machines. Transformer welders require only to be kept 
dry and a minimal amount of cleaning. Internal mainte¬ 
nance should only be done by electricians due to the 
possibilities of electrical shock Engine-driven ma¬ 
chines require daily maintenance of the motors. Inmost 
places you will be required to fill out and turn in a daily 
inspection form called a “hard card" before starting the 
engine. This form is a list of items, such as oil level, 
water level, visible leaks, and other things, that affect 
the operation of the machine. Transportation depart¬ 
ments are the ones who usually handle these forms. 

After all of the above items have been checked, you 
are now ready to start welding. 

SHIELDED-METAL ARC WELDING 

Before you start to weld, ensure that you have all 
the required equipment and accessories. Listed below 
are some additional welding rules that should be fol¬ 
lowed. 

• Clear the welding area of all debris and clutter. 

• Do not use gloves or clothing that contains oil or 
grease. 

• Check that all wiring and cables are installed 
properly. 

• Ensure that the machine is grounded and dry. 

• Follow all manufacturer's directions on operat¬ 
ing the welding machine. 

• Have on hand a protective screen to protect 
others in the welding area from FLASH bums. 

• Always keep fire-fighting equipment on hand. 

• Clean rust, scale, paint, or dirt from the joints 
that are to be welded. 


El 




ELECTRODE 



I Figure 7-7.^ Electrode covering and gaseous shield that protects 
weld metal from the atmosphere. 


ELECTRODES 

In general, all electrodes are classified into five 
main groups: 

1. Mild steel 

2. High-carbon steel 


All mild steel and low-alloy electrodes are classified with a 4 or 5 
digit number prefixed by "E." 

Prefix "E" = Electrode 


First two (or three) digits = Tensile strength (psi) (stress relieved 
or as welded) 

Third (or fourth) digit = Position of welding 

1 = all positions (flat, horizontal, vertical, overhead) 


2 = horizontal and flat positions onh 


FOURTH 

DIGIT 

TYPE OF COATING 

WELDING CURRENT 

1 

cellulose potassium 

ac or dc Reverse or Straight 

2 

titania sodium 

ac or dc Straight 

3 

titania potassium 

ac or dc Straight or Reverse 

4 

iron powder titania 

ac or dc Straight or Reverse 

5 

low hydrogen sodium 

dc Reverse 

6 

low hvdroqen potassium 

dc or dc Reverse 

7 

iron powder iron oxide 

ac or dc 

8 

iron powder low hydrogen 

dc Reverse or Straight or ac 

0* 

see reference below 



EXAMPLE 

ELECTRODE 

60,000 psi minimum 
tensile strength re¬ 
quirement (stress 
relieved or as welded) 



all position 


•When the fourth digit is 0, the type of coating and current to use are 
determined by the third digit. For example, E-6010 indicates a cellulose 
sodium coating and operates on dc reverse, while E-6020 has an iron 
oxide coating and operates on ac or dc. 


Figure 7-8.| -Explanation of AWS classification numbers. 


3. Special alloy steel 

4. Cast iron 

5. Nonferrous 

The widest range of arc welding is done with electrodes 
in the mild steel group. 

Electrodes are manufactured for use in specific 
positions and for many different types of metal. They 
also are specially designed to use with ac or dc welding 
machines. Some manufacturer's electrodes work iden¬ 
tically on either ac or dc, while others are best suited for 
flat-position welding. Another type is made primarily 
for vertical and overhead welding, and some can be used 
in any position. As you can see, electrode selection 
depends on many variables. 

Types of Electrodes 

Electrodes are classified as either bare or shielded. 
The original bare electrodes were exactly as their name 
implied—bare. Today, they have a light covering, but 
even with this improvement they are rarely used because 
of their limitations. They are difficult to weld with, 
produce brittle welds, and have low strength. J ust about 
all welding is done with shielded electrodes. 

The shielded electrode has a heavy coating of sev¬ 
eral chemicals, such as cellulose, titania sodium, low- 
hydrogen sodium, or iron powder. Each of the chemicals 
in the coating serves a particular function in the welding 
process. In general, their main purposes are to induce 
easier arc starting, stabilize the arc, improve weld 
appearance and penetration, reduce spatter, and protect 


the molten metal from oxidation or contamination by the 
surrounding atmosphere. 

As molten metal is deposited in the welding process, 
it attracts oxygen and nitrogen. Since the arc stream 
takes place in the atmosphere, oxidation occurs while 
the metal passes from the electrode to the work. When 
this happens, the strength and ductility of the weld are 
reduced as well as the resistance to corrosion. The 
coating on the electrode prevents oxidation from taking 
place. As the electrode melts, the heavy coating releases 
an inert gas around the molten metal that excludes the 
atmosphere from the weld Kfia. 7 : 7l 

The burning residue of the coating forms a slag over 
the deposited metal that slows down the cooling rate and 
produces a more ductile weld. Some coatings include 
powdered iron that is converted to steel by the intense 
heat of the arc as it flows into the weld deposit. 

Electrode Identification 

Electrodes are often referred to by a manufacturer's 
trade name. The American Welding Society (AWS) and 
the American Society foresting and Materials (ASTM) 
have set up certain requirements for electrodes to assure 
some degree of uniformity in manufacturing electrodes. 
Thus different manufacturer's electrodes that are within 
the classification established by the AWS and ASTM 
should have the same welding characteristics. (See 
I fiq 7-81 ) 

In this classification, each type of electrode is 
assigned a specific symbol, such as E-6010, E-7010, and 
E-8010. The prefix E identifies the electrode for 































Table 7-2.-h Electrode Selection Guide 


Type 

AWS Class 

Current Type 

Welding Position 

Weld Results 

Mild Steel 

E6010 

DCR 

F, V, OH, H 

Fast freeze, deep penetrating, flat beads, all- purpose 


£6011 

DCR, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

welding 


E6012 

DCS, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

Fill-freeze, low penetration, for poor fit-up, good bead 


£6013 

DCR, DCS, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

contour, minimum spatter 


E6014 

DCS, AC 

F, V, OH, H 



E6020 

DCR, DCS, AC 

F, H 

Fast-fill, high deposition, deep groove welds, single 


£6024 

DCR, DCS, AC 

F, H 

pass 


E6027 

DCR, DCS, AC 

F, H 

Iron powder, high deposition, deep penetration 


57014 

DCR, DCS, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

Iron powder, low penetration, high speed 


£7024 

DCR, DCS, AC 

F, H 

Iron powder, high deposition, single and multiple pass 

Low Hydrogen 

E6015 

DCR 

F* V, OH, H 

Welding of high-sulphur and high-carbon steels that 


£6016 

DCR, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

tend to develop porosity and crack under weld deposit 


E6018 

DCR, AC 

F, V, OH, H 



£7016 

DCR, AC 

F, V, OH, H 



£7018 

DCR, AC 

F, V, OH, H 



E7028 

DCR, AC 

F,H 


Stainless Steel 

E308-15, 16 

DC, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

Welding stainless steel 301, 302, 303 304, 308 


£309-15, 16 

DC, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

Welding 309 alloy at elevated temperature application 
and dissimilar metals 


E310-15, 16 

DC, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

Welding type 310 and 314 stainless steel where high 
corrosion and elevated temperatures are required 


E316-15,16 

DC, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

Welding type 316 stainless steel and welds of highest 
quality. Contains less carbon to minimize carbon 
transfer in the weld. Type 316 reduces pitting 





corrosion 


E347-15,16 

DC, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

For welding all grades of stainless steels 

Low Alloy 

E7011-A1 

DCR, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

For welding carbon moly steels 


£7020-A1 

DCR, DCS, AC 

F 

2 



E8018-C3 

DCR, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

For low alloy, high-tensile strength 


E10013-G 

DCS, AC 

F, V, OH, H 

For low alloy, high-tensile steels 

DCR—Direct Current Reverse Polarity 

AC—Alternating Current 

DCS—Direct Current Straight Polarity 

F—flat, V—vertical, OH—overhead, H—horizontal 


electric-arc welding. The first two digits in the symbol 
designate the minimum allowable tensile strength in 
thousands of pounds per square inch of the deposited 
weld metal. For example, the 60-series electrodes have 
a minimum tensile strength of 60,000 pounds per square 
inch, while the 70-series electrodes have a strength of 
70,000 pounds per square inch. 

The third digit of the symbol indicates the joint 
position for which the electrode is designed. Two num- 
hers are used for this purpose: 1 and 2. Number 1 desig¬ 
nates an electrode that can be used for welding in any 
position. Number 2 represents an electrode restricted for 
welding in the horizontal and flat positions only. 


The fourth digit of the symbol represents special 
characteristics of the electrode, such as weld quality, 
type of current, and amount of penetration. The numbers 
range from 0 through 8. Since the welding position is 
dependent on the manufacturer's characteristics of the 
coating, the third and fourth numbers are often identified 
together. 

Electrode Selection 

Several factors are critical when you choose an 
electrode for welding. The welding position is particu¬ 
larly sianificant. lTable 7-~2l shows the recommended 


7-7 













current types and welding positions for the most com¬ 
mon electrodes. 

As a rule of thumb, you should never use an elec¬ 
trode that has a diameter larger than the thickness of the 
metal that you are welding. Some operators prefer larger 
electrodes because they permit faster travel, but this 
takes a lot of expedience to produce certified welds. 

Position and the type of joint are also factors in 
determining the size of the electrode. For example, in a 
thick-metal section with a narrow vee, a small-diameter 
electrode is always used to run the frost weld or root pass. 
This is done to ensure full penetration at the root of the 
weld. Successive passes are then made with larger elec¬ 
trodes. 

For vertical and overhead welding, 3/16 inch is the 
largest diameter electrode that you should use regardless 
of plate thickness. Larger electrodes make it too difficult 
to control the deposited metal. For economy, you should 
always use the largest electrode that is practical for the 
work It takes about one half of the time to deposit an 
equal quantity of weld metal from 1/4-inch electrodes 
as it does from 3/16-i nch electrodes of the same type. 
The larger sizes not only allow the use of higher currents 
but also require fewer stops to change electrodes. 

Deposit rate and joint preparation are also important 
in the selection of an electrode. Electrodes for welding 
mild steel can be classified as fast freeze, fill freeze, and 
fast fill. FAST-FREEZE electrodes produce a snappy, 
deep penetrating arc and fast-freezing deposits. They are 
commonly called reverse-polarity electrodes, even 
though some can be used on ac. These electrodes have 
little slag and produce flat beads. They are widely used 
for all-position welding for both fabrication and repair 
work 

FILL-FREEZE electrodes have a moderately force¬ 
ful arc and a deposit rate between those of the fast-freeze 
and fast-fill electrodes. They are commonly called the 
straight-polarity electrodes, even though they may be 
used on ac. These electrodes have complete slag cover¬ 
age and weld deposits with distinct, even ripples. They 
are the general-purpose electrode for a production shop 
and are also widely used for repair work They can be 
used in all positions, but fast-freeze electrodes are still 
preferred for vertical and overhead welding. 

Among the F AST-FIL L electrodes are the heavy- 
coated, iron powder electrodes with a soft arc and fast 
deposit rate. These electrodes have a heavy slag and 
produce exceptionally smooth weld deposits. They are 
generally used for production welding where the work 
is positioned for flat welding. 

Another group of electrodes are the low-hydrogen 
type that were developed for welding high-sulfur and 
high-carbon steel. These electrodes produce X-ray 


quality deposits by reducing the absorption of hydrogen 
that causes porosity and cracks under the weld bead. 

Welding stainless steel requires an electrode con¬ 
taining chromium and nickel. All stainless steels have 
low-thermal conductivity that causes electrode over¬ 
heating and improper arc action when high currents are 
used. I n the base metal, it causes large temperature 
differentials between the weld and the rest of the work, 
which warps the plate. A basic rule in welding stainless 
steel is to avoid high currents and high heat. Another 
reason for keeping the weld cool is to avoid carbon 
corrosion. 

There are also many special-purpose electrodes for 
surfacing and welding copper and copper alloys, alu¬ 
minum, cast iron, manganese, nickel alloys, and nickel- 
manganese steels. The composition of these electrodes 
is designed to match the base metal. The basic rule in 
selecting electrodes is to pick one that is similar in 
composition to the base metal. 

Electrode Storage 

Electrodes are expensive; therefore, the loss or de¬ 
terioration through improper handling or storage can 
become very costly. Always store them in a dry place at 
room temperature with 50-percent maximum relative 
humidity. Moisture causes the coating on electrodes to 
disintegrate and fall off. Low-hydrogen rods are espe¬ 
cially sensitive to moisture. After removing these rods 
from their original packaging, you should store them in 
a storage space maintained at a temperature between 
250°F to 400°F. Portable or stationary drying ovens are 
used to store and preserve electrodes at specified tem¬ 
peratures. Care should be taken when handling elec¬ 
trodes because bumping or dropping them can cause the 
coatings to fall off, rendering the rod useless. 

Polarity 

Earlier in this chapter, ac and dc current was briefly 
covered. With ac welding machines, polarity is not a 
problem. When using dc welding machines, you can 
weld with either straight polarity or reverse polarity. 

Polarity is the direction of the current flow in a 
circuit, as shown i i j figure 7^\ In straight polarity, the 
electrode is negative and the workpiece positive; the 
electrons flow from the electrode to the workpiece. In 
reverse polarity, the electrode is positive and the work- 
piece negative; the electrons flow from the workpiece 
to the electrode. To help you remember the difference, 
think of straight polarity as a SENator and reverse 
polarity as a REPresentative. Use only the first three 
letters of each key word. SEN stands for Straight Elec¬ 
trode Negative; REP for Reverse Electrode Positive. 


7-8 





ELECTRODE 



I Figure 7-9.1 -Straight and reverse polarity in electric welding. 

On some of the older machines, polarity is changed 
by switching cables. On many of the newer machines, 
the polarity can be changed by turning a switch on the 
machine. 

Polarity affects the amount of heat going into the 
base metal. By changing polarity, you can direct the 
amount of heat to where it is needed. When you use 
straight polarity, the majority of the heat is directed 
toward the workpiece. When you use reverse polarity, 
the heat is concentrated on the electrode. In some weld¬ 
ing situations, it is desirable to have more heat on the 
workpiece because of its size and the need for more heat 
to melt the base metal than the electrode; therefore, 
when making large heavy deposits, you should use 
STRAIGHT POLARITY. 

On the other hand, in overhead welding it is neces¬ 
sary to rapidly freeze the filler metal so the force of 
gravity will not cause it to fall. When you use REVERSE 
POLARITY, less heat is concentrated at the workpiece. 
This allows the filler metal to cool faster, giving it 
greater holding power. Cast-iron arc welding is another 
good example of the need to keep the workpiece cool; 
reverse polarity permits the deposits from the electrode 
to be applied rapidly while preventing overheating in 
the base metal. 

In general, straight polarity is used for all mild steel, 
bare, or lightly coated electrodes. With these types of 
electrodes, the majority of heat is developed at the 
positive side of the current, the workpiece. However, 
when heavy-coated electrodes are used, the gases given 
off in the arc may alter the heat conditions so the 



I Figure 7-163 -Striking or brushing method of starting the arc. 


opposite is true and the greatest heat is produced on the 
negative side. Electrode coatings affect the heat condi¬ 
tions differently. One type of heavy coating may provide 
the most desirable heat balance with straight polarity, 
while another type of coating on the same electrode may 
provide a more desirable heat balance with reverse 
polarity. 

Reverse polarity is used in the welding of nonfer- 
rous metals, such as aluminum, bronze, Monel, and 
nickel. Reverse polarity is also used with some types of 
electrodes for making vertical and overhead welds. 

You can recognize the proper polarity for a given 
electrode by the sharp, crackling sound of the arc. The 
wrong polarity causes the arc to emit a hissing sound, 
and the welding bead is difficult to control. 

One disadvantage of direct-current welding is “arc 
blow." As stated earlier, arc blow causes the arc to 
wander while you are welding in corners on heavy metal 
or when using large-coated electrodes. Direct current 
flowing through the electrode, workpiece, and ground 
clamp generates a magnetic field around each of these 
units. This field can cause the arc to deviate from the 
intended path. The arc is usually deflected forward or 
backward along the line of travel and may cause exces¬ 
sive spatter and incomplete fusion. It also has the ten¬ 
dency to pull atmospheric gases into the arc, resulting 
in porosity. 

Arc blow can often be corrected by one of the 
following methods: by changing the position of the 
ground clamp, by welding away from the ground clamp, 
or by changing the position of the workpiece. 

STARTING THE ARC 

Two basic methods are used for starting the arc: the 
STRIKING or BRUSHING method RfmlTlQi and the 






























1 Figure 7-lLj -Tapping method of starting the arc. 

TAPPING method [TfTq. 7-lU) . In either method, the arc 
is started by short circuiting the welding current between 
the electrode and the work surface. The surge of high 
current causes the end of the electrode and a small spot 
on the base metal beneath the electrode to melt instantly. 
In the STRIKING or BRUSHING method, the electrode 
is brought down to the work with a lateral motion similar 
to striking a match. As soon as the electrode touches the 
work surface, it must be raised to establish the arc 
Kfig. 7-101 . The arc length or gap between the end of the 
electrode and the work should be equal to the diameter 
of the electrode. When the proper arc length is obtained, 
it produces a sharp, crackling sound. 

In the TAPPING method, you hold the electrode in 
a vertical position to the surface of the work. The arc is 
started by tapping or bouncing it on the work surface 
and then raising it to a distance equal to the diameter of 
the electrode [(fig. 7-lU) . When the proper length of arc 
is established, a sharp, crackling sound is heard. 

When the electrode is withdrawn too slowly with 
either of the starting methods described above, it will 
stick or freeze to the plate or base metal. If this occurs, 
you can usually free the electrode by a quick sideways 
wrist motion to snap the end of the electrode from the 
plate. If this method fails, immediately release the elec¬ 
trode from the holder or shutoff the welding machine. 
Use alight blow with a chipping hammer or a chisel to 
free the electrode from the base metal. 

CAUTION 

NEVER remove your helmet or the shield 
from your eyes as long as there is any possibility 
that the electrode could produce an arc. 


After you strike the arc, the end of the electrode 
melts and flows into the molten crater of the base metal. 
To compensate for this loss of metal, you must adjust 
the length of the arc. Unless you keep moving the 
electrode closer to the base metal, the length of the arc 
will increase. An arc that is too long will have a hum¬ 
ming type of sound. One that is too short makes a 
popping noise. When the electrode is fed down to the 
plate and along the surface at a constant rate, a bead of 
metal is deposited or welded onto the surface of the base 
metal. After striking the arc, hold it for a short time at 
the starting point to ensure good fusion and crater depo¬ 
sition. Good arc welding depends upon the control of 
the motion of the electrode along the surface of the base 
metal. 

Setting the Current 

The amount of current used during a welding opera¬ 
tion depends primarily upon the diameter of the elec¬ 
trode. As a rule, higher currents and larger diameter 
electrodes are better for welding in the flat position than 
the vertical or overhead position. Manufacturers of elec¬ 
trodes usually specify a current range for each type and 
size of electrode; this information is normally found on 
the face of the electrode container. 

Since most recommended current settings are only 
approximate, final current settings and adjustments 
need to be made during the welding operation. For 
example, when the recommended current range for an 
electrode is 90-100 amperes, the usual practice is to set 
the controls midway between the two limits, or at 95 
amperes. After starting the weld, make your final adjust¬ 
ments by either increasing or decreasing the current. 

When the current is too high, the electrode melts 
faster and the molten puddle will be excessively large 
and irregular. High current also leaves a groove in the 
base metal along both sides of the weld. This is called 
undercutting, and an example is shown ir | figure 7-121 
view C. 

With current that is too low, there is not enough heat 
to melt the base metal and the molten pool will be too 
small. The result is poor fusion and a irregular shaped 
deposit that piles up, as shown ir t figure l'Al \ view B. 
This piling up of molten metal is called overlap. The 
molten metal from the electrode lays on the work with¬ 
out penetrating the base metal. Both undercutting and 
overlapping result in poor welds, as shown in | fiqurel 

[HI] 

When the electrode, current, and polarity are correct, 
a good arc produces a sharp, crackling sound. When any 
of these conditions are incorrect, the arc produces a 
steady, hissing sound, such as steam escaping. 


7-10 





















1 Figure 7-123 -Comparison chart of welds. 



POOR 

WELD 




Sharp Crackling Sound. 
Best for Most Welding. 



LONG ARC 

Steady Hiss Allows 
Oxidation and Spatter. 


I Figure 7-143 — Setting the length of an arc. 


GOOD 

WELD 



GOOD 

PENETRATION 


Figure 7-13.-Undercuts and overlaps in welding. 


Length of Arc 

When an arc is too long, the metal melts off the 
electrode in large globules and the arc may break fre¬ 
quently. This produces a wide, spattered, and irregular 
deposit with insufficient fusion between the base metal 
and the weld |(fiq. 7-12| view F). 

When an arc is too short, it fails to generate enough 
heat to melt the base metal properly, causes the electrode 


to stick frequently to the base metal, and produces 
uneven deposits with irregular ripples. The recom¬ 
mended length of the arc is equal to the diameter of the 
bare end of the electrode, as shown in | figure 7^14] 

The length of the arc depends upon the type of 
electrode and the type of welding being done; therefore, 
for smaller diameter electrodes, a shorter arc is neces¬ 
sary than for larger electrodes. Remember: the length of 
the arc should be about equal to the diameter of the bare 
electrode except when welding in the vertical or over¬ 
head position. In either position, a shorter arc is desir¬ 
able because it gives better control of the molten puddle 
and prevents atmospherical impurities from entering the 
weld. 


t m 































































Travel Speed 


WORK ANGLE 



FROM 

HORIZONTAL 


I Figure 7-153k Work angle. 



Electrode Angle 

The angle at which you hold the electrode greatly 
affects the shape of the weld bead which is very impor¬ 
tant in fillet and deep groove welding. The electrode 
angle consists of two positions: work angle and travel 
angle. Work angle is the angle from the horizontal 
measured at right angles to the direction of weldino l(fial 
1 7-15] . Travel angle is the angle in the direction of 
welding and may vary from 5 to 30 degrees, depending 
on the welder's choice and conditions I (fig. 7-161 . 

Work angle is especially important in multiple-pass 
fillet welding. Normally, a small variance of the work 
angle will not affect the appearance or quality of a weld; 
however, when undercuts occur in the vertical section 
of a fillet weld, the angle of the arc should be lowered 
and the electrode directed more toward the vertical 
section. 


Travel speed is the rate at which the electrode travels 
along a weld seam. The maximum speed of welding 
depends on the skill of the operator, the position of the 
weld, the type of electrode, and the required joint pene¬ 
tration. 

Normally, when the travel speed is too fast, the 
molten pool cools too quickly, locking in impurities and 
causing the weld bead to be narrow with pointed ripples, 
as shown in i figure 7^12] view D. On the other hand, if 
the travel speed is too slow, the metal deposit piles up 
excessively and the weld is high and wide, as shown in 
I figure 7-12] view E. In most cases, the limiting factor is 
the highest speed that produces a satisfactory surface 
appearance of a normal weld, as shown in | figure TT2\ 
view A. 

Breaking the Arc 

The most commonly used method to break the arc 
i s to hoi d the el ectrode stati onary unti I the crater i s fi 11 ed 
and then slowly withdraw the electrode. This method 
reduces the possibilities of crater cracks. 

Reestablishing the Arc 

When it becomes necessary to reestablish the arc (as 
in a long weld that requires the use of more than one 
electrode), the crater must first be cleaned before strik- 
i ng the arc. Stri ke the ti p of the new el ectrode at the 
forward (cold) end of the crater and establish an arc. 
Move the arc backward over the crater, and then move 
forward again and continue the weld. This procedure 
fills the crater and prevents porosity and slag inclusions. 

Peening 

Peening is a procedure that involves lightly ham¬ 
mering a weld as it cools. This process aids in relieving 
built-up stresses and preventing surface cracking in the 
joint area; however, peening should be done with care 
because excess hammering can work harden and in¬ 
crease stresses in the weld. This condition leads to weld 
embrittlement and early failure. Some welds are cov¬ 
ered by specific codes that prohibit peening so you 
should check the weld specification before peening. 


ARC WELDING POSITIONS 

The types of welds, joints, and welding positions 
used in manual-shielded metal arc welding are very 
similar to those used in oxygas welding. Naturally, the 
techniques are somewhat different because of the equip¬ 
ment involved is different. 


EH 






















REINFORCEMENT OF WELD, 



OF WELD v 

-i A 


A 


SQUARE GROOVE WELD 


«—s-i-A 



REINFORCEMENT OF WELD 




SINGLE "V" GROOVE WELD 


SINGLE "U" GROOVE WELD 



DOUBLE "V" GROOVE WELD 



DOUBLE "U" GROOVE WELD 

REINFORCEMENT OF WELD% 



SINGLE BEVEL GROOVE WELD 


SINGLE "J" GROOVE WELD 



I Figure 7-17.- Butt joints in the flat position. 


FLAT-POSITION WELDING 

Earlier reexplained that welding can be done in 
any position, but it is much simpler when done in the 
flat position. In this position, the work is less tiring, 
welding speed is faster, the molten puddle is not as likely 
to run, and better penetration can be achieved. When¬ 
ever possible, try to position the work so you can weld 
in the flat position. In the flat position, the face of the 
weld is approximately horizontal. 

J ointType 

Butt joints are the primary type of joints used in the 
flat position of welding; however, flat-position welding 


can be made on just about any type of joint providing 
you can rotate the section you are welding on to the 
appropriate position. Techniques that are useful in mak¬ 
ing butt joints in the flat position, with and without the 
use of backing strips, are described below. 

BUTT JOINTS WITHOUT BACKING 
STRIPS — A butt joint is used to join two plates having 
surfaces in about the same plane. Several forms of butt 
joints are shown in i figure 7^171 

Plates up to 1/8 inch thick can be welded in one pass 
with no special edge preparation. Plates from 1/8 to 3/16 
inch in thickness also can be welded with no special 
edge preparation by welding on both sides of the joint. 





























































Figure 7-18.1 -Butt welds with multipass beads. 



I Figure 7-19] -Weave motions used in manual shielded arc 
welding. 


Tack welds should be used to keep the plates aligned for 
welding. The electrode motion is the same as that used 
in making a bead weld. 

In welding 1/4-inch plate or heavier, you should 
prepare the edges of the pi ates by bevel i ng or by J U 
or V-grooving, whichever is the most applicable. You 
should use single or double bevels or grooves when the 
specifications and/or the plate thickness requires it. The 
first bead is deposited to seal the space between the two 
plates and to weld the root of the joint. This bead or layer 
of weld metal must be thoroughly cleaned to remove all 
slag and dirt before the second layer of metal is depos¬ 
ited. 


UNDERCUT UNDERCUT 



I Figure 7-2dJ -Undercutting in butt joint welds. 


In making multipass welds, as shown in | figure 7-T8] 
the second, third, and fourth layers of weld metal are 
made with a weaving motion of the electrode. Clean 
each layer of metal before laying additional beads. You 
may use one of the weavi ng motions shown i n lfiqurel 
1 7-191 depending upon the type of joint and size of 
electrode. 

In the weaving motion, oscillate or move the elec¬ 
trode uniformly from side to side, with a slight hesitation 
at the end of each oscillation. Incline the electrode 5 to 
15 degrees in the direction of welding as in bead weld¬ 
ing. When the weaving motion is not done properly, 
undercutting could occur at the joint, as shown in i fiaurel 
1 7-20.1 Excessive welding speed also can cause undercut¬ 
ting and poor fusion at the edges of the weld bead. 

BUTT JOINTS WITH BACKING STRIPS.— 

Welding 3/16-inch plate or thicker requires backing 
strips to ensure complete fusion in the weld root pass 
and to provide better control of the arc and the weld 
metal. Prepare the edges of the plates in the same 
manner as required for welding without backing strips. 


7-14 
































































Figure 7-21.—Use of backing strips in welding butt joints. 

For plates up to 3/8 inch thick, the backing strips should 
be approximately 1 inch wide and 3/16 inch thick. For 
plates more than l/2inch thick, the backing strips should 
be 1 1/2 inches wide and 1/4 inch thick Tack-weld the 
backing strip to the base of the joint, as shown in | fiqurel 
17-211 The backing strip acts as a cushion for the root 
pass. Complete the joint by welding additional layers of 
metal. After you complete the joint, the backing strip 
may be “washed” off or cut away with a cutting torch. 
When specified, place a seal bead along the root of the 
joint. 

Bear in mind that many times it will not always be 
possible to use a backing strip; therefore, the welder 
must be able to run the root pass and get good penetra¬ 
tion without the formation of icicles. 



I Figure 7-22J- Horizontal groove weld. 



I Figure 7-23J -Horizontal fillet weld, 


HORIZONTAL-POSITION WELDING 

You will discover that it is impossible to weld all 
pieces in the flat position. Often the work must be done 
in the horizontal position. The horizontal position has 
two basic forms, depending upon whether it is used with 
a groove weld or a fillet weld. I n a groove weld, the axis 
of the weld liesin a relative horizontal plane and the face 
of the weld is in a vertical olane Kfia. 7-221 ). I n a fillet 
weld, the welding is performed on the upper side of a 
relatively horizontal surface and against an approxi¬ 
mately vertical olane Kfia. 7-231 . 


7-15 





























































Figure 7-24H -Horizontal welding angles. 



Figure 7-25.1 -Tack-weld to hold the tee joint elements in place. 


An inexperienced welder usually finds the horizon¬ 
tal position of arc welding difficult, at least until he has 
developed a fair degree of skill in applying the proper 
technique. The primary difficulty is that in this position 
you have no "shoulder" of previously deposited weld 
metal to hold the molten metal. 

E lectrode Movement 

In horizontal welding, position the electrode so that 
it points upward at a 5- to 10-degree angle in conjunction 
with a 20-degree travel anal e l (fig 7-241 . Use a narrow 
weaving motion in laying the bead. This weaving mo¬ 
tion distributes the heat evenly, reducing the tendency 
of the molten puddle to sag. You should use the shortest 
arc length possible, and when the force of the arc under¬ 
cuts the plate at the top of the bead, lower the electrode 
holder a little to increase the upward angle. 



1/4 INCH LEG SIZE 


Figure 7-26.-Position of electrode and fusion area of fillet weld 
on a tee joint. 


As you move in and out of the crater, pause slightly 
each time you return. This keeps the crater small and the 
bead has less tendency to sag. 

J oint Type 

Horizontal-position welding can be used on most 
types of joints. The most common types of joints it is 
used on are tee joints, lap joints, and butt joints. 

TEE J 01 NTS.— When you make tee joints in the 
horizontal position, the two plates are at right angles to 
each other in the form of an inverted T. The edge of the 
vertical plate may be tack-welded to the surface of the 
horizontal plate, as shown ir l figure 7^251 

A fillet weld is used in making the tee joint, and a 
short arc is necessary to provide good fusion at the root 
and along the legs of the weld I (fig. 7-26] view A). Hold 
the electrode at an angle of 45 degrees to the two plate 
surface llfiq. 7-2 6, view B) with an incline of approxi¬ 
mately 15 degrees in the direction of welding. 

When practical, weld light plates with a fillet weld 
in one pass with little or no weaving of the electrode. 
Welding of heavier plates may require two or more 
passes in which the second pass or layer is made with a 
semicircular weaving motion, as shown ir l figure 7^27] 
To ensure good fusion and the prevention of undercut¬ 
ting, you should make a slight pause at the end of each 
weave or oscillation. 

For fillet-welded tee joints on 1/2-inch plate or 
heavier, deposit stringer beads in the sequence shown in 
I figure 7-28] 


7-16 




















































TACK WELD 



I Figure 7-27T- Weave motion for multipass fillet weld. 



Figure 7-30.-Tack welding a lap joint. 




Figure 7-28.1 -Order of making string beads for a tee joint in 
heavy plate. 


Figure 7-31.-Position of electrode on a lap joint. 




Figure 7-297^ 1 nter mi ttent fillet welds. 


Chain-intermittent or staggered-intermittent fillet 
welds, as shown ir | figure 7-291 are used on long tee 
joints. Fillet welds of these types are for joints where 
high weld strength is not required; however, the short 
welds are arranged so the finished joint is equal in 


strength to that of a joint that has a fillet weld along the 
entire length of one side. Intermittent welds also have 
the advantage of reduced warpage and distortion. 

LAP J 01 NTS.— When you make a lap joint, two 
overlapping plates are tack-welded in place ! (fig. 7-30) . 
and a fillet weld is deposited along the joint. 

The procedure for making this fillet weld is similar 
to that used for making fillet welds in tee joints. You 
should hold the electrode so it forms an angle of about 
30 degrees from the vertical and is inclined 15 degrees 
in the direction of welding. The position of the electrode 
in relation to the plates is shown in i figure 7-311 The 
weaving motion is the same as that used for tee joints, 
except that the pause at the edge of the top plate is long 
enough to ensure good fusion without undercut. Lap 
joints on 1/2-inch plate or heavier are made by deposit¬ 
ing a sequence of stringer beads, as shown in i fiqurel 


7-17 


In making lap joints on plates of different thickness, 
you should hold the electrode so that it forms an angle 
of between 20 and 30 degrees from the vertical 












































































Figure 7-32.—Lap joints on plates of different thickness. 



Figure 7-33^| -Horizontal butt joint. 



Figure 7-34^ Multipie passes. 



Kfia. 7-32)1 Be careful not to overheat or undercut the 
thinner plate edge. 

BUTT J 01 NTS — Most butt joints, designed for 
horizontal welding, have the beveled plate positioned on 
the top. The plate that is not beveled is on the bottom 
and the flat edge of this plate provides a shelf for the 
molten metal so that it does not run out of the joint Kfiq.l 
1 7-33] . Often both edges are beveled to forma 60-degree 
included angle. When this type of joint is used, more 
skill is required because you do not have the retaining 
shelf to hold the molten puddle. 

The number of passes required for a joint depends 
on the diameter of the electrode and the thickness of the 
metal. When multiple passes are reauired Rfiq. 7-341) . 
place the first bead deep in the root of thejoint. The 
electrode holder should be inclined about 5 degrees 
downward. Clean and remove all slag before applying 
each following bead. The second bead should be placed 
with the electrode holder held about 10 degrees upward. 
For the third pass, hold the electrode holder 10 to 15 
degrees downward from the horizontal. Use a slight 
weaving motion and ensure that each bead penetrates 
the base metal. 

VERTICAL-POSITION WELDING 

A "vertical weld" is defined as a weld that is applied 
to a vertical surface or one that is inclined 45 degrees or 
less Kfia 7-35)1 Erecting structures, such as buildings, 
pontoons, tanks, and pipelines, require welding in this 
position. Welding on a vertical surface is much more 
difficult than welding in the flat or horizontal position 
due to the force of gravity. Gravity pulls the molten 
metal down. To counteract this force, you should use 
fast-freeze or fill-freeze electrodes. 

Vertical welding is done in either an upward or 
downward position. The terms used for the direction of 
welding are vertical up or vertical down. Vertical down 
welding is suited for welding light gauge metal because 
the penetration is shallow and diminishes the possibility 
of burning through the metal. Furthermore, vertical 
down welding is faster which is very important in pro¬ 
duction work. 

Current Settings and Electrode Movement 

In vertical arc welding, the current settings should 
be less than those used for the same electrode in the flat 
position. Another difference is that the current used for 
welding upward on a vertical plate is slightly higher than 
the current used for welding downward on the same 
plate. 























































VERTICAL bead weld, welding up 

A 


VERTICAL WEAVE BEAD WELD, 
WELDING UP 

B 




VERTICAL BEAD WELD, WELDING DOWN 

c 


VERTICAL WEAVE BEAD WELD, 
WELDING DOWN 

D 


I Figure 7-36^ -Bead welding in the vertical position. 


To produce good welds, you must maintain the 
proper angle between the electrode and the base metal. 
In welding upward, you should hold the electrode at 90 
degrees to the vertical, as shown ii h figure 7-~36l, view A. 
When weaving is necessary, oscillate the electrode, as 
shown in i figure 7-36] view B. 

I n vertical down welding, incline the outer end of 
the electrode downward about 15 degrees from the 
horizontal while keeping the arc pointing upward to¬ 
ward the deposited molten metal l (figure 7-361 view C). 
When vertical down welding requires a weave bead, you 
should oscillate the electrode, as shown i rt figure 7^36] 
view D. 


J ointType 

Vertical welding is used on most types of joints. The 
types of joints you will most often use it on are tee joints, 
lap joints, and butt joints. 

When making fillet welds in either tee or lap joints 
in the vertical position, hold the electrode at 90 degrees 
to the plates or not more than 15 degrees off the hori¬ 
zontal for proper molten metal control. Keep the arc 
short to obtain good fusion and penetration. 

TEE J OINTS.— To weld tee joints in the vertical 
position, start the joint at the bottom and weld upward. 


7-19 











































FOR 1/4" 3/8" AND 1/2“SIZE 

FILLFTS PLATE "H" 



Figure 7-37.f Fillet welds in the vertical position, 


Move the electrode in a triangular weaving motion, as 
shown in i figure 7-37] view A. A slight pause in the 
weave, at the points indicated, improves the sidewall 
penetration and provides good fusion at the root of the 
joint. 

When the weld metal overheats, you should quickly 
shift the electrode away from the crater without break¬ 
ing the arc, as shown in i figure 7-371 view B. This permits 
the molten metal to solidify without running downward. 
Return the electrode immediately to the crater of the 
weld in order to maintain the desired size of the weld. 


When more than one pass is necessary to make a tee 
weld, you may use either of the weaving motions shown 
in i figure 7^371 views C and D. A slight pause at the end 
of the weave will ensure fusion without undercutting the 
edges of the plates. 

LAP J 01 NTS.— To make welds on lap joints in the 
vertical position, you should move the electrode in a 
triangular weaving motion, as shown in i figure 7-37] 
view E. Use the same procedure, as outlined above for 
the tee joint, except direct the electrode more toward the 
vertical plate marked "G." Hold the arc short, and pause 


7-20 








































































I Figure 7-38ll -Butt joint welding in the vertical position. 


slightly at the surface of plate G. Try not to undercut 
either of the plates or to allow the molten metal to 
overlap at the edges of the weave. 

Lap joints on heavier plate may require more than 
one bead. If it does, clean the initial bead thoroughly and 
place all subsequent beads as shown ir l) figure 7-371 view 
F. The precautions to ensure good fusion and uniform 
weld deposits that was previously outlined for tee joints 
also apply to lap joints. 

BUTT J 01 NTS — Prepare the plates used in verti¬ 
cal welding identically to those prepared for welding in 
the flat position. To obtain good fusion and penetration 
with no undercutting, you should hold a short arc and 
the motion of the arc should be carefully controlled. 

Butt joints on beveled plates 1/4 inch thick can be 
welded in one pass by using a triangular weave motion, 
as shown ir l figure 7^381 view A. 

Welds made on 1/2-inch plate or heavier should be 
done in several passes, as shown ir l figure 7-~38] view B. 
Deposit the last pass with a semicircular weaving mo¬ 
tion with a slight “whip-up" and pause of the electrode 
at the edge of the bead. This produces a good cover pass 


with no undercutting. Welds made on plates with a 
backup strip should be done in the same manner. 

E-7018 Electrode Welding Technique 

The previously described vertical welding tech¬ 
niques generally cover all types of electrodes; however, 
you should modify the procedure slightly when using 
E-7018 electrodes. 

When vertical down welding, you should drag the 
electrode lightly using a very short arc. Refrain from 
using a long arc since the weld depends on the molten 
slag for shielding. Small weaves and stringer beads are 
preferred to wide weave passes. Use higher amperage 
with acthan with dc. Point the electrode straight into the 
joint and tip it forward only a few degrees in the direc¬ 
tion of travel. 

On vertical up welding, a triangular weave motion 
produces the best results. Do not use a whipping motion 
or remove the electrode from the molten puddle. Point 
the electrode straight into the joint and slightly upward 
in order to allow the arc force to help control the puddle. 
Adjust the amperage in the lower level of the recom¬ 
mended range. 

OVERHEAD-POSITION WELDING 

Overhead welding is the most difficult position in 
welding. Not only do you have to contend with the force 
of gravity but the majority of the time you also have to 
assume an awkward stance. Nevertheless, with practice 
it is possible to make welds equal to those made in the 
other positions. 

Current Settings and Electrode Movement 

To retain complete control of the molten puddle, use 
a very short arc and reduce the amperage as recom¬ 
mended. As in the vertical position of welding, gravity 
causes the molten metal to drop or sag from the plate. 
When too long an arc is held, the transfer of metal from 
the electrode to the base metal becomes increasingly 
difficult, and the chances of large globules of molten 
metal dropping from the electrode increase. When you 
routinely shorten and lengthen the arc, the dropping of 
molten metal can be prevented; however, you will defeat 
your purpose should you carry too large a pool of molten 
metal in the weld. 

One of the problems encountered in overhead weld¬ 
ing is the weight of the cable. To reduce arm and wrist 
fatigue, drape the cable over your shoulder when weld- 
ing in the standing position. When sitting, place the 





















































cable over your knee. With experience, cable placement 
will become second nature. 




I Figure 7-391- Position of electrode and weave motion in the 
overhead position. 





WARNING 

Because of the possibility of falling molten 
metal, use a protective garment that has a tight 
fitting collar that buttons or zips up to the neck. 

Roll down your sleeves and wear a cap and 
appropriate shoes. 

Type of Welds 

Techniques used in making bead welds, butt joints, 
and fillet welds in the overhead position are discussed 
in the following paragraphs. 

BEAD WELDS.— For bead welds, the work angle 
of the electrode is 90 degrees to the base metal Kfia. 7-391 
view A). The travel angle should be 10 to 15 degrees in 
the direction of welding [(fig. 7-391 view B). 

Weave beads can be made by using the motion 
shown in i figure 7-39 J view C. A rather rapid motion is 
necessary at the end of each semicircular weave to 
control the molten metal deposit. Avoid excessive weav¬ 
ing because this can cause overheating of the weld 
deposit and the formation of a large, uncontrollable 
pool. 

BUTT J 01 NTS.— Prepare the plates for overhead 
butt welding in the same manner as required for the flat 
position. The best results are obtained when backing 
strips are used; however, you must remember that you 
will not always be able to use a backing strip. When you 
bevel the plates with a featheredge and do not use a 
backing strip, the weld will repeatedly burn through 
unless extreme care is taken by the operator. 

For overhead butt welding, bead welds are preferred 
over weave welds. Clean each bead and chip out the 
rough areas before placing the next pass. The electrode 
position and the order of deposition of the weld beads 
when welding on 1/4- or 1/2-inch plate are shown in 
I figure 7-401 views B and C. Make the first pass with the 
electrode held at 90 degrees to the plate, as shown in 
I figure 7-40] view A. When you use an electrode that is 
too large, you can not hold a short arc in the root area. 
This results in insufficient root penetration and inferior 
joints. 


I Figure 7-40^ -Multipass butt joint in the overhead position. 


7-22 


FILLET WELDS.— In making fillet welds in 
either tee or lap joints in the overhead position, maintain 
a short arc and refrain from weaving of the electrode. 






































































A 



B 



I Figure 74Ll -Fillet welding in the overhead position. 


Hold the electrode at approximately 30 degrees to the 
vertical plate and move it uniformly in the direction of 
welding, as shown ir l figure 7-41] view B. Control the 
arc motion to secure good penetration in the root of the 
weld and good fusion with the sidewalls of the vertical 
and horizontal plates. When the molten metal becomes 
too fluid and tends to sag, whip the electrode quickly 
away from the crater and ahead of the weld to lengthen 


the arc and allow the metal to solidify. Immediately 
return the electrode to the crater and continue welding. 

Overhead fillet welds for either tee or lap joints on 
heavy plate require several passes or beads to complete 
the joint. One example of an order of bead deposition is 
shown in i figure 1 ~^\\ view A. The root pass is a string 
bead made with no weaving motion of the electrode. Tilt 
the electrode about 15 degrees in the direction of 
welding, as shown in lfiaurd 741 . view C, and with a 


7-23 
































Table 7-3-Causes and Cures of Common Welding Problems 


porous welds 

WHY 

1. Short arc with exception of 
low hydrogen and stainless 

2. Insufficient puddling time 

3. Impaired base metal 

4. Poor electrode 

5. improper shield coverage 

WHATTO DO 

1. Check impurities in base 
metal 

2. Allow sufficient puddling time 
for gases to escape 

3. Use proper current 


poor penetration 

WHY 

1. Speed too fast 

2. Electrode too large 

3. current too low 

4. Faulty preparation 

WHAT TO DO 

1. Use enough current to obtain 
desired penetration-weld 
slowly 


warping 

WHY 

1. Shrinkage of weld metal 

2. Faulty clamping of parts 

3. Faulty preparation 

4. Overheating at joint 
WHAT TO DO 

1. Peen joint edges before 
welding 

2. Weid more rapidiy 

3. Avoid excessive space 
between parts 

4. Preform parts before welding 


undercutting 

WHY 

1. Faulty electrode or gun 
manipulation 

2. Faulty electrode usage 

3. Current too high 

WHAT TO DO 

1. Use a uniform weave in butt 
welding 

2 . Avoid using an overly large 
electrode 

3. Avoid excessive weaving 


spatter 

WHY 

1. Arc blow 

2. Current too high 

3. Arc too long 

4. Faulty electrodes 

WHAT TO DO 

1. Clean parts in weld area 

2. Adjust current properly 



cracked welds 

WHY 

1. Wrong electrode 

2. Weld and parts sizes 
unbalanced 

3. Faulty welds 

4. Fauiiy preparation 

5. Rigid joint 



4. Weave your weld to eliminate 
pin holes 

5. Use proper electrode for job 

6. Hold longer arc 

7. Check shield gas 



2 . Select electrode according to 
welding groove size 

3. Leave proper gap at bottom 
of weld 



5. Use proper sequence 

6. Clamp or tack parts properly 
—back-up to cool 

7. Adopt a proper weiding 
procedure 

8. Use high speed, moderate 
penetration process 



4. Use moderate Current, weld 
slowly 

5. Hold electrode at safe 
distance from vertical plane 
in making horizontal fillet 

weld 


WHAT TO DO 

1. Design structure to eliminate 
rigid joints 

2. Heat parts before welding 

3. Avoid welds in string beads 

4. Keep ends free to move as 
long as possible 


poor appearance 

WHY 

1. Faulty electrode 

2. Overhang 

3. improper use of electrode 

4. Wrong arc voltage and current 

WHAT TO DO 

1. Use a proper welding tech¬ 
nique 

2. Avoid overheating 


poor fusion 

WHY 

1. Wrong speed 

2. Current improperly adjusted 

3. Faulty preparation 

4. improper electrode size 
WHAT TO DO 

1. Adjust electrode to match 
joint 

2. Weave must be sufficient to 
melt sides of joint 


brittle welds 

WHY 

1. Wrong electrode 

2. Faulty preheating 

3. Meta! hardened by air 

WHAT TO DO 

1. Preheat at 300° to 500° F. if 
weiding on medium carbon 
steel or certain alloy steels 

2. Make multiple layer welds 


5. Make sound welds of good 
fusion 

6. Adjust weld size to parts size 

7. Allow joints a proper and 
uniform gap 

8. Work with amperage as low as 
possible 



3. Use a uniform weave 

4. Avoid overly high current 



3. Select proper current and 
voltage 

4. Keep weld metal from flowing 
away from piates 



3. Stress relieving after weiding 

4. Use low hydrogen processes 
for increased weld ductility 



3. Adjust voltage 

4. Pick suitable electrode 


magnetic blow 

WHY 

t. Magnetic fields cause the arc 
to deviate from its intended 
course 

WHAT TO DO 

1. Use steel blocks to alter 
magnetic path around arc 

2. Divide the ground into parts 

3. Weld in same direction the 
arc blows 



4. Use a short arc length 

5. Locate the ground properly on 
the work 

6. Use A-C welding 
































slight circular motion make the second, third, and fourth 
passes. This motion of the electrode permits greater 
control and better distribution of the weld metal. 
Remove all slag and oxides from the surface of each pass 
by chipping or wire brushing before applying additional 
beads to the joint. 

WELDING DIFFICULTIES 

Many of the welding difficulties in metal-arc weld¬ 
ing are the same as in oxygas welding. A few such 
problems include undercut, cracked welds, poor fusion, 
and incomplete penetration. 

Table 7-3 provides an illustration of the most com¬ 
mon welding problems encountered during the arc¬ 
welding process and methods to correct them. 

Every welder has the responsibility of making each 
weld the best one possible. You can produce quality 
welds by adhering to the rules that follow. 

1. Use only high-quality welding machines, 
electrodes, and welding accessories. 

2. Know the base material that you are working 
on. 

3. Select the proper welding process that gives the 
highest quality welds for the base material used. 

4. Select the proper welding procedure that meets 
the service requirement of the finished weldment. 

5. Select the correct electrode for the job in 
question. 

6. When preheating is specified or required make 
sure you meet the temperature requirements. I n any 
case, do not weld on material that is below 32°F without 
first preheating. 

7. Clean the base metal of all slag, paint, grease, 
oil, moisture, or any other foreign materials. 

8. Remove weld slag and thoroughly clean each 
bead before making the next bead or pass. 

9. Do not weld over cracks or porous tack welds. 
Remove defective tack welds before welding. 

10. Be particularly alert to obtain root fusion on the 
first pass of fillet and groove welds. 

11. When groove weld root gaps are excessive, 
build up one side of the joint before welding the pieces 
together. 

12. When fillet weld root gaps are excessive, be 
sure you increase the size of the fillet weld to the size of 


the root gap to maintain the strength requirement. In 
some cases, it is advantageous to make a groove weld I 
to avoid extremely large fillet welds. 

13. Inspect your work after completion and 
immediately remove and replace any defective weld. 

14. Observe the size requirement for each weld and 
make sure that you meet or slightly exceed the specified 
size. 

15. Make sure that the finished appearance of the 
weld is smooth and that overlaps and undercuts have 
been repaired. 

PIPE WELDING 

Welding is the simplest and easiest way to join 
sections of pipe. The need for complicated joint designs 
and special threading equipment is eliminated. Welded 
pipe has reduced flow restrictions compared to me¬ 
chanical connections and the overall installation costs 
are less. The most popular method for welding pipe is 
the shielded metal-arc process; however, gas shielded 
arc methods have made big inroads as a result of new 
advances in welding technology. 

Pipe welding has become recognized as a profes¬ 
sion in itself. Even though many of the skills are com¬ 
parable to other types of welding, pipe welders develop 
skills that are unique only to pipe welding. Because of 
the hazardous materials that most pipelines carry, pipe 
welders are required to pass specific tests before they 
can be certified 

In the following paragraphs, pipe welding positions, 
pipe welding procedures, definitions, and related infor¬ 
mation are discussed. 

PIPE WELDING POSITIONS 

You may recall from lchapter 3| of this manual that 
there are four positions used in pipe welding (fig. 3-30). 
They are known as the horizontal rolled position (1G), 
the horizontal fixed position (5G), pipe inclined fixed 
(6G), and the vertical position (2G). Remember: these 
terms refer to the position of the pipe and not to the weld 

PIPE WELDING PROCEDURES 

Welds that you cannot make in a single pass should 
be made in interlocked multiple layers, not less than one 
layer for each 1/8 inch of pipe thickness. Deposit each 
layer with a weaving or oscillating motion. To prevent 
entrapping slag in the weld metal, you should clean each 
layer thoroughly before depositing the next layer. 


7-25 





60° MIN. 




BUTT JOINTS 


r- T MIN. 



T MIN. 


« I T MIN. 




COUPLING 

SOCKET FITTING JOINTS 


Figure 7-42.1 -Butt joints and socket fitting joints. 


Butt joints are commonly used between pipes and 
between pipes and welded fittings. They are also used 
for butt welding of flanges and welding stubs. In making 
a butt joint, place two pieces of pipe end to end, align 
them, and then weld them. (Se t fig. 7-42] ) 

When the wall thickness of the pipe is 3/4 inch or 
less, you can use either the single V or single U type of 
butt joint; however, when the wall thickness is more than 
3/4 inch, only the single U type should be used. 

Fillet welds are used for welding slip-on and 
threaded flanges to pipe. Depending on the flange and 
type of service, fillet welds may be required on both 
sides of the flange or in combination with a bevel weld 
|(fiq. 7-43)1 Fillet welds are also used in welding screw 
or socket couplings to pipe, using a single fillet weld 
Kfia. 7-421 Sometimes flanges require aliqnm JiE Fiq-I 
ur d 7-44 j hows one type of flange square and its use in 
vertical and horizontal alignment. 

Another form of fillet weld used in pipe fitting is a 
seal weld A seal weld is used primarily to obtain tight¬ 
ness and prevent leakage. Seal welds should not be 
considered as adding strength to the joint. 


P-42. FILLET WELDED SLIP-ON FLANGES. 



pressure ; iso a less for all sizes. 
temperature: 650'E max. 
service: all, except ferrous 

PIPING FOR SALT WATER 


P-43. FILLET & BEVEL WELDED SLIP-ON FLANGE. 


SLIP-ON FLANGE 
45*1 



BUT NOT LESS THAN 3/16" 


LIGHT 

WEIGHT FLANGES 

"D" 

PIPE OR TUBE SiZE 

3/16" 

THRU 4” 

1/4 "• 

5" a 6" 

5/(6“ 

7"THRU 10" 

3/8" 

II" THRU 16" 

STANDARD FLANGES 

3/16" 

THRU 2" 

1/4" 

2 1/2" THRU 7" 


8" THRU I6 V 


PRESSURE: 150* a LESS FOR ALL SIZES. 
TEMPERATURE: 650 e F MAX. 

SERVICE! all, INCLUDING SALT WATER. 


Figure 7-43.-Flange connections. 



I Figure 7-44^ Flange alignment. 


JOINT PREPARATION AND FIT-UP 

You must carefully prepare pipe joints for welding 
if you want good results. Clean the weld edges or 
surfaces of all loose scale, slag, rust, paint, oil, and other 
foreign matter. Ensure that thejoint surfaces aresmooth 
and uniform. Remove the slag from flame-cut edges; 
however, it is not necessary to remove the temper color. 

When you prepare joints for welding, remember 
that bevels must be cut accurately. Bevels can be made 
by machining, grinding, or using a gas cutting torch. In 
fieldwork, the welding operator usually must make the 
bevel cuts with a gas torch. When you are beveling, cut 
away as little metal as possible to allow for complete 
fusion and penetration. Proper beveling reduces the 
amount of filler metal required which, in turn, reduces 
time and expense. In addition, it also means less strain 
in the weld and a better job of design and welding. 





























































































1 Figure 7-45j -Anqle iron jig. 


Align the piping before welding and maintain it in 
alignment during the welding operation. The maximum 
alignment tolerance is 20 percent of the pipe thickness. 
To ensure proper initial alignment, you should use 
clamps or jigs as holding devices. Apiece of angle iron 
makes a good jig for a small-diameter oio d (fig 
while a section of channel or I-beam is more suitable for 
larger diameter pipe. 

TACK WELDING 

When welding material solidly, you may use tack 
welds to hold it in place temporarily. Tack welding is 
one of the most important steps in pipe welding or any 
other type of welding. The number of tack welds re¬ 
quired depends upon the diameter of the pipe. For 
1/2-inch pipe, you need two tacks; place them directly 
opposite each other. As a rule, four tacks are adequate 
for standard size of pipe. The size of a tack weld is 
determined by the wall thickness of the pipe. Be sure 
that a tack weld is not more than twice the pipe thickness 
in length or two thirds of the pipe thickness in depth. 
Tack welds should be the same quality as the final weld. 
Ensure that the tack welds have good fusion and are 
thoroughly cleaned before proceeding with the weld. 

SPACERS 

I n addition to tack welds, spacers sometimes are 
required to maintain proper joint alignment. Spacers are 
accurately machined pieces of metal that conform to the 
dimensions of the joint design used. Spacers are some¬ 
times referred to as chill rings or backing rings, and they 
serve a number of purposes. They provide a means for 
maintaining the specified root opening, provide a con¬ 
venient location for tack welds, and aid in the pipe 
alignment. In addition, spacers can prevent weld spatter 
and the formation of slag or icicles inside the pipe. 

ELECTRODE SELECTION 

Select the electrode that is best suited for the posi¬ 
tion and type of welding to be done. For the root pass of 
a multilayer weld, you need an electrode large enough, 


yet not exceeding 3/16 inch, that ensures complete 
fusion and penetration without undercutting and slag 
inclusions. 

Makecertain the welding current is within the range 
recommended by the manufacturers of the welding 
machines and electrodes. 

WEATHER CONDITIONS 

Do not assign a welder to a job under any of the 
following conditions listed below unless the welder and 
the work area are properly protected: 

• When the atmospheric temperature is less than 
0°F 

• When the surfaces are wet 

• When rain or snow is falling, or moisture is 
condensing on the weld surfaces 

• During periods of high wind 

At temperatures between 0°F and 32°F, heat the 
weld area within 3 inches of the joint with a torch to a 
temperature warm to the hand before beginning to weld. 


WEARFACING 

The Seabee welder can greatly extend the life of 
construction equipment by the use of wearfacing proce¬ 
dures. Wearfacing is the process of applying a layer of 
special composition metal onto the surface of another 
type of metal for the purpose of reducing wear. The 
selection of a wearfacing alloy for application is based 
on the ability of the alloy to withstand impact or abra¬ 
sion. I impact refers to a blow or series of blows to a 
surface that results in fracture or gradual deterioration. 
Abrasion is the grinding action that results when one 
surface slides, rolls, or rubs against another. Under 
high-compressive loads, this action can result in goug¬ 
ing. 

Alloys that are abrasion resistant are poor in with¬ 
standing impact. Conversely, those that withstand im¬ 
pact well are poor in resisting abrasion; however, there 
are many alloys whose wearfacing properties fall be¬ 
tween the two extremes. These alloys offer some pro¬ 
tection against abrasion and withstand impact well. 

WORKPIECE PREPARATION 

Before you wear-face a workpiece, all dirt, oil, rust, 
grease, and other foreign matter must be removed. If you 
do not, your finished product will be porous and subject 
to spalling. You also need a solid foundation; therefore, 
repair all cracks and remove any metal that is fatigued 
or rolled over. 








TECHNIQUES 



Figure7-46.—Wearfacing techniques. 


PREHEATING 

Depending on the type of metal, sometimes it is 
necessary to preheat the base metal to lessen distortion, 
to prevent spalling or cracking, and to avoid thermal 
shock The preheating temperature depends on the car¬ 
bon and alloy content of the base metal. In general, as 
carbon content increases so does the preheating tem¬ 
perature. Improper heating can adversely affect a metal 
by reducing its resistance to wear, by making it hard and 
brittle, or by making it more prone to oxidation and 
scaling. 

To preheat properly, you must know the composi¬ 
tion of the base metal. A magnet can be used to deter¬ 
mine if you are working with carbon steel or austenitic 
manganese steel. Carbon steel is magnetic, but be care¬ 
ful because work-hardened austenitic manganese steel 
is also magnetic. Make sure that you check for magnet¬ 
ism in a nonworked part of the austenitic manganese 
steel. There are other ways to tell the difference between 
metals, such as cast iron and cast steel. Cast iron chips 
or cracks, while cast steel shaves. Also, some metals 
give off telltale sparks when struck by a chisel. 

In preheating, you should raise the surface tempera¬ 
ture of the workpiece to the desired point and then soak 
it until the heat reaches its core. After wearfacing, cool 
the work places slowly. 


Where possible, position the workpiece for down- 
hand welding. This allows you to finish the job quicker 
and at less cost. 

The building up and wearfacing of cast iron is not 
generally recommended because cast iron tends to 
crack. However, some cast-iron parts that are subject to 
straight abrasion can be wearfaced successfully. You 
must preheat these parts to temperatures of 1000°F to 
1200°F and then allow them to cool slowly after wear¬ 
facing. Peening deposits on cast iron helps to relieve 
stresses after welding. 

Welding materials for building up worn parts differ 
from those used in wearfacing the same parts. Before 
wearfacing a badly worn part, you must first build it up 
to 3/16 to 3/8 of an inch of its finished size. The buildup 
material must be compatible with both the base metal 
and the wearfacing overlay as well as being strong 
enough to meet the structural requirements. Also, they 
must have the properties that enable them to resist cold 
flowing, mushing under high-compressive loads, and 
plastic deformation under heavy impact. Without these 
properties, the buildup materials cannot support the 
wearfacing overlay. When the overlay is not properly 
supported, it will span. 

Many times high-alloy wearfacing materials are 
deposited on the parts before they are placed in service. 
The maximum allowable wear is usually no more than 
two layers deep (1/4 inch) before wearfacing. Try to 
deposit the wearfacing alloy in layers that are not too 
thick. Thick layers creates more problems than no over¬ 
lay at all. Usually you only need two layers. The frost 
layer produces an admixture with the base metal; the 
second forms a wear-resistant surface. 

In wearfacing built-up carbon-steel parts, maintain 
high interpass temperatures and use a weaving bead, 
rather than a stringer bead. (See fig. 7-46.) Limit the thick¬ 
ness of a si ngl e pass bead to 3/16 i nch. U se the same 
technique for each layer and avoid severe quenching. 

Deposits made with high-alloy electrodes should 
check on the surface. Checking reduces residual 




[Figure 7-47.- Comparison between cross-checking and cracking. 


















rrsnnnrv 


twsm 

♦ 

% 

«W«W1 « 

... 


rjf 

W*jVi 


1 Figure 7-48^ Wearfacinq bulldozer end bits. 



I Figure 7-49!i -Wearfacina shovel teeth. 



(locked-in) stresses. Without checking, the combination 
of residual stresses and service stresses may exceed 
tensile strength and cause deep cracks or spalling l(fial 
1 7-47] . Be sure to induce checking if it does not occur 


naturally or if it is unlikely to occur, as in large parts 
where heat builds up. You can bring on checking by 
sponging the deposit with a wet cloth or by spraying it 
with a fine mist of water. Also you can speed up check¬ 
ing by occasionally striking it with a hammer while it is 
cooling. When a check-free deposit is required, use a 
softer alloy and adjust preheating and postheating re¬ 
quirements. 

Bulldozer Blades 

Bulldozer blades are wear-faced by placing the end 
bits in theflat position and welding beads across the 
outer corners and along the edges. Be sure to preheat the 
high-carbon blades before wearfacing. On worn end 
bits, weld new corners and then wear-face Rfiq. 7-481 . 

Shovel teeth 

Wear-face shovel teeth when they are new and 
before being placed into service. The weld bead pattern 
used in wearfacing can have a marked effect on the 
service life of the teeth. Wear-face shovel teeth that work 
mainly in rock with beads running the length of each 
tooth Iffig 7-491 This allows the rock to ride on the hard 
metal beads. Teeth that are primarily used to work in 
dirt, clay, or sand should be wear-faced with beads 
running across the width of each tooth, perpendicular to 
the direction of the material that flows past the teeth. 
(See lfig. 7-491) This allows the material to fill the spaces 
between the beads and provide more protection to the 
base metal. Another effective pattern is the waffle or 
crosshatch Kfiq. 7-501 . The wearfacing is laid on the top 
and sides of each tooth, 2 inches from its point. Stringer 
beads behind a solid deposit reduce wash Kfiq. 7-51t . 


best 



NOT so GOOD 




I Figure 7-5Ll -Comparison of wearfacing patterns for shovel teeth. 


































Table 7-4.-Table of Recommended Electrode Sizes, Current Settings, and Cutting Speeds for Carbon-Arc Cutting Different Thicknesses 

of Steel Plate 


THICKNESS OF PLATE 
INCHES 

300 AMPS. 

1/2 IN. DIA. 

CURRENT SETTING AND CARBON DIA. 

500 AMPS. 700 AMPS. 

5/8 IN. DIA. 3/4 IN. DIA. 

SPEED OF CUTTING IN MINUTE PER FOOT 

1000 AMPS. 

1 IN. DIA. 

1/2 

3.5 

2.0 

1.5 

1.0 

3/4 

4/7 

3.0 

2.0 

1.4 

1 

6.8 

4.1 

2.9 

2.0 

1-1/4 

9.8 

5.6 

4.0 

2.9 

1-1/2 

... 

8.0 

5.8 

4.0 

1-3/4 

... 


8.0 

5.3 

2 



... 

7.0 


More information on wearfacing applications may 
be obtai ned from the NCF Welding Materials Hand¬ 
book , NAVFAC P-433. 


CARBON-ARC CUTTING 

Metals can be cut cleanly with a carbon electrode 
arc because no foreign metals are introduced at the arc 
The cutting current should be 25 to 50 amps above the 
welding current for the same thickness of metal. 

The carbon electrode point should be ground so that 
it is very sharp. During the actual cutting, move the 
carbon electrode in a vertical elliptical movement to 
undercut the metal; this aids in the removal of the molten 
metal. As in oxygen cutting, a crescent motion is pre- 
ferred. ITTgure 7-521 shows the relative positions of the 
electrode and the work in the cutting of cast iron. 



I Figure 7-52^ Carbon-arc cutting on cast iron. 


The carbon-arc method of cutting is successful on 
cast iron because the arc temperature is high enough to 
melt the oxides formed. It is especially important to 
undercut the cast-iron kerf to produce an even cut. 
Position the electrode so the molten metal flows away 
from the gouge or cutti ng areas l. Table 7-4 i s a I i st of 
cutting speeds, plate thicknesses, and current settings 
for carbon-arc cutting. 

Because of the high currents required, the graphite 
form of carbon electrode is better. To reduce the heating 
effect on the electrode, you should not let it extend more 
than 6 inches beyond the holder when cutting. If the 
carbon burns away too fast, shorten the length that it 
extends out of the electrode holder to as little as 3 inches. 
Operating a carbon electrode at extremely high tempera¬ 
tures causes its surface to oxidize and burn away, result¬ 
ing in a rapid reduction in the electrode diameter. 

Carbon-arc cutting does not require special gener¬ 
ators. Standard arc-welding generators and other items 
of arc-welding station equipment are suitable for use. 
Straight polarity direct current (DCSP) is always used. 

Because of the high temperature and the intensity 
of the arc, choose a shade of helmet lens that is darker 
than the normal shade you would use for welding on the 
same thickness of metal. A number 12 or 14 lens shade 
is recommended for carbon-arc welding or cutting. 

AIR CARBON-ARC CUTTING 

Air carbon-arc cutting (ACC) is a process of cutting, 
piercing, or gouging metal by heating it to a molten state 
and then using compressed air to blow away the molten 























I Figure 7-53j -Air carbon-arc cutting. 


metal j Figure 7-53| shows the process. The equipment 
consists of a special holder, as shown i r i figure 7-541 that 
uses carbon or graphite electrodes and compressed air 
fed through jets built into the electrode holder. A push 
button or a hand valve on the electrode holder controls 
the air jet. 

The air jet blows the molten metal away and usually 
leaves a surface that needs no further preparation for 


welding. The electrode holder operates at air pressures 
varying between 60 and 100 psig. 

During use, bare carbon or graphite electrodes be¬ 
come smaller due to oxidation caused by heat buildup. 
Copper coating these electrodes reduces the heat 
buildup and prolong their use. 

The operating procedures for air carbon-arc cutting 
and gouging are basically the same. The procedures are 
as follows: 

• Adjust the machine to the correct current for 
electrode diameter. 

• Start the air compressor and adjust the regulator 
to the correct air pressure. Use the lowest air 
pressure possible-just enough pressure to blow 
away the molten metal. 

• I nsert the electrode in the holder. Extend the 
carbon electrode 6 inches beyond the holder. 
Ensure that the electrode point is properly 
shaped. 

• Strike the arc; then open the air-jet valve. The 
air-jet disc can swivel, and the V-groove in the 
disc automatically aligns the air jets along the 
electrode. The electrode is adjusted relative to the 
holder. 

• Control the arc and the speed of travel according 
to the shape and the condition of the cut desired. 



I Figure 7-5fl -Air carbon-arc electrode holder with carbon electrode installed. 


7-31 

















Figure 7-55^ -V-groove gouged in 2-inch-thick carbon steel. 

• Always cut away from the operator as molten 
metal sprays some distance from the cutting ac¬ 
tion. You may use this process to cut or gouge 
metal in the flat, horizontal, vertical, or overhead 
positions. 

AIR CARBON-ARC GOUGING 

Air carbon-arc gouging is useful in many various 
metalworking applications, such as metal shaping and 
other welding preparations. For gouging, hold the elec¬ 
trode holder so the electrode slopes back from the direc¬ 
tion of travel. The air blast is directed along the electrode 
toward the arc. The depth and contour of the groove are 
controlled by the electrode angle and travel speed. The 
width of the groove is governed by the diameter of the 
electrode. 

When cutting or gouging a shallow groove on the 
surface of a piece of metal, you should position the 
electrode holder at a very flat angle in relation to the 
work. The speed of travel and the current setting also 
affect the depth of the groove. The slower the movement 
and the higher the current, the deeper the groove. An 
example of a V-groove cut made in a 2-inch-thick mild 
steel plate by a machine guided carbon-arc air-jet is 
shown in i figure 7-551 



Figure 7-56.^- Steel electrode being used to cut plate. 


METAL ELECTRODE ARC CUTTING 

Metal can be removed with the standard electric arc, 
but for good gouging or cutting results, you should use 
special metal electrodes that have been designed for this 
type of work, Manufacturers have developed electrodes 
with special coatings that intensify the arc stream for 
rapid cutting. The covering disintegrates at a slower rate 
than the metallic center. This creates a deep recess that 
produces a jet action that blows the molten metal away 
[fig. 7-56)1 The main disadvantage of these electrodes 
is that the additional metal produced must be removed. 

These electrodes are designed for cutting stainless 
steel, copper, aluminum, bronze, nickel, cast iron, man¬ 
ganese, steel, or alloy steels. 

Atypical gouge-cutting operation is shown i n | fiqurel 
1 7-57.1 Notice that the angle between the electrode and 
plate is small (5 degrees or less). This makes it easy to 
remove the extra metal produced by the electrode. 

The recommended current setting is as high as the 
electrode will take without becoming overheated to the 
point of cracking the covering. For 1/8-inch electrodes, 
the setting ranges between 125 and 300 amperes; for 
5/32-inch electrodes, the setting ranges between 250 and 
375 amperes; and for 3/16-inch electrodes, the setting 
ranges between 300 and 450 amperes. Use a very short 
arc, and when cutting takes place underwater, the coat¬ 
ing must be waterproof. 


E33 






























































































































HEAVILY 

COVERED 



1 Figure 7-57i -Gouqe-cutting operation using a solid core arc¬ 
cutting electrode. 

WELDING QUALITY CONTROL 

I n the fabrication or repair of equipment, tests are 
used to determine the quality and soundness of the 
welds. Many different tests have been designed for 
specific faults. The type of test used depends upon the 
requirements of the welds and the availability of testing 
equipment. In this section, nondestructive and destruc¬ 
tive testing are briefly discussed. 

NONDESTRUCTIVE TESTING 

Nondestructive testing is a method of testing that 
does not destroy or impair the usefulness of a welded 
item. These tests disclose all of the common internal and 
surface defects that can occur when improper welding 
procedures are used. A large choice of testing devices is 
available and most of them are easier to use than the 
destructive methods, especially when working on large 
and expensive items. 

Visual Inspection 

Visual inspection is usually done automatically by 
the welder as he completes his welds. This is strictly a 
subjective type of inspection and usually there are no 
definite or rigid limits of acceptability. The welder may 
use templates for weld bead contour checks. Visual 
inspections are basically a comparison of finished welds 
with an accepted standard. This test is effective only 
when the visual qualities of a weld are the most impor¬ 
tant. 

Magnetic Particle Inspection 

Magnetic particle inspection is most effective for 
the detection of surface or near surface flaws in welds. 


DIRECTION OF 



I Figure 7-58j -Circular magnetization (prod method). 


LONGITUDINAL MAGNETIC 
LINES OF FORCE 



[Figure 7-59.- Longitudinal magnetization (coil method). 


It is used in metals or alloys in which you can induce 
magnetism. While the test piece is magnetized, a liquid 
containing finely ground iron powder is applied. As long 
as the magnetic field is not disturbed, the iron particles 
will form a regular pattern on the surface of the test 
piece. When the magnetic field is interrupted by a crack 
or some other defect in the metal, the pattern of the 
suspended ground metal also is interrupted. The parti¬ 
cles of metal cluster around the defect, making it easy 
to locate. 

You can magnetize the test piece by either having 
an electric current pass through it, as shown in | fiqurel 
I 7-58] or by having an electric current pass through a coil 
of wire that surrounds the test piece, as shown in | fiqurel 
I 7-591 When an electric current flows in a straight line 
from one contact poi nt to the other, magneti c I i nes of 





























force are in a circular direction, as shown ir [ figure 7-38) 
When the current flow is through a coil around the test 
piece, as shown in i figure 7-59J the magnetic lines of 
force are longitudinal through the test piece. 

When a defect is to show up as a disturbance in the 
pattern of the iron particles, the direction of the magnetic 
field must be at right angles to the major axis of the 
defect. A magnetic field having the necessary direction 
is established when the current flow is parallel to the 
major axis of the defect. Si nee the orientation of the 
defect is unknown, different current directions must be 
used during the test. As shown ir l figure 7^58] circular 
magnetism is induced in the test piece so you can inspect 
the piece for lengthwise cracks, while longitudinal mag¬ 
netism, as shown in i figure 7-59,1 is induced so you can 
inspect the piece for transverse cracks. In general, mag¬ 
netic particle inspection is satisfactory for detecting 
surface cracks and subsurface cracks that are not more 
than 1/4 inch below the surface. 

The type of magnetic particle inspection unit com¬ 
monly used in the Navy is a portable low-voltage unit 
having a maximum magnetizing output of 1,000 am¬ 
peres, either alternating or direct current. It is ready to 
operate when plugged into the voltage supply specified 
by the manufacturer. The unit consists of a magnetizing 
current source, controls, metering, three 10-foot lengths 
of flexible cable, and a prod kit. The prod kit includes 
an insulated prod grip fitted with an ON-OFF relay or 
current control switch, a pair of heavy copper contact 
prods, and two 5-foot lengths of flexible cable. Cable 
fittings are designed so that either end of the cable can 
be connected to the unit, to the prods, or to any other 
cable. The three outlets on the front of the unit make 
changing from alternating to direct current or vice versa 
very easy. The outlets are labeled as follows: left is ac, 
the center is COMMON, and the right is dc. One cable 
will always be plugged into the COMMON outlet, 
while the other cable is plugged into either the ac or dc 
outlet, depending upon what type of current the test 
requires. For most work, alternating current magnetiza¬ 
tion effectively locates fatigue cracks and similar de¬ 
fects extending through to the surface. When you 
require a more sensitive inspection to detect defects 
below the surface, use direct current. 

You can use the unit with alternating or direct 
current in either of two ways: (1) with prods attached to 
the flexible cable and used as contacts for the current to 
pass into and out of a portion of the test piece, setting 
up circular magnetization in the area between the prods 
contact points, as shown ir h figure 733 ; or (2) with the 
flexible cable wrapped around the work to form a coil 


that induces longitudinal magnetism in the part of the 
workpiece that is surrounded by the coiled cable 
Kfia. 7-59L 

Although you can use either of these two methods, 
the prod method is probably the easier to apply. Inmost 
instances, it effectively serves to detect surface defects. 
With the prods, however, only a small area of the test 
piece can be magnetized at any one time. This magnet¬ 
ized area is limited to the distance between prod contact 
points and a few inches on each side of the current path. 
To check the entire surface, you must test each adjacent 
area by changing the location of the prod contact points. 
Each area of the test piece must be inspected twice— 
once with the current passing through the metal in one 
direction and then with the current passing through the 
metal in a direction at right angles to the direction of the 
first test. One of the advantages of the prod method is 
that the current can be easily passed through the metal 
in any desired direction. Thus, when a given area is 
suspect, magnetic fields of different directions can be 
induced during the test. 

The prod method is accomplished by adjusting the 
unit for a current output suitablefor the magnetizing and 
testing of any particular kind of metal. The current 
setting required depends on the distance between prod 
contact points. With the prod kit that is supplied with the 
unit, the space between prod contact points is 4 to 6 
inches. A current setting between 300 and 400 amperes 
is satisfactory when the material thickness is less than 
3/4 inch. When the material thickness is over 3/4 inch, 
use 400 to 600 amperes. When the prod contact points 
are closer together, the same magnetic field force can be 
obtained with less current. With prods constantly at the 
same spacing, more current will induce a greater field 
strength. 

After adjusting the unit, place the prods in position. 
Hold them infirm contact with the metal and turn on the 
current. Then apply magnetic particles to the test area 
with the duster bulb and look for any indicator patterns. 
With the current still on, remove the excess particles 
from the test area with a blower bulb and complete the 
inspection. Do not move the prods until after the current 
has been turned off. To do so could cause the current to 
arc, resulting in a flash similar to that occurring in arc 
welding. 

When you use magnetic particle inspection, hairline 
cracks that are otherwise invisible are readily indicated 
by an unmistakable outline of the defect. Large voids 
beneath the surface are easier to detect than small voids, 
but any defect below the surface is more difficult to 
detect than one that extends through to the surface. Since 


7-34 














false indications frequently occur, you must be able to 
interpret the particle indications accurately. 

The factors that help you interpret the test results 
include the amount of magnetizing current applied, the 
shape of the indication, the sharpness of the outline, the 
width of the pattern, and the height or buildup of the 
particles. Although these characteristics do not deter¬ 
mine the seriousness of the fault, they do serve to 
identify the kind of defect. 

The indication of a crack is a sharp, well-defined 
pattern of magnetic particles having a definite buildup. 
This indication is produced by a relatively low-magnet¬ 
izing current. Seams are revealed by a straight, sharp, 
fine indication. The buildup of particles is relatively 
weak, and the magnetizing current must be higher than 
that required to detect cracks. Small porosity and 
rounded indentations or similar defects are difficult to 
detect for inexperienced inspectors. A high-magnetizing 
current continuously applied is usually required. The 
particle patterns for these defects are fuzzy in outline 
and have a medium buildup. 

The specifications governing the job determine 
whether or not an indicated defect is to be chipped or 
ground out and repaired by welding. Surface cracks are 
always removed and repaired. Indications of subsurface 
defects detected by magnetic particle inspection are 
evaluated by the inspector. When the indication is posi¬ 
tive, the standard policy is to grind or chip down to solid 
metal and make the repair. Unless the inspector can 
differentiate accurately between true and false indica¬ 
tions, the use of magnetic particle inspection should be 
restricted to the detection of surface defects, for which 
this application is almost foolproof. 

After the indicated defects have been repaired, you 
should reinspect the areas to ensure that the repair is 
sound. The final step in magnetic particle inspection, is 
to demagnetize the workpiece. This is especially impor¬ 
tant when the workpiece is made of high-carbon steel. 
Demagnetization is essential when you use direct cur¬ 
rent to induce the magnetic field; however, it is not as 
necessary when alternating current was used in the test. 
In fact, the usual demagnetization procedure involves 
placing the workpiece in an ac coil or solenoid and 
slowly withdrawing it while current passes through the 
coil. 

Demagnetization can be accomplished with the 
portable unit if a special demagnetizer is not available. 
To demagnetize with the portable unit, form a coil of 
flexible cable around the workpiece. Ensure that 
the cable is plugged into the unit for the delivery of 


alternating current. Set the current regulator to deliver a 
current identical to that used for the inspection and turn 
on the unit. Gradually decrease the current until the 
ammeter indicates zero. On large pieces, it may be 
necessary to demagnetize a small portion of the work at 
a time. 

A check for the presence of a magnetic field may be 
made by using a small compass. A deviation of the 
needle from the normal position, when the compass is 
held near the workpiece, is an indication that a magnetic 
field is present. Also you can use an instrument called a 
field indicator to check for the presence of a magnetic 
field. This instrument usually comes with the magnetic 
particle inspection unit e 

Liquid Penetrant Inspection 

Liquid penetrant methods are used to inspect metals 
for surface defects that are similar to those revealed by 
magnetic particle inspection. Unlike magnetic particle 
inspection, which can reveal subsurface defects, liquid 
penetrant inspection reveals only those defects that are 
open to the surface. 

Four groups of liquid penetrants are presently in 
use. Group I is a dye penetrant that is non water wash¬ 
able. Group II is a water washable dye penetrant. Group 
III and Group IV are fluorescent penetrants. Carefully 
follow the instructions given for each type of penetrant 
since there are some differences in the procedures and 
safety precautions required for the various penetrants. 

Before using a liquid penetrant to inspect a weld, 
remove all slag, rust, paint, and moisture from the 
surface. Except where a specific finish is required, it is 
not necessary to grind the weld surface as long as the 
weld surface meets applicable specifications. Ensure the 
weld contour blends into the base metal without under¬ 
cutting. When a specific finish is required, perform the 
liquid penetrant inspection before the finish is made. 
This enables you to detect defects that extend beyond 
the final dimensions, but you must make a final liquid 
penetrant inspection after the specified finish has been 
given. 

Before using a liquid penetrant, clean the surface of 
the material very carefully, including the areas next to 
the inspection area. You can clean the surface by swab¬ 
bing it with a clean, lint-free cloth saturated in a non¬ 
volatile solvent or by dipping the entire piece into a 
solvent. After the surface has been cleaned, remove all 
traces of the cleaning material. It is extremely important 
to remove all dirt, grease, scale, lint, salts, or other 





Figure 7-60.1 -Liquid penetrant inspection. 


materials and to make sure that the surface is entirely 
dry before using the liquid penetrant. 

Maintain the temperature of the inspection piece 
and the liquid penetrant in the range of 50°F to 100°F. 
Do not attempt to use the liquid penetrant when this 
temperature range cannot be maintained. Do not use an 
open flame to increase the temperature because some of 
the liquid penetrant materials are flammable. 

After thoroughly cleaning and drying the surface, 
coat the surface with theliquid penetrant. Spray or brush 
on the penetrant or dip the entire piece into the penetrant. 
To allow time for the penetrant to soak into all the cracks, 
crevices, or other defects that are open to the surface, 
keep the surface of the piece wet with the penetrant for 
a minimum of 15 or 30 minutes, depending upon the 
penetrant being used. 

After keeping the surface wet with the penetrant for 
the required length of time, remove any excess penetrant 
from the surface with a clean, dry cloth, or absorbent 
paper towel. Then dampen a clean, lint-free material 
with penetrant remover and wipe the remaining excess 
penetrant from the test surface. Next, allow the test 
surface to dry by normal evaporation or wipe it dry with 
a clean, lint-free absorbent material. In drying the sur¬ 
face, avoid contaminating it with oil, lint, dust, or other 
materials that would interfere with the inspection. 

After the surface has dried, apply another substance, 
called a developer. Allow the developer (powder or 
liquid) to stay on the surface for a minimum of 7 minutes 
before starting the inspection. Leave it on no longer than 
30 minutes, thus allowing a total of 23 minutes to 
evaluate the results. 


The foil owing actions take place when using dye 
penetrants. First, the penetrant that is applied to the 
surface of the material will seep into any passageway 
open to the surface, as shown ir | figure 71)01 view A. 
The penetrant is normally red in color, and like penetrat¬ 
ing oil, it seeps into any crack or crevice that is open to 
the surface. Next, the excess penetrant is removed from 
the surface of the metal with the penetrant remover and 
a lint-free absorbent material. Only the penetrant on top 
of the metal surface is removed [(fig. 7-601 view B), 
leaving the penetrant that has seeped into the defect. 

Finally, the white developer is applied to the surface 
of the metal, as shown in i figure 7-60.1 view C. The 
developer is an absorbing material that actually draws 
the penetrant from the defect. Therefore, the red pene¬ 
trant indications in the white developer represent the 
defective areas. The amount of red penetrant drawn 
from the defective areas indicates the size and some¬ 
times the type of defect. When you use dye penetrants, 
the lighting in the test area must be bright enough to 
enable you to see any indications of defects on the test 
surface. 

The indications you see during a liquid penetrant 
inspection must be carefully interpreted and evaluated. 
In almost every inspection, some insignificant indica¬ 
tions are present. Most of these are the result of the 
failure to remove all the excess penetrant from the 
surface. At least 10 percent of all indications must be 
removed from the surface to determine whether defects 
are actually present or whether the indications are the 
result of excess penetrant. When a second inspection 
does not reveal indications in the same locations, it is 
usually safe to assume that the first indications were 
false. 


7-36 





















Remove all penetrant inspection materials as soon 
as possible after the final inspection has been made. Use 
water or solvents, as appropriate. Since some of the 
liquid penetrant materials are flammable, do not use 
them near open flames, and do not apply them to any 
surface that is at a temperature higher than 100°F. I n 
addition to being flammable, many solvents are poison¬ 
ous in the vapor form and highly imitating to the skin in 
the liquid form. 

Radiographic Inspection 

Radiographic inspection is a method of inspecting 
weldments by the use of rays that penetrate through the 
welds. X rays or gamma rays are the two types of waves 
used for this process. The rays pass through the weld 
and onto a sensitized film that is in direct contact with 
the back of the weld. When the film is developed, gas 
pockets, slag inclusions, cracks, or poor penetration will 
be visible on the film. 

Because of the danger of these rays, only qualified 
personnel are authorized to perform these tests. As 
Seabees, you will rarely come in contact with these 
procedures. 

Ultrasonic Inspection 

Ultrasonic inspection of testing uses high-fre¬ 
quency vibrations or waves to locate and measure de¬ 
fects in welds. It can be used in both ferrous and 
nonferrous materials. This is an extremely sensitive 
system and can locate very fine surface and subsurface 
cracks as well as other types of defects. All types of 
joints can be tested. 

This process uses high-frequency impulses to check 
the soundness of the weld. In a good weld, the signal 
travels through the weld to the other side and is then 
reflected back and shown on a calibrated screen. Irregu¬ 
larities, such as gas pockets or slag inclusions, cause the 
signal to reflect back sooner and will be displayed on 
the screen as a change in depth. When you use this 
system, most all types of materials can be checked for 
defects. Another advantage of this system is that only 
one side of the weld needs to be exposed for testing. 

Eddy Current Testing 

Eddy current is another type of testing that uses 
electromagnetic energy to detect faults in weld deposits 
and is effective for both ferrous and nonferrous materi¬ 
als. As a Seabee, you will rarely use this type of testing 
in the field. 


Eddy current testing operates on the principle that 
whenever a coil carrying a high-frequency alternating 
current is placed next to a metal, an electrical current is 
produced in the metal by induction. This induced current 
is called an eddy current. 

The test piece is exposed to electromagnetic energy 
by being placed in or near high-frequency ac current 
coils. The differences in the weld cause changes in the 
impedance of the coil, and this is indicated on electronic 
instruments. When there are defects, they show up as a 
change in impedance, and the size of the defect is shown 
by the amount of this change. 

DESTRUCTIVE TESTING 

I n destructive testing, sample portions of the welded 
structures are required. These samples are subjected to 
loads until they actually fail. The failed pieces are then 
studied and compared to known standards to determine 
the quality of the weld. The most common types of 
destructive testing are known as free bend, guided bend, 
nick-break, impact, fillet welded joint, etching, and 
tensile testing. The primary disadvantage of destructive 
testing is that an actual section of a weldment must be 
destroyed to evaluate the weld. This type of testing is 
usually used in the certification process of the welder. 

Some of the testing requires elaborate equipment 
that is not available for use in the field. Three tests that 
may be performed in the field without elaborate equip¬ 
ment are the free-bend test, the guided-bend test, and the 
nick-break test. 


Free-Bend Test 

The FREE-BEND TEST is designed to measure the 
ductility of the weld deposit and the heat-affected area 
adjacent to the weld. Also it is used to determine the 
percentage of elongation of the weld metal. Ductility, 
you should recall, is that property of a metal that allows 
it to be drawn out or hammered thin. 

The first step in preparing a welded specimen for 
the free-bend test is to machine the welded reinforce¬ 
ment crown flush with the surface of the test plate. When 
the weld area of a test plate is machined, as is the case 
of the guided-bend as well as in the free-bend test, 
perform the machining operation in the opposite direc¬ 
tion that the weld was deposited. 

The next step in the free-bend testis to scribe two 
lines on the face of the filler deposit. Locate these lines 




COMPRESSIVE 

FORCE 



A 


B 


C 


D 


Figure 7-6]J -Free-bend test 



1/16 inch from each edge of the weld metal, as shown 
in i figure 7^6Ll view B. Measure the distance, in inches, 
between the lines to the nearest 0.01 inch and let the 
resulting measurement equal (x). Then bend the ends of 


the test specimen until each leg forms an angle of 30 
degrees to the original centerline. 

With the scribed lines on the outside and the piece 
placed so all the bending occurs in the weld, bend the 


7-38 















































































































ROOT BEND FACE BEND 




I Figure 7-63^ Guided-bend test specimens. 

test piece by using a hydraulic press or similar machine. 
When the proper precautions are taken, a blacksmith's 
forging press or hammer can be used to complete the 
bending operation. If a crack more than 1/16 inch devel¬ 
ops during the test, stop the bending because the weld 
has failed; otherwise, bend the specimen flat. After 
completing the test, measure the distance between the 
scribed lines and call that measurement (y). The percent¬ 
age of elongation is then determined by the formula: 
Y—X 

—r— x 100 = % elongation 


Requirements for a satisfactory test area minimum 
elongation of 15 percent and no cracks greater than 1/16 
inch on the face of the weld. 

Guided-Bend Test 

You use the GUIDED-BEND TEST to determine 
the quality of weld metal at the face and root of a welded 
joint. This test is made in a specially designed jig. An 
example of one type of jig is shown in i figure T^2\ 

The test specimen is placed across the supports of 
the die. A plunger, operated from above by hydraulic 
pressure, forces the specimen into the die. To fulfill the 
requirements of this test, you must bend the specimen 
180 degrees—the capacity of the jig. No cracks should 
appear on the surface greater than 1/8 inch. The face- 
bend tests are made in this jig with the face of the weld 
in tension (outside), as shown l in figure 71 -63. The root- 
bend tests are made with the root of the weld in tension 
(outside), as shown ir l figure 7^631 

I Figure 7-64l shows a machine used for making the 
guided-bend test. It is used in many welding schools and 



[ Figure 7-64.V Testing machine for making guided-bend tests. 


















































I Figure 7-65j -Nick-break test of a butt weld. 


testing laboratories for the daily testing of specimens. 
Simple in construction and easy to use, it works by 
hydraulic pressure and can apply a direct load up to 
40,000 pounds, and even more on small specimens. 
When you make the test, position the specimen in the 
machine as previously indicated and start pumping the 
actuator. Keep your eye on the large gauge and watch 
the load increase. You will know the actual load under 


which the test piece bends by the position of an auxiliary 
hand that is carried along by the gauge pointer. The hand 
remains at the point of maximum load after the pointer 
returns to zero. 

Nick-Break Test 

The NICK-BREAK TEST is useful for determining 
the internal quality of the weld metal. This test reveals 
various internal defects (if present), such as slag inclu¬ 
sions, gas pockets, lack of fusion, and oxidized or 
burned metal. To accomplish the nick-break test for 
checking a butt weld, you must first flame-cut the test 
specimens from a sample weld Kfiq. 7-65) . Make a saw 
cut at each edge through the center of the weld. The 
depth of cut should be about 1/4 inch. 

Next, place the saw-nicked specimen on two steel 
supports, as shown |in figure 7^ 5. Using a heave ham¬ 
mer, break the specimen by striking it in the zone where 
you made the saw cuts. The weld metal exposed in the 
break should be completely fused, free from slag inclu¬ 
sions, and contain no gas pockets greater than 1/16 inch 
across their greatest dimension. There should not be 
more than six pores or gas pockets per square inch of 
exposed broken surface of the weld. 

Impact Test 

You use the IMPACT TEST to check the ability 
of a weld to absorb energy under impact without 


0.394* 


j 0.315 ! 



> j 0.010" 


t 



NOTCH f 


J 

A 


- /\ 








* 2.165" 


0.394" 


A 

CHARPY 



B 

IZOD 


I Figure 7-66^ -Test pieces for impact testing. 




























































LU 



CHARPY IZOD 


I Figure 7-67TI Performing impact test. 


fracturing. This is a dynamic test in which a test speci¬ 
men is broken by a single blow, and the energy used in 
breaking the piece is measured in foot-pounds. This test 
compares the toughness of the weld metal with the base 
metal. It is useful in finding if any of the mechanical 
properties of the base metal were destroyed by the 
welding process. 

The two kinds of specimens used for impact testing 
are known as Charpy and Izod Vfig. 7-66)1 Both test 
pieces are broken in an impact testing machine. The only 
difference is in the manner that they are anchored. The 
Charpy piece is supported horizontally between two 
anvils and the pendulum strikes opposite the notch, 
as shown in i figure 7-67 J view A. The Izod piece is 
supported as a vertical cantilever beam and is struck on 
the free end projecting over the holding vise Kfiq. 7-671 
view B). 


Fillet-Welded J oint Test 

You use the FI LLET-WELDED J 01 NT TEST to 
check the soundness of a fillet weld. Soundness refers 
to the degree of freedom a weld has from defects 
found by visual inspection of any exposed welding 
surface. These defects include penetrations, gas 
pockets, and inclusions. Prepare the test specimen, 
as shown in i figure 7-681 Now apply force at Point A 



ll Figure 7-68.1 -Test plate for fillet weld test. 


7-41 




























































1 Figure 7-69.] -Rupturinq fillet weld test plate. 


Kfiq. 7-69)1 until a break occurs in thejoint. This force 
may be applied by hydraulics or hammer blows. 

In addition to checking the fractured weld for 
soundness, now is a good time to etch the weld to check 
for cracks. 

EtchingTest 

The ETCH ING TEST is used to determine the 
soundness of a weld and also make visible the boundary 
between the base metal and the weld metal. 

To accomplish the test, you must cut a test piece 
from the welded joint so it shows a complete transverse 
section of the weld. You can make the cut by either 
sawing or flame cutting. File the face of the cut and then 
polish it with grade 00 abrasive cloth. Now place the test 
piece in the etching solution. 

The etching solutions generally used are hydrochlo¬ 
ric acid, ammonium persulfate, iodine and potassium 
iodide, or nitric acid. Each solution highlights different 
defects and areas of the weld. The hydrochloric acid 
dissolves slag inclusions and enlarges gas pockets, 
while nitric acid is used to show the refined zone as well 
as the metal zone. 

Tensile Strength Test 

The term TENSILE STRENGTH may be defined as 
the resistance to longitudinal stress or pull and is meas¬ 
ured in pounds per square inch of cross section. Testing 
for tensile strength involves placing a weld sample in a 
tensile testing machine and pulling on the test sample 
until it breaks. 


|^-1 1/8“ -►W5/8 , >4<- 2 1/4" -5/8 "-►j ■<— 1 1/8"-^| 

| I i REDUCED SECTION I I | 

1 -in 





T 





- 2 “-►! 

I GAUGE LENGTH 


I Figure 7-70H -Standard tensile test specimen. 


The essential features of a tensile testing machine 
are the parts that pull the test specimen and the devices 
that measure the resistance of the test specimen. Another 
instrument, known as an extensometer or strain gauge, 
is also used to measure the strain in the test piece. Some 
equipment comes with a device that records and plots 
the stress-strain curve for a permanent record. 

The tensile test is classified as a destructive test 
because the test specimen must be loaded or stressed 
until it fails. Because of the design of the test machine, 
weld samples must be machined to specific dimensions. 
This explains why the test is made on a standard speci¬ 
men, rather than on the part itself. It is important that the 
test specimen represents the part. Not only must the 
specimen be given the same heat treatment as the part 
but it also must be heat-treated at the same time. 

There are many standard types of tensile test speci¬ 
mens, an d figure 7-7(D shows one standard type of speci¬ 
men commonly used. The standard test piece is an 
accurately machined specimen. Overall length is not a 
critical item, but the diameter and gauge length are. The 
0.505-inch-diameter (0.2 square inch area) cross section 
of the reduced portion provides an easy factor to ma¬ 
nipulate arithmetically. The 2-inch gauge length is the 
distance between strain-measuring points. This is the 
portion of the specimen where you attach the exten¬ 
someter. In addition, you can use the gauge length to 
determine percent elongation. 

The tensile test amounts to applying a smooth, 
steadily increasing load (or pull) on a test specimen and 
measuring the resistance of the specimen until it breaks. 
Even if recording equipment is not available, the testis 
not difficult to perform. During the test, you observe the 
behavior of the specimen and record the extensometer 
and gauge readings at regular intervals. After the speci¬ 
men breaks and the fracturing load is recorded, you 
measure the specimen with calipers to determine the 
percent of elongation and the percent reduction in area. 
In addition, you should plot a stress-strain curve. From 
the data obtained, you can determine tensile strength, 

























yield point, elastic limit, modulus of elasticity, and other 
properties of the material. 

SAFETY REGULATIONS 

You, as the welder, must have a thorough KNOWL¬ 
EDGE of the safety precautions relating to the job. That 
is not all; you should also consider it your responsibility 
to observe all of the applicable safety precautions. When 
welding, carelessness can cause serious injury to your¬ 
self as well as others. 

Bear in mind the safety precautions for operating 
welding equipment can vary considerably because of 
the different types of equipment involved; therefore, 
only general precautions on operating metal arc-weld¬ 
ing equipment are presented here. For specific instruc¬ 
tions on the operation and maintenance of your 
individual equipment, consult the equipment manufac¬ 
turer's instruction manual. In regards to general precau¬ 
tions, know your equipment and how to operate it. Use 
only approved welding equipment, and ensure that it is 
maintained properly. 

I Before you start welding, ensure that the welding 
machine frame is grounded, that neither terminal of the 
welding generator is bonded to the frame, and that all 
electrical connections are secure. The ground connec¬ 
tion must be attached firmly to the work, not merely laid 
loosely upon it. 


• Keep welding cables dry and free of oil or grease. 
Keep the cables in good condition and always take 
appropriate steps to protect them from damage. When it 
is necessary to run cables some distance from the ma¬ 
chine, lay them overhead, if at all possible, using ade¬ 
quate support devices. 

• When you are using portable machines, make 
sure that the primary power cable is separate from the 
welding cables so they do not become entangled. Any 
portable equipment mounted on wheels should be se¬ 
curely blocked to prevent accidental movement during 
welding operations. 

• When stopping work for any appreciable length 
of time, be sure to de-energize the equipment. When the 
equipment is not in use, you should completely discon¬ 
nect it from its source of power. 

• Keep the work area neat and clean. If at all 
possible, make it a practice to dispose the hot electrode 
stubs in a metal container. 

I Chapter j contains information on protective cloth¬ 
ing, eye protection, and safe practices applicable to the 
personal safety of the operator and other persons who 
may be working nearby so that information will not be 
repeated here. If necessary, go back and review the 
section entitled “Safety" in i chapter 3l before proceeding 
to the next chapter. 


7-43 







CHAPTER 8 


GAS SHIELDED-ARC WELDING 


The primary goal of any welding operation is to 
make a weld that has the same properties as the base 
metal. The only way to produce such-a weld is to protect 
the molten puddle from the atmosphere. In gas 
shielded-arc welding, briefly discussed in i chapter~3] 



I Figure 8-1.1 -Gas shielded-arc welding principle. 


you use a gas as a covering shield around the arc to 
prevent the atmosphere from contaminating the weld. 
Gas shielding makes it possible to weld metals that are 
otherwise impractical or difficult to weld by eliminating 
atmospheric contamination from the molten puddle. 

I Figure 8- ll shows the basic principle of gas shielded-arc 
welding. 

The two general types of gas shielded-arc welding 
processes are gas tungsten-arc welding (GTA) and gas 
metal-arc welding (GMA). GTA is often tilled TIG 
(tungsten inert gas) and GMA is referred to as MIG 
(metal inert gas). The term inert refers to a gas that will 
not combine chemically with other elements. 


GAS TUNGSTEN-ARC 
WELDING—GTAW 

Gas tungsten-arc welding is basically a form of arc 
welding; however, in gas tungsten-arc welding, the elec¬ 
trode is used only to create the arc. The electrode is not 
consumed in the weld as in the shielded metal-arc 
process. The gas tungsten-arc welding process generally 
produces welds that are far superior to those produced 
by metallic arc welding electrodes. Especially useful for 
welding aluminum, it also may be used for welding 
many other types of metals. The GTA process is most 
effective for joining metals up to 1/8 inch thick, although 
you can use it to weld thicker material. 

As shown in lfiqure 8-2,1 the basic GTA process 
involves an intense arc between the base metal and a 



I Figure 8-2^ -GTA welding process. 













































I Figure 8-3.-l -Power supply unit specifically designed for gas tungsten-arc welding. 


tungsten electrode. The arc, the electrode, and the weld 
zone are surrounded by an inert gas (usually either 
helium or argon or a mixture of the two) that displaces 
the air and eliminates the possibility of weld contami¬ 
nation by the oxygen and nitrogen present in the 
atmosphere. The tungsten electrode has a high melting 
point that makes it virtually nonconsumable. 

Specific advantages of gas tungsten-arc welding 
include the following: 

• Welding can be done in all positions. 

• The weld is usually equal to the base metal in 
composition. 

• Flux is not used; therefore, finished welds do not 
require cleaning of corrosive residue. 

• Smoke or fumes are not present to obscure vi¬ 
sion; therefore, you can easily seethe welding 
process. 

• Distortion of the base metal is minimal because 
the heat is concentrated in a small area. 

• No splatter is produced because metal is not 
transferred across the arc. 


GTA WELDING EQUIPMENT 
AND SUPPLIES 

The equipment and supplies required for gas tung¬ 
sten-arc welding consist of an electric power unit, 
shielding gas, a pressure-reducing regulator and flow¬ 
meter, an electrode holder (commonly called a torch), 
nonconsumable tungsten electrodes, filler rods, a supply 
of cooling water (when required), and personal protec¬ 
tive gear. 

Electric Power Unit 

Most welding power sources can provide the cur¬ 
rent needed for GTA welding. The common welding 
machines, whether alternating current (at) or direct 
current (de), have their advantages in certain welding 
applications; however, they can be cumbersome and 
their hose and cable connections can create difficulties. 
Because of this, specially designed machines with all 
the necessary controls are available for gas tungsten-arc 
welding I (fig 8-31 . 

GTA power units are equipped with solenoid valves 
that turn the flow of shielding gas and cooling water on 
and off. They are also equipped with a hand- or foot- 
operated remote-control switch that turns the water and 
gas on and off. Some of these remote-control devices 


8-2 























Figure 84.^ Effects of polarity on the weld. 


also turn the main welding current on and off at the same 
time. This not only allows the operator to start and stop 
without leaving the work but also to adjust the current 
while welding. 

Most of these welding machines can produce both 
ac and dc current. The choice of ac or dc depends on the 
welding characteristics required. 

DIRECT CURRENT.— As you learned ir l chapterl 
m a direct-current welding circuit maybe either straight 
or reverse polarity. When the machine is set on straight 
polarity, the electrons flow from the electrode to the 
plate, concentrating most of the heat on the work With 
reverse polarity, the flow of electrons is from the plate 
to the electrode, thus causing a greater concentration of 
heat at the electrode. Because of this intense heat, the 
electrode tends to melt off; therefore, direct-current 
reverse polarity (DCRP) requires a larger diameter elec¬ 
trode than direct-current straight polarity (DCSP). 

The effects of polarity on the weld are shown in 
I figure 8-41 Notice that DCSP produces a narrow, deep 
weld. Si nee the heat is concentrated on the work, the 
welding process is more rapid and there is less distortion 
of the base metal. Overall, straight polarity is preferred 
over reverse polarity because you can achieve better 
welds. 

DCRP forms a wide and shallow weld and is rarely 
used in the GTAW process. The exception to this is when 
it is used to weld sections of aluminum or magnesium. 
DCRP has excellent cleaning power that results from the 



WORK (AND OPPOSITELY THE ELECTRODE) 
ALTERNATELY POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE A C 


+ 



DIRECT CURRENT DIRECT CURRENT ONE COMPLETE 

REVERSE POLARITY STRAIGHT POLARITY CYCLE OF A C 

A B C 


I Figure 8-5.-i -The ac welding cycle. 



I Figure 8-6.^ ACHF combines the desired cleaning action of 
DCRP with the good penetration of DCSP. 


action of positive-charged gas ions. When these gas ions 
strike the metal, they pierce the oxide film and form a 
path for the welding current to follow. This same clean¬ 
ing action occurs in the reverse polarity half of an 
alternating-current welding cycle. 

ALTERNATING CURRENT.- AS showi h in fieri 
ure l8-5.1 ac welding is actually a combination of DCSP 
and DCRP; however, the electrical characteristics of the 
oxides on the metal often prevent the current from 
flowing smoothly in the reverse polarity half of the 
cycle. This partial or complete stoppage of current flow 
(rectification) causes the arc to be unstable and some¬ 
times go out. Ac welding machines were developed with 
a high-frequency current flow unit to prevent this recti¬ 
fication. The high-frequency current pierces the oxide 
film and forms a path for the welding current to follow. 
The effects of alternating current high-frequency 
(ACHF) are shown in i figure Notice that ACHF 
offers both the advantages of DCRP and DCSP. ACHF 
is excellent for welding aluminum. 


8-3 




















































Table 8-l.-Current Selection Guide for GTA Welding of Common Metals 


Material 

Alternating Current 

With High-Frequency Stabilization 

With High-Frequency 
Starting Current 

Straight 

Polarity 

Reverse 

Polarity 

Aluminum-uo to 3/32 inch thick 

1 

2 

N.R. 

Aluminum-over 3/32 inch thick 

1 

N.R. 

N.R. 

Aluminum castings 

1 

N.R. 

N.R. 

Brass alloys 

2 

1 

N.R. 

Silcon copper 

N.R. 

1 

N.R. 

Monel 

2 

1 

N.R. 

Stainless steel 

2 

1 

N.R. 

Hard-surfacing alloys 

2 

1 

N.R 

Key: 1. Excellent Results 

2. Good Results 

N.R. Not Recommended 



You can us d tabled as a guide for selecting the 
current for welding some of the more common metals. 
For more specific information, refer to the operator's 
manual for the specific machine you are using. 

Torches 

GTA welding torches are designed to conduct both 
welding current and inert gas to the weld zone. The 
torches can be either air or water cooled, depending on 
the welding current. Air-cooled torches are used for 
welding light-gauge materials at relatively low-current 
settings. Water-cooled torches are recommended for 
currents above 200 amperes. A sectional view of a GTA 
water-cooled torch is shown ii j figure 8-71 When you are 
using this type of torch, a circulating stream of water 
flows around the torch to keep it from overheating. 



NOTE: To avoid torch overheating caused by clog¬ 
ging and flow restrictions, you must keep the water 
clean. 

The GTA welding torch carries the welding current 
and directs the gas to the weld area. The torch must have 



Figure 8-7+ GTA water-cooled torch. I Figure 8-8.1 -GTA torch parts. 


8-4 












































1 Table 8-2.| -Approxi mate Cup Size for GTA Welding 


TUNGSTEN ELECTRODE 

CUP ORIFICE 

diameter (inches) 

diameter (inches) 

1/16 

1/4-3/8 

3/32 

3/8-7/16 

1/8 

7/16-1/2 

3/16 

1/2-3/4 


Table 8-3.-Approximate Current Ranges for Tungsten Electrodes 


Electrode Diameter 

Inches 

Current, 

Amperes 

Standard Ttingsten 
Electrodes 

Thoriated Tungsten 
Electrodes 

0.04 

10-60 

15-80 

1/16 

40-120 

60-150 

3/32 

100-160 

140-250 

1/8 

150-210 

225-350 

5/32 

190-275 

300-450 

3/16 

250-350 

400-550 

1/4 

300-490 

500-800 

5/16 

450-600 



the proper insulation for the maximum current ranges to 
ensure 'operational safety. Current is transmitted-from 
the weld-rig machine through the power cable to a collet 
holding the tungsten electrode. A variety of collet sizes 
are available, depending on the diameter of the el ec- 
trode. 1 Figure 8-81 shows the various parts of a typical 
GTA torch. 

Gas is fed to the welding zone through the torch 
nozzle that consists of a ceramic cup. Nozzles also are 
made of steel (chrome plated), plastic, and glass (Pyrex) 
materials. These nozzles (gas cups) vary in size, depend¬ 
ing upon the type and size of torch and the diameter of 
the electrode. Se d table 8^21 for sizes. 

Electrodes 

The electrode should extend beyond the end of the 
gas cup a distance equal to its diameter for butt welding 
and slightly further for fillet welding. Selecting the right 
size electrode for each job is important to prevent elec¬ 
trode damage and poor welds caused by too high or too 
low a current. Excessive current causes tungsten parti¬ 
cles to transfer to the weld, while not enough current 
allows the arc to wander emetically over the end of the 
electrode. 


The diameter of the electrode selected for GTA 
welding is governed by the amount of welding current 
used. Remember: DCRP requires larger electrodes than 
DCSP. Recommended electrode sizes for various ranges 
of welding current are shown in ltable 8-3j These current 
ranges are broad. You should refer to the manufacturer's 
recommendations for specific current ranges and elec¬ 
trode sizes based on the type of material you are weld¬ 
ing. 

Basic diameters of nonconsumable electrodes are 
.040, 1/16, 3/32, and 1/8 of an inch. They are either pure 
tungsten or alloyed tungsten. The alloyed electrodes are 
of three types: 1% thorium alloy, 2% thorium alley, and 
zirconium alloy. Pure tungsten is routinely used with ac 
welding and is sufficient for most GTA welding opera¬ 
tions. The thoriated types are normally used for DCSP 
welding. These electrodes give slightly better penetra¬ 
tion and arc-starting characteristics over a wider range 
of current settings. The zirconium alloy is excellent for 
ac welding and has high resistance to contamination. 
The electrodes alloyed with thorium and zirconium are 
primarily used for critical weldments in the aircraft and 
missile industries. 






















AC DC 

I Figure 8^9j -Tungsten electrode shapes for ac 
and dc welding. 



127.286 


Tungsten electrodes are usually color-coded at one 
end. A green color indicates that the rod is pure 
tungsten; yellow indicates a 1-percent thoriated tungsten 
rod; red indicates a 2-percent thoriated tungsten rod; and 
brown indicates that the rod is alloyed with zirconium. 


To produce good quality welds with the GTA 
process, you must shape the electrode properly. The 
general practice is to use a pointed elect rode with dc 
welding and a spherical end with ac weldinq |(fiq. 8-9] . 


Shielding Gas 


Shielding gas for GTA welding can be argon, he¬ 
lium, or a mixture of argon and helium. Argon is by far 
the most popular. When compared to helium, argon has 
greater cleaning action and provides a more stable arc. 
Argon is heavier than air; therefore, it provides a blanket 
over the weld that protects it from contaminants. 
Helium, being lighter than air, requires a higher gas flow 
than argon and is therefore more expensive to use. 
However, as a shielding gas, helium - allows greater 
penetration and faster welding speeds because the arc is 
hotter in the helium atmosphere than in the argon 
atmosphere. The opposite is true for GMA welding; 
therefore, a mixture of argon and helium is sometimes 
used in welding metals that require a higher heat input. 

I Table SA] lists a selection of shielding gases 
recommended for various metals for both the GTA and 
GMA welding processes. Notice that for most GTA 
welding operations, you use pure argon. 


Regulators 

The primary difference between the regulators used 
for oxyfuel welding and for GTA/GMA welding is that the 
working pressure on the oxyfuel regulators is shown in 
pounds per square inch (psi) while the regulators used 


I Figure 8-10.-l -Combination regulator and 
flowmeter. 



I Figure 8-11.1 —Cross section of flowmeter. 


for GMA/GTA show the flow of shielding gas in cubic 
feet per hour (cfh) or liters per minute (Ipm). 
Regulators used for GMA/GTA welding have a 
flowmeter instead of a working pressure gauge along 
with the cylinder pressure gauge. Se a figure 8-10J 


8-6 


The flowmeter consists of a plasticor glass tube that 
contains a loosely fitting ball. As the gas flows up the 
tube, it passes around the ball and lifts it up. The more 

















































































[Table 8-4.1 -Selection of Shielding Gases for Various GMAW and GTAW Applications 


METALS 

ARGON 

HELIUM 

co 2 

o 2 

h 2 

n 2 

METHOD 

POLARITY 

(GTAW) 

(GMAW) 

Aluminum Alloys 

100 







* 

DCRP 

100 






* 


ACHE 


100 





* 


DCSP 

25 

75 






* 

Aluminum Bronze 

100 






* 

* 

DCSP 

Copper 

25 

75 





* 

* 

DCSP 

100 







* 


100 





* 


95 





5 



Magnesium 

100 







* 

DCRP 

100 






* 


ACHF 

Nickel 

100 






* 

* 

ACHF 

20 

80 








100 





*A 


DCSP 

Silicon Bronze 

100 






* 

* 

ACHF 

100 







* 

Steel mild 

100 






* 


DCSP 

75 


25 





* 

DCRP 


100 





*A 




100 





* 

98 



2 




* 

Low alloy 

97 



3 




* 

DCRP 

95 



5 




* 

80 




20 




80 


20 






Stainless 

99 



1 




* 

DCRP 

95 



5 




* 

DCSP 

80 




20 


* 


100 






* 



100 





*A 


Titanium 

100 







* 

DCSP 

100 






* 



100 





*A 


Dissimilar Metals 

Backup Gas 

100 






* 


DCSP 





5 

80 




gas that moves up the tube, the higher the ball is lifted. 

I Figure 8- HI shows a cross section of the flowmeter. 

The shielding gas regulator has a constant outlet 
pressure to the flowmeter of about 50 psig. This is 
important because the flowmeter scales are accurate 
only if the gas entering them is at that approximate 


pressure. If you use higher inlet pressures, the gas flow 
rate will be higher than the actual reading. The reverse 
is true if the inlet pressure is lower than 50 psig; there¬ 
fore, it is important to use accurately adjusted regulators. 
With an accurate flowmeter, these regulators can deliver 
inert gas flows up to 60 cfh. You should read the scale 
by aligning the top of the ball with the cfh desired. 




































































Table 8-5.-Suggested Inert Gas Flow Rates for Various Metals 


METAL 

GAS FLOW CU.FT./HR. 




(CFH) 


KIND 

THICKNESS 

ARGON 

HELIUM 

*C0 2 

Steel 

.035-3/32 

8-10 

20-30 

8-10 

Cast Iron 

1/4 

16 

40 

— 

Stainless Steel 

1/16-1/8 

11 

30 

— 

Stainless Steel 

3/16-1/4 

13 

32 

— 

Copper 

1/16-1/4 

15 

38 

— 

Magnesium 

1/16-1/8 

10 

25 

— 

* Pure CO 2 is currently used exclusively on steel. 


To obtain an accurate reading, you must mount the 
meter in a vertical position. Any slant will create an 
off-center gas flow and result in an inaccurate reading. 
Also, because gas densities vary, you should use differ¬ 
ent flowmeters for different gases. 

The flow of gas necessary for good GTA welding 
depends primarily on the thickness of the material. 
Other factors include the foil owing: welding current, 
size of nozzle, joint design, speed of welding, and a 
draft-free area in the location the welding is done. This 
last factor can affect gas coverage and use considerably. 

I Table 8-5l shows the approximate gas flow rates for 
various types of metals. 

Filler Rods 

Normally you do not require filler metal when GTA 
welding light-gauge materials since they tend to flow 
together easily. Thick material and thin material that 
needs reinforcing should be welded using a filler metal. 

Special filler rods are available for GTA welding; 
therefore, you should not use welding rods designed for 
oxyfuel welding because they can contaminate the tung¬ 
sten electrode. You should use filler rods that have the 
same composition as the base metal; for example, use 
mild steel rods to weld low-carbon steel and aluminum 
rods for welding aluminum. Additionally, there are 
many different compositions of the same metal; there¬ 
fore, you should select a filler metal of the same com¬ 
position as the metal you are welding. 

Personal Protective Equipment 

A welding hood like the one used in shielded 
metal-arc welding should be used for gas tungsten-arc 


welding. The correct shade of lens depends on the 
intensity of the Arc. Chapt er 3 provides a chart of rec¬ 
ommended lens shades based on the current setting of 
the machine. For normal GTA welding at current ranges 
of 76 to 200 amperes, a shade No. 10 lens is satisfactory. 
Eye fatigue indicates you should use a different shade 
of lens or there is leakage around the protective filter 
glass. 

In addition to the welding hood, protective clothing, 
such as gloves and an apron, should be worn. Bare skin 
should never be exposed to the rays of the welding arc 
because painful burns may result. 

GTA WELDING PREPARATION 

Although it can produce outstanding results, GTA 
welding can be expensive. The equipment, electrodes, 
and shielding gas are costly and the material you weld 
is usually much more expensive than the material 
welded by other welding processes. To avoid costly 
mistakes, you should take the time to prepare for each 
welding operation fully. Preparation is the key to pro¬ 
ducing quality weldments. 

Specific information on the different manufacturers 
of GTA welding equipment is not provided in this train¬ 
ing manual. You should read the manufacturer's instruc¬ 
tional pamphlets for specific information on your 
machine. The following suggestions are considered 
general and you can apply them to any GTA welding 
operation: 

• Prepare the joint according to the welding proce¬ 
dure you are performing. Refer t d chapterll of 
this training manual for specific information 
about joint preparation. 




















• Clean the metal of all oxidation, scale, oil, dirt, 
or other foreign matter. Regardless of the type of 
joint used, proper cleaning of the metal is essen¬ 
tial. For best results, use a stainless steel wire 
brush. 

• Check all electrical circuit connections to make 
sure they are properly connected and all fittings 
are tight. 

• Be sure the torch is the right type and capacity 
for the current at which most of the welding will 
be done. Some manufacturers offer different 
torches for different ranges of welding current. 

• Check the size, appearance, and position of the 
tungsten electrode in the torch. Ensure that the 
electrode diameter and nozzle size meet the 
manufacturer's recommendations. The tip 
should be properly shaped as discussed earlier 
(refer to lfiqure S^ . The electrode should extend 
beyond the end of the gas cup a distance ranging 
from 1/8 to 3/16 of an inch for butt welding and 
1/4 to 3/8 of an inch for fillet welding. Check the 
electrode for positioning and good electrical con¬ 
tact. The electrode should be clean and silvery. A 
dirty tungsten electrode can usually be cleaned 
satisfactorily with a fine emery cloth. If severely 
contaminated, the electrode should be replaced 
or the tip broken off and dressed on a grinding 
wheel. A contaminated tungsten electrode and a 
good tungsten electrode are shown ir l figure 8-12] 

• Check the ground cable connections to the work- 
piece. The connections should be periodically 
checked after welding begins because they tend 
to work loose. When this happens, the welding 
current varies. 

• Set the machine for the correct welding amper¬ 
age. (Follow manufacturer's recommendations.) 

• Open the cylinder valve and adjust the gas flow. 
Before welding, check the connections on the gas 
supply for leaks with soapy water. 

• If using a water-cooled torch, turn on the water. 
Be sure the water pressure is not higher than 
recommended by the torch manufacturer. 

GTA WELDING PROCEDURES 



I Figure 8-12,-h Containitiated and good tungsten electrode. 



I Figure 8-13l -Torch position for the starting swing to strike 
the arc. 

procedure for a particular welded joint includes many 
variables. The same variables that must be considered 
for other welding processes also must be considered for 
gas shielded-arc welding. Some of the variables that you 
must consider include the following: type of base metal, 
the joint design, the welding position, the type of shield¬ 
ing gas, and the welding machine setting. 

Starting the Arc 

Before starting the arc, you should form a ball on 
the end of the electrode for ac welding. To do this, 
simply set the current to DCRP and strike an arc for a 
moment on a piece of carbon or a piece of copper. The 
ball diameter should be only slightly larger than the 
original diameter of the tungsten electrode. 

When starting the arc with an ac high-frequency 
current, you do not have to bring the electrode into 
contact with the workpiece. To strike the arc, you must 
hold the torch in a horizontal position about 2 inches 
above the work surface, as shown in i fiqurd 8-13J Then 


As we discussed in i chapter 3] the detailed methods 
and practices used to prepare a particular weldment are 
called the welding procedure. We also said that the 


8-9 







































Figure 8-lA.lk Torch position at the end of the swing when the 
arc strikes. 



rapidly swing the electrode end of the torch down to 
within 1/8 of an inch of the work surface. The high-fre¬ 
quency arc will then jump the gap between the electrode 
and the plate, establishing the arc l Figure 8-141 shows 
the torch position at the time the arc strikes. 

If you are using a dc machine, hold the torch in the 
same position, but touch the plate to start the arc. When 
the arc is struck withdraw the electrode so it is about 
1/8 of an inch above the plate. 

To stop the arc, quickly swing the electrode back to 
the horizontal position. If the machine has a foot pedal, 
gradually decrease the current before stopping the arc. 

Welded J oints 

In the following paragraphs the different types of 
joints and the procedures used to weld them is discussed. 

BUTT J OINTS.— After you strike the arc, hold the 
torch at a 90-degree angle to the workpiece surface, and 



II Figure 8-163 -Addition of filler metal in the flat position. 

with small circular motions, as shown ir i figure 8-151 
form a molten puddle. After you form the molten puddle, 
hold the torch at a 75-degree angle to the work surface 
and move it slowly and steadily along the joint at a speed 
that produces a bead of uniform width. Move the torch 
slowly enough to keep the puddle bright and fluid. No 
oscillating or other movement of the torch is necessary 
except the steady forward movement. 

When you must use a filler metal, form the molten 
puddleas described previously. When the puddle be¬ 
comes bright and fluid, you should move the arc to the 
rear of the puddle and add the filler metal by quickly 
touching the rod to the front edge of the puddle. Hold 
the rod at about a 15-degree angle from the work. 
Because the electrode is pointing toward the filler metal 
or pushing it, it is known as the push angle. Remove the 


















































Figure 8-18.-GTA welding a lap joint. 


filler rod and bring the arc back to the front edge of the 
puddle. When the puddle becomes bright and fluid 
again, you should repeat the steps as described before. 

I Figure 8-T6| shows the correct procedures for adding 
filler metal. Continue this sequence until the weld joint 
has been completed. The width and height of the weld 
bead is determined by the speed of travel, by the move¬ 
ment of the torch, and by the amount of filler metal 
added. 

In welding practice, it is again stressed that good 
(GTA welding depends on following this definite proce¬ 
dure-form the molten pool and then feed filler rod 
intermittently to the leading edge of the pool as you 
move the torch forward. DO NOT feed the filler rod into 


the arc. You should practice making single-pass butt 
welds until you can produce satisfactory welds. 

LAP AND TE E J Ol NTS.- I h chapter 3. we said 
that lap and tee joints are welded using the fillet weld. 
Fillet welds are slightly awkward to make using the GTA 
welding process because of the gas nozzle. Once you 
establish the arc, you should pay close attention to the 
molten ouddl d Figures 8-17l and 8-18 show the correct 
torch and rod angles for the tee and lap joints. 

In welding a tee or lap joint, the puddle forms a 
V-shape. The center of the V is called a notch , and the 
speed at which you fill the notch governs how fast you 
should move the torch. Do NOT get ahead of the notch. 
If you do, the joint will have insufficient fusion and 
penetration. As you weld along the joint, dip the rod in 


TO 











































and out of the puddle about every 1/4 of an inch of travel. 
If you add the filler rod to the molten puddle at just the 
right time uniform welds result every time. 

Out-of-Position Welding 

Rules for quality welding in the flat position also 
must be followed for out-of-position GTA welding. 
Cleanliness, good joint fit-up, preheat, sufficient shield¬ 
ing gas, and correct welding current are important. In 
addition, you should not use high welding current or 
deposit large weld beads. Direct the arc so there is no 
overheating at anyone area that could cause sagging or 
undercutting. The adding of filler metal, bead size, and 
sequence must be done correctly to ensure complete 
fusion between passes. 

HORIZONTAL WELDING.— When welding in 
the horizontal position, start the arc on the edge of the 


joint. Then hold the torch at a work angle of 15 degrees 
and a push angle of 15 degrees. After you establish the 
puddle, dip the rod into the front edge of the puddle on 
thehigh side as you move the torch along the joint l(fial 
1 8-191 . Maintain an arc length as close as possible to the 
diameter of the electrode. Correct arc length coupled 
with the correct speed of travel helps prevent undercut¬ 
ting and permits complete penetration. 

VERTICAL WELDING.— When welding thin 
material with the GTA welding process, you should weld 
from the top, moving downward Kfiq. 8-201 This helps 
you produce an adequate weld without burning through 
the metal. Filler material is not normally needed for 
welding downward. 

On heavier materials, you should weld from the 
bottom, uowards flfiq. 8-21) . This enables you to achieve 
adequate penetration. When welding upward, you nor¬ 
mally need to use a filler rod. 


8-12 









































OVERHEAD WELDING.— When GTA welding 
in the overhead position, you should lower the welding 
current by 5 to 10 percent of what normally is used for 
flat welding. This reduced welding current enables you 
to maintain better control of the welding puddle. 
Conversely, you need a higher flow of shielding gas. 
Hold the torch and the rod as you do for flat welding 
Kfiq. 8-22)| . You should try to maintain a small weld 
puddle to avoid the effects of gravity. Most inexperi¬ 
enced welders find overhead welding awkward; there¬ 
fore, try to get in as comfortable and relaxed a position 
as possible when welding. This helps you to maintain 
steady, even torch and filler rod manipulation. 

GTA WELDING COMMON METALS 

The actual welding technique for gas tungsten-arc 
welding common metals is virtually the same; however, 
each of the metals that we discuss has its own unique 
welding characteristics. I n this section we discuss some 
of those characteristics. It is not the scope of this training 
manual to provide you with an in depth study of the 
welding procedures required to weld all types of metals. 
This chapter is merely an introduction to gas shielded- 
arc welding. For more information, refer to the manu¬ 
facturer's literature for the specific welding equipment 
you use or any of the references listed in this book. 

Aluminum 

Steelworkers use the gas tungsten-arc welding pro¬ 
cedure more for aluminum than for any other metal. 
Aluminum is available in a variety of compositions. 
Series 1000,3000, and 5000 aluminum alloys are con¬ 
sidered nonheat-treatable and are easily weldable. The 
heat-treatable alloys in the series 2000, 6000, and 7000 
also can be welded; however, higher welding tempera¬ 
tures and speed are needed. 

You can weld aluminum in all positions, but better 
welds are normally produced in the flat position. You 
should also use copper backup blocks whenever 
possible, especially on thin material. For best results use 
ACHF current and argon for shielding gas. 

Stainless Steel 

In GTA welding of stainless steel, the welding tech¬ 
niques used are similar to those used with aluminum. 
The major differences are in the selection of the welding 
current and the type of tungsten electrode used. To get 
the best results in welding stainless steel, you should use 
DCSP welding current; however, ACHF can be used. 
The forehand welding technique should be used. 


The amperage settings for GTA welding stainless 
steel are higher than for aluminum. The amperage used 
for different thicknesses of stainless should be accord¬ 
ing to the recommended settings that you can find in the 
manufacturer's technical manual or the information 
pamphlets provided with the equipment. 

Copper and Its Alloys 

Pure copper is easily welded; however, as with any 
of the other metals we have discussed, it must be thor¬ 
oughly cleaned before to welding. The GTA weldability 
of each copper-alloy group depends largely upon the 
alloying elements. Copper-silicon and copper-nickel 
alloys are weldable using the GTA process. Copper- 
zinc, copper-tin, and copper-lead alloys are difficult or 
impossible to weld by the GTA process. Plates up to 1/4 
of an inch thick are generally prepared with a square 
edge. The forehand welding technique with DCSP is 
recommended for materials thicker than 0.050 of an 
inch. On lighter material, ACHF also can be used. 

Cast Iron 

You can make sound welds using the GTA welding 
process in three principal grades of cast iron: gray, 
white, and malleable. Cast-iron parts must always be 
preheated before to welding. Gray cast iron should be 
preheated to a temperature ranging between 500°F to 
1250°F. The required temperature depends on the size 
and shape of the workpiece. 

In either GTA or GMA welding, you should allow 
the workpiece to cool slowly after welding. You can 
accomplish this by covering the workpiece in a bed of 
lime or ashes. This slow cooling prevents cracking and 
residual stresses. 

Magnesium 

The welding characteristics of magnesium are com¬ 
parable to those of aluminum. Both have high-heat 
conductivity, a low-melting point, high-thermal expan¬ 
sion, and both oxidize rapidly. Both DCRP and ac pro¬ 
vide excellent cleaning action to the weld metal. DCRP 
can be used with helium gas to produce wide weld 
deposits, high heat, and shallow penetration. ACHF with 
helium, argon, or a mixture of the gases can be used to 
join metals ranging from 0.20 to over 0.25 of an inch. 
DCSP with helium produces deep penetration but no 
surface cleaning. 

Most satisfactory results on magnesium are ob¬ 
tained by using the electrode in as nearly a vertical 


8-13 





Figure 8-23.-h GMA welding process. 


CONTROL SYSTEM 



Figure 8-24.-Diagram of GMA welding equipment. 


position as possible. The electrode is advanced along the 
line of weld, using the forehand technique. 

CAUTION 

Always be sure there is good ventilation 
when welding. The fumes from some of these 
metals are highly toxic; therefore, a good ven¬ 
tilating system is essential. 

GAS METAL-ARC WELDING-GMAW 

The gas metal-arc welding process (GMAW), often 
called MIG , has revolutionized arc welding. In this 
process, a consumable electrode (in the form of wire) is 
fed from a spool through the torch (welding gun) at a 


preset controlled speed. As the wire passes through the 
contact tube of the gun, it picks up the welding current. 
The consumable wire electrode serves two functions: it 
maintains the arc and provides filler metal to the joint. 
The method of delivery of the filler metal allows 
GMAW welding to be basically a one-handed operation 
which does not require the same degree of skill as 
GTAW [ Figure 8-231 shows the basic principie of gas 
metal-arc welding. 

An important factor in the GMA welding process is 
the high rate at which metal can be deposited. This high 
rate of metal deposition and high speed of welding 
results in minimum distortion and a narrow heat-af¬ 
fected zone. When you are deciding whether to use GTA 
or GMA welding, the thickness of the material should 












































































be a deciding factor. GMAW is often chosen for welding 
thicker material. 

Like GTA welding, gas metal-arc welding also uses 
a shielding gas to protect the weld zone during welding. 
The inert gas is fed through the gun into the weld zone 
and prevents atmospheric contamination. 

GMAW offers many of the advantages of GTAW. 
Since there is no flux, GMA welds are clean and there 
is no slag to remove. GMAW enables you to produce 
sound welds in all positions quickly. Now let's take a 
look at the equipment you will use for GMA welding. 

GMA WELDING EQUIPMENT 
AND SUPPLIES 

Gas metal-arc welding equipment basically consists 
of four units: the power supply, the wire feeding mecha¬ 
nism, the welding gun (also referred to as the torch), and 
the gas suddI V. Figure 8-21 4 shows atypical GMA weld¬ 
ing outfit. 

Welding Machine 

When you use a conventional type of welding ma¬ 
chine for GMA welding, the voltage varies depending 
on the length of the arc. Whenever the nozzle-to-work 
distance changes, the arc length and the voltage changes. 
The only way to produce uniform welds with this type 
of power source is to maintain the arc length and voltage 
at a constant value. Besides producing nonuniform 
welds, this inconsistent voltage can cause the wire to 
burn back to the nozzle. 

A constant voltage (CV) power source was devel¬ 
oped to overcome the inconsistent voltage charac¬ 
teristics of a conventional welding machine, (Se dfial 
I 8-251 . It can be either a dc rectifier or motor generator 
that supplies current with normal limits of 200 to 250 
amperes. 

The CV type power source has a nearly flat voltam- 
pere characteristic. This means that the machine main¬ 
tains the same voltage regardless of the amount of 
current used. With this type of power source, you can 
change the wire-feed speed over a considerable range 
without causing the wire to burn back to the nozzle. 
When the wire-feed speed is set at a specific rate, 
a proportionate amount of current is automatically 
drawn. In other words, the current selection is based on 
the wire-feed speed. When the wire is fed faster, the 
current increases; when it is fed slower, the current 
decreases. With this type of power supply, variations in 



I Figure 8-25J -Constant voltage (CV) power unit. 


the nozzle-to-work distance will not change the arc 
length and burn back is virtually eliminated. 

In gas metal-arc welding, direct-current reverse po¬ 
larity (DCRP) is recommended. You should recall from 
the previous section that DCRP produces excellent 
cleaning action and allows for deeper penetration. 

Wire Feed Drive Motor 

The wire feed drive motor is used to automatically 
drive the electrode wire from the wire spool through the 
gun up to the arc point. You can vary the speed of the 
wire feed by adjusting the controls on the wire-feed 
control panel. The wire feeder can be mounted on the 
power unit or it can be separate from the welding ma¬ 
chine. 

Welding Gun 

The function of the welding gun is to carry the 
electrode wire, the welding current, and the shielding 
gas to the arc area. The gun has a trigger switch that 
controls the wire feed and arc as well as the shielding 
gas. The welding operator directs the arc and controls 
the weld with the welding gun. GMA welding guns are 
availablein many different styles, some of which are 


8-15 
















































F igur e 8-26,-j-GMA welding guns. 


shown in i figure 8-26.| When using these guns, the wire 
is fed to the torch by an automatic wire feeding 
machine which pushes the wire through a flexible 
tub e to the arc po int. 

I Figure 8-~27l shows another type of GMA welding 
gun that Steelworkers could use. This model incorpo¬ 
rates the drive motor and a small spool of wire inside 
the gun. This type of gun is attached directly to the 
welding unit and gas supply, eliminating the need for 
a separate control unit and wire drive assembly. 

As with the GTA welding torch, the torch nozzle 
must be kept clean at all times. Also, you should clean 
the tube through which the electrode wire passes each 
time the electrode reel is changed. 

Shielding Gas 

In gas metal-arc welding, as with gas tungsten- 
arc welding, the shielding gas can have a major effect 
on the properties of the base metal. Some of the 
shielding gases commonly used with the GMA process 
are pure argon, argon-helium, argon-oxyg en, argon- 
carbon dioxide, and carbon dioxide. Refer t d table 8^41 
for a selection of shielding gases recommended for 
various metals for both the GMA and GTA welding 
processes. The smoothness of operation, weld 
appearance, weld quality, and welding speeds are 
affected indifferent ways with each type of metal, 
thickness, and gas mixture. 

ARGON.— Earlier in this chapter, we said that 
argon provides greater cleaning action than other gases. 
Because it is heavier than air, argon blankets the weld 
from contamination. Also, when you are using argon as a 
shielding gas, the welding arc tends to be more stable. 
For this reason, argon is often used in combination with 



127.258B 

I Figure 8-27.^ GMA welding torch with wire feed 
motor and wire spool inside. 

other gases for arc shielding. Argon reduces spatter by 
producing a quiet arc and reducing arc voltage that 
results in lower power in the arc and thus lower 
penetration. The combination of lower penetration 
and reduced spatter makes argon desirable when 
welding sheet metal. 

Pure argon is seldom used for arc shielding 
except in welding such metals as aluminum, copper, 
nickel, and titanium. The use of pure argon to weld 
steel usually results in undercutting, poor bead 
contour, and the penetration is somewhat shallow. 

ARGON-OXYGEN.— Small amounts of oxygen 
added to argon can produce excellent results. 
Normally oxygen is added in amounts of 1, 2, or 5 
percent. When oxygen is added to argon, it improves 
the penetration pattern. It also improves the bead 
contour and eliminates the undercut at the edge of the 
weld. You use argon-oxygen mixtures in welding alloy 
steels, carbon steels, and stainless steel. 

HELIUM.— Helium, like argon, is an inert gas. 
But there are few similarities between the two gases. 
Argon is heavier than air and helium is lighter than 
air. Helium has a high-voltage change as the arc 
length changes. When you use helium for GMA 
welding, more arc energy is lost in the arc itself and is 
not transmitted to the work In the section on GTA 
welding, we said that helium produces good 
penetration and fast welding speeds. For GMA 
welding, the opposite is true. In GMA welding, helium 
produces a broader weld bead, but shallower 
penetration. 

Because of its high cost, helium is primarily used 
for special welding tasks and for welding nonferrous 
metals, such as aluminum, magnesium, and copper. It 
is also used in combination with other gases. 

CARBON DIOXIDE (CO 2 ).- Argon and helium 
gases are composed of single atoms. Carbon dioxide, on 
the other hand, consists of molecules. Each molecule 
contains one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms. At 


8-16 





















Table 8-6-Recommended Wire Diameters for GMA Welding Using Welding Grade C0 2 and a Wire Stick-out of 1/4 to 3/8 of an Inch 


(Manual travel, single pass, flat fillet welds) 

MATERIAL 


WELDING 



TRAVEL 

THICKNESS 

ELECTRODE 

DCRO 

CONDITIONS 

GAS FLOW 

SPEED 

(inches) 

SIZE 

(arc volts) 

(amperes) 

(cfh) 

(ipm) 

0.025 

0.030 

15-17 

30-50 

15-20 

15-20 

.031 

.030 

15-17 

40-60 

15-20 

18-22 

.037 

.035 

15-17 

65-85 

15-20 

35-40 

.050 

.035 

17-19 

80-100 

15-20 

35-40 

.062 

.035 

17-19 

90-110 

20-25 

30-35 

.078 

.035 

18-20 

110-130 

20-25 

25-30 

.125 

.035 

19-21 

140-160 

20-25 

20-25 

.125 

.045 

20-23 

180-200 

20-25 

27-32 

.187 

.035 

19-21 

140-160 

20-25 

14-19 

.187 

.045 

20-23 

180-200 

20-25 

18-22 

.250 

.035 

19-21 

140-160 

20-25 

10-15 

.250 

.045 

20-23 

180-200 

20-25 

12-18 


normal temperatures carbon dioxide is essentially an 
inert gas; however, at high temperatures it decomposes 
into carbon monoxide (CO) and oxygen (0 2 ). Because 
the excess oxygen atoms can combine with carbon or 
iron in the weld metal, wires used with this gas must 
contain deoxidizing elements. A deoxidizing element 
has a great affinity for the oxygen and readily combines 
with it. Some of the more common deoxidizers used in 
wire electrodes are manganese, silicon, and aluminum. 

Carbon dioxide is used primarily for the GMA 
welding of mild steel. Because of its low cost, C0 2 is 
often used in combination with other shielding gases for 
welding different types of metals. Direct-current reverse 
polarity (DCRP) is generally used with C0 2 . The current 
setting is about 25 percent higher with C0 2 than with 
other shielding gases. 

Carbon dioxide produces abroad, deep penetration 
pattern. It also produces good bead contour and there is 
no tendency toward undercutting. The only problem 
with C0 2 gas is the tendency for the arc to be violent. 
This can lead to spatter problems; however, for most 
applications this is not a problem and the advantages of 
C0 2 far outweigh the disadvantages. 

Regulators 

You should use the same type of regulator and 
flowmeter for gas metal-arc welding that you use for gas 
tungsten-arc welding. The gas flow rates vary, depend¬ 
ing on the types and thicknesses of the material and the 
joint design. At times it is necessary to connect two or 


more gas cylinders (manifold) together to maintain 
higher gas flow. 

For most welding conditions, the gas flow rate is 
approximately 35 cubicfeet per hour (cfh). This flow 
rate may be increased or decreased, depending upon the 
particular welding application. Final adjustments usu¬ 
ally are made on a trial-and-error basis. The proper 
amount of gas shielding results in a rapidly crackling or 
sizzling arc sound. Inadequate gas shielding produces a 
popping arc sound and results in weld discoloration, 
porosity, and spatter. 

Filler Wires 

The composition of the filler wire used for GMA 
welding must match the base metal. For mild steel, you 
should select mild steel wire; for aluminum, you should 
select aluminum wire. Additionally, you should try to 
select electrode wire that matches the composition of the 
various metals you are welding. For instance, when you 
are welding Type 308 aluminum, you should use an 
ER-308L filler wire. 

Wires are available in spools of several different 
sizes. The wire varies in diameter from .020 to 1/8 of an 
inch. You should select the proper diameter of wire 
based on the thickness of the metal you are welding as 
well as the position in which you are welding. Wires of 
0.020,0.030, and 0.035 of an inch are generally used for 
welding thin materials. You also can use them for weld¬ 
ing low- and medium-carbon steels and low-alloy/high- 
strength steels of medium thicknesses. (Se d table 8^ ) 
Medium thicknesses of metals are normally welded with 













1 Figure 8-28^ -Correct wire stick-out. 


0.045-inch or 1/16-inch diameter wires. For thicker 
metals, larger diameter electrodes may be required. 

As you learned earlier, the position of welding is a 
factor that must be considered. For instance, when you 
are welding in the vertical or overhead positions, you 
normally use smaller diameter electrodes. 

Special attention must be given to ensure the wire 
is clean. Unsound welds result from the use of wire that 
is contaminated by oil, grease, dust, or shop fumes. You 
can obtain the best welding results with wire that has 
just been taken out of its carton. Wire should be stored 
in a hot locker or in a warm dry area, and should be kept 
covered. If welding is stopped for a long period of time, 
you should remove the wire and place it in its original 
carton to prevent contamination. 

WIRE STICK-OUT.— In gas metal-arc welding, 
wire stick-out refers to the distance the wi re extends 
from the nozzle of the gun Kfig 8-281 The correct 
amount of wire stick-out is important because it influ¬ 
ences the welding current of the power source. Since the 
power source is self-regulating, the current output is 
automatically decreased when the wire stick-out in¬ 
creases. Conversely, when the stick-out decreases, the 
power source is forced to furnish more current. Too little 
stickout causes the wire to fuse to the nozzle tip, which 
decreases the tip life. 

For most GMA welding, the wire stickout should 
measure from 3/8 to 3/4 of an inch. For smaller (micro) 
wires, the stick-out should be between 1/4 and 3/8 of an 
inch. 

WIRE-FEED SPEED.— As we stated earlier, you 
can adjust the wire-feed drive motor to vary the 


wire-feed speed. This adjustment is limited to a definite 
range, depending on the welding current used. (See ltablel 
I 8-6] . The wire-feed speed is measured in inches per 
minute (ipm). For a specific amperage setting, a high 
wire-feed speed results in a short arc, whereas a low 
speed produces a long arc. You use higher speeds for 
overhead welding than with flat-position welding. 

Personal Protective Equipment 

As with any other welding process, SAFETY is 
extremely important. A welding hood like the one used 
in shielded metal-arc welding should be used for gas 
metal-arc welding. The correct shade of lens depends on 
the intensity of the arc. lChaoter 31 provides a chart of 
recommended lens shades based on the current setting 
of the machine. Eye fatigue indicates you should use a 
different shade of lens or there is leakage around the 
protective filter glass. 

In addition to the welding hood, protective clothing, 
such as gloves and an apron, should be worn. Bare skin 
should never be exposed to the rays of the welding arc 
because it could result in painful burns. 

TYPES OF GMA WELDING 

When using the GMA welding process, metal is 
transferred by one of three methods: spray transfer, 
globular transfer, or short-circuiting transfer. The type 
of metal transfer depends on the arc voltage, current 
setting, electrode wire size, and shielding gas. 

Spray-Arc Welding 

Spray-arc transfer is a high-current range method 
that produces a rapid disposition of weld metal. This 
type of transfer is effective for welding heavy-gauge 
metals because it produces deep weld penetration. The 
use of argon or a mixture of argon and oxygen are 
necessary for spray transfer. Argon produces a pinching 
effect on the molten tip of the electrode, permitting only 
small droplets to form and transfer during the welding 
process. Spray transfer is useful when welding alumi¬ 
num; however, it is not practical for welding light-gauge 
metal. 

Globular Transfer 

Globular transfer occurs when the welding current 
is low. Because of the low current, only a few drops are 





























transferred per second, whereas many small drops are 
transferred with a higher current setting. In this type of 
transfer, the ball at the tip of the electrode grows in size 
before it is transferred to the workpiece. This globule 
tends to reconnect with the electrode and the workpiece, 
causing the arc to go out periodically. This results in 
poor arc stability, poor penetration, and excessive spat¬ 
ter. 

Globular transfer is not effective for GMA welding. 
When it is used, it is generally restricted to thin materials 
where low heat input is desired. 

Short-Circuiting Arc Transfer 

Short-circuiting arc transfer is also known as short 
arc Short arc was developed to eliminate distortion, 
burn-through, and spatter when welding thin-gauge 
metals. It can be used for welding in all positions, 
especially vertical and overhead where puddle control 
is more difficult. In most cases, it is used with current 
levels below 200 amperes and wire of 0.045 of an inch 
or less in diameter. Small wire produces weld puddles 
that are small and easily manageable. 

The shielding gas mixture for short-arc welding is 
75% carbon dioxide and 25% argon. The carbon dioxide 
provides for increased heat and higher speeds, while the 
argon controls the spatter. Straight C0 2 is now being 
used for short-arc welding; however, it does not produce 
the excellent bead contour that the argon mixture does. 

GMA WELDING PREPARATION 

Preparation is the key to producing quality weld¬ 
ments with the gas metal-arc welding process. As in 
GTA welding, the equipment is expensive; therefore, 
you should make every effort to follow the manufac¬ 
turer's instruction manuals when preparing to use GMA 
welding equipment. 

J oints 

For the most part, the same joint designs recom¬ 
mended for other arc welding processes can be used for 
gas metal-arc welding (refer t d chapter"^ . There are 
some minor modifications that should be considered due 
to the welding characteristics of the GMA process. Since 
the arc in GMA welding is more penetrating and nar¬ 
rower than the arc for shielded metal-arc welding, 
groove joints can have smaller root faces and root open¬ 
ings. Also, since the nozzle does not have to be placed 
within the groove, less beveling of the plates is required. 


GMA welding can actually lower material costs, since 
you use less weld metal in the joint. 

Equipment 

The following suggestions are general and can be 
applied to any GMA welding operation: 

• Check all hose and cable connections to make 
sure they are in good condition and are properly 
connected. 

• Check to see that the nozzle is clean and the 
correct size for the particular wire diameter used. 

• Make sure that the guide tube is clean and that 
the wire is properly threaded through the gun. 

• Determine the correct wire-feed speed and adjust 
the feeder control accordingly. During welding, 
the wire-speed rate may have to be varied to 
correct for too little or too much heat input. 

• Make sure the shielding gas and water coolant 
sources are on and adjusted properly. 

• Check the wire stick-out. 

GMA WELDING PROCEDURES 

As with any other type of welding, the GMA weld¬ 
ing procedure consists of certain variables that you must 
understand and follow. Many of the variables have 
already been discussed. This section applies some of 
these variables to the actual welding procedure. 

Starting the Arc 

For a good arc start, the electrode must make good 
electrical contact with the work For the best results, you 
should clean the metal of all impurities. The wire stick- 
out must be set correctly because as the wire stick-out 
increases, the arc initiation becomes increasingly diffi¬ 
cult. 

When preparing to start the arc, hold the torch at an 
angle between 5 and 20 degrees. Support the weight of 
the welding cable and gas hose across your shoulder to 
ensure free movement of the welding torch. Hold the 
torch close to, but not touching, the workpiece. Lower 
your helmet and squeeze the torch trigger. Squeezing the 
trigger starts the flow of shielding gas and energizes the 
welding circuit. The wire-feed motor does not energize 
until the wire electrode comes in contact with the work- 
piece. Move the torch toward the work, touching the 
wire electrode to the work with a sideways scratching 







wire-feed dial slightly counterclockwise. This decreases 
the wire-feed speed and increases the arc length. A 
clockwise movement of the dial has the opposite effect. 
With experience, you can recognize the sound of the 
proper length of arc to use. 

To break the arc, you simply release the trigger. This 
breaks the welding circuit and de-energizes the wire- 
feed motor. Should the wire electrode stick to the work 
when striking the arc or during welding, release the 
trigger and clip the wire with a pair of side cutters. 

Welding Positions 


motion, as shown in lfiqure 8-29-l To prevent sticking, 
you should pull the torch back quickly, about 1/2 of an 
inch—the instant contact is made between the wire 
electrode and the workpiece. The arc strikes as soon as 
contact is made and the wire-feed motor feeds the wire 
automatically as long as the trigger is held. 

A properly established arc has a soft, sizzling sound. 
Adjustment of the wire-feed control dial or the welding 
machine itself is necessary when the arc does not sound 
right. For example, a loud, crackling sound indicates 
that the arc is too short and that the wire-feed speed is 
too fast. You may correct this problem by moving the 


In gas metal-arc welding, the proper position of the 
welding torch and weldment are important. The position 
of the torch in relation to the plate is called the work and 
travel angle. Work and travel angles are shown i n | fiqurel 
1 8-30.1 If the parts are equal in thickness, the work angle 
should normally be on the center line of the joint; 
however, if the pieces are unequal in thickness, the torch 
should angle toward the thicker piece. 

The travel angle refers to the angle in which welding 
takes place. This angle should be between 5 and 25 
degrees. The travel angle may be either a push angle or 
a drag angle, depending on the position of the torch. 





GROOVE WELD 


[Figure 8-30- -T ravel and work anglefor GMA welding. 
















































I Figure 8-33j -Pullinq and pushing travel angle techniques. 


When the torch is ahead of the weld, it is known as 
pulling (or dragging) the weld. When the torch is behind 
the weld, it is referred to as pushing the metal I (fig. 8-311 . 

The pulling or drag technique is for heavy-gauge 
metals. Usually the drag technique produces greater 
penetration than the pushing technique. Also, since the 
welder can see the weld crater more easily, better quality 
welds can consistently be made. The pushing technique 
is normally used for light-gauge metals. Welds made 
with this technique are less penetrating and wider be¬ 
cause the welding speed is faster. 


For the best results, you should position the weld¬ 
ment in the flat position. This position improves the 
molten metal flow, bead contour, and gives better shield¬ 
ing gas protection. 

After you have learned to weld in the flat position, 
you should be able to use your acquired skill and knowl¬ 
edge to weld out of position. These positions include 
horizontal, vertical-up, vertical-down, and overhead 
welds. The only difference in welding out of position 
from the fiat position is a 10-percent reduction in am¬ 
perage. 

When welding heavier thicknesses of metal with the 
GMA welding process, you should use the multipass 
technique (discussed in | chapter 3t . This is accomplished 
by overlapping single small beads or making larger 
beads, using the weaving technique. Various multipass 
welding sequences are shown lin figure 8^ 2. The num¬ 
bers refer to the sequences in which you make the 
passes. 

Common Weld Defects 

Once you get the feel of welding with GMA equip¬ 
ment, you will probably find that the techniques are less 
difficult to master than many of the other welding pro¬ 
cesses; however, as with any other welding process, 
GMA welding does have some pitfalls. To produce good 
quality welds, you must learn to recognize and correct 
possible welding defects. The following area few of the 
more common defects you may encounter along with 
corrective actions that you can take. 



OVERHEAD 


TEE FLAT 


VEE GROOVE VERTICAL UP 
FILLET 


I Figure8-32.+ Multipass welding. 













































SURFACE POROSITY.— Surface porosity usu¬ 
ally results from atmospheric contamination. It can be 
caused by a clogged nozzle, shielding gas set too low or 
too high, or welding in a windy area. To avoid surface 
porosity, you should keep the nozzle clean of spatter, use 
the correct gas pressure, and use a protective wind shield 
when welding in a windy area. 

CRATER POROSITY.— Crater porosity usually 
results from pulling the torch and gas shield away before 
the crater has solidified. To correct this problem, you 
should reduce the travel speed at the end of the joint. 
You also may try reducing the tip-to-work distance. 

COLD LAP.— Cold laps often result when the arc 
does not melt the base metal sufficiently. When cold lap 
occurs, the molten puddle flows into an unwelded base 
metal. Often this results when the puddle is allowed to 
become too large. To correct this problem, you should 
keep the arc at the leading edge of the puddle. Also, 
reduce the size of the puddl e by i ncreasi ng the travel 
speed or reducing the wire-feed speed. You also may use 
a slight whip motion. 

LACK OF PENETRATION.— Lack of penetra¬ 
tion usually results from too little heat input in the weld 
zone. If the heat input is too low, increase the wire-feed 
speed to get a higher amperage. Also, you may try 
reducing the wire stick-out. 

BURN-THROUGH.— Burn-through (too much 
penetration) is caused by having too much heat input in 
the weld zone. You can correct this problem by reducing 
the wire-feed speed, which, in turn lowers the welding 
amperage. Also you can increase the travel speed. Burn- 
through can also result from having an excessive 
amount of root opening. To correct this problem, you 
increase the wire stick-out and oscillate the torch 
slightly. 

WHISKERS.— Whiskers are short pieces of elec¬ 
trode wire sticking through the root side of the weld 
joint. This is caused by pushing the wire past the leading 
edge of the weld puddle. To prevent this problem, you 
should cut off the ball on the end of the wire with side 
cutters before pulling the trigger. Also, reduce the travel 
speed and, if necessary, use a whipping motion. 

GMA WELDING COMMON METALS 

You can use the welding equipment and techniques 
for gas metal-arc welding to join all types of metals; 
however, as we discussed in the GTAWprocess, each of 
the metals requires a unique welding method. In this 


section, we discuss some of the welding methods asso¬ 
ciated with a few of the more commonly welded metals. 

Carbon Steels 

The majority of welding by all methods is done on 
carbon steels. When you are using GMA to weld carbon 
steels, both the spray-arc and short-arc methods may be 
applied. For spray-arc welding, a mixture of 5-percent 
oxygen with argon is recommended. As we mentioned 
earlier, this mixture provides a more stable arc. Also you 
may use a mixture of argon and C0 2 or straight C0 2 . 
Straight C0 2 is often used for high-speed production 
welding; however, with C0 2 the arc is not a true spray 
arc. For short-arc welding, a 25-percent C0 2 and 75-per¬ 
cent argon mixture is preferred. 

For GMA welding of thin materials (0.035 inch to 
1/8 inch), no edge preparation is needed and a root 
opening of 1/16 of an inch or less is recommended. For 
production of adequate welds on thicker material, some 
beveling is normally required. When welding plates 1/4 
of an inch or greater in thickness, you should prepare a 
single or double-V groove with 50- to 60-degree in¬ 
cluded angle(s). 

Aluminum 

The joint design for aluminum is similar to that of 
steel; however, aluminum requires a narrower joint 
spacing and lower welding current setting. 

The short-arc welding method is normally used for 
out-of-position welding or when welding thin materials 
because short-arc produces a cooler arc than the spray 
type arc. When welding thinner material (up to 1 inch in 
thickness), you should use pure argon. 

The spray-arc welding method is recommended for 
welding thicker materials. With spray arc, more heat is 
produced to melt the wire and base metal. When you are 
welding thicker material (between 1 and 2 inches) a 
mixture of 90-percent argon and 10-percent helium is 
recommended. The helium provides more heat input and 
the argon provides good cleaning action. 

Stainless Steel 

DCRP with a 1- or 2-percent oxygen with argon 
mixture is recommended for most stainless steel weld¬ 
ing. In general, you weld stainless steel with the spray- 
arc welding method and a pushing technique. When 
welding stainless steel up to 1/1 6 of an inch in thickness, 
you should use a copper backup strip. For welding thin 
materials in the overhead or vertical positions, the short- 
arc method produces better results. 




APPENDIX I 


GLOSSARY 


ACC— Air carbon arc cutting. 

ARC BLOW— The tendency for an arc to wander or 
whip from its normal course during arc welding. 

ASME— American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 

AWS— American Welding Society. 

BACKFIRE— Momentary burning back of the flame 
into the torch tip during welding or cutting. 

BACKHAND WELDING- Welding in the direction 
opposite the direction the gas flame is pointing. 

BURR— The sharp edge remaining on metal after cut¬ 
ting. 

CARBURIZING FLAME- Produced by burning an 
excess of fuel gas. 

CHAMFER— Bevel angling the metal edge where 
welding is to take place. 

COMPRESSION STRESSES— The stresses devel¬ 
oped within a material when forces tend to com¬ 
press or crush the material. 

DCRP— Direct current reverse polarity. 

DCSP— Direct current straight polarity. 

DISTORTION— The warping of a structure. 

DUCTILITY— The property that enables a material to 
withstand extensive permanent deformation due to 
tension. 

ELASTICITY— The ability of a material to return to 
its original form after deformation. 

FATIGUE — The tendency of a material to fail after 
repeated stressing at the same point. 

FATIGUE STRENGTH- The ability of a material to 
resist various kinds of rapidly alternating stresses. 

FERROUS— Denotes the family of metals in which 
iron is the major ingredient. 

FLASHBACK— The flame burning in or beyond the 
torch mixing chamber during welding or cutting. 

FLUX— A chemical used to promote fusion of metals 
during the welding process. 


FOREHAND WELDING— Welding in the same di¬ 
rection as the torch flame points. 

FUSION— The melting together of metals. 

GMAW— Gas metal arc welding. 

GTAW— Gas tungsten arc welding. 

IMPACT STRENGTH— The ability of a metal to 
resist suddenly applied loads; measured in foot¬ 
pounds of force. 

KERF — The narrow slit formed in metal as cutting 
progresses. 

LAYOUT— The process of measuring and marking 
materials for cutting, bending, drilling, or welding. 

MALLEABILITY— The property that enables a ma¬ 
terial to withstand permanent deformation caused 
by compression. 

MAPP— A stabilized methyl acetylene-propadiene 
fuel gas. A Dow Chemical Company product. 

METALLOID— A nonmetal that can combine with a 
metal to form an alloy. 

METALLURGY— The science and technology of 
metals. 

MIG— A term used to describe gas metal arc welding 
(metal inert gas). 

NEUTRAL FLAME— Produced when equal amounts 
of oxygen and fuel gas are burned. 

NORMALIZING— A heat-treating operation involv¬ 
ing the heating of an iron-base alloy above its 
critical temperature range and cooling it in still air 
for the purpose of removing stresses. 

NONFERROUS— Metals containing no iron. 

OFW— Oxyfuel welding. 

OXIDIZING FLAME— Produced by burning about 
twice as much oxygen as fuel gas. 

PASS— A single progression of a welding operation 
along a joint or weld deposit. The result of a pass is 
a weld bead. 





PLASTICITY— The ability of a material to perma¬ 
nently deform without breaking or rupturing. 

POROSITY— The presence of gas pockets or voids in 
metal. 

QUENCHING— The process of rapid cooling from an 
elevated temperature by contact with fluids or 
gases. 

QUENCHING MEDIUM— The oil, water, brine, or 
other medium used for rapid cooling. 

RSW— Resistance spot welding. 

RW— Resistance welding. 

SEIZE— To bind securely the end of a wire rope or 
strand with seizing wire. 

SHEARING STRESSES— The stresses developed 
within a material when external forces are applied 
along parallel lines in opposite directions. 

SMAW— Shielded metal arc welding. 

SOAKING— Holding a metal at a required tempera¬ 
ture for a specified time to obtain even temperature 
throughout the section. 


STINGER— An electrode holder; a clamping device 
for holding the electrode securely in any position. 

STRESS— External or internal force applied to an ob- 
jectl 

TENSILE STRENGTH— The resistance to being 
pulled apart. 

TENSION STRESSES— The stresses developed 
when a material is subjected to a pulling load. 

TIG— A term used to describe gas tungsten arc welding 
(tungsten inert gas). 

TINNING— A term applied to soldering where the 
metals to be soldered together are first given a coat 
of the soldering metal. 

WELD— To join metals by heating them to a melting 
temperature and causing the molten metal to flow 
together. 

WELDMENT— An assembly whose parts arejoined 
by welding. 

ULTIMATE STRENGTH— The maximum strain that 
a material is capable of withstanding. 


AI-2 



APPENDIX II 


REFERENCES USED TO DEVELOP 
THE TRAMAN 


References Chapters 

Althouse, Andrew D. f Carl H. Turnquist, and William A. 1-8 

Bowditch, Modern Welding, Goodheart-Wilcox Co. 

Inc., 1970. 

Bennet, A. E., and LouisJ . Sky, Blueprint Reading for 3 

Welders, 3d ed., Delmar Publishers Inc., 1983. 

Blueprint Reading and Sketching, NAVEDTRA 3 

10077-F1, Naval Education and Training Program 
Management Support Activity, Pensacola, Fla., 1988. 

Equipment Operator 3, NAVEDTRA 10392, Naval 7 

Education and Training Program Management 
Support Activity, Pensacola, Fla., 1990. 

Giachinoand Weeks, Welding Skills, American Technical 1-8 

Publishers Inc., 1985. 

Heat Treatment and Inspection of Mdials, ATC Manual 2 

52-5, Air Training Command, Scott Air Force Base, 

III., 1963. 

Naval Construction Force Welding Materials Handbook, 3,6 

P-433, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 

Department of the Navy, Washington D. C., 1991. 

The Oxy-Acetylene Handbook, 2d ed., Linde Company, 3-5,6 

Union Carbide Corporation, 270 Park Avenue, New 
York, 1960. 

Safety and Health Requirements Manual, EM 385-1, U.S. 4,5,8 

Army Corps of Engineers, United States Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D. C., 1987. 

Smith, David, Welding Skills and Technology, Gregg 3-8 

Division, McGraw-Hill, 1984. 

Welding Theory and Application, TM 9-237, Department 1-8 

of the Army Technical Manual, Headquarters, 

Department of the Army, Washington D.C., 1976. 


All-1 




INDEX 


Acetvlene. l 4-31 
Acetone, [TU 

Air carbon-arc cuttinq fT^Ol 
Air carbon-arc gouging ] 7-321 
Arc length, [Tll| 

Arc starting methods ! 7-91 
Arc weldinq. rm 
equipment. ! 7-11 
positions, ! 7-1E7-13L7TH 

B 

Backfire and flash back f 4-231 
Beveling mild steel ! 4-171 
Brazing !"!^ 

equipment ! 6-81 
filler metals ! 6-81 
fluxes, ! 6-81 
fluxinq. l 6-111 
heating devices 
joint designs, 
procedures. ! 6-10l 
silver ! 6-121 

surface preparation ! 6-101 
work support ! 6-111 
Braze weldinq. l~6T2l 
equipment, ! 6-121 
filler metal, ! 6-141 
fl ux. l~6-14l 
procedures ! 6-141 

Butt joints !, 3-B.6-4t.7-13.7-iai7mr8T0l 

C 

Cable size selection guide ! 7-31 
Carbon-arc cutting ! 7-301 


Carburizing, ! 2-51 
Carburizing flame ! 4-141 
Chip test ! 1-121 
Chain clamps HTMl 
Circular magnetization ! 7-331 
Cleaning equipment ! 7-41 
Color warn inqs f 4-251 
Color codes ! 8-61 

Corrosion resistance of metal s i 1-4 
Cup sizes ! 8-5| 

Current setting ! 7-10l 

Cutting and beveling pipe ! 4-191 

Cutting and welding hoses ! 4-81 

Cutting cast iron ! 4-161 

Cutting mild-carbon steel l 4-144-211 

Cutting on containers ! 4-211 

Cutting quality ! 4-221 

Cutting rivets ! 4-211 

Cutting thin steel l 4-151 

Cutting thick steel ! 4-161 

Cutting torches ! 4-81 

Cutting torch tips ! 4-91 

Cutting torch tip maintenance ! 4-111 

Cutting wire rope ! 4-211 

Cutting, metal electrode ar d 7-321 

Cvanidinq J 2-51 

Cyl i nders ! 4-IB,4-14, 4-21,4-261 

D 

Dimensions ! 3-251 
Dimensioning ! 3-281 

Dimensions applied to weld symbols[~?29| 
Drag lines ! 4-221 
Drawings ! 3-211 
Drawing views ! 3-261 


INDEX-1 




















































































































E 


Electric drive cutting torch carriage pTISl 
Electrical terms, ! 7-l| 

ElectrodesQ3[83 
Electrode anale. 1 7-l3 
Electrode holder j 7-4| 

Electrode selection [TT/] 

Electrode sizes ] 7-301 
Etching test ] 7-411 

Expansion and contraction of metal ] 3-l7| 
control of, 1 3-181 

F 

Ferrous met a Is, IT?] 

Filler metals ] 3-4| 

Filler rods[53[83 
Filler wires ] 8-171 
Filter lenses l 3-331 
Flame hardening methods l 2-61 
Flowmeter, ! 8-61 
Fluxes JTSI 
brazing ] 6-81 
soldering ] 6-51 
welding, ! 3-5| 

Forehand welding, [33 
F ree bend test l 7-371 
Fusion welding of pipe ] 5-131 

G 

Gas flow rates l 8-81 
Gas metal arc welding. l 8-141 
common metals ] 8-221 
eouipment j 8-191 
joints ] 8-191 
positions ] 8-201 
preparation, ! 8-191 
procedures. ! 8-191 
types of. l 8-181 


Gas shielded-arc welding (GSAW) 1 8-11 
Gas tungsten-arc welding (GrTAW T^II 
Gas weldingOj] 
gmawQOJ 

Gouging mild steel ] 4-17| 

Grinding wheel dresser fFIOl 
Ground clamps ] 7-41 
GTTAW weldingCO 
common metal s PlTISl 
preparation UTS! 
procedures. ! 8-91 
Guided-bend test ! 7-391 

H 

Heat colors for steel ] 2-2| 

Heat treating theory, fMl 
Heat treatment ] 2-11 
annealing ] 2-2| 
hardening ! 2-4] 
normalizing ] 2-41 
types of ] 2-21 

I 

I impact test ] 7-401 
Inspection ] 7-371 

radiographic fTGTI 
ultrasonic l 7-371 

J 

J pints ] 3-51 

butt l 3-1318-101 
comer ] 3-14] 
edge ! 3- 151 
lap, ! nHTO 
tee, rTMMll 

J oint designs for brazing fMlIG-lOl 


INDEX-2 


butt ioints l 6-91 
lap joints ] 6-9| 









































































































J oint designs for brazing—Continued 


P 


scarf joints ] 6-9l 
J oint edge preparation ] 5-81 
Joint preparation ] 7-261 

L 

Liquid penetrant inspection f 7-351 
Line characters and uses, 3-24 

M 

Magnetic test ] 1-131 

Magnetization ] 7-35 

Magnetic particle inspection ! 7-331 

Maintenance of oxygas welding equipment ] 5-51 

MAPP qasf44| 

cutting tios l 4-121 

cylinder, [33 

safety ] 4-4] 

Metal electrode arc cutting[T32| 

Metal identification ] 1-9| 

Metal properties, ! 1-1| 

Metal sfT4| 

N 

Nick-break test ! 7-401 

Nitriding rrSI 

Nondestructive testingQiH 
Nonfemous metal s. lTBI 

O 

Oxidecolors l 2-81 

Oxidizing flame ] 4-141 

Oxygas cutting equipment ] 4-11 

Oxygas cutting operations ] 4-131 

Oxygas welding equipment ! 4-13,5-11,5-4] 

Oxygas welding of metalsJjTSI 

Oxygas welding techniques ] 5-6| 

Oxygen ,[T3 
Oxygen regulators ] 4-6| 


Pipe weldinq l 7-251 

Preheatinq. l 7-281 

Protective equipment ] 8-ffl, 8-181 

Q 

Quenching media ] 2-8| 

R 

Radiographic inspection ! 7-371 
Regu I ators l 8-618-171 

S 

Safety, [73| 

equipment ] 7-41 
precautions ! 4-231 
regulations, 3-43 
Service ownership titles ! 4-251 
Shielded metal-arc weldinq f7-l],7-5| 

Shielding gas ] 8-161 

Shielding gases for GMAW and GTAW l 8-61.8-71 
Shovel teeth I 7-291 
Spacers l 7-271 

Soaking periods for steel I 2-31 
Soldering, I 6-11 
Soldering equipment ] 6-11 
coppers, ! 6-l| 
fluxes ] 6-51 
heat sources, [631 
solder ] 6-41 

Solder ,[63 

Soldering techniques ! 6-6] 

Spark patterns jlTin 
Spark test ] 1-91 
Stages of heat treatment ! 2-11 
Steel JT5l 

Structural steel ! 1-51 
Surface colors of metal sQ3l 


INDEX-3 






































































































Symbol s F3-27I 

su ppl ementarv f 3-301 
weld J 3-271 


T 

Tack weldingQ^Zl 
Tempering steel 1 2-71 
Tests TT371 

etching ] 7-421 
fillet-welded joint ] 7-4ll 
free bend l 7-391 
guided bend ] 7-391 
impact ] 7-401 
nick-break ] 7-401 
tensile, strength I 7-421 
Testing[T37| 

destructive ! 7-371 
eddy current[T37] 

Torch gas leaks ! 5-51 
Torch tips[53 

W 

Wearfaci ng ] 6-1H7-27I 
Wearfacing materials 
iron-base alloys, ! 6-161 
procedures ] 6-161 
tungsten carbide. l~6^l6l 
Weld iointsFT5l 
parts of ] 3-7| 

Welded joint design ] 3-121 
Welding, [33 

allied processes. !"?^ 
alternating-current transfer [73 
arc, [33 

area reguirements l 7-51 
backhand l 5-71 
braze ] 6-121 

equipment, [73 


Welding-Continued 
fluxes. ! 5-111 
forehand ] 5-71 
gas tungsten arc ] 8-l| 
gas shielded metal arc ! 3-31 
gasJjTl] 

gas metal-arc l 8-141 

gas metal arc welding l 8-141 

machine operation and maintenance ] 7-51 

machines ] 7-21.7-31 

motor oenerator f 7-21 

multilayer ] 5-71 

pipeLi25| 

positions, I 3-16,7-13.7-1817-211 

preparation ] 5-lJ] 8-81 

problems and difficulties ! 7-24.7-251 

procedure specification. ! 3-221 

procedures ] 3-2(D.6-1418-9l 

processes. ! 3-11 

quality control [731 

rectifier ] 7-31 

rods mn 

shielded metal arc l 3-3| 
tack FTTTI 

technigues ! 5-1217-281 
torches ] 5-11 
WeldsrT9l 
parts of. 1 3-111 
typesrrgi 
Weld defects f&TIl 
burn through ] 8-221 
cold lao l 8-221 
lack of penetration ] 8-221 
porosity ] 8-211 
whiskers ] 8-221 
Wire diameters ] 8-171 
Wire-feed speed ] 8-181 
Wire stick out ] 8-181 


INDEX-4 



























































































































Assignment Questions 









ASSIGNMENT 1 


Textbook Assignment: "Properties and Uses of Metals" and "Basic Heat Treatment," 

pages 1-1 through 2-11. 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

mechanical and chemical properties 
of various metals used in the field 
by Steelworkers. 

1-1. Steelworkers work primarily with 
iron and steel. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-2. Which of the following symbols is 
NOT a chemical symbol for a metal? 

1. A1 
2 . Fe 

3. Cr 
4 . Br 

1-3. An alloy is defined as a substance 
having metallic properties that is 
composed of two or more elements. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-4. The characteristics of elements 

and alloys are terms of physical, 
chemical, electrical, and 
mechanical properties. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-5. Which of the following properties 
is an electrical property of an 
alloy? 

1. Load carrying 

2. Heat conductivity 

3. Magnetic qualities 

4. Wear resistance 

1-6. Tension stresses are also known as 
"tensile stresses." 

1. True 

2. False 

1-7. Having the capacity to conduct heat 
and electricity, to be lustrous, 
and to be deformed or permanently 
shaped at room temperature are 
properties of which of the 
following substances? 

1. Metalloid 

2. Nonmetal 

3. Metal 

4. Chemical 


1-8. Which of the following elements 
sometimes behave like-metals and 
at other times like nonmetals? 

1. Carbon and sulfur 

2. Titanium and iron 

3. Silver and tin 

4. Calcium and chloride 

1-9. A metal alloy is a 

1. combination of halogens 

2. pure metal compound 

3. substance having metalic 
properties that is composed 
of two or more elements 

4. compound of metalloids 

1-10. FeCrMn is the symbology for a 

metallic alloy composed of what 
elements? 

1. Iron, carbon, and magnesium 

2. Iron, chromium, and manganese 

3. Iron, chlorine, and molybdenum 

4. Iron, copper, and manganese 

1-11. The color, density, weight, and 
heat conductivity of an element 
or alloy are known as what kind 
of properties? 

1. Chemical 

2. Electrical 

3. Mechanical 

4. Physical 

1-12. Which of the following properties 
is NOT a mechanical property of a 
metal alloy? 

1. Sturdiness 

2. Elasticity 

3. Weight 

4. Hardness 

1-13. Within a column that is supporting 
a roof beam, internal stresses 
develop. This condition is 
referred to by what term? 

1. Compression 

2. Shearing 

3. Tens ion 

4. Torsion 

1-14. Tensile stresses are developed 
when a material is subjected to 
what type of force? 

1. Compression load 

2. Twisting action 

3. Shearing action 

4. Pulling load 


1 




1-15. 


1 - 21 . 


Carbon steel has an ultimate 
tension and compression strength 
of what maximum psi? 

1. 42,000 

2. 48, 000 

3. 56, 000 

4. 66,000 

1-16. What term is used to describe the 
tendency of a metal to fail after 
repeated stressing at the same 
point ? 

1. Tension 

2. Ductility 

3. Malleability 

4. Fatigue 

1-17. What term is used to describe the 

mechanical property of a metal that 
allows it to be drawn out into a 
thin wire? 

1. Malleability 

2. Toughness 

3. Brittleness 

4. Ductility 


Learning Objective: Distinguish 
ferrous and nonferrous alloying 
elements and their use in metals. 


1-18. What characteristic makes pig iron 
have limited use? 

1. It is comparatively weak and 
brittle 

2. It is difficult to remelt 

3. It cannot be combined with 
other metals 

4. It is used exclusively for 
manufacturing cast-iron pipe 

1-19. When cast iron is alloyed with 
nickel, chromium, molybdenum, 
silicon, or vanadium, which of 
the following characteristics 
is enhanced? 

1. Hardness 

2. Tensile strength 

3. Toughness 

4. All of the above 

1-20. What process is used to produce 
malleability in cast iron? 

1. Remelting 

2. Annealing 

3. Plating 

4. Alloying 


What group of steel is best suited 
for the manufacture of crane hooks 
and axles? 


1 . 

High 

carbon 

2. 

Medium carbon 

3. 

Mild 

carbon 

4. 

Low 

carbon 


1-22. Steel containing 12% to 27% 

chromium, .08% to .20% carbon, 
and no nickel is in what group and 
series of stainless steel? 

1. Martensitic-chromium of the 
300 series 

2. Austenitic chromium-nickel 
of the 300 series 

3. Ferritic-austenite of the 
400 series 

4. Ferritic-chromium of the 
400 series 

1-23. For what purpose is nickel added 
to low-alloy nickel steel? 

1. To increase strength and 
toughness 

2. To reduce the chromium 
requirement due to weight 
limitations 

3. To increase its ability to cut 
other metals after the steel 
becomes red-hot 

4. To permit the steel to be drawn 
into wire 

1-24. Which of the following metals is 
nonferrous? 

1. Cast iron 

2. Carbon steel 

3. Aluminum 

4. Pig iron 

1-25. What element or base metal is 
alloyed with copper to produce 
bronze and is alloyed with lead 
to produce soft solders? 

1. Zinc 

2. Nickel 

3. Tin 

4. Aluminum 

1-26. When used in conjunction with a 
numbering system that classifies 
different aluminum alloys, the 
letter "T" signifies that what 
action has occurred? 

1. The metal has been heat-treated 

2. The alloying elements have been 
tempered 

3. The major alloying elementv has 
been tested 

4. The metal has been covered with 
a tungsten rolled cover 


2 



1-27. What alloy contains 64% to 68% 

nickel, about 30% copper, and small 
percentages of iron, manganese, and 
cobalt ? 

1. K-monel 

2. Inconel 

3. Monel 

4. Duralumin 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the characteristics exhibited 
by different metals during spark 
and chip tests. 

1-28. When applying the spark test to a 
metal, you notice the spark stream 
has shafts and forks only. What 
does this condition indicate about 
the metal under test? 

1. It is steel having a high- 
carbon content 

2. It is steel having a low-carbon 
content 

3. It is a nickel alloy 

4. It is a molybdenum alloy 

1-29. What metal produces a spark stream 
about 25 inches long with small and 
repeating sparklers of small volume 
that are initially red in color? 

1. Nickel 

2. Stainless steel 

3. Grey cast iron 

4. Monel metal 

1-30. Which of the following metals 

produces the shortest length spark 
stream? 

1. High-carbon steel 

2. Low-carbon steel 

3. White cast iron 

4. Nickel 

1-31. On which of the following metals 

does a chip test produce chips that 
have smooth surfaces and sawtooth 
edges? 

1. Low-carbon steel 

2. Cast steel 

3. Aluminum 

4. Monel 


Learning Objective: Identify the 
factors included in the theory of 
heat treatment. 


1-32. Tempering, normalizing, hardening, 
and annealing are common forms of 
what process? 

1. Cold forming of metals 

2. Heat treatment of nonferrous 
metals 

3. Heat treatment of ferrous metal 

4. Quenching of austenitic 
materials 

1-33 Most nonferrous metals can be 

normalized and case hardened but 
not annealed. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-34 Which of the following conditions 

is required for the successful heat 
treatment of metals? 

1. Proper size of furnace 

2. Proper furnace atmosphere 

3. Suitable quenching medium 

4. All of the above 

1-35. An atmosphere that consists of gas- 
air combustion products is formed 
in what types of furnaces? 

1. Oil-fired furnaces only 

2. Gas-fired and electric furnaces 

3. Both oil fired and gas fired 

4. Both oil fired and electric 

1-36. Which of the following gas mixtures 
are constituents of a fuel-fired 
furnace atmosphere? 

1. Hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen 

2. Nitrogen, argon, and radon 

3. Bromine, oxygen, and chlorine 

4. Hydrogen, argon, and radon 

1-37. Oxidizing, reducing, and neutral 

atmospheres are provided in a fuel- 
fired furnace by which of the 
following processes? 

1. Varying the type of fuel 

2. Construction of the furnace 

3. Varying the proportion of 
air to fuel 

4. Each of the above 


3 



1-38. In an electric furnace the 

atmosphere is either air or a 
controlled mixture of gases. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Recognize 
how each phase of heat treatment 
is produced and controlled and 
its effect on the metals being 
treated. 


1-39. What is the primary cause of 

distortion and cracking of the 
heat-treated part? 

1. Heating the part too slowly 

2. Increasing the soaking 
temperature too slowly 

3. Heating one section of the part 
more rapidly than the rest of 
it 

4. Uneven expansion due to carbon 
deposits in the part 

1-40. When parts are uneven in cross 
section, the soaking period is 
determined in what manner? 

1. By the total weight 

2. By the largest section 

3. By the lightest section 

4. By the number of parts 

1-41. What type of medium is normally 

used to quench nonferrous metals? 

1. Oil 

2. Brine 

3. Air 

4. Water 

1-42. Steel must be cooled very slowly in 
a medium that does NOT conduct heat 
easily in order to produce what 
kind of effect? 

1. Maximum softness 

2. Maximum hardness 

3. Maximum ductility 

4. Minimum ductility 

1-43. Copper becomes hard and brittle 
when mechanically worked; but 
it can be made soft again by 
annealing. To anneal it, you 
heat it at temperatures that fall 
within what range? 


1 . 

500 °F 

to 

60 0 °F 

2. 

600 °F 

to 

7 0 0 °F 

3. 

7 0 0 °F 

to 

90 0 °F 

4. 

900 °F 

to 

1100 °F 


1-44. Normalizing is a form of heat 

treatment applicable to nonferrous 
metals only. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-45. Which of the following metals 

are difficult to harden by heat 
treatment? 

1. Wrought iron 

2. Pure iron 

3. Extremely low-carbon steels 

4. All of the above 

1-46. In plain carbon steel, the maximum 
hardness that can be obtained 
depends almost completely upon what 
factor? 

1. The carbon content of the steel 

2. The thickness of the steel 

3. The heating time 

4. The temperature to which it was 
heated 

1-47. What case-hardening method produces 
the hardest surface of any of the 
hardening processes? 

1. Carburizing 

2. Halogenizing 

3. Cyaniding 

4. Nitriding 

1-48. The steel parts are laced in a 

container packed with charcoal and 
heated in a furnance. Which of the 
following case-hardening processes 
is being used? 

1. Cementation 

2. Pack hardening 

3. Carburizing 

4. Atmospheric cementation 

1-49. A slightly oxidizing flame should 
be used on what areas of a part 
being flame hardened? 

1. Flat surfaces 

2. Corners and grooves 

3. Rounded surfaces 

4. Edges and elongated sections 

1-50. When flame hardening a steel part, 
you move the welding torch at a 
certain rate according to which 
of the following factors? 

1. Mass of the part 

2. Shape of the part 

3. Depth of the hardness desired 

4. All of the above 


4 



1—51 * 


1-57. 


Flame hardening produces a hard 
case that resists wear and a tough 
core that is unaffected by heat 
treatment. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-52. The process of heating steel to a 
specific temperature (below its 
hardening temperature), holding 
this temperature for a certain 
length of time, and then cooling 
the steel in still air to room 
temperature is known by what term? 

1. Annealing 

2. Hardening 

3. Tempering 

4. Case hardening 

1-53. Steel can be tempered provided some 
hardness remains after it has been 
normalized. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-54. The softness, ductility, and 
resistance to impact are NOT 
increased in which of the following 
metals? 

1. Aluminum 

2. High-speed steel 

3. Low-carbon steel 

4. Already hardened steel 

1-55. What are the most important 
properties to be obtained in 
tempering permanent steel magnets? 

1. Stability and malleability 

2. Softness and malleability 

3. Hardness and stability 

4. Ductility and resistance 
to wear 

1-56. When cooling a part in a quenching 
medium, you should agitate the part 
or the quenching medium for what 
reason? 


L 

To 

break 

up gases that form 

2. 

To 

induce 

oxidation 

3. 

To 

reduce 

the cooling rate 

4. 

To 

raise 

the temperature of 


the liquid 


The flush method of quenching is 
better than other quenching methods 
for parts having cavities or 
recesses for which of the following 
reasons? 

1. It enables formation of gases 
that enhance the hardening 
process 

2. It enduces oxygen into the 
process to increase the 
temperature 

3. It ensures a thorough uniform 
quench as liquid is sprayed all 
over the parts 

4. It facilitates the formation 
of gases that help reduce the 
temperature 

1-58. When water is used as a quenching 
medium, it should NOT exceed what 
temperature? 

1. 65 ° F 

2. 7 5 °F 

3. 8 5 °F 

4. 95 ° F 

1-59. Of the following quenching mediums, 
which one has the highest cooling 
rate compared to water? 

1. Fuel oil 

2. Caustic soda 

3. Brine, 10% solution at 65°F 

4. Sodium hydroxide, 10% solution 

1-60. Which of the following is the 
solution? 

1. 3.8% salt for every 3 gallons 
of water at 65°F 

2. 3/4 pound of salt per gallon 
of water at 65°F to 100°F 

3. 20% salt solution for the 
entire mix 

4. 3/4 pound of salt per 
100 gallons of water 

1-61. Caustic soda requires special 

handling because of its harmful 
effects on skin and clothing. 

1. True 

2. False 


5 



ASSIGNMENT 2 


Texbook Assignment: "Introduction to Welding 


Learning Objective: Identify the 
general processes and material used 
in welding. 

2-1. The source of heat for the forge 
welding process is a flow of 
electricity between two contacts. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-2. In welding terms, RSW means 

1. round sheet welding 

2. resident shop welds 

3. resistance spot welding 

4. resistant spot welds 

2-3. The source of heat for electric-arc 
welding is 

1. a flow of electricity between 
two contacts 

2. the resistance of a metal to 
the flow of an electric current 

3. the bombardment of a metal with 
electrons 

4. a furnace 

2-4. The primary advantage of using 

shielded metal-arc welding is that 
it produces high-quality welds 
rapidly at a low cost. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-5. Which of the following factors 

are unique to shielded metal-arc 
welding and are NOT connected at 
all to gas shielded-arc welding? 

1. Use of a transformer 

2. Use of a rectifier 

3. Production of a shield 
of inert gas 

4. Each of the above 


Learning Objective: Identify 
correct welding terminology 

2-6. When welding two pieces of metal 
together, you will often need to 
leave a space to be filled in. 
What material is added during the 
welding phase? 

1. Filler metal 

2. Electrodes 

3. Flux 

4. Fusion gas 


pages 3-1 through 3-35. 

2-7. The two types of filler metals 
commonly used in welding are 
welding rods and welding 
electrodes. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-8. A common property of a welding 
rod and a welding electrode is 
that both are used to conduct 
electricity. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-9. When electrodes are divided into 
groups, they are classified into 
what categories? 

1. Consumable or nonconsumable 

2. Conductive or nonconductive 

3. Electric-arc or gas 

4. Metallic or nonmetallic 

2-10. The materials used to dissolve or 
facilitate the removal of oxides 
and other undesirable substances 
formed during welding are known 
by what term? 

1. Alloys 

2. Peroxides 

3. Fluxes 

4. Distillates 

2-11. A good flux does NOT have to 

1. remove oxides from joint 
surfaces 

2. be active at the melting 
point of the filler metal 

3. mix well with the base metal 
alloys in order to lower the 
base metal melting temperature 

4. be easily removed after the 
joint is welded 

2-12. Fluxes are produced in which of the 
following forms? 

1. Paste 

2. Powder 

3. Liquid 

4. All of the above 


6 




2-13. What are the five fundamental types 
of joints? 

1. Fillet, groove, bead, stringer, 
and tack 


2. 

Lap, 

edge 

flanged. 

tee. 

butt, 

and 

3. 

Lap, 

bead 

flanged. 

tee. 

butt, 

and 

4. 

Lap, flanged, 
stringer 

tee. 

butt, 

and 


2-14. When two members are at right 
angles to each other, you should 
use what type(s) of welded joint? 


1 . 

Lap 

only 

2. 

Edge 

only 

3. 

Tee 

or corner 

4. 

Butt 

or edge 



Figure 2A 


2-18. When the edge of each of two joints 
that are to be joined are beveled 
to an angle of 45 degrees, how 
large is the groove angle? 

1. 30 degrees 

2. 45 degrees 

3. 60 degrees 

4. 90 degrees 

2-19. To determine the bevel angle, 

groove angle, and root opening for 
a weld joint, you must consider 
which of the following factors? 

1. The type of weld joint and 
electrode composition 

2. The kind of joint, the welding 
process, and the thickness of 
the base metal or material to 
be welded 

3. The amount of weld joint 
penetrator required to produce 
a sound weld 

4. The thickness of the base metal 
and the diameter of the 
electrode to be used 

2-20. The depth that a groove weld 

extends into the root of a joint 
is known by what term? 

1. Reinforcement factor 

2. Joint penetration 

3. Root opening 

4. Root penetration 


2-21. What type of weld bead is made by 


IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-15 THROUGH 2-17, 


using a side-to-side oscillation? 

REFER 

TO FIGURE 2A. 


1. 

Stringer 

2-15. 

A corner joint is indicated at what 


2. 

Filler 


location(s)? 


3. 

Weave 




4. 

Buildup 


1. B only 

2. A and C only 

2-22. 

The 

term "buildup sequence" refers 


3. A, B, and C only 


to 

what factor in the welding 


4. A, B, C, and E 


process? 

\— i 
l 

CM 

A tee joint is located at what 


1. 

The frequency of oscillation 


location (s)? 


2. 

required to fill in a groove 

The order in which the beads of 


1 . B 



a multipass weld are deposited 


2. A and C 


3. 

The number of filler layers 


3. E 



required 


4. D and F 


4. 

The thickness of the metal that 
is to be welded 

2-17. 

What type of joint is E? 





2-23. 

What type of weld has a triangular 


1. Butt 


cross section? 


2. Lap 

3. Edge 


1. 

Single surface 


4. Tee 


2. 

Plug 




3. 

Root 




4. 

Fillet 


7 




2-24. 


2-25. 


2-26. 


2-27. 


2-28. 


2-29. 


What type of weld has a circular 
cross section made by applying 
filler metal through a prepunched 


or 

precut 

hole ? 

1 . 

Single 

surface 

2. 

Plug 


3. 

spot 


4. 

Fillet 



What type of weld is used to apply 
a hard wear resistant layer of 
metal to surfaces or edges of worn- 
out parts? 

1. Surfacing 

2. Plug 

3. spot 

4. Fillet 

To provide for the final weld, 
you should use what type of weld 
temporarily to hold two parts in 
proper alignment? 

1. Fillet 

2. Tack 

3. Plug 

4. slot 

The junction between the face of 
the weld and the base is known as 
the 

1. face 

2. root 

3. toe 

4. leg 


2-30. Why is the term "heat-affected 
zone" important to a welder? 

1. It is the zone only where 
melting (fusion) occurs 

2. It is the zone that includes a 
portion of the base metal that 
has not been melted. The 
structural and mechanical 
properties have been altered 
by weld heat 

3. The amount of heat applied 
after weld completion to return 
it to its original condition 

4. The type of heating gases 
produced during welding 

2-31. What term do you use to describe 
the details of a joint that 
includes both geometry and required 
dimensions? 

1. Joint efficiency 

2. Joint design 

3. Joint shape 

4. Joint description 

2-32. What butt joint is NOT recommended 
when metals are subject to fatigue 
or impact loads? 

1. Single-V butt joint 

2. Double-V butt joint 

3. Square butt joint 

4. Single-bevel butt joint 

2-33. What joint is recommended as an 
excellent joint for all load 
conditions? 


The exposed surface on the side 
from which the weld was made is 
known as the 


Single V 
Double V 
Square 


1. 

face 



4. Single bevel 


2. 

root 





3. 

toe 


co 

1 

CM 

What corner joint 

is used primarily 

4. 

leg 



for welding 12 gauge or lighter 





sheet metal? 


The 

portion of the 

weld from the 




toe 

to the root is 

known as the 


1. Full open 

2. Flush 


U 

face 



3. Half open 


2. 

root 



4. Double fillet 

lap 

3. 

toe 





4. 

leg 


2-35. 

What tee joint is 

used in locations 




where heavy loads 

are applied? 


1 . 

Single 

bevel 

2. 

Double 

bevel 

3. 

Square 


4. 

Full open 


8 



2-36. 


2-37. 


2-38. 


2-39. 


2-40. 


2-41. 


The strength of a single-fillet lap 
joint is determined by what factor? 

1. The depth of weld penetration 

2. The strength of the base metals 

3. The size of the fillet 

4. The filler metal 


Learning Objective: Identify 
the welding positions used when 
making welds. 


All welding is done in four 
positions. 

1, True 

2. False 

The American Welding Society (AWS) 
number/letter designation IF 
indicates 

1. a vertical weave bead 

2. a horizontal stringer bead 

3. a fillet weld in the overhead 
position 

4. a fillet weld in a flat 
position 

Because of the effect of gravity 
on welding, what is the welding 
position a welder should use any 
time conditions allow? 

1. Flat 

2. Vertical 

3. Horizontal 

4. Overhead 

In pipe welding there are four 
basic-test positions used that 
refer to the position of the pipe 
and not to the position of the 
welding. 

1. True 

2. False 

When welding a pipe in the 6G 
position for pipe welding, you 
use what welding position(s)? 

1. Horizontal only 

2. Vertical only 

3. Overhead and vertical 

4. All positions 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the effects of expansion and 
contraction upon welds. 


2-42. When two pieces of metal are welded 
together, what factor causes 
internal stresses, distortion, and 
warpage? 

1. The difference in temperature 
from the actual joint of the 
weld out to the edges of the 
joint 

2. The structural weakness of the 
metal 

3. An incorrect flame adjustment 

4. A high concentration of heat in 
one area 

2-43. When exposed to the heat buildup 
of welding, all metals expand in 
the path of least resistance. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-44. To aid in controlling distortion, 
you should space tack welds at 
least 12 inches apart and run 
approximately how long? 

1. The thickness of the metal 

2. Twice the thickness of the 
metal 

3. The thickness of the weld 

4. Twice the thickness of the weld 

2-45. Why is an intermittent weld (often 
referred as a skip weld) used? 

1. To control heat input 

2. To ensure spacing between 
the metals being welded 

3. To allow you to check weld 
penetration 

4. Job requirement 

2-46. To control the forces of expansion 
and contraction during welding 
operations, you heat the entire 
structure after welding. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-47. What devices should use to prevent 
excessive movement of metal parts 
during a welding operation, you 
should use what devices? 

1. Clamps and tape 

2. Tape and glue 

3. Fixtures and springs 

4. Welding clamps and jigs 


9 



2-54. 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the factors involved with 
determining welding procedures 
and reading and interpreting 
welding drawing and specifications. 


2-48. Which of the following variables 

must be considered when identifying 
the correct welding procedure? 

1. Type of base metal 

2. Testing requirement 

3. Joint design 

4. All of the above 

2-49. When assigned a welding job, you 

should make a thorough examination 
of the drawings and specifications. 
In what section of the specifi¬ 
cations do you look for welding 
codes ? 


A general note is used to provide 
additional information that applies 
to one particular part or feature 
of a drawing. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-55. The dimensions of an object should 
be measured (scaled) directly from 
the drawing. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-56. What do you call a drawing that 
shows how an object will appear 
after being manufactured? 

1. Orthographic 

2. Pictorial 

3. Sectional 

4. Dimensional 


1. Section 5 

2. Section 2 

3. Section 3 

4. Section 4 

2-50. What type of line is used to show 
the edges of an object that are 
visible to a viewer? 

1. Hidden 

2. Visible 

3. Viewing plane 

4. Section 

2-51. What type of line is used on a 
drawing to show the edges of 
concealed studs, pipes, and 
electrical conduit? 

1. Hidden 

2. Visible 

3. Viewing plane 

4. Section 

2-52. What type of line is used on a 
drawing to show different types 
of materials? 

1. Hidden 

2. Visible 

3. Viewing plane 

4. Section 

2-53. Which of the following drawings is 
used to show internal components? 

1. Cutting plane 

2. Hidden 

3. Section 

4. Internal 


2-57. What type of drawing is used to 

show a complex object completely? 

1. Orthographic 

2. Pictorial 

3. Sectional 

4. Dimensional 

2-58. The standard welding symbols of 

the American Welding Society) AWS 
consist of which of the following 
features? 


1. A reference line 

2. An arrow 

3. A tail 

4. All of the above 


2-59. 


The term "welding symbol" refers to 
the total symbol which includes all 
the information needed to specify 
the weld(s) required. 

1. True 

2. False 


2-60. What type of symbols is used with 
weld symbols to show how the face 
of the weld is to be formed? 


1. Finish 

2. Contour 

3. Completion 

4. Detail 

2-61. What type of symbols is used to 
indicate the method to use for 
forming the contour of the weld? 


1 . 

Finish 

2. 

Contour 

3. 

Completion 

4. 

Detail 


10 



Learning Objective: Identify 
characteristics and functions 
of safety equipment worn by 
welders. 


2-62. What eye protection device is 
designed to be worn under the 
welder's helmet? 

1. Eyecup or cover goggles 

2. Flash goggles with side shields 

3. Dark lens plastic full-face 
shield 

4. Commercial sunglasses 

2-63. Which one of the following reasons 
is a welding helmet worn? 

1. To provide eye protection 

2. To shield against flying metal 

3. To protect against ultraviolet 
rays 

4. All of the above 

2-64. When you are welding with a current 
of 300 amperes, what lens filter is 
best for eye protection? 


1. 

No. 

06 

2 . 

No. 

08 

3. 

No. 

10 

4 . 

No. 

12 


2-65. When using a light bulb to test a 
filter lens, you can determine 
whether the lens is of the proper 
shade by which of the following 
indications? 


1 . 

You can see a distinct 
of the bulb 

outline 

2. 

The light from the bulb 
a sharp point of light 

becomes 

3. 

You can no longer see the 
outline of the bulb 

4. 

The light becomes blue 
scattered 

and 


2-66. What type of leather gauntlets are 
recommended for arc welding? 

1. Five finger 

2. Two finger 

3. Three finger 

4. Four finger 

2-67. What items of safety gear are best 
suited for overhead welding? 

1. Cape and sleeves 

2. Apron and overalls 

3. Jacket and leggings 

4. Bib and leggings 


2-68. Which of the following clothing 

materials is least likely to catch 
fire from welding sparks? 

1. Oilskin 

2. Wool 

3. Plastic 

4. Cotton 


11 



ASSIGNMENT3 


Textbook Assignment: "Gas Cutting," pages 4-1 through 4-26. 


Learning Objective: Recognize 
the relationship of oxidation 
to gas cutting. 


3-1. What portion, if any, of a ferrous 
metal becomes oxidized during the 
oxygas cutting process? 


1 . 

The 

portiondirectly in 

the 


path 

of the 

cutting flame 

2. 

The 

portion 

directly in 

the 


path 

of the 

oxygen jet 


3. 

The 

portion 

previously 

cut 

4. 

None 





3-2. Metals that oxidize readily are 
best suited for oxygas cutting. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Recognize the 
construction, operation, and care 
of the oxyacetylene and MAPP 
gas-cutting tips . 


3-3. The principal difference between a 
standard cutting torch and an 
oxygas welding torch is that the 
cutting torch has an extra tube for 
high-pressure oxygen. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-4. Unless the cutting torch tips and 
seats are properly designed and 
constructed, what type of problem 
can occur during their use? 

1. Improper cooling 

2. Improper gas flow 

3. Leakage 

4. All of the above 

3-5. When cutting torch tips are not in 
use, you should take what action to 
keep them in proper working order? 


3-6. Of the following basic types of 
MAPP gas-cutting tips, which one 
is often used by a steelworker? 


1 . 

High pressure only 

2. 

Standard pressure 

only 

3. 

High pressure and 

normal 


cutting 


4. 

Standard pressure 

and high 


cutting 




Figure 3A.—Cutting torch tips. 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-7 THROUGH 3-9, 
REFER TO FIGURE 3A. 


1. Place them in kits 

2. Store them in toolboxes 3-7. What cutting torch tip is a MAPP 

3. Store them in a container gas one-piece tip? 

equipped with a wooden rack 

4. Store them in a mount-out box 1. A 

2 . B 
3. C 
4 . D 


12 




3-8. What cutting torch tip is a MAPP 
gas two-piece tip? 


IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-15 AND 3-16, 
REFER TO TABLE 4-1 IN THE TEXTBOOK. 


1 . A 

2 . B 
3. C 
4 . D 

3-9. Of the cutting torch tips shown, 
which one is a medium-preheat 
oxyacetylene tip? 

1. A 
2 . B 
3. C 
4 . D 


3-15. When the oxygen cutting pressure 
is set between 50 to 60 psi and a 
number 54 cutting tip is used, you 
can cut material that has what 
thickness ? 

1. 1 1/4 inches only 

2. 2 inches only 

3. 1 1/2 or 2 inches 

4. 1 1/4 or 1 1/2 inches 

3-16. What device is used to ignite a 
cutting torch? 


3-10. The FS type of MAPP gas-cutting tip 
can be used for machine cutting. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-11. What can you use as a tool to 

clean torch tip orifices when a 
tip cleaner is not available? 

1. A nail 

2. A welding rod 

3. A soft cooper wire 

4. A twist drill 

3-12. When cleaning the orifices of a tip 
with a cleaner, you should push the 
cleaner straight into the orifices 
and pull it straight out without 
twisting. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-13. You can correct slightly belled 

orifices by wearing down the end of 
the tip with which of the following 
tools ? 

1. A grinding tool 

2. A wire brush 

3. An emery cloth 

4. A file 


Learning Objective: Identify 

techniques of cutting, beveling, 
and piercing ferrous metals with 
an oxygas cutting torch. 


3-14. Before starting to cut with a 
torch, you should inspect the 
working area and adjacent areas for 
combustibles that must be removed 
or covered to keep sparks or slag 
from igniting them. 

1. True 

2. False 


1. A safety match 

2. An open flame 

3. A spark igniter 

4. A butane lighter 

3-17. Before low-carbon steel is cut, you 
should use what type of flame to 
preheat it? 

1. Oxidizing 

2. Neutral 

3. Carburizing 

4. Cyanizing 

3-18. When using the cutting torch to 
preheat a low-carbon steel plate, 
you should keep what distance 
between the surfaces of the metal 
and the preheating flame? 

1. 1/32 of an inch 

2. 1/16 of an inch 

3. 1/8 of an inch 

4. 3/16 of an inch 

3-19. When you have started a cut 

properly and the cut is going all 
the way through the material, the 
shower of sparks should fall in 
what manner? 

1. Over both sides of the material 

2. From the top of the material 

3. Over one side of the material 

4. From the bottom of the material 

3-20. When you need to cut a round piece 
of metal stock with a cutting 
torch, you can save time by 
performing which of the following 
actions? 


1 . 

Using a one-piece 

standard 


pressure 

tip 



2. 

Using a two-piece. 

fine spline 


standard 

pressure 

tip 


3. 

Chiseling 

a small 

burr 

at the 


starting 

point on 

the 

stock 

4. 

Punching 

a small dent 

in the 


stock at 

the starting 

point 


13 



3-21. When starting a cut from the center 
of a meterial, you should take 
which of the following steps? 

1. Preheat the starting area 

2. Angle the torch approximately 
45 degrees 

3. Slowly open the cutting oxygen 
valve 

4. Each of the above 

3-22. Which of the following conditions 
can develop when you are cutting 
from the center of a material and 
do not use the proper procedures? 

1. Spark blow-back 

2. Clogged cutting tip orifices 

3. Slag blows back on the cutting 
tip 

4. Each of the above 

3-23. When cutting metal plate with an 

oxygas torch, you can cause the top 
surfaces of the kerf to fuse if you 
make what error? 

1. Using too much oxygen pressure 

2. Advancing the torch too slowly 

3. Holding the torch tip too close 
to the line of cut 

4. Advancing the torch too rapidly 

3-24. Moving the cutting torch too fast 
during the cutting process results 
in what effect on the material? 

1. An incomplete cut 

2. Slag buildup on the cutting 
side 

3. Penetration by the cutting 
oxygen 

4. Each of the above 

3-25. What results when you cut thin 

steel by holding the torch vertical 
to the metal surfaces? 

1. A smooth cutting action 

2. An irregular cutting action 

3. Accelerated flame penetration 

4. Slow flame penetration 

3-26. When, if ever, can you place your 
cutting torch almost vertical to 
the 'surface for cutting? 

1. Cutting steel that is less than 
1/8-inch thick 

2. Cutting pipe that is over 
1/4-inch thick 

3. Cutting steel that is over 
1/8-inch thick 

4. Never 


3-27. When cutting steel greater than 
1/8 of an inch in thickness, you 
should position the torch so the 
preheat flames are from 1.6mm to 
3.2mm from the edge of the steel 
plate. You then hold the flame 
at this position until the steel 
becomes what color? 

1. Bright red 

2. Cherry red 

3. Light red 

4. Dark red 

3-28. To start a cut quickly in thick 

plate, you should hold the cutting 
torch so it slants toward the 
direction of travel. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-29. One way you can commence a starting 
cut is to place an iron filler rod 
at the edge of a thick metal plate 
and begin preheating it. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-30. When cast iron is being cut, what 
is the preheating temperature? 

1. 500 °F 

2. 2 0 0 °F 

3. 300 °F 

4. 4 0 0 °F 

3-31. By varying the speed of travel, the 
oxygen pressure, and the angle of a 
large orifice, and by using a 
low-velocity-jet cutting tip on the 
surface of a metal plate, you can 
accomplish which of the following 
tasks? 

1. Create gouged contours 

2. Beveling 

3. Chamfering 

4. Each of the above 

3-32. In using a cutting torch, a 

Steelworker can end up with a deep, 
wide gouge on a metal plate by 
taking which of the following 
actions? 

1. Applying too much cutting 
oxygen 

2. Moving the torch too fast 
in the cut 

3. Moving the torch too slow 
in the cut 

4. Each of the above 


14 



3-33. The technique for cutting bevels on 
metal plates with an oxygas cutting 
torch differs from the technique 
for making straight cuts with the 
same torch in that the cutting of 
bevels requires the welder to use 


(a) 

what level of oxygen pressure 

and 

(b) 

what 

cutting speed? 

1 . 

(a) 

More 

(b) slower 

2. 

(a) 

More 

(b) faster 

3. 

(a) 

Less 

(b) slower 

4. 

(a) 

Less 

(b) faster 


3-34. A motor-driven cutting torch is 
adjusted up and down by means of 
what component (s)? 

1. The handwheel only 

2. The radial bar only 

3. The reduction gear assembly 
and the handwheel 

4. The gear and rack assembly 

3-35. When using an electric drive 

carriage on a straight track, you 
can check the clearance of the 
torch before cutting by performing 
which of the following actions? 

1. Releasing the clutch and 
pushing the carriage an arms 
length in either direction 
on the track 

2. Releasing the clutch and 
freewheeling the carriage 
the full length of the track 
by hand 

3. Releasing the clutch, opening 
the oxygen torch valve, and 
measuring the flame distance 
between the torch and material 

4. Turning on the current and 
making a dry pass with the 
torch 

3-36. After the desired cut with the 
motor-driven cutting torch is 
completed, you should secure the 
machine in what sequence? 

1. By extinguishing the flame, 
turning off the cutting oxygen, 
and then turning off the 
electric current 

2. By turning off the cutting 
oxygen, extinguishing the 
flame, and then turning off 
the electric current 

3. By turning off the cutting 
oxygen, turning off the 
electric current, and then 
extinguishing the flame 

4. There is no specific sequence 
to follow 


3-37. To obtain a smooth bevel on heavy 
pipe with an oxygas cutting torch, 
an inexperienced operator should 
perform which of the following 
actions ? 

1. Cut the pipe off square, 
then cut the bevel 

2. Cut the pipe off square, 
then cut the bevel with a 
bench grinder 

3. Use a small cutting tip, one 
that is easy to manipulate 

4. Use a length of angle iron 
to guide the torch along the 
line of cut 

3-38. When cutting a pipe, you should 

keep the torch at a 45-degree angle 
and cut from bottom up to the top. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-39. When fabricating a T-fitting from 
pipe, what condition develops if 
you do not cut out the punch marks 
used to mark an outline? 


1 . 

Slag buildup 

2. 

Enlarged 

kerf 

3. 

Irregular 

bevel 

4. 

Cracking 



IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-40 AND 3-41, 

REFER TO FIGURE 4-2 8 IN THE TEXTBOOK. 

3-40. Which of the following steps shows 
the procedure for cutting the miter 
on the branch of the pipe? 


1. 

Step 

1, 

part 

B 

2. 

Step 

2, 

part 

A 

3. 

Step 

3, 

part 

A 

4. 

Step 

If 

part 

C 


3-41. Which of the following steps shows 
the completed cut for the run? 


1. 

Step 

If 

part 

C 

2. 

Step 

2 r 

part 

B 

3. 

Step 

3, 

part 

A 

4. 

Step 

5, 

part 

B 


15 



3-42. 


3-46. 


3-43. 


3-44. 


3-45. 


When using the cutting torch to 
pierce holes in a steel plate, you 
should hold the preheating flame 
above the surface of the plate at 
what distance relative to the 
preheating cones and the metal 
surfaces? 

1. The inner preheating cones 
contact the metal surface 

2. The outer preheating cones are 
about 1/16 inch above the metal 
surfaces 

3. The inner preheating cones are 
about 1/8 inch above the metal 
surface 

4. The inner preheating cones are 
about 1/4 inch above the metal 
surface 

When removing a rivet from a plate 
with a cutting torch, you should 
take what procedural step just 
before slicing off a portion of 
the head? 

1. Heat the entire rivet and 
surrounding plate to cutting 
temperature 

2. Change the torch tip from 
preheating to cutting 

3. Remove the layer of scale 
between the rivet head and 
the plate 

4. Cut a slot in the rivet head 

The cutting tip best suited for 
cutting buttonhead rivets and 
removing countersunk rivets has 
a large diameter cutting oxygen 
orifice and is referred to as 
what type of cutting tip? 

1. Low velocity 

2. High velocity 

3. Fast cut 

4. Low speed 

When cutting wire rope with a 
torch, you can prevent the strands 
of rope from unlaying by performing 
what action? 

1. Clamping the wire rope with 
c-clamps on each side where 
the cut is to be made 

2. Wrapping the wire rope with 
seizing wire on each side 
where the cut is to be made 

3. Placing the wire rope in a 
riggers vise 

4. Heating the ends of the wire 
rope until the strands fuse 
together 


Before cutting a wire rope with an 
oxygas cutting torch, you should 
take what action? 

1. Remove excess lubricant 

2. Remove the outer layer of 
strands 

3. Coat the rope with a special 
flux material in the area to 
be cut 

4. Fuse the ends of the strands 

to prevent unlaying of the wire 
rope 


Learning Objective: Identify 
special oxygas cutting techniques. 


3-47. Which of the following metals can 
be cut with the oxygas cutting 
torch and fluxes? 

1. Cast iron 

2. Alloy steel 

3. 1 percent carbon steel 

4. Each of the above 

3-48. When a cutting operation takes 
place, you can take what action 
to reduce distortion and prevent 
hardness of surfaces? 

1. Clamp the metal in a vise 

2. Apply a steady flow of 
high-pressure oxygen before, 
during, and after the cutting 
period 

3. Preheat the metal before 
starting the cut 

4. Insert iron or low-carbon steel 
into the area being cut 

3-49. To preheat cast iron before cutting 
with the oxygas cutting torch, you 
should use what type of flame? 

1. A strong carburizing flame 

2. A weak carburizing flame 

3. A neutral flame 

4. An oxidizing flame 

3-50. To make alloy metals easier to cut, 
you can add what type of metal (s) 
to their cutting areas? 

1. Iron only 

2. Low-carbon steel only 

3. Iron and low-carbon steel 

4. Thin cast iron and pig iron 

3-51. A reciprocating torch movement is 
used to cut which of the following 
metals? 


1 . 

Copper 


2. 

Thick cast 

iron 

3. 

Stainless 

steel 

4. 

Thin cast 

iron 


16 



3-52. 


3-57. 


When stainless steel is being cut 
with an oxygas cutting torch, how 
does the use of flux make the 
cutting easier? 

1. Flux reacts chemically with 
stainless steel to lower the 
melting point of steel 

2. Flux reacts chemically with 
oxides to form a slag having a 
melting point lower than that 
of stainless steel 

3. Flux generates heat to increase 
the temperature of the flame 
above the melting point of 
stainless steel 

4. On melting, flux counteracts 
the effect that oxides have 
on stainless steel 

3-53. Of the following characteristics, 

which indicates a good cutting job 
with an oxygas torch? 

1. Smooth at the sides 

2. Sharp and square at the top 

3. Free of Slag 

4. Each of the above 

3-54. Which of the following character¬ 
istics of a drag line indicates 
proper cutting procedures were 
followed? 

1. Long and irregular 

2. Long and vertical 

3. Short and vertical 

4. Short and irregular 

3-55. What is the minimum distance 
permitted between unprotected 
combustibles and oxygas cutting 
equipment that is being used? 

1. 10 feet 

2. 20 feet 

3. 30 feet 

4. 40 feet 

3-56. During the operation of an oxygas 

cuttinng torch, a backfire can occur 
under which of the following 
circumstances? 


When you have a flashback with an 
oxygas cutting torch, what action, 
if any, should you take to stop it 
safely? 

1. Close off the gas value first 

2. Close off the oxygen valve 
first 

3. Close off both valves 
simultaneously 

4. None 

3-58. What component(s) of an oxygas 

cutting torch unit is/are usually 
responsible for a flashback? 

1. Loose tip or head 

2. Clogged valves only 

3. Clogged orifices only 

4. Clogged valves and orifices 

3-59. When, if ever, should you weld or 
cut a container that once held a 
flammable substance? 


1 . 

After 

cleaning 


2. 

After 

filling with 

water 

3. 

After 

cleaning and 

filling 


with 

water 


4. 

Never 




3-60. During the welding or cutting 
operation, what percentage of 
air space inside a water-filled 
container does nitrogen occupy? 

1. 80 percent 

2. 60 percent 

3. 50 percent 

4. 40 percent 

3-61. When doing any hot work on 

water-filled tanks or containers, 
you should take what additional 
safety precaution? 


1 . 

Vent 

them 

2. 

Stem 

them 

3. 

Wash 

them chemically 

4. 

Seal 

them 


1. Overheating of the cutting tip 

2. Dirt on the tip seat 

3. Incorrect gas pressure 

4. Each of the above 


17 



ASSIGNMENT 4 


Textbook Assignment: "Gas Welding" and "Soldering, Brazing, Braze Welding, and Wearfacing," 

pages 5-1 through 6-8. 


Learning Objective: Identify the 
principles and techniques of 
operating gas welding equipment. 


4-1. When gas welding, you should 

consider which of the following 
factors? 


1 . 

Edge prep, spacing, 
alignment 

and joint 

2. 

Flame adjustment and 
torch manipulation 

rod and 

3. 

Temperature control, 

before. 


during, and after the welding 
process 

4. 

All of the above 



4-2. Welding tips are made of what 
special type of alloys? 

1. Carbon and zinc 

2. Tin and iron 

3. Aluminum, silver, and titanium 

4. Copper, bronze, and stainless 
steel 

4-3. In a low-pressure torch, the fuel 
pressure in pounds per square inch 
(psi) is 


4-6. In a medium-pressure welding torch, 
the working pressure of oxygen and 
fuel-gas is equal. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-7. In oxygas welding, filler rods 
serve what primary function? 

1. As an electrical connection 
between the torch and the 
workpiece 

2. As a source of metal to fill 
the weld joint 

3. As a surface for braze welding 

4. As a heat conductor 

4-8. The copper coating on steel filler 
rods enable the rods to 

1. melt at a higher temperature 

2. melt at a lower temperature 

3. clean the weld joint of 
impurities 

4. resist corrosion during storage 

4-9. The diameter of the filler rods 
used for gas welding two steel 
plates depends on which of the 
following factors? 


1. 1 psi or less 

2. 2 to 3 psi 

3. a constant 5 psi 

4. greater than 7 psi 

4-4. The volume of oxygen and fuel-gas 
burned at the torch tip is 
controlled through the use of what 
devices? 


1. The type of steel that the 
plates are made of 

2. The thickness of the metal 

3. The job specifications 

4. The type of welding torch 

4-10. The type of filler rods used in 
oxygas welding is determined by 
what factor? 


1 . 

One 

needle valve at 

the ' 

torch 

2. 

Two 

needle valves at the 

torch 

3. 

One 

separate mixing 

head 

for 


each 

gas 



4. 

Two 

different size 

tips 



4-5. The required amount of fuel-gas 

enters a low-pressure welding torch 
as the result of suction created in 
the torch by a jet of high pressure 

1. nitrogen 

2. gasoline 

3. oxygen 

4. helium 


1. Federal, military, or Navy 
specifications 

2. The composition of the rod 
coatings 

3. The length and shape of 
available rods 

4. The type of welding position 
required 

4-11. Welding torch tip size is 

designated by a number stamped 
on the tip. The tip size is given 
in the number drill size of the 
orifice. Additionally, as the 
drill size number increases, the 
size of the drill decreases. 


1. True 

2. False 


18 




4-12. 


4-18. 


While welding, you have difficulty 
controlling the melting of the 
welding rod and the welds are being 
made too fast and their appearance 
and quality are unsatisfactory. 

What mistake have you most likely 
made ? 

1. Used a welding rod that is 
too small 

2. Used incorrect polarity 

3. Used an incorrect "dragging 
technique 

4. Used a welding tip that is 
too large 

4-13. After a welding torch is ignited, 

what factor dictates the adjustment 
to the flame you must make? 

1. The thickness of the metal 

2. The type of filler rod used 

3. The type of metal being welded 

4. The polarity being used 

4-14. What type of flame is best used 
for welding high-carbon steels, 
hardfacing, and for welding non- 
ferrous metals? 

1. Neutral 

2. Carburizing 

3. Oxidizing 

4. Normalizing 

4-15. What type of flame is correct 
to use for most metals? 

1. Neutral 

2. Carburizing 

3. Oxidizing 

4. Normalizing 

4-16. What flame is limited in use and 
is harmful to many metals? 

1. Neutral 

2. Carburizing 

3. Oxidizing 

4. Normalizing 

4-17. What is the first step you should 
take when needle valves, in a 
torch, fail to shut off when hand 
tightened in the usual manner? 

1. Use a wrench to tighten it 

2. Open the valve and using the 
working gas pressure blow out 
any foreign matter 

3. Remove the stem assembly 
and wipe the seat clean 

4. Have the parts replaced 
by qualified personnel 


When there is a leak around the 
torch valve stem, you should 
tighten the packing nut or repack 
it if necessary. For repacking, 
NEVER use oil. Instead, you should 
use only 

1. dry packing 

2. the packing recommended 
by the manufacturer 

3. heavy-weight packing 

4. granulated packing 

4 _ 19 . To ensure good performance of 
welding tips, you must remove 
regularly deposits of what type? 

1. Copper and zinc oxide 

2. Sodium carbide and phosphorus 

3. Ferrous oxide and sodium 
phosphate 

4. Slag and carbon 

4-20. You can safely recondition the end 
of a torch tip that has become 
rough and pitted by following what 
procedure? 

1. Insert a drill one size larger 
than the orifice opening into 
the tip end 

2. Insert a tip drill into the 
seat opening and twist until 
penetration can be made at the 
tip-end opening 

3. Place emery cloth, grit side 
up, on a flat surface and rub 
the tip end over it until the 
tip is back to its original 
condition 

4. Use a bench grinder to square 
off the end of the tip, then 
drill out the orifice 


Learning Objective: Identify 
proper oxygas welding techniques. 


4-21. What type of file is commonly 

used to recondition the tip end 
of a welding torch? 

1. Mill 

2. Pillar 

3. Square 

4. Taper 

4-22. When forehand welding, you should 

point the flame in the direction of 
travel and hold the tip at a angle 
of how many degrees? 


1 . 

15 

2. 

30 

3. 

45 

4. 

60 


19 



4-27 . 


4-23. The forehand method of oxygas 
welding is best for welding 

1. heavy plate that is between 
1 to 3 inches thick 

2. sheet and light plate up 
to 1/8 of an inch thick 

3. sheet plate that is between 
1 to 2 inches thick 

4. any type of metal 

4-24. When backhand welding, you ensure 
the torch tip precedes the rod in 
the direction of welding and the 
flame points back at the molten 
puddle and completed weld. At what 
angle do you hold the tip to the 
plates or joints to be welded? 

1. 15 degrees 

2. 30 degrees 

3. 45 degrees 

4. 60 degrees 

4-25. When welding plates thicker than 
1/8 inch, you should use the 
backhand method instead of the 
forehand method for which of the 
following reasons? 

1. It uses less welding rod and 
results in less puddling of 
molten metal 

2. It requires less motion of rod 

and torch tip and increases 
welding speed 

3. It results in better control of 
large puddles of molten metal 
and more complete fusion at the 
root of the weld 

4. All of the above 

4-26. By using the backhand technique and 
a reducing flame, rather than the 
forehand technique and a neutral 
flame, it is possible to weld steel 
plates faster for which of the 
following reasons? 

1. More of the base metal is 
melted during the welding 
operation 

2. It is not necessary to control 
the heat on the plate 

3. A thin surface layer of steel 
absorbs carbon and reduces the 
melting point of steel 

4. All of the above 


For thick plate and pipe, which 
of the following factors is an 
advantage of using multilayer 
welding instead of single layer 
welding? 

1. The final layer is easier to 
control to get a smooth surface 

2. Improved ductility of the weld 
metal since one layer cools to 
a black heat before being 
reheated when an additional 
layer is made 

3. There is better control over 
each layer since carrying of 
large puddles of molten metal 
is avoided 

4. All of the above 

4-28. Sheet metal is easily melted and 
does not require special edge 
preparation. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-29. On what size of plate do you make 
a slight root opening between the 
parts to get complete penetration? 

1. 1/16 to 1/8 inch 

2. 3/16 to 1/4 inch 

3. 1/4 to 3/8 inch 

4. 3/8 to 1/2 inch 

4-30. What size plate requires beveled 

edges 30 degrees to 45 degrees and 
a root opening of 1/16 inch? 

1. 1/16 to 1/8 inch 

2. 3/16 to 1/4 inch 

3. 1/4 to 3/8 inch 

4. 3/8 to 1/2 inch 

4-31. When oxygas welding low-alloy 

steels, you must take what action 
to relieve stresses developed 
during the welding process? 

1. Chip and peen after welding 

2. Quench after welding 

3. Heat-treat before and after 
welding 

4. Use special flux in the welding 
process 

4-32. In the process of welding wrought 
iron, what causes the surface of 
the molten puddle of weld metal to 
appear greasy? 

1. The high carbon content of the 
wrought iron 

2. The slag used in manufacturing 
the wrought iron 

3. The use of mild steel as a 
filler metal 

4. The failure to use a special 
flux 


20 



4-33. 


4-38. 


When oxygas welding cast iron, you 
must preheat the entire weldment to 
a temperature between 750°F and 
900°F. After completing the weld, 
you must again postheat to a 
temperature of 1100°F to 1150°F to 
relieve stresses. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-34. The method of joining a light 

stainless steel sheet by oxygas 
welding is characterized by the use 
of which of the following elements? 

1. No flux, a carburizing flame, 
no puddle, and a relatively 
small torch tip 

2. No flux, an oxidizing flame, 
puddle, and a relatively large 
torch tip 

3. Flux, an oxidizing flame, no 
puddle, and a relatively small 
torch tip 

4. Flux, carburizing flame, no 
puddle, and a relatively small 
torch tip 

4-35. In the oxygas welding of deoxidized 
copper, you should preheat the 
joint area to what temperature 
range? 

1. 100°F to 300°F 

2. 30 0 °F to 500 °F 

3. 500 °F to 8 0 0 °F 

4. 800 °F to 90 0 °F 

4-36. Compared with the technique for 

joining steel parts by the oxygas 
process, the technique for joining 
deoxidized copper parts (same 
welding process and same part 
thickness) calls for use of a/an 

1. smaller torch tip and no 
preheating 

2. larger torch tip and more 
preheating 

3. oxidizing flame and no flux 

4. carburizing flame and oxygas 
brass flux 

4-37. What type of rod is used for 
welding brass by the oxygas 
process? 

1. Lead 

2. Steel 

3. Silicon copper 

4. Silicon bronze 


In the oxygas process of welding 
parts of copper-nickel alloys, the 
welder should take which of the 
following actions? 

1. Adjust the flame to a slightly 
oxidizing flame 

2. Agitate the molten puddle when 
adding filler metal 

3. Keep the welding rod end 
outside the protective envelope 
of the flame 

4. Remove all traces of flux with 
warm water after welding is 
completed and the part has been 
cooled slowly 

4-39. To guard against poisonous fumes, 
you must wear a respirator when 
welding what type of metal? 

1. Silver 

2. Aluminum 

3. Lead 

4. Brass 

4-40. When gas welding wrought aluminum 
alloys, you can minimize cracking 
by using what type of welding rod? 

1. 1100 

2. 3003 

3. 4043 

4. 5511 

4-41. Pure aluminum is one fourth as 
strong as 

1. steel 

2. iron 

3. copper 

4. titanium 

4-42. When welding aluminum alloy, you 
use a flux for which of the 
following reasons? 

1. To preserve the luster of the 
metal 

2. To reduce the tendency of the 
metal to crack 

3. To remove the aluminum oxide 
formed during the welding 
process 

4. To lower the melting point of 
aluminum 


21 



4-43. Edge notching is a recommended 

procedure for gas welding aluminum 
plate because 

1. it gives a clear view of the 
weld area 

2. it aids in getting full 
penetration and prevents 
distortion 

3. it allows the torch flame to 
cover a greater area 

4. it allows the welder to use 
either the forehand or backhand 
method 

4-44. To prevent weakening of aluminum 
alloys, when preheating is 
required, you should not exceed 
what temperature? 

1. 300 °F 

2. 500 °F 

3. 7 00 °F 

4. 900 °F 

4-45. The forehand method of welding is 
preferred for aluminum alloys 
because the flame points away from 
the weld which preheats the edges 
to be welded and prevents too rapid 
melting. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-46. You can reduce the possibility of 

aluminum alloys cracking during the 
welding process by taking which of 
the following actions? 

1. Securing the aluminum alloys in 
a jig 

2. Using a 4043 filler rod to 
cause the base metal to 
solidify before the weld puddle 
freezes 

3. Tacking the work while clamped 
in a jig, then loosening the 
clamps before completing the 
seam 

4. All of the above 

4-47. When oxygas welding pipe, which of 
the following requirements must be 
met to complete a successful weld? 

1. A controlled heat source 
localized to produce rapid 
melting 

2. Elimination of surface oxides 

3. Union of edges or surfaces by 
means of molten metal 

4. All of the above 


4-48. What factor determines the 

soundness and strength of a weld? 

1. Torch manipulation 

2. Amount of heat used 

3. Quality of welding rod used 

4. All of the above 

4-49. The backhand technique produces 

faster melting of the base metal 
surfaces, allows a smaller bevel 
to be used, and results in a 
savings of 20% to 30% in welding 
time, rods, and gases. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Ovjective: Identify 
the characteristics and functions 
of soldering materials. 


4-50. The processes that do NOT require 
fusion are soldering, brazing, 
braze welding, and wearfacing. 

These processes allow the joining 
of dissimilar metals, producing 
high strength joints, as well as 
not affecting heat treatment or 
warping the original metal as much 
as conventional welding. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-51. Soldering is a process of joining 
metals by melting filler metal 
below what temperature, in degrees 
Fahrenheit? 

1. 800 °F 

2. 850 °F 

3. 90 0 ° F 

4. 950 °F 

4-52. Which one of the following types of 
soldering coppers (irons) is used 
for soldering flat seams requiring 
considerable heat? 

1. Pointed 

2. Stub 

3. Bottom 

4. Top 

4-53. The size designation of soldering 

coppers refers to the weight of two 
copper heads in 

1. kilograms 

2. pounds 

3. grams 

4. ounces 


22 



4-54 . 


A pair of coppers has a weight 
designation of 3 pounds. This 
designation indicates that each 
individual copper weighs 

1. 1 1/2 kilograms 

2. 1 1/2 pounds 

3. 10 grams 

4. 16 ounces 

4-55. What type of file should you use to 
file a soldering copper head during 
the filing and tinning process? 

1. Rasp 

2. Single cut 

3. Double cut 

4. Half round 

4-56. What should you do to carry out the 
preliminary steps in filing a cold, 
but once overheated, soldering 
copper head? 

1. Without clamping it in a vise, 
heat the copper head, but not 
hot enough to melt the solder 

2. Without clamping the copper 
head in a vise, heat the copper 
head until it is hot enough to 
melt the solder 

3. Clamp the copper in a vise, 
then heat the copper head until 
it is cherry red 

4. Heat the copper until it is 
cherry red, then clamp the 
copper in a vise 

4-57. What technique should you use to 
manipulate a file? 

1. On each forward stroke, bear 
down and rock the file, and on 
each return stroke, let up on 
the file 

2. On both forward and return 
stroks, bear down and rock 
the file 

3. On each forward stroke, bear 
down on the file without 
rocking it; on each return 
stroke, let up on the file 

4. On both strokes, bear down on 
the file without rocking it 

4-58. In the forging process of reshaping 
a copper, you should ensure a sharp 
point and a long taper is created. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-59. Most solders are alloys consisting 
of what elements? 


1 . 

Lead 

and tin 


2. 

Cadmium and aluminum 

3. 

Tin, 

lead, and 

zinc 

4. 

Tin, 

lead, and 

bismuth 


4-60. Which of the following solders has 
the lowest melting point? 

1. 30/70 

2. 40/60 

3. 50/50 

4. 60/40 

4-61. What characteristic of a solder 

causes it to change from a solid 
to a liquid? 

1. Its constitutional range 

2. Its eutectic composition 

3. Its liquidus/solidus point 

4. Its temperature differential 

4-62. What solder composition is best for 
joining aluminum alloys? 

1. 50% tin, 45% lead, and 5% 
antimony 

2. 63% tin and 37% lead 

3. 60% tin and 40% zinc 

4. 86% tin, 12% lead, and 2% zinc 

4-63. Flux serves which of the following 
purposes? 

1. To clean the metal during 
the soldering process 

2. To harden the solder 

3. To soften the metal to be 
joined 

4. To increase the ductility 
of solder 

4-64. Which of the following fluxes is 

used to solder zinc and galvanized 
iron? 

1. Borax 

2. Rosin 

3. Sal ammoniac 

4. Zinc chloride 

4-65. What is the most commonly used non- 
corrosive flux? 

1. Rosin 

2. Zinc chloride 

3. Soldering salts 

4. Sal ammoniac 


Learning Objective: Recognize 
general soldering methods and 
techniques. 


23 



4-66. When heating solder or surfaces 

that are to be soldered, you should 
make it a practice to take what 
action? 

1. Heat the surfaces to cherry red 

2. Heat just enough to melt the 
solder 

3. Overheat the solder, then allow 
it to cool slightly to working 
temperature 

4. Heat the surfaces until scum 
forms, then skim it off and 
discard 

4-67. Heating a solder to a temperature 

higher than its working temperature 
increases oxidation and changes the 
proportions of tin and 

1. lead 

2. copper 

3. aluminum 

4. silver 

4-68. When using a corrosive flux to 
solder a joint, you should take 
what action immediately after 
finishing the soldering? 

1. Sprinkle the joint with a 
powdered noncorrosive flux 

2. Remove all the traces of flux 
or as much as possible 

3. Clean the joint with powdered 
rosin 

4. Clean the joint with a solution 
of sal ammoniac and water 

4-69. When soldering seams that are held 
together by rivets or other 
fasteners, you manipulate the 
copper in what way? 

1. Keep it in contact with the 
work 

2. Raise it at regular intervals 
and retrace the work 

3. Raise it at intermittent 
intervals 

4. Hold it slightly above the work 
as you go 

4-70. When soldering a bottom seam using 
solder beads, you should take which 
of the following actions? 


1 . 

Hold 

the 

copper in one 

position 


until 

. the 

: solder flows 

freely 


into 

the 

seam 


2. 

Draw 

the 

copper along 

the seam 

3. 

Turn 

the 

work as you go 

4. 

All of the above 



Learning Objective: Identify the 
special methods and techniques of 
soldering aluminum. 

4-71. Which of the following actions 

should you take before soldering 
an aluminum alloy? 

1. Coat the alloy with 
noncorrosive flux 

2. Remove the oxide that covers 
the alloy 

3. Coat the alloy with a thin 
layer of tin-lead solder 

4. Dip the alloy in a solution of 
turpentine and powdered rosin 

4-72. A thick layer of oxides is present 
on the piece of aluminum you are 
going to solder. Which of the 
following cleaning methods should 
you use to remove the oxides? 

1. Filing 

2. Sanding 

3. Wire brushing 

4. All of the above 

4-73. When soldering aluminum with a 

torch, you should direct the torch 
flame to what location? 

1. The solder 

2. The flux 

3. The work surface 

4. The metal near the work 

4-74. What type of solder does NOT 

require the use of flux when you 
are using it in combination with 
aluminum solder? 

1. Tin and antimony 

2. Tin and lead 

3. Tin and zinc 

4. Tin and silver 

4-75. What type of solder is recommended 
for food containers? 

1. 50% tin and 50% lead 

2. 50% tin, 45% antimony, 

and 2% lead 

3. 96% tin and 4% silver 

4. 95% tin and 5% antimony 


24 



ASSIGNMENT 5 


Textbook Assignment: "Soldering, Brazing, Braze Welding, and Wearfacing" and "Shielded 

Metal-Arc Welding and Wearfacing," pages 6-8 through 7-27. 


Learning Objective: Identify 
principles, materials, and joint 
designs used in brazing. 


5-1. What process is used to join two 
base metals together by using a 
filler metal, such as a hard 
solder? 

1. Braze welding 

2. Bronze welding 

3. Brazing 

4. Soldering 

5-2. In brazing, what chemical reaction 
causes the filler metal to bond 
with the base metal? 

1. Oxidation 

2. Fusion 

3. Reduction 

4. Ionization 

5-3. One of the advantage that brazing 
or braze welding has over gas 
welding is that you can use it to 
join dissimilar metals. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-4. The use of flux in brazing 

operations does NOT serve what 
function? 

1. Increasing the flow of brazing 
filler material 

2. Oxidizing the metal surface 

3. Permitting the molten filler 
metal to penetrate the pores of 
the metal 

4. Bringing the brazing filler 
metal into contact with the 
metals to be joined 

5-5. What type of application should be 
used with paste or solution fluxes 
to ensure a uniform coating on 
metals to be brazed? 


5-6. What chemical mixture should you 
use when a prepared flux is not 
available? 

1. A mixture of tallow and water 

2. A mixture of copper sulfate and 
ammonia 

3. A mixture of borax and boric 
acid 

4. A mixture of muriatic acid and 
water 

5-7. When lap joining two base metals 
with silver-based brazing filler 
metal, you should maintain a 
clearance of 0.001 inch to 0.003 
inch for which of the following 
reasons ? 

1. To improve durability 

2. To produce a finished braze 

3. To extend the bonding area 

4. To increase strength 

5-8. You are preparing a scarf joint for 
brazing. A scarf of 19 1/2° 
produces a bond area that is how 
many times greater than that of a 
90° butt joint? 

1. 5 times 

2. 2 times 

3. 3 times 

4. 4 times 


Learning Objective: Identify 
procedures for brazing and braze 
welding using various joints and 
base metals. 


5-9. What condition will result if there 
is any movement of the base metal 
while you are brazing or braze 
welding? 

1. A weakness in the joint 

2. An imperfect weld joint 

3. An over oxidized surface 

4. An faulty bond 


1. Spray gun 

2. Brush 

3. Cloth 

4. Putty knife 


25 




5-10. When brazing or braze welding, you 
heat two pieces of base metai to 
what temperature? 

1. A temperature slightly below 
the melting temperature of the 
brazing filler metal 

2. A temperature at the melting 
point of the brazing filler 
metal 

3. The temperature at which the 
flux turns milky 

4. The temperature at which the 
flux turns clear 

5-11. For best results, you should obtain 
the heat that is needed to braze or 
braze-weld from an oxygas torch 
with what kind of flame? 

1. Carburizing 

2. Oxidizing 

3. Neutral 

4. Reducing 

5-12. Which of the following tools should 
be used to clean base metals 
mechanically before brazing or 
braze welding? 

1. Any type of file 

2. A piece of emery cloth 

3. A piece of steel wool 

4. A grinding wheel 

5-13. What is the primary reason you must 
remove all traces of flux after 
brazing? 

1. It will corrode the metal 

2. It will weaken the metal 

3. It will cause distortion in the 
pieces brazed 

4. It will reduce bonding strength 

5-14. Braze welding often produces bonds 
that are comparable to those made 
by fusion welding without the 
destruction of the base metal 
characteristics 

1. True 

2. False 

5-15. A loss of strength when subjected 
to high temperatures and an 
inability to withstand high 
stresses are disadvantages of what 
type of welding? 

1. Braze 

2. MIG 

3. TIG 

4. Arc 


5-16. You can braze-weld tubing by using 
a filler-metal rod or what type of 
rings ? 

1. Brazing alloy 

2. Silver shim 

3. Copper alloy 

4. Silver alloy 

5-17. In preparation for braze welding, 

you have cleaned, aligned, clamped, 
or tack-welded the base metals. 

What is the next step? 

1. Tinning 

2. Fluxing 

3. Preheating 

4. Applying filler metal 

5-18. When using a prefluxed braze- 

welding rod, you do NOT have to add 
flux during welding. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-19. What condition has developed if the 
filler metal forms little-balls and 
runs off the metal? 

1. The joint is not clean enough 

2. The wrong flux was used 

3. The metal is too hot 

4. The metal is too cold 


Learning Objective: Identify the 
oxygas wearfacing process and the 
materials used in hardfacing. 

5-20. Which of the following is NOT a 
purpose of wearfacing? 

1. To increase resistance to 

abrasion 

2. To buildup undersized parts 

3. To stop corrosion and erosion 

4. To increase ductility 

5-21. What two types of hard-surfacing 

materials are in general use by the 
Navy? 

1. Iron-base alloys and low-carbon 

alloys 

2. Iron-base alloys and tungsten 

carbide 

3. Stainless steel and copper- 

based alloys 

4. Stainless steel and low-carbon 

alloys 


26 



5-22. 


5-28. 


Before commencing wearfacing 
procedures, you must remove scale, 
rust, and foreign matter from the 
metal surfaces. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-23. Parts that require wearfacing are 
preheated with (a) what type of 
flame and (b) at what temperature? 


1 . 

(a) 

Oxidizing 

(b) 

800 

2. 

(a) 

Carburizing 

(b) 

700 

3. 

(a) 

Neutral 

(b) 

800 

4. 

(a) 

Neutral 

(b) 

700 


5-24. Being able to recognize a "sweated" 
surface is essential for surfacing. 
What type of flame do you use to 
heat the steel to a white heat 
temperature for sweating? 

1. Oxidizing 

2. Carburizing 

3. Neutral 

4. Normalizing 


Learning Objective: Identify the 
processes and principles of metal- 
arc welding, the operation and care 
of equipment used, and the specific 
techniques used in the various 
welding positions. 


5-25. What type of arc energy is provided 
by the power-source used in arc 
welding? 

1. Alternating 

2. Direct 

3. Alternating or direct 

4. Modulated high frequency 

5-26. The basic function of a welding 

machine is to provide what type of 
power? 

1. High-frequency/low-amperage 

2. High-amperage/low-voltage 

3. Low-frequency/high-voltage 

4. Low-voltage/low-amperage 

5-27. A constant flow of electrical 

current that travels in one 
direction only has what type of 
polarity? 

1. Alternating 

2. Reverse 

3. Direct 

4. Straight 


Which of the following machines are 
basic types of welding machines 
used in the Navy? 


1 . 

Alternators, 
transducers 

transformers, and 

2. 

Motor generators, rectifiers, 
and transformers 

3. 

Transducers, 

voltage 


regulators, 

rectifiers 

and audio 

4. 

Cathode-ray 

generators, voltage 


amplifiers, 

and transducers 


5-29. A direct-current generator that has 
a rated capacity of 600 amperes at 
40 volts is most often used for 
what type of work? 

1. General shop welding 

2. Inert-gas welding 

3. Light-shielded metal arc 
welding 

4. Submerged-arc welding and 
carbon cutting 

5-30. What factors determine the size of 
a welding cable needed for a job? 

1. The size of the electrode and 
number of lock connections 

2. The amperage rating of the 
machine and distance from the 
work to the machine 

3. The size of the ground cable 
and capacity of the electrode 
holder 

4. The distance from the ground 
clamp and type of electrode 

5-31. The distance between an operator 

and any joint in the welding cable 
should be a minimum of how many 
feet? 

1. 35 

2 . 25 

3. 15 

4 . 10 

5-32. When selecting an electrode holder 
for a specific task, you should 
base your selection on what 
criteria? 

1. Current capacity and cable size 

2. Type of machine and polarity 

3. Electrode diameter and welding 
current 

4. Type of holder insulation and 
polarity 


27 



5-33. The use of a good ground clamp that 
provides proper grounding is 
essential to the production of 
quality welds. Which of the 
following conditions could develop 
without this proper grounding? 

1. Circuit voltage that fails to 
produce enough heat 

2. A damaged welding machine 

3. Damaged cables 

4. All of the above 

5-34. Which of the following safety 

devices should you use to protect 
other personnel in a welding work 
area from eye flash burns? 

1. Welding helmets 

2. Flash goggles 

3. Face masks 

4. Welding screens 

5-35. Which of the following classifi¬ 
cations does NOT identify one of 
the five main groups of electrodes? 

1. Mild steel 

2. Cast iron 

3. Nonferrous 

4. Ferromagnetic 

5-36. The coating on an arc-welding 

electrode provides which of the 
following advantages? 

1. Improved weld penetration 

2. Prevention of oxidation 

3. Control and increased stability 
of the arc 

4. All of the above 

5-37. Electrodes manufactured in the U.S. 
must conform to what standards? 

1. AISC/CRSI 

2. AWS /ASTM 

3. NAVOP 1061 (welding) 

4. Engineering Standards, U.S. 

(1996 ed.) 

5-38. An electrode that has a minimum 

tensile strength of 80,000 psi for 
use in all positions for low alloy, 
high tensile strength has what 
designation? 


1 . 

E11810 

2. 

E8024 

3. 

E8018-C3 

4. 

E7 018 


5-39. A welding electrode that has an AWS 
classification of E-7024 should be 
used for a metal-arc welding job in 
what position (s)? 

1. Horizontal position only 

2. Flat position only 

3. Horizontal and flat positions 

4. Vertical and overhead 

5-40. What is the largest diameter 

electrode that can be used for 
vertical and overhead welding? 

1. 1/16 inch 

2. 1/8 inch 

3. 3/16 inch 

4. 1/2 inch 

5-41. What type of electrode has a heavy 
iron powder coating with a soft arc 
and fast deposition rate? 

1. Fast-fill 

2. Fast-freeze 

3. Fill-freeze 

4. Low-hydrogen 

5-42. When welding stainless steel, you 
must use what type of electrode? 

1. Sulfur/titanium 

2. Hydrogen/manganese 

3. Cellulose/sodium 

4. Chromium/nickel 

5-43. Which of the following properties 
is the basic rule for selecting an 
electrode for a job? 

1. Great tensile strength 

2. Composition similar to the base 
metal 

3. The melting temperature 

4. The least expensive 

5-44. When the electrode is positive and 
the workpiece is negative, the 
electrons flow from the workpiece 
to the electrode. What polarity is 
being used? 

1. Straight 

2. Negative 

3. Positive 

4. Reverse 

5-45. In describing polarity, the acronym 
SENator means 

1. straight electrode negative 

2. standard electric neutral 

3. short-arc electrode neutral 

4. special electrode negative 


28 



5-46. 


5 - 47 . 


5 - 48 . 


5 - 49 . 


5-50. 


5-51. 


Which of the following factors is a 
reason reverse polarity is used in 
out-of-position welding? 

1. Greater heat is generated at 
the workpiece 

2. Less heat is generated in the 
workpiece 

3. Greater heat is required in the 
base metal 

4. A higher deposition of filler 
metal is required 

What kind of sound does improper 
polarity emit? 


5-52. What condition occurs when the 
welding current is too high? 

1. Overlap 

2. Poor fusion 

3. Undercutting 

4. Porosity 

5-53. What condition(s) can develop when 
the welding current is too low? 

1. Overlap only 

2. Poor fusion only 

3. Undercutting and poor fusion 

4. Overlap and poor fusion 


1. Cracking 

2. Humming 

3. Whistling 

4. Hissing 

Which one of the following steps do 
you take to correct arc blow? 


1 . 

Changing the 
ground clamp 

position 

of 

the 

2. 

Welding away 
clamp 

from the 

ground 

3. 

Changing the 
workpiece 

position 

of 

the 

4. 

All of the above 




What is the first thing you should 
do to start an arc by the striking 
method? 

1. Hold the electrode at right 
angles to the work and strike 
it sharply against the base 
metal 

2. Bring the electrode into 
contact with the work by using 
lateral motion 

3. Slowly lower the electrode on 
to the work until the arc 
strikes 

4. Place the electrode on the work 
until the base metal melts 

Upon striking an arc. You 
immediately start the weld to 
ensure good fusion and penetration. 


5-54. What kind of sound does a good arc 
produce when the electrode, 
current, and polarity are correct? 

1. Sharp cracking 

2. Humming 

3. Whistling 

4. Hissing 

5-55. When arc welding, the distance 

between the electrode and the base 
metal, except in vertical and 
overhead welding, should be 
approximately equal to the 

1. length of the electrode 

2. length of the electrode holder 

3. thickness of the base metal 

4. diameter of the bare electrode 
being used 

5-56. Of the following practices, which 
one is correct for breaking an arc 
with an electrode? 

1. It is withdrawn slowly from the 
crater after the arc has 
lengthened 

2. It is held stationary until the 
crater is filled, then 
withdrawn slowly 

3. It is held stationary until the 
equipment is secured 

4. It is lowered into the crater 
until contact is made, then 
quickly withdrawn 


1. True 

2. False 

When using a 5/32-inch-diameter 
electrode with a recommended 
current range of 130 to 160 
amperes, you should initially use 
what ampere setting? 


1 . 

130 

2. 

140 

3. 

145 

4. 

150 


5-57. What maximum thickness can a plate 
be welded, in one pass, without 
edge preparation? 


1 . 

1/16 

inch 

2. 

1/8 

inch 

3. 

3/16 

inch 

4. 

1/4 

inch 


29 



5-58. 


When flat bead welding, 
undercutting is eliminated by the 
use of 


5-64. Overhead butt welding must be done 
with relatively small electrodes 
for which of the following reasons? 


1. less current 

2. less voltage 

3 - a proper weave motion 
4. a nonweaving motion 

5-59. What purpose do you use a backing 
strip when making a butt weld on 
3/16-inch plate or heavier in the 
flat position? 

1. To reinforce the weld 

2. To hold plates in position 
while tack welding in place 

3. To obtain complete fusion at 
the root pass of the weld 

4. To reflect the heat from the 
electrode 

5-60. What (a) width and (b) thickness of 
backing strip should be used on 
plate over 1/2-inch thick? 


1 . 

(a) 

1 

1/2 

inches 

(b) 

1/4 

inch 

2. 

(a) 

2 

1/4 

inches 

(b) 

3/8 

inch 

3. 

(a) 

3 

1/4 

inches 

(b) 

1/8 

inch 

4. 

(a) 

4 

1/2 

inches 

(b) 

1/4 

inch 


5-61. What angle should be maintained 
between the electrode and the 
vertical plate of a tee joint when 
1/4-inch plate is used in the flat 
position? 

1 . 35 ° 

2. 40° 

3. 45° 

4. 50 ° 

5-62. What angle from the vertical should 
you hold the electrode when welding 
a lap joint on plates of varying 
thicknesses? 


1. 

15° 

to 

20 

2. 

0 

0 

CN 

to 

30 

3. 

30° 

to 

40 

4. 

0 

0 

■xT 1 2 3 4 

to 

50 


5-63. When vertical welding upwards, how 
many degrees do you hold the 
electrode to the vertical? 


1 . 

30 

2. 

45 

3. 

60 

4. 

90 


1. A long arc is needed to 
penetrate to the root of the 
joint 

2. A short arc is needed to 
develop penetration at the root 
of the joint 

3. Reduced current flow through 
the small electrode is needed 
to create a fluid puddle 

4. Accelerated current flow is 
need to control the fluid 
puddle 

5-65. When making a fillet weld of a lap 
or T-joint-in the overhead 
position, what string bead do you 
deposit with NO weaving motion of 
the electrodes? 

1. First 

2. Second 

3. Third 

4. Fourth 

5-66. Which of the following mistakes can 
cause undercutting in welds? 

1. Current too high 

2. Current too low 

3. Faulty preheating 

4. Joints too rigid 

5-67. Which of the following mistakes 
can cause excessive spatter in 
welds ? 

1. Arc too short 

2. Arc too long 

3. Current too low 

4. Rigid joints 

5-68. Which of the following mistakes can 
cause cracked welds? 

1. Faulty preparation 

2. Using the wrong electrode 

3. Using a rigid joint 

4. All of the above 

5-69. Which of the following mistakes can 
cause poor penetration? 

1. Current too low 

2. Current too high 

3. Welding speed too slow 

4. Rigid joints 


5-70. Which of the following mistakes can 
cause brittle welds? 


1. Current too low 

2. Current too high 

3. Rigid joints 

4. Faulty preheating 


30 



5-75. 


5-71. 


5-72. 


5-73. 


5-74. 


Learning Objective: Identify 
principles and techniques of 
welding pipe using the metal-arc 
welding process. 


Only the single U-type of butt 
joint should be used to weld joints 
between pipes when pipe has what 


wall 

thickness? 


1 . 

1/4 

inch 

or 

less 

2 . 

1/2 

inch 

or 

less 

3. 

1/2 

inch 

or 

more 

4. 

3/4 

inch 

or 

more 


When preparing a joint for welding, 
you should NOT use which of the 
following procedures? 

1. Cleaning the edges of surfaces 
to be welded 

2. Adjusting the joint surfaces so 
they are smooth and uniform 

3. Removing slag from flame-cut 
edges 

4. Removing temper color 

A tack weld should not exceed what 
size when applied to a pipe with a 
wall thickness of 1/2 inch? 

1 . 1-inch long and two thirds of 
the thickness of the pipe in 
depth 

2. 3/4-inch long and two thirds of 
the thickness of the pipe in 
depth 

3. 1/2-inch long and 2/3-inch deep 

4. 1 1/4-inches long and 1/8-inch 
deep 

When using an electrode to make the 
root pass of a multilayer weld on 
pipe, you should NOT exceed what 
maximum nominal diameter of 
electrode? 


You must weld outside and the 
temperature is between 0°F and 
32°f. Which of the following 
ACTIONS, if any, should you take 
before welding? 

1. Heat the weld area within 

3 inches of the joint to be 
welded to a temperature warm to 
the touch 

2. Heat the area to the joint to 
be welded to a temperature of 
800° 

3. Heat the area to be welded to 
cherry red 

4. None 


1 . 

3/32 

inch 

2 . 

1/8 

inch 

3. 

3/16 

inch 

4. 

1/4 

inch 


31 



ASSIGNMENT 6 


Textbook Assignment: "Shielded Metal-Arc Welding and Wearfacing" and "Gas Shielded-Arc 

Welding," pages 7-27 through 8-22. 


Learnning Objective: Identify the 
principles of the arc welding 
hardfacing process. 


6-1. What is the primary purpose of 

hardfacing or wearfacing parts of 
construction equipment? 


1 . 

To 

protect them 

from 

rust 

2. 

To 

increase the 

alloy 

content 


of 

their base metal 


3. 

To 

reduce wear 



4. 

To 

protect them 

from 

corrosion 


6-2. Which of the following factors have 
the most influence on the preheat 
temperature of a steel part that is 
to be hardfaced? 


1 . 

Size and ultimate use of 
part 

the 

2. 

Austenitic and manganese 
contents of the steel 


3. 

Degrees of magnetism and 
of the steel 

size 

4. 

Carbon and alloy contents 
the base metal 

of 


6-3. When the work location permits, you 
should use what welding position 
while wearfacing? 

1. Vertical 

2. Flat 

3. Horizontal 

4. Downhand 

6-4. Hardfacing a cast-iron part is NOT 
recommended unless the part is to 
be subjected to abrasion because 
the cast iron tends to 

1. crack 

2. expand 

3. shrink 

4. chip 

6-5. The materials used to build up a 
part before it can be hardfaced 
must be compatible with which of 
the following factors? 

1. The type of equipment on which 
the part is to be used 

2. The base metal and the 
hardfacing overlay 

3. The welding procedure used to 
produce the part 

4. The carbon content and heating 
temperature of the part 


6 -6. For which of the following 

reasons is checking essential when 
deposits are made with high-alloy 
electrodes? 

1. The stresses may exceed tensile 
strength and cause spalling 

2. The induced alloy strength 
tends to weaken the base metal 

3. The tensile strength is 
increased in the base metal and 
cracking occurs 

4. The tensile strength is 
decreased and swelling occurs 

6-7. When hardfacing shovel teeth, you 
run the beads in what direction or 
pattern if the teeth are to be used 
primarily in rock? 


1 . 

Across each 

tooth 

2. 

The length 

of each tooth 

3. 

In a checkered pattern 

4. 

In a waffle 

pattern 


Learning Objective: Identify 
characteristics of and applications 
of the equipment used in carbon-arc 
cutting processes. 


6-8. What maximum distance from the 

holder should the electrode extend 
when carbon-arc cutting? 

1. 6 inches 

2. 2 inches 

3. 3 inches 

4. 4 inches 

6-9. What type of current is always used 
for the carbon-arc process? 

1. Alternating current high 
frequency (ACHF) 

2. Direct current reverse polarity 

(DCRP) 

3. Direct current straight 
polarity (DCSP) 

4. Alternating current straight 
polarity (ACSP) 

6-10. When carbon-arc cutting with a 
compressed air attachment, the 
electrode holder operates within 
what air pressure range? 


1 . 

40 

to 

60 

psig 

2. 

50 

to 

70 

psig 

3. 

60 

to 

100 

psig 

4. 

100 

to 

200 

psig 


32 




6-11. When gouging with an air carbon 

arc, what factor controls the depth 
and contour? 

1. The amount of air pressure 

2. The ampere rating of the 
electrode 

3. The capacity of the power 
source 

4. The electrode angle and travel 
speed 

6-12. What is the recommended ampere 

setting range of 3/16-inch metal 
cutting-arc electrodes? 

1. 125 to 300 amp DCSP 

2. 250 to 375 amp DCRP 

3. 300 to 450 amp DCSP 

4. 450 to 550 amp ACSP 

Learning Objective: Identify 
welding quality control processes 
and procedures. 

6-13. Which of the following types of 
tests are used to test welds? 

1. Diagnostic and Informative 

2. Diagnostic and Destructive 

3. Informative and Nondestructive 

4. Destructive and Nondestructive 

6-14. What type of inspection is the most 
effective means for detecting 
subsurface defects in welds? 

1. Liquid Penetrant 

2. Magnetic particle 

3. Free-bend 

4. Guided-bend 

6-15. How many different groups of 

penetrants are available to perform 
liquid penetrant inspections? 

1. One 

2 . Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

6-16. Before using a liquid penetrant, 

you must use which of the following 
cleaning materials? 

1. Non-volatile solvent 

2. Gas 

3. Thinner 

4. Standard cleaning solvent 


6-17. For what period of time must you 
keep a surface wet with the 
penetrant before removing it from 
the piece? 

1. 5 to 10 minutes 

2. 10 to 15 minutes 

3. 15 to 30 minutes 

4. 20 to 40 minutes 

6-18. After you have removed all of the 
penetrant and the surface has 
dried, you apply the developer. 

The developer must stay on the 
surface a minimum of how long? 

1 . 1 minute 

2. 5 minutes 

3. 7 minutes 

4. 9 minutes 

6-19. Which of the following tests is NOT 

used for destructive testing? 

1. Free-bend 

2. Nick-break 

3. Impact 

4. Radiographic 

6-20. When preparing the welded specimen 
for a free-bend test, you must 
machine the welded reinforcement 
crown flush in the opposite 
direction from that in which the 
weld was deposited. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-21. A crack develops in a specimen you 
are bending flat by applying the 
free-bend test. If the crack 
exceeds what length, you should 
stop the test because the weld has 
failed? 

1. 1/32 inch 

2 . 1/16 inch 

3. 1/8 inch 

4. 1/4 inch 

6-22. The guided-bend test is used to 

determine the quality of the weld 
metal at the face and root of a 
welded joint using a specially 
designed 

1 . jig 

2 . vise 

3. bracket 

4. clamp 


33 



6-23. 


6-29. 


While performing the guided bend 
test, to fulfill the requirements, 
how many degrees must you bend the 
piece? 

1 . 90 ° 

2. 135° 

3. 180° 

4. 215° 

6-24. What test is used for determining 
the internal quality of the weld 
metal by detecting slag inclusions, 
lack of fusion, and gas pockets? 

1. Nick-break 

2. Guided-bend 

3. Liquid penetrant 

4. Magnetic particle 

6-25. While performing the nick-break 
test, you notice that there are 
five gas pockets in 1 square inch 
of weld. The size of each of the 
pockets is less than 1/16 inch at 
their widest point. This is an 
unsatisfactory weld. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Identify the 
GMA-GTA welding processes and 
techniques. 


6-26. In the GTA-GMA welding process, 

what type of current flow produces 
a wide, shallow weld? 

1. DCSP 

2. DCRP 

3. ACHF 
4 . ACSP 

6-27. As an exception to the general 
rule, DCRP is used with the GMA 
process to weld 

1 . aluminum and magnesium 

2 . copper and cast-iron 

3. stainless steel and steel 

4. copper and steel 

6-28. What type of torch is used to weld 
light-gauge materials at a 
relatively low current setting? 


For butt welding, the electrode 
should extend past the gas cup for 
what distance? 

1. A distance equal to its 
diameter 

2. A distance equal to 1 1/2 its 
diameter 

3. A distance equal to twice its 
diameter 

4. A distance equal to 2 1/2 its 
diameter 

6-30. Tungsten electrodes are color-coded 
at one end. What does the color 
brown indicate about the electrode? 

1. It is a pure tungsten rod 

2. It is a 1% thoriated tungsten 
rod 

3. It is a 2% thoriated tungsten 
rod 

4. It is alloyed with zirconium 

6-31. What gases are most often used as 
GTA-GMA welding gases? 

1. Xenon and radon 

2. Neon and krypton 

3. Argon, helium, or a mixture of 
the two 

4. Carbon dioxide and bromine 

6-32. The primary difference between the 
regulators used for oxyfuel welding 
and GTA/GMA welding is their 
working pressures. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-33. When setting gas volume on a 

flowmeter, you should read the 
scale in which of the following 
ways ? 

1. By aligning the bottom of the 
ball with the cfh required 

2. By aligning the top of the ball 
with the cfh required 

3. By aligning the center of the 
ball with the cfh required 

4. By noting the vertical 
positions of the gas flow 
between the pressure gauge and 
the tank nozzle 


1 . 

A 

water-cooled 

GMA 

2 . 

A 

water-cooled 

GTA 

3. 

A 

helium-cooled 

GMTA 

4. 

A 

helium-cooled 

GTA 


34 



6-34. Before starting an arc, you form a 
ball at the end of the electrode 
for ac welding. To accomplish this 
task, you set the current to DCRP 
and strike an arc for a moment on a 
piece of carbon or a piece of 
copper. After this action is 
completed, the ball should be at 
least two times the diameter of the 
electrode. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-35. When butt welding, after striking 
an arc, you should hold the torch 
at what angle to (a) form the 
molten pool and (b) actually lay 
the weld bead? 

1. (a) 70° (b) 75° 

2. (a) 70° (b) 90° 

3. (a) 90° (b) 75° 

4. (a) 90° (b) 90° 

6-36. When filler metal must be used, you 
should use what technique? 

1. When the puddle becomes bright 
and fluid, you move the arc to 
the front of the puddle and 
quickly add filler metal into 
the center of the pool 

2. When the puddle becomes bright 
and fluid, you move the arc to 
the rear of the puddle and 
quickly add filler metal to the 
front edge of the pool 

3. Move the arc to and from the 
pool and melt the filler rod 
into the edge of the pool 

4. Move the arc to and from the 
pool and melt the filler rod 
into the center of the pool 

6-37. When GTA welding "out of 

position," you must ensure you 
have metal with clean surfaces, 
good joint fit-up, and sufficient 

1 . liquid penetrate 

2 . joint dryer 

3. air pressure 

4. shielding gas 

6-38. When GTA welding in the horizontal 
position, you should have how many 
degrees "push" angle? 

I 10 ° 

?! 15 ° 

q 20° 

4 ’ 25° 


6-39. When welding thin materials with 

the GTA welding process, you should 
weld from the top moving 

1 . downward 

2 . upward 

3. to the left 

4. in a zig-zag motion 

6-40. When welding with the GTA process 
in the overhead position, you 
should lower the welding current by 
what percentage of what is normally 
used for flat welding? 

1. 1 to 5 percent 

2. 5 to 10 percent 

3. 10 to 15 percent 

4. 15 to 20 percent 

6-41. For best results when welding 

aluminum with the GTA process you 
should use (a) what current and (b) 
what gas? 


1 . 

(a) 

Helium 

(b) 

DSCP 

2 . 

(a) 

Argon 

(b) 

ACHF 

3. 

(a) 

Carbon dioxide 

(b) 

DCRP 

4. 

(a) 

Argon 

(b) 

DCSP 


6-42. Before welding gray cast iron with 
the GTA welding process, it must be 
preheated. What is the preheating 
temperature range? 

1. 350° to 500° 

2. 450° to 800° 

3. 500° to 1250° 

4. 600° to 1500° 

6-43. The GMA welding process is normally 
chosen for use over the GTA welding 
process when thick metal has to be 
welded. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-44. The advantages the GMA process 

provides over the GTA process are 
that it enables a welder to produce 
sound welds in all positions 
quickly, creates no slag, and 
produces 

1 . softer welds 

2 . a much lower flame 

3. increased surface porosity 

4. cleaner welds 

6-45. GMA welding requires the use of 
what type of polarity? 

1. DCRP 

2. ACHF 

3. DCSP 

4. ACRP 


35 



6-46. In addition to the carrying of the 
electrode wire and the welding 
current, the functions of the 
welding gun include 


1 . 

reversing polarity 

2 . 

controlling 

wire feed 

3. 

reducing air 

pressure 

4. 

carrying the 

shielding gas to 


the arc area 



6-47. When welding mild steel, you use 
pure argon as a shielding gas. 

This action produces shallow 
penetration undercutting, and 

1 . increased porosity 

2 . poor bead contour 

3. deep cratering 

4. clean welds 

6-48. Carbon dioxide is used primarily 
for what type of metal? 

1. Aluminum 

2. Mild steel 

3. Manganese 

4. Copper 

6-49. you use the same type of regulator 
and flowmeter for GMA welding as 
used for GTA welding. 

1. True 

2. False 


6-53. What is the proper amount of "wire 
stick-out" for micro wires? 


1 . 

Between 

1/16 

and 

1/8 inch 

2 . 

Between 

1/8 

and 

3/16 inch 

3. 

Between 

3/16 

and 

1/4 inch 

4. 

Between 

1/4 

and 

3/8 inch 


6-54. Which of the following types of 

metal transfer is used to eliminate 
distortion, burn through, and 
spatter when welding thin-gauge 
metals? 

1. Spray-arc welding 

2. Globular transfer 

3. Short-circuiting-arc transfer 

4. Long-arc transfer 

6-55. When starting an arc, you should 

hold the GMA welding torch at what 
angle to the work? 

1. Between 5° and 20° 

2. Between 25° and 30° 

3. Between 30° and 45° 

4. Between 45° and 90° 

6-56. When striking an arc and the wire 
sticks to the piece, you should 
release the trigger and clip the 
wire with side cutters. 

1. True 

2. False 


6-50. What sound is produced when there 
is inadequate gas shielding? 

1. Crackling 

2. Popping 

3. Sizzling 

4. Bacon frying 

6-51. you should store the unused portion 
of a wire spool of GMA wire in its 
original container in a hot locker 
located in an area that is 

1 . dry 

2 . humid 

3. very cold 

4. very hot 

6-52. When you are GMA welding in the 

vertical or overhead positions, you 
use smaller diameter electrodes 
than those used in the flat 
position. 

1. True 

2. False 


6-57. When welding pieces of unequal 
thickness, you should angle the 
torch in what direction? 

1. Toward the thinner piece 

2. Toward the thicker piece 

3. Down the center line 

4. Away from the center line 

6-58. When you are GMA welding, the 

"travel angle" should be how many 
degrees? 

1. Between 75° and 90° 

2. Between 60° and 75° 

3. Between 30° and 45° 

4. Between 5° and 25° 

6-59. The pulling or dragging technique 
of GMA welding is used for heavy 
gauge metals because it allows the 
welder to see the crater easily and 
produces great penetration. 

1. True 

2. False 


36 



6-60. 


What type of GMA welding defect is 
caused from a clogged nozzle, 
shielding gas set too low or high, 
and/or welding in a windy area? 

1. Surface porosity 

2. Crater porosity 

3. Lack of penetration 

4. Cold lap 

6-61. Burn-through is corrected by 
increasing your welding speed 
and/or by reducing the wire-feed 
speed which, in turn, lowers the 
welding 

1 . amperage 

2 . voltage 

3. resonance 

4. shield 

6-62. When GMA welding aluminum up to 1- 
inch thick, you use what type of 
shielding gas? 

1. Helium 

2. Carbon dioxide 

3. Pure argon 

4. A mixture of carbon dioxide and 
argon 


37 




