STEELWORKER 1 & C 



Prepared by 
BUREAU OF NAVAL PERSONNEL 




NAVY TRAINING COURSES 
NAVPERS I0654-A 



UNITED STATES 
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
WASHINGTON : 1 954 



First edition, 1950 
Reprinted with minor corrections, 1951 
Reprinted with changes, 1954 



For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U. S. Government Printing Office 
Washington 25, D. C. - Price 70 cents 



PREFACE 



This book is written for the men of the Navy and of the 
Naval Reserve who are studying for advancement to the rates 
of Steelworker First and Chief Steelworker. Combined with 
the necessary practical experience, the information in this Train- 
ing Course will help prepare the reader for advancement in 
rating examinations. 

The first chapter of this book contains general information 
concerning the work and responsibilities of a Steelworker 1 
or C. Subsequent chapters deal with rigging heavy equipment, 
framing of wooden structures, physical and chemical properties 
of steel, and steel fabrication. Chapter 6 takes up various 
troubles you may encounter in welding, and short cuts for 
overcoming welding difficulties. Chapters 7 and 8 contain dis- 
cussions of the duties of a Steelworker 1 and C as a supervisor 
and as an instructor. 

As one of the Navy Training Courses, this book represents 
the joint endeavor of the U. S. Navy Training Publications 
Center and the Bureau of Naval Personnel, with technical 
assistance supplied by the Bureau of Yards and Docks. 



617 



STUDY GUIDE 



The table below indicates which chapters of this book 
apply to your rating. To use the table follow these rules : 

1. Select the column which applies to your rating. If you are 
in the regular Navy you will use the column headed SW. If 
you are in the Naval Reserve you will use the column 
headed by your particular emergency service rating— SWS 
or SWR. 

2. Observe which chapters have been marked in your rating 
column with the number of the rate to which you are seek- 
ing advancement. 

3. Study those particular chapters. They include information 
which will assist you in meedng the qualifications for your 
rating. See appendix III of this book for the qualifications 
for advancement in rating. To gain a well-rounded view 
of the duties of the general service rating, it is recom- 
mended that you read the other chapters of this book, even 
though they do not pertain directly to your rating. 

4. Here is an example: If you are a member of the Naval 
Reserve studying for advancement to the rate of SWS1, 
you will select the column headed SWS. Following this 
column down you will observe that you must study chapters 
1, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. 



Chapter 

* 


SW 


SWS 


. SWR 


1 


1 1, c 


1, c 


1, c 




1, c 




1, c 


3 


c 


. c 


c 


4 


1, c 


i, c 




5 


i, c 


i, c 




6 


1, c 


i, c 




7 


1, c 


1. c 


1, c 




1, c 


1, c 


1, c 



iv 



READING LIST 



NAVY TRAINING COURSES 

Steelworker 3 & 2, NavPers 10653-A 

Use of Tools, NavPers 10623-A 

Blueprint Reading, NavPers 10077 

Pipefitter 3 & 2 (chapters 6, 7, 8), NavPers 10592-A 

Cargo Handling, NavPers 10124 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

Pontoon Gear Handbook, NavDocks TP-PL-7 

USAFI TEXTS 

United States Armed Forces Institute (USAFI) courses for additional 
reading and study are available through your Information and Education 
Officer.* A partial list of those courses applicable to your rate follows : 

Number Title 

CA 769 Mechanical Drawing (Correspondence) 
MA 769 Mechanical Drawing (Self-Teaching) 

♦"Members of the United States Armed Forces Reserve components, 
when on active duty, are eligible to enroll for USAFI courses, services, 
and materials if the orders calling them to active duty specify a period 
of 120 days or more or if they have been on active duty for a period of 
120 days or more, regardless of the time specified in the active duty 
orders." 



v 





4 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER I Page 
On the way up _ 1 

CHAPTER 2 

Rigging heavy equipment 7 

CHAPTER 3 

Building with wood- 33 

CHAPTER 4 

Steel 65 

CHAPTER 5 

Steel fabrication 93 

CHAPTER 6 

Techniques and trouble shooting in welding 127 

CHAPTER 7 

Supervision 147 

CHAPTER 8 

Steel worker as an instructor 163 

APPENDIX I 

Wire rope specifications 175 

APPENDIX II 

Answers to quizzes 181 

APPENDIX III 

Qualifications for advancement in rating 187 

Index 191 

vii 



STEELWORKER 1 & C 



I 



I 



I 



I 



CHAPTER I 
ON THE WAY UP 



A STEP UP 

On the day you make a rate, the Navy recognizes the skill 
and knowledge you have gained. That higher rate is not a 
gift, but something you have earned and to which you are 
entitled. However, the Navy doesn't give you the rate out- 
right ; there are some strings attached to it. You have to take 
on added responsibility and added duties. These duties and 
responsibilities are in addition to those of the rate you held 
previously. 

REVIEW 

Now is the time for review. You will be examined not 
only on the qualifications that apply to first and chief but also 
on those qualifications that apply to 3 and 2. Before you can 
be a good first or chief you must thoroughly understand the 
duties of the lower rates. 



Give yourself this little test. Turn to the qualifications in 
appendix III at the back of this book. Go through them and 
examine yourself on each qualification. Can you read and work 
from specifications, drawings, and sketches? Has it been a long 
time since you had an acetylene torch in your hand ? Can you 
still do a good job of welding? Quiz yourself in this manner. 
If you are 4.0 on each qualification, you are ready to study for 
first and chief. If you are not 4.0, start to review. 

If you have been working at welding most of the time and 
have forgotten what you knew about rigging, go back to Steel- 
worker 3 and 2 and reread chapter 3, "Fiber Line and Wire 
Rope," and also chapter 4, "Rigging/' But it isn't enough 
to just read and understand how to reeve and use common 
blocks and tackles and how to use jacks, rollers, wire rope, 
and slings in handling heavy equipment. The items listed under 
practical fattors must actually be performed. So if you haven't 
done any rigging for a long time, get some actual practice. Go 
to your chief and request to be placed in a rigging crew for a 
while. Explain to him that you want to meet the qualifications 
for advancement. The Navy and your officer in charge are 
interested in the man who is interested in his job. 

After you have completed a review of the practical factors, 
go on to the qualifications listed under examination subjects. As 
you go through the examination subjects for 3 and 2, give 
yourself a mental quiz. Can you still answer questions on the 
methods and procedures of assembling and launching pontoon 
strings and structures? It shouldn't take you more than fifteen 
minutes to go over the examination subjects and list those in 
which you are weak. When you have recognized your weak- 
nesses, half the battle is won. 

ON YOUR WAY 

If you now feel that you can get 4.0 on all the practical 
factors and examination subjects for 3 and 2, you are ready 
to go on to the qualifications for Steelworker 1 and C. Read 
them and keep them in mind as you study this and other books 
pertinent to your job as a Steelworker 1 or chief. 

As a higher rated petty officer you will have more responsi- 



9 



bility for supervision. You will be placed in charge of rigging, 
pontoon assembly, and steel erection. When you are in charge 
of steel erection, you will direct the erection or dismantling of 
such structures as towers, tanks, hangars, buildings, and bridges. 
You will be required to lay out and direct the fabrication of 
structural steel and built-up members in the shop and field in 
accordance with plans and specifications. Your work in super- 
vising erection and fabrication makes it necessary to draw 
sketches to show what is to be done. As your work becomes 
more supervisory in nature, it also becomes more administra- 
tive. You will prepare work orders, job requisitions, and job 
completion and progress reports. Closely linked to these duties 
is the qualification that calls for you to make material estimates 
from specifications, working drawings, and sketches. Don't fail 
to review the quals listed in appendix III, and make sure you are 
familiar with all requirements applicable to the 1 and C rates. 

To advance to warrant officer, you will have to broaden your 
training and work experience to include the functions of a 
Builder. When a Steelworker reaches warrant grade he will 
act as a supervisor on all types of building construction. 

STUDY AND TECHNICAL AIDS 

While you are studying for advancement in rating there 
are a number of publications with which you should become 
familiar since this book can't possibly give you all the answers 
to all the problems you will have to meet as a Steelworker 1 or 
chief. Some of these are discussed in the following paragraphs. 

Seamanship, NavPers 16U8-A and Knight's Modern Seaman- 
ship will give you valuable help on problems that arise in select- 
ing wire rope, splicing, rigging of loads, and other rigging 
problems. Manufacturers of wire rope have printed excellent 
handbooks. These manufacturers' handbooks list breaking 
strengths of wire rope manufactured according to various speci- 
fications, and also give information on splicing and wire rope 
fittings. 

The Navy Training Course, Builder 3 & 2, NavPers 10648-B 
gives you valuable information on all phases of wood construc- 
tion. 



There is one book which will come closer to answering all 
questions on welding than any other. It is the Welding Encyclo- 
pedia. You will find this book a valuable one to own and one 
that you will consult many times. 

For the last word on pontoon structures of all types you 
should consult the Pontoon Gear Handbook, NavDocks, 
TP-PL-2. This manual, written by the Bureau of Yards and 
Docks, has complete and detailed instructions for assembling of 
pontoon barges, bridge units, wharves, floating cranes, and 
floating dry docks. 

When you get a job of steel fabrication, you may want to 
brush up on your blueprint reading and principles of layout. 
.If you do, get Blueprint Reading, NavPers 10077. You will 
also find a valuable section on pipe layout in the Welding 
Encyclopedia. 

For information on tank location and erection, Advanced 
Base Fuel Storage, prepared by the Bureau of Yards and Docks 
will prove to be a valuable guide. 

As a Chief Steelworker you may be placed in charge of a 
platoon and as a first class you may be placed in charge of a 
squad. The military duties of a squad or platoon leader are the 
same regardless of his rating. The ability to assume the duties 
of military leadership are required of every petty officer in the 
Navy. If you are not up to date on your duties as a platoon 
or squad leader refer to the Bluejackets' Manual, the General 
Training Course for Petty Officers, NavPers 10055, the US 
Navy Landing Party Manual, and the Guide Book for Marines. 
Besides being a skilled craftsman you are required to be a 
military leader. As you advance, you will be given more military 
duties and responsibilities. 

The battalion education officer will help you get these books 
when you need them for study and reference purposes. 

COOPERATION 

If you are given the job of supervising the erection of fuel 
storage tanks at an advanced base, do not become so absorbed 
in the task that you overlook the important contributions made 
by other members of the Navy. 



If, after the fuel storage facilities are complete, someone 
asks you how the tanks got there, what would you say? To 
reply "We put them up" would, in a way, be right. But, there . 
was really much more to getting the facility erected on that 
particular island. 

How was the location for the base selected in the first place? 
Who decided how many tanks would be needed ? Who bought 
them? How did they get to the base? Who gave the job to 
the battalion? The answers to these and similar questions can 
be summed up in two words — organization and cooperation. 

Long before an operation is begun, trained officers on the 
staff of the area commander determine the location and require- 
ments of the new base. These requirements of men, equipment, 
and materials are set forth in the Base Development Plan. 
From the plan, other staff officers order the required equipment 
and components and schedule the shipping. The officer who is 
to command the construction troops then assigns the various 
major jobs to his units. Eventually your battalion is given the 
job of putting in the tanks at a location possibly selected months 
before. 

When your officer in charge receives the order from his 
superior, he calls upon the headquarters company to develop 
the details. The engineering officer develops the specific plans, 
the supply officer checks to see that all the tools, equipment, 
and parts are on hand. The job is then given to a project officer, 
whose responsibility is to carry it through to completion. 

Since "it takes men to do the actual construction, the project 
officer first determines how many and what ratings in the 
construction companies are available to him. He breaks the 
job down into its parts — staking out the tank sites and pipeline 
trenches, clearing and grading, actual construction of tanks, 
installation of pipeline and valves, construction of pump houses, 
installation and wiring of the pumping machinery. He also plans 
a time schedule for the operations so the ratings work together 
as a team. 

After the plans are completed, you and the other construction 
ratings come on the job to change the plans from blueprints 
into a completed facility. 



5 



The Surveyors are first on the job. From charts and survey 
data they set the stakes for the locations of the tank and pump 
sites and pipeline trenches. Next on the job are the Drivers. 
They will come in with bulldozers, ditchers and other heavy 
equipment to clear the sites and dig the trenches. Mechanics 
come with the Drivers to keep the equipment in good repair. 
Now the sites are ready for you and your shipmates to begin 
tank erection. Those tanks won't be much good without pump- 
ing equipment, so while you are erecting the tank with the help 
of the Driver who operates the crane, Builders have been con- 
structing forms and pouring concrete to prepare bases for the 
pumping machinery. 

It isn't the Steelworkers alone who are responsible for the 
completion of that fuel facility. The combined efforts of the 
men and officers of the battalion are necessary before the tank 
farm can refuel the first ship or plane. It takes the knowledge, 
skill, and cooperation of all the ratings to do the job. 

QUIZ 

1. To what publication would you refer for an answer to a 
welding question, if you could not find the answer in a 
Navy Training Course? 

2. What publication would give you the most complete infor- 
mation on pontoon assemblies ? 

3. If you are studying for Steel worker 1, on what qualifica- 
tions will you be examined ? 

4. Who determines the location and requirements of a new 
base? 

5. What rating will usually be the first to go to work on any 
construction job? 



6 



CHAPTER 2 



RIGGING HEAVY EQUIPMENT 

STEEL TENDONS 

Heavy equipment is the muscle of the Seabee battalion. 
Dozers and scrapers move huge loads of earth. Shovels, clam- 
shells, and draglines bite into mountains for cut and fill. 
Cranes lift and place steel for tanks and towers, load and 
unload tons and tons of supplies, and move heavy machinery. 
Pile drivers drive piles for docks and other water . front 
structures. And all this work is accomplished with tendons 
of steel. The Wire Rope that hoists the shovel's bucket and 
raises the crane's heavy load is as important in getting the 
work done as the engine in the piece of equipment. 

WIRE ROPE SPECIFICATIONS 

When the wire rope parts on a shovel and the Driver on 
the job rushes to you for help, don't just pick up any piece of 
new wire rope and expect to get the shovel back on the job. 
There are a number of tilings you will have to know before 
you can pass a wire rope over the first sheave. 

First, you should know the make and the model of the 
shovel. Xext, you should know which line has parted. For 
example, on a Northwest Model 80D, five lines are used to 
rig the shovel, and wire rope of three different diameters 



300247°— 54 2 



7 



is used to reeve the complete assembly. Unless you have had 
considerable experience with the reeving of a particular piece 
of equipment, you should get hold of the manufacturer's 
manual and look up the wire rope specifications. And, it's a 
good idea to check the specifications even if you think you 
know what type of wire rope a particular assembly takes. 
It's easy to forget that the hoist line of a Model 80D shovel 
takes a wire center wire rope. 

Look at the wire rope specifications in figure 1 and you will 
see how important it is to select the correct wire rope to reeve 
a particular assembly. 



MODEL 25 WIRE ROPE SPECIFICATIONS 

(18' 0" BOOM — 15' 3^" STICKS) 

Hoist rope dia. x 94' 0" long 

Backhaul rope %" dia. x 27' 7" long 

Crowd rope %" dia. x 50' 0" long 

Boom hoist rope % 6 " dia. x 115' 0" long 

Dipper trip rope $ie" dia. x 43' 0" long 

For dipper trip and boom hoist — 6x19 improved plow steel, regular- 
lay hemp-center. 

For hoist crowd and backhaul — 6 x 19 improved plow steel. 

Lang lay, with independent wire-rope center, preformed if possible. 



Figure L — Wire rope specifications for Northwest Model 25 shovel. 

For the dipper, trip, and boom-hoist lines, you will use 
6 x 19, improved plow steel, regular lay, hemp-center wire 
rope. But, for the hoist, crowd, and backhaul lines, 6 x 19, 
improved plow steel, Lang lay, with independent wire-rope 
center is specified. Rapid wire rope failure would result if 
hemp-center wire rope were used for the hoist, crowd, and 
backhaul lines. 

If you can't locate the manufacturer's manual for a particu- 
lar piece of equipment, take off the damaged wire rope and, 
after you have identified it, replace it with the same kind of 
wire rope. Of course, you can recognize the lay of the rope, 
the kind of center it has, and the strand construction, but you 
will have difficulty recognizing the type of steel used. As a 
general rule, the wire rope used by the Navy is improved 

8 



plow steel, so you can't go wrong in using this type of wire 
rope to replace any damaged wire rope assembly. Appendix I 
lists the wire-rope specifications for the equipment most com- 
monly used by the Navy. 

REEVING DIAGRAMS 

When you are reeving a piece of equipment such as a 
bulldozer or rooter, you won't need a reeving diagram. How- 
ever, when you are called upon to reeve a scraper or shovel, 
you will find that it is much easier to do the job if you have 
a diagram to follow. As with wire-rope specifications, reeving 
diagrams will be found in the manufacturer's manuals. 

Figure 2 shows the reeving diagram for the dipper-hoist 
line on a Lorain Model 82 shovel. The reeving instructions 
accompanying this diagram are as follows: 

1. The shovel boom should be in lowered position so 
cables can be run through the boom head easily. 

2. Unroll and stretch out 85 feet of specified wire rope 
on the ground beside the right-hand side of your 
machine. 

3. Pass the hauling part of your wire rope up and over 
the right-hand boom point sheave from front to rear. 

4. Pass the hauling part of your wire rope under the 
hoist drum and secure the end in the socket of the 
drum with a wedge. 

5. Engage your machine and wind up the cable on the 
hoist drum. Leave enough hanging to accomplish the 
following steps. 

6. Pass the standing part of your wire rope down and 
around the sheave on the dipper block. 

7. Then pass the standing part up and over the left-hand 
boom point sheave. 

8. By use of a wedge, secure your wire rope end in the 
socket at the top of the left-hand boom point. 

With the reeving diagram in figure 2 and the foregoing 
reeving instructions, you should have a good idea of how to 



9 



reeve the dipper hoist line on a Lorain 82 before you actually 
get on the job. 

Not all the reeving diagrams, however, will be as clear * 
and explicit as the one shown here, but any reeving diagram 
will make your job a lot easier. 

There will be times when you will be unable to find the 
manufacturer's manual for a piece of equipment. When this 
happens, you can make your own reeving diagram. If your 
job is simply to replace a worn wire rope, you can make a 
sketch of the assembly to be reeved before you remove the 
worn line. Don't trust your memory — it takes less time and 
work to make a sketch than it does to rereeve a hundred feet 




Figure 2. — Reeving diagram for dipper-hoist line, Lorain Model 82. 

10 



of wire rope. It's a good idea to make a sketch even if the 
damaged wire rope is unreeved from the equipment you are 
to reeve. You can thus plan the work of reeving and you 
won't have to go ahead in a hit or miss manner. When you 
draw the sketch, think the rigging problem through. Where 
will the line be dead ended? Which sheave will it pass over 
first? Then where will it go? A little planning will save a lot 
of work. 

REEVING A DOZER 

A cable-operated dozer will be one of the simplest pieces 
of equipment you will reeve. Figure 3 shows the reeving 
diagram for a Laplant-Choate dozer, Model R?6B. This type 
of dozer is commonly used on a Caterpillar D? tractor. 

If you look at the diagram, you will see that the job of 
reeving a dozer is practically the same as reeving a twofold 
purchase. Start at the back of the dozer and lead the wire 
rope over the fairlead above the power control drum, then 
forward over the left-hand sheave in the top of the front 




Figure 3. — Reeving diagram for Laplant-Choate dozer. 

II 




Figure 4. — Reeving diagram for LeTourneau Model M scraper. 

12 



dozer frame. Now, lead the wire rope down through the 
left-hand sheave on the block attached to the dozer blade; up 
and over the right-hand sheave on the top of the dozer frame ; 
then down through the sheave in the block on the dozer blade. 
Attach the hauling part to the power control drum with the 
wedge provided, and secure the standing part to the front frame 
with the wedge. 

There may be slight differences in reeving different makes 
of dozers. Some may secure the standing part of the wire rope 
to the blade, but basically all dozers will be reeved in a manner 
similar to the one illustrated in figure 3. 



One of the most difficult reeving jobs you will encounter 
is that of reeving a scraper. Fortunately, most scrapers carry 
a spare reel of wire rope which is an integral part of the wire 
rope that operates the scraper. So it is not necessary to reeve 
the entire machine when a line breaks. Usually, breaks occur 
at the fairlead between the scraper and the power control 
drum. When this occurs, the wedge securing the wire rope is 
taken out and enough wire rope is unreeled to replace that 
lost when the line parted. 

If you have to completely reeve a scraper, you should start 
by getting hold of the manufacturer's manual. Unless you 
have had a great deal of experience reeving scrapers, you will 
be lost without it. 

Figure 4 is the reeving diagram for a LeTourneau Model 
M, 6-cubic-yard scraper. Observe this diagram as you study 
the reeving instructions on the following pages. The letter at 
the end of each step is identified in figure 4. 



Hoist Cable 

From the right drum on the power control unit, enter and 
pass the cable as indicated in the following steps: 



REEVING A SCRAPER 



1. At the bottom of fairlead sheave 

2. Up and enter slot in main beam . . 

3. Over the inside sheave in housing 



A 
F 
G 



13 



4. Forward and enter top of housing C 

5. Back and around outside sheave in housing G 

6. Forward to" top pushbeam sheave D 

7. Back to outside sheave in housing I 

8. Forward and enter bottom of pushbeam sheave 
housing E 

9. Through the hole in the top of sheave housing I 

10. Dead end at cable wedge H 



Dump Cable 

From cable spool on scraper tailgate, unspool approximately 
106 feet of cable, leaving extra cable wrapped on the reel. 



Then take the end of the cable and extend — 

1. From left to right around sheave in housing . . . . K 

2. Back and around top sheave in housing N 

3. Forward and around bottom sheave in housing .... K 

4. Back and enter bottom sheave in housing N 

5. Across tailgate and around bottom sheave in 
housing Q 

6. Forward and around bottom sheave in housing .... P 

7. Back and around top sheave in housing Q 

8. Forward and enter top sheave in housing P 

9. Across A frame and enter bottom of sheave in 
housing M 

10. Up and enter bottom of sheave in housing L 

11. Down and enter slot in apron and around sheave in 
housing J 

12. Up and enter inside sheave in housing I 

13. Down and enter fairlead sheave in housing B 

14. Around sheave in housing B and through the power 
control unit double-deck sheaves and onto the power 
control unit left-hand cable drum. 



The LeTourneau scraper is one of the makes of scrapers 
most commonly used by the Navy. You will find that all 
scrapers made by LeTourneau are reeved similarly to the one 
described in the preceding paragraphs. 

Le Tourneau scrapers have another wire rope assembly 

14 



besides the hoist and dump assemblies. This is the spring pipe 
cable. This assembly rarely breaks, so the method of reeving 
it will not be covered in this book. Complete instructions for 
reeving the spring pipe will be found in the manufacturer's 
manual. 

REEVING A SHOVEL 

Shovel reeving can be broken down into the reeving of 
three main lines — the crowd line, the backhaul line, and the 
hoist line. In this discussion of reeving a shovel, all illustrations 
and descriptions will refer to the Northwest Model 25. The 
Navy uses all makes and models of shovels but your chances 
of reeving a Northwest Model 25 are very good. First, let's 
take up the reeving of the Crowd Line. This is the line 
that moves the dipper into the face of the excavation. Figure 
5 is the reeving diagram for the crowd line. To reeve the 
crowd line, first measure and cut a 50-foot length of the 
specified wire rope. Have the dipper stick extended out as far 
as it will go, as shown in figure 5, before you begin to reeve. 




Figure 5.— Reeving diagram for crowd line on Northwest Model 25 

15 



Now, reeve the crowd line as follows (consult fig. 5 as you 
read the instructions) : 

1. Secure one end of the crowd line C by means of a 
U-bolt in the socket in the center of the grooved barrel 
of front drum E. 

2. Secure the other end of the crowd line C by means 
of the wedge in the take-up drum R at the right-hand 
end of the front drum E. 

3. Push the loop thus formed through the opening in 
the boom and under the two outermost sheaves on the 
shipper shaft, then up and over the anchor bracket O 
located at the inner end of the dipper stick. 

4. Wind up both ends of the crowd line C by rotating 
drum E till the line is fairly tight. 




Figure 6.— Reeving diagram for backhaul line for Northwest Model 25. 

The Backhaul Line is the line that pulls the dipper stick in. 
To reeve this line refer to figure 6 and the following 
instructions : 

1. Counting from the upper surface of the front drum E 
feed the backhaul line B around the drum 1^2 wraps 
and secure it in the wedge socket in the left-hand end 
of the grooved barrel of the front drum E. 

16 



2. Lead the line up over the top of the center sheave on 
the shipper shaft and then down along the under side 
of the dipper stick. 

3. Anchor the end of the line with the wedge in the 
adjustable socket at the outer end of the dipper stick. 
Use this adjustable socket to get the final desired 
/tightness in the line and also to take up slack as the 
result of wear. 

The Hoist Line is the line that raises and lowers the dipper 
stick. Figure 7 is the reeving diagram for this assembly. 




Figure 7.— Reeving diagram for hoist line for Northwest Model 25. 



To reeve the hoist : 

1. Start at the upper surface of the large diameter por- 
tion of the front drum E, wind 1^4 wraps of the hoist 
line H around the drum and secure the end by means 
of a wire rope clip in the socket in the flange. 

2. Lead the line over the top of the lef t-hand sheave at 
the boom point. 

3. Pass the line down through the padlock sheave. 



4. Lead the line up and over the right-hand boom point 
sheave and back to the top of the right-hand drum D 
on the drum shaft. 

5. Secure the end of the line in the socket provided on 
the drum. 

To complete the reeving adjustment of the shovel, wind 
the rest of the hoist line on to drum D (fig. 7) and move the 
dipper stick into position S as shown in figure 5. Tighten the 
crowd line . by means of the take-up drum R. Lock the take-up 
drum tightly by screwing up on sleeve T which is locked to 
the take-up drum R by means of a capscrew. There are two 
notches in the outer flange of the take-up drum R, one of 
which must be in line with any of the capscrew holes in sleeve 
T before the capscrew can be screwed in place. 

REEVING A BOOM HOIST 

For this discussion of reeving a boom hoist the illustrations 
and explanations will be for a Northwest Model 80D. 

Figure 8 is the reeving diagram for the boom hoist line. 
Refer to k as you read the following reeving description: 

Lead the line from the underside of the boom hoist drum 
A to the front side of sheave B on the A-frame, then up to 
the rear of sheave C, and up to and over sheave D on the 
gantry. Then lead forward to and around upper sheave E in 
the .boom hoist bridle block. Now, lead the line back to and 
around sheave F in the gantry bridle block, then forward to 
and around the lower sheave G in the boom hoist bridle block. 
The line should now be led across to and around the lower 
sheave H, then back to and around the lower sheave I in the 
gantry bridle block. The next step is to lead the line forward 
to and around upper sheave J in the boom hoist bridle block, 
and back to and around the upper sheave K in the gantry bridle 
block. Finally, to finish reeving the assembly, lead the line 
across to and around sheave L, then forward to and around 
sheave M and back to dead end at N. 



19 



REEVING CRANES AND CLAMSHELLS 



A crane is fairly simple to reeve. The crane itself is reeved 
with one line. The hook block may be reeved as either a whip, 
a gun tackle, a luff tackle, a twofold purchase, or a threefold 
purchase depending on the capacity of the crane and the loads 
to be handled. 

Figure 9 is the crane reeving diagram for the Model 82 
Lorain. 




Figure 9. — Crane reeving diagram for a Model 82 Lorain. 

The following instructions apply to figure 9: 

1. Boom should be in a horizontal position. 

2. Remove entire roller cable guard assembly from boom 
head. Roll and stretch out cable on ground along right- 
hand side of boom. 

3. Pass rear end of cable up and over both right-hand 
sheaves at boom point from front to rear. 

4. Pull rear end of cable down and pass under right-hand 
hoist drum and secure with cable wedge. 

5. Engage machinery and wind up cable on drum. 

6. Leave enough hanging from boom head to pass standing 
part of cable through and around sheaves of hoist 
block for desired parts of line. 

20 



A clamshell is reeved with two lines ; the closing line which 
closes the bucket, and the holding line which holds the bucket 
when it is dumped. These lines are reeved like a crane line. 
One line is reeved over the right-hand boom point sheave and 
one over the left-hand boom point sheave. Before you begin 
to reeve a clamshell, determine the actual set up for the 
particular machine you are reeving by consulting the manu- 
facturer's manual. 

The clamshell bucket is reeved with the standing part of the 
closing line, and the holding line is secured to the top of the 
bucket (see fig. 10). Clamshell buckets may be reeved with 
either 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 part line, as shown in figure 10. The 
sheaves in clamshell buckets have a minimum of clearance, so 
before you begin to reeve the closing line make sure it is 
properly pointed. You do this by welding the wires and strands 
in the end of the wire rope. 

REEVING HINTS 

There are a number of things about reeving heavy equip- 
ment that you will learn through experience on the job. How- 
ever, here are a few practical hints. 

Keep the wire rope clean while you are reeving equipment. 
Dirt and grit will stick to the lubricant on the cable and 
cause rapid wear when the machine is in operation. If at all 
possible, move the equipment to a hard-surfaced area so the 
wire rope can be stretched out without picking up grit and 
dirt. If it is impossible to reeve the equipment without getting 
the wire rope dirty, wipe or brush it off before winding on a 
drum. 

Always have an operator present when you are reeving any 
piece of equipment. It is often necessary to take up wire 
rope on a drum before the rest of the assembly can be rigged. 
The operator of a piece of equipment is the man most familiar 
with it and best qualified to test the equipment after you have 
completed your reeving. He may also -be of assistance in the 
actual reeving. 

When you are reeving crane blocks do not permanently 



21 




Figure 10. — Clamshell reeving diagram. 



secure the standing part of the line until you are sure there 
will be no twists in the lines. You will have to use a trial and 
error method to get lines to hang straight by pulling in and 
taking out twists till the block hangs straight. 

You can determine the proper lay of wire rope to use 
on a particular drum by finding out how the line winds on the 
drum and to which side of the drum the line is secured. The 
winding diagrams in figure 11 are self explanatory and apply 
to either regular or Lang lay rope. 

For example, right lay rope should be used on a drum on 
which the wire rope is overwound from left to right. When 
the proper lay of rope is used for the drum winding conditions, 

22 



the coils will hug together when the load is slacked off and 
maintain an even layer. With rope of improper lay the coils 
will spread apart at each removal of load and when winding 
is resumed, the rope may criss-cross and overlap on the drum 
causing flattening and crushing. 

One way that you can reeve a piece of equipment on which 
you are replacing a worn line is to secure a piece of six thread 
to the end of the worn line. As you unreeve the worn line the 
six thread will follow around the sheaves and be reeved onto 
the machine. Now, secure the new wire rope to the end of 
the six thread and pull it back through the sheaves. There is 
little chance for mistake when this reeving method is used. 

When you are reeving a crane, especially when reeving one 
with a single whip and light hook, it may be necessary to 
include a "headache ball" in the hook assembly to pull down 
the line when it is unwound from the drum. A "headache 
ball," which is a heavy iron weight, may also be used on twofold 
and threefold purchases to overhaul the blocks. 




USE LEFT LAY ROPE USE RIGHT LAY ROPE 

Figure 1 1. — Drum winding diagrams for selection of proper lay of rope. 

309247°— 54— — 3 n 



WIRE ROPE STORAGE AND STOCK CONTROL 

As a Steelworker first or chief, you may be placed in charge 
of wire rope storage and stock control. If you are given this 
detail, you should become familiar with class 22 of the Bureau 
of Yards and Docks Section of the Catalog of Navy Material. 
In this publication, under class 22, you will find listed the 
wire rope carried in stock by navy supply depots, the US Navy 
Advanced Base Depot at Port Hueneme, and navy supply 
centers at Guam, M.I., and Pearl Harbor, T.H. You will have 
to consult class 22 when you order wire rope. 

Your job as the man in charge of storage and stock control 
will be to see that enough wire rope is on hand to meet the 
needs of the equipment on the base. You will also have to see 
that the wire rope is safely stored where it can be found when 
needed and where it will not get wet. 

To do a good job on stock control you will have to become 
thoroughly familiar with the wire rope specifications of the 
equipment on your base. Your experience in reeving equip- 
ment will be of value to you in estimating the life of wire rope 
on various pieces of equipment under various operating con- 
ditions. 

You will have to keep a record of the amounts of various 
wire rope on hand and the amount on order. With these 
records and your knowledge of the wire rope requirements of 
your activity, you can reorder supplies in time to keep from 
running out. Unless you are close enough to a navy supply 
activity to get delivery in a few days it is a good idea to carry 
at least a full reel of all commonly used wire rope. 

Storage of wire rope should be no great problem. Most reels 
are weather proof until they are opened. Once they are 
opened, store them in a dry place under cover. 

MATERIAL STORAGE 

Part of your rigging work as a Steelworker will be the 
storage of supplies. The rigging in this type of work will be 
relatively simple. Most of it will involve the securing of slings 
and box hooks so that a crane can move the load. The major 
job is the correct placing and piling of the material. 

94 



With the exception of portland cement, most of the material 
you handle will be stored outside. 

Dunnage is essential in any storage operation since it sup- 
ports and protects the material to be stored. If material were 
piled up without dunnage the maximum storage capacity of 
the area could not be utilized, the dampness of the ground 
might damage the goods, and the job of moving it would be 
difficult. If at all possible, store goods on a hard-surfaced 
area, or at least select a site easily cleared of underbrush and 
well drained. Dunnage may be board lumber, cord wood, or 
other similar material. Board lumber is the most frequently 
used, especially for outside storage. Boards to be used as a 
foundation should be placed between tiers to bind the material, 
distribute the weight, and furnish a means of ventilation. When 
you are stacking bagged goods (see fig. 12), the bags should 
be cross-stacked and a layer of dunnage placed both beneath 
them and throughout the pile to evenly distribute the weight 
of the bags. Too much pressure on any one bag will cause it 
to burst. 

If boxed materials are to be stacked, dunnage must be placed 
beneath the center and both ends of the boxes. Select dunnage 




Figure 12. — Methods of using dunnage. 



that is flat and reasonably straight so that containers will rest 
securely and evenly. 

Everything the Seabees use — from pontoons to tooth paste 
— is likely to pass through your storage area at one time or 
another. Of course, all like material should be placed together. 
It would be tough to try to find one box of tractor repair parts 
in a stack of 50 boxes of jeep parts. 

One of the most effective means of conserving space is by 
using the block system of storing. A block is simply a self- 
supporting, regular pile of supplies, two or more units high, 
wide, and deep (see fig. 13). 

When supplies are stored in blocks the same size containers 
are placed in each block, thereby eliminating the need for 
small aisles running through the supplies. Of course, blocks 
of material should be spaced far enough apart so individual 
boxes from any one block can be removed. 

When you are stacking rectangular boxes, you may be able 
to tie the stacks together by cross stacking. To cross stack, 
you place one layer of containers at right angles to the layer 
below it. 

The height of stacks in outdoor storage is limited by the 
equipment used to handle the material and the material being 
stacked. Use good judgment in regulating the height of the 
stacks. 




Figure 13.— Block stacking. 
7h 



The CB's used and still use a lot of lumber. Figure 14 
shows the correct method of stacking lumber for outside storage. 
Timbers should be placed as the dunnage for the bottom of the 
stack. Place this dunnage in such a manner that there is a slight 
incline frpm one end to the other to drain off rain. 




Figure 14. — Stacking lumber. 



Pipes should be placed with dunnage between the layers, and 
chocks should be nailed to the ends of the dunnage to prevent 
the pipe from rolling. 

When rigging loads to be stacked, never use the hoist line 
of the crane as a sling. Suitable softeners should be placed 
between slings and metals loads to protect the wire rope and 
prevent it from slipping out (see fig. 15). 

RIGGING SAFETY 

As a first or chief, you will, in all probability, be in charge 
of a rigging crew. The most important duty you will have as 
a supervisor is to run a safe job. There is no place for mis- 
takes in rigging. A mistake on the part of a rigger can easily 
cause loss of life and the destruction of valuable property. 



Figure 15. — Softeners on a load. 



Be sure the following safety rules are understood by all 
the men in your crew and see that they are rigidly enforced. 

1. Only one man may give signals (he must use standard 
hand signals) and all men in the crew should be so 
instructed. The only exception to this rule is that an 
emergency stop signal given by anyone must be obeyed. 

28 



2. Riding on the hook or load is prohibited. There are 
no exceptions to this rule. 

3. In all hoisting operations, the hooking-up must be 
completed before the signal to hoist is given. 

4. Only experienced men may make slings or hook on 
loads. Great care should be taken to see that the load 
is properly secured. 

5. Signalmen, hook tenders, etc., must warn all men and 
see that they keep out from under loads and booms. 

6. In handling all heavy material where rigging is 
necessary, the supervisor must specify and examine 
rope blocks, slings, chains, and other necessary material 
for size and condition. 

7. More accidents occur because of carelessness in han- 
dling small material than when handling larger mate- 
rial. When handling small material, take extra pre- 
cautions. Remove all small pieces that may be lying 
on material that is to be lifted. 

8. Always place softeners on all sharp corners with which 
ropes, slings and chains might otherwise come in con- 
tact, especially in cases where the sling might slide. 

9. Do not lift a piece of assembled apparatus or equipment 
without first making sure that the assembled parts are 
securely bolted. 

10. Do not carry a load on the point of a hook. 

11. Avoid sharp bends or kinks in slings. When a heavy 
load is to be lifted, it must be raised a few inches and 
allowed to hang a minute or two, so balance can be 
checked and brake capacity tested. 

12. The hoist cable must not be wrapped around a load. 
The load should be attached to the bottom hook by 
means of slings or other approved devices. 

13. All rigging gear, when not in use, should be kept on 
the crane and inspected for defects by the supervisor 
before being used again. 

14. Always place dunnage or softeners before load is moved 
into place. Never place hands or feet under the load 
to adjust dunnage — use a board or crowbar. 



15. Do not stand between the load and a stationary object 
at any time. 

16. Tag lines must always be available on the crane and 
used whenever necessary to control the swing of the 
load, especially in the handling of long material such 
as piling or pipe. 

17. All men must be in the clear when slings or hooks 
are pulled from under the load by the crane. 

18. Riggers, as well as crane crewmen, must be aware of 
the great danger of becoming caught between sta- 
tionary objects and the rear end of cranes. 

19. Before the operator moves a crane upon which an 
empty sling is hanging, the sling supervisor should 
hook both ends of the sling to the hook. 

20. Sling hookers should never attempt to hold the sling 
taut with the hands while the crane takes up the slack. 

21. All riggers must wear a safety helmet, leather gloves, 
and hard-toed safety shoes to guard against head, hand, 
and foot injuries. 

TRICKS OF THE TRADE 

If you have ever been on a difficult rigging job with an 
experienced rigger you have had a splendid opportunity to learn 
a lot. There are numerous books on rigging that will give you 
a great deal of information, but the tricks of the trade that the 
old hand at rigging has acquired is the rigging "know how" 
that will get the job done most efficiently. You have already 
learned many of these short cuts ; here are a few more. 

If you have the problem of lowering a heavy load into a 
confined space where it is impractical to use jacks, you may 
be able to support and lower the load by using ice. If the 
load is supported on cribbing, jack it up and as you remove the 
cribbing replace it with blocks of ice. After you get the load 
supported by the ice, it can be lowered as desired by melting 
the ice with blow torches or other sources of heat. . 

Large petroleum storage tanks that would be most difficult 
to move by conventional methods can at times be moved by 
employing water. Approximately 4 feet of water will float a 
10,000-gallon tank. So, if equipment is available to construct 

30 



a dike, and water and pumping equipment are available to keep 
the dike filled, the tank may be floated to a new location. 

There will be times when it is necessary to rig a piece of 
machinery so that it can be lowered over studs in a foundation 
and alined very accurately. In doing precise work of this 
nature, you will find that one or two chain falls rigged from 
the crane hook to the slings supporting the load will enable 
you to lower, and raise the load the small amount necessary to 
accurately place it in position. 

There is usually more than one way to do most rigging jobs. 
The method you use will depend on the equipment available 
and your own judgment. You should be on the alert for 
better methods of doing the job and for learning new tricks of 
the trade. 



QUIZ 

1. Before you can start to reeve a piece of heavy equipment 
what must you know? 

2. Where will you find the wire-rope specifications for heavy 
equipment ? 

3. Besides the wire-rope specifications what other information 
will aid you in reeving a piece of equipment? Where can 
you get this information ? 

4. When you can't find a reeving diagram what should you 
do before beginning the reeving job? 

5. Reeving a dozer is similar to what other reeving job you 
have performed? 

6. What lines will you most likely reeve on a shovel? 

7. What is the function of the hoist line on a shovel? 

8. What position should the boom be in when you are reeving 
a model 82 Lorain crane? 

9. If you are reeving a crane block, when should you perma- 
nently secure the standing part of the line? 



10. What class is wire rope listed under in the Bureau of 
Yards and Docks Section of the Catalog of Navy Mate- 
rial? 

11. What is the function of dunnage? 

12. What is your most important duty as a supervisor in 
charge of a rigging job? 



CHAPTER 3 



BUILDING WITH WOOD 

WHY 

The rate you hold means that you are a specialist in building 
with steel; so, you may ask yourself, "Why is there a chapter 
on building with wood in a Steelworker's Training Course?" 
Since you and the Builder will both advance to the same war- 
rant grade and because your rating is most closely related to the 
rating of Builder, it is important that you acquire some knowl- 
edge of carpentry. As a Steelworker first or chief there may 
be times when you are in charge of a job that involves both 
steel work and carpentry. To adequately perform your duties 
as the leading chief or first class under such conditions you 
will have to know at least the fundamentals of framing. 

TERMINOLOGY 

To understand the fundamentals of framing you should begin 

33 



by learning the various terms that designate the parts of a 
frame. First the term frame should be understood. The 
frame of a building corresponds roughly to the skeleton in the 
human body. It is made up of the structural members that 
support the outside and inside walls, the roof, the partitions 
that divide the building into rooms, and the members that 
support the floors. Each of these membershas a name depend- 
ing on its function. Identical pieces of lumber will be desig- 
nated by different names according to their place in the frame. 

Let's begin at the bottom of a building and examine the 
frame members as they would be placed in a wooden building. 

The first frame member to be put in place after the founda- 
tion is complete is the sill — or, as it is sometimes called, the 
foundation sill. The sill forms the support or bearing sur- 
face for the outside of the building. It provides a smooth level 
surface on which to place other framing members (see fig. 16). 



Joists are illustrated in figure 17. As you can see, joists 
are the framing members that support the floor and ceiling. 
In a two story building the ceiling joists would also support 
the second floor. 

A girder (fig. 17) is a timber or iron beam, either single or 




Figure 16. — Sill, joists, corner post, and studs. 



34 



built up, used to support joists or walls over an opening. Gen- 
erally, girders are used to support joists when the unsupported 
span of the joists would be excessive. 




Figure 17. — Girder. 

Studs or studding are the vertical members of the building 
to which outside walls are nailed. Studs is also the term used 
to designate the vertical supporting members of partitions (see 
fig. 16). 

Corner posts or corner studs are those studs at the corner 
of the building. They are heavier than the other studs and may 
be either built up or solid timbers (see fig. 16). 

A Brace is an inclined piece of lumber used to stiffen the 
framing. Braces may be temporary to hold a part of the fram- 
ing in place so it can be trued up and nailed or they may be a 
permanent part of the building. Figure 18 shows both types. 

Bridging is a special form of bracing. It is used to stiffen 
floor joists and partition studs. Cross bridging, the most com- 
monly used form of bridging, is shown in figure 19. 

A ribbon is a horizontal frame member usually found at the 
second story level of a building. As a general rule it is set into 
the studs. The ends of the second story floor joists rest on it.' 
Ribbons are sometimes referred to as ledgers. (See fig. 20). 

As you can see from figure 20, the plate corresponds 
roughly to the sill. It is supported by the studs and, in turn, 
supports the rafters. The rafters are the members of the 




figure 19.— Cross bridging. 

1L 



frame that support the roof. There are various kinds of 
rafters as shown in figure 21. 

Common rafters join at the ridge to make an angle. The 
ridge is the structural member at the top of the roof. The 
rafters are supported at their bottom ends by the plate, and 
at the top by the ridge. 



COMMON RAFTERS 

/ 




Figure 2!.— Various kinds of rafters. 

Hip rafters extend diagonally from an outside corner of 
the plate to the ridge. 

Valley rafters extend diagonally from the plate to the 
ridge at an inside corner or at the intersection of the gable 
extension with the main roof (see fig. 21). 

Jack rafters are short rafters, extending from the plate 
to another rafter or the ridge (fig. 21). Those rafters extend- 
ing from the plate to a hip rafter are termed hip jacks. Those 
extending from a valley rafter to the ridge are called valley 
jack rafters. Cripple rafters are not supported by either 
the plate or the ridge but extend between a hip rafter and a 
valley rafter. 

Figure 22 shows header and trimmer construction. A 
header is a short transverse member that supports wall studs 
or floor framing at the point where they are cut off to form 




Figure 22. — Header and trimmer. 



wall or floor openings. A trimmer is a carrying joist or stud 
which supports an end of a header. 

BUILDING FRAMES 

Since you will be in charge of jobs that for the most part 
involve only light- wood framing (a builder will be in charge 
of heavy construction), only the two most common types of 
light-wood framing will be discussed here. 

Light-wood framing is used in residence and smaller types 
of buildings where the loads are light. The two types of light- 
wood framing most commonly used are the balloon frame and 
platform frame. There are modifications and variations in detail 
to these two general methods, but fundamentals readily come 
under these two types of framing. 

There are two other types of framing you may hear men- 
tioned. They are full framing and combination framing. These 
ordinarily will not be used in Navy construction. 

Balloon framing (see fig. 23) is cheap, light, and quickly 
constructed. It has several disadvantages in that it is not as 
rigid or permanent and is more readily consumed by fire than 
other types of framing. 



301)247°- 



39 



—Courtesy of Delmar Publishers. 
Figura 23.— Balloon frame. 

In balloon framing the sills are laid on the foundation and 
secured with anchor bolts. The first-story joists are spiked 
in place on the sill, and the corner posts are set in position and 
held by temporary braces. In one method of construction the 
studs which run from the sill to the plate, are spiked into posi- 
tion on the sill and held near their upper ends by temporary 
boards nailed across them. The ribbon is nailed into the 
notched studs and lower posts at the proper height to support 
the second-story joists, which are nailed in place next. A joist 
is brought against a stud whenever possible. The plate is 

40 



nailed on top of the studs and halved together over the corner 
posts. The outside boarding should be nailed on diagonally 
to brace the frame. The long slender studs ; the light sill, plate, 
and corner posts ; and the omission of bracing tend to make 
this a frame lacking in rigidity. It is, therefore, likely to sway, 
creak, and tremble in heavy winds. Unless the building is 
insulated or constructed with fire stops at the floor levels, the 
long unencumbered spaces from the sill to the roof-eaves pro- 
vide excellent flues for the passage of flames and make the 




—Courtesy of Delmar Publishers. 
Figure 24. — Platform frame. 



balloon framed building a fire trap. The frame can be modified 
to obtain greater rigidity by use of heavier lumber in sills and 
joists, and by introducing horizontal bridging between the 
studs in the outer walls. One by six braces cut diagonally 
into the studs from sill to corner post, as shown in figure 24, 
will also add greatly to the strength of the frame. 

Platform framing, or western framing as it is sometimes 
called, is the second type of framing that you will encounter 
(see fig. 24). In platform framing the sills are first put in place 
as in balloqn framing. The joists are spiked to the sill and 
then the subfloor is laid on top of the joists to create a plat- 
form. This provides a safe convenient place on which to raise 
the side walls and center bearing partitions. The studs of 
inside partitions and outside walls are cut to the same length 
and the erection of partitions and side walls is similar. Each 
floor and each wall can be built as a separate unit. The studs 
do not need to be notched for a ribbon as in the balloon frame. 
The same length studs may be used for all walls and partitions 
throughout the house unless the ceiling heights vary. Also 
one pattern may be used for all the main joists of the building. 
Platform framing is especially adaptable to prefabrication. 
When a number of identical buildings are to be constructed the 
studs, joists, walls, rafters, etc., may be cut by power tools and 
in some cases nailed into panels for erection on the building 
site. 

FRAMING DETAILS 

From the preceding description of framing terms and types 
of frames you should have a good idea of the general con- 
struction of a wood building. Before you actually start work on 
a framing job you will require specific information on a number 
of the details of the construction. This information is con- 
tained in the blueprints (working drawings) and specifications 
(specs) for the building. Specific information on framing is 
found in the framing details which are a part of the working 
drawings. 

Figure 25 is the working drawing for a wooden garage. As 
you study this drawing you will notice at the bottom of the 

42 




43 



drawing two smaller drawings labeled cornice section and sill 
section. Let's look at the sill section a moment and see what 
we can learn about the construction of this garage. The sill 
is a solid 4x4 timber which supports 2x4 studs. Board 
siding is nailed to studs and then covered with roofing paper 
and shingles. The details of the foundation are also shown 
in this drawing. 

The cornice section (fig. 25) gives further information you 
will need to construct this garage. By studying this drawing 
you can see that the rafters are 2 x 6's and the plate is made up 
of two 2 x 4's. The details of roof and gutter construction 
are also given in this framing detail. You probably won't 
ever frame a garage like the one shown in figure 25, but you 
will eventually be on a job which requires framing and the 
ability to read framing details. 

DETAILS OF CONSTRUCTION 

In the previous discussion of framing members no mention 
was made of the details of construction of these members. These 
details of construction will appear in the blueprints and framing 
details. You should know at least a few of the methods com- 
monly used in the construction of framing members. 

SILLS 

As we have said, sills are the first members of a frame to be 
placed. They rest directly on the foundation and extend all 
around the building. They are spliced where necessary and 
joined together at all corners. There are four types of sills: 
laminated, solid, lapped, and box. 

The laminated sill is made up of two or more timbers 
set on edge and spiked together to make the sill strong enough 
to bear the structure. These laminations should be staggered 
at the joints, as shown in figure 26 A. 

A solid sill consists of one piece of timber. (See B, fig. 26.) 
This type is preferred over the laminated sill because of the 
added strength and ea£y and quick installation. All joints in 
the solid sill should be halved. You should join solid sills 



44 




Figure 26. — A. Staggered laminated-joint sill. B. Solid till. C. Lapped sill. 

45 



directly over the foundation piers if the structure is supported 
by this type of foundation. 

A lapped sill is made up of two members laid flat on a solid 
foundation. Its primary purpose is to receive the floor joists 
and serve as a nailing surface for the outside sidewalls and 
header blocks between the floor joists (see C, fig. 26). 

The box sill is generally used when continuous foundation . 
walls support the structure. This sill consists of two pieces of 
wood. One rests flat on the foundation and is called the sill 
plate, while the other piece is laid edgewise on the outside edge 
of the sill plate. The three methods of box sill construction 
are shown in figure 27. 




2X4 CUT 
BETWEEN EACH 




Figure 27. — Threa methods of box sill construction. 

46 



On solid foundations, the sill is the means of joining the 
structure to the foundation. In most cases, particularly in light 
frame structures, anchor bolts are set into the masonry at 
intervals of from 8 to 10 feet. These bolts extend up through 
holes bored in the sill and are fastened at the top of the sill 
with a nut screwed down tight on a washer, thus fastening the 
sill, and the whole frame, securely to the foundation. When the 
sills rest on a concrete foundation, a couple of coats of linseed 
oil or wood preservative should be applied to the underside 
of the sill to keep it from absorbing moisture from the masonry. 

JOISTS 

Joists are usually single boards and are not built up as are 
sills. Nails and spikes are commonly used to join joists to 
sills. Joists are supported at one or both ends on the sill. A 
common joist is one that extends from one sill to the other 
and helps support the uniform load. A carrying joist is one 
that extends and is spaced directly under a partition. Carrying 
joists are usually placed in pairs, spaced about 4 inches apart, 
to carry the added weight of the partition. These two joists 
should be far enough apart to project a little on each side of 
the partition, as shown at A in figure 28, to give a nailing 
surface for the finished flooring. Plank or solid bridging 
should be placed between such joists at intervals of from 14 
to 20 inches to stiffen them. However, the subfloor is often 
put in place as soon as the joists are laid. Then, the carrying 
joists are doubled and spiked together, forming one unit. 




Figure 28.— Partition joist support. 
47 



In order to prevent joists from springing sideways under 
a heavy load, bracing called bridging is nailed into place. Figure 
29 shows two kinds of bridging. 

Herringbone or cross-bridging is preferred for use in floor 
frames to stiffen the frame, prevent unequal deflection of the 
joists, and enable an overloaded joist to get some assistance 
from the joists on either side of it. This diagonal bridging 
consists of pieces of scantling, usually 1x3 inches or 2 x 3 
inches in size, nailed diagonally between the floor joists, as 
shown in figure 29. Each piece is nailed to the top of one 
joist and to the bottom of the next joist; and the two pieces 
which cross each other are placed close together between the 
same two joists, forming a cross. Bridging should be placed 
in straight lines at intervals of 8 or 10 feet, forming continuous 
trusses across the whole length of the floor. When possible, 
only the top of the bridging should be nailed first, then when 
the joists have adjusted themselves to their final position, the 
lower ends of the pieces of bridging are fastened in place against 
the joists from underneath. 

Solid bridging is made by placing small blocks of the same 
width as the joists between the joists. They are placed in a 
vertical position, tying the joists together so that loads will 
be evenly distributed. 

FLOORS AND SUBFLOORS 

After the joists are in place, the subflooring and flooring are 
usually laid, especially in buildings using platform framing. 
All subflooring should be laid diagonally to the joists to give 
additional strength to a structure. Then finished flooring 
should be laid at 90° to the joists. This insures better nail- 
ing, as the finished flooring is nailed through the subflooring 
into the floor joists themselves. Ordinarily 6-inch tongue and 
groove sheathing is used. The same kind of material is used 
for subfloors that is used for exterior sheathing. Subflooring 
may be laid either before or after the walls are framed, although 
it is better to lay it before, so that it can be used as a deck to 
work on while framing the walls. 



CORNER POSTS 



After the sill, first-floor joists, and the subflooring are in 
place, the next building step is to construct the corner posts. 
The corner posts may be made in three different ways (see 
fig. 30). 




Figure 30. — Corner post construction. 

You'll observe that the first post consists of a 4 x 6 with a 
2x4 nailed flush with one edge on the broad side. This type 
should be used when putting in a 4-inch sidewall. Heavier 
timber should be used for a thicker wall. The second post con- 
sists of two 2 x 4's with blocks between them and a 2 x 4 nailed 
to the flush edge of one of the previously mentioned 2 x 4's. A 
third post may be made by nailing one 2 x 4 to the edge of 
another. The edge of one is placed flush with the side of the 
other. This type is generally used where no interior finish is 

required, such as for field construction in advanced areas. 

■ 

T-POSTS 

When a partition meets an outside wall, a stud called a T-post 
must be installed. T-posts should be wide enough to extend 
beyond the partition on both sides so as to furnish a solid nailing 
base for the interior wall finish. The T-post may be made in four 
different ways (see fig. 31). 

50 



A. A 2 x 4 may be centered and nailed on the face side of 
a 4 x 6. 

B. A 2 x 4 may be centered and nailed on two 4 x 4's nailed 



C. Two 2 x 4's may be nailed together with a block between 
them and a 2 x 4 centered on the wide side. 

D. A 2 x 4 may be centered and nailed on the face side of 
a 2 x 6, with horizontal bridging nailed behind them to 
give support and stiffness. 

In cases where partition walls cross, you should use a double 
T-post. Double T-posts are made simply by nailing another 2x4 





A 





T-POST CONSTRUCTION 



ABC 
DOUBLE T-POST CONSTRUCTION 



Figure 31. — T-post construction and double T-post. 



to the opposite wide side of T-posts made by methods A, B, or 
C in figure 31. 

LEDGER PLATE 

A ledger plate is a member nailed to the face of the sill or 
girder, flush with the bottom edge. This ledger plate serves to 
connect joists to girders and sills where piers are used for 
foundations. The ledger plate is secured to the sill or girder by 
20-penny nails about 12 inches apart. When the floor joists used 
in a structure are 2 x 4's, 2 x 6's, or 2 x 8's, it is well to use 
2 x 2's for the ledger plates, so as to prevent the joists from 
splitting at the notch. When the joists are 10 inches deep or 
deeper, you can use 2 x 4s for ledger plates without reducing 
the strength of the joists. In cases where a notch is used, you 
should use joist ties, as shown in figure 32, to overcome this loss 
of strength. 

PLATES 

The top plate serves three essential purposes: (1) To tie the 
studding together at the top and form a finish for the walls; 




Figure 32.— Floor framing. 
52 



(2) to act as a support for the lower ends of the rafters; and 

(3) to support the ceiling joists. 

The top plate serves as a connecting link between the wall and 
the roof, just as the sills and girders are connecting links 
• between the floors and the walls. 

The plate should be made with one or two pieces of timber of 
the same size as the studs. Frequently top plates are doubled. 
A double plate is made by nailing the first plate or bottom section 
to the top of the corner posts and to the studs, the connection 
being made at the corner as shown in figure 33. Secure the 
single plate and corner braces in place. Then nail the top part of 
the plate to the bottom section in such a manner that the edges 
of the top section are flush with the edges of the bottom section. 
Lap the corner joints as shown in figure 33. 




Figure 33.— Plate construction. 

A sole plate is a 2 x 4 or timber that carries the bottom end of 
the studs. The sole plate is laid horizontally on the floor or 
joists. All partitions and outside walls should be finished with a 
sole plate corresponding to the thickness of the wall. 

BRACES 

Braces should be installed in the framing wherever the sills, 
girts, or plates make an angle with a corner post or with a T-post 
in the outside wall. Braces serve to stiffen the walls, keep the 

53 




54 



corners square and plumb, and prevent the frame from being 
distorted by a lateral force, such as wind. Braces should be 
placed so that they extend from the sill or sole plate to the top 
of the plate or post. Install them at an angle of 60° with the sill 
or sole and at an angle of 30° with the post. Braces placed 
between the studs should always be of the same size material as 
the stud. In advanced base construction, girts are used where 
the outside walls are covered with vertical sheathing or siding. 
Girts should be made of material of the same width as the studs, 
and placed flush with both the inside and outside face of the 
stud. Studs are placed from \y$ to 12 feet apart, with girts 
spaced about four feet apart, running horizontally between them 
(see fig. 34). Vertical siding helps to carry the weight of the 
roof along with the studs. 

In frame construction, where time permits, braces should be 
notched into the structural members and spiked in place. 
Notched studs make the best braces. This type of bracing is 
called let-in bracing (see fig. 34). 

After the sills are in place, the framing of the wall can be 
completed. Window and door openings should be laid out 
according to the architect's plans and specifications. Then the 
studs are laid out on the soles by measuring from one corner the 
distances the studs are to be set apart. 

PARTITIONS 

Partitions divide the interior space of a building. They are 
usually framed as part of the structure. However, in cases 
where floors are to be installed after the outside of the building 
is completed, the partition walls are left unframed. There are 
two types of partition walls, the bearing type which supports 
overhead braces, partitions, or ceiling joists, and the nonbearing 
type which supports only itself. The nonbearing type may be 
put in at anytime after installing the other framework. Parti- 
tions are framed in the same manner as outside walls. The door 
openings in partitions should be framed in the same manner as 
outside door openings. Where there are corners, or where one 



309247°— 54 5 



55 



partition wall joins another, corner posts or T-posts should be 
used to provide nailing surfaces for the interior wall finish. 
When the plans and specifications call for the installation of 
wall or insulating boards for interior sidewall finish, the studding 
should be placed 1% ^ eet apart. This provides more nailing 




SPAN 



s 



CD 



THESE NUMBERS ARE THE 
"RISE IN INCHES' ANO WITH 
12 GIVE THE "CUT OF THE ROOF 



UNIT OF RUN(I2")-I 
UNIT OF SPAN (24")- 



I I I I I I I I I 



2 




Figure 35.— Rafter lay-out terms. 
56 



surface and helps keep the wall or insulating board from warp- 
ing or buckling. 

RAFTERS 

Rafters are the structural members that support the roof. 
Framing hip and valley roofs is a rather complicated process 
and, since the most commonly used roofs in military construc- 
tion are the shed and double pitch roofs, this discussion will be 
limited to the rafters required for these types of roofs. 

Before you can begin to learn about roof framing, however, 
there are a number of terms with which you must become 
familiar. They are: 

(1) The pitch of a roof is the slope of the roof surface. 
It is the angle which the roof surface makes with a 
horizontal plane. The roof pitch is expressed by 
numbers, for example: 8 and 12. Eight is 
the rise and 12 the run. On blueprints, the pitch is 
shown as in figure 35. 

(2) The span of any roof is the shortest distance between 
the two opposite rafter seats. 

(3) The total rise is the vertical distance from the plate 
to the top of the ridge. 

(4) The total run refers to the level distance over which 
any rafter passes or one-half the span of the roof. 

(5) The unit of run, or the unit of measurement, 
1 foot or 12 inches, is the same for the roof as for 
any part of the building. Using this common unit of 
measurement, you can employ the framing square in 
laying out roofs as shown in figure 35. 

(6) The rise in inches is the number of inches that a roof 
rises for every foot of run. 

(7) The cut of a roof is the rise in inches and the unit 
of run as indicated in figure 35. 

(8) The term line length, as applied to roof framing, is 
the hypotenuse of a right triangle whose base is the 
total run and whose altitude is the total rise (see fig. 
35). 

57 



(9) The plumb and level lines refer to the direction of 
a line and not to any particular rafter cut. Any line 
that is vertical when the rafter is in its proper position 
is called a plumb line. Any line that is level when the 
rafter is in its proper position is called a level line. 
Refer to figure 35. 




Figure 36.— Rafter terms. 

There are three kinds of rafter cuts as follows (see fig, 36) : 

1. The ridge or plumb cut which is the cut that fits against 
the opposite rafter at the ridge. 

2. The seat cut which is the notch cut in the rafter to fit 
it to the plate. 

3. The tail cut which is the cut at the lower end of the 
rafter. 

There are several methods of laying out rafters. The meas- 
ured step off method is the simplest method. It makes con- 
siderable use of the framing or carpenter's square. The short 
leg of the square is called the tongue and the long leg is the 
blade. 

Suppose you are framing the rafters for a building 20 feet 
wide. The roof is to have a rise of 8 inches per foot. 

To find the length of the rafter to be used, first determine 
one-half the distance between the outside edges of the plate. 
Since it was assumed that the building was 20 feet wide this 
distance (the run) would be 10 feet. Remember this 10 feet — 

58 



you will have to use it later. Now measure the diagonal distance 
(line length) between 8 inches on the tongue of the square and 
12 inches on the blade. This distance is 14% 2 inches. The 
reason you measure the distance between the 8-inch and 12-inch 
marks is because the rise is 8 inches and the unit of run is 12 
inches. Now multiply that 14% 2 inches by 10 which is the 
span of the rafter. The result of this multiplication should be 
144% 2 inches or 12 feet % inch which is the length of the 
rafter disregarding overhang. 

After the length of rafter is determined you are ready to lay 
out the cuts. To lay out the plumb cut, place the rafter material 
on saw horses, hold the square with its tongue in your right 
hand, its blade in your left, and the heel (the place where 
tongue meets blade) away from you. Place the square on the 
material with the 8-inch mark on the tongue, and the 12-inch 
mark on the blade along what is to be the top edge of the rafter. 
Marking along the tongue edge of the steel square will give 
complete marking of the seat cut. 

To mark the seat cut, you measure the length of the rafter 
12 feet y$ inch from the top of the plumb cut. Now, holding the 
square in the same position as for the plumb cut, with the 8-inch 
mark on the tongue directly over the 12-foot %-inch mark, 
mark along the tongue of the square. Slide the square down 
the rafter till the blade intersects the mark just drawn. Mark 
along the blade of the square to complete marking the plumb 
cut. The tail cut may be square or plumb cut. 

After the rafters are laid out and cut to size they are usually 
assembled into trusses. Two rafters .are connected at the top 
by a collar tie nailed onto both rafters. Before any ties or chords 
are made fast, the rafters should be spread out at the lower end 
to correspond to the width of the building. This may be done 
by using a template, or by measuring the distance between the 
seat cuts with a tape. A chord of 2 x 6 is nailed across the 
rafters at the seat cut to tie the rafters together. This chord 
forms a truss with the two rafters. A vertical member of 1 x 6 
is nailed to the rafter joint and this extends to the chord at 
midpoint, thus securing the rafter to the chord. If no additional 



bracing is needed, then the pair of rafters is put in place on the 
plates. If additional bracing is required, a knee brace is used. 
The knee brace should form an angle of 45° with the wall stud. 
Another brace is nailed to the rafter at its midpoint; this brace 
extends to the chord at its midpoint as shown in figure 37. 




Figure 37. — Rafter construction detail. 



To speed erection, the knee braces may be omitted until the 
rafter truss is set in place. After the rafters are assembled into 
trusses, the next operation is the placing of the trusses on the 
building. Generally, the set of rafters in the end section of the 
building is assembled first. The rafter trusses are raised into 
position by hand and fastened to the plate with 16- or 20-penny 
nails. These trusses should be temporarily braced to the end sec- 
tion of the building, until the roof sheathing is applied. 

With the erection of the rafters the frame of the building is 
complete. The sides and roof, if not sheathed as the building is 
constructed, are then sheathed, and the outside finish is applied 
to the sheathing to complete the building. 

FRAMING SAFETY 

If you are in charge of a job that involves carpentry you 
should know the safety precautions that apply to this work. See 



that the men you are supervising know and observe the follow- 
ing safety rules : 

1. Nails must be removed from temporary bracing when 
the bracing is removed. 

2. The frame must be braced securely before any person- 
nel are allowed to go out on it. 

3. All sharp-pointed or sharp-edged tools must be properly 
sheathed before being placed in pockets. 

4. All frames should be securely braced before closing 
down the job for the day. Also, all ladders should be 
taken down. 

5. A temporary deck should be laid on the joists to provide 
a safe working platform. 

6. A catwalk should be installed across the ceiling joists 
to aid in pulling rafters or trusses in place.. 

HEAVY CONSTRUCTION 

Not all the wood construction done by the Seabees is the light 
construction described in the preceding pages. Water front con- 
struction in particular involves the use of heavier structural 
members than those ordinarily found in frame buildings. These 
heavier members are called timbers. By definition a timber is 
a piece of lumber that is over five inches thick. 

Just as the lumber in light framing is designated accord- 
ing to its place and function in the building, timber structural 
members are also designated according to their function. 

To understand the nomenclature of timber construction take 
a look at the typical pier in figure 38. This pier is supported by 
piling. After the piles are driven and sawed to the same height, 
beams are placed across them and fastened in place. These trans- 
verse beams are called cap sills. The stringers are the longitudi- 
nal timbers that are secured to the cap sills. The floor is nailed 
to these stringers. Heavy timber may be used for the flooring 
or two layers of lighter lumber may be used as a substitute for 
the heavy timber. Timber braces are used to tie the piles to- 
gether and to give the pier greater rigidity. A fender of heavy 
timbers is placed the length of the pier and secured to the piles at 



61 



a point above high water. This timber protects both ships tying 
up and the pier. 

Timbers are used in other military construction such as cul- 
verts and bridges. In general, the terms used to designate the 
structural members making up these structures are the same 
as those designating corresponding members in pier construction. 



STRINGER FLOOR FENDER 




8RACE HUNG 
Figure 38. — Timber pier. 



You are not a Builder just because you have read this short 
chapter on building and have perhaps been on several jobs that 
involved simple carpentry. Don't begin to think the job of the 
Builder is a cinch. Before you can assume the duties required 
to become a warrant, you will have to gain a great deal of on-the- 
job carpentry experience and burn a lot of midnight oil on in- 
tensive study. 

The Navy Training Course, Builder 3 & 2, NavPers 10648-A, 
will give you a good foundation in carpentry. 



62 



QUIZ 

1. What is the framing member that rests on the foundation 
and forms a bearing surface for the outside of a building 
called? 

2. What is the function of the joists? 

3. What are the vertical framing members to which outside 
walls are nailed? 

4. What are the members that support the roof of a build- 
ing? . 

5. Name two types of light-wood framing commonly used in 
Navy construction. 

6. What type of framing is especially suited to prefabrica- 
tion? 

7. Name four types of sills. 

8. What name is given to a joist that is spaced directly 
under a partition? 

9. When a partition meets an outside wall a special stud 
must be installed. What is this stud called ? 

10. The top plate serves three essential purposes. What are 
they? 

11. In roof terminology, what is the shortest distance between 
two opposite rafter seats? 

12. What terminology is applied to the notch in the rafter 
which makes it fit the plate ? 



63 



1 



CHAPTER 4 



STEEL 

YOUR MATERIAL 

Have you ever gone through Pittsburgh at night? The 
Bessemer converters shoot their fireworks into the night sky 
and steel is born. Three months to a year later you may have 
that same steel in your hand in the form of a wire rope, a bolt, 
or a wrench. Or it may be in a warehouse in the form of shapes 
and plates waiting for your skill as a Steelworker to turn it 
into a tower, tank, or Butler building. 

Have you ever wondered — What goes into steel? How is it 
made? Why do some steels bend and other steels break under 
the same conditions? How is steel formed into sheets, rods, 
beams and other shapes? 

Steel is a wonderful material. If you have a better under- 
standing of its properties you will be able to use it more 
effectively to carry out your duties as a Steelworker. 



HISTORY OF IRON 

No one knows exactly when iron was first used but we know 
that it was used by the ancient Hebrews and Assyrians as 
early as 1400 B.C. The Romans became quite proficient in 
extracting and shaping iron. At the time of the Roman 
occupation of Europe, the iron industry became important in 
England. 

The early iron makers made iron by heating a mixture of 
ore and charcoal in a flat-bottomed furnace until a small 
quantity of pasty metal collected in the bottom of their crude 
furnace. They then took this metal from the furnace and worked 
it by hammering it into what today is known as wrought iron. 
This was the only known method ^of making iron until 1350. 
at which time the iron makers of Central Europe succeeded in 
producing molten iron. This they accomplished by building 
a furnace of masonry which enclosed an opening in the form 
of two truncated cones placed end to end. In a crude way this 
furnace resembled the modern blast furnace. In this furnace 
ore, flux, and charcoal were charged in at the top of the shaft 
while air was blown in at the bottom. In 1619, coke was first 
used instead of charcoal. Since then many refinements have 
been made in the equipment used to produce iron, but the basic 
process for separating iron from its ore has remained un- 
changed. 

The iron obtained by blast furnace melting of iron ore is 
known as pig iron. Pig iron is the basic raw material from 
which all iron and steel products are produced. 

PIG IRON 

To produce pig iron, a mixture of iron ore, limestone, and 
coke is charged into a blast furnace (see fig. 39). The heat of 
the burning coke, together with the heat from the hot blast, 
causes certain ehemical reactions by which the iron is produced. 
The end products of the chemical reactions in the furnace 
are slag and pig iron which are drawn off at the bottom of the 
furnace. 

As you can see from table 1 pig iron contains other elements 
besides iron. 



IRON ORE 
LIMESTONE 
COKE 



SLAG NOTCH 




GASES 



♦ PREHEATED 
AIR BLAST 



P16 IRON 



Figure 39. — Blast furnace. 
Table I.— CHEMICAL COMPOSITIONS OF IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTS 



Material 


Percent 
carbon 


Percent 
silicon 


Percent 
manganese 


Percent 
sulphur 


Percent 
phosphorus 


Pig iron 


3.00-4.00 


0.50-3.50 


0.50-2.00 


0.02-0.10 


0.03-1.00 


Gray cast iron. 


2.50-3.75 


1.00-2.50 


0.50-1.00 


0.06-0.12 


0.10-1.00 


Malleable cast 














2.00-2.50 


0.50-1.10 


0.20-0.30 


0.04-0.06 


0.10-0.20 


Ingot iron 


0.01-0.02 


0.005 


0.01-0.02 


0.02-0.03 


0.005 


Wrought iron . 


0.02-0.08 


0.10-0.20 


0.02-0.10 


0.02-0.04 


0.05^020 


Carbon steel . . 


0.05-1.50 


0.05-0.30 


0.30-1.00 


0.02-0.20 


0.02-0.15 



Pig iron is seldom used as it comes from the furnace since 
the large quantity of impurities in it give it properties that 
make it unsuitable for most purposes. 



67 



COMPOSITION OF STEEL 



Steel is an alloy of iron and carbon together with other 
elements that are intentionally or unavoidably introduced into 
the metal during the manufacturing process. The properties 
of steel are dependent to a large extent on the chemical com- 
position of the metal. Let's look at the other elements in steel 
besides iron. 

Carbon has a greater influence on the mechanical properties 
of steel than any other element. As you can see by referring 
to table 1, steel is made up of from 0.05 to 1.50 percent carbon. 
In making steel for various purposes, the carbon content is 
accurately controlled. Table 2 lists the carbon content of steels 



Table 2. — CARBON CONTENT OF STEELS FOR DIFFERENT USES 



Carbon ranges 
percent 


Uses of carbon steel 


0.0!M).15 


Pipes, chains, rivets, screws, nails, stampings. 


0.15-0.30 


Structural sections, plates, bars, carburized parts. 


0.30-0.40 


Axles, connecting rods, shaftings. 


0.40-0.50 


Chankshafts, gears, crane hooks. 


0.50-0.60 


Scraper blades. 


0.60-0.70 


Dies for drop hammers, set screws, locomotive tires. 


0.70-0.80 


Anvil faces, band saws, smithing hammers, rails. 


0.80-0.90 


Punches, rock drills, cold chisels, rivet sets. 


0.90-1.00 


Springs, axes, knives, shear blades. 


1.00-1.10 


Milling cutters, flat drills, taps. 


1.10-1.20 


Lathe tools, twist drills, wood chisels. 


1.20-1.30 


Files, reamers. 


1.30-1.40 


Wire-drawing dies, razors, brass-turning tools. 


1.40-1.50 


Saws for cutting steel. 



68 



for different uses. You can see that a steel with 0.80 to 0.90 
percent carbon would be unsuitable for plates for a tank. 

Manganese is used in the manufacture of steel as a refining 
agent to reduce the amount of oxygen in steel and to reduce 
the harmful effect of sulphur in the metal. Manganese causes 
an increase in tensile strength and is considered to be generally 
beneficial. The manganese content of carbon steels is usually 
less than 1.00 percent and commonly ranges from 0.30 to 1.00 
percent. 

Silicon is used in the making of steel to deoxidize and clean 
the molten metal. The amount of silicon which remains in the 
finished steel usually ranges from 0.05 to 0.30 percent and has 
no appreciable effect on the physical properties of the steel. 

Sulphur appears in steel combined either with the iron or 
with the manganese. When iron combines with the sulphur, 
a chemical compound called iron sulphide is produced. Iron 
sulphide has a low melting point and causes a lack of cohesion 
between the grains of steel when it is being worked hot. This 
results in weak steel at high temperatures. If the sulphur com- 
bines with manganese to form maganese sulphide the steel 
is not appreciably weakened since manganese sulphide has a 
higher melting point than iron sulphide. In many specifications 
for construction steels, the sulphur content is limited to 0.06 
per cent. Steel used for tools usually has a sulphur content of 
less than 0.04 percent. 

Phosphorus combines with iron when the ore is smelted and 
is present in solution in the steel. In low-carbon steels (max- 
imum 0.15 percent carbon) phosphorus raises the yield point 
and improves the resistance to atmospheric corrosion. The 
percentage of phosphorus in steels which must have favorable 
impact resistance is dependent upon the carbon content. The 
sum of the carbon and phosphorus usually does not exceed 0.25 
percent. 

The previous discussion deals with the composition of 
carbon steels. There is another class of steels called alloy steels. 
Alloy steels differ from carbon steels in that they contain 
percentages of nickel, chromium, vanadium, tungsten or high 
percentages of silicon and manganese. Most alloy steels are 



special purpose steels and will not be discussed in detail in this 
book since most of your work as a Steelworker will be with 
carbon steel. 

STEEL MAKING 

By looking at table 1 you can compare the chemical composi- 
tion of steel and pig iron. You can see that average pig iron 
contains too much carbon, silicon, manganese, sulphur, and 
phosphorus to make steel. To make steel from pig iron the 
metal must be refined so that the carbon and other elements 
are contained in the steel in definite quantities. 

Steel has not always been the cheap and plentiful material 
it is today. Prior to 1856 only two methods of making steel, 
tlje cementation and crucible processes, had been developed. 
Both of these methods were slow and could not be adapted to 
making steel in the large quantities used today. However, 
crucible steel is still used in small quantities for special tools 
and other high-grade products. , 

Today most steel is manufactured by three processes. They 
are: (1) open-hearth, (2) Bessemer, and (3) electric furnace. 

Let's look at these three methods. Since the basic open-hearth 
method is used to manufacture most steel used in this country, 
this method will be described first. 

In the open-hearth process, pig iron and steel scrap are 
melted on a hearth by heat from the combustion of gaseous fuel. 
In some operations molten iron from a blast furnace is used 
instead of the pig iron and steel scrap. 

Although there may be slight variations from one steel plant 
to another, the following description of steel making by the 
basic open-hearth method is typical of that generally used. 

First, limestone is charged on the bottom of the furnace. 
Iron ore is charged on top of the stone, and steel scrap on top 
of this. If molten pig iron cannot be obtained in sufficient 
quantity to complete the charge, cold pig iron is charged with 
the scrap. After the charge of scrap and limestone is in the 
furnace, it is heated for about two hours or until the scrap is 
white hot and slightly fused. Molten pig iron is then added to 
make the total pig iron 50 percent of the charge. When the 



molten pig iron is added a lively reaction takes place. During 
this chemical reaction almost all the silicon, manganese, phos- 
phorus, and part of the carbon are burned out (oxidized). The 
silicon, manganese, and phosphorus combine with the slag 
and are drawn off with it at the end of about 3 hours. 

The iron ore that was charged at the beginning of the heat 
continues to act on the carbon for three or four hours longer. 
During this time the limestone is being decomposed by the heat 
liberating carbon dioxide (C0 2 ). The carbon dioxide bubbles 
up through the molten metal exposing part of it to the flame 
in the furnace which completes the purification started by the 
ore reaction. What is known as the lime action or lime boil 
lasts 2 or 3 hours longer. At the end of this time, if the raw 
materials were charged in the correct proportions, the carbon 
content of the metal would be slightly higher than it should be 
when the metal is to be tapped. Generally, of course, the carbon 
is too low or too high and it is necessary to add more pig iron 
or ore to the melt to bring it to the specified carbon content. 
After another hour the carbon content will have been reduced 
to the proper content for tapping. 

The second important method used in the making of steel 
is the Bessemer process. Of all the processes for purifying pig 
iron the Bessemer is the simplest. Essentially, it consists of 
blowing air under pressure through molten pig iron in a 
Bessemer converter. A converter as shown in figure 40 is 
constructed of a steel shell lined with refractory material. Air 
at ordinary temperature is blown through openings known as 
tuyeres in the bottom of the converter. Molten iron from a 
blast furnace is poured into the converter while it is tipped to 
one side. The air is blown through the tuyeres before the 
converter is turned to an upright position. When the air passes 
through the molten metal a violent chemical reaction takes 
place and practically all the silicon, manganese, and carbon 
are eliminated from the molten metal. However, considerable 
iron oxide and dissolved gas remain in the metal. Additions of 
iron alloys containing silicon, manganese, and carbon are made 
to the metal in the converter or as the metal is being poured 
from the converter. These alloys remove the undesirable 

309247°— 54 6 71 



oxides and gases from the metal and at the same time supply 
the necessary proportion of these elements in the steel. The 
refining period requires only 12 to 18 minutes. 

The electric furnace method of making steel is discussed 
briefly here since this method is for the most part confined to 
producing steels for special purposes. You will not ordinarily 
work with steels produced by this method. 

In the electric furnace method steel is produced by melting 
steel scrap and high grade pig iron in a furnace, heated by 
electricity. The necessary materials are added to the molten 
metal to refine it and give it the required physical and chemical 
properties. This process can be controlled more closely than 
either the Bessemer or open-hearth processes and is extensively 
used to obtain high-grade tool steels. 

Forming Steel Shapes 

After being refined and brought to the specified chemical 
content, steel produced by any of these three methods is cast 



A*-i 




Figure 40. — Bessemer converter. 



72 



into ingots. The steel ingots must be shaped into plates or bars 
before they can be further fashioned into useful articles. 

Ingot sizes vary from a few hundred to several hundred 
thousand pounds. A common ingot size is 6,000 pounds. There 
are two reasons for working the ingot steel. They are equally 
important. One is to improve the quality of the steel and the 
other is to form it into articles more suitable for use. 

Mechanical shaping improves the quality of the metal by 
forcing its particles into more intimate contact and by refining 
its crystalline structure. When metal is worked its strength, 
ductility, and hardness may all be affected. 

There are three mechanical methods of working steel: 
hammering, pressing, and rolling. 

Hammering was the first method employed by man to shape 
metals. Hammer forging is still an important method of shaping 
steel. Such articles as connecting rods, wrenches, engine valves, 
crankshafts, and bolts are a few items commonly forged. Driv- 
ing hot rivets is a common forging operation. For the most 
part, steel stock used for forging articles is the product of 
rolling mills. 

Another method of forming steel is by press forging. In 
this method of forging, the steel is heated to the forging 
temperature and then subjected to great pressure in a hydraulic 
press. This method of forging is used to make armor plates, 
large gun barrels, and similar articles. 

The most important method of shaping steel is by rolling it. 
The hot working begins with the reduction of ingots which 
have been heated in soaking pits to the desired rolling tem- 
perature. The ingots are rolled in blooming mills between two 
grooved rolls, one directly above the other as shown in figure 41. 

The space between the rolls can be adjusted and the direction 
of the rolls can be reversed for alternate passes through the 
rolls. On a two-high blooming mill (one with two sets of rolls) 
an ingot about 23 inches square in cross section can be rolled 
down to a bloom (rolled ingot) 6 inches square in cross section, 
increasing the length proportionately in about 17 passes. This 
process requires about 2 minutes. After the bloom passes 
through the rolls for the last pass it goes to the shears where 
the top of the ingot is cut off and the bottom is squared. 



73 




Figure 41. — Blooming mill. 

When the bloom is to be used for bars, it is further reduced 
in size by passing through another series of rolls known as a 
billet mill. The billet is then cut into shorter lengths which 
are reheated for further rolling in the bar mill. 

To manufacture plates, ingots are first reduced in size on 
slabbing mills into long flat pieces of steel. After the ends are 
cut off, the product from the ingot is then cut into slabs of 
suitable size for the plate mill. The slabs may be conveyed 
directly to the plate mill or may be stored for reheating. 
Slabs are rolled into plates on a plate mill as shown in figure 
42. When the plate has been rolled to the desired thickness 
and then straightened, it is cut into plates of the required 
dimensions. 

Sheet steel may be produced in the same manner as plate 



74 



Figure 42. — Plate mill. 



steel by continued reheating and rolling. To give sheet steel 
a better finish it may be cold rolled. Cold working a steel 
increases its hardness and tensile strength but reduces its 
ductility. 

Structural shapes are made by reheating blooms and passing 
them through a series of rolls. The first pass has approximately 
the shape of the bloom, see figure 43. Each succeeding pass 
approaches the final shape of the finished product. To produce 
a standard 10-inch I-beam from a bloom 8 by 10 inches, 10 
passes are necessary as shown in figure 43. The long lengths 
are cut to specification, straightened, and finally inspected 
before shipment. 

Drawing Wire 

You have used a great deal of wire rope, and you will use 




8"X II" BLOOM 



J~7\ 



ROUGHING MILL PASSES 



r\ n 



r\ n 



[V 

f 



6 



PASSES OF INTERMEDIATE ROLL STAND 




PASSES OF FINISHING ROLLS 



Figure 43. — Typical roll passes in forming a ten inch I-beam. 

a great deal more during your career as a Steelworker. Wire 
for the manufacture of wire rope and other wire products 
is made by drawing wire rod at room temperature through 
tapered holes in wire drawing dies. The material from which 
wire is made is hot rolled steel rod having the desired chemical 
composition and grain structure. To draw wire, the end of 
the rod is pointed and pushed through the tapered hole in the 
die. Sufficient wire is pulled through the die so that it can 
be attached to a power operated drum (see fig. 44). 

The drum is then rotated at a speed which will draw the 
wire through the die at the desired rate. Wire is drawn through 
successively smaller dies until the desired diameter is 
secured. As the wire passes through the dies, the steel is 
severely cold worked. Only a limited amount of cold work- 
ing is possible before the wire becomes too brittle for further 
drawing. Almost any degree of hardness and strength can 

7A 



be obtained in the finished wire by controlling the composition 
of the steel and the reduction in size. 

Pipe and seamless tubing also may be made by drawing 
steel rod over a special mandrel. Another method for producing 
pipe and tubing is to form long strips of plate into cylinders 
and weld the edges. 

Other steel products are produced by stamping and casting. 
Stamping is similar to forging except that the metal worked 
is in the form of sheets and it is worked cold. Cast steel 
products are produced by pouring molten steel into sand molds. 



■'//?> 




figure 44.— Wire-drawing block end enlarged section of die. 

PHYSICAL TESTING OF STEEL 

The quality of steel is usually determined by its hardness 
and tensile 'strength. There are other physical properties of 
steel that also may be measured such as its strength under 
compression, shear strength, and impact strength. 

The tensile strength of a steel is determined by pulling 
apart a carefully prepared sample. The testing is performed on 
a testing machine which enables the operator to determine the 

77 



number of pounds pull it takes to break the sample. This figure 
is converted to tensile strength in pounds per square inch. 
Tests to determine the tensile strength of steel also reveal the 
ductility of the metal. 

Steel may possess two kinds of hardness. One is resistance 
to abrasion, the other resistance to indentation. Tests for 
hardness of steel are usually based on the resistance of the 
material to indentation. There are three common methods for 
measuring the hardness of steel. They employ the Brinell test- 
ing machine, the Rockwell hardness tester and the Shore 
scleroscope. The first two machines measure hardness, based 
on the measurement of the indentation produced by a small 
steel ball under a given load. The Shore scleroscope measures 
the rebound of a small diamond-tipped hammer which is 
dropped from a fixed height. It is unlikely that you will use 
any of these testing machines but you may run across hardness 
numbers in literature and specifications. Table 3 may be of 
practical value to you in understanding the meaning of the 
various hardness numbers. 

As a practical field test for hardness of steel you can use a 
good quality file. To file test a piece of steel move a sharp file 
slowly across it as you apply a steady downward pressure. If the 
material resists the cutting action of the file it is said to be file 
hard. The upper limit in hardness of steel that can be filed is 
about Rockwell hardness C-60. 

CLASSIFICATION OF STEEL 

There are a number of ways of classifying steel. It may be 
classified according to method of manufacture or according 
to composition, use, methods of shaping, or microscopic struc- 
ture. Let's look at a few of these classifications so that you will 
be better able to understand the terms used to describe steel 
of various types. 

Each steel making process yields steel having special 
characteristics. 



78 



Table 3. — COMPARISON OF HARDNESS NUMBERS 



Brincll 
hardness 

XT.— 

Nos. 


Rockwell 

M ■ A 1 U & 1 ^ O <J 

Nos. "C" 
scale 150-kg. 
load and 

190° rnne 


Rockwell 

h ri rri nr*HS 

Nos. "B" 
scale 100-kg. 
toad and 
J__in hall 

18 111. UAII 


Shore 
scleroscope 
hardness 

XT 

Nos. 


A r> n ro x i m a 1 1* 
tensile strength 
in units of 1000 
lbs. per sq. in. 


663 


62 


■ ■ ■ 


66 


329 


627 


60 


... 


84 


317 


601 


68 


... 


a 


306 


578 


66 


... 


78 


296 


655 


65 


... 


75 


284 


634 


63 


... 


73 


273 


514 


61 


• •• 


71 


263 


495 


60 


... 


68 


253 


477 


48 


... 


66 


&42 


461 


47 


... 


61 


233 


444 


46 


. • . 


62 


221 


429 


44 


... 


60 


211 


415 


43 


... 


58 


202 


401 


42 


... 


56 


193 


BBS 


41 


... 


54 


185 


375 


39 


• •• 


52 


178 


368 


38 


■•■ 


51 


171 




37 


... 


49 


165 


341 


36 


... 


48 


159 


331 


35 


... 


46 


154 


331 


34 


... 


45 


148 


311 


32 


. • ■ 


43 


143 


302 


31 


... 


42 


139 


293 


30 


... 


41 


135 


286 


29 


... 


40 


131 


277 


28 


... 


38 


127 


269 


27 


... 


37 


124 


262 


26 


... 


36 


121 


255 


26 


... 


35 


117 


248 


24 


100 


34 


115 


241 


23 


99 


33 


112 


235 


22 


99 


32 


109 


229 


21 


98 


32 


107 


223 


00 


97 


31 


105 


217 


18 


96 


30 


103 


212 


17 


95 


30 


100 


207 


16 


95 . 


39 


98 


197 


14 


93 


28 


95 


187 


12 


91 


27 


91 


179 


10 


89 


25 


67 


170 


8 


87 


24 


84 


163 


6 


85 


23 


81 


156 


4 


83 


23 


78 


149 


2 


81 


22 


76 


143 


• • 


79 


21 


74 


137 


• • 


77 


20 


71 


131 


• ■ 


75 


19 


68 


126 


• • 


73 


18 


65 



Basic open-hearth steel is produced by the basic 
open-hearth process as previously described in this chapter. Over 
90 percent of the steel produced in this country is produced 
by this method. Basic open-hearth steel is made into structural 
shapes, rails, bars, sheets and plates, for many purposes. 

Acid open-hearth steel is made in much the same manner 
as basic open-hearth steel with the exception that the hearth 
is acid. Acid open-hearth is usually purer than basic open- 
hearth steel. For this reason it is preferred for some uses 
where a superior grade is necessary. Armor plate and special 
wire for wire rope are made of this kind of steel. 

Bessemer steel is made as previously described. Most of the 
steel made by this process has a relatively high percentage 
of phosphorus and sulphur which makes it easier to machine 
than steels low in these elements. A large proportion of 
Bessemer steel is cold finished for industrial purposes such 
as bars for screw-machine products, strips for welded pipe, 
wire, sheets for tin plate, concrete reinforcing bars, and 
structural sections. 

Electric furnace steel may be purified to any extent de- 
sired. Thus this process is used to produce high quality alloy 
steel for tools and other purposes. 

Crucible steel has been largely replaced by electric furnace 
steel for the manufacture of tool steels. However, a small 
amount of tool steel is still made in crucibles. 

Steel is also classified according to its composition. There 
are two broad classifications: carbon steels and alloy steels. 

Carbon steels are also called simple carbon, plain carbon, 
straight carbon, and ordinary carbon steels. Carbon steels 
are steels in which carbon is the only element employed to 
control physical properties. They may contain some manganese 
(less than 1%) and a minimum of other impurities. Carbon 
steels are divided into three classes: 

1. Low-carbon steels with carbon up to 0.30 percent. 

2. Medium-carbon steels with carbon from 0.30 to 0.60 
percent. 

3. High-carbon steel with carbon above 0.60 percent. 



80 



Alloy steels have special physical or chemical properties 
which are dependent on the addition of metallic elements other 
than those present in carhon steels, or on an increase in either 
silicon or manganese. Nickel, chromium, molybdenum, vana- 
dium, manganese, silicon and tungsten are the chief alloying 
elements. These elements may be used separately or in com- 
bination to produce the desired characteristics in the steel. 

Alloy steels may be produced in structural sections, sheets, 
plates, and bars for use in the as-rolled condition. Better 
physical properties are obtained with these steels than are 
possible with hot rolled carbon steels. These alloys are em- 
ployed for structures in which strength of material is especially 
important. Bridge members, railroad cars, dump bodies, dozer 
blades, and crane booms are commonly made from alloy steel. 

Let's take a brief look at some of the alloy steels. 

Nickel steels usually contain 3 to 5 percent nickel which 
increases the strength of the steel, makes it tougher, and 
makes it better able to resist corrosion. 

Chromium steels resist wear. Ball bearings and similar 
products are made of an alloy containing about 1 percent 
chromium and 1 percent carbon. 

Chrome-vanadium steels possess a maximum of strength 
with a minimum of weight. Take a look at a good set of 
12-point box-end wrenches. You'll see "chrome-vanadium" 
stamped on the handles. Steels of this kind contain 0.15 to 
0.25 percent vanadium, 0.60 to 1.50 percent chromium, and 
0.10 to 0.60 percent carbon. They are used mainly where great 
strength is required as in gears, crank shafts, and axles. 

Tungsten steel possesses the unusual property of remaining 
hard at high temperatures. It will remain hard even at red-hot 
temperatures. This property of red hardness makes tungsten 
steel especially suited for high speed cutting tools. 

Molybdenum is often used as an alloying agent for steel in 
combination with chromium and nickel. The addition of 
molybdenum adds toughness to the steel. 

There are many other alloy steels. In fact steel is tailor 
made to fit many different jobs. 



GRAIN SIZE AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 



Steel is composed of crystalline grains. You can see this 
grain structure by looking at the freshly fractured surface of 
a piece that has been broken. But to determine the grain size 
of a given piece of steel more elaborate equipment than a pair 
of eyes is required. 

The grain size of steel definitely influences its physical 
properties. If two pieces of steel of the same chemical composi- 
tion but different grain sizes were subjected to physical 
tests, the results would be as shown in table 4. 

Table 4. — EFFECT OF GRAIN SIZE ON THE PROPERTIES OF STEELS 



Property or condition Coarse grained steel Fine grained steel 

Hardenability Deeper Shallower. 

Machinability Lower Higher. 

Ductility at same hardness. , Lower Higher. 



The grain structure of steel is altered by heat treatment 
and hot and cold working. Heat treating is beyond the scope 
of this book. However you will find a good discussion of this 

subject in Metalsmith 3 &2 (NavPers 10565-A). 

« 

When you bend or hammer a piece of steel to get it into 
place you are, in effect, cold working the metal. Steel that is 
cold worked has its grain size reduced (see fig. 45). Steel that 
has a smaller grain size is less ductile and harder than coarser 
grained steel. Thus with repeated cold working a piece of 




HOT ROLLING HOT FORGING COLO ROLLING 

figure 45.— Effect of working on grain size. 



• 



steel becomes brittle and will break. This is commonly called 
crystallizing. A wire rope that makes a sharp bend over a 
small sheave will break after continued use, not from wear as 
in ordinary use but because of crystallization. 

BOOKS ON THE METALLURGY OF STEEL 

The study of iron and steel is known as ferrous metallurgy. 
In this chapter, this subject has been covered briefly and 
generally. Since so much of your time will be spent working 
with steel you may desire to go more deeply into the study of 
ferrous metallurgy. It is a fascinating and interesting subject 
and there is a great deal of material available. Listed below 
are a few of the numerous books on iron and steel which you 
may want to read. 

Metals Handbook, American Society for Metals, 1948. Cleve- 
land, Ohio. 

Tool Steel Simplified, Frank R. Palmer, 1937. The Carpenter. 
Steel Co., Reading, Pa. 

Principles of Heat Treatment, M. A. Grossman, 1935. Ameri- 
can Society for Metals, Cleveland, Ohio. 

The Elements of Ferrous Metallurgy, Joseph L. Rosenholtz, 
1930. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N. Y. 

An Introduction to the Metallurgy of Iron and Steel, M. H. 
Boylston, 1928. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N. Y. 

The Making, Shaping, and Treating of Steel, J. M. Camp and 
C. B. Francis, 1925. Carnegie Steel Co., Pittsburgh, Pa. 

BENDING REINFORCING STEEL 

The cold bending of reinforcing steel bars is of paramount 
importance in view of the part which steel plays as a reinforce- 
ment for concrete. Properties which make steel a desirable 
reinforcement for concrete include high tensile strength and 
ductility. As a further advantage, the rate of contraction and 
expansion from temperature changes is about the same in con- 
crete as in steel. This factor is essential to proper adhesion 
between the concrete and steel. Known as the bond of the steel, 



83 



adhesion allows the concrete and steel to work together as a unit 
under a load. The strength of the adhesion is termed the bond 
strength. 

As a Steelworker 1 or Chief Steelworker it will be to your 
advantage to know some of the theory applicable to cold bend- 
ing. A knowledge of this will be an asset and may prove very 
helpful to you in meeting problems that will arise in your work. 
Now let's see what goes on within the metal bar being subjected 
to bending. 

In the process of bending, a big change takes place within 
the rod. There's a flow of metal inside the material, which 
results in a change in the dimensions of the part formed. The 
fact that the flow of metal occurs at a stress in the "plastic 
range" of the material means that the material will maintain 
its changed form after the forming stress is no longer applied. 

At this point we might explain that, by the application of 
force upon a ductile material such as steel, you can cause the 
material to increase (as well as decrease) in length. You may 
have heard that the change in length (longer or shorter) will 
occur at a constant rate if the forming force is increased at a 
constant rate. This is true, all right — but only to a certain point. 
What happens is that if you continue to increase the force, a 
level is reached at which the deformation rate will commence 
to increase rapidly. This takes place at a definite loading point. 
Additional increase in the forming force will speed up the de- 
formation rate and soon cause the material to break. 

To better understand the theory of cold bending, make sure 
you familiarize yourself with the meaning of these words: 
stress, yield stress, ultimate strength, elastic limit, and plastic 
range. 

Stress is the amount of internal force which resists a change 
in the form of a body or mass. 

Yield stress is the stress at which the rate of stretching 
begins to increase markedly. 

Ultimate strength means the stress at which the material 
will break. 



84 



Elastic limit is the greatest stress which a material is 
capable of withstanding without taking a permanent set or 
deformation. 

Plastic range indicates the stresses ranging between the 
yield stress and the ultimate strength. It is in this range that 
a flow of metal occurs inside the material and makes possible 
a permanent change in the dimensions of the material; thus 
the material will retain its changed form after the forming 
stress is no longer applied. 

Bar Sizes 

The sizes of reinforcing bars are presently referred to by 
bar numbers, which are based on the number of eighths of an 
inch in the nominal diameter of the bar. As you may know, 
bars formerly were designated by type and size, like a 1-inch 
square or a ^-inch round bar. (Square types of bars are also 
obsolete.) Current types include plain round and round de- 
formed bars. 

The obsolete bar designations and the present designations 
are given in table 5 below: 



T*fc4e #f typical *S| ul val Mtts 

(This table H for inlonnational purposes and Is not part of Um simplified practice recommendation] 



Current 


Unit 


Nominal dimensions— round section* 








be^d«Jf- 






Cross- 








sectional 
are* 


Perimeter 




lb. 


m. 


*aoS* 


to. 


»a 


0. 167 


0250 


0.786 


a 


.378 


.376 


.n 


•1.178 


4 


MB 


.M0 


.30 


1.671 


6 


1 043 


.635 


.31 


1.083 


6 


1.503 


.780 


.44 


1366 


7 


1044 


.875 


.60 


1740 


8 


1670 


1.000 


.70 


3.142 


*• 


3.400 


1.138 


1.00 


3.644 


* 10 


4.303 


1.370 


1.37 


3.000 


Ml 


5.313 


1.410 


1.66 


4.430 



Obsolete bar designation (sis*, In.) 



Rounds: 



6* ••—■■-••»-••-•. 

J::::::::::::::: 
fc== ~ 



Squares: 

1H— 



' Bar No. 3 In plain rounds only. 

* Bars Noa. 9. 10, and 11 correspond to tbe former 1-ln. square, lH*ln. square, and m-in. square sixes, 
and are equivalent to those former standard bar sizes in weight and nominal cross-sectional area. 



Table 5. — Tabic of typical equivalents. 



SIC 



Hand Bending 

* 

To produce the desired change (or bend) in the material 
during the plastic flow of the metal, it is important that Fhe 
bending operation be done cautiously and properly. Thus, you 
can see the advantage of power machines for bending. If the 
hand method of bending is used, avoid hurrying while the 
actual bending operation is under way. Besides applying a slow, 
even pull on the rod, keep the curve of the bend round enough 
to resist cracking or breaking. 

To make a bend by hand in a heavy reinforcing rod, start 
by making an outline of the shape the bar is to have, on your 
bending table. Then bore holes in the bending table at the 
points where the bend will be made. Next insert steel bars or 
steel plugs about 6 inches long in these holes ; then nail boards 
to the table as indicated in figure 4G, so that the rod will remain 
in place during the bending operation. 



A 




B 



Figure 46.— Hand bending. 



86 



Now to get down to the bending, using as an example the 
operation given in figure 46: lay the rod as indicated by line 
AB, bend it around the plugs labeled G and H, then around 
the two lower plugs D and E, and finally, get parts C and F in 
line with A and B. 

When a bending machine is not available, the problem of 
bending beam and girder bars is not as difficult as it might 
sound. Locate a piece of heavy pipe which can be slipped on 
the bar and then proceed to make the bends needed, employing 
either steel plugs or angles bolted to the table. 

A vise, secured to a table, provides a method of hand bending 
when the job calls for bends having a short radius. Simply 
insert the bar in the vise at about the spot of the intended bend. 
Then pull on the end of the bar until you obtain the proper angle. 

Machine Bending 

A power-driven bending machine is a big timesaver where 
you have a large number of bends to be made. There are 
various types and makes of power-driven benders available. 
Make sure that the men you assign to operate bending machines 
for the first time are properly instructed beforehand. 

Your shop may have a hydraulic full automatic reinforcement 
bar bender like that shown in figure 47. The labels in the illus- 
tration will help you to understand the name and location of 
various parts of the machine. Standard bending pins with bend- 
ing forms are provided in the following sizes: 2>4", 3", Zy 2 \ 
4", 5", 5y 2 ", 6", 7", 7y 2 '\ and 8", 10", and 12" diameter. 

A major advantage of this machine is that, with rods ranging 
from y%" through 1" in size, it can bend more than one rod at 
the same time. (See fig. 48.) It can also make two offset bends 
in a 1}4" rod in one operation. The capacity of the machine 
to bend more than one rod at a time, according to the size of 
rod, is as follows: 



Bar Size Capacity 

y*" 10 
y 2 " 8 
y%" 6 

ft" (or %») 3 
1" 2 



ft7 



[Tever{ 

Figure 47. — Wallace No. 47 hydraulic reinforcement bar bending machine. 

In making a bend, first insert the proper bending pin and 
bending form in the table of the machine. Then place your rod 
in the bender, positioning it as shown in figure 48. 

The machine is started merely by pulling the hydraulic hand 
lever. When this is done, the center portion of the table, as well 
as the wiper die and bender arm, rotates, and the rod is bent to 
the desired shape. The hand lever is moved to the right for a 
right-hand bend and to the left for a left-hand bend. 

You can also make duplicate bends on the machine shown 
in figure 47. For this purpose, control stops are mounted on an 
external control drum. One of these stops will allow you to set 
the machine so that it will always stop automatically at the same 
point. Another of these control stops will also cause the lever 
to lock automatically into bending position and to disengage 
automatically, cither right hand or leftJiand. 

After the desired bend is made, shifting the lever in the 
opposite direction will cause it to lock in place and cut out 
automatically at the starting point. The stopping action is fast, 
as well as accurate. 



88 




Figure 48. — Bending five hooks in one operation. 



Shop Arrangement 

As a Steel worker 1 or C you should be able, if called upon, to 
set up and operate a reinforcing steel bending shop. That may 
sound like a big order, but with a little briefing you should not 
find this task as difficult as it sounds. 

Two of the major considerations in setting up a reinforcing 
steel bending shop are efficiency in handling work and safety 
of personnel and equipment. 

Quite often you may find that space is strictly limited, in 
which case "don't spare an inch" in utilizing to best advantage 
the amount of space available. 

The position of machines should allow sufficient working 
space and not create any hazard or interference from traffic 
in the aisles or work lanes. Also, allow sufficient clearance 
between adjacent machines so that men working on them at the 
same time will not be in the way of each other or otherwise 
endangered. 

Make provision for an adequate number of benches or tables 
on which to bend bars by hand. If necessary to make your own 
tables, follow the fabrication procedure given in Stcelworker 
3 & 2 (chapter 8). Make sure these benches are of substantial 
build and that they are secured against tipping. Place them on 
a level surface. 

You will need adequate storage space for stock. See that 
incoming stocks of reinforcing bars are stored according to 
size, and that they are near enough at hand that your men won't 

ftp 



have to be running back and forth to get bars from a distant 
stock pile. In other words, make materials as accessible to the 
place where they will be used as available space will permit. 
You may find it practicable to use racks for storing bars that 
have been bent. When this is done, designate and label each 
rack according to the size of rod to be stored on it. 

You'll need an office or desk space, but keep it as small as 
practicable, especially when space is at a premium. An ideal 
location for the office is near the shop entrance because the 
result will be less traffic near workmen and machines. 

Operating Procedure 

A standing operating procedure is needed if you expect to 
turn out a high quality of work and complete the jobs assigned 
to your shop on time. See that the procedure you follow is 
based on the most practical and economical way of doing the 
job. Encourage your men to express their ideas on how to do 
a job, but require that they first demonstrate a proposed new 
method for your evaluation and approval before adopting it as 
standing operating procedure. Also, when equipment or regu- 
lations change, make sure your men are informed and that 
they understand how the change will affect them in their work. 

To help you maintain a smooth flow of production, give 
careful attention to incoming work requests and the prompt- 
ness with which they are filled. As for work requests having a 
"rush" priority, make every effort — as a good supervisor — to 
cooperate fully in expediting each of them. To estimate the 
time required to complete a job and to plan your work in 
advance, know the amount of work that each man in your shop 
is capable of producing. In arriving at this estimate, take into 
consideration such factors as the facilities of your shop, the type 
of work to be done, the qualifications of the men who will do 
the work, and the like. Suppose, for example, that you have 
a work request which calls for 100 eighth or quarter bends in 
bars Yz" in diameter. Taking into consideration the various 
factors pertinent to the job, you may wind up with an estimate 
like 3 to 4 hours by hand, and 1 to 1^2 hours by machine. 



90 



The number of hours required to bend 100 bars in 
diameter may be much less than that needed to bend the same 
number of bars 1" in diameter. Therefore, make a study of the 
production situation in your shop and prepare an estimate of 
the hours needed to bend various size rods, both by hand and 
machine. 

Remember to keep materials handling to a minimum and 
insist that your men observe safe handling practices. See that 
your men handling reinforcing steel wear leather gloves. 

There will be some paper work — like keeping job completion 
and progress reports prescribed by your particular activity. See 
that each record is maintained properly and kept up to date. In 
that way you will have a better picture of the internal operations 
of your shop and of the efficiency being achieved. 

Don't overlook good housekeeping as one of the important 
functions of a well-run shop. Keep trash, pop bottles, and other 
such matter off the floors. Also, see that equipment receives the 
care and maintenance needed to keep it in good operating con- 
dition. A neat, orderly shop not only aids efficiency, morale, 
and output, but also contributes toward a low accident rate. 

Supervision and training should also play an important role 
in shop operation. These topics are covered separately in 
chapters 7 and 8. 



QUIZ 

1. What are the raw materials used in the manufacture of 
pig iron ? 

2. Steel is an alloy of iron and other elements. What element 
has the greatest influence on the mechanical properties 
of steel ? 

3. How does manganese affect the physical properties of 
carbon steel? 

4. How does silicon affect the physical properties of carbon 
steel? 

5. Name three modern processes for making steel. 

91 



6. What method of manufacture is used to produce most of 
the steel used in this country? 

7. Briefly explain the Bessemer process for purifying pig 
iron. 

8. Give two reasons for working ingot steel. 

9. What is the most important method of shaping steel ? 

10. How is wire manufactured ? 

11. What percentages of carbon does medium carbon steel 
have? 

12. What property does a molybdenum steel have? 

13. What is stress? 

14. How can a pipe be used to bend girder bars by hand ? 

15. How is the hand lever on the power bender, illustrated in 
this chapter, used to make a right-hand and left-hand bend ? 

16. What are two major considerations in setting up a reinforc- 
ing steel bending shop ? 

17. How would you label racks to be used for storing bars 
that have been bent ? 

18. What part should leather gloves play in the operation of 
a reinforcing steel bending shop? 



92 




CHAPTER 5 
STEEL FABRICATION 

BUILD IT YOURSELF 

You belong to an outfit that is noted for its ingenuity. During 
the last war, if supply didn't have it. the Seabees made it. 

Your steel work won't lie confined to the erection of pre- 
fabricated structures such as towers, tanks, and Butler build- 
ings. There will be times when the job you are assigned will 
require you to start from scratch. 

Your ability as a Steelworker will be reflected in the manner 
in which you and your men turn out these special jobs. 

THE JOB PLAN 

The beginning of the job is the job plan. First, you have to 
understand what the job is, what it will look like when 
it's finished, and its function. This information should 



93 



appear on the job order. If it doesn't, get in touch with the 
originator of the job order and get the details. 

Now after you know definitely what the job is, determine 
how you can do it and determine the men, material, and tools 
required. For example, suppose you are in charge of erecting a 
tank. Suppose further that the manhole cover has been lost 
in shipment. You'll make one. But what gage steel will you 
need? How will the steel be cut? What size are the bolt holes? 
How will you make them? How will you line them up with 
the holes in the tank? Who will you put on the job? Will he 
need help? 

After you have considered these questions carefully and 
arrived at satisfactory answers, you are ready to begin the 
job. On another job you might have different conditions, so it 
is necessary to analyze each job. Take every factor into 
consideration. Don't let your men go on the job "half cocked". 
Study the problem from every angle. Visualize the effect that 
various production methods and materials will have on the 
final product. Weigh the advantages of each, and select the 
method and materials that will best serve the purpose. 

Estimate the quantity of time and material required to do 
the job, and be sure that needed materials are available. 
Foresee the need for special tools and handling equipment. 
Have everything ready for the job before it is begun. 

Care should be exercised in the assignment of jobs. Rotate 
the type of work so that the most difficult jobs don't fall on 
the shoulders of the same man each time. Assign strikers or 
rated men who are weak in the skills required for that particu- 
lar job to assist with the work so they will gain experience 
in all the skills required of a Steelworker. 

If speed is a factor, assign your best men. But if plenty of 
time is available, give those men who need experience a chance 
to get in some practice. 

You should analyze each job as soon as you receive the 
work request. Then you should pass the ideas you form about 
it along to the men you assign to do the work. If it is a job 
that is difficult to explain or if the men doing the job have 
trouble visualizing the job, make sketches and drawings so 



94 



that the work required is perfectly clear. 

Even a striker often has some very good ideas. Invite, con- 
sider and utilize the worth-while suggestions made by your 
men. Encourage them to use initiative and work out details for 
themselves. But always be ready to give them the benefit of 
your experience. 

GETTING THE JOB DONE 

After you have assembled the material and tools, get the 
work underway. Give your men all the help and advice they 
need, but use discretion and common sense in your supervision. 

Keep up with the job. Know what progress is being made 
and iron out difficulties as they occur. Adequate inspection will 
keep you "in the know". When the work has been completed 
to your satisfaction, have the job inspected and accepted by the 
activity or individual that requested the work. 

Jobs must be completed to the satisfaction of the requesting 
authority. When a job is not satisfactory the necessary changes 
must be made. Proper planning, and supervision, will avoid 
waste of material and save valuable time. 

SPECIAL JOBS 

You and your men will build and repair all types of steel 
products such as crane booms, tank staves, dozer blades, frames, 
and parts for all types of heavy equipment. 

You may be given a complete set of prints with the job ; a 
broken part to repair or duplicate ; a rough drawing ; or nothing 
more than a brief work order or oral request. 

LAYOUT TOOLS 

Most of the jobs you are given will require a certain amount 
of layout work. 

The tools you will use most often in laying out jobs are: 
the scratch awl, soapstone, straightedge, dividers, rule, steel 
tape, compass, punch, steel level, trammel points, and hammer. 
Some of these tools are shown in figure 49. 

Layout work is essentially a process of measuring and 



95 




OUTSIDE CALIPERS 



Figure 49. — Layout tools. 

marking. After you have made a few practice layouts, the 
importance of accurate measurements will be firmly impressed 
on your mind. You will have a feeling of satisfaction when 
your layout "comes out" in the manner you planned. If it 
doesn't quite fit, the probability is that you were careless 
somewhere along the way. 

USING LAYOUT TOOLS 

Scratch awls, punches, and soapstone will be your marking 
tools. For most work you will use soapstone to do your mark- 
ing. However, where dimensions have to be held very close 
you will use a scriber to mark your lines. To scribe a line with 
a scriber set the point of the scriber as close to the edge of the 
scale as possible by tilting the tool outward. Exert pressure 

96 



on the point and draw the line, tilting the tool slightly in the 
direction of the movement. For short lines, use a steel scale 
as the guide. For longer lines use a straightedge. When you 
have a line to draw between two points, punch each point. 
Start from one punch mark and scribe toward the center. 
Complete the line by scribing from the other punch mark in 
the opposite direction. 

The flat steel square is a useful tool for laying out plate. In 
laying out certain work you may use a method known as 
parallel line development. In parallel line development you 
use the square to construct lines that are parallel to each other 
as well as perpendicular to the base line. This procedure is 
illustrated in figure 50. 



i 



Figure 50. — Drawing perpendicular parallel lines. 

Just clamp the straightedge firmly to the base line. Slide 
the body of the square along the straightedge, and draw 
perpendicular lines through the desired points. 

The combination square can be used to draw a similar set 
of lines as illustrated in figure 51. The edge of the plate upon 
which you are working must be square when you use this 
method since it acts as the straightedge. As you can see in 
figure* 51 one edge of the combination square is 90° and the 
other edge is 45°. 

While most tools used in steel working are pretty rugged 
and can be dropped and tossed around without undue damage, 
layout tools must be handled with care. This is especially true 
of the combination square. The combination square is a delicate 
instrument and will be of little value to you if it is given rough 
treatment. Stow your tools properly when you are through 



Figure 51. — Using combination square. 



using them. Keep them clean and in tiptop shape and you'll 
be able to get accurate layouts. 

For constructing angles other than 90° or 45°, you \yill use 
a protractor. To lay out an angle with the protractor, first 
mark the vertex of the angle on the base line with a prick 
punch. Set the vertex of your protractor on this mark (see 
fig. 52) and scribe a V at the desired angle (in this case 70°). 
Now place a straightedge between the two points and scribe 
or draw in the line to form your angle. Since the protractor is 
a half circle, it contains 180°, so when you construct an angle 





-4- 
(A) 



(B) 



Figure 52.— Constructing an angle with a protractor. 



of 70° to the right of the vertex the remaining angle to the 
left of the vertex is 110°. 

When you are working on a layout that has to be very 
accurate you should mark your points lightly with a prick 
punch. Use light taps with a small hammer. The smaller the 
mark you make (so long as you can see it), the more useful 
and accurate that mark becomes. 

You will use dividers to scribe arcs and circles and also 
to transfer measurements. Careful setting of the dividers is 
most important. When you transfer a measurement from a 
scale to the work, set one point of the dividers on the mark 




Figure 53. — Setting the dividers. 



and accurately adjust the other leg to the desired length as 
illustrated in figure 53. 

To scribe a circle, or an arc, grasp the dividers between 
the fingers and thumb, place the point of one leg of the 
dividers on the center and swing the arc. Exert enough pres- 
sure to hold the point on the center, slightly tilting the dividers 
in the direction in which they are rotated. 

Trammel points serve the same function as dividers except 
that they may be extended to greater lengths than the points 
of the dividers. Thus you use trammel points for transferring 
longer measurements and drawing circles and arcs with longer 
radii than those that can conveniently be drawn with dividers. 

Much of the marking you do will be done with soapstone. 
You can draw fairly accurate circles using string with a piece 
of soapstone tied to one end, if no dividers or trammel points 
are available. 

LAYOUT WORK 

The layout work you will do requires that you be thoroughly 
familiar with blueprints. Review the chapter on this subject 
in Steelworker 3 & 2. The basic training course, Blueprint 
Reading, NavPers 10077, will also be of value to you in your 
review of blueprint reading. 

Before the first cut can be made on any piece of metal you 
or your men are going to make into a finished product, guide 
lines have to be provided. Layout work provides these guide 
lines. Thus layout work may be very simple or quite compli- 
cated, depending upon what is being made. When you measure 
off a 10-foot section of pipe and mark it, you are in effect 
, making a layout. 

To start a layout on plate work, you must first have a 
base line to work from. If the edge of the plate is true you may 
use it as the base line. Once you have established this line your 
measurements will start from there. Most of the prints you 
will use have center line references for dimensions so you should 
also mark center lines on your layout. 

Figure 54 shows an envelope layout for a shallow tank to 



be constructed of light plate. This method of layout for square 
and rectangular tanks locates seams in the flat sides instead 
of in corners. These seams are easier to weld and grind smooth. 
In the layout in figure 54, the notches are cut at an angle of 45 °. 



1— "—1 








z; ;m 

1 1 


T 




1 






* W PIUS 20 — ^ 





* 70 — ' 

F1F ...'▼I 




DIPTH* ftWIDTH 



SHAUOW TANK lAYOUT 



Figure 54.— Shallow tank layout. 

The important thing to remember when making a layout 
is that the layout will be a full-sized reproduction of the blue- 
print or sketch you are working from. Care must be exercised 
in measuring dimensions and angles. Centers for holes must 
be accurately measured and marked. A sloppy inaccurate 
layout will result in wasted material and time. 



BEND ALLOWANCE 

Low carbon stock up /to y 4 inch can be bent cold. When 
metal is bent at right angles, allowance should be made to 
compensate for shrinkage of the piece of metal. This allowance 
is equal to one-half of the thickness of the metal being bent. 
Thus if you are bending a piece of metal %-inch thick you 
should allow % inch extra length for the bend. When you are 
bending the metal in a vise, the allowance for the bend should 
be added to the part that extends above the vise jaws (see 
fig. 55). 




Figure 55. — Layout for a single bend. 

The section that is clamped in the vise remains the same 
length while the part being bent loses in length. If you are 
making more than one bend in the same piece of metal, the 
order of bending must be determined before the proper bend 
allowance can be laid out. 

PATTERNS FOR PIPE WORK 

Not all of the layout work youNvill do will be on plate 
and flat sections. There will be times when you will be called 
on to weld pipe for water and fuel supply. To cut the pipe to 
the correct shape before it can be fitted and welded into the 
finished assembly, you will have to have a pattern or template 
for marking the pipe. To make patterns for this type of work 
you will use parallel-line development. Parallel-line develop- 
ment is based upon the fact that a line which is parallel to 
another line is, by definition, always an equal distance from 
that line at all points. The main lines of structures to be laid 



out by parallel-line development are parallel to each other. 
Objects which have opposite sides parallel to each other, and 
which have the same cross-sectional shape throughout their 
length, are developed by this method. This includes such shapes 
as cylinders, prisms and their many variations. 

In making parallel-line developments, you must observe 
certain fixed principles as follows: 

1. A plan and elevation of the desired shape must first 
be drawn in which the parallel lines of the solid are 
shown in their true lengths. In other words, draw a 
plan and elevation view of the part's actual size. 

2. Visualize the pattern from a right view of the article 
in which the miter lines or lines of intersection are 
shown. 

3. Draw a line at right angles to the parallel lines of the 
solid. Each space contained in the section or plan view 
is placed on this line. 

4. Draw the measuring lines at right angles to the line 

in "3" mentioned above. 

5. Draw lines from points of intersection of the miter 
line, in the right view, intersecting similarly num- 
bered measuring lines drawn from the stretch-out, to 
show outline of the development. 

6. Trace a line through the points thus obtained to give 
the desired pattern. 

Perhaps the principles in the preceding paragraph don't 
mean too much to you right now. Refer to them while you are 
reading the step-by-step discussion of the layout for a pipe 
intersecting a straight-sided tank at an angle as shown in figure 
56. 

To begin your layout first construct an elevation on the 
miter line similar to the one shown in figure 57. The miter line 
is the inclined plane created when the pipe meets the plate 
of the tank at an angle. The elevation is a front view. Line 
AB represents the diameter of the pipe. The distance between 
AB and the miter line may be taken as any convenient length, 
since of course, you won't show the full length of the pipe. 



309247°— 54 8 



103 



Figure 56. — Pictorial viaw of pipe intersecting a tank at an angle. 




Now, determine the center of line AB, and construct a 
center line as shown in figure 57. Set your dividers for one- 
half the distance of line AB. Develop your plan by the follow- 
ing steps: 

1. Construct line 1-7 parallel to and just above AB. 
Using the point at which the center line of the eleva- 
tion intersects line 1-7, swing an arc with your divid- 
ers and complete the half plan as shown. 

2. Step off the circumference of the half plan into six 
equal parts. 

3. Now draw lines parallel to the center line from points 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 on the circumference of the half plan 
to the miter line (see fig. 58). 

4. Draw line EF (an extension of line AB), and step 
off spaces 1 to 7 and 7 to 1, equal to the division on 
the half plan. 

5. Draw line GH parallel to EF at a distance equal to 
the greatest height of the elevation. 

6. Through the points 1-7-1 draw parallel lines as shown 
in figure 58. 

7. At this point in the parallel line development, you 
are ready to transfer the miter line to the grid of 
parallel lines (called the stretch-out) and thus form 
your pattern. To do this you may use either of two 
methods : 




r 



H 



Figure 58. — Development of layout for intersecting pipe. 

105 



(1) By measuring and transferring that measurement from 
the elevation to the stretch-out, making use of your 
dividers. 

(2) By protecting the points in the elevation to the stretch- 
out by parallel projection lines (broken lines). 

No matter which method you use, you should come out with 
the same pattern if you make your measurements with care. 

To develop your pattern by the use of dividers, follow these 
step-by-step instructions. As you read refer to figure 59. 

1. Set the dividers along line 1, on the elevation, equal to 
the distance from line AB to CD. 

2. Keep your dividers at this distance and transfer this 
measurement to the two lines numbered 1 in the stretch- 
out. 

3. Then measure lines 2 in the elevation and transfer 
this measurement to the lines numbered 2 in the stretch- 
out. Repeat this procedure for lines 3, 4, 5, and 6. 

4. Notice that there is but one line 7 in the stretch-out 
so you will only transfer this measurement one time. 

5. Finally connect the points just measured on lines 1-7-1 
on the stretch-out with a smooth curve as shown in 
figure 59. 

To obtain the pattern by projection, you merely project paral- 
lel broken lines from the points of intersection on the miter to 
like-numbered lines in the stretch-out, as shown in figure 59. 




Figure 59. — Transferring from elevation to stretch-out to moke the pattern. 

106 



These lines are drawn at right angles to the numbered lines and 
parallel to line AB. They are drawn from the point at which the 
numbered lines intersect the miter (line CD) to the point at 
which they intersect the most distant like numbered line in the 
stretch-out. Again, the pattern is completed by connecting the 
points of intersection on the stretch-out with a curved line. 

Remember the more care you take in drawing your elevation, 
stepping off the half plan, and transferring your measurements 
from the elevation to the stretch-out, the more accurate your 
pattern will be. 




Figure 60. — Pictorial view and side and end elevation of a T-joint. 



Now to use your pattern, cut it along the curved line. Allow 
enough material at the ends so that the pattern will lap over 
when it is wrapped around the pipe. Now ta mark the pipe, 
wrap the template around it, hold it in place and mark along the 
edge with chalk or a piece of soapstone. 

The parallel line method can be used to develop other patterns. 
In the pattern for a pipe meeting a rectangular tank that was 
just developed, it was necessary to draw only one elevation or 
plan view. Some developments will require two or more eleva- 
tions. In the construction of tank farms there will be many 
times when it will be necessary to make a T- joint by welding a 
pipe into another at right angles. 

Let's see how a T-joint is developed. To develop a T-joint you 
will have to draw a side and end elevation of the joint. For the 
side elevation you draw the T exactly as you would see it when 
you looked at it directly from the side. Now, imagine that you 
are holding the T in the palm of your hand looking at the side. 
Revolve it 90° toward you so that you will be looking into the 
end of the horizontal pipe and draw the end elevation. Figure 
60 shows a pictorial view and side and end elevation of a T-joint. 

To construct a side and end elevation proceed as follows: 

1. Draw a horizontal center line. 

2. Construct parallel lines, leaving sufficient space for the 
development of your side and end elevations. These 
lines will form the center lines for the two elevations 
(see fig. 60). 

3. Draw the plan view above the constructed elevations 
(see fig. 61). 

4. Step off the circumference of the plan view into equal 
spaces with your dividers. 

5. Number the elements of the plan as illustrated. The plan 
is numbered 1 to 4 to 1 because each quarter section of 
the intersection or miter of the two pieces is the same 
as any other quarter section in the elevation. If the 
intersection of the T were other than 90° you would 
number from 1 to 7 as you did in developing the 
previous pattern. 




Figure 61. — Transferring elements to obtain miter line. 

6. Extend lines parallel to the center lines in each of the 
views from the numbered points. In the end view these 
lines will be drawn to the horizontal pipe. To determine 
the lower end of the lines in the side elevation proceed as 
follows : 

a. Place your straightedge at right angles to the number 
4 vertical element of the end view. Draw a broken 
horizontal line from number 4 element of the end view 
to number 4 element of the side view. Connect the 
other like numbered elements in the same manner. 
Remember that there are two elements numbered 3, 
2, and 1 in the side elevation to be connected (see fig. 
61). 

7. Draw a curve through the intersections you have just 
located on the side view. 

8. To the right of the elevations draw a stretch-out equal 
in length to the T (see fig. 62) or equal to twice the dis- 
tance that you stepped off in the half plan. The height 
of the stretch-out obtained by projection is equal to the 
height of the T as drawn. The length is equal to the longest 
element in the side elevation — in this case, element num- 
ber 4. 




Figure 62.— Stretch-out of the T. 



9. Step-off, locate, and number the element lines in the 
stretch-out. 

10. Project the points of intersection locating the miter in 
the side elevation. Draw the curve through these i>oints. 

11. Now using the circumference and length of the hori- 
zontal pipe for dimensions, draw the stretch-out for the 
horizontal pipe as shown in figure 63. 

12. Bisect the length of the stretch-out with an element line 
and number that line 1. 

13. Set the dividers on the distance from 1 to 2 in the half 
plan in the elevation. Using this radius and the point at 
which line 1 intersects the righthand edge of your 
stretch-out, draw an arc on either side of I on the edge 
of the stretch-out. Number each of these points 2. 
Now setting your dividers for the distance from 1 to 3 
in the half plan of the elevation, scribe arcs using 1 as 
a center on either side of element 1 in the stretch-out. 
Number these points both 3. Repeat the procedure to 
get the points for number 4 elements in the stretch-out. 

14. Through the points located, draw the element lines 
parallel to line 1. 

15. Project the elements of the side elevation view to the 
correspondingly numbered elements in the stretch-out. 
Connect the intersecting points with curved lines to out- 
line the hole in the horizontal pipe. 

16. Add space for seams to the stretch-out as required. 



i in 




Figure 63. — Stretch-out of trie horixontal pipe in a T-joint. 



Now that your layout is complete, cut along the curved lines 
to form a template so that you can mark the pipe to be cut. You 
should maintain a file of pipe templates for different sized pipe. 
When a template begins to wear out, trace around it on a new 
sheet of template paper so it is not necessary to make a complete fc 
new lay-out. 

STRAIGHTENING BENT SECTIONS 

i 

You can straighten bent dozer frames and other steel struc- 
tural members by using an oxyacetylene torch. This method of 
straightening and bending steel is called spot heating. Spot heat- 
ing depends on the expansion and contraction of steel for its 
bending force. A 12-inch bar of steel, where it is heated to the 
forging temperature, expands about % inch. When it cools to 
room temperature it contracts to its original size. 

The principle of straightening or shortening a section of 
metal is based on controlled expansion and normal contraction. 
If a 12-inch bar is secured in a die so that it cannot increase its 
length, when heat is applied the metal will be upset. When the 
bar contracts as it cools, the over-all length of the bar will be 
less than 12 inches — about % inch shorter — as there is nothing 
to prevent contraction. 

Figure 64 illustrates what happens if heat is applied in one 
spot when a shape is in a fixed position. It can't go anywhere by 




Figure 64. — Effect of heat on metal. 
I 12 




Figure 65. — Straightening a bent channel. 



expansion, but the side which was heated shrinks when it 
cools. The result is illustrated by the warped section to the 
right in figure 64. 

Now if you have a warped channel to straighten you would 
apply heat to the longer edge as illustrated in figure 65. 

It all sounds very simple, but the secret is the control of heat. 
When heat is applied at one spot, it rapidly spreads to other 
parts of a bar by conduction. This spreading has to be controlled 
so that the metal will upset just where you want it. You can't 
completely control heat spread, but with proper manipulation of 
the torch you can keep spreading to a minimum. This takes 
practice. 

Figure 66 shows one good way to control heat. First mark 
with chalk the area to be heated. Usually this will be in the 
shape of a triangle because more heat is required at the outer 
part of the bend and less toward the center. Select a fairly large 
welding tip for the torch you are using and hold the flame steady 
at one point until the metal reaches a light cherry red color. 
Start at the apex of the triangle or at the outer edge as shown in 














I 





:. 




I 



Figure 66. — Controlling the heat. 



figure 66. When the small area beneath the tip reaches the 
proper temperature, slowly move the tip to one side so that the 
circular area of heated metal moves with it. 

In spot heating the tip must be held steady as it is in flame 
cutting. Don't use the weaving motion that you would in weld- 
ing. Watch the work closely and keep the hot spot moving prop- 
erly. Otherwise there will be no upsetting and the metal may 
be burned. Under no circumstances should the metal be heated 
to the melting point. Continue this heating until the small circle 
of hot metal has covered all the area within the triangle. With 
this procedure you will get an appreciable bend. If the first bend 
is not sufficient, repeat the operation. If the first attempt bends 
the piece too much, straighten it slightly by applying heat to the 
opposite side. 

Figure 67 shows how several different members can be 
straightened by the spot-heating method. Don't try this method 
on important structural members unless you have practiced and 
know what you are doing. If the section is heat-treated or made 
from tool steel, leave it alone until the entire unit can be taken 
down and repaired according to usual shop procedures. 

It is better to apply too little heat several times than too much 
heat all at once. Long bends are best straightened by heating 
several times at intervals along the length of the bend. 

This method can be used in combination with straightening 
by forging, hammering, and pressing. Sections to be kept cool 
can be wrapped in wet rags. 

HARD-FACING 

The cutting edge of scraper and dozer blades are tough, but in 
rocky soil these blades wear rapidly. The teeth of shovels, clam 
shells, and drag lines also wear rapidly. It will be your job to 
build up and resurface these parts. 

The process of resurfacing parts with wear resistant metal is 
called either hard-facing or hard-surfacing. You may even hard- 
surface a blade or shovel teeth before they are put in service. 

Hard-surfacing material is usually applied so that it forms a 
thin layer over the base metal. The thickness of the deposit is 



115 



Figure 67. — Examples of straightening by spot heating. 

usually from 34 6 to Yg inch and seldom over y 4 inch. Applica- 
tions on small parts are ordinarily made with an acetylene torch. 
Hard-surfacing alloys are also available in the form of electrodes 
for metal arc welding. 

There are three general types of hard-surfacing materials. In 
general, you will use iron-base alloys. These alloys contain 
nickel, chromium manganese, and other hardening elements. 
They are fused to the base metal by welding since they melt at 
about the same temperature as steel. 

Tungsten and cobalt alloys are the second class of hard- 
facing materials. Those alloys are sweated to the base metal by 
a process similar to that used for bronze-welding. 



116 



Tungsten carbide is the third class of hard-facing material. 
It is furnished in the form of small cast inserts. You may weld 
these inserts into tools. The inserts are not melted but are held 
in place by weld metal built up around them. Tungsten carbide 
is one of the hardest man-made materials. It closely approaches 
diamonds in hardness. 

Alloys used for hard-facing are manufactured under many 
trade names, such as stellite, colmonoy, blackor, manganal, borod, 
carboloy, haschrome, and stoodite. 

Low-carbon and medium-carbon steels and low-alloy steels 
are easily hard-faced by either the torch or arc method. 

High-carbon steels can be faced if they are first annealed. 
They must be heat-treated after being hard-faced. Minimum 
penetration is advisable. 

Metal surfaces to be hard-faced should be cleaned of all dirt, 
scale, and rust by grinding, machining or chipping. In a pinch 
you can file, wire brush, or sand blast the surface. Edges or 
grooves, corners, or recesses must be well rounded to prevent 
overheating of the base metal and to provide a good cushion for 
the hard-facing materials. 

When preheating is required for hard-facing, it is done in the 
same manner as for fusion welding. If preheating is required 
for good welding, that is your cue to preheat for hard-facing. 

In some cases it is necessary to quench the hard-faced mate- 
rial. This should be an oil quench. 

Figure 68 (A), (B), (C) and (D) shows four different 
methods of rebuilding and hard-facing a worn dipper tooth. 

In figure 68 (A) the entire worn portion of the tooth is built 
up with the hard-facing material. This method is commonly 
used. Figure 68 (B) shows a more economical method of re- 
building dipper teeth. In this method the tooth is first built up 
with high carbon steel and the hard-facing is then deposited on 
top of the high carbon base. In figure 68 (C) most of the metal 
worn from the dipper tooth is replaced by cast steel or a man- 
ganese nickel repointer bar which has been welded to the worn 
tooth. Figure 68 (D) shows a fourth alternative which is more 
or less a combination method. In this method high carbon steel 



117 




118 



is deposited over a mild steel core. A hard-facing is then de- 
posited over the high carbon to increase the hardness of the tip. 

The method you use to rebuild teeth will depend on the mate- 
rials available and your experience. 

HARD-FACING WITH THE TORCH 

You can use either an electric arc or an oxyacetylene torch 
to apply hard- facing. Use of the oxyacetylene flame allows close 
control of the hard-facing operation and produces a smooth de- 
posit. Scale and foreign matter are easily eliminated by this 
method and edges and corners are readily formed. This is im- 
portant when the hard-facing must be ground. 

The degree of penetration can be accurately controlled with 
the torch. This is important because some facing alloys must be 
fused and puddled into the base while others are merely sweated 
onto it. 

The torch tip size for hard-facing should be about two sizes 
larger than that used for welding with a welding rod of the same 
size. 

When using an iron alloy hard-facing material the flame 
should be carburizing. This increases the hardness of the metal 
deposited. 

The nonferrous hard-facing alloys are applied by sweating. 
Do not stir or puddle the rod. Control the thickness of the 
deposited metal by manipulation of the flame. Only a small area 
should be faced at one time. 

Crushed tungsten carbide is used to make certain hard facing 
material. The crushed tungsten carbide particles are imbedded 
' in steel strips or rods or are used to fill steel tubes. For applica- 
tion, the surface of the base metal should be melted and the hard- 
facing rod stirred to distribute the particles of tungsten carbide 
in the deposited metal. 

HARD-FACING WITH THE ARC 

Ferrous and nonferrous hard-facing alloys are applied to the 
base metal by using reversed polarity. Coated electrodes are 
generally used since they reduce spatter loss, assure good pene- 
tration, prevent oxidation of the deposited metal, and help 



stabilize the arc. Bare electrodes may be used for heavy work. 

Keep the arc as long and the voltage as high as possible. You 
may use the following as a general guide for current settings : 


Size of electrode 


Current 


% inch 


100 to 150 amps. 
150 to 200 amps. 
200 to 250 amps. 


%e inch.... ' 







Tungsten carbide hard-facing material may be "set on" the 
base with heat provided by a carbon arc. Set the welding 
machine for straight polarity. The process is much the same as 
oxyacetylene torch application of the same material. 



BOLTED AND RIVETED ASSEMBLIES 

As you know from experience, many of the steel structures at 
advanced bases are of a temporary nature. When ease of 
assembly and disassembly is a factor in the design of a steel 
structure, it is usually assembled with nuts and bolts. 

Job orders should ordinarily indicate how a particular piece 
you are to build h to be fastened. However, if it does not, con- 
sider the possibility of bolted assembly before you go ahead and 
weld it up. It may be possible to build ease of maintenance, 
portability, and ease of disassembly into steel products by 
using bolted construction. 

When bolted construction is used to assemble anything, ex- , 
treme care must be exercised in the layout work. On a welded 
structure you may be able to cut and patch and save time and 
material even though you may have done a sloppy job on the 
layout. But if your bolt holes don't line up on a bolted job, the 
piece is usually ruined. And you'll find yourself starting over 
again with lost time and material to worry about. 

Any steel structure that can be bolted, as a general rule, can 
also be riveted. Riveted construction is less widely used today 
than formerly, since it has been replaced by welded construction. 
However there are still occasions where rivets are used. The 



same care used in making layouts for bolted construction obvi- 
ously must be followed in making layouts for riveted construc- 
tion. 

When you are supervising or working on a job that is being 
riveted, the following suggestions should be followed : 

1. The faying surface— the surface between the two 
riveted plates must be carefully cleaned and given a pro- 
tective coating of paint before the plates are riveted 
together. 

2. The rivet holes must be fair (lined up). Unf aired 
holes must be lined up with a drift pin or reamed with 
a tapered reamer. When a hole has to be reamed to be 
faired up, a larger-sized rivet must be used. A hole that 
has been reamed larger than that specified for a particu- 
lar rivet will not have the designed strength. 

3. Prior to riveting, sections of plates to be riveted should 
be closely bolted ^together. Enough bolts should be 
used to insure close contact of the faying surfaces. 
After rivets are driven in the free holes, the bolts are 

i removed and replaced by rivets. 

4. Large rivets must be heated. Care must be taken to 
avoid overheating rivets since a burned rivet is useless. 
A properly heated rivet should be a light red when taken 
from the forge and cherry red when driven. Rivets 
under %-inch in diameter may be driven cold. 

5. When a rivet is inserted in a hole, the point should 
not be driven until the head is solidly against 
the plate. Before driving the point, strike the head a 
few blows with a hammer. 

6. Form the point on the rivet by striking a series of 
blows around the edge of the rivet. Figure 69 illustrates 
a. rivet properly set up for driving. The holding-on 
hammer is used for bucking the rivet. For removing 
rivets the cutting torch is your best tool 

MAKE IT YOURSELF 

You will be called on to make and repair many metal articles. 
Before you start a repair job on a cast-iron part, it might be well 



HOLDING-ON 
HAMMER 

\ 



HOT RIVET 



RIVETING 
HAMMER 

iTT ' 




BOLT 



WASHERS 



INNER PLATE 

figure 69.— Driving a rive*, 



OUTER 

PLATE 




figure 70.— Welded foot pedals. 



to consider making the part from sheet steel. In industry, 
welded machine parts are constantly replacing heavier, more 
expensive forged and cast-iron parts. The physical properties 
of steel — high-tensile strength; superior resistance to fatigue, 
shock, and impact ; and good ductility — far surpass these prop- 
erties in cast iron. 

Parts such as foot pedals, which are normally cast, can be 
built from steel stock, using welding techniques. Figure 70 
shows several different designs of foot pedals built by welding. 
The next time a Driver or Mechanic brings in a broken foot 
pedal to be welded try your hand at fabricating one from steel 
stock. • 

Figure 71 shows a group of welded products. At some time 
you may have to build similar pieces as replacements for broken 
forgings, castings, or as parts for modifications to meet special 
conditions. 

When you are making steel parts to replace broken castings, 
take your dimensions from the broken part as you make your 
welding layout. 

Here are some points to remember when designing replace- 
ment parts. 

1. Use % 0 the thickness of the cast iron when the same 
degree of rigidity is desired. 

2. Use Yz the thickness when strength is the principal 
factor and rigidity is secondary. 

3. Use y 4 the thickness where rigidity is of no importance 
and strength is the only factor. 

4. Locate important stress members to obtain maximum 
distribution of loads and strains. 

5. Consider each component part of an assembly as an 
individual problem. 

6. Utilize standard welded joint designs. 

7. Minimize the amount of welding by bending whenever 
possible. 

PAPER WORK 

As a first class or chief you will be required to prepare work 
orders, job requisitions, and job completion and progress 

874192°-50-10 



reports. Standard forms have not been prescribed for these 
reports by the Bureau of Yards and Docks. The forms to be 
used will be drawn up by the activity to which you are attached. 

When you are making up work orders or job requests the 
important thing to remember is to state the exact nature of the 
work to be accomplished. If blueprints are available, send them 



cc 







i iQ 







o 




(A) LEVER ARM 



(B) CLEVIS 



[ 



3 




(C) CRANK SHAFT 



a 



a 





(0) LEVER 



(E) WHEEL 



Figure 71. — Welded parts. 



with the job order. In some cases a sketch is the best method to 
convey the information needed for successful completion of the 
work order. 







SHO' WOftK ft J C v C G 












Mioainr 


«M NMWTVI 


MU 




■»TCti»i cmaoco 








■CCtlVfD 










*otM» 



























figure 72.— Shop work and job order log. 

Records are an important item in any metal shop. They need 
not be complicated. Figure 72 shows a simple shop work and job 
order log. Such records aid you in estimating the amount of 
material used. They are also valuable as a record of the work 
performed and the time spent in performing it. Your log may 
not be like the log shown in figure 72 but it should include the 
date the job was started, completed, and the material and time 
consumed in doing the job. There can't be any argument when 
your shop log is kept up to date. You have it down in black and 
white. 

INCREASE YOUR SKILL 

Layout and steel fabrication are manual skills. You will not 
be a good layout man after the first, second, or tenth layout. 
However, if you exercise care and follow the established prin- 
ciples, you will get layouts that fit. Try your hand at layouts 
and fabrication at every opportunity. Remember it is practice 
that counts. 



QUIZ 



1. You are making a layout in which the dimensions have to 
be held very close. With what should you mark your lines? 

2. What two angles can you conveniently construct with a 
combination square? 

3. While making a layout, you find that you cannot transfer a 
certain measurement with your dividers since they will not 
extend far enough. What layout tool will you use ? 

4. You are bending a piece of %-inch stock. How much bend 
allowance should you allow ? 

5. What is the first step in making a parallel line development? 

6. On what principle is straightening by spot heating based ? 

7. How are the iron alloy hard-surfacing materials applied to 
parts being hard-faced? 

8. Name the three general types of hard-facing materials. 

9. What polarity is used to apply ferrous and nonferrous hard- 
facing alloys ? 

10. What is the faying surface? 



I7A 



CHAPTER b 



TECHNIQUES AND TROUBLE SHOOTING 
IN WELDING 

ABILITY COUNTS 

You are familiar with the basic principles underlying the 
process of oxy acetylene and arc welding. You have learned 
the safe handling of welding equipment, types of flames and 
electrodes, and methods of welding. As a Steelworker 1 or 
Chief Steelworker, you will he called on to handle welding and 
related joining processes that will require more skill than a 3 
or 2 billet. However, ability to do advanced work in welding 
— tough and unusual jobs — is largely a matter of expanding 
upon the basic skills already possessed. Some skill and know- 
how will l>e acquired through practice. Considerable im- 
provement will also be gained through studying this Training 
Course and texts of leading manufacturers of welding equip- 
ment. 

There will be plenty of questions from the men under your 
supervision. It is no disgrace not to know the answer to every 



127 



question, but you are inviting trouble if you fail to find the 
answer without too much delay. Just remember that you are the 
master craftsman, supervisor, leader, instructor, and inspector 
— all rolled into one. If you are to fill this billet, you must 
consider the problem of welding pretty seriously. 

Here are some troubles that you can expect to encounter in 
welding, and some techniques that you can employ in over- 
coming them. 

TROUBLE SHOOTING: Oxyace+ylene Welding 

Difficulties common in oxyacctylcne welding are distortion, 
welding stress, warping, poor weld appearance, cracked welds, 
undercutting, incomplete penetration, porous welds, brittle 
welds, poor fusion, corrosion, and brittle joints. 

Distortion is one of the more serious difficulties encountered 
by the inexperienced welder. There are three common causes 
for the distortion of the finished product ; namely, shrinkage of 
deposited metal, nonuniform heating of parts, and improper 
welding sequence. Figure 73 shows an example of distortion 
occurring in a T-joint made from a %6-inch plate. 



1 


j , 




. ■ 5 , 


ru-Mt-mx* m — *- rioau wu» 





Courtesy of New York Shipbuilding Corp. 
Figure 73. — Distortion. 



To prevent the shrinkage of deposited metal from pulling 
welded parts together and changing their relative position, 
clamp or tack the parts. Another cure for shrinkage is peening 
the deposited metal while it is still warm (see fig. 74). 

If nonuniform heating of parts during welding causes buck- 



128 




Figure 74.— Peening the weld. 

ling before the welding is finished, and the final welding of parts 
in distorted position prevents control of desired dimensions, 
provide supports for the parts of the structure to be welded. 
You will find preheating desirable in some heavy structures. In 
some cases, you'll find it helpful to remove rolling or forming 
strains before welding. 

If distortion occurs as a result of improper welding sequence, 
study the structure to develop a definite sequence of welding, or 
to distribute the welding to prevent excessive local heating. 

Welding stress is another problem with which the welder 
has to contend. Stresses are inherent in all welds, especially 
heavy parts. They may also be caused by holding the joint too 

129 



rigidly, or by improper welding procedure. In heavy parts, 
you can peen each deposit of weld metal, and if this does not do 
the job to your satisfaction, stress-relieve the finished product at 
1100° to 1250° F, and soak 1 hour for every inch of thickness. 
You will discover that if stresses are being caused by holding the 
joint too rigidly, you can develop — as a cure — a welding pro- 
cedure that will permit all parts to be free to move as long as 
possible. 

Always remember that to do a good job you should make the 
weld in as few passes as practicable. Use a special intermittent 
or alternating welding sequence and step-back or skip pro- 
cedures. 

To avoid warping when welding thin plates, the follow- 
ing precautions should be observed: 

1. Distribute the heat evenly over the full length of the seam. 

2. Weld rapidly to prevent excessive heating of base metal 
adjacent to the weld. 

3. Prpperly space parts to be welded. 

4. Use a special welding sequence. The step-back or skip 
procedure may save you trouble. 

5. Properly clamp the parts adjacent to the joint. 

Poor weld appearance may be caused by poor welding tech- 
nique — that is, improper flame adjustment or improper welding- 
rod manipulation. If you expect to get good weld appearance, 
prepare all joints properly, use a rod designed for the job, use 
proper heat, and weld with a uniform weave and speed at all 
times. 

When you inspect the work of your men, you will occasionally 
discover a cracked weld. Cracked welds are caused by 
using too small a weld for the size of the parts joined, improper 
welding procedure, improper preparation of joints, or holding 
joints too rigidly. 

It is not enough just to tell a man why a weld is cracked or 
otherwise unsatisfactory. You will have to re-explain and 
demonstrate the procedure in order to prevent further unsatis- 
factory work. Whenever you find a cracked weld, it must be 
chipped, ground, or gouged out, and the joint rewelded. 

Too much weaving of the bead, improper tip size, or in- 



130 



sufficient welding rod added to the molten puddle can cause 
undercutting in the finished product. Likewise, im- 
proper manipulation — excessive and nonuniform weaving — of 
the welding rod may cause undercutting in butt welds. Use 
good welding technique — proper welding-rod deposition with 
uniform heating. In other words, do not hold a welding rod 
too low near the lower edge of the plate in the vertical plane 
when making a horizontal fillet weld. Otherwise, undercutting 
on the vertical plate will result. 

One of the most common faults you will find in inspecting 
welds is INCOMPLETE PENETRATION. This is shown diagram- 
matically in the lower half of figure 75 and pictorially in the 
upper half of the same illustration. Causes of incomplete pene- 
tration are improper preparation of the joint, using a welding 
rod that is too large, a torch tip that is too small, a welding 
speed that is too fast, or insufficient heat. 




Coumsy of Welding Engineer Publishing Co. 




Figure 75.— Incomplete penetration. 

Good instruction and supervision, with special attention to 
the following pointers, will help to eliminate many of the in- 
complete penetration rejections. 

1. Allow proper free space at the bottom of the weld. 



2. When you can get at the back of the joint, deposit a layer 
of weld metal to ensure complete fusion in the lower "V." 

3. Obtain the balance of heat required to melt the welding 
rod, to break down the sidewalls, and to maintain a puddle 
of molten metal of the desired size. To obtain these re- 
quirements, the proper-sized rod must be selected. For 
welding narrow grooves, use small-diameter welding rods. 

If you use a torch tip large enough to give you sufficient heat 
input for proper penetration of the plate thickness being welded, 
and keep your speed slow enough to allow welding heat to pene- 
trate to the bottom of the joint, you will have no trouble with 
incomplete penetration. 

Porous welds are frequently caused by the inherent proper- 
ties of a particular type of welding rod. Be sure to choose a rod 
of proper chemical analysis in order to get a good solid weld. 
Porosity (see fig. 76) also may be caused by improper welding 
procedure, or improper flame adjustment. Carefully avoid over- 
heating the molten puddle and carrying too large a puddle of 
weld metal. Use the multilayer welding technique. Allow suffi- 
cient puddling time to give the entrapped gas, oxides, and slag 
inclusions a chance to escape to the surface. If you discover that 
the quality of the base metal is causing porous welds, modify the 
normal welding procedure to conform with the requirements 
for welding that particular type of metal. 

Brittle welds may be caused by an unsatisfactory welding 
rod, excessive heat input, improper flame adjustment, or a 




Fisure 76. — Porosity in a welded joint. 
132 



high-carbon or alloy base metal which has not been taken into 
consideration. 

To avoid brittle welds: 

1. Do not use welding rods that produce an air-hardening 
weld metal such as high-tensile, low-alloy steel rods 
where ductility is desired. 

2. Use the proper size tip to avoid coarse grain structure 
and oxide inclusions. 

3. Adjust flame so that molten metal does not boil, foam, 
or spark. 

4. Use a multilayer weld. 

5. Be sure you know the analysis and characteristics of a 
steel before attempting to weld it. 

Anyone is likely to get a poor weld once in a while, but 
if you find that one of your men is continually producing welds 
that show poor fusion, you'd better give him a bit of help. Be 
sure he is using the proper welding rod, torch tip, welding 
techniques, and method of preparing the joint. 

Use rods small enough to reach the bottom of the cut when 
welding in narrow "Vs." Make sure that heat input is sufficient 
to melt the rod and break down the sidewalls of the base metal. 
Instruct the welder to make a weave sufficiently wide to melt 
both sides of the joint thoroughly. 

Corrosion is another of the many natural phenomena that 
you will be combating. You can overcome corrosion by selecting 
rods and fluxes with proper corrosion-resisting properties that 
are not changed by the welding process. Never expect more 
from the weld than you do from the parent metal. On stainless 
steels, use welding rods that are as good or better than the base 
metal, and for best corrosion-resistance use a filler rod whose 
composition is the same as that of the base metal. 

You will find, too, that the metallurgical effect of welding can 
cause corrosion trouble. To overcome this problem when weld- 
ing 18-8 (18 percent chromium, 8 percent nickel) steel, be sure 
the analysis of the steel and the welding procedure are correct 
so that the butt welding does not cause carbide precipitation (an 



accumulation of carbides at the grain boundaries). To be safe, 
anneal the base metal at 1900° to 2100° F. 

If you are working with such metal as aluminum, you'll find 
that careful and proper cleaning of all slag is required to prevent 
corrosion in the finished weld. 

Brittle joints result from using unsatisfactory welding 
rods, improper welding procedures, and an air-hardening base 
metal. Austenitic welding rods will often work on special steels, 
but the fusion zone will generally contain an alloy which is 
hard. The proper welding rods combined with proper welding 
procedure will help to avoid brittle joints. Welding by the 
multilayer method will tend to anneal the hard zones. If this 
method fails to produce the desired results, stress-relieve at 
1100° to 1250° F. This will generally reduce hard areas formed 
during welding. 

If your welds are made on medium carbon steel or certain 
alloy steels which are air-hardening, the fusion zone may be 
hard as a result of rapid cooling. A preheat of from 300° to 
500° F should be used before welding. 

TROUBLE SHOOTING: Electric Arc Welding 

With a few exceptions, the troubles you run into in electric 
arc welding will be identical to those you encounter in oxy- 
acetylene welding. However, you will find some of your weld- 
ers having trouble with magnetic or arc blow. This difficulty 
is brought about by a magnetic field causing a direct-current arc 
to blow away from the point to which it is directed. In alter- 
nating-current welding you will not be bothered with arc blow. 
When using direct-current, arc blow is particularly noticeable at 
the ends of joints and in corners. To correct this difficulty, 
instruct your welder to locate the ground on the work properly. 
Placing the ground in the direction the arc blows from the point 
of welding is often helpful.. You may also find it helpful to 
separate the ground into two or more parts. Good arc-welding 
technique will eliminate a great deal of the trouble in direct- 
current welding. Hold a short arc, weld toward the direction 
the arc blows, and change the angle of the electrode relative to 
the work, and you can be pretty sure your technique is correct. 



134 



Another trouble peculiar to arc welding is spatter, that is, 
metal particles which are sometimes scattered around during 
welding and are not deposited at the desired location. Selection 
of the proper type of electrode which does not have this inherent 
property will help. Use of a short arc without excessive welding 
current is another cure for spatter. In general, to avoid arc- 
welding difficulties, observe the same rules that you follow for 
oxyacetylene welding with the following additions: 

1. Use electrodes for welding in the position for which they 
are designed. 

2. Use moderate welding current and do not try to weld 
at too high a speed. 

3. Select and use the proper type of electrode for the job 
to be done. 

WELDED PIPE JOINTS 

To weld joints in" steel piping you will use the metal arc-weld- 
ing process. Butt joints should be used in welding joints be- 
tween pipes, and between pipes and welding-type fittings, butt 
welding of flanges, and welding stubs. In making a butt joint, 
two pieces of pipe are placed end to end, aligned, and welded. 
(See fig. 77.) 

If the wall thickness of the pipe is Y\ inch or less you can 
use either the single V- or single U-tvpe butt joint. (See fig. 
79.) However, when the wall thitkness exceeds }i inch only 
the single U-type should be used. 

Fillet welds should be used for welding slip-on type or 
screwed type of flanged joints to pipes, using the double fillet. 
These two types of flanged joints are illustrated in figure 78. 
With the slip-on flange (B and C), notice that the edge of the 
pipe is not flush with the flange in B and is flush in C. At A, 
a flange square is used to square the flange to the pipe hori- 
zontally and vertically. Screwed flanges (D) are threaded and 
a lubricant is used with them. Fillet welds are also used in 
welding screwed and socket couplings and fittings to pipes, 
using the single fillet. Before attempting to make any of these 
welds, familiarize yourself with the designs shown in figures 
79 and 80. 

135 



SINGLE V SINGLE, U 

BUTT JOINTS 





T MIN. 



ELBOW 




MIN. 



COUPLING 

SOCKET FITTING JOINTS 

Figure 77.— Butt joint. 



136 



Doublo-boll Joint 




Butt Joint 

Figure 79.— Butt joints and socket fitting joints. 



w-oti MLPMf atsaum haw 



ML 






LAP Ja/Mj{VA/1 S7*V£) MtlAHf S706. 

Figure 80. — Welding flanges and stub. 



139 



Seal welds, butt or fillet types, may be used to secure tight- 
ness. But keep in mind that seal welds should not be con- 
sidered as adding to the strength of joints. Try to keep seal 
welds as small in cross section as practicable. Also, in making 
a seal weld, exercise care to avoid undue straining of joint 
structures. 

Joint Preparation 

In preparing joints for welding, remember that bevels should 
be cut accurately. They may be made by machining, by grinding, 
or by oxyacetylene cutting torch. 

Make sure that surfaces to be welded are free from loose 
scale, slag, rust, paint, oil, and other foreign material. Also, 
see that joint surfaces are smooth, uniform, and free from 
fins, tears, and other defects which might affect proper welding. 
Remove any slag from flame-cut edges to be welded — but 
temper color need not be removed. 

Unless the welder and the work are protected properly, do 
not assign a man to a job under these conditions: when the 
atmospheric temperature is less than 0° F ; when the surfaces are 
wet; when rain or snow is falling, or moisture condensing on 
the surfaces to be welded ; or during periods of high wind. 

At temperatures between 32° and 0° F, heat the surfaces to be 
welded, with a torch, for an area within 3 inches of the joint, 
to a temperature warm to the hand before welding. 

Piping should be aligned carefully before welding and main- 
tained in alignment during the welding operation. An align- 
ment tolerance of 20 percent of the pipe thickness may be 
allowed. To ensure proper initial alignment, use clamps, jigs, or 
other suitable devices. 

Tack welds may be used to maintain alignment and root 
clearance. With the slip-on flange, for instance, tack-weld it — 
after it has been slipped on the pipe and properly aligned — 
where the flange and the top of the pipe meet. Keep tack welds 
below the outside surface of the pipe and have them not more 
than twice the pipe thickness in length nor two-thirds the pipe 
thickness in depth- Tack welds should be the same quality 



140 



as the final welds, and they should be fused thoroughly. Remove 
defective tack welds, if any, before making the final weld. 

In addition to tack welds, spacers may sometime be required 
to maintain proper joint alignment. Spacers are accurately 
machined pieces of metal which conform to the dimensions of 
the joint design employed. They serve two purposes: (1) 
provide a means for maintaining the specified root opening, 
and (2) provide a convenient location for tack welds. Spacers 
are tack-welded so that the parts being joined are rigidly locked 
together. 

Technique 

How good a welder you are is determined largely by the 
techniques you employ in getting the job done. This section 
discusses some of the proper techniques that apply to arc weld- 
ing steel piping. 

The size of the electrode should be that best suited for the 
position and kind of welding to be done. For the root pass 
of a multilayer weld you will need an electrode of proper size 
to insure thorough fusion and penetration with freedom from 
undercutting and slag inclusions, but it should not exceed %e 
inch nominal diameter. In selecting your filler metal, the guide 
to follow is Navy Department Specification Xo. 46E3 (INT). 

Make certain your welding current is maintained within the 
ranges recommended by the manufacturers of the welding sets 
and electrodes, and is in keeping with the production of satis- 
factory welds. 

Welds which cannot be made in a single pass should be 
made in interlocked multiple layers, not less than .one layer for 
each l /% inch of pipe thickness. Deposit individual layers with 
a weaving or oscillating motion. See that each layer is cleaned 
thoroughly before you deposit the next layer. Also, make sure 
you avoid entrapping slag in the weld metal. 

Peering 

When required, peen all layers of multiple-layer welds — 
except exterior layers — with light blows from a power hammer, 
using an elongated round-nosed tool. Before peening, allow the 



141 



weld to cool to a temperature warm to the hand. Also, remove 
all slag particles before peening. Welds showing hairline cracks 
or other defects should not be peened until you correct the 
defects. Exercise care to prevent scaling or flaking of weld 
metal from overpeening. 

Stress Relieving 

Welded joints in steel piping will be stress-relieved when the 
wall thickness is Y$ inch and over and the service temperature 
is in excess of 250° F. Stress relieving will require heating 
uniformly and slowly to a temperature between 1,100 and 1,200° 
F, maintaining that temperature for a period in the ratio of 1 
hour per inch of wall thickness, and allowing to cool slowly in 
the atmosphere. 

For the heating operation, use one of these methods: (1) 
heat the complete structure as a unit, (2) heat a complete section 
containing the weld or welds before attachment to other sections, 
or (3) heat the weld by attaching a circumferential band, not 
less than six times the wall thickness, on each side beyond the 
weld, and heat the band uniformly to the temperature and for 
the period specified. Pyrometer equipment will prove useful 
to indicate accurately the joint temperature during heating and 
cooling. The piping should be free to move during the stress 
relieving. 

Positions for Pipe Welding 

In plate work, the welding positions are flat, vertical, hori- 
zontal, and overhead. These terms, although perfectly correct, 
do not adequately describe the positions for pipe welds. When 
you weld pipe, you will weld either in the horizontal rolled 
position, the horizontal fixed position, or the vertical fixed 
position. This terminology refers to the position of the pipe 
and not to the weld. The three pipe welding positions are 
illustrated in figure 81. 

In horizontal rolled position welds, the axis of the pipe 
is horizontal. The joint is made by welding in the flat or down- 
hand position. At the same time, rotate the pipe at a rate equal 
to the speed of filler metal deposition. Pipe welded in this 



142 



D2TMWBS 




A HMZOmLMUEBPasmON 




figure 81.— Pipe welding positions. 



position is first carefully aligned and tack- welded. Then it is 
placed in a jig (some have rollers) which facilitates rotation 
of the pipe. As illustrated in figure 81 at A, all welding should 
be accomplished between points A and C. 

The pipe axis in a horizontal fixed position weld is the 
same as the horizontal rolled position weld. In this position, 
however, the pipe cannot be rotated. As a consequence, weld- 
ing must be accomplished by progression through the overhead, 
vertical, and flat welding positions. When piping is in the 
horizontal fixed position (see fig. 81fi), the weld is started at 
the bottom and progresses upward to the top of the pipe — first 
on one side, then on the other. 



In the vertical fixed position, the pipe axis is vertical and 
held in a fixed position. The weld itself is made in the horizontal 
welding position (see fig. 81 C). 

Visual Inspection 

To determine the quality of welds made under your super- 
vision you should be familiar with the visual method of inspec- 
tion. This method may be divided into three separate phases: 
inspection before welding, inspection during welding, and in- 
spection after welding. 

A pre-welding inspection is of special advantage in that it 
allows you to make sure the welder is making the correct prepa- 
ration for the job. It includes checking the condition of the 
equipment; examining the area to be welded for grease, oil, 
scale, or other matter which would interfere with the welding 
operation ; and ascertaining that pipes are properly beveled and 
aligned. 

Good results from visual inspection during welding will be 
obtained by observing the techniques used by the man doing 
the job. Watch the rod or electrode to see how it melts down. 
Notice the fusion and penetration. Listen to the sound of the 
arc. If multiple layers are being made, see that each layer is 
cleaned thoroughly before the next layer is deposited. In case 
of faulty techniques resulting in defects such as slag accumula- 
tions or cracks, make sure that corrections are made then and 
there— not after the job is finished. 

In checking a completed welding job, watch closely to see if 
the welds are sound throughout, and fused thoroughly. Examine 
the welds for gas pockets, oxides, slag, and surface porosity. 
Make sure there are no defects such as overlaps, undercut, 
spatter, and excessive convexity. See that the inside of the 
pipe is free from globules (icicles) of weld metal which would 
restrict the pipe area, or which might become loose. Check the 
size, length, and location of the welds, making sure — before 
passing on the work — that the beads of the deposited metal are 
of uniform (rather than irregular) size. 

This section is not intended as a complete listing of items 
to be covered in conducting visual inspections of welds. It 
should give you an idea, however, of the major factors involved 



in visual inspections. The qualifications and experience of your 
men may require closer inspection in some instances than in 
others. The condition of equipment might also have a bearing 
on the number of defective welds. At any rate, on every welding 
job for which you are responsible, know in advance what defects 
to look for ; and don't overlook any item, however insignificant 
it might seem. 

Protection 

Special attention should be given the importance of safety 
in welding. Consider it a major responsibility of your job as a 
leader and supervisor to keep your men safety conscious. In 
addition to posting safety precautions, orientation and constant 
reminders will help keep accidents on the job to a minimum. A 
few safety precautions are given below. Keep these in mind 
and, if possible, study chapter 11, "Welding and Cutting," of 
the United States Navy Safety Precautions, OPNAV 34P1. 

1. Always wear protective clothing, such as helmets or hand 
shields which must be worn during all arc welding or cutting 
operations. Spectacle-type (side shielded) goggles must also 
be worn on these operations to provide protection from injurious 
rays from adjacent work and from flying objects. Gloves 
should be worn when handling energized holders, cables, or 
machines, and when removing or replacing electrodes. The 
gloves should be dry and in good condition. 

2. Use only electrode holders which are fully insulated and 
in good condition. Use only those specifically designed for arc 
welding and capable of safely handling the maximum rated 
current required by the electrodes with which the holder is 
intended to be used. 

3. Keep in mind that any electric power circuit, whether a-c 
or d-c, high or low voltage, is a potential source of danger. 
Although voltages required for arc welding are low and nor- 
mally will not cause injury or severe shock, they are strong 
enough to be a potential source of serious shock under unfavor- 
able conditions. 

4. When flammable or explosive materials will be exposed to 
welding or cutting operations, see that a fire watch is posted 
in that vicinity. Fire watches should be posted on both sides of 



a deck, bulkhead, wall, or ceiling being worked on, if fire 
hazards exist on both sides. Require that the fire watches 
remain at their stations for a reasonable time (at least 30 
minutes) after the job is completed to ensure that there are no 
smoldering fires. 

5. Where a welding operator must enter a confined space 
through a manhole or other small opening, means should be 
provided for quickly removing him in case of emergency. 
Safety belts and lifelines used for this purpose should be so 
attached to the operator's body that the body cannot be jammed 
in a small exit opening. 

6. Welding equipment should be maintained in good mechani- 
cal and electrical condition to avoid unnecessary hazards. Com- 
mutators should be kept clean to prevent excessive flashing. 

7. Always make sure that suitable fire-extinguishing equip- 
ment of approved types are maintained near all welding and 
cutting operations. 

QUIZ 

1 . Name three common causes of distortion in a finished weld. 

2. How may cracks be prevented in oxyacetylene welds? 

3. Name the causes of incomplete penetration that may be 
encountered in oxyacetylene welding. 

4. In addition to the rules for proper oxyacetylene welding, 
what rules should be observed for satisfactory arc welding? 

5. When are butt joints used in welding pipe joints? 

6. For what purpose would you use seal welds in pipe joints? 

7. How are bevels made ? 

8. What two purposes are served by spacers? 

9. Name two results from overpeening. 

10. When is stress relieving of welded joints in steel piping 
necessary ? 

11. When will a fire watch be needed in the vicinity where 
welding or cutting operations are to be done? 

12. Name three positions in which pipe welds are made. 

13. When a pipe joint is welded in the horizontal fixed posi- 
tion, at what point is the weld started? 



146 



CHAPTER 7 



SUPERVISION 

NEW RESPONSIBILITY 

When you advance to first class or chief your supervisory 
duties will become increasingly important. More of your time 
will be spent in directing and leading the work of your crew 
and you will spend less time working with your hands. 

By now you have probably worked under a number of 
leading petty officers. Most of them were good supervisors, 
or they wouldn't have been leading petty officers, but you can 
probably remember several who were outstanding. Look 
back and try to discover what made you and the rest of the 
men work harder, longer, and more willingly for those men. 
Sure, they were good guvs, and you liked them, but there was 
more to it than that. Those men weren't born outstanding 
petty officers. They had learned certain fundamentals that they 
observed in their contacts with the men under their super- 
vision. 



The following pages should help point the way for you to 
assume your new responsibilities. 

PLAN THE JOB 

One of the first factors affecting supervision is an adequate 
job plan. Before you can begin to supervise a job you must 
know what the job is and lay the ground work by formulating 
a job plan. This was pointed out in chapter 5. With- 
out a clear-cut plan you will just be muddling through. Know 
what the job is. Know how you are going to accomplish the 
job. Know the number of men required. Know the tools and 
materials necessary. Take all factors that apply to the par- 
ticular job into consideration, and when you arrive at the right 
answers, you are ready to get started. 

KNOW YOUR MEN 

You must know your men. Not just that the man with a 
wrench in his hand is Joe Kink, Constructionman, but much 
more. The men in your crew aren't just so many warm bodies. 
If you consider them as such you will end up with just so 
many individuals instead of a coordinated, work-producing 
crew. 

Every man is an individual and must be treated as such. 
Men in the Navy have all kinds of backgrounds. There is no 
typical sailor. "All men are created free and equal" according 
to the Declaration of Independence, but a lot has happened to 
them by the time they become members of your crew. One 
may have been reared in the competitive lower east side of 
New York. He knows his way around; he had to learn to 
get along with others. Another may have come from a sleepy 
southern farm. There will be wide educational differences 
between members of your crew. There will be mental differ- 
ences too. One man may be sharp. He doesn't have to be 
told twice. He grasps the problem when you give him the 
barest outline. Another may be a bit slow. For him things 
will have to be explained slowly, clearly, and perhaps repeated 
several times. 

You will have to deal with sensitive men and "thick skinned" 



men. You can't treat them alike. A mild rebuff will have no 
effect on the "£hick skinned" individual. The sensitive man 
will respond to your suggestion but will resent a rebuff. 

Besides these, and many other personal differences, you 
should know the skills possessed by your men. If one is a fast 
man with a splice but a slow man with a torch, you should 
know about this so you can give him more practice in welding. 
However, don't overlook an opportunity to call on him for an 
emergency splice in a cable, when the occasion arises. 

You can't set yourself up in an "ivory tower" and expect to 
get to know your men. Merely professing to be interested in 
your men isn't going to get you anywhere either. If you are 
really interested you will get to know them. Be a good listener. 
Ask that Southern boy where he got his accent. He'll prob- 
ably give you a long story about his home in North Carolina. 
You'll know him better, and what's more he will know you are 
interested in him. 

There are many ways you can get to know your men. Watch 
them at work. Join in their ball games and other athletic con- 
tests. Chat with them when they assemble around the "Joe" 
pot for that midmorning cup of coffee. Make yourself avail- 
able for discussion of personal problems. Perhaps you won't 
be able to help the man, but he will feel better after he has 
discussed it with you. Perhaps the man's problem can best 
be solved by a visit to the chaplain or medical officer; if so, 
you are the man to send him on to the proper person. 

You will build some lasting friendships while you are in the 
Navy. It would be rather strange if you did not. Friendships 
in themselves are fine, but they bring up the problem of 
favoritism. You can't be a good supervisor if you play 
favorites. If you give one or two men all the breaks you will 
soon have a disgruntled, uncooperative crew. They will be 
quick to see that effort on their part is unrecognized. You 
won't be doing your friend a favor either, since the men will 
soon have them tagged as "ear bangers" and life can be made 
pretty miserable for an "ear banger." 

It's a perfectly natural inclination, a part of every man's 
make-up, to give the breaks to the people he likes. The 



important thing is to realize that you have the inclination and 
control it. When you have a specially good detail to fill or a 
privilege to grant, you had better think about the reason behind 
the choice you're making. Let ability be the measure of your 
men. Choose a man you don't like if he is more competent. 
Your men may not like him either, but they know he is quali- 
fied for that detail. If he doesn't get it, they will lose confidence 
in you, and consequently they'll lose interest in their jobs. 
Don't give your men reason to believe that the only way to 
get ahead is to become your pal. 

You can't allow friendship to interfere with your duties as a 
supervisor. You must act impersonally. Often this is difficult 
to do, but it's absolutely necessary. You won't lose the man's 
friendship, if he is the kind of friend worth having. 

Impartiality isn't a rare and miraculous quality, but simply 
the result of thinking a situation through to a sound, logical 
conclusion. 

FIT THE JOB TO THE MAN 

After you know your men, you won't gain any advantage 
unless you put that knowledge to work. You have learned 
about him as an individual. Now treat him as one. That 
does not mean coddling him or protecting his tender feelings. 
This is still a man's Navy even though we do have the Waves. 

Your job is to make every man a competent hand. But 
your methods will prove a lot more successful if you suit them 
to the individual. A deck court has less effect on some men 
than a "bawling out" has on others. If you go into an unneces- 
sary long-winded explanation to a quick-witted man you'll 
irritate him ; but if you don't explain very carefully to the slow 
learner, he'll become hopelessly fouled up. Some men perform 
best when acting in a position of responsibility; others prefer 
to follow. You must be the judge. Decide what your men 
do best, and assign them accordingly. 

Understanding your men enables you to assign them to the 
details they are especially well fitted for. It helps you to get 
to the bottom of the trouble when a man seems to go sour. The 
net result is good morale. 

150 



To help get the right man on the job, the Navy has developed 
a system of job classification. You and every enlisted man in the 
Navy has a Navy Job Code or codes. This code(s) indicates 
the job(s) a man is qualified to perform. By obtaining a new 
man's job codes and looking them up in the Manual of Navy 
Enlisted Classifications, NavPers 15105 (Revised), you can 
quickly find out for what jobs he is qualified. 

AS GOOD AS YOUR WORD 

To be an efficient supervisor you must be reliable. When 
you make a promise or threat be sure that you can follow 
through and carry out your word. 

Promises are good incentives if you can carry them out. 
The outfit will work harder if you promise them extra liberty 
on completion of the job. But before you make the promise be 
sure that it is entirely within your power to carry it out. A com- 
plete understanding with your immediate senior, either petty 
officer or commissioned officer, is absolutely necessary to give 
your decisions the force they need to seem important to the men. 
No one is more disliked than the PO who promises special 
privileges for a special detail and then, when the chips are 
down, can't produce. 

An unkept threat is as dangerous as an unkept promise. 
Even small children soon run wild if threatened with punish- 
ment and never punished. Unless a joint policy is established 
between officers and petty officers you may find yourself bound 
hand and foot when you want your men to complete an unpleas- 
ant assignment. An SW1 who has threatened to stop all liberty, 
when he had no authority to stop anyone's liberty, looks pretty 
foolish watching his men walk out the gate with liberty cards 
issued in spite of him. No PO should get the idea he has the 
authority to stop liberty as a punishment. Only the command- 
ing officer has -that authority. 

Promises and threats are easy to make. They can be made to 
save time, to avoid argument or explanation, to postpone a de- 
cision with the thought in the back of your mind that you will be 
able to wiggle out of the situation — you can make them with the 



309247°— 54 11 



151 



best intentions then forget them. But for every promise or threat 
not kept — no matter how small — you have lost that much 
control over your men. They are experts in detecting phonies 
and there is nothing phonier than the PO who welshes on his 
word. 

Think of a promise as equal to a commitment made in writing, 
signed, and witnessed. This will make you less likely to use a 
promise as an easy solution to a problem. If you can't promise 
to fulfill a reasonable request from a man, try to explain why. 
But it's better to say "No," without an explanation than to give 
a promise you know can't be carried out. When you do promise 
something, you must be willing to go all the way to carry it out. 
Thus you can build a solid foundation of confidence. 

Once you are sure that a man is making a reasonable request 
or a justified complaint, you must be ready to go to bat for him. 
The men will respect you for it and so will the officers. Of 
course, you should check the facts before you go out on a limb 
for a man. Make sure that the complaint is a bona fide one 
which should be investigated and on which action should be 
taken. In this way you will acquire a reputation for reliability 
and fair dealing. 

The officers you deal with will soon recognize that you come 
to them with only legitimate complaints and requests, and will 
give them the consideration they are entitled to. 
, Loyalty to your men means more than "sticking out your 
neck." Often it means hours of extra work and personal sacri- 
fice. For example, your rigging crew is given the job of moving 
a heavy piece of water purification equipment into place in the 
shelter just built for it. It's a rush job, but as the day wears on 
it becomes increasingly obvious that the job cannot be finished 
till late that night. The PO in charge rates liberty and has plans. 
Should he leave his men to finish the job, or stay to see it 
through? This is a matter of common sense and personal deci- 
sion. The PO in charge decides to stick with his men. He 
arranges for lights, splits his crew into two shifts for evening 
chow, and applies his rigging experience to speed the job. Even 
then the job isn't finished till past midnight, but the PO has 
other details to attend to. He has to request the OOD to let his 



152 



men sleep until breakfast the next morning and he has to see 
about special liberty for them. The PO may have missed a good 
liberty that night, but he has gained a devoted crew. 

PASSING THE WORD 

In the Navy a man obeys the order of his lawful superior or 
becomes liable for punishment. Some supervisors operate en- 
tirely on this basis. They will tell you there is just one way to 
get a job done and that is to give the command and then keep 
driving until the job is finished. They ignore a truth known to 
every good supervisor ; a man does better work when he under- 
stands the purpose of a job and has a share in the planning of it. 
Your men will forget discomfort and ignore danger if they feel 
that what they are doing is important. 

How do you make it important to them? By showing them 
that their job is an essential part of something big. For this 
reason you must keep your men as well informed as possible 
about the general plans of the activity of which you are a part. 
If they know what the activity is doing and why, they'll under- 
stand better what they are to do. Show your men the reason for 
their duties when possible. Make clear how those duties fit into 
the big picture. 

During the last war there were innumerable instances of in- 
creased efficiency directly traceable to the men's personal interest 
in and understanding of their work. 

You have all heard of the amazing feats of airfield construc- 
tion accomplished by CB units in the Pacific. Those same CB's 
had Jap planes dropping bombs on them almost every night. The 
war was a very personal thing to them. So they put every 
effort toward establishing bases from which our planes could 
operate and end the menace of Jap aircraft. 

Of course, during the war most men were personally inter- 
ested in the job at hand. During peacetime it will be your job to 
point out the importance of their duties as training for war and 
as a necessity for maintaining high operating efficiency in the 
naval service. 

If you can, let your men feel that they share in the responsi- 
bility for the job. In other words, when it's up to you to figure 



153 



out how to accomplish a piece of work, share your problems with 
your men. As soon as it becomes their problem, they tackle the 
job with enthusiasm because they feel it depends on them. You 
have appealed to their intelligence. This pleases them and they 
will work more intelligently for you. 

You get something better than mechanical obedience — you get 
smart and willing cooperation. Your men make the suggestions, 
but you make the decisions. The final responsibilty still rests on 
your shoulders. 

There are other incentives to good work. They don't take the 
place of your official authority as the petty officer in charge of a 
job; but every good supervisor uses them. For example, an 
SW3, momentarily disgusted with his job of welding some small 
tanks, turns out a sloppy job of welding. The PO in charge of 
the job tells him to do it over but adds that it is poor work to 
come from a good workman. In this case the PO appeals to the 
S\V3's pride in his skill. Every man with a skill has that pride. 
When you appeal to it you get the best he has to offer. 

The competitive spirit is also a strong incentive that will help 
you get things done. Give a man something he can beat — his 
own past record, the record of a shipmate or another section or 
another battalion — and the chances are that he will work his 
head off. A group of CB builders will put up a large warehouse 
in 3 days to beat a record established by aviation engineers who 
have taken 4 days to erect the same type of building. Make 
competition work for you. It can add zest to an otherwise dull 
job. 

WORKING CONDITIONS 

Men do their best work when their living conditions are 
pleasant and when their duties don't involve a lot of unnecessary 
discomforts. You may have heard the story about a certain CB 
battalion in the Pacific during World War II that from all 
reports seemed to be going to "pot." They were slow to accom- 
plish the jobs given them, morale was bad, and they appeared to 
have an excessive number of men constantly on the sick list. An 
inspection of their camp disclosed that it had grown knee deep 
with weeds, the galley was dirty, the cooks were sloppy, and 



154 



there was a mountain of tin cans behind the galley. The men had 
to go a distance of a mile to obtain water to wash — and conse- 
quently didn't wash. The stench in the heads would knock you 
off your feet. The tents didn't smell much better. 

A change in command was made. The weeds were cut. The 
camp site was cleared up. New heads were built, and the old 
ones were eliminated. The men were given time and water and 
told to clean themselves and their clothes. The tin cans behind 
the galley were cleared away, eliminating a source of flies and 
mosquitoes. The cooks were told to produce or else. When that 
same unit was sent back to the States they were given a citation 
for their outstanding accomplishments. 

Of course, in a situation like the one just described, the com- 
manding officer would be held responsible for the conditions as 
they existed, but, in many cases, attention to details by petty 
officers can bring about marked improvement in living condi- 
tions. After all, the commanding officer has many imjx>rtant 
things to attend to. He depends on reliable petty officers for 
attention to details. 

One of your primary responsibilities is to check on the living 
and working conditions of your men. You've got to be on the 
ball. You should be able to spot defects in living quarters and 
work areas before the men complain. Think of new improve- 
ments before others do. Investigate all complaints by the men 
under you and get action on valid gripes. During working hours 
be on the alert to prevent small annoyances that can hamper your 
men. Make certain that late rations for your working party are 
served hot. Pick up liberty cards and (if it is station procedure) 
hand them out well in advance of liberty time. 

If you are on the ball, your men will know it. They don't want 
to be wet-nursed but they expect you to look out for their 
welfare. When you take care of their interests they will give 
you their support and cooperation. 

GIVING ORDERS 

Remember the distinction between an order and a command 
that you learned during your recruit training days? An order 
tells a man what to do without requiring him to do it in a certain 



way. A command is more exact and usually requires immediate 
action. Both an order and a command, however, are based on 
the same principles and that is what you should be interested in. 

It is easy to see the need for an order when you are making a 
decision the men can't possibly anticipate, and when your order 
is based on information they don't have. Orders are also neces- 
sary where the men know pretty well what the work will be. 
Perhaps the men could make the decision to start putting up the 
next course of staves where they are erecting a tank, but that's 
not their responsibility. They expect the order from you. These 
expected orders put snap into the work and keep the men work- 
ing as a team. For example, a well-trained section could prob- 
ably carry out a physical drill under arms without a word from 
the petty officer in charge ; but they go through it with more 
smartness and energy because of his cadence count. 

Use good judgment in deciding when to give an order. Too 
many orders spoil the result. The better trained your men are, 
the fewer orders they need. Unnecessary orders will actually 
slow them down. They will tend to ignore you completely if 
you keep nagging at them. On the other hand, when you note a 
slackening in the work or an uneasiness in the men, a simple 
order may do the trick. It pulls the men back on the job. This is 
the difference between nagging and giving the needed order. 

A good order is clear, simple, and complete. It conveys the 
necessary information — no more. It gives a man his instructions 
in a way he can remember. A good order makes clear — 

1. What is to be done. 

2. When to do it. 

3. How to accomplish it (if necessary to obtain specific 
results). 

4. Why it must be done (when practicable to explain). 

The why gives foundation to the order. It shows the men the 
importance of the job. When you say, "Splice these wire ropes 
together ; we are out of long lengths of %-inch rope and need it 
to reeve a shovel," the man who is to do the splicing knows you 
aren't just inventing a job to keep him busy. He knows the 
importance of the job and will do his best to give you a good 

IRA 



strong splice. It is not always possible to give a good reason for 
the job to be done. Perhaps the officer who assigns you the job 
doesn't explain the purpose of a particular job and its reason is 
not immediately apparent. In that case, don't go into elaborate, 
long-winded, meaningless explanations which will only confuse 
the man and delay the job. On the other hand, if the instructions 
are complicated, don't hesitate to give them step by step. 

There is a right and a wrong way to give an order. If your 
bearing is smart, if you look like you mean business, you will get 
results. But if you slouch and look like you are ready to turn in 
for the day you might as well tell the men that you don't think 
the job is worth doing. Stand up like a military man should. 
Look alive! Look straight at the man you're talking to. 

The way you speak is also important in giving orders. You 
can't change your voice or accent, but you can speak clearly and 
loud enough to be heard. Don't mumble an order, speak dis- 
tinctly. You can't expect a man to turn to when he has heard 
only half of the order. You should speak forcefully enough to be 
heard, and that may have to be pretty loud to be heard over the 
noise of the work that is going on. However, don't be a "bull 
of the woods" and continually shout at your men in an effort to 
scare them into action. It doesn't work and you will lose the 
respect of your men. 

Article 8 of Navy Regulations specifically forbids profanity 
and makes it a court martial offense. Not many of us are "lily 
pure" when it comes to profanity, but profanity certainly has 
no place in an order. Profanity adds nothing to the meaning 
of an order and destroys any emphasis you intended making. 

Don't give an order in a low, bored tone, or drawl. If you 
do, the men will soon feel as tired as you sound. If you coax 
or wisecrack, you are really not giving orders at all. 

The secret of giving a good order is to make it mean busi- 
ness. If everything about your manner and the way you speak 
your order implies that you expect the job to be well done, 
it will be. 



PRAISE AND REPRIMAND 



You won't handle men long before you have to set a man 
straight. You won't enjoy doing it, no one does except the 
Petty Officer who is so blown up with his own importance that 
he likes to throw his weight around. But reprimands are 
sometimes necessary. 

Fix in your mind the purpose of a reprimand. You repri- 
mand a man so he won't make the same mistake twice. The 
purpose of a reprimand is not to "bawl-out" a man to embarrass 
him or to let off steam. You reprimand him to point out his 
mistake and show him the right way, so keep the reprimand 
impersonal. 

Don't "blow your top." Before you give a reprimand count 
to 10 and make sure of your ground. Investigate the situation 
thoroughly, checking the facts. Otherwise the man may have 
a perfectly logical explanation which will make you look foolish. 

Once you know the facts, talk to him privately. You are 
trying to keep him from making the same mistake twice, but 
you won't, if you humiliate him in front of other men. His 
emotions will take over instead of his reason and he probably 
won't even admit the mistake to himself, but rather become 
resentful and feel that you are picking on him. If you work it 
right, he won't feel any resentment even though you had to 
bear down pretty hard on him at first. Wind up by showing 
him how to improve. After the reprimand, don't hound the 
man. Treat him as though nothing had happened and watch 
for results. 

It is just as important to give praise as it is to reprimand. 
Men do better work when they know it is appreciated, and 
they certainly don't know it is appreciated unless you tell them 
This doesn't mean that you should pamper your crew with a 
pat on the head for each right move. Too much of this sort 
of stuff annoys the men. Give your men broad, general orders 
when practicable ; then let them work out the details for them- 
selves. The job will be done more rapidly, and the men will 
feel a much greater sense of accomplishment. An occasional 
tour of inspection and a "Nice going Smith" or "Keep at it 
Jones" will mean a lot to the crew. 

I 5ft 



When praise is warranted, it should be given in public. If 
a man has done an outstanding piece of work, don't wait until 
later to call him aside to tell him that you think he has done a 
nice job. Tell him right away in front of the whole crew. If 
you fall into the habit of taking good work for granted, you 
may be missing an opportunity to obtain even better work. 
So be alert to give a word of praise where it is merited. 

Make sure that when a man comes up with an idea for 
improvement, he gets the credit for it. Imagine you are in 
charge of an unloading detail and one of your men thinks of 
a wrinkle that speeds up the operation. The company com- 
mander notices the difference and compliments you. Because 
you are a smart supervisor, tell him in front of the men, 
who was really responsible for the speed-up of the operations. 
You will be a straight guy in the minds of both the company 
and the company commander. 

The men don't want phony praise. They recognize soft 
soap quickly. To mean anything, praise must be based on fact. 

LEARN TO LISTEN 

The supervisor who fails to listen to the suggestions of his 
subordinates is missing a good bet. Remember you don't 
know it all and you are not the only one with ideas. One of 
your men may have had a lot of experience on pontoon work 
and his ideas on this particular assembly may be better than 
yours. Encourage the men under you to express their ideas 
and make suggestions in line with their work. 

When a situation calls for prompt action, you will not have 
time to wait and get ideas from others. It's your responsibil- 
ity to make the decision immediately, based upon your knowl- 
edge as a first or chief. When time permits it is always a good 
idea to sound out your men for their ideas. It makes them 
feel that they are members of the team and their ideas are 
good. 

LEADERSHIP 

Good leadership and efficient supervision mean practically 
the same thing in the Navy. Many men have attempted to 



IRQ 



define leadership, or some of the attributes of a leader. In 
the following list are 49 factors affecting leadership. All lead- 
ers do not possess all 49 attributes. Check yourself against the 
list. Stand up against the yardstick. It will point out your 
weaknesses, and help you develop the attitudes and ways that 
characterize the leader. 

1. Do I develop zest and enthusiasm in others? 

2. Do the men feel that they can confide in me concern- 
ing their personal or professional problems and sug- 
gestions ? 

3. Am I entirely fair with the men under me? 

4. Do I assign responsibility to my men? 

5. Have the men really felt that I am interested in them, 
their advancement, and their personal problems? 

6. Do I set a good example by my own conduct? 

7. Do I perform my work thoroughly so that my su- 
periors show that they trust me? 

8. Am I constantly trying to increase my professional 
experience? 

9. Do I think well before I make a decision? 

10. Do I always praise a good job? 

11. Am I a good instructor? 

12. Am I a credit and an asset to the Navy in my pres- 
ent job, and a loyal and devoted citizen who not only 
preaches but practices the basic decencies of life? 

13. Do I assume responsibility? 

14. Am I a good organizer? 

15. Do I understand the significance and fitness of every- 
thing I do? 

16. Do I believe in what I am doing? 

17. Am I tactful, polite, and considerate? 

18. Am I military in my conduct? 

19. Am I just and impartial in my dealings with those 
under me? 

20. Am I loyal to my superiors and subordinates ? 

21. Do I understand motivation, and obtain cooperation? 

22. Do I select the right men for the right jobs? 

160 



23. Do I praise in public and reprimand in private? 

24. Do I keep my promises? 

25. Do I know all I should know about my men? 

26. Am I always available to my men? 

27. Do I obey the rules I set for my men ? 

28. Do I provide for the comfort of my men? 

29. Do I instill a fighting spirit in my men? 

30. Do I build esprit de corps in my men? 

31. Am I self-disciplined? 

32. Am I an evaluator of my men and myself? 

33. Do I understand my superiors and my subordinates? 

34. Do superiors and subordinates understand me? 

35. Do I know how to delegate authority? 

36. Do I plan ahead? 

37. Am I flexible and adaptable to situations? 

38. Do I have the quality of patience? 

39. Am I a good listener? 

40. Am I a good talker? 

41. Am I a good disciplinarian? 

42. Do I always demand top-notch performances? 

43. Am I a good cooperator and team worker? 

44. Do I put my every act to this acid test : Does this 
reflect honor upon my country, upon my uniform, and 
upon me? 

45. Am I proficient in the basic weapons used by all petty 
officers ? 

46. Do I make sound decisions? 

47. Can I think on my feet? 

48. Do I respect my superiors and subordinates? 

49. Am I energetic? 



QUIZ 

1. What is ©ne of the first factors affecting good supervision? 

2. Name differences that you will find in the men you are 
supervising. 

3. What problem is created by friendships with the men you 
are supervising? 

4. How should you treat the men under your supervision? 

5. Who has the authority to stop liberty? 

6. A man under you makes a suggestion for a job you are in 
charge of. His ideas are followed and as a result the job 
is ruined. Who is responsible? 

7. Which requires immediate action — an order or a command ? 

8. What does a good order make clear? 

9. After reprimanding a man, how should you treat him? 



CHAPTER 8 



STEELWORKER AS AN INSTRUCTOR 

HOW YOU LEARNED 

Remember the days when you were learning the different 
skills of a Steelworker? In looking back over those days, you 
probably recall that many of the skills seemed quite complex 
when you first encountered them. But when you had been 
shown how, they proved relatively easy, didn't they? 

The individual jobs were easier because a good instructor 
showed you how to do them. He possessed all the knowledge, 
skills, and techniques required to do those seemingly hard-to- 
understand jobs. But he had something else, too — the art of 
teaching. Because he was able to explain so clearly what to 
do and how to do it, he made it seem simple. And because he 
watched over you while you tried your own hand at doing the 
job, he was able to point out your mistakes or to help you 
"remember the next step." By continued practice, under his 
close supervision, you rapidly mastered the new job. 



163 



In your new rate as first or chief, the responsibility of in- 
structing is on your shoulders. You have all the knowledge, 
skills, and techniques to do the job yourself; but it is up to 
you to learn "the art of teaching." 

YOU AS AN INSTRUCTOR 

As a nonrated man you probably had little experience — if 
any — in teaching. You were too busy learning how to do the 
job yourself. But that picture changes now that you've learned 
the job well enough to be given a rating which requires you to 
pass on your knowledge to others. 

Your job as an instructor is to develop in your men the same 
skills you possess, the skills they will need for satisfactory per- 
formance of their job. And it isn't as easy as it sounds. Know- 
ing how to do the job yourself is one thing; but knowing how to 
teach someone else to do the same job is something altogether 
different. It is a case where both what you say and how you 
say it are of utmost importance. 

Knowing how to instruct is just as important to a Steel- 
worker first or chief as knowing how to do the job himself. 
Poor instruction will result in sloppy, low-grade work; and 
you will be censured as the chief of a unit doing bad work. 
On the other hand, efficient instruction, simply and interest- 
ingly presented, brings about an elimination of waste, a high 
quality and quantity of production, high morale among your 
men, and recognition of your own abilities. 

The art of teaching does not come naturally — it is acquired 
only through practice and experience. However, if the begin- 
ning instructor applies the proper techniques understandingly 
and conscientiously, good results may be expected from the 
beginning. Your success as an instructor is partly dependent 
upon your personality ; and you should measure yourself 
against the yardstick of personality and correct any faults you 
find in yourself. 

The instructor should have five characteristics if he is to suc- 
ceed in his job — he should be firm, fair, friendly, patient, 
and enthusiastic. A trainee who finds out he can "dodge it" 



164 



will never learn, and a showing of firmness is the only way to 
keep many trainees on their toes and making progress. At 
the same time, a trainee who feels that he is not receiving a 
fair deal loses all desire to learn. Unless you have the quality 
of patience, your students will never learn, and unless you are 
friendly — and you can be friendly without loss of dignity — 
your trainees will not want to learn. 

The instructor must also watch his appearance, his voice, 
his manner of speaking, and his personal attitudes toward the 
individual. If he dresses neatly, carries himself well, and 
moves with snap and precision, the class tends to take on the 
same characteristics; but, if he is slovenly in his personal 
appearance, the class will tend in that direction. The speaking 
manner can also have a definite effect upon the class. Trainees 
usually judge the instructor by his appearance and his voice. 
His voice should have expression and strength of tone. He 
should speak distinctly, and at an understandable speed. He 
should be able to give proper emphasis at the right time by the 
pitch or strength of his voice. 

The personal attitude of the instructor is infectious. If the 
instructor is enthusiastic toward his subject, the class will 
share his enthusiasm. If he shows his sincerity, they will 
accept it. If he commends the students for their good work, 
he soon has them working to gain such commendation. 

SUBJECT MATTER 

No instructor is a good instructor unless he keeps abreast 
of all the new developments, methods, or materials which help 
him do his job. Study or review your Navy Training Courses, 
be familiar with all the textbooks which your men will be using, 
watch for new developments in your field. The more time 
you spend in personal study, the less time it will take you to 
weld your unit into an efficient, well-trained group of Seabees. 

TEACHING SITUATIONS 

Two types of teaching situations generally used for Navy 
training purposes are organized classroom instruction and on- 
the-job instruction. It's hard to say which of the two (if 



165 



either) is better. Both have repeatedly proved successful. 
Most likely, you'll have occasion to use both types of instruc- 
tion. Therefore, you should understand and know how to 
conduct either type in the manner that will best bring about 
the most effective results. 

It is possible that you may be assigned as an instructor in a 
navy training school. When this is the case, much of your 
teaching will consist of organized classroom instruction. This 
type of teaching places special emphasis upon the fact that you 
must be able to put into words the knowledge you have in 
your head. By careful preparation and planning of your class- 
room lessons, you will tell, discuss, explain, and demonstrate 
to your trainees the proper method for performing the various 
phases of their job. You will teach them all the necessary 
facts or related information. In Navy training schools space 
and equipment are normally available, so you will go a step 
farther and have them perform various jobs on actual pieces 
of equipment, as well as practice doing many kinds of manipula- 
tive operations. 

Through on-the-job instruction your men learn by perform- 
ing actual jobs under actual operating conditions. You will 
assign a trainee to a certain task, and you'll explain and show 
him the method and procedure by which it should be done. But 
instruction does not end there. As the man performs the job, 
you'll be there, ready to correct him in any errors, and to lend 
a hand if the situation demands. 

On-the-job instruction is frequently supplemented by regu- 
lar periods of classroom instruction. Quite often a combina- 
tion of these two teaching situations helps trainees to learn 
their trade more rapidly than when only one situation is used. 
Some steel working jobs require lengthy explanations. That 
is one reason why it would be impractical to give each man 
individual instruction on how to do the job. Naturally, the 
logical way is to teach the necessary facts and theories of the 
job by the group method of instruction. The commanding 
officer of your unit may require that you conduct organized 
classes in steelworking. On the other hand, it may be left 

166 



to your discretion to determine whether or not they are neces- 
sary. 

Maybe you're thinking that on-the-job training is a diffi- 
cult process by which to learn a job — but it isn't Usually, it 
deals with down-to-earth, practical things, such as telling and 
showing men how to rig a gin pole, how to erect staves for 
a 10 ; 000-gallon tank, or how to do the thousand-and-one 
other jobs which contribute to making the Seabees the most 
outstanding construction unit in the world. The need for 
doing those jobs exists every day, and every hour of the day. 
Your unit will be called upon to do many of them, and you 
will be charged with the responsibility of seeing that they are 
done. Despite your own admitted skill and knowledge, you 
can't do all of the jobs yourself. They are unit-assignments, 
and the entire unit must perform them. Success depends upon 
how well you have instructed your men in doing their part 
of the unit-job, and upon how efficient you are as a supervisor. 

When you can combine instruction with doing, you speed up 
the teaching process. Be sure that the trainee does correctly 
the tasks which you assign him, and be sure that he under- 
stands how to do them before he begins. The best instruction 
is usually individualized, with the instructor first showing the 
trainee how to do the job, explaining each step as it is per- 
formed, then repeating the performance while the trainee tells 
the instructor what to do at each step. When the instructor is 
convinced the trainee knows what to do, then the positions 
should be reversed. Allow the trainee to do the task, telling the 
instructor what he is doing in each step. The instructor should 
immediately correct all mistakes which are made. The student 
should then practice doing the task under the supervision of the 
instructor until the latter is convinced that the trainee is 
thoroughly familiar with how to do it and needs only further 
practice to develop skill. 

TECHNIQUES OF INSTRUCTION 

In most cases the men you are to train will be eager to learn. 
It's your job to give them the training they need. 

You, as an honest, fair-minded, intelligent instructor — repeat, 
instructor — should think of your men as trainees who, by 



309247°— 54 12 



167 



thorough and efficient instruction, can be developed into highly 
skilled Steelworkers. 

Here are the principal techniques which will help you in doing 
your instruction job. Some of them are more important than 
others, but all are essential in teaching. Include all of them 
and you will convert those green hands into skilled Steelworkers. 

Know Your Subject 

You were selected for your job because you know the Steel- 
worker's jobs and techniques. But there will be new things com- 
ing up all the time. Be sure you understand how to do a 
job before you try to teach others to do it. There are 
books, for example, which will tell you how to do some of the 
new tasks that come up from day to day. No doubt you already 
have read some of them, and probably would be able to follow 
the instructions yourself, but you're training green men. Do 
you understand it well enough to tell it to others? Be sure. 
Don't merely repeat the explanation in the book (in parrot-like 
fashion) or read it aloud to your men. They probably won't 
understand it unless you explain it to them. 

Plan Your Instruction 

Part of your instruction begins before you actually start talk- 
ing to your men. This is the planning part. You should not 
only be familiar with the material you plan to teach, but 
should have a well-thought-out plan for passing on this infor- 
mation to your men. If you try to teach without a plan, you'll 
probably muddle through the instruction, and your men will 
be more confused than helped by your instruction. 

Your plan should be simple, inclusive, and conform to need. 
Simple means that it should be so planned that you do not in- 
clude at any single instruction session more material than can be 
readily assimilated by the men. It also means that you should 
deal with only one subject at a time and that you should present 



subject matter in the most understandable form. Inclusive 
means your instruction should contain all the information 
needed to teach the man to do a particular job. Many instructors 
know how to do the job so well themselves that they fail to in- 
clude all the information that some beginner might need to know. 
To make your instruction conform to need, it should fit into 
the over-all pattern of your unit. As a petty officer, you need 
to know what qualifications your men must possess to gain 
advancement or perform their job efficiently. Your instruc- 
tion should follow this pattern. 

Teach Both Facts and Skills 

To do his job well, your trainee will need both skill in the 
job performance and ability to determine when, where, 
or how to use these developed skills. The skill is learned 
in the field or shops and comes from practice in doing. Judg- 
ment comes from facts learned, usually in classrooms or during 
discussions. 

Brcalc Your Instruction into Logical Steps 

Most instructors who fail, do so because they try to teach 
more at one time than the trainee can absorb. If you break 
your job into small, simple units and instruct the trainee how 
to do these units one at a time, allowing him to practice each 
unit until he becomes proficient in doing it, you find that your 
pupils learn readily and easily. Part of your planning should 
be this breaking of a task into smaller units for easier instruc- 
tion. 

Show How Not to Do a Job 

Often it is important to show how not to do a job as well as 
how to do it. Jobs done in a way which the trainee decides is 
easier might result in loss of life or damage to property. Short 
cuts observed in the practice of experienced workers might 
prove dangerous in the hands of novices. Always point out 
the damages which might result from slipshod, careless, or 

169 



inaccurate work, and watch your trainees to see that they do 
not develop work habits which are incorrect and which would 
be hard to break, later. 

Teach Only the 100 Percent Safe Methods 

Often there may be more than one way to do a job, and you 
as an experienced Steel worker may know all of them. Your 
trainees need know only one way — they will be able to pick up 
the others when needed. In your instruction select the one 
best way to do the job, and teach this to them. Make your 
• selection primarily on the basis of safety, since the trainee will 
be more awkward or hesitant at first than a skilled worker, 
and since his awkwardness or hesitancy may cause accidents 
to himself or others. 

Summarize Frequently 

From time to time, stop to summarize what you have already 
told, or shown, your trainees. It helps bring the whole job 
into the correct perspective, helps to review what has already 
been said, and makes sure you haven't omitted something im- 
portant. Don't wait until you have completed your instruction 
before you summarize what you have already told them. By 
the end of the instruction period you may have covered so 
much ground that they will be unable to follow your complete 
summary. If your instruction extends over more than one 
period, summarize briefly the material given at previous ses- 
sions so the trainee will be able to pick up the new material 
from a familiar point. 

Use Simple Language 

Textbooks such as the one you are reading contain a lot 
of concentrated information, most of which you may want to 
pass on to your trainees. But if you give it to them as it 
appears in the texts, they may not find it interesting, helpful, or 
understandable. To make it interesting to your trainees, you 



170 



must first be interested in it yourself. Interest is contagious, 
and your own enthusiasm will be passed on to your men. But 
you must still present it in a way which they can understand, 
will listen to willingly, and be able to use. One way is to 
"pep up" your talk with anecdotes which illustrate what you 
are trying to teach. To be sure you are understood, explain 
all technical words in simple language. 

In addition, make your trainees comfortable if you expect 
them to absorb what you plan to teach. A fidgeting trainee has 
only half of his attention on your instruction. If he can't see 
the blackboard which you are using, or the piece of equipment 
which you are demonstrating, you might as well not be using it. 
Remember that no speaker can hold the attention of his audience 
for long periods, so keep your instruction brief and pointed. 
Remember that something new perks up lagging interest — so 
do something to create a change whenever interest seems to be 
lagging. 

Make Them Want to Learn 

No matter how well you present your subject, the trainee will 
not learn unless he wants to learn. Part of your job is to 
create this desire to learn. You can do it by showing him 
the benefits to be gained from this instruction. If he sees it as 
a step toward promotion, for example, he is more anxious to 
understand your instruction. Pride of craftsmanship, com- 
petitive spirit, or cooperation are all excellent ways to create a 
desire to learn. 

Remember that Your Men Are Individuals 

No two men are exactly alike. A good instructor takes ad- 
vantage of this fact by planning his instruction to take advantage 
of the differences between individuals. Some persons learn more 
quickly when spurred on by competition, others need some 
personal reward. One person may be able to learn best by doing, 
another needs to see the explanation in print to understand it. 



171 



Some learn quickly, others must pore over a subject for long 
hours. The instructor who is able to size up the men under him 
and train them in a manner which takes complete advantage of 
their individual differences always does the best job of training. 

Teach It Right the First Time 

Incorrect habits are difficult to break, and a trainee learns 
more the first time he does a task than at any other time. As an 
instructor you should see that he follows the correct method the 
first time he does a job. Stop him if he makes a mistake — at 
the time he makes the mistake, not after the task is completed — 
and point out the error. Have him practice doing correctly the 
step in which he made the mistake until he has the correct tech- 
nique down perfectly. 

Have the Trainee Do the Job 

In your instruction, it isn't enough to show or tell a trainee 
how to do the job. He learns by doing. And he learns best if he 
does the task as soon as he has learned how to do it If you 
provide instruction at one session and he does not have an oppor- 
tunity to practice what he has learned right away, he may have 
forgotten much of it by the time he is called upon to do it. Or, 
he may do it incorrectly, and need to "relearn" his lesson. 

Don't Permit Safety Violations 

Don't permit your trainees to learn bad habits. Even though 
they may succeed in doing something without harm to them- 
selves or others on the first occasion, they may not be as lucky 
the next time. They will probably continue to do the job just as 
you have let them do it the first time. If they do violate a safety 
measure, stop them and carefully explain what might have 
happened by doing it that way. Then show them how to do it 
safely and have them practice doing it by this correct method. 

Use Training Aids 

A trainee learns best when he is told and shown, and allowed 
to do. To do this three-part job, make use of any training aids 



which are available. Films, models, blow-ups, diagrams, charts, 
trainers, and recordings are all useful, and should be used when- 
ever they can help you do a better job. Usually these are avail- 
able from the training officer, and should be requisitioned from 
him when needed. Often, however, you can improvise your own. 
Part of your job is done if you have assembled in advance the 
training aids you will need and made sure you know how to use 
them. The actual material or equipment used in the field is the 
best training aid you can use. 

Ask Questions 

By asking questions you are better able to determine whether 
your trainees have understood your instruction and are able to 
use it intelligently. Plan your questions in advance, and deter- 
mine the best time to ask them. Avoid questions which will be 
answered by a simple "yes"' or "no". By forcing him to explain 
his answer, you are making him think about the subject of your 
question, and thus he will clarify his own thinking. If the 
answers are incorrect, stop immediately while you make sure this 
trainee and any others in the group clearly understand the cor- 
rect answer. An incorrect answer may indicate faulty instruc- 
tion on your part and may even require you to go back and 
repeat some of the instruction. 

PUBLICATIONS FOR NAVY INSTRUCTOR 

To help you to become a better instructor, the Navy has sev- 
eral publications. The U. S. Naval Training Bulletin is pub- 
lished monthly by the Bureau of Naval Personnel. It contains 
articles on training that you will find both interesting and help- 
ful to you as an instructor. 

The Manual for Navy Instructors (NavPers 16103B) is 
another publication you should read and study. This manual sets 
forth the essential areas of knowledge and procedure necessary 
for a good background as an instructor. In this book you will 
find many ways to increase your efficiency. 



PRACTICE 



As an instructor, your principal job is to train men in your 
unit so that they may become an efficient, well-trained, coopera- 
tive group in the shortest possible time. While your actual train- 
ing task never ends, since there are always new men coming 
into the unit or new tasks to be worked out, your job of instruc- 
tion becomes easier as you become more familiar with the use of 
the various training techniques. And you will become familiar 
with these through practice and use, just as the men you are 
training will become proficient in their tasks as you train them 
and they use their newly-won skills. 

But remember — if the trainees have not learned, the 
instructor has not taught. You are measured as an instruc- 
tor by the success of the men you train, not by your own abili- 
ties. 



QUIZ 

1. What five characteristics should an instructor have to suc- 
ceed in his job? 

2. What two types of teaching situations are generally used 
for Navy training purposes ? 

3. Before you begin your instruction, what should you do? 

4. Cite the most frequent cause of instructor failure. 

5. When there is more than one way to do a job in what 
way(s) should you teach? 

6. What should you do to bring the whole job into correct 
perspective, help review, and make sure you have omitted 
nothing? 

7. If you are teaching a man to splice, when will he learn 
most ? 

8. What will be your best training aids ? 



CO 

Z 

o 

< 

o 

— — 
<£ 

2 



c 

a 



S 



or-oo© 



c 

V 

E 

o 
o 

- 



4 



1 



* ©o© o oo © 



* ©-*© o oo o oo 



5 



J3 

JS o 

JQ 



S2« 



o -E 
c a 



■ ■ 



3 



O B-r 

J> o 5 
W — T f 

a 



W 

in 

a 



H 



X 

i 

o 

05 

Q 



*c CO 



O 
H 



■J 

5 



175 



01 

I 

c 











— rri 


— HtH 




• ; 

4 


: : : : : 




* * 


i : : ' ' 

: : : : : 


U 






B 

jj 
8 


© © © o © © c © 

S?8£ 



M 
C 

H 

g 

n 



S 



I 
8 



©©© © ©o © 



jj c © © © ©© © 





c 


© © 10 


© ©© 


— 








g 


•4* 













I 

5 



r © © © © ©© © 



.si 



is 

§ - 2 



■pill 



a 

£ 



i-sl 1 0 





.j : 




J : 




5 : 




S : 




H : 




w : 


— 


uj : 


s 


£ : 


B 


S : 






'5 


Si 






















Or/1 




o 







N 


d 








H 




EC 










C <?' ^ 




= 









u 
o 

0 



c 



H 

— 



- 

< 

05 

a 



•— * 

K 
o 

H 



176 



£ 



I 




5 



1 



£ ©©© © ©© © 

t 83* I *S g 



c©co© 



I 

a 

5 



©©© © ©© © 
jt e©o © ©© © 

< i§ 5 I ff 3 g 



= ©c© © o© © 



r © © © © ©© © 



c §2^ g g 




1 3 



■5 c 



i 



H 

o — — r 



u 

a 

S 
< 

u 



c 



— — 

— < 



S 



177 




r \ • 



178 



2 Sti 



oo ©« 



o 



9 



o - a, - • - 

be v « c 5 

*— _e — • _e . 



,2 V 



1 C 
CO 



|8js 

Si 

c 3 a. a o 



H 
a 

"3 



Pi 
< 

u 



5 
CO 

C 



1^ 



Soy .3* 



APPENDIX II 



ANSWERS TO QUIZZES 

CHAPTER I 
ON THE WAY UP 

1. The Welding Encyclopedia. 

2. Pontoon Gear Handbook (NavDocks TP-PL-7). 

3. Those qualifications that apply to 3, 2, and 1. 

4. The staff of the area commander. 

5. Surveyors. 

CHAPTER 2 
RIGGING HEAVY EQUIPMENT 

1. The wire rope specifications for that particular piece of 
equipment. 

2. In the manufacturer's manual and in the appendix of 
this book. 

3. The reeving diagram and the reeving instructions. This 
information is contained in the manufacturer's manual. 

4. Draw your own reeving diagram. 

5. Reeving a twofold purchase. 

6. The crowd line, the backhaul line, and the hoist line. 

7. It raises and lowers the dipper stick. 

8. Horizontal position. 

9. When you are sure there are no twists in the lines. 

10. Class 22. 

11. To support and protect material stored. 

12. To run a safe job. 



CHAPTER 3 



BUILDING WITH WOOD 

1. The sill. 

2. Joists support floors and the ceiling. 

3. Studs. 

4. Rafters. 

5. Balloon framing and platform framing. 

6. Platform framing. 

7. Laminated, solid, lapped, and box. 

8. A carrying joist. 

9. A T-post. 

10. To tie the studding together and form a finish for the 
walls, to act as a support for the lower ends of the rafters, 
and to support the ceiling joists. 

11. The span. 

12. The seat cut. 

CHAPTER 4 
STEEL 

1. Iron ore, coke, and limestone. 

2. Carbon. 

3. It increases the tensile strength. 

4. It has no eifect 

5. Open-hearth, Bessemer, and electric furnace. 

6. The basic open-hearth method. 

7. In the Bessemer process, air is blown through molten pig 

iron in a Bessemer converter. 

8. To improve the quality of the steel and to form it into 
shapes more suitable for use. 

9. Rolling. 

10. By drawing steel rod through successively smaller dies. 

182 



11. 0.30 to 0.60 percent 

12. Toughness. 

13. Stress is the amount of internal force which resists a change 
in the form of a body or mass. 

14. Slip the pipe on the bar and then proceed to make the bends 
needed, employing the use of either steel plugs or angles 
bolted to the table. 

15. The lever is moved to the right for a right-hand bend and 
to the left for a left-hand bend. 

16. Efficiency in handling work and safety of personnel and 
equipment. 

17. Designate and label each rack according to the size of rod 
to be stored in it. 

18. As a safety precaution, men handling reinforcing steel 
should always wear leather gloves. 

CHAPTER 5 
STEEL FABRICATION 

1. A scriber. 

2. 45° and 90°. 

3. Trammel points. 

4. 3 / 16 inch. 

5. Draw a full-sized plan and elevation of the desired shape. 

6. Controlled expansion and normal contraction. 

7. They are fused to the base metal by welding. 

8. Iron-base alloys, tungsten and cobalt alloys, and tungsten 
carbide. 

9. Reversed polarity. 

10. The surface between two riveted parts. 

309247° 54 13 183 



CHAPTER 6 

TECHNIQUES AND TROUBLE SHOOTING 
IN WELDING 

1. Shrinkage of deposited metal, nonuniform heating of parts, 
and improper welding sequence. 

2. By eliminating rigid joints, increasing size of weld, welding 
in full-sized short sections, making sure welds are sound 
and fusion is good, and preparing joints with uniform and 
proper free space. 

3. Improper preparation of the joint, use of too large welding 
rod or too small torch tip, insufficient heat input, and too 
fast a welding speed. 

4. Use electrodes for welding in the position for which they 
were designed, use moderate current at proper welding 
speed, and use proper electrode for weld to be made. 

5. In welding joints between pipes, and between pipes and 
welding-type fittings, butt welding of flanges, and welding 
stubs. 

6. To secure tightness. 

7. By machining, grinding, or oxyacetylene cutting torch. 

8. Spacers provide a means for maintaining the specified root 
opening. They also provide a convenient location for tack 
welds. 

9. Scaling or flaking of weld metal. 

10. When the wall thickness is % inch and over and the service 
temperature is in excess of 250° F. 

11. When flammable or explosive materials will be exposed to 
welding or cutting operations. 

12. The horizontal rolled position, the horizontal fixed position, 
or the vertical fixed position. 

13. The weld is started at the bottom and progresses upward 
to the top of the pipe — first on one side, then on the other. 

184 



CHAPTER 7 
SUPERVISION 

1. The job plan. 

2. Differences in home background, education, mentality, 
and skill. 

3. The problem of favoritism. 

4. As individuals. 

5. The commanding officer. 

6. You are. 

7. A command. 

8. What, when, how, and why. 

9. As though nothing had happened. 

CHAPTER 8 
STEELWORKER AS AN INSTRUCTOR 

1. Firmness, fairness, friendliness, patience, and enthusiasm. 

2. Organized classroom instruction and on-the-job instruction. 

3. Plan your instruction. 

4. Failure to divide the instruction into small simple units. 

5. The safe way(s). 

6. Summarize frequently. 

7. On the first splice he makes. 

8. The actual material and equipment used in the field. 



185 



i 



4 



APPENDIX III 



QUALIFICATIONS FOR ADVANCEMENT 

IN RATING 

STEELWORKERS (SW) 
RATING CODE NO. 5700 

General Service Rating 
Scope 

Steehvorkers rig and erect A frames, gin poles, derricks, booms, and 
blocks and tackle; operate winches and hoists in moving and hoisting 
operations; erect and dismantle the following steel structures — bridges, 
buildings, storage tanks, towers, and pontoons; place, fit, weld, cut, 
and bolt steel shapes, pipes, plates, and built-up sections; splice fiber 
and wire rope; fabricate nets and slings and rig cable assemblies used 
in heavy construction. 

Emergency Service Ratings 

Steelworkers s (Structural Steel workers), Rating Code No. 

5701_ 

Erect and dismantle steel structures; place, fit, weld, cut. 
and bolt steel shapes, pipes, plates, and built-up sections. 

Steelworkers r (Construction Riggers), Rating Code No. 

5702 

Rig and erect A frames, gin poles, derricks, booms, and 
blocks and tackle; operate winches and hoists in moving 
and hoisting operations; splice fiber and wire rope; fabri- 
cate nets and slings and rig cable assemblies used in heavy 
construction. 

Navy Job Classifications and Codes 

For specific Navy job classifications included within this rating and 
the applicable job codes, see Manual of Enlisted Navy Job Classifica- 
tions, NavPers 15105 (Revised), codes SW-6000 to SW-6099. 

187 



SWS 

SWR 



Qualifications for Advancement in Ratine 



Qualifications for Advancement in Ratine 



100 PRACTICAL FACTORS 

101 Operational 

1. Select and use hand tools commonly employed 

in: 

a. Rigging of heavy construction equipment 
assemblies 

b. Erection and dismantling of steel structures 

2. Read simple working drawings and sketches. _ 

3. Cut wire rope and steel plates and bars with 

oxyacetylene torch 

4. Reeve common blocks and tackle and act as 
hook-on man and guide for moving loads 

5. Set up and adjust oxyacetylene equipment to 
produce carburizing, neutral, and oxidizing 
flames 

6. Serve as helper in: 

a. Assembling pontoon structures 

b. Erecting or dismantling steel structures 

c. Bending reinforcing bars; raising, placing, 
and tying reinforcing steel 

7. Set up, adjust, and connect d. c. arc welders for 
straight polarity and reverse polarity work 

8. Perform electric arc welding on mild steel plate 
in a flat position 

9. Splice fiber rope and make cargo nets 

10. Work from working drawings, specifications, 
and sketches 

11. Erect or dismantle steel towers, tanks, build- 
ings, and bridges. Climb and work in raising 
gang as a connector or tag man 

12. Assemble a pontoon 

13. Assemble pontoon structures 

14. Perform electric arc welding on mild steel in 
vertical and overhead positions 

15. Perform oxyacetylene welding on mild steel 
plate in a flat position 

16. Cut structural steel shapes with oxyacetylene 
torch 

17. Splice wire rope and make slings 



Applicable rates 



SW SWS SWR 



3 3 3 

3 3 3 

3 3 3 

3 3 3 

3 3 3 



3 3 3 
3 3 3 

3 

3 

3 

3 . 



2 
2 
2 

2 2 ... 
2 2 ... 
2 



Qualification* for Advancement in Ratine 



Applicable rate$ 
SW SWS SWR 



101 Operational — Continued 

18. Use blocks and tacke, winches, hoists, jacks, 
rollers, cables, and slings to move heavy ob- 
jects; erect scaffolding; erect and use A frames, 
gin poles, and derricks 

19. Bend, place, and tie reinforcing steel in accord- 
ance with plans and specifications 2 2 

20. Rig cable assemblies used on heavy construc- 
tion equipment _ _ 1 ... 2 

21. Set up and operate a reinforcing-steel bending shop. 1 1 

22. Make electric arc welded joints on steel pipe in ; 

place 1 l 

23. Perform all position oxyacetylene welding on 
mild 8 teel plate _ 1 1 

102 Maintenance and/or Repair 
(No minimum qualifications.) 

103 Administrative and/or Clerical 

1. Prepare progress reports, job orders, and work 
requisitions _ — 111 

2. Make sketches for rigging and steelworking — I I ! 

3. Make material estimates from working draw- 
ings, sketches, and specifications 1 1 

4. Supervise and train personnel engaged in: 

a. Assembly of a pontoon and pontoon struc- 
tures I 1 1 — 

b. Bending and placing reinforcing steel 1 1 — 

c. Rigging 1 — 1 

d. Erecting and dismantling steel # towers, ; 

tanks, buildings, and bridges C C 

5. Lay out and direct cutting and welding of struc- : 

tural steel shapes and built-up members j C C — 

200 EXAMINATION SUBJECTS 



201 Operational 

1. Selection and use of tools, materials, methods, 
and equipment common to rigging and steel- 
work 

2. Standard hand signals for directing equipment 
operators 

3. Basic types and shapes of structural and rein- 
forcing steel 



3 3 3 
3 3 3 
3 3 3 



189 



Qualification* for Advancement in Rating 



Applicable rate* 



SW SWS SWR 



201 Operational — Continued 

* 4. Construction and uses of the common types of 
hoisting rigs; mechanical advantages of the 
common block and tackle arrangements 

5. Construction and erection of gin poles, A 
frames, stiff-leg derricks, and dead men. 

6. Methods and procedures for assembling and 
launching pontoon structures 

7. Types and uses of wire rope. Uses of the vari- 
ous wire and manila rope splices 

8. Safety precautions to be observed in rigging, 
welding and steelwork. _ 

9. Sizes, care, stowage, and uses of manila and 
wire rope. Lubrication of wire rope 

10. Types of various welds and their strengths 

11. Types and uses of electrodes, filler rods, and 
fluxes for welding ferrous metals 

12. Types and application of welded joints 

13. Methods of controlling expansion during weld- 
ing. Preheating, skip welding, spacing, and 
transfer of heat- 

14. Methods and procedures for fabrication of steel 
structures and shaping of various steel plates in 
shop or field. l 

15. Methods of construction and erection of simple 
wooden framing including rafters, subfloors, 
partitions, and heavy timber members, includ- 
ing stringers, braces, fenders, beams, and floors.. 

16. Methods of visual inspection of welds 

202 Maintenance and/or Repair 
(No minimum qualifications.) 

203 Administrative and/or Clerical 

1. Functions of operational companies of a Con- 
struction Battalion 



3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 
3 

2 
2 

2 

1 



C C 
C C 



3 3 



190 



INDEX 



Acetylene torch, 116 
Alloys 

ferrous, hard-facing, 119 

non-ferrous, hard-facing, 119 

steel, 69 

types of, 117 
Anchor 

bolts, 40 

bracket, 16 
Assembly, pontoon, 3 

Backhaul 

line, 16 

rope, 8 
Balloon framing. 39 
Barges, pontoon, 4 
Base development plan, 5 
Bending metal, 101 
Bessemer converters, 65, 72 
Bessemer steel manufacturing 

process, 71 
Billet Mill, 74 
Blast furnace, 66 
Blocks, 2 

bridle, boom hoist, 19 

crane, 21, 22 

dipper, 9 

gantry bridle, 19 

hook, 20 
Block system of storing, 26 
Blooming mills, 73, 74 
Blueprints, 42, 100 
Bolted assemblies, 120 
Bolts, anchor, 40 
Boom, 29 

head, 9 

hoist bridle block, 19 
hoist reeving of, 19 



hoist reeving diagram, 18 

hoist rope, 8 

point sheave, 9 
Borod, 117 
Box hooks, 24 
Brace, 35, 53, 55, 60, 61 

timber, 62 
Bracing, let in, 55 
Bridge units, 4 
Bridging, 35, 48, 49 
Brinell testing machine, 78 
Bronze welding, 116 
Building frames, 39 
Bulldozer, 9 

Cable 

dump, 14 

hoist, 13 
Cable-operated dozer, 11 
Cap sills, 61 
Carboloy, 117 
Carbon, 68 
Carbon steels, 69 
Carpenter's squaro, 58 
Carrying joists, 47 
Caterpillar D7 tractor, 1 1 
Ceiling joists, 53 
Chocks, 27 

Chromium manganese, 116 
Clamshell, 7,21,115 

bucket, 21 

reeving diagram, 22 

reeving of, 20 
Classification of steel, 78 
Cobalt alloys, 116 
Collar tie, 59 
Colmonoy, 117 
Common joist, 47 



191 



Common rafters, 38 
Compass, 95 
Corner posts, 35, 50 
Corner studs, 35 
Cornice section, 44 
Cranes, 7 

floating, 4 

reeving of, 20 
Crane blocks, 21, 22 
Crane reeving diagram for a 

Model 82 Lorain, 20 
Cribbing, 30 
Cross-bridging, 49 
Crowd line, 15 
Crowd rope, 8 

Diagrams 

clamshell reeving, 22 

crane reeving, for a Model 82 

Lorain, 20 
reeving, 9 

reeving for backhaul line for 

Northwest Model 25, 16 
reeving, boom hoist, 18 
reeving, for crowd line on 

Northwest Model 25, 15 
reeving, for dipper-hoist line, 

Lorain Model 82, 10 
reeving, for hoist line for 

Northwest Model 25, 17 
reeving, for Laplant-Choate 

dozer, 11 
reeving, for LeTourneau Model 
M scraper, 12 
Dividers, 95, 99, 110 
Dipper 
block, 9 
hoist line, 10 
stick, 16 
trip rope, 8 
Dozers, 7, 13 
blades, 13, 115 
cable-operated, 11 
frames, 13, 112 
reeving of, 11 
Draglines, 7, 115 



Drawing wire, 75 
Drum, power control, 13 
Drum shaft, 19 
Dry docks, floating, 4 
Dump cable, 14 
Dunnage, 25, 27, 29 
methods of using, 25 

Electric arc, 119 

Electric furnace steel manufac- 
turing process, 72 
Erection, steel, 3 

Fabrication, 3 

Ferrous hard-facing alloys, 119 

Ferrous metallurgy, 83 

Fire stops, 41 

Floating cranes, 4 

Floating dry docks, 4 

Floor framing, 52 

Flooring, 49 

Foundation sill, 34 

Frames, 34 

building, 39 

dozer, 13, 112 
Framing 

balloon, 39 

floor, 52 

light-wood, 39 

platform, 42 

safety, 61 

square, 58 

western, 42 
Furnace, blast, 66 

Gantry, 19 

bridle block, 19 
Girders, 52 
Girts, 55 
Gun tackle, 20 

Hammers, 95 
Hard-facing, 115 
Hard-surfacing materials 

types of, 116 
Haschrome, 117 



192 



Headache ball, 23 
Header, 38 
Hoist 

cable, 13 

drum, 9 

line, 17 

rope, 8 
Hooks, 30 

block, 20 

tenders, 29 

Ingot, 73 

Instructor, Steelworker, 164 
Instruction, techniques of, 167 
Iron 

history of, 66 

pig, 66 

products, chemical composition 
of, 67 

Jacks, 2, 30 

Job completion report, 3, 123 
Job order, 94 
Job plan, 93, 148 
Job requisition, 3, 123 
Joists, 34, 52 

carrying, 47 

ceiling, 53 

common, 47 

ties, 52 

Layout tools, 95 

Leader, attributes of, 160 

Leadership, 159 

Ledger plate, 52 

Let-in bracing, 55 

LeTourneau Model M, 6-cubic- 

yard scraper, 13, 14 
Light-wood framing, 39 
Lorain Model 82 shovel, 9 
Luff tackle, 20 
Lumber, stacking, 27 

Manganal 117 

Manganese, 69 
Material storage, 24 



Metallurgy 
ferrous, 83 
of steel, books on, 83 

Navy Instructor, publications for, 

173 
Nickel, 116 

Non-ferrous hard-facing alloys, 
119 

Orders, 

giving, 155 

job, 94 

work, 3, 123 
Open-hearth steel manufacturing 

process, 70 
Oxyacetylene torch, 112, 119 

Padlock sheave, 17 
Partitions, 55 
Phosphorus, 69 
Pig iron, 66, 70 
Piers, 52 
Pile drivers, 7 

Pipe work, patterns for, 102 
Plates, 35, 53 

sole, 53 

top, 53 

purposes, 52 
Platform framing, 42 
Pontoon 

assembly, 3 

barges, 4 

strings, 2 

structures, 2 
Portland cement, 25 
Power control drum, 13 
Praise, 158 
Prick punch, 99 
Progress reports, 3, 123 
Protractor, 98 

Publications for Navy Instructor, 

173 
Punches, 96 



193 



Purchase 
threefold, 20 
twofold, 20 

Rafters, 35, 57 

common, 38 

cripple, 38 

hip, 38 

jack, 38 
Rafter truss, 60 
Rope, types of, 8 
Reeve, 2 
Reeving, 8 

boom hoists, 19 

clamshells, 20 

dozers, 11 

scrapers, 13 

shovels, 15 
Reeving diagrams, 9 

for backhaul line for Northwest 
Model 25, 16 

for crowd line on Northwest 

Model 25, 15 
for dipper-hoist line, Lorain 
Model 82, 10 

for hoist line for Northwest 
Model 25, 17 

for Laplant-Choate dozer, 11 

for LeTourneau Model M 
scraper, 12 
Replacement parts, designing of, 

123 
Reports 

job completion, 123 

progress, 3, 123 
Reprimand, 158 
Requisitions, job, 3, 123 
Ribbon, 35 
Ridge, 38 
Rigging, 2, 3, 30 

gear, 29 

safety, 27 
Right-hand boom point sheave, 19 
Riveted assemblies, 120 
Rockwell hardness tester, 78 
Rollers, 2 



Roof framing, terms, 57 
Roofs, types of, 57 
Rooter, 9 
Rules, 95 

Safety, framing, 60 
Scrapers, 7, 9 

LeTourneau Model M, 6-cubic- 
yard, 13, 14 

reeving of, 13 
Scratch awl, 96 
Scriber, 96 
Shaft 

drum, 19 

shipper, 16 
Sheathing, tongue and groove, 49 
Sheave, 9 

boom point, 9 

padlock, 17 

right-hand boom point, 19 
Sheet steel, 74 
Shipper shaft, 16 
Shore scleroscope, 78 
Shovel boom, 9 
Shovels 7, 115 

Lorain Model, 82, 9 

reeving of, 15 
Signalmen, 29 
Silicon, 69 
Sill plate, 46 
Sills, 34, 44, 52 

box, 46 

cap, 61 

laminated, 44 

lapped, 46 

solid, 44 
Sill section, 44 
Slings, 2, 24, 30 
Soapstone, 95, 108 
Socket, wedge, 16 
Softeners, 29 
Sole plate, 53 
Solid bridging, 49 
Spot heating, 112 

method 115 

straightening by, 116 



194 



Square, 

carpenter's, 58 

framing, 58 
Steel, 70 

alloy, 69 

carbon, 69 

casting of, 77 

classification of, 78, 80-81 

erection, 3 

grain size, 82 

hardness of, 78 

high carbon, 117 

level, 95 

low-alloy, 117 

low-carbon, 117 

making of, 70 

manufacturing processes, 70 
medium-carbon, 117 
physical properties of, 82, 123 
physical testing of, 77 
products, chemical composition 

of, 67 
shapes, forming of, 72 
sheet, 74 
stamping of, 77 
tape, 95 
tendons, 7 

tensile strength of, 78 
Stellite, 117 
Stoodite, 117 

Storing block system of, 26 
Straight edge, 95 
Stringers, 61 
Strings, pontoon, 2 
Structures, pontoon, 2 
Studs, 35 
Subflooring, 49 
Sulphur, 69 
Supply depots, 24 



T-joint, 118 
T-posts, 50 
Tackle, 2 

gun, 20 

luff, 20 
Tag lines, 30 
Template, 59, 108, 112 
Tendons, steel, 7 
Tensile strength cl steel, 78 
Ties, joist, 52 
Timber, 61 

braces, 61 
Tongue and groove sheathing, 49 
Tractor, caterpillar D7, 11 
Training Aids, 172 
Trammel points, 95, 100 
Trimmer, 39 
Truss, rafter, 60 
Trusses, 59 
Tungsten alloys, 116 
Tungsten carbide, 117 

Wedge socket, 16 
Welding, 2 

bronze, 116 
Western framing, 42 
Wharves, 4 
Whip, 20 
Wire, drawing, 76 
Wire rope, 2, 7 

specifications, 7 

stock control, 24 

storage, 24 
Work orders, 3, 123 
Working drawing for wood garage : 

43 

Working steel, mechanical 
methods of, 
Hammering, 73 
pressing, 73 
rolling, 73 



195 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: !»54 



