NONRESIDENT 

TRAINING 

COURSE 





November 1996 



Steelworker, Volume 2 

NAVEDTRA 14251 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 





Although the words “he,” “him,” and 
“his” are used sparingly in this course to 
enhance communication, they are not 
intended to be gender driven or to affront or 
discriminate against anyone. 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 





COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC 

6490 SAUFLEY FIELD RD 
PENSACOLA, FL 32509-5237 


ERRATA #1 


29 May 2001 


Specific Instructions and Errata for 
Nonresident Training Course 

STEELWORKER, VOLUME 2, NAVEDTRA 14251 

1. This errata supersedes all previous errata. No attempt has been made to 

issue corrections for errors in typing, punctuation, etc., that do not affect 

your ability to answer the question or questions. 

2. To receive credit for deleted questions, show this errata to your local 

course administrator (ESO/scorer). The local course administrator is directed 

to correct the course and the answer key by indicating the questions deleted. 

3. Assignment Booklet, NAVEDTRA 14251. 

Delete the following questions, and leave the corresponding spaces blank 

on the answer sheets: 

Questions Questions 


2-44 

5-12 

3-16 

6-31 

3-17 

7-23 

3-18 

7-55 

4-45 

8-51 

4-52 

8-52 

4-55 





PREFACE 


By enrolling in this self-study course, you have demonstrated a desire to improve yourself and the Navy. 
Remember, however, this self-study course is only one part of the total Navy training program. Practical 
experience, schools, selected reading, and your desire to succeed are also necessary to successfully round 
out a fully meaningful training program. 

COURSE OVERVIEW: In completing this nonresident training course, you will demonstrate a 
knowledge of the subject matter by correctly answering questions on the following subjects: 

Technical Administration 

Layout and Fabrication of Sheet Metal and Fiberglass Duct 
Structural Terms/Layout and Fabrication of Structural Steel and Pipe 
Fiber Line 
Wire Rope 
Rigging 

Reinforcing Steel 

Pre-engineered Structures: Buildings, K-Spans, Towers, and Antennas 

Pre-engineered Storage Tanks 

Pontoons 

Pre-engineered Structures: Short Airfield for Tactical Support 
Steelworker Tools and Equipment 

TH E COURSE: This self-study course is organized into subject matter areas, each containing learning 
objectives to help you determine what you should learn along with text and illustrations to help you 
understand the information. The subject matter reflects day-to-day requirements and experiences of 
personnel in the rating or skill area. It also reflects guidance provided by Enlisted Community Managers 
(ECMs) and other senior personnel, technical references, instructions, etc., and either the occupational or 
naval standards, which are listed in the Manual of Navy Enlisted Manpower Personnel Classifications 
and Occupational Standards, NAVPERS 18068. 

THE QUESTIONS: The questions that appear in this course are designed to help you understand the 
material in the text. 

VALUE: In completing this course, you will improve your military and professional knowledge. 
Importantly, it can also help you study for the Navy-wide advancement in rate examination. If you are 
studying and discover a reference in the text to another publication for further information, look it up. 

1996 Edition Prepared by 
SWC Michael P. DePumpo 


Published by 

NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER 


l 


NAVSUP Logistics Tracking Number 
0504-LP-026-8850 



Sailor’s Creed 


“I am a United States Sailor. 

I will support and defend the 
Constitution of the United States of 
America and I will obey the orders 
of those appointed over me. 

I represent the fighting spirit of the 
Navy and those who have gone 
before me to defend freedom and 
democracy around the world. 

I proudly serve my country’s Navy 
combat team with honor, courage 
and commitment. 

I am committed to excellence and 
the fair treatment of all.” 


11 










CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 

[1] Technical Administration. 

[2] Layout and Fabrication of Sheet Metal and Fiber-glass Duct. . 

[3] Structural Steel Terms/Layout and Fabrication of Structural Steel 

and Pipe. 

[3] Fiber Line. 

[5] Wire Rope. 

[6] Rigging. 

|T| Reinforcing Steel. 

[8] Pre-engineered Structures: Buildings, K-Spans, Towers, 

and Antennas. 

[9] Pre-engineered Storage Tanks. 

|To] Pontoons. 

nil Pre-engineered Structures: Short Airfield for Tactical 

support. 

ITzl Steelworker Tools and Equipment. 


PAGE 

■ [HI 

m 


.nn 

\M 

[H 

[63 

□3 


8-1 

iM 


.. 11-1 

TT\\ 


APPENDIX 

m Glossary. 

Ill . | Mathematics. 

Mil. i Metric Conversion Tables. 

1 1 V.lti andSignals. 

m References Used to Develop This TRAM AN 
INDEX. 


. . . Al-l 
. ~AM 
. Alll-l 
. AIV-1 

... a vn 

INDEX-1 


111 








































































SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 


Safety is a paramount concern for all personnel. Many of the Naval Ship's 
Technical manuals, manufacturer's technical manuals, and every Planned Mainte¬ 
nance System (PMS) maintenance requirement card (MRC) include safety precau¬ 
tions. Additionally, OPNAVINST 5100.19 (series), Naval Occupational Safety and 
Health (NAVOSH) Program Manual for Forces Afloat, and OPNAVINST 5100.23 
(series), NAVOSH Program Manual, provide safety and occupational health infor¬ 
mation. The safety precautions are for your protection and to protect equipment. 

During equipment operation and preventive or corrective maintenance, the 
procedures may call for personal protective equipment (PPE), such as goggles, 
gloves, safety shoes, hard hats, hearing protection, and respirators. When specified, 
your use of PPE is mandatory. You must select PPE appropriate for the job since 
the equipment is manufactured and approved for different levels of protection. If 
the procedure does not specify the PPE, and you aren't sure, ask your safety officer. 

Most machinery, spaces, and tools requiring you to wear hearing protection are 
posted with hazardous noise signs or labels. Eye hazardous areas requiring you to 
wear goggles or safety glasses are also posted. In areas where corrosive chemicals 
are mixed or used, an emergency eyewash station must be installed. 

All lubricating agents, oil, cleaning material, and chemicals used in mainte¬ 
nance and repair are hazardous materials. Examples of hazardous materials are 
gasoline, coal distillates, and asphalt. Gasoline contains a small amount of lead and 
other toxic compounds. Ingestion of gasoline can cause lead poisoning. Coal 
distillates, such as benzene or naphthalene in benzol, are suspected carcinogens. 
Avoid all skin contact and do not inhale the vapors and gases from these distillates. 
Asphalt contains components suspected of causing cancer. Anyone handling asphalt 
must be trained to handle it in a safe manner. 

Hazardous materials require careful handling, storage, and disposal. PMS 
documentation provides hazard warnings or refers the maintenance man to the 
Hazardous Materials User's Guide. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) also 
provide safety precautions for hazardous materials. All commands are required to 
have an MSDS for each hazardous material they have in their inventory. You must 
be familiar with the dangers associated with the hazardous materials you use in your 
work. Additional information is available from you command's Hazardous Mate¬ 
rial Coordinator. OPNAVINST 4110.2 (series), Hazardous Material Control and 
Management, contains detailed information on the hazardous material program. 

Recent legislation and updated Navy directives implemented tighter constraints 
on environmental pollution and hazardous waste disposal. OPNAVINST 5090.1 
(series), Environmental and Natural Resources Program Manual, provides detailed 
information. Your command must comply with federal, state, and local environ¬ 
mental regulations during any type of construction and demolition. Your supervisor 
will provide training on environmental compliance. 

Cautions and warnings of potentially hazardous situations or conditions are 
highlighted, where needed, in each chapter of this TRAM AN. Remember to be 
safety conscious at all times. 


IV 



SUMMARY OF STEELWORKER 
TRAINING MANUALS 


VOLUME 1 

Steelworker, Volume 1, NAVEDTRA 14250, consists of chapters on the fol¬ 
lowing subjects: properties and Uses of Metal; Basic Heat Treatment; Introduction 
to Welding; Gas Cutting; Gas Welding; Soldering Brazing, Braze Welding and 
Wearfacing; Shielded Metal-Arc Welding and Wearfacing; and Gas Shielded-Arc 
Welding. 


VOLUME 2 

Steelworker, Volume2, NAVEDTRA 14251, consists of chapters on the fol¬ 
lowing subjects: Technical Administration; Layout and Fabrication of Sheet Metal 
and Fiber-Glass Duct; Structural Steel Terms/Layout and Fabrication of Structural 
Steel and Pipe; Fiber Line; Wire Rope; Rigging; Reinforcing Steel; Pre-engineered 
Structures: Buildings, K-Spans, Towers, and Antennas; Pre-engineered Storage 
Tanks; Pontoons; pre-engineered Structures: Short Airfield for Tactical Support; 
and Steelworker Tools and Equipment. 


v 



CREDITS 


The following copyrighted illustrations in this TRAMAN are included 
through the courtesy of MIC Industries: 


Figure 8-11 
Figure 8-24 
Figure 8-25 


VI 



INSTRUCTIONS FOR TAKING THE COURSE 


ASSIGNMENTS 

The text pages that you are to study are listed at 
the beginning of each assignment. Study these 
pages carefully before attempting to answer the 
questions. Pay close attention to tables and 
illustrations and read the learning objectives. 
The learning objectives state what you should be 
able to do after studying the material. Answering 
the questions correctly helps you accomplish the 
objectives. 

SELECTING YOUR ANSWERS 

Read each question carefully, then select the 
BEST answer. You may refer freely to the text. 
The answers must be the result of your own 
work and decisions. You are prohibited from 
referring to or copying the answers of others and 
from giving answers to anyone else taking the 
course. 

SUBMITTING YOUR ASSIGNMENTS 

To have your assignments graded, you must be 
enrolled in the course with the Nonresident 
Training Course Administration Branch at the 
Naval Education and Training Professional 
Development and Technology Center 
(NETPDTC). Following enrollment, there are 
two ways of having your assignments graded: 
(1) use the Internet to submit your assignments 
as you complete them, or (2) send all the 
assignments at one time by mail to NETPDTC. 

Grading on the Internet: Advantages to 
Internet grading are: 

• you may submit your answers as soon as 
you complete an assignment, and 

• you get your results faster; usually by the 
next working day (approximately 24 hours). 

In addition to receiving grade results for each 
assignment, you will receive course completion 
confirmation once you have completed all the 


assignments. To submit your assignment 
answers via the Internet, go to: 

http ://courses.cnet.na vv.mil 

Grading by Mail: When you submit answer 
sheets by mail, send all of your assignments at 
one time. Do NOT submit individual answer 
sheets for grading. Mail all of your assignments 
in an envelope, which you either provide 
yourself or obtain from your nearest Educational 
Services Officer (ESO). Submit answer sheets 
to: 

COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N331 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 

Answer Sheets: All courses include one 
“scannable” answer sheet for each assignment. 
These answer sheets are preprinted with your 
SSN, name, assignment number, and course 
number. Explanations for completing the answer 
sheets are on the answer sheet. 

Do not use answer sheet reproductions: Use 

only the original answer sheets that we 
provide—reproductions will not work with our 
scanning equipment and cannot be processed. 

Follow the instructions for marking your 
answers on the answer sheet. Be sure that blocks 
1, 2, and 3 are filled in correctly. This 
information is necessary for your course to be 
properly processed and for you to receive credit 
for your work. 

COMPLETION TIME 

Courses must be completed within 12 months 
from the date of enrollment. This includes time 
required to resubmit failed assignments. 


vii 



PASS/FAIL ASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES 

If your overall course score is 3.2 or higher, you 
will pass the course and will not be required to 
resubmit assignments. Once your assignments 
have been graded you will receive course 
completion confirmation. 

If you receive less than a 3.2 on any assignment 
and your overall course score is below 3.2, you 
will be given the opportunity to resubmit failed 
assignments. You may resubmit failed 
assignments only once. Internet students will 
receive notification when they have failed an 
assignment—they may then resubmit failed 
assignments on the web site. Internet students 
may view and print results for failed 
assignments from the web site. Students who 
submit by mail will receive a failing result letter 
and a new answer sheet for resubmission of each 
failed assignment. 

COMPLETION CONFIRMATION 

After successfully completing this course, you 
will receive a letter of completion. 

ERRATA 

Errata are used to correct minor errors or delete 
obsolete information in a course. Errata may 
also be used to provide instructions to the 
student. If a course has an errata, it will be 
included as the first page(s) after the front cover. 
Errata for all courses can be accessed and 
viewed/downloaded at: 

http://www.advancement.cnet.navy.mil 

STUDENT FEEDBACK QUESTIONS 

We value your suggestions, questions, and 
criticisms on our courses. If you would like to 
communicate with us regarding this course, we 
encourage you, if possible, to use e-mail. If you 
write or fax, please use a copy of the Student 
Comment form that follows this page. 


For subject matter questions: 

E-mail: n314.products@cnet.navy.mil 

Phone: Comm: (850) 452-1001, Ext. 1826 

DSN: 922-1001, Ext. 1826 
FAX: (850)452-1370 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 

Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N314 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32509-5237 

For enrollment, shipping, grading, or 
completion letter questions 

E-mail: fleetservices @ cnet.navy.mil 

Phone: Toll Free: 877-264-8583 

Comm: (850)452-1511/1181/1859 
DSN: 922-1511/1181/1859 
FAX: (850)452-1370 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 

Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N331 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 

NAVAL RESERVE RETIREMENT CREDIT 

If you are a member of the Naval Reserve, 
you may earn retirement points for successfully 
completing this course, if authorized under 
current directives governing retirement of Naval 
Reserve personnel. For Naval Reserve retire¬ 
ment, this course is evaluated at 12 points. 
(Refer to Administrative Procedures for Naval 
Resen’ists on Inactive Duty, BUPERSINST 
1001.39, for more information about retirement 
points.) 


viii 



Student Comments 


Course Title: Steelworker, Volume 2 


NAVEDTRA: 14251 


Date: 


We need some information about you: 




Rate/Rank and Name: 

SSN: 

Command/Unit 


Street Address: 

City: 

State/FPO: 

Zip 


Your comments, suggestions, etc .: 


Privacy Act Statement: Under authority of Title 5, USC 301, information regarding your military status is 
requested in processing your comments and in preparing a reply. This information will not be divulged without 
written authorization to anyone other than those within DOD for official use in determining performance. 


NETPDTC 1550/41 (Rev 4-00 


IX 





CHAPTER 1 


TECHNICAL ADMINISTRATION 


When you achieve the status of PETTY 
OFFICER, it becomes your most important 
advancement in the Navy. Sewing on your first 
chevron carries many responsibilities with it. Among 
these responsibilities is the commitment to become an 
effective supervisor/leader, instructor, and 
administrator in all military, technical, and safety 
areas of your rating. 

As a petty officer, you will begin to develop your 
ability to manage the work that is done by your 
personnel as well as to supervis^lead them. 

As you gain experience as a petty officer and 
increase your technical abilities as a Steelworker, your 
skill as leader becomes more and more important as 
you lead/supervise personnel assigned to you. At each 
rating level, you will be given more responsibility and 
wi 11 be expected to seek the responsi bi I ity associ ated 
with that particular rating level. The intent of this 
chapter is to help you understand the importance of 
leadership, to show you the practical aspects of 
applying leadership principles coupled with sound 
administrative practices, and to help you use and 
prepare the administrative "paperwork" that you will 
be involved with as a crew leader. 

CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATION 

As your crew leader or supervisor experience 
grows, you begi n to assume greater responsi bi I ity for 
the work of others. As this is occurring, you will also 
assume greater administrative duties. For this reason, 
you must understand that proper administration is the 
backbone of anv project. You will have personnel 
assigned to your project who must be employed 
effectively and safely. Therefore, you not only have to 
meet production requirements and conduct training 
but also must know and apply the procedures required 
to process "paperwork" correctly, 

Administration is the mechanical means that a 
person or an organization uses to plan, organize, 
supervise, manage, and document activities. It 
provides a means of telling you such things as what 
has been planned, what is required, what has occured, 
what is completed, what personnel are assigned, and 
soon. Try keeping all that information in your head 


for even a small assignment/project. You will begin to 
understand the variety of methods used to administer 
the job. Administration ranges from just keeping a 
notebook in your back pocket to filling out a variety 
of reports and forms. 

As a growing leader in the Navy, you must learn 
about and become effective in the use of 
administrative tools as well as the tools of your trade. 
Once you become comfortable with using these tools, 
you will then develop the skill of a successful 
administrator who can lead and direct people in 
getting the job done right and done well. 

PLANNING PERSONNEL WORK 
ASSIGNMENTS 

While planning for a small or large project, you 
must consider the abilities of your crew. Use PROP 
data, which will be discussed later in the chapter. Next, 
consider any special tools and equipment you will 
need and arrange to have them at the jobsite when the 
work is started. Determine who will use these tools, 
and ensure the crew members assigned know how to 
use them Properly and safely. 

To assure that the project is done properly and on 
time, you should consider the method of 
accomplishment as well as the skill level (PRCP level) 
of your crew. When there is more than one way of 
constructing a particular project, you must analyze the 
methods and choose the one best suited to the project 
conditions and the skill levels of your crew. Listen to 
suggestions from others. If you can simplify a method 
and save time and effort, by all means do it. 

As the petty officer in charge of a crew, you are 
responsible for crew member time management as 
well as your own. You must plan constructive work 
for your crew. Always remember to PLAN AHEAD! 
A sure sign of poor planning is that of crew members 
standing idle each morning while you plan the events 
for the day. At the close of each day, you should 
confirm the plans for the next workday. I n doing so, 
you will need answers on the availability y and use of 
manpower, equipment, and supplies. Keep the 
following questions in mind: 


1-1 



1. Manpower. Who is to do what? How is it to be 
done? When is it to be finished? Since idleness will 
breed discontent, have you arranged for another job to 
start as soon as the first one is finished? Is every crew 
member fully used? 

2. Equipment. Are all necessary tools and 
equipment on hand todothejob? Is safety equipment 

on hand? 

3. Supplies. Are all necessary supplies on hand to 
start the job? If not, who should take action? What 
supply delivery schedules must you work around? 

Have a definite work schedule and inspection 
plan. Set up realistic daily goals or quotas. Personally 
plan to check the work being done at intervals and the 
progress toward meeting the goals. Spot-check for 
accuracy, for workmanship, and the need for training. 

Organizing 

As a crew leader or supervisor, you must be able 
to ORGAN IZE. This means that you must analyze the 
requirements of a job and structure the sequence of 
events that will bring about the desired results. 

You must develop the ability to look at a job and 
estimate how many man-hours are required for 
completion. You will probably be given a completion 
deadline along with the job requirements. Next (or 
perhaps even before making your estimate of 
man-hours), plan the job sequences. Makesurethat 
you know the answers to questions such as the 
following: 

• What is the size of the job? 

• Are the materials on hand? 

• What tools are available, and what is their 
condition? 

• Is anyone scheduled for leave? 

• Will you need to request outside support? 

After getting answers to these questions, you 
should be able to assign your crews and set up tentative 
schedules. If work shifts are necessary, arrange for the 
smooth transition from one shift to another with a 
minimum of work interruption. How well you do is 
directly related to your ability to organize. 

Delegating 

In addition to organizing, you must know how to 
DELEGATE. This is one of the most important 
characteristics of a good supervisor. Failure to 


delegate is a common failing of a new supervisor. It is 
natural to want to carry out the details of a job yourself, 
particularly when you know that you can do it better 
than any of your subordinates. Trying to do too much, 
however, is one of the quickest ways to get bogged 
down in details and to slow down a large operation. 
On some projects, you will have crews working in 
several different places. Obviously, you cannot be in 
two places at the same time. There will be many 
occasions when a crew member needs assistance or 
instruction on some problem that arises. If he or she 
has to wait until you are available, then valuable time 
will be lost. Therefore, it is extremely important for 
you to delegate authority to one or more of your 
experienced crew members to make decisions in 
certain matters. However, you must remember that 
when you delegate authority, you are still responsible 
for the job. Therefore, it is very important that you 
select a highly qualified individual when you delegate 
authority. 

Coordinating 

A supervisor must be able to COORDINATE. 
When several jobs are in progress, you need to 
coordinate completion times so one can follow 
another without delay. Possessing coordinating skill is 
also very helpful when working closely with your 
sister companies or shops. Coordination is not limited 
to projects only. You would not want to approve a 
leave chit for a crew member and then remember a 
school during the same time period. Nor would you 
want to schedule a crew member for the rifle range 
only to find the range coaches unavailable at that time. 

Production 

The primary responsibility of every supervisor is 
PRODUCTION. You and your crew can attain your 
best by doi ng the fol I owi ng: 

• Plan, organize, and coordinate the work to get 
maximum production with minimum effort and 
confusion. 

• Delegate as much authority as possible, but 
remain responsible for the final product. 

• Continuously supervise and control to make sure 
the work is done properly. 

• Be patient ("Seabees are flexible and 
resourceful"). 


1-2 



Supervising/Leading Work Teams 

Before starting the project, you should make sure 
your crew understands what is expected of them. Give 
your crew instructions, and urge them to ask questions. 
Be honest in your answers. If you do not know, say so; 
then find the correct answers and inform your crew. 
Establish goals for each workday and encourage your 
crew members to work together as a team while 
accomplishing these goals. Goals should be set that 
will keep your crew busy but also ensure these goals 
are realistic. Do not overload your crew or undertask 
them. During an emergency, most crew members will 
make an all-out effort to meet the deadline. But people 
are not machines, and when there is no emergency, 
they cannot be expected to work at an excessively high 
rate continuously. 

While the job is underway, check from time to 
time to ensure that the work is progressing 
satisfactorily. Determine if the proper methods, the 
materials, the tools, and the equipment are being used. 
If crew members are doing the job incorrectly, stop 
them, and point out what is being done 
unsatisfactorily. Then explain the correct procedure 
and check to see that it is followed. 

NOTE: When you check the work of your crew 
members, do it in such a way that they will feel that 
the purpose of checking is to teach, guide, or direct, 
rather than to criticize or find fault. 

Make sure your crew members take all applicable 
safety precautions and wear/use safety apparel/ 
equipment that is required. Also, watch for hazardous 
conditions, improper use of tools and equipment, and 
unsafe work practices that could cause mishaps and 
possibly result in injury to personnel. Many young 
personnel ignore danger or think a particular safety 
practice is unnecessary. This can normally be 
corrected by proper instruction and training. Safety 
awareness is paramount, and it must be a state of 
mind and enforced daily until the crew understands its 
importance. When this occurs, you MUST NOT allow 
the crew to become complacent in safety matters. 
Constant training and awareness is the key; therefore, 
conduct safety lectures daily! 

When time permits, rotate crew members on 
various jobs within the project. Rotation gives them 
varied experience. It also helps you, as a crew leader, 
to get the job done when a crew member is out for any 
length of time. 


As a crew leader, you should be able to get others 
to work together in getting the job accomplished. 
Maintain an approachable attitude toward your crew 
so that each crew member will feel free to seek your 
advice when in doubt about any phase of the work. 
Emotional balance is especially important; you must 
not panic before your crew, nor be unsure of yourself 
in the face of conflict. 

Be tactful and courteous in dealing with your 
crew. Never show partiality to certain members of the 
crew. Keep your crew members informed on matters 
that affect them personally or concern their work. 
Also, seek to maintain a high level of morale because 
low morale can have a detrimental effect on safety 
awareness and the quality and quantity of the work 
your crew performs. 

As you advance in rate, more and more of your 
time will be spent in supervising others. Therefore, 
learn as much as you can about the subject of 
supervision. Study books on supervision as well as 
leadership. Also, watch how other supervisors operate 
and do not be afraid to ASK QU E STI ON S. 

TOOL KITS AND REQUISITIONS 

Tool kits contain all of the craft hand tools 
required by one four-member construction crew of a 
given rating to pursue their trade. The kits kits can be 
augmented with additional tools to complete a specific 
job requirement. However, kits must not be reduced in 
any type of item and must be maintained at 100 percent 
of the kit allowance. 

As a crew leader, you are authorized to draw the 
tools required by the crew. In so doing, you are 
responsible for the following: 

* Maintaining complete tool kits at all times 

* Assigning tools within the crew 

* Ensuring proper use and care of assigned tools 
by the crew 

* Preserving tools not in use 

* Securing assigned tools 

TOOL KIT INVENTORIES 

To ensure that the tools are maintained properly, 
the operations officer and the supply officer establish 
a formal tool kit inventory and inspection program. 
You, as a crew leader, must have a tool kit inventory 
performed at least once a month. Damaged and worn 
tools must be returned to the central toolroom (CTR) 


1-3 



for replacement. Tools requiring routine maintenance 
are turned in to CTR for repair and reissue. 
Requisitions will be submitted through prescribed 
channels for replacement items. 

PREPARING REQUISITIONS 

As a crew leader, you should become familiar with 
forms that are used to request material or services 
through the Naval Supply System. Printed forms are 
available that provide all the necessary information for 
physical transfer of the material and accounting 
requirements. 

Two forms used for ordering materials are the 
Single-Line Item Consumption/Management 
Document (Manual), NAVSUP Form 1250 ( fig. 1-1)| 
and the Requisition and Invoice/Shipping Document, 
DD Form 1149 Kfiq. 1-21 . 

As a crew leader, you are not usually required 
to make up the entire NAVSUP Form 1250; 
however, you must list the stock number (when 
available) of the item, the quantity required, and 
the name or description of each item needed. This 
form is turned in to the company expediter, who 
will check it over, complete the rest of the 
information required, and sign it. Then it is 
forwarded to the material liaison officer (MLO) 
or supply department for processing. 

You are not likely to use DD Form 1149 often 
since the items most frequently ordered are bulk fuels 
and lubricants. This form is limited to a single page 
and must contain no more than nine line items. It is 


not necessary to fill in all the blocks on this form when 
it is used as a requisition. 

When ordering material, you need to know about 
the national stock number (NSN) system. Information 
on the NSN system and other topics relating to supply 
is provided in Military Requirements for Petty Officer 
Third Class, NAVEDTRA 10044-A. 

TIMEKEEPING 

In a battalion deployed overseas, as well as at 
shore-based activities, your duties can involve the 
posting of entries on time cards for military 
personnel. Therefore, you should know the type of 
information called for on timecards and understand 
the importance of accuracy in labor reporting. You 
will find that the labor reporting system primarily 
used in Naval Mobile Construction Battalions 
(NMCBs) and the system used at shore-based 
activities are similar. 

A labor accounting system is mandatory to record 
and measure the number of man-hours that a unit 
spends on various functions. In this system, labor 
utilization data is collected daily in sufficient detail 
and in a way that enables the operations officer to 
compile the data readily. This helps the operations 
officer manage manpower resources and prepare 
reports to higher authority. 

A unit must account for all labor used to carry out 
its assignment, so management can determine the 
amount of labor used on the project. Labor costs are 
figured and actual man-hours are compared with 



1-4 








































































Figure 1-2.—DD Form 1149. 


previous estimates based on jobs of a similar nature. 
When completed, this information is used by unit 
managers and higher commands for developing 
planning standards. Although labor accounting 
systems can vary slightly from one command to 
another, the system described here can be considered 
typical. 

CATEGORIES OF LABOR 

The type of labor performed must be broken down 
and reported by category to show how labor has been 
used. For timekeeping and labor reporting purposes, 
all labor is classified as either productive or overhead. 

Productive Labor 

PRODUCTIVE LABOR includes labor that directly 
or indirectly contributes to the accomplishment of the 


mission of the unit, including construction operations, 
military operations, and training. Productive labor is 
accounted for in three categories: direct labor, 
indirect labor, and military, which is called "other" on 
some timekeeping cards. 

1. DIRECT LABOR includes labor expended 
directly on assigned construction tasks either in the field 
or in the shop that contributes directly to the completion 
of an end product. Direct labor must be reported 
separately for each assigned construction task. 

2. INDIRECT LABOR comprises labor required 
to support construction operations but does not produce 
an end product itself. 

3. MILITARY or "Other" includes military 
functions and training necessary to support the 
mission. 


1-5 

































































Overhead Labor 

OVERHEAD LABOR is not considered to be 
productive labor because it does not contribute 
directly or indirectly to the completion of an end 
product. Included is labor that must be performed 
regardless of the assigned mission. 

LABOR CODES 

During the planning and scheduling of a 
construction project, each phase of the project 
considered as direct labor is given an identifying code. 
Because there are many types of construction projects 
involving different operations, codes for direct labor 
reporting can vary from one activity to another. For 
example, excavating and setting forms can be assigned 
code R-15; laying block, code R- 16; and installing 


bond beams, code R-17. You will use direct labor 
codes to report each hour spent by each of your crew 
members during each workday on assigned 
construction tasks. 

Codes are also used to report ti me spent by crew 
members in the following categories: indirect labor, 
military operations and readiness, disaster control 
operations, training, and overhead labor. The codes 
shown in lfiqure l-3| are used at most activities to 
indicate time spent in these categories. 

TIMEKEEPING CARDS 

Your report is submitted on a Daily Labor 
Distribution Report form (timekeeping card), like the 
one shown in lfiqure 1-41 The form provides a 
breakdown by man-hours of the activities in the 
various labor codes for each crew member for each 


PRODUCTIVE LABOR. Productive labor includes all labor that directly contributes to the accomplishment of the Naval 
Mobile Construction Battalion, including construction operations and readiness, disaster recovery operations, and training. 


DIRECT LABOR. This category includes all labor expended directly on assigned construction tasks, either in the field or in 
he shop, and which contributes directly to the completion of the end product 


INDIRECT LABOR. This category comprises labor required to support construction operations, but which does not produce 
n itself. Indirect labor reporting codes are as follows: 

X01 Construction Equipment Maintenance, X04 Project Expediting (Shop X06 Project Material Support 

Repair and Records Planners) X07 Tool and Spare Parts Issue 

X02 Operation and Engineering X05 Location Moving X08 Other 

X03 Project Supervision 

MILITARY OPERATIONS AND READINES. This category comprises all manpower expended in actual military 
operations, unit embarkation, and planning and preparations necessary to insure unit military and mobility readiness. Reporting 
codes areas follows: 


M01 Military Operations M04 Unit Movement 
M02 Military Security M05 Mobility Preparation 
M03 Embarkation 

DISASTER CONTROL OPERATIONS 


M06 Contingency M08 Mobility & Defense 

M07 Military Administrative Exercise 
Functions M09 Other 


D01 Disaster Control Operations D02 Disaster Control Exercise 

TRAINING. This category includes attendance at service schools, factory and industrial training courses, fleet type training, 
and short courses, military training, and organized training conducted within the battalion. Reporting codes are as follows: 

T01 Technical Training T03 Disaster Control Training T05 Safety Training 

T02 Military Training T04 Leadership Training T06 Training Administration 

OVERHEAD LABOR. This category includes labor which must be performed regardless of whether a mission is assigned 
and which does not contribute to the assigned mission. Reporting codes are as follows 


Y01 Administrative & Personnel 
Y02 Medical& Dental Department 
Y03 Navy Exchange and Special Semites 
Y04 Supply& Disbursing 
Y05 commissary 


Y06 Camp Upkeep^ Repairs 
Y07 security 
Y08 Leave& Liberty 
Y09 Sickcall, Dental& 
Hospitalization 


Y10 personal Affairs 
Yll Lost Time 
Y12 TAD not for unit 
Y13 Other 


Figure 1-3.—Labor codes. 


1-6 








Figure 1-4.—Typical timekeeping card. 


day on any given project. It is reviewed at the company 
level by the staff and platoon commander and then 
initialed by the company commander before it is 
forwarded to the operations department. It is tabulated 
by the management division of the operations 
department, along with all of the daily labor 
distribution reports received from each company and 
department in the unit. This report is the means by 
which the operations office analyzes the labor 
distribution of total manpower resources for each day. 
It also serves as feeder information for preparation of 
the monthly operations report and any other source 
reports required of the unit. This information must be 
accurate and timely. Each level in the company 
organization should review the report for an analysis 
of its own internal construction management and 
performance. 

PERSONNEL READINESS 

CAPABILITY PROGRAM 

The Personnel Readiness Capability Program 
(PRCP) was developed for use within the Naval 
Construction Force (NCF). The PRCP is based upon 
skill inventories of personnel and provides personnel 


information to all levels of management within the 
NCF. 'Ibis increases the ability of management to 
control, to plan, and to make decisions concerning the 
readiness of each unit. The PRCP is also used to 
identify the rating skills required and to determine the 
formal training and individual skills required by the 
Naval Facilities Engineering Command ! Figure T3] is 
an example of a PRCP. 

NAVFAC P-458 

Guidance for the PRCP has been published in a 
one volume publication, NAVFAC P-458, to ease its 
use by staff personnel and PRCP interviewers. The 
PRCP contains standard skill definitions applicable to 
the NCF, Standards and Guides, that consist of seven 
separate manuals (one for each Seabee rating), and is 
the primary tool of the interviewer in collecting and 
updating data. 

SKILL INVENTORIES 

An accurate and current skill inventory is the 
backbone of PRCP. Without this information, any 
planning done would be questionable. The PRCP is 
























































FASCORPT/SYM NO.0404Q/82060R01 PRCP SKILL UPDATE RECORD 

GEMS REPORT NO. 1200-0 

NCTC PORHUE UIC0612A CET COMPANY 


FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
PAGE 1 
B4 FEB 15 


UIC PNEC 0000 SNEC9502 


i SKILL CATEGORY 


SKILL TITLE 

SKILL 

SKILL 

SKILL 

CODE 

LEVEL 

YEAR 

GENERAL MATHEMATICS 

000 

1 

81 

PLANNING, ESTIMATING AND SCHEDULING 

030 

1 

84 

INSTRUCTING 

oao 

3 

84 

SAFETY 

090 

1 

81 

PLUMBING 

710 

2 

81 

SHORE BASED BOILERS 

720 

2 

81 

WATER TREATMENT 

740 

3 

81 

SEWAGE DISP AND FIELD SANITATION 

750 

2 

81 

AIR-CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION 

760 

1 

81 

DRIVERS LICENSE 

801 

1 

81 

DISEASE VECTOR PEST CONTROL 

812 

1 

81 

AMPHIBIOUS EMBARKATION 

901 

1 

81 

FIREFIGHTING 

904 

1 

81 

CIVIL DISTURBANCE 

907 

1 

81 

MILITARY INSTRUCTOR 

909 

1 

81 

SQUAD LEADERS 

942 

1 

81 

M-16 RIFLE 

953 

2 

84 

.45 CAL PISTOL 

954 

1 

84 

COMBAT COMMUNICATIONS 

964 

1 

84 

SURVIVAL. EVASION. RESIST. ESCAPE (SERE) 

974 

1 

81 

MINES AND BOOBY TRAPS 

978 

1 

81 

DISASTER RECOVERY. HEAVY RESCUE 

979 

1 

84 

CBR PERSONAL PROTECTION AND DECONTAMINATION 

980 

1 

84 

DISASTER RECOVERY. CNTRL COMMCTN 

981 

1 

81 


UTILITIES MAN 


SPECIAL 

MILITARY 


TNEC 0000 



SKILL ADD / CHANGE / DELETE 

SKILL 

CODE 

SKILL 

LEVEL 


SKILL 

CODE 

SKILL 

LEVEL 






























































SWNP00C4 


INSTRUCTIONS: 

1. DET/TEAM CHANGE - vald *ntry is two 
position alphanumeric 

2 ADO/CHANGE SKILL - enter del code and 
skill levev 1,2, or 3 

3. DELETE SKILL - enter sMI code, leave 
skil level blank 

4 FORWARD CHANGES TO CBC PORHUE, CODE 18112 

REFER is navfac p-466 (standard & guide* 
for skin codes.) 

SKILL YEAR is computer generated and 
identifies year skin level assigned 

SHELF LIFE will be computed from skil year 


Figure 1-5.—PRCP Skills Update Record. 


the management tool used to determine the readiness 
of the unit and identify skill deficiencies in which the 
troops must be trained. It is used with the requirements 
established by the Commander, Second Naval 
Construction Brigade (COMSECONDNCB), and 
Commander, Third Naval Construction Brigade 
(COMTHIRDNCB), which are issued in their joint 
instruction COM SEC ON D/COM THI RDNCB IN ST 
1500.1 (series). This instruction identifies and defines 
the skills required to meet peacetime and contingency 
operations and specifies the required number of 
personnel that must be trained in each skill. 

NOTE: A "skill" is a specific art or trade. For 
PRCP purposes, skills are described as either a 
"manipulative" or "knowledge" skill. 


SKILL CATEGORIES 


Skills required by the PRCP have been classified 
into five major categories as follows: 


1. Individual General Skills (PRCP 040-090). 
These are essentially nonmanipulative skills 
(knowledge) related to two or more ratings, such as 
material liaison office operation (PRCP 040), 
instructing (PRCP 080), and safety (PRCP 090). 

2. Individual Rating Skills (PRCP 100-760). 
These are primarily manipulative skills associated with 
one of the seven Seabee ratings. Some examples areas 
follows: pipe welding (PRCP 612), for the Steelworker 
rating; cable splicing (PRCP 237), for the Construction 
Electrician rating; and shore-based boiler operation 
(PRCP 720), for the Utilitiesman rating. 

3. Individual Special Skills (PRCP 800-830). 
These are technical skills performed by personnel in 
several ratings, including personnel that are not 
Occupational Field 13 (Seabees). Examples are as 
follows: forklift operation (PRCP 800), ham radio 
operation (PRCP 804), and typing (PRCP 803). 

4. Military Skills (PRCP 901-981). Military skills 
are divided into three subcategories: mobilization, 
disaster recovery, and Seabee combat readiness. 


1-8 









Examples are aircraft embarkation (PRCP 902), M-16 
rifle use and familiarization, disaster recovery, and 
heavy rescue (PRCP 979). 

5. Crew Experience Skills (PRCP 1000A- 
1010A). These skills are attained by working with 
others on specific projects. Most of these projects are 
related to advanced base construction, such as an 
observation tower (PRCP 1002A), fire fighting (PRCP 
1009A), and bunker construction (PRCP 1008A). 

A skill inventory has three principal steps. First, 
each skill is accurately defined and broken down into 
task elements. Second, a standard procedure for 
obtaining the information is developed. This 
procedure helps to ensure that the information, 
regardless of where it is col lected or by whom, meets 
standards of acceptability. The third step is the actual 
collection of the skill data and includes the procedures 
for submitti ng the data to the data bank. 

When you become a crew leader, it will be your 
responsibility to your crew members to provide them 
with the opportunity to learn new skills. This can be 
done through training or by assigning your crew to 
various types of work whenever possible. You and 
your crew members can gain a higher skill level by 
determining the training requirements needed and 
satisfying them. Then you, as the crew leader, should 
report these newly acquired skills to the PRCP 
coordinator, who will add them to your other skills and 
to the skills of each crew member. It is your 
responsibility to see that this skill information is kept 
current and accurate. For additional information on 
the PRCP program, interview techniques, and 
procedures, refer to the NCF/SEABEE 1 and C, 
NAVEDTRA 12543. 

SAFETY PROGRAM 

As a petty officer, you must be familiar with the 
safety program at your activity. You cannot perform 
effectively as a petty officer unless you are aware of 
the importance of the safety program. You should 
know who (or what group) comprises and establishes 
the safety policies and procedures you must follow. 
You should also know who provides guidelines for 
safety training and supervision. Every NCF/NMCB 
unit and shore command are required to implement a 
formal safety organization. 

In the Seabees, everyone is responsible for safety. 
According to the NCF Safety Manual, COM- 
SECON DNCB/COMTH I RDNCBI NST 5100.1 
(series), the battalion safety office administers the 


battalion safety program and provides technical 
guidance. Overall guidance comes from the Navy 
Occupational Safety and Flealth Program Manual 
(NAVOSH), OPNAVINST 5100.23 (series). If you 
have any questions concerning safety on the jobsite, 
the safety office is the place to get your questions 
answered. 

It is not the responsibility of the safety office to 
prevent you from doing something you know or 
suspect is unsafe, but they do have the authority to stop 
any operation where there is impending DANGER of 
injury to personnel or damage to equipment or 
property. Safe construction is your responsibility, and 
ignorance is no excuse. It is your responsibility to 
construct safely. 

SAFETY ORGANIZATION 

The safety organization of the NMCB provides for 
(1) the establishment of safety policy and (2) control 
and reporting. As shown in Figure l-67l the Battalion 
Safety Policy Organization is made up of the policy 
committee, supervisors' committee, equipment, shop, 
and crew committees. The SAFETY POLICY 
COMMITTEE is presided over by the executive 
officer. Its primary purpose is to develop safety rules 
and policy for the battalion. This committee reports to 
the commanding officer, who must approve all 
changes in safety policy. 

The SAFETY SUPERVISORS’COMMITTEE is 
presided over by the battalion's safety chief and 
includes safety supervisors assigned by company 
commanders, project officers, or officers in charge of 
detail. This committee provides a convenient forum 
for work procedures, safe practices, and safety 
suggestions. Its recommendations are sent to the 
policy committee. 

The EQUIPMENT, SHOP, AND CREW 
COMMITTEES are assigned as required. Each 


BATTALION SAFETY POLICY ORGANIZATION 



SWNPQ005 


Figure 1-6.—The Safety Organization Chart of the NMCB. 


1-9 



























committee is usually presided over by the company or 
project safety supervisor. The main objective of the 
committee is to propose changes in the battalion's 
safety policy to eliminate unsafe working conditions 
or prevent unsafe acts. These committees are your 
contact for recommending changes in safety matters. 
In particular, the equipment committee reviews all 
vehicle mishap reports, determines the cause of each 
mishap, and recommends corrective action. As a crew 
leader, you can expect to seine as a member of the 
equipment, shop, or crew safety committee. Each 
committee forwards reports and recommendations to 
the Safety Supervisors' Committee. 

CONSTRUCTION SITE SAFETY 

The work involved in construction and 
maintenance/repair is inherently dangerous, and many 
of the functions that must be performed contain 
elements hazardous to personnel. The type of work 
performed on construction sites is broad and 
encompasses are as for which substantial material on 
safety has been written. 

General Safety Concerns 

This chapter addresses the major areas of general 
safety concerns and references other publications that 
are used by NCF/PHIBCB safety and supervisory 
personnel. 

"Safety is everybody's responsibility." This is a 
rule that must be adhered to during all phases of 
construction, maintenance and repair, and battalion 
operations. Training at all levels and enforcement of 
safety regulations during all types of work is the 
ongoing responsibility of each Seabee. 

Safety at the construction site has elements of 
general construction, steel erection, high work, and 
rigging and weight handling. Specialized and detailed 
areas of safety include weight-handling operations, 
construction and use of scaffolding, and welding and 
cutting. Numerous safety manuals and publications 
provide detailed procedures and regulations for these 
types of work. 

Safety References 

Some of the more useful manuals and handbooks 
applicable to tasks performed on construction sites 
and maintenance shops are as follows: 

1. Naval Construction Force Safety Manual. This 
manual is applicable to COMSECONDNCB/ 


COMTHIRDNCB units and also covers many 
areas useful to PHIBCBs. 

2. General Safdcy Requirements Manual, Corps of 
Engineers, EM 385. This field manual contains 
guidance primarily concerning construction. 

3. Occupational Safety and Health Standards for 
the Construction Industry (29 CFR 1926). 

Safety Procedures/Standards 

Major safety procedures/standards that are 
required on a jobsite that apply to both construction 
sites and construction/repair of pontoon structures are 
as follows: 

1. Hard hats must be worn by all personnel in the 
area, including visitors. 

2. Post the site with a hard hat area sign and 
warning signs (red for immediate hazards and yellow 
for potential hazards). 

3. The safety manuals, EM 385 and the 29 CFR 
1926, are required to be kept on the jobsite. 

4. Housekeeping is important. Keep materials well 
sorted, stacked, and accessible. Remove excess items. 
Keep discarded items and trash picked up. Watch and 
remove hipping hazards. 

5. Designate and mark vehicle/forklift traffic lanes 
and areas. 

6. Each jobsite must have emergency plans posted, 
containing the location of the nearest phone, the 
telephone numbers, and the reporting instructions for 
the ambulance, the hospital, the physician, the police, 
and the fire department personnel. 

7. If a medical facility is not readily accessible 
(due to time or distance), two crew members must be 
both first aid and CPR qualified. 

8. For every 25 personnel or less, one first-aid kit 
must be on site and checked weekly for consumable 
items. 

9. If toilet facilities are not readily available, you 
must provide portable facilities, 

10. Drinking water must be provided from an 
approved source and labeled for "drinking only." 
Common use cups are not allowed. 

11. Temporary fencing is required as a safety 
measure to keep unauthorized personnel away from 
potential hazards if the jobsite is in an area of active use. 


1-10 



12. Eyewash stations are required on all jobsites. 
Fire Extinguishers 

An adequate number of fire extinguishers are 
required to be on site. The number required is 
determined by the types of extinguisher required to 
extinguish the various types of materials, such as 
paint, corrosives, and other flammables, on the jobsite. 
Also, the size of the jobsite must be considered, and 
there must be one extinguisher at each welding station. 
Refer to the EM 385 for further guidance. 

• Material Safety Data Sheets are required to be 
on site for all hazardous material. (MSDS will 
be discussed in this chapter.) 

• All high work is serious business. Work above 5 
feet in height must be particularly well planned 
and personnel safety constantly enforced. 

Scaffolds 

Accidents occur when high work becomes so 
routine that safety measures become lax and 
inspection of scaffolds is not performed. A healthy 
respect for the hazards must be maintained. 
References (1) and (3) contain detailed safety 
information on scaffolds, and additional safety 
guidance can be found in reference (2). Scaffold safety 
is also discussed ii t chapter's of this manual. Some of 
the more general precautions are the following: 

• Work above 5 feet must have scaffolding 
provided. 

• People working above 12 feet and not on 
scaffolding must have a safety belt and lifeline. 

• Ground personnel must be kept clear of high 
work. 

• Never use makeshift, expedient scaffolding. 

• Inspect scaffold members and equipment daily 
before work is started. Keep all members in good 
repair without delay. 

• Do not use scaffolds for storage space. 

• Use handlines for raising and lowering objects 
and tools. 

• Do not paint scaffolds since painting can conceal 
defects. 


Welding and Cutting 

A significant part of construction and 
maintenance/repair work is welding and cutting. 
Safety was addressed in volume 1 of this manual and 
is addressed here as a part of general on-site safety 
concerns. Safety precautions required for this work are 
extensive and specialized. The importance be shown 
by the extent of guidance on welding safety provided 
in references (1), (2), and (3). One point to bear in 
mind is that welding safety must be concerned with 
other personnel on the jobsite as well as the people 
performing the work. A list of some of the more basic 
precautions and procedures welders must be aware of 
or adhere to should include the foil owing: 

• Eye injury. 

• Burns. 

• Toxic vapors. 

• Electric shock (when applicable). 

• Fire and explosion. 

• All welding equipment should be inspected 
daily. Remove the defective items immediately 
from service. 

• personnel protective equipment and clothing 
must be considered an integral part of the work 
and must be inspected and maintained 
accordingly. No compromises in the protection 
of welders is allowed. 

• Areas should be marked with Danger - Welding 
and Eye Hazard Area signs. 

• Welders working above 5 feet must be protected 
by railings or safety belts and lifelines. 

• When welding any enclosed space or pontoons, 
ensure that a vent opening is provided and that 
the space is free of flammable liquids and 
vapors. 

• Do not weld where flammable paint or coating 
can cause a fire hazard. 

• After welding is completed, mark the area of hot 
metal or provide some means of warning other 
workers. 

SAFETY RESPONSIBILITIES 

I Figure 1-71 shows the Battalion Safety Control and 
Reporting Organization. As a crew leader, you will 
report to the safety supervisor, who directs the safety 
program of a project. Duties of the safety supervisor 


1-11 







BATTALION SAFETY CONTROL 
AND 

REPORTING ORGANIZATION 



Figure 1-7.—Battalion Safety Control and Reporting Organization. 


include indoctrinating new crew members, compiling 
mishap statistics for the project, reviewing mishap 
reports submitted to the safety office, and comparing 
safety performances of all crews. 

The crew leader is responsible for carrying out 
safe working practices under the direction of the safety 
supervisor or others in position of authority (project 
chief, project officer, safety chief, and safety officer). 
You, as the crew leader, must be sure each crew 
member is thoroughly familiar with these working 
practices, has a general understanding of pertinent 
safety regulations, and makes proper use of protective 
clothing and safety equipment. Furthermore, be ready 
at all times to correct every unsafe working practice 
you observe and report it immediately to the safety 
supervisor or the person in charge. When an unsafe 
condition exists, the safety supervisor (or whoever is 
in charge) has the power to stop work on the project 
until the condition is corrected. 

In case of a mishap, you must ensure that anyone 
injured gets proper medical care as quickly as 
possible. Investigate each mishap involving crew 
members to determine its cause. Remove or 
permanently correct defective tools, materials, and 
machines as well as environmental conditions that 
contribute to the cause of a mishap. Afterwards, you 
are required to submit the required written reports. 

SAFETY TRAINING 


the latest techniques in maintenance and operational 
safety and then pass them onto your crew members. 
Keep them informed by holding daily standup safety 
meetings. As crew leader, you are responsible for 
conducting each meeting and for passing on 
information that thesafety supervisor has organized 
and assembled. Information (such as the type of safety 
equipment to use, where to obtain it, and how to use 
it) is often the result of safety suggestions received by 
the Safety Supervisors' Committee. Encourage your 
crew members to submit their ideas or suggestions to 
this committee. 

At times, you will hold a group discussion to pass 
the word on specific mishaps that are to be guarded 
against or have happened on thejob. Besuretogive 
plenty of thought to what you are going to say 
beforehand. Make the discussion interesting and urge 
the crew to participate. The final result should be a 
group conclusion as to how the specific mishap could 
have been prevented. 

Your daily standup safety meetings also give you 
the chance to discuss matters pertaining to safe 
operation and any safety items, such as riding in the 
back of a vehicle, prestart checks, and maintenance of 
automotive vehicles, assigned to a project. Since these 
vehicles are used for transporting crew members as 
well as cargo, it is important to emphasize how the 
prestart checks are to be made and how the vehicles 
are to be cared for. 


New methods and procedures for safely 
maintaining and operating equipment are constantly 
being developed. Therefore, you must keep abreast of 


1-12 


In addition to standup safety meetings, you are 
also concerned with day-to-day instruction and 
on-the-job training. Although it is beyond the scope 







of this manual to describe teaching methods, a few 
words on your approach to safety and safety training 
at the crew level are appropriate. Getting your crew to 
work safely, like most other crew leader functions, is 
basically a matter of leadership. Therefore, do not 
overlook the power of personal example in leading 
and teaching your crew members. Soon you will 
discover that they are quick to detect differences 
between what you say and what you do. It is 
unreasonable to expect them to maintain a high 
standard of safe conduct if you do not. As a crew leader 
you must be visible at all times and show your sincere 
concern for the safety of your crew. Although it is not 
the only technique you can use, leadership by example 
has proven to be the most effective of those available 
to you. 

HAZARDOUS MATERIAL 

Various materials are used in shops and jobsites 
throughout the NCF, some of which can be hazardous. 
The key to the NAVOSH program is to inform the 
workers about these hazards and the measures 
necessary to control hazardous materials. To track all 
hazardous materials, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) has established the Hazardous Material 
Information System (HMIS), OPNAVINST 5100.23 
(series), which is designed to obtain, store, and 
distribute data on hazardous materials procured for 
use. This information is readily available through 
every supply department. 

MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET 

A Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS), OSH A 
Form 174 or an equivalent form (fig. 1-8), shall be 
completed for each hazardous item procured and shall 
be submitted to the procuring activity by the 
contractor/manufacturer/vendor. 

Upon drawing any hazardous material, MLO 
provides the crew leader with an MSDS. The MSDS 
identifies all hazards associated with exposure to that 
specific material. It also will identify any personnel 
protective equipment or other safety precautions 
required as well as first-aid/medical treatment 
required for exposure. The crew leader is required by 
federal law to inform crew members of the risks and 
all safety precautions associated with any hazardous 
material present in the shop or on thejobsite. This can 
be done during each daily safety lecture as the material 
is drawn and delivered tothejobsite'shop. All hands 
must be informed before the material can be used; 


therefore, it is a good practice to have a sign-off sheet 
on the actual MSDS. Additionally, the MSDS must be 
posted conspicuously, and all hands are aware of its 
location-at the jobsite, shop spaces, and any other 
approved hazardous material storage area. 

HAZARDOUS MATERIAL CONTROL 
PROGRAM 

The Hazardous Material Control Program is a 
Navy-wide program to administer the correct storage, 
handling, usage, and disposition of hazardous 
material. Steel workers are tasked with monitoring and 
complying with this program. Hazardous waste 
disposal has become a serious concern for the Naval 
Construction Force today. Cleaners, acids, fluxes, 
mastics, sealers, and even paints are just a few of the 
hazardous materials that can be present in your 
shop/jobsite. As a crew leader, you are responsible for 
the safety and protection of your crew. You are equally 
responsible for the protection of the environment. 
There are stiff fines and penalties that apply to NCF 
work as well as civilian work for not protecting the 
environment ! You are not expected to be an expert in 
this area. You should, however, immediately contact 
the environmental representative or the safety office 
in case of any environmental problem (spill, permits, 
planning, and such). 

HAZARDOUS WARNING MARKINGS 
AND LABELS 

Specific hazards can be determined at a glance 
by referring to warning markings and labels that 
identify hazardous materials. Hazardous warning 
markings and labels are necessary to show clearly 
the hazardous nature of the contents of packages or 
containers at all stages of storage, handling, use, and 
disposal. When unit packages (marked packages 
that are part of a larger container) are removed from 
shipping containers, the continuity of the specific 
hazard warning must be preserved. This is normally 
done by applying the appropriate identifying 
hazardous label to the hazardous material container 
or package. 

The Department of Transportation (DOT) labeling 
system shown in lfiaure l-9l is a diamond-shaped 
symbol segmented into four parts. The upper three 
parts reflect hazards relative to health, fire, and 
reactivity. The lower part reflects the specific hazard 
that is peculiar to the material. 


1-13 




Material Safety Data Sheet 

May be used to comply with 
OSHA's Hazard Communication Standard, 
29 CFR 1910.1200. Standard must be 
consulted for specific requirements. 


IDENTITY (As Used on Label and List) 


Section I 


Manufacturer's Name 


Address (Number, Street. City, State, and Zip Code) 



U.S. Department of Labor 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration vvx 

( Non - Mandatory Form) ' 

Form Approved 
OMB No. 1218-0072 


Note: Blank apace* are not permitted, if any item is not applicable, or no 
information is available, the apace must be marked to indicate that 


Emergency Telephone Number 


Telephone Number for Information 


Date Prepared 


Signature of Preparer ( Optional) 


Section II — Hazardous Ingredients/Identity Information 


Hazardous Components ( Specific Chemical Identity ; Common Name(8) OS HA PEL 


Other Limits 

Recommended %(Optional) 



Section III —Physical/Chemical Charactaristics 


Boiling Point 


Vapor Pressure (mm Hg) 


Vapor Density (Air = 1 ) 


Solubility in Water 


Appearance and Odor 


Section IV — Fire and Explosion Hazard Data 


Flash Point (Method Used ) 


Extinguishing Media 


Special Fire Fighting Procedures 



Specific Gravity ( H 2 O = 1 > 


Melting Point 


Evaporation Fla be 
( Butyl Acetate = 1) 



I Flammable Limits 



( Reproduce Locally) 

OS HA 174. Sept. 1985 


SWNP0007 



1-14 





























1-15 






















Figure 1-9.—Hazardous Code Chart. 


The four specific hazards that the labels are 
designed to illustrate are as follows: 

Health Hazard—the ability of a material to either 
directly or indirectly cause temporary or permanent 
injury or incapacitation. 

Fire Hazard—the ability of a material to bum 
when exposed to a heat source. 

Reactivity Hazard—the ability of a material to 
release energy when in contact with water. This term 
can be defined as the tendency of a material, when in 
its pure state or as a commercially produced product, 
to polymerize, decompose, condense, or otherwise 
become self-reactive and undergo violent chemical 
changes. 

Specific Hazard—this term relates to a special 
hazard concerning the particular product or 
chemical that was not covered by other labeled 
hazard items. 

The degree of hazard is expressed in numerical 
codes as follows: 

4 = extremely dangerous material 

3 = dangerous hazard 

2 = moderate hazard 

1 = slight hazard 


0 = no hazard 

The example shown in lfiqure l-10l describes the 
hazards of methyl ethyl ketone. Methyl ethyl ketone 
is usually found mixed with paints, oils, and greases 
from solvent cleaning, paint removers, adhesives, and 
cleaning fluid residues. The numbers on the label 
identify this chemical compound as follows: 

• Health Hazard 2, "Hazardous" 

• Fire Hazard 4, "Flash point below 73°F, 
extremely dangerous material" 

• Reactivity 3, "Shock or heat may detonate, 
dangerous material" 

• Specific Hazard, "None" 



Figure 1-10.—Hazard warning lahel for methyl ethyl ketone. 


1-16 



















Other specific labeling requirements are provided 
in the NAVSUPINST5100.27 (series). All supervisors 
should carefully review the contents of this 
instruction. 

HAZARDOUS MATERIAL STORAGE 

The safest practice concerning hazardous material 
is to draw only the amount of material that can be used 
that day. Storing hazardous materials on thejobsite 
requires the use of approved storage containers. These 
containers must be placed a minimum of 50 feet away 
from any ignition device or source. Plan for the 
delivery of proper storage equipment before having 
hazardous materials delivered to the jobsite. Since 
many hazardous materials require separate storage 
containers (as an example, corrosives and flammables 
cannot be stored together), consult your safety office 

HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TURN-IN 

Any excess material must be disposed of through 
an authorized hazardous material disposal facility. 
Proper labeling of hazardous materials is critical. 
Properly labeled, waste can be disposed of for a 
relatively low price. Unidentified material must first 
be analyzed, which is extremely expensive. Anytime 
you turn-in hazardous material, an MSDS must 
accompany the material and ensure the MSDS is 
ledgeable. This will save valuable time and expense 
and make the job easier for supply. 

Avoid mixing unlike types of waste. Do not mix 
waste paint thinner in a waste oil drum. The Navy sells 
uncontaminated waste oil for a profit. If only minor 
amounts of any other substance are present in the 
waste oil, the Navy must pay high prices for analysis 
and disposal. The best method for disposal is properly 
labeling the materials and returning them, unmixed, to 
the supply department. Each container must be clearly 
labeled, preferably with the BM line item or other 
supply tracking documentation. It is always best to 
check with the battalion MLO staff or safety office for 
proper disposal procedures. 

PLANNING AND ESTIMATING (P&E) 

Good construction planning and estimating 
procedures are essential for any Seabee. This section 
is intended to give crew leaders helpful information 
for planning, estimating, and scheduling construction 
projects. This material is designed to help you 
understand the concepts and principles and is NOT 
intended to be a reference or establish procedures. 


There are Special Construction Battalion Training 
classes (SCBT) specifically for Steelworker P&E as 
well as C-l Advanced P&E school (NEC 5915) for 
Sea bees. 

NOTE: There are various techniques for 
planting, estimating, and scheduling. The procedures 
described herein are suggested methods that have been 
proved with use and result in effective planning and 
estimating. 

PLANNING 

Planning is the process of determining 
requirements and devising and developing methods 
and actions for constructing a project. Good 
construction planning is a combination of many 
elements: the activity, material, equipment, and 
manpower estimates; project layout; project location; 
material delivery and storage; work schedules; quality 
control; special tools required; environmental 
protection; safety; and progress control. All of these 
elements depend upon each other. They must all be 
considered in any well-planned project. Proper 
planning saves time and effort, making the job easier 
for all concerned. 

ESTIMATING 

Estimating is the process of determining the 
amount and type of work to be performed and the 
quantities of material, equipment, and labor required. 
Lists of these quantities and types of work are called 
estimates. 

Preliminary Estimates 

Preliminary estimates are made from limited 
information, such as the general description of 
projects or preliminary plans and specifications 
having little or no detail. Preliminary estimates are 
prepared to establish costs for the budget and to 
program general manpower requirements. 

Detailed Estimates 

Detailed estimates are precise statements of 
quantities of material, equipment, and manpower 
required to construct a given project. Underestimating 
quantities can cause serious delays in construction and 
even result in unfinished projects. A detailed estimate 
must be accurate to the smallest detail to quantify 
requirements correctly. 


1-17 



Activity Estimates 

An activity estimate is a listing of all the steps 
required to construct a given project, including 
specific descriptions as to the limits of each clearly 
definable quantity of work (activity). Activity 
quantities provide the basis for preparing the material, 
equipment, and manpower estimates. They are used to 
provide the basis for scheduling material deliveries, 
equipment, and manpower. Because activity estimates 
are used to prepare other estimates and schedules, 
errors in these estimates can multiply many times. Be 
careful in their preparation! 

Material Estimates 

A material estimate consists of a listing and 
description of the various materials and the quantities 
required to construct a given project. I nformation for 
preparing material estimates is obtained from the 
activity estimates, drawings, and specifications. A 
material estimate is sometimes referred to as a Bill of 
Material (BM) or a Material Takeoff (MTO) Sheet. 

Equipment Estimates 

Equipment estimates are listings of the various 
types of equipment, the amount of time, and the 
number of pieces of equipment required to construct 
a given project. Information, such as that obtained 
from activity estimates, drawings, specifications, and 
an inspection of the site, provides the basis for 
preparing the equipment estimates. 

Manpower Estimates 

The manpower estimate consists of a listing of the 
number of direct labor man-days required to complete 
the various activities of a specific project. These 
estimates will show only the man-days for each 
activity, or they can be in sufficient detail to list the 
number of man-days for each rating in each 
activity—Builder (BU), Construction Electrician 
(CE), Equipment Operator (EO), Steelworker (SW), 
and Utilitiesman (UT). Man-day estimates are used in 
determining the number of personnel and the ratings 
required on a deployment. They also provide the basis 
for scheduling manpower in relation to construction 
progress. 

When the Seabee Planner's and Estimator's 
Handbook, NAVFAC P-405, is used, a man-day is a 
unit of work performed by one person in one 8-hour 
day or its equivalent. One man-day is equivalent to a 


10-hour day when the Facilities Planning Guide, 
NAVFAC P-437, is used. 

Battalions set their own schedules, as needed, to 
complete their assigned tasks. In general, the work 
schedule of the battalion is based on an average of 55 
hours per man per week. The duration of the workday 
is 10 hours per day, which starts and ends at the jobsite. 
This includes 9 hours for direct labor and 1 hour for 
lunch. 

Direct labor ("Timekeeping" as previously 
discussed) includes all labor expended directly on 
assigned construction tasks, either in the field or in the 
shop, that contributes directly to the completion of the 
end product. Direct labor must be reported separately 
for each assigned construction item. In addition to 
direct labor, the estimator must also consider overhead 
labor and indirect labor. Overhead labor is considered 
productive labor that does not contribute directly or 
indirectly to the product. It includes all labor that must 
be performed regardless of the assigned mission. 
Indirect labor includes labor required to support 
construction operations but does not, in itself, produce 
an end product. 

SCHEDULING 

Scheduling is the process of determining when an 
action must betaken and when material, equipment, 
and manpower are required. There are four basic types 
of schedules: progress, material, equipment, and 
manpower. 

Progress schedules coordinate all the projects of a 
Seabee deployment or all the activities of a single 
project. They show the sequence, the starting time, the 
performance time required, and the time required for 
completion. 

Material schedules show when the material is 
needed on the job. They can also show the sequence 
in which materials should be delivered. 

Equipment schedules coordinate all the 
equipment to be used on a project. They also show 
when it is to be used and the amount of time each piece 
of equipment is required to perform the work. 

Manpower schedules coordinate the manpower 
requirements of a project and show the number of 
personnel required for each activity. I n addition, the 
number of personnel of each rating (Steelworker, 
Builder, Construction Electrician, Equipment 
Operator, and Utilitiesman) required for each activity 
for each period of time can be shown. The time unit 


1-18 



shown in a schedule should be some convenient 
interval, such as a day, a week, or a month. 

NETWORK ANALYSIS 

In the late 1950s, a new system of project 
planning, scheduling, and control came into 
widespread use in the construction industry. The 
critical path analysis (CPA), critical path method 
(CPM), and project evaluation and review technique 
(PERT) are three examples of about 50 different 
approaches. The basis for each of these approaches is 
the analysis of a network of events and activities. The 
generic title of the various networks is network 
analysis. 

The network analysis approach is now the 
accepted method of construction planning in many 
organizations. Network analysis forms the core of 
project planning and control systems and is 
accomplished by completing the following steps: 

1. Develop construction activities. After careful 
review of the plans and specifications (specs), your first 
step is to break the job down into discreet activities. 
Construction activities are generally less than 15 days 
in duration and require the same resources throughout 
the entire duration. 

2. Estimate construction activity requirements. 
Evaluate the resource requirements for each 
construction activity. Identify and list all of the 
materials, tools, equipment (including safety-related 
items), and manpower requirements on the 
Construction Activity Summary (CASS) Sheet. 

3. Develop logic network. List the construction 
activities logical] y from the first activity to the last, 
showing relationships or dependencies between 
activities. 

4. Schedule construction activities. Determi ne 
an estimated start and finish date for each activity based 
on the sequence and durations of construction activities. 
Identify the critical path. This will help focus attention 
of management on those activities that cannot be 
delayed without delaying the project completion date. 

5. Track resources. As the crew leader, you must 
be sure the necessary resources are available on the 
project site on the day the work is to be performed. For 
materials on site, this will be as easy as submitting a 
material request, NAVSUP Form 1250-1, to the 
material liaison office (MLO) several days in advance. 
For local purchase requirements, such as a concrete 


request to MLO, a request can be required 2 to 3 weeks 
in advance. 

6. Control resources. As the crew leader, you are 
also responsible for on-site supervision of all work 
performed. Productive employment of available 
resources to accomplish assigned tasking is your 
greatest challenge. 

PROGRESS CONTROL 

Progress control is the comparing of actual 
progress with scheduled progress and the steps 
necessary to correct deficiencies or to balance 
activities to meet overall objectives. 

CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS 

In planning any project, you must be familiar with 
construction drawings and specifications. The 
construction of any structure or facility is described 
by a set of related drawings that gives the Seabees a 
complete sequential graphic description of each phase 
of the construction process. In most cases, a set of 
drawings shows the location of the project, 
boundaries, contours, and outstanding physical 
features of the construction site and its adjoining 
areas. Succeeding drawings give further graphic and 
printed instructions for each phase of construction. 

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION 
DRAWINGS 

Drawings are generally categorized according to 
their intended purposes. Some of the types commonly 
used in military construction are discussed in this 
section. 

Master Plan Drawings 

MASTER PLAN DRAWINGS are commonly 
used in the architectural, topographical, and 
construction fields. The y show sufficient features to 
be used as guides in long-range area development. 
They usually contain section boundary lines, 
horizontal and vertical control data, acreage, locations 
and descriptions of existing and proposed structures, 
existing and proposed surfaced and unsurfaced roads 
and sidewalks, streams, right-of-way, existing 
utilities, north point indicator (arrow), contour lines, 
and profiles. Master plan and general development 
drawings on existing and proposed Navy installations 
are maintained and constantly upgraded by the 


1-19 



resident officer in charge of construction (ROICC) and 
by the Public Works Department (PWD). 

Shop Drawings 

SHOP DRAWINGS are drawings, schedules, 
diagrams, and other related data to illustrate a 
material, a product, or a system for some portion of 
the work prepared by the construction contractor, 
subcontractor, manufacturer, distributor, or supplier. 
Product data include brochures, illustrations, 
performance charts, and other information by which 
the work will be judged. As an SW, you will be 
required to draft shop drawings for minor shop and 
field projects. You can draw shop items, such as doors, 
cabinets, and small portable structures (prefabricated 
berthing quarters, and modifications of existing 
buildings), or perhaps you will be drawing from 
portions of design drawings, specifications, or from 
freehand sketches given by the design engineer. 

Working Drawings 

A WORKING DRAWING (also called project 
drawing) is any drawing that furnishes the information 
required by a Steelworker to manufacture a part or a 
crew to erect a structure. It is prepared from a freehand 
sketch or a design drawing. Complete information is 
presented in a set of working drawings, complete 
enough that the user will require no further 
information. Project drawings include all the drawings 
necessary for the different Seabee ratings to complete 
the project. These are the drawings that show the size, 
quantity, location, and relationship of the building 
components. 

A complete set of project drawings consists of 
general drawings, detail drawings, and assembly 
drawings. General drawings consist of "plans" (views 
from above) and "elevations" (side or front views) 
drawn on a relatively small defined scale, such as 1/8 
inch = 1 foot. Most of the general drawings are drawn 
in orthographic projections, although sometimes 
details can be shown in isometric projections. Detail 
drawings show a particular item on a larger scale than 
that of the general drawing in which the item appears, 
or it can show an item too small to appear at all on a 
general drawing. Assembly drawings are either an 
exterior or a sectional view of an object showing the 
details in the proper relationship to one another. 
Usually, assembly drawings are drawn to a smaller 
scale than are detail drawings. This procedure 


provides a check on the accuracy of the design and 
detail drawings and often discloses errors. 

Red-lined Drawings 

RED-LINED DRAWINGS are the official 
contract drawings that you will mark up during 
construction to show as-built conditions. Red-lined 
drawings are marked in color "red” to indicate either 
a minor design change or a field adjustment. 

As-built Drawings 

AS-BUILT DRAWINGS are the original contract 
drawings (or sepia copies) that you will change to 
show the as-built conditions from the red-lined 
drawings. Upon the completion of the facilities, the 
construction contractor or the Naval Military 
Construction Force (NMCB) is required to provide the 
ROICC with as-built drawings, indicating 
construction deviations from the contract drawings. 
All of the as-built marked-up prints must reflect exact 
as-built conditions and must show all features of the 
project as constructed. After the completion of the 
project, as-built marked-up prints are transmitted by 
theROICC to the engineering field division (EFD). 

ORDER OF PROJECT DRAWINGS 

Project drawings for buildings and structures are 
arranged in the following order: 

1. TITLE SHEET AND I N DE X—Contai n 
specific project title and an index of drawings. 
(Used only for projects containing 60 or more 
drawings.) 

2. SITE or PLOT PLANS-Contain either site or 
plot plans or both, as well as civil and utility 
plans. For small projects, this sheet should 
include an index of the drawings. 

3. LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION (if 
applicable). 

4. ARCHITECTURAL (including interior design 
as applicable). 

5. STRUCTURAL. 

6. MECHANICAL (heating, ventilation, and air 
conditioning). 

7. PLUMBING. 

8. ELECTRICAL. 

9. FIRE PROTECTION. 


1-20 



Title Blocks 

The title block identifies each sheet in a set of 
drawings. (See lfia. 1-11.Il Generally, the title block is 
located at the bottom right comer of the drawing 
regardless of the size of the drawing (except for 
vertical title block). For further information on the 
layout of title blocks, refer to the E ngi neeri ng Ai d 3. 

The information provided in the title block is 
important information that a Steelworker MUST 
understand. The information includes the following: 

• Architect’s name 

• Architect's seal 

• Drawing title 

• Date prepared 

• Revisions 

• Designed by 

• Checked by 

• Drawing numbers 

• Name of local activity 

• Code ID number (80091 NAVFAC) 

• Letter designation 

• Size of drawing 

• Scale of drawing 

• ABFC drawing number (if applicable) 

• Approved by 

There are many variations to title blocks. 
Depending on the preparing activity (NAVFAC, NCR, 
NMCB, etc.), all title blocks should contain the same 
information listed above. 


Drawing Revisions 

A Revision block contains a list of revisions made 
to a drawing. The Revision block is located in the 
upper right-hand corner. The Revision block can 
include a separate "PREPARED BY" column to 
indicate the organization, such as an architectural 
engineering firm, that prepared the revision. Like title 
blocks, revision blocks can vary in format with each 
command. 

Graphic Scales 

Graphic scales are located in the lower right-hand 
comer of each drawing sheet, with the words Graphic 
Scales directly over them. The correct graphic scales 
must be shown prominent y on each drawing because, 
as drawings are reduced in size, the reductions are 
often NOT to scaled proportions. Remember, scaling 
a drawing should be done as a "last resort." 

Drawing Notes 

NOTES are brief, clear, and explicit statements 
regarding material use and finish and construction 
methods. Notes in a construction drawing are 
classified as specific and general. 

SPECIFIC notes are used either to reflect 
dimensional information on the drawing or to be 
explanatory. As a means of saving space, many of the 
terms used in this type of note are often expressed as 
abbreviations. 

GENERAL notes refer to all of the notes on the 
drawing not accompanied by a leader and an 
arrowhead. As used in this book, general notes for a 
set of drawings covering one particular type of work 
are placed on the first sheet of the set. They should be 



REVISED DWG, AND LIST OF FAC ITEMS 5 &9 

ESS |l 2/8 & E/R 

fa 

CHG. ITEMS 2, 3, 6, 7, 8 & 10- OF BM1 & ELT 

RWL11-83 APS 

A 

ADDED NOTES 5 THRU 0 EN8 11-83EMS 

A 

CHG. DESCRIPTION OF ITEM A IN B/M RK 8-83 APS 

SYM 

DESCRIPTION BY DATE APPO 

REVISIONS 

FUMCDOMAL COMPONENTS 
DEPARTMENT 

DEPARTMENT OF TH: NAVY NAVAL FACtUTES ENGINEERING COMMAND 

CIVIL ENGINEER SUPPORT OFFICE 

NAVAL LUN3IHUCIIUN HA 1 IMJUNChNIhH PORT HUENFME. CAUFOfWtA 


CML 

ELEC 

tCCH 

□SON 




D3QNCK 




NAVAL CONTROL OF SHIPPING 
OFFICE 

MTO 




PROJECT UOH 

ENttHlMH 

tfYSItMMtiM 



CODE IDE NT NO. 

80091 

NAVFAC DRWG NO. 6028299 

SATISFACTORY TO 


TITLE DATE 

awusyhnu. 816 A 


SCALE 

1” = 30' 

j SHEET | OF | 


SWNP0011 


NAME OF LOCAL 
ACTIVITY 


NUMBER ASSIGNED 
BY NAVFACENGCOM 
WESTERN DIVISION 


Figure 1-11.— 1 Title block. 


1-21 








































placed a minimum of 3 inches below the space 
provided for the revision block when the conventional 
horizontal title block is used. When the vertical title 
block is used, you can place the general notes on the 
right side of the drawing. General notes for 
architectural and structural drawings can include, 
when applicable, roof, floor, wind, seismic, and other 
loads, allowable soil pressure or pile-bearing capacity, 
and allowable unit stresses of all the construction 
materials used in the design. Notes for civil, 
mechanical, electrical, sanitary, plumbing, and similar 
drawings of a set can include, when applicable, 
references for vertical and horizontal control 
(including soundings) and basic specific design data. 

General notes can also refer to all of the notes 
grouped according to materials of construction in a 
tabular form, called a SCHEDULE. Schedules for 
items, like doors, windows, rooms, and footings, are 
somewhat more detailed. Their formats will be 
presented later in this chapter. 

MAJOR CATEGORIES OF PROJECT 
DRAWINGS 

Generally, working or project drawings can be 
divided into the following major categories: civil, 
architectural, structural, mechanical, electrical, and fire 
protection. In Seabee construction, however, the major 
categories most commonly used are as follows: CIVIL, 
ARCHITECTURAL, STRUCNTURAL, MECHANICAL, 
and ELECTRICAL sets of drawings. 

Regardless of the category, working drawings 
serve the following functions: 

• They provide a basis for making material, labor, 
and equipment estimates before construction begins. 

• They give instructions for construction, showing 
the sizes and locations of the various parts. 

• They provide a means of coordination between 
the different ratings. 

• They complement the specifications; one source 
of information is incomplete without the others. 

• Civil working drawings encompass a variety of 
plans and information to include the following: 

• Site preparation and site development 

• Fe ricing 

• Rigid and flexible pavements for roads and 
wal kways 

• Environmental pollution control 


• Water supply units (that is, pumps and wells) 

Depending on the size of the construction project, 
the number of sheets in a set of civil drawings can vary 
from a bare minimum to several sheets of related 
drawings. Generally, on an average-size project, the 
first sheet has a location map, soil boring log, legends, 
and it sometimes has site plans and small civil detail 
drawings. (Soil boring tests are conducted to 
determine the water table of the construction site and 
classify the existing soil.) Civil drawings are often 
identified with the designating letter C on their title 
blocks. 

SITE PLANS 

A SITE PLAN furnishes the essential data for 
laying out the proposed building lines. It is drawn from 
notes and sketches based upon a survey. It shows the 
contours, boundaries, roads, utilities, trees, structures, 
references, and other significant physical features on 
or near the construction site. The field crews 
(Equipment Operators) are able to estimate and 
prepare the site for conduction and to finish the site 
(including landscaping) upon completion of 
construction by showing both existing and finished 
contours. As an SW, you should be familiar with the 
methods and the symbols used on maps and 
topographic drawings. 

Site plans are drawn to scale. In most instances, 
the engineer’s scale is used, rather than the architect’s 
scale. For buildings on small lots, the scales normally 
used are 1 inch = 10 feet. 

PROJECT FOLDERS 

The intent of this section is to acquaint you with 
the basic concepts and principles of project 
management and is NOT intended to be a reference 
but also to make you familiar with the contents of a 
project folder. 

The project folder, or package, consists of nine 
individual project files. These files represent the 
project i n paper format-a type of project history from 
start to finish. 

File No. 1-General Information File 

File No. 1 is the General Information File and 
contains the foil owing information: 

LEFT SIDE—The left side of the General 
Information File basically contains information 


1-22 



authorizing the project. The file should have the 
following items: 

• Project scope sheet. 

• Tasking letter |(fiq. 1-12D . 

• Project planning checklist. 

• Project package sign-off sheet. 

RIGHT SIDE—The right side of the General 
Information File contains basic information relating 
to coordinating the project. The file should have the 
following items: 

• Project organization. 


• Deployment calendar. 

• Preconstruction conference notes. 

• Predeployment visit summary. 

File No. 2—Correspondence File 

File No. 2 is the Correspondence File and consists 
of the following items: 

LEFT SIDE—The left side contains outgoing 
messages and correspondence. 

RIGHT SI DE-The right side of the file contains 
incoming messages and correspondence. 


Date: 

MEMORANDUM 


From: Operations Officer 
To: 

Subj: PROJ ECT _ 

1. Company is tasked as the prime contractor for the subject project. Project planning 
and estimating should be accomplished by the crew leader and/or project crew, in accordance with current 
battalion procedures. Plans, specs, and master activity description (if applicable) are available from S3QC. 

2. The CBPAC manday estimate for NMCB-74's tasking is _ 

3. Project scope: 

4. The folowing dates are established as milestones to be met for your project planning: 

ITEM DUE DATES 

Familiarization with project 
Establish Detail Activities 
Complete Front of cas Sheets 
Prepare MTO 

Finalize Mini Computer Input 
Prepare Level II 
Safety Plan 
Quality Control Plan 
Final Package Review 

5. Sub-contractor (s) for the subject project is/are _ 


6. Regress will be monitored by S3 at short informal meetings. Contact S3 or S3A, if you have any questions. 


copy to: 

Figure 1-12.—Project tasking letter. 


1-23 















1-24 


Figure 1-13.—Level II. 























File No. 3—Activity File 

File No. 3, the Activity File, contains the 
following information: 

LEFT SIDE—The left side contains the 
Construction Activity Summary Sheets of completed 
activities. 

RIGHT SI DE-The right side of the file contains 
the foil owing form sheets: 

• Master Activity Sheets. 

• Level II. A general schedule for each project 
prepared for the operations officer by the company. It 
contains a general schedule for each project and 
contains all of the major work elements and a schedule 
for each prime contractor or project manager based 
upon major work Kfig. 1-131 . 

• Level II Precedence Diagram. 

• Master Activity Summary Sheets Iff i a. 1-14-t . 

• Construction Activity Summary Sheets Kfig. I 

[ m • 

File No. 4—Network File 

File No. 4 is the Network File. It contains the 
following information: 

LEFT SI DE—The left side contains the following 
documents: 

• Computer printouts. 

• Level III is a detailed schedule fore each project, 
developed by the company selected as prime contractor 
and assisted by the companies selected as subcontractor. 
The Level III not only serves as stool in which the prime 
contractor and subcontractor manage their projects but 
it also provides important data, enabling the operations 
officer to redistribute or reschedule assignments and to 
arrange for extra personnel, equipment, or special 
training required for the task. Level III shows such 
details as crew sizes, material delivery dates, and 
periods where special tools/equipment will be required 
on the project. 

• Level III Precedence Diagram. 

RIGHT SIDE—The right side of the Network File 
contains the foil owing items: 

• Resource leveled plan for manpower and 
equipment. 

• Equipment requirement summary. 

File No. 5—Material File 


File No. 5 is the Material File. It contains the 
following information: 

LEFT SIDE—The left side contains the work 
sheets that you, as a project planner, must assemble. 
THe list includes the following items: 

• List of Iona lead items tfia. 1-161 . 

• 45-day material list. 

• Material transfer list. 

• Add-on/reorder justification forms. 

• Bill of Material/Material Takeoff Comparison 
Work Sheet Kfig. 1-17) . 

• Material Takeoff Work Sheet Kfig. 1-181 . 

RIGHT SIDE—The right side of the Material File 
contains the Bill of Material (including all 
add-on/reorder BMs) supplied by the Naval 
Construction Regiment. 

File No. 6—Quality Control File 

File No. 6, theQuality Control File, contains the 
following information: 

LEFT SI DE-The left side of this file contains 
various quality control forms and the field adjustment 
request. 

RIGHT SIDE—The right side of the Quality 
Control File contains the daily quality control 
inspection report and the quality control plan. 

File No. 7—Safety/Environmental File 

File No. 7 is the Safety/Environmental File and 
consists of the following information: 

LEFT SIDE—The left side of the Safety/ 
Environmental File contains the following items: 

• Required safety equipment. 

•Standup safety lectures. 

• Safety reports. 

• Accident reports. 

RIGHT SIDE—The right side of the Safety/ 
Environmental File contains the following: 

• Safety plan, which you must develop. 

• Highlighted EM 385. 

• Environmental plan (if applicable). 

File No. 8—Plans File 

File No. 8 is the Plans File and contains the 
following information: 


1-25 

















Figure 1-14.—Master Activity Summary Sheet. 


LEFT SIDE—The left side contains the following 
planning documents: 

• Site layout. 

• Shop drawings. 

• Detailed slab layout drawings (if applicable). 

• Rebar bending schedule. 


RIGHT SIDE—The right side of the Plans File 
contains the actual project plans. Depending on 
thickness, plans should be either rolled or folded. 

File No. 9—Specifications File 

File No. 9 is the Specifications File; it contains the 
following information: 


1-26 









CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY SUMMARY SHEET 


PROJECT TITLE:_ 

BMCOOE _ 

START SCHEDULED:. 

ACTUAL: _ 


PREPARED BY: 


CHECKED BY: 


ACT. NO. _ 

ACT. TITLE:_ 

DESCRIPTION OF WORK METHOD: 


FINISHED SCHEDULED:. 

ACTUAL: 


ACT. CODE_ 


DURATION: ESTIMATED_ I 

ACTUA1_ 

PRODUCTION EFFICIENCY FACTOR: 

LABOR RESOURCES: 

NO DESCRIPTION 


MANDAYS: ESTIMATED. 

ACTUAL 


1 cu - WORKWEEK: 

ACTUAL_ 

RESULTING DELAY FACTOR: _ 

O. DESCRIPTION 


EQUIPMENT RESOURCES: 





NO. DESCRIPTION 

QTY. 

NO. 

DESCRIPTION 

QTY. 


MATERIAL RESOURCES: 

NO. DESCRIPTION 


QTY. NO. 


DESCRIPTION 



ASSUMPTIONS:. 


SWNP0014 


Figure 1-15.—Construction Activity Summary Sheet 


LEFT SI DE—The left side of this File is reserved 
for technical data. 


RIGFIT SIDE—The right side of the Specifications 
File has highlighted project specifications. 


1-27 







LONG LEAD TIME ITEMS 


PROJECT NUMBER: _ TITLE: _ 

BM NUMBER Lrt DESCRIPTION INTENDED USE QUANTITY ROS 



ROS - DATE REQUIRED ON SITE EOS - DATE ESTIMATED ON SITE 


SWNP0015 


Figure 1-16.—Long Lead Time Item Work Sheet. 


1-28 




BM/MTO COMPARISON WORK SHEET 



Figure 1-17.—Bill of Material/Material Takeoff Comparison Work Sheet. 


1-29 








Figure 1-18.—Material Takeoff Work Sheet. 


1-30 








CHAPTER 2 


LAYOUT AND FABRICATION OF SHEET-METAL AND 

FIBER-GLASS DUCT 


As a Steelworker you are required to operate 
sheet-metal tools and to apply basic sheet-metal layout 
techniques. In many Naval Construction Force (NCF) 
projects, sheet metal is used to protect the exterior of 
buildings by using flashing, gutters, and at times, 
complete sheet-metal roofing systems. Other items 
made from sheet metal are dust collection systems, 
machinery guards, lockers, and shelving. 

Although many of the parts and fittings used in 
sheet-metal work are stock items, which are simply 
installed or assembled, Steelworkers are required to 
fabricate parts and fittings frequently in the shop or to 
modify them to fit irregularities in the project design. 
Therefore, you must have knowledge not only in 
laying out patterns but also have the skills required to 
cut, bend, shape, assemble, and install the finished 
sheet-metal products. This chapter describes some of 
the methods of measuring, marking, cutting, forming, 
and joining as well as installing sheet-metal sections, 
duct systems, and fiber-glass ducts. In addition, the 
use of various hand tools and power tools required in 
sheet-metal layout and fabrication is provided. 

SHEET-METAL LAYOUT AND CUTTING 
TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT 

Numerous types of layout tools, cutting tools, and 
forming equipment are used when working with sheet 
metal. This section will describe the uses of the layout 
and cutting tools and the operation of the forming 
equipment. 

LAYOUT TOOLS 

The LAYOUT of metal is the procedure of 
measuring and marking material for cutting, drilling, 
or welding. Accuracy is essential in layout work. 
Using erroneous measurements results in a part being 
fabricated that does not fit the overall job. This is a 
waste of both time and material. In most cases, you 
should use shop drawings, sketches, and blueprints to 
obtain the measurements required to fabricate the job 
being laid out. Your ability to read and work from 
blueprints and sketches is paramount in layout work. 


If you require information on blueprints, you will find 
I chapters - !^ and 8 of Blueprint Reading and 
Sketching, NAVEDTRA 10077-F1, an excellent 
reference. 

Layout tools are used for laying out fabrication 
jobs on metal. Some of the more common layout tools 
that you will use in performing layout duties are as 
follows: scriber, flat steel square, combination square, 
protractor, prick punch, dividers, trammel points, and 
ci rcumference rule. 

Scriber 

Lines are scribed on sheet metal with a SCRATCH 
AWL, coupled with a STEEL SCALE or a 
STRAIGHTEDGE. To obtain the best results in 
scribing, hold the scale or straightedge firmly in place, 
and set the point of the scriber as close to the edge of 
the scale as possible by tilting the scriber outward. 
Then exert pressure on the point and draw the line, 
tilting the tool slightly in the direction of movement 
(fig. 2-1). For short lines, use the steel scale as a guide. 
For longer lines, use a circumference rule or a 
straightedge. When you have to draw a line between 
two points, prick punch each point. Start from one 
prick punch mark and scribe toward the center. 



Figure 2-1—Scribing a line. 


2-1 




Complete the line by scribing from the other prick 
punch mark in the opposite direction. 

Flat Steel Square 

The FLAT STEEL SQUARE is a desirable tool for 
constructing perpendicular or parallel lines. In the 
method of layout, known as parallel line development, 
the flat steel square is used to construct lines that are 
parallel to each other as well as perpendicular to the 
base line. This procedure is shown ir l figure 2-21 
Simply clamp the straightedge firmly to the base line. 
SI ide the body of the square along the straightedge, 
and then draw perpendicular lines through the desired 
points. 

Before using the flat steel square or at least at 
periodic intervals, depending on usage, see that you 
check it for accuracy, as shown in i figure 2-3.1 When 
the square is off, your work will be off 
correspondingly no matter how careful you are. 

Combination Square 

The COMBINATION SQUARE can be used to 
draw a similar set of lines, as shown ir l figure 2~4l An 
edge of the metal upon which you are working is used 
as the base line, as shown in the figure. One edge of 
the head of the combination square is 90 degrees and 
the other edge is 45 degrees. Combination squares are 



SWNTO018 

Figure 2-2.—Using a swuare to cinstruct perpendicular and 
parallel lines. 



Figure 2-3—Checking a square for accuracy. 



Figure 2-4.—Using the combination square 


delicate instruments and are of little value if you 
handle them roughly. Store your squares properly 
when you have finished using them. Keep them clean 
and in tiptop shape, and you will be able to construct 
90-degree angles, 45-degree angles, and parallel lines 
without error. 

Protractor 

To construct angles other than 45 degrees or 90 
degrees, you will need a PROTRACTOR. Mark the 
vertex of the angle of your base line with a prick 
punch. Set the vertex of your protractor on the mark 
and then scribe a V at the desired angle (assume 700). 
Scribe the line between the vertex and the point 
located by the V, and you have constructed an angle 
of 70 degrees. 

Prick Punch 

When you locate a point and mark it with the PRICK 
PUNCH, be sure to use alight tap with a small ball peen 
hammer, ensuring it is on the precise spot intended to 
mark. The smaller the mark you make (so long as it is 
visible), the more accurate that mark becomes. 

Dividers 

You should use DIVIDERS to scribe arcs and 
circles, to transfer measurements from a scale to your 
layout, and to transfer measurements from one part of 
the layout to another. Careful setting of the dividers is 
of utmost importance. When you transfer a 


2-2 


































measurement from a scale to the work, set one point 
of the dividers on the mark and carefully adjust the 
other leg to the required length, as shown ir l figure 2^31 

To scribe a circle, or an arc, grasp the dividers 
between the fingers and the thumb, as shown in | fiqurel 
I 2-61 Place the point of one leg on the center, and swing 
the arc. Exert enough pressure to hold the point on 
center, slightly inclining the dividers in the direction 
in which they are being rotated. 

TrammelPoints 


need a right angle for a layout. Breakout your dividers, 
a scriber, and a straightedge. Draw a base line I ike the 
one labeled AB in i figure 2^81 Set the dividers for a 
distance greater than one-half AB; then, with A as a 
center, scribe arcs like those labeled C and D. Next, 
without changing the setting of the dividers, use B as 
a center, and scribe another set of arcs at C and D. 
Draw a line through the points where the arcs intersect 
and you have erected perpendiculars to line AB, 
forming four 90-degree, or right, angles. You have also 
bisected or divided line AB into two equal parts. 


To scribe a circle with a radius larger than your 
dividers, you should select TRAMMEL POINTS. The 
method of adjusting the points, as shown ir l figure i7i\ 
is to set the left-hand point on one mark, slide the 
right-hand point to the required distance, and tighten 
the thumbscrew. The arc, or circle, is then scribed in 
the same manner as with the dividers. 

Constructing a 90-degree, or right, angle is not 
difficult if you have a true, steel square. Suppose that 
you have no square or that your square is off and you 



Constructing a right angle at a given point with a 
pair of dividers is a procedure you will find useful 
when making lavouts. rFiqure 2-91 shows the method 
for constructing a right angle at a given point. 



Figure 2-7.—Setting trammel points. 



A 


B 


Figure 2-5—Setting the dividers 


SWNP0025 



Figure 2-6.—Scribing an acr/circle with dividers 


Figure 2-9.—Constructing a 90-degree angle at a given point 


2-3 




















I magi ne that you have I i ne XY with A as a poi nt 
at which you need to fabricate a perpendicular to form 
a right angle. Select any convenient point that lies 
somewhere within the proposed 90-degree angle. I n 
I figure 2-9~l that point is C. Using C as the center of a 
circle with a radius equal to CA, scribe a semicircular 
arc, as shown in lfiqure ?9l Lay a straightedge along 
points B and C and draw a line that will intersect the 
other end of the arc at D. Next, draw a line connecting 
the points D and A and you have fabricated a 
90-degree angle. This procedure may be used to form 
90-degree comers in stretch-outs that are square or 
rectangular, like a drip pan or a box. 

Laying out a drip pan with a pair of dividers is no 
more difficult than fabricating a perpendicular. You 
will need dividers, a scriber, a straightedge, and a sheet 
of template paper. You have the dimensions of the pan 
to be fabricated: the length, the width, and the height 
or depth. Draw a base line Kfiq. 2-101 Select a point 
on this line for one comer of the drip pan layout. Erect 
a perpendicular through this point, forming a 
90-degree angle. Next, measure off on the base line 
the required length of the pan. At this point, erect 
another perpendicular. You now have three sides of the 
stretch-out. Using the required width of the pan for the 
other dimensions, draw the fourth side parallel to the 
base line, connecting the two perpendiculars that you 
have fabricated. 

Now, set the dividers for marking off the depth of 
the drip pan. You can use a steel scale to measure off 
the correct radius on the dividers. Using each comer 
for a point, swing a wide arc, like the one shown in the 
second step in | figure 2-101 Extend the end and side 
lines as shown in the last step in i figure 2-10l and 
complete the stretch-out by connecting the arcs with a 
scriber and straightedge. 

Bisecting an arc is another geometric construction 
that you should be familiar with. Angle ABC |(fiq.| 

I 2-111) is given. With B as a center, draw an arc cutting 
the sides of the angle at D and E. With D and E as 
centers and a radius greater than half of arc DE, draw 
arcs intersecting at F. A line drawn from B through 
point F bisects angle ABC. 

Two methods used to divide a line into a given 
number of equal parts are shown in i figure 2-12J When 
the method shown in view A is to be used, you will 
need a straightedge and dividers. In using this method, 
draw line AB to the desired length. With the dividers 
set at any given radius, use point A as center and scribe 
an arc above the line. Using the same radius and B as 
center, scribe an arc below the line as shown. From 




f\ 

. . >: < 


\ 

:•!* !y i* \\*tv >> :*>:•»:•>. .*:• 



>! , ^ 4 . " „ 'c- > 4 s 

, * 

, •'.: : : . . :: > > ?•: •: •:< x : 


r“~ 

i r ' :vx " $.5 > 

% >> > ' 

- ’ *1 

k. 

a : .... 

O ' ' * ss " " ^ A - *' " ? - 

-A 

j 


SWNP0027 


Figure 2-10.—Laying out a drip pan with dividers. 



Figure 2-11.—Bisecting an arc. 


2-4 












































Figure 2-12.—Two methods used to divide a line into equal 
parts. 

point A, draw a straight line tangent to the arc that is 
below point B. Do the same from point B. With the 
dividers set at any given distance, start at point A and 
step off the required number of spaces along line AD 
using tick marks-in this case, six. Number the tick 
marks as shown. Do the same from point B along line 
BC. With the straightedge, draw lines from point 6 to 
poi nt A, 5 to 1, 4 to 2, 3 to 3, 2 to 4, 1 to 5, and B to 
6. You have now divided line AB into six equal parts. 

When the method shown in view B oi l figure 2-121 
is used to divide a line into a given number of equal 
parts, you will need a scale. In using this method, draw 
a line at right angles to one end of the base line. Place 
the scale at such an angle that the number of spaces 
required will divide evenly into the space covered by 
the scale. I n the illustration (view B 1 fig. 2-121 the base 
line is 2 1/2 inches and is to be divided into six spaces. 
Place the scale so that the 3 inches will cover 
2 1/2 inches on the base line. Since 3 inches divided 
by 6 spaces = 1/2 inch, draw lines from the 1/2-inch 
spaces on the scale perpendicular to the base line. 

I ncidentally, you may even use a full 6 inches in the 
scale by increasing its angle of slope from the baseline 
and dropping perpendiculars from the full-inch 
graduation to the base line. 

To divide or step off the circumference of a circle 
into six equal parts, just set the dividers for the radius 
of the circle and select a point of the circumference for 
a beginning point. I n lfiqure 2-13,1 point A is selected 
for a beginning point. With A as a center, swing an arc 
through the circumference of the circle, like the one 
shown at B in the illustration. Use B, then, as a point, 
and swing an arc through the circumference at C. 


Continue to step off in this manner until you have 
divided the circle into six equal parts. If the points of 
intersection between the arcs and the circumference 
are connected as shown ir l figure 2 r T31 the Iines will 
intersect at the center of the circle, forming angles of 
60 degrees. 

If you need an angle of 30 degrees, all you have 
to do is to bisect one of these 60-degree angles by the 
method described earlier in this chapter. Bisect the 
30-degree angle and you have a 15-degree angle. You 
can construct a 45-degree angle in the same manner 
by bisecting a 90-degree angle. In all probability, you 
will have a protractor to lay out these and other angles. 
But just in case you do not have a steel square or 
protractor, it is a good idea to know how to construct 
angles of various sizes and to erect perpendiculars. 

Many times when laying out or working with 
circles or arcs, it is necessary to determine the 
circumference of a circle or arc. For the applicable 
mathematical formula, refer t b appendix III of this text. 

Circumference Rule 

Another method of determining circumference is 
by use of the circumference rule. The upper edge of 
the circumference rule is graduated in inches in the 
same manner as a regular layout scale, but the lower 
edge is graduated, as shown ir l figure 2-141 The lower 
edge gives you the approximate circumference of any 
circle within the range of the rule. You will notice in 
I figure 2-14l that the reading on the lower edge directly 
below the 3-inch mark is a little over 9 3/8 inches. This 



Figure 2-13.—Dividing a circle into six equal parts 


TyWFFT 

TTrfTTT 

Tl’rprr 

TTTnrrr 


n 1 

incm.i»ths2 

3 

4 


\k 


4k 


7 

ililili 


I 

ikki 


iiki 


i 

ikiik 


o 1 

4 


1 12 
4iiii 


Figure 2-14.—Circumference rule. 


2-5 













































reading would be the circumference of a circle with a 
diameter of 3 inches and would be the length of a 
stretch-out for a cylinder of that diameter. The 
dimensions for the stretch-out of a cylindrical object, 
then, are the height of the cylinder and the 
ci rcumference. 

CUTTING TOOLS 

Various types of HAND SNIPS/HAND SHEARS 
are used for cutting and notching sheet metal. Hand 
snips are necessary because the shape, construction, 
location, and position of the work to be cut frequently 
prevents the use of machine-cutting tools. 

Hand snips are divided into two groups. Those for 
straight cuts are as follows: straight snips, 
combination snips, bulldog snips, and compound lever 
shears. Those for circular cuts are as follows: circle, 
hawk's bill, aviation, and Trojan snips. These snips are 
shown in I figure 2-15.1 The following is a brief 
description of each type of snip. 

STRAIGHT SNIPS Kfiq. 2-15J view A) have 
straight jaws for straight line cutting. To ensure 
strength, they are not pointed. These snips are made 
in various sizes and the jaws may vary from 2 to 4 1/2 
inches. The overall length will also vary from 7 to 15 
3/4 inches. The different size snips are made to cut 
different thicknesses of metal with 18 gauge steel as a 
minimum for the larger snips. These snips are 
available for right- or left-hand use. 

COMBINATION SNI PSCEaZZlS view B) have 
straight jaws for straight cutting but the inner faces of 
the jaws are sloped for cutting curves as well as 
irregular shapes. These snips are available in the same 
sizes and capacities as straight snips. 

BULLDOG SNIPS HTTo^m view C) are of the 
combination type, They have short cutting blades with 
long handles for leverage. The blades are inlaid with 
special alloy steel for cutting stainless steel. Bulldog 
snips can cut 16 gauge mild steel. The blades are 2 1/2 
inches long and the overall length of the snip varies 
from 14 to 17 i nches. 

COMPOUND LEVER SHEARS RFq. 2-151, view 
D) have levers designed that give additional leverage 
to ease the cutting of heavy material. The lower blade 
is bent to allow the shears to be inserted in a hole in 
the bench or bench plate. This will hold the shear in 
an upright position and make the cutting easier. The 
cutting blades are removable and can be replaced. The 
capacity is 12 gauge mild steel. It has cutting blades 


that are 4 inches long with an overall length of 34 1/2 
inches. 

CIRCLE SNIPS Rim 2-151 view E) have curved 
blades and are used for making circular cuts, as the 
name implies. They come in the same sizes and 
capacities as straight snips and either right- or 
left-hand types are available. 

HAWK'S BILL SNIPS tfio. 2-15.1 view F) are 
used to cut a small radius insideand outsidea circle. 
The narrow, curved blades are beveled to allow sharp 
turns without buckling the sheet metal. These snips are 
useful for cutting holes in pipe, in furnace hoods, and 
in close quarters work. These snips are available with 
a 2 1/2-inch cutting edge and have an overall length 
of either 11 1/2 or 13 inches and have a 20 gauge mild 
steel capacity. 

AVIATION SNIPS Ifig. 2-15,1 view G) have 
compound levers, enabling them to cut with less 
effort. These snips have hardened blades that enable 
them to cut hard material. They are also useful for 
cutting circles, for cutting squares, and for cutting 
compound curves and intricate designs in sheet 
metal. Aviation snips come in three types: right 
hand, left hand, and straight. On right-hand snips, 
the blade is on the left and they cut to the left. 
Left-hand snips are the opposite. They are usually 
color-coded in keeping with industry 
standards-green cuts right, red cuts left, yellow 
cuts straight. Both snips can be used with the right 
hand. The snips are 10 inches long and have a 2-inch 
cut and have a 16 gauge mild steel capacity. 

TROJAN SNIPS flfio. 2-15.1 view H) are 
slim-bladed snips that are used for straight or curved 
cutting. The blades are small enough to allow sharp 
turning cuts without buckling the metal. These snips 
can be used to cut outside curves and can also be used 
in place of circle snips, hawk's bill snips, or aviation 
snips when cutting inside curves. The blades are 
forged high grade steel. These snips come in two sizes: 
one has a 2 1/2-inch cutting length and a 12-inch 
overall length and the other has a 3-inch cutting length 
and a 13-inch overall length, They both have a 20 
gauge capacity. 

Modern snips are designed to cut freely with 
a minimum curling of the metal. The snips are 
generally held in the right hand at right angles to 
the work tfio, 2-16)1 Open the blades widely to 
obtain maximum leverage. Do not permit the ends 
to close completely at the end of a cut or a rough 


2-6 






















AVIATION SNIPS 
(RIGHT HA' 


B 

COMBINATION SNIPS 



D 


COMPOUND LEVER SHEARS 



HAWKS-BILL SNIPS 



H 


TROJAN SNIPS 


SWNP0032 




SECTION TO BE REMOVED 



Figure 2-16.—Proper method of cutting with snips. 


edge will result. Cut circular sections from the right 
side Kfia. 2-17D . 

When making internal circular cuts, you make a 
small opening near the center of the opening, insert the 
snips, and cut from the upper side, gradually 
increasing the radius of the cut until the opening is 
compl eted I (fig. 2-18l l. 

Large sheet-metal sections are cut on SQUARING 
SHEARS that are discussed later in this chapter. 

The COMBINATION NOTCHER, COPER, and 
SH EAR Kfia. 2-19 ) is ideal for notching corners or the 
edge of sheet metal. The blades are adjustable for 
conventional notching or for piercing, starting inside 
the blank. 

PORTABLE POWER SHEARS make it possible 
to do production work. They are designed to do 
straight or circular cuttin d(fio. 2-201 . 

Small diameter openings can be made with a 
SOLID PUNCH Iffig. 2-211 or a HOLLOW PUNCH 



Figure 2-17.—Making a circular cut. 



Figure 2-18.—Making an internal circular cut. 



Figure 2-19.—Combination notcher, coper, and shear. 


[fig. 2-22)1 Locate the position of the hole; select the 
correct size punch and hammer; then place the metal 
section on a lead cake or on the end grain of a block 
of hard wood Ifig. 2-23)1 Strike the punch firmly with 


2-8 






















































Figure 2-20.—Portable power shears 



Figure 2-22.—Hollow punch. 


the hammer. Turn the punched section over so the 
burred section is up, then smooth it with a mallet. 

FOOT-ACTUATED SQUARING SHEARS Rfiql 
1 2-24)1 make it possible to square and trim large sheets. 
Do not attempt to cut metal heavier than the designed 
capacity of the shears. The maximum capacity of the 
machine is stamped on the manufacturer's 



specification plate on the front of the shears. Check 
the gauge of the metal against this size with a 
SHEET-METAL GAUGE I (fig. 2-251 . This figure 
shows the gauge used to measure the thickness of 
metal sheets. The gauge is a disc-shaped piece of 
metal, having slots of widths that correspond to the 
U.S. gauge numbers from 0 to 36. Each gauge number 
is marked on the front and the corresponding decimal 
equivalent marked on the back. 

Do NOT cut wire, band iron, or steel rods with the 
squaring shears. 




swNfwtc CORRECT 



Figure 2-23.—Correct method of backing sheet metal for making a hole with a punch. 


2-9 
























































U.S. STANDARD GAUGE 


Figure 2-25.—Sheet-metal guage. 


The length of the cut is determined by the position 
of the BACK GAUGE when the metal is inserted from 
the front of the shears. The FRONT GAUGE controls 
the length of the cut when the metal sheet is inserted 
from the rear. The front gauge is seldom used and is 
usually removed from the shears. A BEVEL GAUGE 
permits angular cuts to be made. 

To make a cut, set the back gauge to the required 
dimension by using the graduated scale on the top of 
the extension arms or on the graduated section on the 
bed top. Hold the piece firmly against the SIDE 
GAUGE with both hands until the HOLD-DOWN 
comes i nto position, and apply pressure to the F OOT 
PEDAL. 

NOTE: KEEP HANDS CLEAR OF THE BLADE 
AND FEET FROM BENEATH THE FOOT PEDAL. 

RING AND CIRCULAR SHEARS HTTg. 2-261) are 
intended for cutting inside and outside circles in sheet 
metal. The CLAM PI NG HEAD is positioned for the 
desired diameter and the blank is inserted. Lower the 
CUTTING DISC and make the cut. 

SHEET-METAL BENDING AND 
FORMING EQUIPMENT 

Sheet metal is given three-dimensional shape and 
rigidity by bending. Sheet metal can be formed by 
hand or with various special tools and machines, 
several techniques are described in the following 
sections. 



Figure 2-26.—Ring and circular shears 


Stakes 

METAL STAKES allow the sheet-metal 
craftsman to make an assortment of bends by hand 
Stakes come in a variety of shapes and sizes. The work 
is done on the heads or the horns of the stakes. They 
are machined, polished, and, in some cases, hardened 
Stakes are used for finishing many types of work; 
therefore, they should NOT be used to back up work 
when using a chisel. The following is an assortment of 
the most common stakes that are used within the NCF 
and Public Works Departments ! (fig. 7rTi\ \ 

1. SQUARE STAKES fiTTg. 2-271 , view A) have 
square-shaped heads and are used for general work 
Three types are used: the coppersmith square stake with 
one end rounded, the bevel edge square stake that is 
offset, and the common square stake. Some of the edges 
are beveled and this allows them to be used for a greater 
variety of jobs. 

2. The CONDUCTOR STAK fllfig"?2% view B) 
has cylindrical horns of different diameters and is used 
when forming, seaming, and riveting pieces and parts 
of pipes. 

3 . The HOLLOW MANDREL STAKE lT(m^27l 
view C) has a slot in which a bolt slides allowing it to 
be clamped firmly to a bench. Either the rounded or the 
flat end can be used for forming, seaming, or riveting. 
There are two sizes available with an overall length of 
either 40 or 60 inches. 

4. The BLOW HORN STAKE RtmTZTl view D) 
has two horns of different tapers. The apron end is used 
for shaping blunt tapers and the slender-tapered end is 
used for slightly tapered jobs. 

5. The BEAKHORN STAKE l7fm~2^27l view E) 
is a general-purpose stake. The stake has a 
round-tapered horn on one end and a square-tapered 
horn on the other end. This stake is used for riveting and 
shaping round or square work 

6. The DOUBLE-SEAMING STAKE WITH 
FOUR INTERCHANGEABLE HEADS RTiq. 2-271 
view F) has two shanks and either one can be installed 


2-10 



























COPPERSMITH 
SQUARE STAKE 


COMMON 
SQUARE STAKE 



BEVEL EDGE 
SQUARE STAKE 




c 


SQUARE STAKES 



BEAKHORN STAKE 


BLOW HORN STAKE 




Figure 2-27.—Metal stakes 



in a bench plate, allowing the stakes to be used vertically 
or horizontally. This stake is used for double seaming 
large work of all types and for riveting. 

7. The HAND DOLLY |(fiq. 2-27,1 view G) is a 
portable anvil with a handle that is used for backing up 
rivet heads, double seams, and straightening. 

Other Forming Tools 

Stakes are designed to fit in a BENCH PLATE 
|(fiq. 2-281 The bench plate is a cast-iron plate that is 
affixed to a bench. It has tapered holes of different 
sizes that support the various stakes that can be used 
with the plate. Additionally, there is another type of 
bench plate that consists of a revolving plate with 
different size holes which can be clamped in any 
desired position. 

The SETTING HAMMER Kfiq. 2-29)1 has a 
square, flat face and the peen end is single-tapered. 
The peen is for setting down an edge. The face is used 
to flatten seams. Setting hammers vary in size from 4 
ounces to 20 ounces and their use is determined by the 
gauge of the metal and the accessibility of the work. 

A WOOD MALLET Rfio. 2-301 provides the 
necessary force for forming sheet metal without 
marring the surface of the metal. 

Narrow sections can be formed with the HAND 
SEAM ER l (fio. 2-311 ). Its primary use is for turning a 
flange, for bending an edge, or for folding a seam. The 
width of the flange can be set with the knurled knobs 
on the top of the jaw. 




1 

1 

. 1 

1 1 

I * 1 2 

1 

1 



SWNP0045 


Figure 2-28.—Bench plate. 



Figure 2-29.—Setting hamer. 



Figure 2-30.—Wood mallet 



Figure 2-31.—Hand seamer. 


Forming and Bending Machines 

Many machines have been designed to perform 
precise sheet-metal bending operations. They include 
the bar folder, several types of brakes, roll forming 
machines, and combination rotary machines. These 
machines are described next. 

BAR FOLDER.— The BAR FOLDEf TiTTg. 2-321 
is designed to bend sheet metal, generally 22 gauge or 
lighter. Bar folders are used for bending edges of 
sheets at various angles, for making channel shape 
(double-right angle folds), and for fabricating lock 
seams and wired edges. Narrow channel shapes can be 
formed but reverse bends cannot be bent at close 
distances. The width of the folder edge is determined 
by the setting of the DEPTH GAUGE rTfioT33t . The 
sharpness of the folded edge, whether it is to be sharp 
for a hem or seam or rounded to make a wire edge, is 
determined by the position of the WING lTfib. 2-341 . 
Right-angle (90°) and 45-degree bends can be made 
by using the 90-degree and 45-degree ANGLE STOP. 

Hemmed edges are made in the following manner 

Kfiq- 2-351 : 

1. Adjust the depth gauge for the required size, and 
position the wing for the desired fold sharpness. 

2. Set the metal in place, setting it lightly against 
the gauge fingers. 


2-12 



























Figure 2-33.—Fold size depth gauge. 


3. With the left hand holding the metal, pull the 
handle as far forward as it will go. Return the handle to 
its original position. 


4. PI ace the folded section on the beveled section 
of the blade, as close to the wing as possible. Flatten the 
fold by pulling the handle forward rapidly. 

BRAKES. — Large sheet-metal sections are 
formed by using bending brakes. These machines 
produce more uniform bends than can be made by 
hand and require significantly less effort. The two 
most commonly used brakes are the cornice brake and 
the finger brake. 

A CORNICE BRAKE is shown ir l figure 2-3~6| 
Two adjustments have to be made before using the 
machine. 

1. Adjust the UPPER JAW or CLAMPING BAR 
vertically for the gauge of sheet metal to be bent. The 
clamping device holds the work solidly in position, 
provided it is correctly adjusted. For example, if the 
clamping device is set for 18 gauge sheet metal and you 



Figure 2-36.—Cornice brake. 




c- 


T 





BAR FOLDER WING 


WING 


Figure 2-34.—Wing setting determines the tightness of fold. 


SWNPOQ52 


ZZZ1 


7 



(A) 




Figure 2-35.—Making a hemmed edge. 


2-13 


























































bend 24 gauge sheet metal at that setting, the sheet will 
slip and the bend will be formed in the wrong position. 
When you try to bend 18 gauge sheet metal when the 
machine is set for 24 gauge sheet metal, you can break 
the clamping bar handle. The pressure to lock the 
clamping bar should NEVER be too strong. With a little 
practice you will be able to gauge the pressure correctly. 

2. Adjust the upper jaw horizontally to the correct 
position for the thickness of the metal and for the radius 
of the bend to be made. 

CAUTION 

I f the upper jaw is adjusted to the exact 
thickness of the metal, the bend will be sharp 
or it will have practically no bend radius. If it 
is set for more than the thickness of the metal, 
the bend will have a larger radius; if the jaw is 
set for less than the thickness of the metal, the 
jaws of the machine may be sprung out of 
alignment and the edges of the jaws may be 
damaged. 

After these two adjustments have been made, the 
machine is operated as follows: 

1. Scribe a line on the surface of the sheet metal to 
show where the bend will be. 

2. Raise the upper jaw with the clamping handle 
and insert the sheet in the brake, bringing the scribed 
line into position even with the front edge of the upper 
jaw. 

3. Clamp the sheet in position. Ensure that the 
scribed line is even with the front edge of the upper jaw. 
The locking motion will occasionally shift the 
workpiece. 

4. Once you are satisfied that the metal is clamped 
correctly, the next step is to lift the bending leaf to the 
required angle to form the bend. If you are bending soft 
and/or ductile metal, such as copper, the bend will be 
formed to the exact angle you raised the bending leaf. 
If you are bending metal that has any spring to it, you 
will have to raise the bending leaf a few degrees more 
to compensate for the spri ng i n the metal. The exact 
amount of spring that you will have to allow for depends 
on the type of metal you are working with. 

5. Release the clamping handle and remove the 
sheet from the brake. 

The brake is equipped with a stop gauge, 
consisting of a rod, a yoke, and a setscrew. You use 
this to stop the bending leaf at a required angle. This 


feature is useful when you have to fabricate a large 
number of pieces with the same angle. After you have 
made your first bend to the required angle, set the stop 
gauge so that the bending leaf will not go beyond the 
required angle. You can now fabricate as many bends 
as you need. 

The cornice brake is extremely useful for making 
single hems, double hems, lock seams, and various 
other shapes. 

It is impossible to bend all four sides of a box on a 
conventional brake. The FINGER BRAKE, sometimes 
referred to as a BOX AND PAN BRAKE RfiaT37l . has 
been designed to handle this exact situation . The upper 
jaw is made up of a number of blocks, referred to as 
"fingers." They are various widths and can easily be 
positioned or removed to allow all four sides of a box to 
be bent. Other than this feature, it is operated in the same 
manner as a cornice brake. 

ROLL FORMING MACHINE.— When 
cylinders and conical shapes are being formed, no 
sharp bends are obviously required; instead, a gradual 
curve has to be formed in the metal until the ends meet. 
Roll forming machines have been invented to 
accomplish this task. The simplest method of forming 
these shapes is on the SLIP ROLL FORMING 
MACHINE Kfiq. 2-381 Three rolls do the forming 
[fig. 2-391 . The two front rolIs are the feed rolIs and 
can be adjusted to accommodate various thicknesses 
of metal. The rear roll, also adjustable, gives the 
section the desired curve. The top roll pivots up to 
permit the cylinder to be removed without danger of 
distortion. Grooves are machined in the two bottom 



Figure 2-37.—Finger brake. 


2-14 













Figure 2-38.—Slip roll forming machine. 


STARTING POSITION 




CURVATURE 
CONTROLLED BY 
MOVING REAR ROLL 
UP OR DOWN 


SWNP0056 


Figure 2-39.—Forming cylinders on rolling forms. 


rolls for the purpose of accommodating a wired edge 
when forming a section with this type edge or for 
rolling wire into a ring. 

COMBINATION ROTARY MACHINE.— 

Preparing sheet metal for a wired edge, turning a burr, 
beading, and crimping are probably the most difficult 
of sheet-metal forming operations to perform. When 
production dictates, large shops will have a machine 
for each operation. However, a COMBINATION 
ROTARY MACHINE Rfia. 2-40) with a selection of 
rol Is wi 11 prove acceptable for most shop uses. 

Wiring an Edge.—The wire edge must be applied 
to tapered shapes after they are formed. This is 
accomplished by turning the edge on the rotary 
machine. Gradually, lower the upper roll until the 
groove is large enough for the wire. The edge is 
pressed around the wire with the rotary machine (fig. 
241). 

The wire edge can be finished by hand if a rotary 
machine is not available. The edge is formed on the 



Figure 2-40.—Combination rotary machine with extra 
forming rolls. 





r 

Si 

* 



\ 




SWNP0058 

Figure 2-41.—Turning a wire edge with a rotary machine. 


2-15 











































































bar folder and forced into place around the wire with 
a setting hammer or oliers Kfig. 2-421 . 

Turning a Burr.— A BURR, in sheet-metal 
language, is a narrow flange turned on the circular 
section at the end of a cylinder [(fig. 2-43) . Before you 
cut the section, remember that additional material 
must be added to the basic dimensions of the object 
for the burr. lFigure 2-44| shows how to calculate the 
additional material. 

After the rotary machine has been adjusted to turn 
the proper size burr, the work is placed in position and 
the upper roll lowered. Make one complete revolution 
of the piece, scoring the edge lightly. Lower the upper 
roll a bit more, creating more pressure, and make 
another turn. Continue this operation, raising the disc 
slightly after each turn until the burr is turned to the 
required angle Kfig. 2-451 . 

This procedure is also used to turn the burr on the 
bottom of the cylinder for a double seam Kfio. 2-461 1. 
The two pieces are snapped together, the burr set 
down, and the seam completed ! (fig. 2-471) . 

NOTE: Because turning a burr is a difficult 
operation, you should turn several practice pieces to 



Figure 2-42.—Setting a wire edge with a setting hammer or 
pliers. 



Figure 2-43.—Burrs turned on a cylindrical section. 



Figure 2-44.—Calculating the material needed for a double 
seam. 



Figure 2-45—Turning a burred edge. 




Figure 2-46.—Fitting burred sections together. 


develop your skill before turning the burr on the actual 
piece to be used. 


2-16 


































































Q 


(D» 


Figure 2-47.—Making a double seam on a cylindrical section. 


Beading. — B E ADI N G (fig. 2-48) is used to gi ve 
added stiffness to cylindrical sheet-metal objects for 
decorative purposes, or both. It can be a simple bead 
or an ogee (S-shaped) bead. They are made on the 
rotary machine using beading rolls. 

Crimping. — CRIM PI NG llfia. 2-49)1 reduces the 
diameter of a cylindrical shape, allowing it to be 
slipped into the next section. This eliminates the need 
for making each cylinder with a slight taper. 



SINGLE BEAD 


SWNP0065 




OGEE BEAD 


Figure 2-48.—Turning a bead with a rotary machine. 


CRIMP 



Figure 2-49.—A crimped section. 


SHEET-METAL DEVELOPMENT 

In sheet-metal development work, some 
fabrication or repair jobs can be laid out directly on 
sheet metal. This development procedure, known as 
SCRATCH ING, is used when the object to be made 
requires little or no duplication. 

When a single part is to be produced in quantity, 
a different development procedure is used. Instead of 
laying out directly on the metal, you will develop a 
PATTERN, or TEMPLATE, of the piece to be 
fabricated and then transfer the development to the 
metal sheet. The second development procedure is 
what we are primarily concerned with in this section. 

Special attention is given to the three primary 
procedures commonly used in developing sheet-metal 
patterns. They are parallel line, radial line, and 
triangular development. We will also discuss the 
fabrication of edges, joints, seams, and notches. 

PARALLEL LINE DEVELOPMENT 

Parallel line development is based upon the fact 
that a line that is parallel toanother line is an equal 
distance horn that line at all points. Objects that have 
opposite lines parallel to each other or that have the 
same cross-sectional shape throughout their length are 
developed by this method 

To gain a clear understanding of the parallel line 
method, we will develop, step by step, a layout of a 
truncated cylinder l(fia. 2-50)1 Such apiece can be used 



Figure 2-50.—Truncated cylinder. 


2-17 










































































as one half of a two-piece Odegree elbow. This piece 
of sheet metal is developed in the following 
procedure: 

1. First, draw a front and bottom view by 
orthographic projection [(fig. 2-511 , view A). 

2. Divide half the circumference of the circle 
Iffig. 2-51J view A) into a number of equal parts. The 
parts should be small enough so that when straight lines 
are drawn on the development or layout between 
division points, they will approximate the length of the 
arc. Project lines from these points to the front view, as 
shown in i figure 2-51,1 view B. These resulting parallel 
lines of the front view are called ELEMENTS. 

3. Lay off the base line, called the 
STRETCH-OUT LINE, of the development to the right 
of the front view, as shown in lfioure 2-51.1 view C. 



Figure 2-51.—Development of a truncated cylinder. 


4. Divide the stretch-outline into twice the number 
of equal parts equal to each division of the 
circumference on the half circle of the orthographic 
view Ifig. 2-5lJ view C). 

5. Erect perpendicular lines at each point, as 
shown in i figure 2-51J view C. 

6. Using a T-square edge, project the lengths of the 
elements on the front view to the development 
Iffia. 2-511 View D). 

7. Using a curve (french or other type), join the 
resulting points of intersection in a smooth curve. 

When the development is finished, add necessary 
allowances for warns and joints, then cut out your 
patterns. 

RADIAL LINE DEVELOPMENT 

The radial line method of pattern development is 
used to develop patterns of objects that have a tapering 
form with lines converging at a common center. 

The radial line method is similar in some respects 
to the parallel line method. Evenly spaced reference 
lines are necessary in both of these methods. But, in 
parallel line development, the reference lines are 
parallel —like a picket fence. In radial line 
development, the reference lines radiate from the 
APEX of a cone—I ike the spokes of a wheel. 

The reference lines in parallel line development 
project horizontally. In radial line development, the 
reference lines are transferred from the front view to 
the development with the dividers. 

Developing a pattern for the frustum of a right 
cone is a typical practice project that will help you get 
the feel of the radial line method. You are familiar with 
the shape of a cone. A right cone is one that, if set 
big-side-down on a flat surface, would stand straight 
up. In other words, a centerline drawn from the point, 
or vertex, to the base line would form right angles with 
that line. The frustum of a cone is that part that remains 
after the point, or top, has been removed. 

The procedure for developing a frustum of a right 
cone is given below. Check each step of the procedure 
against the development shown ir i figure 2-52 j 

1. Draw a cone ABC with line ED cutting the cone 
in such a way that line ED is parallel to the base line 
BC. EDCB is called a frustum. 

2. With center O and radius OB, draw the 
half-plan beneath the base line BC. Divide the 


2-18 








































































































half-plan into an equal number of parts and number 
them as shown. 

3. With vertex A as a center and with dividers, set 
a distance equal to AC and draw an arc for the 
stretch-out of the bottom of the cone. 

4. Set the dividers equal to the distance of the 
step-offs on the half-plan and step off twice as many 
spaces on the arcs as on the half-plan; number the 
step-offs 1 to 7 to 1, as shown in the illustration Kfiq.l 

□HU. 

5. Draw lines connecting A with point 1 at each 
end of the stretch-out. This arc, from 1 to 7 to 1, is equal 
in length to the circumference of the bottom of the cone. 

6. Now, using A for a center, set your dividers 
along line AC to the length of AD. Scribe an arc through 
both of the lines drawn from A to 1. 

The area enclosed between the large and small arcs 
and the number 1 line is the pattern for the frustum of 
a cone. Add allowance for seaming and edging and 
your stretch-out is complete. 

TRIANGULAR DEVELOPMENT 

Triangulation is slower and more difficult than 
parallel line or radial line development, but it is more 
practical for many types of figures. Additionally, it is 
the only method by which the developments of warped 
surfaces may be estimated. In development by 
triangulation, the piece is divided into a series of 



Figure 2-52.—Radial line development of a frustum of a cone. 


triangles as in radial Line development. However, there 
is no one single apex for the triangles. The problem 
becomes one of finding the true lengths of the varying 
oblique lines. This is usually done by drawing a true, 
length diagram. 

An example of layout using triangulation is the 
development of a transition piece. 

The steps in the triangulation of a warped 
transition piece joining a large, square duct and a 
small, round duct are shown in i figure 2-53.1 The steps 
are as follows: 

1. Draw the top and front orthographic views 
(view A Jfiq. 2-53] . 

2. Dividethecircle in thetop view intoa number 
of equal spaces and connect the division points with AD 
(taken from the top part of view D 1 fig. 2-531 from point 
A. This completes one fourth of the development. Since 
the piece is symmetrical, the remainder of the 
development may be constructed using the lengths from 
the first part. 

It is difficult to keep the entire development 
perfectly symmetrical when it is built up from small 
triangles. Therefore, you may check the overall 
symmetry by constructing perpendicular bisectors 
of AB, BC, CD, and DA (view E | fig. 2-53t and 
converging at point O. From point O, swing arcs a 
and b. Arc a should pass through the numbered 
points, and arc b should pass through the lettered 
poi nts. 

FABRICATION OF EDGES, JOINTS, 

SEAMS, AND NOTCHES 

There are numerous types of edges, joints, seams, 
and notches used to join sheet-metal work. We will 
discuss those that are most often used. 

Edges 

Edges are formed to enhance the appearance of the 
work, to strengthen the piece, and to eliminate the 
cutting hazard of the raw edge. The kind of edge that 
you use on any job will be determined by the purpose, 
by the sire, and by the strength of the edge needed. 

The SINGLE-HEM EDGE is shown in | fiqurel 
1 2-54.1 This edge can be made in any width. In general, 
the heavier the metal, the wider the hem is made. The 
allowance for the hem is equal to its width (W i n | fig. I 
2-54). 


2-19 



















c 



Figure 2-53—Traingular development of a transition piece. 


The DOUBLE-HEM EDGE rTfTql 2^551 is used 
when added strength is needed and when a smooth 
edge is required inside as well as outside. The 
allowance for the double-hem edge is twice the width 
of the hem. 




A WIRE EDGE I (fig. 2-561 1 is often specified in the 
plans, Objects, such as ice-cube trays, funnels, 
garbage pails, and other articles, formed from sheet 
metal are fabricated with wire edges to strengthen and 
stiffen the jobs and to eliminate sharp edges, The 


2-20 















































































Figure 2-56.—Development of a truncated cylinder. 



Figure 2-57.—Making a grooved seam joint. 



Figure 2-58.—Hand groover. 




Figure 2-59.—Locking a grooved seam with a hand groover. 


allowance for a wire edge is 2 1/2 times the diameter 
of the wire used As an example, you are using wire 
that has a diameter of 1/8 inch. M ultiply 1/8 by 2 1/2 
and your answer will be 5/16 inch, which you will 
allow when laying out sheet metal for making the wire 
edge. 

Joints 

The GROOVED SEAM J PIN T (fig. 2-371) is one 
of the most widely used methods for joining light- and 
medium-gauge sheet metal. It consists of two folded 
edges that are locked together with a HAND 
GROOVER Rtia. 2-581 . 

When making a grooved seam on a cylinder, you 
fit the piece over a stake and lock it with the hand 
groover |fiq. 2-59H The hand groover should be 
approximately 1/16 inch wider than the seam. Lock 
the seam by making prick punch indentions about 
1/2 i nch i n from each end of the seam. 

The CAP STRIP SEAM RfiaTlMSO] view A) is 
often used to assemble air-conditioning and heating 
ducts. A variation of the joint, the LOCKED CORNER 
SEAM Kfiq. 2-60] view B), is widely accepted for the 
assembly of rectangular shapes. 



Figure 2-60.—(A) Cap strip seam, (B) Locked corner seam 


2-21 







































A DRIVE SLIP J 01 NT is a method of joining two 
flat sections of metal l Figure 2-6U is the pattern for the 
drive slip. End notching and dimensions vary with 
application and area practice on all locks, seams, and 
edges. 

"S" joints are used to join two flat surfaces of 
metal. Primarily these are used to join sections of 
rectangular duct. These are also used to join panels in 
air housings and columns. 

I Figure 2^621 shows a flat "S" joint. View A is a 
pattern for the "S" cleat. View B is a perspective view 
ofthetwo pieces of metal that form the flat "S"joint. 
In view C, note the end view of the finished "S"joint. 

I Figure 2^631 shows a double "S" joint. View B is 
the pattern for the double "S" cleat. View A is one of 
two pieces of metal to be joined. Note the cross section 
of a partially formed cleat and also the cross section 
of the finished double "S" joint, his is a variation of 



Figure 2-63.—Double “S’ joint (cleat) pattern. 


the simple flat "S”and it does not require an overlap 
of metals being joined. 

I Fiqure2-~64l shows a standing "S"joint. View B is 
the pattern for the standing "S" cleat. View A is one of 
the two pieces of metal to be joined. Note the cross 
section of the finished standing "S" cleat and standing 
"S" joi nt. 



*-SIZE OF DUCT + 1-1/2"-- 

1 

t 

\ 


1 

2-1/4" 

SWNP0C78 

T 

1-1/4" 

1 


L 

I 

/ 

i tr 

; 

i 

!_ 

A 

#* _ I 

t 


1 - 1 / 8 " 


i/r y i/r k 


1 / 8 - 


END Vi EW OF DRIVE 
SUP CONNECTION 


Seams 

Many kinds of seams are used to join sheet-metal 
sections. Several of the commonly used seams are 
shown in lfiqure 2-65.I When developing the pattern, 
ensure you add adequate material to the basic 
dimensions to make the seams. The folds can be made 
by hand; however, they are made much more easily on 
a bar folder or brake. The joints can be finished by 
soldering and/or riveting. 


Figure 2-61.—Drive slip pattern and connections 


3-3/C 


1- 

1 - 1 / 2 * 

4 - 


1-1/8--) 


1 - 1 / 8 " 

4 — 

1 - 1 / 8 * 

i 


3/8" 


I—i-i,y~j 4j 


- 4-7/8“ 


CUTTING PATTERN 



PERSPECTIVE VIEW - SUP "S" CLEAT CONECTION 

|— I 1/8"-j 

END VIEW OF A SUP 'S' CLEAT CONNECTION 


Figure 2-62.—“S” joint or slip pattern and connections. 


When developing sheet-metal patterns, ensure 
you add sufficient material to the base dimensions to 
make the seams. Several types of seams used to join 
sheet-metal sections are discussed in this section. 

There are three types of lap seams: the PLAIN 
LAP seam, the OFFSET LAP seam, and the CORNER 
LAP seam [fig, 2-66)1 Lap seams can be joined by 
drilling and riveting, by soldering, or by both riveting 
and soldering. To figure the allowance for a lap seam, 
you must first know the diameter of the rivet that you 
plan to use. The center of the rivet must be set in from 
the edge a distance of 2 1/2 times its diameter; 
therefore, the allowance must be five times the 
diameter of the rivet that you are usina. 1 Figure 2-671 
shows the procedure for laying out a plain lap and a 
comer lap for seaming with rivets (d represents the 
diameter of the rivets). For comer seams, allow an 
additional one sixteenth of an inch for clearance. 


2-22 


































































Figure 2-64.—Standing “S” cleat pattern. 



STANDING SEAM FLAT LOCK SEAM 




LAP BOTTOM SEAM tJSERT BOTTOM SEAM 


SINGLE BOTTOM SEAM 


Figure 2-65.—Common sheet-metal seams. 


2-23 





Figure 2-67.—Layout of lap seams for riveting. 


GROOVED SEAMS are useful in the fabrication 
of cylindrical shapes. There are two types of grooved 
seams-the outside grooved seam and the inside 
grooved seam Kfia. 2-68D . The allowance for a grooved 
seam is three times the width (W ii h fig, 2-6£l ) of the 
lock, one half of this amount being added to each edge. 
For example, if you are to have a 1/4-inch grooved 
seam, 3 x 1/4 =3/4 inch, or the total allowance; 1/2 of 
3/4 inch =3/8 inch, or the allowance that you are to 
add to each edge. 

The PITTSBURGH LOCK SEAM I (fig. 2T39I) is a 
comer lock seam. l Figure 2-69l shows a cross section 
of the two pieces of metal to be joined and a cross 
section of the finished seam. This seam is used as a 
lengthwise seam at comers of square and rectangular 
pipes and elbows as well as fittings and ducts. This 
seam can be made in a brake but it has proved to be so 
universal in use that special forming machines have 
been designed and are available. It appears to be quite 
complicated, but like lap and grooved seams, it 



Figure 2-68.—Grooved seams 




Figure 2-69.—Pittsburgh lock seam. 

consists of only two pieces. The two parts are the 
flanged, or single, edge and the pocket that forms the 
lock The pocket is formed when the flanged edge is 
inserted into the pocket, and the extended edge is 
turned over the inserted edge to complete the lock. The 
method of assembling and locking a Pittsburgh seam 
is shown in i figures 2-70 d ind 2-71. 

The allowance for the pocket is W + W + 3/16 
inch. W is the width or depth of the pocket. The width 
of the flanged edge must be less than W. For example, 
if you are laying out a 1/4-inch Pittsburgh leek seam 
Kfiq. 2-721 , your total allowance should be 1/4 +1/4 + 
3/16 inch, or 11/16 inch for the edge on which you are 
laying out the pocket and 3/16 inch on the flanged 
edge. 


2-24 














































Figure 2-70.—Assembly of a Pittsburgh lock seam 


STANDI NG SEAMS are used for joining metals 
where extra stiffness is needed, such as roofs, air 
housing, ducts, and so forth. 1 Figure 2-731 is a cross 
section of the finished standing seam. Dimensions and 
rivet spacing will vary with application. 

Standing seams used when stiffening is required 
are as follows: The SPREADER DRIVE CAP, the 
POCKET SLIP, and the GOVERNMENT LOCK gficfl 
1 2-74)1 are seams frequently used in large duct 
construction where stiffeners are required. 

The DOVETAIL SEAM is used mainly to join a 
round pipe/fitting to a flat sheet or duct. This seam can 
be made watertight by solderinq l Figure 2 : 75l shows 
the pattern for forming a dovetail seam and an example 
of its use. 

Notches 



Figure 2-71.—Closing a Pittsburgh lock seam 



swNPooae 

Figure 2-72.—Layout of a 1/4-inch Pittsburgh lock seam. 


RIVET 
6" CTRS. 


SWNP009C 


T 


7/8" 

i 



Figure 2-73.—Cross section of a standing seam. 


a job. Before you can mark a notch, you will have to 
lay out the pattern and add the seams, the laps, or the 
stiffening edges. If the patterns are not properly 
notched, you will have trouble when you start 
forming, assembling, and finishing the job. 

No definite rule for selecting a notch for a job can 
be given. But as soon as you can visualize the 
assembly of the job, you will not have any trouble 
determining the shape and size of the notch required 


Notching is the last but not the least important step 
to be considered when you are getting ready to lay out 


2-25 












































swn=ocbi 

POCKET SUP GOVERNMENT LOCK 


Figure 2-74.—Miscellaneous seam. 



Figure 2-75.—Dovetail lock seam 


2-26 










for the job. If the notch is made too large, a hole will 
be left in the finished job. If the notch is too small or 
not the proper shape, the metal will overlap and bulge 
at the seam or edge. Do not concern yourself too much 
if your first notches do not come out as you 
expected—practice and experience will dictate size 
and shape. 

A SQUARE NOTCH nfia~2^7l ) is likely the first 
you will make. It is the kind you make in your layout 
of a box or drip pan and is used to eliminate surplus 
material This type of notch will result in butt comers. 
Take a look around the shop to see just how many 
different kinds of notches you can see in the 
sheet-metal shapes. 

SLANT NOTCHES are cut at a 45-degree angle 
across the comer when a single hem is to meet at a 
90-degree angle. fFTciure 2-77l shows the steps in 
forming a slant notch. 

A V NOTCH is used for seaming ends of boxes. 
You will also use a full V notch when you have to 
construct a bracket with a toed-in flange or for similar 
construction. The full V is shown in | figure 2-781 

When you are making an inside flange on an angle 
of less than 90 degrees, you will have to use a 
modification of the full V notch to get flush joints. The 
angle of the notch will depend upon the bend angle. A 
modified V notch is shown in i figure 2-791 


■ 

Y 

3 

n 

SWNP0093 





Figure 2-77.—Slant notch. 


jF 

Figure 2-78—V notch. 




A WIRE NOTCH is a notch used with a wire edge. 
Its depth from the edge of the pattern will be one wire 
diameter more than the depth of the allowance for the 
wi re edge (2 1/2 d), or i n other words, 3 1/2 ti mes the 
diameter of the wire (3 1/2 d). Its width is equal to 1 
1/2 times the width of the seam (11/2 w). That portion 
of the notch next to the wire edge will be straight. The 
shape of the notch on the seam will depend on the type 
of seam used, which, i i t figure 2 r 8n . is 45 degrees for 
a grooved seam. 

Most of your work will require more than one type 
of notch, as shown in i figure 2-80,1 where a wire notch 
was used in the forming of a cylindrical shape joined 
by a grooved seam. I n such a layout, you will have to 
notch for the wire edge and seam. 

JOINING AND INSTALLING 
SHEET-METAL DUCT 

After the sheet metal has been cut and formed, it 
has to be joined together. Most sheet-metal seams are 
locked or riveted but some will be joined by torch 
brazing or soldering. Lock seams are made primarily 
by the forming processes that have already been given. 

I 1 SWNP0097 



STEP 1 STEP 2 

Figure 2-80.—Wire notch in a cylindrical layout. 


2-27 

















































Torch brazing and soldering are discussed in 
Steelworker, volume l, lchapter~6l This section deals 
only with joining sheet-metal seams by either metal 
screws or rivets. 

METAL SCREWS 

Different types of metal screws are available for 
sheet-metal work. The most common type in use is the 
MACHINE SCREW. Machine screws are normally 
made of brass or steel. They will have either a flathead 
or a roundhead and are identified by their number size, 
threads per inch, and length; for example, a 6 by 32 by 
1 inch screw indicates a number 6 screw with 
32 threads per inch and 1 inch in length. 


SELF-TAPPING SHEET-METAL SCREWS are 
another common type of screw. Most screws of this 
type will be galvanized and are identified by their 
number size and length. These screws form a thread 
as they are driven [fig. 2-81)1 as the name implies. 

THREAD-CUTTING SCREWS ITfio. 2-82] are 
different from self-tapping screws in that they actually 
cut threads in the metal. They are hardened and are used 
to fasten nonferrous metals and join heavy gauge sheet 
metal. 


SWNP00B8 



TYPE SLOTTED TYPE A PHILUPS HI-THREAD TAPITS 

PAN HE/D PAN HEAD 

Figure 2-81.—Self-tapping sheet-metal screws 






TYPE B HEX HEAD 


TYPE F PHILIPS 
ROUNDHEAD 


TYPE BF PHILUPS 
ROUNDHEAD 


TYPE L PHILLPS 
ROUNDHEAD 



TYPE B SLOTTED TYPE B PHILUPS 
ROUNDHEAD ROUNDHEAD 


Figure 2-82.—Thread-cutttng screws. 



TYPE U DRIVE TYPE 21 DRIVE 
SCREW SCREW 


Figure 2-83.—Drive screws. 

DRIVE SCREWS |(fig. 2-831 are simply 
hammered into a drilled or punched hole of the proper 
size to make a permanent fastening. 

RIVETS 

Rivets are available in many different materials, 
sizes, and types. Rivets, made of steel, copper, brass, 
and aluminum, are widely used. Rivets should be the 
same material as the sheet metal that they join. 

Tl NNERS' RIVETS of the kind shown in lfiourel 
I 2-84 d ire used in sheet-metal work more than any other 
type of rivet. Tinners’ rivets vary in size from the 
8-ounce rivet to the 16-pound rivet. This size 
designation signifies the weight of 1,000 rivets. If 
1,000 rivets weigh 8 ounces, each rivet is called an 
8-ounce rivet. As the weight per 1,000 rivets increases, 
the diameter and length of the rivets also increase. For 
example, the 8-ounce rivet has a diameter of 0.089 
inch and a length of 5/32 inch, while the 12-pound 
rivet has a diameter of 0.259 inch and a length of 1/2 
inch. For special jobs that require fastening several 
layers of metal together, special rivets with extra, long 
shanks are used. l Table 2-U is a guide for selecting 
rivets of the proper size for sheet-metal work. 



Figure 2-84.—Tinners’ rivets. 

Table 2-1.—Guide for Selecting Rivet Size for Sheet-Metal 
Work 


Gauge of sheet metal 

Rivet size (weight in 
pounds per 1,000 rivets) 

26 

1 

24 

2 

22 

2 1/2 

20 

3 

18 

3 1/2 

16 

4 


2-28 
















































When you arejoining sheet metal that is greater than 
two thicknesses, remember that the shank of the rivet 
should extend 1 1/2 times the diameter of the rivet. 
This will give you adequate metal to form the head. 

Rivet spacing is given on the blueprint or drawing 
you are working from. If the spacing is not given, 
space the rivets according to the service conditions the 
seam must withstand. For example, if the seam must 
be watertight, you will need more rivets per inch than 
is required for a seam that does not have to be 
watertight. No matter how far apart the rivets are, there 
must be a distance of 2 1/2 times the rivet diameter 
between the rivets and the edge of the sheet. This 
distance is measured from the center of the rivet holes 
to the edge of the sheet. 


PUNCH HOLDER 

PUNCHING LEVER 



CENTERING 



Figure 2-85.—Hand punch. 


After you have determined the size and spacing of 
the rivets, mark the location of the centers of the rivet 
holes. Then make the holes by punching or by drilling. 
If the holes are located near the edge of the sheet, a 
hand punch, similar to the one shown ir l figure 2-851 
can be used to punch the holes. If the holes are farther 
away from the edge, you can use a deep-threaded 
punch (either hand operated or power driven) or you 
can drill the holes. The hole must be slightly larger 
than the diameter of the rivet to provide a slight 
clearance. 

Riveting involves three operations-drawing, 
upsetting, and headin d (fig. 2-861) . A rivet set and a 
riveting hammer are used to perform these operations. 
The method for riveting sheet metal follows: 

1. Select a rivet set that has a hole slightly larger 
than the diameter of the rivet. 

2. I nsert the rivets in the holes and rest the sheets 
to be joined on a stake or on a solid bench top with the 
rivet heads against the stake or bench top. 

3. Draw the sheets together by placing the 
deep hole of the rivet set over the rivet and striking 
the head of the set with a riveting hammer. Use a 
light hammer for small rivets, a heavier hammer 
for larger rivets. 

4. When the sheets have been properly drawn 
together, remove the rivet set. Strike the end of the rivet 
LIGHTLY with the riveting hammer to upset the end of 
the rivet. Do not strike too hard a blow, as this would 
distort the metal around the rivet hole. 

5. Place the heading die (dished part) of the 
rivet set over the upset end of the rivet and form 
the head. One or two hammer blows on the head of 
the rivet set will be enough to form the head on the 
rivet. 



Figure 2-86.—Drawing, upsetting, and heading a rivet. 


2-29 
























CORRECT RIVETING 


1. DRAWN 




2. UPSET 

TROUBLES 
HEAD TOO SMALL 


3. HEADED 


1. RIVET NOT DRAWN 2. SHEETS NOT DRAWN 

Figure 2-87.—Correct and incorrect riveting. 


A correctly drawn, upset, and headed rivet is 
shown in the top part o fl figure 2-87 J The lower part of 
this figure shows the results of incorrect riveting. 


Pop rivets provide simplicity and versatility, 'hey 
are simple and easy to use in complicated installations. 
Expensive equipment or skilled operators are not 
required. J ust drill a hole, insert, and set the pop rivet 
from the same side, and high riveting quality and 
strength are easily and quickly accomplished. 

Two basic designs of pop rivets are used: closed 
end and open end. The closed-end type fills the need 
for blind rivets that seal as they are set. They are 
gastight and liquidtight, and I ike the open-end type, 
they are installed and set from the same side. As the 
rivet sets, a high degree of radial expansion is 
generated in the rivet body, providing effective 
hole-filing qualities. 


An addition to sheet-metal rivets are the pop 
rivets shown in | figure 2-88. 1 These pop rivets are 
high-strength, precision-made, hollow rivets 
assembled on a solid mandrel that forms an integral 
part of the rivet. They are especially useful for blind 
fastening-where there is limited or no access to the 
reverse side of the work. 


CLOSED-END TYPE 


HOLLOW-CORE TYPE 
DOMED HEAD 





SWNP0105 


The open-end type of pop rivet resembles a hollow 
rivet from the outside. Because the mandrel head stays 
in the rivet body, the mandrel stem seals to a certain 
degree, but it is not liquidtight. 

I Figure 2-891 shows two of the tools used for setting 
the pop rivets. These tools are lightweight and very 
easily used. For example, when using the small hand 
tool, you need only to insert the mandrel of the rivet 
in the nosepiece, squeeze the handle (usually three 
times), and the rivet is set. To operate the scissors-type 
tool, fully extend the lever linkage or gatelike 
mechanism and insert the rivet mandrel into the 
nosepiece of the tool. I nsert the rivet into the piece 
being riveted. Apply firm pressure to the tool, 
ensuring that the nosepiece remains in close contact 
with the rivet head. Closing the lever linkage retracts 
the gripping mechanism, which withdraws the 
mandrel. The rivet is set when the mandrel head 
breaks. 




Figure 2-88.—Pop rivets. 


Figure 2-89.—Pop rivet toots. 


2-30 
































































Before inserting another rivet in the tool, be sure 
that the broken mandrel has been ejected from the tool. 
This can be done by fully extending the lever linkage 
and allowing the mandrel to fall clear. 

The scissors or expandable type of tool is unique 
because it can reach hard-to-get-at areas and can set 
the rivets with ease. This tool is particular] y useful for 
installing ventilation ducting. 

RIVETED SEAMS 

Riveted seams are used for joining metals and 
have numerous applications. 

I Figure 2-90] shows the pattern of one of two pieces 
to be joined by lap and rivet. Note the cross section of 
the finished seam. 



3-1/4“ 

i 



Figure 2-90.—Pattern for riveted lap seam. 


I Figure 2-9H shows the patterns for constructing a 
lapped and riveted comer seam. View A is the pattern 
for one piece and view B is the other. Note the cross 
section through the completed seam. 

Frequent use is made of lapped and riveted seams 
in joining round pipe sections. 

SHEET-METAL DUCT SYSTEMS 

With the advent of high-tech equipment, such as 
computers and other specialized electronic 
equipment, air-conditioning systems are incorporated 
more than ever into many Naval Construction Force 
(NCF) construction projects. Many of the structures 
are designed for long-life usage instead of temporary 
buildings with a short time use. There are also some 
advanced base functional components (ABFC) which 
incorporate heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning 
systems (HVAC) within the facility design. 

FI VAC systems require close coordination 
between ratings. Air conditioning, air handling, and 
heating units are normally installed by an 
Utilitiesman, and the electrical connections are 
accomplished by a Construction Electrician. These 
items must be installed before the ductwork 
installation phase begins. The Steelworker must also 
coordinate with the Builder assigned to the project to 
ensure that all openings in walls and floors are 
sufficient to accommodate ducts, diffusers, and vents. 

Sheet-metal HVAC systems require knowledgeable 
workers to fabricate and install the various ducts and 



SECIIQU. THRU- 

COMPLETED SEAM 



Figure 2-91.—Riveted seam for tapped and riveted corner seam. 


2-31 



























































fittings needed in a complete heating, ventilating, and 
air-conditioning system. The Steelworker must be 
very versatile because the most difficult part of 
sheet-metal work is the installation of a product that 
has been built in a shop and is installed on a site at a 
later time. 

All of the variables and problems that occur 
during the installation process cannot be covered here; 
however, this section will cover some of the different 
hanging and connecting systems used by the 
sheet-metal worker. The type of connecting system 
used depends upon where the duct system is installed, 
its size, how many obstructions there are, and also, 
what type of structure the system is hanging from or 
connected to. 

SHOP PROCEDURES 

The small sheet metal shops in the NCF or in a 
Public Works Department are normally tasked with 
single fabrication jobs for an NCF project or small 
repair projects. These shops usually employ a small 
number of Steelworkers as part of a multi-shop 
environment. The senior Steelworker assigned to a 
shop is tasked with the plan development and 
estimating of materials. The layout Steelworker makes 
up most of the fittings in the shop and is responsible 
for stockpiling patterns and tracings on standard 
fittings used for sheet-metal duct systems. 

NOTE: You should fabricate an entirejob at the 
shop, rather than deliver an incomplete system to the 
jobsite. 

SHOP DRAWINGS 

A shop drawing is a plan view or an elevation view 
of a fitting, duct, or other object that is drawn either 
by the freehand sketch method or by using drafting 
instruments. It maybe useful to get assistance from an 
Engineering Aid for complex duct systems or fittings. 
One of the better methods is to draw a complete set of 
standard fittings and then add the required dimensions 
to fit the job. 

The dimensions shown on the views of a shop 
drawing are finished dimensions. Once the finished 
dimensions have been determined, one-half inch must 
be added to each end to obtain the raw size of the 
pattern. This dimension produces a cut size 
dimension. The type of material, gauge number, and 
type of seam may be added to the shop drawing if 
desired. Usually these are specified on the drawings 
and on the pattern sheets. 


DUCT MATERIAL 

Metal sheets, wire, band iron, and angle iron are 
the most widely used materials in sheet-metal 
fabrication. The types of metal sheets are plain, flat 
sheets and ribbed sheets or corrugated sheets. The 
sheets are made of such materials as black iron, 
galvanized iron, tin plate, copper, aluminum, stainless 
steel, or Monel. Galvanized and black iron sheets are 
the most commonly used material in sheet-metal 
work. 

The thickness of a sheet is designated by a series 
of numbers called gauges. Iron and steel sheets are 
designated by the U.S. standard gauge which is the 
accepted standard in the United States. 

REINFORCEMENT AND SUPPORT 

The recommended gauge thicknesses of sheet 
metal used in a standard ventilating and 
air-conditioning system with normal pressure and 
velocities are shown in I table 2-2.1 Where special 
rigidity or stiffness is required, ducts should be 
constructed of metal two gauges heavier than those 
given in the table. All insulated ducts 18 inches or 
greater on any flat side should be cross broken, as 
shown in lfiqure 2-92.| Cross breaking maybe omitted 
if the duct is insulated with approved rigid type of 
insulation and sheet metal two gauges heavier is used. 

The maximum length of any section of ductwork 
will not exceed 7 feet 10 inches; this measurement 
allows individual sections to be fabricated from an 
8-foot sheet of metal with a 2-inch allowance for 
connection tabs. If lengths of 7 feet 10 inches are 
considered too long for a specific job, it is 
recommended that the duct system be constructed 
with sections of 3-foot 9-inch multiples. 

Many duct systems run into unplanned 
obstructions, particularly in renovation work, such as 
electrical connections and wiring, structural members, 



Figure 2-92.—Cross-broken flat surfaces 


2-32 






Table 2-2.—Recommended Gauges for Sheet-Metal Duct Construction 


Aluminum B. & S. 
gauge 

Steel U.S. std. 
gauge 

Maximum side, 
inches 

Type of transverse 
joint connections 

Bracing 

24 

26 

up to 12 

S-drive, pocket or bar 
slips, on 7-ft. 10-in. 
centers 

None. 



13 to 24 

S-drive, pocket or bar 
slips, on 7-ft, 10-in. 
centers. 

None. 

22 

24 

25 to 30 

S-drive, 1-in. pocket 
or 1-in. bar slips, on 
7-ft. 10-in. centers. 

1- x 1- x 1/8-ia angles 
4 ft. from joint. 



31 to 40 

Drive, 1-in. pocket or 
1-in. bar slips, on 7-ft. 
10-in. centers. 

1-xl-x 1/8-ia angles 
4 ft. from joint. 

20 

22 

41 to 60 

1 1/2-ia angle connec¬ 
tions, or 1 1/2-in. bar 
slips with 1 3/8-in. x 
1/8-in. bar reinforcing 
on 7-ft 10-in. centers. 

11/2-x 11/2-x 1/8-ia 
angles 4 ft. from joint. 

18 

20 

61 to 60 

1 1/2-ia angle connec¬ 
tions, or 1 1/2-in. bar 
slips 3-ft. 9-in. 
maximum centers 
with 1 3/8-x 1/8-in. 
bar reinforcing. 

11/2-x 11/2-x 1/8-ia 
diagonal angles, or 

11/2-x 11/2-x 1/8-ia 
angles 2 ft from joint. 

16 

18 

91 and up 

2- ia angle connections 
or 1 1/2-in. bar slips 

3- ft 9-in. maximum 
centers with 1 3/8- x 
1/8-in. bar reinforcing. 

11/2-x 11/2-x 1/8-in. 
diagonal angles, or 

11/2-x 11/2-x 1/8-in. 
angles 2 ft from joint. 


and piping systems. These obstructions must be 
avoided by fabricating the duct system to go around 
the obstacles. Do NOT run obstructions through duct 
systems because it creates turbulence that reduces the 
efficiency of the system. When the obstruction is an 
electrical obstruction, you should ensure all power is 
off and safety checked. When running the duct 
through an obstruction is absolutely unavoidable, the 
turbulence can be reduced by enclosing the 
obstruction in a streamlined collar |(fiq. 2-931 . 

FLEXIBLE CONNECTIONS 


Most duct systems are connected to either a 
heating or a cooling system. These systems are 
general] y electric motor driven to move air through the 
duct system. Therefore, all inlet and outlet duct 
connections to all fans or other equipment that may 



Figure 2-93.—Easement around an obstruction in ducts. 

create vibration should be made with heavy canvas, as 
shown in | figure2-941 

The most common method of making connections 
between duct sections and fittings is the method of 


2-33 































CD Connector 1 © ME "cof?NcCTiCN KiNG Figure 2-96.—Placing S slips for S-and-drive connection. 


Figure 2-94.—Flexible duct connection. 

combining two S slips and two drive slips Kfiq. 2-95D . 
S slips are first placed on two opposite edges of one 
of the sections or fittings to be joined. These S slips 
are applied to the widest dimension of the duct Kfia.l 
12-96] . The second section or fitting is then inserted 
into the slips, and the two sections are held together 
by inserting drive slips along the opposite sides Iffig.l 
[Hzl. After the drive slips are driven home, they are 
locked in place by bending the ends of the drive slip 
over the comer of the S si ips to close the comer and 
leek the drive slips in place Kfiq. 2-981 , completing the 
joint shown in i figure 2-991 

HANGING DUCT FROM 
PURLINS OR BEAMS 

Most of the ductwork Steelworkers install, 
modify, or repair are in pre-engineered buildings or 
repairs to more permanent type of ducting in 
buildings, such as barracks and base housing. 

The most common installation method is hanging 
the duct from purlins or beams in the hidden area of a 




© s SUP ©DRIVE SUP 

Figure 2-95.—Methods of connecting ducts, 




Figure 2-98.—Bending drive slips to complete the Joint. 


roof or below a ceiling. Figure 2-100l shows one such 
system when the duct is running parallel to the 
structural member. These systems require that angle 
be installed between the beams so that the hanger 
straps can be installed on both sides of the duct. 
Normally, 2-inch by 2-inch by 1/8-inch angle is 


2-34 







































































Figure 2-99.—Completed S-and-drive connection. 



Figure 2-100.—Duct running parallel to purlins or beams. 


sufficient. However, if the duct is of a very large size, 
a larger angle may be required. 

The straps that are used as hangers may be 
fabricated from 1/8-inch plate. In a normal 
installation, a 1 inch by l/S-inch strap will suffice. All 
straps must be connected to the ductwork with 
sheet-metal screws. On all government work, it is 
required that the screws be placed 1 1/4 inches from 


all edges, as illustrated in the figure which shows that 
the duct system hanging from angle rails and that all 
angles be either bolted or tack-welded to purlins or 
beams. 

Strap hangers may be hung directly on purlins or 
beams when the duct is running transverse] y or across 
the purlins or beams, as shown in i figure 2-1011 
However, the strap hangers must be twisted to turn 90 



Figure 2-101.—Strap hangers from purlins. 


2-35 





















































degrees onto the flange of the beam or purlin. Again, 
the standard 7 feet 10 inches maximum span required 
between hangers applies. Also, the hanger screws 
standard will apply. The hanger span may be shortened 
to fit the job requirements. 

For heavier or larger systems, an installation 
similar to that shown in | figure 2-102 I maybe required. 
This system is hung entirely on angle rails and the 
straps are fabricated into one-piece units. This system 
is by far the neatest looking and is normally used when 
the duct system is exposed. 

Installing a duct system under a built-up steel roof 
[fig. 2-103)1 is accomplished by hanging the duct 
system with all-thread bolts and 2-inch by 2-inch by 
1/8-inch angles. The all-thread bolt protrudes through 
the steel decking and is bolted from the top with a large 
washer and bolt, which extends down alongside the 
duct into the 2-inch by 2-inch angles which is also 
bolted from under the angle. This system allows for 
adjustment of height. Also notice that the all-the ad 
bolt extends into the top flat of the apex of the steel 
roof decking. This is required because connecting the 
all-thread bolt to the bottom valley of the steel deck 
will reduce the structural strength of the decking and 
may also cause water leaks. 


FIBER-GLASS DUCT SYSTEMS 

Throughout the Naval Construction Force (NCF) 
fiber-glass duct is becoming common on jobsites. It 
has the advantage of added insulating value, ease of 
fabrication and handling, as well as installation, and 
making it useful where traffic and handling/abuse are 
restricted. 

DUCT CHARACTERISTICS 

Fiber-glass ducts are manufactured of molded 
fiber-glass sheets covered with a thin film coating of 
aluminum, although thin vinyl or plastic coatings are 
sometimes used. In the NCF, we are primarily 
concerned with aluminum coated duct. Because it is 
fabricated of glass fibers, it is inherently insulated; 
therefore, it is used where insulation is a requirement. 

Fiber-glass ducts can be molded into various 
shapes for special applications. The desired shapes can 
be ordered from the manufacturer's stock In the NCF, 
for all but special purposes, the duct is supplied in the 
flat form of a board that has V grooves cut into the 
inner surfaces to allow folding to fabricate rectangular 
sections ITfiq. 2-1041 view A). The ends of the board is 
molded so when a rectangular/square duct is formed 
two sections of the same size will fit together in a 
shiplap joint |(fiq. 2-1041 view C). This joint ensures a 
tight connection coupled with a positive alignment. 


r xrx 3/i6" l 


SWNP0119 


PURLIN 



SHEET METAL SCREWS 


Figure 2-102.—Duct system with strap hangers from angle rails transverse to purlti 


2-36 




























































































© 


Figure 2-104.—Fabricating rectangular/square fiber-glass duct from duct board. 


Of extreme importance is the selection of the 
proper board size to fabricate the duct before 
cutting and grooving. In all applications the 


2-37 


inside diameter of the duct is the determining 
factor of the board size. Use ltable 2-3I to determine 
board size. 










































































Table 2-3—Duct Board Length Selection Chart 



6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

6 

32 

34 

36 

38 

40 

42 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

7 

34 

36 

38 

40 

42 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

8 

36 

38 

40 

42 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

9 

38 

40 

42 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

10 

40 

42 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

11 

42 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

12 

44 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

13 

46 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

14 

48 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

15 

50 

52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 


52 

54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 


54 

56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 


56 

58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 


58 

60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 


60 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

21 

62 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

22 

64 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

23 

66 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

no 

24 

68 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

no 

112 

25 

70 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

26 

72 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

no 

112 

114 

116 

27 

74 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

28 

76 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 

29 

78 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 


30 

80 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 



31 

82 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 




32 

84 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 





33 

86 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 






34 

88 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 







35 

90 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 








36 

92 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 









37 

94 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 










38 

96 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 











39 

98 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 












40 

100 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 













41 

102 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 














42 

104 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 















43 

106 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 




♦For 1 1/2-inch board—ADD 4 INCHES 

to these dimensions. 

44 

108 

110 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 




•For 2-inch board—ADD 

8 INCHES 

to these dimensions. 


_45_ 

no 

112 

114 

m_ 

m. 

120 


















46 

112 

114 

116 

118 

120 



















47 

114 

116 

118 

120 




















48 

116 

118 

120 





















49 

118 

120 






















50 

120 
























2-38 





NOTE: Within a heating system, the use of 
fiber-class duct is restricted by the adhesive 
used to affix the protective outer coating to the 
fiber glass. Check the specifications and ensure 
that it will not fail when exposed to heat over 
250 degrees. 

FABRICATION 

To fabricate a rectangular/square duct, you must 
first measure the duct board accurately. Next, the 
grooves must be cut. Ensure they are at the proper 
locations and cut straight because this allows the board 
to be folded to create the desi red rectangular/square 
shape. When cutting the board, you will need to leave 
an overlapping tab that is pulled tight and stapled Iffial 
I 2-1041 view A). Tape is then applied and the joint is 
heat-sealed |(fiq. 2-104~1 view B). J oints between 
sections are fabricated by pulling the shiplap end 
sections together and finished by stapling, taping, and 
heat sealing the ioint Rfia. 2-1041 view C). 

INSTALLATION 

The very nature of fiber-glass duct requires that it 
be supported with 1-inch by 1/16-inch galvanized 
steel strap hangers. These must be supplied or 
fabricated to fit the duct precisely whether the duct be 
rectangular/square or round. Rectangular/square ducts 
up to 24 inches (span) can be supported on 8-foot 
centers. Ducts larger than 24 inches must be supported 
on 4-foot centers. For round ducts the supports must 
not be less than 6-foot centers. 

SAFETY 

Some of the safety precautions applicable to 
sheet-metal tools and equipment have been mentioned 
throughout this chapter. Here are a few additional 
precautions that should be carefully observed when 
you are working with sheet metal. 


1. Sheet metal can cause serious cuts. Handle it 
with care. Wear steel reinforced gloves whenever 
feasible. 

2. Treat every cut immediately, no matter how 
minor. 

3. Remove all burrs from the metal sheet before 
attempting to work on it further. 

4. Use a brush to clean the work area. NEVER 
brush metal with your hands. 

5. Use tools that are sharp. 

6. Keep your hands clear of the blade on all 
squaring shears. 

7. A serious and painful foot injury will result if 
your foot is under the foot pedal of the squaring shears 
when a cut is made. 

8. Do not run your hands over the surface of sheet 
metal that has just been cut or drilled. Painful cuts can 
be received from the burrs. 

9. Get help when large pieces of sheet metal are 
being cut. Keep your helper well clear of the shears 
when you are maki ng the cut. 

10. Keep your hands and fingers clear of the rotating 
parts on forming machines. 

11. Place scrap pieces of sheet metal in the scrap 
box. 

12. Always remember to keep a clean shop. GOOD 
HOUSEKEEPI NG is the key to a safe shop. 

13. Do not use tools that are not in first-class 
condition-hammer heads loose on the handle, chisels 
with mushroomed heads, power tools with guards 
removed, and so forth. 

14. Wear goggles when in the shop. 


2-39 



















CHAPTER 3 


STRUCTURAL STEEL TERMS / LAYOUT AND 
FABRICATION OF STEEL AND PIPE 


Structural steel is one of the basic materials used 
in the construction of frames for most industrial 
buildings, bridges, and advanced base structures. 
Therefore, you, as a Seabee Steelworker, must have a 
thorough knowledge of various steel structural 
members. Additionally, it is necessary before any 
structural steel is fabricated or erected, a plan of action 
and sequence of events be set up. The plans, 
sequences, and required materials are predetermined 
by the engineering section of a unit and are then drawn 
up as a set of blueprints. This chapter describes the 
terminology applied to structural steel members, the 
use of these members, the methods by which they are 
connected, and the basic sequence of events which 
occurs during erection. 


STRUCTURAL STEEL MEMBERS 

Your work will require the use of various 
structural members made up of standard structural 
shapes manufactured in a wide variety of shapes of 
cross sections and sizes. I Figure 3-ll shows many of 
these various shapes. The three most common types 
of structural members are the W-shape (wide flange), 
the S-shape (American Standard I-beam), and the 
C-shape (American Standard channel). These three 
types are identified by the nominal depth, in inches, 
along the web and the weight per foot of length, in 
pounds. As an example, a W 12 x 27 indicates a 
W-shape (wide flange) with a web 12 inches deep and 
a weight of 27 pounds per linear foot, figure 3-2 
shows the cross-sectional views of the W-, S-, and 
C-shapes. The difference between the W-shape and 


OLD 

SYMBOL 

OLD 

ILLUSTRATED 

USE 

DESCRIPTION 

EXAMPLE 

NEW 

SYMBOL 

NEW 

ILLUSTRATED 

USE 

V\F 

24Y\F76 

W-SHAPE (WIDE FLANGE) 

% 

W 

W24X76 

BP 

14BP73 

BEARING PILE 

3 

BP 

BP14X73 

I 

15142.9 

S-SHAPE (AMERICAN STD I-BEAM) 

% 

S 

S16X42.9 

i~j 

9 I-J13.4 

C-SHAPE (AMERICAN STD CHANNEL) 

0 

C 

CSX 13.4 

M 

8X8M34.3 

M-SHAPE (MISC SHAPES OTHER THAN 
W.BP.S.&C) 


M 

MS X 34.3 

M 

SM17 




M5X 17 

Jr 

Jr 7Jr.5.5 




M7 X 5.5 

H 

12 X 4 lj 44.5 

MC-SHAPE (CHANNELS OTHER THAN 
AMERICAN STD) 


MC 

MCI 2 X 45 

Jr lj 

10Jtlj84 




MC12X 12.6 



ANGLES: 



3X3X 

L 

L3X3X.1 

EQUAL LEG 

L 

L3X3X1 

L 

L 7X4X-J. 

UN-EQUAL LEG 

Q? 

L 

L 7X4X.J. 



TEES, STRUCTURAL: 

9 



ST 

ST5WF10.5 

CUT FROM W-SHAPE 

WT 

WT12X38 



CUT FROM S-SHAPE 


ST 

ST12X38 j 



CUT FROM M-SHAPE 


MT 

MT12X38 

PL 

PLiaxlxZ-6- 

PLATE 


PL 

Pi-^xirx30” 

BAR 

BAR2lx4- 

FLAT BAR 

PIPE. STRUCTURAL 

__. 

BAR 

BAR2lxl 

PIPE 4 STD 

PIPE 4X-STRG 

0 

2 4 

06* 




PIPE 4 XX-STRG 


SWNP0S04 


Figure 3-L—Structural shapes and designations. 


3-1 















Figure 3-2.—Structural shapes. 


the S-shape is in the design of the inner surfaces of the 
flange. The W-shape has parallel inner and outer 
flange surfaces with a constant thickness, while the 
S-shape has a slope of approximately 17' on the inner 
flange surfaces. The C-shape is similar to the S-shape 
in that its inner flange surface is also sloped 
approximately 17'. 

The W-SHAPE is a structural member whose 
cross section forms the letter H and is the most widely 
used structural member. It is designed so that its 
flanges provide strength in a horizontal plane, while 
the web gives strength in a vertical plane. W-shapes 
are used as beams, columns, truss members, and in 
other load-bearing applications. 

The BEARING PILE (HP-shape) is almost 
identical to the W-shape. The only difference is that 
the flange thickness and web thickness of the bearing 
pile are equal, whereas the W-shape has different web 
and flange thicknesses. 

The S-SHAPE (American Standard I-beam) is 
distinguished by its cross section being shaped like the 
letter I. S-shapes are used less frequently than 
W-shapes since the S-shapes possess less strength and 
are less adaptable than W-shapes. 

The C-SHAPE (American Standard channel) has 
a cross section somewhat similar to the letter C. It is 
especially useful in locations where a single flat face 
without outstanding flanges on one side is required. 
The C-shape is not very efficient for a beam or column 
when used alone. However, efficient built-up 
members may be constructed of channels assembled 
together with other structural shapes and connected by 
rivets or welds. 


An ANGLE is a structural shape whose cross 
section resembles the letter L. Two types, as illustrated 
in i figure j^ are commonly used: an equal-leg angle 
and an unequal-leg angle. The angle is identified by 
the dimension and thickness of its legs; for example, 
angle 6 inches x 4 inches x 1/2 inch. The dimension 
of the legs should be obtained by measuring along the 
outside of the backs of the legs. When an angle has 
unequal legs, the dimension of the wider leg is given 
first, as in the example just cited. The third dimension 
applies to the thickness of the legs, which al ways have 
equal thickness. Angles may be used in combinations 
of two or four to form main members. A single angle 
may also be used to connect main parts together. 

Steel PLATE is a structural shape whose cross 
section is in the form of a flat rectangle. Generally, a 
main point to remember about plate is that it has a 
width of greater than 8 inches and a thickness of 1/4 
inch or greater. 

Plates are generally used as connections between 
other structural members or as component parts of 
built-up structural members. Plates cut to specific 
sizes may be obtained in widths ranging from 8 inches 
to 120 inches or more, and in various thicknesses. The 
edges of these plates may be cut by shears (sheared 
plates) or be rolled square (universal mill plates). 

Plates frequently are referred to by their thickness 
and width in inches, as plate 1/2 inch x 24 inches. The 
length in all cases is given in inches. Note ir l figure 3^41 
that 1 cubic foot of steel weighs 490 pounds, his 
weight divided by 12 gives you 40.8, which is the 
weight (in pounds) of a steel plate 1 foot square and 1 
inch thick The fractional portion is normally dropped 
and 1-inch plate is called a 40-pound plate. In practice, 
you may hear plate referred to by its approximate 
weight per square foot for a specified thickness. An 
example is 20-pound plate, which indicates a 1/2-inch 
plate. (Se &figure 3-41 ) 

The designations generally used for flat steel have 
been established by the American Iron and Steel 
Institute (AISI). Flat steel is designated as bar, strip, 


EQUAL LEGS UNEQUAL LEGS 

SWNP0508 

Figure 3-3—Angles. 




3-2 











STEEL PLATE 


ONE CUBIC FOOT OF 
STEEL - 490 POUNDS 



SWNP0507 


THICKNESS 

NAME 

2" - 

80 POUND 

if- 

— 60 POUND 

1* 

— 40 POUND 

3“ 

4 

30 POUND 

r 

2 

— 20 POUND 

3“ 

— 15 POUND 

8 


7 r 

— 10 POUND 


40-POUND PLATE 

Figure 3-4.—Weight and thickness of steel plate. 


FLAT SQUARE ROUND 

SWNP0509 



Figure 3-5.—Bars. 


somewhat, depending on the type of structure being 
erected. 


sheet, or plate, according to the thickness of the 
material, the width of the material, and (to some 
extent) the rolling process to which it was subjected. 

I Table 3-ll shows the designations usually used for 
hot-rolled carbon steels. These terms are somewhat 
flexible and in some cases may overlap. 

The structural shape referred to as a BAR has a 
width of 8 inches or less and a thickness greater than 
3/16 of an inch. The edges of bars usually are rolled 
square, like universal mill plates. The dimensions are 
expressed in a similar manner as that for plates; for 
instance, bar 6 inches x 1/2 inch. Bars are available in 
a variety of cross-sectional shapes—round, 
hexagonal, octagonal, square, and flat. Three different 
shapes are illustrated in i figure 3^51 Both squares and 
rounds are commonly used as bracing members of 
light structures. Their dimensions, in inches, apply to 
the side of the square or the diameter of the round. 


Now that you have been introduced to the various 
structural members used in steel construction, let us 
develop a theoretical building frame from where you, 
the Steelworker, would start on a project after all the 
earthwork and footings or slab have been completed. 
Remember this sequence is theoretical and may vary 


ANCHOR BOLTS 

Anchor bolts Kfiq. 3-6)1 are cast into the concrete 
foundation. They are designed to hold the column 
bearing plates, which are the first members of a steel 
frame placed into position. These anchor bolts must 
be positioned very carefully so that the bearing plates 
will be lined up accurately. 

BEARING PLATES 

The column bearing plates are steel plates of 
various thicknesses in which holes have been either 
drilled or cut with an oxygas torch to receive the 



Table 3-1.—Plate, Bar, Strip, and Sheet designation 



0.2300 and THICKER 
0.2299 and 0.2031 
0.2030 and 0.1800 
0.1799 and 0.0449 
0.0448 and 0.0344 
0.0343 and 0.0255 
0.0254 and THINNER 


3-3 



























































































anchor bolts Kfig. 3-7)1 The holes should be slightly 
larger than the bolts so that some lateral adjustment of 
the bearing plate is possible. The angle connections, 
by which the columns are attached to the bearing 
plates, are bolted or welded in place according to the 
size of the column, as shown in i figure 3T3l 

After the bearing plate has been placed into 
position, shim packs are set under the four comers of 
each bearing plate as each is installed over the anchor 
bolts, as shown in i figure 3^91 The shim packs are 3- to 
4-inch metal squares of a thickness ranging from 1 1/6 
to 3/4 inch, which are used to bring all the bearing 



CENTER PUNCH MARK 






ANGLES BOLTED TO WEB 




ANGLES BOLTED TO FLANGES 

SWNPOS12 


Figure 3-8—Typical column to baseplate connections. 


plates to the correct level and to level each bearing 
plate on its own base. 

The bearing plates are first leveled individually by 
adjusting the thickness of the shim packs. This 
operation may be accomplished by using a 2-foot level 
around the top of the bearing plate perimeter and 
diagonally across the bearing plate. 

Upon completion of the leveling operation, all 
bearing plates must be brought either up to or down to 
the grade level required by the structure being erected 
All bearing plates must be lined up in all directions 
with each other. This may be accomplished by using 
a surveying instrument called a builder's level. String 
lines may be set up along the edges and tops of the 
bearing plates by spanning the bearing plates around 
the perimeter of the structure, making a grid network 
of string lines connecting all the bearing plates. 

After all the bearing plates have been set and 
aligned, the space between the bearing plate and the 
top of the concrete footing or slab must be filled with 
a hard, nonshrinking, compact substance called 
GROUT. (Se & fig. 3^91 ) When the grout has hardened 
the next step is the erection of the columns. 

COLUMNS 

Wide flange members, as nearly square in cross 
section as possible, are most often used for columns. 
Large diameter pipe is also used frequentl v Kfia. 3-10l 
even though pipe columns often present connecting 
difficulties when you are attaching other members. 
Columns may also be fabricated by welding or bolting 
a number of other rolled shapes, usually angles and 
plates, as shown in i figure 3 : lT\ 

If the structure is more than one story high, it may 
be necessary to splice one column member on top of 
another. If this is required, column lengths should be 


3-4 






























































Figure 3-10.—Girder span on pipe columns. 




Figure 3-11.—Built-up column section. 


such that the joints or splices are 1 1/2 to 2 feet above 
the second and succeeding story levels. This will 
ensure that the splice connections are situated well 
above the girder or beam connections so that they do 
not interfere with other second story work. 

Column splices are joined together by splice 
plates which are bolted, riveted, or welded to the 
column flanges, or in special cases, to the webs as well. 
If the members are the same size, it is common practice 
to butt one end directly to the other and fasten the 
splice plates over the joint, as illustrated in 
I figure 3-121 When the column size is reduced at the 
joint, a plate is used between the two ends to provide 
bearing, and filler plates are used between the splice 
plates and the smaller column flanges Rfig. 3-13D . 

GIRDERS 

Girders are the primary horizontal members of a 
steel frame structure. They span from column to 


1" FILLER PLATE- 


-J- SPLICE PLATE. 
4 


W8x31 


1" BEARING PLATE. 


W10 x 49. 


£:) 


C 


0 




:> 


<H* 


* 




(: 3 > 


C-: 




* 




:) 


0 


SWNP0517 

Figure 3-13.—Column splice with change in column size. 


column and are usually connected on top of the 
columns with CAP PLATES (bearing connections), as 
shown in | figure 3-14.1 An alternate method is the 
seated connection Kfia. 3-151 . The girder is attached to 
the flange of the column using angles, with one leg 
extended along the girder flange and the other against 
the column. The function of the girders is to support 
the intermediate floor beams. 


3-5 








































































SWNPOS19 


Figure 3-15.—Seated connections. 


BEAMS 


25 ^ 


BEAM 


°i‘ * 

!£ 


°< ;> 




BEAM 


-GIRDER 


SWNPOS20 


Figure 3-16.—Column splice with no size change 




Figure 3-17.—Coped and blocked beam ends. 


BAR JOIST 

Bar joists form a lightweight, long-span system 
used as floor supports and built-up roofing supports, 
as shown in lfiaure 3-18.1 Bar joists generally run in the 
same direction as a beam and may at times eliminate 
the need for beams. You will notice in i figure 3-19l that 
bar joists must have a b earing surf ace. The span is 
from girder to girder. (Se dfia. 3-~20l) 

Prefabricated bar joists designed to conform to 
specific load requirements are obtainable from 
commercial companies. 

TRUSSES 


Beams are generally smaller than girders and are 
usually connected to girders as intermediate members 
or to columns. Beam connections at a column are 
similar to the seated girder-to-column connection. 
Beams are used generally to carry floor loads and 
transfer those loads to the girders as vertical loads. 
Since beams are usually not as deep as girders, there 
are several alternative methods of framing one into the 
other. The simplest method is to frame the beam 
between the top and bottom flanges on the girder, as 
shown in i figure 3-161 If it is required that the top or 
bottom flanges of the girders and beams be flush, it is 
necessary to cut away (cope) a port ion of the up per or 
lower beam flange, as illustrated ir l figure 3-171 


Steel trusses are similar to bar joists in that they 
serve the same purpose and look somewhat alike. 
They are, however, much heavier and are fabricated 
almost entirely from structural shapes, usually angles 
and T-shapes. (See l fig. 3-211 ) Unlike bar joists, 
trusses can be fabricated to conform to the shape of 
almost any roof system [(fig. 3-22) and are therefore 
more versatile than bar joists. 

The bearing surface of a truss is normally the 
column. The truss may span across the entire building 
from outside column to outside column. After the 
trusses have been erected, they must be secured 
between the BAYS with diagonal braces (normally 


3-6 












































































Figure 3-18.—Clearspan bar joists (girder to girder) ready to install roof sheeting. 



Figure 3-19.—Bar joists seat connection. 


3-7 









round rods or light angles) on the top chord plane Kfiq.l 
I 3-23)1 and the bottom chord plane Kfiq. 3-241) . After 
these braces are installed, a sway frame is put into 
place. (Se 4 fig. 3 : 25l ) 

PURLINS, GIRTS, AND EAVE STRUTS 


Purlins are generally lightweight and 
channel-shaped and are used to span roof trusses. 
Purlins receive the steel or other type of decking, as 
shown in lfiaure 3-26.l and are installed with the legs 
of the channel facing outward or down the slope of the 
roof. The purlins installed at the ridge of a gabled roof 
are referred to as Rl DGE STRUTS. The purlin units 
are placed back to back at the ridge and tied together 
with steel plates or threaded rods, as illustrated in 
I figure 3-271 

The sides of a structure are often framed with girts. 
These members are attached to the columns 
horizontally Kfiq. 3-28)1 The girts are also channels, 
generally the same size and 'shape as roof purlins. 
Figure 3-20.-Installing bar Joists girder to girder. Siding material is attached directly to the girts. 






Figure 3-21.—Steel truss fabricated from angle-shaped members. 


3-8 









































PURLIN 








Vl/1^7 


SWNP0526 


Figure 3-22.—Different styles of truss shapes. 



Figure 3-23.—Diagonal braces-top chord plane. 



Figure 3-24.—Diagonal braces-bottom chord plane. 




Figure 3-26.—Roof purlin. 


SPACED STEEL IS DIAPHRAGMS 



COLUMN 



Another longitudinal member similar to purlins 
and girts is an cave strut. This member is attached to 
the column at the point where the top chord of a truss 
and the column meet at the cave of the structure. (See 
I fia. 3-291 ) 

There are many more steelworking terms that you 
will come across as you gain experience. If a term is 



3-9 

















































used that you do not understand, ask someone to 
explain it or look it up in the manuals and publications 
availabletoyou. 

Steelworkers are required to lay out and fabricate 
steel plate and structural steel members. Assignments 
you can expect to be tasked with include pipe layout 
and fabrication projects of the type required on a tank 
farm project. Plate layout procedures are similar to 
those for sheet metal (see l chapter 21 . There are some 
procedures of plate fabrication however, that are 
fundamentally different, and they are described in this 
chapter. Steelworkers are also tasked to construct and 
install piping systems designed to carry large 
quantities of liquids for long distances. 

FABRICATING PLATE AND 
STRUCTURAL MEMBERS 

Steel plate is much thicker than sheet steel and is 
more difficult to work with and form into the desired 
shapes. Before fabricating anything with steel, you 
must take into consideration certain factors and ensure 
they have been planned for. First, ensure adequate 
lighting is available to enable you to see the small 
marks you will be scratching on the steel. Second, 
ensure all tools you need are available and accessible 
at the work area. Also, ensure you have an accurate 
field sketch or shop drawing of the item to be 
fabricated. 

LAYOUT OF STEEL PLATE 

When laying out steel plate, you should have the 
following tools: an adequate scale, such as a 
combination square with a square head, an accurate 
protractor, a set of dividers, a prick punch, a center 
punch, and a ball peen hammer. 

When layout marks are made on steel, you must 
use a wire brush to clean them and remove the residue 
with a brush or rag. Then paint the surface with a 
colored marking compound. Aerosol spray is very 
good because it allows the paint to fall only in the areas 
to be laid out and also because it produces a thin coat 
of paint that will not chip or peel off when lines are 
being scribed. 

When appropriate, the layout lines can be drawn 
on steel with a soapstone marker or a similar device. 
However, remember that the markings of many of 
these drawing devices can burn off under an oxygas 
flame as well or be blown away by the force of oxygen 
from the cutting torch. These conditions are 
undesirable and can ruin an entire fabrication job. If 


using soapstone or a similar marker is your only 
option, be sure to use a punch and a ball peen hammer 
to make marks along the cut lines. By "connecting the 
dots," you can ensure accuracy. 

Plan material usage before starting the layout on 
a plate. An example of proper plate layout and material 
usage is shown in i figure 3-30.1 Observe the material 
used for the cooling box. It will take up slightly more 
than half of the plate. The rest of the material can then 
be used for another job. This is only one example, but 
the idea is to conserve materials. An example of poor 
layout is shown in lfiqure 3-31.| The entire plate is used 
up for this one product, wasting material, increasing 
the cost and layout time of the job. 

The layout person must have a straight line or 
straightedge that he or she refers all measurements to. 
This straightedge or line can be one edge of the work 
that has been finished straight; or it can be an outside 
straight line fastened to the work, such as a 
straightedge clamped to the work. Once the reference 
line has been established, you can proceed with the 
layout using the procedures described in i chapter ~2l 

When the layout is complete, the work should be 
checked for accuracy, ensuring all the parts are in the 


MO<JNT JOE 

BRACKETS STUBS 



Figure 3-30.—Proper plate steel cooling box layout. 



Figure 3-31.—Improper plate steel cooling box layout. 


3-10 

































































layout and the measurements are correct. After 
determining that the layout is accurate, the layout person 
should center punch all cutting lines. This ensures 
accurate cutting with either a torch or shears. The work 
can be checked after cutting because each piece will have 
one half of the center punch marks on the edge of the 
material. Remember, always cut with the kerf of the 
torch on the outside edge of the cutting lines. 

LAYOUT OF STRUCTURAL SHAPES 

Structural shapes are slightly more difficult to lay 
out than plate. This is because the layout lines may not 
be in view of the layout person at all times. Also, the 
reference line may not always be in view. 

Steel beams are usually fabricated to fit up to 
another beam. Coping and slotting are required to 
accomplish this ! Figure 3-33 shows two W 10 x 39 
beams being fitted up. Beam A is intersecting beam B 
at the center. Coping is required so beam A will butt 
up to the web of beam B; the connecting angles can be 
welded to the web, and the flanges can be welded 
together. 

A cut 1 1/8 inches (2.8 cm) long at 45 degrees at 
the end of the flange cope will allow the web to fit up 
under the flange of beam B and also allow for the fillet. 


The size of the cope is determined by dividing the 
flange width of the receiving beam in half and then 
subtracting one half of thethickness of the web plus 
1/16 inch. This determines how far back on beam A 
the cope should be cut. 

When two beams of different sizes are connected, 
the layout on the intersecting beam is determined by 
whether it is larger or smaller than the intersected 
beam. In the case shown in i figure 3-331 the 



Figure 3-33—Typical framed construction, top flange flush. 



Figure 3-32.—Fabrication and fit-up for joining two beams of the same size. 


3-11 

































intersecting beam is smaller; therefore, only one 
flange is coped to fit the other. The top flanges will be 
flush. Note that the angles on this connection are to be 
bolted, rather than welded. 

CONNECTION ANGLE LAYOUT 

A very common connection with framed 
construction is the connection angle. The legs of the 
angles used as connections are specified according to 
the surface to which they are to be connected. The legs 
that attach to the intersecting steel to make the 
connections are termed web legs. The legs of the 
angles that attach to the supporting or intersected steel 
beam are termed outstanding legs. The lines in which 
holes in the angle legs are placed are termed gauge 
lines. The distances between gauge lines and known 
edges are termed gauges. An example of a completed 
connection is shown in i figure 3-34.1 The various terms 
and the constant dimensions for a standard connection 
angleareshown in i figure 3-351 




Figure 3-35.—Standard layout for connection angle using 
4-inch by 4-inch angle 


The distance from the heel of the angle to the first 
gauge line on the web leg is termed the web leg gauge. 
This dimension has been standardized at 2 1/4 inches 
(5.6 cm). THIS DIMENSION IS CONSTANT AND 
DOES NOT VARY. 

The distance from the heel of the angle to the first 
gauge line on the outstanding leg is called the 
outstanding leg gauge. This dimension varies as the 
thickness of the member, or beam, varies. This 
variation is necessary to maintain a constant 
5 1/2-inch-spread dimension on the angle connection. 

The outstanding leg gauge dimension can be 
determined in either one of the foil owing two ways: 

1. Subtract the web thickness from 5 1/2 inches 
(13.8 cm) and divide by 2. 

2. Subtract 1/2 of the web thickness from 2 3/4 
inches. 

The distance between holes on any gauge line is 
called pitch. This dimension has been standardized at 
3 inches (7.5 cm). 

The end distance is equal to one half of the 
remainder left after subtracting the total of all pitch 
spaces from the length of the angle. By common 
practice, the angle length that is selected should give 
a 1 1/4-inch (3-cm) end distance. 

All layout and fabrication procedures are not 
covered in this section. Some examples are shown in 
I figure 3-3~6] Notice that the layout and fabrication yard 
has a table designed to allow for layout, cutting, and 
welding with minimum movement of the structural 
members. The stock materials are stored like kinds of 
materials. 

The table holds two columns being fabricated out 
of beams with baseplates and cap plates. Angle clips 
for seated connections Kfiq. 3-37)1 should be installed 
before erection, 

CUTTING AND SPLICING BEAMS 

At times, the fabricator will be required to split a 
beam to make a tee shape from an I shape. This is done 
by splitting through the web. The release of internal 
stresses locked up in the beams during the 
manufacturer’s rolling process causes the split parts to 
bend or warp as the beams are being cut unless the 
splitting process is carefully controlled. 

The recommended procedure for cutting and 
splitting a beam is first to cut the beam to the desired 
length and then proceed as follows: 


3-12 










































COPED ANGLES ^ CAP PLATE 


SWNP0129 


Figure 3-36.—Prefab table and steel storage. 



Figure 3-37.—Seated connection. 

1. Make splitting cuts about 2 feet (60 cm) long, 
leaving 2 inches (5 cm) of undisturbed metal between 
all cuts and at the end of the beam |(fiq. 3-381 1. As the cut 
is made, cool the steel behind the torch with a water 
spray or wet burlap. 


2. After splitting cuts have been made and the 
beam cooled, cut through the metal between the cuts, 
starting at the center of the beam and working toward 
the ends, following the order shown ir | figure 3-381 

The procedure for splitting abeam also works very 
well when splitting plate and is recommended when 
making bars from plate. Multiple cuts from plate can 
be made by staggering the splitting procedure before 
cutting the space between slits. If this procedure is 
used, ensure that the entire plate has cooled so that the 
bars will not warp or bend. 

TEMPLATES 

When a part must be produced in quantity, a 
template is made first and the job laid out from the 
template. A template is any pattern made from sheet 
metal, regular template paper, wood, or other suitable 
material, which is used as a guide for the work to be 
done. A template can be the exact size and shape of 
the corresponding piece, as shown ir l figure 3-391 


3-13 
































Figure 3-38.—Cuttiug order for splitting a beam. 




views 1 and 2, or it may cover only the portions of the 
piece that contain holes or cuts, as shown in views 3 
and 4. When holes, cuts, and bends are to be made in 
a finished piece, pilot holes, punch marks, and notches 
in the template should correspond exactly to the 
desired location in the finished piece. Templates for 
short members and plates are made of template paper 
of the same size as the piece to be fabricated. 
Templates for angles are folded longitudinal] y, along 
the line of the heel of the anqle |(fiq. 3-391 view 3). 

Accurate measurements in making templates 
should be given careful attention. Where a number of 
parts are to be produced from a template, the use of 
inaccurate measurements in making the template 
obviously would mean that all parts produced from it 
will also be wrong. 

Template paper is a heavy cardboard material with 
a waxed surface. It is well adapted to scribe and 
divider marks. A combination of wood and template 
paper is sometimes used to make templates. The use 
of wood or metal is usually the best choice for 
templates that will be used many times. 

For long members, such as beams, columns, and 
truss members, templates cover only the connections. 
These templates may be joined by a wooden strip to 
ensure accurate soacino rTTio. 3-39L views 1 and 2). 


They may also be handled separately with the template 
for each connection being clamped to the member 
after spacing, aligning, and measuring. 

In making templates, the same layout tools 
discussed earlier in this chapter are used. The only 
exception is that for marking lines, a pencil or 
Patternmaker's knife is used. When punching holes in 
a template, keep in mind that the purpose of the holes 
is to specify location, not size. Therefore, a punch of 
a single diameter can be used for all holes. Holes and 
cuts are made prominent by marking with paint. 

Each template is marked with the assembly mark 
of the piece it is to be used with, the description of the 
material, and the item number of the stock material to 
be used in making the piece. 

In laying out from a template, it is important that 
the tempi ate be cl amped to the materi al i n the exact 
position. Holes are center punched directly through 
the holes in the tempiate |(fiq. 3-40] , and all cuts are 
marked. After the template is removed, the marks for 
cuts are made permanent by rows of renter punch 
marks. 

It is important that each member or individual 
piece of material be given identifying marks to 


3-14 












—v PAPER AND WOOD STRIP TEMPLATE 
l) FOR PUNCHING TWO ANGLES TO 



3) STIFFENERS FOR CUTTING AND 
PUNCHING CONNECTION ANGLE 


Figure 3-39.—Paper and combination templates. 



correspond with marks shown on the detail drawing 
Ifio. 3-411 . 

The ERECTION MARK of a member is used to 
identify and locate it for erection. It is painted on the 
completed member at the left end, as shown on the 
detail drawing, and in a position so that it will be right 
side up when the member is right side up in the 
finished structure. 


identified during fabrication and fitting up with other 
pieces to form a finished member. 

PIPE FITTING AND LAYOUT 
OPERATIONS 

Lack of templates, charts, and mathematical 
formulas need not hinder you in pipe layout. In 
emergencies, welded pipe of equal diameter can be 
laid out in the field quickly and easily. By using the 
methods described here and a few simple tools, you 
can lay out branches and Y connections as well as 
turns of any angle, radius, and number of segments. 
The few simple tools required are both readily 
available and familiar to the Steelworker through 
almost daily use. A framing square, a bevel protractor 
with a 12-inch (20-cm) blade, a spirit level, a spring 
steel wraparound (or tape), a center punch, a hammer, 
and a soapstone will meet all needs. (A stiff strip of 
cardboard or a tin sheet about 3 inches [7.5 cm] wide 
also makes a good wraparound.) For purposes of our 
discussion, the long part of the framing square is 
referred to as the BLADE and the short part as the 
TONGUE. 

LAYOUT OPERATIONS 


An ASSEMBLY MARK is painted on each piece 
on completion of its layout so that the piece can be 


3-15 


Two methods of pipe layout are commonly used. 
They are the one-shot method and the shop method. 
The ONE-SHOT method is used in the field. With this 















Figure 3-41.—Erection and assembly marks. 


method, you use hand tools and make your layout on 
the pipe to be cut. The one-shot method is so named 
because you only use it once. In the SHOP METHOD 
you will make templates for pieces that are going to 
be duplicated in quantity. As an example, a job order 
comes into the shop for 25 pieces of 6-inch (15-cm) 
pipe-all cut at the same angle. Obviously, it would 
be time consuming to use the one-shot method to 
produce 25 pieces; hence the shop method is used for 
laying out. Patterns can be made of template paper or 
thin-gauge sheet metal. The major advantage of 
thin-gauge sheet metal templates is when you are 
finished with them they can be stored for later use. 

Keep in mind that all pipe turns are measured by 
the number of degrees by which they turn from the 
course set by the adjacent straight section. The angle 
is measured between the center line of the intersecting 
sections of pipe. Branch connections are measured in 
angle of turnaway from the main line. For example, a 
60-degree branch is so-called because the angle 
between the center line of the main pipe and the center 
line of the branch connection measures 60 degrees. 
Turns are designated by the number of degrees by 
which they deviate from a straight line. 


QUARTERING THE PIPE 

Inlaying out any joint, the first step is to establish 
reference points or lines from which additional 
measurements or markings can be made. This is done 
by locating a center line and dividing the outside 
circumference of the pipe into 90-degree segments, or 
quarters. The framing square, the spirit level, and the 
soapstone are used in these procedures in the 
following manner: Block the pipe so it cannot move 
or roll; then place the inside angle of the square against 
the pipe and level one leg. One point on the centerline 
is then under the scale at a distance of half the outside 
diameter of the pipe from the inside angle of the square 
Kfiq. 3-42)1 Repeati ng at another part of the pi pe wi 11 



Figure 3-42.—Locating the top and side quarter points. 


3-16 





























locate two points and hence the center line. By this 
same method, the quarter points also may be located 
This operation is a must before any layout with the 
field method. 

If you are using a long piece of pipe and are going 
to cut both ends in addition to the square, you wil I need 
a piece of carpenter's chalk line with a plumb bob on 
each end and two 24- or 36-inch (60- or 90-cm)-flat 
steel rules (depending on the diameter o f the pipe) to 
locate the top and the bottom center lines l Figure 3-431 
shows a plumb bob and rules being used to locate the 
top and the bottom center lines. 

Another one-shot method of quartering pipe is to 
take a strip of paper and wrap it around the pipe and 
tear or cut the part that overlaps. The ends should 
touch. Remove the paper from the pipe and fold it in 
half, as shown in i figure 3-44,1 view A. Then double the 
strip once again, as shown in view B. This will divide 
your strip into four equal parts. PI ace the strip of paper 
around the pipe. At the crease marks and where the 
ends meet, mark the pipe with soapstone and your pipe 
will be quartered. 

TEMPLATE FOR TWO-PIECE TURN 

The fact that a length of pipe with square ends can 
be fabricated by wrapping a rectangular section of 
plate into a cylindrical form makes available a method 
(known as parallel forms) of developing pipe surfaces, 
and hence developing the lines of intersection between 



SWNP0137 


Figure 3-44.—Folding a tip of paper for use in quartering 
pipe. 

pipe walls. Based on this principle, wraparound 
templates can be made for marking all manner of pipe 
fittings for cutting preparatory to welding. 

The development of a template is done in practice 
by dividing the circumference (in the end view) of the 
pipe into a specific number of equal sections. These 
sections are then projected onto the side view of the 
desired pipe section. The lengths of the various 
segments that make up the pipe wall may then be laid 
out, evenly spaced, on a base line. This line is, in 
effect, the unwrapped circumference l (fig. 3-45D . If the 
template developed il l figure 3-45] view C, is wrapped 
around the pipe with the base line square with the pipe, 
the curved line, a-b-c-d-e-f-, and so forth, will locate 
the position for cutting to make a 90-degree, two-piece 
turn. Draw a circle Kfia. 3-451 view A) equal to the 
outside diameter of the pipe and divide half of it into 
equal sections. The more sections, the more accurate 
the final result will be. Perpendicular to the centerline 
and bisected by it, draw lineAl equal totheO.D. (view 
B). To this line, construct the template angle (TA) 
equal to one half of the angle of turn, or, in this case, 
45 degrees. Draw lines parallel to the centerline from 
points a, b, c, and so forth, on the circle and mark the 
points where these lines intersect line a-i with 
corresponding letters. As an extension of Al but a little 
distance from it, draw a straight line equal to the pipe 
circumference or that of the circle in view A. This line 
(view C) should then be divided into twice as many 
equal spaces as the semicircle, a-b-c-, and so forth, and 
lettered as shown. Perpendiculars should then be 
erected from these points. Their intersections with 
lines drawn from the points on a-i in view B, parallel 
to the base line in view C, determine the curve of the 
template. 

SIMPLE MITER TURN 

After quartering the pipe, proceed to make a 
simple miter turn. Locate the center of the cut Kfiq.l 
I 3-46] point c) in the general location where the cut is 
to be made. Use a wraparound to make line a-b 
completely around the pipe at right angles to the center 



3-17 






































a 



Figure 3-46.—Simple miter turn. 


and quarter lines. This establishes a base line for 
further layout work. 

When you are measuring, treat the surface of the 
pipe as if it were a flat surface. Use a flat-steel rule or 
tape, which will lie against the surface without kinks, 
even though it is forced to follow the contour of the 
pipe. These angles can also be checked for accuracy 
by sighting with the square. 

Use the protractor and square to determine the 
proper cutback for the desired angle of the miter turn. 
Start with the protractor scale set at zero so that the 
flat surface of the protractor and the blade are parallel. 
You can now set the protractor for the number of 


degrees desired. After you have the correct setting, 
lock the blade. Place the protractor on the square with 
the bottom blade on the outside diameter of the pipe. 
Now read up to the cutback on the vertical blade of the 
square. You must be sure that the flat surface of the 
protr actor is flush against the blade of the square ICfTgl 
1 3-471 . The outside radius of the pipe should have been 
determined during the quartering operation. 


After you have obtained the cutback 
measurement, mark one half of this measurement off 
along the center line on top of the pipe. From the 
opposite side of the base line, measure off the same 


3-18 









































Figure 3-47.—Finding the cutback. 


distance along the bottom quarter line. Make punch 
marks with the center punch on each side of the line, 
along the side quarter lines. These marks will make it 
easy to align the pipe for welding after the joint is cut. 
Use the spring steel wraparound and pull the loop to 
the cutback point. Next, draw a chalk line over the top 
half of the pipe through the first cutback point. 
(NOTE: Do not allow the wraparound to twist or 
kink, and hold the chalk at a right angle to the 
wraparound while marking the pipe.) Now roll the 
pipe one-half turn and mark a chalk line in the same 
way around the bottom half of the pipe. 

TWO-PIECE TURN 

If a template is not available, you may determine 
the dimensions and markings for the cut necessary for 
a two-piece welded turn of any angle between 1 degree 
and 90 degrees by making a full-sized drawing, as 
shown in | figure3-48| 

Draw the center lines intersecting at b by using the 
angle of turn T and then draw the outlines of the pipes 
by using the center lines and the diameter D. These 
will intersect at a and c. By laying the pipe over the 
drawing so that point b will coincide with that 
determined by construction details, you can draw the 
lines a-b and c-b in preparation for miter cutting and 
bevel i ng. 

After being prepared for welding, one section of 
pipe should be rotated through 180 degrees to form the 
desired angle, and then it should be tack-welded. 



turn. 

Spacing should be slightly greater at the inside of the 
turn. 

WELDED TEE 

To lay out the template for cutting the branch and 
header for a 90-degree tee with header and branch of 
equal diameter, draw the side and end view, as shown 
in | figure 3-491 views A and B. 

In making the template for the branch in lfiaurel 
I 3-491 view A, draw lines 1-5 at 45 degrees to the center 
line. Lay off distance 1-P equal to twice the thickness 
of the pipe wall and draw the smooth curve s-P-s. Now, 
project point P from view A to view B and draw the 
lines P-t radially. At a distance above point t equal to 
the thickness of the header wall, draw a-t horizontally, 
and vertical lines a-a and t-t. With lower points a as 
center, swing arcs r-s. Using the intersections of these 
arcs as centers and with the same radius, draw the 
curved lines a-be-d-e arid e d-c-b-a. 

Divide the outside circumference of the branch 
top into equal parts and draw the vertical lines b-b, c-c, 
and so forth. Also, draw the horizontal base line a-a. 

Lay off the unwrapped circumference Kfiq. 3-491 
view D), and divide each half of it into the same 
number of equal parts as the branch 
semi circumference. In view D, you should plot the 
distances a-a, b-b, and so forth, from view B. This 
gives the distances from the base line to the branch 
curve of the intersection and determines the location 
of the branch template. 


3-19 









































To make the template for the hole in the header, 
divide the circumference of the header into equal 
parts, as at points 1, 2, 3, and so forth. Next, project 
these points across to view A I (fig, 3-491 , as shown. As 
in view C, lay off the line 1-5-1 equal to one half of 
the circumference of the header, and divide it into the 
same number of equal parts as was done on the header. 
Locate point P, a distance from 1 in view C equal to 
1-P in view B. With this point P and the distances 5-5, 
4-4, and so forth, in view A, plotted as shown in view 
C, the curve of the template is located. 


BRANCH CONNECTIONS 

Branch to header connections !(fig. 3-501) at any 
angle of 45 degrees to 90 degrees can be fabricated in 
equal diameter pipe by the following procedures. 
(Note that angles less than 45 degrees can be made, 
but a practical limitation is imposed by the difficulty 
of welding the crotch section.) 

First, quarter both sections of pipe as before, hen 
I ocate the center I i ne of the i ntersecti on (poi nt B) on 
the header and draw lineGF around the pipe at this 


3-20 






















































































Figure 3-50.—Branch connections 


point. Set the diameter FG on the blade of the square. 
Set and lock the protractor atone fourth of the number 
of degrees of turnaway from the header (in the 
example, 1/4 of 60° = 15°). With the blade along FG, 
the frost cutback measurement, FA, will be indicated 
on the tongue of the square. Measure off this distance 
along the center line of the header from line FG and 
mark point A. As described before, join point A with 
the points of intersection of line FG and the two side 
quarter lines to outline the first cut. 

With the same protractor setti ng, fl i p the square 
and mark point H. Distance FH is equal to FA. FH is 
the first portion of the second cutback measurement. 
With the same settings and with the square upside 
down (as compared to before), locate point I the same 
way you located point H. 

Now, set the protractor to one half of the number 
of degrees of turnaway from the header (in the 
example, 1/2 of 60° = 30°). With the blade set to the 
diameter, the second portion, FID, of the second 
cutback measurement will be indicated on the tongue. 
The second cutback measurement is the total distance 
FC. Connect points C and B and connect C with the 
point, which corresponds toB, on the quarter line on 
the opposite side of the header. This outlines the 
second cut and completes the marking of the header. 

Use the same two cutback measurements to lay out 
the end of the branch. Branch cutback distance DA is 
equal to header cutback distance FA. Branch cutback 
distance EC is equal to header cutback distance FC. If 
the branch end is square, make cutback measurements 
from the end, rather than marking in a circumferential 
line. Make all cuts as before, and level and join the 
branch and header by welding. 


WELDED TEE (BRANCH SMALLER 
THAN THE HEADER) 

One of the best types of joint for a 90-degree 
branch connection where the branch is smaller than 
the header is obtained by inserting the smaller branch 
pipe through the wall down to the inner surface of the 
header. The outside surface of the branch intersects the 
inside surface of the header at all points. When the 
header is properly beveled this type of intersection 
presents a very desirable vee for welding. In ease 
templates or template dimensions are not available, 
the line of cut on both header and branch can be 
located by other methods, but the use of templates is 
recommended. 

I n the fi rst method, the square end of the branch 
should be placed in the correct position against the 
header and the line of intersection marked with a flat 
soapstone pencil Kfia. 3-5ll . Since radial cutting is 
used in this case and since the outer branch wall should 
intersect the inner header wall, point B should be 
located on both sides of the branch a distance from A 
equal to slightly more than the header wall thickness. 
A new line of cut is then marked as a smooth curve 
through the points, tapering to the first line at the top 
of the header. Following radial cutting, the joint 
should then be beveled 

The branch should be slipped into the hole until 
even with point B to locate the line of cut on the 
branch. A soapstone pencil may then be used to mark 
the line for radial cutting. No beveling is necessary. 

A second method for larger diameter pipe is 
shown i n | figure 3-52.1 After thecenterl ines have been 
drawn, the branch should be placed against the header, 
as shown. By means of a straightedge, the distance 
between A and the header wall is determined, and this 
measurement above the header is transferred to the 
branch wall, as represented by the curved linea-b-c. 



Figure 3-51.—Method where the line of cut is first marked on 
main. 


3-21 

































After this line is radially cut, the branch maybe used 
to locate the line of cut on the header, allowing for the 
intersection of the outer branch wall and inner header 
wall as before. This line should be radially cut, 
followed by beveling. 

In making an eccentric branch connection the 
extreme case being where the side of the branch is 
even with the side of the header, a similar procedure 
is followed, as shown in i figure 3-531 

THREE-PIECE Y CONNECTION 

The entire procedure for fabrication of an equal 
diameter, three-piece Y connection is based on 
individual operations already described. As the first 
step, quarter the end of the three pieces of pipe and 
apply circumferential lines. When the three pieces are 
welded together to form the Y, there will be three 
center lines radiating from a common point. 

The open angle between each pair of adjacent 
center lines must be decided, for each of these angles 
will be the angle of one of the branches of the Y. As 
shown in i figure 3-54.l these open angles determine the 
angle of adjoining sides of adjacent branches. Thus 
half of the number of degrees between center lines A 
and B are included in each of the adjoining cutbacks 
between these two branches. The same is true with 
respect to the other angles and cutbacks between 



Figure 3-52.—Line of cut is first marked on branch with this 
method. 



Figure 3-53.—Marking cut on branch for eccentric branch 
connection. 



Figure 3-54.—Three-piece Y connection. 


center lines, Moreover, each piece of pipe must have 
a combination of two angles cut on the end. 

To determine the amount of cutback to form an 
angle of the Y, set the protractor at one half of the open 
angle between adjacent branch center lines. Place the 
protractor on the square, crossing the outside radius 
measurement of the pipe on the tongue of the square, 
and read the cutback distance off the blade of the 
square. Mark off this distance on one side quarter line 
on each of the two pieces that are to be joined. Then 
mark the cutback lines. Repeat this procedure for the 
other two angles of the Y, taking care to combine the 
cutbacks on each pipe end. Three settings of the 
protractor determine all cutbacks. 

An alternate method for determining each cutback 
is to treat two adjacent branches as a simple miter turn. 
Subtract the number of degrees of open angle between 
center lines from 180 degrees and set the protractor at 
one half of the remaining degrees. Cross the outside 
radius measurement on the tongue. M ark one side of 
each adjoi ni ng pi pe section. Repeat for the other two 
branches. Take care to combine the proper cutbacks 
on each pipe end. Set the protractor for each open 
angle of the Y connection. 

The computations and measurements for the 
layout Kfia. 3-54)1 are shown in Itable 3-H The pipe is 
12 inches in diameter and has a radius of 6 inches (15 
cm) 


3-22 























































Table 3-2.—Computations and Measurement for a Y Connection. 



ACB 

ACG 

BCG 

Open angle between center lines 

90 deg. 

110 deg. 

160 deg. 

Protractor setting (half of each angle) 

45 deg. 

55 deg. 

80 deg. 

Cutbacks 

6" 

4 1/8" 

1 1/16” 

Center lines 

A 

B 

G 

Paired cutback measurements (inches) 

fe = 6" 
cd = 4 1/8" 

ab = 1 1/16" 
fe = 6" 

ab = 1 1/16" 
cd = 4 1/8" 



LAYOUT OF A TRUE Y 

I n laying out pipe for the fabrication of a true Y 
without the use of templates or tables, a full-sized 
drawing of the intersection Kfiq. 3-55)1 should be made, 
'he intersection of the center lines of the three pipes 
will locate point B, and lines from B to the 
intersections of the pipe walls will locate points A, C, 
and D. F rom these points the pipe maybe marked for 
cutting. Miter cutting, followed by suitable beveling, 
is necessary in preparing the pipe for welding. 

TEMPLATE LAYOUT FOR 
TRUE Y BRANCHES 
AND MAIN LINES 

I nlaying out a template for a true Y, a drawing of 
the intersection should be made, as shown in ifiqurel 
3-56, view A. After drawing the lines of intersection, 


the same essential methods as for other templates 
are followed. Note that here it is suggested the 
equally divided semi circumferences are more 
conveniently placed directly on the base line. The 
distances from the base line to the line of 
intersection plotted on the unwrapped base line 
determine the template. 

ORANGE PEEL HEAD 

A number of different types of heads are used in 
welded pipe construction. Here, we are interested in 
one general type, the ORANGE PEEL, since it will 
often concern you in your work. A main advantage of 
the orange peel is that it has high strength in resisting 
internal pressure. 

If templates or tables are not available for making 
an orange peel head, a reasonably accurate marking 
can be secured by the following procedure for laying 
out a template. 

The number of arms to make an orange peel head 
should be the minimum number which can be easily 
bent over to form the head. Five arms and welds are 
the recommended minimum for any pipe; this 
number should be increased for larger sizes of pipe. 
Dividing the circumference by 5 is a good method 
for deciding the number of arms, provided, there are 
at least 5. 

To lay out the template, draw the side and end 
views Kfiq. 3-57)1 Divide the pipe circumference in 
view B into the same number of equal parts as it is 
planned to have welds, and draw the radial lines o-a, 
o-b, and so on. Project the points a, b, and so on, in 
this view. 


3-23 























Figure 3-56.—Template for true Y branches and main of equal diameter. 


3-24 


OUTSIDE CIRCUMFERENCE 









A B 


0 0 0 



Figure 3-57.—Orange peel head. 


Now, divide x-o-x into equal parts-in this case, 6. 
Then draw the I i nes xl-xl and x2x2. These represent 
the concentric circles in view B. In laying out the 
template, the distances a-b, b-c, al-bl, a2-b2, and 
so on, are taken from view B. The distances x+,x-xl, 
x-x2, b-bl, and soon, are taken from view A. It is not 
actually necessary to draw views A and B since all the 


values can be determined by a simple computation. All 
cutting should be radial followed by a beveling cut. 

A one-shot field method of making an orange peel 
is shown in lfiqure 3-58.I This method can be used when 
you are going to make only one orange peel. 
Incidentally, the tables shown ir l figure 3-581 wi 11 help 
to lineup your template better. 



Figure 3-58—A field method of making an orange peel. 


3-25 




















































PIPE CUTTING 


Cutting pipe is not much different than cutting 
structural shapes, except that you must always keep in 
mind that the cut will either be radial or miter. The gas 
cutting torch is used to cut pipe fittings for welding. 
Procedures relating to the use of the cutting torch are 
given in volume 1, chapter 4. The torch maybe hand 
operated, or it maybe mounted on a mechanical device 
for more accurate control. 


Cutting machines may be used to prepare many 
fittings without the use of templates. These machines 
cut and bevel the pipe in one operation-the bevel 
extending for the full pipe wall thickness. When the 
pipe is cut by hand, beveling is done as a second 
operation. 

For many types of welded fittings, a RADIAL cut 
is required before beveling. Radial cutting simply 
means that the cutting torch is held so it is 
perpendicular to the interior center line at all times. In 
other words, the cutting orifice always forms a 
continuation of a radius of the pipe, making the cut 
edge square with the pipe wall at every point. IF iqurel 
1 3-59 d hows radial cutting. Except in the case of the 
blunt bull plug, for which the radial cut provides the 
proper vee, the radial cut should be followed by a 
beveling cut for pipe with 3/1 6 inch (4.8 mm) or more 
wall thickness. 


In MITER cutting the torch tip is held so that the 
entirecut surfaceis in the same plane. The miter cut 
is followed by a beveling cut, leaving a 1/32- to 
1/16-inch (.8 to 1.6-mm) nose at the inner walI. IF iqurel 
1 3-60 j hows miter cutting. 



Figure 3-60.—Miter cutting. 


PIPE BENDING 

Any piping system of consequence will have 
bends in it. When fabricating pipe for such a system, 
you can make bends by a variety of methods, either 
hot or cold, and either manual] y or on a power-bending 
machine. Cold bends in pipe are usually made on a 
bending machine. Various types of equipment are 
available, ranging from portable handsets to large 
hydraulically driven machines that can cold bend pipe 
up to 16 inches (40.64 cm) in diameter. You will be 
concerned primarily with hot bending techniques, 
using a bending slab or using a method known as 
wrinkle bending. 

TEMPLATES 

Whatever method you use to bend pipe, you 
should normally have some pattern that represents the 
desired shape of the bend. Templates made from wire 
or small, flexible tubing can be invaluable in preparing 
new installations as well as in repair work, When 
properly made, they will provide an exact guide to the 
bend desired. 

One of the simple types of bend template is the 
center line template. A centerline template is made to 



3-26 























conform to the bend or bends of the pi pe to be made. 
It is used to lay off the bend area on the pipe and as a 
guide during the pipe or tube bending operation. 

I Figure 3-~6T1 shows the use of a center line template. 
These templates are made of wire, or rod, and are 
shaped to establish the center line of the pipe to be 
installed. The ends of the wire are secured to special 
clamps, called flange spiders. A clearance disc, which 
must be the same diameter as the pipe, is used if there 
is any doubt about the clearance around the pipe. 

HOT BENDS 

Hot bends are accomplished on a bending slab 
[fig. 3-62)1 This slab requires little maintenance 
beyond a light coating of machine oil to keep rust in 
check. 

As a preliminary step in hot bending, pack the pipe 
with dry sand to prevent the heel or outside of the bend 
from flattening. If flattening occurs, it will reduce the 




Figure 3-62.—Bending on a slab. 


cross-sectional area of the pipe and restrict the flow of 
fluid through the system. 

Drive a tapered, wooden plug into one end of the 
pipe. Place the pipe in a vertical position with the 
plugged end down, and fill it with dry sand. Leavejust 
enough space at the upper end to take a second plug. 
To ensure that the sand is tightly packed, tap the pipe 
continually with a wooden or rawhide mallet during 
the filling operation. The second plug is identical with 
the first, except that a small vent hole is drilled through 
its length; this vent permits the escape of any gases 
(mostly steam) that may form in the packed pipe when 
heat is applied. No matter how dry the sand may 
appear, there is always a possibility that some 
moisture is present. This moisture will form steam that 
will expand and build up pressure in the heated pipe 
unless some means of escape is provided. If you do 
not provide a vent, you will almost certainly blow out 
one of the plugs before you get the pipe bent. 

When you have packed the pipe with sand, the 
next step is to heat the pipe and make the bend. Mark 
the bend area of the pipe with chalk or soapstone, and 
heat it to an even red heat along the distance indicated 
from A to B in figure 3-63. Apply heat to the bend area 
frost on the outside of the bend and then on the inside. 
When an even heat has been obtained, bend the pipe 
to conform to the wire template. Thetemplate is also 
used to mark the bend area-on the pi pe. 



Figure 3-63.—Heating and bending pipe to conform to wire 
template. 


3-27 

























The main problem you will have in bending 
copper tubing and pipe is preventing wrinkles and flat 
spots. Wrinkles are caused by compression of the pipe 
wall at the throat (inside) of the bend. Flat spots are 
caused by lack of support for the pipe wall, by stretch 
in the heel (outside) of the bend, or by improper 
heating. 

If the pipe is properly packed and properl y heated, 
wrinkles and flat spots can be prevented by bending 
the pipe in segments so that the stretch is spread evenly 
over the whole bend area. When a pipe is bent, the 
stretch tends to occur at the middle of the bend. If the 
bend area is divided into a number of segments and 
then bent in segments, the stretch will occur at the 
center of each segment and thus be spread more evenly 
over the bend area. Another advantage of bending in 
segments is that this is almost the only way you can 
follow a wire template accurately. 

When bending steel and some other piping 
materials, you can control wrinkles and flat spots by 
first overbending, the pipe slightly and then pulling the 
end back Kfia. 3-641 . 

Hot bends are made on a bending slab l (fig. 3-641 . 
The pull to make the bend is exerted in a direction 
parallel to the surface of, the bending slab. The 
necessary leverage for forming the bend is obtained 
by using chain falls, by using block and tackle, or by 
using a length of pipe that has a large enough diameter 
to si i p over the end of the packed pi pe. Bendi ng pi ns 
and hold-down clamps (dogs) are used to position the 
bend at the desired location. 

Be sure to wear asbestos gloves when working on 
hot bending jobs. Pins, clamps, and baffles often have 
to be moved during the bending operation. These 
items absorb heat radiated from the pipe as well as 
from the torch flame. You cannot safely handle these 
bending accessories without proper gloves. 

Each material has its peculiar traits, and you will 
need to know about these traits to get satisfactory 



Figure 3-64.—Overbending to correct flattening of pipe. 


results. The following hints for bending different 
materials should prove helpful: 

WROUGHT IRON—Wrought iron becomes 
brittle when hot, so always use a large bend radius. 
Apply the torch to the throat of the bend instead of to 
the heel. 

BRASS—Do not overbend, as brass is likely to 
break when the bend direction is reversed. 

COPPER—Hot bends may be made in copper, 
although the copper alloys are more adaptable to cold 
bending. This material is one that is not likely to give 
any trouble. 

ALUMINUM—Overbending and reverse 
bending do not harm aluminum, but because there is 
only a small range between the bending and melting 
temperature, you will have to work with care. Keep 
the heat in the throat at all times. You will not be able 
to see any heat color, so you must depend on "feel" to 
tell you when the heat is right for bending. You can do 
this by keeping a strain on the pipe while the bend area 
is being heated. As soon as the bend starts, flick the 
flame away from the area. Play it back and forth to 
maintain the bending temperature and to avoid 
overheating. 

CARBON-MOLYBDENUM and CHROMIUM- 
MOLYBDENUM—These maybe heated for bending, 
if necessary, but caution must be exercised so as not 
to overheat the bend area. These types of metal are 
easily crystallized when extreme heat is applied. Pipes 
made from these materials should be bend cold in 
manual or power-bending machines. 

WRINKLE BENDS 

It may seem odd that after describing precautions 
necessary to keep a bend free of wrinkles, we next 
describe a method which deliberately produces 
wrinkles as a means of bending the pipe. Nevertheless, 
you will find the wrinkle-bending technique a simple 
and direct method of bending pipe, and perhaps in 
man y pipe-bending situations, the only convenient 
method. This would particularly be the case if no 
bending slab were available or if time considerations 
did not permit the rather lengthy sand-packing 
process. 

Basically, wrinkle bending consists of a simple 
heating operation in which a section of the pipe is 
heated by a gas welding torch. When the metal 
becomes plastic (bright red color), the pipe is bent 
SLIGHTLY, either by hand or by means of tackle 


3-28 

















rigged for that purpose. The unheated portion forms 
the heel (outside) of the bend, while the wrinkle is 
formed at the throat (inside) of the bend due to 
compression. 

It should be understood that the pipe should not be 
bent through very large angles (12 degrees being 
considered the maximum for one wrinkle) to avoid the 
danger of the pipe buckling. The procedure in making 
a large bend is to make several wrinkles, one at a time. 
If, for example, you want to produce a bend of 
90 degrees, a minimum of eight separate wrinkles 
could be made. Figure 13-65 shows a 90-degree bend 
made with ten separate wrinkles. The formula to 
determine the number of wrinkles is to divide the 
degrees per wrinkle required into the degrees of the 
bend required. 



Figure 3-65.—90-degree bend made with ten separate 
wrinkles. 


Wrinkle bending has been successful on pipe of 
more than 20 inches in diameter. Experience has 
shown that, for 7-inch-diameter pipe and over, more 
complete and even heating is accomplished using two 
welding torches, rather than one. In any event, the 
heating procedure is the same-the torch or torches 
being used to heat a strip approximately two thirds of 
the circumference of the pipeEfi^TjiM]- The heated 
strip need not be very wide (2 to 3 inches, or 5.08 to 
7.62 cm, is usually sufficient) since the bend will only 
be through 12 degrees at most. The heated portion, as 
we have noted, is the part which will compress to 
become the inside of the bend. The portion which is 
not heated directly will form the outside of the bend. 

The technique most often used to bend the pipe, 
once it has been heated, is simple and straightforward. 
The pipe is merely lifted up by hand (or by tackle), 
while the other end is held firmly in position. 



Figure 3-66.—Part of pipe heated before wrinkle bending. 


3-29 













Chapter 4 


FIBER LINE 


Starting with this chapter, we explore another 
major area of steelworking ski I Is-the erection and 
assembly of steel structure. Steelworkers require 
tools to hoist and maneuver the steel members into 
place to erect a structure of any magnitude. These 
hoisting tools range from uncomplicated devices, 
such as tripods and gin poles, to more complex 
mechanisms, such as cranes and motor-powered 
derricks. Whatever the case, one of the most 
important components of these hoisting mechanisms 
i s the fi ber I i ne or wi re rope that must be attached to 
and hold the load to be hoisted and maneuvered. 
Before you, as a Steelworker, can become skilled in 
the supervision of hoisting devices, you must first 
understand the use and maintenance of fiber line and 
wire rope. 

FIBER LINE 

This chapter and the next are designed to 
familiarize you with the different types of fiber line 
and wire rope commonly used by Steelworkers. We 
also discuss knots, bends, hitches, clips, and fittings 
and describe how they are used. Other topics 
discussed include the handling and care of fiber line 
and wire rope, making splices in fiber line, and 
methods of determining safe working loads. 

TYPES OF NATURAL FIBER LINES 

Vegetable fibers commonly used in the 
manufacture of line include manila, sisal, hemp, coir, 
and cotton. 

Manila 

Manila is a strong fiber that comes from the leaf 
stems of the stalk of the abaca plant, which belongs to 
the banana family. The fibers vary in length from 4 to 
12 feet in the natural state. The quality of the fiber and 
its length give manila line relatively high elasticity, 
strength, and resistance to wear and deterioration. A 
good grade of manila is cream in color, smooth, clean, 
and pliable. Poorer grades of manila are characterized 
by varying shades of brown. In many instances, the 
manufacturer treats the line with chemicals to make it 
more mildew resistant, which increases the quality of 


the line. Manila line is generally the standard item of 
issue because of its quality and relative strength. 

Sisal 

The next best line-making fiber is sisal. It is made 
from two tropical plants—si sal ana and henequen. 
The fiber is similar to manila, but lighter in color. It 
is grown in the East Indies, Africa, and Central 
America. Sisal fibers are usually 26 to 40 inches (65 
cm to 1 m) long but are only about 80 percent as strong 
as manila fibers. Sisal line withstands exposure to 
seawater exceptionally well. It is frequently used in 
towing, mooring, and similar purposes. 

Hemp 

Hemp is a tall plant that provides useful fibers for 
making line and cloth. It is cultivated in the U nited 
States, Russia, Italy, and South America. Hemp was 
used extensively before the introduction of manila. 
Throughout the Navy the principal use is for small 
stuff, ratline, marline, and spun yarn. Since hemp 
absorbs tar much better than the hard fibers, these 
fittings are invariably tarred to male them water 
resistant. The term small stuff is used to describe 
small cordage that a layman may call string, yarn, or 
cords. Tarred hemp has about 80 percent of the 
strength of untarred hemp. Of these tarred fittings, 
marline is the standard item of issue. 

Coir 

Coir line is a light line made from the fiber of 
coconut husks and is light enough to float on water. A 
resilient rough line, it has about one fourth of the 
strength of hemp; therefore, the use of coir is restricted 
to small lines. 

Cotton 

Cotton line is a smooth white line that stands much 
bending and running. Cotton is not widely used in the 
Navy except, in some cases, for small lines. 


4-1 



TYPES OF SYNTHETIC FIBER LINES 

Although natural fiber line is normally used, a 
number of synthetic fibers are also used to make line. 
The synthetic fibers used to fabricate line include the 
following: nylon, Kevlar, Orion, and Dacron. 

Of the types of line made from synthetic fibers, 
nylon is the one used the most. The primary benefit 
of using nylon line is that the breaking (tensile) 
strength of nylon line is nearly three times that of 
manila line. An additional benefit of using nylon line 
is that it is waterproof and has the ability to resume 
normal length after being stretched and absorbing 
shock. It also resists abrasion, rot, decay, and fungus 
growth. 

FABRICATION OF LINE 

The fabrication of line consists essentially of three 
twisting operations. First, the FIBERS are twisted to 
the right to form the YARNS. Second, the yarns are 
twisted to the left to form the STRAN DS. Thi rd, the 
strands are twisted to the right to form the LINE. 

I Figure 4-H shows you how the fibers are grouped to 
form a three-strand line. 


The operations just described are standard 
procedure. The product produced is known as a 
RIGHT-LAID line. The process is sometimes 
reversed, then you have what is known as a 
LEFT-LAID line. I n either instance, the principle of 
opposite twists must always be observed. One reason 
for this is to keep the line tight or stable and prevent 
the elements from unlaying when a load is suspended 
on it. Another reason for twisting the elements of a 
line in opposite directions is to prevent moisture 
penetration. 

TYPES OF LAYS OF LINE 

There are three types of lays of fiber line with 
which you should be familiar. They are the 
HAWSER-LAID, SHROUD-LAID, and CABLE- 
LAID lines. Each type is shown ir i figure 4^21 

Hawser-Laid Line 

Hawser-laid line generally consists of three 
strands twisted together, usually in a right-hand 
direction. 



Figure 4-1.—Fabrication of line. 


Shroud-Laid Line 

Ordinarily, a shroud-hid line is composed of four 
strands twisted together in a right-hand direction 
around a center strand or core. This core is usually of 
the same material but smaller in diameter than the four 
strands. You will find that shroud-laid line is more 
pliable and stronger than hawser-laid line. You will 
also find that shroud-laid line has a strong tendency to 
kink. In most instances, it is used on sheaves and 
drums. This not only prevents kinking but also makes 
use of its pliability and strength. 



CORE 



SHROUD- 
LAID LINE 



CABLE- 
LAID LINE 


Figure 4-2.—Lays of line. 


4-2 









Cable-Laid Line 

Cable-laid line usually consists of three right-hand 
hawser-laid lines twisted together in a left-hand 
direction. This type is especially useful in heavy 
construction work, because if it tends to untwist, it will 
tighten any regular right-hand screw connection to 
which it may be attached; hence, its use provides an 
added safety feature. 

SIZE DESIGNATION OF LINE 

The size of a line larger than 1 3/4 inches (44.5 
mm) in circumference is generally designated by its 
circumference in inches. A 6-inch (15-cm) manila 
line, for instance, would be constructed of manila 
fibers and measure 6 inches (15 cm) in circumference. 
Line is available up to 16 inches (40 cm) in 
circumference, but 12 inches (30 cm) is normally the 
largest line carried in stock. Anything larger is used 
only on special iobs Kfiq. A31 >. 

Line 1 3/4 inches (44.5 mm) or less in 
circumference is called SMALL STUFF, and size is 
usually designated b y the number of threads (or yarns) 
that make up each strand. You may find 6- to 
24-thread small stuff, but the most common sizes are 
9- to 21-thread Kfia. 4-3)1 . You may hear some small 
stuff designated by name without reference to size. 
One such type is MARLINE-a tarred, two-strand, 
left-laid hemp. Marline is the small stuff you used the 
most for seizing. When you need something stronger 
than marline, use a tarred, three-strand, left-laid hemp, 
called HOUSELINE. 


SOME COM MON L N 
USED SIZES 

MANILA UNE 



’CIRCUMFERENCE 

NOMINAL 

DIAMETER 


INCHES 

MILLIMETERS 

»»'nnrram3 

«■» 

3/4 

19.05 

1/4 


w 

1 

25.40 

5/16 

JL4J..va.JL1CtAZ3. 

■3 

1-1/8 

28.58 

3/8 


K> 

1 - 1/4 

31.70 

7/16 


K> 

1-1/2 

38.10 

1/2 

tSSSSSSSS 

m 

1 - 3/4 

44.45 

9/16 

gSSSSBSS 

D 

2 

50 . SO 

5/8 



3 

76.20 

1 



4 

101.6 

1 - 1/4 



5 

127.0 

1 - 8/16 

EBBS 


6 

152.4 

2 


•SZE IS DESK3NATED BY THE CIRCUMFERENCE _ 

SWNP0162 


Figure 4-3— Size designation of line. 


If you ever order line, you may find that you have 
to order it by diameter. The catalog may also use the 
term rope (rather than line). 

ROPE YARNS for temporary seizings, 
whippings, and lashings are pulled from large strands 
of old line that has outlived its usefulness. Pull your 
yarn from the middle, away from the ends, or it will 
get fouled. 

HANDLING AND CARE OF 
FIBER LINE 

If you expect the fiber line you work with to give 
safe and dependable service, make sure it is handled 
and cared for properly. Procedures for the handling 
and care of fiber line are as follows: 

• CLEANLI NESS is part of the care of fiber line. 
NEVER drag a line over the ground nor over rough or 
dirty surfaces. The line can easily pick up sand and grit 
that can work into the strands and wear the fibers. If a 
line does get dirty, use water only to clean it. Do NOT 
use soap because it takes oil out of the line. 

• AVOID pulling a line over sharp edges because 
the strands may break. When you have a sharp edge, 
place chafing gear, such as a board, folded cardboard or 
canvas, or part of a rubber tire, between the line and the 
sharp edge to prevent damaging the line. 

• NEVER cut a line unless you have to. When 
possible, always use knots that can be untied easily. 

Fiber line contracts, or shrinks, if it gets wet. If 
there is not enough slack in a wet line to permit 
shrinkage, the line is likely to overstrain and weaken. 
If a taut line is exposed to rain or dampness, make sure 
that the line, while still dry, is slackened to allow for 
the shrinkage. 

When nylon line is properly handled and 
maintained, it should last more than five times longer 
than manila line subjected to the same use. Nylon line 
is also lighter, more flexible, less bulky, and easier to 
handle and store than manila line. When nylon line is 
wet or frozen, it loses little strength. Additional y, 
nylon line is resistant to mildew, rotting, and attack by 
marine borers. 

If a nylon line becomes slippery because of grease, 
it should be cleaned with light oils, such as kerosene 
or diesel oil. 


4-3 





























Uncoiling Line 


RIGHT-lAY ROPE- 
COIL IN CLOCKWISE 
DIRECTION 


New line is coiled, bound, and wrapped in burlap. 
This protective covering should not be removed until 
the line is to be used because it protects the line during 
storage and prevents tangling. To open, remove the 
burlap wrapping and look inside the coil for the end 
of the line. This should be at the bottom of the coil. 
If it is not, turn the coil over so that the end will beat 
the bottom. Pull the end of the line up through the 
center of the coil [fig. 4-4)1 As the line comes up 
through the coil, it will unwind in a counterclockwise 
direction. 

Uncoiling Nylon Line 

Do not uncoil new nylon line by pulling the ends 
up through the eye of the coiI. Avoid coiling nylon in 
the same direction all the time, or you could unbalance 
the lay. 

Making Up Line 

After the line has been removed from the 
manufacturer's coil, it may be MADE UP (that is, 
prepared for storage or for use) by winding on a reel. 
It may also be made up by cooling down, faking down, 
or blemishing down. 

To COI L DOWN a line simply means to lay it in 
circles, roughly one on top of the other |(fig. 4-5] . Line 
should always be coiled in the same direction as the 
lay-clockwise for right lay and counterclockwise for 
left lay. When a line has been coiled down, one end 
is ready to run off. This is the end that went down last 



RIGHT-LAY ROPE- 
UNCOIL FROM INSIDE, 
IN COUNTERLOCK- 
WISE DIRECTION 


SWNPC163 


UNCOILING A NEW COIL OF FIBER ROPE 


Figure 4-4.—Uncoiling line. 



COILING OF A FIBER ROPE AFTER BEING USED 
Figure 4-5—Colling down line after use 


and is now on top. If, for some reason, the bottom end 
must go out first, you will have to turn your coil over 
to free it for running. 


Whipping a Line 


The term whipping refers to the process of 
securing the ends of a line to prevent the strands 
from unlaying and the yams from separating or 
fraying. It will not increase the size of the line 
enough to prevent the fitting of the blocks or 
openings through which it must pass. Whippings 
are made with fine twine. 


I Figure 4-~6| shows the steps to follow in applying 
a whipping. Makea loop in the end of the twine and 
place the loop at the end of the line, as shown in the 
figure. Wind the standing part around the line 
covering the loop of the whipping. Leave a small loop 
uncovered, as shown. Pass the remainder of the 
standing end up through the small loop and pull the 
dead end of the twine, thus pulling the small loop and 
the standing end back towards the end of the line 
underneath the whipping. Pull the dead end of the 
twine until the loop with the standing end through it 
reaches a point midway underneath the whipping. 
Trim both ends of the twine closeup against the loops 
of the whipping. 


Before cutting a line, place two whippings on the 
line 1 or 2 inches apart and make the cut between the 
whippings, as shown in i figure 4-7.1 This procedure 
prevents the ends from untwisting after they are cut. 


4-4 





















LAY BIGHT ALONG ROPE 




1 


STANDING END 



LAST ROUND THROUGH 
LOOP 


a: 


+'m»A mH\mWdm 'i»wi 


X 


PULL LOOP TO CENTER 


CUT HERE 


{THE LOOPS ARE OPENED TO CLARIFY 
THE WHIPPING PROCEDURE) 


Figure 4-6.—Whipping a line. 



CUT 

BETWEEN WHIPPINGS 


ESS 


Figure 4-7.—Cutting a line between whipping. 


Inspecting Line 

The exterior appearance of fiber line is not always 
a good indication of its internal condition. Line 
softens with use, and dampness, heavy loads, fraying, 
breaking or broken strands, and dragging over rough 
surfaces all contribute to line weakening and failure. 
Also, overloading a line can cause it to part and heavy 
damage to material, equipment, and serious injury to 
personnel can result. For these reasons, line should be 
inspected carefully at regular intervals to determine 
whether it is safe for use. 

The interior of a line can be checked by untwisting 
the strands slightly. Line that is mildewed gives off a 
musty odor. Broken strands or yams usually can be 
spotted immediately by a trained observer. You will 
want to look carefully to ensure there is no dirt or 


sawdust-like material inside the line. The presence of 
dirt or other foreign matter indicates possible damage 
to the internal structure of the line. In line having a 
central core, the core should not break away in small 
pieces upon examination. If this occurs, it indicates 
that the line has been overloaded. Additionally, a 
decrease in line circumference is usually a sure sign 
that an excessive strain has been applied to the line. 

For a thorough inspection, a line should be 
examined at several places. After all, only one weak 
spot—anywhere in the line-makes the entire line 
weak. As a final check if the line appears to be 
satisfactory in all aspects, pull out a couple of fibers 
from the line and try to break them. Sound fibers show 
a strong resistance to breakage. 

If an inspection discloses any unsatisfactory 
conditions in a line, destroy it or cut it into small pieces 
as soon as possible. This precaution will prevent the 
possibility of the defective line being used for hoisting 
purposes, but save the small pieces for miscellaneous 
uses on the jobsite. 

As with manila, nylon line is measured by 
circumference. Nylon, as manila, usually comes on a 
reel of 600 to 1,200 feet, depending upon the size. 

Storing Line 

When fiber line is to be stored, certain precautions 
must be taken to safeguard the line against 
deterioration. A line should never be stored when wet. 
Always dry the line well before placing it in storage. 

After being used, a lineshould be coiled down in 
a clockwise direction (assuming it is a right-hand lay). 
Should the line be kinked from excessive turns, 
remove them by the procedure known as "thorough 
footing." This is accomplished by coiling the line 
down counterclockwise and then pulling the bottom 
end of the coil up and out the middle of the coil. If the 
line is free of kinks as it leaves the coil, make it up in 
the correct manner. If the line is still kinked, repeat 
the process before making up the line for storage. 

Where you store line deserves careful considera¬ 
tion. Line deteriorates rapidly if exposed to prolonged 
dampness; therefore, it is important that the storage 
area is dry, unheated, and well-ventilated. To permit 
proper air circulation, place the line in loose coils on 
a wood grating platform about 6 inches ( 15 cm) above 
the floor. You can also hang the line in loose coils on 
a wooden peg. Avoid continuous exposure of line to 
sunlight because excessive sunlight can damage the 


4-5 





line. Do not store nylon line in strong sunlight. Cover 
it with tarpaulins. 

As a final precaution, line should NEVER be 
exposed to lime, acids, or other chemicals, or even 
stored in a room containing chemicals. Even the 
fumes may severely damage the line. 

STRENGTH OF FIBER LINE 

Overloading a line poses a serious safety threat to 
personnel It is also likely to result in heavy losses 
through damage to material and equipment. To avoid 
overloading, you must know the strength of the line 
with which you are working. This involves three 
factors: breaking strength, safe working load, and 
safety factor. 

Breaking Strength 

The term breaking strength refers to the tension at 
which the line will break apart when an additional load 
is applied. The breaking strength of the various lines 
has been determined through tests made by line 
manufacturers, and tables have been established to 
provide this information. In the absence of a 
manufacturer's table, a rule of thumb for finding the 
breaking strength of manila line is as follows: 

C squared x 900 =BS 

In this rule, C = circumference in inches and BS = 
breaking strength in pounds. The circumference is 
squared and the figure obtained is then multiplied by 
900 to find BS. With a 3-inch line, for example, you 
will get a BS of 8,100 pounds. This was figured as 
follows: 

3x 3x 900 =8,100 lb 

When the line is measured in centimeters, the 
breaking strength can be figured in kilograms. The 
same equation is used with only the constant being 
changed to 64.8 (vice 900). The breaking strength in 
kilograms is figured as follows: 

7.5 cm x 7.5 cm x 64.8 =3,645 kg 

The breaking strength of manila line is higher than 
that of an equal-size sisal line. This is because of the 
difference in strength of the two fibers. The fiber from 
which a particular line is constructed has a definite 
bearing on its breaking strength. 


Safe Working Load 

Briefly defined, the safe working load of a line is 
the load that can be applied without causing damage 
to the line. Remember that the safe working load of a 
line is considerably less than the breaking strength. A 
wide margin of difference between breaking strength 
and safe working load is necessary to allow for such 
factors as additional strain imposed on the line by 
jerky movements in hoisting or bending over sheaves 
in a pulley block 

You may not always have a chart available to tell 
you the safe working load for a particular size line. 
Fortunately, there is a rule of thumb with which you 
can determine the safe working load (SWL). 

SWL =C squared x 150 

SWL = the safe working load in pounds 
C =the circumference of the line in inches 

To determine the SWL, simply take the 
circumference of the line, square it, and then multiply 
by 150. For example, for a 3-inch line, here is how 
the rule works: 

3 x 3 x 150= 1,350 lb 

Thus the safe working load of a 3-inch line is 1,350 
pounds. 

In the metric system, the rule is as follows: 

SWL =C squared x 10.8 

SWL =the safe working load in kilograms 

C =the circumference of the line in centimeters 

Substituting in the equation for a 3-inch line the 
centimeter equivalent of 3 inches (3 inches =7.5 cm), 
the formula becomes the following: 

7.5 cm x 7.5 cm x 10.8 = 607.5 kg 

Thus the safe working load of a line 7.5 cm in 
circumference is equal to 607.5 kg. 

NOTE: 10.8 is the metric constant equivalent to 
150 in the decimal system. 

If the line is in good shape, add 30 percent to the 
calculated SWL. If it is in bad shape, subtract 30 
percent from the SWL. In the example given above 
for the 3-inch line, adding 30 percent to the 1,350 
pounds would give you a safe working load of 1,755 
pounds. On the other hand, subtracting 30 percent 
from the 1,350 pounds would leave you a safe working 
load of 945 pounds. 


4-6 



Remember that the strength of a line will decrease 
with age, use, and exposure to excessive heat, boiling 
water, or sharp bends. Especially with used line, these 
and other factors affecting strength should be given 
careful consideration and proper adjustment made in 
the breaking strength and safe working load capacity 
of the line. Manufacturers of line provide tables to 
show the breaking strength and safe working load 
capacity of line. You will find such tables useful in 
your work; however, you must remember that the 
values given in manufacturers' tables apply to NEW 
LINE used under favorable conditions. For that 
reason, you must PROGRESSIVELY REDUCE the 
values given in the manufacturers' tables as the line 
ages or deteriorates with use. 

The safety factor of a line is the ratio between the 
breaking strength and the safe working load. Usually 
a safety factor of 4 is acceptable, but this is not always 
the case. In other words, the safety factor will vary, 
depending on such things as the condition of the line 
and circumstances under which it is to be used. While 
the safety factor should never be less than 3, it often 
must be well above 4 (possibly as high as 8 or 10). For 
best, average, or unfavorable conditions, the safety 
factors indicated below are usually suitable. 

Best condition (new line): 4. 

Average condition (line used, but in good 
condition): 6. 

Unfavorable condition (frequently used line, such 
as running rigging): 8. 

Breaking Strength of Nylon Line 

The breaking strength of nylon line is almost three 
times that of manila line of the same size. The rule of 
thumb for the breaking strength of nylon line is as 
follows: 

BS =C squared x 2,400 

NOTE: The symbols in this rule are the same as 
those for fiber line in both the English and metric 
systems. 

Application of the formula: determine the BS 
for a 2 1/2-inch nylon line in both pounds and 
kilograms: 

Solution: BS =2.5 x 2.5 x 2,400 =15,000 pounds 

or BS = 6.35 cm x 6.35 cm x 172.8 = 6,967 

kilograms 


NOTE: The constant for the metric system is 
172.8. 

Nylon line can withstand repeated stretching to 
this point with no serious effects. When nylon line is 
underload, it thins out. Under normal safe working 
loads, nylon line will stretch about one third of its 
length. When free of tension, it returns to its normal 
size. 

When nylon line is stretched more than 40 percent, 
it is likely to part. The stretch is immediately 
recovered with a snapback that sounds like a pistol 
shot. 

WARNING 

The snapback of a nylon line can be as 
deadly as a bullet. This feature is also true for 
other types of lines, but overconfidence in 
the strength of nylon may lead one to 
underestimate its backlash; therefore, ensure 
that no one stands in the direct line of pull when 
a heavy strain is applied to a line. 

The critical point of loading is 40-percent 
extension of length; for example, a 10-foot length of 
nylon line would stretch to 14 feet when underload. 
Should the stretch exceed 40 percent, the line will be 
in danger of parting. 

Nylon line will hold a load even though a 
considerable number of strands are abraded. 
Ordinarily, when abrasion is localized the line maybe 
made satisfactory for reuse by cutting away the chafed 
section and splicing the ends. 

KNOTS, BENDS, AND HITCHES 

The term knot is usually applied to any tie or 
fastening formed with a cord, rope, or line. In a 
general sense, it includes the words bends and 
hitches. 

Line Parts 

A BEND is used to fasten two lines together or to 
fasten a line to a ring or loop. A HITCH is used to 
fasten a line around a timber or spar, so it will hold 
temporarily but can be readily untied. Many ties, 
which are strictly bends, have come to be known as 
knots; hence, we will refer to them as knots in this 
discussion. 


4-7 



Knots, bends, and hitches are made from three 
fundamental elements: a bight, a loop, and a round 
turn. Observe pfigure 4-8l closely and you should 
experience no difficulty in making these three 
elements. Note that the free or working end of a line 
is known as the RUNNING END. The remainder of 
the line is called the STANDING PART. 

NOTE: A good knot is one that is tied rapidly, 
holds fast when pulled tight, and is untied easily. I n 
addition to the knots, bends, and hitches described in 
the following paragraphs, you may have need of others 
in steelworking. When you understand how to make 


those covered in this chapter, you should find it fairly 
easy to learn the procedure for other types. 

Overhand Knot 

The OVERHAND KNOT is considered the 
simplest of all knots to make. Totiethis knot, pass the 
hose end of a line over the standing part and through 
the loop that has been formed. rFiqure 4-91 shows you 
what it looks like. The overhand knot is often used as 
a part of another knot. At times, it may also be used 
to keep the end of a line from untwisting or to form a 
knob at the end of a line. 



Figure 4-8—Elements of knots, bends, and hitches 


4-8 






































2 


Figure 4-9.—Overhand knot. 


Figure-Eight Knot 

The FIGURE-EIGHT KNOT is used to form a 
larger knot than would be formed by an overhand knot 
in the end of a line Ifia. 4-101 A figure-eight knot is 
used in the end of a line to prevent the end from 
slipping through a fastening or loop in another line. 
To make the figure-eight knot, make a loop in the 
standing part, pass the running end around the 
standing part, back over one side of the loop and down 
through the loop, and pull tight. 

Square Knot 

The SQUARE KNOT, also called the REEF 
KNOT, is an ideal selection for tying two lines of the 
same size together so they will not slip. To tie a square 




Figure 4-10.—Figure-eight knot 


knot, first bring the two ends of the line together and 
make an overhand knot. Then form another 
overhand knot in the opposite direction, as shown in 
I figure 4-TT1 

NOTE: A good rule to follow for a square knot 
is left over right and right over left. 

When tying a square knot, make sure the two 
overhand knots are parallel, 'his means that each 
running end must come out parallel to the standing 
part of its own line. If your knot fails to meet this 
test, you have tied what is known as a "granny." A 
granny knot should NEVER be used; it is unsafe 
because it will slip under strain. A true square knot 
instead of slipping under strain will only draw 
tighter. 

Sheepshank 

The SHEEPSHANK is generally thought of as 
merely a means to shorten a line, but, in an emergency, 
it can also be used to take the load off a weak spot 
in the line. To make a sheepshank, form two bights 



Figure 4-11.—Square knot. 


4-9 









|(fiq. 4-12,1 view 1). Then take a half hitch around each 
bight (views 2 and 3). In case you are using the 
sheepshank to take the load off a weak spot, make sure 
the spot is in the part of the line indicated by the arrow 
in view 2. 

Bowline 

The BOWLINE is especially useful when you 
need a temporary eye in the end of a line. It will 
neither slip nor jam and can be untied easily. To tie 
a bowline, follow the procedure shown in i fiqurel 

G3!] 

The FRENCH BOWLINE is sometimes used to 
lift or hoist injured personnel. When the french 
bowline is used for this purpose, it has two loops 
which are adjustable, so even an unconscious person 
can be lifted safely. One loop serves as a se at for the 
person, while the other loop goes around the body 
under the person's arms. The weight of the person 
keeps both loops tight and prevents the person from 
falling. The procedure to follow in making the french 
bowline is shown in i figure 4-141 

Spanish Bowline 

The SPANISH BOWLINE is useful in rescue 
work, especially as a substitute for the boatswain's 
chair. It may also be used to give a twofold grip for 
lifting a pipe or other round object in a sling. Many 
people prefer the Spanish bowline to the french 
bowline because the bights are set and will not slip 





3 

Figure 4-13.—Bowline. 



3 

Figure 4-14.—French bowline. 


4-10 


























back and forth (as in the french bowline) when the 
weight is shifted. 

To tie a Spanish bowline, take a bight and bend it 
back away from you Kfia. 4-151 view 1), forming two 
bights. Then lap one bight over the other (view 2). 
Next, grasp the two bights where they cross at (a) in 
view 2. Fold this part down toward you, forming four 
bights (view 3). Next, pass bight (c) through bight (e) 
and bight (d) through bight (f) (view 4). The complete 
knot is shown in view 5. 


Running Bowline 

The RUNNING BOWLINE is a good knot to use 
in situations that call for a lasso. To form this knot, 
start by making a bight with an overhand loop in the 
running end |(fiq. 4-16,1 view 1). Now, pass the running 
end of the line under and around the standing part and 
then under one side of the loop (view 2). Next, pass 
the running end through the loop, under and over the 
side of the bight, and back through the loop (view 3). 



Figure 4-15.—Spanish bowline 


4-11 














Becket Bend 



Figure 4-16.—Running bowline. 



UP THROUGH BACK UNDER ITSELF ROUND AGAN 

FROM UNDER ONCE-SINGLE BECKET BACK UNDER - 

DOUBLE BECKET 


Figure 4-17.—Becket bend. 


An especially good knot for bending together 
two lines that are unequal in size is the type 
known as the BECKET BEND. The simple 
procedure and necessary instructions for tying a 
becket, single and double, are given in i fiqurel 
[4171 

Clove Hitch 

When it comes to bending to a timber or spar 
or anything that is round or nearly round, the 
familiar CLOVE HITCH is an ideal selection. 

I Figure 4-18 I shows how this knot is made. A 
clove hitch will not jam or pull out; however, if a 
clove hitch is slack, it might work itself out, and 
for that reason, it is a good idea to make a HALF 
HITCH in the end, as shown in i figure 4-191 view 
1. A half hitch never becomes a whole hitch. 
Add a second one and all you have is two half 
hitches, as shown in i figure 4-191 view 2. 

The SCAFFOLD HITCH is used to support the 
end of a scaffold plank with a single line. To make the 
scaffold hitch, lay the running end across the top 
and around the plank, then up and over the standing 


AT CENTER OF ROPE 



Figure 4-18.—Clove hitch. 


4-12 




































SINGLE HALF HITCH 




1 


2 



3 

DOUBLE HALF HITCH 


SWNP0178 

Figure 4-19.—Half hitch. 


part Kfiq. 4-20,1 view 1). Bring a doubled portion of 
the running end back under the plank (view 2) to form 
a bight at the opposite side of the plank. The running 
end is taken back across the top of the plank (view 3) 
until it can be passed through the bight. Make a loop 
in the standing part (view 4) above the plank. Pass the 
running end through the loop and around the standing 
part and back through the loop (view 5). 




Figure 4-21.—Barrel hitch. 


Barrel Hitch 

A BARREL HITCH can be used to lift a barrel or 
other rounded object that is either in a horizontal or a 
vertical position. Toslinq a barrel horizontally |(fiq. I 
4-21), start by making a bowline with a long bight. 
Then bring the line at the bottom of the bight up over 


the sides of the bight. To complete the hitch, place the 
two "ears" thus formed over the end of the barrel. 

To sling a barrel vertically, pass the line under the 
bottom of the barrel, bring it up to the top, and then 
form an overhand knot Kfiq. 4-221 view 1). While 
maintaining a slight tension on the line, grasp the two 


4-13 
























































Figure 4-22.—A vertical barrel hitch. 


parts of the overhand knot Kfiq. 4-221 view 2) and pull 
them down over the sides of the barrel. Finally, pull 
the I i ne snug and make a bowl i ne over the top of the 
barrel Kfia. 4-221 view 3). 

SPLICING FIBER LINE 

When it is necessary to join lengths of line, a 
splice, rather than a knot, should be used. A properly 
made short splice will retain up to 100 percent of the 
strength of the line, while a knot will retain only 50 
percent. 

"Splicing" means the joining of two separate lines. 
It also means the retracing of the unlaid strand of the 
line back through its own strands in the standing part 
of the line. 


Four general types of splices in fiber line are 
commonly used in rigging work. They are the eye 
splice, short splice, long splice, and back splice. Once 
you learn how to make one type, the others should not 
be difficult. 

Eye Splice 

The principal use of an EYE SPLICE is to make 
an eye in the end of a line. The eye is useful in 
fastening the line to a ring or hook. It can also be made 
up with a thimble. A thimble is a grooved ring that 
may be set in the eye of a line to prevent chafing. The 
eye splice is estimated as being 90 percent as strong 
as the line itself. 

To make an eye splice, you UNLAY (untwist) the 
strands in the end of your line about five turns, and 
splice them into the standing part of the line by 
TUCKING the unlaid strands from the end into the 
standing part. An original round of tucks plus two 
more complete rounds is enough for an ordinary eye 
splice. 

With large lines, you must whip the ends of your 
strands before you start; otherwise, they will frazzle 
out and cause you trouble. Large lines must also be 
seized at the point where unlaying stops or you will 
have trouble working them. With any lineup to about 
2 inches (50 mm), you can open the strands in the 
standing part with your fingers. 

With larger lines, you use the fid. A fid is a tapered 
and pointed tool made from maple, hickory, or other 
hardwood. I Figure 4-231 shows you the knack of 
working the fid in making an eye splice. Lay your line 
out along the deck with the end to your right. Bend it 
back until your eye is the size you want it, and shove 
the fid through the standing part at the right spot to 
raise the top strand. Shove the fid through the rope 
AWAY from you with your right hand as you hold the 
line with your left. Takethe raised strand with your 



Figure 4-23.—Working the fid 


4-14 


































left finger and thumb and hold it up while you pull out 
the fid. Drop the fid, pick up the proper strand in the 
end, and tuck it through the raised strand from 
outboard TOWARD you, as shown in the figure. 

Your first round of tucks must be taken in proper 
order or you will come out all fouled up. Separate the 
strands in the end and hold them up, as shown in i figure! 

14-24.1 view 1. The middle strand facing you always 
tucks first. Be sure you keep the right-hand strand 
(view 2) on the side of the line which is toward you. 
You tuck that one next, over the strand you just tucked 


the other one under, and under the strand just below it 
(view 3). 

Now turn the whole thing over. You can see (view 
4) that you now have only one strand from the end left 
untucked, and only one strand in the standing part that 
does not already have a strand under it. Be sure you 
tuck your last strand also from outboard toward you, 
as shown in view 5. 

The first round of tucks is the big secret. The rest 
is easy. Simply tuck each strand from the end over the 
strand of the standing part which it is now above, and 
under the next strand below that one, until you have 







3 

PASS THE TOP STRAND 
UNDER THE NEXT STRAND 
IN THE STANDING PART 


4 

PASS THE BOTTOM STRAND 
UNDER THE LAST STRAND IN 
THE STANDING PART 


5 

TUCK THE THREE STRANDS 
INTO THE STANDING PART 
AS IN THE SHORT SPLICE 


Figure 4-24.—Making an eye splice. 


4-15 










tucked each strand twice more besides the original 
tuck. Three tucks to each strand in all is enough. 

Short Splice 

In a SHORT SPLICE, the ends of a line are joined 
together or the ends of two different lines are joined, 
causing an increase in the diameter of the line for a 
short distance. This splice should NOT be used where 
the increase in the diameter of the line would affect 
operation. One purpose for which you may find the 
short splice especially useful is in making endless 
slings. It is also used for making straps. Slings and 
straps are made of pieces of line with their own ends 
short-spliced together. Where possible, a short splice, 
rather than a long splice, should be used. The reason 


is that the short splice requires less line and can be 
fashioned quicker than the long splice. 

In making a short splice, unlay both ends of the 
lines about seven turns kfia. 4-251 view 1) and put a 
temporary whipping on each of the loose strands. The 
next step involves "marrying” the ends together. In 
marrying, the technique is to interlace the loose 
strands of one line with the loose strands of the other 
line. When this is completed properly, each loose 
strand should be between the two loose strands of the 
other line. With the strands in this manner, start 
making the tucks, following the principle of "over one 
and under one" (view 2). One side of the splice car 
be made with three tucks, and then the other side will 
be made identically. Three complete tucks of each 


UNLAY SEVEN TURNS AT END OF EACH 
ROPE AND PLACE ENDS TOGETHER 




‘■•SB-,, 'SB: 

Vi& Cl. 




CROSS AND TUCK EACH STRAND 
AT NEARLY RIGHT ANGLES 


DIVIDE EACH STRAND INTO TWO PARTS AND AND TAKE 
TWO OR MORE TUCKS WITH EACH HALF STRAND 



CUT OFF ALL LOOSE ENDS AND ROLL ON HARD SURFACE 

4 


Figure 4-25.—Making a short splice. 


4-16 











strand should be sufficient to ensure a safe splice 
(view 3). As a finishing touch, cut off all loose ends 
and roll and pound the splice on a hard surface 
(view 4). 

Long Splice 


In a LONG SPLICE, either the ends of a line are 
joined together or the ends of two different lines are 
joined without increasing the diameter of the line. The 
strength of a properly made long splice will be equal 
to that of the line itself. The long splice is ideal for 
joining two lines where the line will be run over 
pulleys in a block. A short-spliced line would not 
serve this purpose since the diameter of the line at the 
point of splicing is larger than that of the remaining 
portion and may not pass over the pulleys in the block 
properly. The long splice also has a neater appearance 
than the short splice. 


To make a long splice, unlay the ends about 15 
turns and arrange the strands as shown i d figure 4-261 
view 1. Using two opposing strands, begin unlaying 
one and follow immediately laying its opposing strand 
tight into the left groove |(fiq. 4-26] view 2). Be sure 
you choose the correct pairs of strands for opposites. 
This is important. To determine the correct pair, try 
laying one of the tucking ends into the opposite 
standing line. The strand that this tucking end tends 
to push out and replace will be the correct opposing 
strand. In the process of replacing one strand with its 
opposing tucking end, keep a close watch on the 
marriage back at the starting place. If the other loose 
tucking ends are allowed too much freedom, they will 
divorce themselves from the original marriage. This 
creates quite a puzzle for the splicer due to the fact that 
the lines do not fit up correctly, and no matter which 
two strands are chosen, the splicer seems to end up 
with a stranger between them or else the last tucking 
ends have two strands between them. Therefore, it is 
important to keep the marriage intact when replacing 





4 


Figure 4-26.—Making a long splice. 


4-17 

























one strand with another. Cut off all the remainders of 
the ends close up, then roll and pound the line so the 
tucks will settle in tight. As soon as you have gone far 
enough with the first tucking end to have its end left 
to make an overhand knot and two tucks, stop and tie 
the ends together. This procedure must be done in the 
correct direction; the ends must stand out away from 
the standing part, not alongside. 

Now, select two more opposing strands from the 
marriage in the same manner as before. Be careful to 
pick the correct two strands. Proceed to unlay and 
replace (DOWN TIGHT) as you did the first 
pair-this time in the opposite direction. When the 
proper place is reached, tie a knot (view 3). 

You now have two opposing strands with which 
you have nothing to do but make an overhand knot. If 
at this point there happens to be a standing strand 
running between them, a wrong choice has been made 
in choosing opposing strands (pairs) during one of the 
first two steps. The solution is to bring one or the other 
of these first two back and redo it with the correct pair. 
When completed, the splice should look similar to the 
example shown in view 4. 

After all three overhand knots have been correctly 
tied, then start tucking all the loose ends over one and 
under one, twice each. Cut off all the remainders of 
the ends close up, then roll and pound the line so the 
tucks will settle in tight. When completed, the splice 
will look like view 4. 

Back Splice 

I n a BACK SPLICE, the strands at the end of a 
line are spliced back into its own strands. This splice 
is used to prevent a linefrom unlaying or unraveling 
when an enlargement at the end of the line is not 
objectionable. 

The back splice starts from a crown knot. The 
procedure for making aback splice is shown ir l fiqurel 

After you have hauled the crown down tight by 
heaving on each of the three strands, proceed to lay up 
the back splice. This merely requires splicing the 
three loose strands back into the line, following the 


UNTWIST SIX TURNS STAKT WITH 

CROWN KNOT 



TRIM ENDS 


Figure 4-27.—Making a back splice 

same principle as with the eye and short splice—over 
one and under one. 

Because the back splice leaves a lump in the line, 
it should not be used where there is a possibility of the 
enlarged end hanging up, as might be the case if it were 
run through hoisting blocks. 

SPLICING NYLON LINE 

Nylon line can hold a load even when many 
strands are abraded. Normal] y, when abrasion is local, 
the line may be restored to use by cutting away the 
chafed section and splicing the ends. Chafing and 
stretching do not necessarily affect the load-carrying 
ability of nylon line. 

The splicing of nylon line is similar to that of 
manila; however, friction tape is used instead of 
seizing stuff for whipping the strands and line. 
Because it is smooth and elastic, nylon line requires at 
least one tuck more than does manila. For heavy 
loads, a back tuck should betaken with each strand. 


4-18 











CHAPTER 5 


WIRE ROPE 


Wire rope is stronger, lasts longer, and is much 
more resistant to abrasion than fiber line. Because of 
these factors, wire rope is used for hoisting tasks that 
are too heavy for fiber line to handle. Also, many of 
the movable components on hoisting devices and 
attachments are moved by wire rope. 

Wire rope is an intricate device made up of a 
number of precise moving parts. The moving parts of 
wire rope are designed and manufactured to maintain 
a definite relationship with one another. This 
relationship ensures that the wire rope has the 
flexibility and strength crucial to professional and safe 
hoisting operations. 

WIRE ROPE 

This chapter discusses the construction, the 
characteristics and specifications, and the criteria used 
for the selection of wire rope. The related attachments 



and the proper handling procedures for wire rope are 
also discussed. 

NOTE: In the Navy, you may hear wire rope 
referred to as wire or rope but never as line. 

WIRE ROPE CONSTRUCTION 

Wire rope is composed of three parts: wires, 
strands, and core Kfip. 57TH . A predetermined number 
of wires of the same or different size are fabricated in 
a uniform arrangement of definite lay to form a strand. 
The required number of strands is then laid together 
symmetrically around the core to form the wire rope. 

Wires 

The basic component of the wire rope is the wire. 
The wire may be made of steel, iron, or other metal in 
various sizes. The number of wires to a strand varies, 


CROSS SECTION 


SWNP022D 



Figure 5-1.—Fabrication of wire rope 


5-1 









depending on what purpose the wire rope is intended. 
Wire rope is designated by the number of strands per 
rope and the number of wires per strand. Thus a 
1/2-inch 6 by 19 wire rope has six strands with 
19 wires per strand. It has the same outside diameter 
as a 1/2-inch 6 by 37 wire rope that has six strands with 
37 wires (of smaller size) per strand. 

Strands 

The design arrangement of a strand is called the 
construction. The wires in the strand may be all the 
same size or a mixture of sizes. The most common 
strand constructions are Ordinary, Scale, Warrington, 
and Filler [fig 5-2)[ 

• Ordinary construction wires are all the same size. 

• Scale is where larger diameter wires are used on 
the outside of the strand to resist abrasion and smaller 
wires are inside to provide flexibility. 

• Warrington is where alternate wires are large and 
small to combine great flexibility with resistance to 
abrasion. 

• Filler is where small wires fill in the valleys 
between the outer and inner rows of wires to provide 
good abrasion and fatigue resistance. 

Core 

The wire rope core supports the strands laid 
around it. The three types of wire rope cores are fiber, 
wire strand, and independent wire rope [tig. 5-3)| 

• A fiber core maybe a hard fiber, such as manila, 
hemp, plastic, paper, or sisal. The fiber core offers the 
advantage of increased flexibility. It also serves as a 


SWNP0222 

FIBER WIRE STRAND INDEPENDENT 

WIRE ROPE 

Figure 5-3.—Core construction. 


cushion to reduce the effects of sudden strain and act as 
an oil reservoir to lubricate the wire and strands (to 
reduce friction). Wire rope with a fiber core is used 
when flexibility of the rope is important. 

• A wire strand core resists more heat than a fiber 
core and also adds about 15 percent to the strength of 
the rope; however, the wire strand core makes the wire 
rope less flexible than a fiber core. 

• An independent wire rope core is a separate wire 
rope over which the main strands of the rope are laid. 
This core strengthens the rope, provides support against 
crushing, and supplies maximum resistance to heat. 

When an inspection discloses any unsatisfactory 
conditions in a line, ensure the line is destroyed or cut 
into small pieces as soon as possible. This precaution 
prevents the defective line from being used for 
hoisting. 

Wi re rope may be manufactured by either of two 
methods. When the strands or wires are shaped to 
conform to the curvature of the finished rope before 
laying up, the rope is termed preformed wire rope 






6 X10 ORDINARY. FIBRE CORE 8X19 ORDINARY FIBRE CORE 8X10SEALE IWRG 8X IS SEALE FIBRE CORE 


WARRINGTON FILLER 



8X 10 WARRINGTON. FIBRE CORE S X 19 WARRINGTON, FIBRE CORE 6 X 21 FILLER, FIBRE CORE 8 X 25 FILLER, IWRC 

SWNP0221 


Figure 5-2.—Common strand construction. 


5-2 













When they are not shaped before fabrication, the wire 
rope is termed non preformed wire rope. 

The most common type of manufactured wire rope 
is preformed. When wire rope is cut, it tends not to 
unlay and is more flexible than nonpreformed wire 
rope. With nonpreformed wire rope, twisting produces 
a stress in the wires; therefore, when it is cut or broken, 
the stress causes the strands to unlay. 

WARNING 

When wire rope is cut or broken, the almost 
instantaneous unlaying of the wires and strands 
of nonpreformed wire rope can cause serious 
injury to someone that is careless or not familiar 
with this characteristic of the rope. 

GRADES OF WIRE ROPE 

The three primary grades of wire rope are mild 
plow steel, plow steel, and improved plow steel. 

Mild Plow Steel Wire Rope 

Mild plow steel wire rope is tough and pliable. It 
can stand repeated strain and stress and has a tensile 
strength (resistance to lengthwise stress) of from 
200,000 to 220,000 pounds per square inch (psi). 
These characteristics make it desirable for cable tool 
drilling and other purposes where abrasion is 
encountered. 

Plow Steel Wire Rope 

Plow steel wire rope is unusually tough and 
strong. This steel has a tensile strength of 220,000 to 
240,000 psi. Plow steel wire rope is suitable for 
hauling, hoisting, and logging. 

Improved Plow Steel Wire Rope 

I mproved plow steel wire rope is one of the best 
grades of rope available and is the most common rope 
used in the Naval Construction Force (NCF). 
Improved plow steel is stronger, tougher, and more 
resistant to wear than either mild plow steel or plow 
steel. Each square inch of improved plow steel can 
stand a strain of 240,000 to 260,000 pounds; therefore, 
this wire rope is especially useful for heavy-duty 
service, such as cranes with excavating and 
weight-handling attachments. 


LAYS OF WIRE ROPE 

The term lay refers to the direction of the twist of 
the wires in a strand and the direction that the strands 
are laid in the rope. In some instances, both the wires 
in the strand and the strands in the rope are laid in the 
same direction; and in other instances, the wires are 
laid in one direction and the strands are laid in the 
opposite direction, depending on the intended use of 
the rope. Most manufacturers specify the types and 
lays of wire rope to be used on their piece of 
equipment. Be sure and consult the operator's manual 
for proper application. 

The five types of lays used in wire rope are as 
follows: 

• Right Regular Lay: In right regular lay rope, the 
wires in the strands are laid to the left, while the strands 
are laid to the right to form the wire rope. 

• Left Regular Lay: In left regular lay rope, the 
wires in the strands are laid to the right, while the strands 
are laid to the left to form the wire rope. In this lay, each 
step of fabrication is exactly opposite from the right 
regular lay. 

• Right Lang Lay: In right lang lay rope, the 
wires in the strands and the strands in the rope are laid 
in the same direction; in this instance, the lay is to the 
right. 

• Left Lang Lay: In left lang lay rope, the 
wires in the strands and the strands in the rope are 
also laid in the same direction; in this instance, the 
lay is to the left (rather than to the right as in the 
right lang lay). 

• Reverse Lay: 1 n reverse lay rope, the wires in 
one strand are laid to the right, the wires in the nearby 
strand are laid to the left, the wires in the next strand are 
laid to the right, and so forth, with alternate directions 
from one strand to the other. Then all strands are laid to 
the right. 

The five different lays of wire rope are shown in 
I figure 5-41 

LAY LENGTH OF WIRE ROPE 

The length of a wire rope lay is the distance 
measured parallel to the center line of a wire rope in 
that a strand makes one complete spiral or turn around 
the rope. The length of a strand lay is the distance 
measured parallel to the centerline of the strand in that 
one wire makes one complete spiral or turnaround the 


5-3 




SWNKK23 



REVERSE LAY 

Figure 5-4.—Lays of wire rope. 


strand. Lay length measurement is shown in 
I figure 5-5] 


S<VNP0225 



(6X19) 


A 



Figure 5-6—A. 6 by 19 wire rope; B. 6 by 37 wire rope. 


CLASSIFICATION OF WIRE ROPE 

The primary types of wire rope used by the NCF 
consist of 6, 7, 12, 19, 24, or 37 wires in each strand. 
Usually, the wire rope has six strands laid around the 
core. 

The two most common types of wi re rope, 6 by 19 
and 6 by 37, are shown in i figure 5-~6] The 6 by 19 type 
(having six strands with 19 wires in each strand) is the 
stiffest and strongest construction of the type of wire 
rope suitable for general hoisting operations. The 6 b y 
37 wire rope (having six strands with 37 wires in each 
strand) is flexible, making it suitable for cranes and 
similar equipment where sheaves are smaller than 


usual. The wires in the 6 by 37 are smaller than the 
wires in the 6 by 19 wire rope and, consequently, will 
not stand as much abrasive wear. 

WIRE ROPE SELECTION 


Several factors must be considered when you 
select a wire rope for use in a particular type of 
operation. Manufacture of a wire rope that can 
withstand all of the different types of wear and stress, 
it is subjected to, is impossible. Because of this factor, 
selecting a rope is often a matter of compromise. You 
must sacrifice one quality to have some other more 
urgently needed characteristic. 


ONE ROPE LAY 


| STRAND NO. 

6 1 2 3 4 5 6 



Figure 5-5.—Lay length of wire rope. 


Tensile Strength 


Tensile strength is the strength necessary to 
withstand a certain maximum load applied to the rope. 
It includes a reserve of strength measured in a 
so-cal led factor of safety. 


5-4 


































MEASURING WIRE ROPE 


Crushing Strength 


Crushing strength is the strength necessary to 
resist the compressive and squeezing forces that 
distort the cross section of a wire rope, as it runs over 
sheaves, rollers, and hoist drums when under a heavy 
load. Regular lay rope distorts less in these situations 
than lang lay. 


Fatigue Resistance 


Fatigue resistance is the ability to withstand the 
constant bending and flexing of wire rope that runs 
continuously on sheaves and hoist drums. Fatigue 
resistance is important when the wire rope must be run 
at high speeds. Such constant and rapid bending of the 
rope can break individual wires in the strands. Lang 
lay ropes are best for service requiring high fatigue 
resistance. Ropes with smaller wires around the 
outside of their strands also have greater fatigue 
resistance, since these strands are more flexible. 


Abrasion Resistance 


Abrasion resistance is the ability to withstand the 
gradual wearing away of the outer metal, as the rope 
runs across sheaves and hoist drums. The rate of 
abrasion depends mainly on the load carried by the 
rope and the running speed. Generally, abrasion 
resistance in a rope depends on the type of metal that 
the rope is made of and the size of the individual outer 
wires. Wire rope made of the harder steels, such as 
improved plow steel, has considerable resistance to 
abrasion. Ropes that have larger wires forming the 
outside of their strands are more resistant to wear than 
ropes having smaller wires that wear away more 
quickly. 


Corrosion Resistance 


Corrosion resistance is the ability to withstand the 
dissolution of the wire metal that results from 
chemical attack by moisture in the atmosphere or 
elsewhere in the working environment. Ropes that are 
put to static work, such as guy wires, maybe protected 
from corrosive elements by paint or other special 
dressings. Wire rope may also be galvanized for 
corrosion protection. Most wire ropes used in crane 
operations must rely on their lubricating dressing to 
double as a corrosion preventive. 


Wire rope is designated by its diameter, in inches. 
The correct method of measuring the wire rope is to 
measure from the top of one strand to the top of the 
strand directly opposite it. The wrong way is to 
measure across two strands side by side. 

To ensure an accurate measurement of the 
diameter of a wire rope, always measure the rope at 
three places, at least 5 feet apart |(fiq. 5-7| . Use the 
average of the three measurements as the diameter of 
the rope. 

NOTE: A crescent wrench can be used as an 
expedient means to measure wire rope. 


WIRE ROPE SAFE WORKING LOAD 


The term safe working load (SWL) of wire rope is 
used to define the load which can be applied that 
allows the rope to provide efficient service and also 
prolong the life of the rope. 

The formula for computing the SWL of a wire 
rope is the diameter of the rope squared, multiplied by 
8 . 


D x D x 8 =SWL (in tons) 

Example: The wire rope is 1/2 inch in diameter. 
Compute the SWL for the rope. 

The first step is to convert the 1/2 into decimal 
numbers by dividing the bottom number of the 
fraction into the top number of the fraction: (1 divided 
by 2 = .5.) Next, compute the SWL formula: (.5 x .5 
x 8 =2 tons.) The SWL of the 1/2-inch wire rope is 2 
tons. 



CORRECT INCORRECT 

Figure 5-7.—Correct and incorrect methods of measuring 
wire rope. 


5-5 





















CAUTION 

Do NOT downgrade the SWL of wire rope 
because it is old, worn, or in poor condition. 
Wire rope in these conditions should be cut up 
and discarded. 

WIRE ROPE FAILURE 

Some of the common causes of wire rope failure 
are the foil owing: 

• Using incorrect size, construction or grade 

• Dragging over obstacles 

• Improper lubrication 

• Operating over sheaves and drums of 
inadequate size 

• Overriding or cross winding on drums 

• Operating over sheaves and drums with 
improperly fitted grooves or broken flanges 

• J umping off sheaves 

• Exposure to acid fumes 


• Use of an improperly attached fitting 

• Grit being allowed to penetrate between the 
strands, causing internal wear 

• Being subjeted to severe or continuing overload 

WIRE ROPE ATTACHMENTS 

Attachments can be put on a wire rope to allow it 
to be attached to other ropes; for example, pad eyes, 
chains, or equipment. 

END FITTINGS 

Some end fittings that are easily and quickly 
changed are wire ropeclips, clamps, thimbles, wedge 
sockets, and basket sockets. Generally these 
attachments permit the wire rope to be used with 
greater flexibility than a more permanent splice would 
allow. These attachments allow the same wire rope to 
be made in numerous different arrangements. 

Wire Rope Clips 

Wire rope clips are used to make eyes in wire rope, 
as shown in lfiaure S^Hl The U-shaoed part of the clip 
with the threaded ends is called the U-bolt; the other 


CORRECT 


INCORRECT 


INCORRECT 




Figure 5-8.—Wire rope clips 


5-6 















part is called the saddle. The saddle is stamped with 
the diameter of the wire rope that the clip will fit. 
Always place a clip with the U-bolt on the bitter (dead) 
end, not on the standing part of the wire rope. When 
clips are attached incorrectly, the standing part (live 
end) of the wire rope will be distorted or have smashed 
spots. A rule of thumb to remember when attaching a 
wire rope clip is to "NEVER saddle a dead horse." 

Two simple formulas for figuring the number of 
wi re rope cl i ps needed are as fol I ows: 

3 x wire rope diameter+ 1 = Number of clips 

6 x wire rope diameter^ Spacing between clips 

Another type of wire rope clip is the twin-base 
clip, often referred to as the universal or two clamp 
Kfiq. 5-9)| . Both parts of this clip are shaped to fit the 
wire rope; therefore, the clip cannot be attached 
incorrectly. The twin-base clip allows a clear 
360-degree swing with the wrench when the nuts are 
being tightened. 

Wire Rope Clamps 

Wi re rope damps fTFTq. 5-101) are used to make an 
eye in the rope with or without a thimble; however, a 
clamp is normally used without a thimble. The eye will 
have approxi mately 90 percent of the strength of the 
rope. The two end collars should be tightened with 
wrenches to force the wire rope clamp to a good, snug 
fit. This squeezes the rope securely against each other. 

Thimble 

When an eye is made in a wire rope, a metal fitting, 
called a thimble, is usually placed in the eye | (fig. 5-8) . 
The thimble protects the eye against wear. Wire rope 
eyes with thimbles and wire rope clips can hold 
approximately 80 percent of the wire rope strength. 



Figure 5-9.—Twin-base wire rope clip. 



Figure 5-10.—Wire rope. 


After the eye made with clips has been strained, 
the nuts on the clips must be retightened. Checks 
should be made now and then for tightness or damage 
to the rope cause by the cl i ps. 


Wedge Socket 


A wedge socket end fitting Kfiq. 5-11) is used in 
situations that require the fitting to be changed 
frequently. For example, the attachment used most 
often to attach dead ends of wire ropes to pad eyes, or 
like fittings, on cranes and earthmoving equipment is 
the wedge socket. The socket is applied to the bitter 
end of the wire rope. Fabricated in two parts, the 
wedge socket has a tapered opening for the wire rope 
and a small wedge to fit into the tapered socket. The 
loop of wire rope must be installed in the wedge 
socket, so the standing part of the wire rope will form 
a nearly direct line to the clevis pin of the fitting. When 
a wedge socket is assembled correctly, it tightens as a 
load is placed on the wire rope. 




Figure 5-11.—A. Wedge socket B. Parts of a wedge socket. 


5-7 























NOTE: The wedge socket efficiency is 
approximately two thirds of the breaking strength of 
the wire rope due to the crushing action of the wedge. 

Basket Socket 

A basket socket is normally attached to the end of 
the rope with either molten zinc or babbitt metal; 
therefore, it is a permanent end fitting. In all 
circumstances, dry or poured, the wire rope should 
lead from the socket in line with the axis of the socket. 

DRY METHOD. — The basket socket can also& 
fabricated by the dry method [fig. 5- 12) when facilities 
are not available to make a poured fitting; however, its 
strength will be reduced to approximately one sixth of 
that of a poured zinc connection. 

POURED METHOD. — The poured basket 
socket Kfiq. 5-131 is the preferred method of basket 
socket assembly. Properly fabricated, it is as strong as 
the rope itself, and when tested to destruction, a wire 
rope will break before it will pull out of the socket. 
When molten lead is used vice zinc, the strength of the 
connection must be approximate] y three fourths of the 
strength of a zinc connection 


Permanent eyes in wire rope slings can also be 
made in 3/8- to 5/8-inch (9.5 to 15.9-mm) wire rope 
by using the nicopress portable hydraulic splicing tool 
and oval sleeves. The nicopress portable splicing tool 
Kfiq. 5-14)1 consists of a hand-operated hydraulic pump 
connected to a ram head assembly. Included as a part 
of the tool kit are interchangeable compression dies 
for wire sizes 3/8, 7/16, 1/2, 9/16, and 5/8 inch (9.5, 
11.1, 12.7, 14.3, and 15.9 mm). The dies are in 
machined halves with a groove size to match the oval 
sleeve and the wire rope being spliced. The oval 
sleeves l(fiq. 5-151 are available in plain copper or 
zinc-plated copper. 

To make an eye splice, pick an oval sleeve equal 
to the size of the wire rope being spliced. Slide the 
sleeve over the bitter end of the length of rope, then 
form an eye and pass the bitter end through the end 
again Kfiq. 5-161 . Next, place the lower half of the 
compression die in the ram head assembly. Place the 
oval sleeve in this lower half and drop in the upper half 
of the die. Fully insert the thrust pin that is used to hold 
the dies in place when making the swage. Start 
pumping the handle and continue to do so until the dies 
meet. At this time the overload valve will pop off, and 
a 100-percent efficient splice is formed [(fig. 5-171 1. 
Retract the plunger and remove the swaged splice. 


UNLAY STRANDS EQUAL TO TWICE 
THE LENGTH OF SOCKET 



BEND EACH 
WIRE OVER 
THE KNOT 


BIND ENDS 
WITH TWINE 


SWNP0231 



WRAP WITH 
TWINE TO 
FORM A KNOT 


DRIVE WIRE 
FIRMLY INTO 
SOCKET 


Figure 5-12.—Attaching a basket socket by the dry method. 


5-8 































SPREAD WIRES IN 
EACH STRAND 


UNLAY STRANDS 
EQUAL TO LENGTH 
OF SOCKET 



BEND EACH 
WIRE OVER 


© 




POUR IN MOLTEN 
ZINC OR BABBITT 


Figure 5-13.—Attaching a basket socket by the pouring method. 



RAM-HEAD 

ASSEMBLY 


Figure 5-14.—Nicopress portable splicing tool. 



Figure 5-15.—Oval sleeve. 


Check the swage with the gauge supplied in each 
die set |(fig. 5-18] . This process represents a 
savings in time over the eye formed by using wire 
rope clips. 



Figure 5-17.—Completed eye splice using an oval sleeve. 


5-9 


Additionally, lap splices can be made with 
nicopress oval sleeves Kfiq. 5-191 . Usually, two sleeves 
are needed to create a full-strength splice. A short 

























































2 - PULL UP SOME SLACK 
INTO A BACK TURN- 



Figure 5-18.—Swage gauge. 



LEAVE SPACE 

Figure 5-19.—Lap splice using a nicopress oval sleeve. 


space should be maintained between the two sleeves, 
as shown. The lap splice should be tested before being 
used. 


HANDLING AND CARE OF WIRE ROPE 


To render safe, dependable service over a 
maximum period of time, you should take good care 
and upkeep of the wire rope that is necessary to keep 
it in good condition. Various ways of caring for and 
handling wire rope are listed below. 

Coiling and Uncoiling 


SWNP0239 


3 - AND PASS IT UNDER 



Figure 5-20.—Throwing a back turn. 

reel helps keep the rope straight. During unreeling, 
pull the rope straight forward and avoid hurrying the 
operation. As a safeguard against kinking, NEVER 
unreel wire rope from a reel that is stationary. 

To uncoil a small coil of wire rope, simply stand 
the coil on edge and roll it along the ground like a 
wheel, or hoop [fig. 5-21,1 view B). NEVER lay the 
coil flat on the floor or ground and uncoil it by pulling 
on the end because such practice can kink or twist the 
rope. 

Kinks 


Once anew reel has been opened, it may be coiled 
or faked down, like line. The proper direction of 
coiling is counterclockwise for left lay wire rope and 
clockwise for right lay wire rope. Because of the 
general toughness and resilience of wire, it often tends 
to resist being coiled down. When this occurs, it is 
useless to fight the wire by forcing down the turn 
because the wire will only spring up again. But if it is 
thrown in a back turn, as shown ir l figure 5-201 it will 
lie down proper] y. A wire rope, when faked down, will 
run right off like line; but when wound in a coil, it must 
always be unwound. 

Wire rope tends to kink during uncoiling or 
unreeling, especially if it has been in service for a long 
time. A kink can cause a weak spot in the rope that 
wears out quicker than the rest of the rope. 

A good method for unreeling wire rope is to run a 
pipe, or rod, through the center and mount the reel on 
drum j acks or ot her supports, so the reel is off the 
ground llfia. 5-211 view A). In this way, the reel will 
turn as the rope is unwound, and the rotation of the 


One of the most common types of damage 
resulting from the improper handling of wire rope is 
the development of a kink. A kink starts with the 
formation of a loop |(fiq. 5-22) . 

A loop that has not been pulled tight enough to set 
the wires, or strands, of the rope into a kink can be 
removed by turning the rope at either end in the proper 
direction to restore the lay, as shown i r h figure 5^2^ . If 
this is not done and the loop is pulled tight enough to 
cause a kink I (fig. 5-241 , the kink will result in 
irreparable damage to the rope Kfiq. 5-251 . 

Kinking can be prevented by proper uncoiling and 
unreeling methods and by the correct handling of the 
rope throughout its installation. 

Reverse Bends 

Whenever possible, drums, sheaves, and blocks 
used with wire rope should be placed to avoid reverse 
or S-shaped bends. Reverse bends cause the individual 
wires or strands to shift too much and increase wear and 
fatigue. For a reverse bend, the drums and blocks affecting 


5-10 





























VIEW A 

UNREELING WIRE ROPE 



Figure 5-21.—A. Unreeling wire rope; B. Uncoiling wire rope. 



the reversal should be of a larger diameter than 
ordinarily used and should be spaced as far apart as 
possible. 

Sizes of Sheaves 

The diameter of a sheave should never be less than 
20 times the diameter of the wire rope. An exception 
is 6 by 37 wire for a smaller sheavethat can be used 
because this wire rope is more flexible. 


5-11 



rope 



Figure 5-24.—A wire rope kink. 



KINK DAMAGE 


Figure 5-25.—Kink damage. 

The chart shown in Itable 5-ll can be used to 
determine the minimum sheave diameter for wire rope 
of various diameters and construction. 

Seizing and Cutting 

The makers of wire rope are careful to lay each 
wire in the strand and each strand in the rope under 
uniform tension. When the ends of the rope are not 


Table 5-1.—Suggested Mininum Tread Diameter of sheaves 
and Drums 


Rope diameter in 
inches 

Minimum tread diameter in inches 
for given rope construction* 

6x7 

6x 19 

6x37 

8x19 

1/4. 

10 1/2 

8 1/2 

- - - 

61/2 

3/8. 

15 3/4 

12 3/4 

6 3/4 

9 3/4 

1/2. 

21 

17 

9 

13 

5/8. 

26 1/4 

21 1/4 

11 1/4 

16 1/4 

3/4. 

31 1/2 

25 1/2 

13 1/2 

19 1/2 

7/8. 

36 3/4 

29 3/4 

15 3/4 

22 3/4 

1 . 

42 

34 

18 

26 

11/8. 

47 1/4 

38 1/4 

20 1/2 

29 1/4 

11/4. 

52 1/2 

42 1/2 

22 1/2 

32 1/2 

11/2. 

63 

51 

27 

39 


♦Rope construction is in strands times wires per 
strand. 


secured properly, the original balance of tension is 
disturbed and maximum service cannot be obtained 
because some strands can carry a greater portion of the 
load than others. Before cutting steel wire rope, place 
seizing on each side of the point where the rope is to 
be cut, as shown ir l figure 5^261 

A rule of thumb for determining the size, number, 
and distance between seizing is as follows: 

1. The number of seizing to be applied equals 
approximately three times the diameter of the rope. 

Example: 3- x 3/4-inch-diameter rope = 2 1/4 
inches. Round up to the next higher whole number and 
use three seizings. 

2. The width of each seizing should be 1 to 1 1/2 
times as long as the diameter of the rope. 

Example: 1- x 3/4-inch-diameter rope=3/4 inch. 
Use a 1-inch width of seizing. 

3. The seizing should be spaced a distance equal 
to twice the diameter of the wire rope. 

Example: 2- x 3/4-inch-diameter rope = 1 1/2 
inches. Space the seizing 2 inches apart. 

A common method used to make a temporary wire 
rope seizing is as follows: 

Wind on the seizing wire uniformly, using tension 
on the wire. After taking the required number of turns, 
as shown in step 1, twist the ends of the wires 


5-12 



































TWIST PORTION 
NEAR MIDDLE 


C5^ 




© WRAP WITH SMALL 
WIRES 


© TWIST ENDS TOGETHER 
COUNTERCLOCKWAISE 


© TIGHTEN TWIST WITH 
NIPPERS 




SWNP0245 


CUTOFF ENDS 



© BEND TWISTED PORTION 
DOWN AGAINST ROPE 


Figure 5-26.—Seizing wire rope. 


counterclockwise by hand, so the twisted portion of 
the wires is near the middle of the seizing, as shown 
in step 2. Grasp the ends with end-cutting nippers and 
twist up the slack, as shown in step 3. Do not try to 
tighten the seizing by twisting. Draw up on the seizing, 
as shown in step 4. Again twist up the slack, using 
nippers, as shown in step 5. Repeat steps 4 and 5 if 
necessary. Cut the ends and pound them down on the 
rope, as shown in step 6. When the seizing is to be 
permanent or when the rope is 1 5/8 inches or more in 
diameter, use a serving bar, or iron, to increase tension 
on the seizing wire when putting on the turns. 

Wire rope can be cut successfully by a number of 
methods. One effective and simple method is to use a 
hydraulictypeof wire rope cutter, as shown in lfiqurel 
1 5-27.1 Remember that all wire should be seized before 
it is cut. For best results in using this method, place 
the rope in the cutter, so the blade comes between the 
two central seizings. With the release valve closed, 
jack the blade against the rope at the location of the 


cut and continue to operate the cutter until the wire 
rope is cut. 

INSPECTION 

Wire rope should be inspected at regular internals, 
the same as fiber line. The frequency of inspection is 
determined by the use of the rope and the conditions 
under which it is used. 

Throughout an inspection, the rope should be 
examined carefully for fishhooks, kinks, and worn and 
corroded spots. Usual] y breaks in individual wires will 
be concentrated in areas where the wire runs 
continually over the sheaves or bend onto the drum. 
Abrasion or reverse and sharp bends cause individual 
wires to break and bend back These breaks are known 
as fishhooks. When wires are slightly worn but have 
broken off squarely and stick out all over the rope, that 
condition is usually caused by overloading or rough 
handling. If the breaks are confined to one or two 


5-13 
















VIEW A 
HYDRAULIC 


normally caused by improper, infrequent, or no 
lubrication, the internal wires of the rope are often 
subject to extreme friction and wear. This type of 
internal and often invisible destruction of the wires is 
one of the most frequent causes of unexpected and 
sudden wire rope failure. To safeguard against this 
occurring, you should always keep the rope well 
lubricated and handle and store it properly. 

CLEANING AND LUBRICATING 
WIRE ROPE 



VIEW B 
HAMMER 


Figure 5-27.—Types of wire rope cutters: A. Hydraulic; B. 
Hammer. 


Wire rope should always be cleaned carefully 
before lubrication. Scraping or steaming removes 
most of the dirt and grit that has accumulated on used 
wire rope. Rust should be removed at regular intervals 
by wire brushing. The objective of cleaning is to 
remove all foreign material and old lubricant from the 
valleys between the strands as well as the spaces 
between the outer wires. This allows the new lubricant 
to flow into the rope. 

Wire rope bending around hoist drums and 
sheaves will wear like any other metal article, so 
lubrication is just as important to an operating wire 
rope as it is to any other piece of working machinery. 
For a wire rope to work right, the wires and strands 
must be free to move. Friction from corrosion or lack 
of lubrication shortens the service life of wire rope. 


strands, then the strength of the rope maybe seriously 
reduced. When 4 percent of the total number of wires 
in the rope are found to have breaks within the length 
of one lay of the rope, the rope is considered unsafe. 
Consider the rope unsafe when three broken wires are 
found in one strand of 6 by 7 rope, six broken wires in 
one strand of 6 b y 19 rope, or nine broken wires in one 
strand of 6 by 37 rope. 

Overloading a rope will reduce the diameter. 
Additionally, failure to lubricate wire rope will reduce 
thediameter. This occurs because the hemp core will 
eventually dry out and collapse or shrink. The 
surrounding strands are therefore deprived of support, 
and the strength and dependability of the rope are 
equally reduced. Rope that is 75 percent of its original 
diameter should be removed from service. 

When wide-spread pitting and corrosion of the 
wires are visible through inspection, the rope should 
be removed from service. Special care should be taken 
to examine the valleys and small spaces between the 
strands for rust and corrosion. Since corrosion is 


Deterioration from corrosion is more dangerous 
than that from wear because corrosion ruins the inside 
wires—a process hard to detect by inspection. 
Deterioration caused by wear can be detected by 
examining the outside wires of the wire rope because 
these wires become flattened and reduced in diameter 
as the wire rope wears. 

Both internal and external lubrication protects a 
wire rope against wear and corrosion. Internal 
lubrication can be properly applied only when the wire 
rope is being manufactured, and manufacturers 
customarily coat every wire with a rust-inhibiting 
lubricant, as it is laid into the strand. The core is also 
lubricated in manufacturing, 

Lubrication that is applied in the field is designed 
not only to maintain surface lubrication but also to 
prevent the loss of the internal lubrication provided by 
the manufacturer. The Navy issues an asphaltic 
petroleum oil that must be heated before using. This 
lubricant is known as Lubricating Oil for Chain, Wire 
Rope, and Exposed Gear and comes in two types: 


5-14 













• Type I, Regular: Does not prevent rust and is 
used where rust prevention is not needed; for example, 
elevator wires used inside are not exposed to the 
weather but need lubrication. 

• Type II, Protective: A lubricant and an 
anticorrosive that comes in three grades: grade A, for 
cold weather (60°F and below); grade B, for warm 
weather (between 60°F and 80°F); and grade C, for hot 
weather (80°F and above). 

The oil, issued in 25-pound and 35-pound buckets 
and in 100-pound drums, can be applied with a stiff 
brush, or the wire rope can be drawn through a trough 
of hot lubricant, as shown in i figure 5-28.1 The 
frequency of application depends upon service 
conditions; as soon as the last coating has appreciably 
deteriorated, it should be renewed. 

A good lubricant to use when working in the field, 
as recommended by COMSECOND/COMTFIIRD 
NCBINST 11200.11, is a mixture of new motor oil and 
diesel fuel at a ratio of 70-percent oil and 30-percent 
diesel fuel. The NAVFAC P-404 contains added 
information on additional lubricants that can be used. 

Never lubricate wire rope that works a dragline or 
other attachments that normally bring the wire rope in 
contact with soils. The reason is that the lubricant will 
pick up fine particles of material, and the resulting 
abrasive action will be detrimental to both the wire 
rope and sheave. 

As a safety precaution, always wipe off any excess 
when lubricating wire rope, especially with hoisting 
equipment. Too much lubricant can get into brakes or 
clutches and cause them to fail. While in use, the 



motion of machinery may sling excess oil around over 
crane cabs and onto catwalks, making them unsafe. 

STORAGE 

Wire rope should never be stored in an area where 
acid is or has been kept. This must be stressed to all 
hands. The slightest trace of acid or acid fumes coming 
in contact with wire rope will damage it at the contact 
spot. Wire that has given way has been found many 
times to be acid damaged. 

It is paramount that wire rope be cleaned and 
lubricated properly before placing it in storage. 
Fortunately, corrosion of wire rope can be virtually 
eliminated if lubricant is applied properly and 
sufficient protection from the weather is provided, 
Remember that rust, corrosion of wires, and 
deterioration of the fiber core will significantly reduce 
the strength of wire rope. Although it is not possible 
to say exactly the loss due to these effects, it is 
certainly enough to take precautions against. 


5-15 






CHAPTER 6 


RIGGING 


Rigging is the method of handling materials using 
fiber line, wire rope, and associated equipment. Fiber 
line and wire rope were discussed in chapters 4 and 5. 
We will now discuss how these materials and 
equipment can be used in various tackle and lever 
arrangements to form the fundamental rigging 
necessary to move heavy loads. Additionally, we 
discuss the makeup of block and tackle, reeving 
procedures, and common types of tackle 
arrangements. I nformation is also provided on other 
common types of weight-handling devices, such as 
slings, spreaders, pallets, jacks, planks and rollers, 
blocking and cribbing, and scaffolds. 

SAFETY is paramount in importance. You will be 
briefed throughout this chapter on safety measures to 
be observed as it pertains to the various operations or 
particular equipment we are discussing. Also, 
formulas are given for your use in calculating the 
working loads of various weight-moving devices, 
such as hooks, shackles, chains, and so on. SAFE 
rigging is the critical link in the weight-handling 
process. 

BLOCK AND TACKLE 

The most commonly used mechanical device is 
block and tackle. A block |(fiq. 6-l| ) consists of one or 
more sheaves fitted in a wood or metal frame 
supported by a shackle inserted in the strap of the 



Figure 6-1.—Parts of a fiber line block. 


block. A tackle is an assembly of blocks and lines used 
to gain a mechanical advantage in lifting and pulling. 

The mechanical advantage of a machine is the 
amount the machine can multiply the force used to lift 
or move a load. The strength of an individual 
determines the weight he or she can push or pull. The 
ability to push or pull is referred to as the amount of 
force the individual can exert. To move any load 
heavier than theforceyou can exert requires the use 
of a machine that can provide a mechanical advantage 
to multiply the force you can apply. If you use a 
machine that can produce a push or pull on an object 
that is 10 ti mes greater than the force you apply, the 
machine has a mechanical advantage of 10. For 
example, if the downward pull on a block-and-tackle 
assembly requires 10 pounds of force to raise 100 
pounds, the assembly has a mechanical advantage of 
10 . 

In a tackle assembly, the line is reeved over the 
sheaves of blocks. The two types of tackle systems are 
simple and compound. A simple tackle system is an 
assembly of blocks in which a single line is used Kfiq.l 
1 6-2,1 view A). A compound tackle system is an 
assembly of blocks in which more than one line is used 
Kfiq. 6-2,1 view B). 



Figure 6-2.—Tackles: A. Simple tackle; B. Compound tackle. 


6-1 






















The terms used to describe the parts of a tackle 
[fig. 6-3)1 and various assemblies of tackle are as 
follows: 

• The block(s) in a tackle assembly change(s) the 
direction of pull, provides mechanical advantage, or 
both. 

• The fall is either a wire rope or fiber line reeved 
through a pair of blocks to form a tackle. 

• The hauling part of the fall leads from the block 
upon which the power is exerted. 

• The fixed (or standing) block is the end which 
is attached to a becket. 

• The movable (or running) block of a tackle is 
the block attached to a fixed objector support. When a 
tackle is being used, the movable block moves and the 
fixed block remains stationary. 

• The frame (or shell), made of wood or metal, 
houses the sheaves. 

• The sheave is a round, grooved wheel over 
which the line runs. Usually the blocks have one, two, 
three, or four sheaves. Some blocks have up to eleven 
sheaves. 

• The cheeks are the solid sides of the frame or 
shell. 

• The pin is a metal axle that the sheave turns on. 
It runs from cheek to cheek through the middle of the 
sheave. 



Figure 6-3—Parts of a tackle. 


• The becket is a metal loop formed at one or both 
ends of a block; the standing part of the line is fastened 
to the becket. 

• The straps inner and outer) hold the block 
together and support the pin on which the sheaves 
rotate. 

• The shallow is the opening in the block through 
which the line passes. 

• The breech is the part of the block opposite the 
swallow. 

• To overhaul means to lengthen a tackle by 
pulling the two blocks apart. 

• To round in means to bring the blocks of a tackle 
toward each other, usually without a load on the tackle 
(opposite of overhaul). 

• The term two blocked means that both blocks 
of a tackle are as close together as they can go. You may 
also hear this term called block and block. 

BLOCK CONSTRUCTION 

Blocks are constructed for use with fiber line or 
wire rope. Wire rope blocks are heavily constructed 
and have large sheaves with deep grooves. Fiber line 
blocks are generally not as heavily constructed as wire 
rope blocks and have smaller sheaves with shallow, 
wide grooves. A large sheave is needed with wire rope 
to prevent sharp bending. Since fiber line is more 
flexible and pliable, it does not require a sheave as 
large as the same size that wire rope requires, 

According to the number of sheaves, blocks are 
called SINGLE, DOUBLE, OR TRIPLE blocks. 
Blocks are fitted with a number of attachments, such 
as hooks, shackles, eyes, and rinqs l Fiqure6-4| shows 



MANILA LINE WIRE ROPE 

SNATCH BLOCK DOUBLE BLOCK 

A B 


Figure 6-4.—Heavy-duty blocks. 


6-2 

















two metal framed, heavy-duty blocks. Block A is 
designed for manila line, and block B is for wire rope. 

BLOCK TO LINE RATIO 

The size of a fiber line block is designated by the 
length in inches of the shell or cheek. The size of 
standard wire rope block is controlled by the diameter 
of the rope. With nonstandard and special-purpose 
wire rope blocks, the size is found by measuring the 
diameter of one of its sheaves in inches. 

Use care in selecting the proper size line or wire 
for the block to be used. If a fiber line is reeved onto 
a tackle whose sheaves are below a certain minimum 
diameter, the line becomes distorted which causes 
unnecessary wear. A wire rope too large for a sheave 
tends to be pinched which damages the sheave. Also, 
the wire will be damaged because the radius of bend 
is too short. A wire rope too small for a sheave lacks 
the necessary bearing surface, puts the strain on only 
a few strands, and shortens the life of the wire. 

With fiber line, the length of the block used should 
be about three times the circumference of the line. 
However, an inch or so either way does not matter too 
much; for example, a 3-inch line may be reeved onto 
an 8-inch block with no ill effects. Normally, you are 
more likely to know the block size than the sheave 
diameter; however, the sheave diameter should be 
about twice the size of the circumference of the line 
used. 

Wire rope manufacturers issue tables that give the 
proper sheave diameters used with the various types 
and sizes of wire rope they manufacture. In the 
absence of these, a rough rule of thumb is that the 
sheave diameter should be about 20 times the diameter 
of the wire. Remember, with wire rope, it is the 
diameter, rather than circumference, and this rule 
refers to the diameter of the sheave, rather than to the 
size of the block, as with line. 

TYPES OF BLOCKS 

A STANDING BLOCK is a block that is 
connected to a fixed object. 

A TRAVELING BLOCK is a block that is 
connected to the load that is being lifted. It also moves 
with the load as the load is moved. 

A SNATCH BLOCl fWG^ is a single sheave 
block fabricated so the shell opens on one side at the 
base of the hook to allow a rope to slip over the sheave 
without threading the end through the block. Snatch 



WITH 

SWIVEL SHACKLE 
(CLOSED POSITION) 



Figure 6-5.—Snatch blocks. 


blocks are used when it is necessary to change the 
direction of pull on the line. 

REEVING BLOCKS 

To reeve blocks in simple tackle, you must first 
lay the blocks a few feet apart. The blocks should be 
placed down with the sheaves at right angles to each 
other and the becket bends pointing toward each other. 

To start reeving, lead the standing part of the falls 
through one sheave of the block that has the greatest 
number of sheaves. Begin at the block fitted with the 
becket. Next pass the standing part around the sheaves 
from one block to the other, making sure no lines are 
crossed until all sheaves have a line passing over them. 
Now secure the standing part of the falls at the becket 
of the block having the fewest number of sheaves, 
using a becket hitch for temporary securing or an eye 
splice for permanent securing. 

When blocks have two or more sheaves, the 
standing part of the fall should be led through the 
sheave closest to the center of the block. This places 
the strain on the center of the block and prevents the 
block from toppling and the lines from being chafed 
and cut through by rubbing against the edges of the 
block. 

Falls are normally reeved through 8-inch or 
10-inch wood or metal blocks, in such away as to have 
the lower block at right angles to the upper. Two 
3-sheave blocks are the traditional arrangement, and 
the method of reeving is shown in i figure 6-61 The 
hauling part has to go through the middle sheave of 
the upper block or the block will tilt to the side and the 
falls will jam under load. 


6-3 








Figure 6-6—Reeving two 3-sheave blocks. 


If a 3- and 2-sheave block rig is used, the method 
of reeving is almost the same Kfiq. 6-6)1 but the becket 
for the deadman must be on the lower instead of the 
upper block. 

You reeve the blocks before you splice in the 
becket thimble, or you will have to reeve the entire fall 
through from the opposite end. For the sake of 
appearance, if the becket block has a grommet, it is 
better to take it out and substitute a heart-shaped 
thimble. Splice it with a tapered eye splice, and worm, 
parcel, and serve the splice if you want a sharp-looking 
job. 

TYPES OF TACKLE 

SINGLE-WHIP tackle consists of one single 
sheave block (tail block), attached to a support with a 


line passing over the sheave Rim 6-7)1 . It has a 
mechanical advantage of 1, and if a load of 50 pounds 
were to be lifted, it would require 50 pounds of force 
to lift it, plus allowance for friction. 

A RUNNER is a single sheave movable block that 
is free to move along the line for which it is rove. It 
has a mechanical advantage of 2. 

A GUN TACKLE is made up of two single sheave 
blocks Kfiq. 6-81 The name of the tackle originated 
when it was being used in the old days of 
muzzle-loading guns. After the guns were fired and 
reloaded, this tackle was used to haul the guns back to 
the battery. 

A gun tackle has a mechanical advantage of 2. 
Therefore, to lift a gun weighing 200 pounds requires 
a force of 100 pounds without considering friction. 

By inverting any tackle, you should gain a 
mechanical advantage of 1. This occurs because the 
number of parts at the movable block has increased. 

By inverting a gun tackle, as an example, you 
should gain a mechanical advantage of 3 1 (fig. 6-9] , 
When a tackle is inverted, the direction of pull is 
always difficult. This can be overcome easily by using 
a snatch block, It changes the direction of pull but does 
not increase the mechanical advantage. 

A SINGLE-LUFF TACKLE consists of a double 
and a single block Kfiq. 6-101 . This type of tackle has 
a mechanical advantage of 3. 




Figure 6-7.—A single-whip tackle. 



Figure 6-8.—A gun tackle. 


6-4 
































SWNP0256 


Figure 6-9.—An inverted gun tackle. 

A TWOFOLD PURCHASE tackle consists of 
two double blocks lifTa. 6-111 It has a mechanical 
advantage of 4. 

A DOUBLE-LUFF tackle consists of a triple 
block and a double block |(fiq. 6-121 . It has a 
mechanical advantage of 5. 


SWNPC256 




Id 


Figure 6-11—A twofold purchase. 



Figure 6-10.—A single-luff tackle. 



Figure 6-12.—A double-luff tackle. 


6-5 



































A THREEFOLD PURCHASE consists of two 
triple blocks and has a mechanical advantage of 6 Kfiq.l 

[EH- 

A COMPOUND TACKLE is a rigging system 
using more than one line with two or more blocks. 
Compound systems are made up of two or more 
simple systems. The fall line from one simple 
system is secured to the hook on the traveling block 
of another simple system, which may have one or 
more blocks. 

To determine the mechanical advantage of a 
compound tackle system, you must determine the 
mechanical advantage of each simple system in the 
compound system. Next, multiply the individual 
advantages to get the overall mechanical advantage. As an 
example, two inverted luff tackles, each has a mechanical 
advantage of 4. Therefore, the mechanical advantage of 
this particular compound system is 4 x 4 = 16. 



Figure 6-13.—A threefold purchase. 


ALLOWANCE FOR FRICTION 

Because of friction, some of the force applied to 
tackle is lost. Friction develops in tackle by the lines 
rubbing against each other or the shell of the block. It 
is also caused by the line passing over the sheaves or 
by the rubbing of the pin against the sheaves. Each 
sheave in the tackle system is expected to create a 
resistance equal to 10 percent of the weight of the load. 
Because of fiction, a sufficient allowance for loss 
must be added to the weight being moved in 
determining the power required to move the load. 

As an example, you have to lift a 1,000-pound load 
with a twofold purchase. To determine the total force 
needed to lift the load, you take 10 percent of 1,000 
pounds, which is 100 pounds. This figure is multiplied 
by 4 (the number of sheaves), which gives you 400 
pounds. This value is added to the load; therefore, the 
total load is 1,400 pounds. This figure is divided by 4, 
the mechanical advantage of a twofold purchase, 
which results in 350 pounds being the force required 
to move the load. 

BLOCK SAFETY 

• Safety rules you should follow when using 
blocks and tackle are as follows: 

• Always stress safety when hoisting and moving 
heavy objects around personnel with block and tackle. 

• Always check the condition of blocks and 
sheaves before using them on a job to make sure they 
are in safe working order. See that the blocks are 
properly greased. Also, make sure that the line and 
sheave are the right size for the job. 

• Remember that sheaves or drums which have 
become worn, chipped, or corrugated must not be used 
because they will injure the line. Always find out 
whether you have enough mechanical advantage in the 
amount of blocks to make the load as easy to handle as 
possible. 

• You must NOT use wire rope in sheaves and 
blocks designed for fiber line. They are not strong 
enough for that type of service, and the wire rope will 
not properly fit the sheaves grooves. Likewise, sheaves 
and blocks built for wire rope should NEVER be used 
for fiber line. 

SLINGS 

Slings are widely used for hoisting and moving 
heavy loads. Some types of slings come already made. 
SI i ngs may be made of wi re rope, fi ber I i ne, or chai n. 


6-6 





















SLINGS AND RIGGING GEAR KITS 

The NCF has slings and rigging gear in the 
battalion Table of Allowance to support the rigging 
operations and the lifting of CESE. The kits 80104, 
84003, and 84004 must remain in the custody of the 
supply officer in the central toolroom (CTR). The 
designated embarkation staff and the crane test 
director monitor the condition of the rigging gear. The 
rigging kits must be stored undercover. 

WIRE ROPE SLINGS 

Wire rope slings offer advantages of both strength 
and flexibility. These qualities make wire rope 
adequate to meet the requirements of most crane 
hoisting jobs; therefore, you will use wire rope slings 
more frequently than fiber line or chain slings. 

FIBER LINE SLINGS 

Fiber line slings are flexible and protect the 
finished material more than wire rope slings; however, 
fiber line slings are not as strong as wire rope or chain 
slings. Also, fiber line is more likely to be damaged 
by sharp edges on the material being hoisted than wire 
rope or chain slings. 

CHAIN SLINGS 

Chain slings are frequently used for hoisting 
heavy steel items, such as rails, pipes, beams, and 
angles. They are also handy for slinging hot loads and 
handling loads with sharp edges that might cut the 
wire rope. 

Chain sizes, inspection, safe working load, and 
handling and care will be discussed after wire rope and 
fiber line, as their characteristics have been discussed 
in previous chapters. 

USING WIRE ROPE AND 
FIBER LINE SLINGS 

Three types of fiber line and wire rope slings 
commonly used for lifting a load are the ENDLESS, 
the SINGLE LEG, and the BRIDLE slings. 

An ENDLESS SLING, usually referred to by the 
term sling, can be made by splicing the ends of a piece 
of fiber line or wire rope to form an endless loop. An 
endless sling is easy to handle and can be used as a 

CHOKER HITCH r7fia~6^l4t . 


Figure 6-14.—Endless sling rigged as a choker hitch. 

A SINGLE-LEG SLING, commonly referred to 
as a strap, can be made by forming a spliced eye in 
each end of a piece of fiber line or wire rope. 
Sometimes the ends of a piece of wire rope are spliced 
into eyes around thimbles, and one eye is fastened to 
a hook with a shackle. With this arrangement, the 
shackle and hook are removable. 

The single-leg sling maybe used as a choker hitch 
[fig. 6-15,1 view A) in hoisting by passing one eye 
through the other eye and over the hoisting hook. The 
single-leg sling is also useful as a double-anchor hitch 
Kfiq. 6-15,1 view B). The double-anchor hitch works 


CHOKER HITCH 

A 



DOUBLE-ANCHOR 

HITCH 

B 


Figure 6-15.—Methods of using single-leg slings. 




6-7 













well for hoisting drums or other cylindrical objects 
where a sling must tighten itself under strain and lift 
by friction against the sides of the object. 

Single-leg slings can be used to make various 
types of BRIDLES. Three common uses of bridles are 
shown in i figure 6-16J Either two or more single slings 
may be used for a given combination. 

The bridle hitch provides excellent load stability 
when the load is distributed equally among each sling 
leg, the load hook is directly over the center of gravity 
of the load, and the load is raised level. The use of 
bridle slings requires that the sling angles be carefully 
determined to ensure that the individual legs are not 
overloaded. 


SLING INSPECTION 

All slings must be visually inspected for obvious 
unsafe conditions before each use. A determination to 
remove slings from service requires experience and 
good judgment, especially when evaluating the 
remaining strength in a sling after allowing for normal 
wear. The safety of the sling depends primarily upon 
the remaining strength. Wire rope slings must be 
immediately removed from service if any of the 
following conditions are present: 

• Six randomly distributed broken wires in one 
rope lay or three broken wires in one strand in one lay 

• Wear or scraping on one third of the original 
diameter of outside individual wires 


NOTE: It is wrong to conclude that a three- or 
four-leg bridle will safely lift a load equal to the safe 
load on one leg multiplied by the number of legs. This 
is because there is no way of knowing that each leg is 
carrying its share of the load. 

With a four-legged bride sling lifting a rigid load, it 
is possible for two of the legs to support practically the 
full load while the other two legs only balance it. COM- 
SECOND/COMTHIRDNCB strongly recommend 
that the rated capacity for two-leg bridle slings listed 
in the COM SECON D/COMTH I RDNCBI NST 
11200.11 be used also as the safe working load for 
three- or four-leg bridle hitches. 



• Kinking, crushing, bird caging, or any other 
damage resulting in distortion of the wire rope structure 

• Evidences of heat damage 

• 1 E nd attachments that are cracked, deformed, or 
worn 

• Hooks that have an obviously abnormal (usually 
15 percent from the original specification) throat 
opening, measured at the narrowest point or twisted 
more than 10 degrees from the plane of the unbent hook 

• Corrosion of the wire rope sling or end 
attachments 

To avoid confusion and to eliminate doubt, you 
must not downgrade slings to a lower rated capacity. 
A sling must be removed from service if it cannot 
safely lift the load capacity for which it is rated. Slings 
and hooks removed from service must be destroyed by 
cutting before disposal. This ensures inadvertent use 
by another unit. 

When a leg on a multi-legged bridle sling is 
unsafe, you only have to destroy the damaged or 
unsafe leg(s). Units that have the capability may 
fabricate replacement legs in the field, provided the 
wire rope replacement is in compliance with 
specifications. The NCF has a hydraulic swaging and 
splicing kit in the battalion Table of Allowance 
(TOA). The kit, 80092, contains the tools and 
equipment necessary to fabricate 3/8- through 
S/S-inch sizes of wire rope slings. Before use, all 
fabricated slings must be proof-tested as outlined in 
the COM SECON D/COMTH I RDNCBI NST 11200.11. 

PROOF TESTING SLINGS 

All field-fabricated slings terminated by 
mechanical splices, sockets, and pressed and swaged 


Figure 6-16.—Multi-legged bridle stings. 


6-8 














terminals must be proof-tested before placing the sling 
in initial service. 

The COMSECOND/COMTHI RDNCBI NST 
11200.11 has rated capacity charts enclosed for 
numerous wire rope classifications. You must know 
the diameter, rope construction, type core, grade, and 
splice on the wire rope sling before referring to the 
charts. The charts provide you the vertical-rated 
capacity for the sling. The test weight for single-leg 
bridle slings and endless slings is the vertical-rated 
capacity (V. R. C.) multiplied by two or (V.R.C. x 2 = 
sling test weight). 

The test load for multi-legged bridle slings must 
be applied to the individual legs and must be two times 
the vertical-rated capacity of a single-leg sling of the 
same size, grade, and wire rope construction. When 
slings and rigging are broken out of theTOA for field 
use, they must be proof-tested and tagged&fore being 
returned to CTR for storage. 

Check fiber line slings for signs of deterioration 
caused by exposure to the weather. Ensure none of 
the fibers have been broken or cut by sharp-edged 
objects. 

SLING SAFE WORKING LOADS 

There are formulas for estimating the loads in 
most sling configurations. These formulas are based 
on the safe working load of the single-vertical hitch of 
a particular sling. The efficiencies of the end fittings 
used also have to be considered when determining the 
capacity of the combination. 

The formula used to compute the safe working 
load (SWL) for a BRIDLE HITCH with two, three, 
or four legs Kfiq. 6-17] is SWL (of single-vertical 
hitch) times H (Height) divided by L (Length) 
times 2 =SWL. When the sling legs are not of equal 
length, use the smallest H/L measurement. This 
formula is for a two-leg bridle hitch, but it is strongly 
recommended it also be used for the three- and 
four-leg hitches. 

NOTE: Do NOT forget it is wrong to assume that 
a three- or four-leg hitch can safely lift a load equal to 
the safe load on one leg multiplied by the number of 
legs. 

Other formulas are as follows: 

Single-basket hitcl j (fiq. 6-18) : 

For vertical legs: 


SWL =SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x 2. 

For inclined legs: 

SWL =SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x H divided 
by L x 4. 

Double-basket hitc h (fiq. 6-19L 

For vertical legs: 

SWL =SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x 4. 

For inclined legs: 

SWL =SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x H divided 
by L x 4. 

Single-choker hitc h (fia. 6-201) : 

For sling angles of 45 degrees or more: 

SWL = SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x 3/4 (or 
.75). 

Sling angles of less than 45 degrees are not 
recommended; however, if they are used, the formula 
is as follows: 

SWL =SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x A/B. 

Double-choker hitc h (fia. 6-211 : 

For sling angle of 45 degrees or more: 

SWL =SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x 3 divided 
by 4 x H divided by L x 2. 

Sling angles of less than 45 degrees: 

SWL =SWL (of single-vertical hitch) x A divided 
by B x H divided by L x 2. 

When lifting heavy loads, you should ensure that 
the bottom of the sling legs is fastened to the load to 
prevent damage to the load. Many pieces of equipment 
have eyes fastened to them during the process of 
manufacture to aid in lifting. With some loads, though, 
fastening a hook to the eye on one end of each sling 
leg suffices to secure the sling to the load. 

Use a protective pad when a fiber line or wire rope 
sling is exposed to sharp edges at the comers of a load. 
Pieces of wood or old rubber tires are fine for padding. 

SLING ANGLE 

When using slings, remember that the greater the 
angle from vertical, the greater the stress on the sling 
legs. This factor is shown in | figure 6-221 


6-9 














pi 


m 


IH 


LOAD MAY BE SUPPORTED BY ON ONLY 2 LEGS 
WHILE OTHER LEGS BALANCE IT 
THEREFORE THE RECOMMENDED SWL IS 
SWL = SWL (OF SINGLE-VERTICAL HITCH) X_ti.X 2 

4-LEG L 


of bridle hitch sling capacity. 


STORAGE 

Wire rope slings and associated hardware must be 
stored either in coils or on reels, hung in the rigging 
loft, or laid on racks indoors to protect them from 
corrosive weather and other types of damage, such as 
kinking or being backed over. Slings are not to be left 
out at the end of the workday. 

CHAINS 

Chains are made up of links fastened through each 
other. Each link is fabricated of wire bent into an oval 
and welded toaether. The weld usually causes a sliaht 


I 














X_H_X 2 X 2 

L 


Figure 6-18.—Determination of single-basket hitch sting 
capacity. 

bulge on the side or end of the link. Chain size refers 
to the diameter, in inches, of the wire used to fabricate 
the chain. 

In theNCF, never usea chain when it is possible 
to use wire rope. Chain does not give any warning 
that it is about to fail. Wire rope, on the other hand, 


fails a strand at a time, giving you warning before 
failure actually occurs. 

NOTE: Although chain gives no warning of 
failure, it is better suited than wire rope for some jobs. 
Chain is more resistant to abrasion, corrosion, and 
heat. Additionally, use chains to lift heavy objects with 
sharp edges that could cut wire or are hot. When chain 
is used as a sling, it has littleflexibility but grips the 
load well. 

CHAIN INSPECTION 

First, you must be aware that chains normally 
stretch under excessive loading and individual links 
will be bent slightly. Therefore, bent links are a 
warning that the chain has been overloaded and may 
fail suddenly under load. Before lifting with a chain, 
make sure the chain is free from twists and kinks. A 
twisted or kinked chain placed under stress could fail 
even when handling a light load. Additionally, ensure 
that the load is properly seated in the hook (not on the 
point) and that the chain is free from nicks or other 
damage. Avoid sudden jerks in lifting and lowering the 
load, and always consider the angle of lift with a sling 
chain bridle. 

The strength of any chain is negatively affected 
when it has been knotted, overloaded, or heated to 
temperatures above 500°F. 



XHX4 

L 


Figure 6-19.—Determination of double-basket hitch sling capacity. 


6-11 



CHAIN SAFE WORKING LOADS 


WHEN THIS ANGLE IS GREATER 
THAN 45° SWL = SWL (OF SINGLE¬ 
VERTICAL HITCH) X 3/4 



-WHEN THIS ANGLE IS LESS THAN 45° SWL = SWL 
(OF SINGLE- VERTICAL HITCH) X A 

B 


To determine the safe working load on a chain, 
apply a factor of safety to the breaking strength. The 
safe working load is ordinarily one-sixth of the 
breaking strength, giving a safety factor of 6 [tabl el 

[ 13 . 

The capacity of an open link chain can be 
approximated by using the foil owing rule of thumb: 

SWL = 8D 2 x 1 ton 
Where: 

D = Smallest diameter measured in inches 

SWL = Safe working load in tons 
Example: 

Using the rule of thumb, the safe working capacity 
of a chain with a diameter of 3/4 inch is as follows: 

SWL = 8D 2 = 8 (3/4) 2 = 4.5 tons (or 9,000 lbs) 


Figure 6-20.—Determination of single-choker hitch sling 
capacity. 


These figures assume the load is being applied in 
a straight pull, rather than an impact. An impact load 
is when an object is suddenly dropped for a distance 



6-12 








































SWNP0269 


1000 LB 



^K. 


1000 LB 



Figure 6-22.—Stress on slings at various vertical angles. 


Table 6-1.—Safe Working Load of Chains 


Size* 

Approximate 
weight per linear 
foot in pounds 

Safe working 

oad in pounds 

Common iron 

High grade iron 

Soft steel 

Special steel 


0.8 

512 

563 

619 

1,240 

3/8 

1.7 

1,350 

1,490 

1,650 

3,200 

1/2 

2.5 

2,250 

2,480 

2,630 

5,250 

5/8- 

4.3 

3,470 

3,810 

4,230 

7,600 

3/4- 

5.8 

5,070 



10,500 

7/8 

8.0 



8,250 


1 

10.7 

9,300 

10,230 

10,600 

18,200 

1 1/8 

12.5 

9,871 

10,858 

11,944 

21,500 

1 1/4- 

16.0 

12,186 

13,304 

14,634 

26,300 

1 3/8 

18.3 

14,717 

16,188 

17,807 

32,051 


* Size listed is the diameter in inches of one side of a link. 


and stopped. The impact load is several times the 
weight of the load. 

HANDLING AND CARE OF CHAIN 

When hoisting heavy metal objects using chain for 
slings, you should insert padding around the sharp 
comers of the load to protect the chain links from 
being cut. 

Store chains in a clean, dry place where they will 
not be exposed to the weather. Before storage, apply a 
light coat of lubricant to prevent rust. 

Do NOT perform makeshift repairs, such as 
fastening links of a chain together with bolts or wire. 
When links become worn or damaged, cut them out of 
the chain, then fasten the two nearby links together 
with a connecting link. After the connecting link is 


closed, welding makes it as strong as the other links. 
For cutting small-sized chain links, use bolt cutters. 
To cut large-sized links, use a hacksaw. 

I nspect the chain to ensure it is maintained in a 
safe, operating condition. A chain used continuously 
for heavy loading should be inspected frequently. 
Chain is less reliablethan manila or wire rope slings 
because the links may crystallize and snap without 
warning. 

Examine the chain closely link by link and look 
for stretch, wear, distortion, cracks, nicks, and gouges. 
Wear is usually found at the ends of the links where 
joining links rub together. If you find wear, lift each 
link and measure its cross section. 

NOTE: Remove chains from service when any 
link shows wear more than 25 percent of the thickness 
of the metal. 


6-13 






























Replace any link that shows cracks, distortion, 
nicks, or cuts. However, if a chain shows stretching or 
distortion of more than 5 percent in a five-link section, 
discard and destroy the entire chain. 

Remove chains from service when any link shows 
signs of binding at juncture points. This binding 
condition indicates that the sides of the links have 
collapsed as a result of stretching. 

Before lifting with a chain, first place dunnage 
between the chain and the load to provide a gripping 
surface. For hoisting heavy metal objects with a chain, 
always use chaffing gear around the sharp comers on 
the load to protect the chain links from being cut. As 
chafing gear, use either planks or heavy fabric. In 
handling rails or a number of lengths of pipe, make a 
round turn and place the hook around the chain, as 
shown in | figure 6-231 



A. SLIP HOOK B. GRAB HOOK 

Figure 6-24.—Hooks: A. Slip; B. Grab. 


Grab Hooks 


ADDITIONAL LIFTING EQUIPMENT 

In addition to block and tackle, slings, and chains, 
hooks, shackles, and beam clamps are also used for 
lifting objects and material. 

HOOKS 


Grab hooks have an inside curve that is almost 
U-shaped so that the hook will slip over a link 
edgeways and not allow the next link to slip past. Grab 
hooks have a much more limited range of use than slip 
hooks. They are used exclusively when the loop 
formed in the chain is not intended to close around the 
load. 


There are two types of hooks available: the slip 
hook and the grab hook |(fiq. 6-241 . 


Mousing a Hook 


Slip Hooks 

Slip hooks are made so the inside curve of the 
hook is an arc of a circle. They are used with wire rope, 
chains, and fiber line. Chain links can slip through a 
slip hook so that the loop formed in the chain can 
tighten under a load. 


As a rule, a hook should always be moused as a 
safety measure to prevent si i ngs or I i ne from comi ng 
off. Mousing also helps prevent the straightening of a 
hook but does not add to the strength of the hook. To 
mouse a hook I (fig. 6-251 after the sling is on the hook 
you should wrap the wire or small stuff 8 or 10 turns 
around the two sides of the hook. Mousing is then 



Figure 6-23—Chain sting. 


Figure 6-25.—Mousing a hook. 


6-14 



























completed by winding several turns around the wire 
or small stuff and tying the ends securely. 

Inspection of Hooks 

Hooks should be inspected at least once a month, 
but those used for heavy and continuous loading 
should be inspected more frequently. Attention must 
be given to the small radius fillets at the neck of the 
hooks for any deviation for the original inner arc. 
Additionally, each hook must be examined for small 
dents, cracks, sharp nicks, worn surfaces, or 
distortions. If any of these defects are present, the 
hook must be discarded. 

Hook Strength 

Hooks normally fail by straightening. If any 
deviation of the inner arc of a hook is evident, it 
indicates that the hook has been overloaded. Evidence 
of overloading a hook is easy to detect, so it is 
customary to use a hook that is weaker than the chain 
it is attached to. Using this system, distortion of the 
hook will occur before the hook is overloaded. Any 
distorted, cracked, or badly worn hook is dangerous 
and should be discarded immediately. 

The safe working load of a hook can be formulated 
by using the following rule of thumb: 

SWL = 2/3 x D 2 x 1 ton. D is the diameter (in 
inches) of the hook where the inside of the hook starts 
to arc Kfiq. 6-~26l 

Below is an example of the safe working capacity 
of a hook with a diameter of 5/8 inch: 



Figure 6-26.—Hook diameter. 


D 2 = 5/8 X 5/8= 25/64 

SWL = 2/3 x 25/64 x 1 ton= 25/96= 0.2604 ton 

0.2604 ton x 2,000 pounds/ton= 520.8 pounds 

In the metric system, the formula for the safe 
working load for hooks is as follows: SWL = .46 x 
D 2 x 1 tonne 

Below is an example of the safe working capacity 
of a hook having a diameter of 1.59 cm. 

D = 1.59 cm 

D 2 = 2.52 cm 2 

SWL= .046 x 2.52 crrfx 1 tome = .116 tonne 
SHACKLES 

Shackles Rfig, 6-271 should be used for loads too 
heavy for hooks to handle. They provide a useful way 
of attaching, hauling, and lifting a load without tying 
directly to the object with a line, wire rope, or chain. 
Additionally, they can be attached to wire rope, line, 
or chain. 

Safe Working Load of Shackles 

The formula for computing the safe working load 
for a shackle is as follows: 

SWL = 3D 2 x 1 ton 
Example: 



Figure 6-27.—Two types of shackles: A. Anchor; B. Chain. 


6-15 














D = 5/8 (Se dfiq. 6-28) 

D 2 = 5/8 X 5/8= 25/64 

SWL = 3 X 25/64 x 1 ton = 75/64 x 1 ton=1.1719 

tons 

The SWL in pounds = 1.1719 x 2,000 pounds = 
2,343.8 pounds 

In the metric system, the formula for the safe 
working load 

for shackles is as follows: 

SWL = .417 X D 2 X 1 tonne 

Example: 

D= 1.59cm 

D 2 = 1.59 X 1.59 =2.52 

SWL = .417 x 2.52 x 1 tonne 

SWL = 1.05 tomes 

NOTE: A hook or a shackle can actually lift more 
than these formulas allow. These formulas give you 
the safe working load UNDER ANY CONDITIONS. 

Mousing Shackles 

Mouse shackles whenever there is danger of the 
shackles pin working loose or coming out due to 
vibration. To mouse a shackle properly, you take 
several turns with seizing wire through the eye of the 
pin and around the bow of the shackle. fFiqure 6-291 
shows what a properly moused shackle looks like. 


SWNP0276 



Figure 6-29.—Mousing a shackle. 


BEAM CLAMPS 


Steelworkers are required to move and handle 
many steel beams and steel shapes. When off-loading 
steel from vehicles and storing for further use, beam 
clamps are much more practical than using slings or 
chokers, especially when the flanges are the only 
available parts of the load l Figure 6-30| shows three 
different types of beam clamps. View A shows a clamp 
designed for use on a beam with a flat flange, either 
an I or an H. The clamp in view B may be used on 
beams with a circular cross-sectional area or where 
only one side of the flange is accessible. View C shows 
a clamp that is useful for connection to a column with 
a snatch block attached. The clamps shown can all be 
fabricated in the shop or field. 


Hooks, shackles, and beam clamps must have the 
rated capacities and SWL permanently stenciled or 
stamped on them. OSHA identification tags can be 
acquired at no cost from COMTHIRDNCB DET, Port 
Hueneme, California, or COMSECONDNCB DET, 
Gulfport, Mississippi. Metal dog tags are authorized 
providing the required information is stamped onto the 
tags. 


OTHER LIFTING EQUIPMENT 



Other devices used for moving equipment are as 
follows: spreader bars, pallets, jacks, planks and 
rollers, blocks and cribbing, and scaffolds. 



Figure 6-28.—Shackle diameter. 


Figure 6-30.—Types of beam clamps. 


6-16 












SPREADER BARS 


I n hoisting with slings, spreader bars are used to 
prevent crushing and damaging the load. Spreader 
bars are short bars, or pipes, with eyes fastened to each 
end. By setting spreader bars in the sling legs above 
the top of the load [fig, 6-311 , you change the angle of 
the sling leg and avoid crushing the load, particularly 
in the upper portion. 

Spreader bars are also used in lifting long or 
oversized objects to control the sling angle, as shown 
in i figure 6-lZl When spreader bars are used, make sure 
you do not overload the end connection. A spreader 
bar has a rated capacity that is the same as hooks and 
shackles. A good rule of thumb is the thickness of the 
spreaders end connection should be the same as the 
thickness of the shackle pin. 

PALLETS 

Cargo pallets coupled with slings are an immense 
advantage on jobs that involve moving a lot of small 
items |(fiq. 6-331 Spreader bars can be used often to 
avoid damaging the pallet and the load. The pallet 
supplies a small platform on which a number of items 
can be placed and then moved as a whole instead of 
piece by piece. Palletizing is clearly easier and faster 
than moving each item by itself. 

Commonly, packages of the same size are 
palletized together, and when shipped, remain on the 
pallet until they are used up. You may not have the 
luxury of having excess pallets at your job site; 



Figure 6-31.—Using spreader bars. 



Figure 6-32.—Spreader bar used with an oversized load. 



Figure 6-33.—Cargo pallet. 


however, you need to have several to work efficiently. 
One can be loaded as the prior loaded one is being 
lifted. After each pallet is unloaded, the hoist will 
return for reloading. With two pallets, you are able to 
maintain a steady flow of material. One set of slings 
will be able to handle any number of pallets. 

JACKS 

To be able to place cribbing, skids, and rollers, you 
need to be able lift a load a short distance. J acks are 
designed and built for this purpose. J acks are also used 
for precise placement of heavy loads, such as beams, 
or for raising and lowering heavy loads a short 


6-17 



































distance. There are a number of different styles of 
jacks available; however, only heavy-duty hydraulic 
jacks or screw jacks should be used. The number of 
jacks used is determined by the weight of the load and 
the rated capacity of the jacks. Ensure the jacks have 
a solid footing and are not susceptible to slipping. 

J acks are available in capacities from 5 to 100 
tons. Small capacity jacks are normally operated 
through a rack bar or screw, and large capacity jacks 
areusually operated hvdraulical N (fig, 6-341) . 

The types of jacks used by Steelworkers are as 
follows: 

1. Ratchet lever jacks are rack bar jacks having a 
rated capacity of 15 tons. Thesejacks have a foot lift by 
which loads close to the base of the jack can be engaged 
|(fiq. 6-34J view A). 

2. Steamboat ratchets (often referred to as pushing 
and pulling jacks) are ratchet screw jacks of 
10-ton-rated capacity with end fittings that permit 
pulling parts together or pulling them apart. They are 
primarily used for tightening lines or lashings and for 
spreading or bracing parts in bridge construction Kfiq.l 

I 6-34] view B). 

3. Screw jacks have a rated capacity of 12 tons. 
They are approximately 13 inches high when closed and 
have a safe rise of 7 inches. Thesejacks are used for 
general purposes, including steel erection Ufig. 6-341 
view C). 



Figure 6-35—Use of planks and rollers. 


4. Hydraulic jacks are available in many different 
capacities and are used for general purposes ITfio. 6-341 
view D). 

PLANKS AND ROLLERS 


Planks and rollers provide you with an excellent 
means of moving heavy loads across the ground on a 
jobsite or the floor of a shop Kfiq. 6-351 . 

Oak planks are appropriate for most operations 
involving plank skids. Planks 15 feet long and 2 to 3 
inches thick should be suitable. They distribute the 
weight of a load and also provide a smooth runway 
surface in which to skid the load along or in which to 
use rollers to ease the effort required to move the load. 



SWNP0281 

Figure 6-34.—Mechanical and hydraulic jacks: A. Ratchet lever jack with foot lift; B. Steamboat ratchet; C. Screw Jack; D. 

Hydraulic jack. 


6-18 





















Timber skids (planks) are placed longitudinally 
under heavy loads to distribute the weight over a 
greater area. (Se dfia. 6-35.1) The angle of the skids 
must be kept low to prevent the load from drifting or 
getting out of control. Skids can be greased only when 
horizontal movement is involved. Extreme care must 
be exercised. In most circumstances greasing is 
inherently dangerous, as it can cause the load to drift 
sideways suddenly, causing injuries to personnel and 
damage to equipment. 

Hardwood or pipe rollers can be used in 
conjunction with plank skids for moving heavy loads 
into position. Planks are placed under the rollers to 
provide a smooth continuous surface to enable them 
to roll easily. The rollers must be smooth and round to 
aid in the ease of movement and long enough to pass 
completely under the load. The load should be 
supported by longitudinal wooden members to 
provide a smooth upper surface for the rollers to roll 
on. The skids placed underneath must form continuous 
support. Normal practice is to place four to six rollers 
under the load to be moved. Several rollers are to be 
placed in front of the load and the load is then slowly 
rolled onto these rollers. As the load passes the rollers 
that are left clear of the load they are then picked up 
and moved in front of the load. This creates a 
continuous path of rollers. Turns can be made using 
rollers; but, first the front rollers must be inclined 
slightly in the direction of the turn and the rear of the 
rollers in the opposite direction. This inclination of the 
rollers can be made by striking them sharply with a 
sledge hammer. Rollers can be fabricated and set on 
axles in side beams as a semipermanent conveyor for 
lighter loads. Permanent metal roller conveyors are 
avai I able |(fi q. 6-36] and are normally fabricated in 
sections which can bejoined together. 

BLOCKING AND CRIBBING 

Block timbers are commonly used to provide a 
foundation for heavy loads or jacks. Cribbing must be 
used when a heavy weight must be supported at a 
height greater than blocking can provide. Cribbing is 
made up by aligning timber in tiers that run in alternate 
directions Kfiq. 6-371 . Blocking and cribbing is often 
necessary as a safety measure to keep an object 
stationary to prevent accidents and injury to personnel 
working near these heavy objects. 



Figure 6-36.—Permanent metal roller conveyor. 



Figure 6-37.—Examples of the use of cribbing. 

Additionally, it must be placed firmly on the ground 
with the load (pressure) distributed evenly. 


When selecting blocking as a foundation for jacks, 
ensure it is sound and large enough to support the load 
safely. It must be free from grease and thoroughly dry. 


6-19 


A firm and level foundation is a paramount 
requirement where cribbing is used. Also, equally as 































































critical is that the bottom timbers be placed so they 
rest evenly and firmly on the ground. 

Cribbing is desirable when lifting loads by jacking 
stages. This procedure requires blocking to be placed 
under thejacks, lifting the load to the maximum height 
the jacks can safely accommodate, placing the 
cribbing under the load in alternating tiers, with no 
personnel under the load, and then lowering the load 
onto the cribbing. 

When cribbing is not high enough or at the correct 
height, build up the blocking under thejacks until the 
jacks can bear against the load while in their lowered 
position. Raise the jacks again to their maximum safe 
height and lower onto the added cribbing. This 
procedure can be repeated as many times as necessary 
to build up the cribbing to the desired height. 

SCAFFOLDS 

The term scaffold refers to a temporary elevated 
platform used to support personnel and materials, for 
immediate usage, throughout the course of 
construction work. You will use scaffolds in 
performing various jobs which cannot be done safely 
from securely placed ladders. We will take a brief look 
at a few of the different types of scaffolds which you 
will need from time to time on the job. 

Planking and Runway Scaffold 

A planking and runway scaffold shown in 
I figure 6-38~l consists of single scaffold planks laid 
across beams of upper floors or roofs. It is frequently 
used to provide working areas or runways. Each plank 
should extend from beam to beam, and not more than 
a few inches of the planks should extend beyond the 
end supporting beam. A short overhang is essential to 
safe practice to prevent personnel from stepping on an 
unsupported plank and falling from the scaffold. 
Planks should be thick enough to support the load 
safely and applied without excessive sagging. When 
the planking is laid continuously, as in a runway, make 
sure the planks are laid so that their ends overlap. 
Single plank runs may be staggered with each plank 
being offset with reference to the next plank in the run. 

Swinging Platform Scaffold 

The most commonly used type of swinging 
scaffolding is the platform scaffold shown in | fiqurel 
6-39. The swinging platform scaffold consists of a 
frame with a deck of wood slats. The platform is 



Figure 6-38.—A planking and runway scaffold. 


supported near each end by iron rods, called stirrups, 
which have the lower blocks of fiber line fall attached 
to them. This tackle arrangement permits the platform 
to be raised or lowered as required. The tackle and 
platform are supported by hooks and anchors on the 
roof of the structure. The fall line of the tackle must 
be secured to a part of the platform when in final 
position to prevent it from falling. 



Figure 6-39.—A platform scaffold. 


6-20 








Needle-Beam Scaffold 

A needle-beam scaffold consists of a plank 
platform resting on two parallel horizontal beams, 
called needle beams, which are supported by lines 
from overhead. (Se ^fid. 6-401 ) 

Needle-beam scaffolds should be used on-l y for the 
support of personnel doing light work. They are 
suitable for use by riveting gangs working on steel 
structures because of the frequent changes of location 
necessary and the adaptability of this type of scaffold 
to different situations. 

Several types of patent and independent 
scaffolding are available for simple and rapid 
assembly, as shown in i figure 6-41[ The scaffold 
uprights are braced with diagonal members, and the 




Figure 6-41.—Assembling prefabricated independent 
scaffolding. 


working level is covered with a platform of planks. All 
bracing must form triangles, and the base of each 
column requires adequate footing plates for bearing 
area on the ground. The patented steel scaffolding is 
usually erected by placing the two uprights on the 
ground and inserting the diagonal members. The 
diagonal members have end fittings, which permit 
easy assembly. The first tier is set on steel bases on the 
ground, and a second tier is placed in the same manner 
on the first tier with the bottom of each upright locked 
to the top of the lower tier. A third and fourth upright 
can be placed on the ground level and locked to the 
first set with diagonal bracing. The scaffolding can be 
built as high as desired, but high scaffolding should be 
tied into the main structure. 

Boatswain’s Chair 

The boatswain's chair shown in i figure 6-42l also 
comes under the heading of scaffolding. It is 
sometimes used to provide a seat for a person working 
above the ground. 

The seat of the boatswain's chair should be at least 
2 feet long, 1 foot wide, and 11/4 inches thick (60 cm 


Figure 6-40.—A needle-barn scaffold. 


6-21 












































Figure 6-42.—A boatswain’s chair. 


long, 30 cm wide, and 3.1 cm thick). Make sure you 
always wear a safety belt when using a boatswain's 
chair. Thesafety belt should be attached to a lifeline 
secured to a fixed object overhead. Use a bowline to 
secure the lifeline to the person in the chair. 


should extend a suffient distance beyond the edge of 
the scaffold to catch any material that may fall over 
the edge. A netting of screen should not be less than 
No. 18 gauge, U.S. Standard Wire, with a mesh not to 
exceed 1/2 inch. Screens of heavier wire or smaller 
mesh should bex used where conditions are such that 
the No. 18 gauge wire or 1/2-inch mesh will not suppl y 
adequate protection. Personnel should NOT be 
required to work underneath a scaffold. Scaffolds 
erected over passageways, thoroughfares, or locations 
where persons are working should be provided with 
side screens and a protective covering. A side screen 
is a screen paneling from the platform to an 
intermediate railing or from the platform to the top 
railing. Screening is formed of No. 16 U.S. gauge wire 
with 1/2-inch mesh. Screen is used for the purpose of 
preventing materials, loose or piled, from falling off 
the scaffolds. 

A safe means of access should be provided to all 
scaffolds by means of standard stairs or fixed ladders. 
Additionally, ensure that a scaffold is properly secured 
against swaying. 


NOTE: A BOATSWAIN' S CHAIR SHOULD 
BE USED ONLY IF OTHER MEANS ARE NOT 
AVAILABLE. 

Scaffold Safety 

When you are using scaffolds, SAFETY is your 
NUMBER ONE PRIORITY! Failure to observe safety 
precautions can result in serious injury to yourself or 
coworkers. Some essential safety measures applicable 
to scaffolds are given here. Use each of them routinely. 
THINK SAFETY! Be a SAFE WORKER! 

Structural members, support ropes, and scaffold 
equipment must be inspected carefully each workday 
before using them on the job. The use of makeshift 
scaffolds is strictly prohibited. 

When personnel are working on a scaffold with 
other personnel engaged directly above, either the 
scaffold must have an overhead protective covering or 
the workers on the lower scaffold must wear 
Navy-approved, protective hard hats. The purpose is 
to provide protection against falling material. Where 
the upper working level is no more than 12 feet (3.6 
m) above the lower, hard hats worn by workers on the 
lower level will satisfy this requirement. 


Personnel should not be permitted on scaffolds 
which are covered with ice or snow. In such instances, 
clinging ice must be removed from all guardrails, then 
the planking sanded or otherwise protected against 
slipping. Workers should not be permitted on scaffolds 
during a storm or high wind. 

No scaffold should be used for the storage of 
materials, except that required for the immediate 
needs of the job. Tools should be placed in containers 
to prevent their being knocked off and the containers 
should be secured to the scaffold by line. Always make 
a special effort to ensure that tools, equipment, 
material, and rubbish do not accumulate on a scaffold 
to the point where the safe movement of personnel is 
jeopardized. 

NEVER throw or drop objects or tools from 
scaffolds. Handlines should be used for raising or 
lowering objects when they cannot be reached easily 
and safely by hand. Such things as jumping or 
throwing material upon a scaffold platform are to be 
avoided at all times. 

Scaffolds must never be overloaded! 
Furthermore, whenever possible, see that the scaffold 
load is uniformly distributed and not concentrated at 
the center of the platform. 


An overhead protective covering consists of a roof 
of lumber, heavy wire screen, or heavy canvas, 
depending upon the hazard involved. The covering 


6-22 


Wire ropes and fiber lines used in suspension and 
swinging scaffolds should be of the best quality steel, 
manila, or sisal. Manila or sisal line used as lifelines 


should be 1 7/8 inches (51.2 mm) in circumference. 
Lifelines and safety belts must be used when working 
on unguarded scaffolds at heights of 10 feet (3 m) and 
above (as well as on boatswain's chairs, as explained 
earlier). If working over water, lifejackets must be 
worn. 

All scaffolds and scaffold equipment should be 
maintained in safe condition. Avoid making repairs or 
alterations to a scaffold or scaffold equipment while 
in use. Rather than take a chance, NEVER permit 
personnel to use damaged or weakened scaffolds! 

FIELD-ERECTED HOISTING DEVICES 

Because of the nature of heavy construction, 
Steel workers must at times erect heavy structural 
members when constructing pre-engineered 
buildings, piers, bridges, and many other components 
related to Advanced Base Functional Components 
(ABFC). These members are usually hoisted into 
position using cranes, forklifts, or other construction 
equipment. In contingency/ combat operations, 
however, because of operational commitments this 
equipment may not be available and structural 
members must be hoisted without the use of heavy 
equipment. We will now discuss some of the methods 
which can be used for the erection process when heavy 
equipment is not available. 

The term field-erected hoisting da/ice refers to a 
device that is constructed in the field, using material 
available locally, for the purpose of hoisting and 
moving heavy loads. Basically, it consists of a 
block-and-tackle system arranged on a skeleton 
structure consisting of wooden poles or steel beams. 
The tackle system requires some form of machine 


power or work force to do the actual hoisting. The 
three types of field-erected hoisting devices used are 
gin poles, tripods, and shears. The skeleton structure 
of these devices are anchored to holdfasts. 

HOLDFASTS 

Gin poles, shear legs, and other rigging devices 
are held in place by means of guy lines anchored to 
holdfasts. In fieldwork, the most desirable and 
economical types of holdfasts are natural objects, such 
as trees, stumps, and rocks. When natural holdfasts of 
suffient strength are not available, proper anchorage 
can be provided through the use of man-made 
holdfasts. These include single picket holdfasts, 
combination picket holdfasts, combination log picket 
holdfasts, log deadmen, and steel picket holdfasts. 

Natural Types of Holdfasts 

When using trees, stumps, or boulders as 
holdfasts, you should always attach the guys near 
ground level. The strength of the tree, stump, or 
boulder size is also an important factor in determining 
its suit ability as a holdfast. With this thought in mind, 
NEVER use a dead tree or a rotten stump or loose 
boulders and rocks. Such holdfasts are unsafe because 
they are likely to snap or slip suddenly when a strain 
is placed on the guy, Make it a practice to lash the first 
tree or stump to a second one Kfia. 6-431 . This will 
provide added support for the guy. 

Rock holdfasts are made by inserting pipes, 
crowbars, or steel pickets in holes drilled in solid rock. 
Using a star drill, drill holes in the rock 1 1/2 to 3 feet 
apart, keeping them in line with the guy. Remember to 
drill the holes at a slight angle so the pickets lean away 


ROUND TURN AND 
TWO HALF HITCHES 



GUY UNE WITHOUT BLOCK 

Figure 6-43.—Using trees as a holdfast. 


GUY UNE WITH BLOCK 


6-23 




from the direction of pull. Make the front hole about 
1 1/2 to 3 feet deep and the rear hole 2 feet deep 
(fig. 6-44). After driving pickets into the holes, you 
should secure the guy to the front picket. Then lash the 
pickets together with a chain or wire rope to transmit 
the load. 

Single-Picket Holdfasts 

Pickets used in the construction of picket holdfasts 
may be made of wood or steel. A wood picket should 
be at least 3 inches in diameter and 5 feet long. A 
single picket holdfast can be provided by driving a 


picket 3 to 4 feet into the ground, slanting it at an angle 
of 15 degrees opposite to the pull. In securing a single 
guy line to a picket, you should take two turns around 
the picket and then have part of the crew haul in on the 
guy as you take up the slack. When you have the guy 
taut, secure it with two half hitches. I n undisturbed 
loam soil, the single picket is strong enough to stand 
a pull of about 700 pounds. 

Combination Picket Holdfast 

A combination picket holdfast consists of two or 
more pi cket i~F iaure 6-4$ gives you an idea of how to 


0 DRIVE PIPES, CROWBARS, OR STEEL PICKETS INTO HOLES 




SINGLE PICKET 



1-1-1 COMBINATION 



3-2-1 COMBINATION 
Figure 6-45.—Combination pickets. 


6-24 



























arrange pickets in constructing a 1-1-1 and a 3-2-1 
combination picket holdfast. 

In constructing the 1-1-1 combination !(fig. 6-461) , 
drive three single pickets about 3 feet into the ground, 
3 to 6 feet apart, and in line with the guy. For a 3-2-1 
combination, drive a group of three pickets into the 
ground, lashing them together before you secure the 
guy to them. The group of two lashed pickets follows 
the first group, 3 to 6 feet apart, and is followed by a 
single picket. The 1-1-1 combination can stand a pull 
of about 1,800 pounds, while the 3-2-1 combination 
can stand as much as 4,000 pounds. 

The pickets grouped and lashed together, PLUS 
the use of small stuff secured onto every pair of 
pickets, are what make the combination picket 
holdfasts much stronger than the single holdfasts. 

The reason for grouping and lashing the first 
cluster of pickets together is to reinforce the point 


where the pull is the greatest. The way small stuff links 
each picket to the next is what divides the force of pull, 
so the first picket does not have to withstand all of the 
strain. Using 12- to 15-thread small stuff, clove hitch 
it to the top of the first picket. Then take about four to 
six turns around the first and second pickets, going 
from the bottom of the second to the top of the first 
picket. Repeat this with more small stuff from the 
second to the third picket, and so on, until the last 
picket has been secured. After this, pass a stake 
between the turns of small stuff, between EACH pair 
of pickets, and then make the small stuff taut by 
twisting it with the stake. Now, drive the stake into the 
ground. 

If you are going to use a picket holdfast for several 
days, it is best to use galvanized guy wire in place of 
the small stuff. Rain will not affect galvanized guy 
wire, but it will cause small stuff to shrink. If the small 
stuff is already taut, it could break from overstrain. 


(T) DRIVE PICKETS (STEEL OR WOOD) INTO 
GROUND 15° MINIMUM FROM VERTICAL 



LASH PICKETS TOGETHER, 
STARTING AT TOP OF 
FIRST PICKET 



( 7 ) TWIST ROPE WITH RACK 
STICK, THEN DRIVE STICK 
INTO GROUND 


© COMPLETED PICKET 
HOLDFAST 



Figure 6-46.—Preparing a 1-1-1 picket holdfast. 


6-25 








Still, if you must use small stuff, be sure to slack it off 
before leaving it overnight. You do this by pulling the 
stake up, untwisting the small stuff once, and then 
replacing the stake. 

Combination Log Picket Holdfast 

For heavy loads or in soft- or wet-earth areas, a 
combination log picket holdfast is frequently used. 
With this type, the guys are anchored to a log or timber 
supported against four or six combination picket 
holdfasts. (Se dfiq. 6-47.1) The timber serves as beam 
and must be placed so that it bears evenly against the 
front rope of the pickets. Since the holding power of 
this setup depends on the strength of the timber and 
anchor line, as well as the holdfast, you must use a 
timber big enough and an anchor line strong enough 
to withstand the pull. 

Deadman 

A deadman provides the best form of anchorage 
for heavy loads. It consists of a log, a steel beam, a 
steel pipe, or a similar object buried in the ground with 
the guy connected to it at its center. (Se &fiq. 6-48[ ) 
Because it is buried, the deadman is suitable for use as 
a permanent anchorage. When you are installing a 


permanent deadman anchorage, it is a good idea to put 
a turnbuckle in the guy near the ground to permit 
slackening or tightening the guy when necessary. 

In digging the hole in which to bury the deadman, 
make sure it is deep enough for good bearing on solid 
ground. The less earth you disturb in digging, the 
better the bearing surface will be. You should undercut 
the bank in the direction toward the guy at an angle of 
about 15 degrees from the vertical. To increase the 
bearing surface, drive stakes into the bank at several 
points over the deadman. 

A narrow, inclined trench for the guy must be cut 
through the bank and should lead to the center of the 
deadman. At the outlet of the trench, place a short 
beam or logon the ground under the guy. I n securing 
the guy to the center of the deadman, see that the 
standing part (that is, the part on which the pull occurs) 
leads from the bottom of the log deadman. Thus, if the 
wire rope clips slip under strain, the standing part will 
rotate the log in a counterclockwise direction, causing 
the log todig into the trench, rather than roll up and 
out. See that the running end of the guy is secured 
properly to the standing part. 



Figure 6-47.—A combination log picket 


6-26 








Figure 6-48.—A deadman anchorage for a heavy load. 


Steel Picket Holdfast 

The steel picket holdfast shown in i figure 6-491 
consists of steel box plates with nine holes drilled 
through each and a steel eye welded on the end for 
attaching the guy. When you are installing this 
holdfast, it is important to drive steel pickets through 
the holes in such a manner that will cause them to 
clinch in the ground. You will find the steel picket 
holdfast especially useful for anchoring horizontal 
lines, such as the anchor cable on a pontoon bridge. 
The use of two or more of the units in combination 
provides a stronger anchorage than a single unit. 

GIN POLES 

A gin pole consists of an upright mast which is 
guyed at the top to maintain it in a vertical or nearly 
vertical position and is equipped with suitable hoisting 
tackle. The vertical mast can be timber, a wide-flange 
steel beam section, a railroad rail, or similar members 
of suffient strength to support the load being lifted. 
The load can be hoisted by hand tackle or by the use 
of hand- or engine-driven hoists. The gin pole is 
predominately used in erection work because of the 
ease with which it can be rigged, moved, and operated, 
and it is suitable for raising loads of medium weight 


to heights of 10 to 50 feet where only a vertical lift is 
required. The gin pole can also be used to drag loads 
horizontally toward the base of the pole in preparation 
for a vertical lift. It cannot be drifted (inclined) more 
than 45 degrees from the vertical or seven-tenths the 
height of the pole, nor is a gin pole suitable for 
swinging a load horizontal y. The length and thickness 
of the gin pole depends on the purpose for which it is 
installed. It should not be longer than 60 times its 
minimum thickness because of the tendency to buckle 
under compression. A usable rule is to allow 5 feet of 
pole for each inch of minimum thickness. ! Table 6-21 
lists values for the use. of spruce timbers as gin poles 
with allowance for normal stresses in hoisting 
operations. 

NOTE: Safe capacity of each length shears or 
tripod is seven-eighths of the value given for a gin 
pole. 

1. Rigging. When rigging a gin pole, lay out the 
pole with the base at the exact spot where it is to be 
erected. To make provisions for the guy lines and tackle 
blocks, place the gin pole on cribbing for ease of 
lashinq JTiqure 6-501 shows the lashing on top of a gin 
pole and the method of attaching guys. The procedure 
is as follows: 


6-27 









ANCHORAGE IS PROVIDED BY NINE STEEL PICKETS 
DRIVEN THROUGH HOLES IN THE PLATE 


Figure 6-49.—A steel picket holdfast. 


Table 6-2.—Safe Capacity of Spruce Timber as Gin Poles in Normal Operations. 


Size of 
timber in 
inches 

Safe capacity in pounds for given length of timber 

20 feet 

25 feet 

30 feet 

40 feet 

50 feet 

60 feet 

6 dia 

5,000 

3,000 

2,000 




8 dia 


11,000 

8,000 

5,000 

3,000 


10 dia 

31,000 

24,000 

16,000 

9,000 

6,000 


12 dia 



31,000 

19,000 

12,000 

9,000 

6x6 

6,000 

4,000 

3,000 




8x8 


14,000 

10,000 

6,000 

4,000 


10 x 10 

40,000 

30,000 

20,000 

12,000 

8,000 


12 x 12 



40,000 

24,000 

16,000 

12,000 


a. Make a tight lashing of eight turns of fiber 
rope about 1 foot from the top of the pole, with two of 
the center turns engaging the hook of the upper block 
of the tackle. Secure the ends of the lashing with a 
square knot. Nail wooden cleats (boards) to the pole 


flush with the lower and upper sides of the lashing to 
prevent the lashing from slipping. 

b. Lay out guy ropes, each one four times the 
length of the gin pole. I n the center of each guy rope, 


6-28 

























CLEAT 


CLOVE HITCH IN EACH GUY ROPE 


GUY LINES 



CLEAT 


Figure 6-50.—Lashing for a gin pole. 


form a clove hitch over the top of the pole next to the 
tackle lashing, and be sure the guy lines are aligned in 
the direction of their anchors. 

c. Lash a block to the gin pole about 2 feet from 
the base of the pole, the same as was done for the tackle 
lashing at the top, and place a cleat above the lashing to 
prevent slipping. This block serves as a leading block 
on the fall line which allows a directional change of pull 
from the vertical to the horizontal. A snatch block is the 
most convenient type to use for this purpose. 

d. Reeve the hoisting tackle and use the block 
lashed to the top of the pole so that the fall line can be 
passed through the leading block at the base of the gin 
pole. 


e. Drive a stake about 3 feet from the base of 
the gin pole. Tie a rope from the stake to the base of the 
pole below the lashing on the leading block and near the 
bottom of the pole. This is to prevent the pole from 
skidding while it is being erected. 

f. Check all lines to be sure that they are not 
tangled. Check all lashings to see that they are made up 
properly, and see that all knots are tight. Check the 
hooks on the blocks to see that they are moused 
properly. The gin pole is now ready to be erected. 

2. Erecting. A gin pole40 feet long can be raised 
easily by hand, but longer poles must be raised by 
supplementary rigging or power equipment. !Figure! 
16-51 j hows a gin pole being erected. The numbe of men 


6-29 










































needed depends on the weight of the pole. The 
procedure is as follows: 

a. Dig a hole about 2 feet deep for the base of 
the gin pole. 

b. Run out the guys to their respective 
anchorages and assign a man to each anchorage to 
control the slack in the guy line with a round turn around 
the anchorage as the pole is raised. If it has not been 
done already, install an anchorage for the base of the 
pole. 

c. If necessary, the tackle system used to raise 
and lower the load can be used to assist in raising the 
gin pole, but the attaching of an additional tackle system 
to the rear guy line is preferable. Attach the running 
block of the rear guy line tackle system lTfiq. 6-52D to 
the rear guy line end which at this point is near the base 
of the gin pole. The fixed or stationary block is then 
secured to the rear anchor. The fall line should come out 
of the running block to give greater mechanical 
advantage to the tackle system. The tackle system is 
stretched to the base of the pole before it is erected to 
prevent the chocking of the tackle blocks during the 
erection of the gin pole. 

d. Keep a slight tension on the rear guy line, 
and on each of the side guy lines, haul in on the fall line 
of the tackle system whileeight men (more for larger 
poles) raise the top of the pole by hand until the tackle 
system can take control. 

e. The rear guy line must be kept under tension 
to prevent the pole from swinging and throwing all of 
its weight on one of the side guys. 


f. When the pole is in its final position, 
approximately vertical or inclined as desired make all 
guys fast to their anchorages with the round turn and 
two half hitches. It is often advantageous to double the 
portion of rope used for the half hitches. 

g. Open the leading block at the base of the gin 
pole and place the fall line from the tackle system 
through it. When the leading block is closed, the gin 
pole is ready for use. If it is necessary to move (drift) 
the top of the pole without moving the base, it should 
be done when there is no load on the pole unless the 
guys are equipped with tackle. 

3. Operating. The gin pole is perfectly suited to 
vertical lifts. It also is used under some circumstances 
for lifting and pulling at the same time so that the load 
being moved travels toward the gin pole just off the 
ground. When used in this manner, a snubbing line of 
some kind must be attached to the other end of the load 
being dragged and kept under tension at all times. Tag 
lines are to be used to control loads being lifted 
vertically. A tag line is a light line fastened to one end 
of the load and kept under slight tension during hoisting. 

TRIPODS 

A tripod consists of three legs lashed or secured at 
the top. The advantage of the tripod over other rigging 
installations is its stability, and it requires no guy lines 
to hold it in place. The disadvantage of a tripod is that 
the load can be moved only up and down. The load 
capacity of a tripod is approximately 11/2 times that 
of shears made of the same-size material. 



6-30 










Figure 6-52.—Hoisting with a gin pole. 


1. Rigging. There are two methods of lashing a 
tripod, either of which is suitable provided the lashing 
material is strong enough. The material used for lashing 
can be fiber rope, wire rope, or chain. Metal rings joined 
with short chain sections and large enough to slip over 
the top of the tripod legs also can be used. The method 


described below is for fiber rope 1 inch in diameter or 
smaller. Since the strength of the tripod is affected 
directly by the strength of the rope and the lashing used, 
more turns than described below should be used for 
extra heavy loads and fewer turns can be used for light 
loads. 


6-31 








Procedure 

a. Select three masts of approximately equal 
size and place a mark near the top of each mast to 
indicate the center of the lashing. 

b. Lay two of the masts parallel with their tops 
resting on a skid or block and a third mast between the 
first two, with the butt in the opposite direction and the 
lashing marks on all three in line. The spacing between 
masts should be about one half or the diameter of the 
spars. Leave the space between the spars so that the 
lashing will not be drawn too tight when the tripod is 
erected. 

c. With a 1-inch rope, make a clove hitch 
around one of the outside masts about 4 inches above 
the lashing mark, and take eight turns of the line around 
the three masts Kfia. 6-53)1 Be sure to maintain the space 
between the masts while making the turns. 

d. Finish the lashing by taking two close 
trapping turns around the lashing between each pair of 
masts. Secure the end of the rope with a clove hitch on 
the center mast just above the lashing. Frapping turns 
should not be drawn too tight. 

Al ternate procedure 

a. An alternate procedure |(fiq. 6-54| can be 
used when slender poles not more than 20 feet long are 
being used or when some means other than hand power 
is available for erection. 

b. Lay the three masts parallel to each other 
with an interval between them slightly greater than 


SPACING BETWEEN SPARS SHOULD BE ABOUT 
ONE HALF OF THE DIAMETER OF THE SPARS 



SWNP0300 


Figure 6-53.—Lashing for a tripod. 


Figure 6-54.—Alternate lashing for a tripod. 

twice the diameter of the rope to be used. Rest the tops 
of the poles on a skid so that the ends project over the 
skid approximately 2 feet and the butts of the three 
masts are in line. 

c. Put a clove hitch on one outside leg at the 
bottom of the position the lashing will occupy, which 
should be approximately 2 feet from the end. Weave the 
line over the middle leg, under and around the outer leg, 
under the middle leg, over and around the first leg, and 
continue this weaving for eight turns. Finish with a 
clove hitch on the outer leg. 

2. Erecting. The legs of a tripod in its final position 
should be spread so that each leg is equidistant Kfiq.l 

1 6-55] from the others. This spread should not be less 
than one half nor more than two thirds of the length of 
the legs. Chain, rope, or boards should be used to hold 
the legs in this position. A leading block for the fall line 
of the tackle can be lashed to one of the legs. The 
procedure is as follows: 

a. Raise the tops of the masts about 4 feet, 
keeping the base of the legs on the ground. 

b. Cross the two outer legs. The third or center 
leg then rests on top of the cross. With the legs in this 
position, pass a sling over the cross so that it passes over 
the top or center leg and around the other two. 

c. Hook the upper block of a tackle to the sling 
and mouse the hook. 

d. Continue raising the tripod by pushing in on 
the legs as they are lifted at the center. Eight men should 
be able to raise an ordinary tripod into position. 

e. When the tripod legs are in their final 
position, place a rope or chain lashing between the legs 
to hold them from shifting. 

3. Erecting Large Tripods. For larger tripod 
installations it maybe necessary to erect a small gin pole 
to raise the tripod into position. Tripods, lashed with the 



Vv V vv Y-v 


HITCH 


6-32 






































Figure 6-55.—Tripod assembled for use. 


three legs laid together, must be erected by raising the 
tops of the legs until the legs clear the ground so they 
can bespread apart. Guy lines or tag lines should be 
used to assist in steadying the legs while they are being 
raised. The outer legs should be crossed so that the 
center leg is on the top of the cross, and the sling for the 
hoisting tackle should pass over the center leg and 
around the two outer legs at the cross. 

SHEARS 

Shears, made by lashing two legs together with a 
rope, is well adapted for lifting heavy machinery or 
other bulky loads. It is formed by two members 
crossed at their tops with the hoisting tackle suspended 
from the intersection. The shears must be guyed to 
hold it in position. The shears is quickly assembled 
and erected. It requires only two guys and is adapted 
to working at an inclination from the vertical. The 
shear legs can be round poles, timbers, heavy planks, 
or steel bars, depending on the material at hand and 
the purpose of the shears. For determining the size of 


the members to be used, the load to be lifted and the 
ratio of the length and diameter of the legs are the 
determining factors. For heavy loads the 
length-diameter (L/ d) ratio should not exceed 60, 
because of the tendency of the legs to bend, rather than 
to act as columns. For light work, shears can be 
improvised from two planks or light poles bolted 
together and reinforced by a small lashing at the 
intersection of the legs. 

1. Rigging. In erection, the spread of the legs 
should equal about one half of the height of the shears. 
The maximum allowable drift (inclination) is 45 
degrees. Tackle blocks and guys for shears are essential. 
The guy ropes can be secured to firm posts or trees with 
a turn of the rope so that the length of the guys can be 
adjusted easily. The procedure is as follows: 

a. Lay two timbers together on the ground in 
line with the guys with the butt ends pointing toward 
the back guy and close to the point of erection. 

b. Place a large block under the tops of the legs 
just below the point of lashina flTfa. 6-561 . and insert a 
small spacer block between the tops at the same point. 
The separation between the legs at this point should be 
equal to one third of the diameter on one I eg to make 
handling of the lashing easier. 

c. With sufficient 1-inch rope for 14 turns 
around both legs, make a clove hitch around one mast, 
and take 8 turns around both legs above the clove hitch. 
Wrap the turns tightly so that the lashings are made 
smooth and without kinks. 

d. Finish the lashing by taking two trapping 
turns around the lashing between the legs and securing 
the end of the rope to the other leg just below the lashing. 
For handling heavy loads the number of lashing turns 
is increased. 

2. Erecting. Holes should be dug at the points 
where the legs of the shears are to stand. I n case of 
placement on rocky ground, the base for the shears 
should be level. The legs of the shears should be crossed 
and the butts placed at the edges of the holes. With a 
short length of rope, make two turns over the cross at 
the top of the shears and tie the rope together to form a 
sling. Be sure to have the sling bearing against the masts 
and not on the shears lashing entirely. The procedures 
is as follows: 

a. Reeve a set of blocks and place the hook of 
the upper block through the sling. Secure the sling in 
the hook by mousing. Fasten the lower block to one of 
the legs near the butt, so it will be in a convenient 


6-33 









Figure 6-56.—Lashing for shears. 


position when the shears have been raised, but will be 
out of the way during erection. 

b. If the shears are to be used on heavy lifts, 
another tackle is rigged in the base guy near its 
anchorage. The two guys should be secured to the top 
of the shears with clove hitches to legs opposite their 
anchorages above the lashing. 

c. Several men (depending on the size of the 
shears) should lift the top end of the shear legs and 
"walk" them up by hand until the tackle on the rear guy 
line can take affect. After this, the shear legs can be 
raised into final position by hauling in on the tackle. 
Secure the front guy line to its anchorage before raising 
the shear legs and keep a slight tension on this line to 
control movement. (Se fefia. 6-571 ) 

d. The legs should be kept from spreading by 
connecting them with rope chain, or bards. It can be 
necessary, under some conditions, to anchor each leg of 


the shears during erection to keep the legs from sliding 
in the wrong direction. 

3. Operating. The rear guy is a very important part 
of the shears rigging, as it is under a considerable strain 
when hoisting. The front guy has very little strain on it 
and is used mainly to aid in adjusting the drift and to 
steady the top of the shears when hoisting or placing the 
load. It maybe necessary to rig a tackle in the rear guy 
for handling heavy loads. In operation, the drift 
(inclination of the shears) desired is set by adjustment 
of the rear guy, but this should not be done while a load 
is on the shears. For handling light loads, the fall line of 
the tackle of the shears can be led straight out of the 
upper block. When heavy loads are handled, you should 
lash a snatch block Kfiq. 6-58) near the base of one of 
the shear legs to act as a leading block, The fall line 
should be run through the leading block to a hand- or 
power-operated winch for heavy loads. 


6-34 















SWNP0304 


Figure 6-57.—Erecting shears 


RIGGING SAFE OPERATING 
PROCEDURES 

All personnel involved with the use of rigging 
gear should be thoroughly instructed and trained to 
comply with the following practices: 

1. Wire rope slings must not be used with loads that 
exceed the rated capacities outlined in enclosure (2) of 
the COMSECOND/COMTHI RDNCBI NST 11200.11. 
Slings not included in the enclosure must be used only 
according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 

2. Determine the weight of a load before 
attempting any lift. 

3. Select a sling with sufficient capacity rating. 

4. Examine all hardware, equipment, tackle, and 
slings before using them and destroy all defective 
components. 

5. Use the proper hitch. 


6. Guide loads with a tag line when practical. 

7. When using multiple-leg slings, select the 
longest sling practical to reduce the stress on the 
individual sling legs. 

8. Attach the sling securely to the load. 

9. Pad or protect any sharp comers or edges the 
sling can come in contact with to prevent chaffing. 

10. Keep slings free of kinks, loops, or twists. 

11. Keep hands and fingers from between the sling 
and the load. 

12. Start the lift slowly to avoid shock loading 
slings. 

13. Keep slings well lubricated to prevent 
corrosion. 

14. Do not pull slings from under a load when the 
load is resting on the slings; block the load up to remove 
slings. 


6-35 




15. Do not shorten a sling by knotting or using wire 
rope clips. 

16. Do not inspect wire rope slings by passing bare 
hands over the rope. Broken wires, if present, can cause 
serious injuries. When practical, leather palm gloves 
should be worn when working with wire rope slings. 

17. Center of Balance. It is very important that in 
the rigging process that the load is stable. A stable load 
is a load in which the center of balance of the load is 
directly below the hook, as shown in | figure 6-591 When 
a load is suspended, it will always shift to that position 
below the hook. To rig a stable load, establish the center 


of balance (C/B). Once you have done this, simply 
swing the hook over the C/B and select the length of 
slings needed from the hook to the lifting point of the 
load. 


18. When using a multi-legged bridle sling, do not 
forget it is wrong to assume that a three- or four-leg 
hitch will safely lift a load equal to the safe load on one 
leg multiplied by the number of legs. With a four-legged 
bridle sling lifting a rigid load, it is possible for two of 
the legs to support practically the full load whilethe 
other two only balance it I (fig. 6-601 . 


6-36 


















I 




Figure 6-59.—Example of a load shifting when lifted. 



Figure 6-60.—Multi-legged bridle sling lifting a load. 


NOTE: If all the legs of a multi-legged sling are 
not required, secure the remaining legs out of the way, 
as shown in i figure 6-611 



Figure 6-61.—Secure sling legs that are not used. 


6-37 











CHAPTER 7 


REINFORCING STEEL 


As a Steelworker, you must be able to cut, bend, 
place, and tie reinforcing steel. This chapter describes 
the purpose of reinforcing steel in concrete 
construction, the types and shapes of reinforcing steel 
commonly used, and the techniques and tools used by 
Steelworkers in rebar (reinforcing steel) work. This 
chapter begins with a presentation of fundamental 
information about concrete to help you understand 
rebar work fully. 

REINFORCED CONCRETE 

As a Steelworker you will be primarily concerned 
with reinforcing steel placement but you should to 
some extent, be concerned with concrete as well. 
Concrete with reinforcing steel added becomes 
reinforced concrete. Structures built of reinforced 
concrete, such as retaining walls, buildings, bridges, 
highway surfaces, and numerous other structures, are 
referred to as reinforced concrete structures or 
reinforced concrete construction. 

CONCRETE MATERIALS 

Concrete is a synthetic construction material made 
by mixing cement, fine aggregate (usually sand), 
coarse aggregate (usually gravel or crushed stone), 
and water in proper proportions. This mixture hardens 
into a rocklike mass as the result of a chemical reaction 
between the cement and water. Concrete will continue 
to harden and gain strength as long as it is kept moist 
and warm. This condition allows the chemical reaction 
to continue and the process is known as curing. 
Durable, strong concrete is made by the correct 
proportioning and mixing of the various materials and 
by proper curing after the concrete is placed . 

The correct proportioning of the concrete 
ingredients is often referred to as the mix. The quality 
of the concrete is largely determined by the quality of 
the cement-water paste that bonds the aggregates 
together. The strength of concrete will be reduced if 
this paste has water added to it. The proportion of 
water to cement is referred as the water-cement ratio. 
The water-cement ratio is the number of gallons of 
water per pounds of cement. H igh-quality concrete is 


produced by using the lowest water-cement mixture 
possible without sacrificing workability. 

Because concrete is plastic when it is placed 
forms are built to contain and form the concrete until 
it has hardened I n short forms and formwork are 
described as molds that hold freshly placed concrete 
in the desired shape until it hardens. All the ingredients 
of the mix are placed in a concrete mixer, and after a 
thorough mixing, the concrete is transferred by 
numerous methods, such as by bucket, by 
wheelbarrow, and so forth, into the formwork in which 
the reinforcing steel has already been placed. 

Concrete reaches its initial set in approximately 1 
hour under normal conditions and hardens to its final 
set in approximately 6 to 12 hours. Before the initial 
set, concrete must be placed in the forms and vibrated 
to consolidate it into the formwork and ensure 
complete coverage of all reinforcing bars. Finish 
operations, such as smooth troweled finishes, must be 
performed between initial and final set. After the final 
set, concrete must be protected from shock, extreme 
temperature changes, and premature drying until it 
cures to sufficient hardness. Concrete will be 
self-supportive in a few days and attain most of its 
potential strength in 28 days of moist curing . For 
further information on concrete, refer to Builder 3 & 
2, Volume 1, NAVEDTRA 12520. 

CONCRETE STRENGTH 

As stated previously, the strength of concrete is 
determined by the water-cement ratio. The strength of 
ready-mixed concrete ranges from 1,500 to about 
5,000 pounds per square inch (psi); and, with further 
attention paid to proportioning, it can go even higher. 
Under usual construction processes, lower strength 
concrete will be used in footers and walls and higher 
strength in beams, columns, and floors. The required 
strength of concrete on a given project can be found 
in the project plans and specifications for a specific 
project. 

NOTE: Quality control is important to ensure 
specific design requirements are met. If the design 
specifications do not meet minimum standards, 
structural integrity is compromised and the structure 


7-1 



is considered unsafe. For this reason, the compressive 
strength of concrete is checked on all projects. 

The strength of the concrete is checked by the use 
of cylindrical molds that are 6 inches in diameter and 
12 inches in height. Concrete samples must betaken 
on the jobsite from the concrete that is being placed. 
After being cured for a time period that ranges 
between 7 to 28 days, the cylinders are "broken to 
failure" by a laboratory crushing machine that 
measures the force required for the concrete to fail. 
For further information on concrete strength and 
testing, refer to Engineering Aid 3, NAVEDTRA 
10696, and NAVFAC MO 330. (The MO 330 should 
be maintained in a battalion's tech library.) 

PURPOSES AND TYPES OF 
REINFORCING STEEL 

Reinforced concrete was designed on the principle 
that steel and concrete act together in resisting force. 

Concrete is strong in compression but weak in 
tension. The tensile strength is generally rated about 
10 percent of the compression strength. For this 
reason, concrete works well for columns and posts that 
are compression members in a structure. But, when it 
is used for tension members, such as beams, girders, 
foundation walls, or floors, concrete must be 
reinforced to attain the necessary tension strength. 

Steel is the best material for reinforcing concrete 
because the properties of expansion for both steel and 
concrete are considered to be approximate] y the same; 
that is, under normal conditions, they will expand and 
contract at an almost equal rate. 

NOTE: At very high temperatures, steel expands 
more rapidly than concrete and the two materials will 
separate. 

Another reason steel works well as a 
reinforcement for concrete is because it bonds well 
with concrete. This bond strength is proportional to 
the contact surface of the steel to the concrete. I n other 
words, the greater the surface of steel exposed to the 
adherence of concrete, the stronger the bond. A 
deformed reinforcing bar adheres better than a plain, 
round, or square one because it has a greater bearing 
surface. In fact, when plain bars of the same diameter 
are used instead of deformed bars, approximately 40 
percent more bars must be used. 

The rougher the surface of the steel, the better it 
adheres to concrete. Thus steel with a light, firm layer 
of rust is superior to clean steel; however, steel with 


loose or scaly rust is inferior. Loose or scaly rust can 
be removed from the steel by rubbing the steel with 
burlap or similar material. This action leaves only the 
fi rm layer of rust on the steel to adhere to the concrete. 

NOTE: Reinforcing steel must be strong in 
tension and, at the same time, be ductile enough to be 
shaped or bent cold. 

Reinforcing steel can be used in the form of bars 
or rods that are either plain or deformed or in the form 
of expanded metal, wire, wire fabric, or sheet metal. 
Each type is useful for different purposes, and 
engineers design structures with those purposes in 
mind. 

Plain bars are round in cross section. They are 
used in concrete for special purposes, such as dowels 
at expansion joints, where bars must slide in a metal 
or paper sleeve, for contraction joints in roads and 
runways, and for column spirals. They are the least 
used of the rod type of reinforcement because they 
offer only smooth, even surfaces for bonding with 
concrete. 

Deformed bars differ from the plain bars in that 
they have either indentations in them or ridges on 
them, or both, in a regular pattern. The twisted bar, for 
example, is made by twisting a plain, square bar cold. 
The spiral ridges, along the surface of the deformed 
bar, increase its bond strength with concrete. Other 
forms used are the round and square corrugated bars. 
These bars are formed with projections around the 
surface that extend into the surrounding concrete and 
prevent slippage. Another type is formed with 
longitudinal fins projecting from the surface to 
prevent twistin d. Figure 7-1 shows a few of the types 
of deformed bars available. In the United States, 
deformed bars are used almost exclusively; while in 
Europe, both deformed and plain bars are used. 



SWNPCBOe 



Figure 7-1.—Various types of deformed bars. 


7-2 

















Eleven standard sizes of reinforcing bars are in use 
todav l Table 7-11 lists the bar number, area in square 
inches, weight, and nominal diameter of the 11 standard 
sizes. Bars No. 3 through 11 and 14 and 18 are all 
deformed bars l Table 7-21 lists the bar number, area in 
square inches and millimeters, weight in pounds per foot 
as well as kilograms per meter, and nominal diameter of 
the 8 standard metric sizes. At various sites overseas, 


rebar could be procured locally and could be metric. 

I Table 7-3l is given for comparison. Remember that bar 
numbers are based on the nearest number of 
one-eighth inch included in the nominal diameter of 
the bar. To measure rebar, you must measure across 
the round/square portion where there is no 
deformation. The raised portion of the deformation is 
not measured when measuring the rebar diameter. 


Table 7-1.—U.S. Standard Reinforcing Bars 


U.S. Standard Reinforcing Steel Bars 

Bar Size 
Designation 

Area Square 
Inches 

Weight lb 

Per Foot 

Diameter 

inches 

mm 

m 

.11 

.376 

.375 

9.53 

m 

.20 

.668 

.500 

12.7 

#5 

.31 

1.043 

.625 

15.88 

■#6 

.44 

1.502 

.750 

19.05 

#7 

.60 

2.044 

.875 

22.23 

m 

.79 

2.670 

1.000 

25.40 

m 

1.00 

3.400 

1.128 

28.58 

#10 

1.27 

4.303 

1.270 

31.75 

#L1 

1.56 

5.313 

1.410 

34.93 

#14 

2.25 

7.650 

1.693 

43.00 

#18 

4.00 

13.600 

2.257 

57.33 


Table 7-2.—Metric Reinforcing Bars 


METRIC REINFORCING STEEL BARS 

BAR SIZE 

DESIGNATION 

AREA 

WEIGHT 

DIAMETER 

Sq. Inches 

Sq. mm 

Lb Per Ft 

KG/M 

Inches 

mm 

10m 

.16 

100 

.527 

.785 

.445 

11.3 

15m 

.31 

200 

1.054 

2.355 

.630 

16.0 

20m 

.47 

300 

1.563 

2..355 

.768 

19.5 

25m 

.78 

500 

2.606 

3.925 

.992 

25.2 

30m 

1.09 

700 

3.649 

5.495 

1.177 

29.9 

35m 

1.55 

1000 

5.213 

7.850 

1.406 

35.7 

45m 

2.33 

1500 

7.820 

11.775 

1.710 

43.7 

55m 

3.88 

2500 

13.034 

19.625 

2.220 

56.4 


7-3 











































Table 7-3—Comparison of U.S. Customary and Metric Rebar 


U.S. Standard Bar 

Metric Bar 

Metric 

Bar Size 

Area Sq. Inches 

Bar Size 

Area Sq. Inches 

Bar is: 

m 

.11 

10m 

.16 

45% larger* 

#4 

.20 

10m 

.16 

20% smaller 

m 

.20 

15m 

.31 

55% larger 

#5 

.31 

15m 

.31 

Same 

#6 

.44 

20m 

.47 

6.8% larger 

#7 

.60 

20m 

.47 

22% smaller 

#7 

.60 

,25m 

.78 

30% larger 

m 

.79 

25m 

.78 

1.3% smaller 

m 

1.00 

30m 

1.09 

9% larger 

#10 

1.27 

30m 

1.09 

14% smaller 

#10 

1.27 

35m 

1.55 

22% larger 

#L1 

1.56 

35m 

1.55 

0.6% smaller 

#14 

2.25 

45 m 

2.33 

3.5% larger 

#18 

4.00 

55m 

3.88 

3.0% smaller 

NOTE: % Difference is based upon area of rebar in square inches. 


Reinforcing Bars 

Reinforcing bars are hot-rolled from a variety of 
steels in several different strength grades. Most 
reinforcing bars are rolled from new steel billets, but 
some are rolled from used railroad-car axles or 
railroad rails that have been cut into Tollable shapes. 
An assortment of strengths are available. 

The American Society for Testing Materials 
(ASTM) has established a standard branding for 
deformed reinforcing bars. There are two general 
systems of bar branding. Both systems serve the basic 

purpose of identifying the marker size, type of steel, 
and grade of each bar. In both systems an identity mark 
denoting the type of steel used is branded on every bar 
by engraving the final roll used to produce the bars so 
as to leave raised symbols between the deformations. 
The manufacturer's identity mark that signifies the 
mill that rolled the bar is usually a single letter or, in 
some cases, a symbol. The bar size follows the 
manufacturer's mark and is followed by a symbol 
indicating new billet steel (-N-), rolled rail steel (-I-), 


or rolled axle steel (-A-). I Figure 7-21 shows the 
two-grade marking system. 

The lower strength reinforcing bars show only 
three marks: an initial representing the producing 
mill, bar size, and type of steel. The high strength 
reinforcing bars use either the continuous line system 
or the number system to show grade marks. I n the line 
system, one continuous line is rolled into the 
60,000 psi bars, and two continuous lines are rolled 
into the 75,000 psi bars. The lines must run at least 
five deformation spaces, as shown ii li figure 1^2[ In the 
number system, a "60" is rolled into the bar following 
the steel type of mark to denote 60,000 psi bars, and a 
"75" is rolled into the 75,000 psi bars. 

Expanded Metal and Wire Mesh 
Reinforcement 

Expanded metal or wire mesh is also used for 
reinforcing concrete. Expanded metal is made by 
partly shearing a sheet of steel, as shown in view A 
I figure 7-3l The sheet steel has been sheared in parallel 


7-4 





























AMERICAN STANDARD BAR MARKS 
Lower Strengih Bars Show Only 3 Marts (no grade rmrtc): 
1st - Producing Mil (usually on lnttla!> 

2nd - Bar Stz# Numoar (#3 trough * 18) 

3rd - Type (Nfcr New Bilet; A for Me: I for Ral) 

Mart *S" is special bilet steel, #14 and # 13 only. 

Hl^i Strength Bars Must Also Show Grade Marks: 

60 or One (1) Line for 60,000 psi Strength 
(Grade mart lines ere smaler and between the two main 
ribs w hich are on opposite sides of all American Bars 

CONTINUOUS LINE SYSTEM-GRADE MARKS 


(O 


H'' 




-MalnRJfcs 

• Initial of 
Producing Mil 

• Bar Size 

#11 


j, l u- Type Steel 
■N—XI (New Bilet) 




On Line 


Grade 

Marks 


GRADE 60 


NUMBER SYSTEM-GRAPE MARKS 


Main Ribs 


Initial of 
Producing M3 

Bar Size 
#11 


Type Steel 
(New Bilet) 


GRADE 40 GRADE 60 

GRADE 50 


REINFORCING BAR SPECIFICATIONS 


U.S. irtndtid ipwcHratiore f« rertKting bn ere ettebfahed 
by he Americen Society ior Testing end Materials (ASTM).These 
standards govern strength ^ades, ri> patterns, sizes, end mark¬ 
ing* Ql tors 

Rertorang ben ere produced hum throe kinds d steel —new 
bilet. side, or rail—in three grades ol usekl (yield) strengdis. 

The yield strenglh d • bv is its ussrij strengOi. 

The tne ASTM Bar Spedkaiions err 

A61S — Bilet sieei detanned bers 
Grade 40 • Sizes #3 - #11 
aide 80 - Sizes #3 -#11: #14 end #18 
AI116 - Rei sleei ddormed bars 
Seda SO-Sizes #3-#11 
Gede«0-Slzes#3-#tt 
A417 — Ada steal detonned bers 
Grade 40 - Sizes #3 - #11 
aede 60 -Sizes #3 -41II SWNP0313 




Figure 7-2.—American standard reinforcing bar marks. 

lines and then pulled out or expanded to form a 
diamond shape between each parallel cut. Another 
type is square, rather than diamond shaped, as shown 
in view B, |figure Expanded metal is customarily y 
used during plastering operations and light reinforcing 
concrete construction, such as sidewalks and small 




127.74 

Figure 7-3.—Expanded or diamond mesh steel reinforcement. 

concrete pads that do not have to bear substantial 
weight, such as transformer and air-conditioner pads. 

Welded Wire Fabric 

Welded wire fabric is fabricated from a series of 
wires arranged at right angles to each other and 
electrically welded at all intersections. Welded wire 
fabric, referred to as WWF within the NCF. has 
various uses in reinforced concrete construction. In 
building construction, it is most often used for floor 
slabs on well-compacted ground. Fleavier fabric, 
supplied mainly in flat sheets, is often used in walls 
and for the primary reinforcement in structural floor 
slabs. Additional examples of its use include road and 
runway pavements, box culverts, and small canal 
linings. 

Four numbers are use-d to designate the style of 
wire mesh; for example, 6 by 6-8 by 8 (sometimes 
written 6x6x8x8or6x6-W2.1xW 2.1). The 
first number (in this case, 6) indicates the lengthwise 
spacing of the wire in inches; the second number (in 
this case, 6) indicates the crosswise spacing of the wire 
in inches; the last two numbers (8 by 8) indicate the 
size of the wire on the Washburn and Moen gauge. 
More recently the last two numbers are a W number 
that indicates the size of the cross-sectional area in the 
wire in hundredths of an inch. (See table 7-4.) WWF 
is currently available within the Navy stock system 
using the four-digit system, 6 by 6-8 by 8, as of this 
writing, but if procured through civilian sources, the 
W system is used. 


7-5 






























Table 7-4—Common Stock Sizes of Welded Wire Fabric 


STYLE DESIGNATION 

Weight 

Approximate lb 
per 100 sq. ft. 

Current 

Designation 
(by W—Number) 

Previous 

Designation 
(By Steel Wire Gauge) 

PANELS / SHEETS 

6 x6 —W1.4XW1.4 

6 x6-10x10 

21 

6 x6 —W2.1xW2.1 

6 x 6 — 8 x 8 

29 

6 x6 —W2.9xW2.9 

6 x 6 — 6 x 6 

42 

6 x6 —W4.0xW4.0 

6 x 6 — 4 x 4 

58 

4x4 —W1.4XW1.4 

4x4-10x10 

31 

4x4 —W2.1xW2.1 

4 x 4 — 8 x 8 

43 

4x4 — W2.9xW2.9 

4 x 4 — 6 x 6 

62 

4x4 — W4.0xW4.0 

4 x 4 — 4 x 4 

86 

ROLLS 

6 x6 — W1.4XW1.4 

6 x6-10x10 

21 

6 x6 — W2,9xW2.9 

6 x 6 — 6 x 6 

42 

6 x6 — W4.0xW4.0 

6 x 6 — 4 x 4 

58 

6 x6 — W5.5xW5.5 

6 x 6— 2 x 2 

80 

4x4 — W4.0xW4.0 

4 x 4 — 4 x 4 

86 


Light fabric can be supplied in either rolls or flat 
sheets. Fabric made of wire heavier than W4 should 
always be furnished in flat sheets. Where WWF must 
be uniformly flat when placed, fabric furnished in rolls 
should not be fabricated of wire heavier than W 2.9. 
Fabricators furnish rolled fabric in complete rolls 
only. Stock rolls will contain between 700 to 1,500 
square feet of fabric determined by the fabric and the 
producing location. The unit weight of WWF is 
designated in pounds per one hundred square feet of 
fabric (table 7-4). Five feet, six feet, seven feet, and 
seven feet six inches are the standard widths available 
for rolls, while the standard panel widths and lengths 
are seven feet by twenty feet and seven feet six inches 
by twenty feet. 

Sheet-Metal Reinforcemat 

Sheet-metal reinforcement is used mainly in floor 
slabs and in stair and roof construction. It consists of 
annealed sheet steel bent into grooves or corrugations 


about one-sixteenth inch (1.59 mm) in depth with 
holes punched at regular intends. 

Tension in Steel 

Steel bars are strong in tension. Structural grade 
is capable of safely carrying up to 18,000 psi and 
intermediate, hard, and rail steel, 20,000 psi. This is 
the SAFE or WORKING STRESS; the BREAKING 
STRESS is about triple this. 

When a mild steel bar is pulled in a testing 
machine, it stretches a very small amount with each 
increment of load. In the lighter loadings, this stretch 
is directly proportional to the amount of load Kfia. 74l 
view A). The amount is too small to be visible and can 
be measured only with sensitive gauges. 

At some pull (known as the YIELD POINT), such 
as 33,000 psi for mild steel, the bar begins to neck 
down Kfiq. 7-4,1 view B) and continues to stretch 
perceptibly with no additional load. 


7-6 






























PUU 


GAUGE 

LENGTH 



VIEW A 





VIEW C 


Figure 7-4.—Tension in steel bars. 

Then, when it seems the bar will snap like a rubber 
band it recovers strength (due to work hardening). 
Additional pull is required Kfia. 7-4.1 view C) to 
produce additional stretch and final failure (known as 
the ULTIMATE STRENGTH) at about 55,000 psi for 
mild steel. 


middle to the opposite side pull away from the middle. 
This is similar to what happens inside the beam. 

For instance, take a simple beam (a beam resting 
freely on two supports near its ends). The dead load 
(weight of the beam) causes the beam to bend or sag. 
Now, from the center of the beam to the bottom, the 
forces tend to stretch or lengthen the bottom portion 
of the beam. This pad is said to be in tension, and that 
is where the steel reinforcing bars are needed. As a 
result of the combination of the concrete and steel, the 
tensile strength in the beam resists the force of the load 
and keeps the beam from breaking apart. At the exact 
center of the beam, between the compressive stress 

and the tensile stress, there is no stress at all-it is 
neutral. 

In the case of a continuous beam, it is a little 
different. The top of the beam maybe in compression 
along part of its length and in tension along another 
part. This is because a continuous beam rests on more 
than two supports. Thus the bending of the beam is not 
all in one direction. It is reversed as it goes over 
intermediate supports. 

To help the concrete resist these stresses, 
engineers design the bends of reinforcing steel so that 
the steel will set into the concrete just where the tensile 
stresses take place. That is the reason you may have to 
bend some reinforcing rods in almost a zigzag pattern. 
The joining of each bar with the next, the anchoring 
of the bar ends within concrete, and the anchoring by 
overlapping two bar ends together are some of the 
important ways to increase and keep bond strength. 
Some of the bends you will be required to make in 
reinforcing bars are shown i nCFTgiJreTS 

The drawings for a job provide all the information 
necessary for cutting and bending reinforcing bars. 
Reinforcing steel can be cut to size with shears or with 
an oxygas cutting torch. The cutting torch can be used 
in the field. 


BENDING REINFORCING BARS 

The job of bending reinforcing bars is interesting 
if you understand why bending is necessary. There are 
several masons. Let us go back to the reason for using 
reinforcing steel in concrete—the tensile strength and 
compressive strength of concrete. You might compare 
the hidden action within a beam from live and dead 
loads to the breaking of a piece of wood with your 
knee. You have seen how the splinters next to your 
knee push toward the middle of the piece of wood 
when you apply force, while the splinters from the 


Before bending the reinforcing bars, you should 
check and sort them at the jobsite. Only after you 
check the bars can you be sure that you have all you 
need for the job. Follow the construction drawings 
when you sort the bars so that they will be in the proper 
order to be bent and placed in the concrete forms. After 
you have divided the different sizes into piles, label 
each pile so that you and your crew can find them 
easily. 

For the job of bending, a number of types of 
benders can be used. Stirrups and column ties are 
normally less than No. 4 bar, and you can bend them 


7-7 























































SWNP0317 




127.75 

Figure 7-5—Typical reinforcement bends. 



127.76 

Figure 7-6—Bar-bending table. 


cold by means of the bending table, as shown in |fiqurel 
1 7-6.1 Typical stirrup tie shapes are shown ir l figure 7-7] 
Stirrups are used in beams; as shown in i figure 
Column ties are shown in position ir l figure "Mil 


of the bend and pulling on the handle, you can produce 
a smooth, circular bend through almost any angle that 
is desired. 

Bending Guidelines and Techniques 


When the bars have to be bent in place, a bending 
tool, like the one shown in |figure 7-10] is effective. By 
placing the jaws of the hickey on one side of the center 


7-8 


Make bends, except those for hooks, around pins 
with a diameter of not less than six times the bar 
diameter for No. 3 through No. 8 bar. If the bar is larger 
























































































127.77 

Figure 7-7.—Stirrup and column ties. 



45.482A 

Figure 7-9.—Column steel in place. 



45.481 

Figure 7-8.—Steel in place in a beam 

than 1 inch (25.4 mm) (No. 9, No. 10, and No. 11 bar), 
the minimum pin diameter should be eight times the 
bar size. For No. 14 through No. 18, the pin diameter 
should be ten times the diameter of the bar. 

To get smooth, sharp bends when bending large 
rods, slip a pipe cheater over the rod. This piece of pipe 
gives you a better hold on the rod itself and makes the 
whole operation smoother. You can heat No. 9 bars and 
larger to a cherry red before bending them, but make 
sure you do not get them any hotter. If the steel 
becomes too hot, it will lose strength, become brittle, 
and can even crack. 



29.183 

Figure 7-10.—Bending tool. 

Bend Diameters 

If you do not want your rod to crack while it is 
being bent, bend it gradually, not with a jerk. Also, do 
not make your bends too sharp. Bends made on a 
bar-bending table or block are usually too sharp, and 
the bar is somewhat weakened. Therefore, certain 


7-9 



minimum bend diameters have been established for 
the different bar sizes and for the various types of 
hooks. These bending details are shown in i figure 7-111 
You can use many different types of bends. The one 
you select depends on where you are to place the rods. 
For example, there are bends on heavy beam and 
girder bars, bends for reinforcement of vertical 
columns at or near floor levels, bends for stirrups and 
column ties, bends for slab reinforcement, and bends 
for bars or wire for column spiral reinforcement. To 
save yourself some time and extra work, try to make 
all bends of one kind at one time instead of 
remeasuring and resetting the templates on your 
bending block for different bends. 


Detailing Hook 
Dimension *|ao7g1 


Detailing 




Dimension 


180° 



SEES Of ItO-OEG HOOKS 
0 « «d for #3 trough *8 
D- for #9. #10. end #11 
D- lOdlor#14end#18 


SEES OF 80-DEG HOOKS 
O • tc for #3 trcu^i #8 
D - 80 for #9, *10. and #11 
D - lOd for #14 and #18 


RECOMMENDED END HOOK DIMENSIONS 


Bar 

ISO* 

HOOKS 

90* HOOKS 


All Graces 

All Graces 


A or G 

j 

A or G 

»3 

5 

3 

6 

*4 

6 

4 

8 

*5 

7 

5 

10 

*6 

8 

6 

1-0 

rr 

10 

7 

1-2 

#8* 

11 

8 

1-4 

#9“ 

1-3 

11-1/4 

1-7 

#10" 

1-5 

10-1/4 

1-10 

#11 

1-7 

1-2-1/4 

28 

#14 

2-2 

1-8-172 

2-7 

#18 

2-11 

2-3 

38 


"These sizes - Grade SO - check availability. Sizes *14 - 
#18. check availability; no Grade 40 under ASTM. 


STIRRUP 4 TIE HOOKS 



(TIES SIMILAR) 


RECOMMENDED STIRRUP t TIE HOOK DIMENSIONS 

Grades 40-50-60 ksi 


Bar 

Size 


D 

(in.) 


90° HOOK 


hook 
A or G 


135» HOOK 


Hook Approx 

A or G H 


#3 

#4 

#5 


1 - 1/2 

2 

2 - 1/2 


4 

4-1/2 

6 


4 

4- 1/2 

5- 1/2 


2 - 1/2 

3 

3-3/4 


SWNPQ323 


Figure 7-11.—Standard hook details 


The Iron master Portable Hydraulic 
Rod Bender and Shear 

The Ironmaster portable hydraulic rod bender and 
shear |(fiq. 7-12 j can cold-work reinforcing bars into 
various shapes for use in concrete construction work. 
The machine is capable of working reinforcing bars 
up to and including No. 11 bars, which is equivalent 
in a cross-sectional area to 1 1/4-inch (31.75 mm)- 
squareor 11/2-inch (38.1 mm)-round bar. 

In addition to all sizes of reinforcing bars, the 
Ironmaster will also work bars of higher carbon 
content desired in the fabrication of anchor bolts, and 
so forth. However, limitations must be imposed when 
considering bar of 1-inch (25.4 mm) diameter or 
greater that have a carbon content of greater than 0.18 
percent, such as 5AE 1020 cold-finished steel. Bars 
under 1 inch (25.4 mm) in diameter should have a 
carbon content of no greater than 0.37 percent, such 
as SAE 1040 C. F. steel. 

Although the Ironmaster is powered to work steels 
of heavier sections than 1 1/2-inch (38.1 mm) 
reinforcing bar, the manufacturer must place safety 
limitations on it when considering various alloys and 
shapes of steel. Users will undoubtedly adapt this 
versatile machine to perform work other than common 
bar bending, such as bending flats and angles. 
However, the primary intention of the manufacturer 
was to produce a machine for bending concrete 
reinforcing steel. The manufacturer recommends that 
the Ironmaster not be used on steels heavier than 1 
1/4-inch (31.75 mm)-square or 1 1/2-inch (38.1 
mm)-round reinforcing bar. 



127.281 

Figure 7-12.—Ironmaster portable hydraulic bender and 
shear. 


7-10 





























































Standard Hook Bending 

Standard hook bending Kfiq. 7-l3l is 
accomplished on the turntable section located on top 
of the machine. Before you start any bending 
procedure, the turntable must be at the START 
position as shown in i figure 7-14.1 As an example, 
when you desire to bend a 180-degree hook in apiece 
of No. 11 reinforcing bar, setup the machine as shown, 
using the following: bending cleat with cleat slide and 
drive pin, main center pin, and No. 11 radius roll. As 
a safeguard, the radius rolls have been designed to 



accept only the number of bars specified, suti as No. 
7 roll for No. 7 bar [fig. 7-15] , 

1. Plain the rebar between the cleat slide upright 
and the radius roll, which is placed over the center pin, 



*11 RADIUS ROLL 
FOR #11 BAR. 
CAPACITY - 1 BAR 



#7 RADIUS ROLL 
FOR #7 BAR. 
CAPACITY - 2 BARS. 



*4 RADIUS ROLL 
FOR #4 BAR. 

CAPACITY - 4 BARS. 

SWNPQ327 

127.284 

Figure 7-15.—Radius rolls for bending rebar on an 
Ironmaster. 


CLEAT SLIDE UPRIGHT 


BENDING 

CLEAT- 


POSITION OF CLEAT 
AND BAR AFTER 
100* BEND 



TURNTABLE 
MAIN CENTER PIN (HI) 
•11 RADIUS ROLL 


#11 RE-8AR 


-MOVE SLIDE-BAR 

FORWARD UNTIL ROLLER 
CONTACTS BAR 


127.283 

Figure 7-14.—Example of bending a 180-degree hook with No. 11 rebar. 


7-11 


































with the end of the rebar protruding a sufficient distance 
for the cleat slide to be upright to engage it where you 
want the bend to commence. 

2. Move the cleat slide to contact the rebar and 
tighten the locking screws. 

3. Move the positioner slide bar until the roller 
contacts the rebar and tightens the T handle. 

4. Set the desired angle 'of bend on the graduated 
control rod which is under the right side of the working 
table. This is done by placing the trigger pin of the rear 
adjustable stop (toward the rear of the machine) in the 
hole corresponding to the angle of bend, in this case, 
180 degrees. This rod is graduated from 5 degrees to 
190 degrees at 5-degree intervals. 

NOTE: ENSURE THE FRONT ADJUSTABLE 
STOP TRIGGER PIN IS IN THE "O' HOLE, so the 
turntable will return to and stop in the START position 
when retracted after the bend. 

5. Advance the engine throttle to operating speed, 
and move either the rear bending control lever or slide 
bending control lever to the bend position. This actuates 
the bend cylinder. The lever will stay in the bending 
position until the bend is completed, the rack movement 
disengaging the cylinder, and the levers returning to 
neutral automatically. 

6 . To remove the rebar from the machine after the 
bend is completed, apply light intermittent reverse 
pressure to the lever until the bar releases from the 
radius roll. After removal of the hook from the machine, 
move the lever to the position shown on "retract" to 
return the turntable to the START position. 


Multiple Bending 

Multiple bending is accomplished the same way 
as standard hook bending for bars up to No. 8 simply 
by placing the bars in the machine one on top of the 
other. 

I Table 7-5l shows the bars that may be bent by the 
Ironmaster and the number of bars it will bend in one 
operation. 

On the side of the machine next to the shear is the 
shearing support ing. 7-161 . This support holds the 
bars square between the shear blades and prevents 
them from "kicking up" during shearing. The upper 
jaw of the shearing support is adjustable. For bars 
three-fourths inch and smaller, place this jaw in the 
LOWER position. For larger bars, use the UPPER 
position. NEVER SHEAR WITHOUT USING THIS 
SUPPORT. 

To operate, insert the bar to be cut to the farthest 
point possible toward the inside of the blades Rflal 
17-151 , making sure that the blades are in the fully 
OPEN or RETRACT position. With light downward 
pressure on the shear control lever, hold the bar in this 
position until the shear grips. Continue applying 
pressure downward to the full limit of the lever until 
the bar is sheared To retract the shear, pull the lever 
up. 

The same-size bar that can be bent can be sheared 
Multiple shearing, however, can be accomplished only 
on bars of less than 0.44-square-inch area. When 
shearing more than one bar at a time, always place the 
bars side by side in the shear, as shearing with bars 
piled on top of each other may cause blade failure. 


Table 7-5.—Single Operation Multibending 


Bar # 

Bar Size in Inches 

Number of Bars that can be 

Bent in One Operation 

3 

3/8 rd 

6 

4 

1/2 rd 

4 

5 

5/8 rd 

3 

6 

3/4rd 

3 

7 

7/8rd 

2 

8 

1 rd 

2 

9 

1 rd 

1 

10 

1 1/8 sq 

1 

11 

11/4 sq 

1 


7-12 























127.285 

Figure 7-16.—Ironmaster bar-cutting unit. 

I Table 7-6| shows the number of bars that can be sheared 
at one time. 

The care and maintenance of the Ironmaster 
portable hydraulic rod bender and shear consist 
primarily of lubrication and cleaning. There are grease 
fittings on the machine. Keep these points well 
lubricated with a good grade of grease, but do not 
overlubricate, as the surplus grease will collect dirt 
and rust scale from the rebars. When greasing the 
shear pin, work the shear arm up and down until grease 
appears between the arm and the side ears. When using 
the stirrup bending attachment, keep the center pin 
clean and well lubricated. 

Rust scale from the rebar will accumulate in the 
holes in theturntableand worktableand in the serrations 
in the bending cleat and roller slide. Keep these cleaned 
out, particular] y when changing over to or from the 
stirrup bending attachment or changing a center pin by 
means of a solvent-soaked rag or brush. Keep the 
worktable as clean as possible to minimize the amount 
of rust scale dropping through to the rack and gear. 

PLACING AND TYING 
REINFORCING STEEL 

Before you place reinforcing steel in forms, all 
form oiling should be completed. Oil on reinforcing 


bars should be avoided because it reduces the bond 
between the bars and the concrete. Use a piece of 
burlap to remove rust, mill scale, grease, mud, or other 
foreign matter from the bars. A light film of rust or 
mill scale is not objectionable. 

Bars are marked to show where they will fit. You 
may work according to either one of the two 
most-used systems for marking bars; however, the 
system you use should agree with the marking 
system which appears on the engineering or 
assembly drawings. The two marking systems used 
are as follows: 

1. All bars in one type of member are given the 
mark of that member. This system is used for column 
bars, beam bars, footing bars, and so on. 

2. The bars are marked in greater detail. These 
marks show exactly where the bar is to be placed. I n 
addition to the type member (that is, beam (B), wall 
(W), column (C), and so on), the marks show the floor 
on which the bars are to be placed and the size and 
individual number of each particular bar. Instead of 
showing the bar size by its diameter measurement, the 
mark shows the bar size in code by eighths. The 
examples shown below show the second type of 
marking system. 

2B805 2 = second floor 
B = beam member 
8 = 8/8- or 1 -inch (2.5 cm)-square bar 
05 = part of the second floor plan designated 
by the number 5 

2B0605 2 = second floor 
B = beam member 

06 =6/8- or 3/4-inch (1.9 cm)-round bar 
05 = part of second floor plan designated 
by the number 5 

Tie wire is used to hold rebar in place to ensure 
that when concrete is placed the bars do not shift out 
of position. Sixteen gauge wire is used to tie 


Table 7-6.—Multishearing 


Bar Size 

Quantity 

3,4,5,6 

4 

7 

3 

8 

2 

9, 10, 11 

1 


7-13 


























reinforcing bars. About 12 pounds (5.4 kg) of wire is 
required to tie an average ton (0.9 tome) of bars. 

NOTE: Tie wire adds nothing to the strength of 
the steel. 

A number of different types of ties can be used 
with reinforcing bars; some are more effective than 
others. fFlgure 7-171 shows six types of ties that are 
identified below according to the letters of the 
alphabet used to show individual ties. 

A. SNAP TIE or SIMPLE Tl E. The wire is simply 
wrapped once around the two crossing bars in a 
diagonal manner with the two ends on top. These are 
twisted together with a pair of sidecutters until they are 
very tight against the bars. Then the loose ends of the 
wire are cut off. This tie is used mostly on floor slabs. 

B. WALL Tl E. This tie is made by going about 1 
1/2 times around the vertical bar, then diagonally 
around the intersection, twisting the two ends together 
until the connection is tight, but without breaking the 
tie wire, then cutting off the excess. The wall tie is used 
on light vertical mats of steel. 

C. DOUBLE-STRAND SINGLE Tl E. This tie is a 
variation of thesimpletie. It is especially favored for 
heavy work 

D. SADDLE TIE. The wires pass halfway around 
one of the ban on either side of the crossing bar and are 
brought squarely or diagonally around the crossing bar 
with the ends twisted together and cut off. This tie is 
used on special locations, such as on walls. 

E. SADDLE TIE WITH TWIST. This tie is a 
variation of the saddle tie. The tie wire is carried 
completely around one of the bars, then squarely across 
and halfway around the other, either side of the crossing 
bars, and finally brought together and twisted either 
squarely or diagonally across. The saddle tie with twist 
is used for heavy mats that are to be lifted by a crane. 

F. CROSS TIE or FIGURE-EIGHT TIE. This type 
of tie has the advantage of causing little or no twist in 
the bars. 

The proper location for the reinforcing bars is 
usually given on drawinas Rtable 7-7 ). In order for the 
structure to withstand the loads it must carry, place the 
steel in the position shown. Secure the bars in position 
in such a way that concrete-placing operations will not 
move them. This can be accomplished by the use of 
the reinforcing bar supports shown in | figures 7-181 
7-19, and 7-20. 



127.80 

Figure 7-17.—Six types of ties. 



HIGH CHAIR - HC CONTINUOUS HIGH CHfiJR - CHC 


SWNPG332 

SLAB BOLSTER - SB BEM) BOLSTER - B8 

45.480 

Figure 7-18.—Reinforcement bar accessories. 

The proper coverage of bars in the concrete is very 
important to protect the bars from fire hazards, 
possibility of corrosion, and exposure to weather. 
When not specified, minimum standards given below 
and in lfiqure 7-21 I should be observed. 

FOOTINGS-3 inches at the sides where concrete 
is cast against the earth and on the bottoms of footings 
or other principal structural members where concrete 
is deposited on the ground. 


7-14 



























































PRECAST 

CONCRETE BLOCK METHOD OF USING CONCRETE 

BLOCK 


127.83 

Figure 7-19.—Precast concrete block used for rebar support. 

WALLS-2 inches for bars larger than No. 5, 
where concrete surfaces, after removal of forms, 
would be exposed to the weather or be in contact with 
the ground; 1 1/2 inches for No. 5 bars and smaller; 
3/4 inch from the faces of all walls not exposed 
directly to the ground or the weather. 

COLUMNS—1 1/2 inches over spirals and ties. 

BEAMS AND GIRDERS—1 1/2 inches to the 
nearest bars on the top, bottom, and sides. 

JOISTS AND SLABS—3/4 inch on the top, 
bottom, and sides of joists and on the top and the 
bottom of slabs where concrete surfaces are not 
exposed directly to the ground or the weather. 

NOTE: All measurements are from the outside of 
the bar to the face of the concrete, NOT from the main 
steel, unless otherwise specified. 

Footings and other principal structural members 
that are against the ground should have at least 3 


TIE WIRE WOOD STRIP 



127.85 

Figure 7-20.—Rebar hung in place. 

inches (76.2 mm) of concrete between the steel and 
the ground. If the concrete surface is to be in contact 
with the ground or exposed to the weather after 
removal of the forms, the protective covering of 
concrete over the steel should be 2 inches (50.8 mm). 
It maybe reduced to 1 l/2inches (38.1 mm) for beams 
and columns and 3/4 inch (19.5 mm) for slabs and 
interior wall surfaces, but it should be 2 inches 
(50.8 mm) for all exterior wall surfaces. This 
measurement is taken from the main rebar, not the 
stirrups or the ties. 

NOTE: Where splices in reinforcing steel are not 
dimensioned on the drawings, the bars should be 
lapped not less than 30 times the bar diameter nor less 
than 12 inches Ktable 7-7j The stress in a tension bar 


Table 7-7.—Length of Lap Splices in Reinforcing Steel 


INCHES OF LAP CORRESPONDING TO NUMBER OF BAR DIAMETERS* 

Number 

of 

Diameters 

Size of Bars 

#3 

#4 

#5 

#6 

#7 

#8 

#9 

#10 

#11 

#14 

#18 

30 

12 

15 

19 

23 

27 

30 

34 

39 

43 

51 

68 

32 

12 

16 

20 

24 

28 

32 

36 

41 

45 

55 

73 

34 

13 

17 

22 

26 

30 

34 

39 

44 

48 

58 

77 

36 

14 

18 

23 

27 

32 

36 

41 

46 

51 

61 

82 

38 

15 

19 

24 

29 

34 

38 

43 

49 

54 

65 

86 

40 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

46 

51 

57 

68 

91 

Minimum lap equals 12 inches! 

♦Figured to the next larger whole inch 


7-15 













































K 


n n a 


n n f 


FOOTINGS 

1-1 nr 

|-* TO OUTSIDE OF SPIRALS 
*6 THRU f IS 




1-1/T 


COLUMNS 





127.286 

Figure 7-21.—Minimum coverage of rebar in concrete. 


can be transmitted through the concrete and into 
another adjoining bar by a lap splice of proper length. 

To lap-weld wirefabricywire mesh, you can use a 
number of methods, two of which are the end lap and 
the side lap. In the end lap method, the wire mesh is 
lapped by overlapping one full mesh, measured from 
the ends of the longitudinal wires in one piece to the 
ends of the longitudinal wires in the adjacent piece, 
and then tying the two pieces at 1-foot 6-inch (45.0 
cm) centers with a snap tie. I n the side lap method, the 
two longitudinal side wires are placed one alongside 
and overlapping the other and then are tied with a snap 
tie every 3 feet (.9 m). 

Reinforcing bars are in tension and therefore 
should never be bent around an inside corner beams. 
They can pull straight through the concrete cover. 
Instead, they should overlap and extend to the far face 
for anchorage with 180-degree hooks and proper 
concrete coveraqe Rfiq. 7-231) . 

The bars can also be spliced by metal arc welding 
but only if called for in the plans and specifications. 
For bars which are placed in a vertical position, a butt 
weld is preferred. The end of the bottom bar is cut 


LAP AT LEAST 30 X MR QWMCTOt 



9WWSBJ7 


127.85 

Figure 7-22.—Bars spliced by lapping. 


r 

? 

** 

/ 

CORRECT 

-v— 



145.66X 

Figure 7-23.—Correct and Incorrect placement of 
reinforcement for an inside corner. 


square, and the end of the top bar resting on it is cut 
in a bevel fashion, thus permitting a butt weld. For bars 
which will bear a load in a horizontal position, a fillet 
weld is preferred. Usually, the two bars are placed end 
to end (rather than overlapping), and pieces of flat bar 
(or angle iron) are placed on either side. Fillet welds 
are then made where the metals join. The welds are 


7-16 























































made to a depth of one half of the bar diameter and for 
a length eight times the bar diameter. 

The minimum clear distance between parallel bars 
in beams, footings, walls, and floor slabs should either 
be 1 inch (25.4 mm) or 1 1/3 times the largest size 
aggregate particle in the concrete, whichever distance 
is greater. In columns, the clear distance between 
parallel bars should be not less than 1 1/2 times the bar 
diameter or 11/2 times the maxi mum size of the coarse 
aggregate. Always use the larger of the two. 

The support for reinforcing steel in floor slabs is 
shown in i figure 7-24.1 The height of the slab bolster is 
determined by the required concrete protective cover. 
Concrete blocks made of sand-cement mortar can be 
used in place of the slab bolster. Wood blocks should 
never be used for this purpose. Hiqhchairs Kfiq. 7-18l l 
can be obtained in heights up to 6 inches (15 cm). 
When a height greater than 6 inches is required, make 
the chair out of No. 0, soft, annealed iron wire. To hold 
the bars firmly in position, you should tie the bars 
together at frequent intervals where they cross with a 
snapat. 

Steel for column ties may be assembled with the 
verticals into cages by laying the vertical bars for one 
side of the column horizontally across a couple of 
sawhorses. The proper number of ties are slipped over 
the bars, the remaining vertical bars are added, and 


then the ties are spaced out as required by the placing 
plans. All intersections are wired together to make the 
assembly rigid so that it may be hoisted and set as a 
unit. l Figure 7-25| shows atypical column tie assembly. 

After the column is raised, it is tied to the dowels 
or reinforcing steel carried up from below. This holds 
it firmly in position at the base. The column form is 
erected and the reinforcing steel is tied to the column 
form at 5-foot (4.5-m) intervals, as shown in lfiqurel 

UM 

The use of metal supports to hold beam 
reinforcing steel in position is shown in i figure 7-81 
Note the position of the beam bolster. The stirrups are 
tied to the main reinforcing steel with a snap tie. 
Wherever possible you should assemble the stirrups 
and main reinforcing steel outside the form and then 
place the assembled unit in position. Precast concrete 
blocks, as shown in i figure 7-27.1 maybe substituted for 
metal supports. 

The horizontal and vertical bars are wired securely 
to each other at sufficiently frequent intervals to make 
a rigid mat. Tying is required at every second or third 
intersection, depending upon the size and spacing of 
bars, but with not less than three ties to any one bar, 
and, in any case, not more than 4 to 6 feet apart in 
either direction. 



127.86 

Figure 7-24.—Steel in place in a floor slab. 


7-17 




















SWNP0340 


Figure 7-25.—Column assembly. 


45.282B 



127.87 

Figure 7-26.—Method of holding column steel in plain in 


formwork. 

PRECAST CONCRETE BLOCK 
OR STONE OF PROPER SEE 



SWNP0342 


127.89 

Figure 7-27.—Steel in place in a footing. 


TIE WIRE 



Steel in place in a wall is shown in i figure 7-281 
The wood block is removed when the form has been 
filled up to the level of the block For high walls, ties 
in between the top and bottom should be used. 

Steel is placed in footings very much as it is placed 
in floor slabs. Stones, rather than steel supports, may 
be used to support the steel at the proper distance 
above the subgrade. Steel mats in small footings are 
generally preassembled and placed after the forms 
have been set. A typical arrangement is shown in 
Ifiqure 7-27.1 Steel mats in large footings are 
constructed in place. 


7-18 
























































CHAPTER 8 


PRE-ENGINEERED STRUCTURES: BUILDINGS, 
K-SPANS, TOWERS, AND ANTENNAS 


As a Steelworker, pre-engineered metal structures 
are a special interest to you; you are expected to 
assemble and disassemble them. Rigid-frame 
buildings, k-spans, steel towers, and antennas are 
some of the more commonly used structures, 
particularly at advanced bases overseas. 

All pre-engineered structures, discussed in this 
text, are commercially designed structures, fabricated 
by civilian industry to conform to the specifications of 
the armed forces. The advantage of pre-engineered 
structures is that they are factory-built and designed 
to be erected in the shortest possible time. Each 
pre-engineered structure is shipped as a complete 
building kit including all the necessary materials and 
instructions to erect it. 

Various types of pre-engineered structures are 
available from numerous manufacturers, such as Strand 
Corporation, Pasco, and Butler; however, all are similar 
because each is built to military specifications. It would 
not be practical to try and include all of the structures 
that each company fabricates; therefore, in this manual 
a description of the basic procedures for erecting and 
dismantling the 40-foot by 100-foot building is provided 
as an example. 

PRE-ENGINEERED BUILDINGS 

This chapter introduces you to the design, the 
structure, and the procedures for the erection of the 


typical pre-engineered buildings (P.E.B.), the 
K-spans, the pre-engineered towers, and the antennas. 

The basic pre-engineered metal building (fig. 8- 1) 
is 40 feet wide by 100 feet long. Although the unit 
length of the building is 100 feet, the length can be 
increased or decreased in multiples of 20 feet, which 
are called "20-foot bays." The true building length 
will be equal to the number of 20-foot bays plus 6 
inches; each end bay is 20 feet 3 inches. The building 
is 14 feet high at the cave and 20 feet 8 inches at the 
ridge. 

Pre-engineered buildings are ideal for use as 
repair shops or warehouses because they have a large, 
clear floor area without columns or other obstructions 
as well as straight sidewalls. This design allows 
floor-to-ceiling storage of material and wall-to-wall 
placement of machinery. The column-free interior also 
permits efficient shop layout and unhindered 
production flow. 

After a building is up, it can be enlarged while in 
use by "bays", providing additional space under one 
roof. If desired, buildings can be erected side by side 
"in multiples." When a building is no longer needed 
it can be disassembled, stored, or moved to another 
location and re-erected because only bolted 
connections are used. There is no field riveting or 
welding. The rigid frame is strong. It is designed for 



Figure 8-1—Completed 40-foot by 100-foot by 14-foot pre-engineered building. 


127.121 


8-1 




working loads of 20 pounds per square foot load, plus 
the dead load, and the load from a 70 mph wind. 

The building can be easily modified to varying 
lengths and purposes by taking out or adding bays or 
by substituting various foundation and wall sections. 
A bay is the distance between two column centers or 
between the end wall and the first column center in 
from the end wall. 

Formulas used to determine the number of bays, 
frames, and intermediate frames in a building are as follows: 

Length divided by 20= number of bays 

Bays +1 = total number of frames 

Total number of frames -2 = number of intermediate 

frames 

PRE-ERECTION WORK 

Extensive pre-erection work is required before 
you start the actual erection of a building. After the 
building site is located and laid out by the Engineering 
Aids, it will then be cleared and leveled by Equipment 
Operators. Batter boards are set up in pairs where each 
comer of the foundation is located. Builders fabricate 
the forms for concrete while Steelworkers are cutting, 
bending, tying, and placing reinforcing steel. If this 
particular building requires underslab utilities (that is, 
plumbing and electrical service), the Utilitiesman and 
Construction Electricians will also be on the jobsite. 
Last, all underslab work must be completed and pass 
all Quality Control inspections before concrete is 
placed and finished. 

Most importantly (as far as ease of erection is 
concerned), before the concrete is placed, templates 
for the anchor bolts are attached to the forms, and the 
anchor bolts are inserted through the holes in each. 


Next, the forms are tied to make sure they remain 
vertical. It must be stressed at this point that the proper 
placement of the anchor bolts is absolutely critical in 

the erection of a P.E.B. You will only have a tolerance 
of plus or minus one eighth of an inch to work with. 
The threads of the bolts are greased, and the nuts are 
placed on them to protect the threads. Concrete is 
poured into the formwork and worked carefully into 
place around these bolts, so they will remain vertical 
and in place. Finally, according to the plans and 
specifications, the slab is poured. 

Whilethe foundation is being prepared, the crew 
leader will assign personnel/crews to perrform various 
types of preliminary work, such as uncrating and 
inventorying all material on the shipping list, bolting 
up rigid-frame assemblies, assembling door eaves, 
and glazing windows. Box 1 contains the erection 
manual, the drawings, and an inventory list and should 
be opened first. If all of the preliminary work is done 
correctly, the assembly and erection of the entire 
building is accomplished easily and quickly. 

All material, except the sheeting, should be 
uncrated and laid out in an order] y manner, so the parts 
can be located easily. Do not uncrate the sheeting until 
you are ready to install it. When opening the crates, 
use care not to cause any undue damage to the I umber. 
This is important since the lumber can be used for 
sawhorses and various other items around the jobsite. 

In most situations, after the building foundation 
has been prepared, building materials should be placed 
around the building site new the location where they 
will be used I (fig. 8-21 . This action provides the 
greatest accessibility during assembly. 

Girts, purlins, cave struts, and brace rods should 
be equally divided along both sides of the foundation. 



PARTS 


Figure 8-2.—Material layout 


127.122 


8-2 


























Panels and miscellaneous parts, which will not be used 
immediately, should be placed on each side of the 
foundation on pallets or skids and covered with tarps 
or a similar type of covering until needed. Parts, 
making up the rigid-frame assemblies, are laid out 
ready for assembly and in position for raising. 

Care should always be used in unloading 
materials. Remember that damaged parts will cause 
delays in getting the job done. To avoid damage, lower 
the materials to the ground slowly and do not drop 
them. 

I Figure 8^31 wi 11 help you identify the structural 
members of the building and their location. Each part 
has a specific purpose and must be installed in the 
location called for to ensure a sound structure. 
NEVER OMIT ANY PART CALLED FOR ON THE 

DETAILED ERECTION DRAWINGS. Each of the 
members, parts, and accessories of the building is 
labeled by stencil, so it is not necessary to guess which 
one goes where. Refer to the erection plans to find the 
particular members you need as you work. 

ERECTION PROCEDURES 

With all pre-erection work completed, inspected, 
and passed by Quality Control, as well as your 
inventory completed, you are ready to start erecting 


the P.E.B. This phase of our discussion will introduce 
you to the basic erection procedures. The reason for 
these instructions is to give you a general guide to 
follow. Keep in mind that the drawings provided bv 
the manufacturer must be followed in all cases, even 

where the they might differ from information in this 
training manual. The manufacturer's standard practice 
is to always pack an erection manual and a set of 
drawings in the small parts box (Box 1) shipped with 
each building. 

Bolting Rigid Frames 

Before bolting up the rigid-frame assembly, clean 
all the dirt and debris from the top of the foundation, 
Then lay out and bolt the base shoes firmly to the 
concrete, using the 5/8-inch black steel washers 
between the shoes and the nuts. Lay out an assembled 
column and roof beam at each pair of base shoes 
Kfig. 8-41 . using one 3/4-inch by 1 l/2-inch bolt on 
each side of each base shoe to act as pivots in raising 
the frame. Use driftpins, if necessary, to line up the 
holes. 

Frame Erection 

A gin pole (chapter 6] can be used to raise the end 
frame of the building. To prevent distortion of the 



127.123 

Figure 8-3—Structural members of a pre-engineered building. 


8-3 











































127.124 

Figure 8-4.—Frame assembly. 


frame when it is being raised, attach a bridle securely 
to each side of the frame below the splice connection 
and also to the ridge on the roof beam. Drop a driftpin 
in the flame, as shown in i figure 83] to prevent the bridle 
from slipping up. Set up the gin pole with a block at the 
top. If a gin pole is not available, take three 2 by 6's, 20 


feet long, from the longest shipping crate and nail 
them together. 

Attach a tag line to the name, as shown in figure 
8-5. Now, pull the end frame into the vertical position, 
using a crew of four or five people on the erection line. 
A tag person should have something to take a couple 


DRFTPtNS 



Figure 8-5—Frame erection. 


127.128 


8-4 
















of turns around, such as the bumper of a truck. Then, 
if the frame should go beyond the vertical, the tag 
person would be able to keep it from falling. 

To get the frame started from the ground, it should 
be lifted by several people and propped upas high as 
practical. Bolt an cave strut to each column, as shown 
in lfigure 8-5.1 The cave struts allow the frame to be 
propped at every stage of the lifting. After the frame 
is in a vertical position, install guy lines and props to 
it so it cannot move. 

Now, raise the second frame in the same way, and 
hold it vertically in place by installing purlins, girts, 
and brace rods. 

A crane or other suitable type of power equipment 
can be used to hoist the frames into place where such 
equipment is available. When power equipment is 
used, the suggested procedure to comply with is as 
follows: 

1. Raise the columns and bolt them to the base 
shoes and then brace them in plain. 

2. Install all sidewall girts to keep the columns as 
rigid as possible. 

3. Bolt the roof beams together and install the 
gable posts and end-wall header. 

4. Secure the guy lines, and tag lines to the roof 
beams, as shown ir li-fiaure 8^1 . Attach a wire rope sling 
at approximately the center of each roof beam. 

5. Hoist the roof beams into position on top of the 
columns and bolt them in place. 

6. When the second rigid-frame section is secured 
in position, install all of the roof purlins, the gable 
angles, and the louver angles. Attach the gable clips to 
the purlins before raising into position. 

7. Install the brace rods and align the first bay. TH E 
FIRST BAY MUST BE ALIGNED BEFORE 

ERECTING ADDITIONAL BAYS. 

Brace Rods 

Brace rods must be installed in the first bay erected 
tfia. 8-7)1 These rods are of paramount importance 
since the y hold the frames in an upright position. 
THEY SHOULD NEVER BE OMITTED. 

The diagonal brace rods are attached to the frames 
in the roof and sidewall through the slotted holes 
provided. Use a half-round brace rod washer and a flat 
steel washer under the nuts at each end of the rods. 



127.129 

Figure 8-6.—Using power equipment. 


With the rods installed, plumb each frame column with 
the carpenter's spirit level. 

Check the distance diagonally from the upper 
comer of one frame to the lower comer of the adjacent 
frame. When this distance is the same for each rod, the 
columns will be plumb. After the sidewall rods are 
installed, install the roof rods. The length of the roof 
rods can be adjusted by tightening or loosening the 
turnbuckle. When the two diagonal measurements are 
the same, the end bay will be square. 

After the two frames have been plumbed and 
braced square with the diagonal rods (and the purlins, 
the girts, and the eave struts have been installed), the 
guy lines or props can be removed and the remaining 
frames of the building can be erected. To raise the next 
frame, attach blocks to the last frame raised. 

Z Do not omit the diagonal brace rods that are 
required in the last bay of the building. 

Z. Be sure and bolt the girts, the purlins, and the 
cave struts to the inside holes of the end frames. 

Z Install the cave struts, the girts, and the purlins 
in each bay as soon as a frame is erected. 

Z Exercise care to see that the diagonal brace rods 
are taut and do not project beyond the flanges of the end 
frame to interfere with end-wall sheeting. 


8-5 
















SWNP0350 



Figure 8-7.—Braoe rods. 


127.130 


Sag Rods 

Sag rods are used to hold the purlins and the girts 
in a straight line. First, install the sag rods that connect 
the two purlins at the ridge of the building. Each rod 
must be attached from the' top hole of one purlin 
through the bottom hole of the adjacent purlin. Use 
two nuts at each end of the sag rods-one on each side 
of each purlin. Adjust the nuts on these rods, so the 
purlins are held straight and rigid. 

Next, install the sag rods between the purlins 
below the ridge with the rod attached from the top hole 
of the upper purlin through the bottom hole of the 
lower purlin. Use two nuts on each end-one on each 
side of each purlin. Follow the same procedure with 
the sidewall sag rods. 

Remember that the roof purlins should show a 
straight line from end to end of the building. Do NOT 
tighten the sag rods so much that the purlins are 
twisted out of shape. 


Brace Angles and Base Angles 

After two or more bays have been erected, part of 
the erection crew can be assigned to install the 
diagonal brace angles. 

To install the brace angles, lay the notched portion 
against the frame flange and bend it into position Kfiq.l 
I 8-81 . Diagonal brace angles are needed to support the 
inner flange of the frame. Be sure to install them so 
that they are taut. 

While some members of the crew are installing 
brace angles, other members can be installing base 
angles. When assigned this duty, first, sweep off the 
top of the concrete foundation, so the base angles will 
set down evenly. Bolt the base angles in place with a 
flat steel washer under the nut. Leave the nuts loose to 
permit later adjustments after the wall sheeting has 
been applied. 

End-Wall Framing/DoorsAVindows 

Refer to the manufacturers' specifications for 
proper assembly and installation procedures for 
end-wall framing, doors (both sliding and roll-up), and 






















PURLIN 



127.131 

Figure 8-8—Diagonal brace angles 


windows, as these procedures will vary with available 
building options. 

Sheeting 

Sheeting, both sidewall and roof, must always be 
started at the end of the building toward which the 
prevailing winds blow. This action will ensure that the 
exterior joint in the side laps is away from the blowing 
of the prevailing winds. When installing roof sheeting, 
always use a generous amount of mastic on the upper 
si de of al I roof sheets j ust before movi ng them to the 
roof. Turn the sheet over and put a bead of mastic on 
the lip of one side of the corrugation and along one 
end (near the end but never more than one 1 inch from 
the end). Be sure to apply a horizontal bead of mastic 
between all sheets in the end laps, BELOW THE LAP 
HOLES. The roof sheets must be dry when mastic is 
applied. Mastic is extremely important, and care 
should be exercised whenever applying it to ensure a 
watertight seal. Apply generous beads, especially at 
the comers of the sheets. Finally, the ridge cap will be 
installed ensuring proper watershed. As previous] y 
stated, the information in this manual is general 
information common to pre-engineered buildings. 

Building Insulation 

The pre-engineered building can be insulated by 
any of several methods. A blanket type of insulation, 
in 2-foot-wide strips, to match the width of the roof 
and wall sheets can be installed between the sheets and 
structural at the same time the sheeting is installed. 
Or, a hardboard insulation can be applied directly to 
the inside surface of the structural, attaching it by 


helix nails or by sheet-metal screws in holes prepared 
by drilling of the structural. Or, a wood framing can 
be prepared, attached to the structural, and a 
hardboard insulation is nailed to the wood. 

Buildings Set Side by Side “In Multiples” 

Pre-engineered buildings can easily be set upside 
by side to increase the working area under one roof. 
When this is done, the adjacent rigid frames should be 
bolted back to back with a channel spacer at each girt 
location |(fiq. 8-91 . 

The cave struts are moved up the roof beam to the 
second set of 11/16-inch-diameter holes to provide a 
gutter. This arrangement provides a space between 
cave struts of 13 1/2 inches. A field-fabricated gutter 
can be installed. 

Flat, unpainted galvanized steel of 24-to 26-gauge 
material should be used for the gutter. A depth of 6 1/4 
inches is desirable with the downspouts located as 
required. Gutter ends should be lapped at least 6 inches 
and should be braze-welded for watertightness. Note 
that wall sheets can be used to form a gutter if the 
outside corrugations are flattened and all of the end 
laps are braze-welded. 

Roof sheets must be cut shorter where they 
overhang the gutter. The corrugations can be closed 
with the continuous rubber closure with mastic 
applied to the top and bottom surfaces of the closure. 
An alternate method is to flatten the corrugations at 
the gutter and seal them with a glass fabric stripping 
set in plastic. 


8-7 















CHANNEL SPACER 



GABLE FLASHING 



SWNP0352 


DISASSEMBLY PROCEDURES 


Figure 8-9.—Buildings side by side. 


K-SPAN BUILDINGS 


127.146 


Disassembly of the pre-engineered building 
should not be difficult once you are familiar with the 
erection procedures. In disassembling a building, be 
sure and clearly mark or number all of the parts. Then 
you will know where the parts go when reassembling 
the building. The main steps of the disassembly 
procedures are as fol lows: 

1. Remove the sheeting. 

2. Remove the windows, the door leaves, and the 
end wall. 

3. Remove the diagonal brace angles and the sag 
rods. 

4. Remove the braces, the girts, and the purlins. 

5. Let down the frames. 


K-span buildings I (fig. 8-ld) are a new form of 
construction within the Seabee community. The 
intended uses of these buildings are as flexible as the 
pre-engineered buildings discussed earlier. 

ABM 120 SYSTEM 

The K-span building system consists of a 
self-contained, metal building manufacturing plant, 
known as the ABM 120 System/Automatic Building 
Machine 120. This machine is mounted on a trailer, 
forming a type of "mobile factory" tfio. 8-111 that is 
easily towed to even the remotest construction sites. An 
important aspect of this machine is that it can be 
transported by air anywhere in the world easily. In fact, 
the ABM System has been certified for air transport by 
the U.S. Air Force in C-130, C-141, and C-5 aircraft. 


8-8 


Once the machine is delivered on site, it can be set 
up in minutes and turn coils of steel into structural 









































Figure 8-10.—Typical K-span building. 


strength arched panels. The panels are then machine 
seamed together to form an economical and watertight 
steel structure. 

The final shape and strength of the materials used 
cancels the need for columns, beams, or any other type 
of interior support. All of the panel-to-panel 
connections are joined using an electric automatic 
seaming machine. Because of this, there are no nuts, 
bolts, or any other type of fastener to slow down 
construction or create leaks. 

Once delivered to the jobsite, the "on-site" 
manufacturing abilities of the machine give the ABM 
operator complete control of fabrication as well as the 
quality of the building, Training key personnel in the 
operation of all related K-span equipment is essential. 
These crew members, once trained, can instruct other 
members of the crew in the safe fabrication and 
erection of a K-span. The following section gives you 
some, but not all, of the key elements associated with 
K-span construction. As with all equipment, always 
refer to the manufacturers’ manuals. 

Operating Instructions 

The main component of the K-span system is the 
trailer-mounted building machine [(fig. 8-12[ . This 


figure shows the main components of the trailer and 
the general operating instructions. The primary 
position is the operator's station at the rear of the 
trailer Kfia. 8-13)1 . The crew member, selected for this 
position, must have a thorough understanding of the 
machine operations and the manuals. From that 
position, the operator controls all of the elements 
required to form the panels. First, the operator must 
run the coil stock through the machine to form the 
panel shape. Next, it is cut off at the correct length. 
This length is the required length for one arched panel 
to run continuously from one footer to the other. Last, 
after the panel is cut to length, it is run back through 
the machine to give it the correct arch. The operator 
must remain at the controls at all times. From the 
placement of the trailer on site to the completion of 
the curved panel, attention to detail is paramount as 
with all of the aspects of construction. 

As you operate the panel, you will be adjusting the 
various machine-operating components. Adjustments 
for the thickness, the radius, and the curving machine 
MUST be made according to the manuals. Do not 
permit shortcuts in adjustments. Any variations in 
adjustments or disregard for the instructions found in 
the operating manuals will leave you with a pile of 
useless material or an inconsistent building. 


8-9 






























Figure 8-11.—Automatic Building Machine 120. 


Copyright §1993 by MIC Industries, Inc, 


8-10 




GENERAL OPERATION (TOP VIEW) 


SWNP0355 

A. OPERATOR'S STATION 

B. PANEL CURVING MACHINE 

C. PRIMARY CURVING ROU-OUT TABLE 

D. STRAIGHT PANEL ROLL FORMING MACHINE 

E. RUN-OUT TABLES IN TRANSPORTING RACK 

F. COIL STOCK PAY-OUT REEL AND STAND 

G. ENGINE/HYDRAULIC PUMP PRIMARY POWER UNIT 


1. COIL STOCK ENTERS PANEL FORMING MACHINE 

2. FORMED STRAIGHT PANEL 

3. STRAIGHT PANEL ENTRY TO PANEL CURVING MACHINE 

4. CURVED BUILDING PANEL 


Figure 8-12.—Trailer-mounted machinery. 



OPERATOR'S STATION, AT REAR OF TRAILER: 

A. STRAIGHT PANEL EXIT AND CUT-OFF 

B. CURVING MACHINE RADIUS ADJUSTMENTS AND DIALS 

C. STRAIGHT PANEL ENTRANCE TO CURVING MACHINE 

D. ENGINE REMOTE CONTROL PANEL 

E. HYDRAULIC CONTROLS 


Figure 8-13.—Rear of K-span trailer. 


Machinery Placement 


concern as long as the bed of the trailer aligns with the 
general lay of the existing surface conditions. Using 
I figure 8-14l as a guide when placing the machinery, 
you should consider factors such as thefollowing: 

• Maneuvering room for the towing of the 
trailer, or leave it attached to the vehicle (as 
shown at A). 

• The length of the unit is 27 feet 8 inches long 
by 7 feet 4 inches wide (B). 

• Allow enough room for run-out stands to 
hold straight panels. Stands have a net length 
of 9 feet 6 inches each(C). 

• Find point X: From the center of the curve, 
measure the distance equal to the radius in 
line with the front of the curved frame. From 
point X, scribe an arc equal to the radius. 
This arc will define the path of the curved 
panel. Add 10 feet for run-out stands and 
legs (D). 

• Storage area required to store the coil stock 
and access for equipment to load onto the 
machine (E). 


Preplanning of the site layout is important to avoid 
setup problems. Uneven or sloped ground is not a 


8-11 















































































© 



Figure 8-14.—Machinery placement calculations. 


8-12 




• Direction curved panels must be carried 
after being formed (F). 

• Level area required to lay panels on the 
ground for seaming. Building will not be 
consistent if panels are not straight when 
seaming (G). 

• Space required for crane operations (I-I). 
Foundations 

The design of the foundation for a K-span 
building depends on the size of the building, the 
existing soil conditions, and the wind load, 'he 
foundations for the buildings are simple and easy to 
construct. With the even distribution of the load in 
a standard arch building, the size of the continuous 
strip footing is smaller and therefore more 
economical than foundations for more conventional 
buildings. 

The concrete forms and accessories provided are 
sufficient to form the foundations for a building 100 


feet long by 50 feet wide. When a different 
configuration is required, forms are available from the 
manufacturer. 

The actual footing construction is based, as 
with all projects, on the plans and specifications. 
The location of the forms, the placement of the 
steel, and the psi (pounds per square inch) of the 
concrete are critical. The building panels are 
welded to the angle in the footer before the 
concrete is placed. Because of this operation, all 
of the aspects of the footer construction must be 
completely checked for alignment and 
squareness. Once concrete is placed, there is no 
way to correct errors. 

As mentioned above, forms are provided for the 
foundation. Using table 8-1 as a guide ) figure 8-151 
gives you a simple foundation layout by parts 
designation. As noted in i figure 8-151 the cross pipes 
are not provided in the kit. They must be ordered when 
the project is being planned and estimated. 


Table 8-1.—Concrete Forms Included in Kit 


DESCRIPTION 

(Each set of forms is sufficient to erect a building 100 feet long 
by 50 feet wide.) 

PART 

NUMBER 

Side form panels, P x KT, 12-gauge steel 

F-l 

Transition panels, 1' x 12", 12-gauge steel 

F-2 

Transition panels, 1' x 28", 12-gauge steel 

F-3 

End-wall caps, l'x 15", 12-gauge steel 

F-4 

Sidewall caps, 1' x 19", 12-gauge steel 

F-5 

Filler form, l'x 12', 12-gauge steel 

F-6 

Sidewall inside stop, 1' x 12", 12-gauge steel 

F-7 

End wall inside stop, l'x 12", 12-gauge steel 

F-8 

Stakes, 1/4" diameter, bar steel 

F-9 

All-thread rod, 1/2-13 x 18" 

F-10 

Hex nuts, 1/2-13 

F-ll 

Hex bolts, 1/8-16 x 1.1/2" 

F-12 

Hex nuts, 3/8-16 

F-13 

Flat washers, 1/8" S AE 

F-14 


8-13 














Figure 8-15.—Simple form assembly. 


4 




















BUILDING ERECTION 

With the placement of the machinery and 
forming of the building panels in progress, your next 
considerations are the placement and the 
weight-lifting capabilities of the crane. Check the 
weight-lifting chart of the crane for its maximum 
weight capacity. This dictates the number of panels 
you can safely lift at the operating distance. As with 
all crane operations, attempting to lift more than the 
rated capacity can cause the crane to turn over. 

Attaching the spreader bar | (fiq. 8-T6j ) to the curved 
formed panels is a critical step; failure to clamp the 
panel tightly can cause the panels to slip and fail with 
potential harm to personnel and damage to the panel. 
With guide ropes attached Rfiq. 8-17> and personnel 
manning these ropes, lift the panels for placement. 
When lifting, lift only as high as necessary, position 
two men at each free end to guide them in place, and 
remind crew members to keep their feet from under 
the ends of the arches. Never attempt lifting any sets 
of panels in high winds. 

Place the first set of panels on the attaching angle 
of the foundation, and position them so there will be 
room for the end-wall panels. After positioning the 
first set of panels, clamp them to the angle, plumb with 
guide ropes, and secure the ropes to previously 
anchored stakes. Detach the spreader bar and continue 
to place the panel sets. Seam each set to standing 
panels before detaching the spreader bar. 

After about 15 panels (three sets) are in place, 
measure the building length at both ends (just above 
forms) and at the center of the arch. This 
measurement will seldom be exactly 1 foot per panel 
(usually slightly more), but should be equal for each 
panel. Adjust the ends to equal the center measure. 
Panels are flexible enough to adjust slightly. Check 
these measurements periodically during building 
construction. Because exact building lengths are 
difficult to predict, the end wall attaching angle on 
the finishing end of the building should not be put 
in place until all of the panels are set. 

After arches are in place, set the longest end-wall 
panel in the form, plumb, and clamp it in place. Work 
from the longest panel outward and be careful to 
maintain plumb. 

When all of the building panels are welded to the 
attaching angle (fig. 8-18) at 12 inches on center, you 


are ready to place the concrete. When you are placing 
the concrete, remember it is extremely important that 
it be well-vibrated. This action may eliminate voids 
under all embedded items. As the concrete begins to 
set, slope the top exterior portion of the concrete cap 
about 5 inches RTTg. 8-19) to allow water to drain away 
from the building. The elevation and type of the 
interior floor are not relevant as long as the finish of 
the interior floor is not higher than the top of the 
concrete cap. 

The K-span building system is similar to other 
types of pre-engineered or prefabricated buildings in 
that windows, doors, and roll-up doors can be installed 
only when erection is completed. When insulation of 
the building is required, insulation boards (usually 4 
by 8 feet) maybe of any semirigid material that can 
be bent to match the radius of the building. The 
insulation is installed using clips, as shown in i fiqurel 
fS^Ol 

When the integrity of the end-wall panels is 
continuous from ground to roof line, the end walls 
become self-supporting. The installation of 
windows [(fi q. 8-21) and aluminum doors I (fig. 8-22) 
presents no problem because the integrity of the wall 
system is not interrupted. The installation of the 
overhead door Kfiq. 8-23)1 does present a problem in 
that it does interrupt the integrity of the wall system. 
This situation is quickly overcome by the easily 
installed and adjustable (height and width) 
doorframe package that supports both the door and 
end wall. This doorframe package is offered by the 
manufacturer. 

Shown in i figure 8-24 b re the fundamental steps in 
constructing a K-span from start to finish. 

ABM 240 SYSTEM 

There is another type of K-span building, 
actually referred to as a Super Span by the 
manufacturer, the ABM 240. Actual construction of 
the ABM 240 is the same as the ABM 120 (K-span). 
It can use heavier coil stock and is a larger version. 

I Figure 8-25 | is given to show the differences 
between the two. 

Keep in mind that the information provided in 
this section on the K-span building is basic. During 
the actual construction of this building, you must 
consult the manufacturer's complete set of 
manuals. 


8-15 






















SPREADER BAR ATTACH DETAIL 



ATTACH TO CENTER PANEL 
wrm FOUR CLAMPS 

REVOLVED VIEW A - A 



SWNP0360 


Figure 8-16.—Spreader bar attachment. 


8-16 



GUIDE ROPE DIAGRAM 


+ + + 


I I 



Figure 8-17.—Guide rope diagram. 


8-17 













MIC-120 CURVED PANELS 
WELDED TO PANEL ATTACHING 
ANGLE AT RIBS-- 



8-18 


Figure 8-18.—Building foundation concept. 





CURVED PANELS 


CROSS PIPE- 

3/4* DIAMETER. IS" LONG 
LENGTH DETERMINES WIDTH OF 
FOUNDATION AND MAY BE VARIED 
TO CORRESPOND WITH LOCAL SOIL 
AND LOADING CONDITIONS. 

MUST BE CUT ACCURATELY TO 
LENGTH AND SQUARE ON 
BOTH ENDS. 


CONCRETE FOUNDATION 

SLOPE TOP APPROX 5* TO DRAIN WATER 


PANEL ATTACHING ANGLE. 

3*XrX3/16- 

WELD TO CROSS PIPE 


1 !T ALL THREAD, THRU CROSS PIPE • 


FLOOR LEVEL— 


JU4 


#3 REINFORCING BARS, CONTINUOUS. 
ATTACH TO CROSS PIPE. 2 MINMUM 




CONCRETE FLOOR (OPTIONAL) 

4* DEEP. 8 X 6X10 -10 REINFORCING MESH. 
POUR AFTER FORM REMOVAL. 

1/2* MINMUM EXPANSION JOINT AT 
INTERSECTION WITH FOUNDATION. 



BUILDING ERECTION CONCRETE FOUNDATION FORMS 


" SUBGRADE FOUNDATION 

(ALL ITEMS AVAILABLE) 

10* DIAMETER CAISSON, 4* DEEP 
(BELOW NATURAL GRADE), 12* ON 
CENTER. WITH 2 (MINIMUM) #3 
REINFORCING BARS ATTACHED TO 
CROSS PIPE OR PANEL ATTACHING 
ANGLE. FROST WALL OR TRENCH MAY 
BE INCORPORATED M UEU OF CAISSONS. 
SUBGRADE FOUNDATION MAY BE 
COMPLETED PRIOR TO PLACEMENT OF 
ERECTION FORMS. 



8-19 






INSULATION 

4 X ff X VARIABLE THICK. 


PROTECTIVE CLADDING 


T STRIP (CONTINUOUS) 



Figure 8-20.—Insulation. 


7 








ALL DISSIMILAR METAL SURFACES 
ft DIRECT CONTACT W/EACH OTHER. 

WALL SYSTEM 


SWNP0365 


Figure 8-21.—Aluminum window installation. 


8-21 




ALUMINUM DOOR DETAILS 


K-SPAN WALL 



12 GA STEEL 


#12-14 TEK SELF TAPPING 
SCREW,TYP. 



FLASHING 


NOTE: PLACE 1/8" THICK X 1/2" WIDE 
TRIMCO. STRIP CONTINUOUS BETWEEN 
ALL SCREWED 4 BOLTED CONNECTIONS 



WALL SYSTEM 

K-13 SPRAY-ON 
INSULATION SYSTEM 

12 GA. FRAME IF LG BENT. 
4“ - 4-3/4* -7* TYP.@ 

HEAD, MULL. 


#12-14 TEK SELF TAPPING 
SCREWS @12“ O.C. INTO FLANGE 

#12-14 TEK SELF TAPPING 
SCREWS @12“ O.C.,TYP. 

T X 1* ANGLE, .035 STEEL 
ATTACH W/C12-14 TEK SELF 
TAPPING SCREWS. 


^ FLASHING 

WEEP HOLES CUT INTO 12 
@12“ O.C. 

NOTE: 

PROVIDE A LAYER OF BITUMINOUS 
OR NEOPRENE MATERIAL BETWEEN 
ALL DISSIMILAR METAL SURFACES 
IN DIRECT CONTACT W/EACH OTHER. 


ANCHOR ALU. SILL TO SLAB 


CONC. SLAB 


WALL SYSTEM 


SWNP0366 


Figure 8-22.—Aluminum door installation. 


8-22 







ADJUSTABLE HEIGHT 



Figure 8-23.—Overhead doorframe. 


8-23 















8-24 

















0.040*/1.0 mm 

*0.60 / 1.5 mm ON UPGRADED MIC-240 


MAXIMUM STEEL THICKNESS 



PANEL PROFILE 




MINIMUM SPAN 


Figure 8-25.—ABM System 120 and 240 comparison chart. 

















STEEL TOWERS 

Airfield observation towers, harbor shipping 
control towers, and radio towers are all erected by 
Steelworkers. These towers are manufactured and 
packaged according to military specifications. They 
are shipped with all parts and with plans and 
specifications. 

The framework of the tower is made up of 
fabricated structural shapes that are bolted together. 
Anchor angles with baseplates are furnished for 
setting in the concrete foundation, as shown in i figure! 
I 8-26J In most cases, the foundation will be built by the 
Builders. The manufacturer also furnishes square head 
bolts, lock washers, and nuts. Spud wrenches and 
driftpins are suppfied for each size of bolt. Field bolts 
and shipping lists are prepared and packaged with each 
shipment of a tower. 

The tower members are bundled in the most 
compact manner possible to keep shipping space to a 
minimum. Erection identification marks and stock list 



127.147 

Figure 8-26.—Anchor angles in a concrete foundation. 


numbers are painted on all of the pieces. All of the 
nuts, the bolts, and the washers are boxed and 
identified by painted marks. 

A check must be made of all of the parts and 
packages received in a tower shipment. Check them 
against the shipping list to be sure that no boxes or 
bundles have been lost, stolen, or misplaced. Also, 
check to see that none have been damaged When all 
are accounted for, sort the materials. The drawings tell 
you what is needed for each section. It is smart 
planning to lay out all of the materials for each section 
from the foundation to the top before any erection is 
started. This will save a lot of time later. 

ASSEMBLY AND ERECTION OF 
SECTIONS 

The first section of the tower is assembled on the 
ground alongside the foundation. Start by assembling 
the two-column legs on one side of the tower and bolt 
them loosely, with one bolt each, to two foundation 
stubs (anchor angle irons); these will act as pivot 
points. Next, loosely join the angle and the cross 
braces. Then lift the entire side. A crane or gin pole 
can be used to rotate it into a vertical position or, if 
necessary, it can be lifted by hand. Two people can 
start by lifting the far end and start walking it up. The 
two others, with handlines, can complete the upward 
journey. 

As the column legs fall into position, use driftpins 
or spud wrenches to line up the holes with the holes in 
the anchor angle irons. Then insert the bolts and 
tighten them. Use spud wrenches for this job. Place 
lock washers under each nut. When one side is 
standing in the upright position, repeat the process for 
the opposite legs. Finally, connect the cross braces on 
the open sides, and add the cross braces on the inside. 
When the whole first section, or bay, is in place, 
tighten the bolts. l Figure 8-27| shows the correct 
connection of diagonal and center horizontal 
members; notice the alternate connections of the 
diagonal members at all points, 

Use a snatch block and line to lift each piece for 
the next section. Do not tighten the bolts until the 
entire section is in place. Then start lifting the pieces 
for the next section, shifting the snatch block as 
necessary. When the whole section is in place, tighten 
the bolts. Repeat this process until the whole 
framework of the tower is erected. Bolts should be 
hoisted by handlines in buckets or I eat her-bottom bolt 
baqs. 1 Figure 8-28| shows a partially completed tower. 


8-26 






















127.148 


Figure 8-27.—Connection of diagonal and center 
horizontal members. 


The ladder for the tower is assembled on the 
ground. As the tower is erected, the sections of the 
ladder are raised in place by handlines. These sections 
are then bolted in place. The cabin section is made of 
wood and is constructed by the Builders and raised in 
place; but, Steelworkers will be called upon to assemble 
rails and platforms. 


After the tower is complete, one or two people 
must go over all of the bolts, center punching them to 
lock them in place. These people must also tighten all 
the nuts and see to it that washers have been inserted 
under each nut. This can be repeated after a few weeks 
as a final check. ITTgu re 8-291 shows the top of a 


completed tower with a control room and with the guys 
in place. 


DISMANTLING A TOWER 

Steel towers can be taken down when they are no 
longer needed and then be erected again at a new 
location. As the first step in dismantling a tower, 
remove the guy lines, the electrical conduit for the red 
warning light for aircraft atop the tower, the platform, 
and any other accessories. Next, set up your rigging 
gear so that one leg of the section-preferably the leg 
that the ladder is connected to—will serve as the gin 



29.178.1 


Figure 8-28.—Partially erected tower. 



29.178.2 

Figure 8-29.—Completed tower. 


8-27 
































pole. Proceed to attach a shackle to the top vacant hole 
in the gusset plate and have a snatch block in the 
shackle. Open the snatch block and insert the fiber line 
to be used as a hoist line. Tie a bowline in the end of 
the line to keep it from slipping through the block 
Take the line to be used as the tag line and secure one 
end to the bowline. Now, secure a snatch block to the 
base of the tower, and run the hoist line from the top 
snatch block to this block. Be sure the snatch block at 
the base of the tower is located in a straight line to a 
source of power. The source of power can be a dump 
truck, a weapon carrier, or some other vehicle. 

NOTE: When using a vehicle as a source of 
power, you must keep it back far enough so that as it 
comes forward, it does not arrive at the base of the 
tower before the load is on the ground. 

The tower is dismantled by sections, and the top 
and second horizontal braces are the first members of 
the section to be removed. Start by tying the hoist line 
and tag line to the horizontal braces. Then signal the 
vehicle operator to back up and take a strain on the 
hoist line. You are now ready to remove the bolts, 
holding the horizontal braces in place. After all of the 
bolts are removed, lower the horizontal braces to the 
ground. Now, remove the diagonal braces in the same 
manner. 

The next step is to remove the legs of the tower 
section, except the leg being used as the gin pole. First, 
shinny up the leg to be dismantled and hang a shackle 
at the top. Tie the hoist line to the shackle and then 
come back down the leg. Signal the vehicle operator 
to take a strain on the hoist line-just enough strain to 
take up the slack Remove the gusset plate from one 
side. Remove the remainder of the bolts that hold the 
leg being removed, leaving the two top bolts in place. 
Now, take the tag line and secure it with a clove hitch 
and a half hitch to the bottom of the load. Also, take a 
turn with the tag line around the horizontal bracing in 
the section that will be removed next. You should then 
remove the two top bolts as you slack off on the tag 
line and take up on the hoist line until the leg is 
hanging straight up and down against the gin pole. 
Release the tag line to the personnel on the ground who 
will guide the load, as it is lowered to the ground. 
Repeat this process with all of the remaining legs until 
only the ladder and the leg used as a gin pole are left. 
To remove the ladder, secure the hoist line to a rung 
above the center. Remove the bolts and then lower the 
ladder to the ground. 

When you are ready to start dismantling the leg 
used as the gin pole, shinny up the leg and remove the 


hoist line from the snatch block. Secure the hoist line 
to the shackle. Remove the snatch block and hang it in 
your safety bit. Then come back down the leg to the 
spliced connection. (Generally, at all spliced 
connections, there will be horizontal brace 
connections that can serve as working platforms.) 
Signal the personnel on the ground to remove the hoist 
line from the base snatch block; then signal the vehicle 
operator to take up the slack. Remove the rivets and 
the gusset plate from one side of the splice. Remove 
the remaining bolts in the leg. After all of the bolts are 
removed, ensure that all personnel are clear of where 
the load will land Remove the top bolt, and release 
the nut on the other bolt one-quarter turn. Signal the 
vehicle operator to back up slowly. As the operator 
backs up, the leg will pivot downward on the bolt and 
fall against the leg it has been standing upon and which 
will be used as the gin pole in dismantling the next 
section. Now, insert the shackle in the top hole of the 
gusset plate and hang the snatch block in it. Put the 
hoist line back in both snatch blocks. With the hoist 
line, throw a half-hitch below the center of the leg. 
Now secure the tag line. Next, signal the vehicle 
operator to give a slight strain to take the tension off 
the bolt. You can then remove the bolt and lower the 
leg to the ground. This completes the dismantling of 
an entire section of the tower, so you can proceed to 
the next section. 

Repeat the above procedure with each section 
until the tower is completely dismantled. 

If the tower will be put up again, rather than 
scrapped, a crew should be assigned to wire brush each 
member of the tower after it is lowered to the ground 
In wire brushing, all rust, loose paint, and the like, 
should be removed from the member. Each member 
should also be marked. After they are marked, the 
members should be stored in a orderly manner. 

ANTENNA TOWERS 

Modem communications in different parts of the 
world between ships, shore stations, and aircraft, 
including the United States aerospace efforts, have 
required that transmitting and receiving facilities 
be erected all over the globe. Many times the 
Steelworkers from battalion detachments will be 
assigned to erect them. This section will describe some 
of the common communications antenna towers that 
are erected and the procedures for erecting them. 


8-28 



GUYED TOWERS 

The most commonly used guyed towers are 
fabricated from steel in untapered sections 10 to 20 
feet long. These constant dimensional sections are 
erected one above the other to form the desired height. 
Structural stability for this type of tower is provided 
by attaching guy wires from the tower to ground 
anchors. 

Base supports for guyed towers vary according to 
the type of tower to be installed. Three commonly used 
base supports are the tapered tower base, the pivoted 
tower base, and the composite base. All three are 
shown in i figure 8-301 

A tapered tower base concentrates the load from 
multiple tower legs to a small area on the foundation. 

The pivoted base is used primarily on lightweight 
structures for ease of tower erection. 

A composite base is generally used with heavier 
towers because it affords much greater supporting 
strength than the other two types. 

Sections for lightweight towers are usually 
assembled before delivery, to expedite final tower 
assembly, whereas heavier weight towers must be 
assembled completely in the field. 

Tower bracing should include diagonal bracing 
and horizontal struts in the plane of each tower face 
for the full tower height. 


FREESTANDING TOWERS 

Freestanding, or self-supporting, steel antenna 
towers are characterized by heavier construction than 
guyed towers and by a shape that tapers in toward the 
top from a wide base. Freestanding towers exert much 
greater weight-bearing pressure on foundations than 
most guyed towers. Consequent y, deeper foundations 
are required (because of the greater size, the weight, 
and the spread of tower legs) to provide sufficient 
resistance to the uplift. Each leg of a freestanding 
tower must be supported by an individual foundation. 

I Figure 8-311 shows a typical individual foundation for 
a freestanding tower, and l figure 8-32 1 shows a 
foundation plan for a triangular steel freestanding 
tower. Bracing and material specifications for these 
towers are the same as for guyed towers. 

TOWER ASSEMBLY 

Advance planning for tower assembly and 
erection is essential for completion of the project 
safely and correctly. Both the installation plan and the 
manufacturers' instructions should be studied to gain 
a complete understanding of the tower assembly and 
erection methods to be used. The following general 
procedures and practices should be observed for the 
assembly and erection of towers: 

1. Assemble the tower sections on well-leveled 
supports to avoid building in twists or other deviations. 
Any such deviations in one section will be magnified 
by the number of sections in the complete assembly. 





COMPOSrTE BASE 


Figure 8-30.—Base support for guyed towers. 


127.504 


8-29 
































SWNP0375 




127.505 

Figure 8-31.—Square self-supporting tower and base. 


2. Check all of the surface areas for proper 
preservation. Cover all of the holes and dents in 
galvanized materials with sine chromate or another 
acceptable preservative to prevent deterioration. 

3. When high-strength bolts are used in a tower 
assembly, place a hardened steel washer under the nut 
or bolt head whichever is to be turned. Care must be 
exercised not to exceed the maximum torque limit of 


the bolt. Maximum torque values of several different 
sizes and types of bolts commonly used in antenna 
towers are listed in | table 8-2] 

ERECTION OF GUYED TOWERS 

The following paragraphs present methods that 
have been successfully used to erect guyed towers. 
'I he most practical method for any particular tower 


Table 8-2.—Bolt Torques (foot-pounds) 


Size 

Mild Steel 

High-Strength 

Steel 

Aluminum 

24 ST-4 

Stainless 

Steel 18-8 

3/8" 

- 16. 

17 


12 

30 

3/4" 

- 13. 

38 

105 

26 

43 

* 

00 

in 

- 11. 

84 

205 

60 

92 

3/4" 

- 10-. 

105 

370 

82 

128 

7/8" 

-9. 

160 

530 

184 

194 

1" 

- 8.- 

236 

850 



1-1/8" 

- 7. 

340 

1100 



1-1/4" 

- 7. 

432 

1800 




8-30 




























































FOUNDATION PLAN 



ms 


1 • 1 

-i + — 



-;t r 


PIER REINFORCING PLAN ANCHOR BOLTS 

SWNP0B78 


127.506 

Figure 8-32.—Triangular tower foundation. 

will be determined by the size, the weight, and the 
construction characteristics of the tower and by the 
hoisting equipment. 

Davit Method 

Lightweight guyed towers are frequently erected 
with a davit hoist that is anchored to the previously 
erected section, providing a pivoted hoisting arm. The 
davit arm is swung away from the tower in hoisting 
the added section and swung centrally over the tower 
in depositing the section before bolting up the splice 
plates iTTgure 8-331 shows a ground assembled unit 
being hoisted for connection to a previously erected 
tower section. A snatch block, secured to the tower 
base, transmits the hoisting line to a source of power 



127-507 

Figure 8-33.—Typical davit installation. 

or hand winch. A tag line, secured to the base of 
section being hoisted, avoids possible contact with the 
erected portion of the tower. 

Gin Pole Method 

Light triangular guyed towers, furnished with a 
pivoted base, may be completely assembled on the 
ground and then raised to a vertical position with the 
aid of a gin pole. lFiqure 8-34| shows the lower section 



127.508 

Figure 8-34.—Pivoted tower-hoisting preparation. 


8-31 















































































OBSERVER FOR 

LATERAL 

MOVEMENT—^ 


2 MEN 


Figure 8-35.—Erection plan for a pivoted tower. 


of a tower that has an attached pivoted base in a 
horizontal position preparatory to hoisting. The thrust 
sling shown counteracts the thrust on the base 
foundation from hoisting operations. Rigging 
operations and location of personnel essential to the 
raising of a pivoted base tower are detailed in figures 
8-35 and 8-36. Light towers in lengths of 
approximately 80 feet may be raised with a single 
attachment of the winch line. However, longer towers 


frequently are too flexible for a single attachment, and, 
in this case, a hoisting sling, furnished with a snatch 
block, allows for two points of attachment. The gin pole 
is mounted close to a concrete tower base and is provided 
with atop sheave to take the winch line. Permanent guys, 
attached to the tower at three elevations, are handled by 
personnel during hoisting operations, as shown in figure 
8-35. Temporary rope guys, provided with a snatch 
block anchored to deadmen, furnish the necessary lateral 




Figure 8-36.—Erection of a pivoted guyed tower. 


127.510 


8-32 




stability As the mast approaches a vertical position, 
the permanent guys are fastened to the guy anchors 
installed before erection. 

Hand Assembly 

Erection, without a davit or gin pole, may be 
accomplished by the assembly of the individual 
members piece by piece, as the tower is erected. As 
assembler, you climb inside the tower and work with the 
lower half of your body inside the previously assembled 
construction. You then build the web of the tower section 
around you, as you progress upward. As each member 
is bolted in place, you should tighten all of the 
connections immediately so that at no time are you 
standing on or being supported by any loose member. 

GUYING 

Temporary guying of steel towers is always 
necessary where more than one tower section is 
erected. Under no circumstances should the tower be 
advanced more than two sections without guying. 
Permanent guys are to be installed before the 
temporary ones are removed. 

Temporary Guying 

Several materials, including stranded wire, wire 
rope, and fiber line, are all acceptable for temporary 
guying. New manila line is the most suitable because 
of its strength and ease of handling. The size of the 
guyed material required is determined by the height 
and weight of the structure to be guyed and by weather 
conditions at the installation site. 

Secure the temporary guys to the permanent guy 
anchors to temporary type anchors or to any nearby 
structure that provides the required supporting 
strength. Leave the temporary guys in place until the 
structure is permanent y guyed and plumbed. 

Permanent Guying 

Antenna structures are permanently guyed with 
steel cables or fiber glass sections to pre-positioned 
anchors according to the installation plan. 

IFiqure 8-37 I shows two methods of guying 
triangular steel towers. Guys A, B, and C aresecured 
to a single anchor, while guys D, E, and F are secured 
to individual anchors. Both arrangements are 
satisfactory. Flowever, the anchor that terminates guys 
A, B, and C must be capable of withstanding much 
greater stresses than the individual guy anchor 
arrangement. Triangular tower guys are arranged so 



120*/ 1 \I20» 

w 

120 " 

GUTIHGPLAN 

127.511 

Figure 8-37.—Tower-guying arrangements. 

that three guys are spaced 120 degrees apart at each 
level of guying jfiq. 8-36)1 Square towers require four 
guys spaced 90 degrees apart at each level of guying 
[fig. 8-37)1 Square towers require four guys spaced 
90 degrees apart at each guying level. The following 
general elevation requirements apply to guy 
attachments for towers: 

SINGLE-GUY LAYER The cable attachments 
are placed in position at approximately two thirds of 
the tower height. 

TWO-GUY LAYERS. For towers with two-guy 
layers, cable attachments are placed in positions at 
approximately 30 and 80 percent of the tower height. 

THREE-GUY LAYERS. For towers with 
three-guy layers, cable attachments are placed in 
positions at approximately 25,55, and 85 percent of 
the tower height. 

Tower Guy Tension 

Setting guy tension and plumbing a tower are done 
at the same time and only when wind forces are light. 
Guy tension adjustment and tower plumbing are done 
as follows: 

INITIAL TENSION. All of the guys should be 
adjusted gradually to the approximate tensions 
specified in the antenna installation details. If tensions 
are not specified, guy tension should be adjusted to 10 
percent of the breaking strength of the strand of the 


8-33 











CABLE GRIP 


SERIES 

DYNAMOMETER 


COFFING HOIST OR 
SET OF BLOCKS 


ANCHOR 



CABLE GRIP 


STEP B 


GUY, 



TURNBUCKLE 
ANCHOR. 


SWNP0383 


STEP C 


DEAD END 
OF GUY 


GUY CLAMPS (SPACE CLAMPS 6 
TIMES THE GUY DIAMETER 
APART. THE U-BOLT PART OF 
CLAMP MUST BE ON DEAD 
END OF GUY.) QUANTITY OF 
GUY CLAMPS MAY VARY WITH 
DIAMETER OF GUY. 


Figure 8-38.—Final 

guy. The tension on all of the guys is adjusted after the 
tower is in a stable, vertical position. 

FINAL GUY TENSION. I n one procedure used 
for final tensioning of tower guys, the final tension is 


127.512 

tensioning of guys. 

measured with a dynamometer, as shown in figure 
8-38. Carpenter stoppers or cable grips of the proper 
skin, designed for the lay of the wire, must be selected 
for use in the tensioning operation. Any cable grip 
assembly that grips the wire by biting into the cable 


8-34 




Figure 8-39—Typical screw anchor. 


with gripping teeth could penetrate and damage the 
protective coating of guy cables and should not be 
used In step A o fl figure 8-381 the coffing hoist is 
shown in series with a dynamometer to measure the 
tension. A turnbuckle is shown in position to receive 
the guy tail. In step B, an additional cable grip and 
hoist or tackle are attached above the cable grip shown 
instep A. The lower end of this tackle is provided with 
a second cable grip that is' attached to the guy tail 
previously threaded through the turnbuckle. The 
second coffing hoist is operated until sufficient 
tension is applied to cause the reading on the series 
dynamometer to fall off. Step C shows the guy in final 
position secured in place with clamps. With the tower 
properly plumbed to a vertical position, only one guy 
at a given level need be tested with the dynamometer. 

On some installations, other procedures for 
tensioning guys may be necessary because of the type 
of guys and hardware supplied with the antenna. For 
example, preformed wire helical guy grips are 
sometimes used for attaching guy wires to the 
adjusting turnbuckles. In such cases, the techniques 
used for the guy assembly, the connection of the guy 
wire to the anchor, and the tension adjustments must 
be determined for the detailed installation plan or the 
appropriate antenna technical manual. 

Guy Anchors 

Antenna design and installation plans specify the 
anchor type, the location, and the hole depth required. 

Anchor shafts, or rods, must project above the 
grade sufficiently to keep all of the connecting guy 
wire attachments free of vegetation and standing 
water. Shafts and connecting attachments should be 
thoroughly cleaned and then coated with a petroleum 
preservative to retard the effects of weather. 


SCREW ANCHOR. The screw anchor shown in 
figure 8-39 may be used for temporary guying and for 
anchoring guys for lightweight towers. This anchor is 
installed by screwing it into the ground in line with the 
direction the guy will take. 

EXPANSION ANCHOR. The expansion anchor 
shown in | figure 8-40 | is suitable for practically all 
guying applications where the soil is firm. This anchor 
is placed with its expanding plates in the closed 
position in an auger-drilled inclined hole, not less 
than 3 feet deep. The plates are expanded into the firm, 
undisturbed sides of the hole by striking the expanding 
bar at point B with a hammer and thereby forcing the 
sliding collar downward the distance D shown in 
I figure 8-40l The anchor installation is completed by 
backfilling the hole with thoroughly tamped backfill. 

CONCRETE ANCHORS. Poured in-place 
concrete anchors are normally used for high stress 
applications and where multiple guys are attached to 
a single anchorage. 



2-WAY ANCHOR 

SWNP0365 


LEGEND 

A = EXPANDING BAR 
B = HAMMER STRIKING POINT 
C - MOVEMENT DISTANCE 
OF EXPANDING BAR 
D * MOVEMENT DISTANCE 
OF SLIDING COLLAR 

127.514 

Figure 8-40.—Expansion anchor. 


8-35 











CHAPTER 9 


PRE-ENGINEERED STORAGE TANKS 


During World War II, steel tanks made possible 
many operations. During large operations, especially 
in forward areas, the need for rapid transport and 
appropriate storage facilities were of major 
importance. Steel tanks were used to store fuel, diesel 
oil, gasoline, and water to meet the demand for storage 
facilities. Ships and planes were supplied from secret 
tank farms at overseas bases, making possible many 
of the large invasions of the war in the Pacific. 

This chapter will brief you on the procedures to 
follow in erecting bolted steel tanks including 
preparation of the foundation for a tank- 

STEEL TANKS 

Many types of tanks are available. Besides tanks 
that are constructed of standard mild steel sheets, tanks 
of galvanized steel sheets and of wrought iron may 
also be obtained. Tanks may be bolted, riveted, or 
welded. Bolted and riveted tanks have capacities of up 
to 10,000 barrels. Welded tanks may hold as many as 
50,000 barrels. 

Steelworkers are normally concerned with 
PREFABRICATED BOLTED TANKS. These tanks 
are composed of steel sheets of a size that is easily 
transported. Individual pieces are quite light. They can 
be assembled quickly in the field by crews of 
relatively untrained men so long as the man in charge 
understands the details of their construction. Once the 
tanks are assembled, they will last for 5 or 6 years or 
longer. A shipment includes all of the bolts, the nuts, 
the fittings, and the gasket material required for 
assembly. Drawings and assembly instructions also 
are provided. 

Ten-thousand-barrel tanks are used to store fuel 
and diesel oil at overseas bases. One-thousand-barrel 
tanks are used for gasoline storage. Low 5,000-barrel 
tanks are seldom used for fuel storage where large 
operations are under way, but they may be used for 
storage of water. Since a barrel is equal to 42 gallons, 
you can see that a 10,000-barrel tank is capable of 
holding 420,000 gallons. 

If desired, bolted steel tanks can be dismantled and 
re-erected at another location. You can obtain 


re-erection kits that contain new gasket material and 
extra nuts and bolts. In disassembling a tank, however, 
workers should make an effort to save all of the items 
of hardware that can be used again. When taking down 
a tank, avoid damage to any of the members because 
the number of re-erections of a tank depend largely 
upon the care taken during dismantling. 

CAUTION 

Exercise care when handling plates to 
avoid bending, dropping, or otherwise 
damaging the steel. Bent plates will cause 
problems when the tank is erected, and when 
used, the result is usually a leaking tank. 

TANK FOUNDATIONS 

Considerable care should betaken in constructing 
the GRADE or finished foundation on which the tank 
is to be erected. Concrete foundations are ordinarily 
not necessary if the ground is reasonably hard. When 
the grade is properly prepared and perfectly level, the 
tank can be joined on an even surface, and, therefore, 
it is easier to fit up and erect the tank Also, with proper 
support, the completed tank will be less likely to leak. 

Grading 

The earth grade should be constructed 
approximately 1 foot greater in diameter than the 
diameter of the tank which is to occupy it. The earth 
must be well-tamped to a firm and smooth surface. 
Never fill the area for a tank foundation because 
erosion will, in time, result in a faulty foundation. 

Foundation Construction 

The tank foundation should be dry, level, and 
well-drained. A layer of clean gravel or sand on the 
grade is ideal for this purpose. Tar paper may be spread 
under the tank as a corrosion-resistant carpet. 

When a layer of gravel or sand is used on a grade 
of firm earth, follow these steps: 

1. Drive a peg in the exact center. 


9-1 



2. Mark this center peg at a point 6 inches from the 
top) and drive it down in the grade to this mark. 

3. Use a wooden straightedge with a carpenter's 
level attached to set grade stakes about 10 feet apart. 
Note that, set in this manner, they will protrude 6 inches 
above the earthen grade. 

4. Distribute sand over the whole grade, using 
shovels and rakes. When the sand just covers the top of 
each of the stakes and the center peg, the proper level 
has been reached. 

5. Drive the stakes and the center peg all the way 
down into the earth under the sand. When the tank is 
filled, the sand will compact, and if the stakes are not 
driven down, they may cause leaks. Mark the position 
of the center peg with a temporary pin so that you will 
be able to position the center of the tank bottom later. 

6. To make the surface smooth, use a sweep with 
a carpenter's level attached. Pin the sweep to the center 
peg and drag it over the sand, filling in any hollows and 
smoothing out humps. The sand pad should be at least 
4 inches thick and should have a crown of about 1 inch 
in 10 feet of tank radius; however, the crown should not 
exceed 6 inches. 

When a foundation is properly prepared, many 
unnecessary problems do not occur during 
construction of the tank. J ust imagine the problems 
that might occur, both in erection and in subsequent 
maintenance of a tank, if the' foundation were to settle 
unevenly, throwing the steel plates on one side of the 
tank slightly out of line. Remember that the walls of 
the tank—consisting merely of steel plates bolted 
together-must act as bearing walls to support the 
roof. So, make sure you have a good foundation before 
starting to assemble a tank. 


BOLTED STEEL TANK ASSEMBLIES 


Tanks are assembled by sections, consisting of 
pieces of various sizes and shapes that combine to 
form cylindrical structures. Among the most common 
are the bolted steel tanks, having a capacity of 100, 
250, or 500 barrels of liquid Many tank sections serve 
the same function regardless of tank capacity. 
However, the number of sections used in each 
assembly will vary according to capacity. The 
procedures for assembling and erecting these tanks are 
similar. 


100-Barrel Tank 

The 100-barrel tank shown in |figure 9-l| is the 
smallest bolted steel tank. It has a holding capacity of 
4,200 gallons of liquid and is made up of preformed 
and punched metal sections, fastened together with 
l/2-inch-diameter bolts. The tank bottom [Tfiq. 9-2| l 
consists of two semicircular halves, bolted together at 
a lap joint along the center of the tank bottom. This 
vertical, bolted steel tank has a 9 foot 2 3/4-inch-inside 
diameter and is 8 feet 1/2 inch high at the sidewall. 

SIDE STAVES. — The side staves consist of six 
curved, vertical sections, arranged in a single ring. The 
staves are chimed (flanged) at the top and bottom of 
each section with the left end of each chime offset so 
the vertical seams overlap. The bottom chime bolt 
holes are patterned to match the outer edge bolt holes 
in the tank bottom. The vertical seams have one row 
of bolt holes. 



SWNPQ386 


Figure 9-1.—100-barrel capacity, vertical, bolted steel tank. 



Figure 9-2.—Tank bottom. 


9-2 

















CENTER LADDER SUPPORTS.— The center 
ladder is the center support for the tank deck. The 
ladder is adjustable and is used to align the deck 
section bolt holes and provide the required slope to the 
tank deck 

The ladder consists of two ladder braces, two 
ladder rails, four ladder steps, steel angles, and a 
flanged manhole that supports the tank deck 

TANK DECK — The tank deck is made up of six 
sections, extending radially from the tank center 
ladder support to the top chime of the single ring of 
side staves. Each deck section has an integral formed 
flange along its right edge when viewed from the large 
end toward the small end of the deck section. The 
flanged side of the deck section acts as a supporting 
rafter for the deck section. A bolt retainer angle is 
attached to the inside face of each deck section, 
flanged to retain the radial seam joint bolts that are 
installed near the right edge of each deck section. 

SPECIAL SECTIONS.— The tank bottom has 
one special section, fitted with a blind opening. All of 
the staves are special sect ions [(fig. 9-3] . One section 
is for a cleanout cover, and the other five sections are 
used for pipe connections. The tank deck has three 
special sections. One section is for a combination thief 
hatch and vent, one section has a blind hatch, and one 
section has a liquid level indicator. 

EMERGENCY VENT. — Each tank is equipped 
with an 8-inch emergency vent, bolted to the top cover 


of the manhole attached to the top of the center ladder 
supports. 

OUTSIDE LADDER. — Each tank is equipped 
with an outside ladder for access to the deck The 
ladder is bolted to the bottom and top chimes of a side 
stave and is usually located near a tank thief and vent. 

250-Barrel Tank 

The 250-barrel tank has a capacity of 10,500 
gallons of liquid, and the fabrication is similar to the 
100-barrel tank. The tank bottom consists of ten 
wedge-shaped plates, assembled radially around a 
one-piece center section, as shown ir i figure ^41 The 
inside diameter is 15 feet 4 5/8 inches and is 8 feet 1/2 
inch high at the sidewall. 

SIDE STAVES. — The side staves consist of ten 
curved, vertical sections, arranged in a single ring. The 
staves are chimed (flanged) at the top and bottom of 
each section with the left end of each chi me offset so 
the vertical seams overlap. The bottom chime bolt 
holes are patterned to match the outer edge bolt holes 
in the tank bottom. The vertical seams have one row 
of bolt holes. 

TANK DECK. — The tank deck is made up of ten 
sections, extending radially from the tank center 
ladder support to the top chime of the single ring of 
side staves. Each deck section has an integral formed 
flange along its right edge when viewed from the large 



Figure 9-3—Layout of the staves around the tank bottom. 


9-3 














2 



Figure 9-4.—Layout of the staves around the tank bottom, 250-barrel capacity tank. 


end toward the small end of the deck section. The 
flanged side of the deck section acts as a supporting 
rafter for the deck section. A bolt retainer angle is 
attached to the inside face of each deck section, 
flanged to retain the radial seam joint bolts that are 
installed near the right edge of each deck section. 


SPECIAL SECTIONS.— The tank bottom has 
one special section, fitted with a blind opening. Four 
of the ten staves are special sections. One section is 
for a cleanout cover, and the other three sections are 
used for pipe connections. The tank deck has three 
special sections. Two sections are used for a 


combination thief hatch and vent, and one section is 
used for a liquid level indicator. 

EMERGENCY VENT.— An 8-inch vent is 
bolted to the top cover of the manhole attached to the 
top of the center ladder supports. 

500-Barrel Tank 

The 500-barrel tank Kfiq. 9-51 has a capacity of 
21,000 gallons of liquid and is similar to the 250- 
barrel tank, except that the bottom consists of 14 
wedge-shaped plates around a one-piece center 
section, as shown in[TTgu?e9^6] This vertical, bolted 



Figure 9-5.—500-barrel capacity vertical, bolted steel tank assembled. 


9-4 


























steel tank has a 21 foot 6 l/2-inch-inside diameter and 
is 8 feet 1/2 inch high at thesidewall. 

SIDE STAVES. — The side staves consist of 14 
curved, vertical sections, arranged in a single ring. The 
staves are chimed (flanged) at the top and bottom of 
each section with the left end of each chime offset so 
the vertical seams overlap. The bottom chime bolt 
holes are patterned to match the outer edge bolt holes 
in the tank bottom. The vertical seams have one row 
of bolt holes. 

TANK DECK. — The tank deck is made up of 14 
sections, extending radially from the tank center 
ladder support to the top chime of the single ring of 
side staves. Each deck section has an integral formed 
flange along its right edge when viewed from the large 
end toward the small end of the deck section. The 
flanged side of the deck section acts as a supporting 
rafter for the deck section. A bolt retainer angle is 
attached to the inside face of each deck section, 
flanged to retain the radial seam joint bolts that are 
installed near the right edge of each deck section. The 
bolt retainer angle acts as a stiffening member to the 
deck section flange along the span of the deck section 

SPECIAL SECTIONS.— The tank bottom has 
one special section, fitted with a blind opening. Five 
of the 14 staves are special sections. One section is for 
a cleanout cover, and the other four sections are used 
for pipe connections Kfiq. 9-6)1 The tank deck has three 
special sections. Two sections are used for a thief 
hatch and relief valve, and one section is used for a 
liquid indicator. 

EMERGENCY VENT. — Each tank is equipped 
with a 10-inch emergency vent, bolted to the top cover 
of the manhole attached to the top of the center ladder 
supports. 


ERECTION OF A 500-BARREL TANK 

Although similar in design and construction, 
bolted steel tanks differ mainly in the number of parts 
required for each different size tank. Therefore, the 
erection procedures for the 500-barrel tank, described 
here, can be applied to the other tanks regardless of 
size. 

Center Bottom Plate 

The center bottom plat e l (fig 9^71 is a circular, flat 
steel plate. The tank bottom plates are attached to the 
outer circumference bolting circle. Before installation 
of the center bottom plate, make sure that it is not 
warped or broken. Check the bolt holes for bolt 
clearance. Clean the bolt holes of dirt or other foreign 
material where the center plate gasket is applied. Drive 
the center stake below the surface of the foundation 
and backfill the hole. Place the bolt-retaining boards 
around the outer circumference of the plate. Position 
the plate over the center stake. Place the gasket around 
the bolt circle of the center bottom plate. I nsert two 
1/2- by 1 l/2-inch bolts in the two bolt hole channel. 



Figure 9-7.—Installation of the gasket the bolts, and the 
channels on the center bottom plate. 



9-5 





















Insert the channel assembly through the center bottom 
plate and gasket. 

NOTE: To prevent damage to the gasket, do not 
use a sharp-edged tool or pipe to force the gasket over 
the bolts. Use a well-rounded, smooth, mouth tool. 

Lay the center bottom plate on the bolt-retaining 
boards. These boards will prevent movement of the 
bolts when the bottom plates are installed. 

Bottom Plates 

The tank bottom consists of 14 tapered, flat steel 
plates. Thirteen plates are plain, and one is soecial. All 
of the plates are interchangeable. When the bottom is 
completely installed, the pla te patter n resembles a 
wheel. The first bottom plate Hfia. 9-/1 . #7) has a bolt 
channel placed under each radial lap seam with 1/2- 
by 1 l/4-inch bolts Ifia. 9-8)1 A strip gasket is placed 
along each seam. The seams are identified as right and 
left, facing the large end. 

Starting at the large end of the plate Kfia. 9-7D . 
place a bolt channel under the right and left lap seams 
of the plate. I nsert the bolts through all except the end 
bolt holes in the plate and channel. As the channels are 
put in place, position the bolt-retaining boards to 
facilitate installation of the gaskets. Install the gasket 
along the full length of the right and left lap seams. 
Allow a l/2-inch bolt hole overlap at each end. 

NOTE: When there is a break in the gasket 
material, the ends should overlap two bolt holes and 
be cut squarely across the second hole. Putty must be 



applied to each end of the overlap strip to ensure a 
leakproof joi nt. 

Upon the completion of the assembly, move this 
plate to the approximate installation position on the 
tank foundation. 

Of the 13 intermediate plates, one is an outlet 
plate, which is assembled with channels and strip 
gaskets. The channels are placed under the right lap 
seams. Follow the same assembly procedures as 
outlined above. In addition, the outlet plate has a blind 
flange set assembled on it. The above procedure does 
not apply to the last bottom plate as no further 
assemblies are made on it. Keep the last bottom plate 
separated from all of the other plates until it is installed 
in the tank bottom. 

Cut six one-hole gaskets from the strip gasket 
material Iffig, 9-81 #2). Force a one-hole gasket over 
and against the head of each flange bolt. I nsert the 
bolts through the bolt holes in the inside flange half 
from the outside face of the flange with the heads of 
the bolts fitting into the cutouts provided. Lay 
bolt-retaining boards on the ground. Position the 
flange assembly with the bolt head resting on the 
boards. Slip a gasket over the bolts and force it down 
against the inside face of flange #7, using a round 
smooth, mouth tool. Work from the ground face of the 
plate Kfiq. 9-7J #7) and push the bolts through the bolt 
holes of the flanged opening. Place blocking under the 
bolt and flange assembly to hold it in position. Slip a 
gasket over the bolts and force it down against the 
inside face of the plate. Slip the outside flange half 
over the bolts with the machined face of the flange 
facing the gasket. Apply the nuts to the bolts, lighten 
the bolts. Remove the plate from the blocking and lay 
it on the tank foundation 

With the first bottom plate in the approximate 
installation location on the tank foundation, lay the 
remaining plates around the tank foundation. Proceed 
with the installation as follows. 

FIRST PLATE.— Place the small end of the plate 
over the center plate bolts I (fig. 9-81 #3). Apply 
finger-tightened catch nuts to the bolts inside the lap 
seams. Catch nuts are ordinary nuts applied to the bolts 
to hold the assembled plates in position. 

FIRST INTERMEDIATE PLATE.— 

Wedge-shaped gaskets must be used wherever three 
plates are joined together. Before installation of the 
plate, you should place a wedge gasket lTfla. 9-8 . #4) 
over the gasket [(fTa. 9-71. #3) at the right edge of the 
first plate #7. Face the small end of the plates. Install 


9-6 




















the plate and all of the remaining plates to the left of the 
first plate or in a counterclockwise direction around the 
tank fou ndation. Place the small end of the plate over 
the bolts Kfiq. 9T3] #3) with the right lap seam of the plate 
laid over the b olts Kfiq. 9T3l #1) in the left lap seam of the 
plate Kfiq. 9^7[ #7). 


Apply finger-tightened catch nuts to the bolts. 
Follow the same procedure as outlined above. Apply 
catch nuts to the bolts in the lap seam at intervals of 
approximately 18 inches. 


Do not tighten the catch nuts beyond finger 
tightness. Each plate must move in the adjustment of 
the tank bottom to obtain the correct spacing for the 
installation of the last plate. 


REMAINING INTERMEDIATE PLATES.— The 

remaining intermediate plates are installed following the 
same procedure as above. 



LAST PLATE.— Install the last plate by spacing 
the lap seams over the lap seams of the next-to-last plate 
[fig. 9-9,1 #1) and the fi rst plate Kfiq. 9-9J # 2 ). Place the 
small end over the bolts ! (fig. 9lj , #3). 'Ibis is a vital point 
in the tank bottom; make sure it is secure against 
leakage. 


Figure 9-10.—Applying sealing compound to the 
bottom chimes of the staves. 

which secures the side staves. Tighten all of the bolts in 
the tank bottom, starting at the small end of the plates. 


INSTALLATION OF WEDGE GASKETS.— 

Apply a heavy coa ting of se aling compound to both faces 
of the two gaskets Rfi q. 9-9| #3), and install them over the 
bolts Kfiq. 9-9,1 #4). Use a generous amount of sealing 
compound at the overlap to seal The opening under the 
small end. 


SEALING SEAMS. — Sweep the bottom clean after 
tightening the bolts. With the bottom dry, apply a 
sealing compound to all of the bottom seams (fig. 9-10). 

Side Staves 


TIGHTENING TANK BOTTOM.— Work from the 
small end of the plates and remove all of the catch nuts. 
Install a rubber gasket, a steel recessed washer, and a 
nut on each of the bolts. This applies to all of the bolts in 
the tank bottom with the exception of those in the outer 
circumference (chime) of the tank bottom, 



Figure 9-9.—Method of installing the wedge 
gaskets at the installation of the last bottom plate 


This is a single ring tank Place all of the center 
support ladder components and the manhole dome on 
the bottom just before installing the last stave. This is to 
prevent them from having to be lifted over the top of the 
staves later. The top and the bottom flanged edges of the 
staves are called chimes, and the side edges are called 
vertical seams. The staves have a single row of bolt holes 
in each seam. 

LAYOUT OF STAVES.— There are five special 
and nine plain staves in the ring. Place the staves with 
the opening and pipeline connections in the proper 
position, then lay out the remaining staves around the 
perimeter of the bottom. Place the staves with the 
chimes side down for convenience in preparing them for 
assembly. The staves are laid out so each straddles a 
radial seam of the bottom. 

Staves have an offset at the top and the bottom. The 
top is determined by looking at the stave in a 


9-7 



























Figure 9-11.—Stave chimes bent. 


vertical position from the outside. In proper position, 
offsets are at the lower left and upper left comer. 

DRESSING STAVES.— The end of the chime at 
the offset and the plain section, top and bottom, must be 
slightly bent for ease in installation. The end of the 
chimes at the offsets (fig, 9-11)1 must be bent inward 
(towards each other). The end of the plain chimes is bent 
outward (away from each other). The bends are made 
with a few sharp blows from a hammer. 

Along the right seam of each stave, as it will be put 
in place with the chimes out, place a strip gasket on the 
outside at the row of bolt holes. The gasket material 
comes in rolls and is cut to proper length for each stave. 
Cut the gasket material so that it covers and projects 
one bolt hole past the top and the bottom chimes. 

I nsert 1/2- by 1 l/4-inch bolts through the stavejoint 
channel, the stave, and the gasket, in that order. Omit 
one bolt about 10 inches from the bottom of the stave 
and other bolts at about 2-foot intervals, so the driftpins 
can be inserted to align the staves with one another 
before bolting them together. 

PREPARING OUTER EDGE OF TANK 
BOTTOM.— AS no channels are used with the bolts 


inserted through the chime (outer edge) of the bottom, it 
must be raised to provide clearance to insert and tighten 
the bolts following installation of the staves. 

Raise the chime and block it up with short lengths 
of 3- by 3- or 4- by 4-inch timbers at equally spaced 
intervals around the perimeter of the bottom. Set the 
blocking about 16 inches from the outer edge. 

I nstall the strip gasket to coverall of the bolt holes. 
When one roll of gasket material is used up and a new 
one is started, the overlap should extend over two bolt 
holes. Apply putty at each end of the overlap. Insert a 
wedge gasket underneath the gasket at the laps formed 
by the bottom plates. 

Insert 1/2- by l-inch bolts through all of the bolt 
holes in the bottom and the gasket, in that order, except 
in the lap seams of the bottom. Insert 1/2-by 1 l/2-inch 
bolts in each lap seam. 

Omit the rubber gaskets and steel recessed washers 
on all of the chime bolts. 

FIRST STAVE.— The first stav d; (fig. 9-13 , $), 
installed on the bottom, must be the one fitted with a 
pipe coupling of the same size as the tank supply pipe. 

Place the stave over the proper bolts, so the stave 
straddles a radial seam in the bottom. As a result, each 
subsequent stave will straddlea radial seam. Install four 
equally spaced catch nuts to hold the stave in position. 
Run the nuts down by hand to fasten the stave loosely. 
The nuts are not tightened until the last stave in the 
ring is in place. 

Two special gaskets are needed. The wedge gasket 
fills the space by the lap offset at the vertical seam, and 
a radii gasket is installed underneath the gasket at the 
bottom and the top chi mes of the stave. Radi i 



Figure 9-12.—Installing first stave. 


9-8 







gaskets must be placed between the chimes and the 
rubber gasket material at the seams, the top, and the 
bottom of all of the side sheets to ensure a leakproof 
connection. 

SECOND STAVE. — Install the staves in a 
counterclockwise direction around the bottom. To 
assist in the installation of this stave, push two or 
three bolts flush with the gasket in the chime of the 
bottom to the right of the first stave. Install the 
rubber gaskets and steel recessed washers on all of 
the vertical seam bolts. 

Set the stave in position with the left seam 
outside the right seam of the first stave. Use driftpins 
in the open bolt holes in the stave to align the holes 
in the stave. Install the nuts only at every sixth or 
tenth bolt in the row. As the remaining staves are 
installed, check carefully the position and the 
tightness of all the radii, the strip, and the wedge 
gaskets. 

REMAINING INTERMEDIATE STAVES.— 

Face the outside of the second stave and install 11 
staves to the right of the second stave or in a 
counterclockwise direction around the bottom. 
Assemble the hook ladder, and hook it over the inside 
of the staves. As the staves are installed, stand on the 
ladder and fit all of the bolt heads squarely into the 
channels. All of the bolt heads must befitted squarely 



Figure 9-13.—I.ocation of the scaffold around 
the top chime of the staves. 


into the stave joint channels to ensure proper 
tightening of the nuts. 

LAST STAVE. — To assist in the installation of 
this stave, push all of the bolts I (fig. 9-121 4 &) in the 
chime of the bottom flush with the gasket to provide 
clearance for sliding in the last stave. Set the stave in 
position with the left seam outside the right seam of 
the next-to-last stave and the right seam inside the 
left seam of the first stave. Loosen the bottom chime 
nuts of staves #1 and #3. Lift the first stave #3 
slightly, so the bottom chime of the stave #1 slips into 
place. Use driftpins and align the holes and the bolts 
in staves #1, #. 2 , and #3. Install the nuts on the bolts 
in the chime of the bottom. Install 1-by 1 l/2-inch 
bolts Kfiq. 9-13] 4 &) in the third and twentieth bolt 
holes of the vertical seam, counting down from the 
top chi me of every stave. These are scaffold-mounti ng 
bolts. Install the remaining bolts in all of the seams. 
Install the gaskets and washers with the cup side 
down over the gaskets 



Figure 9-14.—Removing the timber blocking. 


9-9 








on all of the seam bolts. Apply the nuts with the 
rounded facedown to all of the bolts. Do not tighten. 

Tighten all of the chime bolts uniformly. Remove 
the blocking Kfig. 9-14] ; place it under the chime of the 
bottom. Use a heavy, long timber as a lever and a short 
timber as a fulcrum to lift the chime, lighten all of the 
seam bolts. Be careful not to crush the gaskets. Apply a 
sealing compound to the inside perimeter of the bottom 
chimes of the staves. 

DRESSING TOP CHIME.— Use the scaffold and 
install the strip gasket to coverall of the bolt holes Kfiq.l 
I9-15D . When one roll of gasket material is used up and 
a new one is started, the overlap should extend over 
two bolt holes. Apply a sealing compound at each end 
of the overlap. Insert a wedge gasket underneath the 
gasket at each lap, formed by adjoining staves. Insert 
1/2- by l-inch bolts through the chime and gasket, in 
that order. The gasket will hold the bolts in place. 

Ladder Assembly 

'he ladder consists of a bolted steel angle section. 
The top of the ladder is fitted with a manhole dome. 
The bottom of the ladder is fitted with ladder anchors, 
flanged, flat steel plates. The small end of the deck 
plates is bolted to the bottom flange of the manhole 
dome. 

Place two ladder rails |(fiq. 9-161 #1 and 4B.) with 
similar bolting legs facing each other on top of several 
pieces of blocking of sufficient length to support both 
rails and spaced wide enough apart to insert a ladder 




step. Determine which end of the roils will be the 
bottom. Install the steps from the bottom toward the 
top of the ladder. Five steps make up the assembled 
section. Insert 1/2- by l-inch bolts through the ends of 
the step and rails. I nstall a nut on each bolt protruding 
through the rails. Tighten the bolts after all of the 
steps are installed. 

Face the 30 bolt hole flange of the manhole dome 
and slide it over the top of the rails. Use a driftpin and 



Figure 9-15.—Dressed top chime of the staves 


Figure 9-17.—First deck plate installed. 


9-10 
































Figure 9-19.—Deck plates ready for installation. 


Line up two diametrically opposite lap seams RTTcH 
19-181 ) in the tank bottom. Remove a nut from each bolt 
in the lap seams and the first bolt to the right and left 
of each lap seam. Raise the ladder assembly and sethe 
anchors over the bolts. Apply the nuts and tighten 

Top Deck Assembly 

The assembled deck consists of 14 tapered, flat 
steel plates [mg 9-191) with an integral formed flange 
along the right lap seam. The seams are identified rig 
and left, facing the large end All of the plates are 
interchangeable. 

Of the 14 plates, three are special. Two plates a 
fitted with a tank thief and vent, and one plate is fitted 
with a liquid level indicator. Each deck plate has deck 
plate channel and a rafter bolt retainer angle 
assembled on it. The small end of the plates is bolted to 
the bottom flange of the dome. The large end bolted to 
the top chi me of the staves. 

LAYOUT AND ASSEMBLY OF PLATES.— Lay 

out the plates around the outer perimeter of the tank 
foundation. Place the blocking on the ground, spaced to 
fit inside the confines of the pi ate. Lay the inside of the 
flange with the short leg facing outward. Insert four 
equally spaced bolts through the angle and flange. 
Apply the nuts to the bolts. Tighten the bolts. Turn the 
plate over with the flange down. I nstall a gasket along 
the full length of the right lap seam. Allow a two bolt 
hole overlap at each end. 

LAYOUT OF ASSEMBLED PLATES.— As the 

plates areassembled, raisethem up and stand them 


align the three bolt holes at the top of the rails with 
similar holes in the side of the dome. Insert 1/2-by 1 
Ml-inch bolts through the rails and the dome, in that 
order. Apply gaskets and washers to the bolts Kfiq. 9-161 
# 6). Make sure that the cup side of the washers is 
facing down over the gaskets. Apply the nuts to the 
bolts. Make sure that the rounded face of the nut is 
bearing against the washer. T ighten the bolts. I nstall a 
28 bolt hole gasket |(fiq. 9-17| #1) on the inside face of 
the bottom flange of the dome. I nsert 1/2- by 1 1/4-inch 
bolts through the flange and the gasket. The gasket 
will hold the bolts in place. 

Install the ladder anchors Kfiq. 9-161 #8) at the 
bottom of the rails. Place the long leg of the anchor 
over the three bolt holes in the vertical leg of the rails. 
The short leg of the anchor faces outward. Adjust the 
outside bolting face of the short leg so it measures 9 
feet 5 15/16 inches from the top flange of the dome. 
Insert two bolts through each anchor and rail. Apply 
the nuts to the bolts and tighten securely. 


Figure 9-18.—Center support ladder installed. 


9-11 
























against the scaffold, as shown in i figure 9-19.1 Locate 
each plate so it straddles a vertical seam of the side 
staves in the approximate installation position, 
counterclockwise. 

ADJUSTMENT OF CENTER SUPPORT 
LADDER— Check and adjust the ladder to the correct 
height before the installation of the deck plates, 'he 
distance from the top of the tank bottom to the outer 
face of the top flange of the dome is 9 feet 6 9/64 inches. 
Raise or lower the ladder as required. 

Place a jack under one of the ladder steps. Adjust 
the ladder so that in the final position, one set of the 
holes in the bottom of the rails line up with the holes in 
the brace. Lock the jack Insert the bolts through the 
proper bolt holes in the brace to match the top holes in 
the rails. Apply the nuts to the bolts. Tighten the bolts. 
Unlock and remove the jack. 

When all of the deck plates have been installed on 
the tank, check the height to the outer face of the top 
flange of the manhole dome above the top of the tank 
bottom. If not the required height, adjust the ladder 
until it is the correct dimension. Insert the bolts in 
aligned bolt holes and tighten the nuts. 

INSTALLATION OF FIRST DECK 
PLATE.— The first plate installed should be a plate 
with a vent <fiq. 9-19,1 48). The remaining plate, fitted 
with a vent, must be installed directly across the tank 
from the first plate with a vent. Attach two rope deck 
hooks to the small end of the plate while it stands 
against the scaffold |(fiq. 9-131 . Guide the large end of 
the plate and pull the plate in place by means of a haul 
line. Lower the large end of the plate over the proper 
bolts in the top chi me of the staves, so it will straddle a 
vertical seam. The small end of the plate will drop over 
the proper bolts. Release the hooks. Apply four equally 
spaced catch nuts to the bolts through the large end of 
the plate. One catch nut will be sufficient to hold the 
small end in place. Do not tighten the bolts. 

INSTALLATION OF SECOND DECK 
PLATE.— I nstall a gasket over the bolts at the left lap 
seam of the plate |(fiq. 9-171 #3 and #4). Face the small 
end of the plate #4. Install this plate and all of the 
remaining plates to the left of the first plate or in a 
counterclockwise direction around the tank Raise the 
plate. Place the right lap seam of the plate over the 
bolts in the left lap seam of the first plate #4 and the 
large end over the proper bolts in the top chime of the 
staves. 

Install the nuts to six equally spaced bolts in the 
lap seam of the plates. Install the nuts on all of the 


bolts in the chime. Finger tighten all of the nuts. As 
the deck will have to be adjusted as the plates are 
installed, do not tighten any bolts until the deck is 
completely installed. Raise or lower the center support 
ladder as required to fit the plates in place. 

INSTALLATION OF INTERMEDIATE DECK 
PLATES.— There are 12 intermediate plates. The 
special plates remaining are installed to suit field 
conditions. 

LAST DECK PLATE.— Raise the last deck plate 
before the next-to-last plate is in stalled Ra ise the right 
lap seam of the first deck pi ate | (fig. 9-20| 4A). This is 
necessary to permit the installation of the last plate. 




Figure 9-20.—Installing last deck plate. 



Figure 9-21.—Outside ladder installed. 


9-12 

























The left lap seam of the last plate slips under the right 
lap seam of the first plate. The right lap seam of the 
last plate is placed over the bolts in the left lap seam 
of the next-to-last plate installed. 

Make the necessary adjustments in the deck if the 
last plate fails to fit properly. Remove the nuts 
temporarily installed on all of the bolts in the plate lap 
seams. Install a rubber gasket, a steel recessed washer, 
and a nut on all of the bolts except on the bolts in the 
top chi me of the staves. Install any missing nuts on the 
chime bolts. Make sure that the rounded head of the 
nut is against the plate and washers and that the cupped 
side of the washer is facedown covering the rubber 
gasket. Tighten the bolts. Remove the scaffold. Install 
the gaskets, the washers, and the nuts to all of the bolts 
in the vertical seams. Return the brackets and the posts 
to the tank erection tool set. 

MANHOLE COVER— If this tank is used for 
water storage, omit the emergency vent valve Kfiql 
GE2U. Install the manhole cover with the blind flange 
hatch set after installation of the manhole air intake. 

I nstall a 30 bolt hole gasket on the top flange of 
the dome. Insert 1/2- by 1 l/2-inch bolts through the 
flange and gasket, in that order. The gasket will hold 
the bolts in place. Install a 30 bolt hole manhole cover 
[fig. 9-21,1 #1) over the bolts. Install the gasket, the 
washer, and the nut on all of the bolts. Install the 
washer and the nut as above. Tighten the bolts. 

Emergency Vent Valve 

The emergency vent valve consists of a one-piece, 
flanged, round, cast steel body, fitted with lugs for a 
hinged vent. The vent is a one-piece, round, cast steel 
body, fitted with a lifting handle and hinge lugs. The 
vent comes attached to the flanged body hinges and 
seals the deck opening. 

Place the manhole cover gasket over the bolt holes 
at the opening in the cover ftfiq. 9-21] , $). I nsert 1/2- 
by 1 1/2-inch bolts through two bolt hole channels. 
Work through the 10-inch hole and insert the bolts 
through the cover and the gasket. Install the vent valve 
Ifio. 9-211 #2) over the bolts. Apply the nuts to the 
bolts. Tighten the bolts. 

Manhole Air Intake 

The manhole air intake consists of a one-piece, 
round, flanged sheet steel dust restrictor ring, a 
one-piece, round, fabricated steel bar, an inside screen 
ring, and a copper insect screen. The insect screen is 


attached to the screen ring by two outside rings, 
formed from steel bars. Flange bolts, inserted through 
the manhole cover, a dust restrictor ring, and steel pipe 
sleeve spacers attach the air intake to the manhole 
dome. 

Wrap the insect screen around the outside of the 
inside screen ring. J oin the ends of the screen with the 
copper wire weave. Install an outside screen ring at the 
top and the bottom of the insect screen to hold it in 
place. Make sure the screen is not knocked out of 
position. Tighten the bolts. 

Install the screen ring on the top flange of the 
dome Kfio. 9-20] #3). I nsert the flange bolts through 
the cover, the dust restrictor ring, the steel pipe sleeve 
spacers, and the top flange of the dome Rfig. 9-201 #3), 
in that order. Apply the nuts to the bolts and tighten. 

Place the manhole cover gasket over the bolt holes 
at the opening in the cover. I nsert 1/2- by 1 l/2-inch 
bolts through the two bolt hole channels. Work 
through the 10-inch hole and insert the bolts through 
the cover and the gasket. Install the blind hatch flange 
over the bolts. Apply the nuts to the bolts. Tighten the 
bolts. 

Outside Ladder 

The outside ladder consists of one bolted steel 
angle section. The top of the ladder is attached to the 
deck by two fabricated steel handrails. Two bolted 
steel angle braces support the ladder at the bottom 
chi me of a stave. 

Place the left side ladder section and the right side 
ladder section with similar bolting legs facing each 
other on top of several pieces of blocking of sufficient 
length to support both sections and spaced wide 
enough apart to install a ladder step I (fig. 9^2H #6). 

Select the bottom end of the ladder. Seven steps 
make up the assembled section. I nsert 1/2- by l-inch 
bolts through the ends of the step and the sections, in 
that order. Install a nut on each bolt protruding through 
the sections. Tighten the bolts after all of the steps are 
installed. Install the braces at the bottom of the section. 

The leg with three bolt holes near each end of the 
braces is attached at the outside face of the vertical 
legs of the sections. Insert a bolt through the end bolt 
hole in the sections and the brace. Install the nuts on 
the bolts. Finger tighten the bolts. Install the handrails 
at the top of the sections. Insert the bolts through the 
horizontal legs of the sections and the rails, in that 
order. I nstall the nuts to the bolts. Tighten the bolts. 


9-13 


















Use the temporary ladder while you are installing the 
outside ladder. 

Place the assembled ladder where it is convenient 
to thief and vent at the outer perimeter of the deck. 
Lift the la dder and set the end bolt holes of the braces 
[fig. 9-211 #7 and # 8) over the bolts in the bottom chime 
of the staves. Mark the bolts. From the top of the 
temporary ladder, mark the bolts in the outer 
perimeter of the deck covered by rails. Set the outside 



Figure 9-22.—One-piece flanged elbow installed 
on the inside of the tank. 


ladder aside. Remove the nuts from the bolts. Set the 
outside ladder back over the bolts. Install the nuts on 
the bolts, lighten the bolts. Tighten the bolts by 
attaching the braces to the bottom of the ladder. 
Remove and disassemble the temporary ladder. 

Water Drawoff Valve 

The valve assembly consists of a commercial 2-inch 
bronze valve made up in a cast-iron flange with a 
gasket installed outside the tank. A one-piece, flanged 
cast steel elbow with a gasket is installed inside the 
tank. The valve and elbow bolt together through the 
side of the tank 

FLANGED ELBOW.— Install the elb bw (tig, g 

22, #1) inside the tank on the stave. Cut four one-hole 
gaskets. Force the gaskets over the bolts. Insert the 
bolts through the flange of the elbow. Place the 
blocking under the heads of the bolts. Force a gasket 
over the bolts. Turn the inlet of the elbow toward the 
tank bottom. I nsert the bolts through the stave. I nstall 
the nuts temporarily on two bolts while you are 
assembling the valve. Remove the nuts before 
installation of the valve. 

DRAWOFF VALVE.— Hold the el bow l (fig. 9^221 
#1) in position inside the tank. Install a gask let (fig~9- 

23, #1) over the bolts. Install the outside flange over 
the bolts. Install the nuts on the bolts. Tighten the 
bolts. I nstall the made-up valve inside the flange. With 



Figure 9-23.—Water drawoff valve installed on the outside of the tank. 


9-14 












the threads tight, the valve outlet must be facing the 
ground. 

Tank Outlets 

The outlet assembly consists of an elbow, 
fabricated, made up with a flange, inside, cast iron, 
and a gasket installed inside the tank An adapter, 
fabricated, steel pipe, made up with a flange, outside, 
cast iron, and a gasket are installed outside the tank 
The outlet end of the adapter is sealed with a cap 
(malleable iron), held in place by a bolted split 
coupling (malleable iron). The adapter and elbow are 
bolted together through the side of the tank. 

Cleanout Cover and Frame 

Special bolt channels are installed inside the 
tank at the top and sides of the cleanout opening. 
Gaskets are installed over the bolts outside the tank. 

The frame is a fabricated, rectangular shaped, 
flanged steel sheet that is flanged all of the way 
around, both front and back. The back flanges are 
radiused to fit the outside of the tank. The holes in 
the bottom flange are punched to fit the tank chime. 



Figure 9-24.—Bolts installed at cleanout 
opening. 


The cleanout cover is a flat, rectangular steel 
sheet. Two formed, round steel handles are welded 
the outside face of the sheet. 

HORIZONTAL CHANNEL.— Place the bolt 
channel above the cleanout opening inside the stave 
(fig. 9-24,1 # I). Insert 1/2- by 1 l/4-inch bolts through 
all of the bolt holes. Be sure the bolt heads are square 
in the channel. Install the gasket along the full 
length of the top seam outside the stave. Allow a one 
bolt ho overlap at each end. 

VERTICAL CHANNEL.— Each side seam the 
cleanout opening consists of one vertical row bolt 
holes. Place a bolt channel inside the tank on each 
row of bolt holes. Insert the bolts through all of the 
bolt holes. Be sure the bolt heads are square in the 
channels. Install the gasket along the full length each 
row of bolts. Pass the gaskets over the top sea gasket. 
Allow a one bolt hole overlap at each en Apply a 
heavy coating of sealing putty at the overlap of the 
top and vertical seam gaskets. I nstall the radii gasket 
under the vertical seam gaskets at the bottom chime 
of the stave. 

CLEANOUT FRAME.— To assist in the 
installation of the cleanout frame ftfiq. 9-25J #2), push 
all of the chime bolts flush with the gasket on the 
chime of the bottom to provide clearance for sliding 



9-15 


Figure 9-25.—Cleanout cover installed. 











the frame in place. Install the frame with the radiused 
flanges over the bolts with the flange against the 
outside of the stave. As the frame straddles a lap seam, 
make sure a wedge gasket is under the gasket at the 
seam. Work the bolts through the bottom flange of the 
frame. Install the nuts temporarily or enough bolts to 
hold the frame in place. 

I nstal I the gasket and the washer with the cup side 
down over the gasket on all of the seam bolts. Omit 
the gaskets and the washers on the chime bolts. Apply 
the nuts with a rounded facedown on all of the bolts. 
Tighten them uniformly around the frame to maintain 
a leakproof joint. 

CLEANOUT COVER— Work from the back 
and insert 1/2- by 1-inch bolts through the front 
flanges of the frame. Install the gasket along the full 
length of each row of bolts in the top and the bottom 
flanges. Allow a one bolt overlap at each end. Install 
the gasket along the full length of each row of bolts in 
the side flanges. Press the gaskets over the top and the 


bottom flange gaskets. Allow a one bolt hole overlap 
ate each end. 

Apply a heavy coating of sealing compound at the 
overlap of the top and the side flange gaskets. Stand 
the cover Kfiq. 9-25,1 #6) in position with plates #7 and 
#8 set for direct reading, and slip the cover over the 
bolts. I nstal I the gasket and the washer with the cup 
side down over the gasket on all of the bolts. Apply 
the nuts with a rounded facedown on all of the bolts. 
Tighten the bolts uniformly around the cover to 
maintain a leakproof joint. 

Cleaning Site 

The tank erection crew must clear out all of the 
debris, paper, and any other matter of an inflammable 
nature, leaving a clean and neat installation for the 
pipeline crew or others. All of the tools and other 
erection equipment must be picked up and returned to 
the tank erection tool set. 


9-16 




CHAPTER 10 


PONTOONS 


When the United States entered World War II, our 
Navy was faced for the first time with the problem of 
landing and supplying large forces in areas where 
traditional harbor facilities were controlled by the 
enemy. Navy Lightered (N.L.) pontoons were 
developed in 1942 to meet this difficult situation. They 
were designed for erection by naval personnel and 
shipment aboard Navy vessels. These pontoons 
pro-veal to be an invaluable asset and were used 
extensively in operations during World War II, the 
Korean conflict, and again in Vietnam. 

P-SERIES PONTOONS 

P-series pontoons were used throughout the 
Republic of Vietnam in combat conditions. Although 
originally designed to meet the requirements of the 
Advanced Base Functional Component (ABFC) 
System, they have been used successfully in many 
other fields due to their inherent versatility and ease 
of erection. Large structures are easily and quickly 
disassembled then made into smaller structures, and 
then the smaller structures can be quickly and easily 
reassembled into larger structures. The light draft, 
structural strength, mobility, and adaptability of 
pontoon structures made them extremely useful for 
shallow water passage and tactical deployment in the 
Mekong Delta. They allowed movement of heavy 
weapons and shifting of firepower throughout 
otherwise remote areas. Many structures not 
discussed in this manual, such as armored barges, 
helicopter pads, mortar barges, and barracks barges, 
were constructed in the field for use in special 
situations throughout the waterways of South 
Vietnam. 

TYPES OF P-SERIES PONTOONS 

Five basic types of P-series pontoons are in use 
today, designated PI, P2, P3, P4, and P5. These 
pontoons are specially designed, internally reinforced, 
welded steel cubes. They are tested to withstand an 
internal pressure of 20 pounds per square inch (psi). 
All pontoons have plain deck plates covered with a 
nonskid coating, and all are, fitted with a 2" plugged 


hole for air, drain, or siphon connections at the top and 
bottom of one of the end plates. 

The PI pontoon is cubicle in shape. (See fig. 
10-1.) The deck of the PI is 5'3/8" x 7', and the sides 
are 5'3/8" high. The side, end, deck, and bottom 
plating is 3/16" thick. The PI is the most common and 
widely used pontoon in the P-series. Its usage is 
required in every structure of the pontoon system. 

The P2 pontoon has the same depth (5'3/8") as the 
PI, but it has a 7’ square deck and a straight-line 
sloping bow. (Se dfia. li>2l ) The side, end, and deck 
plates are 3/16" thick. The sloping bow plate is 3/8" 
thick. P2 pontoons are used on the bow and stern of 
various pontoon structures. 



Figure 10-1.—PI pontoon. 



Figure 10-2.—P2 straight-line sloping bow pontoon. 


10-1 










The P3 pontoon has an inclined deck5'l 3/4" long 
and T wide. (See fig. 103.) The deck slopes from 4' 
11 3/8"to3'8 1/4" high. The bottom is horizontal. All 
plating is 3/16" thick The sloping deck is fitted with 
five 1" square ribs 5/6" long, evenly spaced and 
secured by welding, with a covering of nonskid paint 
applied between the cleats. The P3 is used in 
conjunction with the P4 to form a gradually sloped 
ramp for causeway ends and ramp barge bows. 

The P4 pontoon has a deck 5’1 3/4" long and 7’ 
wide inclined at the same angle as that of the P3 
pontoon. (Se dfiq. 10-41 ) The after end is 3'6" high; 
the forward end, 1'. The bottom is horizontal for 8" on 
the after end, then slopes upward. The deck, side, and 
back plates are 3/16" thick; the bottom, or bilge, plate 
is 3/8" thick. Five evenly spaced, 1" square ribs are 
welded to the sloped deck, and a coat of nonskid paint 
is applied between the cleats. Used in conjunction with 
the P3 pontoon, the P4 forms a continuous ramp for 
causeway ends and ramp barge bows. 



Figure 10-3.—P3 sloped deck pontoon, 



Figure 10-4.—P4 ramp-end pontoon. 


P5 pontoons consist of P2 pontoons with 
quick-lock hinge connectors fixed to the bow. The 
P5M is a P5 with a male connector; the P5F is a P5 
with a female connector. (Se ^fia. 10-51 ) P-series 3 x 
15 pontoon causeways are connected end-to-end by 
alternate P5M and P5F pontoons; so are barge sections 
that are used as wharves where end-to-end connection 
is required. These pontoons are constructed by 
welding hinge connectors to P2 pontoons that are then 
assembled in male and female sequence, forming 
causeways of any required length. These pontoons are 
also used for enlarging or extending wharf structures. 
The center section of the P5F hinge is made from a 
section of extra strong pipe. When joined, these two 
parts resist the torsion, compression, and vertical shear 
forces in the joint. 

Making end-to-end connections with P5M and 
P5F pontoons is not a difficult task |(fiq. 10-5) . When 
the mating ends of two causeway or wharf sections are 
brought together, the male pipe connection is simply 
guided into the female and held in place by pad eyes 
and links. The resulting pipe joint then prevents 
vertical movement of either section. A short 
chain-locking device completes the connection and 
secures the links in the pad eyes. Each set of hinges is 
capable of withstanding 300,000 pounds of pull. 
Closure plates are welded on either side of each 
connection to bridge open spaces between pontoons. 

A wide variety of structures-wharves, barges, 
causeways, and so on-can be assembled from 
pontoons. I n the assembly of pontoon structures, the 
pontoons are first joined into strings and the strings 
are launched; the floating strings are then attached to 
each other. Structures of not over three strings in width 
can be entirely assembled on land and then launched 
as a unit. The number of pontoons in each string and 
the number of strings attached to each other depends 
upon the size and type of structure being assembled. 
The manner of assembly is similar in each case with 
variations depending largely on the intended use of the 
completed structure. The size of each pontoon 
structure is designed by indicating the number of 
strings in the assembly and the number of pontoons in 
each string, Thus a 3 x 15 causeway section is three 
strings wide and fifteen pontoons long. Pontoon gear 
is usually shipped with the parts required to complete 
a specific structure. 

PONTOON ATTACHMENTS 

Pontoon attachments, used in the basic assembly 
of pontoon structures, include assembly angles, bolts, 
nuts, keepers, assembly plates, and closures. 


10-2 













P50 CLOSURE 
ASSEMBC 


P5M 


Figure 10-5.—End-to-end connections for P5M and P5F pontoons. 


Structural steel ASSEMBLY ANGLES in varying 
lengths are used to connect the P-series pontoons into 
stings. Each is suitable for assembling a definite 
number of pontoons and designated as E-series angles. 
The angles are positioned to each of the four edges of 
a row of pontoons. Various types of assembly angles 



Figure 10-6.—All E516 assembly angle. 


are available l Figure 1CL61 shows an ES 16 assembly 
angle ] Figure 10-71 shows assembly angles E 16L and 
E 26L. 

Angles are supplied in several lengths, so strings 
can be made up with a minimum number of welded 
joints, and they are designed so these welds fall 
midway along the edges of each pontoon, rather than 
between pontoons where stress is greatest. Each angle 
has one or two cross-sectional sizes, 6" x 6" x 1/2" 
thick or 8" x 8" x 1/2" thick. Angles with 8" legs are 
used to replace 6 x6's at the center of strings 18 to 24 
pontoons long, and strings of 30 pontoons have 8" 
angles throughout to resist the extra stress that their 
weight imposes. Regardless of dimensions, however, 
each P-series angle falls into one of two types: basic 
or end-condition angles. Basic angles are those angles 
used throughout the body of a structure. Their 
application is not restricted to top, bottom, left, or right 



10-3 












angles of the strings. On the other hand, end-condition 
angles connect P2, P3, or P4 pontoons to the ends of 
strings, and each is designed for a specific 
orientation-top or bottom and right or left. Basic 
angles can be shortened or lengthened to make up 
modified configurations, and end-condition angles 
can be cut and formed from basic angles to meet 
abnormal operating requirements. 

The A6B ASSEMBLY BOLT is a 1 1/2”diameter 
x 3 3/8" long, hexagonal head, steel bolt |(fiq. 10-81) . 
Three radial grooves on the head, spaced 120 degrees 
apart, are the code for grade 5 steel rated at a tensile 
strength of 105,000 psi. In addition to its use in 
securing assembly angles to pontoons ate each comer, 
the A6B bolt is also used to connect strings into 
structures, to secure deck fittings and accessories, and 
to pin hinges on dry dock stabilizer towers. 

The forged FNI FLANGED NUT |(fiq. 10^9] is 
designed to fit into a pontoon pocket with sufficient 
clearance to allow positioning on the A6B assembly 
bolt. The flange of the nut is large enough to prevent 
the nut from turning in the pocket when the bolt is 
tightened; it is formed near the midline of the nut to 
clear welds in the pocket and allow positive se sting of 
the nut hoss when the A6B bolt is tight. 




The KPI KEEPER PLATE Kfia. 10-101 is made 
from a plate 3 3/4" long, 2 1/8" wide, and 3/16" thick. 
The plate is cut out to fit over four of the hexagonal 
flats on the A6B bolt head. After final tightening of a 
bolt in a pontoon structure, the keeper plate is 
positioned around the bolt head and skip-welded to the 
underlying assembly plate or angle. This prevents the 
bolt from working loose during operations. To reduce 
maintenance problems, you should use the keeper 
plate on the bottom of pontoon structures where daily 
inspection is impractical. Keeper plates should not be 
welded to the bolt head. 

Steel PLATES of various shapes are used in the 
assembly of pontoon structures mostly to reinforce 
those areas that are subjected to maximum stress and 
shear. A number of different types of assembly plates 
are shown in lfiqure 10-llj Each of the plates shown is 
designed for a specific application, as indicated below. 

API CONNECTING PLATE: The API is a steel 
plate with four drilled holes for A6B assembly bolts. 
It reinforces the A6B bolts that hold pontoon strings 
to each other in completed structures that use either 6" 
or 8" angles. 

AP3 LAUNCHING ANGLE PLATE: When 
pontoon structures are to be side-loaded on an LST, an 
accessory known as an LAI launching angle is 
attached. The AP3 is a steel plate that is used to attach 
the LAI to the structure. The AP3 has four drilled 
holes for A6B bolts, and a curved plate is attached to 
form a semi cylindrical pad. The pad serves as a fender 
to protect the hull of the LST on which the pontoon 
structure is side-loaded. 



Figure 10-10.—A KPI keeper plate being installed on an A6B 

bolt. 


10-4 





















































Figure 10-11.—Assembly plates. 


NOTE: As of this printing LSTs are being 
decommissioned and it is undecided what platform 
will transport causeways. The information on LSTs is 
given because the Reserve Fleet will retain two and 
the next platform used could require the same 
hardware for loading and launching. 

AP4ATIE PLATE: The AP4A is a steel plate with 
two drilled holes for A6B bolts. It is used for 
connecting pontoon strings to each other at their bow 
and stem ends. If necessary, an acceptable substitute 
for the AP4A can be obtained by cutting an API 
connecting plate in half across the narrower 
dimension; two plates are produced, both of which can 
be used. 

LA2 LAUNCHING ANGLE END PLATE: The 
LAI launching angle used when side-loading a 


pontoon structure on an LST is attached to the 
structure at the bow and stem ends with a two-hole 
assembly plate, just as pontoon strings are connecteed 
within the structure by the two-holed AP4A at the bow 
and stem. The two drilled holes in theLA2 are for A6B 
bolts. Two half-ovals are welded perpendicularly to 
the upper face of the plate, on either side of the bolt 
holes. These half+oval lugs serve as fenders to protect 
the hull of the LST in the same way as the pad on the 
AP3. 

AP5 END PLATE: The AP5 is a steel plate that 
is welded across the gap between pontoons at the bow 
and stem of adjacent strings. It is used only in certain 
special cases where structures require extra 
reinforcement; for example, where end connectors are 
used or where the structure will be side-launched. An 


10-5 




TO FORM 00° ANGLE 


DROP FENDER 


FENDER MOUNTING 



SWNP0422 


Figure 10-12.—Typical fender installations. 


acceptable substitute for the AP5 can be 
field-fabricated, if necessary, from an API. To do so, 
remove the holes from the API by cutting 3" inside 
the two edges measuring 18 1/4", and halve the 
resulting 18 1/4" x 5" plate to produce two 9 1/8" x 5" 
plates; both can be used as end plates. 

AP6 CHAFING PLATE: The AP6 is a steel plate. 
10” square, with two opposite edges beveled. Welded 
to the sides of causeway sections, the AP6 protects the 


causeway from damage due to sliding contact. It is 
frequently used between side-lapped causeway 
sections. Because the AP6 is a nonstock item, it should 
be fabricated in the field when it is required. 
Dimensions are not critical; halves of an API or an 
AP7 pi ate will serve as chafing plates when properly 
beveled. 

AP7 GUSSET PLATE: The AP7 is a steel plate 
cut in the form of a 9“ high trapezoid. The parallel 


10-6 



edges are 18" and 12" long, and the 18" edge has a 1/4" 
bevel. The AP7 reinforces the end-condition angles 
used at the fore and aft ends of larger structures. The 
18" edge is positioned against a tip or bottom assembly 
angle so the plate bridges the gap between the 
pontoons to which the angle is bolted. The 18" edge is 
welded to the angle, and the two vertical edges are 
welded to the adjacent pontoons. API connecting 
plates can also be used for reinforcing, welded to 
end-condition angles in the same way as the AP7. 

AP8 RAMP-END BENT PLATE: The AP8 is 
fabricated from steel plate. An 11" x 20 1/4" rectangle 
is bent to form two legs, one 8 5/8" and the other 11 
5/8" long; each leg has two drilled holes for A6B bolts. 
The AP8 is used for connecting pontoon strings at the 
point where each string has a P3 sloped-deck ramp 
pontoon connected to a PI pontoon. 


RUBBER FENDERS 


Anew rubber fendering system for use on pontoon 
structures has replaced oak timber fenders. Rubber 
fendering is wing-type, extrusion-shaped, styrene 
butadiene composition; it is supplied in random 
lengths to be cut, formed, and fitted in the field for 
specific structures and operating conditions. For each 
structure, the fenders, brackets, retainers, and 
fasteners are furnished in the quantities required. The 
new fenders absorb enough impact, upon contact with 
the dock or other structure, to transfer shock from 
dynamic to static load, thereby protecting both of the 
impacting structures. 


To install rubber fenders, lay out fendering on the 
deck over the position to be installed. Cut it to the 
required length, bolt on the retainers and the brackets, 
and ease it into position, using lines attached. 
Tack-weld the brackets in pi ace temporarily, remove 
the lines, and when the entire fender is properly 
positioned, weld all the brackets as shown on the 
drawings. Damaged portions can be cut out and 
repaired with a rubber portion of the same length. Use 
odd pieces for drop fenders or bumpers. Use a 
fine-tooth oil-lubricated saw, manually operated or 
power-operated, for cutting wood or steel bits for 
drilling holes. Various fendering arrangements and 
details are shown i n l figure 10-12. i These are subject to 
change to meet local fendering needs. 


H6 HATCH COVER AND 
FLOOR PANEL ASSEMBLY 

Various pontoon structures require a stowage 
space for tools, chaining, fittings, and miscellaneous 
gear when not in use. The H6 hatch cover and floor 
panel assembly tfig, 10- 131 ) was designed to be 
installed on any designated pontoon structure and 
consists of a mounting frame, grating panels, hanger 
rings, and a 21" diameter, quick-acting, waterproof, 
flush-mounting, shipboard type of scuttle, together 
with the parts required to convert a PI pontoon into a 
stowage compartment. Making the necessary cutout in 
the pontoon deck and installing the hatch cover and 
the other components are done in the field When 
installed, the hatch cover is a string as the pontoon 
deck. However, on structures normally traversed by 
heavy loads, such as causeways and ramp barges, it is 
advisable to locate the hatch cover away from the 
regular line of travel-preferably to one side and as 
far forward or aft as possible—to protect the 
watertight sealing gasket under the hatch rim. 

DECK CLOSURES 

Deck closures are used to bridge the openings, or 
slots, between pontoons while meeting the 




Figure 10-13.—H6 hatch cover and floor panel assembly. 


10-7 





































requirements for fitting around plates and lift pads. 
They also can be configured to provide access to 
assembly angles between structures for wrapping 
chains and wire rope during causeway beaching and 
LST side-carry operations. Formerly, five types of 
closures were needed to perform the necessary 
functions. These were identified as DC1 through DC5. 
The DC6 deck closure [tig. 10-1471 with certain field 
alterations, was designed to fulfill all closure 
requirements and will replace the five closures 
entirely when stocks of these have been depleted. 

The H22 and H23 closure plates are used for 
joining pontoons and for making bridge-to-wharf or 
barge-to-wharf connections. The H17AF and FI 17AM 
heavy-duty hinges are used to close the deck openings 
formed by the hinges between the pontoon sections. 
The closures ( |ng. iu-i57) which are 20” wide and 24 
1/4" long, are made from 1/2" steel plate and are used 
in combinations to fit over and enclose the heavy-duty 
hinges. Nonskid coating is applied on the top of the 
closures to prevent slippage. The H22 and H23 
closures are not included in the heavy-duty hinge set. 
They are to be fabricated in the field as required. 

BITTS AND CLEATS 

Bitts and cleats are steel posts, or arms, to which 
lines are secured. Structures to be side-carried should 
have bitts and cleats, as well as all other deck fittings, 



Figure 10-14.—DC6 deck closure. 



bolted down on the launching angle side. A typical 
cleat is shown in i figure 10-161 The B1 all-purpose bitt 
I (fig. 10-1^ 1 consists of a single 4" diameter post that 
is 13" long with a 6" diameter cap welded to a base 
that has two drilled holes for A6B assembly bolts. A 
1 1/2" diameter crossarm, 16 1/2" long, runs through 
the post approximately 10" above the deck. The B1 
can be used on all structures requiring a single bitt and 
can be welded to the deck angles opposite the 
launching angle side. 

The B4 bitt Ifia. 10-181 is the same as the B1 bitt 
except for the base that has been designed for quick 
positioning in the CPI chain plate. 





Figure 10-18—B4 retractile bitt. 


10-8 















































The M147 double bitt Ufig. 10-19 ) consists of two 8" 
steel pipe posts, 20" long, welded to a 13" x 40" base 
and capped on the upper ends. 

PROPULSION UNITS 

Self-propelled pontoon barges and tugs are 
powered by outboard propulsion units. These units 
have been specially designed for this purpose and 
readily installed on tug s or barges of any size. The 
propulsion unit shown in i figure 10-20l is essentially a 
heavy-duty outboard motor, consisting of a propulsion 
mechanism and a marine diesel engine mounted on a 
heavy structural base. Propulsion power is carried 
from the engine through a right-angle housing and a 
vertical-drive housing to the propeller. Steering is 
affected by shifting the propulsion-force direction; the 
propeller can be turned around a vertical axis in either 
direction through a complete circle. Each unit has a 
steering wheel and an indicator that show direction of 



Figure 10-19.—M147 double bitt. 



Figure 10-20.—Model L-295 diesel outboard 
propulsion unit. 


travel. The tail section, with the propeller, is mounted 
on the vertical housing assembly that can be elevated 
outward and backward to raise it out of the water for 
inspection or repairs. As new equipment and 
techniques for amphibious operations developed, 
performance requirements for all components 
increased accordingly. As a result, propulsion units 
have increased in power and thrust capability. 

PONTOON STRING ASSEMBLY 

After the first two assembly angles have been 
placed on the ways, the pontoons are placed in the 
angles Kfigs. 10-21 h nd 10-22). The pontoons are 
positioned on their sides with all deck surfaces on the 
same side. The first pontoon will ordinarily be placed 
in the center of the angles with the assembly bolt holes 
aligned; placement of the remaining pontoons from the 
center toward each end can be accomplished without 
difficulty. 

Bolting Lower Angles 

As each pontoon is placed in the assembly angles, 
the A6B assembly bolt holes in the pontoon nut 
receptacles are aligned with those in the angles, using 
spud wrenches or driftpins as necessary. The A6B bolts 
arethen inserted through the assembly angles 



Figure 10-21.—Pontoon positioned on assembly 
angle. 


10-9 






















Figure 10-22.—PI pontoons on assembly angles 


and started by hand to thread the F N1 nut |(fiq. 10-231 ). 
The bolts should be snugly tightened, then backed off 
about one turn. 

Positioning Upper Angles 

The second pair of assembly angles is placed on 
the top of the pontoons and positioned and bolted in 



Figure 10-23.—Positioning of A6B bolt and FN1 
nut to connect pontoon to assembly angle. 


the same manner as the bottom pair of angles. 
Spreader jacks, come-alongs, or heavy-duty pinch bars 
can be used to align holes for the top angles. 

Tightening Bolts 

After all of the A6B assembly bolts have been 
installed, final tightening is accomplished with an 
impact wrench or 48" ratchet wrench in those locations 
where accessories or assembly plates are not bolted to 
the structure. 

NOTE: The proper setting of A6B bolts requires 
tightening to a 2,400-foot-pound torque. (The 
applicable rule is to draw the bolt or nut up tight and 
then add another half turn.) 

FINAL ASSEMBLY OF STRING 

CPI chain plates, LAI launching angles, or other 
accessories that attach to the outer edge of the 
particular structure under construction can be 
installed on the string at this time, if desired. Strings, 
requiring the addition of a launching angle, should be 
so assembled on the way that the launching angle can 
be installed on the top of the string. After installation 
of the chain plates, the A6B assembly bolts that attach 
the parts are tightened, and the chain plates or other 
accessory items are welded, as required. KPI keeper 
plates can be installed at this time in all locations for 
which they are specified for the one string of the 
structure being built. After all fittings are in place and 
the assembly bolts tightened, the assembly should be 
inspected for security of bolts and fittings. After the 
first string has been launched, the same assembly 
procedures are followed for assembly of the second and 
additional strings, as applicable. 

LAUNCHING A STRING 

If the pontoon string has been assembled along the 
edge of a dock, it can be tilted into the water by means 
of jacks or a crane. If it has been assembled on a way, 
the anchorage is released and the string is allowed to 
glide head-on into the water. Note that adequate 
freeboard will be required for this method of launching. 
End launchings can be accomplished from flat or 
nearly flat ways by pushing the string with a 
bulldozier or pulling it with a tug or M-boats. Strings 
also have been assembled inland and pulled to the 
shoreline by a bulldozer. A line, secured to the string 
before launching, should be made fast ashore to keep 
the string from drifting away in either side launching 


10-10 













or end launching and can be used to assure that the 
string rights itself when launched. 

ASSEMBLY OF LAUNCHED 
STRINGS INTO STRUCTURES 


A new method for securing pontoon strings 
together, referred to as the bolt and nut attachment, has 
been implemented throughout the pontoon system and 
completely replaces the heavy tie rod assemblies 
formerly used. It consists of an A6B bolt and heavy 
nut connection through holes in the vertical legs of 
adjoining assembly angles between strings. Special 
wrenches have been designed to facilitate bilge angle 
connections while working from the deck, and a 
two-piece aligning tool is used when hole alignment 
restricts passage of the bolt. Detailed instructions for 
using the bolt and nut method of connection to 
assemble a pontoon structure are presented below. 



Figure 10-24.—Angle clamp for assembly of pontoon strings 


As each pontoon string is launched, it is brought 
up alongside the other string(s), lined up, and clamped 
together with J T2 top angle clamps irfTq. 10-24D . Insert 
the A6B bolts by hand through the holes in the vertical 
legs of the top assembly angles located in spaces 
between the pontoons, and secure them with the heavy 
nuts. This is done at every space, starting in the middle 
and working toward each end. Connections are 
threaded snug only, at this time, to be tightened later. 

After the top bolts and nuts are in place, the bottom 
angle connections are started. The hole locations and 
bolting pattern are the same as for the top angles, 
except that here the special wrenches are used for 
inserting the bolt, holding nut, and tightening, which 
is accomplished from the deck side. 

Using the J T7 drive wrench, insert theA6B bolt 
in the holes through the adjoining bottom angles and 
make contact with the nut being held in position with 
thej T8 backup wrench. When thread contact has been 
made, draw up snug but do not tighten until all the 
bottom bolts have been installed. Again, work from 
the center out to both ends. (If only one special wrench 
set is used, start in the center and work each side 
alternately toward the ends.) When all the bolts have 
been installed, reverse the wrenches so that j T8 holds 
the bolt whilej T7 drives the nut, and tighten all the 
nuts to the bolts, top and bottom, to the required torque 
of 2,400 foot-pounds. Note that the applicable rule is 
to draw the nut up tight, then turn it about another half 
turn. (Se ^fig. 10-251 ) 

TheJT13, a two-piece aligning tool, should be 
used when differences in the hole alignment between 
angles restrict easy passage of the A6B bolts. The 



LOWER ANGLE ATTACHMENT DETAILS USING BOLT & 

NUT CONNECTIONS IN LIEU OF TIE RODS SWNP0435 


Figure 10-25.—Lower angle attachment details using bolt and nut connections instead of tie rods. 


10-11 



































JT13 is inserted anywhere along the strings 
(preferably in the center) and drawn together tightly, 
using the J T7 and J T8 drive and backup wrenches. 
Leave the aligning tool installed, remove the J T7 and 
J T8 wrenches, and complete connections of the bolts 
and the nuts, after which remove the aligning tool and 
replace it with a bolt and nut. Lanyard rings, provided 
on wrenches and two-piece aligning tools, must 
always be used to safeguard against loss. 

As each string is secured with the bolt and the nut 
to the preceding string(s), installation of AP4A plates, 
pad eyes, chocks, cleats, and other accessories 
required for the structure and not previously installed 
on the strings are welded or bolted in position as 
specified in the detailed drawing. To complete the 
assembly, skip-weld the deck closures in the slots of 
the deck. 

ASSEMBLY OF COMPLETE 
STRUCTURE ON LAND 

Assembly of a complete structure on land is begun 
in the same manner as construction of strings, except 
that the structure is assembled parallel to the shoreline 
on rails perpendicular to the shoreline. Structures up 
to three strings wide can be built in this manner by 
assembling the second and third strings on top of the 
first. When built this way, the bolt and nut attachment 
previously described and the assembly plates are 


installed as the work progresses. KPI keeper plates are 
welded on the bottom A6B assembly bolts and 
accessories. They will not interfere with launching and 
can be attached to the assembly. Portable scaffolding, 
fabricated in the field and similar to that shown in 
I figure 10-26.1 is attached to the pontoon assembly 
angles and can be moved to other locations on the 
structure to meet construction progress. The 
completed structure can be side-launched by sliding it 
out to the ends of the rails and tipping it into the water. 

USES OF PONTOON ASSEMBLIES 

A barge is any of several pontoon string 
assemblies connected together to form a complete unit 
used for transporting cargo, including vehicles and 
personnel, and used primarily in their transfer from 
landing craft to amphibious vehicles or for lighterage 
duties in ship-to-shore movement of cargo. Barges, 
designed for lighterage operations, either 
self-propelled or towed, can be built in various sizes 
and, with modifications as required, can be used as a 
diving platform for salvage operations, as a tugboat, 
as a gate vessel, for fuel storage, or for mounting 
cranes. 

The intended use of the barge determines the 
length of the strings, the number of strings needed, and 
the pontoon configuration of each string. Seven 
standard-size barges in the P-series equipment include 



Figure 10-26.—Portable scaffolding used in assembly of structures on a pier. 


10-12 












































the following: 3x7, 3x12, 4x7, 4x12, 5x12, 6x18, and 
10x30 barges. The conventional pontoon barge, in sizes 
up to and including the 6x18 barge, is designed to 
carry its rated load with 1' of freeboard or a load 
concentrated at the center point that is heavy enough 
to bring the deck awash. 

The 3x7 pontoon barge is a general-purpose 
structure that can be used as necessary in lighterage 
and ferrying operations. Cargo transport can be 
accomplished by tow, or the barge can be self-propelled 
by mounting a propulsion unit on the end without 
fenders. A 3x7 barge with a propulsion unit is shown in 
I figure 10-271 

The 3x12 pontoon ramp barge is ordinarily used 
for transporting cargo and equipment and has proved 
suitable for general use in amphibious operation. The 
sloping bow end with ramps attached permits beaching 
the barge under its own power. And also it helps to 
unload tractors and equipment that will be used to 
assist in forming a causeway pier. Four 3x12 barges 
can be side-loaded on an LST for side-carry to the 
assault area, or the barges can be loaded in the well 
deck of an LSD or deck-loaded on an LST. 

The 4x7 pontoon barge is similar in all respects to 
the 3x7 barge, except it is one string wider. Although 
this is a general-purpose barge used principally for 
lighterage operations, it is suitable for any 
transportation task within its capacity. 


The 4x12 pontoon barge is a general-purpose 
structure that can be used in lighterage operations 
either by towing or as a self-propelled structure by the 
addition of propulsion. 

The 5x12 pontoon barge is one string wider than 
the 4x12 barge but similar in all other respects. It is 
particularly suitablefor mounting a crawler crane with 
a lifting capacity ranging from 20 tons at a 12' radius 
to 7 tons at 55 1 . This barge can also be used as a 
general-purpose structure and can be used in 
lighterage operations as a self-propelled structure by 
the addition of propulsion units. 

The 6x18 pontoon barge is the second largest 
barge in the P-series pontoon system. Installation of 
propulsion units permits its use in lighterage 
operations for transporting loads (cargo, vehicles, and 
personnel) up to 250 tons. By the addition of 
accessories and equipment, the barge can be con verted 
into a 1,500-barrel fuel storage barqe Kfiq. 10-281 . Also, 
by installing heavy-duty hinges, the barge can be 
converted into a wharf or used for outfitting and repair 
of smaller structures when placed on its deck. 

The 10x30 pontoon barge is the largest barge in 
the pontoon system. It was d eveloped p rimarily for 
mounting a 100-ton derrick (Se d fig. 10-291 ) The barge, 
however, is adaptable to other uses. With propulsion 
units attached, it can serve as a lighterage barge in 
transporting over 800 tons of cargo at one time from 
ship to shore or dock. The barge can also be 



Figure 10-27.—A 3x7 pontoon barge with a propulsion unit. 


10-13 










used as a pier or wharf or, by installing heavy hinges, 
could be connected to any existing pontoon wharf to 
enlarge or extend that structure. 

Essentially, tugs are barges equipped with 
outboard propulsion units and the accessories required 
for the operations to be performed. The P-series 
equipment tugs are widely adaptable and can be used 
for towing, causeway tending, placing and retrieving 



anchors, salvage operations, assisting in the 
installation and recovery of fuel systems, and other 
services. 

The 3x14 warping tug shown in i figure 10-301 is 
equipped with two outboard propulsion units. The 
after end of the center string incorporates an anchor 
housing to accommodate the 2,500-pound mooring 
anchor and also holds the anchor wire away from the 
propulsion screws. An A-frame, mounted on the bow 
of the tug, stands approximately 13' above the deck of 
the barge. A double-drum winch is mounted near the 
center of the barge. A line from the after drum is 
fairlead to the deck and back to the anchor astern, 
while the line from the forward drum is run over a 
sheave in the top of the A-frame and is used for lifting 
over the bow or pulling from the bow of the warping 
tug. The winch is mounted on a welded steel 
cross-braced frame. Standard equipment for the tug 
also includes M147 double bitts and navigation lights. 
The warping tug is approximately 90' long and 21' 
wide, has a stem draft of 48", a bow draft of 18", and 
a speed of 6 1/2 knots. The 3x14 warping tug replaces 
the 3x12 tug throughout the pontoon system. The 
only difference in these two is that the 3x14 tug is 
longer by two PI pontoons and incorporates new style 
winches with lines feeding off horizontally laid 
drums. 


10-14 






















A PONTOON CAUSEWAY consists of an inshore 
section, an offshore section, and as many intermediate 
sections as necessary to make up the desired length. 
Lengths up to 1 mile are considered possible. Each 
section is a 3x15 structure designed to support a load 
of 105 tons with a freeboard of 12". 

Each string of the offshore (fig. 10-31) and inshore 
sections (fig. 10-32) is made up of 12 PI pontoons 
with a P3 sloped deck pontoon and a P4 ramp-end 
pontoon at one end At the other end is an end-to-end 
connection pontoona—a P5F (female) end connection 
pontoon on the offshore section and a P5M (male) end 
connection pontoon on the inshore section. Strings of 
the intermediate sections (fig. 10-33) are made up of 
13 PI pontoons with a P5F at one end and a P5M at 
the other. 

SIDE-LOADED CAUSEWAYS 

Causeways, as well as binges, normally are 
transported to the combat area side-loaded on an LST. 
To facilitate this, you should weld a hinge rail or shelf 
bracket on each side of the LST. An LAI launching 
angle is bolted to one of the outboard strings of the 
barge or causeway I (fig. 10-34D . 

The LST is listed far enough to the side being 
loaded to permit the hinge bar of the pontoon structure 
to be hoisted onto the shelf bracket. Then the structure 
is hoisted upright, either by a crane or by the winch(es) 


on the LST. The hoisting sequence can vary, 
depending on the gear used and the LST involved. 

Regardless of the method use& personnel from an 
amphibious construction battalion, usually with a 
SWC or BMC in charge, bring the required gear 
aboard and do the job. The ship's company make 
necessary preparations aboard ship and provide 
whatever assistance is required of them. 

FLOATING DRY DOCKS 

Floating pontoon dry docks are structures 
consisting principally of a main wharf-like deck and 
vertical side towers constructed of P-series pontoon 
units. Pontoon dry docks are submerged by admitting 
a controlled amount of water into the deck pontoons 
and raised by expelling the water with compressed air. 
The tower pontoons act as stabilizers to keep the dry 
dock level when the deck is under waler. Dry docks 
require 18' of water in which to submerge the decks 
12", the maximum safe submergence, and should be 
moored in sheltered, quiet water 18' to 20' deep, in an 
area with a smooth bottom, devoid of large rocks or 
other obstacles. Two sizes of pontoon dry docks are 
presently in the ABFC System. This is identified as 
the 4 x 15 (100-ton capacity) dry dock. I Figure 10-351 
shows a 6 x 30 pontoon dry dock installation. 

The assembly method of erecting pontoon strings 
for the dry docks is the same as those used for other 
pontoons structures. Only PI pontoons are used and 


10-15 
















DETAIL A 



10-17 


Figure 10-32.—Inshore causeway section. 






AIL A 



10-18 


FFlgure 10-33.—Intermediate causeway section. 







are made up into strings, launched, and joined in the 
water the same as with other structures. However, 
before pontoon string construction, dry dock drawings 
should be prepared in detail to show the type and the 
location of parts, together with field erection 
information. It is important to make available the 
applicable drawings of the dry dock to be erected at 
all times during the initial construction stage. This will 
ensure that parts are properly located, positioned, and 
secured and will facilitate erection during the final 
stage. 

ELEVATED CAUSEWAY SECTIONS 

The elevated causeway pier facility (ELCAS) 
provides a link between lighterage and the beach by 
bridging the surf zone. The standard ELCAS consists 
of six 3x15 approach or roadway sections and six 
3x15 pierhead sections (fig. 10-36). The pierhead is 


two sections wide by three sections long. Since the 
facility is modular, it may be expanded by enlarging 
the pierhead and/or adding approach sections. The 
basic component of the ELCAS is the 3 x 15 
intermediate causeway section that is converted to the 
elevating mode by the addition of spudwells. 
Spudwells provide the attachment between the 
causeway deck and the supporting piling. Internal 
spudwells (fig. 10-37) are used where the full width 
of the causeway section is required for traffic and to 
support the fender piles along the fender side of the 
pierhead. The internal spudwell incorporates four 
grooved connection pins that are inserted into four 
receiver boxes attached to the side of the causeway. 
Two guillotines are lowered into the pin grooves 
behind the receiver boxes to secure the spudwell to the 
section. A steel-angled locking key is used to lock the 
guillotine into place. External spudwell s i (fig, 10-381 


10-19 





































































10-20 


Figure 10-36.—Twelve section elevated causeway. 





Figure 10-37—Internal spudwell. 



Figure 10-38.—External Spudwell. 


are used in the outboard strings of pierhead sections, container handling crane. The external spudwell is 
where side to aide connection with another section is fabricated into a frame having the same overall 

required, and at load-bearing points, such as under the dimensions as a PI pontoon. It is interchangeable with 


10-21 





















Figure 10-39.—Types and positions of causeway sections in the ELCAS. 


the PI pontoon and uses the same attaching hardware. 
The ELCAS consists of four distinct parts as follows: 

Z The PIERHEAD is made up of four types of 
sections. It is the offshore section of the ELCAS and 
supports cargo unloading functions. The pierhead 
includes a crane installation for off-loading lighterage 
and a turntable for turning trucks around on the 
causeway. 

Z The FENDER SECTIONS provide an 
interface between the pierhead and the lighterage. 

ZThe ROADWAY provides for two-way traffic 
between the pierhead and the beach. 

Z The BEACH RAMP provides access from the 
beach to the ELCAS. 

The types of sections used and their locations are 
shown in i figure 10-391 

CONSTRUCTION OF 
PIERHEAD SECTIONS 

The type 1 pierhead section makes use of four 
internal spudwells. This section is also equipped with 
support brackets to receive the side connectors used to 


join these sections side to side with type 3 pierhead 
sections. 

The type 2 pierhead section contains six internal 
spudwells. Support brackets for side connectors are 
also used in this type. Additionally, the type 2 section 
contains six reinforced PI pontoons. 

The type 3 pierhead section uses four internal and 
three external spudwells. Support brackets must be 
also added to support the side connectors. 



10-22 




















The type 4 pierhead section, which supports the 
container handling crane, contains seven internal and 
three external spudwells. Six reinforced PI pontoons 
are also included. 


CONSTRUCTION OF FENDER 
SECTIONS 


A fender section is a l'xl5’ structure incorporating 
three fender soudwells Kfia. 10-401 . Fender piles are 
driven through the fender spudwells after the 
causeway is elevated [(fig. 10-411 . The fender section 
can then rise and fall on' the piling. A series of 
foam-filled fenders are strung on the outboard side of 
the fender system to absorb impact from lighterage. 
Since it is only one pontoon wide, the fender system 
uses P5 pontoons as end-to-end connections instead of 
the P8. 



10-23 

















CHAPTER 11 


PRE-ENGINEERED STRUCTURES: SHORT AIRFIELD 

FOR TACTICAL SUPPORT 


The Short Airfield for Tactical Support (SATS) is 
a rapidly constructed expeditionary airfield that can 
be erected near a battle area to provide air support for 
amphibious Marine forces. In any land-and-sea 
military/contingency operation, the rapid assembly of 
a temporary airfield provides ground units with the 
distinct advantage of continuous air support on foreign 
soil. Because of this, the Marine Corps has been trying 
several types of expeditionary airfields since early in 
World War 11.1 nitial research used wooden planking 
for the runway surface. Later, during the Korean 
Conflict, aircraft actually landed on pierced steel mats, 
known as "Marston matting." 

One of the more important breakthroughs in SATS 
research was the development of Short Expeditionary 
Landing Field (SELF). SELF, a bulky predecessor of 
SATS, was a 4,000-foot runway that served as the 
landing area. In earlier expeditionary arresting 
operations, the Marine Corps had been successful with 
the M-2 Mobile Arresting Gear (MOREST). 
However, the weight of this gear (74,000 pounds) 
decreased its usefulness as a portable unit. 

In 1956, the Commandant of the Marine Corps 
established exact specifications for the development 
of a portable expeditionary airfield. This proposed 
airfield was to be 1,000 feet long, construction 
completed in 5 days, and capable of accommodating 
one squadron of aircraft for 30 days. Additionally, the 
Marine Corps required that the field be designed to 
allow both launch and recovery (arresting) operations. 
These standards included the development of a 
land-based catapult and lighter arresting gear to 
replace the M-2 MOREST. In 1958, the runway 
specification was expanded to 2,000 feet and received 
official SATS designation. However, because the 
catapult and arresting gear are no longer available in 
theABFC (Advanced Base Functional Components) 
System, they are not discussed in this chapter. 

Because Steelworkers can be assigned to crews 
assigned to place airfield matting, we will discuss the 
important parts of SATS. Also, the proper placement 
procedures for AM-2 matting are discussed and 


information is also provided on the installation and 
repair and removal of AM-2 mating. 

PARTS OF SATS FIELD 

A SATS field incorporates numerous parts. We 
will not attempt to cover all the parts of a SATS 
installation but will cover enough to make you 
familiar with the function of each of the major parts 
that make a SATS field an effective system. 

AM-2 MATTING 

The AM-2 mat (fig. 1 l-l) is a fabricated 
aluminum panel, 1 1/2 inches thick that contains a 
hollow, extruded, one-piece main section with 
extruded end connectors welded to each end. (AM-2 
mats may also be fabricated in two- and three-piece 
main panel extrusions that, when welded 
longitudinally, form the same size and shape as the 
one-piece extrusion.) The AM-2 mat comes in full 
sheets and half sheets and is painted Marine Corps 
green. The top surface is coated with a nonskid 
material of the same color. For runways and taxiways, 
the mats are installed in a brickwork type of pattern. 
The staggered joint arrangement provides the required 
stability across the runway and the necessary 
flexibility in the direction of aircraft travel. 



Figure 11-1.—AM-2 mat. 


11-1 




The sides of the mat panels are constructed to 
interlock with a rotating motion. The end connectors 
are arranged with the prongs up on one end and down 
on the other [fig, 11-1J section A-A). By placing the 
end connector of one mat properly over the end 
connector of the previous mat, you can form a 
continuous layer of matting. A flat-locking bar is then 
inserted into the slot common to the two mats to form 
a nonseparable joint. 

The physical characteristics of AM-2 matting are 
shown in ltable liTII 

AM-2 mats are packaged in two standard pallet 
loads for storage and shipment. One pallet assembly, 
designated Fll, consists of 11 full-length mats, 2 
half-length mats, and 13 locking bars Kfia. 11-21 . The 
other mat pallet, designated F15, contains 16 full-length 
mats, 4 half-length mats, and 20 locking bars 
[fig. 11-3] , The pallets are fabricated end frames that 
are held together by tie rods or strapping. The end 
frames fit around the ends of the mats and become the 
storage pi ace for the locking bars. 

The quantity of mats found in the standard pallet 
assembly (F11) provides a width of two rows (4 feet) 
on a runway or taxiway that is 72 feet wide. For widths 
other than 72 feet, more or less coverage (in terms of 
strip length) is obtained. Since the parking and storage 
areas need not have a specific mat pattern, as is 
required on the runways and taxi ways, the "extra” 
half-length of full-length mats that result from the 
runway construction may be used in these areas. The 
use of a guide rail and/or keylocks will not affect the 
amount of coverage to any great extent. 


INSTALLATION 

As a Steelworker, you can be assigned to a project 
placing AM-2 mats for airfield surfaces; therefore, 
you need to be familiar with the procedures used for 
installing mats. Primary operations involving site 
preparation and pallet staging are also discussed. 
Additionally, information on manpower requirements 
and the organizational structure of the installation 
crew is presented. 

Site Preparation 

'he soil and subbase materials of the site selected 
as the SATS field must be suitable for use with the 
AM-2 landing mats. The subbase material must have 
a minimum compaction of 95 percent, and the 
engineering staff will provide you further guidance 
based on their analysis of the soil type and the 
available base materials. 

The operations that are part of the site preparation 
that must be completed before mats are installed are 
as follows: 

1. The terrain in the area to be used must be 
cleared, leveled, and rolled to provide the designated 
compaction for the matting base. Grading must provide 
adequate drainage of water away from the field area and 
the soil must be disturbed as little as possible in 
obtaining the prescribed finish. These operations will 
provide a soil having a maximum bearing capacity. 

2. The soil in any area under the matting, requiring 
installation of service, drainpipes, or other objects, must 
be backfilled and thoroughly compacted 


Table 11-1.—Physical Characteristics of AM-2 Matting 



ONE-PIECE 

MAIN EXTRUSION 

TWO-PIECE 

MAT 

(1) Weight (full-length mat) 

1441b 

148 lb EST 

(2) Length (full mat) 

12ft 

12 ft 

(3) Length (half-mat) 

6ft 

6ft 

(4) Width 

2ft 

2ft 

(5) Wt/Sq Ft of Coverage 

61b 

6 lb EST 

(6) Locking Bars 



Length 

24 in. 


Width 

5/8 in. 


Depth 

3/16 in. 



11-2 






















DETAL "A’ 

TIE ROD CONNECTION 


6WNP0464 


DETAIL "B" 

TE ROD CONNECTION 



Figure 11-2.—FI 1 AM-2 full-length pallet. 


3. The final grading operation must be adequately 
level so mats, when laid, do not vary more than l/4inch 
in height over a 12-foot distance. 

4. Hand raking is necessary to remove small rocks 
and other debris that would hinder this task as well as 
the connecting of mats. 

5. The overall field configuration must be staked 
out in its entirety. Accurate longitudinal and transverse 
center lines must be established to ease the staging of 
the pallets. When no guide rail is used, both lateral 
runway edges must be accurately marked to ensure 
smooth linear edges from which to lay the mat field. The 
line for the edges of the runway is determined by using 
a transit and marking them clearly with a chalk line or 
stakes. This type of survey is also required when 
taxiways and parking areas are installed. When a guide 


rail installed, only the center line of the guide rail is 
established by transit. 

NOTE: Site preparation may not be required if 
there is an existing concrete or asphalt runway because 
matting can be laid over the existing hard surface. 

Pallet Staging 

Under combat/contingency operations, pallets 
must be staged in a manner to keep manual handling 
to a minimum. Additionally, staging should maximize 
all available equipment and manpower coupled with 
consideration for the climatic conditions in which the 
construction is started 

Different methods are used for the staging of 
pallets. The most efficient method is the staging of 


11-3 











pallets by rough-terrain forklifts. This method is the 
most eflicient because the forklift can deliver the 
pallets directly to the mat-laying crews who 
disassemble the pallets on the forklift. Pallet 
disassembly is done at the work area, rather than the 
storage point, because the mats could be dropped and 
damaged while being moved if they are uncrated and 
moved in a loose configuration. The forklift remains 
on site until the pallet load has been installed. This 
method presumes that an adequate number of forklifts 
are available to resupply the laying crews 
continuously. Round-trip time between the work area 
and the pallet storage area must be considered to keep 
the work flowing smoothly and completed in a time] y 
manner. 

The primary rough-terrain forklift used in the 
NCF is the 4K rough-terrain forklift |(fiq. ll-4| l. A 
diesel engine-driven, self-contained, material¬ 


handling vehicle, the 4K forklift is designed primarily 
for the rough-terrain handling and warehousing of 
materials. The 4K forklift can lift and carry loads up 
to a maximum of 4,000-pound capacity and is the ideal 
equipment to use for staging pallets. The hydraulically 
operated forklift mechanism, mounted on the extreme 
front of the vehicle, eases the lifting, reaching, tilting, 
and sliding of loads during material-handling 
operations. 

AM-2 matting in its palletized configuration is 
vulnerable to damage resulting from improper 
handling. Lifting eyes are contained in the pallet end 
frames to receive the sling lifting hooks. Under NO 
circumstances should "choker” type of slings be used 
because these damage matting side connectors. 
Normal cargo-handling precautions must be used 
during AM-2 pallet assembly handling. 


11-4 


















SWNPG4SA 

Figure 11-4.—4K rough-terrain forktlift. 


Pal let components are vulnerable to damage by 
misuse of tools, such as cutting torch, bolt cutters, and 
sledge hammers. Therefore, extreme care must be 
used during pallet disassembly. No spare components 
are packaged in the pallet. 

Installation Crew 

Field experience dictates that a 16-man crew 
provide maximum efficiency and flexibility when 
laying a runway 96 feet in width. Two crews can be 
used inlaying a runway and additional crews used for 
laying other areas simultaneously. A typical crew of 
16 would include 1 petty officer in charge, 1 alignment 
person, 2 pry bar crew members, and 12 (six 2-person 
teams) mat installation personnel. 

The alignment person ensures the field is aligned 
by adjusting the first mat in each transverse row, so it 
is flush with the presurveyed lateral boundary before 
the rest of the mats in that row are laid. 

The pry bar crew members adjust individual mats, 
using a pry bar to provide maximum allowance for 
thermal expansion and insert the mat-locking bars. 

The installation pesonnel, working with partners, 
take a mat from the pallet, carry it to the installation 
point, and then install the mat in place. 

SATS Field Installation Sequence 

The sequence of laying matting for a runway 
where a guide rail for a catapult system is not required 
is not the same as for a runway where a guide rail is 
required. f Figure lF5l shows you what a guide rail 


looks like. When a catapult facility is used with a 
SATS installation, a guide rail is needed to provide 
stability to the dolly and the aircraft during the launch. 
The guide rail is supplied in 9- and 10-foot lengths and 
has connectors on both sides to mate with the mat end 
connectors. A l/8-inch rubber seal is installed between 
each section to provide for thermal expansion and to 
prevent debris and soil from coming up between the 
rail sections. Dowel pins are used between two holes 
in the mats at each end of the guide rails to maintain 
alignment of the sections. The guide rail is installed 
concurrently with the mat field, and standard 
mat-locking bars are used to secure it to the mats. 

NOTE: The catapult and arresting system is not 
available currently in the ABFC System. Flowever, it 
was originally designed for the ABFC System and 
could be used in the future; therefore, information on 
guide rails is provided. 



Figure 11-5.—Guide rail. 


11-5 












































):: i _ J_ _ J:: i_T_r^ 



EDGE OF 
RUNWAY 


STARTER 

KEYLOCK' 

STEP 7 




r~r 


—J=S 


(—h f ■ I —T8-J 
i _ j_ _ 'cirsstzpr ~ i —l" 


I J 3 T-—4 5 I — fc —i f—J 



t 


8 I 


STARTER 

KEYLOCK 

STEP 8 


—c 


\fi 




r—s—| - - - 8 - ■ -J - - 4 , 

7-T-t—2—T-r 2 - 1 , 


■TRANSVERSE 
CENTER LINE 
OF RUNWAY 


i__; 


TYPICAL 

KEYLOCK- 






100 FEET 


9 - FOOT SECTION 


(7) 12 - FOOT SECTIONS 

3 - FOOT SECTION 



SWNP0458 


Figure 11-6.—AM-2 mat installation sequence without a guide rail. 


The general sequence of laying matting for any 
length of installation where a guide rail is not required 
is to start at the transverse centerline and work toward 
each end simultaneously. The starter keylock section 
is laid, and then individual mats are laid in a brickwork 
type of pattern from left to right when facing the 
working area. The left-to-right sequence is dictated by 


the mat interlock design which is such that reversing 
the procedure is difficult and inefficient. The coated 
side is always "up," and the interlocking prongs on the 
2-foot edge are always to the right and up. Survey lines 
are present to guide at least one edge of the section 
being laid to maintain proper longitudinal 
alignment. Other sections of the site maybe laid in 


11-6 







the same reamer and at the same time if survey lines 
have been established, pallet staging has been 
accomplished, and sufficient personnel are available. 
A typical keylock section is laid every 100 feet, 
starting with the 100-foot mark on either side of the 
starter keylock. 

The general sequence of laying mating for the 
runway with the guide rail installed is to start at one 
end (at the approach apron) and work toward the 
opposite end. The guide rail divides the runway into 
two sections, 18 feet and 78 feet (or 18 feet and 30 feet 
for a 48-foot runway). Individual mats are laid in a 
brickwork type of pattern from the guide rail to the 
outer edge in each section when facing the working 
area. The starter keylock is not used when laying a 
runway with a guide rail. Instead, typical keylocks are 
laid at 100-foot intends on the runway, and other 
sections of the SATS field are laid as explained in the 
previous paragraph. 

Be sure to inspect visually upturned sides and end 
connectors of AM-2 matting for foreign matter before 
placing them in position. The presence of dirt, chips, 
stones, and soon, can prevent proper interlocking of 
the mats. Brooms or brushes can be used to clean 
foreign matter from the connectors. 

Mat-Laying Procedure without 
a Guide Rail 

The sequence for installing AM-2 mats and related 
components where a guide rail is not required is shown 
in |figure 11-6.1 The sequence can be modified, so work 
proceeds on only one row of mats at any given time; 
however, SPEED OF INSTALL ATION IS 
IMPORTANT. The sequence, as shown in i figure 11-61 
allows the use of at least two crews with six 2-man 
teams on each crew carrying and placing mats and 
keylocks. 

When placing AM-2 mats, you should have three 
types of keylocks: starter, typical, and female. You 
should use a step-by-step procedure to place the AM-2 
mats. 

STARTER KEYLOCK.— The starter keylock is 
a narrow mat that is used to decrease runway 
installation time by approximately one half Kfiq. 11-71 . 
Previous mat installation methods required 
assembling the runway at one extremity and working 
to the other end. The starter keylock is installed in the 
middle of the runway only and enables two mat-laying 
teams to start together and work simultaneously 
toward each end of a runway, section. Starter keylocks 



Figure 11-7.—Starter keylock. 


are furnished in 3-foot, 9-foot, and 12-foot lengths to 
allow for the staggering of joints in matting patterns. 
The starter keylock is coated with a nonskid material. 
It is not used in installations having a guide rail. 

TYPICAL KEYLOCK.— A typical keylockRTfgl 
111-8D is inserted every 100 feet in the pattern to permit 
the easy removal of sections of the matting for a 
multiple-mat replacement. For this reason, only a 
maximum of 50 feet of any one section needs to be 
removed to replace mats that could not economically 
be replaced as individual units by replacement mats. 
Typical keylocks are furnished in 3-foot, 9-foot, and 
12-foot lengths to allow the staggering of joints of 
matting patterns. The typical keylock is coated with a 
nonskid material. 

FEMALE KEYLOCK.— A female keylock RTfgl 
111-9D is used to join two adjacent male mats. The 
female keylock is coated with a nonskid material. 



Figure 11-8.—Typical keylock. 


11-7 

















Steps for Laying AM-2 Mats and Keylocks 

The procedure for laying AM-2 mats and keylocks 
is shown in figures 11-10 through 11-18 and consists 
of the fol lowi ng steps: 

1. Lay starter keylocks on the transverse center 
line of the runway. (See fig. 11-10.) A 9-foot starter 
keylock is laid at the outer edge of the runway. Remove 
the socket head screws from the keylock to allow for 
extending the locking bars into the next keylock section. 

2. Place a 12-foot starter keylock next to, and 
aligned with, the 9-foot section. Move the 12-foot 
section against the 9-foot section, and adjust the locking 
bar so the socket head screws secure the locking bar in 
each section this procedure secures the 9-foot starter 
keylock and the 12-foot starter keylock, as shown in 
detail "A” of figure 11-10. 


3. Repeat laying six more 12-foot sections and one 
3-foot section of starter keylocks to complete the 
96-foot width of the runway. 

NOTE: Initially, lay several transverse rows of 
AM-2 matting in one direction only from the starter 
keylock row. If matting is started on both sides of the 
starter keylock, a seesaw force could result, disturbing 
the alignment of the entire field. 

4. With the nonskid side of the mat turned up and 
the upturned prongs on the right, align the first mat (half 
mat) on the left side with the starter keylock Kfiq. 11-111 . 
Al ign the downturned prongs with the runway edge. 
Hook the female edge of the mat into the groove on the 
starter keylock [?fTg. 11-121) while holding the mat in an 
angular position. Rotate the mat downward to form the 
joint. (See lfiq. 11- 121 ) 

5. Lay the second and all successive mats the same 
way as the first mat Kfiq. 11-111 in relation to the starter 
keylock. The downturned prongs of the second mat 
should mate with the upturned prongs of the first mat, 
as shown in i figure 11-13J When the mats are properly 
engaged, a rectangular slot is formed by the engagement 
of the end connectors. 

6. Lock the first and second mats together, as 
shown in lfiqure 11-141 by inserting the locking bar Kfiq.l 

rTTBl) . 

NOTE: The first two mats and all mats in the first 
row should be aligned accurately before inserting the 
locking bar. Misalignment of mats will prevent proper 
installation of the second row. Locking bars may stick 


RUNWAY 

TRANSVERSE 



11-8 



















Figure 11-11.—Placing first and second mats 



TYPICAL LOCKED POSITION 
FOR MATTING AND KEYLOCKS 


Figure 11-12.—Engaging first half mat (half length) to starter keylock. 


because of the natural waviness in the manufacture of 
the mat end connectors and the locking bars. A few 
light taps of a hammer should drive the bar into the 
proper position. 

7. Place the third mat at the start of the second row, 
as shown in lfiqure 11-16.1 Ensure that the third mat is 
aligned on the left side with the mat in the preceding 
row. Refer to l figure ll-12l and step 4 for the engagement 
procedure, which is the same for the engagement of the 
third mat with the first and second mats. 

NOTE: The first row of mats and each alternate 
row thereafter is laid using half mats at the outer edges 
of the runway and full mats in between Kfiq. 11-61 . The 
second row of mats and each alternate row thereafter 
is laid using full mats only. This method provides a 
staggered joint for greater matting strength. 

8. Complete the first row, installing six more 
full-length mats and finally a half mat, using the same 


procedure as described for installation of the second 
mat. (See step 5.) 

NOTE: The first row of mats on the opposite side 
of the starter keylock row are all full mats |(fiq. 11-61 . 

CAUTION 

Align the first row accurately with stakes 
or guidelines delineating the extent of matting. 

As work progresses, periodically check the 
alignment of mats already installed. Any 
misalignment causes a displacement of the 
runway from the planned position at the far end 
of the field. 

9. Install the second and succeeding rows 
according to the procedure for the third mat (first mat 
in the second row) with one notable exception. The 
second mat in each row must first be hooked to the 


11-9 



























Figure 11-15.—Insertion of the locking bar. 


STARTER KEYLOCK - 



SEE FIG. 11 -12 FOR 
MAT ENGAGEMENT 


HALF MAT 
(TEMPORARILY LAID ASIDE) 


Figure 11-16.—Placing of third mat (full-length). 


preceding row while being held at an angle Kfiq. 11-121 . 
The mat must then be aligned so when it is rotated 
downward, the end connectors mate properly, as shown 
in i figure 11-131 

NOTE: The mats are designed with an apparent 
'loose fit." This is to allow for expansion and also to 
allow for the natural waviness inherent in the extruded 
mat sections. Because of this, it is possible to have a 
row of mats "installed" but misaligned so as to prevent 
the proper engagement of one or more of the mats in 
the following row. (Such a condition in exaggerated 
form, and the method of corrections, is shown is lfiqurel 


111-17.1) Locking bars may be used as temporary 
spacers between the rows to prevent this. Place a 
locking bar on edge where the ends of two mats join 
and as the row ends. After three or four rows have been 
laid using locking spacers, proceed with the remainder 
of the runway or taxi way by removing the spacers 
from thefurthest row and using them in the row just 
laid. 

CAUTION 

If it becomes necessary to adjust matting 
with a sledge, always place a wooden block 


11-11 












SWNPQ400 

Figure 11-17.—Correction of mat misalignment. 


against the mat edge before striking, as shown 
in ffigure 11-171 

10. Every 100 feet, install a row of typical keylocks 
in the matting field Kfia. 11-6K . Place a 9-foot typical 
keylock at the outer edge of the runway with the female 
end of the keylock aligned with the first mat of the 
preceding row Kfia 11-1 S ). Engage the female edge of 
the typical keylock with the male edge of the mat in the 
preceding row (similar to fig 11-12 and step 4). 

11. Place a 12-foot typical keylock next to the 
installed 9-foot typical keylock. Move the 12-foot 
section against the 9-foot section after first engaging the 
female edge of the keylock with the male edge of the 
first twoo mats in the preceding row. Raise the socket 
head screw in the male end of the 9-foot keylock until 
the threaded hole in the female end of the 12-foot 


keylock is aligned. Then secure the socket head screw 
in the 9-foot keylock, using the socket head screw 
wrench. 

See detail "A" of I figure 11-18 I that shows the 
typical keylocks secured together. Repeat laying of six 
more 12-foot sections and one 3-foot section of the 
typical keylocks to complete the 96-foot width of the 
runway. 

NOTE: After the laying of a row of typical 
keylocks every 100 feet, continue laying AM-2 
matting, according to steps 4 through 9, to the ends of 
the runway. 

Runway APPROACH APRONS are required at 
each end of the main runway. These aprons are ramps 
made of mats placed to prevent the tail hook of a low 


11-12 















12 - FOOT MATS 



12-FOOT 

TYPICAL 

KEYLOCK 


SEE DETAIL "A" 


\ 

\ I— EDGE OF 
-9-FOOT X RUNWAY 
TYPICAL ' 

KEYLOCK 


SWNfWO 



DETAIL *A■ 

TYPICAL KEYLOCK CONNECTION 


Figure ll-18.-Placing typical keylocks in a matting field. 


incoming aircraft from engaging or hooking onto the 
edge of the runway. (See lfiq. 11-191 ) 

The aprons are constructed in a brickwork type of 
pattern but may be entirely of half-length mat units 
and extend across the full width of the runway. The 
free end of the apron should fall a distance of 18 to 24 
inches below the normal ground level. The ground 
surface beneath each mat should be shaped to provide 
full contact across the bottom of the mat. After 
installation of the ramp, the excavation should be 
backfilled (ramp covered to the normal ground level). 
The backfill should be tamped and compacted. 

Installation of the ramp at the starting end of the 
runway can be readily accomplished although the 
installation procedure is slightly different. Place the 
side connector under the overhanging lip of the first 
row of mats and lift until contact is made. The mat is 
then rotated downward while keeping the two mats in 
contact. Locking bars are installed as described 
previously. 

MAT END RAMPS are used at the ends of the 
runways, laid on a hard surface (concrete), to smooth 
the passage from one surface to the other. The edge 
connection between the ramp and mat sections is the 
same as between two rows of matting. The ramp is 
fabricated from aluminum extrusions and is provided 
with welded inserts and extension plates, drilled and 
tapped to allow the ramp sections to be joined and 
anchored. (Se dfio. 11-201 ) 


When installing mat end ramps, you should use 
the following procedure: 

1. Install the first ramp at the right-hand corner, 
looking toward the opposite end of the runway. Place 
the next ramp adjacent to it, ensuring that holes in the 
overlapping pi ate on the ramp line up with threaded 
inserts on the matting ramp. Insert five flathead screws 
in each ramp, using the Allen wrench provided in the 
toolbox. Apply antiseize compound to the screw 
threads. 

2. Next, use the locking baron the edge between 
the ramps and edges of the mats to assure the alignment 
is straight. 

3. As the ramps are placed and screwed together, 
drill holes in the concrete for lag screw shields, using 
the holes in each ramp as a template. Drill holes to 
5/8-inch diameter and 3 inches deep with the drill bit 
from the toolbox. Insert an expansion shield in each hole 
drilled in the concrete. Insert a lag bolt and washer in 
each counterbored hole. Tighten the lag bolts with the 
offset, square box-end wrench provided in the toolbox. 

4. Complete the end ramp installation, as shown in 
I figure 11-211 

Mat-Laying Procedure with a Guide Rail 

The sequence for installing AM-2 mats and related 
components where a guide rail for a catapult system is 
required is shown in i figure 11-22.1 The guide rail 
divides the runway into an 18-foot and a 78-foot 


11-13 












Figure 11-20.—Mat end ramp. 


11-14 






































DETAIL A 


INTERLOCKING OF END RAMP 



soon 


wmm 


' ^nmo| 


Figure 11-21.—Placememt of mat end ramps. 


C=IE= 

SWNP0473 


section. The laying of matting should proceed in one 
direction only, from oneend of the runway. Laying of 
the guide rail, mats, and related components is as 
follows: 

NOTE: The instructions presented here are for a 
96-foot runway, but they are also applicable for a 
48-foot runway. 

1. Establish the guide rail center line, using a 
transit. 

2. Install the first guide rail with dowel pins facing 
aft (opposite the direction of laying the guide rails). The 
first guide rail should be 9 feet in length, NAEC (Naval 
Air Engineering Center) Part No. 6125354, to prevent 
alignment of the guide rail joint with the mat joint. 

3. Install the next four guide rails (10-foot rail) 
using spacer seals, NAEC Part No. 414233-1, and gap 
gauges, NAEC Part No. 414219-1, between the guide 
rail joints before driving the dowel pins. Check for 
proper position of the pins in the guide rails, using a pin 
gauge, NAEC Part No. 414212-1. 


NOTE: As the guide rails and mats are being laid, 
any visible depressions in the grade should be filled in 
and raked with the applicable hand tools. 

4. Insert the transit target, NAEC Part No. 
414691-1, in the center slot of the guide rail and 
preliminary alignment of each rail. 

5. Lay the 18-foot section of AM-2 matting, as 
shown in i figure 11-22.1 1 nsert the mat-locking bars 
between the guide rail and the mat. (Se dfia. 11-231 ) 

6. Insert the transit target, NAEC Part No. 
414691-1, in the center slot of the guide rail and make 
the final alignment by shifting the five guide rails and 
attached mats. The guide rails and mats maybe shifted 
by pounding the edge of the guide rail or mat with a 
wooden block and a mallet. The guide rail center line 
should not vary more than 1/4 inch in 50 feet in the 
horizontal direction nor more than 1/8 inch in 12 feet in 
the vertical direction as determined by a 12-foot 
straightedge. The straightedge should be moved in 
6-foot increments. 


11-15 


































































































EDGE OF RUNWAY 


5 SECTIONS OF GUIDE RAIL 


END OF RUNWAY 


STE p HALF-LENGTH 


STEP 2 


STEP 3 


STEP 4 


STEP S 


MAT. 


EDGE OF RUNWAY 


3T 


TYPICAL 

KEYLOCK 


STEP 6 


STEP 7 



Figure 11-22.—AM-2 mat installation sequence (with guide rails—96-foot-wide runway). 


7. Begin laying the 78-foot side of matting for the 
length of the guide rail and matting as aligned in step 6. 
Transverse mat joints should not vary more than 3 
inches between the 18-foot and 78-foot-wide section of 
the runway where joints meet the guide rail and the mat. 
Installation of the 78-foot side may lag behind the guide 
rail and the 18-foot side but should never be installed 
beside the guide rails that have not yet been aligned 
according to step 6. 

8. Install the next five guide rails. Guide rail joints 
should never be closer than 3 inches in reference to the 
transverse mat joi nts. (Se 4fiq. 11-231 ) To ensure the 
3-inch distance between the mat and guide rail joints, 


substitute a 9-foot length of guide rail for a 10-foot 
guide rail. Lay matting on the 18-foot side and then the 
78-feet side. (See steps 5,6, and 7.) Continue installing 
the runway until 100 feet of the matting has been laid. 

NOTE: A minimum of ten gap gauges should 
remain installed to the rear of the guide rail dowel pins 
being installed. 

9. Every 100 feet, install typical keylocks across 
the runway. Typical keylocks cannot be secured to the 
guide rail. Cut keylocks in 6-foot sections, as necessary, 
to ease installation on the 18-foot and the 78-foot sides 
of the guide rail. Refer to the section discussed 
previous] yin this chapter on "Mat-Laying Procedures 


11-16 















































Figure 11-23.—Laying of guide rails and mats. 


without a Guide Rail,” steps 10 and 11, for typical 
installation of keylocks in the field 

10. Install approach aprons at both ends of the 
runway. Use 90-degree connectors to join the approach 
aprons to the field matting. (Se dfig. 11-24.1) Connectors 



are 12-foot-long aluminum "H" sections that allow 
relative movement and slight misalignment between the 
adjoining sections of matting. 

Field-Laying Procedure 


The sequence for laying an entire field is as 
follows: 

1. The main runway 

2. The lateral taxiways 

3. Thetaxiway that is parallel to the runway 

4. The parking stands and storage areas 

The above sequence may be modified in the 
interest of gaining time in the overall installation by 
laying the main runway and the parallel runway at the 
same time. Then the lateral taxiways and parking area 
can be installed. 


11-17 








CAUTION 

If the latter procedure is to be used the 
distance between the runway and its parallel 
taxiway must be carefully controlled Since the 
mat width is 2 feet, a gap of almost 1 foot could 
occur at each end of the interconnecting lateral 
taxiway. The gap between the lateral taxi way 
and the long taxiway and runway should not 
exceed 2 inches. 

RUNWAY-TAXIWAY CONNECTIONS.— 

Install W-degree connectors on the edge of the runway 
at the point where the lateral taxiways will connect 
with the runway. The 90-degree connectors may be 
used at other points where two mat-laying patterns, at 
90 degrees to each other, are to be joi ned. 

NOTE: The 90-degree connectors can be used to 
connect the end of the lateral taxiway with the long 
taxi way also. 


The two procedures for installing 90-degree 
connectors are as follows: 

PROCEDURE NUMBER 1. Where the 
adjoining pattern has not been laid, install a sufficient 
number of 90-degree connectors along the 2-foot edge 
of matting, such as the edge of the runway, equal to 
the width of the taxi way or other section to be joined. 
Lay a half-length mat into the first 90-degree 
connector, so the end of the mat matches the end of the 
connector. Engage the prongs of a full-length mat into 
the prongs of the half-length mat previously laid and 
push into engagement with the 90-degree connector. 
Continue to lay mats in the above manner until the first 
row is completed to the length of the 90-degree 
connectors. Additional mats may then be laid in the 
usual manner. (Se ^fiq. 11-251 ) 

PROCEDURE NUMBER 2. Where the 
adjoining mat pattern has already been laid, adjust the 
last few rows of matting (of the taxi way), so the space 




RUNWAY 

DIRECTION 



^ ' »> 


RUNWAY 

DIRECTION 



11-18 














































































































between the runway and the taxiway is between 1 and 
2 inches. Place a 90-degree connector in position, as 
shown in i figure 11-26.1 Using a sledge hammer and a 
wooden block, drive it into position. The most 
efficient method is to drive the 90-degree connectors 
from either edge toward the center of the taxiway. 
Place a mark at or near the midpoint of the 12-foot 
length of the mat. Drive the first connector to this 
mark. The positions of the remaining 90-degree 
connectors are then automatically established. Care 
must be maintained while driving the connectors not 
to al low debris to be scooped up by the forward edges 
of the connectors. 

INSTALLATION OF TIE-DOWNS.— 

The-downs are provided for aircraft anchorage. (See 
I fig. 11-271 They are shipped in a package or 
container, as shown in i figure 11-281 An individual 
container contains 120 tie-downs, plus the screws, 
drilling, and tapping equipment necessary to install 
the tie-downs. 



When tie-downs are to be installed, start by 
drilling and tapping the AM-2 matting on the 
prongs-down connector. Drill two holes for each 
tie-down ring retainer, using tools from the tie-down 
container. The procedure for drilling is as follows: 

1. Secure the sleeve, 412131-1, to the 5/16-inch 
drill with the setscrew, using the drill fixture, 509044-1, 
as shown in operation l. lfiqure 11-29.1 Orient the sleeve 
to ensure seating of the setscrew on the body diameter 
of the drill. 

2. Position the drill fixture, as shown in operation 
2 Ifia. 11-29)1 and drill one hole, as shown. Proper depth 
is obtained when the sleeve contacts the bushing. 

3. Insert the pilot, 4121301, through the drill 
bushing into the drilled hole, and drill the second hole, 
as shown in operation 3 Kfiq- 11-29] , 



Figure 11-27.—Tiedowu 


(120 TIE-OOWNS) 

Figure 11-28—Tie-down container. 


4. Tap two holes 3/8 inch, 16 threads per inch, 
unified national coarse class 3B fit. Finish with the 
bottom tap to obtain 9/16-inch minimum full-thread 
length. 

5. Store the sleeve and the pilot in the holes 
provided and secure with setscrews. 

After the drilling is completed, secure the ring 
retainer with two socket head screws. 

PARKING AND STORAGE AREAS.— The 

parking and storage areas should be installed next. 
Mats and locking bars are installed in the same manner 
as the runway and taxi ways, except that the staggered 
joint pattern is not mandatory. This means that the area 
can be built up in any random pattern and that all 
leftover half-length or full-length mats can be used. 
The 90-degree connectors should be installed between 
these parking and storage areas and taxi ways 
according to the procedure outlined earlier. Install 
tie-downs on the matting in these areas, as shown in 
I figure 11-301 

BLAST DEFLECTOR INSTALLATION.— To 

shield the ground area around taxiways and parking 
areas from the blast effects from aircraft, install blast 
deflectors as required. Assemble blast deflector 
adapters to the boundaries of matting that will be 


11-19 










































OPERATION 1 


OPERATION 2 


Figure 11-29.—Drilling jig for installing tiedowns 


OPERATION 3 

SWNP0481 



either male edges, female edges, prongs-down ends, 
or prongs-up ends. Three types of adapters are 
supplied to fit anyone of the joints. Erect AM-2 mats 
to the exposed upturned edge of the adapters to 
provide the blast shield. Use the adapters to support 
each AM-2 mat. (See lfig. 11-311 ) 


MATTING REPAIR 

During use in the field, matting may become 
damaged and require repair or overhaul. Some of the 
repairs that may be necessary are covered here. If you 
are called upon to make repairs other than those 


11-20 


























































Figure 11-31.—Installation of blast deflector (adapters and mats). 


covered below, consult your leading petty officer for 
instructions. 

INDIVIDUAL MAT REPLACEMENT 

If an individual mat is damaged and cannot be 
satisfactorily repaired, damaged AM-2 mats may be 
cut out of the installation and replaced with a 
replacement mat assembly. A replacement mat is 
shown in lfiqure 11-32.1 Replacement mats allow the 
replacement of damaged mats with a replacement item 
that duplicates the original installation. These mats are 
complete with a nonskid coating. Replacement mats 


are prepared from AM-2 mats by cutting off the 
prongs-up edge and the male connector edge and 
welding on adapters. Additional adapters must be 
bolted on at the time of installation. 

To replace a damaged mat with a replacement mat 
assembly, follow the procedure below. 

1. Cut out the damaged mat so complete removal 
can be affected without damage to surrounding mats, 
this can best be accomplished using a portable circular 
saw, set for a 2-inch depth of cut. The cut should be 
made along the male edge and prongs-up connector. 
(Se dfiq. 11-331 ) 


11-21 










SOCKET HEAD 
CAP SCREW 



Figure 11-32.—Replacement mat 





Figure 11-33.—Mat cutting for removing mat. 


11-22 


2. Ensure that all recesses in the mats surrounding 
the repair area are clean. Use a broom or brush to 
remove any debris. 

3. Remove the male connector and adapters from 
the replacement mat, using socket head screw wrenches 
taped to the pallet. Be careful to retain the dowel pin in 
the lower adapter. (See view A o fl fig. 11-34] ) 

4. Place the lower adapter prong under the lower 
prong of the prongs-down end of the adjacent mat A, 
keepi ng the dowel pin up. (See view A o fl fig. 11-34] ) 

5. Place the middle and upper adapters on the 
lower adapter, using the dowel pin as a locating device. 
Ensure that the locking bar tongue on the middle adapter 
is in the locking bar slot of mat A and the upper adapter 
prong mates with the upper prong of the prongs-down 
end of the adjacent mat A. (See view B o fl fig. 11-341 ) 

6. Place the male connector into the female 
connector of adjacent mats B and C. (See view C o fl fig. I 
I H-341 ) 


7. Place the female connector edge of the 
replacement mat over the grooves of the male connector 
edges of adjacent mats E and F I (fig. 11-341 ) in the same 
manner that AM-2 mats are connected. Gently lower the 
replacement mat into place, being careful to lift the 
dowel pin into the hole in the connector adapter and the 
male connector adapter into the groove in the male 
connector. (See views A and C of l fig. 11-34] ) 

8. Align the holes between the upper, middle, and 
lower adapters and the connector adapter. The dowel 
pin will provide at least approximate alignment, 
although some minor shifting of the replacement mat 
with a pry bar maybe necessary. I nsert and tighten the 
four socket head cap screws with the 5/16-inch box 
wrench provided. (See view B o fl fig. 11-34] ) 

9. Place a clamp over the male connector. 
Alignment of holes can be accomplished by sliding the 
clamp in the adapter grooves. Insert and tighten the ten 
socket head screws with the 5/16-inch wrench. (See 
view C of lfio. 11-341 ) 



LOCKING BAR 
y SETSCREW 

< /'LOCKING BAR CONNECTOR 


LOCKING BAR 
ADJUSTING HOLE 


MALE CONNECTOR 
MALE CONNECTOR ADAPTER 


SOCKET HEAD SCREW 

SOCKET HEAD CAP 
SCREW 

CONNECTOR 
ADAPTER 


LOCKING BAR 


SETSCREW 


VIEW B 


VIEW C 

Figure 11-34.—Replacement mat installation. 


VIEW D SWNP04M 


11-23 















































10. Using the 5/32-inch socket head screw wrench, 
loosen the two setscrews retaining the locking bar. 
Insert a screwdriver or similar instrument in the holes 
next to the setscrews, and force the locking bar toward 
mat D as far as possible. This will lock the replacement 
mat and clear the setscrew holes. Bottom the setscrews 
so that the locking bar remains in plain. (See view D of 
fig. 11-34.) 

SECTION OF RUNWAY 
REPLACEMENT 

A section of runway replacement maybe required 
when groups of mats are damaged beyond repair or 
when excessive mat deflection and roughness, dueto 
cavities under the mats, must be corrected. 

The procedure for replacing a section of runway 
is essentially the same with or without a guide rail 
installation. However, with a guide rail installed, 
removal of typical keylock sections will proceed from 
the outer edge of the runway regardless of which side 
of the guide rail the repair is to take place. Without a 
guide rail and when starter keylocks are used, typical 
keylocks must be removed from the right-hand edge 
of the runway (or taxi way) when facing the end of the 
runway from the transverse center line. This edge of 
the runway exposes the female end of the keylock into 
which the special removal tool must be inserted. 

The replacement of a section of the runway is 
accomplished in the foil owing manner: 

1. Remove the first typical keylock action by 
loosening the socket head screw at the first inboard 
connection. This screw only needs to be loosened until 
it is free of the male end of the adjoining keylock (about 


7/1 6 inch). The screw should not be removed further 
since it is designed to be self-retaining and reassembly 
can be affected from this position. 

2. I nsert the prong of the removal tool under the 
turned down lip of the female connector and slide the 
keylock from its position, as shown in i figure 11-351 

NOTE: The initial 3-foot or 6-foot keylock 
section will have to be pried out since the exposed end 
is merely an unfinished cross-sectional cut and will 
not accept the removal tool. 

3. Loosen the next and subsequent connectors, as 
described previously, and remove the remaining 
keylock sections. If mat distortion is minimal, you may 
be able to remove more than one keylock section at a 
time. 

4. Use blocking and pry bars to lift the first row of 
mats high enough to allow the locking bars to clear. 
Each mat has one pry bar. All pry bars should be 
operated at the same time for the full width of the 
runway (or taxi way) to prevent warping of the mats. The 
mats will readily hinge at the first longitudinal mat joint. 

NOTE: If a guide rail has been installed, the 
adjacent mat maybe cut parallel to the guide rail. This 
cut must be made so it severs the locking bar to allow 
the locking bar and the end connector to be removed 
from the guide rail. 

5. With the row of mats raised, insert a bent rod or 
wire in the locking bar hole and remove each locking 
bar including the bars securing the cut piece of the guide 
rail. The first row of matting may then be disassembled 
and removed. (Se d fig. 11-361 ) 



11-24 







6. With the clearance now provided, removal of 
the remainder of the matting and additional guide rail, 
as necessary to affect the repair, may be readily 
accomplished Remove the cut piece of guide rail aft of 
the repair area by removing locking bars and 
disconnecting the guide rail pins, using a pin remover, 
NAEC Part No. 414223-1. Slide the guide rail out of the 
mats. 

7. Repair the ground surface, as necessary, before 
installing the guide rail and new or refurbished matting. 

8. The installation procedure must be the same as 
that for the original installation. Replace the locking 
bars. 

9. Reinstall matting over the repair area until the 
last row of matting is in place. At this point, this row of 
matting must be raised in unison with pry bars to permit 
installation of locking bars. 

NOTE: It will not be possible to insert locking 
bars between the guide rail and adjacent mats for this 
row. Therefore, a replacement mat should be installed 
next to the guide rail. A locking bar is built into the 
replacement mat. 

10. Insert the typical keylocks in the reverse order 
in which they were taken out. Always use wood 
blocking between the hammer and connector if force is 
necessary to drive the sections into place. 

Excessive mat deflection and roughness, which 
can be attributed to cavities under the mats, can be 
repaired in the following manner: 


1. Remove all mats that show excessive wear and 
deformation according to the instructions given earlier. 

2. Fill all cavities under the mats and cover cavity 
areas with old matting. Areas should be reinforced with 
any available matting: M9M1, M9M2, AM-1, or 
damaged AM-2 mats. The mats in the bottom layer need 
not be joined together to save material and manpower. 
It is advisable to have the reinforcing mats touching, but 
it is not imperative that the mats in the bottom layer be 
interlocked. The mats in the bottom layer must be 
placed with the long dimension of the mats at right 
angles to the mats in the top layer. A double layer of 
matting should be considered in all cases where sandy 
areas can cause excessive mat roughness due to 
movement of the sand 

3. Replace the top layer of matting according to the 
instructions given earlier. 

Before proceeding, note that a heavy-duty mat, as 
shown in I figure 11-37.1 has been developed 



SWNP048B 


Figure 11-37.—Heavy-duty mat. 


11-25 
















EDGE REPAIRS 



Figure 11-38.—Straightening of lower female edge. 



Figure 11-39.—Straightening of upper female edge. 



Heavy-duty mats are used under arresting cables to 
eliminate excessive dents and other external damage 
that occurs to regular matting during aircraft 
arrestment procedures. These mats are only used on 
the end of the runway where aircraft touch down. 
Heavy-duty mats are 6 feet in length and 18 inches 
wide after connectors are attached. They are painted 
Marine Corps green, color No. 23; the top surface is 
also coated with a nonskid material of the same color. 
Locking bars used to secure heavy-duty mats together 
are approximately 6 feet in length. 


To straighten male and female integrally extruded 
edges of AM-2 mats, you use a mat connector repair 
edge tool, 510827-1. Edges that are slightly damaged 
during shipping and handling can be straightened with 
the edge tool to allow the edges to be interlocked 
during installation. 

I Figure lF5S| shows the use of the edge tool for the 
lower female edge of the mat. 1 figure 11-391 shows the 
use of the edge tool for the upper female edge of the 
mat, an d figure 11-40 shows the use of the edge tool 
for the male edge of the mat. 

The procedure to follow in straightening the edges 
of AM-2 mats is given below. 

1. To straighten the edges of a mat, place it on 
blocks to raise it off the ground and provide sufficient 
clearance to use the edge tool. 

2. Orient the mat properly; that is, place the top of 
the mat faceup, as shown in i figure 11-401 and pi ace the 
bottom of the mat faceup, as shown in i figures 11-38 j nd 
11-39, as required to allow the edge tool to be used in 
an upright position. 

3. E ngage the tool with the mat edge, as shown in 
I figures 11-38, 11-39, or 1140, at the beginning of the 

bent area, 

4. To straighten the edge, apply a lateral form on 
the tool handle to bend the edge lip toward a 
straightened position. Be certain that the tool fully 
engages the mat edge lip by applying a constant force 
on the tool handle toward the mat. 

5. Move the tool into the bent area in small 
increments and straighten gradually until the entire 
length of the bent section has been straightened Do not 
attempt to straighten the bent section in one pass; make 
several passes with minimum bending per pass until the 
area has been straightened 

CAUTION 

Care should be taken during bending to 

prevent cracking. 

REMOVAL PROCEDURES 

Disassembled pallets should be distributed in the 
same pattern that was used for installation of the field 
mats to facilitate repackaging, as the various 
components are removed With the use of typical 
keylock sections, disassembly can be done at several 


11-26 


















points simultaneously consistent with the available 
personnel and handling equipment. Speed of removal 
of matting will be considerable y greater if disassemble y 
takes place in the opposite direction of assembly; that 
is, the female connector is removed from the male 
connector. 

MATTING REMOVAL WITHOUT 
A GUIDE RAIL 

I n a SATS system where a guide rail is not used, 
matting removal at points other than exposed ends of 
matting requires removal of typical keylock sections 
as the initial step. 

The procedure for removal is composed of the 
following steps: 

1. Remove typical keylocks by loosening the 
socket head screw at the first joint until it is free of the 
lower thread (about 7/1 6 inch). Do not remove further 
as this screw is self-retaining, and disassembly and 
future assembly are accomplished from this position. If 
the exposed end of the typical keylock is a cut end, that 
particular section must be pried out or pulled out. If the 
female end is exposed, the section may be removed 
using the special removal tool. (Se d fig. 11-351 ) 

2. The backfill must be removed from the runway 
approach aprons that may be accomplished as the center 
portions of the runway are being disassembled. 

3. The 90-degree connectors are independently 
removable by sliding individual connectors lengthwise. 
However, the mat disassembly procedure should be 
planned so that the matting engaged on the 12-foot edge 
is removed first. This cccurs, for example, where the 
lateral taxi way matting (12-foot edge) meets the runway 
|(fiq. 11-261 , then 90-degree connectors can be removed 
more easily than by sliding connectors lengthwise. 


4. Tie-downs must be removed before parking area 
disassembly. 

5. Disassembly of a mat row may proceed from the 
end with the overlapping mat. Remove the locking bar 
from the adjaent mat by inserting a bent rod or wire 
into the hole in the locking bar and pulling it straight 
out. (See l fia. 11-351 ) The most efficient procedure 
requires disassemble y in reverse order of assembly. 
Therefore, starter keylocks will be the last component 
removed from the runway. Remove the starter keylocks 
by removing the socket head screws from each 
adjoining starter keylock Insert the connector bar in the 
starter keylock just removed to the second hole (the bar 
will protrude 1 inch), and tighten the screw. Replace and 
tighten the screw in the adjacent keylock. 

MATTING REMOVAL WITH 
A GUIDE RAIL 

In a SATS system where a guide rail is used, 
portions of the installation, other than the runway, may 
be disassembled in the same manner as described 
previously. However, the presence of the guide rail 
prevents the removal of matting other than from one 
end. Runway aprons that do not include guide rail 
sections are an exception. These portions may be 
removed at any convenient time after the backfill has 
been removed. Removal of the runway matting and 
guide rail must start at the same end at which the 
runway was completed. I n addition to the removal of 
locking bars between the mats, the locking bars 
connecting the mats to the guide rail must also be 
removed. Removal of guide rail locking bars is 
accomplished in the same manner as for mats. (Se dfia.l 

□ES ]) 


11-27 













CHAPTER 12 


STEELWORKER TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT 


In the shop and out on a jobsite, you will be using 
grinders, portable power drills, compressors, saws, 
and various other tools. As a Steelworker you need to 
be thoroughly familiar with the operation and 
maintenance of these tools as well as all applicable 
safety precautions. 

BENCH AND PEDESTAL GRINDERS 

The common bench and pedestal grinders are the 
simplest and most widely used grinding machines. 
The grinding work done with them is called 
OFFHAND GRINDING. Offhand grinding is used for 
work on pieces that can be held in the hands and 
controlled until ground to the desired shape or size. 
This work is done when the piece king ground does 
not require great precision or accuracy. 

The bench grinder Kfiq. 12-1)1 is attached to a 
bench or table. The grinding wheels mount directly 
onto the motor shaft. One wheel is coarse for rough 
grinding, and the other is fine for finish grinding. 

The pedestal grinder, inmost cases, is larger than 
the bench grinder and is equipped with a base and 
pedestal fastened to the floor. The DRY TYPE Kfia.l 
1 12-2[ has no arrangement for cooling the work while 
grinding other than a water container into which the 
piece can be dipped to cool it. The WET TYPE 
[fig. 12-31 is equipped with a built-in coolant system 
that keeps the wheels constantly drenched with fluid. 
The coolant washes away particles of loose abrasive 
material, as well as metal, and keeps the piece cool. 



Figure 12-1.—The bench grinder, Eye shields have not been 
mounted. 



Figure 12-2.—The pedestal grinder (dry type). 



Figure 12-3.—Pedestal grinder (wet type) wttb a built-in 
coolant system 

Bench and pedestal grinders are dangerous if they 
are not used correctly They must never be used unless 
fitted with guards and safety glass EYE SHIELDS 
Kfiq. 12-41 Even then you must wear goggles or safety 
glasses. A TOOL REST is furnished to support the 
work while grinding. It should be adjusted to come 
within one eighth of an inch from the wheels. This will 


12-1 













































Figure 12-4.—Eye shields for bench and 
pedestal type of grinders. 


prevent work from being wedged between the tool 
rest and the wheel. Turn the wheel by hand after 
adjusting the tool rest to ensure there is satisfactory 
clearance completely around the wheel |(fiq. 12-5D . 

The grinding wheels themselves can be sources 
of danger and should be examined frequently, based 
upon usage, for irregularities and soundness. You can 
test a new wheel by suspending it on a string or wire 
and tapping the side of the wheel with a light metal 
rod. A solid wheel will give off a distinct ringing 
sound, A wheel that does not give off such a sound 
must be assumed to be cracked and should be 
discarded. Under no circumstances should it be used. 
Since it is not practical to check the wheels by this 
manner every time you use the grinder, make it a 
habit never to stand in front of a grinder when it is 
first turned on. A cracked wheel can disintegrate and 
become projectiles quickly. 


The wheel must also run true and be balanced on 
the shaft. A WHEEL DRESSER Ufiq. 12-61) should be 
used to bring abrasive wheels back to round and 




Figure 12-6.—Mechanical wheel dresser. 


remove the glaze that occurs after heavy use. This is 
done by holding the dresser firmly against the wheel 
with both hands, using the tool rest for support. 
Then, as the wheel turns, move the d resser back and 
forth across the surface |(fig. 12-7] , For maximum 
efficiency and safety in operating the grinder, you 
should observe the foil owing rules: 

1. U se the face of the wheel, never the si des. 

2. Move the work back and forth across the face 
of the wheel. Even wear results because this action 
prevents the wheel from becoming grooved. 

3. Keep the wheel dressed and the tool rest 
properly adjusted. 

Do not shape soft metals, like aluminum, brass, 
and copper, that tend to load (clog) the abrasive 
wheel. These metals should be shaped by other 
methods, such as tiling, sanding, and chipping. 

PNEUMATIC POWER TOOLS 

The portable power tools that are available for use 
are either powered by electric motors or by air 
(pneumatic) motors. Whether powered by electricity 
or compressed air, the tools are basically the same 
and the procedures for usi ng them are the same. This 
section will deal with pneumatic tools since these 
require unique maintenance and servicing on the 
jobsite or in the shop. 

NOTE: All low-pressure compressed air systems 
should have a filter, a regulator, and a lubricator 
assembly installed at the outlet. This assembly will 
ensure delivery of clean, regulated mist lubricated 
compressed air for the operation of pneumatic tools. 



Figure 12-5.—Properly spaced tool rest. 


Figure 12-7.—Using a wheel dresser. 


12-2 








































CAUTION 

Before operating a pneumatic tool, inspect 

the air hose and check it for leaks or damage. 

Blow air through the air hose to free it of foreign 

material before connecting it to the tool. Keep 

the air hose clean and free from lubricants. 

Never point the air hose at another person. 

Pneumatic tools must have complete lubrication. 
The moving parts of pneumatic tools are fitted very 
closely, and they must be lubricated correctly or they 
will wear quickly and fail to work. 

Valves and pistons on pneumatic hammers require 
a light machine oil. Since the compressed air comes 
directly in contact with these parts, it has a tendency 
to drive the lubricant out through the exhaust. 

When working continuously with a pneumatic 
tool, you should regularly check the lubricator to 
ensure there is ample lubricant available. Next, empty 
the filter assembly as needed. 

On low-pressure compressed air systems that do 
not have the filter, the regulator, and the lubricator 
assembly installed, you should disconnect the air hose 
every hour or so and squirt a few drops of light oil into 
the air hose connection. Do NOT use heavy oil 
because the oil will cause precision parts to either fail 
or to have operating troubles. If this occurs, you have 
to clean your tool in cleaning solvent to loosen the 
gummy substance that results. Blow out the tool with 
air, lubricate it with light oil, and go back to work. 

Keep your pneumatic tools clean and lubricated 
and you will have few operating problems. 

SHOP MACHINERY 

Prefabrication of steel parts and assemblies is 
typically accomplished in a steel shop where heavy 
steel working machinery is accessible. The steel shop 
is tasked with manufacturing and fabricating items, 
such as sheet-metal ducts, pipeline section fittings, 
plates, and angles. In the foil owing sections, we will 
discuss some of the common types of machinery found 
in a well-equipped steel shop. 

COMBINATION IRON WORKER 

The combination iron worker is likely the most 
valuable and versatile machine in a shop. The 
combination punch, shear, and coper I (fig. 12-81 is 
capable of cutting angles, plates, and steel bars, and it 


can also punch holes. The size of the angles and plates 
that can be safely handled by the machine depends 
upon its capacity. It is manufactured in various sizes 
and capacities, and each machine has a capacity plate 
either welded or riveted on it. This guide should be 
strictly adhered to. The pressure and power the 
machine develops demand extreme caution on the part 
of the operator. 

VERTICAL BAND SAWS 

While the vertical band saw is designed primarily 
for making curved cuts, it can also be used for straight 
cutting. Unlike the circular saw, the band saw is 
frequently used for freehand cutting. 

The band saw has two large wheels on which a 
continuous narrow saw blade, or BAND, turns, just as 
a belt is turned on pulleys. The LOWER WHEEL, 
located below the WORKING TABLE, is connected 
to the motor directly or by means of pulleys or gears 
and serves as the driver pulley. The UPPER WHEEL 
is the driven pulley. 

The saw blade is guided and kept in line by two 
sets of BLADE GUIDES: one fixed set below the 
table and one set above with a vertical sliding 
adjustment. The alignment of the blade is adjusted by 
a mechanism on the back side of the upper wheel. 
TENSIONING of the blade—tightening and 
loosening-is provided by another adjustment located 
just back of the upper wheel. 

Cutoff gauges and ripping fences are sometimes 
provided for use with band saws. However, you will 
do most of your work freehand with the table clear 
because accurate cuts are difficult to make with a band 
saw when gauges or fences are used. 

The size of a band saw is designated by the 
diameter of the wheels. Thus the 14-inch model |(fiq.| 
1 12-91) has 14-inch wheels. Common sizes are 14-, 16-, 
18-, 20-, 30-, 36-, 42-, and 48-inch machines. The 
14-inch size is the smallest practical band saw. With 
the exception of capacity, all band saws are much alike 
in maintenance, operation, and adjustment. 

Blades, or bands, for bandsaws are designated by 
POINTS (tooth point per inch), THICKNESS (gauge), 
and WIDTH. The required length of the blade is found 
by adding the circumference of one wheel to twice the 
distance between the wheel centers. Length can vary 
within a limit of twice the tension adjustment range. 

Vertical band saws are comparatively simple 
machines to operate. Each manufacturer publishes a 
technical manual for their machine. Refer to the 


12-3 







ADJUSTABLE 
TAKE-UP FOR MOTOR 


ADJUSTMENT FOR BAR- 
CUTTER RETURN SPRING 


ADJUSTABLE TAKE-UP ■ 


HAND WHEEL CONTROL 
FOR FULL-FLOATING 
PUNCH 


UPPER NOTCHING 
BLADE 


2-P : ECE NOTCHER • 
DIE 


ADJUSTABLE 
DEPTH GAUGE 


STRIPPER FOR 
MITERING ANGLES 


SUPPORT FOR 
MITERING ANGLES' 


ADJUSTMENT SCREWS 
FOR CENTERING 
DIE-8L0CK 

SINGLE SCREW HOLDING 
DIE-BLOCK. ALLOWING 
FOR QUICK CHANGES 
OF BLOCKS 

FOOT PEDAL. 


5-PIECE 

BAR-CUTTER KNIVES 


ANGLE STRIPPER 
FOR BO* CUTS 



HAND CONTROL FOR 
ENGAGING BAR - 
CUTTER SLITTING 
SHEAR AND COPER 

STRIPPER FOR ROUND 
AND SQUARE BARS. 
ALWAYS IN POSITION 

SPIRAL GEARS FOR 
STRIPPER ADJUSTMENT 
HAND CRANK FOR 
STRIPPER ADJUSTMENT 


SHEAR BLADES WITH 
4 CUTTING EDGES 


Figure 12-8.—Combination punch, shear, and coper. 


manufacturer's manual for detailed information 
concerning the structure, operation, maintenance, and 
repair of the individual machine. 

One of the key parts of the vertical band saw is its 
blade that must be sharp and accurately set to cut in a 
straight line. The radius of the curve, or circle, to be 
cut determines the size of the saw blade to be used. 
Use a narrow blade to cut curves of small radii. A 
l/8-inch blade will cut a I-inch curve; a 3/16-inch 
blade, a 1 l/2-inch curve; a l/4-inch blade, a 2-inch 
curve; and a 3/8-inch blade, a 2 l/2-inch curve; 
provided, in each instance, the teeth have the correct 
amount of set. 

After turning on the power, see that the blade is 
operating at full speed before you start a cut. It is 
advisable to true up one face or edge of the stock 
before taking a cut with the saw. Also, start the cut in 
the waste stock and do not crowd or cramp the blade. 


Keep the top guide down close to the work at all 
times. When sawing curves or straight lines (outlines), 
you guide the stock along the lines marked on the face 
of the stock. When more than one piece is to be sawed, 
several can be tack-welded together before sawing. 
Tack-weld from the side on which the outline is 
marked so the welds will be visible to the saw operator. 
Be careful not to exceed the rated capacity of the 
machine. 

Do not force the material too hard against the 
blade. A light contact with the blade permits easier 
following of the line and prevents undue friction and 
overheating of the blade. 

By keeping the saw blade well sharpened, you 
need to apply very little forward pressure for average 
cutting. Move stock steadily against the blade, but no 
faster than required to give an easy cutting movement. 


12-4 






UPPER 


WHEEL 


GUARD 


THROAT PLATE 


OR BLADE 
TABLE 


LOWER WHEEL 
GUARD 


LOWER GUIDE 
ASSEMBLY 

BELT GUARD 


Figure 12-9.—14-inch band saw. 


Avoid twisting the blade by trying to turn sharp 
corners. Remember that you must saw around comers. If 
you want to saw a very small radius, use a narrow blade. 


If you find that a saw cut cannot be completed, it is 
better to saw out through the waste material to the edge 
of the stock than to back the blade out of the curved cut. 
This will prevent accidentally drawing the blade off the 
wheels. 


BAND SAW teeth are shaped like the teeth in a 
hand ripsaw, which means that their fronts are filed at 
90 degrees to the line of the saw. Reconditioning 
procedures are the same as they are for a hand ripsaw, 
except that very narrow band saws with very small teeth 
must usually beset and sharpened by special machines. 

A broken band saw blade must be BRAZED when 
no accessory welder is available. The procedure for 
brazing is as follows: 

1. SCARF the two ends to be joined with a file so 
that they may be joined in a SCARFJ 01N T |(fiq. 12-10> . 

2. Place the ends in a brazing clamp, or some 
similar device, that will permit them to be brought 
together in perfect alignments. 

3. Coat the filed surfaces with soldering flux. 

4. Cut a strip of silver solder the length of the scarf 
and the width of the blade. Coat it with flux and insert it 
between the filed surfaces. 

5. Heat a pair of brazing tongs bright red and clamp 
the joint together. The red-hot tongs will heat the blade 
and melt the solder. Keep the tongs clamped on the joint 
until they turn black. 

6. Smooth thejoint on both sides with a flat file, and 
finish it with fine emery cloth. 

Figure 12-111 shows band ends being joined by using 
the butt welder-grinder unit. The entire procedure for 
joining is as follows: 

1. Trim both ends of the band square; clean them 
thoroughly. Butt the ends together in the jaws of the 
welder-grinder unit; make sure that the ends are aligned 
and that the seam is centered between the welder jaws. 
First, set the resistance knob to agree with the dial for 
the width of band you are going to weld Then press and 




Figure 12-10.—Rejoining a broken band saw blade. 


12-5 



















Figure 12-11.—Butt welder-grinder unit. 


hold the WELD button until the blade ends fuse 
together. Let the weld cool for a few seconds and then 
press the ANNEAL button until the welded area heats 
to a dull cherry red. Hold the welded area at that 
temperature momentarily by jogging the button, and 
then allow the temperature to fall off slowly and 
gradually by increasing the time between jogs. (Allow 
about 10 seconds for this last phase.) 

2. After the band has been annealed, take it out of 
the welder jaws and grind the weld bead with the small 
grinder. Grind the weld area to the same thickness as the 
rest of the band. Check the back edge of the band for 
burrs and misalignment; grind off irregularities. After 
the grinding is completed, pi ace the band in the butt 
welder-grinder unit and reanneal the welded areas to 
destroy any hardness that may have developed. See the 
technical manual furnished with each machine. 

Causes of Blade Breakage 


A number of conditions may cause a band saw 
blade to break. Breakage is unavoidable when it is the 
result of the peculiar stresses to which such saws are 
subjected. The most common causes of blade 
breakage that may be avoided by good judgment on 
the part of the operator are as follows: (1) faulty 
alignment and adjustment of the guides, (2) forcing or 
twisting a wide blade around a curve of short radius, 
(3) feeding too fast, (4) dullness of the teeth or the 


absence of sufficient set, (5) excessive tension on the 
blade, (6) top guide set too high above the work being 
cut, and (7) using a blade with a lumping or improper] y 
finished braze or weld. When a saw blade breaks, shut 
off the power immediately, and then wait until the 
wheels stop turning before replacing the blade. 

Replacing Saw Blades 

To replace a bandsaw blade, open the wheel guard 
on each wheel. Raise the guide to the top position. 
Remove the throat plate from the table. Release the 
tension on the blade by turning the top wheel adjusting 
screw. Remove the blade and install the replacement. 

HORIZONTAL BAND CUTOFF SAW 

A relatively new metal-cutting band saw is shown 
in I figure l~2^l2l This HORIZONTAL BAND 
CUTOFF SAW is being used in shops to replace the 
red procati ng type of power hacksaw. The conti nuous 
cutting action of the blade provides greater speed, 
accuracy, and versatility for metal-cutting jobs. 

Good results from the use of any metal-cutting 
band saw depend upon careful choice of blade, speed, 
rate of feed, and feed pressure. The primary 
consideration in selecting the blade is the tooth pitch. 
Tooth pitch should be considered in relation to the 
hardness and toughness of the material being worked 
and the thickness of the workpiece. At lease two teeth 
should be in contact with the work. When cutting thick 
material, do not select a tooth pitch that will allow too 



Figure 12-12.—Horizontal band Cutoff saw. 


12-6 





























many teeth to be in contact with the material. The more 
teeth in contact, the greater the feed pressure required 
to force them into the material. Excessive feed 
pressure wi 11 cause off-l i ne cutti ng. 

POWER HACKSAWS 

The POWER HACKSAW is found in all except 
the smallest shops. It is used for cutting bar stock, pipe, 
tubing, or other metal stock. The power hacksaw Rfiq] 
112-1$ ) consists of a base, a mechanism for causing the 
saw frame to reciprocate, and a clamping vise for 
holding the stock while it is being sawed. Two types 
of power hacksaws are in use today: the direct 
mechanical drive and the hydraulic drive. 

The capacity designation of the power hacksaw 
shown is 4 inches by 4 inches. This means that it can 
handle material up to 4 inches in width and 4 inches 
in height. 

Three types of feed mechanisms are in use today. 
They are as follows: 

1. Mechanical feed, which ranges from 0.001 to 
0.025 inch per stroke, depending upon the class and type 
of material being cut. 

2. Hydraulic feed, which normally exerts a 
constant pressure but is so designed that when hard 
spots are encountered, the feed is automatically stopped 
or shortened to decrease the pressure on the saw until 
the hard spot has been cut through. 



3. Gravity feed, which provides for weights on the 
saw frame. These weights can be shifted to increase or 
decrease the pressure of the saw blade on the material 
being cut. 

All three types of feed mechanisms lift the blade 
clear of the work during the return stroke. 

Hacksaw Blades 

The blade shown in i figure 12-14 1 is especially 
designed for use with the power hacksaw. It is made 
with a tough alloy steel back and high-speed steel 
teeth-a combination which gives both a strong blade 
and a cutting edge suitable for high-speed sawing. 

These blades vary as to the pitch of the teeth 
(number of teeth per inch). The correct pitch of teeth 
for a particular job is determined by the size of the 
section and the material to be cut. Use coarse pitch 
teeth for wide, heavy sections to provide ample chip 
clearance. For thinner sections, use a blade with a pitch 
that will keep two or more teeth in contact with the 
work so that the teeth will not straddle the work. Such 
straddling will strip the teeth. In general, you select 
blades according to the following information: 

1. Coarse (4 teeth per inch—for soft steel, cast 
iron, and bronze. 

2. Regular (6 to 8 teeth per inch)—for annealed 
high carbon steel and high-speed steel. 

3. Medium (10 teeth per inch)—for solid brass 
stock, iron pipe, and heavy tubing. 

4. Fine (14 teeth per inch)—for thin tubing and 
sheet metals. 

Speeds and Coolants 

Speeds on hacksaws are stated in strokes per 
minute—counting, of cm-use, only those strokes that 
cause the blade to come in contact with the stcck. 
Speed changing is usually accomplished by means of 
a gearshift lever. There maybe a card attached to your 
equipment or near it, stating recommended speeds for 



Figure 12-14.—Power hacksaw blade. 


12-7 












































cutting various metals. The following speeds, 
however, can usually be used: 

1. Cold rolled or machine steel, brass, and soft 
metals—136 strokes per minute. 

2. Alloy steel, annealed tool steel, and cast 
iron-90 strokes per minute. 

3. High-speed steel, unannealed tool steel, and 
stainless steel—60 strokes per minute. 

Cast iron should be cut entirely dry, but a coolant 
should be used for cutting all other materials. A 
suitable coolant for cutting most metals is a solution 
of water and enough soluble oil to make the solution 
white. The coolant not only prevents overheating of 
the blade and stock but also serves to increase the 
cutting rate. 

Using the Power Hacksaw 

Place the workpiece in the clamping device, 
adjusting it so the cutting-off mark is in line with the 
blade. Turn the vise lever to clamp on the material in 
place, being sure that the material is held tightly, and 
then set the stroke adjustment. 

Ensure the blade is not touching the workpiece 
when you start the machine. Blades are often broken 
when this rule is not followed. Feed the b] blade slowly 
into the work, and adjust the coolant nozzle so it 
directs the fluid over the saw blade. 

NOTE: Safety precautions to be observed while 
operating this tool are posted in the shop. READ and 
OBSERVE them! 

DRILL PRESSES 


Many sizes and styles of drilling machines or 
DRILL PRESSES are in use today-each designed for 
a particular type of work. Only the drill presses not 
covered in Tools and Their Uses, NAVEDTRA 
10085-B2, are discussed here. 

One type of upright drill press is the SENSITIVE 
DRILL PRESS Rim 12-151 . This drill is used for 
drilling small holes in work under conditions where 
the operator must "feel" what the cutting tool is doing. 
The drill bit is fed into the work by a very simple 
device—a lever. These drill presses are nearly always 
belt driven because the vibration caused by gearing 
would be undesirable. 


INDEX PIN 



-MOTOR 


TABLE CLAMP 


COLUMN 



SWNP0201 


Figure 12-15.—Sensitive drill press. 


The RADIAL DRILL PRESS Rfia~ 12-161 1 has a 
movable spindle that can be adjusted to the work. This 
type of machine is convenient to use on large and 
heavy work or where many holes are to be drilled since 
the work does not have to be readjusted for each hole. 

Check occasionally to make sure that all locking 
handles are tight and that the V-belt is not slipping. 

Before operating any drill press, visually inspect 
the drill press to determine if all parts are in the proper 
place, secure, and in good operating condition. Check 
all assemblies, such as the motor, the head, the pulleys, 
and the bench, for loose mountings. Check the 
adjustment of the V-belt and adjust as necessary 
according to the manufacturer's manual. Make sure 
that the electric cord is securely connected and that the 
insulation is not damaged, chafed, or cracked. 

While the drill press is operating, be alert for any 
sounds that may be signs of trouble, such as squeaks 
or unusual noises. Report any unusual or 
unsatisfactory performance to the petty officer in 
charge of the shop. 


12-8 































SPEED 
ADJUSTING 
MECHANISM 


SWNP0202 


WORKTABLE 


TABLE CLAMP 


CLAMP FOR POSITIONING TBALE 
SQUARE OR AT AN ANGLE 
WITH THE SPINDLE 


COLUMN 


SWITCH 


DEPTH GAUGE 


SPINDLE LOCK 
CLAMP 


CHUCK 


Figure 12-16.—Radial drill press. 


After operating a drill press, wipe off all dirt, oil, 
and metal particles. I nspect the V-belt to make sure no 
metal chips are embedded in the driving surfaces. 

DRILL BITS 

Common drill bits are known as TWIST DRILLS 
because most of them are made by forging or milling 
rough flutes and then twisting them to a spiral 
configuration. After twisting, the drill bits are milled to 
the desired size and heat-treated. 

The general-purpose twist drill is made of high¬ 
speed steel l Figure 12-17l shows a typical plastic-cutting 
drill bit and a typical metal-cutting drill bit. Notice the 
smaller angle on the drill bit used for drilling plastics. 

Drill bit sizes are indicated in three ways: by 
inches, by letter, and by number. The nominal inch 
sizes run from 1/16 inch to 4 inches or larger. The letter 
sizes run from "A” to "Z" (0.234 inch to 0.413 inch). 



SWNPQ203 

Figure 12-17.—Comparison of a twist drill for 
plastic and a twist drill for metal. 


The number sizes run from No. 80 to No. 1 (0.0135 inch 
to 0.228 inch). 

Before putting a drill bit away, wipe it clean and 
then give it a light coating of oil. Do not leave drill bits 
in a place where they maybe dropped or where heavy 
objects may fall on them. Do not place drill bits where 
they will rub against each other. 

A drill bit should be reground at the first sign of 
dullness. The increased load that dullness imposes on 
the cutting edges may cause a drill bit to break. 

Cutting Fluids 

When drilling steel and wrought iron, use a cutting 
oil. Cast iron, aluminum brass, and other metals may be 
drilled dry; therefore, at high-drilling speeds it is 
advisable to use some medium for cooling these metals 
to lessen the chances of overheating the drill bit with 
the resultant loss of the cutting edge. Compressed air 
may be used for cast iron; kerosene for aluminum; oleic 
acid for cooper; sulphurized mineral oil for Monel metal; 
and water, lard, or soluble oil and soda water for 
ferrous metals. (Soda water reduces heat, overcomes 
rust, and improves thefinish.) 

Sharpening Drill Bits 

A drill bit becomes dull with use and must be 
resharpened. Continued useofadull drill bit may cause 
it to break or bum up as it is forced into the metal. 

I mproper sharpening will cause the same difficulties. 

Remove the entire point if it is badly worn or if the 
margins are burned or worn off near the point. If, by 
accident, the drill bit becomes overheated during 
grinding, do NOT plunge it into the water to cool. Allow 
it to cool in still air. The shock of sudden cooling may 
cause it to crack. 


12-9 


















Three factors must be considered when repainting 
a drill bit: 


1. LIP CLEARANCE Kfia. 12-181 . The two 
cutting edges or lips are comparable to chisels. To cut 
effectively, you must relieve the heel or that part of the 
point back to the cutting edge. Wh.bout this clearance, 
it would be impossible for the lips to cut. If there is too 
much clearance, the cutting edges are weakened. Too 
little clearance results in the drill point merely rubbing 
without penetration. Gradually increase lip clearance 
toward the center until the line across dead center stands 
at an angle of 120 to 135 degrees with the cutting edge 
Kfiq. 12-19) . 

2. LENGTH AND ANGLE OF LIPS. The 
material to be drilled determines the proper point angle. 
Theangles, in relation to the axis, must be the same. 
Fifty-nine degrees has been found satisfactory for most 
metals. If the angles are unequal, only one lip will cut 
and the hole will be oversize lTfia. 12-201 . 

3. THE PROPER LOCATION OF THE DEAD 
CENTER Rfiq. 12-211) . Equal angles but lips of different 
lengths results in oversize holes and the resulting 
"wobble" places tremendous pressures on the drill press 
spindle and bearings. 



Figure 12-20.—Unequal drill point angles. 



Figure 12-21.—Drill point off center. 




A combination of both faults can result in a broken 
drill bit, and if the drill bit is very large, permanent 
damage to the drilling machine. The hole produced 
tfig. 12-221 will be oversize and often out-of-round. 

The web of the drill bit increases in thickness 
toward the shank Kfiq. 12-231 . When the drill bit has 
been shortened by repeated grindings, the web must 



Figure 12-19.—Angle of the dead center. 


Figure 12-22.—Drill point with unequal point angles and with 
the drill point sharpened off center. 


12-10 







































NEB 



WEB 



SWNPG208 


Figure 12-23.—The web of the drill bit and how the drill 
point is relieved by grinding. 


3. Stand so the centerl i ne of the dri 11 bit wi 11 be at 
a 59-degree angle with relation to the centerline of the 
wheel Kfiq. 12-251 , and lightly touch the drill lip to the 
wheel in approximately a horizontal position. 

4. Use the left hand as a pivot point and slowly 
lower the shank with the right hand. Increase the 
pressure as the heel is reached to ensure proper 
clearance. 

5. Repeat the operation on each lip until the drill 
bit is sharpened. DO NOT QUENCH HIGH-SPEED 
STEEL DRILLS IN WATERTO COOL. LET THEM 
COOL IN CALM AIR. 


be thinned to minimize the pressures required to make 
the drill bit penetrate the material. The thinning must 
be done equally to both sides of the web, and care must 
be taken to ensure that the web is centered. 

The DRILL POINT GAUGE Rfla. 12-241 is the 
tool most frequently used to check the drill point 
during the sharpening operation. 

Use a coarse wheel for roughing out the drill point 
if much metal must be ground away. Complete the 
operation on a fine wheel. 


6. Check the drill tip frequently with the drill point 
gauge to assue a correctly sharpened drill bit. 

Secure a drill bit that is properly sharpened and 
run through the motions of sharpening it. When you 
have acquired sufficient skill, sharpen a dull drill bit. 
To test, drill a hole in soft metal and observe the chip 
formation. When proper] y sharpened, the chips will 
come out of the flutes in curled spirals of equal length. 
The tightness of the chip spiral is governed by the 
RAKE ANGLE RTFa 12-260 . 


Many hand sharpening techniques have been 
developed. The following are recommended: 

1. Grasp the drill shank with the right hand and the 
rest of the drill bit with the left hand. 

2. Place the fingers of the left hand that are 
supporting the drill bit on the grinder tool rest. The tool 
rest should be slightly below center (about 1 inch on a 
7-inch wheel). 




Figure 12-24.—Using a drill point gauge. 


Figure 12-25.—The correct position of the drill bit at the start 
of the grinding operation. View is looking down on the 
grinder. 



Figure 12-26.—Rake angle of drill bit for ordinary work. 


12-11 




























An attachment for conventional tool grinders is 
shown in i figure 12-27.1 In a shop where a high degree 
of hole accuracy is required and a large amount of 
sharpening is to be done, a machine or attachment is a 
must. 

AIR COMPRESSORS 

A compressor is a machine for compressing air 
from an initial intake pressure to a higher exhaust 
pressure through reduction in volume. A compressor 
consists of a driving unit, a compressor unit, and 
accessory equipment. The driving unit provides power 
to operate the compressor and may be a gasoline or 
diesel engine. Compressors are governed by a pressure 
control system adjusted to compress air to a maximum 
pressure of 100 psi. 

Compressed Air System 

A compressed air system consists of one or more 
compressors, each with the necessary power source, 
control of regulation, intake air filter, aftercooler, air 
receiver, and connecting piping, together with a 
distribution system to carry the air to points of use. 

The object of installing a compressed air system 
is to provide sufficient air at the work area at pressures 
adequate for efficient operation of pneumatic tools 
being used. 

Many construction projects require more cubic 
feet of air per minute than any one compressor will 
produce. Terrain conditions often create problems of 
distance from the compressor to the operating tool. 
Since the air line hose issued with the compressor 
causes considerable line loss at distances farther than 
200 feet, a system has been devised for efficient 



Figure 12-27.—A drill bit sharpening attachment mounted on 
a conventional bench grinder. 


transmission of compressed air over longer distances. 
This system is called air manifoldin d (fig. 12-281 ). An 
air manifold is a pipe having a large diameter used to 
transport compressed air from one or more 
compressors over a distance without detrimental 
friction line loss. I n construction work, air manifolds 
are usually constructed of 6-inch diameter pipe. A 
pipe of this size can carry 1,200 cubic feet per minute 
(cfm) of air (output from two 600 cfm air compressors) 
at 100 psi with less than .035 pound pressure loss per 
100 linear feet. One or more compressors pump air 
into the manifold and eventually "pressurize" it at 100 
psi; then air may be used at any point along the 
manifold by installing outlet valves and connecting air 
lines and pneumatic tools. 

Compressor Operation and Maintenance 

The following paragraphs will give general 
instructions on operating and maintaining air 
compressor units. 

A compressor must be located on a reasonably 
level area. Most compressors permit a 15-degree 
lengthwise and a 15-degree sidewise limit on 
out-of-level operation. The limits are placed on the 
engine, not the actual compressor. When the unit is to 
be operated out-of-level, it is important to do the 
following: (1) keep the engine crankcase oil level near 
the high-level mark (with the unit level) and (2) have 
the compressor oil gauge show nearly full (with the 
unit on the level). 

An instruction plate, similar to the one shown in 
Ifiaure 12-29,1 is attached to all compressors. Notice 
that this plate refers you to the manufacturer's engine 
and compressor manuals for detailed instructions. 

STARTING THE UNIT.— Take the following 
steps when starting the engine during mild weather: 


COMP 


COMP 

COMPRESSORS SHOULD 
HAVE APPROXIMATELY 
THE SAME LOADING- 
UNLOADING PRESSURE. 

i 

RECEIVING 

TANK 

1 

RECEIVING 

TANK 


|*| CHECK VALVE 

|*| CHECK VALVE 


P <-ci—. r-J 


SWNP0214 SERVICE VALVES 


Figure 12-28.—Methods of manifolding compressors. 


12-12 


























1. Open the service valves about one quarter-not 
wide open. 


NOTE: The reason for starting with the service 
valves partly open is that they aid in quicker warm-up 
of the compressor oi I. 

2. Position the low-pressure, engine-oil-system 
safety knob to ON I (fig. 12-301 . 

3. Turn the ignition switch to the START position. 
Immediately after the engine starts, release the ignition 
switch. If the engine fails to fire within 30 seconds, 
release the ignition switch and allow the starting motor 
to cool off for a few moments before trying the starter 
again. 

4. With the engine running, check the engine oil 
pressure gauge. If no pressure is indicated, turn the 
engine off. When the oil pressure goes above 22 psi, 
continue to operate the engine and check the 
low-pressure engine oil switch. The knob on this switch 
should be in the RUN position. 


NOTE: The engine oil pressure gauge indicates 
erratically until the engine oil warms up. 

5. Open the side curtains on both sides of the 
engine enclosure and leave them open. The flow of air 
through the oil cooler and engine radiator will be 
impeded if the side curtains are closed while the engine 
is running. 

6. After the engine has run about 3 minutes, check 
the engine coolant temperature gauge. The gauge 
should indicate less than 210°F. If the gauge is showing 

Figure 12-29.— Operating Instruction plate. more than 210°F, SHUT OFF THE ENGINE. 


9T 


OPERATING INSTRUCTION 


"VQ 


ice ENMWE ANO COMPRESSOR MANUAL! CON DCTAILCO INSTRUCTIONS 
IBFOiE STARTING Ijggg °8XSl 

LCHECK A NO MAINTAIN ; OR. M CAAMKCASC MOT*. 

COOLANT IN It A CHAT ON 10 GALS. 

FUEL M TANKS St GALS. 

OIL IN COMP'R. TANKS SO UU. 

I. ON AIN CONDENSATE MOM ST STEM 

STAKTIN 0 : 


is on. 
10 SALS. 
OS SALS. 
SO SALS. 


ON INITIAL DAILY START OR AFTER PROLONGED SHUTDOWN, 
OPEN A SERVICE VALVE APPROX 1/4 TO ALLOW COMPRESSOR 
TO RUN LOADED FOR 9 MINUTES TO WARM COMPRESSOR OIL 
BEFORE PERMITTING THE COMPRESSOR TO RUN UW.OAOEO. 


I IN WARM WEATHER - ST ANT ENGINE WITH CLUTCH ENGAGED. 

«. |a COLO WEATHER- DISENGAGE CLUTCH AS DIRECTED ON ITS 
INSTRUCTION Plate.WH eN ENGINE WATCH TEMPERATURE REACHES 
B0*r. STOP ENGINE. ENGAGE CLUTCH. 

«. IN EXTREME COLD WEATHER: DETROIT CUMMINS 


S> 


ENGINE 


ENGINE 


DISENGAGE CLUTCH AND USE _ _ _ _ 

STARTING AIO AS INDICATED use cd^R CAPSULE SWITCH ON OLOw' 
AT RWHT. STARTING AID PUJQ DLMING CRAlNCml 

STOPPING: 

v close air scrvicc valves, run s minutes depone stopping engine. 


OAljY; 

1.CLEAN RADIATOR ANO COOLER CORES WITH AN AIR HOSE PROM THE 
PAN SIDE. COOLER MAT DC SWING OUT POR CASE OP CLEANING, 
f.CHECK PL AG HEIGHT IN AIR FILTER INDICATOR. CHANGE CATRIOCE 
ONLY WHEN FLAG REMAINS LOCKED UP AFTER ENGINE STOPS. 

EVERY 500 HOURS: more frequently umccr severe dust 

~ CONDITIONS. 

lchange compressor or.. 

A.USE SAC-10 OIL ADOVt TO*P. 

•.use sai-iow Oil between o # f ano toV, 

C.USE MINUS (-) 20* POURPOINT OIL 1EL0W 0*F. 

S.DOMOT MIX BRANDS OP OIL. 

S.tF COMPRESSOR CHL CONSUMPTION IS EXCESSIVE CHECK RECEIVER 
FILTER AND SCAVENGE TUBE. CORRECT MALFUNCTION OR REPLACE 
element. 

G.INSPECT COMPRESSOR OIL FILTER CARTRIDGES AT TIME OP OIL 
CHANGE.REPLACE IF NICCSSART. 


capacity: boo pi 5 /min. 

PULL LOAD SPEED: 1100 R.P.M. 
IDLE SPEED: 1000 R.P.M. 


MODEL 


Q \ SVVNPQ215 


PRESSURE 100 P.S.L 

MADE IN U.S.A. 
PLT-4MG 


PRIMING PUMP 



TEMPERATURE 

GAUGE 


Figure 12-30.—Instrument panel. 


12-13 


















































7. After 5 minutes of operation, close the service 
valve and attach the hose or service line of the tool or 
device to be operated. 

8. Open the service valves fully and start the work. 
After start-up, the unit automatically provides 
compressed air at the discharge service valves. Only 
periodic checking of the gauges on the instrument panel 
is then required. 

9. When the engine is started during the day, after 
the first daily start-up, the above warm-up steps maybe 
eliminated, 

STOPPING THE UNIT.— When stopping the 
unit at the end of the day, you should take the 
following steps: 

1. Close the service valves and permit the engine 
to run at idle for 5 minutes. This will allow the engine 
coolant temperature to level off and the entire unit to 
cool down. 

2. Turn the ignition switch to the OFF position. 

COLD-WEATHER START-UP.— The following 
steps should be completed during cold-weather 
Start-up: 

1. Start the engine using the heater switch and 
priming pump according to the engine manual. 

2. Warm the engine until the engine coolant 
temperature reaches 120°F. Leaving the side curtains 
closed for a few minutes helps the engine to warm up. 

3. Turn the ignition switch to OFF. 

4. When the engi ne has stopped, start the engi ne 
again with the service valves partly open. Be sure the 
side curtains are open. 

5. When the compressor has run for several 
minutes and the gauges indicate normal operating 
conditions, connect up the tools and go to work. 

LUBRICATING THE UNIT.— The lubrication 
chart in the operator's manual for the particular make 
and model of compressor you are operating will show 
you where the unit should be lubricated, how often to 
lubricate, and what lubricant to use. The frequency 
will vary depending upon operating conditions and 
usage. Operating under abnormal conditions requires 
more frequent service. 


CAUTION 

Before servicing the compressor air system 
or compressor oil system, open the service 
valves to the atmosphere to relieve all pressure 
in the systems. 

SERVICING THE AIR CLEANER.— A 

two-stage, dry type of air cleaner, installed inside the 
engine enclosure at the right rear, falters the intake air 
|(fiq. 12-31] , Air is drawn into a first-stage element that 
causes nearly all the dust in the air to drop into a bin. 
Air then enters the second-stage element, a paper 
cartridge, where more dust is trapped and collected. 

The dustbin should be removed by hand and 
emptied daily. Some models have a self-emptying 
dustbin that is piped into an aspirator in the exhaust 
pipeline, just beyond the muffler. When the aspirator 
is used, no alterations are allowed to be made to the 
engine muffler or exhaust pipe. 

A service indicator is mounted on the side of the 
air cleaner housing. As the paper cartridge clogs with 
dust, a red indicator flag gradually rises in the window. 
When the cartridge is completely loaded, the window 
will show all red, and the flag will be locked in place. 
It is time to replace the paper cartridge, Discard the 
old cartridge and reset the red flag so that the window 
shows clear. Cleaning used paper cartridges is not 
recommended. 



12-14 















































APPENDIX I 


GLOSSARY 


BLOCK— One or more sheaves fitted in a wood or 
metal frame supported by a hook or shackle 
inserted in the strap of the block. 

BREECH— The part of the block opposite the swallow. 

BURR— The sharp edge remaining on metal after 
cutting. 

CHOKER— A chain or wi re rope so fastened that it 
tightens on its load as it is pulled. 

COMPRESSION STRESSES— The stresses 
developed within a material when forces tend to 
compress or crush the material. 

COPE—The notch or shape to fit or conform to the 
shape of another member. 

DUCTILITY— The property that enables a material 
to withstand extensive permanent deformation 
due to tension. 

ELASTICITY— The ability of a material to return to 
its original form after deformation. 

FALL— A line reeved through a pair of blocks to form 
a tackle. 

FATIGUE— The tendency of a material to fail after 
repeated stressing at the same point. 

FATIGUE STRENGTH— The ability of a material 
to resist various kinds of rapidly alternating 
stresses. 

GUY LINE—The fiber line or wire rope used for 
holding a structure in position. 

IMPACT STRENGTH— The ability of a metal to 
resist suddenly applied loads; measured in 
foot-pounds of force. 

LAY— Refers to the direction in which wires are 
twisted into strands or strands into rope. 

LAYOUT— The process of measuring and marking 
materials for cutting, bending, drilling, or welding. 

MALLEABILITY— The property that enables a 
material to withstand permanent deformation 
caused by compression. 


MOUSING— technique often used to close the 
open section of a hook to keep slings, straps, and 
so on, from slipping off the hook. 

OVERHAUL— To Lenghten a tackle by pulling the 
two blocks apart. 

PLASTICITY— The ability of a material to per¬ 
manently deform without breaking or rupturing. 

ROUND IN— To bring the blocks of a tackletoward 
each other. 

SCAFFOLD— A temporary elevated platform used 
to support personnel and materials in the course 
of any type of construction work. 

SEIZE— To bind securely the end of a wire rope or 
strand with seizing wire. 

SHEARING STRESSES— The stresses developed 
within a material when external forces are applied 
along parallel lines in opposite directions. 

SNATCH BLOCK— A single sheave block made so 
the shell on one side opens to permit the line to be 
placed over the sheave. 

SHELTERING— TO attach a socket to wire rope by 
pouring hot zinc around it. 

STRESS— External or internal force applied to an 
object. 

SWALLOW— The opening in the block through 
which the line passes. 

TACKLE— An assembly of blocks and lines used to 
gain a mechanical advantage in lifting or pulling. 

TENSILE STRENGTH— The resistance to being 
pulled apart. 

TENSION STRESSES— The stresses developed 
when a material is subjected to a pulling load. 

TWO-BLOCKED— Both blocks of a tackle are as 
close together as they will go. 

ULTIMATE STRENGTH— The maximum strain 
that a material is capable of withstanding. 

WHIPPING— The process of securing the ends of a line 
to prevent the strands from unlaying or separating. 


AI-1 




APPENDIX II 


MATHEMATICS 


The purpose of this mathematics section is twofold: 
first, it is a refresher for the Steelworker who has en¬ 
countered a time lapse between his or her schooling in 
mathematics and the use of this subject in sheet metal 
work; second, and more important, this section applies 
mathematics to steelworking tasks that can not be ac¬ 
complished without the correct use of mathematical 
equations. 

The mathematics problems described in this section 
are examples only and are not converted into the metric 
system. However, if you so desire, you can convert all 
of the problems by using the metric conversion tables in 
appendix 111 of this manual. If you need more informa¬ 
tion on metrics, order The Metric System, NAVEDTRA 
475-01-00-79, through your Educational Services Offi¬ 
cer (ESO).. 

LINEAR MEASUREMENT 

Measurements in sheet metal are most often made 
in feet (ft) and inches (in.). It is necessary that a sheet 
metal worker know how to make computations involv¬ 
ing feet and inches. I n addition, it is necessary to become 
familiar with the symbols and abbreviations used to 
designate feet and inches, such as the following: 

12 i nches = 1 foot; 12 i n. = 1 ft; 12” = 1' 

CHANGING INCHES TO 
FEET AND INCHES 

To change inches to feet and inches, divide inches 
by 12. The quotient will be the number of feet, and the 
remainder will be inches. 

Example 

Change 30 1/2 inches to feet and inches. 

2 ft. (quotient) 

12|30 1/2 
24 

6 1/2 in. (remainder) 


CHANGING FEET AND 
INCHES TO INCHES 

To change feet and inches to inches, multiply the 
number of feet by 12 and add the number of inches. The 
result will be inches. 

Example: 

Change 3 feet 6 inches to inches. 

3 ft x 12 = 36 inches + 6 inches = 42 inches 


CHANGING INCHES TO 
FEET IN DECIMAL FORM 

To change inches to feet in decimal form, divide the 
number of inches by 12 and carry the result to the 
required number of places. 

Example 

Express 116 inches as feet to 2 places. 

9.666 

121116.000 

108 

80 

72 

80 

72 

Answer: 9.67 


CHANGING FEET TO INCHES 
IN DECIMAL FORM 

To change feet in decimal form to inches, multiply 
the number of feet in decimal form by 12. 

Example; 

Change 26.5 feet to inches. 

26.5 

12 

530 

265 

318.0 inches 


AII-1 



ADDITION OF FEET AND INCHES 

A sheet metal worker often finds it necessary to 
combine or subtract certain dimensions which are given 
in feet and inches. 

Arrange in columns of feet and inches and add 
separately. If the answer in the inches column is more 
than 12, change to feet and inches and combine feet. 


Example: 

12 ft 4 1/2 in. 

5 ft 9 1/4 in. 

17 ft 13 3/4 in. 

In the changing inches column, we have 

1' 1 3/4" 

1T0 

18' 1 3/4" 

SUBTRACTION OF FEET AND INCHES 

Arrange in columns with the number to be sub¬ 
tracted below the other number. If the inches in the lower 
number is greater, borrow 1 foot (12 in.) from the feet 
column in the upper number. 

Subtract as in any other problem. 

Example 

Subtract 2' 8 1/4" from 4' 1". 

4' 1" 

2' 8 1/4" 

3' 13" 

T 8 1/4" 

V 4 3/4" 


MULTIPLICATION OF FEET AND INCHES 

A sheet metal worker maybe required to determine 
the total length of metal required to make eight pieces 
of duct 1' 8" long. To do this, you should be able to 
multiply feet and inches by the number of pieces. 

Arrange in columns. Multiply each column by the 
required number. If the inches column is greater than 12, 
change to feet and inches then add to the number of feet. 


Example 

Multiply 1' 8" by 8. 

1 ' 8 " 

8 

8' 64" 

Change 64" to feet and inches 

5 = 5' 4" 

12[64 

60 

4 

Combine: 8' and 5' 4" = 13' 4" 

NOTE: On occasion it might be necessary to mul¬ 
tiply feet and inches by feet and inches. To do this, either 
change to inches or change to feet using decimals. 

DIVISION OF FEET AND INCHES 

Two problems may require the sheet metal worker 
to know how to divide feet and inches. An example of 
one problem is the division of a piece of metal into an 
equal number of parts. The other problem is to deter¬ 
mine the number of pieces of a certain size which can 
be made from a piece of metal of a given length. 

In dividing feet and inches by a given number, the 
problem should be reduced to inches unless the number 
of feet will divide by the number evenly. 

Example 

Divide 36 ft 9 in. by 4. 

Since 36 is divisible by 4 evenly, you may proceed. 

9' 2 1/4" 

4j36' _ 9" 

Example 

Divide 34 ft 9 in. by 4. 

Since 34 is not divisible evenly by 4, change the problem 
to inches. 

34 

12 

68 

34_ 

408 in. 

408 

417 in. 


AII-2 



The answer should then be changed to feet and inches 
(104 1/4" = 8' 8 1/4"). 

104 1/4" 

4 [417 

To divide feet and inches by feet and inches, change 
to inches or feet (decimals). 

Example 

Divide 10 ft 4 in. by 2 ft 6 in. 

Example 

Same problem as above by use of ft (decimals). 

4 

30fl24 

120 

4 inches remainder 

4_ 

2.5ll0.33 

10.3 

.33 ft remainder 

It will divide 4 times with .33 ft remainder. 


ANGLES 

When two lines are drawn in different directions 
from the same point, as shown below, an angle is 
formed, /is the symbol for angle, and this angle is 
described as Z ABC or simply Z B. B is the vertex of 
the angle. AB and CB are the sides of the angle. 


MEASUREMENT OF ANGLES 


A 



C 


Observe that two straight lines have been drawn to 
form four right angles. 

I n order to have a way to measure angles, a system 
of angle-degrees has been established. Assume that each 
of the four right angles is divided into 90 equal angles. 
The measure of each is 1 angle degree; therefore, in the 
four right angles, there are 4 x 90°, or 360 angle- 
degrees. For accurate measurement, degrees have been 
subdivided into minutes and minutes into seconds. 

1 degree=60 minutes ('). 1 minute=60 seconds ("). 

RELATIONSHIP OF ANGLES 



R N 


A 
C 

Angles are of four types: 

1. Right angle-a 90° angle. 

2. Acute angle-an angle less than 90°. 

3. Obtuse angle-an angle greater than 90°, but 
less than 180°. 

4. Reflex angle—an angle greater than 180°. 


1. Z ZOY and Z ZOX are supplementary angles 
and their total measure in degrees is equal to 
180°. When one straight line meets another, two 
supplementary angles are formed. One is the 
supplement of the other. 

2. Z DAC and Z CAB are complementary angles 
and their total is a right angle or 90°. 

Two angles whose sum is 90° are said to be comple¬ 
mentary, and one is the complement of the other. 

3. Z MOP and Z RON are a pair of vertical 
angles and are equal. 

MOP and z PON area pair of vertical angles 
and are equal. 

When two straight lines cross, two pairs of vertical 
angles are formed. Pairs of vertical angles are equal. 



AII-3 



BISECTING ANGLES 


Problem: 


To bisect an angle merely means to divide the angle 
into two equal angles, his may be done by use of a 
compass. 

Problem: 

Bisect Z ABC. 


Construct an angle Z PMN equal toZ ABC. 




Solution: 

Step 1. Draw an arc with the radius less than the 
shorter of AB or BC intersecting AB and BC 
at points X and Y. 

Step 2. From X and Y using the same radius, draw 
arcs intersecting at point F. 

StepS. Draw BF which will bisect Z ABC. 

Conclusion: 

Z ABF = Z CBF 


Solution: 

Step 1. From B, draw an arc with a convenient 
radius which intersects AB and CB at points 
XandY. 

Step 2. Using the same radius, draw an arc from M 
intersecting MN at point 0. 

Step 3. With X as center, set the compass to a radius 
which will pass an arc through Y. 

Step 4. Using this radius (Step 3) and 0 as center, 
draw an arc that wi 11 i ntersect the arc drawn 
from M in Step 2 at point P. 

Step 5. Draw PM completing PMO. 

Conclusion: 

Z PMO = Z ABC 

PERPENDICULARS LINES 

Lines are said to be perpendicular when they form 
a right angle (90°). 

A perpendicular may be drawn to a line in several 
ways. 

1. Using an object which has a right angle, such as 
a drawing triangle. 


TRANSFERRING ANGLES 

It is often necessary in sheet metal layout to con¬ 
struct an angle that equals a given angle. 

Given: 

Z ABC 



2. Using a compass from a point on a line. 
Example 

Construct a perpendicular to AB at point C. 



AII-4 



Solution: 


Solution: 


Step 1. Draw an arc from C as a center, using any 
convenient radius cutting AC and CB at X 
and Y. 

Step 2. Increase the size of the radius and from X 
and Y, draw arcs which intersect at point F. 

Step 3. Draw CF which is perpendicular to AB at 
point C. 

3. Using a compass, from a point outside the line. 

Example 

Draw a perpendicular to AB from C. 



Step 1. From C, draw an arc using any convenient 
radius, intersecting AB at X and Y. 

Step 2. Using the same radius, draw arcs from X 
and Y intersecting at F. 

Step 3. Draw CF, which is perpendicular to AB. 

4. Using a compass from a point at the end of a line. 
Example 

Draw a perpendicular to AB from B. 



Step 1. From B, swing an arc with any convenient 
radius intersecting AB at 0 and continuing 
in a clockwise direction at least 120°. 

Step 2. From 0, using the same radius, draw an arc 
intersecting the arc drawn in Step 1 and X. 

Step 3. From point X, draw an arc with the same 
radius intersecting the arc drawn in Step 1 
atY. 

Step 4. From X and Y, draw arcs using the same 
radius intersecting at F, 

Step 5. Draw FB perpendicular to AB at B. 

PARALLEL LINES 

Two lines are said to be parallel if they are equidis¬ 
tant (equally distant) at all points. 

Facts about parallel lines: 

Two straight lines lying in the same plane either 
intersect or are parallel. 

Through a point there can be only one parallel 
drawn to a given line. 

If two lines are perpendicular to the third, and in the 
same plane, they are parallel. 

BISECTING LINES 

It is often necessary to find the midpoint of a line. 
This may be found by measuring, or by using dividers 
and finding it by trial and error. A much simpler way is 
by the use of a compass. 

Example 

To bisect a line AB by using a compass: 



AII-5 



Solution: 

Step 1. Using A as a center and a radius more than 
1/2 of AB, but less than AB, draw an arc. 

Step 2. Using B as a center and the same radius as 
Step 1, draw an arc intersecting the arc 
drawn in Step 1. Mark intersecting points X 
and Y. Draw XY. 

Conclusion: 

AE = EB 

NOTE: That E also represents the midpoint of XY 
and that XY is perpendicular to AB. XY is termed the 
perpendicular bisector of AB, 

CONSTRUCTION OF PARALLEL 
LINES USING PERPENDICULARS 

Example; 

Construct parallel lines 2" apart. 


> 

/ 

C 

IP 

\ 

] 

' A 

/ \ 

*4 

--2- 

B / 


Solution: 

Step 1. Draw a base line and lay out two points A 
and B 2" apart. 

Step 2. Construct perpendiculars AC and BD to 
AB at A and B. 

Conclusion; 

AC is parallel to BD. 

Principle: 

Perpendiculars to the same line are parallel. 

NOTE: Horizontal parallel lines can be drawn by 
the same procedures. 


c D 


- 

> 

_I_ 

1 | 

\ 

_i_: 


' A 

1 1 

ANY DISTANCE 

B 1 


DIVIDING LINES 

Lines can be divided into equal parts by a number 
of methods. Four of these methods are (1) by using 
parallel lines, (2) by transferring angles, (3) by using 
equal segments on the side of an angle, and (4) by using 
a scale. 

1. Using parallel lines 
Example; 

Divide AB into 5 equal parts. 



Solution: 

Step 1. Assume any angle ABD and draw BD. 

Step 2. At A construct Z BAC equal to Z ABD. 
Now BD and AC are parallel. 

Step 3. Assume a radius so that 5 times the radius 
will fall within the BD, Swing arcs using 
this radius on BD and AC. 

Step 4. Connect B with the last arc swung from A 
and connect corresponding points. 

Conclusion: 

Lines drawn in Step 3 divide AB into 5 equal parts. 

2. Transferring angles 

Example: 

Divide AB into 5 equal parts. 



AII-6 


Solution: 

Step 1. Draw a line AC at any assumed angle to AB. 
Step 2. Step off with compass 5 equal parts on AC. 
Step 3. At Q (the end of 5 parts), draw line BQ. 

Step 4. At points M, N, 0, and P, construct angles 
equal toZBQA. 

Conclusion: 

Where sides of angles constructed in Step 4 meet AB, 
they will divide AB into equal parts. 

3. Equal segments on the side of an angle 

Example: 

Divide AB into 5 equal parts. 



Solution: 

Step 1. At any assumed angle draw AC. 

Step 2. Step off 5 equal parts on AC. 

Step 3. At Q (the end of 5 parts), draw line BQ. 

Step 4. Draw lines through P, 0, N, and M parallel 
to BQ. 

Conclusion: 

Where parallel lines intersect AB, AB will be divided 
into 5 equal parts. 

Note the similarity of methods 3 and 2. 

4. Use of a scale 
Example 

Divide line AB, which is 29/16" long, into 6 equal parts. 



Solution: 

Step 1. At A draw a line perpendicular to AB. 

Step 2. Place the scale at an angle so that the 
distance on the scale will divide easily into 
6 parts. I n the above, we have selected 3" 
which will divide into 6 equal parts of 1/2" 
each. 

Step 3. Draw lines from 1/2"; each division is 
perpendicular to AB. 

Conclusion: 

The perpendiculars drawn will divide AB into 6 equal 
parts. 

PLANE SHAPES 

A plane shape is a portion of a plane bounded by 
straight or curved lines or a combination of the two. 

The number of different types of plane shapes is 
infinite, but we are concerned with those which are of 
importance to you as a sheet metal craftsman. We will 
cover the circle, triangle, quadrilateral, other polygons, 
and ellipses. 

CIRCLES 



Definitions: 

A CIRCLE is a closed curved line in which any 
point on the curved line is equidistant from a point called 
the center. (Circle 0). 

A RADIUS is a line drawn from the center of a 
circle to a point on a circle. (As OA, OB, OX, and OY.) 

A DIAMETER is a line drawn through the center 
of a circle with its ends lying on the circle. 

A DIAMETER is twice the length of a radius. (AB 
is a diameter of circle 0.) 


AII-7 


Solution: 


A CHORD is a linejoining any two points lying on 
a circle. (CD is a chord of circle O.) 

An ARC is a portion of the closed curved lines 
which forms the circle. It is designated by CD. An arc 
is said to be subtended by a chord. Chord CD subtends 
arc CD. 

A TANGENT is a straight line which touches the 
circle at one and only one point. (Line MZ is a tangent 
to ci rdeO.) 

A CENTRAL ANGLE is an angle whose vertex is 
the center of a circle and whose side are radii of the 
circle. (As XOY, YOA, and XOB.) 

CONCENTRIC Cl RCLES are circles having the 
same center and having different radii. 

The CIRCUMFERENCE of a circle is the distance 
around the circle. It is the distance on the curve from C 
to A to X to Y to B to D and back to C. 

Some examples of problems involving circles ap¬ 
plicable to sheet metal work are as follows: 

1. Construct a tangent to circle O by use of a 
square. 



Solution: 

Step 1. Place the square in a position so that one 
side touches the center and the other side 
touches the circle. 

Conclusion: 

A line drawn along the second side will be tangent to the 
ci rcle. 

2. Divide a circle into 6 equal parts. 



Step 1. Using a radius of the circle, begin at any 
point, and step off chords equal to the 
radius. If done accurately, this will make 6 
divisions of the circle. 

3. Divide a semicircle into 6 equal parts. 



Solution: 

Step 1. At 0 erect a perpendicular to AB. 

Step 2. With point A as the center and radius equal 
to AO, swing an arc cutting the circle at E. 

Step 3. With poi nt B as the center and the same 
radius as in step 2, swing an arc cutting the 
circle at F. 

Step 4. With the same radius, and point C as the 
center, swing arcs cutting the circle at points 
G and H, 

Conclusion: 

AG =GE =EC =etc. 

4. Divide a circle into 8 equal parts. 

Problem: 

To divide circle 0 into 8 equal parts. 

Solution: 

Step 1. Draw diameter AB. Draw CD perpendicular 
to AB, thus dividing the circle into 4 equal 
parts. 

Step 2. Bisect the central angle COB. Mark the 
point of the intersection of the bisector and 
circle 0. 


AII-8 


Step 3. From B swing an arc equal to BP and from 
this intersection with the circle, draw the 
diameter, thus dividing circle 0 into 8 equal 



1. The altitude of a triangle is a line drawn from the 
vertex, perpendicular to the base. 



ALTITUDE 


2. The median of a triangle is a line drawn from the 
vertex to the midpoint of the base. 


TRIANGLES 

A triangle is a plane shape having 3 sides. Its name 
is derived from its three (tri) angles. 

Other facts help define a triangle. 

1. The sum of the angles in any triangle equals 

180°. 

2. A triangle is the only plane shape which maybe 
defined in terms of its sides only; in all others 
one or more angles must be stated. 

Types of Triangles 

There are four kinds of triangles. They are classified 
according to the size of their sides and angles as follows: 

1. Equilateral-all sides are equal-all angles are 
equal-all angles are 60° 

2. Isosceles—two sides equal-two angles equal 

3. Scalene—all sides unequal-all angles unequal 

4. Right—one right angle 



EQUILATERAL ISOSCELES SCALENE RIGHT 

TRIANGLE TRIANGLE TRIANGLE TRIANGLE 



Construction of Triangles 

There are many ways to construct a triangle, de¬ 
pending upon what measurements are known to you. 
The following examples will assist you. Select the ap¬ 
propriate method according to the information given 
about the triangle. 

1. A triangle may be constructed if the lengths of 
three sides are known. 

Problem: 

Construct a triangle. 

Given: 

Three sides of a triangle: 2", 1", 1 1/2". 


Altitudes and Medians 

The altitude and median of a triangle are not the 
same; the difference is pointed out in the following 
definitions: 



B 


AII-9 


Solution: 


Given: 


Step 1. Draw a base line equal to one of the sides. 
Mark the ends of lines A and B. 

Step 2. Set the compass equal to the second side (I" 
in the above) and swing an arc from A. 

Step 3. Set the compass equal to the third side (1 
1/2" in this case) and swing an arc. 


Conclusion: 

The intersection of these two arcs will be the vertex C 
and will complete triangle ABC. 

2. A triangle maybe constructed if two sides and 
the included angle (angle between the sides) are 
known. 

Problem: 

To construct a triangle with two sides and the included 
angle known. 

Given: 

Two sides 1 1/2" and 2 1/4" and the included angle. 


c 



Solution: 

Step 1. Draw the base equal to one side. 

Step 2. Construct an angle equal to the given angle. 

Step 3. Measure the second side on the side of the 
angle and connect the ends of the given 
sides BC. 


Conclusion: 

Triangle ABC has been constructed with two sides and 
the included angle given. 

3. A triangle maybe constructed if two angles and 
the included side are given. 

Problem: 

Construct a triangle. 


Z A, Z B and line AB 2 1/8" long. 



Solution: 

Step 1. Draw line AB. 

Step 2. At point A, transfer angle A. 

Step 3. At point B, transfer angle B. 

Step 4. Where sides of z. A and z B intersect, mark 
point C. 

Conclusion: 

Triangle ABC has been constructed with two angles and 
the included side given. 

4. A right triangle may be constructed if the two 
sides adjacent to the right angle are known. 

Problem: 

Construct a right mangle whose sides adjacent to the 
right angle are 1 1/2" and I". 


C 



Solution: 

Step 1. Draw AB 1 1/2" long. 

Step 2. At A, erect a perpendicular to AB. 

Step 3. Locate point C 1" from AB and complete 
the triangle. 


AII-10 



Conclusion: 

Triangle ABC is a right triangle, 

5. A right triangle maybe constructed by making 
the sides 3", 4", and 5" or multiples or fractions 
thereof. 

Problem: 

Construct a right triangle with sides of 11/2", 2", and 2 
1/2" (1/2 of 3,4, and 5). 

Solution: 

Step 1. Draw line ab =2". 

Step 2. From A, draw an arc equal to 1 1/2". 

Step 3. From B, draw an arc equal to 2 1/2". 
Conclusion: 

Triangle ABC is a right triangle, 



QUADRILATERALS 

A quadrilateral is a four-sided plane shape. There 
are many types, but only the trapezoid, parallelogram, 
rectangle, and square are described here. 

1. A TRAPEZOID is a quadrilateral having only 
two sides parallel. If the other two sides are 
equal, it is an isosceles trapezoid. BF is the 
altitude of the trapezoid. 



2. A PARALLELOGRAM is a quadrilateral hav¬ 
ing opposite sides parallel. 


C D 



a. AB is parallel to CD. 

b. AC is parallel to BD. 

c. AD and CB are diagonals. 

d. Diagonals bisect each other so CO =OB and 
AO =OD. 

e. Opposite angles are equal ACD = DBA and 
CAB = BDC. 

f. If two sides of a quadrilateral are equal and 
parallel, the figure is a parallelogram. 

g. A parallelogram may be constructed if two 
adjoining sides and one angle are known. 

3. A RECTANGLE is a parallelogram having one 

right angle. 



a. ABCD is a parallelogram having one right 
angle. This, of course, makes all angles right 
angles. 

b. AC and BD are diagonals. 

c. O is the midpoint of AC and BD and 
OB =OC =OD = OA. 

d. 0 is equidistant from BC and AD and is also 

equidistant from AB and CD. 

e. A rectangle may be constructed if two 
adjoining sides are known. 


AII-11 



into equal arcs or by dividing the circle into equal central 
angles. 


4. A SQUARE is a rectangle having its adjoining 
sides equal. 



a. ABCD is a square. 

b. AC and BD are diagonals. 

c. O is the geometric center of the square. 
AO =OC =OB = OD. 

d. 0 is equidistant from all sides. 

e. A square may be constructed if one side is 
known. 

POLYGONS 

A polygon is a many-sided plane shape. It is said to 
be regular if al I sides are equal and irregular when they 
are not. Only regular polygons are described here. 



Regular Polygons 

Triangles and quadrilaterals fit the description of a 
polygon and have been covered previously. Three other 
types of regular polygons are shown in the illustration. 
Each one is inscribed in a circle. This means that all 
vertices of the polygon lie on the circumference of the 
circle. 

Note that the sides of each of the inscribed polygons 
are actually equal chords of the circumscribed circle. 
Since equal chords subtend equal arcs, by dividing the 
circumference into an equal number of arcs, a regular 
polygon may be inscribed in a circle. Also note that the 
central angles are equal because they intercept equal 
arcs. This gives a basic rule for the construction of 
regular polygons inscribed in a circle as follows: 

To inscribe a regular polygon in a circle, create 
equal chords of the circle by dividing the circumference 


Dividing a circle into a given number of parts has 
been discussed, so construction should be no problem. 
Si nee there are 360 degrees around the center of the 
circle, you should have no problem in determining the 
number of degrees to make each equal central angle. 

Problem: 

What is the central angle used to inscribe a pentagon in 
a circle? 

Solution: 

360° _ . , . , 

- , = 72° in each circle 

5 slides 

Methods for Constructing Polygons 

The three methods for constructing polygons de¬ 
scribed here are the pentagon, the hexagon, and the 
octagon. 

The PENTAGON is a method to develop the length 
of a side and departs from the rule given. Radius PB has 
been bisected to locate point O. Radius OC has been 
used to swing an arc CE from the center O. E is the 
intersection of arc CE with diameter AB. Chord CE is 
the length of the side and is transferred to the circle by 
arc EF using chord CE as radius and C as center. 

The HEXAGON has been developed by dividing 
the circumference into 6 equal parts. 

The OCTAGON method has been developed by 
creating central angles of 90° to divide a circle into 4 
parts and bisecting each arc to divide the circumference 
into 8 equal parts, 



PENTAGON HEXAGON OCTAGON 


AII-12 




Circumscribing a Regular 
Polygon about a Circle 

Problem: 

Circumscribe a hexagon about a given circle. 



Solution: 

Step 1. Divide the circumference into a given 
number of parts. 

Step 2. At each division point draw a tangent to the 
circle. The intersection of the tangents 
forms vertices of the circumscribed poly¬ 
gon. 

ELLIPSES 

An ellipse is a plane shape generated by point P, 
moving in such a manner that the sum of its distances 
from two points, F] and F 2 , is constant. 



D 


BF] +PF 2 =C = (a constant) 

AE is the major axis. 

BD is the minor axis. 

MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS 

Formulas, which are in effect statements of equality 
(equations), require the use of symbols to state the 
relationship between constants in any given set of con¬ 
ditions. To illustrate: 


Consider triangle ABC. 

Distance (D) around triangle ABC is equal to the 
sum of a, b, and c. 

Expressed as a formula, 

D = a + b + c 

This formula would express the distance around a 
triangle regardless of conditions. 


C 



c 


ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION OF 
MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS 

1. The sum of any two symbols, a and b, is written 

a+b. 

2. The difference of any two symbols, a bei ng the 

greater and b being the smaller, is written a -b. 

MULTIPLICATION OF 
MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS 

1. The product of any two symbols, a and b, is 
written as a x b or ab. 

2. The sum of any number of like symbols, such as 

a+a + a + a, may be combined and written once, 
preceded by a numeral designating the number 
of times the symbol occurs, as 4a. 

DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS 

The quotient of any two symbols a and b where a is 
the dividend and b is the divisor maybe written a/b. 

Summary 

1. Addition 

a+b =sum 

2. Subtraction 

a - b = difference 


AII-13 



3. Multiplication 


Substitute: 


a x b = ab = product 
a+a+a+a =4a 
4. Division 


a -rb =a/b = quotient 


GROUPING—USE OF PARENTHESES 


Occasionally a combination of symbols must be 
treated as a single symbol. When this occurs, the group 
is set apart by use of parentheses. 

In order to symbolize 5 times the sum of a + b, you 
should write 5(a + b). 

The quotient of a + b divided by 2 is written 

(a + b) 

2 

REMOVAL OF COMMON FACTORS 
FROM AN EXPRESSION BY USE OF 
PARENTHESES 


5(4 + 2) 5(6) 5x6 30 

2 2 2 2 15 

PERIMETERS AND 
CIRCUMFERENCES 

Perimeter and circumference have the same mean¬ 
ing; that is, the distance around. Generally, circumfer¬ 
ence is applied to a circular object and perimeter to an 
object bounded by straight lines. 

PERIMETER OF A POLYGON 

The perimeter of a triangle, quadrilateral, or any 
other polygon is actually the sum of the sides. 



d 


In the expression 2a + 2b + 2c: the common factor 
may be removed and the remainder combined in paren¬ 
theses: 2(a + b +c) or in the foil owing: 4ab +2ac + 6ax. 

All the terms contain the factor 2a. The expression 
may be changed to read 2a(2b + c + 3x). 

Since the parentheses indicate that each term within 
is to be multiplied by the factor outside the parentheses, 
the parentheses may be removed by multiplying each 
term by the common factor. 

Expression: 2x(2y +3z + m) 

Multi ply: 4xy+6xz+2xm 


SUBSTITUTION OF NUMERICAL 
VALUES FOR GROUPED SYMBOLS 


Consider the expression: 

5(a + b) 

2 

This means to first: add a and b. Second: multiply the 
sum by 5. Third: divide the product by 2. 

Assign numerical values to a and b. 

Let a =4and b =2. 


Write an equation for the perimeter(P) of the quad¬ 
rilateral above. 

P=a+b+c+d 

If this figure were a rectangle, 


a 


b 


c 


d 


the formula P = a+ b+c+d would still apply, but since 
opposite sides are equal, we could substitute a for c and 
b ford and write 

P =2a +2b 

If the figure were a square, the formula would 
become: 


P =4 a 

We may, by the same reasoning, establish that the 
formula for the perimeter of any regular polygon of n 
sides having a sides is: 


AII-14 


P = n(s) 




CIRCUMFERENCE OF A CIRCLE 


Definition of Pi: Mathematicians have established 
that the relationship of the circumference to the diameter 
of a circle is a constant called Pi and written K.The 
numerical value of this constant is approximately 
3.141592653. For our purpose 3.1416 or simply 3.14 
will suffice. 

The formula for the circumference of a circle is 
C =tcD where C is the circumference and D is the 
diameter since D = 2R where R is the radius, the 
formula may be written C =2 tiR. 



Given: 

Diameter of circle 0 is 4". 

Problem: 

Compute the circumference. 

Formula C = nD 

C = 3.1416 X 4" 

C = 12.5664’ 

STRETCHOUT OF ROUND OBJECTS 



Problem: 

The size of flat sheet necessary to form pipe. 

Solution: 

By formula the circumference of the end is tcD. If this 
were rolled out, the stretchout would be teD. 


STRETCHOUT = TT,0 



H 


STRETCHOUT OF A RIGHT 
CIRCULAR CONE 


V 



The stretchout of a right circular cone will be a 
portion of a circle whose radius (S) is equal to the slant 
height of the cone. 



To determine how much of the circle will be re¬ 
quired for the cone, you measure on the circumference 
of this circle the circumference of a circle of radius R. 



Given: 

Diameter of the round pipe= D 
Length of the round pipe= 1 


AII-15 



AREAS 


AREA OF A CROSS SECTION 


All areas are measured in squares. 
Illustration: 

Let one side of a square be s. 


s 



This is a squares or s 2 . 

Ifs equals 1 inch then this would be 1 square inch. 
Ifs equals 1 foot then this would be 1 square foot, etc. 


S 

s 



s s 


s 

s 


Consider the area of the above. The area of A is one 
squares or s 2 ; of B is s', etc. The area of the whole is 
A+ B + C+ D =s 2 +s z +s 2 + s 2 = 4s 2 . What is the length 
of one side? It is obviously 2s, so in the above the area 
is 2s x 2s =4s 2 . 


The area of a square is the product of two of its sides 
and since both sides are equal, it may be said to be the 
square of its side. 


NOTE: The area of any plane surface is the measure 
of the number of squares contained in the object. The 
unit of measurement is the square of the unit which 
measures the sides of the square. 


AREA OF A RECTANGLE 




The cross section of an object is a plane figure 
established by a plane cutting the object at right angles 
to its axis. The area of this cross section will be the area 
of the plane figure produced by this cut. 

The area of the cross section is L x W. 

The most common units are square inches, square 
feet, square yards and in roofing, "squares." 

1 square foot = 144 square i nches 

1 square yard =9 square feet 

1 square of roofing = 100 square feet 



Establish a side of the small square as s and write 
the formula 3s x 4s =Area. But L =4s and W =3s, so 
our formula becomes 

A = L x W 
where 

A = area of a rectangle 
L = length of a rectangle 
i n = width of a rectangle 



AII-16 


























COMMON CONVERSIONS 

1. To convert square inches to square feet, divide 
square inches by 144. 

2. To convert square feet to square inches, multiply 

by 144. 

3. To convert square feet to square yards, divide by 

9. 

4. To convert square yards to square feet, multiply 

by 9. 

5. To convert square feet to squares, divide by 100. 
Example 

1. Convert 1,550 square inches into square feet. 

10,76 sq ft 

144 sq in.11550 sq in. 

2. Convert 15 square feet to square i nches. 

15 sq ft x 144 sq in. = 2160 sq in. 

3. Convert 100 square feet to square yards. 

11.11 sq yd 
9 sq ftl 100 sq ft 

4. Convert 10.3 square yards to square feet. 

10.3 square yards x 9 square feet= 92.7 square feet 

5. Convert 17,250 square feet to squares. 

172.5 squares 
100 sq ft 117250 sq ft 


The above demonstrates that a circle divided into a 
number of parts maybe laid out as a parallelogram. As 
the number of parts is increased, the longer side ap¬ 
proaches 1/2 of the circumference; if divided into an 
indefinite number of parts, it would be equal to 1/2 the 
circumference. As the number increases, h approaches 
r and would be equal if the circle was divided into an 
infinite number of parts. 

The areas of the parallelogram is 

A = bh, but b = nr 
so A = nrh 
or A = nr x r 

The formula for the area of a circle 

A = nx 2 
where 

A = area of circle 
r = radius of circle 
n = 3.1416 


Since r =d/2 where d is the diameter of a circle, the 
formula for the area of a circle in terms of its diameter 
is 


A = 



V ) 


nd 2 


4 


GEOMETRIC SOLIDS 

I n describing plane shapes, you use only two dimen¬ 
sions: width and length; there is no thickness. By adding 
the third dimension, you describe a solid object. 

Consider the solids shown below. 


AREA OF A CIRCLE 

Development of Formula: 






CONE 




cyundei 


AII-17 




1. A PRISM is a figure whose two bases are 
polygons, alike in size and shape, lying in parallel planes 
and whose lateral edges connect corresponding vertices 
and are parallel and equal in length. A prism is a right 
prism if the lateral edge is perpendicular the base. The 
altitude of a prism is the perpendicular distance between 
the bases. 

2. A CONE is a figure generated by a line moving 
in such a manner that one end stays fixed at a point called 
the "vertex." The line constantly touches a plane curve 
which is the base of the cone. A cone is a circular cone 
if its base is a circle. A circular cone is a right circular 
cone if the line generating it is constant in length. The 
altitude of a cone is the length of a perpendicular to the 
plane of the base drawn from the vertex. 

3. A PYRAMID is a figure whose base is a plane 
shape bounded by straight lines and whose sides are 
triangular plane shapes connecting the vertex and a line 
of the base. A regular pyramid is one whose base is a 
regular polygon and whose vertex lies on a 
perpendicular to the base at its center. The altitude of a 
pyramid is the length of a perpendicular to the plane of 
the base drawn from the vertex. 

4. A CIRCULAR CYLINDER is a figure whose 
bases are circles lying in parallel planes connected by a 
curved lateral surface. A right circular cylinder is one 
whose lateral surface is perpendicular to the base. (Note: 
Any reference in this text to a cylinder will mean a 
circular cylinder.) The altitude of a circular cylinder is 
the perpendicular distance between the planes of the two 
bases. 


when one side of the cube is equal in length to some unit 
of linear measure. 

COMMON VOLUME FORMULAS 

All factors in theformulas must be in the same linear 
units. As an example, one term could not be expressed 
in feet while other terms are in inches. 

Volume of a Rectangular Prism 

V = lXH'X/l 

where 

v = Volume in cubic inches 
w = width of the base in linear units 
/ = length of base in linear units 
h = altitude of the prism in linear units 

Example: 

Find the number of cubic inches of water which can be 
contained by a rectangular can 5" x 6" x 10" high. 

V = lxwxl; 

V = 5" x 6" x 10" = 300 cubic inches 
Volume of a Cone 


MEASUREMENT OF VOLUME 


Volume is measured in terms of cubes, 


S 



This represents a cube of sides. The volume of this 
may be represented by S 3 . Ifs equals I", then the volume 
would be 1 cubic inch, and ifs equals 1’, then the volume 
would be 1 cubic foot, etc. 

It can be said that the volume of an object is mea¬ 
sured by the number of cubes contained in the object 


or 

or 


V = 

V = 

V = 


A x h 
3 

nrh 

~T~ 

nd 2 h 

12 


where 

V = Volume of a cone in cubic units 
A = Area of the base in square units 
h = Altitude of a cone in linear units 
r = Radius of the base 
d = Diameter of the base 


AII-18 




Example 

Find the volume of a cone whose altitude is 2'6" and 
whose base has a radius of 10". 

V . sf = . „ (1000) 

= 3141.6 cubic inches 

Volume of a Pyramid 


Volume of the Frustum of 
a Right Circular Cone 




where 

V = Volume in cubic units 
A = Area of a base in square units 
h = Altitude in linear units 
Example 

Find the volume of a rectangular pyramid whose base is 
3" x 4" and whose altitude is 6". 

Area of the base= 3 x 4 = 12 square inches 
V = ^ - = 24 cubic inches 

Volume of a Cylinder 


V=Ah 
or V = 7tr 2 h 


where 

V = Volume in cubic units 
A = Area of the base in square units 
h = Altitude in linear units 
r = Radius of the base 
d = Diameter of the base 


Example 

Find the volume of a cylindrical tank whose diameter is 
9’6“ and whose height is 11' 6". 


V = 


3.1416(9.5) 2 x 11.5 
4 


815.15 cubic feet 


The frustum of a cone is formed when a plane is 
passed parallel to the base of the cone. The frustum is 
the portion below base CD. The altitude of the frustum 
is the perpendicular distance between the bases. 

V = 1/3 nh(r 2 + R 2 + Rr ) 


where 

h = Altitude in linear units 
r = Radius of the upper base in linear units 
R = Radius of the lower base in linear units 


Example 

Find the volume of a conical shaped container whose 
dimensions are indicated in the drawing. 



V = 1/3ji/i(^ + R 2 + Rr) 

V = l/3rcl5(6 2 + 12 2 + 6 x 12) 

V = 5n(36 + 144 + 72) 

V = 5x(252) 

V =3956.4 cubic inches 


Volume of a Frustum of a Regular Pyramid 

A frustum of a pyramid is formed when a plane is 
passed parallel to the base of the pyramid. The frustum 


AII-19 



is the portion below plane MN. The altitude is the 
perpendicular distance between the bases. 



V = l/3h(B + b + <Bb) 

where 

V = Volume of the frustum in cubic units 
h = Altitude in linear units 
B = Area of the lower base in square units 
b = Area of the upper base in square units 

Example 

Find the volume of a frustum of a square pyramid if one 
side of its upper base is 2" and one side of the lower base 
is 8". The distance between the bases is 10". 

The area of the bases wi 11 be 

B = (8) 2 

b = (2f 

V = 1/3 x 10 ( 8 2 + 2 2 + V8 2 + 2 1 ) 

V =l/3xl0[64+4-H8+2)] 

V = 1/3x10(6444+16) 

V = 1/3x10x84 

V = 280 cu in. 

Conversion of Units of Cubic Measure 

It is often necessary to convert from one cubic 
measure to another. The conversion factors used are as 
follows: 

1 cubic foot = 1,728 cubic inches 

1 cubic yard= 27 cubic feet 

1 cubic foot = 7.48 U.S. gallons (liquid measure) 


1 U.S. gallon (liquid measure) =231 cubic inches 
1 bushel (dry measure) =2,150.42 cubic inches 
Example 

1. How many cubic feet are there in 4,320 cubic 
inches? 

2,5 c ubic feet 
1728(4320 
3456 
8640 
8640 


To convert cubic inches to cubic feet, divide by 
1,728. 

2. How many cubic inches are there in 3.5 cubic 
feet? 

1728 

3.5 

8640 

5184 

6048.0 cubic inches 

To convert cubic feet to cubic inches, multiply by 
1,728. 

3. How many cubic yards are there in 35 cubic 
feet? 

1.29 

27135.00 

27 

80 

54 

260 

243 

17 

To convert cubic feet to cubic yards, divide by 27. 
To convert cubic yards to cubic feet, multiply by 27. 

4. How many gallons are contained in a tank 
having a volume of 25 cubic feet? 

7.48 

25 

3740 

1496 

187.00 gallons 

To change cubic feet to,gallons, multiply by 7.48. 
To change gallons to cubic feet, divide by 7.48. 


AII-20 


RATIO 

The ratio of one number to another is the quotient 
of the first, divided by the second. This is often ex¬ 
pressed as a:b, which is read the ratio of a to b. More 
commonly, this is expressed as the fraction a/b. 

Ratio has no meaning unless both terms are ex¬ 
pressed in the same unit by measurement. 

Example: 


Let: 

1/4 = l'O" or a ratio of (1/48) or (1 to 48) 
1/8” = l'O" or a ratio of (1/96) or (1 to 96) 
3 = l'O" or a ratio of (1/4) or (1 to 4) 
3/8 = l'O" or a ratio of (1/32) or (1 to 32) 

CIRCUMFERENCE RULE 



What is the ratio of the diameter of circle 0 to circle 
M? This ratio is D:d or D/d. If the diameter of O is 3 

inches and the diameter of M is 1.5 inches, then the ratio 
of the diameters of circle 0 and circle M would be 3/1.5 
or 2/1 (read "ratio of two 1 to one"). 

What is the ratio of the diameter of circle M to the 
diameter of circle 0? 


RATIO APPLIED TO SCALE DRAWINGS 


-1-1— 

1 z 

—| l i | r— 

3 4 5 « 7 

~1— 

e 

n 1 —\ 

3 IO A, 

1 

_1_1_L 

I 1 ■ i ■ t 2 1 - 

_i_ 

1 - 3 ■ . \ 


The above illustration shows a portion of a circum¬ 
ference rule. This is an example of the application of a 
ratio. The upper edge of the rule is graduated in such a 
manner that one inch on the upper scale is in the ratio of 
3.1416 to 1 on the lower scale. This is in the ratio of the 
circumference of a circle to its diameter, so that any 
diameter can be converted to a circumference or vice 
versa by reading directly across the rule. 

In sheet metal pattern development, effective use 
can be made of the circumference rule. By using the 
circumference side, you can lay out the development of 
large objects. After making the layout, you can make the 
development of the pattern full size. 


Since it is not always possibleto make a drawing 
full size, the size of the drawing maybe made in a given 
ratio to the full size of the object. 

Example: 


" a " 

FULL 

A 

SIZE. 

|l/ 2 " 



ic HALF 
B SIZE 


I 1 /*” 



In the above example, A represents the object in its 
full size and B represents a drawing one-half size. The 
ratio of the drawing B to object A is one to two. (1/2) 
( 1 : 2 ) 

Drawings may be commonly "scaled down" by the 
use of the following ratios: 


PERCENTAGE 


Percentage (%) is a way of expressing the relation¬ 
ship of one number to another. I n reality, percentage is 
a ratio expressed as a fraction in which the denominator 
is always one hundred. 

Example 

The ratio of 6 to 12, expressed as %: 

.5 

.2l6xT 


The ratio of 6 to 12 may be expressed as .5 or 1. To 
change to %, move the deci mal two places to the right. 


.5 


50 

100 


= 50% 


This means there are 50 parts to 100. 

From a galvanized iron sheet weighing 46 1/4 
pounds, an "ell" and one section of pipe were produced 


AII-21 



which weighed 30 pounds. Find the percentage of the 
scrap. 

40 1/4 total weight 
-30 amount used 
16 1/4 weight of scrap 


16 1/4 
46 1/4 


.351 


35.1% 


PROPORTION 


squares of the two legs. It is expressed by the formula 
a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . 

1. RIGHT TRIANGLE — triangle having one 
right angle. 

2. HYPOTENUSE — The hypotenuse of a right 
triangle is the side opposite the right angle. 

3. LEG — The leg of a right triangle is a side 
opposite an acute angle of a right triangle. 

A ABC is a right triangle. 


Proportion is a statement of two ratios which are 
equal. 


Example 

1/3=5/15 or 1:3=5:15 

£ _ 3r 
3 " 9 


= r:3 = 3r:9 



SOLVING PROPORTIONS 

Given the proportion: 


a _ £ 
b ~ d 

by cross multiplying: a x d = b x c 
Example 

If 50 sheets of galvanized iron weigh 2,313 pounds, how 
much will 39 sheets weigh? 

Let W = weight of 39 sheets 

39 W 
50 ~ 2313 


CROSS MULTIPLY 


50 x W = 39 x 2313 


W = 


39 x 2313 
50 


1804.14 


THE LAW OF PYTHAGORAS 

The Law of Pythagoras is the square of the hy¬ 
potenuse of a right triangle equals the sum of the 


ZC is a right angle. 

c is side opposite Z C and is the hypotenuse, 
a is side opposite Z A and is a leg. 
b is side opposite Z B and is a leg. 

According to the Law of Pythagoras: 

a 2 + b 2 = c 2 

or by subtracting b 2 from both sides 
a 2 = c 2 - b 2 

or by subtracting a 2 from both sides 
b 2 = c 2 - a 2 

Example: 



b 


AH-22 



1. Given: a = 10; b= 7 
Problem: find c. 

a 2 + b 2 = c 2 
10 2 + 7 2 = c 2 
c 2 = 100 + 49 
c = Vl49 = 12.2 

2. Given: C =50; b =40 


Prove that the area of a circle of a diameter of side c is 
equal to the sum of the areas of circles whose diameters 
are sides a and b. 


area circle diameter c =area circle diameter a +area 
circle diameter b. 


area circle c 


TIC 


4 


area circle a = 


na 


Problem: find a 


a 


2 



area circle b = 


nb 


a 2 = 2500 - 1600 
a 2 = 900 


Then: 

tic 2 _ na?_ _ nb 2 
4 _ 4 ~ 4 


a = 30 

3. Proof of a 3,4,5 triangle. 

A right triangle can be constructed by making the 
sides 3, 4, and 5. We can prove it by the Law of 
Pythagoras. 

a 2 + b 2 = c 2 
3 2 + 4 2 = 5 2 
9 +16 = 25 
25 = 25 


c 2 = a 2 + b 2 


multiply both sides by 


n 


V J 


Since this is the rule of the right triangle, the above 
statement is true. 


Example 

In the Y branch shown, the areas of the two branches 
must equal the area of the main. By the above proof, if 
the two known diameters are considered to be legs of a 
right triangle, the hypotenuse will be the diameter of the 
main. 


Since values of 3,4, and 5 satisfy the equation, we 
may conclude that the statement above is correct. 

4. Application of the Law of Pythagoras 
Given a right triangle ABC: 






AII-23 





APPENDIX III 


METRIC CONVERSION TABLE 



ENGLISH AND METRIC SYSTEM UNITS OF MEASUREMENT 

COMMON EQUIVALENTS AND CONVERSIONS 

Conversions Accurate to Parts Per Million 

Approximate Common Equivalents 

(units stated in abbreviated form) 

Number x Factor 

1 inch 

= 25 millimeters 

in x 25.4* 

= mm 

1 foot 

= 0.3 meter 

ft x 0.3048* 

= m 

1 yard 

= 0.9 meter 

yd x 0.9144* 

= m 

1 milet 

= 1.6 kilometers 

mix 1.60934 

= km 

1 square inch 

= 6.5 square centimeters 

in 2 x 6.4516* 

= cm 2 

1 square foot 

= 0.09 square meter 

ft 2 x 0.0929030 

= m 2 

1 square yard 

= 0.8 square meter 

yd 2 x 0.836127 

= m 2 

1 acre 

= 0.4 hectare 

acres x 0.404686 

= ha 

1 cubic inch 

= 16 cubic centimeters 

in 3 x 16.3871 

= cm 3 

1 cubic foot 

= 0.03 cubic meter 

ft 3 x 0.0283168 

= m 3 

1 cubic yard 

= 0.8 cubic meter 

yd 3 x 0.764555 

= m 3 

1 quart (lq.) 

= 1 liter 

qt(lq.)x 0.946353 

= 1 

1 galioo 

= 0.004 cubic meter 

gal x 0.00378541 

_ 3 

— m 

1 ounce (avdp) 

= 28 grams 

oz (avdp) x 28.3495 

=g 

1 pound (avdp) 

= 0.45 kilogram 

lb (avdp) x 0.453592 

= kg 

1 horsepower 

= 0.75 kilowatt 

bp x 0.745700 

= kW 

1 pound per square inch 

= 0.97 kilogram per square 
centimeter 

psi x 0.0703224 

= kg/cm 

1 millimeter 

= 0.04 inch 

mm x 0.0393701 

= in 

1 meter 

= 3.3 feet 

m x 3.28084 

=ft 

1 meter 

= 1.1 yards 

mx 1.09361 

= yd 

1 kilometer 

= 0.6 mile 

km x 0.621371 

= mi 

1 square centimeter 

= 0.16 square inch 

cm 2 x 0.155000 

= in 2 

1 square meter 

= 11 square feet 

m 2 x 10.7639 

ii 

to 

1 square meter 

= 1.2 square yards 

m 2 x 1.19599 

= yd 2 

1 hectare 

= 2.5 acres 

ha x 2.47105 

= acres 

1 cubic centimeter 

= 0.06 cubic inch 

cm 3 x 0.0610237 

= in 3 

1 cubic meter 

= 35 cubic feet 

m 3 x 35.3147 

=ft 3 

1 cubic meter 

= 1.3 cubic yards 

m 3 x 1.30795 

= yd 3 

1 liter 

= 1 quart (lq.) 

Ixl.05669 

= qt (lq.) 

1 cubic meter 

= 250 gallons 

m 3 x 264.172 

= gal 

1 gram 

= 0.035 ounces (avdp) 

gx 0.0352740 

= oz (avdp) 

1 kilogram 

= 2.2 pounds (avdp) 

kg x 2.20462 

= lb (avdp) 

1 kilowatt 

= 1.3 horsepower 

kWx 1.34102 

= hp 

1 kilogram per square = 14.2 pounds per 

centimeter square inch 

tnautical mile = 1.852 kilometers 

kg/cm 2 x 14.223226 

* exact 

= psi 


AIII-l 






APPENDIX IV 

HAND SIGNALS 


AIV-l 




AIV-2 















USE WHIP LINE. 

(AUXILIARY HOIST) TAP 
ELBOW WITH ONE HAND. 

THEN USE REGULAR SIGNALS. 


MAKE RIGHT OR LEFT TURN 
AS INDICATED BY CLENCHED 
FIST. 


Figure AIV-1.—Hand signals—Continued. 


AIV-4 





TRAVEL BOTH TRACKS 


WHEN CUT. FILL OR HAUL ROAD IS TO BE 
DRAGGED OR BLADEO. POINT TO THE AREA. 
THEN RUB PALMS OF HANDS TOGETHER IN¬ 
DICATING a smoothing motion, applies to 

SCRAPERS. MOTOR GRADERS AND 
BULLDOZERS. 




Figure AIV-1.—Hand signals—Continued. 








APPENDIX V 


REFERENCES USED TO DEVELOP 
THIS TRAMAN 


I ChapterTl 

Crew Leader's Handbook, 5200X, Commander, Naval Construction Battalions, U.S. 
Pacific Fleet, Pearl Harbor, HI, 1992. 

General Safety Requirements Manual, EM 385, Department of the Army, U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, DC, 1992. 

Naval Construction Force Manual, NAVFAC P-315, Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, Alexandria, VA, 1985. 

Naval Construction Force Safety Manual 5100.23 series, Commander, Naval 
Construction Battalions, U.S. Atlantic Fleet, Norfolk VA, 1992. 

Occupational Safety and Health for the Construction Industry (29 CFR, 
1926/1910), 1985. 

Operations Officer's Handbook, COMCBPAC/COMCBLANTI NST 5200.2A, 
Commander, Naval Construction Battalions, U.S. Pacific Fleet, Pearl Harbor, 
HI, and Commander, Naval Construction Battalions, U.S. Atlantic Fleet, 
Norfolk, VA, 1988. 

Personnel Readiness Capability Program Standards and Guides, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, Alexandria, VA, 1983. 

SeabeePlanner's and Estimator's Handbook, NAVFAC P-405, Change 3, Naval 
Facilities Engineering Command, Alexandria, VA, 1983. 

Seabee Supply Manual, COMCBPAC/COMCBLANTI NST 4400.3A Ccmmander, 
Naval Construction Battalions, U.S. Pacific Fleet, Pearl Harbor, HI, and 
Commander, Naval Construction Battalions, U.S. Atlantic Fleet, Norfolk, VA 
1987. 

I Chapter~2l 

Blueprint Reading and Sketching, NAVEDTRA 12014, Naval Education 
Training Program Management Support Activity, Pensacola FL, 1988. 

Budzik Richard, S., 'Fittings Used Today that Require Triangulation Including the 
Theory of Triangulation" Practical Sheetmetal Layout, Practical Publications, 
Chicago, IL, 1971. 

Budzik, Richard, S., "Round Fittings Used Today including Methods and 
Techniques of Fabricating Round Work" Practical Sheetmetal Layout, 
Practical Publications, Chicago, IL, 1971. 

Budzik, Richard, S., 'Today's 40 Most Frequently-Used Fittings, " Practical 
She&m&ai Layout, Practical Publications, Chicago, IL, 1971. 

Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Sheetmetal Work, TM-745, 
Headquarters Department of the Army, Washington, DC, 1968. 


AV-1 






Johnston, Philip, M., Sheet Metal, Volumes 1-4, Delmar Publishers Inc., Albany, 
NY, 1966. 

Tools and Their Uses, NAVEDTRA 10085-B2, Naval Education and Training 
Program Management Support Activity, Pensacola, FL, 1988. 

Walker, John, R., Modern Metalworking, Goodheart-Wilcox Company Inc., South 
Holland, IL, 1973. 

I Chapter 31 

Frankland, Thomas, W., The Pipefitter's and Pipe Welder's Handbook, Glenco 
Publishing Company, Encino, CA, 1969. 

Nelson, Carl, A., Millwright’s and Mechanids Guide, 2d ed., Theodore Audel and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN, 1972. 

Th eOxy-AcetyleneHandbook, 2d ed., Linde Company, New York NY, 1960. 

Walker, John, R., Modern Metalworking, Goodheart-Wilcox Company Inc., South 
Holland, IL, 1973. 

Chapter 4 

Rigging, TM 5-725, Headquarters Department of the Army, Washington, DC, 1968. 

Rigging Manual, llth ed., Construction Safety Association of Ontario, Toronto, 
Canada, 1990. 

I Chapter~5| 

Rigging, TM 5-725, Headquarters Department of the Army, Washington, DC, 1968. 

Rigging Manual, llth ed., Construction Safety Association of Ontario, Toronto, 
Canada, 1990. 

I Chapter~6| 

Rigging, TM 5-725, Headquarters Department of the Army, Washington, DC, 1968. 

Rigging Manual, llth ed., Construction Safety Association of Ontario, Toronto, 
Canada, 1990. 

I Chapter~7l 

Builder 3 and2, NAVEDTRA 10646, Volume 1, Naval Education and Training 
Program Management Support Activity, Pensacola FL, 1985. 

Consolidated Cross-Reference, TA13, Department of the Navy, Navy Facilities 
Engineering Command, Alexandria, VA, 1989. 

Concrete and Masonry, FM-742, Headquarters Department of the Army, 
Washington, DC, 1989. 

Construction Print Reading in the Field, TM 5-704, Headquarters Department of 
the Army, Washington, DC, 1969. 

Placing Reinforcing Bars, 5th ed., Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute, 
Schaumburg, IL, 1986. 


AV-2 










Reinforcing Bar Detailing, 3d ed., Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute, 
Schaumburg, IL, 1988. 

Safety and Health Requirements Manual, EM 385-1-1, Department of the Army, 
Washington, DC, 1987. 


Chapter 8 


Facilities Planning Guide, NAVFAC P-437, Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, Alexandria, VA, 1990. 

Naval Construction Battalion Table of Allowance, TA-01, Department of the Navy, 
Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Alexandria, VA, 1987. 

MIC-120ABM (K-Span), Training and Operator Manuals, MIC Industries, Reston, 
VA, 1993. 

I Chapter~9l 

Facilities Planning Guide, NAVFAC P-437, Volume 2, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, Alexandria, VA, October 1982. 

Naval Construction Battalion Table of Allowance, TA-01, Department of the Navy, 
Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Alexandria, VA, 1987. 

Tank, Steel Vertical Bolted Knockdown Sealed Openings Standard Bottom and Roof 
TM 5-9788-1, Fleadquarters Department of the Army, Washington, DC, 1956. 

I Chapter 101 

Pontoon System Manual, NAVFAC P-401, Department of the Navy, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, Alexandria, VA, 1982. 

I Chapter 111 

AM-2 Airfield Landing Mat and Accessories, NAVAIR 51-60A-1, Change 5, 
Commander, Naval Air Systems Command, Washington, DC, 1993. 

I Chapter 12l 

Steelworker 3 &2, NAVEDTRA 10652-F, Naval Education and Training Program 
Management Support Activity, Pensacola FL, 1977. 


AV-3 












INDEX 


ABM 120 system ] 8-8| 

ABM 240 system, [Ml 
AM-2 matting, installation of. l 11-21 
installation sequence. ! 11-161 
pallets. ! 11-41 
Anchors. ! 8-351 
B 

Bar folder, ! 2-121 

Bar joist structural steel I 3-7| 

Beam clamps l 6-161 
Beams, structural steel ] 3-61 
Bearing plates, structural steel I 3-31 
Bending reinforcing bars, ! 7-81 
bar bending table l 7-81 
bend diameters ] 7-91 
guidelines arid techniques ] 7-81 
multiple bending ] 7-121 
Bending sheet metal by machine ] 2-101 
Bends l~3^26l 
hot IT26l 
wrinkle ] 3-27| 
becket ] 4-121 

Bill of Material Work Sheet ] 1-291 
Block and tackle, types of l 6-31 
construction of ] 6-21 

Bolt torquesQOO 

Blocking and cribbinq, r6-19| 

Buildings, pre-enqineered. l 8-11 
Boatswain's chair l 6-211 
Bowline, ! 4-101 
Brace anqles l 8-71 
Brace rods l 8-61 
Brakes ] 2-131 


Causeways ] 10-151 
Chain slinqs l 6-10l 
Columns l 3-41 
Column assembly ! - 7-181 
Concrete materials, ! 7-11 
Connections, Branch,[J^20] 

Construction activity summary sheet ] 1-271 
Construction administration ! l-ll 
Cutting and splicing beams l 3-121 
Cutting tools, and equipment ! 2-6| 

D 

Drawings, Construction, ! 1-191 
master plan ] 1-191 
shoo ! 1-201 

working (project) n-20| 

Dressing staves, HTSl 
Dry docks l 10-151 
Duct, fiber -glass ] 2-361 
Duct material F 2-321 

Duct Board Length Selection Char H 2-381 
Duct systems, sheet metal I 2-3ll 

E 

elcasOEH 

Elevated causeway sections, flO-191 
Eye splice l 4-151 

F 

Fiber line ] 4-l| 

fabrication of line l 4-21 
handling and care of lines l 4-41 
inspecting line ] 4-51 
safe working load of ] 4-6| 


INDEX-1 


























































































































Fiber line-Continued 
strength of, 1 4-61 
uncoiling line l 4-4| 
whipping line l 4-41 
size designation of line l 4-31 
types of I i ne J 4-11 
types of lay, | 4-2| 

Folders. r 1-221 

F rame assembly flPtl 
G 

Gin pole, hoisting devices l 6-271 
Girders, structural steel I 3-51 
Girts, eaves, and purli ns l~8^7l 
Guvin d 8-331 
Guy anchors l 8-351 

H 

Hazardous material, 117131 
Hitches, knots, and bends ] 4-71 
Hoisting devices, field erected l 6-231 
Hook bending, l~7-ll[ 

Hot bends l 3-271 

I 

Ironmaster portable hydraulic rod bender, 

UM 

K 

Keylocks, ! 11-71 
KPI keeper plate. 1 10-41 
Knots, bends, and hitches l 4-71 
K-span buildings£8^8| 

K-span construction, steps in | 8-241 

L 

Labor, categories of l 1-51 
Lap splices ] 7-151 


Layout of steel plate ] 3-101 
Layout tools, I 2-11 
Lifting equipment ] 6-141 

M 

Manhele cover, I 9-131 
Master activity summary sheet ] 1-261 
Material Takeoff Worksheet ] 1-301 
Mathematics, Al I-I t fc Al l-2E > 
anqles l All -31 
bisecting angles ! AIMl 
measurement of anqle t, AlbB t di Al I-4| 
relationship of anqles l, AIH4I 
transferring angle d, Al H4| 
areas l~Am 6 t d AII-lB 
common conversion ^. Al 1-1 7 to All-18 
geometric solids, All-I 8 tc t All-21 
common volume formula dT Al I-]| 9 t d) Al 1-21 
conversion of units of cubic measur d~AI 1-21 
volume of a cylinder [~AII-2D 
volume of a frustrum of a regular pyramid fAl 1-21 
volume of a pvramid [~AI I -2D 
measurement of volume TAI I-1B 
Law of Pvthaoora d Al 1-21 3 t d) Al l-5l 
linear measuremen t, All-1 t d) Al 1-31 

N 

NAVFAC P-458, E3 
NAVFAC P-437, [Hi 
NCF Level 11 [17241 
Notches ! 2-251 
Network analysis, QHl 

0 

Orange peel head l 3-251 

P 

Pallets, |~6d71 

Plates, pontoon assemblv l 10-51 


INDEX-2 





























































































































Personal Readiness Capability Program, IT tI 
Pipe bendinq l 3-261 
Planks and rollers,[6^8] 

Pontoons, 1 10-11 

assembly angles, [To^3] 
assembly plates l 10-51 
attachments for, l 10-21 
bitts and cl eats J 10-81 
deck closures ! 10-71 
fender installations. ! 10-61 
launching a string of j 10-101 
P-series, types of. 110-11 
propulsion units ! 10-91 
rubber fenders for ! 10-71 
structures ! 10-11.1 
uses of, 110-121 
Project folders, 022! 

Project tasking letter I 1-231 

0 

Quartering pipe ! 3-161 

R 

Rebar chart l 7-41 
Reinforcing bars ! 7-31 
Reinforcing steel ! 7-21 

Rigging, HO 

Rivets ! 2-281 

Rods, [O 

Roll-forming machine ! 2-141 
Rotary machine ! 2-151 

s 

Safety, iv 

block and tackle ! 6-61 

rigging operating procedures ! 6-351 

scaffold ! 6-221 

sheet metal tools and equipment ! 2-391 
Safe working load of chains, [OH 


SATS matting, mm 

installation seouence fll-51 
mat-laying procedures with a guide rail ! 11-131 
matting tie downs, mmi 
matting repair ! 11-201 
mat replacement ! 11-211 
runway replacement ! 11-241 
Scaffolds ! 6-201 
Screws, l~~2^28l 
Seams ! 2-231 
Shackles l 6-151 

Shears, [60 

Sheet-metal bending and forming equipment, 

[20 

Sheet-metal gauge ! 2-10| 

Sheet metal development ! 2-171 
Sheet metal fabrication ! 2-191 
Site plans l 1-221 
Skill categories ! 1-81 

SlingsJlO 

Snips l 2-7l 
Spreader bars l 6-171 
Splicing fiber line ! 4-141 
Splicing nylon line ! 4-181 
Soudwells ! 10-211 
Stakes ITnl 
Storage tanks ! 9-11 

bolted steel tank assemblies ! 9-21 
erection of ! 9-51 
Structural shapes ! 3-11 
Strutsfim 


Tackle, types of ! 6-41 
Tanks, steel ! 9-11 
Template, layout of ! 3-231 


INDEX-3 




































































































































Templates ! 3-13 an d 3-181 
Templates, pipe bending ! 3-261 
Timekeeping, ! 1-41 
Trailer-meunted machinery, ! 8-111 
Teels and eguipment. l 12-11 
air ccmpresscrs, ! 12-121 
band saws ! 12-31 
bits l~12T)l 
grinders, ! 12-11 
hacksaws ! 12- 7| 
pneumatic pewer tools ! 12- 2| 
presses, ! 12-81 

Tool Kits, Qil 
Towers, [JT26] 

Tripods J 6-311 


W 

Warping tug, ! 10-151 
Welded Tee l~3T>Il 
Welded wire fabric ] 7-61 
Wire rope, ! 5-11 

attach ments PS 1 ^ 
cleaning and lubrication of ] 5-141 
construction of ] 5-11 

laysj~53 

classification ] 5-41 

handl i ng and care of, | 5-101 

inspection of ] 5-131 

measuring ] 5-51 

safe working load ] 5-51 

storage of ] 5-151 


INDEX-4 




























































Assignment Questions 


Information : The text pages that you are to study are 
provided at the beginning of the assignment questions. 








ASSIGNMENT 1 


Textbook Assignment: "Technical Administration," pages 1-1 through 1-30. 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

principles and techniques a crew 
leader applies in job planning, 
supervision, and production. 


1-1. When you become a petty officer, 

you take on which of the following 
responsibilities? 

1. Company clerk 

2. Project manager 

3. Project estimator 

4. Crew leader 

1-2. Administration is the mechanical 
means petty officers use to 
accomplish which of the following 
functions? 

1. To plan, organize, supervise, 

manage, and document 
activities 

2. To apply their technical 
knowledge in directing 
personnel 

3. To ensure their subordinates 
work as efficiently as possible 

4. To set training goals for newly 
assigned supervisors 

1-3. You are assigned duty as a petty 

officer in charge of a crew. What 
is your first responsibility before 
you make any work assignments? 

1. To pass on to the operations 
officer the details of getting 
the job done 

2. To ensure your crew understands 
what is expected of them 

3. To establish daily work goals 
for your crews 

4. To determine whether equipment 
for the job is appropriate 

1-4. To ensure a job is completed on 
schedule, you should take which 
of the following actions? 

1. Order extra equipment 

2. Conduct training 

3. Demand quality work 

4. Encourage teamwork and 
establish goals 


1-5. To ensure a job is completed on on 
schedule, you should take which of 
the following actions? 

1. Order extra equipment 

2. Conduct training 

3. Demand quality work 

4. Encourage teamwork and 
establish goals 

1-6. Many young Seabees ignore danger 
or think a particular regulation 
is unnecessary. You , as a crew 
leader, can correct this problem 
by taking which of the following 
actions? 

1. Rotating work assignments 

2. Giving proper instruction 
and training 

3. Criticizing them openly 

4. Scheduling projects 
appropriately 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the procedures for tool kit 
maintenance, inspection, and 
material requisitioning. 


1-7. A tool kit contains the hand tools 
required for a crew of what size? 

1. Five 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

1-8. As a crew leader, you must schedule 
tool kit inventories at what time 
intervals? 

1. Daily 

2. Weekly 

3. Monthly 

4. Bimonthly 

1-9. Which of the following forms is a 

crew leader most likely to use when 
ordering materials? 


1 . 

DD Form 1148 


2. 

DD Form 1250 


3. 

NAVSUP Form 

1149 

4. 

NAVSUP Form 

1250 


1 




1 - 10 . 


1-15. 


What is the labor code for an 
embarkation? 


Of the following rate training 
manuals, which one offers 
information on the National Stock 
Number System? 

1. Military Requirements for Petty 
Officer Third Class 

2. Blueprint Reading and Sketching 

3. Tools and Their Uses 

4. Constructionman 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

purpose of reporting labor hours 
used on given projects, the 
categories of labor, and the type 
of information that is entered on 
the daily labor distribution 
report. 


1-11. A labor accounting system is 

required to measure the man-hours 
that a unit spends on various 
functions. 

1. True 

2. False 


A. 

Direct 

B. 

Indirect 

C. 

Overhead 

D. 

Military 


Figure 1A 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 1-12 THROUGH 1-14, 
REFER TO FIGURE 1A. 

1-12. Labor that contributes to the 

product but does not produce an 
end product itself. 

1. A 

2. B 

3. c 
4 . D 

1-13 Labor that does not contribute 

directly or indirectly to the end 
product, but includes all labor 
that must be performed regardless 
of the assigned mission. 

1. A 

2. B 

3. c 
4 . D 

1-14 Labor that contributes directly to 
the completion of the end product. 


1. 

A 

2 . 

B 

3. 

c 

4 . 

D 


1. D02 

2. M03 

3. M08 

4. X05 

1-16. When you attend a leadership school 
at Port Hueneme, your time is 
reported on the daily time card 
under what labor code? 

1. X08 

2. XOl 

3. T04 

4. MO 5 

1-17. Refer to textbook figure 1-4. The 
2 hours shown for Aaron represent 
time spent in what labor category? 

1. Training 

2. Overhead 

3. Indirect 

4. Disaster control operations 

1-18. After a daily labor distribution 
report form is filled out, it 
should be initialed by what person? 

1. The company chief 

2. The platoon commander 

3. The assistant company commander 

4. The company commander 

1-19. The daily labor distribution 
reports from each company are 
compiled and tabulated by what 
organizational unit? 

1. The Supply Department 

2. The Management Department 

of the Operations Department 

3. The Training Department 

4. The Engineering and P&E 

Division 

1-20. Information from the daily labor 
distribution report serves as a 
feeder report to the operations 
officer, as well as a construction 
management analysis source 
document, for which of the 
following personnel? 


1 . 

Crew 

leaders 


2. 

Platoon 

leaders 

3. 

The 

company 

chief 

4. 

Each 

of 

the 

above 


Learning Objective: Recognize 

the principles of the Personnel 
Readiness Capabilities Program 
(PROP) , the Safety Program, and 
the responsibilities of key 
personnel. 


2 




1-21. PRCP provides for collecting 
information on which of the 
following subjects? 

1. Predeployment planning 

2. Readiness of an NCF unit 

3. Training publications available 
to the NCF 

4. Prior military service 
education 

1-22. Newly acquired skills are reported 
to which of the following 
personnel? 

1. The company commander 

2. The educational services 

officer 

3. The PRCP coordinator 

4. The company clerk 

1-23. What person directs the safety 
policy committee? 

1. The safety chief 

2. The company chief 

3. The administration officer 

4. The executive officer 

1-24. What is the primary objective of 
the safety policy committee? 

1. To develop a safety doctrine 
and policy for a battalion 

2. To discipline personnel 
involved in an accident 

3. To elect a battalion safety 
chief and members of the 
committee 

4. To review all vehicle accident 
reports and determine the 
causes of accidents 

1-25. The safety supervisors' committee 
serves what primary purpose? 

1. It maintains safety programs 
for each project 

2. It collects and exchanges 
safety information and policies 
between projects 

3. It advises the safety division 
on safety procedures 

4. It investigates accidents that 
occur on the job 

1-26. Recommendations for improving 
safety on the job should be 
forwarded to the safety policy 
committee via the safety 
supervisors' committee. 

1. True 

2. False 


1-27. What safety group should you, as a 
crew leader, contact when 
recommending changes in safety 
matters? 

1. Safety division 

2. Supervisors' safety committee 

3. Safety policy committee 

4. Crew safety committee 

1-28. As a leader of a crew working on a 
construction project, you are 
responsible for which of the 
following duties? 

1. Training your crew members 
conditions 

2. Correcting unsafe practices and 
conditions 

3. Executing certain procedures 
when a crew member is involved 
in an accident 

4. All of the above 

1-29. What person is responsible for 

conducting short stand-up safety 
meetings? 

1. Safety chief 

2. Safety officer 

3. Crew leader 

4. Company chief 

1-30. In addition to discussing project 
safety during stand-up safety 
meetings, which of the following 
topics of concern should be 
included? 

1. Vehicle safety 

2. Prestart checks 

3. Equipment maintenance 

4. All of the above 

1-31. What is one of the most practical 
safety techniques that you, as a 
crew leader, can apply? 

1. Stand-up meetings 

2. Reprimanding violators in front 
of their peers 

3. Designating a crew member as a 
safety representative 

4. Leadership by example 


Learning Objective: Recognize the 

procedures and documentation for 
hazardous material warnings, 
handling, and turn-in procedures. 


1-32. A material safety data sheet (MSDS) 
is required to be on site for all 
hazardous material. 


1. True 

2. False 


3 



1-33. A material safety data sheet does 

NOT contain which of the following 

information? 

1. All hazards associated with 
exposure to the material 

2. Applicable laws governing use 

3. Personnel protective 
equipment/safety precautions 

4. First-aid/medical treatment for 
exposure 


1. Health hazard 

2. Fire hazard 

3. Reactivity 

4. Specific hazard 


Figure IB 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 1-34 THROUGH 1-37, 
REFER TO FIGURE IB. 

1-34. In a hazardous code chart, what 
does the top diamond indicate? 

1. 1 

2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

1-35. In the hazardous code chart, what 
does the bottom diamond indicate? 

1. 1 

2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

1-36. In the hazardous code chart, what 
does the right diamond indicate? 

1. 1 

2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

1-37. In the hazardous code chart, what 
does the left diamond indicate? 

1 . 1 
2 . 2 
3. 3 

4 . 4 

1-38. The degree of hazard is indicated 
on the code chart numerically from 
0 through 4. As the number 
increases, the threat decreases. 

1. True 

2. False 


1-39. Concerning the use of hazardous 

material, you should practice what 
safety rule? 

1. Draw all material needed for an 
entire project 

2. Draw material between each 
phase of a project 

3. Draw only daily requirements 

4. Draw weekly requirements 

1-40. Hazardous material must be stored 
in approved containers and stored 
what distance from an ignitable 
source? 

1. 15 feet 

2. 25 feet 

3. 35 feet 

4. 50 feet 

1-41. When turning in hazardous 

materials, you must submit a 
legible MSDS with the material. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Identify 

principles and techniques for 
planning and estimating projects. 


1-42. In planning a construction project, 
you should be concerned with which 
of the following estimates? 

1. Equipment 

2. Material 

3. Manpower 

4. All of the above 

1-43. Activity quantities provide the 
basis for preparing the material, 
equipment, and manpower estimates. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-44. According to NAVFAC P-405, Seabee 
Planner's and Estimator's Handbook, 
a man-day is based upon how many 
hours? 

1 . 8 

2. 9 

3. 10 

4 . 12 

1-45. According to NAVFAC P-437, 

Facilities Planning Guide, a man- 
day consists of how many hours? 

1 . 8 

2. 9 

3. 10 

4 . 12 


4 




1-46. A "material takeoff" is also known 
by what other term? 

1. A material estimate 

2. An equipment summary 

3. A work element 

4. A takeoff 

1-47. Equipment estimates do NOT contain 
which of the following information? 

1. Types of equipment 

2. Number of equipment required 

3. Fuel required 

4. Time required on site 

1-48. As an estimator for a construction 
project, manpower estimates must 
contain sufficient detail to list 
man-days for all ratings assigned 
to each activity. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

different types of construction 
drawings and their uses. 


1-49. What type of drawings contains 
size, quantity, location, and 
relationship of building 
components? 

1. Master plan drawings 

2. Project drawings 

3. Red-lined drawings 

4. As-built drawings 

1-50. What type of drawings consists of 
boundary lines, acreage, locations, 
and descriptions of existing and 
proposed structures, existing 
utilities, north point indicator 
(arrow), and contour lines? 

1. Master plan drawings 

2. Project drawings 

3. Red-lined drawings 

4. As-built drawings 

1-51. During construction, you should 
mark up what type of drawing to 
indicate a minor change or a field 
adjustment? 

1. Master plan drawings 

2. Project drawings 

3. Red-lined drawings 

4. As-built drawings 


1-52. What type of drawing is made to 
indicate changes to a completed 
project? 

1. Master plan drawings 

2. Project drawings 

3. Red-lined drawings 

4. As-built drawings 

1-53. The order of project drawings is 
always the same. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-54. Title blocks may vary in format but 
contain the same information. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-55. The revision block is at what 
location on the drawing? 

1. Top left corner 

2. Bottom left corner 

3. Top right corner 

4. Bottom right corner 

1-56. A revision block contains what type 

of revisions? 

1. Environmental 

2. Structural 

3. Supplementary 

4. Site 

1-57. Graphic scales must be shown 

prominently on each drawing, 
because when drawings are reduced 
in size, the reductions are often 
not scaled to proportion. 

1. True 

2. False 

1-58. What is the purpose of "specific 
notes" on a project? 

1. To give dimensional information 

2. To be explanatory 

3. To save space 

4. Each of the above 

1-59. Working drawings do NOT serve which 
of the-following functions? 

1. Provide a basis for making 
material, labor, and equipment 
estimates 

2. Complement the specifications; 
one is complete without the 
other 

3. Provide a means of coordination 
between ratings 

4. Provide extensive environmental 
and pollution control 
information 


5 



1-60. Civil working drawings do NOT 
include which of the following 
plans and information? 

1 0 Site prep and site development 

2. Fencing 

3. Comprehensive instructions for 
construction 

4. Water supply units 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

BASIC concepts and principles of 
project management (project 
packages) 


1-61. A project package consists of a 
total of how many files. 


1. 7 

2 . 8 

3. 9 

4 . 10 


1-62. 


In a project package, the safety 
plan is kept in what file? 


1. File 1 

2. File 5 

3. File 3 

4. File 7 


1-63. At what location in a project 

package should you find the master 
activity sheets and the level II? 


1. File 1, 

2. File 3, 

3. File 3, 

4. File 1, 


left side 
left side 
right side 
right side 


1-64. What file contains all authorizing 
and coordinating information about 

a project? 

1. File 1 

2. File 2 

3. File 3 

4. File 4 


1-65. The construction activity summary 
sheets are contained in what file? 


1. File 2, 

2. File 2, 

3. File 3, 

4. File 3, 


right side 
left side 
right side 
left side 


1-66. Project level Ills are located in 
what file? 


1. General information 

2. Correspondence 

3. Activity 

4. Network 


1-67. In what file are field adjustment 
requests filed? 

1. Quality control 

2. Correspondence 

3. Activity 

4. Plans 

1-68. The project specifications are 
found in what file? 

1. File 5 

2. File 3 

3. File 7 

4. File 9 

1-69. A list of long lead items is filed 
in the left side of what file? 

1. File 1 

2. File 2 

3. File 3 

4. File 5 

1-70. The right side of the 

Safety/Environmental file contains 
which of the following information? 

1. Safety plan 

2. Highlighted EM 385 

3. Environmental plan 

4. Each of the above 

1-71. The left side of the specifications 
file contains technical data for 
the project. 

1. True 

2. False 


6 



ASSIGNMENT 2 


Textbook Assignment: "Layout and Fabrication of Sheet Metal and Fiber-glass Duct," 

pages 2-1 through 2-39. 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the tools and equipment needed 
for measuring and fabricating 
sheet metal and recognize their 
uses. 


2-1. The procedure for measuring and 
marking material for the cutting, 
drilling, and/or welding of metal 
is known by the term "layout." 

1. True 

2. False 

2-2. What type of tool is most 

frequently used to scribe lines 
on sheet metal? 

1. Prick punches 

2. Trammel points 

3. Scratch awls 

4. Dividers 





2-4. You need to draw a line that cuts 
the base line of your layout work 
at an angle of 45 degrees. Of the 
tools in the figure, which one is 
quickest and easiest to use in 
constructing this angle? 

1. C 

2. D 

3. E 
4 . F 

2-5. What layout tool should you use 
to mark a point on your work? 

1. B 

2 . D 

3. G 
4 . H 

2-6. Which of the tools is required to 
scribe a circle having a radius of 
22 inches? 

1 . B 

2. C 

3 . D 

4 . H 


Figure 2A 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-3 THROUGH 2-6, 
REFER TO FIGURE 2A. 

2-3. To construct parallel lines in 

layout work, you should first clamp 
tool A to the base line of your 
work. What other tools in figure 
2A do you need to complete the job? 

1. D and C 

2. C and G 

3. B and E 

4. A and D 


7 









2-7. To construct a right angle by 

bisecting a base line, you must set 
the dividers for what distance? 

1. To exactly one half of the 
length of the base line 

2. To less than one half of the 
length of the base line 

3. To more than one half of the 
length of the base line 

4. Equal to the length of the base 
line 

2-8. In a simple drip pan layout, the 

radius of a corner arc is equal to 
what dimension of the pan? 

1. Its depth 

2. Its length 

3. Its width 

4. Its diagonal cross section 



SWNP0494 


Figure 2B 

IN ANSWERING QUESTION 2-9, REFER TO FIGURE 
TO FIGURE 2B. 

To construct a 90 degree or right 
angle using steps A through D 
shown in the figure, you should 
perform the steps in what sequence? 


1. A, B, C, D 

2. B, C, A, D 

3. C, A, D, B 

4. D, B, C, A 


2-9. 




2 - 10 . 


2-13. 


Refer to figure 2-11 in the 
textbook. To find point F in 
bisecting angle ABC, you must set 
the dividers for what distance? 

1. To less than one half of the 
line BD 

2. To twice the length of EB 

3. To greater than the total 
length of arc DE 

4. To greater than one half of 
the length of arc DE 



SWNP049S 


Figure 2C 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-11 THROUGH 2-13, 

REFER TO FIGURE 2C. 

2-11. Base line B is 10 inches long and 

you want to divide it into 12 equal 
parts. Using a rule after drawing 
line A perpendicular to the base 
line, you should orient the ruler 
in which of the following ways? 

1. Set the 12-inch mark at (e) 
and the 0-inch mark at (f) 

2. Set the 12-inch mark at (e) 
and the 1-inch mark at a point 
4 1/2 inches above (d) 

3. Set the 9-inch mark at the 
midpoint of base line B and 
the 3-inch mark at the mid¬ 
point of line A 

4. Set the 9-inch mark at the 
midpoint of line A 

2-12. Your next step in dividing base 

line B into equal parts is to drop 
perpendiculars to B from what mark 
on the ruler? 


1. 

1 

inch 

2. 

3/4 

inch 

3. 

1/2 

inch 

4. 

1/4 

inch 


After line B is divided into 
12 equal parts, what is the 
approximate length of each part? 

1. 5/16 inch 

2. 7/16 inch 

3. 13/16 inch 

4. 15/16 inch 

2-14. You set dividers for the radius 
of a circle and strike off this 
distance on the entire circum¬ 
ference. Into how many equal arcs 
have you divided the circumference? 

1. Six 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Nine 

2-15. Into how many equal parts is the 
circumference of a circle divided 
if the lines intersecting at the 
center of the circle form angles 
of 30 degrees? 

1. 4 

2. 6 

3. 12 

4 . 18 

2-16. What is the approximate circum¬ 
ference of a circle that has a 
diameter of 18 inches? 

1. 45.5 inches 

2. 56.5 inches 

3. 133.0 inches 

4. 365.0 inches 

2-17. What is the mathematical formula 
for determining the area of the 
stretchout of a cylinder? 

1. A = Trr 
2 . A = 7rrd 

3. A = 2irr 

4. A = (ird)h 


9 




Learning Objective: Identify 

uses and operation of tools and 
equipment used in fabricating 
sheet metal. 


IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-18 THROUGH 2-20, 
SELECT FROM COLUMN B THE TYPE OF SNIPS 
THAT SHOULD BE USED TO MAKE THE CUTS IN 
COLUMN A. 


A. CUTS 

B. 

TYPES OF 
SNIPS 

Outside circles 

1 . 

Circular 

1. 1 

2. 2 

2. 

Aviation 

3. 3 

3. 

Hawkbill 

4 . 4 

4. 

Beakhorn 


2-19. Compound curves 
and intricate 
designs 

1 . 1 

2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

2-20. Internal openings, 
such as rings or 
holes 

1 . 1 

2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

2-21. Squaring shears are designed to cut 
which of the following materials? 

1. Wire rope 

2. Steel rods 

3. Sheet metal 

4. Fiber line 

2-22. Metal stakes are used to make an 

assortment of bends by hand and to 
finish many types of work. 

1. True 

2. False 


IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-23 THROUGH 2-25, 


SELECT 

FROM COLUMN B THE TYPE OF 

STAKE 

THAT SHOULD BE USED TO FORM 

THE 

SHAPES IN 

COLUMN 

A. 




A. SHAPES 

B. 

STAKES 

2-23. 

Forming, seaming, 

1 . 

Conductor 


and riveting 




pieces and 

2. 

Hollow 


parts of pipe 


pipe 


mandrel 





3. 

Blowhorn 


1 . 1 




2. 2 

4. 

Beakhorn 


3. 3 




4 . 4 




2-24. Blunt and slender 
tapered jobs 

1 . 1 
2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

2-25. Riveting and shaping 
round and square work 

1 . 1 
2 . 2 
3. 3 

4 . 4 


2-26. What part of the bar-folding 
machine is used to make right 
angles and 45-degree bends? 

1. The depth gauge 

2. The bar handle 

3. The wing 

4. The angle stop 

2-27. A total of how many adjustments 
must be made on a cornice brake 
before you can use the machine 
to bend sheet metal? 

1. One 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

2-28. What feature on the cornice brake 
enables you to make as many 
duplicate bends as required? 

1. The clamping device 

2. The balancing weight 

3. The stop gauge 

4. The mold clamps 

2-29. The box and pan brake is often 

referred to as a finger brake. 

1. True 

2. False 


10 



2-30. 


2-36. 


2-31. 


2-32. 


2-33. 


2-34 . 


2-35. 


When forming a curved shape, you 
can fabricate the most accurate 
bend by using what piece of 
equipment? 

1. A stake 

2. A mandrel 

3. A pipe 

4. A slip-roll forming machine 

The slip-roll forming machine is 
designed to allow one end of the 
top front roll to be released 
quickly so you can perform what 
task easily? 

1. Removal of the work 

2. Cleaning operations 

3. Repairs on the machine 

4. Adjustments to the machine 

What operation of the combination 
rotary machine is used to reduce 
the size of the end of a cylinder? 


1 . 

The 

beading 

2. 

The 

burring 

3. 

The 

crimping 

4. 

The 

clamping 


Learning Objective: Recognize 

the methods of pattern development 
and identify types of edges, seams, 
and notches used in fabricating 
sheet metal. 


Instead of scribing directly on the 
metal when a single piece is being 
made in quantity, you can make a 
pattern or template and transfer it 
to the metal. 

1. True 

2. False 

Assume that the cylinder shown in 
textbook figure 2-51 has a diameter 
of 8 1/2 inches. Excluding the 
seam, what is the length of the 
stretchout? 

1. 26 5/8 inches 

2. 38 3/4 inches 

3. 51 7/8 inches 

4. 61 5/8 inches 

A patternmaker decides to divide a 
half plan or top view into 12 equal 
parts. What number of divisions 
will be required for the stretch¬ 
out line? 

1 . 6 
2. 12 
3. 24 

4 . 48 


What method of pattern development 
should you use to develop a pattern 
for an object that has a tapering 
form with lines converging at a 
common center? 

1. Radial line 

2. Parallel line 

3. Triangulation 

4. Scratching 





D E 


SV'VNPC-193 


Figure 2D 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-37 THROUGH 2-39, 
REFER TO FIGURE 2D. 


11 










2-37. What stretchouts are developed by 
the radial-line method? 

1. A and B 

2. A and C 

3. C and D 

4. C and E 

2-38. Triangulation is used to develop 
what pattern? 

1. A 

2. C 

3. D 
4 . E 

2-39. What pattern will ultimately fold 
or roll into a cylinder? 

1. A 

2. C 

3. D 
4 . E 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-40 THROUGH 2-42, 
REFER TO FIGURE 2-52 IN THE TEXTBOOK. 

2-40. The radial line method is used to 
develop a frustrum of a right cone. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-41. The stretchout pattern of the 

frustrum has been stepped off into 
how many spaces? 

1. 6 

2. 7 

3. 12 

4 . 14 

2-42. The length of the numbered line 
on the stretchout from 1 to 1 
is equal to what measurement? 

1. Height of the frustrum 

2. Circumference of the base 
of the cone 

3. Radius of the top of the 
frustrum 

4. Slant height of the frustrum 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-43 THROUGH 2-45, 
ASSUME THAT YOU ARE TO DRAW A PATTERN OF 
A TRANSITION PIECE FOR A SQUARE DUCT AND 
A SMALLER ROUND DUCT, AS SHOWN IN TEXTBOOK 
FIGURE 2-53. 

2-43. What view of the transition piece 
should you draw first? 

1. A 
2 . B 

3. C 
4 . D 


2-44. What triangle should you develop 

first in E? 

1. B3 and 4 

2. B4 and 5 or C7 and 8 

3. D7 and 6 

4. A2 and 1 or B2 and 1 

2-45. You have constructed perpendicular 

bisectors of AB, BC, CD, and DA in 
E and have established the location 
of point 0 0 What step should you 
perform next in order to check the 
overall symmetry of your transition 
piece? 

1. Swing length D5 from point 5 

2. Swing an arc of radius A2 from 
point A 

3. Swing arcs A and B from point 0 

4. Swing arcs from point G that 
will intersect at point 0 

Learning Objective: Identify 

the various sheet-metal joints 
and locking methods used in the 
fabrication of sheet-metal 
sections. 


2-46. When fabricating a wired edge to 
a cylinder, you must add how much 
edging to a pattern? 

1. 1 1/2 times the thickness 
of the metal 

2. 2 1/2 times the diameter 
of the wire to be used 

3. Twice the diameter of the 
upper burring roller 

4. One half of the diameter 
of the wire to be used 

2-47. In the fabrication of rectangular 

duct, what seam is used most often? 

1. Grooved 

2. Pittsburgh lock 

3. Lap 

4. Standing 

2-48. When laying out a pattern, you 
consider what feature last? 

1. Seams 

2. Laps 

3. Notches 

4. Edges 

2-49. What type of notch is used on a 
corner when a single-hemmed edge 
is to meet a 90-degree angle? 

1. Square 

2. Slant 

3. V 

4. Wire 


12 



2-50. What type of connection is used 
to join a flat sheet and a round 
pipe/fitting? 

1. Dovetail seam 

2. Drive slip 

3. Pocket slip 

4. Standing seam 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the various joints, installation 
procedures, metal requirements, 
and connections used in sheet-metal 
duct systems. 


2-51. What type of screw is most often 
used in sheet-metal work? 

1. Self-tapping 

2. Machine 

3. Thread-cutting 

4. Drive 

2-52. Drive screws are simply driven into 
sheet metal. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-53. Tinners are designated by their 
weight per 1,000 rivets. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-54. The distance from the center of the 
rivet to the edge of the sheet must 
equal how many rivet diameters? 

1. 1 

2 . 1 1/2 

3. 2 

4. 2 1/2 

2-55. The correct method for riveting 
using tinner rivets is to draw, 
upset, and head the rivet. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-56. What gauge of aluminum sheet metal 
is required to construct a duct 
62 inches wide at the top and 
28 inches high on the sides? 

1. 26 

2. 24 

3. 18 

4 . 16 


2-57. You are to construct a duct of 

24 gauge sheet metal. Each section 
is 7 feet 10 inches long. If the 
total system length is 60 feet, you 
should place the bracing angles at 
what location? 

1. 2 feet on center along the 
length of the duct 

2. 4 feet on center along the 
length of the duct 

3. 2 feet from each joint 

4. 4 feet from each joint 

2-58. The cross breaking of a duct having 
a flat side of 18 inches or greater 
can be omitted under which of the 
following conditions? 

1. The duct is installed in the 
vertical position 

2. The material used is at least 
reinforced at the edges of each 
duct segment 

3. The duct is insulated with 
approved materials 

4. The duct is insulated with 
rigid insulation and the sheet 
metal used is 2 gauges heavier 

2-59. When securing duct systems to 
heating and cooling units, you 
should use what material to 
fabricate the flexible connections? 

1. Light-gauge sheet metal 

2. Asbestos 

3. Heavy canvas 

4. Aluminum 

2-60. When "S" slips and drive slips are 
used on a duct system, you lock the 
joint into position in what way? 

1. By bending the "S" slip over 
the drive slip 

2. By bending the drive slip over 
"S" slip 

3. By cutting off the drive slip 
even with the "S" slip and 
welding each corner 

4. By center punching the "S" slip 


Learning Objective: Identify 

material requirements, fabrication, 
and installation procedures used 
in fiber-glass duct systems. 


2-61. Fiber-glass duct has which of the 
following advantages? 

1. Added insulating value 

2. Ease of fabrication and 
handling 

3. Ease of installation 

4. Each of the above 


13 



2-62. In all applications, the inside 

diameter is the determining factor 
of the duct size. 

1. True 

2. False 

2-63. Fiber-glass duct must not be used 
in a heating system in which the 
heat generated exceeds what 
temperature? 

1. 150 °F 

2. 200 °F 

3. 250 °F 

4. 300 °F 

2-64. What are the dimensions of the 
galvanized steel straps used to 
support fiber-glass duct? 

1. 3/4-inch diameter by 1/8-inch 
thick 

2. 1-inch diameter by 1/8-inch 
thick 

3. 1-inch diameter by 1/16-inch 
thick 

4. 1 1/8-inch diameter by 

1 1/16-inch thick 

2-65. You have fabricated a fiber-glass 
duct system that has a 30-inch 
diameter. At what distance should 
the supports be placed? 


1 . 

6-foot 

centers 

2. 

2-foot 

centers 

3. 

8-foot 

centers 

4. 

4-foot 

centers 


14 



ASSIGNMENT 3 


Textbook Assignment: "Structural Steel Terms/Layout and Fabrication of Steel and Pipe, 

pages 3-1 through 3-29. 


Learning Objective: Identify 

structural steel members by 
appropriate terminology and 
recognize steel structural 
erection rocedures. 



C D 


SWNP0497 

Figure 3A 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 3-1 AND 3-2, REFER 
TO FIGURE 3A. 

3-1, What structural shape does the 

designation W6 x 13 fit best? 

1. A 

2. B 

3. C 
4 . D 

3-2. What structural shape does 

the classification S15 x 42.9 
indicate? 

1. A 

2. B 

3. C 
4 . D 

3-3. A piece of steel plate 3 feet 

square weighs 180 pounds. What is 
the classification of this plate? 


1 . 

10-pound 

plate 

2. 

20-pound 

plate 

3. 

30-pound 

plate 

4. 

40-pound 

plate 


3-4. A 10-foot piece of steel that is 
3/8-inch thick and 2 inches wide 
is classified as a 

1. bar 

2. strip 

3. sheet 

4. plate 

3-5. What sequence is the proper order 
you should follow for the erection 
of structural members? 

1. Girders, bearing plates, anchor 
bolts, columns, beams 

2. Anchor bolts, column plates, 
girders, bearing plates, beams 

3. Anchor bolts, bearing plates, 

columns, girders, beams 

4. Bearing plates, anchor bolts, 

columns, girders, beams 

3-6. When cutting the holes in bearing 

plates to receive anchor bolts, you 
cut the holes larger than the bolts 
for what reason? 

1. To allow for height adjustment 

2. To permit lateral adjustment 

3. To compensate for angle 

connections 

4. To allow space for welding 
of columns 

3-7. Bearing plates are brought to their 
proper levels by 

1. installing shim packs 

2. welding the plates to 
the bearing plates 

3. forcing the grout under 
the bearing plates 

4. using locknuts 

3-8. What structural shapes are most 
often used in columns? 

1. Standard beam 

2. Tee shapes 

3. Pipes 

4. Wide flange beam 

3-9. What structural steel member is 

used primarily to span from column 


to 

column 

horizontally? 

1 . 

Beam 


2. 

Truss 


3. 

Girder 


4. 

Column 

splices 


15 





3-10. 


3-15. 


3-11. 


3-12 . 


3-13. 


3-14 . 


Which of the following members form 
a lightweight, long-span system 
used as floor supports and built-up 
roofing supports? 

1. Bar joist 

2. Truss 

3. Beam 

4. Girder 

Workers have installed diagonal 
braces between bays of a truss 
system. Their next step is to 
secure the roof system with what 
structural members? 


A job has been laid out and is 
determined to be accurate. At 
this time, what modification should 
be made to all cutting lines? 

1. Cut them with a torch on 
the inside of the kerf 

2. Center punch, then cut them 
with the kerf on the outside 
edge of the reference lines 

3. Transfer to patterns before 
cutting them so the work can 
be checked after cutting 

4. Lightly paint them to preserve 
the layout lines 


1. Angle ties 

2. Sway frame 

3. Diagonal locking bars 

4. Bottom chord extensions 

When using purlins to span roof 
trusses, you should ensure the 
legs face in what direction? 

1. Up toward the center or apex 
of the roof 

2. Flat with the face of the 
channel face directly toward 
the truss 

3. Downward with both legs welded 
to the truss 

4. Outward or down toward the 
slope of the truss system 

What structural members are used to 
frame the sides of a building which 
are attached to the outside 
perimeter columns? 


1 . 

Eave 

struts 

2. 

Purlins 

3. 

Girts 


4. 

Ridge 

plates 


Learning Objective: Identify 

methods of fabricating plate 
and structural shapes and the 
procedures for cutting, forming, 
and joining plate steel and 
structural steel shapes. 


3-16. When a 10-inch beam is connected 
to a 10-inch girder with the web 
of one end butted to the side of 
the other, the required layout is 
indicated by what letter? 

1. A 

2. B 

3. E 
4 . H 

3-17. The beam S 12 x 35 encloses the 
girder W 10 x 39, and it extends 
above the girder 2 inches. The 
beam butts the girder together 
at the center line of the girder. 
The bottom flange is flush with 
the bottom of the girder flange. 
What layout is required? 

1. C 

2. F 

3. G 
4 . H 

3-18. As the webs of the girder W 10 x 39 
and beam S 8 x 23 are connected and 
welded, what beam connection layout 
must be used for the beam S 8 x 23? 
(The top flange is flush.) 

1. A 

2. B 

3. D 
4 . E 


When laying out a plate with many 
parts, you must consider which of 
the following factors? 


Learning Objective: Identify 
the procedures for laying out 
structural members. 


1. Time required 3-19. Which of the following conditions 

2. Economic use of material must exist before you lay out steel 

3. Accuracy of measurements members ? 

4. All of the above 

1. Adequate lighting 

2. All required tools are on hand 

3. An accurate field drawing or 
sketch 

4. All of the above 


16 



3-20. 


3-26. 


Structural shapes are more 
difficult to lay out than plate 
because the reference lines are 
not always visible. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-21. When two beams of equal dimensions 
are fitted together, coping is 
required so one will butt up 
against the web of the other. 

You can determine the size of 
cope needed 

1. by dividing the flange width 
by 1/8, then adding 1/16 inch 

2. by dividing the flange width 
by 1/2, then subtracting 1/2 
of the thickness of the web 
and adding 1/16 inch 

3. by dividing the flange width 
by 1/4, then adding 1/8 inch 

4. by dividing the flange width 
by 1/2, then adding 1/2 of 
the thickness of the web 
and subtracting 1/16 inch 

3-22. The legs used to attach to 

intersecting steel to make a 
connection are referred to as 

1. connection legs 

2. web legs 

3. fit-up legs 

4. gauges 

3-23. Outstanding legs are the legs 
of the angles that attach the 
supporting angle or intersected 
steel beam. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-24. The lines in which holes in the 
angle legs are drilled are known 
as what type of lines? 

1. Dimension 

2. Layout 

3. Gauge 

4. Drill 

3-25. On what part of a connection angle 
does the distance from the heel of 
the angle to the first gauge line 
remain constant? 

1. Web leg gauge 

2. Outstanding leg 

3. Gauge line 

4. Top flange 


The standard 3-inch distance 
between the holes on any gauge 
line is known as 

1. leg gauge 

2. pitch 

3. web leg gauge 

4. dimension angle 

3-27. When a beam is joined to the flange 
of a vertical member, you should 
use what type of connection? 

1. Cap plate 

2. Direct insert 

3. Seated 

4. Slotted angle 


Learning Objective: Identify 

procedures for laying out pro¬ 
posed metalwork. 


3-28. A template is to be used as the 
pattern for the construction of 
a large number of precision metal 
parts. This template should be 
made of what material? 

1. Graph paper 

2. Plain white paper 

3. Template paper 

4. Metal 

3-29. When using templates to help lay 

out a steel member, you should make 
sure the identifying marks on the 
templates and the member correspond 
to which of the following plans or 
drawings? 

1. Erection 

2. Detail 

3. Flat 

4. Field 

3-30. What information does the erection 
mark on a member provide? 

1. The location of the member 
during erection 

2. Date of fabrication 

3. The sequence of erection 

4. The erection completion date 


Learning Objective: Identify 

pipe layout operations, procedures 
in constructing design patterns 
for pipe, and methods of joining 
pipe into different arrangements. 


17 



3-31. 


To fabricate 25 pieces of pipe 
of the same diameter and layout 
dimensions, you should use the 
shop method of making templates. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-32. When quartering a pipe before 
proceeding to lay out a joint, 
you should place the inside angle 
of the framing square against the 
pipe after taking what action? 


1 . 

Leveling 

one 

leg of the 


framing 

square 

2. 

Blocking 

one 

leg of the 


framing 

square 

3. 

Blocking 

the 

pipe 

4. 

Leveling 

the 

pipe 


3-33. What is the first step in devel¬ 
oping a template layout for pipe? 

1. Drawing a circle equal to the 
outside diameter of the pipe 

2. Constructing the template angle 
equal to twice the angle of the 
turn 

3. Dividing the circumference of 
the projected view by one half 

4 0 Bisecting the template angle 

3-34. The curve in view C of textbook 
figure 3-45 is determined 

1. by spacing the perpendicular 
line in view C to equal the 
outside dimension of view A 

2. by extending the line a-i in 
view C 

3. by basing the length of the 
perpendicular lines in view C 
on 1/2 of the length of the 
outside diameter of view A 

4* by joining in a smooth curve 

the set of points formed by the 
intersection of perpendicular 
lines drawn from the base line 
with parallel lines drawn from 
the point on a-i 

3-35. In makinq a simple miter turn, you 
perform what step after determining 
the cutback measurement? 


3-36. Assume you are making a full-sized 
drawing to determine the cut 
necessary for a two-piece welded 
turn where the angle of turn of 
the pipe is 60 degrees. First, you 
should draw the center lines to 
intersect as shown in textbook 
figure 3-46. Then you should 

1. lay the pipe over the drawing 
so its center line will 
intersect point b 

2. lay the pipe over the drawing 
so its edges will intersect 
points d and e 

3. draw lines a-b-c-d 

4. draw the outlines of the pipes 

3-37. In view A of textbook figure 3-49, 
the distance 1-P is equal to 

1. the diameter of the pipe 

2. the radius of the pipe 

3. the thickness of the pipe wall 

4. double the thickness of the 
pipe wall 

3-38. In what position should the 

protractor be locked to show the 
number of degrees of turnaway from 
the header to fabricate a branch- 
to-header connection of equal 
diameter pipe? 


1 . 

At an angle equal to 
degree of turnaway 

the 

2. 

At half of the angle 
turnaway 

of 

3. 

At one third of the 
of turnaway 

angle 

4. 

At one fourth of the 
of turnaway 

angle 


3-39. In textbook figure 3-50, the 

cutback measurements for laying 
out the end of the branch are 
the distances represented by 


what 

letters? 

1 . 

EC 

and 

AB 

2. 

AB 

and 

BC 

3. 

DA 

and 

EC 

4. 

BC 

and 

DA 


1. Measure one half of the 
distance to the cutback on 
the vertical plane 

2. Mark one half off the cutback 
measurement along the center 
line on top of the pipe 

3. Lock the protractor blade 

4. Determine the outside radius 
of the pipe 


18 



3-44 . 


3-40. Refer to textbook figure 3-51. 

Where a branch is welded to a large 
header, what should be the distance 
on each side of the branch between 
points A and B? 

1. Same as or a little more than 
the thickness of the branch 
wall 

2. Same as or a little less than 
the thickness of the branch 
wall 

3. Same as or a little more than 
the thickness of the header 
wall 

4. Same as or a little less than 
the thickness of the header 
wall 

3-41. In fabricating a three-piece 

connection of equal diameter pipe, 
you must decide upon the size of 
the open angle between each pair 
of center lines for what reason? 

1. To determine the position 
of the center lines 

2. To determine the angle of the 
adjoining sides of adjacent 
branches 

3. To quarter the ends of the 
three pieces of pipe 

4. To apply circumferential lines 
to each piece of pipe 

IN ANSWERING QUESTION 3-42, REFER TO 

TEXTBOOK FIGURE 3-54 AND TABLE 3-2. 

3-42. Of the following paired cutback 
measurements, which belongs to 
angle ACG? 

1. AB = 1/16 inch and 

FE = 6 inches 

2. AB = 1 1/16 inches and 

FE = 4 1/8 inches 

3. FE = 6 inches and 

ED = 4 1/8 inches 

4. FE = 1/16 inches and 

CD = 6 inches 

3-43. Refer to textbook figure 3-54. 

Without the use of templates or 
tables, how do you locate point 
B of the true Y? 

1. By determining the vertex 
of the triangle ABC 

2. By constructing a perpendicular 
line from point D to bisect 
line AC 

3. By intersecting the center 
lines of the three pipes 

4. By intersecting lines AB and BC 


In the preparation of an orange 
peel template, such as the one 
shown in textbook figure 3-57, 
which of the following projection 
lines are taken from view A? 

1. B-C and Al-Bl 

2. A-B and B-Bl 

3. B-Bl and X-Xl 

4. Al-Bl and X-X2 

3-45. When cutting a pipe with a hand 

torch, you use what type of cutting 
process to hold the cutting torch 
perpendicular to the interior 
center line of the pipe at every 
point? 

1. Miter 

2. Radial 

3. Reverse 

4. Concentric 


Learning Objective: Identify 

procedures for pipe bending, 
including heat bending and 
wrinkle bending. 


3-46. What are the flange spiders of a 
center line template made of wire 
used for in pipe bending? 

1. To clamp the ends of the wire 

2. To maintain a constant 
clearance around the pipe 

3. To indicate pipe clearance 

4. To indicate the center line 
of the pipe 

3-47. Before heating a pipe, what action, 
if any, should you take to prevent 
a reduction in the cross-section 
area of a hot-bend pipe? 

1. Pack it with wet sand 

2. Pack it with dry sand 

3. Pack it with wet packing 

4. None 

3-48. What is the technique for applying 
heat to the bend area of the pipe 
shown in textbook figure 3-62? 

1. First, heat ends A and B, 
then the part in between 

2. First, heat the area midway 
between A and B, then the ends 

3. First, heat the outside (heel) 
of the bend, then the inside 

(throat) 

4. First, heat the inside (throat) 
of the bend, then the outside 

(heel) 


19 



3-49. Flat spots in hot-bent copper 

pipe are caused by which of the 
following factors? 

1. Improper heating 

2. Not enough support for 
the pipe wall 

3. Stretch in the outside 
(heel) of the bend 

4. All of the above 

3-50. The use of which of the following 
bending techniques should prevent 
wrinkles and flat spots in properly 
packed and heated copper pipe? 

1. Bending so all the stretch 
takes place at the center of 
the bend area, none on the ends 

2. Bending so all the stretch 
takes place at the ends of the 
bend area, none at the center 

3. Bending so more of the stretch 
takes place at the center of 
the bend area than at the other 
end 

4. Dividing the bend area into 
segments, then bending one 
segment at a time so stretching 
is evenly spread over the 
entire area 

3-51. In bending steel pipe, you can 
control wrinkles and flat spots 
at the throat of a bend by over¬ 
bending, then pulling the end back 
to round out the flat spot. 

1. True 

2. False 

3-52. Pipe made of what material is 

likely to break if overbent and 
then pulled back? 

1. Steel 

2. Brass 

3. Copper 

4. Aluminum 

3-53. In hot bending aluminum pipe with a 
torch, you should use which of the 
following techniques? 

1. Keep the flame on the throat 
while the pipe is being bent 

2. Heat only the throat of the 
bend and avoid overheating 

3. Notice changes in heat color 

to determine the proper bending 
temperature 

4. Overheat then remove heat when 
bending starts 


3-54. When using the wrinkle-bending 

technique to make a 60-degree bend 
in a pipe, you should make a total 
of how many wrinkles to keep from 
buckling the pipe? 

1. One or two 

2. Two or three 

3. Three or four 

4. Five or more 

3-55. What technique should you use to 
wrinkle-bend a 12-inch-diameter 
pipe? 

1. With one torch, heat a strip 
about 2 feet long and 2 to 

3 inches wide along the throat 
of the planned bend 

2. With one torch, heat a strip 
about 2 feet long and 2 to 

3 inches wide along the heel 
of the planned bend 

3. With more than one torch, heat 
a strip about 2 feet long and 
2 to 3 inches wide along the 
throat of the planned bend 

4. With more than one torch, 
heat a strip about 2/3 of the 
circumference of the pipe, and 
2 to 3 inches wide along the 
throat of the planned bend 

3-56. When bending a heated pipe, you 

should use what technique, if any? 

1. While holding one end of the 
pipe firmly in position, lift 
the other end 

2. While holding the midpoint of 
the pipe on the ground, lift 
both ends at the same time 

3. While holding the midpoint of 
the pipe on the ground, lift 
one end then the other 

4. None 


20 



ASSIGNMENT 4 


Textbook Assignment: "Fiber Line" and "Wire Rope," pages 4-1 through 5-15. 


Learning Objective: Identify 

types, fabrication of, size 
designations, and proper handling 
and care of fiber line. 


4-1. What is the primary reason manila 
line is preferred for use as 
standard issue line? 

1. Its resistance to wear 

2. It is waterproof 

3. Its quality and relative 
strength 

4. It is easy to handle 

4-2. The primary reason for the use of 
nylon line is that it 

1. is waterproof 

2. is resistant to abrasion 

3. resumes normal length after 
being stretched 

4. has a breaking strength that is 
nearly 3 times greater than 
that of manila line 

4-3. Fiber line is fabricated in three 
twisting operations. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-4. Which, if any, of the following 

types of line is formed from three 
twisting operations in a right- 
hand direction? 

1. Hawser laid 

2. Shroud laid 

3. Cable laid 

4. None of the above 

4-5. The circumference of a 1 1/4-inch 
manila line is equal to about how 
many millimeters? 

1. 29 

2. 32 

3. 38 

4 . 44 

4-6. What is the maximum size of fiber 
line normally carried in stock? 


1 . 

12 

inches 

2. 

14 

inches 

3. 

16 

inches 

4. 

18 

inches 


4-7. You may have to order line by 
diameter, rather than 
circumference, and refer to it as 
rope. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-8. Soap is not used to clean fiber 
line because 


1 . 

it 

shrinks 

the line 


2. 

it 

creates 

abrasion 


3. 

it 

causes 

deterioration 

of 


fibers 



4. 

it 

takes the oil out of 

the 


line 




4-9. When nylon line becomes slippery 
with grease or oil, it should be 
cleaned with what solvent(s)? 

1. Acetone only 

2. Either kerosene or diesel fuel 

3. Alcohol or gasoline 

4. Gasoline only 

4-10. Which of the following fabrics 

should you use to apply whippings 
to a line? 

1. Rope yarn 

2. Marline 

3. Houseline 

4. Twine 

4-11. When nylon line is properly handled 
and maintained, it should last five 
times longer than manila line 
subjected to the same use. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-12. Which of the following agents can 

cause damage to a line that is hard 
to detect by visual examination? 

1. Storage room containing 
chemicals 

2. Lime 

3. Direct sunlight 

4. Each of the above 

4-13. When stowing wet line, you should 
always select a heated well- 
ventilated space to promote rapid 
drying. 

1. True 

2. False 


21 




4-14 . 


4-19. 


A line that is kinked from 
excessive turns should be given a 
thorough footing by 

1. coiling the line down clockwise 
and then pulling the bottom end 
of the coil up and out of the 
middle of the coil 

2. coiling the line down 
counterclockwise and then 
pulling the bottom end of the 
coil up and out of the middle 
of the coil 

3. taking an end at the inside 
bottom of the coil and after 
pulling it free, coiling the 
line down clockwise 

4. taking an end at the inside 
bottom of the coil and after 
pulling it free, coiling the 
line down counterclockwise 

4-15. Which of the following methods of 

inspecting fiber line for safety is 
approved? 

1. Visual inspection 

2. Smell test 

3. Fiber break test 

4. Each of the above 

4-16. The breaking strength of a line is 
considerably higher than its safe 
working load to account for what 
factor? 

1. The different applications of 
pressure due to load sizes 

2. The strain imposed by bending 
over sheaves in a block 

3. Excessive vibration 
4* Exposure to moisture 

4-17. You are going to use a new 2-inch 
manila line to hoist a load, and 
you do not have tables to use to 
determine the safe working load 
(SWL) of the line. This situation 
requires you to use the "rule of 
thumb" formula to calculate the SWL 
for the 2-inch line. By doing so, 
you determine the SWL for the line 
is 

1. 400 pounds 

2. 600 pounds 

3. 800 pounds 

4. 900 pounds 

4-18. What is the breaking strength of a 

2 1/2-inch fiber line? 

1. 4,625 pounds 

2. 4,825 pounds 

3. 5,225 pounds 

4. 5,625 pounds 


The safety factor of a line is the 
ratio between the breaking strength 
and the safe working load. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-20. Nylon has a breaking strength 

approximately three times greater 
than that of manila line. What is 
the breaking strength of a 2-inch 
nylon line? 

1. 7,600 pounds 

2. 8,6oo pounds 

3. 9,600 pounds 

4. 10,600 pounds 

4-21. Nylon line can be stretched what 

percentage of its length before it 
will part? 

1 . 20 % 

2. 30% 

3. 40% 

4. 50% 

4-22. Although nylon line is superior in 
many ways to manila line, what 
characteristic can cause it to be 
hazardous? 

1. It is very smooth and slips 
through the hands easily 

2. It may part when stretched more 
than 30% 

3. The snapback is severe when a 
heavy strain is released 

4. Freezing produces a slight loss 
of stretch 


Learning Objective: Recognize the 

fundamentals of making knots, 
bends, and hitches. 


4-23. The free or working end of a line 
is known as the 

1. bight 

2. running end 

3. tag end 

4. open end 

4-24. What type of knot is best used to 
tie two lines of the same size 
together so they will not slip? 

1. Reef 

2. Figure eight 

3. Overhand 

4. Sheepshank 


22 



4-25. 


4-26. 


4-27. 


4-28. 


4-29. 


4-30. 


Which of the following types of 
knots is used to take a load off a 
weak section out of line and can 
also be used to shorten a line? 


4-31. Because nylon line is smooth and 
elastic, at least how many extra 
tucks are required when splicing 
it? 


1. Reef 

2. Figure eight 

3. Overhand 

4. Sheepshank 

When tying lines together that are 4-32. 

unequal in size, you should use 
what type of knot? 

1. Becket bend 

2. Bowline 

3. Running bowline 

4. Half hitch 

4-33. 

A free-running lasso that will not 
tighten up on the standing part of 
the line is provided by what knot? 

1. Bowline 

2. Running bowline 

3. Spanish bowline 

4. French bowline 

4-34 . 

When tying up timber or anything 
that is round or nearly round, you 
should use what type of hitch? 

1. Barrel 

2. Clove 

3. Half 

4. Scaffold 


Learning Objective: Recognize the 

fundamentals of splicing fiber 
line. 


A properly made short splice will 
retain up to 50% of the strength of 
the line, while a properly tied 
knot will retain 100% of its 
strength. 

1. True 

2. False 


1 . 

One 




2. 

Two 




3. 

Three 




4. 

Four 




What type 

of 

splice should be 

used 

to 

run freely 

through a block? 


1 . 

Back 




2. 

Long 




3. 

Short 




4. 

Eye 




When there 

is 

not much overlap 

for 

splicing. 

you 

should use what 

type 

of 

splice? 




1 . 

Back 




2. 

Long 




3. 

Short 




4. 

Eye 





A back splice should be used to 
prevent a line from unlaying or 
unraveling at the end of a line. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Recognize how 

wire rope is fabricated and 
identify the different grades, 
lays, and types of wire rope. 


4-35. What type of rope should you select 
for a job that requires wire rope 
of great flexibility while 
maintaining adequate strength? 

1. 6 by 7 fiber core 

2. 6 by 19 wire strand core 

3. 6 by 24 wire rope core 

4. 6 by 37 fiber core 


What type of tape is used for 
whipping the strands and lines in 
nylon line instead of seizing stuff 


4-36. What type of wire rope should you 

select for use on a permanent hoist 
in which the rope runs through 
several sheaves and onto a small- 


as 

in manila line? 

diameter drum? 

1 . 

Duct 

1 . 

Hot-dipped galvanized wire rope 

2. 

Aluminum 


with a fiber core 

3. 

Friction 

2„ 

Electroplated wire rope with an 

4. 

Strapping 


independent wire rope core 


3. Plain wire rope with a fiber 
core 

4. Hot-dipped galvanized wire rope 
with a wire strand core 


23 



4-37. Wire rope that withstands crushing 
the best has which of the following 
properties? 

1. Wires that are uncoated 

2. Is made of improved plow steel 

3. An independent core 

4. A galvanized wire core 

4-38. How does preformed wire rope 

compare to nonpreformed wire rope? 


1 . 

It 

is 

harder to splice 

2. 

It 

is 

more flexible 

3. 

It 

is 

likely to fly apart when 


cut 

or 

broken 

4. 

It 

is 

less flexible 


4-39. The three grades of plow steels 

used in manufacturing wire rope can 
have a variation in tensile 
strength of 

Is 10, 000 psi 

2. 20,000 psi 

3. 30,000 psi 

4 0 40,000 psi 

4-40. When looking at a wire rope, you 

observe that the wires in the 
strands are laid to the right and 
the strands are laid to the left. 
This wire rope has what type of 
lay? 

1. Regular right lay 

2. Lang right lay 

3. Lang left lay 

4. Left regular lay 

4-41. What type of wire rope is most 
often used by the Construction 
Battalions (Seabees) of the Naval 
Construction Force? 

1. 8 strand, consisting of 6, 7, 

12, 19, 24, or 37 wires in each 

strand 

2. 6 strand, consisting of 4, 8, 

16, 24, or 36 wires in each 

stand 

3. 6 strand, consisting of 6, 7, 

12, 19, 24, or 37 wires in each 

strand 

4. 8 strand, consisting of 4, 8, 

16, 24, or 36 wires in each 

strand 


Learning Objective: Identify 

various factors to consider in 
selecting a method of measuring 
wire rope and for computing safe 
working loads. 


4-42. The ability of a wire rope to 
withstand the compressive and 
squeezing forces that can distort 
its cross section when running over 
sheaves, rollers, and drums is 
known by what term? 

1. Abrasion resistance 

2. Fatigue resistance 

3. Crushing strength 

4. Tensile strength 

4-43. The outer wires of each strand of 

wire rope contribute to the fatigue 
resistance or abrasion resistance 
of the wire. This factor makes 
which of the following service 
applications correct? 

1. Use large wires when high 
abrasion resistance only is 
required 

2. Use small wires when high 
abrasion resistance only is 
required 

3. Use large wires when high 
fatigue resistance only is 
required 

4. Use small wires when both high 
fatigue and abrasion resistance 
are required 

4-44. The correct way to measure wire is 
to measure from the top of one 
strand to the top of the strand 
directly opposite it. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-45. Compute the safe working (SWL) of a 
2-inch wire rope. 

1. 6,000 pounds 

2. 7,000 pounds 

3. 8,000 pounds 

4. 9,000 pounds 

4-46. Which of the following actions does 
NOT help to prevent wire rope 
failure? 

1. Checking for overriding or 
crosswinding of drums 

2. Lubricating with heavy-duty 
grease 

3. Inspecting fitting attachments 

4. Ensuring correct size, 
construction, and grade are 
utilized 


24 



Learning Objective: Recognize the 

fundamentals of wire rope handling. 


4-47. In what manner should right and 

left lay wire rope be coiled down? 

1. Both clockwise 

2. Both counterclockwise 

3. Left lay, clockwise; right lay, 
counterclockwise 

4. Right lay, clockwise; left lay, 
counterclockwise 

4-48. When wire rope or fiber line is 

received from the manufacturer on a 
reel, it should be unwound instead 
of pulled off in bights in order to 
keep the rope or line from 

1. chafing 

2. kinking 

3. breaking 

4. unraveling 

4-49. When a loop forms in wire rope and 
it is pulled into a kink, you 
should take what action? 

1. Uncross the ends and push them 
apart 

2. Cut out the kinked portion 

3. Pull it out by stretching one 
end of the rope 

4. Pound it out with a wooden 
mallet 

4-50. In those cases where reverse bends 
cannot be avoided, you should take 
what action to help decrease wear 
and fatigue in wires and strands? 

1. Use smaller diameter rope than 
is ordinarily used 

2. Lubricate the rope at more 
frequent intervals than usual 

3. Reduce the space between the 
blocks and drums being used 

4. Use larger blocks and drums 
than are ordinarily used and 
space them as far apart as 
possible 

4-51. Sheave diameter should not be less 
than 20 times the diameter of the 
wire rope, EXCEPT in the case where 
wire rope has which of the 
following properties? 

1. An independent core 

2. Electroplated wire strands 

3. 6 by 37 with a fiber core 

4. 6 by 24 with a steel core 


4-52. Before cutting wire rope, you 

should apply a total of how many 
seizings to each side of the area 
being cut? 

1. One 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

4-53. When putting on the turns of 

seizing wire, you use a serving bar 
or iron to increase the tension on 
the seizing wire when what 
conditions exist? 

1. The seizing is only temporary, 
or the diameter of the wire 
rope is 1/2 inch 

2. The seizing is only temporary, 
or the diameter of the wire 
rope is 1 inch 

3. The seizing is to be permanent, 
or the diameter of the wire 
rope is 1 1/2 inches or more 

4. The seizing is permanent, or 
the diameter of the wire rope 
is 1 5/8 inches or more 

4-54. Seizing is placed at intervals from 
each other that equal what 
distance? 

1. The diameter of the wire rope 

2. Twice the diameter of the wire 
rope 

3. Three times the diameter of the 
wire rope 

4. Four times the diameter of the 
wire rope 

4-55. What advantage is gained by cutting 
back or reversing ends of wire rope 
connections? 

1. The exposure of worn parts 

2. The prevention of corrosion on 
exposed ends 

3. An increase in the service life 
of the rope 

4. A change in the tension 
direction of the rope core 

4-56. While inspecting a wire rope, you 
come across individual wires that 
are broken and bent back 
(fishhooks) . What situation caused 
this condition to develop? 

1. Damaged drum 

2. Incorrect sheave size 

3. Reverse and sharp bends 

4. Improper fleet angle 


25 



4-57. Overloading a rope will decrease 
its diameter. a rope should be 
removed from service when its 
diameter is reduced to what 
percentage of its original size? 

1. 50% 

2. 75% 

3. 80% 

4. 85% 

4-58. Of all the protective actions you 
should take when storing wire rope, 
which one is of prime importance? 

1. Wrap securely in waterproof 
material 

2. Rotate to prevent damage to 
bottom coils 

3. Always place out of direct 
sunlight 

4. Clean and lubricate well 

4-59. Fishhooks, kinks, abrasion, and 

corrosion in wire rope are causes 
to remove it from service. Wire 
rope is unsafe when what percentage 
of the total number of wires within 
the length of one lay of the rope 
is broken? 

1. 8% 

2. 6% 

3. 5% 

4 . 4% 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

techniques used for special 
attachments for wire rope. 


4-60. To make a temporary eye splice with 
a 1 1/2-inch rope, you need a total 
of how many wire rope clips? 

1. Five 

2. Six 

3. Three 

4. Four 

4-61. You have to change the fitting on 
the end of a wire rope several 
times during a job and the fitting 
must bear a heavy load without 
slipping or failing. What type of 
fitting meets your needs best? 

1. A poured socket 

2. A wedge socket 

3. A wrapped and mule-tailed 
socket 

4. A spliced fitting 


4-62. When making an eye in wire rope 
with the Nicopress, you are 
primarily saving what resource? 

1. cost 

2. Time 

3. Labor 

4. Material 

4-63. A basket socket, fabricated by the 
dry method, has one sixth of the 
strength of a poured zinc 
connection. 

1. True 

2. False 

4-64. Molten lead is used vice zinc for a 
basket socket. This socket has 
approximately what fraction of the 
strength of a zinc connection? 

1. One fourth 

2. One half 

3. Three fourths 

4. Seven eighths 


26 



ASSIGNMENT 5 


Textbook Assignment: "Rigging" and "Reinforcing Steel," pages 5-1 through 6-37. 


- 5-9. If you wish to rig a tackle using 

Learning Objective: Recognize 1/2-inch wire rope, you should 

block-and-tackle arrangements select blocks that have a sheave 

used by Steelworkers. that are of what size, in diameter? 


5-1. The most important operation 
in rigging is safety. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-2. The mechanical advantage of a 

machine is the amount a machine 
can multiply the force used to 
lift or move a load. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-3. What term is used when blocks of 
a tackle are as close together as 
they can go? 

1. Two-blocked 

2. Fall 

3. Running block 

4. Standing block 

5-4. What is a block called when it is 
attached to an object to be moved? 

1. A two-block 

2. A fall 

3. A running block 

4. A standing block 

5-5. The "becket" holds the block 

together and supports the pins. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-6. The "cheeks" are the solid sides 
of the frame or shell. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-7. A "sheave" is a round grooved wheel 
over which the line runs. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-8. The "breech" is the opening through 
which the line passes. 

1. True 

2. False 


1. 10 inches 

2. 14 inches 

3. 18 inches 

4. 20 inches 

5-10. When it is necessary to change the 
direction of pull on a line, you 
should use what type of block? 

1. Snatch 

2. Standard 

3. Leading 

4. Double 

5-11. Adding a snatch block does NOT 

increase the mechanical advantage, 
of a tackle system. 

1. True 

2. False 



SWNP0499 


Figure 5A 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 5-12 THROUGH 5-14, 
REFER TO FIGURE 5A. 


27 





5-12. In reeving a tackle with the blocks 
shown in figure 5A, you should 
first insert the standing end of 
the fall as shown by what arrow? 


1. A 

2. B 

3. C 
4 . D 

5-13. If the load on the tackle weighs 
150 pounds, what force must be 
applied at arrow A to hoist the 
load if the effects of friction 
are not considered? 

1. 50 pounds 

2. 100 pounds 

3. 300 pounds 

4. 450 pounds 

5-14. If the load is 900 pounds, what 
total pull must be applied at 
arrow A to overcome the friction 
in the blocks and lift the load? 

1. 300 pounds 

2. 330 pounds 

3. 390 pounds 

4. 570 pounds 



SWNP0500 


Figure 5B 

IN ANSWERING QUESTION 5-15, REFER TO 
FIGURE 5B. 


5-15. What type of tackle is used to lift 
the weight shown in figure 5B? 

1. Single luff tackle 

2. Gun tackle 

3. Runner 

4. Single whip tackle 

5-16. In what type of tackle is the 
running block usually rigged 
with its sheaves at a right 
angle to the sheaves of the 
standing block? 

1. A twofold purchase 

2. A single luff 

3. A double luff 

4. A gun 

5-17. What is the mechanical advantage 

of gun tackle when it is inverted? 

1. 1 

2. 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

5-18. A threefold purchase is made of two 
triple sheave blocks and provides a 
mechanical advantage of what value? 
1.4 
2. 6 
3. 8 

4 . 10 

5-19. Determine the mechanical advantage 
of a compound tackle using two 
inverted luff tackles. 

1. 8 

2. 12 

3. 16 

4 . 20 

5-20. When the necessary allowance for 

friction is made, what is the safe 
working load (SWL) of a double-luff 
tackle reeved a with line that has 
a SWL of 3 tons? 

1. 5 tons 

2. 10 tons 

3. 15 tons 

4. 20 tons 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the various means used to lift, 
move, or support heavy loads. 


5-21. What are the primary advantages 
of wire rope slings? 

1. Resiliency and strength 

2. Strength and hardness 

3. Flexibility and weight 

4. Flexibility and strength 


28 




5-22. When compared to wire rope 

slings, fiber line slings offer 
the advantage of protecting the 
finished material; however, they 
are not as strong as wire rope and 
are easily damaged by sharp edges 
on material. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-23. Chain slings offer which of the 
following advantages? 

1. Resistance to abrasion 

2. Best for slinging hot loads 

3. Best for handling loads with 
sharp edges 

4. All of the above 

5-24. "Strap" is the term commonly used 
when referring to what type of 
sling? 

1. Single leg 

2. Endless 

3. Fiber line 

4. Wire rope 

5-25. When the weight is evenly distri¬ 
buted among the slings, how many 
1/2-inch chain slings will you 
need to hoist a 5-ton load safely? 

1. One 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

5-26. Why are chain slings less reliable 
than fiber line or wire rope 
slings ? 

1. They have less resistance 
to stress and strain 

2. They have welded links 

3. Their links may crystallize 
and snap without warning 

4. They cannot be protected 
from rust 

5-27. When using rope yarn or wire 
to mouse a hook, you should 
make how many wraps? 

1. 10 to 14 

2. 8 to 10 

3. 5 tO 7 

4. 3 tO 5 

5-28. What is the safe working load (SWL) 
of a 3/4-inch-diameter hook? 


5-29. What is the SWL of a 1/2-inch- 
diameter shackle? 

1. 1,000 pounds 

2. 1,250 pounds 

3. 1,500 pounds 

4. 1,750 pounds 

5-30. What is the small platform called 
that is used to store small lot 
items that can then be moved as one 
large item instead of piece by 
piece? 

1. A sling 

2. A spreader bar 

3. A bridle 

4. A pallet 

5-31. What jack is used for tightening 
lines and bracing parts on bridge 
construction? 

1. A ratchet 

2. A screw 

3. A steamboat 

4. A hydraulic 

5-32. When making a turn with a load on 

rollers, you should point the front 
and rear rollers in what direction? 

1. Slightly opposite the direction 
of the turn 

2. The front rollers slightly 
opposite to the direction of 
the turn with the rear rollers 
pointing slightly in the 
direction of the turn 

3. Both slightly in the direction 
of the turn 

4. The front rollers must be 
slightly, inclined in the 
direction of the turn with 
the rear of the rollers in 
the opposite direction 

5-33. Blocking and cribbing are often 
necessary as a safety measure 
to keep an object stationary in 
position. This action can prevent 
accidental injury to personnel who 
must work near these heavy objects. 

1. True 

2. False 


1. 500 pounds 

2. 750 pounds 

3. 1,000 pounds 

4. 1,250 pounds 


29 



Learning Objective: Identify 

the procedures for the construc¬ 
tion, placement, and application 
of various types of scaffolding. 


5-34. What is the maximum length of a 
swinging platform equipped with 
reinforcing under rails? 

1. 14 feet 

2. 18 feet 6 inches 

3. 22 feet 

4. 24 feet 6 inches 

5-35. On a swinging platform, at what 
distance from the ends of each 
beam are the stops located? 

1. 12 inches 

2. 14 inches 

3. 16 inches 

4. 18 inches 

5-36. A boatswain's chair should be used 
only if no other scaffolding means 
are not available. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-37. If secured properly, the material 
used by a crew working on a 
scaffold can be stored on another 
scaffold. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-38. Handlines should be used to raise 
and lower objects from scaffolding 
when they cannot be reached easily 
by hand. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Describe 

the various types of field- 
erected hoisting devices. 


5-39. What is the maximum height limit 
for an 8-inch-diameter gin pole? 

1. 20 feet 

2. 30 feet 

3. 40 feet 

4. 50 feet 


5-40. What is the safe capacity of a 
40-foot spruce timber gin pole 
that has a 10-inch diameter? 

1. 6, 000 pounds 

2. 7,000 pounds 

3. 8,000 pounds 

4. 9,000 pounds 

5-41. How long should the guy ropes 
be for a 15-foot gin pole? 

1. 30 feet 

2. 45 feet 

3. 60 feet 

4. 75 feet 

5-42. To what depth should the hole be 
dug for the base of a gin pole? 

1. 6 feet 

2. 2 feet 

3. 3 feet 

4. 4 feet 

5-43. When a gin pole is being erected, 
the rear guy line must be kept 
under tension to prevent the pole 
from swinging and throwing all of 
its weight on one of the side guys. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-44. What are the primary advantages of 
using the tripod over other rigging 
installations? 

1. Load capacity and stability 

2. Load capacity and cost 

3. No guy lines required and 
load capacity 

4. Stability and no guy lines 
required 

5-45. The strength of a tripod is 

directly affected by the strength 
of the rope and the lashings used. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-46. When shears are used to lift heavy 
loads, the length to diameter (L/D) 
ratio should not exceed what 
number? 


1. 

40 

2 . 

50 

3. 

60 

4 . 

70 


30 



5-47. What is the maximum allowable 

drift (inclination), in degrees, 
for shears? 

1. 30 

2. 35 

3. 40 

4 . 45 

5-48. When shears are erected, the spread 
of the legs should equal what 
length? 


1 . 

One 

fifth o 

f 

the 

length 


of 

the 

legs 




2. 

One 

fourth 

of 

the length 


of 

the 

legs 




3. 

One 

third o 

f 

the 

length 


of 

the 

legs 




4. 

One 

half of 

the 

length 


of 

the 

legs 





Learning Objective: Identify the 

purpose, types, and uses of 
reinforcing steel in concrete. 


5-49. What is the primary factor that 
determines the strength of 
concrete? 

1. Dryness 

2. Water-to-cement ratio 

3. Age 

4. Type of steel reinforcement 

5-50. Concrete is strong in tension but 
weak in compression. 

1. True 

2. False 

5-51. Which of the following factors 
make steel the best material 
for reinforcing concrete? 

1. Steel adds compressive strength 

2. The expansion properties of 
both steel and concrete are 
approximately the same 

3. Steel is easily bent to fit 
all shapes of forms 

4. Steel adheres well to concrete 

5-52. What type of surface condition on 
rebar provides the best adherence 
with concrete? 


1 . 

Clean 

and smooth 

2. 

Loose 

or scaly rust 

3. 

Painted 

4. 

Light 

firm layer of rust 


5-53. On what part of rebar are diameter 

measurements taken? 

1. The round/square where there 
are no deformations 

2. Across the deformations where 
the diameter is greatest 

3. The diagonal of its widest 
section 

4. The diameter of the deformation 
plus the height of the 
deformation 



Figure 5C 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 5-54 THROUGH 5-56, 
REFER TO FIGURE 50. 

5-54. The identifying marks of bar D 
indicate what grade of rebar? 

1. 40,000 psi 

2. 50,000 psi 

3. 60,000 psi 

4. 75,000 psi 

5-55. What types of rebar are equal 

in size, type, and grade in both 
bar-branding systems? 

1. E and L 

2. D and F 

3. B and J 

4. A and F 

5-56. What types of rebar are rolled axle 
steel? 


1 . 

A, 

D, 

F, 

L 

2. 

B, 

c. 

G, 

K 

3. 

c. 

E, 

N, 

A 

4. 

H, 

I, 

J, 

K 


31 




5-57. 


5-62. 


When the number designation 
8x8x10x10 is used, what do these 
numbers indicate about a roll of 
wire mesh? 

1. The wire gauge is 8 and the 
crosswise spacing is 10 inches 

2. The wire gauge is 10 and 
crosswise and lengthwise 
spacing is 8 inches 

3. The wire gauge is 8 and the 
length spacing is 8 inches 

4. The crosswise spacing is 

10 inches and the wire gauge 
is 10 


Learning Objective: Identify 

the fundamentals of bending, 
tying, and placing reinforcing 
bars. 


5-58. What size pin diameter is required 
when a bend is made on a #9 bar? 


A bar marked 1 B0409 is to be bent 
into a 180-degree S-shape that is 
considered a standard bend. What 
is the minimum diameter of the pin 
around which the bar can be bent? 

1. 8 inches 

2. 2 inches 

3. 3 inches 

4. 4 inches 



FIGURE 5D 

1. 8 1/2 inches 

2. 9 inches IN ANSWERING QUESTION 5-63, REFER TO 

3. 11 1/4 inches FIGURE 5D. 

4 . 18 inches 


QUESTIONS 5-59 THROUGH 5-62 CONCERN THE 
HYDRAULIC IRONMASTER ROD BENDER. 

5-59. What is the maximum capacity for 
cold working rebar? 

1. #7 

2. #9 

3. #10 

4. #11 


5-63. In checking the building plans, 

you notice that six rebars marked 
3C0205 are to be bent with standard 
180-degree hooks at one end. 

Distance A should equal 


1 . 

1 

1/2 

inches 

2. 

2 

1/2 

inches 

3. 

3 

1/2 

inches 

4 . 

4 


inches 


5-60. The bend angle which is set on 
the control rod is graduated 
into (a) what range of degrees 
at (b) what intervals? 


1. (a) 10° to 360° (b) 10° 

2. (a) 5° to 180° (b) 10° 

3. (a) 1 2 3 4 5 ° to 190 ° (b) 5° 

4. (a) 5° to 180° (b) 5° 


5-61. What is the purpose of the shearing 
support? 


1. To prevent the bars from 
kicking up during shearing 
operations 

2. To prevent the breaking of bars 
after bending past 190 degrees 

3. To allow the table to back off 
slightly after bending 

4. To disengage the bending 
cylinder and return the rack 

to neutral 


32 





Figure 5E 

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 5-64 THROUGH 5-66, 
REFER TO FIGURE 5E. 

5-64. What tie is most often used in 
floor slabs? 

1 . 6 

2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

5-65. What type is tie #1? 

1. Double-strand single strand 

2. Saddle tie with a twist 

3. Figure eight tie 

4. Saddle tie 

5-66. What tie will cause the LEAST 

amount of twisting action on rebar? 

1. 5 

2 . 2 

3. 3 

4 . 4 


5-68. In footings between the ground 

and steel, what minimum thickness 
of concrete should be provided? 

1. 6 inches 

2. 8 inches 

3. 3 inches 

4. 4 inches 

5-69. When splicing 1/2-inch-thick rebar 
of reinforcing steel without the 
benefit of drawing specifications, 
what is the minimum distance that 
you should lap the bar? 

1. 12 inches 

2. 15 inches 

3. 20 inches 

4. 25 inches 

5-70. When a column assembly of rebar is 

raised into place, the reinforcing 
steel is tied to the column form 
at intervals of what distance? 

1. 5 feet 

2. 2 feet 

3. 3 feet 

4. 4 feet 


5-67. In concrete, proper coverage of the 
bars is required to prevent what 
condition(s) from developing? 

1. Fire, weather, and corrosion 
damage 

2. Bars expanding and breaking 
through the concrete 

3. Rust seeping to the surface 
of the concrete 

4. Loss of tensile strength 
in the bars 


33 




ASSIGNMENT 6 


Textbook Assignment: "Pre-engineered Buildings, K-spans, Towers, and Antennas" and "Pre¬ 

engineered Storage Tanks," pages 8-1 through 9-13. 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

construction characteristics of 
pre-engineered metal structures and 
procedures for erection and 
disassembly. 


6-1. What is the true length of a pre¬ 
engineered building (P.E.B.) that 
consists of four bays? 

1. 40 feet 6 inches 

2. 60 feet 6 inches 

3. 80 feet 6 inches 

4. 90 feet 6 inches 

6-2. There are a total of how many 
intermediate frames in a P.E.B. 
that is 100 feet long? 

1. Nine 

2. Eight 

3. Six 

4. Four 

6-3. What is the most important step in 
pre-erection work that increases 
the ease of erecting a P.E.B.? 

1. Earthwork placement 

2. Forms placement 

3. Concrete placement 

4. Anchor bolt placement 

6-4. At what location is the erection 

manual and a set of drawings for a 
P.E.B. to be erected and 
maintained? 

1. With the plans and 
specifications 

2. In the battalion tech library 

3. In the small parts box (Box 1) 

4. At the quality control office 

6-5. You are ready to begin the erection 
of a P.E.B. at a selected site. At 
what location (s) should the girts, 
purlins, cave struts, and brace 
rods be staged? 

1. In the center of the site 

2. At each end of the site 

3. At the designated locations 
around the site where they will 
be used 

4. Only at one end of the site 


6-6. After all foundation work is 

completed and cleaned off, the base 
shoes are bolted in place. What 
component (s) is/are laid out next? 


1 . 

The 

doors only 

2. 

The 

assembled columns and roof 


beams 

3. 

The 

girts only 

4. 

The 

purlins and struts 


6-7. When a gin pole is being used to 
raise the end frame of a P.E.B., 
what action should you take to 
prevent distortion of the frame as 
it is being raised into place? 

1. A driftpin should be dropped 
into the frame 

2. A block should be mounted to 
the top of the gin pole 

3. A tag line should be attached 
to the frame 

4. A bridle should be attached 
securely on each side of the 
frame below the splice 
connection and to the ridge of 
the roof beam 

6-8. A gin pole is being used to raise 
an end frame of a P.E.B. What 
action can the tagman take to 
maintain control of the frame if it 
moves beyond the vertical position? 

1. Keep the line taut 

2. Allow some slack in the line 

3. Keep the frame in balance just 
beyond the vertical position 

4. Take a few turns of the tag 
line around the bumper of a 
truck previously positioned for 
this purpose 

6-9. How do you determine whether the 

erected columns of the frame for a 
P.E.B. are plumb and square? 

1. By checking each corner with a 
carpenter's level 

2. By checking each corner with a 
carpenter's square 

3. By checking the horizontal 
distance from the upper corner 
of one frame to the upper 
corner of the adjacent frame 

4. By checking the diagonal 
distance from the upper corner 
of one frame to the lower 
corner of the adjacent frame 


34 




6-10. When should a construction team 

install the cave struts, girts, and 
purlins in the bays of a P.E.B.? 

1. After the building is completed 

2. After all the frames are 
erected 

3. As soon as each frame is 
erected 

4. As soon as the diagonal brace 
rods are installed 

6-11. When the base angles are installed, 
you can take what action that will 
permit adjustments after the wall 
sheeting has been applied? 

1. Bolt the base angles in place 

2. Sweep the concrete foundation 

3. Place a flat steel washer under 
each nut 

4. Leave the nuts loose 

6-12. Helix nails or sheet-metal screws 
are recommended for attaching what 
type of P.E.B. insulation material 
to the building? 

1. Hardboard insulation that is 
applied directly to the inside 
surface of the structural 

2. Blanket-type insulation 
installed between the sheets 
and structural 

3. Hardboard secured to wood 
framing 

4. Sheet board to the outside 
frame 

6-13. When disassembling a P.E.B., you 
remove what structural member 
first ? 

1. Windows 

2. Doors 

3. Sheeting 

4. Purl ins 

6-14. After the sheeting has been removed 
from a P.E.B., you can proceed to 
disassemble the building by 
removing what parts first? 

1. Frames 

2. Girts and purlins 

3. Windows, doors, and end walls 

4. Diagonal brace angles and sag 
rods 


Learning Objective: Identify 

erecting procedures for K-span 
buildings (ABM 120) . 


6-15. The K-span building machine turns 
coils of steel into structural 
strength arched panels which are 
machine seamed together. This 
process eliminates the need for 
nuts, bolts, or other types of 
fasteners. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-16. The machine operator does NOT 
control which of the following 
functions? 

1. The running of the stock 
through to form the panel shape 

2. The cutting of the stock to the 
correct length 

3. The selection of the site 
location 

4. Putting the arch in the panel 

6-17. Concrete forms and accessories are 
provided for a K-span building of 
what size? 

1. 100 feet long by 50 feet wide 

2. 100 feet long by 40 feet wide 

3. 80 feet long by 50 feet wide 

4. 80 feet long by 40 feet wide 

6-18. All material for the forms is 

provided for with the exception of 

1. stakes 

2. side form panels 

3. end wall caps 

4. cross pipes 

6-19. Why is attaching the spreader bar a 
critical step in erecting panels? 

1. A loose clamp can cause panels 
to slip and fall, resulting in 
injury to personnel and damage 
to the panel 

2. A loose clamp can cause damage 
to the crane 

3. Guide ropes are not required 
with a spreader bar 

4. It allows panels to be placed 
in high winds 

6-20. It is not necessary to seam each 
set of standing panels before 
detaching the spreader bar. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-21. How many inches "on center" do you 
weld the panels to the attaching 
angle? 

1. 8 
2. 10 

3. 12 

4 . 14 


35 



6 - 28 . 


6-22. Which of the following building 
characteristics determine the 
foundation design of a K-span? 

1. Wind load only 

2. Building size only 

3. Soil conditions only 

4. Each of the above 

6-23. Where are the actual footing 
details for a K-span building 
located? 

1. In the erection manual 

2. In the plans and specifications 

3. In the blueprints 

4. In the construction drawings 

6-24. When do you install the end wall 
attaching angle? 

1. After the first three panels 
are set 

2. When the exact building length 
has been determined 

3. After the first set of panels 
is set 

4. After all panels are set 

6-25. How many inches is the top exterior 
portion of the concrete sloped 
after all of the panels are welded 
to the attaching angle? 

1. 6 

2. 5 

3. 3 

4 . 4 

6-26. The Super Span (ABM 240) uses 

heavier coil stock, has a larger 
minimum and maximum span, and has a 
panel profile than that used for 
the K-span building (ABM 120) 

1. True 

2. False 

6-27. Although there are some differences 
between the ABM 120 and the ABM 
240, the actual construction steps 
are the same for both buildings. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Identify 

erecting and dismantling procedures 
for prefabricated steel towers. 


What is the correct method for 
assembling a side of the first 
section of a tower? 

1. Each leg is connected to the 
foundation stub 

2. Two legs are connected to the 
foundation stub, then the angle 
and cross braces are joined 

3. Two legs are connected to the 
foundation stubs, the angle and 
braces are joined, and the side 
is then erected as a unit 

4. The whole section is assembled 
and fitted to the foundation 
stubs , and then connected 

6-29. How are the bolts used in 

assembling a steel tower locked in 
place after the tower has been 
completed? 

1. They are tightened with 
locknuts 

2. They are center punched 

3. They are countersunk 

4. They are fitted with lock 
washers 

6-30. When dismantling a tower, you 

should insert the fiber line in the 
snatch block after what steps have 
been accomplished? 

1. The securing of one end of the 
tag line to one end of the 
bowline 

2. The securing of the snatch 
block to the base of the tower 

3. The lining up of the snatch 
block with the power source 

4. The attaching of a shackle to 
the gusset plate and hanging a 
snatch block in the shackle 

6-31. To remove the legs of a tower 
section, you remove the first 
gusset plate to accomplish what 
action? 

1. The securing of the tag line 
with a clove hitch 

2. The cutting out of all of the 
rivets that hold the leg 

3. The taking up of the slack in 
the hoist line 

4. The tightening of the two 
inserted machine bolts 


36 



6-32. 


6-37. 


You are dismantling the leg of a 
tower structure section that has 
served as a gin pole in the 
dismantling operation. You should 
remove the top machine bolt and 
loosen the other machine bolt one- 
quarter turn before taking what 
action? 

1. Cutting the remaining rivets 
from the leg 

2. Signaling the vehicle operator 
to back up slowly 

3. Removing the gusset plate from 
one side of the splice 

4. Signaling the crew to remove 
the hoist line from the base 
snatch block 

6-33. How is an untapered antenna tower 
made structurally stable? 

1. By guy wires attached to ground 
anchors 

2. By external braces fastened to 
the base of the tower 

3. By use of oversized base 
supports 

4. By use of a composite base or 
foundation 

6-34. What type of antenna tower requires 
a composite base? 

1. Heavy construction 

2. Guyed, light construction 

3. Pivot type, light construction 

4. Tapered, light construction 

6-35. When level, the supports for an 
antenna tower can help keep 
sections of the tower from 
twisting. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-36. You are fastening parts of an 

antenna tower with high strength 
steel bolts that are 3/4 inch by 10 
inches in size. What is the 
maximum torque that you should 
apply to tighten the bolts? 

1. 105 foot-pounds 

2. 205 foot-pounds 

3. 370 foot-pounds 

4. 490 foot-pounds 


Refer to textbook figure 8-33 which 
shows a davit hoist used for 
erecting a lightweight guyed tower. 
Why is a snatch block attached to 
the tower base? 

1. To maintain a fixed distance 
between the hoisting line and 
the upper end of the davit 

2. To help tower sections being 
hoisted from touching sections 
already in place 

3. To direct the hoisting line to 
a winch 

4. To fasten the tower base to the 
concrete foundation 

6-38. How is a lightweight, pivoted 120- 
foot tower raised with a gin pole? 

1. By a hoisting line attached to 
a single point near the tower 
top 

2. By a snatch block and hoisting 
sling attached to the tower at 
two points 

3. By a snatch block and tag line 
attached to the tower base 

4. By a snatch block attached at 
the top of the tower 

6-39. At least how many sections of a 

tower are erected before temporary 
guying becomes necessary? 

1. One 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

6-40. For a 200-foot tower with two guy 

layers, cable attachments should be 
positioned at approximately what 
levels ? 

1. The 60- and 100-foot levels 

2. The 60- and 160-foot levels 

3. The 160- and 200-foot levels 

4. The 100- and 200-foot levels 

6-41. When the guy tension is not 

specified in the tower installation 
plans, the tension is adjusted at 
first to what percentage of the 
breaking strength of the guy 
strand? 

1. 10% 

2 . 20 % 

3. 30% 

4. 40% 


37 



6-42. 


6-48. 


After an antenna tower is erected 
and plumbed, you should test the 
tension of how many of its guy 
lines with a dynamometer? 

1. One guy in each direction of 
pull 

2. One guy only at each level to 
which guys are clamped 

3. The uppermost guys only 

4. All of the guys 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

principles and methods of 
assembling and erecting pre¬ 
fabricated bolted steel tanks. 


6-43. What size bolted steel tank will 

you need to store 10,000 gallons of 
water? 

1. A 1.00 barrel tank 

2. A 250 barrel tank 

3. A 500 barrel tank 

4. A 900 barrel tank 

6-44. What size earth pad is required for 
a tank with an outside diameter of 
15 feet 5 inches? 

1. 15 feet 5 inches 

2. 16 feet 5 inches 

3. 17 feet 5 inches 

4. 18 feet 5 inches 

6-45. What advantage is gained from the 
spreading of a layer of clean sand 
or gravel over the foundation for a 
tank ? 

1. Good drainage is ensured 

2. Corrosion is prevented 

3. Oxidation is increased 

4. Erosion is prevented 

6-46. The two bottom plates of a 100 
barrel tank are what shape? 

1. Wedge 

2. Semicircular 

3. Circular 

4. Square 

6-47. What part of the tank erection kit 
do you use to make the tank deck 
slope properly? 

1. A bolt retainer angle 

2. A flanged manhole 

3. A top chime 

4. The center ladder 


What part of the deck section acts 
as a supporting rafter for the top 
of the tank? 

1. The center ladder support 

2. The flanged side 

3. The radial seam joint 

4. The bolt retainer angle 

6-49. What is the total capacity, in 
gallons, of a 250 barrel tank? 

1. 4,500 

2. 5,350 

3. 10,500 

4. 21,000 

6-50. The bottom of what size tank 

consists of 14 wedge-shaped plates 
that connect to a one-piece center¬ 
ring section? 

1. 100 barrel 

2. 250 barrel 

3. 500 barrel 

4. 900 barrel 

6-51. After the bottom plates of a 250 or 
500 barrel tank have been 
installed, their pattern should 
resemble what shape? 

1. A triangle 

2. A rectangle 

3. A wheel 

4. A trapezoid 

6-52. What characteristic should the ends 
of gasket material that you have 
broken or cut exhibit to ensure a 
leakproof joint? 

1. They should overlap at least 
two bolt holes and be squarely 
across the second hole 

2. They should be cut squarely and 
bolted close together over two 
bolt holes 

3. They should be laid over each 
other in a crosswise fashion 

4. They should extend at least one 
bolt hole and be folded back 
under the cutoff piece 

6-53. After the first intermediate plate 
has been installed on the bottom of 
a 500 barrel tank, the remaining 
plates are installed in a 
counterclockwise direction. 

1. True 

2. False 


38 



6-54. 


6-59. 


What is the reason that all catch 
nuts for the bolts on the bottom 
plates of a tank should be finger- 
tightened only? 

1. So each plate can be adjusted 
to allow the last plate to fit 

2. So the wedge gussets fit under 

3. So caulking can be applied 
under all gaskets 

4. So the gaskets are not damaged 
during assembly 

6-55. At what point during construction 
should the center support ladder 
components and manhole dome be 
placed inside the tank? 

1. Just before the bottom bolts 
are tightened 

2. Just before the last stave is 
installed 

3. Just after the deck has been 
installed 

4. Just after sealing compound has 
been applied to all bottom 
seams 

6-56. To determine which end of a stave 
is the top, you look at the stave 
from the outside while it is in the 
vertical position. if the stave is 
in the proper position, offsets are 
at what corners? 

1. Upper right and lower left 

2. Lower right and upper left 

3. Lower left and upper left 

4. Upper right and upper left 

6-57. The special stave, fitted with a 
pipe coupling of the same size as 
the tank supply pipe, must be the 
first stave to be installed. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-58. Of the 14 deck plates used for the 
500 barrel tank, 2 are fitted with 
what components? 

1. Liquid level indicators 

2. A tank thief and vent 

3. Cross-braced flanges 

4. Left-side lap seams 


As the deck plates are being 
installed, you find that the ends 
of some of them will not align with 
the bolt holes on the manhole or 
the top chime bolts. What action 
should you take to eliminate this 
problem? 

1. Cut the short end around the 
manhole with a torch 

2. Raise or lower the center 
support ladder until all deck 
section bolt holes are aligned 

3. Raise the outside or top chime 
section and pull the vertical 
staves out or in as required 

4. Increase the size of the holes 
by drilling 

6-60. If a tank is to used for other than 
water storage, the emergency vent 
valve can be omitted. 

1. True 

2. False 

6-61. The outside ladder assembly of a 

500 barrel tank has how many steps? 

1. Five 

2. Seven 

3. Eight 

4. Nine 


39 



ASSIGNMENT 7 


Textbook Assignment: "Pontoons" and "Pre-engineered Structures: Short Airfield for 

Tactical Support," pages 10-2 through 11-27. 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

design and construction features of 
P-series pontoons and attachments. 

7-1. What types of pontoons are used to 
form a continuous ramp for causeway 
ends and barge bows? 

1. PI and P2 

2. P3 and P4 

3. PI and P3 

4. P2 and P4 

7-2. What pontoon number does a P2 

become when quick-lock connectors 
are fixed to-its bow? 

1. P5 

2. P2 

3. P3 

4. P4 

7-3. A 4 by 12 pontoon assembly consists 
of 

1. 4 pontoons, each 12 feet square 

2. several 4-foot by 12-foot 
pontoons 

3. 4 pontoon strings in width and 
12 pontoons long 

4. 4 pontoon strings, each 12 feet 
long 

7-4. Assembly angles E16L and E26R are 
designed to be used 

1. as basic condition angles on 
the edges of the pontoon 
strings 

2. as basic condition angles 
anywhere on the pontoon strings 

3. as end condition angles on left 
and right edges, respectively, 
of the pontoon strings 

4. as basic condition angles only 
to be used on topside of the 
continuous angles 

7-5. What device is used to prevent an 
A6 assembly bolt from working out 
of assembly angles? 

1. A cotter pin 

2. Keeper plates 

3. Flanged nuts 

4. Links 


7-6. What accessory is used for 

connecting pontoon strings at the 
point where each string has a P3 
sloped-deck ramp pontoon connected 
to a PI pontoon? 

1. AP8 ramp-end bent plate 

2. AP7 gusset plate 

3. AP6 chafing plate 

4. AP5 end plate 

7-7. When installing RF1 rubber fenders, 
you use the RF4 fender bracket for 
what purpose? 

1. Horizontal fender connections 

2. Corner installations 

3. Drop fender installations 

4. Diagonal fender installations 

7-8. The H6 hatch cover and floor panel 
assembly are primarily used to 
convert what type of pontoon into a 
storage compartment? 

1. PI 

2. P2 

3. P5M 

4. P4 

7-9. The DC6 deck closure is used 

1. to bridge openings or slots 
between pontoons 

2. to bridge the space between 
adjacent causeway sections 
being set up 

3. to make a bridge to wharf 
connection 

4. to make a barge to wharf 
connection 

7-10. What bitt is desiqned for quick 

positioning in the chain plate of a 
causeway section? 

1. The B1 all-purpose bitt 

2. The MI147 double bitt 

3. The B4 retractable bitt 

4. The LK12 utility bitt 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

fundamentals of assembling pontoons 
to form a string, launching the 
string, and joining launched 
strings to form barges and 
causeways. 


40 





7-11. At what location should you 

position the first and succeeding 
pontoons after the first two 
assembly angles are installed in a 
causeway section? 

1. The first pontoon is placed in 
the center of the angle and 
succeeding pontoons on each 
side of the first one 

2. The first pontoon is placed on 
the bow and succeeding pontoons 
on the stern, working forward 

3. The first pontoon is placed on 
the bow, the second on the 
stern, the third on the bow, 
and the fourth on the stern 

4. The first pontoon is placed on 
the stern then succeeding 
pontoons work outward and 
forward 

7-12. In which of the following ways are 
A6B bolts used in the construction 
of pontoon systems? 

1. To connect strings into 
structures 

2. To secure assembly angles to 
pontoons at each corner 

3. To secure deck fittings and 
accessories 

4. All of the above 

7-13. After being launched, what special 
tool is used to clamp together a 
series of pontoon strings? 

1. JT7 drive wrench 

2. JT8 backup wrench 

3. JT13 two-piece aligning tool 

4. JT2 top angle clamp 

7-14. The JT13 aligning tool should be 
used when the differences in the 
hole alignment between angles 
restrict easy passage of A6B bolts. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-15. What pontoon barge was designed for 
mounting a crawler crane? 

1. The 3 by 12 

2. The 4 by 12 

3. The 5 by 12 

4. The 6 by 18 

7-16. What is the primary use of the 10 
by 30 barge? 

1. As a 1,500 barrel fuel storage 
tank 

2. As a mount for a 100-ton 
derrick 

3. As a heavy-duty wharf structure 

4. As a warping tug 


7-17. A pontoon causeway consists of what 
sections? 

1. One inshore and one offshore 
with as many intermediate 
sections as required for length 

2. One inshore, one intermediate, 
and two offshore 

3. Two inshore, two offshore, and 
two intermediate 

4. One inshore and two offshore 

7-18. What types of pontoons make up an 
inshore section of a causeway? 


1. 

PI, 

P5M, 

and 

P4 

2. 

PI, 

P2, 

P3, 

and P4 

3. 

PI, 

P5F, 

and 

P5M 

4. 

PI, 

P3, 

P 4, 

and P5M 


7-19. Causeway sections are normally 
deployed on what type of ship? 

1. LSD 

2. LCM 

3. LST 

4. LPD 

7-20. To submerge the decks of a dry dock 
to its maximum depth of 12 feet, 
you need a sheltered area with a 
smooth bottom with how many feet of 
quiet water? 

1. 12 to 14 

2. 18 to 20 

3. 22 to 24 

4. 24 to 26 

7-21. What type(s) of pontoons are used 
to form dry docks? 

1. PI and P5M 

2. PI, P2, and P3 

3. PI only 

4. P4 only 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

design, use, and features of the 
Elevated Causeway Sections (ELCAS). 

7-22. The ELCAS is used to bridge the 
surf zone. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-23. A standard ELCAS consists of three 
3 by 15 approach/roadway sections 
and 

1. nine 3 by 15 pierhead sections 

2. six 3 by 15 pierhead sections 

3. three 3 by 15 pierhead sections 

4. four 3 by 15 pierhead sections 


41 



7-24 . 


7-30. 


Why are AM-2 mats installed with 
their joints staggered in a 
brickwork fashion? 


What unique component of the ELCAS 
system gives it the ability to 
elevate? 


1. PI pontoons 

2. Supporting pilings 

3. Spudwells 

4. 3 by 15 intermediate causeway 
sections 

7-25. Internal spudwells are used in the 
inboard string of pierhead 
sections. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-26. The ELCAS consists of a total of 
how many parts? 

1. Eight 

2. Six 

3. Three 

4. Four 

7-27. How many spudwells are required to 
construct a type 3 pierhead 
section? 


1 . 

Three internal 
external 

and 

four 

2. 

Four internal 

and 

four external 

3. 

Four internal 
external 

and 

three 

4. 

Three internal 
external 

and 

three 


7-28. The fender system uses P8 pontoons 
as end-to-end connections instead 
of P5 pontoons since it is only one 
pontoon wide. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

construction features and functions 
of the major components of the 
Short Airfield for Tactical Support 
(SATS) . 


1. To stabilize the runway across 
its width and in the direction 
of aircraft travel 

2. To stabilize the runway across 
its width and to make it 
flexible in the direction of 
aircraft travel 

3. To make the runway flexible 
across its width and to 
stabilize it in the direction 
of aircraft travel 

4. To make the runway flexible 
across its width and in the 
direction of aircraft travel 

7-31. What are the contents of one full 

pallet assembly of AM-2 matting? 

1. 11 half mats, 2 full mats, and 
2 locking bars 

2. 2 half mats, 11 full mats, and 
2 locking bars 

3. 4 half mats, 8 full mats, and 

12 locking bars 

4. 2 half mats, 11 full mats, and 

13 locking bars 

7-32. What does one F15 pallet assembly 

of AM-2 matting contain? 


1 . 

2 

half mats, 4 

full 

mats. 

and 


10 

locking bars 




2. 

2 

half mats, 8 

full 

mats. 

and 


20 

locking bars 




3. 

4 

half mats, 20 

full 

mats. 

and 


24 

locking bars 




4. 

4 

half mats, 16 

full 

mats. 

and 


20 

locking bars 





7-33. The standard pallet assembly (Fll) 
provides a width of two rows (4 
feet) on a runway or taxiway that 
is how many feet wide? 

1. 54 

2. 72 

3. 69 

4 . 99 


7-29. AM-2 matting is manufactured from - 

what type of metal? Learning Objective: Recognize the 

general principles and procedures 

1. Steel for installing AM-2 runway mats. 

2. Aluminum - 

3. Iron 

4. Copper 


42 



7-34 . 


7-39. 


When a SATS site for placement of 
AM-2 mats is being prepared, the 
surface must be leveled and graded 
so that over a span of 12 feet, the 
maximum variation in height of the 
mats is 


1. 

1 

inch 

2. 

3/4 

inch 

3. 

1/2 

inch 

4. 

1/4 

inch 


7-35. For which of the following reasons 
should accurate longitudinal and 
transverse center lines be 
established before a SATS 
installation? 

1. To ensure there is enough room 
for the airfield 

2. To ensure that the site meets 
CBR requirements 

3. To make the deployment of 
pallets easier 

4. All of the above 

7-36. What equipment is best suited for 
handling pallets of AM-2 airfield 
matting? 

1. A motorized rough-terrain crane 

2. A helicopter 

3. A 4K forklift 

4. A 6,000-pound rough-terrain 
forklift 

7-37. In addition to the POIC, the 

typical installation crew assigned 
to lay a 96-foot-wide runway 
consists of what personnel? 

1. 1 alignment man, 12 mat 
installation men, and 2 pry bar 
men 

2. 2 alignment men, 12 mat 
installation men, and 2 pry bar 
men 

3. 2 alignment men, 24 mat 
installation men, and 2 pry bar 
men 

4. 2 alignment men, 12 mat 
installation men, and 4 pry bar 
men 

7-38. The pry bar men of the installation 
crew are responsible for which of 
the following tasks? 

1. Adjusting the first mat in each 
transverse row 

2. Spacing the mats to allow for 
thermal installation and 
insertion of the mat-locking 
bars 

3. Taking the mats from a pallet 
and installing them in place 

4. All of the above 


What is used as the starting point 
for laying runway mats in an 
installation not requiring a guide 
rail system? 

1. The approach apron 

2. The transverse center line 

3. The longitudinal center line 

4. The end opposite the approach 
apron 

7-40. In an installation requiring a 

guide rail system, starter keylocks 
are used for laying runway mats. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-41. To guide the crew in the 

installation of the AM-2 matting, 
you should install keylocks every 
100 feet. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-42. What action, if any, is recommended 
to prevent a seesaw force from 
disturbing the alignment of the 
matting when a keylock section is 
placed and aligned at the center 
line? 

1. Lay several transverse rows of 
matting initially in opposite 
directions 

2. Initially lay several 
transverse rows of matting in 
one direction only 

3. Lay several longitudinal rows 

of matting in one direction 

4. None 

7-43. When AM-2 mats are being installed, 
the installers can prevent 
misalignment due to the "loose fit" 
design by taking what action? 

1. Using locking bars as temporary 
spacers between the rows 

2. Installing rubber spacers 
between the longitudinal rows 

3. Installing rubber spacers 
between the transverse rows 

4. Installing gap gauges between 
the transverse rows 

7-44. What devices are used to secure 

typical 9-foot and 12-foot keylocks 
together? 

1. Male-female edges 

2. Locking bars 

3. Socket head screws 

4. Binding straps 


43 



7-45. On what type of surface should mat 
ends be laid? 

1. Crushed rock 

2. Concrete 

3. Packed dirt 

4. Sand 

7-46. At what depth should the free end 
of the approach apron be buried? 

1. Between 12 to 16 inches 

2. Between 16 to 18 inches 

3. Between 18 to 24 inches 

4. Between 24 to 26 inches 

7-47. When guide rails and mats are being 
laid, any depression in the grade 
that is not within specifications 
can be disregarded. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-48. What total number of gap gauges 

should remain installed after the 
guide rail pins have been 
installed? 

1. 10 

2. 2 

3. 5 

4 . 4 

7-49. To speed up the installation of AM- 
2 mats, you should assume that no 
two parts are laid at the same 
time. For the field-laying 
procedure, what is the order of 
sequence of installation, first to 
last ? 

1. Lateral taxiway, main runway, 
parallel taxiway, and parking 
areas 

2. Main runway, parallel taxiway, 
parking areas, and lateral 
taxiways 

3. Main runway, lateral taxiways, 
parallel taxiways, and parking 
and storage areas 

4. Lateral taxiway, parallel 
taxiway, main runway, and 
parking and storage areas 

7-50. As described in the text for 

taxiway procedure #2, the space 
between the taxiway and the runway 
should fall within what size range, 
in inches? 

1. 1 to 2 

2. 2 to 3 

3. 3 to 4 

4. 4 to 5 


7-51. Parking and storage areas may be 
laid with leftover mats in any 
random pattern. 

1. True 

2. False 


Learning Objective: Identify the 

procedures for repairing damaged 
matting and for disassembling and 
removing the matting from the 
runway. 


7-52. When cutting out a damaged AM-2 
mat, you should make a cut along 
(a) what edge and (b) what 
connector? 

1- (a) Female (b) prongs-up 

2. (a) Male (b) prongs-down 

3. (a) Female (b) prongs-down 

4. (a) Male (b) prongs-up 

7-53. In the lower adapter, the dowel pin 
functions as (1) a locating device 
in the placement of the upper and 
middle adapters on the lower 
adapter, and (2) a means of keeping 
the holes in the upper, middle, 
lower, and connector adapters in 
approximate alignment. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-54. What action is taken to lock in 
place the locking bar of the 
replacement mat shown in figure 11- 
34 of the textbook? 

1. The attachment of a clamp over 
the male connector 

2. The bottoming of the setscrew 

3. The tightening of the socket 
head screws 

4. The insertion of the dowel pins 

7-55. A section of SATS runway must be 
replaced. To remove the typical 
keylock section, you should ensure 
what step is taken first? 

1. Pry the keylock out halfway 

2. Insert the keylock removal tool 

3. Remove the socket head screw 

4. Loosen the socket 

7-56. When replacing a SATS runway 

section, you remove the initial 3- 
foot and 6-foot keylock section by 

1. hammering it out with a sledge 

2. prying it with a bar 

3. pulling it with a keylock 
removal tool 

4. cutting it with a portable saw 


44 



7-57 . 


The first row of runway mats can be 
disassembled and removed by lifting 
the entire row evenly with lifting 
blocks and pry bars and by pulling 
out the locking bars. 

1. True 

2. False 

7-58. In the procedure for replacing 
damaged mats with new or 
refurbished mats, the last row of 
matting is raised in unison for 
what purpose? 

1. To level the ground surface 

2. To attach end connectors 

3. To insert locking bars 

4. To install the guard rail 

7-59. What material should be used to 

reinforce filled cavities under am- 
2 matting? 

1. Dry sand 

2. Crushed rock 

3. Damaged AM-2 mats 

4. Restored AM-2 mats 

7-60. In which of the following ways 

should you position mats-so their 
edges can be straightened with the 
edge repair tool? 

1. To give the tool clearance, 
place them on blocks that have 
the height to do this 

2. When straightening male edges, 
place the tops of the mats face 
up 

3. When straightening lower and 
upper female edges, place the 
bottoms of the mats face up 

4. All of the above 

7-61. What components do you remove last 
when using the most efficient 
procedure for disassembling a SATS 
runway (no guide rail)? 

1. Typical keylocks 

2. Female keylocks 

3. Starter keylocks 

4. Starter locking bars 

7-62. When disassembling a guide rail 
equipped SATS runway, you should 
start removing mats from the end of 
the runway that was assembled last. 

1. True 

2. False 


45 



ASSIGNMENT 8 


Textbook Assignment: "Steelworker Tools and Equipment," pages 12-1 through 12-15. 


Learning Objective: Describe the 

principles and techniques for 
operating and maintaining tools 
used by Steelworkers in the shop 
and field. 


8-1. Work that does not require great 
accuracy and is accomplished on a 
bench or pedestal grinder is known 
as what type of grinding? 

1. Free hand 

2. Precision 

3. Off hand 

4. Offset 

8-2. What advantage is gained by 

flooding the wheel on a wet type of 
grinder? 

1. The wheel will not become 
brittle 

2. The chips and cracks are made 
easy to find 

3. Fire hazards are totally 
eliminated 

4. The wheel and work are kept 
cool and clean 

8-3. Tool rests on a grinder must always 
be used and properly adjusted to 
prevent what problem from 
occurring? 

1. Work becoming wedged between 
the rest and the wheel 

2. Fingers being caught in the 
wheel 

3. Clothing getting caught in the 
wheel 

4. Sparks and dust obscuring the 
view of the work 

8-4. Grinding wheels can be sources of 
danger and must be checked 
periodically for irregularities and 
soundness. To test the wheel, you 
suspend it on a string or wire and 
tap it with a metal rod. A solid 
wheel gives off a clear ringing 
sound. 

1. True 

2. False 


8-5. When using a wheel dresser, you 
should never take which of the 
following actions? 

1. Remove the glaze from the wheel 

2. True the wheel 

3. Put the flat surfaces on the 
sides of the wheel 

4. Bring the wheel back to round 

8-6. Because doing so will clog the 

wheel, you should never shape which 
of the following metals on an 
abrasive wheel? 

1. Gray cast iron 

2. High carbon steel 

3. Aluminum 

4. Tungsten 

8-7. Which of the following actions 
should you take before using a 
pneumatic tool? 

1. Inspect the air hose for leaks 
or damage 

2. Blow air through the air hose 
to free it of foreign material 
before connecting it to the 
tool 

3. Keep the air hose clean and 
free of lubricants 

4. All of the above 

8-8. Compressed air comes directly in 

contact with valves and pistons in 
pneumatic hammers and causes which 
of the following conditions to 
occur? 

1. Rust formations in the valves 

2. Lubricants evaporate from the 
system 

3* Lubricants are driven out of 
the exhaust 

4. Lubricants become contaminated 
with moisture 


46 



8-9. 


8-14 . 


Which of the following steps must 
be taken when working continuously 
with a pneumatic tool on a 
compressed air system not equipped 
with a filter, a regulator, and a 
lubricator assembly? 

1. Stop hourly, disconnect the 
hose, and squirt a few drops of 
heavy oil into the hose 
connection 

2. Stop twice daily, disconnect 
the hose, and squirt a few 
drops of light oil into the 
hose connection 

3. Every morning before starting, 
squirt as much oil as you can 
into the hose connection 

4. Disconnect the hose every hour 
or so and squirt a few drops of 
light oil into the hose 
connection 

8-10. What lubricant must be used to 
clean a pneumatic tool that has 
become gummed up and dirty from 
heavy oil? 

1. Kerosene 

2. Cleaning solvent 

3. Gasoline 

4. Diesel fuel 

8-11. What other task does the 

combination iron worker perform in 
addition to shearing, coping, 
notching, and mitering? 

1. Straightening bends 

2. Punching holes 

3. Cutting circles 

4. Bending rebar 

8-12. The maximum capacity of a material 
that can be safely handled by a 
combination iron worker is found at 
what location? 

1. On the supervisor's checklist 

2. At designated sites 

3. On the capacity plate 

4. On the material handling cards 

8-13. The vertical band saw is primarily 
used to make curved cuts; however, 
it is frequently used for what 
other type of cutting? 

1. Design 

2. Off hand 

3. Machine 

4. Straight 


On a band saw, the mechanism that 
adjusts and controls the alignment 
and tensioning of the blade is at 
what location? 

1. On the blade guides 

2. On the lower wheels 

3. On the upper wheels 

4. On the worktable 

8-15. What is the smallest size band saw 
manufactured? 

1. 12 inches 

2. 14 inches 

3. 16 inches 

4. 18 inches 

8-16. Which of the following values do 

you add to the circumference of one 
wheel to determine the required 
length of a vertical band saw 
blade? 

1 0 Twice the distance between the 
wheel centers 

2. The distance between the wheel 
centers 

3. Twice the tension adjustment 
range 

4. Tooth points per inch by 
thickness by gauge 

8-17. What factor determines the size of 
the radius of the curves and 
circles you can cut with a vertical 
band saw? 


1 . 

The 

number of 

teeth per inch 


blade 



2. 

The 

thickness 

of 

the material 


being cut 



3. 

The 

speed of 

the 

blade 

4. 

The 

width of 

the 

blade 


8-18. When making identical cuts on 

multiple pieces at the same time on 
a band saw, you must follow what 
procedure? 

1. Put them in a jig 

2. Clamp them together 

3. Tack-weld them together 

4. Increase the blade speed 

8-19. Which of the following blades can 
be reconditioned by the same 
procedures that are used for a band 
saw blade? 


1 . 

A 

hacksaw 

2. 

A 

circular saw 

3. 

A 

hand ripsaw 

4. 

A 

chain saw 


47 



8 - 20 . 


8-27. 


Which of the following processes do 
you use to repair a broken band saw 
blade when there is no accessory 
welder available? 

1. The soldering 

2. The riveting 

3. The overlapping 

4. The brazing 

8-21. Why must you anneal a band saw 

blade again after grinding the weld 
bead off a butt-welded blade? 

1. To achieve uniform thickness 
alignment 

2. To remove burrs and correct 
alignment 

3. To remove any hardness that has 
developed while grinding 

4. To retemper the band saw blade 

8-22. When working on a band saw and the 
blade breaks, you should take what 
action first? 

1. Step clear of the machine 

2. Pull the piece clear you are 
working on 

3. Attempt to guide the broken 
piece out of the machine 

4. Immediately shut off the power 

8-23. What shop tool is gradually being 
replaced by the horizontal band 
cutoff saw due to its increased 
speed, accuracy, and versatility? 

1. The vertical band saw 

2. The reciprocating power hacksaw 

3. The power shear 

4. The unishear 

8-24. What is the minimum number of teeth 

that should be in contact with the 
work when band sawing metals? 

1. One 

2. Two 

3. Three 

4. Four 

8-25. Which of the following materials 
can be cut with a power hacksaw? 

1. Bar stock 

2. Tubing 

3. Pipe 

4. All of the above 

8-26. What are the two types of power 
hacksaws? 

1. High speed and low speed 

2. Forward and reverse action 

3. Mechanical and hydraulic drive 

4. Vertical and horizontal feed 


What does "the pitch of the teeth" 
mean in relation to the selection 
of band saw blades or hack saw 
blades? 

1. The forward and reverse angle 
of the teeth 

2. The number of teeth per inch 

3. The width of the cutting area 

4. The distance the blade can 
twist without affecting the cut 

8-28. You are using a reciprocating power 
hacksaw. What feed on the hacksaw 
will shut off automatically if a 
hard spot is hit? 

1. The hydraulic 

2. The gravity 

3. The mechanical 

4. The pneumatic 

8-29. How can you determine the speed of 
a power hacksaw? 

1 0 Count the forward strokes 

2. Count the reverse strokes 

3. Count the strokes per minute 

4. Count the strokes per minute 

that contact the material 

8-30. Which of the following materials 

can be cut without using a coolant? 

1. Solid brass 

2. Rolled aluminum 

3. Cast iron 

4. Cold rolled steel 

8-31. Why are belts almost always used 
instead of gears on a sensitive 
drill press? 

1. Gears cause excessive vibration 
which eliminates the "feel" 

2. Belts are stronger than gears 

3. Belts require little 
maintenance 

4. Gears are too heavy 

8-32. Which of the following factors 
makes a radial drill press 
convenient to use on work where 
many holes must be drilled? 

1. The ease the chuck can be swung 
out of the way 

2. The work does not have to be 
readjusted for each hole 

3. Adjust the drill base easily to 
drill all holes 

4. Drill holes horizontally 


48 



8-33. You have completed a preoperational 
safety inspection of a drill press; 
however, after it is started, you 
still should be alert for 

1. frayed v-belts 

2. loose locking handles 

3. frayed electric cords 

4. squeaks or unusual noises 

8-34. The size of a drill bit can be 

indicated by which of the following 
designators? 

1. Letters 

2. Inches in diameter 

3. Numbers 

4. Each of the above 

8-35. Which of the following cutting 

oils/cooling fluids reduces heat, 
overcomes rust, and improves the 
finish on ferrous metals? 

1. Mineral oil 

2. Kerosene 

3. Soda water 

4. Motor oil 

8-36. When reshaping a badly worn drill 
bit that has become overheated by 
accident, you should take which of 
the following actions? 

1. Dip it in cool water 

2. Cool it with compressed air 

3. Dip it in oil 

4. Cool it in still air 

8-37. What results when you use a drill 
bit you repointed but allowed too 
little lip clearance on it? 

1. It will rub without penetration 

2. It will gouge material 

3. Its cutting action is increased 

4. It will break easily 

8-38. What results when you bore holes 
with a drill bit whose lip length 
and lip angles are improper? 

1. Tapered holes 

2. Angled holes 

3. Oversized holes 

4. Undersized holes 

8-39. What shape are the chips that come 
from a hole that has been drilled 
in soft metal with a drill bit that 


was 

sharpened properly? 


1 . 

Long curled chips of 

unequal 


size 


2. 

Long straight chips 

of equal 


size 


3. 

Short tightly curled 

spirals 

4. 

Curled spirals of equal length 


8-40. Air compressors have a system for 
taking in air and exhausting it at 
a much higher pressure. This is 
accomplished by compressing the air 
through a process known by what 
term? 

1. Reduction in volume 

2. Pumping action 

3. Compaction 

4. Flow reduction 

8-41. Air compressors in the field have a 
pressure control system that is 
governed to allow how many pounds 
of pressure? 

1. 200 psi 

2. 150 psi 

3. 100 psi 

4. 50 psi 

8-42. The terrain or activity on a 

construction site may not allow a 
compressor to be placed near the 
actual work. For this reason, you 
should remember that air line hoses 
suffer a considerable loss in 
pressure beyond what distance? 

1. 150 feet 

2. 200 feet 

3. 250 feet 

4. 300 feet 

8-43. A manifold compressor system that 

has a pipe 6 inches in diameter and 
100 feet long can carry a total of 
how many cubic feet of air per 
minute? 

1. 900 cfm 

2. 1,000 cfm 

3. 1,100 cfm 

4. 1,200 cfm 

8-44. When operating an air compressor, 
you must keep it within the 
15-degree out-of-level limits for 
what reason? 

1. To prevent stress on the 
compressor drive shaft 

2. To prevent it from rolling 
without blocking 

3. To prevent the starting torque 
from turning over the 
compressor 

4. To maintain the proper engine 
crankcase and compressor oil 
levels 


49 



8-45. 


8-50. 


When starting the engine of an air 
compressor, you should open the 
service valves to what position to 
hasten the warm-up of the 
compressor oil? 

1. The one-quarter OPEN position 

2. The half-OPEN position 

3. The three-quarters OPEN 

position 

4. The fully OPEN position 

8-46. For what reason are both side 

curtains of the engine enclosure of 
an air compressor kept in the OPEN 
position when the engine is 
running? 

1. To help detect engine 
malfunctions 

2. To maintain an air flow through 
the oil cooler and radiator 

3. To place the engine preheat 
switch within easy reach 

4. To simplify mechanical 
adjustments 

8-47. For how many minutes should the 
engine and compressor operate 
before you close the service valve 
and connect the tool hoses? 

1. 10 

2 . 8 

3. 6 

4 . 5 


The drain cocks on all air 
compressor field units must be 
opened for what reason? 

1. To drain excess oil 

2. To relieve air pressure 

3. To drain condensation 

4. To expel dust 

8-51. In addition to shortening 

construction time, what is another 
advantage of using a blind rivet on 
pre-engineered metal buildings? 


1 . 

Eliminates the 
bolting crew 

need 

for 

a 

2. 

Eliminates the 
scaffolding 

need 

for 


3. 

Eliminates the 
lines 

need 

for 

tag 

4. 

Eliminates the 
drilling crew 

need 

for 

a 


8-52. What type of action does the blind 
rivet installation tool produce to 
compress the blind rivets after 
they are inserted into their holes? 

1. A combined holding and 
hammering action 

2. A combined clamping and 
crimping action 

3. A combined vibrating and 
crushing action 

4. A combined reciprocating and 
pulling action 


8-48. In cold weather conditions, what 

should you do to aid the warm-up of 


an 

air compressor? 


1 . 

Run it wide open for a 
of minutes 

couple 

2. 

Open 

open 

the service valves 

wide 

3. 

Leave 

the side curtains 

closed 


for a 

few minutes 


4. 

Close 

all valves for 5 

minutes 

You 

must 

lubricate an air 



compressor according to the 
instructions maintained in what 
location (s)? 


1. The crew leader's instruction 
or SOP book 

2. On the instruction plate or in 
the operator's manual 

3. Notices and instructions 
maintained by the mechanic 

4. Your own notes from past 
inspections 


50 



