


)/>/'// 



ARMY TM 5-530 

NAVY NAVFAC MO-330 

AIR FORCE AFM 89-3 



MATERIALS TESTING 



KETU3;-* TO 




DEPARTMENTS OF THE ARMY, THE NAVY, AND THE AIR FORCE 

FEBRUARY 1971 



I 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3* 



TECHNICAL MANUAL 
NO. 5-530 
NAVY PUBLICATION 
NAVFAG MO-330 
AIR FORCE MANUAL 
NO. 89-3 



DEPARTMENTS OF THE ARMY, 
THE NAVY, AND THE AIR FORCE 



WASHINGTON, D.C., 6 February 1971 



MATERIALS TESTING 



Paragraph Page 

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION ._ 1-11-3 1-1 

2. SOILS 

Section I. Classification, exploration, and field identification 2-1 2-10 2-1 

II. Sampling 2-112-22 2-15 

III. Sieve analysis 2-23 2-27 2-29 

IV. Specific gravity 2-282-35 2-36 

V. Hydrometer analysis 2-36 2-41 2-43 

VI. Decantation or wet mechanical analysis 2-42 2-46 2-50 

VII. Combined mechanical analysis 2-47 2-52 2-55 

VIII. In-place moisture content testing 2-53 2-55 2-6 1 

IX. Liquid and plastic limits 2-562-62 2-63 

0X. Compaction control test.. _ 2-632-68 2-70 

XI. Density determination 2-692-76 2-79 

XII. California bearing ratio test _ 2-772-85 2-86 

XIII. Plate bearing test 2-862-88 2-96 

XIV. Unconfined compression test 2-892-91 2-99 

XV. Soil trafficability tests __ 2-922-96 2-104 

CHAPTER 3. BITUMINOUS MIXTURES 

Section I. Introduction 3-1 3-6 3-1 

II. Sampling materials 3-73-9 3-10 

III. Field identification 3-103-12 3-11 

IV. Tests on bitumens 3-13 3-18 3-15 

V. Tests on aggregate and fillers 3-193-21 3-19 

VI. Bituminous mix design 3-22 3-28 3-23 

VII. Plant control 3-293-33 3-40 

CHAPTER 4. CONCRETE 

Section I. Characteristics and behavior 4-1 4-7 4-1 

II. Aggregate testing 4-84-12 4-6 

III. Identification of cements -- 4-134-16 4-12 

IV. Proportioning of mixes 4-17 4-24 4-13 

V. Flexural strength (modulus of rupture) test 4-25 4-29 4-28 

VI. Compressive strength test 4-304-32 4-31 

CHAPTER 5. SOIL STABILIZATION 

Section I. Mechanics of stabilization 5 "~! 5 ~ 4 5-1 

II. Soil-cement stabilization tests.. 5-5 5-11 5-11 

III. Bituminous stabilization tests 5-12 5-15 5-18 

APPENDIX A. REFERENCES A-" 1 

B. UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM B-l 

C. USEFUL INFORMATION c ~ l 

D. METRIC CONVERSION TABLE D- 1 

INDEX INDEX-1 

* This manual supersedes TM 5-530/AFM 88-51 , 24 February 1966. 

U.S.SUPT.OFDOCS. ! 



TM 5-53O/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



1-1 



CHAPTER 1 



INTRODUCTION 



11. Purpose and Scope 

a. The purpose of this manual is to provide tech- 
nical information to enable military personnel to take 
samples and perform engineering tests and calcula- 
tions on soils, bituminous paving mixtures, portland 
cement concrete, stabilized soils, and their component 
aggregates and cements. These tests and calculations 
are required to achieve proper design with these 
materials and adequate control over their use in mili- 
tary construction. 

5. The materials covered in this annual include 
soils, aggregates, bituminous cements, portland 
cement, bituminous paving mixtures, portland 
cement concrete, and stabilized soil including stabi- 
lizing agents such as bitumens, cements, lime, flyash, 
and chemical modifiers. Detailed instructions are 
given for taking adequate representative test samples. 
Step-by-step procedures are given for making phys- 
ical properties tests and recording, calculating and 
evaluating the test results. Methods for design of 
bituminous paving mixtures, portland cement con- 
crete and soil stabilization are explained, together 
with the procedures and tests required for control of 
the manufacture of these mixtures. The tools and 
equipment for performing these tests are described. 
General instructions relative to the care, calibration, 
and use of test equipment are contained in the 
manual. 

c. Users of this publication are encouraged to sub- 
mit recommended changes and comments to improve 
the publication. Comments should be keyed to the 
specific page, paragraph, and line of the text in which 
the change is recommended. Reasons will be provided 
for each comment to insure understanding and com- 
plete evaluation. Comments should be prepared using 
DA Form 2028 (Recommended Changes to Publica- 
tions) and forwarded direct to the Commandant, 
U.S. Army Engineer School, Fort Belvoir, Va. 22060. 

d. This manual is adopted for use by Navy per- 
sonnel as outlined in the following subparagraphs : 

(1) Certain tests and procedures prescribed in 
this manual differ in principle or method and/or are 
more detailed than counterpart tests currently 
required by the Navy for new construction at Navy 
installations including those in forward areas. 



(2) Although this manual provides general 
guidance for materials and soils testing, the design of 
new structures and facilities will be based on the 
results obtained from methods and procedures out- 
lined in NAVDOCKS DM-Y "Soil Mechanics, Foun- 
dations and Earth Structures." Additional criteria 
related to exploration and sampling are found in 
NAVFAC DM-5 under "Exploration for Highways" 
and DM-21 under "Exploration for Airfields." When 
methods and procedures prescribed by the Navy 
differ from those in this manual, the Navy methods 
will take precedence. 

1-2. Discussion of Materials Testing 

a. The military engineer is responsible for develop- 
ing and maintaining the means of transportation and 
access, housing and special structures, sanitary facili- 
ties, and military defenses. Transportation facilities 
include roads, railways, airports and landing strips, 
pipelines, and harbor structures. These structures and 
facilities all are built on, or in some cases are made 
of the local soil. To design these, the engineer must 
know the type of soil at the site and its characteristic 
properties. For example, in designing a road or air- 
field, he must determine whether the soil can with- 
stand the loads, including the vehicle weights to be 
transported, or whether soil stabilization or paving 
will be needed. If the road or airfield requires a pave- 
ment, then the suitability of available aggregate 
materials must be established, since speed and effi- 
ciency of construction dictate the use of nearby 
sources. Bituminous paving mixtures and portland 
cement concrete are made at or near the work site, 
under the control of the local engineering officers 
who must design the mix and test the performance 
of the finished product. The engineer must have basic 
data concerning the properties of these materials in 
order to use them effectively in construction. Such 
data are obtained from the tests described in this 
manual. 

&. The properties of all materials are determined 
by their chemical composition and the physical struc- 
ture in which the constituent compounds are 
arranged. Earth minerals and cementing materials 
are very complex and the nature of the forces that 
bind them together is but imperfectly understood on 



VYJ.J.J. UO 



stiffness, stability, and resistance to wear, erosion, or 
weathering can be determined by material tests on the 
bulk material. Laboratory research related to field 
observation, and experience with such materials in 
service, enable engineers to establish limiting values 
of the properties measured in these tests that will 
insure satisfactory performance of the material in 
service. Materials specifications based on this research 
give such limits. Tests of representative samples of a 
particular material available for an engineering use 
then are made and the results are compared to the 
specifications to decide whether the material will do 
for the intended application. Materials tests also are 
used to identify or classify materials on the basis of 
their physical properties. These tests also provide 
basic data on the aggregates and cements necessary 
for the design of bituminous mixtures, stabilized 
soil, or portland cement concrete. 

c. The physical characteristics of soil that deter- 
mine its usefulness to support traffic or to serve as a 
subgrade or foundation material depend upon the 
size and shape of the individual grains, the grain size 
distribution, the specific gravity, and compaction 
characterstics. Properties of many soils are strongly 
dependent upon moisture content and tests for the 
moisture limits describe their plasticity characteris- 
tics. Strength tests such as California bearing ratio 
and unconfined compression measure load-carrying 
capacity directly. Tests for these properties include 
expedient and deliberate testing procedures and are 
used to identify and classify the type of soil repre- 
sented by the samples. With the soil accurately iden- 
tified and described by the results of these tests, its 
suitability for supporting traffic, as a subgrade, base, 
or foundation material, or as an aggregate, filler, or 
binder for mixtures, can be evaluated. The construc- 
tion of subgrades and bases for pavements, embank- 
ments, and other earth structures requires continual 
testing during the course of the work to insure ade- 
quate compaction and to adjust mixtures and con- 
struction methods as needed. 

d. Tests and evaluation of results are more easily 
made by using some common reference or system 
which has a universal interpretation. Thus no matter 
who made the tests or the evaluation, the results 
would be understandable by anyone familiar with 
the system. One reference for soils used by the mili- 
tary engineer is called the Unified Sott Classification 
System. All soils are divided into three major cate- 
gories, two of which are based on grain size. Further 
subdivision distinguishes between gravel, sand, silt 
clay, and organic content and between well-graded 
and poorly -graded soils. Each of these types is sym- 
bolized by a combination of two or four letters. A 
more detailed explanation of the Unified Soil Classifi- 



2 and in TM 5-330.* 

e. The engineer, having the soil classification com- 
plete and with all the other information required for 
a proper design of an airfield or road, can start the 
design. The design requirements are covered in TM- 
5-330. Design requirements and criteria for Navy air- 
fields are covered in NAVE AC DM-21, "Design 
Manual Airfield Pavements." Evaluation and 
strengthening of existing airfield pavements is cov- 
ered in chapter 4 of NAVE AC DM-21. 

/. Bituminous paving mixtures consist of aggre- 
gates, filler, and bitumen binder. Aggregate sources 
near the construction area are tested to give data on 
particle size distribution and specific gravity; these 
data are used in designing the mix. Testing of 
bituminous cements as received at the mixing plant 
may be required to identify the material, to deter- 
mine its suitability as a binder, or to provide data 
to determine what aggregates und fillers are required. 
The tests of bitumens described in this manual are 
field identification procedures to expedite use of the 
material until more detailed tests can be performed. 
g. Portland cement concrete is a mixture of fine 
and coarse aggregates, .portland cement, and water. 
The cement and water react chemically to form com- 
pounds that hold the aggregates in a strong rock- 
like mass. Concrete is made in mixing plants, field 
mixers, or truck mixers near or at the construction 
site. The quality of the concrete produced depends 
upon proper mix design to achieve the desired work- 
ability of the fresh concrete and strength of the 
hardened material. Tests of aggregates and fresh and 
hardened concrete, and instructions for using these 
test data in mix design and control, are given in this 
manual. 

7t. Accurate soil description given by tests is nec- 
essary to determine whether its properties must be 
improved by "stabilization" to make it adequate for 
supporting traffic or use as a base course. Test results 
indicate the method of stabilization and materials 
to be used, as well as verifying the adequacy of the 
stabilized soil. 

i. The test procedures and terminology used in this 
manual conform to the latest methods and specifica- 
tions of the American Society for Testing and Mate- 
rials, the American Association of State Highway 
Officials, the American Concrete Institute, and the 
Portland Cement Association, where appropriate. 

j. ^The tests given in this manual also apply to 
arctic construction. However, cold weather effects 
present different problems and additional tests will 
be required for correct evaluation of the materials. 
These additional tests as well as the considerations 
associated with arctic construction will be found in 
TM 5-349. 



*The references in this manual are listed in Appendix A. 



I 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

1-3. Equipment 

The equipment for materials testing consists of three 
sets : a soil test set, an asphalt test set, and a concrete 
test set. The soil test set is considered the basic set 
and the other two sets are used in conjunction with 
it. In selected operations, for example control testing 
at concrete batch plant, the concrete test set can be 
used independently of the soil test set. Certain items 
listed as part of the sets are not issued with the sets 
but must be requisitioned separately. Some of the 
test methods, such as the specific gravity of solids, 
the hydrometer analysis, and the shrinkage limit, 
describe items of equipment which are not issued with 
the test sets but would be either locally available or 
procurable from commercial sources. 

a. Test Set, Soil (SC 6635-97-OL-EOZ*). This is 
the basic set for performing soil tests, including sieve 
analysis, moisture content, Atterberg limits, Cali- 
fornia bearing ratio (CBR), and soil trafficability. 
Included in this test set is the separately packaged 
test set, soil trafficability (SC 6635-97-CL-E01) *. 



1-3 

Items such as DA forms, pencils, tracing paper, 
labels and tags, towels, twine, and wax are not issued 
initially with the set, but must be requisitioned sepa- 
rately by stock or form number. 

1. Test Set, Asphalt (SC 6636-97 -CL-E 03). The 
asphalt set is issued in three chests : a laboratory cen- 
trifuge chest, a miscellaneous equipment chest, and. a 
1,1,1-Trichloroethane chest. This set is not complete 
within itself and therefore must be used in conjunc- 
tion with the soil test set (a above). Items such, as 
forms, brushes, cloth, and chemicals ('alcohol, sodium 
hydroxide, and 1,1,1-Trichloroethane) are not issued 
with the set but must be requisitioned separately. 

c. Test Set, Concrete (SC 6636-9V-CL-EOJ,). The 
concrete set is issued in three chests : a beam testing- 
machine chest, a collapsible steel forms chest, and 
a miscellaneous equipment chest. This set normally 
is used in conjunction with the soil test set (a above) . 
DA forms, chemicals, and some other items are not 
issued with the set but must be requisitioned 
separately. 



> 



""These sets are no longer standard items of issue ; new items are being developed. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 8*-3 



2-1 



CHAPTER 2 
SOILS 



Section 3. CLASSIFICATION, EXPLORATION, AND FIELD IDENTIFICATION 



21 . Description 

The soil types in an area are a very important con- 
sideration in selecting the exact location of any struc- 
ture. The military engineer, construction supervisor, 
and members of engineer reconnaissance parties must 
be capable of properly identifying soils in the field to 
determine their engineering characteristics. Because 
the military engineer must be economical of time, 
men, equipment, and material, as well as money, site 
selection for a project must be made with these fac- 
tors in mind. 

a. Soil, by definition, is a heterogeneous accumula- 
tion of uncemented or loosely cemented mineral 
grains inclosing voids of varying sizes. These voids 
may contain air, water, organic matter, or different 
combinations of these materials in varying amounts. 
The engineer must therefore concern himself not only 
with the sizes of the particles, but also with the voids 
between them and particularly what these voids in- 
close (water, air, or organic materials) . 

b. Geologists classify rocks into three basic groups : 
igneous, formed by cooling from a molten state; sedi- 
mentary, formed by accumulation and cementation 
of existing particles and remains of plants and ani- 
mals ; and metamorphic, formed from existing rocks 
subjected to heat and pressure. Exposed to the at- 
mosphere, these rocks disintegrate and decompose 
either by mechanical action (wind, water, ice, and 
vegetation) or chemical action, or both in combina- 
tion. The resulting material may remain where it is 
formed or it may be transported by water, glaciers, 
wind, or gravity and deposited at a distance from the 
parent rock (TM 5-545). This resulting material is 
called soil. 

G. The process of soil formation is a continuing 
one and is still in action today. The great number of 
original rocks, the variety of soil-forming forces, and 
the time that these forces have acted produce a tre- 
mendous number of different soils. For engineering 
purposes, the soils are evaluated by their basic physi- 
cal properties : gradation or sizes of the different par- 
ticles, bearing capacity as reflected by soil density, 
and particle shapes. The engineer extends his evalu- 
ation by considering the effect of water action on the 



soils. With a complete evaluation, the engineer can 
determine whether the soil is adequate for his project. 
d. At a particular location there usually will be 
several layers or strata, one above the other, each of 
which is composed of a different kind of soil. Strata 
may be a few inches or many feet thick. The topmost 
layer is called the agricultural soil since it supports 
plant growth. Adequate soil evaluation for engineer- 
ling uses requires that all strata be identified to 
whatever depth may be affected by the construction. 
A vertical cross section through the earth, with the 
depths and types of soil indicated, is called a soil 
profile. See TM 5-330, chapter 2, section IV for more 
detailed description. 

2-2. Physical Properties of Soil 

The physical properties of a soil aid in determining 
the engineering characteristics. These properties are 
the basis for the system of soil classification used in 
engineering identification of soil types. Physical 
characteristics of soil particles are size and shape. 
The proportions of particles of different sizes de- 
termine the gradation of the aggregate of soil par- 
ticles. Compactness refers to the closeness of packing 
of the soil particles; the closer the packing, the 
greater the compactness and the larger the weight 
of soil per unit of volume. Plasticity characteristics 
of fine-grained soil components include liquid and 
plastic limits, shrinkage ratios, dry strength, a-nd 
unconfined compressive strength. Specific gravity of 
soil particles aids in their identification. The presence 
of organic matter is important to the engineering 
use of soil materials. Color, texture, odor, structure, 
and consistency are readily observed factors that 
aid in soil description. 

a. Grain Size Groups. Soils are divided into groups 
based on the size of the particle grains in the soil 
mass. Common practice distinguishes the sizes 
through the use of sieves. A sieve is a screen attached 
across the end of a shallow cylindrical frame. The 
screen permits particles smaller than the openings 
to fall through and retains the larger particles on 
the sieve. By using sieves with screen openings of 
different sizes (the largest on the top and the small- 
est at the bottom) , the soil can be separated into par- 



ticle groups based on size. The amount remaining on 
each sieve is measured and described as a percentage 
by weight of the entire sample. Size groups as em- 
ployed in the United Soil Classification System are 
as follows : 



Size groups 


Sieve size 


Passing 


Retained on 


Cobbles - - 


No maximum size*__ 
3-inch_ _ - 


3-inch 
No. 4 
No. 200 
No minimum size 


Gravels 


Sands - __ 


No. 4_ 


Fines - 


No. 200_ 







*In military engineering, maximum size of cobbles is accepted as 40 inches, 
based upon, maximum jaw opening of the crushing unit. 

Particles passing the No. 200 sieve but larger than 
0.002-mm to 0.005 -mm are called silt and those finer 
are clays. 

1}. Particle Shape. The shape of the particles in- 
fluences the strength and stability of a soil. Two gen- 
eral shapes are normally recognized bulky and 
platy (fig. 2-1) . Bulky shape includes particles which 
are relatively equal in all three dimensions as com- 
pared to the platy shape in which one dimension is 
very small compared to the other two. 
For example, a thick book would be considered bulky 
whereas a page of the book would be platy. 

(1) Bulky shapes are subdivided depending on 
the amount of weathering which has acted on them. 
They may be angular, subangular, subrounded, or 
rounded (fig. 2-1) . The angular shape shows flat sur- 
faces, jagged projections, and sharp ridges, whereas 
the rounded shape has smooth curved surfaces and 
almost approaches a sphere. Cobbles, gravel, sand, 
and silt fall into the bulky shape group. 

(2) Platy grain shapes have one dimension 
.elatively small compared to the other two. The faces 
it approximately right angles to this dimension will 
liave relatively large areas whereas the other surface 
will be edges an'd present small surfaces. Clay exhibits 
this shape. Coarse-grained soil particles with bulky 
shapes are individually discernible to the naked eye, 
whereas fine grained particles with platy or bulky 
shapes are not. 

c. Soil Gradation. The size and shape of the soil 
particles discussed above deal with properties of the 
individual grains in a soil mass. Gradation describes 
the distribution of the different size groups within 





a soil sample. The soil may be well graded or poorly 
graded. 

(1) A soil, in order to be classified as well 
graded, must have a good range of all representative 
particle sizes between the largest and the smallest. 
All sizes are represented and no one size is either over- 
abundant or missing (fig. 2-2). 

(2) Poorly graded soils are either those contain- 
ing a narrow range of particle sizes or those with 
some intermediate sizes lacking (fig. 2-2). Soils with 
a limited range of particle sizes are called "uniformly 
graded." Soils which have some intermediate size or 
sizes not well represented or missing are called "gap 
graded", "step graded", or "skip graded". 

d. Compactness. The structure of the aggregate 
of soil particles may be dense, in which the particles 
are closely packed and may be said to have a high 
degree of compactness ; or the structure of the aggre- 
gate of soil particles may be loose, in which case the 
particles are not fitted together as closely as possible 
and, hence, lack compactness. A dense structure pro- 
vides "interlocking" of particles with smaller grains 
filling the voids, or open spaces, between the larger 
particles. When each particle is closely surrounded 
by other particles the grain-to-grain contacts are 
increased, the tendency for displacement of indi- 
vidual grains under load is lessened, and the soil is 
capable of supporting heavier loads. Coarse materials 
that are well graded usually are dense and have 
strength and stability under load. Loose, open struc- 
tures have large void spaces and will compact under 
load, leading to settlement or disintegration under 
foundation or traffic loads. 

e. Specific Gravity of Soil. The specific gravity, 
designated by the symbol G s , is defined as the ratio 
between the weight per unit volume of the material 
and the weight per unit volume of water at a stated 
temperature, usually 20 C. Using the metric system, 
specific gravity can be determined by using the fol- 
lowing formula : 

._ . weight of sample in air (gm) 
bpecific gravity = ^, = ^ : : 7- 

(metric system) ^ / sam f le f air (&^~ 
weight of sample submerged (gm) 

Test procedures are given in section IV of this 
chapter. The specific gravity of the solid substance 
of most inorganic soils varies between 2.60 and 2.80. 
Tropical iron-rich laterite as well as some lateritic 
soils will generally have a specific gravity of 3.0 or 






ROUNDED 



SUBANGULAR ANGULAR SUBROUNDED 

Figure 2-1. Shapes of soil grains. 



O.ooot MM-** 
PLATY 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 





WELL GRADED 



UNIFORMLY GRADED 




GAP GRADED 
Figure 2-2. Types of soil gradations. 

more. Sand particles composed of quartz have a spe- 
cific gravity around 2.65. Clays can have values as 
high as 3.50. The solids of soil particles are composed 
of minerals. Generally these minerals will have a 
specific gravity greater than 2.60. Therefore, values 
of specific gravity smaller than that are an indication 
of the possible presence of organic matter. 

/. Soil Moisture. The moisture content of a soil 
mass is often the most important factor affecting the 
engineering characteristics of the soil. The water 
may enter from the surface or may move through, 
the subsurface layers either by gravitational pull, by 
capillary action, or by hygroscopic action. This mois- 
ture, present in most cases, influence various soils 
differently, and may have the greatest implication 
upon the soil's behavior when subjected to loading. 

(1) Surface water results from precipitation or 
runoff and enters the soil through the openings 
between the particles. This moisture may adhere 
to the different particles or it may penetrate the soil 
to some lower layer. 

(2) Subsurface water is collected or held in 
pools or layers beneath the surface by a restricting 
layer of soil or rock. This water is constantly acted 
upon by one or more external forces. 

(a) Water controlled by gravity (free or 
gravitational water) seeks a lower layer and moves 
through the voids or spaces until it reaches some 
restriction. This restriction may be a bedrock or an 
impervious layer of soil whose openings or voids are 
so small as to prevent water passage. 

(&) The voids or spaces in a soil may form 
continuous tunnels or tubes and cause the water to 
rise in the tubes by capillary action (capillary mois- 
ture}. Since the smaller the tube, the stronger the 
capillary action, the water will rise higher in the 
finer soils which have smaller interconnected voids. 
This area of moisture above the free water layer or 
pool is called the capillary fringe. 

(c) Another force acting on soil water is ab- 
sorption by the atmosphere. As the moisture evapo- 
rates from the soil's surface, it draws more moisture 
from the soil below. This process will continue until 
the soil moisture reaches an equilibrium with the 



2-3 

water vapor in the air. The amount of water held by 
the soil is called the hygroscopic moisture. 

(3) To define the amount of water present in a 
soil sample, the term moisture content (symbol w) 
is used. It is the proportion of the weight of water 
to the weight of the solid mineral grains (weight of 
dry soil) expressed as a percentage or 



weight of water 
weight of dry soil 



X100% 



(4) The effects of soil moisture to a great extent 
depend upon grain size. Coarse-grained soils with 
the larger voids permit easy drainage of water. They 
are less susceptible to capillary action. The amount 
of water held in these soils is less than in fine-grained 
soils since the surface area is smaller and excess water 
will tend to drain off whenever possible. The fine 
grains and their small voids retard the movement 
of water and also tend to hold the water by surface 
tension. Many fine-grained soils made from certain 
minerals exhibit plasticity (putty-like properties) 
within a range of moisture contents. These soils are 
called clays and their properties may vary from 
essentially liquid to almost brick-hard with different 
amounts of moisture. Further, clays are essentially 
impervious to the passage of free or capillary 
moisture. 

g. Cohesive Soils. A cohesive soil has considerable 
strength when air-dried, but has low strength when 
its moisture content is high. Such clay soils are com- 
posed of fine-grained (usually less than 0.002-mm) 
particles of so-called clay minerals. Clay particles 
usually have flat, platy shapes, and are capable of 
holding a film of absorbed water on their surfaces. 
Absorbed water is held by physiochemical forces 
and has properties substantially different from or- 
dinary or chemically combined water. The attraction 
exerted by clay particles for water molecules gives 
these materials the property of plasticity. Plasticity 
is a property of the fine-grained portion of a soil 
that allows it to be deformed beyond the point of 
recovery without cracking or appreciable volume 
change. This property permits a clay to be rolled into 
thin threads at some moisture content without 
crumbling. Note that only clay minerals possess this 
property, while some minerals, such as quartz pow- 
der, cannot be made plastic no matter how fine the 
particles nor how much water is added. Thus, the 
degree of plasticity is a general index to the clay 
content of a soil. The terms "fat" and "lean" are 
sometimes used to distinguish between highly plastic 
and slightly plastic soils. 

For example, lean clay is only slightly plastic 
whereas fat clay is highly plastic. 

(1) In engineering practice, soil plasticity is de- 
termined by observing the different physical states 
that a plastic soil passes through as the moisture 



conditions change. The boundaries between the dif- 
ferent states as described by the moisture content at 
the time of change are called consistency limits or 
Atterberg limits, named after the Swedish scientist 
who denned them years ago. 

(2) The Hgmd limit (LL) is the moisture con- 
tent corresponding to the arbitrary limit between 
the liquid and plastic states of consistency of a soil. 
Above this value, the soil is presumed to be a liquid 
and behaves as such by flowing freely under its own 
weight. Below this value, it will deform under pres- 
sure without crumbling, provided the soil exhibits 
a plastic state. 

(3) The plastic limit (PL) is the moisture con- 
tent at an arbitrary limit between the plastic and 
semisolid states. As the sample is dried, the semi- 
solid state is reached when the soil is no longer pli- 
able and crumbles under pressure. Between the liquid 
and plastic limits is the plwtw range, and the numer- 
ical difference in moisture contents between the 
two limits is called the plasticity index (PI) 
( PI=LL PL) . It defines the range of moisture con- 
tent in which the soil is in a plastic state. 

(4) The shrinkage limit is the boundary in 
moisture content between the solid and the semisolid 
states. The solid state is reached when the soil sample, 
upon being dried, finally reaches a limiting or mini- 
mum volume. Beyond this point, further drying will 
not reduce the volume, but may cause cracking. The 
limit tests are described in section IX of this chaper. 

h. Organic Soils. Soils having a high content of 
organic material are described as organic soils. They 
usually are very compressible and have poor load- 
maintaining properties. 

i. Effects of Soil Characteristics. The soil charac- 
teristics are a measure of the soil's suitability to 
serve some intended purpose. Generally, a dense soil 
will withstand greater applied loads (have greater 
bearing capacity) than a loose soil. Particle size has 
a definite relation to this capacity. From empirical 
tests, it has been found that well graded, coarse 
grained soils generally can be compacted to a greater 
density than fine grained soils, because the smaller 
particles tend to fill the spaces between the larger 
ones. The shape of the grains also affects the bearing 
capacity. Angular particles tend to interlock and 
form a denser mass and are more stable than the 
rounded particles which can roll or slide past one 
another. Poorly graded soils with their lack of one 
or more sizes leave more or greater voids and there- 
fore a less dense mass. Moisture content and the con- 
sistency limits aid in describing the soil's suitability. 
A coarse grained sandy or gravelly soil generally 
has good drainage characteristics and may be used 
in its natural state. A fine grained clayey soil with a 
high plasticity index may require considerable treat- 
ment especially if used in a moist location. 



2-3. Classification 

Soils seldom exist in nature separately as sand, 
gravel, or any other single component. They are usu- 
ally mixtures with varying proportions of different 
size particles. Each component contributes to the 
characteristics of the mixture. The Unified /Soil 
Classification System is based on the characteristics 
which indicate how a soil will behave as a construc- 
tion material. 

a. In the system, all soils are divided into three 
major categories: coarse grained, fine grained, and 
peat. The first two are differentiated by grain size, 
whereas the third is identified by the presence of 
large amounts of organic material. 

>. Each of the major categories is further subdi- 
vided into groups and a letter symbol is assigned to 
each group. 

For example, the symbol assigned to gravel is G, to 
sand S, to silt M, and to clay C. Refinements 
in the system also distingush between well graded 
("W") and poorly graded (P) soils, and between high- 
compressibility (H) and low-compressibility (L). 
Highly organic soils, such as peat, are symbolized 
Pt, whereas organic silts and clays use the letter 
as a prefix. These symbols are combined to describe 
soil mixture. 

c. The physical properties are determined by ap- 
propriate tests and calculations ; these characteristics 
are used to classify the soil. The criteria for identify- 
ing the different soil types are give in table B-l 
(App. B), which has been especially developed to 
facilitate soil classification, and in the following par- 
agraphs. The chart of figure B-l (App. B) shows the 
procedures to be followed. Principal categories 
shown in the chart include soil groups, group sym- 
bols, and typical soil names ; laboratory classification 
criteria; field identification procedures; and infor- 
mation required for describing soils. These charts 
provide a simple, systematic means of soil classi- 
fication. Once an accurate classification is attained, 
the potential behavior of the sdil under traffic or 
foundation loads is known. 

2-4. Coarse Grained Soils 

a. Definition. Coarse grained soils are denned as 
those in which at least half the material by weight 
is larger than (retained on) a No. 200 sieve. They are 
divided into two major divisions : gravels and sands. 
A coarse grained soil is classed as a gravel if more 
than half the coarse fraction by weight is retained 
on a No. 4 sieve. It is a sand if more than half the 
coarse fraction is smaller than a No. 4 sieve. In gen- 
eral practice there is no clear-cut boundary between 
gravelly and sandy soils; as far as behavior is con- 
cerned, the exact point of division is relatively un- 
important. Where a mixture occurs, the primary name 



IM a-oJU/NAVi-A.1- 

is the predominant fraction (in percent by weight) 
and the minor fraction is used as an adjective. 

For example, a sandy gravel would be a mixture 
containing more gravel than sand by weight. For 
the purpose of systematizing the discussion, it is 
desirable to further divide coarse-grained soils into 
three groups on the basis of the amount of fines 
(materials passing a No. 200 sieve) which they 
contain. 

NOTE 

If fines interfere with free draining proper- 
ties, as may occur with plastic fines, use 
double symbol (that is, GW-GC, and so on) 
meaning that such soils will be classed with 
soils having from 5 to 12 percent nonplastic 
fines or to 12 percent plastic fines. 

&. Coarse-Grained Soils With Less Than 5 Percent 
Nonplastic Fines. These soils may fall into the groups 
GW, GP, SW, or SP, as follows, where the shape of 
the grain-size distribution curve determines the sec- 
ond letter of the symbol. Paragraph 2-2 discusses 
the terms well graded (W) and poorly graded (P). 
However, as denoted above, if the fines do interfere 
with the free drainage properties, a dual or double 
symbol will be used. 

(1) GW and SW groups. In the GW groups are 
well graded gravels and gravel-sand mixtures which 
contain little or no nonplastic fines. The presence of 
the fines must not noticeably change the strength 
characteristics of the coarse-grained fraction, and 
must not interfere with its free-draining character- 
istics. The SW groups contain well graded sands and 
gravelly sands with little or no plastic fines. 

(2) GP and SP groups. The GP group includes 
poorly graded gravels and gravel-sand mixtures con- 
taining little or no nonplastic fines. In the SP group 
are contained poorly graded sands and gravelly 
sands with little or no nonplastic fines. These soils 
will not meet the gradation requirements established 
for the GW and SW groups. 

c. Coarse-Grained Soils Containing More Than 
12 Percent Fines. These soils may fall into the groups 
designated GM, GC, SM, and SC. The use of the 
symbols M and C is based upon the plasticity char- 
acteristics of the material passing the No. 40 sieve. 
The liquid limit and plasticity index are used in 
specifying the laboratory criteria for these groups. 
Eef erence also is made to the plasticity chart shown 
in table B-l which is based upon established rela- 
tionships between the liquid limit and plasticity 
index for many different fine-grained soils. The 
symbol M is used to indicate that the material pass- 
ing the No. 40 sieve is silty in character. M usually 
designates a fine-grained soil of little or no plasticity. 
The symbol C is used to indicate that the binder soil 
is predominantly clayey in character. 



(1) GM and SM groups. Typical of the soils 
included in the GM group are silty-gravels and 
gravel-sand-silt mixtures. Similarly, in the SM group 
are contained silty sands and sand-silt mixtures. For 
both of these groups, the Atterberg limits must plot 
below the A-line of the plasticity chart (table B-l) 
or the plasticity index (para 2-61) must be less 
than 4. 

(2) GC and SC groups. The GC group includes 
clayey gravels and gravel-sand-clay mixtures. Sim- 
ilarly, SC includes clayey sands and sand-clay mix- 
tures. For both of these groups, the Atterberg limits 
must plot above the A-line with a plasticity index 
of more than 7. See section IX of this chapter. 

d. Borderline Soils. Coarse-grained soils which 
contain between 5 and 12 percent of material passing 
the No. 200 sieve are classed as borderline and are 
given a dual symbol (for example, GW-GM). Sim- 
ilarly, coarse-grained soils which contain more than 
12 percent of material passing the No. 200 sieve, and 
for which the limits plot in the shaded portion of 
the plasticity chart (table B-l), are classed as bor- 
derline and require dual symbols (for example, 
SM-SC). It is possible, in rare instances, for a soil 
to fall into more than one borderline zone and, if 
appropriate symbols were used for each possible 
classification, the result would be a multiple desig- 
nation consisting of three or more symbols. This 
approach is unnecessarily complicated. It is consid- 
ered best to use only a double symbol in these cases, 
selecting the two that are believed to be most repre- 
sentative of the probable behavior of the soil. In 
cases of doubt, the symbols representing the poorer 
of the possible groupings should be used. For ex- 
ample, a well-graded sandy soil with 8 percent pass- 
ing the No. 200 sieve, with LL 28 and a PI of 9, 
would be designated as SW-SC. If the Atterberg 
limits of this soil were such as to plot in the shaded 
portion of the plasticity chart (for example, LL 20 
and PI 5), the soil would be designated either SW- 
SC or SW-SM, depending on the judgment of the 
engineer, from the standpoint of the climatic region 
he is in. 

2-5. Fine-Grained Soils 

a. Definition. Fine-grained soils are those in which 
more than half the material is smaller than (passes) 
a No. 200 sieve. 

5. Groupings. The fine-grained soils are not classi- 
fied on the basis of grain size distribution, but accord- 
ing to plasticity and compressibility. Laboratory 
classification criteria are based on the relationship 
between the liquid limit and plasticity index which 
is designated as the plasticity chart in table B-l. This 
chart was established by the determination of limits 
for many soils, together with an analysis of the effect 
of limits upon physical characteristics. Examination 



of the chart will show that there are two major 
groupings of fine-grained soils. These are the L 
groups, which have liquid limits less than 50, and 
the H groups, which have liquid limits equal to and 
greater than 50. The symbols L and H have general 
meanings of low and high compressibility, respec- 
tively. Fine-grained soils are further divided with 
relation to their position above or below the A-line 
of the plasticity chart. 

(1) ML and ME groups. Typical soils of the 
ML and MH groups are inorganic silts ; those of low 
compressibility in the ML group, others in the MH. 
All of these soils plot below the A-line. In the ML 
group are included very fine sands, rock flours (rock 
dust) , and silty or clayey fine sands or clayey silts 
with slight plasticity. Loess-type soils usually fall 
into this group. Micaceous and diatomaceous soils 
generally fall into the MH group, but may extend 
into the ML group when their liquid limits are less 
than 50. The same statement is true of certain types 
of kaolin clays which have low plasticity. Plastic 
silts will fall into the MH group. 

(2) OL and CH groups. In these groups, the 
symbol C stands for clay, with L and H denoting 
low or high liquid limits. These soils plot above the 
A-line and are principally inorganic clays. In the 
CL group are included gravelly clays, sandy clays, 
silty clays, and lean clays. In the CH group are 
inorganic clays of high plasticity, including fat clays, 
the gumbo clays of the southern United States, vol- 
canic clays, and bentonite. The glacial clays of the 
northern United States cover a wide band in the CL 
and CH groups. 

(3) OL and OH groups. The soils in these two 
groups are characterized by the presence of organic 
matter, hence the symbol, O. All of these soils gen- 
erally plot below the A-line. Organic silts and or- 
ganic silt-clays of low plasticity fall into the OL 
group, while organic clays of high plasticity plot in 
the OH zone of the plasticity chart. Many of the 
organic silts, silt-clays, and clays deposited by the 
rivers along the lower reaches of the Atlantic sea- 
board have liquid limits above 40, and plot below 
the A-line. Peaty -soils may have liquid limits of 
several hundred percent, and will plot well below the 
A-line due to their high percentage of decomposed 
vegetational matter. A liquid limit test, however, is 
not a true indicator where a considerable portion con- 
sists of other than soil matter. 

(4) Borderline soils. Fine-grained soils which 
have limits which plot in the shaded portion of the 
plasticity chart are borderline cases, and are given 
dual symbols (for example, CL-ML). Several soil 
types, exhibiting low plasticity, plot in this general 
region on the chart, where no definite boundary be- 
tween silty and clayey soils exists. 



2-6. Highly Organic Soils 
A special classification (Pt) is reserved for t 
highly organic soils, such as peat, which have 
many undesirable characteristics from the standpo: 
of their behavior as foundations and their use as cc 
struction materials. No laboratory criteria are estf 
lished for these soils, as they generally can be read 
identified in the field by their distinctive color a 
odor, spongy feel, and frequently, fibrous textui 
Particles of leaves, grass, branches, or other fibr< 
vegetable matter are common components of th 
soils. 

2-7. Soil Exploration 

Exploration and sampling are basic operations 
engineering work involving soils. The samples re 
be required to determine the type of structure wlr 
can be built on the soil or to control the construct: 
material. Soil exploration programs which determ: 
which samples are to be taken are discussed in det 
in TM 5-330. The methods of taking samples \ 
described in paragraphs 2-11 through 2-22. 

a. When circumstances and time permit, the 
exploration program develops a "picture" of 
soil conditions at the site. Available sources of 
formation such as agricultural soil maps and repoi 
geologic maps and reports, topographic maps, aei 
photographs, or intelligence reports are examin 
Trained experts often can identify soil types fr 
aerial photographs combined with other inf ormat 
from the above sources. Soil exploration on 
ground is necessary, however, to provide quantitat 
test data on the available materials. 

5. Soil exploration involves field reconnaissar 
field identification and classification, and sampling 
time and circumstances permit. Soil surveys for 
foundations of structures are relatively limited 
area but require knowledge of the soil strata t 
depth that depends upon the nature of the structi 
Soils under earth structures, or embankments, in 
cations where deep cuts will be made and in depo 
that are potential sources of aggregates, must be 
plored to greater depths. Programs for these surv 
must be specified by the foundation engineer, j 
often must be developed as partial data are obtair 
Subgrade soil surveys for highways and airp< 
should include location and depth of all soil ty 
along the route with complete descriptions and cla 
fications. The moisture content and in-place dent 
of the soils should be determined. Properly i 
formed soil exploration provides the engineer v> 
information to decide on the final location of 
road, suitable fill material, the design of the road^i 
cross section, drainage requirements, subgrade st* 
lization if needed, and the type of road surface. 

c. The exploration is conducted to determine 
following : location, nature, and classification of 



im a 

layers ; condition of soils in place ; drainage charac- 
teristics ; and ground water and bedrock. For a com- 
plete picture, exploration should also give estimates 
or predictions of possible problem conditions which 
may be created by surface drainage, ground water, 
frost action, or the underlying bedrock. To keep the 
number of samples for testing to a minimum, the 
exploration includes field identification and soil 
classification. The samples that appear to be similar 
are carefully examined and only a representative 
selection is prepared for further detailed testing. 

d. Soils are exposed for study by examining ex- 
cavations, road cuts, and so on, and by making 
borings or digging test pits. The program for loca- 
tion and depth of pits and borings should insure that 
each type of soil in the area of interest is identified. 
Use is made of the information available in a above, 
as well as field reconnaissance, to locate preliminary 
borings where different soils occur. Even stations 
along the centerline survey are a convenient interval 
for borings for the beginning, to be modified by in- 
creasing the interval where conditions are uniform 
or by adding intermediate sites where the character 
of the soil profile changes. In cut and borrow pit 
areas, borings should extend 4 feet below the final 
subgrade or excavation depth. In fill areas they 
should extend 4 feet below the ground surface. Bor- 
ings must extend to the depth of maximum frost. 
Test pits may be required where there is a need for 
samples of undisturbed soil. More detailed require- 
ments for soil exploration are given in TM 5-330. 

e. The soil exploration program must provide ade- 
quate field observations, complete and accurate notes 
locating the samples in plan and elevation, and a 
group of samples that are properly taken, handled, 
and identified. Failure to comply with even one of 
these conditions can destroy the value of the explora- 
tion. It may also result in misleading information 'and 
subsequent problems in future operations. 

2-8. Field Identification 

Lack of time and facilities often makes laboratory 
soil testing impossible in military construction. Even 
where laboratory tests are to follow, field identifica- 
tion tests can reduce the number of laboratory test 
samples to a minunium. 

a. Preparation. Several simple tests are used in 
field identification. The number of tests depends on 
the type of soil and the experience of the individual 
employing them. Experience is the greatest asset in 
field identification, and learning the technique from 
an experienced technician is the best method of ac- 
quiring experience. Lacking such 'assistance, experi- 
ence is gained by getting the "feel" of soils during 
laboratory testing. An approximate identification can 
be made by spreading a dry sample on a flat surface 
and examining it. All lumps should be pulverized 



until individual grains are exposed, but not broken, 
since this will change the grain size and the character 
of the soil. A rubber- faced or wooden pestle and a 
mixing bowl are recommended, but mashing under- 
foot on a smooth surface will suffice for an approxi- 
mate identification. Examination of the characteris- 
tics of the particles in the sample makes it possible 
to assign the soil to one of the three principal groups 
(coarse-grained, fine-grained, or organic soils). 
Classifications derived from these tests should be 
recognized as approximations. 

(1) An approximate identification of a coarse- 
grained soil is made by observing grain size, grada- 
tion, grain shape, and hardness of particles. 

(2) Tests for identification of the fine-grained 
portion of any soil are performed on the portion of 
the material which passes a No. 40 sieve. This is the 
same soil fraction used in the laboratory for Atter- 
berg limits tests, such as plasticity. If this sieve is 
not available, a rough separation may be made by 
spreading the material on a flat surface and removing 
the gravel and larger sand particles. Fine-grained 
soils are examined primarily for characteristics re- 
lated to plasticity. 

(3) Organic soils are those which contain sig- 
nificant quantities of organic matter. The presence 
of decayed roots, leaves, grasses, and other vege- 
table matter produces highly organic soil, which is 
usually dark in color when moist and has a soft 
spongy feel and a distinctive odor of rotting organic 
matter. Partly organic soils may contain finely di- 
vided organic matter detectable by color or odor. 

5. Equipment Required. Field tests may be per- 
formed with little or no equipment other than a small 
amount of water. However, accuracy and uniformity 
of results will be greatly increased by the proper 
use of certain items of equipment available in nearly 
all engineer units. The equipment should include : 

(1) Sieves. At least the No. 40, and possibly 
the No. 4 and the No. 200. 

(2) Pioneer tools. A hand earth auger or post 
hole digger is useful to secure samples from depths 
a few feet or more below the surface. 

(3) Stirrer. 

(4) Knife. 

(5) Mixing bowl and pestle. 

(6) Paper. 

(Y) Pan and heating element. 

(8) Scales or balances. 

c. Factors Considered. The Unified Soil Classifi- 
cation System (para 2-3) considers three soil prop- 
erties : percentage of gravel, sand, or fines ; the shape 
of the grain-size distribution curve; and the plas- 
ticity. These are the primary ones to be considered, 
but other observed properties should also be in- 
cluded in the soil description whether made in the 



field or in the laboratory. The following information 
can be invaluable in the design phases: 

(1) Color. 

(2) Grain size. 

(a) Estimated maximum grain size. 
(5) Estimated percent by weight of fines 
(material passing No. 200 sieve). 

(3) Gradation. 

(4) Grain shape. 

(5) Plasticity. 

(6) Predominant soil type. 
(Y) Secondary components. 

(8) Classification (symbol). 

(9) Other, where applicable. 

(a) Organic, chemical, or metallic content. 
(5) Compactness (dense or loose). 

(c) Consistency. 

(d) Cohesiveness (ability to hold together as 
a plastic). 

(e) Dry strength. 

(/) Source (residual or transported). 
d. Example of Soil Description. A complete de- 
scription with the proper classification symbol obvi- 
ously conveys much more to the user of the data than 
the symbol of any isolated portion of the description 
alone. An example of a soil description using the 
sequence and considering the properties referred to 
in c above might be as follows: 

(1) Dark brown to white. 

(2) Coarse grained, maximum particle size 2% 
inches, estimated 60 percent gravel, 36 percent sand, 
and 4 percent fines passing through No. 200 sieve. 

(3) Poorly graded (gap-graded, insufficient fine 
gravel). 

(4) Gravel particle subrounded to rounded. 

(5) Nonplastic. 

(6) Predominantly gravel. 

(7) With considerable sand 'and a small amount 
of nonplastic fines (silt). 

(8) GP. 

(9) Slightly calcareous, no dry strength, dense 
in the undisturbed state. 

2-9. Tests for Field Classification 

Some or all of the following tests produce observa- 
tions that pertain to the Unified Soil Classification 
System (table B-l). Their use permits field identi- 
fication according to the outline in paragraph 2-8 
as well as classification. Such tests as are appropriate 
to the given soil sample should be made. Some tests 
appear to yield duplicate results. The purpose of 
these tests is to get the best possible identification in 
the field. Thus, if a simple visual examination will 
define the soil type, only one or two of the other tests 
have to be made to verify or check the identifica- 
tion. On the other hand, when the result from a test 
is inconclusive, some of the similar tests should be 
tried to establish the best identification. 



im a-O'JU/NAVCAl. MO 33O/AFM 89-3 

a. Visual Examination. This test should establish 
the color, the grain sizes, the grain shapes (of the 
coarse-grained portion) , some idea of the gradation, 
and some properties of the undisturbed soil. 

(1) Color. Color is often helpful in distinguish- 
ing between soil types, and with experience, may be 
useful in identifying the particular soil type. Color 
may also indicate the presence of certain chemicals 
or impurities. Color often varies with the moisture 
content of a soil. For this reason, the moisture con- 
tent at the time of color identification should be 
included. Some of the more familiar color properties 
are stated below. Colors in general become darker 
as the moisture content increases and lighter as the 
soil dries. Some fine-grained soil (OL, OH) with 
dark, drab shades of brown or gray, including al- 
most black, contain organic colloidal matter. In 
contrast, clean, bright looking shades of gray, olive 
green, brown, red, yellow, and white are associated 
with inorganic soils. Gray-blue or gray-and-yellow 
mottled colors frequently result from poor drainage. 
Red, yellow, and yellowish-brown result from the 
presence of iron oxides. White to pink may indicate 
considerable silica, calcium carbonate, or aluminum 
compounds. 

(2) Grain size. The maximum, particle size of 
each sample considered should always be estimated 
if not measured. This establishes the upper limit of 
the gradation curve. Gravels range down to the size 
of peas. Sands start just below this size and decrease 
until the individual grains are just distinguishable 
by the naked eye. The eye can normally see individual 
grains about 0.07-mm in size, or about the size of 
the No. 200 screen. Thus, silt and clay particles 
(which are smaller than this dimension) are indis- 
tinguishable as individual particles. 

(3) Grain shape. While examining the sample 
for grain sizes, the shapes of the visible particles 
can be determined. Sharp edges and flat surfaces 
indicate angular shape while smooth, curved surfaces 
are associated with the rounded shape. Particles may 
not be completely angular nor completely rounded. 
These particles are called subangular or subrounded 
depending on which shape predominates. 

(4) Distribution of grain sizes. Laboratory 
analysis must be performed when accurate distribu- 
tion is to be determined. However, an approximation 
can be made during the visual examination. 

(a) Separate the larger grains (gravel and 
some sand particles) from the remainder of the soil 
by picking them out individually. 

(&) Examine the remainder of the soil and 
estimate the proportion of visible individual particles 
(larger than No. 200 sieve) and the fines (smaller 
than No. 200 sieve) . 

(c) Convert these estimates into percentages 
by weight of the total sample. If the fines exceed 50 



percent, the soil is considered fine grained (M, C, or 
O) ; if the coarse material excedes 50 percent, thei soil 
is coarse grained (G or S) . 

(d) Examine coarse-grained soil for grada- 
tion of particle sizes from the largest to the smallest. 
A. good distribution of all sizes without too much or 
too little of any one size means the soil is well graded 
(W). Overabundance or lack of any size means the 
material is poorly graded (P). 

(e) Estimate the percentage of the fine- 
grained portion of the coarse grained soil. If less than 
5 percent (nonplastic fines) of the total, the soil may 
be classified either as a GW, GP, SW, or SP type, 
depending on the other information noted above. 

(/) If the fine-grained portion ((e) above) 
exceeds 12 percent, the soil will be either silty (M) or 
clayey (C) and requires further testing to identify. 

(g] Fine-grained portions ( (e} above) be- 
tween 5 and 12 percent (nonplastic fines or fines not 
interfering with free drainage, or 0-12 percent plastic 
fines) total are borderline and require double sym- 
bols such as GW-GM, SW-SM, etc. 

(h) Fine-grained soils (M, C, or O) from (c) 
above, require other tests to distinguish further. 
Grain-size distribution of fine portions is not nor- 
mally performed in field identification. However, 
should it become necessary, an approximation can be 
made by shaking the fine portions in a jar of water 
and 'allowing the material to settle. The materials will 
settle in layers of different sizes from which the pro- 
portion can be estimated. It should be kept in mind 
that gravel and sand settle into a much denser mass 
than either clay or silt. A. description of the technique 
is given in paragraph 2-10. 

(5) Undisturbed soil properties. Using charac- 
teristics determined up to this point, it is possible to 
evaluate the soil as it appeared in place. Gravels or 
sands can be described qualitatively as "loose", "me- 
dium", or "dense". Clays may be "hard", "stiff", or 
"soft". The ease or difficulty with which the sample 
was removed from the ground is a good indicator. 
Soils which have been cultivated or farmed can be 
further evaluated as "loose" and "compressible." 
Highly organic soils can be "spongy" and "elastic." 
In addition, moisture content of the soil influences 
the inplace characteristics. This condition should be 
recognized and reported with the undisturbed soil 
properties. 

l>. Breaking or Dry Strength Test. This test is per- 
formed only on the material passing the No. 40 sieve. 
It is used to measure the cohesive and plastic charac- 
teristics of the soil. The test distinguishes between the 
clayey (C) and the silty (M) soils. 

(1) Sep'arate the selected sample of the soil on 
the No. 40 sieve. 

(2) Using a representative portion of the sample 
which has passed through the sieve, prepare a pat of 



soil about iy 2 inches in diameter and y^-V 
thick by molding it in a wet, plastic state. Natural 
samples may be found in pats which are of the proper 
size, but may yield incorrect results. This is due to the 
variations in the natural drying and compaction pro- 
cesses. If natural samples are used, the results must 
be treated as approximations and verified later. 

(3) Allow the pat to dry completely. 

(4) Grasp the pat between the thumbs and fore- 
fingers of both hands and attempt to break it. See 
figure 2-3 for proper way to hold the pat. 

(5) If the pat breaks, try to powder it by rub- 
bing it between the thumb and forefinger of one hand. 

(6) Typical results and the indicated classifi- 
cations are as follows: 

(a) Pat cannot be broken nor powdered by 
finger pressure Very highly plastic soil (CH). 

(&) Pat can be broken with great effort, but 
cannot be powdered Highly plastic soil (CH). 

( G) Pat can be broken, and powdered but with 
some effort Medium plastic soil (CL) . 

(d) Pat breaks quite easily and powders 
readily Slightly plastic soil (ML, MH, or CL) . 

(e) Pat has little or no dry strength and crum- 
bles or powders when picked up Nonplastic soil 
(ML or MH), or (OLor OH). 

(7) The test described above is one of the best 
for distinguishing between plastic clays and non- 
plastic silts or fine sands. However, a word of caution 
is appropriate. Dry pats of highly plastic clays quite 
often display shrinkage cracks. To break the sample 
along such a crack will give an indication of only a 
very small part of the true dry strength of the soil. 
It is important to distinguish between a break along 
such a crack, and a clean, fresh break that indicates 
the true dry strength of the soil. 

c. Roll or Thread Test. This test is performed only 
on the material passing the No. 40 sieve. A. represen- 
tative portion of the sample is mixed with water until 
it can be molded or shaped without sticking to the 




Figure 2-3. Breaking or dry strength test. 



2-10 

fingers. This moisture content is referred to as being 
just below the "sticky" limit. 

(1) Prepare a nonabsorbent rolling surface by 
placing a sheet of glass or heavy wax paper on a flat 
or level support. 

(2) Shape the sample into an elongated 
cylinder. 

(3) Roll the prepared soil cylinder on the sur- 
face rather rapidly into a thread approximately y & 
inch in diameter. The technique is shown in figure 
2-4. If the moist soil rolls into a thread, it is said to 
have some plasticity. The number of times it can be 
rolled into a thread without crumbling is a measure 
of the degree of plasticity of the soil. Materials which 
cannot be rolled in this manner are nonplastic or 
have a very low plasticity. 

(4) The results of this test indicate the 
following : 

(a) Soil may be molded into a ball or cylinder 
and deformed under very firm finger pressure with- 
out crumbling or cracking High plasticity (CH). 

(5) Soil may be molded but cracks or crum- 
bles under finger pressure Medium plasticity (CL) . 

(c} Soil cannot be lumped into a ball or cylin- 
der without breaking up Low plasticity (CL, ML, 
orMH). 

(d) Soil forms soft, spongy ball or thread 
when molded Organic material ( OL or OH) , also 
peat. 

(e) Soil cannot be rolled into a thread at any 
moisture content Nonplastic soil (ML or MH). 

NOTE 

Micaceous silts and sands can roll due to the 
flaky nature of the mica. The wet shaking 
test is the only way to distinguish this 
property. 

(5) From this test, the cohesiveness of the 
material near the plastic limit may also be described 
as weak, firm, or tough. The higher the position of a 
soil on the plasticity chart (table B-l), the stiffer 
are the threads as they dry out and the tougher are 
the lumps if the soil is remolded after rolling. 




Wi.fiii.rf> 9,!, Tfnll nr t/h.rf.fi.d 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

d. Ribbon Test. This test is also performed only on 
material passing the No. 40 sieve. The sample is pre- 
pared as for the roll test (c above) until the moisture 
content is just below the sticky limit. This test and 
the roll test complement each other and give a clearer 
picture of the soil. 

(1) Form a roll of soil about i/ 2 to 3 A f an mcn 
in diameter and 3 to 5 inches long, or even longer. 

(2) Lay the roll across the palm of one hand 
(palm up), and starting at one end, squeeze it 
between the thumb and forefinger over the edge of 
the hand to form a flat unbroken ribbon about % to 
14 inch thick. As formed, the ribbon is allowed to 
hang free and unsupported (fig. 2-5) . 

(3) Continue squeezing and handling carefully 
to form the maximum length of ribbon that can be 
supported only by the cohesive properties of the soil. 

(4) The typical results and their indication are 
as follows : 

(a) Sample holds together for a length of 6 
to 10 inches without breaking Highly plastic and 
highly compressive (CH). 

(b) Soil cannot be ribboned Nonplastic 
(MLorMH). 

(c) Soil can be ribboned only with difficulty 
into short lengths Low plasticity (CL). 

e. Wet Shaking Test. 

(1) Sample preparation. The wet shaking test 
is performed only on the material passing the No. 
40 sieve. For this test, enough 'material to form a ball 
of material about % inch in diameter is moistened 
with water. This sample should be just wet enough 
that the soil will not stick to the fingers upon remold- 
ing or just below the "sticky limit". 

(2) Testing. The sample is then placed in the 
palm of the hand and shaken vigorously. This is 
usually done by jarring the hand on the table or some 
other firm object, or by jarring it against the other 
hand. The soil is said to have given a reaction to this 
test when, on shaking, water comes to the surface of 
the sample producing a smooth, shiny appearance. 
This appearance is frequently described as "livery" 
(1 and 2, fig. 2-6). Then, upon squeezing the sample 
between the thumb and forefinger of the other hand, 
this surface water will quickly disappear, the sur- 
face will become dull (3, fig. 2-6), the material will 
become firm, resisting deformation, and cracks will 
occur as pressure is continued, with the sample finally 
crumbling like a brittle material (4, fig. 2-6). The 
vibration caused by the shaking of the soil sample 
tends to reorient the soil grains, decrease the voids, 
and force water, which had been within these voids, 
to the surface. Pressing the sample between the 
fingers tends to disarrange the soil grains and in- 
crease the voids space, and the water is drawn into 
the soil. If the water content is still adequate, shaking 
the broken pieces will cause them to liquefy again and 
flow together, and thpj cornmlptp, cvoJp, ma.v hp. -m- 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




Figure 2-5. Ribbon test. 

peated. This process can occur only when the soil 
grains are bulky in shape and noncohesive in 
character. 

(3) Typical reactions. Very fine sands and silts 
fall into this category and are readily identified by 
the wet shaking test. Since it is rare that fine sands 
and silts occur without some amount of clay mixed 
with them, there are varying degrees of reaction to 
this test. Even a small amount of clay will tend to 
greatly retard this reaction. Some of the descriptive 
terms applied to the different rates of reaction to this 
test are as follows : 



2-11 

(a) Sudden or rapid. A rapid reaction to the 
shaking test is typical of nonplastic, fine sands and 
silts (2, fig. 2-6). 

(5) /Sluggish or slow. A. sluggish reaction in- 
dicates slight plasticity such as -might be found from 
a test of some organic silts, or silts containing a small 
amount of clay. 

(c) No reaction. Obtaining no reaction at all 
to this test does not indicate a complete absence of 
silt or fine sand. 

/. Odor Test. Organic soils (OL and OH) usually 
have a distinctive, musty, slightly offensive odor. 
With experience, the odor can be used as an aid to 
identifying such materials. This odor is especially 
apparent from fresh samples, but becomes less pro- 
nounced as the sample is exposed to air. It can be 
made stronger by heating a wet sample. 

g. Bite or Grit Test. This test is a quick and useful 
one in identifying sand, silt, or clay. A small pinch of 




Figure 2-6. Wet shalcvnff test, (sheet 1) Initial sample. 




Figure 2-6. Wet shaking test, (sheet 2) Livery appearance. 




Figure 2-6. Wet shaking test (sheet 3) Squeezing the sample. 

soil is ground lightly between the teeth. The typical 
reactions of the different types of soil are as follows : 

(1) Sandy soils. The sharp hard particles of 
sand will grate very harshly between the teeth and 
will be highly objectionable. This is true even of the 
fine sands. 

(2) Silty soils. Silt grains are so much smaller 
than sand grains that they do not feel nearly as harsh 
between the teeth. They are not particularly gritty 
although their presence is still quite unpleasant and 
easily detected. 

(3) Clayey soils. Clay grains are not gritty, but 
feel smooth and powdery like flour between the teeth. 
Dry lumps of clayey soils will stick when lightly 
touched with the tongue. 

h. Slaking Test. This test assists in determining 
the quality of some soft shales and other "rocklike" 
materials. Place a sample of the soil in the sun or in 
an oven to dry. Then, place it in a bucket of water 
and soak it for at least 24 hours. Examine the 
strength of the soil after this period. Certain types 
of shale will completely disintegrate and lose all 
strength after this treatment. 

i. Acid Test. The acid test is performed to deter- 
mine the presence of calcium carbonate and requires 
hydrochloric acid. Place a few drops of acid on a 
piece of the soil. A fizzing reaction (effervescence) 
indicates the presence of calcium carbonate and the 
degree of reaction indicates the concentration. In very 
dry soils, the absorption of the acid creates an illu- 
sion of effervescence. This can be elim'inated in all dry 
soils by moistening the soil prior to applying the 
acid. Calcium carbonate provides a degree of cement- 
ing action in a soil. This test permits an understand- 
ing of what appears to be abnormally high strength 
in a fine grained soil tested in place. 




Figure 2-6. Wet shaking test (sheet 4) Crumbling the sample. 

j. Shine Test. This test is another means of deter- 
mining plasticity characteristics of a soil. A slightly 
moist or dry piece of highly plastic clay will produce 
a definite shine when rubbed with a fingernail or a 
smooth metal surface, such as a knife blade. Lean 
clay will remain dull after this treatment. 

k. Feel Test. This is a general purpose test and re- 
quires considerable experience and practice before 
reliable results can be expected. The extent of its use 
will increase with increasing familiarity with soils. 
Consistency and texture are two characteristics which 
can be determined. 

(1) Consistency. The natural moisture content 
is an indicator of the soil drainage which may affect 
this characteristic. 

(a) For the test, squeeze a piece of undis- 
turbed soil between the thumb and forefinger to 
determine its consistency. Description of consistency 
is made by such terms as "hard," "stiff," "brittle," 
"friable," "sticky," "plastic," and "soft". 

(&) Remold the soil working it between the 
hands, and observe the results. This can be an indica- 
tor of the natural water content. Clays which become 
fluid on remolding are probably near their liquid 
limit. If they remain stiff and crumble when re- 
worked, they are probably below the plastic limit. 

(2) Texture. This term is applied to the fine 
grained portion of the soil, and refers to the degree 
of fineness and uniformity. 

(a) Rub a portion of the soil between the 
fingers. 

(6) Observe the texture and describe it as 
"floury", "smooth", "gritty", or "sharp". 



O-3.SU/ WAV I- A^ mu .30V/ Mtm 0V ,9 



(c) Sensitivity may be increased by rubbing 
the soil on a more tender skin area as the inside of the 
wrist. 

(d) Typical results are somewhat similar to 
the bite test. Sand will feel gritty. Silts, if dry, will 
dust readily and feel soft and silky to the touch. 
Clays powder only with difficulty, but feel smooth 
and gritless like flour. 

2-10. Hasty Methods of Testing 
With the standard methods of field identification sup- 
plemented with a few simplified tests, an ajpproximate 
and hasty classification can be obtained of almost 
any soil. The three simple or hasty tests outlined 
below will, for the most part, eliminate the need for 
specialized equipment such as sieves. The results of 
these tests, when used or supplemented with the 
results of the tests described in the previous para- 
graph, will give at least a tentative classification to 
almost any soil. The schematic diagram (fig. 2-7) 
may be used as a guide to the testing sequence in the 
process of assigning a symbol to a sample soil. 

a. Sedimentation Test. From the visual observa- 
tion test (para 2-9&) it is relatively simple to ap- 
proximate the proportions of sand and gravel in a 
soil by spreading the dry sample out on a flat surface, 
and separating the gravel particles by hand. Sepa- 
rating the fines from the sand particles is more diffi- 
cult although just as important. Smaller particles 
will settle through water at a slower rate than large 
particles. By placing a small representative amount 
of the fine fraction of soil (such as a heaping table- 
spoon measure) in a transparent cup or jar, covering 
with about 5 inches of water, and agitating by stir- 
ring or shaking, the soil will be completely suspended 
in water. With most cohesive soil it will be necessary 
to break up the lumps of soil before adding the 
water. This can be done by grinding the soil in a 
canteen cup with an improvised wood pestle. After 
the soil particles have been thoroughly dispersed in 
the water and then left, they will start to settle out, 
beginniing with the larger size particles, in time 
periods approximately as indicated below : 



Differentiates 

Coarse sand fine sand. 
Sand fines. 
Coarse silt fine silt. 
Silt clay. 



(1) The most important use of the sedimenta- 
tion test is to differentiate the coarse (0.072-mm.) 
fraction from the fine fraction of a soil. Since all of 
the particles of soil larger than 0.072-mm will have 
settled to the bottom of the cup or jar 30 seconds 
after the mixture has been agitated, it follows that 
the particles still remaining in suspension are fines. 



Approximate time of settlement 
through 5 inches of water 

2 seconds 


Grain 
diameter 
(mm) 

0. 4 


30 seconds 


0. 072 


10 minutes- 


0. 03 


1 hour 


0. 01 



If the water containing the suspended fines is care- 
fully poured into another container 30 seconds after 
agitation, if more water is added to the cup or jar 
containing the coarse fraction, and if the procedure 
is repeated until the water-soil mixture becomes clear 
30 seconds after mixing, then the cup or jar will 
contain the coarse fraction of soil and the pan con- 
taining the suspension will hold the fines. If the 
water can be wicked or evaporated off, the relative 
amounts of fines and sand can be determined fairly 
accurately. Otherwise a direct measurement of the 
settled out fines can be obtained as a guide. Thus, in 
a sense, the test acts like a No. 200 sieve. 

(2) Most field identification tests are performed 
on the No 40 sieve soil fraction (fines and fine sand 
portion) . This fraction can be separated by using a 
procedure similar to that outlined above, except that 
the water is poured off within 1 or 2 seconds after 
completion of agitation. The suspended portion will 
then include the particles of the fine sand range. 

(3) A difficulty that will be encountered with 
many clay soils stems from the fact that the clay 
particles will often form small lumps (flocculate) 
that will not break up in water. Usually this condi- 
tion can be detected by examining the coarse fraction 
of the soil after several repetitions of the test. If 
substantial amounts of clay are still present, the sand 
will have a somewhat slippery feel and further mix- 
ing and grinding with a wood stick will be necessary 
to help break up these lumps. 

&. Oast Test. The cast test refers to the strength 
of a moist soil sample when squeezed in the hand. 
It is used to indicate the approximate type and quan- 
tity of fines present in the sample. The correct 
amount of water to add to the soil must be estimated 
by trial and error, although it can generally be stated 
that maximum cohesion or attraction between the 
individual soil particles normally will occur when 
the soil is damp but not sticky. The test consists of 
compressing a handful of the moist soil into a ball 
or cigar-shaped cast and observing its ability to with- 
stand handling without crumbling. While experience 
is desirable in making predictions based upon this 
test, the listing below may serve as a general guide 
for the behavior of different soil types when formed 
into a cast and tested : 

Soil type Reaction to handling 

GP, SP, SW, G-W Cast crumbles when touched. 

SM, SO Cast withstands careful handling. 

ML, MH Cast can be handled freely. 

GL, CH Cast withstands rough handling. 

c. Wash, Dust, and /Smear Tests. A small amount 
of silt (less than 5 percent), when intermixed with 
a coarse-grained soil, normally will not lessen the 
value of the soil as a construction material. However, 
increasing quantities of silt will sharply reduce the 



2-14 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




"CO uJ 

^ ti 
<n 

w -J 
^ 

feg 
< .. 



< a: 

5 < 
^ -i 



> 
I'd 

(5-J3 
to o "- 
w w a. 

&fe 3 

oc ... z 



O 0. 

w S 

_J < 

ui (n 



TM 5-530/NAVPAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

strength and interfere with the free drainage char- 
acteristics of the coarse-grained soil, thus making it 
less desirable as a road or airfield construction ma- 
terial. To decide what constitutes a harmful con- 
centration of silt by the field identification methods 
generally requires extensive field experience. If the 
dust, wash, and smear tests are first practiced on 
soils of known silt contents, they can be used to pro- 
duce a fairly accurate result. In the dust test, when 
a completely dry sample of soil (with the gravel por- 
tion removed) is dropped from a height of 1 or 2 
feet onto a solid surface, a silt content higher than 
10 percent will generally cause a fairly large amount 
of dust to be produced. In the wash test, an identical 
soil sample, as above, is placed in the palm of a hand, 



2-15 

and covered with about y 8 inch of water. If the 
water 'becomes completely discolored and hides the 
sand grains, this indicates that the soil sample con- 
tains a silt content higher than 5 percent. In the 
smear test, a sample of soil, again with the gravel 
portion removed, is moistened to just below the 
"sticky limit", and then smeared between the thumb 
and forefinger. When it produces a gritty, harsh 
feel, this indicates that it contains a, silt content of 
less than 10 percent. A rough, less harsh feel, how- 
ever, indicates that the sample contains more than 
10 percent silt. It should be emphasized that all of 
the above tests require the testing engineer to have 
some experience in their use before they can be con- 
sidered as reliable indicators of the silt contents. 



Section II. SAMPLING 



21 1 . Sample Selection 

a,. The purposes of soil surveys and field identifi- 
cation were discussed in previous paragraphs. Repre- 
sentative soil samples are taken during these opera- 
tions for field identification and for more detailed 
testing. For hasty investigations, samples from the 
surface or from excavations already in existence may 
be sufficient. The exploratory survey and field identi- 
fication, together with the requirements of the con- 
struction, dictate the location, depth, type of sample 
needed and sampling method to be used. 

&. The two most commonly used methods for ob- 
taining samples are the test hole and the test pit. 
Samples from test holes, or borings, are taken by 
hand or power augers, wash borings, dry sample 
borings, undisturbed sampling, or core borings. Au- 
gers and other borings yield disturbed samples satis- 
factory for determining the soil profile, classification, 
moisture content, compaction capabilities, and simi- 
lar properties. Special sampling tools are needed to 
take undisturbed samples from test holes. Test pits 
are open excavations large enough for a man to enter 
and study the soil in its undisturbed condition. They 
may be dug by hand or by power equipment if avail- 
able. Undisturbed samples are taken from the walls 
of the test pits. Load bearing tests can be made, if 
desired, on the soil in the bottom of the pit. 

2-12. Locating, Recording, and Numbering 
Samples 

a. Loodtmg. Information obtained from each test 
pit, boring, or other exploratory excavation must be 
correlated with data obtained from other sources. In 
exploration for roads and airfields, locations are es- 
tablished by measurements along the centerline or at 
right-angle offsets to the centerline, as required. Meas- 
urements may be made by pacing or taping. The soil 
testing set contains a 100-foot steel tape for this pur- 



pose. The location, type, and identification of the 
exploratory excavation are plotted on a photograph, 
map, or sketch made in the notebook as illustrated in 
figure 2-8. A uniform system should be used for plot- 
ting exploratory excavations. The symbols below are 
in common use. 

Type Abbreviation Symbol 

Pit P Square. 

Boring B Circle. 

Trench T Rectangle. 

6. Recording. A detailed record or log of each ex- 
ploratory excavation (test pit) is kept in a fieldbook 
as shown in figure 2-9. Logs must be complete and 
contain all information which may be of value in 
interpreting the test results and in plotting the soil 
profiles. Interpretation of the log will be made easier 
if each of the soils encountered is identified in the 
field and classified under the Unified Soil Classifica- 
tion System. Soil descriptions must be accurate and 
complete (para 2-8). 

c. Numbering Samples. Each sample is identified 
by the following information : 

(1) A project number which consists of a num- 
ber, an abbreviation, or a symbol. 

For example, BF might be used for Benton Field. 

(2) An excavation number which corresponds 
to the number of the exploratory excavation. 

Fcr example, P3 would mean that the sample was 
obtained from test pit number 3. 

(3) A sample number, which is the number of 
the sample in the order in which it was obtained from 
each location. If more than one bag sample is taken 
from one location, the total number of bags compris- 
ing the sample also must 'be recorded. An example of 
a complete designation number is as follows : 

B10-P3-2 
(Bag 1 of 2) 



2-16 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




Figure 2-8. Typical fieldbook page showing locations of soil explorations. 



This designation means that the sample was taken on 
project BIO, pit number 3, that it is the second sam- 
ple taken in this pit, and that the bag is the first of 
a total of two bags. The sample number is printed 
with a glazed surface-marking pencil on two tags, 
one of which is placed inside the bag, and the other 
of which is tied on the outside, as shown in figure 
2-10. Gummed labels may be similarly used to mark 
samples which are contained in moisture content 
boxes, cylinders, or jars. 



d. Responsibility. Responsibility of the officer in 
charge of soil exploration is to see that : 

(1) Each test pit, boring, or other exploratory 
excavation is properly surveyed, numbered, and 
recorded. 

(2) A log is kept of each test hole or test pit. 

(3) Each sample is properly numbered, tagged, 
or otherwise labeled, and prepared for shipment or 
transportation to the laboratory. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-17 



P&OJZCT A/ 



o. 



O- 



or 



i 



i 



STA- 



No.KBw) 





Figure 2-9. Typical jteldbook page showing log of test pits. 




Figure 2-10. Method, of lubeWng bag samples. 



2-13. Bag Samples 

Disturbed soil samples taken by means of a shovel, 
auger, or any other convenient handtool and placed 
in bags are known as bag samples. They are used for 
mechanical analysis, plasticity, specific gravity, frost 
susceptibility, compaction, and laboratory compacted 
CBE tests. The size of the sample taken will depend 
upon the tests to be conducted. Two sizes of bags are 
issued in the soil test set. 

a. Individual Samples. When exploring founda- 
tion conditions, bag samples are taken of each indi- 
vidual type of soil encountered. 

(1) To take individual samples from a pit, 
trench, or exposed face, shave off loose and dried soil 



2-18 



TM 5-530/NAV.FAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



to obtain a fresh, surface, and to expose clearly any 
variations in the soil. Then a typical sample of each 
type of soil, or of those types whicih. require further 
investigation, is taken as illustrated in figure 2-11. 

(2) When sampling in auger holes, typical por- 
tions of soil obtained are placed along a row in cor- 
rect order as indicated in figure 2-12. 

5. Composite Samples. A composite sample is a 
representative mixture of all soil within a profile or 
soil mass to be investigated, or of the material con- 
tained in a stockpile or windrow of soil excavated 
from a trench. A test sample is obtained from a com- 
posite sample by quartering in the laboratory (para 
2-22) 

(1) To take composite samples from test pits, 
trenches, or power shovel cuts, the following steps 
are required : 

(a) Any overburden or surface soil that is to 
be wasted is removed. 




Figure 2-11. Obtaining individual bag samples from an ex- 
posed face. 




SAMPLE NO. 1 
FROM HERE 



SAMPLE NO. 2 
FROM HERE 



(5) Loose and dried soil is shaved off to ob- 
tain a fresh surface for taking the sample. 

(c) A quartering cloth or tarpaulin is spread 
at the toe of the bank. 

(d) A channel of uniform cross section is ex- 
cavated from top to bottom (fig. 213) , and the soil 
deposited on the canvas. 

(e) All material removed is collected and 
bagged to insure that the sample contains the correct 
proportions. 

(2) To take composite samples from auger holes, 
all material excavated from the hole is collected, after 
first removing overburden. 

(3) Particular care must be taken to obtain 
representative samples when composite samples are 
being taken from stockpiles or large windrows. When 
material is dumped on large piles, the coarse mate- 
rial tends to roll to the bottom, leaving the finer mat- 
rial in the upper portion. The sample is taken from 
a full-height strip after clearing 1 the surface. 

(4) To sample a small windrow, material is ex- 
cavated and bagged from a short section, as illus- 
trated in figure 2-14. 




Figure 2-13. Taking a composite sample from an exposed face. 




Figure 2-12. Obtaining individual bag samples from an auger 
boring. 



Figure 2-14. Taking a composite sample from a small 
windrow. 



im 3-3.su/roA VTA:*- 



2-14. Moisture Content Samples 
The natural moisture content of soil is determined 
from samples taken in the field and placed in a con- 
tainer which is sealed to prevent loss of moisture by 
evaporation. Natural moisture content determina- 
tions are valuable in interpreting information ob- 
tained from test borings or pits, in drawing the soil 
profile, and in estimating the physical properties of 
soils encountered in the field (para 2-2/) . Generally, 
100 grams of soil is enough to determine the moisture 
content of fine grained soils. Larger samples are re- 
quired for soils which contain gravel. Three sizes of 
metal dishes are provided in the soil test set. These 
have tight-fitting covers and do not required sealing 
if the test is made within 1 day after the sample is 
taken. If a longer time interval will elapse between 
sampling and testing, the boxes may be sealed by the 
method illustrated in figure 2-15. Any other clean 
containers which can be adequately sealed may be 
used for moisture-content samples. 



WRAP WITH 
FRICTION TAPE 



DIP OR PAINT 
WITH PARAFFIN 



WRAP WITH 

PARAFFIN-WP.APPED 

CAPER OR CLOTH 




Figure 2-15. Sealing container in order to retain moisture 
content of a sample. 

2-15. Undisturbed SampSes 
An undisturbed soil sample is one that is cut, re- 
moved, and packed with the least possible disturb- 
ance. They are samples in which the natural struc- 
tures, void ration, and moisture content are preserved 
as carefully as possible. Samples of this type are used 
for determining the density (unit weight) of soil in 
the laboratory, and investigating the strength of un- 
disturbed soils in the laboratory by the California 
bearing ratio or unconfined compression tests. These 
samples may be shipped to more completely equipped 
laboratories for shear, consolidation, or other 
strength tests. 

a. Types of Undisturbed Samples. Equipment is 
available for obtaining undisturbed samples of three 
different types and by several methods as follows : 

(1) Chunk samples cut by hand with shovel and 
knife. 

(2) Cylinder samples obtained by use of a 
cylindrical sampler or the CBR mold equipped with 
sampling cutter. Expedient methods of obtaining 
cylinder samples are also used. 

(3) Box samples. 

b. Method. The method of sampling chosen de- 
pends upon the equipment available, the tests 
required, and type of soil. All undisturbed samples 



must be handled Avith care. Cohesionless soil samples 
must be kept in the container in which taken until 
ready for testing and the container should be handled 
without jarring or vibration. Some soils are too hard 
or contain too many stones to permit sampling with 
the cylindrical samplers and can be sampled only 
by cutting out chunks by hand. The taking of un- 
disturbed samples frequently requires a great deal 
of ingenuity in adapting the sampling devices to job 
conditions and in devising schemes for their use. 
Whatever method is used, the sample must be taken 
and packed in the container for shipment without 
allowing its structure to change. Protection against 
change in moisture content during sampling and 
shipment is also required. 

216. Chunk Samples 

The simplest type of undisturbed sample is obtained 
by cutting out a chunk of soil of the desired size and 
covering it to prevent loss of moisture and breakage. 
This method can be used only with soils that will not 
deform, break, or crumble while being removed. 

a. The process of obtaining a chunk sample from 
a subgrade or other level surface, such as the bottom 
of a test pit, is illustrated in figures 2-16, 2-17, and 
2-18. The first step is to smooth the ground surface 
and mark the outline of the chunk. A trench is exca- 
vated around the chunk (fig. 2-16), after which the 
excavation is deepened, and the sides of the chunk 
trimmed with a knife (fig. 2-17). The chunk is then 



-Jfc-a. 




Figure 2-16. Taking chunk sample from a level surface. Step 
1 excavate trench. 




Figure 2-11. Taking chunk sample from a level surface. Step 
2 trim sample. 



2-20 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



^'^^rSg 




Figure 2-18. Taking chunk sample from a level surface. Step 
3 cut off and remove. 

cut off at the bottom with a knife, trowel, or hacksaw 
blade, and carefully removed from the hole (fig. 
2-18). 

&. To obtain a chunk sample from the vertical face 
of a test pit or trench (figs. 2-19, 2-20, and 2-21), 
the first step again is to carefully smooth the surface 
of the face and mark the outline of the chunk. Soil 
is excavated from around and in back of the chunk 
(fig. 2-19) . The chunk is shaped with the knife (fig. 
2-20) , after which it is cut off and carefully removed 
from the hole (fig. 2-21) . 

c. The chunk sample must be sealed after remov- 
ing it from the hole. One method is to apply three 
coats of melted paraffin, as illustrated in figure 2-22. 
Each coat is allowed to cool and become firm before 







Figure 2-19. Talcing a chunk sample from a vertical face. 
Step 1 excavate pit and sample tunnel. 





-&& 

*N* 



ISSfc 1 -** 



Figure 2-21. Taking a chunk sample from a vertical face. 
Step 3 cut off and remove. 

applying the next coat. This gives adequate protec- 
tion for strong samples that are to be used within 
a few days. Samples that are weak, or which may 
not be used soon, require additional protection. They 
should be wrapped with cheesecloth or other soft 
cloth (fig. 2-23) and sealed in paraffin. If cloth is 
not available, the sample can be reinforced with 
several loops of friction tape or twine. Three more 
coats of paraffin then are applied. Extreme care is 
required to prevent damage to the structure or other 
disturbance to the sample while performing these 
operations. 

d. An alternate method of sealing a chunk sample 
is to dip the entire sample in melted paraffin (fig. 
2-24) after the first brush coat has been applied and 




Figure 2-22. Applying paraffin to seal chunk sample. 




Figure 2-28. Wrapping a weak chunk sample prior to final 
sealing. 



Figure 2-20. Taking a chunk sample -from a vertical face. 
Step 2 trim sample. 




Figure 2-24- Dipping chunk sample in melted paraffin. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

the sample wrapped. This requires a large container 
and more paraffin, but gives a more uniform coating. 
By repeated dipping, the layer of paraffin can be 
built up to a minimum y 8 inch thickness. 

e. Samples that are to be shipped require additional 
protection. This may be accomplished by placing the 
chunk in a small box and packing, as illustrated in 
figure 2-25, or by applying many coats of cloth and 
paraffin. 



WOOD BOX 



HEAVY CORD 



SLIGHTLY DAMPENED EXCELSIOR, 
SAWDUST, OR NEWSPAPER 



SAMPLE 



CORRUGATED 

CARDBOARD 

BOX 




V4" MIN PARAFFIN 



Figure 2-25. Packing a chunk sample for transportation or 
shipment to laboratory. 



2-17. Cylinder Samples by Drive Sampler 

A drive sampler is a device used for obtaining rela- 
tively undisturbed soil samples suitable for labora- 
tory tests at the surface or at the bottom of shallow 
borings or test holes, and at the bottom, of test pits. 
It consists of a sampling tube or cylinder which is 
driven into the soil. One end of the tube is tapered 
to a cutting edge which penetrates the soil. The tube 
or cylinder is used in conjunction with a drive head 
and rod. Drive samplers' use is restricted to soils 
from soft to fairly firm, and free of stones or rocks 
which can damage the equipment. Drive samplers 
are not issued in the Soil Test Set but may still be 
available in some units. 

a. Prepare data sheet, DD form 1214 (Unit 
Weight Determination "Volume of Sample" 
Methods) (fig. 2-26), recording date, project, test 
site location and number as described in paragraph 
2-12, surface elevation, sample depth and number, 
type and size of sampler, method of driving sampler, 
and blows required. Description of soil and field 
identification corresponding to the sample should be 
included, if available. 

&. Weigh the sampling cylinder, after cleaning to 
remove any adhering soil or corrosion, and record 
weight of cylinder as item 6, DD form 1214 (fig. 
2-26). Measure and record diameter and height of 



2-21 

cylinder. The drive head with the rod attached is 
placed over the sampling tube or cylinder. The 
cylinder is then "driven" into the soil using the hand- 
held hammer (fig. 2-28) or the drophammer built 
as part of the drive rod assembly (fig. 2-29). When 
the sampling cylinder is fully driven and some soil 
is seen above the top of the cylinder, the cylinder 
and soil sample are carefully dug out. The sample 
is carefully trimmed with a knife at both bottom and 
top, and weighed. Record this weight of sample and 
tube on line 5. The weight of the sample and its 
weight per unit volume (items 1 and 8) can now be 
computed. The reverse side of DD form 1214 (fig. 
2-27) is used for weight per unit volume determina- 
tion of paraffin coated samples and water content 
determinations which are discussed in section VIII. 

c. Samples to be transported to the laboratory must 
be carefully sealed and protected. If field weighing 
(b above) is not possible, the sample must be sealed 
in the tube immediately after taking. If left in the 
cylinder, the ends must be sealed with a thin coat 
of paraffin. If the samples are to be handled much 
or removed from the cylinder, they should be care- 
fully sealed, reinforced, and protected. Cloth or 
proper reinforcement should be used in conjunction 
with paraffin applied by use of paintbrush or dip- 
ping. The soil core is laid on a flat, clean board and 
the reinforcing paper or cloth is coated with paraffin 
as it is rolled onto the core sample. Sufficient rein- 
forcing material is left at the ends to fold in to pro- 
tect the ends of the core. 

d. Undisturbed samples may be taken from greater 
depth in test holes by thin- walled tube sampling. The 
hole is made by a suitable method to the desired 
depth for taking the sample. The boring operation 
must not disturb the soil below the bottom of the 
hole. Thin- walled sample tubes, 2 to 5 inches in diam- 
eter, having lengths 5 to 10 times the diameter and 
of adequate strength and corrosion resistance, are 
used. A sharpened cutting edge is desirable, and the 
upper end must be fitted with a coupling to connect 
to pipe extensions on the drilling apparatus to drive 
the tube into the soil and withdraw it with the sam- 
ple. The test hole must be clean of loose material and 
water should remain at the ground water level during 
sampling. The tube should be pushed into the ground 
by a continuous downward motion without twisting. 
If it is necessary to use a driving hammer in hard 
soils, the weight, height of drop, and number of blows 
should be recorded. The tube should then be turned 
through two revolutions to shear off the sample at 
the bottom of the tube. The ends of the sample tube 
are then plugged with impervious disks, sealed, and 
labeled for shipment to the laboratory. 



2-22 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



UNIT WEIGHT DETERMINATION 
"VOLUME OF SAMPLE" METHODS 


DATE 


PROJECT 


^ao 3 


SAMPLE NUMBER 


TEST SITE 


/ 


S7X>, /3+00) ///$A/WAf ^Zoa^tSXSKC* 


a 


& S>T4. /3+00, // /, % />/T?,l>P7M3' 










ADDITIONAL SPECIFICATIONS 

^"K -57 

^/3sW/?^E. , 

Stf/Wp^^ & 


'/9. /3-^OO .78. S /=T 
/, <^/ZS9l/ ^5<flA/Z>y ^/L~T 3/Y? A/O Z)&V/A/$ 

^. ^5/9/1/4? CZ/9V Arf/X7^l/%-' /2- &^-OW '^5 


CONVERSION FACTORS 

1 in. = 2.64 cm. 1 gnu /cc. or 62.4 Ib. /CD. ft. = Unit weight of water 
'1 Ib. = 454 gm. Specific gravity .of clean paraffin = 0.9 
1 cu. ft. - 1728 cu. in. 




SAMPLE VOLUME AND WET UNIT WEIGHT - CYLINDER SAMPLER 


SAMPLE NUMBER 




UNITS 














/ 


a 






CYLINDER NUMBER 




/>-3 


/^--^ 






1. DIAMETER OF CYLINDER, 


IN. 


3-0 


3.0 






2. HEIGHT OF CYLINDER, H 


IN. 


a. 7 


3.^ 






3. VOLUME OF CYLINDER, V fWz>V) 


CO. IN. 


/<?./ 


25.5 






U. VOLUME OF SAMPLE, (V/1738) 


CU. FT. 


0.01 1| 


O.OI4? 






5. WEIGHT OF CYLINDER + SAMPLE 


LB. 


1.78 


2,^3- 






6. WEIGHT OF CYLINDER 


LB. 


O.V-8 


0.'^ 






7. WEIGHT OF SAMPLE (5. - 6.) 


LB. 


/.30 


/.8/ 






8. WET UNIT WEIGHT OF SAMPLE, "Y (77-) 


LB./CU. FT. 


117.2 


IZ3.Z 







GPO 98415 1 * 



Figure 2-26. Data sheet, unit weight determination by volume of sample (DD form 1214) 



SAMPLE VOLUNE AttD WET UM9T WEIGHT- PARAFf I COATED SAMPLES 


UNITS 
SAMPLE NUMBER l\:\l^\^ : :l\\:li\~^ 


OCX, /} 


o/ ^ r 


: 





9. WEIGHT OF SAMPLE + PARAFFIN IN AIR GM. 


O 'V s " 

#52X6> 


J5fe~^-' 






10. WEIGHT OF SAMPLE IN AIR GM. 


t$LO()*?> 


/X.7^ 






11. WEIGHT OF PARAFFIN IN AIR (9. -10.) GM. 


SO* 


7* *- 






12. VOLUME OF PARAFFIN ( 


n. 


CC. 


55.7 


gs.t* 






ap . gr. of paraffin' 


13. WEIGHT OF SAMPLE + PARAFFIN IN WATER GM. 


&OO.O 


675.7 






11. VOLUME OF SAMPLE + PARAFFIN (9. -13.) CC. 


50.6 


475. 4 






15. VOLUME OF SAMPLE (14. -12.) CC. 


e ?4>7 


S<?/.8 






16. WET UNIT WEIGHT OF SAMPLE, Y (^- 62.4) LB./CU. FT. 


/> 4 


//7.3 










WATER CONTENT 


DETERMINATION 


FARE NUMBER 


UN ITS 


27 


28 


z.1 


3O 










17 WEIGHT WET 
SOIL 4 TARE 


%Yn> 


37.4o 




st>.*> 












10 WEIGHT DRY 
SOIL & TARE 


<%YY\ 


3E54 


38.15 


55.10 


54<87 










1Q WEIGHT OF WATER 
ly - (17. -18.) 





l>86> 


2.77 


0.4-0 


0.33 










20. WEIGHT TARE 


tfyn 


3/-3I 


37-88 


St/b 


53.V!* 










?1 WEIGHT DRY SOIL 
"' (18. -20.) 


U 


^.23 


6.27 


/BO 


/.V7 










WATER CONTENT 
22 : ^IT" * 100 > 


(/ 

PERCENT 


44.o 


442. 


22. a 


22.4 










? o AVERAGE 
' WATER CONTENT 


PERCENT 


4-4.1 


22.3 






DRY UNIT WEIGHT DETERMINATION 




RUN NUMBER 


UNITS 




"" i;i:i;tz" :;: 
















/ 


2L 














DRY UNIT WEIGHT 

2U. 
, 100 


LB./CU. FT. 


870 


<*., 














*' * 100 + 23. } 


REMARKS 




TECHNICIAN (Signature) 

{T^, ^3t-6^A^As 


COMPUTED BY (Signature) 


CHECKED BY (Signatttr*) 



(/ 

Figure 2-37. Da*a s/iee*, toe* tint* weight <md water content determination (reverse of DD form 1214) . 



2-24 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




Figure 2-28. Driving sampler with hand-held hammer 




^Mftw^'-' - -afc 'j 

w^$^'"i$? .$'**,?".; 

Figure 2-29. Driving sampler with drophammer. 

2-18. Cylinder Samples by Soil Trafficability 
Sampler 

a. The soil trafficability sampler (fig. 2-30) con- 
sists of a sample tube and an assembly to force the 
tube into the soil. It is forced by hand pressure, not 
~by blows from a hammer. A movable piston is fitted 
within the cylinder and is attached to a rod which 
extends through the center of the drive tube and 
terminates in a flat dish or base plate at the upper 
end. The outer drive tube is attached to the sample 
cylinder at the bottom and has two handles at the 
top end. One of the handles is knurled and can be 
turned to lock the inner rod when the piston is in 
position. A long and a short spacer bar are bolted to 
the outer tube and are used to establish the size of 
the sample core. It is recommended that the sampler 
not be used for other than extremely soft and yield- 
ing soils. The walls of the cylinder are very thin and 
can be deformed if they come in contact with a hard 
object. Even hard or dry soil can damage the sampler. 
Its primary use is for samples to test the remolding 
characteristics in soils having initial low or very low 
supporting value. 



OCKING (KNURLED! 
HANDLE 




DRIVE 
ROD 



PISTON ROD 




,__ LEATHER WASHER 
PISTON RING 
PIST6N 



SAMPLING TUBB 



Figure 2-SO. Soil trafficability sampler. 

Z>. In operation, the piston is adjusted so that it is 
flush with the cutting edge of the sampler cylinder. 
The knurled handle is locked. 

(1) The sampler is placed firmly in contact with, 
the soil to be sampled. 

(2) Holding the disk at the top to prevent ver- 
tical movement and unlocking the knurled handle, 
the sampler cylinder is forced into the soil. 

(3) When the cylinder is fully in the soil, the 
knurled handle is locked to clamp the piston and 
keep the soil sample from slipping out due to the 
vacuum created. 

(4) The entire sampler is now rotated a half turn 
to shear the soil at the base of the cylinder, then 
carefully withdrawn from the hole and inverted so 
that the dish becomes a base plate. There is a spud 
on the side of the sampler for releasing the side fric- 
tion and the vacuum caused by withdrawing the 
sampler from the ground. 

(5) The longer spacer bar is swung into position 
to act as a stop while the piston ejects the sample. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

(6) The knurled handle is released and the drive 
tube is pushed until the spacer bar hits the base plate 
and a portion of the sample is pushed up out of the 
cylinder. 

(7) The portion of the sample flush with the 
cutting edge of the sampler is cut off and discarded. 
This amount of soil discard offsets any uneven shear- 
ing at the bottom of the hole and gives the soil sample 
a true cylindrical shape. 

(8) The short spacer bar is swung into position 
and the long bar is moved out of the way. 

(9) The soil sample is ejected until tihe short 
bar stops the action. Some of the soil sample will 
still be in the cylinder. 

(10) Using the sample cutter (piano wire), the 
soil sample is cut off flush with the sampler cutting 
edge into a preformed plate made to fit around the 
cutter. The sample is now exactly 1.87 inches in diam- 
eter and 3.453 inches long. 

(11) The remaining soil in the sampler is 
discarded. 

c. This sampler can be used in conjunction with a 
hand auger to obtain cores at depths up to 48 inches 
below the surface. 

NOTE 

If the hole dug by the auger does not cave 
in, the soil may be too dry for the piston 
sampler. 

The cores are sealed as described in paragraph 2 16c. 

d. The soil trafficability sampler requires proper 
maintenance and adjustment to produce consistent 
results. 

(1) It is essential to keep the inside of the sam- 
pling tube, the piston ring, and the leather washer 
reasonably clean. After 5 to 25 samplings, depending 
on the type of soil, the tube should be immersed, first 
in water and then in fuel oil, working the piston up 
and down five or six times in each liquid. After the 
excess of fuel oil has been wiped off, light machine 
oil should be squirted into the tube. If the instrument 
becomes stiff and hard to work, the tube should be 
removed, the piston disassembled and thoroughly 
cleaned, and the leather washer oiled. Care should be 
taken in removing the tube to prevent its slipping 
from the head suddenly and bending the piston rod. 
Tube walls and cutting edges are relatively soft and 
should be handled with care. 

(2) The effective piston rod length should be 
adjusted to keep the face of the piston flush with the 
cutting edge of the tube when the piston rod handle 
(disk) is fully depressed. This is done by loosening 
the setscrew on the handle, screwing the handle up or 
down to the correct position, and retightening the 
setscrew. 



2-25 

2-19. Cylinder Samples by CBR Mold 

a. In soft, fine grained soils, cylinder samples for 
undisturbed California bearing ratio (CBK) or 
.density tests may be taken directly in the CBE 
compaction cylinder by using the sampling collar 
(cutter) as illustrated in figure 2-31. First, the sur- 
face of the ground is smoothed and the sampling 
collar and mold pressed into the soil with moderate 
pressure. A trench is excavated around the cylinder 
(fig. 2-32). The mold is again pressed firmly down 
over the soil, using the hand driver or loading bar if 
necessary (fig. 2-33). A loading bar may be impro- 
vised from any piece of timber of suitable size. The 



EXTENSION COLLAR 



CBR COMPACTION MOLD 




-- SAMPLING COLLAR 



Figure 2-81. Section through GBR mold. 




Figure 2-32. Trench cut around cylinder. 



TRIM OUT AND DOWN 




Figure S-3S. Using loading bar to drive cylinder. 



2-26 

soil is carefully trimmed away from the sampling 
collar with, a knife, cutting downward and outward 
to avoid cutting into the sample. The actual cutting 
to size is done with the sampling collar. The sampler 
may be forced down with the field CBE. jack, al- 
though this jack has only approximately 2 inches of 
travel. It is better to use a truck jack, if available. In 
either case, the sampler should not be forced down 
ahead of the trimming on the outside of the cylinder. 
The trench is then .excavated deeper and the process 
repeated until the soil penetrates well into the exten- 
sion collar (fig. 2-54). If stones interfere, they are 
picked out carefully and the space filled with soil. 
This fact is recorded in the log of the sample where 
pertinent. 

&. The sample is cut off at the bottom of the mold, 
using a shovel, knife, or wire saw (fig. 2~35). The 
mold and sample are then removed from the hole. 




Figure 2-34- Cylinder in position prior to cutting sample. 

SHOVEL 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

<?. The upper collar is removed and the top surface 
of the sample trimmed down into the mold a distance 
of 'about 1/2 inch. This recess is filled with paraffin 
to seal the end of the sample (fig. 2-36). The mold 
is turned over and the cutting edge removed. This 
end is trimmed down into the mold about y 2 inch, as 
before, and the resulting space filled with paraffin. 
If the sample is to be 'handled very much prior to 
testing, the ends should be overfilled with paraffin 
and then trimmed exactly flush with a straightedge. 
Boards are placed over each end and clamped in 
place by the use of bolts, wire, or string (fig. 2-37) . 
Samples which must be transported some distance 
or which may 'have to be handled quite a bit before 
testing should be wrapped in cloth and soaked in 
paraffin in layers. 




Figure 2--S6. Sealing sample in GBR mold. 




Figure 2-35. Cutting off cylindrical sample. 



Figure 2-37. Protecting sample in OBR mold. 

2-20. Cylinder Samples by Expedient Methods 

Under expedient conditions, undisturbed samples 
may be taken by the use of a large cylindrical tin 
can from which the top and bottom have been re- 
moved. A short section of pipe may be similarly used, 
first sharpening one end to a cutting edge, the 
diameter of which is equal to the inside diameter of 
the pipe. The method of securing, trimming, and 
sealing the sample in such cases is similar to that 
described in paragraph 2-16. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-33O/AFM 89-3 



2-27 



2-21. Box Samples 

Box samples sometimes are used for large un- 
disturbed samples requiring extensive investigation. 
They can be packed firmly for shipment or storage, 
but require considerable paraffin. The process of ob- 
taining a box sample is shown in figures 2-3 : 8, 2-39, 
and 2-40. As indicated, an excavation is made as for a 
chunk sample. The sample is trimmed to a size 
slightly smaller than the size of the box. The top and 
bottom are removed from the box, which is then 
placed over the sample (fig. 2-38). The space be- 




FILL WITH 
PARAFFIN 



Figure 2-S8. Securing a l)ox sample. 





Figure 2-40. Cutting off a fcoa? sample. 

tween the sides of the sample and the inside of the 
box is filled with melted paraffin, after which paraffin 
is poured over the top of the sample, and the top of 
the box replaced (fig. 2-39). This end is marked 
"TOP". The sample is cut off, and the box and sam- 
ple removed from the hole (fig. 2-40). The bottom 
of the box is then replaced. 

2-22. Quartering Samples 

The process of reducing a representative sample to 
a convenient size, or of dividing a sample into two 
or more smaller samples for testing, is called quarter- 
ing. The procedure to be used varies somewhat, 
depending on the size of the sample. 

a. Samples Weighing over 100 Pounds. Quartering 
of a sample of this size is shown in figures 2-41, 2-42, 
2-43, and 2-44. The sample is first mixed and piled 
on the quartering canvas (fig. 2-41) . Each shovelful 




Figure 2-89. Sealing a 6oa? sample. 

418-320 O 71 A 



Figure 2-41. Mixing and piling a sample weighing more than 
100 pounds. 



2-28 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



is placed in the center of the cone so that the soil 
runs down evenly in all directions in order to mix the 
sample. The cone is then flattened with the shovel, 
spreading the material to a circular layer of approxi- 
mately uniform thickness (fig. 2-42) . A stick or pipe 
is inserted under the center of the pile (under the 
canvas) and both ends of the stick are lifted, thus 
dividing the sample into two parts (fig. 2-43). The 
stick is removed, leaving a fold in the canvas. The 
stick is again inserted under the pile, this time at 
right angles to the first division, and again lifted, 
dividing the sample in four parts (fig. 2-44). Two 
diagonally opposite quarters are discarded, being 
careful to clean the fines from the canvas. The re- 
maining material is remixed by taking alternate 
shovelfuls from each quarter. The quartering process 
is repeated as necessary to reduce the sample to the 
desired size. 

&. Samples Weighing $5 to 100 Pounds. In quar- 
tering this size of sample, the soil is piled on the 
canvas and mixed by alternately lifting the corners 




Figure 2-42. Flattening sample to uniform thickness. 




of the canvas and pulling over the samples as if 
preparing to fold the canvas diagonally, as illus- 
trated in figure 2-45. The sample is then flattened 
and quartered, as in a above. 

c. Samples Weighing Less Than %5 Pounds. The 
process of quartering samples less than 25 pounds 
is similar to the 100 pound and more process. The 
sample is placed on the canvas or a clean sheet of 
paper. It is mixed thoroughly with a trowel and 
formed into a conical pile (fig. 2-46). The cone is 
flattened by pressing downward with the trowel 
(fig. 2-47). The trowel is used to divide the sample 



DISCARD 




DISCARD 

Figure 2-44. Quartering the sample. 




Figure 2-45. Mixing a sample weighing 25 to 100 pounds. 




Figure 2-48. Halving the sample. 



Figure 2-46. Preparing a sample weighing less than 2, 
pounds. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-2 y 



into quarters. Diagonally opposite quarters are dis- 
carded (fig. 2-48) . The process is repeated as neces- 
sary to reduce the size of the sample for testing. 




Figure 2-47. Flattening a small sample. 




Figure 2-48. Quartering a small sample. 



Section III SIEVE ANALYSIS 



2-23. Description 

Soil grains and gradation are discussed in paragraph 
2-2, with some consideration of the effects of grain 
characteristics on the physical properties of soils. 
The use of grain size and grain-size distribution in 
soil classification is explained in paragraph 2-3 and 
visual-manual tests and their use for field identifica- 
tion are covered in paragraphs 2-8 and 2-9. Although 
estimates of grain size of coarser materials may be 
made in this way, the accurate determination of 
the grain-size distribution or gradation of coarse soil 
fractions requires a sieve analysis, or grain-size anal- 
ysis. The proportion of material of each grain size 
present in a given soil is determined by this test. 
Sieve separation of coarse and fine fractions of mixed 
soil is required to provide samples for further testing. 
a. The term grain-size distribution refers to the 
portion of soil particles of different sizes which are 
contained in a given soil. The determination of the 
grain-size distribution of a soil, also called mechani- 
cal analysis^ may be accomplished by a screening 
process (sieve analysis] for coarse-grained or cohe- 
sionless soils, by a settling process in water (wet 
mechanical analysis or hydrometer analysis] for fine- 
grained or cohesive soils, or by both the screening 
and settling processes on the same sample (combined 
mechanical analysis). Any grain-size distribution 
test is valid only when the soil particles are complete- 
ly separated one from the other, so that the par- 
ticles can pass through the sieve opening or settle 
through the water individually. Sieve analysis is 
applicable to soil containing small amounts of ma- 
terial passing the No. 200 sieve provided the grain- 
size distribution of that portion passing the No. 200 



sieve is not of interest. The sieve analysis is con- 
ducted either on the entire sample or on the sample 
after the fines are removed by prewashing. 

6. The Corps of Engineers specifies a washed sieve 
analysis with prewashing unless otherwise allowed 
by the specifications. Even the most coarse grained 
and apparently the cleanest soil will at times pro- 
duce a higher-than-expected percentage of fine par- 
ticles. For military expediency, or when time is criti- 
cal, prewashing may be eliminated. If there is any 
doubt as to the need for prewashing, a moist pat of 
the soil may be quickly dried on the stove or in the 
oven and its dry strength examined by crushing be- 
tween the fingers. If it can be crushed and powdered 
easily, a sieve analysis can be made without pre- 
washing (dry sieve analysis). In preparing a sample 
for dry sieve analysis, however, it may still be neces- 
sary to pulverize the finer portion of the sample to 
insure separation of the particles. The size of sample 
required for a sieve analysis depends upon its particle 
size as follows: 

Maximum particle size (indies) Minimum weight of sample (grams) 

3 6000 

2 4000 



Finer than No. 4 sieve. 



2000 

1000 

200 



G. A majority of the large samples must be dried 
in preparation for tests such as mechanical analysis, 
compaction, and CBE,. 

(1) Air drying. The soil is placed in pans, or 
spread on a canvas and exposed to the direct rays 
of the sun, or to a draft of dry air. Frequent agita- 
tion or stirring speeds up the drying. A fan blow- 



2-30 

ing air over the sample will greatly increase the rate 
of drying. Care must be taken not to blow away the 
fine material. 

(2) Oven-drying. Samples frequently are dried 
in an oven to constant weight. This is done most 
frequently in connection with the determination of 
the moisture (water) content of the soil. 

(3) Direct heat. Some samples, particularly 
coarse grained soils which do not contain appreciable 
amounts of organic matter, can be dried expeditious- 
ly in a frying pan over a hotplate or gasoline burner, 
if available. 

2-24. Equipment 

The following equipment (fig. 2-49) is provided in 
the soil testing set for sieve analysis : 



TM 5-530/NAV.FAC MO-330/AFM 8? 

Balance, specific gravity determination, 2 

gram capacity (not shown) 
Brush, varnish, 1-inch 
Cover, test sieve, 8-inch diameter 
Cloth, cotton duck, 60 x 60 inches 
Mortar, porcelain 
Oven, laboratory (not shown) 
Pan, test sieve, 8-inch diameter 
Pans or evaporating dishes, as required 
Pestle, porcelain-tipped 
Scale, bench, 3 weigh beams, 2610-gram capac 
Scale, bench, twin weigh beams, 21,100-gr 

capacity 
Scoop, kitchen 
Shaker, testing sieve, laboratory, hand-opera 

(fig. 2-50) 



SCALE, BENCH, 
21,100-GRAM 



SIEVES, TEST 

8-IN.,W/COVER 

AND PAN 



SCALE, BENCH 
2610-GRAM 




SCOOP BRUSH \ PESTLE 

CLOTH, COTTON DUCK MORTA 



Figure 2-49. Equipment for sieve analysis. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

Sieves, test, 8 inch diameter : 

Full Height (2 in. deep) : 2, iy 2 , 1, %, and 

y^ inch. 
Half Height (1 in. cleep) : U.S. No. 4, 10, 

40, 60, 100 and 200* (fig. 2-51). 



2-31 




ini 



Figure 2-50. Hand, operated sieve shaker. 



*NOTB. A full set of sieves includes 3 and % inch, but not % inch 
and U.S. No. 20, No. 140 but not No. 100, in addition to the above. A 
set consisting of 3, 1%, %, and % inch, U.S. No. 4, 8, 16, 30, 50, 
100 and 200 is recommended by A.S.T.M. to give uniform spacing 
of points on the grain-size distribution graph, since each opening 
is twice the size of the one below. 



Figure 2-51. Testing sieves for dry sieve analysis. 



2-32 

2-25. Dry Sieve Analysis 

a. Preparation. Material to be analyzed using the 
dry sieve method is first air-dried, after which any 
clusters of soil are thoroughly broken up using the 
fingers or a mortar and pestile. Care must be taken 
only to separate the individual particles and not to 
crush any of them. If the sample is larger than the 
recommended amount, it should be reduced in size 
by quartering (para 2-22) until a representative 
sample of about the correct size (para 2-235) is ob- 
tained. Too large a sample can overload a sieve and 
result in incomplete separation and errors in the test. 

b. Procedure. The prepared sample is now ready 
for the actual test which is conducted according to 
the following directions : 

(1) Record all identifying information of the 
sample, such as project, excavation number, sample 
number, description of sample, and date on a DD 
Form 1206 (Sieve Analysis Data Sheet) (fig. 2-52). 

(2) Oven-dry the sample at 110 5 C., and 
allow it to cool. 

(3) Weigh the dried and cooled sample and re- 
cord the weight as the weight of original sample. 

(4) Select a nest of sieves suitable to the soil 
being tested. Weigh each selected sieve and record 
its weight. The top sieve, if possible, should be able 
to pass the largest particles in the sample. Particles 
larger than the largest sieve must be measured. The 
remaining sieves are selected based on the knowledge 
of the use to which the grain-size distribution curve 
will be put. Lacking this information, all the sieves 
below the largest one should be used. The sieves is- 
sued in the test set, in order of decreasing size open- 
ings, shown in parentheses (in millimeters) , are as 
follows : 

2-inch (50.8-mm) 
li/ 2 -inch (38.1-mm) 
1 inch (25.4-mm) 
34 inch (19.0-mm) 
1/4 inch (6.35-mm) 
No. 4 (4.76-mm) 
No. 10 (2.00-mm) 
No. 40 (0.420-mm) 



TM 5-530/NAV.FAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

No. 60 (0.250-mm) 
No. 100 (0.149-mm) 
No. 200 (0.074-mm) 

(5) Arrange the sieves in a nest with the largest 
opening sieve on top and each progressively smaller 
opening sieve in order below it. Attach the bottom 
pan to the smallest sieve used. 

(6) Place the sample on the top sieve of the nest 
and put the cover plate on. 

(7) Place the nest of sieves in the shaker and 
shake the nest for about 10 to 15 minutes. The length 
of time depends on the- amount of fine material in 
the sample. Shaking should continue until the amount 
of material on any sieve does not show appreciable 
change. 

(8) The nest may be shaken by hand if a shaker 
is not available. Use a lateral and vertical motion 
accompanied by a slight jarring to keep the sample 
moving continuously over the screens. Jarring is 
accomplished by dropping the nest lightly on a stack 
of papers or magazines. Use extreme caution not to 
"break" the nest and do not open it to rearrange or 
manipulate the particles. 

(9) When the shaking is completed, set the nest 
down and remove the top cover. 

(10) Start with the top sieve. Weigh it and the 
material retained on it. 

(11) Record this weight (sieve and sample) on 
the line opposite the sieve size. 

(12) Set the weighed sieve and material aside 
until the weighing of all sieves is completed. Do not 
discard any of the material. 

(13) Remove the next sieve and material, weigh, 
record, and set the sieve and material aside. 

(14) Continue this process for each sieve and 
the "bottom pan in the nest. 

(15) Subtract the weight of the empty sieve or 
pan from the sieve plus material weight. Total the 
individual material weights and compare the total 
to the original sample weight, (3) above. If the differ- 
ence exceeds one percent, check each sieve fraction 
for possible error. If no error has been made in the 
weighing, but the weight error still exceeds one per- 
cent, rerun the test. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-33 



SIEVE ANALYSIS DATA 



DATE 



/<J7O 



ROJECT 



EXCAVATION NUMBER 



SAMPLE NUMBER 



ESCRIPTION OF SAMPLE 



PREWASHED 



25 



EIGHT ORIGINAL SAMPLE ( 6 . ) 



WEIGHT AFTER PREWASHING 1 (gin.) 



WASHING LOSS 1 (gn.) 



SIEVE OR SCREEN 



WEIGHT RETAINED 

ON SIEVE (*) 

b 



PASSING SIEVE 



WEIGHT 



PERCENT 
d 



978. 



100 



/ 



78,3 



Joo. 3 



833.8 



85,2. 



26, 2. 



No, 



8 



37.5 



/So. 10 



7 



7-o 



23, 



NUMBER 200 



A. WEIGHT SIEVED THROUGH NO. 200 (gm.) 



ERROR (Original weight - total weight of frac tionu)(gm. ) 



37,2. 



E). WASH ING LOSS 1 (gm.) 



OTAL PASSING NO. 200 (fa,.) (A. + B.) 



> 2-. 



PERCENT ERROR *-> ~7 

*" ' ' 
Error 



TOTAL WEIGHT OF FR ACT IONS (Total of all en trie* in Col, b) 



rr , r {**L}, T-* 10<- /),2#2 

al weight > ~~ l ~" f *~ LJ /& 



REMARKS 



FECHNJUAN (Signature) 




COMPUTED BY (Signature) 



CHECKED BY (Signature) 







931 t 50 



Figure 2-52. Data sheet, example of dry sieve analysis. 



2-34 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



226. Sieve Analysis With Pre wash ing 
Samples containing cohesive soil must be washed 
prior to sieve analysis to break up the lumps and to 
remove the coating of cohesive particles. 

a. Preparation. The sample is oven-dried and 
weighed, then it is placed in a clean container and 
clean water added to cover the sample completely. 
Allow the sample to soak until the adhering and 
lumpy particles are completely disintegrated. This 
process may take from 2 to 24 hours depending on the 
amount and plasticity of the fine material. Stirring 
and breaking up lumps will hasten the process. 

b. Procedure. When the sample has disintegrated 
and no lumps exist, it is ready for prewashing accord- 
ing to the following procedures : 

(1) Transfer the sample and water from the 
container to a No. 200 sieve. If the sample contains 
an appreciable amount of coarse particles, use a nest 
of a No. 4 or a No. 40 sieve and a No. 200 sieve to 
prevent overloading the smaller opening sieve. Large 
particles may be washed individually over the No. 
200 sieve (no more than 200 grams at a time) and set 
aside for future use. 

(2) Wash the sample thoroughly until the 
material on the sieve and the wash water appear to 
be clean (fig. 2-53) . Eub or stir the sample carefully 
using the fingers. 

(3) The wash water and the material which has 
passed through the No. 200 sieve are discarded (when 
only dry sieve analysis is required) . 

(4) The washed sample and any separately 
washed large particles are oven dried and reweighed. 
The difference in weight between the original oven- 
dried sample and this weight sample is entered as a 
washing loss, included in the pan total (fig. 2-52) . 




(5) The washed and dried sample is dry-sieve 
tested as described in paragraph 2-255(4) through 
(15). 

(6) In recording the weights, the amount pass- 
ing the No. 200 sieve (weight retained in pan) is 
added to the washing loss to obtain the pan total 
weight. This pan total is added to the other fraction 
weights to compute the total weight after testing and 
the error in weights. 

2-27. Calculations and Curve Plotting 

The figures as recorded during the test are used to 
compute the percentages and then to compile a grain- 
size distribution curve. 

a. Computations. 

(1) The weight retained on each sieve times 100 
is divided by the total weight to give the partial per- 
cent retained : 



weight retained on sieve 
total sample weight 



X 100: 



: partial percent 
retained. 



(2) Add the percent retained for a particular 
sieve to the total of all the partial percent retained 
values for the larger sieves to give the total percent 
retained. The percent finer than any sieve size is 
found by subtracting the total percent retained from 
100. 

Example : weight retained on No. 10 sieve = 175.1 g. 



partial percent retained 



1Y5.1 
9T&6" 



X 100 = 17.9% 



Figure 2-58. PrewasMng a sample. 



total percent retained= 8.0 + 6.8 + 23.1 + 

24.6 + 17.9 = 80.4 
percent fines by weight=100 80.4= 

19.6% 

This value is recorded in the last column of figure 
2-52. 

(3) The total of the weights retained on the 
sieves plus the total passing the No. 200 sieve (pan 
total) are compared to the original weight. This error 
(2.7 g. in fig. 2-52) is within the allowable limits. 

6. Plotting. DD Form 1207 (Grain-size Distribu- 
tion Graph) (fig. 2-54) is used to show the sieve 
analysis results in a graphic form. The graph uses 
semilogarithmic coordinates. The grain sizes arc 
plotted on a logarithmic scale while the percentages 
are plotted on an arithmetical scale. The grain sizes 
may be plotted using the sieve number along the top 
edge or grain diameters (in millimeters) along the 
bottom edges. The percentage values from DD Form 
1206 are plotted and a smooth curve is drawn con- 
necting the plotted points. The curve for the sample 
FT-PI-I (fig. 2-52) is shown as one of the curves 
on figure 2-54. This is the final product of a sieve 
analyisis. 



5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-35 



Significance of Grain-size Distribution Curve. 
s curve affords ready visualization of the distri- 
Lon and range of particle sizes, and is particularly 
Dihil in determining the soil classification and usa- 
by of the soil as a foundation or construction 
erial. Coefficients of uniformity and curvature, 
1 in the Unified Soil Classification System to 
sify sands and gravels as to their gradation 
?acteristics, are determined from the grain-size 
ribution curve as follows : 

(1) The grain-size, in millimeters, which cor- 
>oiids to 10 percent passing on the grain-size dis- 
iition curve is called Hazerts effective size; it is 
gnated by the symbol D 10 . The uniformity co- 
ient (C u ) is the ratio between the grain diameter, 
millimeters, corresponding to 60 percent passing 
he curve (that is D 60 ) and the 10 percent passing 
). Hence, C U =DGO/DIO- 

(2) The coefficient of curvature, designated by 
symbol C c , is written C c = (D 3 o) 2 /(E>eoXD 10 ). 

and DQO have meanings previously assigned while 



D 30 is the grain diameter, in millimeters, correspond- 
ing to 30 percent passing on the grain size distribu- 
tion' curve. 

(3) For example, the uniformity coefficient and 
coefficient of curvature of the well-graded sand, SW, 
in figure 2-54 (DD Form 1207 (Grain Size Distri- 
bution Graph- Aggregate Grading Chart) ) is deter- 
mined from the grain-sized distribution curve as 
follows : 

(a) DGO reads 0.72 mm 

(b) D 30 reads 0.36 mm 

(c) D 10 reads 0.09 mm 



(d) C u = 



0.72 



=8.0 



0.09 

0.36X0.36 
0.72X0.09 



(f) Both C u and C meet criteria shown in 
table B-l (Appendix B) for well-graded sand, SW 
(C u greater than 6 and C c between 1 and 3) . 



GRAIN SIZE DISTRIBUTION GRAPH - AGGREGATE GRADING CHART 


m I?J<,H69 


FRAUHCE THZATEff 


100 

90 
80 
70 
60 
60 
40 
80 
20 
10 

10 




SIZE f/ncha.J 
1 i 
i 1 




ft 




US STA 

>IEVE NUt 
80 
4 


NDARO SIEVES 




WET MECHANICAL ANALYSIS 



10 
20 
30 


a i 

2i 1 


4 
8/8 4 




8 16 
10 2 


60 80 140 
60 100 200 




^ 






V 




1 

T-PJ 






~"\^ 






i i " 

-B3-3' 


K 


'FT 


1 


i 






























1 






s 


, h 


-i 






N 


1- 1 
































V 






\ 














\ 










^ 




T 
































~~\ 








\ ^ 










\ 


CP 










V 


jj 






























t-x 






S l 


ft- 




















\ 


-^ 




























> 




A 












N. , 















































\ 








\ 












' 












\ 












































\ 


\ 












V 
















































\ 








\ 












\ 












\ 




































x 


- 






\ 












\ 












\ 




























60 t 

60 
o 
o; 

70 *" 
80 
90 
100 














""*" ^ 


**fc 


\ 














\ 










\ 














































\- 










-. 






\ 










\ 














































t 


* 






*^- 


. 


^ 










\ 
















































\ 














V 








\ 


















































\ 












\ 


v 


X, 




















































X 


^ 












s 


S 


> 




V 


















































''x^ 














^ 


s. 


\ 


















































" 


-~^ 














"^ 


\ 






















































"~~ 


i 


L, 










I-J 






























































* ' ,-_ 


-t 


J_ 


( 


> 


























III 


1 






Illl 










1111 


1 , 




III 




























60 


20 10 6 




2 1 0.6 0.2 0.1 

GRAIN SIZE IN MILLIMETERS 


0.06 0.02 0.01 0.005 0.002 0.001 


AVATION NUMBER 




SAMPLE NUMBER 


NATURAL 
MOISTURE 


"T W P 


'f 


CLASSIFICATION 


REMARKS 





FT-Pl-i 








GW 


Wfei.i.-w &WKKJL; ^/TTTLC MT 


A- 


FT-35-i 








SP 


MX S*H*. UH,*.*.LY-t* 


4 


FT-B5-5 








SW 


C.O4KSE. S4H&; WfejLi. - &ZADZ.& 


^^S'')^^^^ 


ri &z^y%ouL**^ 


CHECKED yh(Sif0i*fur*) f\ 



FORM 

1 AUG 57 



Figure 2-54' Grain-sine distribution curves from sieve analysis. 



2-36 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



Section IV. SPECIFIC GRAVITY 



2-28. Introduction 

A general definition for specific gravity of a solid 
substance is the ratio of its weight to the weight of 
an equal volume of water. For exact analysis, the 
specifications require distilled water, and all measure- 
ments of water and solids to be made at stated tem- 
peratures. In dealing with soils, the specific gravity is 
necessary for certain soil tests, such as the wet me- 
chanical analysis. It is also necessary for computa- 
tions involving volume or weight relationships, such 
as computing the void ratio, percent saturation, and 
similar values. Specific gravity is not too useful as 
an aid to soil identification since it varies over a com- 
paratively narrow range for most soils. Specific 
gravity of a soil is largely dependent upon the min- 
erals from which it was derived and their specific 
gravity. However, as a general guide, some typical 
values can be given for soils based on their organic 
content. 

a. For most inorganic soils, specific gravity ranges 
from 2.60 to 2.80. Many within this group fall be- 
tween 2.65 and 2.75. Occasional soils derived from 
unusually heavy material may have a specific gravity 
as high as 3.00. 

b. Soils with large amounts of organic matter or 
porous particles (such as diatomaceous earths) have 
specific gravities below 2.60. Some range as low as 
2.00. 

2-29. Specific Gravity of Soil 

The specific gravity of a soil mass can be expressed 
in one of three different forms : the specific gravity of 
the solids, the apparent specific gravity, and the bulk 
specific gravity. 

a. The specific gravity of solids is the ratio of the 
weight in air of a given volume of soil solids to the 
weight of an equal volume of distilled water, both at 
a stated temperature. 

&. The apparent specific gravity of a soil is the 
ratio of the weight in air of a given volume of the im- 
permeable portion to the weight in air of an equal 
volume of distilled water at a stated temperature. The 
impermeable portion of a porous or permeable ma- 
terial such as soil grains includes the solid material 
plus the impermeable pores or voids within the 
particles. 

c. Bulk specific gravity is the ratio of the weight in 
air of a given volume of a permeable material (in- 
cluding permeable and impermeable void spaces) to 
the weight of an equal volume of distilled water at a 
stated temperature. 

d. Soil particles generally contain pore space or 
voids that may be large enough to be visible or may 
be of such minute size as to be undetectable even at 
high magnification. Specific gravity of solids thus 



can be measured only when particles are of such 
small size that all voids will be fiOed with the water 
used to measure the volumes. The test procedure 
must ensure that no air entrapped in pores is included 
in the measured particle volume. The test procedure 
for apparent specific gravity requires the application 
of a partial vacuum or boiling to remove air from 
pores. Then water can enter (permeate) these pores 
and such permeable pores are not measured as part 
of the given volume. However, most soil particles, 
even as small as sand grains, will contain pores that 
are impermeable under these conditions, hence are 
included in the measured volume, 'and cause the 
apparent specific gravity to be less than the specific 
gravity of solids. In measuring the sample volume 
for determination of bulk specific gravity, all pores 
that will hold capillary water are included since the 
particles are weighed in a saturated condition. 

2-30. Apparatus and Sample Selection 

a. Apparatus. Some of the apparatus used to per- 
form specific gravity tests (figure 2-55) includes: 

Balance, 200-gram capacity (not shown) 

Boxes, moisture 

Dishes, evaporating 

Filler, battery 

Flask, volumetric, 500-inl capacity (not in test 

set) 

Funnel, metal (not shown) 
Hotplate, electric 
Mortar and pestle 
Pump, vacuum (not shown) 
Scale, bench, 3 weigh beams, 2610-gram capacity 
Stirrer, soil dispersion (not in test set) 
Thermometer, general laboratory 

The test also requires some equipment that is not 
in the test set but must be procured from commercial 
sources. Otherwise, use expedient substitutes from 
local sources. 

6. Sample Selection. Particular care must be taken 
to obtain representative samples for a specific gravity 
test. 

(1) It is ususally easier to begin the test with 
an oven- dried sample. However, some soils, particu- 
larly those with a high organic content, are difficult 
to rewet. These should be tested at their natural water 
content first, if possible, and the oven-dried weight 
determined at the end of the test. 

(2) When the sample contains large and small 
particles, it should be separated on the No. 4 sieve. 
The specific gravity of the fine fraction and the ap- 
parent specific gravity of the coarse fraction are de- 
termined separately. A composite specific gravity for 
the entire sample is computed on the basis of the 
percent, by weight, of the fine and coarse material. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-37 



SCALE, BENCH, 21,100-GRAM 



FLASK, 

VOLUME! 1C 

500-ML 



SCALE, BENCH, 
2610 -GRAM 




HOT PLATE 



MORTAR & PESTLE 



FILLER, BATTERY 



EVAPORATING 



BOXES, 
MOISTURE, 
W/COVERS 



Figure 2-55. Apparatus for determining specific gravity of soils. 



(8) If the specific gravity is to be used in con- 
junction with a hydrometer analysis (section V), it 
must be determined only on the fraction which is 
required for hydrometer analysis. This fraction is 
denned as that which passes through the No. 200 
sieve. Note that the hydrometer is not included in 
the test set. 

2-31. Procedures 

The specific gravity test is made in one of two ways 
depending on whether the requirements call for soil 
at natural water content or oven-dried soil. The 
weight of the volumetric flask and water must be cali- 
brated over the range of temperatures likely to be 
encountered in the laboratory. Selection of a repre- 
sentative soil sample and its handling during trans- 
fers from container to container are very critical in 
this testing procedure. 

2-32. Calibration of the Voiumetric Flask 

Calibration consists of direct weighing of the flash 
and water over a selected temperature range. 

a. Determine the dry weight of the flask (W b ). 

6. Fill the flask with distilled water to slightly 
below the calibration mark. 



c. Place the filled flask into a water bath of about 
30 to 35 degrees centigrade and allow it to remain 
until the water and flask reach the bath temperature. 

d. Remove the flask from the bath and add or re- 
move a slight amount of water until the bottom of 
the meniscus is even with the calibration mark. Care- 
fully dry the outside of the flask and remove any 
excess moisture which may be adhering to the inside 
of the neck above water surface. 

e. Weigh the flask and water to the nearest 0.01 g. 
/. Immediately after the weighing, shake the flask 

gently to mix the water and immerse a thermometer 
to about mid-depth in the water. Eead and estimate 
the temperature of the water to the nearest 0.1 
centigrade. 

g. Repeat the procedures of 5 to / above, at ap- 
proximately the same temperature (30 to 35 C.)- 

Ii. Make two more determinations, 5 to g above; 
one at room temperature and another at approxi- 
mately 5 C cooler than room temperature. 

i. Plot the weight of flask and water (Wbw) against 
the temperature (T) for each determination and 
draw a smooth curve through the plotted points (fig. 
2-56). This is the calibration curve for the particu- 
lar flask. 



2-38 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 





















W faw G , WT OF BOTTLE* WATER 

A 0> O> 

fag ui w c#a A 
_S * < 




















































































































































































































































































































~^s 


s, 






























































S 


























V 


:9< 


10 


3- 


re 




























N; 


s 




















V 






























s 






























































s 






























































s 






























































s 






























































s 






























































s 






























































N 




























































y 


V .. 




























































S 






























































s 






























































S, 






























































s 




























































\ 






























































s 






























































S 




























































\ 


i_ 




























































\ 






























































\ 




























































> 






























































S 






























































v 




























































\ 






























































^ 




























































" 










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































15 20 25 30 35 40 

TEMPERATURE,!, C 

CALIBRATION CURVE FOR 
VOLUMETRIC FLASK NO. ONE 



Figure 2-56. Calibration curve for volumetric flasks. 



2-33. Testing 

Specific gravity tests are usually easier to make if 
they begin with an oven- dried sample. However, they 
may begin with the natural water content still pres- 
ent in the soil, and the over-dried weights obtained 
after the test has been performed. 

a. Soils With Natural Water Content. 

(1) Kecord all identifying information for the 
sample (DD form 1208 (Specific Gravity Test Data- 
Flask Method) , fig. 2-57) . 



(2) Select a representative sample of approxi- 
mately 50 to 80 g and place it in a dish. 

(3) Add sufficient distilled water to form a 
slurry while mixing with a spatula. 

(i) Transfer the slurry to the volumetric flask, 
and add distilled water until the flask is half full. 
Allow the suspension to soak 4 to 6 hours. Soaking 
is not required on clean sands. 

( 5 ) Connect the flask to a vacuum line and apply 
a vacuum of approximately 29.5 inches of mercury. 
Agitate the flask gently at intervals during the evac- 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 8*-3 



2-39 



SPECIFIC GRAVITY TEST DATA 
FLASK METHOD 



DATE 



ROJECT 



JOB 



EXCAVATION NUMBER 



3* 



ORMULAS 



W bws I Weight of flask + water + sample at TC 

W bw z Wei & ht of flask + water at TC (from calibration curve) 



Specific Gravity, G, =' 



bw ~ *bws 



SAMPLE NUMBER 



FLASK NUMBER 



7 



TARE NUMBER 



TEMPERATURE, T OF WATER IN FLASK WHEN WEIGHED (C) 



DRY WEIGHT OF SAMPLE + TARE (*.) 



WEIGHT OF TARE (tm.) 



DRY WEIGHT OF SAMPLE, W (g.) 



75/3 



^bw ( & m ) (from calibration carve) 



14731 



bws 



^85.25 



709.11 



28.35 



36.BO 



SPECIFIC GRAVITY, G 



2.71 



REMARKS 



TECIOUCIAN (Signature) 





COMPUTED BY (Signature) 



CHECKED BY (Signature) 




DDiT,,1208 



GPO 822837 



Figure 2-57. Data sheet, specific gravity test for soils. 



2-40 

nation process. Soils of high plasticity will require 
about 6 to 8 hours to remove the air; soils of low 
plasticity about 4 to 6 hours. A vacuum pump is not 
available in the test set. 

(6) Alternatively, entrapped air may be re- 
moved by boiling (slow rolling boil) the suspension 
gently for at least 10 minutes while occassionally 
"rolling" the flask to aid in the removal. Fast boiling 
may cause losses in the material being tested and 
should be avoided. Allow the flask and contents to 
cool before proceeding. 

(7) Fill the flask with de-aired, distilled water 
to about % inch below the 500-ml graduation and 
again boil to de-air the suspension. 

(8) To test the de-airing, observe the water sur- 
face in the flask and carefully remove the stopper. 
The suspension can be considered de- aired sufficiently 
when the water surface in the flask is lowered less 
than l / 8 inch during this process. 

(9) Using a pipette, add more water to the flask 
until the bottom of the meniscus is coincident with 
the calibration line on the neck of the flask. 

(10) Thoroughly dry the outside of the flask 
and any moisture above the water surface inside the 
flask. 

(11) Weigh the flask and contents to the nearest 
0.01 gram and record the information. This is 

(Wbw.). 

(12) Immediately after weighing, stir the sus- 
pension to assure even temperature distribution and 
immerse a thermometer to the middepth of the flask. 
Read and record the temperature to the nearest 
0.01 C. 

(13) Carefully transfer the contents of the flask 
to an evaporating dish. Rinse the flask with distilled 
water until the sample is entirely transferred to the 
evaporating dish. 

(14) Oven-dry the sample at a temperature of 
100 5 C. until it reaches a constant weight. Allow 
the soil to cool overnight in a desiccator to room 
temperature. 

(15) Determine the dry weight of the sample, 
(W s ), to the nearest 0.01 g and record the weight 
on the data sheet. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

5. Oven- Dried Soils. When the soil can be dried 
before the test, the procedure is as follows : 

(1) Record the information identifying the soil 
sample. 

(2) Oven-dry a representative fraction of ap- 
proximately 100 g of the sample to a constant weight 
at 110:5 C., and cool in the desiccator to room 
temperature. 

(3) Weigh the sample to the nearest 0.01 g and 
record the weight. 

(4) Transfer the soil to a volumetric flask taking 
care not to lose or leave any material during the op- 
eration. As a check, reweigh the soil and flask after 
the transfer. 

(5) Fill the flask about half full with de-aired, 
distilled water. 

( 6 ) Connect the flask to a vacuum line and apply 
a vacuum of approximately 29.5 inches of mercury 
for about 2 to 4 hours. Entrapped air may be removed 
as described in a(5) above, using the same precau- 
tions. 

(7) Continue with the remainder of the test as 
described in a (6) to (12) above. Procedures a (13) 
to (15) can be used as a check on the initial weights. 

2-34. Computations 

a. The test furnishes the following information 
(first colume in fig. 2-57) : 

(1) Weight of flask plus water plus solids at 
the test temperature (W b ws in grams). 

(2) Weight of tare (container) plus dry soil (in 
grams). 

(3) Weight of dry soil, (W a ), obtained by sub- 
tracting the weight of the container (tare) from (2) 
above. 

(4) Weight of flask plus water at test tempera- 
ture (Wbw in grams) obtained from the calibration 
curve (fig. 2-56). 

ft. To compute the specie gravity, (G s ), the follow- 
ing formula is used : 

W 8 K 



where K is a correction factor based on the density 
of water at 20 C. (table 2-1). 






TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

Table 2-1. Relative Density of Water and Correction Factor (K) at Various Temperatures 



2-41 



TempC. 


Relative density 


Correction factor, K 


TempC. 


Relative density 


Correction factor, K 


TerapC. 


Relative density 


Correction factor, K 


18. 


0. 99862 


1. 0004 


23.0 


0. 99756 


0. 9993 


28. 


0. 99626 


0. 9980 


. 1 


60 


4 


. 1 


54 


3 


. 1 


23 





.2 


58 


4 


.2 


51 


3 


.2 


20 





.3 


56 


3 


.3 


49 


3 


.3 


17 





.4 


54 


3 


.4 


46 


2 


.4 


14 


0. 9979 


.5 


52 


3 


. 5 


44 


2 


. 5 


11 


9 


.6 


50 


3 


. 6 


42 


2 


.6 


08 


9 


.7 


49 


3 


.7 


39 


2 


.7 


06 


8 


. 8 


47 


2 


. 8 


37 


1 


.8 


03 


8 


. 9 


45 


2 


.9 


34 


1 


. 9 


00 


8 


19. 


0. 99843 


1. 0002 


24. 


0. 99732 


0. 9991 


29.0 


0. 99597 


0. 9977 


. 1 


41 


2 


. 1 


29 


1 


. 1 


94 


7 


. 2 


39 


2 


.2 


27 





. 2 


91 


7 


. 3 


37 


1 


. 3 


24 





.3 


88 


6 


.4 


35 


1 


.4 


22 





.4 


85 


6 


.5 


33 


1 


. 5 


20 





.5 


82 


6 


.6 


31 


1 


. 6 


17 


0. 9989 


.6 


79 


6 


.7 


29 


1 


.7 


14 


9 


.7 


76 


5 


.8 


27 





. 8 


12 


9 


.8 


73 


5 


.9 


25 





. 9 


09 


9 


.9 


70 


5 


20.0 


0. 99823 


1. 0000 


25. 


0. 99707 


0. 9988 


30.0 


0. 99567 


0. 9974 


. 1 


21 





. 1 


04 


8 


. 1 


64 


4 


.2 


19 





. 2 


02 


8 


.2 


61 


4 


.3 


17 


0. 9999 


. 3 


0. 99699 


8 


.3 


58 


3 


.4 


15 


9 


.4 


97 


7 


.4 


55 


3 


.5 


13 


9 


. 5 


94 


7 


.5 


52 


3 


.6 


10 


9 


. 6 


91 


7 


.6 


49 


3 


.7 


08 


8 


. 7 


89 


7 


.7 


46 


2 


.8 


06 


8 


.8 


87 


6 


.8 


43 


2 


.9 


04 


8 


.9 


84 


6 


9 


40 


2 


21.0 


0. 99802 


0. 9998 


26.0 


0. 99681 


0. 9986 


31. 


0. 99537 


0. 9971 


.1 


00 


8 


. 1 


78 


6 


. 1 


33 


1 


.2 


0. 99798 


8 


. 2 


76 


5 


. 2 


30 


1 


.3 


96 


7 


. 3 


73 


5 


.3 


27 





.4 


93 


7 


.4 


70 


5 


.4 


24 





.5 


91 


7 


.5 


68 


4 


. 5 


21 





.6 


89 


7 


.6 


65 


4 


.6 


18 


0. 9969 


.7 


87 


6 


.7 


63 


4 


.7 


15 


9 


.8 


85 


6 


. 8 


60 


4 


.8 


12 


9 


.9 


83 


6 


.9 


57 


3 


.9 


09 


9 


22.0 


0. 99780 


0. 9996 


27.0 


0. 99654 


0. 9983 


32.0 


0. 99505 


0. 9968 


. 1 


78 


6 


. 1 


51 


3 


. 1 


02 


8 


.2 


75 


5 


.2 


48 


2 


.2 


0. 99499 


8 


.3 


73 


5 


.3 


46 


2 


.3 


96 


7 


.4 


70 


5 


.4 


43 


2 


.4 


93 


7 


.5 


68 


5 


. 5 


40 


2 


. 5 


90 


7 


.6 


65 


4 


.6 


37 


1 


.6 


86 


6 


.7 


63 


4 


. 7 


34 


1 


. 7 


83 


6 


.8 


61 


4 


.8 


32 


1 


.8 


80 


6 


.9 


58 


4 


.9 


29 


1 


.9 


77 


5 



Note. Relative density of water based on density of water at 4C. equal to unity. Data obtained from Smithsonian Tables, compiled by various authors. Correction 
factor, K, is found by dividing the relative density of water at the test temperature by the relative density of water at 20 C. 



2-35. Apparent and Bulk Specific Gravity 
Apparent specific gravity is defined in paragraph 
2-29&. Bulk specific gravity is defined in paragraph 
2-290. The test is described below. 

a. Apparatus. The apparatus must be set up in a 
special manner to perform this test. The apparatus 
required for a bulk specific gravity test consists of 
the following : 

( 1 ) Balance ( capacity of 5 kg or more ; sensitive 
to 0.1 g). 

(2) Mesh wire basket (approximately 8 inches 
in diameter and 8 inches high) . 

(3) Container (large enough to permit immers- 
ing the wire basket) . 

(4) Suitable equipment for suspending the wire 
basket from the center of the balance scale pan. 

(5) Thermometer (range to 50 C., graduated 
to 0.1). 

5. Sample Preparation. Bulk specific gravity is 
usually determined for the coarser materials (retained 
on the No. 4 sieve) of a soil sample. Large stones may 
be determined individually. 

(1) The soil sample should be separated on a 
No. 4 sieve and the material retained on the sieve 
used for the test. A representative sample of ap- 
proximately 5 kg is required. 

('2) The sample should not be oven-dried if at 
all possible. Air-drying is permissible. 

( 3 ) The sample should be washed to remove dust 
or coatings from the surface and immersed in water 
for 24 hours. 

(4) Just before making the test, the sample 
should be removed from the water and rolled in a 
large absorbent cloth to remove the excess surface 
moisture. Large particles may be wiped individually. 
The surfaces may still appear damp. 

(5) Care should be taken to avoid excessive 
evaporation during the surface drying. 

G. Test Procedures. The first two steps in the test 
should be performed as quickly as possible after the 
surface drying to avoid excessive evaporation. 

(1) Weigh the saturated surface-dry sample 
and record the value to the nearest 1.0 g. 

o 

(2) Place the sample into the wire mesh basket 
and immerse the basket and sample into the water 
container. 

(3) Hang the basket from the balance and sup- 
port the container so that the basket hangs freely in 
the water. 

(4) Determine the weight of the sample in water 
and record the value. 

NOTE 

The weight of the wire basket in water must 
be determined and substracted from the 
overall weight. 



(5) Measure and record the water temperature. 

(6) Oven-dry the sample at 110 5 C., to a 
constant weight. 

(7) After cooling the sample to room tempera- 
ture, weigh the sample and record the weight. 

d. Calculations. The test furnishes the dry soil 
weight ( oven- dried ), the saturated surface dry 
weight, and the weight of the sample in water. Table 
2-1 lists the bulk correction factor (K) based on 
water temperature. 

(1) To determine the bulk specific gravity 
(G m ) : 

weight of dry soil in air X K 

m weight of saturated sample in air weight of 
sample in water 

(2) To determine the apparent specific gravity 
(G a ) : 

weight of dry soil in air X K 

a weight of dry soil in air weight of sample in 

water 

(3) To determine the specific gravity (G) of an 
entire soil sample (larger and smaller than the No. 4 
sieve) from the component determinations : 

100 

Q. = 

% passing No. 4 sieve 4- % retained on No. 4 sieve 



G a 



G a 



e. Expedient Methods. The methods described 
above are the laboratory tests performed to determine 
the specific gravity of a soil sample. On occasion, the 
accuracy of these methods is not required or a quick 
determination is requested. The following factors 
should be considered : 

(1) For instance, the water density correction 
factor (K) and the associated water temperature 
measurement (c(5) above) may be ignored in bulk 
specific gravity determination (d above). 

(2) At times, there are stones present in the 
soil sample. An expedient method to determine the 
specific gravity of these particles is to tie a string or 
thread around the circumference and suspend the 
particle from the hook of a beam balance and weigh 
it to the nearest 0.1 gram (fig. 2-58). Note that this 
limits the minimum size of particle that can be tested 
by this method since it must be large enough to be tied 
with a string. The particle may come from an oven- 
dried or saturated sample. A can, glass beaker, or 
container of water is set on a platform below the 
balance and the particle is immersed in the water 
(fig. 2-59). The suspended particle is not permitted 
to rest on the bottom nor to touch the sides of the 
container. The sample is weighed again to the nearest 
0.1 g. The weight of the thread or string is considered 
negligible and is disregarded in the calculations. The 
specific gravity (G a ) is calculated as follows : 



weight of sample in air 



8 weight of sample in air weight of sample in 
water 

(3) A simple, quick method uses only a grad- 
uated cylinder. The air-dried sample is weighed to 
the nearest 0.1 g. The graduate is filled with water 
to a predetermined volume. The sample is submerged 
in the water and the change in the volume of water is 
noted. The change in water volume reading (in cubic 
centimeters) is equal to the volume of the sample. The 
same number (in grams) is the weight of an equal 
volume of water. The average specific gravity 
is computed as follows : 

p __ air-dry weight of sample 

weight of equal volume of water 

(4) When a sample is too large to be submerged 
in a graduated cylinder, another method can be used. 
A can or container large enough to take the sample 
is placed in a pan that will catch any overflow. The 
can is filled with water to the top. The air-dried and 
weighed sample is submerged in the can and the over- 
flow volume of water caught in the pan is measured. 
This value converted to grams is the weight of a 
volume of water equal to the volume of the sample. 
The formula for computing ( Gavg. ) is : 

C = weight of air-dried sample (in grams) 

weight of an equal volume of water (in 
grams) 




Figure 2-58. Expedient method of determining specific 
gravity: voeiffhing in air. 




Figure 2-59. Expedient method of determining specific 
gravity: weighing in water. 



Section V. HYDROMETER ANALYSIS 



2-36. Description 

a. Hydrometer analysis is based on Stokes' law 
which relates terminal velocity of a free-falling 
sphere in a liquid to its diameter. The relation is 
expressed by the following equation, 



V=- 



18n 



D 2 



where : 



V= terminal velocity 
G s = specific gravity of solids 
G w = specific gravity of the liquid in which the 
sphere is falling 

n= viscosity of the liquid 

D diameter of the sphere 

It is assumed that Stokes' law can be applied to a 
mass of dispersed soil particles of various shapes and 
sizes. Larger particles settle more rapidly than the 
smaller ones. Beginning with a uniform dispersion 
of particles suspended through the liquid, after a 
time all particles larger than Diameter D will have 
settled below a depth H R , where H R =Vt. Applica- 
tion of Stokes' law permits calculation of grain sizes 

418-3SO< 71 4 



in silts and clays, assuming an equivalent spherical 
shape of particle. 

6. The density of water with the soil particles 
dispersed in it depends upon the concentration of soil 
particles. If the suspension is allowed to stand, the 
soil particles will settle and the density will be de- 
creased. The hydrometer is the instrument used to 
measure the density of the suspension at a known 
depth below the surface. The density measurement, 
together with knowledge of the specific gravity of 
the soil particles, determines the percentage of 
dispersed soil particles in suspension at the time and 
depth of measurement. The depth at which the meas- 
urement is mad is found by calibrating the hydrom- 
eter. Stokes' law is used to calculate the maximum 
equivalent particle diameter for the material in 
suspension at this depth and for the elapsed time of 
settlement. A series of density measurements at 
known depth in the suspension and at known times 
of settlement thus provides determination of the per- 
centages of particles finer than the diameter given by 
Stokes' law for each time. Thus, the series of readings 
will reflect the amount of different sizes of particles 
in the fine-grained soils. 



2-44 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-37. Apparatus 

a. Equipment for performing this test ((1) to (4) 
below) is not in the soil test set. The apparatus re- 
quired includes: 

(1) Hydrometer (calibrated at 20 C. grad- 
uated in specific gravity; range 0.995 to 1.040, ac- 
curacy 0.001 ; or graduated in grams per liter, range 
to 50, accuracy 1) . 

(2) Dispersion apparatus (or stirrer) to keep 
the soil particles dispersed. 

(3) Sedimentation cylinder of glass (essenti- 
ally 18 inches high, 2^ inches in diameter, and 
marked for a volume of 1000 ml.) . 

(4) Centigrade thermometer range to 50 C., 
and accurate to 0.5 C. 

(5) Timing device (watch or clock) with sec- 
ond hand. 

( 6) Balance, sensitive to 0.1 g. 

(7) Oven. 

5. A sheltered location for taking readings is re- 
quired. The sedimentation cylinders must not be 
disturbed during the test. A steady bench or a level 
floor in a location having adequate light for taking 
readings should be provided. 

2-38. Preparation 

Prior to making tihe test, the hydrometer must be 
calibrated and a meniscus correction determined. A 
dispersion agent should be acquired. 

a. Hydrometer Calibration. The hydrometer must 
be calibrated to determine its true depth in terms of 
the hydrometer reading. 

( 1) The volume of the bulb is determined either 
by measuring the volume of 'water displaced or by 
weighing the hydrometer. Since the specific gravity 
of the hydrometer is about 1, the weight in grams 
may be recorded as the volume in cubic centimeters. 

(2) Compute the area of the graduate (A). 
Measure the distance between two graduations. The 
volume between two measured marks is divided by 
the measured distance to obtain the area. 

(3) Measure the distance from the lowest grad- 
uation to the other major graduation (R) . 

(4) Measure the distance from the neck of the 
bulb to the lowest graduation. The distance HI, cor- 
responding to a reading, R, equals the sum of the 
two distances measured in (3) and (4). 

(5) Measure the distance from the neck to the 
'ip of the bulb. This value is h, the height of the bulb, 

d h/2 locates the center of volume of a symmetrical 
.b. If a nonsymmetrical bulb is used, the center 



of volume can be determined with sufficient accuracy 
by projecting the shape of the bulb onto a sheet of 
paper and locating the center of gravity of the pro- 
jectedarea. 

(6) The measured values are substituted in the 
following formula : 



where : 

H R =true height of suspension above the center 
of the hydrometer bulb (in cm). 

HI = distance corresponding to the reading on 

the hydrometer (in cm). 
h= height of hydrometer bulb (in cm). 

V R = volume of hydrometer (in cc). 
A = inside area of graduate (in sq cm). 

(7) By plotting the true height (H R ) against 
the reading R for the major graduations, a calibra- 
tion curve can be drawn. This relation is essentially 
a straight line for a hydrometer having a stream- 
lined shape. 

&. Menistnis Correction. Hydrometers are calibrat- 
ed to read correctly at the surface of the liquid. Soil 
suspensions are not transparent and the reading is 
made not at the surface but where the upper rim of 
the meniscus touches the glass. A correction for this 
meniscus (C M ) must be determined using clear dis- 
tilled or demineralized water. This correction will be m 
constant for a given hydrometer. The hydrometer is r 
immersed in the water and the difference in height 
between the surface and the meniscus carefully de- 
termined. This value (C M ) is approximately 0.5, 
which may be used for routine work where greater 
accuracy is not required. 
G. Preparation of Sample. 

(1) The soil is separated on the No. 10 sieve, 
and the percentage finer than this sieve is determined. 
Samples for hydrometer analysis are taken from rep- 
resentative material finer than the No. 10 sieve. 

( 2 ) The approximate size of sample for hydrom- 
eter analysis varies according to the type of soil being 
tested : 



Soil type 

Fat clays 

Lean clays and silty soils 
Sandy soils 



Dry weight, g. 

30 

50 

75 



(3) The exact dry weight of the sample in sus- 
pension must be determined either before or after 
the test. For economy of time and labor, it is prefer- 
able to oven-dry and weigh the sample before the 
test. In this case, any loss of material during the test 
will uffect the results. Also, for some clays, drying 
may cause permanent changes in the grain sizes. I 



TM 5-53Q/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

Samples of such soils should be preserved at natural 
water content, if possible, and tested before oven- 
drying. The dry weight is determined at the conclu- 
sion of the hydrometer analysis. 

d. Dispersing Agent. Very fine soil grains in sus- 
pension normally tend to flocculate (adhere to each 
other in clusters) and to settle through the solution 
as a larger unit. This can lead to errors in the analysis. 
( 1 ) To prevent flocculation, a dispersing agent is 
added to the solution which keeps the individual 
particles separated. In most instances, 15 ml of a 
dispersing agent solution is adequate. An addi- 
tional 15 ml can be added a second or third time if the 
flocculation continues. The following agents have 
been found satisfactory for most types of soil and are 
listed in an approximate order of effectiveness : 



Dispersing agent 


Stock solution 


Concen- 
tration 


g./liter 


Sodium trip olyphosphate - 


0. 4N 
0. 4N 
0. 4N 
0. 4N 


29 
36 
31 
41 


Sodium poly phosphate _ -- 


Sodium te trap hosp hate (Quadrof os) .* 
Sodium hexametaphosphate (Calgon).**_ 



"Trade names. 

**Calgon is buffered with NajCOa. 

(2) Sodium silicate should not be used. Phos- 
phate solutions are somewhat unstable and should not 
be stored for extended periods of time. 

(3) A dispersing agent increases the liquid den- 
sity and a correction must be made to the observed 
reading. The correction, (C a ), is determined by first 
adding the amount of dispersing agent to be used 
to & graduate partially filled with distilled or de- 
mineralized water. The graduate is then filled to the 
1000 ml mark and a hydrometer reading taken. The 
correction factor, (C d ) is the difference between this 
reading and another taken in pure distilled or de- 
mineralized water. 

e. Other Considerations. 

(1) Temperature changes can effect a hydrom- 
eter test. The location for the test should be selected 
where temperature variations are at a minimum. The 
solution should be kept away from heat sources such 
as radiators and sunlight, and where temperatures 
can change such as near open windows. 

(2) Highly organic soils require oxidation of 
organic matter before performing the hydrometer 
test. Oxidation is accomplished by mixing a solution 
of 30 percent hydrogen peroxide with the sample. 

(3) If oven-dry weight is required before the 
test, the sample should be dried in the oven, allowed 



2-45 

to cool to room temperature, and weighed to the near- 
est 0.1 g. This dry weight should be recorded. 

2-39. Procedures 

The hydrometer test consists of the following steps : 
a. Kecord all identifying information for the sam- 
ple (fig. 2-60). DD Form 1794 (Hydrometer Analy- 
sis) will be reproduced locally for Army us on 
8" X 10i/ 2 " paper (image size Z4/10"X9 5/6") (fig. 
2-60) . Supplies of DD Form 1794 for the other serv- 
ices will be requisitioned through normal publications 
supply channels. 

&. Record the meniscus correction, (C m ) 5 and the 
dispersing agent correction, (C d ), if an agent is to 
be used. 

c. Determine or estimate the specific gravity of 
solids and record this value. 

d. Place the sample in a numbered dish and add 
sufficient distilled or demineralized water until the 
sample is submerged. Add the dispersing agent. Al- 
low the sample to soak overnight or until all soil 
lumps have disintegrated. 

e. Add the oxidizing agent to the sample if it is 
highly organic. If only a small amount of organic 
matter is present, omit the oxidizing agent. 

/. Transfer the soil-water slurry from the dish to 
a dispersing cup, washing (with distilled water) any 
residue in the dish into the cup. Add distilled water 
to the cup until the surface is 2 to 3 inches below 
the top. (Too much water will splash out during the 
mixing and carry out some of the soil sample.) Place 
the cup into the dispersing machine and mix for 1 
to 10 minutes depending on the plasticity of the soil ; 
the lower the plasticity, the shorter the mixing time. 
g. Transfer the mixed suspension into a 1000-ml 
sedimentation cylinder and add distilled or 
demineralized water until the volume equals 1000 ml. 
At this time, the suspension should be brought to the 
temperature expected to prevail during the test. 

h. One minute before starting the test, hold the 
graduate in one hand, and place the other hand or 
a suitable rubber cap over the open end to act as a 
stopper. Shake the suspension vigorously for a few 
seconds to raise any sediment from the bottom of 
graduate into suspension. Continue the agitation for 
the remainder of the minute by turning the cylinder 
upside down and back. In some cases, the sediment at 
the bottom may have to be loosened with a glass rod 
before shaking. Figure 2-61 illustrates a type of hand 
agitator which may be used instead of shaking. This 
agitator prevents the accumulation of sediment at 
the base and on the sides of the graduate. It is moved 
down through the suspension for the 1 minute. 



HYDROMETER ANALYSIS 




PROJECT 

/_ A- !< A /V/> >v f-\ S" 


DATE 


BORING NO. , SAMPLE OR SPECIMEN NO. 

,'.; "/"/<. ' ' ; -%. $ 


C UASSIFIC ATION 

<? ri 




DISH NO. 


GRADUATE NO. 

/ 7^ 7 A 


HYDROMETER NO. 


DISPERSING AGENT USED ., . ." 
sV O /(/' &" 


QUANTITY 


DISPERSING AGENT CORRECTION 
Cd = 


MENISCUS CORRECTION 




TIME 


ELAPSED 
TIME 
MIN 


TEMP 
C 


HYDRO. 
READING 


CORRECTED 
READING 
(R) 


PARTICLE 
DIAMETER 
(D) , mm 


TEMP 
CORREC- 
TION 
(m) 


R + m 


PERCENT FINER 


PARTIAL. 


TOTAL. 


9:3*"' 


Q 
















4? / 

"5 ie> 


i 


#3.3 


.V/-3"" 


33L>t 


;<// 


*- /. 


J^'6 


/o& 


37 


2 


.3^3 


^^,^- 


L-Jj3 <5 


. 30 


<& 


3 ' (- 


Q<? 




3*1 





3-3.3 


d?.^ ^ 


m>3 


* Afll 


> (* 


SO i 1 


97 




*r$ 


//r 


Ji*f-3> 


J.{.J' 


y 7 j ft 

(, / U 


- C // 


z 


3.7.* 


jf /*\ 




/O, OS 


3o 


M'7 


3, C 


SL3.S- 




/. y 


3. 4 -f *? 


Q" / 




^r 


&d 


-U. 7 


.-s-A.r 


<& 


ct>&- 


/ 7 


3>V 


1& 




//.'#.r 


/d 


7< & 


ysy o 


/ 1 * 5" 


A/iVD 


h L 


3.1 * / 


>$ 




/,. sr 


J.V& 


A&d 


/ 7, 


/7o" 


, afi&q 


h% 


/9>3 


&>& 




/ * *-j/''j 


/w) 


jta>& 


/6>*t) 


/^o'"" 


* O Q J ^ 


*"/j<y 


/6'<S 


d^" 




















































































X S 

l"i 


Dish plus dry soil 


^-'^y ; X/ 


Specific grav 

8 fif 
Corrected hy 


ity of solids, 

z> ^<f 

drome ter reading (R) 

er reading (R') + '-j + ^ m 
lographic chart for solution of Stokes' ' 


Dish 


//) S\ 
/ C- ' C- 


Dry soil *o 


j(J ? _, ^/ 


The particle diameter (D) is calculated from Stokes' equation using corrected hydrometer reading. Use non 
equation. 



Hydrometer graduated in specific gravity 



Partial percent finer = 



100 



G. - 1 



fK H- mj 



Hydrometer graduated in grams per liter 



Partial percent finer = 






(R + m ) 



W 8 = total oven-dry wt of sample used for combined 
analysis 



w o = oven-dry wt in grams of soil used for hydrometer 
analysis 

Wj = oven-dry wt of sample retained on No. 200 sieve 



'otal percent finer = partial percent finer X 



REMARKS 



ECHNICIAN 



COMPUTED BY 



CHECKED BY 



X" 



Figure 2-60. DD Form 11/94 Hydrometer analysis data sheet, sample. 



TM 5-530/NAWAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-47 



HYDROMETER ANALYSIS 


PROJECT 


DATE 


BORING NO. SAMPLE OR SPECIMEN NO. 


C LAS SIFIC ATION 


DISH NO. 


GRADUATE NO. 


HYDROMETER NO. 


DISPERSING AGENT USED 


QUANTITY 


DISPERSING AGENT CORRECTION 


MENISCUS CORRECTION 


TIME 


ELAPSED 
TIME 
M!N 


TEMP 
C 


HYDRO. 
READING 


CORRECTED 
READING 
W 


PARTICLE 
DIAMETER 
(D) , mm 


TEMP 
CORREC- 
TION 
(m) 


R + m 


PERCENT FINER 


PART1A L 


TOTAL 


























































































































































































































































































WEIGHT 
IN 
GRAMS 


Dish plus dry soil 




Specific gravity of solids, 


Dish 




Corrected hy 

= hydromet 
ding. Use non 


drometer reading (R) 

er reading (R f ) + C d + C m 
lographic chart for solution of Stokes 1 

-dry wt of sample used for combined 
/t in grams of soil used for hydrometer 
/t of sample retained on No. 200 sieve 


Dry soil 


W 




The particle diameter (D) is calculated from Stokes' equation using corrected hydrometer rea 
equation. 

Hydrometer graduated in specific gravity w 


Partial percen 
Hydromete 


t finer - s X ,,, fjf 


+ m) 


W 


analysis 

= oven-dry v 
analysis 

= oven-dry v 


r i ' W 
G s - 1 w o 

r graduated in grams per liter 


Partial percen 
Total percent 


t finer = i 


(R + m) 
al percent fin 


W s - U^ 




=' W 


REMARKS 


TECHNICIAN 


COMPUTED BY 


CHECKED BY 



DD, F ,r,,1794 



A *n rtl/iioi a 



2-48 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM I 



2-28 

is placed 
runs dov 
sample, 
spreadii) 
mately i 
is insert 
canvas) 
dividing 
stick is 
stick is 
right 'ai 
dividing 
diagona 
careful 
maininj 
shovelfi 
is repes 
desired 
6. St 
tering ' 
canvas 



V ""' 

* 



Figt 



-BRASS PLATE 
if "dia- thick 

B ot 




19' 



-BRASS ROD ~ dm 




Loop for finger 



< ,! tit. Ittintt ittjitttti: 



I After 1 minute of agitation, sot the. cylinder em 
a table. If foam has developed on the surface _of 
the suspension, removo it by touching it lightly with 
a .piece of soap. Slowly imme.rse the, hydrometer in 
the liquid, wait about 20 to Jif> .second*, ivnd take a 
reading. Care must bo taken in inserting uiul remov 
ing the hydrometer to pre.vent disturbing the 
suspension. 

j. Observe and record hydrometer readings after 
1 and 2 minutes have, elapsed from the time the 
cylinder was set down. Make nil readings at. tin- top 
of the meniscus. As cae.h reading is completed, re 
move the hydrometer carefully and plan* if in n eon 
tainer of clean water. Tho. soil muteriul will st-tth* 
on or adhere to the hydrometer if it is left in the 
suspension and canst", an error in the rending. 

k. Repeat the readings and nn'ord them utter 
elapsed times of 4, 15, and M minutes and 1, :I t -t, 
and 24 hours. Remove, the> liydromc'ti-r from flu- 
suspension 'after each reading and place it. in u ^ nu { 
uate of clean water. When the. hydrometer nnnlv.-is 
is used for soil classification pnrixtst-s, rlie ! unit 
24-hour reading may not be, rwjuirwl. 

I With hydrometers graduated to read grams per 
liter, record the actual reading. With hydrometers 
graduated to read specific, gravity, read only thi last 
two figures and estimate, the third. Uwonl the spurilir 
gravity indicated reading, minus l.dtui. mnlfiplc.i hy 
1000. For example.' a reading of l.OiWri is rwordeil as 
22.5 (1.0225 -1.000=. 0225; .Oi&V/ KHHJ- ii2.5). 

m. At the end of the, 2-miuute, hydrometer rending 
a-nd after each subsequent reading*, place, u thinami- 
eter in the suspension and record th temperature 



u.:' ( ', Te-wiHTuf ure < < hunges will affect th 



;j. I f t !m dry weight, had not heen 
fully wu.'.h all of the suspension into an cvnpur 
tlish. Ovi-n tiry the. material, allow it to ('(! 
tletenuiu % thf sample weight. 

2-40. Computations 

The recon lel re:uliu/^s must he, corrected am 
\erted into si/.e tlist rihution of the particles. 

>i. i 'urrff/r'tl Hijtlrtnnrtrr HwtdingR (K), Alg 
.-silly iultl tin* tiispei-sing agent correc-tum, 
tjmra :! :is//) and tlih meniscus correction 
{para :! :;sAj to the ac.tnul hydrome.ter n-a 
iK'). The result is (he corrected hydroinctcT 
iu^fs, (III. 

?,. I'.irfirtt- /H,iwft'r.'V\w purticlft diameter 
fiiliitctl for esu'h n-atling on the. hasiwof Htok^' 
firm usiutf the nniuopraph shown in figure. 'J > 
hyinuueter ralihration (pani a-38fl) funiH: 
tnii- height t!I M ) <>u the hy<lrometer. The, U-.- 
le.viitfiieil for the part ienlar hydrometer uawl 
h^f. The iMmujgrnph etmtahw thft key which 
tlie steps to follow in romputing the diameter, 
earh rca.tmg. I'lun- a straightedge, (enginw 
uutflt' or tran-purent scale) on the specific gra 
solhls (point 1) and the tempe.raturo at the i 
muling {'point it) and mark the, intersection 
tine on the A neale (point .'I). Kefer to the h; 
eter nililimticin for the true, height (II R ) ant 
on the srah- t point 4). I r sing the straightcdj 
in.,-f point } uiul the time, of reading (point 5 
rate point t the velocity of settlement PI 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-49 



a 'ONiavaa asiawoaaxH 



, pm.pmrimnnrjiiupmjnnp.i,! ,,,,|, ,,,. |, ,i | 

WO Nl' a HlHSI3H 



\ LO 



\ / 





11111 'y|'^|l/> l |' l '[','vl"i"h | f|^i|. t .|. i . rWi'iliViW''^'!"'"! 



t '3WI1 



"* QN003S a3d WO Nl 
sainNIW , '.-AXI0013A 

i|i|i|i|i|i|i|....i....| i iiiiiiiiiiiiiiinui,,,,! Mi|Mi|i'|i|lii|....|....| Mimi|ihiiri|....|....| Mi|iTi|iii|iii|....|....| MM 



ww NI 'o ' 



Q -H-H- 



I. ...... .In... u|... Mill 



Z S<S,-g< 

,, S uj o: ui > . 
" uj a. u. h i - 



p Q 
* K 



Figure 2-62. Stokes' la 



straightedge on points 3 and 6 and read the particle 
diameter (D) (point 7) in mm at the intersection of 
this line and the scale of diameters. Record diameter 
so found 011 the data sheet. 

c. Percent Finer. The grain-size distribution is 
computed as a percent finer. To make the computa- 
tion, the temperature correction factor (m), must be 
added. The temperature at each reading is used to de- 
termine the correction factor from table 2-2. This 
factor is added algebraically to the corrected hy- 
drometer reading, and the total (R+m) is recorded. 
To complete the computation, the following formulas 
are used : 

( 1 ) Hydrometer calibrated in specific gravity. 
Percent finer (by weight) = 

G s 100 

"GFT WT 

(2) Hydrometer calibrated in grains per liter. 
Percent finer (by weight) = 

100 

w7 (R+m) 

Where: 

G s = specific gravity of solids 
WB oven-dry weight of soil (in grams) 
R+m= corrected hydrometer reading plus 
temperature correction. 



Table 2-2. Temperature Correction Factor, m, For Hydrometer 
Analysis 



c. 


P. 


m 


c. 


F. 


m 


14. 


57. 2 


-0.9 


24. 


75. 2 


+ 0. 8 


14. 5 


58. 1 


-0.8 


24. 5 


76. 1 


+ 0. 9 


15. 


59. 


-0. 8 


25. 


77.0 


+ 1.0 


15. 5 


59. 9 


-0..7 


25. 5 


77.9 


+ 1. 1 


16. 


60.8 


-0. 6 


26. 


78. 8 


+ 1.3 


16. 5 


61. 7 


-0. 6 


26. 5 


79. 7 


+ 1.4 


17.0 


62. 6 


-0. 5 


27. 


80. 6 


+ 1.5 


17. 5 


63. 5 


-0.4 


27. 5 


81.5 


+ 1.6 


18.0 


64. 4 


-0. 4 


28.0 


82. 4 


+ 1.8 


18. 5 


65.3 


-0. 3 


28. 5 


83.3 


+ 1.9 


19. 


66.2 


-0. 2 


29.0 


84. 2 


+ 2. 1 


19. 5 


67. 1 


-0. 1 


29.5 


85. 1 


+ 2. 2 


20. 


68. 


0.0 


30. 


86. 


+ 2. 3 


20. 5 


68.9 


+ 0. 1 


30. 5 


86.9 


+ 2. 5 


21. 


69. 8 


+ 0.2 


31. 


87. 8 


+ 2. 6 


21. 5 


70.7 


+ 0. 3 


31.5 


88.7 


+ 2. 8 


22. 


71.6 


+ 0. 4 


32.0 


89.6 


+ 2. 9 


22. 5 


72. 5 


+ 0. 5 


32. 5 


90. 5 


+ 3. 


23. 


73. 4 


+ 0. 6 


33. 


91.4 


+ 3. 2 


23. 5 


74. 3 


+ 0.7 


33. 5 


92. 3 


+ 3. 3 








34. 


93. 2 


+ 3. 5 



2-41. Presentation of Results 

Hydrometer analysis separates the fine particles of a 
soil into a grain-size distribution. The percentages 
can be plotted on a grain-size distribution chart (DD 
form 1207, fig. 2-54) using the particle diameters 
(D), and the percentages. 



Section VI. DECANTATION OR WET MECHANICAL ANALYSIS 



1-42. Principles 

a. The grain-size distribution of a fine grained soil 
using hydrometer analysis obviously requires labora- 
tory facilities and experienced personnel. The mili- 
tary engineer can identify the characteristics with 
greater accuracy using Atterberg limits or plasticity 
tests rather than grain-size distribution methods. 
However, when analyzing a soil for frost suscepti- 
bility, a wet mechanical analysis or decantation test 
may be used as an expediency to determine the per- 
centage of material smaller than 0.02-mm in di- 
ameter. A soil is considered to be frost susceptible if 
it contains 3 percent or more by weight of particles 
smaller than 0.02-mm in diameter. 

5. The principle of wet mechanical analysis is 
identical to the one used in hydrometer analysis. The 
basis is Stokes' law which expresses the rate of fall 
of a particle through a liquid. In general, sedimenta- 
tion occurs when a suspended solid separates from a 
liquid and falls to the bottom. The viscosity of the 
liquid will affect the rate of fall and is a definite 
factor in the sedimentation process. Larger particles 
settle out faster than the smaller particles, and with 



similar sizes, the greater the difference in specific 
gravity between the solids and the liquid, the moro 
rapid the settling. 

G. If a single sphere is allowed to fall through a 
liquid of infinite extent, its velocity will increase', 
under the influence of gravity. However, within a f ew 
seconds, a constant terminal velocity is reached and. 
maintained as long as the conditions are unchanged. 
This is the relation expressed by Stokes' law (para 2 -- 
36#). For general application and simpler computa- 
tions, certain assumptions are made. These introduce* 
errors which may be self -compensating or may re- 
quire empirical corrections. These errors are a result 
of the following factors : 

(1) Particles are assumed to be truly spherical 
but they seldom if ever attain this shape. 

(2) The extent of the liquid (Stokes' law is 
based on water) is not infinite and particles tend to 
influence neighboring particles. Also, the sides of the 
container holding the liquid present a restricting in- 
fluence on particles in their proximity. 

(3) An average specific gravity is used for the 
particles whereas some of them may vary consid- 
erably from this average. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3' 

(4) The temperature of the suspension must be 
assumed constant throughout its use which may not 
be true. An increase in temperature reduces the 
liquid's viscosity and increases the rate of fall. 

2-43. Apparatus and Sample Preparation 

a. The equipment needed for the test may be avail- 
able in the soil test set or may have to be improvised. 

b. The standard equipment, some olf which is illus- 
trated in figure 2-63, includes : 

(1) Balance. 
( ; 2) Spatula, 

(3) Electric or Coleman stove. 

(4) Graduated cylinder, 100-cc capacity. 
('5) Evaporating dish. 

(6)> Metal 'boxes, as required. 
(Y) Stopwatch. 

( 8 ) Pestle, rubber-tipped or ceramic. 

(9) Thermometer. 

( 10) No. 10 and No. 200 sieves. 



2-51 

(11) Battery filler. 

c. Other equipment which should be available 
includes 

(1) Stirrer, soil dispersion. 

(2) Sedimentation cylinder. 

d. When the equipment is not available and has to 
be improvised, the following are some of the methods 
that may be used : 

(1) Rubber covered pestle improvised by plac- 
ing a portion of an inner tube over a hardwood 
handle. 

(2) Sedimentation cylinder improvised from 
a piece of 2-inch steel pipe about 2 feet long or from 
any other cylinder of about the same diameter (fig. 
2-64). Note that the figure indicates welding or 
soldering the base. However, the end of the cylinder 
may be threaded and capped or, under expedient con- 
ditions, may be- covered with overlapping layers of 
water resistant tape to form a watertight joint. The 




MARK LINE ON INSIDE 

OF CYLINDER AT 

1000-CC LEVEL 



2" STEEL PIPE 



WELD OR SOLDER 



STEEL BASE 
APPROX. '/4 




2" APPROX 



20 CM OR 7.9" 



DRILL 3/32" DIAMETER DRAWOFF 
PORT AND CUT WOOD PLUG TO FIT 



IMPROVISED SEDIMENTATION CYLINDER 
FOR WET MECHANICAL ANALYSIS 



Figure. 2-6Jf. Improvised sedimentation cylinder. 

plug for the % 2 -inch hole in the wall may also 'be 
improvised by pointing a wood twig. 
(3) Proceed as follows : 

(a) Seal or cap one end. 

(&) Pour 1000 cc of water into the cylinder 
and mark this level on the inside of the cylinder. 

(c) Transfer and mark this same position on 
the outside. Measure 20 cm (7.9 inches) below this 
mark and drill a % 2 -inch hole into the cylinder wall. 

(d) Cut a wood or cork plug to fit the hole. 

e. A deflocculating or dispersing agent (para 2- 
38d) is necessary to prevent the small particles from 
sticking to each other and yielding erroneous results. 
Prepare this solution in the proportion of 15 to 50 g 
of dispersing agent per liter of distilled water. The 
concentration of the solution should be higher for 
highly plastic soils. 

/. The size of the sample should be proportional 
to the sand content of the soil. Select 30 to 50 g (dry 
weight) for clays and silts and 50 to 150 g (dry 
weight) for sandy soils. Since the test is made only 
on the portion of a sample which passes the No. 10 
sieve, the sample must be separated using the No. 10 
sieve. Determine the specific gravity of the sample. 
This will be used in the test. 

2-44. Procedure, 0.02-mm Fraction 

a. Oven-dry the sample that has passed through 
the No. 10 sieve, and cool and weigh it to the nearest 
0.01 g. Record this weight (W ) . 

6. Pulverize the dry sample with the rubber cov- 
ered pestle. Do not crush the individual particles. 

G. Transfer the sample to an evaporating dish and 
mix it with enough water to form a thin slurry. 

d. Add 10 to 20 cc otf dispersing solution, and al- 
low the mixture to soak until all the particles are 
thoroughly separated. This should range from about 
2 hours for a nonplastic soil to 24 hours for very 
plastic clays with high dry strength. 

e. Transfer the soaked slurry to a dispersion stirrer 
cup, washing out the dish carefully with the battery 
filler to get all of the sample (fig. 2-65) . 




Figure 2-65. Transferring slurry to stirrer cup. 

/. Stir the solution for not more than 1 minute. If 
a stirrer is not available, the mixing should be done 
by hand being careful not to spill any of the solution. 

g. Transfer the mixed solution to the sedimenta- 
tion cylinder, carefully washing all the material out 
of the cup with the battery filler (fig. 2-66). Add 
water to bring the mixture up to the 1000-cc mark 
and measure the temperature of the solution. 

Ji. Using the palm of one hand as a stopper, shake 
the cylinder vigorously for 1 minute by reversing it 
end for end (fig. 2-67). 





Figure 2-66. Transferring slurry to a sedimentation cylinder. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-53 




Figure 2-67. Shaking the mixture. 

i. Set the cylinder on a firm base in a protected 
spot where it is not exposed to direct sunlight or 
other nonuniform source of heat. 

j. Using the values for specific gravity and solu- 
tion temperature as determined, select from table 2-3 
the elapsed time bPor the 0.02-mm fraction to settle. 

Table 2-3. Elapsed Time For Determining 0.02-mm Fraction. 
Elapsed time (minutes) 



Water temperature 



Specific gravity 



(C.) 


(F.) 


2.00 
to 
2.19 


2.20 
to 
2.39 


2.40 
to 
2.69 


2.70 
to 
2.99 


3.00 
to 
3.19 


4. 5-9. 5 


40-99 


19 


16 


13 


11 


10 


10. 0-15. 


50-59 


16 


14 


11 


9 


8 


15. 5-20. 5 


60-69 


14 


12 


9 


8 


7 


21. 0-26. 


70-79 


12 


10 


8 


7 


6 


26. 5-31. 5 


80-89 


10 


9 


8 


6 


5 


32. 0-37. 5 


90-99 


9 


8 


7 


6 


5 



k. At the end of the elapsed time, measured by a 
stopwatch, remove the plug from the drawoff port 
and carefully collect 100 cc of suspension (fig. 2-68) . 
Note that if a thorough mixing is assumed, grains 
larger than 0.02 mm in diameter will have settled 
through 20 cm. of this solution. In the lower portions 
of the cylinder, these particles will have been re- 
placed by similar particles settling from above. The 
top 20 cm, however, will not have the particles re- 
placed and will only contain the smaller particles 
which have not settled during the elapsed time. 
Therefore, the collected 100 cc of solution has a sam- 
ple of the original soil from which particles larger 
than 0.02 mm have been excluded. 

1. Pour the 100 cc of suspension carefully into a 
metal box or evaporating dish (which has previously 
been weighed) and evaporate the water. 

m. Weigh the residue and container to the nearest 
0.01 g. Subtract the weight of the box or dish, and 
record the result as the dry weight of the residue 




Figure 2-68. Drawing off sample from sedimentation 
cylinder. 



245. Calculations and Corrections 

a,. To calculate the percent finer than 0.02-mm, a 
proportional relation of volume and weight is set up : 

W 1 _Wt 

Vi Vt 
Where : 

Wi is the weight of the residue (para 2-44m) . 
V t is the measured drawoff (100 cc). 
W t is the weight of the fraction finer than 0.02- 
mm. 

V t is the measured total volume in the cylinder 
(1000 cc.). 
The percentage of the total finer than 0.02-mm= 

W Lxl 

Where W is the weight of the sample passing 
through the No. 10 sieve (para 2-44a). 
Example : Sieve analysis indicates that 25 percent of 
a soil sample passes the No. 10 sieve. 
36.82g of the soil passing through the No. 10 sieve 
(W) is selected for the decantation test to determine 
if the soil is frost susceptible. After the test, the 
weight of the residue (Wi) is found to be 1.73 g. The 
percent finer is computed as follows: 

Wi_Wt 

V~V t 



or 



XF,=~X 1000== 17.30 



Percent finer= 



Since only 25 percent of the entire sample passed the 
No. 10 sieve and of this 47 percent is finer than 0.02- 
mm, the percent finer referred to the entire soil sam- 
ple is 47 percent of 25 percent = .47X.25 = .ll75, or 



11.75%. This amount is greater than 3 percent 
(para 2-42a) and this soil can be considered frost 
susceptible. 

Z>. Large variations in water temperature or spe- 
cific gravity which can affect the results are corrected 
by reading the correct elapsed time before drawoff 
in table 2-3. Note that minor variations are blan- 
keted within the range of values given for tempera- 
ture or specific gravity. The average conditions are : 
68 F., water temperature, and specific gravity of 
soil, 2.67. The elapsed time is given as 9 minutes. 
If either variable is off standard a small amount, it 
can be ignored. If large variations in temperature or 
specific gravity occur, the elapsed timo before draw- 
off should be corrected to give a truer result. 

2-46. Procedure for Other Grain Sizes 

To complete a grain-size distribution curve of fine 
grained soil, several points on the curve must be 



determined and plotted. The wet mechanical analy- 
sis method can bo used to establish these points. 

a. Method. In general, three points are sufficient to 
plot the fine grain portion of the curve. These points 
are selected at the 0.05-mm, .02-mrn, and .005-mm 
grain sizes. A separate Suspension for each desired 
point must be prepared. The elapsed time for each 
size is determined from figure 2-69. This figure com- 
bines a nomograph of temperature and specific grav- 
ity to establish the first point on the left edge of 
the line graph. A line drawn through this point and 
parallel to the average condition line will establish 
the elapsed time to drawoff for the different particle 
diameters. 

5. Example 1 : To obtain elapsed time for a grain 
size smaller than 0.010-mm under average 
conditions 

(1) Follow the average condition line to its in- 
tersection with the 0.010-mm coordinate line. 



3.2- 
3.1- 
3.0 
2.9 
2.8 

2.7- 
| 2.6 
2.5 

ff 2.4- 

I- 

2.2 
2.1-- 

2.0- - 



CHART FOR 



BASED ON DRAWOFF AT 



DESIRED GRAIN SIZE 



r - 

N 

u. 

w 

a 

C 

u 

a 

I 

>R 
ANA 

FF AT 
0-CC 

ASED 
IS US 
PSED 
FOR / 
.E 


-50 
.60 
























300 

200 
150 

100 
90 
80 
70 

60 
50 

40 

30 
25 

20 

15 

12 

10 
9 
8 

7 

6 
5 

4 
3 

< 














































h 8o" 
90 
'100 


\ 






AV 


RA 


3E C 


3NDITI 


ON 










L 






X 














1YSIS 

MARK 

ON 
ED 
TIME 
kNY 




\ 




X* 


















\ 


pin 


















% 

V 




V 




















% 


1 


>l 




EXAMPLE NO. 1 










k 


\ 




X 


X 














1 


> 


k 




















\ 
\ 


N 




















\ 




V 




















% 

1 


\ 


|L 




















\ 


\ 




















\ 


\ 






















% * 






















\ 


i 




















\ 


\ 




















\ 


N 












EXAMPLE NO. 2 J 


k 


V 




















\ 
\ 


N 






















\ 


\ 




















\ 


A 


v 



GRAIN DIAMETER IN MILLIMETERS 



Figure 2-69. Wet mechanical analysis chart. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

(2) Follow this value to the right-hand edge 
coordinates (between 30 and 40 minutes). 

(3) The elapsed time to drawoff for the re- 
quired size is about 35 minutes. 

G. Example 2: To obtain elapsed time for grain 
sizes smaller than 0.02-mm, if specific gravity is 2.95 
and the suspension temperature is 100F. 

(1) Extend a line from 2.95 on the specific grav- 
ity scale through 100 F. on the temperature scale 



2-55 

until it intersects the left-hand edge of the graph 
(at approximately 90 minutes) . 

(2) From this point, draw a line parallel to the 
average condition line (dashed line in figure 2-69). 
(3) Follow this line until it intersects the 0.02- 
mm coordinate line. 

(4) This value extended to the elapsed time co- 
ordinates on the right edge falls between 5 and 6 
minutes. 

(5) The elapsed time to drawoff is 5.5 minutes 



Section VII. COMBINED MECHANICAL ANALYSIS 



2-47. Description 

Sieve analysis, hydrometer analysis, or wet mechan- 
ical analysis (sees. Ill, V, and VI of this chapter) 
are performed individually when the requirement for 
some individual characteristic, such as frost suscep- 
tibility or grain-size distribution, is specified. Many 
natural soils are mixed, that is, they contain both 
fine and coarse grained materials. Soil stabilization 
is accomplished in some cases by mixing finer graded 
soils with coarse sands and gravels. A complete 
grain-size analysis is needed to classify such mixed 
materials. To obtain a complete grain-size distribu- 
tion curve of coarse and fine particles when there is 
a particular interest for both, a combined mechanical 
analysis is conducted. The analysis is performed in 
one of two ways depending on the method of de- 
termining the fraction finer than the No. 200 sieve, 
whether by hydrometer analysis or by sedimentation. 

2-48. Apparatus and Sample Preparation 
(Hydrometer Analysis) 

In this method, a sieve analysis and a hydrometer 
analysis are combined. 

a. Apparatus. The apparatus for each of the two 
analyses is the same as used for the individual test. 
Sieve analysis equipment is described in paragraph 
2-24 and hydrometer analysis apparatus in para- 
graph 2-37. The equipment should be assembled and 
checked prior to starting the analysis. 

&. jS ample Preparation. A representative sample is 
selected and prepared as for sieve analysis (para. 2- 
23) . The size of the sample should be large enough to 
yield sufficient amounts of materials for both sieve 
and hydrometer analyses. 

(1) A visual inspection of the sample will 
usually indicate the need for any intermediate steps 
sucli as large screen separation of sizes larger than the 
No. 4 sieve or prewashing to separate the sizes. 

(2) Samples with fines of little or no plasticity 
are oven-dried, weighed, and separated on the No. 
200 sieve. The plus and minus No. 200 sieve fractions 
are preserved for sieve and hydrometer analyses 
respectively. 



(3) Soils containing plastic fines may be oven- 
dried initially. However, if the fines tend to adhere 
to the large particles and to form large lumps, the 
sample must be soaked in a pan with enough water 
to cover the material. Soaking must continue until 
all lumps and coatings have disintegrated. This will 
vary from 2 to 24 hours depending on the amount and 
plasticity of the fines. See paragraph 2-26. 

(4) The water-soil mixture is washed over a No. 
200 sieve (and a No. 4 sieve if necessary) . The coarse 
fractions are preserved for sieve analysis, and the 
fines and water passing the No. 200 sieve are set aside 
for hydrometer analysis. 

(5) Excess water with the fines is removed by 
evaporation, filtration, or wicking. 

(6) If there is a possibility of altering grain- 
size of the fines by oven- dry ing, the dry weight meas- 
urement should be made after the hydrometer test. 

2-49. Procedure (Hydrometer Test) 

The combined analysis is performed as follows : 

a. Record all identifying information for the sam- 
ple on both the sieve analysis (fig. 2-52) and the 
hydrometer analysis (fig. 2-60) data sheets. 

1). Perform a sieve analysis (para. 2-25) on the 
portion of the sample which was retained on the No. 
200 sieve. 

c. Perform a hydrometer analysis (para. 2-39) on 
the portion passing the No. 200 sieve. 

d. Record all the test information on the appro- 
priate data sheets. 

e. The computations consist of the following steps : 
(1) Compute the percentage of the total sample 

retained on the No. 200 sieve. 

Percent retained on No. 200 sieve= 

T^-XIOO 



Where 

Wi=dry weight of sample retained on the No. 

200 sieve. 

W s total dry weight of sample used for the 
combined analysis 



2-56 

(2) Compute the sieve analysis data ***** 
in p-irioTiph 2-27 except that the percent retained 
<>n eichsieve is based only on that portion of the total 
material used for the sieVe analysis, (W 2 ) . The por- 
"n used may be less than the amount retamed on t 
Xo. -200 sieve, and a partial percent retained must be 
computed : 

Partial percent retained = 

Weight retained on a sieve N/^QQ 
Total weight used for sieve (W 2 ) 
The total percent retained is computed as follows: 
Total percent retained = 

Partial percent retained X^- 

Tlie total percent finer =100 total percent retained. 
(3) Compute the hydrometer analysis data as 
described in paragraph 2-40, except that the results 
are shown as a partial percent finer. As in the sieve 
analysis ((2) above), the amount of material used 
for hydrometer analysis may be less than the amount 
which passed the No. 200 sieve or less than (W a )- 
( Wi) . A partial percent finer is computed as follows : 

Hydrometer calibrated in specific gravity 
Partial percent finer = ~ J^X- 

Hydrometer calibrated in grams per liter 
Partial percent finer ===-(R+m) 

Where: 

W Q = oven-dry weight in grams of soil used for 
hydrometer analysis 

G s = specific gravity of solids 

R = corrected hydrometer reading 

ra = temperature correction 
The total percent finer is computed as follows: 

Total percent finer= 

partial percent finerX %/ - 



2-50. Apparatus and Sample Preparation 
(Sedimentation Analysis) 

In this type of analysis, a representative sample is 
separated on the No. 10 sieve, and the sedimentation 
analysis is performed on the portion passing through 
the sieve. 

a. Apparatus. The apparatus for this test is the 
same as that used for the sieve analysis (para 2-24) 
and the wet mechanical analysis (para 2-43) with one 
exception. Additional pans may be required for sort- 
ing the sample into the wet and dry analysis fractions. 

1). Sample Preparation. The size of the sample de- 
pends somewhat on the amount of material larger 
than 14 inch. With only a small amount of material 
larger than % inch, select about 200 g of dry ma- 
terial. For gravelly soils, select a representative sam- 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

pie that will provide both about 200 g of dry material 
finer than the 14 inch sieve, and about 1000 g total 
material if the maximum particle size is in the range 
of %- to li/^-inch sieves. 

2-51. Procedure (Sedimentation Test) 

Recommended procedures for a combined sieve and 
wet mechanical analysis, using the sedimentation test 
(para 2-46), are given in the following paragraphs. 
Refer to the chart, figure 2-70, for the sequence of 
operations and to DD Form 1795 (Combined Me- 
chanical Analysis (Sedimentation Test)), figure 2- 
71, for recording and computing results. DD Form 
1795 will be reproduced locally for Army use on 
8"xlOi" paper (image size 7 4 / 10 "x9%"). Supplies 
of DD Form 1795 for the other services will be re- 
quisitioned through normal publications supply 
channels. Details of procedures for a combined sieve 
and wet mechanical analysis are as follows : 

a. Oven-dry the selected sample at 110 C.5 to 
a constant weight. 

"b. Cool the sample and weigh it to the nearest 
0.1 g. Record this weight as the original weight of 
sample on the sieve analysis data sheet (fig. 2-71) . 

c. Pulverize or separate all fractions using a 
rubber pestle. 

d. Soak the entire pulverized sample for 24 hours 
in about 500 cc of water mixed with a deflocculating 
solution (para 2-38e). Clean sands and gravels will 
only require about 2 hours of soaking. 

e. Wash the soaked sample over a No. 10 sieve 
with a minimum of additional wash water. Mako 
sure the sample is separated into individual particles 
and that none of the fine material is clinging to the 
particles retained on the sieve. Catch all the particles 
and wash water passing the No. 10 sieve. 

/. Place the porton retained on the sieve in the 
oven and dry to a constant weight. Record its weight, 
then set it aside for later use. 

g. Place the portion, including the wash water, 
which passed the No. 10 sieve in the oven and dry 
to a constant weight. Weigh and record the weight. 

h. Select representative amounts of this dried por- 
tion for wet mechanical analyses (para 2-44 through 
2-46). Save the remaining material for later use. 
Weigh each, portion and record dry weights, (W ) 9 
under sedimentation tests (fig. 2-71). 

i. Soak the selected amount in water mixed witli 
a dispersing agent and complete the mechanical 
analysis procedure as described in paragraph 2-44<sZ 
to m. Record weights in the form for sedimentation 
analysis. 

j. Compute partial percent finer than the selected 
particle diameters in each sedimentation test. Use 
formulas in paragraph 2-45. This is the percent finer 
in the material passing the No. 10 sieve. Compute the 
percent finer than the selected diameters for the total 



5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-57 



Oven Dry 
Weigh and Record 



Pulverize and Soak 
(Def locculating Agent) 
2k hours or as required 



oven dry 
Weigh and record 



Select 

amounts for three 
wet analysis 





oven dry and weigh 



Calculate percent 

retained on No. 10 

sieve 



Weigh and record 
each portion 



Perform sedimentation 
tests for desired 
particle diameters 
Record weights 




Calculate 
washing 

loss 
in (gm) 



Plot combined 
grain-size 
distribution curve 



Figure 2-70. Combined mechanical analysis (sedimentation method), operations sequence. 



2-58 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



COMBINED MECHANICAL ANALYSIS 

(Sedimentation Test) 




PROJECT 






DESCRIPTION OF SAMPLE 


WEIGHT TOTAL. SAMPLE 


WEIGHT PA5SI N 






WEIGHT RETAINED ON 
NO. 10 SIEVE 

<e) 


WEIGHT RETAINED ON 
NO. 200 SIEVE 
(6) 


TOTAL WEIGHT FINER 
THAN NO. 200 SIEVE 
(6) 


WASHING LOSS 
(6) 










SIEVE ANALYSIS 


SIEVE 

OR 
SCREEN 


SIZE OF 
OPENING 
(mm) 


WEIGHT OF 
SIEVE 
(6) 


WEIGHT OF 
SIEVE AND 
SAMPLE 
(6) 


WEIGHT 
RETAINED 
ON SIEVE 
(6) 


CUMULATIVE 
WEIGHT 
RETAINED 
(6) 


PERCENT 
RETAINED 


PERCENT 
FINER 


2 in. 


50.8 














1-1/2 in. 


38.1 














lin. 


25.4 














3/4 in. 


19.0 














1/4 in. 
(No. 3) 


6.35 














No. 4 


4.76 














No. 10 


2.00 














No. 40 


0.420 














No. 60 


0.250 














No. 100 


0.149 














No. 200 


0.074 














Pan 
















Wash loss 
















SEDIMENTATION ANALYSIS 


SELECTED 
DIAMETER 
(mm) 


DRY 
WEIGHT 
W 
(6) 


WEIGHT OF 
RESIDUE 
PLUS DISH 
(& 


WEIGHT OF 
DISH 
(6) 


DRY WEIGHT 
OF RESIDUE 
W t 
(6) 


TOTAL WEIGHT 
FINER 
W t 
(0) 


PARTIAL % 
FINER THAN 
SELECTED 
DIAMETER 


PERCENT 
FINER 
TOTAL 
SAMPLE 


0.05 
















0.02 
















0.005 
















TECHNICIAN 


COMPUTED BY 


CHECKED BY 


DO, KK.1795 



Figure 2-71. DD Form 1195 (Combined mechanical analysis (sedimentation method) ), data sheet. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

sample by multiplying the partial percents finer by 
the percent passing the No. 10 sieve, (Pi) above. 

Example : If the percent finer than 0.02-mm of the 
passing No. 10 fraction (g above) was 27 percent 
and the combined dry sieve analysis resulted in 15 
percent passing the No. 10 sieve, the percent finer 
than 0.02-mm for the entire sample would be: 

27%X15% 
Percent finer = - - =4.05 percent 



7*3. Combine the fraction passing the No. 10 sieve 
that was set aside (/< above) with the soil left in the 
sedimentation cylinder, and wash over a No. 200 
sieve to remove the fines. 

Z. Oven-dry at 100 C.5 to constant weight the 
material retained on the No. 200 sieve after washing. 

m. Combine the material retained on the No. 200 
sieve (I above) with the portion retained on the No. 
10 sieve (/ above). Add the weights retained on No. 
10 and on No. 200 sieves; subtract this sum from 
the original total weight of sample to get the wash- 
ing loss. 

'ii. Perform dry sieve analysis on the combined 
material retained on the No. 200 sieve. See instruc- 
tions in paragraph 2-25 for procedure and para- 
graph 2-27 for calculations. 



2-59 

2-52. Presentation of Results 

a. The combined mechanical analysis results in 
the percent finer by weight in terms of the different 
size particles in the soil sample. The tabulated results 
are useful for comparison to a set of specifications. 
An easily interpretable form is the grain-size dis- 
tribution chart (fig. 2-54). The values of percent 
finer per grain size are plotted on a semilogarithmic 
chart. The plotted points are joined by a smooth 
curve. This curve can be used to determine the uni- 
formity coefficient (C u ) and the coefficient of curva- 
ture (C c ). See paragraph 2-27c for the definitions 
of these terms. 

&. The data in the example shown on the data 
sheet of figure 2-71 are plotted on DD Form 1207 
(fig. 2-72), to give an example of such a curve for 
a mixed soil. For this soil, the diameter correspond- 
ing to 60 percent passing (D 6 o) is 1.2-mm and that 
for 10 percent passing (D 10 ) is 0.11-mm. Hence the 
uniformity coefficient is 

o I- 2 



The diameter for 30 percent passing (D 30 ) is 0.4-mm. 
Thus, the coefficient of curvature is 



= (0.4) 2 , 




21 



418-320 071- 



2-60 



TM 5-530/NAVfAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



K 

UJ 

1- 
o 


1 
o 

Ul 


o 

K 

a. 


IUS STANDARD SIEVES 1 



i 


oooooooooo 


O 

o 

o 

e 



o 

to 

o 
o 



o 

IN 

e 




REMARKS 1 








a 
ui/Pv 


O 


m 

8 

o 

a. 
<a 

* 
































































































































ISTRIBUTION GRAPH - AGGREGATE GRADING CHART 




















































































































































































































. 

o 
o 

'" 










































































































































































XO 10 5 2 1 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.06 

GRAIN SIZE IN MILLIMETERS 


o 

i 
it 
o 

u. 

C/3 
CO 

_J 
O 








1 
* 

^ L 




















































































/ 














2 

o 




































/ 








o *"* 




































/ 






o 




















jj 


H 




3 








/ 








X 






o 




















Vl 


H 


^ 








/ 










i 2 






















VI 




. 




/ 












MBHiM 


i ^ 

E o 




















\ 


>r 




^ 


/ 














J 

J 
1 

























> 




















0. 














w 


H 
oo 

'-; 

V HI 

1 

: MT 
4 

j . 
j 

HI 
04 

P* 

< 

w 


















s 


x 
























CL 






( 














/ 


/ 


























1 








T> 

o' 

Q- 










s 






































/ 


/ 


































UJ 

ife 








^j 

1 

Z 
K 

UJ 


O 
CM 

ICS 
r-t 

a 








o 

LU 
CO 

x. 

O 
CO 




/ 






































* 


/ 












































SAMPLE NUMBER 






























































































































































































































o 


Oe 

LU 
CD 

z 
o 










































































































































o 


, oee-wO'e^ 

SNISSVd i30a3<i 


1 EXCAVATI 



aecnon vm. 



LUINICNI 



253. Description 

a. Definition. Moisture content (w) is the ratio, 
expressed as a percentage, of the weight of water hi 
in a soil mass to the weight of the soil matter (dry 
weight) ; 



w= 



weight of water 
weight of dry soil 



X100. 



b. Need- for In-place Determinations. With many 
soils, close control of moisture content during field 
compaction by rolling is necessary in order to de- 
velop a required density and strength in the soil mass. 
The amount of compaction effort that must be ex- 
erted to obtain a specified density is dependent upon 
having the moisture content at, or very close to, 
optimum. Because the specified density is in terms 
of dry unit weight, the moisture content must be 
determined in conjunction with the wet unit weight 
in order to determine whether moisture must be 
added or whether moisture must be removed from 
the iii-place soil to achieve the optimum moisture 
content. This is a necessary field procedure in the 
construction of embankments and compaction of 
highway stibgrades. Adjustment of moisture during 
construction can be done only if the moisture content 
is known promptly. The time required for oven- 
drying often cannot be afforded. 

G. Methods. Experienced engineers who become 
familiar with soils in an area can judge moisture 
content by field examination. The best and most accu- 
rate method uses an oven with temperature control. 
If time is not a consideration, the soil may be air- 
dried in the sun. Under expedient conditions, the soil 
sample may be dried in a frying pan or container 
heated by an external source. Because organic ma- 
terial may be burned off by high temperatures, ail 
error may result. Another expedient method is to 
saturate the soil sample in alcohol and to burn the 
alcohol off. However, this procedure must be done 
carefully and repeated several times to achieve the 
best results. Also, the speedy moisture tester, a com- 
ponent of the soil test set, can be used. 

254. Procedure and Computations 

a. Apparatus. The apparatus needed for the 
laboratory method is as follows : 

(1) Oven, preferably automatically controlled 
for 105-110 C. 

(2) Balance, sensitive to 0.01 g. 

(3) Desiccator (unnecessary if samples are 
weighed immediately after cooling) . 

(4) Sample containers, with lids. 

6. Test Procedure. The determination is accom- 
plished by the oven or alcohol method in the follow- 
ing manner: 



(1) Eecord identifying information of the 
sample on the data sheet, DD Form 1205 (fig. 2-73). 

(2) Weigh and record the weights of the con- 
tainers to be used in the test. 

(3) Place the sample in a container, weigh it, 
and record the total weight of container (tare) and 
wet soil. If the weight of the sample is less than 100 
g, weigh it to the nearest 0.1 g, otherwise the weight 
should be to the nearest 1.0 g. 

(4) Place the open container and sample in an 
oven heated to 110 5 C. and dry until the sample 
weight becomes constant. This will generally require 
8 to 12 hours. 

(5) Remove the container from the oven and 
place it in the desiccator to cool. If the container is 
too large for the desiccator, allow the sample to cool 
to room temperature in the open air. 

(6) After the sample has cooled, weigh it and 
the container and record the weight (tare and dry 
soil) on the data sheet. 

c. Computations. 

(1) The moisture content (in percent) is equal 
to 

weight of water 





weight of dry soil 

weight of wet soil weight of dry soil 



weight of dry soil 



X100 



*jyinn 

- xioo 



(2) The computations are made on the data 
sheet (fig\ 2-73). Item A minus item B equals the 
weight of water (W w ). Item B minus item D equals 
the weight of dry soils (W 8 ). The division is made, 
converted to a percentage, and recorded as the water 
content (w). 

(3) Examvple: A pan weighing 44.0 g was used 
to contain a. sample of soil for determination of its 
moisture content. The total weight, including the 
pan, was 189.39 and after drying was reduced to 
170.0 grams. What is the resulting percent moisture 
in the soil ? 

(a) Weight of water = (weight of wet sam- 
ple plus tare) (weight of dry sample plus tare) = 
189.3-170.0=19.3 grams. 

(5) Weight of dry soil= (weight of dry sam- 
ple plus tare) (weight of tare) =170.0 44.0=126.0 
grams. 

(c) Water content = 

1 00 X weight of water Iff M 

weight of dry soil ~ W s 

1 n q 

^=100X77^=15.3 percent. 



2-62 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



SOIL MOISTURE COHTENT 


DATE 


PROJECT 

Xv 6 ? c/ Z. fc t^ /Q &\^J&$ S 


EXCAVATION NUMBER 

3 


SAMPLE NUMBER 

FA-P2- I 


FORMULA W w 

Water Content, w x 100 

W g 


TEST NATURAL SOIL MOISTURE CO^TEWT 




RUN NUMBER 


1 


2. 


3 








TARE NUMBER 


5 


/O 


I 








A. WEIGHT OF TARE + WET SOIL QW> 


JgCjf^ 


/ 7&' 


223.O 








B. WEIGHT OF TARE + DRY SOIL * 


170.0 


J&2A 


_ZLO">O 








C. WEIGHT OF WATER. W.., (A. - B.) 
W 


_!5? 3 


I2.tf 


/ *?() 








D. WEIGHT OF TARE 


^4>cD 


4^2,5 


4/".2* 








E. WEIGHT OF DRY SOIL. W s ( Bi _ D j ^ 


1 2&>Q 


111.2 


/>&.& 








WATER CONTENT. W 


/52> * 


/0-& % 


12.0 * 


% 


% 


% 


TEST /cTL/MVVAV jt 










RUN NUMBER 


1 G-s 


!&- 


26L* , 


2.-^- 


2-C~ 




TARE NUMBER 


2.1 


21 


\2\. / 


21 


21 




A. WEIGHT OF TARE + WET SOIL C%ft\ 


$.\&.rf- 


ZOO. 2. 


\\4tf 


22."*>,te> 


241. 8 




B. WEIGHT OF TARE + DRY SOIL U 


20&.4- 


I *? I 7 


( o^.C 


213.7 


230.^ 




C. WEIGHT OF WATER, W w (A. - B.) 


^0* 


a >j? 


f&ttf 


<?. ^ 


Z7 * ^ 




D. WEIGHT OF TARE 


76. Z 


/ uf * 2- 


fl&te. 


7<^ < 


76' 2. 




E. WEIGHT OF DRY SOIL, Ws (B. - D.) y 


/32,2. 


ft 5,5 


jfO^f.^ 


/E7.3 


/5^2- 




WATER CONTENT, W 


T. 6 * 


7< % 


&. \ * 




7.^ * 


% 


TEST 




RUN NUMBER 














TARE NUMBER 














A. WEIGHT OF TARE + WET SOIL 














B. WEIGHT OF TARE + DRY SOIL 














C. WEIGHT OF WATER, W w (A. - B.) 














D. WEIGHT OF TARE 














E. WEIGHT OF DRY SOIL, W s (B. - D.) 














WATER CONTENT, W 


% 


% 


% 


*1 


% 


X 


TEST 






RUN NUMBER 














TARE NUMBER 














A. WEIGHT OF TARE + WET SOIL 














B. WEIGHT OF TARE + DRY SOIL 














C. WEIGHT OF WATER, W w (A. - B.) 














D. WEIGHT OF TARE 














E. WEIGHT OF DRY SOIL, W s (B. - D.) 














WATER CONTENT, W 


* 


% 


* 





% 


X 


TEST 




RUN NUMBER 














TARE NUMBER 














A. WEIGHT OF TARE + WET SOIL 














B. WEIGHT OF TARE + DRY SOIL 














C. WEIGHT OF WATER, W w (A. - B.) 














D. WEIGHT OF TARE 














E. WEIGHT OF DRY SOIL. W s (B. - D.) 














WATER CONTENT, W 


% 


* 


% 


X 


n 


% 


REMARKS (Continue on r*vr* if addition*! apace l required) *M? 

/?UA/W#Y 1 TEST BY ALZO//OL t/lGTMQD /WE. ' 7*5" 


TECHNICIAN (Signature) 

\dtsvt*j>#*> ^SMA^U' 


COMPUTED BY (Signature) 


CHECKED BY CSJtffltur.) 


^f^ FORM 1 O/^S" 

J \J\ FEB 82 1 ,."... '' 


EDITION OF 1 AUG 87 IS OBSOLETE. CPO B072B7 



> 



> 



Figure 2-73. Soil moisture content data sheet. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89^-3 

255. Speedy Moisture Tester 

a,. The procedure for determining moisture content 
using the speedy moistiwe tester (26 grams] is as 
follows : 

(1) Weigh a gram sample of soil. 

(2) Place the soil sample and two 1^4 -inch steel 
balls in the large chamber. 

(3) Place three scoops of reagent in the cap. 
Then with the pressure vessel in a horizontal posi- 
tion, insert the cap into the pressure vessel, and 
tighten the clamp to seal the cap to the unit. 

(4) Raise the moisture tester to a vertical posi- 
tion so that the reagent falls into the vessel. 

(5) Holding the moisture tester horizontally, 
manually rotate the device for 10 seconds so that the 



2-63 

steel balls are put into orbit around the inside cir- 
cumference, and then rest for 20 seconds. Repeat the 
shake-rest cycle for a total of 3 minutes. Do not 
allow the steel balls to fall against either the cap or 
orifice leading to the dial, since this might cause 
damage. 

(6) Read the pressure gage of the moisture 
tester and determine the moisture content of the soil 
on a dry-weight basis from the conversion chart. 
Record the moisture content. 

(7) When sample is dumped, examine it for 
lumps. If the soil sample is not completely broken 
down, increase the time limit (shaking unit) by 1 
minute on the next test. 

5. Speedy Moisture Tenter (0 grams). See instruc- 
tions contained in the apparatus. 



Section IX. LIQUID AND PLASTIC LIMITS 



256. Discussion 

a. Clays and some other fine-grained soils exhibit 
the physical property of plasticity if the proper 
amount of water is present in the soil (para 2-2<7). 
A plastic soil is one that can be deformed beyond the 
point of recovery Avithout cracking or change in vol- 
ume. Such soils can be remolded. The liquid limit 
(LL) is the greatest water content which the material 
may contain and still remain plastic; more water 
causes it to become a thick liquid. The plastic limit 
(PL) is the lowest water content which the material 
may contain for plastic behavior ; with less water the 
soil is semisolid and breaks into fragments if remold- 
ing is attempted. The plasticity index (PI) is the 
numerical difference between the liquid and plastic 
limits: (PI) = (LL) - (PL). A large PI indicates 
a very plastic clay, a small one denotes a clay having 
little plasticity. As water content decreases below 
the plastic limit, the semisolid clay mass shrinks and 
becomes stiffer. The shrinkage limit is the water con- 
tent where further drying shrinkage ceases and 
below this water content the soil behaves as a solid. 
Since there is no sharp distinction between the semi- 
liquid, plastic, and semisolid states of consistency, 
arbitrary, standardized procedures have been estab- 
lished for determining the liquid and the plastic 
limits. 

&. Research with large numbers of clay soils was 
used to establish the soil plasticity chart for labora- 
tory classification of fine-grained soils (table B-l, 
app B) that is part of the Unified Soil Classification 
system. Values of liquid limit and plasticity index 
are coordinates that locate a particular soil sample on 
the chart. The region on the chart in which the sam- 
ple falls gives the classification, based upon the beha- 
vioral characteristics of the particular soil. 



2-57. Liquid Limit Test Preparation 

a. Definition. The liquid limit of a soil is the 
water content at the boundary between the liquid 
and the plastic states expressed as a moisture content 
and reported as a whole number. This boundary is 
arbitrarily defined as the water content at which two 
halves of a soil cake placed in a standard cup and 
divided into two sections by a standard grooving tool, 
will flow together for a distance of 0.5 inch along 
the bottom of the groove when the cup is dropped 25 
times for a distance of 1 cm (0.3937 in.) at the rate 
of t.wo drops per second. 

6. Apparatus. The apparatus for a liquid limit test 
consists of the following : 
Balance 
Boxes, stainless steel, 2-inch diameter by % inch 

high 

Dishes, evaporating 
Filler, battery 
Liquid limit machine, complete with brass cup 

and grooving tool 
Mortar, porcelain 
Oven, electric 
Pan, sieve, 8-inch frame 
Pestle, rubber-tipped 
Screwdriver 
Sieve, testing, 8-inch frame full height, U.S. 

No. 40 
Spatula 
Tongs, crucible 
Some of this equipment is shown in figure 2-74. 

G. Preparation. Soil samples should be at natural 
water content when preparing for the test. Although 
the effects of drying may be negligible for many soils, 
it is significant for some and any drying which occurs 
before testing will reduce the limit values. Certain 



200-GRAM 



MOISTURE- 
CONTENT 
BOXES 




LIQUID LIMIT MACHINE 

^ 



GROUND GLASS 6"X6"X 1/4"- 



EVAPORATING DISH 



Figure 2-7J h Apparatus for determining Atter~berg limits. 



soil colloids undergo an irreversible change on oven 
or complete drying. Liquid and plastic limit tests 
on these soils after drying will yield improper results. 
Factors which must be considered before testing 
are 

(1) The liquid limit is performed on material 
finer than the No. 40 sieve. 

(2) Samples should be large enough to produce 
150 to 200 grams of material for testing. 

(3) The selected sample must not be subjected 
either to air-drying or oven-drying before testing. 

(4) If the sampL) contains no material coarser 
that the No. 40 sieve, it should be thoroughly mixed. 
It will then be ready for testing. 

(5) If the sample contains material coarser than 
the No. 40 sieve, it is soaked in clean water for 24 
hours and washed over a No. 40 sieve using a mini- 
mum of wash water. The fines and wash water are 
caught in a large dish or collecting pan and saved. 

( 6 ) Material retained on the No. 40 sieve is oven- 
Iried at 110dr5 C., and then dry-sieved through 
he No. 40 sieve. 

(7) The portion that passed through the No. 40 
ieve during the dry-sieving is combined with the 

ash-through portion for testing. 



(8) The combined (passing No. 40) sample is 
dried to a putty-like consistency by decantation or 
evaporation being careful to prevent caking or lump- 
ing during the process. 

(9) Neither chemical substances nor dry soil are 
added to hasten settlement nor to speed drying. 

(10) The soil sample should be thoroughly 
mixed just before starting the test. 

d. Checking and Adjusting the Liquid Limit De- 
vice. The liquid limit testing machine (fig. 2-75) 
must be inspected prior to the test to determine that 
it is in good working condition. 

(1) Check the pin connecting the cup for wear. 
It must not be worn to the point where it permits 
sideplay of the cup. 

(2) Check the screws connecting the cup to the 
hanger arm. They should be tight. 

(3) Check the cup for wear. Long usage will 
develop a groove through the cup. This can be felt by 
running the fingers over the inside surface. If worn 
to this extent, it should be replaced. 

(4) Check the grooving tool for wear. The di- 
mensions which control the size of the groove are 
shown in figure 2-75. The tool should be discarded 
when the point width exceeds 0.086 inch. 



flaw O'Ou/Mrivi ov d 




GROOVING TOOL 

(FOR HIGHLY PLASTIC 
SOILS) 




OHOOVIHO TOOL ,ASTM 
(FOR LESS PLASTIC AND SILTY SOILS) 




p 

M 



FRONT VIEW 



SECTION 



Figure 2-15. Mechanical liquid limit device. 



(5 ) Each time the test is run, or at proper inter- 
vals, verify the height of the drop of the cup. The 
gage for this check is on the handle of the grooving 
tool. Using the gage, the height is adjusted bj means 
of the adjusting screw (A, fig. 2-75) until the point 
on the cup that strikes the base (B) is exactly 1 cm 
(0.394 in.) above the base. Tighten screws (C) to se- 
cure the adjustment and check it by turning the crank 
at approximately two revolutions per second. If the 
adjustment is correct, a slight click will be heard. 
If the cup is lifted off the gage or no sound is heard, 
further adjustment is necessary. 



2-58. Liquid Limit Test Procedure 

"With the sample prepared and the device checked, 
the test procedure consists of the following steps : 

a. Record all identifying information for the 
sample on the top section of the data sheet, DD Form 
1209 (fig. 2-T6). 

5. Place 50 to SO grams of the prepared sample in 
the cup and level it off to a depth of approximately 1 
cm at the point of greatest thickness (fig. 2-77). 
When leveling the soil, squeeze it downward and 
spread it using as few strokes of the spatula as pos- 
sible. Be careful to prevent entrapping air bubbles 
in the mass. Return unused soil to sample stock. 



2-66 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



ATTERBERG LIMITS DETERMINATION 


DATE 


PROJECT 
I^'**^ i *"ir"f ^J i c9 ! i f^ i T^ 

_J$ /c, / T7 nlr^FIE^U^ 

*r*^ ^ 


EXCAVATION NUMBER 

Z+81 


SAMPLE NUMBER 

S-F3-/ 


LIQUID LIMIT, W L 


RUN NUMBER 


/ 


^L 


i^|^ 


4- 






TARE NUMBER 


4-/ 


,4.^ 


i^J* ^jy 


44 






A. WEIGHT OF WET SOI L + TARE 




44. S^ 


4/.fi>7" 


4/.X7 






B. WEIGHT OF ORY SO 1 L + TARE 


4/i og 


4-J , ,5X. 


3S, /i 


.28,39 






C. WEIGHT OF WATER, W w (A.-B.) 


jr, 55 


J. 37 


., 97 


Z.58 






0. WEIGHT OF TARE 


34. 64 


34. Jif 


JTK56 1 


^2.. 06 






E. WEIGHT OF ORY SO 1 L, W^BD .) 


7, 04 


7, A3 


/ ft Q 
O * A* O 


6.35 






WATER CONTENT, w=f-jp- * *00; 
a 


47,3 


46.6 


44,5 








NUMBER OF BLOWS 


AS*- / r*- /6 


i.3 1 -^.4 


a 9 - z & - jr^> 


33-33 






'< J.L.S 44 


Wp p^, ^ /<S 


p fw L - V c> 7- _ p p 3 

/-\JL - A- O 1 


b ' 

s 

1 -s 
Z -u 
UJ C 

1 u 






i 














1 
























i 
















































































































































































































































































































































^ 


?-- 


*5SS 


* 


*. 


i 






























































= 3 



































^ 


^i 












































??-- 


; ; 






































CJ U 
C 

Qc a. 

UJ !>^ 

K- 




























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































5 6 7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 40 50 

NUMBER OF BLOWS 


PLASTIC LIMIT, W P 


NATURAL 


RUN NUMBER 


/ 


. 


^r 




CONTENT 


TARE NUMBER 


4^* 


4-6> 


Ar 




4S 


P. WEIGHT OF WET SOIL + TARE 


^"^.Zl 


JC5". /5* 


4>o, 6o 




^re.r^ 


G. WEIGHT OF ORY SOI L + TARE 


jrt5^ 90 


JT4.59 


^o. / 




jrr. az 


H. WEIGHT OF WATER, W w (F.-G.) 


6.31 


0..2-& 


o. ro 




0.90 


1. WEIGHT OF TARE 


JT4, ^ 


*5^ 46 s 


^rr.45 




s5I5". <5^. 


J. WEIGHT OF ORY SOIL, W s fG.-rO 




y.49 


. &T 




/t. 80 


WATER CONTENT, w=(^~-x 100) 


17. t- 




/a./ 




31.1 














PLASTIC LIMIT, l p CXverarfe w) 






j& 






REMARKS 

Cs&L^GtG r~0 *7Or Qr&OlSH4Q TO0I t/&CI ttQ ft&tJi<Sf (IrtpfiJt \.J*~l~J /fcff, 
*^ *-* ~-^ ' 


TECHNICIAN fSignaturcJ 


COMPUTED 8Y (Signature) 


e "r?."2^^. 



00x^,71209 



GPO-3 1499 



Figure 2-16. Data sheet, Atter'berg limits determination. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-67 




1 Cm. 




point of contact 



Figure 2-77. LeveUng sample in the cup. 

G. Holding the grooving tool and the cup as shown 
in figure 2-78, make the groove by drawing the tool 
down through the sample along the diameter through 
the centerline of the cam follower so that a clean, 
sharp groove of the proper dimensions will be 
formed. 

(1) More than one stroke may be necessary to 
make the groove. Each stroke should be a little deeper 
than the preceding one until the last stroke scrapes 
the bottom of the cup clean. However, do not exceed 
6 strokes and be careful not to tear the sides of the 
groove or to allow the soil cakes to slip in the cup. 

(2) Note that with some sandy and highly 
organic soils, it is impossible to draw the tool through 
the sample without tearing the sides of the groove. 
In such cases, the groove is made with the spatula 
(fig. 2-79) and shaped with the grooving tool. 

(3) Before laying the grooving tool aside, clean 
the cutting edge by running the thumb over the tool 
or by washing it. This prevents the soil from drying 
on the tool and lost time trying to scrape or wash it 
clean. 

d. Attach the cup to the carriage of the device and 
turn the crank at the rate of two revolutions per sec- 
ond. Count the number of blows until the two halves 
of the soil cake come into contact at the bottom of 
the groove for a distance of y 2 inch (fig. 2-80). 
Record the number of blows. 





Figure 2-79. Cutting groove with spatula in sandy soil. 




SCI"- 



BEFORE TEST AFTER TEST 

Figure 2-SO. Liquid limit test. 

e. Remove about 10 grams of soil from the cup by 
drawing the spatula from edge to edge perpendicular 
to the groove and through the portion of the cake that 
closed (fig. 2-81). This sample is used to determine 
the water content (para 2-54). All weighing should 
be accurate to 0.01 g and the water content com- 
puted to one decimal place. 



REMOVE ABOUT 
10 GRAMS 




Figure 2-78. Hold-ing cup and grooving tool. 



Figure 2-81. Removing -moisture content portion. 



A-OQ 



f. Transfer the remaining soil in the cup to the 
mixing dish. Wash and dry the cup and grooving 
tool. Repeat steps in 5 through e above, for three ad- 
ditional samples, each of which, has had the water 
content adjusted by drying. Drying is accomplished 
by continued mixing with the spatula and aided by a 
small electric fan, if desired. The water content ad- 
justment must be sufficient to produce a noticeable 
change in the number of blows to close the groove, 
and results in a series with some more and some less 
than 25 blows which close the groove. Preferably, the 
range should be from 15 or more to 35 or less with 
two tests between 15 and 25 blows and two tests be- 
tween 25 and 35 blows. 

g. Material remaining in the mixing dish should 
be reserved for the plastic limit test. 

A. Computing the liquid limit is done graphically 
by plotting a "flow curve" with the number of blows 
and the water content as coordinates (fig. 2-76). The 
water content, on the left edge, is plotted on an arith- 
metic scale and the number of blows (along the bot- 
tom) is plotted on a logarithmic scale. If the points 
are relatively close to lying on a straight line, a 
straight line is drawn as nearly as possible through 
the plotted points, thus establishing an average be- 
tween the points. However, if the plotted points do 
not define a straight line, additional check runs 
should be made and new points plotted. The liquid 
limit is the water content corresponding to the point/ 
where the drawn straight line crosses the 25 blow co- 
ordinate. The liquid limit is read to the nearest 0.1 
percent, but is reported to the nearest whole number. 
Example (fig. 2-76) : In a given test, the determina- 
tions resulted in the following values : 



(1). 
(2). 
(3). 
(4). 



Number of blows Water content 

16 47. 3 

23-24 46. 6 

29 46. 3 

33 45. 5 



After plotting these four points and drawing a 
straight line as nearly as possible through them, the 
water content corresponding to the 25-blow coordinate 
is 46.3. Thus the liquid limit for this sample would 
be reported as 46. 

2-59. Simplified Liquid Limit Test 

The simplified test is based on the premise that the 
slope of the flow curve for soils within a given 
geologic environment is essentially constant. Thus, 
the liquid limit flow curve could be drawn using only 
one test point provided that test slope has been 
established by experience with other soils in the area. 
The simplified test should only be used in geologically 
similar areas and where adequate correlations have 
been made to define the slope of the flow curve. 
a. The apparatus for the simplified test is the same 



as that listed in paragraph 2-575. The sample is pre- 
pared as for a standard test except that its consistency 
is controlled to result in 20 to 30 blows to cause 
closure. 

&. Proceed with the test as described in paragraph 
2-57ft through d. The amount removed from the cup 
for the water content determination is replaced from 
the prepared sample. Remix the entire amount in 
the cup without the addition of water. Regroove the 
specimen and operate the device once again. The 
number of blows to close the groove -should be within 
two blows of the first measurement. If the disagree- 
ment is greater than two blows, the mixing was insuffi- 
cient and the entire test must be repeated. 

c. The liquid limit can be determined graphically 
by drawing a line through the one plotted point at the 
predetermined slope or by using the following 
equation : 



0. 12 



Where : 

WN= water content at N" blows 
N = number of blows to close the groove 

Values of (^/25)- 12 are given in table 2-4. The 
exponent 0.12 is an average value to be used in this 
simplified method if the slope of the flow curve is 
not known for the particular soil. If the correct slope 
is known, the corresponding exponent is to be used. 
See ASTM Designation D 423 and AASHO Designa- 
tion T 89. 

Talle 2-2Jf. Values of (N.25) OM For Liquid Limit Test 

N (N/S5)-u 

20 0. 974 

21 0.979 

22 0. 985 

23 0.990 

24 0. 995 

25 1. 000 

26 1. 005 

27 1.009 

28 1.014 

29 1. 018 

30 1. 022 

2-60. Plastic Limit Test Preparation 

a. Definition. The plastic limit of a soil is the water 
content, expressed as a percentage of weight of oveii- 
dried soil, at which the soil begins to crumble when 
rolled into a thread % inch in diameter. 

T). Apparatus. The apparatus for the plastic limit 
test consists of the following : 

(1) Surface for rolling such a ground glass 
plate, a piece of linoleum, or a tabletop of close 
grained wood. Paper may be used as a rolling surface 
provided that it does not give off lint which can be 
picked up by the sample during rolling. 



(2) Spatula. 

(3) Containers (boxes, stainless steel, such, as 
used in the liquid limit test) . 

(4) Balance, sensitive to 0.01 g. 

(5) Oven (preferably automatically controlled 
for 105 to 110 C). 

( 6 ) Evaporating dish. 

G. Preparation. Approximately 20 g of material is 
required for the plastic limit test. The sample is pre- 
pared as described for a liquid limit test or is the 
material remaining after the liquid limit is tested. 

2-61. Plastic Limit Test Procedure 

The test procedure consists of the following steps: 

a. Record all identifying information for the sam- 
ple on the data sheet, bottom half (fig. 2-Y6) . 

&. Take approximately 5 g of the prepared ma- 
terial. The sample should be taken at any stage of 
drying when the mass is just plastic enough to be 
shaped into a ball that will not stick to the fingers 
when squeezed. 

G. Shape the test sample into a ellipsoid and roll it 
between the fingers and rolling surface (fig. 2-82) 
using enough pressure to roll the soil mass into a 
'thread % inch in diameter. The rate of rolling 
should be between 80 and 90 strokes per minute. One 
stroke is considered a complete forward and back 
motion returning to the starting position. 

d. When the thread diameter reaches % mc h with- 
out crumbling, remold the sample into a ball and 
repeat the rolling process. Continue remolding and 
rolling until the ball has dried sufficiently for the 
rolled thread to crumble (fig. 2-83) . The plastic limit 
has been reached when the thread crumbles (regard- 
less of diameter) if the original %-inch diameter has 
been reached at least once. Do not precipitate crum- 
bling at exactly the %-inch diameter by reducing 
the rate of rolling, the hand pressure, or both, and 
do not roll beyond the y 8 -inch diameter. It is permis- 
sible, however, to reduce the total amount of defor- 





Figure 2-83. Rolled, threads, uncrumbled, and crumbled. 

mation for poorly plastic soils by making the initial 
diameter of the ellipsoidal-shaped mass nearer the 
required %-inch final diameter. Continue to roll until 
all the soil has crumbled. (It does not crumble all at 
the same time.) 

e. Collect the crumbled portions and determine 
the water content. 

/. Repeat the process with an additional portion 
of the prepared sample to obtain an average value 
for the plastic limit. The two tests should agree 
within 1 percent moisture content or the test must 
be repeated. 

g. Record sample weight and computations on the 
data sheet. Weighing should be accurate to 0.01 g 
and water content computed to one decimal place. 
Report the limit to the nearest whole number. 

li. Computing the plastic limit is done as follows : 



Water content for each run 
weight of water 






Figure 2-82. Rollina-the soil, plastic limit test. 



weight of oven-dried soil 

Plastic limit = aver age of water content from 

two or more runs (fig. 2-76). 
Plasticity index= liquid limit plastic limit; or 

PI=LL-PL 

Example (fig. 2-76) : In this example, the following 
data were obtained. Determine the plasticity index. 

Liquid limit =LL= 46 
Plastic limit = PL= 18 
Plasticity index=PI=LL-PL; PI=46 

-18=28 

262. Shrinkage Factors 

The Shrinkage limit of a soil is the water content, 
expressed as a percentage of oven- dried soil, at which 
further loss in moisture will not cause a decrease in 
the volume. The shrinkage ratio, (R), and linear 
shrinkage, (L s ), are usually determined as part of 



this test. The shrinkage ratio is defined as the ratio 
between a given volume change and the correspond- 
ing change in water above the shrinkage limit. Linear 
shrinkage is the decrease in one dimension of a soil 
mass when the water content is reduced from a given 



value to the shrinkage limit. The procedure for de- 
termining shrinkage factors of soils is given in 
ASTM Designation D 427. Shrinkage factors are 
useful information for certain soils encountered in 
heavy frost areas (TM 5-349). 



Section X. COMPACTION CONTROL TEST 



2-63. Discussion 

a. One of the basic construction procedures in- 
volved in building subgrades and bases for roads and 
airport pavements, enbankments, earth-fill dams, and 
similar structures is compaction. Compaction is the 
process of increasing the amounts of solids per unit 
volume by mechanical means. Field compaction is 
accomplished by rolling, or 'by the passage of con- 
struction equipment. Laboratory compaction may be 
accomplished by the impact of hammer blows, vibra- 
tion, static loading, or any other method which does 
not alter the water content of the soil. In general, 
efficient and adequate compaction in the field is at- 
tained by compacting the soil at a moisture content 
and to a density established in the laboratory. 

b. As related to compaction, the term dry 
"density" means dry unit weight, that is, pounds per 
cubic foot of soil computed on an over-dry basis. 
Laboratory compaction generally is accomplished by 
placing the soil in a cylinder of known volume and 
dropping a tamper of known weight onto the soil 
from a known height for a given number of blows. 
The amount of energy which is applied in this dy- 
namic compaction procedure is called compactive 
effort. For the large majority of soils and for a given 
compactive effort, the density of the soil will increase 
to a certain point as the moisture content is increased, 
then start to decrease with any 'further increase in 
moisture content. The moisture content at which 
maximum density occurs is called the optimum mois- 
ture content for that compactive effort. For a given 
soil, each compactive effort has its own optimum 
moisture content ; as the compactive effort is in- 
creased, the maximum density generally increases 
and the optimum moisture content decreases. 

G. Compaction tests in the laboratory are per- 
formed to determine such properties of the soil as 
(1) The effect of varying percentages of water 
on dry density. 

(*2) The maximum density obtainable under a 
given compactive effort. 

( 3 ) The optimum moisture content. 

d. The compaction control test used by the Corps 

of Engineers is the modified version of the standard 

AASHO* method T 180, and conforms entirely to 

10TM Designation D 1557. This method is intended 

^ determine the relationship between moisture con- 



* American Association of State Highway Officials. 



tent and density of soils when compacted in a mold 
of a given size with a 10 pound tamper dropped from 
a height of 18 inches. 

2-64. Preparation 

The ASTM compaction procedure may be performed 
either in the standard Proctor mold or the larger 
laboratory CBR (California bearing ratio) mold. 
The mold to be used as determined by particle size 
in the soil sample. Fine grained soils (passing No. 4 
sieve) are compacted in the Proctor mold whereas 
soils contining up to %-inch material should be com- 
pacted in the CBR mold. 

a. Apparatus. The apparatus used in the compac- 
tion test consists of 

(1) Compaction cylinder (Proctor mold). A 
cylindrical metal mold 4: inches in diameter and 4.584: 
inches high having a volume of % cubic foot. The 
mold is fitted with a detachable base plate and a 
removable extension collar 2i/ inches high. 

(2) Compaction cylinder (CBR mold) . A cylin- 
drical metal mold 6 inches in diameter and 4.5 or 
more inches high having a removable extension col- 
lar. If the mold is higher than 4.5 inches (usually 
7 inches) , the compacted sample is controlled to 4.5 
or 5 inches by means of a spacer disk to act as a false 
bottom. The spacer disk is % 6 inch smaller in diam- 
eter than the mold and 2 to 2i/ inches high. The CBR 
mold is used for samples containing material re- 
tained on the No. 4 sieve and for any type of sample 
in the CBR test (sec. XII) . The volume of the mold 
is 0.075 cubic foot at an inside height df 4.584 inches 
and 0.0818 cubic foot at an inside height of 5 inches. 

(3) Compaction tamper. The tamper is a sliding 
weight, 2 inches in diameter and weighing 10 pounds, 
which is attached to a plunger and handle that move 
with the tamper in a tamper guide (fig. 2-84) . The 
height of fall is designed to be 18 inches. 

(4) Balances, 25 kg capacity, sensitive to 1 g 
and 5 kg capacity, sensitive to 0.1 g. 

'(5) Three sieves to process the soil (2 inch, % 
inch, and No. 4) . 

(6) Straightedge, steel. 

(7) Mixing tools, such as pans, spoon, trowel, 
spatula, or electric mixer. 

(8) Other general laboratory equipment includ- 
ing that necessary to perform moisture content deter- 
minations (para. 2-54). 

b. Sample Preparation. Samples are prepared dif- 



TAMPER GUIDE 




Figure 2-84- Soil compaction in a mold. 

f erently depending on whether they are fine grained 
or gravelly soils. 

(1) Fine grained soils with no material retained 
on the No. 4 sieve require approximately 30 pounds, 
dry weight, of soil (about 5 pounds for each mold) 
for the test. The soil is air-dried until it can pass 
readily through the No. 4 sieve. All lumps are broken 
up into individual particles to obtain a uniform mix- 
ture. After screening through No. 4 sieve, the sample 
is thoroughly mixed and an initial moisture-content 
determination is made. The sample is stored in an 
airtight container until ready for use. 

(2) Gravelly soils are compacted in the GBR 
mold using material which passes the %-inch sieve. 
The sample is air-dried and screened over a %-inch 
sieve. If any particles are larger than % inch, a 
processing-for-size correction is required before the 
test. Approximately 75 pounds, dry weight, of proc- 
essed soil is required for the test (12 pounds per 
mold). To determine the size corrections, separate 
the material on the %-inch and the No. 4 sieves. 
Weigh the three fractions and compute the percent- 
age ~by weight retained on the two sieves and passing 
the No. 4 sieve. The material retained on the %-inch 
sieve is to be discarded. It is then, in effect, replaced 
in the sample from the portion retained on the No. 4 
sieve. One method of doing this is to sieve an addi- 
tional sample of the material and use the portion 
retained on the No. 4 sieve to replace the discarded 
material greater than ^-inch of the total soil sample. 
However, once the desired percentages are computed, 
the amount retained on No. 4 could remain constant 
and the portion passing No. 4 reduced to correct pro- 
portions as indicated in the example below. The re- 
constituted material and the portion passing the No. 
4 sieve are recombined in the desired proportions, 
well mixed, and stored in an airtight container until 
ready for use. Reconstituting the soil restricts the 
maximum size oif particles and avoids the problem of 



trying to compact material into a layer thinner than 
the largest size particles. 

(3) Example (size correction for gravelly 
soils). Total weight of an air-dried natural sample 
is 110 pounds. The table gives the results of soil com- 
paction test. 



Natural sample 



Processed sample 



Screen size 



Desired Computed 

Retained on screen percentage weight 
Ib percent percent Ib 



%inch 16.0 14. 6 

No. 4 44.0 40.0 54.6 44.0 

Passing No. 4 50.0 45.4 45.4 36.5 

Total 110.0 100.0 100.0 80.5 

This computation permits using all of the material 
retained on the No. 4 sieve, and making the correc- 
tion by reducing some of the material which has 
passed the No. 4 sieve. If the weight of the material 
passing the sieve was held constant, more natural 
material would have to be sieved while the original 
44 pounds retained on the No. 4 sieve would have to 
be transferred and held during this extra step. 

2-65. Procedure 

a. The compaction test procedures for the fine 
grained soils and the gravelly soils are the same with 
two exceptions: first, the Proctor mold is used for 
the fine and the GBR mold for the gravelly, and 
second, 25 tamper blows per layer are used in the 
Proctor mold and 55 blows per layer in the GBR 
mold. This results in equal compactive efforts for 
the two molds and the different sizes of soil. The 
test procedure is as follows: 

(1) From the prepared material (para 2-64), 
weigh out about 12-15 pounds (GBR mold) or 5-7 
pounds (Proctor mold) dry weight of soil. 

(2) Determine the quantity of water which, 
when mixed with the soil, will cause it to adhere 
or ball together slightly when squeezed firmly in the 
palm of the hand. Add the water to the sample and 
mix thoroughly. 

(3) Store the water-mixed material in an air- 
tight container for approximately 24 hours to per- 
mit the moisture content to become uniform. 

(4) Weigh out at least four additional speci- 
mens ( (1) above). For each specimen, progressively 
increase the water content (determined in (2) 
above) about 2 percent over the previous one. (For 
adjustment of water content, see para 2-66). Mix 
and store each specimen in a separate airtight con- 
tainer. Note that sandy soils absorb moisture readily 
and 24 hour storage may not be required. In this 
case, separate the five or more specimens and add 
the water before testing. Do not reuse a tested 
specimen. 

(5) Cover the proper mold with a light coat 
of oil and weigh it to the nearest gram. Do not in- 
clude base plate and extension collar. Record the 
weight on the data sheet, DD Form 1210 (fig. 2-85) . 



2-72 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




8 



65 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-73 



(6) Prepare the mold by attaching the collar 
and mounting the base, if necessary, and setting it 
on a concrete floor or other rigid support, such as a 
pedestal. If using the GBR mold with the spacer 
disk, place filter paper on top of the disk. 

(7) Place a sufficient amount of the first pre- 
pared specimen into the mold to result in a 1-inch 
compacted layer (usually between 1- and 1%-inch 
uncompacted thickness) . 

(8) Compact the material in the mold with 
25 blows (55 blows in the CBE mold) of the 10- 
poimd tamper from a height of 18 inches (fig. 2-84) . 
Hold the tamper vertically, place its face on top of 
the soil, raise the handle until it reaches the top, 
and let the weight fall freely onto the soil. Change 
the position of the guide and tamper, and repeat 
the process until the soil layer has received the pre- 
scribed number of blows. Be sure that the tamping 
is evenly distributed around the soil in the mold. 
After compacting each layer, check the height of 
the compacted layer to see if the compacted thick- 
ness is 1 inch; if more than 1 inch in thickness, 
add less soil for the next layer ; if less than 1 inch, 
add more soil for the next layer. 

(9) Using a sharp pointed instrument, scarify 
the surface of the compacted layer to a depth of about 
i/4 inch; a grid of scratch lines % inch to 1 inch 
apart provides the proper degree of scarifying. Add 
the next layer of the speciment ((7) above) and 
repeat the tamping process ((8) above). Continue 
adding and tamping until five layers have been com- 
pacted in the mold. The fifth layer should extend 
slightly above the top of the mold, and into the 
collar. 

(10) With a knife or spatula, cut around the 
inside edge of the collar to prevent shearing the com- 
pacted soil when removing the collar. Carefully re- 
move the collar and using the straightedge or spatula, 
trim the excess portion above the exact level of the 
top of the mold (fig. 2-86) . Use a sawing back and 
forth motion of the straightedge to trim the excess 
soil ; start at the center of the mold and work out- 
ward, first to one side and then to the other. 

(11) Remove mold, with the compacted speci- 
men in it, from the base plate and weigh mold plus 
specimen. Record weight of mold plus soil (fig. 2-85) . 

(12) Take two samples of the compacted soil, 
one from the top and one from the bottom (fig. 
2-87) , for a moisture-content determination. Weigh 
these samples to 0.1 g and save them for the remain- 
ing moisture-content procedures. 




Figure 2-86. Trimming the compacted soil sample. 

NOTE 

(Take sample for moisture content from 
loose layer before compacting if sample is 
used for CBR determination.) 

(13) Repeat (6) through (12) above, for the 
remaining specimens. 

(14) After completing the compaction portion 
of the test, complete the moisture-content determina- 
tions (para 2-54). 

Z>. The following computations can be made with 
data obtained : 

(1) Wet iwiit weight. The weight of the com- 
pacted specimen and the mold (a (11) above) minus 
the weight of the mold alone (a (5) above) is the 
weight of the compacted specimen. The wet unit 
weight is equal to the weight of the compacted speci- 
men divided by the volume of the mold. The volume 
of the Proctor mold is % cubic foot ; the 7-inch CBR 
mold with 2-inch spacer is 0.0818 cubic foot and with 
a 2%-inch spacer is 0.0750 cubic foot. 

(2) Moisture content (10). This is determined 
as described in paragraph 2-54, 



wt of water 
wt of dry solids 



X100. 



2-74 



(3) Dry unit weight. 

T-k -^ -LJ. 
Dry unit weight= 



unit 



content 



__ 

(4) Optimum moisture content (OMO). The 
OMC is determined from a curve obtained by plot- 
ting the moisture content against the equivalent dry 
unit weight on arithmetic graph paper. The plotted 
points are joined to form a curve (DD Form 1211 
(fig. 2-88) ). The highest point on the curve is desig- 
nated 100 percent or maximum modified AA'SHO 
density and the moisture content corresponding to 
this reading is the optimum moisture content for this 
density. In figure 2-88, the maximum density for the 
55-blow curve is 127.2 pounds per cubic foot and 
optimum moisture content is 10.9 percent. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



TOP SAMPLE 




BOTTOM SAMPLE 



Figure 2-87. TaMng moisture-content samples of a compacted 
specimen. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 8*-3 



2-75 



SOIL COMPACTION TEST GRAPH 


DATE 


PROJECT / - 

JAMOCK AlRFIE 


r~) 


RESULTS 


*-'"' MAXIMUM 


DRY UNIT WEIGHT 


EXCAVATION NUMBER SAMPLE 

1ZI-ECHO 


NUMBER J 




MOISTURE (Water) CONTENT 

jo. 9 % 


F"/N&- GrK.AlN.E-C> SOIL. 


^f- 






1 JO - 












3 
















i 








\ 








"^ i 








^ 


i 






\ 








"^ . 




tin 




>. 




uu 




t ... 
















i 






MAXIMUM DENSITY 


5 <** 






_L ... ^o 


L^ L 






^'"'*" H! 4 "* < 's w." f <S>'~ 


' 






/ ^ *^K k-^r L. 








~4 *- ' ^ v -^ O 




ISJT 




2 i2 ^ ^5 








f _ 1 . J* 




*, 




Z S Vi ^" 




o 




2 U 4 J Wt* 


^p 








^ 




t 




5. 




2" 


_ - k 


-^ ^N 


a 


> 


, 1 


u V ^3 


a 




- - \- 


Vk. ^ 






21 *l 




^ i 




UJ^ 


$ r % ^- - - 


a. 


^- 


J- 2 -f 


\~ S; ' 




~jt 


| ft 


L 5 


c 


~jt ~" 




\- S 


a 







2 \ t 


o. 






\ S 


^^ 


4 ^ 


3 JL 


J^ ^__ 


1 ^ ~- 


^ ' _ 


~" v* 
O* 


^ ^5 


s - i 

t 




_ 5 1 




LU 








( 




-$i 




=5 

J/o 




IT nT mffr 

-i it- 





*$ j 


f JT fo r 

MOISTURE Cirt 


-i 

i 

3 9 to a (2, 13 I 

r) CONTENT, W (per cent of dry welt 


4 IS 16 17 
ht) 


TECHNICIAN (Signature) PLOTT 
>^ 


EO BY (Signature) CHECKE 

/^7^? (//? t^tir't^ / 


ID BY (Signature) 



r\ r\ FORM 1011 

^ **1 AUG 57 1 fc 1 I 



GPO 3T33 



Figure 2-88. Determination of optimum moisture content. 



4tl 8-320 O ft 



2-66. Adjustment of Moisture Content 

a. The OMC curve is drawn with dry density and 
moisture content as coordinates. To construct an ac- 
ceptable curve, at least two of the plotted points 
should fall on one side and two on the other side 
of the OMC. However, it is important to remember 
that during the testing period the only density that 
can be determined is the wet soil density or wet unit 
weight. To compute the dry density, the moisture 
content must be determined and this can take up 
to 24 hours, 

&. An acceptable curve can be obtained by starting 
at a water content to produce a sample just wet 
enough to ball together when squeezed and released. 
Additional points can be obtained by increasing the 
water content by 2 percent for each of four subse- 
quent samples. This may not always be true. At 
times, it may be necessary to increase the water by as 
much as 4 percent per step to get the proper curve. 

c. One method to determine when the OMC has 
been reached while testing is to compare the wet 
weights of the various samples after compaction. The 
OMC and maximum density have been passed when 
the wetter compacted sample shows a decline in 
weight over the previous drier sample. If this occurs 
with the third or fourth sample, the curve will have 
at least two plotted points on either side of the OMC. 

d. To aid in the selection of increments (2 percent 
to 4 percent increases) hints can be taken from typi- 
cal curves. Generally, the more plastic the soil, the 
flatter the curve, and the higher the OMC. By ex- 
perience, it is possible to select appropriate incre- 
ments for the soil to be tested. 

e. To compute the amount of water required to 
raise the moisture content of a soil to a certain per- 
centage, the following data must be known : 

Weight of soil sample 
Present moisture content 
Desired moisture content 

An example of the computation is given below: 
Assume a 12 pound sample with a 3 percent moisture 
content must be raised to 10 percent. 



=11 . 65 lb 

G l.Ud 



1+; 



1+- 



100 A '100 
where moisture content (w) is 

u ._ weight of water 
weight of dry soil 

'hus: Weight of water 

_moisture content X dry weight of soil 



The 7 percent moisture content is derived from the 
required value (10 percent) minus the content in the 
soil (3 percent). 
To convert to grams : 

0.816 pound X454g/lb= 370 g. 

The formulas above may be combined into one for- 
mula, thus : Water to be added (in grams, cc, or ml) 



' wet soil weight (lb) N 
moisture content 
100 , 



. 
+ 



1X454 
X 



moisture difference (%) 
100 



100 



7X11.65 
100 



-=0.816 pound 



2-67. Degree of Saturation 

a. At complete saturation, the voids (space between 
particles) in the soil mass are completely filled with 
water, that is, no air is present, and the degree of 
saturation, (S), is equal to 100 percent. The zero air 
voids curve (100 percent saturation) for the soil used 
(specific gravity, G, equal to 2.72) is shown on the 
plot of figure 2-88. This curve is obtained by plotting 
dry densities corresponding to complete saturation at 
different moisture contents. 

&. When saturation is complete, ( S'= 100) , the mois- 
ture content, (w 100 ), required to fill all voids is de- 
pendent upon only the specific gravity of the soil 
particles (G) and the dry unit weight, (w a ), 

_62.43 1 

^(100) ~ri 

Wd Cr 

(The unit weight of 1 cubic foot of water is 62.4 lb) . 
This expression may be used to compute points for 
plotting the zero air voids curve. Table 2-5 gives 
values of water content and densities at zero air voids 
(complete saturation) for the usual range of specific 
gravity and dry density. The specific gravity of the 
soil is determined by the described methods. 

c. The zero air voids curve represents theoretical 
values which are practically unattainable, because it 
is not possible to remove all the air contained in the 
voids of a soil by compaction alone. Typically, at 
moisture contents beyond optimum, the actual com- 
paction curve closely parallels theoretically perfect 
compaction curve. Any values of dry density which 
plot to the right of the zero air voids curve are in 
error. The error may be in the test measurement, the 
calculations, or the specific gravity. 

d. It is sometimes desirable to know the degree of 
saturation corresponding to points on the actual com- 
paction curve. With the plot of figure 2-88 available, 
the degree of saturation which corresponds to any 
point on the moisture-density curve may be calcu- 
lated by dividing the actaul water content of the 
specimen by the water content which corresponds to 
100 percent saturation (at the same density). 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89^-3 



2-77 



oo oooo co oo en o> en en cnccooooooo Z Z "Z Z Z 'Z Z ^ ^ ^ 
o> oo-4-vnr-.cnocMoo LA MO co en CM -4- LA MO co cnocMooj-Mor->.coo^- cM 

loOCnenOOOOOO * CM CM CM CM CM CM CMOOOOOOOOOOOOOO-4--4- -4--4--4--4--4"-4"LALALALA 



oocr\cr\cr\cncr\cn(T\cr\o 



oocn'-cM.4-u-\r^coCT\ cMcoiAMOf--cno-- roj- un r-oo en o CM 00.4- LA MO 
r^.r^oo'coooooooco'oocn cncncncncncnoooo 1 H Z 



o oo -4- LT\ r- oo o-\ CM 



CTiOOCTv' CM-4-LTNI OOO 



I OOCT\OCM 



r--r--cooo oooooocooocncncncncn cncnoocoooooo 

, _ . __ _ _ _ , _ , , >_ r CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM 



CNJJ-LAU3 COCTtO 



^- . CM CM CM 



CM CM CM CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM 



C^ CM C^ C^ CM CM r^ CM CM CM CM CM cil ctl N ptl CM ctl Csl N Rj W CM - CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM 



r-voocncncncnoooooo o ~- 




r^-oo cncnmcncno 



OO' i CM cMCMCMCMcMcMcoooooco oooooooO-4--4'-4--4'-4'-4" 

LALALALALALALAIALALA LALALALAIAUALALALALA UALAUALALALALALALALA 

CM cOLAMOr-OOO CMOOLA 



i cr\ 



r--oo o CM 



CMCOLA 



MO MO MO MO MO MO ^D 



vO vO *D vD MO vO MO MO MO vD 
CMCOLAvOOOCn CMOO 



oooooooooocncncncncn 

MO MD MO VO **O MO MO MO MO vO VO MO MO MO ^.O 



- CMCOJJ-LTVMOOOCTV 



ooo CMJ-I^VOOOCT\O cMpo-4-u-vrv.oocno 




o > m 

<1) 05 

D. 1- M_ 

</> ai o 



. . _ , _._._._._.^.___ __MOvDr-.r^r-r^r-t^ r-.cococooococooococn 
cocococococooocooooooooo cooococooococoooooco oococooooooooooooooo oooooooococooocncncn 



Or- CMcO-4-LAMOr^COCT\ 

oocooooooocooococooo 

CMd4CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM 



c cn cn o 



r-*.fM oo 
d o CM 



OO <""* Cn LA LA 
CM CM C-\^f 



LA !" CM f"\ 
LA\D 



LA O vO CM CM 

LA vO vO r^CO 



CO J" O LA LA 



r1 O\ J- O O 



CM CO -3" (TV O 



CT\ tA O vD VJD 




CO f^ CT> LA IA 



CO CTi ON O 
-3" -d" -^ LA IA 



CM CM ro J- 
vO vO vD vD vO 



<T\ <T\ O O 

rx r^oo QO co 



O CM m 
CT\ cn cr* crv cn 



O LA O LA LA 
CM CM P-V (^ f^ 



JZ 

cn 

(0 (0 



o 

- 1 (C 

4J . 

<D 3 

i- E 

3 L. 



<U E 
0) O 
l_ 1_ 
01'+- 
01 

TJ TJ 
0) 



O Q. 

M E 

O 



O ro 

!- 4-1 

<u m 

M Q 



For example : at maximum density for the soil repre- 
sented by the plot of figure 2-88, the actual water 
content is 10.9 percent ; at 100 percent saturation and 
the same density, the corresponding moisture is 12.3 
percent. Therefore, the degree of saturation and max- 
imum density is equal to 10.9% /12.3% = 0.89 or 89%. 

2-68. Other Compactive Efforts 
Under some circumstances, it may be necessary to 
use a compactive effort in the laboratory which is 
different from the modified AASHO (or ASTM) 
compaction procedure. The usual reason for doing 
this is to study the effect of variation in density upon 



some property of the soil, such as the CBR. In this 
case, samples are compacted using the procedures 
previously described, except that the variation in 
density is achieved by varying the number of blows 
applied to each layer and by choosing one of the two 
tampers available. In unusual circumstances, the lab- 
oratory compaction procedure may be changed to 
produce -a compactive effort which more closely re- 
sembles the energy that can be put into the soil by the 
use of available rolling equipment. In the CBK test, 
the compaction procedure calls for 12, 26, or 55 blows 
per layer. This is discussed under the California 
Bearing Ratio (sec XII). 



Section XI. DENSITY DETERMINATION 



269. Introduction 

Proper field control is of paramount importance in 
earthwork construction. The control tests are con- 
ducted on the soil at the jobsite as construction pro- 
ceeds. If at any time the tests indicate that operations 
are not producing a soil condition specified by the 
design tests, immediate action should be taken to 
remedy the situation. Additional facts about the con- 
trol of earthwork construction are contained in TM 
5-335. 

a. The stress-deformation characteristics of a soil 
are directly related to the moisture content and densi- 
ty of the soil. Consequently, it is possible to set up the 
specifications for a given soil on the basis of moisture 
content and density, as indicated in paragraph 2-63. 
Field control then consists of taking samples for 
moisture content and density determinations as con- 
struction proceeds. Densities obtained are compared 
with minimum densities established for the particular 
job, while water contents are compared, generally, 
with the optimum moisture content previously es- 
tablished to see that compaction is taking place with- 
in the desired range or to permit its adjustment, if 
necessary. 

&. An undisturbed sample of known or measurable 
dimensions provides information for the computa- 
tion of density and the moisture content of the soil. 
However, if the soil is not in proper condition dur- 
ing construction to remove an undisturbed sample, 
fche density determination requires measuring the 
volume of the hole after the sample is removed. The 
procedure consists of filling the hole with a measured 
quantity of a known-density material, such as sand, 
oil, or water, and computing the volume of the hole 
which is equal to the volume of soil removed. The 
soil's moisture content and density are then 
determined. 

c. The method for in-place density depends upon 
tihe type of soil encountered and the equipment avail- 
able. On moist, cohesive, fine grained soils, un- 



disturbed samples (para 2-17) using the samplers 
may be sufficient. Coarse grained soils or cohesionless 
soils make it difficult to obtain an undisturbed sam- 
ple. In these soils, density determination by the dis- 
placement method may be required. Sand-displace- 
ment may be used on any type of base course or 
subgrade material. Oil-displacement cannot be 
used on highly pervious soils, or crushed stone 
or slag base courses. In addition, if the pavement 
to 'be used is asphaltic concrete, the residual oil and 
spillage will tend to soften the asphalt. Water- 
displacement requires the use of a balloon to contain 
the water and can be used on any type of soil. 

270. Sand-Displacement Equipment 
Preparation 

The sand-displacement method may be used in either 
fine or coarse grained materials. This method is so 
named because a calibrated sand is used to determine 
the volume of the hole from which a sample has 
been taken. 

a. Requirements. The test consists of digging out 
a sample of the material to be tested, determining 
the volume of the hole, and determining the dry 
weight of the sample. There are three requirements 
that must be met for this test. 

( 1 ) The volume of the sample must be 0.05 cubic 
foot or larger. Samples of 0.05-cubic foot volume 
are satisfactory for materials with a maximum ag- 
gregate size of about !/% inch. For 1-inch particles 
a minimum of 0.075 cubic foot, and for 2-inch par- 
ticles 0.100 cubit foot are required. 

(2) A double-cone cylinder must be used. This 
permits calibrating the sand for each test performed. 

(3) The sand must be clean, dry, and free flow- 
ing with a constant moisture content while perform- 
ing the test. Uniformly-graded and well-rounded 
sand passing a No. 20 sieve and retained on a No. 40 
sieve is most suitable for this test. There should be 
practically no material finer than the No. 200 sieve 
in the sand. 



2-80 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



l>. Equipment. The essential equipment, some of 
which is shown in figure 2-89, consists of 

Can, friction-top, 1-gallon capacity 

Cylinder, soil-compaction 

Digger, density 

Hammer 

Knife 

Nails, 20 d, common 

Pie plate 

Scale, bench, twin weigh beams, 21,100-gram 
capacity 

Spoon, cooking 

Straightedge, steel 

Tester, soil density, sand method, double cone as- 
sembly, with 1-gallon sand jug 

Tray, template, soil density, 4-in. hole 
A 4-in. pesthole auger, a bake pan, and moisture con- 
tent cans are also needed. A paint brush with mod- 
erately long bristles and some modeling clay will be 
needed in some cases. 

c. Calibration. The volume of the jar and connect- 
ing cone up through the valve, and the empty weight 
of the apparatus must be known before the sand can 



be calibrated. A data sheet (fig. 2-90) should be 
prepared for recording the information. The sand 
calibration is repeated prior to each test. One other 
calibration must be made to account for surface irreg- 
ularities between the surface of the cone base and the 
surface to be tested. 

(1) Apparatus calibration. To determine the 
weight and volume of the apparatus, the procedure 
is 

(a} Weigh the empty dry cone and jar, and 
record the weight (in grams) . 

(b) Screw the cone tightly on the jar, place 
apparatus upright and open valve. 

(c) Fill the apparatus with water at room 
temperature until the water level stands some distance 
up in the top cone. Make sure no air bubbles are 
trapped in the apparatus. 

(d) Close the cone valve, pour off the excess 
water, shake the apparatus to check for entrapped 
bubbles, and dry the cone and outside of the 
apparatus. 

(e) Weigh the water-filled apparatus and re- 
cord the weight (in grams) . 



COMPACTION 

CYLINDER, 

SOIL 



SCALE, BENCH, 
21,100-GRAM 



CONE, 
SAND. 
DENSITY 



HAMMER BRL| SH, 
VARNISH 




CAN, FRICTION 
TOP, 1-GALLON 



STAIGHTEDGE, 
STEEL 



TRAY, TEMPLATE 



Figure 2-89. Sand-disolaoement method avnaratus. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-81 



(/) Empty the water from the apparatus. 

(g) Repeat (b) through (/) above, at least- 
two or more times. 

(7i) Compute the volume of the apparatus by 
averaging the measured weights, converting the aver- 
age to pounds (divide by 453.6 g/lb) , and converting 
the average weight in pounds to volume (divide by 
62.4 pounds per cubic foot) . The result is the volume 
in cubic feet. Note the example of the computation in 
figure 2-90. 

(2) Sand calibration. The bulk density of sand 
is affected by changes in temperature and humidity. 
Sand calibration must be checked prior to each test. 
The information is recorded on DD Form 1215 (fig. 
2-91) . The procedure is as follows : 

(a) Weigh the empty cone and jar, and record 
the weight (line 2, fig. 2-91) . 

(b) Check the cone to see that it is screwed 
tightly on the jar and place the apparatus on a firm, 
level surface. 

(c) Close the cone valve and fill the upper 
cone with air-dried sand. 

(d) Open the cone valve and as the sand runs 
into the jar, keep adding more sand to the upper cone 
to maintain a steady, full stream of sand through the 
valve. Be careful not to jar the apparatus while the 
sand is being poured. 

(e) When the jar and lower cone are filled, 
and the sand stops flowing, close the valve. 

(/) Dump the excess sand from the upper 
cone. 



(g) Weigh the sand-filled apparatus and re- 
cord the weight (line 1, fig. 2-91 ) . 

(k) Compute the calibrated density (in Ib/cu 
ft) by subtracting the weight of the empty apparatus 
from the weight of the filled apparatus (line 1 minus 
2 equals line 3, fig. 2-91), and dividing first by 453.6 
to convert grams to pounds, and then by the volume 
of the apparatus (line 4) . 

(i) An alternate method of sand calibration 
is to use a container of known volume, such as the 
Proctor mold. The mold with base plate attached is 
weighed empty. The collar is attached and the sand 
cone with the valve open is placed on top. The sand 
is poured from about the same height that it will fall 
in a field-dug hole and allowed to fall at its own rate 
into the mold. When the sand stops running into the 
mold, the valve on the cone is closed. The sand cone 
and the mold collar are carefully removed, in turn. 
The excess sand remaining on top of the mold is 
struck oft' with a straightedge. Any sand adhering to 
the outside of the mold is brushed off. The mold, full 
of sand, is weighed. The entire process is repeated 
and the two weights (mold full of sand) are averaged. 
The weight of the empty mold is subtracted from the 
average of the full weights. The difference in weights 
divided by the known volume of the container is equal 
to the density of the sand. 

(3) /Surface calibration. One more calibration 
must be made prior to starting the test. However, it 
is performed after the surface is prepared and the 
template tray is in place (para 2-Yla (2) ) . 



CALIBRATION OF SAND-CONE APPARATUS 



Sand No. 



Batch No. 



Date 



J 


1 


2 


3 


Avg 


Weight of apparatus filled with water, grams 


/f,295 


//,Z99 


/I,3o3 




Weight of apparatus empty and dry, grams 


4Z4& 


4Z49 


4Z5o 




Weight of water, grams 


7047 


70^0 


7053 


70^0 



. . . . Weight in grams 7O5O 

Weight of water m pounds s ^ = >jga -^ = /5.34J? pounds 

453. o 



Volume of apparatus -- Weight water in pounds .75.54* 

62.3 



feef 



Figure 2-90. Sample data sheet, calibration of sand-cone density apparatus. 



2-82 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



m 1 T WE 1 QHT DETEitM 1 NAT 1 OH "" ,- ^ _ y ^ y/> 
"VOLUME OF HOLE 8 HETHOOS *- /Y 3 ^ / / /C/ 


PROJECT TfST SITf SAMPLE tfUBBf* 

>//flVlV/JV ^2.03 ^ S7V\ 50-1-00 203-6 

/ / T' r v /^ f " !-> ^. g-t M y\ f*" A JL. /*\<7*\ , 
y,., CS> 1 A"| J_^ ^r.*~r CJ V_> ^3 ^J "i^ __ ^7 


ADDITIONAL SPEC IPI CAT IONS 

FILL coMpAC'T/>*/ 


CONVCaSIOtl FACTODS 

1 ia. 1.84 ca, t pa. /ee or SS.4 U>,. /s. ft, a Bait veifit of mter 
1 16. a 4S.S fob 1 ca. ft a 1?IS ca ia. 


CAUeftATiOtt OF ITAaOAIS NATiaiAt. 


STAKOAMO MATCH IAL fChe& ) 
Q&tSANO CD OIL CUD OTBEfl <8pltv) 


APPARATUS OR TARE NUMBER 


UNITS 


:::: : .:::: : .::::::: 




iiiinilliiiiiiii; 








/ 


/ 






1. WEIGHT OF APPARATUS Off TARE FILLED 


f 


/2S30 








2. WEIGHT OF APPARATUS OP TARE EMPTY 




37/I 


^ 






3. WEIGHT OF MATERIAL fl.-J.) 


f 


881^? 


^ 






. VOLUME OF APPARATUS OR TARE 


A* ft 


.204-8 


^ 






5. UNIT WEIGHT OF MATERIAL (j^ 


Ih/cuft 


941 








6. AVERAGE UNIT WEIGHT OF MATERIAL 


li-'CU- PT 










CAUIRATIM OF AFfARATOS 




TEMPLATE NUMBER 

203-^, 203-J 


CONE NUII9ER 


1. INITIAL WEIGHT OF APPARATUS * SANO 




szszo 


/25I6 






8. FINAL WEIGHT OF APPARATUS * SAND 


fm 


JQ73I 


/^>877 






9. WEIGHT OF SAND IN TEMPLATE AND/OR CONE 


f 


I5<?<? 


^>2I 






VOUfMK OF HOLE 9 


10. INITIAL WEIGHT OF APPARATUS * MATERIAL 




fon\ 


/ fj DT / 






H. FINAL WEIGHT OF APPARATUS * MATERIAL 


frv 


6608 


^?(ff V* 






12. WEIGHT OF MATERIAL RELEASED C'.-Jf.) 


qrn 


432?> 


4&U 






I3e WEIGHT OF MATERIAL IN HOLE 


<%w 


21 & 


2t#S 






1. VOLUME OF HOLE f-r) 


o ft 


o&z 


.ou4 







DD FORM 1213, 1 AUO $7 



Figure 2-91. Data sheet, soil density in place, s<md cone method. 



IIYI O 



2-71 . Sand-Displacement Test Procedure 

The preparation and calibration up to this point have 
dealt solely with the equipment. The next procedures 
are performed on the soil at the site where the test 
is required. 

a. Site Preparation. Prior to the density determi- 
nation, a hole must be dug and a soil sample taken. 

(1) Setting the template. The ground surface 
where the density is to be determined is prepared by 
clearing and leveling. No attempt should be made to 
pack or smooth the surface with a spatula, trowel, or 
other tool. The template tray (j, fig. 2-89) should be 
seated flush on the surface, especially around the cen- 
ter hole. Any spaces on the inside edge under the plate 
should be sealed with modeling clay. Nails should be 
forced through the holes in the tray to hold it firmly 
in position. 

(2) Surface calibration. As mentioned in para- 
graph 2-70<?(3), the surface irregularities inside of 
the metal tray must be accounted for. To do this, the 
volume of space between the inner surface of the 
upper cone and the test surface must be checked. 

(a) The apparatus with its sand fill (para 
2-70c (2) ) is used for this calibration. 

(5) With the valve closed, turn the apparatus 
over, large cone down, and place it over the hole in 
the metal tray. Be careful not to jar or shake the 
container and cause packing of the sand. 

(c) Open the valve carefully and permit the 
sand to fill the space under the cone. 

(d) Close the valve and weigh the apparatus 
and remaining sand. Record this weight (line 8, fig. 
291). The difference in weight between the starting 
and final values (lines T and 8) is the weight of sand 
in the tray and cone (line 9) . 

(e) After making the calibration, recover as 
much of the sand from the tray as feasible without 
disturbing the tray or the soil in the hole. Brush the 
remaining sand particles lightly from within the 
tray. 

(3) Digging the sample. The next procedure is 
to dig into the soil through the center hole in the 
tray. A hole is required which is about 6 inches deep 
and approximately the same diameter as the hole 
in the tray. The digging of samples in nonplastic 
coarse grained soils is difficult, especially in keeping 
the walls of the hole undisturbed. Driving a chisel or 
other tool with a hammer should not be tried unless 
no other method works and then only near the cen- 
ter of the hole. The inside of the hole should be kept 
as free of pockets and sharp protuberances as pos- 
sible. Coarse grained material with plastic fines or 
fine grained soils are easier to dig. Care should be 
taken to remove all loose particles from the hole and 
to see that all the removed particles are included in 
a container whose weight has been previously de- 
termined and recorded (line 23, fig. 2-92) . Weigh the 
sample and container immediately and record the 



weight (line 15). Keep the lid on the container as 
much as possible to prevent excessive moisture loss 
until it can be weighed. The container should be 
marked for later identification when the soil mois- 
ture content is determined. 

5. Volume-Of-Hole Detennination. After the soil 
sample has been removed from the hole, the sand- 
density procedure is as follows: 

( 1 ) Place the sand-cone apparatus on the metal 
plate over the hole. Do not jar or shake the container 
to cause compaction of the sand. 

(2) Open the valve and allow the sand to fill 
the hole in the ground and the space under the cone. 

(3) When the sand stops flowing, close the 
valve, remove the apparatus, and weigh it and the 
remaining sand. Record this weight (line 11, fig. 
2-91). 

(4) The weight of sand required to fill the hole 
equals the weight of the apparatus and sand (line 8 
transferred to line 10) minus the final weight (from 
(3) above) and minus the weight of sand in the 
template and cone (line 9, from a(2) (d) above). 

(5) The volume of the hole is computed by di- 
viding the weight of sand in the hole by the cali- 
brated density or unit weight (line 6). 

c. Density Determination. With the volume of 
the hole computed the remaining requirements are 
the moisture content and the dry weights of the soil 
sample. 

( 1 ) The container with the sample (a ( 3 ) above) 
is oven dried, air-cooled, and weighed. Record this 
weight (line 16, fig. 2-92). The difference (line 15 
line 16= line IT) is the weight of water in the sam- 
ple. Subtracting the tare weight (line 18) from the 
dry soil and tare weight (line 16) results in the 
weight of dry soil (line 19) . Moisture content (line 
20) is the weight of water (line IT) divided by 
the dry weight (line 19) and expressed as a 
percentage. 

(2) If drying the entire sample and the con- 
tainer is not possible, an alternate but less desir- 
able method may be used. A specimen selected from 
the container is weighed and oven dried. Using the 
weight of the specimen and the entire sample, a per- 
centage is determined and the dry weight of the 
specimen is translated to give the dry weight of the 
entire sample. 

(3) The wet density or unit weight (line 25) 
is computed by dividing the wet soil weight (line 
24) by 453.6 to convert the grams to pounds, and 
then by the volume of the hole (line 14) . The dry 
density or unit weight is computed as follows : 



dry density (line 26)== 



wet density 



1 + 



_ 
100 



(4) The speedy moisture tester (para 2-55) 
is recommended when time is critical. 



2-84 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



MATE! COiTEIT DCTOMSBATlOa 



ARE NUMBER 



UNITS 



/a 



15. WEIGHT WET SOIL A TARE 



16. WEIGHT DRY SOIL & TARE 



17. WEIGHT WATER <tS..li.) 



/fffl 



U. WEIGHT TARE 



213 



19. WEIGHT DRY SOIL (it .-J*.> 



5722 



20. WATER CONTENT 



a 190) 



4-7 



21. AVERAGE WATER CONTENT 



rCRCCNI 



U*tT WEIGMT DCTCIMIIIATlOa 



_ 

- 7 



TARE NUMBER 



UNITS 



22. WEIGHT WET SOIL A TARE 



4/70 



23. WEIGHT TARE 



276 



213 



21. WEIGHT WET SOI L f"- -" . ) 



25. WET UNIT WE IGHT 



LB /CU FT 



26. DRY UNIT WEIGHT 



LB /CU FT 



REMARKS 







TCCNNICIAN C*i|nerj 



CHICKCO BT 



^^r; *^H^-**t 



Figure 2-92. Reverse of data sheet (DD Form 1215) for sand cone method. 



2-72. Liquid-Displacement Methods 

a. Oil-Displacement Method. This method is re- 
stricted because it cannot be used on pervious soils 
"which will absorb the oil quickly. In addition, resid- 
ual oil and spillage in a construction area will tend to 
soften asphaltic concrete placed in the area. How- 
ever, the method, when used, is similar to sand 
displacement. 

(1) The unit weight of oil must be known in 
pounds per cubic foot (SAE 40-weight oil is nor- 
mally used although heavier oil is acceptable. Oil 
lighter than SAE 30-weight should not be used). 
A 1000 cc graduate is weighed and its empty weight 
recorded. The oil is poured into the graduate to the 
1000 cc mark, and graduate and oil weighed. The unit 
weight of the oil (in Ib/cu ft) equals the weight of 
oil, less graduate (in grams), divided by 1000 (cc) 
and multiplied by 62.36 pounds per cubic foot. 

For example: assume 1000 cc of oil weighs 881 g. 
The unit weight of the oil is 



881 
1000 



X62.36=54.93 Ib/cu ft. 



(2) To make the test, the template tray is 
placed firmly on the prepared ground, and the soil 
within the hole is dug out and saved. A can is filled 
with oil and weighed. After the hole is cleaned of 
loose material, oil from the weighed can is poured 
quickly into the hole until it is exactly full. A 
straightedge laid across the hole will define the top 
edge to which the oil is filled. The can and remaining 
oil are weighed again. Moisture content of the 
saved oil taken from the hole is determined. The 
weight of oil to fill the hole, the unit density of the 
oil, the wet weight, and the moisture content of the 
soil are then known. It is now possible to determine 
the soil density using DD form 1215 (fig. 2-91). 

(3) Most of the oil in the hole should be recov- 
ered using a suction gun. Care should be taken not 
to pick up soil with the gun. However, a. small 
amount of soil in the. can will not affect future tests 
if it is allowed to settle to the bottom and only clear 
oil poured from the top. 

b. Water-Displacement Method. The volume of 
the hole from which a soil density sample is taken 
can be measured by placing a rubber balloon in the 
hole and observing the volume of water required to 
fill the balloon. A water-balloon device is a water- 
tight container with a float attached to a calibrated 
scale, graduated directly in cubic feet. A balloon is 
attached to the bottom of the device to make the 
test. The cylinder in the device is filled with water 
and the apparatus is placed over the area where the 
sample is to be removed. The balloon is allowed to 
fill with water and an initial reading is taken. After 
the sample is removed from the ground, the device 
is replaced over the dug hole in the original position. 



The water is allowed to flow by gravity into the 
balloon in the hole. By blowing through the hose 
attached to the device, the air pressure on the water 
surface is increased and forces the water-filled bal- 
loon in the hole to conform to all the contours of the 
hole. Observing the scale attached to the float results 
in a reading of the water volume left in the device. 
Subtract this value from the original reading. The 
result is the volume of the hole in cubic feet. 

2-73. Drive-Cylinder Method 

The drive-cylinder method of determining iii-place 
density can be used satisfactorily in moist, cohesive, 
fine grained soils and in many sands which exhibit 
tendencies toward cohesiveness. The drive samplers 
are thin-walled cylinders driven into the soil to ob- 
tain an undisturbed sample. These may be driven 
samplers (para 2-17), or an expedient form of 
sampler (para 2-20). To obtain an equal sample 
at all times, some method must be used to cut the 
sample flush with the ends of the cylinder. This may 
be accomplished with a steel straightedge sharpened 
on one edge, or a knife, or with a special cutter used 
with the soil trafticability sampler. The samples are 
carefully dug out with a shovel to produce an undis- 
turbed soil sample. A balance, capable of weighing 
to 0.1 g, is needed to weigh the soil sample in its 
different states, as well as an oven to dry the sample. 

2-74. Procedure Near the Surface 

a. The weight of the cylinder (in grams) and the 
volume (in cubic inches) are determined and record- 
ed prior to starting the test. 

b. The soil at the point of testing is prepared by 
clearing all loose material and exposing a soil sur- 
face. The drive-cylinder is placed in position on the 
surface and driven into the soil so that the top of the 
cylinder is at least y 2 i nc h below the original surface. 
The cylinder is dug from the ground by cutting soil 
away from around the cylinder for several inches and 
undercutting the cylinder several inches below its 
lower edge (para 2-17 through 2-20). The sample is 
trimmed flush with the ends of the cylinder. Itf the 
sample is disturbed during trimming or a large par- 
ticle encountered during driving, the sample is dis- 
carded and another one dug. 

c. The wet weight of the sample is determined as 
quickly as possible after the trimming is completed. 
A moisture content specimen (of about 100 g) is re- 
moved from the center of the sample. Using the tech- 
niques discussed in paragraphs 2-53 and 2-54, the 
moisture content is computed. 

2-75. Procedure Below the Surface 

Samples from below the surface require digging a 
hole to reach the desired level. Shallow holes may be 
dug with a shovel until an undisturbed surface is 



2-86 

reached. For deeper holes, the auger is used to dig 
the hole to the required level. The loose material is 
cleaned out of the hole as thoroughly as practicable. 
A drive sampler is used that will reach the level, and 
a sample is taken by driving the top of the cylinder 
about 1/2 inch below the surface. The cylinder is re- 
moved and the sample trimmed. The determination 
olf wet weight, dry weight, and moisture content fol- 
lows the usual procedure. 

2-76. Calculations 

The in-place dry density is expressed as 

dry weight of soil /vu f , >. 

^ 2 _ _ (lb per cu ft) 
volume of soil 

Applying the moisture content to the cylinder speci- 
men, the dry weight is calculated as follows : 
dry weight= 
(weight of cylinder plus wet specimen weight of cylinder) 

/moisture content (in %)\ 
" ' \ inn J 



\ 



100 



The soil volume is computed from measurements of 
the drive cylinder. The dry weight and soil volume 
are entered into the formula to obtain the dry den- 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

sity. Note that the drive cylinder is usually con- 
structed to standard specification, and once the 
volume is computed, it can be used as a standard for 
the tests. By including necessary conversions, it Is 
possible to multiply the dry weight of the sample in 
grams by a precomputed factor to obtain the dry 
density. 

For example : a drive cylinder having an inner diam- 
eter of 2.58 inches and length of 14.1 inches is used 
to secure a sample. The empty cylinder weighs 2.65 
pounds and the cylinder containing the wet sample 
weighs 68.93 pounds. Moisture content of the sample 
is determined to be 6.4 percent. Then the dry density 
is computed as follows : 



dry weight= 



68.93-2.65^66.28 
1.064 ~ 



Volume of cylinder is 



144 



=0.512 cubic feet 



Hence the in-place dry density is 
62.2 



0.512 



= 121.5 pounds per cubic foot. 



Section XII. CALIFORNIA BEARING RATIO TEST 



2-77. Discussion 

The California Bearing Eatio (GBR) method of de- 
sign for flexible pavements started as an essentially 
empirical method. Developments and thorough test- 
ing have led to the establishment of a distinct pattern 
for design relations. From this pattern, standard 
procedures have been evolved for constructing any 
desired set of OBE curves. 

a. The Corps of Engineers adopted the method 
and, through research and development, made it 
applicable to the design of flexible pavements for 
airfields in locations where frost action is not the 
controlling factor. 

5. The test procedure determines the CBE to be 
used in design of a specific airfield and consists otf 
two principal steps : first, the preparation of soil test 
specimens, and second, the penetration test per- 
formed upon the prepared soil samples. Although a 
fixed, standardized procedure has been established 
for the penetration portion of the test, it is not pos- 
sible to establish one fixed procedure for the prepara- 
tion of test specimens since soil conditions and con- 
struction methods vary widely. The soil test speci- 
mens are prepared so as to duplicate the soil condi- 
lons existing (or expected to occur later) in the 
teld. For airfields, the method of preparing the test 

oecimens and the number of specimens depend upon 

i.e type of airfield, the soils encountered at the site, 



and other factors. The soil sample should be tested in 
the laboratory at a density comparable to that ob- 
tained during construction. In cases where moisture 
conditions are favorable and the suibgrade will not 
accumulate moisture approaching a saturated condi- 
tion, samples should be tested at a moisture content 
approximating actual moisture conditions expected 
during the time the road or airfield is used. In all 
other conditions, samples are laboratory tested in a 
saturated condition. Although penetration tests are 
most (frequently performed upon laboratory speci- 
mens, they also may be performed upon undisturbed 
soil samples or in the field upon the soil in place. 

2-78. The CBR Test 

The basic operations for conducting the CBR test are 
the same regardless of variations in soil conditions 
and types of construction. 

a. The test essentially measures the soil resistance 
to penetration prior to reaching its ultimate shearing 
value. It is not exactly a measure of the shearing 
modulus since the confining effects of the molds do 
exert some influence. The CBE is designated as a 
ratio in percent from to 100 with a crushed well- 
graded (passing through %" sieve) limestone serv- 
ing as the 100 percent material. 

5. Minor variations in the CBE test will cause 
wide variations in the results. For this reason, the 



still arise. Material with gravel or stones does not 
yield entirely satisfactory results. A number of tests 
must 'be conducted to establish a reasonable average 
value. 

o. The CBR values range from as low as 3 to as 
high as 80 depending on the type of soils. The fine 
grained soils vary from 3 for organic clays to 
15 for micaceous or diatomaceous silts and 
sands. The sand-silfc-clay coarse grained combinations 
range from 10 for the clayey -mixtures to 40 for the 
gravelly and silty sands. Gravelly soils range from 
20 for the -clayey group to 80 for the well-graded 
gravels and gravel sand mixtures. Table B-l (app B) 
lists the typical ranges for soils classified under the 
Unified Soil Classification System. 

279. Equipment 

The equipment used for preparing and testing re- 
molded specimens is listed below. Some of it is il- 
lustrated in figure 2-93 : 



Spacer disk, 2 or 2.5 inches high. 

Compaction tamper (para2-64o;(3)). 

Adjustable stem perforated base plate with 
tripod support and dial gage (read to 0.001 inch) 
attachments for measuring soil expansion. One extra 
base plate is desirable for a set of molds, if the molds 
are inverted during the test specimen .preparation. 

Set of slotted annular surcharge weights for 
loading the cylinder during the test. 

Penetration piston with an end area of 3 square 
inches ( 1.95 inches diameter) and long enough 
to pass through the surcharge weights and to pene- 
trate the soil. 

GBR screw jack of testing machine capable of 
forcing the piston into the specimen at a rate of 
0.05 inch per minute. 

Other general equipment such as mixing bowls, 
spatulas, straightedges, scales, soaking tank or 
buckets, oven, and moisture content cans. 




Figure 2-9S. Soil test apparatus, laboratory CBR test. 



280. Preparation of Samples 

OBR values are most useful when the specimens 
tested duplicate the density and moisture content 
expected in the field. In general, the most critical 
condition for most materials will exist when the 
maximum amount of water has been absorbed. For 
this reason, the CBR test is made on specimens which 
have soaked for 4 days and while confined in molds 
under a surcharge equal to the weight of the planned 
base and pavement. 

a. Size of Materials. The soil to .be used is air-dried 
and mixed thoroughly. Artificial drying may be used 
provided that the sample temperature does not ex- 
ceed 140 F. The soil should .be broken up into indi- 
vidual particles "but not pulverized. A representative 
amount is screened first over the %-inch sieve and 
then the No. 4 sieve. For soils that contain particles 



over % inch in size, all of the material retained on 
the 34-inch sieve is removed and replaced with an 
equal percentage by weight of material between tihe 
No. 4 sieve and the 94-inch sieve (para (2-645 ) . The 
sample is recombined and thoroughly mixed. 

&. Compaction of Samples. Compaction tests are 
carried out in accordance with the procedures dis- 
cussed in paragraph 2-65 and the data entered on DD 
Form 1212 (California Bearing Ratio Test Data) 
(figs. 2-94 and 2-95). The compactive effort used and 
the number of compacted samples required will de- 
pend upon the soil type, weight and type of field com- 
paction equipment, and other job conditions. Nor- 
mally, compactive efforts of 12, 26, and 55 blows per 
layer (for five layers) are used in each of three suc- 
cessive compaction tests. This permits plotting the 
moisture, density, and CBR relationship curves. 



2-88 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



CALIFORNIA BEARING RATIO TEST DATA 


DATE 

Z/7/7/e /f70 


PROJECT 

/^/U 


/X-Z/V A,ef=tEi.D 


HD FIELD-IN-PLAC 


E TEST SITE 




123 LABORATORY 


EXCAVATION NUMBER SAMPLE NUMBER TYPE 
2- Sf**-/?/ ^ d3 UNSOAKEO CZ] SOAK60 


BEStONAINED CZ] UNDRAINEDg 


CONDITION NUMBER OF LAYERS NUMBER OF BLOWS WEIGHT 
CD UNDISTURBED SlDISTURBED 5 PER LAYER 55 (">>) 


)F HAMMER DROP (inches) 

SO /S 


MOLD NUMBER 
7 


MOLD DIAMETER MOLD HEIGHT fin.) DEPTH, TOP TO SAMPLE 
fin.) SAMPLE (In.) (in.) 


HEIGHT SAMPLE VOLUME 
feu. ft.) 

& .073 


PROVING RING NUMBER PROVING RING CONSTANT PROVING RING CAPACITY 


SURCHARGE WEIGHTS 


3 


>/ // ^-^vK^/^7 SOAKING 

I2.LB/Q.OOQI 50QOt-&< 2.. 


fib.) PENETRATING fib.) 

5 2.5 


FORMULAS CONVERS 
Total Load = Corrected Dial Peadiag z Proving Riag Constant 
1 
trait rmui - Total Load - '-' - Correct d Dait ^^ - - 


ON FACTORS 

728 ca. is. per CB. ft. 
S3. 6 gin. or Ib. 




8 St&adard Dait Load 




PENETRATION DATA 




PENETRATION 
f inches) 


STO. UNIT PROVING RING . CORRECTED RING TOTAL LOAD UNIT 
LOAD fpai) DIAL READING DIAL READING fpounda)) (pa 


LOAD CORRECTED UNIT CBR 
t) LOAD (pal) (%) 


0.025 


250 O.OO68 O^003S_ ^^5~^> /^ 


'2. A/o 


0.050 


500 O-O/O.5 C.C07S ^f>O 3C 


10 0RfeeT/d*J 


0.075 


750 O.O/Vl f^. C}M / /33Z 4^^ 


!/V A/6CiESS^/$y' 


0.100 


1000 O'O/7O Q.Oltf-O /68O 6"< 


&O 5<> 


0.150 


1250 O.OZJO O,O<8O 2.1 6>G 72 


?0 


0.200 


1500 OO2.<>7 O.O255 Z&ZO 9^ 


/^7 ^2.7 


0.250 


noo O'02L < v'7 O.O2.fc7 32/0 /^>"; 


ro 


0.300 


1900 <9'O32.4- ^,O2^V- 3S25 //I 


rs 


0.400 


2300 O.O351 <?.O32./ 3855 /^g 


35 


0.500 


2500 #'>37O .Q3*/-O 3 ( 1^>O /3> 






WATER CONTENT AND UNIT WEIGHT DATA 




WEIGHT OF SOI L + 


MOLO f/b.J (gtn)* /S t 4>7 OPTIMUM MOISTURE CONTENT 


c THEORETICAL MAXIMUM UNIT 
WEIGHT fftenBity) 
fib. /en. /t.) 

/2.7.Z 


WEIGHT OF MOLD (Ib.j (gm)* 3"\ 3 8 '""" W P* '"' 


WEIGHT OF WET SOIL (Ib.) (gn)* ^ , C j 2- , , ^ 


VOLUME OF SAMPLE 


fc. /<.) 0.075 //4 ^ 


WET UNIT WEIGHT flfc./ca. ft.) /3&'0 


TARE NUMBER 


/ ^- ACTUAL WATER CONTENT OF 


ACTUAL UNIT WEIGHT i 
fib. /CM. /t.) 


WEIGHT OF WET SOIL + TARE (i.) /V3.O /<iV,O 


WEIGHT OF DRY SOIL + TARE (f*.) J31'5 /JTC .3 *-, y 


WEIGHT OF WATER, 


W frf.) /? ^k /"=i.T 0-W 
w ' ' /^-' ^ i O'/ 


WEIGHT OF TARE (t 


.; ^(3.2- ^<?,7 


WEIGHT OF DRY SOIL, W a dm.) 81 '3 *?.> DIFFERENCE C*} 


PERCENT OF MAXIMUM 
<?*? ' ."7^ y ^ yrt ^ 


WATER CONTENT, w 


f *> /5 / /S. B 


AVERAGE * (*) /^".2- 2.. 6 


DRY UNIT WEGHT(DnjJ<7) ( lb./c*.. ft . ) //&tO 


REMARKS 
^Strike out unit weight not applicable. 


USB KBVSK3K SIDE fOt S9ELL DATA AMD OUAFV 



Figure 2-94. Datasheet, (CBR) test (DD form 1212) . 



TM 5-530/MAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-89 



SWELL DATA 



DATE 



T.I ME 



DAYS 



GffGE READING 



SELL (in.) 



SWELL 



30 



0-OI2 



Q. 



337 



0-033 



AO 



3000 



2500 



20OO 



CALIFORNIA BEARING RATIO TEST GRAPH 
(Plot test curve batow to obtajn corrected unit load) 




-:=: 20 



PENETRATION (In.) 



TECHNICIAN (Slfnituri) 



COMPUTE!) BY 




CHECKED BY (Si|itatur) 



B 2 9 6 1 9 



Vintivo a_Q 



Compaction will always be accomplished in the 6 inch 
diameter CBR, mold with a 2- or 2 1 / -mch spacer disk 
in the mold beneath the sample. Since the mold is 7 
inches high, the sample will be 4^/ 2 or 5 inches high, 
depending on the spacer disk used. The compaction 
tamper is the modified AASHO tamper, which 
weighs 10 pounds and falls 18 inches. 

c. Soaking the /Sample. After the sample has been 
compacted and excess material trimmed away so that 
the sample is flush with the top of the mold, the per- 
forated base plate and spacer block are removed. A 
piece of filter paper is placed over the trimmed end 
(top during compaction) and the perforated base 
placed on this end. The top of the compacted sample 
will become the bottom of the soaked sample. 

(1) Invert the mold so that the portion next to 
the spacer block during the compaction becomes the 
top surface. 

(2) Place the adjustable stem with the per- 
forated plate on the top surface with a filter paper 
underneath. 

(3) Apply surcharge weights equal to the ex- 
pected base and pavement weight (within 5 Ib but 
in no case less than 10 Ib). One 5-pound surcharge 
weight is equivalent to 3 inches of overlying material. 

(4) Enter the amount of the surcharge used in 
the appropriate space on DD Form 1212 (fig-. 2-94) . 

(5) Immerse the mold in water in a bucket or 
other suitable container so as to allow a free access of 
water to top and bottom of the specimen, as il- 
lustrated in figure 2-96. The adjustable stem extend- 
ing from the perforated swell plate is set so that the 
tripod dial can travel in either direction ; the sample 
may consolidate, or it may swell. 

(6) Using the tripod and extensometer, obtain 
an initial reading for swell measurements and record 
it on the top line on reverse of DD Form 1212. 

(7) Normally, the required soaking period is 4 
days. A shorter immersion period for pervious soils is 
permissible, if it is apparent that a maximum degree 
of saturation has been obtained. Take dial readings at 

o 

1-day intervals during the soaking period. 

(8) When the soaking period is ended, read the 
extensometer to determine the amount of consolida- 
tion or swell. The amount of swell or consolidation is 
computed as a percent of initial height of specimen. 
More than 3 percent swell is considered excessive. 

d. Draining the Samples. After soaking, free sur- 
face water is removed and the specimen allowed to 
drain for about 15 minutes prior to conducting the 

)enetration portion of the test. Care must be taken 

lot to disturb the surface of the specimen during the 

emoval of free water ; it probably will be necessary 

.o tilt the sample. The surcharge weight and the per- 

" orated swell plate are removed, and the specimen 

sighed. This weight is entered in the lower portion 

: the data sheet. For computing percent saturation, 




Figure 2-96. Soaking GBR test sample. 

the tare weight of the mold must be determined be- 
fore the start or at the conclusion of the test; the 
weight of dry soil is calculated by using moisture con- 
tent samples from the top and bottom of the mold, 
after the penetrating portion of the test is completed. 

2-81. Penetration Test 

The penetration test is always the same, regardless of 
variations in specimen preparation. The following 
procedure also is applicable to undisturbed mold 
samples and ill-place tests : 

a. Assembly of Apparatus. The parts of the CBR 
apparatus including proving ring, penetration 
piston, and penetration dial are assembled as shown 
in figure 2-97. Three proving rings having capacities 
of 2,000, 5,000, and 7,000 pounds are included in the 
equipment for this test. The total load on the penetra- 
tion piston should be estimated on the basis of the ex- 
pected CBR and the proper proving ring selected so 
that its capacity will not be exceeded, since overload- 
ing can do permanent damage to a proving ring. 
Standard unit loads on the piston at 0.3-, 0.4-, and 
0.5-inch penetration are 1,900, 2,300, and 2,600 
pounds per square inch, respectively. Thus, if the an- 
ticipated CBR is 80 percent and the test will be car- 
ried to 0.5-inch penetration, the approximate total 
load on the piston will be 2,600X3X0.80=6,240 
pounds at a penetration of 0.5 inch, since the area of 
the piston is 3 square inches. Similarly, if the ex- 
pected CBR is only 10 percent and the test will be 
carried only to a penetration of 0.3 inch, the approxi- 
mate total load on the piston at that point will be 
1,900 X 3 X 0.10=570 pounds. 

&. Swrcliarge. A penetration surcharge is applied, 
and must be sufficient to produce an intensity of load- 
ing equal to the weight of base and pavement (as 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-33U/AFM 




Figure 2-97. Assembled apparatus, CBR venetration test. 

described in para 2-80e). To prevent the soil being 
squeezed into the hole of the surcharge weights, one 
5 pound annular disk is placed on the sample, the 
'penetration piston is seated, and finally, the re- 
mainder of the weights are applied. It should be 
noted that for laboratory molded samples the pene- 
tration test is performed on the bottom of the sample 
as originally molded, since the sample is inverted be- 
fore penetration. 

<?. Seating Piston. The peneration piston is brought 
into contact with the sample, with sufficient pressure 
to cause the load dial to register a load of 1 pound. 
This insures a satisfactory seating of the piston and 
is considered as the zero load in further tests. 

d. Application of Load. Load is applied to the 
penetration piston by cranking the jack at such a 
rate that the piston travels at 0.05 inch per minute. 
The mechanical jack must be calibrated for the rate 
of 0.05 inch per minute, or the rate of penetration may 
be determined by comparing the progress of the hand 
on the penetration dial with the second hand of the 
clock or watch. Headings of the proving ring dial are 
made at the following depths of penetration : 0.025, 

418-320071 7 



Z-VI 

0.050, 0.075, 0.1, 0.125, 0.150, 0.175, 0.2, 0.250, 0.3, 
0.350, 0.4, 0.450, and 0.5 inch. Proving ring dial read- 
ings are entered in the appropriate spaces on. DD 
Form 1212. Corrected proving ring dial readings are 
computed later, and converted to load in pounds using 
the calibration sheet provided with each proving ring, 
or the calibration constant engraved on the proving 
ring block. 

e. Moisture Content. The sample is removed from 
the loading device and a moisture content sample 
taken from the upper inch beneath the penetration 
piston and another from the bottom inch of the 
sample. 

/. Penetration. The unit load is obtained in pounds 
per square inch by the computation indicated in 
figure 2-94. Using the reverse side of DD Form 1212 
(fig. 2-95), the unit load in pounds per square inch 
(psi) is plotted against depth of penetration in 
inches. To obtain true penetration loads, it is some- 
times necessary to adjust the zero point of the curve 
to correct for surface irregularities and for the ini- 
tial concave-upward shape which develops on some 
soils under certain conditions. The correction is made 
by extending downward a line tangent to the steepest 
portion of the curve which extends for a distance of 
not less than 0.1 inch in the penetration range. The 
point at which this line intersects the zero load line 
then becomes the zero penetration point of the curve. 
The 0.1 and 0.2 inch points are moved to the right on 
the curve the same distance that the zero point has 
been advanced to the right. In figure 2-95, necessary 
corrections have been made to two of the curves 
shown. Corrected unit loads are entered in the appro- 
priate places on DD Form 1212. 

g. California Bearing Ratio (CBR}. The correct 
load values are determined at 0.1 and 0.2 inch pene- 
tration. CBR values are obtained by dividing the 
loads at 0.1 and 0.2 inch by the standard loads of 
1,000 and 1,500 psi, respectively. The standard loads 
of 1,000 and 1,500 psi are always constant and repre- 
sent the loads required to penetrate a well-graded, 
minus s^-inch, crushed limestone sample at a Modi- 
fied AASHO maximum density. Each ratio is mul- 
tiplied by 100 to obtain the CBR in percent. The 
CBR is usually selected at 0.1 inch. If the CBR at 
0.2 inch is greater, the test should be rerun. If check 
tests give similar results (0.2 inch penetration), the 
CBR at 0.2 inch should be used. 

h. Test Results. When the CBR test is completed, 
the results should contain the following information : 

(1) Compaction procedure (Modified AASHO) . 

(2) Compaction effort (12, 26, or 55 blows/ 
layer) . 

(3) Molding water content (moisture content 
prior to soaking). 

(4) Density (prior to soaking). 

( 5 ) Soaking and penetration surcharges. 



2-92 

(6) Expansion of sample (percent swell) . 

(7) Moisture content after soaking (saturated 
condition) . 

(8) Density after soaking (saturated condition) . 

(9) Optimum moisture content and maximum 
dry density by Modified AASHO (CE 55) compac- 
tion test (55 blows per layer) . 

( 10 ) Stress-penetration curve and corrections, if 
necessary. 

(11) Calculations and selection of a corrected 
GBR value. 

2-82. Remolded Sample Test 
In determining CBR, remolding of the test soil pro- 
duces a change in the shearing resistance of some types 
of soils. Natural clays, for instance, show a decrease 
in shearing resistance even when the moisture con- 
tent remains unchanged. This loss in strength is at- 
tributed to a breakdown of the absorbed water films 
and the soil's natural structure. Some soils exhibit a 
swelling tendency upon remolding and this must be 
considered. The soils are grouped into three classes 
with respect to behavior during saturation ; cohesion- 
less sands and gravels, cohesive soils, and highly 
swelling soils. Separate procedures are given for each 
of the groups. 

a. Oohesionless Scmds and Gravels. This group in- 
cludes the (GW), (GP), (SW) and (SP) classifica- 
tions (para 2-3 and table Bl). Cohesionless soils 
compact readily and specimens should be prepared at 
high densities and at the range of moisture content 
anticipated in the field. If soaking does not lower 
the CBR, it may be omitted from further tests of the 
same material. In the construction phase, the ma- 
terial should be placed in an almost saturated 
condition. 

t>. Coliesive Soils. This group of soils usually falls 
into the (GM), (GC), (SM), (SC), (ML), (CL) 
and (OL) classifications (para 2-3 and table Bl). 
They are tested in a manner to show their behavior 
over the entire range of anticipated moisture con- 
tent. Compaction curves are developed for 55, 26, 
and 12 blows per layer. Each specimen is soaked and 
>enetrated to develop a complete family of curves 
howing the relationship between density, molding, 
?ater content, and corrected CBR. 

c. Swelling Soils. This group of soils usually com- 
prises the (MH), (CH), and (OH) classifications. 
The test procedures are the same as for cohesive soils. 
However, the objectives of the testing program are 
different. Tests on .swelling soils are made to deter- 
mine a moisture content and unit weight which will 
minimize expansion. The proper moisture content 
and density are not necessarily the optimum values 
as computed from the Modified AASHO compaction 
tests. Generally, the minimum swell and the highest 
soaked CBR occur at a moisture content slightly 



TM 5-S30/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

wetter than the optimum value. It may, therefore 
be necessary to prepare high-swelling samples for a 
wider range of moisture and density than normal 
The test results can be evaluated by a-n experienced 
engineer who will select the proper values required 
by the design. 

2-83. Undisturbed Sample Test 

a. Tests on undisturbed samples are used when the 
base design calls for uncompacted soil, such as highly 
compressible clay which loses strength upon remold- 
ing, or when correlating field in-place tests to the 
design moisture condition. For this latter condition 
duplicate samples should be tested to determine the 
correction necessary for the in-place tests. The re- 
duction that occurs from 4 days of soaking is applied 
as a correction to the field in-place test. 

b. Care and patience are necessary to maintain the 
relatively undisturbed samples in this condition (para 
2-15). If proper lateral support is not afforded on 
the sides of the samples, erroneous CBR values will 
result. In fine grained materials, molds or metal jack- 
ets are satisfactory. With samples cut or trimmed 
from a pedestal, paraffin or a mixture of 10 percent 
resin and paraffin is used to fill the annular space and 
offer support. For gravelly soils, the box method is 
desirable. Wax paper or paraffin is used to cover the 
sample and prevent moisture loss during transporta- 
tion to the laboratory. 

c. Soaking and penetration tests are performed as 
outlined (para 2-80 and 2-81) after removal of the 
paper or paraffin from, the end of the specimen and 
after the surface is leveled (with a thin layer of sand, 
if necessary). 

d. Computations and test results are reported as 
discussed below (para 2-85) . 

2-84. Field in-Place Test 

Under certain conditions, the field in-place test is 
used for determining the load-carrying capacity of 
a soil. Basically, the penetration phase of the test is 
the same as described in paragraph 2-81. 

a. Conditions for Use. The field in-place test is used 
under any one of the following conditions : 

( 1 ) When the in-place density and moisture con- 
tent are such that the degree of saturation (per- 
centage of voids filed with water) is 80 percent or 
more. 

(2) When the material is coarse grained and co- 
hesionless so that the changes in moisture content will 
not greatly affect it. 

(3) When the material has been in-place and 
undisturbed for several years. The moisture content 
in such material does not become constant, but fluctu- 
ates within rather narrow ranges. The time required 
for the moisture content to stabilize cannot be stated 
definitely, but the minimum time is approximately 3 



I 89-3 I TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



refore, 
s fora 
ormal. 
ienced 
quired 



len the 
highly 
emold- 
to the 
clition, 
ine the 
?he re- 
Applied 

ain the 
i (para 
ied on 
es will 
il jack- 
immed 
Dercent 
ice and 
bhod is 
ver the 
sporta- 

med as 

of the 

en and 

'f sand, 

rted as 



test is 
.city of 
, test is 



is 



used 



ire con- 
L (per- 
cent or 

and co- 
ait will 

,ce and 
content 
, fluctu- 
squired 
i stated 
lately 3 



years. The field in-place test is considered a satisfac- 
tory indicator of the load-carrying capacity in this 

case. 

5. Apparatus. Equipment which is needed for the 
conduct of field in-place GBR tests is as follows : 

(1) Soil test apparatus, field in-place GBR. 
This includes a jack to apply the load, calibrated 
proving rings, penetration piston with extensions, 
dial gages and support, surcharge weights, and sur- 
charge plate. This apparatus is furnished in a field 
GBR chest as part of the soils test set (para 2-79) . 
The in-place test is performed in conjunction with a 
loaded truck to provide resistance for the CBR screw 
jack. 

(2) Beam, kit, field CBR. This kit includes a 
loading beam, a penetration beam, and a beam clamp 
packed in a beam and weight chest as part of the soil 
test set. 

(3) Other equipment. This includes the mois- 
ture content cans, truck jack, carpenter's level and 
plumb, stopwatch, and wrenches. These items are all 
included in the regular soil test set. 

c. Preparation. The apparatus is assembled on the 
rear bumper of a standard Army 2i/-ton truck, 
which is positioned directly over the spot where the 
test is to be performed. 

(1) The truck is jacked up so that no weight 
rests on the springs. A short section of 6-inch I-beam 
to hriclge the bumpers and a clamp for securing the 
jack to the beam are provided. 

(2) The ground surface is leveled and prepared 
by removing loose material. The apparatus is as- 
sembled and positioned under the bumper (fig. 2-98) . 
The swivel head must be adjusted so that the pene- 
tration piston is plumb, and the device locked in 
position. The dial foot must rest upon a firm, hard 
object which has a solid foundation far enough from 
the area affected by the test so as not to be influenced 
by the reaction of the test through the soil. Except 
in the case of an extremely high CBR material which 
is thoroughly interlocked or cemented, this influence 
will seldom extend beyond a 1-foot radius with suf- 
ficient magnitude to be of any consequence. 

(3) The steel plate (as an initial 10-pound sur- 
charge weight) should be seated in a layer of fine 
sand to distribute the surcharge reaction uniformly 
below all points of the plate. The penetration piston 
is seated and an initial load of 1 pound is applied to 
establish a firm bearing. The deflection gages and 
the load gages are zeroed before starting the test. 
Surcharge weights are applied to the steel plate to 
establish the equivalent load intensity of the expected 
load (table 2-6). 

d. Procedure. With the penetration piston set, the 
surcharge weights added, and the load and penetra- 
tion dials set to zero, the test can be performed as 
follows : 



2-93 

(1) Jack the penetration piston at a rate of 0.5 
inch per minute. 

(2) Read the proving ring (load) readings at 
the following depths of penetration: 0.025, 0.050, 
0.075, 0.100, 0.125, 0.150, 0.175, 0.200, 0.250, 0.300, 
0.350, 0.400, 0.450, and 0.500 inch. 

(3) Using the proving ring calibration, deter- 
mine the bearing value (in pounds per square inch). 

(4) Plot the penetration versus load deforma- 
tion curve, with corrections if necessary (fig. 2-95). 

(5) Compute the corrected CBR in percent. 

(6) Obtain a sample of the soil at the point of 
penetration for moisture content determination. 

(7) Repeat the procedure in (1) through (6) 
above, two or more times ( for a total of three tests) 
in the same type of soil. 

(8) If the results do not show reasonable agree- 
ment, three additional tests should be made. The 
numerical average of the six tests is used as the CBR 
at that location. Reasonable agreement is designated 
as the following : 



Permissible 
tolerance 

3 



CBR range 

Less than 10 

10-30 5 

30-60 10 

A'bove 60 unimportant 

For example: Test results of 6, 8, and 9 are rea- 
sonable and average 8 ; 23, 18, and 20 are reasonable 
and average 20. Values below 20 are rounded off to 
the nearest unit, and above 20 to the nearest 5 units. 




Figure 2-98. Assembled apparatus, fleld in-place CBR test. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 





I'- 





















fs. ' LA OO fN 

















A 


CN -d" LA VO CO 














en 
















<u 


















5 


I '->' i 


vo o oo vo cn CM 


LA 


cn 


CM 


LA 


00 


-d- oo 


nj 




__^- 


CM J" LA vO r- CTN 








OO 


-d- 


LA 


(*> oo cn 


c 




- 










_ 








~~ ~~ "~ 


O 


















4-1 
-l 







LA oo -d- vo en 


CM 


LA 


^ 


cn 


CM 


LA CO 


T3 






CM OO LA VO f* 00 


O 


1 


CM 


co 


LA 


vorv.cn 


03 




















in 


















0) 


















in 




















(D 




LA 


LA p^ cn -d vo 


CO 


O 


co 


LA 


p 


cn CM <r 


u 






CM co -d" vo r^ co 


cn 





CM 


^ 


- 


LA r^ co 


"ftj 




O 


-d" LA r-- cn oo 


LA 


vO 


00 


o 


CM 


-d* LA r*> 


Q. 




oo 


CM oo -d- LA r>. oo 


cn 










-d- 


LA VO t^ 


in 




1 
















C 

t-H 




LA 


f*\ -d" 


LA r-. oo o 


_ 


CM 


j. 


LA 


vO 


co cn o 


^ 




CM 


CM OO 


-d- LA vo co 


cn 


O 


* 


CM 


CO 


-d" LA r~> 


4-> 




^~ 











0HW 


r - 


r 


rM F *-* 


tn 






















0) T3 




















4-1 0) 


4-> 




















>. 3 


**~ 


O 


CN 00 


-d" LA LA VD 


c-^ 


CO 


cn 


O 


. 


CM CO ^f 


i- a 




CM 


CN OO 


-d" LA vo r 


oo 


cn 





CM 


OO 


-d" LA VO 


03 E 


U 












~~ 


1 


*-" 


w r 


c o 

.H U 


X) 


















T3 
I- C 


*""" 




















O Q) 


- 


if) 


CM 00 


CM CM OO CO 

-d" LA vo r> 


-d- 
oo 


-d- 
cn 


LA 
o 


LA 


CM 


vO vO P* 
OO -? LA 


(U 
U JO 


^" 













r 


i 


* 


_ ^ _ 


O 


tn 




















4- in 


in 


















TJ x: 


C 

<1J 








o o o o 


o 


o 


O 


O 


O 


O 


(U 


~ 




CM CO 


-d" LA vo r->- 


oo 


cn 


o 





CM 


CO J- LA 


3 


4-> 

CU 




















0) CO 


3= 























LA 


cn cn 


co oo r*- r^. 


vO 


vO 


vO 


LA 


LA 


J- ^J- ro 


O 




O 


CM 


00 -d" LA VO 




oo 




o 





CM CO J- 


rt 4J 
















r 


r 


p F 


2 






















a. 




















(U 4-> 3 




















c ro 






















-< JC 4J 




O 


00 OO 


VO LA LA -d" 


CO 


r 





O 


cn 


OO P*- vO 


4J .C 




O 


CM 


OO -d" LA VO 


f>. 


00 


cn 


o 





CM CO 


cn 




- 












r 


< 


i i r 


(U (U -i 






















> cn <u 




















v- 5 




















X> 03 






















co x: <u 




LA 


f"~- vO 


LA CO CM O 


cn 


CO 


vD 


LA 


j- 


CM ^- cn 


o en 




cn 


^ 


CO -d" LA vO 


vO 


r--. 


oo 


cn 


o 


r CM CM 


~O 1_ i- 
























C 3 fl] 
nt m .g* 


















U 




















0) E - 




o 


vo LA co cn r-^ 


LA 


-d- 


CM 


o 


oo 


VO -d" CO 


033 




cn 


CM CO -d" -d" LA 


VO 


r*. 


00 






O CM 


nj E m 
i j <r- ^ 


















v- X ci) 


















3 03 U 




















irt E O 




LA 

00 


LA co cn vo -d~ 
CM oo oo -d~ LA 


CM 
VO 


o 


1 


LA 
CO 


cn 


O CO vO 

o o 


C l/t (1) 


















I r w 


O '- u 


















<U 


















a) a) x: 




















cn cn -w 




o 


LA CM cn vo -d* ' 


00 


LA 


OO 


O 


PX. 


LA CM cn 


i_ i_ 




CO 


CM CM CO -d" LA 


LA 


vO 


(. 


00 


OO 


cn o o 


OJ JO " 


















r~* i 


x: x: T 


















u o <u 
















- 1- TO 
















330) 
















in in (1) 
















c 
















JQ J3 


















0) 


JZ 
















1 1 XI 


4-J 
















O O 


D- C 


-d" vO CO O CM <f 


VO 


00 


O 


CM 


_J- 


vO OO 


co cn x 


0) -H 


r~ ^* ? 


I 




CM 


CM 


CM 


CM CM CO 


-X JJ 10 


O 



















TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



2-95 



2-85. Presentation of CBR Data 

The data from the CBR tests and the resulting: fam- 

o 

ily of CBR curves represent characteristics for a 
wide range of field conditions. The CBE, data, the 
molding water content, and the dry density can be 
combined to present the test results in a highly usable 
form. This combination is an extension of the com- 
paction curve data and is illustrated in A, B, and 
C, figure 2-99. 

a. Part A, figure 2-99 is the compaction graph 
(discussed in para 2-65&(4)) using the moisture 
content and density as coordinates. A curve is drawn 
for each of the 'three compactive efforts ; 55, 26, and 
12 blows. The optimum moisture content (OMC) 
and maximum density are determined as explained. 
Assume that the lean clay can be compacted to a den- 
sity of 95 percent of Modified AASHO; then this 
density is computed from the maximum dry density 
(A, fig. 2-99) as 116.5 X. 95 = 110.6 and the result is 
plotted on the graph. A horizontal line (dashed on 
the figure) is drawn through the plotted point until 



it intersects the drawn curve. In this case, values oJ 
l l /2 percent are plotted on either side of the OMC 
(14.1 11/2 = 12.6 or 15.6 percent). For ease in plot- 
ting, the lines have been drawn at 13 and 16 percenl 
until they intersect the 55 blow curve and the 9f 
percent density line. The shaded area in A, figure 
2-99, represents values greater than 95 percent Mod- 
ified AASHO density and within about 1^ per- 
cent of the OMC. These values will be used later as 
explained in c below. 

5. B, figure 299, is a graph using the relation oi 
corrected CBR values for the same molding moisture 
contents as used in graph A. For ease in plotting, 
the CBR i)s water content graph is drawn directly 
above the density graph and uses the same abscissa 
as the graph A. 

c. The desired presentation is a family of curves 
graph showing the relation of molded density to cor- 
rected CBR (C, fig. 2-99) at a constant moisture con- 
tent. The graph is plotted by selecting several whole 
percent values of moisture contents below the OMC- 



a: 
CD 
o 

a 
LJ 



o 

a: 
LU 
a. 

w 

3 

z 

> 

w 

z 

UJ 

a 

> 
a: 
a 



SILTY CLAY(CL) 

PII4 25 



NOTE'- FIGURE BESIDE CURVE 
IS MOLDING WATER CONTENT 



WATER CONTENT VS 
DENSITY AFTER SOAKING 




5 10 15 20 25 

MOLDING WATER CONTENT IN PER CENT 
DRY WEIGHT 



95 IOO 105 110 115 

MOLDED DRY DENSITY POUNDS PER CU. FT. 




LEGEND^ 

O - 55 BLOWS /LAYER COMPACTIVE EFFORT 
D - 26 BLOWS/ LAYER COMPACTIVE EFFORT 
A - 12 BLOWS/ LAYER COMPACTIVE EFFORT 



Figure 2-99. Presentation of CBR data. 



.ercent computed in a above (11 percent in the 
pie) . The density ( from graph A) and the GBR 
i graph B) corresponding to this selected value 
letermined for each of the three compactive 

1) To determine the values, place a straight- 
or draw a line vertically through the point along 
ottom edge corresponding to the selected mois- 
iontent. 

2) Move up the line until it intersects the 12 
'curve on the density graph (A, fig. 2-99), and 
the density corresponding to this value. 

'3) Move up the line to the 12 blow curve on 
i B, and read the CBR corresponding to this 

(4) On graph C, plot the CBR vs density (read 
") and (3) above) and mark this point as the 12 

point. 

(5) Using the same selected moisture line, deter- 
the CBR vs density for the 26 and the 55 blow 

ts, and plot these values on graph C. 

(6) Draw a smooth curve through the three 
ed points, and mark it with the moisture content 
ted. As an example, see line marked "11", C, 

e 2-99. 

(7) Repeat this process ((1) to ((>) above) for 
tional moisture contents desired using incre- 
;s of 1 percent until all three points on the curve 
' a definite falling off. Note the 18 percent curve 

figure 2-99. 

(8) Transfer the desired density, in this case the 
jrcent line (110.6 Ib per cu ft) , and the maximum 
vable density line (115 Ib per cu ft) from graph 
?he hatched vertical lines in graph C indicate 
i values. 



im o-ojv/rMAVi-Ai- MU-33U/AFM 89-3 

d. To interpret the test results from graph C, con- 
sider the hatched portion. This illustrates that the 
CBE can vary from 11 (13 percent moisture; 95 per- 
cent density) to 26 (15 percent moisture; maximum 
allowable density) . For design purposes, a GBR of 11 
or 12 would be used and the moisture content speci- 
fied to stay between 13 and 16 percent. Thus, when 95 
percent density (or better) is attained in the field 
with a moisture content maintained between 13 and 
16 percent, the GBR would definitely be above its de- 
sign value. 

e. Note how the graph illustrates the effect of mois- 
ture content variations on the CBR. A drop to 12 per- 
cent would require a maximum compactive effort to 
reach a GBR of 12. Maintaining this same effort and 
achieving this same density at 13 percent moisture in- 
creases the GBR to 16, and at 14 percent moisture to 
above 20. At the upper limit (as little as 1 percent in- 
creases in moisture (16 to 17 percent) will cause a 
drop in GBR from 18 to 8 at 95 percent density. At 18 
percent moisture, the GBR would decrease to 3. This 
presentation illustrates the importance of maintain- 
ing the moisture content within the specified range 
until the 95 percent density is reached. 

/. Note that while the above example uses a 3 per- 
cent moisture content range, a 4 percent moisture con- 
tent range is considered acceptable. A 4 percent mois- 
ture content range would necessitate checking the de- 
sign GBR for the following moisture content ranges : 
OMC2 percent; OMC + 1 to OMC-3 percent; 
OMC-1 to OMC + 3 percent; OMC to OMC + 4 per- 
cent; and OMC to OMC 4 percent. The moisture 
content range that produces the highest design GBR 
is the recommended range. 



Section XIII. PLATE BEARING TEST 



6. Discussion 

esignmg concrete pavements for roads or air- 
3, certain features must be- considered. These in- 
3 the anticipated loads, the typo and amount of 
ned traffic, the supporting value olf the subgrade, 
the characteristics of the ronr.retc. The, antiri- 
cl traffic and loading are design factors and are 
nd the scope of this manual. The materials test- 
technician may be called upon, however, to per- 
i the plate bearing test to determine the modulus 
nbgrade reaction, &, of the subgrade for a con- 
> pavement. The modulus of subgrade, reaction is 
[oad per unit area required to product*, a soil do- 
lation of the subgrade. It is expressed in pounds 
square inch per inch of deformation. 

7. Preparation and Test Procedures 

test is performed on representative areas and 
ections or adjustments can be made by the. de- 



signer in light of experience or knowledge of the 
local conditions which can alter the load supporting 
value of the subgrade. Most soils exhibit a marked 
reduction in modulus with an increase in moisture 
content. However, since the design is not too sensi- 
tive to small changes in /<?, a bracket or range of 
values is sufficient. 

a. Equipment. The following equipment is needed 
to conduct the plate bearing test : 

Hydraulic jack, 25,000 pound capacity. 
Proving ring or hyrdaulic gage. 
Bearing plates, 18-inch, 24-inch, and 30-inch di- 
ameter by 1-inch-thick or li^-inch-thick 
aluminum alloy plate. 
Dial indicators, 0.001 inch, three required (with 

extensometers) . 
Dial support beam and clfimps (A frame for 3- 

sided support) . 
Load reaction beam (steel I or H beam). 




SUOUJLU. oe stripped rree or overburden to the 
elevation of the subgrade surface which will be used. 
It should be uncovered for a sufficient area to elimi- 
nate any surcharge of confining effects. If the sub- 
grade is to be fill material, a test embankment of 
about 30 inches in height should be constructed after 
the necessary stripping. The subgrade should be com- 
pacted to the specified densities at optimum moisture 
content. The test should be made with the soil as close 
to optimum moisture content as practical. If possible, 
it is advisable to conduct comparative tests on the 
subgrade representative of conditions after the pave- 
ment has been in place for some time. Methods of cor- 
rection are available when it is impractical to simu- 
late actual conditions. On granular subgrades, the 
natural condition of the soil should not be disturbed 
while the test area is being prepared. Prior to place- 
ment of the 30 inch diameter plate, all loose material 
and boulders which protrude more than 1 inch above 
the lowest point should be removed and replaced by 
a layer of sand or plaster of paris mixture to prevent 
the plate from resting on these points. The thickness 
of this layer should be held to the absolute minimum 
needed to prevent point bearing. 

c. Loading System-. Loads are applied by a hy- 
draulic jack working against a jacking frame and 
through a steel bearing plate 30 inches in diameter 
and 1 inch thick (fig. 2-100). The load must be ap- 
plied in the exact center of the plate to reduce the 
possibility of tilting the plate during the test. A nest 
of plates (30 inch, 24 inch, and 18 inch diameter) 
is used to assist in the centering. The plates must be 
leveled prior to applying the load. If cribbing is 
needed, it is best to place such filling members be- 
tween the top plate and the jack. If a proving ring is 
used to measure load, it should be placed on top of 
the jack and a ball joint used between it and the 
load reaction device. The load reaction device must 
be long enough so that its supports will be at least 
8 feet 'from the bearing plate. Aluminum-alloy plates 
which have the same rigidity as the 1-inch steel plates 

may be used if weight reduction is necessary. 

d. Load Reaction Devices. The load reaction from 
the jack can be taken by bearing against a truck 
trailer, anchored frame, or any other device of suffi- 
cient magnitude for the test. Granular subgrades re- 
quire a reaction of at least 25,000 pounds while for 
most cohesive subgrades, 10,000 pounds is sufficient. 

e. Deformation Measuring. The movement of the 
plate due to the applied loads should be measured in 
three places, spaced 120 apart around the circumfer- 
ence of the 30 inch plate and within 14 mcn f the 
rim. Dial gages, accurate to 0.0001 inch, will be re- 
quired for granular subgrades. However, gages ac- 
curate to 0.001 inch may be used if time readings are 
made. 



DIAL SUPPORTS. 



Z_3L 



PLAN 

r 12 5OO LB MIN SUPPORT FOR LOAD REACTION MUST BE I2.5OO LB M\N-i 

\ ' AT LEAST 8FT FROM BEARING PLATES j 



SUPPORTS FOR DIAL SUPPORT 
MUST BE AT LEAST 4 FT 
FROM BEARING PLATES 




I MAX THICKNESS 
OTTAWA SAND OR 
PLASTER OF PARIS 



DIA PLATE 
24" DIA PLATE 
30" DIA PLATE 

ELEVATION 



Figure 2-160. Plate bearing test loading. 

f. Loading Procedure. The loading system and 
bearing plate should be seated by applying a load of 
707 pounds (1 pound per square inch (psi) on the 30 
inch diameter plate) for light load pavements (less 
than 15 inches thick) or 1,414 pounds (2 psi) for 
heavy load pavements (15 inch or more) . The seating 
load must be allowed to remain until complete de- 
formation of the subgrade has taken place. The dial 
gages are read and the values recorded as a zero 
correction. 

(1) An additional 7,070 pound (10 psi) load is 
applied and held until complete deformation has 
taken place. Before releasing the load, a value of &' u 
(preliminary subgrade modulus) is computed from 
the average deflation on the rim : 



If' 
K u 



10 psi 



average deflection in inches 

where the deflection readings on the dials at 10 psi 
are averaged and the units are psi/inch. 

(2) For cohesive subgrades, where &' u is less 
than 200 psi/inch the test is considered complete and 
the load may be released. Some clay soils may require 
a time-settlement curve to determine when complete 
deformation has been reached. The load is held until 
the rate of deflection is less than 0.0002 inch per 
minute (0.002 inch in 10 minutes) which indicates 
that most of the consolidation has taken place. A field 
plot of average dial reading versus time, on arithmet- 



2-98 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



ical coordinates may be made to show settlement 
rates. 

(3) For granular subgrades or some cohesive 
subgrades with a 7c' u of 200 psi per inch or more, the 
load is applied in successive increments of 3,535 
pounds (5 psi) to a maximum load of 21,210 pounds 
(30 psi) . The load is not released between increments. 
Each increment loading is held for at least 16 minutes 
and until less than 0.0002 inch per minute deforma- 
tion is read. The final load (30 psi) is held until 
practically complete deformation is reached, but not 
less than 16 minutes. In general, this will be when the 
rate of deformation is less than 0.0001 inch per min- 
ute (0.001 in/10 min) and most of the consolidated 
has occurred. 

g. Unit Load-Deformation Curve. A curve of unit 
load vs deformation should be plotted for materials 
with a &' u of 200 psi per inch or more. The plotted 
points are joined with a smooth curve (fig. 2-101) . 
If the curve approximates a straight line between 10 
psi and 30 psi loadings, and goes through the "0" 
point, no correction is needed. If it does not approxi- 
mate a straight line or the straight line does not ex- 
tend through the "0" point, a straight line is drawn 
through the origin and parallel to the straight line or 
the straight line portion of the curve (fig. 2-102a). 
If no portion approximates a straight line, the cor- 
rection line is drawn parallel to the average slope 
as determined by at least three points in the area of 
least curvature (fig. 2-102b). A new value of de- 
formation is then read at the 10 psi point on the cor- 
rected curve. 

PENETRATION IN INCHES 



c 



10 

a 

H 

o 1 
1/1 

IT 20 

H 

a 


1^ 

30 

Uo 
Figiir 


} .02 .Oli .06 .06 .1 


"X 


^ 




















^ 


K 




-Loading Curve Apj 
Straight Line 


roxinu 


~ 

tee a 










K 


XQ 




















^S. 


X 






















X 


N. 






















\ 


""<> 










































e 2-101. Load-deformation curve from plate bearing 



6' 

en 10 

w ' 
| I 20 

I a 

3 so 



,00 



Deformation - Inches 
oOl .02 .05 



.04 



\ 

\ 


i 
> 


.< 


"~~- Corrected Deformation 
Read at 10 pgi. Load 






<s 

V 


^s 










Cor 


rectc 


id Cu 


rve 


^ 









,01 



.02 



.05 



.04 



STRAIGHT-LUC 
Load - psi 

tQ t-> 

5 o o c 


" v -- 


Illii 


1 

^* 


/ 


-Cor 


1 

~ected Cur 


ve 










. 


-^ 


















^~*c 


<^T 



i w 
hj 
30 

3 

a 10 
i 

1 20 

o 

iJ 

an 


Co: 


~rect 


;d Ci 


.rve-^ 


^ 








.01 .02 .05 .0 






- ^, 


j 




rCor 


recte 


d Cm 


ve 








*~-~. 




-4. 

^-* 


^r 





1 f 






She 


ar Fe 


iluri 


J 







test. 



b. 

Note; Corrected Curve May Lie Above or Below Actual Curve 
Figure 2-102. Zero corrections to load-deformation curves. 

2-88. Evaluation of Results 

a. Deflection Correction. There is a certain amount 
of bending in the bearing plate when load is applied, 
even when a nest of plates is used, and bending re- 
sults in a greater deflection at the center than on the 
rim. Since the deflection is measured at the rim, the 
measurement is smaller than if taken at the center 
and the 7<?' u is higher. For &' u of less than 100 psi per 
inch, the bending correction is negligible and can be 
omitted. For 7c' u between 100 and 200, the correction 
graph (fig. 2-103) is used. A &' u greater than 200 
requires a load-deformation curve to be drawn and a 
new value of &' u determined. This value is used to 
enter the curve and to read the corrected value (& u ), 
the subgrade modulus corrected for plate deflection. 

5. Saturation Correction. For a better evaluation, 
a correction for subgrade saturation should be con- 
sidered. The most applicable method is an adaptation 
of the consolidation test. The samples are selected 
from the location where the tests are to be performed. 
The correction is determined by loading two samples 



100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 IOOO 
k u - POUNDS PER CUBIC INCH 

Figure 2-103. Plate bending correction for fc u . 

of the undisturbed subgrade material, one with the 
moisture content in-place (sample A) and the other 
(sample B) with the undisturbed subgrade in a sat- 
urated condition. The same seating load (para 
2-8Y/) used in the plate bearing test is applied to 
both specimens. When the vertical dial becomes sta- 
ble, a "zero" reading is taken and an additional 10 
psi load is applied (total of 11 or 12 psi). After the 
dial becomes stable again, the reading reflects the 
deformation under a 10 psi load. Certain soils may 
swell under saturation and cause the material to 
squeeze up over the restraining ring when pressure 
is applied. The top of both of these specimens, A and 
B, should be trimmed about 1/16 inch to allow for 
swelling, so that the height of both specimens is the 
same at the start of the test. The correction for sat- 
uration is applied in proportion to the deformation 
of both specimens under a load of 10 psi. The value 
of the corrected subgrade modulus (k) is 



Where: 

&=subgrade modulus corrected for saturation 
and bending of the plate, 

& u =subgrade modulus, uncorrected for satura- 
tion, but corrected for bending of the 
plate when necessary, 

d B = deformation of a standard specimen under a 
unit load of 10 psi in inches, and 

d deformation of a specimen at field conditions 
under a unit load of 10 psi in inches. 

Note. The value of -j- is limited to less than one 
d s 

c. Interpretation of Corrections. & u is rarely used 
in design without a correction. For coarse granular 
soils, & may be used without a correction if compac- 
tion requirements are met. Cohesive soils in arid re- 
gions with a low water table may have actually 
smaller saturation corrections than determined by the 
test. If examination of other pavements in the area 
indicates no loss in support at the joints due to infil- 
tration or leakage and the moisture content is lower 
than optimum for compaction, the uncorrected (for 
saturation) value of & u may be used. In some in- 
stances, the correction does not fulfill the intended 
purpose and is not satisfactory. Two examples of 
these soils are: cohesionless or nearly cohesionless 
silts and fine sands which "pump"; and uniform, 
poorly-graded and poorly-compacted sand that tends 
to shift at pavement joints. For these conditions, a k 
value is assumed for the design. 

d. Correlation of Subgrade Modulus and CBR. If 
time and equipment are not available for a full scale 
loading test, an approximate k value may be deter- 
mined from the CBR value. This must be done for 
each soil type encountered. Table B-2 (app B) shows 
typical k and CBR design values based on the type 
of classified subgrade soil. 



Section XIV. UNCONF1NED COMPRESSION TEST 



2-89. Discussion 



a. The unconfined compression test is used widely 
to estimate the shearing strength of clay soils. It can- 
not be performed on cohesionless soils which cannot 
stand unsupported. The test is most applicable to 
saturated clay soils, and as described in this para- 
graph, is performed upon relatively undisturbed 
samples at their natural moisture contents. In many 
soils the test is also run as remolded on samples of 
the same soils at the same moisture content; this 
procedure is not described. 

&. Description. The unconfined compression test is 
a simple test usually performed on a small cylindrical 



sample (l-l 1 /^ inches in diameter and 2-3 inches 
high) . It resembles the compression test on a concrete 
cylinder except that the sample and loads are much 
smaller. The principal information obtained is the 
value of the compressive unit stress which corre- 
sponds to failure of the cylinder, or to 15 percent 
strain (reduction in height). This value, designated 
as q u , is expressed in pounds, or tons, per square foot. 
The unconfined compression strength is assumed to be 
equal to twice the shearing strength (cohesion) of 
such soils. In the form of an equation, this relation- 
ship is stated as q u =2c, in which c is the cohesion and 
q u is the unconfined compressive strength. The rela- 
tionship between stress and strain (unit deformation, 



1-100 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



>r in this case, unit shortening) , may also be deter- 
nined during this test. Since the test is made on a 
sample which must stand by itself with no support 
md is made immediately after the sample is placed 
n the test machine, the shearing strength is regarded 
is a minimum. The use of the test value is, therefore, 
;onservative in many instances. 

190. Apparatus 

a. Basically, the testing is done by loading the 
sample in the frame provided for the CBR test, 
samples used in the test normally are secured with the 
ioil trafficability sampler. Apparatus for conducting 
;he test is assembled from components found under 
joil test apparatus (para 2-79), penetrometer, plus 
such other items as may be necessary. The assembled 
ipparatus for the unconfined compression test is 
shown in figure 2-104. Moisture contents are deter- 
mined by -oven-drying of total specimen. 

2>. The CBR frame is placed, with jack down, on 
a table in position to turn the crank and preferably 
damped in place. The sample will be placed directly 
an the jack plunger or on a metal plate which will 
in turn rest firmly on the plunger plate. 

G. A. cone penetrometer proving ring is selected 




Figure 2-104. Assembled apparatus, unconfined compression 

test. 



from the soil trafficability apparatus. The penetrom- 
eter dial (0.001 inch sensitivity graduated from 
to 300) is then removed and the 0.0001 inch sensitiv- 
ity dial is substituted. It must be emphasized that, 
when the unconfined compression test is completed, 
care must be taken to return the proper dial to the 
proving ring, since the penetrometer's dial indicator 
is calibrated for one particular ring only. If the face 
of the penetrometer is graduated so that to 300 
equals exactly 360 of the dial face, it may be as- 
sumed that a deflection of 0.1 inch equals 150 pounds ; 
therefore, a deflection of 0.001 inch equals 0.15 
pound. However, the readings taken frequently will 
be in the lower range of the ring's capacity and much 
greater accuracy will be assured by a recalibration 
of the ring with the 0.0001 inch dial in place. The 
ring may be calibrated simply for the range needed 
for the unconfined compression test (seldom, more 
than 100 pounds total load except for very stiff or 
hard clays). This is accomplished by attaching the 
ring vertically in the vise using a convenient thread 
on the penetrometer shaft and balancing known 
weights on it or an adapter above it. Calibrated 
weights may be used or weights prepared by weight- 
ing on the solution balance. A series of weights 
should be used as, for example, i/, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 
20, 30, and so forth pounds and the corresponding 
dial readings recorded. Some penetrometer rings 
have been made whose dials have been calibrated to 
the ring. Therefore 360 on the dial will not be equal 
to precisely 300 cone index, but slightly more or less. 
If such a ring is used with the 0.0001-inch dial, the 
ring must be calibrated for the dial. 

d. The recalibrated ring is attached to the CBR 
ring-to-frame adapter and to the field CBR piston 
by means of the two penetrometer ring adapters. 
Piston extensions may be used as needed. The ring 
dial should be set at zero with the piston to be used 
hanging free. 

e. The strain or deformation of the sample is read 
from a 0.001-inch-sensitivity dial attached to the dial 
clamp on the CBR frame in position to read the 
travel of the jack upward. A zero reading is recorded 
as the sample, being lifted upward on the jack, comes 
into contact with the CBR piston above. It should 
be ascertained that no play whatsoever is present be- 
tween the ring-to-frame adapter and the frame. If 
play is found to exist, the adapter should be forced 
tightly into the clamp by using paper shims. 

2-91. Test Procedures and Calculations 

As previously indicated, the sample used for an un- 
confined compression test normally is obtained with 
the soil trafficability sampler. See paragraph 2-18 
for sampling procedures. 



(1) Any protective coating or wrapping used 
to preserve the sample must be carefully removed 
before testing. The sample obtained by this sampler 
is 1.87 inches in diameter and 6.0 inches long. Under 
expedient conditions, samples may be cut from a 
chunk sample. A minimum size of cylindrical sample 
in such cases is 1 inch in diameter and 2 inches high. 
In any case, the height-diameter ratio should be 
about 2. The sample should be handled very care- 
fully and quickly throughout the test. 

(2) The sample should be tested immediately 
after being extruded from the sample tube, or cut 
from a chunk sample. The ends of the sample must 
be examined and trimmed, if necessary, to make cer- 
tain that they are plane and parallel to each other and 
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the sample. 
The height of the sample and its cross-section area 
must be accurately known; the area may be deter- 
mined by measuring the circumference with a flexi- 
ble tape and then computing the diameter. If tape 
is not available, a strip of paper about i/ 2 mcn wide 
is wrapped around the sample, marked for length, 
and measured. The average of at least three measure- 
ments should be used for both the height and area. 
DD Form 1213 (Unconfined Compression Test) is 
provided for the unconfined compression test (fig. 
2-105). 

(3) If desired, the weight of the sample may be 
determined before testing. This is done to permit 
computation of the unit weight of the material. 

(4) The sample is placed in the loading frame, 
the loading apparatus adjusted, and both the vertical 
dial and proving ring dial set at zero. The sample 
is loaded by turning the jack handle at the rate of 
0.05 inch per minute. This is the same rate as re- 
quired for the CBK penetration test. During the 
early stages of the test, readings on both dials should 
be taken corresponding to every 0.01-inch movement 
of the vertical dial. Later, as the stress-strain curve 
(fig. 2-106) begins to flatten, readings may be taken 
at 0.02-inch and, still later, at 0.05-inch intervals in 
the vertical dial readings. Eeadings of both dials are 
recorded in the appropriate space on the data sheet. 
Stop the test when the axial load remains constant or 
when 20 percent axial strain has been produced. Ke- 
cord the duration of test, in minutes, to peak strength 
(time to failure) , type of failure (shear or bulge) , 



strain plot siieet, figure 2-l(Jt>. 

(5) After the sample has failed, place the entire 
specimen or a representative portion thereof in a 
preweighed container and determine the moisture 
content in the usual way. 

b. Calculations. Necessary calculations are indi- 
cated on the data sheet (fig. 2-105). 

(1) The unit s! rain, E, is computed by the equation, 
E=AL where AL is the change in length of the speci- 

Lo 

men, in inches, determined from the vertical dial 
readings and L is the initial length of the specimen, 
in inches. 

(2) The average corrected area, A in square feet, 

which corresponds to any rate of strain is computed 

j^ 

from the expression, A= -L in which A is the initial 
1 Hi 

area of the test sample, in square feet. 

(3) The total axial load, P, in pounds is deter- 
mined by multiplying the quantity, proving ring 
reading minus initial proving ring reading, by the 
calibration factor for the proving ring or by the use 
of a calibration curve. 

(4) The unit stress is determined by dividing the 
axial load, P, in pounds, by the corresponding cor- 
rected area, A, in square feet. 

(5) The stress-strain curve is drawn as indicated 
in figure 2-106 by plotting the strain or deformation, 
AL in percent, on the horizontal scale and the unit 

5T 

stress, P/A, in pounds per square foot, on the vertical 
scale. 

(6) The unconfined compressive strength, q u is 
normally taken to be the peak value of P/A on the 
stress-strain curve. As previously noted, the shearing 
strength, c=} 2 q u - In the example shown (fig. 2-106), 
c=795 pounds per square foot. 

c. Typical Values. Typical values of the unconfined 
compressive strength of clays of various consistencies 
are given in table 2-7. 

Table 2-7. Typical Values of Unconfined Compressive Strength 
of Clay Soils 

Unconflned compressive 

strength 
Consistency pounds per square foot 

Very soft Less than 500 

Soft 500-1,000 

Medium 1,000-2,000 

Stiff 2,000-4,000 

Very stiff 4,000-8,000 

Hard More than 8,000 



2-102 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



DATE 

UNCOHFiNED COMPRESS! OH TEST /<?/>/ /?7O 


PROJECT EXCAVATION NUMBER SAMPLE NUMBER 

&o/sL>/rtQ /C-3 / K.-B/-/ 


PROVING RING DIAL NUMBER PROVING RING NUMBER CALIBRATION CURVE NUMBER 

3 3 t* 


PROVING RING CONSTANT, K f VERTICAL DIAL NUMBER RATE OF LOAD APPLICATION 

QJS2.&/O.OOO/ 2. G.OS''//VSA/ 


FORMULAS 
*D 2 C 2 D 


rected Area, A 


A f9. /<., 


> 

Uait Stral 


AL Pfjfi.J 


4 4 


1-E 


L O A f.<7. /*.; 


INITIAL MEASUREMENTS ON SAMPLE 


AVERAGE AREA, AQ 


TOP 


DIAMETER, fin.; CIRCUMFERENCE, C(ln.) AREAfoq. in.) 


SQ. IN. 

z.7^ 


SO. FT. 

O.OJ9/ 


/.&&o 5~>&4- 2.74^2. 


CENTER 


/,S68 f.&7 2,74^6 


HEIGHT, L (in.) 

3.4^ 


BOTTOM 


/,B7/ ^8? ^.730 


ELAPSED 
TIME 
(min.) 


PROVING RING 
DIAL READING 
(0.0001 in.) 


LOAD, P fib.) 
fffiit^ Di*l 
* f f , or frow 

calibration 
carve) 


VERTICAL 
DIAL READING 
fiO 


VERTICAL DIAL 
DIFFERENCE, 
AL fin.) 


UNIT 
STRAIN, E 
(in. /in.) 


CORRECTED 
AREA, A 
f.<7. ft.) 


UNIT 
STRESS 
(ib./m. ft.) 


o 


o.o 


o. oo 


0,900 


ooo 


o.oo 


O.OI*?/ 


O 




25' 3 


3.80 


0,9^O 


0. O\ 


0.26 


0.0132- 


/9? 




ST?.? 


.78 


0. 660 


o.oz. 


0,52. 


0-OtfZ. 


4^<^>3 




7/,9 


/A 2^ 


0*870 


o.oz 


r cD>76 


o.o ite 


5S2. 




l?.3 


'22,39 


O.8&0 


a.of- 


/. oy- 


O.Otfl 


//60 




/flf,^ 


27.25 


0, S50 


O>O5 


y.3/ 


G.Otft 


/4/0 




aoo.6 


30.lt 


0-B^ 


o.ot? 


/, 37 


0>OW/ 


;^$z. 




^O^J 


30.11 


O- &3O 


0-01 


A 8^ 


O- 01^5 


/5&5 




20^>.7 


3/>QO 


D-8ZO 


o.oS 


a. 09 


O.Ol^S 


/390 




Z^,^ 


3.<?7 


O.tf/0 


C*C3 


^,35 


G,0iq& 


ssso 




Z<9// 2. 


3c>. / 8 


^,800 


G./O 


2,t>/ 


C'Otfd, 


/54D 




/f7.7 


29. 6>5 


O.790 


c.il 


2,&7 


0>0tf7 


/J~&5 




/<73^ 


23, 0& 


o.7^?o 


CtfZ, 


3./3 


O.OW7 


S4-7& 




/?/. y 


3A.7I 


0.170 


0.13 


3.3f 


0,0/98 


/4-50 




/88./ 


2&>2I 


O,76>0 


0,14- 


3,<^7 


O.OW& 


/V2.4~ 


3,0 


/8^.^ 


2.7,&b 


0.750 


Q. IS 


3/32 


C.Cl^ 


/^>9<i) 


































































































WATER CONTENT (%) 

51. 2. 7t 


UNCONFINED COMPRESS1VE STRENGTH, q f/b./q. ft.) 

/&9S 


REMARKS AND CALCULATIONS (Uie reverie tide, if more ipaco it needed) 


TECHNICIAN (Signature) COMPUTED BY (Signature) CHECKED BY (Slfnatare) 

^?u<JL ^^-t*^ ^-d^u^ ^?<^*^t $)d$uuJi, yh^fi^t^. 



GPO 03t 154 



Figure 2-105. Data sheet, unconfined compression tests. 



Li. 

d 

CO 



ui 
o. 

CO 
OQ 

-J 



CO 
CO 
LU 
(T 

CO 



1500 



1200 



900 



600 



300 



UNCONFINED COMPRESSION TEST 




PROJECT: BLDG K-3 

SAMPLE' K-BI-I 

TEST NO. I 

W = 39.2 % 

C = 1590 = 795 PSF 

DURATION OF TEST 3<00 MIN 
FAILURE TYPE SHEAR 



0.5 1.0 15 2.0 25 3.0 35 4.0 4.5 



STRAIN , 



% 



Figure 2-106. Stress-strain curve, unconfined compression test. 



2-1 U4 



im a 
Section XV. SOIL TRAFFICABILITY TESTS 



mu oou/Arm ov 



2-92. Description 

Soil trafficability is the capacity of a soil to support 
cross-country movement of military vehicles. 

a. One commonly used method of determining the 
trafficability of a soil is by actual contact tests made 
on the soil in-place with a cone penetrometer and re- 
molding test equipment. These tests are described 
below. The estimating of soil trafficability from a 
knowledge of topography, soil types, and weather 
conditions, by methods for predicting vehicle mobil- 
ity on both flat and sloping terrain, and by methods 
of indicating trafficability data on maps or aerial 
photographs are beyond the scope of this manual. 

&. Certain terms which are related to soil traffic- 
ability are defined as follows : 

(1) Bearing capacity. The ability of a soil to 
support a vehicle without undue settlement of the 
vehicle. 

(2) Traction capacity. Ability of a soil to resist 
the vehicle-tread thrust required for steering and 
propulsion. 

(3) Cone index. An index of the shearing resist- 
ance of soil obtained with the cone penetrometer. It 
represents resistance to penetration into the soil of a 
30 right circular cone with i^-square-inch base area 
(actually, load in pounds on cone area in square 
inches) . 

(4) Remolding. The change or working of a soil 
by traffic, or by a remolding test. Remolding may 
have a beneficial, neutral, or detrimental effect on 
soil strength. 

( 5 ) Remolding index. The ratio of remolded soil 
strength to original strength. 

(6) Rating cone index. The measured cone in- 
dex multiplied by the remolding index of the same 
soil layer. 

(1} Critical layer. The soil layer in which the 
rating cone index is considered a significant measure 
of trafficability. Its depth varies with weight and 
type of vehicles and the soil profile, but it is normally 
the layer lying 6 inches to 12 inches below the surface. 

(8) Vehicle cone index. The index assigned to a 
given vehicle that indicates the minimum soil 
strength in terms of rating cone index required for 
50 passes of the vehicle. The vehicle cone indexes, 
which are applicable to all types of military vehicles, 
are not given in this manual. 

(9) Stickiness. The ability of a soil to adhere 
to vehicles. 

(10) /Slipperiness. Low traction capacity of a 
soil's surface owing to its lubrication by water or 
mud. 

c. Both bearing and traction capacities of soils are 
functions of shearing resistance. 



(1) Shearing resistance, as measured by the 
cone penetrometer, is expressed in terms of cone in- 
dexes. Since the strength of a soil may increase or 
decrease when worked, remolding tests measure the 
gain or loss of soil strength to be expected under traf- 
fic. A comparison of the rating cone index with the 
vehicle cone index indicates whether the vehicle can 
negotiate the given soil condition. 

For exam-pie : If a soil has a cone index of 120 and a 
remolding index of 0.60 in its critical layer, its 
strength may be expected to fall to 120 times 0.60, 
or 72, under traffic. Accordingly, it is considered that 
such a soil is not trafficable for vehicles with vehicle 
cone indexes greater than 72, 

(2) Both stickiness and slipperiness may ham- 
per the mobility of vehicles under certain conditions. 
These items are not expressed quantitatively, and are 
normally troublesome only when associated with soils 
of low bearing capacity. It may be further noted 
that, except in a few unusual circumstances, the traf- 
ficability of a fine-grained soil will vary with the 
weather. Rainy periods will cause an increase in mois- 
ture, an increase in stickiness and slipperiness, and a 
decrease in strength ; dry periods will have the op- 
posite effects. For this reason, trafficability character- 
istics measured on a given date cannot be applied 
later, unless full allowance is made for the changes 
in soil strength caused by weather. 

2-93. Equipment and Adjustment 

a. Description. The cone penetrometer is the 
principal instrument in evaluating soil trafficability. 
A complete soil trafficability test set, in backpack for 
portability, is shown in figure 2-107. It consists of a 
30 degree right circular cone (base area % square 
inch) mounted on one end of a graduated staff or rod 
with a measuring device attached to the other end. 
When the cone is forced slowly into the soil, the 
measuring device records the amount of force re- 
quired to move the cone. This penetrating force is 
considered to be an index of the shearing resistance 
and is called the cone index of the soil. The cone index 
refers to some given plane of reference such as the 
soil surface or some given distance below the soil 
surface. Readings are first taken when the top of the 
cone is just even with the soil surface, and then at 
successive 1, 2, or 6 inch increments as the cone 
penetrates further into the soil. The 6 inch increments 
are indicated on the shaft and any other increment 
can be premarked. 

J). Apparatus. The issue cone penetrometer (fig. 
2-108) uses two 18 inch extension rods (to provide 
either an 18 or 36 inch length) , a proving ring, a dial 
gage, and a handle. In use, the dial is mounted inside 
the proving ring. The amount of force applied to 





Figure 2-107. Test set, soil trafflcabllity. 




move the cone into the soil is indicated on the dial 
which has a range from to 300 pounds per square 
inch (0-150 Ib). Maintenance and adjustment are as 
follows : 

(1) The penetrometer needs little care beyond 
keeping it clean and well oiled, keeping the joints 
tight, and checking the calibration. 

(2) Particular care should be taken to see that 
no grit is caught between the extensometer arm of 
the dial gage and the lower mounting block. 

(3) If either or both mounting blocks loosen and 
become movable, they should be positioned to lie on 
a diameter of the ring and then retightened. If this 
happens, the proving ring calibration should be 
checked before using the instrument. 

(4) The point of the cone may become rounded 



through use. This may affect the accuracy of the in- 
strument, hence an excessively worn or deformed cone 
should be replaced. 

(5) The proving ring should not be subjected to 
overstressing, deformation, hard knocks, or extreme 
changes in temperature. If treated properly, the prov- 
ing ring will hold its calibration for the life of the 
instrument. 

(6) The micrometer dial gage is a sensitive in- 
strument which must be protected against rough us- 
age. It should never be immersed in water, and if used 
in rainy weather, should be wiped dry as soon as pos- 
sible. When transporting the instrument, the dial 
should be cushioned by wrapping it in a cloth or 
paper. 



1-106 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



PROVING RING 

\ 







6" GRADUATIONS 




30" CONE 




SQ. IN. 
END AREA 



HANDLE 



. : IP 

! 18" EXTENSION RODS 

Figure 2-108. Gone penetrometer. 

c. Airfield Penetrometer. In addition to its use for 
soil trafficability, the cone penetrometer is a useful 
instrument in theater of operations airfield evalua- 
tion and design. It must be emphasized that the cone 
penetrometer is at no time a substitute for the labora- 
tory or in-place GBR methods. However, it may be 
ased when hasty conditions prevail and time is a 
factor. The cone penetrometer may be used to obtain 
tin airfield index which is a consideration in airfield 
iesign. A modified version of the penetrometer per- 
mits evaluation of higher indexes than the standard 
model. Also, a penetrometer specially devised for the 
Air Force and called the airfield penetrometer can 
3e used. 

(1) Modified penetrometer. The modification to 
:he described cone penetrometer consists of an adap- 
;er attachment which replaces the lower removable 
ialf of the staff. It consists of a %-inch staff attach- 
nent with a 0.2 square-inch end-area cone mounted 
)n the lower end of the staff. When the 0.5 square- 
inch base is used, the airfield index is obtained by 
iividing the cone index by 50, or 

. cone index 
Airfield index = ^ 

With the 0.2 square-inch cone, the airfield index is 
)btained by dividing the cone index by 20, or 



Airfield index = 



cone index 
20 



(2) Airfield penetrometer. This instrument uses 
a built-in spring-loaded measuring device in place of 
the proving ring and dial gage. The penetrometer 
consists of a 30 right circular cone with an end area 
of 0.2 square inch mounted on a graduated staff. The 
spring housing and handle are on the other end of 
the staff. The instrument may be disassembled into 
three main pieces, each less than 13 inches long, for 
transportation. The handle forms part of the largest 
piece and protects the cone. The other two pieces are 
extension staffs. The entire unit weighs approxi- 
mately 3 pounds. 

(a) The load indicator consists of two sepa- 
rate sets of interwound coils which act as a single 
spring. In use, the spring is stretched (tension) in 
direct proportion to the applied load. The measur- 
ing device located on the spring housing is an in- 
dicator which moves up as the force is applied. 

( 5 ) The technique for measuring with the air- 
field penetrometer is very simple. Force is applied to 
the handle until a slow steady downward movement 
occurs. The indicator on the barrel is read at the 
moment the base of the cone enters the ground (sur- 
face reading) , and at any other desired depth when 
the corresponding depth mark reaches the surface. 
The reading is made by shifting the line of vision 
from the depth mark to the load indicator just a 
moment before the desired depth is reached. 

(G) When the required depth of penetration 
is at some distance below the surface, either one or 
both extension staffs are inserted between the spring 
housing and the cone. The staffs are marked at 2 inch 
intervals. 

d. Adjustment. The proving ring supplied with 
the cone penetrometer is calibrated by the manufac- 
turer. This calibration should be accurate throughout 
the life of the instrument, unless the ring receives 
a severe jolt, the dial gage is abused, an excessive load 
is applied to the ring, or the ring is overstressed in 
some other way. If recalibration is necessary, the pro- 
cedure given below may be used : 

( 1 ) Remove the handle and rod. 

(2) Place the lower mounting block of the ring 

assembly on a smooth, horizontal surface. 

(3) Check the mounting block alinement. Both 
blocks should be on a diameter ring. A drafting 
triangle or a carpenter's square may be used in this 
operation. 

(4) Seat the extensometer arm of the dial firmly 
on the lower block with sufficient travel of the arm 
available for the full range (approx. 0.1 inch deflec- 
tion) of the proving ring. The dial can be moved up 
or down by adjusting the two nuts on the threaded 
stud which holds the gage in position. Both nuts 
should be tight when in final position. 

(5) Zero the dial by rotating its face so the 
"O" is under the needle. 



jjouiiu.5, ma.rK.iiig or noting me position 01 LIIB 

on the dial after the addition of each load increment. 

Any of the following loading methods may be used. 

(a) Dead weights may be added to the top of 
the ring assembly. If a plate is used to hold the 
weights, its weight should be considered in the first 
10 pound load. 

(b) Any of the load machines commonly used 
in laboratory work may be used to apply the load. 

d. Takp. a dial reading just as the base of the cone 

(c) The ring assembly may be placed on a set 
of platform scales and the load increments applied 
by a jack and measured with platform scales. 

(7) Remove load in 10 pound increments, noting 
the position of the needle after the removal of each 
increment. 

(8) The load run should be made at least twice, 
using the average of the needle position for each in- 
crement as the final point. 

(9) Some variation in needle position will oc- 
cur, but will not be significant. 

(10) When 10 pound increments have been es- 
tablished on the dial, they may be marked 20, 40, 
up to 300, and then subdivided into four subinter- 
vals. Each interval should be subdivided separately, 
since the scale arcs of the various 10 pound intervals 
are not necessarily the same. 

2-94. Test Procedure 

The step -by-step procedure in using the cone pene- 
trometer is as follows : 

a. The penetrometer must be inspected before use 
to make sure that all nuts, bolts, and joints are tight 
and that the dial gage stem contacts the proving ring 
bearing block. 

b. Allow the penetrometer to hang vertically from 
its handle. It should read zero, and when a 150 pound 
load is applied, it should read 15. 

c. Place the hands over each other on the handle 
in order to minimize eccentric loading of the proving 
ring and to help keep the rod vertical (fig. 2-109). 
Force is applied by pressing the chest against the 
hands until slow, steady, downward movemnt oc- 
curs. 

d. Take a dial reading just as the base of the cone 
is flush with the ground surface. Continue the slow, 
steady, downward movement and take successive dial 
readings at appropriate intervals, usually at 6 inch 
intervals, as each 6 inch graduation on the rod en- 
ters the ground. A normal rate of progression will 
yield the usual five readings involved in penetrating 
to 24 inches in about 15 seconds. An assistant should 
be provided to record the readings taken by the op- 
erator. 




Figure 2-109. Method of using cone penetrometer. 

e. The following precautions should be observed in 
the use of the cone penetrometer : 

(1) The instrument must be kept vertical. 

(2) Readings higher than the 150-pound capac- 
ity of the dial should not be attempted, since this 
might overstress the proving ring. 

(3) If the dial capacity is exceeded at less than 
24 inches of penetration, the operator should assure 
himself that the cone is not striking an isolated rock 
fragment by making another penetration nearby. 

(4) The instrument should never be withdrawn 
by the ring but always by the rod or the handle. 

/. A data sheet should be prepared in advance 
showing location of observations, date, weather con- 
ditions, names of operator and observer and the value 
of the readings at the 6-inch depth intervals. 

2-95. Remolding Test 

The remolding index of a soil is an expression of 
the ability of a soil to retain its original strength 
under the traffic of a vehicle. 

a. Apparatus. Equipment which is required for de- 
termining the remolding index includes the follow- 
ing: 

(1) Trafficability remolding equipment consist- 
ing of a cylinder, approximately 2 inches in diameter 
and 9 inches long, mounted on a base, and a 2%-pound 
drophammer. 

(2) Penetrometer, with a 36 inch shaft, used to 
measure soil strength in the cylinder before and after 
remolding. 

(3) Soil trafficability sampler used to obtain the 
soil sample and to place it in the remolding cylinder. 



418-320 071- 



2-108 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 







5/8-IN. 

ALUMINUM 

STAFF 



3/B-IN. STEEI 
I STAFF 



Figure 2-110. Remolding test equipment. 



(4) The equipment discussed in (1) and (2) 
above is illustrated in figure 2-110. 

b. Test Procedure. The test procedure for determin- 
ing the remolding index is as follows : 

(1) Take a sample with the soil trafficability 
sampler (para 2-18). 

(2) Eject the sample directly into the remolding 
cylinder (fig. 2-111). 



(3) Push the sample to the bottom of the cylin- 
der with the foot of the drophammer. 

(4) Using the penetrometer, take cone index 
readings as the base of the cone enters the soil surface 
and at each inch to a depth of 4 inches (fig. 2-112). 

(5) Apply 100 blows with the drophammer fall- 
ing 12 inches (fig. 2-113). 

(6) Repeat the cone index readings ( (4) above) . 



of 300 pounds per square inch for each inch 
elow the last reading. 




Figure 2-111. Transferring sample into remolding cylinder. 





Figure 2-112. Taking cone index readings. 



Figure 2-11S. Remolding the sample. 



c. Calculations. The sum of the five cone index 
readings after remolding, divided by the sum of the 
five cone index readings before remolding, gives the 
remolding index. The remolding index is a ratio of 
the remolded soil strength to the original soil 
strength and may be either greater or less than 1.00. 
Confinement in the small cylinder prevents a direct 
comparison of cone index in the cylinder with cone 
index in the ground. However, the ratio determined 
by the test can be applied along with the cone index 
of the soil to determine the iii-place cone index. The 
rating cone index is the product of the cone index; 
and the remolding index for the same soil layer. For 
example, if the cone index of a soil in-place is 85 
and the remolding index is 0.80, the rating cone index 
is 85X0.80=68. Thus, the cone index of this soil 
can be expected to change from 85 to 68 under the 
action of traffic. 

2-96. Typical Results 

Probable ranges of the cone index, the remolding 
index, and the rating cone index are given in table 
2-8 for four general groups of soils. The general ef- 
fects of stickiness and slipperiness are noted in the 
table, together with some general comments relative 
to trafficability characteristics of the soils contained 
in each group. More extensive discussion of the uses 
of soil trafficability test results is given in TM 5-330, 
chapter 9. 



TM 5-53O/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



I in 

-^ cn u 
u in CU 
._ (I) 14- 
4-J C et- 
c/I 0) 



c 
o 
2: 



-C 
en 



(U O 
to 4-J in 



I O 4-J 

U. 4J JC 

d) cn 

-a <u 

O 4-> r- 

2: (D CO 




0) in u 
a. m <u 
a. o) M- 



cn a) 
O 

I/) C 



JC 

CD 



0) 
to cn 



0) 4-J 

V- JZ 

<l> CD 

(U 

tO 10 



0) 
T3 
O 



JC 
CO 



o 



OJ 



cu a) 
c cr 
o c 

U 03 
JD i- 

ro cn 

-OCX 

O "H 0) 

i- 4J "CD 

a. ro c 



-O 

4-J 03 

o o 



a 
a. 



LA 
vD 



LA 

CM 



o 

4-J 
LA 



O 

CM 



LA 
CM 



<U cn 

.0 "H x cu 

ro TJ 0) cr 

J3 

O O 

- E 

Cu 0) 



c ro 



I 

.rH 0) 

o a. JQ 

zo.ro 

ro u 



LA LA LA LA 

r-- o CA -3" O r^>. 



o 



LA LA 

CM O 00 



X 

CO QJ 

-a 

JD C 0) 

ro .-. a 

JD c 

O a) ti 

L- c v- 

Q. O 

o 



c 

O 



oo fo E 

O OJ 

T3 .-. 4-i 

(U M- cn 

<4- cn co 

-I (/) 

c ra 



o 
O 



LA 
on, 



Q_ 
C3 



T5 
C 
03 



-a 

c 

03 



TJ 

0) 
C 

ro 

u in 

cn 

i a; 

Q) > 

in 03 

i_ i_ 

ro cn 



LA 

vO 



LA 
LA 



ro 

QL 



.c 
cn 



>. 

ro 



c cn 
ro >- 
cn 03 
i_ 
O u 
c 



LA 

r^ 



4-1 

LA 
CO 

O 

CJ 

cn 

CU 

i_ 
a 

4-J 

X 

H 

E 
>- 

ro 

o 
i 

-o 
c 
ro 
cn 
i 

cu 
> 

ro 

!_ 

cn 


and-clay mixtures SC 
sandy clays, inorganic CL 


C 

ro 
cu 

4-1 
U 

co 
ro 

a. 

E 

TJ 
CU CO 

E > 

ro 



4- U 


gravel -sand-si It mixtures GM 85 to 180 
nd-silt mixtures SM 


_J 

2: 

_J 
o 

TJ 

C 

ro 

2: 

in 
TJ 

c 
ro 
in 

0) 

c 

FH 

14- 

0) 

TJ 

C 

ro 


C 
<4_ 

cu 
> 

ro 

o 

L, 
O 

4-1 


4-1 

JC 

cn 

rH 

cn 

. 4-J 

cn 

4-" 

. to 
<U 




, micaceous or diatoma- MH 


cn 

rH 

O 
cn 

4-J 

cn 
O 

TJ 

c 




o 

M- 

o 

in 
ro 
u 

4-J 

cn 
u 

c 
ro 
cn 



c 


>. 


X 

o 

cn 
ro 

O. 

x: 

cn 

O 

4-J 

E 

rH 
QJ 

<4- 


cn 

4-J 
CO 

u 

rH 





CO 









ro 


co 


cn 


>- 




co 


ro 


cn 


ro 




o 


C 


cn 




cn 


5 


>. 


> cn 


4-* 




ro 




4-J 


in 


4-1 




rH 




ro 


- 


> 


>- 


O 


4-1 


CO 


r 


*. 


r 




r 




r 


in 


O 


in 


cn 


CL> 


cn 


ro 





r 


r * 


rH 


i- 


U 


>^. 


r*f 


Ci) 


rH 


4-J 


rH 


>. 


i_ 


> 


TJ 







rH 


OJ CO 


cn 


3 




4-1 


in 


C 


CO 


r 


4-J 


ro 


o 


ro 


C 


u 


u- 


in 


> TJ 




O 


1_ 


rH 




rH 




rH 


CO 






i_ 


ro 




o 




ro c 





r 





U 


u 


<4_ 


o 


cn 


ro 


u 


n 


cn 


cn 


>* 




M 


L- ro 


rH 


q- 




rH 


rH 












^ 









cn 


cn 


cn cn 


C 




cn 


4-1 


C 


cn 


4-J 


o 


Q. 





4_l 


^^ 


^ 


r ' 


^s 


^% 




ro 


*v^ 


TJ 


CO 


ro 


3 


cn 


rH 




rH 


rH 


cu 


CU 


OJ 


ro 


ro 


>N. >>, 


cn 


U 


C 


ro 


cn 


O 


ro 


C 


3; 


C 


U 


>N 


> 


> 


* 


r 


4-J 4-J 


L- 


O 


ro 


F 


V- 


(U 


r 


ro 


o 


ro 


rH 


ro 


ro 


ro 


o 


U 


1 r 


O 


u 


cn 


CL 


O 


U 


CU 


cn 




cn 


4-> 


r 


r 


i_ 






rH -F-i 


c 








c 










v_ 




O 


O 


C3 






to c/) 


f-H 








r ( 






o 




o 











i 






cn 






,_, 


c 


. 




t . 


c 






c 






4 


0) 


tn 




O 1 1 




| 


0) 


o - 






4- 


O 4-> 


in 




o 




* Q) 




LA O 




4-> 


ro 


IA 4 


ro 




o 


_ 


T3 > 




C3 




O 3 


L- 4-1 


O 


a. 4-1 




.H (D <4- 


r <D 


O 


>. 


C 




LA -Q 


4-J in 


O 


tn 




14- 


1-1 1- 


O -0 


ro 


fQ 






O 


4-J 


<D O 




4- >- J3 

ro O 01 


2 

0} 


01 <U 
0) 0) 


E 
in 


jr 
4J m 

0) 


m 


O 

4-> in 


o E 
0) 

4J C 


O m 


cn 
c c 




4- tn jz 
0) 


o c 

C "* 


- 0) 
ro JZ 


0) 
i- in 


0) 
V- (J 


0) 


O 

- U 


E "^ 


4-> U 


in 




m JC. 


03 


"U 


..H -a 


n^ 


rH 


rt 


r-l 4-> 


L- *1 


^"^ 




3 U 4- 


E 0) 
i m 


-a 


4-1 C 


JZ 
0) 


^ 


v- 0) 


"~ 3 


O JZ 

a. a> 


(0 
3 


in 

4_t 


3 "jC *2 

C 0) 

r* > m 

XJ *>g^ 


O ro 

4- 0) 
!_ 1_ 
4) O 


c 
m -i-i 


~o in 


*- > 
>* 

ex u 


4-1 

ro 


O > 
CL 

a. >- 

3 l- 


4J (J 

O ^ 
Q.V4- 


a > 

3 

in >- 


C U 
Q) < 
> H- 
0) >4- 


C 

d 


c ^ o 

O I- 3 


a. a) 
-o 


4-> U- 


C T3 

ro 


D. (0 

3 4-1 


^ 


m ro 

4-J 


CL 
3 "O 


O *-* 


4-> "D 




o ro - 




rH >> 


1 1 p 


in "H 


o 


4-1 -^ 


in 


C "H 


"*1 


O 
o 


4-1 4J 
_ Q) 


. ro 
in 
a) j= 


o ^> 
z: c 
o 


in "i 

JZ -0 


!H 'E 


14- 
u- 


O 

C "H 


z- 2 


^ 'E 


E 1) 

J- jQ 
0) 




O i > 


i- 4-> 




4-1 O 


>-f 


f-4 


*^ 


rt ^" 


^H 


Q. ^~ 




O.E-- 

Q. V- 

3 -a TJ 
in a) i 

U D 


.-i .1-1 
u 2 

C (U 
O m 


in 

0) T3 
U C 

tn in 
in 


"H N 

2 - 

in "-i 
(U J3 
O 


tn 
(L) 
ro in 


-a 

0) 
JQ 


IZ o 
in 

C tt) 

a) in 


(TJ C (1) 


m 
^- 0) 
ro in 


4J -rn 
2 
C 

cn m 

CO) 




ra <u 
3 -b "f 


ro - 

4-1 U 


0) >> 

J_ L. 

Q.-a 


H E 


3 in 
in fo 
ZD Q- 


i 


4J in 
<4- ro 
CL 


3 -^ in 
in O ro 

3 O O 


3 in 
<n ro 

Z3 Q- 


IZ o m 
200 



oo 
i 

CM 

0) 
r-i" 
,5 

H 




CHAPTER 3 

BITUMINOUS MIXTURES 



Section 9. INTRODUCTION 



3-1. Description 

Bituminous pavements are a mixture of well graded 
mineral aggregates, mineral filer, and a bituminous 
cement or binder. They are used as the top portion 
of a flexible payment structure to provide a resilient, 
waterproof, load-distributing medium which pro- 
tects the base course from detrimental effects of water 
and the abrasive action of traffic. This chapter dis- 
cusses the materials used in the construction of bi- 
tuminous surfaces, and the methods of testing these 
materials and the mixes prepared from them. The 
design considerations, such as bearing capacity and 
thickness of pavement, are described in TM 5-330. 
Mixing and placing operations, as well as the con- 
siderations for preparing the mixes, are fully 
described in TM 5-337. 

32. Aggregate 

The aggregate may consist of crushed stone, crushed 
or uncrushed gravel, slag, sand and mineral filler or 
a combination of some of these materials. Aggregates 
normally constitute 90 percent or more by weight of 
bituminous mixtures, and their properties have a 
very important effect upon the finished product. 

3-3. Bituminous Cements 

a. The bituminous cement is the adhesive agent 
in the bituminous mixture and may be either a tar 
or an asphaltic material. The asphalts are generally 
obtained from the distillation of crude petroleum 
(fig. 3-1). Asphalt may also be obtained from nat- 
ural deposits in Trinidad and elsewhere. The tars are 
obtained from the destructive distillation of bitumi- 
nous coal (fig. 3-2). The functions of a bituminous 
cement are to hold the aggregate particles together 
and to seal the surface which then resists the penetra- 
tion of water. All bituminous materials possess these 
qualities. 

5. The bituminous cements are available in sev- 
eral forms suitable for different procedures of mix- 



ing or application under wide variations in tempera- 
ture. Some asphalts and tars are solid or semisolid 
at room temperatures. Other grades are relatively 
viscous (thick) liquid at room temperatures and all 
become liquid at higher temperatures. Mixing bitu- 
mens with petroleum solvents or water produces cut- 
backs or emulsions that are liquid at atmospheric 
temperatures. Such liquid asphalts and tars are used 
for cold mixes or applied as sprays in building 
pavements. 



PETROLEUM ASPHALT FLOW CHART 




ANIONIC 
EMULSIFIED 
ASPHALTS 



RS-2K 

RS-3K CATIONIC 

SM-K EMULSIFIED 

CM-K ASPHALTS 

SS-K 

SS-Kh 



Figure 3-1. Simplified flow chart showing recovery and refin- 
ing of petroleum asphaltic materials. 



3-2 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

I Metallurgical Coke 
| Domestic Coke 



1 Benzene Toluene 
'< Xylene , Solvent Napht 
\ Coumarone Resins, et 



phthas 



1 Uluimnating Gas, Fuel Gas 

fl 

I Sulfur, Cyanogen Compounds 

1 Aqua Ammonia, Anhydrous Ammonia 
I Ammonium Sulfate 



PROCESSING tJ^ight & Heavy Solvents 
'j | Coumarone Indene Resin 



PROCESSING 



PROCSSuNG {= T **< Anthrae ne 



. 
Naphthalene , Creosote 

^ T **!<; Anthra f e 
J Special fluxing oils 



( A simplified, schematic presentation of only one 
of a number of processes for refining tar.) 



Refined Tars 
Soft Pitch 




Intermediate 
Pitches 




Herd Pitches 



SATURANTS ROOFING ELECTRODES 

PAINTS ELECTRODES CORE COMPOUNDS y. p -r 

COATINGS ENAMELS ROBBER 

FUEL COMPOUNDS 

BRIQUETTES 



RTC B5 Cold patching. Seal coat and Road Mix 
RTCB6 Cold patching, Seal coat and Road Mix 

RT 1 Oust Laying 

RT 2 Prime Coating 

RT 3 Prime Coating i Surface Treatments 

RT 4 Prime Coating & Surface Treatments 

R T 5 Surface Treatments & Road Mines 

RT 61 

R ~T 7 j Surface Treatments. Seal Coats 8. Road Mixes 

RT 8 ^ 

RT 9 

RT 

RT 

12 Penetration Macadam.Tar Concrete and 

Hot Repairs. 
3fr Used in manufacture of Tar-Rubber Binders 



9 J 

10 1 Seal Coats, Tar Concrete & Hot Repairs 



Figure 3-2. Simplified flow chart showing production of road tars from 'bituminous coals. 



3-4. Asphalts 

Asphalts may be natural or manufactured, and may 
be solid, semisolid or liquid in consistency. Natural 
asphalts occur in lakes (as lake asphalt), pits, or 
rock structures (as rock asphalt). Asphalt cement 
is one of the components from the refining of crude 
petroleum. 

a. The military engineer is only secondarily con- 
cerned with the natural asphalts because they are 
not usually available in those areas in which the en- 
gineer is interested. He depends most generally upon 
the manufactured asphalts, which are obtained when 
crude petroleum is refined for the purpose of separat- 
ing the various fractions (fig. 3-1). The crude oil 
vapors are separated into gasoline, kerosene, and 
fuel oils, while the residue is asphalt cement and 
lubricating oils. The longer the process and the 
higher the temperatures, the harder the residue be- 
comes because of the increased loss in volatiles. All 
asphalt cements are solid or semisolid at room tem- 
perature (77 F.) and must be converted to a fluid 
state by heating. 

&. Relative hardness is measured by the penetra- 
tion test (para 3-16). The test determines the 



distance that a standard needle under a standard 
loading (weight) will penetrate a sample in a given 
time under known temperature conditions. From this 
test, a penetration number is assigned to the asphalt 
cement. The current Corps of Engineers specifica- 
tions cover five paving grades as determined by this 
test. Each grade is designated by a penetration grade 
or AP number. (AP refers to asphalt, manufactured 
from crude petroleum.) Table 3-1 lists the ranges 
presently recognized. Asphalt petroleum (AP) num- 
bers corresponding to the grades are also listed. 

Table 3-1. Penetration Grades and AP Numbers of Asphalt 
Cement 



Penetration grade 

40-50 

60-70 

85-100 

120-150 

200-300 



APNo. 

7 
5 
3 
1 
00 



Relative 
consistency 

Hard 

Medium 

Soft 



c. When heating equipment is not available or is 
impractical to use, asphalt cement can be made fluid 
by adding solvents (called cutterstock or -flux oils). 
Cutterstock may be any one of the more volatile pe- 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



3-3 



troleum distillate products. The resulting combina- 
tion, is called asphalt cutback. Exposure to air causes 
the solvents to evaporate and leave the asphalt cement 
to perform its functions. 

(1) The classification of the cutback is based 
on the rate of evaporation of the distillate that is 
in the mixture. Gasoline or naphtha (highly vola- 
tile) will produce a rapid curing cutback (EC) ; 
kerosene (medium volatility) a medium, curing cut- 
back (MC) ; and a fuel oil (low volatility), a slow 
curing cutback (SC). At times, reference will be 
found to road oils, which are one of the SC grades 
of liquid asphalt, or in effect, a heavy petroleum oil. 
Table 3-2 shows the percentage of components by 
grade for the three types of asphalt cutbacks. 

(2) As more cutterstock is mixed with a given 
amount of asphalt cement, a thinner liquid results. 
In practice, different amounts of cutterstock are 
added to a given amount of asphalt cement to obtain 
various viscosities, or grades, of cutbacks. The Corps 
of Engineers has approved a new set of specifica- 
tions for cutbacks based on. kinematic viscosity. The 
number assigned to each grade corresponds to the 
lower limit of kinematic viscosity as determined by 
a standard test. The upper limit of each grade is 
equal to twice the lower limit or grade number. The 

/stokesX 
units used in the rest are stokes or centistokes [ ) 

\ 100 / 

Thus, a number 70 cutback refers to a viscosity range 
of 70 to 140 centistokes. The other grades and their 
limits are 250 (250-500), 800 (800-1600), and 3000 
(3000-6000) ; in addition, the MC has a 30 grade. 
Figure 3-3 shows the scale of visconsity grades ; the 
higher the viscosity, the thicker the liquid. 

(3) Asphaltic penetrative soil binder is a spe- 



cial cutback asphalt composed of low penetration 
grade asphalt and a solvent blend of kerosene and 
naphtha. It is similar in character to a standard low 
viscosity, medium-curing cutback asphalt, but dif- 
fers in many specific properties. It is used as a soi] 
binder and dust palliative. 

d. Emulsified asphalt is an emulsion of asphalt 
and water in which soaps, colloidal clays, and nu- 
merous other organic agents are used as emulsifiers. 
It is a heterogeneous system in which water forms 
the continuous phase of the emulsion and the minute 
globules of asphalt form the discontinuous phase. 
There is also an inverted asphalt emulsion in which 
the continuous phase is asphalt (generally liquid 
asphalt) and the discontinuous phase is minute 
globules of water in relatively small quantities. 
Emulsified asphalts may be anionic (negatively- 
charged asphalt globules) or cationic ( positively - 
charged asphalt globules) depending upon the emul- 
sifying agent. 

(1) Emulsions are classified according to set- 
ting time. Setting or "breaking" rate is the speed 
with which the emulsion breaks or separates the 
asphalt and water. This rate is generally dependent 
upon the emulsifier used and the proportion of water 
to asphalt. Emulsions are described as rapid set- 
ting (RS), tnedium setting (MS), and slow setting 
(SS), and also by viscosity numbers (fig. 3-3). 

(2) Emulsions are also grouped according to 
their ability to mix with damp aggregate. The RS 
emulsion breaks so fast that it cannot be mixed and 
is therefore called a non-mining type. The MS and 
SS emulsions break slowly enough to permit good 
mixing until each particle of the aggregate is uni- 
formly coated. Emulsions may also be satisfactorily 
used as a tack coat for bituminous pavements. 



Table S-2. Asphalt Cutback Composition (Expressed in Percent of Total Volume.} 



Type 




Components 






Grades 










Solvent 


30 


70 


250 


800 


3000 


Rapid curing 


Asphalt cement 






65 


75 


83 


87 


RC 




Gasoline or naphtha. 




35 


25 


17 


13 


















Medium curing 


Asphalt cement 




54 


64 


74 


82 


86 


MC 




Kerosene _ 


46 


36 


26 


18 


14 




















Asphalt cement 






50 


60 


70 


80 


SC 




Fuel oil _~ _- _- 




50 


40 


30 


20 



















3-4 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



VISCOSITY COMPARISONS 



COMMON 
MATERIALS! 



RT 
GRADES 

RTCB 



ASPHALT 
CUTBACKS 



WATER 


LIGHT SYRUP 


SYRUP 


MOLASSES 


HEAVY 
MOLASSES 


BARELY 
DEFORM 


SOLID 



1 


2 


3 


4 




7 


8 


9 



10 



ASPHALT CEMENT 







200 


150 


100 


60 


40 


300 


200 


ISO 


100 


60 



KINEMATIC VISCOSITY AT 140 CENTISTOKES 



en 
O 



NEW 
GRADES 



*> X S: 

8 8 



m go 





HP 



Figure S-8. Viscosity grades at room temperature. 



3-5. Tars 

Tars are a product of the distillation of coal. No nat- 
ural source of tars exists. Coal tar is a general term 
applied to all varieties of tar obtained from coal. It is 
produced by one of several methods depending on the 
desired end product. When bituminous coal is destruc- 
tively distilled, coke and gas are formed, and tar, 
ammonia, light oils, sulfur, and phenol may be re- 
covered. Coke-oven tar is produced in the greatest 
amount and its chemical, physical, and adhesive char- 
acteristics make it most suitable for road-tar pur- 
poses. Water-gas tar is obtained in the manufacture 
of carbureted water gas. The nature of the carburet- 
ing oil largely determines the character of the water- 
gas tar produced, and may vary widely in specific 



gravities; viscosities, and other physical and chemical 
properties. 

a. Eoad tars are manufactured in twelve grades of 
viscosity (figs. 3-2 and 3-3). There are also some 
special grades for use in rubberized-tar binders. 
Grades 1 through 7 are liquid at room temperature, 
while grades 8 through 12 are semisolid or solid. The 
difference is due to the liquid coal distillates in the 
tar ; the more distillate, the more liquid (or less solid) 
the tar. The road tar cutbacks (ETCB) are the prod- 
ucts of cutting back the heavier or harder grades with 
coal tar distillates. Road tar cutbacks are manufac- 
tured in two viscosity grades (5 and 6) only. 

5. Tar, which is insoluble in petroleum distillates, 
is sometimes mixed with oil-resistant, unvulcanized 
rubber to form a rubberized-tar binder material. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3, 

3-6. Characteristics and Uses of Bitumens 

Tables 3-3 and 3-4 list the bituminous materials, 
sources, curing, temperatures, and grades associated 
with bituminous operations. 

a. Safety Precautions. Extreme caution must be ob- 
served when handling bituminous materials. Asphalt 
cement, which is solid at room temperature, is heated 
to high temperatures to make it workable as a binder 
material. Heated asphalt can cause severe burns if 
allowed to come in contact with the skin. Asphalt 
cutbacks contain highly flammable volatiles. The 
vapors will ignite at relatively low temperatures, and 
the lowest temperature at which they will ignite is 
called the flashpoint. Minimum flashpoint for RC- 
250, RC-800 and RC-3000 is 80 F. ; for MO30 and 
MC-YO, about 100 F. ; for MC-250 to 3000 and SC- 
70, about 150 F., and for the remaining SC grades, 
about 25 F. higher per grade up to 225 F. for 
SC-3000. Note that the spraying and mixing tem- 
peratures (table 3-3) in many cases are above the 
flashpoint. Use extreme caution when handling these 
mixtures. Do not expose their vapors to an open flame. 

Z>. Advantages and Disadvantages. Advantages 
and disadvantages of .the bituminous materials used 
in construction are : 

(1) Asphalt cement cutbacks are flammable. 



3-i 

Also, all asphalts can be dissolved by petroleum prod 
ucts which may be spilled on them, such as during 
refueling at an airfield. Tars, on the other hand 
are not affected by petroleum derivatives since the; 
are products of coal. Tars, when used as a prime fo 
base courses, also seem to possess better ;penetraitioi 
qualities than asphalts. Tars are very temperatur 
susceptible, having a wide range in viscosity wit! 
normal ambient temperature changes. Tar can be 
come so soft during warmer weather that the pave 
ment will rut under traffic. In colder weather, i 
can become so brittle that the pavement will crack 
(2) Asphalt emulsions are not flammable an< 
are liquid at normal temperatures. Since they ar 
mixed with water, they can be used with a more dam] 
aggregate than required for the cutbacks. Additiona 
water may be added to the emulsion up to propor 
tions of 1:3 for use in slurry seal coats. Becaus 
emulsions contain water they have certain dis 
advantages. During freezing weather, the emulsion 
can freeze and the components separate. Also, emul 
sions are difficult to store for extended periods, be 
cause they tend to "break" even in unopened drums 
In shipping emulsions, the water in the mixtur 
takes up valuable space which could be used to trans 
port hard- to- obtain materials. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



s 



GO 



















^3 






o3 


*H 


"d 


4-l 


a3 d CQ 


o3 




CO 

<o 






1 


d 4-3 

H 


ta d 

QJ O 
-P O 
o3 


o 

I 


3 ^ j" " 

d S d ,_ 
| g ^ | _ -g g 


* lu 


1 








y 


O o3 


S -t= 


>1 


9 ^ t-c CJ "rt **-^ ' ^ ^ 


C/3 "^ ^ 


c^ 


*rH 




& 

& 
a 

0> 

PS 


03 o ,3 
w w -e 

*1! 

* .f>5 fl 
,0 a 3 eg 
~t^ i"^ c^ .1-* 


H 

> w 
g Wl 

rO p) 


1 

0) 
hD 
.2 

'-*3 
-ij 


^IglJlSgl 1 

4>*. 03 w ^ 4^5 Q r/i OJ --* d 
KT> Q O ^ r^ G iii r-I F 7n C 
rj H>3 ^ ^ fv PM *M ""^ C/? ^^ Pi 


3 03 2 

o % *g 


03 


d rH 

CD CD 






J3 


~ -t^ 


rd i> 


'3 


rt ^0 ,3 o3 CC 


*^ O ^3 


^4 


--^ 






antains nap 
Caution: 


faD o3 

d "o 

'* I 

^s 

.5 bD 

&a 


03 ^ OJ 
^| ft . 

sill 

5 3 .2 g 

01 O* J2 co 


g'if |! |?113 
g| w '^|^i ' 


s -s 
1 2 


S 2 " 

<U 3 10 

o-t: i 

~ 3 iO 


flashpoint. 







# 






a 


pj 










Q 


^ 


t> 


I> t- 




*. i> vo us i ct i 










g 




<N 


CM 


CM CM 




eococococococ-oso 










If 












rH 














O 


O 


O 




ooooooioo^o 












o 


00 


00 


00 00 


























rH rH (N CM 




















co 




CO CO 


i> co co 


CO 


lO 












IV Oi 


O5 rH 
03 rH 






t^- CO CO 












d 


1 


1 


t~ co 




CO *-O I s * O5 irH lO t*" O5 r I 
' VO tl ' ' ' ' rH ' 


03 10 ' 


1 


1 












CO 1C 






rH CO l-O 1 s * O^ CO IO t^ O^ 


^^ CO CO 


CO 


O3 




















rH rH rH 


rH 






E 


no 
























3 






10 >0 


O 




UDIOOOIOIOOO 


10 10 


10 









s 






CO 1> 


rH t^< 






iO CM CM 


o^ 


JX. 




a 








rH rH 


CM CM 




C52rHrHCMCMrHTHCSlCM 


CO CO CO 


CO 


CM 




_o 




PR 


1 


10 10 


o i 




1 1 1 1 1 1 111 


CD 10 xo 


1 


ci 




53 




Q 




o> co 


|> ^J 




>OO5COt>OO5COI>O 


CJ J> JSm 


t**" 






.~ 








rH 


i~H C^ 




rH rH CM rH rH CM 


CO CM CM 


CM 


CM 




"n 
























a 
























03 
























*O 
























O 








^f 


^f CO 




*^H "^ CO "*^ "^ CO 


!> |>i 


[x. 


CO 










IO 

co 


Oi O 


(M -^ 




Oc7lOCM-*OlOCMTt< 


> 1> 


> 


CO 




2 




O 


IO 


1 

rH CO 


1 T 




1 ! 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 

rHrHCOCMCNlrHCOCMCM 


^ 7* 


1 


7 






Hfl 




to 


<* CO 


00 O 






^^ XH 


^^ 


CM 




a 


a 






N 






rH rH 


rH rH 


rH 


rH 




s 


*& 








<M 














EH 


03 
























M 




o 


10 O 


"5 O 




OlOOlOOiOOlOO 


O O 


O 


IO 






CQ 




10 


b- CM 


iO O2 




^d^ t*~ C*Q lO O3 1>~ CM iO Cft 


10 IO 


IO 


CM 










rH 


i I CM 


CM CM 




rHrHCMCMCMrHCMCMCM 


CO CO 


CO 


CO 








o"* 


,1, 


iO IO 


CD iO 




II 111 1 111 

O iO iO O JO iO iO O iO 






(J, 










CO 


O Tt< 


00 r-H 




1 s CO TH OO rH CD *^ 00 rH 


00 00 


00 


co 










rH 


rH rH 


rH CM 




rHrHrHCMrH-rHrHCM 


CM CM 


CM 


CM 
















O 


O 


O 




fl 












OOO 


IO 







11 

2 
Of 




' 


O 
O iO 
IV <N 

6 ' 

P5 


O 

o o 


00 CO 




O O O O 
OOiOOO OOO 
COt-CMCOCOOiOOO 
1 [ I I 1 t^- CM 00 CO 

^ 1 I I 

CQ 


IO t~ rH 

ooJ, 

tf CO 00 


rH 

CD 
CM 

TH 


CO 

i 


CM 








j*^ Tl) 


1 


















J ^ 


o 


ta 












d 




& 


2 0, 


-3 












B 




W 


o 


C/3 

















0) 


a<u 














pq 






ra 


u 














_j 


'T1 'O 


( j "+T 


d 


o c 












'3 


3 '3 


"S " 


p 


T3 T 


T! 












^D* ^ 




rH 




rd 




















o 










J 


^ 








02 




















d 








1 

.3 


O T3 




PH 






I 


CO 








a 


. 3 


^ ' 






N_X S_X 


o 








s 


sa 


rM 


















B -=j 


o3 








"3 6 s 










o 


f Q 








rd ^^ 










d 02 


tj 








ft^J- 













o 








^ 












3 w t* 2 

2 P ' _ ^ . W 

' ^ S 80 "> 

i i| co s g 2 

3 co 1 S = | . 2 
> 8 S -^ fad "^ T3 C 

ij *||- T s g e 

'i o-?!! * |s 

J^S^^P . !? "R 
JcaS^bo 03 ^*'9c 

! 2 ^"S ;|| ' i M'-S 

-S, d P J -^ o SPhcfloJ 
" M .a fi H -i -2 .3 ., 3 r 

33 N t_j 03 rl -f 3 S3 "*"^ ** ^^ 
QOJooSo3 S Oc5 

I^SOJ^CJCDO -P fl "S 

f-t -M 03 
1 &4 f< CW 


& 

1 
! 

s 

cr 

S 

c 

g 

T: 
a 
>< 

S 


found. Cutback may be adde 
if necessary. 














OOOO OOOOOOO 
CO CO C0 CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO 












hOOOO OOOOOOO 






o 






OOOO OOOOOOOC^C<ICOC5O5 
COCOCOCO COCOCOCOCOCOCOlOiOCO'^*'^ 












OOOO OOOOOOOxO*OOOO 

^^T^TH ^^Tt*^H^T|H^H(N(NO(M(N 






iicio iiiicLiiiiioci 
lO ^O lO ^O ^O "O ^O *O ^O *O *O CO CO 00 CO C 






10 CD 

PH PM ivi ^d ^H -^ pQ PL 

^H O^ C^l CO |* *, 1 ^. F ^ h^ f*^ '"" Cl CO "v ** 






^ d 

d ""* K^ W) 
!3 08 T3 X* d 

g . T3 n ^ '& 

pJD (H ^* jf^ r^J d *M 

|l a |Si^ . 

O^"-!^< to CPT3 'O ..-i TI 

MoS'SiaSeibo 9 

o34^CT'PHo3coe3o3 CT 


cc 




1 

CQ 1 W-^H 

2 d- J 

' -1 SI 
1 r ^ 
^ S^ | ^8 

^jS" S OQ T3 T3^ 

5i ft S- vS* 5S- ^ ^ 5z 

"^S rM rM 


.! 

c 

i 

tf 


^ 



3-8 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



Table 3-4. Typical Uses of Bituminous Materials 




Grade or designation 



Purpose or use 



CB - Asphalt cutback 



RC 
Rapid curing 



MC 
Medium curing 



SC 
Slow curing 



Dus t pa 1 1 iat ive 



DCA-70 3 



MC-30, 70, 250 SC-70, 250 
A.P.S.B.^ 



Prime coat: 

Tightly bonded surfaces MC-30 

Loosely bonded - fine grained sur- MC-70 SC-70 

faces . 

Loosely bonded - coarse grained MC-250 SC-250 

surfaces . 

Tack coat RC-250, 800 MC-250, 800 -- 

Surface treatment and seal coat: 

Coarse sand cover RC-70, 250 MC-250, 800 -- 

Clean coarse aggregate cover RC-250, 800, 3000 MC-800 

Graded gravel aggregate cover - MC-250, 800 SC-800 

Gravel mulch MC-250 SC-250 

Mixed in-place - Roadmix: 
Open-graded aggregate: 

Sand - RC-70, 250 MC-800 - - 

Maximum diameter 1 in., high MC-800 

percentage passing No. 10. 

Macadam aggregate RC-250, 800 

Dense-graded aggregate: 

High percentage passing No. 200 -- MC-250 SC-250 

Maximum diameter 1 in., medium MC-250, 800 SC-250, 800 

percentage passing No. 200. 
Premix or cold patch: 

Open-graded aggregate RC-250 MC-800 SC-800 

Dense-graded aggregate MC-250 SC-250 

Cold-laid plant mix: 

Open-graded aggregate: 

Sand RC-250, 800 - 

Maximum diameter 1 in., high RC-800 SC-800 

percentage passing No. 10. 

Macadam aggregate RC-800, 3000 

Dense-graded aggregate: 

High percentage passing No. 200 MC-800 SC-800 

Maximum diameter 1 in., medium MC-800 SC-800 

percentage passing No. 200. 

Aggregate precoating followed with MC-30 SC-70 

asphalt 

Hot-laid plant mix RC-3000 MC-3000 SC-3000 

Penetration macadam: 

Cold weather RC-800, 3000 SC-3000 

Hot weather 




1 Prevailing temperature during construction also affects selection of bitumen and may be the 
determining factor rather than size and gradation of aggregate. 

2 Caution: Do not overheat aggregate when cutbacks are used to produce hot mixes. 

3 DCA-70 is a water emulsion of a polyvinyl acetate containing chemical modifiers (formerly 
UCAR-131). Proprietary product of Union Carbide Corporation, New York, N.Y. 

^ Asphaltic penetrative soil binder. 




Table 3-4. Typical Uses of Bituminous Materials Continued 



AC 

Asphalt cement 
with a penetration of - 



AE 

Anionic and cationic 
asphalt emulsion 



RT-RTCB 

Road tar and 
road tar cutback 



SS-1, lh 



RT-1 



RS-1, 2 
RS-1 , 2 



RT-2 



RT-4 

RT-4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 

RT-6, 7, 8, 9, 10 



MS-2 



RT-6 



SS-lh 
SS-1 



RT-5, 6, 7 
RT-6, 7, 8, 9 



MS-2 



RT-5, 6, 7, 8 or 
5-5, 6 



MS-2 
MS-2 



SS-1 



RT-5, 6, 7, 8, 9 



85-100 



RS-1 
RS-1 



RT-11, 12 

RT-10, 11 
RT-1 2 







37. Representative Samples 

a. The materials used in conducting tests must be 
representative of those that will be used in construc- 
tion. Otherwise, test results will be entirely mis- 
leading. Sampling of materials for testing should 
receive close attention. Even when large samples 
must be subdivided into small units for the actual 
tests, care must be taken to keep the sample repre- 
sentative of the original mass. Aggregate samples 
should be quartered (para 2-22) to maintain a 
representative fraction of the larger unit until the 
proper size sample is obtained. 

1). Methods for sampling natural deposits of sands 
and gravels are discussed in Section II of Chapter 2 
and are applicable here. 

c. Samples of bituminous materials may be taken 
at the place of manufacture or at the point of de- 
livery, as expedient. For the purposes of this manual, 
it is assumed that sampling is done at the point of 
delivery. Samples may be taken for either of two 
purposes ; to obtain an average of the delivered mate- 
rial as nearly as possible and to ascertain the maxi- 
mum variation in the material's characteristics. 
Samples may be taken for analysis to identify 
bituminous materials if records are not available. 

3-8. Aggregate Sampling 

Aggregate varies in size from the larger stones or 
rocks to the gravels and sands. These materials for 
paving may still be in their natural deposits or may 
be in stockpiles previously gathered. 

a. Stone From Ledges and Quarries. Separate 
samples of unweathered stone weighing alt least 50 
pounds eacli should be obtained from all strata that 
appear to vary in color and structure. A sketch, plan, 
and elevation, showing the thickness, length, width, 
and location of the different layers, should be pre- 
pared so that the quantity available can be estimated. 

&. Natural Deposits of Sand and Gravel. Samples 
should be selected which represent the different 
materials available in the deposit. The area should be 
sketched and the approximate quantities of different 
materials indicated. If the deposit is an open-face 
bank or pit, the sample should be taken by channel- 
ing the face, so that it will represent material that 
visual inspection indicates may be used. The face 
should be cut immediately before sampling and any 
material which has fallen from the surface along the 
face discarded. Any overlying material (over- 
burden) that is not suitable for use as an aggregate 
is not included in the sample, since this material 
would be stripped away when the aggregate is re- 



moved from the pit. It probably will be necessary to 
make test borings or dig test pits to determine the 
approximate extent of the material. If test pits are 
dug, they must be adequately shored to prevent mate- 
rial from caving in on personnel working in the pit. 
Representative samples for each change in strata 
can be obtained from the pit. If the material being 
sampled is all sand, about 25 pounds is sufficient for 
the tests. If it consists of sand and gravel, a some- 
what larger sample (about 100 Ib) will be required 
for preliminary tests ; the coarser the gravel portion, 
the larger the sample should be. 

c. Stockpiles of Sand and Gravel. If the material 
has been stockpiled previously, great care must be 
exercised in obtaining samples, since there is a natural 
tendency toward segregation, that is, separation of 
similar size fractions into groups in the stockpile. 
The material near the outer edges and near the base 
of the pile is likely to be coarser than the average. A 
face should be cut into the stockpile near the base, 
near the center, and near the top, on at least two 
opposite sides. Samples obtained from these differ- 
ent sections of the pile are combined to give a repre- 
sentative sample. 

d. Commercial Aggregates. It is preferable to ob- 
tain samples of commercial aggregates at the plant 
during loading from stockpiles or bins when this is 
possible. Separate samples should be obtained at 
different times while the material is being loaded, in 
order to determine variations in the grading- of the 
material. Samples from a bin should be taken from 
the entire cross section of the flow of material as it 
is being discharged. Testing separate samples will 
give a better idea of variations that occur, but sam- 
ples should be mixed and reduced by quartering when 
the average condition is desired. When it is not prac- 
ticable to visit the plant to obtain samples, the next 
preferred method is to sample the material in cars 
or trucks, or while it is being unloaded. Samples from 
railroad cars should be taken from three or more 
trenches dug across the car at points that appear on 
the surface to be representative of the material. The 
person obtaining the sample should always bear in 
mind that segregation of the different sizes has prob- 
ably taken place, and samples which are representa- 
tive should be chosen. 

39. Bituminous Materials Sampling 

a. Clean, dry containers must be used in sampling 
and the containers must be tightly closed and prop- 
erly marked. A sample for routine examination 
should not be less than 1 quart. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




b. When sampling liquid bituminous materials 
from storage tanks or tank cars, samples should be 
obtained from near the top, middle, and bottom. 
Semisolid and solid materials shipped in tank cars 
may be made fluid by the application of heat and 
sampled in the same way. Samples can be taken from 
drain cocks on the side of the tank or car. If cocks are 
not present, the samples can be obtained by lowering 
weighted bottles or cans into the material, as illu- 
strated in figure 3-4. The bottle or can should be fitted 
with a stopper which can be removed by a string or 
wire after it has been lowered to the proper depth. 
The samples from the three levels should be tested 
separately to detect stratification. 

G. In sampling semisolid or solid materials in 
drums, barrels, or cakes, samples should be taken at 
least 3 inches below the surface and 3 inches from 
the side of the container or cake. A clean hatchet may 
be used on hard material and a stiff putty knife on 
soft material. An auger, brace with a % inch or 
larger bit, or other suitable tools may also be used. 



APPROX 1V4" 




APPROXIMATE SAMPLE LOCATIONS 



NOTE: WIDE MODI 
GLASS BOTTLE CAS 
IMPROVISED, USII 
WIRE OR ROPE SL 



Figure 3-4. Sampling liquid 'bituminous materials from 
car or storage tank. 



Section III FIELD IDENTIFICATION 





3-10. Introduction 

Tests which would be conducted on bituminous ma- 
terials in a large laboratory, usually for the purpose 
of checking compliance with established specifica- 
tions, are not normally considered field tests but are 
described for information. The field tests which are 
discussed are limited to the simple identification pro- 
cedures, flashpoint tests, and the penetration test. 
These field identification procedures are applicable to 
both tars and asphalts. They are intended not so 
much for determining the exact specifications to 
which a material conforms, but for determining for 
what it can be used and how it can be used safely. 

a. Bituminous materials are often found stock- 
piled in unmarked or incorrectly marked containers. 
This leads to confusion and delay in construction 
since the various types and grades of bituminous ma- 
terial are manufactured for a specific purpose. 

5. Field identification is important to the military 
engineer and this importance can be summarized in 
the following way: 

( 1 ) Knowing the type and grade of the material, 
the type of surface that can be constructed may be 
determined. 

(2) With the type of surface known, the con- 
struction procedure may be outlined and scheduled 
for a particular target date. 

(3) The procedure will, in turn, determine the 
proper equipment for the job. 

(4) The safety procedures are also dependent 
upon the identified material. 



G. The aggregate must also be tested to deter] 
its acceptability for the bituminous constructk 

3-1 1 . Bitumen Identification 

Field tests may be performed to identify the bit 
nous paving materials as asphalt cement, asphalt 
back, asphalt emulsion, road tar, or road tar cutt 
In addition, it is necessary to identify as close! 
possible the viscosity grade of the bitumen (fig. 2 
In order to distinguish among the several asph 
and tar products, it is necessary to know somet 
of their origin, physical properties, and the ma: 
in which they are normally used. Some of this ir 
mation is contained in tables 3-3 and 3-4. The i 
tification procedure outlined in figure 3-5 is b 
upon a consideration of the physical propertie 
these materials. 

a. Asphalts and Tars. The first procedure in 
identification of an unknown bituminous materi 
to determine whether it is an asphalt or a tar. r i 
may be differentiated by a solubility test. To 
form, the test, simply attempt to dissolve an mikr 
sample (a few drops, if liquid, or enough to c 
the head of a nail, if solid) in any petroleum d 
late. Kerosene, gasoline, diesel oil, or jet fuel is 
able for this test. One or more of these is usi 
available to the engineer in the field. Since asphi 
derived from petroleum, it will dissolve in the 
troleum. distillate. Road tar will not dissolve. IJ 
sample is an asphalt, the sample-distillate mix 
consist of a dark, uniform liquid. Asphalt cen 



Unknown Bituminous Material 




(Color Test) 
(Water Mixing Test) 

(Flame Test) 
Stone Coating Test 



I 

Wil 1 Not Mix 

RS 



Will Mix 
MS or SS 



Wi 




Not 



Will 



Asphalt Cement Asphalt Cutback 

(Determine Viscosity 30-3000 




40-85 85-150 150-300 
Med 



Hard 



Soft 





iea.t Odor Tes- 

.J "" 
Definite Kerosene Odor No Odor 



MC 



SC 



Figure S-5, Identification of unknown bituminous materials. 



or cutbacks dissolve completely ; the asphalt in emul- 
sions dissolves and forms black beads or globules in 
the bottom of the container. If it is a road tar, sample 
will be a dark, stringy, undissolved mass in the distil- 
late. A check can be made by spotting a piece of 
paper or cloth with the mix. Asphalt dissolved in 
distillate will produce a brown to black spot or stain ; 
the clear distillate above the settled tar will not cause 
a stain. The solubility test provides a positive method 
of identification. 

&. Cements and Cutbacks. The various grades of 
asphalt cement are solid at room temperatures while 
cutbacks are liquid. Hence, a pour test will distin- 
guish between them. Place a sample of the material 
in a small container and attempt to pour it. If the 
material does not "pour", it is an asphalt cement. If 
it pours, it is a cutback or emulsion. Note that at 77 
F., even the softest asphalt cement will not pour or 
deform if the container is tilted. 



c. Grades of Asphalt Cement. The various grades 
of asphalt cement are distinguished principally by 
their hardness, as measured by a field penetration 
test. This information may be sufficient for planning, 
or in some cases actually starting emergency con- 
struction. The exact penetration grade is not de- 
termined, but the field test will distinguish between 
hard, medium, or soft groups of asphalt cement. This 
test is performed by attempting to push a sharpened 
pencil or nail into the container of asphalt (at about 
77 F.) using a firm strong force. By "strong" is 
meant perhaps a 10 pound force. If only a slight 
penetration is made with considerable difficulty, a 
hard asphalt cement is present. If the penetration is 
made without great difficulty slowly, perhaps, but 
positively, and to any desired depth, probably a me- 
dium asphalt cement is present. If the penetration is 
made with ease, the asphalt cement is naturally in 
the high penetration scale, a soft asphalt cement. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



3-13 



Even the highest penetration grade will not pour 
or deform at 77 F. if its container is tilted. 

d. Asphaltic Cutbacks. As stated previously, an as- 
phalt cement would not pour at 77 F. but a cutback 
would. Therefore, the pour test can be utilized to 
determine whether or not the unknown material is 
an asphalt cutback. If the material pours, it is an 
asphalt cutback. The approximate viscosity grade 
number of the cutback is found by comparing the 
flow to well-known materials such as water, syrup, 
and others. In this test, if made at a temperature be- 
low 77 F., the materials will appear more viscous 
than at 77 F. and the opposite if pour-tested when 
warmer than 77 F. It has been found that the cut- 
backs of a given viscosity grade will pour in a man- 
ner similar to the following : 

30's Water 

70's Light Syrup 
250's Syrup 
800's Molasses 
3000's Barely Deform 

After the pour test, the approximate viscosity grade 
of the cutback is known, but the actual type (RC, 
MC, SC) is not. 

(1) To determine if a cutback is an RC or not, 
the "smear test" is performed. This is done by mak- 
ing a uniform smear of the substance on a piece of 
glazed paper or other convenient nonabsorbent sur- 
face. This will give volatile materials, if present, a 
chance to evaporate. Since EC's are cut back with a 
very volatile substance, most of the volatiles will 
evaporate within 10 minutes. The surface of the 
smear will then become extremely tacky. This is not 
true of the lighter grades of MC's and SC's, which 
remain fluid and smooth for some time. An MC will 
not result in a tacky surface for a matter of hours ; 
for SC materials, several days may be required. 

(2) To identify an 800 or 3000 grade MC or SC 
cutback, a "prolonged" smear test is used. This is 
necessary because these grades of MC's and SC's 
contain such small quantities of cutterstock that they, 
too, may become tacky in the 10-minute period speci- 
fied above. A thin smear of the material is made 011 
a nonabsorbent surface and left to cure for at least 
2 hours. By the end of that time, if the material 
being tested is an RC, the smear will have cured and 
will be hard, or just slightly sticky. However, if 
the material being tested is an MC or SC, the smear 
will be uncured and still quite sticky. If the material 
is an RC 3000, it will cure completely in 3 hours, 
whereas an RC 800 will take about 6 hours to cure. 
Even after 24 hours, an MC or SC will still be sticky. 

(3) Since MC's are cut back with kerosene and 
SC's with oil, this fact may be employed to differen- 
tiate between them. Heat is used to drive off the kero- 
senes, if present, and result in an odor from the 
vapors. It is best to heat the unknown sample in a 
closed container in order to capture the escaping va- 



pors, being careful not to apply too much heat. If the 
sample is an MC, it will have a strong petroleum or 
kerosene odor. On the other hand, if the sample is 
an SC, no kerosene or petroleum odor will be de- 
tected, even though it might smell a little like hot 
motor oil. The ability to tell an RC from an MC, 
and an SC from either, is perhaps as important as 
any other part of field identification. 

e. Asphalt Emulsions. Another asphaltic material 
used in paving work is asphalt emulsion, which is a 
mixture of asphalt, water, and an emulsifying agent. 
It presents no problem in identification, since it is 
usually distinguished by its dark brown color, while 
the other bitumens are black. If mixed with kerosene 
or some other petroleum distillate, the emulsion can 
be detected by the appearance of small black glob- 
ules or beads which fall to the bottom of the con- 
tainer. If mixed with water, an emulsion will accept 
the extra water and still remain a uniform liquid. The 
other bitumens will not mix with water. Since an 
emulsion contains water, a small piece of cloth satu- 
rated with it will not burn if a flame is applied. The 
other bitumens will burn or flame. After it has been 
established that the material is an emulsion, it is still 
important to know whether or not the emulsion is 
a mixing grade. To tell if the emulsion is a mixing 
grade (slow-setting, MS or SS) or a iionmixing grade 
(fast-setting, RS), the best way is to try to mix a 
small amount (6 to 8 percent by weight) with damp 
sand using a metal spoon. A fast-setting emulsion 
cannot be mixed; it breaks immediately, gumming 
up the spoon with the relatively hard original as- 
phalt cement. A slow-setting emulsion mixes nicely, 
coating the sand. During this test, not too much 
emulsion should be added to the sand. This would 
saturate the sand and not give conclusive results. No 
further identification is necessary since both MS and 
SS grades are largely used for the same jobs. 

/. Road Tars. If the unknown bituminous material 
did not dissolve in the solubility test, but formed a 
stringy mass (fig. 3-5) , the material is a tar. The 
next step is to determine its viscosity grade by the 
pour test. By comparing the flow to that of the com- 
mon materials (fig. 3-3) , the viscosity of the tar may 
be closely estimated. The grades vary from RT-1 to 
RT-12. If the identified tar has a viscosity in the 
range of an RT-4 to RT-7 material, a smear test must 
be performed to determine whether it is a road tar or 
a road tar cutback. The smear test is performed in the 
manner previously described for cutback asphalt (d 
(1) above) . A great increase in stickiness in about 10 
minutes identifies a road tar cutback. No apparent 
change in consistency after 10 minutes shows the 
material to be a road tar. It is of no particular im- 
portance which grade of cutback is available, since 
both are used under approximately the same condi- 
tions. 



3-14 

3-12. Aggregate Identification 
Available aggregate may not always have all the 
characteristics that are desirable. The one meeting 
most of the requirements is usually selected, if not 
rejected for reasons such as availablity, length of 
haul, or overburden. 

a. Angular and Rough. The aggregate in a pave- 
ment must transmit the traffic load to the base, usually 
by the interlocking and surface friction of the differ- 
ent particles. Angular particles with a rough texture 
are the best for this purpose since they do not tend to 
slide past each other. However, more binder may be 
required since the angular shape has a greater surface 
area per unit volume than a round particle. 

&. Hard and Durable. The aggregate must with- 
stand the loads without cracking or being crushed. 
Resistance to weathering is also a function of the dur- 
ability. The resistance-to-wear of an aggregate can 
be determined by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test if 
the equipment is available. The equipment and pro- 
cedures are detailed in the AASHO method T96 and 
in ASTM Designation C 131. The equipment for the 
above test is usually not available for field testing and 
the Mohs hardness scale may be used to determine 
the hardness of the aggregate. This scale is fully ex- 
plained in TM 5-54:5. It ranges from 1 for talc or 
mica to 10 for diamond. By trying to scratch the ag- 
gregate or the common materials and vice versa, it is 
possible to establish which is harder, and from this, 
the hardness of the aggregate. If both scratch each 
other, the hardness of both is the same. Be sure to rub 
the "scratch" mark to see that it is really a scratch 
and not a powdering of the softer material. Some 
common materials and their hardness are : fingernail 
about 2, copper coin between 3 and 4, knife blade 
about 5, and window glass about 5.5. 

G. Clean and Dry. The bituminous binder must 
penetrate in to the pores of the aggregate, and also 
adhere to the surface of the particles. Aggregates 
coated with clay or dust or having water-filled pores 
will prevent the penetration or the adherence of bitu- 
men and result in stripping of the binder. If the ag- 
gregate is not clean, it should be washed either as 
part of the crushing operation or by spreading it on 
a hard surface and hosing it with water. When wash- 
ing is impracticable, dry screening may remove a 
great deal of dust and clay. Even hand picking may 
have to be done if no other method can be used. The 
aggregate should be made as clean as possible with 
the equipment and manpower available. 

d. Impermeable. Affinity for water can make an 
aggregate undesirable. If the aggregate is porous and 
absorbs water easily, the binder can be forced out of 
the pores, the bond between the aggregate and binder 
weakens and breaks, and "stripping" occurs. Strip- 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

ping is the loss of bituminous coating from the ag- 
gregate particles due to the action of water, leaving ^g^ 
exposed aggregate surfaces. One of the three follow- 
ing tests can be used to determine the detrimental 
effect of water on a bituminous mix : 

(1) Stripping test. A test sample is prepared by 
coating a specific amount of aggregate with bitumi- 
nous material at the applicable temperature for the 
grade of bitumen to be used. The mixture is spread 
in a loose, thin layer and air-cured for 24 hours. A 
representative sample is placed in a jar (up to no 
more than one-half of its capacity) and covered with 
water. The jar is closed tightly, and allowed to stand , 
24 hours. At the end of 24 hours, the jar with the 
sample is shaken vigorously for 15 minutes. A visual 
examination is made to determine the percentage of 
exposed aggregate surface which is then reported 

as percent stripping. 

(2) Swell test. Asphaltic mixtures containing 
fines of doubtful quality are sometimes measured for 
swell as a basis for judging the possible effects on a 
pavement. This test is more frequently used with 
dense-graded mixtures using liquid asphalts. A sam- 
ple of the mix is compacted in a metal cylinder and 
cooled to room temperature. The specimen and mold 
are placed in a pan of waetr and a dial gage is 
mounted above the sample in contact with the surface. 
An initial reading is taken. The specimen is allowed to 
soak for a specified period (usually 24 hours) or until 
there is no further swelling. Another reading of the 
dial is taken. The difference in readings is the swell 
of the mixture. Experience has shown that bitumi- 
nous pavement made with clear, sound stone, slag, 
or gravel aggregate and mineral filler produced from 
limestone will show test values of swell of less than 
1.5 percent of the original specimen thickness. 
Aggregates of doubtful character should be tested 
for conformance to specifications of test method 
AASHO T-101. 

(3) Immersion-compression test. This test is 
intended to measure the loss of Marshall stability 
resulting from the action of water on compacted 
bituminous mixtures containing penetration-grade 
asphalt. The result is a numerical index of reduced 
stability obtained by comparing the Marshall sta- 
bility (para 3-24) with the stability of specimens 
that have been immersed in water for a prescribed 
period. Eight standard Marshall specimens (4 in. in 
diameter and 2i/^ 1 / 16 in. high) are prepared for 
each test. The specific gravity of each of the specimens 
is determined. The set of eight are separated into two 
sets of four so that the average specific gravity of one 
set is essentially the same as the other set. One set is 
now tested using the Marshall method (para 3-24) 
and the other set is first immersed in water (at 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

140 1 F.) for 24 hours and then tested. The result 
is computed as a ratio of soaked stability to unsoaked 
stability, expressed as a percentage, or 



Index of reduced stability = S* 

Si 



X 100 



Where : 

Si average stability of unsoaked specimens 
S 2 = average stability of soaked specimens 

Mixes with an index of less than 75 percent are 
rejected or an approved method of processing aggre- 
gate and treating asphalt is required to increase the 
index to a minimum of 75 percent. 

e. Particle Size. In bituminous construction, it is 
common practice to designate aggregate according 
to particle size. There are three types of designations 
under this system based on two sieve sizes, No. 10 and 
No. 200. 

(1) Coarse aggregate is all material too large 
to pass the No. 10 sieve. 

(2) Fine aggregate passes the No. 10 sieve, but 



3-15 

is retained on the No. 200 sieve. In bituminous paving, 
the fine aggregate is usually a sand, but small pieces 
of crushed rock may be used. 

(3) Mineral filler or mineral dust refers to all 
nonplastic materials which pass the No. 200 sieve. 
Most clays are too plastic and are not used. Generally, 
crushed rock dust, agricultural mineral filler, lime, 
or portland cement may be used as the mineral filter. 
/. Gradation. 

(1) Uniform gradation. All particles are ap- 
proximately the same size and normally less than 
1 inch. 

(2) Macadam gradation. This group consists of 
uniformly sized particles except that they are in 
excess of 1 inch. 

(3) Open gradation. The sizes of particles in 
this group may have a considerable range from large 
to small, usually containing little or no mineral filler 
or in which the void spaces in the compacted aggre- 
gate are relatively large. 

(4) Dense gradation. There is a good representa- 
tion of all particle sizes, coarse, fine, and mineral filler. 



Section IV. TESTS ON BITUMENS 



3-13. Discussion 

a. The field identification tests on bitumens (para 
3-11) identify the material during expedient condi- 
tions or until such time as the more detailed tests can. 
be performed. The identification determines whether 
the material is an asphalt or a tar, and whether it is 
a cutback or an emulsion. 

&. Bituminous materials are manufactured to meet 
specifications established by the Federal government, 
American Association of State Highway Officials 
(AASHO), and American Society for Testing and 
Materials (ASTM). These specifications define the 
extreme limits permitted in the manufacture of the 
material and assure the user that the material will 
possess definite characteristics and fulfill the project 
requirements. Conformance to specifications tests 
include determining the specific gravity of the ma- 
terial, its solubility, its analysis by distillation, and 
its softening point. The equipment for performing 
these tests is not included in the asphalt test set, and 
is not normally available to the soil technician. How- 
ever, these tests are described for information and 
when the equipment is available, to identify the ma- 
terial beyond field identification, to furnish informa- 
tion for mix design, or to establish safe handling 
procedures. 



314. Specific Gravity Test of Bituminous 
Materials 

Specific gravity of a bituminous material is defined 
as the ratio of the weight of a given volume of the 
material at 77 F. (25 C.) to the weight of an equal 
volume of distilled water at the same temperature. 
The results of a bitumen specific gravity test are used 
in the selection of the temperature-volume-weight 
correction factor to convert volumes to volume at 
77 F. (25 C.). Space is provided on DD form 1216 
(fig. 3-6) to make this determination. A pycnome- 
ter (specific gravity bottle) is weighed empty and re- 
weighed filled with water. The water is emptied 
from the bottle and the bitumen is added. The pyc- 
nometer and bitumen are weighed. Water is added 
to the same level as at the start of the test and the 
entire combination is weighed. The procedure out- 
lined on the form is followed to compute the weight 
of water displaced by the bitumen and the bitumen's 
apparent specific gravity. The specific gravity of 
asphalt cements will generally be in the range of 
1.00 to 1.06 with the higher values being character- 
istic of the harder materials. For details of the spe- 
cific gravity test, see ASTM Designation D 70. 



3-16 



im a 



SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF BITUMINOUS MIX COMPONENTS 


DATE 

2. /9/7/e /*?7O 


PROJECT -JOB 

(0 U /) AJ ^ /~/^> &/3> /^UA/V^ 


<*/ M.I 


COARSE AGGREGATE 




UNITS ( 






SAMPLE NUMBER 


c./) 









1. WEIGHT OF OVEN - DRY AGGREGATE 


378.3 








2. WEIGHT OF SATURATED AGGREGATE IN WATER 


2VAO 








3. DIFFERENCE (Line 1 minus 2) 


/37.3 








APPARENT 'iPFCIFIC GRAVITY, G = .( ..'".? ..- 


375.3 


~ 2.7S5 


(Line 3y 


/ !*>T i "?> 


FINE AGGREGATE 




UNITS ( 


Grams; 




SAMPLE NUMBER 


^SS 











A. WEIGHT OF OVEN - DRY MATERIAL 


4^76,8 








8. WEIGHT OF FLASK FILLED WITH WATER AT 20 C 


72. <b 








6. SUM (Line 4 + S) 


//5-7,^. 








7. WEIGHT OF FLASK + AGGREGATE + WATER AT 20 C, 


777 V- 








8. DIFFER ENC E (Line 6 minus 7) 


/BO.O 








APP ARFWT SP ECl FIC GRAVITY, G = \~" e ' 


if. 73 . & ^ 


>O 


(Line 8) 


/ (3,O> O ' 4 


FILLER 


UNITS (Grams; 


SAMPLE NUMB ER 


ZS> 








9. WEIGHT OF OVEN - DRY MATERIAL 


4-&<c. 5 








10, WEIGHT OF FLASK FILLED WITH WATER AT 20 C, 


&7&.I 








11. SUM (Line 9 + 10) 


//2<<c> 








12. WEIGHT OF FLASK + AGGREGATE + WATER AT 20 C, 


<?73.& 








13. DIFFERENCE (Line 11 minus 12) 










APPARENT SPECIFIC GRAVITY G ~ -...'?.?.... 


^j^<jy^,,^> ^ ~ 


^2 


(Line 13) 




BINDER 


UNITS (Grams; 




SAMPLE NUMBER 


6B73 








14. WEIGHT OF PYCNOMETER F 1 LL ED Wl TH W AT ER 


6,1. ^513 








IB. WEIGHT OF EMPTY PYCNOMETER 


37?2/S 








16. WEIGHT OF WATER (Line 14 minus 15) 


2.4.0WC 








17. WEIGHT OF P Y CNOM ET K.R t I3II-IDER 


47>8t?ll 








18. WEIGHT OF BINDER (Line 17 minus 1 ?') 


*f34ol 








IB. WEIGHT OF PYCNOMETER f I'M' JlL:-< + WATER TO FILL PYCNOMETER 










20. WEIGHT OF WATER TO FILL P ' KOME T L-.R (Line 19 minus 17) 


14.2151 








21. WEIGHT OF WATER DISPLACED BY BINOSR (Line 16 minus 20) 


?7z4?9 










*7. 9^0*2. / /\ 


zo 


(Line 21) 


d f ftj. tz/ty ' 


TECHNICIAN (Signature) COMPUTE!; BY (Signature) CHECKED BY (Signature) 



PREVIOUS EOITION OF THIS FORM IS OBSOLETE. 



Figure 3-6. Data sheet, specific gravity of bituminous mix components. 



3-15. Flashpoint Tests 

These tests are applicable to asphaltic materials and 
are of some use in the identification of these mate- 
rials. Their greatest usefulness, however, is in deter- 
mining safe heating temperatures. Material heated 
above its flashpoint presents a very real danger, 
particularly if it is exposed to an open flame. 

a. Cleveland Open Cup. This test is used for all 
petroleum products except fuel oils and those hav- 
ing open cup flashpoints below 175 F. (79 C.). 

(1) Apparatus. The equipment consists of a 
flashpoint test kit (fig. 3-7) , a knife, a frying pan or 
copper beaker, a hotplate and a stopwatch. 

(2) Procedure. It is best to perform this test 
away from any bright light or to shield the appa- 
ratus, if necessary. The cup should be cleaned thor- 
3oughly before starting. The bituminous material 
may be heated until it is fluid enough to pour into 
the cup. Within the last 30 F., before the expected 
flashpoint is reached, the cup and its contents should 
not be moved or disturbed. Even air movement or 
drafts across the specimen surface should be pre- 
vented. The procedure of the test is as follows : 

(a] Set up the open cup apparatus. 

(5) Adjust the thermometer in a vertical po- 
sition 14 mc h &bove the bottom of the cup and about 
midway between the center and back of the cup. 




Figure 3-7. Flashpoint apparatus, Cleveland open cup. 



(c) Fill the cup with the heated materi 
until the top of the meniscus is exactly at the fillii 
line, and let the material cool. 

(d) Apply heat to the cup so that the spec 
men temperature is raised at a rate of 25 to 30 . 
per minute until a temperature of about 100 . 
below the probable flashpoint is reached. 

(e) Keduce the heat at this time, and adju 
it so that for the last 50 F. before the expected flas; 
point, the temperature rise will be not less than ! 
and not more than 11 F. per minute. Use the sto 
watch to regulate this rate. Failure to set the ra 
of rise between these limits will result in inaccura 
readings. 

(/) Adjust a test flame to about 5/32 inc 
in diameter. 

(g) Starting at least 50 F. (28 C.) belo 
the expected flashpoint, pass the test flame in 
straight line across the center of the cup at rig] 
angles to the thermometer and level to the upp< 
edge of the cup. The time for each pass should be r 
more than 1 second. 

(h) Repeat the test flame pass for each su 
cessive 5 F. (2.8 C.). 

(3) Results. The flashpoint is reached when 
flash (distinct flicker) appears at any point on tl 
surface of the material. Read the thermometer *, 
this time and record the temperature as the flas] 
point. 

(4) Repeatability. Duplicate tests on the san 
material should not differ by more than 15 ] 
(8.3 C.). 

&. Tag Open Cup. This test is used for the RC an 
MC asphalt cutbacks having a flashpoint belo 
175 F. (para3-6a). 

(1) Apparatus. The equipment for this tcf 
consists of a flashpoint tester (Tag open cup (fij 
3-8)), a hotplate, a thermometer (20 to 230 F. i 
1 divisions) , and a torch or test flame. 

(2) Procedure. The tester should be set up in 
draft-free and dimly-lighted location. The coppc 
water bath is to be filled to % inch below the to 
(when the top is in place). The bath may have a 
overflow to control' the water level. The glass cup 
cleaned and dried and the water bath assembled. Tl" 
procedure of the test is as follows : 

(a) Place the thermometer vertically midwa 
between the center and the outer edge of the cu; 
and diametrically across from the guide wire. Set tl 
bottom of the bulb about i/4 inch above the bottom < 
the glass cup. 

(5) Fill the glass cup with the sample to ju 
% 6 inch below the edge. 

(c) Place the guide wire in position touchin 
the rim of the glass cup. 




Figure 3-8. Flashpoint apparatus, Tag open cup. 

(d) Adjust the lieat for the sample tempera- 
ture to rise at 2,i/ 2 F- per minute. The thicker 
materials should be stirred occasionally. 

(e) Adjust the test flame to form a % 2 -inch 
sphere. 

(/) Remove any bubbles which may have 
formed on the surface before starting the flame test. 

(ff) Pass the test flame in one direction only 
across the sample at intervals of 2 F. until the flash- 
point is determined. Make the pass across the ma- 
terial in about 1 second. 

(A) Repeat the test using a fresh sample and 
starting at least 20 F. below the previously deter- 
mined flashpoint. 

(3) Results. The two determinations should be 
within 5 F. of each other or the test must be 
repeated. 

G. Additional Information. ASTM Designations 
D 92 and D 1310 may be consulted for more specific 
details of apparatus and procedure for each of these 
tests. 

3-16. Penetration Test 

As indicated in paragraph 3-45, the grade of an 
asphalt cement is based upon the results of the stand- 
ard penetration test. Penetration is defined as the dis- 



tance mat a sranaara neeuie veriu."injr penci.iu.ieo . 
sample of the material under standard conditions of 
time, temperature, and loading. Standard conditions 
are 5 seconds, 25 C. (77 F.) and 100 grams, respec- 
tively, and the units of penetration are hundredths 
of a centimeter. Other conditions of temperature, 
load and time that are used for special testing are : 



Temperature 
32 F. (0 C.) 

39.2 F. (4 C.) 

115 F. (46.1 C.) 



Load, g 
200 
200 
50 



Time, see 

60 

60 

5 



a. Apparatus. Equipment required for this test is 
as follows : 

Bath, hot water 

Copper beaker, or frying pan 

Stainless steel box 

Electric hotplate 

Sieve pan, 8-inch.diameter 

Penetrometer, asphalt, testing (fig. 3-9) 

Thermometer (66 to 80 F.) 

Stopwatch 




Figure 3-9. Asphalt penetrometer. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

6. Procedure. The described test is dependent upon 
the use of the water bath maintained as closely as 
possible to the standard temperature of 77 F. Since 
the penetration of an asphalt cement varies with 
temperature, the bath is maintained at 77 F. In the 
event that this is impractical, or when less accuracy 
is required, the test may be performed with the 
sample at room temperature. The procedure of the 
test is as follows : 

(1) Melt the sample at the lowest possible tem- 
perature, using the electric hotplate and frying pan 
or copper beaker. Stir thoroughly until sample is 
homogeneous and free of air bubbles. 

(2) Pour the sample into the sample container 
(moisture box) to a depth of not less than % inch 
for the harder grades, and % inch for the softer 
grades. Protect the sample from dust and allow it 
to cool in in an atmosphere not lower than 65 F. for 
1 hour. 

(3) Place the sample in its container in the 
sieve pan (or any other small, flat-bottomed pan or 
container which is about 2 inches deep) and immerse 
the pan and sample in the water bath maintained at 
77 F. (25C.),forlhour. 

(4) During the test, the sample remains in the 
pan which is filled with water from, the water bath. 
The water should completely cover the sample con- 
tainer in order to maintain the temperature during 
the test. Place the transfer dish containing the sample 
in its container and the water on the stand of the 
penetrometer. 

(5) Adjust the needle to make contact with the 
surface of the sample. Place a light in a position so 
that the actual needlepoint and its image reflected 
on the surface of the specimen are clearly defined. 
Contact may be judged when the point and its image 
touch on the surface. 

(6) Either note the reading of the dial or bring 
the indicator on the dial to zero. 

(7 ) The needle and plunger are designed to have 
a standard weight of 100 grams. Release the needle 
for a period of 5 seconds, after which, read the dis- 
tance penetrated on the penetrometer. The dial is 
divided into 38 major divisions, each of which is in 
turn marked in 10 smaller subdivisions. Each of the 
smaller subdivisions represents a penetration of the 



3-11 

needle of 1/100 centimeter. Thus, readings on tb 
dial give penetration values without conversion. 

(8) Test at least three points on the surfac* 
not less than % inch from the side of the containe: 
and not less than % inch apart. After each test, tin 
sample and pan are returned to the water bath, anc 
the needle is carefully wiped toward its point with i 
clean, dry cloth to remove all adhering asphalt. 

c. Remits. The reported penetration is the averagi 
of at least three tests whose values do not differ mor< 
than four points between maximum and minimum 

3-17. SoSubiSify Test 

This test indicates the purity of the asphalts. Th< 
specimen is dissolved in carbon tetrachloride 01 
carbon disulphide which should almost completely 
dissolve all the bitumen. The amount of residue is 
an indication of the amount of impurity in the 
specimen. Refer to ASTM Designation D 2042 foi 
complete instructions and precautions in making this 
test. 

3-18. Viscosity Test 

a. Baybolt-FuTol Method. This test measures th{ 
time in seconds required to pass 60 cc of liquic 
asphalt material at a given temperature through 
tube of standard dimensions. Its purpose is to deter- 
mine the viscosity of the material from which. the 
spraying temperatures are established for field ap- 
plication of the bitumen. The special apparatus 
needed and test procedures are given in ASTJV1 
Designation D 88. 

b. Kinematic Viscosity Test. This test, like the 
Saybolt-Furol (a above), measures the time that a 
given amount of liquid asphalt material will flo^ 
through a tube of standard dimensions under rigidly 
controlled conditions of temperature and pressure 
(or vacuum) . The test establishes the viscosity of the 
liquid and when correlated with the specific gravity 
of the material at the same temperature, results ir 
a numerical designation called kinematic viscosity 
The units used for kinematic viscosity are the stdke, 
(square centimeters per second) or centistokes (10( 
stokes) (para 3-4). Determination of kinemati< 
viscosity requires much special laboratory equipmen 
that is not available in the field. See ASTM Designa- 
tion D 2170 and D 2171 for standard test methods 



Section V. TESTS ON AGGREGATE AND FILLERS 



3-19. Discussion 

The aggregate transmits the load, takes the abrasive 
wear of traffic, and provides a nonskid surface. 

a. The desired characteristics include angular 
shape, rough surface, hardness and durability, re- 
sistance to water penetration, cleanliness, and grada- 
tion (para 3-12). Some of these characteristics, such 



as shape, surface, and cleanliness, are determinec 
visually. Durability and hardness cannot be "seen" 
but require either knowledge based on experience 01 
some form of abrasion testing (para 3-12). Rock 
that soak up water will eventually reach the conditioi 
where the binder is forced from the surface pore 
and the cementing action breaks down (para 3-12) 



o. me remaining onaracterisncs or grauanon may 
he established to some extent by observation. How- 
ever, the grain size distribution (sieve) tests will de- 
fine the particle sizes and amounts much more 
accurately. In bituminous paving, the aggregate con- 
stitutes the bulk of the pavement. Common practice 
subdivides the bituminous aggregates into a coarse 
aggregate, a fine aggregate, and a mineral filler. The 
No. 10 sieve separates coarse from fine aggregate, and 
the No. 200 sieve size is the lower limit for fine ag- 
gregate. Usually 65 percent or more of mineral filler 
will pass the No. 200 sieve. The distribution of the 
different sizes determines the amount of voids that 
will remain, and in turn, aids in determining the 
amount of bitumen that will be needed. 

c. Bituminous pavement specifications define ac- 
ceptable gradation limits. The bitumen content for 
the mix is then determined from the trial mix prop- 
erties which are defined in the specifications. The 
procedures for a bituminous mix design is described 
in paragraph 3-24. Detailed specifications for ag- 
gregates and filler for bituminous paving mixtures 
are given in ASTM Designations D 692, D 693, D 694, 
D 242, D 1073, and D 1139. 

320. Sieve Analysis 

A sieve analysis of the aggregates to be used in a 
paving mixture is required to determine the particle 
size distribution. 

a. Amount Finer Than No. WO Sieve. In bitu- 
minous paving, particles finer than the No. 200 sieve 
are referred to as mineral filler. To measure the 
amount of filler in a selected sample, a washed sieve 
analysis (para 2-2-6) is performed using the No. 40 
and No. 200 sieves. After all the material possible has 
passed the No. 200 sieve and has been discarded, the 
materials on the sieves are returned to the original 
washed sample, oven-dried, and weighed. The amount 
of mineral filler is computed as : 



of sample, grams 



Fine aggregate 



Percent finer than No. 200= 

original dry weight washed dry weight 
original dry weight 



X100 



&. Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregate 
( Washed) . When definite amounts or limits of coarse 
and fine aggregate are specified, the sieve analysis 
with prewashing (para 2-26) must be made using 
suitable sieves. If no limits have been designated, a 
range of sieves is selected to give adequate informa- 
tion about the gradation. The results are recorded 
(DD Form 1206 (fig. 2-52)) and then plotted as a 
gradation curve (DD Form 1207 (fig. 2-54)). In 
testing aggregates, a representative, sample is ob- 
tained by quartering (para 2-22), if necessary. The 
size of the sample depends somewhat on the maxi- 
mum size of particles in the material. 



At least 05ft finer than No. 10* ____________________ 100 

At least 90 r r finer than No. 4 and more than 5ft 

coarser than No. 10* ____________________________ 500 

Coarse aggregate 

%-ineh maximum .size ____________________________ 1,000 

^i-inch maximum size ____________________________ 2,500 

a i-inch maximum size ---------------------------- 5, 000 

1-inch maximum size _____________________________ 10, 000 

P/ii-inr-h maximum size ___________________________ 15,000 

2-inch maximum size _____________________________ 20, 000 

2 Vis-inch maximum size --------------------------- 25,000 

3-inch maximum size _____________________________ 30, 000 

maximum size ___________________________ 35, 000 



*\otf. ASTM specifies No. S, 1C, 30, and 50 instead of No. 10, 40 
and (50. Tests based on ASTM standards identify the appropriate 
sieve sizes. 



321 . Specific Gravity 

The specific gravities of aggregates used in bitumi- 
nous paving mixtures are required in the computa- 
tion of the percent of air voids and percent voids 
filled with bitumens. Apparent specific gravity used 
with aggregate blends showing water absorption of 
less than 2% percent is based upon the apparent vol- 
ume of the material, which does not include those 
pore spaces in the aggregate which are permeable to 
water. Bulk-impregnated specific gravity is used for 
aggregate blends with 2% percent or greater water 
absorption. The methods for determining absorption 
of aggregates are given in paragraph 4-10. 

a. Apparent Specific Gravity. The apparent spe- 
cific gravity may be determined using the method 
described in paragraph 2-35, or it, may be determined 
using the Dunagan apparatus furnished with the 
concrete test set (para 1-3) . 

(1) The apparatus using the concrete test set 
includes the Dunagan apparatus (fig. 3-10), sieves 
(2, 1%, %, %, and Nos. 4, 10, 40, 60, 80, 100, 200), 
evaporating dishes, electric oven, and pans. 




Figure 8-10. Specific gravity test, Dunagan apparatus. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



3-2 



(2) The step-by-step test procedure is as 
follows : 

(a) Approximately 5,000 grams of aggregate 
is selected from the sample, not including particles 
smaller than the %-inch sieve. A %-inch sieve is 
provided. 

(&) The aggregate is washed, to remove any 
dust or other coating and dried to constant weight in. 
the oven. The total weight of oven-dry aggregate is 
recorded on DD Form 1216 (fig. 3-6). 

(c) The aggregate is immersed in water at 15 
to 25 C., for a period of 24 hours. 

(d) After soaking, the sample is placed in the 
copper bucket which is filled with water, and bucket 
and aggregate are then turned sharply back and 
forth to assist in removing any air. 

(e) The bucket is suspended from the brass 
hanger and the water level brought up to the over- 
flow pipe. 

(/) The submerged weight is determined us- 
ing weights placed in the scoop on the right-hand 
pan. Weights are recorded. 

(3) The calculations required for the determi- 
nation of the apparent specific gravity of coarse ag- 
gregate are shown on the DD Form 1216 and are 
self-explanatory. 

T). Apparent Specific Gravity of Fine Aggregate 
(C alibrateed Flask] . 

(1) The equipment required to perform this test 
consists of : 

Balance, 2000-gm 
Evaporating dish 



Battery filler 

Volumetric flask, 500-ml 

Electric oven 

Pan 

Thermometer (0 to 300 F., in 1 graduj 

tions) 
Absorbent paper or cloth 

This equipment, with the exception of the oven, 
shown in figure 3-11. 

(2) The test procedure for particles finer tha 
the %-inch sieve is as follows (data are recorded c 
DD Form 1208 (fig. 2-57) ) : 

(a) A 500-milliliter volumetric flask is cal 
brated (para 2-32) . 

(5) A representative sample weighing aboi 
500 grams is dried to constant weight in the electr. 
oven. 

(c) After cooling, the oven-dry weight of tl 
sample is determined, and recorded on DD For] 
1208. 

(d) The sample is transferred to the 50( 
milliliter flask, being careful not to lose any of tl 
material. 

(e) Clean water is added until the level jui 
reaches the neck of the flask. The sample is then a 
lowed to soak for 24 hours. 

(/) After the sample has been soaked, tl 
flask is held by the neck and rolled back and fort 
on a smooth surface until air bubbles cease to coir 
from the sample. This procedure is illustrated i 
figure 3-12. 



2000-GRAM BALANCE 



EVAPORATING DISH 



VOLUMETRIC FLASK 




.____ PIE PLATE 

^^^i 
BATTERY FILLER 

Figure 3-11. Calibrated flasJc apparatus for determining apparent specific gravity of fine aggregate. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




Figure 3-12. Manipulation of calibrated flask to remove air. 

(g) When air has ceased to come from the 
sample, the battery filler is used to bring the water 
level up in the neck of the flask until the bottom of 
the meniscus coincides with the calibration mark on 
the flask. Absorbent paper or cloth is used to remove 
any drops of water from the inside of the neck, and 
on the outside of the flask. 

(h) The weight of the flask, aggregate, and 
water is determined and recorded on DD Form 1208. 

(i) The temperature is measured and 
recorded. 

(3) The calculations for apparent specific 
gravity are the same as those indicated for soil in 
figure 2-5Y. 

G. Apparent Specific Gravity of Fine Aggregate 
( Uncalibrated Flask). When a calibrated flask is not 
available, the follo'wing procedure can be used : 

(1) The same equipment is required as for the 
test specified in b 'above, with the addition of a -water 
bath maintained at 68 F. (20 C.). This procedure 
cannot be used if the temperature cannot be 
maintained. 

(2) The de-tailed test procedure is as follows : 
(a) A representative sample of aggregate 

passing the % inch sieve weighing about 500 grams 
is obtained and dried to constant weight in the elec- 
tric oven, maintained at at temperature of 212 F. 
(100 C.) to 230 F. (110 C.). 

(&) After cooling in air, the dry weight is 
obtained and recorded. 

(c) The sample is transferred to the flask, 
being careful not to lose any of the material. 

(d) Clean water is added until its level just 
reaches the neck of .the flask, and the sample is 
allowed to soak for 24 hours. 

(e) After soaking for 24 hours, the flask is 
rolled back and forth on a smooth surface until air 
bubbles cease to come from the sample, as illustrated 
in figure 3-12. 

(/) The battery filler is used to bring the 
waiter level up in the neck of the flask to slightly 
above the calibrated mark. 

(g) The flask with water and aggregate is 



placed in the water bath maintained at a tempera- 
ture of 68 F. (20 C.). The glass thermometer is 
used to check the temperature of the water in the 
flask from time to time. 

(h) When the water in the flask reaches a 
uniform temperature of 68 F. (20 C.), the battery 
filler and absorbent paper are used to adjust the 
bottom of the meniscus to coincide with the calibra- 
tion mark. Any drops of water inside of the neck 
of the flask are removed. 

(i) The flask is removed from the bath and 
the outside thoroughly dried. The weight of the flask 
plus aggregate, plus the water at 68 F. (20 C.), is 
determined and recorded. It does not matter if the 
level of the water in the neck of the flask changes 
after removal from the bath. The proper adjustment 
was made at 68 F. (20 C.), and the total weight is 
not affected by the subsequent change in volume. 

(j) The weight of the flask filled only with 
water at 68 F. (20 C.) must be known. Procedures 
in (/) through (i) above are repeated, using water 
only. The weight of flask filled with water at 68 F. 
(20 C.) is entered on DD Form 1216. This needs to 
be done only once for a given flask; this value can 
be tabulated and used in subsequent tests. 

(3) Calculations necessary to the determina- 
tion of the apparent specific gravity of fine aggre- 
gate using an uncalibrated flask are indicated on DD 
Form 1216 (fig. 3-6). 

d. Bulk-Impregnated Specific Gravity of Aggre- 
gate. This method of test is intended for use in 
determining the specific gravity of the blended ag- 
gregates (including filler) used in hot asphaltic mix- 
tures. This method is to be used only when die water 
absorption for the entire blend of aggregate selected 
for the job mix formula exceeds 2,y 2 percent. The 
method is not applicable to determination of specific 
gravity of mineral filler except when included in 
the blended aggregate. 

(1) The following equipment is required for 
performing this test : 

Dunagan concrete test apparatus 

Electric oven (sensitiveto5 F. in the 
range of 275 -325 F.) 

1-gallon capacity pails 

Balance, 5-kg capacity sensitive to 0.1 g. 

Bake pans, and 

A heavy sheet metal strip for stirring contents 

of the pail. 

A wire handle is convenient for handling the pail, 
but is not essential, since the container will be placed 
in the copper bucket of the Dunagan apparatus in 
order to determine weight submerged in water. A 
No. 10 can (an empty fruit or vegetable can) with 
the top smoothly cut out is satisfactory, but care must 
be taken to eliminate air entrapped under the bottom 
when the can is submerged. 



gregate insuring that the sample represents proto- 
type grading. 

(b) Asphalt. 85-100 penetration grade as- 
phalt cement. 

(3) The procedure is as follows: 

(a) Dry aggregate sample to constant weight 
at a temperature not less than 230 F. nor greater 
than 290 F. and after cooling in air, weigh to 
nearest 0.1 gram. 

(b) Heat the asphalt to 280 5 F. using 
care to insure that the temperature never exceeds 
285 F. and add a sufficient amount to the 1-gallon 
pail to fill it about one-third full. 

(c) Insert the sheet metal stirrer and allow 
pail and contents to cool to room temperature. (A 
minimum of 8 hours is usually required to accom- 
plish this, and preferably overnight.) 

(d) Weigh pails plus asphalt and stirrer in 
air at room temperature and submerged in water at 
72 F.2. 

(e) Place the pail of asphalt with stirrer and 
also the sample of aggregate in oven at 280 5 F. 
until temperatures of both are equalized. (A mini- 
mum of 4 hours is usually required. ) 

(/) Remove aggregate and asphalt from 
oven, and gradually add aggregra'te to asphalt, stir- 
ring thoroughly. After all aggregate is added, con- 



_ . . .. -- 

cooling period, apply a flame to the surface to remov 
air bubbles, if present. Cool to room temperatm 
(preferably overnight). 

(g) Weigh in air and in water at 72 2 I 
(4) Calculate the bulk impregnated specif 
gravity as follows : 

Bulk impregnated specific gravity 

A 



(D-E) (B-C) 
Where : 

A= weight of oven-dry aggregate in grams. 

B = weight of pail phis stirrer plus asphalt in aii 

C= weight of pail plus stirrer plus asphalt i 

water. 
D = weight of pail plus stirrer plus asphalt plu 

aggregate in air. 
E= weight of pail plus stirrer plus asphalt plu 

aggregate in water. 

(5) Duplicate determinations should checl 
within 0.04. If the values are within the 0.04 toler 
ance, an average value should be used. If the initia 
duplicate tests are not within the 0.04 tolerance, re 
peat tests should be made in duplicate. If the secom 
set of test values is within the tolerance, the first twi 
test values should be discarded and an average vahi 
of the second two tests should be used. 



Section VI BITUMINOUS MIX DESIGN 



3-22. Introduction 

Hot-mix bituminous concrete for pavements is a mix- 
ture of blended aggregate and filled with bituminous 
cement binder. The materials are heated when mixing 
to promote fluidity of the bitumen for thorough cov- 
erage of the aggregate particles. The design of a 
bituminous concrete mix consists of the determination 
of an economical blend and gradation of aggregates 
together with the necessary content of bituminous 
cement to produce a mixture that will be durable, 
have the stability to withstand traffic loads, and 
be workable for placement and compaction with the 
construction equipment available. 

a. The procedures described in this section are per- 
formed during the design of a hot-mix bituminoui. 
concrete. They include testing, plotting the results on 
graphs, and checking the readings against values 
from the design tables. Testing of the ingredients and 
the mix is started before and continued throughout 
the paving operations. TM 5-330 more fully describes 
the design considerations. TM 5-337 explains the 
paving operations, and the blending and bitumen 
content criteria. This manual discusses the testing 

o 

phases. 



Z>. The following is a list of the general procedure 
in the design of a hot-mix. The objective is to deter 
mine the most economical blend of components whicl 
will produce a final product that meets specifiec 
requirements. 

(1) Prepare a sieve analysis of each of the ag 
gregates available. 

(2) Determine the aggregate blend which wil 
achieve the specified gradation (TM 5-337). Ploi 
the selected blend proportions on a graph with th< 
allowable limits to see that it conforms. 

(3) Determine the specific gravity of th< 
components. 

(4) Using selected percentages of bitumen (TM 
5-337) make trial mixes and compute the design tesi 
properties of the mix. 

( 5 ) Plot the test properties on individual graphs 
using the selected bitumen percentages. Draw smootl: 
curves through the plotted points. 

(6) Select the optimum bitumen content foi 
each test property from the curves (as explained in 
the criteria tables) . 

(7) Average the bitumen content values (froir 
(6) above), and from the graphs, read the tesi 

property value corresponding to this average. 



3-24 

(8) Check these read values with the satisfac- 
toriness-of-mix criteria. 

c. The selection of the mix ratios of materials is 
tentative. The bitumen should be the same as the one 
to be used in the construction. The aggregates and 
fillers must meet definite requirements. In general, 
several blends should be considered for laboratory 
mix-design tests. 

d. (Gradation specifications are based on limits 
established by the Corps of Engineers as satisfactory. 
Within these limits, the following variables are 
considerations which will affect the final mix-design : 

(1) Use of miy (surface course, binder course, or 
road mix) . 

(2) Binder ( asphalt, cement, or tar ) . 

(3) Loading (low tire pressure 100 psi and 
under, or high tire pressure over 100 psi). 

(4) Maximum size of aggregate (in stockpile, 
or based on thickness of the pavement course) . 

e. Once the gradation specifications have been 
selected, the available materials are checked to deter- 
mine how to proportion the blend to meet these speci- 
fications. Sieve analyses of the available aggregates 
are studied and a series of trial blends is computed. 
Adjustment of the blend may have to be made after 
the design and prepared mix is tested. The considera- 
tions for establishing and adjusting the blend are 
explained in TM 5-337. 

/. The determination of optimum bitumen content 
is based on a definite design and testing procedure, 
known as the Marshall method. This is outlined later 
in this section. 

ff. The final step is the preparation of a job-mix 
formula to be furnished to the construction unit. 

Ji. It is recognized that at times it will be necessary 
to shorten the design procedure as much as possible 
to expedite military construction. Suggestions for 
expediting the design of the mix are given in para- 
graph 3-28. More detailed instructions are given in 
TM 5-337. 

3-23. ApparatusMarshall Test Method 

The following equipment is required for mix design : 
Balance, solution, 20-kg capacity L 
Balance, 2,000-gram capacity P 
Bath, hot water, electric S 
Beaker, copper V 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

Bituminous test apparatus, Marshall Method 
1ST consisting of : 

2 ea. collar, compaction cylinder, stability 

test 

6 ea. cylinder, compaction, stability test G 
1 ea. head, test, Marshall stability O 
1 ea. jack and frame, extrusion, stability 

test Z 

1 ea. meter, flow stability O 
1 ea. piston, extrusion, stability test I 
4 ea. plate, base, compaction cylinder, 

stability test 

1 ea. tamper, compaction, stability test F 

2 ea. adapter, ring, penetrometer W 
Compaction hammer 

Cone test apparatus C 

Cover, sieve, 8 -inch diameter 

Dishes, evaporating U 

Frame, testing sieve, Tyler rocker type 

Gloves, asbestos M 

Hotplate, electric A 

Mixer, electric, complete with mixing bowl and 

beaters J 

Molds, 4-inc'h diameter 
Oven, electric 
Pan, bake D 
Pan, sieve, 8-inch diameter 
Paper, filter AA 
Pedestal, compaction 
Scoop, kitchen K 
Shaker, sieve, electric T 
Sieve, testing, 8-inch diameter Nos. 4, 10, 20, 

40, 60, 100, and 200 B (See Note in para 

2-24) 

Spatula, 6-inch blade H 
Spoon, cooking Y 
Thermometer, dial, general laboratory (50 

300 F. in 2 increments) E 
Thermometer, asphalt testing, copper-sheathed 

point Q 
Tongs, beaker E 
Watch, stop X 
Rags 

Kerosene or other petroleum distillate 
Items in the above list which are followed by letters 
are shown in figures 3-13 and 3-14. 



i 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



N 




Figure 3-13. Apparatus for Utuminous mix design Marshall method. 




M 



Figure 3-14. Apparatus for bituminous mix design Marshall method. 



-26 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



24. Procedures Marshall Method 
'he Marshall method described is applicable to hot- 
iix mixtures using penetration grades of asphalt 
anent and containing aggregate with not more than 
3 percent of the aggregate larger than the 1-inch 
eve. The following procedures and example provide 
3r the determination of the optimum asphalt con- 
ait for one particular blend of aggregates. 

a. Selection of Asphalt Contents. The optimum 
mount of asphalt cement for the aggregate to be 
ssted must be estimated in order to start the lab- 
ratory tests. Tests are continued until results show 
b least two asphalt contents above and two below 
r hat would be the optimum content. Since the opti- 
iiim is not determined until after the results are 
lotted, specimens are prepared usually for each of 
.x different contents. At least four specimens will 
e prepared at each asphalt content. One percent 
icremental changes of asphalt content may be used 
sr preliminary work; however, increments of % 
f 1 percent will be used for final tests. The percent 
f asphalt will be expressed as percent of the total 
^eight of the batch of paving mix. TM 5-337 ex- 
lams how to establish the estimated optimum 
^ntent. 

b. Preparation of Aggregates. About 30 kg or 70 
ounds of the selected blend are dried to constant 
reight at 1105 C. (221 to 239 F.). This 
mount of material is equivalent to 1200 grams per 
pecimen for four specimens per content and for six 
sphalt contents (total of 24: specimens). The dry 
ggregate is separated into several size ranges by 
;eving. Preparing test specimens by recombining 
iparate size fractions prevents nonunif ormity of test 
pecimens which results from 'aggregate segregation 
uring handling and heating. Separations may vary, 
epending on the grading of the aggregate. Incom- 
lete sieving of the different sizes is not detrimental 
c not carried out to excess, providing it is recog- 
ized and appropriate adjustments are made in 
^combining the aggregate for preparing the test mix- 
ires. A sieve -analysis of each of the separate f rac- 
ions is made to determine the adequacy of the 
jparation and to furnish the necessary data for cal- 
ulating the percentage of each size range to use in 
reparing the required mix. 

c. Preparation of Mia;. The bitumen and the ag- 
regates must be heated to specified temperatures 
or mixing. These temperatures are based on the 
itumen which will be used. 



Mixing temp. F. 



Bitumen type 



Aggregate 



Bitumen 



sphalt cement 3005 2705 

'ar (RT 10, 11, or 12) 2255 2005 

Lubberized tar 2505 2255 



Bitumen should not be held at the mixing tempera- 
ture for more than 1 hour before using. Therefore, 
the preparation should be planned so that the mix- 
ing will be done within this time limit. The mixing 
pans are preheated to a temperature about 50 F. 
above the mixing temperature. The heated dry ag- 
gregate fractions are poured into the pans and mixed 
thoroughly. A crater is formed in the mixed aggre- 
gate and the required amount of bitumen (a above) 
at the proper temperature is poured into the crater. 
At this point, the temperature of the ingredients 
should be within the limits specified above. Mixing 
of the aggregates and bitumen should be as rapid 
and as thorough as possible to get a uniform distri- 
bution of the bitumen throughout the aggregate. 

d. Preparation and Compaction of Specimens. 
Four specimens are to be prepared at each bitumen 
content and the molds should be ready to receive 
the specimens as soon as they are mixed. The strik- 
ing face of the compaction hammers and the com- 
paction molds must be thoroughly clean and heated 
to 180 to 250 F. Oiling the mold and other metal 
in contact with the mix before the mixture is intro- 
duced facilitates removal of the specimen after com- 
paction. The mix is placed in the mold (rodding the 
material as it is added), after which the collar is 
removed, and the top surface of the mix smoothed 
to a slightly rounded shape with a trowel. (The 
thickness of the compacted specimen should be 2^ 
% inch. One or two trials will indicate the quan- 
tity of mix required to produce such a specimen.) 
The collar is replaced and the mold assembly placed 
on the compaction pedestal. The temperature at this 
point must be as specified for compaction. 

Bitumen type Compaction temperature F. 

Asphalt cement 2505 

Tar, R'T-10, 11, or 12 1805 

Rubberized tar 2005 

The required number of blows are applied with the 
compaction hammer (fig. 3-15). The base plate and 
collar are removed and the mold reversed and reas- 
sembled. The required number of blows are then 
applied to the other side of the specimen. For ex- 
ample, roads, streets, and facilities for an airfield 
designed for aircraft whose tires carry 100 p.s.i. (or 
less) should be compacted by 50 blows on each end 
of the specimen. If the pavement is being designed 
for aircraft which carry tires with pressure greater 
than 100 p.s.i., the compactive effort should be 75 

blows per side. 

e. Cooling of Specimens. After compaction, the 

base plate and collar are removed, and the mold and 
the specimen are either air-cooled (normally over- 
night) or placed in cold water for a minimum of 2 
minutes for fast cooling. The cooled specimen is 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 






Figure 3-15. Compaction of bituminous trial mix specimens. 

removed from the mold by an extension jack, or by 
placing the collar on the floor, the mold and specimen 
on top, and forcing the specimen out with light blows 
from the compaction hammer. The specimen, care- 
fully handled and suitably identified, is placed on a 
smooth well -leveled surface until ready for testing. 
It is ready for testing anytime after it has cooled to 
room temperature. 

/. Density and Voids Determination. Density of 
the specimens is determined by weighing in air and 
in water (fig. 3-16) . A direct weight in water of open 





Figure 3-16. Weighing compacted bituminous specimen in 

water. 



3-23 

textured or porous specimens will give erroneou 
results because of absorption of water, and othe 
means must be used to determine the volume of th 
specimen. One means of measuring the volume of th 
porous specimens is to coat the specimen with paraffii 
to seal all the voids and then weigh the coated speci 
men in air and in water. (See fig. 2-27 for typical dat; 
sheet.) A correction is made for the weight an< 
volume of paraffin. The difference between these tw< 
weights in grams gives the volume of the specime] 
in cubic centimeters. The unit weight of the mix ii 
pounds per cubic foot for each specimen will b 
determined by multiplying the specific gravity o 
the specimen by 62.4. Before the calculations fo 
percent voids can be carried out, it is necessary t< 
know the specific gravity of the aggregate blend, am 
the asphalt content used. 

g. Stability and Flow Determination. The tes 
specimens are brought to the desired temperature o 
test by immersing in a water bath for at least 2i 
minutes, and not more than 1 hour. The bath tempera 
ture for asphalt samples is 1401F. ; for ta 
samples (RT-10 to RT-12), 100drlF.; for tar 
rubber samples, 120 1 F. 

(1) The inside surfaces of the test heads an< 
the guide rods are cleaned thoroughly prior to mak 
ing the stability test and the guide rods well lufori 
cated so that the upper test head will slide easily ove 
the guide rods on the lower test head. 

(2) The specimen is removed from the wate 
bath and placed on its side in the lower section of th 
breaking head. The upper section of the breakinj 
head is positioned on the guide rods and on the speci 
men, and the complete assembly then placed in posi 
t'ion in the test/ing machine (fig. 3-lY). In order t 
prevent excessive cooling of this specimen with 
resulting increase in stability value, the entire proce 
dure from the time the specimen is removed from th 
water bath should be performed as quickly as possi 
ble; normally in 30 seconds. 

(3) The flowmeter is placed over one of th 
guide rods and an initial reading taken on the flo-rc 
meter is estimated to 0.01 inch. The flowmeter is heL 
firmly over the guide rod while loading the specime: 
and is read or removed from its position over th 
guide rod just when the load first begins to decrease 
as indicated by the dial gage in the proving ring. 

(4) Load is applied to the specimen at a constar 
rate of strain of 2 inches per minute until failure o 
the specimen occurs. The load builds up on the typica 
test as movement occurs, until it reaches a maximur 
and falls off. The maximum reading of the dial, cor 
verted to pounds, is the stability value for th 
specimen. 

(5) A second reading is taken on the flowmete] 
and the difference between this reading and th 



418-320 71 10 



3-28 




TM 5-S-30/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 
Table 3-5. Stability Correlation Ratios, Marshall Stability Test 



Figure 3-17. Stability test assembly. 

original reading, expressed in hundredths of an inch, 
is the flow value of the specimen. 

(6) The stability value varies directly with the 
thickness of the specimen. Therefore it is necessary 
to correct the stability values for specimens of a 
thickness greater or less than the standard 2i inches. 
Table 3-5 shows the necessary conversion factors for 
specimens varying in thickness from 1 inch to 3 
inches. Ta'ble 3-5 also contains data whereby the sta- 
bility conversion factor can be determined on the 
basis of the volume of the specimen, since the volume 
is a direct function of height for a constant 4-inch 
diameter specimen. Flow values do not vary appreci- 
ably with change in thickness of specimen ; therefore 
no corrections are needed for the flow value. An 
example of the design is given in the following 
paragraph. 



Volume of specimen in 
cubic centimeters 


Approximate thickness of 
specimen in inches 


Correlation 
ratio 


200-213 


1 


5.56 


214-225 


1/16 


5.00 


226-237 


1/8 


4.55 


238-250 


1 3 /16 


4.17 


251-264 


1/4 


3.85 


265-276 


1/10 


3.57 


277-289 


1% 


3. 33 


290-301 


1/16 


3.03 


302-316 


Itf 


2.78 


317-328 


1/16 


2.50 


329-340 


1% 


2.27 


341-353 


1% 


2.08 


354-367 


1% 


1.92 


368-379 


1% 


1.79 


380-392 


1/8 


1.67 


393-405 


1% 


1.56 


406-420 


2 


1.47 


421-431 


2/ 16 


1.39 


432-443 


2/a 


1.32 


444-456 


2/16 


1.25 


457-470 


2/4 


1.19 


471-482 


2/16 


1.14 


483-495 


2% 


1.09 


496-508 


2/16 


1.04 


509-522 


2# 


1.00 


523-535 


2/10 


0.96 


536-546 


2% 


0.93 


547-559 


2% 


0.89 


560-573 


2% 


0.86 


574-585 


2% 


0.83 


586-598 


2% 


0.81 


599-610 


2% 


0.78 


611-625 


3 


0.76 



NOTES: 1. The measured stability of a specimen multiplied by the ratio for 
the thickness of the specimen equals the corrected stability for a 
214 in. specimen. 

2. Volume-thickness relationship is based on a specimen diameter of 
4 in. 



3-25. Example of Marshall Method of Hot- 
Mix Design 

A typical mix design is illustrated by the calculations 
and graphs shown on figures 3-18 through 3-23. 

a. Aggregate Grading. An aggregate grading 
chart is shown in figure 3-18 (DD Form 1207). This 
chart shows the gradation curves of the three aggre- 
gates which are available for the mix. The sieve 
analyses are run in the manner described in para- 
graphs 3-19 and 3-20. Calculations may be made and 
data recorded on DD Form 1206 (fig. 2-52), prepar- 
atory to drawing curves. A gradation curve is not 
shown for the mineral filler to be used. 

5. Aggregate Blending. A data and computation 
sheet for aggregate blending-ls shown in figure 3-19 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 






ft 



AGGREGATE GRADING CHART 



X 



V* 




IN 






Ul 



Ul 
fid 






00 
M 

R 



o 



V 



"> 1 

"K 



3-30 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



(DD Form 1217). In the upper portion of the form, 
the gradation of the available aggregates is recorded. 
The lower portion may be used for the computation 
of the trial blend. Several attempts may be required 
before a blend meeting specifications is obtained. The 
cold feeds (quantities per batch) of aggregate to 
the asphalt plant are set according to the proportions 
obtained in computing the final trial blend. 

c. Aggregate Blending Limits. Figure 3-20 is an 
aggregate grading chart (DD Form 1207) showing 
the specification limits for the mix and the gradation 
of the blend when mixed in the proportions shown in 
figure 3-19, Trial 1. 

d. Specific Gravity of Bituminous Mix Compo- 
nents. A specific gravity worksheet is shown in figure 
3-21 (DD Form 1216) . This form is used for comput- 
ing the specific gravity of all the bituminous mix 
components. If more aggregate fractions are used 
than, are provided for on the form, additional forms 
may be used. Procedures for performing these tests 
are discussed in paragraph 3-21. 

G. Marshall Stability Computations. DD Form 1218 
(fig. 3-22) is a data and computation sheet used in 
the Marshall Stability Test. The specific gravity 
values of the aggregates (d above) and the aggre- 
gate fraction percentages from the trial blending (b 
above) furnish the information to compute the frac- 
tional weights and to prepare the test specimens. The 
measurements made on the test specimens (para 
3-24) are recorded in the upper right-hand corner 
of the form. The stability, flow, unit weight of total 
mix, and percent voids filled with binder are deter- 
mined to complete the form. 

/. MarsJwll Method Computations. The values 
from DD Form 1218 (e above) for each binder- 
content computation are transferred to DD Form 
1219 (fig. 3-23). Each graph on the form represents 
a different test property. The values for each prop- 
erty are plotted on their respective graph using the 
binder contents as ordinates. A smooth curve is drawn 
through the plotted points. 

g. Marshall Test Criteria. Table 3-6 lists the cri- 
teria for determining optimum asphalt content 
(OAC) . For each test property, the type of mix to be 
used and the expected load are considered. The 
optimum bitumen content for each property is desig- 
nated as a definite point on the curve for that prop- 
erty. The bitumen content percentages (one for each 



property) are averaged and the average is used to 
read the corresponding value of each test property. 
The value, as determined, is referred to the criteria 
portion of table 3-6 to check if it is within the per- 
missible limits so that the mix will perform satis- 
factorily. 

h. Test Variation for Aggregates With 10 Percent 
or More Larger Than 1-Inch Maximum, Size. The 
procedure described in paragraph 3-24 and the ex- 
amples as given in a through g above are applicable 
to hot-mix design where the amount of aggregate 
larger than the 1 inch sieve is less than 10 percent of 
the total. When the larger than (plus) 1 inch ma- 
terial exceeds 10 percent of the total, the following 
variations are made in the procedure : 

(1) Mix bitumen at the selected content with the 
entire aggregate, including the plus 1 inch portion, 

(2) Pass the mixed hob batch through a 1 inch 
sieve. Discard the plus 1 inch portion. 

(3) Make compacted specimens from the por- 
tion which passes the 1-inch sieve and perform the 
Marshall test, except do not calculate the voids of the 
compacted specimens at this time. 

(4) Determine the bulk specific gravity of the 
plus 1 inch aggregate, and with the specific gravity 
of the compacted specimens, compute the adjusted 
specific gravity (G A ) as follows 



a 



10 



v/ 



Where: 

A= weight of dry, plus 1 inch material expressed 

as a percentage of the total batch weight 

(bitumen plus aggregate) 
B= portion of total batch remaining after the 

dry, plus 1 inch portion is removed 

(100%-A %) 

C=bulk specific gravity of plus 1 inch aggregate 
D= actual specific gravity of compacted 

specimen 
f= empirical factor=0.995 

(5) Calculate the voids by using the adjusted 
specific gravity and apply the design criteria for 
this value. 

(6) Use stability and flow values as measured on 
the compacted specimens. 



TM 5-530/NAViFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



3-31 




\ 



cvi 



N 




N 



O 



Q 

Z 



CQ 

Ul 
I- 
< 
O 
Ul 
OS 
O 
O 



O 
Z 



CO 



m 
o 



X. 



X 




00 







CO 



in 






CQ 



s - 







O 



oo 



o 



00 



10 



QO 



t 



O 

A 



O 



CO 






o 



CO 



ol 



10 



o 



o 



00 



<M 



CO 



CM 



10 



10 

cvi 
in 



00 



O 
CM 



Q 

ca 



o 

K 
I s - 



Q 
Cf) 



to 



00 



t) 



Q 
10 



CM 



UJ 
U.O 



Q 

o 



3-32 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 




H 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



3-33 



I 



I 



a 



AGGREGATE GRADING CHART 



GRAPH 



STRIB 



UJ 
M 



o o 




5<S 



r^ 
o 
CM 



DNISSVd iM33iJ3d 



Q 

o 



-34 



TM 5-530/NAVPAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF BITUMINOUS MIX COMPONENTS 


DATE ^ 

,2 Am 1970 


PROJECT JOB 

HIGHWAY -**-2.03 Ho. 4-7Z26 


COARSE AGGREGATE 




UNITS r 


Grams) 




SAMPLE NUMBER 


Cfl 








1. WEIGHT OF OVEN - DRY AGGREGATE 


378.3 








2. WEIGHT OF SATURATED AGGREGATE IN WATER 


2.4) '*o 








3. DIFFERENCE (Line 1 minus 2) 


/37.B 








APPARENT SPECIFIC GRAVITY. G = < Line 1 \. 
(Line 3y 


376 . 3 _ ^ -j 


'S-^ 


/SV.3 -~' 


FINE AGGREGATE 
<t * tt 




UNITS ( 


Grama) 




SAMPLE NUMBER 


A/^/SS 








^^^-^^ 


4. WEIGHT OF OVEN - DRY MATERIAL 


^7#.6 








5. WEIGHT OF FLASK FILLED WITH WATER AT 20 C 


&7S.<0 








6. SUM (Line 4 + 5) 


// 5-7.4- 








7. WEIGHT OF FLASK -1- AGGREGATE f WATER AT 20 C, 


<777,+ 








8. DIFFERENCE (X/ne <* minus 7) 


/80.0 










417 &. 8 


.6>&O 


(Line 8) 


/ 80 . ** 


FILLER 


UNITS CGrams; 


SAMPLE NUMBER 


LSD 








9. WEIGHT OF OVEN - DRY MATERIAL 


^k.Z' 








10. WEIGHT OF FLASK FILLED WITH WATER AT 20 C, 


&1&J 








11. SUM (Line 9 + 10) 


n>jz>(p 








12. WEIGHT OF FLASK + AGGREGATE + WATER AT 20C, 


173$ 








13. DIFFERENCE (Lino 11 minus 12) 


/68.8 








(Line 9) 


^<b 6?. 5" _ ~. 


.76>2. 


RENT R/l ' Y ' G (Line 13) 


/ &P> . & ~~ 


BINDER 


UNITS (Grama) 


SAMPLE NUMBER 


^.B73 








14. WEIGHT OF PYCNOMETER FILLED WITH WATER 


6/,f^^ 








15. WEIGHT OF EMPTY PYCNOMETER 


37.12./5 








16. WEIGHT OF WATER (Lino 1 1 minus 15) 


24<0380 








17. WEIGHT OF PYCNOMEfFR t iMVIOER 


47.%(<?I7 








18. WEIGHT OF BINDER (Line 17 minus !'.') 


1.WZ- 








10. WEIGHT OF PYCNOMETER + !.M ' _).:.* i WATER TO FILL PYCNOMETER 


t*2.lteS 








20. WEIGHT OF WATER TO FILL P >" I-.OM E T u-.R (Line 19 minus 17) 


/4.2<?5| 








21. WEIGHT OF WATER DISPLACED BY BINDER (Line 16 minua 20) 


^7^^ 








_ (Line 18) 


?. ^V/P2- / . 


$2.0 


(Line 21) 


q. 74-2.4 "" 


TECHNICIAN (Signature) COMPUTE!; BY (Signature) CHECKED BY (Signature) ^^^ 

S/>~4 &^yWa^y- $ dtt&u* Qt*^*- 



DD, 



FORM 1 P 1 C 

DEC 65 I Cm I \J 



PREVIOUS EDITION OF THIS FORM IS OBSOLETE. 



C/ 



Figure 3-21. Specific gravity of "bituminous mix components, data sheet. 



TM 5-530/NAV.FAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



UJ 

in 



m Uj 



x "3 

i-S b. 

I- X . 3 

z <2< o 

O UJ (- ^5 

*0 - 
I- ti 



cO 



00 



(Q 



m 







N 



Cx 



N 



Ch 



cvi 



O 



2.050 



O 

CM 



U) 
N 



CM 





in 
o 

N 



vr 
O 
N 



O 



O 



^ 





^ 



\s 



iK 



in 



Of 



S -N 

3 C 

U -> g 

< O C 

> 



ro 



U) 



h- 

X 



m 
o 



in 



10 
Kl 

C\l 



in 
r\i 







\f\ 



Q 



OJ 




CO 



CM 



INI 



CO 



N 



CVI 



CVI 



N5 



CM 





K 

X 



VOLUME 
CC 



rO 



00 



m 



ID 



n 



LO 



M> 



CO 



"0 



00 



CJ 



rr> 



o 



in 



<M 



CM 

CD 
fO 



CO 



rvj 



rf\ 
03 
rA 

N 



m 



cr- 
^ 

Oj 



si) 



Ul 



en 



fO 



U 



U 



rO 
\ 

O 



W 



i 

CJ 



s o f 

O u, o 
-I I- o 



X 2- 

i-t, 

I- x _i a 
52^o 

3 U I- ^ 

S O = 
I- ti. 



3 "? 

u -i g 



OLUME 
CC 



0. UJ 



2 



CO 



o 







CvJ 



cO 



CO 



00 






10 



00 



CO 



CO 



00 



10 



QQ 



2* 









a) 



o 



t 



6 



o 



UJ 



Cf) 



CM 



00 



N 



in 



rn 



O 



CM 



m 



5P 



00 
C\J 



o 

O 





I PERCENT BITUMEN 
i CONTENT 



UNIT WEIGHT - 
I AGGREGATE ONLY 



UNIT WEIGHT . 
TOTAL MIX 



-RECAP Uh MARSHALL TEST REs"uT7s 

\3\*0 \#5 \^,0 \ 5.S 




*7y}C*7vi 

DD i oeclsl 219 Devious eo JION OF TH'S F 



j^.&xfa 

u~~ 

1-2S. Asphalt mis, curves, Marshall test properties. 











QJ 










-C 

^J 








Cj O 'U iJ OJ QJ QJ QJ QJ 0) QJ QJ 


QJ 








S_ ^ '_ C U ^-1. L. V- !_ !_ 1- V- 


"O "O 








33 33 33 >. 3 3 33 33 


.,-. QJ 






? 


U -J ULJ <J U 1-1 ij U UU OO 
-0 t3 "0 ._ -O -O T3 


in jc 
4-> cn 






) 


L. i j pj q 1 1 (ij t, u; (L) ^ ' ( ' ; QJ 14 14 QJ t 4 C| QJ 


3 "H 




O 


!_ 
Q 


CO-n COm O O <n ro O O in OOm O O in 

3 3 . , , - 1 *- D v/- 3 V V - 1 


O 

JO 

ro 






2 


CO fO *-* ^ ro fO 4-J ~'>- CO CO -*- 1 "^. TOfO-t-' J^C CU <U 4-J ^i fO fQ 4-J >5 


. 4-J 




ti 


O 


n \ r\ (~\ "^ *"*> (1 j (1 ) O ^.j f"i QJ QJ O \; CD 1 1 QJ QJ O "^^c LA QJ QJ O ^S LA QJ QJ O r^S LA 


ro in 




o 


1 


G n -^* -t- /v^ ,-| f^ -^ , ^ -^^^ f^ /N J. p^^^ ^ f-\ f\ -^f r^r\ rf\ O n <^y *!*. ^^ /^ f\ ^ 11*1 p^^ 


U_ QJ . 








' ^ *"- ^LJ * 


1_ 




c 




>. 4 


O C QJ 




c 




. ' ' O -'," -,* 


4J QJ "O 




S'5 


in 

l/) 


>QJO (UOJ OlCJQJ QJQJ 
fD>> > > CX>> >> 


QJ C 
X -Q 3 




"""' c 


1> 


CT33 33 ^33 33 


E in -t-J i- 




'i 


Q. 


O U O ^ ~O O IJ O O 


4-> O O 




V 




,, (, rt\ t . (j QJ Q\ , , 1 [ 1 [ Q) 1 | 1 [ Q) QJ 


"j 'E "- 




CJ 
4-1 


Jd 

cn 


iv-OO;n OOm m tuOOin OOtn in 

-3 3 % 3C3 3 3 


4-J i QJ in 
O > Q- 




OJ 
Q 


x: 




QJ JC O 








Q. oj QJ o ^ LA QJ QJ o ^ o -;:-;: o v -;; v_ QJ QJ o s< o <L> o> o 5-8 LA. -is -;c o -:s -;s 


in jc O 








in ^X. n ^y _j- j^^ n n ^y* .Q ^r\ .*; j; "^y _'; j; f-^ f^ n t?^ PA CO ^ f^ 7?" LA VO -I -Js "Z. -1% -Ii 


-o 4-i in 








E 


.^ QJ 








4-J -r-4 


O C 1- JC 








c 


^ _! it 4^ 


U-J. 






QJ V 


r _(^ 4-J *^ 


o 








0) 4J 3 


1 






ro>- >- *- 3 s - *- i - 


JC -rt QJ 


(TJ f^l 4-J 




^ ^ 


CXQJ QJ QJ ^)QJ QJ QJ 


4-> 3 S_ QJ 


O C 




(D 


Q. -C -C JC JT JC -C 


3 m 


r-J. -H QJ 




atn 


rocnin cntn cnm .ccntn cnm cnin 


in QJ m O 


U-4 U -1 l 




in 


.,-. in >S - 1 m ><-* in 5^ 4-1 < in g^ ' in 5~S -^ in s-2 


QJ L. in JC 


'^ ^ EJ 




QJ 


2^ jC QJ LA JC QJ LA JC QJ LA -H JC QJ O JC QJ O JC QJ O 


in CD QJ 4-< 


ado 
a) -H o 




*> a 


["^V-l^LA 00 S_l'~^ r " V_l'~f^ r " 2 Ul'~-|h Cn V-!'~LA 00 Ul'""^ 00 


a i- 

CD X Q. QJ 


pu S 
OJ r-4 




3 

iD o 


<r O 1 - l Oiv_ l 011- j -o O I i- l Oil- > Oil- I 
Oi Oi Oi QJ Ol Ol ' 


"H !_ 

E jc fa 
QJ cn 


U -t- TO 
W QJ rC 


ra 


"* 


-HLA CMrAP-^ LA CxlJifvO LA CMLAvO ' LA CM CM CO LA CM cv\ r~- LA CM J" 1 . 


en i in 
co CD jc QJ 


V Q CL, 


i 




3 


1 4- L- 


H w 


V ^~ 




^o 


a> o - 


T3 < 


CVi OJ 




-D L. i- CM 1- 1- 


> 4-* O 4-* 




, ,4-J 


m 


Qj QJ QJ ~^~^. QJ QJ 


CO <4 


t-i to g 


^ 


in 


in -C -C JC JC 


in 0) 


to 3 


L. 


^ ^ QJ 


3 cn cn cn cn 


4J T3 4-J L. 


JCi CO :! 


t_3 


in ^ 


.-i m - in CM *+ in < in 


JC - C 3 


W C -H 




3 - 


jc in *^< jc m "^ r~ (/) gs5 JC in ^S 


4i O QJ in 


M O 4-1 




O ,- 


^5IQJO IQJO 1 CtQJl-A IQJLA 1 


> E in 


CO T-t CX 




w -C 

cn 


CM s- i >< CO v_ g-S r>. -Is i -;; -,: -I: ro - 1 3-S CO i- l & r^ -Is i -Is -Is -Is 

-^,01 LA oi r-. -is " -;s -;; -;: jc o i -ct oi vo -is i -is -;s -is 


C QJ QJ 

r-l QJ > 1- 








, 1_ 1 L_ 1 4-11-1 1-1 


JC CD CL 






LA* 


OOIOOI OOIOOI 


in 4-J Q. 







r"^- -'* 


CMO 3-SO &5 i-O o^O o^ 


4-J 2 


vO 




' -is 


OO xD>5OCO \jOo-2O QJCO \J05<LACO vO5-9l-A 


c 4-> cn O 


1 




~\' 


Q. . rAr- LA LA 4-< CMp^ -q-LA 
4-J TO 


-< CD C 1 
O JC -. 


QJ 






0) 


a. 4-> c 
cn . 


5 






fonjcofOfQ fDftjfonjfD 


QJ O "< - 

in in in in 


cO 

H 


Q) 




C JCJC-CJT-CC JCJCJCJCJC 
O Q.Q.CXCXCX.O Q.O-Q.Q-Q, 


QJ QJ a. 

JC -0 13 




^-* (fl 




.QjOJOJOjaj in cn in m m i-<QJQJQ)QJQJ ininminin 


4-J QJ O 
4-J C O 




O 




o HJOj'fOftJfO QJQJQJQJQ) Q_ fDfDnjfO^D QJQJQJQJQJ 


4-j m "-i i-- 
co 3 
->"O QJ 




O 




jQ t/1 Lf) t/0 CA CO rn QQ ff\ QQ QQ cy) t/) CO C-O CO o CO CO CO CO CO f*** pi"* OQ ^** o^ CO CO CO CO CO 


in ~O QJ > 

4-J CD tn O 








tD fO 


C 3 JO 










QJ QJ CD 








. j_ 


4-1 JO OJ 








QJ QJ 


C -0 0) 








4-J 4-J 


O "O in 








fl3<_> O OfDO O C-3 


o O O 








> ,^ ,^ ^^ ^ ^f ^f ^^ 


3 4-1 JC 








X *^^. X """-^ X ^^^ X ~*\ X ^"^ X "" ^- 


CO 4-J 








cn -< 3 -3 -< 3 cn >- < 3 - 3 -< 3 


QJ JC 4-> 








CE E ECE E E 


E m QJ 








.-. -O T3 "O -rt -O "O "O 


3 (0 U 




>* 




2 r QJ . Q) QJ 3 -QJ QJ 4) 


4-1 C JC CO 




4*J 




O fD *~- fC r fD ' O TO * fO ' OJ 


-t QJ Q. 




X"<v 




f | i ,-_ . 4_j ^ 4-1 r f 4-J f^ 4_| v_ 4^ p 


-Q E in in 




Z-T ^ 




in O H o -! O in O "-< O -i-i O --i 


3 CO QJ 




S^-' ^" 




>* 4-J ' | ^s. 41 14 >- 4-J 14 ^* 4-* i ] - >i^ | i it ^^ ^ i 1 1 


*j^ 4^ j^ 




o 




cn 4-J 4-J [ ' (n 4-J ] * 4_J 


O "-< -a -< 




Q 




t3- 1 -i4-i mm i 4-j mm --< 4-J min -a--<4-J inm"-<4.j in in -H 4J mm 


ja c 4J 








c 3 -0-02 "0-02 "O -o c 3 -0-03 "o T3 3 T3-O 


C CO 

O E in QJ 








.a 4-J 3 O O -04-J2OO J34-J2OO -Q 4-< 3 O O -Q4-3OO -Q4-J3OO 


-< 3 U 








--. (Q -,-4 Q -^> ^p (U *-< O ~^> ^> CD '"^ O "^ ^* O f(J rH Q ^^ ^> fO -< O ^> ^> CD r-1 O ^* J> 


in E s_ 3 








4JC"- 4JC 4->C' J^JC-- 4->C 4-JC' 


3 -1-1 O in 








QJ CO 13 1 1 ^v^S > **2 CO CD 1 1 i^5 >^$ CO Cj 1 1 >$ >*^ fl) ty^ ^ 1 1 >J3 v^ ^j -j j , p>v5 S^S CO C3 1^1 ^^ js5 


v 4-j 14 m 








4J 4-J 


00- Q) 








ro ro 


c O CD i- 








cn en 


- .r-. O. 








Q) Q) 


QJ l- 








u u 


OJ JC QJ JC 








cn cn 


jc 4-1 4- cn 








en fn 


4-1 -< iH 










C J- X 










W- QJ C_3 -IS 








fll Js'l 


5 "JS -is 



TM 5-530/NAYFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

3-26. Job-Mix Formula (AC Mixes) 
When the mix has proven itself to be satisfactory, 
the percentages by weight of the aggregate and the 
averaged optimum bitumen content are combined to 
establish the job-mix formula. Figure 3-19 lists the 
final percentages of the aggregate for a given job- 
mix. By plotting the test results, figure 3-22, on DD 
Form 1219, figure 3-23, and applying the Marshall 
Test criteria for determining optimum bitumen con- 
tent, the determination is made that the mix requires 
4-7 percent of asphalt cement. Accordingly, the ag- 
gregates must be 95.3 percent of the total mix. The 
selected blend contained 46 percent coarse aggregate 
(CA), 30 percent fine aggregate (FA), W percent- 
fine river bar sand (FKBS) , and 5 percent limestone 
dust (LSD) mineral filler. The job-mix formula is 
computed as follows : 

(74=95.3 X 45=42.9% 

#,4=95.3 X 30=28.6% 

FRBS=W>3 X 20=19.0% 

Mineral filler =95.3 X 5=4.8% 



Asphalt cement = 
Total= 



95.3% 

4.7% 

100.0% 



3-27. Modified Test for Gold-Mix Pavements 

This method is used as an aid in determining the 
asphalt content for cold-mix design of light duty 
pavement. It can be used where asphalt cutbacks will 
be the binder. The procedures follow those used for 
hot mix design (para 3-24 a to g) in general with the 
following modifications : 

a. Aggregates. These are dried to a moisture con- 
tent expected during construction (up to a maximum 
of 2 percent, by weight) . 

T). Asphalt. The selected bitumen is mixed with the 
aggregates, but at the temperature recommended for 
field application. The aggregates remain at room 
temperature. 

G. Curing. Prior to compaction, the mixture is 
cured for at least 12 hours in an oven set at 140 : 
5F. 

d. Compaction. After curing, the mixture is com- 
pacted at 140 F. using 50 blows of the hammer at 
each end of the specimen. 

e. Cooling. After molding, the specimens are 



3-39 

cooled to room, temperature in the molds. Care must 
be taken to remove the specimens, undisturbed and 
undamaged, from the molds. 

/. Testing. The specimens are heated in an oven 
to 100 2 F. and tested in the Marshall machine. 
Heating will normally take about 2 hours. 

g. Selection of the Design Amount of Asphalt. The 
asphalt contents at maximum density and maximum 
stability, after averaging, are used as the design 
amount. 

3-28. Surface Area Method of Mix Design 

When laboratory equipment, except for sieve analy- 
sis, is not available, the following formulas may 
be used in place of laboratory procedures to deter- 
mine the necessary asphalt content. 

a. For Asphalt Cement, 

P= 0.02a+0.07b+0.15c+0.20d 
Where 

P= Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
asphalt material by weight of dry aggregate 
a== Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
mineral aggregate retained on No. 50 sieve 
b = Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
mineral aggregate passing No. 50 and re- 
tained on No. 100 sieve 

c= Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
mineral aggregate passing No. 100 and re- 
tained on No. 200 sieve 

d= Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
mineral aggregate passing the No. 200 
sieve 

Absorptive aggregates such as slag, limerock, vesic- 
ular lava and coral will require additional asphalt. 

b. For Asphalt Emulsion. Formula No. 2 for deter- 
mination of estimated percent when using asphalt 
emulsions is as follows: 

P=0.05A+0.lB-f-0.5C 
Where 

P= Percent (expressed as a whole number) by 
weight asphalt emulsion, based on weight 
of graded mineral aggregate 

A Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
mineral aggregate retained on No. 8 sieve 

B= Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
mineral aggregate passing No. 8 sieve, re- 
tained on No. 200 sieve 

C Percent (expressed as a whole number) of 
mineral aggregate passing No. 200 sieve 



3-29. Plant Operation 

Figures 3-24 and 3-25 are schematic drawings of a 
batch plant and a continuous mix plant, respectively. 
<z. It is generally necessary to combine aggregates 
from two or more sources to produce an aggregate 
mixture having the desired gradation. In the opera- 
tion of a high-type bituminous paving plant, aggre- 
gates from the different sources are fed into the 
aggregate dryer in the approximate proportions 
required to produce the desired gradation. This 
initial proportioning generally is accomplished by 
means of a hopper-type feeder, operating from one 
or more bins, which feeds the aggregates into a cold 
elevator which in turn delivers them to the dryer. 
The mechanical feeder is loaded by a clamshell or 
other suitable means. The aggregates pass through 
the dryer where the moisture is driven off and the 
aggregates are heated to the desired temperatures. 
Upon leaving the dryer, the aggregate pass over 
vibrating screens where they are separated according 
to size. The usual screening equipment for a three-bin 
plant consists of a rejection (scalping) screen for 
eliminating oversized material and screens for divid- 
ing the coarse aggregate into two separate sizes 
(bins). Fine aggregate goes into the third bin. An 
additional screen is provided for further separation 
of the coarse aggregates in a four-bin plant. Addi- 
tional mineral filler, if required, usually is stored, 
and weighed or proportioned into the mix separately. 
It may be obtained from the plant's dust collector 
or from an external source. Plant screens may be 
changed to provide a variation in size of openings ; 
the sizes employed are largely dependent upon the 



type or mixture being produced. In some cases it may, 
be necessary to change the size of screens to obtain 
a proper balance of aggregate sizes in each bin. 

b. The aggregates must be fed through the plant 
uniformly, preferably by mechanical feeder, in order 
to obtain efficient plant operation and produce a 
desired mixture. It is usually necessary to make some 
slight adjustments in the plant-bin proportions, since 
a screen analysis of the hot storage bins will not 
entirely duplicate the screen analysis used in the 
laboratory design. This may be a result of : 

(1) Fines lost while passing through the dryer 
(unless the equipment includes an effective dust 
collector and the fines are returned to the mix). 

(2) Aggregate degradation in the dryer. 

(3) Plant screens which are not completely 
efficient in separation of the aggregate, with the re- 
sult that some fines are carried over into the coarser 
bins. 

(4) Separation of material at hot bins into more 
or fewer fractions than represented at stockpiles. 

c. Intermediate-type plants will not have the re- 
finements of the high-type plant described in a above. 
Such items as the gradation control unit, the dryer 
unit, and even the storage hoppers or bins may not 
be components of this type of plant. The aggregates 
from stockpiles or trucks are added directly (in 
correct proportion) into the elevator and then fed 
into the mixer. Corrections or changes in aggregate 
proportions must be made during the feed. If a dryer 
is not part of the plant, adjustments to com- 
pensate for moisture must be anticipated and made 
externally. 



I'M 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



3-41 



co 



UJ 

o: 



u z 



ig 

< CD 




-42 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



MANUFACTURE OF HOT MIX 
BITUMINOUS PAVEMENTS 



HOT ELEVATOR 



HOT ELEVATOR 




FINE SAND 



COARSE SAND 



Figure 3-25. BiittwCncms /lOt-mia? continuous-mix plant. 



1-30. Initiating Plant Production 

?he heaviest demands on laboratory facilities arise 
t the initiation of plant production. Preliminary 
omputations, which provide the gradation on which 
lie mixture design is based, may be made to deter- 
line the weight of material from each bin. However, 
b should be recognized that the gradation of the 
ggregate supplied by the plant in accordance with 
omputed bin weights may not reproduce precisely 
he desired gradation. The gradation of the plant- 
>roduced aggregates generally approximates the one 
sed in design, within reasonable tolerances, if 
tiitial sampling for design purposes has been ac- 
omplished properly and if the plant is operated 
fficiently. Certain steps should be taken, however, 
o insure that satisfactory mixtures are reproduced 
rom the beginning and throughout the period of 
ilant production. Procedures outlined in this section 
till insure satisfactory paving mixtures. 

a. Sieve Analysis. Sieve analysis (para 3-20) is 
fiade on material from each plant bin. Samples for 
hese sieve analyses are obtained after a few tons of 
ggregate have been processed through the dryer 
nd screens, in order that the sample will be repre- 
entative. Final bin proportions may be determined 
n the basis of these sieve analyses. 

6. Provision for Redesign of Mix. The aggregates 
Tom the bins sometimes cannot be proportioned to 
eproduce satisfactorily the gradation of the aggre- 
gate used in the laboratory design. It is then neces- 
iary to redesign the mix, using plant-produced 
ggregates. Specimens are prepared and tested for 



the new design in the same manner as for the original 
design tests. Optimum asphalt content and probable 
satisfactoriness of the mix that will be produced by 
the plant are determined thereby. Occasions may 
arise in which the gradation of the plant-produced 
aggregate will differ from the laboratory design so 
that a part of the aggregates may be wasted. Con- 
sideration then should be given to redesigning the 
mix to use all of the available aggregate. Sufficient 
additional tests should be performed to establish 
optimum asphalt requirements and insure that the 
mix meets applicable criteria for satisfactoriness. 

3-31. Controlling Plant Production 

a. A sample of paving mix adequate for the prep- 
aration of four test specimens is obtained from each 
of the first four truckloads of paving mix upon 
initiation of plant production. The four specimens 
prepared from each of these samples are compacted 
and tested in accordance with standard procedures 
described previously. The tests are conducted as 
rapidly as possible, and plant production delayed 
until data from these tests are available. These data 
must conform to final design data at the same asphalt 
content, within reasonable tolerances, before plant 
production is resumed. If necessary, proper adjust- 
ments are made to secure a conforming mix. Such 
procedures will delay plant production generally less 
than 2 hours, and production of satisfactory mixes 
is thereby assured from the start. As soon as data 
from tests of the plant-produced mix are obtained, 
they should be compared with corresponding design 
data for further adjustment of the mix, if necessary. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

6. The average flow and stability values of truck 
samples should be in substantial agreement with flow 
and stability values from the final design. Variations 
of not more than two points in flow and not more 
than 10 percent in stability are allowable. The aver- 
age unit weight of total mix of specimens prepared 
from samples obtained from trucks should not vary 
from the average unit weight of specimens prepared 
from plant-produced mixtures by more than 1.5 
pounds per cubic foot. Plant production should be 
delayed, if these property variations exceed those 
noted above, until the cause of these variations is 
determined. Computations for scale weights and size 
of gate openings are checked first. If no error is 
found in these computations, the plant scales or other 
proportioning devices are recalibrated. Variations of 
only a few tenths of one percent in asphalt contents 
may cause variations of two or three points in the 
flow value. Small variations in aggregate quanti- 
ties generally are not particularly effective in chang- 
ing test properties. Plant scales or proportioning 
devices found to be inaccurate should be adjusted, 
and four additional truckloads of plant mix pre- 
pared, sampled, and tested. The plant must not be 
placed in continuous operation until the variations 
in test properties are within allowable tolerances. 
Once the plant has been placed in continuous opera- 
tion, test specimens are prepared from approximately 
each 400 tons of mix placed. All the Marshall prop- 
erties must be determined from these samples. Tol- 



3-43 

erances cited above are allowable for the continua- 
tion of plant production. Also, the variation of voids 
in the total mix must not exceed 1 percent. 

c. Generally, a 'material increase in flow value in- 
dicates that either the gradation of the mix has 
changed sufficiently to require a .revision in the opti- 
mum asphalt content for the mix, or too much as- 
phalt is being incorporated in the mix. Substantial 
changes in stability or void content also serve as an 
indication of these factors. As a general rule, how- 
ever, the flow and stability values are obtainable 
quickly and are reasonably reliable indicators of the 
consistency of the plant-produced mix. Mix propor- 
tions should be adjusted whenever any of the test 
properties fall outside of the specified tolerances. In 
the case of batch plants, failure of the operator to 
weigh accurately the required proportions of mate- 
rial or faulty scales are common causes of paving- 
mixture deficiencies. The total weight of each load of 
mixture produced should not vary more than 2 per- 
cent from the total load of the batch weights dumped 
into the truck. Improper weighing or faulty scales 
may be detected readily and corrective measures 
taken by maintaining close check of load weights. 
Other probable causes of paving- mixture deficiencies 
for both batch and continuous mixing plants are 
shown in figure 3-26. These deficiencies are observed 
at the plant. Other imperfections and their causes 
that may be encountered in placing the mix in the 
pavement are given in figure 3-27. 



/ Probable Causes of Deficiencies in Hot Plant Mix Paving Mixtures / 



Item 



eficiencies That May Be 



d in Producing Hot Plant 



XXX/\X Bitumen content fails to check job -mix formula 



Gradation fails to check job-mix formula 



Poorly mixed loads 



Fat, rich mixtures 



Mixture temperature fails to check job mix 



Overweight or underweight loads 



xxxxxx 



xxxxxxx 



X/\ Lack of uniformity of mixtures in loads 




Items 6 to 23 incl. are applicable to all types plants. Items 1 to 5 incl. and items 24 to 28 incl. are applicable 
to batch plants and volumetric plants respectively. 



Figure 3-26. Provable causes of paving mixture deficiencies detected at plant. 



418-32O 71- 



-11 



3-44 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



PROBABLE CAUSES OF IMPERFECTIONS IN FINISHED PAVEMENTS 




TYPES OF PAVEMENT IMPERFECTIONS 
'THAT MAY BE ENCOUNTERED IN LAYING 
'HOT PLANT MIX PAVING MIXTURES 



x 



x 



x 



BLEEDING 



X 



X 



X 



BROWN, DEAD APPEARANCE 



XX 



X 



X 



X 



POOR SURFACE TEXTURE 



xxxxxx 



XXX 



X 



X 



X 



ROUGH UNEVEN SURFACE 



X 



X 



X 



X 



UNEVEN LATERAL JOINTS 



X 



X 



X 



X 



X 



X 



UNEVEN LONGITUDINAL JOINTS 



X 



X 



X 



ROLLER MARKS 



XX 



XXX 



X 



X 



X 



PUSHING 



X 



X 



XX 



X 



WAVES 



X 



X 



XX 



XX 



CRACKING 



xxxx 



X 



X 



X 



HONEYCOMB 



X 



XX 



X 



X 



X 



DISTORTION 



X 



X 



X 



X 



TEARING OF SURFACE DURING LAYING 



XLXI 



X 



RICH OR FAT SPOTS 



3-32. Asphalt Content (Use of Dulin-Rotarex 
Extraction Device) 

The (procedure outlined in paragraph 3-31 for con- 
trol of plant production, based upon the test proper- 
ties secured by the use of the Marshall apparatus, 
may be supplemented by the use of the Dulin-Rofcarex 
extraction device. The measured asphalt content is 
compared -with the optimum asphalt content pre- 
viously established; discrepancies may be corrected 
by plant adjustments, if necessary. After the asphalt 
has ibeen extracted, the remaining aggregates ni'ay be 
subjected to a sieve analysis for comparison with 
the previously selected aggregate gradation, with 
corrections again being made in the operation of the 
plant, as necessary. 

a. Apparatus. The following equipment is neces- 
sary for determining the asphalt content of a bitu- 
minous plant mixture by ithe use of the Dulin-Rotarex 
extraction device: 

Balance, 2,000-gram capacity 
Beaker, 600-ml capacity 



Varnish brush 
Graduate, 1,000-ml glass 
Evaporating dishes 

Dulin-Rotarex centrifugal extractor, hand- 
driven w/pad 

Filter- ring (paper-basket type) 
Electric hotplate 
Electric oven 
Bake pan 

Solvent (trichloroethane) , 5-gal. can 
Spatula 
Cooking spoon 
Crucible tongs 

The Dulin-Rotarex extraction device and related 
equipment are shown in figure 3-28. 

H). Test Procedure. This test may be performed 
upon a representative sample taken from an individ- 
ual batch or upon a composite sample representing 
several batches. 

(1) After the plant is in normal operation, a 
suitable composite sample as obtained by combining 
5 -pound samples of the hot-mix taken every 2 hours. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



3-45 



GRADUATE, 1000-ML 



DULIN-ROTAREX 
CENTRIFUGAL EXTRACTOR 




Figure 8-28. Dulin-Rotareai extraction equipment. 



This is done by using a shovel and cutting com- 
pletely across the stream of hot mixture as it is dis- 
charged from the mixer. The hot samples should 
be placed in a tin pail or other container with a 
tight-fitting lid until the last sample for the day is 
taken. 

(2) The combined sample is heated in a pan on 
the hotplate or in the oven, until it is sufficiently soft 
to be easily disintegrated by the use of a large spoon. 
Care must be taken to see that the individual par- 
ticles of aggregate are not crushed. 

(3) A representative sample is prepared by the 
method of quartering. After cooling, not less .than 
500 grams of a sample containing particles larger 
than % inch or not less than 200 grams of a sample 
with all particles smaller than % inch are accurately 
weighed and placed in the bowl of the extraction 
device. The initial weight of the sample is recorded. 

(4) A gasket-type filter paper is weighed and 
the weight recorder, after which it is fitted on the rim 
of the bowl. The cover plate is placed in position and 
securely locked in place. The bowl is then placed on 
the shaft of the extractor and fastened securely. 



(5) The empty 1,000-milliliter glass graduate 
is placed under the spout. Approximately 150 cubic 
centimeters of solvent is poured into the bowl through 
the solvent funnel. Flow through the weep holes indi- 
cates a full bowl. The solvent is added from the 
beaker, pouring carefully. For best results, the 
solvent is allowed to set in the bowl for 10 to 15 
minutes before operating. 

(6) The lid is put on and the bowl rotated by 
turning the handcrank until the solvent discharges 
from the spout in a, thin stream. After the first charge 
is drained out, the lid is removed and an additional 
amount of solvent is added. The lid is replaced and 
the bowl again rotated. This operation is repeated 
several times, until the discharged solvent is clean. 
With a little experience the operator can soon judge 
exactly what treatment is necessary for any given 
material. 

(7) When the last addition of solvent has 
drained off, the bowl is removed and placed with the 
cover plate uppermost on a sheet of paper. The cover 
plate and the filter plate are carefully set aside on 
the piece of paper. After the sample is thoroughly 



3-46 

dry, it is carefully brushed from the bowl, cover 
plate, and filter paper, an-d weighed. This weight is 
recorded. 

(8) Some of the mineral filler may be retained in 
the filter paper. For this reason, the filter paper is 
weighed, and the weight is recorded. 

(9) The weight of the clean aggregate, plus the 
weight of any mineral filler retained in the filter 
paper, is subtracted from the weight of the original 
sample to determine the amount of asphalt extracted. 
This value for the amount of asphalt extracted is 
subject to correction, depending upon the amount of 
mineral filler contained in the solvent, as indicated 
below. 

(10) The amount of mineral filler which passed 
through the filter paper is contained in the solvent 
and may be estimated as follows : The total amount 
of solvent, well stirred, is rapidly measured and a 
proportionate amount, usually from 50 to 100 cubic 
centimeters, poured into a previously weighed evapo- 
rating dish. The solvent is evaporated over very low 
heat, preferably outdoors. The residual material is 
then ignited and allowed to burn until all the organic 
material is consumed. The evaporating dish is allowed 
to cool and weighed again. If the organic material 
has been entirely burned off, the difference in initial 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

and final weights of the dish represents the weight of 
mineral filler contained in that portion of the solvent 
used. 

c. Calculations. The numerical example (fig. 3-29) 
will serve to illustrate the method of calculating the 
percentage of asphalt contained in the original 
sample. DD Form 1793 (Fig. 3-29 continued) will be 
reproduced locally for Army use on 8"xlOi/ 2 " paper 
(image size 7 4 / 10 "x9%"). Supply of BD Form 1793 
for other services use will be requisitioned through 
normal publications supply channels. 

d. Sieve Analysis of Aggregate. The clean aggre- 
gate may be subjected to sieve analysis, using the 
method described in paragraph 3-20. The amount of 
material passing the No. 200 sieve (mineral filler) in 
the sieve analysis must be increased by the weight o-f 
filler retained in the filter paper gasket contained in 
the solvent, determined as indicated in c above. 

e. Testing Tar on Tar-Rub~ber Mixes. For tar ov 
tar-rubber mixes the above procedure should be morK 
fled as follows: 

(1) Soak sample in crystal-free creosote over 
night. 

(2) Transfer soaked sample and creosote to 
Rotarex and centrifuge to remove the creosote. 

(3) Wash sample with benzine until solvent is 
a light straw color. 



IM 



DETERMINATION OF ASPHALT CONTENT 

(Dulin - Rotarex Extractor) 


PROJECT 


DATE 
ff A-PJ? / '/ / () 


LINE 
NO. 


ITEM 


UNIT 


1 


2 


1. 


Weight of original sample and tare 


g 


^ .*V.?./ 




2. 


Weight of tare 


g 


J-? / 




3. 


Weight of original sample 


(1-2 ) 


g 


=2 O ' 




4. 


Weight of clean aggregate and tare 


g 


3 9 .2 




5. 


Weight of tare 


g 


.y V./ 




6. 


Weight of clean aggregate 


(4-5 ) 


g 


/-</ 




7. 


Final weight of filter paper 


g 


J*.& 




8. 


Initial weight of filter paper 


g 


2-y<2 




9. 


Weight of filler in filter paper 


g 


/ y 




10. 


Total amount of solvent 


cm 3 


c /-^? 




11. 


Amount of solvent evaporated and ignited 


cm 3 


f, 




12. 


Final weight of evaporation dish and 


residue 


g 


,T< 3 




13. 


Initial weight of clean evaporation dish 


g 


j < I 




14. 


Amount of filler in evaporation dish 


(12-13 ) 


g 


6- / 




15. 


Amount of filler in total solvent ( "T7 x 14 ) 


g 


l-6~ 




16. 


Total amount of aggregate in sample 


(6+9+15 ) 


g 


tz'i- (. 




17. 


Percentage asphalt 


(2^6 x 100 ) 


% 


cf-J" 




REMARKS 

SAMPLE 7$ 




TECHNICIAN 


COMPUTED BY 
/J j // 


CHECKED BY 



Figure 3-29. Asphalt content 6y Dulin-Rotarex extractor, sample data sheet. (DD form 1793). 



DETERMINATION OF ASPHALT CONTENT 

(Dulin - Rotarex Extractor) 


PROJECT 


DATE 


LINE 
NO. 


ITEM 


UNIT 


1 


2 


1. 


Weight of original sample and tare 


g 






2. 


Weight of tare 


g 






3. 


Weight of original sample (1-2 ) 


g 






4. 


Weight of clean aggregate and tare 


g 






5. 


Weight of tare 


g 






6. 


Weight of clean aggregate (4-5 ) 


g 






7. 


Final weight of filter paper 


g 






8. 


Initial weight of filter paper 


g 






9. 


Weight of filler in filter paper 


g 






10. 


Total amount of solvent 


cm3 






11. 


Amount of solvent evaporated and ignited 


cn.3 






12. 


Final weight of evaporation dish and residue 


g 






13. 


Initial weight of clean evaporation dish 


g 






14. 


Amount of filler in evaporation dish (12-13 ) 


g 






15. 


Amount of filler in total solvent ( "7T x 14 ) 


g 






16. 


Total amount of aggregate in sample (6+9+15 ) 


g 






17. 


Percentage asphalt Og x 100 ) 


% 







REMARKS 



TECHNICIAN 



COMPUTED BY 



CHECKED BY 



DD 



FORM 

1 FEB 71 



Figure 8-29. Continued. 



i 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

3-33. Expediting the Design 

When military expediency demands it, the prelimi- 
nary laboratory mix designs are eliminated, and the 
mix is designed directly from plant-produced aggre- 
gates. In such cases, the engineering officer will, on 
the basis of sieve analysis or other available informa- 
tion, or judgment, select the most promising of the 
available aggregates and start the plant using this 
aggregate. As pointed out previously, in nearly all 
cases the aggregate will show some breakdown of the 
particles because of the heating and screening ; con- 
sequently the grading curve for the material which 
has passed through the plant nearly always will be 



3-49 

somewhat different from grading curve of the ma- 
terial prior to entering the plant. Laboratory tests, 
using aggregate from the plant bins combined in the 
most desirable proportions must be conducted to 
determine the optimum asphalt content. Manufacture 
of the paving mix then can be initiated. If the avail- 
able aggregate must be used, regardless of whether 
it produces a mix which meets all the design criteria 
at the optimum asphalt content, the asphalt content 
should be selected so as to give a mix which meets the 
criteria for flow and percent voids in the total mix, 
with the criteria for stability and percent voids filled 
with asphalt given less consideration. 



I 




\ 





CONCRETE 



CHAPTER 4 



Section 1 CHARACTERISTICS AND BEHAVIOR 



41. Description 

a. Concrete is one of the most economical, versatile, 
and universally used construction materials. It is one 
of the few building materials that can be produced 
by the user directly on the job to meet his specific 
requirements. Concrete is an artificial stone which, 
when first mixed, forms a plastic or putty-like mix- 
ture. This mix is then placed into a form and allowed 
to harden or cure for a prescribed length of time. 
When cured, the finished concrete is a hard, stone-like 
material. It is used for pavements, foundations, dams 
and retaining walls, bridges, buildings of all types, 
and many military works. 

&. Concrete can be described as a mixture of ce- 
ment, fine and coarse aggregates, and water. During 
mixing, the cement and water from a fluid paste that 
permits thorough mixing and effective placement 
of the concrete. After mixing, the cement and water 
combine chemically to form a variety of compounds 
that adhere to the aggregate particles and bind the 
entire mass together into a strong, hard, stone-like 
material. This process, called hydration, causes a 
rapid development of strength in the first few hours 
after mixing, followed by less rapid gains in strength 
during the following weeks. 

These "curing" conditions are essential to the devel- 
opment of the maximum strength of the concrete. 
The strength and desired resistance to weathering 
deterioration depend upon an adequate amount of 
cement-water paste to thoroughly cover all aggregate 
surfaces and fill the voids between aggregate par- 
ticles. The amount of water per unit quantity of 
cement in the paste (water-cement ratio) largely 
determines the strength of the hardened concrete. 
For design purposes, the strength at 28 days after 
mixing usually is used. Beyond this period, the rela- 
tive increase in strength becomes smaller and the 
strength curve flattens out. Some airfield designs use 
a 90-day strength which is determined by increasing 
the expected 28-day strength by 10 percent. 

c. The aggregate is a mixture of fine and coarse 
material, generally sand with either natural gravel or 



crushed stone. It serves as an inert filler to provide 
the great bulk of material required. Well-graded ag- 
gregates contain particles of all sizes, from the largest 
permitted by the dimensions of the member to be 
formed, to sand fines. The smaller particles fill the 
spaces between the larger, thus providing a dense 
material that requires a minimum of cement paste 
for binder. The aggregate materials must be clean, 
hard, and at least as strong as the hardened cement 
to withstand the load pressures and the weathering 
processes. 

4-2. Cement 

Cement is a substance which hardens with time and 
holds or entraps objects or particles in a definite rela- 
tion to each other. For concrete, portland cement 
usually is used. Portland cement is manufactured by 
a standardized process consisting of grinding lime- 
stone and clay, mixing them in correct proportions, 
heating the mixture to a high temperature to form 
clinkers, and pulverizing the clinkers so that 95 per- 
cent of the material will pass through a No. 200 sieve. 
A small amount of gypsum is added to retard the set. 
^References to cement in Chapters 4 and 5 mean port- 
land cement. The American Society for Testing and 
Materials specifies five common types of portland ce- 
ment ( ASTM Designation C 150) . These are adequate 
for most purposes and can be used when necessary to 
compensate for the heat conditions encountered dur- 
ing the curing process and to offset soil conditions 
which can cause deterioration of the concrete. The 
various types of portland cement are known as hy- 
draulic cements because they are capable of harden- 
ing and developing strength in the presence of water. 
The standard types of portland cement are 

a. Type I Normal. This type is used for general 
construction when not subject to sulfate hazard and 
where hydration heat will not cause an objectionable 
rise in temperature. 

b. Type II Modified. This cement has a lower heat 
of hydration than the normal Type I and generates 
heat at a slower rate. It also has improved resistance 
to sulfate attack. Modified cement is used when con- 



Tete is placed in warm weather or in locations where 
, high temperature rise is objectionable. It is used in 
tructures of considerable mass such as large piers, 
leayy abutments, and heavy retaining walls. 

c. Type III High-Early Strength. This type of 
;ement is used where a high strength is needed very 
[uickly. This may be due to a demand for early use, 
vhere forms must be removed as soon as possible, 
>r in cold weather construction to reduce the period 
>f protection against low or freezing temperatures. 

d. Type IV Low Heat. This cement is used where 
.he amount and rate of heat generated must be kept to 
', minimum. Type IV cement develops strength at a 
lower rate than Type I cement but prevents the de- 
r elopment of high temperatures in the structure with 
he attendant danger of shrinkage cracking upon 
ater cooling. It is a special type, usually made to 
>rder, for massive structures such as large gravity 
lams wherein temperature rise from the heat of 
lydration is critical. 

e. Type V /Sulfate Resistant. Sulf ates react chem- 
cally with the cement compounds, disrupt the needed 
sementing action, and cause undesirable expansion of 
he mixture. The sulf ates may be present in the water 
ised to mix the concrete, or may be created by sul- 
'urous gases from nearby industrial areas. The prin- 
ipal source of sulfate attack, however, occurs on 
foundations and other concrete in contact with the 
sarth in certain regions and is caused by a reaction 
)etween the ground water, containing dissolved re- 
ictive minerals or acid, and the hardened cement. 
Resistant cement is low in calcium aluminate and is 
lighly resistant to sulfate attack. It usually is avail- 
ible only on special order. 

/. Other Types. These cements may be variations of 
he five types above or especially designed types. 

(1) Type IS Portland blast furnace slag. This 
cement uses granulated slag which is rapidly chilled 
>r quenched from its molten state in water, steam, or 
dr. The slag (from 25 to 65 percent of the total 
veight of cement) is ground with the cement clinker. 

(2 ) Type IP Pozsolan. This cement uses a mix- 
ure (15 to 35 or 40 percent) of pozzolan with the 
:ement clinker. Pozzolan is a siliceous, or siliceous 
tnd aluminous material such as fly ash, volcanic ash, 
liatomaceous earth, or calcined shale. The strength 
if concrete made with pozzolanic cements is not as 
jreat as concrete made with the same amount of port- 
and cement, but its workability may be better for 
ome uses. 

(3) Air-entrained. Concrete made with air- 
intrained cement is resistant to severe frost action 
md to salts used for ice and snow removal. It is pro- 
Luced by adding air-releasing materials to the clinker 
,s it is ground. In general, air-entrainment may be 
;ontrolled to a much greater extent by the use of ad- 



mixtures with normal cements during mixing. This 
combination results in a concrete with tiny, distrib- 
uted, and separated air bubbles (up to millions per 
cubic foot). The entrained air bubbles improve the 
workability of the fresh concrete. These bubbles re- 
duce the capillary and water channel structure within 
the hardened concrete and restrict the passage of 
water. This prevents the buildup of damaging water 
pressure in the pores when concrete is frozen, and 
hence air-entrained concrete has greatly increased 
durability in outdoor locations exposed to freezing 
weather. Each of the first three types (I, II, or III) 
and types IS and IP are available as air-entrained. 
To signify this characteristic a letter A is added after 
the type. Thus, air-entrained pozzolan cement is 
known as type IP-A. 

(4) Other. In addition to the types described 
above, there is white cement, waterproofed cement, 
and oil well cement. White cement is made from se- 
lected materials to prevent coloring, staining, or dark- 
ening of the finished concrete. Waterproofed cement 
has water-repellent material added. The finished and 
set concrete has a water-repellent action. Oil well 
cement is especially made to harden properly when 
used under high temperature in deep oil wells. 

4-3. Water 

Water plays an important part in the concrete mix. 
Its principal uses are to make the mix workable and 
to start the chemical reaction. Any material in the 
water which retards or changes the reaction is detri- 
mental. A good rule of thumb is "if it's good enough 
to drink, it may be used for concrete." 

a. Ordinary Water. The materials found in some 
types of water include organic compounds, oil, alkali, 
or acid. Each has its effect on the hydration process. 

(1) Organic material and oil. These compounds 
tend to coat the aggregate and cement particles, and 
to prevent the full chemical action and adherence. 
The organic material may also react with the chemi- 
cals in the cement and create a weakened cementing 
action, thus contributing to deterioration and struc- 
tural failure of the concrete. 

(2) Alkalies, acids, and sulf ates. These chemical 
impurities in the water tend to react with the chemi- 
cals in the cement. The result is an inadequate cement- 
ing and weakened concrete. Water must be free of 
these chemicals for use in concrete mixing. 

I. Sea Water. The salts in sea water are normally 
thought of as being corrosive. However, sea water 
is used sometimes for concrete mixing with satis- 
factory results. A loss of 10 to 20 percent in com- 
pressive strength can be expected when using the 
same amount of sea water as fresh water. This can 
be compensated somewhat by reducing the water- 
cement ratio. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



4-3 



4-4. Aggregates 

The aggregates commonly used for concrete a-re 
natural deposits of sand and gravel, where avail- 
able. In some localities, the deposits are hard to 
obtain and large rocks must be crushed to form the 
aggregate. Crushed aggregate costs more to produce 
(in most cases) and will require more cement paste 
clue to its shape. More care must be used in handling 
crushed aggregate to prevent poor mixtures and im- 
proper dispersion of the sizes through the finished 
concrete. At times, artificial aggregates such as blast 
furnace slag or especially burned clay are used. 

a. Types of Aggregate. Aggregates are divided 
into two types : fine and coarse. When properly pro- 
portioned and mixed with cement these two groups 
will yield an almost voidless stone which is strong 
and durable. Aggregate must be equal to or better 
in strength and durability than the hardened cement 
to withstand the designed loads and the effects of 
weathering. 

1). Fine Aggregate. Fine aggregate is defined as 
the material which will pass a No. 4 sieve and will 
be predominantly retained on a No. 200 sieve. To 
increase workability and for economy as reflected 
by use of less cement, the fine aggregate should have 
a rounded shape. The purpose of the fine aggregate 
is to fill the voids in the coarse aggregate and to 
act as a workability agent. This characteristic of 
workability is discussed more fully in the descrip- 
tion of finished concrete (para k-5d). 

c. Coarse Aggregate. Coarse aggregate is a ma- 
terial which will pass the 3-inch screen and will be 
retained on the No. 4 sieve. As with fine aggregate, 
to increase workability and for economy as reflected 
by use of less cement, the coarse aggregate should 
have a rounded shape. Even though the definition 
seems to limit the size of coarse aggregate, other 
considerations must be accounted for. 

(1) It can be readily seen that the more coarse 
aggregate, the more economical the mix. Larger 
pieces offer less surface area of the particles than 
an equivalent volume of small pieces. Use of the 
largest permissible maximum size of coarse aggre- 
gate permits a reduction in cement and water require- 
ments. 

(2) One restriction usually assigned to coarse 
aggregate is its maximum size. Large pieces can in- 
terlock and form arches or obstructions within a 
concrete form. This restricts the area below to a void, 
or at best, to become filled with the finer particles of 
sand and cement only. This is either a weakened area 
or a cement-sand concentration which does not leave 
the proper proportion to coat the rest of the aggre- 
gate. The maximum size of coarse aggregate must 
be no larger than the sizes given in table 4-1. Capaci- 
ty of mixing equipment also may limit maximum 
aggregate size. 



Table 41- Maximum Recommended Size of Coarse Aggregate 

Minimum dimension inches 
Structure S 1 A-B 6-11 



1S-S9 SO or more 



Reinforced walls, 
beams and columns. 

Unreinforced walls 

Slabs, heavily 
reinforced 

Slabs, lightly 

reinforced 



iy 2 



1/2-3 



3 



3-6 

1 



Note. Maximum size not to exceed one-fifth of minimum dimension of a wal 
or similar structure, one-third of slab thickness for horizontal slab, or three- 
fourths of minimum clear spacing between reinforcing bars. 



d. Gradation. Gradation of aggregate refers to the 
amount of each size of particle used in the mix. A too 
large proportion of coarse aggregate leaves voids 
which require more cement paste to fill. This affects 
the economy of the mix. Too much fine aggregate, 
besides preventing good bonding, also increases the 
surface area which must be coated with cement paste. 
This will weaken the concrete. Good gradation re- 
sults in a dense mass of concrete with a minimum vol- 
ume of voids, an economical mix, and a strong struc- 
ture. Optimum strength, watertightness, and dura- 
bility in the hardened concrete 'require careful con- 
trol of aggregate gradation. 

e. Durability. Durability is the ability to resist the 
elements of weathering and the load pressures. Weak 
or easily crushed rock or other mineral particles that 
break down under the applied loads will cause 
changes in the internal stresses and a breakdown of 
the concrete. Rocks or mineral particles that are ab- 
sorptive or susceptible to swelling when saturated 
will disintegrate when -acted upon by different weath- 
er conditions. Freezing moisture causes expansion 
stresses which can easily rupture absorptive rocks. 
Radiant heat from the sun causing rock to swell fol- 
lowed by sudden cooling due to a shower and tem- 
perature drop causes shrinkage and a breakdown 
of some rocks. The aggregate must be chosen to with- 
stand these forces of nature. 

/. Deterioration. Deterioration of concrete in 
many cases can be traced to the aggregate. An ex- 
cessive amount of organic material in or on the ag- 
gregate prevents the cement paste from forming an 
adequate bond with the aggregate particles. A large 
percentage of clay or fine silts adhering to the ag- 
gregate may prevent the cement paste from reach- 
ing the particles. This will result in a structurally 
weak concrete which is also susceptible to breakdown 
by weathering. Washing the aggregate to remove the 
silts, clays, and organic material will avoid this 
problem. 

g. Chemical Composition. Chemical composition 
of the aggregate is also important. Any chemical 
reaction between aggregate and cement in the pres- 
ence of water reduces the hardening and cementing 
processes. Any reduction in the amount of water- 



Binent paste due to chemical reaction reduces the 
mount available to bond to the aggregate. This 
esult is similar to one caused by an insufficient 
mount of cement. 

-5. Desirable Properties of Concrete 

?o combine the ingredients correctly and to form the 
equired concrete, it is essential to know the proper- 
ies of both the fluid or plastic mix and the hardened 
oncrete. The hardened concrete must have adequate 
trength (as required by the design of the struc- 
ure), be watertight, and be resistant to the deteri- 
rating effects of weather or wear. The quality and 
haracter of the hardened concrete is greatly influ- 
nced by the properties of the mix when plastic. To 
ttain optimum quality, the plastic mix must be uni- 
orm, homogeneous, and workable. This permits 
facing the concrete without developing segregation, 
Loneycombing, or other defects in filling the forms 
r in producing the desired smooth, hard surface. 

a. Strength. This is the ability of the concrete to 
esist a load in compression, bending, or shear (sees. 
7 and VI below). The desired design strength is 
obtained by proportioning the mix of correctly 
graded aggregates, an adequate amount of cement 
o coat the surface area of the particles, and the 
>roper amount of mixing water. The most important 
nfluencing factor on strength is the ratio of water 
o cement (referred to as the W/C ratio) . For plastic 
md workable mixes, low values of the W/C ratio 
rive higher strengths. Practice shows that 2 1 / gallons 
s the minimum amount of water that will adequately 
lydrate one sack (94 pounds) of cement. This amount 
>f water is not sufficient to provide economically 
,he needed plasticity and workability of the freshly 
nixed concrete. Hence additional water must be used, 
rat the amount is held as low as consistent with 
workability requirements to produce the desired 
strength with economy of cement. Additional water 
vill thin the paste and coat more particles. This in- 
ireases the "yield" from each sack and produces a 
nore economical mix. Excessive amounts of water 
(too high a W/C ratio) weaken the paste by allow- 
ng the cement to harden while suspended in water 
without being in contact with the aggregate or other 
jement particles. In addition, much of this water 
svaporates and leaves holes or voids in the hardened 
concrete with a comparative reduction in strength. 
Viinimum and maximum amounts of water are spec- 
fied to assure an economical mix with no loss in 
strength. This ranges from 4 gallons to 8 gallons 
oer sack of cement. 

1}. Durability. The ability of concrete to resist the 
elements is called durability. The elements affecting 
concrete are wind, abrasion, freezing and thawing, 
vetting and drying, and the chemical action of salts. 
is the W/C ratio is increased (from 4 gallons per 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

sack) , more voids develop in the hardened concrete 
and more surface area is presented for the elements 
to act upon. This results in a less durable structure. 

c. Watertightness. A well-mixed, well-propor- 
tioned concrete presents a solid surface to water pene- 
tration. Small surface voids permit some water to 
enter, but the water soon meets a solid mass which 
prevents further penetration. As the W/C ratio is 
increased, the excess water forms more holes which 
eventually connect to form channels into and through 
the structure. The result is a porosity which permits 
water to pass. For watertightness, 6 gallons of water 
or less per sack of cement will meet the specifications. 

d. Workability. Workability is the relative ease or 
difficulty of placing and consolidating concrete. It 
is governed primarily by the amount of each aggre- 
gate in proportion to a given quantity of cement 
paste. As more aggregate is added to a given amount 
of paste, the mix becomes stiffer. The increased stiff- 
ness makes it more difficult to work the mix in the 
forms and around the reinforcing bars. The con- 
sistency needed depends upon the conditions under 
which the concrete must be placed and finished. Very 
dry and stiff mixes may be placed in many situations 
when high frequency vibration can be used to assist 
in consolidating and compacting the fresh concrete. 
In other situations, difficult placing conditions may 
require a very fluid mixture to fill narrow forms and 
to flow in between reinforcement. 

e. Homogeneity. Concrete is a fluid mix combining 
particles of different sizes. The heavier particles tend 
to settle through the mix faster than the lighter 
particles. The result is layers of different consistency 
through the concrete and poor quality. When prop- 
erly mixed and carefully handled, concrete particle 
separation (segregation) can be held to a minimum. 
The mix must have the proper proportion of cement- 
sand mortar to prevent the larger coarse aggregate 
particles from separating from the batch (segrega- 
tion) during mixing and placing. Proper mixing and 
careful handling during placing will hold such sege- 
gation to a minimum. One handling operation caus- 
ing particle separation is allowing the mix to drop 
(free fall) over a considerable distance. To minimize 
segregation, for drops in excess of 3 to 5 feet, bottom- 
dump buckets should be used to put concrete directly 
in place. See TM 5-742 for proper construction 
procedures. 

/. Uniformity. Uniformity refers not only to a 
single batch of mix, but to all batches for an entire 
project. The same amount of each ingredient should 
be mixed into each batch or a nonuniform structure 
will result. The design criteria would not be met in 
all sections of the structure and failure of these sec- 
tions could result. Proper supervision of each step in 
mixing and handling of batches will insure 
uniformity. 



I 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

4-6. Curing 

Concrete does not develop its full strength until 
the chemical process of curing called hydration is 
complete. Curing takes place over an extended period, 
the most critical portion of which is from the day 
of placement through the 10th day. The extent and 
rate of curing depends upon the presence of moisture 
and the correct temperature within the mix. 

a. Temperature. The ideal temperatures for con- 
crete work are between 55 F. and 70 F. Above this, 
rapid evaporation of moisture creates a problem. At 
lower temperatures, the curing or setting is delayed. 
Temperatures below 32 F. stop the hydration proc- 
ess. Since the chemical action gives off some heat, 
some method must be used to keep the heat within 
the structure during times of low temperatures. Cold 
weather construction may even require heating the 
ingredients or mix, and covering the emplaced con- 
crete or providing a heated inclosure. In hot weather, 
extra care is required to prevent a high temperature 
rise and too rapid drying of the fresh concrete. 
Moistening the aggregate with cool water will lower 
the generated temperature. To keep the water as cool 
as possible, reflective white or aluminum paint is 
applied to water supply lines and storage tanks. On 
massive construction such as dams and heavy retain- 
ing walls, the mixing water is often cooled artificially 
or ice is substituted for part of the water. This ice 
must be melted by the time the concrete is fully 
mixed and is ready to leave the mixer. Cement re- 
placement materials (such pozzolans as diatomaceous 
earth, pumicites, or fly ash) may be used to depress 
concrete temperature by reduction of heat of hydra- 
tion in a structure. However, pozzolans vary widely 
and may have adverse effects on strength, air content, 
and durability if used in excessive amounts. 

I. Moisture. Concrete curing depends upon chemi- 
cal action in the presence of water. Any moisture 
lost during the process by seepage or evaporation 
prevents complete hydration and development of op- 
timum strength and water-tightness. Saturating the 
subgrade on which the concrete will be placed will 
delay, if not prevent, seepage from removing mois- 
ture. Wood forms should be thoroughly wetted if they 
have not been treated otherwise. Covering the con- 
crete without marring the surface as soon as possible 
after finishing is one method to reduce evaporation. 
This covering may be some material such as straw, 
burlap, or plastic film, or it may be a chemical curing 
compound which is sprayed over the finished surface. 
After the initial set is attained, water can be applied 
directly to the surface to keep the hydration process 
in action. This water application can be part of the 
temperature control. The increase of concrete com- 
pressive strength with age is shown by the curves in 



figure 4-1. Note the long-time gain in strength ths 
occurs when proper temperature and moisture coi 
ditions are maintained. 



Compressive strength, percent 
of 28-day moist-cured concrete 
150 



In air after 7 days 

T " "" 

In air after 3 days 




Figure Jf~l. Increase of concrete compressive strength wi 
curing age. 

4-7. Admixtures 

Several chemical agents, or admixtures, are availab 
to improve workability, increase resistance to free 
ing and thawing, and compensate for inadequa 
curing time and conditions. 

a. Accelerators. Sometimes, it is desirable to a 
celerate the hydration reaction. The result is a high 
early strength and a higher rate of heat productio 
This combination can be useful in winter operatioi 
The addition of a chemical accelerator (general 
calcium, chloride) to the mix will produce the desir< 
conditions. The amount specified is 2 percent of tl 
weight of cement and rarely more than 3 percent. T] 
main reaction with calcium chloride occurs with 
the first 3 days. The ultimate strength of concrete 
not affected by the use of this chemical. 

&. Retarders. Retarders are used when excessive 
high heat and too rapid setting of concrete will pi 
vent full hydration. Many materials will retard t 
setting of concrete. Basically, they are types of fat 
acids, or starches and sugars. 

c. Workability Agents or Plasticizers. The woi 
ability of concrete is governed by the amount of a 
gregate in a mix. Where reduction of aggregate ( 
increase in cement) is impractical, workability 
increased by adding a plasticizer. Air-entraini 
agents, when used, are plasticizers. Other substan< 



ove) . Lime increases the cementing properties of 
nent, as do pozzolans combined with lime. Fly ash 
v ery inexpensive as compared to cement and is used 
a partial replacement (up to as much as 50 percent) 
the cement. It changes both the plastic and the 
rdened. properties of concrete. Fly ash improves 
>rkability and reduces segregation, bleeding, and 
a heat of hydration. The concrete will not be as 
itertight as a cement-only concrete, nor will it have 
much initial strength. Additional tests may have 
be made to determine when to remove the forms. 
5 final strength, however, will be as great as a 
tnent-only concrete. 

d. Densifiers. Dense concrete is required in some 
pes of construction, such as in prestressed struc- 
res. To achieve this density, the cement particles 
3 separated evenly throughout the mix, or at least 
evented from attaching to each other (flocculat- 
?) . A detergent admixture will disperse the parti- 
ss individually and will create a more uniform 
ste. These admixtures also reduce the formation 
a cement gel which expands at the early stages of 
'dration and pushes the particles apart thus in- 



e. Waterproofing Agents. Watertightness (para 4- 
o<?) can be controlled to a great extent by lowering 
the W/C ratio. This may not be practical, or even 
with a fairly low W/C ratio, capillaries may still 
form through the concrete. Densifying or using an 
accelerator like calcium chloride will improve the 
watertightness. 

/. Air-Entraining Agents. The greatest improve- 
ment in watertightness and resistance to deteriora- 
tion under freezing and thawing is obtained by 
incorporating 4 to 6 percent by volume of entrained 
air into the mix. Workability of fresh concrete is en- 
hanced by such entrained air. Air-entraining cement 
contains the necessary admixture. Soaps, oils, butyl 
stearate, some of the fine pozzolans, and several pro- 
prietary compounds are available for use as air- 
entraining admixtures with ordinary cements. These 
agents minimize the formation of capillaries and 
plug the tiny holes with a water-repellent or sealing 
material. They provide very small, uniformly-spaced, 
discrete air voids that prevent the buildup of damag- 
ing pressures from the expansion into ice of freezing 
water. 




Section II. AGGREGATE TESTING 



-8. Sampling 

order for the aggregate tests to be worthwhile, 
e sample secured for testing must be representative 

the supply of aggregates. If possible, samples 
ould represent the processed and ready-for-use 
gregate. Sufficient samples should be taken from 
e processing plant discharge to represent the ma- 
rial in the stockpile. The sample should consist of 
least four times as much material as is needed for 
e tests, and should be reduced to the size desired 
r testing by quartering. 

a. Stockpile Samples. Stockpile samples should be 
ken at or near the base, at about the middle, and 

the top of the pile. Three or four such samples 
ould be taken and recombined. A board shoved into 
e pile just above the point of sampling will prevent 
e material above the sampling point from falling 

sifting into the sample. 

b. Pit Samples. Unprocessed sources of sand and 
avel should, be sampled by channeling exposed 
ces or in pits, if exposures are not available. Care 
ould be taken to insure that the samples include 
ily those materials which are below the overburden 
strip zone. 

-9. Gradation 

sieve analysis indicates whether an aggregate is 
arse or fine and whether it is evenly or unequally 
stributed between the larger and smaller sizes. This 



information is useful in deciding whether the aggre- 
gate will make good concrete. See table 4-2 for ac- 
ceptable gradation limits. 

Table J^-2. Desirable Gradation for Aggregates in Concrete 




a. Coarse aggregate. 

Sieve size in. S 

3 
2 
1 

No. 4 

b. Fine aggregate. 

Sieve size U.S. Standard 

4 
8* 
10 
16* 
20 
30* 
40 
50* 
60 
100 



Percent passing indicated sieve 

& m i x M 

No. 357 No. 467 No. 57 No. 87 No. 7 



100 
88 
76 


100 
86 


100 










61 


69 


81 


100 








44 


49 


58 


72 


100 






33 


38 


44 


55 


76 


100 




21 


24 


28 


35 


48 


63 


100 


14 


16 


18 


23 


32 


41 


65 



Percentages by weight passing 

95-100 
80-100 
75-95 
50-85 
40-75 
25-60 
20-50 
10-30 
10-25 
2-1Q 




*ASTM C 33 specifies U.S. Standard sieve sizes No. 8, 16, 30, and 50 instead of 
No. 10, 20, 40 and 60. Both ranges are provided for convenience. 



I 



I 



li/2-inch sieve, 58 percent passing the 1-inch sieve, 
etc. Acceptable aggregates should be near to these 
gradation limits, say within 5 percent of the fig- 
ures given in the table. 

a. Apparatus, Test Procedure, and Calculations. 
The apparatus, test procedure, and calculations re- 
quired to determine the gradation of aggregates for 
portland cement concrete are the same as explained 
in paragraph 3-206, except that the No. 4 sieve is 
taken as the dividing line between fine and coarse 
aggregate. The size of sample required in the sieve 
analysis of fine aggregate is 300 grams. The result 
of this test is a gradation curve for the aggregate 
concerned. 

b. Material Finer Than No. WO Sieve. In deciding 
whether an aggregate will make good concrete, it is 
important to know the amount of material passing 
the No. 200 sieve. The apparatus, test procedure, and 
calculations are described in paragraph 4-11&. Fine 
material, not to exceed 3 to 4 percent of the total ag- 
gregate weight, is not harmful to concrete. For some 
purposes, a small amount of such fines may improve 
the workability. 

c. Fineness Modulus. The fineness modulus is an 
empirical factor that gives a relative measure of the 
proportions of fine and coarse particles in a fin ag- 
gregate. The fineness modulus does not give any idea 
of the graduation of the material although the 
process is similar. A 500 gram sample of sand is 
sieved through a series of sieves (No. 4, 8*, 16*, 30*, 
50*, and 100). The weight retained on each sieve is 
converted into a cumulative weight and a cumulative 
percentage retained, starting with the No. 4 sieve. 
The sum of the six percentages is divided by 100 and 
results in the fineness modulus. Fineness modulus de- 
termines the volume of coarse aggregate per unit 
volume of concrete when being considered as a factor 
in the mixture. The fineness modulus values are in- 
terpreted as follows : 

Fine sand =2.20-2.60 
Medium sand =2.60-2. 90 
Coarse sand =2.90-3.20 

4-10. Specific Gravity, Absorption, and Surface 
Moisture 

These tests must be performed on the aggregates be- 
fore the necessary calculations can be made to design 
the concrete mixture. In aggregates used in portland 
cement concrete, measurements are made of the bulk 
specific gravity with the aggregates in a saturated, 
surface-dry condition. Specific gravity determina- 
tions are thus based upon determinations of the total 
volume occupied by the aggregate particles, includ- 



calculation of the amount of mixing water to be 
used in concrete mixture. 

a. Apparatus. The following equipment is neces- 
sary to perform tests for bulk specific gravity, per- 
cent absorption, and surface moisture : 

Chapman flask 

Concrete test apparatus, Dunagan 

Cone pycnometer 

Fan, electric 

Gloves, lineman's 

Mold, cone, water-absorption 

Oven, electric 

Pan, bake 

Rod, tamping, steel, flat-head 

Scoop, kitchen 

Shovel, square-point 

Spatula, 4-inch 

The water-absorption cone and tamping rod are 
shown in figure 4-2. The Dunagan concrete test ap- 
paratus is illustrated in figure 3-10. 

&. The 'bulk specific gravity of coarse aggregate in 
a saturated, surface-dry condition is determined as 
follows : 

(1) The Dunagan concrete test apparatus is 
assembled. 

(2) A representative sample weighing approxi- 
mately 5,000 grams is secured. 

(3) The sample is immersed in water and al- 
lowed to soak for not less than 24 hours. 

(4) The sample is removed from the water and 
rolled in a large, absorbent cloth until all visible 
films of water are removed, although the surfaces of 
the particles will still appear to be damp. The larger 
fragments may be wiped individually. 




*See note in paragraph 2-24. 



Figure 4~%- Water-absorption cone and tamping rod. 



face-dry aggregate is weighed out. To do this, add a 
'2 kg slotted weight to the left hanger and pour the 
sample into a scoop on the right-hand pan until bal- 
anced. Remove the 2 kg weight and pour the sample 
into the bucket. Place the spare scoop, clean and dry, 
on the right-hand pan and balance with weights. This 
weight is the immersed weight. 

(0) The bulk specific gravity is calculated as 
follows : 

Bulk specific gravity (saturated, surface-dry condi- 
tions) = 

2,000 

2,000 immersed weight 

c. The test procedure for determing the bulk spe- 
cific gravity of -fine aggregate in a saturated, surface- 
dry condition is as follows: 

(1) The Dunagan concrete test apparatus is 
assembled. 

(2) A representative sample weighing approxi- 
mately 3,000 grams is secured. 

(3) The sample is immersed in water and al- 
lowed to soak for 24 hours. 

(4) At the end of the 24-hour soaking period, 
the sample is spread on a flat surface and stirred fre- 
quently so as to obtain uniform drying. Drying is 
continued until the sample approaches a moisture- 
free surface condition. 

(5) The conical mold is placed large end down 
on a smooth surface and rilled loosely with the aggre- 
gate, after which the surface of the aggregate is 
tamped lightly 25 times with the metal rod. 

(6) The conical mold is lifted vertically from 
the sand. If free moisture is present, the cone of fine 
aggregate will retain its shape. 

(7) Drying is continued, accompanied by con- 
stant stirring, and the cone tests (5) and (6) repeated 
at frequent intervals until the cone of fino aggregate 
slumps upon removal of the mold. This indicates that 
the fine aggregate has reached a surface-dry 
condition. 

(8) Exactly 1,000 grams of the saturated, sur- 
face-dry sample is weighed out. This may be con- 
veniently done by placing a 1-kg slotted weight on 
the left hanger and the sample in a scoop in the right- 
hand side. 

(9) Using the Dunagan apparatus, the weight 
in water of this 1,000 grams of saturated, surface-dry 
sample is obtained immediately. This is recorded as 
"immersed -weight." 

(10) The specific gravity is calculated as 
follows : 

Bulk specific gravity (saturated, surface-dry) 

= 1,000 

~ 1, 000 immersed weight 



absorption of either coarse or fine aggregate is as 
follows: 

(1) Representative samples of the fine and 
coarse aggregates are secured. The sample of fine 
aggregate should weigh approximately 500 grams. 
Coarse aggregate which contains no pieces larger 
than iy 2 inches should be represented by at least 
3,000 grams, while coarse aggregate which contains 
pieces larger than iy 2 inches should be represented by 
at least 5,000 grams. 

(2) The samples of fine aggregate and coarse 
aggregate are immersed in water. The fine aggregate 
is allowed to soak for 2 hours and the coarse aggre- 
gate for at least 24 hours. 

(3) The samples are dried to a saturated, sur- 
face-dry condition, following the methods described 
in the specific gravity test procedures (c above) . 

(4) The weights of the samples in a saturated, 
surface-dry condition are obtained and recorded. 

(5) The samples are dried to constant weight in 
the electric oven, maintained at a temperature be- 
tween 100 C. and 110 C. (212 F. and 230 F.). 

(6) The oven-dry weights of the samples are ob- 
tained and recorded. 

(7) The percent absorption is calculated by the 
use of the following formula : 



(100) 






Where: 

2= percent absorption by the aggregate, 
SSD= weight of saturated, surface-dry sample, 

grams, and 
D= oven-dry weight of sample, grams. 

(8) The percent absorption represents the 
moisture content (oven-dry basis) of the fine aggre- 
gate when the aggregate is in a saturated, surface-dry 
condition. 

e. Surface moisture is the water which is present 
in the fine aggregate, over the above that which cor- 
responds to a saturated, surface-dry condition. This 
water will become part of the mixing water when the 
fine aggregate is used in making concrete. The amount 
of mixing water used must be corrected to allow for 
its presence. The test described in this paragraph is 
used only if the total moisture content of the aggre-, 
gate is greater than the total moisture content cor- 
responding to a saturated, surface-dry condition. By 
definition, the total moisture content of the aggregate 
in a saturated, surface-dry condition is the percent 
absorption. If the bulk specific gravity (saturated, 
surface-dry) has not been determined previously, this 
determination is made, using the procedure given in 
c above. The test procedure for determining the 



amount 01 surrace moisture present 111 nne aggregate 
is as follows: 

(1) Exactly 1,000 grams of the sample on which 
the surface moisture determination is desired is 
weighed out. The sample will be representative of the 
condition of the fine aggregate at the time the test 
is made. 

(2) Using the Dunagan apparatus, the weight 
of this 1,000-gram sample immersed in water is ob- 
tained. This weight is recorded as (W 2 ). 

(3) The amount of surface moisture is calcu- 
lated from the following formula: 

rw TO- ^ S P Gr 



v ' ri "*>SpGr-l 
Where: 

SM= grams of surface moisture in sample 
Wi= weight of a 1,000-gram sample of saturated 
surface-dry material immersed in water 
(taken from data for bulk specific gravity 
determination, (c(9) above), grams 
W 2 = immersed weight of the 1,000-gram test, sample, 

(2) above, grams, and 
Sp Gr= bulk specific gravity (saturated, surface-dry). 

(4) The surface moisture expressed as a percent 
(Pa.) of the saturated surface dry weight of fine 
aggregate is 



P 



SM 



1000 SM 



(100) 



(5) The surface moisture expressed as a percent 
(P 2 ) of the weight of wet fine aggregate is 



/. An alternative determination of surface mois- 
ture on fine aggregate is obtained by drying com- 
pletely a sample having known weight of wet fine 
aggregate, and calculating total moisture as: 

rn . -i , wet weight dry weight ,, AAX 
Total moisture= - ~ - r-~ - & (100) 

dry weight 

The absorption, expressed as percent of dry weight 
(d(T) above) is subtracted from this total moisture 
:o give the surface moisture in percent of dry weight. 
Drying of this sample is accomplished in an oven 
naintained at a temperature between 100 C. and 
110 C. (212 F. and 230 F.) or by placing the 
ample in a metal pan, pouring alcohol over it, and 
mrning off the alcohol to evaporate the water. 

l-l 1 . Tests for Impurities 

The quality of the aggregate is another important 
onsideration. The presence of organic material, ex- 
essive quantities of clay or silt, and shale or other 
rater-absorbing particles can be detrimental to the 
oncrete strength, watertightness, and durability. 



permissions minis ior u.eieuerious auo- 
stances in fine and coarse aggregates are given in 
tables 4-3 and 4r-4. 

Tattle 4-3. Limits for Deleterious Substances in Fine 
Aggregate for Concrete 

Maximum, 

percent 

bj/ weight 

of total 

Item sample 

Clay lumps 1.0 

Material finer than No. 200 sieve : 

Concrete subject to abrasion a 3.0 

All other concrete a 5.0 

Coal and lignite : 

Where surface appearance of concrete is of im- 
portance 0.5 

All other concrete 1.0 

In the case of manufactured sand, if the material finer than the 
No. 200 sieve consists of the dust of fracture, essentially free from 
clay or shale, these limits may be Increased to 5 and 7 percent, 
respectively. 

Table 4~4- Limits for Deleterious Substances in Coarse 
Aggregate for Concrete 

Maximum, 

percent 

by weight 

of total 
Item sample 

Clay lumps 0.25 

Soft particles 5.0 

Chert as an impurity * that will disintegrate in five 
cycles of the soundness test, or 50 cycles of freezing 
and thawing (0 F. to 40 F.) b ; or that has a spe- 
cific gravity, saturated-surface-dry, or less than 2.35 : 

Severe exposure 1.0 

Mild exposure 5.0 

Material finer than No. 200 sieve c 1.0 

Coal and lignite : 

Where surface appearance of concrete is of im- 
portance 0.5 

All other concrete 1.0 

1 These limitations apply only to aggregates in which chert appears 
as an impurity. They are not applicable to gravels that are pre- 
dominantly chert. Limitations on soundness of such aggregates must 
be based on service records in the environment in which they are 
used. 

* Disintegration Is considered to be actual splitting or breaking 
as determined by visual examination. 

c In the case of crushed aggregates, if the material finer than the 
No. 200 sieve consists of the dust of fracture, essentially free from 
clay or shale, this percentage may be increased to 1.5. 

a. Test for Material Finer Than No. 200 Sieve. 
The presence of fine particles of soil and clay can 
affect the concrete in two ways. The added surface 
area of the fine particles picks up the cement paste 
and reduces the amount available to bind and hold 
the aggregate. The small particles also tend to float 
up to the surface when the concrete is finished (espe- 
cially when wet mixes are used). This results in a 
surface covered by hair cracks and a tendency for 
the fines to dust off when dry. 

(1) Apparatus. Two sieves (No. 16* and No. 
200) and a container large enough to held the sample 
covered with water are required. The container 



*See note In paragraph 2-24. 



71- 



-12 



MO 



should allow vigorous shaking without loss of either 
sample or water. 
(2) Procdure. 

(a) Select a representative sample as follows : 



Approx. minimum 
weight (kg) 



fominal maximum 
sieve size 

sTo. 4 0.5 

4-in. 2. 5 

L%-in. or larger 5. 

(6) Oven-dry the sample at 110 C. (230 F.) 
ind weigh it. 

(c) Place the dry material into the container 
ind cover it with water. 

(d) Agitate the material vigorously to bring 
;he fine portion into suspension. 

(e) Decant the water and run it through the 
sieves. Any material retained on the sieves is returned 
:o the sample container. 

(/) Repeat the operation until the water runs 
jlear. 

(g) Oven dry the sample ait 110 C. (230 F.) , 
X) a constant weight. 

(h) Weigh the dry sample and record the 
weight. 

(3) Computations. The percent fines can now 
t>e calculated as follows : 

Percent fines = 

3riginal dry weight dry weight after washing. ... 
original dry weight 

(4) Expedient test. The method described above 
is accurate but time consuming. For a quick and ap- 
proximately correct determination, a 1000 g repre- 
sentative sample is obtained. About 2 inches is placed 
into a quart mason jar which is then filled three- 
fourths full with water. The mixture is shaken vigor- 
ously and then allowed to stand for 1 hour. The silt 
ind clay layer will form on top of the sand. If the 
[ayer is more than % inch thick, the material has 
more than 3 percent fines and should be washed 
before using. 

>. Test for Clay Lumps. This test is performed on 
the material remainig after completion of the deter- 
mination of material finer than the No. 200 sieve. 
The cleaned material is oven- dried at 110 C. 
(230 F.) , weighed, and separated into sample sizes. 
For fine aggregate, a 100 gram sample of material 
3oarser than the No. 16 sieve is required. Coarse 
aggregates are separated into four size ranges as fol- 
lows : No. 4 to % inch ; % inch to % inch ; % inch to 
iy 2 inch; and over iy 2 inch. Minimum sample 
weights for these four size ranges are : 1000 grams, 
2000 grams, 3000 grams, and 5000 grams respectively. 
The tests are performed as follows : 

(1) Spread the sample in a thin layer on the 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

bottom of a flat pan and examine it for clay lumps. 
Break up all such particles by crushing them be- 
tween the fingers. Remove the residue from the 
broken clay lumps by sieving dry over the appropri- 
ate one of the following sieves : fine aggregate No. 
20; No. 4 to % inch No. 8; % to % inch No. 4; 
% to V/2 inch No. 4; over iy 2 inch No. 4. Weigh 
the residue retained on the sieve ( W 2 ) . 

(2) Calculate the percentage of clay lumps as 
follows : 



%<?=' 



^(100) 

Where: 

%C= percentage of clay lumps 
Wi= weight of sample 

^2= weight of residue after clay lumps are 
removed 

c. Test for Undersirable Lightweight Material. 
Soft, laminated pieces of aggregate such as chert or 
shale are 'detrimental to concrete. Coal and lignite 
also are harmful and are distinguished from other 
lightweight materials by the brownish-black or black 
color of the particles. Visual examination of the 
coarse aggregate will often show these minerals. The 
amount of these minerals in an aggregate can be 
determined by immersing the aggregate in a liquid 
with a specific gravity that will allow the shale and 
other light particles to float, and the heavier par- 
ticles to sink. Test procedures are as follows : 

(1) Place a portion of the sample, dried to 
constant weight, into a container partly filled with 
a heavy liquid. A saturated solution of zinc chloride 
at room temperature 26.5 C. (T8 F.) has a specific 
gravity of 1.95. This or any other liquid with this 
specific gravity can be used. 

( 2 ) Agitate the mixture five times. 

(3) Skim, off the lighter particles. 

(4) Separate the liquid and pebbles and repeat 
the operation. 

(5) When all the undesirable lightweight ma- 
terial has been removed, wash, dry, and weigh the 
remaining material. The difference between the final 
weight and the original dried weight (expressed as a 
percentage of the total weight) represents the un- 
desirable material in the aggregate. 

d. Color Test for Organic Matter. Any sand that 
gives a color darker than the standard of this test 
probably contains an excess of organic matter which 
will give trouble in concrete. It is possible that the 
organic matter can be removed by washing; if not, 
better sand should be obtained. If neither of these 
things can be done, it will be necessary to use a 
lower water cement ratio and control the concrete 
production carefully in order to obtain the desired 
strength. 



(1) Apparatus. The following items are re- 
quired for the conduct of this test : 

Acid, tannic 

Alcohol, ethyl 

Bottle, prescription, 12 ounce, graduated 

Cylinder, 100 cc, graduated 

Plate, color 

Sodium 'hydroxide, caustic soda 

This apparatus is shown in figure 4-3. 

(2) Test procedure. A reference standard color 
solution is prepared by adding 2.5 mililiters of 2- 
percent solution of tannic acid in 10 percent alcohol 
to 97.5 milliliters of a 3-percent sodium hydroxide 
solution. The 3-percent sodium hydroxide solution 
is made by dissolving I ounce of sodium hydroxide in 
enough water to make 32 fluid ounces. The 2 percent 
tannic acid solution is made by adding 10 milliliters 
of 190 proof alcohol and 2 grams of tannic acid 
powder to 90 milliliters of water. This solution is 
poured into a 12 ounce bottle, stoppered, shaken 
vigorously, and allowed to stand for 24 hours. 

(a) A representative sample of about 500 
grams of the material to be tested is obtained. 

(b) A 12-ounce graduated bottle is filled to 
the 4y 2 ounce mark with the sample to be tested. A 
3-percent solution of sodium hydroxide in water is 
added until the volume of sand and water after shak- 
ing is 7 liquid ounces. The bottle is then stoppered, 
shaken vigorously, and allowed to stand for 24 hours. 

(c) After the standard color solution and the 
test sample have been allowed to stand 24 hours, the 
color of the referenced solution is compared with the 
color of the clear liquid above the test sample. 

(3) Evaluation of results. If the liquid above 
the sample is darker than the standard color solution, 
the sand may contain organic impurities which will 
reduce the strength of the concrete in which the sand 
is used. 

(4) Alternate test procedure. After the test 
sample has been prepared as described above and the 
sample set aside for 24 hours, the color of the liquid 
above the sample may be compared with the colors 
given in the standard color plate. A decision may 
then be made as to whether the sand contains an 
excessive amount of organic matter. 

412. Test for Soundness 

Soundness is the property of resisting disintegration. 
Some aggregates disintegrate when they absorb 
water and are exposed to a freezing and thawing 
cycle. Others containing shale can disintegrate under 
load pressures. The following test will indicate the 
presence of these deleterious materials. 

a. Freeze-Thaw Test. In one form of this test, the 
aggregate is saturated with water and subjected to 
freezing and thawing cycles. The amount of breakage 



is measured to evaluate the soundness of the material. 
These tests are used primarily for research into the 
durability of concrete and aggregates. 

&. Salt Test. The freeze-thaw operation requires 
considerable equipment and has generally been re- 
placed by a simpler one that requires less equipment. 
This simple test uses solutions of special salts in 
which the aggregate is immersed and saturated. The 
crystals of these salts are permitted to grow and 
create a disruption similar to freezing water. The 
salts used are sodium sulfate (glauber salt) and 
magnesium sulfate (epsom salt). This test is 
performed as follows : 

(1) Secure a representative sample. The sample 
must be separated on the sieves listed in table 4-5 
until the minimum amount, as indicated, is retained 
on each sieve. If there is an indication that there is 
less than 5 percent of any sieved size in the entire 
sample, that size need not be tested for soundness. 
Instead, the average of the next two immediate 
sizes can be assumed to be representative of the 
nontested size. 



Table 4-5. Minimum Amounts of Material for Aggregate 

Soundness T.est 



Fine aggregate: 

No. 50 

No. 30 

No. 16 

No. 8 

No. 4 



Sieve size Minimum amount for testing 

100 g. 

100 g. 

100 g. 

100 g. 

Coarse aggregate (after all sizes finer than No. 4 are removed) : 
No. 4 300 g. 

'%-. Yzin 33% 

Yz in %in 67% 

%in 1 in 33% 

[lin l^in 67% 

in 2 in 50% 

n 2X 2 in..__ 50% 

Larger sizes (1-inch spread in sieves sizes) 3000 g. 



1000 g. 
1500 g. 



3000 
^uuu 



(2) Immerse the aggregate fractions in satu- 
rated solutions of the specified salts for a period of 
16 to 18 hours. 

(3) Oven dry the aggregate at a temperature of 
105 to 110 C. (221 F. to 230 F.). 

(4) Repeat the cycle as specified by the engineer 
in charge (generally 5 cycles are sufficient) . 

(5) Wash the fractions until all the salt is re- 
moved. Adding 20-30 g of barium chloride to the 
wash water will cause a precipitate to form if any salt 
is left. Continue washing until no precipitate is seen. 

(6) Dry the washed fractions to a constant 
weight and place each one, in turn, on its designated 
sieve which is held over a pan. The amount passing 
the sieve is weighed and is called the "loss". It repre- 
sents the particles that are chipped off during the 
test. 




SODIUM HYDROXIDE TANNIC ACID COLOR PLATE 

Figure 4-3. Apparatus, color test for organic matter. 



jZj O 

o a 

f CO o 

1 o 



\ 
GRADUATED CYLINDER 



(7) Convert the loss of each fraction into a per- 
centage of the total sample weight. 

(8) The report shall include the following 
information : 

(a) Total weighted loss for the sample. 
(&) For particles larger than % inch, the 
number of particles before and after the test. 

(9) The permissible limits are as follows: 

(a) Sand Total weighted loss not greater 
than 10 percent if sodium sulfate is used or 15 percent 
if magnesium sulfate is used. 

(5) Coarse aggregate Total weighted loss 
not greater than 12 percent if sodium sulfate is used 
or 18 percent if magnesium sulfate is used. 

(c) Aggregates failing to meet these require- 
ments are rejected unless they pass an actual freeze- 
thaw test. 



(10) Example: 

Fraction tested (passing No. 30 retained No. 50) 

Weight at start 100. g 

Weight at end 95. 8 g 



Loss 4. 2 g 

4.2 

Percentage loss of fraction = X 100 =4.2 percent 

100 

Sieve analysis indicated that this fraction is 26 per- 
cent of the total sample. Adjusting fraction loss to 
total sample : 

Percentage loss (No. 30 No. 50 fraction) of total 
=4.2X26=1.09 percent. This result signifies that 
1.09 percent of the sand sample is lost in the No. 30 
to No. 50 range. To complete the procedure, all size 
fraction losses (in percent of total) are added and 
reported as the soundness test weighted loss. 



Section HI. IDENTIFICATION OF CEMENTS 



413. Introduction 



The positive identification of cement, because of 
the very wide variety of related or similar-appearing 
materials, requires a complete chemical analysis and 
physical tests. The different types of cement are dis- 
cussed in paragraph 4-2. 

a. Every effort should -be made to identify the un- 
known material directly by obtaining and, if neces- 
sary, translating, all labels, tags, shipping docu- 
ments, manufacturing sheets, and all other papers 
which may contain applicable information. When 
this does not produce results, the simple procedures 
outlined in the following paragraphs generally will 
supply enough information to permit a tentative, 
if not conclusive, identification. 

Z>. The following items will be required for some 
of the described tests : 

Kerosene 

Balance 2000 gram 

Graduate, glass 1000 ml 



Volumetric flask 500 ml 
Small metal funnel 
Pans or evaporating dishes 
Square glass plates 4" x 4" 
Spatula 4 inch 

414. Tests 

The tests given below are made to identify whether 
the material is a cement, and then to attempt an 
identification of its type. 

a. Hardening Test. A small sample of the material 
is selected and mixed with enough water to make a 
plastic paste of a consistency similar to that generally 
used in cement mortars. It is then molded into a pat 
about 3 inches in diameter and % inch thick. The 
paste should be observed several times an hour to 
determine whether or not the paste is setting (hard- 
ening). The cement has attained a final set when 
the surface is hard enough to be unmarked when a 
pencil point or fingernail is pressed against it with 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

moderate force. If it sets within 1 to 10 hours, the 
material is probably a cement. 

6. Color. If it has been fairly welll established that 
the material in question is a cement, color may 
serve as a means of further classification. If the 
material is gray, it is likely to be a portland cement; 
if brownish gray, it may be a natural cement; if 
black, an aluminous cement ; and if white, it probably 
is hydraulic lime, plaster, or possibly white portland 
cement. 

c. Specific Gramity. The approximate specific 
gravity may be determined and used to provide an 
additional clue to the identity of the material. The 
approximate specific gravities of several types of 
cement are shown below, and may be determined 
by the outlined procedure. 

(1) Typical values. 

Speoiflc gravity ProlaUe material 

More than 3.3 Iron-ore cement 

3.0 to 3.3 Portland cement 

2.7 to 3.0 Natural cement 

2.2 to 2.4 Plaster of parts 

(2) Calibration of flask. A calibrated 500-ml. 
flask is accurately weighed in a dry condition. The 
flask is filled with water exactly to the calibration 
mark. The weight of the flask and water is deter- 
mined. The water is poured out and the flask thor- 
oughly dried. The flask is then filled to the calibration 
mark with kerosene and the weight determined. In 
expedient conditions, light fuel oil may be substituted 
for the kerosene. 

(3) Test procedure. The weight of a sample 
(about 500 grams) of the material to be identified is 
determined as accurately as possible. The sample is 
placed in the calibrated, clean, dry flask and enough 
kerosene poured into the flask to cover it. The mix- 
ture is stirred thoroughly to remove all the air. Any 
air that is not removed by stirring will tend to give 
too low a value for specific gravity. The flask is filled 
to the calibration mark with kerosene, and the weight 
of the flask, sample, and kerosene determined. All 



4-13 

weighings should be done at approximately the same 
temperature. 

(4) Calculations . The approximate specific 
gravity of the cement may be calculated by use of the 
following formula: Specific gravity = 



( 



-E \G-B 



Where: 

A weight of the sample 
B= weight of the flask, empty 
0= weight of the flask with water 
J9= weight of the flask with kerosene 
E= weight of the flask, with sample and kero- 
sene. 

All weights normally would be in grams. 

4-15. Air-Entraining Cement 

To determine whether or not a given material con- 
tains an air-entraining agent, a sample is placed in a 
glass cylinder to a depth of about 1 inch. Water is 
added to a depth of about 6 inches and the cylinder 
and its contents shaken vigorously. If a considerable 
volume of stable, persistent foam forms on the sur- 
face, the cement probably contains an air-entraining 
agent (para 4-7/). 

4-16. High-Early Strength Cement 

High-early strength cement (Type III, para 4-2c) 
may be recognized by making a batch of concrete 
using the unknown cement in parallel with a similar 
batch which uses a known cement. Concrete which 
contains high-early strength cement will usually 
harden in less time than concrete which contains reg- 
ular portland cement. High-early strength cement 
concrete, if molded into standard concrete beams and 
tested after 3 days for flexural strength, should have 
a modulus of rupture more than 150 pounds per 
square inch higher than similar specimens containing 
regular portland cement concrete. 



Section IV. PROPORTIONING OF MIXES 



4-17. Discussion 

Cement, water, and fine and coarse aggregates are the 
basic materials used in the production of concrete. 
Certain admixtures (para 4-7) are used occasionally 
to meet special requirements. Design of a concrete mix 
consists of determining the correct amount of each 
material to provide a mixture of concrete having the 
necessary consistency or workability in the freshly- 
mixed condition and having the desired strength and 
durability characteristics in the hardened condition. 
The workability required depends upon mixing, 
placing, and finishing conditions of the job and is 



specific in terms of the slump test (para 4-23). 
Strength requirements, specified by the engineer for 
the particular construction, and exposure conditions 
determine the correct water-cement ratio to be used. 
Gradation of the fine and coarse aggregates is the 
factor that controls the proportion of each in the 
total amount of aggregate. The maximum size of 
coarse aggregate particle is limited by the dimensions 
of the structure being built (para 4-40). Coarse ag- 
gregate size and workability requirements establish 
the amount of water needed, and hence the water- 
cement ratio fixes the required quantity of cement in 



(the cement factor, in 94 pound bags per cubic yard 
of concrete) is specified. The care and intelligence 
used in proportioning these ingredients are evident 
in the finished product ; poor concrete or quality con- 
crete. There are two methods of proportioning avail- 
able to the military engineer, the book method and 
the trial batch method. 

a. Book Method of Miss Proportioning. Concrete 
may be made with a wide variation in quality. The 
considerations which the proportioning must follow 
are given under the desirable properties of concrete 
(para 4-5 ) . The selections of the correct water-cement 
ratio, the allowable slump, and the type and size of 
aggregate are all part of the design function. Having 
all of the above information, the design engineer can 
use prepared tables to establish the weights of ma- 
terials to be used and the expected yield for a one sack 
of cement batch. Mixes so proportioned may require 
modifications in the field to achieve the desired qual- 
ity. This method is discussed further in paragraph 
4-19. 

b. Trial Batch Method, of Mix Proportioning. The 
trial batch method is a simple field method which 
incorporates many of the best features of several 
other methods, and it may be used under almost any 
circumstances. The trial batch method is capable of 
producing, with a minimum of tests, a satisfactory 
mix using the materials which will be used in the 
project. Such trial mixes are relatively small batches 
made with laboratory precision to establish the pro- 
portions of materials that produce a mix of required 
workability characteristics, density, and economy. 
The minimum cement content or water-cement ratio, 
maximum size of aggregate, air content, and consis- 
tency (slump) are selected to meet job requirements. 
Then mixes are made in which the aggregate propor- 
tions are adjusted by trial until the most economical 
proportions that provide a dense, workable mixture 
are found. The final quantities of materials for the 
field mixes are calculated by using a ratio from the 
quantities used in the selected trial batch. See para- 
graph 4-20 for detailed discussion. 



The strength required of the concrete, the exposure 
conditions, and the kind and size of members to be 
constructed must be known in order to design a mix 
having the needed characteristics. Selection of the 
water-cement ratio fixes, to a large extent, the quality 
of the hardened concrete. Total quantity of cement 
and water then is found from the workability re- 
quirements. Finally, aggregate proportions are 
determined. 

a. Water- Cement Ratio. Recommended values of 
water-cement ratio for various strength and exposure 
requirements are given in tables 4-6 and 4-7, respec- 
tively. To attain the desired compressive strength of 
concrete, the water-cement ratio should not exceed the 
value shown in table 4-6. The type of structure and 
degree of exposure also set maximum limits on water- 
cement ratio as given in table 4-7. The smaller ratio 
derived from these two tables governs the mix design. 

Table 4~6. Compres&ive Strength of Concrete for Various 
Water-Cement Ratios 

Probable compressing strength at 8 days, p,s.i, 
Water-cement ratio, gal 
per bag of cement 

4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 

&. Consistency. Workability or consistency of 
freshly-mixed concrete is measured by the slump test 
(para 4-23). Recommended slumps (in inches) for 
various types of construction are given in table 4-8. 
The stiffness of the mix is inversely proportional to 
slump. In the absence of any other criteria, concrete 
should be placed as "stiff" as possible, yet maintain- 
ing a homogeneous, voidless mass. 

c. Water Content. The amount of mixing water re- 
quired for the desired slump depends upon maximum 
size of aggregate. In table 4-9 are given approximate 
water requirements in gallons per cubic yard of con- 
crete for concrete mixes made from different sizes 
of aggregate for ranges in slump. 



Non-air-entrained concrete 


Air-entrained concrete 


6,000 


4,800 


5,000 


4,000 


4,000 


3,200 


3,200 


2,600 


2,500 


2,000 


2,000 


1,600 





TM 5-S30/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



4-15 



Table 4-7. Maximum Permissible Water- Cement Ratios for Different Types of Structures and Degrees of Exposure* 



Exposure condi t ions '"'-' 



Severe wide range in tempera- 
ture or frequent alternation? 

of freezing and thawing 
(air-entrained concrete only) 
(ga 1 Ions / sack) 



Mild temperature rarely below 
freezing, or rainy, or arid 
(ga I Ions / sack) 



Type of structures 



In 
air 



At water line or within 
range of fluctuating 
water level or spray 



In 
ai r 



At water line or within 
range of fluctuating 
water level or spray 







In 
fresh 
water 


In sea water 
or in contact 
with sulfatest 


In 
fresh 
water 


In sea water 
or in contact 
wi th sul f ates t 


A. 
B. 


Thin sections such as 
reinforced piles and pipe 5-5 
Bridge decks 5 


5 
5 


4.5 6 
4.5 5.5 


5.5 
5.5 


4.5 
5 



Thin sections such as 

railings, curbs, sills, 

ledges, ornamental or 

architectural concrete, 

and all sections with 

less than 1-in. concrete 

cover over reinforcement 5.5 

Moderate sections, such 

as retaining wal Is , 

abutments, piers, 

girders, beams 6 

Exterior portions of 

heavy (mass) sections 6.5 

Concrete deposited by 

tremie under water 

Concrete slabs laid on 
the ground 6 

Pavements 5.5 

Concrete protected from 
the weather, interiors 
of buildings, concrete 
below ground ft 

Concrete which will later 
be protected by enclosure 
or backfill but which 
may be exposed to freezing 
and thawing for several 
years before such 
protection is offered 6 



5.5 
5.5 
5 



tt 
tt 



tt 
6 



tt 



5-5 

6 
6 

5 



tt 



"Adapted from Recommended Practice for Selecting Proportions for Concrete (ACI 613-54). 

-''" Air-entrained concrete should be used under all conditions involving severe exposure 
and may be used under mild exposure conditions to improve workability of the mixture. 

tSoi 1 or groundwater containing sulfate concentrations of more than 0.2 percent. For 
moderate sulfate resistance, the tricalcium aluminate content of the cement should be 
limited to 8 percent , and for high-sulfate resistance to 5 percent. At equal cement 
contents, air-entrained concrete is significantly more resistant to sulfate attack than 
non-air-entrained concrete. 

ttWater-cement ratio should be selected on basis of strength and workability requirements, 
but minimum cement content should not be less than 470 Ib per cubic yard. 



Reinforced foundation walls and footings. . 
Plain footings, caissons, and substructure 

walls - 
Reinforced slabs, beams, and walls _______ 

Building coUimnL - ________________ 

Pavements _________________ ..... ______ 

Heavy mass construction _______________ 

Bridge decks __________________________ 

Sidewalks, driveways, and slabs on ground. 



Maximum .\fmimum 
2 
l 


3 

3 
2 
2 
3 
3 



water requirement (table 4-9) and water-cement 
ratio (tables 4-6 and 4-7). Under field conditions 
where inspection and careful control of concrete 

quality are difficult, a minimum cement content 
, ,,, . , 

should be specified. 




When, high-frequency vibrators are used, the values may be decreased ap- 
proximately one-third; in no case should the slump exceed 6 inches. 

Table ^-9. Approximate Mixing Water Requirements for Different Slumps and Maximum Sizes of Aggregates 

Water, gal per cu yd of concrete, for indicated maximum sizes of aggregate 





Hin. 


Xin. 


Jifa. 


lin. 


IX In. 


2 in. 


3 in. 


6 in. 



Non-air-entrained concrete 



1 to 2__ _ _ ... ._ 


42 


40 


37 


36 


33 


31 


29 


25 


3 to 4 


46 


44 


41 


39 


36 


34 


32 


28 


5to6_._ . ._ _.. 


49 


46 


43 


41 


38 


36 


34 


30 


Approximate amount of entrapped air in non-air-entrained concrete, 


3 


2. 5 


2 


1. 5 


1 


0.5 


0.3 


0.5 


percent. 



















Air-entrained concrete 



1 to 2_. ... 


37 


36 


33 


31 


29 


27 


25 


22 


3 to 4 _ 


41 


39 


36 


34 


32 


30 


28 


24 


5 to 6 


43 


41 


38 


36 


34 


32 


30 


26 


Recommended average total air content, percent 


8 


7 


6 


5 


4. 5 


4 


3. 5 


3 






















Note. These quantities of mixing water are for use in computing cement factors for trial batches. They are maximums for reasonably well-shaped angular coarse ag- 
gregates graded within limits of accepted specifications. If more water is required than shown, the cement factor, estimated from these quantities, should be in- 
creased to maintain desired water-cement ratio, except as otherwise indicated by laboratory tests for strength. If less water is required than shown, the cement 
factor, estimated from these quantities, should not be decreased except as indicated by laboratory tests for strength. 



419. Book Method of Mix Proportioning 

The selection of the quantities of cement, water, and 
fine and coarse aggregates to produce concrete of 
desired characteristics may be made from tables that 
have been established for the purpose. These tables 
have been worked out for aggregates having prop- 
erties within the limits specified, and will produce 
concrete of satisfactory quality for such aggregates. 
The mix proportions so determined are not always 
the most economical, however, and the trial batch 
method should be used to design the mix when time 
is available and the size of the job is large enough 
to warrant the laboratory effort required. The mix 
proportions given by the book method may be modi- 
fied if the desired workability is not obtained. Such 
modification, if needed, is made by changing the pro- 
portions of fine to coarse aggregate or by changing 
the amount per cubic yard of cement- water paste. 
(Do not change the water-cement ratio in making 
these modifications) . Details of selecting mix char- 
acteristics and quantities of materials are given in the 
following three paragraphs. 



a. Select water-cement ratio to meet strength and 
exposure conditions. Use the smaller value given by 
table 4-6 and table 4-7. Concrete exposed to the 
weather in temperate climate or colder zones should 
contain 4 to 6 percent of entrained air. Determine 
maximum size of aggregate from dimensions of mem- 
bers or the limitations of available materials. For 
economy, use the largest possible size. Determine by 
sieving or estimate the fineness modulus of the sand. 
Establish the required slump to meet job placement 
conditions. 

5. Tables 4-10a and b give suggested mixes for air- 
entrained and non-air-entrained concrete, respec- 
tively. Using the water-cement ratio and aggregate 
size required, select weights of water and cement per 
cubic yard of concrete. Select weights of fine and 
coarse aggregates from the columns in the table that 
are appropriate to the fineness of the sand. If the 
slump is to be different from the 3 to 4 inch range 
of table 4-10 refer to the footnote for corrections to 
the book quantities. For conversion factors, one bag 
of cement weighs 94 pounds ; there are 8.33 pounds 
of water in 1 gallon. 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

c. Optimum aggregate gradation depends upon 
the proportion of fine to coarse aggregate. The vol- 
ume of coarse aggregate per cubic yard of concrete 
is given in table 4-11 for four values of fineness 
modulus of fine aggregate. This table may be used 
to estimate mix quantities when the range in table 
4-10 is exceeded. Determine waiter-cement ratio 
(tables 4-6 and 4-7) , water content (tables 4-8 and 
4-9) , and percent of entrained air. Find the volume 



4-17 

of coarse aggregate per cubic yard from table 4-11. 
Calculate absolute volumes in cubic feet, of water, 
cement, air, and coarse aggregate per cubic yard. 
Absolute volume in cubic feet is the weight of ma- 
terial divided by 62.4 times specific gravity. For 
aggregate, use saturated surface dry specific gravity. 
Subtract this total from 27 cubic feet to get the 
absolute volume of fine aggregate and convert this 
to weight. 



a. Air Entrained Concrete 


With fine sand - 












fineness 


modulus = 


2.50 


Water- 
cement 


Maximum 
size of 


Air content 
(entrapped 


Water 
gal per 


Cement ~ 
sacks per 


Fine 


Fine 


Coarse 


ratio 


aggregate 


air) 


cu yd of 


cu yd of 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


Gal per 


inches 


percent 


concrete 


concrete 


per cent 


Ib per 


Ib per 


sack 










of total 


cu yd of 


cu yd of 












aggregate 


concrete 


concrete 


4.5 


3/8 


7.5 


41 


9.1 


50 


1250 


1260 




1/2 


7.5 


39 


8.7 


41 


1060 


1520 




3/4 


6 


36 


8.0 


35 


970 


1800 




-^ / 

1 


6 


34 


7.8 


32 


900 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


7.1 


29 


870 


2110 


5.0 


3/8 


7.5 


41 


8.2 


51 


1330 


1260 




1/2 


7.5 
6 


39 
36 


7.8 
7-2 


43 
37 


1140 
1040 


1520 
1800 




1 


6 


34 


6.8 


33 


970 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


6.4 


31 


930 


2110 


5.5 


3/8 


7.5 


41 


7.5 


52 


1390 


1260 




1/2 


7.5 


39 


7.1 


44 


1190 


1520 




3/4 


6 


36 


6.5 


38 


1090 


1800 




1 


6 


34 


6.2 


34 


1010 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


5.8 


32 


970 


2110 


6.0 


3/8 


7.5 


41 


6.8 


53 


1430 


1260 




1/2 


7.5 


39 


6.5 


45 


1230 


1520 




3/4 


6 


36 


6.0 


38 


1120 


1800 




1 


6 


34 


5.7 


35 


1040 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


5.3 


32 


1010 


2110 


6.5 


3/8 


7.5 


41 


6.3 


54 


1460 


1260 




1/2 


7.5 


39 


6.0 


45 


1260 


1520 




3/4 


6 


36 


5.5 


39 


1150 


1800 




1 


6 


34 


5.2 


36 


1080 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


4.9 


33 


1040 


2110 


7.0 


3/8 


7.5 


41 


5.9 


54 


1500 


1260 




1/2 


7.5 


39 


5.6 


46 


1300 


1520 




3/4 


6 


36 


5-1 


40 


1180 


1800 




1 


6 


34 


4.9 


36 


1100 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


4.6 


33 


1060 


2110 


7.5 


3/8 


7.5 


41 


5.5 


55 


1530 


1260 




1/2 


7.5 


39 


5.2 


47 


1330 


1520 




3/4 


6 


36 


4.8 


40 


1210 


1800 




1 


6 


34 


4.5 


37 


1140 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


4.3 


34 


1090 


2110 


8.0 


3/8 


7-5 


41 


5.1 


55 


1560 


1260 




'# 


7.5 


39 


4.9 


47 


1360 


1520 




3/4 


6 


36 


4.5 


41 


1240 


1800 




1 


6 


34 


4.3 


37 


1160 


1940 




1 1/2 


5 


32 


4.0 


34 


1110 


2110 





Note. i ncrease or decrease water per cubic yard by 3 percent for each increase or decrease of 
1 in. in slump, then calculate quantities by absolute volume method. For manufactured 
fine aggregate, increase percentage of fine aggregate by 3 and water by 17 Ib per cubic 
yard of concrete. For less workable concrete, as in pavements, decrease percentage of 
fine aggregate by 3 and water by 8 Ib per cubic yard of concrete. 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



4-19 



Table 4-10. Trial Mixes for Concrete of Medium Consistency - Continued 
a. Air-Entrained Concrete --Continued 



With average sand - 


With coarse sand - 


fineness 


modulus = 2. 


75 


fineness modulus 


- 2.. 90 


Fine 


Fine 


Coarse 


Fine 


Fine 


Cocrse 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


percent 


Ib per 


Ib per 


percent 


1 b per 


Ib per 


of total 


cu yd of 


cu yd of 


of total 


cu yd of 


cu yd of 


aggregate 


concrete 


concrete 


aggregate 


concrete 


concrete 


53 


1320 


1190 


54 


1360 


1 150 


44 


1130 


1450 


46 


1180 


1400 


38 


1040 


1730 


39 


1090 


1680 


34 


970 


1870 


36 


1010 


1830 


32 


950 


2030 


33 


990 


1990 


54 


1400 


1190 


56 


1440 


1150 


46 


1210 


1450 


47 


1260 


1400 


39 


1110 


1730 


41 


1160 


1630 


36 


1040 


1870 


37 


1080 


1830 


33 


1010 


2030 


35 


1050 


1990 


55 


1460 


1190 


57 


1500 


1150 


46 


1260 


1450 


48 


1310 


1400 


40 


1160 


1730 


42 


1210 


1680 


37 


1080 


1870 


38 


1 120 


1830 


34 


1050 


2030 


35 


1090 


1990 


56 


1500 


1190 


57 


1540 


1150 


4? 


1300 


1450 


49 


1350 


1400 


41 


1190 


1730 


42 


1240 


1680 


37 


1110 


1870 


39 


1 150 


1830 


35 


1090 


2030 


36 


1 130 


1990 


56 


1530 


1190 


58 


1570 


1150 


48 


1330 


1450 


50 


1380 


1400 


41 


1220 


1730 


43 


1270 


1680 


38 


1150 


1870 


39 


1190 


1830 


36 


1120 


2030 


37 


1160 


1990 


57 


1570 


1190 


58 


1610 


1150 


49 


1370 


1450 


50 


1420 


1400 


42 


1250 


1730 


44 


1300 


1680 


38 


1170 


1870 


40 


1210 


1830 


36 


1140 


2030 


37 


1180 


1990 


57 


1600 


1190 


59 


1640 


1150 


49 


1400 


1450 


51 


1450 


1400 


43 


1280 


1730 


44 


1330 


1680 


39 


1210 


1870 


41 


1250 


1830 


37 


1170 


2030 


38 


1210 


1990 


58 


1630 


1 190 


59 


1670 


1150 


50 


1430 


1450 


51 


1480 


1 400 


43 


1310 


1730 


44 


1360 


1680 


ko 


1230 


1870 


41 


1270 


1830 


37 


1 190 


2030 


38 


1230 


1990 

























With f 


me -,:. 












fineness 


modu ! ... 


2.50 


Water- Maximum 
cement size of 


Air content 
(entrapped 


Water 
gal per 


Cement 
sacks per 


Fi ne 


Fine 


Coarse 


ratio aggregate 


air) 


cu yd of 


cu yd of 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


Gal per inches 


percent 


concrete 


concrete 


per cent 


1 b per 


1 b per 


sack 








of total 


cu yd of 


cu. yd of 










aggregate 


concrete 


concrete 


4.5 3/8 


3 


46 


10.3 


50 


1240 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


9.8 


42 


1100 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


9.1 


35 


960 


1800 


1 


1.5 


39 


8.7 


32 


910 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


8.0 


29 


880 


21 10 


5.0 3/8 


3 


46 


9.2 


51 


1330 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


8.8 


44 


1180 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


8.2 


37 


1040 


1800 


I 


1.5 


39 


7-8 


34 


990 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


7.2 


31 


960 


21 10 


5.5 3/8 


3 


46 


8.4 


52 


1390 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


8.0 


45 


1240 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


7.5 


38 


1090 


1800 


1 


1.5 


39 


7.1 


35 


1040 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


6.5 


32 


1000 


2110 


6.0 3/8 


3 


46 


7.7 


53 


1440 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


7.3 


46 


1290 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


6.8 


39 


1130 


1800 


1 


1.5 


39 


6.5 


36 


1080 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


6.0 


33 


1040 


2110 


6.5 3/8 


3 


46 


7.1 


54 


1480 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


6.8 


46 


1320 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


6.3 


39 


1190 


1800 


1 


1.5 


39 


6.0 


37 


1 120 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


5.5 


34 


1070 


21 10 


7-0 3/8 


3 


46 


6.6 


55 


1520 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


6.3 


47 


1360 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


5.9 


40 


1200 


1800 


1 


1.5 


39 


5-6 


37 


1150 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


5.1 


34 


1100 


21 10 


7-5 3/8 


3 


46 


6.1 


55 


1560 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


5-9 


48 


1400 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


5.5 


41 


1240 


1800 


1 


1.5 


39 


5-2 


38 


1190 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


4.8 


35 


1130 


2110 


8.0 3/8 


3 


46 


5-7 


56 


1600 


1260 


1/2 


2.5 


44 


5.5 


48 


1440 


1520 


3A 


2 


41 


5.1 


42 


1280 


1800 


1 


1.5 


39 


4.9 


39 


1220 


1940 


1 1/2 


1 


36 


4.5 


35 


1160 


2110 




Increase or decrease water per cubic yard by 3 percent for each increase or decrease 
of 1 in. in slump, then calculate quantities by absolute volume method. For 
manufactured fine aggregate, increase percentage of fine aggregate by 3 and water 
by 17 lb per cubic yard of concrete. For less workable concrete, as in pavements, 
decrease percentage of fine aggregate by 3 and water by 8 lb per cubic yard of 
concrete. 




Table 4-10. Trial Mixes for Concrete of Medium Consistency Continued 
b. N 'on- Air-Entrained Concrete Continued 



With average sand - 


With coarse sand - 


fineness 


modulus = 


2.75 


fineness 


modulus = 


2.90 


Fine 


Fine 


Coarse 


Fine 


Fine 


Coarse 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


aggregate 


percent 


Ib per 


Ib per 


per cent 


1 b per 


Ib per 


of total 


cu yd of 


cu yd of 


of total 


cu yd of 


cu yd of 


aggregate 


concrete 


concrete 


aggregate 


concrete 


concrete 


52 


1310 


1190 


54 


1350 


1150 


45 


1170 


1450 


47 


1220 


1400 


37 


1030 


1730 


39 


1080 


1680 


34 


980 


1870 


36 


1020 


1830 


32 


960 


2030 


33 


1000 


1990 


54 


1400 


1190 


56 


1440 


1150 


46 


1250 


1450 


48 


1300 


1400 


39 


1110 


1730 


41 


1160 


1680 


36 


1060 


1870 


38 


1100 


1830 


3^ 


1040 


2030 


35 


1080 


1990 


55 


1460 


1190 


57 


1500 


1150 


47 


1310 


1450 


49 


1360 


1400 


40 


1160 


1730 


42 


1210 


1680 


37 


1110 


1870 


39 


1150 


1830 


35 


1080 


2030 


36 


1 120 


1990 


56 


1510 


1190 


57 


1550 


1150 


48 


1360 


1450 


50 


1410 


1400 


41 


1200 


1730 


43 


1250 


1600" 


38 


1150 


1870 


39 


1190 


1830 


36 


1120 


2030 


37 


1160 


1990 


57 


1550 


1190 


58 


1590 


1150 


49 


1390 


1450 


51 


1440 


1400 


42 


1240 


1730 


43 


1290 


1680 


39 


1190 


1870 


40 


1230 


1830 


36 


1150 


2030 


37 


1190 


1990 


57 


1590 


1190 


59 


1630 


1150 


50 


1430 


1450 


51 


1480 


1400 


42 


1270 


1730 


44 


1320 


1680 


39 


1220 


1870 


41 


1260 


1830 


37 


1180 


2030 


38 


1220 


1990 


58 


1630 


1190 


59 


1670 


1150 


50 


1470 


1450 


52 


1520 


1400 


43 


1310 


1730 


45 


1370 


1600 


40 


1260 


1870 


42 


1300 


1830 


37 


1210 


2030 


39 


1250 


1990 


58 


1670 


1190 


60 


1710 


1150 


51 


1520 


1450 


53 


1560 


1400 


44 


1350 


1730 


45 


1400 


1680 


41 


1290 


1870 


42 


1330 


1830 


38 


1250 


2030 


39 


1280 


1990 



Concrete 



Maximum size of 
aggregate, in. 




2.40 


2.60 


2.80 


3.00 


Coar?e aggregate, cu ft per cu yd* 


% 


13.5 
15. 9 
17.8 
19. 2 
20. 2 
21. 1 
22. 1 


13.0 
15. 4 
17. 3 
18.6 
19. 7 
20. 5 
21. 6 


12.4 
14.8 
16. 7 
18. 1 
19. 2 
20. 
21. 1 


11.9 
14.3 
16.2 
17.6 
18.6 
19.4 
20.5 


y 2 


% 


i 


iy> 


2 . . 


3 





*Volumes are based on aggregates in dry-rodded condition. These volumes are 
selected from empirical relationships to produce concrete with a degree of work- 
ability suitable for usual reinforced construction. For less workable concrete 
such as required for concrete pavement construction, they may be increased 
about 10 percent. When, placement is to be by pump, they should be decreased 
about 10 percent. 

420. Trial Batch Method of Mix Proportioning 

The trial batch, method is a simple field method 
which incorporates many of the best features of sev- 
eral other methods, and it may be used under almost 
any circumstances. The trial batch method is capable 
of producing a satisfactory mix incorporating the 
materials -which will be used in the project with a 
minimum of tests. The procedure consists of 6 steps : 

a. The first step is the selection of the water-cement 
ratio, which must satisfy the requirements of 
strength, durability, and watertightness. Tables 4r-6 
and 4-7 list suggested W/C ratios. Since the W/C 
ratio is the most important factor, it must be held 
constant and other variables used to control the other 
requirements. It is extremely important to remem- 
ber that a change in the W/C ratio will alter the 
characteristics of the hardened concrete. 

. The second step is to determine the workability 
or consistency desired. Consistency is measured by 
the slump test (para 4-23) and is expressed in inches 
of slump. Slump (in inches) is inversely proportion- 
al to the stiffness of the mix. See table 4-8 for rec- 
ommended values of slump for different types of 
construction. In the absence of any other criteria, 
concrete should be placed as "stiff" as possible, yet 
maintaining a homogeneous voidless mass. 

c. The third step is the calculation of weights of 
cement, water, or fine and coarse aggregates required 
for the trial batch. This design of a small batch mix, 
usually based on one-fifth (18.8 pounds) or one-tenth 
(9.4: pounds) of a bag of cement, follows the pro- 
cedure outlined in para 4-19 1 . This step may be 
omitted if data needed for this calculation are not 
available, and time does not permit their determina- 
tion. 

d. The fourth step is the mixing of a trial batch. 
A. convenient batch quantity must be determined. Al- 
though, on large projects, a batch using the full 



tity batch is more convenient. More reliable results 
will be obtained from larger batches, particularly 
for larger size coarse aggregate. The batch must be 
large enough for machine mixing if the concrete is 
air-entraining. All quantities of materials used are 
measured and recorded. The slump, air content (para 
4-23) , and observations of workability are recorded. 

e. The fifth step is to determine the amount of 
concrete which will result from a one-bag batch. 
Since the proportions for a one-fifth bag batch have 
been determined, multiplying the weights by five 
will give the weight of each ingredient in a one-bag 
batch. Converting these weights to absolute volumes 
and adding the volumes will give the volume of con- 
crete obtained from a one-bag batch. 

/. The sixth step is the calculation of the cement 
factor (CF). This is a numerical value by which the 
amount of each ingredient (in a one-bag batch) is 
multiplied and results in the amount of each in- 
gredient needed to fill or batch a mixer. The cement 
factor is obtained by dividing the volume of the job 
(or mixer) by the yield per bag of cement. 

For example, if a mixture has a 16-cubic foot 
capacity (no overload) and a one-bag batch yields 
4 cubic feet of concrete, the (CF) equals 16/4 or 4. 
The amount of each ingredient in the one-bag batch 
is multiplied by four and this is the quantity which 
must be placed in the mixer for a full load. 

4-21. Preparation for Trial Batch Procedure 

a. Apparatus. The test procedures which are de- 
scribed require the following equipment : 

Bucket, 14 quart 

Slump-cone molds 

Electric oven 

Concrete-mixing pan, 24 x 31 x 6 inch 

Steel tamping rod, %-inch diameter by 24-inch 

long 

Steel rule 

Scales, 300 pound capacity 
Kitchen scoop 
Square point shovel 
Brick trowels 
Wood float 
Graduates, 25 ml 

Some of this equipment is shown in figure 4--4. 

&. Preparation of Aggregates. Some of the phys- 
ical characteristics of the aggregates to be used must 
be determined before the mix design can be carried 
out. Tests will be conducted to provide the follow- 
ing necessary information : 

(1) Gradation of both fine and coarse aggre- 
gates (para 4-9). 

(2) Bulk specific gravities (saturated, surface- 
dry condition) and absorption of both fine and coarse 
aggregates (para 4-10) . 






I 




Figure 4-4- Apparatus for trial batch method of mix proportioning of Portland cement concrete. 



I 



(3) Surface moisture of both fine and coarse 
aggregates (para 4-1 Qe and 4-10/) . 

(4) If time permits, soak the aggregates for sev- 
eral hours prior to use, allow them to dry to a sat- 
urated, surface-dry condition, and place them in 
covered containers to keep in this condition until use. 
Corrections for surface moisture then will not be 
required. 

(5) If the course aggregate to be used contains 
particles larger than % inch, it should be separated 
into two or more fractions. 

For example, it may be divided into the following 
sizes : No. 4 to % inch, % inch to 1% inches, 1% to 
3 inches. The two or more fractions are then recom- 



bined in the proportions necessary to produce the 
best possible gradation. Desirable coarse aggregate 
gradings are given in table 4-2. 
Example. Assume that the coarse aggregate to be 
used contains material from the No. 4 sieve to l 1 /^ 
inches in size. It should be divided into two size 
ranges: No. 4 to % inch, and % to iy 2 inches. The 
two fractions are then recombined in such propor- 
tions as to most nearly give the grading called for 
in table 4-2. This proportioning procedure and the 
necessary computations are given in table 4-12. 

(6) The result of the preliminary tests are en- 
tered in the appropriate spaces on DD Form 1220 
(Concrete Mixture Design Data), fig. 4-5. 



Table 4-12. Example of Calculations, Aggregate Blending 



Sieve size 


Separate sizes Individual 
% retained 


50% 


50% 


Combined grading 50-50 


Desired grading 


No. 4 to 
Hto. 


3 Ato 
Itf In. 


No. 4 to 
Jiin. 


Jf to 

l>in. 


Individual 
%ret. 


Cumulative % 


Individual 
% ret. 


Cumulative 
% Pass. 


Ret. 


Pass. 


l^in. 














100.0 
70.0 
52.0 
33.0 
21.0 
1.0 


0.0 
28.4 
16.9 
20. 1 
13.2 
21.4 


100.0 
71.6 
54.7 
34.6 
21.4 
0.0 


1 in ._ 




60.0 
36.0 
40 




30. 
18.0 
2.0 


30.0 
18.0 
19.0 
12.0 
20.0 
1.0 


30.0 
48.0 
67.0 
79.0 
99.0 
100.0 


%in__ .. . 






^in__ _ 


34.0 
24. 
40. 
2.0 


17.0 
12.0 
20.0 
1.0 


y 8 in 


No. 4 . 






Pan 






Total.. 












100.0 


100.0 


50.0 


50.0 


100.0 






100.0 

















1-24 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



CONCRETE MIXTURE DESIGN DATA "a /?/>/ /?70 


PROJECT ,, 

^4375 


JOB 

/5- 3Z 


PORTLAND CEMENT OTHER ADMIXTURE AIR-ENT ADMIXTURE 


TYPE HE 


ADDITIONS TYPE A/& A/ - TYPE AMOUNT^ 


BRAND 1 Ml LL 


SOURCE /Vt/'X 1 p. 

SOLUTIOfJ O.Ol /o 


FINE AGGREGATE 


COARSE AGGREGATE 


TYPE yMFS. .^AtJD.TTZAP ^>CK 


TYPE CJ2us/J> 7%&P /fotitL SUE // 


SOURCE /W^lV /V/? 


VA/ , Co*JfiJ. 


SOURCE //>*/ /4^9KX/ , C&/L/4/, jJ-W^ 




MATERIALS 


MATERIALS 


SERIAL NUMBER SIZE RANGE BULK SP. GR. ABSORPTION * 


CEMENT 


C-l 3./S 


FINE AGGREGATE 


S 1 A/0, y- To- 2.00 2^'^Z. O>Q 


COARSE AGGREGATE (A) 


(S'QJt) $ 1 3/t-f To A/0. *j- 2.9Z. O- &> 


COARSE AGGREGATE (S) 


(5~& %) &- 1 1 l /*z~ ~r& 3//. fl 2. *^2> O fa 


COARSE AGGREGATE (C) 




COARSE AGGREGATE (D) 




MIXTURE DATA 


MATERIALS 


SAMPLE NUMBER SAMPLE NUMBER 


MIXTURE ? ET * E1GHTS 
B^WEJGHT X B r A 5 b B 5 TCH 


SOLID VOLUME UIYTIIDI: NET ^EIGHTS SOLID VOLUME 
1 BAG BATCH il.^T 1 BAG BATCH 1 BAG BATCH 
feu. ft.) BY WEIGHT (lb.) (cu. ft.) 


CEMENT 


/, (D O ^^,00 


0.478 


FINE AGGREGATE 


2,6f 2.52., 35 


1 1 -^ftt-, 


COARSE AGGREGATE (A) 


/*T ^> I / "^ *1 C. 
/ o / u?7 ' ^> 


o. 71 8 


COARSE AGGREGATE (8) 


1.7S l&'l^-y-S 


Q j 1 Cj 


COARSE AGGREGATE (C) 






COARSE AGGREGATE (D) 






WATER 




O.5B 56>OO 


O> &6 O 

O*? |-T i:::::::::::::::!:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 


TOTAL 




731, OS 


^- 1 / i:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 


WATER/CEMENT (gal. per bag) &. O 


THEO. UNIT WEIGHT (Ib./cu. ft.) /&>'2-tJJ-' 


SLUMP (in.) 


2. 


ACTUAL UNIT WEIGHT (Ib./cu. ft.) / )*S * O Q 


AIR CONTENT (%)* 


THEO. CEMENT FACT, (bag/cu. yd.) } . OQ 


AIR'C-OWTENT (%) 3 ^.& 


ACTUAL CEMENT FACT, (bag/cu. yd.) 

5,73 


SAND^AOGREGATE (% volume) ^3 



REMARKS (Condition of mix, workability, plasticity, bleeding, etc.) 



TECHNICIAN C5J<nturJ 


COMPUTED BY (Signature) 

../2^ll* 


CHECKED BY (Signature) 
^.\&ft<ft*^ 


/ / ~T7'~ ~ " ' ~ VI \| 
1. {Calculated on the baaim of: v 

\*-' 

3. In the entire batch as mixed. 
3. In that portion of the concrete containing affregate amaller than the 1H inch aieve. 



DD 1 r T,,1220 



-.',- U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1957 O 443B59 



Figure 4-5. Data sheet, concrete mix design. 



530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

* Entraining Admixture. If an air-entraining 

i to be used in the concrete, the proper amount 

material is obtained and placed in a suitable 

3r. The amount of admixture required varies 

rably, depending upon the type used. If neu- 

vinsol resin is used, approximately 0.01 per- 

weight of the cement will be required. This 

lilliliters for a one-bag batch. 

xing Pan. Before the trial batch can be mixed, 

de of the mixing pan must be coated with 

similar to that which will be contained in the 

tch. After the materials for the trial batch 

311 prepared, the same procedure is followed 

reparation of a one-twentieth-bag batch. All 

es will be one-quarter of those used in prepa- 

)f the one-fifth-bag trial batch. The one- 

h-bag batch is placed in the mixing pan and 

ccording to the procedure described in para- 

-22. This batch is discarded after making 

t the inside of the pan is well coated with 

If the trial batch is not mixed immediately 

5 minutes), the pan is covered with wet bur- 

eep the mortar from drying out. 

Trial Batch Procedure 

1 batch procedures are as follows: 
a one-tenth bag trial batch if the aggregate 
; not exceed % inch and if hand mixing is 
r larger aggregate, and for machine mixing 
ncrete is air-entraining, use a one-fifth bag 
trial mix. Weigh out the required amount 
.t, 9.4 pounds or 18.8 pounds, respectively. 
>m the specified water-cement ratio, the 
>f water to be used is calculated and weighed 
weight of mixing water required may be 
d by the use of one of two formulas. 
The first equation is used when the water- 
atio (W/C) is given as a decimal fraction 
it, and the second when the water-cement 
expressed in gallons of water per bag of 



'eight of water, pounds (WIG) 9.4, 

/TT///~yN O QQ 
-.-,./. . , (W Li ) O.OO 

eight ot water, pounds =- -^-^ 

The amount of mixing water calculated 
>ased upon the assumption that the aggre- 
in a saturated, surface-dry condition. If the 
is are not in this condition, the amount of 
i must be corrected. If free moisture (above 



4-25 

the moisture content of the aggregate in a saturated, 
surface-dry condition) is present in the aggregate, 
the amount of free moisture must be deducted from 
the calculated weight of mixing water. If the 
moisture content of the aggregate is less than that 
which corresponds. to a saturated, surface-dry condi- 
tion, enough, water must be added to the calculated 
weight of mixing water to bring the aggregate to a 
saturated, surface-dry condition. 

c. If an air-entraining admixture is to be used, 
calculate the required amount and measure it care- 
fully. Take about % of the mixing water, add the 
air-entraining agent to it, and mix thoroughly. 

d. Weigh out enough fine and coarse aggregate to 
exceed the requirements of the trial batch (about 35 
pounds of fine aggregate and 55 pounds of coarse 
aggregate for a one-tenth bag batch), place in 
separate containers and cover with damp cloths to 
prevent change in water content. 

e. About 30 pounds of the coarse aggregate and 
about 20 pounds of the fine aggregate are placed in 
the mixing pan and thoroughly mixed with the 
shovel. All of the cement is added and mixed with the 
aggregates. After the cement and aggregates have 
been mixed, a flat-topped pile is formed in the center 
of the pan. The center of the pile is hollowed out to 
form a shallow crater. The portion of the mixing 
water containing the air-entraining agent is poured 
into the crater in the pile of cement and aggregate. 
The aggregates and cement are mixed with the water 
by shoveling them into the crater. Splashing water 
into the pan outside the crater should be avoided. 
Carefully add the remainder of the mixing water 
together with more aggregates as needed to prevent 
loss of mixing water. Additional coarse and fine 
aggregate (in about a ratio of 2 : 1) may be added as 
needed to reduce the consistency to the desired slump. 
Care should be taken to prevent harshness due to 
excessive amounts of coarse aggregate, or over- 
sanding. The concrete should be troweled occasionally 
in order to estimate the texture of the mixture. If 
the mixture appears too smooth during troweling 
(too easily finished), more coarse aggregate is re- 
quired. If considerable effort in troweling is neces- 
sary to bring about a smooth finish, the mixture is 
too harsh and more sand is required. Properly 
proportioned and mixed concrete is cohesive and ap- 
pears rough around the edges, though with a medium 
amount of troweling it will present a smooth, dense 
surface. The appearance of a properly proportioned 
mix is shown in figure 4-6. 




X'*. i <.'-K*''iA 

A Undersanded B Correct proportions C Oversanded 
Figure 4-6. Appearance of concrete mixtures. 



/. When the trial mix appears to have the desired 
consistency, perform the slump test, measure the air 
content (if air-entrained mix), and take notes on 
workability. Revise the mix by adding aggregates, 
as needed, until satisfactory proportions are ob- 
tained. Weigh the remaining aggregates and sub- 
tract from the original weight to obtain the amounts 
used for each aggregate. Record all weights of 
materials on trial mix data form. 

g. Usually a single trial batch does not supply 
enough information, since it is almost certain to be 
either oversanded or too harsh, or to miss the desired 
slump or air content. After calculating the results 
of the first batch, additional batches should be made 
using different weights of material obtained by ad- 
justing the quantities used in the initial batch. Each 
batch is mixed according to the procedure previously 
described. Adjustments in the mix are made until the 
best possible mixture is obtained. 

423. Tests of Fresh Concrete 

A.f ter the concrete is first mixed several tests are used 
to determine its quality such as 

a. Slump Test. When the mixture apears to have 
reached the desired consistency, a slump test should 
be made. The slump cone (a metal mold, fig. 4-7) is 
dampened with a moist cloth and placed on a flat, 
smooth, nonabsorbent surface. The slump cone is 
filled in three aproximately equal volumes, using 'a 
representative sample of the concrete. In placing 
each scoopf ul of concrete in the slump cone, the scoop 
is moved around to insure equal distribution of con- 
crete in the cone. Each of the three layers of concrete 
is rodded with 25 strokes of the tamping rod. The 
strokes are distributed in a uniform manner over the 
cross section of the slump cone. Each stroke should 
penetrate into, (not through) the underlying layer, 
with the bottom layer being rodded throughout its 
entire depth. After the top layer of concrete has been 



rodded, the surface of the concrete is struck off with a 
trowel so that the slump cone is exactly filled. The 
slump cone is removed from the concrete by raising 
it carefully in a vertical direction. The slump is 
measured immediately by determining the difference 
between the height of the slump cone and the height 
of the pile of concrete at its vertical axis, as illustrated 
in figure 4-7. The results are recorded on DD Form 
1220 (fig. 4 5) , in inches to the nearest 14 inch. The 
desired slump will be established by the officer in 
charge. (See table 4-S for typical ranges in slump.) 
Reference may be made to TM 5-7-12 for additional 
information, if desired. After the slump measurement 
is complete, the side of the pile of concrete on which 
the slump was determined should be tapped gently 
with the tamping rod. The behavior of the concrete 
under this treatment is a valuable indication of the 
cohesiveness, workability, and placeability of the 
mixture. A well-proportioned, workable mix will 
gradually slump to lower elevations and retain its 
original identity, while a poor mix will crumble, 
segregate, and fall apart. 

6. Air Content Testing. An air-entraining admix- 
ture is added to the concrete mix so that enough air 
will be entrained to improve workability and dura- 
bility of the mixture, but not enough to substantially 
reduce the strength. Air-entraining cements may also 
be available for use in some military situations. The 
desired amount of air is generally from 3 to 6 percent 
of the total mix. 

(1) Apparatus. The equipment for determining 
the percentage of entrained air is included in the. 
boxed test kit. The basic tool is the pressure-type 
indicator. The equipment furnished in these kits 
varies with manufacturers. Each kit contains com- 
plete equipment for conducting this test, including a 
detailed instruction pamphlet and the calibration 
procedure for the particular meter. Typical test ap- 
paratus is shown in figure 4-8. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



4-27 




Figure 4-7. Measuring slump o/ /res7t concrete. 



(2) Calibration of apparatus. Before the air 
content of a concrete mixture can be determined, it 
is necessary that the entrained air indicator be cali- 
brated accurately and that the correction factor for 
the aggregate contained in the concrete be deter- 
mined. 

(3) Testing procedure. The following is the 
step-by-step test procedure in determining the air 
content : 

(<x) The measuring bowl of the apparatus is 
filled with three equal layers of the concrete to be 
tested. Each layer is consolidated by 25 blows of the 
rodding tool evenly distributed over the surface of 
the layer. After rodding each layer, the sides of 
the bowl are tapped smartly 10 to 15 times with the 
mallet until the holes left by the rodding are leveled 
out, and no large bubbles of air appear on the surface 
of the layer. While rodding the first layer, care should 
be taken not to strike the bottom of the measuring 
bowl too hard. The second and third layers should 
be rodded with only enough force for the rod to 
penetrate the surface of the previous layer. The bowl 
should be overfilled by the third layer, and after rod- 



ding, the excess concrete should be removed by sliding 
the strike-off bar across the top flange with a sawing 
motion until the concrete is just level with the top of 
the bowl. 

(&) The remainder of the test will depend on 
the type of meter furnished. The detailed procedure 
is outlined in the instruction book furnished Avith 
each meter. 

(c) The calculations for determining the en- 
trained air content are given in the instruction book 
furnished with the air meter. 

c. Unit Weight. A. cylindrical metal measure of 
either % -, i/ 5 -, or %-cubic foot capacity is filled with 
the fresh concrete and rodded in three layers as de- 
scribed for the slump test. After each layer is rodded, 
the sides of the container are tapped several times 
with the rod to remove any air pockets. The con- 
tainers are rodded 25 times per layer. After filling 
and consolidating, the top surface is struck off with 
a heavy, flat metal cover plate to insure that the 
measure is level full. Clean all excess concrete from 
the surface of the container and weigh. Measure the 
tare weight of the clean, dry container. The measure 




Figure 4-8, Apparatus, air content test. 

is calibrated if necessary to determine its volume by 
accurately filling it with water at 62 F. (16.7 C.), 
weighing and dividing the weight of water by 62.4 
pounds per cubic foot to get the volume of container. 

4-24. Calculations 

a. The volume of concrete which is produced per 
sack of cement is called the yield. Yield for concrete 
made without an air-entraining agent is computed by 
assuming that the ingredients form a solid mass with 



is desirable that the yield be as high as possible, con- 
sistent with the other desired properties of the con- 
crete mixture. The yield is also useful in estimating 
the quantity of each material required to produce a 
given amount of concrete. 

6. Correct the actual weights used in the trial mix 
for free surface moisture if any is present in the ag- 
gregates. Record corrected values (SSD weights). 
The weights of materials used are multiplied by 94 
pounds and divided by the weight of cement used to 
get the weights for a one-bag batch. Calculate the 
yield for a one-bag batch by dividing the total weight 
of a material by the unit weight of concrete. The 
cement factor is the number of 94-pound bags of ce- 
ment required for a cubic yard of concrete. It is 
calculated by dividing the yield per bag into 27 (cubic 
feet per cubic yard) . Then weights of all materials 
needed for a cubic yard are found by multiplying the 
weights for a one-bag batch by the cement factor. 
Convert pounds of water to gallons per cubic yard by 
dividing the weight of water by 8.33 pounds per gal- 
lon. The fine aggregate expressed in percent by 
weight of total aggregate is found as : 




weight of fine aggregate 

weight of fine aggregate plus 

weight of coarse aggregate 



(100) 



c. The cement factor will vary with the water- 
cement ratio and the maximum size and particle 
shape of the coarse aggregate used. The cement fac- 
tor might be as high as 9.0 -bags per cubic yard with 
pea-gravel concrete and as low as 5.0 or 5.5 bags per 
cubic yard with angular, li^-inch stone, both having 
a water-cement ratio of 6.0 gallons per bag. Cement 
factors for structural and paving concrete contain- 
ing li/^-inch aggregate and a water cement ratio of 
5.5 gallons per bag might vary between 5.5 and 7.0 
bags of cement per cubic yard. 




Section V. FLEXURAL STRENGTH (MODULUS OF RUPTURE) TEST 



4-25. Introduction 

The purpose of the test described in this section is to 
determine the flexural strength of concrete. A deter- 
mination of the flexural strength is frequently neces- 
sary as a part of the design of concrete mixtures to 



check compliance with established specification or 
even to provide information necessary to the design 
of an engineering structure. Beam forms for casting 
test beams from fresh concrete are available in the 
concrete test set. Although equipment for obtaining 






TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

sawed specimens is not provided, the test may be 
performed upon beams sawed from existing concrete 
structures for evaluation, purposes. The equipment 
furnished includes a tester designed to obtain an 
index of the flexural strength. Equipment which is 
necessary for the performance of this test, aside from 
the loading frame, is as follows : 

Concrete beam tester., third-point loading 

Wire brush 

Wood float 

Collapsible mold, for 6- x 6- x 21-inch beams 

Mixing ipan, 24 x 24 x 3 inches 

Proving ring, complete with gage and ring 

clamps, 10,000-pound capacity 
Tamping rod 
Square point shovel 
Steel straightedge 
Brick trowel 

The flexural strength testing assembly is shown in 
figure 4-9. An alternate testing assembly can be made 
up from 'the loading frame and certain of the attach- 
ments provided with the CBE, test set, the breaker 
(third-point loading), and the 10, 000 -pound-capac- 
ity proving ring. This assembly is shown in figure 
4-9 (alternate testing assembly). 





t 




Figure 4-9. Beam broken by third-point loading 




Figure J^-Q. Flexural strength testing assembly for concrete 
beam Standard 6- x 6- CD 21-inch beam ready for testing. 



Figure 4-9. Alternate testing assembly using 01 
ment Continued 



4-30 

4-26. Test Beams 

The concrete from which the test beams are to be 
made is mixed in accordance with the procedure de- 
scribed in paragraph 4-22, except that three one- 
fifths-bag batches are required. This will produce 
approximately 3 cubic feet of concrete. After the 
concrete has been mixed, the slump tests is conducted 
in accordance with the procedure described in para- 
graph 4-23. If air-entrained concrete is being made, 
the air content is determined by the procedure de- 
scribed in paragraph 4-23. If the slump and air con- 
tent are within the desired limits, the concrete used 
to conduct these tests is returned to the mixing pan. 
The entire batch is remixed just enough to produce a 
homogeneous mass. Flexure test beams are used to 
check the quality of concrete being produced in the 
field, particularly in constructing pavements. When 
the concrete has cured to produce an adequate beam 
strength, traffic may use the pavement. Concrete is 
sampled from the production batches as required and 
beams are molded, cured, and tested as described in 
the following procedures. 

a. Forming Beams. A concrete-beam mold is as- 
sembled and the inside of the mold lightly oiled. The 
mold is filled with two layers of concrete, each ap- 
proximately 3 inches in depth. Each layer is con- 
solidated by hand redding, using 40 strokes evenly 
distributed over the surface of the layer. A light 
spading of the concrete along the sides of the mold 
with a trowel helps in removal of surface voids. The 
top surface is struck off with a straightedge and 
finished with a wood float. 

b. Number of Specimens. Five specimens are made 
for each mix design being evaluated. Two of the 
beams are broken at the age of 7 days. This will per- 
mit an early evaluation of the mix design. The 
remaining three beams are broken at the age of 28 
days. Specimens containing standard portland ce- 
ment generally will develop about 80 percent of their 
28-day strength during the first 7 days of curing. 

c. Curing. A suitable identifying label is placed 
on the finished surface of the specimen and the entire 
specimen, still in the mold, covered with a double 
thickness of wet burlap. About 73 F. (23 C.) is the 
most satisfactory curing temperature for concrete. 
Therefore, an effort should be made to store the test 
specimens at approximately that temperature. The 
specimens are removed from the molds after 24 hours 
of curing. The beams are stored under water, in moist 
sand, sawdust, or earth, or under a double thickness 
of wet burlap, so that they will be kept continuously 
wet until they are tested. 

4-27. Testing Procedure 

The loading device is assembled as shown in figure 
4-9. The test beam is turned so that the finished sur- 
face is to the side and centered in the loading assem- 



TM S-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-^3 

bly. The testing apparatus is operated until the load- 
ing blocks are brought into contact with the upper 
surface of the beam. Care should be taken to secure 
full contact between the loading (and supporting) 
surfaces and the beam. If the surface of the specimen 
is so rough that full contact is not secured, the speci- 
men should be ground to secure full contact. Load 
may be applied at a rate such that the increase in 
extreme fiber stress in the beam does not exceed 150 
pounds per square inch per minute. The extreme fiber 
stress corresponding to any load may be estimated 
from the equation given in paragraph 4-28. Eeadings 
are obtained on the proving ring dial, and are con- 
verted to corresponding total loads in pounds by ap- 
plication of the proving ring constant. Aside from 
controlling the rate of application of the load, the 
only reading necessary is that which corresponds to 
the maximum load applied to the test beam. After the 
specimen has been broken, the dimensions of the cross 
section at which failure occurred are obtained to the 
nearest 0.1 inch. These dimensions are taken to be 
the average width and average depth at the section of 
failure. 

4-28. Modulus of Rupture Calculations 

a. If the specimen broke within the middle third 
of the span length, the modulus of rupture is cal- 
culated as follows: 

P _PL 

bd 2 
Where: 

R= modulus of rupture in pounds per square 

inch, 

P= maximum applied load in pounds, 
Z=span length in inches, 
6= average width of specimen in inches, 

and 
d= average depth of specimen in inches. 

b. If the specimen broke outside the middle third 
of the span length by not more than 5 percent of 
the span length, the modulus of rupture is calculated 
as follows: 

R= 





bd 2 

where a is the distance in inches between the line of 
fracture and the nearest support, measured along the 
center line of the bottom surface of the beam, and 
other symbols have meanings given in a above. 

c. If the specimen broke outside of the middle 
third of the span length by more than 5 percent of 
the span length, the results of the test will be dis- 
carded. 

d. The report of the test for flexural strength 
should include the following : 

( 1 ) Identification number. 

(2) Average width to the nearest 0.1 inch. 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

( 3 ) Average depth to the nearest 0.1 inch. 

(4) Span length in inches. 

(5) Maximum applied load in pounds. 

(6) Modulus of rupture calculated to the nearest 
5 pounds per square inch. 

(Y) Defects in specimen. 
(8) Age of specimen. 

4-29. Conclusions 

a. Values of the modulus of rupture vary widely, 
depending on the concrete tested. Specifications rela- 
tive to concrete pavements frequently require a modu- 
lus of rupture in excess of 600 to 650 pounds per 



4-31 

square inch (28-day curing, third-point loading) . The 
flexural strength (modulus of rupture) generally 
maybe expected to be approximately 15 percent of the 
compressiv strength for comparable conditions of 
age and curing. 

b. An approximate relationship between modulus 
of rupture and compressive strength is 



f = 

-L c 



100 7 



in which f' c is compressive strength, pounds per 
square inch, R is modulus of rupture, pounds per 
square inch. 



Section VI. COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH TEST 



4-30. Introduction 

a. The compressive strength of hardened, concrete, 
as measured by compression tests on standard forms 
of cylindrical specimens, is used in the design of struc- 
tures. The standard test specimen is a cylinder 6 
inches in diameter by 12 inches long, capped with a 
suitable material to provide smooth bearing surfaces 
on each end. Load is applied to the end surfaces 
through metal platens on the testing machine (cyl- 
inder breaker) causing compressive stress in the lon- 
gitudinal direction of the cylinder. 

Z>. The following equipment is required to mold 
and test concrete cylinders : 

Concrete compression tester, 250,000-pound ca- 
pacity 

Mixing equipment for trial mixes (para 4-21a) 
Concrete cylinder molds, 6 by 12 inches 
Mixing pan, 24 by 24 by 3 inches 
Scoop 

Tamping rod 
Steel straightedge 
Trowel 

Square point shovel 
Polyethylene sheeting 
Burlap 

Calipers, 6-inch opening 
Steel scale, inches and hundredths 

c. Compressive strength tests are made on con- 
crete trial mixes to evaluate the performance of 
available materials -and to establish mix proportions 
that give the required strength. Strength tests are 
used also to control the quality of concrete being 
manufactured in the field. The compressive strength 
is defined as the average of the strengths of all cylin- 
ders of the same age made from a sample taken from 
a single batch of concrete. At least two cylinders, and 
preferably three, are required to constitute a test. 
Hence four or six specimens are required if tests 
are to be made at 7 and 28 days. 



4-31. Preparation of Cylinders 

a. The cylinders should be made as near as pos- 
sible to 'the place where they will be stored for the 
first 24 hours. Sufficient concrete (about 1 cubic foot) 
for the desired number of cylinders must be avail- 
able in the trial mix or field sample. Material must 
not be taken from the air content test, since this may 
be contaminated with excess water. The sample is 
taken from a stationary mixer by passing a receptacle 
completely through the discharge stream of the mixer 
at about the middle of the batch, or by diverting the 
stream into a container. The contents of a paving 
mixer should be discharged into a pile and sample 
material taken by a shovel from at least five different 
portions of the pile. Samples are taken from revolv- 
ing drum truck mixers or agitators by repeatedly 
passing a receptacle through the entire discharged 
stream until sufficient concrete is collected into the 
pan (fig. 4-10). Thoroughly mix the sample before 
filling the cylinder molds. 

Z>. Clean and dry the molds. Give the metal molds, 
if these are used, a light coat of oil before filling. 
Fill the molds in three equal layers, rodding each 
layer 25 times, as described for the slump test. Tap 
the side of the mold with the rod after each layer 
to close holes that may be left by the rod. Strike off 
the top surface level with the top of the mold. Store 
the cylinders on a level, flat, hard surface free from 
vibration. In moving the cylinders of fresh concrete 
in cardboard molds, lift them on a flat trowel to pre- 
vent bulging of the lower end of the mold. Tag the 
specimens or molds for identification. 

c. Cover the specimens in the molds with poly- 
ethylene sheeting and place wet burlap over them 
(fig. 4-11). Maintain the temperature of the speci- 
mens between 60 F.' and 80 F. (16 to 27 C.). 
Stoves or electric light bulbs may be used for beat- 
ing. Cooling is accomplished, if needed, by evapo- 
ration of excess water from the wet burlap. A fan 
can be used to cause lower temperatures tliaii will 




Figure $-10. Sampling concrete from truck mixer. 



occur from natural evaporation. Keep the burlap 
wet; if it is allowed to dry the concrete curing will 
be adversely affected. At the end of 24 hours, the 
specimens are removed from the molds and stored 
to continue curing until test, Mask the sides of the 
cylinders with wax or permanent, ink, or attach 
moisture-proof tags with wire for identification. 
Individual handling of samples from different 
sources is as indicated: 

(1) Specimens intended for checking the 
strength of laboratory trial mixes or to serve as 
the basis for acceptance or quality control of field 
concrete are moist cured at 70 to 76 F. (21 to 26 
C.) until test. They are stored in moist rooms, damp 
sand, or sawdust or in lime water to maintain free 
water on all surfaces of the specimen at all times. 

(2) Test specimens made in the field to deter- 
mine when forms may be removed should receive, 
insofar as possible, the same protection from the 



elements on all surfaces as is given to the portions 
of the structure that they represent. They are stored 
in or on the structure as near as possible to the point 
of use. They are tested in the moisture condition re- 
sulting from the specified curing treatment. Speci- 

-POLYETHYLENE 
BURLAP 

..CONCRETE 
CYLINDER 




Figure 4-11. Curing of teat cylinders 




JJLIL 1J.1LU UOC CIJ.C J. C1IJ.U V GU. J.J.U1J.1 



JJ.J.UO.U.O 



at the time of removing formwork from the struc- 
ture. 

(3) Specimens shipped from the field to the 
laboratory for testing are packed in a sturdy wooden 
box or other suitable container surrounded by wet 
sawdust or wet sand. Protection from freezing dur- 
ing storage or shipment must be provided. Upon re- 
ceipt in the laboratory, moist curing is continued. 

d. The ends of compression test specimens must 
be plane within 0.002 inch and within 3 degrees of 
being perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder. 

(1) Specimens formed in strong metal molds 
having accurately fiat base plates can be capped with 
neat cement at 2 to 4 hours after molding. A stiff 
paste or portland cement and water is made at the 
time the cylinder is molded, so that the capping 
mixture will have shrunk before application. Any 
free water or laitance (layer of fine particles on the 
surface) is removed from the end of the specimen. 
The paste is applied to the top of the concrete and 
worked with a flat plate until it is smooth and level 
with the top of the mold. 

(2) Hardened concrete specimens may be ground 
to place ends or capped with a material having 
greater compressive strength than the concrete. Pre- 
pared mixtures of sulfur and granular materials, 
special high-strength gypsum plasters, and neat 
high-early strength cement are satisfactory capping 
materials (ordinary low-strength plaster of paris, or 
compressible rubber or fibrous materials are not suit- 
able for caps). These materials are applied in a 
plastic state and finished to the desired plane surface 
by applying glass or metal plates and squeezing out 
excess material to provide a cap that is as thin as 
possible. Sulfur caps may be applied in time to 
harden for at least 2 hours before testing. Plaster 
caps cannot be stored over 4 hours in the moist room. 
Neat cement caps must be aged 3 days or more in the 
moist room. During capping, moist cured specimens 
should be protected against drying by covering them 
with wet burlap. 



Ihe procedure for conducting the compression test 
is as follows: 

a. Prepare the testing machine (fig. 4-12) by 
cleaning the bearing plates and, if needed, cleaning 
and lubricating the spherical seat. Check the opera- 
tion of the machine. Keep the specimens moist by 
covering with wet burlap during the period between 
removal from the curing environment and testing. 

5. Determine the diameter of specimen to the 
nearest 0.01 inch by averaging two diameters 




Figure 4-12. Compression testing niacMne with 6-inch diame- 
ter ly 12-inch high cured, concrete test cylinder in 'place. 



-34 

leasured at right angles to each other at mid-height 
f the cylinder. Measure the length, including caps, 
3 the nearest 0.1 inch. Record dimensions on a pre- 
ared data sheet. 

G. Place the specimen on the lower bearing block, 
ring the upper block near to contact, and aline the 
xis of the specimen with the center of thrust of the 
pherical head. Carefully and slowly bring the 
pherical head into contact with the specimen, rotat- 
ig the movable portion gently by hand so that uni- 
orm seating is obtained. Apply the test load con- 
inuously and without shock at a rate of 20 to 50 
iounds per square inch per second. Observe and 
ecord the maximum load during the test. Observe 
ype of fracture and record any unusual features. The 
.ormal cone-type fracture is shown in figure 4r-13. 

d. The compressive strength of the concrete is the 
laximum load divided by the cross sectional area of 
lie cylinder: 

P 
_ 

D 2 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



i> _ __ i 0^4 _ 
J c ~*~~ 2 



a which f' c is compressive strength, pounds per 
quare inch 

P is maximum load in test, pounds 
D is average diameter of cylinder, inches 
leport the identification, diameter and length, maxi r 
mm. load, compressive strength, irregular fracture 
r defect in caps or specimen, and age of specimen at 
est. Report average compressive strength of all 
ylinders from the same concrete sample. 





Figure 4-13. Normal fracture of concrete test cylinder in 
compression. Load of 154,000 pounds averted over a 
28.3 square-inch area determines the strength to be 5400 
psi. 




TM S-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



5-1 



5 

SOIL 



Section I. MECHANICS Of STABILIZATION 



5-1 . Discussion 



a. Soil stabilization is the process which alters any 
property of the soil to improve its engineering 
characteristics. Stabilization may be divided into two 
categories: cementing action and modification. 
Cementing action results in a hardened product of 
considerable strength. Modification results in an im- 
provement of some soil properties or in the elimina- 
tion of some undesirable features in a soil. The end 
product may or may not show a significant increase 
in strength. Stabilization cannot always be classified 
into one or the other category exclusively. It is possi- 
ble to achieve a thoroughly cemented end product by 
adding a sufficient quantity of stabilizing agent. How- 
ever, basic improvement can be achieved many times 
with a much smaller quantity of cementing agent and 
final stabilization completed with modification. 

/;. Soil stabilization is used to provide improved 
subgrade and base course characteristics for pave- 
ments. Stabilized soils can often be adequate for light 
traffic pavements, and for parking and storage areas 
where an all-weather surface is required yet traffic 
does not justify a higher strength pavement. Surface 
treatments are used also to provide control of dust. 

5-2. Stabilization by Cementing Action 

This category requires the addition of agents to the 
soil to produce the hardened product. There are four 
main stabilizing agents which can be added, and the 
method of treatment bears the name of these agents ; 
soil-cement, soil-lime, lime-fly ash, and bituminous 
(soil-asphalt). The first three methods have much in 
common and involve somewhat similar construction 
practices. They depend upon hydration, pozzolanic 
action of lime with silica and alumina, alteration of 
the clay material, or a combination of these actions. 
The result is a semirigid fairly brittle material with 
considerable compressive strength and moderate 
flexural strength when tested either statically or 
dynamically. The ultimate strength depends to a 



great degree on the density which is achieved during 
compaction 'and before the mix cures. In bituminoni 
treatment, the end product performs differently. A 
least initially, the product is much less brittle and it: 
behavior depends on the nature of the loading (stati 
or dynamic) , and the temperature when the load i 
applied. 

53. Stabilization by Modification 
Soil stabilization by modification usually results ii 
something less than a thoroughly cemented hardeiie< 
or semihardened material. This type of stabilizatio) 
may be accomplished by compaction, by mechanica 
blending, by adding cementing materials in smal 
amounts, or by addition of chemical modifiers. Cc 
ment and lime modifiers (cement modified soil aii( 
lime modified soil) are used in quantities too sinal 
to provide high strength cementing action. They re 
duce the plasticity of clay soils. Calcium chloride o 
sodium chloride are added to the soil to retain mois 
ture (and hence control dust), to hold fine materia 
for better compaction, and to reduce frost heave IT 
lowering the freezing point of water in the soil. Bi 
tuminous materials, such as cutback asphalts or as 
phaltic penetrative soil binder (APSB), and certaii 
chemicals, such as poly vinyl acetate emulsion (DC A 
70), are used to waterproof the soil surface and t 
control dust. 

5-4. Stabilization Processes 

The method of soil stabilization chosen is determine* 
by the amount of stabilizing required and the condi 
tions encountered on the project. An accurate soil de 
scription and classification (paras 2-3 and 2-8) i 
essential to the selection of the correct materials aii 
procedure. In table 5-1 are listed the most suitabl 
treatments for various soil types to stabilize these soil 
for different objectives. Table 5-2 is a summary o 
soil stabilization methods. More extensive discussio: 
of field construction operations to stabilize soils ma 
be found in TM 5-330 and DA Pam 525-5. 



Furpose 


sou type 


Method 


1. Subgrade stabilization 
a. Improved load carrying 
tics. 


and streoS distribution characteris- 


Fine granular 


SA, SC, MB, C 


Coarse granular 


SA, SC, MB, C 


Clays of low PI 


C, SC, CMS, LMS, SL 


Clays of high PI 


SL, LMS 


b. Reduce frost susceptibil 


tv- - -- 


Fine granular 


CMS, SA, SC, LF 




Clays of low PI 


CMS, SC, SL, LMS 


c. Waterproofing and impr 


Dved runoff _ 


Clays of low PI 


CMS, SA, LMS, SL 




d. Control of shrinkage anc 


i swell _ . . . -_. 


Clays of low PI 


CMS, SC, C, LMS, SL 






Clays of high PI 


SL 


e. Reduce resiliency . 




Clays of high PI 


SL, LMS 






Elastic silts or clays 


SC, CMS 


2. Base course stabilization 
a. Improvements of substa 


ndard materials _ _ _ 


Fine granular 


SC, SA, LF, MB 




Clays of low PI 


SC, SL 


b. Improved load carrying 
istics. 


and stress distribution character- 


Course granular 


SA, SC, MB, LF 


Fine granular 


SC, SA, LF MB 


c. Reduction of pumping. _ 




Fine granular 


SC, SA, LF, MB, membranes 






3. Dust palliative 




Fine granular 


CMS, SA, Oil or bituminous 
surface spray, APSB 






Plastic soils 


CMS, SL, LMS, APSB, 
DCA70 






Where the methods of treatment are: 

APSB = Asphalt Penetration Surface Binder 

C= Compaction 
CMS=Cement modified Soil 
DCA70=Polyvinylacetate emulsion 
LF=LlmeFIyash 
LMS=Lime Modified Soil 
MB=Mechanical Blending 
SA=Soil-Asphalt 
SC=Soil-Cement 
SL= Soil-Lime 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



5-3 



Table 5-2. Susanary of Stabilization 
Methods 





Cementing agent 




Portland cement 


*'"","' ."r Bituminous (with asphalt cr tar", 
an u ^ u i c f , 1 


Primary Use 


Base, 


subbase, shoulders 


Sjbbase and 
shoulder Base, subbase, shoulders 
occational base 


Quantity of 
additive 3y 
v.ei ght 


3-8 


5-9; 9-12. 10-16 


2-6 2-3 3-6 3-6 5-5' 


Coarse 
granular 


A 




N A A 


Fine 
granular 




A 


N A' A 


Relative effect 
of soil types Fine low- 
Pi 




A 


A 3 


Grained Hi 
PI 




B 


A 


Compress ive 
strength 


LI 


LI LI LI 


222 
LI LI MI MI SI 


Flexural 

strenqth 


LI 


LI LI MI 


- o -5 
MI? MI? MI MI Sr 


. . Durabilit, 
Relative change 


LI 


LI LI MI 


LI LI LI LI MI 


in soi 1 Dens i iv 


SI 


SI-NC NC-SD SD 


$r> MD SI-SD 3I-SC SD 


properties Watc-r 
absorption 


SD 


SD LD MD 


LD LD LD LO LD 


Water 
reterit ion 


SD 


SD LD MD 


LD L:> LD LJ LO 


Per~ieabi 1 i ty 


LD 


LD SD NIC -SI 


SD-SI SI LD L: Si: 


Vol ume 
c harqe 


LD 


LD LD MD 


LD LD MD MD MD 


Plast ici ty 


MD 


MD MD LD? 


LD I?- SI? "I SD 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



5-5 



S-2 Summary of Stabilization Methods - Continued 

a Cementing Agents (increased strength through action) - Centred 



Li me fly ash 



Base, subbase, shoulders 



3-5% Lime 5-9% Lime 
10-20% fly ash 10-25% fly ash 



LI 



LI 



MI 



N/A 



LI 



LI 



MI 



LI 
SD 



LI 
SD 



MI 
SD 



SD 



SD 



LD 



SD 
LD 



SD 
LD 



LD 
SD 



LD 
MD 



LD 
MD 



LD 
LD 



I 



Table 5-2. Summary of Stabilization Methods Continued 

a. Cementing Agents (increased strength through action) - Continued 



Cement 



Lime 
(hydrated & quick) 



Bituminous 
(with asphalt or tar) 



Lime flyash 



Primary use 



Base, subbase, shoulders Subbase & shoulders 



Base, subbase, shoulders Subbase & shoulder; 



Construction 


Pulverize, mix, com- Pulverize, mix, com- 


Batch 


Pulverize, mix, com- 


procedure 


pact, cure. For best pact and cure. 


Plant 


pact cure. A sup. 




results, use plant 


or hot 


base req. Plant 




mix and granular 


pen. 


Mix operation and 




aggregate. 


Mix, 


granular aggre- 






cure, 


gate. 






com- 








pact. 





Limitations 



Unique 

advantages 



Organic soils, some 
fat clays, sand and 
gravels of highly 
uniform grain size 
and acidic podzolic 
sands do not respond 
to treatment. 

Develops high strength 
more rapidly than 
1 ime or 1 ime fly ash 
products. 



Gravel and sand soils 
with less than 25% 
finer than the #200 
sieve do not respond 
to treatment. Quick- 
1 ime in caustic. 



Construction expedi- 
ent; quickly lowers 
PI of clay. Moder- 
ate delay between 
mixing and compac- 
tion not critical . 



Creeps under high Develops strength 
temperature or sus- slowly; requires 
tained load; cutback warm tempera- 
or emulsions re- tures (50 F.+) for 
quire warm temp long duration to 
for curing. cure sufficiently. 



Waterproofing effect 



Cure can be inter- 
rupted and re- 
started without 
adverse effects. 
Speed not essen- 
tial 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 5-7 



r 



TM S-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



Table 5-2. Summary oi Stabilization Methods - Continued 
b. Modifiers 



Primary function 


Incr ease 


stabi 1 i ty 


Stabilization method 


Compaction 


Mech blending of soils 


Primary use 


Base, subbase, , , , 
, ' , . . , Base and s ubbase 
subgrade, shoulders 


Quantity of additives required by weight 


Rel. effect on soil Coarse granular 


B 


A 


types " 

Fine granular 


A-WG 
B-PG 


A 


Fine 
Grained Low PI 

Cm' 1 c . - 


A 


N/A 


High PI 




B N/A 


Relative change Compressive 
s trength 


MI MI MI 3 


MI 3 MI MI 


Flexural strength 


SI SI SI 3 


SI 3 SI SI 


Durabi 1 i ty 


NC NC MI 3 


MI 3 NC NC 


Density 


I I I 


I or D LI LI 


Water a bsorption 


NC NC SD 


SD NC NC 


Water r etention 


NC NC SD 


SD NC-SI NC-SI --- 


Permeabi 1 ity 


SD SD SI-LD 


SI-LD SD-MD SD-MD - 


Volume change 


NC NC SD 3 


MD 3 NC NC 


Plasticity 


NC NC NC 


NC NC NC 



TM S-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



Table 5-2. Summary of Stabilization Methods Continued 
b. Modifiers Continued 



Reduce plasticity 


vol ume change 


and res i 


1 ience 


Waterproof 




Cement 


Lime 


Bi tumens 


Subgrade, subbase 


, Subgrade, 


subbase 


Subbase, subgrade 




1 -4% 


2-6% 


1 -4% 


2-6% 


1 -4% 


1 -L/ i -k% 


N/A 






N/A 




B 




N/A 






N/A 






A 




A 




B 






B 






B 




A 




N/A 





MI 


SI 


MI 


MI 


MC 


SI SI 


--- 


MI 


SI 


MI 


MI 


MC 


SI SI 


--- 


MI 


SI 


MI 


MI 


SI 


MI MI 


- 


NC-SD 


NC-SD --- SD 


SD 


SI 


SI SI-SD 


--- 


MD 


MD 


MD 


LD 


SD-SI 


MD MD 


--- 


MD 


MD 


MD 


MD 


SI-SD 


--- 





SD-SI 


SI 


SD-SI 


SI 


LD 


LD SD 


--- 


MD 


MD 


MD 


LD 


NC 


NC SD 





MD 


MD 


MD 


LD 


SI? 


SI? SD? 



Table 5-2. Summary of Stabilization Methods Continued 
b. Modifiers Continued 



Cons tructior. 


Vibration Sheeps foci and 


rtix. thorough- 


Pulverize, mix, 


P'jlverize, nix, 


"', i A , cur o 


p mcedure 


equipment pneunat ic 


ly wi th field 


and compact. 


compact , 


and 




and steel cornp ;-i 


equipment 




and cure. 


cc,-pac t . 




rollers, aeration and 


or batch 










water addi- 


plants, then 










t ion varied 


compact . 










as req. 










Li mi tat ions 


Ultimate change in properties 


Sufficient mod- 


Cost may not 


Cost may not 


Cost nay 




smal 1 compared to that 


ification of 


be j us ti f ied 


by justified 


not be 




achieved by some stabilizers. 


det r imenta 1 


by modest 


by modes t 


j us ti f i ed 






soi 1 may be 


property im- 


property im- 


by modest 






cos tl y 


provement. 


provement 


property 












improvement 


Un i que 


Low cost and ease of control 


Can make un- 


Construct ion 


Construe t ion 


Helps main- 


advantages . 




sui table soi 1 


expedient; 


expedient ; 


tain "As 






suitable. 


improve un- 


improve 


Con-^, tructtd" 








sui tabl e 


unsui tabl e 


condi tion. 








soi Is. 


soi Is. 




Legend ; 












A -Most suitable soil type for given stabilization 


M 


-Moderate 






method - significant property 


improvements 


S 


-Sma \ \ 






B -Moderate property improvements 




? 


-Uncertain 




N/A -Not suitable for use with given soil 


I 


-Increase 






WG -Wei 1 graded soils 




D 


-Decrease 






PG -Poorly graded 




NC 


-No change 






L -Large 











Notes : 



.Not suitable unless granular material contains excess plastic fines. 

..Cementing effect and resulting strength increase greatest for low temperature and dynamic loads. 
^Provided water content, density and compaction method are properly controlled. 
Unless increase desired through additives of fines. 



1M 3- 



3-1 I 



Section IS. SOIL-CEMENT STABILIZATION 



5-5. Soil-Cement Tests 

Soil-cement stabilization consists of mixing soil, ce- 
ment, and water in definite proportions and compact- 
ing the mixture to a prescribed density. The tests are 
performed to determine three fundamental require- 
ments : the amount of cement to be added, the amount 
of water to be added, and the density to which the 
soil-cement must be compacted. 

a. Description. There are three standard tests: 
moisture-density, wet-dry, and f reeze-thaw ; a short- 
cut test for sandy soils; and a rapid test procedure 
used for soil-cement stabilization. The moisture-den- 
sity test determines the proper (optimum) moisture 
content and maximum density for molding laboratory 
specimens. In the field, this test is used to determine 
the quantity of water to be added and the density to 
which the mixture should be compacted. The wet-dry 
test indicates whether the hardened soil-cement will 
stay hard or soften from exposure to moisture varia- 
tions. The f reeze-thaw test not only shows how soil- 
cement reacts to weather, but also whether the cement 
has hardened the soil or not. Shortcut test procedures 
for sandy soils do not involve a series of new tests, 
but rather use previous test information to reduce 
the testing required. The rapid test procedure is ade- 
quate for emergency construction and for small proj- 
ects where more complete testing is impractical. 

5. Selection of Cement Contents. Specimens pre- 
pared with very high cement contents will all pass 
the tests and a minimum cement factor cannot be 
determined. On the other hand, inadequate cement 
contents will cause all specimens to fail the test. 

(1) The principal requirement of a hardened 
soil-cement mixture is to withstand exposure to the 
elements. Although strength is a requirement also, 
most soil-cement mixtures which possess adequate 
resistance to the elements also possess adequate 
strength. The reverse is not always true. 

For example, a compacted, clay loam soil (without 
added cement) can withstand relatively heavy loads. 
When mixed with cement and compacted, the same 
soil will have a stability equal to that of the raw 
soil (before the cement hardens) . Under the effects 
of moisture, the original soil (without cement) will 
lose stability even though compacted. The soil with 
cement, upon hardening, will show an increase in 
stability. 

(2) Economy is another important factor. Ex- 
perience shows that approximately 85 percent of the 
soils considered for soil-cement stabilization can be 
adequately stabilized by adding 14 percent or less of 
cement. However, more than 50 percent require only 
10 percent or less of cement. Selecting the optimum 
amount can result in a sizable saving of cement. 

(3) As a general rule, the cement requirement 



increases as the silt and clay content increases, and a 
gravelly or sandy soil will require less cement. There 
is one exception. A poorly graded, one-size-particle 
sand with no silt and clay will require more cement 
than a sandy soil with some silt and clay. Well graded 
mixtures, containing gravel, coarse and fine sands, 
and with or without small amounts of silt or clay, 
require percent or less of cement by weight. The 
poorly graded, one-particle-size sand requires about 
9 percent by weight, while the other sandy soils only 
Y percent. Nonplastic or moderately plastic silty soils 
require 10 percent and plastic clays 13 percent or 
more. The following listing indicates the usual range 
in cement requirements. Where classification appears 
in more than one category, plasticity and organic 
content are considerations. The cement contents are 
used as preliminary estimates which are verified or 
modified as the test data become available. 

Cement required 
Soil classifioatton* (percent By weight) 

GW, GP, SW, SP, GM, or SM 3-5 

SP, GM, SM, or GP 5-8 

SM, SO, some GM or GC 5-9 

SP 7-11 

CL or ML 7-12 

ML, MH, or OH 8-13 

CL, CH ,9-15 

OH, MH, or some CH 10-16 

*See chapter 2 for description of soil classifications. 

c. Preparation for Testing. Two methods of test- 
ing will be described. The first is used with soils con- 
taining material that is retained on the No. 4 sieve 
(up to a maximum of 45 percent) , and the second for 
soils not containing material that is retained on the 
No. 4 sieve. The maximum size particle used in the 
test specimen is % inch. If larger particles are present 
in the sample, they are replaced with an equivalent 
weight of material from, the portion that passes the 
% -inch sieve and is retained on the No. 4 sieve (para 
2-G4&). About 75 to 100 pounds of soil are prepared 
for testing. When necessary, the sample is dried until 
it is friable under a trowel. This may be accomplished 
by air-drying or oven-drying at a temperature of 
60 C. (140 F.). The soil is then separated on the 
3-inch, 3^-inch, and No. 4 sieves. All clusters should 
be broken up into individual particles. The soil pass- 
ing the No. 4 sieve should be well mixed and stored in 
a covered container throughout the duration of the 
test. The material larger than the 3-inch sieve is not 
included in the calculations of grain-size distribu- 
tion, but its quantity is noted and the material dis- 
carded. The material retained on the %-inch and No. 
4 sieves is weighed and the weights recorded. They 
will be used in the computations. The material re- 
tained on the %-inch sieve is replaced with the ma- 
terial retained on the No. 4 sieve. 



Before starting this test, it is necessary to select the 
cement contents that will be used in the f reeze-thaw 
and wet-dry tests. The cement contents are usually 
selected in 2-percent increments to encompass the 
values given in paragraph 5-5. 
For example, the table lists 7 to 11 percent for the SP 
sand. The cement content increments would be 7, 9, 
and 11 percent. In the CL-CH group (9-15 percent) , 
the selected increments would be 10, 12, and 14 per- 
cent. Since maximum density varies only slightly 
with variations in the cement content, only the 
median value is used in preparing specimens for the 
moisture -density test. The procedures for determin- 
ing the optimum moisture content (OMC ) are similar 
to those described in paragraphs 2-63 to 2-66 with 
the following exceptions. Compaction is performed 
on. five layers of approximately equal thickness to 
result in a total compacted depth of 5 inches. Each 
layer is compacted by 25 uniformly spaced blows of 
a 10 pound tamper (2 inch diameter face) dropped 
from a height of 18 inches. The computations and 
OMC determination then follow the procedures de- 
scribed in paragraph 2-65. 

5-7. Wet-Dry and Freeze-Thaw Tests 
After determining the maximum density and OMC, 
specimens must be molded for the wet-dry and f reeze- 
thaw tests. These specimens are prepared using the 
computed OMC and the cement contents described 
above for the different soil classifications. The cement 
contents are selected in 2 percent increments either 
side of the median value. Two specimens are molded 
for each of the three cement contents; one for the 
wet-dry test, and one for the freeze-thaw test. The 
same procedure is used to mold the specimens as was 
used for the OMC determination. Special care must 
be used to scarify the surfaces between layers to as- 
sure a good bond. When the second layer is being 
placed, a 750 gram sample should be taken for a 
moisture determination. The molded specimens are 
placed in a moisture cabinet in an atmosphere of high 
humidity for 7 clays to permit cement hydration 
before testing. 

a. Conducting the Wet-Dry Test. After this 7 day 
curing period, the specimens are submerged in tap- 
water at room temperature for a period of 5 hours 
and removed. Then the specimens are dried in an 
oven at 71 C. (160 F.) for 42 hours and removed. 
The entire surface area is wire brushed to remove all 
material loosened during wetting and drying. Use 
two firm strokes on each portion of the surface. These 
strokes are applied full height and width with a 3 
pound force. Five hours of water immersion, 42 hours 
of drying, and 1 hour of handling constitutes one 
cycle. The operation is repeated for a total of 12 
cycles. After 12 cycles of test, the specimens are dried 



to determine tlie oven-dry weignts. 

1). Conducting the Freeze-Thaw Test. After the 
curing period, water-saturated felt pads about 14 inch 
thick, blotters, or similar absorptive materials are 
placed between the specimens and specimen carriers, 
and the assembly is placed in a freezing cabinet 
with a constant temperature not warmer than 23 
C. ( 10 F.) for 24 hours and removed. The assem- 
bly is then allowed to thaw in a moist room or in 
suitable covered containers with a temperature of 
21 C. (70 F.) and a relative humidity of 100 per- 
cent for 23 hours. Free water is made available to 
the absorbent pads to permit the specimens to absorb 
water by capillarity during the thawing period. The 
specimens are next given two firm strokes on all 
areas with the wire brush to remove material loosened 
during freezing and thawing. Scale that has formed 
should be removed, with a sharp pointed instrument 
if necessary. Twenty- four hours of freezing, 23 hours 
of thawing, and 1 hour of handling (total 48 hours) 
constitutes one cycle. After being brushed at the end 
of each thawing period, the specimens are turned 
over end-for-end before they are replaced on the 
water-saturated pads. The test is continued for a total 
of 12 cycles after which the specimens are dried to 
constant weight at 110 C. (230 F.) and weighed to 
determine their oven-dry weights. 

5-8. Comprehensive Strength Test 
As mentioned previously, compressive strength is a 
supplementary consideration to the resistance to 
weather. Five specimens are molded, for each of the 
three cement contents (para. 5-7) , using the optimum 
moisture and the molding procedure of the moisture- 
density test. If a 4 inch diameter, 4.6 inch high speci- 
men is to be molded (a 2.0 inch diameter, 4.0 inch 
high specimen is also acceptable) , only the samples 
with material retained on the N"o. 4 sieve (up to 45 
percent maximum) are used. Compressive strength 
tests are conducted after 2, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days 
(tests at 14 and 21 days are optional). Four hours 
prior to the test, one specimen at each cement content 
is withdrawn from the moisture cabinet and im- 
mersed in tap water at room temperature (approx. 
70 F.) . Each specimen is tested in the compression 
machine until failure and the total load required 
for failure is recorded. The compressive strength in 
pounds per square inch is computed by dividing the 
total load by the average area of the top and bottom 
of the specimen. 

59. Calculations and Criteria 

The results of the wet-dry and freeze-thaw cycles 
are indicated as soil-cement losses. These losses are 
computed by using the original dry weights and final 
corrected dry weights. 






TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

a. Water-Of -Hydration Correction. The final 
oven-dry weight of the specimen includes some water 
used for cement hydration that cannot be driven off 
at 110 C. (230 F.). The average amount of this 
water retained in the specimen is based on the type 
of soil; gravels iy 2 percent , sands 2% percent , 
silts 3 percent , and clays 3i percent . This cor- 
rection is computed by the following formula: 

Corrected oven-dry weight 

measured oven-dry weight of specimen 
percent water retained +100 

Example: Sample composed mostly of sand weighs 
3.77 pounds at the end of the test. Water 
of hydration is 2.5 percent. 

Corrected oven-dry weight = 



Z>. Soil-Cement Loss. The soil-cement loss can now 
be calculated, as a percentage of the original dry 
weight, or: 
Soil-cement loss= 



original oven-dry weight final 

corrected oven-dry weight 

original oven-dry weight 



X100 



Example: The sample in the example above weighed 
3.99 pounds originally. 

Q QQ _Q AQ 

Soil-cement loss= ' r' Da X100 = 7.8% 



This value would be reported to the nearest whole 
number or as 8 percent. 

c. Weight Loss Criteria. The minimum cement 
content recommended for use is the one for which 
losses of specimen weight during 12 cycles of the 
wet-dry test or freeze-thaw conform to the follow- 
ing standards: 

GW, GM, GC 5 SW, SM, SO, and SP soils, not 

over 14 percent. 

ML, 'and MH soils, not over 10 percent. 
CL, CH, OH, and Ol soils, not over 7 percent. 

d. Strength Criteria. The strength of soil cement 
specimens tested in compression at various ages 
should increase with age and with increases in 
cement, in the ranges of cement contents producing 
results meeting the requirements above. A sample 
that has an unconfined compression strength of ap- 
proximately 300 p.s.i. after curing 7 days and shows 
increasing strength with age can be considered ade- 
quately stabilized. 



5-13 

e. Cement Weight- to -Volume Conversion. The re- 
quired cement content by weight must be converted 
to the equivalent cement content by volume for con- 
trol during construction, since this is the easier 
quantity to use in the field. The following formula 
illustrates the calculation. 



Volume of cement (percent) = 



94 



X100 



Where: 

D= oven-dry density of soil-cement (Ib/cu ft) 

n __ 100+ percent cement (by weight) 
c _ __ 

94= weight of 1 cu ft of cement. 

The nomograph in figure 5-1 makes the conversion 
without computation. Use a straightedge placed at 
the soil-cement density and at the percent by weight 
of cement. Read the percent cement by volume on 
the right-hand scale. 

5-10. Modified Mix Design for Sandy Soils 
Sandy soils are generally the most readily and eco- 
nomically stabilized becaues they require the least 
amount of cement for adequate hardening and be- 
cause they contain a minimum amount of material 
which prevents intimate mixing of soil and cement. 
The following shortcut testing procedures for sandy 
soils will not always indicate the minimum cement 
contents required but the results will be close enough 
to be on the safe side and economical. If time per- 
mits, the procedures in paragraph 5-9 are followed 
for greater economy of design. 

a. Two procedures are used ; one for soils not con- 
taining material retained on the No. 4 sieve, and the 
other for soils containing material retained on the 
No. 4 sieve. The procedures can be used only with soils 
containing less than 50 percent of material smaller 
than 0.05 mm (silt and clay) and less than 20 per- 
cent smaller than 0.005 mm (clay). Dark gray to 
black sandy soils obviously containing appreciable 
organic impurities, together with miscellaneous 
granular materials such as cinders, caliche, chat, 
chert, marl, red dog, scoria, shale, and sla-g should 
be tested using the full procedures and not tested 
by the modified methods for sandy soils. When 
coarse grained or sandy soils (generally of groups 
GW, GP, GM, SW, or SM) are encountered, they 
may be classified for testing purposes using either 
the first or the second procedure. There is one other 
exception. Granular soils with materials retained 
on the No. 4 sieve whose bulk specific gravity is less 
than 2.45 cannot be tested. 



5-14 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



-100 



-105 



-18 
-17 
-16 
-15 
14 
-13 

-12 



-10 



-9 



-115 



-120 



-125 



-130 



-135 



-140 



H45 



-5 



-4 



-16 
-15 
i-14 

-13 
-12 



7 *~ 




10 



-9 



-8 



-7 




-6 



-5 



Figure 5-1. Relation o~f cement content 'by weight of oven-&ry soil to cement content 'by volume of compacted soil-cement 

mixture. 



H). The procedure consists of Itlie following 
sequence : 

(1) Determine the soil gradation. 

(2) Determine the bulk specific gravity of the 
material retained on the No. 4 sieve. Procedure is 
described in paragraph 2-3'5. 

(3) Perform the moisture-density test of an 
estimated soil-cement mixture. 



(4) Locate the indicated cement requirements 
from the charts. 

(5) Perform compressive-strength tests to ver- 
ify the cement requirement. 

c. The step-by-step method for soils with no mate- 
rial retained on the No. 4 sieve is -as follows : 

(1) Determine the maximum density and OMC 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 
130 



20% SILT ft CLAY OF 



MINUS N0.4 FRACTION 




20 40 60 80 100 

N0.4 TO NO.BO SIEVE SIZE MATERIAL OF MINUS N0.4 FRACTION-PER CENT 

Figure 5-2. Average maximum densities of the minus No. j. fraction of soil-cement mixtures. 



for a mixture of soil and cement. (Fig. 5-2 will give 
an estimated maximum, density. This value and the 
percentage of material smaller than 0.05 -mm are 



used with fig. 5-3 to determine an estimated ce: 
content.) 

(2) Use the maximum density value 




Figure 5-3. Indicated, cement contents of soil 
300 



10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Material smaller than 0.05mm.- per cent 

'.-cement mixtures not containing material retained on the No. 



4 sieve. 



a. 



If 

i "a> 
N. 

c 



250 



200 




10 



15 20 25 30 35 

Material smaller than O.OSmm.- percent 



40 



45 



50 



Figure 5-4. Minimum 1-day compressive strengths required for soil-cement not containing material retained on the No. 4 sieve. 

above) 'and figure 5-3 to determine an indicated 
cement requirement. 

(3) Mold three compressive-strengt'h speci- 
mens at maximum density and OMC. 

(4) Moist-cure the specimens for 7 days 'and test 
for strength. 

(5) Plot the value of the averaged compressive 
strength on figure 5-4. If this plot is above the curve, 
the cement factor is probably too low and needs 
adjusting. Two new test specimens are prepared; one 
at the cement content as computed in (2) above, and 
the second with a 2 percent higher cement content. 
The full f reeze-thaw test is performed on these two 
specimens. 

d. The method of testing of soils containing mate- 
rial retained on the No. 4 sieve is as follows : 

(1) Determine the maximum density and opti- 
mum moisture content for a mixture of soil and ce- 
ment. Use figure 5-i5 for an estimated maximum 
density, and figure 5-6 with tihis density, percentage 
of material retained on the No. 4 sieve, and percent- 
age smaller than 0.05 -mm to determine cement con- 
tent. The 45 percent maximum retained on No. 4 sieve 

(discussed in para 5-8) still applies. Also, any mate- I0 20 30 40 

rial larger than % inch must be replaced with an Motenai smaller than o.os mm -percent 

equivalent weight of the material passing the %- Figure 5-5. Average maximum densities of soil-cement mte- 

inch sieve and retained on tJhe No. 4 sieve. tures containing material retained on No. 4 sieve. 



20 



10 




TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



5-17 



Cement content by weight - per cent 









i 


3 




i 






2 






1 




i 


I 




, 






10 






i 




c 


) 




! 






8 






, 






p 










i 






I 






5 
















S 














s. - 


, 










' 




* 










' 


k S 












\ 


k S 












s 


l, 












\ 


/ 


, 1 














> 


\/f 


-) 










S, 














\ 


Sh 












\ 














\ 


^ 












\ 


$ 


V 










\ 


W 




x 












\ 














\J 














\j 














VI 














\ 












i 


\ 














y 




V 














\ 














S, 














ik 












>j 


ly 












s 


. 










l 


\ 


. 












\ 






vi 


5 










H 


L 












s 














s 














N 














\ 










i 




\ 










^ 


\ 






\ 


kj 












\ 














\ 














\ 














\ 














\ 








4 






V 






/ 




j 






















V 














V. 














\ 












' 


\ 














v 






I 






A 




/ 






f 








^ 


V 


? 










^ 


. 












N 














N 














\ 














\ 






I 








\ 






/ 


/ 












'; 












> 














\ 














\ 














\ 














\ 




1 








/ 


s 


f 




j' 












s 


'^ 












\ 














\ 














V 














I 














s. 


1 






/ 




) 






/ 














S"" 














V 












* 


^ 












s 


. 












s 














S 


,4 




/ 






f 


\ 


/ 


~2_ 


o 












N 


\ < 












s 














\ 














N 














\ 














V 


f 


' 




/ 




/ 


\ 


2 




\ 












\ 


-4 












\ 














\ 














\J 














\ 












1, 


K 




/ 




J 




/ 


^j. 






\ 












\d 


"&.. 












\ 














y. 












\j 


V 














V 










^1 


> 


V 






f 


f 


' 




i n 






V 










> 


V s 


^ . 
























N 














\ 






















f 


1 


j 


> 




/ 




/ 




'\ 




N 




\ 














"j. 












\ 














\ 














\ 














\ 




j 




1 


/ 




\( 




/ 




/ 








\ 




S 










1 


\ 














V 














\ 














\ 














\f\ 


* 




A 




X 


\ 


< 




/ 






?o 






s. 




\ 










\ 


s 












i 














\ 














s 














A 




/ 


i 


/ 






\ 


/ 










s 






X 




v^ 










N 




























\ 














\ 














X 








J 




/ 


\ 








"*r\ 




\ 




N 




' 


s. 










\ 














s 














\ 














\ 






/ 




/ 




V 


^i 


A 


r 


/ 






\ 








\ 




v 




r\ 






t 










k 














s, 














. 












\ 




/ 




/ 






r> 




/ 


* 








\ 










\ 




s. 




\ 




\ 


^ 








N 














V 














N 














X 




^ 






/ 


. 


A 


/ 


f 










\ 




40 


^ 




V 


> 


x 




\ 




s, 










\ 














\ 














\ 










f 




V 


' 




/ 




/ 


J 


\ 














\ 






V 


> 




Nj 






\ 




\ 










V 














V 














X 






^ 




J 


/\ 


V 


/ 






^ 


'*, 




V. 












N 






N 








\ 






\J 




s 








N 














V 














N 




/ 




J 


t 




^ 




/ 


/ 


/ 


i 




N 












N 








N 




\ 




s 







s, 




\ 








\ 














\ 














V 




s 


' 




f 




K 


^ 


* 




i 






\ 




















\ 




\ 




\ 




^ 


S^ 




X 








V 














\ 














y 


r 




/ 


. 


/ 


/ 


\ 






i 








\ 




















\ 




\ 




\ 






^ 




S 






1 


. 














. 






/ 




/ 


'\ 


\ / 




/ 


s 






> 






i 








\ 






















\ 




\ 




\ 






Xj 




s 






^ 














s 




j 








j 




s\ 


r 


/ 








\j 














\ 






















\ 




\ 




\ 






s 




s 


s, 




s^ 














X 




/ 




/ 




/ 


\ 


/ 












\ 














\ 






















X, 




s 




s 






X 










s. 










s 




K 










. 


/\ 


h 












V 














> 
























X, 




x 




s 


x 










*s 


A 








i/ 




/ 


> 


/ 




j 


s 


- 


f 


N 














\ 














\ 
























X 




s 






y 












^ 


b^ 


. 






/ 


\s 


\ 


** 


^ 










\ 














\ 














S 
























% 


s 




s, 


Itfc- 


x 


n. 






^ 


^ 








^ 








s 














L 














s, 












V 




























v, 


>v. 








> 


c 








r 1 


w 










N 














N 














\ 












N 
















































\ 














\ 




I 










\ 














\ 




























































\ 














\ 














s,. 

























10 



40 



45 



40 Q. 



30 -2 



20 



10 -2 



50 



15 20 25 30 35 

Motenal smaller than 0.05 mm -percent 

Figure 5-6. Indicated cement contents of soil-ce-ment mixtures containing material retained, on No. 4 sieve. 

-45 



c. 

Q) 
O 

t_ 
O) 

o. 



e 

E 

S 30 
d 

c. 
o 

.c 



20 
o 
E 




10 







Figure 5-7. Minimum 7-day compressive strengths required for soil-cement mixtures containing material retained on No. 4 

sieve. 



40 



30 



20 



10 



5-18 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



(2) Using .the maximum density from (1) above 
and figure 5-6, determine the indicated cement 
requirement. 

(3) Mold test specimens at maximum density 
and OMJC. 

(4) After 7 days moist-curing (para 4-6) test 
for compressive strength and average. 

(5) Using figure .5-7, determine the allowable 
compressive strength for the soil-cement mixture. 
Connect points on the right- and left-hand scales of 
the nomograph and read the minimum required com- 
pressive strength from the inclined center scale. If 
the tested strength is equal to or greater than the al- 
lowable, the cement content is adequate. If the 
strength is too low, the cement factor is also too low, 
and a full test should be performed. 

5-1 1 . Approximate and Rapid Tests 

a. Squeeze Test. A sample mixture of soil, cement, 
and water may be tested for optimum moisture con- 
tent by squeezing some in the hands. When squeezed 
firmly, the sample at optimum moisture content will 
form a cast that will cling together and moisten the 
hands but water cannot be squeezed out of the 
mixture. 

6. "Pick" and "Click" Tests. Specimens covering a 
wide range of cement contents (for example: 10 per- 



cent, 14 percent and 18 percent) are molded at opti- 
mum moisture and maximum density. After at least 1 
or 2 days of hardening while kept moist, and after 
a 3-hour soaking period, the specimens are inspected 
by "picking" done with a pointed instrument such 
as a dull ice pick or bayonet and by sharply "click- 
ing" each specimen against a hard object such as 
concrete or another sound specimen, to determine 
their relative hardness when set. If the specimen can- 
not be penetrated more than % to ^4 i ncn by "pick- 
ing" and if it produces a clear or solid tone upon 
"clicking" an adequate cement factor is indicated. 
When a dull thud or "punky" sound is obtained, 
there is inadequate cement even though the specimen 
may resist picking. The age of the specimens is defi- 
nitely a factor, and a specimen which may not test 
properly at first try may harden properly a few 
days later. Some satisfactory specimens require 7 
days or longer to produce adequate hardening. The 
test results will indicate the proper content. If the 
results show that some intermediate content may be 
satisfactory, new test specimens (at the suggested 
content) should be prepared and tested. It is impor- 
tant to remember that too much cement is not harm- 
ful (although more expensive), but that too little 
will not produce a satisfactory stabilization. 



Section HI. BITUMINOUS STABILIZATION TESTS 



5-12. Description 

Bituminous soil stabilization refers to a process by 
which a controlled amount of bituminous material is 
thoroughly mixed with an existing soil or aggregate 
material to form a stable base or wearing surface. 
Bitumen increases the cohesion and load-bearing ca- 
pacity of the soil and renders it resistant to the action 
of water. Bitumens used include asphalt cutbacks, 
asphalt emulsions, and tar. The type of soils most 
readily stabilized with bituminous materials are 
granular friable, contain small amounts of clay and 
silt, and are free of mica, organic material, and other 
injurious substances. Gradation and plasticity re- 
quirements for soils to be stabilized with bituminous 
materials are as follows : More than 50 percent pass- 
ing the No. 4 sieve and less than 35 percent passing 
the No. 200 sieve ; liquid limit less than 25, and PI 
less than 5. Asphalt-treated base courses should have 
no more than 12 percent passing the No. 200 sieve 
with a PI of the passing No. 40 fraction of less 
than 10. 

a. Type of Bituminous Material. Generally the 
heaviest grade of bitumen which can be readily 
worked into the soil is employed. This will depend 
upon the soil, the available mixing equipment, and 
the weather at the time of construction. The RC 
grades work best and are recommended for use in the 



extremely sandy soils or those containing a minimum 
of silt and clay particles. As the silt and clay parti- 
cles become more prevalent in the sandy soil, a me- 
dium curing cutback is advised. In soils that have as 
much as 30 to 40 percent silt and clay particles, 
slow-curing asphalts have been successfully used, 
particularly in arid regions. The following types of 
bituminous material have been successfully used: 

(1) Asphalt cutback. 

(a) Rapid-curing grades, RC-70 to RC-800. 
(&) Medium-curing grades, MC-70 to MC- 
800. 

(c) Slow-curing grades, SC-70 to SC-800. 

(2) Slow-setting emulsions. 

(3) Tars of grades RT-3 to RT-7. 

Z>. Quantity of Bitumen. Bitumen contents in the 
range of 3 to 9 percent, exclusive of volatile materials, 
are generally used for soil stabilization with increas- 
ing fines in the soil requiring the higher bitumen 
contents. The quantity to be employed is first esti- 
mated from the results of the soil analysis. If no tests 
are to be used to determine the bitumen content, y 2 
gallon of liquid bitumen per square yard per inch 
of compacted depth should be specified as a starting 
point for trial mixing, corrections to be made to trial 
mixes as deemed necessary. If testing is to be used f 01 
determining actual bitumen percentages, the tesi 



TM 5-S30/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

procedures of paragraph 5-7 should be followed, 
testing the estimated content and a range of bitumen 
contents above and below the estimated value at y 2 - 
to 1-percent intervals. These estimated percentages 
are actual bitumen contents, exclusive of volatile ma- 
terials, based on the material finer than the No. 4 sieve 
in the soil. Additional bitumen, approximately 3 
percent by dry weight of the plus No. 4 portion of 
the soil, is required for wetting the coarser material. 
The total bitumen content to be specified is deter- 
mined from the following formula : 

Percent bitumen specified (percent bitumen 

determined by test) X (percent of minus No. 

4 material) -f- (3 percent of plus No. 4 

materials) . 

513. Method of Testing Mixtures 
This method (ASTM Designation D 915) provides 
for determination of water absorption, expansion, 
and extrusion characteristics of compacted soil or 
soil- aggregate mixtures containing liquid bituminous 
materials. The method may be used for determining 
the characteristics of a mixture of specified propor- 
tions under specified conditions of curing or noncur- 
ing. Also, it may be used for determining the effects 
on these characteristics of varying the curing and the 
proportions of the different ingredients. The test 
results are not intended for use in formulas to deter- 
mine thickness nor to predict relative field perform- 
ance of the different bituminous materials. 

a. Apparatus. The apparatus will consist of the 
following : 

(1) Mechanical mixer. Capable of producing in- 
timate mixtures of soil, water, and bituminous 
material. 

(2) Compaction apparatus. Specified in the 
Tentative Method of Testing Soil-Bituminous Mix- 
tures, ASTM Designation D 915 consists of the 
following : 

( a} Compaction mold. A cylindrical hardened 
steel mold having an inside diameter of 2.000 0.001 
inch, a length of 5.25 inches, and an outside diameter 
of 2.5 inches or greater. The mold is equipped with 
a suitable device to control the specified drop and to 
protect the top of the mold during precompaction 
with the tamper. 

( b ) Compaction plungers. One hardened steel 
plunger having a circular face, 1.997 0.001 inch in 
diameter and a length of 5.5 inches ; and one hardened 
steel plunger having a diameter of 1.997 0.001 inch 
and a length of 2.5 inches. 

(c) Tamper ( blade type) . The tamper is made 
of steel and has an overall length of 141^ inches. For 
the upper 6 inches, it is turned to a steel shank % inch 
in diameter and fitted with a wooden handle 1% 
inches outside diameter. The flat blade is Sy 2 inches 
in length, 1% inches in width next to the handle, and 



5-19 

1% inches in width of the tamping end. The thickness 
of the flat blade is % inch at the handle and for a dis- 
tance of 6y 2 inches below the handle. The lower 2 
inches of the blade is 14 inch in thickness with the 
tamping edge finished to a rounded edge. The total 
weight of the tamper is approximately 1200 grams. 

NOTE 

The inside diameters of all compaction 
and extrusion test apparatus and the diam- 
eter of the testing end of the test plunger 
should be checked periodically to assure ad- 
herence to the specified tolerances on dimen- 
sions. 

(3) Water absorption apparatus. A corrosion- 
resistant, flat-bottomed pan approximately 2 inches 
in depth, and a cabinet or moist room maintained at 
a temperature between 65 and 80 F. (18.5 and 
26.5 C.) , and relative humidity of at least 90 percent. 

(4) Extrusion test assembly. ASTM Designa- 
tion D 915 and consisting of the following: 

(a) Testing model. A cylindrical hardened 
steel mold 4.5 inches long having an outside diameter 
of 3 inches, and an inside diameter of 2.07:0.01 inch 
at the large end tapered to 2.0200.001 inch at a 
point 2.25 inches from the bottom and continuing at 
this diameter to the bottom. 

( b ) Test plunger. A cylindrical, hardened tool 
steel plunger having a diameter of 1.125:0.001 inch 
on the testing end for a distance of 2 inches, and then 
a diameter of 1.250+0.005 inch for a distance of 4 
inches, for an overall length of 6 inches. 

(c} Test plunger guide. A cylindrical steel 
guide or sleeve having an outside diameter of 
2.010:0.005 inch, an inside diameter of 1.265+0.005 
inch, and a length of 4 inches. 

(d} Testing ring. A hardened tool steel, an- 
nular plate, 0.25 inch in thickness, having a circular 
opening with a diameter of 1. 125 rt 0.001 inch. The 
cutting edge of the aperture is 0.0625 inch in thick- 
ness, and the aperture is tapered outward from the 
cutting edge at an angle of approximately 30 with 
the vertical. It is fitted with a "seat" 2.018 zfc 0.001 
inch in diameter and 0.05 inch in height. 

(e) Testing ring support. A testing ring sup- 
port of the Hubbarcl-Field type, or equivalent, 
adequate to support other parts of the extrusion test 
assembly. 

(5) Testing machine. A loading device of at 
least 10,000-pound capacity, capable of applying a 
load through a uniform motion of the testing head 
at a rate of 1 inch per minute. It is fitted with a device 
for continuously measuring the applied load, and is 
equipped with a maximum load indicator. 

(6) Drying oven. A drying oven capable of 
maintaining a temperature of 140 5 F. (60db 
3 C.) 



5-20 

(7) Measuring device. A measuring device that 
is accurately calibrated and equipped to determine 
heights and diameters of test specimens to the nearest 
0.01 inch. 

(8) Water determination apparatus. Apparatus 
conforming to the requirements of the Standard 
Method of Testing for Water in Petroleum Products 
and Other Bituminous Materials (ASTM Designa- 
tion : D 95) . The test apparatus is described in para- 
graph 5-14. 

(9) Balance. A balance having a capacity of 
2,000 grams or more and sensitive to 0.5 gram or less 
or a balance having a capacity of 500 grams or more 
and sensitive to 0.05 gram or less. 

(10) Sieves. No. 4 and No. 10 sieves. 

(11) Containers. Metal containers with tight- 
fitting lids for storing and "aging" mixtures. 

(12) Mixing pans, thermometers. 
5. Materials. 

(1) Distilled water. Used in preparing mixtures 
and in absorption tests. 

(2) Xylol. Used as the solvent for determining 
the moisture content of soil and soil-bituminous mix- 
tures in accordance with ASTM Method D 95. 

(3) Bituminous material. Emulsified asphalt, 
cutback, or other liquid asphalt, or tar; the type 
and grade as specified. 

c. Preparation of Soil. The air-dry soil is pulver- 
ized to separate the soil particles without reducing 
the particle size, and screened through a No. 4 sieve. 
The percentage retained on the No. 4 sieve is re- 
corded. The soil passing the No. 4 sieve is screened 
through the No. 10 sieve. If soil-binder clusters are 
retained on the No. 10 sieve, they are further pulver- 
ized to pass the No. 10 sieve. The material passing 
the No. 4 sieve and retained on the No. 10 sieve is 
then combined and intimately mixed with the ma- 
terial passing the No. 10 sieve. The soil thus pre- 
pared is stored in tightly closed containers. The water 
absorption, expansion, and extrusion tests are con- 
ducted on the total material passing the No. 4 sieve. 

d. Moisture Content and Dry Weight of Soil. 

(1) Moisture content. The moisture content of 
the air-dried soil is determined by testing 100 grams 
of the prepared soil by the procedures outlined in 
paragraphs 2-53 and 2-54. 

(2) Dry weight. The weight of dry soil to be 
used in the water absorption, expansion, and extru- 
sion tests is calculated as follows : 

Weight of dry soil=- 



1 + 



w 

Too 



TM 5-530/N'AVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

e. Preparation of Mixtures. 

( 1 ) Tar and liquid asphalt. 

(a) If the addition of water is required, the 
air-dried soil described in c above is weighed out in 
1,000-gram portions (calculated on the dry-soil basis) 
to supply sufficient mix materials for the required 
number of test specimens. The weighed quantity of 
soil is placed in the bowl of the mechanical mixer. 
The specified amount of distilled water, based upon 
the calculated dry weight of the soil and with due 
allowance for the determined moisture present, is 
added and roughly distributed by cutting and stir- 
ring with a stiff knife. The mixer is started and mix- 
ing continued for a total mixing period of 5 minutes, 
stopping when necessary to clean the sides of the 
mixing bowl and blade. Time spent in scraping the 
blade and sides of mixing bowl is not included in 
the mixing time. The soil-water mixture is then 
placed in a tightly closed metal container and al- 
lowed to stand for a period of 16 to 24 hours. 

(5) The aged soil-water mixture or air-dried 
soil is placed in 1,000-gram portions (calculated in 
the dry-soil basis) in the bowl of the mechanical 
mixer. The specified amount of bituminous material 
is added into a depression previously made in the 
prepared soil- water mixture and roughly stirred into 
the mixture by means of a stiff knife. The bowl is 
attached to the mixer, the mixer started, and mixing 
continued for a total mixing period of 5 minutes, 
stopping w r hen necessary to clean the sides of the 
mixing bowl and blade. Extra mixing may be per- 
formed by hand, if necessary, for an additional 5- 
minute period, using a rubber tipped pestle. The 
soil-bituminous mixture is placed in a tightly closed 
container and allowed to stand for a period of 4 
hours. The mixture is formed into specimens the 
same day the mix is prepared (/ below) . 

(2) Emulsi-fied asphalt. The air-dried soil pre- 
pared as described in c above is weighed out in 1,000- 
gram portions (calculated on the dry-soil basis) to 
supply sufficient mix material for the required num- 
ber of test specimens. The weighed quantity of soil 
is placed in the bowl of the mechanical mixer, th 
machine started at slow speed, and the specified 
amount of distilled water added to the moving mass 
Mixing is continued for a total elapsed period oJ 
5 minutes, stopping when necessary to clean the sides 
of the mixing bowl. Time spent in scraping the side; 
of mixing bowl is not included in the mixing- time 

~ o 

The specified amount of emulsified asphalt is adde< 
to the wetted soil and stirring continued for a mini 
mum of 5 minutes or a maximum of 10 minutes s< 
as to produce a mixture having visual homogeneity 
The completed mixture is placed in tared shallow 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3. 
NOTi 

Certain soils have a tendcy toward forma- 
tion of hard clods during drying. Special 
precautions are necessary at times to im- 
prove the handling characteristics and uni- 
formity of the mixture during compaction. 
In such cases, as soon as the consistency of 
the mixture will permit, it is cut with a 
spatula into dice-like pieces having approxi- 
mately 1/2- to %-mch edges. These diced 
cubes are stirred occasionally during dry- 
ing. When the cubes have dried to just 
'below the plastic limit consistency of the 
soil, they are placed in the bowl of the 
mechanical mixer and mixed at the second 
speed of the machine until a discrete, uni- 
form, granular mass is obtained. This 
worked mass is placed in tared shallow 
pans and allowed to continue to air-dry, 
while stirring with a spatula at intervals, 
to the specified moisture content. 
(3) Moisture content of mixture. The moisture 
content of the aged soil-bituminous mixture is deter- 
mined by testing 100 grams of the mixture in the 
water determination apparatus, using xylol as a 
solvent. The moisture content is calculated as follows : 

Moisture content, M, percent by weight 

yqoo+i?) 

-m- 



Where: 

V=milliliters of water collected in the water 

determination apparatus, and 
B= percentage by weight (calculated on the dry 

soil basis) of bituminous material added 

in preparing the mixture. 

If the percentage of moisture does not vary from the 
specified moisture content by more than 0.15, the soil- 
bituminous moisture is formed into specimens as de- 
scribed in / below. If the moisture content does not 
fall within this allowance tolerance, the mixture is 
discarded and a new mixture prepared. 

NOTE 

The percentages of moisture and of bitu- 
minous material are calculated on the basis 
of calculated dry soil =100 percent; that is, 
7 percent moisture, 5 percent bituminous 
material means 

Calculated dry soil _________________________ 100.0 grains 

Hygroscopic plus added moisture ____________ 7. grams 

Bituminous material ________________________ 5. grams 

/. Preparation of Specimens. 

(1) Number. Three specimens are prepared for 
each test result desired, making each test result the 



5-21 

average of three readings. Each of the three readings 
is recorded. 

(2) Molding. Portions of the soil-bituminous 
mixture, each sufficient to form a specimen 2.00 inches 
in diameter by 2.00 0.0 5 inch in height, are weighed 
and formed into specimens >as follows : 

(a) The short compaction plunger is inserted 
approximately 1 inch into the bottom of the compac- 
tion mold suitably supported to maintain its 
position during initial compaction. The weighed 
mixture is placed in the compaction mold. 

( ~b ) Initial compaction is obtained by 25 blows 
with the tamper. The tamper is allowed to fall 
freely from a height of 6 inches above the bottom of 
the specimen being formed, and is rotated between 
application of the blows. The long compaction 
plunger is then inserted into the top of the compac- 
tion mold, the support for the mold removed, and 
the entire assembly placed in the testing machine. 

(c) Final compaction is obtained by com- 
pressing the specimen at a constant rate of I inch 
per minute until a total load of 6,000 pounds is in- 
dicated. This load is maintained for 2 minutes. The 
specimen is removed from the mold, the top of the 
specimen as tamped is marked, and the specimen then 
weighed and measured for average height and dia- 
meter. The average height of the specimen should 
be 2.00 0.5 inch. Any specimens not conforming to 
the specified tolerance are discarded. 

(3) Density. The density is expressed on the 
basis of the calculated weight of dry soil in the speci- 
men, assuming that no change has occurred in the 
composition of the mixture during compaction : 

TJ/ _ 100W S 



WQ+M+B 



D= 



d X 62.43 _ 
vX 16.39 



Where : 

W d = calculated weight of dry soil in specimen, 

in grams 

PP r ,=weight of specimen in grams 
M= percentage by weight of moisture in 
mixture molded into specimens (e(3) 
above) 

B= percentage by weight (calculated on the 
dry soil basis) of bituminous material 
added in preparing the mixture 
Z>= density in pounds of dry soil per cubic foot, 

and 
v= volume of specimen in cubic inches. 

g. Curing of Specimens. 

(1) Soil and emulsified asphalt. Unless other- 
wise specified, specimens containing emulsified as- 
phalt are tested in the cured state. Prior to testing 



5-22 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



for moisture absorption, expansion, and extrusion 
value, the specimens are cured as follows : 

(a) the soil-emulsified asphalt specimens 
are placed in an oven maintained at 140 :5 F. 
(60 3 C.) until 80 to 90 percent (unless other- 
wise specified) of the moisture at the time of mold- 
ing has been removed. This point is determined on 
a control specimen chosen from each group of three 
specimens. At the completion of the curing period, 
the weight, average height, and the diameter of each 
specimen are recorded. 

(o) The control specimen, after removal from 
the curing oven, is placed in a desiccator for at 
least 30 minutes (to reach laboratory temperature) 
and then weighed. All other specimens are removed 
at the same time and placed in a desiccator arrange- 
ment similar to that used for the control specimen, 
to insure the same degree of drying. 

(c} The curing of specimens is conducted 
only during times when the laboratory is in opera- 
tion. At times when control checks cannot be car- 
ried out, all specimens are removed from the oven 
and placed in a sealed container to retard further 
loss in weight. 

(2) Soil and asphalt or tar. Soil-asphalt and 
soil tar specimens are tested in the uncured state, in 
the cured state, or both, as specified. If tests on cured 
specimens are required, they are cured prior to test- 
ing for moisture absorption, expansion, and extru- 
sion value, as follows: 

(a) The specimens are dried to constant 
weight in an oven maintained at 140 5 F. (60 
3 C.) . Constant weight for this purpose is reached 
when the loss in weight during a 6-hour period in 
the oven is 0.3 gram or less. From each set of three 
specimens, a control specimen is chosen to determine 
when constant weight has been reached. 

(Z>) All specimens are placed in an oven 
maintained at 140 5 F., for an initial curing pe- 
riod of 40 to 42 hours, after which all specimens, re- 
moved from the oven, are placed in a desiccator for 
at least 30 minutes to reach laboratory room tem- 
perature. The control specimens are weighed. All 
specimens are again placed in the oven, and after 
an interval of 6 hours, removed, and cooled to room 
temperature in a desiccator, and the control speci- 
mens reweighed. Further weight readings, based on 
6-hour periods in the oven, are made until the con- 
trol specimens have been dried to constant weight as 
defined in (a) above. After the initial curing period, 
when the last weight readings on a given day have 
been made, all the specimens are removed from the 
oven and placed in a desiccator until the start of the 
next working day. 

(c} When a control specimen has been dried 
to constant weight, all specimens represented by that 
control specimen are removed from the desiccator 



and the weight, average height, and diameter oi 
each specimen recorded. 

h. Procedure for Water Absorption and Expan- 
sion tests. 

(1) Absorption cabinet. The water absorptioi 
test is performed in an absorption cabinet or moisi 
room maintained at a temperature between 65 anc 
80 F. (18 und 27 C.) and a relative humidity o: 
at least 90 percent. 

(2) Exposure, and measurement of specimens 
The bottom of the specimens, as tamped, is placec 
directly on the bottom of a flat-bottomed pan, anc 
the distilled water in the pan is adjusted to and main 
tained at a height of 1 inch above the bottom of th< 
specimens. After 7 days, the specimens are remove( 
from the absorption cabinet or moist room and tb 
free surface moisture removed by quick blotting 
The weights and average diameters of the bottom o 
the specimens are recorded. 

(3) Calculation of water absorption. Water a-b 
sorption (in percent) 



~ W L 
Where: 

Wi= weight before absorption 

W 2 = weight after absorption, and 

W d = calculated weight of dry soil specimen. 

(4) Calculation of expansion. Expansion (i 
percent) 

=(?A-l] 100. 



Where: 

PI = diameter before absorption, and 
D 2 = average diameter of bottom of specime 
after absorption. 

i. Procedure for Extrusion Test. 

(1) Specimens. The extrusion test is per forme 
at room temperature on specimens that have bee 
subjected to the water absorption test. 

(2) Assembly. After the specimen has been n 
moved from the absorption cabinet, weighed, an 
measured, it is placed in the testing mold with tl 
face downward that was down during the absor] 
tion test. The specimen is inserted into the large en 
of the testing cylinder, being gradually forced, 
necessary, by use of the compaction plunger unt 
seated against the testing ring. The testing plung< 
and guide are inserted into the large end of tl 
testing mold until resting on top of the test specime 

(3) Test. The entire test assembly is centered c 
the platform of the testing machine. Load is applie 
through the 'test plunger, which is moved at a coi 
stant rate of 1 inch per minute. The extrusion vali 
is the maximum total load required to cause f ailu: 
of the test specimen. 



I 



k 
" 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 

j. Report. The following data are reported as the 
average of three determinations : 

(1) Water absorption during the absorption 

test. 

(2) Expansion during the absorption test. 

(3) Extrusion value after the absorption test. 

(4) Additional data as may be specified. 

5-14. Method of Testing for Water 

This method (ASTM Designation D 95*) is used to 
determine the water content of bituminous materials 
by distillation with a water-immiscible, volatile sol- 
vent. The method is suitable for a variety of bitu- 
minous materials, but it is especially applicable to 
crude petroleums, tars, and products derived from 
them, such as fuel oils, road oil, creosotes, road tars, 
and asphalts. The material is heated under reflux 
with a water-immiscible solvent which co-distills 
with the water in the sample. 
a. Apparatus. 

(1) General. The condensed solvent and water 
are continuously separated in a trap, with the water 
settling into a graduated section of the trap and the 
solvent returning to the still. The apparatus con- 
sists of a metal still or glass flask, heated by suitable 
means and provided with a reflux condenser dis- 
charging into a trap connected to the still or flask. 
The trap serves to collect and measure the condensed 
water and to return the solvent to the still. The type 
of distilling apparatus used is not an essential feature 
of this method, but glass is generally used for petro- 
leum products and metal for road materials and tars. 

(2) Still. The still specified in the Standard 
Method of Testing for Water in Petroleum Products 
and Other Bituminous Materials, American Society 
for Testing and Materials Designation D 95, is a 
vessel having a nominal capacity of 500 to 1000 ml 
and a short neck accommodating the reflux tube of 
the trap. 

(3) Heat source. The burner used with the 
metal still is a ring gas burner of 4 inches (lOO-mm) 
inside diameter. With the glass flask, an ordinary gas 
burner or electric heater may be used as the source 
of heat. 

(4) Condenser. The condenser is a water-cooled, 
reflux, glass- tubed type, having a condenser jacket 
not less than 400-mm (15% inches) in length, with an 
inner tube 9.5 to 12.7 mm (%-% inch) outside 
diameter. The end of the condenser to be inserted in 
the trap is ground off at an angle of 30 5 from the 
vertical axis of the condenser. 

(5) Trap. The trap is made of well-annealed 
glass constructed as specified in ASTM D 95, and is 
graduated in 0.1 ml divisions from to 2 ml and 0.2 
ml divisions from 2 to 10 ml. The error of the indica- 
tive capacity from to 2 ml must not be greater than 



5-23 

plus or minus 0.05 ml and from to 2 to 10 ml must not 
exceed plus or minus 0.10 ml. 
5. Solvent. 

(1) General use. An aromatic solvent is pre- 
ferred since it has a high solvency and dispersing 
power for most bituminous materials. Xylol or a 
blend of 20-percent benzol and 80-percent xylol is 
recommended. 

(2) Petroleum derivatives. The solvent used 
when testing petroleum products or bituminous ma- 
terials derived from petroleum is a petroleum deriva- 
tive, such as petroleum naphtha, and conforms to the 
following distillation requirements : 

5 percent 'boiling at a temperature not below 
194F. (90C.) nor above 212 F.(100C.), and 
90 percent distilling below 410F. (210C.) . 

(3) Tar derivatives. The solvent used when test- 
ing bituminous materials derived from coal tar, 
water-gas tar, and similar materials, is the aromatic 
solvent ((1) above). 

c. Sample. The sample must be thoroughly repre- 
sentative of the materials to be tested and the portion 
used for the test thoroughly representative of the 
sample itself. Deviation from this requirement is not 
permitted. The sample must be measured to an ac- 
curacy of 1 percent and added to the still. Ordinary 
liquid samples are measured in a graduated cylinder. 
Rinse the material adhering to the cylinder into the 
still with one 50 ml and two 25 ml portions of solvent. 
Drain the solvent thoroughly after the transfer and 
each rinsing. Weigh solid and semisolid materials 
directly into the still and all 100 ml of solvent. 

NOTE 

The difficulties in obtaining proper repre- 
sentative samples for this determination are 
unusually great and the importance of 
sampling cannot be too strongly emphasized. 

d. Procedure. 

(1) Water content of sample. Base the size of 
the test portion on an estimated water content of the 
sample so that the water yield does not exceed the 
capacity of the trap. 

NOTE 

In special cases where the water content is 
great and it is not desirable to reduce the 
size of the sample, a distilling tube receiver 
graduated from to 2 ml in 0.1 ml divisions 
and from 2 to 25 ml in 0.2 ml divisions may 
be used. (See the Standard Method of Test- 
ing Emulsified Asphalts: ASTM Designa- 
tion D 244). 

(2) Connections. The connections between the 
still or flask, trap, and condenser must be made by 
means of tight-fitting stoppers or ground glass joints. 
The end of the condenser inserted in the trap is ad- 



5-24 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89- 



submerged to a depth of not more than 1-mm below 
the surface of the liquid in the trap after distillation 
conditions have been established. When the metal 
still is used, a heavy paper gasket moistened with 
the solvent is inserted between the lid and flange 
before attaching the clamp. A loose cotton plug is 
inserted in the top of the condenser tube to prevent 
condensation of atmospheric moisture in the con- 
denser tube. 

(3) Application of heat. Heat is applied and so 
regulated that the condensed distillate falls from the 
end of the condenser at the rate of 2 to 5 drops per 
second. The ring burner used with the metal still 
should be placed about 3 inches above the bottom of 
the still at the beginning of the distillation and grad- 
ually lowered as the distillation proceeds. 

(4) Duration of test. The distillation is con- 
tinued at the specified rate until no water is visible 
on any part of the apparatus except at the bottom 
of the trap. This operation usually requires less than 
an hour. A persisting 1 ring of condensed water in the 
condenser tube is removed by increasing the rate of 
distillation for a few minutes. The trap and contents 
are allowed to cool to room temperature. Dislodge 
any water adhering 1 to the trap sides and make sure it 
falls into the trapped water. Read the volume of 
water to the nearest smallest division. 

e. Calculations. The volume of condensed water 
measured in the trap at room temperature multiplied 
by 100 and divided by the volume of the sample used 
is the percentage of water, or 



, , x Volume of water in trap 

Water (percent) =^r\ - 7 - U+N t - i~ 
^ ' V omme ( or weight) of sample 



Note that water-soluble material may also be mea; 
ured as water. 

/. Precision. Two tests of the sample materi: 
should agree within the following limits : 



Volume of water 
collected 



Repeatability (same operator Reproducibility (Differet 
and apparatus) operator and apparatus 



to 1 ml 
1 to 25 ml 


0.1 ml 
0.1 ml or 1% of 
the mean. 


0.2ml 

0.2 ml or 5% 
of the mean. 



5-15. Acceptability Requirements 

For purposes of designing soil-bitumen mixtures, tl 
following test values are suggested : 

a. Extrusion value before the absorption test, 1,0< 
pounds minimum. 

5. Extrusion value after the absorption test, 4i 
pounds minimum. 

G. Expansion during the absorption test, 5 perce: 
maximum. 

d. If it is also desired to include the percent wat 
absorption during the absorption test, a maximu 
of 7 percent is suggested. The above values are basi 
on the recommended procedure of testing uncur 
specimens. No recommended values have been esta 
lished for results on cured specimens. In cases 
doubt it should be borne in mind that a slighi 
leaner rather than slightly richer soil- asphalt mi 
ture is preferable. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



A-l 



APPENDIX A 
REFERENCES 



A 1. Military Publications 

a. Army Regulations. 

AE 310-25 Dictionary of United States Army Terms 
AE 310-50 Authorized Abbreviation and Brevity 

Codes 
AE, 415-30 Troop Construction for the Air Force. 

(AFE 88-12) 

b. Field Manuals. 

FM 5-34 Engineer Field Data 

FM 5-35 Engineers' Eeference and Logistical Data 

c. Technical Manuals. 

TM 5-330/AFM 86-3, VOL II Planning and Design 
of Eoads, Airbases, and Heliports in the Theater 
of Operations 

TM 5-331A Utilization of Engineer Construction 
Equipment; Volume A Earthmoving, Compac- 
tion, Grading, and Ditching Equipment 

TM 5-331D Utilization of Engineer Construction 
Equipment; Volume D Asphalt and Concrete 
Equipment 

TM 5-337 Paving and Surfacing Operations 

TM 5-349 Arctic Construction 

TM 5-545 Geology 

TM 5-624 Eoads, Runways and Miscellaneous Pave- 
ments; Repairs and Utilities: 

d. DA Pamphlet 525-5 Dust Control 

e. DA Technical Bulletin 5-337-1 Central Mix 
Plant and Slip-Form Paver 

A-2. Other Technical Publications 

American Association of State Highway Officials. 
Standard Specifications for Highway Materials 
and Methods of Sampling and Testing, Part II. 
Washington DC, 1966 

American Society for Testing and Materials, 1969 
Book of ASTM Standards, Part 10 Concrete and 
Mineral Aggregates, and Part 11 Bituminous Ma- 
terials for Highway Construction, Waterproofing, 
and Roofing; Soils; Skid Resistance. Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, 1969 



The Asphalt Institute, Manual Series No. 4 (MS-4) : 
The Asphalt Handbook* College Park, Maryland, 
1965 

The Asphalt Institute, Manual Series No. 10 (MS- 
10) : SOILS MANUAL for Design of Asphalt 
Pavement /Structures* 

The Asphalt Institute, Manual Series No. 13 (MS- 
13) : Asphalt Surface Treatments and Asphalt 
Penetration Macadam 

The Asphalt Institute, SS-1 ; Specifications and Con- 
struction Methods for Hot Mix Asphalt Paving* 

Concrete Inspection Manual* by Kelley, Berlin, and 
Clair 

Data Book for Civil Engineers, Volume II, Specifica- 
tions and Costs* by Seelye 

Handbook of Heavy Construction* by Stubbs 

Highway Engineering* by Ritter and Paquette 

Portland Cement Association booklet, Design and 
Control of Concrete Mixtures, Eleventh Edition 

Reinforced Concrete Design Handbook* The Ameri- 
can Concrete Institute 

Soil Mechanics, Foundations and Earth /Structures'* 
by Tschebotarioff 

Engineering Materials'** by The Committee on En- 
gineering Materials 

CRSI Design Handbook** by Concrete Eeinforcing 
Steel Institute 

Properties of Concrete by A. M. Neville, John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. 

Concrete by G. E. Troxell and H. E. Davis, McGraw- 
Hill Book Company 

Concrete Manual, United States Department of the 
Interior, 1963 

Concrete Construction Handbook by J. J. Waddell, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1968 



"Contained in BOOK SET : Engineer Construction Group FSN 
7610-664-0437. 

"Contained in BOOK SET: Field Army, Engineer Section FSN 
7610-664-0438. 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



B-l 



APPENDIX B 

SOIL CLASSIFICATION 



The Unified Soil Classification System is a method 
of describing the different soils based on the soils' 
physical characteristics. The system was adopted by 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (and the De- 
partment of Interior Bureau of Beclamation) in 
January 1952. The three tables, B-l, B-2, and B-3, 
are included to aid in identifying the soils from the 
different test results, and to illustrate the engineer- 
ing characteristics pertinent to roads and airfields, 
and embankments and foundations. The tables list 



some of the limiting values associated with the tests 
described in this manual. The values should guide 
the technician in his testing. A great discrepancy be- 
tween a test result and the values given in the tables 
for that particular soil type should alert the tech- 
nician to the possibility of some inaccuracy or error 
either in the testing or in the identification of the 
soil. Figure B-l illustrates the process of identifying 
soils through the tests. A more detailed discussion of 
the system is given in TM 5-330. 



Table B-l. Unified Soil Classification System. 



Table B-2. Characteristics Pertinent to Roads and Airfields. 



Table B-S. Characteristics Pertinent to Embankments ana 
Foundations. 



Figure B-l. Identification of soils under soil classification 
system. 



[Located in back of manual! 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



-1 



APPENDIX 
USEFUL INFORMATION 



I inch=2.54 centimeters =25.4 millimeters 

12 inches =1 foot =0.3048 meter 

1 square foot =144: square inches 

1 square yard=9 square feet= 1,296 square inches 

1 acre =43, 5 60 square feet 

1 acre, if square = approximately 208.7 feet on each 

side 
1 cubic foot= 1,728 cubic inches=7.48 United States 

gallons 

1 cubic yard =27 cubic feet =0.7646 cubic meter 
1 cubic meter =1.308 cubic yards= 35.31 cubic feet= 

1,000 liters 
1 United States gallon=231 cubic inches= 0.1337 

cubic foot=4 quarts=8 pints 

1 United States gallon of water weighs 8.33 pounds 
1 British Imperial gallon = 1.2 United States gallons 
1 gross or long ton=2240 pounds=1.12 net tons 
1 net or short ton=2000 pounds 
1 pound=16 ounces==256 drams=7000 grains=453.6 

grams 

1 kilogram=1000 grams 
1 atmosphere =14.7 pounds per square inch=30 

inches Mercury =33.95 feet of water at 62 F. 
1 pound per square inch=144 pounds per square 

foot = 0.068 atmosphere = 2.042 inches mercury = 2. 1 

feet of water at 62 F. 

1 cubic foot of water at 62 F. weighs 62.36 pounds 
Water freezes at 32 F. or at C. 
Water boils at 212 F. or 100 C. (sea level and 14.7 

pounds per square inch pressure). 

F.=4(C.)+32 
5 



Circumference of a circle = diameter X 3.14 
Area of a circle = diameter squared by 0.7854 
1 foot-pound = unit of work or the work required to 
lift 1 pound through a vertical distance of 1 foot. 

Relation between A.P.I, degrees and specific gravity 
(liquids lighter than water) * 

A.P.I. Gravity Degrees Specific Gravity, 60"/GO 

10 ___ 1. 000 

15 0. 9655 

20 0. 9333 

25 0. 9032 

30 0. 8750 

35 0. 8485 

40 0. 8235 

45 0.8000 

A.P.I. Gravity Degrees- ^-131.5 

Multiply By To obtain 

Atmospheres 14. 70 Pounds per square inch 

Centimeters 0. 3937 Inches 

Cubic feet 7. 481 "United States gallons 

Cubic feet 1728 Cubic inches 

Cubic meters 35. 51 Cubic feet 

Cubic yards 27 Cubic feet 

Feet 0. 3048 Meters 

Feet 30. 48 Centimeters 

Gallons 231 Cubic inches 

Gallons 0. 134 Cubic feet 

Inches 2. 54 Centimeters 

Kilograms 1000 Grams 

Kilograms 2. 205 Pounds 

Liters 0. 03531 Cubic feet 

Liters 0. 2642 Gallons 

Liters 1000 Cubic centimeters 

Miles 5280 Feet 

Pounds 453. 6 Grams 



V 



TM 5-S30/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 0-1 



APPENDIX D 

METRIC CONVERSION TABLE 



1 centimeter = 0.03281 feet 1 gallon = 3785 cubic centi- 

1 centimeter = 0.3937 inches meters 

1 cubic centimeter = 0.06102 cubic inches 1 gallon = 3.785 liters 

1 inch = 2.540 centimeters 1 liter = 61.02 cubic inches 

1 cubic inch = 16.39 cubic centi- 1 liter = 0.2642 gallons 

meters 1 kilogram = 2.205 pounds 

1 pound = 453.6 grams 



1 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



index 1 



INDEX 



Paragraph 

Absolute specific gravity of solids 2-29a 

Absorption test, concrete aggregate 4-10 

Acceptability requirements, bituminous 

stabilization 5-15 

Acid test, soils 2-9i 

Agent, dispersing, soil 2-B8d 

Aggregate and filler tests, bituminous mix- 
tures 3-19 

Aggregates for bituminous mixtures : 

Apparent specific gravity 3-2la 

Fine aggregate, calibrated flask. _ 3-216 
Fine aggregate, uncalibrated 

flask 3-21c 

Blending 3-256 

Bulk-impregnated specific gravity 3-21d 

Description 3-2 

Desirable properties 3-12 

Preparation 3-246 

Sample 3-8 

Sieve analysis 3-20 

Specific gravity 3-21 

Aggregates for concrete : 

Color test for organic matter 4-lld 

Description 4-4 

Freeze-thaw test 4-12a 

Gradation test 4-9 

Impurities 4-11 

Percent absorption test 4-10d 

Salt teat..: 4-126 

Sampling 4-8 

Shale test 4-11 

Silt and clay test 4-11 

Soundness test 4-12 

Specific gravity test 4-10 

Surface moisture test 4-10e 

Tests, discussion 4-8 

Air content test, concrete 4-236 

Air content test, procedure 4-236 (3) 

Air-drying soil 2-23c 

Air-entrained cement 4-2/(2) , 

(3) 

Air-entraining agents test 4-15 

Airfield penetrometer 2-93c 

Analysis, soil: 

Combined mechanical 2-23a 

Dry sieve 2-25 

Hydrometer 2-23a, 

2-36 

Mechanical 2-23a 

Sieve 2-23 

Wet mechanical 2-23a 

Analysis with prewashing 2-26 

Anionic asphalt emulsions 3-4d 

Apparatus calibration, density determina- 
tion 

Apparent specific gravity: 

Computations 2-35d 

Of soils, definition 2-296 

Tests 2-35 



Page 
2-36 

4-7 

5-24 
2-12 

2-45 

3-19 

3-20 
3-21 

3-22 
3-28 
3-22 
3-1 
3-14 
3-26 
3-10 
3-20 
3-20 

4-10 
4-3 

4-11 
4-6 
4-9 
4-8 

4-11 
4-6 
4-9 
4-9 

4-11 
4-7 
4-8 
4-6 

4-26 

4-27 

2-29 
4-2 
4-2 

4-13 
2-106 

2-29 
2-32 
2-29 
2-43 
2-29 
2-29 
2-29 
2-34 
3-3 



2-70c 2-80 



2-42 
2-36 
2-42 



Paragraph Page 

Approximate and rapid tests, stabilization 5-11 5-18 

Asphalt and tar, field identification 3-1 lo 3-11 

Asphalt cement grade, field identification- 3-116 3-12 

Asphalt consistency 3-46 3-2 

Asphalt content sele ction 3-24a 3-26 

Asphalt content test; Dulin-Rotarex ex- 
traction device 3-32 3-44 

Asphalt cutback 3-4c 3-2 

Asphalt, description 3-3 3-1 

Asphalt emulsions : 

Anionic 3-4d 3-3 

Cationic 3-4d 3-3 

Field identification 3-llc 3-12 

Medium setting 3-4d(l) 3-3 

Nonmixing 3-4d(2) 3-3 

Rapid setting 3-4d(l) 3-3 

Slow setting 3-4d(l) 3-3 

Asphaltic cutback, field identification 3- lid 3-13 

Asphalt, relative hardness 3-46 3-2 

Asphalt testing penetrometer 3-16 3-18 

Asphalt test set 1-36 1-3 

Asphalt viscosity 3-4c 3-2 

Atterberg limits 2-20(1) 2-3 

Bag samples 2-13 2-17 

Below surface drive cylinder procedure, 

density 2-75 2-85 

Binder, bituminous 3-3 3-1 

Bite test, soils 2-90 2-11 

Bitumen : 

Content, optimum 3-250 3-30 

Field identification 3-11 3-11 

Flashpoint 3-6a 3-5 

Flashpoint test 3-15 3-17 

Specific gravity test 3-14 3-15 

Tests, discussion 3-13 3-15 

Bituminous materials: 

Field identification, discussion 3-10 3-11 

Samples 3-9 3-10 

Bituminous mix design: 

Aggregate preparation 3-246 3-26 

Asphalt content selection 3-24o "3-26 

Compaction of specimens 3-24d 3-26 

Cooling of specimens 3-24e 3-26 

Density and voids determination 3-24/ 3-27 

Discussion 3-22 3-23 

Example 3-25 3-28 

Job-mix formula 3-26 3-39 

Marshall stability test __ 3-240 3-27 

Mix preparation 3-24c 3-26 

Stability and flow determination 3-240 3-27 

Bituminous mixtures: 

Aggregates 3-2 3-1 

Aggregate samples 3-8 3-10 

Binder 3-3 3-1 

Controlling plant production 3-31 3-42 

Description 1-2/, 3-1 1-2,3-1 

Expediting the design 3-33 3-49 

Initiating plant production 3-30 3-42 

Tests, aggregates and fillers 3-19 3-19 



Sndex-2 

Paragraph Page 
Bituminous paving plant: 

High-type 3-29a 3-40 

Intermediate-type 3-296 3-40 

Bituminous stabilization 5-2 5- 1 

Acceptability requirements 5-15 5-24 

Description 5-12 5-18 

Expansion test 5-lSh 5-22 

Extrusion test 5-13i 5-22 

Quantity of bitumens 5-126 5-18 

Testing for water 5-14 5-23 

Testing mixtures 5-13 5-19 

Type of bituminous material 5-12a 5-18 

Water absorption test 5-13ft 5-22 

Bituminous treatment 5-2 5-1 

Blast-furnace-slag cement 4~2/ 4-2 

Book method, concrete mix proportioning- 4-19 4-16 

Box samples, soil 2-21 2-27 

Bulk-impregnated specific gravity 3-21d 3-22 

Bulk specific gravity: 

Coarse aggregate, concrete 4-106 4-7 

Computations 2-35d 2-42 

Fine aggregate, concrete 4-10c 4-8 

Soil 2-29c 2-36 

Test 2-35 2-42 

Calcium chloride soil modifier 5-3 5-1 

Calibration: 

Hydrometer 2-38a 2-44 

Volumetric flask 2-32 2-37 

California Bearing Ratio: 

Discussion 2-77 2-86 

Field in-place test 2-84 2-92 

Mold 2-19 2-25 

Molded soil sample 2-64o( 2) 2-70 

Penetration test 2-81 2-90 

Remolded sample test 2-82 2-92 

Test 2-78 2-86 

Test sample prep aration _ _ 2-80 2-87 

Undisturbed sample test 2-83 2-92 

Capillary fringe 2-2/(2)(6) 2-3 

Capillary moisture 2-2/(2) (6) 2-3 

Cast test, soil 2-106 2-13 

Cationic asphalt emulsions 3-4d 3-3 

Cement: 

Air-entrained 4-2/(3) 4-2 

Air-entraining agent test 4-15 4-13 

Blast furnace slag 4-2/(l) 4-2 

Color test 4-145 4-13 

Hardening test 4-14a 4-12 

High-early strength 4-2c 4-2 

High-early strength test 4-16 4-13 

Identification 4-13 4-12 

Identification tests 4-14 4-12 

Low heat __. 4-2d 4-2 

Modified 4-26 4-1 

Normal 4-2o 4-1 

Oil well 4-2/(4) 4-2 

Pozzolan 4-2/(2) 4-2 

Specific gravity test 4-l4c 4-13 

Sulfate resistant 4-2e 4-2 

Types 4-2 4-1 

Waterproofed ___ 4-2/(4) 4-2 

White 4-2/(4) 4-2 

Cement and lime modifiers _ 5-3 5-1 

Cementing action in stabilization 5-4 5-1 

Centistokes 3-4c(2) 3-3 

Characteristics of soils, physical 2-2 2-1 

Check batch, concrete mix 4-220 4-26 

Chunk samples 2-16 2-19 

Classification, soil 2-3 2-4 



IM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-J 

Paragraph Pag< 

Classification System, Unified Soil App. B B- 

Clay 

Clay lumps, test for 4-116 4-K 

Cleveland open cup test 3-l5a 3-1' 

Coaltar 3-5 3_/ 

Coarse aggregate, concrete 4-4 4-i 

Cohesive ^ ._ 2-2g 2-i 

Cold-mix pavements modified test 3-27 3-3! 

Color test, cement .... 4-14& 4-li 

Color test for organic matter, aggregate..- 4-lld 4-l( 
Combined mechanical analysis: 

Definition 2-23a 2-2 ( . 

Description 2-47 2-51 

Presentation of results 2-52 2-5 { 

Sedimentation test 2-51 2-5( 

Compaction : 

Control test 2-63 2-7( 

Control test preparation 2-64 2-7( 

Control test procedure 2-65 2-7 '. 

Specimens for bituminous mix 3-24d 3-2( 

Stabilization. _ __ 5-3 5-! 

Compactive effort 2-636 2-7( 

Compactness of soil 2-2d 2-S 

Components of concrete 4-1 4-: 

Composite samples 2-136 2-l 

Compressive strength test, concrete 4-32 4-3c 

Compressive strength test, soil-cement 

stabilization 5-8 5-15 

Computations: 

Concrete flexural strength 4-28 4-3C 

Concrete mix design 4-24 4-2 

Decantation 2-45 2-5S 

Density. 2-76 2-8C 

Hydrometer analysis 2-40 2-4 

In-place moisture content 2-54c 2-63 

Liquid limit _ 2-58h 2-68 

Percent finer 2-40c 2-5C 

Plasticity index 2-61A 2-6 

Plastic limit 2-61A 2-6 

Shrinkage limit 2-62 2-6 

Concrete : 

Aggregate: 

Bulk specific gravity, coarse 4-106 4-7 

Bulk specific gravity, fine 4-10c 4-8 

Color test for organic matter 4-lld 4-10 

Discussion 4-lc, 4-4 4-1,4-3 

Freeze-thaw test-- 4-12a 4-11 

Gradation test 4-9 4-6 

Impurity tests 4-11 4-9 

Percent absorption test. _ 4-10cJ 4-8 

Requirements 4-lc 4-1 

Salt test. _. 4-126 4-11 

Sampling... 4-8 4-6 

Shale test 4-llc 4-10 

Silt and clay test 4-llc 4-9 

Soundness test 4-12 4-11 

Specific gravity tests, description. 4-10 4-7 

Surface moisture test 4-10e 4-8 

Tests 4-8 4-6 

Aggregate tests _ _ 4-8 4-6 

Air-content test 4-236 4-26 

Coarse aggregate _ 4-lc 4-1 

Components 1-20,4-1 1-2,4-1 

Curing: 

Accelerators __ 4-7a 4-5 

Densifiers 4-7d 4-6 

Discussion 4-6 4-5 

Moisture 4-66 4-5 

Plasticizers 4-7c 4-5 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



lndex-3 



Paragraph Page 
Concrete Continued 
Curing Continued 

Retarders 4-76 4-5 

Temperature 4-6a 4-5 

Waterproofing agents 4-7e 4-6 

Watertightness 4-7 e 4-6 

Workability agents 4-7c 4-5 

Description 4-1 4-1 

Desirable properties 4-5 4-4 

Fine aggregate 4-lc 4-1 

Flexural strength 4-25 4-28 

Flexural strength test 4-27 4-30 

Mix preparations 4-18 4-14 

Mix proportioning 

Air content 4-19 4-16 

Book method 4-19 4-16 

Calculations 4-24 4-28 

Check batches 4-220 4-26 

Preliminary tests 4-21 4-22 

Preparation 4-18 4-14 

Slump test 4-23a 4-26 

Trial batch method 4-20 4-22 

Trial b atch preparation 4-21 4-22 

Unit weight 4-23c 4-27 

Modulus of rupture 4-28 4-30 

Test beams 4-26 4-30 

Test set l-3c 1-3 

Water for mix 4-3 4-2 

Yield of concrete 4-24a 4-28 

Cone penetrometer 2-93o 2-104 

Consistency limits 2-20 2-3 

Control, bituminous plant 3-29 3-40 

Controlling plant production, bituminous 3-31 3-42 

Cooling of bituminous specimens 3-24e 3-26 

Correction, meniscus, hydrometer test 2-386 2-44 

Curing concrete (See Concrete curing.) 

Curing temperature for concrete 4-6 4-5 

Curve plotting, sieve analysis 2-27 2-34 

Curve, zero air voids 2-67c 2-76 

Cutback: 

Asphalt 3-4c 3-2 

Medium 3-4c 3-2 

Rapid-curing 3-4c 3-2 

Slow-curing 3-4c 3-2 

Road tar 3-5 3-4 

Cutterstock 3-4c 3-2 

Cutting solutions 3-4c 3-2 

Cylinder samples, soil: 

GBR mold 2-19 2-25 

Drive sampler 2-17 2-21 

Expedient methods 2-20 2-26 

Soil trafficability sampler 2-18 2-24 

Cylinder, sedimentation 2-43c 2-5 1 

Decantation: 

Calculations 2-45 2-53 

Grain sizes other than 0.02 mm 2-46 2-54 

Principles., 2-42 2-50 

0.02 mm fraction 2-44 2-52 

Degree of saturation 2-67 2-76 

Dense gradation of bituminous aggregates. 3-12/ 3-15 

Density: 

Apparatus calibration 2-70 2-79 

Calculations 2-76 2-86 

Determination 2-69, 2-71 2-79, 

2-83 

Drive cylinder method : 2-73 2-85 

Below-surf ace procedure 2-75 2-85 

Near-surface procedure 2-74 2-85 



Paragraph Page 
Density Continued 

Oil displacement procedure 2-72o 2-85 

Sand displacement test: 

Equipment 2-70 2-79 

Sand calibration 2-70c 2-8 1 

Surface calibration 2-70c 2-8 1 

Test procedure 2-71 2-83 

Volume of hole measurement 2-7lb 2-83 

Water displacement test 2-726 2-85 

Density and void determination, bitumi- 



nous mix 

Description: 

Bituminous mixtures 

Combined mechanical analysis- 
Concrete 

Soil 

Design, expediting, bituminous mix. 

Design of bituminous mix 

Desirable properties: 

Bituminous mix aggregates 

Concrete 



3-24/ 3-27 



3-1 
2-47 

4-1 
2-8cZ 
3-33 
3-22 

3-12 
4-5 
Determination, density 2-69, 2-71 

Determination of optimum moisture con- 
tent 2-65 

Direct-heat drying of soil 2-23c (3) 

Discussion: 

Bitumen tests 3-13 

California Bearing Ratio 2-77 

Material testing 1-2 

Soil trafficability 2-92 

Dispersion agent, soils 2-38d 

Distribution, grain-size 2-23a 

Drive cylinder method, density determi- 
nation 2-73 

Drive sampler, soils 2-17 

Drying soil 2-23c 

Dry sieve analysis 2-25 

Dry sieve analysis result presentation 2-276 

Dry strength test, soils 2-9h 

D ulin-Rotarex extraction device 3-32 

Dunagan apparatus 3-21, 4-10 



Durability, hardened concrete. 
Dust, wash, and smear tests. _ 



Equipment test sets _. 

Evaluation of results, plate bearing test... 

Example of bituminous mix design. 

Expansion test, bituminous stabilization. _. 
Expedient method: 

Cylinder soil samples 

Specific gravity test 

Expediting the design, bituminous mix- 
tures 

Exploration, soil 

Extrusion test, bituminous stabilization 

Feel test, soils 

Field identification: 

Asphalt cement grades 

Asphalt emulsions 

Asphaltic cutbacks 

Asphalts and tars 

Bitumens 

Bituminous materials 

Cement 

Road tar cutbacks 

Road tars 

Soil 



4-5 
2-1 Oc 

1-3 

2-88 

3-25 

5-13/1 

2-20 
2-35e 

3-33 

2-7 

5-13* 



3-116 

3-1 le 

3-11 

3-1 la 

3-11 

3-10 

4-13 

3-1 If 

3-1 If 

2-8 



3-1 

2-55 

4-1 

2-8 

3-49 

3-23 

3-14 

4-4 

2-79, 

2-83 

2-71 
2-30 

3-15 

2-86 

1-1 

2-104 

2-45 

2-29 

2-85 
2-21 
2-29 
2-32 
2-34 
2-12 
3-44 
3-20, 
4-7 
4-4 
2-13 

1-3 

2-98 
3-28 
5-22 

2-26 
2-42 

3-49 

2-6 

5-22 

2-12 

3-12 
3-13 
3-11 
3-11 
3-11 
3-11 
4-12 
3-13 
3-13 
2-7 



lndex-4 

Paragrapli 

Field in-place test, GBR 2 ~8 4 

Fine aggregate: 

Apparent specific gravity: 

Calibrated flask 3-215 

Uncalibrated flask 3-21c 

Concrete 4-4 

Fineness modulus of sand 4-10c 

Flashpoint 3-6a 

Flashpoint test, bitumens 3-15 

Flexural strength computations 4-28 

Flexural strength, concrete 4-25 

Flexural strength test, concrete 4-26 

Flow and stability determination 3-240 

Free water in soils 2-2f(2)(o) 

Freeze-thaw test: 

Concrete 4-12o 

Soil-cement stabilization 5-7b 

Fringe, capillary 2-2f(2)(b) 

Gradation : 

Aggregates for bituminous mix: 

Dense 3-12/ 

Macadam 3-12/ 

Open 3-12/ 

Uniform 3-12/ 

Soil 2-2c 

Test, concrete aggregates 4-8 

Grain shape, soil 2-9o(3) 

Grain size: 

Distribution: 

Definition 2-23a 

Presentation of results . . 2-276 

Soils 2-9a(2) 

Soil 2-9a(2) 

Gravitational water, soils 2-2/(2) (a) 

Hardened concrete: 

Durability . 4-5b 

Properties 4-5 

Strength ^ 4-5a 

Watertightness 4-5c 

Hardening test, cement 4-14a 

Hasty method of testing soil 2-10 

High-early strength cement 4-2a 

High-early strength test, cement 4-16 

High-type bituminous paving plant 3-29a 

Hydrometer analysis: 

Computations 2-40 

Definition 2-23o 

Description 2-36 

Preparation 2-48 

Presentation of results 2-41 

Hydrometer calibration 2-38a 

Hydrometer meniscus correction 2-38b 

Hygroscopic moisture, soils 2-2/(2) (c) 



Identification: 

Bituminous materials. 

Cements 

Soils, field 

Tests, cement 

Tests, soil 

Impurities test, concrete aggregates. 



3-13 
4-13 
2-8 
4-14 
2-9 
4-11 

Index, plasticity 2-20(3) 

Information, useful app. C 

Initiating plant production, bituminous 

mixtures 3-30 

In-place moisture content 2-53, 2-54 

Intermediate-type bituminous paving 

plant 3-29c 



Page 
2-92 



3-21 

3-22 

4-3 

4-8 

3-5 

3-17 

4-30 

4-28 

4-30 

3-27 

2-3 

4-11 

5-12 

2-3 



3-15 

3-15 

3-15 

3-15 

2-2 

4-6 

2-8 



2-29 

2-34 

2-8 

2-8 

2-3 

4-4 

4-4 

4-4 

4-4 

4-12 

2-13 

4-1 

4-13 

3-40 

2-48 
2-29 
2-43 
2-55 
2-50 
2-44 
2-44 
2-3 



3-15 

4-12 

2-7 

4-12 

2-8 

4-9 

2-4 

C-l 

3-42 
2-61 

3-40 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89- 

Paragraph Pa 

Job-mix formula, bituminous mix design.. 3-26 3-5 

Kinematic viscosity: 

Asphalt cutbacks 3-4c(2) 

Asphalts.. _ 3-186 

Laterite ^-2e 

Law, Stokes' 2-366 

Lime-fly ash treatment, stabilization 5-3 

Limit: 

Liquid 2-20(2) 

Plastic 2-2(7(3) 

Shrinkage 2-20(4} 

Limits, Atterberg 2-20(1) 

Limits, consistency 2-20(1) 

Liquid limit: 

Computation 2-58/t 

Definition - 2-20(2) 

Device 2-57d 

Test: 

Preparation 2-57 

Procedure 2-58 

Simplified 2-59 

Locating, recording, and numbering soil 

samples 2-12 

Locating soil samples 2-12a 

Low heat cement 4-2d 

Macadam gradation, aggregates 3-1 2/ 

Marshall stability test 3-24 

Materials testing 1-2 

Mechanical analysis: 

Combined, definition 2-23a 

Definition 2-23a 

Wet, definition 2-23a 

Medium curing asphalt cutback 3-4c 

Medium setting asphalt emulsion 3-4d 

Moniscus correction, hydrometer 2-38?) 

Mineral filler definition __ 3-20a 

Mix design: 

Bituminous. (See Bituminous mix de- 
sign) 

Concrete. (See Concrete mix propor- 
tioning) 

Sandy soils, modified, stabilization 5-10 

Mix preparation, bituminous 3-24c 

Mix proportions, concrete 4-17 

Modified cone penetrometer 2-93a 

Modified mix design for sandy soils 5-10 

Modified portland cement : 4-26 

Modified soil stabilization 5-3 

Modified test for cold-mix pavements 3-27 

Modulus, fineness, sand 4-9c 

Modulus of rupture, concrete 4-28 

Moisture, capillary , 2-2/(2)(6) 

Moisture content: 

In-place _ 2-53 

Optimum 2-636 

Samples of soil 2-14 

Moisture-density relationship, soil-cement 

stabilization 5-6 

Moisture, hygroscopic 2-2/(2)(c) 

Moisture in soil 2-2/ 

Mold, GBR ."__" 2-64a(2) 

Mold, Proctor 2-64a(l) 

Near-surface drive cylinder density deter- 
mination 2-74 

Nonmixing type, asphalt emulsions 3-4d 

Nonsegregation of plastic concrete 4-5 

Normal portland cement 42a 

Numbering soil samples 2-12c 



3- 
3- 

2- 

2' 

6- 

2- 
2- 

2- 
2- 
2 



2- 



2 ' 
2- 
2- 

2- 

4 
3- 
3 

1 

2- 
2- 
2- 
3 
3- 
2- 



3-: 

4- 
2-K 

f\ 
* i 

4- 
5- 
3 

4- 
4' 
2- 



5-J 
2- 
2- 
2-1 
2-7 

2-8 
3- 

4 
4. 

2-1 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



Sndex-S 



Paragraph Page 

Odor test, soils 2-9/ 2-11 

Oil-displacement test for soil density 2-72a 2-85 

Oil well cement 4-2/(4) 4-2 

Open gradation of aggregates 3-12/ 3-15 

Optimum bitumen content 3-250 3-30 

Optimum moisture content 2-63 2-70 

Optimum moisture content procedxire 2-65 2-71 

Optimum moisture content, water content 

adjustment 2-67 2-76 

Oven-drying soil 2-23b 2-29 

Particle shape of soils 2-2b 2-2 

Penetration test: 

Asphalt cement 3-16 3-18 

CBR 2-81 2-90 

Penetrometer: 

Airfield 2-93c 2-106 

Asphalt testing 3-16b 3-19 

Cone 2-93a 2-104 

Modified cone 2-93a 2-104 

Test procedure 2-94 2-107 

Percent absorption test, concrete aggregate. 4-10d 4-8 

Percent finer 2-40c 2-50 

Physical characteristics of soil l-2c, 2-2 1-2, 2-1 

Pick and click test, stabilization 5-llb 5-18 

Plant, bituminous paving 3-29 3-40 

Plant control of bituminous mixtures 3-29 3-40 

Plastic concrete: 

Homogeneity 4-5e 4-4 

Nonsegregation 4-5e 4-4 

Properties 4-5 4-4 

Uniformity 4-5/ 4-4 

Workability 4-5d 4-4 

Plasticity 2-20 2-3 

Plasticity index 2-20(3) 2-4 

Plastic limit: 

Computation 2-61 2-69 

Definition 2-20(3) 2-4 

Preparation 2-60 2-68 

Test procedure 2-61 2-69 

Plastic range 2-20(3) 2-4 

Plate bearing test: 

Discussion 2-86 2-96 

Evaluation of results 2-88 2-98 

Procedure 2-87 2-96 

Portland cement 4-2 4-1 

Pozzolan cement 4-2/(2) 4-2 

Preparation : 

Aggregate for bituminous mix 3-24Z> 3-26 

Bituminous mix 3-24c 3-26 

Concrete mix design 4-21 4-22 

Hydrometer analysis 2-48 2-55 

Liquid limit test 2-57 2-63 

Plastic limit test 2-60 2-68 

Presentation of CBR data 2-85 2-95 

Presentation of results : 

Combined mechanical analysis 2-52 2-59 

Dry sieve analysis 2-27b 2-34 

Grain-size distribution 2-27b 2-34 

Hydrometer analysis 2-41 2-50 

Prewashing, sieve analysis 2-26 2-34 

Principles of decantation 2-42 2-50 

Principles of wet mechanical analysis 2-42 2-50 

Proctor mold 2-64o 2-70 

Properties, desirable: 

Bituminous mix aggregates 3-12 3-14 

Concrete 4-5 4-4 

Properties of materials 1-26 1-1 



Paragraph Page 

Properties of undisturbed soil 2-9a(5) 2-9 

Purpose of manual 1-1 1-1 

Quantity of bitumen, stabilization 5-12& 5-18 

Quartering samples 2-22 2-27 

Rapid-curing asphalt cutback 3-4c 3-2 

Rapid-setting asphalt emulsion 3-4d 3-3 

Recording soil, sample locations 2-12& 2-15 

Remolded sample test, CBR 2-82 2-92 

Remolding test, soil trafficability 2-95 2-107 

Requirements, acceptability, bituminous 

stabilization 5-15 5-24 

Requirements, concrete aggregates 4-4 4-3 

Ribbon test, soil 2-9d 2-10 

Road oils 3-4c(l) 3-3 

Road tar: 

Cutback, field identification 3-11 3-11 

Cutbacks 3-5a 3-4 

Field identification 3-11 3-11 

Roll test, soil 2-9c 2-9 

Salt test, concrete aggregate 4-12b 4-11 

Sample: 

Bituminous materials 3-9 3-10 

Location, soils 2-12 2-15 

Numbering soils 2-12c 2-15 

Preparation, CBR test 2-80 2-87 

Quartering 2-22 2-27 

Selection, soils 2-11 2-15 

Selection, specific gravity test 2-30b 2-36 

Sampling : 

Concrete aggregates 4-8 4-6 

Materials for bituminous mixtures 3-7 3-10 

Soil 2-11 2-15 

Sand: 

Calibration, density determination 2-70c 2-80 

Displacement equipment preparation. 2-70 2-79 

Displacement test ..- 2-71 2-83 

Fineness modulus.- 4-9c 4-7 

Sandy soils, modified mix design stabiliza- 
tion 5-10 5-13 

Saturation, degree of 2-67 2-76 

Saybolt-Furol viscosity test 3-l8a 3-19 

Scope of manual g 1-1 1-1 

Sedimentation cylinder 2-43c 2-51 

Sedimentation test 2-lOa 2-13 

Sedimentation test for combined mechan- 
ical analysis 2-51 2-56 

Selection of asphalt content 3-24o 3-26 

Selection of soil samples 2-11 2-15 

Shine test, soil 2-9; 2-12 

Shrinkage limit 2-20 (4) , 2-62 2-4, 

2-69 
Sieve analysis: 

Bituminous mixture aggregates 3-20 3-20 

Calculations 2-27 2-34 

Curve plotting 2-27 2-34 

Definition 2-23 2-29 

Dry 2-25 2-32 

Fine and coarse aggregates, bitumi- 
nous mix _ 3-20b 3-20 

With prewashing 2-26 2-34 

Silt and clay test, concrete aggregate 4-11 4-9 

Simplified liquid limit test._ 2-59 2-68 

Size groups of soils 2-2a 2-1 

Slaking test, soil 2-9ft 2-12 

Slow-curing cutback 3-4c 3-2 

Slow-setting emulsions. _ 3-4d 3-3 



lndex-6 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



Paragraph Page 

Slump test, concrete mix design 4-23a 4-26 

Smear test: 

Asphalt cutbacks 3-lld(l) 3-13 

Soil 2-lOc 2-13 

Soil: 

Airdrying 2-236 2-29 

Bearing capacity 2-2i 2-4 

Classification 2-3 2-4 

Classification System, Unified App . B B- 1 

Cohesive 2-2g 2-3 

Compactness 2~2d 2-2 

Definition 2-la 2-1 

Description 2~8d 2-8 

Direct-heat drying 2-236 2-29 

Drying 2-236 2-29 

Examination, visual 2-9a 2-8 

Exploration 2-1,2-7 2-1, 

2-6 
Exploration, classification and field 

identification 2-1 2-1 

Formation 2-lc 2-1 

Gradation 2-2c 2-2 

Grain size 2-2a 2-1 

Grain-size distribution 2-9a (4) 2-8 

Identification tests 2-8 2-7 

Moisture 2-2/ 2-3 

Moisture content 2-2/(2) 2-3 

Organic 2-2A 2-4 

Oven-drying 2-236 2-29 

Particle shape 2-26 2-2 

Physical characteristics 2-2 2- 1 

Plasticity 2-20 2-3 

Site classification, stabilization 5-4 5-1 

Size groups 2-2a 2-1 

Specific gravity 2-2e, 2-29 2-2, 

2-36 

Strata 2-ld 2-1 

Test. (See Testing soil) 

Testset l-3a 1-3 

Soil- cement stabilization: 

Criteria 5-5 5-11 

Discussion 5-2 5-1 

Moisture-density relationship 5-6 5-12 

Tests. 5-5 5-11 

Treatment 5-2 5-1 

Water-of-hydration correction 5-9a 5-13 

Soil dispersing agent 2-38d 2-45 

Soil-lime-fly ash stabilization 5-2 5-1 

Soil-lime stabilization 5-2 5-1 

Soil-lime treatment, stabilization 5-2 5-1 

Soil sample numbering 2-l2c 2-15 

Soil sample selection 2-11 2-15 

Soil samples: 

Bag 2-13 2-17 

Box 2-21 2-27 

Chunk 2-16 2-19 

Composite 2-136 2-18 

Cylinder: 

CBRmold .._ 2-19 2-25 

Drive sampler 2-17 2-21 

Expedient methods 2-20 2-26 

Soil trafBcability sampler 2-18 2-24 

Locating 2-l2o 2-15 

Moisture content 2-14 2-19 

Recording locations 2-126 2-15 

Undisturbed 2-15 2-19 

Soil dispersing agent 2-38d 2-45 

Soil sampling 2-11 2-15 



Paragraph Page 
Soil stabilization: 

Bituminous treatment 5-2 5- 1 

Discussion 5-2 5-1 

Modification 5-3 5-1 

Soil-cement treatment 5-2 5-1 

Soil-lime treatment 5-2 5- 1 

Soil testing, bituminous stabilization 5-12 5-18 

Soil testing, hasty methods 2-10 2-13 

Soil tramcability: 
Definitions: 

Bearing capacity 2-926 2-104 

Cone index 2-926 2-104 

Critical layer 2-926 2-104 

Rating cone index 2-926 2- 1 04 

Remolding index 2-926 2- 1 04 

Shearing resistance 2-92c 2-104 

Slipperiness 2-92c 2-104 

Stickiness 2-926 2-104 

Traction capacity 2-926 2-104 

Vehicle cone index 2-926 2-104 

Remolding test 2-95 2-107 

Sampler 2-18 2-24 

Test, discussion 2-92 2-104 

Typical results 2-96 2-109 

Solubility test, asphalts 3-17 3-19 

Soundness test, concrete aggregates 4-12 4-11 

Special purpose cements 4-2/ 4-2 

Specific gravity: 

Apparent, bituminous mix aggregate.. 3-21a 3-20 

Bituminous mix aggregates 3-21 3-20 

Bulk: 

Coarse aggregate, concrete 4-106 4-7 

Fine aggregate, concrete 4-10c 4-8 

Bulk-impregnated aggregate 3-21d 3-22 

Computations : 

Apparent 2-35d 2-42 

Bulk 2-35d 2-42 

Entire soil sample 2-35d 2-42 

Discussion 2-28 2-36 

Soil 2-29 2-36 

Apparent 2-296 2-36 

Bulk 2-29c 2-36 

Solids, absolute 2-29a 2-36 

Tests: 

Apparent 2-35 2-42 

Bitumens 3-14 3-15 

Bulk 2-35 2-42 

Cement 4-14c 4-13 

Computations 2-34 2-40 

Concrete aggregates 4-10, 4-11 4-7 , 

4-9 

Expedient methods 2-35e 2-42 

Oven dried soils 2-336 2-40 

Sample selection 2-306 2-36 

Soils with natural water content.. 2-33a 2-38 

Tests 2-33 2-38 

Specimen compaction, bituminous 3-24rf 3-26 

Specimen cooling, bituminous 3-24e 3-26 

Spot test, asphalt 3-lla 3-11 

Stability and flow determination 3-240 3-27 

Stabilization : 
Bituminous: 

Acceptability requirements 5-15 5-24 

Description 5-12 5-18 

Expansion test 5-137i 5-22 

Extrusion test 5-13i 5-22 

Quantity of bitumens 5-12b 5-18 

Procedures 5-2 5-1 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



lndex-7 



Paragraph 

Stabilization Continued 
Bituminous Continued 

Soil testing 5-12 

Testing for water 5-14 

Testing mixtures 5-13 

Type of bituminous materials 5-12a 

Water absorption test 5-13h 

By cementing action 5-2 

By modification 5-3 

Criteria, soil-cement tests 5-9 

Modified design for sandy soils 5-10 

Modifiers : 

Calcium chloride 5-3 

Cement and lime 5-3 

Compaction 5-3 

Sodium chloride 5-3 

Waterproofing 5-3 

Process 5-4 

Soil and site classification 5-2 

Soil-cement procedures 5-2 

Soil discussion 5-1 

Test calculations 5-9 

Tests 5-11 

Stabilizations tests, approximate and rapid 5-11 

Stokes 3-4c(2) 

Stokes' law 2-36 

Stokes' law nomograph 2-406 

Strength, hardened concrete 4-5 

Subgrade modulus 2-86, 2-88 

Subsurface water in soils 2-2/( 2) 

Sulf ate-resistant cement 4-2e 

Surface moisture test, concrete aggregate. _ 4-10e 

Surface water, soils 2-2/(l) 

System, Unified Soil Classification App. B 



Tag open cup test- 
Tar rubber blend.. 
Tars 



Tar viscosity grades 

Test: 

Asphalt and Cement: 

Kinematic viscosity 

Penetration 

Saybolt-Furol viscosity 

Solubility 

Spot 

Asphalt content, Dulin-Rotarex ex- 
tration device 

Bitumens : 

Cleveland open cup 

Flash point 

Identification 

Specific gravity 

Tag open cup 

Bituminous mixtures: 

Aggregates and fillers 

Density and voids 

Marshall stability 

Specific gravity. (See Specific 

gravity.) 
Stability and flow 

Bituminous stabilization: 

Expansion 

Extrusion 

For water 

Mixtures 

Water absorption 



3-156 

3-56 

3-5 

3-5a 



3-186 
3-16 

3-18fl 
3-17 

3-1 In 

3-32 

3-15o 
3-15 
3-11 
3-14 

3-156 

3-19 
3-24/ 



Page 



5-18 

5-23 

5-19 

5-18 

5-22 

5-1 

5-1 

5-12 

5-13 

5-1 

5-1 

5-1 

5-1 

5-1 

5-1 

5-1 

5-1 

5-1 

5-12 

5-18 

5-18 

3-3 

2-43 

2-48 

4-4 

2-96, 

2-98 

2-3 

4-2 

4-8 

2-3 

B-l 

3-17 
3-4 
3-4 
3-4 



3-19 
3-18 
3-19 
3-19 
3-11 

3-44 

3-17 
3-17 
3-11 
3-15 
3-17 

3-19 
3-27 
3-27 



3-24 ff 3-27 



5-13& 

5-13J 

5-14 

5-13 

5-13h 



5-22 
5-22 
5-23 
5-19 
5-22 



Paragraph Page 
Test Continued 

Cement : 

Air-entraining agents 4-15 413 

Color 4-136 4-12 

Hardening 4-14a 4-12 

High-early strength 4-16 4-13 

Identification 4-13 4-12 

Specific gravity 4-14c 4-13 

Compaction control 2-65 2-71 

Concrete: 

Air content 4-236 4-26 

Compressive strength 4-32 4-33 

Flexural strength 4-27 4-30 

Preliminary mix design 4-21 422 

Concrete aggregates: 

Color for organic matter 4-llcZ 4-10 

Description 4-8 4-6 

Freeze-thaw 4-12a 4-11 

Gradation 4-9 4-6 

Impurity 4-11 4-9 

Percent absorption 4-10cZ 4-8 

Salt 4-126 4-11 

Silt and clay 4-11 4-9 

Soundness 4-12 4-11 

Specific gravity 4-10 4-7 

Surface moisture 4-10e 4-8 

Undesirable lightweight material. 4-1 Ic 4-10 

Concrete mix design: 

Preliminary 4-21 4-22 

Slump 4-23a 4-26 

Density: 

Oil displacement 2-72a 2-85 

Sand displacement 2-71 2-83 

Water displacement 2-726 2-85 

Identification, soil 2-8 2-7 

Modified, cold-mix pavements 3-27 3-39 

Optimum moisture content 2-65 2-71 

Penetrometer 2-94 2-107 

Soil: 

Acid 2-9t 2-12 

Bite 2-9ff 2-11 

Breaking 2-96 2-9 

California Bearing Ratio 2-78 2-86 

Cast 2-106 2-13 

Combined mechanical analysis 2-51 2-56 

Compaction control 2-63 2-70 

Dry strength 2-96 2-9 

Dust 2-10c 2-13 

Feel 2-9fc 2-12 

Field in-place, CBR 2-84 2-92 

Hasty method 2-10 2-13. 

Identification 2-8 2-7 

In-place moisture content 2-54 2-61 

Liquid limit 2-58 2-65 

Odor 2-9/ 2-11 

Penetration, CBR 2-81 2-90 

Penetrometer 2-94 2-107 

Plastic limit 2-61 2-69 

Plate bearing 2-86 2-96 

Remolded sample, CBR 2-82 2-92 

Ribbon 2-9d 2-10 

Roll 2-9c 2-9 

Sedimentation 2-10o 2-13 

Shine 2-9j 2-12 

Shrinkage limit 2-62 2-69 

Sieve analysis 2-23 2-29 



index-8 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-33.0/AFM 89 



Paragraph 



Test Continued 
Soil Continued 

Slaking 

Smear 

Specific gravity at natural water 

content 

Specific gravity of oven-dry soils - 

Thread 

Unconfined compression 

Undisturbed sample, CBR 

Visual examination 

Wash 

Wet shaking 

Soil-cement stabilization: 

Approximate and rapid 

Compressive strength 

Description 

Freeze and thaw 

Pick and click 

Squeeze 

Wet and dry 

Soil trafficability. (See Soil traffica- 

bility test.) 

Specific gravity. (See Specific gravity 
test.) 

Test beams, concrete _ . 

Testing soil for bituminous stabilization 

Testing soil, hasty methods 

Test preparation: 

Compaction control 

Liquid limit 

Plastic limit 

Test procedure: 

Compaction control 

Liquid limit 

Oil-displacement, density 

Penetrometer 

Plastic limit 

Sand displacement, density 

Water displacement, density 

Tests: 

Concrete aggregate 

Soil, identification 

Soil stabilization 5- 

Specific gravity, soils 

Test set: 

Asphalt 

Concrete 

Soil 

Thread test, soil 

Trial batch method concrete mix pro- 
portioning 



2-9h 
2-10c 

2-33a 

2-33b 

2-9c 

2-89 

2-83 

2-9a 

2-1 Oc 

2-9e 

5-2 

5-8 

5-2 

5-7 

5-116 

5-1 la 

5-7 



4-26 
5-13 
2-10 

2-64 
2-58 
2-60 

2-65 
2-58 

2-72a 
2-94 
2-61 
2-70 

2-72b 

4-8 
2-9 

5, 5-13 

2-33 

1-36 
l-3c 
l-3o 
2-9c 



Page 



2-12 
2-13 

2-38 
2-40 

2-9 
2-99 
2-92 

2-8 
2-13 
2-10 

5-1 
5-12 

5-1 
5-12 
5-18 
5-18 
5-12 



4-30 
5-17 
2-13 

2-70 
2-65 
2-68 

2-71 
2-65 
2-85 
2-107 
2-69 
2-79 
2-85 

4-6 

2-8 

5-11, 

5-19 

2-38 

1-3 
1-3 
1-3 
2-9 



4-20 4-22 



Paragraph 

Trial batch preparation, concrete - 4-21 

Types of cement ^-2 

Typical results, soil trafficability 2-96 

Typical values, unconfined compressive 

strength 2 ~ 91c 

Unconfined compression test, soil 2-89 

Unconfined compressive strength typical 

values 2-9 Ic 

Undesirable lightweight material test, 

concrete 4-1 1 c 

Undisturbed sample test, CBR 2-83 

Undisturbed soil properties 2-9o(5) 

Undisturbed soil samples - 2-15 

Unified Soil Classification System l-2d, App. B 

Uniform gradation, aggregates 3-12/ 

Uniformity, plastic concrete 4-5/ 

Useful information App. C 

Use of Dulin-Rotarex extraction device. __ 3-32 

Viscosity: 

Asphalt 3-4 

Grades, tar - 3-5a 

Kinematic, asphalt cutbacks 3-4c 

Saybolt-Furol test 3-18a 

Test, kinematic, asphalt 3-18!> 

Visual examination test, soil 2-9a 

Void and density determination, bitumi- 
nous 3-24/ 

Volume-of-hole determination, density 2-7 1 b 

Volumetric flask calibration 2-32 

Wash test, soil 2-10c 

Water absorption test, bituminous stabili- 
zation 5-14 

Water content adjustment, OMC 2-6C 

Water-displacement test, density 2-726 

Water for concrete 4-3 

Water in soils: 

Free 2-2/(2)(a) 

Gravitational. _ 2-2/(2) (a) 

Subsurface 2-2/(2) 

Surface 2-2/(l) 

Water-of-hydration corrections, soil- 
cement 5-9a 

Waterproofing modifiers, stabilization 5-3 

Watertightness, hardened concrete 4-5c 

Wet-dry test, cement stabilization 5-7 

Wet mechanical analysis definition. _ 2-23a 

Wet mechanical analysis principles _ 2-42 

Wet shaking test, soil 2-9e 

Workability, plastic concrete 4-5rf 

Zero air voids curve 2-67c 



P 
4- 

2 

2- 
2- 

2-: 

4- 

2- 
e 

2- 
1- 
E 

3- 
4 
C 

3- 

a 

3 

3 

3- 
3- 

2 

3- 

2- 
2- 

2- 



2- 
2- 
2- 
2- 

B-: 

5- 
4- 



2-] 

4- 
2-7 



TM 5-530/NAVFAC MO-330/AFM 89-3 



By Order of the Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force : 



Official: 
KENNETH G. WICKHAM, 

Major General^ United States Army, 
The Adjutant General. 



W. C. WESTMORELAND, 

General, United States Army, 
Chief of Staff. 



W. M. ENGER 
Rear Admiral, OEG, UJS. Navy 
Commander, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command 



Official: 

DWIGHT W. GOVELL, Colonel, USAF 
Director of Administration 



JOHN D. RYAN, General, USAF 
Chief of Staff 



Distribution : 

Active Army; 

AOSI (2) 

ACSFOR (2) 

DCSPBR (2) 

DOSLOG (2) 

DCSOPS (2) 

OOBO (2) 

CNGB (2) 

ORD (1) 

CO A (1) 

GINFO (1) 

TIG (1) 

TJAG (1) 

OPO (1) 

C'ofEngrs (10) 

GONARC (5) 

USAARENBD (5) 

ARADOOM (2) 

ARADCOM Rgn (1) 

USACDQ (2) 

USACDGAgcy (2) except 
USACDGEngr Agcy (10) 

USAMERDC (10) 

OSMaj Comd (10) except 
US ARAL- (30) 
USAREUR (70) 
USASETAF (5) 



LOGCOMD (5) 

MDW (2) 

Armies (10) except 

EUSA (30) 
Corps (10) 
Div (5) 

USASFTngGp (2) 
Instl (2) 
USMA (5) 
Svc Colleges (10) 
Br Svc Sch (5) except 

USAES (6,000) 
PM,S Sr Div Units (5) 
U SATO Armor (2) 
USATGInf (2) 
USASTC (2) 
USAECFB (100) 
Div Engr (5) 
DistEngr (5) 
EAMTMTS (5) 
WAMTMTS (5) 
MOTBA (5) 
MOTBY (5) 
MOTKI (5) 
MOTSU (5) 
Army Pic Cen (2) 



USA TOPOCOM (10) 
Units org under f ol TOE : 



5-25 (5) 
5-35 (5) 
5-38 (2) 
5-52 (3) 
5-54 (2) 
5-58 (1) 
5-64 (1) 
5-67 (1) 
5-77 (1) 
5-78 (1) 
5-S7 (1) 
5-97 (1) 
5-101 (10) 
5-107 (1) 
5-111 (10) 
5-112 (10) 
5-114 (2) 
5-115 (15) 
5-124 (1) 
5-127 (2) 
5-129 (5) 
5-137 (2) 
5-145 (5) 
5-155 (5) 



5-165 (15) 
5-177 (3) 
5-195 (5) 
5-201 (10) 
5-207 (2) 
5-215 (5) 
5-267 (2) 
5-301 (5) 
5-305 (10) 
5-327 (2) 
5-346 (10) 
5-401 (10) 
5-402(10) 
5-405 (5) 
5-500 (1 
5-520 (1) 
5-530 (3) 
5-540 (3) 
5-550 (2) 
5-590 (5) 
55-225 (3) 



NG-: State AG (3) ; units same as active Army except allowance is one (1) copy per unit. 
USAR: Same as active Army except allowance is one (1) copy per unit 
For explanation of abbreviations used, see AR 310-50. 



Navy: 

(5 copies to each except where otherwise specified) SNDL 27G- ( OINC DET ONE only) ; 39'B ; 39C ; 39D ; 39E ; 39H ; E3A 
(Washington only) ; FA6 (Albany, Brunswick, Cecil Field, Jacksonville, Lakehurst, Quonset Point, Virginia Beach 
only) ; FAT (Brooklyn, Key West, Keflavik, May port, Roosevelt Roads, S'an Juan only) ; FA10; FA12; FA18; FA25; 
FB6; FB7 (Alameda, Atsugi, Barbers Point, Lemoore, Mlramar, Moffett Field, Oak Harbor, San Diego only) ; FB8; 
FB10 (Adak, Kodlak, Midway Island, Long Beach, San Francisco, Sangley Point only) ; FB21 ; FB26; FB34 (Sasebo 
only) ; FC3 (London only) ; FC4 (Naples, Sigonella only) ; FC5; FO7 ; FC9 1 ; FE2 ; FE4 (Bremerhaven, Edzell, 
Homestead, Karniseya, Winter Harbor only ; 2 copies each) FF3 ; FF4 (2 copies) ; FFtt (2 copies) ; FF19 ; FG2 (Adak, 
Ethiopia, Exmouth, Londonderry, Nea Makri, San Miguel, Sidi Yahia, Stockton, Wahiawa only; 2 copies 1 each) ; 
FG5 (East Machias, Oso, Fort Allen, Sabana Seca, Tarlac only; 2 copies each) ; FH3 (Beaufort, Chelsea, Oakland, 
Philadelphia, Portsmouth (VA), St. Albans only; 2 copies each) ; FH6; FH8 (Unit No. 3 only, 2 copies) ; FJ14 
(Bainbridge, Orlando only); FJ23; FJ35 ; FJ36; 2 copies); FJ52; FKA6A1 ; FKA6A2; FKA6A3A; FKA6A3B ; 
FKA6A4; FKA6A5; FKA6A6; FKA6A8; FKA6A9; FKL1 (Boston, Bremerton, Charleston, Long Beach, Philadelphia, 
Portsmouth (NH), Portsmouth (VA), San Francisco, Vallejo only) ; FKL5A (2 copies) ; FKL6 (2 copies) ; FKM9 
(Norfolk, Oakland only) ; FKM22; FKN1 (15 copies each) ; FKN2; FKN3; FKN4 ; FKN5 ; FKP1A (Crane, Earle, 
Hawthorne, McAlester, Oahu only) ; FKP1B ; FKP1E; FKP1J (Indian Head, Louisville only) ; FKP4C (2 copies) ; 
FKR1A; FKR3A; FKR3H; FKR5; FT6 (Beeville, Corpus Christi, Dallas, Glen view, Glynco, Kingsville, Marietta, 
Meridian, Millington, Milton, New Orleans. South Weymouth, Willow Grove only); V4; V5; V8; V9 (Albany, 
Barstow only) ; V12; V16 (CampLejeune, Camp Pendleton, Twenty-fcine Palms only). 

Copy to : (2 copies to each except when otherwise specified) 

SNDL 27G COMNAVSUPPFORANTARCTICA only 1 copy) ; A2A (CNR only) (1 copy) ; A3 (1 copy) ; A4A (1 
copy) ; A5; AS; FE1 ; FG1 ; FJ27 (30 copies) ; FJ28 (Davisville only 3 copies) ; FJ28 (Port Hueneme only- 
ID copies') ; FKA1A ; FKA1B ; FKA1D ; FKA1E ; FKA1F ; FKR3J (1 copy ) . 

Additional copies' may be obtained from : 
U.S. Naval Publications and Forms Center 
5801 Tabor Avenue 
Philadelphia, Pa. 19120 
Air Force: F 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1971 O - 418-320 



Major Divisions 



Group 
Symbols 



<N 


_2 C 

oJ 



111 

'p-2| 



D) " 




8 

u 



8- 



o 

-c 







c 
o 

<D 

(J N 

O '7> 

^ <u 



-o 
a> 



-g c E " 

-co <u g> 

c- .N > 

O i 10 

" 



D) 

>- 

o 



c 
o u 



oZ 

itr c 



S 



o 

O o 



O 



GW 



GP 



i 



GM 



' ^ 
o> 

o 



j* o c 

2. E d 





O 



GC 



sw 



o i: o 

0) --j c 

u * 




*- _Q *. ^~, 

lllll 

C "- Q. D u- 



SP 



SM 



sc 





U 

TJ 



._ c 



5 72 *" 
: or o 



-o . 
a -o 



en 



ML 



CL 



OL 



MH 



CH 



OH 



Major Divisions 
(1) (2) 


Letter 
(3) 


Symbol 


Kane 
(6) 


Value as foundation 
Vhen Rot Subject to 
yront Action 
(7) 


Value M Ba.sc Di- 
rectly under Bi- 
tuainous Pavement 
(8) 


Potential 
Frost 
Action 
(9) 


Cospre 
Exp 


Batching 

00 


Color 
(5) 


COARSE 
GRAINID 
SOILS 


CRAWL 

AND 
GRAVZLLY 
SOILS 


CW 


3 

ft 


0' 


*0 




Well-graded gravels or grv*l-s*Bd 
mixtures, little or no fines 


Excellent 


Good 


None to very 
slight 


Almost 


OP 


:* 
* 


t 

:; 


Pccrly graded gravels or gravel-sand 
mixture*, little or no fines 


Good to excellent 


Poor to fair 


None to very 
slight 


Almost 


I' 

i 
CM [-- 

r 
i 


1 
I 
I 
,i 


1' 

1 ' 


Tcllov 


Siity gravels, gravel -and-s lit 

nlxtures 


Good to excellent 
Good 


Fair to good 

Poor 


Slight to 
medium 

Slight to 
nediua 


Very si 

Slight 


GC 


\ 


1 


Clayey gravels, gravel-saad-clay 
aixturea 


Gcsd 


Poor 


Slight to 
medium 


Slight 


SATO 
AND 
SAHBY 
SOILS 


sw 


*c 


i 

r4 







u 

K 


Hell-graded sands cr gravelly sands, 
little or no fines 


Good 


Poor 


None to very 

slight 


Almost 


SP 


* 




Poorly graded sands or gravelly 
sands, little or no fines 


Fair to good 


Poor to not 
suitable 


Hone to very 

slight 


Almost 


! 

1 

SM h- 
|u 
1 


; 


K 

1 1 


Yellov 


Sllty sands, sand-silt mixtures 


Gs^d 
Fair to g;od 


Poor 
Hot suitable 


Slight to 
high 

Slight to 
high 


Very si 

Slight 
aedlua 


sc 


i 


1 




Clayey sands, sand-clay mixtures 


Fair to g:od 


Not suitable 


Slight to 
high 


Slight 


FINE 

GRAIHED 
SOILS 


SILTS 
AND 

CLAYS 
IX < 50 


ML 






it 
& 


rock flour, silty or clayey fine 
sands or clayey silts with slight 
plasticity 




Hot suitable 


Medium to 
very high 


Slight 


CL 


i 


I 


Inorganic clays cf lew t: nedius 
plasticity, gravelly clays, sandy 
clays, sllty clays, lean clays 


Fair ts poor 


Not suitable 


Medina to 
high 


Medium 


OL 



i 
i 

LL. 




Organic silts and organic silt-slays 
of low plasticity 


Posr 


Not suitable 


Medium to 
high 


Hedius 


SILTS 
AMD 
CLAYS 
LL> 50 


MH 


1 




1 



Inorganic silts, micaceous or 
dlatomacecus fine sandy cr sllty 
soils, elastic silts 


Prcr 


N;t suitable 


Mediuo to 
very high 


High 


CH 


/ 


f 


Inorganic clays of high plasticity, 
fat clays 


Poor to very pocr 


Net suitable 


Medium 


High 


OR 


1 


i 

/ 


Organic clays of medium to high 
plasticity, organic silts 


Posr to very poor 


Not suitable 


Medium 


Hig!: 


HIGHLY ORGANIC SOILS 


Pt 


AM 
Mu 
JUU 

MJ 
wU 


yfc* 

Ufc 

wkfc, 
LU. 
**< 


Orange 


Peat and other highly organic sails 


Not sultab3e 


Mot suitable 


Slight 


Very hi 



1. Column 3, Division of CM,and SM groups into subdivisions of d and u are for roads ar.i airfields only; subdivision ;s cr. tm.t -f Atterfcfrg limi 
plasticity index is 6 or less; the suffix u will be ueed when the liquid Halt Is greater than 28. 

2. Column 7, values are for subgrades and base courses except for bace course directly under bitumir.uus pavement. 

3- In column 8, the term "excellent" has been reserved for base materials consisting of high quality F rcce ssei crushed st:se. 

It. In column 9, these soils are susceptible to frost as indicated under conditions favorable to frost action described ir. the text. 

5. In column 12, the equipment listed will usually produce the required densities with a reascnatle number of pastes vi-.er. acilsV^re cc.r.ditior.s ar.i th 
are listed, because variable soil characteristics within a given soil group may require different eqjipnent. In sane instances, a combination of 
a._ Processed base materials and other angular na^rials. Steel-wheeled rollers are recommended f-r hard angular materials with iiaited fines cr 

to degradation. 

b. Finishing. Bubber -tired equipment is receemended for rolling during final shaping operations for most soils and processed materials. 
c". Equipment size. The folloving siies of equipaent are necessary to assure the high densities required for airfield construction: 
Crawler-type tractor -- total weight in excess of 30,000 Ib. 

Rubber -tired equipment -- wheel load in excess of 15,000 Ib, wheel loads as high as J0,000 Ib may be necessary to obtain the required densi 
Sheepsfoot roller unit pressure (on 6- to 12-sq-in. foot) to be In excess of 250 psl and unit pressures as high as 050 pa i tay be necesi 
should be at least 5 per cent of the total peripheral area of the drua, using the diameter measured to the faces of the feet. 

6. Coluan 13, unit dry weights are for compacted soil at optimum moisture content for modified AASHO conpactlve effort. 



Foundation-*. 



Major Divisions 
(1) (2) 




Symbol 


Haste 
(6) 


Value for Embankments 
(7) 


Penaeabilit: 
Cm Per Sec 
(8) 


Letter 
(3) 


Hatching 

00 


Color 
(5) 


COARSE 
GRAINED 
SOILS 




GW 


*>'. 
% 


> 


a 


Well-graded gravels or gravel-sand 
mixtures, little or no fines 


Very stable, pervious shells 
of dikes and dams 


k > 10" 2 


GRAVEL 
AND 


CP 


It 
* 


i 





Poorly-graded gravels or gravel-sand 
mixtures, little or no fines 


Seasonably stable, pervious 
shells of dikes and dams 


k > 10" 2 


GRAVELLY 
SOILS 


CM 


i 
: 


' 
i 


Yellow 


Silty gravelo, gravel-sand-silt mix- 
tures 


Seasonably stable, not particu- 
larly suited to shells, but may 
be used for impervious cores or 
blankets 


k 10 "] 
to 10-6 


OC 


\ 


I 


Clayey gravels, gravel-sand-clay 
mixtures 


Fairly stable, may be used for 
impervious core 


k = 10-6 

to 10' 


SAND 

AND 
SANDY 

SOILS 


SW 





* 


r* 



* 




Well-graded sands or gravelly sands, 

little or no fines 


Very stable, pervious sections, 
slope protection required 


k > 10'3 


SP 


# 





V 

K 


Poorly-graded sands or gravelly 
sands, little or no fines 


Reasonably stable, may be used 
in dike section with flat slopes 


k > 10*3 


SM 


1 

5 
1 




a 

r-t 

^4 


Silty sands, sar.d-silt Mixtures 


Fairly stable, not particularly 
suited to shells, but may be 
used for impervious cores or 

dikes 


k - 10-3 
to 10' 6 


sc 


1 


B 


> 


Clayey sands, sand-silt mixtures 


Fairly stable, use for Impervious 
core for flood control 
structures 


k . 10*6 
to KT 8 


FINE 
GRAINED 
SOILS 


SILTS 
AMD 
CLAYS 

LL < 50 


ML 








Inorganic silts and very fine sands, 
rock flour, silty or clayey fine 
sands or clayey silts with slight 
plasticity 


Poor stability, may be used for 
embankments with proper control 


k - 10'| 
to 10 " 6 


CL 


1 


1 


a 

V 
41 
t, 

o 


Inorganic clays of low to medium 
plasticity, gravelly clays, sandy 
clays, silty clays, lean clays 


Stable, impervious cores and 
blankets 


k = 10-6 
to 10-8 


OL 


i 






Organic silts and organic silt-clays 
of low plasticity 


Not suitable for embankments 


k - 10-J 

to KT 6 


SILTS 
AND 
CLAYS 
LL > 50 


MH 








Inorganic silts, aicaceous or 
dlatomaceous fine sandy or silty 
soils, elastic silts 


Poor stability, core of hydraulic 
fill daa, not desirable in rolled 
fill construction 


k . 10-|j 
to ID' 6 


CH 


r 
/ 
/ 
/ 


/ 
/ 
/ 


D 
.-i 

CO 


Inorganic clays of high plasticity, 
fat clays 


Fair stability with flat slopes, 
thin cores, blankets and dike 
sections 


k . 10-6 

to 10' e 


OH 


r , 
'. 
'/ 


/ 
$ 




Organic clays of medium to high 
plasticity, organic silts 


Hot suitable for embankments 


k . 10-6 
to 10 ' a 


HIGHLY ORGANIC SOILS 


Pt 






Orange 


Peat and other highly organic soils 


Not uaed for construction 



















Notes: 1. Values in 

2. In column 

3. Column 10, 



columns 7 and 11 are for guidance only. Design should be based on test results. 

9, the equipment listed will usually produce the desired densities vith a reasonable number of passes when moistu: 

unit dry weights are for compacted soil at optimum moisture content for Standard AASHO (Standard Proctor) compact 



HIGHLY ORGANIC SOILS 

(Pt) 

Fibrous texture, color, odor, 
very high moisture content, 
particles of vegetable mat- 
ter (sticks, leaves, etc.) 



COARSE GRAINED 
50% or less pass No. 200 sieve 



Run sieve analysis 



GRAVEL (G) 

Greater percentage of coarse fraction 
retained on No. 4 sieve 



Less than 5% pass 
No. 200 sieve* 




Between 5% and 12% 
pass No. 200 sieve 



More than 12% pass 
No. 200 sieve 



Borderline, to have 
double symbol appro- 
priate to grading and 
plasticity character- 
istics, e.g.,GW-GM 



Run LL and PL on 

minus No. 40 sieve 

fraction 



Below"A" line or 
hatched zone on 
plasticity chart 




Limits plot in 
hatched zone on 
plasticity chart 




Above "A "line and 
hatched zone on 
plasticity chart 




Note: Sieve sizes are U.S. Standard. 



* If fines interfere with free draining properties use double symbol such as GW-GM, etc. 



