Naval Education and 
Training Command 



NAVEDTRA 10657-G1 
MINOR REVISION 
May 1989 
0502-LP-22 1-9400 



Training Manual 
(TRAMAN) 




Utilitiesman 1 



DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 



Nonfederal government personnel wanting a copy of this document 
must use the purchasing instructions on the inside cover. 



S/N0502-LP-221-9400 



The terms training manual (TRAMAN) and 
nonresident training course (NRTC) are now the 
terms used to describe Navy nonresident training 
program materials. Specifically, a TRAMAN in- 
cludes a rate training manual (RTM), officer text 
(OT), single subject training manual (SSTM), or 
modular single or multiple subject training manual 
(MODULE); and a NRTC includes nonresident 
career course (NRCC), officer correspondence 
course (OCC), enlisted correspondence course 
(ECC) or combination thereof. 



Although the words "he," "him," and "his" 
are used sparingly in this manual to enhance 
communication, they are not intended to be 
gender driven nor to affront or discriminate 
against anyone reading this text. 



DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 










UTI LINESMAN 1 



NAVEDTRA 10657-G1 




Edition Prepared by 
UCCM Steven G. McAllister 
and UTCS Theodore C. Bockenstedt 







s^\^^^ V ^^^^ 



PREFACE 



The ultimate purpose of training naval personnel is to produce a 
combatant Navy which can ensure victory at sea. A consequence of the quality 
of training given them is their superior state of readiness. Its result is a 
victorious Navy. 

This training manual (TRAMAN), NAVEDTRA 10657-G1, and 
nonresident training course (NRTC) will enable Utilitiesmen first class to help 
themselves fulfill the requirements of their rating. They direct and coordinate 
efforts of individuals and crews to plan, estimate, schedule, supervise, and 
perform tasks involved in the installation, maintenance, and repair of 
plumbing, heating, steam, compressed air, air conditioning, and refrigeration 
systems; and maintain fuel storage and distribution systems, water treatment 
and distribution systems, and sewage collecting and disposal facilities. 

Designed for individual study and not formal classroom instruction, the 
TRAMAN provides subject matter that relates directly to the occupational 
standards of the Utilitiesman rating. The NRTC provides a way of satisfying 
the requirements for completing the TRAMAN. The set of assignments in 
the NRTC includes learning objectives and supporting items designed to lead 
the student through the TRAMAN. 

This TRAMAN was prepared by the Naval Education and Training 
Program Management Support Activity, Pensacola, Florida, for the Chief 
of Naval Education and Training. Technical assistance was provided by the 
Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Alexandria, Virginia; the Naval 
Construction Training Center, and the Civil Engineering Support Office, Port 
Hueneme, California; and the Naval Construction Training Center, Gulfport, 
Mississippi. 

Revised 1986 
Revised 1989 



Stock Ordering No. 
0502-LP-22 1-9400 



Published by 

NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM 
MANAGEMENT SUPPORT ACTIVITY 



UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
WASHINGTON, D.C.: 1989 



THE UNITED STATES NAVY 

GUARDIAN OF OUR COUNTRY 

The United States Navy is responsible for maintaining control ^of _the 
sea and is a ready force on watch at home and overseas, capable of 
strong action to preserve the peace or of instant offenuve action to 
win in war. 

It is upon the maintenance of this control that our country's glorious 
future depends; the United States Navy exists to make it so. 

WE SERVE WITH HONOR 

Tradition, valor, and victory are the Navy's heritage from the past. To 
these may be added dedication, discipline, and vigilance as the 
watchwords of the present and the future. 

At home or on distant stations we serve with pride, confident in the 
respect of our country, our shipmates, and our families. 

Our responsibilities sober us; our adversities strengthen us. 

Service to God and Country is our special privilege. We serve with 
honor. 



THE FUTURE OF THE NAVY 

The Navy will always employ new weapons, new techniques, and 
greater power to protect and defend the United States on the sea, 
under the sea, and in the air. 

Now and in the future, control of the sea gives the United States her 
greatest advantage for the maintenance of peace and for victory in 
war. 

Mobility, surprise, dispersal, and offensive power are the keynotes of 
the new Navy. The roots of the Navy lie in a strong belief in the 
future, in continued dedication to our tasks, and in reflection on our 
heritage from the past. 

Never have our opportunities and our responsibilities been greater. 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER Page 

1 . Administration 1-1 

2. Leadership and Supervision 2-1 

3. Facilities Maintenance Management 3-1 

4. Blueprint Reading and Technical Drawings 4-1 

5. Planning, Estimating, and Scheduling 5-1 

6. Advanced Base Planning, Embarkation, and Project 

Turnover 6-1 

7. Planning Plumbing Projects 7-1 

8. Fire Protection Systems 8-1 

9. Water Treatment and Purification 9-1 

10. Sewage Treatment and Disposal 10-1 

1 1 . Compressed Air Systems 11-1 

12. Boilers 12-1 

13. Duct and Ventilation Systems 13-1 

14. Air Conditioning and Refrigeration 14-1 

15. Environmental Pollution Control 15-1 

INDEX INDEX-1 



in 



I 



CREDITS 



The illustrations listed below are included in this edition of Utilitiesman 1 &C 
through the courtesy of the designated sources. Permission to use these 
illustrations is gratefully acknowledged. Permission to reproduce illustrations 
and other materials in this publication must be obtained from the source. 



SOURCE 

American Society of Heating, Refrigerating 
and Air-conditioning Engineers, Inc. 

National Association of Plumbing-Heating- 
Cooling Contractors 



York-Shipley, Inc. 



FIGURES 



Table 13-3 

10-2, 10-4 

Tables 10-14, 10-15 

10-16, 10-17 

Table 12-1 



IV 



UTILITIESMAN 1 & C 
OCCUPATIONAL STANDARDS 



NUMBER 



OCCUPATIONAL STANDARD 



CHAPTER 



UTILITIESMAN FIRST CLASS (UT1) 

28 TECHNICAL DRAWINGS 

28330 PREPARE AS-BUILT DRAWINGS 

28356 READ SCHEMATICS ON BOILERS AND AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT 

35 ADMINISTRATION 



35830 PREPARE WORK PROGRESS REPORTS AND PROVIDE MATERIAL 
USAGE DATA 

35831 CONDUCT PERSONNEL READINESS CAPABILITY PROGRAM 
INTERVIEWS 

35832 MAINTAIN STANDARD FORMS USED BY THE MAINTENANCE/ 
UTILITIES DIVISION OF A PUBLIC WORKS ACTIVITY 

35833 PREPARE ACCIDENTAL INJURY/DEATH REPORTS 
44 TRAINING 

44374 IMPLEMENT TRAINING FOR TEAM/CREW MEMBERS 
56 CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS 

56029 INSTALL SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, AND LEACHING FIELDS 

56030 INSTALL FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 

56031 INSTALL ADVANCED BASE TYPE OF BOILERS AND PRESSURE 
VESSELS 

56033 INSTALL COMPRESSED AIR SYSTEMS 
60 CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS SUPPORT 



4 
12 

1,3 



1,2 

10 

8 

12 

11 



60022 ORGANIZE DAILY WORK ASSIGNMENTS FOR TEAM/CREW 
LEADERS 



NUMBER OCCUPATIONAL STANDARD CHAPTER 

UTILITIESMAN FIRST CLASS (UT1) CONTINUED 

60 CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS SUPPORT CONTINUED 

60023 PREPARE EQUIPMENT, MANPOWER, AND MATERIAL ESTI- 5 
MATES FROM DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

60024 PERFORM CPM SCHEDULING, PRECEDENCE DIAGRAMMING, 5 
AND ARROW DIAGRAMMING 

60026 PERFORM CONSTRUCTION/MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS 3 

60074 PERFORM DUTIES OF PLANT SUPERVISOR FOR THE FOLLOWING: 9, 10, 12 

A. STEAM 

B. SEWAGE 

C. WATER 

60075 PERFORM OPERATIONAL TEST ON BOILERS AND PRESSURE 12 
VESSELS 

60077 PERFORM TECHNICAL MAINTENANCE ON AIR-CONDITIONING 13, 14 
AND REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS 



60078 PERFORM TECHNICAL MAINTENANCE ON SEWAGE TREATMENT 1 




60079 PERFORM TECHNICAL MAINTENANCE ON WATER TREATMENT 9 
AND TEST EQUIPMENT 

60081 PERFORM TECHNICAL MAINTENANCE ON PUMPS, COMPRES- 1 1 
SORS, AND COMPRESSED AIR SYSTEMS 

60082 PERFORM TECHNICAL MAINTENANCE ON FIRE PROTECTION 8 
SYSTEMS 

60171 PREPARE INPUT TO AND UTILIZE OUTPUT FROM THE CON- 5 
STRUCTION MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

98 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION CONTROL 

98250 CONTROL AIR POLLUTION CAUSED BY FUEL COMBUSTION 12, 15 

98252 CARRY OUT PROCEDURES TO LIMIT OR MINIMIZE THE 15 
ADVERSE EFFECTS OF OIL AND FUEL SPILLAGE 

CHIEF UTILITIESMAN (UTC) 

35 ADMINISTRATION 

35834 DRAFT LETTERS, MESSAGES, INSTRUCTIONS, AND NOTICES 1 

35837 ADMINISTER AN ACCIDENT PREVENTION PROGRAM 1 



VI 



NUMBER 



OCCUPATIONAL STANDARD 



CHAPTER 



CHIEF UTILITIESMAN (UTC) CONTINUED 
35 ADMINISTRATION CONTINUED 



UTILIZE PERSONNEL READINESS CAPABILITY PROGRAM 
(PRCP) DATA 



35838 

60 CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS SUPPORT 



60028 SUPERVISE AND COORDINATE ALL CONSTRUCTION TASKS 2 
ASSIGNED TO A COMPANY OR DETACHMENT 

60029 PROVIDE TECHNICAL ADVICE ON PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 4, 7 

60030 PROVIDE TECHNICAL ADVICE AND ASSISTANCE ON CON- 3 
STRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE TECHNIQUES 

6003 1 USE NAVAL FACILITIES PLANNING GUIDE P-437 (ABFC SYSTEM) 6 

60032 IMPLEMENT A PROGRAM OF MAINTENANCE/COST CONTROL 3 

60033 PREPARE/USE NETWORK ANALYSIS 5 

60034 PREPARE AND MAINTAIN PROJECT PROGRESS CHARTS 3,5,7 

60035 PREPARE MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT FOR EMBARKATION 6 

60036 COORDINATE AND SUPERVISE THE BATTALION TURNOVER OF 2, 6 
PROJECTS, MATERIALS, AND RATE-RELATED EQUIPMENT 

60037 ORGANIZE AND CONTROL THE SITE DEPLOYMENT OF MATE- 2, 6 
RIALS AND EQUIPMENT 



VII 



REGULATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION 
AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

Environmental Pollution and Hazardous Waste Handling and Disposal programs have been 
enacted and are United States law. These programs are of immense importance and should be 
taken into consideration during the planning stages before beginning any new construction 
or rehabilitation project. 

As a member of the Naval Construction Forces, United States law requires you to be 
constantly aware of potential environmental pollution hazards or hazardous material spills and 
to report them to your immediate supervisor or other senior personnel at the earliest possible 
time. 

The following list of directives contains information on the cognizant government 
departments and the procedures for preventing, reporting, and correcting environmental 
pollution hazards and hazardous materials disposal worldwide: 

Naval Occupational Safety and Health Program Manual, OPNAVINST 5100.23B 

Environmental and Natural Resources Protection Manual, OPNAVINST 5090.1 

Domestic Wastewater Control, MIL-HDBK 1005/8 



vin 



CHAPTER 1 



ADMINISTRATION 



Learning Objective: Identify the administrative duties and responsibilities of 
a petty officer first class within a Navy Construction Force occupation in 
relation to the Personnel Readiness Capability Program, crew member 
training, writing of evaluations, and maintaining reports. 



The higher you ascend on the enlisted rating 
ladder, the more valuable you are to the Navy. 
This is understandable since you have more 
experience in your particular rating, you have 
probably been to several Navy schools, and your 
overall attitude is generally well-oriented to Navy 
life. In a sense, you are now better qualified and 
in a position to impart your knowledge and 
experience to the personnel under you. Your 
bearing, actions, and disposition are under 
scrutiny not only by your seniors but also by your 
subordinates. 

Advancement brings both increased rewards 
and increased responsibilities. The advantages are 
higher pay, greater prestige, more interesting and 
challenging assignments, and the satisfaction of 
getting ahead in your chosen career. As a first 
class petty officer, you will have many respon- 
sibilities added to those you had as a second class 
petty officer. You have acquired a lot of valuable 
knowledge, and now it is your turn to pass on the 
technical know-how of your job to others. 

In addition to supervising and training lower 
rated personnel, you must be able to perform 
various administrative duties, such as giving 
Personnel Readiness Capability Program inter- 
views, maintaining reports, drafting rough 
evaluation reports, and organizing daily work 
assignments for team/crew leaders. 

The type of activity to which you are assigned 
will determine the way you should carry out your 
administrative responsibilities. But the ability to 
plan and organize your work, to apply effective 
techniques of supervision, and to get along with 
people will help you succeed in the Navy, 
regardless of your assignment. 



THE PERSONNEL READINESS 
CAPABILITY PROGRAM 

The Personnel Readiness Capability Program 
(PROP) is a management tool used throughout 
the active and reserve Naval Construction Force 
(NCF). It is a skill inventory designed to provide 
managers at all levels of the NCF with timely 
personnel information to increase their capabilities 
in planning, decision making, control, and in 
determining unit readiness. 

Before PRCP was developed, personnel 
information was kept on an as-required basis by 
various members of the unit in personal note- 
books, files, and records. This information was 
collected as management required it to determine 
military and construction capabilities, training 
requirements, logistics support, and so forth. The 
collection of this information was usually a time- 
consuming, laborious task that required a piece- 
meal inventory of the command's capabilities and 
requirements. Another way of getting this 
information was through the use of rough 
estimates. Neither way, however, produced the 
accuracy or rapid response desired. PRCP has 
helped to do so by establishing standard 
procedures for identifying, collecting, processing, 
and using this information. 

The PRCP requires each participating com- 
mand to gather and continuously update 
information on each member of the unit. Most 
of this information concerns skills acquired 
through actual job experience or through some 
type of training program. Other information, such 
as expiration of enlistment or rotation date, is 
required for accurate planning. This information 
is placed in a document called a skill update 
record. Each enlisted individual within an NCF 



1-1 



unit is required to have a skill update record, 
which is maintained at the company /department 
level. Regular updates are forwarded to the unit s 
PRCP manager (S-2 department). 

SKILL INVENTORY 

An accurate and current skill inventory is the 
backbone of PRCP. Without it, the reliability of 
any planning based on information stored in the 
PRCP data bank is questionable, resulting in 
unnecessary retraining, reduced manpower 
availability, or skill deficiencies. The PRCP is the 
management tool used to determine a unit's 
readiness and skill deficiencies. It is used in 
conjunction with the requirements established 
by the Commander, Construction Battalions 
Pacific Fleet (COMCBPAC), the Commander, 
Construction Battalions Atlantic Fleet (COMCB- 
LANT), and the Commander, Reserve Naval 
Construction Force (COMRNCF) which is 
issued in their joint instruction COMCBPAC/ 
COMCBLANT/COMRNCF 1500.20 (series). 
Additionally, these skills have been conveniently 
classified into the following five major categories: 

1. Individual general skills (PRCP 040 - 090). 
These are essentially non-manipulative skills 
(knowledge) related to two or more ratings, such 
as material liaison office operation (PRCP 040), 
instructing (PRCP 080), and safety (PRCP 090). 

2. Individual rating skills (PRCP 100 - 760). 
These are primarily manipulative skills associated 
with one of the seven Occupational Field 13 
(Construction) ratings. Some examples are light- 
frame construction (PRCP 150) for the Builder, 
cable splicing (PRCP 237) for the Construction 
Electrician, and shore-based boiler operation 
(PRCP 720) for the Utilitiesman. 

3. Individual special skills (PRCP 800 - 830). 
These are technical skills performed by personnel 
in several ratings, including people that are not 
in Occupational Field 13; for example, forklift 
operation (PRCP 800), ham radio operation 
(PRCP 804), and typing (PRCP 803). 

4. Military skills (PRCP 901 - 981). These 
skills are further classified into three subcategories: 
mobilization, disaster recovery, and Seabee com- 
bat readiness. Examples are aircraft embarkation 
(PRCP 902); M-16 rifle use and familiarization 
(PRCP 953); and disaster recovery, heavy rescue 
(PRCP 979). 

5. Crew experience skills (PRCP 1000A - 
1010A). These skills are gained by working with 
others on specific projects. Most of these projects 



are related to advanced base construction, such 
as observation tower (PRCP 1002A), fire fighting 
(PRCP 1009A), and bunker construction (PRCP 
1008A). 

A skill inventory has three principal steps. 
First, each skill is closely defined and broken 
down into task elements, so each person will give 
it the same meaning. Second, a standard 
procedure for obtaining the information is 
developed. This procedure helps to ensure that 
the information, regardless of where it is collected 
or by whom, meets certain standards of 
acceptability. The third and last step is the actual 
collection of the skill data and includes the 
procedures for submitting the data to the data 
bank. 

Skill Definitions 

PRCP, NAVFAC P-458, volume I, Skill 
Definitions, contains a definition for every PRCP 
skill identified in the Personnel Readiness 
Capability Program. Each definition has been 
jointly approved by COMCBPAC, COMCB- 
LANT, and COMRNCF (Commander, Reserve 
Naval Construction Force) and applies to the 
entire Naval Construction Force. 

PRCP Standards and Guides 

The skill definitions alone do not contain 
sufficiently detailed information to accurately 
classify people, nor do they provide any classifica- 
tion procedures. Recognizing this, the Civil 
Engineer Support Office (CESO) conducted 
special Seabee workshops where the PRCP, NAV- 
FAC P-458, volume II, Standards and Guides, 
was developed under the guidance of CESO. This 
volume consists of seven separate manuals one 
for each Seabee rating. The PRCP Standards and 
Guides is the principal tool used in collecting 
and updating skill data. By following the inter- 
viewing procedures in the PRCP Standards and 
Guides, a trained interviewer is able to classify 
people to a predetermined skill level with an 
acceptable degree of uniformity. Also, by having 
a thorough knowledge of the tasks required of 
each skill, anyone so authorized can classify others 
to an appropriate skill level by actually observing 
them perform the tasks, either in training or on 
the job. 

Skill information obtained by interview or 
observation is recorded on the individual's Skill 
Update Record (fig. l-i) and forwarded to the 
unit's S-2 department where it is recorded on the 



1-2 



FACSO RPVSYM NO. ;^040/B2060R01 PRCP SKILL UPDATE RE .'ORD FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
GEMS REPORT 110. 1 ?)?- U PAGE 1 
84 FES 15 
NCTC PORHUE U1C 061?A D FT COMPANf 

U 7 C PNEC 0000 SMEC 9;J.J TNEC OCOO 


1 SKUi CATEGORY SKHL TMLC l [ * 


COMPANY CHANGE 








DET / TEAM CHANGE 








GENERAL GENERAL MATHEMATICS Wj 1 SI 
PLANNING. ESTIMATING AND SCHEDULING 03J ! 31 
INSTRUCTING OS? 3 3 
SAFETY 050 1 SI 
UTIL1TIESMAN PLUMBING 710 2 S' 
SHORE BASED BOILERS 720 <> SJ 
WATER TREATMENT 7JC 3 31 

SEWAGE DISP AND FIELD SANITATION 750 ? 31 
AIR-CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION 763 1 i} 
SPECIAL DRIVERS LICENSE 301 ; 31 
DISEASE VECTOR PEST CONTROL 3;; [ 31 
MILITARY AMPHIBIOUS EMBARKATION 9 0! . 31 

FIREFIGHTING 901 i fll 
CIVIL DISTURBANCE 907 1 81 
MILITARY INSTRUCTOR 909 < 1 
SQUAD LEADERS 94? , ] 
M-I6 RIFLE 9S3 2 4 
.45 CAL PISTOL 954 4 
COMBAT COMMUNICATIONS 954 4 
SURVIVAL, EVASION, RESIST, ESCAPE (SERE) 974 ) 
MINES AND BOOBY TRAPS 978 S' 
DISASTER RECOVERY, HEAVY RESCUE 979 34 
CBR PERSONAL PROTECTION AND DECONTAMINATION ggo 84 
DISASTER RECOVERY, CNTRL COMMNCTN 931 81 








SKILL ADD / CHANGE / DELETE 


SKILL 
CODE 


SKILL 
LEVEL 


SKILL 
CODE 


SKILL 
LEVEL 










































































































MSTHUCTIONS 
DET/TEAM CHANGE -VALID NIR. is TWO 


2 ADD/CHANGE SKILL -ENIE 


R SKILL CODE AHO 


18112 


4 

F 

S 


DELETE SKILL -ENTER SKI LI CODE LEAVE 

SKILL LEVEL BLANK 

FORWARD CHANGES TO CBC PORHUE, CODE 

1EFER 10 NAVFAC P <S (STANDARD 1. GUIDf SI 
FOX SKILL COCKS 





87.291 



Figure 1-1. PRCP skill update record. 



Seabee Automated Mobile Management System 
(SAMMS) and forwarded to the appropriate 
Naval Construction Regiment (NCR). The 
information is reviewed, skill deficiencies deter- 
mined, and training requirements established to 
maintain the unit's readiness. Complete instruc- 
tions and information for using the PRCP skill 
update record, and other PRCP data processing 
information, can be obtained from the training 
officer of the units participating in the program. 
As a crew/squad leader, you are directly 
responsible for using the PRCP Standards and 
Guides to assist a designated interviewer in 
maintaining an accurate skill profile on your 
personnel and to provide the initial information 
for the PRCP data bank. Subsequent updating 
of this initial information for each person 
is based on performance on the job (which 
you observe), completed training, and regular 



interviews. Newly reporting personnel, regardless 
of previous assignment, require interviewing 
within 30 days. 

PRCP INTERVIEWS 

There are two types of PRCP interviews. The 
first and most important is the individual rating 
skill interview. The second type is simply called 
other interviews. Both types require the use of the 
PRCP Standards and Guides. 

Rating Skill Interviews 

In conducting an individual rating skill 
interview, the interviewer uses a discussion 
technique to classify Seabees in the skill levels of 
the various individual rating skills. This technique 
requires a thorough understanding of the skills 



1-3 



710 Plumbing 

Contents 

710 Skill Definition 
. ! Skill Level 1 
.01 Install sewage collection systems 
.02 Install interior plumbing 
.03 Install water distribution systems 
.04 Install steam piping systems 
.05 Install galley equipment 
.06 Gas cutting and welding pipe/tube 

.2 Skill Level 2 

.01 Lay out piping systems 

.02 Test newly installed piping systems 

.03 Maintenance of interior plumbing 

fixtures 

.04 Maintain water distribution systems 
.05 Maintain galley equipment 



Figure 1-2. Title and content of the PRCP Standards and 
Guides. 



and tasks defined in the PRCP Standards and 
Cuides Since few individuals possess the talent 
reauired to interview in all the skills of a rating, 
the interviewers must be mature enough to 
recognize their own limitations and be willing to 
seek assistance from individuals holding the skill 
being interviewed; for example, using the crane 
crew supervisor to assist in interviewing person- 
nel for crane skills. 



Other Interviews 

Other interviews are used to classify people 
into the individual general and special skills, 
military skills, and crew experience. With few 
exceptions, these skills do not require an 
experienced interviewer. In many cases, skill 
levels can be assigned to individuals on the 
basis of their service or training record and 
by completed training evolutions, such as 
contingency construction crew training or 
block military training. This should be done 
whenever possible to cut down on interviewing 
time. Then, when a person is scheduled for 
interviewing, it will be just a matter of 
verification or updating. 



710 Plumbing 
Skill Level I: 



Skill Level 2: 



Skill Level 3: 



SKILL DEFINITION 



Individual must select, use, and care for hand tools, equipment, and machines com- 
monly used for measuring, marking, cutting, threading, and joining the following 
types of pipe; steel, wrought iron, copper, plastic, cast iron, cement-asbestos, con- 
crete, and vitrified clay; and gas cut and weld pipe/tubes using methylacetylenepropa- 
diene (MAPP) gas. He must also install plumbing systems for water, steam, air, 
fuel, sewage and rough-in plumbing for building; install fixtures and accessories 
such as bathtubs, water closets, sinks and urinals; apply insulation on steam, hot 
and cold water piping systems; and hook up equipment such as hot water heaters, 
water coolers, and galley equipment such as steam chests, coppers, dishwashing 
machines, ranges and ovens, both gas and oil fired. 

Skill Level 1 plus utilize drawings and specifications to determine grade, bedding, 
and backfilling requirements, and types of materials; to locate risers and position 
of sleeves in walls, floors and footings; to establish rough-in measurements; to 
designate the spacing of pipe supports for all types of piping systems. Also, he must 
read and interpret grade stake marks used in laying out trenches; utilize batter boards 
and grade lines; specify the location and size of thrust blocks; make service connec- 
tion on transite pipe; cut machine pipe and install transite pipe utilizing lathe; per- 
form hydrostatic and gravity tests on newly installed piping systems; treat and test 
water in new distribution systems; be able to operate drilling tapping machines; main- 
tain all types of piping systems specified in Skill Level 1, including such items as 
faucets, valves, pressure regulators, fire hydrants, and galley equipment; and diagnose 
trouble and make repairs or adjustments in any of the above. 

Not applicable. 



Figure 1-3. Individual rating skill definition. 



1-4 



410.1.01 TASK: Perform as Chalnman. 

Apply these ACTION STATEMENTS to the TASK ELEMENTS listed below: 

A. Describe the sequence of steps of this procedure nd explain the 
reasons Cor each. 

B. List significant tools and materials used In this procedure. 

C. Describe principal materials used In this procedure. 

D. Discuss the parameters of this procedure. 

E. Describe assistance required while performing this procedure. 

F. Explain results If this procedure Is not performed properly or Is 
neglected. 

G. Perform the steps of this procedure when practical. 



TASK ELEMENTS: 

.01 Perform as head chalnman: 

a. Select and set traverse station. 

b. Horizontal chaining using plumb bob. 

c. Break chaining using locke hand level 

d. Slope chaining using clinometer. 

e. Keep control point notes. 

f . Give and set foresight for angle turning 
TASK ELEMENTS: 

.02 Perform as rear chalnman: 

a. Give backsight for alignment. 

b. Hold tape or chain. 

c. Drive and mark stakes, 
rt. Clear line of sight. 

.03 Transport, clean, and store: 

a. Chains. 

b. Range poles. 

c. Plumb bobs. 

d. Cutting tools. 



A B C D E F G 



X X 

X X 

X X 

X X 
X 

X X 



XXX 
X X 
X X 
X X 
X X 
X X 



A B C D E P G 



X X 

X X 

X X 

X X 

X 
X 
X 
X 



X X 

X X 

X X 

X X 

X X 

X X 

X X 

X X 



82.252 



Figure 1-4. Typical task analysis with task elements and related action statements. 



USING THE STANDARDS AND 
GUIDES FOR INDIVIDUAL 
RATING SKILLS 

When assigned as an interviewer, you must ob- 
tain, read, understand, and use the PRCP Stan- 
dards and Guides. The format is standard. After 
the skill title, you will find the contents, the skill 
definitions, and the tasks, which are broken down 
into task elements. (See figs. 1-2 through 1-4.) 

Skill Title and Contents 

The title identifies the skill; for example, figure 
1-2 identifies the individual Utilitiesman skill of 



710, "Plumbing." The number 710 is a numerical 
code for this skill. The contents can be used to 
ensure there are no missing pages. The skill 
definition is always listed first and directly beneath 
it is .1 Skill Level 1 . The tasks are listed under 
each skill level. You must interview each candidate 
to see if he or she is qualified for that skill level. 

Skill Definitions 

Figure 1-3 illustrates an individual rating 
skill definition. The definition shown is for 
"Plumbing" and is a statement of tasks to be 
performed at each skill level. 



1-5 



There are one, two, or three skill levels, 
depending upon the complexity and number of 
tasks. Each level within a given skill is more 
difficult to attain than the previous one and 
requires a broader knowledge in both application 
and theory. For example, a person having Skill 
Level 1 in "Plumbing" performs comparatively 
easy tasks; whereas, at Skill Level 2 and 3 that 
person must demonstrate a skill and knowledge 
factor for a much more complex phase of this 
specific area of the trade. 

The purpose of the skill definition in the 
PRCP Standards and Guides is to introduce the 
skill material to the interviewees. In fact, 
you begin your interview by reading the skill 
definition. If the interviewees say they can do the 
related work, you may continue with the inter- 
view for the skill level; however, if they say they 
CANNOT do the work, it is obvious that you 
should go on to some other skill. 

Task and Task Elements 

A TASK is a specific portion of the overall 
skill level. (See fig. 1-4.) Many tasks cover 
relatively broad areas. Others may be quite 
specific and brief. Each task is further broken 
down into several smaller jobs called task 
elements. 

A TASK ELEMENT is a basic part of each 
task. When interviewing, you use the task 
elements and their related ACTION STATE- 
MENTS to determine the interviewee's qualifi- 
cations. Action statements tell you the type of 
information you should get from the person being 
interviewed. Each action statement is identified 
in the guides by a capital letter (A, B, C, and so 
forth). They are listed near the top, and the 
number used varies from task to task. The first 
action statement in figure 1-4 is, "Describe the 
sequence of steps of this procedure and explain 
the reasons for each." A matrix is used to show 
how the statements relate to the task elements. 

To gain familiarity with the matrix, refer to 
task element .01, "Perform as head chainman." 
Under the task element subparagraph a, you find 
"Select and set traverse station." If you follow 
this line and look to the right of this statement 
at the matrix, you see Xs under certain letters, 
indicating which action statements apply to this 
task element. 

INTERVIEWING STEPS 

When interviewing, the first thing you should 
do is to attempt to put the interviewee at ease. 



A good way of doing this is to explain the pur- 
pose of the interview. For example, explain to the 
interviewee that the interview will 

1 let him know what he is actually expected 
to know and to do, 

2. determine what he can actually do so he 
can be assigned to the right job, and 

3. determine his deficiencies so that he can be 
programmed to receive proper training. 

Next, explain to the interviewee that he should 
discuss his knowledge of the skill honestly and that 
he should not be embarrassed if he doesn't know 
every item covered in the guides. 

Tell the interviewee what skill and skill level 
he is being interviewed for. Read the skill 
definition to see if the person is knowledgeable 
of the subject. 

Task Interviewing 

Begin interviewing by reading the task. This 
directs the interviewee's concentration to the right 
area. Then rephrase the task in your own words. 
For example, you could rephrase it as follows: 
"The first thing we will discuss in surveying is the 
performance of the chainman." 

Now read the first TASK ELEMENT 
("Perform as head chainman") (fig. 1-4). When 
you apply this task element through ACTION 
STATEMENT A ("Describe the sequence of steps 
of this procedure and explain the reasons for 
each"), it sounds similar to the following: 
"Describe the sequence of steps a head chainman 
should take in selecting and setting traverse 
stations, and explain the reason for each step." 

The above sentence is not a question. It is a 
statement that directs the interviewee to tell you 
what he or she knows about performing the steps 
of the prestart check and the reasons for 
performing them. There are no questions in the 
PRCP Standards and Guides; therefore, no 
answers are provided. The guides point out the 
areas to be discussed (in terms of TASK 
ELEMENTS and ACTION STATEMENTS); 
and the interviewee's replies are evaluated by the 
interviewer on the basis of his own personal 
experience, knowledge, and judgment. 

It should be obvious now why all rating skill 
interviewers MUST be experienced in the skill for 
which they interview. The only way you can 
determine that the interviewee knows the task 
element is to thoroughly know it yourself. If you 
are unfamiliar with, or "rusty" in, any tasks in 



1-6 



the guides, you must study these areas thoroughly 
before attempting to interview anyone. Also, if 
you do not understand how a particular action 
statement is used with a task element, you must 
resolve this before interviewing. One way of 
doing this is to discuss the problem with others 
who are familiar with the skill. 

Discuss the task element ONLY with the 
action statements indicated in the columns to their 
right by an X in the matrix. For example, in figure 
1-4, only action statements A, B, D, F, and G are 
used with task element .02a. In task element .03a 
of the same figure, only action statements A, C, 
F, and G are applied. As an expert in the skill, 
you probably have the desire to ask questions 
about tasks not covered by the guides. You must 
avoid doing this, as you would have no applicable 
standard against which to gauge interviewees' 
replies. If you feel strongly that the guides can 
be improved, discuss your recommendation with 
the PRCP coordinator. 

Scoring Interviews 

If interviewees have a Navy Enlisted Classifi- 
cation (NEC) in the skill for which they are 
being interviewed, they are automatically assigned 
to that skill level without being interviewed for 
any of the lower skill levels. When interviewing, 
you should use a positive approach. The inter- 
viewees either do or do not know the skill. The 
decision is left up to the interviewer. ALL TASKS 
must be accomplished for each skill level. The 
results of the interview are then introduced into 
the PRCP system. The procedures used for 
doing this are contained in NAVFAC P-458, 
volume III, Systems Documentation. 



TRAINING 

Each training program is formulated to 
provide personnel with the skills needed to 
accomplish current missions and mobilization 
missions. The program is developed according to 
the pattern, priorities, and tempo established by 
the commanding officer. It covers many phases 
from orientation courses to special technical 
courses. The success of a training program 
depends upon operational commitments, policies, 
and directives from higher authorities; experience 
and previous training of the personnel assigned; 
and training facilities available. Although much 
of the construction training is provided by 
class A and C-l advanced schools, as well as 



special construction battalion training (SCBT) 
courses, additional skill and experience must be 
acquired. 

TRAINING ORGANIZATION 

Navy regulations state that the NMCB 
executive officer supervises and coordinates the 
work, exercises, training, and education of 
personnel in the command. The executive officer 
supervises the training of officers, coordinates the 
planning and execution of the training program 
and, when necessary, acts to correct deficiencies 
in the program. The executive officer does this 
in the capacity as chief staff officer (CSO). The 
executive officer's principal assistant is the plans 
and training officer (S-2). 

Company commanders are directly responsible 
for the training of their company personnel and 
for fulfilling training goals established by the 
commanding officer. The company commanders 
help to formulate training programs, supervise 
training of subordinate officers, and direct 
technical military and general training of their 
companies. The battalion service department 
heads are responsible for individual training 
in their departments. They conduct training for 
advancement and administer the OPNAV- 
sponsored general training. Platoon leaders 
observe closely the training progress of person- 
nel in their platoons. They directly supervise 
on-the-job construction and military training. All 
petty officers assume the responsibility for 
training their members and must be able to 
conduct effective training courses using lectures, 
discussions, project work, and so on. 

The plans and training officer (S-2) is assisted 
by a permanently assigned staff of three or four 
petty officers and by additional personnel on a 
part-time basis as necessitated by the formal 
training work load. This group is headed by a 
chief petty officer (S-2C), and its members 
function as the unit's central training coordi- 
nators. Responsible for the entire training 
program, this group is concerned with the 
formulation and administration of the formal 
military training program and the technical 
training program which includes formal schools, 
Special Construction Battalion Training (SCBT), 
advanced base construction, and disaster re- 
covery. The individual assignments to classes 
are formulated and administered within each 
company and must correspond to the guide- 
lines established by the plans and training 
officer. 



1-7 



In the Amphibious Construction Battalion 
(PhibCB), the training officer may serve as 
assistant to the operations officer. The training 
officer arranges and schedules all formal 
training of officers and enlisted personnel, 
performing essentially the same duties as the plans 
and training officer in the Naval Mobile 
Construction Battalion (NMCB). However, the 
training program planned by the training officer 
of a PhibCB is tailored to meet the specialized 
mission of the PhibCB. It provides the knowledge 
that operational teams and crews apply in 
carrying out all phases of their primary mission. 
Included are seamanship, installation and 
operation of causeway piers, fuel systems, and 
beach salvage techniques. 

TRAINING GUIDELINES 

In general, training should be consistent with 
the following guidelines: 

It must be closely integrated and coor- 
dinated with daily operations of the battalion. The 
plan and organization for training that is adopted 
must not interfere with essential construction 
functions. 

Notwithstanding the guideline just listed, 
the construction schedule should not be so 
inflexible that it overlooks opportunities for 
training that might even expedite the construction 
schedule. 



t Maximum advantage should be taken of 
the opportunity to derive training benefits from 
routine operations. 

Figure 1-5 shows a typical battalion training 
organizational chart. 

TRAINING NEEDS 

Training for advancement is a continuous 
concern of all personnel within a battalion, 
whether at the company or platoon level. 

In home port, training programs become the 
primary mission. The NMCB is expected to spend 
about 75 percent of the available man-days in 
formalized technical, military, and general 
training. In addition, the planning and estimating 
group may be considered to be involved with on- 
the-job training. Approximately 2 months before 
an NMCB returns to home port, it sends a 
training conference team to the home port 
regiment to prepare the training schedule for the 
battalion's home port stay. This team schedules 
the training required for the battalion to meet its 
readiness and construction tasking for its next 
deployment. They also coordinate home port 
support for berthing, supplies, and recreation. All 
personnel are trained in the areas of technical, 
military, and general topics. However, the 
program may be tailored to meet the specialized 
mission of the battalion's next deployment. If one 
of the projects scheduled is the construction of 
an airstrip, there will undoubtedly be a great deal 



EXECUTIVE OFFICER 

(CSO! 



PLANS a TRAINING OFFICER 
(S-2) 




-ADVANCEMENT IN RATING 

-PROJECT PREPARATION 
-SAFETY 

ADVANCED BASE 
CONSTRUCTION 

'-DISASTER RECOVERY 



-WEAPONS 
TACTICS 
LEADERSHIP 
-DRILL 

-PHYSICAL 
CONDITIONING 

"SURVIVAL 



-NAVAL HISTORY 6 MISSIONS 
-CAREER OPPORTUNITIES 
-AMERICAN DEMOCRACY 

-CITIZENSHIP 
RESPONSIBILITIES 

-PERSONAL AFFAIRS 



Figure l-S.-Training organizational chart. 



143.133 



1-8 



of site preparation going on. You will need to see 
how many qualified Construction Mechanics are 
available; you might need to train more personnel 
to maintain and repair specific equipment. 
Whenever an uncommon work item of sufficient 
magnitude is encountered during a forthcoming 
deployment, it should allow the majority of your 
personnel to gain experience and training in the 
operation. 

Take inventory of the skills the members in 
your crew possess, whether through actual job 
experience or through some type of training 
program. After you have made this study, you 
can easily see whether the required skills for a 
particular job match the available skills. When 
they do not match, you have a good indication 
that training is needed to bring the crew up to the 
desired level of proficiency. In some cases, you 
will need to conduct refresher training; in other 
cases, you will have to provide instruction on new 
techniques. 

As a supervisor, you may also check your 
personnel's service records, conduct a PRCP 
interview with each person, and select those best 
suited for training given at a Navy C-l advanced 
school or at a special construction battalion 
training course. 

ON-THE-JOB TRAINING 

There are many forms of on-the-job training 
(OJT). It may be in the form of an especially 
tailored, well-organized program, such as one 
designed to help Utilitiesmen acquire advanced 
skills in air conditioning and refrigeration. 
Then again, OJT may be in the form of simple 
instruction, like explaining and showing a person 
how to tie a certain type of knot. In other words, 
when one person helps others to learn to do a job 
and makes sure they learn the right way, it is a 
form of OJT. 

You may not have realized it, but in the 
Seabees, OJT goes on around us all the time. For 
instance, two strikers were assigned a job of 
copper pipe installation. Although they had 
performed many comparable jobs, they had not 
done that particular one. Their supervisor 
assigned an experienced crew member to guide 
them. This person explained the exact procedure 
for laying out the pipe; how it was marked, cut, 
and joined; and why that particular joint was 
necessary. The strikers understood and easily 
proceeded with the job. 

There are as many examples of OJT as there 
are contacts between personnel in the Seabees. Its 



importance becomes readily apparent in an 
organization, such as the Seabees, where changes 
in equipment, personnel, and improvements call 
continuously for new and better methods of 
doing construction work. 

In the Seabees, as well as in private industry, 
the term on-the-job training has come to mean 
helping an individual acquire the necessary 
knowledge, skill, and habits to perform a specific 
job. This definition implies that the job training 
applies not only to the Constructionman or to the 
new personnel in an organization but also to any 
other person who is assigned a new job. It 
indicates that job training is a continual function 
in the Seabees. No person should be regarded as 
completely trained. One's performance can always 
be improved by keeping interest high and by 
passing on directions, suggestions, and infor- 
mation that will increase proficiency of the 
trainee. 

Bear in mind, however, that OJT is an active 
process and requires supervisors who are aware 
of the needs of the trainees and who can motivate 
them to learn. Use methods that add meaningful 
experiences to the trainees' storehouse of 
knowledge. 

A supervisor who does a good job of training 
personnel stands to benefit in many ways. For one 
thing, well-trained crew members brag about their 
supervisor, especially to their buddies in other 
crews. A remark they might make proudly is, "I 
sure do enjoy working for Petty Officer Smith 
because I learn so much." As you can see, this 
multiplies your effectiveness with the crew. If you 
have a skill, knowledge, or attitude of value to 
the Navy and impart that skill, knowledge, or 
attitude to 10 others you have multiplied your 
effectiveness considerably. 

Setting Up a Program 

In setting up an OJT program, one of the first 
things you should do is to make an administrative 
analysis to determine the type of training required. 

One of the training requirements may be for 
advancement in rate for your personnel. There is 
nothing that will make you feel prouder than to 
see Constructionmen that you have trained make 
third class petty officer. Do you know what they 
are thinking? Their thoughts are not, as 
commonly believed, "Oh boy, no more mess 
cooking." Their real thoughts are probably that 
they cannot wait until they can sew on the next 
stripe. In preparing a program, keep in mind 
the broad knowledge you have pertaining to the 



1-9 



training objectives and determine in which 
ways you can best use your experience. You have 
to determine, of course, the subjects to be 
taught. 

You will have to break the subjects down 
into lessons, consider the length of time to be 
devoted to each subject, and determine if you are 
going to teach these subjects in a classroom, field, 
or shop. You may have to establish lesson 
sequence, determine lesson objectives, analyze 
reference materials, prepare lesson plans, and so 
on. Remember that in any type of training 
program, the objective is to help the trainee 
learn the most information in the shortest time 
possible. 

Implementing a Program 

You should consider various courses of action 
in implementing an OJT program. To the super- 
visor or trainer, some of the most important are 
as follows: 

Survey unit assignments and ensure each 
assignment is in the best possible accord with an 
individual's classification and specific skills 
background. 

Determine the exact need for training. To 
determine this need, establish two things: (A) the 
specific job requirements and (B) the individual 
skills of the trainee. When A and B are known, 
the OJT required can be stated in a simple 
formula. 

A - B = OJT required 

Determine the method or methods of 
training that are most effective. The number of 
people, time available, facilities required, nature 
of training, and individual capabilities are factors 
that will affect your decision. 

Select the individuals who will actually 
conduct the training. You should remember that 
the end product will be no better than those who 
conduct the training program. 

Procure all available materials that may 
help supplement the program. 

Monitor the program continually to ensure 
it does not lag, that training records are kept 
current, and that newly developed skills are 
properly applied. 



This is truly a large order. But now, more than 
ever, our Navy depends upon quality training. It 
is an important job, and it is one that never ends. 

Training Methods 

In OJT, you must be prepared to use a 
combination of training methods, depending upon 
the nature of the subject, time available, and the 
capabilities of the trainee. The following methods 
of training are basic to any well-planned unit 
training program. 

No other method of training is as effective, 
as intelligent, or as interesting as coach-pupil 
instruction. In addition to being a quick way of 
fitting a new worker into the operation of a unit, 
it serves as one of the best methods of training. 
Without specific directions and guidance in 
learning to perform the necessary duties, a worker 
is likely to waste time and material and form bad 
work habits. 

Many organizations in industry have appren- 
ticeship programs designed to train workers in a 
trade or skill. Their training consists of coach- 
pupil instruction with skilled worker supervision 
and periodic group instruction when it is 
advantageous. 

Self-study should be encouraged. Skilled and 
semiskilled jobs require a considerable amount of 
job knowledge and judgment ability. Even in 
simple jobs, there is much basic information a 
worker must acquire. The more complicated 
technical jobs involve both basic and highly 
specialized technical knowledge and related skills 
that must be taught. 

Group instruction is a practical addition to 
direct supervision and self-study. It is a time-saver 
when several workers are to be instructed in the 
same job-related knowledge or procedures. The 
supervisor or trainer can check training progress 
and clarify matters that are difficult for the 
trainees to understand. Group instruction, if 
intelligently used, can speed up production. For 
example, suppose you have six trainees learning 
the same job. Four of the trainees are having 
trouble with a certain job element, while the other 
two have learned it. The four people having 
trouble can be brought over to the other two, and 
in a short time the difficulty will most likely be 
solved. In OJT, this is called group instruction. 
As you can see, group instruction is not the same 
as classroom or academic instruction. 

Another type of OJT is piecemeal instruction. 
For instance, a crew member asks you for 
information and you supply it. That is piecemeal 



1-10 



instruction. A supervisor's orders are, in a sense, 
a piecemeal method of instruction because they 
let others know what, when, where, and perhaps, 
how and why. Other examples of piecemeal 
instruction are explaining regulations, procedures, 
and orders; holding special meetings; indoctri- 
nating a new person; and conducting organized 
or unorganized meetings. 

Training Development 

In any type of effective training where one 
individual is working directly under the super- 
vision of another, the trainers and trainees 
must understand the objectives of the training. 
Factors deserving careful consideration include 
determining the training needs of the trainees, 
defining the purpose of training, and explaining 
or discussing different points concerning training 
with the trainees. 

In determining training needs, it is often a 
good idea to interview the trainees. A summary 
of previously acquired skills and knowledge 
relative to the job can be learned by proper 
questioning. Compare jobs the trainees know how 
to do with those they will be doing. Determine 
training needs (required knowledge and skills 
minus the knowledge and skills the trainers 
already possess). Training needs should be 
determined for each job pertaining to the trainee's 
position assignment. Analyze the job to be done 
and have all necessary equipment and materials 
available before each job training situation. 

In defining the purpose of training, you should 
clearly explain the purpose of the job, duty, or 
task to be performed by the trainees. You should 
also point out to the trainees their place on the 
team and explain to them how they help in 
getting the unit's mission done. Stress the 
advantages of doing the job well, and how the 
training benefits them, their organization, and the 
Seabees. 

The trainers should also explain facts about 
the job to be done, principles that are proven and 
workable, and directions on ways to do the job 
safely, easily, and economically. The trainers 
should explain, too, the techniques that will 
improve the skill of the trainees. The importance 
of each operation in a job should be stressed. The 
technical terms associated with the job should also 
be explained. 

The trainers and trainees should discuss the 
problems that arise in doing a job, and try to clear 
up any questions the trainees may have concerning 
the job. Trainers should point out to the trainees 



the similarity of different jobs. The relationship 
of procedures in a particular job, to things with 
which the trainees are acquainted, should also be 
discussed. This allows the trainees to learn 
through association with past experiences. It also 
is important for the trainers to discuss the 
progress of the trainees. 

The most valuable end product of a peacetime 
military operation is trained personnel. Regardless 
of your unit's mission, you must have trained 
personnel to carry it out. It is the responsibility 
of every petty officer in the Navy to train the 
personnel under their immediate supervision. This 
responsibility should never be taken lightly. 

SYSTEMATIC TRAINING 

Effective training requires a great deal of 
planning and directed effort, organizing of 
materials into a logical sequence to prevent a 
haphazard approach to the job of training, and 
having an accurate method for measuring results. 
If any learning takes place, there must be some 
results. If you push as hard as you can on an 
object and there is no result if you fail to move 
it no work has been done regardless of the 
energy you expended. If no learning takes place, 
you have not trained. Three steps that may help 
you in planning and carrying out your training 
programs are as follows: 

1. Ensure learning by using the correct 
training methods. 

2. Measure achievement at regular intervals 
to assure that learning is taking place. 

3. Record results so interested parties can 
check progress; records in the open can create 
competition that often is a great motivating 
factor. 

Evaluation 

It is nice to know that you are doing something 
worthwhile and that your efforts are appreciated. 
You and the trainee will want an evaluation of 
the work each does. Generally, the most valid 
trainer evaluation can be obtained by testing the 
trainees to see how much they have achieved under 
your guidance. If they have learned to perform 
in a highly satisfactory manner, this is an 
indication that you have done a good job of 
training. The effectiveness of the training is 
determined by how much training has taken place 
and the value of that training. The personnel must 
be trained correctly. Improper training, in many 
cases, is worse than no training at all. 



1-11 



Performance Testing 

- 



to be transferred or hospital- 
if that person were ^ ^ period of time> 
izedorgoonleaveiu 

Pi fl 1 consideration to strikers in work 

Give special -^^^ be assigned to jobs of 

assignments, iney . fficulty- strikers may be 

increasing levels 01 licated job , but they 

useful assistants to ajomP Qf 



carry out the following 



to do. 

.To aid you in rating the improvement of 

persons undergoing OJT. 

. To help you locate the strengths and 
weaknesses in OJT programs. 

. To help you determine the qualifications 
of personnel entering OJT programs. 

. To assist you in assigning new people to 
particular jobs. 

Since it isapracticalcheckonaw^kproJ S 

a performance test must be a J^^. some 

^erf*^*2S^ 

J 4- fvioO CUTf" 1 WllcLL- Cl L'-- lJv ^ 

test is not designed to measu 

knows about the job (a w tten or o ^ 

fill that need for you). . Instead it s ^ 

^rstts-"^ 

ffitcring the performance tes^ . Th er wd 
always be room for improvement in most 
testing that you do. 

DAILY WORK ASSIGNMENTS 

The assignment of work is an important 

has opportunity to acquire skiUs and experience 
fn the different phases of their rating. When 
ass gnments are rotated, the work becomes more 
Sting for the crew. Another good reason for 
rotating work assignments is to prevent a 
parSar person from doing all the work of a 
Stain type. This could be a severe ^advantage 



basic tasks. 

work be sure to give the worker 
In assigning worK D tQ do the job 

aS ^"SS^d vorte may need only 
property. An W ' stateme nt concerning the 
a drawing and a genera^ experieilced worker is 

finished proauci. rv ti conc erning the 

i^oTrra^procedures to be 

followed. 



es. R member, there ia limit 
job compete s. K fe Qn a 

to the number of ^workers tn ^ 

n me B u t to 



adva ^fto a projecwhen their services can be 
TcS used or when the opportunity to earn 
'a Phase of the rating presents rtself . 



REPORTS 

As vou advance in rating, your job will require 






MLO Forms for Mineral Products for Projects 
T (fig. 1-9), \nlisted Performance 
Evaluation Reports, Work Requests, and JSMCB 
Job Orders. More information on repo rts or 
equipment and other forms can be f ound un fte 
Migeme( o/ Transportation E^rmnt, 
NAVFAC P-300; Nava/ Construction Force 
NAVFAC P-315; and Inspection oj 
-322. in addttion, 



1-12 



NMCB 



EQUIPMENT REQUEST 



PART A: To be completed by requester: 

Project/Destination: 

Requesting Company and Point of Contact: 

Date and Time Equipment Required: 

Type of Equipment Required: 

Intended Use: 

Operator Required: YES. NO. 

Requester's Signature and phone number: 

Project Supervisor's Signature: 

Company Commander/Company Chief's Signature: 



Date of request: 
(3 copies required) 



PART B: To be completed by Alfa Company 
Received By and Date: 

Approved . Disapproved for the following reason: 

Signature (A3 approval required for all construction equipment): 
USN NO: PM DATE: 

Equipment Type: 

Copy to: 

REQUESTER 

DISPATCH 



Figure 1-6. Equipment Request. 



forms used for reports often are designed locally 
and differ somewhat from one activity to another. 
At most activities, you will find it helps to 
maintain logs, notebooks, and charts of your own 
design to meet specific needs. 

ENLISTED PERFORMANCE 
EVALUATION REPORTS 

The Navy Enlisted Performance Evaluation 
Report is a periodic recording of an individual's 



qualifications, performance level in comparison 
to contemporaries, conduct, and prospects 
for increased responsibilities. It is the most 
significant personnel management tool in the 
enlisted service record. It is primarily designed 
for use by the Commander, Naval Military Per- 
sonnel Command (COMNAVMILPERSCOM), 
in making advancement and assignment decisions. 
It is also used in determining a person's 
eligibility for the Good Conduct Medal, reenlist- 
ment, and character of service at time of 



1-13 



EXCAVATION REQUEST (Submit in Triplicate] 



Date: 



(Organization) (Point of Contact) 

To: Public Works Officer, 



(Telephone No. ) 



Request for Clearance to Excavate for the Purpose of: 
(Description of Excavation Proposed) 



Method of Excavation: 



Planned Start Date: 



Estimated Completion Date: 

(including backfill, compaction, 
ground cover, paving repair, etc,) 



Plot plan/sketch is mandatory and attached 
showing location of planned 
excavation. (Allow 4 work- 
days for processing) 



- Signature (Requesting Official] 



INTERNAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPT ROUTING 



Public Works Utilities Div Endorsement: 
PVTJ LINE CREW: APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL DATE: 



PVU WATER CREW: 



COMMENTS : 



Signature 
APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL DATE: 



Signature 



PWI: 



APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL DATE: 



COMMENTS : 



Signature 



PUBLIC WORKS DEPT ENDORSEMENT 



Froir.: Public Works Officer, 
Tc: 



Date: 



Approved 



Originator 



Disapproved 



Approving Official 



Figure l-7.~Utilities Excavation Permit. 



1-14 



INSPECTOR'S REPORT 

(QUALITY CONTROL DEPT.) 
NMCB 2313/1 (REV. 2-83) 


OUTE TO INITIAL DATE REMARKS 


S3 


S3C 


S3QC 


S3S 


Prime 


Sub 


CM. 11 


Tl I 


""""""'' 


RlfORTNO 


ntiucco. 


PROJECT TITLE 


tutco- 






BJTERVIJOR 


INSPECTOR 


ACTIVITY 


RATE 


DESCRIPTION OF WORK PERFORMED 


































ACTIVITIES IT ARTEC 








CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION PLAN ITEUS CHECKED 


RESULTS 












DC LAVS 













CERTIFY ALL WOICPtRfOflMEOTU DATE IJ IAW PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 



PROJECT SUPER VISQ ft 

Dat" I. KO ICC 

2. QCFILEVIAS-3 

3. LEAD COMPANY 



OC INSPECTOR 



REVIEWED IS3Q1 



Figure 1-8. Construction Quality Control Report. 



1-15 



Date 



From: 

To: 

Via: 



Project Supervisor 



MLO, NMCB 
S3, NMCB __ 



Subj: PROJECT NUMBER/TITLE: 
BM CODE/LI: 



JL 



g. CONCRETE 

PSI: AGGREGATE: 

h. ASPHALT 

GRADATION: _ 
i. OTHER 



CY 



End: (1) Completed 1250 for requested material 

1. It is requested that the following mineral product be provided as follows: 
(Only one product per request) 

a. 2" MINUS CY 

b. 3/4" CLEAR MT 

c. 3/8" CLEAR MT 

d. BEDDING SAND CY 

e. WASH SAND CY 

CY 



SLUMP: 



MT 

MIN TEMP: 



f. MORTAR MIX 



j. SITE LOCATION (Bldg #, Street, etc.) 



k. DATE/TIME REQUIRED: 

L 

1. CONCRETE AND ASPHALT: (1) CY/MT PER TRUCK 



(2) INTERVAL BTWN TRUCKS 

(3) NO. OF TRUCKS RQD 



m. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/COMMENTS/LOCAL MATL INST: 



2. Review/comments (S3QC): 



3. Review/comments/order data (MLO): 

4. Contact person(s)/phone #: 



5. Submitted by:. 

6. Approved: 



S3QC:. 
MLO:. 
A6: . 



NMCB 



DATE 



DATE 



DATE 



MLO Form 4000/01 (6-85) 



.(Project Chief - Keep copy) 



Figure 1-9. MLO Form for Mineral Products for Projects in NMCB's. 



1-16 



discharge. Various selection boards use perform- 
ance evaluation reports to select members for 
advancement, continuation of active duty, 
retention, appointment to commissioned status, 
assignment to special duties, and special educa- 
tional programs. The performance appraisal 
process cannot be overemphasized and it demands 
command attention. 

As a first class petty officer, it is your job to 
see that the rough draft of the evaluation report 



is filled out clearly. You can get a copy of 
NAVMILPERSCOMINST 16 16.1 A or Military 
Requirements for Petty Officer First Class, 
NAVEDTRA 10046-A, chapter 3, to show you 
what information goes in each block. See 
that you have the Enlisted Performance Evalu- 
ation Report Individual Input, NAVPERS 
1616/21, filled out by each person on whom you 
are making an evaluation report. (See fig. 1-10.) 
All of the blocks must be filled in before you 
forward it through the chain of command. (See 



ENLISTED PERFORMANCE EVALUATION REPORT - 
INDIVIDUAL INPUT 
NAVPERS 1616/21 IB. 761 




DEPARTME NT 


NAME ilaii. (int. mddli i 







THE SUBMISSION OF THIS FORM is A MEANS OF ENSURING THAT YOUR PERSONAL A 

CREDITABLE ACTIVITY DURING THE CURRENT REPORTING PERlOO ARE BROUGHT 
SENIOR THROUGH THE CHAIN OF COMMAND 



HE ATTENTION OF YOuH 



fi OTHER CIVIC AND COMMUNITY SUPPORT ACT 



COMMENDATORY CORRESPONDENCE RCCHVEO OuH'NG THIS REPORT PERIOD 



SENIOR UPON COl. 



24.74 



Figure 1-10. Enlisted Performance Evaluation Report Individual Input. 



1-17 



slut. Flat. Ml** "Ml** I 



tftAKCH/CLAU 

Ut* 

ITATIOM 



11 OATS BWT*0 



PIBIOO Of FOBT 

Frow 



OCCASION FO* **OT 

Anodic 1 14 LjT'ini 



IT Tc 

IFF OAT OC HATS 



EVALUATIOW IECTIC5N 
Krauirtt Cammfnl 



j MILITARY KNOWLEDGE/ 
PERfOMANC 



41 MOMATUBK O? BKIOaTlNa UNtOM 



4 tlONATUMC Or MKMBIR 

/ at kni>H ledge that I lia\'t sten this evaluation report and 

\- rtfhn under Article 1110. U.S. Navy Regulations 
1 1 V?J; in submit a statement. 



'iii Di'sircili.Vui Desired (cmss out as appropriate) 



ATIIH* OF KtOULAN MCIOHTINO UNIOB OM COMCUBBKNT BKFORT 



4 OATS PWO tlf41Ul94) 



NAVPCRt MM/24 (S-2ltN 010-LF-019-17 
rt SMPC |6!6-) 




24.72 



Figure 1-11. Enlisted Performance Evaluation Report (front). 



1-18 



OCR TYPING FONT NOT fttOUmtD FOR COMPLIT1ON OP THM SlOf 



MEM BSWS LAST NAME. INITIALS 



1 SON 



PCftlOD OP MKFOMT 

2 From 



* To 



M DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 



}9 SPECIAL ACHIEVEMENTS 



8 EVALUATION COMMENTS 



24.73 



Figure 1-12. Enlisted Performance Evaluation Report (back). 



figs. 1-11 and 1-12.) Preparation of rough 
evaluations reports is your single most important 
administrative task. It is important for you to be 
thorough, timely, and fair. Give the continuing 
evaluation of your personnel top priority. 

As a first class petty officer, you will write 
evaluations in the rough on people in paygrades 
E-l through E-5. The evaluations for people in 
paygrades E-l through E-3 do not include 
narrative remarks. The evaluations for people in 
paygrades E-4 (PO3) do not include narrative 
remarks but should contain a listing of significant 
qualifications achieved during the reporting 
period. Evaluations for people in paygrades E-5 
(PO2) include narrative remarks and all of the 
blocks must be filled in. Some comments that may 
help you are as follows: 

Paragraph 1 . First sentence. Use one to three 
adjectives that best describe the person plus a 
statement concerning overall performance. (The 
more adjectives, the better the person.) State the 
person's job within the sentence and how it relates 
to the command's mission. Be careful not to use 
redundant adjectives. 

Example: Petty Officer Seabee is self- 
motivated, resourceful, and can be relied upon 
to complete difficult assignments without direc- 
tion or guidance. Is aggressive and initiates 
workable ideas for ways of doing things more 
accurately, more quickly, and more thoroughly 
with the same means and resources as his 
contemporaries. 



Second sentence. Use words related to leader- 
ship ability and describe his effectiveness in 
integrating people with the mission. Discuss 
difficulty of billet, number of people being 
supervised, and where appropriate, the dollar 
value of the equipment for which he is 
responsible. 

Example: Sets and maintains a high standard 
of performance for himself and subordinates. 
Maintains a high state of operational and material 
readiness. In the supervision of five assigned 
personnel, he is extremely firm and fair. He is 
responsible for the operation and working 
condition of equipment valued at $2 million 
dollars. 

Third sentence and remainder of paragraph 1 : 
Words related to technical competence on the 
job. 

Example: He continually maintains a high 
state of operational and material readiness despite 
antiquated equipment and non-availability of 
spare parts and material support. 

Paragraph 2. List of solid accomplishments 
taken from individual input. Do not overdo the 
superlatives. Talk about facts that are a matter 
of record. This part should be "hard hitting," in 
bullet format, capitalized, and underlined for 
emphasis. 

Example: Contributed significantly to the 
department achieving zero report deficiencies in 



1-19 



FY 37's TYCOM Inspection. Received numerous 
superlative comments from the inspection team 
regarding condition of the equipment. 

Paragraph 3. Attaboys, if any. Quote un- 
classified citations; paraphrase classified cita- 
tions. State the source of the citation. If 
signed by an admiral, state his name. For 
unit attaboys, tie in personal performance as 
a key to unit success if in fact, the person 
was a significant contributor to the successful 
evolution. 

Example: Received CO's letter of appreciation 
for superior preparation of facility for change of 
command. 

Received letter of appreciation from QIC, 
NAS Annex, for volunteer work on their 
emergency generator during a station power 
outage. 

Paragraph 4. Specific aspects of perform- 
ance. Comment on any particularly outstanding 
or adverse mark assigned. Personal traits may 
be mentioned. Identify extracurricular acti- 
vities that have been of benefit to the Navy. 
Comment on family involvement that has 
been an influential factor in the person's 
performance. 

Example: Petty Officer Seabee is deeply 
involved in many community activities. He is a 
Boy Scout troop leader, a youth counselor at the 
local Boys Club, and a deacon on the First 
Baptist Church council. He is an excellent 
representative of the U.S. Navy. 

Paragraph 5. Recommendations. Cover the 
following items, as appropriate: 

Next duty 

Augmentation/officer programs 

Potential for C school, or special education 

Retention and promotion 

The strength of the above recommendations 
must match the overall strength of the evaluation. 
The report must be accurate, hard hitting, and 
to the point. Flowery language is of no value. 
When a person is good, say so and back it up with 
examples. Above all else, the evaluations must be 



consistent with performance. It must track with 
monthly and/or feeder evaluations for enlisted 
personnel. 

WORK REQUESTS AND JOB ORDERS 

As a shop supervisor, your work involves 
work requests and job orders. A work request, 
as the name implies, asks that work be done. A 
job order is issued primarily for the purpose of 
specifying what work is to be done and when it 
is to be accomplished. A job order also provides 
for the accumulation of cost data. Since the job 
order procedure is not the same at all activities, 
you must learn the procedure for your particular 
activity and follow it carefully; this will help 
ensure that jobs are accomplished without undue 
delay. 

Wherever work requests and job orders are 
concerned, it is important for a work control 
system to be established that designates who may 
request work, what type of work may be 
requested, and who will approve the request 
authorizing the job order. In the public works 
department, control and responsibility are 
normally designated within the work classification 
system. The public works department uses eight 
classifications of work as follows: 

1 . Emergency work 

2. Service work 

3. Minor work 

4. Specific job orders 

5. Standing job orders 

6. Supplements to authorized work 

7. Amendments to authorized work 

8. Rework 

EMERGENCY WORK requires immediate 
action and includes the following: 

Prevent loss or damage to government 
property. 

Restore essential services disrupted by a 
breakdown of utilities. 



1-20 



Eliminate hazards to personnel and 
equipment. 



To increase or decrease the scope of a 
job 



Emergency or service work authorizations 
are limited to 2 man-days. When the work 
requires more than 2 man-days, emergency work 
initiated by an emergency work authorization 
must be superseded by a minor work authoriza- 
tion or by a specific job order, whichever is 
appropriate. 

SERVICE WORK is relatively minor in scope, 
can be accomplished within 2 man-days, is not 
emergency work by nature, and does not exceed 
the predetermined dollar limitation. The work 
reception and control branch is authorized to 
approve $75 to $150, depending upon the size of 
the activity. 

MINOR WORK is work in excess of that 
already authorized by an emergency or service 
work authorization and less than that authorized 
by a specific job order. 

SPECIFIC JOB ORDERS authorize the 
accomplishment of a specific amount of work 
for which individual job costs are needed 
for financial and performance evaluation 
purposes. 

STANDING JOB ORDERS include all work 
that is highly repetitive on which accumulated 
costs are needed for a specified period, usually 
a fiscal year. Some examples are trash and 
garbage disposal, power plant watch standing, 
public works engineering, leave cost, and shop 
overhead. 

SUPPLEMENTS TO AUTHORIZED WORK 

are issued for any portion of the work under a 
basic job order that is to be initially charged to 
an accounting classification other than that shown 
on the basic job order. A supplementary job order 
may be issued under a specific or standing job 
order. 

A specific, standing, or supplementary job 
order may use an AMENDMENT TO AUTHOR- 
IZED WORK for various reasons including the 
following: 

To reopen a closed job order 

To modify technical provisions 



To increase or decrease the dollar estimate 

To change the accounting classification 

REWORK is work that, in the judgment of 
the public works officer, is necessary to correct 
faulty work by public works department 
personnel. 

Certain types of work require prior approval 
or authorization of the commanding officer, 
management bureau, or higher authority. How- 
ever, issuing job authorizations to the public 
works shop is the responsibility of the public 
works officer or his delegated representative. 
Although job authorization is, in effect, signing 
of the authorizing document, this act pre- 
supposes knowledge and approval of every item 
contained in the work request. Job authorization, 
therefore, presumes an understanding of the 
principles and workings of controlled mainte- 
nance, as well as familiarity with the work to be 
approved. 

The public works officer may approve and 
sign any or all work authorizations within 
limitations established by the cognizant manage- 
ment bureau of the commanding officer. In 
actual practice, the public works officer usually 
approves and signs only those documents 
authorizing work that exceeds the limitations for 
authorization established by him for the director 
of the maintenance control division. The assistant 
public works officer may approve and sign any 
or all of the work authorization documents when 
such authority has been specifically delegated by 
the public works officer. 

The director of the maintenance control 
division may approve and sign any or all work 
authorization documents that do not exceed the 
monetary limitations imposed by the public works 
officer. The engineer of the shop may approve 
minor work, service work, and emergency work 
authorizations. The director of the maintenance 
or utilities division may approve minor work, 
service work, and emergency work authorizations. 
The work reception and control branch (mainte- 
nance control division) may approve and sign 
emergency work and service work authorizations 
within the limits established by the public works 
officer. 



1-21 



At times, it may be necessary for you to make 
up work requests or job orders. Requests for all 
work, except service and emergency, are prepared 
on a Work Request, NAVFAC 9-11014/20. (See 
fig. 1-13.) Job orders are prepared from these 



requests on a Work Authorization/Estimate, 
NAVFAC 11014/22, and a continuation sheet, 
NAVFAC 11014/22A. (See fig. 1-14.) For emer- 
gency or service work, an Emergency or Service 
Work Authorization, NAVFAC 9-11014/TF-21, 



WOK REQUEST (MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT) 

KMTAC ,|IOU/fr" J-MI /H-010l03.7J10 
-1 HAttOOO 1UI 



HAYVAC i/OJB.-) 



itt tjutn^tioft a* 



PAKT 1 REQUEST (F9bd out by Uojk>r) 



). IKM 

Supply Officer 


2. QUOT NO. 

12-711 


X 10 

Public Works Officer 


X. MR Of BOUBT 

26 June 19- 


. KOUBTIQt 
f^] COT BTUUTt 


Eel rafOuuMCi o won 


te. KOUCST WOK STAIT 


. KM RjnXX K3tlTKX CU1 

ZIJG L. Moore 


Bldg. C. 
Ext. 891 


7. KZTOVTIAM ATTACMEO 
D 3" 



Fabricate and erect extension to wood storage rack, southweat corner, 
Bldg. 107. Start from the outh xa.ll and extend through bays 3-4 approx: 30' long 

2' deep 
ID' high 

Storage rack to be anchored to -wall and have 5 shelves spaced approx. 2* 
apart. Shelves should be capable of storage of material weighing up to 5 Iba. 
per q. ft. No paint required. 

Ertra storage space needed for small shop store items. 



J7602 (sap 



USN 



PAJtT II COST ESTIMATE 
{RW out by Moinhmorxa Control DMilon M ntiragt* twpwfed) 



Supply Officer 



. Ubor 



c Ova-bud 



6. Equipaveot 



1AO. 



90. 



307 



D 



I*MC OM nUEHi woaaOAO. MS JOB CAM u 
noommtp 10 tmr M ^0 d&ya 



PAJK HI-ACTION I (FiUd oil by Uqu^ 




Figure 1-13. Work Request, NAVFAC 9-11014/20. 



117.294 



1-22 





si 


O 
<M 










* 





















O 










o 








4 
O 
PJ 






. 


o. 

CO 

n 




i 


Ul 

o 

Ul 

z 
o 








Ul 

i 

19 

t 


EXISTING 


oc 

Ul 



<_) 

o 

I 




z 

Ul 






a 

Z 

Ul 

ac 

3 


V 
I 

3 


CO 

Ul 

cc 

a. 




o 

CO 

ac 
o 




(FIBER- 






2 



Ul 




CO 


Ul 

CO 

1-4 

X 




O 

5 








o -0 
in 




CO 
Q 

z> 

K- 

X 

PJ 

S 

s 


1 

Ul 

o 

19 

Z 

Ul 

a 








X 

UJ 

o 

H- 

1 
O 



V 

ac 

Ul 


o 

t- 

o 

a 
z 

Z 


z 
_l 

_J 

Q. 
CO 

Ul 

3 








FIXTURES AND HO' 


S 

V 
Ul 

z 
< 
a. 

i 

CO 


> RECEPTACLES, AND 




Q 

O 

CO 

Ul 

z 

UJ 

f 

CO 




z 

H- 

t- 

UL 
O 

z 

Ul 
M 






o 
u 

19 

-1 

Ul 

u 

a 
z 




ac 
o 

H4 

ac 

Ul 

Z 

_l 


o 
_J 

i 

_J 




CO 

Ul 

CJ 

1- 

0. 

Ul 

Ul 








TtoN/trnMATE (MAINTENANCE MANAOEMENTI 
SET 

K.W U 


s 

5 


CONSTRUCT A PARTITION 30' LONG, 12' HI 


o 

X 

o 
ac 

S 

CD 
Ul 
CO 

< 
CD 

V 
O 

cc 

o 

CD 
Q. 

OO 

X 

X 

PJ 


z 
o 


2 

ac 
O 

h- 
u. 




8 

Cl 

ac 

UJ 

I 
3 
O 

UJ 

z 

Ul 

h- 

PJ 

d 


PJ 

_l 

_i 
< 
i- 

5 

Ul 

4X 
CO 

oc 

z 

UJ 

z 

H 

_J 


O 

PJ 

_1 

i 

CO 

z 

u 

p 
< 
z 

1- 
co 

t- 

z 

Ul 




USE COPPER TUBING. 




REMOVE (8) EXISTING INCANDESCENT LIGHT 


CO 

a 

t- 
3 
CC 
t-I 

CO 

i 

K 

1- 

1? 
O 

o 

u 


OUTLET BOXES FOR FLUORESCENT LIGHTS ANt 




UJ 

a 
z 
o 

1*1 

I 

-I 
a. 
a. 

CO 

UJ 
CO 

_J 

i 

1-4 




EL 

Ul 

H- 

t- 

3 

CO 

Z 
^-t 

Ul 

a. 
a! 
_i 

Ul 
Ul 

>- 

(O 


o 

t 
< 
_i 

Z3 

^ 
>l 

CO 
CO 

_J 




o 

3 

CD 

O 

ac 

o 

m 

OL 

19 

03 

X 

X 

PJ 

_J 

_l 

< 
1 

CO 

z 


* 

_l 

ac 

Ul 



z 

ta4 
1 

Z 

M 

i 

- 

ac 
a. 


z 
| 



ac 



a. 

d 

i- 

co 




Ul 

ac 

X 
u. 

1 

i 

UJ 
CJ 
CO 
Ul 

ac 

S 

_l 
u, 

co 

_l 
to 


CO 



1- 

CJ 

(J 




stimate. 


ii 


if 


5 










UJ 

a. 
a. 












Ul 
Ul 








UJ 

a. 

a. 










ac 
o 








Ul 
Ul 






w 

B 
O 


WORK A 
CONTINt 

IkAVfAC *M 
1 tl 


?l ' 


- 










PJ 












Kl 








j- 










,n 








- 






horizat 




























































s 














! 




2 










n. 


a 


ao 

00 


O 

s 

PJ 


in 

Kl 


o 
PJ 

00 












o 
in 











CO 


<! 
2 

o 

1 


50-001-8 


i 
i 


| 




I 

: 




i 
! 




1 
cc 
u 










i 


: B 
i 


PJ 
o 


cO 


1 


O 

PJ 


g 












O 

PJ 
in 
o 








. 1 

) 


^ 

1 1 

FH 
U 









: 


8 

















? 

> 




























s 
















n 




n 




<_ 








) 


S 


o 


o 
o 

M 


* 


o 


o 

PJ 
a 












a 

-0 

PJ 




C 






b 


i 








y 

c 

rt 


OO 

o 






Ul 
M 










1!' 


2 


b 


in 


: - 


PJ 
o 












o 
PJ 


INOIHCY 


5 


S 






<- 


OO 


S * 




.5 








< 

































w 




" 


J 








l 


f 




I 




ol 




1 
Z 










g: 


cc 


O- 
CL 


Ul 
Ul 


19 

IE 


t- 
z 

0- 












8 














i 








: 


i -'^ 






. 


< 










. 


































i 








M 




s^ 


CO 










5 


5|5 






























Ul 




J> IV ILHJfdi 

UNir 




I 3 




^ 

I 


co 


Is 


OFFICE 


d 

i 

te. 





















































- 


y 


















































3 T 




I'D 





5 






s 

u. 


u. 












































IAINTENANCE M 
/nf/nx-rfc 




h 


| 


f 


r- 


1 


CO 

UJ 

1 


LIGHTING 








i 


|" 


h- 
Ul 
Ul 
X 
CO 

1^1 




















i 


















E 


* O 
! * 






I 


UJ 















2 






















PJ 


















Jj 




I 


'JC. 


k-4 
































N 








2 




ii 


5 

M 

1 







? 


PJ 


1 


u 


t 

QC 












i 




























{ 




Pi 


t 
-1 


\ 
{ 




| 


ao 


1 ^ 

i O 
: V) 


o 


s 2: 












Ul 
Ul 
CO 






















Ul 

X 

o 

CO 






! 




ii 

sfi 


Z 


9 t> 


! 


{. 




i ~" 




s d 
; K 










if- 
























PJ 


- 





i 




| MODK 

MAVTAC 
l II 


f = 


3 5 




i 


f- 


s S 

* -s 


sg 


X 










* 
























al 


1 


X 

a 


i". 

l! 31 





1-23 



E S WOR* AUTrtOP:ZATi0N 
KA*r AC 9 ":"*' ?' R l^2*0/ 
CiftCiE ONE 

[|]EMEBGENCY NO. 

[i] SERVICE 


"^ riss&^wt" DA- 1 !' WECD HOUR RECD 
1 ' ' ' | , ' ' | 1 L. STT-TTTT 


.ihli 


''If 


*. 


ASSTG AC* 1 CCC? S 
"l II 


MRS 2 ASS'G "WR" CODE SIO HH5 

WORK CTfl 


3 ASS^G A'D^* t CDOt 5 

T c ' s i i ! 


^OHRT < ASSTG WORK CODE STD HRS 

WORK CTR 
















PERFORM^^ ! WiTiAtS OF 
WOK C*B TRADES PERSON 


REMARKS'SHOP COMMENTS - WORK PERFORMED 
W DIFFERENT THAN REQUESTED) 


i 




2 ! 




3 




4 







117.295A 

Figure 1-15. Emergency or Service Work Authorization, 
NAVTAC 9-11014/TF-21. 



is used. This form is shown in figure 1-15. The work 
request becomes a job order when it is authorized. 

In making up a work request or a job order, 
furnish a clear description of the work to be per- 
formed and include all pertinent drawings and 
details. An accurate description of the work re- 
quired is necessary, so the proper number and type 
of skilled personnel can be assigned to the job. 

You may be in an NMCB working with job 
orders concerning military construction 
(MILCON). A typical job order from an NCR 
to an NMCB is shown in figure 1-16. The job 
order form is explained below. 

WORK ORDER NUMBER: An assigned 
accounting number used to control and 



accumulate charges of material and labor against 
the project. 

LINE ITEM: The MILCON line item number 
that identifies the particular project. 

JOB TITLE: A short, general description of 
the work to be performed. 

DoD CAT CODE: The DoD facility cat- 
egory code under which the work is being 
assigned. 

QUANTITY: The scope of the facility being 
constructed in terms of DoD category units of 
measure. 

ESTIMATED MAN-DAYS: An estimate of 
direct labor man-days required to do the work 
described. 

ESTIMATED COST: Dollar cost estimate to 
complete the project. 

CUSTOMER ACTIVITY: The activity or 
command for whom the work is to be performed. 

REPRESENTATIVE: An official designated 
to provide liaison between the construction unit 
and the customer. 

TELEPHONE: The telephone number of the 

representative. 

DESIGNATED FOR ACCOMPLISHMENT: 

Construction unit that is to perform the 
task. 

AUTHORIZED BY: Name and signature of 
the authorizing official. 

GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND RE- 
MARKS: A brief, general description of the work 
and other pertinent data, such as special 
specifications. 

REFERENCE: Identification of references 
pertaining to the construction project. 

ENCLOSURE: Identification of drawings, 
specifications, and so forth, that are being 
forwarded with the work order. 

INSTALL TASK NO: Numerical identifica- 
tion of sub-tasks to be performed by the 



1-24 



THIRTIETH NAVAL CONSTRUCTION RBGIMSNT 
BST MD 2.0OO 


WORK ORDER NUMBER 
6PPP69901 


JOB TITLB ESTIMATED COST 
TWENTY FIFTH' MOUNTED POLICB BATTALION ^$26,OOO 


LINE ITEM 
C-777 


CANTONMENT, OTTAWA 
DOD CAT CODS 699 


DATE 
QUANTITY 700 MN 22 July 19 


CUSTOMER 
ACTIVITY 25th MOUNTED POLICE BATTALION 


DESIGNATED FOR ACCOMPLISHMENT 

Naval Mobile Construction Battalion SEVENTY-FIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE FIELD COPPBOO BOO 


TELEPHONE OTTAWA 4 


AUTHORIZED BY: 




GENERAL DESCRIPTION AJ>JD REMARKS 
Construct the following facilities for customer unit in accordance with reference ^L): 

(1) Eighty-two (82) 16' x 32' Metal roofed strongbacks. 
(2) Three (3) 8 Hole latrines. 
(3) One (1) 2O ' x 48' Shower with concrete deck. 
(4) One (1) 5OO Man Galley. 

Site location as shown by enclosure (1). 


REFERENCE: 

(a) 25th MOUNTED POLICE BN LTR DTD 25 MAY 19 
SER 0000. ~ 


ENCLOSURE: 

(1) BASE DEVELOPMENT DWG 732 


INSTALL WORK 
TASK NO. CLASS 


DESCRIPTION Of WORK 
ACCOMPLISHED 




DATE 


MANDAYS 


BBGIN 


FINISH 


82 - 16' x 32' Strongbacks 




10 
738 
72 


25 JUN 19 


5 AUG 19 


1. EO 
2. BU 
3. CE 

3- 8 Hole latrines 


Site Preparation 
Erection of Strongbacks 
Interior/exterior Wiring 


20 JUL 19 


5 AUG 19 


TOTAL 
Brect three structures 


820 
54 


1. BU 
1 - 20* x 48' Showe 


20 JUL 19 


5 AUG 19 


r with concrete deck 


TOTAL 


54 

1O 
70 
10 
10 


1. BU 
2. BU 
3. UT 
4. CB 

1 - 500 Man Gallej 


Concrete pour 
Erect building 
Install piping 
Wiring 
TOTAL 

Site preparation 
Concrete pour 
Building erection 
Wiring 
TOTAL 

GRAND TOTAL 


6 JUL 19 


5 AUG 19 


1OO 

2O 
8O 
8 SO 
50 


1. BO 
2. BU 
3. BU 
4. CB 






10OO 
1974 






SIGNATURE DATE 



117.296 



Figure 1-16. NMCB Job Order. 



construction unit in completing the assigned 
project. 

WORK CLASS: Indication of the pre- 
dominate ratings involved in the sub-task. 



DESCRIPTION OF WORK ACCOM- 
PLISHED: Short description of the sub-task. 

MAN-DAYS: Estimated or actual number of 
direct labor man-days required to complete the 
sub-task. 



1-25 



BEGIN DATE: Estimated or actual calendar 
date the sub-task will commence. 

FINISH DATE: Estimated or actual calendar 
date the sub-task will be completed. 

SIGNATURE AND DATE: Signature of 
construction unit representative and date of 
signature. 

When you, as a supervisor, receive a job 
order, examine it carefully. Make sure you 
have a clear picture of what is to be done, 
who is to do it, and when. Be sure you 
have all of the information necessary to do 
the job. If material listings and drawings are 
listed on enclosures, make sure they have 
been included and check them for accuracy. 
If you have been designated as prime contractor 
or lead shop, see that the subcontractors 
or other shops have received the job order, 
prints, and material list as required. Check 
availability of material. Material support may 
vary greatly. On some jobs, you may not receive 
the job order until after all the materials required 
for the job have been received. On other jobs, you 
may have to order the materials yourself through 
a material yard, shop store, or the Navy Supply 
System. If you have any questions, get them 
answered before starting the job. 

Ensure all of the material is properly 
charged to the correct job order number 
and that the material is used on the job 
for which it is drawn. Also, ensure that 
the labor required is charged to the proper 
job order number. This will keep you from 
the embarrassing position of trying to explain 



how a job was completed without someone 
working on it. 



MAINTENANCE AND 
UTILITIES FORMS 

In a public works department, most super- 
visory positions held by a first class petty officer 
are located in the maintenance division or in the 
utilities division. Here, you will see many types 
of forms and reports. Most of these forms and 
reports are standard within the system; however, 
some of them are standard only to the local 
activity. In either case, they are the tools you need 
to increase the productivity of the work force. 



REFERENCES 

Military Requirements for Petty Officer First 
Class, NAVEDTRA 10046-A, Naval Educa- 
tion and Training Program Management 
Support Activity, Pensacola, Fla., 1987. 

Naval Construction Force Manual, NAVFAC 
P-315, Naval Facilities Engineering Com- 
mand, Alexandria, Va., 1985. 

Personnel Readiness Capability Program, NAV- 
FAC P-458, Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, Alexandria, Va., 1981. 

The Navy Enlisted Performance Evaluation 
System, NAVMILPERSCOMINST 1616.1 A, 
Department of the Navy, Washington, D.C., 
1988. 



1-26 



CHAPTER 2 



LEADERSHIP AND SUPERVISION 



Learning Objective: Compare leadership and supervision; analyze the 
differences between the two, and assess the methods recommended for use. 



As a first class petty officer, your duties 
include leadership and supervision. To help you 
in fulfilling these duties, this chapter has been 
included to increase your awareness of the 
leadership and supervision competencies and to 
build your skills in these areas. The knowledge 
and use of these competencies will help you 
perform your duties more effectively. Now, what 
are competencies? In general, competencies are 
the knowledge, behavior, thought patterns, and 
skills that can be shown to distinguish reliably 
between effective and ineffective leadership and 
supervision. 



LEADERSHIP 

In this chapter, several concepts of leadership 
and human behavior are presented. Some you 
may already know; some may be new to you. 
Since there is no single way of leading that is 
always best for every person or for every situation, 
you may want to experiment with these concepts 
to find those that work best for you. 

As you develop new insight into human 
behavior, your leadership ability increases; 
therefore, your subordinates should do their work 
better. This is your reward. Leaders are evaluated, 
not so much by their technical expertise, but by 
their ability to increase the effectiveness of their 
people in getting the job done. The reward for 
the Navy is better people and more production. 
The Navy has the best equipped ships, aircraft, 
and weapons systems money can buy; but only 
well-trained, dedicated people can make these 
systems work. 

You have a lot of experience with people in 
many different situations. As you study this 
material, use your experience. When you come 
to a principle of human behavior, actively think 



about it and tie it in with your past experience. 
When help is needed to clarify your ideas, talk 
about it with someone whose opinion you respect. 
A better understanding of your responsibilities 
and actions in carrying out your Navy leadership 
roles getting Navy tasks done through the 
effective use of personnel will have far-reaching 
rewards for you and the Navy. 

DEFINITION OF LEADERSHIP 

As a senior petty officer, what does leadership 
mean to you? Your ideas about leadership may 
differ from other petty officers' ideas. One might 
say, "leadership is the ability to inspire your 
people"; another might say, "leadership is the 
ability to keep your people in line." To some 
people, it is just getting the job done. To others, 
it is not only getting the job done, but getting the 
job done well. 

When leaders get the required work done with 
the whole-hearted support of their people, this 
shows good leadership. However, if what is done 
produces dissension, disorganization, or inef- 
ficiency, effective leadership is not being 
practiced. 

To be effective, leaders must earn and 
maintain the confidence, respect, and cooperation 
of their people. It has been said that leaders are 
known by the way they develop their people. 
When an interest is shown in people and they are 
guided in a way that uses their talents, capabilities, 
and skills, they, in return, become interested in 
and more responsible for their work. This 
increases their knowledge and ability to do the 
job. Tangible results help to identify the effective 
leader. Leaders are known by the results of their 
actions. 

Leadership, then, can be defined as the art of 
influencing and directing people to win their 



2-1 



confidence, respect, willing obedience, and 
cooperation to achieve a common objective. 

For a clearer understanding of leadership, let 
us distinguish between the concept of leadership 
and the leader's role as a supervisor. The leader's 
role depends on a formal grant of authority, 
normally from one's superior. Leadership is based 
on respect from those being led. It is an earned 
authority. This grant may be the sole authority, 
or it may be in addition to the formal grant of 
authority that characterizes the role of an officer 
or petty officer. The basis of all leaders' earned 
authority is personality, expert knowledge, 
problem-solving ability, and so forth. Often this 
earned authority is a composite of these traits. 
But, whatever the reason, people are leaders 
only if they are willingly followed by others. 

PRINCIPLES OF LEADERSHIP 

Leadership is an art. It requires the ability to 
organize, delegate, and coordinate. These are 
traits which you, the supervisor, should apply 
daily on the job. You can learn to organize, 
delegate, and coordinate in the same way you 
learn any other skill. Developing this type of skill 
is a continuing process. 

Military leadership is NOT inborn; it becomes 
a matter of understanding and of applying sound 
leadership principles and techniques, as given 
below. 

1. Be technically and tactically proficient. 

2. Know yourself, and seek self-improve- 
ment. 

3. Know your personnel, and look out for 
their welfare. 

4. Keep your personnel informed. 

5. Set a good example. 

6. Ensure the task is understood, supervised, 
and accomplished. 

7. Train your personnel as a team. 

8. Make sound and timely decisions. 

9. Develop a sense of responsibility in your 
subordinates. 

10. Employ your crew members according to 
their capabilities. 

1 1 . Seek responsibility, and take responsibility 
for your actions. 



SUPERVISION 

Supervision involves working with people, and 
a major responsibility of a supervisor is 



production. A good supervisor knows how to get 
a job done by getting the most out of personnel. 
As a word of caution, however, the drive for 
production must be tempered by consideration for 
the human element. People are not machines. The 
supervisor who treats them as such finds that no 
amount of pressure will permanently increase their 
rate of production. While striving for a high level 
of production, a supervisor wants people to 
produce willingly and to show an interest in their 
work. If you have had any supervisory experience, 
you are no doubt aware that the job of a 
supervisor is not as it sometimes appears. The 
following discussion will give you an idea of some 
of the major factors involving a supervisory 
position. 



SUPERVISORY DUTIES AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 

Specific duties and responsibilities can be listed 
for a specific position only. However, here are 
some that are typical. 

Getting the right person on the job at the 
right time 

Using and placing materials economically 

O Safety, health, and physical welfare of 
crew members 

Keeping morale high 

6 Maintaining quality and quantity of work 

Preparing records and reports 

Maintaining discipline 

Planning and scheduling work 

Training your crew members 

Procuring the tools and equipment 
necessary to accomplish the work satis- 
factorily 

Inspecting, caring for, and preserving tools 
and equipment 

Giving orders and directions 

Maintaining liaison with other units 



2-2 



Checking and inspecting jobs of crew 
members 

Promoting teamwork 

Maintaining good housekeeping on the job 

Keeping operations running smoothly and 
efficiently 

EARNING RESPECT 

Respect must be earned. You cannot win it by 
flattery, apple polishing, throwing your weight 
around, avoiding issues, or striving for popularity. 
In supervising your crew, create an atmosphere 
of courteous and helpful direction. The less noise 
you make, the better the results. There is no room 
for the "Do as I say, not as I do" approach. In 
today's technical and ever-changing Navy, the 
need is for personnel who have intelligence, 
technical know-how, leadership ability, and set 
a good example. Good supervision produces a 
smooth running organization; poor supervision 
creates confusion, dissatisfaction, and dismay. 

COMMON MISTAKES 

Your first days as a new supervisor are the 
most important. Your crew will be watching to 
see how you react to your new responsibility. Your 
superiors will be observing you too. This is the 
time to avoid some of the more common mistakes 
made by supervisors. Learning what NOT to do 
is often as important as learning what to do. 

"New broom" tactics are out! It is not 
unusual for an inexperienced supervisor to go into 
a new job with the idea that "things are going to 
be different around here." Try not to make a big 
showing, or let it be known that you did not like 
the way the last supervisor operated. If so, you 
have overlooked a psychological factor called 
"resistance to change." Some people fear and 
resent change. It is better to let your crew know 
that change can wait for now. After getting your 
feet on the ground, you can make. changes 
gradually. 

Do not make promises to gain your crew's 
friendship and support. Even a hinted or implied 
promise can sometimes be dynamite. For example, 
statements such as "if you do this job right, you 
may get a little time off" can get you in trouble 
quick. You could be overruled by higher 
authority. Besides, doing a good job is what 
everyone is being paid for already and should be 



its own reward. It should not require bribes or 
additional compensation to get people to do what 
they are supposed to do. 

Avoid dictatorial practices; they are fiercely 
resented. A dramatic display of authority during 
your first days on the job will be particularly 
noticed. 

Playing favorites, being partial to former 
friends, ignoring the more timid of your crew 
members, and assigning the best jobs to a chosen 
few will rapidly break down the morale of your 
crew. 

Careless remarks, which would normally go 
unnoticed if they came from one of the crew, take 
on new significance when they come from a 
supervisor. You must carefully weigh your 
remarks when members of your crew are listening. 

Failure to delegate work and fearing to trust 
subordinates are common failings of a new 
supervisor. The end result is you become so 
backlogged with work that you bottleneck the 
entire unit. 

When you make a promise to have a job ready 
for inspection at a certain time and you are unable 
to keep that promise, accept the blame yourself. 
There may be a good reason for your inability to 
keep your promise or the fault may lie with one 
of your subordinates, but the important thing is 
for you to accept the responsibility and not pass 
the buck. Passing the buck when something goes 
wrong is a sure way to lose the respect of your 
crew. And above all, do not lose your temper in 
front of crew members. You must master yourself 
before you can control others. 

THE FINE LINE 

As supervisor, you must draw a fine line in 
your relationship with your crew. Do not assume 
false dignity; but the old relationships that you 
used to enjoy may no longer be appropriate. 
Drawing this fine line is the most difficult part 
of being a new supervisor, but it must be done. 
As a first class petty officer and project supervisor 
or crew leader, you may have a difficult job in 
drawing this fine line, particularly when on 
battalion duty. You wear the same uniform and 
may even eat and sleep in the same areas as your 
subordinates. You may also attend the same clubs; 
however, you must ensure that your subordinates 
understand that your general conversation in the 
relaxed atmosphere of the club and your 
comments on the job carry different weights and 
have different values. This does not mean that as 
an off-duty supervisor you are free to act the 



2-3 



opposite of the way you act on the job, but it does 
allow you to relax somewhat. To maintain 
balance, ask your crew for advice and help rather 
than give the impression that you know it all. Let 
the crew members know that you have confidence 
in them; maintain a friendly but conservative 
attitude; be impartial; be consistent; and set a 
good example. 



DISTINGUISHABLE LEADERSHIP 
AND SUPERVISION SKILLS 

A private survey of the Navy's middle 
managers, junior officers, and senior petty 
officers found there are 16 factors that distinguish 
an average performer from a superior performer. 
They are called competencies. There are 16 
competencies, which have been proven capable 
of distinguishing between effective and ineffective 
leadership performance. Some of the more 
important concepts are discussed below. 

THE CONCERN FOR EFFICIENCY 
AND EFFECTIVENESS 

The concern for efficiency and effectiveness 
should be high on all senior petty officers' priority 
lists. Training is the key to meeting this obligation. 
But before training can be effective, the 
individuals responsible for training should have 
a firm grasp of the material they will be teaching. 

A common pitfall is the complete disregard 
for setting goals and performance standards. At 
times, tasks may seem insurmountable. However, 
it should be emphasized that through realistic goal 
setting and meeting performance standards, most 
tasks can be handled with ease. During the course 
of a project, the trainees should be encouraged 
to use this technique. Allowances should be made 
in task assignments for decision making on the 
part of the trainee; this encourages junior 
members to take the initiative in accomplishing 
tasks. 

In the attempt to maintain an efficient and 
effective organization, communication has been 
identified as another problem area. This area is 
often overlooked at the time task assignments are 
being made; often the supervisor does not relay 
instructions clearly and concisely enough. This can 
result in a lack of understanding, and subse- 
quently, a job not completed, a poorly completed 
section of a job, or even damage to major items 
of equipment. 



Training 

Leaders have a responsibility to train people 
in their present duties and for future duty 
responsibilities. Most jobs are usually performed 
adequately, but they can often be performed 
better. Items of equipment are constantly 
changing, and people must be trained to operate 
them. Newer people in the unit must be instructed 
in the proper execution of their duties. Through 
effective training, the potential of your people can 
be increased substantially. 

To be effective in training subordinates, you 
must understand the learning process. One 
outstanding characteristic of people is that they 
have the ability to learn throughout their lifetime. 
They learn continuously from the time they are 
born until they die. To understand the concept 
of learning better, it is important to analyze what 
happens to the person. One learning experience 
may change a person's way of perceiving, 
thinking, feeling, and way of doing something. 
Learning can be defined as a change in behavior 
as a result of experience. The behavior may be 
physical and overt, or it may be intellectual or 
attitudinal; it may not always be noticeable. A 
leader should understand these factors and apply 
them during the training program. When one or 
more of the four learning characteristics listed 
below are stimulated, the individual will learn. 

1 . Learning must be purposeful: To the indivi- 
dual, one's needs and notions must be satisfied, 
then the learning process will be effective. If 
instructors are aware of this fact, they can seek 
ways to relate learning to the student's goals. 

2. Learning comes through experience: 
Learning is an individual process. The instructor 
cannot do it for the student. The instructor cannot 
pour knowledge into the student's head. The 
student can learn only from that which is 
experienced. 

Learning and knowledge cannot exist apart 
from the individual. A person's knowledge results 
from experience. And no two people have had 
identical experiences. 

Although all learning is by experience, it can 
take place in different forms and in varying 
degrees. Some experiences may involve all or the 
majority of a person's senses; other experiences 
may involve only one or two senses, such as 
hearing or seeing. The leader is faced with the 
problem of providing meaningful, varied, and 
appropriate experiences. 



2-4 



Learning a physical skill requires actual 
experience in performing it. An individual will 
never learn how to install air-conditioning 
equipment effectively unless the work is actually 
performed by that individual. 

Mental habits are also learned through 
practice. If a person is to use sound judgment and 
solve problems well, then this person must have 
a general awareness of the principles involved in 
solving realistic problems. Once these principles 
are learned and followed continually, experiences 
in which sound judgment has been exercised will 
become more and more evident. 

3. Learning is multifaceted: While learning 
the material at hand, students may be learning 
other things as well. They may be learning 
cooperation and group dynamics. They may be 
developing attitudes about the Navy, good or bad, 
depending on what they experience. Under a 
skillful instructor, they may even learn self- 
reliance. The list is endless. This learning is 
sometimes called incidental, but it may have a 
great impact on the development of the students. 

4. Learning is an active process: Students do 
not soak up knowledge the way a sponge absorbs 
water. The instructor must present the material 
in small bits, testing to see if the material is being 
absorbed by the students as anticipated. 

To check the student's progress, use methods 
of testing as dictated by the subject matter. The 
Navy classifies subject matter into three types: 
knowledge, skill, and attitude. 

Knowledge-type subject matter is taught to 
build up a storehouse of useful facts, principles, 
theories, and so on. It is usually presented in a 
formal training situation. 

Skill-type subject matter (mental or physical) 
is taught to help the student acquire the ability 
to perform the assigned jobs with ease, speed, and 
precision. The teaching approach in this situation 
is quite different from a knowledge-type in- 
structional situation. The presentation of 
knowledge-type instruction is usually given first, 
followed by skill-type instruction. 

Attitude-type subject matter is selected and 
taught to create proper feelings, understanding, 
respect, and so forth. Safety and military courtesy 
are examples of attitude-type subject matter. It 
can be organized in the same manner as know- 
ledge-type subject matter. 

To measure attainment or progress, administer 
achievement tests. If the material to be tested is 
knowledge, then a written test would be the most 



effective way of measuring progress. For skills, 
the performance-type test, which measures 
manipulative and mechanical skills as well as 
knowledge, is the most effective way of measuring 
students progress. However, attitude tests present 
other problems. There is no way to look inside 
the students' heads to see what they may be 
thinking, so the most effective way of measuring 
progress is by personal observation. 

Knowing Your Job and Crew 

Your job is likely to vary with each deploy- 
ment of the battalion. If the principal mission 
of the battalion is to construct housing, 
you may be in charge of a crew installing interior 
piping. On another assignment, the mission of a 
battalion may be to install portable distillation 
plants, including the water distribution system. 
On some assignments, it may be necessary to 
install refrigeration systems. On most assign- 
ments, it is necessary to set up a mechanical repair 
shop. You may be in charge of a crew assigned 
to carry out one or more of these jobs. 

To carry out the job properly, you must know 
exactly what is to be done, the deadlines for the 
job or portions of it, who will be your supervisor 
for the job, and the relationship of this job to 
other jobs or projects. You will need to plan your 
part of the job with respect to materials and 
scheduling. Unless you understand lines of 
authority, the materials and equipment required, 
the limitations of the equipment, and the 
capabilities of your crew, you are likely to have 
trouble in meeting your responsibilities. 

Unless you thoroughly understand the job to 
be done, it is not likely that you can do a good 
job. It is obvious that a good supervisor needs 
to know the strong and weak points of each crew 
member. You need to know your crew to make 
intelligent decisions about assignments, needed 
training, and recommendations for advancement 
in rating, among other things. 

When you learn that new people are being 
assigned to your crew, learn what you can about 
them. Ask to see their records, talk to them when 
they report, find out what they have done and like 
to do, and finally, observe them closely in various 
work situations. You will soon learn what type 
of people they are and know their capabilities. 

Setting Goals and Performance Standards 

Effective groups are successful groups. The 
effective unit (and the effective individual) is one 



2-5 



that expects success. The gunnery crew of a ship 
that sets out to win the gunnery championship of 
its division will work vigorously toward that goal 
only if it is getting somewhere and has a fair 
chance of winning. If the crew members are 
convinced that it is impossible to achieve this goal, 
they will not really try. The unit will be ineffective. 
The unit that expects failure will be depressed, 
erratic, and without zip and likely to experience 
failure. 

When the goal is realistic and within reach, 
groups will work hard. If the coach of Short 
Pump State College tells the team of small but 
well-trained football players that they are expected 
to beat the number one team in the country, it 
is unlikely that much work from the team will 
occur. Such a goal is unrealistic. Since the coach's 
goal is too high, no member of the team has any 
real hope of success. But if the goal is to score 
on the number one team, there will be more 
enthusiasm. They will work equally hard to get 
ready for a game next week with a neighboring 
team that has beaten them 10 times in the last 16 
games. That is a goal that might be reached. 

Now, if the goal is to beat another nearby 
college team that has not won a game in 7 years, 
the team is not likely to work hard either. Since 
it is such an easy goal, it is not a challenge. 

If the group is to work toward a goal with 
energy and commitment, it must be a realistic 
challenge. When goals are set too high, the group 
will not function well. Frustration, unhappiness, 
and resentment are the likely results. Goals that 
are set at a realistic, challenging level promote 
good morale within the group. 

The supervisor should be concerned with the 
performance of the crew. Performance will hinge 
on realistic goals being set and acceptable 
standards being established. These standards 
should be set at the outset of the project, so the 
crew is aware that their work will be measured 
against some standard and that the project is of 
concern to the supervisor and the command. 
When made aware of these facts, the crew will 
tend to put forth its maximum effort in the 
accomplishment of the task. 

Individual performance and satisfaction result 
from the interaction of four basic elements: 

1. The individual: The person's motives and 
skills. 

2. The individual's manager: The expectations 
and behavior of the person's manager the 
managerial style used. 



3 The individual's job: Tasks that must be 
performed by the person as part of the job. 

4 The individual's work center or command: 
How' the person views the climate and structure 
of the work center or command. 

When you, as supervisor, are able to make the 
elements fit and work well together, the workers' 
performance and satisfaction will be high. 
Conversely, when these elements do not fit 
together, but instead conflict, jobs will not get 
done and work satisfaction for the crew will be 
low. 

Taking the Initiative 

At this point in your career, you will supervise 
crews and platoons. The young men and women 
of your organization are very perceptive. If you 
obey orders and regulations in an unconcerned 
fashion, the chances are your orders to your 
people will be received and administered in the 
same manner. 

When the crew leader is in the process of 
giving an order, how often have you heard the 
statement, "The chief said. ..." By making 
such a statement and without realizing it, the crew 
leader relinquishes all authority to the chief who 
gave the order originally. Not all orders that you 
will be required to follow in the Navy will be to 
your liking; however, it is your responsibility to 
accept them and administer them as if they were 
your own. 

As the supervisor, you should take the 
initiative and accept the responsibilityit is yours! 
If you respond in an unconcerned fashion, the 
result could be costly. In time, the crew will sense 
your lack of concern over the project and will not 
be concerned about the time it takes to carry out 
the task. In regard to material, your lack of 
concern in this area will also affect the crew's 
concern for conservation of material. The safety 
of your crew, as well as other personnel in the 
area, will be jeopardized through halfhearted 
enforcement of safety regulations. 

You should adopt the attitude that the buck 
stops with you. This will have to be more than 
a mental process; you will have to demonstrate 
these actions by becoming a self-starter. You 
should anticipate situations rather than react to 
them. You should start new actions and plans 
without being told, and you should be resourceful 
and persistent. Junior members of your team will 
sense this attitude and will be more likely to follow 
suit. 



2-6 



Communicating Effectively 

When old friends talk to each other, they 
usually communicate easily and naturally. They 
may use only incomplete sentences or gestures. 
Sometimes a single word or a raised eyebrow 
conveys all the meaning necessary. They are able 
to make themselves understood because they 
communicate in an atmosphere of mutual under- 
standing and trust; they are receptive to each 
other's thoughts and opinions. 

We take for granted our ability to com- 
municate with others, for speaking and con- 
versing are integral parts of our lives. Yet 
communicating in the work situation can be a real 
challenge to you, as a supervisor. When you give 
a simple order to a subordinate or listen to a 
suggestion from a subordinate, you face com- 
munication barriers that rarely exist between 
old friends. 

Although the obvious tools of communication 
are words (written and spoken) and pictures (TV, 
maps, drawings), this chapter deals mainly with 
the verbal and nonverbal communication process 
between two people. 

Effective communication is more than send- 
ing a message. Effective communication occurs 
when the receiver accurately understands the 
message. 

The effective person-to-person communication 
process has three steps. 

1. The sender encodes and sends a message. 

2. The listener receives and decodes the 
message. 

3. The sender makes sure the receiver 
correctly understands the message by 
asking for feedback. 

To send a message, you select symbols or 
words that convey your intended message to the 
receiver (encoding). At its basic level, 
communication is achieved through the use of 
simple oral and visual codes. Your ideas are 
communicated only when the words are combined 
in meaningful, whole sentences. Each part of this 
code is vital to effective communication. You 
must select your words carefully to convey 
messages your listeners can understand. 

Facial expressions, hand gestures, and body 
motions form other communication signals. These 
nonverbal signals often convey more information 
than the verbal codes. With these nonverbal 
signals, we consciously or unconsciously reveal 
our emotions, feelings, and attitudes. 



The effective communicator always 
remembers one basic rule: communication suc- 
ceeds only in relation to the reaction of the 
receiver. Communication takes place when the 
listener reacts with understanding and makes 
behavior changes accordingly. 

The listener receives and then decodes the 
message from a personal frame of reference, likes 
and dislikes, and particular needs. You can help 
to translate your message accurately if you assess 
the receiver's background, experience, and 
education before you send your message. You 
then increase your chances of communicating with 
words and feelings that have meaning to your 
receiver. 

You can determine if your listener accurately 
understands your message from the information 
relayed back to you. This feedback of information 
takes many forms. A person may state, "As I 
understand you, you want me to. . . ." Or the 
person may express agreement or disagreement 
with what you say. Wandering glances by the 
person with whom you are talking may express 
confusion, impatience, or boredom. An affirma- 
tive or negative nod of the head provides 
meaningful feedback. You can learn much about 
your communications by observing the reactions 
of your receivers. 

Your challenge is to be sufficiently perceptive 
to detect this feedback. You can then ask yourself 
the following questions: 

Am I accurately sending my intended 
message? 

If not, how can I adjust my transmission to 
obtain the desired results? 

Listening is another area where communi- 
cation breaks down. Hearing is not listening. A 
person hears, often without listening, whenever 
sound waves strike the eardrums. Hearing, a 
physical experience, is only a step in the listening 
process. Comprehending and remembering are the 
others. Not until a person comprehends and 
remembers what is heard can the person be said 
to be listening. Listening is an active process that 
engages a person's reasoning and thinking pro- 
cesses. To listen, a person must put energy and 
effort into the listening process. One must 
concentrate. 

By definition, concentration is ' 'close mental 
application" or "exclusive attention." Oc- 
casionally, stories circulate about some genius 
who can simultaneously be reading a book, 



2-7 



listening to someone talking, hearing the president 
speak on the radio, and abstracting the important 
ideas of each. Few people can match this 
performance. In fact, most people must work at 
focusing their attention on even one subject for 
any length of time. 

'The behavior of the mind can be compared 
to the flow of a river. A river meanders, finding 
and following the course of least resistance from 
the mountain to the sea. Every navigable river, 
however, has a safe channel. The captain who 
wants to take a ship up and down the river keeps 
the ship in this channel. Like a river, the human 
mind tends to wander, but the objective listeners 
keep their attention in a mental channel, the 
channel of concentration. Whenever listeners 
allow their minds to stray, they let the current of 
the spoken ideas in the channel pass them by. 
Their attention may get back into the current, but 
it can rarely catch up with the speaker's ideas. 
What can people do to channel their attention? 
The answer lies in forming good listening habits. 
Listening effectively is not a gift; it is acquired 
through practice and hard work. Anyone who 
wants to become a better listener can do so by 
practicing the following rules: 

Get ready to listen. 

Listen to understand rather than to refute 
what is said. 

Take responsibility for comprehending. 

Control emotions. 

Be mentally agile. 

The successful communicator realizes that 
person-to-person communication has both verbal 
and nonverbal signals. Words must be carefully 
selected, using concrete ones, where possible. A 
good communicator knows the message not only 
must be sent but also the listener must accurately 
understand the intent of the message. This 
encourages the two-way communication process 
for a mutual exchange of facts, feelings, and 
ideas. Messages that are sent back are listened to, 
then worked on to overcome the barriers to two- 
way communication by building a helpful and 
supportive work climate. 

If a communication problem does exist for 
you, more detailed information may be obtained 
from the training manual Human Behavior, 
NAVEDTRA 10058-C1. 



USE OF INFLUENCE 

An essential tool of leadership is the 
knowledge of human nature. If you understand 
the needs that direct and influence behavior, you 
are better equipped to fulfill your leadership 
responsibilities. You are then better able to 
understand both yourself and your crew, for you 
are both subject to the same basic needs. 

Supervisor's Influence 

You, as a supervisor, must realize when a 
person's needs surface, that person will take 
whatever action is necessary to satisfy those needs. 
Knowledge of human behavior can help you 
considerably in your leadership and supervision 

role. 

Each person is different. Although each 
person has unique needs, people have many needs 
in common. People, as they grow and develop, 
are subject to similar experiences in the family, 
the school, and the society in which they live. 
Therefore, despite wide individual differences, 
people within our culture display certain common 
characteristics. 

Identifying and classifying the needs that 
influence human behavior according to their 
relative importance are important tools in 
understanding human behavior. We need a 
classification simple enough to be practical yet 
broad enough to cover observed behavior. At 
best, a classification cannot be all-inclusive 
because some needs defy classification in neat 
categories and the comparative value of needs 
fluctuate. 

All people have five common needs. These 
needs may be pictured on a triangle, or pyramid, 
with the basic needs lying at the base with the 
increasingly more complex needs layered toward 
the top. Starting from the bottom, the needs 
arranged in order of their relative importance are 
(1) survival, (2) safety, (3) social, (4) ego, and (5) 
growth. 

First, you must understand the survival needs 
that appear in humans and are shared with all 
animals. People's need for food overshadows 
their other needs when they are hungry. The basic 
survival needs for food, air, and water are the 
most urgent, and satisfaction of them cannot 
usually be postponed. Safety requirements push 
social and ego needs (needs for friends and self- 
esteem) into the background. Take the example 
of a person who is looking for a job; the security 
need for a job will most likely dominate that 



2-8 



person's behavior. The belonging and self-esteem 
needs do not influence the person's behavior to 
a great extent until he has a job and has met 
security needs. 

People's higher needs to belong (social) and 
for self-fulfillment of their potential (growth) arise 
only after their physiological, safety, and security 
needs are satisfied. The lower needs normally are 
easier to satisfy, but the satisfactions are less 
pervasive. Higher needs, however, can be 
disregarded more easily; but when satisfied, they 
bring a greater sense of well-being. In general, 
survival, safety, and belonging needs are similar 
but self-esteem (ego) and self-fulfillment (growth) 
needs vary more from individual to individual. 

When trying to persuade or sell an idea by 
recognizing an individual's needs for esteem and 
self-growth, you should remember to always 
reassess the individual's needs, because once 
satisfied, those needs cease to influence that 
person's behavior. 

In the process of influencing the behavior of 
your crew, try to gain commitments to 
organizational goals, traditions, and values. These 
objectives may be obtained by making others feel 
strong; for example, by delegating authority and 
responsibility to frontline subordinates and by 
clearly communicating with them. Keep them fully 
informed by providing timely, up-to-date 
information. Other important aspects are stating 
reasons why such a task must be done, providing 
time limits, and setting a personal example. 

Self-Control 

As you have progressed up the ladder, you 
have had considerable influence on a large number 
of people. Just as you are constantly rating your 
people, they are constantly rating you. Regardless 
of your actions, good or bad, some people will 
model themselves after your example. As their 
leader, you should maintain self-control even 
under the most stressful conditions. Modeling 
desirable behavior is important! 

Team Building 

The skillful use of the team building concept 
will promote a spirit of teamwork and cooperation 
within work groups. You can do this by effectively 
communicating with your subordinates, with 
workers of other groups, and with everyone 
concerned, so they will all cooperate in the 
completion of assigned tasks. 



Development of Subordinates 

How often have you found yourself in a 
position where you are unable to go on leave or 
even take a day off? In a sense, this is an example 
of poor supervision practice. Through the years, 
you have obtained a great deal of knowledge and 
skill. You must transfer this to your subordinates, 
along with an example of how the jobs are to be 
done. This is done by providing your subordinates 
with a variety of the right tasks, training 
opportunities, expertise, and resources. It should 
be expected that your superiors will provide 
similar opportunities for you. 

One area in the development of subordinates 
that is often overlooked is in teaching them how 
to make decisions. 

The bulk of most people's lives is composed 
of routine matters that can be satisfactorily 
disposed of by snap judgments or by following 
routine procedures. Be alert, recognize the 
exception. Recognize the situations that call for 
applying the decision-making process. 

1. THE NEED FOR A DECISION IS 
THERE A PROBLEM? 

Poor decisions often result because we fail to 
recognize the problems and we act on impulse. 
The first step in sound decision making is the 
ability to recognize problems requiring solutions 
instead of routine handling. 

2. WHAT IS THE SITUATION? 

Pertinent facts about a situation are the basis 
for making a sound decision. Situations do not 
just happen. They come about for various 
reasons: something different, new, or unplanned 
occurred to change the situation. Your job is to 
ask, What happened? What caused the problem? 
What are the circumstances? The more relevant 
information you gather, the better chance of a 
sound solution. 

3. THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM- 
PROBLEMS AND THE PRIORITY THEY 
ASSUME. 

Sometimes you may identify the symptoms of 
a problem situation and fail to recognize the 
deeper and underlying problem. As a decision 
maker, you must not only recognize the problem, 
but you must also identify and treat the underlying 
cause that prompted it in the first place. 



2-9 



4 WHAT ARE THE ALTERNATIVE 
COURSES OF ACTION? 

As you analyze the facts gathered that 
help to explain the situation, new and dif- 
ferent ideas begin to develop. There is no 
formula for analyzing data or ideas to say 
which is the best; this is where your initi- 
ative, creativity, and imagination are chal- 
lenged. 

5. WHAT WILL BE THE CONSE- 
QUENCES? 

At this point in the decision-making process, 
you need two columns for writing down the points 
for and against each alternative course of action. 
Ask, What will happen if. . . ? Does this course 
of action take care of A, B, and C possibilities? 
Include long- and short-range advantages and 
disadvantages. When you do this seriously and 
honestly, you have made a good analysis of the 
various alternatives. 

6. WHAT ALTERNATIVE IS TO BE 
CHOSEN? 

You are now ready to make the decision with 
good reason to hope that it will be a sound one. 
This step is often the simplest and easiest of the 
whole process. 

7. WHAT IS THE PLAN OF ACTION 
AND SCHEDULE FOR CARRYING OUT 
THE DECISION? 

Now that you have made a decision, your next 
step is to take action. You must not only clearly 
state your decision but also give guidance to those 
who carry it out. 

8. HOW WELL HAS THIS DECISION 
WORKED OUT IN PRACTICE? IF IT 
FAILS, WHAT ALTERNATIVE CAN BE 
TAKEN? 

Consider changing your course of action 
if you learn some important new facts that 
appear to alter the situation. Consult in 
advance all those who are to be affected by 
the decision. You need their cooperation. No 
decision is any better than the people's will- 
ingness to carry it out. Their cooperation 
and understanding are essential if you must 
redirect your course of action. 



ADVISING AND COUNSELING 

Advising is helping people take steps to correct 
problems. This is done by providing information 
about functions, procedures, opportunities, and 
alternatives for the actions that might be taken. 

Counseling is helping individuals explore, 
understand, and discover solutions for problems. 
You should encourage the individuals seeking help 
to find different ways of solving their problems. 

A critical technique to motivating, developing, 
training, and appraising the performance of your 
subordinates is counseling. Many supervisors 
either shy away from counseling subordinates or 
bungle the job because they do not understand 
the true nature and function of this important 
responsibility. When counseling, you need to 
realize that you cannot change a subordinate's 
attitude directly. You must get the individual to 
change his or her own attitude. 

The key to counseling is to find out the 
motivation behind certain behavior. The objective 
is to change the attitude and behavior of the 
subordinate by having him or her recognize the 
problem and the thinking that led to it. Criticize 
the performance, not the person. Suggest the 
person think about the problem and find ways to 
solve it. Counseling should be used for career- 
development planning, training, and accepting 
changes; counseling is not just for performance 
problems. 

Be sure to listen and use questions that 
motivate the subordinate to examine himself or 
herself. Wait for answers to your questions; don't 
jump in when there is silence. To ensure that this 
process works, follow up. Look for evidence of 
change and base your next session on the rate of 
change, prior questions discussed, and indications 
or resistance to change. 

To advise and counsel subordinates suc- 
cessfully, you must develop both positive and 
realistic expectations. 



Positive Expectations 

Leadership is having a positive outlook 
regarding future expectations, and it deals with 
the way you think. It involves believing and 
trusting in your subordinates' basic worth and 
abilities. It also means having positive feelings 
about your subordinates' growth and develop- 
ment. When using this skill, you must have 
a strong belief that others are fully capable of 
doing good work when given a chance. 



2-10 



Realistic Expectations 

Realistic expectations also deal with the way 
you think about people. It is realizing that 
instructions may not always be followed or carried 
out effectively by others. In having realistic 
expectations, you must be aware of the short- 
comings of people. 

Understanding 

Once a subordinate's problems are identified, 
you can employ the element of understanding to 
help them see the reasons for their problems. 
Understanding is a way you can respond in a time 
of need to help your subordinates deal with their 
problems. 

CONCEPTUALIZING 

Conceptualizing is important because it helps 
you to determine which element of leadership you 
should apply to any given situation. To do this 
effectively, you must have the ability to con- 
ceptualize a situation. 

Conceptualizing is being able to view a 
situation, identify what is going on, sort through 
available facts, and draw conclusions. In other 
words, it is seeing the big picture of what is 
happening. Remember, you are a significant part 
of this picture. Use it to advantage! 



INSPECTIONS 

Maintenance inspection/service checkpoints 
for various types of facilities and equipment are 
provided in Inspection of Shore Facilities, 
NAVFAC MO-322, volumes 1, 2, and 3 and 
Preventive/Recurring Maintenance Handbook, 



NAVFAC P-717.0. As a supervisor and a 
craftsman, you should use the checkpoint 
guidelines to perform preventive maintenance 
inspections (PMI). The purpose of these publi- 
cations is to provide a guide for developing 
and implementing an effective and efficient PMI 
system. The goal of the PMI system is to 
maximize the useful life of facilities and equip- 
ment and to minimize costly breakdowns and 
repairs. The steps in establishing a sound and 
effective PMI system are as follows: 

1 . Prepare a comprehensive inventory of all 
facilities and equipment that are a public works 
maintenance responsibility or a battalion main- 
tenance responsibility. 

2. Review manufacturers' operational man- 
uals and maintenance manuals to determine 
the necessary routine maintenance inspection/ 
service requirements. 

3. Establish a formal PMI schedule that 
includes the details of inspection/service to be 
accomplished, the frequency of inspection/service, 
and the standard time required to perform 
inspection/service for each inventory item. 

4. Inspect facilities and equipment using the 
appropriate checkpoint guides and report on the 
condition of each element inspected. 

5. Periodically review the PMI system to 
assure work is accomplished as planned, that 
scheduled frequencies are reasonable, and that 
facilities and equipment are neither over main- 
tained nor under maintained. 



REFERENCES 

Human Behavior, NAVEDTRA 10058-C1 , Naval 
Education and Training Program Manage- 
ment Support Activity, Pensacola, Fla., 1989. 



2-11 



CHAPTER 3 

FACILITIES MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT 



The information in this chapter pertained to 
chief petty officer occupational standards and has 
been removed. This subject matter has been revised 
and placed in Naval Construction Force/ SEABEE 
Chief Petty Officer, NAVEDTRA 10600. 



3-1 



CHAPTER 4 

BLUEPRINT READING AND 
TECHNICAL DRAWINGS 



Learning Objective: Identify the graphic symbols and diagrams used on prints; 
analyze the types of diagrams and prints used by the Utilitiesman; assess the 
uses of specifications, as they relate to construction; and recognize the im- 
portance of accurate recordkeeping. 



Blueprints, sometime called prints, are 
reproduced copies of mechanical or technical 
drawings. Drawing and sketching are the univer- 
sal language used by engineers, technicians, and 
skilled trades personnel. 

Your ability to read blueprints or blueprint 
reading is the means by which you interpret the 
ideas of others expressed on the drawing, whether 
the drawing is an actual blueprint or not. 

This chapter has been developed to give you 
some insight into the preparation and use of 
blueprints. By carefully studying this chapter, you 
will gain the knowledge necessary to become 
skilled in the use of drawings and sketches. 



DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTRUCTION 
DRAWINGS 

Drawings are generally categorized according 
to their intended purposes: preliminary drawings, 
presentation drawings, shop drawings, and work- 
ing drawings. 

A building project may be broadly divided into 
two major phases: the design phase and the con- 
struction phase. First, the preliminary drawings 
are prepared during the design phase. They are 
prepared by the designer or by the A and E firm 
(architects and engineers) to promote the building 
development. The preliminary drawings are used 
for exploring design concepts between the designer 
and the user (customer), making material selec- 
tion, getting preliminary cost estimates, and as a 
basis for preparing the finished working drawings. 



During this phase, the presentation drawings 
that are developed show the proposed building or 
facility in an attractive setting in its natural 
surroundings at the proposed site. Since these 
drawings are actually used to sell an idea or a 
design, your only contact with such drawings will 
be as a cover sheet to a set of construction 
drawings. 

In the second phase, after approval has been 
given for construction, shop drawings and work- 
ing drawings are developed. Throughout your 
career, you will hear these drawings referred to 
as construction drawings, prints, or plans. 
Basically, these terms are all correct; they can be 
used interchangeably. 

As mentioned earlier, the construction draw- 
ings are developed from the preliminary drawings. 
With the collaboration of the designer or the 
architect and the engineer, both the materials to 
be used and the construction methods to be 
followed are decided. The engineer determines the 
loads that the supporting (structural) members will 
be required to bear and designs the mechanical 
systems for the structure; for example, heating, 
power, lighting, and plumbing. 

As a crewmember or a supervisor, you will 
find the construction drawings, the specifications, 
and the bill of material your chief source of in- 
formation during the construction of the project. 



BLUEPRINT READING 

There are a number of reasons for having con- 
struction drawings and why you should have the 



4-1 



1. TRIM LINE 

2. BORDER LINE 

3. MAIN OBJECT LINE 

4. DIMENSION LINE 

5. EXTENSION LINE 

6. EQUIPMENT LINE 

7. SYMBOL SECTION LINE 

8. BROKEN LINE 

9. INVISIBLE LINE 

10. CENTER LINE 

11. SECTION LINE 

12. STAIR INDICATOR 




87.312 



Figure 4-1. Construction drawing lines. 



ability to read and interpret them. Imagine using 
only written instructions for the construction of 
even a small building. It would take volumes of 
written material. Having to try to understand and 
visualize all the details involved in the construc- 
tion would present a very difficult problem for 
anyone. 

For this reason, prints are used to express the 
ideas easier and faster. They are also used by 
the supervisor to monitor the progress of 
construction. 

From these drawings, the craftsman must be 
able to interpret and perform the work, follow 
directions, and visualize the work alone. You 
should be capable of reading the prints and 
passing along the information contained on the 
drawings. As you should be able to see now, the 
UtiUtiesman who is unable to read and interpret 
prints would require extra help, causing an un- 
necessary personnel drain. 



BLUEPRINT LANGUAGE 

There are various ways that a blueprint tells 
you what is to be done. Since the written word 
could be confusing and take up too much time 
and space, other means of getting the ideas 
across to the craftsman were developed. These 
means include various types and weights of 
lines, symbols, abbreviations, and many other 
methods of giving dimensions and working 
directions. 



TYPES AND WEIGHTS OF 
LINES FOUND ON DRAWINGS 

The main types of lines the Utilitiesman should 
be able to read and understand are the main ob- 
ject lines, dimension lines, extension lines, equip- 
ment lines, broken lines, and crosshatched lines. 
(See fig. 4-1.) 



4-2 



Below is a partial listing (and definitions) of 
the lines the Utilitiesman should be able to 
recognize readily. 

Trim line. A light, continuous line along which 
the tracing is trimmed to square the sheet. 

Border line. A heavy, continuous line that 
outlines or borders the drawing. The border line 
expresses the fact that the drawing is complete 
within this lined border. 

Object line. A heavy, unbroken line used to 
show visible outlines or edges that would be seen 
by people looking at the article, house, or 
building. This line is one of the most important 
because it outlines the main wall lines on plans 
and sections. It shows clearly the important parts 
of the construction and emphasizes the outline of 
the elevations. 

Dimension line. A light line drawing outside 
the structure or detail to show the distance be- 
tween two points. This line is drawn between 
extension lines with an arrowhead on each end. 
Between the arrowheads, the distance will be 
given, either at a break in the line or just above 
the line. On some drawings the scale and the 
distance between the two points may not agree; 
in that case, the distance will be given in a dimen- 
sion line. 

Extension line. A line use with dimension lines 
and that touches the dimension line. The line will 
extend out from the edge or the point at which 
the dimension is to be determined. 

Equipment line. A light, continuous, un- 
broken line used to show the location of equip- 
ment, such as water chillers, boilers, and galley 
equipment. This line is used to allow the 
Utilitiesman to install the necessary piping in the 
proper location during rough-in work. 

Symbol section lines. These lines are generally 
solid; although for certain conventions, dotted 
lines of the same weight may be used. Section 
lines, evenly spaced, are used to shade surfaces 
shown on a drawing and by these means indicate 
the material used. Material section lines are 
standardized to a certain degree, but you will find 
some variations. A set of working drawings using 
these symbols would have a symbol schedule key 
showing the various materials in that particular 



set. This schedule is usually placed near the title 
box on the plan of the first floor. 

Broken line. A line with wavy breaks in it, at 
intervals, used to indicate that parts have been left 
out or that the full length of some part has not 
been drawn. This line will be found a lot in detail 
drawings, where only a section of the object is 
to be shown. 

Hidden line. This line is made up of a series 
of short dashes and is used to indicate a hidden 
or an invisible edge or edges that are hidden under 
some other part of the structure. 

Center line. This line is made up of alternating 
long and short dashes and is used to indicate the 
center of an object. 

Section line. A solid line that has arrowheads 
at each end that point in the direction in which 
the section is to be taken. This line tells just where 
the section line has been cut through the wall or 
building. The sections are indicated in most cases 
by the letters A-A, B-B, and so forth, although 
numbers are sometimes used. Do not overlook 
these section lines on a plan. To obtain a clear 
picture of the construction at the particular point 
indicated, always refer to the section detail called 
for by the letter or number. 

Stair indicator line. A solid line with an 
arrowhead indicating the direction of the run. For 
example, Up 12-R means that there are 12 risers 
from floor to floor and that the stairs go up. A 
riser is the vertical part of the step; the flat part 
on which one steps is the tread. In most cases, 
the floor plan will only indicate the run of stairs 
half the distance between floors. For example, the 
ground floor will indicate a broken line that will 
tell you the steps continue up. The next floor plan 
will indicate the stair indicator line half the 
distance to the first floor, down. 



ELECTRICAL SYMBOLS AND 
ABBREVIATIONS 

In addition to using different types of lines, 
the architect's and engineer's intentions are com- 
municated through the use of symbols and ab- 
breviations. In the preparation of the electrical 
drawings, most engineers use symbols adopted by 
the American National Standards Institute 



4-3 





GRAPHIC SYMBOLS 




RESISTORS 


TRANSFORMERS 


RECTIFIERS 




it *^\ /" 


GENERAL P^ 


-A/W OR -OQ- 


Lft5J a K 






o) Jo 


SEMICONDUSTOR H 


GENERAL TAPPED 'N/VV- 


nnnn J *- 

' 1 MAGNETIC CORE 


(NORMAL CURRENT FLOW IS AGAINST 


ADJUSTABLE TAP -AA/V" 


GENERAL TRANSFORMER 


THE ARROW) i 


VARIABLE -A/V/V 


<3 -^ ^ 


FULL WAVE _/^ N- 


. 


<3 oj 


BRIDGE TYPE ~*v^ ^~ 


NONLINEAR -A^VV 


^j Q* 


^*\^/ 




AUTOTRANSFORMER W|TH TAPS ' 





CAPACITORS 


SINGLE-PHASE 

SWITCHES , 


ROTATING MACHINES 


-)h xT J? 


GENERAL O O 


(MOT) ^EN) 


FIXED VARIABLE TRIMMER 

_i/ i^ f~\i~~i 


(SINGLE THROW) , 
GENERAL O O O 


MOTOR GENERATOR 


^p- ^~~ i 7i i~ 


(DOUBLE THROW) 


TYPES OF WINDINGS j^ 


GANGED SHIELDED 


TWO POLE a/ j 
DOUBLE THROW / 
SWITCH CT O 
> 


x-xP 

SERIES (MOT) ^ 


ilx )r "^ 


/> 

KNIFE SWITCH Q O 


i . 


SPL 1 T-STATOR FEED-THROUGH 


I 


SEPARATELY (cEN\ lo 




PUSHBUTTON ' 


EXCITED V.V Vo 




(MAKE) O O 




INDUCTIVE COMPONENTS 


PUSHBUTTON Q | Q 




GENERAL nnT5~ v - 


(BREAK) 


i-/Mor) < 




PUSHBUTTON Q | Q 


SHUNT |V_y^ 


MAGNETIC CORE ^_/~KK7\~^ 


TWO CIRCUIT 


L/TOOJ-\J 









TAPPED 'TFjiy^- 


CIRCUIT PROTECTORS 


DYNAMOTOR S^iT 


ADJUSTABLE ^fW^- 


FUSE OR OVERLOAD ( ~\J 








BATTERIES 


ADJUSTABLE OR CONTINUOUSLY 
ADJUSTABLE _^^^JT 

npstf*- 


CIRCUIT BREAKERS 
SWITCH L i 


ONE CELL j| 


SATURABLE IflJLfiJ /~ 


PUSH PULL L 
OR PULL 


MULT 1 CELL jljl 
TAPPED li __ i 




/"I \ 


MULTICELL 1' T ' 


I/ I 


GANGED 7^~~\ 


1 


' ' 


L 


(LONG LINE IS ALWAYS POSITIVE) 




ARCHITECTURAL SYMBOLS 




SINGLE RECPT. OUTLET Q 


FLOOR DUPLEX RECPT. OUTLET 


PUSHBUTTON BELL OR SIGNAL 


DUPLEX RECPT. -Q 


11 


H 




SINGLE POLE SWITCH S 




CEILING INCAN. LIGHT (_) 
SINGLE FLUOR. FIXTURE Ift. "1 


THREE WAY SWITCH Sj 
SWITCH FOR LOW VOLTAGE SYSTEM 

SL 


BUZZER . I I 


CONTINUOUS ROW FLUOR. FIXTURE 


THERMOSTAT (j) 


CHIME |CH| 


m> i | -| 


^~S 






PUSHBUTTON STATION t -\ 





EXIT LIGHT (CEILING) (x) 


MOTOR CONTROLLER * ' 


BELL TRANSFORMER IBT] 


EKIT LIGHT (WALL) (x) 


FLUSH MOUNTING PANEL 


WIRE CONCEALED IN WALL OR 


^"^ 


| ] 


nrn lur. 


JUNCTION BOX (7) 


"HHg~~ ~~ 






RECESSED PANEL 


WIRE CONCEALED IN FLOOR 


CLOTHES DRYER OUTLET 


i ^ i 


BRANCH CIRCUIT EXPOSED 









Figure 4-2. Electrical symbols. 



13.5 



4-4 



(ANSI). However, many engineers will modify 
them to suit their needs. For this reason, most 
drawings have a symbol list or legend. The elec- 
trical symbols in figure 4-2 are taken from the 
ANSI Y32.9, 1972 publication. 



CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS 

With a thorough knowledge of blueprint 
language (symbols, abbreviations, and lines), you 
will be able to extract the information that is 
provided on the different prints. Types of con- 
struction drawings you should be familiar with 
are discussed in the following sections. 



Plot Plan 

The plot plan is the starting point for any 
building that is to be constructed. It shows where 
the building is to be placed on the plot of land 
or property and shows the shapes and dimensions 
of the plot. When the plot plan is bounded by 
streets or drives, such information is also shown. 

The plot plan aids the Utilitiesman by show- 
ing the point where the service taps from a main 
are to be connected or what route the pipe will 
need to be run for an underground service. 



Exterior Elevation Drawings 

The exterior elevation drawings show views of 
the finished exterior sides of the building. They 
show exterior trim, finish, window and door open- 
ings, roofing, and brickwork. Finished grade lines 
and floor lines are also shown. You may find this 
information helpful in locating outside wall 
hydrants or hose bibs. 



Interior Elevation Drawings 

The interior elevation drawings show views of 
inside wall space that contain counters, sinks, cup- 
boards, and other special features. These draw- 
ings can be of great help in determining where to 
place rough-in piping for water or drainage 
systems in kitchens and bathrooms. The material 
that is to be used for walls also affects the 
distance from the finished wall that the through 
floor drainage or water supply will be roughed 
in to (water closets, floor drains, and so forth). 



Sectional or Detail Drawings 

Sectional or detail drawings are often inserted 
into drawings to show a specific detail. They may 
be a cross-sectional view of the building supports 
or foundation. They could be used to show story 
height and ceiling height. They may be used to 
show what floors are made of, whether they have 
wooden joists or some other type of construction. 
Any of these factors might influence the method 
of doing mechanical work and the kind of 
material that is to be used. 



Floor Plan 

A floor plan drawing is used to show exactly 
what the name implies, a plan of the floor. The 
drawing includes the layout of all interior and ex- 
terior walls, including windows and doors. It also 
shows all fixture requirements. A typical floor 
plan is shown in figure 4-3. 

All the drawings mentioned thus far are pro- 
portional reductions of the final structure. The 
amount of reduction depends on the size draw- 
ing desired. Dimensions in feet are reduced to 
parts of an inch; for example, 1 foot may be 
reduced to 1/4 inch or 1/8 inch. The reduction 
is called the scale of the drawing. If the scale of 
a drawing is 1/4 inch = 1 foot, a 1-inch line would 
represent 4 feet on the actual structure. 



BILL OF MATERIAL 

A bill of material (BM) is a tabulated state- 
ment of the material required for a given project. 
It contains information such as stock numbers, 
unit of issue, quantity, line item-number, descrip- 
tion, vendor, and cost. Sometimes the bill of 
material will be submitted on either material 
estimate sheets or material takeoff sheets; each 
contains similar information. Actually, a bill of 
material is a grouped compilation based on the 
takeoffs and the estimates of all the materials 
needed to complete a structure. Usually, the 
takeoff sheet is an actual tally and checkoff of 
the items shown, noted, or specified on the con- 
struction drawings and specifications. 

Most NAVFAC drawings will contain a bill 
of material incorporated within the drawings. But, 
there are times when you are directed to tabulate 
materials needed for a new project that has been 
designed in-house for cost estimating and funding. 



4-5 



STORAGE 2-6x6- 
L ' iTRAP DOOR 




45.515A 



Figure 4-3. Floor plan. 



An example (and explanation) of the bill of 
material sheet is given in chapter 5 of this manual. 



ELECTRICAL WIRING AND 
MECHANICAL DIAGRAMS 

As a Utilitiesman, you will be working with 
mechanical equipment that will require electrical 
connections. This will require your close liaison 



with the Construction Electricians and involve you 
in working with electrical diagrams as well as 
mechanical drawings. Utilitiesman 3 &2, Volume 
I, Chapter 3, NAVEDTRA 10660, thoroughly 
covered mechanical drawings and symbols. This 
section will discuss the electrical diagrams and 
symbols the Utilitiesman may use. 

An electrical diagram is defined as a line 
drawing that shows the arrangement and/or 



4-6 



relationship of parts. Electrical diagrams are 
usually used to show how the parts of a piece of 
equipment or several pieces of equipment are 
wired together. These diagrams are similar to each 
other. Their names are sometimes used inter- 
changeably, but they do have differences. 

The types of diagrams with which you will be 
working are covered below. The short description 
of each should enable you to recognize the dif- 
ferent diagrams. 

ISOMETRIC WIRING DIAGRAMS 

The isometric wiring diagram is not used very 
often in electrical work. When used, it shows the 
electrical relationship in multilevel buildings, be- 
tween floors, or the total electrical system. In the 
isometric diagram, the cable and fixtures are 
shown only in their general location. Their exact 
locations are given in the electrical prints. 
(See fig. 4-4.) 



BROWN 




R-E-D CONNECTOR 



26.316 

Figure 4-4. Schematic wiring diagram of side-by-side 
refrigerator with automatic ice maker. 



PUSH BUTTON 
STATION 



AUTOMATIC 
STATION 




87.314 



Figure 4-5. Block diagram. 



BLOCK DIAGRAMS 

A block diagram is a simple drawing show- 
ing the relationship of major parts of a system. 
Figure 4-5 shows a block diagram of a motor con- 
trol system. You can easily see why it is called a 
block diagram. The parts or components in any 
block diagram will be shown just as they appear 
in this drawing, as blocks. They are then con- 
nected by a line or lines that show the relation- 
ship of the parts. The internal connections of the 
components are not shown in these drawings. The 
blocks are simply labeled to show what each 
represents. These drawings would be of little help 
for troubleshooting. 



WIRING DIAGRAMS 

The wiring diagram, which is like a picture 
drawing, shows the wiring between components 
and the relative position of the components. 



4-7 



Figure 4-6 shows a wiring diagram of the same 
motor control system shown by the block dia- 
gram. You can see that instead of blocks being 
used to show components, a picture of the com- 
ponent is used. You can also see that the lines used 
to show the wiring are marked with numbers or 
letter-number combinations. Lines LI, L2, and L3 
are incoming power leads, and the diagram shows 
which terminals they are connected to in the 
starter. Wiring diagrams are often used along with 
a list of repair parts and can be used to do some 
troubleshooting. 

CONNECTION DIAGRAMS 

Figure 4-7 is a connection diagram. It makes 
use of diagram symbols instead of pictures to 
show components. It also shows all the internal 
and external circuit connections, and these can be 
read and traced more easily than on the wiring dia- 
gram. In the connection diagram, the components 
are still shown in their relative positions. This 
diagram can be used to help you connect all the 
wiring and trace any part of the circuit, which 
makes it a very valuable troubleshooting tool. It 
is often found inside the cover of a piece of 
equipment. 



LINES 

L3 LI L2 PUSH BUTTON 
\ / STATION 



AUTOMATIC 
STARTER 




START 



OVERLOAD 
RELAY 



Figure 4-6. Wiring diagram. 



87.315 



SCHEMATIC/SINGLE-LINE 
DIAGRAMS 

The schematic diagram is a drawing that 
shows the electrical plan of operations of a piece 
of equipment or component. The relative posi- 
tion of parts is not shown in this type of diagram. 
The schematic diagram, like the connection 
diagram, makes use of symbols instead of pic- 
tures. The schematic shown in figure 4-8 is a plan 



L3 LI 



S START 




87.316 



Figure 4-7. Connection diagram. 



L3 LI L2 




Figure 4-8. Schematic diagram. 



87.317 



4-8 



of the same motor control system shown in the 
other three diagrams. It is laid out so the 
components are in line to make it easy to trace 
the operation. Notice the use of heavy and light 
lines in the drawing. In this case, the heavy lines 
show the main power circuit, and the light lines 
show the control circuit. The schematic is 
sometimes called an elementary or a single-line 
diagram. It is very useful in troubleshooting or 
tracing the plan of operation. 

WORKING SKETCH 

As you have learned thus far, the information 
provided in the floor plan of a blueprint is limited 
to what fixtures are to be installed and their loca- 
tions. Diagrams that show the actual layout of 
the plumbing systems are provided in the 
mechanical section of the prints. Before you send 
a crew to put in a system and its components, a 
working sketch should be drawn translating the 
blueprint drawings to a usable tool that can guide 
a crew leader during actual installation or 
troubleshooting of a system. 

A working sketch is a drawing made to clearly 
express a tasking and provide quick reference to 



job requirements. It is drawn to help show actual 
conditions on the job, what size piping is to be 
installed, where connections will be made, and 
possibly what type of joints will be used. It should 
show as much detail as you can include to help 
your crew during installation or troubleshooting. 
A working sketch will usually show the work you 
want your crew to accomplish in a selected area, 
and will provide ready reference to jobsite con- 
ditions. Figure 4-3 is the floor plan of a house; 
it shows a bath, heater room, and kitchen. The 
floor plan of a structure is found in the architec- 
tural section of the blueprint package. It shows 
the locations of plumbing fixtures, built-in 
cabinets, mechanical equipment, and so forth, 
that will be installed as functional components of 
the completed facility. 

Now that you have seen what the floor plan 
shows, look at figure 4-9. This is an isometric 
drawing of the plumbing system that will service 
the floor plan shown in figure 4-3 . It lays out the 
system showing every detail involved in the 
installation but is not representative of actual job- 
site conditions. From the isometric drawing you 
can determine planning and estimating informa- 
tion but not the actual locations or installation 



LAVATORY 



WATER CLOSET 



WATER I" COLD WATER 
SERVICE 




HOT WATER 
COLD WATER 



Figure 4-9. Isometric drawing of hot and cold water piping system. 



45.894 



4-9 



interfaces and problems your crew may encounter 
during the job. 

The working sketch is something a crew will 
have with them while working. It can show them 
how, what, where, and when things happen in the 
sequence of the job. Your first step in making a 
working sketch would be to draw the symbols that 
represent all the fixtures that are to be installed 
and locate them within the room. Try to draw 
them in the sequence of installation and include 
measurements. Now draw the piping system for 
hot and cold water, show where it comes from 
and where it is going. Include pipe sizes, fittings, 
hanging requirements, and rough-in measure- 
ments. Do the same for the sanitary and vent 
systems. The amount of detail you use in a 



working sketch will be determined by the crew's 
experience, the complexity of the systems in- 
volved, and the need for interface with other 
trades working on the jobsite. 

Working sketches are also useful to simplify 
complicated electrical schematics when you are 
installing or servicing mechanical equipment such 
as air-conditioners and boilers. Figure 4-10 shows 
the electrical symbols you will commonly find 
when reading electrical schematics. By under- 
standing what these symbols represent, you will 
be able to translate manufacturer's equipment 
schmatics. By drawing a simplified working sketch 
of this information, you will be aiding your crew 
in the installation and troubleshooting of the 
equipment. 



GRAPHIC SYMBOLS 


RES 1 STORS 


TRANSFORMERS 


RECTIFIERS 


-WV -CZID- 


LfilfiJ ^ ^ 


GENERAL pjj 


iENERAL TAPPED \/\/\s 
AD-.JSTASLE TAP -A/VV- 


nnnn ? <? 

1 MAGNETIC CORE 
GENERAL TRANSFORMER 


SEMICONDUSTOR ^ 

(NORMAL CURRENT FLOW IS AGAINST 
THE ARROW) . 


COSTINLOUSLY ^Jf 




+ A - 


ARIASLE ^P<7\> 
NONLINEAR f \foj\r- 




*\ 

FULL WAVE /^ V 
BRIDGE TYPE "*-, >~ 

\ )T 




AUTOTRANSFORMER WITH TAPS, 


V^ 


CAPAC 1 TORS 


SINGLE-PHASE 


T 


-)j_ jfif ^ 


SWITCHES / 


ROTATING MACHINES 


FIXED VARIABLE TRIMMER 


GENERAL O O 
(SINGLE THROW) 


(wop ^EN) 




/ 


MOTOR GENERATOR 


j/ i/ rTfj 


GENERAL O O O 




"2jTL_ JT" i ~j 1 j~ 


(DOUBLE THROW) 


TYPES OF WINDINGS s* 


L i 

SANGED SHIELDED 


TWO POLE O CT |0 


i 


J/Lf, o_o 


DOUBLE THROW J 
SWITCH O Cr O 
l^ 


r~\ ^ 

(MOT]^ 
vl/ 


E.FL 1 T-STATOR FEED-THROUGH 


KNIFE SWITCH CT O 


I f- 




PUSHBUTTON 1 


SEPARATELY (rc^\ fe 




(MAKE) O O 


EXCITED \~ y to 


INDUCTIVE COMPONENTS 




T s 


GENERAL ^CM/O^" 


PUSHBUTTON ^ 1 
(BREAK) u ! u 


1/^1 


MAGNETIC CORE _OOOJX_ 


PUSHBUTTON n 1 O 
TWO CIRCUIT 


\^y T 







L / TTS1P 1 -' 


TAPPED _/~jymTv-_ 


CIRCUIT PROTECTORS 


0/~S' 




FUSE mi 


f ) 
X^ 


ADJUSTABLE ^rTSlT 1 - 


FUSE OR OVERLOAD <~\ r _ 


-^m^- 


AOJU5TABLE OR CONTINUOUSLY 
ADJUSTABLE ,-*-*& 


CIRCUIT BREAKERS 

SWITCH __f \ 


BATTERIES 

ONE CELL 1| 


SATURABLE L&SLfiJ /" 
CORE REACTOR / 


PUSH PULL ' \ 
OR PULL 


MULTICELL 1||| 


f^j 


GANGED X^~N 


TAPPED 1, . 
MULTICELL I 1 T~~ ' 


^~~"~~~-' j 


m zi 


(LONG LINE IS ALWAYS POSITIVE) 

' __ 



Figure 4-10. Electrical symbols. 
4-10 



13.5 



ELECTRONIC SYMBOLS 
AND DIAGRAMS 

Because more and more electronic circuitry 
is finding its way into the Utilitiesman's 
world, you will be called upon to make 



repairs to equipment that uses these circuits. 
Your ability to recognize basic circuits and 
their basic operation will be paramount in 
the repair of such equipment. Figure 4-11 
shows the electronic symbols most commonly 
used. 



ARRESTER, LIGHTNING (4) 


CAPACITOR (8) 


CIRCUIT BREAKER (11) 


jacks normalled through 








both ways 


general 


general 


general 


roo^r- 


carbon block 


polarized 


) 


^Tlirr- 


00 


J 








T 


CLUTCH; BRAKE (14) 


2-conductor nonpolarized, 


electrolytic or aluminum 






female contacts 


cell 




disengaged when operating 


/^-s 




adjustable or variable 


means is de-energized 


^0) 


->- 


- 


--}}-- --^-- 


2-conductor polarized, 


horn gap 


~^\ 




male contacts 


-^ 


continuously adjustable 
or variable differential 


engaged when operating 
means is de-energized 


-- 


protective gap 


u 


"&" - ~^- 


waveguide flange 





/r 


COIL, RELAY and 


7/ 


sphere gap 


\ 


OPERATING (16) 


plain, rectangular 


_)<_ 


phase-shifter 


-fl-Q: 


~fr> 


valve or film element 


1 


semicircular dot indicates 


choke, rectangular 


Ill 


|^ | 


inner end of wiring 


-&< 


multlgap 


T 


-B- * Lt 


CRYSTAL, PIEZO- 




split-stator 


CONNECTOR (18) 


ELECTRIC (62) 






assembly, movable or sta- 


iQi 


ATTENUATOR, FIXED 
(see PAD) (57) 
(same symbol as variable 


HfJ4- 


tionary portion; jack, 
plug, or receptacle 


COUPLER, DIRECTIONAL (27) 
(common coaxial/waveguide 


attenuator, without vari- 
ability) 


feed -through 


o < 


usage) 


X 




- a 


jack or receptacle 




ATTENUATOR .VARIABLE (5) 


T 


< n 


ELECTRON TUBE (34) 


balanced 


CELL, PHOTOSENSITIVE 
(Semiconductor) (9) 


v u 
plug 


triode 


^ 


asymmetrical photocon- 


n 


/I. 


^ ~ 


ductive transducer 


' U 


i^~*\ 






separable connectors 


\ J 


unbalanced 


XX 




\XV/1 




Q 


- " CD 


n I 


ks 




two-conductor switch- 


pentode, envelope connec- 


zztr 




board jack 


ted to base terminal 


BATTERY (7) 


symmetrical photocon- 


o^** 


,<LN 




ductive transducer 




1 >l 


generalized direct current 




two-conductor switch- 


~f~:::n_ 


source; one cell 


XX 


board plug 


r\ 


-V 


~^~ 


" n 


twin triode, equipoten- 


multicell 


photovoltaic transducer; 


jacks normalled through 
one way 


tial cathode 


H'l- 


solar cell 




_/tix 




-- 


-TVO 


"w" 



13.5.1 



Figure 4-11. Electronics symbols. 

4-11 



______- " 
rtctifier; voltage regu- 
lator 


.^^^an^M^^l^^* ^' 

traveling-wave tube 
(typical) 


_ . 
circular 




PICKUP HEAD (61) 
general 


( LAMP, CLOW) 


forward-wave traveling- 
wave-tube amplifier shown 
with four grids, having 
slow-wave structure with 


(E, H or HE transverse 
field indicators re- 
place (*) asterisk) 


writing; recording 


^y 


attenuation, magnetic 
focusing by external 


INDUCTOR (42) 


reading; playback 


phototube, single and 


permanent magnet, rf in- 




-t" > 


iBultipHer 


put and rf output cou- 


general 


erasing 




pling each E-plane aper- 


rwv. 0* 'WT 




\r~aC 


ture to external rect- 




1 O* 


i^^\ (^.-TO\ 


angular waveguide. 


magnetic core 


writing, reading, and 


VJ^ *y ^k_l$v 




^^. 


erasing 


/I 


IPM] 


tapped 


-_.|-ii> 


catho<Se-ray tube, electro- 




"TP 




static and magnetic de- 


.HI 1 i \ 


1 | 


stereo 


flection 


~Tl!ii! 1 ^ || <"^ 1-4 








"v'i'i _-/ 


adjustable, continuously 


"~j ^ 


jLy /] /"] 


1 T 


adjustable 




^|jT ^Ejf"^ 


I 


~y ^A 


RECTIFIER (65) 


mercury-pool tube, 


FERRITE DEVICES (10Q) 


KEY, TELEGRAPH (43) 


semiconductor diode; 
metallic rectifier; 


igniter and control 
grid (see RECTIFIER) 


field polarization 
rotator 


j^- 


electrolytic rectifier; 
asymmetrical varistor 






LAMP (44) 


M 


I 








/d>v 




ballast lamp; ballast 


mercury-pool tube power 


\ "*) 


field polarization 


tube 


rectifier 


V^x 


amplitude modulator 





1 


resonant magnetron, co- 


u. 


lamp, fluorescent, 2 and 


i * 1 


axial output and perma- 


Jt-^L 


4 terminal 


x^n x 


nent magnet 


~\i/~ 


_/c-r3\_ fa. afr 


1^ 


o 


FUSE (36) 


lamp, glow; neon lamp 
& c. 


RESISTOR (68) 
general 


V 


-3-0.^0-0,-^- 






reflex klystron, integral 


high-voltage primary 






cavity, aperture coupled 


cutout, dry 


d. c. 


tapped 


JL 


'J^. o* ^S. 


""- 


ViA/ III 


-B^LlI'.lJ 




lamp , incandescent 


heating 


\pp 


high-voltage primary cut- 
out, oil 


= 


--wv- o. C3Z) 






indicating lamp; switch- 




transmit- receive (TR) 




board lamp 


symmetrical varistor 


tube gas filled, tunable 


\f3\ " [fn>j 


(see VISUAL SIGNALING 


resistor, voltage 


integral cavity, aperture 




DEVICE) 


sensitive (silicon 


coupled, vith starter 


HYBRID (41) 




carbide, etc.) 






NUCLEAR-RADIATION DE- 




"Tf^X 


general 


TECTOR, gas filled; 


^tf* o -<* / i on () 


~Q(8(/\&Q- 


1 


IONIZATION CHAMBER; 




y"jt/ 


-rij}- 

-T-T- 


PROPORTIONAL COUNTER 


(identification marks 






TUBE; 


replace (*) asterisk) 






GEIGER-MULLER COUNTER 






June t ion 








(common coaxial/wave- 
guide usage) 


TUBE (50) 
(see RADIATION-SENSITIVITY 


ROTARY JOINT, RF (COU- 
PLER) (72) 






INDICATOR) 






1" 




general; with ret [angular 




-f 


pjK 


wdve guide 






V 


^yfr- 



13.5.2 



Figure 4-11. Electronics symbols Continued. 



4-12 



(transmission path recog- 


semiconductor diode, PNPN 


NPN transistor, trans- 


nonlocking; momentary 


nition symbol replaces (*) 


switch (also Shockley di- 


verse-biased base 


circuit closing (make) 


asterisk) 


ode, four- layer diode and 








SCR). 


T^lV "lC~~V 


4 


coaxial type in rectangular 




\V n " (V // 


T 


waveguide 


-K N 


V^_/ Tl 


nonlocking ; momentary 


_D ff*f\ fl_ 


- Nl 




circuit opening (break) 


U vS' U 


^ < *-*' 


PNIP transistor, ohmic 


i 

c ' 01 ^^-JT" 


circular waveguide type in 


i y~ 


connection to the intrin- 




rectangular waveguide 


_7J- " J7f~ 


sic region 


transfer 


_D fej D_ 


(Multi-Terminal, transis- 


X-N 





U U 


tor, etc.) 


(\ rf\ 




SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICE (73) 




IT 


locking, circuit closing 


(Two Terminal , diode) 


PNF transistor 




(make) 






NPIN transistor, ohmic 




semiconductor diode; 


_^ 


connection to the in- 


^v " -; 


rectifier 


iC /r 


trinsic region 




/"~"\ /"~N 


xTx 




locking, circuit opening 


H o fn o THJ 




iCOr 


(break) 


X-X 


NPN transistor 


MT> 




capacitive diode (also 




rr 


iv OR ^~, 


Varicap, Varactor, re- 


/- s. 




T w 


actance diode, parametric 


A A 


PNIN transistor, ohmic 




diode) 


vip' 


connection to the in- 


transfer, 3 -posit ion 


^^^ 




trinsic region 


o 


H f* 1 | 


unijunction transistor, 


lOr 


"~~l" 


-HI- \H(y 


N-type base 


V 


wafer 


breakdown diode, unidirec- 








tional (also backward di- 
ode, avalanche diode, volt- 
age regulator diode, Zener 
diode , voltage reference 


unijunction transistor, 


NPIP transistor, ohmic 
connection to the intrin- 
sic region 


(example shown.: 3-pole 
3-circuit with 2 non- 
shorting and 1 shorting 
moving contacts) 


diode) 


P-type base 


tvS" 


^ Lj 


^j f ^ ^i 


r\\ 


TT 


^y/^^f 


j " H7 


T r 




~7[ U *~ 






SQUIB (75) 


/1\ 


breakdown diode, bidirec- 
tional and backward diode 


field-effect transistor, 
N-type base 


explosive 


safety interlock, circuit 


(also bipolar voltage li- 


i _i 


-f\\- 


opening and closing 


miter) 


ffi) - () 


^-^ 


& V 


_^ 


H-K N-K 


igniter 




j* o, T*n~ 


i i i r 


j_._ L 


SYNCHRO (78) 





field-effect transistor, 


1 "^- I 


I 




P-type base 


1 t 1 


ff\ 


tunnel diode (also Esaki 






\s-J 


diode) 


xHrx /i^\ 


sensing link; fusible 


1 


* on (** ) 


W " S-K 


link operated 


Synchro Letter Combina- 
tions 


j vjy 


semiconductor triode, 




CDX Control-differential 


temperature-dependent 


PNPN-type switch 


SWITCH (76) 


transmitter 
CT Control transformer 


diode 


^-. ^^ 




CX Control transmitter 


/ ^ 


"K^T 


push button, circuit clos- 


TDR Torque-differential 
receiver 


f y.j 


T^ 


ing (make) 


TDX Torque-differential 


^ 


semiconductor triode, 


J. 


transmitter 




NPNP-type switch 


o 


TR Torque receiver 


photodiode (also solar 
cell) 


-Q. 


push button, circuit op- 
ening (break) 


TX Torque transmitter 
RS Resolver 
B Outer winding rotat- 


- 




J. 


able in bearings 



13.5.3 



Figure 4-11. Electronics symbols Continued. 



4-13 



'" '"** 

THERMAL ELEMENT (83) 




THERMOCOUPLE (85) 


, - 
one winding with adjust- 
able inductance 


typical separate drive 
(terminals shown) 


actuating device 


temperature-measuring 


}V 


1 1 1 11 


__jn_ _^>- 


u 


separately adjustable 


i J 1 WT 

11 


theraal cutout; flasher 


current-measuring , inte- 
gral heater connected 


inductance 




TV on HO* 


i i 




VISUAL SIGNALING DEVICE 


thermal relay 


MUT HN H 


If 


(88) 




ll 




communication switchboard- 


o o* 


current-measuring, inte- 
gral heater insulated 


adjustable mutual induc- 
tor, constant -current 


type lamp 

- 


ff 0t f ~f r . 


1 i 


!* 




, 4 ^t 


HtllElls/S^A 


JC 


indicating, pilot, sig- 




T^r 




naling, or switchboard 


thermostat (operates on 
rising temperature) , con- 
tact) 


temperature-measuring, 
semiconduc tor 


autotransfonner , 1-phase 
adjustable 


light (see LAMP) 

D o. =5) o. 


n-j. o. -OOy 


"" 


it 


(identification replaces 
(*) asterisk) 


thermoscat, make contact 


current -measuring, semi- 






| ^ 


conductor 


current, with polarity 


indicating light letter 
combinations 


OG 


-- 


marking 




thermostat, integral 
heater and transfer 
contacts 


w 


i 1 M * i 

iij )t i i J 


A Amber 
B Blue 
C Clear 




TRANSFORMER (86) 




G Green 


/" Sv f ^k 






NE Neon 


-H~4) -KM) 


general 


potential, with polarity 


Orange 


r-v r-T 




mark 


OP Opalescent 


I 1 i 1 


II 1 1 




P Purple 




OR 


i C on ~* 3 C 


R Red 




P^^n rs'nn 


.V 


W White 


THERMISTOR; THERMAL 






Y Yellow 


RESISTOR (84) 


magnetic-core 










VIBRATOR; INTERRUPTER (87) 


jeweled signal light 


~tl7~ 


^jlf 


typical shunt drive 


OD 


with integral heater 


sill 


(terminals shown) 




fv>vV 




JI 




Tf 








c T_ji 





13.5.4 



Figure 4-11. Electronics symbols Continued. 



4-14 



CIRCUIT BREAKER (11) 
with magnetic overload 

drawout type 

-<*' 

CONNECTOR (18) 

engaged 4-conductor ; the 
plug has 1 male and 3 
female contacts, individual 
contact designations shown 



C 
Ufi 

coaxial, outside conductor 
shown carried through 



! 
1 ' 



,>-i I 

coaxial, center conductor 
shown carried through; 
outside conductor not 
carried through 



1 - l-X- 1 - 1 



mated choke flanges in 
rectangular waveguide 



COUPLER, DIRECTIONAL (27) 

(common coaxial /waveguide 
usage) 

E-plane aperture-coupling, 
30-decibel transmission 
loss 



X 



COUPLING (28) 

by loop from coaxial to 
circular waveguide, 
direct-current grounds 
connected 



ELECTRON TUBE (34) 

typical wiring figure to 
show tube symbols placed 
in any convenient positior 




HYBRID (41) 

(common coaxial /waveguide 
usage) 

rectangular waveguide and 
coaxial coupling 



CD 



MODE TRANSDUCER (53) 

(common coaxial /waveguide 
usage) 

transducer from rectangu- 
lar waveguide to coaxial 
with mode suppression, 
direct-current grounds 
connected 



MOTION, MECHANICAL (54) 

rotation applied to a 
resistor 



(identification replaces 
(*) asterisk) 

PATH, TRANSMISSION (58) 

cable; 2-conductor, 
shield grounded and 
5-conductor shielded 




RECTIFIER (65) 
fullwave bridge-type 



-^ 



RESISTOR (68) 
with adjustable contact 



~r~ 



adjustable or continuously 
adjustable (variable) 



QC_> 



(identification replaces 
(*) asterisk) 

RESONATOR , 
TUNED CAVITY (71) 

(common coaxial /waveguide 
usage) 

resonator with mode sup- 
pression coupled by an E- 
plane aperture to a guided 
transmission path and by a 
loop to a coaxial path 



tunable resonator with 
direct -current ground con 1 
nected to an electron de- 
vice and adjustably 
coupled by an E-plane 
aperture to a rectangular 
waveguide 




SWITCH (76) 

2-pole field -discharge 
knife, with terminals and 
discharge resistor 



(identification replaces 
(*) asterisk) 

TRANSFORMER (86) 

with direct-current con- 
nections and mode suppres- 
sion between two rectan- 
gular waveguides 

(common coaxial /waveguide 

usage) 

tilt 



shielded, with magnetic 
core 

ri 

it! 

with a shield between 
windings, connected to the 
frame 



Figure 4-11. Electronics symbols Continued. 



13.5.5 



4-15 



' " " " 


. 


_ 

CIRCUIT ELEMENT (12) 


DELAY LINE (31) 


AMPLIFIER (2) 


dipole 














general 


ir 


general 

QD 


OEED- 


"~r > 5~ 




Circuit Element Letter 


' 


-j^X- 


loop 


Combinations (replaces (*) 
asterisk) 


tapped delay 


vith two inputs 


CTI 






1\__ 


~1 1 


EG Equalizer 


(Tl 4 3 


C^~ 


counterpoise 


FAX Facsimile set 
FL Filter 


1*1*1* 




j 


FL-BE Filter, band 




with two outputs 


-b 


elimination 


bifilar slow-wave struc- 


-T^ 


AUDIBLE SIGNALING 
DEVICE (6) 


FL-BP Filter, band pass 
FL-HP Filter, high pass 


ture (commonly used in 
traveling-wave tubes) 


\>r^ ~~ 




FL-LP Filter, low pass 




with adjustable gain 


bell, electrical; ringer, 


PS Power supply 
RG Recording unit 


^H * ^ 


iT^k: 


telephone 


RU Reproducing 1 unit 
DIAL Telephone dial 


(length of delay indication 
replaces (*) asterisk) 


with associated power 
supply 


buzzer 

=0 

horn, electrical; loud- 


TEL Telephone station 
TPR Teleprinter 
TTY Teletypewriter 

Additional Letter Combin- 
ations (symbols preferred) 


DISCONTINUITY (33) 
(common coaxial/waveguide 
usage) 

equivalent series element, 
general 


with associated attenu- 


speaker; siren; under- 
water sound hydrophone, 
projector or transducer 


AR Amplifier 
AT Attenuator 
C Capacitor 


-A- 




- r/| 


CB Circuit breaker 


capacitive reactance 


\f 


M.J 


HS Handset 




IN] 


Horn, Letter Combinations 


I Indicating or switch- 


A 


_T^x_ 


(if required) 


board lamp 
L Inductor 


__4\_ 


with external feedback 


*HN Horn, electrical 
*HW Howler 


J Jack 
LS Loudspeaker 


inductive reactance 


path 


*LS Loudspeaker 


MIC Microphone 
OSC Oscillator 


A 




*SN Siren 






MxT 


JEM Electromagnetic 


PAD Pad 


L i 


-1/~ 


with moving coil 
EMN Electromagnetic 
with moving coil 


P Plug 
HT Receiver, headset 
K Relay 


inductance-capacitance 
circuit, intinlte re- 
actance at resonance 


Amplifier Letter Combin- 
ations (amplifier-use 


and neutralizing 
winding 


R Resistor 
S Switch or key switch 




identification in symbol 
if required) 


MG Magnetic armature 
+PM Permanent magnet 


T Transformer 
WR Wall receptacle 


^ik~ 




with moving coil 






BDG Bridging 
BST Booster 


identification replaces 


COUNTER, ELECTROMAGNETIC ; 
MESSAGE REGISTER (26) 


inductance -capacitance 
circuit, zero reactance 


CMP Compression 
DC Direct Current 


(*) asterisk and (+) 
dagger) 


general 


at resonance 


EXP Expansion 
LBi Limiting 


sounder, telegraph 


cfa/b 


f\ 


MOK Monitoring 






f^*j~$\ 


PGM Program 


3T 


with a make contact 




PRE Preliminary 
PHR Power 


-U 


cb7 


resistance 


TRQ Torque 




T 








DETECTOR, PRIMARY ; 


f\^ 


ANTENNA (3) 




MEASURING TRANSDUCER (30) 


ykyAAr^ 






(see HALL GENERATOR and 




general 




THERMAL CONVERTER) 


equivalent shunt element, 






^"^^ 


general 











Figure 4-11. Electronics symbols Continued. 



13.5.6 



4-16 




conductance 



inductive susceptance 



inductance-capacitance 
circuit, infinite sus- 
ceptance at resonance 



indue t ance -c apac it anc e 
circuit, zero suscept- 
ance at resonance 



GOVERNOR fContact- 
making) (37) 

contacts shown here as 
closed 

-- 

HALL GENERATOR (39) 




HANDSET (40) 
general 



operator's set with push- 
to talk switch 



LOGIC (see 806B and Y32-14) 
(including some duplicate 
symbols; left- and right- 
hand symbols are not mixed) 

AND function 




OR function 



EXCLUSIVE-OR function 



* OK 



((*) input: side of logic 
symbols in general) 

condition indicators 
state (logic negation) 



a Logic Negation output 
becomes 1-state if and 
only if the input is nt 
1-state 

an AMD func. where output 
is low if and only if all 
inputs are high (NAND 
opera Li on) 



electric, inverter 



O 



(elec. invtr. output be- 
comes 1-state if and only 
if the input is notl-state) 
(elec. invtr. output is 
more pos. if and only if 
input is less pos.) 

level (relative) 



1-state is 1-state is 
less + more + 

(symbol is a rt. triangle 
pointing in direction of 
flow) 

an AND func. with input 
1-states at more pos. 
level and output 1-state 
at less pos. level (NAND 
operation) 



single shot (one output) 



(waveform data replaces 
inside/outside (*)) 

schmitt trigger, waveform 
and two outputs 




flip-flop, complementary 




register 




(binary register denoting 
four flip-flops and bits) 

amplifier (see AMPLIFIER) 



D> 



channel path(s) (see PATH, 
TRANSMISSION) 

magnetic heads (see PICK- 
UP HEAD) 

oscillator (see OSCIL- 
LATOR) 



O 



relay, contacts (see 
CONTACT, ELECTRICAL) 
relay, electromagnetic 
(see RELAY COIL RECOG- 
NITION) 

signal flow (see DIREC- 
TION OF FLOW) 

ttme delay (see DELAY 
LINE) 



CD 



time delay with typical 
delay taps: 




functions not otherwise 
symboli'zed 



(identification replaces 
(*)) 

Logic Letter Combinations 

S set 

C clear (reset) 

T toggle (trigger) 

(N) number of bits 

BO blocking oscillator 

CF cathode follower 

EF emitter follower 

FF flip-flop 

SS single shot 

ST schmitt trigger 

RG(N) register (N stages) 
SR shift register 

MACHINE, ROTATING (46) 
generator 



METER, INSTRUMENT (48) 



identification replaces 
(*) asterisk) 

Meter Letter Combinations 

A Ammeter 

AH Ampere-hour 

CMA Contact-making (or 
breaking) ammeter 

CMC Contact-making (or 
breaking) clock 

CMV Contact-making (or 
breaking) voltmeter 

CRO Oscilloscope or 

cathode-ray oscil- 
lograph 

DB DB (decibel) meter 

DBM DBM (decibels re- 
ferred to 1 milli- 
watt) meter 

EM Demand meter 

DTR Demand-totalizing 
relay 

F Frequency meter 

G Galvanometer 

GD Ground detector 

I Indicating 

INT Integrating 

uA or 

UA Microammeter 

MA Milliammeter 

m. Noise meter 

OHM Ohmmeter 

OP Oil pressure 



Figure 4-11. Electronics symbols. Continued. 



13.5.7 



4-17 



Armed with the knowledge of basic circuitry 
and symbols, most technicians, troubleshooting 
electronic circuits, will use a diagram of some 
form. The definitions of the different diagrams 
used are the same as those mentioned earlier; 
however, in most cases, they are somewhat more 
complicated. Figure 4-12 shows a typical diagram 
frequently used in the repair and installation of 
equipment using electronic circuitry. It is shown 
to give you some idea of what the diagrams look 
like. 



SPECIFICATIONS 

When project specifications are prepared, they 
must be brief, clear, and complete. Specifications 
must convey the complete description of the work 
to be performed in a clear, concise, and coherent 
manner, stating the actual minimum needs of the 
government and the conditions known, such as 
site location or special construction techniques. 
The use of general statements should be 
avoided. 

The specifications should be used with con- 
struction drawings to provide the Utilitiesman the 



needed details of the project. Basically, the 
drawings should show the extent, size, shape, 
generic types of material, and the relationship 
between different materials. The specifications 
should describe the quality of materials, the 
installation requirements, and the method of 
construction. The writer of the specifications 
should review the drawings while writing the 
specifications and after they have been com- 
pleted. This ensures that the information 
appearing on the drawings has been covered 
in the specification and that all the require- 
ments to accomplish the work have either 
been covered in detail on the drawings or 
described in the specifications. On the other 
hand, the designer or engineer should review 
the specifications to ensure complete coordina- 
tion. Quite often, a simple detail, section, 
or note on the drawings makes it possible 
to eliminate lengthy, descriptive statements 
from the specification and at the same time 
clarify the designer's intent. Conflicts or 
duplications between drawings and specifica- 
tions must be eliminated. The terminology 
used in specifications and drawings must be 
identical. 



POWER SUPPLY 

(D 



RECTIFIER AND I SCHMlTT 




NEC. 



TOP 
START 

I 

J BOTTOM 
START 

L 



r- - 


I r?v YELLOW 




Q TUNNING 
, , SLUG 
> * CENTER FINISH 


(5) 
L -m REO 


/\ 


1 , 


v2/ 
1 /-v BROWN 


H 


'Ih 




^X 



BOTTOM FINISH 



<!>- 



NOT EARTH 
GROUND 



.SHIELD 
CABLES 



SENSING HEADS 



Figure 4-12._Diagram of an electronic limit switch. 



77.292 



4-18 



In short, the plans and the specifications are 
one and the same; when they are used as such, 
the desired results should be obtained. 



AS-BUILT DRAWINGS 

Upon the completion of a facility, the crew 
leader or project supervisor should provide opera- 
tions with marked prints that indicate any con- 
struction deviations. The information required 
must show all features of the project as actually 
built. It is necessary that operations review the 
as-built drawings after they are completed. This 
assures that all information appearing on the 
drawings shows the exact as-built conditions. 

From the as-built drawings, record drawings 
are prepared. These drawings are the original con- 
struction drawings, but are corrected according 
to the as-built marked print. They then provide 
a permanent record of as-built conditions. The 
original record drawings must be kept up-to-date 
at all times. If maintenance requires a change to 
the record drawing, this information should be 
passed back to operations or the maintenance con- 
trol director (MCD) to update the record print. 



SCHEDULES 

The schedule is a systematic method of 
presenting notes and information in a tabular 
form. This makes the detailed information re- 
quired easily accessible to the Utilitiesman and 
specifications writer. Schedules are used mostly 
on large projects. 



A plumbing fixture schedule lists the fixture 
type and identifies each fixture type on the 
drawing by number. The manufacturer and 
catalog number of each type are given along with 
the number, size, and type of fixture. A column 
is left for additional remarks. This Remarks col- 
umn may give such information as the mounting 
height above the finish floor (for wall mountings) 
or any other information required for proper 
installation. 

Sometimes the same information can be found 
in the specifications of the project, but combing 
through page after page of written material can 
be time consuming. You may not always have ac- 
cess to the specifications while working, but the 
drawings are there. Therefore, the schedule is an 
excellent way of providing essential information 
in a clear and accurate manner, allowing you to 
carry out your task in the least amount of time. 



CHAPTER REFERENCES 

Blueprint Reading and Sketching, NAVEDTRA 
10077-F, 1977, Naval Education and Train- 
ing Program Development Center, Pensacola, 
Fla. 32509. 

Construction Electrician 1 & C, NAVEDTRA 
10637-E, 1985, Naval Education and Train- 
ing Program Development Center, Pensacola, 
Fla. 32509. 

Electrician's Mate 3 & 2, NAVEDTRA 10546-E1, 
1981, Naval Education and Training Program 
Development Center, Pensacola, Fla. 32509. 



4-19 



CHAPTER 5 

PLANNING, ESTIMATING, 
AND SCHEDULING 



LEARNING OBJECTIVE: Identify the requirements needed for planning 
and estimating; identify the fundamentals and use of precedence diagrams 
for scheduling; recognize the computer management program used in the NCF. 



Good construction planning and estimating 
procedures are essential to the Naval Construc- 
tion Force's (NCF) ability to provide quality con- 
struction responsive to the fleet's operational 
requirements. This chapter contains information 
that can be used in planning, estimating, and 
scheduling construction projects normally under- 
taken by the SEABEES. This material is designed 
to be a helpful reference, NOT to establish pro- 
cedures. The techniques described are suggested 
methods that have been proven with use and can 
result in effective planning and estimating. How 
and when these techniques are applied is left to 
the discretion of the user. The tables are included 
to be helpful references and are not intended to 
establish production standards. These tables must 
be used with sound judgment and modified as the 
user's experience suggests. Man-hour tables are 
based upon direct labor and do not include 
allowances for indirect or overhead labor. 

In planning any project, you must have an 
idea of the meaning of the terms commonly 
associated with planning, estimating, and schedul- 
ing. We have defined 16 terms you will need in 
your job. Read them with care, but do not try to 
memorize them. Remember where you found 
them, so you can refer to these terms when you 
have to use them. 

Planning is the process of determining re- 
quirements and devising and developing methods 
and a scheme of action for construction of a pro- 
ject. Good construction planning is a combina- 
tion of various elements: the activity, material, 
equipment, and manpower estimates; project 
layout; material delivery and storage; work 
schedules; quality control; specialty tools re- 
quired; environmental protection; safety; and pro- 
gress control. All these elements depend upon 



each other. All must be taken into account in any 
well-planned project. 

Estimating is the process of determining the 
amount and type of work to be performed and 
the quantities of material, labor, and equipment 
required. The lists of these quantities and types 
of work are called estimates. 

Preliminary Estimates are made from limited 
information, such as the general descriptions of 
projects or preliminary plans and specifications 
having little or no detail. Preliminary estimates 
are prepared to establish costs for the budget and 
to program general manpower requirements. 

Detailed Estimates are precise statements of 
quantities of material, equipment, and manpower 
required to construct a given project. 
Underestimating quantities can cause serious 
delays in construction or can result in unfinished 
projects. A detailed estimate must be accurate to 
the smallest detail to correctly qualify 
requirements. 

Activity Estimates consist of a listing of all the 
steps required to construct a given project, in- 
cluding specific descriptions as to the limits of 
each clearly definable quantity of work (activity). 
Activity quantities provide the basis for prepar- 
ing the material, equipment, and manpower 
estimates. They are used to provide the basis for 
scheduling material deliveries, equipment, and 
manpower. Because activity estimates are used to 
prepare other estimates and schedules, errors in 
these estimates can be multiplied many times. Be 
careful in their preparation! 

Material Estimates consist of a listing and 
description of the various materials and the quan- 
tities required to construct a given project. 
Information for preparing material estimates 
is obtained from the activity estimates, draw- 
ings, and specifications. A material estimate is 



5-1 



sometimes referred to as a bill of material (BM) 
or a material takeoff (MTO) sheet. 

Equipment Estimates consist of a listing of the 
various types of equipment, the amount of time, 
and the number of pieces required to construct 
a given project. Information obtained from ac- 
tivity estimates, drawings, specifications, and an 
inspection of the site provide the basis for prepar- 
ing the equipment estimates. 

Manpower Estimates consist of a listing of the 
number of direct labor man-days required to com- 
plete the various activities of a specific project. 
These estimates may show only the man-days for 
each activity, or they may be in sufficient detail 
to list the number of man-days for each rating 
(Builder, Construction Electrician, Equipment 
Operator, Steelworker, and Utilitiesman) for each 
activity. Man-day estimates are used in determin- 
ing the number of personnel and the ratings re- 
quired on a deployment and in providing the basis 
for scheduling manpower in relation to construc- 
tion progress. 

A Man-Day is a unit of work performed by 
one person in one 8-hour day, or its equivalent, 
when NAVFAC P-405 is used and one 10-hour 
day, or its equivalent, when NAVFAC P-437 is 
used. 

Direct Labor includes all the labor expended 
directly on assigned construction tasks either in 
the field or in the shop that contributes directly 
to the completion of the end product. Direct labor 
must be reported separately for each assigned con- 
struction item. 

Overhead Labor is considered to be produc- 
tive labor that does not contribute directly or in- 
directly to the product. It includes all labor that 
must be performed regardless of the assigned 
mission. 

Indirect Labor includes the labor required to 
support construction operations but which does 
not produce an end product itself. 

An Estimator is one who evaluates the re- 
quirements of a task. A construction estimator 
must be able to mentally picture the separate 
operations of the job as the work progresses 
through the various stages of construction and be 
able to read and obtain accurate measurements 
from drawings. The estimator must possess a 
knowledge of mathematics, have previous con- 
struction experience, and have a working 
knowledge of all branches of construction. The 
estimator must use good judgment when deter- 
mining what effect numerous factors and condi- 
tions will have on construction of the project and 



what allowances should be made for each of them. 
The estimator must be able to do careful and ac- 
curate work. A SEABEE estimator must have 
ready access to information about the material, 
the equipment, and the labor required to perform 
various types of work under conditions en- 
countered in SEABEE deployments. The collec- 
tion of such information on construction 
performance is a part of the job of estimating. 
This kind of reference information may change 
from time to time; therefore, this data should be 
reviewed frequently. 

Scheduling is the process of determining when 
an action must be taken and when material, equip- 
ment, and manpower will be required. PROG- 
RESS SCHEDULES coordinate all the projects 
of a SEABEE deployment or all the activities of 
a single project. They show the sequence, the start- 
ing time, the performance time required, and the 
time required for completion. MATERIAL 
SCHEDULES show when the material is needed 
on the job and may show the order in which 
materials should be delivered. EQUIPMENT 
SCHEDULES coordinate all the equipment to be 
used on a project, show when it is to be used, and 
show the amount of time each piece of equipment 
is required to perform the work. MANPOWER 
SCHEDULES coordinate the manpower re- 
quirements of a project and show the number of 
personnel required for each activity. In addition, 
the number of each rating (Builder, Construction 
Electrician, Equipment Operator, Steelworker, 
and Utilitiesman) required for each activity for 
each period of time may also be shown. The 
selected unit of time to be shown in a schedule 
should be some convenient interval, such as a day, 
a week, or a month. 

Network Analysis is a method of planning and 
controlling projects by recording their in- 
terdependence in a diagram form. This enables 
each fundamental problem involved to be under- 
taken separately. The diagram form, known as 
a network diagram, is drawn so each job is 
represented by an activity on the diagram, as 
shown in figure 5-1. The direction in which the 
activities are linked indicates the dependencies of 
the jobs on each other. 

Progress Control is the comparing of 
actual progress with scheduled progress and 
the steps necessary to correct deficiencies or 
to balance activities to meet the overall ob- 
jectives. 



5-2 



COMPUTE NETWORK 
(DETERMINE CRITICAL 
PATH, ETC.) 




II 



LEVEL, ADJUST AND 
SCHEDULE RESOURCES 

(MANPOWER, 

EQUIPMENT, TOOLS, 

AND MATERIALS) 



26.317 



Figure 5-1. Planning and estimating precedence diagram. 



PLANNING 

The basic ground rules in analyzing a project 
are that planning and scheduling are separate 
operations and that planning must always precede 
scheduling. When these two steps are done at the 
same time, they generally introduce elements of 
scheduling prematurely, thus clouding the picture 
of the plan and severely limiting its flexibility. 

Everyone concerned should know precisely 
what the project is, its start and finish points, its 
external factors, such as the schedule dates and 
requirements of other trade groups, and the 
availability of resources, such as manpower and 
equipment. 

All projects consist of separate, but inter- 
related, operations. In network analysis, these 
operations are called activities. The first stage in 
applying this technique is to develop an activity 
list that describes the project to be scheduled. You 
can obtain this list in various ways: by studying 
the manufacturers' specifications, the bills of 
material, the technical drawings, the modifica- 
tion(s) of a previous application, and the work 
sheets for a previous project. Also, a joint discus- 
sion should be held by those persons who suffi- 
ciently understand the project. Use the last 
method even if a tentative list has been obtained 
by other means. 



There are no specific definitions as to what 
makes up an activity; it is largely a matter for in- 
dividual interpretation according to the re- 
quirements of a particular project. A useful 
guideline is to ask the following three ques- 
tions about any particular activity in the 
network. 

1 . Would the activity normally be regarded 
as continuous from start to finish? This does not 
mean it may not prove expedient to split the ac- 
tivity later to help scheduling. The key here is the 
word normally. 

2. Will the required resources remain con- 
stant throughout the duration of the activity? 
Sometimes constant resources may not be achiev- 
able, even though they make control easier. 

3. Is the amount of work involved small 
enough to allow a reliable duration estimate to 
be assigned to the activity? 

No attempt should be made to minimize the 
number of activities in a network by leaving out 
those considered to be unimportant and that have 
considerable float. They can easily be forgotten. 
Their omission could lead to an entirely false 
analysis. 



5-3 



One further point to remember: there may be 
space limitations in the computer (discussed later 
m this chapter) for activity descriptions. Each ac- 
tivity should be given a fairly concise title that will 
identify it in the computer printout. 



ESTIMATING TECHNIQUES 

For you, as the estimator, to prepare a detailed 
and accurate estimate, information must be 
available about various conditions affecting con- 
struction of the project. The drawings should be 
detailed and complete. The specifications should 
be exact. They should leave no doubt as to their 
intent. Information should be available about 
local material, such as quarries, gravel pits, spoil 
areas, types of soil, haul roads and distances, 
foundation conditions, the weather expected 
during construction, and the time allotted for 
completion. Know the number and types of con- 
struction equipment available for use. Consider 
all other items and conditions that might affect 
production or the progress of construction. 

NEED FOR ACCURACY IN THE 
USE OF DRAWINGS AND 
SPECIFICATIONS 

Information found on drawings is the main 
basis for defining the required activities and for 
measuring the quantities of material. Accurate 
estimating requires a thorough examination of the 
drawings. Read all notes and references carefully. 
Examine all detail and reference drawings. In 
preference to scaling, use the dimensions shown 
on the drawings or figures. If you need to scale 
dimensions, use a scale rule; also check for ex- 
pansion or shrinkage of the graphic scale on the 
drawings. When there is disagreement between the 
plans, elevations, and details, you normally follow 
the detail drawing. When there is disagreement 
between the specifications and the drawings, you 
normally follow the specifications. 

When preparing the activity, equipment, and 
quantity estimates, use the specifications with the 
drawings. Be familiar with all the requirements 
contained therein, such as unfamiliar work pro- 
cedures or material, and the specific requirements 
in testing various mechanical systems. You may 
have to read the specifications several times to fix 
these requirements in mind. Notes made while 
reading the specifications will help you when the 
drawings are being examined and when realistic 
estimates are being made. When checking the 



estimates, it helps to have a list of the activities 
and the material described. Specifications often 
contain information required for preparing pur- 
chase requisitions; note this data for use later in 
preparing material lists. Wrong interpretation of 
a section of the specifications can cause errors in 
the estimate. If there is any doubt about the mean- 
ing of any portion of the specifications, request 
an explanation. 

The tables and diagrams in NAVFAC P-405, 
SEABEE Planner's and Estimator's Handbook, 
will save you time in preparing estimates and, 
when understood and used properly, will give ac- 
curate results. Wherever possible, the tables and 
the diagrams used are based on the SEABEES' 
experience. Where suitable information was not 
available, construction industry experience was 
adjusted to represent production under the range 
of conditions encountered in SEABEE 
construction. 

A thorough knowledge of the project draw- 
ings and specifications will make you alert to the 
various areas where errors may occur. The most 
common sources of errors in quantity estimates 
are as follows: 

1 . Failure to read all the notes and references 
on the drawing 

2. Errors in scaling drawings that result in er- 
roneous quantities 

3. Omissions caused by careless examination 
of the drawing 

4. Failure to make proper allowances for 
material loss/waste caused by cutting and 
handling 

Make a thorough examination of the draw- 
ings and a proper allowance of the material. This 
action will greatly improve the accuracy of the 
quantity estimate. As the estimator, check changes 
or updates to the drawings and changes in material 
quantities added to the material estimate. 

ACTIVITY ESTIMATES 

The activity estimate provides a basis for 
preparing the estimate of material, the equipment, 
and the manpower requirements. An activity 
estimate, for example, might call for rough-in pip- 
ing in a floor slab. In the activity estimate, your 
immediate concern is to identify the material 
necessary to do the task; that is, pipe, fittings, 
joining materials, and so forth. The equipment 
estimate for this activity would consider vehicles 
for movement of material and special tools; that 
is, portable power tools, a threader, a power vise, 
and so forth. From the scope of the activity and 



5-4 



the time restraints, you can estimate the manpower 
required. The information shown in the activity 
estimate is also useful in scheduling progress and 
in providing the basis for scheduling deliveries of 
material, equipment, and manpower to the jobsite. 
The following techniques have been proven 
through use, and you will find they produce 
satisfactory results in obtaining activity estimates. 
Become knowledgeable of the project by study- 
ing the drawings, reading the specifications, and 
examining all available information concerning the 
site and local conditions. Only after first becom- 
ing familiar with the project are you ready to iden- 
tify individual activities. First, define activities as 
they may vary depending on the scope of the pro- 
ject. An activity is a clearly definable quantity of 
work. For estimating and scheduling, an activity 
for a single building or job should be a specific 
task or work element done by a single trade. For 
scheduling of large-scale projects, a complete 
building may be defined as an activity; 
but for estimating, it must remain at the single- 
task, single-trade level. After becoming familiar 
with the project and defining its scope, proceed 



with identifying the individual activities required 
to construct the project. To identify activities, be 
sure each activity description shows a specific 
quantity of work with clear, definite limitations 
or cutoff points that can be readily understood by 
everyone concerned with the project. Prepare a list 
of these activities in a logical sequence to check 
for completeness. 

Material Estimate 

Material estimates are used to procure con- 
struction material and to determine if sufficient 
material is available to construct or complete a pro- 
ject. The sample forms shown in figures 5-2, 5-3, 
and 5-4 may be used in preparing material 
estimates. The forms are presented as one method 
of recording the various steps taken in preparing 
a material estimate. Each step can readily be 
understood when the work sheets are reviewed. A 
work sheet must have a heading that shows the 
project title, project location, drawing number, 
sheet number, project section, prepared by, 
checked by, and the date. The estimating work 
sheet (fig. 5-2), when completed, will show the 







ESTIMATING 


WORK SHEET 


TOWCD Vt ' ..&. JAViM 


PROJ. LOCATION: 
DIE<O fcClk 


SHEET ( OF , 


DRAWING HO. , -, AaA/T-oioaJPROJ. TITLE CKVJTOWW*.VT va.jL 

!,5*/,'->^-/' / taU, 1 *aq !MTtR\VA WVTEE SYSTEM D.I.CV.. 


CHECKED BY: 


PROJ. SECTION: 


ACTIVITY NO. 
NODE 1 1 TO NODE 


<tr* 


BM MO. 
&M-II2 


MTO NO. 


DATE PRE RAPED 


TEM 
NO 


DESCRIPTION 


PS 


t^^ 


i PC 


RV.S 


RE.F 
SE,< 


E 1 
.T. V 


Dl 
P&.C 


V Q< 
B< 


'5 






BM 

NO. 


BM 

LINE 
ITEM 
NQ 




UNIT 
OF 
SSUE 




TOTAL 
QTY 


REMARKS 


USE. LOC. PROCEOURES.ETC 




^LMUDIKKjf 


~ooq 


1W 




l_ 




W 




T 




















SLAkB/F^OTlKWa 












2fe'-' 




SAs" 




12" 




















tlXaE. FOR.^S-TO BE 


1. 


3V PLV*/OOD 


2(< 


(o'-e* 


)+(Z< 


>')ia 


53'- 


V'i-4 


D'=S 


i'-4-" 










; 




SH 





3 


UitD A>T TRANMmtR 




BB E,XTE.R.\O> TXPE 




































S>T BUD4- 




4'x 8' 


SS 


A-'P 


.YVJO 


its R 


IPPEB 


IT." 


= 31' 
































9 




'31'' 


, 3,' 


;H&E 


r, 






























































2. 


LUMBER ixfcxRL 


(a 


LE 


IOC,T 


4 * 1 


E.K. 


COE 


wefc 












2 




BF 


5 


30 


BLCX- LiCTOOT 




Ge 2 oe. BE.TTEU 




x4 


co(?K 


ERS 


fl P 


cs/ 


6 LO 


4 




















&ATTE.B. BOKR.DS 










































3. 


LUMBE.6. 2 *4 X RL 


ICo 


' -4 


J PC 


> -1 


i'x.2 


t4x 


46 P 


5 










5 




E>F 


|^> 


^o 


USE. REU&A>e>l_E 








































2.x 4 AT fifAMSMVrrtE. 








































SITE. BUIU>IWC% 




KAMP . 


>K1D 


DO< 


1C ' 


|TO( 


?P 1 


OK, 


.AC, 
























4. 


3V PLYWOOD 4'xe' 


fn 


-8" 


)+2( 


fo') + ' 


i(4') 


^1: 


B'' 












1 




5U 


O 


I 


E-tXiE. FOfeMS RU5E 






R 


P P 


YV*J^ 


50O 


KJTO 


6" 


VK.\P: 






















AJ TRAKI5KA4TTEI? 









fox 


5 i / 


ft 




























SITE: BUILDING 












































BEAMS 








































B-l 





: EA 


CW 


zc='. 


8"! 


aowi 


> B! 


AMI 






















t^ 


3/4* PLYWOOD 6* BB 




































B-l SIDC rofchAS 




E.VT TYPE- 4'X 6' 


2 


b'-R 


"x4 


SIC 


F.*S - 


= IOI 


>~8 












1 




SH 


O 


10 


REUSE AT 








































TRANSWMTTEfc SlTC 








































e*J\L,D\Ki6 



















































































26.318 



Figure 5-2. Typical estimating work sheet. 



5-5 



various individual activities for a project with a 
listing of the required material. Material scheduled 
for several activities or uses will be shown in the 
Remarks section. The work sheet should also con- 
tain an activity description, the item number, a 
material description, the cost, the unit of issue, 
the waste factors, the total quantities, and the 
remarks. The estimating work sheets should be 
kept by the field supervisor during construction 
to ensure use of the material as planned. The 
material takeoff (MTO) sheet (fig. 5-3) shows, in 
addition to the information listed above, the sug- 
gested vendor(s) or source(s), supply status, 
national stock number (NSN), and the required 
delivery date. The bill of material (BM) sheet 
(fig. 5-4) is similar in content to the material 
takeoff sheet; the information is presented 
in a format suitable for data processing. For 
requests of supply status, issue, or location 
of material, use this form. Use the bill of 
material sheets for preparing purchase docu- 
ments. When funding data have been added, 
use these sheets for drawing against existing 
supply stocks. 



Between the procurement of construction 
material and its final installation, construction 
material is subject to loss and waste. This loss may 
occur during shipping, handling, or storage, or 
from the weather. Waste is inevitable where 
material is subject to cutting or final fitting before 
installation. Frequently, material, such as lumber, 
conduit, or pipe, will have a standard issue length 
that is longer than required. More often than not, 
the excess will be too short for use and end up 
as waste. Waste and loss factors vary depending 
on the individual item and should be checked 
against the conversion and waste factors found 
in NAVFAC P-405, Appendix C. 

Use checklists to eliminate any omissions from 
the material estimates. Prepare a list for each in- 
dividual project when you examine the drawings, 
specifications, and activity estimates. This is the 
practical way to prepare a listing of the variety 
of the material used in a project. The listing will 
apply only to the project for which it has been 
prepared. If no mistakes or omissions have been 
made in either the checklist or estimate, the 




Figure 5-3.-Typical material takeoff sheet. 



26.319 



5-6 



material estimate will contain a quantity for each 
item on the list. 

Long lead items are not readily available 
through the normal supply system. They will re- 
quire special attention by you to ensure delivery 
on time. Items requiring long lead time are those 
that are not shelf items, such as steam boilers, 
special door and window frames, items larger than 
the standard issue, and electrical transformers for 
power distribution systems. Identify and order 
these items early. Make periodic checks as to the 
status of the orders to avoid delays in completing 
the project. 

The procedure for preparing a material 
estimate is to determine the activity by using the 
activity description with the detailed information 
given in or on the drawings and plans to provide 
a quantity of work. This quantity is then con- 
verted to the material required. Next, enter the 
conversion on a work sheet to show how each 
quantity was obtained, as shown in figure 5-2. 
Work sheets need to be sufficiently detailed to be 
self-explanatory, so anyone examining them can 
determine how the quantities were computed 



without having to consult the estimator. 
Allowances for waste and loss are added after 
determining the total requirement. All computa- 
tions should appear on the estimate work sheet 
as must all notes relative to the reuse of the 
material. Material quantities for similar items of 
a project are entered on the material takeoff or 
bill of material. Figures 5-3 and 5-4 become the 
material estimate for the project. 

Equipment Estimate 

Equipment estimates are used with production 
schedules to determine the construction equipment 
requirements and constraints for SEABEE 
deployment. Of these constraints, the movement 
of material over roadways is frequently 
miscalculated. In the past, estimators used the 
posted speed limits as an average rate for mov- 
ing material; this concept was wrong. Equipment 
speed will usually average between 40 to 56 per- 
cent of the posted speed limit. Factors, such as 
the road conditions, the number of intersections, 
the amount of traffic, and the hauling distances 



LL Of NATUIM. 

IK/I (m. t-n) 

ri XI* 



5$ 



SHIP APRIL'// 

""" INTERIM WATER SYSTEM REINDEER STATION (CAMTOMMEMT AREA) - - I . */ \\1_ 



K>U1 M 5EKV > B SV I SufP $ fUNO ? , OJt , T M , ... 

OtT I tOM g 00tSi c coot S "OJECI Ml DO 



P962N62583 NY1WII2 ATNMZM905094 4K6404 



DOCUMENT *UM8E 



Ate 



..49 jMAlIftfii.. 



-TJP4 



..JJLW. 



i^... 



3. 

r 






__< 8HTXEK. 



UUMAIK .Cft, 



.Uft*JWd.-Cff.. 



fe^t-M 



-JJBL. 






-3L4* 



t ^. JXftOU toVMKggTJ. MRWATHV 



26.320 



Figure 5-4. Sample bill of material sheet. 



5-7 



will vary the percentage of the posted speed limit. 
The percentage may be used with a degree of ac- 
curacy. Other factors used are types of material 
hauled (for example, damp sand or loam is much 
easier to handle than clay), safety (machine 
limitations), operators' experience, condition 
of the equipment, work hours, and the local 
climate. 

Equipment production must be determined so 
the amount and type of equipment may be 



selected. Equipment production rates are available 
in the SEABEE Planner's and Estimator's Hand- 
book, NAVFAC P-405. The tables provide infor- 
mation as to the type of equipment required. The 
production rate per day should be estimated for 
each piece of equipment. Consider the factors 
discussed above, information obtained from 
NAVFAC P-405, and your experience. The 
quantity of work divided by the production rate 
per day will produce the number of days required 



SHEET ' OF z 

ESTIMATED BY B 1 " *" 1 DATE 6/l3/e8 
CHECKED BV <?" DATE 6/23/6 g 



EQUIPMENT ESTIMATE 



NMCB 



LOCATION 



YEAR ' 9ec 



PROJECT Np.OI3_ 



DESCRIPTION 



Sit* Reparation 



Earth Fill 36,000 CY loose measurement required. 
Haul one way 2-1/2 miles. 
Use 2-1/2 CYendloader and 10 CY dump trucks. 

Endfoader capacity 100 CY/hours. 

36.000 

500 390 hours or 45 eight-hour days. 

100 

~~fo~ 10 trucks loaded per hour. 

Average hauling speed estimated at 15 MPH, 

2 x iS 5 miles round trip, 
5/15 x 60 20 minutes hauling time. 

60/10 6 minutes loading time. 
Estimated 4 minutes dumping time, 

30 minute* total time per truck load. 
60/30 2 bads per hour per truck. 

10/2 - 5 trucks required to keep end loader working at capacity. 
100 x 8 800 CY hauled per 8-hour day. 
Need one bulkjozer (can spread 1 400 CY daily). 
Need one grader to keep haul road in shape. 
1 bulldozer (can spread 1 400 CY daily). 
1 tractor & tandem sheepfoot roller (can compact 1200 CY daily). 
1 water truck with sprinkler for moisture control. 
1 







Figure S-S.-Sample equipment estimate (sheet 1 of 2). 



26.321 



5-8 



to perform the project. After you determine the 
number of days of required equipment operation, 
consult the project schedule to find the time allot- 
ted to complete the activities. Prepare the schedule 
for the total deployment; use the project schedule 
to determine when the work will be performed. 
The schedule will also indicate peak usage; it may 
have to be revised for more even distribution of 
equipment loading, thereby reducing the amount 
of equipment required during the deployment. 
After the reviews and revisions, prepare a list 
of equipment required. The list must include 



anticipated downtime. Sufficient reserve pieces 
must be added to cover any downtime. 

To aid in the preparation of the equipment 
estimate schedule, use forms, such as those shown 
in figures 5-5 and 5-6. The important informa- 
tion on the forms includes the sheet number, 
estimator's name, checker's name, date checked, 
battalion and detachment number, location 
of deployment, year of deployment, project 
number, and a brief description of the project. 

The naval mobile construction battalion's 
(NMCB) table of allowance (TOA) contains 



SHEET 



ESTIMATED BY Bro " n DATE 6/13/86 
CHECKED BY s """ DATE 6/23/88 



NMCB 



EQUIPMENT ESTIMATE 
LOCATION 60AM 



YEAR 



PROJECT 



DESCRIPTION 



Site Preparation 



NOTE: Preceding it not very efficient, at spreading equipment it not utd to full capacity. Suppose that when 
the work tchedule it prepared, completion of fill will be required in 18 days. Assume that climate it such 
that 3 days in every 17 working days wHI be lost due to rain. Therefore. 15 working days would be 
available in an 18 day schedule. 



3,600/15' 2,400 cu. yd. must be hauled daily to complete the work on schedule. 
2,400/800 - 3 times the output of loading and hauling spread shown previously. 
Equipment required for loading and hauling: 

3 - 2-1/2 cu.yd. end load on. 
1 bulldozer to keep pit in shape. 
1 grader to keep haul road in shape* 

15 10-ton trucks hauling (1 or 2 extra trucks should be added to assure that a truck will always be 
waiting to be loaded to that end loader will work at full capacity). 

2,400 cu. yd. will be hauled etch day. 

2,400/1,200 2 tractors and tandem theepfoot roller for compaction, 
2 bulldozers to spread earth, 

2,400/1,400 - 1 water truck with sprinkler. 

1 wobbly-wheel roller (standby for sealing of fill before raimj. 

NOTE: This is a more efficient operation, as production has been tripled but equipment has not, and total 
equipment working at or at dose to capacity as can be expected. 



26.321.1 



Figure 5-6. Sample equipment estimate (sheet 2 of 2). 



5-9 



specific information on the quantities and 
characteristics of construction equipment 
available to the NMCBs. Table 5-1 contains an 
abbreviated listing of such equipment. 



Labor Estimate 

There are two types of labor estimates- 
preliminary manpower estimates and detailed 
manpower estimates. Use preliminary manpower 



estimates to establish costs for the budget and to 
project manpower requirements for succeeding 
projects and deployments. The estimates are 
prepared from limited information, such as 
general descriptions or preliminary plans and 
specifications that contain little or no detailed 
information; for example, area, length, or other 
suitable measurement. In some cases, you can 
make a comparison with similar facilities of the 
same basic design, size, and type of construction. 
A good preliminary estimate varies less than 



Table 5-1. NMCB Construction Equipment Characteristics 



QUANTITY 



12 
8 



EQUIPMENT DESCRIPTION 



TRUCKS 

Dump, 6 x 6, 5 Ton, 5 Cu. Yd. Capacity 

Dump, 6 x 4, 15 Ton, 10 Cu. Yd. Capacity 



GRADERS 

Motor, Road, 12 Ft. Blade, 6x4, with Scarifier 



LOADERS 

Scoop, Full Tracked, 2 Vz Cu. Yd. Multipurpose Bucket 
Scoop, Wheeled, 4 x 4, 2 Vz Cu. Yd. Std. Bucket with Forks 
Scoop, Wheeled, 4 x 4, 2 Vz Cu. Yd. Std. Bucket with Forks 
Backhoe, Crane, Dozer Blade 



ROLLERS 

Oscillating, Self-Propelled, 9 Wheel, Pneumatic Tired 

Vibrating, Self-Propelled, Pneumatic Tired, Single Drum 



SCRAPERS 

Tractor, Whl, 14 to 20 Cu. Yd., Hydraulic 



TRACTORS 

Crawler, Hydraulic Semi-U Tilt Dozer 

Crawler, Hydraulic Angle Dozer, Winch 

Crawler, Hydraulic Semi-U-Dozer, Hydraulic Ripper 



CRANES 

Truck, Mounted, 8 x 4, 35 Ton, 60 Ft. Boom with Extension 
Truck, Mounted, 8 x 4, 25 Ton, Hydraulic 
Tractor, Wheel Mounted, 4 x 4, 12 Vz Ton, Telescoping Boom, 
Hydraulic 



SPECIALIZED EQUIPMENT 

Distributor, Bituminous Material, Truck Mounted, 6x4, 2,000 Gal 

Capacity 

Distributor, Water, Truck Mounted, 6x6 2,000 Gal. Capacity 
Distributor, Water, Wagon Mounted, 8,000 Gal. Capacity 
Ditching Machine, Ladder Type, 8 to 24 In. Width by 7 Ft Deoth 

Crawler Mounted ' 

3, Hydraulic, 6 x 6, 1 1 Ft. 1 In. Digging Depth, 
Auger, Earth, Truck Mounted 
Truck. Forkllft. Rough Terrain, 6,000 Lb. Capacity, Pneumatic Tired 



26.322 



5-10 



15 percent from the detailed estimate. Use detailed 
manpower estimates to determine the manpower 
requirements for construction of a given project 
and the total direct labor requirements of a 
deployment. Use the individual activity quantities 
taken from the activity work sheet to prepare 
detailed estimates. Then, select the man-hours per 
unit figure from the appropriate table in 
NAVFAC P-405 and multiply it by the quantity 
to obtain the total man-hours required. When you 
prepare the activity estimates in the format 
discussed earlier, you may use a copy of the ac- 
tivity estimates as a manpower estimate work 
sheet by adding three columns to it with the 
headings of Activity Quantity, Man-Hours Per 
Unit, and Total Man-Days Required. Work 
sheets, whether on the activity work sheet or on 
another format, should be prepared in sufficient 
detail to provide the degree of progress control 
desired; for example, the work sheets should show 
the following information. (NOTE: 8 man-hours 
equal 1 man-day.) 



Description 

Install 12-inch 
diameter concrete 
pipe 



Man-Hours 
Quantity Per Unit 

2,500 feet 20/100 



Install 30-inch 

diameter concrete 2,500 feet 80/100 

pipe 

5,000 feet 



Total 
Man-Days 

62.5 



250.0 



312.5 



If the control is to be exercised only on con- 
crete pipe installation without regard to detail, the 
manpower estimate would show the following in- 
formation on the summary sheet. 

Man-Hours Total 

Description Quantity Per Unit Man-Days 



Install concrete 

pipe 5,000 feet 50/100 



312.5 



The man-hours per unit on the work 
sheet is obtained by dividing the total man- 
days shown in the detail estimate by the total 
feet of concrete pipe times the unit to obtain 
the average man-hours. The man-hours per 
unit will be used for checking actual prog- 
ress. 

Check manpower estimates against the activity 
estimate to assure that no activities have been 
omitted. 



Tables 4-110 through 4-125 of NAVFAC 
P-405 provide labor estimates for the various pro- 
jects undertaken by the UTs. 

Facilities Planning Guide, NAVFAC P-437, 
Volumes 1 and 2, is an excellent source for 
preliminary estimates. It can be used to find 
estimates for a wide range of facilities and 
assemblies commonly constructed. The P-437 not 
only gives the man-hours required, but it also gives 
a breakdown of the construction effort by ratings 
(BU, CE, UT, and so forth), as well as lapsed day 
estimates. 

You must bear in mind that the lapse time 
from the P-437 is calculated using the contingency 
norm of a 10-hour man-day instead of the 8-hour 
man-day used in the P-405. For example, a 
specific task from the P-437 requires 100 
man-hours of UT effort. The optimum crew is 
four UTs. This will yield the following lapse 
time: 



100 MH 



4 UTs x 10 hours 



= 2.5 days (lapse time) 



For this same task using the P-405, an 8-hour 
man-day would yield the following: 



100 MH 



4 UTs x 8 hours 



, ,. + . . 
days (lapse time) 



In preparing manpower estimates, weigh the 
various factors that affect the amount of labor 
required to construct a project. These factors are 
weather conditions during the construction 
period, the skill and experience of the personnel 
who will perform the work, the time allotted 
for completion of the job, the size of the crew 
to be used, the accessibility of the site, and 
the types of material and equipment to be 
used. 

The production efficiency guide chart, table 
5-2, lists eight elements that directly affect pro- 
duction. Each production element is matched with 
three areas for evaluation. Each element contains 
two or more foreseen conditions from which to 
select for the job in question. Evaluate each pro- 
duction element at some percentage between 25 
and 100, according to your analysis of the 
foreseen conditions. The average of the eight 
evaluations is the overall production efficiency 
percentage. Then convert the percentage to a delay 
factor on the production efficiency graph 



5-11 



Table 5-2. Production Efficiency Guide Chart 



LOW PRODUCTION 


AVERAGE PRODUCTION 


HIGH PRODUCTION 


PRODUCTION ELEMENTS (PERCENT) 
-K 55 65 75 85 90 


1. Workload 


Const requirement high; misc. 
overhead high 


FORESEEN CONDITIONS 

Const, requirement normal; 
misc. overhead normal. 


Const, requirement low; misc. 
overhead low. 


2. Site Area 


Cramped working area, no area 
for material storage, work 
restricted to design; poor job 
layout 


Work area limited slightly; 
partial material storage: some 
variation from design: average 
lob layout. 


Large work area; adequate 
material storage; wide latitude 
from design: good job layout. 


3. Labor 


Poorly trained; low strength; 
low morale: high sick call. 


Average trained; normal 
strength; fair morale; normal 
'sick call. 


Highly trained; over strength; 
high morale; low sick call. 


4. Supervision 


Poor management, poorly 
trained personnel, low 
strength 


Average management: average 
trained personnel; normal 
strength 


Efficient management; highly 
trained personnel; over 
strength. 


$. Job 

Conditions 


High quality work required, 
unfavorable site materials, 
short time operations; insect 
annoyance nigh 


Average work required; 
average site materials: 
reasonable operation time, 
insect annoyance normal. 


Passable work required; good 
site materials; long time 
operation: no insect 
annoyance. 


. Weather 


Abnormal rain; aonormal heat: 
abnormal cold. 


Moderate ram: moderate heat: 
moderate cold. 


Some rain: occasional heat; 
occasional cold. 


7. Equipment 


Improper job application: 
equipment in poor condition, 
repair and maintenance 
inadequate 


Fair job application: equipment 
in average condition; repair 
and maintenance average. 


Efficient job application; 
equipment in good condition; 
efficient repair and 
maintenance. 


8. Tactical and 
Logistical 


Slow supply delivery, frequent 
tactical delays 


Normal supply delivery; 
occasional tactical delays. 


Prompt supply delivery; no 
tactical delays. 



NOTES: 

1 . The weights of the elements can be adjusted if known facts so indicate. 

2. Rainfall is normally treated separately in the area of calendar day scheduling. Predictions of lost construction days 
are based on geographic rainfall charts. Typhoon and hurricane seasons can cause considerable lost time in 
securing jobsites for alerts and warnings even if work areas are not directly in the path of the storm. 

3. The tactical delay area of consideration should include: Night travel restrictions, mine sweeps on roads into the 
work area, preparation of zig-zag trenches or individual protective measure, sabotage of equipment or materials left 
on the jobsrte, and any additional security requirements that detract from the assigned work force. 

4. The continual pilferage and theft of tools and materials can affect production and is very common in some areas of 
the worid. This condition requires abnormal controls and security, which in turn slows production. 



26.323 



PRODUCTION EFFICIENCY 



4 


















^ 


0.66 
0.72 

o 

0.80 m 
0.88 > 
1.00 -n 
1.14 
1.33 
1.60 
2.00 














t ^ 


>** ' 














i-"" 
















.- 


^^ 














, ^ 
















-^ 
















^** 


















x**^ 
















*^ 

S 3 


5 ^ 


E 


5 t 















Figure 5-7. Production efficiency graph. 



26.324 



5-12 



(fig. 5-7). It is strongly recommended that the field 
or project supervisors reevaluate the various pro- 
duction elements and make the necessary ad- 
justments to man-day figures based on the actual 
conditions at the jobsite. 

NOTE: The estimate of average SEABEE pro- 
duction used in the NAVFAC P-405 tables falls 
at 67 percent on the bottom of the graph shown 
in figure 5-7, which in turn will be a delay factor 
of 1.00 on the right. A delay of 0.66 represents 
peak production. 

In reading the graph, note that the produc- 
tion element at the bottom of the graph is com- 
puted; an imaginary vertical line is drawn from 
that point to dissect the diagonal line; then the 
delay factor may be read from the right vertical 
Delay Factor line. As an example, assume that 
from the work estimate taken from the tables in 
P-405, you find that 6 man-hours are needed for 
a given unit of work. To adjust this figure to the 
conditions evaluated on your job, assume that the 
average of foreseen conditions rated by you is 87 
percent. The corresponding delay factor read off 
the production efficiency graph is 0.80. You find 
the adjusted man-hour estimate by multiplying 
this delay factor by the man-hours from the 
estimating tables (6 MH x 0.8 = 4.8 = the ad- 
justed man-hour estimate). 

The man-hour labor estimating tables are ar- 
ranged and grouped together into the 16 major 
divisions of work. This is the same system used 
in the preparation of government construction 
specifications. The 16 major divisions of work are 
as follows: 

1. General 

2. Site Work 

3. Concrete 

4. Masonry 

5. Metal 

6. Carpentry 

7. Moisture Protection 

8. Doors, Windows, Glass 

9. Finishes 

10. Specialties 

1 1 . Architectural Equipment 

12. Furnishings 

13. Special Construction 

14. Conveying Systems 

15. Mechanical 

16. Electrical 

The activities in the various labor estimating 
tables are divided into units of measurement 



commonly associated with each craft and material 
takeoff quantities. There is only one amount of 
man-hour effort per unit of work. This number 
represents normal SEABEE production under 
average conditions. As used herein, 1 man-day 
equals 8 man-hours of direct labor. Man-day 
figures do not include overhead items, such as 
dental or personnel visits, transportation to and 
from the jobsite, or inclement weather. 

No two jobs will be exactly alike nor will they 
have exactly the same conditions. Therefore, you, 
as the estimator, must exercise some judgment 
about the project that is being planned. The pro- 
duction efficiency guide and graph (table 5-2 and 
fig. 5-7) are provided to assist you in weighing 
the many factors that contribute to varying pro- 
duction conditions and the eventual completion 
of a project. You can then translate what is known 
about a particular project, producing a more ac- 
curate quantity from the average figures given on 
the labor estimating tables. 



SCHEDULING BY NETWORK 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES 

After World War II, the construction industry 
experienced the same critical examination the 
manufacturing industry had experienced 50 years 
before. Large construction projects came under 
the same pressures of time, resources, and cost 
that had prompted studies in scientific manage- 
ment in the factories about 1900. 

The emphasis, however, was not on actual 
building methods, but upon the management 
techniques of programming and scheduling. The 
only planning methods used were those that had 
been developed for use in factories. Management 
tried to use these methods for the control of large 
construction projects. These techniques suffered 
from serious limitations in project work. The need 
to overcome these limitations led to the develop- 
ment of the network analysis techniques. 

In the late 1950s, this new system of project 
planning, scheduling, and control came into 
widespread use in the construction industry. 
Critical path analysis (CPA), critical path method 
(CPM), and project evaluation and review tech- 
nique (PERT) represent about 50 titles ap- 
proaches. The basis of any of these approaches 
is the analysis of a network of events and ac- 
tivities. For this reason, the generic title covering 
the various networks is Network Analysis. 

These network analysis techniques are now the 
accepted method of construction planning in 



5-13 



many organizations. They form the core of pro- 
ject planning and control systems. 

ADVANTAGES OF NETWORK 
ANALYSIS 

There are many advantages of network 
analysis. As a management tool, it readily 
separates the planning from the scheduling of 
time. The diagram, a picture representation of the 
project, enables you to see the interdependencies 
between events and the overall project to prevent 
unrealistic or superficial planning. Resources and 
time restraints are easily detachable to allow ad- 
justments to be included in the plan before its 
evaluation. 

Because the system splits the project into in- 
dividual events, estimates and lead times are more 
accurate. Deviations from the schedule are quickly 
noticed. Manpower, material, and equipment 
resources are easily identifiable. Since the network 
remains constant throughout its duration, it is also 
a statement of logic and policy. Modifications of 
the policy are allowed, and the impact on events 
is assessed quickly. 

Identification of the critical path is useful if 
the completion date has to be advanced. Atten- 
tion can then be concentrated toward speeding up 
those relatively few critical events. The network 
allows you to analyze critical events accurately and 
to effectively provide the basis for the prepara- 
tion of charts which results in better control of 
the entire project. 

DISADVANTAGES OF 
NETWORK ANALYSIS 

The only disadvantage of network analysis as 
a planning tool is that it is a tedious and an 
exacting task when attempted manually. Depend- 
ing upon just what the project manager wants as 
output, the number of activities that can be 
handled without a computer varies, but the 
number is never very high. 

Calculations are in terms of the sequence of 
activities; and, if this is all, a project involving 
several hundred activities may be attempted 
manually. However, the chance for error is high. 
Suppose the jobs are to be sorted by rating, so 
that jobs undertaken by Utilitiesmen are together 
as are those for Equipment Operators or construc- 
tion Electricians. The time required for manual 
operation would become costly. The considera- 
tion of various alternative plans also becomes im- 
possible because of the large volumes. 

On the other hand, standard computer pro- 
grams for network analysis can handle project 



plans of 5,000 activities or more and can produce 
output in various forms. However, a computer 
assists only with the calculation and prints plans 
of operations sorted into various orders. 

The project manager, NOT the computer, is 
still responsible for the planning and must still 
make decisions based on the information supplied 
by the computer. Computer output is only as ac- 
curate as its input, supplied by people. 

ELEMENTS OF SCHEDULING 

A network represents any sequencing of 
priorities among the activities that form a 
project. This sequencing is determined by hard 
or soft dependencies. Hard dependencies are 
based upon the physical characteristics of the job, 
such as the necessity for placing a foundation 
before building walls. A hard dependency is nor- 
mally inflexible. Soft dependencies are based upon 
practical considerations of policy and may be 
changed if circumstances demand; for example, 
the decision to start at the north end of a building 
rather than the south. 

In constructing networks, there are two types 
of diagramming techniques that you can apply: 
precedence (relatively new) and arrow diagram- 
ming. The questions often asked by users are: 
"What is the difference?" and "What should we 
be using?" Since the project management system 
accommodates both methods with ease, the choice 
of method comes down to which is the least com- 
plicated and most efficient to implement. The 
Naval Construction Force (NCF) has converted 
to the precedence diagram method. 

BASIC PRECEDENCE SCHEDULING 

Networking procedures are based upon a 
system that identifies and schedules key events in- 
to precedence-related patterns. Since the events 
are interdependent, proper arrangement helps 
monitor the independent activities and evaluate 
progress to complete the project on time. The 
basic concept is known as the critical path method 
(CPM). Because the CPM places great emphasis 
upon task accomplishments, a means of activity 
identification must be established to track an ac- 
tivity's progress. The methods currently in use are 
the arrow diagramming method (ADM) and the 
activity-on-node precedence diagramming method 
(PDM). 

Comparison to Arrow Diagram 

The precedence method differs considerably 
trom the arrow-diagram method, since the 



5-14 



operations are shown at the ends of the lines 
rather than on the lines or the arrows. In 
precedence networks, lines are used to show 
dependencies of work items only and not to repre- 
sent the operation itself. 

A precedence network also differs from an 
arrow-diagram network in that the precedence 
network does not have the extraneous activities 
in arrow diagrams. A precedence network does 
not need dummy or restraint activities. Yet, the 
sequence of a construction project can be 
diagrammed to reflect identical logic using either 
an arrow-diagram or a precedence network. 

Conventions for number differ considerably 
between an arrow-diagram and a precedence net- 
work. Arrow-diagram activities are identified 
with a number that must fit within a certain 



increasing sequence. An identification number for 
precedence activities, however, need only be 
unique for each activity. Generally, a precedence 
activity may be identified by any code selected by 
the planner. If new activities are added or the logic 
is changed, it is not necessary to renumber the ex- 
isting activities. 

Figure 5-8 shows a comparison between arrow 
and precedence diagrams. Note in item number 
3 that a dummy arrow is required to maintain 
logic and unique code numbers for arrow 
activities. 



Precedence Diagramming 

Precedence diagramming does not require the 
use of dummy activities, is easier to draw, and 
has greater applications and advantages when 



CIRCLE /ARROW 



2. 




3. 




4. 




PRECEDENCE 






87.318 



Figure 5-8. Diagram comparison. 



5-15 



networks are put on the computer. In precedence 
diagrams, the activity is on the node, as illustrated 
in figure 5-9; it is not on the arrow, as is the case 
with arrow diagramming. 

ACTIVITIES AND EVENTS. To build a 
flexible CPM network, the manager must have 
a reliable means of obtaining project data 
that gets represented graphically by an activity 
node. 

An activity in a precedence diagram is repre- 
sented by a rectangular box. It is identified by an 
activity number and not the start and finish nodes 
as in an arrow diagram. This eliminates the need 
for additional activities, called dummies, for the 
purpose of achieving positive identification. 

The left side of the activity box represents the 
start of the activity and the right side represents 
the completion. Lines linking the boxes are 
called connectors. The general direction of flow 
is evident in the connectors themselves, and ar- 
rowheads are not necessary. 

Activities may be divided into three distinct 
groups. 

1. Working Those activities that relate to 
Activities particular tasks. 

2. Milestone Intermediate goals with no 
Events time duration but that re- 
quire completion of prior 
events before the project can 
proceed. 

3. Critical Those activities that together 
Activities comprise the longest path 

through the network. This is 
represented by a heavy or 
hash-marked line. 



The activities are logically sequenced to show 
the activity flow for the project. The activity flow 
can be determined by answering the following 
questions. 

1 . What activities must precede the activity 
being examined? 

2. What activities can be concurrent with this 
activity? 

3. What activities must follow the activity? 

Working Activities. With respect to a given 
activity, these representations indicate points in 
time for the associated activities. Although the 
boxes represent activities, they do not represent 
time and, therefore, are not normally drawn to 
scale. They only reflect the logical sequence of 
events. 

Milestone Events. The network may also 
contain certain precise, definable points in time, 
called events. Examples of events are the start and 
finish of the project as a whole. Events have no 
duration and are represented by oval boxes on a 
network. A precedence network is illustrated in 
figure 5-10. 

Milestones are intermediate goals within a net- 
work. For instance, Ready for Print is an impor- 
tant event that represents a point in time but has 
no time duration of its own. To reach this par- 
ticular activity, all activities leading up to it must 
be completed. 

Critical Activities. A critical activity is an ac- 
tivity within the network that has zero float. 
The critical activities of a network make up 
the longest path through the network (critical 
path) that controls the project finish date. The 



EXCAVATE FORM 
FOOTINGS FOOTINGS 










I 


2 


EXCAVATE 
FOOTINGS 


FORM 
FOOTINGS 


ARROW DIAGRAMMING 




PRECEDENCE DIAGRAMMING 



Figure 5-9. Representation of arrow and precedence diagrams. 



87.319 



5-16 




ACTIVITY 



87.320 



Figure 5-10. Precedence diagram. 





87.321 



Figure 5-11. Designation of critical path. 



slashes drawn through the activity connector, 
as shown in figure 5-11, denote critical path. 

The rule governing the drawing of a network 
is that the start of an activity must be linked to 
the ends of all completed activities before that 
start may take place. Activities taking place 
at the same time are not linked in any way. In 
figure 5-10, both activity 2 and activity 3 start as 
soon as activity 1 is complete. Activity 4 requires 
the completion of both activities 2 and 3 before 
it may start. 

USE OF DIAGRAM CONNECTORS. 

Within a precedence diagram, connectors are lines 
drawn between two or more activities to establish 
sequence logic. The diagram connectors com- 
monly used in the NCF are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 

Representing a Delay. In certain cases there 
may be a delay between the start of one activity 
and the start of another. In this case the delay may 
be indicated on the connector itself, preceded by 
the letter d, as has been done in figure 5-12. Here 
activity 2 may start as soon as activity 1 is com- 
plete, but activity 3 must wait 2 days. The delay 




87.322 



Figure 5-12. Representation of delay. 



is stated in the basic time units of the project, so 
the word days can be omitted. 

Representing a Parallel Activity. Some ac- 
tivities may parallel others, as illustrated with 
arrow networks. This can be achieved in 
precedence diagrams without increasing the 
number of activities. For instance, it is possible 
to start laying a long pipeline before the excava- 
tions are completed. This type of overlap is known 
as a lead. It is possible to start a job independently, 
but not to complete it before another is com- 
pleted. This type of overlap is known as a lag. 
(It is also a common occurrence that both the start 
and the finish of two activities may be linked, but, 
in this case, are accommodated by a combination 
of lead and lag.) 



5-17 





87.323 
Figure 5-13. Lead on start of preceding activity. 



As seen in figure 5-13, a lead (or partial start) 
is indicated by drawing the connector from the 
start of the preceding activity (1); in figure 5-14, 
a lag (or partial finish) is indicated by drawing 
the connector from the end of the following ac- 
tivity (3). The values may be given in the basic 
time units of the project, as with a delay, or as 
a percentage overlap. In certain circumstances, 
it could also be stated as a quantity, if the per- 
formance of the activity can be measured on a 
quantitative basis. The indication of the type and 
amount of delay, lead, or lag is generally referred 
to as a lag factor. 

In figure 5-13, activity 3 may start when ac- 
tivity 1 is 1-day completed, although activity 2 
must wait for the final completion of activity 1 . 
In figure 5-14, activity 3 may start when activity 
2 is completed, but will still have 1 day to go when 



activity 1 is completed. The last phase of activity 

3 may not begin until activity 1 has been com- 
pleted. In figure 5-15, activity 2 may start when 
activity 1 is advanced 3 days, but will still have 

4 days of work left when activity 1 is completed. 

Splitting Connectors. The number of se- 
quencing connectors becomes very large when a 
network is of a great size. When two activities are 
remote from each other and have to be connected, 
the lines tend to become lost or difficult to follow. 
In such cases it is not necessary to draw a con- 
tinuous line between the two activities. To show 
their relationship, circles are used with the 
following-activity number in one and the 
preceding-activity number in the other. In figure 
5-16, both activities 2 and 6 are dependent upon 
activity 1. 

Direct Linking Using an Event. When the 
number of common preceding and succeeding 




87.325 
Figure 5-15. Start and finish lags on same activity. 





87.324 
Figure 5-14. Lag on finish of following activity. 




87.326 



Figure 5-16. Splitting connectors. 



5-18 



activities in a particular complex is large, as in 
figure 5-17, a dummy event or focal activity of 
zero duration may be introduced to simplify the 
network. The use of such a dummy event is shown 
figure 5-18, which is a simplification of 



in 



figure 5-17. The effect terms of scheduling is the 




87.327 

Figure 5-17. Multiple predecessors and successors (direct 
linking). 



same, but it can be seen that the introduction of 
the dummy has improved the clarity of the 
diagram. 

Joining Connectors. In many instances, 
opportunities are present for joining several con- 
nectors going to a common point to reduce the 
congestion of the drawing. The diagrams in 
figures 5-19 and 5-20 have precisely the same 
interpretation. The danger with the form of 
representation in figure 5-20, where several 
connectors have been joined, is that when the net- 
work is coded for the computer, sight may be lost 
of the fact that activity D has three preceding ac- 
tivities, since only one line actually enters activity 
D. For this reason, this practice must be 
discouraged. 





87.328 

Figure 5-18. Multiple predecessors and successors (using 
dummy collector). 



87.329 
Figure 5-19. Direct representation of dependencies. 





87.330 
Figure 5-20. Indirect linking of dependencies. 



5-19 



SCHEDULING PRECEDENCE 
DIAGRAMS 

Scheduling, or putting the network on a work- 
ing timetable, will be discussed in this section. The 
information relating to each activity is contained 
within an activity box, as illustrated in figure 5-21. 

Network Time/Duration Computations 

To place the network on a timetable, you must 
figure time and duration computations for the en- 
tire project. These computations will establish the 
critical path and provide the start and finish dates 
for each activity. 



Each activity in the network can be associated 
with four time values. 

Early Start (ES) = Earliest time an activity 
may be started 

Early Finish (EF) = Earliest time an activity 
may be finished 

Late Start (LS) = Latest time an activity 
may be started and still 
remain on schedule 

Late Finish (LF) = Latest time an activity 
may be finished and 
still remain on schedule 



ACTIVITY 

NUMBER" 



EARLY 

START" 
RESOURCES- 



LATE 
START* 



.ACTIVITY 
DURATION 

. ACTIVITY 
DESCRIPTION 

EARLY 
FINISH 



LATE 
FINISH 



Figure 5-21. Information for a precedence activity. 



87.331 




4 | 25 


30 




55 




Figure 5-22. Example of forward pass calculations. 



26.325 



5-20 



THE FORWARD PASS. The main objec- 
tive of forward pass computations is to determine 
the duration of the network. The forward pass 
establishes the early start and finish of each ac- 
tivity and determines the longest path through the 
network (critical path). 

The common procedure for calculating the 
project duration is to successively add activity 
durations, as shown in figure 5-22, along chains 
of activities until a merge is found. At the merge, 
the largest sum entering the activity is taken as 
the start of succeeding activities. Addition con- 
tinues to the next point of merger and the step 
is repeated. The formula for forward pass calcula- 
tions is as follows. 

ES = EF of Preceding Activity 
EF = ES + Activity Duration 

THE BACKWARD PASS. Back ward pass 
computations provide the latest possible start and 
finish times that may take place without altering 
the network relationships. These values are 
obtained by starting the calculations at the last 
activity in the network and working backward, 
subtracting the succeeding activity's duration 
from the early finish of the activity being 
calculated. When a "burst" of activities emanating 
from the same activity is encountered, each path 
is calculated and the smallest or multiple value 
is recorded as the late finish. 

The backward pass is the opposite of the for- 
ward pass. During the forward pass, the early start 
is added to the activity duration to become the 



early finish of that activity. During the backward 
pass, the activity duration is subtracted from the 
late finish to provide the late start time of that 
activity. This late start time then becomes the late 
finish of the next activity within the backward 
flow of the diagram. 

LS = LF - Activity Duration 

Figure 5-23 shows a network with forward and 
backward pass calculations entered. 

FREE AND TOTAL FLOAT. The amount 
of scheduled leeway allowed for a network activity 
is called float or slack. For each activity, it is 
possible to calculate two float values from the 
results of the forward and backward passes. 



1. Total Float = 



The accumulative time 
span in which the com- 
pletion of all activities 
may occur and not delay 
the termination date of 
the project. If the amount 
of total float is exceeded 
for any activity, the pro- 
ject end date extends to 
equal the exceeded amount 
of total float. 



Calculating the total float consists of subtract- 
ing the earliest finish date from the latest finish 
date. 

Total Float = LF - EF 



1 | 10 







10 







10 




5 


8 


55 






63 


57 






65 



4 | 25 


30 




55 


30 




55 




6 | 10 


55 




65 


55 




65 



26.325.1 



Figure 5-23. Example of forward pass and backward pass calculations. 



5-21 



2. Free Float = The time span in which 
the completion of an ac- 
tivity may occur and not 
delay the finish of the pro- 
ject or the start of a suc- 
cessor activity. If this 
value is exceeded, it may 
not affect the project end 
date but would affect 
the start of succeeding, 
dependent activities. 

Calculating the free float consists of subtract- 
ing the earliest start date from the latest start 
date. 

Free Float = LS - ES 

Figure 5-24 is an example of an activity-on- 
node precedence diagramming method (PDM) 
network with total and free float calcula- 
tions completed. 



Basic Logic Patterns 

The graphical representation of an activity is 
a node. These nodes should not be confused with 
vectors as used in many engineering disciplines. 
The node may be square, rectangular, or round 
to suit the needs of the model; however, the 
graphical representation should use a standard 
form throughout the network. 

INDEPENDENT ACTIVITY. An indepen- 
dent activity is an activity that is not dependent 
upon another activity to start. Activity 1, 
diagrammed in figure 5-25, is an example of an 
independent activity. 

DEPENDENT ACTIVITY. A dependent 
activity is an activity that is dependent upon one 
or more preceding activities being completed 
before it can start. The relationship in figure 5-26 
states that the start of activity 2 is dependent upon 
the finish of activity 1 . 

MERGE. Frequently an activity cannot start 
until two or more others have been completed. 




ACTIVITY 



DUR ES 



EF 



LS 



LF 



FF 



TF 



1 


10 





10 





10 








CRITICAL 


2 


15 


10 


25 


15 


30 


5 


5 




3 


20 


10 


30 


10 


30 








CRITICAL 


4 


25 


30 


55 


30 


55 








CRITICAL 


5 


8 


55 


63 


57 


65 


2 


2 




6 


10 


55 


65 


55 


65 








CRITICAL 


7 


25 


65 


90 


65 


90 








CRITICAL 


FORMULAS-' 


TF = 


LF- EF 




EF = 


ES + DUR 




LF = 


LS- DUR 




FF = 


LS-ES 




ES = 


EF + DUR 




LS = 


LF-hDUR 



Figure 5-24. PDM network with total and free float calculations. 



26.325.3 



5-22 




87.332 



Figure 5-25. Independent activity. 



I 1 




2 1 












- 






87.333 



Figure 5-26. Dependent activity. 





87.334 



Figure 5-27. Merge. 



This appears in the diagram as a merge or 
junction. In figure 5-27, activities 3 and 4 
must be completed before the start of activity 
5. 

BURST. A burst is similar to a merge. A 
burst exists when two or more other activities can- 
not be started until a third activity is completed. 
In figure 5-26, when activity 2 is finished, activities 
3 and 4 may start. 



ADVANTAGES OF PRECEDENCE 
DIAGRAMS 

Precedence networks eliminate many of the 
complicating factors of arrow networks. Most 
construction management programs for com- 
puters are limited by the number of activities the 
computer can accommodate. Arrow networks 
may contain 30 percent or more of dummy ac- 
tivities or split activities and are, therefore, very 
costly to run on computers. 

Precedence networks are easier to draw 
because all the activities can be placed on small 
cards, laid out on a flat surface, and manipulated 
easily until a realistic logic is achieved. Draw lines 
(connectors) to each of the activities to show the 
relationship between the activities. Figure 5-28 (a 
foldout at the end of this chapter) represents a 
typical precedence diagram for a 40- by 100-foot 
rigid-frame building. 



MINICOMPUTER USE IN THE NCF 

The usefulness of the minicomputer as a con- 
struction management tool for the NCF was first 
tested in September 1976 during the deployment 
of NMCB-3 to Diego Garcia. The results were en- 
couraging and the decision was made to install 
a system at each of the permanent deployment 
sites, each homeport regiment, the Commander, 
Construction Battalion, Atlantic (COMCBLANT), 
and the Civil Engineer Support Office. In 1982, 
the Navy bought an improved version of the 
original software package for construction 
management, the CM-5. 

Minicomputer use by the private construction 
industry has increased since the NCF purchased 
its first system in 1977. This rapid growth within 
the private sector was a result of the increasing 
cost of labor and materials and the decreasing cost 
of minicomputer hardware and software. Also, 
the evolution of available construction manage- 
ment software programs has provided the con- 
struction manager with the specific scheduling, 
cost, time, and resource information necessary to 
plan, organize, direct, and control construction 
projects. 

GENERAL DESCRIPTION 

The basic minicomputer system consists of at 
least two keyboard video display terminals, a cen- 
tral processing unit (CPU), four hard disk car- 
tridge drivers, two floppy 8-inch diskette drives, 
a high speed dot matrix printer, and a slow speed 



5-23 



daisy wheel character printer. The CM-5 program 
is a menu-driven construction management 
minicomputer software program (fig. 5-29). The 
program is very "user friendly" because the user 
need not have any prior computer training or pro- 
gramming knowledge. This is made possible by 
the extensive use of screen menus which display 
on the terminal screen a list of options from which 
the user may choose. Each option has an assigned 
number or else requires a simple yes or no 
response. As a result, all the information that the 
user needs to make a decision is clearly shown on 
the terminal screen in simple English. 

Although it is always possible to make 
mistakes when entering information, the program 
is written so that most errors are detected by the 
program and the user is immediately informed 
that an error has been made. This prevents the 
user from typing in a set of erroneous numbers 
or letters that could create problems. If an error 
is made, the program has an edit feature that 
allows the user to easily correct the error. 

CM-5 FEATURES 

The CM-5 program handles all the critical path 
methods of netw r ork analysis in use by the NCF, 
including the arrow diagramming method (ADM) 
and the precedence diagramming method (PDM). 
The NCF, however, has chosen to use the PDM 



(Main Menu ) 

NETWORK TITLE = ADMINISTRATION BUILDING RR-89 

NETWORK IS NOT RANKED 
FUNCTIONS AVAILABLE: 



(1) INPUTS TO NETWORK 

(2) EDIT DATA ON NETWORK 

(3) PROCESS NETWORK 

(4) UPDATE WITH FIELD INFORMATION 

(5) DISPLAY DATA ON SCREEN 

(6) PRINT OUT REPORTS 

(7) REPRINT PREVIOUSLY STORED REPORTS 

(8) CREATE BACKUP OR TARGET FILE 

(9) PRINT INPUT FORMS 

(10) PRINT OUT CM-5 SYSTEM INFORMATION 

(0) END PROGRAM 



ENTER FUNCTION DESIRED 



87.335 



Figure 5-29. Main menu. 



for those projects that are planned and managed 
on the minicomputer because of its easier method 
of input and its greater flexibility in changing the 
network logic. As is commonly used with the 
PDM, the user can specify lag factors for any of 
the connectors and structure the network with 
multiple starts and finishes. 

The CM-5 program has a built-in 10-year 
calendar that is used to determine specific start 
and finish dates of activities once the project start 
date is specified by the user. The CM-5 program 
also takes into consideration an unlimited number 
of holidays or nonworkdays that the user may 
specify, and no activities are scheduled to occur 
on such dates. 

Besides being able to specify holidays and non- 
workdays, the user can also specify the normal 
workweek for each activity, whether it is a nor- 
mal workweek of Monday to Friday or a special 
workweek of Monday to Sunday, as in the case 
of a cure activity. 

The user can also specify milestones for each 
activity to allow the user to COMPARE actual 
progress against established milestones. For ex- 
ample, if the completion of a specific phase or 
part of a building represents a significant event 
in the completion of the project, the completion 
of that activity could be set up as a milestone. As 
a result, the project manager can see how actual 
progress is being made toward that milestone. 

A similar feature is the ability of the user to 
specify a specific date on, before, or after the date 
a particular activity must be started or finished. 
This is referred to as placing start and finish con- 
straints on activities as the result of a user-imposed 
constraint. For example, if a certain activity had 
to be finished by a certain date, the user could 
place a constraint on that activity so that when 
the network was processed, the activity would be 
scheduled to finish on that date. 

The program also allows the user to establish 
a list of available resources (called a resource 
library) that will be needed on the project. 

There is no limit to the number of activities 
the user can specify for a particular project. 
However, the number normally used for NCF 
projects seldom exceeds 150 activities. For each 
activity the user can specify a maximum of six dif- 
ferent resources. 

The CM-5 program also has a complete audit 
trail feature that records all changes (edits) and 
updates to the network data file. This feature is 
useful for keeping a written record if the network 
data file has to be re-created. 



5-24 



PROGRAM OPTIONS AND 
MENU DISPLAYS 

As previously discussed, the program consists 
of a full set of menus from which the user can 
easily select a numbered option that tells the pro- 
gram to perform a specific operation. The primary 
menu and the starting point for any session at the 
minicomputer is the main menu. The main menu 
is a list of the major program options available. 

Figure 5-29 shows the actual information or 
main menu that you will see on your computer 
screen. The main menu displays the project 
description, such as Administration Building 
RR-89. The status of the network is also shown 
and tells the user whether the network is Not 
Ranked, Not Processed, or Processed. The user 
has a choice of ten different options from which 
to choose. Below the list of options, the program 
displays a prompt that requests the user to select 
from the available options and enter the number 
that corresponds to the desired option. The op- 
tion is entered by typing in the number and 
depressing the RETURN key on the terminal. 

Depending upon what option is entered, the 
program will automatically take the user to the 
next screen that will display another menu from 
which the user must choose. 



Option 1: Inputs to Network 

The input option is the option through which 
the user enters specific project data into the 
minicomputer by the keyboard terminal. In order 
for the CM-5 program to completely perform its 
capabilities, the user must first input the follow- 
ing information: 

General Project Information 

Resources 

Activities 

Connectors (Logic) 

Milestones (Events) 

To make this procedure easier, the user should 
use the input sheets produced by option 9 
(discussed below) of the main menu. The input 
sheets show the specific information needed and 
places the information in the order it will be re- 
quested. 



Option 2: Edit Data on Network 

The CM-5 program allows the user to use the 
edit option to change or correct any item of in- 
formation in the network data file. Through this 
option, the user can have the program display on 
the screen any item of information desired and 
edit the item at any time. 

It is a common mistake for inexperienced users 
to confuse the edit option with the update 
option. The edit option is used to CHANGE or 
CORRECT information after input to make sure 
the information entered does not contain any 
mistakes. In simple terms, it helps the user pre- 
vent putting "garbage" into the minicomputer so 
"garbage" will not be produced later when the 
network is processed. 

When using the edit option, the user must be 
aware that some changes to certain items of in- 
formation will affect network status. As previously 
discussed, the network status will be either 
unranked, unprocessed (ranked), or processed. 
Since the ranking and processing procedures can 
be time consuming, the user should exercise care 
when using the edit option so the network status 
is not changed unnecessarily. 

Option 3: Process Network 

Once the user has input the required informa- 
tion and has performed any required edits to en- 
sure the information is correct, the next step is 
for the user to use the process option to have the 
CM-5 program perform the network calculations 
to determine the early and late activity dates, and 
free and total float. In short, the process option 
causes the CM-5 program to perform the forward 
and backward passes for the network. Besides 
determining the network schedule, the process op- 
tion also calculates the man-days and resource re- 
quirements for the project. 

The processing procedure, while faster than 
doing the calculations by hand, can take what may 
appear to the user as a long time. The length of 
time it takes to process the network is primarily 
a factor of the number of activities and the pro- 
ject duration. The average NCF project will pro- 
cess in less than 15 minutes. 

Option 4: Update with 
Field Information 

Once the network information has been input, 
edited, and processed, the user is ready to use the 
network to manage the particular project on 



5-25 



deployment. The update option is the manner by 
which* the user informs the minicomputer of the 
ACTUAL start and finish dates, man-days, and 
resource usage for each activity once on the 
deployment site. 

Actual project progress is entered in the up- 
date option to keep the plan up-to-date for each 
activity that was worked on before the update 
date. 

Once the user updates the network data file 
with the information for those activities that have 
been worked on, the CM-5 program will reprocess 
the network and provide the user with a new 
schedule that shows the effect of the actual ac- 
tivity information. For example, if the update 
shows an activity took longer than originally 
planned, then the starting dates and floats of all 
activities that follow will be changed to reflect the 
delay. 

The update option is the key to successful use 
of the CM-5 program. If the program is to be ef- 
fectively used to monitor and control the project 
on the deployment, the battalion must establish 
a uniform policy and procedure for updating the 
network data file with actual time, man-days, and 
resources usage date(s). 



Option 5: Display Data on Screen 

The display option allows the user to view 
specific network data on the terminal screen. By 
looking at the information on the terminal screen, 
the user is saved the time normally spent re- 
questing that a copy of the information be printed 
out on the printer. This saves a considerable 
amount of paper, as well as time. 

The range of items the user can view on the 
screen is indicated by the list of functions the user 
can choose from on the network display menu, 
shown in figure 5-29. 



Option 6: Print Out Reports 

The CM-5 program is capable of producing 
for the user a full set of printout reports. The user 
also has the capability to use activity attributes 
to select and sort specific items of information 
so the report contains only that information 
necessary for the project manager to make a 
decision. 



As in all cases where the user must input data, 
the CM-5 program also has a full set of menus 
the user can use to easily select and sort any one 
of the 25 reports that is available. The activity 
select and activity sort menus list the various 
activity attributes the user can use for structur- 
ing reports. 

As is true for all menus displayed by the CM-5 
program, the user need only enter the number that 
corresponds to the item of interest and depress 
the RETURN key. 



Option 7: Reprint Previously 
Stored Reports 

Option 7 allows the user to save (store) the list 
of commands that were used to select, sort, and 
print out a set of reports. This can speed up the 
process by which a set of reports is obtained. For 
example, on deployment the operations depart- 
ment may set up a series of reports it wants to 
print out at the end of each week. Instead of typ- 
ing in the list of select, sort, and report commands 
for the report option, the operations department 
can have the list of commands saved and use the 
reprint option. This would not only save time but 
would also ensure that the same series of reports 
in the desired format were made available each 
week. 

When this option is used, only one set of 
reports can be saved. Each time a series of 
select, sort, and report commands are saved, 
any previously saved list of commands is 
erased from the file and is unable to be used 
further. 



Option 8: Create Backup 
or Target File 

Option 8 allows the user to make a copy of 
the network data file for future use should the 
working file become damaged or destroyed. The 
working file is the file that is being regularly 
used to plan and manage a project. Also, this op- 
tion allows the user to make a target file 
for use during the deployment to compare 
the planned network against the actual net- 
work. A target file is a copy of the network data 
file that can be made at any time and used to 
compare the current schedule with the target 
schedule. 



5-26 






It is a good procedure to always make a 
backup copy of a working file whenever any 
changes are made to the working file. 

Option 9: Print Input Forms 

The CM-5 program allows the user to print 
out copies of each of the input forms that are 
used to list the information needed to establish 
a network data file. 

Option 10: Print Out CM-5 
System Information 

Option 10 is used to print out a form letter 
by which the user can inform the software 



developer, Structural Programming Inc., of any 
problems that may be encountered when the CM-5 
program is used. 



CHAPTER REFERENCES 

Facilities Planning Guide, NAVFAC P-437, Naval 
Facilities Engineering Command, Alexandria, 
Va. 22332, 1982. 

SEABEE Planner's and Estimator's Hand- 
book, NAVFAC P-405, Chapter 5, Naval 
Facilities Engineering Command, Alexandria, 
Va. 22332, October 1983. 



5-27 



' 1 . 







PRE-ASSEM8LE 
STEEL FRAM 


e 




3 


a SW 


II 



1 a | a 


[ 6 


a | 


17 


PREFAB FOOTG 
RST a CUT 
WWF 


a 


1 2 


INSTALL FTO 
RST AM) SLAB 
WWF 


4 


L_ 


2 


2 SW 


4 


11 4 


2 SW 


6 



START 




4 


2 







PREFAB 
FOOTING 
FORMS 


2 







2 BU 


2 




6 


PLACE CONCRT 
F/FTG ft SLAB 
2 PLACEMENTS 


8 


6 


4 8U 

a sw 


3 NS 
1 EO 


8 




NOTE = 



ACTIVITIES IN THE NETWORK ARE NUMBERED FROM LEFT TO RIGHT AND FROM TOP TO BOTTOM. 
WHEN ACTIVITIES ARE ADDED OR DELETED IN THE NETWORK IT WILL BE NECESSARY TO RECAL- 
CULATE THE "EARLY START AND EARLY FINISH TIMES THROUGH .THE NETWORK THE.N WORK 
BACK, MAKING THE REQUIRED ADJUSTMENTS TO THE LATE FINISH AND LATE START THIS 
ADJUSTMENT SHOULD BE MADE AT THE EARLIEST OPPORTUNITY, TO FACILITATE THE COMPUTER 
UPDATE. 




Fi 



CHAPTER 6 



ADVANCED BASE PLANNING, 
EMBARKATION, AND PROJECT TURNOVER 



Learning Objective: Identify the principles involved in the use of the 
Facilities Planning Guide; identify procedures used in preparing material and 
equipment for embarkation and for project turnover. 



This chapter discusses the principles of 
using the Facilities Planning Guide, which is 
an advanced base planning document. Guidelines 
are provided for a system of preparing ma- 
terial, equipment, and personnel for embarka- 
tion. Information is also presented on how 
you can best coordinate and supervise the 
turnover of the company's projects, material, and 
equipment. 

FACILITIES PLANNING GUIDE 

You should consult the Facilities Planning 
Guide (NAVFAC P-437) when tasked to assist in 
planning the construction of an advanced base. 
This document identifies the structures and 
supporting utilities of the Navy advanced base 
functional component (ABFC) system. It was 
developed to make preengineered facility designs 
and corresponding material lists available to 
planners at all levels. While these designs relate 
primarily to expected needs at advanced bases and 
to the Navy ABFC system, they can also be used 
to satisfy peacetime requirements. Facilities, 
logistic, and construction planners will each find 
the information required to select and document 
the material necessary to construct facilities. 

NAVFAC P-437 consists of two volumes. 
Volume I contains reproducible engineering 
drawings organized as follows: 

Part 1, Component Site Plans, indexed by 
component and ABFC designation. 

Part 2, Facility Drawings, indexed by facility 
number and DOD category code. 

Part 3, Assembly Drawings, containing 
assembly information and indexed by assembly 
number. 

Each drawing is a detailed construction 
drawing that describes and lists the facilities, 



assemblies, or line items required to com- 
plete it. A summary of logistic, construction, 
and cost data is provided for each component, 
facility, and assembly of the ABFC system. 
A component is defined as a grouping of 
personnel and material that has a specific 
function or mission at an advanced base. 
Whether located overseas or in CONUS, 
a component is supported by facilities and 
assemblies. 

Volume II of NAVFAC P-437 contains the 
detailed data display for each component, facility, 
and assembly. (Except for earthwork, material 
lists in volume II are complete bills of ma- 
terial.) It is also arranged in three parts. 

Part 1 lists and describes by DOD category 
code the facilities requirement for each 
component. 

Part 2 lists and describes by assembly number 
the assembly requirement for each facility. 

Part 3 lists line-item requirements by national 
stock number (NSN) for each assembly. 

The P-437 also contains other useful informa- 
tion for planners; for example, crew sizes, 
man-hours by skill, land areas, and the amounts 
of fuel necessary to make a component, facility, 
or assembly operational, and predesigned facilities 
and assemblies that are not directly related to 
components shown in the ABFC table (OPNAV 
P-41P3A). These predesigned facilities and 
assemblies give the planner alternatives for 
satisfying contingency requirements when callout 
of a complete component is not desired. To make 
the P-437 compatible with other DOD planning 
guides, Category Codes for Classifying Real 
Property of the Navy, NAVFAC P-72, is a related 
publication that establishes the category codes, 
nomenclature, and the required units of measure 
for identifying, classifying, and quantifying real 



6-1 



property. The cardinal category codes are as 
follows: 

100 Operations and Training 

200 Maintenance and Production 

300 Research, Development, and Evaluation 

400 Supply 

500 Hospital and Medical 

600 Administrative 

700 Housing and Community Support 

800 Utilities and Ground Improvement 

900 Real Estate 

If a facility is required for enlisted personnel 
quarters, for example, it will be found in the 700 
series (Housing and Community Support). The 
assemblies within each facility consist of a 
grouping of line items at the NSN level which, 
when assembled, will perform a specific function 
in support of the facility. An assembly is func- 
tionally grouped in such a way that the assembly 
number relates to the Occupational Field 13 skill 
required to install it. The groupings are numbered 
as follows: 

DESCRIPTION NUMBER SEQUENCE 

START STOP 

Builder (BU) oriented 10,000 19,999 

Utilitiesman (UT) oriented 20,000 29,999 

Construction Electrician 30,000 39,999 

(CE) oriented 

Steelworker (SW) oriented 40,000 49,999 

Equipment Operator (EO) 50,000 54,999 

oriented 

Waterfront equipment 55,000 57,999 

Underwater construction and 58,000 59,999 

diving equipment 

Operational supplies 60,000 62,499 

Operating consumables 62,500 64,999 

NBC warfare 65,000 67,499 

Personnel-related supplies 67,500 69,999 

Unassigned at present 70,000 79,999 

Shop equipment including 80,000 80,999 

maintenance tools 

Unique ABFC toolkits 81,000 81,999 

Naval Construction Force 82,000 82,099 

(NCF) Table of Allowance 
(TOA) construction tools 
and kits (power tools) 

NCF TOA construction tools 82,500 82,599 

and kits (electrical) 

NCF TOA construction tools 83,000 83,199 

and kits (miscellaneous) 



DESCRIPTION 

NCF TOA construction tools 
and kits (rigging) 

Shop equipment (ABFC 
unique) 



NUMBER SEQUENCE 
START 



84,000 
85,000 



87,499 



When you consider tailoring, it is important 
to realize that the ABFC system is based on a set 
of assumptions. This realization makes it possible 
to develop modular elements that can serve similar 
functions in various locations. The exact require- 
ments for a specific base cannot be defined, 
economically designed, nor supported within the 
general system. However, the base development 
planner knows the specific location, mission, unit 
composition, and availability of other assets. The 
planner can then select from the ABFC system 
the components or facilities that satisfy these re- 
quirements. Tailoring is then applied to the 
preplanned ABFC assets to come up with what 
is needed. 

Components or facilities can be tailored by 

(1) deleting or adding facilities or assemblies and 

(2) specifying requirements for tropical or north- 
ern temperate zones. Assemblies required only in 
tropical installations are coded with the letter T 
in the zone column to the right of the assembly 
description. Assemblies required only in northern 
temperate installations are coded with the letter 
N. Uncoded assemblies are common to both 
zones. 

USE AND APPLICATION OF THE 
FACILITIES PLANNING GUIDE 

Although a listing in the P-437 may help you 
order individual items in general supply, it does 
not replace stock lists of systems commands or 
bureaus, offices, single managers, or inventory 
control points. Stock numbers and descriptions 
can be verified through appropriate stock lists. 
However, you verify them automatically in order- 
ing a component, facility, or assembly. 

A representative sample of component types 
displayed in volume II shows the structure and 
kind of information provided. Figure 6-1 shows 
a P-25 component, Naval Mobile Construction 
Battalion. You can see that a component contains 
a list of facilities by category code. From this list 
select a facility, such as diesel storage and dispens- 
ing facility, 200,000-gallon, facility 123-10F. Lo- 
cate this facility in part 2 of volume II. Figure 6-2 



6-2 







COMPONENT PZS 




















NAVAL MOBILE CONS IKUC ! I ON BAIIAL10N 
PROVIDES PERSONNEL. AOMINISTRATION , SUBSISTANCE 


EdUIPMENT.AND MINIMAL HOUSING REQUIRED FOR THE 
MOBILIZATION OF ONE MOBILE CONSTRUCTION BATTALION. 




















SITE PLAN 6027643 


FACILITY 


MAJOR REV 
QTY COMPONENT KEIGHT 


11 12 76 
CUBE 


DDL 


LAR CONST EFFORT 


FACILITY 
\Z3 10A 


DESCRIPTION 
MOGAS STORAGE-DISPENSING FACILITY 


CAPACITY 
1 OL 


CAPACITY SHORf TON 
1 OL 5.4 


MEAS TON 

23.5 


VA 
48 


LUE MANHOURS 
.832 208 


llj 
143 
? 14 


10F 
4SE 

20N 


DIESEL STOR-OSPNSG FACIL 200000 GAL 
ARMORY SEMITRAILER 
A CO AUTO VEHICLE SHOP 


1 OL 
210 SF 
4000 SF 


1 
210 
4000 


OL 
SF 
SF 


8 

7 

5 


.7 

.6 

. 1 


35.9 
82. 

11. 


<6 
14 
23 


.106 
.061 
.450 


484 

175 
156 


Sir 

218 

Z19 


10A 
20A 
10J 


KEAPONS REPAIR SEMITRAILER 
A COMPANY CONSTRUCTION EQUIP SHOP 
B C AND COMPANY SHOPS MINIMAL 


210 SF 

4000 SF 
5873 SF 


210 
4000 
5872 


SF 
SF 
SF 


4 

5 
3 


.5 

. 1 
.4 


>6. 

11. 
12. 


12 
23 
29 


.475 
.257 
.163 


46 

136 
92 


!l* 
441 
530 


10M 
10S 
10B 


CENTRAL TOOL ROOM (MINIMUM) 
WAREHOUSE GENERAL STORAGE MIN 
MEDICAL/FIRST AID INITIAL 


4000 SF 
4000 SF 
936 SF 


4000 
12000 
1872 


SF 
SF 
SF 


1 
3 

5 


. > 
.9 
8 


5. 
12. 
12. 


16 
24 

8 


,631 
.910 
.345 


46 
120 
110 


Sir 

B10 
810 


10J 
10PS 

10V _ 


DEHtAL CLtNIC SEMI-TRAILER MOUNTED 
SPECIAL SERVICES/POST OFFICE 
OFFICE ADMINISTRATIVE MINIMAL 


2 OU 
936 SF 
936 SF 


2 
938 
1 9300 


OU 
3F 
SF 


16 
6 


.1 

.6 
.0 


104. 
2. 
5. 


93 
3 

31 


.197 
.173 
.727 


17 
33 

200 


Jii 

722 

7 *J 


10AH 
10BH 
60BX 


GALLEY MESS tltlD K/CNTNR REFR-FRZR 
BAKERY PLANT FIELD PORTABLE 
EXCHANGE-BARBER SHOP 


800 MN 
1500 MN 
936 SF 


800 
1500 
936 


MN 
MN 
SF 


62 

2 


.8 

.9 
.6 


7. 
6. 
2. 


237 

4 
3 


.143 
.238 

. 173 


1.027 
61 
20 


723 

7zs 

725 


1A 
10V 
10* 


SHOWER TRAILER 24-SHOVER HEAD GEO 

TROOP HSG EMERG K/OUT WASHROOMS 
TROOP HSG EME-RG W/0 SMOKERS ENLIST 


1 EA 
3744 SF 
8424 SF 


6 
7488 

50544 


EA 
SF 
SF 


13 
8 

60 


.8 

.2 
.6 


42. 
28. 

201. 


94 
27 
185 


.800 
.119 
.554 


102 
3ZO 
2.424 


Tis 

730 

111 


10YO 
40H 
10AU 


QUARTERS F/AlR OET 
LAUNDRY TRAILER-MOUNTED 
ELECTRIC POWER PLANT DIESEL 2-200KK 


5632 SF 
280 SF 

400 KK 


5632 
2BO 
400 


SF 

SF 
KK 


4 
9 
11 


.5 
.9 
.9 


17. 
55. i 


3d 
92 

111 


.372 
.721 
.911 


88 

40 
106 


(12 

131 
841 


30PC 
30A 
10M 


ELECtRlCAL DISTRIBUTION LIME-EXPEO 
LEACH FIELD 
KATER TREATMENT FACILITY 1SOO GPH 


2000 LF 
1 EA 
30 KG 


2000 
3 
60 


LF 
EA 
KG 


30 
1 
11 


.8 
.2 

.0 


s! 

19. 


222 
1 
33 


.253 
.561 
.625 


2.270 
396 
82 


(41 
842 

851 


40E 
1DJ 
10B 


KATER DISTRIBUTION LINE POTABLE 
ROAD UNSTABILIZEO K/ORAINAGE 


30000 GA 
7640 LF 
33066 SY 


60000 
7640 
33066 


GA 
LF 
SY 


6 

15 

4 


.0 
. 1 
.9 


10. 
27. 
14. 


32 

41 
. 6 


.660 
.450 
.142 


134 
480 
777 


(72 
(72 


10B 
ZOO 


SECURITY FENCING 
BUNKER COMMAND POST 


1980 LF 
1 EA 


7920 
3 


LF 
EA 


29 
36 


.2 
.9 


68. 
44. 


30 
17 


.315 
.6(1 


4.216 
2.652 








TOTAL 
TOTAL 


NORTH (TEMPERATE) 
TROPICAL fBASICl 




378 
365 


.2 
.4 


1.279.7 1 
1.238.5 1 


.582 
,500 


.045 
.341 


17.018 
16.658 






COMPONENT P25 




















CONST LAPSED LAND POKER KVA WATER 
STO DAYS ACRES CONNECTED DEMAND GPD 


SEKER 
GPD 


OSL 


FUEL GAL/30DAYS 
HEATING PKR 
MOGAS 


GEN 
DSL 










IMIT 150.0 


360 


244 40.363 


33.960 


65.820 


2.864 1 


.340 










11 


BU 
2.457 


UT CE 
1.724 2.197 


SK 
457 




4 


EO CM 
041 




NS 
5.961 







87.336 



Figure 6-1. Component. 





























FACILITY 123 10F PLANNING FACTOR NA 
DIESEL OIL STORAGE AND DISPENSING 200000 GAL 












NAVFAC ORAKING NUMBER NETWORK 




MAJOR REV. 03 11 


77 




ASSEMBLY 


DESCRIPTION ZONE QTY. 


KEIGHT 
POUNDS 


CUBIC 
FEET 


DOLLAR 
VALUE 


CONST EFFORT 
MANHOURS 


2000Z 
20124 


TANK FUEL PILLOW 50000 GAL 
HOSE MANF F/200000 GAL TANK ARR 


7.698.4 
642.2 


547.2 
55.8 


51.124.44 
1.954 . 19 


352 
2 


26204 
20305 
0307 


FUEL TRANSFER ASSEMBLY 350 GPM 
FUEL DISPENSING ASSY PORTABLE 
NOZZLE DISPENSING STAND 


3.774.9 
1.619. 1 
177.8 


470.3 
53.2 
23.9 


13.670.99 
6.457 .53 
788.30 


44 
36 
8 


0506 


FUEL FILTER AND METER ASSY 600 GPM 
SHORT TON MEAS TON 


3.478.8 


284.3 


12. 110.31 


42 




TOTAL NORTH (TEMPERATE) 8.7 35.9 
TOTAL TROPICAL fBASIC] 8.7 35.9 


17.391 2 
17.391.2 


1.434.7 
1.434.7 


86.105.76 
86. 105.76 


484 
4(4 




FACILITY 123 10F PRIMARY UNIT OF MEASURE 


1 OL 


SECONDARY UNIT OF 


MEASURE 


350 CM 




CONST LAPSED LAND POKER KVA 
STO DAYS ACRES CONNECTED DEMAND VOLTS 


PHASE GPO 


GPM 


GPD CODE 






TEMP 6 1.28 17 8 208 
FUEL (GAL/300AYS1 


3 





A 






HEATING PKR GEN S K 
OSL MOGAS OSL EA BU 


ILLS MA 
UT 


N H U R S 
CE SK 


EO 


CM NS 




490 88 


108 


20 


324 


16 















87.337 



Figure 6-2. Facility. 

6-3 



shows this facility. Note that within the facility, 
the necessary assemblies required to perform 
the defined function are identified. Figure 6-3 
depicts an assembly within facility 123-1 OF. 
Within assembly 20002 (titled 50,000-gallon pillow 
fuel tank), line items by NSN required to make 
the assembly operative are displayed. 

Certain installed equipment and collateral 
equipment, furniture, and fixtures contributed by 
others are not furnished with the facilities or the 
assemblies listed in the P-437. They must be re- 
quested separately. The assembly listings indicate 
what is installed or what NAVFAC collateral 
equipment is provided. 

ADVANCED BASE 
FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS 

ABFCs are normally complete entities. 
However, housing, messing, medical facilities, 
maintenance facilities, defensive ordnance, 
communication equipment, and utilities may not 
be supplied with each component and are 
themselves service components or facilities to be 
integrated into an overall base development or 
augmentation plan. ABFCs are assigned descrip- 
tive names to indicate their functions and 
alphanumeric designators to facilitate reference. 
A detailed advanced base initial outfitting list 



(ABIOL) is an itemized line-item printout of the 
material in each ABFC. Each systems command 
or bureau is responsible for maintaining a detailed 
listing of that part of the ABIOL assigned to it. 

EMBARKATION 

A Navy Mobile Construction Battalion 
(NMCB), an Amphibious Construction Battalion 
(PHIBCB), a Construction Battalion Maintenance 
Unit (CBMU), or any other unit of the Naval 
Construction Force (NCF) must be ready to 
deploy or redeploy by sea, air, or land to 
complete an assigned mission. To meet the 
requirements for contingency support of the naval 
task force and the Fleet Marine Force, PHIBCBs 
and CBMUs must be able to redeploy within 3 
and 6 days respectively. After 30 days in home 
port, other NCF units should be able to redeploy 
within 10 days. While en route to or from a 
deployment site, the units must be prepared for 
immediate diversion to emergency, contingency, 
or mobilization assignments. While deployed, 
NMCBs should be able to redeploy within 
6 days. 

Embarkation planning and preparation of 
personnel, supplies, and equipment for embarka- 
tion to conduct an amphibious operation or air 
movement are expensive in terms of time and 



- 


ASSEMBLY 20002 ZONE 


20002 


TANK FUEL PILLOV 50000 GAL 


NAVFAC DRAWING NUMBER 6002614 MAJOR REVISION 


DATE 03 23 73 










COG 


STOCK NUMBER 


DESCRIPTION 




UI 


HEIGHT 
QTY POUNDS 


CUBIC 
FEET 


DOLLAR 
VALUE 


ac 

9C 


4710-00-273-1041 
n_0.-OQ-?.-944> 


PIPE CULV NESTABLE 16 GA AL 12N X 
PIPE STL BI STO XT 2N NPT 


2FT 


EA 
FT 


4 26 
20 75 


.40 

no 


2. 1600 
.7800 


51 
25 


04 
60 


ac 
ac 


4720-00-978-8887 
4730-00-088-0393 
? 


HOSE ASSY RBR FUEL-XFR 4N X 10 FT FEM X MALE QD1SC 
REDUCER QUICK DISCONNECT CAM-LOCKING TYPE 4N 
FENAUE X 6N MALE 


EA 
EA 


3 171 
1 10 


.00 
.00 


7.5000 
.3000 


628 
95 


74 
72 

31 


9C 

c 


4730-00-018-9286 
4/30-00-1?6-2079 


COUPLING HALF QOISC CAM-LOCKING TYPE FEMALE X 
INTERNAL PIPE THREAD 4N 
NIPPLE PP STL BI 4 It 4N NPT 


EA 
EA 


2 16 
1 3 


.00 

. 15 
.00 
.00 

(is 


.4000 
.0600 


9C 
? 


4820-00-4(9-7125 
5330-00-199-450.9 


REDUCER. QOISC. CAM-LOCKING TYPE.6N FEMALEX4N MALE 
VALVE GATE OIK-OPNG BRS 2N NPT 
GASKET-COUPLING HALF ODISC CAM-LOCKING TYPE 4N 


EA 
EA 
EA 


1 12 

1 11 


."4000 
.2000 
0102 


64 47 
74.69 

TiTTWTW"" 


2C 


1 
1 


TANK. FABRIC. COLLAPSIBLE. 50000 GAL. FUEL STORAGE 
NYLON CLOTH. MATERIAL IMPREGNATED AND COATED 
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE KITH POLYURETHANE . S.67FT HIGH 


EA 


1.600 


.00 


125.0000 


1 8iH LONG. 24H VIDE FILLED ~~ " 
ASSEMBLY 20002 


TOTAL 1 924 


.61 


136 8102 


12 781 


11 


FUEL (GAL/300AYS) 

.. . - - -. H ATIH-G_ PR_GEN SKILLS 


NANHOURS 






CONST EFFORT 











3 05L EA BU UT 
00 2 2 


CE S* * ' * 
_0 


EO 
81 


CM NS 
3 




MANHOURS 










NOTE - CREK SIZE: 2 EA. 1 UT . 4 


EO. 3 CN 















87.338 



Figure 6-3. Assembly. 
6-4 



manpower. However, the efficiency of embarka- 
tion is usually directly proportional to the time 
and effort spent in developing the plan and 
preparing for its execution. A well-developed plan 
usually will reduce time and effort required for 
embarkation and ensure that the embarkation is 
orderly, efficient, and effective. 

Staff officers responsible for embarkation 
must ensure that embarkation is executed on 
schedule in accordance with the time table that 
has been established by their command or higher 
authority. Before the embarkation, for example, 
the medical officer should see that personnel have 
had their inoculations. Also, the dental officer 
should place a hold on personnel who need pro- 
longed dental treatment that would limit their 
combat readiness. The personnel officer should 
ensure that the Record of Emergency Data, 
NAVPERS 601-2, and other records are current. 

Although not part of an embarkation staff, 
you are involved in the embarkation of your 
company. Your tasks include making sure that all 
projects are shut down, tools are cleaned and 
turned into the central toolroom, materials are 
secured on the site or turned into the material 
liaison office (MLO), and that the project sites 
are cleaned and secured. These tasks are carried 
out whether the embarkation is a training exercise 
or an actual movement. Afterward you should 
direct your efforts to the embarkation itself. In- 
structions will come from the embarkation staff's 
office. The embarkation staff relies on the 
Tactical Embarkation Manual, as developed by 
the Commander, Construction Battalions, 
Atlantic (COMCBLANT) and the Commander, 
Construction Battalions, Pacific (COMCBPAC). 
This manual is also available to you. 

Each company or department that is shipping 
material should designate one officer or petty 
officer to act as its embarkation representative. 
The representative's duties include the following: 

1 . Keeping the NMCB and team embarkation 
officers informed of shipping requirements 

2. Ensuring that mount-out box construction, 
color coding, and numbering are in accordance 
with established directives 

3. Ensuring that each box, pallet, or skid 
required for mount-out is available; new boxes 
are constructed for additional gear as received 

4. Ensuring that packing lists are current and 
accurate; that new packing lists are prepared for 
additional gear as received 

5. Making available box covers and hardware 
to attach them to their boxes 



6. Ensuring that unit cargo manifests are 
maintained, reviewed quarterly, and forwarded 
to the embarkation officer 



MOUNT-OUT CONTROL CENTER 

The mount-out control center (MOCC), also 
known as the embarkation control center, con- 
trols, coordinates, and monitors the movement 
of all personnel, supplies, and equipment to the 
embarkation staging area. The MOCC usually has 
authority to establish traffic control, issue 
movement orders to units concerned, and control 
transportation used in the embarkation mount- 
out. The MOCC coordinates and schedules the 
movement of personnel, supplies, and all related 
equipment from storage areas or warehouses, or 
from the unit's base camp area to the staging area 
for embarkation. Within the NMCB, the MOCC, 
with the embarkation staff, controls all aspects 
of an NMCB mount-out and serves as the coordi- 
nating center for all the companies and all the 
staff section heads. 

Within the NMCB, the executive officer, as 
chief staff officer, directs the operation of the 
MOCC. The MOCC may be located in an office 
or conference room that is provided with adequate 
telephone and other communications and has 
suitable space for displays of the progress of the 
mount-out. The executive officer must have a 
small staff of personnel trained to handle the com- 
munications and to plot the status of the critical 
items in the embarkation checkoff listings of the 
principal staff officers and companies. 

The MOCC functions as the nerve center dur- 
ing an embarkation. It is absolutely essential that 
the status of all actions be forwarded to the 
MOCC on a continuous and timely basis. The 
MOCC must be informed of all decisions that are 
made so all personnel with a need to know receive 
the information. 

A preplanned checkoff list of the embarka- 
tion responsibilities of each key staff member in 
the NMCB forms the basis for reporting to the 
MOCC and the display of status information. 
Each of the items on this listing should be reported 
when due, and additional information that has 
an impact on other parts of the organization must 
also be reported. Any uncertainty regarding the 
need to report an item to the MOCC should be 
resolved in favor of reporting; it is impossible to 
have the MOCC too well informed. 

Embarkation/MOCC files must be set up and 
kept current in anticipation of an embarkation, 



6-5 



whether scheduled or unscheduled for the NMCB 
either by surface or air movements. The embarka- 
tion staff is responsible for keeping the MOCC 
files current with all the necessary information on 
embarkation. 

The actual loading of vessels or aircraft is the 
responsibility of the embarkation officer and the 
combat cargo officer or loadmaster of the ship 
or aircraft or their designated representatives. The 
MOCC must be kept informed as to the progress 
of loading by the embarkation staff so the 
embarkation/MOCC can file the required reports 
to higher authority. 

EMBARKATION REPORTS, 
RECORDS, AND FILES 

Upon the completion of any embarkation 
mount-out, a completion report is sent to 
COMCBLANT or COMCBPAC as soon as 
possible under the existing circumstances. The 



completion report should include, but not be 
limited to, the complete corrected load plan, 
problems encountered during the embarkation, 
and suggested remedial steps. 

When an embarkation exercise is conducted 
at the direction of the Naval Construction Regi- 
ment (NCR), COMCBLANT, or COMCBPAC, 
a detailed exercise completion report should be 
submitted within 30 days after the completion of 
the exercise. The report should contain (but is not 
limited to) the following: 

1. Load plan as submitted to the assigned 
ship 

2. Load plan as actually loaded 

3. Summary of problems encountered with 
recommended corrections in procedures 

4. Exercise improvement suggestions 

5. Report of support received during the 
embarkation exercise by all concerned 



LOADING STATUS REPORTS 

Embarkation team commanders should submit the following message reports to the embarkation 
group commander for each ship being loaded or unloaded, with an information copy to the embarka- 
tion unit commander, the homeport NCR, and COMCBLANT and/or COMCBPAC. 

1. India Report 

An India report is the initial report submitted upon commencement of loading or unloading. 
The text format is as follows: 

Name of Ship: 



Charlie Tango: Time Loading/Unloading Commenced 

2. Foxtrot Report 

A Foxtrot report will be sent upon completion of loading or unloading. The text format is as 
follows: 

Name of Ship: 

Foxtrot Tango: Actual time of completion of loading/unloading. 

3. Romeo Report 

Two types of progress reports will be submitted by embarkation commanders. Romeo Alfa will 
be submitted only when directed and as of 0600, 1400, and 2200 daily. Romeo Bravo will be 
submitted as occurring when significant events cause excessive delay to the loading/unloading. 
The text format for the two reports is as follows: 

a. Romeo Alfa Report 

November: Name of Ship 

Papa: Percent Personnel Embarked/Debarked 

Victor: Percent Vehicles Loaded/Unloaded 

Tango: Estimated Time of Completion of Loading/Unloading 



6-6 



b. Romeo Bravo Report 

State exactly the event causing the delay in loading/unloading. 
4. Sierra Reports 

Sierra reports will be classified in accordance with the degree of security required but 
NOT lower than CONFIDENTIAL. They will be submitted in all instances of embarka- 
tion in amphibious/Military Sealift Command (MSC) ships for contingency deployments. 
These reports are not required for embarkation exercises. The reports will be of two 
types: 

a. Sierra Alfa Report 

This report will be a consolidation of all the supplies embarked by the embarkation group 
or the embarkation unit. NMCBs need not submit the Sierra Alfa report. 

b. Sierra Bravo Report 

Each embarkation team commander will submit this report by message upon the 
completion of loading in the following format: 

Paragraph One: Name of operation/exercise; Date/Time Group (DTG) ship commenced 
loading; DTG ship completed loading. 

Paragraph Two: Names of all units and detachments embarked, indicating the officer and 
enlisted strengths of each. Navy and Marine totals will be listed separately. 

Paragraph Three: List the number of crew-served weapons, by type. 
Paragraph Four: The number by type of wheeled and tracked vehicles. 
Paragraph Five: The number and type of aircraft, if assigned. 

Paragraph Six: The number by type of all other combat-essential major items of 
equipment. 

Paragraph Seven: Total square feet of vehicles and equipment. 
EXAMPLE 

FROM: CO TROOPS, USS CANDO COUNTY 

TO: CO FMFLANT 

COMCBLANT 
COMPHIBLANT 
20TH NCR 
CG 2ND MAW 

CLASSIFICATION 
INITIAL SIERRA BRAVO REPORT 
1. EXLANTBEE 6-69. CHARLIE TANGO 120727Z FOXTROT TANGO 122215Z. 



6-7 



2 NMCB-88 USN 18/522 USMC 0/1 

CO A, NMCB 93 USN 1/97 

DET 2ND CA TEAM USA 4/10 

CO B, 8TH ENGR USMC 4/230 

3. 4/106RR 
14/M60 MG 
5/3.5 RL 
4/81 MM MT 

4. 14/M51 
6/M106A1 
14/M100 

6/TD 24 W/PCU 
8/MRS 200 
8/SCRAPER 18 CY 
5/MOTOR GRADER 

5. NONE 

6. I/ASPHALT PLANT 

7. 11351 SQ. FT. 

Changes to this report will be submitted using the reporting by exception principle, reporting only 
those items that change or are originally reported in error. 

Loading reports submitted during an exercise must contain the exercise code name at the beginning 
and the end of the text and must be classified according to the content of the information 
submitted. 



EMBARKATION/MOCC RECORDS 
AND FILES 

An MOCC is established within each unit to 
coordinate the movements of the battalion 
during the embarkation phase. 

Within the embarkation office, the unit main- 
tains as a minimum the following files. 

1 . Packing lists for all company/departmen- 
tal and battalion gear required for or taken on 
an actual mount-out. (These lists should be in 
sufficient detail to enable personnel to rapidly 
identify the contents of the box and the company/ 
department to which it belongs. The packing 
list may be in the form of the unit cargo manifest, 
if desired.) 

2. A current unit personnel and tonnage table 
with all supporting unit cargo manifests or 
packing lists. 

3. A current weapons summary listing all 
weapons currently assigned. 



4. A current personnel, supplies, and equip- 
ment report with appropriate notations to show 
the current status of the equipment to embark. 
(These forms encompass all vehicles and supplies 
assigned. If the unit is deployed to the Pacific 
area, or to the Atlantic area, these forms should 
show the vehicles assigned at the location. If the 
unit is deployed at the home port, one form is 
required for a full battalion allowance of equip- 
ment.) 

5. Template files will be prepared for each 
vehicle in the P-25 allowance. (When the unit is 
deployed in the Atlantic Command (LANTCOM) 
or the Pacific Command (PACOM), the vehicle 
registration numbers will be added for the equip- 
ment assigned. Other data to be filled in on 
the card is specified in chapter 3 of COMCBPAC/ 
COMCBLANT Tactical Embarkation Manual.) 

6. Each unit will maintain a training file of 
ship's loading characteristics pamphlets (SLCPs). 
(COMCBLANT or COMCBPAC will supply a 
representative set of SLCPs to each new battalion. 
Also, each battalion holding an Atlantic or a 



6-8 



Pacific Fleet contingency designation will be 
issued additional SLCPs for training and review 
purposes. These SLCPs will be used to train 
embarkation personnel in the drafting of load 
plans, and will be maintained within the embarka- 
tion office. COMCBLANT or COMCBPAC will 
forward changes to SLCPs as they become 
available.) 



PROJECT TURNOVER 

About 2 weeks before an NMCB completes 
its deployment, the advance party of the reb'eving 
battalion is sent to the deployment site to 
arrange for the arrival of the main body of the 
battalion and to turn over projects, material, and 
equipment. As a member of the advance party, 
you will participate in the onsite proceedings 
which consist of taking inventory of the camp, 
supplies, material, and equipment to determine 
shortages or surpluses. 

The inventories of camp, supplies, and 
material are conducted by members of both 
battalions. The items inventoried include 
administrative and operational machines and 
consumables, weapons and infantry equipment, 
toolkits and toolroom supplies, special clothing 
and bedding, NBC defensive devices, equipment 
and materials for communications, medical and 
dental services supplies and equipment, damage 
control and safety material, photography and 
barber supplies, camp facility collateral equipment 
and supplies, galley and messing equipment, 
provisions, and camp support-related equipment. 

The equipment inventory, better known as the 
battalion equipment evaluation program (BEEP), 
is conducted by assigned personnel of ALFA 
company representing both battalions. It is a 
uniform procedure for evaluating and accounting 
for all equipment, attachments, collateral 
equipage, maintenance records, and correspond- 
ence. 

Your part in a deployment and project 
turnover is important. It is best to learn, or find 
out as much as you can, about your projects. You 
must get information about the status of the 
projects and project materials required. Find out 
whether all materials have been received by 
supply. If so, are they at the project site or in the 
Material Liaison Office (MLO) yard? 



You must have all the information that relates 
to the amount of work in place. This includes 
materials expended as well as man-hours. Obtain 
all updated drawings and specifications for the 
project, including as-built drawings. Also, find 
out whether there are problems to solve. If so, 
what has to be done to solve them? 

Make as many contacts as you can with 
persons who are not attached directly to the 
battalion; for example, public works shop leaders 
and supply personnel. Remember, those you are 
relieving may have had a good working relation- 
ship with others who can help you in turning over 
the project. 

You should remember that the relieving 
process is a very busy time with many details to 
cover. It is important that you determine as 
early as possible the role that you are to play and 
become as familiar as you can with your area of 
responsibility. In this way, both you and your 
counterpart will get the most out of the limited 
time available to complete your tasks. 

In the event of mount-out for contingency 
operations, the project turnover may not be to 
a battalion. Higher authority such as the Naval 
Construction Regiment (NCR) and public works 
designates custodial responsibility for equipment 
and project materials. 



CHAPTER REFERENCES 

Category Codes for Classifying Real Property of 
the Navy, NAVFAC P-72, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, Alexandria, Va. 
22332, March 1980. 

Facilities Planning Guide, NAVFAC P-437, 
Volume II, Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, Alexandria, Va. 22332, October 
1980. 

Tactical Embarkation Manual, CBLANT/ 
CBPAC Instruction 3120.1, March 1983, 
Department of the Navy, Commander Naval 
Construction Battalions Pacific Fleet, Pearl 
Harbor, Hawaii 96860 and Commander Naval 
Construction Battalions Atlantic Fleet, Naval 
Amphibious Base, Little Creek, Norfolk, Va. 
23521. 



6-9 



CHAPTER 7 



PLANNING PLUMBING PROJECTS 



Learning Objective: To analyze plans, specifications, and taskings used in 
developing and supervising projects involving plumbing installations. 



As a UT1 or UTC, you will be responsible for 
planning the needs of plumbing projects. Chapter 
5 of this manual discussed the general considera- 
tions of planning, estimating, and scheduling 
projects. This chapter will discuss the special 
considerations you will encounter when planning 
plumbing installations. 



RESPONSIBILITIES 

In today's Naval Construction Force, you will 
find the Utilitiesman more involved with the 
planning and scheduling of projects than in the 
past. You may be the technical advisor during 
both the planning and execution of a project. You 
will also find yourself supervising crews in the 
field, where you will be held responsible for 
following a schedule that resulted from the 
planning of the project. Remember, ALL THE 
PLANNING IN THE WORLD IS NOT 
WORTH THE PAPER IT'S WRITTEN ON 
UNLESS PROPERLY EXECUTED IN THE 
FIELD. 

TECHNICAL ADVISOR 

As an expert in your field, your company, 
operations department, and crew will expect you 
to have the answers to their questions about 
plumbing (mechanical) jobs. Your having ready 
access to job plans and specifications as well as 
plumbing codes, technical references, and 
manufacturers' manuals will be important in pro- 
viding the answers to their questions. You are not 
expected to have a complete knowledge of every 
detail of your rating. You can be an effective 
technical advisor by knowing where to get answers 
to questions. Use your resources. 



Many problems will require you to make a 
judgment decision based on personal experience. 
Do not rely on rate training manuals and A 
schools to provide you with everything you need 
to know to be a Utilitiesman. The extra effort of 
self-study combined with on-the-job training and 
field experience will enable you to make recom- 
mendations with confidence. 

PLANNER 

Now that you are advising people on the 
technical aspects of installing and maintaining 
plumbing systems, you may become involved in 
the planning of these tasks. 

Planning takes on many applications and 
phases. Chapter 5 covers the preconstruction 
planning used today and how to keep the plan 
up-to-date during construction. This homeport 
planning results in a schedule that you will use 
in considering how and when your work is going 
to be done. The resulting precedence diagram 
along with other available information about a 
project will help you in managing and supervising 
your project. 

SUPERVISOR 

Your company will follow the construction 
schedule that was prepared during the homeport 
period. After your arrival at the deployment site, 
you may need to make changes to the schedule 
to show actual conditions on the job such as 
changes in personnel, equipment availability, or 
material delays. Being flexible is the most 
important thing to remember about a schedule. 
The schedule is designed to be a management tool 
that aids the supervisor. Used in this manner, it 
will alert you to problems and job requirements 
in enough time to eliminate delays in the project. 



7-1 



It is your responsibility to coordinate your 
requirements with other companies and depart- 
ments. For example, determine material, equip- 
ment, and personnel requirements about 30 days 
in advance at the company level, 2 weeks in 
advance at the job supervisor level, and no less 
than 1 week in advance at the crew level. This will 
give supporting elements of the organization the 
necessary time to break out, deliver, and provide 
support to your job. The project you are work- 
ing on will determine how much lead time 
planning you should allow. 

During homeport planning it is not always 
easy to know the actual conditions on a construc- 
tion site. After being on the site a while, you may 
want to reevaluate the original schedule. It is 
generally accepted that, within 45 days of the 
crews' arriving on the job, changes can be made 
to the schedule. It is during this period that you 
will see whether your crews will be able to finish 
all tasks as scheduled. It is possible that you did 
not allow enough time for the job or you may 
have overestimated it. 

Good supervision should consider all required 
needs for the project. Coordination of the sup- 
porting elements of the construction or 
maintenance effort is essential. You must have 
equipment, material, tools, and other facilities on 
the job when they are needed. A missing item 
usually requires an extra trip back to camp, 
decreasing your credibility as a supervisor and 
affecting crew production and morale. 

You put a lot of effort into your schedule. 
Supervision is the prime mover of that schedule. 
Job delays, rework, and unsafe working condi- 
tions will result without proper supervision of the 
schedule. 



PLANNING, ESTIMATING, AND 
SIZING PLUMBING SYSTEMS 

The planning, estimating, and sizing of 
plumbing systems includes sanitary, storm 
drainage, and water supply systems. As a UT1 or 
UTC, you will provide input to the construction 
or maintenance of these systems. This input can 
be in the form of installation techniques, types 
of material required, quantity and size of piping 
or fittings, and so forth. This section provides 
some general considerations you must take into 
account when you plan and estimate a plumbing 
system. The National Standard Plumbing Code, 
military specifications, and job specifications pro- 
vide more concise information. 



SANITARY SYSTEMS 

Sanitary drainage systems are built of various 
types of pipe and fittings. Cast iron and gal- 
vanized steel are the pipe materials most often 
used. However, the materials that may be per- 
mitted will depend upon the location where they 
are to be installed (for instance, above the ground 
within buildings, under the ground within 
buildings, or under the ground outside buildings). 

Aboveground piping within buildings consists 
of one or a combination of brass or copper pipe, 
copper tubing, extra heavy or service weight cast 
iron, galvanized wrought iron, galvanized steel, 
or lead. In single- or two-family dwellings, plastic 
pipe is acceptable for aboveground use. 

Underground piping within buildings should 
be of cast iron. Service weight is used for buildings 
four stories and under. Extra heavy weight is re- 
quired for buildings over four stories. The proper 
authority, however, may permit the use of other 
piping, such as galvanized steel, lead, or copper. 
Where threaded joints are used underground, they 
should be coated with coal tar and wrapped when 
installed. 

Underground piping outside of buildings 
should be installed in a separate trench from the 
water-service pipe. The following materials may 
be used: vitrified clay, cast iron, plastic, concrete, 
asbestos cement, or bituminized fiber. The 
underground water-service and the building drain 
or building sewer should not be less than 6 feet 
apart horizontally and should be separated by un- 
disturbed or compacted earth. Where separate 
systems of sanitary drainage and storm building 
drains are installed, they may be laid side by side 
in one trench. A building sewer or building drain 
installed in fill or unstable ground should be of 
cast-iron pipe, except that nonmetallic drains may 
be used if laid on an approved continuous sup- 
porting system. Existing building sewers and 
drains may be used in connection with new 
buildings' sewer and drainage systems only if they 
meet the requirements of the new systems. All 
joints should be watertight to prevent leakage of 
sewer water into the ground and infiltration of 
subsurface water into the sewer system. Special 
attention should be given the joints to prevent 
roots from growing into the sewer piping. The 
depth of the piping should be enough to protect 
the sewer from freezing. Also, the lines must be 
protected from traffic. It may be necessary to pro- 
vide special protection, such as encasing the pip- 
ing in concrete, where the traffic loads are 
heavy. 



7-2 



It may be necessary, at times, to install the 
building sewer and the water-service pipe in the 
same trench. (See fig. 7-1.) If so, make sure the 
following precautions are observed. 

1 . See that the bottom of the water pipe is at 
least 12 inches above the top of the building sewer. 

2. Place the water pipe on a solid shelf at the 
side of the trench. 



///Mtt/UU 



BOTTOM OF WATER 
MAIN 




TOP OF SEWER 



87.25 

Figure 7-1. Building sewer and water-service line in same 
trench. 



3. Use hot-poured lead in making joints in 
cast-iron pipe for the building sewer; use a hot- 
poured compound in joining bell-and-spigot clay 
or concrete sewer pipe. 

4. After installation, test the building sewer 
with not less than a 10-foot head of water, or an 
equivalent test. 

Grading 

Horizontal piping in the sanitary drainage 
system should be installed at a uniform slope. This 
slope, pitch, grade, or drop per foot will deter- 
mine the flow velocity of the liquid within the 
pipe. Piping of 3 inches or less in diameter requires 
a slope of not less than 1/4 inch per foot. In 
house or building plumbing, pipe larger than 
3 inches in diameter requires a slope of not 
less than 1/8 inch per foot. This allows a velocity 
of not less than 2 feet per second, which will 
provide the scouring action necessary to keep a 
pipe free from fouling. Sewer mains may have 
slopes of less than 1/8 inch per foot, pro- 
viding that a cleaning velocity of 2 feet per 
second or greater is obtained. (See table 7-1.) 



Table 7-1. Approximate Discharge Rates and Velocities in Sloping Drains 



Aciual inside 
diameter of 
pipe (inches) 


l/16-in./ft slope 


l/8-in./ft slope 


l/4-in./ft slope 


l/2-in./ft slope 


Discharge 
gpm 3 


Velocity 
fps 4 


Discharge 
gpm 


Velocity 
fps 


Discharge 
gpm 


Velocity 
fps 


Discharge 
gpm 


Velocity 
fps 


1 1/4 














3.40 


1.78 


1 3/8 














4.44 


1.90 


1 1/2 










3.13 


1.34 


5.53 


2.01 


1 5/8 










4.81 


1.50 


6.80 


2.12 


^ 










8.42 


1.72 


11.9 


2.43 


21/2 






10.8 


1.41 


15.3 


1.99 


21.6 


2.82 


3 






17.6 


1.59 


24.8 


2.25 


35.1 


3.19 


4 


26.7 


1.36 


37.8 


1.93 


53.4 


2.73 


75.5 


3.86 


5 


48.3 


1.58 


68.3 


2.23 


96.6 


3.16 


137.0 


4.47 


6 


78.5 


1.78 


111.0 


2.52 


157.0 


3.57 


222.0 


5.04 


8 


170.0 


2.17 


240.0 


3.07 


340.0 


4.34 


480.0 


6.13 


10 


308.0 


2.52 


436.0 


3.56 


616.0 


5.04 


872.0 


7.12 


12 


500.0 


2.83 


707.0 


4.01 


999.0 


5.67 


1413.0 


8.02 



Flowing Half Full , half full means filled to a depth equal to one-half of the inside diameter. 
Discharge Rate and Velocity, computed from the Manning Formula for 1/2-full pipe, n = 0.015 



I or 1/4 full: multiply discharge by .274 
multiply velocity by .701 

For 3/4 full: multiply discharge by 1.82 
multiply velocity by 1.13 



Gallons per minute 



Feet per second. 



For full: multiply discharge by 2.00 
multiply velocity by 1.00 

For smoother pipe: multiply discharge and veiuatj 

by 0.015 and divide by "n" value 
of smoother pipe. 



7-3 



Higher velocities, or greater drop per foot, 
will increase the carrying capacity of a 
drain. When designing fixture branches, keep 
in mind that a slope/drop of more than 
1/4 inch per foot may cause siphonage of the trap 
seal. 



Sizing Building Drains 

The building drain in a sanitary system 
must be of sufficient size to carry off all 
the water and waste materials that may be dis- 
charged into it at any one time. The minimum 
allowable size is 3 inches for cast-iron pipe, 
but sound practice prescribes a 4-inch pipe, 
and most plumbing codes or ordinances require 
4-inch pipe as a minimum. Increasing the size 
beyond that computed as required (the minimum 
of 3 inches still applies) does not increase 
the efficiency of the drain. The passage of 
liquid and solid waste through a horizontal 
pipe creates a natural scouring action, which 
is partially lost when the size of the drain 
is increased above the necessary size. The 
flow in too large a pipe is shallow and 
slow, and solids tend to settle to the bottom. 
The solids may accumulate to such an extent 
that they cause stoppages in the line. The 
optimum size of pipe should flow half full 
under normal use. This will create an effi- 
cient natural scouring action and still allow 
capacity for peak loads. 

The standard method used in determining 
the size of a building drain is the Unit 
System. Drainage fixture unit system values 
for standard plumbing fixtures have been 
established and some of the most common are 
shown in table 7-2. Use the trap size listing 
at the bottom of table 7-2 for estimating 
drainage fixture unit (d.f.u.) values for fixtures 
that are not listed. 

To select the correct size of pipe for a 
horizontal sanitary drainage system, you must 
first calculate the total volume of liquid 
waste, expressed in drainage fixture units, that 
the system will be subjected to. Assume, for 
example, that a plumbing installation is to 
consist of 20 water closets, valve-operated; 
22 lavatories with 1 1/4-inch traps; 15 shower 
heads in group showers; 20 wall urinals; 
2 service sinks with standard traps; and 4 
floor drains (2-inch). The total discharge, 



Table 7-2. Drainage Fixture Unit Values for Various 
Plumbing Fixtures 



Type of Fixture or Group of Fixtures 



Automatic clothes washer (2 "standpipe) 
Bathroom group consisting of a water 
closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower 
stall: 

Flushometer valve closet 
Tank-type closet 
Bathtub (with or without overhead 

shower) 1 1/2 "trap 
Bidet 1 1/2 "trap 
Clinic sink 
Combination sink-and-tray with food waste 

grinder 1 1/2 "trap 
Combination sink-and-tray with one 11/2" 

trap 
Combination sink-and-tray with separate 

1 1/2 "traps 
Dental unit or cuspidor 
Dental lavatory 
Drinking fountain 
Dishwasher, domestic 
Floor drains with 2 "waste 
Kitchen sink, domestic, with one 1 1/2 " 

trap 
Kitchen sink, domestic, with food waste 

grinder 

Lavatory with 1 1/4 "waste 
Laundry tray (1 or 2 compartments) 
Shower stall, domestic 2 "trap 
Showers (group) per head 
Sinks: 
Surgeon's 

Flushing rim (with valve) 
Service (trap standard) 
Service (P trap) 
Pot, scullery, etc. 

Urinal, pedestal, siphon jet blowout 
Urinal, stall lip 
Urinal stall, washout 
Urinal trough (each 6-foot section) 
Wash sink (circular or multiple) each set 

of faucets 

Water closet, tank-operated 
Water closet, valve-operated 
Fixtures not listed above: 

Trap Size 1 1/4 "or less 
Trap Size 1 1/2" 
Trap Size 2 " 
Trap Size 2 1/2 " 
Trap Size 3 " 
Trap Size 4 " 



Drainage 
Fixture 

Unit 
Values 



3 
1 

1 

1/2 
2 
3 



2 
1 
2 
2 
2 

3 
6 
3 
2 

4 
6 
4 
4 
2 

2 
4 
6 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 



7-4 



expressed in drainage fixture units, would be 
calculated as follows from table 7-2. 



Number and Type Unit Total 
of Fixtures Values Discharge 


20 water closets (flush 
valve) 


6 


120 


22 lavatories (1 1/4-inch 
traps) 


1 


22 


15 shower heads 


2 


30 


20 urinals (wall) 


4 


80 


2 sinks (service) 


3 


6 


4 floor drains (2-inch) 


3 


12 






270 d.f.u. 



After calculating the total discharge and deter- 
mining the slope of the piping and the velocity 
of flow, select the correct size of pipe by using 
table 7-3 . Assume that the cast-iron house drain 
to be installed will have a slope of 1/4 inch per 
foot. From table 7-3, the minimum size pipe for 
the horizontal sanitary drainage system under 
discussion is 5 inches. 



Table 7-3 is for cast-iron soil pipe or gal- 
vanized steel pipe house drains, house sewers, and 
waste and soil branches. When copper tubing is 
used, it may be one size smaller than shown in 
the table. Note that the size of building drainage 
lines must never decrease in the direction of flow. 

When provision is made for the future installa- 
tion of fixtures, those provided for must be con- 
sidered in determining the required sizes of 
drainpipes. Construction to provide for such 
future installation should have a plugged fitting 
or fittings at the stack to eliminate any dead ends. 

Sizing Stacks and Branches 

The term stack is used for the vertical line of 
soil or waste piping into which the soil or waste 
branches carry the discharge from fixtures to the 
house drain. A waste stack carries liquid wastes 
that do not contain human excrement; a. soil stack 
carries liquid wastes that do. 

Most buildings do not have separate soil and 
waste stacks. A single stack known as the soil and 
waste stack, or simply the soil stack, serves to 
carry both soil and waste material. Soil stacks are 
usually made of cast-iron pipe with caulked joints. 
They may, however, be made of other materials 



Table 7-3. Maximum Loads for Horizontal Drains 





Horizontal 


Building Drain or Building Sewer 


Diameter of 


Fixture 


Slope 


Drain 


Branch 


1/16-in/ft 


1/8-in/ft 


1/4 -in/ft 


1/2-in/ft 


(inches) 


(d.f.u) 1 


(d.f.u.) 


(d.f.u.) 


(d.f.u.) 


(d.f.u.) 


11/4 


1 










1 1/2 


3 










2 


6 








26 


21/2 


12 






24 


31 


3 


322 




363 


422 


502 


4 


160 




180 


216 


250 


5 


360 




390 


480 


575 


6 


620 




700 


840 


1000 


8 


1400 


1400 


1600 


1920 


2300 


10 


2500 


2500 


2900 


3500 


4200 


12 


3900 


3900 


4600 


5600 


6700 


15 


7000 


7000 


8300 


10000 


12000 



Drainage fixture unit. 



riot 



more than two water closets or two bathroom groups. 
than 2 feet per second. 



7-5 



such as galvanized steel or copper tubing. 
Branches are usually either threaded galvanized 
steel pipe with drainage (recessed) fittings or 
copper tubing. 

Sizing the Stack 

The stack is sized in the same way as the 
building sewer. The maximum discharge of the 
plumbing installation is calculated in drainage 
fixture units. This figure is applied to table 7-4 
or table 7-5 to obtain the proper stack size. 

Continuing our example, the 270 drainage fix- 
ture units would require a 5-inch stack, if the stack 
had less than three branch intervals. (No soil or 
waste stack should be smaller than the largest 
horizontal branch connected, except that a 4 x 3 
water closet connection should not be considered 
as a reduction in pipe size.) 

Offsets on Drainage Piping 

An offset above the highest horizontal branch 
is an offset in the stack vent and should be con- 
sidered only as it affects the developed length of 
the vent. 

An offset in a vertical stack with a change in 
direction of 45 degrees or less from the vertical 



Table 7-4. Maximum Loads for Soil and Waste Stacks 
Having Not More Than Three Branch Intervals 





Maximum Load 


Diameter of Stack 


On Any One 


On Stack 




Branch Interval 




(inches) 


(d.f.u) 1 


(d.f.u.) 


11/4 


1 


2 


11/2 


2 


4 


2 


4 


9 


21/2 


8 


18 


3 


202 


482 


4 


100 


240 


5 


225 


540 


6 


385 


930 


8 


875 


2100 



1 Drainage fixture unit. 

2Not more than two water closets or bathroom 
groups within each branch interval nor more 
than six water closets or bathroom groups on 
the stack. 



piping may be sized as a straight vertical stack. 
In piping where a horizontal branch connects to 
the stack within 2 feet above or below the offset, 
a relief vent should be installed. 

A stack with an offset of more than 45 degrees 
from the vertical should be sized as follows: 

1 . The portion of the stack above the offset 
should be sized for a regular stack, based on the 
total number of drainage fixture units above the 
offset. 

2. The offset should be sized as for the 
building drain. See table 7-3. 

3 . The portion of the stack below the offset 
should be sized as for the offset, or based on the 
total number of drainage fixture units of the 
entire stack, whichever is larger. A relief vent 
should be installed for the offset. Never connect 
a horizontal branch or fixture to the stack within 
2 feet above or below the offset. 



Sizing Individual Waste Lines 

The water closet, strictly speaking, has no 
waste. It is usually connected directly into the 
stack on a short as possible separate branch of 
its own by the use of a closet bend. The closet 
bend is 3 or 4 inches in diameter if made of cast 
iron or steel and 3 inches if made of copper. 

Because lavatories are used for washing hair, 
loose hair is often carried down into the waste 
pipe, causing a stoppage. Lavatory drainage is 
improved by using a minimum number of fittings 
and by eliminating long horizontal runs. The 
minimum pipe size for lavatory wastes is 1 1/4 
inches, but 11/2 inches is more satisfactory. 

Urinals present a particular problem because 
cigarette butts, cigar stubs, chewing gum, 
matches, and so on are often discarded in them. 
These materials can easily cause a stoppage. For 
this reason, urinals should be equipped with an 
effective strainer. Size of waste pipe should be at 
least 1 1/2 inches for wall-mounted urinals and 
3 inches for the pedestal siphon jet urinal. 

Shower wastes seldom cause trouble since they 
have a relatively clear water waste flowing through 
them. The usual diameter of the waste pipe for 
a single shower is 2 inches if made of cast iron 
or steel and 1 1/2 inches if made of copper. 

A domestic kitchen sink requires a 1 1/2-inch 
cast-iron or steel waste pipe. When a sink is 
equipped with a garbage disposal unit, a minimum 
of 2 inches is required for the cast-iron or steel 
drainage piping. 



7-6 



ffl 



1 

oc 



A 


73 

e 



73 
OS 

o 









3 


o 
o 
oo 


o 
o 


o 

10 


o 

10 


O 

O 


o 


o 


ca 


d 


01 


CO 


^ 


^ 


s 




on any 


one 
interval 


3 
d 


o 
oo 

CN 


o 

CO 

VO 


IO 


VO 


o 
co" 








3 




O O 
O vo 
Tf- <O 


o 

00 


o 




o 


o 
oo 

CO 




O 


2 

t 


d 


r-i CN 


IO 


O 

. I 


VO 


00 
CN 




on any 


13 

> 

1 


3 

d 


10 10 

IO 00 

i-H CN 


o 


>o 


o 


O 

co" 




r 


^ 


3 


o o 

CO CO 



CN 


o 

VO 
CO 




o 
vo 


o 







S 


d 


-i CN 


VO 


ON 


2 


CN 




on any 


| 


3 

d 



r ON 

.-( CN 


10 
VO 

VO 


O 

r- 


<o 

co 



OO 
CN 




c 


^ 


3 


o 

ca o 

r-f IO CN O 


r- 


c^ 


s 


s 




o 


1 


d 


"t CN 


"* 


oo 


!I! 


CN 




on any 


"c3 

c s3 

.s 


3 
t.-! 

d 


f> 

ca " 


S 


1 


1 


CO 






^ 


3 


CJ CS 

oo vo o O O 
** O OO 


o 


o 


o 

!>- 


O 
O 




o 


C3 
S 


T3 


1 < 


"* 


^ 


- 


CN 




>> 




.S 


3 

d 


"2gg2 


r- 


CN 


o\ 


vq 
CO 




c 
o 


U 

2 


3 

d 


ca 


ro 





o" 


CO 

oo" 




c 
o 


o 1 
.5 


3 

d 


a 

i CO 


r- 


CO 


o 
CN" 


CO 




c 
o 





3 

d 


m CN 1 o O o 
ro oo TJ- 


O 


o 
i/o" 



r-^ 
oo" 


o 




on any 


o 

c <u 

.S 


3 
t 
d 


CN CO 


(^- 


1 


s 


CO 


Diameter 


of stack 


^ 

<u 
o 


.S 


ON CO Tf IO VO 


00 


o 


CN 


IO 











U 










o o 










O 00 




C " 


3 




O CN^ 




o 2 


tit ~* 




VO t 


VO 




o 




CN Tj- 




>> * 

s g S 


3 




O VO 
CN vo 




.s 


-d 




--T CN" 










o o 




hj 


( 




o o 




c u 


3 




OO vo 




o 2 


tw 




^r ^jT 




CO 


d 




CN rf 


10 










T < 


1 






o to 




cQ c o 


3 




IO C 




c c 
o .5 


d 




T CN" 










o o to 




.^ 


t 




^H r- , 




C " 


3 




CO ^S" d 




O C3 


<<-j 




10 co" CN" 




S/3 


d 




^H CN rf 




> s? 

c (u i 

C3 q 53 

c o *iz 


3 




^3 
O O O 

c- r^ o 

o vq O 




o .5 


d 




-H" -H" CO 








O 

o 


O O O 






t 


o 


r vo ON 




c o 


3 


vq 


O ON^ CO^ 




o 2 


d 


^ 


ri-" T-H" ON" 
< CN CO 


CO 










11 


-g 




^ 






g S 

.s 


3 

d 


IO 

oo 

10 


O O O 
OO ON co 
O vo O 

r* ~ CO 








o 


O O O 




y 




IO 


o o o 




c o 


3 


CO 


r4 IO C^* 




O rt 


( 


f_r 


CO O vo 




"K 


d 




-H CN CO 


CN 












1 gl 

.S 


3 

d 


o 
vo 


IO *O O 

ON O VO 

o r~ o 
" ^ co" 








o 
o o 


O O 




^ 




O ro 


O CN VO 




c u 


3 


ON CO 


CN O < < 




o 2 


'n 


CN VO 


CN ON *tt* 




c/5 


d 




rt r-( CO 


1 ' 


>> ca 










8 S 


3 


10 O 
vo CN 


000 
^H CO O 




.s 


d 


CN VO 


^" ^-T co 


5 


3 ? 








1 


(/3 Q 

o ^ 


S CN C^ ^ 


f IO VO CO 


O CN to 



_ > 

1 



o 



7-7 



There are two styles of service sinks (slop 
sinks): the trap-to-wall and the trap-to-floor. They 
are used for disposal of wash water, filling swab 
buckets, and washing out swabs. The trap-to-wall 
type requires a 2-inch or 3-inch waste pipe; the 
trap-to-floor, a 3-inch waste pipe. For both types, 
if copper tubing is used, a one size reduction is 
allowed. 

Scullery sinks are large sheet metal sinks used 
for washing large pots and pans and for general 
scouring purposes. The large amount of grease 
that usually passes through a scullery sink makes 
a 2-inch waste pipe necessary. 

Drinking fountains carry only clear water 
wastes and a 1 1/4-inch waste pipe is suitable. An 
indirect drain (covered later in this chapter) should 
be used. 

Sizing Sanitary Collecting Sewers 

The design and sizing of collecting sewers, the 
subtrunks, and the main trunk lines are provided 
by engineers. However, the UT should understand 
the factors that contribute to the design and the 
requirements that must be met. 

While the unit system is used to size the 
building sanitary piping and the building drain, 
the sewage quantities used in sewer design 
normally are computed on a contributing 
population basis. The population to be used in 
design depends upon the type of area that the 
sewer is to serve. If the area is strictly residential, 
the design population is based on full occupancy 
of all quarters served. If the area is industrial, 
the design population is the greatest number 
employed in the area at any time. There are ex- 
ceptions to the general rule that sewers must be 
designed on a population basis. Among these ex- 
ceptions are laundry sewers and industrial-waste 
sewers. The per capita contribution for sewer 
design varies. Typical values are 100 gallons per 
person per day for permanent residents and 30 
gallons per person in the industrial area per 8-hour 
period. 

The sizing of the sewer includes the average 
rate and the extreme (peak) rate of flow (which 
occurs occasionally). The ratio of the peak rate 
of flow to the average rate of flow may vary with 
the area served, because the larger the area or the 
greater the number of persons served, the greater 
the tendency for flow to average out. Typical peak 
flows might range from 6 for small areas down 
to 1.5 for larger areas. 

An allowance for infiltration of subsurface 
water is added to the peak flow to obtain the 



design flow. A typical infiltration allowance is 500 
gallons per inch of pipe diameter, per mile of 
sewer per day. 

Additional capacity to provide for population 
increase is usually included for areas that are likely 
to continue to develop. Provision of approxi- 
mately 25 percent additional capacity over the 
initial requirements is advisable. 

Each length of pipe from one manhole to the 
next is sized to carry the design flow. However, 
to help prevent clogging and to facilitate 
maintenance, a minimum size is usually specified 
which may be larger than is necessary to carry the 
design flow at the upper ends of the system. 
Typical minimum sizes are 6-inch pipe for house 
and industrial-waste sewers and 8-inch pipe for 
all other sewers. 

It is sometimes the practice to select a pipe size 
that will carry the design flow when the pipe is 
half full, thus allowing for expansion. More often, 
however, sufficient safety factors in the future 
population estimate and the peak flow factor are 
included so the pipe may be designed to carry the 
design flow when flowing full. 

The formulas or tables used in sizing the pipe 
are based on experiments and experience. One of 
the factors taken into account is the roughness 
of the pipe. Asbestos-cement pipe, for example, 
is smoother than concrete pipe. Because there is 
less friction on the inside of the asbestos-cement 
pipe, it will carry a greater flow than concrete pipe 
of the same size. 

Another factor is the slope at which the pipe 
will be laid. The slope will generally be determined 
by the fall available on the natural ground area 
through which the sewer runs. The plans for 
collecting sewer systems generally show slope (or 
grade) in terms of fall per hundred feet. Slope is 
sometimes expressed as a percent rather than in 
inches per foot. A 1 percent slope means 1 foot 
of fall in a 100-foot length of pipe, or about 1/8 
inch per foot. A 0.5 percent slope (6 inches in 100 
feet) is about 1/16 inch per foot. 

Table 7-6 gives the minimum slope for some 
of the most commonly used pipe sizes. The slope 
should remain constant in the section between 
each manhole. Each section between successive 
manholes should be analyzed and the slope for 
that particular section determined. If the fall is 
relatively steep, the velocity of the flow is faster 
and a smaller pipe size may be used. If the slope 
is relatively flat, the velocity is slower and a larger 
pipe size may be used. In the larger pipe, the depth 
of flow may decrease to such extent that the 
velocity might be no greater than a smaller pipe 



7-8 



Table 7-6. Minimum Slope for Sewer Pipe 



Inside pipe diameter 
(inches) 


Minimum fall (ft per 
100 ft) 


6 


0.6 


8 


0.4 


10 


0.3 


12 


0.24 


18 


0.14 



on the same grade. Therefore, an increase in pipe 
size to obtain the desired flow velocity is limited 
by the rate of flow. Typical minimum flow 
velocities are 2 feet per second when the design 
flow fills the pipe and 1.6 feet per second at the 
average rate of flow. Maximum velocities must 
also be considered; too high a velocity will erode 
the pipe. A typical maximum velocity is 15 feet 
per second for concrete pipe. Because of the 
differences in available slopes, smaller pipe may 
be used in some sections than is required in an 
upper section of the same sewer. The pipe size 
should be reduced whenever better flow condi- 
tions would result. 

Manholes provide access to sewers for inspec- 
tion and cleaning. They are placed where there 
is a change in grade, a change in pipe size, a junc- 
tion of two or more sewer lines, or a change in 
direction. Otherwise, they are placed at intervals 
of 300 or 500 feet of sewerline. The manholes 
should be built so there is no decrease in velocity 
and a minimum of water disturbance. The channel 
should be deep enough to prevent sewage from 
spreading over the manhole bottom. The covers 
should be of a weight strong enough to support 
the expected traffic. Perforated covers should not 
be used for sanitary sewer manholes, because 
openings in the sewer manhole would permit the 
entrance of sand, grit, and surface water. The 
sewers are ventilated by the stacks of the building 
plumbing systems. 

STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 

Storm drainage systems are designed to drain 
all surface and sometimes subsurface water that 
may cause damage to Navy facilities, property, 
or adjoining land. They consist of pipe, inlets, 
catch basins, and other drainage structures to 
carry the surface runoff and subsurface water to 
a point of disposal. 



Storm drainage systems should be separate 
from sanitary sewage systems wherever possible. 
Some Navy bases may have combination systems 
still in use. However, storm water should never 
be drained into sewers intended for sanitary 
sewage only. 

EOs and BUs generally are responsible for 
building ditches, culverts, and other structures 
that are a part of storm sewers. Therefore, con- 
struction of these facilities is not covered in this 
chapter. 

The UT is generally concerned with only the 
pipework itself. This involves laying storm drain 
lines both inside and outside buildings and other 
structures. This pipe material may be the same 
as that used for the sanitary system. Storm sewer 
systems, however, may include pipe of much 
larger sizes than are needed for sanitary sewers. 
Plain or reinforced concrete pipe (rather than clay, 
cast iron, or asbestos cement) is generally used 
for the larger lines. Also, it is not so important 
that the joints be watertight in storm sewer 
systems. In fact, the mortar is sometimes 
omitted from a portion of the joint and washed 
gravel is placed next to the opening; the storm 
drain thus serves also as an underdrain to pick 
up subsurface water. 



Installation Considerations 

Storm and sanitary systems may differ in the 
installation of the piping. Building storm drains 
should generally be graded at least 1/4 inch per 
foot whenever feasible. This amount of drop per 
foot provides an unobstructed and self-scouring 
flow. However, a greater drop per foot may be 
given as no fixture traps which might lose their 
seals are associated with it. 

When a change of direction is necessary, long 
radius fittings are used and a cleanout need not 
be installed. This is especially true in and under 
buildings. But a manhole is used outside of 
buildings when a change of direction is necessary, 
or when two or more lines are connected together. 



Sizing Building Storm Drains 

To determine the size of building storm drains, 
a number of factors must be considered, such as 
rainfall intensity, roof size, and pitch of roof. 
Tables have been made for use in estimating the 



7-9 



size of pipe to select. One example is table 7-7; 
it shows storm drain sizes. Remember that this 
table is to be used only as a guide when estimating 
for storm drainage, as different areas have 
different intensities of rainstorms. 

Another method for sizing building storm 
drains is to provide 1 square inch of pipe cross- 
sectional area for each 100 square feet of roof 
area. This method is easy to remember: 1 square 
inch for 100 square feet. (However, it is not as 
accurate as using table 7-7.) Using this method, 
you can prepare a table similar to table 7-8. Show 
the diameter in the first column; then the radius 
(which is one-half the diameter); then the square 
of the radius; then the cross-sectional area, which 
is pi (3.14) times the radius squared. Since each 
square inch may take 100 square feet of roof, 
move the decimal of the square inches over two 
places to the left (which is multiplying by 100) to 
get the area of the roof that may be drained to 
the pipe. As you can see by comparing table 7-7 
with table 7-8, the second method is much more 
conservative. 

Sizing Site Storm Sewers 

While rules of thumb such as those just 
described are used to size building storm drains, 
different procedures are used to size the storm 
sewers that carry the runoff from the building site 
and surrounding land areas. The design and 



sizing of storm drains are provided by engineers. 
It is not necessary that the UT understand the 
factors that contribute to the design. Therefore, 
the information is not included here. 

WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS 

After the pipe runs and fittings are located on 
a print or drawing, the size, quantity, and 
joining requirements of the pipe must be deter- 
mined. When a plumbing print is available for the 
job, it will contain this information. If there is 
no blueprint, you must determine these require- 
ments yourself. The quantity of pipe required and 
the number and types of fittings you intend to use 



Table 7-8. Fixture Demand 



Fixture 


Units" 


Gallons per minute 


Water closet 


6 


45 


Urinal 


5 


39 1/2 


Slop sink 


3 


22 1/2 


Shower 


2 


15 


Laundry tray 


2 


15 


Bathtub 


2 


15 


Kitchen sink 


2 


15 


Lavatory 


1 


7 1/2 



1 unit = 71/2 gallons per minute 



Table 7-7. Size of Horizontal Building Storm Drains and Building Storm Sewers 



Diameter 
of Drain 
(inches) 


Maximum Projected Area for Drains of Various Slopes 


1/8-Inch Slope 


1/4-Inch Slope 


1/2-Inch Slope 


Square Feet 


gpm 


Square Feet 


gpm 


Square Feet 


gpm 


3 


822 


34 


1,160 


48 


1,644 


68 


4 


1,880 


78 


2,650 


110 


3,760 


156 


5 


3,340 


139 


4,720 


196 


6,680 


278 


6 


5,350 


222 


7,550 


314 


10,700 


445 


8 


11,500 


478 


16,300 


677 


23,000 


956 


10 


20,700 


860 


29,200 


1,214 


41,400 


1,721 


12 


33,300 


1,384 


47,000 


1,953 


66,600 


2,768 


15 


59,500 


2,473 


84,000 


3,491 


119,000 


4,946 



7-7 is based upon a maximum rate of rainfall of 4 inches per hour for a 5 minute duration and a 10 year return period. 
Where maximum rates are more or less than 4 inches per hour, the figures for drainage area shall be adjusted by multiplying by 
four and dividing by the local rate in inches per hour. 

2 
Gallons per minute. 



7-10 



are easily determined by tracing the layout of the 
water supply system as drawn in a print or sketch. 
Determining the size pipe you will require to meet 
the fixture demand of a facility is more com- 
plicated and will be discussed in this section. 

Sizing Cold-Water Supply Systems 

Some factors that affect the size of the water 
service in a plumbing system are the types of flush 
device used on the fixtures, the pressure of the 
water supply in pounds per square inch (psi), the 
length of the pipe in the building, the number and 
kind of fixtures installed, and the number of fix- 
tures used at any given time. The stream of water 
in a pipe is made up of a series of layers moving 
at different speeds with the center layer moving 
the fastest. The resistance to flow is called pipe 
friction and causes a drop in pressure of the water 
flowing through the pipe. Friction loss may be 
overcome by supplying water at greater pressure 
than would normally be required or by increasing 
the size of the pipe. 

The two most important things to consider are 
the maximum fixture demand and the factor of 
simultaneous fixture use. The maximum fixture 
demand in gallons is the total amount of water 
that would be needed to supply all fixtures if they 
were being used at the same time for 1 minute. 
Since it is very unlikely that all fixtures would be 
turned on at the same time, a probable percentage 
of the fixtures in use at any given time must be 
found. This is the factor of simultaneous use. The 
more fixtures in a building, the smaller the 
possibility that all will be used at the same time. 
Therefore, simultaneous use factors decrease as 
the number of fixtures increase. 

To estimate the maximum fixture demand in 
gallons, the number and type of all fixtures in the 
completed plumbing system must be known. 
Table 7-8 is used to obtain the maximum fixture 
demand. For example, assume a plumbing system 
consists of three urinals, two water closets, one 
slop sink, two shower stalls, one kitchen sink, one 
laundry tray, and four lavatories. From table 7-8 
a maximum fixture demand of 321 gallons per 
minute (gpm) can be figured. Normally only a 
small percentage of fixtures would be used at the 
same time, so the maximum fixture demand is 
reduced by applying the factor of simultaneous 
use. 

The factor of simultaneous use, also called the 
probable demand, is only an estimate. Table 7-9 
gives data for making an estimate of probable 
demand. When using this table, take the actual 



number of fixtures installed, not the fixture unit 
value. For example, five fixtures would have a 
probable demand of about 50 percent, while 45 
fixtures would have a probable demand of about 
25 percent. When a table showing the factors of 
simultaneous use is not available, a practical way 
of figuring the probable demand is 30 percent of 
the maximum fixture demand in gallons. 

Many factors affect the flow of water through 
pipes resulting in a loss of water pressure. Dif- 
ficult calculations are required to consider all the 
factors involved that may cause a loss of water 
pressure. These calculations are beyond the range 
of this manual. For simple systems, approximate 
figures are acceptable for most plumbing 
installations. 

Table 7-10 (for galvanized iron pipe) and table 
7-11 (for copper tubing) may be used with the 
maximum fixture demand and the factor of 
simultaneous use to find the correct size of pipe 
for water-service lines. The minimum practical 
size for a water-service line is 3/4 inch. This size 
should be used even when calculations show that 
a smaller size could be used. 

To continue the example above, the 14 fixtures 
would have a factor of simultaneous use of about 
35 percent. Since the maximum fixture demand 
was 321 gpm, the water-service line must have a 
capacity of 35 percent of 321, or 1 12 gpm. Assum- 
ing a length of pipe 60 feet long and a pressure 
at the main of 40 psi, table 7-10 or 7-11 shows 
that either a 1 1/2-inch galvanized iron or a 1 
1/2-inch copper tubing water-service line would 
be large enough for the example fixture demand. 

Sizing Hot-Water Supply Systems 

The hot-water system is that part of the 
plumbing installation that heats water and 
distributes it to various fixtures. There are many 
ways of heating the water, but whichever is used 
must be able to supply maximum demand. The 
materials used in hot-water systems are similar to 
those used in cold-water supply systems. The use 



Table 7-9. Factors of Simultaneous Use 



No. of fixtures 


Percent of 
simultaneous use 


i _4 


<0-100 


<_5fl 


75-Sft 


*\ 1 r\r mrtrp ________ __________ 


10-95 







7-11 



Table 7-10.-Capacities of Pipe in Gallons Per Minute (Galvanized Iron) 

a. 3/8 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


?,00 


10 


5 


3 


3 


2 


2 


2 













20 


9 


5 


4 


3 


3 


3 


2 


2 


2 


? 


30 


10 


6 


5 


4 


4 


3 


3 


3 


3 


2 


40 


._-.. 


8 


6 


5 


4 


4 


4 


3 


3 


3 


50 




9 


7 


6 


5 


4 


4 


3 


3 


3 


60 





9 


7 


6 


6 


5 


5 


4 


4 


4 


70 





10 


8 


7 


6 


6 


5 


5 


4 


4 


80 


.... 





8 


7 


7 


6 


5 


5 


5 


4 



b. 1/2 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


10 


8 


5 


5 


4 


3 


3 


3 


3 


1 


20 


14 


10 


8 


6 


6 


5 


5 


4 


4 


4 


30 


18 


12 


10 


8 


8 


7 


6 


6 


5 


5 


40 


20 


14 


11 


10 


10 


8 


7 


7 


6 


6 


50 





16 


13 


11 


11 


9 


8 


7 


7 


7 


60 


.... 


18 


14 


12 


12 


10 


9 


9 


8 


7 


70 








15 


13 


12 


11 


10 


9 


8 


8 


80 







































c. 3/4 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 








Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


?00 


10 


22 


14 


12 


10 


8 


8 


7 


6 


6 


6 


20 


30 


22 


18 


14 


12 


12 


11 


10 


10 


8 


30 


38 


26 


22 


18 


16 


14 


13 


12 


12 


10 


40 





30 


24 


21 


19 


17 


16 


16 


15 


n 


50 





34 


28 


24 


21 


19 


18 


17 


16 


n 


60 





38 


31 


26 


23 


21 


20 


19 


18 


17 


70 








34 


29 


25 


23 


22 


21 


19 


18 


80 


__. _ 





36 


30 


27 


24 


23 


22 


21 


20 





d. 1 inch 


Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 






Length of pipe in feet 


20 

"^^iiii 


40 

Mwm^^Hi^M, 


60 




80 

^^^ . 


100 

_ 


120 

1 


140 


160 


180 


200 




10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 


40 
55 
70 
80 


28 
40 
50 
58 
65 
70 
76 


22 
32 
40 
45 
57 
58 
63 


18 
27 
34 
40 
45 
50 
54 


16 
24 
30 
35 
40 
44 
45 


15 

22 
27 
32 
36 
40 
42 


14 
20 
25 
29 
33 
36 
40 


13 
19 

23 
27 
31 
34 
37 


12 
18 
22 
25 
29 
32 
34 


11 
16 
20 
24 
27 
30 
32 





i 


i 


65 

~ 


57 

1 


47 




43 




39 


37 


35 


33 





7-12 



Table 7-10. Capacities of Pipe in Gallons Per Minute (Galvanized Iron) Continued 



e. 1 1/4 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


80 


55 


45 


37 


35 


30 


27 


25 


26 


24 


20 


110 


80 


65 


55 


50 


45 


41 


38 


36 


34 


30 





100 


80 


70 


60 


56 


51 


47 


45 


42 


40 








95 


80 


72 


65 


60 


56 


52 


50 


50 








107 


92 


82 


74 


68 


63 


60 


55 


60 








102 


90 


81 


75 


70 


65 


62 








70 










97 


88 


82 


74 


69 


67 










so 










1fK 


Q<s 


87 


70 


74 


79 



f. 1 1/2 inch 



Pressure at source in 



Length of pipe in feet 



pounds per square inch 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


120 


90 


70 


60 


55 


50 


45 


40 


40 


35 


20 


170 


130 


100 


90 


75 


70 


65 


60 


55 


55 


30 





160 


130 


110 


100 


90 


80 


75 


70 


65 


40 





170 


150 


130 


110 


100 


90 


90 


80 


80 


50 








170 


140 


130 


120 


110 


100 


90 


90 


60 








160 


140 


130 


190 


1 10 


100 


100 






















11AJ 


70 










150 


140 


i on 


190 


i in 


1OO 






















1UU 


so 










16O 


i<;o 


1/10 


13fi 


19O 


1 10 



g. 2 inch 



Pressure at source in 



Length of pipe in feet 



pounds per square inch 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 
20 
30 
40 
50 


240 
300 


160 
240 
300 


130 
200 
240 
280 


110 
160 
200 
240 
980 


100 
150 
180 
220 
940 


90 
140 
160 
200 
990 


90 

130 
150 
180 
900 


80 
120 

140 
160 

900 


80 
110 

140 
160 

i on 


70 
100 
130 
150 

16O 


60 










980 


940 


990 


900 


900 


1 80 


70 










300 


960 


940 


990 


990 


loU 
90O 


80 












980 


960 


940 


990 


\J\) 
99O 



7-13 



Table 7-11. Capacities of Pipe in Gallons Per Minute (Copper Tubing) 



a. 1/2 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 








20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


8 


5 


4 


3 


3 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


20 


12 


8 


6 


5 


5 


4 


4 


3 


3 


3 


30 


15 


10 


8 


7 


6 


5 


5 


4 


4 


4 


40 


17 


12 


9 


8 


7 


6 


6 


5 


5 


4 


50 


____ 


14 


10 


9 


8 


7 


6 


6 


5 


5 


60 





15 


12 


10 


9 


8 


7 


7 


6 


6 


70 








13 


11 


10 


9 


8 


7 


7 


6 


80 








14 


12 


10 


10 


8 


8 


7 


7 



b. 5/8 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


12 


8 


7 


6 


5 


5 


4 


4 


3 


3 


20 


18 


12 


10 


9 


7 


6 


6 


5 


5 


5 


30 


22 


16 


12 


10 


9 


9 


8 


7 


6 


6 


40 


26 


18 


14 


12 


10 


10 


9 


8 


8 


7 


50 





22 


16 


14 


12 


11 


10 


9 


9 


8 


60 





24 


18 


16 


14 


13 


12 


11 


10 


9 


70 








20 


18 


15 


14 


13 


12 


11 


10 


80 








22 


19 


16 


15 


14 


13 


12 


11 



c. 3/4 inch 



Pressure at source in 



Length of pipe in feet 



pounds per square inch 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


20 


14 


10 


10 


8 


8 


6 


6 


6 


5 


20 


30 


20 


16 


14 


12 


10 


10 


10 


8 


8 


30 


36 


26 


20 


17 


15 


14 


13 


11 


10 


8 


40 





30 


24 


20 


18 


16 


15 


14 


13 


12 


50 





34 


28 


24 


20 


18 


16 


16 


14 


14 


60 





36 


30 


26 


22 


20 


18 


18 


16 


16 


70 








32 


28 


24 


22 


20 


18 


18 


16 


80 








36 


30 


26 


24 


22 


20 


18 


18 



d. 1 inch 



Pressure at source in 



Length of pipe in feet 



pounds per square inch 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


50 


30 


24 


20 


18 


16 


14 


14 


12 


12 


20 


70 


45 


36 


30 


26 


24 


22 


20 


18 


18 


30 


80 


55 


45 


38 


34 


30 


28 


26 


24 


22 


40 





65 


55 


45 


40 


36 


32 


30 


28 


26 


50 





75 


60 


50 


45 


40 


36 


34 


32 


30 


60 





80 


65 


55 


50 


45 


40 


38 


36 


34 


70 








70 


60 


55 


50 


45 


40 


38 


36 


80 








80 


65 


60 


50 


50 


45 


40 


40 



7-14 



Table 7-11. Capacities of Pipe in Gallons Per Minute (Copper Tubing) Continued 



e. 1 1/4 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


80 


55 


42 


37 


32 


30 


27 


25 


22 


22 


20 


110 


80 


65 


55 


47 


42 


40 


35 


35 


32 


30 





105 


80 


70 


60 


55 


50 


45 


42 


40 


40 





110 


95 


80 


70 


65 


60 


55 


50 


47 


50 








110 


90 


80 


70 


65 


60 


57 


55 


60 








105 


90 


80 


75 


70 


65 


60 








70 








110 


100 


90 


80 


75 


70 


65 








80 










105 


95 


85 


80 


75 


70 











f. 1 1/2 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 


130 


90 


70 


60 


50 


45 


40 


40 


35 


35 


20 


170 


130 


100 


90 


75 


70 


65 


60 


55 


50 


30 





170 


130 


110 


100 


90 


80 


75 


70 


65 


40 








155 


130 


115 


105 


95 


88 


80 


77 


50 








170 


150 


130 


120 


108 


100 


90 


88 


fJT\ 








165 


145 


no 


120 


110 


105 


98 


70 








170 


160 


142 


130 






106 


so 










170 


1SS 


140 


no 


177. 


115 



g. 2 inch 



Pressure at source in 
pounds per square inch 


Length of pipe in feet 


20 


40 


60 


80 


100 


120 


140 


160 


180 


200 


10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 

80 


280 
320 


180 
280 
320 


150 
220 
280 
320 


145 
190 
240 
280 
320 


110 
165 
210 
240 
280 
300 
320 


100 
160 
180 
220 
250 
280 
300 

390 


90 
140 
170 
200 
230 
260 
280 
300 


85 
125 
160 
190 
210 
240 
260 
780 


80 
120 
150 
175 
200 
220 
240 
260 


70 
110 
140 
160 
190 
200 
230 
240 

























7-15 



of copper has become the most popular because 
of copper's ability to resist corrosion that increases 
in proportion to the temperature of the water. 
Sizing of the piping for a hot-water system is done 
the same way as for a cold-water system. 

The layout of a hot-water system is designed 
to carry heated water from a storage unit to 
plumbing fixtures. Installation planning begins 
with the water-heating device and a main supply 
line from that device. The system should be 
graded to a centrally located drip cock near the 
water heater to allow for draining the system when 
maintenance is required. Water for the individual 
fixtures located throughout the facility is taken 
off the main hot-water supply by risers as needed. 



Each fixture riser should have a valve to make 
repair work easier. 

Buildings of considerable floor area or of 
multifloor construction have the added problem 
of supplying hot water to the fixture as soon as 
possible after the tap is opened. In a one-pipe 
system (such as that used for cold-water supply), 
a lag occurs from the time the hot-water tap is 
opened until the heated water travels from the the 
water-heating device to the fixture. To overcome 
this lag, a circulating water supply system is often 
used. (See fig. 7-2.) 

The circulating supply system is a two-pipe 
system in which hot water flows from the heating 
device through the main fixture risers and returns 
to the heating device. This type of looped system 



UNCIRCULATED RISER 



DRAW TAPS 




87.338 



Figure 7-2. Hot-water circulating supply system. 



7-16 



STOPS WASTE 



PIPING 



LOOP 
CORPORATION STOP 




WALL 



WATER MAIN 



87.339 



Figure 7-3. Typical building water supply system. 




87.340 



COPPER PIPE 





/ 



COPPER FITTINGS 



87.341 



Figure 7-4. Corporation stop. 



Figure 7-5. Flexible gooseneck connector. 



provides for circulation of the hot water at all 
times. The circulation is created because warm 
water tends to rise and cold water tends to fall. 
The circulating system shown in figure 7-2 is 
known as an overhead feed and gravity-return 
system because of its construction. This type of 
system tends to become airbound, preventing cir- 
culation of the hot water. Since air collects at the 
highest point of the distribution piping, the most 
practical way to relieve the air lock is to connect 
an uncirculated riser to the line at that point. Any 
air lock that develops is relieved when a fixture 
on the uncirculated riser is used. 

Piping and Fitting General 
Requirements 

A typical building water-service line is 
shown in figure 7-3 . This line is composed of a 
corporation stop, a flexible connector, a curb 
stop, a stop and waste valve, and a meter stop 
or gate valve. 



The corporation stop is installed at the loca- 
tion (fig. 7-4) on the water main where a tap is 
made. Its function is to make the removal of 
the taping machine and the installation of the 
remaining fittings easier by securing the water 
flow from the tap. A corporation stop may not 
be needed if you are installing building service 
lines from a newly installed, unpressurized water 
main. 

When you install the line between the corpora- 
tion stop and the curb stop, use some type of 
flexible connection for joining the pipe to the cor- 
poration stop. This flexible connection protects 
the corporation stop from strain or damage that 
can result from any movement of the water main 
or service pipe because of settling, earth move- 
ment, or expansion and contraction. 

Several types of flexible connectors are used. 
The type you choose will depend on the type of 
material used for the supply line. A gooseneck 
(fig. 7-5) is used when galvanized iron or steel 



7-17 



pipe is used as the supply line. It consists of a 
length of copper pipe with fittings wiped or 
soldered on each end. Another flexible connector 
is the swing joint type commonly used with 
galvanized iron or steel service lines. (See fig. 7-6.) 
This connection consists of two elbows separated 
by a short section of pipe or a nipple. Next is the 
expansion loop (fig. 7-7) used when copper tub- 
ing is used as the service line. 

A curb stop must be provided in every service 
line to conform to the National Standard 
Plumbing Code, paragraph 10.12.1. (See fig. 7-8.) 
The curb stop provides an accessible shutoff of 
the water supply to the building. 

Next, a stop and waste valve (fig. 7-9) will be 
installed to conform to the National Standard 
Plumbing Code, paragraph 10.12.2. This valve 



is used to drain the building water system. It must 
be installed at a point where drainage by gravity 
can be achieved. When the valve is turned off, 
drainage will occur through a drilled passage in 
the valve body. 

Finally, a meter stop is installed when a water 
meter is to be included in the service line (fig. 
7-10). It is installed on the pressure side of the 
meter and can be used for convenient securing of 
the water supply to the building. Where no meter 
is used, a simple gate valve may be provided for 
convenient use when repairing or maintaining the 
building water lines. 

Each fixture to be installed requires a fixture 
stop valve and a certain size branch and riser 
piping. Branch lines are calculated in the same 
fashion as service supply lines. Risers for each 



ELBOWS 



CORPORATION STOP 




STREET MAIN 



Figure 7-6.Typical swing joint. 



87.342 




COOPER 
TUBING 



Figure 7-7. Expansion loop. 



87.343 




87.344 



Figure 7-8. Curb stop. 



HANDLE 



DRAIN 
HOLE 




87.345 



Figure 7-9. Stop and waste valve. 



7-18 




87.346 



Figure 7-10. Meter stop. 



individual fixture are sized according to table 7-12 
for both cold- and hot- water risers. A typical 
layout for branch lines and fixture risers is shown 
in figure 7-11. 

For more complete information, refer to the 
latest edition of the National Standard Plumbing 
Code. The code will guide you in determining all 
required installation considerations of facility 
water supply system needs. 



CORROSION PREVENTION AND 
PROTECTION 

As a Utilitiesman, you must consider the 
effects of corrosion on the equipment that you 
are installing. When planning a project, the 



SUBFLOOR 

\ 



SOLE PLATE 




90 ELBOW 




NIPPLE 

SUPPLY MAIN TEE 



\ 

JOIST 



RISER 



BRANCH LINE 



87.347 



Figure 7-11. Water supply branch line. 



Table 7-12. Water Pipe Size Chart for Plumbing Fixtures 



PLUMBING FIXTURE 



PIPE DIAMETER 

(inches) 



Dishwasher 1/2 or 3/4 

Water closet tank 1/2 

Water closet flushometer valve 1 

Urinal with flushometer valve 1/2 

Lavatory 1/2 

Shower bath 1/2 

Kitchen sink 1/2 

Slop sink 1/2 

Scullery sink 3/4 

Laundry tray 1/2 

Drinking fountain 1/2 

Hot-water heater (domestic) 3/4 

Bathtub 1/2 



7-19 



necessary materials and equipment required for 
galvanic cathodic protection of underground pipes 
and fittings must be considered. First you must 
understand what corrosion is and how it occurs. 

TYPES OF CORROSION 

Man has had corrosion problems to contend 
with ever since he started making articles out of 
metal. For thousands of years, the only fact 
known about corrosion was that it would affect 
some metals more than others. For example, iron, 
one of the most abundant and useful metals, cor- 
rodes very much; whereas metals such as gold, 
platinum, and silver corrode very little. Later, men 
began to study corrosion to find out what caused 
it. As might be expected, many theories were 
proposed to explain corrosion and its causes. 
Among the many theories, the electrochemical 
theory is most generally accepted as an explana- 
tion of corrosion. 

The electrochemical theory of corrosion is best 
explained by the action that takes place in a 
galvanic cell. A galvanic cell can be produced by 
placing two dissimilar metals in a suitable elec- 
trolyte, as shown in figure 7-12. The resulting 
electrochemical reaction develops a potential 
difference between these metals. This causes one 
metal to be negative or anodic and the other metal 
to be positive or cathodic. In a dry cell battery, 
the zinc case is the anode and the carbon rod the 
cathode. Now, when an external electrical circuit 



is completed, current flows from the zinc case into 
the electrolyte, taking with it particles of zinc. This 
is an example of galvanic corrosion of the zinc 
case. It is this electrochemical action that 
illustrates the electrochemical theory. 

Corrosion may be divided into several types, 
such as uniform corrosion, localized corrosion, 
and compositional corrosion. Each type will be 
explained in the following paragraphs. 

Uniform Corrosion 

Uniform corrosion is caused by direct 
chemical attack. An example of this type of cor- 
rosion is zinc exposed to hydrochloric acid. If you 
examine the surface of zinc in a solution of 
hydrochloric acid, you will find that the entire 
surface is corroding. Furthermore, if the zinc is 
left in the acid long enough, it will be dissolved 
by the acid. 

Localized Corrosion 

Localized corrosion is caused by the elec- 
trolytic action of a galvanic cell. A local galvanic 
action is set up when there is a difference of 
potential between the areas on a metallic surface 
that is an electrolyte. Localized corrosion may be 
in the form of pits, pockets, or cavities due to the 
deterioration or destruction of metal. 

Localized corrosion may develop under a 
number of various conditions when different types 



CURRENT FLOW 



POSITIVE TERMINAL 




NEGATIVE 
TERMINAL 



ZINC / 
CORROSION \ 



]^ 




u 

O- - - -11. 


1 


1 ZINC ION 

c - 


CARBON 
CATHODE 


S ZINC ION 

-i ft , 




ELECTROLYTE 
ZINC ION 

C - 


I 


O u- - ^ 
2 ZINC ION 

^ bJ 

o e- 

O DC -t 






\ 


o 8 






V 


u >- 

X 














y 







7 

ZINC CORROSION 
Figure 7-12. Galvanic cell showing internal galvanic action. 



__ ZINC 
ANODE 

ZINC 
CORROSION 



87.235 



7-20 



of equipment are buried in the ground. Some 
examples of localized corrosion are discussed in 
the following paragraphs. 

Corrosion due to mill scale. The mill scale 
embedded in the walls of iron pipe during its 
manufacture is one cause of pipe corrosion. It 
actually becomes the cathodic area, the iron pipe 
the anodic area, and the moist soil the electrolyte, 
as shown in figure 7-13. Current leaves the iron 
pipe wall and passes through the electrolytic soil 
to the mill scale. This electrochemical action 
causes severe pitting of the pipe metal at the 
anodic areas. Continued action of this type will 
eventually weaken the pipe to the extent of failure. 

Corrosion due to cinders. Another type of 
corrosion occurs when iron pipe is laid in a cinder- 
fill in direct contact with the cinders. The cinders 
and the iron pipe make up the dissimilar metals. 
The pipe forms the anodic area, the cinders form 
the cathodic area, and the highly ionized soil 
serves as the electrolyte. The current leaves the 
pipe through the soil to the cinders and returns 
to the pipe. Severe corrosion occurs at the points 
where the current leaves the pipe. 

Corrosion due to dissimilarity of pipe 
surface. This type of galvanic corrosion occurs 
when there are bright or polished surfaces on some 
areas of the pipe walls in contact with suitable 
electrolytic soil. These bright surfaces become 
anodic to the remaining pipe surfaces. In highly 
ionized soil, the polished surfaces corrode at an 



accelerated rate, thus weakening the pipe at that 
point. 

Corrosion due to different soil conditions. 
This is a general corrosion problem, especially 
prevalent in highly alkaline areas. Corrosion cur- 
rents leave the pipe wall and pass into compact 
soils and enter the pipe wall from light sandy soils. 
The intensity of the corrosion currents and the 
resulting rate of corrosion at the anodic areas of 
the pipe are directly proportional to the con- 
ductivity of the soil. 

Corrosion due to stray currents. Direct 
current circuits that pass in and out of an elec- 
trolyte usually cause stray currents, many of which 
are a direct cause of corrosion. Corrosion does 
not occur at the point where the current enters 
the structure, because it is cathodically protected. 
However, at the section where the current leaves 
the structure, severe stray current corrosion 
occurs. Over a period of a year, this type of cor- 
rosion has been known to displace as much as 20 
pounds of pipe wall for every ampere of current. 

Corrosion due to bacteria. Biological 
corrosion is another distinct type of corrosion 
caused by electrolytic or galvanic cell action. 
It is the deterioration of metals by corrosion 
processes that occurs as either a direct or an 
indirect result of the metabolic activity of certain 
minute bacteria, particularly in water or soil 
environments. These organisms that cause 
bacterial corrosion are bacteria, slime, and fungi. 



CATHODE 
(CURRENTS NEUTRALIZED) 



CATHODE 




ANODE 
(CURRENTS ORIGINATE) 



87.348 



Figure 7-13. Pipe with corroding (anode) and noncorroding (cathode) areas. 



7-21 



Microbiological corrosive action in the soil is due 
to physical and chemical changes in the soil caused 
by the presence of these organisms. Some bacteria 
are responsible for the production of active 
galvanic cells. These bacteria are mostly found in 
highly waterlogged, sulfate-bearing, blue clay 
soils. The bacteria concentration, as well as the 
corrosion rate, varies considerably with the dif- 
ferent seasons of the year. Cast-iron and steel 
pipes are corroded mostly by sulfide production. 

Compositional Corrosion 

Compositional corrosion alters the composi- 
tion of metals. Some of the specific types of 
compositional corrosion are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 

Dezincification. This is a selective type of 
corrosion that occurs in copper and zinc alloys. 
When alloys of this kind (brasses) are exposed to 
this type of corrosion, the zinc dissolves out of 
the alloy and leaves only the copper. 

* Graphitization. Another type of composi- 
tional corrosion is graphitization or graphitic 
softening. It is a peculiar form of disintegration 
that attacks grey cast iron. Cast iron is an alloy 
made of iron and carbon, the carbon being in the 
form of graphite. When cast iron with such a 
composition is subjected to graphitization, the 
iron dissolves out and leaves only the graphite. 
This action leaves cast-iron pipes and other similar 
equipment weakened mechanically. However, 
after graphitization corrosion occurs, the graphite 
pipe may last for many years if it is not subjected 
to any mechanical forces or sudden pressures. The 
action of this type of corrosion is similar to 
dezincification. 

Hydrogen embrittlement. This is a term 
applied to metal that becomes brittle because of 
the action of some form of corrosion that causes 
the formation of hydrogen on its surface. When 
hydrogen forms on the surface of steel, the ac- 
tion of the hydrogen may form blisters or actually 
embrittle the metal. Hydrogen liberated near the 
surface of steel in an electrolyte will diffuse into 
the metal quite rapidly. The hydrogen picked up 
by the steel is in an atomic state and causes the 
steel to become brittle. 

When the production of atomic hydrogen 
on the surface of the metal stops, the hydrogen 
leaves the metal in a few days and the metal again 
regains its original ductility. 



Stress Fatigue of Metals 

Corrosion affects metals that are under stress. 
The action caused by stresses on a pipeline or 
structure is due to the shifting of the various rocks 
and soils of the earth. Usually a complete pipeline 
is not under stress; certain sections are under stress 
while adjacent sections are not. Because of these 
pressures and strains, localized electrochemical 
action takes place. The section of the pipe or 
structure under stress becomes anodic, whereas 
the unstressed sections become cathodic. In this 
way, the pipe under stress begins to corrode and 
weaken because of the action of corrosion. 

Corrosion Caused by Nonelectrolytes 

Nonelectrolytes are materials that will not 
conduct electricity. These materials include 
nonelectrolytic vapors, liquids, and bacterial 
organisms. Since they do not conduct electricity, 
they do not, in themselves, cause corrosion. 

NONELECTROLYTE GASES AND 

VAPORS. Nonelectrolytic gases and vapors 
usually must be subjected to high temperatures 
before corrosive action can take place. Hydrogen 
sulfide causes scaling of iron at temperatures from 
1400 to 2000 F. High-chromium alloy steels 
resist this type of corrosion best. The only remedy 
for this type of corrosion is to keep the gases away 
from the metal or use a metal that can resist 
corrosion. 

High-carbon steels are attacked by hydrogen 
at temperatures above 750 F. This hydrogen com- 
bines with the carbon grains in the steel and causes 
the metal to weaken at the grain boundaries 
between the iron and carbon. 

Oxygen will combine directly with most metals 
at high temperatures. The temperature at which 
oxygen will combine with the metals depends 
mostly upon the type of metal. In the process of 
cutting iron with an oxyacetylene torch, the 
oxygen combines with the iron. 

NONELECTROLYTIC FLUIDS. Non- 
electrolytic fluids include such liquids as pure 
water, lubricating oils, fuel oils, and alcohols. 
These fluids do not cause corrosion, but corro- 
sion does occur in storage tanks that contain these 
liquids and in pipelines that carry them. The 
corrosion is not caused by the nonelectrolyte 
liquids, but by the foreign products in them. For 
example, if impure water is introduced into an oil 
pipeline, the water will cause the inside of the 



7-22 



pipe to corrode. The water collects on the inside 
of the pipe because the pipe is usually cooler than 
the oil. In a storage tank, the water will settle to 
the bottom of the tank because water is heavier 
than oil, and will cause the bottom to corrode. 
Hydrogen sulfide and sulphur dioxide may also 
be introduced into the pipeline to add to the cor- 
rosiveness of the water that collects on the metal. 
The only way to prevent corrosion from this 
source is either to coat the inside of the pipeline 
and tanks with a protective film or to remove the 
water from them. 

Bacterial Organisms 

Bacterial organisms may also cause 
microbiological corrosion. Colonies of bacteria 
that live close to the metal surface in stationary 
slimy deposits produce corrosive substances such 
as carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, ammonia, 
and organic and inorganic acids. These corroding 
substances are found only in the locality of the 
colony and may be undetected in the surrounding 
water or soil. Bacteria that cause corrosion in this 
way need to produce only small amounts of cor- 
rosive products for localized attack. However, 
colonies of bacteria that do not produce corrosive 
products may act as a protective film around the 
metal, causing unequal distribution of electrical 
potential, which gives rise to local anodes and 
cathodes. In this way, the production of local cells 
will cause increased corrosive action. 

Biological corrosion is extremely difficult to 
control, since the organisms are very resistant to 
normal methods of sterilization. Probably the 
most logical method to reduce microbiological 
corrosion is by the use of some barrier coating 
between the environment and the metal. 

Corrosion Caused by Electrolytes 

An electrolyte is any substance that conducts 
electricity. It conducts electricity because it con- 
tains ions that carry electrical charges, either 
negative or positive, that move in electrical fields. 
Some of the more important electrolytes are 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 

ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS. Cor- 
rosion due to atmospheric conditions is caused 
mainly by the water in the atmosphere. Pure water 
is a nonelectrolyte, but because water is a universal 
solvent, it is not found to be pure very often. Rain 
water is often considered to be pure, but this is 
not true. As rain falls to the ground, it dissolves 



gases out of the atmosphere and becomes impure. 
For this reason, any water vapor in the 
atmosphere is also impure. If a piece of metal is 
exposed to atmospheric air, and the metal is cooler 
than the air, water vapor from the air will collect 
on the surface of the metal. The layer of water 
on the metal may be so thin that it cannot be seen; 
but there is enough of it, if impure, to start cor- 
rosion. In this case, when the gases dissolve into 
the water, the water becomes an electrolyte. When 
metal is exposed to an electrolyte, galvanic cells 
are produced on the surface of the metal, since 
there are impurities in it. Each one of these cells 
starts to act on the metal, causing corrosion by 
electrochemical action. 

WATER AND WATER SOLUTIONS. If 

metal is exposed to water or water solutions, cor- 
rosion is likely to occur if the water or metal is 
impure. If the water or metal is pure, corrosion 
probably will not occur; however, these conditions 
seldom exist in nature. Impurities in the water and 
metal produce galvanic cells that cause corrosion. 

CHEMICAL AGENTS. Chemical agents 
such as acids and salts also cause corrosion. When 
these agents are present in the environment, direct 
chemical attack on metal is the result. For 
example, if a piece of zinc is exposed to 
hydrochloric acid, a definite chemical reaction 
takes place. The zinc and hydrochloric acid com- 
bine, producing zinc chloride and hydrogen. This 
action continues until the zinc is completely 
dissolved or the acid is too weak to act on the zinc. 
Corrosion causes the zinc to dissolve. 

Another example that may be used to illustrate 
corrosion through the use of a chemical agent is 
to place aluminum in a lye solution. The lye will 
pit (corrode) the aluminum as long as chemical 
action continues between the aluminum and lye. 

MATERIALS LEAST LIKELY 
TO BE AFFECTED BY 
SCALE AND CORROSION 

Whenever installing various types of plumb- 
ing equipment in areas where corrosion is active, 
you should select equipment made of materials 
least affected by corrosion. To prevent elec- 
trochemical action in plumbing equipment, the 
equipment should be made of materials that are 
not affected by electrolysis. Plastic materials such 
as polyethylene polyester and polyvinyl chloride 
are not acted upon by corrosion. Glass is another 
material that is not acted on by corrosion. (This 



7-23 



is why hot-water tanks are lined with glass.) Other 
materials used for the manufacture of pipe that 
resists corrosion are vitrified clay, cement, fiber, 
asbestos, and rubber. Glass fibers reinforced with 
epoxy or polyester resins are also resistant to 
corrosion. 

Dielectric bushings may be installed to stop 
electrolytic action in plumbing systems or 
wherever dissimilar metals are used. These 
bushings are made of nylon and are usually 
colored. They withstand pressures to 100 psi and 
temperatures up to 300 F. The bushings are 
usually placed in pipe systems as recommended 
by the manufacturer. Some metals least likely to 
be affected by corrosion are copper, brass, Monel, 
and stainless steel. 

COATINGS AND WRAPPINGS FOR 
CORROSION PROTECTION 

Coatings and wrappings are commonly used 
to combat corrosion on exterior piping systems. 
There are many different types of coatings such 
as asphalts, coal tars, plastics, mastics, greases, 
and cements. These coatings are considered to be 
insulating materials, but each is not effective in 
all environments. Each one was developed for a 
certain type of corrosive environment. 

Asphalt Coatings 

Asphalt base coatings are the most common 
type of protective coatings used. They are pro- 
duced from petroleum residue and natural 
sources. Asphalt base coatings can take con- 
siderable abrasion, impact, and temperature 
changes without creating a corrosive condition. 
However, they absorb a considerable amount of 
water and dissolve easily into a form of petroleum 
product. 

Coal Tar Coatings 

Coal tar coatings are commonly used on 
pipelines. They possess continuity, hardness, 
adhesion, and corrosion resistance. Coal tar 
coatings are less expensive than asphalt coatings. 
They do not have a very good impact resistance, 
and a wide temperature change often causes the 
surface to crack. 

Paint Coatings 

Some of the most important paint coatings are 
coal tar, asphalt, rubber, and vinyl. 



Coal tar paints have the outstanding 
characteristics of low permeability and resistance 
to electrolytic reaction. They are not affected by 
the action of water. These paints are recom- 
mended for piers, marine installations, flood 
control structures, sewage disposal plants, and 
industrial concrete pipelines. 

Asphalt paints are weather resistant and 
durable against industrial fumes, condensation, 
and sunlight action. Because of their resistance 
against water solvency, they are used on steel 
tanks and concrete reservoirs. 

Rubber base paints are very resistant to acids, 
alkalies, salts, alcohols, petroleum products, and 
inorganic oils. The resistance of these products 
makes them ideal for use on the inside of metallic 
and concrete storage tanks. If these structures are 
submerged in water or are under ground, a special 
form of this paint should be used because of 
condensation. 

Vinyl paint is one of the many synthetic resin 
base paints. These paints dry to a film that is 
tough, abrasionproof , and highly resistant to elec- 
trolysis. They are odorless, tasteless, nontoxic, 
and nonflammable. The film is especially 
resistant to oils, fats, waxes, alcohols, petroleums, 
solvents, formic acid, organic acids, ammonium 
hydroxides, and phenols. Because of these 
characteristics, vinyl paint is very applicable for 
tanks, pipelines, wellheads, offshore drilling rigs, 
pipe used in oil industries, railroad hopper cars, 
dairy and brewery equipment, storage tanks, and 
concrete exposed to corrosive environments. 



Grease Coatings 

Grease is another material used to form a 
protective coating on structures. It is usually made 
from a petroleum base and resembles paraffin or 
wax. Grease can be applied either hot or cold. 
However, it must be protected by some type of 
wrapping to keep the grease from being displaced 
or absorbed by the backfill soil when it is applied 
to underground surfaces. 



Concrete Coatings 

Concrete coatings have been used with success 
when properly applied to pipelines to be laid in 
highly corrosive soils, such as areas containing 



7-24 



acid mine drainage or in brackish marshes. Well- 
mixed concrete, usually a mix of one part portland 
cement to two parts sand, may be applied to 
pipelines. The thickness of the coating applied 
may be up to 2 inches. If the concrete is properly 
mixed and tamped around the pipe, it may last 
40 years. However, concrete has a tendency to 
absorb moisture and crack, which in many ways 
limits its use. In fact, in places where the coating 
cracks, electrolysis immediately starts to corrode 
the metal. This corrosion can be partially 
prevented by painting the pipe with a bituminous 
primer before coating it. 



Metallic Coatings 

Metallic coatings such as galvanizing (zinc 
coating) are very effective in protecting metallic 
structures or pipes against atmospheric corrosion. 
This type of coating is ideal for cold-water lines 
and metals exposed to normal atmospheric 
temperatures. However, metals such as iron cor- 
rode rapidly when used in high-temperature equip- 
ment because at a critical temperature of 
approximately 140 F iron becomes anodic to zinc. 
This results in the iron's becoming the sacrificial 
anode that corrodes readily. 



Plastic Wrapping 

Plastic tapes for wrapping come in rolls. They 
may be procured in various widths. The tape is 
wrapped around the pipes before they are laid in 
the trench. The wrappings are applied by a 
simple device that is clamped on the pipe and 
turned by the UT. Pipe joints are wrapped after 
the pipes are laid in the trench. 



GALVANIC CATHODIC 
PROTECTION 

Galvanic cathodic protection is a method 
used to protect metal structures from the action 
of corrosion. As explained before, galvanic cell 
corrosion is the major contributing factor to the 
deterioration of metal by electrochemical reaction. 
The area of a structure that corrodes is the anode 
or positive side of the cell. Corrosion occurs when 
the positive electric current leaves the metal and 
enters the electrolyte. Galvanic cathodic protec- 
tion is designed to stop this positive current flow. 



When the current is stopped, the corrosive action 
stops and the anodes disappear. This type of pro- 
tection depends upon the neutralization of the cor- 
roding current and the polarization of the cathode 
metal areas. 



METHODS OF GALVANIC 
CATHODIC PROTECTION 

Galvanic cathodic protection is a means of 
reducing or preventing the corrosion of a metal 
surface by the use of sacrificial anodes or 
impressed currents. When sacrificial anodes are 
used, it is known as the galvanic anode method. 
If impressed currents are used, it is known as the 
impressed current method. These two methods 
can be used separately or with each other, 
depending upon the corrosive characteristics of 
the electrolyte surrounding the structure. 



Galvanic Anode Method 

The galvanic anode method of cathodic pro- 
tection uses an electrode referred to as a sacrificial 
anode that corrodes to protect a structure. This 
sacrificial anode is electrically connected to and 
placed in the same electrolytic area of the struc- 
ture. The anode used to protect iron or steel 
structures should be made of magnesium or zinc 
so it will produce a sufficient potential difference 
to cause the structure to become a cathode. The 
action of this type of galvanic protection causes 
the electric current to flow from the sacrificial 
anode through the electrolyte to the structure to 
be protected. The electrical connection between 
the two metals completes the circuit and allows 
the current to return to the corroding metal. The 
sacrificial anode becomes the anode of the 
established dissimilar metal galvanic cell, and 
the structure to be protected becomes the 
cathode. The current from the sacrificial anode 
is intense enough to oppose or prevent the 
positive current from leaving the anodes in the 
structure to be protected. These structure anodes 
are then suppressed, and the metal in the 
structure becomes a cathode. The prevention of 
these positive currents from the anodic areas 
in the structure reduces the corrosion rate to 
almost zero. 

Galvanic cathodic protection is used in areas 
where the corrosion rate is low and electric power 
is not readily available. A typical example of 



7-25 



galvanic cathodic protection is shown in figure 
7-14. 

Impressed Current Method 

The impressed current method of cathodic 
protection is designed to protect large metal 
structures located in corrosive areas. With this 
method of protection a source of alternating 
current is required. Also, a rectifier is needed to 
obtain the required direct current potential. 

The basic principle of the impressed current 
method is merely the application of the galvanic 
cell reaction. The component parts of this method 
are the cathode (the metal structure to be pro- 
tected), the anode (made of suitable anodic 
material), the electrolyte or ground (the ionized 
corrosive material), and the rectifier and various 
connections that serve to complete the electrical 
circuit. The operation of this method depends on 
the rectifier forcing direct current from the anode 
through the electrolyte (ground) to the metal struc- 
ture to be protected. This method causes the metal 
structure to be the cathode, suppresses the anodic 
currents from it, and, in turn, prevents corrosion 
of the structure. An impressed current method of 
cathodic protection is shown in figure 7-15. 

FIELD TEST EQUIPMENT 
FOR CATHODIC PROTECTION 

The items of field test equipment that the UT 
uses to make tests when installing, operating, and 



maintaining cathodic protection systems are the 
volt-millivoltmeter, multicombination meter, 
resistivity instrument, buried pipe locator, and the 
protective coating leak detector. This equipment 
is discussed in the following paragraphs. 

Volt-Millivoltmeter 

In corrosion and cathodic protection testing 
in the field, it is necessary to measure the poten- 
tial of the structure being investigated as com- 
pared to the earth along the structure and to other 
metallic structures. It is also necessary to measure 
the potential of rectifiers, batteries, galvanic 
anodes, and sometime potentials along the earth's 
surface to determine the distance being protected. 
The potentials may vary from millivolts to 20 volts 
or more. Various types of voltmeters are used for 
this purpose. One of these instruments is the volt- 
millivoltmeter. It is a recording instrument 
designed with a chart that makes one revolution 
in 24 hours. The instrument will record the varia- 
tions in potential and reveal the electrolytic 
conditions around a structure. 

Multicombination Meter 

The multicombination meter is used quite 
often in cathodic protection work. It is designed 
as a combination unit and actually consists of 
more than one instrument. The meter can be used 
as a high-resistance voltmeter, an ammeter, a 



ELECTRICAL CONNECTING WIRE 



THERMIT WELD 
CONNECTION 



TANK OR PIPE 
(CATHODE) 




ELECTROLYTE 
(SOIL ENVIRONMENT) 



MAGNESIUM ANODE 
IN BACK FILL 



Figure 7-14. Galvanic cathodic protection. 



87.237 



7-26 



milliammeter, a low-resistance voltmeter and 
milli voltmeter, and a potentiometer voltmeter. 
The multicombination meter may be used to 
measure galvanic anode current between an anode 
and structure, galvanic current between structures, 
and potentials as with other types of voltmeters 
and milli voltmeters. 

Resistivity Instruments 

Resistivity measuring instruments are units 
used to test the corrosive action of a soil. Tests 
regarding soil corrosivity are necessary when 
designing cathodic protection systems. Informa- 
tion from these tests is used to locate the most 
corrosive areas where a pipeline is to be laid and 
the most corrosive areas of an existing pipeline. 
It is also used to decide the location for anode 
beds. 

One of the simplest methods for making a 
resistivity test is to use a single probe resistivity 
meter. It consists of a probe with two electrodes, 
an indicating instrument, switches, and the re- 
quired wiring. To use this instrument, the probe 
is inserted into the ground and current is applied 
to it. The indicating instrument gives a reading 
that indicates the corrosiveness of the soil. 



Buried Pipe Locator 

In the field of cathodic protection work, it is 
necessary to locate pipes in order to locate 
interferences in the cathodic protection system. 
An electronic pipe locator is used for this purpose. 
The main components of the locator are the direc- 
tional transmitter and the directional receiver. 
Each one of these units is carried by an operator. 
The operators are usually about 30 feet apart. 
During actual operation the transmitter sends out 
signals which travel along the pipeline. The 
receiver, in turn, picks up these signals in 
varying intensities, depending on the distance the 
operators are from the pipe. When both operators 
are directly over the pipe, a maximum response 
is obtained in the phones and on the visual meter 
of the receiver. Most pipe can be located easily 
and accurately in this manner. 

Protective Coating Leak Detector 

A protective coating leak detector (referred to 
as a holiday detector) is used to detect the 
imperfections (holidays) in pipe coatings. The 
holiday leak detector is an instrument that 
operates on an electric current. When it is being 



AC SUPPLY 




PIPELINE 



87.238 



Figure 7-15. Impressed current method of cathodic protection. 



7-27 



moved along a pipe that is covered by a coating 
or wrapping, a completed circuit between it and 
the pipe reveals a holiday and causes a bell to ring, 
or a bulb to light, or a buzzer to sound. 

MAINTENANCE OF ANODE 

SYSTEMS 

The anode system of cathodic protection 
requires very little maintenance, because it does 
not have a power source and does not have to be 
regulated. 

Magnesium and zinc anodes used in the anode 
system sometimes suffer local or self-corrosion 
that reduces their efficiency. When their efficiency 
drops to a minimum, they must be replaced. 
Anode life varies from 5 to 30 years, depending 
upon the type of anode used. It is conservative 
to figure that about 17 pounds of magnesium or 
25 pounds of zinc are wasted away by electrolysis 
from an anode per ampere year. Test stations 
should be installed in the anode system so the 
effectiveness of the cathodic protection can be 
determined. 

MAINTENANCE OF IMPRESSED 
CURRENT SYSTEMS 

The impressed system of cathodic protection 
requires considerably more maintenance than the 
anode system. This is because an electrical cur- 
rent is used for the operation of the system. The 
current may come from any alternating current 
source. Wind-driven generators can be used to 
furnish the alternating current when it is not 
readily available. The transformer rectifier used 
in the system requires much less maintenance and 
servicing than other sources of current. However, 
systematic maintenance procedures must be used 
to keep these units in operating condition. 

The transformer rectifier set consists of two 
units, a transformer and rectifier. The transformer 



is used to step the high voltage down to a value 
of 12 to 40 volts. The rectifier is used to change 
alternating current to direct current. Connections 
on this unit must be kept tight. 

The materials most often used for anodes with 
impressed current are aluminum, high-silicon cast 
iron, and graphite. Scrap iron and steel may be 
used for anodes, since they waste away at a rate 
of 20 pounds per ampere year. Anodes must be 
replaced when they are totally wasted away. 

Insulated wire that resists electrolytic action 
must be used to make the connections between 
the anodes and the structures to be protected. The 
insulation on existing current-carrying lines should 
be checked. If deterioration is evident, the wires 
should be replaced. Overhead electrical lines 
should be checked also to see that they are securely 
fastened to the poles and that the connections are 
tight. 



CHAPTER REFERENCES 

Cathodic Protection Systems Maintenance, 
MO-307, May 1981, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, Alexandria, Va. 

22332. 

National Association of Plumbing-Heating- 
Cooling Contractors, National Standard 
Plumbing Code, 1978 and 1979, Chapter 
10, 1016 20th St. N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20036. 

Plumbing and Pipefitting, TM 5-55 IK, July 
1971, Chapter 10, Department of the Army, 
Washington, D.C. 20310. 

Plumbing Manual, Volume II, NTTC Course 
140-B, Chapter 12, Naval Facilities Technical 
Training Center, Navy Public Works Center, 
Norfolk, Va. 23511. 



7-28 



CHAPTER 8 



FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 



Learning Objective: Recognize the characteristics of various types of fire 
protection systems as applied to the installation and maintenance of these 
systems. 



This chapter describes the operation, testing, 
and maintenance of fire protection systems for 
buildings and other structures. Fire protection 
systems include automatic sprinkler systems, 
standpipe and hose systems, foam extinguishing 
systems, gaseous extinguishing systems, and 
chemical extinguishing systems. Fire alarm and 
detection equipment are discussed showing the 
relationship between the mechanical and electrical 
components of these systems. 

Because of the large number of manufacturers 
and models of fire protection systems, the 
Utilitiesman cannot be expected to acquire a 
detailed knowledge of all installation and 
maintenance considerations involved with this 
equipment. The principles presented in this 
chapter apply on a general basis for any given 
device or system you may encounter in the field. 
Refer to the manufacturer's manuals, job 
specifications, the National Fire Protection 
Association Codes, and local codes for in-depth 
information regarding specific types of equip- 
ment. 



AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM 
CHARACTERISTICS 

Automatic sprinkler systems automatically 
distribute water upon a fire in sufficient quantity 
to either extinguish the fire or prevent its 
spread. All sprinkler systems have three basic 
components. They are (1) a water supply, 
(2) a piping network to carry the water, 
and (3) sprinklers that distribute the water. 
This section discusses the three major cat- 
egories of sprinkler systems with their related 



controlling devices and fittings and the sprinklers 
that may be chosen for installation into these 
systems. 



TYPES OF SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 

There are several types of sprinkler systems. 
The most common ones are the wet pipe, the dry 
pipe (that uses the differential dry pipe valve, the 
low-differential dry pipe valve, or the mechanical 
or latched-clapper dry pipe valve), the water 
deluge, the pre-action, and the combined systems. 



Wet Pipe System 

The wet pipe sprinkler system is the most 
common type. This system has automatic 
sprinklers attached to a piping network with water 
under pressure at all times. The sprinklers are 
actuated by the heat of a fire. A wet pipe system 
is generally used when there is no danger of the 
water in the pipes freezing or when there are no 
special conditions that require a special purpose 
sprinkler system. 

The wet pipe sprinkler system may have an 
alarm check valve (figs. 8-1 and 8-2). This device 
is used to maintain a constant pressure on the 
system piping network above the valve. When 
there is a fire, the flowing water causes the 
clapper assembly inside the alarm check valve 
to open. This permits a portion of the water 
to flow through a port in the valve that is 
connected to an alarm device. To prevent false 
alarms, a retard chamber is usually placed in 
the piping between the alarm check valve and the 
alarm device. 



8-1 



Dry Pipe System 

In a dry pipe system, the pipes normally 
contain either air or nitrogen under pressure. Dry 
pipe systems are used in areas where the water in 
the pipes is subject to freezing. 

A dry pipe valve acts as a control between the 
water supply and the air under pressure in the 
piping network. The dry pipe valve must be in a 



heated enclosure because pressurized water is at 
the underside of the valve. A small amount of 
water, called priming water, is also inside the dry 
pipe valve itself to ensure a tight seal of the 
clapper and to keep the rubber gaskets pliable. 
The valve is usually made so that a moderate air 
pressure holds back a much greater water 
pressure. There are several types of dry pipe 
valves. 



ELECTRIC 
SPRINKLER 
ALARM SWITCH 

TO MECHANICAL 
SPRINKLER ALARM 




STRAINER 



ALARM TEST 
LINE WITH 
VALVE 



OUTLET 
RESTRICTION 




ELECTRIC ALARM 
SWITCH OUTLET 



MECHANICAL 
ALARM OUTLET 



ALARM 
VALVE INLET 



CLAPPER IN 
CLOSED POSITION 




FROM SUPPLY 




CLAPPER IN 
WIDE OPEN 
POSITION 



UNCOVERED 

GROOVED 

SEAT 



FROM SUPPLY 



Figure 8-1. Alarm check valve. 



87.349 



8-2 




e 
'a 



| 



8-3 



DIFFERENTIAL DRY PIPE VALVE. The 
differential dry pipe valve (fig. 8-3) has a large 
clapper on the air side that bears directly on a 
smaller water side clapper. The differential 
between the areas of the two clappers is approxi- 
mately 6 to 1. Therefore, relatively low air 
pressure can hold back a much larger water 
pressure. For example, 30 pounds per square inch 
(psi) air pressure can hold back 180 psi water 
pressure. 

To eliminate an accidental trip of the valve and 
false alarms, air pressure should be maintained at 
least 20 psi greater than the calculated trip 
pressure of the dry pipe valve. This is based on 
the highest normal water pressure of the supply 
system. 

In operation, when there is a fire the heat ac- 
tuates the sprinklers and allows the air pressure 
to be relieved from the piping network. The dif- 
ferential is destroyed. The water pressure below 
the valve opens the clapper, allowing water to flow 
through the piping to the open sprinklers. This 



operation has an inherent time delay between the 
actuation of the sprinklers and the application of 
water to the fire. This delay can be shortened by 
adding an accelerator or an exhauster to the dry 
pipe system. 

The accelerator (fig. 8-4) allows air from the 
system's piping to enter the intermediate chamber 
in the dry pipe valve, destroy the differential, and 
open the clapper. 

The exhauster (fig. 8-5) opens and exhausts 
air from the piping system faster than through the 
sprinklers, destroying the differential sooner. 

LOW-DIFFERENTIAL DRY PIPE 

VALVE. Occasionally the water supply to dry 
pipe valves contains debris. With a differential dry 
pipe valve, the high velocity of water entering the 
system when the valve trips can carry the debris 
into the system, plugging system piping and 
sprinklers. If debris in the water is a problem, the 
low-differential dry pipe valve (fig. 8-6) may be 
useful. 



TO FIRE ALARM BELL 
ELECTRICALLY OPERATED 



TO HYDRAULIC 
FIRE ALARM GONG 



WATER MOTOR STRAINER 



TEST VALVE 



PRIMING CUP 
PRIMING CUP VALVE 
SWING CHECK VALVE 
AIR SUPPLY VALVE NO. 1 




WATER SUPPLY 



Figure 8-3. Differential dry pipe valve. 



87.351 



8-4 




RESTRICTION 
TOP CHAMBER 



MAIN VALVE 
ASSEMBLY 

MIDDLE 
CHAMBER 



MAIN SPRING 



AUXILIARY 

VALVE 
ASSEMBLY 



AUXILIARY 
SEAT 



MAIN VALVE 
CLAPPER 

BOTTOM 
CHAMBER 




CLOSED 



OPEN 



Figure 8-4. Dry pipe system accelerator. 



87.352 



RESTRICTED 
ORIFICE 



UPPER 
CHAMBER 




MAIN VALVE 
OPERATING 
DIAPHRAGM 



INLET 



OUTLET TO 
ATMOSPHERE 



INLET 
CHAMBER 



Figure 8-5. Dry pipe system exhauster. 



87.353 



WVEBOOry 
PHOT \IMVE H5K 
CO1IER PIN 
PtOT WVE SHEATH 
ARJUSTING SCREW 

ADJ. SCREW NUT. 

CLAPPER PIN 

CLAPPER 

CtAPPER HINGC 

CLAPPER SPRING. 




WKZLE BUSHING 
MlXZU PACKING 

PJOT \*kLVt NOZ2U 
PIPE PLUG 



Figure 8-6. Low-differential dry pipe valve. 



87.354 



8-5 




87.355 



Figure 8-7. Air pressure maintenance device. 



The clapper in the low-differential dry pipe 
valve is only slightly larger on the air side than 
on the water side. The air pressure in the system 
is maintained approximately 15 to 20 psi greater 
than the water pressure. Because the sprinkler 
system piping contains air pressure about equal 
to the water pressure, the sudden rush of water 
is slowed and only a slight amount of water is 
diverted into the branch lines, which do not have 
operating sprinklers after the valve opens. 

With either a differential or low-differential 
dry pipe valve an automatic air maintenance 
device (fig. 8-7) must be used to maintain air 
pressure and prevent accidentally tripping the dry 
pipe valve. Also, an automatic drain or high- 
water-level alarm is required for the priming water 
level so the water does not accumulate. (If there 
is too much priming water, the valve cannot 
operate.) 




1. BALL WEIGHT COVER 8. 

2. WATER AND AIR CLAPPER SEATS 9. 

3. AUXILIARY CLAPPER SEAT |Q. 

4. INTERMEDIATE CLAPPER SEAT 1 1. 

5. WATER CLAPPER |2. 

6. ADJUSTING NUT |3. 

7. ADJUSTING SCREW LOCKNUT 14. 



INTERMEDIATE CLAPPER 

INTERMEDIATE CLAPPER LINK 

AIR CLAPPER 

AUXILIARY CLAPPER 

TRIGGER 

BALL WEIGHT 

BALL WEIGHT PIN 



87.356 



Figure 8-8. Mechanical dry pipe valve. 
8-6 



MECHANICAL OR LATCHED-CLAPPER 
DRY PIPE VALVE. The mechanical or 
latched-clapper dry pipe valve operates under 
the same theory as other dry pipe valves. 
It has system air pressure against a small 
disk, diaphragm, or clapper. An arrange- 
ment of levers, links, and latches on the 
valve clapper provides the leverage for the 
closing force placed on the water clapper (fig. 
8-8). 



Water Deluge System 

A water deluge system (fig. 8-9) is 
used where there is an extra hazard, such 



as areas where flammable liquids or pro- 
pellants are handled or stored, or where 
there is a possibility that a fire might 
grow faster than ordinary sprinkler systems 
can control. These systems are also often 
used in aircraft hangars where ceilings are 
unusually high and where drafts may deflect 
the direct rise of heat so that sprinklers 
directly over the fire would not open promptly 
but others, at some distance away, might 
open without having any effect on the 
fire. 

In the water deluge system, all sprinklers con- 
nected to the piping network are open and the 
water supply is controlled by a water deluge 



-WATER MOTOR ALARM 



OPEN SPRINKLERS 
OR NOZZLES 



TROUBLE HORN 
TROUBLE LIGHT 



LOW-PRESSURE 
ALARM SWITCH 



H.A.D. 

(HEAT ACTUATED 

DEVICE) 




ELECTRIC AIR 
PUMP PANEL 



AIR LINE 
RESTRICTION 

AIR LINE 
MERCURY CHECK 
I I 

ALARM CONTROL VALVE 
i i 

ALARM TEST VALVE 

WATER PRESSURE 
GUAGE 

O.S.8Y. MAIN 
CONTROL VALVE 



MONITOR SWITCH 



-WATER SUPPLY 



87.357 



Figure 8-9. Deluge system. 

8-7 



valve (fig. 8-10). The water deluge valve remains 
closed until a fire is detected by a heat-actuated 
device that in turn causes the valve to open. Heat- 
actuated devices (H.A.D.) can be either 
mechanical or electrical in operation. They are 
discussed in further detail later in this chapter. 
The deluge system has a time delay between 
detection of a fire and the discharge of water at 
the sprinkler heads. This delay is due to the time 
required to operate the valve and fill the piping 
network with water, similar to the dry pipe 
system. To reduce the delay, the deluge system 
may be pre-primed by filling the piping network 
with water downstream from the deluge valve. To 
prevent water from escaping from the sprinklers, 
pre-prime plugs (fig. 8-11) are placed on the 
sprinklers. These plugs blow out of the sprinklers 
at approximately 20 psi water pressure. 

Pre-Action System 

A pre-action system differs from a deluge 
system only in that it has normally closed 
automatic sprinklers. When the fire detecting 
device is actuated, the water control valve opens 
and admits water into the piping system. The 
system then acts the same as a wet pipe system. 
Individual sprinklers are opened by the heat of 
the fire. The advantage of the pre-action system 
is that the probability of inadvertent water 



discharge is minimized because operation of both 
the detection system and automatic sprinklers is 
necessary for discharge of extinguishing water. 

It is incorrect to refer to pre-action systems 
as dry pipe sprinkler systems. It is true that the 
pre-action system piping does not contain water. 
However, the term dry pipe system refers to the 
type of sprinkler system and the type of water 
control valve that operates the system. 

There are two types of pre-action systems. 
First is the supervised system, which has air 
introduced into the system piping at a pressure 
of approximately 5 psi. This air pressure "super- 
vises" the piping to detect leaks. The pressure 
switches used for detection of low air pressure on 




87.359 



Figure 8-11. Sprinkler pre-prime plugs. 



1 HANDHOLE COVER 

2 GASKET^ 



S4 SEALINS PLATE 
ENCLOSING SOX 
38 COVER 

.40 CAPiCSEWOBNUT 
(K HANDHOLE COVER) 

i. RESET BRACKET 

SCREW 

-2 RU&BEH SEAL * 
4* RESET BRACKET^ 

44 SPRING 
\4i RESET HANDLE 




.S3. RELEASE 
.M MAN.PULL BRACKET 
11 MAN.PULL HINGE PIN 
NUAL PULL ARM 
-HSPLIT RINGS 
' RUBBER SEAL* 
>6 RETAINING RING 
M RaEASE LEVER SCREW 



34 RELEASING LEVER 
23. WEIGHT SWITCH 
22.WEJ6HT 

VENTS 
JO WEIGHT GUIDE ROD 




.29 CA8LE CLAMP 

21. GUIDE ROD 
SPRING 

3d MANUAL PULL ROD 
31. SPRING 



32. WEIGHT LATCH 
WEIGHT (22; 
-WEIGHT SWITCH (23; 



MERCURY CHECKS 
19. GASKET 

(SEALING PLATE; 



SECTION THRU WEIGHT SWITCH 



16. FACING RETAINING RING 
15. LATCH ARM FACING 

CLAPPER LATCH SAT'|HNG 

17. DRIP CUP 



, I. CLAPPER 
,2. LATCH STUD COLLAR 
,3. COLLAR NOT 
\4. DIAPHRAGM 
5. DIAPHRAGM GRIP PLATE 
,6 6RIP PLATE NUT 
,7. LATCH ARM PIN 




STUD LOCK WASHER 

9 DIAPHRAGM RETAINING PLATE 

10 LATCH ARM 

1 1. STUD LOCKNUT 



12. LATCH ARM BUSHING 

SEALED DRAIN 



Figure 8-10. Deluge valve. 



87.358 



the supervised system should record in inches 
of water rather than pounds per square inch. 
The second system is the unsupervised pre- 
action system. It has no means of continuous 
monitoring. 

Combined System 

A combined system (fig. 8-12) is a special 
purpose arrangement using two modified dry pipe 
valves connected to tripping devices and piped in 
parallel to supply water to the same sprinkler 
system. The piping network is filled with air under 
pressure. When a fire is detected, an exhauster 
at the end of the system opens and releases the 
air within the system. The system then operates 
the same as a pre-action system. However, if the 
detection system fails, the combined system acts 
the same as a dry pipe system and allows water 
to be admitted to the system when the sprinklers 
open, discharging the air from the piping 
network. 



TUBING OR WIRING TO FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM 

( JZT H^ -T" ' T~ 1L"Z. 

/ft frx ^1 TRIPPING TRIPPING^ ^LJ, 

r" ! 




TYPES OF SPRINKLERS 

Sprinklers are nozzles placed at intervals along 
the piping network to distribute a uniform 
pattern of water on the area being protected. To 
attain maximum efficiency, the stream of water 
must be broken into droplets. A deflector (part 
of the frame of the sprinkler) breaks up the water. 

You, as a UT, will generally install sprinklers 
to meet the specifications and plans of a project. 
When you require more information on proper 
locating of sprinklers, refer to the National Fire 
Protection Association Code Book Number 13 
(NPFA #13), entitled Installation of Sprinkler 
Systems. 

Automatic sprinklers are designed for specific 
applications based on orifice size, deflector design, 
frame finish, and temperature rating. Sprinklers 
have orifices ranging in size from 1/4-inch to 
1 /2-inch diameter graduated by 1/16-inch in- 
crements. There is also one 17/32-inch size orifice. 
Deflectors give different patterns of water 
distribution and allow the sprinkler to be placed 
in various locations such as upright, pendent, or 
sidewall (fig. 8-13). Next, sprinkler frames may 





SIDEWALL 



STANDARD PENDENT 





STANDARD UPRIGHT 



OLD STYLE 



87.360 
Figure 8-12. Combined system header arrangement. 



87.361 



Figure 8-13. Sprinkler deflector styles. 



8-9 



be plated for appearance or they may be coated 
for protection from an adverse environment. For 
example, sprinklers that will be used in corrosive 
atmospheres are either lead- or wax-coated. 
Finally, automatic sprinklers are normally held 
closed by heat-sensitive elements that press down 
on a cap over the sprinkler orifice and are 
anchored by the frame of the sprinkler. The heat- 
sensitive elements melt and release at different 
temperatures depending on application. Sprinklers 
are color coded to identify the temperature 
range rating of the fusible element (table 8-1). 
Color coding is not required for plated sprinklers, 
ceiling sprinklers, or similar decorative types. 

There are basically four types of release 
mechanisms for automatic sprinklers. They are 
the fusible link, frangible bulb, frangible pellet, 
and bimetallic element. 



DEFLECTOR 
DEFLECTOR SCREW 
FRAME 

FEMALE LEVER 
I ROLLER KEY 




CAP 



DISK 




MALE LEVER 




The fusible link sprinkler (fig. 8-14) is kept 
closed by a two-piece link held together by a solder 
with a predetermined melting point. When the 
solder melts, the levers pull the two-piece link 
apart and fly away from the sprinkler. Pressure 
in the piping network pushes the cap from the 
orifice of the sprinkler to discharge water. 

The frangible bulb sprinkler (fig. 8-15) has a 
small bulb made of glass between the orifice cap 
and the sprinkler frame. The bulb is partially filled 
with a liquid. Air fills the remaining space. Heat 
from a fire will cause the liquid to expand against 
the air causing the glass bulb to shatter and open- 
ing the sprinkler for water discharge. 



LINK PLATES 




87.362 
Figure 8-14. Fusible link automatic sprinkler. 



87.363 
Figure 8-15. Frangible bulb automatic sprinkler. 



Table 8-1. Sprinkler Temperature Ratings 



MAXIMUM AMBIENT 
CEILING TEMPERATURE 



TEMPERATURE 
RATING 



TEMPERATURE 
CLASSIFICATION 



SPRINKLER 
COLOR CODE 



100 


135 to 170 


Ordinary 


Uncolored 


150 


175 to 225 


Intermediate 


White 


225 


250 to 300 


High 


Blue 


300 


325 to 375 


Extra High 


Red 


375 


400 to 475 


Very Extra High 


Green 


475 


500 to 575 


Untrahigh 


Orange 



8-10 



A. frangible pellet sprinkler (fig. 8-16) has a 
rod between the orifice cap and sprinkler frame. 
The rod is held in place by a pellet of solder under 
compression. When the solder melts, the rod 
moves out of the way of the orifice cap. The cap 
is pushed off by the water pressure in the piping 
network. 

The bimetallic element sprinkler (fig. 8-17) 
uses a disk made of two distinct metals as a heat- 
sensitive element. When the sprinkler is off, the 
disk maintains pressure on a piston assembly. 
When a fire occurs and the temperature reaches 
the sprinkler's rating, the disk flexes and opens, 
releasing pressure on the piston assembly and 
allowing a small amount of water to bleed out of 
the piston chamber faster than it can be replaced 
through a restrictor. The water pressure in the 
piping network pushes the piston down and 
allows water to discharge from the sprinkler. 
When the temperature of the heat-sensitive 
element is reduced, the element returns to its 
normal position and allows water to pass through 
the restrictor, filling up the piston chamber, 
forcing the piston into the closed position, and 
stopping water discharge. This sprinkler can be 



used to automatically cycle on and off as 
necessary; for example, to put out a rekindled 
fire. 

Other sprinkler heads that do not have 
release mechanisms include the dry pendent 
sprinkler, the open sprinkler, and water spray 
nozzles. 




87.365 
Figure 8-17. Bimetallic element automatic sprinkler. 



PENDENT SPRAY SPRINKLER 
MODEL E 



EJECTION' 
ASSIST 
SPRING 
DO NOT 
REMOVE! 




CONVENTIONAL SPRAY SPRINKLER 
MODEL E 




SIDEWALL SPRAY SPRINKLER 
MODEL E 




UPRIGHT SPRAY SPRINKLER 
MODEL E 




87.364 



Figure 8-16. Frangible pellet automatic sprinkler. 



8-11 



A dry pendent sprinkler (fig. 8-18) is used 
when pendent sprinklers must be placed on dry 
pipe systems or in wet pipe systems when the area 
to be protected is subject to freezing (such as a 
walk-in reefer or outside shop area) and the 
piping network is installed in a heated area. This 
sprinkler is fitted with a tube within an attached 
pipe. The tube holds the water sealing elements 
in place against a watertight seal at the top of the 
pipe. When the sprinkler is actuated, the tube 
drops down and releases the elements through the 
tube and out the open sprinkler with the water 
discharge. 

Open sprinklers consist only of a sprinkler 
frame and deflector. They are used on special 
sprinkler systems such as deluge or rapid reaction 
systems (fig. 8-19). 

Water spray nozzles (fig. 8-20) are used for 
special application of water in various patterns 
(for example, wide or narrow angle, long throw 
or flat patterns). The different patterns may be 
achieved by either internal or external deflection 
of the water stream depending on the type of 
nozzle. 




SPRINKLER SYSTEM DETECTION 
AND INDICATING DEVICES 
AND FITTINGS 

Sprinkler systems have many different con- 
trolling devices and fittings. These can be 
classified as detecting or initiating devices or 
fittings. Their function is to detect system opera- 
tion and to initiate system operation or alarm 
systems connected to the sprinkler system. This 
section discusses these devices and fittings to aid 
you in installing and troubleshooting sprinkler 
systems and understanding the interface between 
the mechanical and electrical functions of these 
devices. 

Water-Flow Actuated Detectors 

Sprinkler water-flow detectors are generally 
pressure-actuated or vane-actuated. Pressure 
switches are used on both wet and dry pipe 
systems. Vane switches are widely used on wet 
pipe sprinkler systems. They cannot be used on 
dry pipe systems because the initial rush of water 
into the pipe could damage the vane and 
mechanism. 

Dry pipe system alarms tend to be slow-acting 
because it takes time to lose sufficient air through 
a fused sprinkler to trip the system. Various 
methods are used to speed up dry pipe systems 
as discussed earlier. 

Wet pipe system alarms have a different 
problem. Fluctuating water pressure frequently 
causes flow into a sprinkler system, equalizing the 
sprinkler system pressure with the supply pressure. 
Such surges of water or of pressure cause false 
water-flow alarms if some method of slowing 





87.366 
Figure 8-18. Dry pendent automatic sprinkler. 



87.367 



Figure 8-19. Open sprinklers. 



8-12 




87.368 



Figure 8-20. Water spray nozzles. 



down the switch response to the surge is not used. 
Various retarding techniques are used, some 
associated with the sprinkler piping and some with 
the water-flow detector. 

The pressure increase type of water-flow 
detector (fig. 8-21) comes in numerous styles. It 
is found in wet or dry pipe sprinkler systems. The 
usual arrangement for switch actuation includes 
a sealed accordionlike bellows that is assembled 
to a spring and linkage. The spring-tension 
setting controls the pressure at which the flow 
detector is actuated. It can be field adjustable 
and/or factory set to the desired pressure that 
activates the electrical switch. If this pressure 
switch is to be used on a wet pipe system, it is 
usually mounted at the top of a retarding 
chamber. This reduces the speed of pressure 
buildup at the switch. Other styles of this switch 
incorporate a pneumatic retarding mechanism 
within the detector housing. The retard time is 
adjustable to a maximum of 90 seconds. Usual 
settings are in the range of 20 to 70 seconds. 
The retard switch is connected to the alarm 
port of a wet sprinkler system alarm check 




87.369 
Figure 8-21. Pressure increase type of water-flow detector. 



valve. It is usually set for a pressure range of 8 
to 15 psi. 

Pressure drop detectors can be used in wet 
pipe sprinkler systems equipped with a check 



8-13 



valve (alarm check or swing check) that holds 
excess pressure on the system side of the check 
valve. These detectors are frequently used where 
a water surge or hammer causes false alarms with 
other types of water-flow detectors. The con- 
struction of pressure drop detectors is similar 
to the pressure increase detectors. The switch 
for a pressure drop detector is arranged to 
actuate on a drop in pressure. There is no 
retarding mechanism or chamber. A typical 
switch of this type would be adjusted for 
a normal operating pressure in the range of 
50 to 130 psi. The alarm pressure would be 
adjustable between 10 to 20 psi below normal 
pressure. 

A vane type of water-flow detector (fig. 
8-22) is used only in wet pipe sprinkler 
systems. The detector is assembled at the pipe 
by drilling a hole in the wall of the sprinkler 
pipe, inserting the vane into the pipe, then 
clamping the detector on with U-bolts. When 
the sprinkler system is actuated by fire, the 
water flowing through the pipe causes the 




87.370 
Figure 8-22. Vane type of water-flow detector. 



vane to move. A mechanical linkage connects 
the vane to an adjustable retarding device, usually 
a pneumatic dashpot. The retarding device 
actuates the alarm switch or switches and/or 
signal transmitter. The retarding device setting is 
usually in the range of 30 to 45 seconds. A 
maximum setting may be as high as 90 seconds 
if necessary. 

The pressure pump/pressure drop type of 
water-flow detector is used in large sprinkler 
systems and in those systems with inadequate 
water pressure to reliably operate one of the 
other types of water-flow detectors. These 
detectors are also known as fixed-pressure, 
water-flow detectors, with pump (fig. 8-23). 
This detector has a pump, pump motor, and 
control unit. It is arranged for strap-mounting 
to the sprinkler system riser. The device 
provides a water-flow alarm signal, a low 
system water pressure supervisory signal, and 
excess pressure in the system to prevent 
surges in the supply pressure from opening 
the alarm check valve and causing operation 
of the water motor gong or other alarm 
indicators. 

A typical detector of this type is adjusted 
to maintain the system pressure at 25 to 
50 psi above supply pressure. A slow leak at 
the alarm check valve or anywhere in the 
system will cause the system pressure to drop 
slowly. When pressure decreases to 2 psi below 
the preset value, a pressure switch closes, 
causing the pump to start pumping water from 
the supply side to the system side of the 
alarm check valve at a rate of about 1 gallon 
per minute (gpm). If the total system leaks 
less than 1 gpm, the pressure switch opens 
and stops the pump when the preset pressure 
is reached. However, if the system leaks are 
greater than 1 gpm, system pressure will con- 
tinue to drop even with the pump running. 
If system pressure decreases to 4 psi below 
the preset value, a trouble pressure switch 
opens to indicate that there is a leak greater 
than 1 gpm. If the water pressure continues 
to drop to 6 psi below the preset value, an 
alarm pressure switch closes, signaling a 
water-flow alarm. Some water-flow detectors 
of this type have an additional switch that 
disconnects pump power when the supply water 
pressure drops below 14 psi. This prevents 
pump burnup in case of total supply shutdown 
or a break in the supply line. 



8*14 



LOW SYSTEM PRESSURE 
ALARM SWITCH 



TO OTHER RISERS 
CHECK VALVE 



TO SYSTEM SIDE OF 
ALARM CHECK VALVE 




PUMP CONTROLLING 
PRESSURE SWITCH 



LOW SUPPLY PRESSURE 
ALARM SWITCH 



87.371 



Figure 8-23. Fixed pressure water-flow detector with pump. 



The electronic pressure drop detector is 
often used in sprinkler systems that must 
maintain a high excess system pressure over 
supply pressure that would delay actuation of 
a vane type of water-flow detector. It is 
normally mounted to the riser pipe with a 
flexible hose connection to the system side 
of the check valve. This device requires a 
pressure drop of 5 to 20 ounces per square 
inch continuing over a period of at least 3 seconds 
to signal an alarm. A pressure drop at a slower 
rate or of a shorter duration causes no alarm. A 
slow pressure drop to 15 psi or less causes a 
trouble signal indicating a system leak and low 
supply pressure. Pressure increases do not cause 
an alarm, but an overpressure condition (200 psi) 
causes a trouble signal. Trouble signals will also 
be initiated when the detector's cover is opened, 
supply voltage is outside normal ranges, and an 



internal circuit fails, interfering with detector 
function. 



Supervisory Alarm Initiating Devices 

Supervisory alarm initiating devices cause a 
signal at the supervisory control unit and/or 
remote receiver when an abnormal fire protection 
system condition occurs. In general, supervised 
valves are never closed unless a sprinkler system 
requires maintenance. Valves that control water 
flow to a water-flow detector or valves in a 
sprinkler header room or fire pump room that are 
normally closed may be supervised. Supervisory 
devices for normally open valves signal when the 
valve is closed no more than two turns or 20 
percent of its total travel. Supervisory devices for 
normally closed valves signal when the valve is 



8-15 



opened no more than two turns or 20 percent 
of its total travel. 

Outside screw and yoke (OS&Y) valve posi- 
tion indicators (figs. 8-24 and 8-25) are firmly 
attached to the valve yoke (fig. 8-26). The 
spring-loaded switch-operating lever or plunger 
rests in a smoothly tapered notch in the valve 
stem. When the valve is operated, the stem moves 
in or out; the lever or plunger moves up the 
incline at the edge of the notch. The switch is 
actuated before the lever or plunger is out of the 
notch. This causes a supervisory signal at the 
control unit and/or remote receiver. 

A post indicator valve (PIV) will have a posi- 
tion indicator mounted to it (fig. 8-27). Usually 



a PIV is located outside the building and may be 
mounted on the ground or on the building wall. 
A spring-loaded lever rests against the side of the 
open/shut indicator, called a target. As the valve 
is operated, the target moves. The switch follows 
this movement. The position indicating switch is 
adjusted to cause a supervisory signal before the 
operating nut has rotated two turns or 20 percent 
of its full travel. 

Nonrising stem valve position indicators are 
attached to nonrising stem valves, usually installed 
underground. The housing of the device is made 
of a noncorroding material such as brass. The 
switch itself is a magnetically operated, sealed reed 
switch. As the valve is operated, the magnet moves 
away from the reed switch. After the valve has 




87.372 
Figure 8-24. OS&Y valve position switch (plunger type). 




:ONDUIT 



WALL-MOUNTED 
1 JUNCTION BOX 




Illlllll 



87.373 



Figure 8-25. OS&Y valve position switch (lever type). 



SWITCH LEVER (REST-/ *-SUPERVI SORY 
ING IN VALVE STEM / SWITCH 
NOTCH) 

SECTION A-A 



87.374 

Figure 8-26. OS&Y valve position supervisory switch 
installation. 



8-16 



POST INDICATOR VALVE 




SUPERVISORY 
SWITCH 



87.375 



Figure 8-27. PIV position supervisory switch installation. 



been opened two full turns the magnet is far 
enough away from the reed switch to actuate it, 
causing a supervisory signal at the control unit 
and/or remote receiver. 

Water level in sprinkler system reservoirs must 
be maintained within certain limits. There are 
usually automatic controls for maintaining the 
desired water level. Water level supervisory 
devices cause a supervisory signal when the water 
level is not maintained between the desired high 
and low limits. 

A float-actuated level indicator (fig. 8-28) 
is mounted outside on the wall of a tank 
with its float and lever extended into the 
tank. The lever arm pivots at the tank wall and 
rises or falls with the water level. A switch 
or switches (one for high level, one for low 
level) are actuated when the float moves outside 




87.376 
Figure 8-28. Water level switch (float actuated). 



8-17 



of normal limits. Figure 8-29 shows a typical high- 
low water level supervisory device installed in a 
sprinkler system reservoir. 

A pressure-actuated level indicator is physi- 
cally very similar to the bellows-operated pressure 
switches used for water-flow detection (fig. 8-21). 
As the water level changes in a reservoir, the water 
pressure at the supervisory switch also changes. 
The switch can be adjusted to actuate when 
pressure indicates a low water level or a high water 
level. This device is generally installed in the 
piping near the bottom of the reservoir. 

Electronic level indicators may also be found 
in some systems. These indicators read the con- 
ductivity of water to cause an electrical signal. 
These devices are most frequently used to sense 
high water levels. They are not commonly used 
in fire protection systems. 

Temperature supervisory devices are used to 
prevent water freezing in fire protection systems. 




WALL OF TANK 



HIGH-LOW WATER LEVEL 
SUPERVISORY DEVISE 



FLEXIBLE WATERPROOF 
CONDUIT (TYPICAL) 



WATER TEMPERATURE 
SUPERVISORY DEVICE 



WEATHERPROOF 
JUNCTION BOX 



. DOWN TO JUNCTION BOX 
AT BASE OF TANK 



SECTION THROUGH TANK 



Figure 8-29. Installation of water level 
temperature supervisory devices. 



87.377 
and water 



Utilitiesmen will most commonly work with low 
water temperature indicators. These are usually 
sealed, factory-set thermostats and may be 
installed in system pipe or reservoirs. The most 
frequent low temperature setting is 40 F. Figure 
8-29 shows a low water temperature indicator in- 
stalled in a system reservoir. 

You may find other supervisory devices in use. 
They will usually be specifically designed for a 
particular system. The principles of operation are 
generally the same as those already discussed. 
Physical mounting provisions or other details may 
vary. Refer to NAVFAC MO-1 17, manufacturer's 
manuals, and NFPA #13 for more complete 
information, when you must install or maintain 
these devices. 



WATER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS 

Water supplies that serve sprinkler systems 
must be adequate and reliable. To determine the 
amount of water necessary for a sprinkler system, 
the rate of flow and pressure needed for effec- 
tive performance must be known. If additional 
fire hose streams from outside the building will 
be required, these should also be included. The 
combined water needed for all fire-fighting equip- 
ment is known as the//>e//ovt> demand. 

An adequate system can deliver the required 
fire flow for a specified time with normal water 
consumption at the maximum rate. To be reliable, 
the system must also be able to deliver the fire 
flow demand under certain emergency conditions, 
such as when a supply main or pump is out of 
service. The desired reliability of the system 
depends upon the nature of the protected struc- 
ture (people, property, or mission). Water may 
be supplied by public or base sources, water tanks, 
or fire pumps. 

For specific information regarding the fire 
flow demands of sprinkler systems, refer to NFPA 
#13, chapters 2, 7, and 8. These chapters will give 
you the information required for the sizing of each 
particular type of sprinkler system hazard based 
on residual pressure, acceptable flow rates, and 
duration times. 



INSPECTION, TESTING, AND 

MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sprinkler systems, when properly installed, are 
an effective means of fire protection for life and 
property. To make sure these systems are reliable, 



8-18 



periodic inspection and maintenance of system 
components are required. Inspection should in- 
clude a visual check and, if possible, a test of the 
components to be sure a working condition ex- 
ists. The frequency of the overall testing and in- 
spection process is summarized in table 8-2. 



INSPECTION AND TESTING 

During inspections of sprinklers, certain con- 
ditions indicate maintenance requirements. If 
these conditions are not corrected, they will reduce 
the reliability of the system. These conditions and 



Table 8-2. Summary of Inspection and Test Frequencies for Sprinkler Systems 



a 1 

W Z 

w o 

s 


W HJ 

< z 

D Z 
CX < 


EVERY 3 
YEARS 


Check general condition of sprinklers and sprinkler systems 


X 




Conduct flow tests of open sprinklers 


X 




Conduct main drain tests 


X 




Test water-flow alarms X 






Check air and water pressure in dry pipe systems X 






Trip-test dry pipe valves 


X 




Drain low points in dry pipe systems 


X 




Trip-test deluge and pre-action systems 


X 


X 1 * 


Trip-test high-speed suppression systems 




X 


Check general condition of standpipe systems 


X 




Perform water-flow tests 


X 




Check general condition of hydrants 


X 




Check general condition of fire department connections 


X 




Check water levels in tanks X 






Check general condition of water storage tanks 


X 




Check water level and air pressure in pressure tanks X 






Check general condition of pressure tanks 


X 




Check tank heating systems 


X 




Inspect and test cathodic protection equipment 


X 




Start fire pumps X 






Check fuel supply to engine drivers X 






Perform fire pump flow tests 


X 




Inspect and test controllers 


X 




Inspect valves for open position X 






Conduct general preventive maintenance inspection of valves 


X 




Inspect check valves, water-flow meters and backflow preventers 




X* 


Test pressure regulating and altitude valves 


X 




1 Annual trip test may be dry; wet trip test including flow of water 
shall be conducted a minimum of once every 3 years. 


through heads/nozzles 
* 



8-19 



some remedial actions are discussed in the 
following sections. 

Automatic Sprinklers 

Conditions that indicate the need for 
maintenance for automatic sprinklers include the 
following: 

Mechanical injury such as bent or loose 
deflectors or bent frames. Where sprinklers are 
subjected to continual damage, provide approved 
sprinkler guards. 

Corrosion such as marked discoloration or 
hard deposits. Use lead-coated or wax-coated 
sprinklers to prevent corrosion. 

Overheating causes soldered joints and 
cracked quartz bulbs to give way. Temperature 
ratings for soldered link sprinklers should be 50 F 
above (for quartz bulb sprinklers 25 F above) 
normal room temperature. 

Freezing produces reduced tension in 
soldered links, bent struts, and distorted caps. 

Loading is deposits of paint or other 
foreign materials. 

Need for replacement or relocation. Major 
construction and occupancy changes and changes 
to heating, lighting, and air-conditioning systems 
may require relocation or replacement of 
sprinklers or additions to the system. Changes in 
sprinkler location and pipe sizes should be based 
upon an engineering evaluation. 

Where sprinklers are installed in areas 
where there is stockpiling of materials a clearance 
of at least 18 inches under the sprinklers is 
necessary for proper water distribution. 

Keep a supply of extra sprinklers for the 
various types and temperature ratings required 
and a sprinkler wrench. 

Outside Open Sprinklers 

When you are servicing outside open 
sprinklers, you should do the following: 

Visually check the general condition of 
sprinklers. 



Close windows and doors and take proper 
precautions to avoid water damage to property 
before making flow tests. 

Conduct the flow test by opening the 
control valve. 

After making flow tests, remove and clean any 
plugged or obstructed sprinklers. 

Piping and Hangers 

In servicing piping and hangers, check for 
mechanical injury and corrosion. Replace bent or 
damaged piping and fittings and replace or repair 
missing or loose hangers. Make sure that piping 
is not used to support stock, equipment, or other 
material. 

Make sure wet pipe system piping is properly 
protected against freezing. Before and during 
freezing weather, check piping of dry pipe systems 
for proper drainage. During freezing weather, 
open drains for outside sprinkler systems. Drain 
water from low point drains and drum drips on 
dry pipe systems before freezing weather occurs. 

Obstructed Piping 

When evidence of obstruction of piping has 
been found, check for the following sources of 
obstructing material: 

Improperly screened inlets from open 
bodies of water 

Poorly maintained elevated gravity tanks 

Dead end of extensive water distribution 

systems 

Poorly installed underground mains 

Highly acid, alkaline, or saline water 

Active chemicals in water supply 

Use of secondhand materials in the 
sprinkler system 

Frequent operation of systems (especially 
dry pipe systems) introducing additional 
foreign material and free oxygen 

Alarm Check Valves 

Perform a 2-inch drain test quarterly to test 
alarm check valves. Open the 2-inch drain valve 



8-20 



fully and record pressure on the gauge located 
below the clapper at the lowest point. Close the 
2-inch drain valve and record pressure at the 
stabilization point. Notice whether pressure 
returns quickly or slowly. Maintain a continuous 
record of drain tests. If recorded pressure when 
the valve is wide open is similar to previous 
recordings and pressure returns quickly, it is 
normal. 

If recorded pressure when the valve is wide 
open is significantly lower or pressure is slow to 
return when the valve is closed, there may be an 
obstruction in the waterway. Check for the 
following problems: 

Partially closed valves to sprinkler system 

Obstruction in alarm valve preventing 
clapper from opening freely 

Test local water-flow alarm operation monthly 
by opening the test connection at the end 
of the system. Where there is no test con- 
nection, the alarm may be tested by opening 
the bypass valve to the circuit opener or closer 
or by opening the 2-inch drain valve about 
two and one-half turns. Do not test water 
motor alarms during freezing weather. To find 
principal causes of alarm failures, check for the 
following: 

Failure of automatic drain on retard 
chamber to close 

Closed or partially closed valve on piping 
to alarm devices 

Plugging of bell casings of water motor 
gongs by foreign material 

Corrosion of moving parts of water motor 
gongs 

Detachment of shaft couplings from water 
motor gongs 

Insufficient water flow to operate devices 

Alarm check valve corroded shut (this 
failure is not common and will not occur when 
systems are properly maintained) 



To find principal causes of false fire alarms, 
check for the following: 

Improper drainage of retard chamber (cor- 
rect this by opening the chamber and cleaning or 
repairing the automatic drain) 

Pressure surges through the alarm check 
valve 

Fill wet pipe sprinkler systems slowly through 
throttled valves and open the control valve wide 
after the system has been filled. Be sure there is 
no drainage from retard chambers. Leakage 
means that the alarm valve clappers are not 
seating properly. They require cleaning and 
possibly overhauling. 

Make internal inspections of alarm valves 
when normal testing procedures indicate the need. 

Examine valve body for tuberculation. 

Check clapper operation the clapper 
should move freely without sticking or 
binding. 

Replace clapper facings as required. 

Resurface seat rings as required. 

Dry Pipe Valves and Air 
Check Valves 

Air check valves are special, small, dry pipe 
valves that are usually connected to a wet pipe 
system. The alarms are actuated at the wet pipe 
system riser when the air check valve "trips." To 
prevent premature operation, the valves should 
be fitted with an air chamber to maintain at least 
50 gallons of air in the chamber and on the system. 

Perform the 2-inch drain test quarterly by 
opening the 2-inch drain valve fully and recording 
the pressure at the lowest point. Close the 2-inch 
drain valve and record the pressure at the stabiliza- 
tion point. Notice whether pressure returns 
quickly or slowly. Maintain a continuous record 
of drain tests. 

If the recorded pressure when the valve is wide 
open is similar to previous recordings and pressure 
returns quickly, it is normal. 

If recorded pressure when the valve is wide 
open is significantly lower or pressure is slow to 
return when the valve is closed, there may be an 
obstruction in the waterway. Check for partially 
closed valves to the sprinkler system. 



8-21 



Because dry pipe sprinkler systems are in- 
stalled in areas where temperatures are expected 
to drop below freezing, all parts of the system 
must be airtight and kept free of water. Complete 
drainage is essential. 

Each fall, before freezing season comes, check 
the pitch of all piping carefully using a spurt level 
to detect dips and small pockets in the lines. Check 
for: 

broken, loose, or missing hangers; and 

water in low point drains. 

Check air and water pressures weekly. If air 
pressure losses exceed 10 psi, check the entire 
system for tightness and eliminate air leaks. 
Principal checking methods are as follows: 

Put a strong smelling oil, such as oil of 
peppermint, into the air supply. This will produce 
a strong odor at the point of leakage. 

Paint fittings with a soapy water solution 
and watch for bubbles. 

Check the temperature of valve enclosure and 
maintain a temperature above 42 F. 

Make certain that the valve between the inter- 
mediate chamber and the alarm devices is open 
on dry pipe valves. 

Check drip valves at intermediate chambers, 
making certain that clappers or balls are in a posi- 
tion to allow drainage. This is done by lifting push 
rods or by inserting a pencil in the opening. Water 
leakage through this valve is an indication that 
the water clapper is not holding tightly to the seat. 

Check the air pressure. The air pressure 
versus water pressure for differential dry pipe 
valves should be as outlined in table 8-3 unless 
otherwise specified by the manufacturer's 
operating instructions. Certain mechanical dry 
pipe valves are designed to trip at a fixed pressure 
of 10 to 15 psi. Maintain 30 psi air pressure on 
these valves. 

Basic inspections for accelerators and ex- 
hausters include the following: 

Check air pressure. The system and the 
quick-opening device air pressure should be the 
same. 

Relieve excess pressure in the quick- 
opening device by opening bleeder valves or 
loosening air gauges. 



If the system pressure is high, relieve the 
excess pressure through the priming water test 
valve. Close the valve as soon as pressures 
balance. To avoid the possibility of tripping the 
dry pipe valve, do not open the priming test valve 
more than one turn and keep the valve to the 
quick-opening device closed while the priming test 
valve is open. 

To make sure that dry pipe valves will operate 
effectively in fire situations, they should be 
trip-tested annually as follows: 

1 . Close the main control valve. 

2. Open the 2-inch drain. 

3. Open the main control valve until 5 psi 
pressure shows on the water gauge. 

4. Close the 2-inch drain valve slowly. 

5 . Open the inspector's test connection of the 
system. Where there is no test connection, use the 
most remote low point drain. 

6. As soon as the dry pipe valve trips, close 
the main control valve and open the 2-inch drain. 
This is particularly important in permanently cold 
areas. 

7. Record initial air and water pressures, air 
pressure at the trip point, and time required for 
tripping. 

8. Examine and clean the dry pipe valve in- 
terior. Replace facings and gaskets if needed. 

9. Reset the dry pipe valve and the open con- 
trol valve. 

10. When a dry pipe valve fails to trip or when 
a clapper fails to latch in the open position, notify 
the person responsible for fire protection so that 
a qualified sprinkler contractor may be contacted. 

To test dry pipe valves you should do the 
following: 

1 . Close the main control valve and open the 
2-inch drain valve and low point drain valves. 



Table 8-3. Differential Dry Pipe Valve Air Pressure 
Specifications 



MAXIMUM WATER 

PRESSURE 

psi 

50 

75 
100 
125 
150 



AIR PRESSURE 
RANGE 

psi 

15-25 
20-30 
25-35 
30-45 
35-50 



8-22 



Close low point drain valves when water stops 
flowing. 

2. Clean clapper facings and seats. 

3. Clean the valve interior. 

4. Place clappers on seats and make certain 
the antiwater column latch is in place. Bolt on the 
cover. Do not use grease or other material to help 
seat clappers. Fill the system with 10 psi air 
pressure to blow out any residual water through 
low point drains. 

5. Open valves at the top and bottom of the 
priming chamber and priming test valves. 

6. Admit water to the priming chamber 
until water flows out of the test valve. Close this 
valve. 

7. Close the priming chamber valves. 

8. Admit air pressure to the system. 

9. Open the main control valve slowly. 
10. Close the main 2-inch drain valve, except 

where water hammer conditions exist. In this case, 
leave the 2-inch drain valve open until pressures 
stabilize. 

To check air supply piping, do the following: 

Note air pressure within 12 to 24 hours after 
resetting the dry pipe valve. If air leakage exists, 
test sprinkler piping for leaks. 

Make sure the valves to manually operated 
compressors are tightly closed. A slow air leak 
back through one of these valves can trip the dry 
pipe valve. 

Examine restriction orifices in air piping and 
air pressure regulators, if used, from automatic 
air compressors to dry pipe valves. 

Deluge and Pre-Action Valves 

To test deluge and pre-action valves, perform 
the 2-inch drain test quarterly by opening the 
2-inch drain valve fully and recording pressure at 
lowest point. Close the 2-inch drain valve and 
record pressure at the stabilization point. Notice 
whether pressure returns quickly or slowly. Main- 
tain a continuous record of drain tests. 

If the recorded pressure when the valve is wide 
open is similar to previous recordings and pressure 
returns quickly, it is normal. 

If the recorded pressure when the valve is wide 
open is significantly lower or pressure is slow to 
return when the valve is closed, there may be an 
obstruction in the waterway. Check for partially 
closed valves to the sprinkler system. Check the 
water pressure and the local water-flow alarm 
through the bypass connection. 



Some deluge systems have both open and 
closed sprinklers. Make sure heat-responsive 
devices are provided in areas with both open and 
closed sprinklers and are in service. Fusing of a 
sprinkler will not operate a deluge valve. Where 
conditions permit, trip-test each deluge valve every 
3 years by flowing water through the heads/ 
nozzles. To conduct a deluge valve dry trip-test, 
do the following: 

1. Close the main control valve. 

2. Apply an electric heat lamp to at least one 
heat-actuating device in each circuit, testing one 
circuit at a time. Note the time required to trip 
the valve. Where flammable vapors may be pres- 
ent, use a hot cloth or hot water in place of the 
electric test set. 

3. Reset the deluge valve and trip, using the 
manual release. 

4. Where fixed temperature releases are in- 
volved, wait 15 minutes and trip by removing a 
fusible element from the tubing or a heat- 
responsive device. 

5. When tests are complete, reset valves and 
open the main control valves. 

Because there are so many designs of heat- 
responsive devices, test procedures for each 
cannot be included here. See the individual 
manufacturer's information for detailed testing 
procedure. During routine inspections, check for 
painted or corroded contacts, plugged vents, or 
painted domes. Clean or replace affected devices. 

Cathodic Protection Equipment 

Inspect cathodic protection equipment as 
follows: 

1. While equipment is operating, note and 
record current flow shown by meters. If there is 
no current, check for blown fuses, electrodes 
touching the tank, ground-wire connection to 
tank, or electrodes not immersed in the water. If 
equipment operates at voltages or amperages over 
those listed on the nameplate, the rectifier may 
be damaged. Check polarity and direction of 
current flow. (If connections to rectifier are 
reversed, rapid damage to the tank occurs.) 

2. Check condition of electrodes that 
deteriorate because of action of current passing 
from electrodes to water. Replace worn electrodes. 
(Watch for diminishing current flow on the 
ammeter; this is a sign that the electrodes may be 
failing.) 



8-23 



3. Protect electrodes from ice. If ice forma- 
tion is a serious problem, turn off current and 
remove and store the electrodes during the freez- 
ing season. Tank protection will continue for 
about 3 weeks after the unit is out of operation. 
Reinstall the electrodes at the end of the freezing 
season. 

Nonfreeze Systems 

No special testing of nonfreeze systems is 
required, other than an annual check of the 
specific gravity of the nonfreeze solution. If the 
specific gravity indicates a need for replenishing 
the nonfreeze agent, be sure to add the same agent 
as was previously used. 

High-Speed Suppression Systems 

Full operational testing of high-speed suppres- 
sion systems is conducted at intervals not to 
exceed 3 years except when mission requirements 
justify change. A detector or a manual release sta- 
tion must be actuated. Check to be certain that 
all nozzles are operating. Then, follow these steps 
to reset the system: 

1. Replace pre-prime caps and/or rupture 
disks. 

2. Refill piping with water. 

3. If the system uses an explosive valve, 
replace the firing squib and the squib holder. 

MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

The need for maintenance is shown by 
periodic inspections. It should include replace- 
ment of worn or broken components and clean- 
ing and flushing of systems. A regular schedule 
of maintenance requirements should be devised. 
Logs recording accomplished tasks should be 
maintained as a record of the system's history. 
Be sure to include manufacturers' manuals for the 
system components and consult them when 
making repairs and adjusting or troubleshooting 
the system. 



GASEOUS EXTINGUISHING 

SYSTEMS 

Gaseous extinguishing systems are generally 
found in areas where equipment is installed that 
would be highly vulnerable to destruction from 
water or dry chemical extinguishing agents. 
Computer rooms, electronic gear such as radio 
receiving and transmitting equipment, and power 
generating facilities are examples of areas where 
gaseous extinguishing system installation would 



be desirable. In the Navy today, the Utilitiesman 
will come in contact with two commonly used 
systems. These are the carbon dioxide and the 
halogenated gas systems. Each of these systems 
is discussed in this section. 

Gaseous extinguishing systems can be divided 
into three general categories: local application, 
total flooding, and hose line systems. Local 
application systems discharge agent onto the 
burning material and are commonly used for pro- 
tection of paint dip tanks, restaurant range hoods, 
and special motors. Total flooding systems 
discharge agent into and fill enclosed space. They 
are commonly found in flammable liquid storage 
rooms, computer installations, and transformer 
vaults containing oil-filled equipment. Hose line 
systems discharge extinguishing agent through 
manually operated nozzles connected to a fixed 
supply by piping and/or hoses. At present, 
carbon dioxide is the only gaseous agent approved 
for manual hose line systems. 

CARBON DIOXIDE SYSTEMS 

Here are two general methods of applying 
carbon dioxide to extinguish a fire. One method 
creates an inert atmosphere in the enclosure or 
room where the fire is located for a prolonged 
period of time. This method is called total 
flooding. The second method is to discharge 
carbon dioxide to the surface of liquids or 
noncombustible surfaces coated with liquid 
flammables. This method is known as local 
application. 

Carbon dioxide is electrically nonconductive. 
It is used extensively for the protection of 



FLEXIBLE 
DISCHARGE LOOP" 



SUPPLY LINE 
TO HAZARD- 



ELECTRIC 
CONTROL HEAD 




87.378 

Figure 8-30. Typical cylinder arrangement for high-pressure 
CO 2 system. 



8-24 



electrical equipment. The nondamaging quality 
of this agent makes it useful as an extinguishing 
agent for computer rooms and computer tape 
vaults. 

There are two general types of carbon diox- 
ide extinguishing systems, high pressure and low 
pressure. 

High-Pressure Systems 

In the high-pressure system, high-pressure 
cylinders are used to store liquid carbon dioxide 
at ambient temperatures (fig. 8-30). Normal 
cylinder pressure is nominally 600 psi and varies 
with the ambient temperature of the storage area. 



Storage area ambient temperatures should not ex- 
ceed 130 F or be less than 32 F. For safety pur- 
poses, high-pressure cylinders have a frangible 
disk that will burst at 3,000 psi to prevent cylinder 
rupture as a result of overpressurization. 

Low-Pressure Systems 

Low-pressure systems have a pressure vessel 
maintained at F by insulation and refrigeration 
equipment (fig. 8-31). At this temperature, the 
pressure in the container is approximately 300 
psi. Because the container is kept at a low 
temperature, the container can be filled to 90 to 
95 percent of capacity. For safety purposes a relief 



15) 




1. Carbon dioxide pressure gage 

2. Carbon dioxide liquid-level gage 

3. Bleeder relief valve, 341-lb (2350 kPa)(23.5 bars) 

diaphragm type 

4. Pressure-relief-valve selector 

5. Pressuce-relief valves, 357-lb (2460 kPa>(24.6 bars) 

spring-loaded type 

6. Carbon dioxide filling connection 

7. Refrigerating unit 

8. Carbon dioxide vapor-equalizing pipe 

9. Carbon dioxide liquid-filling pipe 

10. Dip tube 

1 1 . Pressure vessel, ASME Code 

12. Carbon dioxide liquid 

13. Insulation, 5-in. (127-mm) cork 

14. Manway cover 

15. Carbon dioxide vapor 

16. Sheet-metal outer casing 



17. Cooling coil 

18. Manual shutoff valve 

19. Master discharge valve 

20. Carbon dioxide gas-pressure pipe from discharge control 

21. Carbon dioxide supply pipe to selector valves 

22. 90 percent carbon dioxide liquid-content check tube 

with control valve 

23. Discharge test horn for checking carbon dioxide 

liquid content 

24. 100 percent carbon dioxide liquid-content check 

tube with control valve 

25. Carbon dioxide gas-pressure supply pipe to discharge 

control 

26. Pressure relief, 600-lb (4140 kPa) (41.4 bars) 

frangible-disk type 

27. Pressure-relief vent to atmosphere 



Figure 8-31. Refrigerated low-pressure CO 2 storage tank. 



87.379 



8-25 



valve is installed to bleed off pressure at 341 psi. 
Another relief valve operates at 357 psi for rapid 
release of excess pressure. There is also a frangible 
disk designed to burst at 600 psi should the relief 
valves fail to control pressure buildups. 

Advantages/Disadvantages of 
CO 2 Systems 

There are advantages and disadvantages to 
each type of carbon dioxide system. Low-pressure 
storage units have a liquid level gauge that con- 
tinuously monitors the amount of carbon diox- 
ide in storage. High-pressure systems require 
weighing the cylinders. High-pressure systems 
permit storage of almost the exact amount of 
carbon dioxide required to protect a hazard area 
because of the flexibility and selection of cylinders 
in 50-, 75-, or 100-pound sizes. The smallest low 
pressure is 750 pounds. High-pressure systems 
require refilling and hydrostatic testing every 12 
years. Low-pressure systems have no such require- 
ment. Pressures in high-pressure systems vary with 
the ambient temperature; this affects the discharge 
rate of the system. Low-pressure systems keep the 
liquid carbon dioxide at F and 300 psi at all 
times, assuring a uniform discharge rate. Another 
advantage of low-pressure systems is their ability 
to allow automatic, simultaneous discharge for 
more than one hazard area on an engineered basis. 
Hose reels can also be attached to these systems 
to operate simultaneously with hazard protection. 
A reserve supply can be provided by increasing 
the storage unit size of low-pressure systems. 
High-pressure systems require manifolding and 
valving arrangements to achieve a reserve supply. 

Storage of the carbon dioxide is also a con- 
sideration in showing advantages or disadvantages 
of these systems. High-pressure systems require 
approximately 3 pounds of equipment for every 
pound of carbon dioxide stored. Low-pressure 
systems require less than 2 pounds for every stored 
pound. Usually, low-pressure systems require less 
floor space for storage of equal amounts of 
carbon dioxide as compared with high-pressure 
systems. In many instances, low-pressure storage 
containers may be placed outside of the buildings. 
High-pressure systems allow flexibility in 
space requirements since multiple cylinder banks 
may be stored in several smaller locations. 
Low-pressure systems require one large, single 
area for the refrigerated storage unit. 

Operating Devices 

As with all fire protection systems, carbon 
dioxide systems must have operating devices for 
discharge of the extinguishing agent and to cause 



alarms to be actuated. Many of the operating 
devices discussed earlier in this chapter can be 
used. Most commonly used are the heat-actuated 
devices (H.A.D.) or smoke detecting devices. 
Manual controlling devices are also used in 
carbon dioxide systems. Whether the agent release 
is automatic or manual, an alarm at the alarm 
system control unit should be actuated. 

Piping 

Carbon dioxide fire protection system pipe 
and fittings are selected to have suitable low 
temperature characteristics and good corrosion 
resistance inside and out. Ferrous metals are 
galvanized. Steel, copper, brass, and other 
materials having similar mechanical and physical 
properties are acceptable. Copper tubing with 
suitable flared or brazed connections is also 
acceptable. Cast-iron (gray) pipe and fittings are 
not used. 

Pipe and fittings for high-pressure systems 
have a minimum bursting pressure of 5,000 psi. 
In low-pressure systems, pipe and fittings have a 
minimum bursting pressure of 1,800 psi. 

Between the storage tank and selector valves, 
black steel pipe may be used because of the larger 
sizes involved and its airtightness. 

The supply piping is usually routed to prevent 
unnecessary exposure to high temperatures from 
ovens or furnaces or to direct flame impingement 




"BOWL-TYPE NOZZLE 




STRAINER-TTlij[J \NOZZLE 
A ORIFICES 



CARBON DIOXIDE SUPPLY 
NV L"-TYPE NOZZLE 

Figure 8-32. Carbon dioxide nozzles. 



87.380 



8-26 



before discharge. Hot piping causes excessive 
vaporization of carbon dioxide and a resultant 
delay in effective discharge. 

Pressure relief devices or valves that prevent 
entrapment of liquid carbon dioxide may be in- 
stalled on sections of piping that can be closed 
off. On high-pressure systems, relief devices 
usually operate at 2,400 to 3,000 psi, and, on low- 
pressure systems, at 450 psi. 

Nozzles 

Nozzles are of various designs and discharge 
patterns. Two common types are shown in figure 
8-32. Nozzles are marked with a code number in- 
dicating the diameter in 1/32-inch increments of 
a single orifice standard nozzle having the same 
flow rate. A No. 5 nozzle, for example, has the 
same flow rate as a 5/32-inch-diameter standard 
orifice. A plus sign ( + ) after the number indicates 
a 1/64-inch larger size. Decimals are sometimes 
used to indicate sizes between the whole numbers. 



TOTAL FLOODING SYSTEMS 

Total flooding systems are used for rooms, 
ovens, enclosed machines, and other enclosed 
spaces containing materials extinguishable by 
carbon dioxide. 

For effective total flooding, the space must be 
reasonably well enclosed. Openings must be 
arranged to close automatically and ventilation 
equipment to shut down automatically, no later 
than the start of the discharge. Otherwise, 
additional carbon dioxide must be provided to 
compensate for the leakage. 

Automatic closing devices for openings must 
be able to overcome the discharge pressure of the 
carbon dioxide. Conveyors, flammable liquid 
pumps, and mixers associated with an operation 
may be arranged to shut down automatically on 
actuation of the protection system. A typical 
arrangement of a total flooding carbon dioxide 
system is shown in figure 8-33. 




1. Cylinder framing 10. 

2. Cylinder manifold 11. 

3. Pressure-operated discharge head 12. 

4. Flexible connection 13. 

5. Alarm gong 14. 

6. Remote-control cable (1/1 6-in.)(1.6-mm), run in 3/8-in. 15. 
(9.5-mm) galvanized pipe or conduit with corner pulleys 

at all changes in directions; no bends or offsets allowed 16. 

7. Carbon dioxide piping 

8. Actuator tubing, run in Vi-in. (13-mm) conduit 17. 

9. Self-closing weight-operated damper 



Air-exhaust duct 

Fire door 

Nozzle 

Actuator on ceiling 

Remote-control pull box 

Pressure-operated trip to release self-closing damper, 

fire doors, and windows 

Pressure-operated switches to sound alarm and shut 

down fan 

Pneumatic-control head with local manual control 



87.381 



Figure 8-33. Total flooding carbon dioxide system installation. 

8-27 



LOCAL APPLICATION SYSTEMS 

Local application systems are used to protect 
hazards such as oil-filled transformers and paint 
dip tanks. Ventilating fans, conveyors, flammable 
liquid pumps and mixers associated with the 
operation may be interlocked to automatically 
shut down when the protection system is 
activated. 

A typical arrangement of a local application 
carbon dioxide system is shown in figure 8-34. 

HOSE LINE SYSTEMS 

Hose line systems are used to supplement 
fixed protection systems or portable fire 
extinguishers for all hazards extinguishable by 
carbon dioxide. 

Hose line systems may be supplied either by 
high-pressure or low-pressure systems. A 



high-pressure hose line installation is shown in 
figure 8-35. 

HALOGENATED GAS SYSTEMS 

Several types of halogenated gas systems have 
been developed for fire protection purposes: 
Halon 104, Halon 1001, Halon 1011, Halon 1202, 
Halon 1211, Halon 1301, and Halon 2402. The 
numbers relate to the chemical formulas of the 
gases. The first digit identifies the number of 
carbon atoms in the chemical molecule; the 
second digit identifies the number of fluorine 
atoms; the third digit identifies the number of 
chlorine atoms; the fourth digit identifies the 
number of bromine atoms; and a fifth digit, if 
any, identifies the number of iodine atoms 
present. 

Primarily, Halon 1301 and Halon 1211 are in 
general use in the United States today. These 



CYLINDERS 

CONTROL HEAD 
(2) 



PRESSURE- 

OPERATED 

SWITCH 

(3) 



ACTUATOR 
TUBING 



ACTUATOR 
(4) 



REMOTE CONTROL 

PULL BOX 

(I) 




JANKSIDE 
NOZZLE 



6 IN. (152mm) 

FREEBOARD 

(5) 



1 . Normal manual control, pull box, and cable 

2. Pneumatic control head with emergency manual control 

3. Pressure-operated switch to shut down conveyor, etc. 

4. Actuator mounted under 2- by 2-ft (0.6- by 0.6-m) baffle plate 

5. Tank freeboard to be at least 6 in. (152 mm) 



Figure 8-34. Local application carbon dioxide system installation. 



87.382 



8-28 




87.383 
Figure 8-35. Carbon dioxide hose line system installation. 



two types are recognized by the National Fire Pro- 
tection Association (NFPA). Standards for their 
installation and use are published in the National 
Fire Codes. 

Halogenated gas systems are usually used in 
the following situations: 

Where a clean extinguishing agent is 
needed 

Where energized electrical or electronic 
circuits are to be protected 

Where flammable liquids or flammable 
gases are present 

Where surface burning combustible solids 
are protected 

For high value objects or processes 

Where the area to be protected is normally 
occupied by people 

Where availability of water or space for 
other types of systems is limited 

Generally, Halon 1211 and Halon 1301 are 
used in total flooding applications. At the 
present time there is no equipment approved for 
local application systems using halogenated 
agents. 

For effective fire-fighting purposes, a 
minimum concentration of 5 percent is recom- 
mended for total flooding systems for surface fires 
of ordinary combustibles. Deep-seated fires, as 



in cable insulation, require much larger concen- 
trations and extended holding times. 

Halon 1301 is the most commonly used 
halogenated gas in use today. It is the least toxic 
of any of the halogenated gases and does not harm 
personnel when concentrations are below 10 per- 
cent. (For additional information on Halon 1301, 
refer to NFPA Standard 12A.) The major use of 
Halon 1301 is in computer rooms. 

Halon 1211 is toxic to people when concen- 
trations exceed 4 percent. This prevents its use as 
a total flooding agent for areas occupied by per- 
sonnel. (Halon 1211 is normally used in portable 
extinguishers because they do not allow a signifi- 
cant concentration to develop in a space to cause 
a hazard for people.) 

Equipment for Halon fire extinguishing 
systems is similar to that used for high-pressure 
carbon dioxide systems. Halon 1301 is stored in 
a cylinder superpressurized with nitrogen to 600 
psi (at 70 F) to provide an expellant pressure for 
the agent in excess of the agent's normal vapor 
pressure. 

GASEOUS EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM 

ALARM SYSTEMS 

There are some special considerations for 
alarm systems for gaseous systems because of 
possible toxic effects on personnel, the need for 
reasonably fast response, and reliable operation. 

Response of gaseous extinguishing agents is 
not usually as urgent as foam agents, consider- 
ing the types of hazards protected. Personnel 
safety from the possible toxic effects of the agents 
used also affects the speed requirement. Heat 
and/or smoke detectors are frequently used as 
initiating devices. 

Cross-zoning is also frequently used for 
gaseous extinguishing systems. The first detector 
(zone) actuation is usually arranged to cause a 
local audible and/or visual signal. The second 
detector (zone) actuation causes a distinctive local 
signal to warn personnel that the extinguishing 
agent is about to be released. 

Some gaseous extinguishing systems, usually 
those protecting populated spaces, have an abort 
feature to avoid unnecessary discharge of an 
expensive, possibly toxic gaseous agent. Ex- 
tinguishing systems with the abort feature have 
a time delay between actuation of the second (or 
only) detector and release of the agent. The delay 
may be factory set or adjustable. It is usually set 
in the range of 15 to 60 seconds to allow time for 
personnel to leave the area before release of the 



8-29 



agent and to allow for manual interruption of the 
agent release sequence. If the situation is not 
dangerous, the sequence can be interrupted by a 
manual abort switch. When the detectors and con- 
trol unit have been restored to their normal con- 
dition, the abort switch can be restored. The abort 
switch is usually designed to be held in (until the 
control panel is reset) so that the agent discharge 
cannot be accidentally impaired when the switch 
is unattended. 

Initiating Devices 

Frequently used detectors for gaseous agents 
are spot-type ionization smoke detectors and rate- 
compensated heat detectors. Factors affecting 
detector effectiveness, such as electrical power and 
air pressure, if pertinent, are supervised. 

One or two manual methods for release of the 
gaseous agent are usually provided. 

Manual fire alarm devices are frequently 
connected to the alarm system control unit to 
cause immediate discharge of the gaseous agent, 
regardless of cross-zoning and time delays other- 
wise provided. 

Manual devices may also be connected 
electrically to cause direct release of the agent, 
independent of the alarm system. 

Direct mechanical release of agent may be 
by manual actuation of a control valve. 

Whether the agent release is caused by an 
alarm control unit auxiliary output or by an 
independent manual method, there should be an 
alarm at the alarm system control unit. Manual 
release of the gaseous agent usually causes an 
alarm by actuating a pressure switch that senses 
the increase in pressure in the gas line or manifold 
between the release valve (s) and the nozzles. 

Sequence of Alarms 

The normal circuit arrangement for a building 
alarm system to release a gaseous extinguishing 
agent is the same as for a building system with 
added features such as cross-zoning, the abort 
feature, manual release of agent, and other 
specific auxiliary functions of the alarm system. 
Alarm systems that release a gaseous extinguishing 
agent use auxiliary alarm outputs to segregate the 
protected area and reduce dispersion and dilution 
of the agent. Typical auxiliary functions are fan 



shutdown, door (and window) closure, and 
closure of air-handling system dampers. Gaseous 
agent-releasing alarm systems applied to computer 
room installations also shut down computer 
power at the time the agent is released to eliminate 
the heat source for possible electrical fires. 

A typical sequence of alarm system-initiated 
events in a computer room installation that in- 
cludes all the usual features is as follows: 

Detection of fire by first detector in an area 
causes local and remote alarm indication, fan 
shutdown, door and damper closure, and other 
miscellaneous auxiliary functions through inter- 
locks with building systems. 

Detection of fire by second detector in the 
area (cross-zoned with first detector) causes a 
distinctive local audible signal and initiates a time 
delay during which agent release and computer 
power shutdown may be aborted. 

At the end of an adjustable delay 
(normally 20 seconds), assuming the release is not 
aborted, computer power is shut down and the 
extinguishing agent is released into the protected 
area. 



INSPECTION, TESTING, AND 

MAINTENANCE OF GASEOUS 
SYSTEMS 

Inspection, testing, and maintenance of 
gaseous fire extinguishing systems are required to 
be sure they are in proper operating order. Inspec- 
tion and test frequencies for these systems are 
summarized in table 8-4. 

Carbon Dioxide High-Pressure Systems 

Check hoses and nozzles, cylinders, and 
cylinder pressure as follows: 

Weekly, check that all nozzles and hand hose 
lines are clear and in the proper position and that 
all operating controls are properly set. 

Semiannually, weigh cylinders and replace any 
that show a weight loss of greater than 10 per- 
cent. To weigh cylinders, do the following: 

Loosen each cylinder support and dis- 
connect each discharge head. Discharge heads are 
designed to be removed and replaced without 
tools. 



8-30 



Table 8-4. Summary of Inspection and Test Frequencies for Gaseous Systems 





WEEKLY 


MONTHLY 


SEMI- 
ANNUALLY 


ANNUALLY | 


Check CO 2 and Halon nozzles and hand hose lines 


X 








Weigh cylinders 






X 




Check liquid level in low-pressure Co 2 storage tanks 


X 








Check devices and connections of low-pressure CO 2 systems for 
leakage 




X 






Test tank alarm pressure switch and identification device 






X 




Conduct actuating and operating tests of CO2 and Halon system 
cylinders 


X 


Hydrostatic test of cylinders and hoses 


(See 


text 


for frequency) 





Weigh cylinders with a beam scale or with 
a platform scale. To weigh with a platform scale, 
remove the cylinders completely from the rack and 
lift them on to the scale. 

Test cylinders and hoses hydrostatically as 
follows: 

Hydrostatically test cylinders to a minimum 
pressure of 3,000 psi. The frequency for testing 
is as follows: 

If discharged after 5 years from date of last 
test, perform hydrostatic test. 

If not discharged after 1 2 years from date 
of last test, discharge cylinder and perform 
hydrostatic test. 

Hydrostatically test hoses to a minimum 
pressure of 1,250 psi. The frequency of testing is 
the same as for cylinders. 

Carbon Dioxide Low-Pressure Systems 

Check nozzles, pressure and level gauges, and 
for leaks in all devices. 

Weekly, check to see that all nozzles are clear 
and in the proper position and that all operating 
controls are properly set. Check and record the 



reading on the liquid level gauge of all storage 
tanks. Refill tanks when the quantity is less than 
the rninimum required to protect the largest single 
hazard, including any required reserve supply. 

Monthly, check for leaks on all devices and 
connections under continuous pressure, including 
valve packing glands, screwed connections, and 
safety relief valves. 

Semiannually, test the tank-alarm pressure 
switch and the operation of the alarm bell or light 
by reducing and increasing the pressure. Perform 
this test as follows: 

Close valve on the piping from the vapor 
space to the alarm pressure switch. 

Remove the test plug to reduce pressure. 

Increase pressure by connecting a high- 
pressure cylinder to the test opening. 

After testing, disconnect the high-pressure 
cylinder, replace the test plug, and reopen the 
valve on the alarm pressure switch piping. 

If the bell or light fails to operate on the 
pressure test, repair or replace, and test again. 

Check the liquid level and pressure gauges for 
accuracy once each year. 



8-31 



Replace frangible disks on the storage tanks 
once every 5 years. 

Maintain refrigeration equipment according 
to the manufacturer's instructions. 

Halogenated Systems 

Follow these procedures to test halogenated 
systems. 

Weekly, check to see that all nozzles are clear 
and in proper position and that all operating con- 
trols are properly set. 

Semiannually, check weight and pressure con- 
tainers. (See procedures for verifying CO 2 
cylinders.) 

If the container has a loss in net weight of 
more than 5 percent or a loss in pressure (after 
adjusting for temperature) of more than 10 per- 
cent, either refill or replace the container. 

If a factory-charged nonrefillable container 
that does not have a pressure indicator shows a 
loss in net weight of more than 5 percent, replace 
the container. 

Annually, test all actuating and operating 
devices. A cylinder containing carbon dioxide or 
refrigerant may be used in place of Halon 
cylinders to minimize the cost of a discharge test, 
or a simulated test of pressure-operated devices 
may be conducted. 

Alarm Systems 

Tests and maintenance of detectors, circuits, 
control units, annunciators, relays, and power 
supplies are as described in chapter 3 of NAV- 
FAC MO-117, Maintenance of Fire Protection 
Systems. Some additional steps are required to test 
cross-zoned detectors, electrically operated 
releases for gaseous agents, and the abort feature. 

Release Devices and 
Auxiliary Functions 

Test electrically operated release devices for 
gaseous extinguishing systems annually. Combine 
the test with tests of detectors and the total alarm 
system. If an actual discharge test is not desired, 
be sure to prevent gas discharge and computer 
power shutdown, if provided, while allowing ob- 
servation of electrical functions. This may require 
valve closure or partial disassembly of diaphragm- 
piercing, solenoid plunger-type valves and manual 
override of the computer shutdown feature. Refer 
to system instructions from the equipment manu- 
facturer or installing company. The same method, 



once determined, is normally used for testing 
manual devices electrically connected to cause 
direct actuation of gas release devices. 

After taking necessary steps to prevent gaseous 
discharge, cause the necessary alarm conditions 
to actuate the extinguishing system by actuating 
detectors or manual initiating devices. At the end 
of the time delay interval, release device actua- 
tion should be evident by sound or visual observa- 
tion. Verify that relays for auxiliary functions 
actuate. Take notes on which event relays are 
actuated at the first cross-zoned detector alarm, 
second cross-zoned detector alarm, and at the end 
of the timer interval. Note the amount of time 
delay between the second detector actuation and 
the delayed functions. 

If release devices or auxiliary functions fail, 
check appropriate output voltages at the control 
unit and at the failed device with the control unit 
in the alarm condition. If voltages are improper, 
troubleshoot the control unit or circuit as in- 
dicated. Cross-zoned systems require an alarm 
condition on both initiating circuits in an area to 
actuate release devices and some auxiliary func- 
tions. If a timed function fails, check input voltage 
to the timer and the delayed output voltage from 
the timer with a voltmeter. Replace the timer if 
input is proper but output is not. 

If voltages are proper, check solenoid and 
relay coil continuities with one side of their 
respective energizing circuits open to the control 
unit. See testing and maintenance for foam 
systems, section 7.3.1 of NAVFAC MO-117, 
Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems, for 
instructions for this test. Replace defective devices 
and/or wiring. 

Abort Feature 

In gaseous extinguishing systems with an abort 
feature, test the feature annually, along with the 
other elements of the system. To test the abort 
feature, first determine the timer setting from 
prior test records or installation data. Then, cause 
first and second cross-zoned detector alarms. The 
second detector alarm starts the timed period 
during which the gaseous agent release and other 
abortable functions may be activated. Operate the 
abort switch approximately in the middle of the 
time interval. The test should normally be per- 
formed with agent release and computer shutdown 
features disabled. At the end of the time interval, 
confirm that the aborted functions do not occur. 

Possible causes of abort failure are: 

a defective abort switch, 



8-32 



a defect in the wiring between the abort 
switch and the main control unit, or 

an improper abort feature installation or 
an improper timer setting (low). 

During troubleshooting, disable the ex- 
tinguishing agent release and the computer shut- 
down feature, if provided. Check the abort timer 
setting according to the manufacturer's instruc- 
tions. If the timer setting is quite low, 15 seconds 
or less, increase the setting to 20 seconds or more 
(as determined by local authorities to be adequate 
to prevent unnecessary discharge of the agent). 

If actuating the abort switch has no effect, 
check the switch continuity with an ohmmeter 
while actuating it disconnected from its wiring. 
If the switch continuity shows alternating readings 
of zero ohms and infinite resistance, as it should 
when being repeatedly actuated, check that the 
OFF and ON positions of the switch are not 
reversed. (Such reversal may be caused by 
connecting the wires to the wrong pair of switch 



terminals or inverting the switch when mounting 
it.) If the switch has no defect, check its circuit 
continuity with an ohmmeter at the control unit 
and with at least one wire disconnected from the 
control unit. Observe switch action at the ohm- 
meter by actuating the switch repeatedly. Correct 
any circuit defects or wiring errors. Replace the 
switch if it is defective. 

DRY CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING 

SYSTEMS 

Dry chemical extinguishing systems are very 
similar in construction and operation to gaseous 
extinguishing systems. There are three general 
categories of chemical extinguishing systems: total 
flooding, local application, and hose line systems. 

Total flooding systems are arranged to 
discharge the agent into enclosed spaces. Such 
systems are used for the protection of flammable 
liquid storage rooms and paint drying ovens 
(fig. 8-36). Ventilating equipment, conveyors, 




1. Expellant-gas container 

2. Dry-chemical container 

3. Dry-chemical discharge piping 

4. Fire door 

5. Expellant-gas piping to pressure 
trips 



6. Electric-shutdown and alarm cir- 
cuit 

7. Ventilating fan (shuts down on op- 
eration of system) 

8. Pressure trip (closes windows and 
doors on operation of system) 



9. Heat-actuated device 

10. Flooding nozzle 

11. Remote manual-actuation box 

12. Pneumatic-actuation tubing 

13. Alarm bell 



Figure 8-36. Total flooding dry chemical system installation. 



87.384 



8-33 



flammable liquid pumps, and mixers may be 
interlocked with the dry chemical system and 
arranged to shut down automatically upon 
discharge of the system. 

Local application systems are arranged to 
discharge dry chemical directly on the hazard, 
without any enclosure (fig. 8-37). Typical local 
application systems are used for the protection of 
paint dip tanks and restaurant range hoods. 
Ventilating fans, conveyors, flammable liquid 
pumps, and mixers may be interlocked to shut 
down automatically upon discharge of the system. 

Hose line systems discharge dry chemical 
through manually operated nozzles connected by 
hose or by piping and hose to a fixed supply (fig. 
8-38). 

Dry chemical used in approved systems is 
mostly sodium bicarbonate, very finely ground, 
to which has been added other ingredients to keep 
it free flowing and to resist caking. Other agents 
used in dry chemical extinguishing systems include 
potassium bicarbonate, potassium chloride, and 
monoammonium phosphate multipurpose type. 

The dangers dry chemicals used in fire ex- 
tinguishing concentrations cause exposed person- 
nel are temporary breathing difficulty and reduced 
visibility. In areas using total flooding systems, 
suitable means should be provided to permit 
evacuation of personnel. In areas using local 
application systems where the dry chemical is not 
confined, there is little hazard to personnel. 

Dry chemical systems are used primarily for 
extinguishing fires in flammable liquids. 
Bicarbonate base dry chemical can be particularly 
effective for extinguishing fire in deep fat fryers 
caused by overheating. The saponification reac- 
tion between the dry chemical and fat or grease 



TANKSIDE NOZZLE 
DISCHARGE PIPING 




prevents re-ignition by turning the fat to soap. 
Multipurpose dry chemical will not react with the 
fat or grease and can prevent the saponification 
reaction between the fat or grease and any 
bicarbonate base dry chemical subsequently used. 

Dry chemical systems are not suitable for fires 
in materials (such as cellulose nitrate) that con- 
tain their own oxygen supply. They are not 
normally used for fires involving delicate electrical 
equipment such as telephone switchboards, com- 
puters, and certain other electronic equipment 
because the dry chemical will insulate the fine and 
delicate contacts. The contacts will then need 
complete cleaning. 

Monoammonium phosphate and potassium 
chloride are slightly acidic, and in the presence 
of moisture can corrode metals such as steel, cast 
iron, aluminum bronze, and titanium. Corrosion 
can be minimized by prompt cleanup. Most dry 
chemical agents can be cleaned up by wiping, 
vacuuming, or washing the exposed materials or 
surfaces. Monoammonium phosphate will require 
some scraping and washing if exposed surfaces 
were hot when the agent was applied. 

TYPES OF SYSTEMS 

There are basically two types of dry chemical 
systems. 

1 . Gas cartridge systems that use a container 
of expellant gas that, when released by manual 



FROM DRY 
CHEMICAL UNIT 




87.385 

Figure 8-37. Local application dry chemical system 
installation. 



87.386 

Figure 8-38. Stored pressure dry chemical cylinder with 
hose line. 



8-34 



or automatic means, pressurizes the container of 
dry chemical and forces the agent through the 
piping network or hose lines (fig. 8-39). 

2. Stored pressure systems that consist of a 
container of dry chemicals that is constantly 
pressurized, usually with nitrogen. 

SYSTEM COMPONENTS 

Operating devices are used to release the 
expellant gas from its container for the pressuriza- 
tion of the dry chemical tank or to release the dry 
chemical if it is normally stored under pressure. 

In fixed systems, expellant gas is released from 
its container by electrically, pneumatically, or 
mechanically dropping a weight that opens a 
cylinder valve or by mechanically releasing a 
spring that punctures the sealing disk of a gas 
cartridge. The dry chemical when stored under 
pressure is released by pneumatically or 
mechanically dropping a weight that opens the 
discharge valve. 

Pressure trips may be used to release the 
weights of more than one unit for simultaneous 
discharge on hazards needing a greater capacity 
than is available for one unit. Pressure trips are 
operated by gas pressure taken from the low- 
pressure side of the expellant gas regulator. 

Hose line systems are actuated at the cylinder 
by turning a hand wheel or by moving a lever. 

The distribution system (piping) should be 
constructed of standard weight (schedule 40) 



PRESSURE 
REGULATORS 



DROP WEIGHT 
SLEEVE 



DRY CHEMICAL 
TANK 



BURSTING DISK 
UNION 




galvanized steel pipe and standard weight 
galvanized steel or malleable iron fittings. 

It is important that the piping system be 
balanced so that the pressure drop to any one 
nozzle will be about the same as to any other 
nozzle. Although dry chemical suspended in a gas 
may be homogeneous during flow, resembling a 
liquid, certain effects such as inertia and sudden 
expansion of the gas may cause some separation 
of the two phases. 

For example, if several nozzles were installed 
consecutively at right angles to a straight run of 
pipe, the inertia of the dry chemical would carry 
most of it past the first nozzles. These nozzles 
would, therefore, discharge more gas and less dry 
chemical than those farther down the piping 
system. To eliminate this, all branch piping is 
balanced by the use of tees (the dry chemical enter- 
ing the side port and leaving through the two end 
ports). 

Nozzles are of various designs and discharge 
patterns. Nozzles used for distributing the dry 
chemical are of a type approved for the particular 
application. 



CHAPTER REFERENCES 

Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems, NFPA 
12, National Fire Protection Association, 
Battery March Park, Quincy, Mass. 02269, 
November 1980. 

Deluge Foam- Water Sprinkler and Spray Systems, 
NFPA 16, National Fire Protection Associa- 
tion, Battery March Park, Quincy, Mass. 
02269, November 1980. 

Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems, NFPA 17, 
National Fire Protection Association, 
Battery March Park, Quincy, Mass. 02269, 
July 1980. 

Installation of Sprinkler Systems, NFPA 13, 
National Fire Protection Association, 
Battery March Park, Quincy, Mass. 02269, 
1983. 



87.387 

Figure 8-39. Dry chemical and expellant gas storage 
cylinders with piping connection. 



Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems, NAV- 
FAC MO-117, Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, Washington, D.C., October 1981. 



8-35 



CHAPTER 9 



WATER TREATMENT AND PURIFICATION 



Learning Objective: Analyze the theories of operation of equipment required 
for treatment and purification of water, noting the considerations taken when 
choosing, operating, maintaining, and supervising the installation of water 
treatment equipment and sources. 



As a Utilitiesman, you will be responsible for 
ensuring that an adequate supply of safe water 
is available for domestic and fire protection uses. 
In meeting this responsibility there are several 
factors you must consider. They are the selection 
of a water source, how to develop the water 
source, what contaminants you will encounter, 
and the selection of methods you will use to 
remove these contaminants. This chapter discusses 
each of these considerations. 



WATER SOURCE SELECTION 

The first consideration you will encounter is 
the selection of a water source. Three factors must 
be considered in this selection: water source 
quantity, quality, and reliability. 

SOURCE QUANTITY 

Water sources developed for military use are 
commonly referred to as water points. Water 
points are classified as follows: 

1. Surface water (streams, lakes, and rivers) 

2. Ground water (wells and springs) 

3. Seawater 

4. Rain, snow, and ice 

When selecting a water source, you must con- 
sider how much water is available and how much 
water will be demanded for use. Before dealing 
with demand, let's discuss how much water is 
available at the source. 

The amount of water that may collect in any 
surface source will depend on the amount of 
precipitation, the size of the drained area, 
geology, ground surface, evaporation, tempera- 
ture, topography, and artificial controls. 



The available water at a source can be 
estimated by using some simple calculations. To 
calculate the quantity of water (gallons per 
minute) flowing in a stream use the following 
formula: 

Q = 6.4 x A x V 

Q = Quantity of water in gallons per minute 



6.4 = A constant There are 7.5 gallons of 
water per cubic foot. However, because 
of error in stream measurement, 7.5 
has been reduced to 6.4. 

A = The area of the stream in square feet 
obtained by multiplying the width 
times the average depth of the stream. 

V = The velocity of the stream in feet per 
minute obtained by measuring the time 
it takes a floating object to travel a 
known distance. 

An example of this calculation would be a 
stream having an average depth of 2 feet and a 
width of 16 feet, and a twig is noted to flow 13.3 
feet per minute. To find the amount of water 
flowing in the stream, you would work the equa- 
tion as follows: 

Q = 6.4 x A x V 

Q = 6.4 x (2 x 16) x 13.3 

Q = 6.4 x 32 x 13.3 

Q = 2,723.84 gpm 

To calculate the quantity of water in a lake 
or pond having little or no runoff, multiply the 



9-1 



surface area by the average depth. The answer will 
be in cubic feet. Multiply by 7.5 to get the gallons 
in the water source. 

An example of this would be a pond with an 
average depth of 7 feet and a surface area of 2,864 
square feet. It would be calculated as shown 
below: 

Q = AX D x7.5 
Q = 2,864 x 7 x 7.5 
Q = 1,052,520 gallons 

Lakes and ponds are usually located within the 
water table and the hydraulics of the water feeding 
the lake or ponds may be similar to that of wells. 
Therefore, a drawdown test, using a method 
similar to the one described below for wells, may 
be used to calculate the quantity of water. The 
test should consist of the drawdown of the static 
water level 1 or 2 feet and the recovery time 
recorded. A method must be devised to discharge 
the water being pumped in such a manner that 
it does not return to the source during the test. 

To calculate the quantity of water that may 
be supplied from newly constructed or existing 
wells, a drawdown test must be made. For this 
test to be performed properly, the hydraulics of 
a well must be understood. 

Before being pumped, the level of water in a 
well is the same as the level of the water table in 
the water-bearing formation in which the well is 
completed. This is called the static level in the 
well and in the foundation. See figure 9-1. The 
depth from the ground surface to the static water 
level is measured, and this distance is used to 
describe its position. Thus, if the water in the well 



STATIC WATER LEVEL- 




is 25 feet below ground, the static water level is 
said to be 25 feet for this well. Elevation of the 
static water level above mean sea level can also 
be used to describe its position. 

When a well is pumped, the water level drops. 
After several hours of pumping at a constant rate, 
it stabilizes itself in a lower position. This is 
called the pumping level or dynamic water level 
for this rate of pumping. See figure 9-2. 

The distance that the water is lowered by 
pumping is called the drawdown. It is the dif- 
ference between the static level and the pumping 
level. The drawdown in the well, resulting from 
pumping, lowers the water pressure in the well, 
but the surrounding water-bearing formation 
retains its original pressure. In response to this 
difference in pressure, water flows out of the pores 
of the formation into the well. 

The water-bearing formation does not give up 
its water all at once to the pumped well. The flow 
of water into the well is held back by the frictional 
resistance offered by the formation to the flow 
of water through its pores. The resistance varies 
in each formation and is developed in direct 
proportion to the rate of movement or velocity 
of the water in the formation. It follows from this 
that the rate of flow resulting from a given 
pressure difference depends on the frictional 
resistance to flow developed in the formation. 
The term used to describe this characteristic of 
a porous material is permeability. 

For a particular type of well to be constructed, 
the yield of the well for any given drawdown is 




87.129 
Figure 9-1. Static water level before pumping. 



87.130 



Figure 9-2. Pumping level. 



9-2 



directly proportional to the permeability of the 
formation. This property of the formation varies 
through wide ranges, the value for a coarse sand 
stratum being several hundred times that of a fine 
sand stratum of the same thickness. It increases 
with the coarseness of the sand and decreases with 
the compactness of the material. It increases where 
the sand grains are more nearly uniform in size. 
It decreases when fine sand and silt fill the voids 
between larger particles. The permeability of a 
rock formation, like limestone, varies with the 
number and sizes of the fractures, crevices, and 
solution channels. 

The measurements that should be made in 
testing wells include the volume of water pumped 
per minute or per hour, the depth to the static 
water level before pumping is started, the depth 
to the pumping level at one or more constant rates 
of pumpage, the recovery of the water level after 
pumping is stopped, and the length of time the 
well is pumped at each rate during the testing pro- 
cedure. The testing described in this chapter is 
essentially the measurement of the hydraulic 
characteristics of a particular well. 

The pump and power unit used for testing a 
well should be capable of continuous operation 
at a constant and variable rate of pumpage for 
a period of over 24 hours. It is important that the 



equipment be in good condition for an accurate 
test, since it is undesirable to have a forced shut- 
down during the test. The test pump should be 
large enough to test to the expected capacity of 
the well, even though this may be far beyond the 
amount of water required and may exceed the 
capacity of the permanent well pump. Pumping 
by airlift may be a practical method, provided that 
meters are not used for measuring the flow. The 
test should run at least 24 hours. Longer tests, 
up to several weeks' duration, may be desirable 
to verify adequacy of the formation. 

To determine the safe yield of the well, the 
pump should be operated at a rate that will cause 
only about 50 percent of the maximum possible 
drawdown. The drawdown should not exceed a 
point 5 feet above the topmost screen slot. For 
example, a 125-foot well has a static water level 
of 25 feet and a pumping level of 75 feet or a 
50-foot drawdown. The satisfactory pumping 
level is 50 feet or 50 percent of the maximum 
drawdown. Therefore, a safe well capacity is 
established and maintained for that condition 
regardless of the yield. The safe pumping yield 
is the withdrawal rate that will not cause a lower- 
ing of the water table, and should cause no more 
than 50 percent of maximum drawdown. A chart, 
similar to the one shown in figure 9-3, should be 



MO 
GROUND 


DEPTH BELOW 
TOR GROUND ELEV. 


PUMPING TIME (HOURS) RECOVERY TIME (HOURS) 
8 12 16 20 240 * 8 12 


ELEVATION 1 
STATIC 


10 


















1 1 1 


~l I r- 


r r i 


"T 1 1 " 


20- 





- 24 HO 


JRS PUMF 


ING AT 


1 


043 GPM 


*- 










' 



















WATER LEVEL 

WELL 1 
SCREEN r 


30 






1 

40 " 












( 


:COVERY 

o IN 10 M 
IN 30 M 
i IN 1 H 
o IN 5 H 
IN 10 H 


\\- 

N 3 K 














ii" 

S8 


R 
66.09 




I 












81.09 
85.19 


N -f J~ 
R ui u 

k tf) O 

? I < 


70- 
80- 







_ 


- 






96.2* 





~ ". _ 






3 8 


90- 
































READING TAKEN AS FOLLOWS: 
1. DURING PUMPING TEST EACH 10 MIN 
FOR FIRST 30 MIN. THEN EACH' HOUR 
2. DURING RECOVERY EACH 5 MIN FOR 
30 MIN. THEN EACH 10 MIN FOR 30 MIN 
AND THEN EACH HOUR 


















1120- 














130- 














140- 




















150- 





















87.131 



Figure 9-3. Well chart. 



9-3 



included in the test report. The complete test 
report will include the following: 

1 . Initial static water level 

2. Pumping rates, at least every hour 

3. Drawdown data, at least every hour 

4. Rate of recovery 

The simplest way to measure the water 
pumped is to catch it in a steel drum or other tank 
of known volume. The time required to fill the 
tank is determined as accurately as possible. The 
rate of pumpage in gallons per minute is then 
calculated. For reasonable accuracy, the tank 
should be large enough to hold the water pumped 
during a period of at least 2 minutes. This limita- 
tion makes the method practical only for relatively 
small wells, since large tanks will not usually be 
available. 



Water meters offer a definite advantage in 
measuring the water being pumped. The amount 
of water pumped may be recorded from the meter 
at desired intervals. The total discharge may be 
recorded for any individual phase of the draw- 
down test. 

The most accurate way to measure depth to 
the static level and to the pumping level in a well 
is with a chalked tape. A steel tape with a weight 
to make it hang straight is chalked at the lower 
end with blue carpenter's chalk and lowered into 
the well until 1 or 2 feet of the tape is submerged. 
The proper length to lower the tape may have to 
be determined by experiment. The wetted length 
of the tape shows up very clearly on the chalked 
portion of the tape. This length is subtracted from 
the total length lowered below the reference point; 
this gives the depth to water. 

The drawdown observed during a well 
test is the difference in feet between the 



Table 9-1. Daily Water Requirements in Temperate Zone 



Unit consumer 


Conditions of use 


Gallons per 
unit consumer 
per day 


Remarks 


Man 


In combat: 


U, . 1 


For periods, not exceeding 3 days, 
when operational rations are used. 
When field rations are used. 

Drinking plus small amount for 
cooking or personal hygiene. 
Minimum for all purposes. 
Desirable for all purposes 
(does not include bathing). 

Includes allowance for waterborne 
sewage system. 

Depending on size of vehicle. 

Depending on size of vehicle. 
Minimum, does not include bathing 
or water for flushing. 


Vehicle 


Normal 


2 


3 


March or bivouac 


2 


Temporary camp 


5 


Temporary camp 
with bathing facilities 
Semipermanent camp. 

Permanent camp 


15. 
30-60 


60 - 100. 
1/8 to 1/2 

1/4 to 1 


Level and rolling 
country. 
Mountainous country 
Drinking and cooking. 

With waterborne sewage. 


Hospital 


1 HPV hpH 




50 per bed 





87.146 



9-4 



pumping level and the static water level 
before pumping was started. The specific 
capacity of the well is the yield or discharge 
in gallons per minute divided by the drawdown 
in feet. 

Water needs should be estimated, using per 
capita requirements and other controlling 
demands as factors in arriving at the estimate. 
Other controlling demands may be the water 
requirements for such items as fire protection, 
industrial uses, lawn sprinkling, construction, 
leakage, and water delivered to other activities, 
and vehicles. Table 9-1 shows the per capita 
daily water requirements for different situations, 
and the daily average requirements for vehicles. 
Table 9-2 indicates the requirements that may 
be needed for construction equipment. Com- 
pare the yield of the source with the needs of the 
activity. 



SOURCE QUALITY 

The quality of water is the ability of water to 
be potable and palatable (water that is safe to 
drink, being free of harmful characteristics that 
could cause odor, foul taste, bad color and/or 
disease). 

Practically all water supplies have been 
exposed to pollution of some kind. The general 
growth of population and the increasing use of 
streams and other bodies of surface water for the 
disposal of wastes have been detrimental to water 
sources. 

Impurities in water are either suspended or 
dissolved. The suspended impurities are usually 
more dangerous to health. They include mineral 
matter, disease organisms, silt, bacteria, and 
algae. These must be destroyed or removed from 
water that is to be consumed. While some of these 
impurities can be seen by the naked eye, others 



Table 9-2. Quantity and Quality of Water Needed by Construction Equipment 



Equipment 


Size 


Quantity 


Purity of water 


Rock crusher 


225-T 


60 000 gpd 


No special purification Seawater 


Concrete mixers .... 




18 000 gpd 


usable. 
Potable* minimum of organic matter 


Concrete paver 




60,000 gpd 


Acid alkali free. Seawater may be 
used but decreases concrete 


Asphalt plant 




1 000 gph 


strength by 20%. Extra cement 
may be used to offset this effect. 
Alkali free Low sulfates 


Steam jenny 






Potable; low calcium and magnesium 


Steam boiler 


. . . . 200-hp 


2 000 god 






w/receiver 


1,000 gpd 


ii ii ii ii 


Three car heater (for 




50 gph 


n i. ,, 


asphalt plants). 
Water distributor . . . 


1 000 gal 


1 000 gal per 


No special purification Salt water 


Compaction 




100 yd of 8ft 
road. 
Variable 


acceptable. 
Any available water accepted 


Vehicle radiators . . . 




Variable 


Seawater actually preferable for 
certain jobs. 
Potable' calcium and magnesium 


Asphalt rollers 




Variable 


lower than 400 ppm. 
Potable' free of organic matter 











87.147 



9-5 



cannot, but can be detected by taste or 
odor. Still others can be detected by laboratory 
tests only. Table 9-3 identifies some of the 
common impurities in water and summarizes 
their effect on water quality. Some water 
tests may be made in the field; these are 
covered in Utilitiesman 3 & 2, NAVEDTRA 
10660. 

Water samples will have to be forwarded to 
a laboratory for complete mineral or 
bacteriological analysis. The method for gather- 
ing these water samples is also included in 
Utilitiesman 3 & 2. 

The factors that affect and determine 
the quality of water, such as physical, chemical, 
biological, and radiological contamination, will 
be discussed later in this chapter. 



SOURCE RELIABILITY 

The reliability of a water supply is one of the 
most important factors to be considered in the 
selection of a water source. The information 
gathered during the water reconnaissance may in- 
dicate a source of sufficient supply, only to have 
the source dry up during periods of little rainfall. 
Therefore, hydrological data should be studied 
to determine the variation that may be expected 
at the water source. 

Geological formations greatly influence the 
reliability of a ground water source. The amount 
of water flowing and the rate of flow may be con- 
trolled by geological layers. The amount of water 
within the water table may be limited by 
impervious formations, as shown in figure 9-4. 
Therefore, it is important that information on the 
characteristics and properties of the geological 



Table 9-3. Common Impurities in Water 



Suspended 
impurities 


Organisms 


Some cause disease. 




AJae. 


Cause taste, odor, color, turbidity. 




Suspended j 


solids 


Cause murkiness or turbidity. 




ir. 

i) 

'C 

t~- 
CJ 

> 


^n 
y. 

'f~\ 


Salts 


Calcium and 
magnesium. 


Bicarbonate 


Causes alkalinity, hardness. 

Causes alkalinity hardness. 
Causes hardness. 
Causes hardness, corrosive 
to boilers. 


Carbonate 


Sulfate 


Chloride 




Sodium 


Bicarbonate 


Causes alkalinity. 

Causes foaming in steam boilers. 
Causes mottled enamel of teeth. 
Causes salty taste. 


Carbonate 


Sulfate . . 




Fluoride 


Chloride 


Iron 




Causes taste, red water, 
incrustation on metals. 




Manganese 




Causes black or brown water. 


Vegetable 
dye 




Causes color, acidity. 




Gases 


Oxygen 


Causes corrosion of metals. 
Causes acidity, corrosion of 
metals. 
Causes odor, acidity, corrosion 
of metals. 
No effect. 


Carbon dioxide 


Hydrogen sulfide 


Nitrogen 



87.145 



9-6 



formations be studied when a ground source is 
being considered. 

It may be necessary to consider numerous 
other factors that may affect the reliability of the 
source. For one example; Lake Bonnie Rose, U.S. 
Naval Station, Adak, Alaska, is an ample source 
of cool, clear water, being distributed by gravity. 
However, the relatively high elevation of the 
lake results in excessive pressure at the station. 
Pressures are controlled by pressure-reducing 
valves. The valves sometimes fail in service, 
resulting in damage to the water system. 

Reliability of the source is further increased 
as the requirements for items that are subject to 
breakdown decrease (pumps, treatment plants, 
and so on). 

Legal advice may be necessary when selecting 
a water source as the laws regulating and con- 
trolling water rights may vary considerably. The 
title to ground and surface water in the United 
States is usually regulated at the state level. 
Navigable waters having interstate traffic are 
under federal control. Some difficulty was 
experienced in Vietnam by SEABEES in securing 
water rights to surface streams. These waters were 
used for flooding of rice fields, and local control 
denied the use of these sources as water supplies. 

Legal advice may also be required in securing 
the right for waterlines or powerlines to cross 
property. To cite one example, a waterline serving 
a naval air facility in Sicily was completed, 
except for a section crossing an irrigation ditch. 
Final completion of the waterline was delayed for 




87.134 
Figure 9-4. Limitation of water by rock formation. 



2 months, waiting to obtain the right for the 
waterline to cross the ditch. 



DEVELOPMENT OF WATER 
SOURCES 

Development of a water source includes all 
work that increases the quantity and improves the 
quality of the water, or makes it more readily 
available for treatment and distribution. The 
development of surface water sources, springs, 
and seawater sources is considered in this section. 

In developing a source, dams, floats, galleries, 
and similar improvements may be used to increase 
the quantity and quality of the water. Elaborate 
developments should be avoided; simplicity brings 
more rapid results. A temporary water source 
should not be converted into a permanent one 
until the area has been reconnoitered for a source 
requiring less development. All intake hoses or 
pipes should be equipped with an intake strainer 
regardless of the clearness of the water source. 
Suction strainers should be protected from 
floating debris that may damage, clog, or un- 
necessarily pollute them. Proper anchorage of 
suction lines and strainers prevents (1) loss of 
prime, (2) punctured or kinked lines, and (3) 
damage to strainers. Water at the intake point 
should be as clear and deep as possible. The 
strainer on the suction hose is placed at least 4 
inches below the water level. This precaution 
reduces the possibility of the strainer becoming 
clogged with floating debris, or the prime being 
lost because of air getting into the suction line. 

SURFACE WATER DEVELOPMENT 

Of the total amount of rainwater that falls 
upon the land surface of the earth, only a com- 
paratively small part is absorbed by the soil. By 
far the greater part of it runs off the surface of 
the ground and is carried out to the sea by way 
of streams and rivers or remains stored in natural 
lakes and ponds and in artificial lakes and 
impounded reservoirs. The methods by which 
water supply is derived from the surface are (1) 
by damming of streams or rivers, (2) by using the 
flow from streams, (3) by pumping directly from 
surface streams, (4) by collecting water from the 
roofs of buildings, (5) by providing catchment 
areas for the collection of rainwater into specially 
constructed cisterns, (6) by solar distillation, 
(7) by power distillations, (8) by freezing, and 
(9) by electrodialysis. 

For normal field water supply, surface water 
is the most accessible type of water source. This 



9-7 



source also lends itself readily to the purification 
equipment common to most engineer units. Sur- 
face water is the most easily developed source of 
water. Methods of constructing intake points for 
land surface water sources are discussed below. 
If the stream is not too swift and the water 
is sufficiently deep, an intake may be prepared 
quickly by placing the intake strainer on a rock. 
This will prevent clogging of the strainer by the 
streambed and provide enough water overhead to 
prevent the suction of air into the intake pipe. If 
the water source is a small stream or shallow lake, 




PARTICULARLY SUITABLE FOR 

INLET FROM SMALL STREAM OR LAKE 



87.136 

Figure 9-5. Direct intake with hose on bottom of water 
source. 



the intake pipe can be secured to a post or pile 
as shown in figure 9-5. 

When a stream is so shallow that the intake 
screen is not covered by at least 4 inches of water, 
a pit should be dug and the screen laid on a rock 
or board placed at the bottom of the pit. Pits dug 
in streams with clay or silt bottoms should be lined 
with gravel to prevent dirt from entering the 
purification equipment (fig. 9-6). The screen is 
surrounded by gravel to prevent collapse of the 
sides of the pit and also shield the screen from 
damage by large floating objects. The gravel also 
acts as a coarse strainer for the water. A similar 
method may be provided by enclosing the intake 
screen in a bucket as shown in figure 9-7. 

The level of the water in small streams can be 
raised to cover the intake strainer by building a 
dam. 

In swiftly flowing streams, a wing or baffle 
dam can be built to protect the intake screen 
without impounding the water. 

Floats made of logs, lumber, sealed cans, or 
empty fuel drums can be used to support the in- 
take strainer in deep water. Floats are especially 
useful in large streams where the quality of the 
water varies across its width or where the water 
is not deep enough near the banks to cover the 
intake strainer. The intake point can be covered 
by an adequate depth of water by anchoring or 
stationing the float at the deep part of the stream. 
The intake hose should be secured to the top of 
the float, allowing enough slack for movement 



TOUNIT 




FINE GRAVEL" AND' SAND '.. : - 



Figure 9-6. Surface intake with hose buried in gravel-filled pit. 

9-8 



87.388 



TO UNIT. 




FINE GRAVEL AND-SAND'-X' ''=>/ ; '.. . ' * 

"vii '-..'" ' ' :. : o ' INTAKE SCREEN 



Figure 9-7. Use of bucket on end of surface intake. 



87.389 




INTAKE SCREEN 



87.137 



Figure 9-8. Float-type surface intake. 



of the float. If support lines are used to secure 
the float to the banks, the position of the float 
can be altered to correspond to changes in depth 
by manipulation of the Lines. The chief advantage 
of a float intake is the ease with which the screen 
can be adjusted vertically (fig. 9-8). 

Water from muddy streams can be improved 
in quality by digging intake galleries along the 
bank. A trench is dug along the bank deep enough 
so that water from the stream percolates into it so 
it intercepts ground water flowing toward the 
stream. The trench is filled with gravel to prevent 
the sides from collapsing. The intake strainer is 
placed in the gravel below the water table (fig. 
9-9). The amount of work required to produce 



OVERLYING SOILS 




WATER-BEARING SANDS 



GALLERY FILLED WITH GRAVEL 



87.390 



Figure 9-9. Gravel-filled gallery intake. 

9-9 



the gallery is justified by a reduction in the amount 
of chemicals needed to coagulate the water, the 
elimination of the necessity of frequently 
backwashing the filter, and the higher quality of 
water obtained. 

GROUND WATER DEVELOPMENT 

Moisture is held beneath the surface of the 
earth in three zones: (1) the zone of soil moisture, 
where water is temporarily held in pore spaces by 
capillary action or other soil conditions; (2) the 
zone of aeration or zone of percolation beneath 
the soil layer, where both water and air are pre- 
sent in the pore spaces; and (3) the zone of satura- 
tion, where all spaces are filled with water. 
Ground water is the term customarily used for the 
underground water in the saturated zone. 

One possible objection to an underground 
water supply is that the water may be excessively 
hard. This condition may occur because of the 
percolation of the water through mineral deposits 
from which water-hardening constituents are 
leached or extracted. On the other hand, an 
underground supply generally has the advantage 
of requiring less treatment because of the natural 
removal of impurities as the water passes through 
various underground soil formations. However, 
these conditions are general; some mineral 
deposits do not contribute to hardness, and some 
underground formations may not be of the type 
that effectively removes objectionable material. 

Many times it is advantageous to use shallow 
ground water sources or percolated waters adja- 
cent to a turbid surface water. Well points are 
issued in 2-inch diameters and 54-inch lengths. A 
drive cap is placed over the thread and the well 
point is driven into the ground with a sledge. Suc- 
cessive sections of pipe, each 5 feet long, are added 
and driven until the screen is well within the water- 
bearing media. Several well points may be con- 
nected in parallel to supply sufficient water to the 
raw water pump. In developing drive point 
sources, it must be remembered that the practical 
limit of suction lift of the pumps issued with field 
equipment is 22 to 25 feet at sea level. Suction- 
lift pumps can be used, therefore, only where the 
pumping level in the well will be within the limit 
of suction lift, or 22 to 25 feet below the position 
of the pump. At 5,000 feet above sea level, the 
practical limit of suction lift is only 20 feet. It 
should be noted that since a suction-lift pump 
must create a partial vacuum in the suction line, 
it is necessary that the line be absolutely airtight 
if the pump is to function properly. 



Springs yielding 20 gallons per minute or more 
of water can be used as a source of field water 
supply if properly developed. Springs may be 
developed by enlarging the outlet of the spring 
and by damming and conducting water to storage. 
To reduce possible pollution, springs should be 
cleared of all debris, undergrowth, top soil, loose 
rocks, and sand. 

Water that flows from rocks under the force 
of gravity and collects in depressions can be col- 
lected in boxes or basins of wood, tile, or con- 
crete. The collecting box should be large enough 
to impound most of the flow. It should be placed 
below the ground level so only the top is slightly 
above the surface. The box should be covered 
tightly to prevent contamination and lessen 
evaporation. The inlet should be designed to 
exclude surface drainage and prevent pollution. 
This requires fencing off the area and providing 
proper drainage. Figure 9-10 shows a spring 
inlet protected in this manner. The screen on the 
overflow pipe prevents the entrance of insects and 
small animals. Another screen on the intake pipe 
prevents large suspended particles being ingested 
by the pump used to distribute the springwater. 
This prevents mechanical failure or reduces it to 
a minimum. 

The flow of water from a spring located on 
a steep slope of loose earth can be obtained by 
the following two methods. 

Constructing deep, narrow ditches leading 
from the spring to the point of collection. 

Constructing pipeline tunnels from the 
spring to the collecting points. Pipe of large 
diameter is more suitable for this purpose. The 
water from the tunnels can be trapped by con- 
structing a dam at the point of collection. 

Digging is a more positive and more economi- 
cal method of developing a spring than blasting. 
You must proceed with great caution if you use 
exposives to develop the yield from springs. 
Blasting in unconsolidated rocks may shift the 
sand or gravel in such a way as to divert the spring 
to a different point. 

The method used for the development of 
springs as a water source will depend upon the 
extent and characteristics of the flow. Thermal 
(hot) springs should not be developed since their 
waters are likely to be highly mineralized. 

Regardless of the type of construction, all 
springs must be covered. Surplus water should be 
piped from the structure so surface water cannot 



9-10 



SURFACE-WATER 
DIVERSION DITCH 






- . . r zo rc.e.1 ur\ iviurcc. 

WATERBEARING SAND OR GRAVEL 

.-.- ...-..... __r 




TO 
STORAGE 



87.135 



Figure 9-10. Protection of spring from surface contamination. 



enter the spring during periods of flood. It is not 
necessary to ventilate spring structures; therefore, 
all openings should be avoided, except for an 
inspection manhole fitted with a tight, locked 
cover. 

When ground and surface water supplies are 
inadequate or cannot be used, ground water sup- 
plies are developed by constructing wells. Wells 
are classified into five types, according to their 
method of construction. These are dug, bored, 
driven, jetted, and drilled wells. Each type of well 
has its particular advantages, which may be ease 
of construction, type of equipment required, 
storage capacity, ease of penetration into certain 
types of formations, or ease of safeguarding 
against pollution. 

In the event of chemical, biological, and 
radiological operations, it is important to note 
that ground water would probably remain essen- 
tially uncontaminated by airborne or surface 
dissemination, in contrast to surface water, which 
could become severely contaminated. This does 
not mean that ground water is always pure and 
safe to drink. It can be naturally contaminated 
or could, in some cases, become contaminated 
with CBR agents. Well water should be 
thoroughly tested before use. 



The production of ground water involves the 
method of recovery of water stored in the zone 
of saturation below the waterline or water table. 
The ground water table does not always remain 
at the same elevation, as it is controlled by rain- 
fall, tides, the pumping rate from wells, and so 
forth. 

A dug well is a large diameter well, seldom 
less than 3 feet in diameter, excavated with hand 
tools, and lined with brick, stone, steel, wood 
cribbing, or tile. That portion of the lining 
through the water-bearing formation is porous. 
This shallow type of well is usually dug from 20 
to 40 feet deep, depending upon favorable loca- 
tion for water. Because of the large opening and 
perimeter to be protected against the incursion of 
surface drainage, dug wells are easily polluted by 
surface wash. 

Bored wells are constructed in soft water- 
bearing formations that will not cave in while the 
hole is being bored. They are usually bored with 
hand or powered earth augers to a depth ranging 
from 25 to 60 feet without caving in. 

Jetted wells are suitable in soft, uncon- 
solidated, alluvial deposits. The well consists of 
an inner tube which is a drilling or jetting tube 
and an outer tube which is the well-casing. A 



9-11 



power-driven pump with suitable hose attach- 
ments supplies continuous water pressure during 
drilling. One type of rig uses a block and tackle 
or a tripod for controlling the tools and casing. 
Larger rigs have a mast and hoisting block and 
use engine power for handling casing, drive 
weight, and pump. Water is led into the well 
through a small diameter pipe and forced 
downward through the drill bit against the 
bottom of the hole. The stream loosens the 
material, the finer portion of which is carried 
upward and out of the hole by the ascending 
water. During the drilling, the jet or drill is turned 
slowly to ensure a straight hole. Casing is sunk 
as fast as drilling proceeds. In softer materials, 
by using a paddy or expansion drill, a hole may 
be made somewhat larger than the casing. The 
casing then may be lowered a considerable 
distance by its own weight. Ordinarily a drive 
weight is needed to force it down. As a rule, one 
size of casing is used for the entire depth of the 
well. It is difficult to drive a single string of 
casing beyond 500 to 600 feet by this method. If 
a well is sunk much deeper, an additional string 
of smaller size must be used. In fine-textured 
material the hole often may be jetted to the full 
depth and the casing inserted afterward. The wall 
of the hole becomes puddled by the muddy water 
so it will stand alone. 

A driven well is constructed by driving a 
pointed screen, or drive point, and attached pipe 
directly into a water-bearing formation. The 
finished well consists of a series of lengths of pipe 
fitted at the upper end with a pump and the lower 
end with a sand screen through which the water 
is admitted. The drive point consists of a per- 
forated pipe with a mild steel point at its lower 
end to break through pebbles or thin layers of 
hard material. As the drive point is driven down, 
succeeding sections are screwed into place. These 
sections continue until the water-bearing forma- 
tion is reached. The pump then is attached, and 
after the well has been developed, it is ready for 
use. Drive point wells usually range in diameter 
from 1 1/4 to 2 inches, but larger sizes up to 4 
inches also are made. The larger sizes, although 
of greater weight and more difficult to drive, have 
the advantage that deep-well pumps can be used 
when necessary. The smaller sizes, because of their 
lesser weight and greater portability, are valuable 
for determining the depth of water-bearing for- 
mations and for test yields at shallow depths. The 
depth of the well is limited by the formations 
encountered and by the type of pump available. 
For small wells, the ground water level must be 



within 25 feet of the surface because suction 
pumps generally are used. If small self-priming 
centrifugal pumps are used, the lift must be less 
than 25 feet. If 2-inch or larger pipes are used, 
it is possible to lift water from a greater depth by 
installing a cylinder-type pump near the water 
level. 

The following conditions are necessary for 
successful driven wells. The formation into which 
the point is being driven must not be too hard and 
compact. The distance to ground water must not 
exceed the lift of the pumps available. The water- 
bearing formations must have moderately high 
permeability to provide adequate yields in small- 
diameter wells. The wells must be developed 
properly to obtain sufficient water. 

Chief disadvantages against general use of 
driven wells are as follows. Construction is 
laborious and slow when tightly compacted soils 
are encountered. Driving is destructive to well 
equipment; points frequently are stripped of 
mesh; pipe is bent and broken. Couplings fre- 
quently are belled by the force of the hammer 
blows. Belled joints always leak air and either 
render the well useless or seriously impair the yield 
of water. Yields are small from any one well point. 
As many as five points connected in series may 
be required to operate a power pump to capacity. 

Successful construction of driven wells 
depends upon close observation and correct 
interpretation of events (occurring while driving) 
by the well driver. Accurate interpretation of such 
details as the penetration made with each blow, 
the drop and rebound of the monkey, the sound 
of the blow, and the resistance of the pipe to rota- 
tion enables the experienced well driver to deter- 
mine the character of the materials being 
penetrated. An approximation of the geological 
section of the well can be obtained by recording 
these observations. Study of the logs for successive 
wells, coupled with a study of the results obtained 
from each well, assists in developing trained 
well drivers with each successive well. 

Although a well site may have been properly 
selected, the strata correctly interpreted, and the 
presence of water accurately judged, wells may 
fail to yield water merely because they have not 
been pumped to clear the fine sediment from 
around the screen. When the presence of water 
is suspected, a simple test is to pour water into 
the well. If the screen is in dry sand, the water 
sinks downward and seeps into the formation, but 
if the screen is in saturated sand, the level 
of the added water remains nearly stationary or 
quickly sinks to a static level. Also the quantity 



9-12 



of water that can be poured into the well is an 
index of the well capacity when pumping; when 
saturated, the sand yields its contents as freely as 
it absorbs water. Often the raising or lowering of 
the pipe a foot or more brings a greater length 
of the screen into contact with the water-bearing 
stratum and results in a great increase in yield. 
There are two methods of drilling wells, one 
is the hydraulic rotary and the other is the cable- 
tool percussion. Drilled wells tend to be the most 
complicated and require a lot of equipment. In 
most cases Equipment Operators will be called 
upon to place drilled wells. The Utilitiesman may 
be called upon to install pumps and plumbing 
when the drilling is complete. Development of this 
type of well will then proceed in a similar 
manner as any other type of well. 



ALTERNATIVE WATER SOURCES 

In some regions of the world there is not 
enough surface or ground water available to sup- 
port the demands for domestic and fire protec- 
tion water needs. In these areas it may be 
necessary to develop alternate sources of water. 
Rainwater, snow, seawater, water barges, and 
mobile tanks are a few of the alternate water 
sources that may be considered. 

In tropical regions there is an abundance of 
rainwater with a rapid rate of surface runoff. The 
construction of collection surfaces can be a solu- 
tion to water needs. 

For temporary or emergency water supplies, 
collecting surfaces may be constructed by the use 
of tarps, wooden platforms, metal surfaces, and 
so on. Usually, however, surfaces constructed for 
other purposes, such as building roofs, may be 
used. 

More permanent rainwater catchment areas 
will be cleared, graded, and given an application 
of cement or other impervious mixture. The 
catchment area should be located at least 100 feet 
from any source of subsurface contamination 
(septic tanks, cesspools, and so on), and as far 
from other sources of pollution (dust, soot, and 
so on) as possible. The catchment area and 
impounding basin should be enclosed by a fence. 

Collected waters should be carried by gravity 
or pumping to closed stowage reservoirs. As rain 
falls toward the earth, it absorbs dust and such 
gases as carbon dioxide and oxygen, and, 
therefore, must be considered unsafe for con- 
sumption until treated. Filtration and disinfection 
are the minimum required treatment. 



In some locations water may be so hard to 
obtain or polluted that it would not be economical 
to develop any source. In this case, water barges 
or mobile tanks may be used. Barges or mobile 
tanks can be filled from ships, tank trucks, or 
other well points located some distance away. It 
is important to note that all mobile containers are 
a temporary water source. Disinfection of their 
surfaces that will come in contact with potable 
water is required. 

In northern arctic areas where deep wells 
cannot be sunk through the thick layers of 
permafrost, and the surface sources are frozen 
solid, water must be obtained by melting snow 
or ice. Ice is preferred to snow because it will yield 
more water for a given volume. Snow or ice may 
be contaminated. Therefore, all melt produced 
should be treated before drinking. Approximately 
5 cubic feet of snow is required to yield 1 cubic 
foot of water. In emergencies, personnel can eat 
small quantities of snow. This snow should be 
placed in the mouth, rather than being sucked, 
to prevent chapped or cut lips. Only small 
quantities of snow should be consumed in this 
manner because consumption of large quantities 
will reduce the body temperature. 

Seawater is vastly different in its characteristics 
(as well as in the methods of purification used) 
from other surface sources. The chemical 
characteristics of seawater are such that normal 
coagulation and filtration are ineffective as treat- 
ment processes. 

In developing seawater sources, consideration 
must be given to such factors as surf action, 
saltwater corrosion, suspended sand and silt in the 
water, living organisms, surface oil along beaches, 
and the rise and fall of the water level with the 
tides. If the equipment is located on sheltered 
bays, harbors, lagoons, or estuaries, it can be 
supplied by intakes built in the same way as 
freshwater surface intakes. On small islands where 
there is insufficient surface and ground water, and 
on or near open beaches, intakes for equipment 
can be built as follows: 

! Saltwater wells. Beach wells should, if 
possible, be used in preference to offshore intakes. 
Wells can be dug to tap fresh or salty ground 
water. This eliminates the problems caused by 
tides, surf, and shallow water close to shore. Such 
wells have an added advantage in that they can 
be built back of the shoreline under natural 
overhead concealment. Driven and jetted wells 
may also be used effectively at beach locations. 



9-13 



2 - Offshore intakes. Offshore intakes are 
sometimes required because of lack of time, 
personnel, or equipment or because of coral con- 
ditions that prohibit well construction. Intakes of 
either the rigid pipe or float type may be used but 
they should be located in deep water beyond the 
surf. They must be positioned vertically and be 
off the bottom but still beneath the water surface 
at low tide. In this way foreign materials in the 
water which might cause excessive wear on equip- 
ment will be largely excluded. The rigid pipe 
intake can be placed on timber supports and 
anchored securely in position by piling or riprap. 
Floats securely anchored can support the intake 
screen in much the same manner as in surface 
waters. A rubber suction hose can be used to con- 
nect the rigid pipe on the sea bottom to the pipe 
supported beneath the float. 



WATER CONTAMINATION 

Water takes on various characteristics and 
properties as it passes over and through the earth. 
These characteristics and properties vary and are 
dependent on the materials encountered. These 
materials may be natural or man-made and are 
classified according to their means of detection. 

Physical detected by one or more of the 
human senses 

Chemical detected by chemical analysis 

Biological detected by testing for 
chloroform organisms 

@ Radiological detected by radiac equip- 
ment and special laboratory field tests 



PHYSICAL IMPURITIES 

Physical impurities in water are either 
suspended or dissolved. The suspended impurities 
are usually more dangerous to health. They 
include mineral matter, disease organisms, silt, 
bacteria, and algae. They must be destroyed or 
removed from water that is to be consumed by 
humans. 

The most important physical characteristics 
are turbidity, color, odor, taste, and temperature. 
Valuable information can be obtained by 
observing the water with any of the five human 



senses and using commonsense judgment on the 
following characteristics: 

Color 

Turbidity 

Odor 

Taste (use with caution) 

Temperature 

Condition of vegetation around source 
(dead or mottled vegetation can indicate 
the presence of chemical agents) 

Presence of dead fish, frogs, and so forth 

Before starting any treatment to remove 
color, turbidity, taste, or odor, you should take 
several preventive measures. 

You must prevent the formation of algae in 
raw water supply points. Algae can be controlled 
with copper sulfate, chlorine, or activated 
carbon. Before deciding which method or com- 
bination of methods may be most effective, con- 
sider the following factors: 

Volume of water to be treated 

Time of year 

The effects of treatment on fish life 

Type of secondary water treatment in use 

Equipment available 

Cost of treatment 

You must also prevent the raw water source 
from becoming polluted by drainage from in- 
dustrial waste and surface drainage from farms, 
mines, and watersheds. 

The above conditions usually cause water to 
take on color due to the presence of colored 
substances in solution, such as vegetable matter 
dissolved from roots and leaves. Dissolved 
humus, iron, and salts could also be included. 
True color is due to substances in true solution, 
apparent color includes true color and substances 
in suspension rather than dissolved. Color may 
also be caused by industrial wastes and turbidity. 
Color as such is harmless, but objectionable 



9-14 



because of its appearance and the taste and odors 
sometimes associated with it. 

Turbidity is a muddy or unclear condition of 
water caused by particles of sand, clay, or organic 
matter being held in suspension. Clay and silt 
remain suspended in water for the longest period 
of time because of their particle size and specific 
gravities. The removal of turbidity is essential to 
the production of potable water. Removal reduces 
water contamination, extends the time between 
backwashing of filters, decreases chlorine 
demand, improves disinfection, and enhances the 
user acceptability of the finished water. Proper 
water treatment requires turbidity removal 
because suspended particles often contain 
organisms that may cause diseases. 

Turbidity is removed by coagulation and 
sedimentation. Since the physical characteristics 
of raw water vary widely in different locations, 
dosages of coagulant chemicals must be deter- 
mined at each water point to ensure maximum 
efficiency and minimum waste of chemicals. After 
coagulation and settling, the water should not 
have more than 20 percent of the original 
turbidity. Daily jar tests will help check the 
optimum chemical dosage required to meet this 
standard. 

Taste and odors in water must be considered 
from the user's acceptability point of view. Tastes 
and odors found in water are most commonly 
caused by algae, decomposing organic matter, 
dissolved gases, or industrial wastes. Potability 
is not normally affected by the presence of odors 
and tastes. On the other hand palatability is fre- 
quently affected, particularly when a substance 
such as bone or fish oil is present. Tastes and 
odors that make water unpalatable must be 
removed. Use of free available chlorine, aeration, 
and activated carbon will do much to prevent or 
remove unacceptable tastes and odors from 
treated water. 

The use of free available chlorine is advan- 
tageous because most odors and tastes are 
removed and rigorous disinfection is assured. 

Activated carbon is the most widely used single 
process for taste and odor removal. Aeration and 
copper sulfate treatment are also used. All three 
methods are described below. The method used 
will depend upon the substance or substances to 
be removed and available equipment. 

Activated carbon. Activated carbon is an 
excellent absorbing agent to use in ridding water 
of unpleasant tastes and odors. It is also an 
effective agent for removal of organic color. It 



is insoluble and tends to float unless all particles 
are thoroughly wetted by being made into a slurry 
before being added to the water. When continuous 
flow equipment is being used, the activated 
carbon is added to the limestone feeder and added 
to the water with the limestone slurry. When 
batch-type equipment is being used, the activated 
carbon may be added with the other chemicals in 
the coagulation tank. Being insoluble, activated 
carbon will not affect the pH value or chemical 
characteristics of water. One ounce of activated 
carbon per 1 ,000 gallons of water is usually ade- 
quate. However, dosages up to 1 pound per 1,000 
gallons can be used, depending upon the kind and 
degree of impurities present. Use of activated 
carbon in much higher dosages for removal of 
chemical agents is discussed later in this 
chapter. 

NOTE: Treatment with activated carbon 
should always be made ahead of, or part of, the 
coagulation process, so the activated carbon and 
the various impurities absorbed by it will be 
removed. 

Aeration. This treatment consists of 
adding oxygen by exposing the water to air. 
The process has a twofold action. Volatile 
taste- and odor-producing materials are released 
to the atmosphere and the action of the air 
upon readily oxidizable materials causes a 
precipitation of insoluble oxides and hydroxides. 
Removal of hydrogen sulfide is an example 
of the former action, while removal of iron is an 
example of the latter action. The aeration 
of water to rid it of the taste and odor of 
decomposing vegetable matter generally involves 
both actions. 

Copper sulfate. If tastes and odors are 
caused by small living organisms in the water 
source, they may be controlled or prevented 
with use of copper sulfate. This treatment is 
most frequently used in lakes and reservoirs. 
The copper sulfate is applied either by towing 
a porous sack containing copper sulfate crystals 
behind a boat, or by spraying a solution 
over the surface of the water. The amount 
of copper sulfate used depends on the type 
and concentration of organisms present. Dosages 
should be controlled because amounts greater 
than 2.0 parts per million (ppm) will generally 
kill all fish in the water. The amount necessary 
to remove microorganisms has no detrimental 
effect, however, on human beings. Copper 



9-15 



sulfate treatment is rarely used in field water 
supply for several reasons. 

1 . The advantage to be derived from treating 
an entire lake or reservoir frequently does not 
warrant the expense of the treatment, when the 
length of time the water source is to be used is 
taken into consideration. 

2. The amount of copper sulfate used entails 
considerations of wildlife, medical effects, and 
total water chemistry which are beyond the water 
supply technicians' area of operation. 

3. Superchlorination and dechlorination with 
activated carbon are effective for short periods 
although they are expensive for extended 
operations. 

Temperature is also a physical characteristic 
that must be considered in the treatment of water. 
Warm water tastes flat. Lowering the temperature 
of water suppresses odors and tastes and, 
therefore, increases its palatability. In the 
summer the temperature of deep lakes and 
reservoirs decreases sharply from top to bottom. 
By shifting the depth of intake, it may be 
possible to draw relatively cool water even 
during hot weather. Water should be drawn from 
the lower depths when possible. Cool water is 
more viscous than warm water and thus is more 
difficult to filter. Cool water is more difficult to 
coagulate and effectively chlorinate than warm 
water because of slower reactions. Water treat- 
ment rates should be reduced when water 
temperatures are less than 45 F. 

CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
OF WATER 

The most important chemical characteristics 
of water are its acidity, alkalinity, hardness, and 
corrosiveness. A water treatment supervisor must 
be aware of these characteristics and the pro- 
cedures for analyzing and treating the various 
chemical impurities that may be found in raw 
water. Chemical impurities can be either natural, 
man-made (industrial), or be deployed in raw 
water sources by enemy forces. 

Some chemical impurities will cause water to 
behave as either an acid or a base. Since either 
condition has an important bearing on the water 
treatment process, the pH value must be deter- 
mined. Generally the pH influences the cor- 
rosiveness of the water, the amount of chemical 
dosages necessary for proper disinfection, and the 
ability of an analyst to detect contaminants. 



Refer to Utilitiesman 3&2, volume I, chapter 10, 
for the procedures for testing the pH value of 
water. 

Hardness 

Hardness is caused by the soluble salts of 
calcium, magnesium, iron, manganese, sodium, 
sulfates, chlorides, and nitrates. The degree of 
hardness depends on the type and on the amount 
of impurities present in the water. Hardness also 
depends on the amount of carbon dioxide in solu- 
tion. Carbon dioxide influences the solubility of 
the impurities that cause hardness. 

The hardness caused by carbonates and 
bicarbonates is called carbonate hardness. The 
hardness caused by all others (chlorides, sulfates, 
nitrates) is called noncarbonate hardness. 

Alkalinity is usually equivalent to the car- 
bonate hardness. Sodium, however, also causes 
alkalinity. In natural waters, sodium is not 
normally present in appreciable amounts. 
Therefore, in natural waters, the alkalinity is equal 
to the carbonate hardness. After water has been 
softened, however, a large amount of sodium re- 
mains in the treated water. In softened water, the 
total alkalinity is the sum of the carbonate 
alkalinity plus the sodium alkalinity. 

Hardness is undesirable in that it consumes 
soap, makes water less satisfactory for cooking, 
and produces scale in boilers and distillation units. 

The following minerals cause hardness in 
ground and surface waters: 

Calcium carbonate. Alkaline and only 
slightly soluble; causes carbonate hardness and 
alkalinity in water. 

9 Calcium bicarbonate. Contributes to the 
alkalinity and carbonate hardness of water. 
Calcium bicarbonate when heated produces 
carbon dioxide and calcium carbonate. This 
calcium carbonate precipitates as scale in boilers 
and distillation units. 

Calcium sulfate or gypsum. Causes non- 
carbonate hardness in water. Being more soluble 
in cold water than in hot, it separates from the 
water in boilers and forms scale on the boiler 
tubes. 

Calcium chloride. Causes noncarbonate 
hardness in water. In steam boilers and distilla- 
tion units, the presence of calcium chloride can 
cause chemical reactions that result in pitting of 
the boiler tubes. 



9-16 



Magnesium carbonate (magnesite) and 
magnesium bicarbonate. Act the same in water as 
calcium carbonate and bicarbonate. 

Magnesium sulfate (epsom salts). Adds 
to the noncarbonate hardness of water and causes 
boiler scale. In amounts greater than 500 parts 
per million in drinking water, it acts as a laxative. 

Magnesium chloride. Has the same 
properties and effects as calcium chloride. 
However, the magnesium will contribute to the 
formation of magnesium hydroxide scale on 
boilers and evaporators. 

Iron. Iron is undesirable because it imparts 
a rusty color and objectionable taste to water. It 
also forms crusts in plumbing and piping. When 
iron is present in water, organisms whose life 
processes depend on iron compounds may also 
be present. These organisms may cause tastes and 
odors and create what is called red water. 

Manganese. While not encountered as 
often as iron, it is found in both surface and 
ground water. Its presence in water normally 
causes a grey or black color. The total concen- 
trations of iron and manganese in potable water 
should not exceed 0.3 ppm. 

Iron and manganese removal is not normally 
required in the production of field drinking water. 
Oxidation by aeration, followed by sedimentation 
and filtration, is the most common method of 
removing iron and manganese. They are oxidized 
to insoluble ferric oxide and manganese oxide 
by this process. The same methods may generally 
be used to remove both iron and manganese, 
although when they are present together in 
water, removal is more difficult. Combina- 
tions of iron and manganese with organic 
matter may require aeration in trickling beds 
containing coke, followed by sedimentation 
and filtration. In some cases superchlorination 
followed by sedimentation and filtration will 
in itself remove these two substances. The 
addition of lime, Ca(OH) 2 , followed by sedi- 
mentation and filtration, is another method for 
removal of these substances. 

The concentration of chemical substances pre- 
sent in water for military water supply should not 
exceed the values shown below. If local conditions 
or short-term requirements make the use of 
water containing higher chemical concentrations 



necessary, authorization must be obtained from 
the medical officer. 



Chemical Substances 



Maximum Values 



Copper 1.0 

Iron 0.3 

Manganese 0.05 

Zinc 5.0 

Magnesium 125.0 

Chlorides 250.0 

Sulfates 250.0 

Phenolic compounds 0.001 

Lead 0.05 

Hexavalent Chromium 0.05 

Fluoride 1.5 

Turbidity (silica scale) 5.0 

Color (platinum-cobalt 
scale) 15.0 

Nitrate-Nitrogen 10.0 



Total solids 



500.0 



ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
units 

units 
ppm 

ppm 



Water softening is the term used to identify 
the process of treating water supply hardness. 
Water softening is most likely to be necessary 
when water is being supplied to laundries and 
heating units involving boilers and steam 
equipment. 

Lime-Soda Process. Lime-soda ash 
softening consists of the application of these 
materials to the raw water. Lime, Ca(OH) 2 , reacts 
with the soluble calcium and magnesium bi- 
carbonates and forms insoluble calcium carbonate 



and magnesium hydroxide. Soda ash, N 
reacts with the soluble noncarbonate compounds 
of calcium and magnesium to precipitate insoluble 
calcium and magnesium compounds but leaves 
sodium compounds in solution. The physical 
operation of adding lime-soda ash and removing 
the precipitates is similar to that in the conven- 
tional coagulation-filtration process for bacteria 
and turbidity removal. 

Zeolite Process. Zeolites used in water 
softening are complex compounds of sodium, 
aluminum, and silica which have the faculty of 
exchanging bases. They are often called green 
sand because of the color of natural zeolite. 
Synthetic zeolites are also available. When water 



9-17 



containing calcium and manganese compounds 
passes over the zeolite, the calcium and manganese 
are exchanged for the sodium in the zeolite. In 
this way the water is softened and its sodium 
content increased. When the sodium of the zeolite 
is exhausted, it is regenerated by applying a 
sodium chloride solution. Another exchange is 
made, and the resulting concentrated solution of 
calcium and magnesium chloride is discharged to 
waste. The operating rate varies directly with the 
thickness of the zeolite bed. The time between 
regenerations depends on the characteristics of the 
water and the total amount of water applied. The 
need for regeneration will be evident when hard- 
ness is no longer removed. The zeolite process can 
only be used on water that has been treated for 
removal of turbidity. 

Ion Exchange. The ion exchange unit, 
when run on the sodium cycle, will significantly 
soften water. The ion exchange unit will also 
remove such undesirable ions as those of 
manganese and lead. 



Dissolved Gases 

The concentration of a gas in water is directly 
proportional to the concentration, or partial 
pressure, of the gas in the atmosphere in contact 
with the water surface. In general, this involves 
the water temperature, its salinity, and the 
altitude. The gases of primary interest to water 
supply are as follows: 

Oxygen. Large amounts of dissolved 
oxygen are found in rainwater. The amounts in 
surface water vary greatly, depending on the 
amount and type of pollution, the degree of self- 
purification, the action of algae, and the 
temperature of the water. Polluted water will 
exhaust the oxygen supply, while clean water will 
contain much dissolved oxygen. Cold water con- 
tains larger amounts of dissolved oxygen than 
warm; as water temperature rises, the dissolved 
oxygen is released to the atmosphere. Decreased 
pressure on water has the same effect, releasing 
oxygen to the atmosphere. Dissolved oxygen 
causes the solution of metals and, especially in 
the presence of carbon dioxide, causes many 
metals to corrode. 

Carbon Dioxide. The presence of carbon 
dioxide in water contributes to the degree of 



hardness and acidity of the water. Water 
acquires this gas in four ways: from the air 
by natural movements of water in contact 
with the air, such as currents and wave 
action; by contact with decomposing vegeta- 
tion, which gives off carbon dioxide freely; by the 
reaction of ferric chloride and limestone in the 
coagulation process; and by contact with the gas 
in underground deposits. A high carbon dioxide 
content usually makes water more corrosive to 
metals. 

Hydrogen Sulfide. Hydrogen sulfide in 
solution lends a disagreeable taste and rotten-egg 
odor to water. Ground water absorbs sulfides by 
passing over sulfur-bearing rocks. Hydrogen 
sulfide is also responsible for the destruction of 
cement and concrete as well as the corrosion of 
metals. In small amounts, it is unpleasant but 
not dangerous. In large amounts it is harmful. 
Water that smells of hydrogen sulfide should be 
treated. 

Dissolved gases are removed by means of aera- 
tion or the use of activated carbon. Aeration 
exposes as much water as possible to the air. This 
will release dissolved gases such as hydrogen 
sulfide and carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. 
Liberating the dissolved gas from the water by 
aeration permits the oxygen in the air to come in 
contact with the finely divided water particles, 
thereby increasing the dissolved oxygen content 
of the water. This increase of oxygen content 
removes the offensive taste and odor imparted by 
the dissolved gases. Aeration raises the pH by 
eliminating the carbon dioxide, but increases cor- 
rosiveness by increasing the amount of dissolved 
oxygen. One type of aerator consists of trays con- 
taining slats or coke over which the water is 
sprayed. Other methods of aeration include 
spraying water up over a shallow receiving 
basin and forcing air into a basin with 
diffusers or mechanical pump-type aerators 
similar to those used in sewage treatment. 
Operation of most aerators is practically auto- 
matic; operators' duties consist essentially 
of making sure pipes, slots, and surfaces are not 
clogged and that air has free access to the water. 
If the water is not to be filtered after aeration, 
aerators must be screened to keep out insects and 
other foreign matter. 

Activated carbon is a specially treated granular 
powdered carbon. It absorbs or attracts large 
quantities of dissolved gases. It is extremely 



9-18 



effective in taste and odor control, provided 
the 

1. type of activated carbon used meets 
minimum standards, 

2. dosage is correct, 

3. carbon is mixed intimately with the water, 
and 

4. carbon is in contact with the water for an 
adequate period. 

Acceptable commercial preparations of ac- 
tivated carbon should meet the following 
minimum specifications: 

1 . It does not contain any soluble mineral in- 
jurious to health. 

2. Moisture content is not over 8.0 percent. 

3. It is powdered form that wets down and 
goes into suspension readily, does not settle too 
rapidly, and does not float on the surface when 
applied. 

4. At least 99 percent of the carbon in water 
suspension passes a 100-mesh sieve and 95 per- 
cent passes a 200-mesh sieve. 

5. It has enough adsorption capacity to reduce 
a concentration of 0. 1 milligrams per liter (mg/1) 
phenol in distilled water to 0.01 ppm. 

Because of the wide range in waters, no 
general rule can be given for activated-carbon 
dosage. The dose required at each water plant 
must be determined by periodic laboratory tests. 
The test is made by preparing a number of 
samples of raw water, adding the standard 
amount of treating chemicals and varying 
amounts of carbon to each sample, allowing plant 
contact time, filtering, and making odor tests. 
Numerical comparison can be made with the 
threshold odor test. A carbon dose of 3 ppm 
removes most tastes and odors from water. 
However, dosages can vary from 3 to 15 ppm, 
depending upon the odor of the water. Laboratory 
tests will determine the dosage. 

Activated carbon is fed into the water by dry 
feeders. It must be handled more carefully than 
coagulants because it is a fine powder; therefore, 
the feeder must be an approved type and designed 
to prevent the spreading of the carbon dust and 
causing fires. In addition, inhaling of the dust by 



personnel, even in low concentration, can affect 
their lungs. The dry feeder room should have 
explosionproof electrical equipment. A spark or 
pilot flame can create an explosion. Dry carbon 
will float on the surface of the water for a long 
time. Therefore, it is important that the carbon 
be wetted thoroughly, mixed by agitation using 
a paddle wheel, swirling action, a spray, or so 
forth, in a small tank. Some dry feeders have a 
mixing chamber in which the carbon is wetted by 
the swirling action of the water. 

Activated carbon may be applied to the water 
at one or several points, depending on the results 
desired. Carbon is added at one or more of the 
following points: 

In the raw water, as early as possible after 
it enters the plant. This point of application is not 
recommended for extremely turbid waters. 

In the mixing basin. When added before 
sedimentation, activated carbon not only removes 
foreign matter from the water, but the carbon that 
settles in the sedimentation basin continues to 
absorb products of sludge decomposition, thus 
preventing formation of secondary tastes and 
odors. Black alum is premixed activated carbon 
and coagulant that can be used in special situa- 
tions both as a coagulant and for taste and odor 
control. 



CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, AND 
RADIOLOGICAL (CBR) 
CONTAMINATION 

Should chemical or biological agents or 
nuclear weapons be employed during conflicts, 
the water supply of the area involved would, in 
all likelihood, become contaminated. A water 
source contaminated with a chemical, biological, 
or radiological agent can cause incapacitation 
or death to a consumer. Effective means for 
determining the presence of CBR agents, followed 
by proper decontamination procedures, can 
reduce or eliminate the hazards caused by these 
agents. 

In the event that you are assigned to super- 
vise or manage a field water supply point, you 
will be responsible for the detection and removal 
of CBR contaminants. The supervisor of a water 
point crew must be sure the crew is trained 
in the identification of CBR contamination by 



9-19 



recognizing the various indications of CBR con- 
tamination of their water point as follows: 

An unusual taste or odor 

Dead fish and animals in unusually large 
numbers 

A sudden drop in normal pH values or a 
pH value of less than 6.0 

High readings on radiac equipment 

Personnel developing fevers, diarrhea, 
cramps, vomiting, and so forth 

Burning sensation of skin, eyes, and nose 

Runny eyes, nose, and mouth 

If CBR contamination of a water source is 
suspected, have your crew don appropriate pro- 
tective clothing and equipment before they start 
tests for determining the type and extent of the 
problem. This will prevent them from becoming 
casualties. For example, water contaminated with 
a nerve agent should not be allowed to come in 
contact with the skin nor the vapors be inhaled. 
Therefore, wearing a protective mask and gloves 
would be necessary before checking for nerve 
agent contamination. 



Chemical Contamination 

Chemical agents include the nerve agents 
(G-series and V-series), blister agents, vomiting 
agents, blood agents, choking agents, tear agents, 
defoliants, herbicides, smoke, and incendiaries. 
The nerve agents, blister agents, and agents con- 
taining cyanide are most dangerous because they 
are highly poisonous. Some are soluble in water, 
and either are slow to decompose in solution or 
remain poisonous after decomposition. Table 9-4 
contains guidance for decontamination of 
chemical agents. Water supplies are likely to 
become contaminated as an incidental result of 
widespread chemical attack, rather than as a result 
of direct attack on the water supply. 



Biological Contamination 

Water is a carrier of many organisms that 
cause intestinal disease. An epidemic of one 



of these diseases among troops can be more 
devastating than enemy action and can cause great 
damage to morale as well as health. A heavy 
responsibility thus rests upon the Utilitiesman, 
and vigilance over water purification equipment 
and procedures should never be relaxed. It is 
emphasized that water treatment methods to be 
used when certain chlorine-resistant organisms are 
encountered should be prescribed by a repre- 
sentative of the medical officer. The representative 
will recognize or anticipate the presence of these 
organisms and recommend such additional 
chlorination or other treatment methods as may 
be necessary. 

A waterborne disease rarely produces symp- 
toms in its victim immediately after the victim has 
drunk the contaminated water. A period of time 
known as the incubation period must pass before 
the victim comes down with the disease. During 
this incubation period the disease organisms are 
growing and multiplying. Absence of symptoms 
for several days after untreated water has been 
drunk is, therefore, no guarantee that the water 
is safe. Also, absence of disease among the local 
inhabitants is no assurance of safety, because they 
may have developed immunity. 

Types of waterborne diseases include typhoid 
fever, paratyphoid fever, cholera, bacillary 
dysentery, amebic dysentery, common diarrhea, 
infectious hepatitis, and schistosomiasis. 

More recent times have seen accelerated 
research and development in biological agents and 
means of dissemination. Biological agents, if 
used today, can be of major significance, and 
field water sources would undoubtedly be con- 
taminated. The agents that could be used include 
the spectrum of pathogenic (disease-causing) 
organisms. In many ways biological agents 
resemble natural biological contamination that is 
removed by the usual water treatment process. 
However, contamination from biological agents 
could result in the presence of unusual 
microorganisms not normally found in field water 
and they could be present in abnormally high 
numbers. 



Radiological Contamination 

Although nuclear weapons have been used in 
combat, there are no reliable data as to the 
effect of nuclear explosions on field water 



9-20 



Table 9-4. Decontamination and Minimum Potability Standards of Significant Chemical Agents 



Substance 


Symbol 


Type 


Decontaminatiou Method 


Allowable rouei'iitrution (ppm) 


Short term 
(less than 
7 days) 


Long term 
(more than 
7 days) 


Arsenic 


As 


Blister Agent 


Activated Carbon, 600 ppm 


2.0 


0.2 


Lewisite 


L 


Blister Agent 


Activated Carbon, 600 ppm 


2.0 


0.2 


Mustard 


HD 


Blister Agent 


Activated Carbon, 600 ppm 


2.0 


2.0 


Nitrogen Mustard 


HN-1 
HN-2 
HN-3 


Blister Agent 


Activated Carbon, 600 ppm 


2.0 


2.0 


Hydrogen Cyanide 
(incl Cyanogen 
Chloride) 


AC 


Blood Agent 


Warm water aeration 
Cold water 1. Superhypo- 
chlorina- 
tion, 100 


20.0 


2.0 








ppm. 
2. Dechlorina- 
tion, 600 












ppm car- 
bon. 






Nerve Agent (G) 


GA 
GB 


Nerve Agent 
Nerve Agent 


1. Superhypo- 
chlorina- 
tion 100 


0.1 
0.05 


0.1 
0.05 


Nerve Agent (V) 


VX 


Nerve Agent 


ppm. 
2. Dechlorina- 
tion, 600 


0.005 


0.005 








ppm car- 
bon. 







87.391 



supplies. However, available fallout data leave no 
doubt that contamination of water supplies by this 
means must be considered. Since radiation is not 
detectable by human senses, instruments and 
laboratory tests are necessary to determine its 
presence. 

A nuclear attack over or near a source of water 
supply will probably cause its contamination with 
radioactive materials. A nuclear explosion could 
cause contamination by any of the following 



(listed in the decreasing order of importance to 
the water point operator): 

Fallout of fission products 

Induced activity in the water and sur- 
rounding soil 

Blow-in or wash-in of radioactive dust 

Fallout of unfissioned uranium or 
plutonium 



9-21 



The magnitude of contamination is dependent 
upon the yield of the weapon, the location of 
the detonation with respect to the water source, 
and whether it is air, surface, or subsurface 
burst. 



TREATMENT OF CBR 
CONTAMINATION 

If chemical, biological, or radiological agents, 
or any combination of these, are used, the field 
water supply will inevitably be involved. It is 
impossible to foresee what type of agent will be 
used, but effective security measures can decrease 
and counteract the hazards of all three types of 
agents. 

Effective security involves prompt and ac- 
curate detection. Contamination by chemical 
agents usually, although not always, leaves 
significant signs that should arouse immediate 
suspicion. These are drastic lowering of the 
pH value of the water, characteristic odors 
and tastes, and dead fish. If chemical con- 
tamination is suspected, tests should be made 
with the Chemical Agent Water Testing Kit 
M272. A complete technical and operational 
breakdown of this kit can be found in Army 
TM-3-6665-3 19-10. 

Advice and guidance from the medical 
officer must be sought and followed carefully 
when water contaminated by CBR agents 
must be treated and used. The specialized 
training of personnel in the latest means of 
detection and treatment will aid water supply 
technicians in safeguarding the lives and health 
of personnel. 

If contamination of any type, by CBR 
agents or poisonous industrial wastes, is 
detected, every effort must be made to find 
an uncontaminated water source before con- 
sidering treating and using water known to be 
contaminated. 

If an uncontaminated source of supply 
is not available for use, permission must 
be secured from proper medical authority to 
proceed with treatment of the contaminated 
water. 

Water is considered CONTAMINATED 
AND UNSAFE for treating if one or more of the 



following results are obtained from competent 
testing: 

Arsenic test positive 

Mustard test positive 

pH test pH below 6 

Chlorine demand test positive 

Nerve agent test positive 

Taste and odor test positive 

Water is considered safe for treatment by the 
usual methods if the pH is above 6.0 and all other 
contamination tests are negative. 

When contamination by chemical agents has 
been determined to be present in concentration 
beyond the tolerance shown in table 9-4, and the 
water must be treated and used, one of the four 
types of decontamination methods set forth in the 
table is used. 

1 . Activated carbon. This treatment is used 
when blister agents are present. Activated carbon 
is a relatively pure, finely powdered form of 
carbon which absorbs many substances readily. 
It is an excellent absorbing agent because the 
fineness and porosity of the carbon particles give 
it an enormous surface area. One cubic inch of 
activated carbon particles has an internal and 
external exposure area of about 20,000 square 
yards. The activated carbon is added to a pretreat- 
ment tank set up separately from the coagulator 
assembly. Raw water is pumped into this pretreat- 
ment tank from the source, and the activated 
carbon added; 600 ppm is generally sufficient. The 
water is allowed to remain in contact with the 
carbon for 30 minutes or longer, and is then 
pumped to the purification unit for the usual 
treatment. 

2. Aeration. When hydrogen cyanide is the 
contaminant and the water is warm (70 F or 
above), the aeration treatment may be used. 
Water may be aerated by spraying it into the air, 
allowing it to flow over cascades, passing it 
through beds of coke, or passing air under 
pressure into water. The spray method can be 
effectively used with most purification equipment. 
Water can be recirculated through storage tanks 
or reservoirs by pumping the water out of the tank 
and spraying it back through an elevated strainer 
or nozzle attached to the discharge end of the 
hose. 

3. Super chlorination and dechlorination. (See 
Caution below.) When hydrogen cyanide is 
the contaminant and the water is cold (70 F or 
below) or when one of the nerve agents is the 



9-22 



contaminant, two pretreatment tanks should be 
used. Raw water is pumped into both tanks and 
superchlorinated by the addition of 100 ppm 
available chlorine from high strength calcium 
hypochlorite. (The calcium hypochlorite is added 
to the tanks before starting to fill them with raw 
water.) The water is then dechlorinated by the 
active carbon treatment outlined above. By the 
use of two tanks, a continuous quantity of 
pretreated water can be made available to the 
coagulator in much the same manner as two or 
more floe tanks are used in the batch process of 
normal water treatment. It is important that the 
residue of activated carbon in the pretreatment 
tanks be kept in suspension. Pumps should be 
used for this purpose if necessary. The carbon is 
removed by coagulation and diatomite filtration. 
If the residual is inadequate, postchlorination is 
necessary. 

CAUTION 

CALCIUM HYPOCHLORITE, A 
POWERFUL OXIDIZER, AND AC- 
TIVATED CARBON, A REDUCING 
AGENT, WILL REACT VIOLENTLY, 
POSSIBLY RESULTING IN FIRE OR 
EXPLOSION, IF MIXED WITH ONE 
ANOTHER IN SLURRY FORM. THE 
FOLLOWING SAFETY PRECAU- 
TIONS SHOULD BE OBSERVED: 

DO NOT STORE ACTIVATED 
CARBON AND CALCIUM 
HYPOCHLORITE NEAR ONE 
ANOTHER. 

DO NOT USE THE SAME PAIL 
TO PREPARE SLURRIES OF 
THESE TWO SUBSTANCES. 

KEEP BOTH CHEMICALS DRY 
UNTIL ACTUALLY READY 

FOR USE. 

When biological contamination has been 
reported by detection teams and an alternate 
uncontaminated source is not available, the 
prescribed treatment is superchlorination and 
dechlorination as described above. 

Radiological contamination may result from 
fallout of either fission products (radioactive 
isotopes) or unfissioned products (uranium or 
Plutonium), as well as from blow-in or wash-in 



of radioactive dust, and from induced activity 
in dissolved materials in water and surrounding 
soil. Continuous flow equipment, when operated 
according to standard procedure, is capable 
of removing a large amount of such contami- 
nation. However, sources containing radiological 
contamination should be avoided if at all 
possible. 

The efficiency of a given process for removal 
of radioactive materials from water is dependent 
upon the quantity of the contaminant that is in 
suspension in the water and the quantity that is 
dissolved in true solution. Removal of material 
in suspension is relatively easy, since the purifica- 
tion procedure is designed to remove suspended 
matter and to clarify the water. Available infor- 
mation indicates that most of the radioactivity 
occurring in fallout and debris from the detona- 
tion of a nuclear weapon is insoluble in water. 
This fact tends to simplify the decontamination 
problem. 

Continuous flow type of equipment, with aux- 
iliary processing equipment when necessary, 
removes radioactive material from water by one 
or a combination of methods: pretreatment, 
coagulation, and filtration. Coagulation and 
filtration are normal treatment given to all raw 
surface waters in operation of field purification 
units. Removal of suspended radioactive materials 
by this method is very high. Removal of dissolved 
radioactivity depends primarily upon the nature 
of the radioisotopes in question. The removal 
is negligible for strontium 90, iodine 131, 
and cesium 137, the three most hazardous 
materials. For certain other radioisotopes, such 
as yttrium, ionic removals well over 90 percent 
may be realized. 

Pretreatment is suggested when the degree of 
radiological contamination indicates a combina- 
tion of treatment methods, or when the more 
effective ion exchange equipment is not available. 
Pretreatment consists of batch slurrying the 
contaminated raw water with a selected material 
having adsorptive and ion exchange capacity. 
The material of choice is clay, preferably of 
the montmorrillonite type, high in hydrous 
aluminum silicate content. Raw water is slurred 
with 1,000 ppm for 30 minutes and is then 
coagulated and filtered. This series of steps 
will remove most of the suspended radioactivity 
and an appreciable percentage of the dissolved 
radioactivity. 



9-23 



Fe Cl 



CONTAMINATED SUPPLY 

CFPU 



DIATOMITE FILTER 




PUMP CONTINUIOUS FLOW PURIFICATION UNIT (CFPU) 



NORMAL TREATMENT 



COVERED 
CLEAR WELL 




SPECIAL DECONTAMINATING 
CHEMICALS 



i- Fed. 



Co CO, 



Co (OCI), 




DIATOMITE FILTER 



PRETREATMENT CONTINUIOUS FLOW PURI FlCATION 

UNIT (CFPU) 



COVERED 
CLEAR WELL 



PRETREATMENT FOR BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL AGENTS PLUS NORMAL TREATMENT 




DIATOMITE FILTER 



CATION ANION 

EXCHANGER EXCHANGER 



CONTINUIOUS FLOW PURIFICATION 
UNIT (CFPU) 



Co (OCI), 




MOBILE ION 
EXCHANGE UNIT 



j COVERED 
CLEAR WELL 



NORMAL TREATMENT PLUS POST TREATMENT FOR RADIOLOGICAL CONTAMINATION 



87.392 

Figure 9-11. Comparison of standard treatment with process for treating water contaminated by CBR agents continuous 

flow method. 



9-24 



Figure 9-11 shows a comparison of field 
water treatment equipment setups for normal, 
chemical/biological, and radiological contamina- 
tion removal and treatment. 



WATER TREATMENT EQUIPMENT 

The senior Utilitiesman may be called upon 
to select and set up various types of field water 
treatment equipment. You must be familiar with 
the theory of operation, the capabilities, installa- 
tion considerations, and maintenance require- 
ments of this equipment. This section covers three 
types of water treatment equipment. They are 
distillation, filtration, and disinfection units. 

DISTILLATION 

In areas where a satisfactory freshwater source 
cannot be located, and existing water treatment 
facilities are not usable, the distillation process 
can be used to obtain fresh drinking water from 
brackish water, seawater, or water containing 
excessive amounts of dissolved solids. Distillation 
is effective for removing radioactive contaminants 
from water. 

Since the output of distillation equipment is 
limited and the process is expensive, its use is 
restricted to situations in which no other process 
is adequate. Continuous flow or batch-type water 
purification equipment is used whenever possible. 



Theory of Operation 

Distillation consists of heating water to form 
steam, separating the steam from the remaining 
water, and then cooling the steam so that it 
becomes water again (fig. 9-12). As the water is 
heated to form steam or water vapor, and the 
vapor is separated and then cooled, solids dissolv- 
ed in the water do not vaporize, but remain behind 
in the raw water. A large amount of heat that is 
not evidenced as a rise in temperature is required 
to change (vaporize) boiling water into steam. 

The process whereby the latent heat is removed 
and the steam becomes water is called condensa- 
tion. Heat flows through the bottom of the 
evaporator, enters the water, and changes the 
water to steam. The steam is condensed in the con- 
denser, its latent heat of vaporization being 
transferred to the water surrounding the tubes. 
A portion of the cooling water that has picked 
up heat in passing through the condenser is 
generally used as feed water for the evaporator. 
All dissolved solids remain in the equipment and 
noncondensable gases are vented to the air so that 
the resulting distillate is almost pure. Thus the 
distillation process is useful in producing water 
of an extremely high purity and low in total solids. 
Despite this high degree of purity, all distilled 
water must be disinfected before being consumed 
because of the possibility of recontamination 
during handling. 

In thermocompression distillation, the latent 
heat of vaporization of steam is again used to 



EVAPORATOR 



CONDENSER 




HEATER 



DISTILLATE 



87.393 



Figure 9-12. Distillation in its simplest form. 



9-25 



produce additional steam. The pressure and 
temperature of the steam generated in the 
evaporator are raised by compressing the steam. 
The compressed steam passes to the condenser 
section where it condenses, giving up its latent 
heat and causing more steam to form in the 
evaporator. This steam is then compressed and 
the cycle repeated. The use of a combination 
evaporator-condenser with a steam compressor 
creates a closed heat cycle, permitting the con- 
tinued reuse of the latent heat of vaporization. 
The compressor is driven by a gasoline or diesel 
water-cooled engine. 

Figure 9-13 shows the operation of a simple 
thermocompression distillation unit. Cold raw 
water flows through heat exchangers where it is 
heated almost to boiling by the outgoing streams 



of distillate and brine, and by water from the 
engine that drives the compressor. The hot raw 
water flows into the evaporator-condenser and is 
changed to steam by the steam condensing in the 
tubes. This involves the transfer of latent heat. 
The steam in the evaporator is drawn into the 
compressor where it is compressed and its 
temperature raised (from 212 F to 222 F). The 
compressed steam flows back through the coils 
in the evaporator-condenser where it transfers its 
latent heat through the walls of the coil into the 
water in the evaporator section. This transfer of 
latent heat causes the steam to condense in the 
coils and changes the water in the evaporator 
into steam. This cycle will continue as long as the 
compressor runs. Presently the S200 SPD Vapor 
Compression Distillation Unit is found in the table 
of allowance. A complete description of the unit 



STEAM FROM ENGINE 
COOLING 



HOT ENGINE 
WATER IN 



STEAM 222F 



MACHANICAL ENERGY 
COMPRESSOR 



COOL ENGINE 
WATER OUT 



EVAPORATOR CONDENSER 




COLD SEAWATER IN 



DISTILLATE OUT 
BRINE OUT 



87.394 



Figure 9-13. Flow diagram thermocompression distillation. 



9-26 



and its operation may be found in UT 3 & 2, 
NAVEDTRA 10660, volume I, chapter 7. 



Installation 

At permanent naval activities, the installation 
of distillation equipment will be designed by 
engineers and improvements to the system can be 
made over a long period of time. In the tactical 
field environment, it will be the Utilitiesman 
supervisor who must consider various factors for 
the installation of distillation equipment. These 
are as follows: 

Potable water demand 

Site location 

Site drainage 

Security 



The importance of providing adequate 
drainage at any water point cannot be overem- 
phasized. Waste water from filters, leakage from 
tanks, and spillage from distribution points can 
render a water point inoperable as well as creating 
an unsanitary condition. 

Your water point may or may not be located 
in the vicinity of friendly forces. Denying the 
enemy information about your water point by 
using overhead concealment and camouflage may 
be necessary as well as guarding against ground 
attacks and sabotage with a defensive plan. Any 
adverse effect, from thirst to disease, the enemy 
can have on a water point will affect the well-being 
of the force using it. It will be considered in the 
enemy's plans. 

Distillation equipment cannot produce water 
quickly enough to be used for fire protection. Do 
not permit your treated water to be used for this 
purpose except in extreme emergencies. Raw water 
should be used whenever possible. 



Fire protection 

The demand for potable water will determine 
the number of distillation units, the need for 
storage facilities, operating hours, and so forth. 
You must determine the population you will be 
serving. Keep in mind that your water point may 
supply many units in an area, not just your 
organization. 

The site location for distillation equipment 
must be upstream of any source of contamina- 
tion. You must consider ocean currents that may 
change with wind direction, weather conditions, 
the season of the year, or tidal action. It is not 
efficient use of personnel or equipment if you 
have to relocate because the wind changed 
direction. 

The site must also be relatively flat with a 
gradual slope toward the ocean. You also must 
allow for maximum tidal action. In many areas 
the tide may rise and fall several feet depending 
on the season of the year. Build low platforms 
to keep your equipment out of the sand and 
to allow air to circulate underneath tanks to 
prevent rot. These platforms will also prevent 
punctures of the storage tanks by sharp objects 
and provide a stable working area for operating 
personnel. 



FILTRATION 

Filtration consists of passing the water through 
some porous material to remove the suspended 
impurities. Filtration is one of the oldest and 
simplest procedures known to man for removing 
suspended matter from water and other fluids. 

The simplest form of water filter is the sand 
filter. This filter resembles a small reservoir, 
whose bottom is a bed of filter sand that rests on 
a bed of well-graded aggregate with the largest 
size aggregate being at the bottom. An underdrain 
system of tile or brick is provided under the gravel 
to collect the water from the filter area. The 
underdrain system consists of a header or main 
conduit extending across the filter bed. Means are 
provided for regulating the flow of water out of 
the filter through this header and also for con- 
trolling the rate of flow onto the filter. This allows 
the filter to be operated at controlled rates that 
should not exceed 3.0 gpm per square foot of filter 
area. An average filter bed consists of about 12 
to 20 inches of gravel and 20 to 40 inches of sand. 
The depth of water over the sand bed varies from 
3 to 5 feet. 

The most effective filtration system ever 
devised and one of the most effective portable 
systems in existence is the diatomite filter unit 



9-27 



(fig. 9-14). In the diatomite filter, water is 
passed through a layer of diatomaceous silica 
(also called diatomaceous earth). It consists of 
skeletal remains of minute algae (diatoms) found 
in marine deposits that have lifted above sea 
level. 

The diatomite filter accomplishes highly 
efficient filtration. Properly operated diatomite 
filters are capable of removing from coagulated 
and settled water, amoebic cysts, the cercariae of 
schistosomes, and approximately 90 percent of the 
bacteria. They also produce water with less than 
one unit of turbidity. 

Before filtering, water is normally pretreated 
by passing it through sedimentation basins or 
holding tanks. This process removes heavier 
suspended solids that may cause rapid clogging 
of the filter. This water is brought onto the filters 
as the next step in the purification process. This 
water contains very finely divided suspended 
matter such as minute particles of floe, clay, and 
mud that have not settled, and bacteria and 
microscopic organisms that have not been 
removed by sedimentation. The purpose of the 
filter is to remove this suspended matter and give 
the water a clear, sparkling, and attractive 
appearance. 

There are basically three types of filters. These 
are slow sand filters, rapid sand filters, and 
pressure filters. 

Slow sand filters contain fine-grain sand and 
have low filtration rates. They are usually used 
when coagulation is not included in the treatment 
process. Their capacity is about 2 to 10 million 
gallons per day (mgd) per acre of filter surface. 
Use of slow sand filters has been practically 
discontinued because of their high cost per unit 
of capacity and the labor required to clean them. 
Rapid sand filters are now universally used in 
modern water treatment plants. There are two 
types, gravity and pressure. Gravity filters (fig. 
9-15) are essentially open-top rectangular concrete 
boxes about 10 feet deep. An underdrain system 
at the bottom is covered by gravel, which, in turn, 
supports a 24- to 30-inch layer of fine filter sand 
(fig. 9-16). Gravity filters are usually designed to 
filter about 2 gpm per square foot of filter-bed 
area. However, in an emergency, up to 4 gpm per 
square foot can be obtained if prior treatment by 
flocculation and sedimentation produces very low 
turbidity and precholorination and postchlorina- 
tion or both are effectively disinfecting the water. 
Approval must be obtained from the major com- 
mand to operate filters at rates in excess of 2 gpm 



DIATOMITE 
FILTER 



INFLUENT 
SECTION 

EFFLUENT' -fl 
SECTION 




WASH 
RING 



87.395 



Figure 9-14. Diatomite filter, showing one filter element. 



9-28 



RATE-OF-FLOW AND LOSS 
OF-HEAD GAUGES 



FILTER BED 

WASH TROUGHS 




CONCRETE 
FILTER TANK 



OPERATING TABLES 

PIPE-GALLERY FLOOR 



PRESSURE LINES 

TO HYDRAULIC VALVES 

FROM OPERATING TABLES 



: rr INFLUENT TO 

FILTERS 



EFFLUENT TO CLEAR WELL 



87.396 



Figure 9-15. Battery of three gravity-type rapid sand filters. 



WASH TROUGHS 



FILTER STAND 
24" 30" 




FILTER TANK 



PERFORATED LATERALS 



CAST-IRON MANIFOLD WITH 
STRAINERS IN TOP 



FILTER FLOOR 



87.397 



Figure 9-16. Typical sand filter showing relationship of filter media. 



9-29 



per square foot. Pressure filters (fig. 9-17) have 
the filter bed enclosed in a pressure vessel. Water 
is either pumped into the vessel and forced 
through the filter or is drawn into the vessel and 
through the filter by a pump. The diatomite filter 
is classified as a pressure filter. 

DISINFECTION 

Besides coagulation, sedimentation, and filtra- 
tion, water must undergo an additional treatment 
step; disinfection. This is necessary because no 
combination of the other three steps can be relied 
upon to remove all disease-producing organisms 
from water; also because there is danger of recon- 
tamination during handling before consumption. 
Residual disinfection using chlorination is the final 
step in all water treatment processes (including 
distillation). Under emergency or field conditions, 
water may be disinfected with iodine or by boiling. 

The most satisfactory means of water disinfec- 
tion and provision of a residual is by means of 
a chemical disinfectant. The efficiency of the 
disinfection process is dependent upon numerous 



AIR RELIEF 




87.398 



Figure 9-17. Pressure filter. 



factors. These include the chemical used, the con- 
tact time, the type and concentration of 
microorganisms, the pH and temperature of the 
water, the presence of interfering substances, and 
the degree of protection afforded organisms from 
the disinfecting solution by materials in which they 
are imbedded. Therefore, various concentrations 
of disinfectant are required depending upon the 
local environmental conditions and the amount 
of particle removal effected. 

Chlorine is the most commonly used chemical 
for disinfection of water. It is used in field water 
supply in the form of calcium hypochlorite, a 
standard item in the supply system (commercially 
known as HTH powder). When the calcium hypo- 
chlorite is dissolved, the chlorine goes into solu- 
tion and a calcium carbonate sludge settles out. 
The chlorine is present in the solution as 
hypochlorous acid or hypochlorite ion (depending 
on the pH). Both forms are powerful oxidizing 
substances. The chlorine available in either form 
rapidly oxidizes the organic and inorganic 
matter, including the bacteria in the water. In this 
reaction the chlorine is converted to chloride and 
is no longer available as a disinfectant. The 
organic matter as well as such material as iron and 
manganese consumes the chlorine. The use of 
chlorine makes it possible to introduce an 
accurately measured dosage to ensure the destruc- 
tion of disease-producing organisms and provide 
a readily measured residual to safeguard against 
recontamination during further handling. 

Chlorine dosage is the amount of chlorine 
added to water to satisfy the chlorine demand as 
well as to provide a residual after a specified time. 
The amount required to disinfect water varies with 
the organic content and pH value of the water, 
the temperature, the time of contact, and the 
chlorine residual required. The dosage is usually 
stated in terms of parts per million (ppm) or 
milligrams per liter (mg/1). 

The chlorine demand of water is the difference 
between the quantity of chlorine applied in water 
treatment and the total available residual chlorine 
present at the end of a specified contact period. 
The chlorine demand is dependent upon the 
nature and the quantity of chlorine-consuming 
agents present and the pH value and temperature 
of the water. (High pH and low temperatures 
retard disinfection by chlorination.) For com- 
parative purposes, it is imperative that all test 
conditions be stated. The smallest amount of 
residual chlorine considered to be significant is 
0.1 ppm. The relationship of the demand to the 
length of the contact period is discussed below. 



9-30 



Some of the chlorine-consuming agents in the 
water are nonpathogenic (nondisease-causing 
organisms), but this bears no relationship to the 
fact that they contribute to the total chlorine de- 
mand of the water. Navy policy requires that for 
field water supplies, the chlorine demand must be 
satisfied and chlorine residual must be present. 
Residual chlorine is the amount of unreacted 
chlorine remaining at a specified time after the 
chlorine compound is added. Chlorine in aqueous 
solution is highly unstable. It may change 
quantitatively and qualitatively under numerous 
conditions, including the presence of other 
elements or compounds. The total residual 
chlorine in the water can be chemically divided 
into several types. 

Total available residual chlorine. This is 
the sum of the free available chlorine and the 
combined available chlorine. 

Free available chlorine. This refers to 
hypochlorous acid and hypochlorite ion present 
in water. These are the most effective disinfec- 
tion forms of chlorine. The free available chlorine 
is a rapid-acting type, important because it can 
be relied upon to destroy bacteria relatively 
quickly, and thus is active during the period 
immediately following chlorination. The relative 
amount of each present in the water is dependent 
upon the pH value of the water. It is important 
to remember that when the pH is raised, the 
quantity of free available chlorine required to kill 
the same number of microorganisms increases. 
With decreasing temperature, the same situation 
of increasing dosage to maintain the same kill is 
encountered. If the contact time is varied, then 
the dosage applied must also be changed. For 
example, to shorten the contact time the dosage 
would have to be increased. 

Combined available chlorine. This results 
from the presence of ammonia or organic nitrogen 
that will react to form simple chloramines. Thus 
the term combined available chlorine arises from 
the fact that the chlorine has combined with 
another substance. Chloramines are a slower 
acting and less active form of disinfectant. 
Therefore, a much higher concentration than that 
of free available chlorine is needed to produce the 
same germ-destroying effect. The specific 
chloramines present are also a function of pH. 

Chlorine demand in most water is likely to be 
largely satisfied 10 minutes after chlorine is 



added. After the first 10 minutes of chlorination, 
disinfection continues but at a diminishing rate. 
A standard period of 30 minutes' contact time is 
used to assure that highly resistant or high disease- 
producing organisms have been destroyed, pro- 
viding a high enough dosage has been applied. 
Given a sufficiently large chlorine content, and 
if certain other conditions are met, even such 
special water purification problems as the presence 
of amoebic cysts or schistosomes will be solved 
with the 30-minute contact period. 

The efficiency of the chemical disinfection 
process is dependent upon numerous factors. 
They include the type and concentration of 
microorganisms, the pH and temperature of the 
water, the presence of interfering substances, and 
whether or not the organisms are protected from 
the disinfection solution by being embedded in 
tissue cells, or clumps of tissue cells, or other 
material. Therefore, various concentrations of 
disinfectants are required. Minimum concentra- 
tions of disinfectants are prescribed below. Higher 
concentrations may frequently be prescribed by 
the medical officer on the basis of his knowledge 
of endemic disease or local environmental con- 
ditions. 

SEABEE-operated mobile and portable water 
treatment units use coagulation and filtration as 
a part of the treatment process. They are capable 
of a high degree of removal of particulate 
material. When those units are used, sufficient 
chlorine will be added to the water, preferably 
before coagulation, so the residual in the finished 
water after 30 minutes of contact will be at least 
as much as that indicated by the following table. 



pH 

5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 



30-Minute Free Chlorine 
Residuals in mg/1 

0.75 
0.75 
1.00 
3.00 
5.00 
5.00 



If adequate provisions are not made for accurate 
and frequent measurement of pH, 5.00 mg/1 must 
be used. The following guidelines were used in 
developing the above table: 

The water to be treated would be natural 
surface or ground water of average composition 
and not grossly or deliberately contaminated. 



9-31 



Water temperature would be above the 
freezing point. 

Treatment would consist of coagula- 
tion, sedimentation, and filtration through 
diatomaceous earth. Water plant operators would 
be well trained and dependable. 

The prescribed concentrations of free 
chlorine should provide a reasonable margin of 
safety for all bacteria and viruses pathogenic to 
man. Parasitic ova (eggs) would have been 
removed in the coagulation and filtration steps 
of the treatment process. 

EMERGENCY TREATMENT 
METHODS 

Emergency treatment methods using water 
sterilizing bags, canteens, and other water con- 
tainers do not provide for removal of impurities 
by coagulation and filtration. The entire reliance 
for rendering the water safe for consumption is 
placed on the disinfection process. Sufficient 
chlorine is added to the water so the residual, after 
30 minutes of contact, will be at least 5 ppm of 
total chlorine. Under certain conditions, such as 
the presence of highly resistant disease-producing 
microorganisms or adverse environmental condi- 
tions, the medical officer will designate such 
higher residuals as may be necessary. 

Boiling is a quick means of disinfecting small 
quantities of water in the field by individual 
soldiers. It is likely that all bacteria that produce 
diseases in man are killed by pasteurization 
temperatures. But there are some resistant 
organisms, principally viruses (such as infectious 
hepatitis), for which water must be boiled to 
achieve inactivation. A practical minimum 
standard for altitudes from sea level to 25,000 feet 
is to bring the water to a rolling boil for 15 
seconds. Longer boiling times may be prescribed 
by the medical officer on the basis of evidence 
that the minimum is not inactivating all 
pathogenic microorganisms. Upon cooling, the 
boiled water should be kept in a covered uncon- 
taminated container. Boiling is obviously a 
difficult way to disinfect large quantities of water. 

Breakpoint chlorination is the application of 
chlorine to produce a residual of free available 
chlorine with no combined chlorine present. As 
chlorine is added, the total residual increases 
gradually after the initial demand of the water has 
been satisfied. At some residual concentration, 
depending on the water treated, free available 



chlorine reacts with the remaining oxidizable 
substances (including combined chlorine), and the 
residual drops sharply. When all combined 
chlorine has been oxidized by reaction with free 
available chlorine, the residual, now consisting 
only of free available chlorine, rises again and 
continues to increase in direct proportion to 
increased dosage. The point at which the residual 
again begins to increase is the breakpoint. 

Figure 9-18 shows four typical breakpoint 
chlorination curves. Note that the curve rises at 
almost a 45-degree angle after the breakpoint is 
reached. Reactions are most rapid at pH from 6.5 
to 8.5 and with increasing temperatures. 

Curve 1 shows a typical breakpoint for water 
containing a considerable amount of ammonia. 
During the initial upward rise, chloramines are 
first formed. The curve rises until sufficient free 
available chlorine is developed to react with 
chloramine; then it falls until a point where all 
ammonia compounds have been oxidized. 

With less organic matter in the water, as in 
curves 2 and 3, free available chlorine is formed 
sooner, destroying chloramines formed at the 
early stage. This results in lower combined 
chlorine residuals and flatter curves before 
breakpoint. 

With practically no organic matter, curve 4 
shows the chloramines are neutralized at an 
early stage by the upswing of the curve. 

For some waters containing complex organic 
compounds, several intermediate breakpoints 
occur. 

Advantages of breakpoint chlorination are 
high bactericidal efficiency, long-lasting residuals, 
and low odor and taste characteristics. It can be 
used only if detention periods are long enough to 
develop free available chlorine residual. This 
varies with the organic content of water. In some 
cases the treated water must be open to the air 
to permit escape of chloroorganic gases formed. 

Tests for ammonia nitrogen will assist in deter- 
mining the breakpoint. In practice, 10 to 25 times 
as much chlorine as ammonia nitrogen content 
may be needed to reach the breakpoint. Break- 
point chlorination, before instead of after filtra- 
tion, has been found desirable. In surface water 
supplies with widely varying ammonia nitrogen 
content, the breakpoint chlorination should not 
be used unless trained assistance is available to 
make frequent tests for the breakpoint. With such 
water quality, the breakpoint curve can change 
radically in a short time. 

Superchlorination is the application of more 
chlorine than needed for the chlorine residual 



9-32 




-INCREASING CHLORINE DOSAGE 
CURVE I 




INCREASING CHLORINE DOSAGE 
CURVE 3 




BREAKPOINT 



INCREASING CHLORINE DOSAGE 
CURVE 2 




INCREASING CHLORINE DOSAGE 

CURVE 4 



87.399 



Figure 9-18. Breakpoint chlorination curves. 



essential to marginal chlorination. The surplus, 
which is used to control odors and tastes, is later 
removed by dechlorination. This method is 
particularly valuable in surface waters with 
variable ammonia and organic content. Sulfur 
dioxide reacts with chlorine to form acids 
that are neutralized by the natural alkalinity 
of the water. Sulfur dioxide is fed by equipment 
similar to that used for chlorine feeding. Activated 
carbon absorbs the excess chlorine, while 
aeration removes it by dissipating it to the 
atmosphere. 



REFERENCES 

Field Water Supply, TM-5-700, Department of the 
Army, Washington, D.C. 20390, July 1967. 

Intermediate Water, Naval Technical Training 
Center Course 215, Navy Public Works 
Center, Norfolk, Virginia 23511, May 1969. 

Maintenance and Operation of Water Plants and 
Systems, AFM 85-T3, Department of the Air 
Force, Washington, D.C. 20390, February 
1959. 



9-33 



CHAPTER 10 

SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 



Learning Objective: Identify the characteristics of sewage including the 
sampling and testing techniques used in identifying treatment and disposal 
requirements. 



Sewage is the wastewater of community life. 
In composition it includes dissolved and sus- 
pended organic solids that are putrescible and, 
therefore, will decay. Sewage also contains 
countless numbers of living organisms bacteria 
and other microorganisms whose life activities 
cause the process of decomposition. When decay 
proceeds under anaerobic conditions (in the 
absence of dissolved oxygen in the sewage), 
offensive conditions result and odors and un- 
sightly appearances are produced. When decay 
proceeds under aerobic conditions (in the presence 
of dissolved oxygen), offensive conditions do not 
result and the process is greatly accelerated. 

The promotion of cleanliness by the removal 
of filth and wastes to an area remote from the 
center of activity is important. It is only by such 
practices that the environment can be maintained 
in an acceptable and safe condition. Among the 
waste products of life are the disease-producing 
(pathogenic) bacteria and viruses that can be 
readily transferred by sewage from sick in- 
dividuals to well ones. Properly regulated pro- 
cedures for disposal of sewage are necessary to 
protect the health of the people and to maintain 
the cleanliness of the environment and the com- 
fort of the inhabitants. 

The degree of treatment used for sewage 
depends on two main considerations: (1) the 
protection of health of the command and 
community, and (2) the prevention of water pollu- 
tion. The state or local authorities having 
statutory authority in pollution control usually 
have established standards of purity that are 
necessary to prevent pollution of natural waters. 
Accordingly, when a Navy installation dis- 
charges liquid waste into controlled waters, the 
standards set by state or local authority must be 
maintained. 



The Utilitiesman may be involved in the 
installation, operation, and maintenance of the 
systems designed to meet the above requirements. 
This chapter will aid you in performing the varied 
duties and responsibilities of the first class and 
chief Utilitiesman involved in sewage treatment 
and disposal. A discussion of the sources, 
characteristics, sampling and testing procedures, 
and the monitoring of sewage disposal influents 
are given in this chapter. In addition to these 
subjects, septic tanks, cesspools, and leaching 
fields are also discussed. 



SOURCES OF RAW SEWAGE 

The major sources of raw sewage are domestic 
sewage, industrial sewage, and storm water. 

DOMESTIC SEWAGE 

Domestic sewage consists of wastes from 
toilets, lavatories, urinals, bathtubs, showers, 
home laundries, and kitchens. It also includes 
similar wastes from dispensaries and hospitals. 

INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE 

Industrial wastes, depending upon the source, 
usually have characteristics different from 
domestic flows. Some of these wastes can be 
dangerous to the plant operators as well as to the 
treatment plant and collection system. Industrial 
waste sources include, but are not limited to, 
laundry and dry-cleaning plants, metal-cleaning 
and plating processes, paint spray booths, aircraft 
and vehicle cleaning racks, boiler plants, photo- 
graphic processing, and fire-fighting activities. 
Most industrial wastes require pretreatment before 



10-1 



being introduced into a collection system at their 
source. 

Industrial wastes can also be very high or low 
in pH because of acids and/or bases used in their 
processes. You may expect intense colors in wastes 
from painting areas. Grit, salt, and dirt levels may 
be high from vehicle wash racks. Radioactive 
wastes must never be dumped into regular collec- 
tion systems. They must be handled separately 
and, in most cases, very carefully. Explosive or 
flammable liquids can often enter the system from 
fuel storage areas. These liquids also create a 
dangerous fire hazard in a sewage treatment plant. 

STORM WATER 

Storm water should be excluded from the 
sewage collection system as much as possible. 
Heavy input of storm water can disturb the opera- 
tion of a treatment plant by sending it too much 
water, a problem called hydraulic overloading. 



This situation may force diverting or bypassing 
effluent from the treatment plant. Bypassing is 
normally a violation of National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits. 
These permits are controlled by the Environ- 
mental Protection Agency (EPA). Bypassing can 
result in releasing bacteria, heavy metals, and 
other dangerous contaminants into receiving 
waters. It is to be avoided whenever possible. 
Very large paved or roofed areas should not 
be drained into the sanitary collection system. 
Maintenance personnel should prevent storm- 
water infiltration as much as possible by 
ensuring manholes are sealed, pipes are not 
cracked or broken, and all leaking joints are 
repaired. 

SOURCE QUANTITY VARIABLES 

Each military installation has different 
wastewater flows depending upon the types or 



Table 10-1. Characteristics of Typical Wastewater Generated at Military Facilities 



Parameter 


Weak 


Medium 


Strong 


Total solids 


330 


700 


1,200 


Total volatile solids 


240 


420 


810 


Suspended solids 


100 


200 


400 


Total dissolved solids 


230 


500 


800 


Volatile suspended solids 


70 


130 


220 


Settleable solids* 


2 


4 


6 


Biochemical oxygen demand (5 day) 


100 


200 


400 


Total nitrogen as N 


10 


20 


40 


Ammonia nitrogen as N 


4 


10 


20 


Total phosphorus as P 


6 


10 


20 


Grease 


50 


100 


150 


Chemical oxygen demand 


300 


450 


600 


*A11 the above are measured in milligrams 
measured in milliliters per liter (ml/1). 


per liter (mg/1) 


except settleable solids, 


which are 



10-2 



sizes of industrial activities. Normally, 80 to 120 
gallons per day per permanent resident and 30 to 
50 gallons per day per transient and community 
labor personnel can be used as a rough volume 
estimate for flow. 

PATTERNS OF FLOW 

The amount of wastewater a treatment plant 
receives fluctuates from hour to hour. Changing 
seasons also affect the pattern flow. Peak flow of 
domestic wastes normally reaches a plant just after 
breakfast and for several hours in the early even- 
ing. Industrial wastes may reach the plant during 
the industry's period of operation. If the industry 
has two or three shifts, flow will be more constant. 

The size and topography of the area served 
by a treatment plant also affects the flow pattern. 
Small plants may have large differences between 
peak and low flow periods. Larger plants 
normally have more uniform rates of flow. The 
period of lowest flow is usually between 2400 and 
0500 hours. Unusual flow patterns help operating 
personnel identify and correct abnormal surges 
in flow in the wastewater system. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF SEWAGE 

Sewage is composed of many materials that 
are broken down into three general areas. These 
areas are the physical, chemical, and biological 
characteristics of wastewater. This section will aid 
you in identifying these various characteristics. 

WASTEWATER COMPOSITION 

The concentrations of most materials in 
wastewater are expressed in milligrams per liter 



(mg/1) and denote the strength of the wastewater. 
The higher the concentration, or mg/1, the higher 
the strength. Table 10-1 lists the most important 
materials that compose wastewater. 

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 

The physical characteristics of wastewater in- 
clude those items that can be detected using the 
physical senses. They are temperature, color, 
odor, and solids. 

Temperature 

The temperature of wastewater varies greatly, 
depending upon the type of operations being 
conducted at your installation. Wide variation in 
the wastewater temperature indicates heated or 
cooled discharges, often of substantial volume. 
They have any one of a number of sources. For 
example, decreased temperatures after a snowmelt 
or rainfall may indicate serious infiltration. 
Changes in wastewater temperatures affect the 
settling rates, dissolved oxygen levels, and 
biological action. The temperature of wastewater 
becomes extremely important in certain 
wastewater unit operations such as sedimentation 
tanks and recirculating filters. 

Color 

The color of wastewater containing dissolved 
oxygen (DO) is normally gray. Black-colored 
wastewater usually accompanied by foul odors, 
containing little or no DO, is said to be septic. 
Table 10-2 provides wastewater color information. 



Table 10-2. Significance of Color in Wastewater 



Unit Process 



Color 



Problem Indicated 



Influent of 
plant 



Gray 
Red 

Green, Yellow, 
Other 

Red or other 
soil color 

Black 



None 

Blood or other industrial wastes or TNT complex 

Industrial wastes not pretreated (paints, etc.) 

Surface runoff into influent, also industrial flows 
Septic conditions or industrial flows 



10-3 



Odor 

Domestic sewage should have a musty odor. 
Bubbling gas and/or foul odor may indicate in- 
dustrial wastes, anaerobic (septic) conditions, and 
operational problems. Refer to table 10-3 for 
typical wastewater odors, possible problems, and 
solutions. 

Solids 

Wastewater is normally 99.9 percent water and 
0.1 percent solids. If a wastewater sample is 
evaporated, the solids remaining are called total 
solids. 

The amount of solids in the drinking water 
system has a significant effect on the total solids 
concentration in the raw sewage. Industrial and 
domestic discharges also add solids to the plant 
influent. There are many different ways to 



classify solids. The most common types are 
dissolved, suspended, settleable, floatable, 
colloidal, organic, and inorganic solids. 

Part of the total solids is dissolved in 
wastewater. Much like sugar dissolves in coffee, 
many solids dissolve in water. Dissolved solids 
pass through a fine mesh filter. Normal 
wastewater processes using settling or flotation 
are designed to remove solids but cannot remove 
dissolved solids. Biological treatment units such 
as trickling filters and activated sludge plants con- 
vert some of these dissolved solids into settleable 
solids that are then removed by sedimentation 
tanks. 

Those solids that are not dissolved in 
wastewater are called suspended solids. When 
suspended solids float, they are called floatable 
solids or scum. Those suspended solids that 
settle are called settleable solids, grit, or sludge. 
Very small suspended solids that neither float nor 



Table 10-3. Odors in Wastewater Treatment Plant 



Odor 



Location 



Problem 



Possible Solutions 



Earthy, Musty 



Hydrogen sulfide 
(H 2 S), "Like 
rotten eggs" 



Chlorinelike 



Primary and 
Secondary Units 

Influent 



Primary Clarifier 

Activated Sludge 
Aeration Tanks 
Trickling Filters 

Secondary 
Clarifier 

Chlorine Contact 
Tank 

General Plant 

Chlorine Contact 
Tank 



Industrial Odors General Plant 



No problem 
(Normal) 

Septic 



Septic Sludge 

Septic 

Conditions 

(Anaerobic) 



Improper 

chlorine 

dosage 

Inadequate 
pretreatment 



None required 



Aerate, chlorinate, 
oxonizate 



Remove sludge 

More air or less BOD, 
recirculation rate, 
HTH, flood 

Remove sludge and/or 
grease 

Remove sludge 



Good housekeeping 

Adjust chlorine 
dosage controls 



Enforce sewer use 
regulation 



10-4 



settle are called colloidal particles. Colloidal 
particles are often removed in the biological treat- 
ment units. They may also be removed by 
chemical treatment followed by sedimentation. 

All the solids discussed above may be either 
organic or inorganic. Organic solids always con- 
tain carbon and hydrogen and when ignited to 
high temperatures (500 C to 600 C) burn to form 
carbon dioxide, water, and sometimes various 
other compounds. The burning or volatilization 
of organic solids has led to the term volatile solids. 
All solids that burn or evaporate at 500 C to 
600 C are called volatile solids. These solids serve 
as a food source for bacteria and other living 
forms in a wastewater treatment plant. Most 
organic solids in municipal waste originate from 
living plants or animals. 



Those solids that do not burn or evaporate at 
500 C to 600 C, but remain as a residue, are 
called fixed solids. Fixed solids are usually 
inorganic in nature and may be composed of grit, 
clay, salts, and metals. Most inorganic solids are 
from nonliving sources. Table 10-4 summarizes 
the types and amounts of the solids discussed in 
the preceding paragraphs. 

CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS 

The chemical characteristics of wastewater of 
special concern to the Utilitiesman are pH, DO 
(dissolved oxygen), oxygen demand, nutrients, 
and toxic substances. 

pH 

The term pH is used to describe the acid or 
base properties of water solutions. A scale from 



Table 10-4. Solids of a Typical Domestic Wastewater 



DISSOLVED SOLIDS 
700 MG/1 



ORGANIC VOLATILE 
400 MG/1 



ORGANIC VOLATILE 
260 MG/1 



INFLUENT 



TOTAL SOLIDS 
1,000 MG/1 



WASTEWATER 
99.9% WATER 
0.1% SOLIDS 

MG/1 = PPM 



SUSPENDED SOLIDS 
300 MG/1 



INORGANIC FIXED 
40 MG/1 



INORGANIC FIXED 
300 MG/1 



SETTLEABLE 
140 MG/1 



NON-SETTLEABLE 
120 MG/1 



SETTLEABLE 
30 MG/1 



NON-SETTLEABLE 
10 MG/1 



87.400 



10-5 



to 14 has been established where pH 7 is neutral. 
A pH less than 7 is considered acidic. A pH above 
7 is considered alkaline or basic. Table 10-5 lists 
pH values for some common materials. A pH less 
than 7 in the wastewater plant influent may 
indicate septic conditions of wastewater. The pH 
values less than 5 and more than 10 usually 
indicate industrial-type wastes not compatible 



with biological wastewater operations. Pretreat- 
ment of these wastes at the source is usually re- 
quired since extreme pH values may damage 
biological treatment units. 

Dissolved Oxygen 

Dissolved oxygen (DO) in wastewater has a 
great effect on the waste's characteristics. 



Table 10-5. Common Substance pH Values 



MIDPOINTS OF pH RANGES 
FOR PROCESS CONTROL 

ALKALINE 



COPPER PLATING 
WASTES 



BRASS PLATING 
WASTES 



LIME SODA 

WATER SOFTENING 

WASTES 



WASTEWATER 
TREATMENT 

BREWING PROCESS 
WASTES 

NICKEL PLATING 
WASTES 

FOOD PROCESSING 
WASTES 



pH VALUES OF SOME 
COMMON SUBSTANCES 



PICKLE PROCESSING 

PHOTOENGRAVING 

WASTES 



ACID 



14- 
13- 



=-7-E 



O _ 




J 



BLEACH 

(1% OR MORE) 

AMMONIA 

(AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE) 



BAKING SODA 

BLOOD 
DISTILLED WATER 



BATTERY ACID 



PH SCALE 
PH INDICATES HYDROGEN ION CONCENTRATION (ACIDITY) IN WATER 



87.401 



10-6 



Wastewater that has DO is called aerobic or fresh. 
Aerobic raw sewage is usually gray in color and 
has a musty odor. 

Wastewater that has no DO is called anaerobic 
or septic. Anaerobic raw sewage is usually black 
and has an offensive hydrogen sulfide or rotten 
egg odor. 

Oxygen Demand 

Oxygen demand is the amount of oxygen 
used by bacteria and other wastewater organisms 
as they feed upon the organic solids in the 
wastewater. Chemical tests such as the BOD 
(biochemical oxygen demand), the COD (chemical 
oxygen demand), the ODI (instantaneous oxygen 
demand or oxygen demand index), and the TOC 
(total organic carbon) measure the "strength" of 
sewage. These tests are discussed in detail later 
in this chapter. It is important that organic wastes 
be removed to protect the receiving body of water 
into which the wastewater plant is discharging. 



Sludge deposits, odors, and fish kills may occur 
if removal is not adequate. 

Nutrients 

Nutrients are life-supporting nitrogen and 
phosphorus. They stimulate excessive growths of 
algae and other aquatic plant life. They are always 
present in domestic wastewaters and are not 
removed during conventional primary and 
secondary treatment. Removal is accomplished by 
processes in addition to normal wastewater treat- 
ment or tertiary treatment, when specific reuse 
requirements require it. 

Toxic Chemicals 

Most military and industrial installations 
use various types of toxic chemicals, the dis- 
charges of which can be harmful to wastewater 
treatment processes. These toxic chemicals should 
be pretreated or removed before the waste- 
water enters the collecting system. Table 10-6 



Table 10-6. Chemicals and Discharges Commonly Found at Military Installations 



Physical 



Chemical 



Biological 



Solids from: 

Paint 

Photo Lab 
Sandblasting 
Grease Valve, etc. 

(oils) 

Cutting Oils 

Heavy Metals Cr(OH) 3 
Rust (Oil) 

Fiber (Bacterial Slime) 
Misc. Solids (Trash) 
Grit Rocks Sand 
Color Dyes 
H 2 S Metal Sulfides 



Heavy Metals (in solution) 

Chrominum, Nickel, Lead 

Zinc, Copper, Iron Oxide 

Chlorine, Aluminum, Mercury 

Cyanides 

Phenols 

Acids Sulfuric, Hydrochloric, Nitric 

(H 2 S0 4 ) (HCL) (HN0 3 ) 
Base Caustic Soda (NaOH) 

Lime Ca(OH) 2 

Quick Lime CaO 
Salts Alum 

Brine Sodium Chloride (NaCl) 

Copper Sulfate 
Ship Chemicals Cleaning 
Gases SO 2 (H 2 S) 

C1 2 

Ozone 2 

Pesticides Soln (Solid Waste) 
Germicides 

Solvents Refrigerants 
Ketones 

Ethylene Glycol Diethyl Ether 
Detergents 

Adhesives and Resins 
Grinding and Polishing Compounds 
Carbon Spent 

Bentonite and Coagulant Aids (Clays) 
Polymers 
Polyelectrolytes 
Diatomaceous Earth 
Iron Chlorides, Ferric and Ferrous 

Chlorides or Sulfates 



Bacteria Fecal Coliforms 
Iron and Sulfur Bacteria 
Special Slimes, Fungi, and 

Oil Related Growth 
Algae Green and Blue-green 
Snails and Clams 
Viruses 



10-7 



lists several examples of these types of 
wastes. 

BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS 

The three biological organisms present in 
wastewater are bacteria, viruses, and parasites. 

Bacteria 

Sewage consists of vast quantities of bacteria, 
most of which are harmless to man. However, 
pathogenic (disease-causing) organisms such as 
typhoid, dysentery, and other intestinal disorders 
may be present in wastewater. Tests for total 
coliform and fecal coliform nonpathogenic 
bacteria are used to indicate the presence of 
pathogenic bacteria. Because it is easier to test for 
coliforms, fecal coliform testing has been accepted 
as the best indicator of fecal contamination. Fecal 
coliform counts of 100 million per 100 milliliters 
may be found in raw domestic sewage. Detectable 
health effects have been found at levels of 2,300 
to 2,400 total coliforms per 100 milliliters in 
recreational waters. Disinfection, usually chlorina- 
tion, is generally used to reduce these pathogens. 
Breakdown or malfunctions of chlorination 
equipment will probably result in excessive 
discharge of pathogenic organisms and can 
seriously affect public health. 

Bacteria can also be classified according to 
their dissolved oxygen requirement. Aerobic 
bacteria are bacteria that require dissolved oxygen 
to live. Anaerobic bacteria cannot live if dis- 
solved oxygen is present. Facultative bacteria can 
live with or without dissolved oxygen. 

Viruses 

Wastewater often contains viruses that may 
produce diseases. Outbreaks of infectious 
hepatitis have been traced through water systems 
because of wastewater entering the supply. 
Coagulation, sedimentation, filtration, and 
disinfection, if used efficiently, usually provide 
acceptable virus removal. 

Parasites 

There are also many species of parasites 
carried by wastewater. The life cycle of each is 
peculiar to the given parasite. Some are dangerous 



to man and livestock, particularly during certain 
stages of the life cycle. Amoebic dysentery is a 
common disease caused by amoebic parasites. 
Chlorination, chemical precipitation, sedimenta- 
tion, or sand filtration is used to ensure protec- 
tion against parasites. 



SEWAGE SAMPLING 

Samples of sewage are taken to find out how 
well a treatment plant is working and what 
operating changes may need to be made. Some 
samples show how much the plant is reducing 
pollutants like BOD, solids, and so forth. Raw 
sewage entering the plant must be tested as well 
as the effluent from the plant and the receiving 
stream above and below the discharge point to 
determine how well the plant is removing 
pollutants. Since wastewater flows often change 
a great deal, daily sampling is suggested. 



REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLING 

A sample should be taken in a way that will 
represent the wastewater being treated. No 
matter how good the lab analysis is, if the 
sample was not correctly collected, the lab data 
will not be correct. With the large changes in 
composition and flow rate, getting a represen- 
tative sample can be very hard. Careful thought, 
planning, and training must be used to develop 
and carry out a good sampling program. 

Samples may be taken by hand or auto- 
matically. Taking samples by hand may be as 
simple as tying an open bottle to a pole that can 
be lowered into the wastewater. Table 10-7 
explains some of the things that should be done 
when taking samples by hand. The automatic 
samplers may be made by the operator or bought. 



GRAB SAMPLING 

A grab sample is a single sample of wastewater 
taken over a short span of time, usually less than 
15 minutes. This type of sample yields data 
about the wastewater at one time and place. 
The grab sample should be used where the 
wastewater does not change suddenly or change 
a great deal. For example, grab samples may be 
used to determine pH and temperature. Grab 



10-8 



Table 10-7. Procedures for Manual Wastewater Sample Collection 



Procedures 



Special Cautions 



1 . Samples should be taken where wastewater 
is well mixed. 



2. Sampling should be done in the center of the 
flow channel. To avoid floating scum, the 
mouth of the container should be held below the 
liquid surface. 

3. A representative sample should be taken. 



4. When compositing samples into other con- 
tainers, the contents of each should be well 
mixed before pouring. 

5. The sampling containers and sampling devices 
should be clean, uncontaminated, and suitable 
for the planned analysis. 

6. Sampling places should be easy to reach 
and safety precautions should be observed. 



1. Weirs are not good sampling points since 
settling of solids is enhanced upstream and 
greases and oils build up downstream from the 
weir. 

2. Solids often build up near the sides and 
bottom of the flow channel. 



3. Raw wastewater should be sampled after 
screening and grit removal. Deposits or 
nonrepresentative materials such as grease or 
scum should be excluded from the sample. 
Particles larger than 0.25 inch (6 mm) in diameter 
should be excluded. 

4. If dissolved gases or volatile substances are 
to be tested, turbulence may be produced by 
gentle stirring. 

5. Before the sample is taken, the container 
should be rinsed several times with the waste- 
water. 

6. Proper sampling equipment should be 
available. 



samples are also used when a batch dump or 
sludge discharge is seen. 

COMPOSITE SAMPLES 

A composite sample yields data about the 
wastewater over a longer span of time. A series 
of grab samples may be taken over a certain 
amount of time and combined to form a com- 
posite sample. These samples should show the 
time and frequency of the sample; for example, 
an 8-hour composite of 30-minute grab samples. 
The composite sample is used to find BOD, COD, 
suspended solids, and nutrients. 



FLOW-PROPORTIONAL SAMPLES 

The composite may be flow proportional. For 
this type of sample, the volume of the sample 



changes in proportion to the flow. The flow- 
proportional composite sample is most often run 
for 24 hours with a 2-hour interval between each 
collection. To collect this kind of sample, the 
volume needed for the tests and the average 
daily flow for the plant must be known. Table 
10-8 shows the volumes required for some tests. 
The following formula may be used to find the 
volume of sample to be taken at each interval. 



Liters required = 



Flow at 
sampling time 



Total sample size 



Average flow Number of samples 



For example, to collect an 8-hour composite 
sample with a 2-hour interval, five samples would 
be needed. If a total sample of 2 liters was needed, 
the average daily flow was 60,000 gallons (227 
cubic meters), and the flow at the first sample time 
was 45,000 gallons per day (170 cubic meters), 



10-9 



Table 10-8. Recommendation for Sample Volume and Preservation of Sample 



Measurement 


Type 
of 
Sample 


Vol. 
Req. 
(ml) 


Container 


Preservative 


Holding 
Time 


Acidity 


G* 


100 


P, G** 


Cool, 4C*** 


24 hr 


Alkalinity 


G 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 


Arsenic 


P**** 


100 


P, G 


HNO 3 to pH 2 


6 mo 


BOD 


PC 


1,000 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


6hr ! 


Bromide 


G 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 


COD 


PC 


50 


P, G 


H 2 SO 4 to pH 2 


7 days 


Chloride 


G 


50 


P, G 


None req. 


7 days 


Chlorine 


G 


50 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 


Color 


G 


50 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 


Cyanides 


G 


500 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 
NaOH to pH 12 


24 hr 


Dissolved Oxygen 












Probe 


G 


300 


G only 


Det. on site 


No holding 


Winkler 


G 


300 


G only 


Fix on site 


No holding 


Fluoride 


G 


300 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


7 days 


Hardness 


G 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


7 days 


Iodine 


G 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 


MBAS 


G 


250 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 


Metals 












Dissolved 


PC 


200 


P, G 


Filter on site 
HNO 3 to pH 2 


6 mo 


Suspended 


PC 






Filter on site 


6 mo 


Total 


PC 


1,100 




HNO 3 to pH 2 


6 mo 


vtercury 












Dissolved 


PC 


100 




P, G 

_ 


Filter 
HNO 3 to pH 2 




38 days 
(glass) 
13 days 
(hard plastic) 



10-10 



Table 10-8. Recommendation for Sample Volume and Preservation of Sample Continued 



Measurement 


Type 
of 
Sample 


Vol. 
Req. 
(ml) 


Container 


Preservative 


Holding 
Time 


Nitrogen 












Ammonia 


G 


400 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 
H 2 SO 4 to pH 2 


24 hr 2 


Kjeldahl 


PC 


500 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 
H 2 SO 4 to pH 2 


24 hr 2 


Nitrate 


PC 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 
H 2 SO 4 to pH 2 


24 hr 2 


Nitrate 


G 


50 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 2 


NTA 


PC 


50 


P, B 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 


Oil & Grease 


PC 


1,000 


G only 


Cool, 4C 
H 2 SO 4 to pH 2 


24 hr 


Organic Carbon 


PC 


25 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 
H 2 SO 4 to pH 2 


24 hr 


pH 


G 


25 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 
Det. on site 


6m- 1 


Phenolics 


G 


500 


G only 


Cool, 4C 
H 3 PO 4 to pH 4 
l.Og CuSO 4 /l 


24 hr 


Phosphorus 












Ortho- 
phosphate, 
dissolved 


G 


50 


P, G 


Filter on site 
Cool, 4C 


24 hr 2 


Hydrolyzable 


G 


50 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 
H 2 SO 4 to pH 2 


24 hr 2 


Total 


PC 


50 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


24 hr 2 


Total, 
dissolved 


PC 


50 


P, G 


Filter on site 
Cool, 4C 


24 hr 2 


Residue 












Filterable 


PC 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


7 days 


Nonfilterable 


PC 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


7 days 


Total 


PC 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


7 days 


Volatile 


PC 


100 


P, G 


Cool, 4C 


7 days 



10-11 



Table 10-8. Recommendation for Sample Volume and Preservation of Sample Continued 



Measurement 



Type 

of 
Sample 



Vol. 
Req. 
(ml) 



Container 



Preservative 



Holding 
Time 



Settleable Matter PC 

Selenium PC 

Silica PC 

Specific G 

Conductance 

Sulfate PC 
Sulfide G 

Temperature G 

Threshold Odor G 

Turbidity G 

Type G sample = Grab. 
***4C = 4 Celsius. 



1,000 P, G None req. 24 hr 

50 P, G HNO 3 to pH 2 6 mo 

50 P only Cool, 4C 7 days 

100 P, G Cool, 4C 24 hr 3 

50 P, G Cool, 4C 7 days 

50 P, G 2 ml zinc 24 hr 

acetate 

1,000 P, G Det. on site No holding 

200 G only Cool, 4C 24 hr 

1,000 P, G Cool, 4C 7 days 

**P, G = Plastic or Glass. 
****PC = Proportional Composite. 



'if samples cannot be returned to the lab in less 
than 6 hours and holding time exceeds this limit, 
the final reported data should show the actual 
holding time. 

2 Mercuric chloride may be used as an alternate 
preservative at a concentration of 40 mg/1, 
especially if a longer holding time is requried. 
However, mercuric chloride should not be used 
if something better is available. 



3 If the sample is stabilized by cooling, it should 
be warmed to 25 C for reading, or temperature 
correction made and results reported at 25 C. 



Note: It has been shown that certain samples 
properly preserved may be held beyond the 
recommended holding time. Consult designated 
authority. 



then the milliliters required for the first sample 
could be figured like this: 

Liters required = 4 *> P^X x 2 liters 
60,000 gal/day 5 samples 

Liters required = 170 cubic meter/day x 2 liters 
227 cubic meter/day 5 samples 

Liters required = .30 

Milliliters required = 300 

NOTE: 264 gallons = 1 cubic meter (m 3 ) 

Gallons x 0.003785 = cubic meters (m 3 ) 

1 liter = 1,000 milliliters 



SAMPLE STOWAGE 

To get the best results, samples should 
be analyzed as soon as possible after they 
are collected. Some tests, such as DO, temper- 
ature, and pH must be performed at the time 
of collection since the results can change 
while the sample is being carried to the lab. 
Some other tests may be delayed if the sample 
is properly stored. The most common means 
of preserving a sample is to cool it to 2 C to 
10C. Table 10-8 shows some ways to preserve 
the sample. 



10-12 



Table 10-9. Important Laboratory Tests 



Test to be 
Performed 


Sampling Point 


Recommended Means 
of Collection 


Recommended 
Frequency of 
Collection 


Settleable Solids 


1. Influent 
2. Final effluent 


Grab or Composite 


Daily 


Suspended Solids 


1. Influent 
2. Final effluent 


Proportional Composite 


Weekly 
Weekly 


BOD 5 or COD 


1. Influent 
2. Effluent 
3. Stream above 
& below dis- 
charge 


Proportional Composite 


Weekly 


Dissolved Oxygen 


1. Influent 
2. Final effluent 
3. Stream above 
& below dis- 
charge 


Grab 


Daily 


pH 





Grab 


Daily 


Fecal Coliform 


Final Effluent 


Grab 


Weekly 


Alkalinity 


1. Final effluent 
2. Digester 


Proportinal Composite 
or Grab 


Daily 


Chlorine Residual 


Final effluent 


Grab 


Daily 
(at least) 



IDENTIFYING SAMPLES 

After the sample is collected, it should be 
identified with a label. The label should include 
the following information: 

Where the sample was taken 

The date and time of collection 

The type of sample (grab or composite 
with the appropriate time and volume 
information) 

Anything that might change before 
laboratory testing such as temperature, pH, and 
appearance 



The initials or name of the person who 
took the sample 



SEWAGE TESTING 

Laboratory reports are useful in the operation 
of a wastewater treatment plant. The operator can 
use laboratory test results to keep the plant work- 
ing at its best and to give early warning of 
operating problems. Laboratory testing programs 
vary with the type of treatment, size of the plant, 
local water quality requirements, and the NPDES 
permit requirements. Some of the most common 
laboratory tests for wastewater treatment plants 
are shown in table 10-9. They are discussed later 
in this chapter. Laboratory tests required by 
NPDES are determined for each treatment plant 



10-13 




TEST 

TUBE 




6 

FLASK. 
VOLUMETRIC 




CULTURE 

TUBE WITHOUT 

LIP 





FUNNEL 







FUNNEL, 
BUCHNER 

WITH 
PERFORATED PLATE 



BOTTLE, 
BOD 



CYLINDER, 
GRADUATED 






CLAMP, FLASK, SAFETY TONGS 



CLAMP HOLDER 




CLAMP, UTILITY 






TRIPOD, CONCENTRIC RING BURNER, BUNSEN TRIANGLE, FUSED 



n 



SUPPORT, BURET, 
ft BURET CLAMP 




BURET, 
AUTOMATIC 



Figure 10-1. Illustrations of laboratory apparatus. 



87.402 



and are cited in the discharge permit. The normal 
procedures for these tests are given in the Standard 
Methods for the Examination of Water and 
Wastewaters and the Methods of Chemical Analy- 
sis of Water and Wastes published by the EPA. 

LABORATORY EQUIPMENT 

Examples of the various types of laboratory 
equipment are shown in figure 10-1 . In order for 



the operator to conduct accurate sewage tests, the 
laboratory must be equipped with a minimum of 
equipment. Table 10-10 lists the types of equip- 
ment needed for some of the basic laboratory 
tests. 

The operator should always maintain this 
equipment in a high state of repair and cleanliness. 
Any contamination of the test equipment may 
adversely affect the results. Refer to the 



10-14 




CONE, 
IHHOFF 



PIPETTE, VOLUMETRIC 



tt ^1/ioMg JTB 

PIPETTE, SEROLOGICAL 



CONE SUPPORT 





THERMOMETER, DIAL 



COLOR COMPARISON DESICCATOR 

TUBES, NESSLER 






BOD CABINET 



READING SCALE 

BALANCE, ANALYTICAL 





pH METER 



PUMP, AIR PRESSURE AND VACUUM 





OVEN, MECHANICAL CONVECTION 



MUFFLE FURNACE, ELECTRIC 



SPECTROPHOTOMETER 



TEST PAPER, pH 1-11 



87.402.1 



Figure 10-1. Illustrations of laboratory apparatus Continued. 



manufacturer's instructions for the proper 
maintenance procedures for each piece of equip- 
ment. Table 10-11 gives some basic guidelines for 
the maintenance and use of various types of 
laboratory equipment. 

Safety should be vital to all personnel conduc- 
ting sewage tests. Good housekeeping is essential 
in a laboratory to prevent mishaps and damage 
to expensive equipment. Each piece of equipment 
should be cleaned and returned to its proper place 
after being used. 

When conducting sewage tests, it is always 
wise for the operator to avoid actual contact 
of the hands with the sewage samples or 
other filth. Hands must be kept out of the 
nose, mouth, and eyes. It is particularly 
important to use gloves when the hands are 
chapped, or burned, or the skin is broken 
from any wound. Operators should thoroughly 
wash their hands with plenty of soap and hot 
water before eating. 



DISSOLVED OXYGEN TEST 

The DO test finds the milligrams per liter 
(mg/1) of oxygen that is dissolved in water or 
wastewater. Oxygen exists as a gas and can 
dissolve in water in only a limited amount. Pure 
water at 20 C at sea level can hold a maximum 
of 9.17 mg/1 of DO. Raising the temperature, salt 
content, or altitude will lower the DO level in the 
water. An important thing to remember is that 
this test should be run as soon as possible after 
the sample is taken. It must always be run as a 
grab sample. It is best to test several samples taken 
at different times during the day because the DO 
content of wastewater may vary. If incoming 
wastewater has no DO, it is septic. Most 
wastewater treatment plants are not built to treat 
septic wastewater. A great deal of plant and 
animal life that lives in water and wastewater, 
including necessary microorganisms, needs DO 
just as we need oxygen from the air. If the DO 
is used up, aerobic organisms will die and the 
water will become anaerobic or septic and foul 



10-15 



Table 10-10. Types of Equipment Needed for Various Laboratory Tests 





EQUIPMENT NEEDED* 


Atomic Absorption 
600 C Muffle Furnace 
103 C Drying Oven 
Analytical Balance 
Imhoff Cone 


pH Meter 
Lamotte Kit 
BOD Incubator 
Vacuum Pump 
Hot Plate 
Kjedahl Unit 


Condenser/Extract. Eq. 
DO Meter & Probe 
Autoclave 
Amperometric Titrat. 


35 C Incubator 
Gas Analyzer 
Steam Bath 
Magnetic Stirrer 
Blender 


Turbidity Meter 
Carb. Adsorp. Unit 
Desiccator 
Spectrophotometer 
Stirring Equip. 


>, 

"3 

< 

<U -O 

* !rt 
rt 
=! ^ ft 
C/D g 

s>?53 

.S O * w 

te _ , >> 1- 

2 73 .ts u 

3 * 

>Htx 


CONSTITUENTS TO 
BE ANALYZED 


Volatile Solids 


O 








o 




Total Solids 


o o 








o 




Settleable Solids 















pH 















Total Sulfides 




o 










BOD 
















COD 










o 







Suspended Solids 


o o 









o 




Dissolved Oxygen 















Chlorine Residual 















MPN Coliform** 














Volatile Acids 

















Alkalinity 









o 






Gas Analysis 








o 






Grease 


o o 








o 






Total Organic Carb. 















Turbidity 















Volatile SS 


O O 


o 






o 




Total Phosphorus 















MBAS*** 










o 




Sludge Filterability 















Ash Analysis 















Jar Test 










o 




Apparent Density 


o 










o 


Isotherms 












o 


o 


Calcium Content 











o 




Ammonia Nitrogen 
















Organic Nitrogen 




O 


o 








Nitrate Nitrogen 










o 




Heavy Metals 
















*The equipment needed is subject to plant size and complexity of processes and the degree of control required. 
**MPN = Most probably number 
***Methylene Blue Active Substance 



10-16 



Instructions* 


Install on heavy shockproof 
table away from vibration and 
extreme temperature variations. 
Keep level at all times. 


Maintain and use according to 
manufacturer's instructions. 


Calibrate frequently with buffers 
at pH 4.0, 7.0, and 10.0. Be sure 
buffers are fresh. Immerse elec- 


trodes in distilled water while not 
in use. Discard electrodes with 
broken tips and deep scratches. 


Keep electrode reservoir filled. 
Rinse electrodes with distilled 
water after each operation. Keep 
sample mixed during test. 
Observe temperature of sample 
and adjust meter. 


Equip with accurate ther- 
mometer. Be sure temperature 
controls are working properly. 

Ifppn rlonrc fitfincr Hcrht tr nrp- 


vent heat loss. Clean the oven 
frequently. Arrange samples to 


prevent cross-contamination. 
Locate away from heat-sensitive 


equipment. 






co ctf bO 


"S "2 


i i ~ 

C! V-. >> 


o^ 






T3 ^ 












"O ^ *"O 


^ j 


'~ " ' 


"3 






C ,_~j i i 
ctf ^j ctj 












*T3 M co 
oj to" W 


C/3 -y 
i] 'C 


-S J3 

^ "O "(3 


-4-> l^ 






S si 

CJ T3 ^S 












M -a b) 


^ 


^ G 


J3 






4> ^3 00 










(_! 


1/3 co ^3 


C4-I r. 


flj rtf e *~< 


2 ^ 






a co *Q 










Q 


o T3 


O <u 


M 


pj 






OO f** 

"~t "O "^ 










CO 


<*-< "a M s 

g J 

^ KJ W M 

C </> T3 "-^ 


CO ^ 

E s 

S u 


Vj 

ci ^ _j 


O (U r 

S 2 c 

C {rt ~ 

**^ -2 






M e rt 

Kj co 

co 5 
O co oJ 












o c 'S 

'3 00 g. . 
f C lo W 

L^ 'i * *^ ^-< 

Js-cj s a 

as? to 
o> 53 T3 -5 

PL, ^ S E 


Weighing sai 
sludge filte 
chemicals. 


Analysis o 
dustrial w 
mining endp 


acidity and < 
streams, su 
various solu 






c "o 

J3 co Q> 
co *Q ^^ 
S t) 

Il-s 

^ CO ^> 

Q'-o-o 








peration. 
























o 
















CO 








c 
























oJ 
















"a 








1) 

























O 
















CO 








C 
















"o 








."s 


C 

























o 


00 












00 








ctt 




,g 


00 










_G 











P5 


42 


CJ 










> i 








(_ 




_00 


*3 


&JD 








5 u 








^ 


PH 


'1 


.00 


_c 

"C 








IM< 

00 5 








CO 






(U 










C > 








C 




c 


^ 


CO 








i-l CO 
















Kt 








[ CO 








. , ^ 




,~ 


1> 










o J3 








+-j 




CO 


CO 











ts oo 








3 




'o 


3 










c; _, 








VH 




2n 


O 


wC 








O i 








41 
CO 




PH 


U 


a 








U 








. 
























CO 
























"i-i 




W 




















i_ 




U 




















3 

4 > 




2 




















eS 




^ 




















3 


4-> 

C3 


QQ 


W 


















c8 




a 


J 


U 

2 










Z 

W 








5: 


'3 
a- 


U 

HH 


< 


c* 

















*O 


W 


H 


<; 


S 








o 








<*-( 
CO 




J 


PQ 


W 








2 








ro 






OH 


2 








SH 








jj 




2 


> H 
P^ 


E 








(^ 








^ 




^ 


H 


a 








Q 








* 



10-17 



O 

U 



s 
CJ 



Instructions* 


Be sure the furnace is equipped 
with an accurate temperature 


control. Keep heat chamber 
clean. Check frequently for 
deposits of soot and ash. Be sure 


that fumes are properly ex- 
hausted. Locate away from heat- 


sensitive equipment. 


Check doors or lids for tight 
seal. Keep closed at all times ex- 
cept when inserting or removing 
materials. Be sure desiccant 


material is active. Replace or 
replenish inactive desiccant. 


Check temperature controls for 
accuracy. Be sure proper 
temperature is maintained at all 


"& l ~ l "c3 

d bO 

to B o 
u 2 ^H 

to A O 
O O -i-i 

a 

o i> 'o 

O S^ 
TJ ^ (u 

I I H r , , 
^3 J-N 

3 &^ 

o d 

Q. "* _rt 

to ,_ rj > 
D ^2 fe !> 

" Tj ^3 ^J bJ) 


Check temperature control for 
accuracy. Be sure boiler, con- 
denser coils, and tubing are free 
of deposits and scale. Clean fre- 
quently. Use borosilicate glass 
storage containers with tight 
covers to exclude airborne dust, 
gases, and organisms. Test pH 
and conductivity frequently to 


help ensure purity. 1 






If 


L* 1 
QJ tO <U 

*j <L> -i 






"^t t-c 

n P 
O t t 




a 




!!! 




















O5 












<4-t tO 


bO d 

'3 a " 

co ctf 


bb 

d 




WD <g 




(U 

"ft 




y ^> ^ 

J f_) , Q CO 

^ O ^ ^2 2 








3 


T3 < 


CO 




JH o< 




cd 




>-> PQ ,,H ^ 






Ui 


*-. M 
r* _, 


^ ^ to 


.22 




^ 




to 




^ (50 '73 






a 

-o 


3 C 
' 

-o 


^ ^ d 

TJ ^ C 


<U 

-i j 




aj 

c3 C 




Q ^ 

O >^ 




3 'o <L> '-P 

^.2 ? 






to 


rt ;3 


^_j 14 v-H 


3 




O oj 




C-Q i-2 




'bf\ ^ "^ cd d 








s 


ci ^? *7> 


to 

. 




^ 




bO^ 




"13 O O ^ ^ 

"^ to c^J W yj 








:-s 


o d 


to 




ju > d 

to 2 




T3 O 




C Ctf Ctf 'S 








.S 


d 


(U 
.i_* 








cd *-< 




'-6 ^ ^ d 




o 




i-, ^ 

a 
"2 

Q 


rt '3 

-t_l C C 

O O bQ 

!-> tO H 1 


s 

-41 
'.> 

'o 




Q.S S 




r i 

8 

H 1 (N 




> c | 'C 

Cu o '+2 o <4-i 




+-> 

J 

(U 

a 
























o 
























T3 




^ 








i (U T3 




(U 

aj t/3 




Ui 




d 




3 








^ oS 




tH . i 




O 




u 




CO 








fc^ 




i CX 




rrf 




o 




0) 








2 . 




'e 




TO 




d 












(U to to 




F* < *< 
bo ^u 









ctf 




'+-> 








>i >% c3 




J-H tO 




JO 




d 




rt 








1 U CJ 




"^ 




^ 




D 




"o 








i_ u* C 




+- Q 








"d 


d 
_o 

4 > 


/ N 

bO 








= 8 1 

4-> Q< jg 

S2 o 




-t-> 




O 




I 


O 


d 








o <B 




C o 




0) 




Ui 


3 


'd 








C fcj (L) 




O +-! 




4 > 

03 




cH 


&H 


3 








^ c3 




<u 




^ 




to 




& 








bfl'tt ^ 

T t C/D 




bO 3 




bO-rl 




d 
.2 




bO * 












.d si 




d ti 








c S 








"o (-; nj ^ 




"^ a3 




S 03 




o 




'. CJ 








'> O.'cn D< 




'> D, 




."3! T3 




3 




' 








O M C 

j^ O ^ C 




2 




"*"* CH 




Ui 
M 

to 




t 1 tO 








(X 








S tfl 




d 
























to 
























4J 
























V- 




















z 




3 




















o 




o 




w 
















H 




*% 


-4 


u 












0.- 








d 


d 
<u 














O 




h-l 




I 

















H 




y 








D 


















H 
en 




1 


a* 

W 


W 








H 




U 




I-H 

Q 




1 












U 




z 




p^ 




to 




b 








y 




h 1 




W 




d 




fe 








00 




Q 




f" 1 fc 
















U 




O 




"^ Z 




^ 




^ 








Q 








^ ^ 




* 



10-18 





Instructions* 


Use ion exchange cartridges of 
proper type. Discard cartridges 
at once when exchange capacity 
is exhausted. Be sure water feed 
rate is not exceeded. Store 
deionized water same as distilled 
water. 


This equipment is delicate. 
Handle with care. Keep ade- 
quate stock of replacement 
parts. Be sure the equipment is 
properly calibrated before use 
for transmittance or absorbance 
readings. Be sure to use proper 
filter for test being performed. 


Check temperature controls for 
accuracy. Keep interior clean 
and free of biological growths. 
Provide refrigerator(s) with 
adequate capacity for laboratory 
needs. 


Check time, temperature, and 
pressure controls for accuracy. 
Confirm sterilization by use of 
test strips or other indicators. 
Be sure sterilized materials are 
properly wrapped, sealed, and 
stored to prevent contamina- 
tion. 








r-4 


- >> 


T3 O . 


WT-OT3 








C 


4-) 4J ^> C(j 


J- 00 00 


D C O 








.2 


? S'-S.S 


oJ 5 "o3 


td So 








3s 


S o 3 


.w 


^ > O 










*?H ^ *^^ C/3 


t* . rj 


f*l 








t- ( 


C J5 % <U 


O rj C 


c *3 '^* 








OO 


M 5 M 


etf ^ 


.2 ^ <3 








3 


3 


^ ^1" U 


"*^ tj 






^ 


Ui 


O G >^ oo" 2 


S -B JS 


il o rt 




D 


c2 


<U 

-t > 


5 ^ - "o J3 


00 Pa p 


^^ Q< t-c 




V 


"O 


ci 


00 ^ ... C 'Q 


> 00 f2 


4-l g O 




C 




f. 


1 *-* 


> (U OO 


O :Z3 **"< 




t^ 


00 




*< l"jj c^ *^^ T3 


f^ *^ 


v? c/5 




e 




^ 


^X ^^ ^4 | Q_ ^ 


O>4 ^ ^ 






e 




Q 


D ^ < J3 


O C c,, 


^ 




U 




U-i 


fi * 3 


rt ^ 


*5 ^ .Sj 




I 




OO 


**^ tf tT 




^ j ""* 


d 


V 

s 
3 




D 

"r* 


g> ^. .5 


ft! 


y > T3 00 

113 ^ (D < ' 

rs oo is .5 

53-32 


^o 

"+3 
03 
t-i 
O 


o 




00 S 


H 'S 8 s "o 


00 oo oo 


00 60 n *- 


a 
o 


c 












T3 


M 












c 









)-< 






03 


*s 




60 


S T3 

-4 > /"N 






(L) 


*S 




fi 


j3 ^^ 









i 




03 


Sfe ^^ 






C3 


^ 




O ^ 

K^ O 


00 g 


00 




cd 


o 


( 1 


SI 

o rs 


g.a 
^ +-j 


I_ 

o 

C/3 


1 


a 

a 


2 


G 

.2 


'r* t/a 


oo D 
Ctf C 




II 
oo 


6 


(8 




^* r < 


(U _C 


^ 






H 


4 * 

O 


X) T3 




S 


?*i 


t 




C 


V-i ^ 


>*! 


s 

Vi 


.0 

c 


oo 




fe 


^ s 


"> >, 


4) 

D. 


.2 

'+-> 


c 
o 






00 _5 


1 C (-) 


2 


03 


*J-< 






S *~" 


KS ^ 


4J 


_N 


O 






5>> aj 


C -^H 


^ 


^ 


V-H 






'C -c 


5 "c3 


O 


_> 


00 






^ -^"J 


.^y ^ | 




00 


.2 






eu S 








00 














J-H 

(U 








OH 






^ 








w 






tj 








w 






C 








o 


Pi 




1 




0) 




(Vj f-H 


o 




^ 




1 




WO 


H 


W 


J 




'3 


Oil 


W CL 


04 


!^ 


*o 




cr 


w 


IS O 


U-J 


>-J 


4-H 




U 


tS3 


t J p^ 


O 


O 


> 






2 


5r t- 1 


> i 


O 


rt 






o 


S ^ 


S 


H 


^ 






1 H 

w 


pS 


W 


3 


* 






Q 


U co 


w 








i 












10-19 





Instructions* 


Check temperature controls for 
accuracy. Be sure units are ade- 
quate for laboratory needs. If 


controls are manual, do not 
leave hotplates unattended. 


Check accuracy of instrument 
frequently. Recalibrate, if 
necessary, using approved 
standards. Store probe in water 
or in moisture-saturated air. 
Keep probes clean. Change 
membranes and replace elec- 
trolyte as recommended by 
manufacturer. 


Check accuracy of temperature 
controls. Keep storage chamber 
clean and free of spillage and 


bacteriological growths. Check 
door(s) for proper closing and 
sealing. Locate unit where not 


exposed to extreme temperature 
changes. 


Check accuracy of temperature 
controls. Keep storage chamber 


12"3:S 
-^ S 

O TJ 

^ G G 

8 ^'ca 

CO Ul -M 

g.s 
58| 

C*H ^ 

2|e 

w rt 
* U fe 

"2 tf a 
S S 

03 ^ fc-i 

g g a 
S^ o 

7! W O 

O CO <4-< 


"3 

^H 
4 > 

O 

(U 

g 

o 

4-1 

ca 
u 

(U 

4-> 

ca 








52 cT o> 




3Q 


n 






D tt-i 

* > o 












.25 




'SO g 


X3 






ca 

u, 












~ ta 




13 !>< 


O 






- G 
C J 












"O G C 




G TJ 








4- 












W5 4) ^w 

, o 


ts* 


"" " 








r*j i) 








ontinued 


V-i 

a 

CO 

D 


T3 ci * 

ei 

1-2 & 

G - --H 


tperationi 


-" ^ 
o> .?; 

1 S- 
^ E .52 

s gp s 


TJ ^2 
G jo 

ca 








s" 

o S 

4-H i 1 


CO 

"a 

S 
ca 






U 




GO O .^ 
G Cl* co 


u 


si o 

> CO t)_< 


si 






"o "^ 
o 


fe 






s 






.tj> 


bO ^ <3 








CO 


oS 




ei 


*3 




ca o 


-t* 


G tu -H 


f ;^ I t 






(4 *~~4 


^ 






O 




O. u. 


^ 


G +j p. 


^ 






.2 Qu 

+-> ST 


-i-> 




_j3 


a> 




-> o >* 


G 


cS ca S 


"o w 






co H 
(U j-j 


CO 

ca 




ca 


u 

e 

cs 




p ( tt< JG 


ca 


H 


U .0 






C" 1 co 






a 


V 






















o 


'5 








<4-< 


<L) 






(D *-! 






G 










o 


ilj CO 
3 qj 






3 








1 




CO 




00 


ca Q, 






ta fi 






o 


i*4 




."2 






I-H J-l 






u, O 






G 


I-* 








1-1 


y ft 






S^ '*-* 






ca 


o 

i < 




"o 

co 




3 


s ^ 






^H ca 

G ^ 






G 
(U 


3 


c 


*o 

G 




i 


(U t ^-i 

+- o 






<u 3 

-M 






.s 


H 


*-> 

o 






S G 


G C 

ca o 






G -S 






s 




G 


3 




too 


CO '-3 






* J JS 










Lid 


3 




"ca >> 


G co 






CO ^_j 






c2 




F*H 






-* * KS 


^~ 






O JD 






HH 






.5 




G O 


O 3 













CO 






""- 1 




U *^ 


too fi 






too ^ 






C 






60 




C O 


G *ti 






G ^ 






o 






_G 
-ti 




u "o 


J3 oo 






^ g 


QJ 





*-> 

o 






ca 






^ i5 






"^ 


^, 




j3 






<U 






O i-i 






O 


fi 




u 











G -2 









.2 


S 




*-* 

.2 






c* 


















(U 






W 






OH 












3 










2 
W 


O 
H 












M 

U 






W 






^ 












^ 




!- 
G 


K 






oa 












G 




1 

. 


O 




X 

O 


u 
2 






X 






6 




'3 


w 




Q PH 


^^ 






f 1 p^ 






JO 




CT 


H 




w w 


^ 






^H O 










w 


<J 




>N 


1 H 
t> 






PQ H 






s 






HOTPL 




C/3 <* 
M g 


BACTEf 






WATER 
INCUBA 






1 *Always : 



10-20 







**7r t 1 


T3 O 


"H, 


CO 


. "^ 
- g 


CO 

C 


' *-> 

P CO 

' 3 


.tt .> 

3 .^ 










Cy j i 


"*J CO 


C 


CO 




*-< 


>v o3 












00 


CO O 


ccJ 


O 


^*^ ^+-H 


U 




0} 












'oO 


CO 


o 

OJ 


O O 


'c 


o> x 


^ CX 










Q) 




GJ 


c 


^\ rt i 


-G 


^j QJ 


LO 








structions* 


>% a 

72 u 
ti <u 

g W 

&8 
a> g 

i: CD 


,P CO 
ii 
CO 

T3 <U 
S -*- 1 

2 c 

"5 QJ 


> 
i_ 

<U 

CO 

X5 
O 

to 


(U 

J^ 

OJ 

S 

T3 
RS 


"E 

P J3 

"^ C/5 


trained tec! 


O 

a! 

4-. <*-" 


S rt 
": 2 

co 13 
P W 

I c ! 

0> kH 

< 4) 

jo c; 


nician. 






c 

^H 


Calibrate 
known refer 


^ 

^3 *-* 

p jj 

C3 J3 

P JB 

(L> C 
T3 ^ 


CO 
t) 

C 

<u 

(U 

^ 

4-> 

<u 

.0 


temperature 
adjustment. 


o> <L> 

2 ! 

0> 4J" 

3 "S 

Q 3 


to specially 


*-J 

4-> 

Z3 ^ 

^ ^5 

S 


2 ^ 
& 

62 

<U 3 
"5s O 
>J3 

CO CO 


o 

<L> 
4- 

a 

(L> 
P 

"S3 

U. 

4- 

















O T3 
















is 








'S B 




"e3 












"*2i 








nj ^ 




aj 












^ 








00 u, 
_ o 




E 




















O -a 




^, 












i_r w 








c 




>. 












AJ ^"^ 








^ 




cC 












4_> D< 








"cS C 




(U 










o 


5 S 








4-1 - 


to 


"^ 








TJ 

a* 

a 

c 


2 

a 

(U 

CO 


> Ctf 

CO 

M w 








II 

t to ctJ 


"E 

1 


C 

5+-^ o 

to "* 
O . 

"^ rrt 








o 


^3 


'" TO 








'Lo ^ 


to 


cx 2 








U 




to ^ 








J>> o 












1 




'3 iJ 








Ct3 CM 


4J 


^ p 

Cu C 








V 




CO 








C o3 


f?{ 


to 






^ 






00 CO 








cd OO 


> 


oo 






C 


"3 




4 t ^^ 








2 o 


0> 


P ^ 






.2 














P^ ( ^ 


to 


4-* ^.j 






**J 


4) 
U 

e 




H rt 








S 





H O 









a 






















ex 
























o 


M 
13 






















T3 


'S 




d> _: 

3 5 








.0 




." 






C 
03 


I 




0.2 

C *-" 








to O 




O 






a> 
o 


rH 




o ^2 








S *!' 




4 > ip 






C 














. ft> 




Iri 






nj 


O 

rH 




CO 








^ 




^ s 






P 

(U 


CJ 


C 


13 "J 








Jr " 




1/3 c 






C 


IS 
n 




'C "o 








u, 




.2 






'c3 


H 


O 


"o <u 








O t. 




CO 
. CO 






S 




P 

3 


S c 








03 -C* 




o> S 
_ tu 






i-. 




I-M 


4-1 








C> M 




\ 












00 M 

C 'to 








oo O 










CO 

C 






'C 








G '1 




'S 






_O 






CO flj 








^JO 




> & 













KJ U 








o3 p 




"c3 O 






3 






II 








C C 

"^1 CJ 




C ^ 






41 

to 

.S 
























to 

i^ 


















OS 






l-l 


















^H f 1 ^ 






J 














OS 




ob 










P 

<D 

1 

3 


H 

I H 
I H 








GANIC 
ANALYZE 




BSORPTI 
HOTOME 






3 
C 

RJ 

S 




cr 


H 








OS ^ 




<^ CL, 






*~~] 




W 


CONDUC 
METER 








TOTAL O 
CARBON 




ATOMIC . 
SPECTRO 






CO 
Rl 



10-21 



odors will develop. If this occurs, you should 
check for flow problems within the sanitary 
system upstream of the treatment plant. 

HYDROGEN ION CONCENTRATION 
(pH VALUE) TEST 

The measure of acidity or basicity (alkalinity) 
of something is called the pH. The effect of pH 
on some parts of wastewater treatment makes it 
an important test. A low pH of domestic 
wastewater may mean that the wastewater is 
septic, or it can mean that industrial or commer- 
cial acid wastes are entering the system. A pH of 
6.5 to 8 is about right for treatment plant influent. 
Test results showing a very high or low pH may 
mean someone is breaking sewer use regulations. 
Sudden changes of 0.5 or more on the pH scale 
may mean that operating problems are starting. 
Grab samples should be taken for pH tests. 

SETTLEABLE SOLIDS TEST 

The settleable solids test on wastewater can tell 
the operator a lot about what kind of wastewater 
is coming into the plant and how the solids are 
settling. Also, the settleable solids test can help 
the operator estimate the volume of sludge to be 
expected in the clarifier. 

Either grab or composite samples will work 
for this test. The test is done using an Imhoff 
cone. The Imhoff cone (fig. 10-1) can be either 
glass or plastic. It can hold 1 liter and is marked 
off in milliliters (ml). 

Before running the test, you should allow the 
sample to settle for 45 minutes. After 45 minutes, 
you should run a glass or plastic rod gently down 
the inside of the cone and turn it to loosen solids 
clinging to the sides. Settling should then continue 
for another 15 minutes. The depth of the solids 
in the bottom is then read from the scale and 
recorded as milliliters of settleable solids per liter 
of wastewater. 

ACTIVATED SLUDGE 
SETTLEABILITY TEST 

The settleability test is often used with all kinds 
of activated sludge plants to find the amount of 
solids in aeration units. The results help the 
operator to decide when to waste sludge and to 
find the rate of sludge return. The activated sludge 
settleability test can be run in a 1 ,000 ml graduated 
cylinder or in any clear, widemouthed container. 
The container should be ruled off into 10 units 



such as centimeters, milliliters, or inches. The 
sample is poured into the cylinder or jar up to the 
top mark and allowed to settle. Readings are taken 
from time to time to find settling rates. The 
sample should be allowed to settle for about 30 
minutes. 

FIVE-DAY BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN 
DEMAND (BOD 5 ) TEST 

The BOD 5 test is the most important test for 
finding the polluting strength of a wastewater. It 
is the most widely used way to check how the 
treatment plant is running. The BOD 5 test 
indirectly measures the amount of organic 
material in the sample. Either grab or composite 
samples may be used for this test. 

NPDES permits often state that influent and 
effluent flow-proportional composite samples be 
taken for the BOD 5 test. Normal domestic 
wastewater coming into the plant should be in a 
200 to 300 mg/1 BOD 5 range. The effluent must 
comply with the plant's NPDES permit. 

To run the test, the amount of oxygen is 
measured in a portion of diluted wastewater, and 
another portion like the first one is stored at 20 C 
for 5 days. The glass bottles shown in figure 10-1 
are used for this test. During the 5 days, the 
microorganisms eat the organic matter in the 
wastewater and use oxygen at the same time. At 
the end of 5 days, the amount of oxygen con- 
sumed by the microorganisms times the dilution 
factor of the sample gives the sample's 5-day 
BOD. The dilution factor is the number of 
milliliters of dilution water added to a given 
number of milliliters of sample. 

CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND 
(COD) TEST 

Like the BOD 5 test, the chemical oxygen 
demand (COD) test finds the amount of oxygen 
required to consume the organic matter in a 
wastewater sample. The COD test does not 
measure the amount of oxygen used by the 
microorganisms. It uses a strong, chemical con- 
centrated sulfuric acid silver sulfate solution. It 
is a good operating control test because the results 
can be obtained in as little as 1 hour. COD test 
results are equal to or greater than BOD 5 test 
results. The chemical used in the COD test attacks 
more organisms in the wastewater than the slower 
BOD 5 organisms. BOD 5 data can often be related 
to COD data by a multiplying factor. For in- 
stance, the 200 to 300 mg/1 BOD 5 of normal 



10-22 



wastewater influent is about two-thirds of its usual 
300 to 450 mg/1 COD value. If such a factor can 
be figured for a certain kind of wastewater, COD 
data can be used to predict BOD 5 test results that 
will not be known for 5 days. 

TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS TEST 

Total suspended solids are those solids in 
wastewater that can be taken out with a filter 
having a specified pore size. Suspended solids are 
made up of settleable solids and nonsettleable 
solids. Suspended solids tests can be run with 
either grab or composite samples, but flow- 
proportional composite samples are the best for 
this test. Influent wastewater may have as much 
as 400 mg/1 of suspended solids. 

MIXED LIQUOR SUSPENDED 
SOLIDS (MLSS) TEST 

The suspended solids test that is run on the 
aeration tank mixed liquor is called the mixed 
liquor suspended solids test or MLSS test. It is 
used as a control test to help find out whether to 
increase or decrease the rate of sludge return and 
when to waste sludge. The very high solids con- 
tent of mixed liquor requires a larger diameter 
filter (11 centimeters instead of 2.4 centimeters) 
to prevent rapid clogging. 

CHLORINE RESIDUAL TEST 

When chlorine is used to disinfect the effluent, 
tests are needed to see if the chlorine residual 
requirement has been met. The chlorine residual 
test may be run using the iodometric or 
amperometric methods. Since grab samples are 
used for these tests, most states suggest that the 
test be run within 30 minutes after taking the 
sample. 

FECAL COLIFORM TEST 

The fecal coliform test is an indicator of 
harmful bacteria in the wastewater. Both the 
membrane filter and most probable number 
(MPN) can be used to run the test. If the sample 
is not prepared for the test on the site, it should 
be cooled to 4C within 30 minutes and then tested 
within 6 hours. 

ALKALINITY 

The alkalinity test can tell the operator a lot 
about the wastewater in the plant. A very high 



alkalinity in the wastewater may mean that an 
alkaline industrial waste has entered the system. 
The alkalinity test is often used to see how the 
anaerobic sludge digesters are working. The 
alkalinity in treatment lagoons usually goes down 
as the lagoon becomes septic. The alkalinity 
usually shows a 20 to 30 mg/1 change before there 
is a change in pH. 

LABORATORY RECORDS 

Records can be used to find the best operating 
controls for a wastewater plant, problems that 
might arise in the plant, and the future needs of 
the plant. Records may also be used in court if 
a lawsuit is filed against the treatment plant. 

The treatment plant should keep three kinds 
of records. These three types are physical records 
that describe in detail all areas of the plant itself, 
maintenance records that show what repair and 
cleaning has been done or needs to be done, and 
performance records that show the plant's 
operating data. 

Physical records include operation and 
maintenance (O&M) manuals, actual plans and 
blueprints for the plant, shop drawings, O&M 
guides from equipment manufacturers, costs for 
all units, a hydraulic profile showing the height 
of water in all treatment units, and an equipment 
record. Under Public Law (PL) 92-500, consulting 
engineers are required to provide operation and 
maintenance (O&M) manuals for the treatment 
plants they design. These O&M manuals must 
meet the requirements of Considerations for 
Preparation of Operation and Maintenance 
Manuals, EPA, Washington, D.C., 1974. 

Preventive maintenance in the treatment plant 
can reduce costly repairs and downtime on equip- 
ment. One of the key steps in a good maintenance 
program is keeping records. These records include 
the data needed to make a maintenance schedule, 
to estimate a maintenance budget, and to build 
up enough spare parts. 

A record of all equipment in the plant must 
be made. This can be done on index cards. Each 
piece of equipment should be given a number 
based on where it is located in the plant. This 
number is written on an index card with the name 
of the equipment, where it is located in the plant, 
the name and address of the manufacturer or 
supplier, the cost, and when it was installed. The 
card should also have the type, model, serial, and 
any other code numbers, along with the capacity 
or size rating. The same card or another set of 
cards should include the type of maintenance 



10-23 



required and how often it is needed; the special 
lubricants or coatings needed; and a record of all 
work done on the unit, including the labor, parts, 
and total cost. This data should be considered 
when planning to buy new equipment and mak- 
ing a maintenance schedule. 

Making a maintenance schedule requires 
careful thought. Good records can serve as a 
guide. Some large treatment plants now use a 
computer to plan maintenance schedules and keep 
records up-to-date. Preventive maintenance 
should be scheduled so it can be done during good 
weather and not during times of peak load at the 
plant. Also, the schedule must leave time for 
repair work. A large chart showing what needs 
to be done daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, 
semiannually, and annually can help in setting up 
a work schedule. 

A spare parts inventory should be established. 
Many spare parts must be ordered several days 
or weeks before they are delivered. These spare 
parts should be stocked at the treatment plant so 
the plant won't have to be shut down until the 
part arrives. A list or inventory of spare parts 
makes reordering simpler. A written record of 
parts used and replaced should be kept. The 
operator should record the date an item was 
ordered, the date delivered, its cost, and the name 
of the supplier, each time a part is ordered and 
delivered. 

In addition to the above records you must also 
maintain performance records. There are three 
types of performance records. These are the 
laboratory records, operator's log, and NPDES 
forms. 

A complete set of laboratory records should 
be kept for all laboratory tests. The laboratory 
record should have the date and time the sample 



was taken, the method used to take the sample, 
the name of the person who took the sample, 
where the sample was taken, the test performed 
on the sample, and the results of the laboratory 
test. These records should be kept in a bound 
notebook so they can be used as a part of legal 
testimony about the operation of the plant if need 
be. A monthly or quarterly report is also required 
at most plants. 

A monthly report is required for all 
wastewater plants on a military installation. Since 
no two treatment plants are exactly the same, the 
operator will find that a special log designed for 
the treatment plant is helpful. The operator should 
report on special features of the treatment plant 
under the blank columns in the log. Operators at 
each treatment plant are required to complete the 
log. Navy plant operators use the Wastewater 
Treatment Plant Operating Record, NAVFAC 
11340/1 (6-75). 

Finally, every treatment plant that discharges 
to a body of water must get an NPDES permit 
from the EPA or the designated state agency. The 
permit lists standards for the effluent, tests re- 
quired, how often the tests must be run, and the 
sampling method of each test. The treatment plant 
must submit a monthly or quarterly report to the 
EPA or the designated state agency with all the 
laboratory tests required by the permit. These 
reports and laboratory records must be kept for 
at least 3 years. 

Use performance records to check the plant. 
The performance records at a treatment plant can 
provide good process control data to the operator. 
Results of laboratory tests that differ a lot from 
previous records may show an equipment 
breakdown, an industrial waste discharge, or a 
break in the collection system. Table 10-12 shows 



Table 10-12. Variations in Performance and Some Common Causes 



Variation 



Possible Cause 



Solution 



BOD 5 (or COD): 
Increase 



Increased organic loading. 
Population growth. In- 
dustrial expansion. 



Septic influent. 

Septic conditions in treat- 
ment plant units. 



Identify source of increase. If overloading is 
permanent, adjust treatment plant processes for 
maximum efficiency. Require adequate pretreat- 
ment. Enforce sewer use regulations if violations 
are found. Install holding tanks (ponds) if 
feasible. Modify or expand treatment units. 

Freshen by aeration or chlorination. 

Check on detention time and sludge pumping 
schedule. See if dissolved oxygen requirements 
of aerated units are being met. 



10-24 



Table 10-12. Variations in Performance and Some Common Causes 



Variation 



Possible Cause 



Solution 



BOD 5 (or COD): 
Decrease 



Decrease in organic 
loading. 



No problem. 



Wastewater organisms 
killed by toxic waste. 



Find source of toxic waste. Require neutraliza- 
tion or exclude from treatment facility by 
enforcing sewer use regulations. When toxic 
waste is found, immediately notify appropriate 
military and regulatory authorities. Immediately 
seek advice from qualified specialists as to 
disposal of toxic waste remaining in the plant. 
Disposal after neutralization and/or dilution 
may be no problem. 



Suspended 
Solids: Increase 



Industrial expansion or 
population increase. 
Changes in industrial 
processes. 



Generally, same procedure as for BOD 5 in- 
crease. Unless growth and expansion are the 
causes, check pretreatment for operation. Also 
check for industrial "dumping." Enforce sewer 
use regulations, if applicable. 



Suspended 
Solids: Decrease 



Collection sewers blocked 
(clogged). 



Inspect, clean and flush if needed. 



Broken or completely 
blocked sewer resulting in 
bypassing. 



Clean and flush sewer if clogged. Repair or 
replace if sewer is broken or settled out of posi- 
tion. If wastewater is bypassing, treat with 
chlorine at once. 



pH: Increase 



Industrial discharge. In- 
adequate pretreatment. 



Try to find source of alkaline (basic) dis- 
charge and require pH adjustment before 
discharge to collection system. Check on opera- 
tion of pretreatment units. 



pH: Decrease 



Industrial discharge. In- 
adequate pretreatment. 



Try to find source of acidic discharge and 
proceed as suggested above. 



Septic influent. 



Check sewers for low velocity (flat grades) and 
blockage (clogging). Clean and flush sewers. 
Chlorinate if necessary. Check lift station wet 
wells for proper detention time (not more than 
30 minutes in warm weather). If the cause 
cannot be remedied, then freshen the septic 
wastewater at the head of the treatment plant 
by using aeration and/or chlorine. If the pH 
remains too low for satisfactory operation, 
adjust by applying alkaline chemical such as lime 
or soda ash. 



10-25 



Variation 



Possible Cause 



Solution 



Wastewater 
Flow: Increase 



Population and industrial 
expansion. 



Wastewater 
Flow: Decrease 



Temperature 

Influent: 

Increase 

Temperature 

Influent: 

Decrease 

Chlorine 
Demand: 
Increase 



Infiltration-Inflow. 



Bypassing leakage (ex- 
filtration). 



Decreased water use. 



Discharge of hot wastes. 



Infiltration inflow of 
storm water. 



Inefficient operation due 
to septic conditions, poor 
settling, and other 
operating problems. 



Industrial discharges. Slug 
loading or "dumping." 



Chlorine feed equipment 
not properly working. 



Temperature. 



Consider installing holding ponds or tanks. Con- 
sult with industry to prevent "dumping" 
during high flow periods. If increased flow is 
expected to be continually above treatment plant 
design capacity, plant expansion and/or 
modifications should be considered. 

Check collection system for unauthorized storm 
and surface water connections. Enforce sewer 
use regulations. Repair or replace broken or 
cracked pipes and leaky joints. Raise or provide 
good surface drainage for manhole covers in low 
areas. Install holding ponds or tanks. 

Check collection system for leaks and bypass- 
ing. Make necessary repairs. Notify appropriate 
regulatory officials at once. Request their advice. 

Recirculate enough of the treatment plant 
effluent to primary clarifier, trickling filter (or 
other unit) to prevent excessive detention time 
and provide better operation. 

Enforce sewer use regulations if temperature is 
high enough to hinder operation. 



Locate points of entrance. Repair if needed. 
Enforce sewer use regulations, if applicable. 



Check on efficiency of each treatment unit. Ad- 
just controls to secure maximum efficiency. 
Check sludge-pumping schedule and rate, recir- 
culation of effluent, aeration rate, trickling filter 
operation, and return of digester supernatant. 
Check for proper detention time in clarifiers and 
aeration tanks. 

If possible, secure cooperation of industry in 
controlling time and rate of discharging strong 
waste. 

Check accuracy of dosing equipment. The 
problem could be improper dose instead of in- 
creased chlorine demand. Find out if chlorine 
and wastewater are being properly mixed. 

Wastewater with high temperature usually re- 
quires more chlorine to satisfy the chlorine 
demand. 



10-26 



some changes from normal values and some 
causes for these changes. 



DISPOSING OF AND MONITORING 
SEWAGE EFFLUENTS 

The wastewater treatment process includes 
taking the solids out of the wastewater, getting 
rid of the solids, and getting rid of the treated 
wastewater or effluent in a way the federal and 
state regulating agencies approve. Sludge handling 
and disposal are covered in chapter 13. This 
chapter describes many ways to dispose of plant 
effluent. 

All plants that discharge an effluent must have 
NPDES permits issued by the EPA or by a state 
agency for the EPA. Before these permits are 
given to the plant, officials make a careful survey 
of the water use nearby that might be hurt by the 
effluent of the treatment plant. The permit may 
list top, bottom, or average limits for some kinds 
of pollutions. It may also state in what way the 
plant can dispose of its effluent. If the plant does 
not meet the limits on the permit, the operator 
should contact the regulating agency at once. The 
permit can be changed or revoked by the agency. 
Sometimes the plant may be allowed to discharge 
more than the limit on the permit, but that is up 
to the regulating agency. The purpose of the 
permit is to protect human health and natural 
resources. All operators should know the permit 
limits and make every effort to ensure that the 
treatment plant complies with them. 

EFFLUENT DISCHARGE METHODS 

The two major methods of discharging 
effluent are continuous discharge and intermit- 
tent discharge. 

Most treatment plants discharge an effluent 
to a receiving water all the time. The effluent may 
go to an ocean, gulf, bay, lake, or stream. The 
point of discharge may be above or below the 
surface of the receiving water. Continuous 
discharge is often cheaper than other methods 
because it takes less manpower, equipment, and 
storage to operate. However, a very good 
monitoring program must be used to make sure 
toxic waste is not discharged. After a toxic waste 
is discharged, there is no practical way to stop or 
isolate the toxic substance. 

Intermittent discharge means that the effluent 
is not discharged all the time, but only from time 
to time. This type of discharge requires a place 



to store the effluent. It is not often used at large 
plants. But it does work well at lagoons and small 
treatment plants that have holding or "polishing" 
ponds. 

Intermittent discharge lets the operator choose 
the time and rate of discharge. A controlled 
amount of effluent can usually be discharged 
without hurting the quality of the receiving water 
if the operator picks the right time for all 
discharges. In some cases, the receiving water has 
even been improved. Intermittent discharge may 
cost more to build, but it does not require as costly 
a monitoring program. When there is no dis- 
charge, there is no effluent to be tested. 

A special type of intermittent discharge is 
seasonal discharge. This type of discharge is often 
used to protect high-quality streams, especially 
during the season when the stream is used a great 
deal for recreation. More storage is needed for 
seasonal discharge because there are usually 
only two discharges, one in spring and one in 
autumn. The effluent is discharged under con- 
trolled conditions approved by the regulating 
agencies. 

METHODS OF DISPOSING AND 
MONITORING SEWAGE EFFLUENTS 

Several methods of disposing of sewage 
effluents are used today. All methods must con- 
form to the NPDES permit requirements and 
must be closely monitored. This section discusses 
these methods as well as troubleshooting problems 
with sewage effluent quality. 

Direct Discharge to Receiving Water 

Most treatment plants discharge effluent right 
into the receiving water. The abilities of the 
receiving water to dilute and accept the effluent 
is shown in the NPDES permit limits. The 
NPDES permit also considers the use of the 
receiving water. The effluent may come from a 
final clarifier, a disinfection contact basin, a 
lagoon, a polishing pond, or a storage pond. 
However, it must pass through some type of out- 
fall sewer to the point of discharge. 

The outfall sewer may be an enclosed pipe or 
an open channel or some of both. It is used to 
transport the effluent from the final treatment or 
storage unit to the point of discharge. The out- 
fall sewer may be built to include cascades or 
stairsteps, channels, mechanical aerators, or a 
filter bed of coarse rock. The purpose of these 
aerators is to increase the DO content of the 
effluent. 



10-27 



The NPDES permit requires that certain tests 
be made on the effluent on a regular schedule. 
Effluent testing may include, but is not limited 
to, flow measurement, temperature, BOD or 
COD, suspended solids, pH, DO, coliform count, 
and chlorine residual. Test results must be 
reported to the regulating agency. Along with the 
required tests, operators should check the receiv- 
ing water, especially on small streams and lakes. 
Laboratory tests and visual checks may show that 
a problem exists in the receiving water and that 
something needs to be done. Plant operators 
cannot usually test large rivers, bays, lakes, and 
gulfs. 

If an effluent containing a toxic substance is 
accidentally discharged to a receiving water that 
is used downstream as a drinking water supply, 
for recreation, or for livestock watering, operators 
must call the regulating agency and the 
downstream water users at once. Regulating agen- 
cies can then help curb the problem, and drink- 
ing water suppliers will have enough time to close 
their water intake lines until the problem is 
stopped. This will also warn people in recreation 
areas and give farmers and ranchers time to move 
livestock to a safe water supply. 

Discharge for Recycling 

In some areas where there is a shortage of 
water, wastewater effluent is recycled for industry, 
recreation, irrigation, and fire control use. Many 
industries can use treated wastewater for cooling 
and cleaning. Often this is cheaper for the industry 
than using potable (drinking) water. Lakes for 
fishing and boating have been maintained with 
recycled wastewater. Records show that these 
man-made lakes are often no more hazardous to 
the users than natural lakes. Recycled wastewater 
is seldom used as a drinking water supply. 

Monitoring of effluent discharged for recycl- 
ing is very important. Only by monitoring can the 
operator be sure that the effluent is good enough 
to be used. Recycling units may include extended 
settling and biological stabilization in holding 
ponds, sand filtering, and disinfection. Quality 
control is a must since the recycled water must 
be safe. 

Discharge for Land Application 
(Irrigation) 

Irrigation with wastewater effluent is fre- 
quently used in some areas. Before irrigating, it 
is necessary to consider the contour of the area 



for irrigation, soil type, ground water table, and 
potential damage to water supplies. The joint 
EPA/ Army manual, EPA 625/1-77-008 Process 
Design Manual for Land Treatment of Municipal 
Wastewater, provides further guidance on this 
subject. 

Hillsides and other areas with steep slopes are 
not often used for irrigation. Too much runoff 
may occur. Irrigation equipment is harder to 
move, control, and maintain. Each area to be used 
for irrigation should be surveyed by a qualified 
person. Often, areas with slopes on which 
normal farm machinery can be used can be 
irrigated by a sprinkler system or by a jet or spray 
gun. Terracing and contour furrowing help pre- 
vent runoff. Flooding, overland flow, and 
furrow irrigation may require special work done 
to the land. This may include leveling, grading, 
ditches, and dikes. 

Soil type and structure affect the rate at which 
the wastewater can be applied and absorbed. 
Average loams and sandy loams absorb and filter 
well. Clay and other types of tight soil are not as 
good. Deep plowing and chiseling make these soils 
better for wastewater irrigation. Very sandy or 
gravelly soils have very high percolation or 
absorbing qualities. But when these soils are in 
contact with the ground water table, pollutants 
may get into underground water supplies before 
they can be filtered out. Tight, sandy, and gravelly 
soils can be improved for absorbing and filtering 
by plowing crops under. 

Row crops may be watered by furrow, spray, 
and/or sprinkler irrigation. Spray irrigation is 
used where gravity flow is not practical in all parts 
of an effluent disposal plot or field. There should 
be gravity flow from one end of the row to the 
other. A lot of grading is needed to prepare a field 
for furrow irrigation. Long rows without enough 
slope will result in boggy parts of the field while 
other parts will not get enough water. Furrow 
irrigation on steep slopes may cause too much ero- 
sion. Operators in charge of this type of irriga- 
tion need special skill and experience to make sure 
a fairly even amount of water reaches all parts 
of the field. 

Grass crops are often easy to irrigate. The 
grasslands may be pastures, meadows, parks, turf, 
or sodded areas of airfields and golf courses. The 
amount of water applied and how often it is 
applied are not as important as for row crops. 
Effluent can be applied to grassland by overland 
flow, sprinkler heads, or by jet or spray guns. The 
stems, leaves, and roots of the grasses make a 
good filter and help prevent rapid runoff. Grasses 



10-28 



and some other plants purify and release to the 
air large amounts of moisture when they are grow- 
ing. During times of sunny, hot, and dry weather 
with strong breezes, as much as 25 percent of the 
water applied to the land may evaporate, either 
straight from the plants or from the surface of 
the soil. 

Wooded areas and some wastelands have been 
used for effluent disposal. In these areas the 
disposal of the treated wastewater is most often 
the only reason for applying the effluent since 
crops are not grown there. These areas may 
absorb and filter the wastewater very well. The 
amount of wastewater applied to these lands is 
not as important as it is with crop irrigation. 

The use of wastewater irrigation for vegetable 
and fruit crops that can be eaten uncooked may 
be restricted to protect public health. The health 
department or local regulating agency should be 
contacted before wastewater irrigation is applied 
to fruit and vegetable crops. 

Wastewater effluent is often held in storage 
ponds or basins before it is used for irrigation. 
All discharge permit requirements must be met 
before the effluent can be used. Wastewater used 
on parks, golf courses, and other recreation 
areas should be disinfected just before it is 
applied. A chlorine contact chamber installed just 
upstream of the irrigation should be enough, but 
disinfection must meet the rules of the regulating 
agencies. 

Testing of surface and subsurface water 
supplies in the immediate area of irrigation is 
important and must not be forgotten. Samples 
should be taken from all surface waters exposed 
to drainage and seepage of the irrigation water. 
Ground water should be tested using samples from 
existing wells or from test wells dug for that 
purpose. In areas where the water table is only 
a few feet below ground level, tests should be run 
very often. It is not as hard or as costly to pre- 
vent pollution as it is to clean up polluted water. 
Qualified laboratory technicians should check the 
soil to see if it is being hurt by buildups of toxics 
or by too many plant nutrients. Grazing and/or 
harvesting crops may help control soil conditions. 

There must be enough storage capacity to hold 
the wastewater effluent until it is time to irrigate. 
The weather, type of soil, and type of crop are 
important in finding out how much to apply and 
how often to apply it. The wastewater should be 
disinfected before it is used for recreation. A 
power unit and a pump must be used unless 
gravity flow can be used to transport and 
distribute the effluent. A lightweight pipe like an 



aluminum alloy or plastic is often used to carry 
the wastewater. Quick-coupling joints are needed 
so the pipe can be put together and taken apart 
easily. Sections of flexible hose are needed for 
mobile spray equipment and can also be used for 
bends in pipelines carrying the effluent. Valves 
are needed to control the amount of flow. 
Pressure release or bypass devices are needed to 
control pressure. Spray or sprinkler nozzles, 
heads, and guns must be able to adapt to the 
volume of water to be applied. They must also 
be designed to work in the range of water pressure 
maintained. 

Evaporation and Percolation Basins 

Evaporation and percolation basins are used 
to dispose of wastewater effluent by letting it 
evaporate and by letting it percolate or seep into 
the soil. The correct use of these ponds depends 
on the area of the basin compared to the amount 
and kind of the wastewater effluent to be pro- 
cessed. The larger the surface and bottom of the 
pond, the faster the wastewater evaporates and 
percolates. The climate and kind of soil are 
important in finding out whether this type of 
disposal can be used in a given area. This kind 
of system can be a good and cheap way to dispose 
of wastewater effluent. 

It is often better to build two basins or one 
basin with a dike that separates it into two parts. 
After a time, suspended solids will change to 
settleable solids and build up in the pores or open- 
ings of the soil. Percolation will slow down and 
sooner or later will stop. To get the basin back 
in working order, it must be drained, dried, and 
cleaned. Scars must be cut in the bottom. With 
two basins, one can be kept in service while the 
other is being restored. The bottoms of the ponds 
should be sloped for quick and complete draining. 

The berms or dikes must be checked often for 
erosion and rodent damage. The dikes and sur- 
rounding areas should be mowed often to keep 
vegetation at a maximum height of 6 to 10 inches 
(15 to 25 centimeters). This will help keep rodents 
out of the area. The area should be fenced to keep 
out larger animals. 

Signs should be built to show that the ponds 
are wastewater treatment plants and are 
dangerous. As with wastewater lagoons, trees 
should not be allowed to grow within about 500 
feet (150 meters) of the pond. There must be 
enough surface drainage around the edge of the 
pond to keep surface water from entering the 
unit. 



10-29 



Since there is no discharge from the system, 
there is no need for testing the pond effluent. All 
bodies of surface water and all wells in the area 
should be tested often to see if they have been 
polluted by the pond. Too many suspended solids 
discharged to the pond will stop up the unit. A 
suspended solids test must be performed daily (or 
at least very often) to find out if the treatment 
plant units are working well or if operative con- 
trols need to be changed. The ponds should be 
checked each day. Any changes in the way the 
plant looks or smells or any changes from 
normal operation need to be checked out. 
Laboratory tests may help find the problem and 
suggest ways of correcting it. 

Troubleshooting 

Table 10-13 describes some problems and solu- 
tions for these problems with wastewater effluent. 
Refer to manufacturers' manuals for more 
specific troubleshooting and operating guides for 
various types of treatment plants. Effluent quality 



usually depends on the operation and maintenance 
of upstream process units. 

Odors and unsightly conditions are the most 
common subjects of complaints. Toxic wastes and 
wastes with high fecal coliform count are more 
dangerous but are more difficult to detect. 
Therefore, fewer complaints are made regarding 
these two hazards. 

Complaints must be received with courtesy 
and investigated at once to see if the complaint 
is valid. Be sure to inform the complaining 
person(s) as to your findings, what can be done 
or what is being done to remedy the problem. A 
careful investigation may show that the source of 
the problem is not related to the wastewater treat- 
ment plant. 

If the treatment plant is the source of the 
problem, use all available operating controls to 
obtain maximum plant efficiency. Notify desig- 
nated regulatory officials at once as to the nature 
of the problem. If the solution to the problem 
appears to be beyond operator control, request 
advice and/or assistance. 



Table 10-13. Troubleshooting Effluent Disposal 



INDICATOR 



LIKELY CAUSES 



ACTIONS TO TAKE 



Effluent BOD or 
COD too high. 



Effluent settle- 
able solids con- 
tent too high. 



1. Organic overload. 

2. Septic conditions in 
plant units and the col- 
lection system. 



3. Not enough aeration. 



1. Hydraulic overload. 

2. Sludge collection and 
removal equiment not 
working right. 



Control organic loading by sewer use regula- 
tions. Improve plant upkeep. Use all available 
operating control. 

Check sludge pumping schedule for proper 
removal. Inspect pumps to see if they are 
working. Inspect sludge pipes and valves for 
clogging, check for sludge deposits (pockets) 
that are not being pumped out of the clari- 
fiers. Inspect all plant units whether 
primary or secondary for proper operation. 
Refer to manufacturer's instructions for 
process information. Inspect the collection 
system, including lift stations, for septic 
conditions. 

Maintain the recommended DO level in all 
aerated units usually about 2 mg/1. Inspect 
air diffusers for even distribution of air and 
good mixing. 

Try to control hydraulic loading by main- 
taining the collection system. Install holding 
ponds or tanks to handle peak load. Check 
on wastewater flow rate often to see if plant 
capacity is exceeded. Inspect settling tanks for 
short circuiting (channeling). 



10-30 



Table 10-13. Troubleshooting Effluent Disposal Continued 



INDICATOR 



LIKELY CAUSES 



ACTIONS TO TAKE 



Effluent sus- 
pended solids 
content too 
high. 



Effluent pH too 
low or too high. 



Wastewater 
organisms killed, 
very little treat- 
ment being pro- 
vided. 



Coliform count 
above permit 
requirement. 



1 . Secondary units organi- 
cally overloaded. 



2. Hydraulic overload. 



1 . Industrial discharges not 
properly pretreated. 

2. Septic conditions in col- 
lection system or in the 
treatment plant. 



Toxic material leaking or 
being discharged to the col- 
lection system. 



1. Not enough chlorine 
being applied. 



2. Chlorine not well mixed 
with the wastewater. 



3. Contact time too short. 



1. Keep organic loading of secondary units 
within design capacity if reasonably possible. 
Carefully inspect aerated units for DO con- 
tent and mixing. 

2. Same action as for too many settleable 
solids in the effluent due to hydraulic 
overload. 

1 . Inspect and sample the wastewater from the 
collection system to find the source. Require 
or provide proper pretreatment. 

2. Inspect both collection system and plant 
for detention time in sewer pipes, wetwell, 
and clarifiers. Clean and flush clogged or 
partly clogged sewers. Aerate and/or chlori- 
nate the influent wastewater for temporary 
relief. 

Immediately notify downstream users and 
regulatory authorities, giving all available 
information as to type and quantity of toxic 
substance, also time of release. If the operator 
has advance warning of a spill or discharge 
of toxic waste, then all available storage 
should be used to contain the toxic material 
instead of letting it pass through the plant. If 
it cannot be contained, use all available 
methods to neutralize and/or dilute the toxic 
waste. Try to find the source of the toxic 
material and use every reasonable means to 
prevent its discharge to the system. 

1. Test several times daily for "free" chlorine 
residual, especially during and immediately 
after peak flows. Adjust dose of chlorine 
according to test results. Inspect chlorine feed 
pump for working condition. If chlorine com- 
pounds such as HTH and others are being 
used, be sure of its percentage of chlorine con- 
tent when adjusting the feed rate (dose). 

2. Inspect mixing equipment to be sure the 
chlorine and wastewater are well mixed 
immediately. Test for free chlorine residual 
in several areas of the contact tank to be sure 
of proper mixing. 

3. Carefully check the contact (detention) time 
of the tank to be sure that 15 to 30 minutes' 
contact time is provided. Remove sludge 
deposits, if any are present, from the contact 
tank. 



10-31 



SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, 
AND LEACHING FIELDS 

Septic tanks, cesspools, and leaching fields are 
used for sewage treatment processes where 
common sewers are not available. These facilities 
are for the most part underground receptacles. If 
they are properly designed, constructed, located, 
and operated, they work without objectionable 
odors over long periods of time with a minimum 
amount of attention. 

SEPTIC TANKS 

Septic tanks may be used to serve small or 
scattered installations where the effluent can be 
disposed of by dilution, leaching wells or trenches, 
subsurface tile, or artificial subsurface filter 
systems. See figure 10-2. 

The septic tank capacity should equal a full 
day's flow plus an allowance of from 15 to 25 per- 
cent for sludge capacity. The minimum desirable 
size of the tank is 1,000 gallons. Table 10-14 
outlines the minimum tank capacities required by 
the National Standard Plumbing Code. 



Septic tanks are constructed of reinforced con- 
crete. The length of the tank should be not less 
than two nor more than three times the width. 
The liquid depth should not be less than 4 feet 
for the smaller tanks and 6 feet for the larger ones. 
Manholes should be provided over the inlet and 
outlet pipes and over the low points in the 



ACCESS COVER 



U -BOLTS 



INLET 




OUTLET 



NOTE: INLET AT LEAST 3" ABOVE OUTLET 



Reprinted from the National Standard Plumbing Code Illustrated. 
Copyright 1980 is held by the National Association of Plumbing- 
Heating-Cooling Contractors, to which all rights are reserved. 



87.404X 



Figure 10-2. Septic tank. 



Table 10-14. Capacity of Septic Tanks 



Single family 
dwellings number 
of bedrooms 


Multiple 
dwelling units or 
apartments one 
bedroom each 


Other uses; 
maximum 
fixture 
units served 


Minimum 
septic tank 
capacity in 
gallons 


1-3 




20 


1,000 


4 


2 units 


25 


1,200 


5 or 6 


3 


33 


1,500 


7 or 8 


4 


45 


2,000 




5 


55 


2,250 




6 


60 


2,500 




7 


70 


2,750 




8 


80 


3,000 




9 


90 


3,250 




10 


100 


3,500 


Extra bedroom, 150 


gallons each. 






Extra dwelling units 


over 10, 250 gallons each. 






Extra fixture units over 100, 25 gallons per fixture unit. 


NOTE: Septic tanks 


sizes in this table include sludge storage capacity and the connection of domestic 


food waste disposal 


units without further volume increase. 







Reprinted from the National Standard Plumbing Code Illustrated. Copyright 1980 is held by the National Association of Plumbing Heai'ma-Cooling 

Contractors, to which all rights are reserved. 



10-32 



bottom of hopper-bottom tanks. The roof of the 
tank may be covered with earth, but access open- 
ings should extend at least to the ground surface. 
Although ells or tees may be used at inlet and 
outlet connections, straight connections are 
better for rodding. Instead of ells, wooden 
baffles, located approximately 18 inches from the 
ends of the tank and extending 18 inches below 
and 12 inches above the flow line, are provided. 
Elevations should permit free flow into and out 
of the tank. The bottom of the inlet sewer should 
be at least 3 inches above the water level in the 
tank. The inlet and outlet connections should be 
sufficiently buried or otherwise protected to 
prevent damage by traffic or frost. 

When a tank will discharge into a leaching 
field greater than 500 feet in length, a dosing tank 
and siphon should be incorporated into the system 
(fig. 10-3). The rush of sewage that occurs when 
the siphon discharges results in better distribution 
throughout the leaching field. While the dosing 
tank is refilling, the resultant resting period is 
favorable to maintaining aerobic conditions in the 
receiving soil. The dosing tank should have a 
capacity about 60 to 75 percent of the interior 
capacity of the leaching pipe to be dosed at one 
time and should automatically dose once in 3 to 
4 hours. Double the amount of dosing siphons 



for each additional 500 feet of leaching tile or 
pipe. 

Although properly designed septic tanks 
require little operating attention, they must 
be inspected periodically. The frequency is 
determined by the size of the tank and the 
population load. The minimum frequency should 
be once every 2 months at periods of high 
flow. The inspection should assure that the 
inlet and outlet are free from clogging, that 
the depth of scum and sludge accumulation 
is not excessive, and that the effluent passing 
to subsurface disposal is relatively free from 
suspended solids. A high concentration of 
suspended solids in the effluent quickly clogs 
subsurface disposal facilities. Sludge and scum 
accumulation should not exceed one-fourth the 
tank capacity. It should not be assumed that 
septic tanks liquefy all solids, that they 
never need cleaning, and that the effluent is 
pure and free from germs. Perhaps 40 to 60 
percent of the suspended solids are retained 
and the rest are discharged in the effluent. 

Separating sludge and scum from the liquid 
in septic tanks is difficult. In small tanks these 
wastes are customarily mixed, and the entire con- 
tents are removed when the tanks are cleaned. The 




.. .: ' ->;' V: -.:-..' .':. .' > ';;-/.-'.-'- : . : :..''.:>': :'.".'.-!''.".--'-.-.'-:V..''.' : ': 



87.405X 



Figure 10-3. Septic tank with dosing siphon. 



10-33 



material removed contains fresh or partially 
digested sewage solids. It must be disposed of 
without endangering public health. Disposal 
through manholes in the nearest sewerage system, 
as approved by local authorities, or burial in 
shallow furrows on open land is recommended. 
A diaphragm-type sludge pump is best suited for 
removing the tank contents. The contents should 
be transported in a watertight, closed container. 

When installing a septic tank system for 
sewage treatment, you must take into con- 
sideration the location with respect to wells 
or other sources of water supply, topography, 
water table, soil characteristics, area avail- 
able, and the maximum building occupancy. 
Building occupancy is a key factor in deter- 
mining tank size. Table 10-15 shows the 
common sewage uses based on the type of 
facility and the gallons per person per day of 
usage. 

The physical location of a septic tank in 
relation to wells must be no closer than 100 



feet to a shallow well and no closer than 
50 feet from a deep well. In general, a shallow 
well is classified as a well less than 100 feet 
in depth. Deep wells are generally more than 
100 feet in depth. Figure 10-4 shows a typical 
septic tank system layout with minimum distances 
noted. Keep in mind that septic tanks, cesspools, 
and leaching fields must be located downhill from 
any water source. 



CESSPOOLS 

Sewage from private dwellings and farm- 
houses in outlying areas may discharge into 
cesspools if a common sewerage system is not 
available. Cesspools are usually dry-laid masonry 
or brick-lined wells without any masonry at the 
bottom. The sewage flows into them and leaches 
out into the soil. Floating solids collect at 
the top and settling solids collect at the bottom 
of the well. The well's leaching capacity is 
exhausted when the solids accumulate and clog 
the soil. The use of chemicals is not recommended 



SHALLOW 
WELL 



PROPERTY LINE 



DEEP WELL 
(PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY) 





V 


,XXXXXXVXXXXXXXXXN 




1 


i 




N, 


BUILDING S 




1 


1 




s 


^ 



50' WIN TO 
DISPOSALFIELD 
OR SEPTIC TANK 



SOLID PIPE 
SEPTIC TANK 
SOLID PIPE 
DISTRIBUTION BOX 



DISTANCES AS PER LOCAL CODES 




Reprinted from the National Standard Plumbing Code Illustrated. Copyright 1980 is held by the National Association of Plumbing-Heaiing-Coaling 

Contractors, to which all rights are reserved. 



87.406X 



Figure 10-4. Minimum distances for location of components of a private sewage disposal system. 



10-34 



Table 10-15. Sewage Flows According to Type of Establishment 



Type of Establishment 



Gal per Day per Person 



Schools (toilet and lavatories only) 15 

Schools (with above plus cafeteria) 25 

Schools (with above plus cafeteria and showers) 35 

Day workers at schools and offices 15 

Day camps 25 

Trailer parks or tourist camps (with built-in bath) 50 

Trailer parks or tourist camps (with central bathhouse) 35 

Work or construction camps 50 

Public picnic parks (toilet wastes only) 5 

Public picnic parks (bathhouse, showers and flush toilets) 10 

Swimming pools and beaches 10 

Country clubs 25 

Luxury residences and estates 150 

Rooming house 40 

Boarding houses 50 

Hotels (with connecting baths) 50 

Hotels (with private baths two persons per room) 100 

Boarding schools 100 

Factories (gallons per person per shift exclusive of 

industrial wastes 25 

Nursing homes 75 

General hospitals 150 

Public institutions (other than hospitals) 100 

Restaurants (toilet and kitchen wastes per unit of 

serving capacity 25 

Kitchen wastes from hotels, camps, boarding houses, 

etc. Serving three meals per day 10 

Motels 50 



gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 
gal per 



day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
locker 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 
day per 



person 
person 
person 
person 
person 
person 
person 
person 
person 
person 
person 

person 
person 
person 
person 
person 
person 



Motels with bath, toilet, and kitchen wastes 

Drive-in theaters 

Stores 



60 

5 

400 

Service stations 10 

Airports 3-5 

Assembly halls 2 

Bowling alleys 75 

Churches (small) 3-5 

Churches (large with kitchens) 5-7 

Dance halls 2 

Laundries (coin operated) 400 

Service stations 1 ,000 

500 

Subdivisions or individual homes 75 

Marinas Flush toilets 36 

Urinals 10 

Wash basins 15 

Showers 150 



gal per day per person 
gal per day per person 
gal per day per person 
gal per day per person 

gal per day per person 

gal per day per person 
gal per bed space 
gal per bed space 
gal per car space 
gal per toilet room 
gal per vehicle served 
gal per passenger 
gal per seat 
gal per lane 
gal per sanctuary seat 
gal per sanctuary seat 
gal per day per person 
gal per machine 
gal (First bay) 
gal (Each add. bay) 
gal per day per person 
gal per fixture per hr 
gal per fixture per hr 
gal per fixture per hr 
gal per fixture per hr 



Reprinted from the National Standard Plumbing Code Illustrated. Copyright 1980 is held by the National Association of Plumbing-Healing-Cooling 

Contractors, to which all rights are reserved. 



10-35 



to increase the useful life of a cesspool. See 
figure 10-5. 

When the first cesspool becomes filled, a 
second well may be built to take the overflow 
from the first. In such cases, the first cess- 
pool should operate as a septic tank to 
collect the settling and floating solids and 
provide a trapped outlet on the connection 
leading to the next leaching cesspool. Septic 
tanks may be placed advantageously ahead of 
leaching cesspools in larger installations. Leaching 
cesspools should not be placed closer together 
than 20 feet by out-to-out measurement of 
walls. 



Leaching cesspools should be used only where 
the subsoil is porous to a depth of at least 8 or 
10 feet and where the ground water is normally 
below this elevation. When they are located in fine 
sand, the leaching area can be increased by sur- 
rounding the walls with graded gravel. 

The number and the size of cesspools required 
depend on the quantity of sewage and the leaching 
characteristics of the total exterior percolating 
area above the ground water table, including 
bottoms and sidewalls below the maximum-flow 
lines. The allowable rate of sewage application per 
square foot per day, based on the recommended 
leaching test, is given below. Soils that require 
more than 30 minutes for a fall of 1 inch are 



2" PLANK COVER 



MORTARED JOINTS 
ON TOP 4' OF 
SIDE WALLS 



MASONRY LAID 
DRY, OPEN JOINTS 




87.407 



Figure 10-5. Leaching cesspool. 



10-36 



unsatisfactory for leaching. Some other disposal 
method should be used. 



Time for water 

to fall 1 inch 

(minutes) 



1 
2 
5 

10 
30 



Allowable rate of sewage 

application (gallons per 

square foot of percolating 

area per day) 

5.3 
4.3 
3.2 
2.3 
1.1 



The test for leaching should be made by 
digging a pit about one-half the proposed depth 
of the cesspool, making a test hole 1 foot square 
and 18 inches deep at the bottom. The test hole 
is filled with 6 inches of water, which is allowed 
to drain off. Six inches of water is again added, 
and the downward rate of percolation is measured 
in minutes required for the water surface to lower 
1 inch in the hole. 



LEACHING FIELDS 

Leaching fields are an integral component of 
a septic tank individual sewage disposal system. 
Leaching fields may be referred to as tile fields 
or absorption trenches. Whichever term is used 
the function, testing, construction, and 
maintenance techniques of this component remain 
the same. 

Leaching fields are built of lines of 4-inch per- 
forated pipe. Asbestos cement, vitrified clay pipe, 
or fiber perforated pipe (Orangeburg alkacid) are 
commonly used. Many types of perforated pipes 
are commercially available for use in leaching field 
construction. The newer plastic pipe is becoming 
more popular and is the most desirable because 
of its light weight, ease of installation, and vary- 
ing lengths. 

The following conditions are important for the 
proper functioning of a leaching field: 

Ground water levels well below that of the 
leaching field 

Soil of satisfactory leaching characteristics 
within a few feet of the surface extending several 
feet below the leaching pipe 

Subsurface drainage away from the field 



Adequate area 

Freedom from polluting drinking water 
supplies, particularly from shallow wells in the 
vicinity 

Before installing a leaching field in a specified 
area a percolation test must be performed. This 
test will determine whether the area selected is 
suitable for subsurface sewage disposal and helps 
you to determine the overall size of the leaching 
field in relation to trench dimensions and pipe 
lengths. 

The test consists of digging a test pit 2 feet 
square and at least 1 foot in depth. The optimum 
depth should be at the deepest point that the 
leaching pipe will be laid. Next dig a hole 1 foot 
square by 1 foot deep in the test pit. Fill this hole 
with 7 inches of water for wetting purposes. Allow 
the water to drop to 6 inches before recording the 
drop time. Then note the time required for the 
level to drop 1 inch (from 6 to 5 inches) in depth. 
You can then determine the length of pipe in the 
leaching field by using table 10-16. Note that this 
table is based on the assumption that 4-inch pipe 
will be used as recommended by the National 
Standard Plumbing Code. 

In the construction of a leaching field, the 
installer takes into consideration the results of the 
percolation test, type of soil, size of pipe, depth 
in reference to the ground water level and frost 
line, and standard requirements of materials 



Table 10-16. The Tile Length for Each 100 Gallons of 
Sewage Per Day 



Time in 


Tile Length for Trench 


Minutes for 


Widths of 


1-inch Drop 


1 foot 


2 feet 


3 feet 


1 


25 


13 


9 


2 


30 


15 


10 


3 


35 


18 


12 


5 


42 


21 


14 


10 


59 


30 


20 


15 


74 


37 


25 


20 


91 


46 


31 


25 


105 


53 


35 


30 


125 


63 


42 



Reprinted from the National Standard Plumbing Code Illustrated. 

Copyright 1980 is held by the Motional Association of Ptumbing- 

Heating-Cooling Contractors, in which all rights are reserved. 



10-37 



placed in the absorption trench. Figure 10-6 shows 
a typical layout of a leaching field. 

Soil type at the location of the field will 
dictate the width of the trench. Sand and sandy 
loam require a width of 1 foot, loam and sand 
and clay mixture 2 feet, clay with some gravel 3 
feet. Note these are minimum trench widths based 
on the soil type encountered at the jobsite. 

Placing the leaching pipe below the frost line 
to prevent freezing is not necessary. The depth 
should not under any circumstances be deeper 
than the ground water level. 

When digging the absorption trenches, you 
must consider the lengths of each lateral and their 



spacing in relation to each other. Do not make 
any lateral longer than 100 feet in length. Table 
10-17 shows the size and spacing requirements for 
disposal fields. 

After the trenches are laid out and dug, filler 
material is placed along with the actual pipe. The 
filler material may be washed gravel, crushed 
stone, slag, or clean bank-run gravel ranging in 
size from 1/2 to 2 1/2 inches in size. Filler material 
placed into the trench should not be less than 6 
inches deep below the bottom of the pipe. It 
should be at least 2 inches above the pipe. To 
prevent backfill soil from filling the voids in the 
filler material, it is recommended that a 3 -inch 




SEWER FROM SEPTIC 
TANK WITH TIGHT JOINTS 



LEACHING PIPE WITH 
OPEN JOINTS 



PLAN 



COARSE SCREENED GRAVEL -| 
1/2" TO 2 1/2" 




I' TO 3' 



6" TOPSOIL IF SITUATION 
JUSTIFIES GRASSED SURFACE 



TAR PAPER OVER JOINTS 

3" FINE SCREENED GRAVEL 
1/4- TO 1/2" 



6" TILE PIPE WITH OPEN JOINTS 
1/2" CLEAR SPACE AT JOINT 



THIS POINT NEVER BELOW 
GROUND WATER IF POSSIBLE 



TYPICAL SECTION 



Figure 10-6. Typical layout of a subsurface tile system. 



87.408 



10-38 



Table 10-17. Size and Spacing for Disposal Fields 



Width of trench 
at bottom (in.) 


Recommended depth of 
trench (in.) 


Spacing tile 
lines* (ft) 


Effective absorption 
area per lineal ft of 
trench (sq ft) 


18 


18 to 30 


6.0 


1.5 


24 


18 to 30 


6.0 


2.0 


30 


18 to 36 


7.6 


2.5 


36 


24 to 36 


9.0 


3.0 


*A greater spacing is 


desirable where available area 


permits. 





Reprinted from the National Standard Plumbing Code Illustrated. Copyright 1980 is held bv the National Association of Plumbing- Heating-Cooling 

Contractors, to which all rights are reserved. 



layer of medium-screened gravel with another 
layer of fine-screened gravel, untreated paper, or 
straw of 2 to 3 inches in depth be placed in the 
trench. 

Pipe is laid with a minimum pitch of 2 inches 
to a maximum of 4 inches per 100 feet. When 
open joints are used, they must not be spaced 
more than one-half inch apart. Asphalt-treated 
paper is used to cover the joint. The open joint 
allows for free discharge of solids from the line 
to the trench. The asphalt-treated paper prevents 
gravel from entering the pipe. 

The layout of the field requires attention to 
detail to prevent future maintenance and opera- 
tion troubles. When the field is laid on sloping 
ground, the flow must be distributed so each 
lateral gets a fair portion of the flow. Individual 
lines should be laid nearly parallel to land con- 
tours. Leaching fields are commonly laid out 
either in a herringbone pattern (fig. 10-6) or with 
the laterals at right angles to the main distribu- 
tion pipe. 



Little or no maintenance is required for 
leaching fields. Preventive measures such as 
excluding all vehicle traffic and not planting trees 
or shrubs in the field area will ensure troublefree 
operation for extended periods of time, usually 
many years. 

When a leaching field becomes unoperational, 
you must replace it with a new system. Tree or 
shrub roots are a major factor in leaching field 
failure and require the replacement of the field 
components and complete root removal. 



REFERENCES 

Intermediate Sewage, NTTC Course 216, NAV- 
FAC P-335, NAVFAC Technical Training 
Center, Norfolk, Va., May 1969. 

National Standard Plumbing Code, Illustrated, 
National Association of Plumbing-Heating- 
Cooling Contractors, Washington, D.C., 
1984. 



10-39 



CHAPTER 1 1 



COMPRESSED AIR SYSTEMS 



Learning Objective: Recognize the installation and maintenance considera- 
tions of compressed air systems. 



The Utilitiesman will be involved in the 
installation of compressed air systems as part of 
projects. The senior UT must be capable of iden- 
tifying and directing the proper construction 
techniques and installation of fittings and com- 
ponents. You will also be involved in the 
maintenance of previously installed systems. This 
chapter is aimed at increasing your knowledge of 
these considerations. 



SYSTEM CLASSIFICATIONS 

Compressed air is a form of power that has 
many important uses in industrial activities. An 
air compressor plant (fig. 11-1) is required to 
supply air of adequate volume, quality, and 
pressure at the various points of application, 
stated as pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
These plants or systems are classified as 



WATER TEMPERATURE 

ACTUATED SHUTDOWN 

CONTROL WHEN ORDERED 



AFTERCOOLER 

(MAY BE 
HORIZONTAL) 



TEMPERATURE 

CONTROL 

REGULATOR 

WHEN ORDERED 



SUPPLY PIPE MUST DRAIN 

AWAY FROM RECEIVER. 

PROVIDE DRAINS AS SHOWN 

AND AT LOWER END 



TO DRAIN 
FLOOR-LINE 




THIS TYPE CONNECTION 

PREVENTS CONDENSATION 

FROM BEING CARRIED 

OVER WITH AIR 



87.254 



Figure 11-1. Components of a compressed air plant. 



11-1 



low-pressure (0 to 125 psig), medium-pressure (126 
to 399 psig), or high-pressure (400 to 6,000 psig) 
systems. 

LOW-PRESSURE SYSTEMS 

Low-pressure systems provide compressed air 
up to 125 psig pressure. When you are installing 
a low-pressure system, pressure is usually reduced 
at reducing stations for branches requiring 
lower pressures. Several air pressure requirements 
for low-pressure air consumers are listed below: 



Laboratories 
Shops 

Laundries and dry cleaning 
plants 

Hospitals 

Ordinary service (tools, paint- 
ing, and so forth) 

Soot blowing for boilers 



5 to 50 psig 
60 to 125 psig 

70 to 100 psig 
20 to 50 psig 

60 to 80 psig 
80 to 125 psig 



MEDIUM-PRESSURE SYSTEMS 

Medium-pressure systems provide com- 
pressed air within the range of 126 to 399 psig 
pressure. These systems are not extensive and are 
generally provided with individual compressors 
located near the loads. Medium-pressure systems 
are mainly used for the starting of diesel engines, 
soot blowing of boilers and high-temperature 
water (HTW) generators, and hydraulic lifts. 

HIGH-PRESSURE SYSTEMS 

These systems provide compressed air within 
the range of 400 to 6,000 psig pressure. Hazards 
that increase with higher pressures and capacities 
can be minimized by the use of separate com- 
pressors for each required pressure. Systems 
operating at 3,000 psig may require small amounts 
of air at lower pressures, which is supplied 
through pressure-reducing stations. 

Caution must be used with high-pressure 
systems because when high-pressure air enters 
suddenly into pockets or dead ends, the air 
temperature in the confined space increases 
dramatically. If there is any combustible material 
in the space and the air temperature increases to 
the ignition point of the material, an explosion 
may occur. This is known as auto ignition or diesel 
action. Explosions of this type may set up shock 
waves that travel through the compressed air 
system. This travel may cause explosions at 



remote points. Even a small amount of oil residue 
or a small cotton thread may be sufficient to cause 
ignition. 

Some common pressure requirements for 
high-pressure systems may be as follows: 

Torpedo workshop 600 to 3,000 psig 

Ammunition depot 100, 750, 1,500, 2,000, 

and 4,500 psig 

Wind tunnels Over 3,000 psig 

Testing laboratories Up to 6,000 psig 

AIR QUALITY REQUIREMENTS 

The quality of air supplied from a compressed 
air system will vary with application. The installer 
and maintenance personnel should consider the 
class of air entrapment and specific air quality 
requirements for each application. 

CLASSES OF AIR ENTRAPMENT 

The classes of air entrapment may be sub- 
divided into inert and chemical particulates, 
chemical gases, oil, and water. To prevent con- 
tamination of an air compression system by these 
types of entrapments, you should follow certain 
guidelines for each situation of possible 
contamination. 

Particulates 

Intake structures or openings should be free 
of shelves, pockets, or other surfaces that attract 
and accumulate particulates. Properly designed 
intakes are large enough to produce a low-velocity 
airflow. This limits the size of the particles that 
may be picked up by the intake suction. 

Some particulates may contain active 
chemicals that may form acids or alkalines in the 
inevitable presence of water. These chemical 
particulates can accelerate damage to compressor 
surfaces. 

Particulates are sized in microns or micro- 
meters. This measurement is size, not weight. One 
micron is a unit of length equal to one millionth 
of a meter. Particles larger than 10 microns are 
visual to the naked eye. Filter systems are required 
for all air compressors. Generally, filters should 
be able to remove particles down to 1 to 3 microns 
in size. 

Gases or Fumes 

Gases or fumes are fully airborne and 
generally independent of air velocity. They can 



11-2 



be strong acid, alkaline, or otherwise corrosive 
to the internal surfaces or lubricants of the 
compressor. In addition, gases or fumes may be 
prohibited by the end-use process, such as medical 
gases or breathing air and for environmental or 
odor reasons. Intakes near normal flow paths of 
engine exhausts should be avoided. 

Oil 

Oil fumes, vapor, or mist can be as difficult 
to handle as particulates or gases. Even though 
many types of compressors are oil lubricated, the 
oil ingested may not be compatible and com- 
pressor load may be increased. 

Water 

Waste and water vapor are always present in 
air intakes. Installation of intakes should prevent 
the accumulation of free water. Free water in- 
gested into the compressor causes damage to in- 
ternal components. 

Since water vapor with chemical content cor- 
rodes steel piping, precautions must be taken to 
protect materials from corrosion. Galvanizing, 
applying protective coatings, or using plastic or 
stainless steel piping for air intakes are some 
suggested methods to retard or prevent corrosion. 
Also be sure to install intakes in a manner that 
excludes rainfall, snow, or spray by applying a 
weather hood. 



SPECIFIC AIR QUALITY 
REQUIREMENTS 

The diverse uses of air are accompanied by 
specific air quality requirements. These vary from 
high purity requirements through the need to in- 
troduce materials into a system to be carried along 
with the air. This section will discuss these specific 
air quality requirements. 

Commercial Air 

Commercial compressed air is graded accord- 
ing to its purity. The purest is grade A running 
alphabetically to grade J, the least pure. The Com- 
pressed Gas Association has set guidelines for the 
grading of commercial compressed gas. The ap- 
plication of commercial compressed air is varied 
and generally specified for each individual 
installation by engineers. The full extent of the 
quality requirements for commercial compressed 
air applications can be located in the Compressed 
Air Association publication Commodity Speci- 
fication for Air, G-7.1 (ANSI 286.1-1973). 

Breathing Air 

Breathing air must be of high quality for 
obvious reasons. Federal Specification BB-A-1034 
(fig. 11-2) outlines the specific requirements for 
breathing air. 





Source I 
(Pressurized Container Air) 


Source II 
(Compressed Air) 


Component 


Grade A 


Grade B 


Grade C 


Grade D 


Oxygen (by volume) 
percent 


20 to 22 


19 to 23 


20 to 22 


19 to 23 


Carbon dioxide 
(by volume) 


500 parts per 
million (ppm) 
max 


1 ,000 ppm 
max 


500 ppm 
max 


1,000 ppm 
mac 


Carbon monoxide 
(by volume) 


10 ppm max 


10 ppm max 


10 ppm max 


10 ppm max 


Oil (mist and vapor) 
and paniculate 
matter (weight/ 
volume) 


0.005 miligrams 
(mg) per liter, 
max 


0.005 mg 
per liter, 
max 


0.005 mg 
per liter, 
max 


0.005 mg 
per liter, 
max 


Separated water 


None 


None 


None 


None 


Total water 
(weight/volume) 


0.02 mg per 
liter, max 


0.3 mg per 
liter, max 
(Dew point 
20 degrees F.) 


0.02 mg per 
liter, max 


0.3 mg per 
liter, max 
(Dew point 
20 degrees F.) 



Figure 11-2. Breathing air requirements, Federal Specification BB-A-1034A AMI. 



11-3 



Special attention must be given to eliminating 
carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), 
hydrocarbons, odor, and water from breathing 
air. Carbon monoxide has first priority as its 
effects are cumulative and very small concentra- 
tions can cause problems. Whenever possible, 
carbon monoxide monitoring should be provided 
at the compressor intake. This monitoring equip- 
ment should sound an alarm or shut down the 
system when CO is detected. 

Carbon dioxide is found in combustion flue 
gases such as boiler stacks. Do not place com- 
pressor intakes near or downwind of the stacks. 

Systems should be kept free of oil to limit the 
possible concentration of hydrocarbons or 
petroleum products. For breathing air, com- 
pressors should be oil free rather than using 
auxiliary petroleum removal equipment. The heat 
caused by compression may cause thermal break- 
down of oil or an explosion danger may exist 
as a result of drawing hydrocarbons into the air 
system. 

Water content is kept below saturation to pre- 
vent condensation at points that cannot be 
cleaned. It is recommended that refrigerant or 
dessicant dryers be used to remove moisture from 
a breathing air system. This will limit the vapor 
clouding (fogging) of glasses and visors. 

Medical Air 

Medical air quality must be the same or 
better than breathing air. Whatever quality is 
established must be strictly adhered to. 

Instrument and Control Air 

Air quality requirements for instrument and 
control air should place emphasis on cleanliness 
and low moisture content. The Instrument Society 
of America (ISA) has established the following 
requirements: 

Dew point, exterior: 18F (-7.8C) 
below minimum recorded ambient temper- 
ature 

Dew point, interior: 18F (-7.8C) 
below minimum interior temperature but 
not higher than 35 F (1.7C) 

Particle size: 3 microns maximum 

Oil content: As close to zero as possible 
but not over 1 ppm 



Contaminates: INO corrosives or nazara- 
ous gases 

Water content must be low enough to prevent 
condensate accumulations. Special attention 
should be given to ensure that intake air is filtered 
and oil or water removed. A refrigerant dryer with 
a dew point at least as low as 30 F ( - 1 . 1 C) is 
recommended for these services. 

Aircraft Starting and Cooling Air 

Aircraft starting air requires reasonably clean 
air to prevent introduction of excessive levels of 
oil, water, or particulates into engine systems. 
Normal intake filtering and oil/water separation 
should be adequate. 

Aircraft cooling air is intended for electrical 
load cooling to prevent malfunction of the equip- 
ment. Cooling air should be reasonably clean. 
This air may also be used for breathing. If it is, 
then breathing air quality standards should be 
maintained. 

Air for Pneumatic Tools 

When compressed air is intended for use with 
pneumatic tools, it should be filtered for 
particulates and water should be separated out. 
Oil is usually required to be ingested into the air 
for tool lubrication. Mist injection is preferred for 
tools to ensure dispersion and maximum settle- 
ment. Note that pressures in excess of 400 psig 
may cause compression combustion when oil is 
present. 

High-Pressure Air Systems 

Air quality must be carefully analyzed to 
minimize not only the normal hazards of high 
pressure, but the internal explosive hazards that 
exist with high-pressure systems. Of particular 
danger is the introduction of oil and hydrocarbons 
during compression and their remaining and ac- 
cumulating throughout the system. A high- 
pressure system of 500 psig or higher is subject 
to rapid local heat buildup whenever there is a 
rapid filling of a component or vessel. The heat 
buildup (combined with oil and foreign material) 
that permits the oil to wick or vaporize can readily 
cause an explosion or fire. Any explosion in the 
system may produce several shock waves to travel 
the system, compounding the damage. Because 
of this problem, special attention is required to 
clean the intake air, limit the introduction of 



11-4 



lubrication oil, and remove oil after completion 
of the compression process. 



AIR COMPRESSORS AND 
AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT 

There are basically two types of compressors: 
positive displacement and dynamic. This section 
will discuss the reciprocating air compressors, 
the rotary air compressors, the helical screw 
compressors classed as positive displacement 
compressors, and the dynamic centrifugal com- 
pressors. 

General auxiliary equipment will also be 
discussed. Auxiliary equipment consists of any 
device(s) that may be added to the system to 
improve its efficiency or provide a specific func- 
tion. It provides a safe condition under which the 
compressor system will be operating. 



RECIPROCATING AIR 
COMPRESSORS 

The most commonly used stationary air com- 
pressors are the reciprocating, positive displace- 
ment design. They may be single acting or 
double acting, single stage or multistage, and 
horizontal, angle, or vertical in design. 

In a single-stage unit there is but one com- 
pressing element; it compresses air from the 
initial intake pressure to the final discharge 
pressure in one step. A multistage machine has 
more than one compressing element. The first 
stage compresses air to an intermediate pressure, 
then one or more additional stages compress it 
to the final discharge pressure. 

In the reciprocating compressor the compres- 
sion cycle is composed of three phases: intake, 
compression, and discharge. 

During the intake stroke the downward move- 
ment of the piston creates a partial vacuum 
inside the cylinder. The spring-operated intake 
valve is forced open by the differential pressure 
between free air on one side and the partial 
vacuum inside the cylinder. As the valve opens, 
air fills the cylinder. The piston now moves into 
the compression stroke, forcing the intake valve 
closed and raising the pressure of the air trapped 
in the cylinder. When the pressure of this air 
is great enough to overcome the force of the 



spring-operated discharge valve, the valve opens 
and the compressed air is discharged from the 
cylinder. 

Compressors are classified as low pressure, 
medium pressure, or high pressure. Low-pressure 
compressors provide a discharge pressure of 150 
psi or less. Medium-pressure compressors provide 
a discharge pressure of 151 psi to 1,000 psi. Com- 
pressors that provide a discharge pressure above 
1,000 psi are classified as high pressure. Note that 
compressors are classified at different pressures 
than those for classifying total compressed air 
systems discussed earlier. 

Most low-pressure air compressors are of the 
two-stage type with either a vertical or a vertical 
W arrangement of cylinders. Two-stage, V-type, 
low-pressure compressors usually have one 
cylinder that provides the first (low-pressure) stage 
of compression and one cylinder that provides the 
second (high-pressure) stage, as shown in figure 
11-3. W-type compressors have two cylinders for 
the first stage of compression and one cylinder 
for the second stage. This arrangement is il- 
lustrated in figure 11-4. 

Compressors may be classified according to 
a number of other design features or operating 
characteristics. 

Medium-pressure air compressors are of the 
two-stage, vertical, duplex, single-acting type. 
Many medium-pressure compressors have dif- 
ferential pistons, as shown in figure 11-5. This 
type of piston provides more than one stage of 
compression on each piston. 



ROTARY AIR COMPRESSORS 

Rotary sliding vane compressors are machines 
in which longitudinal vanes slide radially in a 
slotted rotor that is mounted eccentrically in a 
cylinder. The rotor is fitted with blades or vanes 
that are free to slide in and out of longitudinal 
slots and maintain contact with the cylinder walls 
by centrifugal force. In operation, as the blades 
are forced outward by centrifugal force, compart- 
ments are formed in which air is compressed (fig. 
11-6). Each compartment varies from a maximum 
volume on the suction side of the revolution to 
a minimum volume on the compression half of 
the revolution. This gives a positive displacement- 
type suction and pressure effect. 

Another type of rotary compressor is the twin- 
lobe unit sometimes referred to as a blower 



11-5 



JNTERCOOLER 
^RELIEF VALVE 



INTERCOOLER 



UNLOADER 



'NLOADER **:: 



\^ ' 



^ .vUtt*&&8W 






FEATHER 

VALVE 



EATHER 



HIGH-PRESSURE 
SUCTION MANIFOLD 

2ND STAGE 
PISTON 






llliiiii 






47.152 



Figure 11-3. A typical two-stage reciprocating low-pressure air compressor. 



(fig. 11-7). This unit consists of two impellers 
mounted on parallel shafts that rotate in opposite 
directions within a housing. As the impellers 
rotate, they trap a quantity of air between 
themselves and the blower housing and move the 
air around the casing to the discharge port. This 



action takes place twice each revolution of an 
impeller and four times per revolution of both 
impellers. The impellers are positioned in relation 
to each other by timing gears, located at 
the end of each shaft and external to the blower 
housing. 



11-6 




47.153 

Figure 11-4. W-type, two-stage, three-cylinder arrange- 
ment. 




T\ 



2-STAGE. VERTICAL, WITH 
2 DIFFERENTIAL PISTONS 




87.251 



47.153 

Figure 11-5. Differentia] piston with a two-stage, vertical 
arrangement. 



Figure 11-7. Twin-lobe rotary compressor. 



You should always use maintenance and 
service literature provided by manufacturers 
when you are working with rotary compressors. 
Maintenance information is given in Operation 
and Maintenance of Compressed Air Plants, 
NAVFAC MO-206. 




INTAKE 



COMPRESSION 



DISCHARGE 






87.250 



Figure 11-6. Compression cycle of rotary compressor. 

11-7 



HELICAL SCREW COMPRESSORS 

Helical screw compressors contain two mating 
rotating screws, one locked and one grooved, 
which provide the driving force. The unit's screws 
take in air, decreasing its volume as it progresses 
in a forward-moving cavity toward the discharge 
end of the compressor. Figure 1 1-8 shows a typical 
single-stage compressor and a double-stage helical 
screw compressor. These compressors are best 
used in booster or near constant-load conditions 
at low-pressure, oil-free application. Helical screw 
compressors may also be found in aircraft start 
facilities. 

DYNAMIC CENTRIFUGAL 
COMPRESSORS 

Dynamic compressors are high-speed rotating 
machines in which air is compressed by the 



INLETEND SECONDARY DISCHARGE END 
CLEARANCE v RQTOR CLEARANCE 




DISCHARGE 
END BEARING 

'^FARING DISCHARGE END DISCHARGE END 
BEARINO CYLINDER TO PLATE BEARING SHIM 
GASKET 



TYPICAL SINGLE-STAGE DESIGN 




TYPICAL TWO- STAGE DESIGN 

87.409 
Figure 11-8. Rotary helical screw compressors. 



action of rotating impellers or blades that impart 
velocity and pressure to the air. Figure 11-9 shows 
the internal parts of a multistage centrifugal 
compressor. This type will deliver air at an 
essentially constant pressure over a wide range of 
capacities. The direction of airflow is radial with 
respect to the axis of rotation. 

Centrifugal compressors have a lower limit of 
stable operation called the surge point. Operation 
below this point results in pumping or surging of 
the airflow. Prime movers are normally electric 
motors or steam turbines. 

Centrifugal compressors are intended for near 
continuous industrial air service when the load is 
reasonably constant. These compressors also work 
well when oil-free air is required and can be used 
for breathing air. 

Table 11-1 shows typical application recom- 
mendations for both positive displacement and 
dynamic class compressors. 

AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT 

A system that functions to provide a con- 
tinuous supply of usable compressed air requires 
certain auxiliary devices in addition to the air com- 
pressor. Most compressed air systems require a 
minimum of auxiliary equipment that should 
include air intakes, intake filters, silencers, inter- 
coolers, aftercoolers, air discharge systems, 
separators, dryers, receivers, and so forth. These 
auxiliary equipments will be discussed in this 
section in addition to less common auxiliary 
equipment. 

Air Intakes 

Air intakes should be located high enough to 
eliminate intake of particles of dust, smoke, dirt, 
water, and snow. Carbon monoxide sources 
should not be able to discharge into compressor 
intakes. Special attention should be given to the 
elimination of flammable fumes into the com- 
pressed air system. 

Whenever air intakes must be placed through 
a roof that is surrounded by parapets, they should 
be 8 to 10 feet above the roof. 

Noise may be generated by air intakes and 
must be considered during installation. Recipro- 
cating compressors are most likely to develop 
resonance through intake piping. If this possibility 
exists, the use of intake dampeners or surge 
chambers will help. High velocities present noise 
level problems. Intake pipe velocities should be 
limited to 1,000 fpm in open areas or 350 fpm 
across filters. Acoustical silencers combined with 
filters and/or pulse dampeners are available and 



11-8 




87.252 



Figure 11-9. Internal view of a multistage centrifugal compressor. 



Table 11-1. Summary Application Recommendations, Types of Compressors 



Type 


Air* 
Delivery 
Quality 


Pressure Range 
scfm Range 
Horsepower Range 


Remarks 


Reciprocating, single- 
stage, air cooled 


L 


100-125 psig, to 
50 scfm, to 10 hp 


Intermittent light duty 


Reciprocating, two- 
stage, air cooled 


L 


100-125 psig, to 
200 scfm, to 50 hp 


Low volume requirements 


Reciprocating, two- 
stage, air cooled 


N 


100-125 psig, to 
50 scfm, to 15 hp 


Low volume requirements 


Reciprocating, two- 
stage, water cooled 


L 


100-150 psig, 
400-1,000 scfm, 
75-200 hp 


Wide application range 


Reciprocating, two- 
stage, water cooled 


N 


100-125 psig, 
400-1,000 scfm, 
75-200 hp 


Wide application where 
required 


Reciprocating, two- 
stage, water cooled, 
duplex and/or double 
acting 


L 


100-150 psig, 
1,000-5,000 scfm, 
200-1, 200 hp 


High volume require- 
ments 


(1 psig = 6.90 kPa gauge, 
*L Lubricated 
N Nonlubricated 


1 scfm = 


0.0268 mmVmin, 1 hp = 


0.746 kW) 



11-9 



Table 11-1. Summary Application Recommendations, Types of Compressors Continued 



Type 


Air* 
Delivery 
Quality 


Pressure Range 
scfm Range 
Horsepower Range 


Remarks 


Reciprocating, multi- 
stage, water cooled 


L, N 


150-6,000 psig, 
10-100 scfm, 
3-1,000 hp 


Medium and high pressure 


Rotary, sliding vane, 
single-stage 


L, N 


5-50 psig, 
50-3,000 scfm, 
0.5-300 hp 


Match to load only pres- 
sure booster 


Rotary, sliding vane, 
two-stage 


L, N 


60-100 psig, 
100-3,000 scfm, 
15-500 hp 


Match to load only pres- 
sure booster 


Rotary, sliding vane, 
single- or two-stage 
oil injected 


L 


80-125 psig, 
120-600 scfm, 
15-200 hp 


Wide application range 


Helical screw, single- 
stage, lubricated 


L 


To 35 psig, 
30-12,000 scfm, 
to 1,200 hp 


Match to load only single 
rating point 


Helical screw, two 
stage lubricated 


L 


60-100 psig, 
30-12,000 scfm, 
to 2,000 hp 


Match load only. Single 
rating point. Aircraft air 
start. Aircraft cooling 


Helical screw, single- 
stage, oil injected 


L 


To 125 psig, 
40-1,500 scfm, 
10-400 hp 


Wide application range 


Dynamic, centrifugal, 
single-stage 


N 


To 35 psig, 
1,500-15,000 scfm, 
100-1,000 hp 


Match load 


Dynamic, centrifugal, 
two-stage 


N 


35-70 psig, 
1,500-15,000 scfm 
100-2,000 hp 


Match load, breathing 
air 


Dynamic, centrifugal, 
three-stage 


N 


70-125 psig, 
1,500-15,000 scfm, 
200-3,500 hp 


High volume require- 
ments, breathing air 


Dynamic, centrifugal, 
four or more stages 


N 


125 psig or more, 
1,500-15,000 scfm, 
to 3,000 hp 


Medium pressure high 
volume 


Dynamic, axial or 
radial barrel, multi- 
stage 


N 


200 psig or more, 
1,500 scfm or more, 
high horsepower 


Medium and high pres- 
sure, high volume 


(1 psig = 6.90 kPa gauge, 
*L Lubricated 


1 scfm = 


0.0268 mmVmin, 1 hp = 


0.746 kW) 


N Nonlubricated 









11-10 



should be used whenever potential noise level dif- 
ficulties are anticipated. 

Intake resistance to airflow should be no more 
than necessary to maintain air quality. The 
resistance created by the air intake system will 
reduce compressor performance and efficiency. 
Refer to the compressor manufacturer's manual 
for maximum resistance requirements. 

Intake Filters 

Air filters are provided on compressor intakes 
to prevent atmospheric dust from entering the 
cylinders and causing scoring and excessive wear. 
The two most common types of elements in use 
are the VISCOUS IMPINGEMENT and the OIL 
BATH. Both types are illustrated in figure 11-10. 




VISCOUS 1NGEMENT TYPE 




In the oil bath type, air must pass through an 
oil seal that removes dirt particles, and then pass 
on through a wire mesh element, which is 
saturated by oil carry-over. Any remaining par- 
ticles of dirt are removed by the wire mesh ele- 
ment. Captured dust particles settle to a sump at 
the bottom of the filter housing. Oil bath filters 
are recommended where dust concentrations are 
present in the atmosphere. 

The viscous impingement filter consists of a 
wire mesh filter element, which is coated with oil. 
Air passing through the filter element must change 
directions many times, causing any dust to adhere 
to the oil film. 

Silencers 

Silencers are similar to mufflers and function 
simply to eliminate objectionable compressor 
suction noise. Figure 11-11 illustrates a standard 



SHELL 



DISHED 
BAFFLE 



i L BATH TYPE 




INLET 
CONNECTION 



NONREACTIVE 

PORTED 
SNUBBING 



DRAIN 



OUTLET 
CONNECTION 



87.255 



Figure 11-10. Compressor intake filters. 



87.256 



Figure 11-11. Intake silencer. 



11-11 



intake silencer. Some compressors are equipped 
with combination filter-silencer units that have the 
filter elements contained within the silencer 
housing. 



Intercoolers 

When air is compressed to 100 psi without heat 
loss, the final temperature is about 485 F. The 
increase in temperature raises the pressure of the 
air under compression, thus necessitating an in- 
crease in work to compress the air. After the air 
is discharged into the receiver tank and lines, the 
temperature falls rapidly to near that of the 
surrounding atmosphere, thereby losing part of 
the energy generated during compression. The 
ideal compressor would compress the air at a 
constant temperature, but this is not possible. In 
multistage compressors, the work of compressing 
is divided between two or more stages, depending 
on the final discharge pressure required. An 
INTERCOOLER is used between the stages to 
reduce the temperature of compression from each 
stage. Theoretically, the intercooler should be of 
sufficient capacity to reduce the temperature 



between stages to that of the low-pressure cylinder 
intake. Actually, intercooling has three purposes: 
to increase compressor efficiency, to prevent ex- 
cessive temperatures within the compressor 
cylinders, and to condense out moisture from the 
air. 

Most intercoolers are either the shell and 
tube, air-to-water heat exchangers or the 
air-cooled radiator-type heat exchangers. Figure 
11-12 illustrates a typical water-cooled inter- 
cooler. The air-cooled type is shown in figure 
11-3. 



Aftercoolers 

Moisture carried in air transmission lines is 
undesirable because it causes damage to air- 
operated tools and devices. AFTERCOOLERS 
are installed in compressor discharge lines to lower 
the air discharge temperature, thus condensing the 
moisture and allowing it to be removed. Also, the 
cooling effect allows the use of smaller discharge 
piping. A water-cooled aftercooler is illustrated 
in figure 11-13. 



PRESSURE RELIEF 
VALVE 



COOLING WATER 
INLET" 




COMPRESSED AIR 
OUTLET 



COMPRESSED AIR 
INLET" 



COOLING WATER 
OUTLET' 



Figure 11-12. Typical water-cooled intercooler. 



87.257 



11-12 



WATER OUT 




AIR 



87.258 



Figure 11-13. Typical water-cooled aftercooler. 



Air Discharge Systems 

Some discharge systems require special 
consideration for the placement of auxiliary 
equipment. All positive displacement compressors 
require a relief valve on their discharge side to pro- 
tect the equipment and piping upstream of the 
first shutoff valve. Relief valves should be sized 
for at least 125 percent of the maximum unit flow 
capacity and should carry the American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) stamp, listing 
the capacity and pressure setting of the valve. 



Separators 

Water and oil separators are required to 
separate and free excess water from the discharge 
air or gas. This is necessary to prevent corrosion, 
deposit buildup, and water or oil buildup in the 
piping or service. For example, water will cause 
rust in piping, wash away lubricants, and plug 
nozzles. Oil will contaminate many industrial 
processes and may present an explosion hazard. 
The need for water or oil separators will be deter- 
mined by the end use of the compressed air. 

A centrifugal separator is illustrated in figure 
11-14. Air is directed into this unit in a manner 
that creates a swirling motion. Centrifugal force 
throws the moisture particles against the wall 
where they drain to the bottom. 




87.259 
Figure 11-14. Centrifugal-type moisture separator. 



11-13 



AIR IN 




AIR OUT 



WATER OUT 



SEPARATOR 



87.260 



Figure 11-15. Baffle-type moisture separator. 



AIR OUTLET 



31 



OUTLET AIR 
PRESSURE 96.5 LBS. 
OUT AIR 
TEMPERATURE52F 

OUTLET AIR 

DEW POINT APPROX.40F 



AIR INLET 

100 LBS 

IOOF 

SATURATED 



Q /Sr^^A-J_ 

Vs. __( 1 y x 

I - - ^ W *~A ""**. 

V c=--r--r-^r7j^^ 



JTXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXJfX 





HOT SATURATED 

CONTAMINATED 

AIR 



WARM, DRY, 
MIRCROCLEAN AIR 



=_-HH; LIQUID R- 12 



REFRIGERANT GAS 



MOISTURE, OIL, 
AND SLUDGETHAT 
HAS BEEN 
REMOVED FROM 
AIR SUPPLY 



1. CONDENSER-EVAPORATOR. 

2. CARTRIDGE TYPE FILTER. 

3. CONDENSATE COLLECTION CHAMBER 

4. REFRIGERATION UNIT. 

5. COMPRESSOR RECYCLE CONTROL. 



Figure 11-16. Flow process of refrigeration-type air dryer. 



87.264 



11-14 



A baffle-type separator is illustrated in figure 
11-15. In this unit the air is subjected to a series 
of sudden changes in direction that result in the 
heavier moisture particles striking the baffles and 
walls, then draining to the bottom. 



Dryers 

Some compressed air supplies require dryers 
that ensure removal of all moisture that might 
otherwise condense in air lines, air-powered tools, 
or pneumatic instruments. Small amounts of 
moisture can cause damage to equipment from 
corrosion, freezing, and water hammer and can 
result in malfunctions of instruments and con- 
trols. The cost of dryers is often justified by the 
reduction in maintenance costs, production time 
lost in blowing down piping, and compressed air 
lost during blowdown. 

There are three basic designs of dryers: two 
absorption types and a condensation type. One 
type of absorption unit consists of two towers, 
each containing an absorbent material. Reactiva- 
tion is accomplished by means of electric or steam 
heaters embedded in the absorbent or by passing 
dried-process air through it. 

Another type of absorption unit consists of 
a single tank or tower containing a desiccant (dry- 
ing agent) that dissolves as it absorbs moisture 
from the air and drains from the unit with the con- 
densate. The drying agent must be replenished 
periodically. 

The third type removes moisture from the air 
by condensation through the use of a mechanical 
refrigeration unit, or where available, cold water. 
Inlet air passes over cold coils where moisture is 
condensed out of the air and is drained from the 
unit by a trap. This process is illustrated in figure 
11-16. 



Receivers 

Air receiver tanks in compressed air plants act 
as surge tanks to smooth the flow of air from the 
action of the compressor to discharge; they 
collect excessive moisture that may condense from 
the cooled air and provide a volume of air 
necessary to operate the pressure control system. 
A typical air receiver is shown in figure 11-17. 
Related components include a relief valve, 
pressure gauge, drain valve, service valve, and 
inspection opening. 




87.262 



Figure 11-17. Air receiver. 



Lubrication 

Compressors must receive adequate lubrica- 
tion using clean oil of characteristics recom- 
mended by the compressor manufacturer. The 
manufacturer will usually specify oil requirements 



11-15 



by characteristics, such as viscosity at one or more 
temperatures, pour point, flash point, and in some 
cases, by specific brands. 

Typical compressor cylinder oils will have the 
following characteristics: 



Flash point, F 
Viscosity at 210 F 
Pour point, F 

Neutralization 
number 

Conradson carbon 
residue, % 



350 minimum 

45 min - 90 max 
4- 35 maximum 

0.10 maximum 
2.0 maximum 



Where cylinder lubrication is separate from 
frame and bearing lubricants, a modified set of 
characteristics may be specified. Synthetic oils 
must conform to the manufacturer's requirements 
and must be used with care as many synthetic oils 
may cause swelling and softening of neoprenes 



and certain rubbers or may not be compatible or 
separable from water. 

Some special considerations for lubricants 
include the provision of a lubrication oil heater 
to ensure adequate viscosity during cold weather 
start-up. High compressor discharge temperatures 
require lubrication flows and characteristics that 
still lubricate when subjected to 300F or higher 
discharge air temperature conditions. Finally, oil 
injection or oil-flooded compressors need ade- 
quate oil flow and characteristics to maintain 
lubrication of temperatures within the cylinders 
or screws. 

A typical lubrication arrangement is shown in 
figure 11-18. 

Discharge Pulsation 

Reciprocating compressor discharge lines 
are subject to pulsations caused by the 
compressor-forcing frequency. This sets up a 
resonant frequency in the discharge piping, and 
the resulting vibration amplification will cause 
noise, support damage, and piping damage. There 



n 



RUNNING GEAR POINTS 



HIGH/LOW PRESSURE 

SWITCH (ES) FOR 
MONITORING SYSTEM 





PRESSURE 
GAUGE 



X-D 



SUMP 



PRESSURE 
CONTROL 
VALVE 
BYPASS 



MEDIA 
FILTER 



OIL 
COOLER 




CHECK 
VALVE 



STRAINER 




SUMP 
HEATER 



POSITIVE 
DISPLACEMENT 



87.410 



Figure 11-18. Typical pressure lubrication system. 

11-16 



is no single solution to this problem, but some 
specific guidelines will be discussed below. 

Pulsation dampeners serve as pulsation and 
noise mufflers by providing acoustical chambers 
with the dampener. Manufacturers generally pro- 
vide dampeners to a specified discharge pulsation 
peak of 2 percent of line pressure. Figure 11-19 
shows several typical pulsation dampeners. These 
units should be used whenever reciprocating and 
centrifugal compressors serve the same com- 
pressed air main, because the pulsations of the 
reciprocating compressor can transmit to and 
disturb the operation of the centrifugal com- 
pressor. Pulsation dampeners may not completely 
solve downstream resonance, but they will reduce 
the vibration amplitudes. 

Several other ways to decrease noise and 
amplification caused by discharge pulsation are 
available. Surge chambers can be used to change 
the equivalent length of the piping and increase 
the pulse-absorbing volume of the pipe. A surge 
chamber can be as simple as an increased diameter 
of discharge piping near the compressor discharge. 
An orifice plate or plates may be installed in 
conjunction with surge chambers to change the 
acoustical resonant frequency of the piping 
system. Piping support is also important at the 
compressor. They must not only be supported 
from top or bottom but also have lateral support. 
When piping is large, provide spring-loaded two- 
way lateral supports to absorb vibration. 



Controls 

Compressor control systems generally include 
one or more controlling devices, such as safety 
controls, speed controls, and capacity controls. 
Such devices function in the system to regulate 
the output of the compressor as it meets the 
demand for compressed air. 

On some small compressors the simple 
Bourdon tube-type pressure switch serves as a con- 
troller by actuating the prime mover on and off 
over a predetermined pressure range. More com- 
plex compressors require control systems that load 
and unload the compressor as air demands 
change. The CONSTANT-SPEED type of con- 
troller used with many compressors decreases or 
increases compressor capacity in one or more steps 
by the use of unloading devices, while allowing 
the prime mover speed to remain constant. 
Another type, referred to as the DUAL- 
CONTROL, is a combination of the constant- 
speed and an automatic start-stop control. It 
permits constant speeds when demands are con- 
tinuous and an automatic stop or start when 
demands are light. There is still another system 
that enables the prime mover to idle and 
compressor suction valves to remain open when 
air pressure reaches a set maximum. As the 
pressure drops below a set minimum, the prime 
mover speed is increased, suction valves are 
closed, and air is compressed. 





Figure 11-19. Pulsation dampeners. 

11-17 



87.411 



CONTROL AIR PRESSURE 




87.265 



Figure 11-20. Inlet valve unioader. 



Generally, control systems include unloading 
devices that function to remove all but the fric- 
tion loads on compressors. Thus starting is unaf- 
fected by compression loads. Various types of 
unloading devices are discussed below. 

The inlet-valve-type unioader holds the inlet 
valve open mechanically during both the suction 
and compression strokes, thereby preventing com- 
pression. Figure 1 1-20 illustrates a common inlet 
valve unioader. The unioader is positioned above 
the inlet valve. When air pressure rises to the 
preset unloading pressure, a pressure switch 
operates a solenoid unioader valve, which opens 
and allows receiver pressure to the inlet valve 
unioader. The pressure from the receiver, acting 
on the diaphragm of the inlet valve unioader, 
forces the yoke fingers against the inlet valve, 
holding it open. The intake air is pushed back out 
the inlet valve on the compression stroke so no 
compression takes place. 

Figure 11-21 illustrates the thin plate, low-lift 
type of compressor valve. Most compressors use 
this type of valve. 

The use of an unioader valve on each cylinder 
and a pressure switch with a solenoid unioader 
valve provides a step or sequenced capacity con- 
trol. Figure 11-22 illustrates a flow diagram of a 



STOP 
PLATE 




VALVE PLATE 



GUIDE PLATE 



87.411 



Figure 11-21. Thin plate, low-lift, compressor valve assembly. 



11-18 




11-19 



five-step capacity control system applied to a two- 
stage, four-cylinder, double-acting, reciprocating 
compressor. Assuming that the compressor in the 
figure is required to maintain a pressure of 92 to 
100 psi, the pressure switches should be set to load 
and unload as follows: switch 1, load at 93 psi 
and unload at 97 psi; switch 2, load at 94 psi and 
unload at 98 psi; switch 3, load at 95 psi and 
unload at 99 psi; and switch 4, load at 96 psi and 
unload at 100 psi. As the receiver pressure reaches 
the high limit of each pressure switch, 25 percent 
of the compressor capacity will unload. As 
receiver pressure falls to the low setting of each 
switch, 25 percent of the compressor capacity will 
load. Pressure switch 1 will therefore unload 25 
percent of the compressor capacity at 97 psi and 
will load 25 percent at 93 psi, and so forth. As 
receiver pressure fluctuates between 93 and 100 
psi, the compressor capacity varies in five steps; 
full, 75 percent, 50 percent, 25 percent, and zero 
capacity. 

The compressor illustrated in figure 11-22 
operates on the following principle: When it is 
started, air pressure switches are closed and the 
solenoids in the unloader valves become energized 
so that receiver pressure cannot enter the 
unloading lines, and compression is permitted. As 
the receiver pressure builds up and reaches 97 psi, 
pressure switch 1 breaks contact, de-energizing 
unloader 1, and allowing 97 psi receiver air to 
enter control line 1, actuating the inlet valve 
unloader. Twenty-five percent of the compressor 
has become unloaded and compression has 
reduced from full to 75-percent capacity. Control 
lines 2, 3, and 4 will operate in the same way as 
receiver pressure increases. At 100 psi, all cylinders 
will be unloaded. Air compression ceases, but the 
compressor continues to run under no load. As 
air is drawn off from the receiver, the pressure 
begins to drop. When the pressure falls to 96 psi, 
pressure switch 4 makes contact and energizes 
unloading valve 4, which cuts off receiver pressure 
from the inlet unloader and vents the unloader 
pressure to the atmosphere. The inlet valve 
unloader releases the inlet valve and normal com- 
pression takes place, loading the compressor to 
25-percent capacity. If the demand for air 
increases and receiver pressure continues to 
decrease, control lines 3, 2, and 1 will load in 
sequence. 

Another method of unloading a compressor 
is by the use of clearance pockets built into the 
cylinders. Normal clearance is the volume at the 
end of the piston and under the valves when the 
piston is at the end of the COMPRESSION 



stroke. Figure 11-23 shows an air cylinder with 
clearance pockets and clearance valves used with 
a five-step clearance control. Each end of the 
cylinder is fitted with two clearance pockets that 
are connected with or cut off from the cylinder 
by air-operated clearance valves. A regulated 
device, not shown, which is operated by receiver 
pressure, uses pilot valves to open and close the 
clearance pocket valve in the proper sequence. 
Each clearance pocket can hold one-quarter of the 
air compressed by the cylinder in one stroke. 
When both pockets at the end of the cylinder are 
open, no air is taken into that end of the cylinder. 
Figure 1 1-24 illustrates the operation of clearance 
pockets under five-step clearance control. 

Prime Movers 

Prime movers for compressors can be elec- 
trical, gasoline, or diesel driven. This section will 
address electrical prime movers only. Gasoline and 
diesel-driven prime movers are normally the 
responsibility of the Construction Mechanic. 

Several types of electric motors can be used 
to drive compressors: induction, synchronous- 
wound motor, and direct current (dc) motors. 



CLEARANCE 
POCKETS 



CLEARANCE 
VALVE 




87.268 

Figure 11-23. Air cylinder showing clearance pockets and 
clearance valves. 



11-20 



FULL LOAD 




D 



U 



3/4 LOAD 



1/2 LOAD 




D 




1/4 LOAD 



NO LOAD 




a 



Figure 11-24. Five-step clearance control. 



87.269 



Although electric motor drive is available for 
compressors of almost any capacity, certain types 
of machines are best driven by an induction 
motor; others may be driven by a synchronous 
motor. Generally, cost will rule out synchronous 
motors except in unusual cases. Direct current 
motors are seldom used. 

Motor-driven compressors may be further 
identified by the type of connection that is used 
between the motor and compressor. Any one of 
the following types of drives may be used: belt, 
direct-connected, or speed reduction gears. 

Induction motors can be used to power single- 
acting reciprocating compressors ranging from 
fractional horsepower up to approximately 300 
horsepower at a speed of 1,800 rpm. Speeds of 
1,200 and 900 rpm and lower are sometimes 



used in higher horsepower applications. When 
sizing a motor, you must allow for belt or drive 
losses of power. 

Caution must be exercised when large belted 
motors are used; manufacturer's recommenda- 
tions should be applied. Most motors that are 
belted to compressors are rated as normal 
starting torque, low-starting current motors. Belt 
selection should be based on a continuous opera- 
tion rating of at least 125 percent of motor 
size with 150 percent preferred. Other com- 
pressors that start under load may require 
motors rated as high-start torque, low-starting 
current. Consideration should be given to 
compressor inertia and load to avoid lengthy 
acceleration time. Whenever possible, it is best 



11-21 



SERVICE 



SERVICE 



SERVICE 



-X3- 



-X- 



i-txJ- 



SERVICE 



COMPRESSOR 
STATION 



RADIAL SYSTEM 
(A) 



SERVICE 



-Xi 



SERVICE 



COMPRESSOR 

STATION 



LOOP SYSTEM 
(B) 



SERVICE 



i h 



SERVICE 



SERVICE 



J 




I 








1 

1 








1 


COMPRESSOR 
STATION 



(X3- 



PARALLEL SYSTEM 
(C) 

Figure 11-25. Types of air distribution systems. 



87.412 



11-22 



to arrange the compressor to be unloaded during 
start-up. 

A reciprocating compressor may be driven by 
an induction motor with a speed reduction gear 
placed between the motor and compressor. This 
permits the use of a higher speed with a less 
costly motor. Gear-driven compressors should 
have flywheel or inertia effect carefully checked. 
Couplings should have enough elasticity and 
dampening to allow for torque and current pulsa- 
tions. Without this consideration, changes in 
torque caused by load variations or loading and 
unloading of a compressor could result in drive 
and motor damage. 



DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 

The development of a distribution system is 
dependent upon a combination of factors, such 
as location and size of each service, time rate 
demand of larger services, and concurrence or 
demand factor of larger services. 



TYPES OF AIR DISTRIBUTION 
PIPING SYSTEMS 

The more common types of distribution 
systems or patterns (fig. 11-25) and their prime 
advantages are as follows: 

Radial, one-way system used for isolated 
or individual service or where special requirements 
dictate a single path. 

Loop system used for a closed route such 
as throughout a building. The two-directional 
flow capacity represents an economical way to 
provide constant pressure to all services and 
permits selective isolation when necessary. 

Parallel system used to provide dual 
service source to ensure at least one source will 
be available at all times. 



SIZING DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 

Compressed air distribution systems are 
sized mainly by calculating the friction loss 
to be expected from piping, fittings, and 



valves as well as various accessories you may 
install. 

Pipe diameters are determined from commer- 
cially available products, such as copper, stainless 
steel tubing, or steel piping. As contained pressure 
increases, the pipe wall thickness must increase 
and interior diameters decrease. This affects 
friction pressure loss; it should not exceed 
15-percent pressure loss. 

When you are determining total friction loss 
for a distribution system, the total length of the 
system piping plus the equivalent length of each 
fitting, valve, or device is summed to produce an 
equivalent hydraulic length. The equivalent 
lengths of fittings, valves, and other devices can 
be determined from table 11-2. Friction loss in 
air hoses may be taken from table 11-3. 



LAYOUT DETAILS 

When installing compressed air systems, you 
must follow seven basic guidelines just as you 
must consider basic guidelines when installing any 
other type of piping or drainage system. 

Compressed air lines should be installed as 
level as practical with a slight pitch in the direc- 
tion of airflow. This pitch is generally placed at 
3 inches per 100 feet of piping. In cases when 
pipes must be pitched upward causing con- 
densate to flow against the flow of air, the 
pitch upward must be 6 inches or greater per 100 
feet, and the piping size should be increased one 
pipe diameter. 

The layout of the piping systems should always 
allow for the removal of dirt, water, oil, or other 
foreign material, which can accumulate over long 
periods of time. Because of this, pockets should 
be avoided and, where necessary, low points 
should be provided with driplegs. In addition to 
providing low points to drain foreign material 
from the system, the prevention of carry-over of 
this material into branch lines is necessary. Carry- 
over into branch lines can be prevented by mak- 
ing connections from the top of the distribution 
mains. 

Piping must be placed with sufficient flexi- 
bility to prevent excessive strain or distortion caus- 
ed by thermal expansion or sudden changes in 
pressure. By properly placing pipe supports, 



11-23 



Table ^.-Representative Equivalent Length in Pipe Diameters (L/D) of Various Valves and Fittings 



Description of Product 


Equivalent Length 
in Pipe Diameters 
(L/D) 


Globe 
Valves 


Stem Perpendic- 
ular to Run 


With no obstruction in flat, bevel, or plug-type seat Fully open 
With wing or pin guided disk Fully open 


340 
450 


Y-Pattern 


(No obstruction in flat, bevel, or plug type seat) 
With stem 60 degrees from run of pipe line Fully open 
With stem 45 degrees from run of pipe line Fully open 


175 
145 


Angle Valves 


With no obstruction in flat, bevel, or plug type seat Fully open 
With wing or pin guided disk Fully open 


145 
200 


Gate 
Valves 


Wedge, Disk, 
Double Disk, 
or Plug Disk 


Fully open 
Three-quarters open 
One-half open 
One-quarter open 


13 
35 
160 
900 


Pulp Stock 


Fully open 
Three-quarters open 
One-half open 
One-quarter open 


17 
50 
260 
1,200 


Conduit Pipe Line Gate, Ball, and Plug Valves Fully open 


3** 


Check 
Valves 


Conventional Swing 0.5t . . -Fully open 
Clearway Swing 0.5t . . -Fully open 
Globe Lift or Stop; Stem Perpendicular to Run or Y-Pattern 2.0| - - -Fully open 
Angle Lift or Stop 2.0T - . -Fully open 
In-Line Ball 2.5 vertical and 0.25 horizontal! - - -Fully open 


135 
50 
Same as Globe 
Same as Angle 
150 


Foot Valves with Strainer 


With poppet lift-type disk 0.3 f - . -Fully open 
With leather-hinged disk 0.4f - - -Fully open 


420 

75 


Butterfly Valves (8-inch and larger) Fully open 


40 


Cocks 


Straight-Through 


Rectangular plug port area equal to 
100% of pipe area Fully open 


18 


Three-Way 


Rectangular plug port are equal to Flow straight through 
80% of pipe area (fully open) Flow through branch 


44 
140 


Fittings 


90-Degree Standard Elbow 
45-Degree Standard Elbow 
90-Degree Long Radius Elbow 


30 
16 
20 


^0-Degree Street Elbow 
45-Degree Street Elbow 
Square Corner Elbow 


50 
26 

57 


Standard Tee 


With flow through run 
With flow through branch 


20 
60 


Close Pattern Return Bend 


50 


**Exact equivalent length is tMinimum calculated pressure 
equal to the length between drop (psi) across valve to provide 
flange faces or welding ends. sufficient flow to lift disk fully. 



87.413 



11-24 



Table 11-3. Loss of Air Pressure in Hose Caused by Friction 



... 
Size of 
hose, 
coupled at 
each end 
(in.) 


Pulsating flow 


Gage 


Free air (cfm) 


sure 


20 


30 


40 


50 


60 


70 


80 


90 


100 


110 


120 


130 


140 


150 


at line 
(lb) 


Loss of pressure 


(psi) 


in 50 ft. lengths of hose 


1/2 


50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 


1.8 
1.3 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 


5.0 
4.0 
3.4 
2.8 
2.4 
2.3 
2.0 


10. 1 
8.4 
7.0 
6.0 
5.4 
4.8 
4.3 


18.1 
14.8 
12.4 
10.8 
9.5 
8.4 
7.6 


23.4 
20.0 
17.4 
14.8 
13.3 
12.0 


28.4 
25.2 
22.0 
19.3 
17.6 


34.6 
30.5 
27.2 
24.6 


41.0 
36.6 
33.3 


44.5 












3/4 


50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 


0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 


0.8 
0.6 
0.5 
0.5 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 












8.5 
6.8 
5.5 

4.7 
4.0 


11.4 
8.6 
7.0 
5.8 
5.0 


14.2 
11.2 
8.8 
7.2 
6.2 


11.0 
8.8 
7.5 
6.6 
5.9 


10.6 
9.0 
7.9 
7.1 


9.4 
8.4 


11.1 
9.9 


1.2 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.5 
0.4 


1.9 
1.5 
1.3 
1.1 
1.0 
0.9 


2.8 
2.3 
1.9 
1.6 
1.4 
1.3 


3.8 
3.2 
2.8 
2.3 
2.0 
1.8 


5.2 
4.2 
3.6 
3. 1 
2.7 
2.4 


3.1 


3.9 


4.9 


1 


50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 


0.1 
0.1 


0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 


0.3 
0.3" 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 


0.5 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 


0.8 
0.6 
0.5 
0.5 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 


1.1 
0.8 
0.7 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 


1.5 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.6 


2.0 
1.5 
1.3 
1.1 

0.9 
0.8 
0.7 


2.6 
2.0 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.9 


3.5 
2.6 
2.0 
1.7 
1.4 
1.2 
I. 1 


4.9 
3.3 
2.5 
2.0 
1.7 
1.5 
1.3 


7.0 
4.2 
3.1 
2.4 
2.0 
1.8 
1.5 


5.5 

3.8 
2.7 
2.4 
2.1 
1.8 


7.2 
4.7 
3.5 
2.8 
2.4 
2.1 


M/4 


50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 







0.1 


0.2 
0.1 
0.1 


0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 


0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 


0.4 
'0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 


0.5 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 


0.7 
0.6 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 


1. 1 
0.8 
0.5 
0.5 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 










1.0 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.4 


1.2 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.5 


1.5 
1.0 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 


1.3 
1.0 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 






































M/2 


50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 












0.1 


0.2 
0.1 


0.2 
0.2 
0.1 


0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 


0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0. 1 


0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 


0.4 

0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 


0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 


- 6 
0.5 

0.4 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
















































































































(1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 CFM = 0.0283 mm 3 /min, 1 psi = 6.90 kPa, 50 feet = 
15.2 m) 



87.414 



11-25 



as shown in table 1 1-4, movement of pipe can be 
accounted for. In addition, piping should be sup- 
ported at all changes in direction and load con- 
centrations, such as heavy valves. 

There are many other considerations in the 
layout of compressed air systems, which are 
beyond the scope of this manual. Refer to NAV- 
FAC DM 3-5, Compressed Air and Vacuum 
Systems, for further information. 

TEST PROCEDURES 

After installation, the compressed air system 
must undergo testing. Generally, all piping and 



pressurized components should be tested at 150 
percent of maximum working pressure. When 
testing, use clean, dry air or nitrogen. The system 
should be held at test pressure without loss for 
at least 4 hours. 



MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

As with any system, preventive maintenance 
conducted on a scheduled basis is an important 
factor in providing reliable service. Breakdown 
maintenance causes interruption in services that 



Table 11-4. Maximum Span for Pipe 



DIAMETER 
INCHES 


STD. WT. 
STEEL PIPE 
40 S 


COPPER 
TUBE TYPE 
K 


1/2 


S'-O" 


3 i_ 9 


3/4 


5 T -9" 


4'-3" 


1 


6 f -6" 


5 f -0" 


1-1/2 


7 f -6" 


5 f -9" 


2 


8'-6" 


6 '-6" 


2-1/2 


9'-3" 


7'-3" 


3 


10'-3" 


7'-9" 


3-1/2 


ll'-O" 


8'-3" 


4 


11 ""6 


9'-0" 


5 


"1 9 ' Q" 


10 f -0" 


6 


13--9" 


10'-9" 


8 


1 j o 




10 


17 '-0" 




12 


18--3- 





( 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 0.3048 m) 



87.415 



11-26 



prove costly to the Navy. It also requires more 
extensive repair to system components. As a 
senior Utilitiesman, you will be required to coor- 
dinate maintenance efforts. An understanding of 
the maintenance needed for each component will 
aid you in carrying out this type of duty. 

PRIME MOVER MAINTENANCE 

Air compressors can be driven by diesel, 
gasoline, and electrical prime movers. These 
power-producing equipments require the same 
maintenance as any prime mover used to drive 
other equipment encountered by the Utilitiesman. 

A definite lubrication schedule should be 
established. Normal oil levels in engines must be 
maintained at all times, using lubricants recom- 
mended by the manufacturer. The frequency of 
oil changes is dependent upon the severity of 
service, atmospheric dust, and dirt. These factors 
will also affect the air filter and, in the case of 
electrical motors, the need for regular lubrication 
of bearings. 

Daily operator maintenance will prevent most 
major breakdowns. Following the manufacturer's 
suggested maintenance requirements will reduce 
downtime caused by prime mover failure. 

AIR COMPRESSOR MAINTENANCE 

Taking into consideration the many types of 
air compressors the Utilitiesman may encounter 
in the field, it would be impossible to cover all 
maintenance requirements of air compressors in 
this section. Several common factors do apply to 
all compressors. 

The establishment of a lubrication schedule 
is at the top of the list for ensuring trouble-free 
operation of compressors. A definite schedule and 
assignment of responsibility to maintenance per- 
sonnel to follow the schedule is required. The 
manufacturer's manual will establish minimum 
requirements that should be followed. 

Bearings, packings, seals, and clearances 
between moving parts must be within manufac- 
turer's specifications and included on the 
maintenance schedule. Many compressors allow 
for adjustments while others will require overhaul 
when clearances are exceeded. 

Visual inspections for dust, dirt, or leaks will 
provide early detection of possible maintenance 
requirements. Operator maintenance, however, 
when properly conducted, will catch and correct 
potential problems early. Ensure all your 
operators are checked out on their equipment, 



including the ability to detect sounds that indicate 
possible internal troubles. 

In all cases have a manufacturer's manual 
handy and follow its recommendations for 
maintenance. 

AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT 
MAINTENANCE 

All auxiliary equipment that services the air 
compressor or is serviced by the compressor will 
require periodic scheduled maintenance. 

Air filters should be checked and cleaned at 
least once a month. Silencers should be checked 
semiannually for corrosion, paint, and gasket 
damage. Inter coolers and aftercoolers need to be 
inspected for scale buildup in hubs, leaks, and so 
forth. In general, all auxiliary equipment must be 
placed on a schedule for inspection and periodic 
maintenance. 

DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

MAINTENANCE 

Distribution systems require a minimum of 
maintenance. Checking valve operation, hose con- 
nectors, draining condensation (manual or 
automatic), protecting pipe from damage, and 
repairing leaks are the common considerations in 
a maintenance plan. 

Procedures applicable to the preventive 
maintenance schedules, inspections, and record- 
keeping for compressed air plants can be found 
in NAVFAC P-322, Inspection for Maintenance 
of Public Works and Public Utilities. 

For more involved technical maintenance, 
such as overhauls, make sure competent person- 
nel are trained before they are needed. Again, 
follow the manufacturer's manuals as a sure way 
to repair any air compressor or component. 



REFERENCES 

Compressed Air and Vacuum Systems, NAV- 
FAC DM-3.5, Naval Facilities Engineering 
Command, Alexandria, Va., March 1983. 

Maintenance of Steam, Hot Water and Com- 
pressed Air Distribution Systems, NAV- 
DOCKS M-209, NAVFAC, Alexandria, Va., 
March 1966. 

Operation and Maintenance of Air Compressor 
Plants, NAVDOCKS MO-206, NAVFAC, 
Alexandria, Va., January 1964. 



11-27 



CHAPTER 12 

BOILERS 



Learning Objective: Identify the procedures required for the installation, 
operation, and maintenance of boiler plants. 



As a senior Utilitiesman, you will be expected 
to analyze situations that task your knowledge and 
expertise in installing, operating, and maintain- 
ing boilers. 

The most common type of boiler you can 
expect to encounter is the scotch marine-type 
boiler. "Scotch marine" is a generic term that 
identifies a boiler with a furnace, which forms an 
integral part of the boiler assembly. This con- 
figuration permits very compact construction 
requiring only a small space for the capacity 
produced. Scotch marine boilers are package units 
consisting of the pressure vessel, burner, controls, 
draft fan, draft controls, and other components 
assembled into a fully factory- fire-tested unit. 
Most are tested by the manufacturer as individual 
units before being shipped to customers. This pro- 
vides, in each case, a preengineered unit ready for 
quick installation and connection to services. 

As a first class petty officer, you will be 
expected to supervise other personnel in the 
installation, operation, and maintenance of 
boilers. As a chief petty officer, you will be 
responsible for the overall management of these 
plants. This chapter provides insight into many 
of the skills that you must develop to be a 
proficient supervisor/manager of a boiler plant. 



INSTALLATION OF BOILERS 

When you are preparing to install a boiler, you 
must consider two basic factors site location and 
accessories and fittings. This section discusses each 
of these items. Remember, the most important 
single point in the successful operation of a boiler 
is its proper installation. Always refer to the 
manufacturer's manuals, and follow your prints 
and specifications closely. By being thorough in 
your planning and execution of plans, you can 



prevent many future problems for operators and 
maintenance personnel. 

SITE SELECTION 

Careful consideration must be given to the 
selection of a site for the construction of any 
boiler plant. Primarily, the cost in materials, 
manpower, and equipment is the most important 
factor affecting this selection. This cost is 
generally reduced by locating the plant site as close 
as possible to the largest load demand facility, 
such as a galley or laundry. 

Location 

When selecting the site, you must also take 
into account other factors, such as the availability 
of water, electricity, fuel, and the capability of 
the site to drain either naturally or by mechanical 
means. Also, high pedestrian and vehicle traffic 
areas should be avoided for safety reasons. 
Another item to consider is noise level. Noise 
pollution may cause discomfort for personnel, 
especially if the site being considered is adjacent 
to a berthing area. 

These are factors you must consider when you 
become involved in selecting a boiler plant site. 
Each situation may include all, part, or more than 
these factors. You must look at each installation 
and evaluate the needs of that job. 

Boiler Foundation 

Constructing the foundation or platform a 
boiler sits on requires skilled engineering and 
development. Manufacturer's specifications must 
be adhered to. Boilers may vary in wet weight 
from 1.5 tons to more than 20 tons. A substantial 



12-1 



foundation that can withstand the weight and ab- 
sorb vibration is a must. 

Reinforced concrete slabs with runners pro- 
vided for placing and anchoring the boiler are 
generally used. The runners should provide a level, 
uniform support and be of sufficient height to 
allow for bottom-side maintenance and the 
installation of piping. A raised platform also pro- 
vides easier access for boiler room cleanup. 

Generally, a sump is constructed in the slab 
between the runners to provide a catchment area 
for boiler blowdown or draining of the boiler. 
This sump is then drained from the building to 
a suitable dispersal point. 



Table 12-1. Recommended Dimensions for Fresh Air 



Total Boiler 
Horsepower 

30 

40 

50 

60 

75 

80 
100 
125 
150 
200 



Equivalent Free 
Area Opening 

15" x 18" 
18" x 20" 
18" x 25" 
20" x 27" 
25" x 27" 
25" x 29" 
28" x 32" 
32" x 35" 
35" x 40" 
40" x 45" 



Boiler Room 

When considering the requirements of shelter- 
ing a boiler, you must take many things into 
account. You must ensure there is enough room 
for the boiler and all of the accessory equipment. 
This accessory equipment may include conden- 
sate tanks and pumps, chemical feeders, water 
makeup tanks and feeders, and blowdown tanks. 

The boiler room must also be large enough to 
allow for boiler maintenance. Allowances for 
retubing and for removing and replacing the boiler 
must be made. The tube length of a boiler may 
be from 2 feet 6 inches to at least 10 feet, and 
possibly longer. To facilitate the removal of these 
tubes, the boiler room must be long enough or 
must have a door located behind the boiler. The 
most important thing to check is the manufac- 
turer's specifications, which gives the proper 
dimensions for locating the boiler. 

Fresh air inlets and louvers to allow fresh air 
to move across the boiler are needed. This fresh 
air entering the boiler room is required not only 
to remove excess heat from the boiler room, but 
also to provide adequate makeup air for combina- 
tion. Table 12-1 gives the general recommended 
dimensions for fresh air inlets. 

When you are planning and building a boiler 
room, you must always consider the boiler 
requirements, maintenance requirements, manu- 
facturer's recommendations, and the boiler 
operator's needs. 



ACCESSORIES 

As you study this section, refer to figure 12-1 
for identification of the accessory equipment 



numbered 1 through 19. An explanation of each 
numbered item follows. 

1 . Boiler A boiler is a closed vessel in which 
steam is generated or water is heated as a result 
of the combustion of fuel. 

2. Main steam-stop valve This valve is 
located at the steam outlet of the boiler. Only one 
such valve is required when a system is being 
supplied by an independent boiler. The purpose 
of this valve is to put the boiler on the line or to 
secure it. The main steam-stop valve should never 
be used for throttling; it's either fully open 
(backed off one-fourth turn) or fully closed. The 
ASME code requires that this valve be of the 
outside screw and yoke rising spindle-type if it is 
over 2 inches in size. The reason for this is that 
such a valve permits the operator to distinguish 
the position (open or closed) by sight. 

3. Guard valve (second steam stop) When 
two or more boilers are connected to a common 
header, the steam connection from each boiler 
having a manhole opening (bodily entrance to 
watersides) must be fitted with two stop valves. 
The purpose of this valve is to serve as a guard or 
backup to the main steam-stop valve, should a 
person be required to enter a boiler that is isolated 
from the system for repair or maintenance. 

4. Daylight (drain) valve Whenever two 
steam stops (main and guard) are required, then 
the system must be provided with a daylight valve 
installed between them. The discharge from this 
valve must be visible to the operator while 
manipulating the valve. This valve should be 
opened only when the main and guard valves are 
closed; thus, it can be used to indicate if either 
valve is leaking and if either valve requires repair 
to provide a positive shutoff . 



12-2 




a. 

'5 

IT 



12-3 



5. Main steam line When a system is 
supplied by an independent boiler, the line that 
conveys steam from the boiler to all branch or 
distribution lines is considered to be the main. 
When a system is supplied by a bank of boilers 
connected into the same header, the line(s) 
conveying steam for the boiler(s) to the header 
is considered to be the main. 

6. Root valve These valves are installed 
on branch or distribution lines Gust off main 
steam line) to enable isolation of equipment or 
areas from the source of pressure by securing only 
one valve. Thus, this valve normally serves as an 
emergency shutoff for individual areas or pieces 
of equipment. This valve is usually of the gate- 
type design and should always be either fully 
opened (backed off one-fourth turn) or fully 
closed. 

7. Pressure regulating valve (PRV) This 
type of valve is normally installed as close as 
practical (after a reducing station) to the equip- 
ment or area it serves as the result of requiring 
a lower pressure than line pressure. Coppers, 
dishwashers, steam chests, turbines, and so forth, 
are a few pieces of equipment that generally 
require the use of PRVs. 

^- Steam traps These devices automatically 
drain condensate and prevent the passage of 
steam. Accumulation of condensate may seriously 
affect the efficiency of a system by decreasing the 
capacity for heat transmission. These devices are 
installed on the discharge side of steam-heating 
or cooking equipment, at dead ends, low points, 
or at regular intervals throughout a steam system 
(for automatic drip legs). 

9. Drip legs Drip legs are usually provided 
throughout a system where condensation is most 
likely to take place, such as at dead ends, low 
points, the bottom of all risers, at intervals of not 
over 200 feet for horizontally pitched (accessible) 
pipe, and at intervals of not over 350 feet for 
buried or inaccessible pipe. Drip legs are provided 
to remove condensate, generally through the use 
of steam traps; however, manual drain valves may 
be used. The disadvantage to manual drip legs is 
that they must be accessible and manually 
operated on a routine basis. 

10. Temperature regulating valve (TRV) 
This valve is installed near equipment that requires 
temperature regulation, such as a heat exchanger. 



The TRV consists of a valve, capillary tubing, and 
a sensing element (thermal bulb). The valve 
portion is installed in the steam or hot-water line 
supplying the heat, and the sensing element is 
inserted at the point where the temperature is to 
be controlled, such as at the hot-water discharge 
side of the heat exchanger. The TRV is always 
in the open position unless activated by pressure 
resulting from an increase in temperature. The 
TRV functions as follows: With the valve in the 
open position, the source of heat is permitted to 
flow, transferring its heat to the product being 
controlled. As the controlled product is heated, 
the gases within the sensing element are also 
heated. As heat is absorbed, the gases begin to 
expand; thus, a pressure is created up through the 
capillary tube to the upper portion of the valve, 
which houses a bellows or diaphragm that is 
directly connected to the valve stem. When the 
desired temperature is reached, through design 
features of the TRV, sufficient force is applied 
to the valve stem to fully close the valve. Once 
the temperature of the controlled product lowers, 
the gases (within the sensing element, cap tube, 
and upper portion of valve) cool and contract. 
This lowers the pressure applied to the bellows 
or diaphragm and allows spring tension to open 
the valve, permitting the source of heat to flow 
through the valve again. 

11. Heat exchanger This device is an un- 
fired, pressure vessel with a shell that is equip- 
ped with a heat supply inlet and outlet and a tube 
nest that is fitted with a water or oil inlet and 
outlet. The heat exchanger should be located as 
close as practical to the source for which it is 
going to supply heated water or oil. For example, 
it should be located near the boiler for which it 
is going to be used as a feedwater heater, or near 
a head for which it is going to supply hot water 
for showers, lavatories, and so on. The source of 
heat supply for an exchanger may be steam, hot 
water, or electricity (such as the heating elements 
in domestic hot-water heaters). The function of 
the heat exchanger is as follows: The product 
(water or oil being heated) flows through the 
tubes that are surrounded by the heat source 
(steam or hot water). Heat is absorbed through 
the tube walls by the product through means of 
conduction. The temperature of the product and 
the flow of the heat source is controlled by the 
temperature-regulating valve. When a larger 
storage space is required for the product, the heat 
source may travel through the tubes that are 
surrounded by the product. 



12-4 



12. Strainer In-line strainers should be in- 
stalled in steam or water lines just ahead 
of PRVs, TRVs, steam traps, and pumps. 
Strainers are used to prevent malfunctions or 
costly damage to vital equipment and system 
components by trapping foreign matter such 
as rust, scale, and dirt, as the flow (steam 
or water) is channeled through the strainer. The 
strainer is fitted with a bucket-type screen, 
which is constructed of thin sheet metal, usually 
of bronze, Monel, or stainless steel. The strainer 
screen may be removed for cleaning; however, it 
is better that you have a piping arrangement that 
allows you to eliminate any foreign matter while 
the system is in operation. 

13. Condensate line Condensate return lines 
extend from the discharge side of steam traps 
(used throughout a system) to the boiler's 
condensate or combination condensate/makeup 
feedwater tank. Condensate lines convey con- 
densed steam back through the system for 
reuse; therefore, less (raw) feedwater makeup 
is required. Thus, the cost of treating the 
water is lowered, and the boiler efficiency is 
raised because the condensate is already 
preheated. This requires less firing of the boiler 
to reach its desired pressure or temperature. 

14. Condensate/makeup tank This tank is 
normally installed as close to the boiler as 
practical and at a level higher than the boiler feed 
pump's suction. The purpose of this tank 
is to provide a storage space for condensate 
(returned) and makeup feedwater (required to 
compensate difference in demand and amount 
of condensate returned). This tank also vents 
noncondensable gases to the atmosphere and 
provides a positive suction and supply of feed- 
water to the boiler's feedwater pump upon 
demand. The float-operated valve admits raw 
(untreated) water into the tank when there 
is insufficient condensate returned to maintain a 
proper level. 

15. Feed pump The purpose of the feed 
pump is to supply water to the boiler as 
required. This pump must be capable of pump- 
ing against the operating pressure of the boiler. 
The feed pump is activated by either an auto- 
matic, water-level control or a manual control. 
It takes its suction from the condensate/makeup 
tank and feeds the boiler upon demand. The 
feed pump is installed between the conden- 
sate/makeup tank and the boiler shell or steam 



drum. Centrifugal, reciprocating, and jet pumps 
are used for boiler feed purposes, with the 
centrifugal type being used almost exclusively. 
Any boiler having 500 or more square feet 
of water-heating surface must have at least 
two means of feeding water. The steam in- 
jector normally suffices as the second means 
of feeding under emergency or standby 
conditions. 

16. Feedwater pipe (external) This line 
extends from the discharge side of the feed 
pump to the point at which it connects either 
to the boiler shell or to the steam drum. (This 
connection is normally below the steaming water 
level.) The purpose of this line is to convey 
feedwater to the boiler and provide a means 
(place) for installing other required accessories 
(relief, check, and stop valves). This line is 
subject to greater pressure when the boiler is 
calling for water. 

17. Relief valve This valve should be in- 
stalled between the feed pump and the nearest 
shutoff valve used in the external feed line. 
Should the external feed line be secured and 
the feed pump accidently started, a ruptured 
line or serious damage to the feed pump 
could occur if there were no relief valve. 
Relief valves are designed to open (gradually 
as the pressure increases) automatically to prevent 
pressures form increasing beyond a safe operating 
limit. 

18. Feed check valve (swing) Such a valve 
should be installed on the external feed line 
(near the boiler) between the feed stop and 
the feed pump. The purpose of this valve is 
to eliminate any back pressure (boiler-operating 
pressure) on the external feed system during the 
intermittent securing (off cycle) of the feed 
pump. 

19. Feed stop valve This valve is installed 
in the external feed line (as close to the 
boiler as possible) between the boiler shell 
or steam drum and the feed check valve. The 
purpose of this valve is to permit or prevent 
the flow of water to the boiler and should be 
used either in the fully opened (backed off 
one-fourth turn) or closed position. When a 
globe-type valve is used as a feed stop, the 
ASME code requires that the feedwater must 
flow so as to enter (pass through) the valve under 
its disc. 



12-5 





s. 



^c= 




FIRE TUBES 

^ '\ x V V 
COMBUSTION CHAMBER 

\ \ 



BILGE 



87.417 



Figure 12-2. Boiler fittings. 



FITTINGS 

As you study this section, refer to figure 12-2 
for identification of the boiler fittings numbered 1 
through 17. An explanation of each numbered 
item follows. 

1 . Air cock This valve is installed in such a 
manner as to be connected to the uppermost steam 
space of a boiler shell or steam drum. The air cock 
is installed on boilers for the following three pur- 
poses: (1) to allow air to escape while a boiler is 
initially being filled with water (air cock should be 
open); (2) to permit air to escape while steam is 
initially being raised on a boiler (air cock should 
be open until sufficient steam has been generated 
to displace the air in the steam space, and then 
closed); and (3) to allow air to enter a boiler when 
it is being drained. 



2. Water column This fitting is mounted on 
either a boiler shell or steam drum adjacent to the 
steaming water level. Water columns can be iden- 
tified as being hollow vessels constructed of steel 
or malleable iron, fitted with gauge glass and try- 
cock connections. Many designs are provided with 
various feedwater-level controls. The water col- 
umn is used for the purpose of steadying the water 
level in the gauge glass (through the reservoir 
capacity of the column). It also serves as a 
sediment chamber that minimizes obstruction of 
the small diameter gauge glass connections. The 
ASME code requires that the column be con- 
nected to the steam and water spaces with a 
minimum size pipe and fittings of 1 inch and that 
each right-angle turn be made with a cross to aid 
in inspection and cleaning. The steam connection 
from the column must connect into the uppermost 
steam space of the boiler shell or steam drum, and 
the waterside connection must be made at least 



12-6 



6 inches below the lowest permissible water level. 
The lowest permissible water level is defined as 
being the lowest level at which a boiler may 
operate without danger of overheating any part 
of the boiler. See figure 12-3. 

3. Column blowdown line and valve The 
line can be identified as being the extension from 
the bottom leg of the cross (used in connecting 
the watersides of a column to the boiler) to either 
a tank, bilge, or blowdown pit. The valve is 
installed within the blowdown line, normally just 
below the column itself, so as to be readily 
distinguishable as the column blowdown valve. 
This valve should be of the gate-type design so 
as not to interfere with the flow (scale, sediment, 
and so forth) during blowdown. The purpose of 
the valve and line arrangement is to permit 



manual removal of sediment and scale from the 
column and its piping through conveying this 
waste to a tank, bilge, or blowdown pit. The 
ASME code specifies a minimum permissible size 
of three-fourth of an inch for the blowdown line 
and valve. 

4. Gauge glass These fittings are installed 
so as to be located at the steaming water level. 
These glasses may be attached to (or mounted on) 
either the water column, boiler shell, or steam 
drum. The purpose of the gauge glass is to 
provide a visual means of checking the water level 
being maintained within the vessel. The ASME 
code stipulates that the minimum permissible size 
for a gauge glass (cylinder type) is one-half inch; 
boilers operating at 400 psi of pressure (or greater) 
must have at least two gauge glasses installed; and 



WATER 
COLUMN 



GAUGE 
GLASS 



UPPERMOST 
STEAM SPACE 



NORMAL OPERATING 
BOILER H,0 LEVEL 



o ofo4o o o o o o o 



6" (AT LEAST) LOWEST 



PERMISSIBLE 
WATER LEVEL 



COLUMN WATERSIDE 
CONNECTION 



LOWEST WATER 
(MUD) SPACE 




87.418 



Figure 12-3. Water column. 



12-7 



the lowest visible portion of a gauge glass must 
be at least 2 inches above the lowest permissible 
water level. 

5. Gauge glass shutoff valves. These valves 
(special fittings) are installed at the upper and 
lower ends of a gauge glass, which permits an 
indirect connection of the glass to a water column, 
boiler shell, or steam drum. These valves are of 
the angle-glove type of design and are sometimes 
fitted with an automatic shutoff device, usually 
consisting of a nonferrous ball that functions to 
secure or prevent the escape of steam and water 
should the gauge glass break while the boiler is 
under pressure. These valves also provide a means 
for securing the steam and water ports. This 
enables the operator to replace the glass (broken, 
stained, chipped, or defective in some other way) 
while the boiler is in service or operating. The 
ASME code stipulates that these valves be not less 
than one-half inch in size. 

6. Glass blowdown line and valve The line 
can be identified as the extension from the 
bottom gauge glass shutoff valve to either a tank, 
bilge, or blowdown pit. The valve is normally 
installed just below the gauge glass, so as to be 
readily distinguishable as the gauge glass blow- 
down valve. This valve and line arrangement 
permits the operator to visually detect partial 
blockage within the gauge glass connections to the 
boiler. When the boiler is under pressure and the 
glass is blowndown, the water level should return 
promptly when the valve is secured. If the level 
does not return promptly, this is a good indica- 
tion of a partial blockage in the gauge glass 
connection(s). 

7. Try-cocks These cocks may be installed 
on either a water column, boiler shell, or steam 
drum. If only two cocks are used, they are located 
slightly above and below the steaming water level. 
If three cocks are employed, they are located 
above, below, and at the approximate steaming 
water level. These cocks are of the angle-globe or 
needle-valve type of design, either of which is 
fitted with a threaded installation connection and 
an unthreaded drip port or discharge. The 
purpose of these cocks is to prove the water level 
within a vessel and to check the accuracy of a 
boiler's gauge glass(es). The ASME code stipulates 
that a boiler with a diameter not exceeding 36 
inches or one with a heating surface not exceeding 
100 square feet need only be provided with two 
try-cocks in conjunction with a single gauge glass. 
On the other hand, if this same boiler is equip- 
ped with two mounted gauge glasses, the code 
stipulates that boilers exceeding 36 inches in 



diameter or 100 square feet of heating surface are 
required to have at least three try-cocks installed, 
regardless of the number of gauge glasses. 

8. Pressure gauge Each boiler is equipped 
with a pressure gauge that serves as a means 
for measuring the pressure (and determining 
the boiler point) within the boiler. Pressure 
gauges should be installed or located in a 
well-lighted area (so as to be easily read) 
and connected to the boiler's uppermost steam 
space. The gauge is connected to a siphon 
(pigtail) having a capacity large enough to fill the 
tube within the gauge during operation. This 
gauge should be installed so that it cannot be 
secured except by a cock installed near the gauge 
(preferably just below the siphon). When the 
piping connecting the gauge to the boiler is over 
10 feet long, the cock may be provided with a 
position-indicating type of handle. The dial on a 
pressure gauge is usually graduated so that it reads 
approximately twice the pressure at which the 
safety valve is set to pipe. It should never read 
less than 1 1/2 times this pressure. Gauges should 
be tested semiannually and anytime there is a 
reason to doubt their accuracy. 

9. Fusible plugs Some boilers are equipped 
with these fittings to provide added protection 
against low water by warning the operator with 
a hissing noise when the tin, copper, and lead core 
is melted out. There are two types, fire-actuated 
and steam-actuated plugs, both of which are 
directly or indirectly connected at the lowest 
permissible water level. It is not necessary to take 
the boiler out of service to replace the steam- 
actuated type; however, it is necessary to take the 
boiler out of service when the fire-actuated type 
is blown or melted. These plugs should be replaced 
yearly, whether melted out or not. Always use new 
plugs, and never refill old casings for reuse. 

10. Bottom blowdown line This line is 
located and identified as being the line connected 
to the lowest water space of a vessel (either to the 
boiler's shell, drum, or header) that extends to 
either a tank, bilge, or blowdown pit. The 
purpose of this line is to convey (blowdown) 
sludge, sediment, excessive chemicals, and water 
from the boiler to either a tank, bilge, or 
blowdown pit. According to the ASME code, the 
minimum size blowdown pipe and fittings for 
boilers having 100 square feet (or less) of heating 
surface is three-fourths of an inch. Boilers 
having heating surfaces in excess of 100 square 
feet must be provided with blowdown piping and 
fittings of at least 1 inch and no more than 2 1/2 
inches in diameter. 



12-8 



11. Bottom blowdown valves These valves 
are installed in the bottom blowdown line. Every 
boiler is required, by the ASME code, to have at 
least one slow-opening bottom blowdown valve. 
The code defines a slow-opening valve as one 
requiring at least 5 full 360-degree turns between 
the fully opened and closed positions. Boilers 
that operate at pressures exceeding 100 psi 
must be provided with two bottom blowdown 
valves. This valve arrangement may be either two 
slow-opening valves or a slow-opening and quick- 
opening valve properly installed. The quick- 
opening valve (usually of the cock or plug type 
of design) must be capable of being fully opened 
or closed with one-fourth turn of its operating 
mechanism. This type of valve can be used only 
if the plug is held in place by a gland or guard 
with the end of the plug being distinctively marked 
in line with the passage (position indicating). The 
purpose of the slow-opening bottom blowdown 
valve is to prevent too rapid a fluctuation on 
holding or securing a blowdown. The quick- 
opening bottom blowdown valve is used to 
permit emergency securing (one-fourth turn to 
fully close) and positive shutoffs. Due to its 
design, this valve is more apt to cut through 
accumulated sludge and sediment that could 
prevent a slow-opening valve from closing com- 
pletely. To avoid shock to the piping and 
possible injury to personnel when blowing down 
a boiler, open the quick-opening valve first, then 
the slow-opening valve. To secure from blowing 
down, close the valves in reverse order. When 
both slow- and quick-opening valves are used for 
blowdown control, the quick-opening valve 
should be located between the slow-opening valve 
and the boiler, with the slow-opening valve 
installed between the quick-opening valve and the 
tank, bilge, or blowdown pit. 

12. Safety valve This valve is installed 
and directly connected to a vessel's upper- 
most steam space without any intervening valve 
or stop between it and the boiler. The safety 
valve is considered the most important of boiler 
fittings; and its construction, installation, and 
performance are rigidly prescribed in the boiler 
code. The purpose of this fitting is to prevent 
pressure within the boiler from increasing beyond 
the safe operating limit. According to the ASME 
code, every boiler must be provided with at least 
one safety valve. If a boiler has more than 500 
square feet of heating surface, two or more safety 
valves are required. At 30-day (monthly) intervals, 
each safety valve should be manually lifted to 
blow any dirt away from its seat and to prevent 



the disc from sticking in place. When manually 
lifting the valve for this purpose, you should 
ensure that the boiler pressure is at least 75% of 
that at which the valve is set to pop. You should 
do this to ensure all foreign matter is blown out 
from around the seat, thereby preventing leakage 
after the valve is secured. Adjustments and 
sealing of safety valves should be performed 
only by authorized personnel, such as qualified 
boiler inspectors and factory representatives. 

13. Handhole plates These plates are located 
or installed so as to conform to ASME construc- 
tion code specifications, which vary considerably 
with each particular type of boiler. Each of 
these plate assemblies can be identified as being 
elliptical or round in shape (plate portion) and 
consisting of a plate, gasket, yoke, and nut. 
Handhole plates are provided throughout various 
areas of a boiler shell or header for the purpose 
of providing access (either visual or hand and arm 
entrance) to a boiler's watersides for inspection, 
maintenance, and repair work. 

14. Manhole plates These fittings can be 
identified as being elliptical or round in shape, 
approximately 5 to 6 times as large as handhole 
plates. Manhole plates consist of a plate, gasket, 
two yokes, and two nuts. The purpose of this type 
of plate is to provide access (bodily) to a boiler's 
watersides for inspection, maintenance, and repair 
work. 

15. Access door These doors provide access 
to the combustion chamber and firesides of a 
boiler for inspection, maintenance, and repair 
work. These doors can be identified as being 
round, square, or rectangular in shape. Those of 
the smaller types are normally fitted with handles 
for manual removal, whereas those of the larger 
type or design are normally mounted on hinges, 
which permit them to be swung aside rather than 
being manually lifted out of place. 

16- Breeching Breechings may be located 
so as to extend over a boiler, in back of a boiler 
setting, or even under boiler room floors. 
Breechings are usually constructed of steel and 
can be identified as the means provided for 
connecting a stack to a boiler, with provisions for 
expansion and contraction. 

17. Stacks Stacks (chimneys) extend from 
a boiler's breeching to an elevated point in the 
atmosphere where health and draft requirements 
are met. Stacks may be constructed of either steel 
plate, masonry, or reinforced concrete. When of 
sufficient size, they are provided or equipped with 
safe climbing devices for inspection, cleaning, and 
repair purposes. These items are necessary for 



12-9 



discharging the products of combustion at an 
elevation high enough to comply with health 
requirements and prevent a nuisance due to low 
flying smoke, soot, and ash. Stacks provide a 
draft, which aids combustion and conducts the 
flue gases through the complete boiler setting 
(furnace, tubes, and so forth). 



INSPECTING AND TESTING 

This section discusses inspection and testing 
of boilers. Utilitiesman 3 & 2, NAVEDTRA 
10061, chapters 13 and 14, covered the basics of 
tests that you can normally expect to encounter 
in the field. You will benefit from a review of 
those chapters before you go further into this 
chapter. This section concerns the responsibilities 
of the supervisor/manager of a boiler plant. 

WATERSIDE INSPECTIONS 
AND TESTS 

Boiler watersides must be inspected before and 
after cleaning and at any other time the main- 
tenance officer considers it advisable. If there is 
any reason to suspect the presence of hard scale 
or serious corrosion, some tubes must be removed 
for a detailed examination. The results of all 
waterside inspections must be entered in detail on 
the boiler water treatment logs and on the 
engineering log. 

When watersides are inspected, at least one 
handhole plate must be opened on each pass of 
the superheater. The drums and headers must be 
opened up completely and the internal fittings 
must be removed. The internal fittings especially 
the steam separators and plates must be marked 
to indicate their position in the steam drum. If 
this is not done, it will be extremely hard to 
reinstall the fittings correctly. 

Since a wet boiler usually gives false indica- 
tions of its real condition, dry out the boiler 
thoroughly before you begin a waterside inspec- 
tion. Note and record the general appearance of 
all visible areas of the boiler watersides. In 
particular, look for accumulations of sludge and 
for indications of scale, rust, general corrosion, 
and oil or grease marks. Insofar as possible, 
determine the extent of all defects as well as their 
nature. 

When oil contamination is suspected, you can 
get a better idea of the extent and nature of the 
contamination by examining the watersides while 
the boiler is still wet. When inspecting for oil, take 



samples of water from the steam drum and from 
the economizer headers before the boiler is 
completely emptied. Analysis of these samples 
should enable you to determine what type of oil 
contamination (lube oil or fuel oil) has occurred. 
If the samples do not show any signs of an oil 
film, it may be that the contaminating oil has not 
yet reached the boiler. On the other hand, it may 
be that the oil contamination has been stopped, 
and all oil has either been deposited or removed 
by distillation. 

To prevent oil contamination of a boiler, the 
drain inspection tanks must be inspected at least 
once each hour and more often if there is any 
reason to suspect that oil contamination may 
occur. If an oil film or any cloudiness is observed 
in the contents of a drain inspection tank, the 
drains must be shifted to the bilges and a search 
must be started to determine the source of the 
contamination. When oil appears in the gauge 
glass of a boiler, a condenser, a deaerating feed 
tank, or a freshwater drain tank, you can be sure 
the feed system has been contaminated by oil. 

Waterside Inspection of Boiler Tubes 

Regular and careful waterside inspection of 
boiler tubes provides the information required to 
determine the need for tube renewal, to determine 
the effectiveness of boiler water treatment and 
other maintenance procedures, to diagnose boiler 
operating troubles, to analyze boiler casualties, 
and, in general, to give an overall picture of the 
condition of the boiler. 

If tubes are removed between inspections, 
samples of generating tubes and superheater tubes 
may be saved for inspection by the Board of 
Inspection and Survey so that additional tubes will 
not need to be removed at the time of the inspec- 
tion. Note, however, tubes that have failed in 
service or have been damaged. 

When there is reason to suspect serious or 
widespread tube damage, or when the condition 
of the tubes cannot be clearly determined on the 
basis of a few sample tubes, an "exploring block" 
of tubes should be cut. The exploring block should 
be not more than 10 tubes wide, and it must be 
deep enough to include the tubes in the center row 
of the tube bank. A superheater tube and an 
economizer element must also be removed for 
inspection when the exploring block is cut. 

Tube failures generally occur in the outer half 
of the tube nest as a result of external corrosion 
just above the water drum. When such failures 
have occurred, either in operation or under 



12-10 



hydrostatic test, or when the examination of tubes 
in the exploring block shows that the tube 
thickness is less than half the original thickness, 
complete renewal must be made of all tubes from 
the center row to the outer row (inclusive) over 
a fore-and-aft length of the tube bank sufficient 
to completely cover the affected area. This 
renewal must be made regardless of the condition 
of the tubes that were not included in the 
exploring block. 

The existence of slight, scattered pitting does 
not necessarily require the complete retubing of 
the boiler, even if the thickness of the tubes at 
some of the pits is less than 50% of the original 
tube thickness. When pitting is observed, tubes 
should be split and examined to see whether the 
pitting is (1) moderately heavy, and (2) general 
throughout the boiler. 

Internal pitting resulting from improper treat- 
ment of boiler water is most likely to occur in 
tubes that receive the most heat (screen tubes, fire 
row tubes, and so forth) and in areas that are 
particularly subject to oxygen pitting. In general, 
oxygen pitting tends to occur most commonly in 
downcomers, in superheaters, and at the steam 
drum ends of generating tubes. If active oxygen 
pits (that is, pits that are still scabbed over, rather 
than clean) are found when the boiler is inspected, 
or if oxygen pitting is suspected because of the 
past operating history of the boiler, one or two 
tubes should be removed from the areas in which 
oxygen pitting is most likely to be found. 

The tubes thus removed should be split and 
examined. If as many as 257o of the pits are 
deeper than 50% of the tube wall thickness, and 
if at least a few of the pits are deeper than 65% 
of the tube wall thickness, a sample of about 20 
tubes from the screen and last rows of the 
generating bank should be cut. These tubes should 
be split and examined, and their condition should 
be evaluated on the same basis as before. If as 
many as 25% of the pits are deeper than 50% of 
the wall thickness, and if at least a few are deeper 
than 65%, the oxygen pitting is considered to be 
general throughout the boiler and moderately 
heavy. With these findings, complete tube renewal 
should certainly be considered. However, it is 
possible that complete tube renewal may be 
postponed in some cases if (1) the boiler can be 
successfully cleaned by a chemical cleaning, (2) 
the boiler can successfully withstand a 125% 
hydrostatic test, and (3) future boiler water treat- 
ment, use of blowdown, and laying-up procedures 



can be expected to be in strict accordance with 
NAVFAC requirements. 

Before you make a detailed waterside inspec- 
tion of boiler tubes, you should be familiar with 
some of the WATERSIDE CAVITIES and 
SCARS that can be recognized by visual 
examination. 

LOCALIZED PITTING is the term used to 
describe scattered pits on the watersides. These 
pits are usually though not always caused by 
the presence of dissolved oxygen. 

WATERSIDE GROOVES are similar to 
localized pits in some ways, but they are longer 
and broader than the pits. Waterside grooves tend 
to occur in the relatively hot bends of the tubes 
near the water drum; they may also occur on the 
external surfaces of desuperheater tubes. Some 
waterside grooves are clean, but most contain 
islands of heavy corrosion scabs. A typical exam- 
ple of waterside grooving is shown in figure 12-4. 

CORROSION FATIGUE FISSURES are 
deep-walled, canyon-like voids. They have the 
appearance of being corroded, rather than frac- 
tured, and they may be filled with corrosion 
products. These fissures occur in metal that has 
been fatigued by repeated stressing, thus making 
it more subject to corrosion than it would other- 
wise be. 

GENERAL WATERSIDE THINNING can 
occur if the boiler water alkalinity is too low over 
a long period of time, if the boiler water alkalinity 
is too high, or if acid residues are not completely 
removed from a boiler that has been chemically 
cleaned. The greatest loss of metal from general 
waterside thinning tends to occur along the side 
of the tube that is toward the flame. The entire 
length of the tube from steam drum to water 




Figure 12-4. Waterside grooving in a generating tube. 



12-11 




98.145 



Figure 12-5. General waterside thinning. 



drum may be affected. Figure 12-5 shows general 
waterside thinning. 

WATERSIDE BURNING may occur if the 
temperature exceeds about 750 F in plain carbon 
steel tubes or about 1,000F in most alloy 
superheater tubes. The effect of waterside burn- 
ing is the oxidation of the tube metal to a shiny, 
black, magnetic iron oxide known as high- 
temperature oxide. 

WATERSIDE ABRASION is the term 
used to describe waterside cavities that re- 
sult from purely mechanical causes rather than 
from corrosion. For example, tube brushes 
or cutters may cause abrasion spots at sharp 
bends in economizer, superheater, and gen- 
erating tubes. The surface markings of such 
abrasions indicate clearly that they result from 
mechanical abrasion rather than from cor- 
rosion. 

DIE MARKS appear as remarkably straight 
and uniform longitudinal scratches or folds on the 
watersides of the tube. They are the result of 
faulty fabrication. Die marks, shown in figure 
12-6, may extend for the full length of the tube. 



Localized corrosion occurs quite often along the 
die mark. 

TUBE CORRUGATION is a peculiar type of 
heat blistering that occurs when the boiler water 
is contaminated with oil. Corrugation may con- 
sist of closely spaced, small-diameter, hemispheri- 
cal bulges, as though the tube metal had been 
softened and then punched from the inside with 
a blunt instrument. It may also exist as a herring- 
bone or chevron pattern on the tube wall nearest 
the flame, as shown in figure 12-7. It is not known 
exactly why oil contamination of the boiler water 
tends to cause this patterned corrugation. 




98.146 
Figure 12-6. Die marks on the waterside of a tube. 



12-12 



98.154 



Figure 12-7. Tube corrugation resulting from oil on watersides. 



Waterside Inspection of 
Drums and Headers 

Whenever a boiler is opened for cleaning and 
overhaul, the internal surfaces of the drums and 
headers should be carefully inspected for evidence 
of cracking. Particular attention must be given 
to steam drum manhole knuckles, knuckles at 
corners of drum heads, corners of cross boxes and 
headers, superheater header vent nozzles, and 
handhole openings. Any defect found must be 
recorded in the boiler water treatment log and in 
the maintenance log. These defects should also 
be reported to the maintenance office so that 
appropriate repair action can be taken. 

Hydrostatic Tests 

Boilers are tested hydrostatically for several 
different purposes. In each case, it is important 
to understand why a test is being made and to 
use but NOT to exceed the test pressure 
specified for that particular purpose. In general, 
most hydrostatic tests are made at one of three 
test pressures: boiler design pressure, 125% of 
design pressure, or 150% of design pressure. 
Other test pressures may be authorized for 
certain purposes. For example, a test pressure of 
150 psi is required for the hydrostatic test given 
before a boiler undergoes chemical cleaning. 

The hydrostatic test at design pressure is 
required upon the completion of each general 
overhaul, cleaning, or repair that affects the boiler 
or its parts and at any other time when it is 
considered necessary to test the boiler for leakage. 
The purpose of the hydrostatic test at design 
pressure is to prove the tightness of all valves, 
gaskets, flanged joints, rolled joints, welded 
joints, and boiler fittings. 

The test at 125% of design pressure is required 
after the renewal of pressure parts, after chemical 
cleaning of the boiler, after minor welding repairs 



to manhole and handhole seats, and after repairs 
to tube sheets, such as the correction of gouges 
and out-of-roundness. The "renewal of pressure 
parts" includes all tube renewals, rolled or 
welded, except downcomers and superheater 
support tubes. 

The test at 150% of design pressure is required 
after welding repairs to headers and drums, 
including tube sheet cracks and nozzle repairs, 
after drain and vent nipple repairs, and after 
renewal or rewelding of superheater support tubes 
and downcomers. The hydrostatic test at 150% 
of design pressure is basically a test for strength. 
This test may be (but is not necessarily) required 
at the 5-year inspection and test. 

Before making a hydrostatic test, rinse out the 
boiler with freshwater. Using at least 50-psi 
pressure, play the hose onto all surfaces of the 
steam drum, the tubes, the nipples, and the 
headers. Examine the boiler carefully for loose 
scale, dirt, and other deposits. Be SURE that no 
tools or other objects are left in the boiler. 

Remake all joints, being sure that the gaskets 
and the seating surfaces are clean. Replace the 
handhole and manhole plates and close up the 
boiler. 

Gag all safety valves. Boiler safety valves must 
NEVER, under any circumstances, be lifted by 
hydrostatic pressure. When gagging the safety 
valves, do not set up on the gag too tightly or you 
may bend the valve stems. As a rule, the gags 
should be set up only handtight. 

Close all connections on the boiler except to 
the air vents, the pressure gauges, and the valves 
of the line through which water is to be pumped 
to the boiler. Be sure the steam-stop valves are 
completely closed and that there will be no leakage 
of water through them. 

After all preparations have been made, use the 
feed pump to fill the boiler completely. After all 
air has been expelled from the boiler, close the 
air vents and build up the hydrostatic pressure 



12-13 



required for the particular test you are making. 
A hand boiler test pump can be used in building 
up the hydrostatic test pressure. If you do not 
have a hand test pump, build up the required test 
pressure by continuing to run the feed pump after 
the boiler has been filled. In any case, be very 
careful that you do not exceed the specified test 
pressure. After the boiler is full, it takes very 
little additional pumping to build up pressure. 

To avoid complications arising from changes 
in pressure caused by changes in temperature, you 
should use water that is approximately the same 
temperature as the boiler and the fireroom. In any 
case, the temperature of the water must be at least 
70 F. 

While the hydrostatic pressure is being built 
up, the boiler should be very carefully checked 
for signs of strain or deformation. If there is any 
indication of permanent deformation, stop the 
hydrostatic test and make the necessary repairs. 
If it is not possible to make the repairs right away, 
give a second hydrostatic test, progressing slowly 
up to 20 psi less than the pressure at which the 
first test was stopped. If the boiler passes this 
second test successfully, the new working pressure 
of the boiler must be two-thirds of the test 
pressure reached on the second test, and all safety 
valves must be set accordingly. 

Do not make any attempt to set up on leaky 
handhole or manhole plates until the pressure has 
been pumped up to within 50 psi of the test 
pressure. After all manhole and handhole leakage 
has been remedied, pump the pressure on up to 
test pressure. Check the pressure drop over a 
period of time. If all valves have been baked off, 
the maximum acceptable pressure drop is 1.5% 
of the test pressure over a period of 4 hours. If 
connected valves are merely closed and left 
installed, a drop test will not indicate the true 
condition of the boiler. The pressure drop test is 
conducted at boiler design pressure. 

A tube seat should not be considered tight 
unless it is bone dry at the test pressure. Any tube 
that cannot be made tight under a hydrostatic test 
should be renewed or rer oiled. 

If there is an excessive pressure drop when 
there is only a slight leakage at tube joints, 
handholes, and manholes, the loss of pressure is 
almost certainly caused by leakage through valves 
and fittings. Valves and fittings should be 
overhauled and made tight. 



Five- Year Inspection and Test 

At 5-year intervals, each boiler must be 
inspected for integrity of welds and nozzle 
connections. Lagging must be removed from 
drums and headers sufficiently to expose the 
welded joints and the nozzle connections. The 
welds and nozzle connections must be inspected 
visually from both inside and outside. If there is 
any doubt about the welds, they should be 
inspected by magnetic particle inspection or dye 
penetrant inspection. If any area, through ex- 
amination (visual, magnetic particle, or dye 
penetrant) reveals that a 150-percent boiler design 
pressure hydrostatic test is warranted, and the area 
proves to be tight under test pressure, further 
investigation of the suspected area should be 
conducted. The investigation should continue 
until the true condition of the area is known, and 
if necessary, appropriate repairs are made. 

INSPECTION OF FIRESIDES 

Boiler firesides should be inspected for signs 
of damage to the refractory lining, tubes, protec- 
tion plates, baffles, seal plates, support plates, and 
other metal parts. This type of inspection is 
usually conducted when the boiler is secured for 
fireside cleaning, but it should be conducted each 
time the boiler is secured. 



Refractory Inspection 

Frequent inspection of refractories, together 
with early repair of any weak or damaged places, 
can do a lot to prevent refractory failure and to 
postpone the need for complete renewal. It is a 
good maintenance practice to inspect the refrac- 
tories every time the boiler is opened up. Such 
inspections should be very detailed if you have 
reason to think the boiler has been operated under 
severe service conditions steaming at high rates, 
burning low-grade or contaminated fuel, or 
undergoing rapid fluctuations of temperature. 
Severe conditions cause rapid deterioration of 
refractories and, therefore, increase the need for 
frequent inspections. 

To make a proper inspection of boiler refrac- 
tories, you should have considerable knowledge 
of the causes of refractory deterioration. Also, 
you should know how to tell the difference 
between serious damage, which may require a 
complete renewal of brickwork, and less serious 
damage, which may be dealt with by patching. 



12-14 



Slagging and spalling are two of the main 
causes of refractory deterioration. Slag is formed 
when ash and other unburnable materials react 
with the brickwork. Although the ash content of 
fuel oil is low, there is always enough present to 
damage the refractories. The most damaging slag- 
forming materials are vanadium salts and sodium 
chloride. 

If the slag that forms on the brickwork would 
remain in place, it would not cause any particular 
trouble; however, the slag does not remain in 
place. Instead, it peels off or melts and runs off, 
taking some refractory with it and exposing a 
fresh layer of refractory to further slag attack. 
When deterioration of the brickwork has pro- 
gressed until only a 3-inch thickness of firebrick 
remains, the wall should be replaced. When 
sufficient slag has accumulated on the deck to 
cause striking with resultant deposits of carbon, 
the slag should be removed. If less than 1 1/2 
inches of firebrick remain after the slag is 
removed, the entire deck must be replaced. 

Another type of slag that results from using 
fuel oil that is contaminated is usually more 
damaging than peeling slag. This type of slag is 
very glassy in appearance, and when this slag 
melts, it usually covers the entire wall or deck. 

Firebrick shrinkage is another cause of 
furnace deterioration. True shrinkage (permanent 
shrinkage) is quite rare in firebrick approved for 
naval use. However, this defect can occur even 
in approved firebrick. In any case, it is impor- 
tant to recognize the appearance of true firebrick 
shrinkage because of the extremely dangerous 
condition it could create if it should occur. When 
the firebrick shrinks, the hot-face dimensions of 
each brick become measurably smaller than the 
cold-face dimensions. This condition leaves an 
open space around each brick, and the entire wall 
or floor becomes loose. A wall or floor having 
this appearance is DANGEROUS and should be 
completely renewed as soon as possible. 

Also, during your inspection, look for signs 
of unequal stresses that are caused by rapid 
raising of the furnace temperature while raising 
steam too rapidly. Emergencies may arise that 
require the rapid raising or lowering of furnace 
temperatures, but it is important to remember that 
the refractories cannot stand this treatment often. 
As a rule, you will find that raising the furnace 
temperature too rapidly causes the firebrick to 
break at the anchor bolts, and lowering the 
temperature too rapidly causes deep fractures in 
the firebrick. 



Also, look for signs of mechanical strain 
caused by poor operation of the boiler. Continued 
panting or vibration of the boiler can cause a 
weakened section of the wall to be dislocated so 
that the bricks fail out onto the furnace floor. 
Improper oil-air ratio is the most common cause 
of boiler panting and vibration. Proper operation 
of the boiler, with particular attention to the 
correct use of the burners and forced draft 
blowers, generally prevents panting and vibration 
of the boiler. 

Inspection should also be made of the lower 
side of the floor pan. Any overheating indicates 
a loss of insulation and excessive heat penetra- 
tion. Under normal conditions, the brickwork in 
a boiler should last for a number of years without 
complete renewal. 

Expansion joints should be inspected often for 
signs of incomplete closure. It is important to keep 
the joints free of grog, mortar, and refractory 
particles so that the joints can close properly when 
the boiler is fired. You can tell if an expansion 
joint is closing completely when it is heated by 
inspecting it when it is cold. If the inside of the 
expansion joint is light in color when the furnace 
is cold, the expansion joint is closing properly. 
If an expansion joint does not close properly when 
heated, the inside is dark and discolored. 

The same method can be used to tell if cracks 
in refractory materials are closing properly when 
the furnace is fired. If the cracks are dark, show- 
ing that they do not close, they should be repaired. 

Since the first firing of a plastic or castable 
burner front does more damage than any other 
single firing, the first inspection after installation 
is a very important one. The unfired burner front 
may appear to be in perfect condition while 
actually containing defects of material or work- 
manship that will show up immediately in the first 
firing. 

After the boiler has steamed for several hours, 
slabs of plastic about 1/2- to 1-inch thick may 
separate from the burner's front surface and fall 
off. This is because the surface layer is more 
densely rammed during installation than the 
remainder of the material. 

Radial cracks in the burner fronts may be 
found on the first inspection. These cracks are not 
harmful. They are caused by stresses resulting 
from the normal expansion and contraction of the 
refractory as it is heated and cooled. After the 
radial cracks occur, the stresses are relieved and 
there should be no further cracking of this type. 

The cracks that eventually result in extensive 
damage run approximately parallel to the surface 



12-15 



of the burner front, and they are called parallel 
cracks. Parallel cracks usually appear at or slightly 
behind the leading edge of the bladed cone. They 
are not dangerous until they actually loosen pieces 
of the burner front. Improper installation and 
boiler operation are usually the cause of parallel 
cracking. 

A slanting crack in the narrow section between 
the burners sometimes joins a radial crack. When 
this occurs, pieces of plastic tend to break off. 
This type of damage can usually be repaired by 
a plastic patch. 

If during your inspection you find that a 
castable burner front is breaking up after very 
little service, it is likely that too much water was 
used in mixing the material during installation. 
Sometimes the material is already partially set 
before installation; a common cause of this 
trouble is that the castable material, while in 
storage, reacted with moisture in the air and 
started to set. When castable material sets before 
it is used, it can never reach full strength. 

Castable material is also subject to spalling 
after several hours of service. The peeling 
material, usually in 1/8-inch strips, should not be 
removed unless it is in the burner cone and is 
interfering with combustion. 

If a castable front is chalky or crumbly, find 
out how deep the condition goes. If no more than 
the surface can be rubbed off, the burner front 
is not seriously damaged. Do not remove the 
crumbly material. The condition is serious only 
if the burner cone is affected or if the casing shows 
signs of overheating. 

Burner tile should be inspected for loose 
segments and broken pieces that might cause 
improper cone angles. The broken or damaged 
segments can be repaired by patching with plastic 
fireclay refractory. In some cases a new segment 
of tile can be installed. 

When you inspect boiler refractories, it 
is a good idea to keep in mind the possibility 
that damage may occur because of operational 
problems. Although boilers must occasionally be 
operated under very severe and damaging condi- 
tions, a lot of damage to refractories (and, in fact, 
to other boiler parts as well) is caused by poor 
operating procedures that are really not necessary 
under the circumstances. It may be helpful to 
show operating personnel any refractory damage 
that appears to be directly related to poor 
operation of the boiler. 



Tube Inspection 

When inspecting the exterior of boiler tubes, 
look for signs of warping, bulging, sagging, 
cracking, pitting, scaling, acid corrosion, and 
other damage. All tube sheets should be inspected 
for signs of leakage, especially the superheater 
tube sheet. 

Inspection of boilers sometimes shows an 
unexpected condition in which adjacent boiler 
tubes are warped in such a way that they touch 
each other. When this condition exists, the tubes 
are said to be married. Tube marriages can result 
either from overheating of the tubes or from 
stresses developed in the tubes during installation. 
For the latter reason, newly erected boilers and 
boilers that have been retubed should always be 
inspected for tube alignment after the initial 
period of steaming. 

When inspection reveals one or more tube 
marriages, the decision as to whether or not the 
married tubes should be renewed should be 
based on the following considerations: 

1 . If the tube marriage occurs in screen tubes 
1 1/2 inches or larger, or if the furnace side wall 
or rear wall tubes are bowed, tube replacement 
is usually required. 

2. If 1-inch or 1 1/4-inch tubes in the main 
bank of generating tubes are married, replacement 
is usually not required if the tube joints are tight 
under hydrostatic test. 

3. Inspect the external surfaces of the tubes. 
If they show blistering or other signs of over- 
heating, the tubes should be renewed. 

4. Inspect the watersides. Where tube mar- 
riages exist, a poor waterside condition may 
indicate hard scale or oil within the affected tubes. 
If hard scale or oil does exist, the married tubes 
should be replaced, and all appropriate steps 
should be taken to remove the scale or oil from 
the rest of the boiler. If the condition of the 
tubes is uncertain, or if a large number of tube 
marriages have occurred, remove one or more 
sample tubes, split them, and examine them 
carefully. 

5. Tube marriages may cause gas laning, 
and gas laning, in turn, may cause local over- 
heating of the inner casing, the bottom part 
of the economizer, and other parts. Inspect 
the boiler carefully for signs of local over- 
heating that might have been caused by gas 
laning resulting from the tube marriages. If 
the local overheating from this cause is found, 
renew the married tubes. 



12-16 



6. On single-furnace boilers, a lane more than 
11/2 inches wide may allow overheating of the 
superheater and of the superheater supports. If 
a large lane (11/2 tubes wide or wider) exists near 
the superheater outlet header end of the boiler, 
the married tubes that caused such a large lane 
should be renewed. 

To identify the cause of the tube failure by 
visual inspection, you will need to know some- 
thing about the various ways in which tubes 
rupture, warp, blister, and otherwise show 
damage. Tube failures must be reported, and they 
must be reported in standard terminology. The 
following sections of this chapter deal with the 
inspection techniques required for determining the 
causes of tube failure and with the various ways 
in which boiler tube damage is classified and 
identified. 

The inspection techniques required for deter- 
mining the cause of tube failure must naturally 
vary according to the nature of the problem. For 
example, a rupture in a fire row tube can usually 
be described adequately on the basis of simple 
visual observation, but the cause of damage to 
a tube that is deep in the tube bank cannot usually 
be determined without removing the intervening 
tubes. When a blistered tube suggests a waterside 
deposit, the nature and extent of the deposit can 
be determined only by removing and splitting the 
tube so that the waterside can be examined. 

Relatively simple equipment is required for the 
field inspection of damaged or fouled pressure 
parts. Equipment for this purpose should include 
the following: (1) devices for measuring tube 
diameters, depth of pits, and thickness of 
deposits; (2) instruments for separating deposits 
and corrosion products a sharp knife, a chisel, 
a steel scribe, or a vise to crack deposits loose from 
the tube samples; (3) an approved type of 
portable light; (4) a supply of clean bottles for 
collecting samples of deposits; and (5) a mirror 
for viewing relatively inaccessible places. 

Many of these items of equipment can be 
improvised if necessary. For example, a simple 
gauge for measuring the depth of waterside pits 
may be made by pushing a straight pin or a paper 
clip through a 3- by 5-inch card so that the point 
of the pin or clip projects beyond the card, at right 
angles to the card. Such an improvised depth 
gauge is shown in figure 12-8. A section of string 
can be wrapped around a deformed tube and then 
laid along a ruler to obtain a measure of tube 
enlargement or tube thinning. Of course, special 
tools such as calipers, depth gauges, and scale 



thickness indicators give more accurate results and 
should be used if they are available; but the 
improvised tools, if used with care, can also give 
good results. 

The classification of boiler tube damage is 
considered here under four major classifications: 
(1) fireside cavities and scars, (2) waterside cavities 
and scars, (3) tube deformities and fractures, and 
(4) tube deposits. 

FIRESIDE CAVITIES AND SCARS on the 
tube firesides often indicate the reasons for tube 
failure. The term circumferential groove is used 
to describe the metal loss that occurs in bands or 
stripes around the circumference of a tube. 
Fireside grooving of this type often occurs at the 
header ends of horizontal tubes such as super- 
heater tubes. The most common cause of this 
damage is leakage from tube seats higher in the 
tube bank. The grooving occurs as the water runs 




98.136 



Figure 12-8. Improvised depth gauge. 



12-17 




98.137 



Figure 12-9. General fireside circumferential grooving. 



down the header and onto the tube ends, or as 
it drips directly onto the tubes. This kind of 
damage is greater on the top of the tube than on 
the underside, but the groove may extend around 
the entire circumference. 

Fireside circumferential grooving may also 
occur on vertical generating tubes as a result of 
thin, damp deposits of soot on horizontal drums 
or headers. In fact, this kind of grooving can 
occur in any part of the boiler where leakage 
provides a sufficient supply of water. Large 
quantities of water trapped between the water 
drum and the boiler casing as, for example, 
from a serious economizer leak can produce 
general fireside grooving around the bottom of 
the rear generating tubes. An example of this 
general fireside circumferential grooving is shown 
in figure 12-9. 

CRATERS are deep, irregular, straight- walled 
cavities in the tube metal. WATER TRACKS are 
closely related to craters; the tracks consist of 
wandering, straight- walled, canyon-like cavities 
in the tube metal. Both cratering and water track- 
ing occur almost exclusively at the header ends 
of water wall tubes and division wall tubes that 
are surrounded by refractory; they are caused by 
water becoming trapped between the tube metal 
and the surrounding refractory. Water washing 
of boiler firesides, without proper drying out, is 



a frequent cause of cratering and water tracking; 
however, any leak higher in the boiler can also 
cause this type of damage. The size of the leak 
and the angle of the tube upon which the water 
leaks determine, to a large extent, whether the 
resulting damage will be circumferential groov- 
ing, cratering, or water tracking. Both cratering 
and water tracking are shown in figure 12-10. 
GENERAL FIRESIDE THINNING consists 
of a uniform loss of metal over a relatively large 
area on the outside of the tube. Soot corrosion 
is by far the most common cause of general 
fireside thinning. The parts that are particularly 
subject to this kind of damage are superheater 




98.138 
Figure 12-10. Fireside catering and water tracking. 



12-18 



tube ends between the headers and the seal plates, 
water drum ends of generating tubes, and return 
bends in economizer tubes. General fireside thin- 
ning of a generating tube is shown in figure 12-11. 

A rather unusual type of general fireside metal 
loss sometimes results from the combination of 
extremely high tube temperatures and the burn- 
ing of fuel oil that contains vanadium compounds. 
The vanadium compounds carried in the flame 
can cause rapid oxidation of metal at high 
temperatures. This type of damage is unusual in 
water-cooled parts of the boiler, since critical 
temperatures are not usually attained. Figure 
12-12 shows a stainless steel superheater tube that 
has suffered this type of general thinning as a 
result of fuel ash damage. 

FIRESIDE BURNING occurs when the rate 
of heat transfer through the tube wall is so 
reduced that the metal is overheated. Waterside 
deposits can cause fireside burning, but most 
serious fireside burning occurs when a tube 
becomes steam bound or dry. Figure 12-13 shows 
the coarse, brittle appearance of tube metal that 
has suffered fireside burning. 

STEAM GOUGING occurs when steam jets 
out of a hole in an adjacent tube. Steam gouging 
can be identified by the extremely smooth surface 
of the cavity, together with the irregular shape of 




the cavity. As may be seen in figure 12-14, a steam 
gouge looks as though the metal has been blasted 
away and the cavity polished. 

TOOL MARKS, such as chisel cuts or 
hammer scars, can usually be identified without 
too much trouble. As shown in figure 12-15, tool 
marks do not resemble corrosion effects in any 
way. 

TUBE DEFORMITIES AND FRACTURES 
comprise another category of boiler tube damage 
that covers abnormal bends, blisters, bulges, 
cracks, warps, sags, and other breaks or distor- 
tions. Like the cavities and scars previously 
discussed, tube deformities and fractures are fairly 
easy to distinguish by visual observation. 




98.141 



Figure 12-13. Fireside burning. 




98.139 
Figure 12-11. General fireside thinning of a generating tube. 



98.142 



Figure 12-14. Fireside steam gauge. 




98.140 

Figure 12-12. General fireside thinning of a stainless steel 
superheater tube (results of fuel ash damage). 




98.143 



Figure 12-15. Fireside tool marks. 



12-19 



The THIN-LIPPED RUPTURE, shown in 
figure 12-16, is a fairly common tube de- 
formity. The rupture resembles a burst bubble; 
the open lips are uniformly tapered to sharp, 
knifelike edges, with no evidence of cracking 
or irregular tearing of the metal. True thin- 
lipped ruptures occur in economizer tubes, 
in generating tubes, and, to a much lesser 
extent, in superheater tubes. Ruptures of this 
type indicate that the flow of steam or water 
was not adequate to absorb the heat to which 
the tube was exposed; consequently, the tube 
metal softened and flowed and then burst. 
Thin-lipped ruptures may be caused by a sudden 
drop in water level or by tube stoppage from 
plugs, tools, and so forth, that were accidentally 
left in the boiler. 

Serious THICK-LIPPED RUPTURES re- 
semble the thin-lipped ruptures except that 
the edges are thick and ragged rather than 
tapered and knifelike. Thick-lipped ruptures 
that occur in mild steel generating tubes in- 
dicate milder and more prolonged overheating 
than the overheating that leads to thin-lipped 
ruptures. Abnormal firing rates, momentary 
low water, flame impingement, gas laning, 
and many other causes can produce mild but 
prolonged overheating that can eventually lead 
to thick-lipped ruptures. A typical thick-lipped 
rupture in a generating tube is shown in figure 
12-17. 

PERFORATION is the term used to de- 
scribe any opening in a tube (other than a 
crack) that is NOT associated with tube enlarge- 
ment. The most common kind of perforation 





98.148 
Figure 12-17. Thick-lipped rupture in a generating tube. 




98.147 
Figure 12-16. Thin-lipped rupture in a generating tube. 



98.150 
Figure 12-18. Thermal crack in a superheater tube. 



is probably the pinhole leak. In many cases, 
the first evidence of tube failure is a pinhole 
leak. 

THERMAL CRACKS, sometimes called 
CREEP CRACKS, result from prolonged, 
mild overheating or repeated short-time over- 
heating. Cracks of this type are found most 
often in alloy superheater tubes, but they 
can occur in mild steel tubes as well. The 
tube is not usually enlarged when a thermal 
crack exists; the cracked wall has normal thick- 
ness, and the break has a dark crystalline ap- 
pearance. A typical example is shown in figure 
12-18. 

TUBE ENLARGEMENT of the type shown 
in figure 12-19 is relatively common in super- 
heater tubes but rare in generating tubes. This 
uniform enlargement of a portion of the tube 
is caused by milder overheating than that 
which produces cracks or ruptures. If an en- 
larged tube is continued in service, it will 
almost certainly crack or break. 



12-20 



98.152 



Figure 12-19. Enlarged tube. 




98.153 



Figure 12-20. Heat blister on a fire row tube. 



HEAT BLISTERS differ from tube en- 
largements in that they affect only one side 
of the tube, usually the side toward the fires. 
Blisters appear as egg-shaped lumps on the 
fireside. They indicate that the tube has been 
heated to the softening point and has blown 
out under boiler pressure. Heat blisters always 
indicate the presence of waterside deposits. 
If the deposit is brittle, as scale or baked 
sludge, blistering breaks the deposit and allows 
the boiler water to quench the hot metal 
before the tube bursts. Heat blisters are most 
commonly found on the fire row generating 
tubes; they are rarely found on superheater 
tubes or economizer tubes. A typical heat 
blister is shown in figure 12-20. 

SAGGING is the term applied to tubes 
that appear to have dropped downward toward 
the furnace under their own weight. This type 
of deformation results from semiplastic flow 
of the tube metal, caused by extremely mild 
overheating. A momentary condition of low 
water is probably the most common cause 
of sagging. If the boiler has been cooled 
slowly, and if the distortion is not so severe 



as to interfere with the designed flow of com- 
bustion gases, sagged tubes may still be continued 
in service. 

WARPING is similar to sagging except 
that the distortion is haphazard rather than 
in one direction. Warping usually occurs as 
a result of sudden cooling of the tubes after 
they have been overheated. Cooling a boiler 
too rapidly after a low-water casualty is a 
typical cause of warped tubes. 

MELTING can occur as a result of a 
serious low-water casualty. If the tube temper- 
ature becomes high enough, the tube metal 
actually melts and runs down into the fur- 
nace. A cluster of fused tubes that resulted 
from melting is shown in figure 12-21. Melting 
of aluminum economizer parts can cause tremen- 
dous damage to a boiler. The molten aluminum 
from overheated economizer parts reacts so 
violently with the iron oxide coating on the 
steel tubes below that the heat of the chemical 
reaction may melt the steel tubes even though the 
furnace temperature is not high enough to melt 
them. 



12-21 




98.155 



Figure 12-21. Melted cluster of tubes. 




Figure 12-22. Lamination of a tube wall (fabrication detect). 



98.157 



MECHANICAL FATIGUE CRACKS occa- 
sionally occur in boiler tubes from such purely 
mechanical processes as flexing. Cracks of this 
type can usually be identified by a clean, bright 
break through a major portion of the metal 
thickness. These cracks begin on the outside 
circumference of the tube. 

TUBE WALL LAMINATION is shown in 
figure 12-22. This lamination or layering occurs 
during the fabrication of the tube. It is the 
most common material defect found in boiler 
tubes. 



FOLDED or UPSET TUBES are a result of 
defective fabrication. A folded tube is shown in 
figure 12-23. This defect resembles a heat blister 
in appearance, but the folded tube shows no wall 
thinning and has a depression on the side of the 
tube opposite the bulge. 

STRETCHED or NECKED TUBES are also 
a result of defective fabrication. A stretched or 
necked tube is shown in figure 12-24. 

FIRESIDE TUBE DEPOSITS can produce 
many of the scars and deformities just described. 
Basically, tube deposits cause tube failure because 
they lead to localized overheating of the tube 



12-22 




98.158 



Figure 12-23. Tube fold (fabrication defect). 




98.159 



Figure 12-24. -Stretched or necked tube (fabrication defect). 



metal. The accurate identification of tube deposits 
is often a necessary part of determining the cause 
of tube failure. 

FIRESIDE TUBE DEPOSITS include soot, 
slag, corrosion products, and high-temperature 

oxide. , 

SOOT is a broad term used to cover all ol trie 
ash products (other than slag) that result from 
combustion. These ash products include carbon, 
sand, salts such as sodium sulfate, and other 
materials. Soot deposits are usually powdery or 
ashy on the tube surfaces near the top of the 
boiler; but they tend to be packed solid on drums, 
headers, and the lower ends of the tubes. 

SLAG is not a powdery or packed ashlike 
soot; rather, it is a saltlike material that is fused 
to the tube surfaces. Slag is objectionable on 
boiler tubes because it retards the transfer of heat 
to the tube metal and because it may cause gas 
channeling, with consequent local overheating of 
tube metal that is not covered by the slag Most 
slags on boiler tubes are soluble enough to be 



controlled by periodic washing of firesides. The 
main way to'prevent slag is to avoid burning fuel 
oil that is contaminated with seawater. 

CORROSION DEPOSITS seldom form 
major fireside deposits. Occasionally, however, 
bulky deposits of ferrous sulfate may form as the 
result of the combination of soot and large 
amounts of water. These deposits have been 
known to travel away from their original location 
and adhere to remote rows of generating tubes. 
The deposits can usually be removed by water 
washing and mechanical cleaning. The source of 
the water leakage should be found and corrected. 
Also, the location of the original deposit should 
be found, and the area should be carefully 
inspected for signs of corrosion. 

HIGH-TEMPERATURE OXIDE is the term 
applied to heavy fireside layers of mixed iron 
oxides formed by overheating of the tube metal. 
Low water is a frequent cause of high-temperature 
oxide on the tube firesides. The high-temperature 
oxide has a rather layered appearance; it resembles 



12-23 



corrosion products and is often wrongly called 
scale. 

Exterior Inspection of 
Drums and Headers 

The exteriors of all boiler drums and headers 
should be inspected for signs of corrosion under 
the insulation. Rusty streaks or signs of corrosion 
on or around the edges of the covering, the drum 
pads, or the tubes indicate possible corrosion of 
the drum and should be investigated immediately. 
If machinery or piping is installed over the boiler, 
water may drip down on the boiler and work its 
way under the insulation. In such installations, 
the boiler drum coverings must be removed, and 
the exterior of the drum must be inspected 
carefully. 

Inspection of Protection, 
Seal, and Support Plates 

All corrosion-resisting steel plates such as 
baffle plates, seal plates, superheater support 
plates, steam drum protection plates, and so forth, 
must be carefully inspected whenever firesides are 
opened. These steel plates are subject to damage 
from overheating, particularly if clogged gas 
passages interfere with the designed flow of 
combustion gases and allow extremely hot gases 
to flow over the plates. Since failure of these parts 
could have extremely serious consequences, the 
plates should be inspected at every opportunity 
and should be renewed when necessary. 

Inspection of Uptakes 
and Smoke Pipes 

The uptakes and smoke pipes are examined 
according to a maintenance system. Check the 
uptake expansion joints to be sure they are not 
clogged with soot. Look for ruptures and for loose 
reinforcing ribs or Z-bar stiff eners. Check the rain 
gutters to see that they are not plugged with soot. 
Check the top of the economizer to see if it is 
clean. 

OPERATIONAL INSPECTION 
AND TESTS 

Following the hydrostatic test, the boiler 
should be fired and brought up to operating 
pressure and temperature. All automatically and 
manually operated control devices provided for 
control of steam and water pressure, hot-water 



temperature, combustion, and boiler water level 
should be inspected and caused to function under 
operating conditions. All associated valves and 
piping, pressure- and temperature-indicating 
devices, metering and recording devices, and all 
boiler auxiliaries should be inspected under 
operating conditions. All safety valves and water- 
pressure relief valves should be made to function 
from overpressure. 

Inspections and tests may be made with the 
main steam or hot-water distribution valves closed 
or open as necessary to fire the boiler and operate 
it under normal operating conditions. Testing the 
function of automatically or manually controlled 
devices and apparatus that may interfere with 
distribution requirements should be one with main 
steam or hot-water distribution valves closed, as 
applicable. 

The purpose of these inspections and tests 
is to discover any inefficient operation or 
maintenance of the boiler or its auxiliaries 
that may be evidenced under operating conditions. 
All deficiencies requiring adjustment, repair, 
or replacement, and all conditions indicating 
excessive operating costs and maintenance costs 
should be reported. 

Firing Equipment 

The operation of all firing equipment, in- 
cluding oil burners, gas burners, fuel injectors, 
fuel igniters, coal stokers and feeders, and other 
such equipment provided to introduce fuel into 
the boiler furnace and ignite the fuel, should be 
inspected for any deficiency that may be evidenced 
under operating conditions. In particular, igniters 
and burners should be checked to ensure that 
burner protrusion, angle, setting, and so forth, 
is such that light off and operation are as effec- 
tive as possible. 

Controls 

Inspect the operation of combustion con- 
trols, steam pressure controls, water tempera- 
ture controls, and feed water controls. Assure 
that the ability of the combustion control 
and steam pressure control to maintain proper 
steam pressure (or water temperature in high- 
temperature water installations) and air-fuel ratio 
is demonstrated throughout the capacity range of 
the boiler. Air-fuel ratio should be checked by 
COi or O 2 measuring devices. On smaller boilers 
the appearance of the fire may be used as a guide 
for inspection of air-fuel ratio. Check fully 



12-24 



automatic boiler controls for proper program- 
ming sequence and timing with respect to 
prepurge, ignition, pilot proving, flame proving, 
and postpurge periods. Check the operation of 
flame failure and combustion air failure devices 
to assure that they properly shut off the supply 
of fuel; do this by simulating a flame failure 
(manually shutting off the fuel or by other means) 
and observing the operating of the controls, 
solenoid valves, and diaphragm-operated valves 
that are to operate during a flame failure. Inspect 
feedwater controls and check the ability of the 
controls to maintain proper water level through- 
out the range of capacity with first load swings. 
Check the operation of low-water fuel cutoff 
and automatic water-feeding devices by drain- 
ing the float bowl, lowering the boiler water 
level, or by performing other necessary steps to 
cause these devices to function, to assure they 
operate properly. The low-flow cutout on high- 
temperature water boilers should be tested by 
reducing the flow until cutout occurs. For 
additional information on the inspection of the 
operating conditions of the controls, refer to the 
section of this RTM that deals with WATER 
COLUMNS AND GAUGE GLASSES. 

Steam and Water Piping 

While the boiler is operating, examine all 
steam and water piping including connections 
to the columns for leaks. If any leaks are 
found, determine if they are the result of excessive 
strains caused by expansion and contraction or 
other causes. Listen for water hammer; if found, 
determine the cause. Look for undue vibration, 
particularly in piping connections to the boiler. 
Where excessive vibration of piping is found, 
examine connections and parts for crystallization. 

Water Columns and Gauge Glasses 

With steam on the boiler, blow down the water 
columns and gauge glasses and observe the action 
of the water in the glass to determine if the 
connection to the boiler or the blowoff piping is 
restricted or not properly free. This will help you 
determine the true condition of high- and low- 
water alarms and of the automatic combustion 
equipment. 

Devices 

While the boiler is operating, cause the 
individual mechanisms of LOW-WATER FUEL 



CUTOFF and/or WATER-FEEDING DEVICES 
to operate to assure they function properly. 

Where a float-operated, low-water cutoff or 
water-feeding device or a combination low-water 
fuel cutoff and water-feeding device is provided, 
its operation should be tested by opening the drain 
to the float bowl and draining the bowl to the low- 
water level of the boiler. When the low-water 
point is reached, the mechanism of the low-water 
fuel cutoff should function and shut off the fuel 
supply to the boiler until boiler water is added to 
the proper level. Also, at the low-water point, the 
mechanism controlling the feedwater supply 
should function to start the feedwater. 

Where there is a low-water fuel cutoff device 
controlled by excess temperature generated in a 
temperature element located inside the boiler, its 
operation may be tested by blowing off the boiler 
to its allowable low-water level. On or before the 
low-water level is reached, the device should 
function to shut off the boiler fuel supply until 
boiler water is added to the proper level. 

On high-temperature water boilers, the flow 
through the boiler should be restricted to the 
minimum allowed, as shown by the manufac- 
turer's operating data. The point at which 
fuel cutoff takes place should be noted and 
adjustments made as required. 

With steam on the boiler, observe the STEAM 
GAUGE pointer for sticking or restriction of its 
movement. Blow down the pipe leading to the 
gauge to assure that it is free. Attach an approved 
test gauge to the pipe nipple provided for this 
purpose, and compare the accuracy of each steam 
gauge on the boiler with that of the test gauge. 
When inaccuracy of any gauge is evidenced or 
suspected, it should be removed and calibrated 
by means of a deadweight gauge tester or other 
device designed for this purpose. When several 
boilers are in service and connected to a common 
steam main, compare the readings of the separate 
gauges. All TEMPERATURE-INDICATING 
DEVICES should be observed for indications of 
excessive temperature, particularly during and 
immediately after the time high-load demands are 
made on the boiler. While the boiler is operating 
under normal conditions, observe the operation 
of all METERING AND RECORDING DE- 
VICES. When there is evidence that any such 
device is not functioning properly, it should be 
adjusted, repaired, or replaced as necessary. 



12-25 



Blowoff Valves 

Test the freedom of each blowoff valve and 
its connections by opening the valve and blow- 
ing off the boiler for a few seconds. Determine 
if the valve is excessively worn or otherwise 
defective, and if there is evidence of restrictions 
in the valve or connected piping preventing 
proper blowoff of the boiler. 



Stop and Check Valves 

While the boiler is operating, inspect the 
operating condition of each stop and check valve 
where possible. Serious defects of externally 
controlled stop valves may be detected by 
operating the valve when it is under pressure. 
Similarly, defects in check valves may be detected 
by listening to the operation of the valve or 
observing any excessive vibration of the valve as 
it operates under pressure. 



Pressure-Reducing Valves 

While there is pressure on the system, open 
and then close the bypass valve as safety and 
operating conditions permit. Also, observe the 
fluctuation of the pressure gauge pointer as an 
aid in determining possible defects in the opera- 
tion of the pressure-reducing valve or the pressure 
gauge. Look for any evidence that may indicate 
improper condition of the relief or safety valves 
provided for the pressure-reducing valves. 



Boiler Safety and Water- 
Pressure Relief Valves 

Test the blowoff setting of each safety valve 
for steam boilers and each water-pressure relief 
valve for hot-water boilers by raising the boiler 
pressure slowly to the blowoff point. In turn, test 
the releasing pressure of each valve, gagging 
all other safety or relief valves except the 
one being tested. Observe the operation of each 
valve as blowoff pressure is reached. Compare 
the blowoff setting with setting requirements 
specified in paragraph 1 or 2 of this section, 
as applicable, and make adjustments where 
necessary. When the steam discharge capacity of 
a safety valve is questionable, it should be tested 
by one of the methods given in paragraph 3 of 
this section. When the pressure-relieving capacity 
of a pressure-relief valve is questionable, it should 



be tested according to the procedures given in 
paragraph 4 of this section. 

1. SAFETY VALVES SETTING RE- 
QUIREMENTS. Note this word of caution: 
Before adjusting safety valves on electric steam 
generators, be sure that the electric power circuit 
to the generator is open. The generator may be 
under steam pressure, but the power line should 
be open while the necessary adjustments are 
being made. At least one safety valve should be 
set to release at no more than the maximum 
allowable working pressure of the steam boiler. 
Safety valves are factory set and sealed. When a 
safety valve requires adjustment, the seal should 
be broken, adjustments made, and the valve 
resealed by qualified personnel only. When more 
than one safety valve is provided, the remaining 
valve or valves may be set within a range of 3 % 
above the maximum allowable working pressure. 
However, the range of the setting of all the 
safety valves on the boiler should not exceed 10% 
of the highest pressure to which any valve is set. 
Each safety valve should reseat tightly with a 
blowdown of not more than 2 psig or 4% of the 
valve setting, whichever is greater. 

In those cases where the boiler is supplied 
with feedwater directly from the pressure main 
without the use of feeding apparatus (not 
including return traps), no safety valve should be 
set at a pressure greater than 94% of the lowest 
pressure obtained in the supply main feeding the 
boiler. 

2. PRESSURE-RELIEF VALVE SET- 
TING REQUIREMENTS. At least one pressure- 
relief valve should be set to release at not more 
than the maximum allowable working pressure of 
the hot- water boiler. When more than one relief 
valve is provided on either hot-water heating or 
hot-water supply boilers, the additional valve (or 
valves) may be set within a range not to exceed 
20% of the lowest pressure to which any valve 
is set. Each pressure-relief valve should reseat 
tightly with a blowdown of not more than 25% 
of the valve setting. 

3. SAFETY VALVE CAPACITY TEST. 
When the relieving capacity of any safety valve 
for steam boilers is questioned, it may be tested 
by one of the three following methods: 

a. By the accumulation test, which consists 
of shutting off all other steam-discharge outlets 
from the boiler and forcing the fires to the 
maximum. The safety valve capacity should be 
sufficient to prevent a pressure in excess of 6% 
above the maximum allowable working pressure. 



12-26 



This method should not be used on a boiler with 
a superheater or reheater. 

b. By measuring the maximum amount of 
fuel that can be burned and computing the 
corresponding evaporative capacity (steam- 
generating capacity) upon the basis of the heating 
value of this fuel. These computations should be 
made as outlined in the code. 

c. By determining the maximum evapora- 
tive capacity by measuring the feedwater. 

When either of the methods outlined in 
(b) or (c) above is employed, the sum of the safety 
valve capacity should be equal to, or greater than, 
the maximum evaporative capacity (maximum 
steam-generating capacity) of the boiler. 

If you discover that the relieving 
capacity is inadequate because of deficiencies in 
the valve, the valve should be repaired or replaced. 
If the relieving capacity of the valve is found to 
be satisfactory within the proper relieving range 
of the valve but inefficient for the steam- 
generating capacity of the boiler, additional safety 
valve capacity should be provided. 

4. PRESSURE-RELIEF VALVE CAPAC- 
ITY TEST. When the relieving capacity of any 
pressure-relief valve for hot-water boilers is 
questioned, the capacity can be tested by turning 
the adjustment screw until the pressure-relief valve 
is adjusted to the fully open position. The pressure 
should not rise excessively. When the test is 
completed, reset the pressure-relief valve to the 
required setting. This test is made with all water 
discharge openings closed except the pressure- 
relief valve being tested. When the discharge is 
led through a pipe, determine at the time the valve 
is operating if the drain opening in the discharge 
pipe is not properly free, or if there is evidence 
of obstruction elsewhere inside the pipe. If deemed 
necessary to determine the freedom of discharge 
from the valve, the discharge connection should 
be removed. After completing tests and adjust- 
ments, the inspector should seal the safety adjust- 
ment to prevent tampering. 



Boiler Auxiliaries 

While the boiler is operating under normal 
conditions, observe the operation of all boiler 
auxiliaries for any defects that may prevent 
proper functioning of the boiler or indicate a lack 
of proper maintenance of auxiliary equipment. 
The unnecessary use of multiple auxiliaries or the 
use of a large auxiliary during a light-load period 
(when a smaller auxiliary could be substituted) 



should be discouraged. The maximum use of 
steam-driven auxiliaries short of atmospheric 
exhaust should be encouraged. Steam leaks, 
wastage to atmosphere, and so forth, should be 
called to the attention of operating personnel. 
Particular attention should be given to deaerator 
venting practice. Venting should be held to the 
minimum required to preclude oxygen entrain- 
ment in the feedwater. 

When intermittently operating condensate 
pumps are used, look for any tendency toward 
creation of a vacuum when a pump starts. If this 
happens, recommend installation of a small, 
continuously operating, float-throttled, conden- 
sate pump (in parallel with intermittently 
operating pumps) to assure a condensate flow at 
all times. If there are a number of intermittently 
operating condensate pumps, it may be possible 
to convert one of them (if of small enough 
capacity) to continuous throttled operation. 



PLANT OPERATION 

To operate boilers or be a plant supervisor, 
you need to know all the mechanical details of 
the boiler you are operating and its associated 
auxiliaries. However, just knowing this informa- 
tion is not enough. To be a professional boiler 
operator or plant supervisor, you must develop 
a keen eye for trouble, a finely tuned ear, and an 
overall sense of awareness concerning boiler plant 
operation at all times. 

As an operator and/or supervisor of a boiler 
plant, you must learn to tell the difference 
between normal and abnormal operating condi- 
tions. By training yourself to notice and analyze 
strange noises, unusual vibrations, abnormal 
temperatures and pressures, and other indications 
of trouble, you will be better able to prevent any 
impending trouble or casualty to the plant. 



OPERATORS 

Boiler plant operators must maintain accurate 
records. Logs provide a means of recording con- 
tinuous data on boiler plant performance and 
analysis of operation. Logs are arranged for use 
over a 24-hour period, consisting of three 8-hour 
shifts. Log entries should be carefully made in 
columns. 



12-27 



Logs 

Information of importance in the operation 
of boilers must be recorded. This section provides 
information concerning the type of data that 
should be recorded in logs. 

1. Steam pressures. Steam pressure is re- 
corded by the operator from steam gauges and 
shows performance of automatic or manual 
control. 

2. Steam flow. Actual output of the plant 
is recorded by the operator in pounds per 
hour to obtain steam flow. This record determines 
the number of boilers to operate for greatest 
efficiency. 

3. Feed water heater. Feed water-heater pres- 
sure indicates whether proper deaerating 
temperature can be maintained in the heater. 
Feedwater-heater temperature shows the effec- 
tiveness of the feedwater heater. A drop in steam 
supply pressure or insufficient venting may cause 
low heater temperature. 

4. Feed-pump pressure. Feed-pump pressure 
indicates effectiveness of the boiler feed pumps. 
If feedwater supply fails, the pressure reading 
enables the operator to determine whether or not 
the difficulty is in the feed pumps. The pumps 
are defective when the feed-pump pressure reading 
is below normal. 

5. Forced draft. Forced draft is an indication 
of thickness of the fuel bed. The most satisfac- 
tory value varies with different installations and 
fuels and is determined by actual trial. 

6. Furnace draft. Furnace draft, when used 
in connection with forced draft, should be slightly 
less than atmospheric pressure to prevent smoke 
from leaking into the boiler room and overheating 
the furnace lining. If only an induced or natural 
draft is used, furnace draft must be sufficient to 
cause the quantity of air required for combustion 
to flow into the furnace. Operating with a 
furnace draft higher than actually required results 
in excessive air leakage into the setting with an 
accompanying loss in efficiency. 

7. Last-pass draft. Last-pass draft shows 
actual draft produced by a stack or an induced- 
draft fan. Fireman should become familiar with 
last-pass draft at various ratings when the boiler 
is operating satisfactorily. A decrease in last-pass 
draft with other conditions constant indicates 
leaking baffles. An increase in last-pass draft 
shows that gas passes are becoming clogged. 

8. Percent CO 2 flue gas. Percent CO 2 flue 
I gas is a measure of relative quantities of air 



supplied with fuel. It is kept at a value that has 
been established as most satisfactory for the plant, 
fuel, rating, and like factors. In plants not equip- 
ped with CO 2 recording meters, this value is deter- 
mined with a hand gas analyzer. With experience, 
you can determine the correct amount of air sup- 
plied for a furnace by checking the draft gauges 
and from personal observation. In all cases, you 
should check values by use of a hand gas analyzer. 
9. Flue-gas temperature. Flue-gas tempera- 
ture is an indication of the portion of heat leav- 
ing the boiler with the flue gases. This heat 
represents a direct energy loss in fuel. Abnormally 
high flue-gas temperatures at a given boiler rating 
are caused by dirty heating surfaces or leakage 
of baffles. If the heating surface has a coating of 
soot and ash, heat that cannot escape is discharged 
to the stack. Leakage through baffles allows the 
gases to take a shorter path than intended and 
reduces contact of gases with the entire heating 
surface. Excessive fouling of the boiler's firesides 
increases the draft loss while leaking baffles 
decreases the draft loss. Either condition raises 
the temperature of flue gases above normal. 

10. Fuel. Always determine the quality of 
fuel being used as this represents a major 
operating cost. 

a. Pounds of coal. Procedures for deter- 
mining the quantity of coal burned depends upon 
the means available. You may use scales that auto- 
matically dump weighed quantities of coal into the 
stoker or pulverizer hoppers. A register indicates 
the number of "dumps" that, multiplied by the 
weight of coal discharged per dump, gives the 
total. Another weighing method uses traveling 
larries equipped with scales so that the weight of 
each load can be recorded before it is dumped into 
the boiler hopper. In the absence of a weighing 
device, the quantity of coal consumed can be 
determined by filling and leveling bunkers at given 
intervals and recording the coal used from the 
report of coal received during a given interval. 
Methods for approximating coal burned by count- 
ing stoker revolutions are only estimates and are 
subject to considerable error when the size of coal 
changes. 

b. Cubic feet of gas. The quantity of gas 
used is indicated on a meter. The readings can be 
direct or they may necessitate calculation by use 
of a meter factor. 

c. Gallons of oil. Fuel oil quantities are 
determined by use of a measuring stick. Tables 
supplied with a given tank are then used to deter- 
mine quantity from level of fuel. Tanks may also 
be supplied with gauges that can be read directly. 



12-28 



11. Outside temperature. A heating plant 
load is greatly influenced by outside temperature. 
Record this temperature for comparison with 
steam generated and fuel used. These comparative 
values are useful in determining abnormal fuel 
consumption and in estimating future require- 
ments. 

12. Makeup water. The quantity of makeup 
water used should be recorded. This enables the 
operator to note an abnormal increase in makeup 
water before a dangerous condition develops. 
Return all possible condensate to the boiler plant; 
this will save on water and chemicals being used 
to treat the water. 

13. Water Pressure. Feedwater is most im- 
portant to the safe operation of the boiler plant. 
The hot-water supply temperature should be 
recorded. Insufficiently heated water can cause 
scaling or deposits in a boiler. 

14. Hot-water supply temperature. Record 
the hot-water supply temperature. Insufficiently 
heated water can cause scaling or deposits in a 
boiler. 

15. Water softeners. Where softeners are 
employed, you should keep a meter record to 
inform the shift operator of the time when the 
units must be regenerated. A decrease in the time 
of runs between regeneration is an indicator of 
either an increase in hardness of incoming water 
or of deterioration of the softening material. The 
note columns are for recording total water 
softened and pounds of salt added. 

16. Totals and averages. Space is provided 
for recording total and average quantities per 
shift. 

17. Steam flow. To find the quantity of 
steam generated, subtract the steam flowmeter 
integrator reading at the start of shift from the 
reading at the end of the shift, then multiply the 
remainder by the meter constant. Dividing steam 
generated by fuel burned (pounds of coal, cubic 
feet of gas, or gallons of oil) yields a quantity that 
indicates the overall economy obtained. If the 
plant does not have a steam flowmeter, pumps 
can be calibrated for flow and a record kept of 
their operating time, or the condensate and 
makeup water can be metered. 

18. Boiler feed pump in service. A record of 
the boiler feed pump in service makes it possible 
to determine appropriate operating hours and to 
see that the various pumps are used for equal 
lengths of service. 

19. Soot blown time and blowdown. A record 
of blown time and blowdown is valuable to the 
relieving shift operator because it is an indicator 



of plant conditions, and it will show irregularities 
if any exist. 

20. Phosphate, caustic soda, and tannin 
added. A record of phosphate, caustic soda, 
and tannin used is valuable in keeping correct 
boiler water analysis and in determining the total 
amount of chemicals used. 

21. Remarks. The remarks column is in the 
upper right area of the log sheet. List all the equip- 
ment that is to be checked each day according to 
the schedule listed in TM 5-651 . Annotate all the 
irregularities that are found in connection with 
these inspections. List the dates when the boilers 
are drained and washed and at other intervals, as 
determined by local water conditions. Indicate the 
degree of internal cleanliness. 

22. Using personnel. Names of personnel 
responsible for these data must be entered in the 
appropriate area on the bottom of the log sheet. 



Turnover/Watch Relief 

When an operator comes on duty, he should 
make an operational inspection to ensure that 
everything is operating normally. The points to 
be checked are as follows: 

1. Check the water level in the gauge glass 
on each boiler by opening and closing the try 
cocks. 

2. Check the low-water cutoffs and the 
boiler feed equipment by blowing down the water 
columns on each boiler. 

3. Check the steam pressure and compare it 
with the steam pressure that the plant should 
deliver. . 

4. Check the boilers for leaks or other 
conditions that can affect plant operation. 

5. Check for proper operation of the boiler 
room accessories. 

6. Check the fuel supply and the firing 
equipment. 

7. Check the condition of the fires to deter- 
mine if they are clean. 

8. Check the general appearance of the 
boiler room, fixtures, piping, and insulation. 

9. Check the boiler room record sheets to 
determine if any troubles were encountered by the 
previous shift operator. 

10. Question the operator being relieved 
about plant operation and the troubles en- 
countered. 

1 1 . Check for any verbal or written orders 
with which you are to comply. 



12-29 



Table 12-2. Effects of Inadequate or Improper Water Conditioning 



EFFECT 


CONSTITUENT 


REMARKS 


Scale 


Silica 


Forms a hard, glassy coating on internal 




Hardness 


surfaces of boiler. Vaporizes in high- 
pressure boilers and deposits on turbine 
blades. 

CaS0 4 , MgS0 3 , CaCO 3 and MgC0 3 form 






scale on boiler tubes. 


r^orrn^inn 


Oxygen 


Causes pitting of metal in boilers, and 




Carbon 
dioxide 


steam and condensate piping. 

Major causes of deterioration of 
condensate return lines. 




O 2 - CO 2 


Combination is more corrosive than 






either by itself. 


Carryover. 


High boiler 
water concen- 
trations. 


Causes foaming and priming of boiler 
and carryover in steam, resulting in 
deposits on turbine blades and valve 
seats. 


Caustic 
embrittlement. 

Economic 
losses. 


High caustic 
concentration. 

Repair of 
boilers. 

Outages 


Causes intercrystalline cracking of 
boiler metal. 

Repair pitted boilers and clean heavily 
scaled boilers. 

Reduce efficiency and capacity of plant 




Reduced heat 
transfer. 


High fuel bills. 



PLANT SUPERVISOR 

As a boiler plant supervisor, you are expected 
to organize and manage the overall operation of 
the boiler. Ensuring that daily logs are maintained 
by operators, submitting monthly operation 
reports and logs, checking maintenance require- 
ments, training personnel, and so forth, are 
included in your duties and responsibilities. Each 
boiler plant has its unique requirements. Only 
through operating your specific plant and com- 
pletely familiarizing yourself with it can you 
establish a comprehensive management program. 

This chapter cannot cover all the aspects of 
supervising a boiler plant. You must refer to 
current Navy publications and manufacturer's 



manuals that pertain to your specific plant. When 
assigned as a boiler plant supervisor, establish an 
on-site library of these publications and manuals, 
and keep them handy for immediate reference. 

WATER CHEMISTRY 

The effects of inadequate or improper water 
conditioning can cause major problems in the 
operation of boilers. Manufacturer's specifica- 
tions must be strictly adhered to. Table 12-2 
outlines the effects and results of poor water treat- 
ment of boiler water. By establishing an aggressive 
water-treatment program, you can greatly reduce 
inefficient boiler operation and high maintenance 
costs. 



12-30 



Utilitiesman 3 & 2, volume 2, chapter 14, 
NAVEDTRA 10661, discussed at length the boiler 
water tests normally encountered in the field. You 
should review this information. This section 
discusses how to treat boiler water, based on the 
results of those tests. 

CHEMICAL MAKEUP OF WATER 

Water has been termed the universal solvent. 
Water has a tendency to dissolve nearly everything 
that comes in contact with it. The purer the water 
is, that is, the lower its dissolved solids content, 
the greater the tendency to dissolve its surround- 
ings. Pure water, if stored in a stainless steel tank, 
after a short contact time, has a very small amount 
of iron, chromium, and nickel from the tank 
dissolved in it. This dissolving of the tank does 
not continue indefinitely with the same water. The 
water, in a sense, has satisfied its appetite in a 
short time and does not dissolve any more metal. 
Pure water, if exposed to air, immediately absorbs 
air and has oxygen, from the air, dissolved in it. 
A glass of tap water at 68 F will contain 9.0 ppm 
of oxygen. If the tap water is heated to 77 F, some 
of the oxygen is driven out and the water contains 
8.2 ppm of oxygen. The higher the temperature 
of the water, the less dissolved oxygen it can hold. 
Conversely, the higher the pressure imposed on 
the water, the greater the dissolved oxygen that 
the water can hold. Water, when boiled, produces 
steam. The steam contains some of the liquid 
water. There is never a perfect separation of pure 
steam from the boiling water. The steam above 
the boiling water will always have entrained with 
it some of the boiling water. The foregoing three 
ideas, water is a universal solvent, water dissolves 
oxygen when in contact with air, and boiling water 
is always entrained with steam, should assist you 
in understanding the nature of feedwater. 

The feedwater, as it enters the boiler steam 
drum, is now considered boiler water. Complete 
understanding of the nature of boiler water can 
be gained by temporarily making the assumption 
that no water treatment, chemical addition, or 
blowdown is applied to the boiler water. The 
character of the boiler water continuously changes 
as the boiler steams. The dissolved and suspended 
solids, contained in the feedwater, concentrate in 
the boiler water at the rate of eight-fold every hour 
if the boiler is producing steam at 50% of its 
normal capacity. Three damaging conditions arise 
in the boiler as the boiler water continues to steam 
without any treatment. Scale formation on the 
steam generating surfaces, corrosion of the boiler 



metal, and boiler water carryover with the steam 
due to foaming are the three results of untreated 
boiler water. 

To prevent scale formation on the internal 
water-contacted surfaces of a boiler and to 
prevent destruction of the boiler metal by 
corrosion, feedwater and boiler water must be 
chemically treated. This chemical treatment 
prolongs the useful life of the boiler and results 
in appreciable savings in fuel, since maximum heat 
transfer is possible when no scale deposits occur. 

CHEMICAL TREATMENT 
(EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL) 

The method of using chemicals may take the 
form of external treatment, internal treatment, 
or a combination of both. The principal difference 
between these forms of treatment is that in 
external treatment the raw water is changed or 
adjusted by chemical treatment outside of the 
boiler so that a different type of feedwater is 
formed, while in internal treatment the water is 
treated inside the boiler by feeding chemicals 
into the boiler water, usually through the feed 
lines. Again, in external treatment the main 
chemical action takes place outside the boiler, 
while in internal treatment the chemical action 
takes place within the boiler. 

INTERNAL TREATMENT 
AND PREVENTION 

At many Navy installations, the boilers are not 
large and do not operate at high pressure. When 
the makeup water is not too high in hardness or 
dissolved solids, it permits good operation with 
only internal treatment. Under this condition, the 
installation of external treating equipment is not 
necessary. Chemical treatment covered in this 
chapter applies primarily to internal treatment. 

Scale 

When water evaporates in a boiler, the hard 
components that were in the water, such as 
calcium salts, magnesium salts, and other insolu- 
ble materials, form deposits on the tubes and 
other internal surfaces. These deposits are known 
as scales. Actually, the temperature of the water 
determines how well the different salts dissolve 
and how long they remain dissolved. Some salts 
are such that the hotter the water, the better they 
stay dissolved. Other salts stay dissolved while the 
water is at a relatively low temperature but form 



12-31 



Table 12-3.-Chemicals Used by NAVFAC for Internal Boiler Water Treatment in Shore-Based Boilers 



CHEMICAL 



PURPOSE 



COMMENT 



Sodium hydroxide 
NaOH (caustic 
soda). 

Sodium carbonate 
Na 2 CO 3 (Soda ash) 



Soduim phosphates 
NaH 2 PO 4 , NaHPO 4 , 
Na 3 PO 4 , NaPO 3 . 



Sodium aluminate 
NaAl 2 4 . 

Soduim sulfite 
Na 2 SO 3 



Hydrazine hydrate 
N 2 H 4 .H 2 O (35%). 



Filming amines; 
Octadecylamine, etc. 



Neutral amines; 
morpholine, cyclo- 
hexylamine, ben- 
zylamine. 

Sodium nitrate 

NaNO 3 

Tannins, starches, 
glucose and lignin 
derivatives. 



Increase alkalinity, raise 
pH, precipitate calcium 
sulfate as the carbonate. 

Increase alkalinity, raise 
pH, precipitate magnesium. 



Precipitate calcium as 

hydroxyapatite 

(Ca IO (OH) 2 (P0 4 ) 6 ). 



Precipitate calcium, 
magnesuim 



Prevent oxygen corrosion. 



Prevent oxygen corrosion. 



Control return-line corrosion 
by forming a protective film 
on the metal surfaces. 



Control return-line corrosion 
by neutralizing CO 2 and 
adjusting pH of condensate. 



Inhibit caustic embrittle- 
ment 

Prevent feed line deposits 
coat scale crystals to produce 
fluid sludge that won't 
adhere as readily to boiler 
heating surfaces. 



Contains no carbonate, therefore 
doesn't promote CO 2 formation in 

steam. 

Lower cost, more easily handled 
than caustic soda. But some 
carbonate breaks down to release 
CO 2 with steam. 

Alkalinity and resulting pH must 
be kept high enough for this 
reaction to take place (pH usually 
above 10.8). 

Forms a flocculent sludge. 



Used to neutralize residual oxygen 
by forming sodium sulfate. At high 
temperatures and pressures, excess 
may form H 2 S in steam. 

Remove residual oxygen to form 
nitrogen and water. One part of 
oxygen reacts with three parts of 
hydrazine (35% solution). 

Protects against both oxygen and 
carbon dioxide attack. Small 
amounts of continuous feed will 
maintain the film. Do not use 
where steam contacts foods. 

About 2 ppm of amine is needed 
for each ppm of carbon dioxide in 
steam. Keep pH in range of 7.0 
to 7.4 or higher. 

Used where the water may have 
embrittling characteristics. 

These organics, often called 
protective colloids, are used with 
soda ash, phosphate. Also distort 
scale crystal growth, help inhibit 
caustic embrittlement. 



12-32 



Table 12-3. Chemicals Used by NAVFAC for Internal Boiler Water Treatment in Shore-Based Boilers Continued 



CHEMICAL 



PURPOSE 



COMMENT 



Seaweed derivatives; 
(Sodium alginate, 
Sodium mannuron- 
ate). 

Antifoams; (poly- 
amides, etc.). 



Proprietary com- 
pounds (of ball or 
brick type). 



Provide a more fluid sludge 
and minimize carryover. 



Reduce foaming tendency 
of highly concentrated boiler 
water. 

Do not use for water 
treatment 



May be used for water 
treatment 



Organics often classed as reactive 
colloids since they react with 
calcium and magnesium and 
absorb scale crystals. 

Usually added with other chemi- 
cals for scale control and sludge 
dispersion. 

Boilers 125 psig and above, all 
power plant boilers, all boilers 
using intermittent blowdown. 

Low makeup boilers (under 125 
psig) for space heating. 

High makeup boilers (under 125 
psig) with continuous blowdown 
and stable feedwater, if cost saving 
is effected. 



solid crystals (scales) that come out in increasing 
amounts as the water gets closer to becoming 
steam. 

The scale-forming salts stay dissolved in the 
water and in the cooler parts of the boiler, but 
when the water reaches the hot tubes, these salts 
start forming solid particles that come out of the 
water and stick to the hot metal parts as scale 
deposits. These deposits are highly objectionable 
because they are poor conductors of heat, actually 
reduce efficiency, and are frequently responsible 
for tube failures. Some of the principal scale- 
forming salts to be considered in most cases are 
listed as follows: 

Calcium sulfate CaSO 4 

Calcium silicate CaSiO 3 

Magnesium silicate MgSiOs 

Calcium hydroxide Ca(OH) 2 

Calcium carbonate CaCOs 

Magnesium hydroxide Mg(OH) 2 

Scale is made up of three main parts: calcium 
sulfate, calcium carbonate, and silicates of 
calcium and magnesium. Scales that are princi- 
pally calcium sulfate or chiefly of the aforemen- 
tioned silicates are very hard; those scales that are 
principally calcium carbonate with little silicate 



are somewhat softer. A scale consisting chiefly of 
calcium carbonate may appear only as a thin, 
porous, soft scale that does not build up in 
thickness. 

Scale can be prevented by the intelligent use 
of proper water treatment, and that is one of the 
objectives of the boiler water test and treatment 
program. 

Prevention and Treatment 
for Scale Control 

Scale-forming substances cannot always be 
prevented from entering the boiler, but they can 
be made to form a fluid sludge. The problem then 
is simply one of proper chemical treatment and 
blowdown. 

The selection of chemicals for internal treat- 
ment is determined by many factors: the kind of 
feedwater hardness (whether carbonate or 
sulfate); the ability of feedwater to build up 
required causticity; the type of external treatment, 
if used; the pH and percentage of condensate 
returns; the location of chemical feed injection; 
and the cost and availability of chemicals. 

The first two chemicals to be considered for 
boiler water treatment of shore-based boilers are 
caustic soda and sodium phosphate (table 12-3). 



12-33 



The caustic soda prepares the way by making the 
water definitely alkaline (high pH). The sodium 
phosphate can then attack the calcium magnesium 
and silica salts and convert them into a fluid 
sludge that can be removed by blowdown. 

Caustic soda is used when the feedwater 
cannot build up the required causticity residual 
in the boiler water. Use of soda ash (Na 2 CO 3 ) 
is not authorized in steaming boilers because it 
breaks down under heat to form undesired 
carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). This gas is corrosive to 
condensate return lines. The Navy boiler com- 
pound customarily used aboard ship is not 
authorized because it contains about 39% soda 
ash. 

Sodium phosphate (NaPO 4 ) has a special 
affinity (attraction) for calcium, and in boiler 
water the phosphate joins with calcium to 
precipitate calcium phosphate (CaPO4). 

Phosphate prevents the formation of calcium 
scales, such as calcium sulfate, calcium carbonate, 
or calcium silicate. The precipitate of calcium 
phosphate develops as a finely divided fluid 
material that can readily be removed by blow- 
down. The sodium phosphate dosage should be 
regulated to maintain a residual reading of 30 ppm 
to 60 ppm. 

Sludge 

Another source of tube coating is BAKED 
SLUDGE. This sludge comes from dirt, oil, 
water-treatment chemicals, and so forth, that are 
suspended in dirty feedwater. The solids settle on 
tube surfaces and absorb the heat intended to be 
transferred to the water. The heat then cooks the 
sludge into a hard coating on the tube walls. These 
deposits are as hard or harder to remove than 
TRUE SCALE and should be recognized as a 
completely different problem. Methods of pre- 
venting and combating baked sludge are different 
from methods of preventing and combating scale. 

Baked sludge is very hard to remove by 
mechanical means, and boiler compound has no 
effect on it at all. The best method found to 
combat sludge is to know where it comes from, 
make it gather by proper treatment, and blow it 
out before it cooks. 

Prevention and Treatment 
for Sludge Control 

When the proper causticity residual is main- 
tained and phosphate is fed in correct amounts, 
the scale-forming impurities in boiler water 



sludges out and should be easy to blow out. 
Sometimes, however, the characteristics of the 
precipitated chemicals are such that the sludge 
formed does not go along with the water and leave 
the boiler with the blowdown. It has been 
discovered that additives called sludge condi- 
tioners cause the sludge to flow better. Most 
sludge conditioners are organic substances that 
act as dispersants. They keep the sludge in a fluid 
state by holding the precipitates as finely divided 
particles. As the precipitated chemicals settle, a 
loose fluid mass that is easy to blow out is formed. 
The only sludge dispersant approved by NAVFAC 
for use in shore-based boilers is QUEBRACHO 
TANNIN. 

Generally, when quebracho tannin is used, 
sufficient quantities are fed to the boiler to give 
the boiler water a medium tea color. If the 
causticity residual is high, a darker color should 
be maintained. This darker color for high 
causticity aids in preventing hardening of metal 
in the boiler. As the tannin particles become part 
of the sludge and are blown out, the brown 
color, given to the water by the initial dose of 
tannin, becomes a lighter color, and more 
tannin must be added. 

Proper blowdown is important because some 
sludges are almost always in the boiler water. 
When only parts of the boiler are badly sludged, 
blowdown may not be complete or there are areas 
of poor circulation. The boiler design may be such 
that even good blowdown does not clear all the 
parts. Another concern is that frequency, time, 
and the kind of blowdown being used may not 
be complete or correct to maintain optimum 
conditions. 

A small amount of seawater in the feedwater 
causes heavy sludging. Where seawater is likely 
to contaminate feedwater or where evaporated 
seawater is used for feedwater, every precaution 
should be taken to prevent saltwater contamina- 
tion of the feedwater. Regular daily boiler water 
tests will show up contaminated feedwater so that 
it can be corrected before serious harm is done. 

Where makeup water is clean and not much 
sludge shows at bottom blowdown, tannin may 
not be necessary. Where there is a lot of sludge, 
the addition of tannin is a big help in keeping the 
boiler free and clean. Also, much less sludge- 
forming materials are required when the raw water 
makeup is upgraded by external treatment. 



12-34 



Corrosion 

Corrosion is the deterioration of metal by 
chemical action. When dissolved oxygen is 
present in the boiler water, corrosion begins and 
continues until all metal has been transformed into 
iron oxide or, commonly stated, rust. When rust 
forms in the boiler, it may drop out as sludge or 
cling to other metal surfaces. It is not economi- 
cally possible to prevent at least some of the iron 
in the boiler from going into solution. All iron 
not protected by a coating or film of something 
that keeps out moisture and air is sooner or later 
going to become RUST. The idea is to slow down 
the process as much as possible by KEEPING 
OXYGEN OUT and by maintaining a proper 
causticity residual. 

The pH level of boiler water is also a factor 
in corrosion. The active agent in the corrosion of 
the internal water surface of boilers is oxygen; 
however, the combined action of oxygen and the 
acid action of the water are required for the 
corrosion process. To suppress the acid action of 
the water, you can raise the pH value of the water 
by adding caustic soda. The lower the pH value, 
the stronger the acid concentration. The higher 
the pH value, the weaker the concentration. 
Economically, acid corrosion cannot be stopped 
completely, but it can be suppressed by keeping 
oxygen out of the boiler and by maintaining a 
proper pH value and causticity range. 



Prevention and Treatment 
for Oxygen Corrosion 

The chemical most commonly used in oxygen 
removal is sodium sulfite, and it is quite often 
referred to as an oxygen scavenger. It is an 
example of a chemical that actually reacts with 
the harmful constituent. It reacts with oxygen, 
forming a neutral compound sodium sulfate. 

When enough sodium sulfite is fed into a 
boiler so that a surplus of the chemical is 
maintained, any of the oxygen getting into the 
boiler water is taken up by the chemical, and the 
boiler water is kept virtually free of oxygen. By 
maintaining a suitable residual, little, if any, 
corrosion due to oxygen occurs. Common prac- 
tice in feeding sodium sulfite is to maintain a 
surplus residual of about 20 ppm to 50 ppm in 
the boiler water. This is generally enough sodium 
sulfite to react with normal amounts of oxygen 
that might get into the boiler. Higher concentra- 
tions of sodium sulfite are unnecessary. 



Sodium sulfite dissolves readily in water and 
must be fed at a point between the feed heater 
and the boiler so that it is used to take up only 
the oxygen that gets by the deaerator or heater. 
If the sodium sulfite is fed through the feed lines 
by continuous feeding, it is always present in the 
feed lines and takes up oxygen in the feedwater 
in addition to maintaining a surplus in the boilers. 

Another advantage of using sodium sulfite is 
that if, for any reason, a feedwater heater or 
deaerator becomes inoperative or efficient opera- 
tion is temporarily interrupted, the sodium sulfite 
residual present in the boiler water can take up 
the larger amounts of the oxygen getting in. At 
the same time, the concentration of sodium sulfite 
drops. This is shown by test analysis of the boiler 
feedwater. This test gives the operator ample 
warning of an existing malfunction within the 
boiler feedwater supply system. Immediate steps 
should be taken to correct this off-standard con- 
dition. Feedwater or makeup water tanks should 
be heated to a temperature of 180F to 200 F. 
This heat alone helps to dispense of most of the 
dissolved oxygen before it can enter the boiler. 
It also allows for more economical use of sodium 
sulfite. 

The prevention of corrosion in the boiler 
means regulating the alkalinity of the water, 
producing protective films, and removing dis- 
solved oxygen. These preventive measures are 
accomplished by maintaining the proper chemical 
residuals in the boiler water and by proper 
deaeration. 

Carryover Foaming and Priming 

The word priming is used rather loosely to 
express the action of the water and steam in a 
boiler when an unusual amount of water is being 
carried over with the steam. For a given boiler 
installation, a certain amount of water or moisture 
in the steam is tolerated. The amount depends 
upon the use of the steam, the boiler construc- 
tion, and the facilities for removing the water 
from the steam. The mechanical causes include 
deficiency in boiler design, high water level, 
improper method of firing, overloading, and 
sudden load changes. A poorly designed boiler 
may have insufficient steam disengaging space. 
It is fairly obvious that the faster the steam is 
produced in a given vessel, such as a boiler, the 
more violent is the boiling effect. But when the 
steam space above the water level is large enough, 
the steam leaving the boiler does not show any 
evidence of carryover. The size of the steam 



12-35 



header and the velocity of steam leaving the boiler 
are, therefore, important elements in boiler 
design. As the rate of steam production goes up, 
so does the tendency for steam contamination. 
The sudden opening of a steam valve or the 
cutting in of a boiler too quickly speeds up the 
production of steam, which can cause violent 
bubbling and carryover. 

The primary chemical causes of carryover are 
high concentrations of totally dissolved and 
suspended solids in the boiler water, excessive 
alkalinity, and the presence of oil. 

Foaming is the production of froth or 
unbroken bubbles on the surface of the boiler 
water. The froth may be thin, with few bubbles 
overlying each other, or it may build up through- 
out the steam space. Under such conditions it is 
difficult to free the steam of the liquid films, and 
the moisture content increases. When certain 
substances are dissolved in water, they concen- 
trate somewhat more in the body of the liquid 
than on the surface; others concentrate more on 
the surface than in the body. In either case, the 
surface tension of the water is affected, and 
bubble film develops. The formation of froth 
depends upon the tenacity of the films of liquid 
that form the shells of the bubbles. A tough film 
can develop that refuses to break and release the 
steam. Apparently, finely divided solids in suspen- 
sion increase the stability of the film so that the 
combination of salts in solution and finely divided 
solids cause foaming to develop more readily than 
when either one is present by itself. Soaps getting 
into the boiler from outside sources or formed 
within the boiler from oils or animal greases 
intensify the foaming action. Water can be 
carried over in the steam without formation of 
froth. When a pure water that does not foam is 
boiled, it frequently "bumps" as unstable steam 
bubbles are formed. These rapidly reach the 
surface of the water and instantaneously burst 
through. Parts of the water tend to become 
superheated and suddenly turn to steam. Fine 
solid particles released in water under these 
conditions cause the immediate production of 
much steam. This may occur in a boiler when 
particles of scale suddenly become loose. 

When a boiler is foaming or priming, it is 
difficult and quite often impossible to read the 
true level of the boiler water on the gauge glass. 
The slugs of boiler water can wreck turbines or 
engines. The carryover of boiler water solids, 
usually caused by foaming and priming, disrupts 
operation of the equipment coming in contact 
with the steam. Deposits form in steam piping, 



valves, superheaters, engines, or turbines. These 
solids erode the turbine blades and frequently 
create out-of-balance conditions to the rotor. 
They often clog tubing, a pipe, and other 
apparatus following the boiler. When live steam 
is used for processing purposes or for cooking, 
the solids can seriously damage the final product. 
Remember also, any moisture carryover with the 
steam is an additional heat loss through the steam 
line. 

Prevention and Treatment for 
Carryover Foaming and Priming 

There are two kinds of solids present in most 
boiler water the dissolved solids, or substances 
that are in solution, and suspended solids. 
Suspended solids are finely divided solid particles 
floating around in the water. This is material left 
over after the scale-forming and corrosive salts 
have been changed into sludge by chemical 
treatment. 

When a boiler is steaming, the feedwater 
continuously carries dissolved mineral matter 
into the boiler. However, the steam leaving the 
boiler carries very little mineral matter with 
it. The concentration of dissolved solids in the 
boiler water, therefore, keeps building up unless 
properly controlled by continuous or intermittent 
blowdown. 

In water tube boilers, concentrations are 
generally highest at the place where the mixture 
of steam and water from the tubes spills over 
into the steam drum. Where total concentrations 
are not reduced sufficiently by the bottom blow, 
another blowdown line should be installed to 
remove water from the drum at the point where 
TDS (total dissolved solids) concentrations are the 
highest. This blowdown is generally operated 
continuously when the boiler is in service and is 
called a continuous blowdown. 

The best remedy for foaming and priming 
carryover is the proper blowdown of TDS. The 
continuous blowdown should be regulated to 
maintain the TDS at 3,000 to 4,000 ppm. The 
greater the TDS that can be carried without 
trouble, the less water, fuel, and chemicals 
required or wasted in the TDS blowdown. 

CHEMICAL TREATMENT 
DETERMINATION 

Because raw water conditions vary so greatly 
with locale, it is impossible to recommend a single, 
specific water treatment. Whenever possible, a 



12-36 



water treatment chemist should be consulted, and 
his or her recommendations for the chemical treat- 
ment of boiler water should be followed. The 
degree of success of any water treatment program 
depends upon how well the recommendations for 
treatment are monitored. 

When the services of a qualified water treat- 
ment chemist are obtained, his or her recommen- 
dations should include the following: 

The treatment formula 

The treatment ingredients 

Instructions to the boiler operator in the 
use of the treatment 

Periodic visits to the plant to check on 
the results of the treatment plan 

When the operator follows instructions and 
uses proper blowdown procedure, scale and 
sludge in the boiler are reduced to a minimum. 
Blowdown limits the amount of dissolved and 
suspended solids in the boiler water. 

Consulting a chemist is an ideal situation. 
SEABEES seldom operate under ideal situations, 
especially during contingency operations. How do 
you determine the initial chemical treatment for 
a boiler, and, then, how do you establish an 
effective treatment program? Some general 
guidelines follow. 

The first determination you will have to make 
is the steaming rate of the boiler, expressed in 
pounds per hour. This is a fairly simple computa- 
tion. You first determine the boiler horsepower 
(BHP); then multiply the result by 34.5 pounds. 
For example, if you have a 100-horsepower boiler 
operating at one-half fire, your steaming rate 
would be 1,725 pounds of steam per hour. 

1 BHP = 34.5 Ib steam/hour 

100 x 34.5 = 3,450 Ib steam/hour at high fire 

3,450 -f- 1/2 = 1,725 Ib steam/hour at 
one-half fire 

To determine the initial chemical dosage, you 
must know the hardness of the raw water. A 
chemist can tell you this; however, in the field you 
must determine it by experimentation. The harder 
the water, the more phosphates you must add 
during treatment to obtain correct phosphate 
residuals. The example that follows assumes zero 



hardness of the raw water and uses a 1,725-pound 
steaming rate. 

1 . Mix the following chemicals in 28 gallons 
of water: 

a. 1 1/4 Ib of sodium sulfate 

b. 1/2 Ib of trisodium phosphate 

c. 1/2 Ib of caustic soda 

2. Adjust the chemical feed rate to 3 gallons 
per hour (allows for 8 to 10 hours of steaming). 

The chemical dosage varies with the steaming 
rate of the boiler. To establish your water- 
treatment program, use the following steps every 
hour of operation for the duration of your initial 
chemical batch. 

1 . Determine the hourly steaming rate 

2. Test for phosphate residual (30-60 ppm) 

3. Test for sulfite residual (25-50 ppm) 

4. Test for pH (9.5 to 11.5) 

5. Test for TDS (3,000 to 4,000 ppm) 

You should make a log entry of these test results 
every hour. This establishes a history of the tests 
with accompanying results. At the completion of 
the initial chemical dosage, you can either add or 
subtract chemicals, based on your log. It may take 
several batches fed over an 8- to 10-hour period 
to get a consistent chemical requirement for boiler 
water treatment. Once the boiler has stabilized and 
treatment test results remain reasonably balanced, 
testing may be required only every 4 hours. 

At this time you can chart your chemical 
requirements, based on load demand on the 
boiler. By establishing this history through 
experimentation, your operators are able to treat 
the boiler water with fairly accurate results. At 
this time note that boiler blowdown has a big 
effect on your treatment program. Proper blow- 
down practices cannot be overemphasized. Too 
little blowdown causes TDS readings to be high; 
too much blowdown causes a high demand for 
chemicals and results in lost efficiency of the 
boiler. 



MAINTENANCE 

The subject of boiler maintenance covers a 
wide range of topics. Many of these topics, 
including renewing boiler tubes, repairing refrac- 
tories, and repairing settings are discussed in 
Utilitiesman 3 & 2, volume 2, NAVEDTRA 
10661. Major repairs that involve welding of 



12-37 



pressure parts of the boiler are done by 
Steelworkers in strict adherence to the procedures 
in section IX of the ASME (American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers), "Boiler and Pressure 
Vessel Code." This section is mainly concerned 
with operator and preventive maintenance and 
major considerations for the maintenance and 
care of firesides and watersides. Procedures for 
laying up idle boilers are also discussed. 

OPERATOR MAINTENANCE 

Operator maintenance is the necessary, 
routine, recurring maintenance work performed 
by the operators to keep the equipment in such 
condition that it may be continuously used, at its 
original or designed capacity and efficiency, for 
its intended purposes. 

The operator is actually the most important 
member of the maintenance team. A well- 
informed and responsible operator can 

1. keep equipment in service for maximum 
periods of time; 

2. detect any flaws so that equipment is 
removed from service in time to prevent serious 
damages; and 

3. perform minor repairs on equipment 
removed from service so as to minimize outage 
time. 

It is sometimes difficult to determine where 
operator duties end and maintenance crew work 
begins. However, the operator must realize that 
he has the keenest interest in the condition of the 
equipment. A well-kept plant not only reflects the 
operator's interest (and the desire to better his or 
her position), but it is vital to the safety of 
equipment and personnel. It is essential that every 
person in the operating aisle perform the follow- 
ing duties: 

1 . Clean. Dirt is the principal cause of equip- 
ment failure. Whether it is fly ash in the switch 
gear, oil on the deck, cloth lint, or dust, it will 
cause trouble. No matter the form in which dirt 
appears, it should be removed immediately by the 
operator. 

2. Lubricate. Any two surfaces brought 
together develop friction. If not properly lubri- 
cated, these surfaces wear one another down, 
change clearances, and cause equipment break- 
downs. A well-placed drop of oil or thin layer of 
grease can go a long way toward keeping a much 
used piece of equipment in good condition. 



3. Cool. Every piece of equipment has an 
operating temperature range. The operator should 
be informed on this matter. Any unusual tempera- 
ture change that the operator cannot correct 
should be reported immediately to the plant 
supervisor. When the temperature of a piece of 
equipment rises rapidly, an immediate shutdown 
is recommended. 

4. Tighten. Vibration is another major source 
of equipment failure. A simple step taken in time, 
such as tightening of bolts, can prevent a serious 
failure. Equipment that is not properly secured 
vibrates, causes an unbalance, vibrates further, 
and compounds a cycle that can only lead to 
further trouble. In making rounds, the operator 
should put his hand on the bearings, touch the 
fan housing, and feel the motor casing. When any 
unusual sound is heard, vibration felt, or motion 
seen, the proper steps should be taken by the 
operator to correct the condition. 

PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE 

Preventive maintenance is a system of routine 
inspections of equipment recorded for future 
reference on some type of inspection record. Its 
purpose is to anticipate and prevent possible 
equipment failures by making periodic inspections 
and minor repairs in advance of major operating 
difficulties. 

Preventive maintenance is the responsibility 
of both operators and specified maintenance 
crews. The operator is expected to do as much 
maintenance as is within his technical abilities, for 
which tools are adequate, and for which time 
allows. Specifically assigned maintenance crews 
work on equipment requiring no operator, or 
where the work to be done is beyond the scope 
of the operator. Since preventive maintenance is 
so vital, it is essential that duties and respon- 
sibilities be clearly defined. It is easy, and quite 
natural, to fall into the "let George do it" 
pattern. An effective maintenance group functions 
well only when clear responsibility is established. 

Scheduling of preventive maintenance is the 
responsibility of the plant supervisor. The super- 
visor should maintain a record card for each ma- 
jor piece of equipment, its PM schedule, and its 
record of PM inspections and operations with the 
results recorded thereon. 

MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS 

The problem of maintenance should be 
approached with the view of how much it will 



12-38 



cost not to carry on an active maintenance 
program. The unexpected expenses are sure to be 
far greater in frequency and extent when such a 
program is abandoned or deferred than when it 
is in effect. 

Large plants use a card-index system. One card 
is made out for each piece of equipment and 
contains identification information and a space 
for entering records of tests and remarks. 
Sometimes, a signaling system can be used to 
indicate the date on which equipment is due for 
tests, overhauls, and inspection. Even the smallest 
plant can create an alphabetical card-index file 
system to furnish this information. 

Preventive maintenance in an industrial boiler 
plant is greatly influenced by legal requirements 
and is performed to protect personnel and to 
prevent equipment damage that could lead to 
costly repairs and loss of productive capacity. In 
fact, preventive maintenance directed specifically 
to maintaining boiler efficiency is the exception 
rather than the rule. Rising fuel costs have placed 
an increasing emphasis on conscientious main- 
tenance because it results in higher boiler 
operating efficiency. These preventive mainte- 
nance practices are often easily justified from an 
economic standpoint. 

Efficiency-related boiler maintenance is 
directed at correcting any condition that increases 
the amount of fuel required to generate a given 
quantity of steam. Thus, at a specified boiler load, 
any condition that leads to an increase in (1) flue- 
gas temperature; (2) flue-gas flow; (3) com- 
bustibles content of ash or flue gas; (4) convec- 
tion or radiation losses from the boiler exterior, 
ductwork, or pipe; or (5) blowdown rates is 
considered an efficiency-related maintenance 
item. Generally, attention to such items can also 
forestall more serious consequences, such as 
damage to equipment and/or injury to personnel. 

The boiler tune-up is one of the most effec- 
tive means for improving efficiency and for 
maintaining it at a high level. The primary 
objective of a tune-up is to achieve efficient 
combustion with a controlled amount of excess 
air, thus reducing the dry-gas loss and the power 
consumption of forced- and induced-draft fans. 

A log in which each operator can keep hourly 
readings and remarks of any unusual occurrence 
is also of value. The value is enhanced by record- 
ing notes on readings and observations from the 
more remote parts of the plant that may seldom 
be visited during the normal course of duties. An 
operator hesitates to walk past equipment to take 
a reading without observing its condition. 



Individual boilers should have a log to record 
the operation and performance of controls and 
safety devices. The minimum tests and checks 
shown assist operators in determining whether the 
boiler and its controls are in good operating 
condition. The tests must be performed at 
established frequencies, and if any malfunctions 
are found, they should be corrected immediately. 
A boiler with a defective safety valve, improper 
water-level control, or nonoperating low-water 
fuel cutoff should never be operated unattended 
until these vital devices are in good working order. 

Log sheets are a forced reminder to check 
certain components of a boiler to prevent trouble 
from developing later and to note if proper opera- 
tion is taking place. A log sheet should be used 
to record all important operating data, such as 
pressures and temperatures. The log sheet should 
also be used to record procedures such as the time 
at which the soot blowers and water columns are 
blown and when blowdown valves are operated. 
A continuous record of operating data and 
important procedures carried out is then at hand 
when needed. It is also important to log the testing 
of safety appurtenances. 

Any irregular operation or event should be 
recorded in a separate book, with a description 
of the irregularity and the corrective measures 
taken. In this book all orders should be written 
and initialed by the operator. 

Operators reporting for duty should read the 
annotations made by the previous watches. Then 
the oncoming operators are informed as to what 
the past operation has been, what orders have 
been issued for future operation, and what trouble 
spots to watch for. They should then initial those 
items for which they are responsible to indicate 
that they are familiar with the situation. Log 
sheets are supplied by some insurance companies 
for small low-pressure plants and industrial high- 
pressure boilers. Many plant operators design 
their own log sheets to record important data 
pertaining to their specific plant's details and 
layout. 

CARE OF BOILER FIRESIDES 

The boiler firesides must be kept clean. The 
burning of any petroleum product tends to be 
incomplete, thus leaving soot and carbon deposits 
on the boiler firesides. These deposits seriously 
reduce the efficiency of a boiler. Slag contributes 
greatly to failure of such parts as superheater 
support plates, baffles, protection plates, and soot 
blowers. Deposits also act as insulation and 



12-39 



prevent the transfer of heat to the water or steam 
in the tubes. 

Soot and slag accumulations that block the gas 
passages through the tube banks require the use 
of high air pressures to force the combustion gases 
through the boiler, thus reducing fireroom effi- 
ciency. Accumulations that block the gas passages 
also interfere with the designed flow of combus- 
tion gases and cause extremely hot gases to pass 
over protection plates, baffles, seal plates, and 
other parts that are not designed for such high- 
temperature gases; in some cases, early failure of 
these parts can be blamed directly on blocked gas 
passages and the resulting overheating of the 
parts. 

When soot is allowed to remain on the boiler 
firesides for any length of time, the sulfur in the 
soot combines with moisture and forms sulfuric 
acid. This acid attacks tubes, drums, and headers. 
The extent of the damage caused by acid attack 
depends upon the length of time the soot remains 
on the tubes and upon the amount of moisture 
present during this interval. Moisture may be 
present as a result of high atmospheric humidity; 
rain or snow coming down the stack; leaky boiler 
tubes; and steam or water leakage through the 
boiler casing joints, particularly from machinery 
and piping installed above the boiler. 

One indication of soot corrosion is the 
development of pinhole leaks at the point where 
the tubes enter the water drums and headers and 
at other points where it is difficult to clean the 
tubes properly. When soot corrosion is allowed 
to proceed unchecked, extensive deterioration of 
the boiler metals results. 

You will find that keeping the firesides clean 
actually saves work, as well as saving the boiler. 
Clean tubes do not collect deposits as readily as 
dirty tubes do. It is a good deal easier to clean 
the firesides several times when they are only 
slightly dirty than to clean them once when they 
are heavily coated with soot and carbon. 

Local instructions usually specify steaming 
intervals after which the boiler firesides must be 
cleaned. In addition to this upkeep, the firesides 
are normally cleaned just before to the annual 
internal inspection. 

Although there are a number of cleaning 
methods available (such as hot-water washing, 
wet-steam lancing, and so forth), mechanical 
cleaning should be considered the basic and 
preferred method of cleaning firesides. The other 
methods are generally used only when mechanical 
cleaning cannot adequately remove the fireside 
deposit. 



Mechanical cleaning is accomplished within 
the boiler, in the furnace, and from outside the 
boiler through access doors by using various types 
of scrapers, probes, and wire brushes to remove 
soot and other deposits. In most instances, these 
cleaning tools can be obtained from the boiler 
manufacturer. 

In addition to scrubbing and cleaning the 
firesides of the generating tubes, other areas of 
the firesides should receive scrupulous cleaning 
as well. Particular care should be given to those 
more or less inaccessible portions of the firesides 
that are not cleansed by the soot blowers. Any 
encrusted soot should be removed from burner 
impeller plates, bladed cones, and drip pans. The 
furnace refractory must also be cleaned. This 
operation is perhaps best done last to remove not 
only original deposits from the brickwork but also 
soot and dust deposited after other parts of the 
boiler were cleaned. It is important to keep the 
brickwork clean for two reasons: First, soot and 
foreign matter lodged in expansion joints can 
obviously prevent proper expansion of refractories 
when hot, and can ultimately cause serious crack- 
ing of the brickwork; second, soot and other 
deposits left on the brickwork will lower the 
melting point of the refractories. 

CARE OF BOILER WATERSIDES 

Failure to keep boiler watersides clean reduces 
the efficiency of the boiler and contributes to 
overheating, thus leading to serious damage. 
Experience has shown that tube failures resulting 
from defective materials or poor fabrication are 
rare. The majority of all tube failures, other than 
those associated with water-level casualties, are 
caused by waterside deposits or accumulations. 
Some tube failures are caused by waterside 
deposits of hard scale. More frequently, however, 
tube failures occur as the result of an accumula- 
tion of relatively soft materials such as metal 
oxides, the residue of chemicals used for boiler 
water treatment, the solids formed as a result of 
the reactions between scale-forming salts or other 
impurities and the chemicals used for boiler water 
treatment. 

As in the case of fireside cleaning, waterside 
cleaning is usually accomplished after specified 
steaming intervals and also before the annual 
internal inspection. 

The need for cleaning watersides or firesides 
is often signaled by a gradual rise in the stack gas 
temperature. In other words, deposits on either 
the firesides or watersides of generating tubes 



12-40 



reduce heat transfer from the furnace to the water. 
A good part of the nontransf erred heat is, as you 
know, retained by the fireside or waterside 
deposit. However, some of the heat not properly 
carried away by the water and not absorbed by 
the deposits remains with the combustion gases. 
Therefore, the temperature of the stack gas rises. 
When working in the watersides of a boiler, 
you should take all possible precautions to keep 
tools, nuts, bolts, cigarette lighters, and other 
small objects from sliding down into the tubes. 
Some required precautions are as follows: 

1. Remove all small objects from your 
pockets before entering the boiler. 

2. Keep an inventory of all the tools and 
equipment you take into the boiler, and ensure 
that you remove each item and check it off the 
inventory before closing up the boiler. 

3. Do NOT set tools or other articles down 
in places where you are likely to forget them. For 
example, you must not leave tools on top of the 
steam separators or in other places that are easy 
to reach but hard to see. 

4. When an article is lost in the boiler water- 
sides, you must not close up or operate the boiler 
until the article has been found and removed. 
Even a very small article can interfere with boiler 
circulation and cause tube ruptures. 

Additional precautions for waterside work 
include the following: 

1 . Close, wire, and tag all steam, water, and 
air valves that could possibly admit fluids to the 
boiler. Disconnect (or otherwise render in- 
operative) the remote operating valves as well. 

2. Be sure that adequate ventilation is pro- 
vided before entering the watersides of a boiler. 

3. Be sure that all portable extension lights are 
of the watertight globe type, with the globe 
encased in a rubberized, metal cage. Be sure that 
all lights are grounded and that wires are not 
broken. Examine the wires from end to end to 
be sure that the insulation is not broken or 
cracked, exposing the bare wire. 

4. Station a person outside the drum whose 
ONLY duty is to act as tender and to assist 
personnel working in the drum. 

Boiling out is a special waterside cleaning 
technique. There are two approved methods for 
boiling out boilers the sodium metasilicate 
pentahydrate method and the trisodium phos- 
phate method. The method to be used depends 



upon the purpose of the boiling out. The sodium 
metasilicate pentahydrate method is used to 
remove rust-preventive compounds and other 
preservatives; consequently, this method is 
used for boiling out (1) newly erected boilers, 
(2) reactivated boilers, and (3) boilers that have 
had major tube renewals. The trisodium phos- 
phate method is used when you are boiling out 
for the removal of oil and for scale softening in 
preparation for mechanical cleaning. 

LAYING UP IDLE BOILERS 

Many operators faithfully and carefully follow 
all the procedures and regulations concerning 
boiler water treatment, only to find that the 
watersides nevertheless experience corrosion and 
pitting. It should come as no great surprise that 
the fault is not with the treatment methods, but 
rather the manner in which the boiler is permitted 
to stand idle. 

After the pressure drops within an idle boiler, 
air gradually seeps into the boiler, carrying 
oxygen with it. The air also contains carbon 
dioxide that combines with the boiler water to 
form carbonic acid, which, in turn, lowers the 
residual causticity of the boiler water. Gradual in- 
leakage of feedwater can dilute and lower the 
causticity of the boiler water even further. In 
addition, condensation within the boiler, on both 
watersides and firesides, can produce water 
droplets that are saturated with oxygen and 
contain no causticity. Conditions within the boiler 
are now ideal for active and rapid corrosion. 

The need for protecting boilers that are left 
idle for any length of time should be obvious. 
There are two principal methods by which idle 
boilers may be protected: WET LAY-UP and 
DRY LAY-UP. 

In the wet method, the boiler is filled to the 
steam takeoff with water treated so that it 
carries as much as 200 ppm of causticity, is free 
of oxygen, and is uniform in chemical composi- 
tion throughout. Additionally, it is sometimes 
desirable that the water be treated with about 
100 ppm of sodium sulfite to take up any oxygen 
that may get into the water. By keeping the boiler 
completely filled, you can avoid air in-leakage and 
waterline pitting. Chemical concentrations must 
be distributed uniformly throughout the boiler to 
prevent an electrolytic type of corrosion. The best 
way to mix the chemicals with the water is to use 
some scheme of circulation for a short time. This 
should be checked by testing a sample of the boiler 
water, and the sampling and testing should be 



12-41 



repeated once a week as long as the boiler is 
idle. 

In the dry method, the boiler is emptied, dried, 
closed, and kept thoroughly dry by use of 
quicklime inside the boiler. 

The wet method is usually considered more 
suitable for boilers left idle for a short period, say 
a month or less, or where there may be an 
unexpected demand for steam so that the boiler 
can be put back into operation more quickly. For 
longer idle periods, say 3 months or more, the dry 
method frequently is considered more desirable 
because it does not require as much care and 
control. When the entire plant is laid up and 
freezing weather is anticipated, only the dry 
method should be used. 

Laying Up a Boiler by 
the Wet Method 

The feedwater used to fill the boiler is 
deaerated as much as possible. While the boiler 
is being filled, caustic soda and, where used, 
sodium sulfite are fed into the boiler by con- 
tinuous feeding. In this way, uniform distribution 
of the chemical throughout the boiler is obtained. 
About 1 ounce of caustic soda and 0.2 ounce of 
sodium sulfite are used for every 100 pounds of 
water, giving about 200 ppm of causticity and 
about 100 ppm of sodium sulfite in the boiler 
water. When equipment is installed in a plant and 
used in acid treatment of the feedwater, it should 
never be used to fill a boiler for idle standby; this 
results in a low pH in the boiler, as concentra- 
tion by boiling is taking place. To ensure the boiler 
is filled completely, you should add water until 
it overflows at the top of the boiler through any 
convenient outlet, and then close the outlet. When 
there is a superheater on the boiler, add water to 
fill it completely. If appreciable air is dissolved 
in the water, you should boil the water to vent 
out any air after the boiler is nearly filled. 

When the chemical feeding setup installed is 
not suitable for continuous feeding and it is 
necessary to slug-feed the chemical while the boiler 
is being filled, the boiler water must be mixed to 
get uniform distribution of the chemical through- 
out the boiler. This can be done by use of a cir- 
culating pump to pump water from one section 
of the boiler to another. Where such a pump is 
not available, mixing can be accomplished by 
heating the boiler water just enough, as by a light 
wood fire, to set up natural circulation. 

After a boiler has been filled for standby, it 
must be kept filled as long as it is idle, with no 



water flowing either out of or into the boiler. 
Leakage out, as through a leaky blowdown valve, 
can admit air and form a waterline in the boiler. 
In-leakage of feedwater or condensed steam gives 
differences in chemical concentration between 
different parts of the boiler. To avoid such 
leakage, it is sometimes necessary to blank off the 
feedwater inlet of the steam line. 

A method sometimes used for keeping a boiler 
completely full consists of using a small tank 
placed above the boiler with a line connected to 
any outlet at the top of the boiler or the 
superheater header. This method also shows when 
any leakage occurs either into or out of the boiler. 
The small tank is provided with a vent and a water 
column. When the boiler is filled, water is added 
up into the tank. Then, if any water leaks out of 
the boiler, water from the tank flows in, keeping 
the boiler full. In-leakage of air due to shrinkage 
by cooling of the water in the boiler is also 
prevented. When the level in the tank rises, it 
shows that water is leaking into the boiler, either 
through the feed line or the steam line. 

Water in an idle boiler should be sampled and 
analyzed at about 1-week intervals. When the 
causticity or the concentration of sulfite is found 
to have dropped considerably, you should ensure 
additional chemical is fed and the boiler water 
circulated to distribute the chemical uniformly. 

One disadvantage of using the wet method is 
that when the temperature of the water in the 
boiler is lower than the outside temperature, 
condensation or moisture occurs on the outside 
of the metal boiler, causing corrosion. Some 
engineers, therefore, coat the outside of the metal 
boiler with light oil to help protect it from 
corrosion. 

Laying Up a Boiler by 
the Dry Method 

Dry lay-up is a much surer way of preventing 
corrosion in idle boilers. The boiler is emptied 
completely when the setting has cooled, and the 
boiler is cleaned with water to remove sludge. The 
boiler is then dried carefully and thoroughly with 
a wood fire or by other means, as recommended 
by the boilermaker. To avoid leakage of water 
into the boiler, you may need to blank off the 
feedwater lines and steam lines. Place a suitable 
chemical drying agent that can absorb moisture 
from the air in the boiler to keep it thoroughly 
dry, and then close the boiler tightly. The drying 
agent commonly used for this purpose is quick- 
lime. It can be placed on any convenient tray or 



12-42 



board arrangement in the boiler. At least 20 
pounds should be used for every 100 boiler- 
horsepower. 

A certain quantity of quicklime can take up 
only so much moisture, after which it becomes ex- 
hausted. Therefore, the boiler should be opened at 
about 3-month intervals to inspect the quicklime. 
If moist, the quicklime must be replenished or 
replaced. Leakage of steam or feed water into the 
boiler can exhaust the quicklime rapidly. 

REFERENCES 

Boiler Technician l&C, NAVEDTRA 10536-E, 
Naval Education and Training Program 
Development Center, Pensacola, Florida, 
1982. 



Boiler Plant Operator, NTTC Course 131, 
NAVFAC P-813, NAVFAC Technical Train- 
ing Center, Navy Public Works Center, 
Norfolk, Virginia. 

Boiler Feedvvater Manual, NTTC Course 116, 
NAVFAC P-370, Navy Public Works Center, 
Norfolk, Virginia. 

Central Boiler Plant, TM-5-650, Headquarters 
Department of the Army, Washington, D.C., 
1962. 

Maintenance of Steam, Hot Water, and Com- 
pressed Air Distribution Systems, NAV- 
DOCKS MO-209, Department of the Navy, 
Washington, D.C., March 1966. 



12-43 



CHAPTER 13 

DUCT AND VENTILATION SYSTEMS 



Learning Objective: Identify the factors that influence the installation of duct 
and ventilation systems. 



As a senior Utilitiesman, you can expect to 
become involved in the installation of duct and/or 
ventilation systems designed to provide con- 
ditioned air or to remove less desirable air from 
a given space or facility. When sheet metal is to 
be fabricated into system components, the 
Steel worker will provide the expertise. When duct 
board is used, fabrication and installation may 
be tasked to the Utilitiesman exclusively. 

This chapter will provide some key knowledge 
to aid you in the identification of types of 
duct and ventilation systems, their installation, 
and factors you must be aware of in determining 
the sizes required to meet specified building 
requirements. Keep in mind that the term 
air-conditioned refers to air that has been 
cooled, heated, dehumidified or humidified, or 
any combination of these. 



DUCT SYSTEMS 

To deliver air to the conditioned space, air 
carriers are needed. These carriers are called ducts. 
They are made of sheet metal or some structural 
material that will not burn (noncombustible). 

Ducts systems are also classified as high- 
pressure or high-velocity ductwork and low- 
pressure or low-velocity ductwork. 

The term high-pressure or high-velocity duct- 
work includes ductwork systems and plenums 
from the fan discharge to the final high-velocity 
mixing boxes, or other final pressure-reducing 
devices or any air supply system served by a fan 
operating with a static pressure range of 3 inches 
to 7 inches of water column (WC). 



High-velocity or high-pressure systems with 
fan static pressures of 3 inches WC or greater are 
defined as high pressure. Usually the static 
pressure is limited to a maximum of 7 inches WC 
and duct velocities are limited to 4,000 feet per 
minute (fpm). Systems requiring pressures in 
excess of 7 inches WC are normally unwarranted 
and could result in very high operating costs. 
Systems with velocities in excess of 4,000 fpm 
perform satisfactorily when all duct fittings are 
carefully designed and installed. However, 
velocity pressure losses are excessive in most cases 
and velocities in excess of 4,000 fpm are not 
recommended. 

A high-velocity double duct system begins with 
a high-pressure fan of class II or III design and 
conveys air through sound-treated high-velocity 
ductwork connected to sound and pressure- 
attenuating mixing units. Connections to the 
outlets of the reduction units are treated as low 
velocity. 

Smaller-sized ductwork using higher velocities 
permits conveyance of air to areas limited by 
construction and reduces floor-to-floor heights in 
most cases. Round ductwork generally provides 
the greatest strength, tightness, and economy. 
However, oval and rectangular ducts can be 
used when large risers are involved. 

A necessary component of the high-pressure 
system is the mixing box or unit. Its func- 
tion is to blend air at two different temper- 
atures for proper delivery to the rooms. This 
requires special pressure-reducing air valves 
at both hot and cold inlets, mixing baffles 
to prevent stratification of air, and sound 
attenuation treatment to absorb noise generated 
by the air valves. 



13-1 



Table 13-1. Outlet Velocities for Optimum Performance of Fans 



STATIC PRESSURE 
INCHES OF WATER 


CENTRIFUGAL FANS 
OUTLET VELOCITY 
fpm 


TUBEAXIAL AND 
VANEAXIAL FANS 
OUTLET VELOCITY AT 
WHEEL DIA. fpm 


1/4 


400- 100 


950-1,500 


1/2 


550-1,450 


1,350-1,900 


3/4 


700-1,750 


1,650-2,350 


1 


800-2,000 


1,900-2,700 


1 1/2 


1,000-2,500 


2,350-3,300 


2 


1,150-2,800 


2,700-3,800 


2 1/2 


1,250-3,200 


3,000-4,300 


3 


1,400-3,500 


3,300-4,700 


4 


1,600-4,050 




6 


2,000-4,950 




8 


2,300-5,700 




10 


2,500-6,400 





The term low-pressure or low-velocity duct- 
work applies to systems with fan static pressures 
less than 3 inches WC. Generally, duct velocities 
are less than 2,000 feet per minute. 

The choice between the use of low versus high- 
velocity systems requires architectural, mechani- 
cal, and structural considerations. Installation 
cost, temperature control, and operating cost 
should also be studied. 

Low-velocity double duct systems are many 
years old. It was not until after World War II 
that their use became extensive. Space for 
the installation of the double ducts is a main 
consideration for this system and must be 
provided during initial planning. Difficulties 
in providing for this space in modern struc- 
tures with low floor-to-floor heights and flush 
ceilings, together with the need for develop- 
ing a compact distribution system for existing 
buildings, has brought about the development 
of high-velocity double duct systems. High 
velocity saves ceiling space and duct shaft 



space, but requires greater attention in the 
selection of fans and equipment with regard 
to sound levels. Also, higher duct velocities 
require increased fan static pressures; there- 
fore, increased operating costs. On the other 
hand, high-velocity systems are easy to balance 
and control and have much greater flexibility 
for partition changes and so forth. 

Generally, high-velocity systems are applicable 
to large multistory buildings; primarily because 
the advantage of saving in duct shafts and 
floor-to-floor heights is more substantial. Small 
two- and three-story buildings are normally 
low velocity; however, both systems should be 
analyzed for each building. Table 13-1 shows 
outlet velocities for the range of optimum 
performance of typical ventilation fans. 

Ducts are made of many types of materials. 
Pressure in the ducts is small, so materials with 
a great deal of strength are not needed. Originally, 
hot air ducts were thin, tinned sheet steel. Later, 
galvanized sheet steel, aluminum sheet, and 



13-2 



Table 13-2. Materials for Ductwork 



Application 



Normal system handling 
dry air 

1. Air conditioning 

2. Ventilating 

System handling air at very 
high temperature 

1. Kitchen exhaust 

Systems handling partly 
saturated air 

1. Outside air intake 
ductwork 

2. Exhaust ductwork 
near discharge 
outlet 

3. Ductwork exposed 
to weather 
elements 

Systems handling completely 
saturated air 

1. Shower exhaust 

2. Dishwasher exhaust 

3. Ductwork exposed to 
salty atmosphere 



Material 



Galvanized Steel 
Fiber-board 



Black Steel 



Aluminum 



Copper 



finally, insulated ducts made from materials such 
as asbestos and fiberboard were developed. 
Passageways, formed by studs or joists, are 
sometimes used for return air where a fire hazard 
does not exist. 

Ducts made of asbestos are no longer legal. 
If discovered, asbestos in any form must be 
removed and disposed of according to the laws 
and regulations discussed in chapter 15 of this 
manual. 

The material used for the construction of duct- 
work depends on the application of the duct. Use 
table 13-2 as a guide in the selection of duct 
material. The thickness of the material depends 
primarily on the pressure developed within the 
duct, the length of the individual sections, and 
the cross-sectional area of the duct. The developed 
length of a section for a particular gauge can be 
increased by installing angle bracing around the 
duct. It is beyond the scope of this manual to in- 
clude the technical details necessary for the 



selection of proper metal thickness and section 
length for different pressures and for different 
cross-sectional areas of duct material. However, 
when repairs are made, the same thickness of 
metal that was originally included in the system 
must be installed. Where the original ductwork 
was destroyed by pressure, repairs may include 
increasing metal thickness or adding of angle 
bracing. 

Ducts are either round or rectangular in cross 
section. Although rectangular ducts usually have 
the advantage of saving room space and being 
easier to install in walls, round ducts provide less 
resistance to airflow and should be used whenever 
possible. 

Additionally, round ducts require less material 
to construct; thus by using round ducts, you can 
save both money and material during installation. 

Initially, an air-handling duct system is usually 
sized for round ducts. Then, if rectangular ducts 
are desired or required, duct sizes can be selected 
to provide flow rates equivalent to those of the 
round ducts originally selected. 

Table 13-3 is a ready reference to determine 
the size of a rectangular duct that equals the 
carrying capacity of a predetermined round duct. 
To use this chart, convert a rectangular duct with 
sides of 17 inches by 16 inches, respectively. First, 
come down the left-hand column until you reach 
17 inches; then, trace the line horizontally across 
tfte columns until you reach the column headed by 
16 inches. At the center of these intersecting lines 
is 18.0 inches. This is the round duct size equiva- 
lent. In the second example, following the same 
procedure, it is clearly shown that a 22-inch by 17- 
inch rectangular duct has a 21 -inch round duct 
equivalent. The formula located in the bottom 
left-hand corner of table 13-3 is the basis for this 
chart. This formula can be used to convert any 
size rectangular duct to an equivalent size round 
duct. 



TYPES OF DUCT SYSTEMS 

In this section, the advantages and dis- 
advantages of a double duct system are dis- 
cussed. Since there are numerous possibilities for 
an adequate duct system, one such system is 
modified to fit the needs of two different residen- 
tial configurations. 



13-3 



Table 13-3. Duct Capacity Conversions 



D/mwufont in Metal 



Sfcfe 
tocfon- 

Ovcf 


4.0 


4.5 


5.0 


5.5 


6.0 


6.5 


7.0 


7.5 


a.o 9.0 


10.0 


77.0 


72.0 


73.0 


74.0 


75.0 


76.0 


3.0 
3.5 
4.0 


3.8 
4.1 
4.4 


4.0 
4.3 
4.6 


4.2 
4.6 
4.9 


4.4 
4.8 
5.1 


4.6 
5.0 
5.3 


4.8 
5.2 
5.5 


4.9 
5.3 
5.7 


5.1 
5.5 
5.9 


5.2 5.5 
5.7 6.0 
6.1 6.4 


5.7 
6.3 
6.8 


6.0 
6.5 
7.1 


6.2 
6.8 
7.3 


6.4 
7.0 
7.6 


6.6 
7.2 
7.8 


6.8 

7.4 
8.1 


7.0 
7.6 
8.3 


4.5 
5.0 
5.5 


4.6 
4.9 
5.1 


4.9 
5.2 
5.4 


5.2 
5.5 
5.7 


5.4 
5.7 
6 


5.6 
6.0 
6.3 


5.9 
6.2 
6.5 


6.1 
6.4 
6.8 


6.3 
6.7 
7.0 


6.5 6.9 
6.9 7.3 
7.2 7.6 


7.2 
7.6 
8.0 


7.5 
8.0 
8.4 


7.8 
8.3 
8.7 


8.1 
8.6 
9.0 


8.4 
8.9 
9.4 


8.6 
9.1 
9.6 


8.9 
9.4 
9.8 
















1 




26 






Sid* 


JUeton- 


6 


7 


8 




9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


J*_ 


^ 


18 


19 


I 

20 


22 


24 


28 


30 


Rectan- 
gular 


golar 


















































Ducf 


Ducf 




















































6 


6.6 




















































6 
7 


7 


7.1 


7.7 
















































g 


8 


7.5 




8.2 


8.8 














































9 


8.0 


8.6 


9 


3 


9.9 










































in 


10 


8.4 


9.1 


9 


8 


10.4 


10.9 








































ll/ 


11 


8.8 


9.5 


10 


2 


10.8 


11.4 


12.0 






































11 

1 9 


12 


9.1 


9.9 


10 


7 


11.3 


11.9 


12.5 


13.1 


































J.4 
1 O 


13 


9.5 


10.3 


11 


1 


11.8 


12.4 


13.0 


13.6 


14 


2 






























lA 


14 


9.8 


10.7 


11 


5 


12.2 


12.9 


13.5 


14.2 


14 


.7 


15.3 






























15 


10.1 


11.0 


11 


8 


12.6 


13.3 


14-0 


14.6 


15 


.3 


15.8 


16.4 


























15 


16 


10.4 


11.4 


12 


2 


13.0 


13.7 


14.4 


15.1 


15 


.7 


16.3 


16.9 


17.5 
























16 


17 


10 7 


11,7 




fi 


13,4 


H,l 


14, ft 


I 


K.R 


16 


.1 


16.8 


17-4 


18,1] 


18.6 
19.1 


19 


.7 


















17 
18 


18 


h.o 


11.9 


12 


9 


13.7 


14.5 


15.3 


16.0 


16 


.B 


17.3 


17.9 


18. 5 


19 


11.2 


12.2 


13 


2 


14.1 


14.9 


15.6 


16.4 


17 


.1 


17.8 


18.4 


19.0 


19.6 


20 


.2 


20.8 
















19 


20 


11.5 


12.5 


13 


5 


14.4 


15.2 


15.9 


16.8 


17 


.5 


18.2 


18.8 


19.5 


20.1 


20 


.7 


21.3 


21.9 














20 


22 


12 


13 i 


14 


1 


15 


15.9 


1fi 7 


17,0 


18,3 


1,1 


19,7 


20,4 


21 A 


21 


.7 


22.3 


22.9 


24.1 












22 


24 


12.4 


13.6 


14 


6 


15.6 


16.6 


17.5 


18.3 


19 


.1 


19.8 


20.6 


21.3 


21.9 


22 


.6 


23.2 


23.9 


25.1 


26.2 










24 


26 


12.8 


14.1 


15 


2 


16.2 


17.2 


18.1 


19.0 


19 


.8 


20.6 


21.4 


22.1 


22.8 


23 


.5 


24.1 


24.8 


26.1 


27.2 


28.4 






26 


28 
30 


13.2 
13.6 


14.5 
14.9 


15'. 6 
16.1 


16.7 
17.2 


17.7 
18.3 


18.7 
19.3 


19.6 
20.2 


20 
21 


.5 

.1 


21.3 
22.0 


22.1 
22.9 


22.9 
23.7 


23.6 
24.4 


24 
25 


.4 
.2 


25.0 
25.9 


25.7 
26.7 


27.1 
28.0 


28.2 
29.3 


29.5 
30.5 


30.6 
31.6 


32.8 


28 
30 


32 


14.0 


15.3 


16 


5 


17.7 


18.8 


19.8 


20.8 


21 


.8 


22.7 


23.6 


24.4 


25.2 


26 


.0 


26.7 


27.5 


28,9 


30.1 


31 


.4 


32.6 


33.8 


32 


34 


14.4 


15.7 


17 





18.2 


19.3 


20.4 


21.4 


22 


.4 


23.3 


24.2 


25.1 


25.9 


26 


.7 


27.5 


28.3 


29.7 


31.0 


32.3 


33.6 


34.8 


34 


36 


14.7 


16.1 


17 


4 


18.6 


19.8 


20.9 


21.9 


23 


.0 


23.9 


24.8 


25.8 


26.6 


27 


.4 


28.3 


29.0 


30.5 


32.0 


33.0 


34.6 


35.8 


36 


38 


15.0 


16.4 


17 


8 


19.0 


20.3 


21.4 


22.5 


23 


.6 


24.5 


25.4 


26.4 


27.3 


28 


.1 


29.0 


29.8 


31.4 


32.8 


34.2 


35.5 


36.7 


38 


40 


15.3 


16.8 


18 


2 


19.4 


20.7 


21.9 


23.0 


24 


.0 


25.1 


26.0 


27.0 


27.9 


28 


.8 


29.7 


30.5 


32.1 


33.6 


35.1 


36.4 


37.6 


40 


42 


15.6 


17.1 


18 


5 


19.8 


21.1 


22.3 


23.4 


24 


.5 


25.6 


26.6 


27.6 


28.5 


29 


.4 


30.4 


31.2 


32.8 


34.4 


35.9 


37.3 


38.6 


42 


44 


15.9 


17.5 


18 


9 


20.2 


21.5 


22.7 


23.9 


25.0 


26.1 


27.2 


28:2 


29.1 


30 


.0 


31.0 


31.9 


33.5 


35.2 


36.7 


38.1 


39.5 


44 


46 


16.2 


17.8 


19 


2 


20.6 


21.9 


23.2 


24.3 


25 


.5 


26.7 


27.7 


28.7 


29.7 


30 


.6 


31.6 


32.5 


34.2 


35.9 


37.4 


38.9 


40.3 


46 


48 


16.5 


18.1 


19 


6 


20.9 


22.3 


23.6 


24.8 


26 


.0 


27.2 


28.2 


29.2 


30.2 


31 


.2 


32.2 


33.1 


34.9 


36.6 


38.2 


39.7 


41.2 


48 


50 


16.8 


18.4 


19 


9 


21.3 


22.7 


24.0 


25.2 


26 


.4 


27.6 


28.7 


29.8 


30.8 


31 


.8 


32.8 


33.7 


35.5 


37.3 


38.9 


40.4 


42.0 


50 


52 


17.0 


18.7 


20 


2 


21.6 


23.1 


24.4 


25.6 


26 


.8 


28.1 


29.2 


30.3 


31.4 


32 


.4 


33.4 


34.3 


36.2 


38.0 


39.6 


41.2 


42.8 


52 


54 


17.3 


19.0 


20 


5 


22.0 


23.4 


24.8 


26.1 


27 


.3 


28.5 


29.7 


30.8 


31.9 


32 


.9 


33.9 


34.9 


36.8 


38.7 


40.3 


42.0 


43.6 


54 


56 


17.6 


19.3 


20 


9 


22.4 


23.8 


25.2 


26.5 


27 


.7 


28.9 


30.1 


31.2 


32.4 


33 


.4 


34.5 


35.5 


37.4 


39.3 


41.0 


42.7 


44.3 


56 


58 


17.8 


19.5 


21 


1 


22.7 


24.2 


25.5 


26.9 


28 


.2 


29.3 


30.5 


31.7 


32.9 


33 


.9 


35.0 


36.0 


38.0 


39.8 


41.7 


43.4 


45.0 


58 


60 


18.1 


19.8 


21 


4 


23.0 


24.5 


25.8 


27.3 


28 


.7 


29.8 


31.0 


32.2 


33.4 


34.5 


35.5 


36.5 


38.6 


40.4 


42.3 


44.0 


45.8 


60 


62 


18.3 


20.1 


21 


7 


23.3 


24.8 


26.2 


27.6 


29 


.0 


30.2 


31.4 


32.6 


33.8 


35.0 


36.0 


37.1 


39.2 


41.0 


42.9 


44.7 


46.5 


62 


64 


18.6 


20.3 


22.0 


23.6 


25.2 


26.5 


27.9 


29 


.3 


30.6 


31.8 


33.1 


34.2 


35.5 


36.5 


37.6 


39.7 


41.6 


43.5 


45.4 


47.2 


64 


66 


18.8 


20.6 


22 


3 


23.9 


25.5 


26.9 


28.3 


29 


.7 


31.0 


32.2 


33.5 


34.7 


35 


.9 


37.0 


38.1 


40.2 


42.2 


44.1 


46.0 


47.8 


66 


68 


19.0 


20.8 


22 


5 


24.2 


25.8 


27.3 


28.7 


30 


.1 


31.4 


32.6 


33.9 


35.1 


36.3 


37.5 


38.6 


40. 


42.8 


44.7 


46.6 


48.4 


68 


70 


19.2 


21. 


22 


8 


24.5 


26.1 


27.6 


29.1 30 


.4 


31.8 


33.1 


34.3 


35.6 


36 


.8 


37.9 


39.1 


41. 


43.3 


45.3 


47.2 


49.0 


70 


72 


Fqoofion for Circular fqirivo/tnf of a Rectangular Due/:' 


39.6 


41. 


43.8 


45.9 


47.8 


49.7 


72 


74 














40.0 


42. 


44.4 


4t 


).4 


48.4 


50.3 


74 


76 

*7O 


, , (<*&)"'" , .V (aW 


40.5 


42. 


44.9 


47.0 


49. C 


50.8 


76 


78 
80 






' ' (a +6) 


D.UO 


^ V (a + 6) 




40.5 
41.3 


43.! 
43. 


45.5 
46.0 


47.5 
48.0 


49. S 
50.1 


51.1 
52.0 


78 
80 


82 














41.8 


44. 


46.4 


48.6 


50.6 


52.6 


82 


84 


, 












42.2 


44.6 


46.9 


49.2 


51.1 


53.2 


84 


86 
88 
90 


WflSTC 

a = length of one side of rectangular duct, inches. 
b = length of adjacent side of rectangular duct, inches. 


42.6 
43.0 
43.4 


45.0 
45.4 
45.9 


47.4 
47.9 
48.3 


49.6 
50.1 
50.6 


51.6 
52.2 
52.8 


53.7 
54.3 
54.8 


86 
88 
90 


92 


d t = circular equivalent of a rectangular duct for equal friction and capac- 
ity, inches. 


43.8 


46.3 


48.7 


51.1 


53.4 


55.4 


92 


96 














44.6 


47.2 


49.5 


52.0 


54.4 


56.3 


96 



Chart determines sizes of rectangular ducts necessary to equal carrying capacity of round ducts. To use, find the diameter 
of the round pipe in the chart. Then find one side of rectangular duct by reading up. Find the other side by reading left to the first 
row of numbers representing the other side of the rectangular pipe. 



87.419X 



13-4 



A double duct system generally consists of a 
blowthrough fan unit discharging filtered air 
through stacked or adjacent heating and cooling 
coils into separate plenums and ductwork with 
thermostatically controlled mixing dampers at 
various room locations. 

The inherent advantage of a double duct 
system is that individual room conditions can be 
maintained from a central system, within the 
limitations of supply air temperatures. This is 
done by the blending of hot and cool air through 
automatically controlled mixing devices. Another 
important credit is flexibility. In this regard, in- 
dividually controlled rooms can be easily 
incorporated, at modest cost, after the building 
is completed. 

In modern buildings of multiple exposures de- 
signed for variable functions and changing oc- 
cupancy, individual room control is essential and 
a double duct system should be seriously 
considered. 

Double duct systems for low pressure are 
usually tiered hot and cold ducts within the furred 
space. They are generally located above corridors. 
The manner of distributing proper temperature air 
to the room is through right angle, interlinked 



mixing dampers operated by motors controlled 
through thermostats. In general, this type of 
system uses the same corridor plenum area around 
the ducts for conveyance of return or exhaust air. 
The residual volume of space left for this purpose 
is too often neglected. Inevitably, this results in 
insufficient relief for the rooms. 

The main disadvantage of a double duct 
system is lack of stability of air quantities supplied 
to areas (rooms) because of varying duct static 
pressures. 

All duct elbows, including supply, exhaust, 
and return, should be made with a center line 
radius of 1 .5 times the duct width, parallel to the 
radius wherever possible. In no case should the 
center line radius be less than the width of the duct 
parallel to the radius. Where space does not per- 
mit the above radius, or where square elbows are 
indicated on plans, turning vanes of an approved 
type should be used. 

Additionally, there are numerous adaptations 
and modifications of duct systems. Figure 13-1 
shows a residential duct system with the furnace 
and central air unit located in the basement. 



OFFSET 
COLLAR 



PLENUM 
CHAMBER 



END CAP 




AKGLE ROUND TO 
OVAL BOOT 



87.420 



Figure 13-1. Residential duct system. 



13-5 



In figure 13-2, the same basic system is shown in a 
single-story house. The duct system is located in 
the overhead and the return air enters through the 
bottom of the central air-handling unit. When the 
duct system is located in a crawl space, basement, 
or attic, it should be insulated to maintain the 
existing temperature. 



DUCT CONSTRUCTION 

In this section, basic sheet metal duct both 
round and rectangular is discussed. Emphasis is 
placed on layout and pattern requirements. Then, 
fiberboard duct construction and its use are 
discussed. 



Round Duct 

Straight sections of round duct are usually 
formed from sheets that are rolled to proper 
radius and assembled with a longitudinal grooved 
seam. Each end of a round section is swaged and 
assembled with the larger end of the adjoining 
section butting against the swage. Sections are 
held together by rivets, by sheet metal screws, or 
by solder. Where solder is not used, duct tape 
should be employed as a covering at all joints. 
Rectangular ducts are generally constructed by 
bending corners and by grooving along the 
longitudinal seam. 

The duct system should be constructed in such 
a manner as to avoid abrupt changes in size, 



OFFSET 
COLLAR 



PLENUM 
CHAMBER 




OVAL 
STACKHEAD 



Figure 13-2. Residential duct system. 



87.421 



13-6 



direction, or other resistance conditions that can 
create unnecessary noise and reduce the air 
volume. The normal noise level of air flowing 
through a duct depends on the velocity of the air 
moving through the duct. This can be further 
reduced by lining or covering the duct with sound- 
absorbing material. The exterior of ducts that 
carry conditioned air can be covered with heat 
insulation materials to prevent heat transfer 
between ducts and the surrounding air. All 
materials used for duct lining and coverings must 
be noncombustible. 

Ducts should be constructed for easy main- 
tenance. They should have access plates or doors 
included to facilitate cleaning and inspection. It 
is important that the correct size duct (as specified 
on the prints or drawings) be used for the 
construction of the duct system. The amount 
of air to be carried depends on the size of 
the duct. This determines the pressure loss 
in the system the larger the quantity of air 
moving through a duct of a given cross-sectional 
area, the greater the friction loss. Similarly, 
with a given quantity of air to be delivered, 
the friction loss increases in inverse proportion 
to the sizes of ducts provided to carry the 
air. Therefore, the power required at the fan 
for delivering a given quantity of air increases 
rapidly as the duct size is decreased. It is 
important to bear these facts in mind when 
it is necessary to replace or to change sections 
of ducts. The same size new duct should be 
used unless proper design provisions are made for 
a change in size. 



Rectangular Duct 

Straight sections of rectangular duct are 
normally formed by personnel in the Steel- 
worker rating. This is normally accomplished 
on bending-brake type of equipment. Then the 
rectangular ductwork is joined together as 
mentioned earlier. 

Straight sections of ducts can usually be 
laid out without a pattern. However, elbows, 
transitions, jump fittings, and so forth, re- 
quire a pattern. While Steelworkers perform 
the task, you, as a planner, need to be aware 
of the time required to draw and fabricate 
the required patterns. Also bear in mind that 
if this is a one-time job, you can make the 
pattern of paper or cardboard. When there 



are large numbers of the same size and dimen- 
sion fittings to be constructed, you should make 
the pattern of sheet metal. 



Fiber Glass Duct 

A fiber glass duct is constructed of molded 
glass fibers covered with a thin film coat- 
ing. This coating is usually of aluminum, but 
vinyl or other plastic coatings are sometimes 
used. Since they are made of glass fibers, 
the ducts are inherently insulated. Also, they 
are primarily used where insulation is a factor. 
Fiber glass meets military specifications for 
a flame spread rating of less than 25 and 
a smoke development rating of less than 50 
for insulating material. The thickness of fiber 
glass ducts allowed for use in Navy installations 
must range between 3/4 inch to 2 inches, 
depending upon the size of the duct. 

The nature of a fiber glass duct requires 
that it be supported with 1-inch by 1/16-inch 
galvanized steel strap hangers shaped to fit 
the duct. For round ducts, these supports 
must be on not less than 6-foot centers. Rec- 
tangular and square ducts up to 24-inch spans 
may be supported on 8-foot centers. Ducts 
larger than 24 inches require support on 4-foot 
centers. 

The applicability of fiber glass ducts on 
heating systems is sometimes limited by the 
adhesive used on the protective outer cover- 
ing to cause it to adhere to the fiber glass 
material. Unless aluminum surface duct is used, 
the specification of the duct should be checked 
carefully to ensure that it does not fail when 
heated over 250 F. 

Fiber glass ducts can be molded into a 
variety of shapes for special uses. Round ducts 
and reducers are available from manufacturers' 
stock. For most purposes, however, the duct 
is supplied flat in the form of a board, with 
V-grooves cut into the inner surface to allow 
folding to make a rectangular section. The 
ends of the boards are molded so that when 
the rectangular duct is formed, two sections 
of the same size fit together in a shiplap 
joint to ensure a tight joint in positive align- 
ment. It is important to exercise care in select- 
ing a board of adequate size to complete 
the desired duct before beginning cutting and 



13-7 



grooving operations. In all cases, the inside 
diameter of the duct is the determining factor 
for board size. To determine board size see table 
13-4. 

To form a rectangular duct, the flat duct 
board is measured accurately and grooves are 
cut at the proper locations. The board is then 
folded into a rectangular shape. When the board 
is cut, an overlapping tab is left and this is then 
pulled tight and stapled. Tape is applied and the 
joint is heat sealed. Joints between sections are 
made by pulling the shiplap end sections together. 



The joint is then completed by stapling, taping, 
and heat sealing the junction as shown in figure 
13-3. 

Sheet metal ducts expand as they become hot 
and contract as they become cold. The degree to 
which expansion and contraction becomes an 
installation factor depends upon the temperature 
of the air surrounding the ducts and the tempera- 
ture of the air moving through the ducts. Fabric 
joints are often used to absorb this duct move- 
ment. Additionally, fan noise and furnace or 
air-conditioner noise tends to travel along the 



Table 13-4. Duct Board Length Selection Chart 





6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 17 


18 


19 


20 


21 22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 28 


6 


32 


34 


36 


38 


40 


42 


44 


46 


48 


50 


52 54 


56 


58 


60 


62 64 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 76 


7 


34 


36 


38 


40 


42 


44 


46 


48 


50 


52 


54 56 


58 


60 


62 


64 66 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 78 


8 


36 


38 


40 


42 


44 


46 


48 


50 


52 


54 


56 58 


60 


62 


64 


66 68 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 80 


9 


38 


40 


42 


44 


46 


48 


50 


52 


54 


56 


58 60 


62 


64 


66 


68 70 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 82 


10 


40 


42 


44 


46 


48 


50 


52 


54 


56 


58 


60 62 


64 


66 


68 


70 72 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 84 


11 


42 


44 


46 


48 


50 


52 


54 


56 


58 


60 


62 64 


66 


68 


70 


72 74 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 86 


12 


44 


46 


48 


50 


52 


54 


56 


58 


60 


62 


64 66 


68 


70 


72 


74 76 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 88 


13 


46 


48 


50 


52 


54 


56 


58 


60 


62 


64 


66 68 


70 


72 


74 


76 78 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 90 


14 


48 


50 


52 


54 


56 


58 


60 


62 


64 


66 


68 70 


72 


74 


76 


78 80 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 92 


15 


50 


52 


54 


56 


58 


60 


62 


64 


66 


68 


70 72 


74 


76 


78 


80 82 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 94 


16 


52 


54 


56 


58 


60 


62 


64 


66 


68 


70 


72 74 


76 


78 


80 


82 84 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 96 


17 


54 


56 


58 


60 


62 


64 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 76 


78 


80 


82 


84 86 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 98 


18 


56 


58 


60 


62 


64 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 78 


80 


82 


84 


86 88 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 100 


19 


58 


60 


62 


64 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 80 


82 


84 


86 


88 90 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 102 


20 


60 


62 


64 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 82 


84 


86 


88 


90 92 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 104 


21 


62 


64 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 84 


86 


88 


90 


92 94 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 106 


22 


64 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 86 


88 


90 


92 


94 96 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 108 


23 


66 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 88 


90 


92 


94 


96 98 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 110 


24 


68 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 90 


92 


94 


96 


98 100 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 112 


25 


70 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 92 


94 


96 


98 


100 102 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 114 


26 


72 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 94 


96 


98 


100 


102 104 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 116 


27 


74 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 96 


98 


100 


102 


104 106 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 118 


28 


76 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 98 


100 


102 


104 


106 108 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 120 


29 


78 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 100 


102 


104 


106 


108 110 


112 


114 


116 


118 


120 


30 


80 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 102 


104 


106 


108 


110 112 


114 


116 


118 


120 




31 


82 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 104 


106 


108 


110 


112 114 


116 


118 


120 






32 


84 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 106 


108 


110 


112 


114 116 


118 


120 








33 


86 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 108 


110 


112 


114 


116 118 


120 










34 


88 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 110 


112 


114 


116 


118 120 












35 


90 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 112 


114 


116 


118 


120 












36 


92 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 114 


116 


118 


120 














37 


94 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 116 


118 


120 
















38 


96 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 118 


120 


















39 


98 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 120 




















40 


100 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 


120 




















41 


102 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 


120 






















42 


104 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 


120 
























43 


106 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 


120 






For 


1%-inch board ADD 


4 INCHES 


to these dimensions. 


44 


108 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 


120 


"For 2-inch 


board ADD 8 


INCHES to these 


dimensions. 


45 


110 


112 


114 


116 


118 


120 






























46 
47 


112 
114 


114 
116 


116 
118 


118 
120 


12U 
































48 


116 


118 


120 




































49 


118 


120 






































50 

^MMKMBMM 


120 

MMHM^mMM^H 




MM^^ 





































87.422 



13-8 




87.423 



Figure 13-3. Forming rectangular fiber glass ducts from duct board. 



metal ducts. Therefore, fabric joints (usually 
constructed of heavy canvas) are used to join the 
branch ducts to the plenum. 

SIZING DUCT SYSTEMS 

There are numerous factors to be considered 
when sizing duct systems. These factors cause you 
to make modifications and adjustments through- 
out the planning and installation process to 
develop an efficient working system. First, you 
must calculate the air volume required for heating 
and for cooling the required space. This will assist 
you in determining the necessary duct size, fan 
size, fan speed, and so forth, that is needed to 
circulate the conditioned air. While determining 
the heating and the cooling factors, you should 
think in terms of air circulation throughout the 
building and in each individual room or space. 
Remember, air movement is determined by the 
type of return airflow that you use. 

Four other important duct system components 
are diffusers, grilles, registers, and dampers. Each 
of these components has a direct correlation 



between functional design, amount of air accom- 
modated, and the air movement pattern. 

The elbows within the duct system are a 
major source of airflow restriction. Whenever 
possible, you can gain efficiency by installing long 
sweeping elbows. Short 90-degree elbows should 
be used sparingly on long duct runs. However, 
they can be used very effectively with a minimum 
of air turbulence and airflow restriction when 
installed just before diffusers, grilles, and 
registers. 

Your final duct calculations involve taking 
unit pressure drops and total pressure drops 
throughout the system. Some of the major con- 
tributing factors to these pressure drops are as 
follows: 

Length of duct 

Duct material and interior finish 

Changes in duct size 

Number of elbows 



13-9 



Normally, you will be installing a duct system 
according to preestablished blueprints and draw- 
ings. Occasionally you may need to refer to other 
sources and review trade association standards. 
The ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals has 
three chapters dedicated to methods and pro- 
cedures for selecting proper duct sizes. You should 
become familiar with the contents of these three 
chapters; particularly, if you are involved in the 
design phase of an air-conditioning system. 

BALANCING DUCT SYSTEMS 

A duct system is always installed to fulfill 
specific requirement features related in some way 
to the health and welfare of human beings. 
Equally important is the fact that a properly 
balanced operating system results in lower 
operating costs and significant utilities conserva- 
tion. Consequently, it is important that these 
systems, regardless of the function, operate 
properly. When a duct system is initially installed, 
the required pressures and performance data are 
available from the construction drawings and the 
manufacturer's instructions. After installation, 
pressures and performance requirements should 
be measured to ensure proper airflow at different 
locations. Once the proper airflows are estab- 
lished, little change should take place within the 
system. Maintenance personnel must ensure that 
the system is operating correctly by conducting 
certain periodic tests. Tests are used for the 
initial and subsequent setting of grilles, diffusers, 
dampers, and registers to obtain the necessary 
airflow required by specifications, codes, regula- 
tions, or trade association standards. 

It is important to understand the pressure in 
a duct carrying a moving stream of air. Certain 
changes in an existing duct system are often 
necessary and you should be able to accomplish 
these changes. In addition, malfunctioning duct 
systems require immediate attention, and an 
understanding of the basic elements of the system 
is required before troubleshooting and corrective 
action can be undertaken. Furthermore, before 
a duct system can be properly balanced, certain 
essential knowledge of airflow is required. 

Static pressure is a measure of the outward 
push of air on the walls of a duct. When air is 
not moving within a duct because a damper at the 
outlet is closed, the static pressure can be 
measured by means of a pressure gauge installed 
in the wall of the duct. If the damper in the duct 
is then opened and the air is flowing, static 
pressure continues to be present. It will be reduced 



when the damper is opened, but the static pressure 
can still be read on the gauge. 

When air is flowing in a duct, there is another 
pressure in addition to the static pressure that 
can be measured. This is the pressure exerted by 
the moving airstream. This pressure acts in a plane 
perpendicular to the direction of airflow. To 
illustrate, imagine a horizontal duct without any 
air flowing in it. When a thin, flat piece of metal 
is suspended with a movable hinge from the top 
of the duct, it will hang straight down when air 
is not moving. When air flows, the hinged piece 
of metal swings upward toward the top of the 
duct. The velocity pressure is the force that causes 
the deflection of the hinged vane (obviously, the 
greater the air velocity, the greater the pressure 
acting on the hinged vane and the greater its 
deflection from the perpendicular). 

The velocity pressure cannot be measured as 
easily as the static pressure. When a hollow tube 
is inserted in the moving airstream, and a gauge 
is connected to the end of the tube, the gauge 
registers a certain pressure. This pressure is larger 
than the static pressure because the gauge indicates 
the sum of the static and the velocity pressure. 
This sum is known as the total pressure. Since 




87.177 



Figure 13-4. Velometer set. 



13-10 



Figure 13-5. Pitot probe. 



87.257 



total and static pressure can be easily measured, 
the velocity pressure can be found by subtracting 
static from total pressure. In most problems 
concerning duct systems, air pressure is expressed 
in terms of inches of water (1 pound per square 
inch = 27.74 inches of water.) 

At the time of initial installation of a duct 
system, the design data should be recorded. After 
initial start-up, the system should be balanced so 
that each air outlet is adjusted to the design rate 
of flow. During the initial balancing procedure, 
the actual design rate of flow is sometimes not 
achieved, but the flow is within the range of 
acceptable standards. When such conditions 
exist, they should be noted on the design data 
sheet where they may be considered by mainte- 
nance personnel during repairs or the rebalanc- 
ing of the system. After the system is balanced 
and proper operation is assured, static pressure 
measurements are taken throughout the system. 
Also, the total pressure difference across the fan 
(the difference between the suction total pressure 
and the discharge total pressure) is noted. 
Although these initial measurements can be used 
for checking the design of the system, their main 
function is to serve as reference data for future 
tests. If the system fails to function properly at 
any time, another set of measurements should be 
taken and compared to the original set. 

AIR BALANCING INSTRUMENTS 

Numerous instruments designed for air 
balancing requirements are available from dif- 
ferent manufacturers. Those that are most 
commonly used are discussed in this section. 

Velometer 

This instrument is particularly adaptable to 
maintenance work because of its portability, wide 
scale range, and instantaneous reading features. 
Its accuracy is suitable for most air velocity and 
static pressure readings. Since velometers are 
made by several manufacturers, the instruction 
sheets for any instrument should be thoroughly 
understood before attempting to use it. A 



functional velometer set consists of the basic meter 
with hoses and accessories as shown in figure 13-4. 

MEASURING DEVICES. There are four 
measuring devices used with the basic meter for 
determining air velocities and pressures. They are 
the pitot probe, low flow probe, diffuser probe, 
and static pressure probe. 

The pitot probe (fig. 13-5) is a stainless steel 
measuring probe with a standard length of 12 in- 
ches and a diameter of 1/2 inch. It is suitable for 
measuring velocities at supply openings and at 
return openings. Its primary purpose is to measure 
velocities within ducts. It is not recommended for 
velocity ranges below 300 fpm. 

The low flow probe (fig. 13-6) is used for 
measuring velocities in open spaces. It connects 
directly to the meter and permits measurement of 
air by placing the instrument directly in the air 
currents. It is useful for measuring drafts in rooms 
and air velocities at ventilation hoods and spray 



CD 



87.258 



Figure 13-6. Low flow probe. 



13-11 



booths. Only velocity ranges from to 300 fpm 
are applicable to this device. 

The diffuser probe (fig. 13-7) is used for 
measuring air output at duct supply diffusers. 
It can also be used with some meters on 
return air diffusers. The meter reading and 
the K factor established by the diffuser manu- 
facturer can be used to determine air volume 
outputs. 




The static pressure probe (fig. 13-8) is used for 
measuring drops across blowers or fans in duct 
systems. The probe is carefully placed over an 
opening in the wall of a duct so as to form a 
positive seal. The hole should not be less than one- 
quarter inch in diameter. 

RANGE SELECTORS. These are devices 
(fig. 13-9) that permit a rapid change of measur- 
ing ranges without the need for shifting to 
separate jets for each range. They are provided 
with connections that accept the various probes. 
These probes can also be connected to the meter. 
With the exception of the low flow probe, 
measurements may require a range selector. 

Manometer 

A manometer is an instrument that indicates 
air pressure by employing the principle of 




87.260 



Figure 13-8. Static pressure probe. 




Figure 13-7. Diffuser probe. 



87.259 



87.261 



Figure 13-9. Range selector. 



13-12 



balancing a column of liquid of known weight 
against air pressure. The units of measure used 
are pounds per square inch, inches of mercury 
using mercury as the fluid, and inches of water 
using water as the fluid. 

The simplest form of manometer is the basic 
U-tube type. Several variations of the basic type 
are presently used in air movement applications, 
for example, the inclined type (draft gauge) and 
the combination inclined and vertical type. An 
inclined manometer with a pitot probe is shown 
in figure 13-10. Many commercially installed 
central duct systems have permanently mounted 
manometers connected to duct interiors with static 
pressure tips. 



Rotating Vane Anemometer 

The rotating vane anemometer (fig. 13-11) 
consists of a propeller or revolving vane connected 
through a gear train to a set of recording dials 
that indicate the number of linear feet of air 
passing in a measured length of time. It requires 
correction factors and frequent calibrations, and 
it is not as accurate as the velometer. 

The primary application for a rotating vane 
anemometer is the measurement of grille velocities 
on heating, cooling, and ventilating installations; 
however, it may not be suitable for exhaust 
measurements or for measurements on very small 
grilles. 



Miscellaneous Instruments 

In addition to the air balancing instruments, 
there are other miscellaneous devices required. 
Thermometers are necessary for making tempera- 
ture measurements at various duct and room 
locations; a tachometer is needed to determine fan 
speeds; and a multimeter is needed to check fan 
motors for proper operation. 



PREPARATION FOR BALANCING 

The following preliminary procedure is 
necessary before proper balancing can begin. 
These steps are general in nature and should apply 
to most situations. 

1. Review applicable mechanical drawings 
and job specifications. This review will provide 
necessary data on the ducts, air handlers, and 
outlets. Information pertaining to design airflow 
can also be taken from these drawings. 

2. Prepare a simple working sketch of the 
entire duct system showing dimensions, airflow 
volumes and velocities, and the location of all 
components such as dampers, fans, coils, and 
filters. Duct outlets should be numbered on the 
sketch starting at the farthest one from the fan 



TOTAL PRESSURE CONNECTION 



STATIC PRESSURE 
CONNECTION 




DIRECTION OF AIRFLOW 



HOLES IN SIDES OF 
OUTER TUBE ONLY 

\ 



PITOT PROBE 



87.179 




87.178 



Figure 13-10. Inclined manometer with pitot probe. 



Figure 13-11. Rotating vane anemometer. 



13-13 



and working back toward the fan. (See fig. 13-12.) 
The type of diffuse: and the air delivery design 
of each outlet should be noted. 

3. Obtain data pertinent to motors, fans, 
diff users, and grilles that are not given on 
drawings. This can usually be taken from the 
manufacturer's identification plate located on the 
component. This information is useful during the 
balancing process for comparing measured results 
with design conditions. 

4. Make a visual check of the system to 
ascertain that all fans are rotating correctly. Also, 
that air filters are clean and properly installed. 

5. Place all dampers in the open position. This 
includes volume balancing dampers, splitter 
dampers, outlet dampers, and fire dampers. 

6. Check all necessary instruments prior to 
starting the balancing procedure. Always follow 
the manufacturer's recommendations for check- 
ing the calibration of instruments. 

PROCEDURES FOR BALANCING 

The procedures required for balancing most 
systems are similar. Balancing is a rigorous tech- 
nique that, if properly done, yields excellent 
results. As with any set of procedures, each opera- 
tion is necessary and must be performed in the 
correct sequence. The following procedures are 
general in nature and apply to most systems. 



Determine Fan Performance 

The first step of the procedure is to determine 
fan performance. The purpose for this is to 
ensure that there is sufficient static pressure 
and air volume being handled at the fan before 
balancing is started. The fan's revolutions per 
minute (rpm), the voltage and amperage of the 
fan motor, the fan static pressure, and the 
system's total airflow are indications of fan 
performance. 

The fan rpm can be measured by a tachometer 
as shown in figure 13-13. You should take several 
readings to ensure an accurate reading. The results 
can be compared with the design conditions to 
determine performance. 

You should use a multimeter to determine if 
the operating voltage and amperage of the fan 
motor are within the range of rated voltage and 
amperage indicated on the motor nameplate. The 
measured results can either be compared or used 
to calculate the brake horsepower. Use the 
manufacturer's recommended calculation to 
determine the brake horsepower. 

You can determine the fan static pressure by 
attaching a velometer and static pressure probe 
to test tap holes located on the inlet and discharge 
duct of the fan, as shown in figure 13-14. Fan 
static pressure is the static pressure at the outlet 
minus the total pressure in the fan inlet. This 



36X20 
RA. 



36X20 
R.A. 



VD (VOLUME DAMPER) 

RA (RETURN AIR) 

CFM (CUBIC FEET PER MINUTE) 

FPM (FEET PER MINUTE) 



2000 CFM 



(z) 

300 CFM 



200 

CFM 



350 

CFM 



200 

CFM 



400 

CFM 



300 CFM 



VD 



I L 



30X20 



30X20 




t 



FILTER 



VD 

-F- 



VD 

-F- 



VD 



250 CF 



FAN 



Figure 13-12. Duct system working sketch. 



87.262 



13-14 




Figure 13-13. Measuring fan rpm. 



87.263 




87.264 
Figure 13-14. Fan static pressure measurement. 



test may not be necessary in the field; however, 
if it is, the results can be compared with the 
manufacturer's fan curve and system specifica- 
tions to determine fan performance. 

You can quickly locate problems caused by 
blockages in duct systems by performing static 
pressure readings. The total air volume in 



cubic feet per minute (cfm) for a fan can be 
determined by the following procedures: 

1 . Downstream of the air handler, establish 
a point along the duct that has the longest straight 
run and drill test holes into the duct. Holes should 
be far enough downstream from any elbows or 
from the fan discharge to minimize the effect of 
turbulence. The holes must be closed and sealed 
after the test is completed. 

2. Take velocity pressure readings using a 
pitot probe and manometer or velometer. For 
rectangular ducts, velocity readings are taken at 
the center of equally divided areas. On round 
ducts, readings are taken across each of two 
diameters on lines at right angles to each other. 
(See fig. 13-15.) 

3. Calculate the cubic feet of air per minute 
by multiplying the average velocity pressure in feet 
per minute found in the above reading by the 
cross-sectional area of the duct in square feet. 
Total airflow in cfm = Average velocity in 
fpm x duct cross-sectional area in square feet. 

The results are compared with design condi- 
tions to determine performance. Measured cfm 
should be approximately equal to design cfm plus 
10 percent to allow for leakage. 

In the event that fan performance is not 
consistent with design conditions, the necessary 
adjustments or repairs should be made at this 
point in the balancing procedure. For example, 




87.265 
Figure 13-15. Velocity pressure measurement. 



13-15 



the fan speed can be changed by adjusting the 
variable diameter motor pulley. Be careful to 
avoid operating the fan at a speed that overloads 
the motor. After adjustments or repairs, tests 
should be repeated to verify that the design 
conditions have been attained. Total air volume 
measurements should be repeated for all air- 
handling units on branch, return, and exhaust 
duct systems. 

Duct and Outlet Adjustments 

You should use the same procedure for 
measuring total air volume to set the main 
splitter dampers on systems containing branch 
ducts. When main ducts, zone ducts, and branches 
are set for design air, the tests necessary for 
adjusting individual outlets can begin. When 
available, always follow the manufacturer's 
recommended procedure. 

The final balancing procedure involves the 
adjustment of individual outlets to correspond 
with the manufacturer's design flow and system 
specifications. Begin with the last outlet on the 
branch farthest from the fan discharge and 
measure the velocity (or cfm). You can use either 
a velometer with the diffuser probe or an 
anemometer. If the cfm is below design, leave the 
damper open and proceed to the next outlet. If 
the cfm is greater than design, close the damper 
to obtain the desired results. In the same branch 
go to the next closest outlet, repeat the procedure, 
then continue the process with each outlet until 
you reach the main duct. 

If applicable, you should complete the same 
procedure on the remaining branch ducts. Finally, 
total cfm of all outlets should agree with total cfm 
of all branches, and this grand total should agree 
with the air volume for the fan or fans. These 
figures should be within 3 to 7 percent of design 
conditions. You should check fan outputs and 
motor amperages to ensure that the motor is not 
in an overloaded condition. At this point, fan 
speed and horsepower, fan total air by velocity 
measurement, and total air by outlet volume 
measurements have been established for the 
specific operating condition of the system during 
the procedure. The system should be balanced for 
those conditions. 



VENTILATION SYSTEMS 

Normally air contains about 21 percent 
oxygen. A ventilation system serving human 



beings requires that a certain oxygen content be 
contained in the air to maintain life and to 
ensure comfort. 

If a room is tightly sealed, any human in that 
room would slowly consume the oxygen and 
increase the amounts of carbon dioxide, water 
vapor, and various impurities. This could cause 
drowsiness or even death. 

You must remember that space for human 
living must have air with a good oxygen content 
and that this air must be kept at a reasonable 
temperature. It is of utmost importance that fresh 
air be admitted to provide the oxygen. 

In the past, this fresh air entered the space by 
infiltration (leakage) from the outside at door and 
window openings and through cracks in the struc- 
ture. However, modern construction is reducing 
this air leakage. Air-conditioning apparatus, 
then, must furnish fresh air. Modern units have 
a controlled fresh-air intake. This fresh air is 
conditioned and mixed with the recirculated air 
before it reaches the room. 

Some conditioned air leaves a building 
through doors, windows, and other construction 
joints. Some also leaves by exfiltration. (This 
means leaking out or being blown out by 
mechanical means.) Any kind of exhaust fan 
removes conditioned air. Some of this air is 
replaced by infiltration on those sides of the 
building exposed to wind pressure. 

It is best to bring in replacement fresh air 
through a makeup air system. When this is done 

the makeup air can be cleaned. 

the makeup air can be cooled or heated. 

a positive pressure can be maintained in 
the building to keep out airborne dirt, dust, and 
pollen. (A negative pressure reduces the efficiency 
of exhaust fans and fuel- fired furnaces.) 

a definite amount of fresh air is brought 
into the building for health purposes (oxygen 
content). 

Certain areas of a building should have a 
slightly less positive pressure (5 to 10 percent) than 
the rest of the building to reduce the spread of 
odors. Such areas would include the kitchen, 
lavatories, and where certain industrial operations 
produce fumes. 

The amount of fresh air required depends on 
the use of the space and the amount of fresh air 
admitted by infiltration. One basic rule is to 



13-16 



provide at least 4 cfm of fresh air per person to 
provide enough oxygen and to remove carbon 
dioxide. If six people occupy a 1 ,000-square-foot 
space with a 10-foot ceiling, there is 10,000 -=- 6, 
or 1 ,667 cubic feet per hour for each person, or 
1,667 -s- 60 = 27.7 cfm (.78 mVmm). This meets 
or exceeds ventilating code requirements. 

One must remember that the air can be 
handled either to produce positive pressure (higher 
than atmospheric pressure) in a building or 
negative pressure (below atmospheric pressure). 
A positive pressure will eliminate infiltration of 
air from the outside or from other spaces. Positive 
pressure is produced by using special air intakes 
to the blowers. A positive pressure assures that 
all air entering a building can be filtered and 
cleaned before reaching the occupied space. 

Negative pressure increases the infiltration at 
windows and doors. This air is untreated and may 
be dirty. If the amount of impurities in the 
inside air such as odor, smoke, and bacteria 
is great enough to require air cleaning, the remedy 
may be either more ventilation (using fresh air) 
or improved air cleaning. 

Ventilation is usually based on air changes per 
hour for the conditioned space. If the space is 
10,000 cubic feet for example, three changes per 
hour would mean 3 ,000 cubic feet per hour or 50 
cfm. Three changes every hour is the minimum 
for a residence during the heating season. As high 
as 12 changes an hour (in the above case, 200 cfm) 
are recommended for cooling. 

It is a good practice to keep the air blowers 
running all the time to provide good ventilation 
to all parts of the building. Variable speed 
blowers are sometimes used. They provide more 
air movement when the heating or cooling system 
is running and less movement when the systems 
are off. 

An adequate air supply is the best way to 
control comfort. Body comfort is controlled by 
evaporation, convection, radiation, and respira- 
tion. You must, therefore, control the temperature 
of the walls, floors, or ceilings to make sure they 
are not too warm or too cold (radiation). You 
must also supply enough air to promote good 
respiration, evaporation, and convection. If the 
specified conditions are not known, it is best to 
design for 2 cubic feet per minute per square foot 
and/or 12 changes of air per hour. It is also very 
important to remember that people occupying a 
closed space give off considerable heat. A sleep- 
ing person gives off about 200 Btu/hr, while a 
person doing heavy work gives off up to 2,400 
Btu/hr. 



Another way to determine ventilation re- 
quirements is to design for 4 cfm to 6 cfm of fresh 
air per person and for about 25 cfm to 40 cfm 
of recirculated air per person. This means the 
system should handle a total of 29 cfm to 46 cfm 
per person. (1 cfm = 0.0283 cu m/min.) 



NATURAL VENTILATION 

Natural ventilation, or gravity ventilation, uses 
the natural forces of wind, stack effect, and 
breathing of structures caused by the interior- 
exterior temperature difference to induce air 
circulation and removal. Generally, air enters 
through openings at or near the floor level in a 
building and escapes through openings high in the 
walls or ventilators on the roof. 

Natural ventilation is used only where the 
necessary quantity of ventilation can be induced 
by natural forces. Applications that require a 
continuous supply of outdoor air for human 
comfort, or the safe use of space (or process), 
should not be designed for natural ventilation. In 
such cases, natural ventilation is not reliable 
because of wide variations in the natural forces, 
such as wind velocity and direction, and the inside- 
outside temperature difference. 

For an installation using natural ventilation, 
you should consider the location and control of 
ventilation openings. Locate the air inlet open- 
ings on the side of the building facing directly 
into the prevailing winds. Locate the air outlets 
where prevailing wind movements would create 
low-pressure areas; that is, on the side directly 
opposite the prevailing wind direction. Outlets 
may also be placed on a roof in the form of 
individual gravity ventilators, continuous moni- 
tors, or ridge ventilators. Calculate the ventila- 
tion rate due to wind velocity and the stack 
effect as detailed in criteria established by the 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and 
Air-conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE). When 
natural ventilation is provided for temperature 
control, you should provide a means for closing 
the openings during the heating season. 

The use of gravity ventilators is another 
method. A roof-mounted gravity ventilator may 
be a stationary, a pivoting wind-directional, or 
a rotating-turbine type of ventilator. You should 
select gravity ventilators based on the rating tables 
for the mounting height involved and a wind 
velocity of 4 miles per hour. 



13-17 



Natural ventilation has limited uses. In 
general, natural ventilation is inadequate for the 
following examples: 

Offices having an open window area less 
than 5 percent of the floor area 

Offices over 24 feet deep and without cross 
ventilation 

Offices having cross ventilation but 
having occupied space more than 35 feet from a 
window or an air inlet 

Dining rooms having a window area less 
than 6 percent of the floor area 

In using natural ventilation, you should 
consider local building and safety codes and the 
minimum requirements of the Occupational 
Safety and Health Act (OSHA), part 1910. 

MECHANICAL VENTILATION 

Mechanical ventilation uses mechanical forces 
to induce air circulation within buildings or 
spaces. Air movement is created by fans, or by 
fans combined with a supply air and/or exhaust 
air duct system. 

You should provide mechanical ventilation 
equipment where the necessary quantity of out- 
side air cannot be supplied continuously by 
natural forces. The quantity of air supplied should 
be kept to the minimum acceptable. 

You should install mechanical ventilation 
equipment in the following cases: 

For a supply of outside air and the removal 
of bad air or air contaminated by smoke, body 
odors, and so forth, in areas having a high 



occupancy level (auditoriums, assembly halls, and 
cafeterias). 

For processes giving off noxious or 
hazardous fumes, dust, or vapor resulting in 
unsafe or unhygienic conditions (paint spray 
booths, electroplating plants, welding booths, and 
other similar applications). 

For limited comfort of operators as in 
laundries, projection booths, and kitchens. 

For spaces containing fumes and vapor 
with specific gravity higher than air, such as 
garages and some refrigeration rooms. In these 
cases, provide exhaust intakes at floor level. 

For electronic or electric equipment in- 
stalled in confined spaces where the operating 
temperatures of the equipment may exceed the 
safe limit. 

For spaces having explosive vapors or 
dusts, use explosionproof ventilation equipment 
regardless of the concentration of explosive 
substances. 

For odor removal in bathrooms. 



REFERENCES 

ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals, Ameri- 
can Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and 
Air-conditioning Engineers. Atlanta, Ga., 
1985. 

NAVFAC DM-3, Mechanical Engineering, 
Department of the Navy, Naval Facilities 
Engineering Command, Washington, D.C., 
September 1972. 



13-18 



CHAPTER 14 

AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION 



Learning Objective: Identify the technical factors involved in the selection, 
installation, and maintenance of air-conditioning and refrigeration systems. 



As a First Class or Chief Utilitiesman, you 
will be expected to know technical information 
about the air conditioning of buildings and the 
refrigeration of perishable products. This chapter 
covers the aspects of selecting and installing 
air-conditioning and refrigeration equipment. 
The individual components required in an air- 
conditioning and a refrigeration system are also 
discussed. Finally, the fundamental electrical 
knowledge you need to actually install, maintain, 
and repair air-conditioning and refrigeration 
equipment is discussed. 



SELECTION AND 

INSTALLATION OF AN 
AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEM 

There are two types of air-conditioning 
systems that must be considered before selection 
and installation of the equipment. The first system 
discussed is forced air. Then, in turn, the hot and 
chilled water system is discussed. 



HOT AND CHILLED WATER 

Hot and chilled water units should be used 
when the areas to be air-conditioned are dis- 
persed, have a wide range of different uses, 
or have different humidity and comfort zone 
requirements. Some examples are a barracks, 
a galley, or a hospital. Some characteristics 
of these air-conditioning units that must be 
taken into consideration regarding this system 
are location (mechanical room), use or non- 
use of return air (hospital operating room), 
humidity and temperature controls, individual 
room temperature requirements, and amount 
of installation space for piping or ducts. See 
figure 1 4-2 for a typical piping diagram of a year- 
round air-conditioning system. 

If you are involved in designing an air- 
conditioning system or desire more informa- 
tion, refer to NAVFAC DM 3.3, Heating, 
Ventilating, Air-Conditioning and Dehumidify- 
ing Systems. 



FORCED AIR 

Forced air units are used when the areas to 
be air-conditioned are in close proximity to each 
other, are being used for similar purposes, or have 
the same humidity and comfort zone require- 
ments. A few examples are office spaces, single- 
dwelling homes, and single-purpose shops. Some 
characteristics of the system that must be taken 
into consideration during the planning phase are 
that the unit be centrally located, that it draw 
return air from the area being cooled, and that 
it be controlled by one thermostat. See figure 14-1 
for two examples of a forced air unit with 
accompanying duct work. 



HEAT LOAD CALCULATIONS 
AND AIR MOVEMENT 

Once the type of air-conditioning system 
has been chosen, the next step is to determine 
its appropriate size. There are two primary 
factors that must be considered. The first 
factor is heat load calculations. Humidity, 
comfort temperature, and psychrometrics are 
the three primary considerations necessary 
for calculating the heat load. The second factor 
is air movement. Velocity, pressure, and drafts 
are the three main factors that are important 
when you are designing and planning the size 



14-1 




87.185 



Figure 14-1. -Arrangements for package-type air-conditioning units and air ducts. 




1 ^CT <ss/ I 



PUMP DRAIN 



COMPRESSORS 



Figure 14-2. Typical piping connections for a year-round air-conditioning system. 



54.179 



14-2 



of an installation. Figure 14-3 shows the relation- 
ship between humidity, temperature, and air 
movement. 

At this time, you may find it helpful to review 
chapter 20 on "Air Conditioning" in Utilitiesman 
3 & 2, NAVEDTRA 10661. Additionally, the 
ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals is an ex- 
cellent source of information. 



SELECTION AND INSTALLATION 
OF REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS 

In a refrigeration system, the major considera- 
tion is the heat load calculation. There are five 



general factors that affect the refrigeration 
estimate required for a particular application. 



Heat leakage factor (K factor), 
leakage occurs around doors and seals. 



This 



Insulation factor (R factor). This is deter- 
mined by type and thickness of the insulating 
material. 

Air change load. This factor is determined 
by the frequency with which a door is opened and 
closed, and the length of time a door is left open. 

Product load factor. This is determined by 
the types of products being stored and product 
temperature at time of storage. 



AIR MOVEMENT OR TURBULENCE 
15 TO 25 FT PER MINUTE 



WINTER 
ZONE 
WINTER 

LINE 
SUMMER 
ZONE 
SUMMER 

LINE 



AVERAGE 
COMFORT 

AVERAGE 
COMFORT 

AVERAGE 
COMFORT 



AVERAGE 
COMFORT 




70 80 

DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE 



Figure 14-3. Comfort zone chart. 



IOO 



54.173 



14-3 




o 
o 
& 



o 

'O 
a 

o 

en 
JS 



14-4 



Miscellaneous factor. This includes such 
factors as exposure to direct sunlight and ambient 
temperature surrounding the system. 

There are several charts and graphs available 
that depict the relationship between the factors 
listed above. To do the job right, you must take 
into consideration the total effect of the factors 
before selecting a particular refrigeration system. 

SPECIAL TYPES OF 
REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS 

There are certain applications where an 
electrically powered refrigeration system cannot 
be used. This requires knowledge of special 
application and selection of a refrigeration system 
that will work effectively. The absorption and the 
expandable refrigeration systems are discussed in 
this section. 

ABSORPTION REFRIGERATION 

SYSTEM 

An absorption system uses either water, 
ammonia, or lithium bromide as the refrigerant. 
The system can range from very simple (small 
refrigerator) to complex (commercial freezer). 
This type of system is used in domestic and 
industrial refrigeration and air-conditioning 
applications. The absorption system is also used 
in recreational vehicles. Normally, these systems 
are identified by the type of heat source being used 
to power them such as kerosene, natural gas, 
steam, or electricity. Because of the high pressure 
(400 psi), you should remember that welded steel 
tube construction must be used throughout the 
system. Also, because of the reaction between 
ammonia and copper or brass, you need a set of 
steel manifold gauges. Figure 14-4 shows an 
absorption refrigeration cycle using ammonia as 
the refrigerant. 

EXPANDABLE REFRIGERATION 
SYSTEM 

An expandable refrigeration system is for use 
in trucks, railroad cars, and shipping containers 
that transport perishable items. The three types 
of refrigerants presently being used in an ex- 
pandable system are ammonia, carbon dioxide, 
and nitrogen. The evaporator system and the 
spray system are two types of expandable systems 
commonly used in the Navy, and they are dis- 
cussed in this section. 



Evaporator Systems 

In the expandable evaporator system, liquid 
refrigerant is stored in large metal insulated 
cylinders. These cylinders are normally located in 
the front of the cargo vehicle. Each cylinder is 
equipped with a temperature control to provide 
a temperature range of -20 F to 60 F. 

The temperature control is connected to a 
temperature sensor. As the temperature rises, the 
switch operating the control valve opens and 
liquid refrigerant flows into the evaporator. The 
evaporator can be blower coils, plates, or eutectic 
plates. As it passes through the evaporator, the 
refrigerant vaporizes. This vapor is pushed 
through the evaporator by the pressure difference 
between the cylinder and the vent. When the 
selected temperature is attained, the refrigerant 
valve closes. The vapor that has been used is then 
discharged from the evaporator at about the same 
temperature as the air in the cargo vehicle. 
With this system, the refrigerant does not mix 
with air in the vehicle space. An example 
of the expendable evaporator system is shown 
in figure 14-5. This example shows two nitrogen 
cylinders located inside a truck body that 
are connected by a manifold to regulators 
and to temperature control solenoid valves. 
The vaporizing liquid nitrogen flows into the 
vaporizers or cold plates to refrigerate the truck 
box. 




87.417 
Figure 14-5. Expendable evaporator refrigeration system. 



14-5 



Spray System 

In the expandable refrigerant spray system, 
liquid nitrogen or carbon dioxide is sprayed 
directly into the vehicle space that is to be cooled. 
This system uses liquid containers, a control box, 
a fill box, spray headers, emergency switches, and 
safety vents. 

The fill box is normally located on the front 
of the vehicle. It contains the valves, gauges, and 
connections that allow the liquid containers to be 
filled. The liquid containers are insulated cylinders 
similar to thermos bottles. The control box 
contains the valves, gauges, and thermostats that 
are necessary for safe release of the liquid to the 
spray headers. Once the liquid is received at the 
spray headers, the nozzles spray it into the 
vehicle. The remaining two components are 
primarily safety devices. These emergency inter- 
lock switches are attached to each door. Thus, 
whenever a door is opened the system shuts down. 
The safety vent is a small trapdoor that vents air 
directly to the atmosphere whenever the air 
inside the truck box exceeds atmospheric pressure. 

A benefit of this system is that liquid nitrogen 
or carbon dioxide replaces the oxygen inside the 
space being refrigerated. Therefore, when fruits, 
vegetables, meats, and fish are being refrigerated, 
they are also preserved by the inert atmosphere. 

A vehicle equipped with this type of system 
must display the following safety sign: 

CAUTION: THE TEMPERATURE OF 
LIQUID NITROGEN, AS IT COMES 
FROM THE SPRAY NOZZLES, IS 
BELOW 0F. 

Liquid nitrogen will instantly freeze any part 
of the human body that it touches. Since liquid 
nitrogen can be dangerous, you should always 
inspect the refrigerated space before closing the 
doors. An expandable spray system for a refriger- 
ation truck is shown in figure 14-6. In this system, 
the liquid nitrogen is in an insulated container that 
is installed vertically inside the truck body. 
Another similar type of spray system with the 
refrigerant container mounted horizontally under 
the truck body is shown in figure 14-7. 

THERMOELECTRIC 
REFRIGERATION SYSTEM 

This type of system is used to move heat from 
one area to another by use of electrical energy. 
The electrical energy rather than the refrigerant 



serves as a "carrier." The primary use of thermo- 
electric systems has been in portable refrigerators, 
water coolers, cooling of scientific apparatus 
used in space exploration, and in aircraft. The 
main advantage of this system is there are no 
moving parts. The system is compact, quiet, and 
requires little service. 

MULTISTAGE REFRIGERATION 

SYSTEM 

Multistage refrigeration systems are used 
where ultralow temperatures are required but 
cannot be obtained economically through the 
use of a single-stage system. The reason for 
this is the compression ratios are too high to 
attain the temperatures required to evaporate and 
condense the vapor. There are two general types 
of systems, presently in use cascade and 
multistage (compound). 

Cascade System 

The cascade system has two separate refriger- 
ant systems interconnected in such a way that the 
evaporator from the first unit cools the condenser 
of the second unit. This allows one of the units 
to be operated at a lower temperature and pressure 
than would otherwise be possible with the same 
type and size of single-stage system. It also allows 
two different refrigerants to be used, and it can 
produce temperatures as low as -250F. Refer 
to figure 14-8. In this typical cascade system, 



SAFETY VENT 
DOOR 



EMERGENCY SHUT OFF 
VALVE 



SENSIHG BULB 
GUARD 




CONNECTING 
LINES 



87.418 



Figure 14-6. An expendable spray system. 



14-6 



SHUT-OFF 

VALVE SENSING 
BULB 




CONTAINER 



CONTROLS 



SAFETY 
VENT DOOR 



Figure 14-7. An expendable spray system. 



87.419 



TEV 




LOW-STAGE COMPRESSOR 



OIL SEPARATOR HIGH-STAGE COMPRESSOR 



OIL SEPARATOR 



Figure 14-8. Cascade refrigeration system. 



87.420 



condenser B of system 1 is being cooled by evapor- 
ator C of system 2. This arrangement enables 
ultralow temperatures in evaporator A of system 
1 . The condenser of system 2 is shown at point 
D in the figure. Two TEV refrigerant controls are 
also indicated in the figure. Notice the use of oil 
separators to minimize the circulation of oil. 



Compound System 

The compound system uses two or more com- 
pressors connected in series in the same refrigera- 
tion system. In this type of system the first stage 
compressor is the largest and for each succeeding 
stage the compressor gets smaller. This is because 



14-7 



MULTISTAGE APPLICATION 




HIGH-SIDE FLOAT BETWEEN STAGES 



OIL SEPARATOR SIZE 

TO EQUAL 3D STAGE 

COMPRESSOR HORSEPOWER 



87.421 



Figure 14-9. Multistage refrigerating system. 



COMPRESSOR 
SERVICE 
VALVES 



AIR-COOLED CONDENSER 



FAN 



CONDENSER OUTLET 
SERVICE VALVE 




RECEIVER SERVICE 
VALVE 

(LIQUID OUTLET) 



MOTOR 



Figure 14-10. Air-cooled condenser mounted on a compressor unit. 



54.288 



14-8 



as the refrigerant passes through each compressor 
it becomes a more dense vapor. A two-stage 
compound system can attain a temperature of ap- 
proximately - SOT. Refer to figure 14-9. In this 
three-stage system a temperature of - 135 F can 
be attained efficiently. Compressor 1 pumps 
vapor into the intercooler and then into the intake 
of compressor 2. This same operation is repeated 
between the second and third stages. In the third 
stage, the refrigerant vapor is further cooled and 
travels to the evaporator for specific cooling use. 



MECHANICAL COMPONENT 
SELECTION 

There are several mechanical components re- 
quired in a refrigeration system. In this section 
some of the more common components and their 
selection are discussed. These components include 
condensers, evaporators, compressors, refrigerant 
lines and piping, refrigerant capacity controls, 
receivers, and accumulators. Many of these units 
and components are discussed thoroughly in 
Utilitiesman 3&2, NAVEDTRA 10661, chapter 
19. Now is an excellent time for you to review this 
material. Then, proceed to read the remainder of 
this chapter. 



CONDENSERS 

There are a number of condensers to be con- 
sidered when making a selection for installation. 
They are air-cooled, water-cooled, shell and tube, 
shell and coil, tube within a tube, and evaporative 
condensers. Each type of condenser has its own 
unique application. Some determining factors in- 
clude size and weight of unit, weather conditions, 
location (city or rural), availability of electricity, 
and availability of water. For example, is electricity 
available in single phase or three phase? Is elec- 
tricity economical or prohibitive? Water in some 
locations may be scarce, expensive, or contain 
chemicals that make it unsuitable for use. Local 
zoning laws should also be checked to ensure there 
are no restrictions as to use of electricity, water, or 
location of the unit. If the unit is to be installed on 
a roof, the roof load strength is of critical impor- 
tance. In some locations, the noise factor of an 
operating unit is an important consideration. With 
the rapid advances in technology, you should con- 
tact a manufacturer whenever possible to get the 
latest condenser design features available for a 
special-purpose installation. A typical installation 
of an air-cooled condenser mounted on a com- 
pressor unit is shown in figure 14-10. Figure 14-11 
shows a cutaway view of a water-cooled condenser. 



VAPOR 

REFRIGERANT 
INLET 



PURGE 




LIQUID 

REFRIGERANT 
OUTLET 



47.95 



Figure 14-11. Water-cooled condenser. 



14-9 



EVAPORATORS 

There are almost as many different types 
of evaporators as there are applications. How- 
ever, evaporators are divided into two general 
groups. The first group has evaporators that 
cool air that, in turn, cools the product. 
The second group has evaporators that cool 
a liquid such as brine solution that, in turn, 
cools the product. Normally, the proper evapor- 
ator comes with the unit (system) that you 
will be installing. However, there may be an 
occasion when you are designing a system. 
At this time, you will need to determine the 



requirements and select the proper evaporator 
from a manufacturer's catalog or manual. 
In figure 14-12 a blower-type evaporator is 
shown in a small space. The air enters the 
bottom of the evaporator, is cooled, and exits 
at the front of the unit. In figure 14-13, 
view A, a forced circulation evaporator is 
shown partially installed; view B shows the 
unit with the fan removed. A compact blower 
evaporator for use in low headroom fixtures 
is shown in figure 14-14. A vertical, flat- 
type blower evaporator designed for mount- 
ing behind either a window or a door frame 
is shown in figure 14-15. In the evaporator 



REFRIGERANT 
LINES 




DRAIN 



FAN 



87.422 



Figure 14-12. Blower-type evaporator. 




DRAIN 



87.424 



Figure 14-14. Compact blower evaporator. 




ELECTRICAL 

AND TUBING 

CONNECTIONS 



(B) 



87.423 

Figure 14-13. (A) Forced circulation evaporator partially 
installed; (B) fan unit removed. 




87.425 
Figure 14-15. Vertical, flat-type blower evaporator. 



14-10 



unit shown in figure 14-16, the motor drives two 
propeller-type fans and the cooler air exits at both 
ends of the evaporator. Figure 14-17 shows a low- 
velocity blower evaporator. In this type of 
evaporator the air enters at the two fan grills and 
exits on both sides. In figure 14-18 a low- 
temperature blower evaporator is shown This 
unit has two axial-flow fans and is equipped with 
electric defrost. 



COMPRESSORS 

With present technology, the newer air- 
conditioning and refrigeration systems are 
equipped with hermetic units. There are nu- 
merous models and designs of hermetic units 
available for all types of applications up to 
20 horsepower. A typical nonaccessible her- 
metic compressor is shown in figure 14-19. In 




DRAIN 



Figure 14-16. Dual fan evaporator. 



87.426 




DRAIN' 



87.427 
Figure 14-17. Low-velocity blower evaporator. 



MOUNTING 
BRACKETS 




DRAIN- 



87.428 



Figure 14-18. Low-temperature blower evaporator. 



PINCH-OFF TUBE 



/?\ /SUCTION TUBE DISCHARGE 

/ A\~^ TUBE 




COMMON/ 

RUNNING WINDING] 

STARTING WINDING 



168.12 



Figure 14-19. Hermetic compressor. 



14-11 



figure 14-20, a cutaway view of a hermetic com- 
pressor motor is shown. 



REFRIGERANT LINES AND PIPING 

Because of the progress made in this field, 
construction has become much simplier. Since 
precharged lines are in everyday use, the problems 
of installation are being eliminated. However, pay 



particular attention to neatness and cleanliness 
when you are installing support brackets (hangers) 
and insulation. 

Figure 14-21 shows a schematic piping 
diagram of a typical commercial refrigera- 
tion system. This system has a roof-mounted 
air-cooled condenser and two motor com- 
pressors. Each motor compressor has a suction 
and a liquid header and is connected to six 




Figure 14-20. -Hermetic compressor motor. 



87.429 



14-12 



PRESSURE 
STABILIZER 



C.V. 

COMPRESSOR 
UHIT 




87.430 



Figure 14-21.-Schematic piping diagram for a commercial refrigeration system. 



14-13 



refrigerant lines. A detailed view of an oil 
separator installation is shown in figure 14-22. 

REFRIGERANT CAPACITY 
CONTROLS 

In a single-stage installation, one evaporator, 
one condensing unit, and any one of the five types 
of refrigerant controls will work. However, in a 
multistage installation (fig. 14-9) with one con- 
denser, only two types of controls can be used. 
There are very few low-side float systems in 
actual operation, but you should be aware that 
there are some units that still use this control. 
Thermostatic expansion valves are the most 
commonly used, and on large capacity units, they 
usually operate a pilot valve which, in turn, 
operates a larger valve. 

The biggest problem associated with capacity 
controls is using one of the wrong size. When 
ordering replacements and when making repairs, 



you should always ensure that the control mark- 
ings are appropriate for the size system they are 
intended to be used in. Also, ensure the replace- 
ment part being ordered is compatible with the 
type of refrigerant being used in the system. 



RECEIVERS AND ACCUMULATORS 

The receiver is a storage tank for liquid 
refrigerant. When a refrigeration system is equip- 
ped with a receiver, you can close the outlet valve 
and pump refrigerant into it. This enables you to 
save the refrigerant while you work on the unit. 
Additionally, when a unit is equipped with a 
receiver, the quantity of refrigerant in the system 
is less critical than a unit not so equipped. 
Figure 14-23 shows the location of a receiver 
installed in a system. This is a commercial system 
with an air-cooled condenser, a thermostatic 
expansion valve, and a V-type compressor. 



Packed Angle 
Receiver Valve 



Port in 

Suction Chamber 
Cover 




Compressor 



Figure 14-22. Installation of an oil separator. 



54.339 



14-14 



THERMAL EXPANSION VALVE 



COLD LIQUID COLD VAPOR 



HOT LIQUID HOT VAPOR 
9>- LIQUID LI NE 




HEATED 
AIR FROM 
CONDENSER 



RECEIVER 



Figure 14-23. Receiver in refrigeration cycle. 



87.431 



14-15 



The accumulator is located inside the refrigera- 
tion cabinet and acts as a safety device. As a safety 
device it prevents the flow of liquid refrigerant 
into the suction line and the compressor. This is 
because liquid refrigerant causes considerable 
knocking and damage to the compressor. Figure 
14-24 shows the location of an accumulator in a 
system. 



SINGLE-PHASE 
HERMETIC MOTORS 

Basically, there are four types of single-phase 
motors used in hermetic assemblies: the split- 
phase; the capacitor-start, induction-run; the 
capacitor-start, capacitor-run; and the permanent 
split-phase. Each motor is discussed in this 
section. 

SPLIT-PHASE 

The split-phase motor is used generally on con- 
densing units of 1/10-, 1/6-, and 1/4-horsepower 




54.301 



Figure 14-24. Accumulator location. 



capillary tube systems. It has a low starting 
torque and contains both a starting winding and 
a running winding. A disconnect device is required 
for the starting winding when the motor reaches 
sufficient speed to operate on the running wind- 
ing. Figure 14-25 is a schematic wiring diagram 
of a split-phase motor circuit. 

CAPACITOR-START, 
INDUCTION-RUN 

This motor is similar to the split-phase type 
except that a starting capacitor is connected in 
series with the starting winding to provide higher 
starting torque. Figure 14-26 is a schematic 
diagram illustrating this type of motor. A device 
is also required to disconnect the starting winding 
when the motor reaches rated speed. This motor 
is commonly used on commercial systems up to 
three-fourths horsepower. 

CAPACITOR-START, 
CAPACITOR-RUN 

Two capacitors are used with the capacitor- 
start, capacitor-run motor: a starting capacitor 
and a running capacitor. The capacitors are in 
parallel with each other and in series with the 
starting winding. Figure 14-27 is a schematic 
diagram illustrating this type of motor circuit. The 
two capacitors turn the motor power surges into 
two-phase power when the motor is started. At 
approximately two-thirds rated speed, the start- 
ing capacitor part of the circuit is disconnected 
by a start relay device. Only the running capacitor 
remains in the circuit. This type of motor has a 



OVERLOAD 



12 



START 
RELAY 




STARTING 
WINDING 



1! 


_O- O 


! -i 




1 

1 


R 

Q 










RUNNING 
WINDING 



87.239 

Figure 14-25. Schematic wiring diagram of a split-phase 
motor circuit. 



L2 



OVERLOAD 



STARTING 
WINDING 




RUNNING 
WINDING 



87.240 

Figure 14-26. Schematic wiring diagram of a capacitor-start 
induction-run motor. 



14-16 



OVERLOAD 



L2 



STARTING 
WINDING 




RUN 
CAPACITOR 



RUNNING 
WINDING 



87.241 

Figure 14-27. Schematic wiring diagram of a capacitor-start 
capacitor-run motor. 



high starting torque and is used with hermetic 
systems up to 5 horsepower. 

PERMANENT SPLIT-PHASE 

The permanent split-phase motor has limited 
starting torque and is used basically with capillary 
tube air-conditioning equipment such as window 
units. Capillary systems permit high-side and low- 
side pressure equilization when the compressor is 
not operating. A run capacitor is wired in series 
with the starting winding. Both the starting wind- 
ing and the run capacitor remain in the circuit 
during operation. No starting relay or start capaci- 
tor is needed. Figure 14-28 is a schematic wiring 
diagram of the circuit used in this type of motor. 



SINGLE-PHASE 

HERMETIC MOTOR 

WINDINGS AND TERMINALS 

Single-phase motors used in hermetic refriger- 
ation and air-conditioning applications are de- 
signed to start under load. These split-phase and 
capacitor motors use two sets of spiral windings: 
a starting winding and a running winding. The 
two sets of windings differ in their impedance and 
in their position in the stator slots. 

The starting winding has a high resistance and 
a small reactance; whereas the running winding 
has a low resistance and a high reactance. Reac- 
tance is the opposition offered to the flow of an 
alternating current by the inductance and 
capacitance. The running winding is made up of 
many turns of large wire and is placed in the 
bottom of the stator slots. The starting winding 



is wound of small, high-resistance wire and is 
placed on top of the running winding. Both wind- 
ings are connected internally at one end to pro- 
vide a common lead, and when starting, both are 
energized in parallel. The currents are out of phase 
with each other and their combined efforts pro- 
duce a rotating field that starts the motor. 

Figure 14-29 illustrates the starting and 
running windings of a two-pole motor in their 
90-degree out-of-phase positions. 



OVERLOAD 



STARTING 
WINDING 



LI 




RUNNING 
WINDING 



87.242 

Figure 14-28. Schematic wiring diagram of a permanent 
split-phase motor. 




STARTING 

COMMON 

RUNNING 



87.243 

Figure 14-29. View of a two-pole motor having starting and 
running windings. 



14-17 



Hermetic motors have three electrical ter- 
minals connected through an insulated seal to the 
motor windings inside the dome. Refer to figure 
14-30. Troubleshooting procedures require that 
these terminals be identified with respect to the 
winding connected to each. The terminals must 
be identified as the START TERMINAL, the 
RUN TERMINAL, and the COMMON TER- 
MINAL. Some manufacturers mark the terminals 
S, R 5 and C for start, run, and common, 
respectively; other manufacturers use different 
designations. 

The terminals can always be identified by 
using a low-range ohmmeter following the 
procedure below: 

Disconnect all power to the terminals, 
discharge capacitors where necessary, remove the 
wires connected to the terminals, and mark the 
wires so they can be reconnected properly. 

Clean terminals to provide a good 
connection. 

Using the ohmmeter, find the two ter- 
minals across which the greatest resistance occurs. 
The remaining terminal is the C-terminal. The 
resistance between the S- and R-terminals is 



RUNNING 
WINDING 



RUNNING 
WINDING 




R TO S 



C TO S 



87.244 

Figure 14-30. Identifying motor terminals using an 
ohmmeter. 



highest because both are being measured in a 
series circuit. 

Identify the S-terminal by placing one 
meter lead on the C-terminal and then checking 
the other two terminals to determine which one 
has the greatest resistance. The S-terminal (start- 
ing winding) is wound with many turns of small 
wire, and therefore has the greatest resistance. The 
remaining terminal is the connection of the run- 
ning winding. 

Always mark the terminals so they can be 
identified later. 



TESTING MOTOR WINDINGS 

If, during the procedure for identifying motor 
terminals, the ohmmeter needle fails to move in 
any one of the tests, there is probably a defective 
winding. A defective winding may be classified 
as an OPEN WINDING, a SHORTED WIND- 
ING, or a GROUNDED WINDING. Test equip- 
ment and procedures applicable to faulty windings 
are discussed below. 

OPEN WINDINGS 

Open windings can occur in the starting 
winding, the running winding, or both. An open 
winding is the result of a burned-out or grounded 
fault, or simply a break somewhere in the lead 
or winding that prevents the current from 
completing the circuit. A motor with an open 
winding does not start. If only one winding is 
open, the motor hums, but if both windings are 
open, no sound is emitted nor current consumed. 
Open windings can be checked by the use of an 
ohmmeter, a voltmeter, or a test light. 

Ohmmeter Continuity Test Procedure 

The procedure for making an ohmmeter 
continuity test is shown in figure 14-31 and out- 
lined below. 

Turn off the power, discharge any 
capacitors, and remove the wires from the motor's 
C-, S-, and R-terminals. 

With the ohmmeter set on the 0- to 
1000-ohm scale, check the resistance from C to 
R, C to S, and R to S. 



14-18 



RUNNING 
WINDING 




87.245 

Figure 14-31. Testing for an open winding with an 
ohmmeter. 



Watch the needle on the meter as the check 
is made. Each reading should appear to be 
approximately ohms, since winding resistances 
are usually less than 10 ohms. If, during the check, 
the resistance remains at 1000 ohms (infinity), an 
open or break exists. 



Voltmeter Test Procedure 



The procedure for carrying out a voltmeter test 
is as follows: 



Ensure the power is on and all wires are 
properly connected to motor terminals. 

With the voltmeter set on the proper scale, 
place the leads across the R- and C-terminals. 

Read the voltmeter. If the motor shows 
line voltage, both the starting winding and the 
running winding are out. The connections are 
similar to that illustrated in figure 14-31. 



Test Lamp Continuity Check Procedure 

In making a test lamp continuity check, here 
is the procedure to follow: 

A simple test lamp consisting of a power 
circuit plug, two flexible insulated wires with clip 
leads, and a 25-watt socket with a bulb is used. 
Figure 14-32 illustrates the test lamp procedure. 

Ensure the power is off, discharge any 
capacitors, and remove the motor terminal wires. 

Make a continuity test through both 
windings by attaching clips across the C-terminal, 
the other terminals one at a time, and then plug 
the test lamp into a receptacle. If the light fails 
to illuminate, there is an open winding. 

SHORTED WINDINGS 

In an electric motor the winding turns lie side 
by side with only the insulating varnish separating 
one loop from another. When one loop of the 
copper wire comes in contact with another, the 



RUNNING 
WINDING 

rv^-\ 

STARTING 
WINDING 




87.246 

Figure 14-32. Testing for an open winding with a 
test lamp. 



14-19 



winding is shorted. The pulling effect of the 
shorted portion of the winding is lost. This, in 
turn, places more load on the active winding, 
causing the motor to draw higher voltage and 
amperage with a concurrent increase in winding 
temperature. In this condition the motor either 
fails to start, or it starts and continues to run, 
finally causing the overload protector to open. 
The fuses may blow also. The result is likely to 
be a burnout where the insulating varnish 
deteriorates from excessive heat. Ultimately a 
ground or short occurs. 

An ohmmeter can be used to check windings 
for shorts. For most applications a low range 
meter with a scale graduated in tenths of ohms 
between and 2 ohms is best. However, to check 
motors throughout the sizes normally encountered 
in hermetic motor-compressor units, a range of 
to 25 ohms is necessary. The meter is used to 
measure resistances of the windings. The readings 
are compared with design resistances. A short is 
indicated when measured resistance is less than 
design resistance. The ohmmeter connections are 
the same as those shown in figure 14-30. 

Often manufacturer's data is not available and 
the design resistances are not known. Table 14-1 
lists the approximate resistances for fractional 
horsepower single-phase motors. The following 
guidelines may also be helpful: 

1. The starting winding of low-starting 
torque motors usually has a resistance of about 
seven to eight times that of the running winding. 

2. The starting winding resistance of high- 
starting torque motors is usually three to four 
times that of the running winding. 

GROUNDED WINDINGS 

A ground is the result of an electrical conduc- 
tor in contact, either directly or indirectly, with 



Table 14-1. Approximate Resistances for Fractional 
Horsepower Motor Windings 



HP 


Running Winding 


Starting Winding 


1/8 


4.7ft 


18ft 


1/6 


2.7ft 


17ft 


1/5 


2.3ft 


14ft 


1/4 


1.7ft 


17ft 



the motor frame or the metal shell of the unit. 
Either the starting winding, the running winding, 
or both can be affected. The ground is either one 
of low resistance or one of high resistance. A low- 
resistance ground is indicated when fuses blow 
repeatedly and the motor fails to start. A high- 
resistance ground is indicated by an occasional 
blown fuse, but more often by the opening of the 
overload protector. 

Three methods of testing windings for grounds 
are the ohmmeter continuity test, the test lamp 
continuity check, and the resistance measurement 
with a megohmmeter. The procedure to follow 
in making each of these tests is given below. 

Ohmmeter Continuity Test 
(Low-Resistance) Procedure 

To perform an ohmmeter continuity test, 
proceed as follows: 

Disconnect the power and remove the wires 
from the motor terminals. 

Scrape off paint and clean a spot on the 
motor-compressor shell for testing. 



METAL SHELL 




87.248 

Figure 14-33. Testing windings for grounds with an 
ohmmeter. 



14-20 



With the ohmmeter set on its highest scale, 
test for continuity between the terminals and the 
shell. This procedure is shown in figure 14-33. If 
continuity exists between the terminals and the 
shell, there is a ground. 

Test Lamp Continuity Check 
(Low-Resistance) Procedure 

The procedure for conducting a test lamp 
continuity check is as follows: 

Disconnect the power and remove the wires 
from the motor terminals. 

Ensure the lamp is connected in the hot 
side of the line. Plug the test lamp into a 
receptacle. 

Connect the hot-line probe to a motor 
winding terminal. 

Touch the free probe to the cleaned spot 
on the shell. Ensure that a good connection is 
made. If the light illuminates, there is a grounded 
winding. 



Megohmmeter (High-Resistance) 
Test Procedure 

The megohmmeter (megger) consists of an 
indicating movement for which current is supplied 
by a small hand-driven generator. Figure 14-34 
illustrates a typical megger used by the SEABEES. 



SCALE 



HAND 
CRANK 




236.261 
Figure 14-34. A typical megohmmeter (megger). 



Two leads are supplied, one of which is marked 
Earth or Ground. 

The procedure for making the megohmmeter 
(high-resistance) test is as follows: 

Disconnect power and remove the wires 
from the motor terminals. 

Place the megger probe marked Earth or 
Ground on the motor or compressor frame. 
Ensure there is a good metal-to-metal contact. 

Place the free probe on terminals C, S, and 
R in sequence. If any reading of low resistance 
is obtained, the motor is grounded. 

You should always refer to the manufacturer's 
instructions when using a megger. It is also a good 
idea to request assistance from a Construction 
Electrician. 



ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT 
COMPONENTS 

Electrical components in hermetic motor 
compressor circuits that give trouble include start- 
ing relays, overload protectors, and capacitors. 
It is essential that a refrigeration and air- 
conditioning service member be able to identify 
these components and test them using the proper 
equipment and procedures. 

STARTING RELAYS 

Basically there are three types of starting relays 
in use. They are the current relay (magnetic type), 
the voltage relay (magnetic type), and the 
thermal relay (hot-wire type). In the hermetic 
motor control circuit, a starting relay allows 
electricity to flow through the starting winding 
until the motor reaches two-thirds to three-fourths 
of its rated speed. At this time, about 3 to 4 
seconds after starting, it disconnects the starting 
circuit. 

Current Relay 

A current relay is an electromagnet, similar 
to a solenoid valve, that employs a weight and 
spring to hold the contacts open when the circuit 
is idle. In operation the instantaneous surge of 
starting current actuates the magnetic coil, caus- 
ing the start winding contacts to close. This 
closure allows starting current to the winding; 



14-21 



after about 3 to 4 seconds, the motor reaches its 
rated speed and the current decreases, causing the 
relay contact to open and disconnect the winding. 
Current relays are ideal for use with split-phase, 
induction-run motors. 

Figure 14-35 is a schematic diagram of a 
current relay motor starting circuit. 

Voltage Relay 

A voltage relay looks much like a current 
relay; however, it differs in operation. It operates 
on increased voltage as the motor reaches rated 
speed, and, unlike the current relay, the contacts 
remain closed during the off cycle. When the 
motor is first turned on, it draws heavy current 
and the voltage drop across the starting winding is 
low. As the motor picks up speed, there is less and 
less load; therefore, more and more voltage is in- 
duced into the winding. At about three-fourths 
rated speed the voltage is high enough to cause the 
relay coil to pull the contacts open and disconnect 
the winding. Voltage relays are used with 



capacitor-start motors. Figure 14-36 is a schematic 
diagram of voltage relay motor starting circuit. 



Thermal Relay 

A thermal relay is commonly known as a hot- 
wire relay. It is available in at least two different 
basic designs and is supplied by several manufac- 
turers. All thermal relays operate on the theory 
that electrical energy can be turned into heat 
energy and that, when the temperature of a metal 
is increased, the metal expands. Thermal relays, 
like current and voltage relays, operate the 
starting winding circuit. In addition, the thermal 
relay controls the running winding circuit, if for 
any reason the circuit draws excessive current. 

The device consists of a specially calibrated 
wire made from a material with high oxidation 
resistance and two sets of contacts, all of which 
are integrally attached to form the relay. Figure 
14-37 illustrates a typical thermal relay motor 
starting circuit. The contacts are controlled by the 
hot wire, either through the use of heat-absorbing 



3* 

RUNNING WINDING 


1 ljo*LA^ ^ 

CURRENT RELAY 






WITH A FEW 


LARGE 




*?' 




TURNS OF 


WIRE 








s POINTS 










O\\ V 


AC 
VOLTAGE 


) 1 ' T 




^TflRTiwr STARTING WEIGHT 


INPUT 
I 




C 
<** 






87.249 

Figure 14-35. Schematic diagram of a current relay 
motor starting circuit. 



RUNNING WINDING CONTACT r r o ' 

' POINTstt_o__^ 

o -L START 

^. T CAPACITOR 

-0 



'STARTING 
"WINDING 



RELAY' 
WINDING' 



AC 

VOLTAGE 
INPUT 



87.250 

Figure 14-36. Schematic diagram of a voltage relay 
motor starting circuit. 




THERMOSTAT 



87.251 
Figure 14-37. A typical thermal relay motor starting circuit. 



14-22 



bimetallic strips, or by its expansion of the 
hot wire, depending on the design of the relay. 

OVERLOAD PROTECTORS 

Essentially, an overload protector is a heat- 
sensitive device much like a circuit breaker. When 
current in the circuit increases above normal, the 
added current heats a bimetallic strip that bends 
and opens a pair of contacts. The opening of the 
contacts disconnects the motor running circuit and 
the motor stops. This prevents damage to the 
compressor motor when troubles occur, such as 



BIMETAL DISK CLOSED 



BIMETAL DISK OPEN 



LINE 



LINE 



87.252 
Figure 14-38. A bimetal disk-type overload protector. 



a defective starting relay, an open starting 
capacitor, or high head pressure. Figure 14-38 
illustrates a typical bimetallic disk-type overload 
protector. This overload protector is connected 
in the common line and mounted on the 
compressor motor shell. 



CAPACITORS 

In hermetic refrigeration and air-conditioning 
work, capacitors are identified in two groups: 
starting capacitors and running capacitors. These 
may be identified further as dry capacitors that 
are used for intermittent operation, and elec- 
trolytic capacitors that are used for continuous 
operation. Various types of electrolytic capacitors 
are shown in figure 14-39. 

Starting capacitors are connected in series with 
starting windings and are usually located in the 
circuit between the relay and the starting winding 
terminal of the motor. This type of capacitor in- 
creases the initial power of the starting winding 
of an induction motor without increasing the 
amount of current used. This results in an extra 
surge of power to help overcome the inertia of 
the motor without an excessive drain on the line. 

Running capacitors are connected in the cir- 
cuit between the hot side of the starting and 
running windings. This type of capacitor serves 
to provide a smoother and quieter operating 
motor. 





87.253 



Figure 14-39. Various types of electrolytic capacitors. 



14-23 





87.254 



Figure 14-40. Testing a starting relay with an ohmmeter. 



EQUIPMENT AND TEST 

PROCEDURES FOR ELECTRICAL 

CIRCUIT COMPONENTS 

The equipment and procedures for testing 
circuit components such as starting relays, 
overload protectors, and capacitors are discussed 
as follows. 

STARTING RELAYS 

Starting relays can be tested two ways with an 
ohmmeter. The meter can be used to check across 
the relay contacts, or it can be used to check across 
the relay coil. This does not apply to thermal 
relays. Figure 1440 illustrates procedures for these 
tests. 

When you check the relay contacts, you must 
know if the contacts are normally open or 
normally closed. Voltage relay contacts and 
thermal relay contacts are normally closed, 
whereas current relay contacts are normally open. 
The meter reading should indicate continuity 
through voltage and thermal relays since the 
contacts are normally closed. On the other hand, 
if the meter indicates continuity through the 
normally open contacts of a current relay, the 
contacts are probably fused together. 

Another method of checking starting relays 
is by using a test line cord and fuse combination 
to isolate the relay. Figure 14-41 illustrates the 
procedure used in making this test. Obtain a 
capacitor of the approximate size used with the 
compressor motor. Connect it from the hot side 
of the running winding to the hot side of the 
starting winding. Connect the test line to the 
motor terminals as illustrated in the figure and 
plug it in. If the compressor is good it should start 
running. After a short time, disconnect the 
capacitor. The compressor should continue to 



speed up and run normally. This procedure has 
accomplished manually what a properly function- 
ing starting relay is supposed to accomplish. If 
the motor failed to start normally before the 
check, the relay is bad. 

Voltage and current relay coils can also be 
tested for resistance with an ohmmeter. When the 
coil is burned out, the meter indicates no 
resistance or an open coil. Commercial starting 
relay testers are available from several manu- 
facturers. 

OVERLOAD PROTECTORS 

Questionable Klixon external overload protec- 
tors should be replaced with new ones. If the 



RUNNING WINDING 




LINE CORD 



87.255 

Figure 14-41. Procedures for checking a starting relay with 
a test line. 



14-24 



motor then operates properly, the old Klixon 
(protector) should be destroyed. Klixons can 
also be checked with an ohmmeter Since 
the contacts are closed at ambient tempera- 
ture, the meter should indicate continuity. 
When the meter indicates an open, the Klixon 
should be replaced and destroyed. 

Internal current temperature overloads can 
be tested by making continuity checks Con 
tinuity checks must be made across terminals 
C and S C and R, and S and R. When both 
C and S and C and R show open, and 
continuity is indicated across S and R the 
protector is open. When the temperature is 
normal, and the continuity test shows the 
overload contacts to be open, the motor com- 
pressor assembly must be replaced. When the 
operating temperature is normal, the internal 
current temperature overload contacts should be 
closed. 



CAPACITORS 

The best test for a questionable motor 
capacitor is to try a new one of the cor- 
rect size. If the motor operates properly, the 
old capacitor is defective and should be de- 
stroyed. 

Capacitors can also be tested with an ohm- 
meter. First, the power must be turned off 
and the capacitor discharged and disconnected. 
Set the meter on the to 10,000 ohm scale 



and touch the meter probes to the capacitor 
terminals. If the meter needle dips to or 
low resistance and then climbs towards high 
resistance, the capacitor is good. If the needle 
dips to or low resistance and stays there, 
the capacitor is shorted. If the needle does 
not move, the capacitor is open. Figure 14-42 
illustrates these procedures. 



HERMETIC ELECTRICAL 
SCHEMATIC WIRING DIAGRAMS 

All wiring circuits are built around four 
requirements: a source of electrons, a place 
for them to flow, a path for them to foUow, 
and a load to make use of and control the 
flow. The schematic wiring diagram puts the 
symbol and line representation on paper in 
a manner that allows instant identification 
of all four requirements. It tells the service 
member how and why a unit works as it 
does. 

In the schematic wiring diagram, the source 
of electrons is a line drawn on one side of the 
diagram and it is usually designated as LI. Any 
and all points on this line have a surplus of 
electrons. On the opposite side, a line is drawn 
representing a shortage of electrons and it is 
usually designated as L2. There is a potential for 
electron flow between the two wires represented 
by LI and L2. When a load is inserted between 
LI and L2, current flows and the load functions. 






DIPS TO OHMS 



CLIMBING TO 
HIGH RESISTANCE 



HIGH RESISTANCE 



87.256 



Figure 14-42. Testing capacitors with an ohmmeter. 



14-25 




STARTING 
CAPACITOR 



STARTING RELAY 



OVERLOAD 
PROTECTOR 



Figure 14-43. Typical hermetic system schematic wiring diagram. 



87.257 



RUNNING WINDING STARTING WINDING 



SELECTOR 
SWITCH 

cool 

fan 



START 
RELAY 




PLUG 



WIRING SCHEMATIC 




BLACK 
'OVERLOAD THERMOSTAT 



WIRING DETAIL 



Figure 14.44.-Wiri ng schematic and detail for a typical room air-conditioner. 



87.258 



14-26 



Figure 14-43 is a typical schematic diagram for 
a hermetic electrical system. 

There are two basic circuits. The LOAD 
CIRCUIT consists of the compressor motor, fan 
motor, and in general, any circuit-carrying 
current to a device that creates mechanical action 
other than the movement of an electrical switch. 
The second kind of circuit is the CONTROL 
CIRCUIT. This circuit consists of thermostats, 
pressure switches, overload protectors, or other 
types of electrical control devices. Figure 14-44 
is a wiring schematic and a wiring detail for a 
typical room air-conditioner. 



unit is supposed to do, and then be able to 
recognize what it is doing. Furthermore, you must 
be able to identify the load and control circuits 
and to test them separately. It is necessary that 
you be able to read and interpret wiring diagrams. 
Practice is the best way to become an effective 
troubleshooter. When available, the manufac- 
turer's instructions should be followed. This is 
particularly helpful when you are unfamiliar with 
the equipment. 

Table 14-2 is a troubleshooting chart ap- 
plicable to hermetic electrical systems. Problems, 
probable causes, and checks are listed. 



TROUBLESHOOTING HERMETIC 
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS 

General electrical troubleshooting techniques 
are used on hermetic refrigeration and air- 
conditioning equipment. Electrical trouble- 
shooting is done by a process of elimination. You 
should begin by checking the most obvious 
trouble and gradually progress to the more remote 
possibilities. To be effective, you must understand 
the unit's electrical circuits, be aware of what the 



REFERENCES 

Utilitiesman 3&2, NAVEDTRA 10061 , Volume 
2, Naval Education and Training Program 
Development Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1983. 

ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals, Ameri- 
can Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and 
Air-conditioning Engineers, Atlanta, Ga., 
1985. 



14-27 



Table 14-2. Troubleshooting Hermetic Electrical Systems 



PROBLEM 



PROBABLE CAUSE 



CHECK 



Compressor fails to start 
(no sound, no hum) 



No power to receptacle. Circuit 
breaker or fuses may be faulty 



Check for power line voltage with 
an ac voltmeter or test lamp 



Loose wire or bad service cord 



Check for continuity through 
plug and cord. Repair or replace 
if faulty 



Defective thermostat switch or 
loose connection in control 
circuit wiring 



Turn off power, check all con- 
nections in the control circuit, 
turn therm o static switch to 
coldest setting and check it for 
continuity. Replace the switch 
if it is faulty 



Open overload protector 



Study the wiring diagram, use a 
jumper at the motor terminals 
or across the switch. If the 
motor runs the switch must be 
replaced 



Compressor tries to 
start but kicks out over- 
load (you hear the over- 
load click) 



Starting capacitor shorted 
or open 



Replace with a suitable capac- 
itor, and if the motor runs 
properly the original capacitor 
is defective. You may check the 
defective capacitor with an ohm- 
meter or a capacitor analyzer. 



Running capacitor shorted 



Replace with a suitable capac- 
itor, and if the motor runs prop- 
erly the capacitor is defective. 
You may check the defective 
capacitor with an ohmmeter or a 
capacitor analyzer 



Loose wire on motor terminals 
or switch 



Turn off power, check all con- 
nections in the control circuit, 
and repair if necessary 



Overload protector defective 



(External) Exchange with new 
protector to determine if old one 
is defective or make a continuity 
check on old one. (Internal) 
Make continuity check across 
terminals C and S, C and R, and 
S and R to determine if the pro- 
tector is open (defective) at 
normal temperatures 



14-28 



Table 14-2.-Troubleshooting Hermetic Electrical Systems-Continued 



PROBLEM 



PROBABLE CAUSE 



CHECK 



Compressor tries to start 
but kicks out overload 
(you hear the overload 
click) continued 



Low power line voltage 



Check at circuit breaker or 
receptacle 



Starting relay defective 



Study the wiring diagram, use a 
jumper across the relay, and if 
the motor continues to run, re- 
place the relay 



Compressor motor shorted 



Use ohmmeter procedure and 
test windings for a short. Com- 
pressor must be replaced if 
shorted 



Open winding in compressor 
motor (you hear motor hum) 



Use test lamp, ohmmeter, or 
voltmeter procedure and test 
windings for open. Compressor 
must be replaced if an open 
exists 



Compressor starts but 
doesn't switch from the 
start winding to the run 
winding 



Low voltage 



Starting relay fails to open 



Run capacitor defective 



Open motor winding 



Shorted motor winding 



Improperly wired 



Use voltmeter to check line 
voltage. It should be within 
+ 1 0% of nameplate voltage 



Contacts may not open due to 
burned surfaces. With power off, 
determine condition of the con- 
trols using an ohmmeter 



A defective run capacitor would 
limit the amount of voltage re- 
quired to open the starting relay 
contacts. Substitute with a 
capacitor and check old one 
with an ohmmeter 



Use ohmmeter or test lamp 
procedure for testing windings 



Use ohmmeter to check resist- 
ance of windings 



Study the manufacturer's 
schematic wiring or detail dia- 
gram and compare with actual 
wiring 



14-29 



CHAPTER 1 5 

ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION CONTROL 

Learning Objective: Identify the techniques used in the identification, 
prevention, and cleanup of environmental pollutants of water, ground, and 
air to include the cleanup of oil spills. 



Environmental pollution results from 
chemical, physical, or biological agents in the 
water, ground, or air that alter the natural 
environment. Pollution adversely affects human 
health, plant life, fish, and wildlife. Pollution can 
disintegrate nylon line, crumble masonry, corrode 
steel, and darken the skies. Most important is the 
damage to vegetation, human illness, and loss of 
productivity. The majority of pollution can be 
prevented, or at least slowed down, if people con- 
trol the amount of foreign matter they put into 
the environment. 

This chapter briefly covers ways to prevent 
water, ground, and air pollution on the jobsite. 
It also describes the means by which the 
Utilitiesman can help prevent, control, and clean 
up the pollution. 



WATER AND GROUND POLLUTION 

Other than creating a fire hazard, oil and other 
petroleum-related products pose many possible 
pollution threats when spilled in the water, 
dumped into the storm or sanitary sewer system, 
or spilled on the ground. Oil products on the 
ground infiltrate and contaminate surface water 
supplies with the groundwater runoff caused by 
rain. Oil products dumped or carried into storm 
or sanitary sewers are also potential explosion 
hazards. 

Oily wastewater from boiler rooms, banks of 
walk-in refrigeration units, and motor pool opera- 
tions are caused by 

improper handling and storage of new and 
waste oil, 



equipment and vehicle washing operations, 



and 



various other maintenance activities that 
generate liquid waste or wastewater that must be 
stored or treated. 

An oil slick on the surface of the water blocks 
the flow of oxygen from the atmosphere into the 
water. This is harmful to fish and other aquatic 
life. If the fish do not die from the oil coating 
on their gills, or from eating the oil or oil-laden 
food, their flesh is tainted and they are no longer 
fit for human consumption. Other than harming 
aquatic life, drinking water can become con- 
taminated. Drinking water from wells and surface 
storage facilities is treated with chemicals to rid 
the water of harmful bacteria. However, no 
amount of treatment can rid a system of con- 
tamination from waste oil products. The system 
must be abandoned. 

As a shop supervisor, your prime concern 
should be to prevent oil in the shop from drain- 
ing into storm sewers and surface drainage 
systems. During pipe threading operations, you 
should provide catch pans and have absorbent 
materials available to soak up spilled oil. Spilled 
oil and fuels should NEVER be washed down a 
drain or sewer unless an immediate fire hazard 
exists and an oil-water separator is connected 
to the discharge line. Where minor spills are 
expected to occur occasionally (pipe threading, 
boiler burner cleaning, compressor oil change), 
absorbent material should be sprinkled on the 
spill, picked up, and then placed in an EPA- 
approved container. The containers are normally 
disposed of through the Defense Property 
Disposal Office (DPDO). When this is not 
possible, the containers must be disposed of 



15-1 



through a government-approved contractor or in 
a sanitary landfill approved by local government 
authorities. 

Waste oils, filters, and contaminated fuel 
should be collected and disposed of in a non- 
polluting manner. Most naval activities collect and 
dispose of waste oil periodically through a 
contractor who may burn it in a boiler plant, or 
in a heating system. The contractor may also 
reprocess it in an oil reclamation plant. Naval 
supply fuel farms usually have the means to 
dispose of waste oils properly. 

As a senior Utilitiesman, you will see con- 
taminated water run off the Equipment 
Operator's washrack every day. You should work 
closely with the person in charge of the washrack 
to ensure that this wastewater is treated and not 
discharged into the storm system. Provisions must 
be made for pretreating or separating oil products 
and cleaning solvents used at the washrack. 

Other than preventing oil pollution from 
vehicle and base equipment operation, SEABEES 
are being considered for use in beach cleanup 
during major oil spill disasters. The techniques 
and uses of construction equipment in beach 
cleanup should be incorporated into SEABEE 
training requirements. In the event of a regional 
or national disaster from a major oil spill, 
this new manpower capability can be used very 
effectively by local commanders. A well-trained 
SEABEE team can form the nucleus of a large- 
scale beach cleanup exercise team by using a 
large number of qualified personnel and heavy 
equipment. 



AIR POLLUTION 

As a First Class or Chief Utilitiesman, you 
should be aware of work conditions that cause 
air pollution, and of the efforts required to 
minimize or correct the problem. 

When incomplete combustion occurs in base 
boilers, space heaters, and stoves, the unburned 
hydrocarbons and various other fuel components 
combine chemically to form by-products. Many 
of these by-products are harmful when emitted 
into the environment. 

These by-products that have an adverse effect 
on the air are carbon monoxide, particulate 
matter, sulfur oxides, unburned hydrocarbons, 
nitrogen oxides, and lead. The most effective 
means of controlling air pollution from in- 
complete fuel combustion is to properly and 
frequently maintain the equipment. In this way, 



the equipment is operating at an optimal fuel and 
oxygen mixture. Another alternative, not always 
under your control, is to use only the best grade 
of fuel. This fuel contains low particulate 
matter, low water and sulfur content, and few 
contaminants. 

ASBESTOS 

Asbestos dust is another air pollutant that you 
must be knowledgeable of and concerned with in 
the installation, maintenance, and removal of 
asbestos material from a construction site. 

Asbestos is a fiberous mineral that can be 
woven like wool. Through a variety of processes, 
asbestos can be turned into thousands of construc- 
tion products. These products were used ex- 
tensively from the 1930s through the 1960s. 
Asbestos has been used by mankind for over 2,500 
years. However, it was not until the early 1800s 
that asbestos was found to be a health hazard. 
In the 1900s, only miners and people working in 
industrial manufacturing plants were believed to 
be affected by asbestos. As research continued 
into the 1900s, asbestos was discovered to be the 
main cause of asbestosis, a generic term for a 
wide range of asbestos-related disorders and 
mesothelioma. Mesothelioma at one time was a 
very rare form of lung cancer. It is presently 
occurring much more frequently among people 
exposed to asbestos dust particles. 

There are three terms associated with asbestos 
dust particle size that you will encounter. These 
terms are micron, nanometer, and angstrom. To 
give you an idea of their size, in 1 meter there are 
1 million microns, 1 billion nanometers, and 10 
billion angstroms. 

It was not until the advent of the transmis- 
sion electron microscope (TEM) and the scanning 
electron microscope (SEM) in the latter part of 
the 1950s that the true size (200 to 250 angstroms) 
of an asbestos particle was discovered. Within this 
size range, air that appears to be dust free can 
contain millions of disease-producing asbestos 
particles. These minuscule asbestos particles have 
lead to many laws, regulations, and cleanup 
problems. Although these particles cannot be 
seen, they remain suspended in the air for months. 
In working to solve this problem, you must take 
air samples to ascertain the severity of the situa- 
tion. To remove the particles, the air must be 
scrubbed with a special air filtration machine. 

At the time of this writing, Navy guidance for 
asbestos use, demolition, and disposal is covered 
by OPNAVINST 5100.23B of 31 August 1983. 



15-2 



However, you should also endeavor to learn the 
local laws and restrictions pertinent to the locale 
in which you work. These federal, state, and local 
laws or ordinances are extremely important. In 
an overseas location, the laws of the host 
country must be researched and clearly under- 
stood in the construction planning phase. It is 
inevitable that somewhere in the disposal cycle, 
transporting of this type of material to a disposal 
site will take place over roads not directly under 
Navy control. 

In all cases, you must research the laws 
governing asbestos. If you are continually in- 
volved with asbestos, you need to stay informed 
of current regulations and laws because they are 
constantly changing and being updated. At the 
present time, legislation is proposed to outlaw all 
forms and uses of asbestos. 



PESTICIDES 

There are also numerous chemicals and 
pesticides that release harmful and deadly fumes 



into the air for example, chlorine gas. It is 
important for you to become very familiar with 
all the materials used by shop personnel within 
your jurisdiction. Normally, toxic substances have 
warning labels affixed to them. Once the 
chemicals being used are identified, you can 
obtain supplemental information from the unit 
environmental protection office, or from the local 
safety office. 



REFERENCES 

Navy Occupational Safety and Health (NA V- 
OSH) Program Manual, OPNAVINST 
5100.23B, Chapter 17 "Asbestos," Depart- 
ment of the Navy, Office of the Chief of 
Naval Operations, Washington, B.C., 
31 August 1983. 

Natale, Anthony and Hoag Levins, Asbestos 
Removal & Control: An Insiders Guide to the 
Business, J. Levins Design Inc., Cherry Hill, 
N.J., 1984. 



15-3 



INDEX 



Absorption refrigeration systems, 14-5 
Administration, 1-1 to 1-26 
chapter references, 1-26 
daily work assignments, 1-12 
Personnel Readiness Capability Program, 
1-1 to 1-7 

interviewing steps, 1-6 to 1-7 
scoring interviews, 1-7 
task interviewing, 1-6 to 1-7 
PRCP interviews, 1-3 to 1-4 
other interviews, 1-4 
rating skill interviews, 1-3 to 1-4 
skill inventory, 1-2 to 1-3 

PRCP standards and guides, 1-2 

to 1-3 

skill definitions, 1-2 
using the standards and guides for 
individual rating skills, 1-5 to 1-6 
skill definitions, 1-5 to 1-6 
skill title and contents, 1-5 
task and task elements, 1-6 
reports, 1-12 to 1-26 

enlisted performance evaluation re- 
ports, 1-13 to 1-20 
maintenance and utilities forms, 1-26 
work requests and job orders, 1-20 

to 1-26 
training, 1-7 to 1-12 

on-the-job training, 1-9 to 1-11 
implementing a program, 1-10 
setting up a program, 1-9 to 

1-10 

training development, 1-11 
training methods, 1-10 to 1-11 
systematic training, 1-11 to 1-12 
evaluation, 1-11 
performance testing, 1-12 
training guidelines, 1-8 
training needs, 1-8 to 1-9 
training organization, 1-7 to 1-8 



Advanced base functional components, 6-4 
Advanced base planning, embarkation, and 
project turnover, 6-1 to 6-9 
advanced base functional components, 

6-4 

embarkation, 6-4 to 6-5 
embarkation/MOCC records and files, 

6-8 to 6-9 

embarkation reports, records, and files, 
6-6 to 6-8 
loading status reports, 6-6 to 

6-8 

facilities planning guide, 6-1 to 6-4 
tailoring components and facilities, 

6-2 
use and application of the facilities 

planning guide, 6-2 to 6-4 
mount-out control center, 6-5 to 6-6 
project turnover, 6-9 
Advising and counseling, 2-10 to 2-11 
Air balancing instruments, 13-10 to 13-13 
manometer, 13-12 to 13-13 
miscellaneous instruments, 13-13 
rotating vane anemometer, 13-13 
velometer, 13-11 to 13-12 
Air compressors and auxiliary equipment, 
11-5 to 11-23 

auxiliary equipment, 11-8 to 11-23 
after coolers, 11-12 
air discharge systems, 11-13 
air intakes, 11-8 to 11-11 
controls, 11-17 to 11-20 
discharge pulsation, 11-16 to 11-17 
dryers, 11-15 
intake filters, 11-11 
intercoolers, 11-12 
lubrication, 11-15 to 11-16 
prime movers, 11-20 to 11-23 
receivers, 11-15 
separators, 11-13 to 11-15 
silencers, 11-11 to 11-12 
dynamic centrifugal compressors, 11-8 
helical screw compressors, 11-8 



INDEX-1 



Air compressors and auxiliary equipment- 
Continued 

reciprocating air compressors, 11-5 
rotary air compressors, 11-5 to 11-7 
Air Conditioning and Refrigeration, 14-1 
to 14-29 

electrical circuit components, 14-21 to 
14-23 

capacitors, 14-23 
overload protectors, 14-23 
starting relays, 14-21 to 14-23 
current relay, 14-21 
thermal relay, 14-22 to 14-23 
voltage relay, 14-22 

equipment and test procedures for electri- 
cal circuit components, 14-24 to 
14-25 

capacitors, 14-25 

overload protectors, 14-24 to 14-25 
starting relays, 14-24 
hermetic electrical schematic wiring 

diagrams, 14-25 to 14-27 
mechanical component selection, 14-9 to 
14-16 

compressors, 14-11 to 14-12 
condensers, 14-9 
evaporators, 14-10 to 14-11 
receivers and accumulators, 14-14 to 

14-16 

refrigerant capacity controls, 14-14 
refrigerant lines and piping, 14-12 to 

14-14 

selection and installation of an air- 
conditioning system, 14-1 to 14-3 
forced air, 14-1 

heat load calculations and air move- 
ment, 14-1 to 14-3 
hot and chilled water, 14-1 
selection and installation of refrigeration 
systems, 14-3 to 14-9 
absorption refrigeration system, 

14-5 

expandable refrigeration system, 
14-5 
to 14-6 

evaporator systems, 14-5 
spray system, 14-6 
multistage refrigeration system, 
14-6 to 14-9 

cascade system, 14-6 to 14-7 
compound system, 14-7 to 14-9 
special types of refrigeration systems, 

14-5 

thermoelectric refrigeration system, 
14-6 



Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Con- 
tinued 

single-phase hermetic motors, 14-16 to 
14-17 
capacitor-start, capacitor-run, 14-16 

to 14-17 

capacitor-start, induction-run, 14-16 
permanent split-phase, 14-17 
split-phase, 14-16 
single-phase hermetic motor windings and 

terminals, 14-17 to 14-18 
testing motor windings, 14-18 to 14-21 
grounded windings, 14-20 to 14-21 
megohmmeter (high-resistance) 

test procedure, 14-21 
ohmmeter continuity test (low- 
resistance) procedure, 14-20 to 
14-21 

test lamp continuity check (low- 
resistance) procedure, 14-21 
open windings, 14-18 to 14-19 
ohmmeter continuity test pro- 
cedure, 14-18 to 14-19 
test lamp continuity check pro- 
cedure, 14-19 

voltmeter test procedure, 14-19 
shorted windings, 14-19 to 14-20 
troubleshooting hermetic electrical 

systems, 14-27 to 14-29 
Air pollution, 15-2 to 15-3 
asbestos, 15-2 
pesticides, 15-3 
Air quality requirements, 11-2 to 11-5 

classes of air entrapment, 11-2 to 11-3 
gases or fumes, 11-2 to 11-3 
oil, 11-3 

particulates, 11-2 
water, 11-3 

specific air quality requirements, 11-3 to 
11-5 
aircraft starting and cooling air, 

11-4 

air for pneumatic tools, 11-4 
breathing air, 11-3 to 11-4 
commercial air, 11-3 
high-pressure air systems, 11-4 to 

11-5 

instrument and control air, 11-4 
medical air, 11-4 

Alternative water sources, 9-13 to 9-14 
Asbestos, 15-2 
As-built drawings, 4-19 



INDEX-2 



Automatic sprinkler system characteristics 
8-1 to 8-18 

sprinkler system detection and indicating 
devices and fittings, 8-12 to 8-18 
supervisory alarm initiating devices 

8-15 to 8-18 
water-flow actuated detectors 8-12 

to 8-15 

types of sprinklers, 8-9 to 8-12 
types of sprinkler systems, 8-1 to 8-9 
combined, 8-9 
dry pipe, 8-2 to 8-7 
pre-action, 8-8 to 8-9 
water deluge, 8-7 to 8-8 
wet pipe, 8-1 

Auxiliary equipment, 11-8 to 11-23 
aftercoolers, 11-12 
air discharge systems, 11-13 
air intakes, 11-8 to 11-11 
controls, 11-17 to 11-20 
discharge pulsation, 11-16 to 11-17 
dryers, 11-15 
intake filters, 11-11 
intercoolers, 11-12 
lubrication, 11-15 to 11-16 
prime movers, 11-20 to 11-23 
receivers, 11-15 
separators, 11-13 to 11-15 
silencers, 11-11 to 11-12 



B 



Balancing duct systems, 13-10 to 13-16 
air balancing instruments, 13-10 to 
13-13 

manometer, 13-12 to 13-13 
miscellaneous instruments, 13-13 
rotating vane anemometer, 13-13 
velometer, 13-11 to 13-12 
preparation for balancing, 13-13 to 13-14 
procedures for balancing, 13-14 to 13-16 
determine for performance, 13-14 to 

13-16 

duct and outlet adjustments, 13-16 
Bill of material, 4-5 to 4-6 
Block diagrams, 4-7 

Blueprint reading and technical drawings, 4-1 
to 4-19 

as-built drawings, 4-19 
blueprint language, 4-2 to 4-6 
bill of material, 4-5 to 4-6 
construction drawings, 4-5 

exterior elevation drawings, 4-5 
floor plan, 4-5 



Blueprint reading and technical drawings- 
Continued 
blueprint language Continued 

construction drawings Continued 
interior elevation drawings, 4-5 
plot plan, 4-5 

sectional or detail drawings, 4-5 
electrical symbols and abbreviations, 

4-3 to 4-5 
types and weights of lines found on 

drawings, 4-2 to 4-3 
blueprint reading, 4-1 to 4-2 
chapter references, 4-19 
development of construction drawings, 

4-1 

electrical wiring and mechanical dia- 
grams, 4-6 to 4-9 
block diagrams, 4-7 
connection diagrams, 4-8 
isometric wiring diagrams, 4-7 
schematic/single-line diagrams, 4-8 to 

4-9 

wiring diagrams, 4-7 to 4-8 
electronic symbols and diagrams, 4-11 to 

4-18 

schedules, 4-19 
specifications, 4-18 to 4-19 
working sketch, 4-9 to 4-10 
Boilers, 12-1 to 12-43 

inspecting and testing, 12-10 to 12-27 
inspection of firesides, 12-14 to 
12-24 
exterior inspection of drums and 

headers, 12-24 
inspection of protection, seal, 

and support plates, 12-24 
inspection of uptakes and smoke 

pipes, 12-24 
refractory inspection, 12-14 to 

12-16 

tube inspection, 12-16 to 12-24 
operational inspections and tests, 
12-24 to 12-27 
blowoff valves, 12-26 
boiler auxiliaries, 12-27 
boiler safety and water-pressure 

relief valves, 12-26 to 12-27 
controls, 12-24 
devices, 12-25 
firing equipment, 12-24 
pressure-reducing valves, 12-26 
steam and water piping, 12-25 
stop and check valves, 12-26 
water columns and gauge 
glasses, 12-25 



INDEX-3 



Boilers Continued 

inspecting and testing Continued 

waterside inspections and tests, 12-10 
to 12-14 

five-year inspection and test, 

12-14 

hydrostatic tests, 12-13 to 12-14 
waterside inspection of boiler 

tubes, 12-10 to 12-12 
waterside inspection of drums 

and headers, 12-13 
installation of boilers, 12-1 to 12-10 
accessories, 12-2 to 12-5 
fittings, 12-6 to 12-10 
site selection, 12-1 to 12-2 

boiler foundation, 12-1 to 12-2 
boiler room, 12-2 
location, 12-1 
maintenance, 12-37 to 12-43 

care of boiler firesides, 12-39 to 

12-40 
care of boiler watersides, 12-40 to 

12-41 

laying up idle boilers, 12-41 to 
12-43 
laying up a boiler by the dry 

method, 12-42 to 12-43 
laying up a boiler by the wet 

method, 12-42 
maintenance programs, 12-38 to 

12-39 

operator maintenance, 12-38 
preventive maintenance, 12-38 
plant operation, 12-27 to 12-37 

chemical makeup of water, 12-31 
chemical treatment determination, 

12-36 to 12-37 
chemical treatment (external and 

internal), 12-31 

internal treatment and prevention, 
12-31 to 12-36 

carry-overfoaming and prim- 
ing, 12-35 to 12-36 
corrosion, 12-35 
prevention and treatment for 
carry-over foaming and prim- 
ing, 12-36 
prevention and treatment for 

oxygen corrosion, 12-35 
prevention and treatment for 

scale control, 12-33 to 12-34 
prevention and treatment for 

sludge control, 12-34 
scale, 12-31 to 12-33 
sludge, 12-34 



Boilers Continued 

plant operation Continued 

internal treatment and prevention- 
Continued 

operators, 12-27 to 12-29 
logs, 12-28 to 12-29 
turnover /watch relief, 12-29 
plant supervisor, 12-30 
water chemistry, 12-30 



Capacitors, 14-23 
Cesspools, 10-34 to 10-37 
Characteristics of sewage, 10-3 to 10-8 
biological characteristics, 10-8 
bacteria, 10-8 
parasites, 10-8 
viruses, 10-8 

chemical characteristics, 10-5 to 10-8 
dissolved oxygen, 10-6 to 10-7 
nutrients, 10-7 
oxygen demand, 10-7 
pH, 10-5 to 10-6 
toxic chemicals, 10-7 to 10-8 
physical characteristics, 10-3 to 10-5 
color, 10-3 
odor, 10-4 
solids, 10-4 to 10-5 
temperature, 10-3 
wastewater composition, 10-3 
Chemical characteristics of water, 9-16 to 9-19 
dissolved gases, 9-18 to 9-19 
hardness, 9-16 to 9-18 
Classes of air entrapment, 11-2 to 11-3 
gases or fumes, 11-2 to 11-3 
oil, 11-3 

particulates, 11-2 
water, 11-3 

Coatings and wrappings for corrosion 
protection, 7-24 to 7-25 
asphalt, 7-24 
coal tar, 7-24 
concrete, 7-24 to 7-25 
grease, 7-24 
metallic, 7-25 
paint, 7-24 

plastic wrappings, 7-25 
Compressed air systems, 11-1 to 11-27 

air compressors and auxiliary equipment, 
11-5 to 11-23 

auxiliary equipment, 11-8 to 11-23 
aftercoolers, 11-12 
air discharge systems, 11-13 



INDEX-4 



Compressed air systems Continued 

aircoinpressors and auxiliary equipment- 
Continued 

auxiliary equipment Continued 
air intakes, 11-8 to 11-11 
controls, 11-17 to 11-20 
discharge pulsation, 11-16 10 

11-17 

dryers, 11-15 
intake filters, 11-11 
intercoolers, 11-12 
lubrication, 11-15 to 11-16 
prime movers, 11-20 to 11-23 
receivers, 11-15 
separators, 11-13 to 11-15 
silencers, 11-11 to 11-12 
dynamic centrifugal compressors, 

11-8 

helical screw compressors, 11-8 
reciprocating air compressors, 11-5 
rotary air compressors, 11-5 to 

11-7 

air quality requirements, 11-2 to 11-5 
classes of air entrapment, 11-2 to 
11-3 

gases or fumes, 11-2 to 11-3 
oil, 11-3 

particulates, 11-2 
water, 11-3 

specific air quality requirements, 
11-3 to 11-5 
aircraft starting and cooling air, 

11-4 

air for pneumatic tools, 11-4 
breathing air, 11-3 to 11-4 
commercial air, 11-3 
high-pressure air systems, 11-4 

to 11-5 

instrument and control air, 11-4 
medical air, 11-4 

distribution systems, 11-23 to 11-26 
layout details, 11-23 to 11-26 
sizing distribution systems, 11-23 
test procedures, 11-26 
types of air distribution piping . 

systems, 11-23 

maintenance requirements, 11-26 to 
11-27 

air compressor maintenance, 11-27 
auxiliary equipment maintenance, 

11-27 
distribution system maintenance, 

11-27 
prime mover maintenance, 11-27 



Compressed air systems Continued 
system classifications, 11-1 to 11-2 
high-pressure systems, 11-2 
low-pressure systems, 11-2 
medium-pressure systems, 11-2 
Compressors, 14-11 to 14-12 
Conceptualizing, 2-11 
Condensers, 14-9 
Connection diagrams, 4-8 
Construction drawings, 4-5 

exterior elevation drawings, 4-5 
floor plan, 4-5 

interior elevation drawings, 4-5 
plot plan, 4-5 

sectional or detail drawings, 4-5 
Corrosion prevention and protection, 7-19 to 
7-25 

coatings and wrappings for corrosion 
protection, 7-24 to 7-25 

asphalt, 7-24 

coal tar, 7-24 

concrete, 7-24 to 7-25 

grease, 7-24 

metallic, 7-25 

paint, 7-24 

plastic wrapping, 7-25 
materials least likely to be affected by 

scale and corrosion, 7-23 to 7-24 
types of corrosion, 7-20 to 7-23 

bacterial organisms, 7-23 

compositional, 7-22 

corrosion caused by electrolytes, 
7-23 

corrosion caused by non-electrolytes, 
7-22 to 7-23 

localized, 7-20 to 7-22 

stress fatigue of metals, 7-22 

uniform, 7-20 



D 



Daily work assignments, 1-12 
Development of water sources, 9-7 to 
9-14 
alternative water sources, 9-13 to 

9-14 
groundwater development, 9-10 to 

9-13 

surface water development, 9-7 to 
9-10 



INDEX-5 



Disposing of and monitoring sewage effluents, 
10-27 to 10-31 

effluent discharge methods, 10-27 
methods of disposing and monitoring 
sewage effluents, 10-27 to 10-31 
direct discharge to receiving water, 

10-27 to 10-28 

discharge for land application 
(irrigation), 10-28 to 10-29 
discharge for recycling, 10-28 
evaporation and percolation basins, 

10-29 to 10-30 

troubleshooting, 10-30 to 10-31 
Distillation, water treatment equipment, 9-25 
to 9-27 

installation, 9-27 
theory of operation, 9-25 to 9-27 
Distribution systems, compressed air, 11-23 to 
11-26 

layout details, 11-23 to 11-26 
sizing distribution systems, 11-23 
test procedures, 11-26 
types of air distribution piping systems, 

11-23 

Dry chemical extinguishing systems, 8-33 to 
8-35 

system components, 8-35 
types of systems, 8-34 to 8-35 
Duct and ventilation systems, 13-1 to 13-18 
balancing duct systems, 13-10 to 13-16 
air balancing instruments, 13-10 to 
13-13 

manometer, 13-12 to 13-13 
miscellaneous instruments, 

13-13 
rotating vane anemometer, 

13-13 

velometer, 13-11 to 13-12 
preparation for balancing, 13-13 to 

13-14 

procedures for balancing, 13-14 to 
13-16 
determine fan performance, 

13-14 to 13-16 
duct and outlet adjustments, 

13-16 
duct systems, 13-1 to 13-10 

duct construction, 13-6 to 13-9 
fiber glass duct, 13-7 to 13-9 
rectangular duct, 13-7 
round duct, 13-6 to 13-7 
sizing duct systems, 13-9 to 13-10 
types of duct systems, 13-3 to 
13-6 



Duct and ventilation systems Continued 
ventilation systems, 13-16 to 13-18 
mechanical ventilation, 13-18 
natural ventilation, 13-17 to 13-18 
Duct construction, 13-6 to 13-9 
fiber glass duct, 13-7 to 13-9 
rectangular duct, 13-7 
round duct, 13-6 to 13-7 
Duct systems, 13-1 to 13-10 

duct construction, 13-6 to 13-9 
fiber glass duct, 13-7 to 13-9 
rectangular duct, 13-7 
round duct, 13-6 to 13-7 
sizing duct systems, 13-9 to 13-10 
types of duct systems, 13-3 to 13-6 
Dynamic centrifugal compressors, 11-8 



E 



Electrical circuit components, 14-21 to 14-23 
capacitors, 14-23 
overload protectors, 14-23 
starting relays, 14-21 to 14-23 
current relay, 14-21 
thermal relay, 14-22 to 14-23 
voltage relay, 14-22 
Electrical symbols and abbreviations, 4-3 to 

4-5 

Electrical wiring and mechanical diagrams, 
4-6 to 4-9 

block diagrams, 4-7 
connection diagrams, 4-8 
isometric wiring diagrams, 4-7 
schematic/single-line diagrams, 4-8 to 4-9 
wiring diagrams, 4-7 to 4-8 
Electronic symbols and diagrams, 4-11 to 4-18 
Embarkation, 6-4 to 6-5 
Embarkation reports, records, and files, 6-6 
to 6-8 

loading status reports, 6-6 to 6-8 
Embarkation/MOCC records and files, 6-8 to 

6-9 
Enlisted performance evaluation reports, 1-13 

to 1-20 

Environmental pollution control, 15-1 to 15-3 
water and ground pollution, 15-1 to 15-2 
air pollution, 15-2 to 15-3 
asbestos, 15-2 
pesticides, 15-3 

Equipment and test procedures for electrical 
circuit components, 14-24 to 14-25 
capacitors, 14-25 

overload protectors, 14-24 to 14-25 
starting relays, 14-24 



INDEX-6 



Equipment estimate, 5-7 to 5-10 
Estimating techniques, 5-4 to 5-13 
activity estimates, 5-4 to 5-13 

equipment estimate, 5-7 to 5-10 
labor estimate, 5-10 to 5-13 
material estimate, 5-5 to 5-7 
need for accuracy in the use of drawings 

and specifications, 5-4 
Evaporators, 14-10 to 14-11 
Expandable refrigeration system, 14-5 to 
14-6 

evaporator systems, 14-5 
spray system, 14-6 
Exterior elevation drawings, 4-5 



Facilities planning guide, 6-1 to 6-4 
tailoring components and facilities, 

6-2 
use and application of the facilities 

planning guide, 6-2 to 6-4 
Field test equipment for cathodic protection, 
7-26 to 7-28 

buried pipe locator, 7-27 
multicombination meter, 7-26 to 7-27 
protective coating leak detector, 7-27 to 

7-28 

resistivity instruments, 7-27 
volt-millivoltmeter, 7-26 
Fire protection systems, 8-1 to 8-35 

automatic sprinkler system characteristics, 
8-1 to 8-18 

sprinkler system detection and indi- 
cating devices and fittings, 8-12 to 
8-18 
supervisory alarm initiating 

devices, 8-15 to 8-18 
water-flow actuated detectors, 

8-12 to 8-15 

types of sprinklers, 8-9 to 8-12 
types of sprinkler systems, 8-1 to 
8-9 

combined system, 8-9 
dry pipe system, 8-2 to 8-7 
pre-action system, 8-8 to 8-9 
water deluge system, 8-7 to 

8-8 

wet pipe system, 8-1 
dry chemical extinguishing systems, 8-33 
to 8-35 

system components, 8-35 
types of systems, 8-34 to 8-35 



Fire protection systems Continued 

gaseous extinguishing systems, 8-24 to 
8-33 

carbon dioxide systems, 8-24 to 8-27 
advantages/disadvantages of 

CO 2 systems, 8-26 
high-pressure systems, 8-25 
low-pressure systems, 8-25 to 

8-26 

nozzles, 8-27 
piping, 8-26 to 8-27 
gaseous extinguishing system alarm 
systems, 8-29 to 8-30 
initiating devices, 8-30 
sequence of alarms, 8-30 
halogenated gas systems, 8-28 to 

8-29 

hose line systems, 8-28 
inspection, testing, and maintenance 
of gaseous systems, 8-30 to 8-33 
abort feature, 8-32 to 8-33 
alarm systems, 8-32 
carbon dioxide high-pressure 

systems, 8-30 to 8-31 
carbon dioxide low-pressure 

systems, 8-31 to 8-32 
halogenated systems, 8-32 
release devices and auxiliary 

functions, 8-32 

local application systems, 8-28 
total flooding systems, 8-27 
inspection, testing, and maintenance 
requirements, 8-18 to 8-24 
inspection and testing, 8-19 to 
8-24 
alarm check valves, 8-20 to 

8-21 

automatic sprinklers, 8-20 
cathodic protection equipment, 

8-23 to 8-24 
deluge and pre-action valves, 

8-23 
dry pipe valves and air check 

valves, 8-21 to 8-23 
high-speed suppression systems, 

8-24 

nonfreeze systems, 8-24 
obstructed piping, 8-20 
outside open sprinklers, 8-20 
piping and hangers, 8-20 
maintenance requirements, 8-24 
water supply requirements, 8-18 
Floor plans, 4-5 



INDEX-7 



G 



Galvanic cathodic protection, 7-25 to 
7-28 

field test equipment for cathodic 
protection, 7-26 to 7-28 
buried pipe locator, 7-27 
multicombination meter, 7-26 to 

7-27 
protective coating leak detector, 

7-27 to 7-28 

resistivity instruments, 7-27 
volt-millivoltmeter, 7-26 
maintenance of anode systems, 7-28 
maintenance of impressed current 

systems, 7-28 

methods of galvanic cathodic protection, 
7-25 to 7-26 

galvanic anode method, 7-26 
impressed current method, 7-26 
Gaseous extinguishing systems, 8-24 to 8-33 
carbon dioxide systems, 8-24 to 8-27 
advantages/disadvantages of C0 2 

systems, 8-26 
high-pressure, 8-25 
low-pressure, 8-25 to 8-26 
nozzles, 8-27 
piping, 8-26 to 8-27 
gaseous extinguishing system alarm 
systems, 8-29 to 8-30 
initiating devices, 8-30 
sequence of alarms, 8-30 
halogenated gas systems, 8-28 to 8-29 
hose line systems, 8-28 
inspection, testing, and maintenance of 
gaseous systems, 8-30 to 8-33 
abort feature, 8-32 to 8-33 
alarm systems, 8-32 
carbon dioxide high-pressure systems, 

8-30 to 8-31 
carbon dioxide low-pressure systems, 

8-31 to 8-32 

halogenated systems, 8-32 
release devices and auxiliary func- 
tions, 8-32 

local application systems, 8-28 
total flooding systems, 8-27 
Groundwater development, 9-10 to 9-13 
Grounded windings, 14-20 to 14-21 
test lamp continuity check (low-re- 
sistance) procedure, 14-20 to 14-21 
megohmmeter (high-resistance) test pro- 
cedure, 14-21 

ohmrneter continuity test (low-resistance) 
procedure, 14-20 to 14-21 



H 



Helical screw compressors, 11-8 

Hermetic electrical schematic wiring diagrams, 

14-25 to 14-27 
High-pressure systems, 11-2 



I 

Inspecting and testing, boilers, 12-10 to 12-27 
inspection of firesides, 12-14 to 12-24 
exterior inspection of drums and 

headers, 12-24 
inspection of protection, seal, and 

support plates, 12-24 
inspection of uptakes and smoke 

pipes, 12-24 

refractory inspection, 12-14 to 12-16 
tube inspection, 12-16 to 12-24 
operational inspections and tests, 12-24 to 
12-27 

blowoff valves, 12-26 
boiler auxiliaries, 12-27 
boiler safety and water-pressure 

relief valves, 12-26 to 12-27 
controls, 12-24 
devices, 12-25 
firing equipment, 12-24 
pressure-reducing valves, 12-26 
steam and water piping, 12-25 
stop and check valves, 12-26 
water columns and gauge glasses, 

12-25 

waterside inspections and tests, 12-10 to 
12-14 

five-year inspection and test, 12-14 
hydrostatic tests, 12-13 to 12-14 
waterside inspection of boiler tubes, 

12-10 to 12-12 
waterside inspection of drums and 

headers, 12-13 

Inspection and testing fire protection systems, 
8-19 to 8-24 

alarm check valves, 8-20 to 8-21 
automatic sprinklers, 8-20 
cathodic protection equipment, 8-23 to 

8-24 

deluge and pre-action valves, 8-23 
dry pipe valves and air check valves, 8-21 

to 8-23 

high-speed suppression systems, 8-24 
nonfreeze systems, 8-24 
obstructed piping, 8-20 
outside open sprinklers, 8-20 
piping and hangers, 8-20 



INDEX-8 



Inspection of firesides, boilers, 12-14 to 
12-24 

exterior inspection of drums and headers 
12-24 ' 

inspection of protection, seals, and 

support plates, 12-24 
inspection of uptakes and smoke pipes, 

J. ^""jSwT 1 

refractory inspection, 12-14 to 12-16 
tube inspection, 12-16 to 12-24 
Inspection, testing, and maintenance require- 
ments, fire protection systems, 8-18 to 8-24 
inspection and testing, 8-19 to 8-24 
alarm check valves, 8-20 to 8-21 
automatic sprinklers, 8-20 
cathodic protection equipment, 8-23 

to 8-24 

deluge and pre-action valves, 8-23 
dry pipe valves and air check valves 

8-21 to 8-23 

high-speed suppression systems, 8-24 
nonfreeze systems, 8-24 
obstructed piping, 8-20 
outside open sprinklers, 8-20 
piping and hangers, 8-20 
maintenance requirements, 8-24 
Inspections, 2-11 

Installation of boilers, 12-1 to 12-10 
accessories, 12-2 to 12-5 
fittings, 12-6 to 12-10 
site selection, 12-1 to 12-2 

boiler foundation, 12-1 to 12-2 
boiler room, 12-2 
location, 12-1 

Interior elevation drawings, 4-5 
Isometric wiring diagrams, 4-7 



Labor estimate, 5-10 to 5-13 
Laying up idle boilers, 12-41 to 12-43 
laying up a boiler by the dry method, 

12-42 to 12-43 
laying up a boiler by the wet method, 

12-42 

Leaching fields, 10-37 to 10-39 
Leadership and supervision, 2-1 to 2-11 

distinguishable leadership and supervision 
skills, 2-4 to 2-11 

advising and counseling, 2-10 to 2-11 
positive expectations, 2-10 
realistic expectations, 2-11 
understanding, 2-11 



Leadership and supervision Continued 

Distinguishable leadership and supervision 
skills Continued 
conceptualizing, 2-11 
concern for efficiency and effective- 
ness, 2-4 to 2-8 
communicatins effectively, 2-7 

to 2-8 

knowing your job and crew, 2-5 
setting goals and performance 

standards, 2-5 to 2-6 
taking the initiative, 2-6 
training, 2-4 to 2-5 
use of influence, 2-8 to 2-10 

development of subordinates, 2-9 

to 2-10 

self-control, 2-9 

supervisor's influence, 2-8 to 2-9 
team building, 2-9 
inspections, 2-11 
leadership, 2-1 to 2-2 

definition of leadership, 2-1 to 2-2 
principles of leadership, 2-2 
supervision, 2-2 to 2-4 
common mistakes, 2-3 
earning respect, 2-3 
fine line, the, 2-3 to 2-4 
supervisory duties and responsi- 
bilities, 2-2 to 2-3 
Loading status reports, 6-6 to 6-8 
Logic patterns, basic, 5-22 to 5-23 
Low-pressure systems, 11-2 



M 



Maintenance and utilities forms, 1-26 
Maintenance, boilers, 12-37 to 12-43 

care of boiler firesides, 12-39 to 12-40 
care of boiler watersides, 12-40 to 12-41 
laying up idle boilers, 12-41 to 12-43 
laying up a boiler by the dry 

method, 12-42 to "l 2-43 
laying up a boiler by the wet 

method, 12-42 

maintenance programs, 12-38 to 12-39 
operator maintenance, 12-38 
preventive maintenance, 12-38 
Maintenance of anode systems, 7-28 
Maintenance of impressed current systems, 

7-28 

Maintenance requirements, compressed air 
systems, 11-26 to 11-27 
air compressor maintenance, 11-27 
auxiliary equipment maintenance, 11-27 



INDEX-9 



Maintenance requirements, compressed air 
systems Continued 
distribution system maintenance, 11-27 
prime mover maintenance, 11-27 
Maintenance requirements, fire protection 

systems, 8-24 

Material estimate, 5-5 to 5-7 
Mechanical component selection, 14-9 to 
14-16 

compressors, 14-11 to 14-12 
condensers, 14-9 
evaporators, 14-10 to 14-11 
receivers and accumulators, 14-14 to 

14-16 
refrigerant capacity controls, 14-14 

refrigerant lines and piping, 14-12 to 

14-14 

Medium-pressure systems, 11-2 
Methods of disposing and monitoring sewage 
effluents, 10-27 to 10-31 

direct discharge to receiving water, 10-27 
to 10-28 

discharge for land application (irrigation), 
10-28 to 10-29 

discharge for recycling, 10-28 

evaporation and percolation basins, 10-29 
to 10-30 

troubleshooting, 10-30 to 10-31 

Minicomputer use in the NCF, 5-23 to 
5-27 

CM-5 features, 5-24 

general description, 5-23 to 5-24 

program options and menu displays, 5-25 
to 5-27 

Mount-out control center, 6-5 to 6-6 

Multistage refrigeration system, 14-6 to 
14-9 

cascade system, 14-6 to 14-7 
compound system, 14-7 to 14-9 



N 



Network analysis techniques, scheduling by 
5-13 to 5-23 

Network time/duration computations, 5-20 to 
5-22 



O 



On-the-job training, 1-9 to 1-11 
Open windings, 14-18 to 14-19 

ohmmeter continuity test procedures, 

14-18 to 14-19 
test lamp continuity check procedure, 

14-19 

voltmeter test procedure, 14-19 
Operational inspection and tests, boilers, 
12-24 to 12-27 
blowoff valves, 12-26 
boiler auxiliaries, 12-27 
boiler safety and water-pressure relief 

valves, 12-26 to 12-27 
control, 12-24 
devices, 12-25 
firing equipment, 12-24 
pressure-reducing valves, 12-26 
steam and water piping, 12-25 
stop and check valves, 12-26 
water columns and gauge glasses, 12-25 
Overload protectors, 14-23 



Personnel Readiness Capability Program, 1-1 

to 1-7 

Pesticides, 15-3 

Planning, estimating, and scheduling, 5-1 to 
5-29 

estimating techniques, 5-4 to 5-13 
activity estimates, 5-4 to 5-13 

equipment estimate, 5-7 to 5-10 
labor estimate, 5-10 to 5-13 
material estimate, 5-5 to 5-7 
need for accuracy in the use of draw- 
ings and specifications, 5-4 
minicomputer use in the NCF, 5-23 to 
5-27 

CM-5 features, 5-24 
general description, 5-23 to 5-24 
program options and menu displays, 
5-25 to 5-27 
option 1: inputs to network, 

5-25 
option 2: edit data on network, 

5-25 

option 3: process network, 5-25 
option 4: update with field in- 
formation, 5-25 to 5-26 
option 5: display data on screen, 
5-26 



INDEX-10 



Planning, estimating, and scheduling Con- 
tinued 

minicomputer use in the NCF Con- 
tinued 

program options and menu displays- 
Continued 

option 6: print out reports 
5-26 ' 

option 7: reprint previously 

stored reports, 5-26 
option 8: create backup or 

target file, 5-26 to 5-27 
option 9: print input forms 

5-27 

option 10: print out CM-5 
system information, 5-27 
planning, 5-3 to 5-4 
references, 5-27 

scheduling by network analysis tech- 
niques, 5-13 to 5-23 

advantages of network analysis, 

5-14 
advantages of precedence diagrams, 

5-23 

basic precedence scheduling, 5-14 to 
5-19 
comparison to arrow diagram, 

5-14 to 5-15 
precedence diagramming, 5-15 to 

5-19 
disadvantages of network analysis, 

5-14 

elements of scheduling, 5-14 
scheduling precedence diagrams, 5-20 
to 5-23 

basic logic patterns, 5-22 to 5-23 
network time/duration computa- 
tions, 5-20 to 5-22 

Planning, estimating, and sizing plumbing 
systems, 7-2 to 7-19 
sanitary systems, 7-2 to 7-9 
grading, 7-3 to 7-4 
offsets on drainage piping, 7-6 
sizing building drains, 7-4 to 7-5 
sizing individual waste lines, 7-6 to 

7-8 
sizing sanitary collecting sewers, 7-8 

to 7-9 
sizing stacks and branches, 7-5 to 

7-6 

sizing the stack, 7-6 
storm drainage systems, 7-9 to 7-10 
installation considerations, 7-9 
sizing building storm drains, 7-9 to 
7-10 



Planning, estimating, and sizing plumbing 
systems Continued 
storm drainage systems Continued 

sizing site storm sewers, 7-10 
water supply systems, 7-10 to 7-19 
piping and fitting general require- 
ments, 7-17 to 7-19 

sizing cold-water supply systems, 
7-11 

sizing hot-water supply systems, 7-11 

to 7-17 
Planning plumbing projects, 7-1 to 7-28 

corrosion prevention and protection, 7-19 
to 7-25 

coatings and wrappings for corrosion 
protection, 7-24 to 7-25 
asphalt coatings, 7-24 
coal tar coatings, 7-24 
concrete coatings, 7-24 to 7-25 
grease coatings, 7-24 
metallic coatings, 7-25 
paint coatings, 7-24 
plastic wrapping, 7-25 
materials least likely to be affected 
by scale and corrosion, 7-23 to 
7-24 

types of corrosion, 7-20 to 7-23 
bacterial organisms, 7-23 
compositional corrosion, 7-22 
corrosion caused by electrolytes, 

7-23 
corrosion caused by nonelectro- 

lytes, 7-22 to 7-23 
localized corrosion, 7-20 to 

7-22 

stress fatigue of metals, 7-22 
uniform corrosion, 7-20 
galvanic cathodic protection, 7-25 to 
7-28 

field test equipment for cathodic 
protection, 7-26 to 7-28 
buried pipe locator, 7-27 
multicombination meter, 7-26 to 

7-27 
protective coating leak detector, 

7-27 to 7-28 

resistivity instruments, 7-27 
volt-millivoltmeter, 7-26 
maintenance of anode systems, 7-28 
maintenance of impressed current 
systems, 7-28 



INDEX-11 



Planning plumbing projects Continued 

galvanic cathodic protection Continued 
methods of galvanic cathodic pro- 
tection, 7-25 to 7-26 
galvanic anode method, 7-25 to 

7-26 

impressed current method, 7-26 
planning, estimating, and sizing plumbing 
systems, 7-2 to 7-19 

sanitary systems, 7-2 to 7-9 
grading, 7-3 to 7-4 
offsets on drainage piping, 7-6 
sizing building drains, 7-4 to 7-5 
sizing individual waste lines, 7-6 

to 7-8 
sizing sanitary collecting sewers, 

7-8 to 7-9 
sizing stacks and branches, 7-5 

to 7-6 

sizing the stack, 7-6 
storm drainage systems, 7-9 to 7-10 
installation considerations, 7-9 
sizing building storm drains, 7-9 

to 7-10 

sizing site storm sewers, 7-10 
water supply systems, 7-10 to 7-19 
piping and fitting general re- 
quirements, 7-17 to 7-19 
sizing cold-water supply systems, 

7-11 
sizing hot-water supply systems, 

7-11 to 7-17 

responsibilities, 7-1 to 7-2 
planner, 7-1 
supervisor, 7-1 to 7-2 
technical advisor, 7-1 
Plant operation, boilers, 12-27 to 12-37 
chemical makeup of water, 12-31 
chemical treatment determination, 12-36 

to 12-37 

chemical treatment (external and inter- 
nal), 12-31 

internal treatment and prevention, 12-31 
to 12-36 
carry-over foaming and priming, 

12-35 to 12-36 
corrosion, 12-35 

prevention and treatment for carry- 
overfoaming and priming, 12-36 
prevention and treatment for oxygen 

corrosion, 12-35 
prevention and treatment for scale 

control, 12-33 to 12-34 
prevention and treatment for sludge 
control, 12-34 



Plant operation, boilers Continued 

internal treatment and prevention Con- 
tinued 

scale, 12-31 to 12-33 
sludge, 12-34 
operators, 12-27 to 12-29 
logs, 12-28 to 12-29 
turnover/watch relief, 12-29 
plant supervisor, 12-30 
water chemistry, 12-30 
Plot plan, 4-5 

Precedence diagramming, 5-15 to 5-19 
Procedures for balancing, 13-14 to 13-16 
determine fan performance, 13-14 to 

13-16 

duct and outlet adjustments, 13-16 
Project turnover, 6-9 



R 



Receivers and accumulators, 14-14 to 14-16 
Reciprocating air compressors, 11-5 
Refrigerant capacity controls, 14-14 
Refrigerant lines and piping, 14-12 to 14-14 
Reports, 1-12 to 1-26 

enlisted performance evaluation reports, 
1-13 to 1-20 

maintenance and utilities forms, 1-26 

work requests and job orders, 1-20 to 

1-26 

Responsibilities, planning plumbing projects, 
7-1 to 7-2 

planner, 7-1 

supervisor, 7-1 to 7-2 

technical advisor, 7-1 
Rotary air compressors, 11-5 to 11-7 



Sanitary systems, 7-2 to 7-9 

grading, 7-3 to 7-4 

offsets on drainage piping, 7-6 

sizing building drains, 7-4 to 7-5 

sizing individual waste lines, 7-6 to 
7-8 

sizing sanitary collecting sewers, 7-8 to 
7-9 

sizing stacks and branches, 7-5 to 7-6 

sizing the stack, 7-6 

Schematic/single-line diagrams, 4-8 to 4-9 
Sectional or detail drawings, 4-5 



INDEX-12 



Selection and installation of an air-condition- 
ing system, 14-1 to 14-3 
forced air, 14-1 

heat load calculations and air movement 

14-1 to 14-3 

hot and chilled water, 14-1 
Selection and installation of refrigeration 
systems, 14-3 to 14-9 
absorption refrigeration systems, 14-5 
expandable refrigeration systems, 14-5 to 
14-6 

evaporator systems, 14-5 
spray system, 14-6 

multistage refrigeration system, 14-6 to 
14-9 

cascade system, 14-6 to 14-7 
compound system, 14-7 to 14-9 
special types of refrigeration systems, 

14-5 
thermoelectric refrigeration system, 

14-6 

Septic tanks, 10-32 to 10-34 
Septic tanks, cesspools, and leaching fields, 
10-32 to 10-39 
cesspools, 10-34 to 10-37 
leaching fields, 10-37 to 10-39 
septic tanks, 10-32 to 10-34 
Sewage sampling, 10-8 to 10-13 
grab sampling, 10-8 to 10-9 
composite samples, 10-9 
flow-proportional samples, 10-9 to 
10-12 

identifying samples, 10-13 
representative sampling, 10-8 
sample stowage, 10-12 
Sewage testing, 10-13 to 10-27 

activated sludge settleability test, 

10-22 

alkalinity, 10-23 
chemical oxygen demand (COD) test, 

10-22 to 10-23 
chlorine residual test, 10-23 
dissolved oxygen test, 10-15 to 10-22 
fecal coliform test, 10-23 
five-day biochemical oxygen demand 

(BOD 5 ) test, 10-22 
hydrogen ion concentration (pH value) 

test, 10-22 

laboratory equipment, 10-14 to 10-15 
laboratory records, 10-23 to 10-27 
mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS) 

test, 10-23 

settleable solids test, 10-22 
total suspended solids test, 10-23 



Sewage treatment and disposal, 10-1 to 10-39 
characteristics of sewage, 10-3 to 10-8 
biological characteristics, 10-8 
bacteria, 10-8 
parasites, 10-8 
viruses, 10-8 

chemical characteristics, 10-5 to 10-8 
dissolved oxygen, 10-6 to 10-7 
nutrients, 10-7 
oxygen demand, 10-7 
pH, 10-5 to 10-6 
toxic chemicals, 10-7 to 10-8 
physical characteristics, 10-3 to 
10-5 

color, 10-3 
odor, 10-4 
solids, 10-4 to 10-5 
temperature, 10-3 
wastewater composition, 10-3 
disposing of and monitoring sewage 
effluents, 10-27 to 10-31 
effluent discharge methods,. 10-27 
methods of disposing and monitoring 
sewage effluents, 10-27 to 10-31 
direct discharge to receiving 

water, 10-27 to 10-28 
discharge for land application 

(irrigation), 10-28 to 10-29 
discharge for recycling, 10-28 
evaporation and percolation 

basins, 10-29 to 10-30 
troubleshooting, 10-30 to 10-31 
septic tanks, cesspools, and leaching 
fields, 10-32 to 10-39 
cesspools, 10-34 to 10-37 
leaching fields, 10-37 to 10-39 
septic tanks, 10-32 to 10-34 
sewage sampling, 10-8 to 10-13 
composite samples, 10-9 
flow-proportional samples, 10-9 to 

10-12 

grab sampling, 10-8 to 10-9 
identifying samples, 10-13 
representative sampling, 10-8 
sample stowage, 10-12 
sewage testing, 10-13 to 10-27 

activated sludge settleabiiity test, 

10-22 

alkalinity, 10-23 
chemical oxygen demand (COD) test, 

10-22 to 10-23 
chlorine residual test, 10-23 
dissolved oxygen test, 10-15 to 

10-22 
fecal coliform test, 10-23 



INDEX-13 



Sewage treatment and disposal Continued 
sewage testing Continued 

five-day biochemical oxygen demand 

(BOD 5 ) test, 10-22 
hydrogen ion concentration (pH 

value) test, 10-22 
laboratory equipment, 10-14 to 

10-15 

laboratory records, 10-23 to 10-27 
mixed liquor suspended solids 

(MLSS) test, 10-23 
settleable solids test, 10-22 
total suspended solids tests, 10-23 
sources of raw sewage, 10-1 to 10-3 
domestic sewage, 10-1 
industrial sewage, 10-1 to 10-2 
patterns of flow, 10-3 
source quantity variables, 10-2 to 

10-3 

storm water, 10-2 
Shorted windings, 14-19 to 14-20 
Single-phase hermetic motors, 14-16 to 
14-17 
capacitor-start, capacitor-run, 14-16 to 

14-17 

capacitor-start, induction-run, 14-16 
permanent split-phase, 14-17 
split-phase, 14-16 
Single-phase hermetic motor windings and 

terminals, 14-17 to 14-18 
Sizing duct systems, 13-9 to 13-10 
Skill inventory, 1-2 to 1-3 
Sources of raw sewage, 10-1 to 10-3 
domestic sewage, 10-1 
industrial sewage, 10-1 to 10-2 
patterns of flow, 10-3 
source quantity variables, 10-2 to 

10-3 

storm water, 10-2 

Specific air quality requirements, 11-3 to 
11-5 

aircraft starting and cooling air, 11-4 
air for pneumatic tools, 11-4 
breathing air, 11-3 to 11-4 
commercial air, 11-3 
high-pressure air systems, 11-4 to 11-5 
instrument and control air, 11-4 
medical air, 11-4 
Specifications, 4-18 to 4-19 
Sprinkler system detection and indicating 
devices and fittings, 8-12 to 8-18 
supervisory alarm initiating devices, 8-15 

to 8-18 

water-flow actuated detectors, 8-12 to 
8-15 



Starting relays, 14-21 to 14-23 

current relay, 14-21 

voltage relay, 14-22 

thermal relay, 14-22 to 14-23 
Storm drainage systems, 7-9 to 7-10 

installation considerations, 7-9 

sizing building storm drains, 7-9 to 
7-10 

sizing site storm sewers, 7-10 
Supervision, 2-2 to 2-4 
Surface water development, 9-7 to 9-10 
System classification, compressed air, 11-1 to 
11-2 

high-pressure systems, 11-2 

low-pressure systems, 11-2 

medium-pressure systems, 11-2 
Systematic training, 1-11 to 1-12 



Tailoring components and facilities, 6-2 
Testing motor windings, 14-18 to 14-21 
grounded windings, 14-20 to 14-21 
ohmmeter continuity test (low-re- 
sistance) procedure, 14-20 to 14-21 
megohmmeter (high-resistance) test 

procedure, 14-21 
test lamp continuity check (low- 
resistance) procedure, 14-21 
open windings, 14-18 to 14-19 

ohmmeter continuity test procedure, 

14-18 to 14-19 
test lamp continuity check procedure, 

14-19 

voltmeter test procedure, 14-19 
shorted windings, 14-19 to 14-20 
Thermoelectric refrigeration system, 14-6 
Training, 1-7 to 1-12 
Treatment of CBR contamination, 9-22 to 

9-25 
Troubleshooting hermetic electrical systems, 

14-27 to 14-29 

Types of corrosion, 7-20 to 7-23 
bacterial organisms, 7-23 
compositional, 7-22 
corrosion caused by electrolytes, 7-23 
corrosion caused by non-electrolytes, 7-22 

to 7-23 

localized, 7-20 to 7-22 
stress fatigue of metals, 7-22 
uniform, 7-20 

Types of duct systems, 13-3 to 13-6 
Types of sprinklers, 8-9 to 8-12 



INDEX-14 



Types of sprinkler systems, 8-1 to 8-9 
combined, 8-9 
dry pipe, 8-2 to 8-7 
pre-action, 8-8 to 8-9 
water deluge, 8-7 to 8-8 
wet pipe, 8-1 



U 



Use and application of the facilities planning 
guide, 6-2 to 6-4 



Ventilation systems, 13-16 to 13-18 
mechanical, 13-18 
natural, 13-17 to 13-18 



W 



Wastewater composition, 10-3 

Water and ground pollution, 15-1 to 15-2 

Water contamination, 9-14 to 9-25 

chemical, biological, and radiological 
(CBR) contamination, 9-19 to 9-22 
biological contamination, 9-20 
chemical contamination, 9-20 
radiological contamination, 9-20 to 

9-22 

chemical characteristics of water, 9-16 to 
9-19 

dissolved gases, 9-18 to 9-19 
hardness, 9-16 to 9-18 
physical inpurities, 9-14 to 9-16 
treatment of CBR contamination, 9-22 to 

9-25 

Water source selection, 9-1 to 9-6 
source quantity, 9-1 to 9-5 
source quality, 9-5 to 9-6 
source reliability, 9-6 
Water supply requirements, 8-18 
Water supply systems, 7-10 to 7-19 

piping and fitting general requirements, 

7-17 to 7-19 

sizing cold-water supply systems, 7-11 
sizing hot-water supply systems, 7-11 to 
7-17 



Water treatment and purification, 9-1 to 
9-33 

development of water sources, 9-7 to 
9-14 

alternative water sources, 9-13 to 9-14 
groundvvater development, 9-10 to 

9-13 
surface water development, 9-7 to 

9-10 
water contamination, 9-14 to 9-25 

chemical, biological, and radiological 
(CBR) contamination, 9-19 to 9-22 
biological contamination, 9-20 
chemical contamination, 9-20 
radiological contamination, 9-20 

to 9-22 

chemical characteristics of water, 
9-16 to 9-19 

dissolved gases, 9-18 to 9-19 
hardness, 9-16 to 9-18 
physcial impurities, 9-14 to 9-16 
treatment of CBR contamination, 

9-22 to 9-25 

water source selection, 9-1 to 9-6 
source quality, 9-5 to 9-6 
source quantity, 9-1 to 9-5 
source reliability, 9-6 
water treatment equipment, 9-25 to 
9-33 

disinfection, 9-30 to 9-32 
distillation, 9-25 to 9-27 
installation, 9-27 
theory of operation, 9-25 to 

9-27 
emergency treatment methods, 9-32 

to 9-33* 

filtration, 9-27 to 9-30 
Water treatment equipment, 9-25 to 9-33 
disinfection, 9-30 to 9-32 
distillation, 9-25 to 9-27 
installation, 9-27 

theory of operation, 9-25 to 9-27 
emergency treatment methods, 9-32 to 

9-33 

filtration, 9-27 to 9-30 

Waterside inspections and tests, boilers, 12-10 
to 12-14 

five-year inspection and test, 12-14 
hydrostatic tests, 12-13 to 12-14 
waterside inspection of boiler tubes, 12-10 

to 12-12 
waterside inspection of drums and 

headers, 12-13 
Wiring diagrams, 4-7 to 4-8 
Work requests and job orders, 1-20 to 1-26 



INDEX-15 

IJ.U . S . GOV ERNMENT PRINTING F F ! CE t i 9 8 9 -6 3 1 - 7 J / 000 t 4 



