TP ~ 
LP ~ 
Q 9 Years of, So % a 


o, 4 
“e 


Forest Products 
Laboratory 


~ 079-2019 
United States — 


Department of 
Agriculture 


=~ Wood Handbook 


Forest 
Products 
Laboratory 


Wood as an Engineering Material 
General 
Technical 
Report “ay 
~SFPL-GTR-190 


USDA 


—_ 


‘| 


Wijias 


ena 


li 


Mh 


6." een 


. asd 5 ao 
at 4s Lee a fats tho! id 


Centennial Edition 


Centennial Edition 


Wood Handbook 


Wood as an Engineering Material 


Forest Products Laboratory * United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service * Madison, Wisconsin 


Abstract 


Summarizes information on wood as an engineering mate- 
rial. Presents properties of wood and wood-based products 
of particular concern to the architect and engineer. Includes 
discussion of designing with wood and wood-based prod- 
ucts along with some pertinent uses. 


Keywords: wood structure, physical properties (wood), 
mechanical properties (wood), lumber, wood-based com- 
posites, plywood, panel products, design, fastenings, wood 
moisture, drying, gluing, fire resistance, finishing, decay, 
preservation, wood-based products, heat sterilization, sus- 
tainable use 


April 2010 


Forest Products Laboratory. 2010. Wood handbook—Wood as an engineer- 
ing material. General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
508 p. 


A limited number of free copies of this publication are available to the 
public from the Forest Products Laboratory, One Gifford Pinchot Drive, 
Madison, WI 53726-2398. This publication is also available online at 
www.fpl.fs.fed.us. Laboratory publications are sent to hundreds of libraries 
in the United States and elsewhere. 


The Forest Products Laboratory is maintained in cooperation with the 
University of Wisconsin. 


The use of trade or firm names in this publication is for reader information 
and does not imply endorsement by the United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) of any product or service. 


The USDA prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the 
basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orienta- 
tion, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or a part 
of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program informa- 

tion (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET 
Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimi- 
nation, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence 
Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 
(voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer. 


Pesticide Precautionary Statement 


This publication reports research involving pesticides. 
It does not contain recommendations for their use, nor 
does it imply that the uses discussed here have been 
registered. All uses of pesticides must be registered by 
appropriate State and/or Federal agencies before they 
can be recommended. 


Caution: Pesticides can be injurious to humans, 
domestic animals, desirable plants, and fish or other 
wildlife, if they are not handled or applied properly. 
Use all pesticides selectively and carefully. Follow 
recommended practices for the disposal of surplus 
pesticides and pesticide containers. 


Chapter 1 Wood as a Sustainable 


Building Material 
Wood as a Green Building Material 1-1 
Forest Certification Programs 1-3 
Literature Cited 1-5 


Chapter 2 Characteristics and Availability 
of Commercially Important Woods 


Timber Resources and Uses 2—2 
Species Descriptions 2-3 
Imported Woods 2-18 
Scientific Name Index 2-41 
Literature Cited 2-45 
Additional References 2—45 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


Biological Structure of Wood at Decreasing Scales 3-2 


Microscopic Structure of Softwoods and Hardwoods 3-9 


Wood Technology 3—12 

Juvenile Wood and Reaction Wood 3-13 
Appearance of Wood as Sawn Lumber 3-13 
Wood Identification 3-16 

Literature Cited 3-16 


Chapter 4 Moisture Relations and 


Physical Properties of Wood 
Wood-—Moisture Relationships 4—1 
Thermal Properties 4-10 
Electrical Properties 4-15 
Friction Properties 4-17 
Nuclear Radiation Properties 4-17 
Literature Cited 4-18 
Additional Reference 4-19 


Chapter 5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 

Orthotropic Nature of Wood 5-1 

Elastic Properties 5—2 

Strength Properties 5—3 

Vibration Properties 5—17 

Mechanical Properties of Clear Straight-Grained 
Wood 5-21 

Natural Characteristics Affecting Mechanical 
Properties 5—26 

Literature Cited 544 

Additional References 5—44 


CONTENTS 


Chapter 6 Commercial Lumber, 


Round Timbers, and Ties 
Hardwood Lumber 6—2 
Softwood Lumber 6-6 
Purchase of Lumber 6-12 
Round Timbers and Ties 6-18 
Commonly Used Lumber, Round Timber, and Tie 
Abbreviations 6—23 
References 6-25 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Prop- 


erties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 
Lumber 7-1 
Round Timbers and Ties 7-13 
Literature Cited 7-14 
Additional References 7-15 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 
Nails 8-1 
Spikes 8-9 
Staples 8-9 
Drift Bolts 8-10 
Wood Screws 8-10 
Lag Screws 8-12 
Bolts 8-14 
Connector Joints 8-19 
Metal Plate Connectors 8—25 
Joist Hangers 8-25 
Fastener Head Embedment 8-26 
Literature Cited 8-27 
Additional References 8-27 


Chapter 9 Structural Analysis Equations 
Deformation Equations 9-1 
Stress Equations 9-4 
Stability Equations 9—7 
Literature Cited 9-10 
Additional References 9-10 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials 
Bond Formation and Performance 

Surface Properties of Wood for Bonding 10-2 

Physical Properties of Wood for Bonding 10—5 

Adhesives 10-8 

Bonding Process 10-14 

Bonded Joints 10-18 

Testing and Performance 10-19 

Standards 10-22 

References 10—23 


it 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Ma- 
terials Panel Products, Glued-Laminated 
Timber, Structural Composite Lumber, and 


Wood-Nonwood Composite Materials 
Scope 11-2 
Conventional Wood-Based Composite Panels 11—2 
Glulam Timber 11-17 
Structural Composite Lumber 11—20 
Wood—Nonwood Composite Materials 11—22 
Literature Cited 11-26 


Chapter 12 Mechanical Properties of 


Wood-Based Composite Materials 
Elastic Properties 12—2 
Strength Properties 12-3 
Panel Products 12-3 
Timber Elements/Structural Composite Lumber 12—5 
Wood—Nonwood Composites 12—7 
Testing Standards 12-9 
Literature Cited 12-10 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture 
Content and Dimensional Changes 


Determination of Moisture Content 13-1 
Recommended Moisture Content 13-3 

Drying of Wood 13-5 

Moisture Control during Transit and Storage 13-13 
Dimensional Changes in Wood 13-15 

Design Factors Affecting Dimensional Change 13-17 
Wood Care and Installation during Construction 13-18 
Literature Cited 13-19 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 
Fungus Damage and Control 14-1 
Bacteria 14-9 
Insect Damage and Control 14—9 
Marine Borer Damage and Control 14-13 
References 14-15 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Wood Preservatives 15-1 

Selecting Preservatives 15—13 

Evaluating New Preservatives 15—13 
Preservative Effectiveness 15-13 

Effect of Species on Penetration 15—15 
Preparation of Wood for Treatment 15—15 
Application of Preservatives 15-18 

Quality Assurance for Treated Wood 15-25 
Effects on the Environment 15—26 
Recycling and Disposal of Treated Wood 15-26 
References 15-27 


iv 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 
Factors Affecting Finish Performance 16—2 
Exterior Wood Finishes 16—16 
Application of Finishes, Special Uses 16-24 
Finish Failure or Discoloration 16—25 
Finishing Interior Wood 16-32 
Wood Cleaners and Brighteners 16—34 
Paint Strippers 16-35 
Lead-Based Paint 16-36 
Literature Cited 16-37 
Additional References 16-37 


Chapter 17 Use of Wood in Buildings 
and Bridges 

Light-Frame Buildings 17-1 

Post-Frame and Pole Buildings 17—4 

Log Buildings 17-6 

Heavy Timber Buildings 17—6 


Considerations for Wood Buildings 17-9 
Literature Cited 17-12 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood 
Construction 


Fire Safety Design and Evaluation 18-1 
Fire-Performance Characteristics of Wood 18-8 
Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood 18-15 

Literature Cited 18-18 

Additional References 18-18 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 
Plasticizing Wood 19-1 
Modified Woods 19-4 
Paper-Based Plastic Laminates 19-12 
References 19-14 


Chapter 20 Heat Sterilization of Wood 


Heat Treatment Standards 20-1 

Factors Affecting Heating Times 20-2 

Methods for Estimating Heating Times 20-5 
American Lumber Standard Committee (ALSC) 
Enforcement Regulations 20-9 

Quality Mark 20-11 

Other Considerations 20-11 

Literature Cited 20-13 


Glossary 


Index 


We are proud to present this edition of the Wood 
Handbook—Wood as an Engineering Material, pre- 
pared and updated to include fascinating new develop- 
ments in the field of wood utilization and released as 
part of the celebration of the Forest Products Labora- 
tory’s first 100 years of service to the public. 


Efficient use of our nation’s timber is of critical impor- 
tance. This handbook is intended to serve as a primary 
reference on the use of wood in a variety of applica- 
tions—from general construction to use of wood for 
decorative purposes. It provides engineers, architects, 
and others who use wood with a source of information 
on the various properties of wood, its relationship with 
moisture, and characteristics of various wood-based 
materials. Continuing research holds promise for wider 
and more efficient utilization of wood in an increasing 
number of applications. 


This handbook was prepared by the Forest Products 
Laboratory (FPL), a research unit within the USDA 
Forest Service. The FPL, first established in 1910 in 
Madison, Wisconsin, was the first institution in the 
world to conduct general research on wood and its 
utilization. The information that resulted from many 
of its scientific investigations of wood and wood prod- 
ucts over the past century is the primary basis for this 
handbook. 


The Wood Handbook was first issued in 1935, and 
slightly revised in 1939, as an unnumbered publica- 
tion. Further revisions in 1955, 1974, and 1987 were 
published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as 
Agriculture Handbook No. 72. The 1999 revision was 
published by the FPL as General Technical Report 
FPL-—GTR-113 and reprinted for broader distribution 
by the Forest Products Society. 


The audience for the Wood Handbook is broad. Con- 
sequently, the coverage of each chapter is aimed at 
providing a general discussion of the topic, with refer- 
ences included for additional information. Thousands 
more publications are available on the FPL website 
(www.fpl.fs.fed.us). 


Wood resources continue to play an important role 

in the world, from packaging materials to buildings 

to transportation structures. Wood has been useful to 
human societies for thousands of years; archeologi- 
cal discoveries have shown wood was used by ancient 
civilizations as a construction material, as a substrate 
for ornate decorative objects, and for providing the 
final resting place for royalty. These discoveries 
highlight the unique, long-lasting performance char- 
acteristics of wood, as many of these artifacts have 
survived for thousands of years. FPL continues on its 
journey of discovery and public service; working with 
cooperators from around the world, we are discovering 
information that covers the entire spectrum of wood 
science—from the use of wood in ancient societies to 
developing new theories that describe the fundamen- 
tal structure of wood based on the emerging field of 
nanoscience. If our forests are managed wisely, and if 
we continue to build our intellectual capacity to meet 
the challenges of evolving human needs and chang- 
ing wood characteristics, this amazing material that is 
wood will serve the public well for years to come. 


Christopher D. Risbrudt, Director 
Michael A. Ritter, Assistant Director 
Theodore H. Wegner, Assistant Director 


USDA Forest Service 
Forest Products Laboratory 


FOREWORD 


This edition of the Wood Handbook—Wood as an 
Engineering Material builds upon past editions, in 
particular the 1999 version, with some important addi- 
tions and modifications: 


e Achapter has been added that highlights the im- 
portance of wood as an environmentally respon- 
sible, sustainable material (Chapter 1). 


e Low-magnification micrographs of cross sections 
of commercial wood species have been added 
(Chapter 2). 


e Anextensive discussion on the microscopic struc- 
ture of wood and its foundational elements are 
presented (Chapter 3). 


e Reference to the most recent research on proper- 
ties of the wood cell wall, at the nanoscale, has 
been included (Chapter 5). 


e To address the need to find uses for wood obtained 
from trees killed by invasive insect species as they 
propagate through various regions of the United 
States, a chapter has been added on heat-treating 
and sterilization procedures for wood products 
(Chapter 20). 


e Important updates are included on wood-mois- 
ture interactions and wood preservation practices 
(Chapters 4 and 15). 


The Wood Handbook originally focused on construc- 
tion practices that utilized solid-sawn wood. Since its 
first printing, the state-of-the-art in wood construc- 
tion practices and the range of wood-based products 
available to the consumer have changed considerably. 
Excellent printed reference and websites have been 
developed by various trade associations and wood 
products manufacturers that document, in detail, cur- 
rent design information for the ever-changing range of 
products available. We have made a concerted effort 


to include the most current references, in addition to 
many historic ones, to help guide the reader to appro- 
priate sources of information. 


This 2010 edition was reviewed by numerous individ- 
uals from industry, academia, and government. Several 
dozen industry, university, and government colleagues 
reviewed various sections and chapters of this edition 
during various stages of revision. We gratefully ac- 
knowledge their contributions. 


The following individuals provided in-depth technical 
reviews of this edition in its entirety: Donald Bender 
(Washington State University), David Green (USDA 
Forest Products Laboratory, retired), John Erickson 
(USDA Forest Products Laboratory, retired), Howard 
Rosen (USDA Forest Service, retired), World Nieh 
(USDA Forest Service), Robert White (USDA Forest 
Products Laboratory), and staff of the American Wood 
Council, American Forest & Paper Association. We 
gratefully acknowledge their contributions. 


Although listing every technical author and contributor 
to the Wood Handbook would be nearly impossible— 
early editions did not even list individual contributors 
by name—we do acknowledge the authors of previous 
editions; they all made significant, noteworthy contri- 
butions. 


Finally, we thank our many research cooperators from 
industry, academia, and other government agencies. 
By working with you we are able to continue develop- 
ing the technical base for using wood, wood-based 
materials, and wood structural systems in a technically 
sound manner. 


Robert J. Ross, Editor 


USDA Forest Service 
Forest Products Laboratory 


Vil 


PREFACE 


CEPI Re! 


Wood as a Sustainable Building Material 


Robert H. Falk, Research General Engineer 


Contents 

Wood as a Green Building Material 1-1 
Embodied Energy 1-1 
Carbon Impact 1-2 
Sustainability 1-3 

Forest Certification Programs 1-3 
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) 1-4 
Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) 1-4 
American Tree Farm System (ATFS) 1—4 
Canadian Standards Association (CSA) 1-5 


Programme for the Endorsement of Forest 
Certification (PEFC) Schemes 1—5 


Additional Information 1—5 


Literature Cited 1—5 


Few building materials possess the environmental benefits 
of wood. It is not only our most widely used building mate- 
rial but also one with characteristics that make it suitable 
for a wide range of applications. As described in the many 
chapters of this handbook, efficient, durable, and useful 
wood products produced from trees can range from a mini- 
mally processed log at a log-home building site to a highly 
processed and highly engineered wood composite manufac- 
tured in a large production facility. 


As with any resource, we want to ensure that our raw ma- 
terials are produced and used in a sustainable fashion. One 
of the greatest attributes of wood is that it is a renewable 
resource. If sustainable forest management and harvesting 
practices are followed, our wood resource will be available 
indefinitely. 


Wood as a Green Building Material 


Over the past decade, the concept of green building! has 
become more mainstream and the public is becoming aware 
of the potential environmental benefits of this alternative 

to conventional construction. Much of the focus of green 
building is on reducing a building’s energy consumption 
(such as better insulation, more efficient appliances and 
heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems) 
and reducing negative human health impacts (such as con- 
trolled ventilation and humidity to reduce mold growth). 
However, choosing building materials that exhibit positive 
environmental attributes is also a major area of focus. Wood 
has many positive characteristics, including low embodied 
energy, low carbon impact, and sustainability. These charac- 
teristics are important because in the United States, a little 
more than half the wood harvested in the forest ends up as 
building material used in construction. 


Embodied Energy 


Embodied energy refers to the quantity of energy required to 
harvest, mine, manufacture, and transport to the point of use 
a material or product. Wood, a material that requires a mini- 
mal amount of energy-based processing, has a low level 


'Green building is defined as the practice of increasing the effi- 
ciency with which buildings use resources while reducing building 
impacts on human health and the environment—through better 
siting, design, material selection, construction, operation, mainte- 
nance, and removal—over the complete building life cycle. 


1-1 


Table 1-1. Wood products industry 
fuel sources* 


Proportion used 


Fuel source (%) 
Net electricity 19 
Natural gas 16 
Fuel oil 3 
Other (primarily biomass) 61 
“EPA (2007). 


of embodied energy relative to many other materials used in 
construction (such as steel, concrete, aluminum, or plastic). 
The sun provides the energy to grow the trees from which 
we produce wood products; fossil fuels are the primary en- 
ergy source in steel and concrete manufacture. Also, over 
half the energy consumed in manufacturing wood products 
in the United States is from biomass (or bioenergy) and is 
typically produced from tree bark, sawdust, and by-products 
of pulping in papermaking processes. The U.S. wood prod- 
ucts industry is the nation’s leading producer and consumer 
of bioenergy, accounting for about 60% of its energy needs 
(Table 1-1) (Murray and others 2006, EPA 2007). Solid- 
sawn wood products have the lowest level of embodied 
energy; wood products requiring more processing steps (for 
example, plywood, engineered wood products, flake-based 
products) require more energy to produce but still require 
significantly less energy than their non-wood counterparts. 


In some plantation forest operations, added energy costs 
may be associated with the use of fertilizer, pesticides, and 
greenhouses to grow tree seedlings. During the harvesting 
operation, energy is used to power harvesting equipment and 
for transporting logs to the mill. Lumber milling processes 
that consume energy include log and lumber transport, saw- 
ing, planing, and wood drying. Kiln drying is the most 
energy-consumptive process of lumber manufacture; how- 
ever, bioenergy from a mill’s waste wood is often used to 
heat the kilns. Unlike burning fossil fuels, using bioenergy 
for fuel is considered to be carbon neutral. Also, advances in 
kiln technologies over the past few decades have significant- 
ly reduced the amount of energy required in wood drying. 
Overall, the production of dry lumber requires about twice 
the energy of producing green (undried) lumber. 


The Consortium for Research on Renewable Industrial 
Materials (CORRIM) found that different methods of forest 
management affect the level of carbon sequestration in trees 
(Perez-Garcia and others 2005). They found that shorter ro- 
tation harvests can sequester more total carbon than longer 
rotation harvests. 


CORRIM also calculated differences in energy consumed 
and environmental impacts associated with resource extrac- 
tion, materials production, transportation, and disposal of 
homes built using different materials and processes. 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Their calculations show that the energy consumed in the 
manufacture of building materials (mining iron and coal for 
steel or harvesting wood for lumber) and the construction 
of a steel-framed house in Minneapolis is 17% greater than 
for a wood-framed house (Lippke and others 2004). The 
difference is even more dramatic if one considers the use 
of bioenergy in the manufacture of wood products. By this 
comparison, the steel-framed house uses 281% more non- 
bioenergy than the wood-framed house (Perez-Garcia and 
others 2005). Global warming potential, air emission index, 
and water emission index are all higher for steel construc- 
tion than for wood construction (Table 1-2). 


These analyses indicate that the amount of energy necessary 
to produce wood products is much less than comparable 
products made from other materials. If wood is substituted 
for these other materials (assuming similar durability allows 
equal substitution), energy is saved and emissions avoided 
each time wood is used, giving it a distinct environmental 
advantage over these other materials (Bowyer and others 
2008). 


Carbon Impact 


The role of carbon in global climate change and its projected 
negative impact on ecosystem sustainability and the general 
health of our planet have never been more elevated in the 
public’s consciousness. 


Forests play a major role in the Earth’s carbon cycle. The 
biomass contained in our forests and other green vegeta- 
tion affects the carbon cycle by removing carbon from the 
atmosphere through the photosynthesis process. This pro- 
cess converts carbon dioxide and water into sugars for tree 
growth and releases oxygen into the atmosphere: 


energy (sunlight) + 6H,O + 6CO, > C,H,,0, + 60, 


A substantial amount of carbon can be sequestered in forest 
trees, forest litter, and forest soils. Approximately 26 billion 
metric tonnes of carbon is sequestered within standing trees, 
forest litter, and other woody debris in domestic forests, and 
another 28.7 billion tonnes in forest soils (Birdsey and 
Lewis 2002). According to Negra and others (2008), be- 
tween 1995 and 2005 the rate of carbon sequestration in 
U.S. forests was about 150 million tonnes annually (not in- 
cluding soils), a quantity of carbon equivalent to about 10% 
of total carbon emissions nationally. 


Unfortunately, deforestation in tropical areas of the world is 
responsible for the release of stored carbon, and these for- 
ests are net contributors of carbon to the atmosphere. Tropi- 
cal deforestation is responsible for an estimated 20% of total 
human-caused carbon dioxide emissions each year (Schimel 
and others 2001). 


Carbon in wood remains stored until the wood deteriorates 
or is burned. A tree that remains in the forest and dies re- 
leases a portion of its carbon back into the atmosphere as the 
woody material decomposes. On the other hand, if the tree 


Chapter 1 Wood as a Sustainable Building Material 


Table 1-2. Environmental performance indices for above-grade wall 
designs in residential construction® 


Wood Steel Change? 
frame frame Difference (%) 
Minneapolis design 
Embodied energy (GJ) 250 296 46 +18 
Global warming potential (CO, kg) 13,009 17,262 4,253 +33 
Air emission index (index scale) 3,820 4,222 402 +11 
Water emission index (index scale) 3 29 26 +867 
Solid waste (total kg) 3,496 3,181 -315 -0.9 
Atlanta design 
Embodied energy (GJ) 168 231 63 +38 
Global warming potential (CO, kg) 8,345 14,982 6,637 +80 
Air emission index (index scale) 2,313 3,373 1,060 +46 
Water emission index (index scale) 2 2 0 0 
Solid waste (total kg) 2,325 6,152 3,827 +164 


*Lippke and others (2004). 


> change = [(Steel frame — Wood frame)/(Wood frame)] x 100. 


is used to produce a wood or paper product, these products 
store carbon while in use. For example, solid wood lumber, 
a common wood product used in building construction (the 
building industry is the largest user of sawn wood in the 
United States), sequesters carbon for the life of the building. 
At the end of a building’s life, wood can be recovered for 
re-use in another structure, chipped for use as fuel or mulch, 
or sent to a landfill (usual fate). If burned or mulched, stored 
carbon is released when the wood decomposes, essentially 
the reverse process of photosynthesis: 


C,H,,0, + 60, > 6CO, + 6H,O 


Carbon contained in wood products currently in-use and as 
wood debris in landfills is estimated at 2.5 billion tonnes and 
accumulates at a rate of about 28 million tonnes per year 
(Skog 2008). Much of the carbon contained within wood 
products resides in the nation’s housing stock, estimated 

at 116 million units in 2000. Skog (2008) estimated that in 
2001, about 680 million tonnes of carbon was stored in the 
nation’s housing stock, nearly a third of the total carbon (2.5 
billion tonnes) cited above. 


As indicated in Table 1-3, carbon emitted to produce a 
tonne of concrete is about eight times that emitted to pro- 
duce a tonne of framing lumber. A similar comparison for 
steel indicates that its production emits about 21 times as 
much carbon as an equal weight of framing lumber. Wood 
products also mitigate carbon emissions to the degree that 
they substitute for steel or concrete, which emit more green- 
house gases in their production. 


Also, because wood products have this low level of em- 
bodied energy compared with other building products and 
because wood is one-half carbon by weight, wood products 
can actually be carbon negative (Bowyer and others 2008). 


Comparisons of the environmental impact of various wood 
products have also been made using life cycle analysis 
software (Calkins 2009). The more processing involved in 
the manufacture of wood products (such as flaking, veneer 
cutting, added heat for pressing, gluing, kiln drying), the 
more impact on energy use, solid waste production, pollu- 
tion production, and global warming potential (carbon). 


Sustainability 


Unlike metals and fossil-fuel-based products (such as 
plastics), our forest resource is renewable and with proper 
management a flow of wood products can be maintained 
indefinitely. The importance of forest-based products to our 
economy and standard of living is hard to overemphasize— 
half of all major industrial raw materials we use in the Unit- 
ed States come from forests. However, the sustainability of 
this resource requires forestry and harvesting practices that 
ensure the long-term health and diversity of our forests. Un- 
fortunately, sustainable practices have not always been ap- 
plied in the past, nor are they universally applied around the 
world today. Architects, product designers, material speci- 
fiers, and homeowners are increasingly asking for building 
products that are certified to be from a sustainable source. 
For the forest products sector, the result of this demand has 
been the formation of forest certification programs. These 
programs not only ensure that the forest resource is harvest- 
ed in a sustainable fashion but also that issues of biodiver- 
sity, habitat protection, and indigenous peoples’ rights are 
included in land management plans. 


Forest Certification Programs 


More than 50 different forest certification systems in the 
world today represent nearly 700 million acres of forestland 
and 15,000 companies involved in producing and 


Table 1-3. Net carbon emissions in producing a 
tonne of various materials 


Near-term net carbon 
emissions including 


Net carbon carbon storage 
emissions within material 
Material (kg C/t)*® (kg C/t)4 
Framing lumber 33 —457 
Medium-density 60 —382 
fiberboard (virgin fiber) 
Brick 88 88 
Glass 154 154 
Recycled steel 220 220 
(100% from scrap) 
Concrete 265 265 
Concrete® 291 291 
Recycled aluminum 309 309 
(100% recycled content) 
Steel (virgin) 694 694 
Plastic 2,502 2,502 
Aluminum (virgin) 4,532 4,532 


“Values are based on life-cycle assessment and include gathering and 
processing of raw materials, primary and secondary processing, and 
transportation. 

Source: EPA (2006). 

‘From Bowyer and others (2008); a carbon content of 49% is assumed 
for wood. 

“The carbon stored within wood will eventually be emitted back to the 
atmosphere at the end of the useful life of the wood product. 

“Derived based on EPA value for concrete and consideration of 
additional steps involved in making blocks. 


marketing certified products. These programs represent 
about 8% of the global forest area and 13% of managed 
forests. From 2007 to 2008, the world’s certified forest area 
grew by nearly 9%. North America has certified more than 
one-third of its forests and Europe more than 50% of its for- 
ests; however, Africa and Asia have certified less than 0.1%. 


Approximately 80% to 90% of the world’s certified forests 
are located in the northern hemisphere, where two thirds 
of the world’s roundwood is produced (UNECE 2008). In 
North America, five major certification systems are used: 


e Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) 

e Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) 

e American Tree Farm System (ATFS) 

e Canadian Standards Association (CSA) 


e Programme for the Endorsement of Forest 
Certification (PEFC) schemes 


In terms of forest acreage under certification, the Forest 
Stewardship Council and the Sustainable Forestry Initia- 
tive dominate in the United States. These two systems 
evolved from different perspectives of sustainability. The 
FSC’s guidelines are geared more to preserve natural 
systems while allowing for careful harvest, whereas 

the SFI’s guidelines are aimed at encouraging fiber 


1-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


productivity while allowing for conservation of resources 
(Howe and others 2004). The growing trends in green 
building are helping drive certification in the construction 
market in the United States. 


Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) 
© — FSC is an independent, non-governmental 
organization established to promote respon- 
sible management of the world’s forests 
FSC and is probably the most well-known for- 
est certification program worldwide. More 
than 280 million acres of forest worldwide are certified to 
FSC standards and are distributed over 79 countries. The 
FSC program includes two types of certifications. The For- 
est Management Certification applies FSC standards of 
responsible forestry to management of the forest land. A 
Chain-of-Custody (COC) certification ensures that forest 
products that carry the FSC label can be tracked back to 
the certified forest from which they came. More than 9,000 
COC certifications are in use by FSC members. The FSC 
has certified 18 certification bodies around the world. Four 
are located in the United States, including the non-profit 
Rainforest Alliance’s SmartWood program and the for-profit 
Scientific Certification Systems. Both organizations provide 
up-to-date lists of FSC-certified wood suppliers across the 
country. 


Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) 


° The SFI program was established 
SUSTAINABLE 12 1994 and currently certifies over 
FORESTRY 152 million acres in the United 
INITIATIVE States and Canada. This program 

has a strong wood industry focus 
and has been adopted by most of the major industrial forest 
landowners in the United States. It is based on the premise 
that responsible forest practices and sound business deci- 
sions can co-exist. The SFI program includes third-party 
certification, which verifies the requirements of the SFI 
2010-2014 Standard. Independent certification bodies eval- 
uate planning, procedures, and processes in the forest and in 
wood processing operations. Annual surveillance audits are 
mandatory on all certified operations, and a full recertifica- 
tion audit is required for forest operations every 3 years. 


American Tree Farm System (ATFS) 


The American Tree Farm System, a 
program of the American Forest Founda- 
tion’s Center for Family Forests, is the 
oldest of forest certification programs 
and was established in 1941. The ATFS 
focuses its program on private family 
forest landowners in the United States. Currently, ATFS 

has certified 24 million acres of privately owned forestland 
and more than 90,000 family forest owners. The ATFS for- 
est certification standard requires forest owners to develop 


Chapter 1 Wood as a Sustainable Building Material 


a management plan based on strict environmental standards 
and pass an inspection by an ATFS inspecting forester. 
Third-party certification audits, conducted by firms ac- 
credited by the ANSI-ASQ National Accreditation Board 
(ANAB) or the Standards Council of Canada (SCC), are 
required for all certifications of the ATFS. 


Canadian Standards Association (CSA) 


The Canadian Standards Association is a 
G non-profit organization and has developed 
over 2,000 different standards for a vari- 
ety of industries. The CSA first published 
Canada’s National Standard for Sustain- 
able Forest Management (SFM) CAN/CSA-Z809 in 1996. 
The SFM program has four components: the SFM Standard 
itself, a Chain-of-Custody program, product marking, and 
the CSA International Forest Products Group, which pro- 
motes the program. The CSA Standard has been adopted by 
the major industrial forestland managers in Canada. As 
of June 2007, about 60% (198 million acres) of Canadian 
forests were certified under the CAN/CSA-Z809 SFM 
Standard. 


' 
COA INTERNATIONAL 
a 


Programme for the Endorsement of 
Forest Certification (PEFC) Schemes 
made it difficult for land managers, mem- 


Ty bers of the wood industry, and consumers 


PEFC * to determine which certification program 
fits their needs (Fernholz and others 2004). 

The Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certifica- 
tion schemes was developed to address this issue and serves 
as an umbrella endorsement system that provides interna- 
tional recognition for national forest certification programs. 
Founded in 1999, the PEFC represents most of the world’s 
certified forest programs and the production of millions of 
tons of certified timber. The FSC, SFI, and ATFS programs 
have received official PEFC endorsement. 


The multitude of certification programs 
with competing standards and claims has 


Additional Information 


Helpful online tools provide more information and data on 
forest certification, including the Forest Certification Re- 
source Center (www.metafore.org), which identifies forests, 
manufacturers, distributors, importers, and retailers certi- 
fied under FSC, SFI, and CSA programs. The database is 
searchable by product, location, and certification system. 
Another helpful resource is the Forest Products Annual 
Market Review (www.unece.org), which provides general 
and statistical information on forest products markets in 
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
(UNECE) and covers the regions of Europe, North Ameri- 
ca, and the Commonwealth of Independent States. 


Literature Cited 


Birdsey, R.; Lewis, G. 2002. Carbon in U.S. forests and 
wood products, 1987-1997: state by state estimates. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. GTR-NE-310. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service. 


Bowyer, J.; Bratkovich, S.; Lindberg, A.; Fernholz, K. 2008. 
Wood products and carbon protocols: carbon storage and 
low energy intensity should be considered. Minneapolis, 
MN: Dovetail Partners, Inc. www.dovetailinc.org. (28 April 
2008). 13 p. 


Calkins, M. 2009. Materials for sustainable sites: a complete 
guide to the evaluation, selection, and use of sustainable 
construction materials. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
457 p. 


EPA. 2006. Solid waste management and greenhouse gas- 
es—a life cycle assessment of emissions and sinks. 3rd Ed. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 


EPA. 2007. Energy trends in selected manufacturing sectors: 
opportunities and challenges for environmentally preferable 
energy outcomes. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Office of Policy, Economics and Innova- 
tion. (March 2007). 


Fernholz, K.; Howe, J.; Guillery, P.; Bowyer, J. 2004. Be- 
ginner’s guide to third-party forest certification: shining a 
light on the programme for the endorsement of forest certi- 
fication schemes (PEFC). Minneapolis, MN: Dovetail Part- 
ners, Inc. www.dovetailinc.org. 


Fernholz, K.; Howe, J.; Guillery, P.; Bowyer, J. 2005. Be- 
ginner’s guide to third-party forest certification: shining a 
light on the Canadian Standards Association (CSA). Minne- 
apolis, MN: Dovetail Partners, Inc. www.dovetailinc.org. 
(18 January 2005). 10 p. 


Howe, J.; Fernholz, K.; Guillery, P.; Bowyer, J. 2004. A land 
manager’s guide to FSC & SFI—to certify or not to certify: 
is that a question? Minneapolis, MN: Dovetail Partners, Inc. 
www.dovetailinc.org. (15 September 2004). 13 p. 


Lippke, B.; Wilson, J.; Perez-Garcia, J.; Bowyer, J.; Meil, J. 
2004. CORRIM: life-cycle environmental performance of 
renewable building materials. Forest Products Journal. 
54(6): 13. (June 2004). 


Murray, B.; Nicholson, R.; Ross, M.; Holloway, T.; Patil, S. 
2006. Biomass energy consumption in the forest products 
industry. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy; Re- 
search Triangle Park, NC: RTI International. 81 p. 


Negra, C.; Sweedo, C.; Cavender-Bares, K.; O’ Malley, R. 
2008. Indicators of carbon storage in U.S. ecosystems: base- 
line for terrestrial carbon accounting. Journal of Environ- 
mental Quality. 37: 1376-1382. 


Perez-Garcia, J.; Lippke, B.; Briggs, D.; Wilson, J.; Bowyer, 
J.; Meil, J. 2005. The environmental performance of renew- 
able building materials in the context of residential con- 
struction. Wood and Fiber Science. (37)12: 3-17. 


Schimel, D.S.; House, J.I.; Hibbard, K.A.; Bousquet, P.; 
Ciais, P.; Peylin, P.; Braswell, B.H.; Apps, M.J.; Baker, 

D.; Bondeau, A.; Canadell, J.; Churkina, G.; Cramer, W.; 
Denning, A.S.; Field, C.B.; Friedlingstein, P.; Goodale, C.; 
Heimann, M.; Houghton, R.A.; Melillo, J.M.; Moore, B., 
Il; Murdiyarso, D.; Noble, I.; Pacala, S.W.; Prentice, I.C.; 
Raupach, M.R.; Rayner, P.J.; Scholes, R.J.; Steffen, W.L.; 
Wirth, C. 2001. Recent patterns and mechanisms of carbon 
exchange by terrestrial ecosystems. Nature. 414: 169-172. 


Skog, K. 2008. Sequestration of carbon in harvested wood 
products for the United States. Forest Products Journal. 
58(6): 56-72. 


UNECE / FAO. 2008. Forest products annual market review 
2007-2008. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Economic 
Commission for Europe / Food and Agriculture Organiza- 
tion. www.unece.org/trade/timber. 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Gla veeIMa 


Characteristics and Availability of Commercially 
Important Woods 


Michael C. Wiemann, Research Botanist 


Throughout history, the unique characteristics and abun- 
Contents dance of wood have made it a natural material for homes 
and other structures, furniture, tools, vehicles, and decora- 


tive objects. Today, for the same reasons, wood is prized for 
Hardwoods and Softwoods 2—2 a multitude of uses. 


Timber Resources and Uses 2—2 


Commercial Sources of Wood Products 2-2 All wood is composed of cellulose, lignin, hemicelluloses, 


Use Classes and Trends 2—2 and minor amounts (usually less than 10%) of extraneous 
Species Descriptions 2-3 materials contained in a cellular structure. Variations in the 
characteristics and proportions of these components and 

U.S. Hardwoods 2-3 differences in cellular structure make woods heavy or light, 

U.S. Softwoods 2-11 stiff or flexible, and hard or soft. The properties of a single 
Imported Woods 2-18 species are relatively constant within limits; therefore, selec- 

tion of wood by species alone may sometimes be adequate. 


Imported Hardwoods 2-19 However, to use wood to its best advantage and most effec- 


Imported Softwoods 2-38 tively in engineering applications, specific characteristics or 
Scientific Nanie ndex 2-41 physical properties must be considered. 
U.S. Wood Species—Hardwoods 2-41 Historically, some species filled many purposes, whereas 


. other less available or less desirable species served only 
Lips Wood Snecies = 2otiwoody 2s one or two needs. For example, because white oak is tough, 
Imported Woods—Hardwoods 2-43 strong, and durable, it was highly prized for shipbuilding, 
Imported Woods—Softwoods 2-44 bridges, cooperage, barn timbers, farm implements, railroad 

Literature Cited 2-45 crossties, fence posts, and flooring. Woods such as black 

walnut and cherry were used primarily for furniture and 

Additional References 2-45 cabinets. Hickory was manufactured into tough, hard, and 

resilient striking-tool handles, and black locust was prized 

for barn timbers. It was commonly accepted that wood from 
trees grown in certain locations under certain conditions was 
stronger, more durable, more easily worked with tools, or 
finer grained than wood from trees in other locations. Mod- 
ern research on wood has substantiated that location and 
growth conditions do significantly affect wood properties. 


This chapter presents brief descriptions of many species; 
current and, in many cases, historic uses are cited to illus- 
trate the utility of the wood. 


Gradual reductions in use of old-growth forests in the 
United States have reduced the supply of large clear logs for 
lumber and veneer. However, the importance of high-quality 
logs has diminished as new concepts of wood use have been 
introduced. Second-growth wood, the remaining old-growth 
forests, and imports continue to fill the needs for wood in 
the quality required. Wood is as valuable an engineering 
material as ever, and in many cases, technological advances 
have made it even more useful. 


Inherent factors that keep wood in the forefront of raw 
materials are many and varied, but a chief attribute is its 


2-1 


availability in many species, sizes, shapes, and conditions to 
suit almost every demand. Wood has a high ratio of strength 
to weight and a remarkable record for durability and perfor- 
mance as a structural material. Dry wood has good insulat- 
ing properties against heat, sound, and electricity. It tends 

to absorb and dissipate vibrations under some conditions 

of use, and yet it is an incomparable material for musical 
instruments. The grain patterns and colors of wood make 

it an esthetically pleasing material, and its appearance may 
be easily enhanced by stains, varnishes, lacquers, and other 
finishes. It is easily shaped with tools and fastened with ad- 
hesives, nails, screws, bolts, and dowels. Damaged wood is 
easily repaired, and wood structures are easily remodeled or 
altered. In addition, wood resists oxidation, acid, saltwater, 
and other corrosive agents, has high salvage value, has good 
shock resistance, can be treated with preservatives and fire 
retardants, and can be combined with almost any other ma- 
terial for both functional and aesthetic uses. 


Timber Resources and Uses 


In the United States, more than 100 wood species are avail- 
able to the prospective user; about 60% of these are of major 
commercial importance. Another 30 species are commonly 
imported in the form of logs, cants, lumber, and veneer for 
industrial uses, the building trade, and crafts. 


A continuing program of timber inventory is in effect in the 
United States through the cooperation of Federal and State 
agencies, and new information on wood resources is pub- 
lished in State and Federal reports. Two of the most valuable 
sourcebooks are An Analysis of the Timber Situation in the 
United States: 1952 to 2050 (Haynes 2003) and The 2005 
RPA Timber Assessment Update (Haynes and others 2007). 
Current information on wood consumption, production, im- 
ports, and supply and demand is published periodically by 
the Forest Products Laboratory (Howard 2007). 


Hardwoods and Softwoods 


Trees are divided into two broad classes, usually referred to 
as hardwoods and softwoods. These names can be confus- 
ing because some softwoods are actually harder than some 
hardwoods, and conversely some hardwoods are softer than 
some softwoods. For example, softwoods such as longleaf 
pine and Douglas-fir are typically harder than the hard- 
woods basswood and aspen. Botanically, hardwoods are 
angiosperms; their seeds are enclosed in the ovary of the 
flower. Anatomically, hardwoods are porous; that is, they 
contain vessel elements. A vessel element is a wood cell 
with open ends; when vessel elements are set one above an- 
other, they form a continuous tube (vessel), which serves as 
a conduit for transporting water or sap in the tree. Typically, 
hardwoods are plants with broad leaves that, with few ex- 
ceptions in the temperate region, lose their leaves in autumn 
or winter. Most imported tropical woods are hardwoods. 


2-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Botanically, softwoods are gymnosperms or conifers; their 
seeds are not enclosed in the ovary of the flower. Ana- 
tomically, softwoods are nonporous (they do not contain 
vessels). Softwoods are usually cone-bearing plants with 
needle- or scale-like evergreen leaves. Some softwoods, 
such as larches and baldcypress, lose their needles during 
autumn or winter. 


Major resources of softwood species are spread across the 
United States, except for the Great Plains, where only small 
areas are forested. The hardwood resource is concentrated in 
the eastern United States, with only a few commercial spe- 
cies found in Washington, Oregon, and California. Softwood 
and hardwood species of the continental United States are 
often loosely grouped in three general regions, as shown in 
Table 2-1. 


Commercial Sources of Wood Products 


Softwoods are available directly from sawmills, wholesale 
and retail yards, or lumber brokers. Softwood lumber and 
plywood are used in construction for forms, scaffolding, 
framing, sheathing, flooring, moulding, paneling, cabinets, 
poles and piles, and many other building components. 
Softwoods may also appear in the form of shingles, sashes, 
doors, and other millwork, in addition to some rough prod- 
ucts such as timber and round posts. 


Hardwoods are used in construction for flooring, architectur- 
al woodwork, interior woodwork, and paneling. These items 
are usually available from lumberyards and building supply 
dealers. Most hardwood lumber and dimension stock are 
remanufactured into furniture, flooring, pallets, containers, 
dunnage, and blocking. Hardwood lumber and dimension 
stock are available directly from manufacturers, through 
wholesalers and brokers, and from some retail yards. Both 
softwood and hardwood products are distributed throughout 
the United States. Local preferences and the availability of 
certain species may influence choice, but a wide selection 
of woods is generally available for building construction, 
industrial uses, remanufacturing, and home use. 


Use Classes and Trends 


Major wood-based industries include those that convert 
wood to thin slices (veneer), particles (chips, flakes), or fiber 
pulps and reassemble the elements to produce various types 
of engineered panels such as plywood, particleboard, orient- 
ed strandboard, laminated veneer lumber, paper, paperboard, 
and fiberboard products. Another newer wood industry is the 
production of laminated wood products. The lumber indus- 
try has also produced smaller amounts of railroad crossties, 
cooperage, shingles, and shakes. 


Chapter 2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


Table 2-1. Major resources of U.S. woods according to 


region 
Northern 

Western and Appalachian Southern 

Hardwoods 

Alder, red Ash Ash 

Ash, Oregon Aspen Basswood 

Aspen Basswood Beech 

Birch, paper Beech Butternut 

Cottonwood Birch Cottonwood 

Maple, bigleaf Buckeye Elm 

Oak, California black Butternut Hackberry 

Oak, Oregon white Cherry Hickory 

Tanoak Cottonwood Honeylocust 
Elm Locust, black 
Hackberry Magnolia 
Hickory Maple, soft 
Honeylocust Oak, red and white 
Locust, black Sassafras 
Maple, hard Sweetgum 
Maple, soft Sycamore 
Oak, red and white Tupelo 
Sycamore Walnut 
Walnut Willow 


Softwoods 
Douglas-fir 
Fir, western 
Hemlock, western 
and mountain 
Incense-cedar 
Larch, western 
Pine, lodgepole 
Pine, ponderosa 
Pine, sugar 
Pine, western white 
Port-Orford-cedar 
Redcedar, western 
Redwood 
Spruce, Engelmann 
Spruce, Sitka 
Yellow-cedar 


Yellow-poplar 


Cedar, northern white 
Fir, balsam 
Hemlock, eastern 
Pine, eastern white 
Pine, Jack 

Pine, red 

Redcedar, eastern 
Spruce, eastern 
Tamarack 


Yellow-poplar 


Baldcypress 

Cedar, Atlantic white 
Fir, Fraser 

Pine, southern 
Redcedar, eastern 


Species Descriptions 


In this chapter, each species or group of species is described 
in terms of its principal location, characteristics, and uses. 
More detailed information on the properties of these and 
other species is given in various tables throughout this 
handbook. Information on historical and traditional uses is 
provided for some species to illustrate their utility. A low- 
magnification micrograph of a representative cross-section 
of each species or species group accompanies each descrip- 
tion. The slides for these micrographs are from the Forest 
Products Laboratory collection. The micrographs are printed 
at magnifications of approximately 15x. Their color is a 
consequence of the stains used to accentuate anatomical fea- 
tures and is not indicative of the actual wood color. 


U.S. Hardwoods 
Alder, Red 


Red alder (Alnus rubra) 
grows along the Pacific 
coast between Alaska and 
California. It is the principal 
hardwood for commercial 
manufacture of wood 
products in Oregon and 
Washington and the most 
abundant commercial hardwood species in these two 
states. 


The wood of red alder varies from almost white to pale 
pinkish brown, and there is no visible boundary between 
heartwood and sapwood. Red alder is moderately light in 
weight and intermediate in most strength properties but low 
in shock resistance. It has relatively low shrinkage. 


The principal use of red alder is for furniture, but it is also 
used for sash and door panel stock and other millwork. 


Ash (Black Ash Group) 


The black ash group includes 
black ash (Fraxinus nigra) 
and pumpkin ash (F- profun- 
da). Black ash grows in the 
Northeast and Midwest, and 
pumpkin ash in the South. 


The heartwood of black ash 
is a darker brown than that of 
American white ash; the sapwood is light-colored or nearly 
white. The wood of the black ash group is lighter in weight 
(basic specific gravity of 0.45 to 0.48) than that of the white 
ash group (basic specific gravity greater than 0.50). 


Principal uses for the black ash group are decorative veneer, 
cabinets, millwork, furniture, cooperage, and crates. 


Ash (White Ash Group) 


Important species of the 
white ash group are Ameri- 
can white ash (Fraxinus 
americana), green ash 

(F. pennsylvanica), blue 

1 ash (F. quadrangulata), and 
Oregon ash (F: Jatifolia). 
The first three species grow 
in the eastern half of the United States. Oregon ash grows 
along the Pacific Coast. 


The heartwood of the white ash group is brown, and the 
sapwood is light-colored or nearly white. Second-growth 
trees are particularly sought after because of the inherent 
qualities of the wood from these trees: it is heavy, strong, 
hard, and stiff, and it has high resistance to shock. Oregon 
ash has somewhat lower strength properties than American 


white ash, but it is used for similar purposes on the West 
Coast. 


American white ash (F. americana) and green ash (F: penn- 
sylvanica) that grow in southern river bottoms, especially 
in areas frequently flooded for long periods, produce but- 
tresses that contain relatively lightweight and brash wood. 


American white ash is used principally for nonstriking tool 
handles, oars, baseball bats, and other sporting and athletic 
goods. For handles of the best grade, some handle specifi- 
cations call for not less than 2 nor more than 7 growth rings 
per centimeter (not less than 5 nor more than 17 growth 
rings per inch). The additional weight requirement of 

690 kg m3 (43 Ib ft-3) or more at 12% moisture content 
ensures high-quality material. Principal uses for the white 
ash group are decorative veneer, cabinets, furniture, floor- 
ing, millwork, and crates. 


Aspen 


; Aspen is a generally 
| recognized name that is 
i applied to bigtooth 
ne (Populus grandidentata) 
is "" | and quaking (P. tremuloides) 

ie % oe) aspen. Aspen lumber 

| is produced principally in 

~ the northeastern and Lake 
States, with some production 
in the Rocky Mountain States. 


ia t an as 


The heartwood of aspen is grayish white to light gray- 

ish brown. The sapwood is lighter colored and generally 
merges gradually into the heartwood without being clearly 
marked. Aspen wood is usually straight grained with a 
fine, uniform texture. It is easily worked. Well-dried aspen 
lumber does not impart odor or flavor to foodstuffs. The 
wood of aspen is lightweight and soft. It is low in strength, 
moderately stiff, and moderately low in resistance to shock 
and has moderately high shrinkage. 


Aspen is cut for lumber, pallets, boxes and crating, pulp- 
wood, particleboard, strand panels, excelsior, matches, ve- 
neer, and miscellaneous turned articles. Today, aspen 

is one of the preferred species for use in oriented 
strandboard, a panel product that dominates the sheathing 
market. 


— 


American basswood (Tilia 
americana) is the most 
important of the native 
basswood species; next in 
importance is white bass- 
wood (T. heterophylla), 
and no attempt is made 

to distinguish between 
these species in lumber form. In commercial usage, “white 
basswood” is used to specify the white wood or sapwood 


2-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


of either species. Basswood grows in the eastern half of 
North America from the Canadian provinces southward. 
Most basswood lumber comes from the Lake, Middle At- 
lantic, and Central States. 


The heartwood of basswood is pale yellowish brown with 
occasional darker streaks. Basswood has wide, creamy 
white or pale brown sapwood that merges gradually into 
heartwood. When dry, the wood is without odor or taste. 

It is soft and light in weight, has fine, even texture, and is 
straight grained and easy to work with tools. Shrinkage in 
width and thickness during drying is rated as high; however, 
basswood seldom warps in use. 


Basswood lumber is used mainly in venetian blinds, sashes 
and door frames, moulding, apiary supplies, wooden ware, 
and boxes. Some basswood is cut for veneer, cooperage, ex- 
celsior, and pulpwood, and it is a favorite of wood carvers. 


Beech, American 


Only one species of 
beech, American beech 
(Fagus grandifolia), is 
native to the United States. 
It grows in the eastern 
one-third of the United 
States and adjacent 
Canadian provinces. 
The greatest production 
of beech lumber is in the Central and Middle Atlantic 
States. 


In some beech trees, color varies from nearly white sap- 
wood to reddish-brown heartwood. Sometimes there is no 
clear line of demarcation between heartwood and sapwood. 
Sapwood may be roughly 7 to 13 cm (3 to 5 in.) wide. The 
wood has little figure and is of close, uniform texture. It has 
no characteristic taste or odor. The wood of beech is classed 
as heavy, hard, strong, high in resistance to shock, and high- 
ly suitable for steam bending. Beech shrinks substantially 
and therefore requires careful drying. It machines smoothly, 
is an excellent wood for turning, wears well, and is rather 
easily treated with preservatives. 


Most beech is used for flooring, furniture, brush blocks, 
handles, veneer, woodenware, containers, and cooperage. 
When treated with preservative, beech is suitable for rail- 
way ties. 


Birch 


The three most important 
species are yellow birch 
(Betula alleghaniensis), 
sweet birch (B. /enta), and 
paper birch (B. papyrifera). 
These three species are the 
source of most birch lumber 
and veneer. Other birch 
species of some commercial 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


importance are river birch (B. nigra), and gray birch 

(B. populifolia). Paper birch is transcontinental, whereas 
yellow and sweet birch grow principally in the North- 
east and the Lake States; yellow and sweet birch also 
grow along the Appalachian Mountains to northern 
Georgia. 


Yellow birch has white sapwood and light reddish-brown 
heartwood. Sweet birch has light-colored sapwood and 
dark brown heartwood tinged with red. For both yellow and 
sweet birch, the wood is heavy, hard, and strong, and has 
good shock-resisting ability. The wood is fine and uniform 
in texture. Paper birch is lower in weight, softer, and lower 
in strength than yellow and sweet birch. Birch shrinks con- 
siderably during drying. 


Yellow and sweet birch lumber is used primarily for the 
manufacture of furniture, boxes, baskets, crates, wooden 
ware, cooperage, interior woodwork, and doors; veneer 
plywood is used for doors, furniture, paneling, cabinets, 
aircraft, and other specialty uses. Paper birch is used for 
toothpicks, tongue depressors, ice cream sticks, and turned 
products, including spools, bobbins, small handles, and 
toys. 


Buckeye 


Buckeye consists of two spe- 
cies, yellow buckeye (Aes- 
| culus octandra) and Ohio 

*) buckeye (A. glabra). These 
species range from the Ap- 

t ii _ | palachians of Pennsylvania, 
AD | he aty + sit Virginia, and North Carolina 
— ~ westward to Kansas, Okla- 
homa, and Texas. Buckeye is 

not customarily separated from other species when manu- 
factured into lumber and can be used for the same purposes 
as aspen (Populus), basswood (Tilia), and sapwood of 
yellow-poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera). 


i 


The white sapwood of buckeye merges gradually into the 
creamy or yellowish white heartwood. The wood is uniform 
in texture, generally straight grained, light in weight, soft, 
and low in shock resistance. It is rated low on machinability 
such as shaping, mortising, boring, and turning. 


Buckeye is suitable for pulping for paper; in lumber form, 
it has been used principally for furniture, boxes and crates, 
food containers, wooden ware, novelties, and planing mill 
products. 


Also called white walnut, 
butternut (Juglans cinerea) 
grows from southern New 
Brunswick and Maine west 
to Minnesota. Its southern 
range extends into northeast- 
ern Arkansas and eastward 
to western North Carolina. 


The narrow sapwood is nearly white and the heartwood is 
light brown, frequently modified by pinkish tones or darker 
brown streaks. The wood is moderately light in weight, 
rather coarse textured, moderately weak in bending and 
endwise compression, relatively low in stiffness, moderate- 
ly soft, and moderately high in shock resistance. Butternut 
machines easily and finishes well. In many ways, butternut 
resembles black walnut, especially when stained, but it does 
not have the same strength or hardness. 


Principal uses are for lumber and veneer, which are further 
manufactured into furniture, cabinets, paneling, interior 
woodwork, and miscellaneous rough items. 


Cherry, Black 


Black cherry (Prunus sero- 
tina) is sometimes known 
as cherry, wild black cherry, 
44) and wild cherry. It is the 
be) hht4| only native species of the 

“| genus Prunus that produces 
commercial lumber. Black 
cherry is found from south- 
eastern Canada throughout the eastern half of the United 
States. Production is centered chiefly in the Middle Atlantic 
States. 


The heartwood of black cherry varies from light to dark 
reddish brown and has a distinctive luster. The nearly white 
sapwood is narrow in old-growth trees and wider in second- 
growth trees. The wood has a fairly uniform texture and 
very good machining properties. It is moderately heavy, 
strong, stiff, and moderately hard, with high shock resis- 
tance. Although it has moderately high shrinkage, it is very 
dimensionally stable after drying. 


Black cherry is used principally for furniture, fine veneer 
panels, and architectural woodwork. Other uses include 
burial caskets, wooden ware, novelties, patterns, and 
paneling. 


Chestnut, American 


American chestnut (Casta- 
nea dentata) is also known 
as sweet chestnut. Before 
this species was attacked by 
a blight in the 1920s, it grew 
in commercial quantities 
from New England to north- 
ern Georgia. Practically all 
standing chestnut has been killed by blight, and most sup- 
plies of the lumber come from salvaged timbers. Because 
of the species’ natural resistance to decay, standing dead 
trees in the Appalachian Mountains continued to provide 
substantial quantities of lumber for several decades after the 
blight, but this source is now exhausted. 


The heartwood of chestnut is grayish brown or brown and 
darkens with age. The sapwood is very narrow and almost 


white. The wood is coarse in texture; growth rings are made 
conspicuous by several rows of large, distinct pores at the 
beginning of each year’s growth. Chestnut wood is moder- 
ately light in weight, moderately hard, moderately low in 
strength, moderately low in resistance to shock, and low in 
stiffness. It dries well and is easy to work with tools. 


Chestnut was once used for flooring, poles, railroad cross- 
ties, furniture, caskets, boxes, shingles, crates, and core- 
stock for veneer panels. At present, it appears most fre- 
quently as wormy chestnut for paneling, interior woodwork, 
and picture frames. 


Cottonwood 


Cottonwood includes sev- 
eral species of the genus 
Populus. Most important are 
eastern cottonwood (P. del- 
toides and its varieties), also 
known as Carolina poplar 
and whitewood; swamp cot- 
tonwood (P. heterophylla), 
also known as river cottonwood and swamp poplar; black 
cottonwood (P. trichocarpa); and balsam poplar (P. balsam- 
ifera). Eastern and swamp cottonwood grow throughout 

the eastern half of the United States. Greatest production 

of lumber is in the Southern and Central States. Black cot- 
tonwood grows on the West Coast and in western Montana, 
northern Idaho, and western Nevada. Balsam poplar grows 
from Alaska across Canada and in the northern Great Lakes 
States. 


The heartwood of cottonwood is grayish white to light 
brown. The sapwood is whitish and merges gradually with 
the heartwood. The wood is comparatively uniform in tex- 
ture and generally straight grained. It is odorless when well 
dried. Eastern cottonwood is moderately low in bending 
and compressive strength, moderately stiff, moderately soft, 
and moderately low in ability to resist shock. Most strength 
properties of black cottonwood are slightly lower than those 
of eastern cottonwood. Both eastern and black cottonwood 
have moderately high shrinkage. Some cottonwood is dif- 
ficult to work with tools because of its fuzzy surface, which 
is mainly the result of tension wood. 


Cottonwood is used principally for lumber, veneer, pulp- 
wood, excelsior, and fuel. Lumber and veneer are used pri- 
marily for boxes, crates, baskets, and pallets. 


Six species of elm grow 

in the eastern United 
States: American (Ulmus 
americana), slippery 

(U. rubra), rock (U. thoma- 
sii), winged (U. alata), 
cedar (U. crassifolia), and 


| 
ey 
“| 
| 
a 
al 


2-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


September (U. serotina) elm. American elm is also known 
as white elm, slippery elm as red elm, rock elm as cork 
elm, and winged elm as wahoo. American elm is threatened 
by two diseases, Dutch Elm disease and phloem necrosis, 
which have killed hundreds of thousands of trees. 


Sapwood of elm is nearly white and heartwood light brown, 
often tinged with red. Elm may be divided into two general 
classes, soft and hard, based on the weight and strength of 
the wood. Soft elm includes American and slippery elm. 

It is moderately heavy, has high shock resistance, and is 
moderately hard and stiff. Hard elm includes rock, winged, 
cedar, and September elm. These species are somewhat 
heavier than soft elm. Elm has excellent bending qualities. 


Historically, elm lumber was used for boxes, baskets, 
crates, slack cooperage, furniture, agricultural supplies and 
implements, caskets and burial boxes, and wood compo- 
nents in vehicles. Today, elm lumber and veneer are used 
mostly for furniture and decorative panels. Hard elm is pre- 
ferred for uses that require strength. 


Hackberry 


Hackberry (Celtis occi- 
dentalis) and sugarberry 
(C. laevigata) supply the 
lumber known in the trade 
as hackberry. Hackberry 
grows east of the Great 
Plains from Alabama, Geor- 
gia, Arkansas, and Oklaho- 
ma northward, except along the Canadian boundary. Sugar- 
berry overlaps the southern part of the hackberry range and 
grows throughout the Southern and South Atlantic States. 


Sapwood of both species varies from pale yellow to green- 
ish or grayish yellow. The heartwood is commonly darker. 
The wood resembles elm in structure. Hackberry lumber is 
moderately heavy. It is moderately strong in bending, mod- 
erately weak in compression parallel to grain, moderately 
hard to very hard, and high in shock resistance, but low in 
stiffness. Hackberry has high shrinkage but keeps its shape 
well during drying. 


Most hackberry is cut into lumber; small amounts are used 
for furniture parts, dimension stock, and veneer. 


Hickory (Pecan Hickory Group) 


Species of the pecan hick- 
ory group include bitternut 
hickory (Carya cordifor- 
mis), pecan hickory 

(C. illinoensis), water 
hickory (C. aquatica), 

and nutmeg hickory 

(C. myristiciformis). Bitter- 
nut hickory grows through- 
out the eastern half of the United States; pecan hickory, 
from central Texas and Louisiana to Missouri and Indiana; 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


water hickory, from Texas to South Carolina; and nutmeg 
hickory, in Texas and Louisiana. 


The sapwood of this group is white or nearly white and rel- 
atively wide. The heartwood is somewhat darker. The wood 
is heavy and sometimes has very high shrinkage. 


Heavy pecan hickory is used for tool and implement 
handles and flooring. The lower grades are used for pallets. 
Many higher grade logs are sliced to provide veneer for fur- 
niture and decorative paneling. 


Hickory (True Hickory Group) 


True hickories are found 
throughout the eastern half 
of the United States. The 
species most important 
commercially are shagbark 
(Carya ovata), pignut 

(C. glabra), shellbark 

(C. laciniosa), and mock- 
ernut (C. tomentosa). The greatest commercial production 
of the true hickories for all uses is in the Middle Atlantic 
and Central States, with the Southern and South Atlantic 
States rapidly expanding to handle nearly half of all hickory 
lumber. 


The sapwood of the true hickory group is white and usu- 
ally quite wide, except in old, slow-growing trees. The 
heartwood is reddish. The wood is exceptionally tough, 
heavy, hard, and strong, and shrinks considerably in drying. 
For some purposes, both rings per centimeter (or inch) and 
weight are limiting factors where strength is important. 


The major use for high quality hickory is for tool handles 
that require high shock resistance. It is also used for lad- 
der rungs, athletic goods, agricultural implements, dowels, 
gymnasium apparatuses, poles, and furniture. Lower grade 
hickory is not suitable for the special uses of high quality 
hickory because of knottiness or other growth features and 
low density. However, the lower grade is useful for pallets 
and similar items. Hickory sawdust, chips, and some solid 
wood are used to flavor meat by smoking. 


Honeylocust 


The wood of honeylocust 
(Gleditsia triacanthos) has 
many desirable qualities, 
such as attractive figure 
and color, hardness, and 
strength, but it is little used 
because of its scarcity. This 
species is found most com- 
monly in the eastern United States, except for New England 
and the South Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plains. 


Sapwood is generally wide and yellowish, in contrast to the 
light red to reddish-brown heartwood. The wood is very 


heavy, very hard, strong in bending, stiff, resistant to shock, 
and durable when in contact with the ground. 


When available, honeylocust is primarily used locally for 
fence posts and general construction. It is occasionally used 
with other species in lumber for pallets and crating. 


Locust, Black 
j 9 ar +O. 
\ 
eis fee @:; je sae 


‘ie, ‘ 
be bleed, ‘ wee a 
yy “Shes Hee 


= 
 ® 


= Black locust (Robinia 
pseudoacacia) is some- 
times called yellow locust. 
This species grows from 
Pennsylvania along the 
Appalachian Mountains 
| to northern Georgia and 
“| Alabama. It is also native 

to western Arkansas and 
southern Missouri. The greatest production of black locust 
timber is in Tennessee, Kentucky, West Virginia, and 
Virginia. 


: mee 
ox 20 


. i» 
Me) Deiat 


Locust has narrow, creamy white sapwood. The heartwood, 
when freshly cut, varies from greenish yellow to dark 
brown. Black locust is very heavy, very hard, very resistant 
to shock, and very strong and stiff. It has moderately low 
shrinkage. The heartwood has high decay resistance. 


Black locust is used for round, hewn, or split mine timbers 
as well as fence posts, poles, railroad crossties, stakes, and 
fuel. Other uses are for rough construction and crating. 
Historically, black locust was important for the manufacture 
of insulator pins and wooden pegs used in the construction 
of ships, for which the wood was well adapted because of 
its strength, decay resistance, and moderate shrinkage and 
swelling. 


Magnolia 


Commercial magnolia 
consists of three species: 
southern magnolia (Mag- 
nolia grandiflora), sweet- 
bay (M. virginiana), 

and cucumbertree 

(M. acuminata). Other 
names for southern 
magnolia are evergreen 
magnolia, big laurel, and bull bay. Sweetbay is sometimes 
called swamp magnolia. The lumber produced by all three 
species is simply called magnolia. The natural range of 
sweetbay extends along the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts from 
Long Island to Texas, and that of southern magnolia ex- 
tends from North Carolina to Texas. Cucumbertree grows 
from the Appalachians to the Ozarks northward to Ohio. 
Louisiana leads in the production of magnolia lumber. 


Sapwood of southern magnolia is yellowish white, and 
heartwood is light to dark brown with a tinge of yellow or 
green. The wood, which has close, uniform texture and is 


2-7 


generally straight grained, closely resembles yellow-poplar 
(Liriodendron tulipifera). It is moderately heavy, moder- 
ately low in shrinkage, moderately low in bending and com- 
pressive strength, moderately hard and stiff, and moderately 
high in shock resistance. Sweetbay is much like southern 
magnolia. The wood of cucumbertree is similar to that of 
yellow-poplar (Z. tulipifera). Cucumbertree that grows in 
the yellow-poplar range is not separated from that species 
on the market. 


Magnolia lumber is used principally in the manufacture of 
furniture, boxes, pallets, venetian blinds, sashes, doors, ve- 
neer, and millwork. 


Hard maple includes 
sugar maple (Acer sac- 
charum) and black maple 
(A. nigrum). Sugar maple 
is also known as rock 
maple, and black maple 
as black sugar maple. 
Maple lumber is manu- 
factured principally in 
the Middle Atlantic and Great Lake States, which together 
account for about two-thirds of production. 


The heartwood is usually light reddish brown but some- 
times considerably darker. The sapwood is commonly white 
with a slight reddish-brown tinge. It is usually 8 to 12 cm 

(3 to 5 in.) wide. Hard maple has a fine, uniform texture. 

It is heavy, strong, stiff, hard, and resistant to shock and 

has high shrinkage. The grain of sugar maple is generally 
straight, but birdseye, curly, or fiddleback grain is often se- 
lected for furniture or novelty items. 


Hard maple is used principally for lumber and veneer. A 
large proportion is manufactured into flooring, furniture, 
cabinets, cutting boards and blocks, pianos, billiard cues, 
handles, novelties, bowling alleys, dance and gymnasium 
floors, spools, and bobbins. 


Maple (Soft Maple Group) 


Soft maple includes silver 
maple (Acer sacchari- 
num), red maple 

(A. rubrum), boxelder 

(A. negundo), and bigleaf 
maple (A. macrophyl- 
lum). Silver maple is also 
known as white, river, 
water, and swamp maple; 
red maple as soft, water, scarlet, white, and swamp maple; 
boxelder as ash-leaved, three-leaved, and cut-leaved maple; 
and bigleaf maple as Oregon maple. Soft maple is found in 
the eastern United States except for bigleaf maple, which 
comes from the Pacific Coast. 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Heartwood and sapwood are similar in appearance to hard 
maple. Heartwood of soft maple is somewhat lighter in 
color than the sapwood and somewhat wider. The wood of 
soft maple, primarily silver and red maple, resembles that 
of hard maple but is not as heavy, hard, and strong. 


Soft maple is used for railroad crossties, boxes, pallets, 
crates, furniture, veneer, wooden ware, and novelties. 


Oak, Live 
See Oak (Tropical) 


Oak (Red Oak Group) 


Most red oak comes 

from the Eastern States. 
The principal species are 
northern red (Quercus ru- 
bra), scarlet (Q. coccinea), 
Shumard (Q. shumardii), 
pin (Q. palustris), Nuttall 
(QO. nuttallii), black 

(Q. velutina), southern 
red (Q. falcata), cherrybark (Q. falcata var. pagodaefolia), 
water (Q. nigra), laurel (Q. laurifolia), and willow (Q. phel- 
los) oak. 


The sapwood is nearly white and roughly 2 to 5 cm (1 to 

2 in.) wide. The heartwood is brown with a tinge of red. 
Sawn lumber of the red oak group cannot be separated by 
species on the basis of wood characteristics alone. Red oak 
lumber can be separated from white oak by the size and 
arrangement of pores in latewood and because it generally 
lacks tyloses in the pores. The open pores of red oak make 
this species group unsuitable for tight cooperage, unless the 
barrels are lined with sealer or plastic. Quartersawn lumber 
of the oaks is distinguished by its broad and conspicuous 
rays. Wood of the red oaks is heavy. Rapidly grown second- 
growth wood is generally harder and tougher than finer 
textured old-growth wood. The red oaks have fairly high 
shrinkage upon drying. 


The red oaks are primarily cut into lumber, railroad cross- 
ties, mine timbers, fence posts, veneer, pulpwood, and 
fuelwood. Ties, mine timbers, and fence posts require pre- 
servative treatment for satisfactory service. Red oak lumber 
is remanufactured into flooring, furniture, general millwork, 
boxes, pallets and crates, agricultural implements, caskets, 
wooden ware, and handles. It is also used in railroad cars 
and boats. 


Oak (White Oak Group) 
, White oak lumber comes 
+ eye chiefly from the South, 

hy j Hee + | South Atlantic, and Cen- 
‘ ; tral States, including the 
: f southern Appalachian 
area. Principal species 
are white (Quercus alba), 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


chestnut (Q. prinus), post (Q. stellata), overcup (Q. lyrata), 
swamp chestnut (Q. michauxii), bur (Q. macrocarpa), 
chinkapin (Q. muehlenbergii), and swamp white 

(OQ. bicolor). The most important western oak species, Or- 
egon white oak (Q. garryana), is a member of this group. 


The sapwood of the white oaks is nearly white and roughly 
2 to 5 cm (1 to 2 in.) wide. The heartwood is generally 
grayish brown. Heartwood pores are usually plugged with 
tyloses, which tend to make the wood impenetrable to liq- 
uids. Consequently, most white oaks are suitable for tight 
cooperage, although many heartwood pores of chestnut oak 
lack tyloses. The wood of white oak is somewhat heavier 
than the wood of red oak. Its heartwood has good decay 
resistance. 


White oaks are usually cut into lumber, railroad crossties, 
cooperage, mine timbers, fence posts, veneer, fuelwood, 
and many other products. High-quality white oak is es- 
pecially sought for tight cooperage. An important use of 
white oak is for planking and bent parts of ships and boats; 
heartwood is often specified because of its decay resistance. 
White oak is also used for furniture, flooring, pallets, agri- 
cultural implements, railroad cars, truck floors, furniture, 
doors, and millwork. 


Sassafras 


Sassafras (Sassafras albi- 
dum) ranges from south- 
eastern Iowa and eastern 
Texas eastward. Sassafras 
is easily confused with 
black ash, which it re- 
sembles in color, grain, 
and texture. Sapwood is 
light yellow, and heartwood varies from dull grayish brown 
to dark brown, sometimes with a reddish tinge. Freshly cut 
surfaces have a characteristic odor. The wood is moderately 
heavy, moderately hard, moderately weak in bending and 
endwise compression, quite high in shock resistance, and 
resistant to decay. 


Sassafras was highly prized by the native Americans for 
dugout canoes, and some sassafras lumber is still used for 
small boats. Locally, sassafras is used for fence posts and 
rails and for general millwork. 


Sweetgum (Liquidambar 
styraciflua) grows from 
southwestern Connecticut 
westward into Missouri 
and southward to the Gulf 
Coast. Almost all lumber 
is produced in the South- 
ern and South Atlantic 
States. 


The lumber from sweetgum is usually separated into sap 
gum (the light-colored sapwood) or redgum (the reddish- 


i. 
ee. 
Wee 

se 

ta) 

' 


be F, 


brown heartwood). Sweetgum often has a form of cross 
grain called interlocked grain, and it must be dried slowly. 
When quartersawn, interlocked grain produces a ribbon- 
type stripe that is desirable for interior woodwork and 
furniture. The wood is moderately heavy and hard. It is 
moderately strong, moderately stiff, and moderately high 
in shock resistance. 


Sweetgum is used principally for lumber, veneer, plywood, 
slack cooperage, railroad crossties, fuel, pulpwood, boxes 
and crates, furniture, interior moulding, and millwork. 


Sycamore, American 


American sycamore 
(Platanus occidentalis) is 
sometimes called button- 
wood or buttonball-tree. 
Sycamore grows from 
Maine to Nebraska, 
southward to Texas, and 
eastward to Florida. 


ot esi 
teat 


%; 
nd *. 
ster 
= 


> * bl 


The heartwood of sycamore is reddish brown; the sapwood 
is light in color and from 4 to 8 cm (2 to 3 in.) wide. The 
wood has a fine texture and interlocked grain. It has high 
shrinkage in drying. It is moderately heavy, moderately 
hard, moderately stiff, moderately strong, and it has good 
shock resistance. 


Sycamore is used principally for lumber, veneer, railroad 
crossties, slack cooperage, fence posts, and fuel. The lum- 
ber is used for furniture, boxes (particularly small food 
containers), pallets, flooring, handles, and butcher blocks. 
Veneer is used for fruit and vegetable baskets and some 
decorative panels and door skins. 


Tanoak 


; Tanoak (Lithocarpus 
densiflorus) is also 
known as tanbark-oak 
because high-grade tan- 
nin was once obtained 
in commercial quanti- 
ties from its bark. This 
species is found from 
southwestern Oregon to 
southern California, mostly near the coast but also in the 
Sierra Nevadas. 


Sapwood of tanoak is light reddish brown when first cut and 
turns darker with age to become almost indistinguishable 
from heartwood, which also ages to dark reddish brown. 
The wood is heavy and hard. Except for compression per- 
pendicular to grain, the wood has roughly the same strength 
properties as those of eastern white oak. Tanoak has higher 
shrinkage during drying than does white oak, and it has a 
tendency to collapse during drying. Tanoak is quite suscep- 
tible to decay, but the sapwood takes preservatives easily. 


Tanoak has straight grain, machines and glues well, and 
takes stains readily. 


Because of its hardness and abrasion resistance, tanoak is 
excellent for flooring in homes or commercial buildings. 

It is also suitable for industrial applications such as truck 
flooring. Tanoak treated with preservative has been used for 
railroad crossties. The wood has been manufactured into 
baseball bats with good results, and it is also suitable for 
veneer, both decorative and industrial, and for high quality 
furniture. 


The tupelo group in- 
cludes water (Nyssa 
aquatica), black (N. syl- 
vatica), swamp (N. syl- 
, vatica var. biflora), and 
' Ogeechee (N. ogeche) 
Rae ee eS tupelo. Water tupelo is 
| ik re also known as tupelo 
gum, swamp tupelo, and 
sourgum; black tupelo, as blackgum and sourgum; swamp 
tupelo, as swamp blackgum, blackgum, and sourgum; 
and Ogeechee tupelo, as sour tupelo, gopher plum, and 
Ogeechee plum. All except black tupelo grow principally 
in the southeastern United States. Black tupelo grows in the 
eastern United States from Maine to Texas and Missouri. 
About two-thirds of the production of tupelo lumber is from 
Southern States. 


Wood of the different tupelo species is quite similar in ap- 
pearance and properties. The heartwood is light brownish 
gray and merges gradually into the lighter-colored sapwood, 
which is generally many centimeters wide. The wood has 
fine, uniform texture and interlocked grain. Tupelo wood is 
moderately heavy, moderately strong, moderately hard and 
stiff, and moderately high in shock resistance. Buttresses of 
trees growing in swamps or flooded areas contain wood that 
is much lighter in weight than that from upper portions of 
the same trees. Because of interlocked grain, tupelo lumber 
requires care in drying. 


Tupelo is cut principally for lumber, veneer, pulpwood, and 
some railroad crossties and slack cooperage. Lumber goes 
into boxes, pallets, crates, baskets, and furniture. 


Walnut, Black 


Black walnut (Juglans 
nigra) ranges from Ver- 
mont to the Great Plains 
and southward into Loui- 
siana and Texas. About 
three-quarters of walnut 
wood is grown in the 
Central States. 


2-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


The heartwood of black walnut varies from light to 

dark brown; the sapwood is nearly white and up to 8 cm 

(3 in.) wide in open-grown trees. Black walnut is normally 
straight grained, easily worked with tools, and stable in use. 
It is heavy, hard, strong, and stiff, and has good resistance 
to shock. Black walnut is well suited for natural finishes. 


Because of its good properties and interesting grain pattern, 
black walnut is much valued for furniture, architectural 
woodwork, and decorative panels. Other important uses are 
gunstocks, cabinets, and interior woodwork. 


Willow, Black 
Weatare ne Black willow (Salix nig- 
hie ye (Ty ra) is the most 


important of the many 
willows that grow in 

the United States. It is 
the only willow marketed 
under its own name. 
Most black willow 
comes from the Missis- 
sippi Valley, from Louisiana to southern Missouri and 
Illinois. 


The heartwood of black willow is grayish brown or light 
reddish brown and frequently contains darker streaks. The 
sapwood is whitish to creamy yellow. The wood is uniform 
in texture, with somewhat interlocked grain, and is light in 
weight. It has exceedingly low strength as a beam or post, is 
moderately soft, and is moderately high in shock resistance. 
It has moderately high shrinkage. 


Black willow is principally cut into lumber, which is then 
remanufactured into boxes, pallets, crates, caskets, and fur- 
niture. Small amounts have been used for slack cooperage, 
veneer, excelsior, charcoal, pulpwood, artificial limbs, and 
fence posts. 


Yellow-Poplar 


Yellow-poplar (Liri- 
odendron tulipifera) is 
also known as poplar, 
tulip-poplar, and tulip- 
wood. Sapwood from 
yellow-poplar is some- 
times called white poplar 
or whitewood. Yellow- 
poplar grows from Con- 
necticut and New York southward to Florida and westward 
to Missouri. The greatest commercial production of yellow- 
poplar lumber is in the South and Southeast. 


Yellow-poplar sapwood is white and frequently several cen- 
timeters wide. The heartwood is yellowish brown, some- 
times streaked with purple, green, black, blue, or red. These 
colorations do not affect the physical properties of the 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


wood. The wood is generally straight grained and compara- 
tively uniform in texture. Slow-grown wood is moderately 
light in weight and moderately low in bending strength, 
moderately soft, and moderately low in shock resistance. 
The wood has moderately high shrinkage when dried from 
a green condition, but it is not difficult to dry and is stable 
after drying. 


The lumber is used primarily for furniture, interior mould- 
ing, siding, cabinets, musical instruments, and engineered 
wood composites. Boxes, pallets, and crates are made from 
lower-grade stock. Yellow-poplar is also made into ply- 
wood for paneling, furniture, piano cases, and various other 
special products. 


U.S. Softwoods 


Baldcypress 


Baldcypress or cypress 
(Taxodium distichum) is 
also known as southern- 
cypress, red-cypress, 
yellow-cypress, and 
white-cypress. Commer- 
cially, the terms tidewater 
red-cypress, gulf- 
cypress, red-cypress 
(coast type), and yellow-cypress (inland type) are fre- 
quently used. About half of the cypress lumber comes from 
the Southern States and about a fourth from the South At- 
lantic States. Old-growth baldcypress is difficult to find, but 
second-growth wood is available. 


Sapwood of baldcypress is narrow and nearly white. The 
color of heartwood varies widely, ranging from light yel- 
lowish brown to dark brownish red, brown, or chocolate. 
The wood is moderately heavy, moderately strong, and 
moderately hard. The heartwood of old-growth baldcy- 
press is one of the most decay resistant of U.S. species, but 
second-growth wood is only moderately resistant to decay. 
Shrinkage is moderately low but somewhat higher than 
that of the cedars and lower than that of Southern Pine. The 
wood of certain baldcypress trees frequently contains pock- 
ets or localized areas that have been attacked by a fungus. 
Such wood is known as pecky cypress. The decay caused 
by this fungus is stopped when the wood is cut into lumber 
and dried. Pecky cypress is therefore durable and useful 
where water tightness is unnecessary, appearance is not 
important, or a novel effect is desired. 


When old-growth wood was available, baldcypress was 
used principally for building construction, especially where 
resistance to decay was required. It was also used for 
caskets, sashes, doors, blinds, tanks, vats, ship and boat 
building, and cooling towers. Second-growth wood is used 
for siding and millwork, including interior woodwork and 


paneling. Pecky cypress is used for paneling in restaurants, 
stores, and other buildings. 

Douglas-Fir 

Douglas-fir (Pseu- 
dotsuga menziesii) is 
also known locally as 
red-fir, Douglas-spruce, 
and yellow-fir. Its range 
extends from the Rocky 
Mountains to the Pacific 
Coast and from Mexico 
to central British 
Columbia. 


Sapwood of Douglas-fir is narrow in old-growth trees but 
may be as much as 7 cm (3 in.) wide in second-growth 
trees of commercial size. Young trees of moderate to rapid 
growth have reddish heartwood and are called red-fir. Very 
natrow-ringed heartwood of old-growth trees may be yel- 
lowish brown and is known on the market as yellow-fir. The 
wood of Douglas-fir varies widely in weight and strength. 


Douglas-fir is used mostly for building and construction 
purposes in the form of lumber, marine fendering, piles, 
plywood, and engineered wood composites. Considerable 
quantities are used for railroad crossties, cooperage stock, 
mine timbers, poles, and fencing. Douglas-fir lumber is 
used in the manufacture of sashes, doors, laminated beams, 
general millwork, railroad-car construction, boxes, pallets, 
and crates. Small amounts are used for flooring, furniture, 
ship and boat construction, and tanks. 


Fir, True (Eastern Species) 


Balsam fir (Abies bal- 
samea) grows principally 
in New England, New 
York, Pennsylvania, and 
the Great Lake States. 

Hi ie ern Fraser fir (A. fraseri) 

| grows in the Appalachian 
Mountains of Virginia, 
North Carolina, and 
Tennessee. 


The wood of the eastern true firs is creamy white to pale 
brown. The heartwood and sapwood are generally indis- 
tinguishable. The similarity of wood structure in the true 
firs makes it impossible to distinguish the species by ex- 
amination of the wood alone. Balsam and Fraser firs are 
lightweight, have low bending and compressive strength, 
are moderately low in stiffness, are soft, and have low resis- 
tance to shock. 


The eastern firs are used mainly for pulpwood, although 
some lumber is produced for structural products, especially 
in New England and the Great Lake States. 


Fir, True (Western Species) 


Six commercial species 
make up the western true 
firs: subalpine fir (Abies 
lasiocarpa), California 
red fir (A. magnifica), 
grand fir (A. grandis), 
noble fir (A. procera), 
Pacific silver fir (A. ama- 
bilis), and white fir 

(A. concolor). The western true firs are cut for lumber pri- 
marily in Washington, Oregon, California, western Mon- 
tana, and northern Idaho, and they are marketed as white 
fir throughout the United States. 


Th HD Ag ie 7 


The wood of the western true firs is similar to that of the 
eastern true firs, and it is not possible to distinguish among 
the true fir species by examination of the wood alone. 
Western true firs are light in weight and, with the exception 
of subalpine fir, have somewhat higher strength properties 
than does balsam fir. Shrinkage of the wood is low to mod- 
erately high. 


Lumber of the western true firs is primarily used for build- 
ing construction, boxes and crates, planing-mill products, 
sashes, doors, and general millwork. Some western true fir 
lumber is manufactured into boxes and crates. High-grade 
lumber from noble fir is used mainly for interior woodwork, 
moulding, siding, and sash and door stock. Some of the 
highest quality material has been used for aircraft construc- 
tion. Other special uses of noble fir are venetian blinds and 
ladder rails. 


Hemlock, Eastern 


Eastern hemlock (Zsuga 
canadensis) grows from 
New England to northern 
Alabama and Georgia, 
and in the Great Lake 
States. Other names are 
Canadian hemlock and 
hemlock-spruce. The pro- 
duction of hemlock lum- 
ber is divided fairly evenly among the New England States, 
Middle Atlantic States, and Great Lake States. 


The heartwood of eastern hemlock is pale brown with a red- 
dish hue. The sapwood is not distinctly separated from the 
heartwood but may be lighter in color. The wood is coarse 
and uneven in texture, and old trees tend to have consider- 
able shake. The wood is moderately lightweight, moder- 
ately hard, moderately low in strength, moderately stiff, 

and moderately low in shock resistance. 


Eastern hemlock is used principally for lumber and 
pulpwood. The lumber is used primarily in building 


2-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 
construction and in the manufacture of boxes, pallets, and 


crates. 


Hemlock, Western and Mountain 


ner rpee 


Western hemlock (Tsuga 
heterophylla) is also 
known as West Coast 
hemlock, Pacific hem- 
lock, British Columbia 
hemlock, hemlock— 
spruce, and western 
hemlock—fir. It grows 
along the Pacific coast 
of Oregon and Washington and in the northern Rocky 
Mountains north to Canada and Alaska. A relative of west- 
ern hemlock, mountain hemlock (7. mertensiana) grows in 
mountainous country from central California to Alaska. It is 
treated as a separate species in assigning lumber properties. 


The heartwood and sapwood of western hemlock are al- 
most white with a purplish tinge. The sapwood, which is 
sometimes lighter in color than the heartwood, is generally 
not more than 2.5 cm (1 in.) wide. The wood often contains 
small, sound, black knots that are usually tight and dimen- 
sionally stable. Dark streaks are often found in the lumber; 
these are caused by hemlock bark maggots and generally 
do not reduce strength. Western hemlock is moderately 
light in weight and moderate in strength. It is also moder- 
ate in hardness, stiffness, and shock resistance. Shrinkage 
of western hemlock is moderately high, about the same as 
that of Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii). Green hem- 
lock lumber contains considerably more water than does 
Douglas-fir and requires longer kiln-drying time. Mountain 
hemlock has approximately the same density as that of 
western hemlock but is somewhat lower in bending strength 
and stiffness. 


Western hemlock and mountain hemlock are used prin- 
cipally for pulpwood, lumber, and plywood. The lumber 
is used primarily for building material, as well as in the 
manufacture of boxes, pallets, crates, flooring, furniture, 
and ladders. 


Incense-Cedar 


Incense-cedar (Caloce- 
- || drus decurrens) grows in 
California, southwestern 
/| Oregon, and extreme 

| western Nevada. Most 

|| incense-cedar lumber 
comes from the northern 
__| half of California. 


Sapwood of incense-cedar is white or cream colored, and 
heartwood is light brown, often tinged with red. The wood 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


has a fine, uniform texture and a spicy odor. Incense-cedar 
is light in weight, moderately low in strength, soft, low in 
shock resistance, and low in stiffness. It has low shrinkage 
and is easy to dry, with little checking or warping. 


Incense-cedar is used principally for lumber and fence 
posts. Nearly all the high-grade lumber is used for pencils 
and venetian blinds; some is used for chests and toys. Much 
incense-cedar wood is more or less pecky; that is, it con- 
tains pockets or areas of disintegrated wood caused by ad- 
vanced stages of localized decay in the living tree. There is 
no further development of decay once the lumber is dried. 
Other uses are railroad crossties, poles, split shingles, pen- 
cils, and composite fireplace logs. 


Larch, Western 


Western larch (Larix 
occidentalis) grows in 
western Montana, north- 
ern Idaho, northeastern 
Oregon, and on the east- 
ern slope of the Cascade 
Mountains in Washing- 
ton. About two-thirds 

of the lumber of this 
species is produced in Idaho and Montana and one-third in 
Oregon and Washington. 


The heartwood of western larch is yellowish brown and the 
sapwood is yellowish white. The sapwood is generally not 
more than 2.5 cm (1 in.) wide. The wood is stiff, moderate- 
ly strong and hard, moderately high in shock resistance, and 
moderately heavy. It has moderately high shrinkage. The 
wood is usually straight grained, splits easily, and is subject 
to ring shake. Knots are common but generally small and 
tight. 


Western larch is used mainly for rough dimension wood in 
building construction, small timbers, planks and boards, and 
railroad crossties and mine timbers. It is used also for piles, 
poles, and posts. Some high-grade material is manufactured 
into interior woodwork, flooring, sashes, doors, and ladder 
stock. The properties of western larch are similar to those of 
Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), and these species are 
sometimes sold mixed. 


Pine, Eastern White 


7 TTT 


| Eastern white pine (Pinus 
strobus) grows from 

| Maine to northern Geor- 
gia and in the Great Lake 
States. It is also known 
as white pine, northern 
white pine, Weymouth 
pine, and soft pine. About 


one-half the production of eastern white pine lumber occurs 
in New England, about one-third in the Great Lake States, 
and most of the remainder in the middle Atlantic and south 
Atlantic States. 


The heartwood of eastern white pine is light brown, often 
with a reddish tinge. It turns darker on exposure to air. The 
wood has comparatively uniform texture and is straight 
grained. It is easily kiln dried, has low shrinkage, and ranks 
high in stability. It is also easy to work and can be readily 
glued. Eastern white pine is lightweight, moderately soft, 
moderately low in strength, low in shock resistance, and 
low in stiffness. 


Practically all eastern white pine is converted into lumber, 
which is used in a great variety of ways. A large propor- 
tion, mostly second-growth knotty wood or lower grades, 

is used for structural lumber. High-grade lumber is used for 
patterns. Other important uses are sashes, doors, furniture, 
interior woodwork, knotty paneling, caskets, shade and map 
rollers, and toys. 


Pine, Jack 


Jack pine (Pinus banksi- 
ana), sometimes known 
as scrub, gray, and black 
pine in the United States, 
grows naturally in the 
Great Lake States and in 
a few scattered areas in 
New England and north- 
ern New York. Sapwood 
of jack pine is nearly white; heartwood is light brown to 
orange. Sapwood may constitute one-half or more of the 
volume of a tree. The wood has a rather coarse texture and 
is somewhat resinous. It is moderately lightweight, mod- 
erately low in bending strength and compressive strength, 
moderately low in shock resistance, and low in stiffness. It 
also has moderately low shrinkage. Lumber from jack pine 
is generally knotty. 


Jack pine is used for pulpwood, box lumber, and pallets. 
Less important uses include railroad crossties, mine timber, 
slack cooperage, poles, posts, and fuel. 


Pine, Lodgepole 


iia fae ga ] Lodgepole pine (Pinus 

BEE Sy contorta), also known 
as knotty, black, and 
spruce pine, grows in 
the Rocky Mountain and 
Pacific Coast regions as 
far northward as Alaska. 
Wood for lumber and 
other products is 


Fy 


produced primarily in the central Rocky Mountain States; 
other producing regions are Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and 
Washington. 


The heartwood of lodgepole pine varies from light yellow 
to light yellow-brown. The sapwood is yellow or nearly 
white. The wood is generally straight grained with narrow 
growth rings. The wood is moderately lightweight, is fairly 
easy to work, and has moderately high shrinkage. It is mod- 
erately low in strength, moderately soft, moderately stiff, 
and moderately low in shock resistance. 


Lodgepole pine has been used for lumber, mine timbers, 
railroad crossties, and poles. Less important uses include 
posts and fuel. Lodgepole pine is being used increasingly 
for structural lumber, millwork, cabinet logs, and engi- 
neered wood composites. 


Pine, Pitch and Pond 


Pitch pine (Pinus 
rigida) grows from 
Maine along the moun- 
tains to eastern Ten- 
nessee and northern 
Georgia. A relative of 
pitch pine (considered 
by some to be a 
subspecies), pond 
pine (P. serotina) grows in the coastal region from 

New Jersey to Florida. 


The heartwood is brownish red or dark orange and resinous; 
the sapwood is wide and light yellow. The wood is moder- 
ately heavy to heavy, moderately strong, stiff, and hard, and 
moderately high in shock resistance. Shrinkage ranges from 
moderately low to moderately high. 


Pitch and pond pine are used for general construction, lum- 
ber, posts, poles, fuel, and pulpwood. 


Pine, Ponderosa 


Ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) is also 
known as western yel- 
low, bull, and blackjack 
pine. Jeffrey pine 

(P. jeffreyi), which grows 
in close association 

with ponderosa pine in 
California and Oregon, 
is usually marketed with 
ponderosa pine and sold under that name. Major ponderosa 
pine producing areas are in Oregon, Washington, and Cali- 
fornia. Other important producing areas are in Idaho and 
Montana; lesser amounts come from the southern Rocky 
Mountain region, the Black Hills of South Dakota, and 
Wyoming. 


2-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


The heartwood of ponderosa pine is light reddish brown, 
and the wide sapwood is nearly white to pale yellow. The 
wood of the outer portions of ponderosa pine of sawtimber 
size is generally moderately light in weight, moderately low 
in strength, moderately soft, moderately stiff, and moder- 
ately low in shock resistance. It is generally straight grained 
and has moderately low shrinkage. It is quite uniform in 
texture and has little tendency to warp and twist. 


Ponderosa pine has been used mainly for lumber and to a 
lesser extent for piles, poles, posts, mine timbers, veneer, 
and railroad crossties. The clear wood is used for sashes, 
doors, blinds, moulding, paneling, interior woodwork, and 
built-in cases and cabinets. Low-grade lumber is used for 
boxes and crates. Knotty ponderosa pine is used for interior 
woodwork. 


Pine, Red 


i) 


Red pine (Pinus resi- 
nosa) is frequently called 
Norway pine. This spe- 
cies grows in New Eng- 
land, New York, Penn- 
sylvania, and the Great 
Lake States. 


The heartwood of red 
pine varies from pale red to reddish brown. The sapwood is 
nearly white with a yellowish tinge and is generally from 5 
to 10 cm (2 to 4 in.) wide. The wood resembles the lighter 
weight wood of the Southern Pine species group. Red pine 
is moderately heavy, moderately strong and stiff, moderate- 
ly soft, and moderately high in shock resistance. It is gener- 
ally straight grained, not as uniform in texture as eastern 
white pine (P. strobus), and somewhat resinous. The wood 
has moderately high shrinkage, but it is not difficult to dry 
and is dimensionally stable when dried. 


Red pine is used principally for lumber, cabin logs, and 
pulpwood, and to a lesser extent for piles, poles, posts, and 
fuel. The lumber is used for many of the same purposes 

as for eastern white pine (P. strobus). Red pine lumber is 
used primarily for building construction, including treated 
lumber for decking, siding, flooring, sashes, doors, general 
millwork, and boxes, pallets, and crates. 


Pine, Southern Group 


A number of species are 
included in the group 
marketed as Southern 
Pine lumber. The four 
major Southern Pine 
species and their growth 
ranges are as follows: 
(a) longleaf pine (Pinus 
palustris), eastern North 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


Carolina southward into Florida and westward into eastern 
Texas; (b) shortleaf pine (P. echinata), southeastern New 
York southward to northern Florida and westward into 
eastern Texas and Oklahoma; (c) loblolly pine (P. taeda), 
Maryland southward through the Atlantic Coastal Plain and 
Piedmont Plateau into Florida and westward into eastern 
Texas; (d) slash pine (P. elliottii), Florida and southern 
South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Loui- 
siana east of the Mississippi River. Lumber from these 

four species is classified as Southern Pine by the grading 
standards of the industry. Southern Pine lumber is produced 
principally in the Southern and South Atlantic States. Geor- 
gia, Alabama, North Carolina, Arkansas, and Louisiana lead 
in Southern Pine lumber production. 


The wood of these southern pines is quite similar in appear- 
ance. Sapwood is yellowish white and heartwood is reddish 
brown. The sapwood is usually wide in second-growth 
stands. The heartwood begins to form when the tree is about 
20 years old. In old, slow-growth trees, sapwood may be 
only 2 to 5 cm (1 to 2 in.) wide. 


Longleaf and slash pine are classified as heavy, strong, stiff, 
hard, and moderately high in shock resistance. Shortleaf 
and loblolly pine are usually somewhat lighter in weight 
than is longleaf. All the southern pines have moderately 
high shrinkage but are dimensionally stable when properly 
dried. 


The denser and higher strength southern pines have been 
extensively used in the form of stringers in the construction 
of factories, warehouses, bridges, trestles, and docks, and 
also for roof trusses, beams, posts, joists, and piles. South- 
ern Pine is also used for tight and slack cooperage. When 
used for railroad crossties, piles, poles, mine timbers, and 
exterior decking, it is usually treated with preservatives. 
The manufacture of engineered wood composites from 
Southern Pine is a major wood-using industry, as is the 
production of preservative-treated lumber. 


Pine, Spruce 


Spruce pine (Pinus gla- 
bra), is also known as 
cedar pine and Walter 
pine. Spruce pine grows 
most commonly on low 
moist lands of the coastal 
regions of southeastern 
South Carolina, Georgia, 
Alabama, Mississippi, 
and Louisiana, and northern and northwestern Florida. 


The heartwood of spruce pine is light brown, and the wide 
sapwood is nearly white. Spruce pine wood is lower in most 


strength values than the wood of the major Southern Pine 
species group. Spruce pine compares favorably with the 
western true firs in important bending properties, crushing 
strength (perpendicular and parallel to grain), and hard- 
ness. It is similar to denser species such as coast Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii) and loblolly pine (Pinus taeda) in 
shear parallel to grain. 


In the past, spruce pine was principally used locally for 
lumber, pulpwood, and fuelwood. The lumber reportedly 
was used for sashes, doors, and interior woodwork because 
of its low specific gravity and similarity of earlywood and 
latewood. 


Pine, Suga 

i Sugar pine (Pinus lam- 
bertiana), the world’s 
largest species of pine, is 
sometimes called Cali- 
fornia sugar pine. Most 
sugar pine lumber grows 
in California and south- 
western Oregon. 


The heartwood of sugar pine is buff or light brown, some- 
times tinged with red. The sapwood is creamy white. The 
wood is straight grained, fairly uniform in texture, and 
easy to work with tools. It has very low shrinkage, is read- 
ily dried without warping or checking, and is dimension- 
ally stable. Sugar pine is lightweight, moderately low in 
strength, moderately soft, low in shock resistance, and low 
in stiffness. 


Sugar pine is used almost exclusively for lumber products. 
The largest volume is used for boxes and crates, sashes, 
doors, frames, blinds, general millwork, building construc- 
tion, and foundry patterns. 


Pine, Virginia 


Virginia pine (Pinus vir- 

giniana), also known as 

Jersey and scrub pine, 

grows from New Jersey 

and Virginia throughout 

the Appalachian region 

i to Georgia and the Ohio 

FS a a Valley. It is classified as a 
minor species in the grad- 

ing rules for the Southern Pine species group. 


The heartwood is orange, and the sapwood is nearly white 
and relatively wide. The wood is moderately heavy, 
moderately strong, moderately hard, and moderately 

stiff and has moderately high shrinkage and high shock 
resistance. 


Virginia pine is used for lumber, railroad crossties, mine 
timbers, and pulpwood. 


Pine, Western White 


Western white pine 
(Pinus monticola) is also 
known as Idaho white 
pine or white pine. 


Heer gene 


wet 
brirropnenritremererte rego 


_ | The heartwood of west- 

ee ees ern white pine is cream 

lersereerstreat Te” | colored to light reddish 

brown and darkens on 

exposure to air. The sap- 

wood is yellowish white and generally from 2 to 8 cm 

(1 to 3 in.) wide. The wood is straight grained, easy to 

work, easily kiln-dried, and stable after drying. This species 

is moderately lightweight, moderately low in strength, mod- 

erately soft, moderately stiff, and moderately low in shock 

resistance and has moderately high shrinkage. 


Practically all western white pine is sawn into lumber, 
which is used mainly for millwork products, such as sashes 
and door frames. In building construction, lower-grade 
boards are used for knotty paneling. High-grade material 

is made into siding of various kinds, exterior and interior 
woodwork, and millwork. Western white pine has practi- 
cally the same uses as eastern white pine (P. strobus) and 
sugar pine (P. lambertiana). 


Port-Orford-Cedar 


Laat Port-Orford-cedar 

herent te te | cet (Chamaecyparis law- 

| |: soniana) is also known 

as Lawson-cypress or 
acth Oregon-cedar. It grows 
| along the Pacific Coast 
dL beametett | from Coos Bay, Oregon, 

lt southward to California. It 

does not extend more than 
65 km (40 mi) inland. 


The heartwood of Port-Orford-cedar is light yellow to pale 
brown. The sapwood is narrow and hard to distinguish from 
the heartwood. The wood has fine texture, generally straight 
grain, and a pleasant spicy odor. It is moderately light- 
weight, stiff, moderately strong and hard, and moderately 
resistant to shock. Port-Orford-cedar heartwood is highly 
resistant to decay. The wood shrinks moderately, has little 
tendency to warp, and is stable after drying. 


Some high-grade Port-Orford-cedar was once used in the 
manufacture of storage battery separators, matchsticks, and 
specialty millwork. Today, other uses are archery supplies, 
sash and door construction, flooring, interior woodwork, 
furniture, and boats. 


2-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Redcedar, Eastern 


ont Eastern redcedar (Juni- 
perus virginiana) grows 
throughout the eastern 
half of the United States, 
except in Maine, Florida, 
and a narrow strip along 
the Gulf Coast, and at the 
higher elevations in the 
Appalachian Mountains. 
Commercial production is principally in the southern Ap- 
palachian and Cumberland Mountain regions. Another spe- 
cies, southern redcedar (JV. silicicola), grows over a limited 
area in the South Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plains. 


The heartwood of redcedar is bright or dull red, and the 
narrow sapwood is nearly white. The wood is moderately 
heavy, moderately low in strength, hard, and high in shock 
resistance, but low in stiffness. It has very low shrinkage 
and is dimensionally stable after drying. The texture is fine 
and uniform, and the wood commonly has numerous small 
knots. Eastern redcedar heartwood is very resistant to 
decay. 


The greatest quantity of eastern and southern redcedar is 

used for fence posts. Lumber is manufactured into chests, 
wardrobes, and closet lining. Other uses include flooring, 
novelties, pencils, scientific instruments, and small boats. 


Redcedar, Western 


le lh 


Laemeprenrereyt i ace lll 


Western redcedar (Thuja 
plicata) grows in the 
Pacific Northwest and 
along the Pacific Coast to 
Alaska. It is also called 
canoe-cedar, giant arbor- 
vitae, shinglewood, and 
Pacific redcedar. West- 
ern redcedar lumber is 
produced principally in Washington, followed by Oregon, 
Idaho, and Montana. 


a 


The heartwood of western redcedar is reddish or pinkish 
brown to dull brown, and the sapwood is nearly white. The 
sapwood is narrow, often not more than 3 cm (1 in.) wide. 
The wood is generally straight grained and has a uniform 
but rather coarse texture. It has very low shrinkage. This 
species is lightweight, moderately soft, low in strength 
when used as a beam or post, and low in shock resistance. 
The heartwood is very resistant to decay. 


Western redcedar is used principally for shingles, lumber, 
poles, posts, and piles. The lumber is used for exterior 
siding, decking, interior woodwork, ship and boat building, 
boxes and crates, sashes, and doors. 


Chapter 2 


Redwood (Sequoia sem- 
pervirens) grows on the 
coast of California and 
some trees are among 

the tallest in the world. 

A closely related species, 
giant sequoia (Sequoia- 
dendron giganteum), 1s 
volumetrically larger and 
grows in a limited area in the Sierra Nevadas of California, 
but its wood is used in very limited quantities. Other names 
for redwood are coast redwood, California redwood, and 
sequoia. Production of redwood lumber is limited to Cali- 
fornia, but the market is nationwide. 


The heartwood of redwood varies from light “cherry” red 
to dark mahogany. The narrow sapwood is almost white. 
Typical old-growth redwood is moderately lightweight, 
moderately strong and stiff, and moderately hard. The wood 
is easy to work, generally straight grained, and shrinks 

and swells comparatively little. The heartwood from old- 
growth trees has high decay resistance; heartwood from 
second-growth trees generally has low to moderate decay 
resistance. 


Most redwood lumber is used for building. It is remanu- 
factured extensively into siding, sashes, doors, blinds, 
millwork, casket stock, and containers. Because of its dura- 
bility, redwood is useful for cooling towers, decking, tanks, 
silos, wood-stave pipe, and outdoor furniture. It is used in 
agriculture for buildings and equipment. Its use as timbers 
and large dimension in bridges and trestles is relatively mi- 
nor. Redwood splits readily and plays an important role in 
the manufacture of split products, such as posts and fence 
material. Some redwood veneer is produced for decorative 
plywood. 


Spruce, Eastern 


The term eastern spruce 
includes three species: red 
(Picea rubens), white (P. 
glauca), and black 

(P. mariana). White 

and black spruce grow 
principally in the 

Great Lake States and 
New England, and 

red spruce grows in New England and the Appalachian 
Mountains. 


The wood is light in color, and there is little difference be- 
tween heartwood and sapwood. All three species have about 
the same properties, and they are not distinguished from 
each other in commerce. The wood dries easily and is stable 


Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


after drying, is moderately lightweight and easily worked, 
has moderate shrinkage, and is moderately strong, stiff, 
tough, and hard. 


The greatest use of eastern spruce is for pulpwood. Eastern 
spruce lumber is used for framing material, general mill- 
work, boxes and crates, and piano sounding boards. 


Spruce, Engelmann 


Engelmann spruce (Pi- 
cea engelmannii) grows 
at high elevations in the 
Rocky Mountain region 
of the United States. This 
species is also known as 
white spruce, mountain 
spruce, Arizona spruce, 
silver spruce, and balsam. 
About two-thirds of the lumber is produced in the southern 
Rocky Mountain States and most of the remainder in the 
northern Rocky Mountain States and Oregon. 


The heartwood of Engelmann spruce is nearly white, with 

a slight tinge of red. The sapwood varies from 2 to 5 cm 

(1 to 2 in.) in width and is often difficult to distinguish from 
the heartwood. The wood has medium to fine texture and is 
without characteristic odor. Engelmann spruce is rated as 
lightweight, and it is low in strength as a beam or post. It is 
also soft and low in stiffness, shock resistance, and shrink- 
age. The lumber typically contains many small knots. 


Engelmann spruce is used principally for lumber and for 
mine timbers, railroad crossties, and poles. It is used also 
in building construction in the form of dimension lumber, 
flooring, and sheathing. It has excellent properties for pulp 
and papermaking. 


Spruce, Sitka 


Sitka spruce (Picea 
sitchensis) is a large 

tree that grows along 

the northwestern coast 
of North America from 
California to Alaska. It 

is also known as yellow, 
tideland, western, silver, 
and west coast spruce. 
Much Sitka spruce timber is grown in Alaska, but most logs 
are sawn into cants for export to Pacific Rim countries. Ma- 
terial for U.S. consumption is produced primarily in Wash- 
ington and Oregon. 


The heartwood of Sitka spruce is a light pinkish brown. 

The sapwood is creamy white and shades gradually into the 
heartwood; the sapwood may be 7 to 15 cm (3 to 6 in.) wide 
or even wider in young trees. The wood has a comparative- 

ly fine, uniform texture, generally straight grain, and no 


distinct taste or odor. It is moderately lightweight, moder- 
ately low in bending and compressive strength, moderately 
stiff, moderately soft, and moderately low in resistance to 
shock. It has moderately low shrinkage. On the basis of 
weight, Sitka spruce rates high in strength properties and 
can be obtained in long, clear, straight-grained pieces. 


Sitka spruce is used principally for lumber, pulpwood, and 
cooperage. Boxes and crates account for a considerable 
amount of the remanufactured lumber. Other important uses 
are furniture, planing-mill products, sashes, doors, blinds, 
millwork, and boats. Sitka spruce has been by far the most 
important wood for aircraft construction. Other specialty 
uses are ladder rails and sounding boards for pianos. 


Tamarack 


Tamarack (Larix larici- 
na), also known as 
eastern larch and locally 
as hackmatack, is a 
small to medium tree 
with a straight, round, 
slightly tapered trunk. 

It grows from Maine to 
Minnesota, with the bulk of the stand in the Great Lake 
States. 


The heartwood of tamarack is yellowish brown to russet 
brown. The sapwood is whitish, generally less than 3 cm 
(1 in.) wide. The wood is coarse in texture, without odor 
or taste, and the transition from earlywood to latewood is 
abrupt. The wood is intermediate in weight and in most 
mechanical properties. 


Tamarack is used principally for pulpwood, lumber, rail- 
road crossties, mine timbers, fuel, fence posts, and poles. 
Lumber is used for framing material, tank construction, and 
boxes, pallets, and crates. The production of tamarack lum- 
ber has declined in recent years. 


White-Cedar, Atlantic 


Atlantic white-cedar 
(Chamaecyparis thy- 
oides), also known as 
southern white-cedar, 
swamp-cedar and boat- 
cedar, grows near the At- 
lantic Coast from Maine 
to northern Florida and 
westward along the Gulf 
Coast to Louisiana. It is strictly a swamp tree. Production 
of Atlantic white-cedar centers in North Carolina and along 
the Gulf Coast. 


The heartwood of Atlantic white-cedar is light brown, and 
the sapwood is white or nearly so. The sapwood is usually 
narrow. The wood is lightweight, rather soft, and low in 

strength and shock resistance. It shrinks little in drying. It 


2-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


is easily worked and holds paint well, and the heartwood is 
highly resistant to decay. Because of its high durability it is 
used for poles, posts, cabin logs, railroad crossties, lumber, 
shingles, decorative fencing, boats, and water tanks. 


White-Cedar, Northern 


Northern white-cedar 
(Thuja occidentalis) is 
Ihe | also known as eastern 
white-cedar or arborvi- 
tae. It grows from Maine 
along the Appalachians 
and westward through the 
| northern part of the Great 
Lake States. Production 
of northern white-cedar lumber is greatest in Maine and the 
Great Lake States. 


The heartwood of Northern white-cedar is light brown, 

and the sapwood is nearly white and is usually narrow. The 
wood is lightweight, rather soft, low in strength and shock 
resistance, and with low shrinkage upon drying. It is easily 
worked and the heartwood is very decay resistant. Northern 
white-cedar is used for poles and posts, outdoor furniture, 
shingles, cabin logs, lumber, water tanks, boats and for 
wooden ware. 


Yellow-Cedar 


Yellow-cedar (Chamaecy- 
paris nootkatensis) grows 
in the Pacific Coast re- 
gion of North America 
from southeastern Alaska 
southward through 
Washington to southern 
Oregon. 


eared 3 ! Dry 


The heartwood of yellow-cedar is bright, clear yellow. The 
sapwood is narrow, white to yellowish, and hardly distin- 
guishable from the heartwood. The wood is fine textured 
and generally straight grained. It is moderately heavy, 
moderately strong and stiff, moderately hard, and moder- 
ately high in shock resistance. Yellow-cedar shrinks little in 
drying and is stable after drying, and the heartwood is very 
resistant to decay. The wood has a mild, distinctive odor. 


Yellow-cedar is used for interior woodwork, furniture, 
small boats, cabinetwork, and novelties. 


Imported Woods 


This section includes many of the species that at present 
are considered to be commercially important, but by no 
means can it be considered all-inclusive. The import timber 
market is constantly changing, with some species no longer 
available but with new species entering the market. The 
same species may be marketed in the United States under 
other common names. Because of the variation in common 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


names, many cross-references are included. Text informa- 
tion is necessarily brief, but when used in conjunction with 
the shrinkage and strength data tables, a reasonably good 
picture may be obtained of a particular wood. The referenc- 
es at the end of this chapter contain information on many 
species not described in this section. 


Imported Hardwoods 
Afara 
(see Limba) 


Afrormosia 


Afrormosia or kokrodua 
(Pericopsis elata), a large 
West African tree, is 
sometimes used as a sub- 
stitute for teak (Tectona 
grandis). 


The heartwood is fine 
textured, with straight to 
interlocked grain. The wood is brownish yellow with darker 
streaks and moderately hard and heavy, weighing about 
700 kg m-3 (43 Ib ft-3) at 15% moisture content. The wood 
strongly resembles teak in appearance but lacks its oily 
nature and has a different texture. The wood dries readily 
with little degrade and has good dimensional stability. It is 
somewhat heavier and stronger than teak. The heartwood 
is highly resistant to decay fungi and termite attack and is 
extremely durable under adverse conditions. 


Afrormosia is often used for the same purposes as teak, 
such as boat construction, joinery, flooring, furniture, 
interior woodwork, and decorative veneer. 


Albarco 


Tid a Albarco, or jequitiba as it 
i ieee 2 Biieas emit ; ; is known in Brazil, is the 
i acagle ee common name applied 
fgamelpiBiiaaE + to species in the genus 
phan SPAT hi 508 # Cariniana. The 10 spe- 
SE APES) cies are distributed from 
eastern Peru and northern 
Bolivia through central 
Brazil to Venezuela and 
Colombia. 


The heartwood is reddish or purplish brown and sometimes 
has dark streaks. It is usually not sharply demarcated from 
the pale brown sapwood. The texture is medium and the 
grain straight to interlocked. Albarco can be worked sat- 
isfactorily with only slight blunting of tool cutting edges 
because of the presence of silica. Veneer can be cut without 
difficulty. The wood is rather strong and moderately heavy, 
weighing about 560 kg m- (35 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture 
content. In general, the wood has about the same strength 
as that of U.S. oaks (Quercus spp.). The heartwood is du- 
rable, particularly the deeply colored material. It has good 
resistance to dry-wood termite attack. 


Albarco is primarily used for general construction and 
carpentry wood, but it can also be used for furniture com- 
ponents, shipbuilding, flooring, veneer for plywood, and 
turnery. 


Amaranth 
(see Purpleheart) 


Anani 
(see Manni) 


Anaura 
(see Marishballi) 


Andiroba 


Because of the wide- 
spread distribution of 
andiroba (Carapa guia- 
nensis) in tropical Amer- 
ica, the wood is known 
under a variety of names, 
including cedro macho, 
carapa, crabwood, and 
tangare. These names are 
also applied to the related species C. nicaraguensis, whose 
properties are generally inferior to those of C. guianensis. 


The heartwood varies from medium to dark reddish brown. 
The texture is like that of true mahogany (Swietenia mac- 
rophylla), and andiroba is sometimes substituted for true 
mahogany. The grain is usually interlocked but is rated easy 
to work, paint, and glue. The wood is rated as durable to 
very durable with respect to decay and insects. Andiroba is 
heavier than true mahogany and accordingly is markedly 
superior in all static bending properties, compression paral- 
lel to grain, hardness, shear, and durability. 


On the basis of its properties, andiroba appears to be suited 
for such uses as flooring, frame construction in the tropics, 
furniture and cabinetwork, millwork, utility and decorative 
veneer, and plywood. 


Angelin 

(see Sucupira) 

Angelique 

Angelique (Dicorynia 
guianensis) comes from 


French Guiana and 
Suriname. 


Because of the variability 
in heartwood color be- 
tween different trees, two 
forms are commonly rec- 
ognized by producers. The heartwood that is russet-colored 
when freshly cut and becomes superficially dull brown with 
a purplish cast is referred to as “gris.” The heartwood that is 


more distinctly reddish and frequently shows wide purplish 
bands is called “angelique rouge.” The texture of the wood 
is somewhat coarser than that of black walnut (Juglans 
nigra), and the grain is generally straight or slightly inter- 
locked. In strength, angelique is superior to teak (Tectona 
grandis) and white oak (Quercus alba), when green or air 
dry, in all properties except tension perpendicular to grain. 
Angelique is rated as highly resistant to decay and resistant 
to marine borer attack. Machining properties vary and may 
be due to differences in density, moisture content, and silica 
content. After the wood is thoroughly air or kiln dried, it 
can be worked effectively only with carbide-tipped tools. 


The strength and durability of angelique make it espe- 
cially suitable for heavy construction, harbor installations, 
bridges, heavy planking for pier and platform decking, and 
railroad bridge ties. The wood is also suitable for ship deck- 
ing, planking, boat frames, industrial flooring, and parquet 
blocks and strips. 


Apa 
(see Wallaba) 


Apamate 
(see Roble) 
Apitong 

(see Keruing) 


Avodire 


Avodire (Turraeanthus 
africanus) has a rather 
extensive range in Africa, 
from Sierra Leone west- 
ward to the Congo region 
and southward to Zaire 
and Angola. It is most 
{ ! | common in the eastern 
region of the Ivory Coast 
and is scattered elsewhere. Avodire is a medium-size tree of 
the rainforest where it forms fairly dense but localized and 
discontinuous timber stands. 


The wood is cream to pale yellow with high natural lus- 

ter; it eventually darkens to a golden yellow. The grain is 
sometimes straight but more often wavy or irregularly in- 
terlocked, which produces an unusual and attractive mottled 
figure when sliced or cut on the quarter. Although avodire 
weighs less than northern red oak (Quercus rubra), it has 
almost identical strength properties except that it is lower 

in shock resistance and shear. The wood works fairly eas- 
ily with hand and machine tools and finishes well in most 
operations. 


Figured material is usually converted into veneer for use in 
decorative work, and it is this kind of material that is chiefly 
imported into the United States. Other uses include furni- 
ture, fine joinery, cabinetwork, and paneling. 


2-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Azobe (Ekki) 


Azobe or ekki (Lophira 
alata) is found in West 

Africa and extends into 
the Congo basin. 


The heartwood is dark 
red, chocolate—brown, or 
purple—brown with con- 
spicuous white deposits 
in the pores (vessels). The texture is coarse, and the grain 
is usually interlocked. The wood is strong, and its density 
averages about 1,120 kg m-3 (70 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture 
content. It is very difficult to work with hand and machine 
tools, and tools are severely blunted if the wood is ma- 
chined when dry. Azobe can be dressed to a smooth finish, 
and gluing properties are usually good. Drying is very dif- 
ficult without excessive degrade, and the heartwood is ex- 
tremely resistant to preservative treatment. The heartwood 
is rated as very durable against decay, resistant to teredo 
attack, but only moderately resistant to termites. Azobe is 
very resistant to acid and has good weathering properties. 


Azobe is excellent for heavy construction work, harbor con- 
struction, heavy-duty flooring, and railroad crossties. 


Bagtikan 

(see Seraya, White) 

Balata 
Balata or bulletwood 
(Manilkara bidentata) 
is widely distributed 
throughout the West 


Indies, Central America, 
and northern South 
America. 


The heartwood of balata 
is light to dark reddish 
brown and not sharply demarcated from the pale brown 
sapwood. Texture is fine and uniform, and the grain is 
straight to occasionally wavy or interlocked. Balata is a 
strong and very heavy wood; density of air-dried wood is 
1,060 kg m-3 (66 lb ft-3). It is generally difficult to air dry, 
with a tendency to develop severe checking and warp. The 
wood is moderately easy to work despite its high density, 
and it is rated good to excellent in all machining operations. 
Balata is very resistant to attack by decay fungi and highly 
resistant to subterranean termites but only moderately resis- 
tant to dry-wood termites. 


Balata is suitable for heavy construction, textile and pulp- 
mill equipment, furniture parts, turnery, tool handles, floor- 
ing, boat frames and other bentwork, railroad crossties, 
violin bows, billiard cues, and other specialty uses. 


Chapter 2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


Balau 


Balau, red balau, and se- 
langan batu constitute a 
group of species that 

are the heaviest of the 

200 Shorea species. About 
45 species of this group 
grow from Sri Lanka and 
southern India through 
southeast Asia to the 
Philippines. 


bee 1EO 5 ie 1 


The heartwood is light to deep red or purple—brown, and 

it is fairly distinct from the lighter and yellowish- to red- 
dish- or purplish-brown sapwood. The texture is moderately 
fine to coarse, and the grain is often interlocked. The wood 
weighs more than 750 kg m-3 (47 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture 
content. Balau is a heavy, hard, and strong timber that dries 
slowly with moderate to severe end checks and splits. The 
heartwood is durable to moderately durable and very resis- 
tant to preservative treatments. 


Balau is used for heavy construction, frames of boats, deck- 
ing, flooring, and utility furniture. 


Balau, Red 


(see Balau) 


Balsa 
aE 7 Balsa (Ochroma pyrami- 
| i dale) is widely distributed 
; ; ie throughout tropical Amer- 
; ica from southern Mexico 
» {| to southern Brazil and 


: Bolivia, but Ecuador has 
J | . yt} At i been the principal source 

j Habe of supply since the wood 
gained commercial im- 
portance. It is usually found at lower elevations, especially 
on bottom-land soils along streams and in clearings and 
cutover forests. Today, it is often cultivated in plantations. 


Several characteristics make balsa suitable for a wide vari- 
ety of uses. It is the lightest and softest of all woods on the 
market. The lumber selected for use in the United States 
weighs, on the average, about 180 kg m3 (11 Ib ft) when 
dry and often as little as 100 kg m°3 (6 lb ft-3). The wood 
is readily recognized by its light weight; nearly white or 
oatmeal color, often with a yellowish or pinkish hue; and 
unique velvety feel. 


Because of its light weight and exceedingly porous com- 
position, balsa is highly efficient in uses where buoyancy, 
insulation against heat or cold, or low propagation of sound 
and vibration are important. Principal uses are for life- 
saving equipment, floats, rafts, corestock, insulation, 
cushioning, sound modifiers, models, and novelties. 


Banak, Cuangare 


am |) 1 7 


Various species of banak 
(Virola) occur in tropical 
{ | America, from Belize 
and Guatemala south- 
ward to Venezuela, the 
iy Guianas, the Amazon 
4) | region of northern Bra- 
x zil, and southern Brazil, 
and on the Pacific Coast 
to Peru and Bolivia. Most of the wood known as banak is 
V. koschnyi of Central America and V. surinamensis and 
V. sebifera of northern South America. Botanically, cuan- 
gare (Dialyanthera) is closely related to banak, and the 
woods are so similar that they are generally mixed in the 
trade. The main commercial supply of cuangare comes from 
Colombia and Ecuador. Banak and cuangare are common 
in swamp and marsh forests and may occur in almost pure 
stands in some areas. 


t 
i if! ‘ah 


The heartwood of both banak and cuangare is usually pink- 
ish or grayish brown and is generally not differentiated 
from the sapwood. The wood is straight grained and is of 

a medium to coarse texture. The various species are nonre- 
sistant to decay and insect attack but can be readily treated 
with preservatives. Machining properties are very good, but 
when zones of tension wood are present, machining may 
result in surface fuzziness. The wood finishes readily and is 
easily glued. Strength properties of banak and cuangare are 
similar to those of yellow-poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera). 


Banak is considered a general utility wood for lumber, ve- 
neer, and plywood. It is also used for moulding, millwork, 
and furniture components. 


Benge, Ehie, Bubinga 

Although benge (Gui- 
bourtia arnoldiana), ehie 
(or ovangkol) (Guibourtia 
ehie), and bubinga (Gui- 
bourtia spp.) belong to the 
same West African genus, 
they differ rather marked- 
ly in color and somewhat 
in texture. 


The heartwood of benge is pale yellowish brown to medium 
brown with gray to almost black stripes. Ehie heartwood 
tends to be more golden brown to dark brown with gray to 
almost black stripes. Bubinga heartwood is pink, vivid red, 
or red-brown with purple streaks, and it becomes yellow or 
medium brown with a reddish tint upon exposure to air. The 
texture of ehie is moderately coarse, whereas that of benge 
and bubinga is fine to moderately fine. All three woods are 
moderately hard and heavy, but they can be worked well 
with hand and machine tools. They are listed as moderately 


2-21 


durable and resistant to preservative treatment. Drying 
may be difficult, but with care, the wood dries well. 


These woods are used in turnery, flooring, furniture 
components, cabinetwork, and decorative veneers. 
Brown Silverballi 

(see Kaneelhart) 

Bubinga 

(see Benge) 


Bulletwood 
(see Balata) 


Carapa 
(see Andiroba) 


Cativo 


Cativo (Prioria co- 
paifera) is one of the few 
tropical American spe- 
cies that occur in abun- 
dance and often in nearly 
pure stands. Commercial 
stands are found in Ni- 
caragua, Costa Rica, 
Panama, and Colombia. 


Sapwood may be very pale pink or distinctly reddish, and 

it is usually wide. In trees up to 76 cm (30 in.) in diameter, 
heartwood may be only 18 cm (7 in.) in diameter. The grain 
is straight and the texture of the wood is uniform, compa- 
rable with that of true mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla). 
On flat-sawn surfaces, the figure is rather subdued as a re- 
sult of exposure of the narrow bands of parenchyma tissue. 
The wood can be dried rapidly and easily with very little 
degrade. Dimensional stability is very good—practically 
equal to that of true mahogany. Cativo is classified as a non- 
durable wood with respect to decay and insects. It may con- 
tain appreciable quantities of gum. In wood that has been 
properly dried, however, the aromatics in the gum 

are removed and there is no difficulty in finishing. 


Considerable quantities of cativo are used for interior 
woodwork, and resin-stabilized veneer is an important pat- 
tern material. Cativo is widely used for furniture and cabi- 
net parts, lumber core for plywood, picture frames, edge 
banding for doors, joinery, and millwork. 


Cedro 
(see Spanish-Cedar) 


Cedro Macho 
(see Andiroba) 


Cedro-Rana 
(see Tornillo) 


2-22 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


; Ceiba (Ceiba pentandra) is 
| i a large tree that grows to 

I 

b 


with a straight cylindrical 
bole 13 to 20 m (40 to 
60 ft) long. Trunk diam- 
eters of 2 m (6 ft) or more 
__| are common. Ceiba grows 
in West Africa, from the 
Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone to Liberia, Nigeria, and the 
Congo region. A related species is lupuna (C. samauma) 
from South America. 


| 66 m (200 ft) in height 


Lge tlp lt a ee ct a gol] 


[on 


« 


Sapwood and heartwood are not clearly demarcated. The 
wood is whitish, pale brown, or pinkish brown, often with 
yellowish or grayish streaks. The texture is coarse, and the 
grain is interlocked or occasionally irregular. Ceiba is very 
soft and light; density of air-dried wood is 320 kg m-3 

(20 lb ft-3). In strength, the wood is comparable with 
basswood (Tilia americana). Ceiba dries rapidly without 
marked deterioration. It is difficult to saw cleanly and dress 
smoothly because of the high percentage of tension wood. It 
provides good veneer and is easy to nail and glue. Ceiba is 
very susceptible to attack by decay fungi and insects. It re- 
quires rapid harvest and conversion to prevent deterioration. 
Treatability, however, is rated as good. 


Ceiba is available in large sizes, and its low density com- 
bined with a rather high degree of dimensional stability 
make it ideal for pattern and corestock. Other uses include 
blockboard, boxes and crates, joinery, and furniture 
components. 


Chewstick 


(see Manni) 


Courbaril, Jatoba 


The genus Hymenaea 
consists of about 25 spe- 
4 cies that occur in the West 
Indies and from southern 
Mexico through Central 
America into the Amazon 
basin of South America. 
The best-known and most 
important species is 
H. courbaril, which occurs throughout the range of the 
genus. Courbaril is often called jatoba in Brazil. 


aed YO war nA 
th ~~ 7 
pant Ta ee eh 
K3 


Sapwood of courbaril is gray—white and usually quite wide. 
The heartwood, which is sharply differentiated from the 
sapwood, is salmon red to orange—brown when freshly 

cut and becomes russet or reddish brown when dried. The 
heartwood is often marked with dark streaks. The texture 

is medium to rather coarse, and the grain is mostly inter- 
locked. The wood is hard and heavy (about 800 kg m-3 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


(50 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture content). The strength proper- 
ties of courbaril are quite high and very similar to those of 
shagbark hickory (Carya ovata), a species of lower specific 
gravity. Courbaril is rated as moderately to very resistant 

to attack by decay fungi and dry-wood termites. The heart- 
wood is not treatable, but the sapwood is treatable with 
preservatives. Courbaril is moderately difficult to saw and 
machine because of its high density, but it can be machined 
to a smooth surface. Turning, gluing, and finishing proper- 
ties are satisfactory. Planing, however, is somewhat dif- 
ficult because of the interlocked grain. Courbaril compares 
favorably with white oak (Quercus alba) in steam-bending 
behavior. 


Courbaril is used for tool handles and other applications 
that require good shock resistance. It is also used for steam- 
bent parts, flooring, turnery, furniture and cabinetwork, 
veneer and plywood, railroad crossties, and other specialty 
items. 


Crabwood 
(see Andiroba) 


Cristobal 
(see Macawood) 


Cuangare 
(see Banak) 


Degame 


Degame or lemon- 
wood (Calycophyllum 
candidissimum) grows 
in Cuba and ranges 
from southern Mexico 
through Central 
America to Colombia 
and Venezuela. It 

may grow in pure 
stands and is common on shaded hillsides and along 
waterways. 


The heartwood of degame ranges from light brown to 
oatmeal-colored and is sometimes grayish. The sapwood is 
lighter in color and merges gradually with the heartwood. 
The texture is fine and uniform. The grain is usually straight 
or infrequently shows shallow interlocking, which may 
produce a narrow and indistinct stripe on quartered faces. 

In strength, degame is above the average for woods of 
similar density; density of air-dried wood is 817 kg m-3 

(51 Ib ft-3). Tests show degame superior to persimmon 
(Diospyros virginiana) in all respects but hardness. Natural 
durability is low when degame is used under conditions fa- 
vorable to stain, decay, and insect attack. However, degame 
is reported to be highly resistant to marine borers. Degame 
is moderately difficult to machine because of its density and 
hardness, although it does not dull cutting tools to any ex- 
tent. Machined surfaces are very smooth. 


Degame is little used in the United States, but its character- 
istics have made it particularly adaptable for shuttles, picker 
sticks, and other textile industry items that require resilience 
and strength. Degame was once prized for the manufacture 
of archery bows and fishing rods. It is also suitable for tool 
handles and turnery. 


Determa 


Determa (Ocotea rubra) 
is native to the Guianas, 
Trinidad, and the lower 
Amazon region of Brazil. 


The heartwood is light 
reddish brown with a 
golden sheen and distinct 
from the dull gray or pale 
yellowish brown sapwood. The texture is rather coarse, and 
the grain is interlocked to straight. Determa is a moderately 
strong and heavy wood (density of air-dried wood is 

640 to 720 kg m3 (40 to 45 Ib ft-3)); this wood is moder- 
ately difficult to air dry. It can be worked readily with hand 
and machine tools with little dulling effect. It can be glued 
readily and polished fairly well. The heartwood is durable 
to very durable in resistance to decay fungi and moderately 
resistant to dry-wood termites. Weathering characteristics 
are excellent, and the wood is highly resistant to moisture 
absorption. 


Uses for determa include furniture, general construction, 
boat planking, tanks and cooperage, heavy marine construc- 
tion, turnery, and parquet flooring. 


Ehie 
(see Benge) 


Ekki 
(see Azobe) 


Ekop 


Ekop or gola (Tetraber- 
linia tubmaniana) grows 
only in Liberia. 


The heartwood is light 
reddish brown and is 
distinct from the lighter 
colored sapwood, which 
may be up to 5 cm (2 in.) 
wide. The wood is medium to coarse textured, and the grain 
is interlocked, with a narrow striped pattern on quartered 
surfaces. The wood weighs about 735 kg m3 (46 lb ft) at 
12% moisture content. It dries fairly well but with a marked 
tendency to end and surface checks. Ekop works well 

with hand and machine tools and is an excellent wood for 
tummery. It also slices well into veneer and has good gluing 
properties. The heartwood is only moderately durable and 
is moderately resistant to impregnation with preservative 
treatments. 


2-23 


Ekop is a general utility wood that is used for veneer, 
plywood, and furniture components. 


Encino 
(see Oak) 


Gola 
(see Ekop) 


Gongalo Alves 


Most imports of gongalo 
alves (Astronium graveo- 
lens and A. fraxinifolium) 
have been from Brazil. 
These species range from 
southern Mexico through 
Central America into the 
Amazon basin. 


Freshly cut heartwood is russet brown, orange—brown, or 
reddish brown to red with narrow to wide, irregular, me- 
dium to very dark brown stripes. After exposure to air, the 
heartwood becomes brown, red, or dark reddish brown 
with nearly black stripes. The sapwood is grayish white and 
sharply demarcated from the heartwood. The texture is fine 
to medium and uniform. The grain varies from straight to 
interlocked and wavy. 


Gongalo alves turns readily, finishes very smoothly, and 
takes a high natural polish. The heartwood is highly resis- 
tant to moisture absorption; pigmented areas may present 
some difficulties in gluing because of their high density. 
The heartwood is very durable and resistant to both white- 
and brown-rot organisms. The high density (1,010 kg m-3 
(63 Ib ft-3)) of the air-dried wood is accompanied by equally 
high strength values, which are considerably higher in most 
respects than those of any U.S. species. Despite its strength, 
however, gongalo alves is imported primarily for its beauty. 


In the United States, goncalo alves has the greatest value 
for specialty items such as archery bows, billiard cue butts, 
brushbacks, and cutlery handles, and in turnery and carving 
applications. 


Greenheart 


Greenheart (Chlorocar- 
dium rodiei) is essentially 
a Guyana tree, although 
small stands also occur in 
Suriname. 


The heartwood varies 
from light to dark olive 
green or nearly black. The 
texture is fine and uniform, and the grain is straight to wavy. 
Greenheart is stronger and stiffer than white oak (Quercus 
alba) and generally more difficult to work with tools be- 
cause of its high density; density of air-dried wood is more 
than 960 kg m-3 (60 lb ft-3). The heartwood is rated as very 


2-24 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


resistant to decay fungi and termites. It is also very resistant 
to marine borers in temperate waters but much less so in 
warm tropical waters. 


Greenheart is used principally where strength and resistance 
to wear are required. Uses include ship and dock building, 
lock gates, wharves, piers, jetties, vats, piling, planking, 
industrial flooring, bridges, and some specialty items (fish- 
ing rods and billiard cue butts). 


Guatambu 
(see Pau Marfim) 


Guayacan 
(see Ipe) 
Hura 


Hura (Hura crepitans) 
grows throughout the 
West Indies from Central 
America to northern Bra- 
zil and Bolivia. 


It is a large tree, com- 
monly reaching a height 
of 30 to 43 m (90 to 

130 fy), with clear boles of 12 to 23 m (40 to 75 ft). The 
diameter often reaches | to 1.5 m (3 to 5 ft) and occasion- 
ally to 3 m (9 ft). 


The pale yellowish-brown or pale olive-gray heartwood is 
indistinct from the yellowish-white sapwood. The texture 
is fine to medium and the grain straight to interlocked. 
Hura is a low-strength and low-density wood (density of 
air-dried wood is 240 to 448 kg m-3(15 to 28 Ib ft-)); the 
wood is moderately difficult to air dry. Warping is variable 
and sometimes severe. The wood usually machines easily, 
but green material is somewhat difficult to work because of 
tension wood, which results in a fuzzy surface. The wood 
finishes well and is easy to glue and nail. Hura is variable 
in resistance to attack by decay fungi, but it is highly sus- 
ceptible to blue stain and very susceptible to wood termites. 
However, the wood is easy to treat with preservative. 


Hura is often used in general carpentry, boxes and crates, 
and lower grade furniture. Other important uses are veneer 
and plywood, fiberboard, and particleboard. 


llomba 


Tlomba (Pycnanthus an- 
golensis) is a tree of the 
rainforest and ranges from 
Guinea and Sierra Leone 
through tropical West 
Africa to Uganda and An- 
gola. Common names in- 
clude pycnanthus, walele, 
and otie. 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


The wood is grayish white to pinkish brown and, in some 
trees, a uniform light brown. There is generally no distinc- 
tion between heartwood and sapwood. The texture is me- 
dium to coarse, and the grain is generally straight. This spe- 
cies is generally similar to banak (Virola) but has a coarser 
texture. Air-dry density is about 512 kg m3 (31 Ib ft-3), and 
the wood is about as strong as yellow-poplar (Liriodendron 
tulipifera). Ilomba dries rapidly but is prone to collapse, 
warp, and splits. It is easily sawn and can be worked well 
with hand and machine tools. It is excellent for veneer and 
has good gluing and nailing characteristics. Green wood is 
subject to insect and fungal attack. Logs require rapid ex- 
traction and conversion to avoid degrade. Both sapwood 
and heartwood are permeable and can be treated with 
preservatives. 


In the United States, this species is used only in the form of 
plywood for general utility purposes. However, ilomba is 
definitely suited for furniture components, interior joinery, 
and general utility purposes. 


Ipe 

Ipe, the common name 
for the lapacho group 

of the genus Zabebuia, 
consists of about 20 spe- 
cies of trees and occurs 
in practically every Latin 
America country except 
Chile. Other commonly 
used names are guayacan 
and lapacho. 


Sapwood is relatively wide, yellowish gray or gray—brown, 
and sharply differentiated from heartwood, which is light to 
dark olive brown. The texture is fine to medium. The grain 
is straight to very irregular and often narrowly interlocked. 
The wood is very heavy and averages about 1,025 kg m3 
(64 Ib ft-3) at 12% moisture content. Thoroughly air-dried 
heartwood specimens generally sink in water. Because of 
its high density and hardness, ipe is moderately difficult to 
machine, but glassy smooth surfaces can be produced. Ipe 
is very strong; in the air-dried condition, it is comparable 
with greenheart (Chlorocardium rodiei). Hardness is two 

to three times that of white oak (Quercus alba) or keruing 
(Dipterocarpus). The wood is highly resistant to decay and 
insects, including both subterranean and dry-wood termites, 
but susceptible to marine borer attack. The heartwood is 
impermeable, but the sapwood can be readily treated with 
preservatives. 


Ipe is used almost exclusively for heavy-duty and durable 
construction. Because of its hardness and good dimensional 
stability, it is particularly well suited for heavy-duty floor- 
ing in trucks and boxcars. It is also used for decks, railroad 
crossties, turnery, tool handles, decorative veneers, and 
some specialty items in textile mills. 


Ipil 
(see Merbau) 


lroko 


Iroko consists of two 
species (Milicia excelsa 
and M. regia). Milicia 
excelsa grows across the 
entire width of tropical 
Africa from the Ivory 
Coast southward to An- 
gola and eastward to 
East Africa. M. regia, 
however, is limited to extreme West Africa from Gambia to 
Ghana; it is less resistant to drought than is M. excelsa. 


The heartwood varies from a pale yellowish brown to dark 
chocolate brown with light markings occurring most con- 
spicuously on flat-sawn surfaces; the sapwood is yellowish 
white. The texture is medium to coarse, and the grain is 
typically interlocked. Iroko can be worked easily with hand 
or machine tools but with some tearing of interlocked grain. 
Occasional deposits of calcium carbonate severely dam- 
age cutting edges. The wood dries rapidly with little or no 
degrade. The strength is similar to that of red maple (Acer 
rubrum), and the weight is about 688 kg m-3 (43 Ib ft) at 
12% moisture content. The heartwood is very resistant to 
decay fungi and resistant to termite and marine borer attack. 


Because of its color and durability, iroko has been sug- 
gested as a substitute for teak (Tectona grandis). Its durabil- 
ity makes it suitable for boat building, piles, other marine 
work, and railroad crossties. Other uses include joinery, 
flooring, furniture, veneer, and cabinetwork. 


Jacaranda 
(see Rosewood, Brazilian) 


Jarrah 


Jarrah (Eucalyptus mar- 
ginata) is native to the 
coastal belt of southwest- 
ern Australia and is one 
of the principal species 
for that country’s sawmill 
industry. 


The heartwood is a 
uniform pink to dark red, often turning to deep brownish 
red with age and exposure to air. The sapwood is pale and 
usually very narrow in old trees. The texture is even and 
moderately coarse, and the grain is frequently interlocked 
or wavy. The wood weighs about 865 kg m-3 (54 lb ft-3) 
at 12% moisture content. The common defects of jarrah 
include gum veins or pockets, which in extreme instances 
separate the log into concentric shells. Jarrah is a heavy, 
hard timber possessing correspondingly high strength prop- 
erties. It is resistant to attack by termites and rated as very 


2-25 


durable with respect to decay. The wood 1s difficult to work 
with hand and machine tools because of its high density and 
irregular grain. 


Jarrah is used for decking and underframing of piers, jetties, 
and bridges, as well as piles and fenders for docks and har- 
bors. As flooring, jarrah has high resistance to wear, but it 

is inclined to splinter under heavy traffic. It is also used for 
railroad crossties and other heavy construction. 


Jatoba 


(see Courbaril) 


Jelutong 


Jelutong (Dyera costu- 
lata) is an important spe- 
cies in Malaysia where it 
is best known for its latex 
production in the manu- 
facture of chewing gum 
ES ; fi rather than for its wood. 
| 


- The wood is white or 
straw colored, and there is no differentiation between 
heartwood and sapwood. The texture is moderately fine 
and even. The grain is straight, and luster is low. The wood 
weighs about 465 kg m-3 (28 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture con- 
tent. The wood is very easy to dry with little tendency to 
split or warp, but staining may cause trouble. It is easy to 
work in all operations, finishes well, and glues satisfacto- 
rily. The wood is rated as nondurable but readily permeable 
to preservatives. 


Because of its low density and ease of working, jelutong is 
well suited for sculpture and pattern making, wooden shoes, 
picture frames, and drawing boards. 


Jequitiba 

(see Albarco) 

Kakaralli 

(see Manbarklak) 

Kaneelhart 
: 7 hie ; Kaneelhart or brown 
' i. A abil o¢ : : 
Biman )s oa tt vii silverballi are names 
hie ‘ + ' | _ applied to the genus 
{yi Vid] 1 i t t Licaria. Species of this 
) } te. t} iit +. | genus grow mostly in 
fs { i i} i i! x Ut t Guyana, French Guiana, 
| : ; 1 es, ti! | and Suriname and are 

* i t tea =| found in association 


with greenheart (Chlo- 
rocardium rodiei) on hilly terrain and wallaba (Eperua) in 
forests. 


The orange or brownish yellow heartwood darkens to yel- 
lowish or coffee brown on exposure to air. The wood is 
sometimes tinged with red or violet. The texture is fine to 


2-26 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


medium, and the grain is straight to slightly interlocked. 
The wood has a fragrant odor, which is lost in drying. Ka- 
neelhart is a very strong and very heavy wood (density of 
air-dried wood is 833 to 1,153 kg m-3 (52 to 72 lb ft-3)); 
the wood is difficult to work. It cuts smoothly and takes an 
excellent finish but requires care in gluing. Kaneelhart has 
excellent resistance to both brown- and white-rot fungi and 
is also rated very high in resistance to dry-wood termites. 


Uses of kaneelhart include furniture, turnery, boat building, 
heavy construction, and parquet flooring. 


Kapur 


The genus Dryobalanops 
consists of nine species 
distributed over parts of 
Malaysia and Indonesia. 
For the export trade, the 
species are combined 
under the name kaput. 


The heartwood is reddish 
brown and clearly demarcated from the pale sapwood. The 
wood is fairly coarse textured but uniform. In general, the 
wood resembles keruing (Dipterocarpus), but on the 
whole, kapur is straighter grained and not quite as coarse 
in texture. Density of the wood averages about 720 to 

800 kg m-3 (45 to 50 Ib ft-3) at 12% moisture content. 
Strength properties are similar to those of keruing at com- 
parable specific gravity. The heartwood is rated resistant 
to attack by decay fungi; it is reported to be vulnerable to 
termites. Kapur is extremely resistant to preservative treat- 
ment. The wood works with moderate ease in most hand 
and machine operations, but blunting of cutters may be 
severe because of silica content, particularly when the dry 
wood is machined. A good surface can be obtained from 
various machining operations, but there is a tendency to- 
ward raised grain if dull cutters are used. Kapur takes nails 
and screws satisfactorily. The wood glues well with urea 
formaldehyde but not with phenolic adhesives. 


Kapur provides good and very durable construction wood 
and is suitable for all purposes for which keruing (Diptero- 
carpus) is used in the United States. In addition, kapur is 
extensively used in plywood either alone or with species of 
Shorea (lauan—meranti). 


Karri 


Karri (Eucalyptus diver- 
sicolor) is a very large 
tree limited to southwest- 
ern Australia. 


Karri resembles jarrah 
(E. marginata) in struc- 
ture and general appear- 
ance. It is usually paler 
in color and, on average, slightly heavier (913 kg m3 

(57 lb ft-3)) at 12% moisture content. Karri is a heavy 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


hardwood with mechanical properties of a correspondingly 
high order, even somewhat higher than that of jarrah. The 
heartwood is rated as moderately durable, though less so 
than that of jarrah. It is extremely difficult to treat with pre- 
servatives. The wood is fairly hard to machine and difficult 
to cut with hand tools. It is generally more resistant to cut- 
ting than is jarrah and has a slightly more dulling effect on 
tool edges. 


Karri is inferior to jarrah for underground use and water- 
works. However, where flexural strength is required, such 
as in bridges, floors, rafters, and beams, karri is an excellent 
wood. Karri is popular in heavy construction because of its 
strength and availability in large sizes and long lengths that 
are free of defects. 


Kauta 
(see Marishballi) 


Kempas (Koompassia 
malaccensis) is distributed 
throughout the lowland 
forest in rather swampy 
areas of Malaysia and In- 
donesia. 


When exposed to air, the 
freshly cut brick-red heart- 
wood darkens to an orange-red or red—brown with numer- 
ous yellow-brown streaks as a result of the soft tissue 
(axial parenchyma) associated with the pores. The texture 
is rather coarse, and the grain is typically interlocked. 
Kempas is a hard, heavy wood (density of air-dried wood is 
880 kg m3 (55 lb ft-3)); the wood is difficult to work with 
hand and machine tools. The wood dries well, with some 
tendency to warp and check. The heartwood is resistant 

to attack by decay fungi but vulnerable to termite activity. 
However, it treats readily with preservative retention as 
high as 320 kg m-3 (20 lb ft-°). 


Kempas is ideal for heavy construction work, railroad 
crossties, and flooring. 

Keruing (Apitong) 

Keruing or apitong (Dip- 
terocarpus) is widely scat- 
tered throughout the Indo- 
Malaysian region. Most of 
the more than 70 species 
in this genus are marketed 
under the name keruing. 
Other important species are 
marketed as apitong in the Philippine Islands and yang in 
Thailand. 


The heartwood varies from light to dark red—brown or 
brown to dark brown, sometimes with a purple tint; the 
heartwood is usually well defined from the gray or buff- 
colored sapwood. Similar to kapur (Drvobalanops), the 


texture of keruing is moderately coarse and the grain is 
straight or shallowly interlocked. The wood is strong, hard, 
and heavy (density of air-dried wood is 720 to 800 kg m3 
(45 to 50 Ib ft-3)); this wood is characterized by the pres- 
ence of resin ducts, which occur singly or in short arcs as 
seen on end-grain surfaces. This resinous condition and the 
presence of silica can present troublesome problems. Sap- 
wood and heartwood are moderately resistant to preserva- 
tive treatments. However, the wood should be treated with 
preservatives when it is used in contact with the ground. 
Durability varies with species, but the wood is generally 
classified as moderately durable. Keruing generally takes to 
sawing and machining, particularly when green, but saws 
and cutters dull easily as a result of high silica content in 
the wood. Resin adheres to machinery and tools and may 
be troublesome. Also, resin may cause gluing and finishing 
difficulties. 


Keruing is used for general construction work, framework 
for boats, flooring, pallets, chemical processing equipment, 
veneer and plywood, railroad crossties (if treated), truck 
floors, and boardwalks. 

Khaya 

(see Mahogany, African) 

Kokrodua 

(see Afrormosia) 


Korina 
(see Limba) 


Krabak 
(see Mersawa) 


Kwila 
(see Merbau) 


Lapacho 
(see Ipe) 
Lapuna 
(see Ceiba) 


Lauan 
(see Meranti Groups) 


Lemonwood 


(see Degame) 


Lignumvitae 


For many years, the only 
species of lignumvitae 
used on a large scale was 
Guaiacum officinale, 
which is native to the 
West Indies, northern 
Venezuela, northern Co- 
lombia, and Panama. With 


2-27 


the near exhaustion of G. officinale, harvesters turned to 

G. sanctum, which is now the principal commercial species. 
G. sanctum occupies the same range as G. officinale but 

is more extensive and includes the Pacific side of Central 
America as well as southern Mexico. 


Lignumvitae is one of the heaviest and hardest woods on 
the market. The wood is characterized by its unique green 
color and oily or waxy feel. The wood has a fine uniform 
texture and closely interlocked grain. Its resin content may 
constitute up to one-fourth of the air-dried weight of the 
heartwood. 


Lignumvitae wood is used chiefly for bearing or bushing 
blocks for ship propeller shafts. The great strength and 
tenacity of lignumvitae, combined with self-lubricating 
properties resulting from the high resin content, make it 
especially adaptable for underwater use. It is also used for 
such articles as mallets, pulley sheaves, caster wheels, sten- 
cil and chisel blocks, and turned products. 


Limba 


Limba (Zerminalia su- 
perba), also referred to as 
afara, korina, or ofram, is 
widely distributed from 
Sierra Leone to Angola and 
Zaire in the rainforest and 
savanna forest. Limba is 
also favored as a plantation 
species in West Africa. 


The heartwood varies from gray—white to creamy or yellow 
brown and may contain dark streaks that are nearly black, 
producing an attractive figure that is valued for decorative 
veneer. The light color of the wood is considered an impor- 
tant asset for the manufacture of blond furniture. The wood 
is generally straight grained and of uniform but coarse 
texture. The wood is easy to dry and shrinkage is reported 
to be rather low. Limba is not resistant to decay, insects, 

or termites. It is easy to work with all types of tools and is 
made into veneer without difficulty. 


Principal uses include plywood, furniture, interior joinery, 
and sliced decorative veneer. 


Macacauba 
(see Macawood) 


Macawood 


Macawood and trebol are 
common names applied 
to species in the genus 
Platymiscium. Other 
common names include 
cristobal and macacauba. 
This genus is distributed 
across continental 


2-28 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


tropical America from southern Mexico to the Brazilian 
Amazon region and Trinidad. 


The bright red to reddish or purplish brown heartwood is 
more or less striped. Darker specimens look waxy, and the 
sapwood is sharply demarcated from the heartwood. The 
texture is medium to fine, and the grain is straight to curly 
or striped. The wood is not very difficult to work, and it 
finishes smoothly and takes on a high polish. Generally, 
macawood air dries slowly with a slight tendency to warp 
and check. Strength is quite high, and density of air-dried 
wood ranges from 880 to 1,170 kg m-3 (55 to 73 lb ft-3). 
The heartwood is reported to be highly resistant to attack by 
decay fungi, insects, and dry-wood termites. Although the 
sapwood absorbs preservatives well, the heartwood is resis- 
tant to treatment. 


Macawood is a fine furniture and cabinet wood. It is also 
used in decorative veneers, musical instruments, turnery, 
joinery, and specialty items such as violin bows and billiard 
cues. 


Machinmango 
(see Manbarklak) 


Mahogany 


The name mahogany is presently applied to several distinct 
kinds of commercial wood. The original mahogany wood, 
produced by Swietenia mahagoni, came from the American 
West Indies. This was the premier wood for fine furniture 
cabinet work and shipbuilding in Europe as early as the 
1600s. Because the good reputation associated with the 
name mahogany is based on this wood, American mahog- 
any is sometimes referred to as true mahogany. A related 
African wood, of the genus Khaya, has long been marketed 
as “African mahogany” and is used for much the same pur- 
poses as American mahogany because of its similar proper- 
ties and overall appearance. A third kind of wood called 
mahogany, and the one most commonly encountered in the 
market, is “Philippine mahogany.” This name is applied to 
a group of Asian woods belonging to the genus Shorea. In 
this chapter, information on the “Philippine mahoganies” is 
given under lauan and meranti groups. 


Mahogany, African 


The bulk of “African 
mahogany” shipped from 
west-central Africa is 
Khaya ivorensis, the most 
widely distributed and 
plentiful species of the 
genus found in the coastal 
belt of the so-called high 
forest. The closely allied 
species K. anthotheca has a more restricted range and is 
found farther inland in regions of lower rainfall but well 
within the area now being used for the export trade. 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


The heartwood varies from pale pink to dark reddish brown. 
The grain is frequently interlocked, and the texture is 
medium to coarse, comparable with that of American ma- 
hogany (Swietenia macrophylla). The wood 1s easy to dry, 
but machining properties are rather variable. Nailing and 
gluing properties are good, and an excellent finish is readily 
obtained. The wood is easy to slice and peel. In decay resis- 
tance, African mahogany is generally rated as moderately 
durable, which is below the durability rating for American 
mahogany. 


Principal uses for African mahogany include furniture and 
cabinetwork, interior woodwork, boat construction, and 
veneer. 


Mahogany, American 


True, American, or Hon- 
duras mahogany (Swiete- 
nia macrophylla) ranges 
from southern Mexico 
through Central America 
into South America as far 
south as Bolivia. Planta- 
tions have been estab- 
lished within its natural range and elsewhere throughout 
the tropics. 


The heartwood varies from pale pink or salmon colored to 
dark reddish brown. The grain is generally straighter than 
that of African mahogany (Khaya ivorensis); however, a 
wide variety of grain patterns are obtained from American 
mahogany. The texture is rather fine to coarse. American 
mahogany is easily air or kiln dried without appreciable 
warp or checks, and it has excellent dimensional stability. 
It is rated as durable in resistance to decay fungi and mod- 
erately resistant to dry-wood termites. Both heartwood and 
sapwood are resistant to treatment with preservatives. The 
wood is very easy to work with hand and machine tools, 
and it slices and rotary cuts into fine veneer without dif- 
ficulty. It also is easy to finish and takes an excellent polish. 
The air-dried strength of American mahogany is similar to 
that of American elm (U/mus americana). Density of air- 
dried wood varies from 480 to 833 kg m3 (30 to 52 Ib ft-3). 


The principal uses for mahogany are fine furniture and cabi- 
nets, interior woodwork, pattern woodwork, boat construc- 
tion, fancy veneers, musical instruments, precision instru- 
ments, paneling, turnery, carving, and many other uses that 
call for an attractive and dimensionally stable wood. 


Mahogany, Philippine 
(see Meranti Groups) 
Manbarklak 


Manbarklak is a common name applied to species in the 
genus Eschweilera. Other names include kakaralli, machin- 
mango, and mata-mata. About 80 species of this genus are 


distributed from eastern 
Brazil through the Ama- 
zon basin, to the Guianas, 
Trinidad, and Costa Rica. 


The heartwood of most 
species is light, grayish, 
reddish brown, or brown- 
ish buff. The texture is 
fine and uniform, and the grain is typically straight. Man- 
barklak is a very hard and heavy wood (density of air-dried 
wood ranges from 768 to 1,185 kg m-3 (48 to 74 Ib ft-3)) 
that is rated as fairly difficult to dry. Most species are dif- 
ficult to work because of the high density and high silica 
content. Most species are highly resistant to attack by decay 
fungi. Also, most species have gained wide recognition for 
their high degree of resistance to marine borer attack. Resis- 
tance to dry-wood termite attack is variable depending on 
species. 


Manbarklak is an ideal wood for marine and other heavy 
construction uses. It is also used for industrial flooring, mill 
equipment, railroad crossties, piles, and turnery. 


Manni 

Manni (Symphonia globu- 
lifera) is native to the 
West Indies, Mexico, and 
Central, North, and South 
America. It also occurs in 
tropical West Africa. Other 
names include ossol (Ga- 
bon), anani (Brazil), waika 
(Africa), and chewstick 
(Belize), a name acquired because of its use as a primitive 
toothbrush and flossing tool. 


The heartwood is yellowish, grayish, or greenish brown and 
is distinct from the whitish sapwood. The texture is coarse 
and the grain straight to irregular. The wood is very easy to 
work with both hand and machine tools, but surfaces tend 
to roughen in planing and shaping. Manni air-dries rapidly 
with only moderate warp and checking. Its strength is simi- 
lar to that of hickory (Carya), and the density of air-dried 
wood is 704 kg m= (44 Ib ft-3). The heartwood is durable 
in ground contact but only moderately resistant to dry-wood 
and subterranean termites. The wood is rated as resistant to 
treatment with preservatives. 


Manni is a general purpose wood that is used for railroad 
ties, general construction, cooperage, furniture components, 
flooring, and utility plywood. 


Marishballi 


Marishballi is the common name applied to species of the 
genus Licania. Other names include kauta and anaura. Spe- 
cies of Licania are widely distributed in tropical America 


2-29 


but most abundant in the 
Guianas and the lower 
Amazon region of Brazil. 


The heartwood is gener- 
ally yellowish to dark 
brown, sometimes with a 
reddish tinge. The texture 
is fine and close, and the 
grain is usually straight. Marishballi is strong and very 
heavy; density of air-dried wood is 833 to 1,153 kg m-3 

(52 to 72 lb ft-3). The wood is rated as easy to moderately 
difficult to air dry. Because of its high density and silica 
content, marishballi is difficult to work. The use of hard- 
ened cutters is suggested to obtain smooth surfaces. Dura- 
bility varies with species, but marishballi is generally con- 
sidered to have low to moderately low resistance to attack 
by decay fungi. However, it is known for its high resistance 
to attack by marine borers. Permeability also varies, but the 
heartwood is generally moderately responsive to treatment. 


Marishballi is ideal for underwater marine construction, 
heavy construction above ground, and railroad crossties 
(treated). 


Mata-Mata 

(see Manbarklak) 
Mayflower 

(see Roble) 

Melapi 

(see Meranti Groups) 


Meranti Groups 


7 + 


Meranti is a common 
name applied commer- 
cially to four groups of 
species of Shorea from 
southeast Asia, most com- 
monly Malaysia, Indone- 
sia, and the Philippines. 
There are thousands of 
common names for the various species of Shorea, but the 
names Philippine mahogany and lauan are often substituted 
for meranti. The four groups of meranti are separated on the 
basis of heartwood color and weight (Table 2—2). About 70 
species of Shorea belong to the light and dark red meranti 
groups, 22 species to the white meranti group, and 33 spe- 
cies to the yellow meranti group. 


Meranti species as a whole have a coarser texture than that 
of mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) and do not have 
dark-colored deposits in pores. The grain is usually inter- 
locked. All merantis have axial resin ducts aligned in long, 
continuous, tangential lines as seen on the end surface of 
the wood. These ducts sometimes contain white deposits 
that are visible to the naked eye, but the wood is not 


2-30 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 2-2. Woods belonging to the genus Shorea 


Density 
Name Color of air-dried wood 
Dark red meranti Dark brown, medium 640+ kg m> 
(also called to deep red, sometimes (40+ Ib ft) 


tanguile and dark with a purplish tinge 
red seraya) 


Light red Variable—almost white 

meranti (also to pale pink, dark red, 

called red seraya) pale brown, or deep 
brown 


Whitish when freshly 
cut, becoming light 
yellow-brown on 
exposure to air 


400-640 kg m™®, 
averaging 512 kg m* 
(25-40 Ib ft, 
averaging 32 lb ft) 
480-870 kg m=> 
(30-54 Ib ft *) 


White meranti 
(also called 
melapi) 


480-640 kg m=* 
(30-40 Ib ft >) 


Yellow meranti 
(also called 
yellow seraya) 


Light yellow or yellow— 
brown, sometimes with 
a greenish tinge; darkens 
on exposure to air 


resinous like some keruing (Dipterocarpus) species that re- 
semble meranti. All the meranti groups are machined easily 
except white meranti, which dulls cutters as a result of high 
silica content in the wood. The light red and white merantis 
dry easily without degrade, but dark red and yellow meran- 
tis dry more slowly with a tendency to warp. The strength 
and shrinkage properties of the meranti groups compare 
favorably with that of northern red oak (Quercus rubra). 
The light red, white, and yellow merantis are not durable 

in exposed conditions or in ground contact, whereas dark 
red meranti is moderately durable. Generally, heartwood is 
extremely resistant to moderately resistant to preservative 
treatments. 


Species of meranti constitute a large percentage of the total 
hardwood plywood imported into the United States. Other 
uses include joinery, furniture and cabinetwork, moulding 
and millwork, flooring, and general construction. Some 
dark red meranti is used for decking. 


Merbau 

Merbau (Malaysia), ipil 
(Philippines), and kwila 
(New Guinea) are names 
applied to species of the 
genus /ntsia, most com- 
monly /. bijuga. Intsia is 
distributed throughout 
the Indo—Malaysian 
region, Indonesia, 
Philippines, and many western Pacific islands, as well 

as Australia. 


Freshly cut yellowish to orange—brown heartwood turns 
brown or dark red—brown on exposure to air. The texture 
is rather coarse, and the grain is straight to interlocked or 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


wavy. The strength of air-dried merbau is comparable with 
that of hickory (Carya), but density is somewhat lower 
(800 kg m3 (50 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture content). The 
wood dries well with little degrade but stains black in the 
presence of iron and moisture. Merbau is rather difficult to 
saw because it sticks to saw teeth and dulls cutting edges. 
However, the wood dresses smoothly in most operations 
and finishes well. Merbau has good durability and high re- 
sistance to termite attack. The heartwood resists treatment, 
but the sapwood can be treated with preservatives. Merbau 
is used in furniture, fine joinery, tumery, cabinets, flooring, 
musical instruments, and specialty items. 


Mersawa 


TA Mersawa is one of the 
y * common names applied 
®! be the ia to the genus Anisoptera, 
BS 3¢ which has about 15 species 
ni distributed from the Philip- 
® ; “ pine Islands and Malaysia 
ligt, 7 hg | to east Pakistan. Names 
Be <te3) applied to this wood vary 
with the source, - = names are generally used in the 
lumber trade: krabak (Thailand), mersawa (Malaysia), and 
palosapis (Philippines). 


Mersawa wood is light in color and has a moderately coarse 
texture. Freshly sawn heartwood is pale yellow or yellow- 
ish brown and darkens on exposure to air. Some wood may 
show a pinkish cast or pink streaks, but these eventually 
disappear on exposure to air. The wood weighs between 
544 and 752 kg m-3 (34 and 47 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture 
content and about 945 kg m-3 (59 lb ft-3) when green. The 
sapwood is susceptible to attack by powderpost beetles, and 
the heartwood is not resistant to termites. The heartwood is 
rated as moderately resistant to fungal decay and should not 
be used under conditions that favor decay. The heartwood 
does not absorb preservative solutions readily. The wood 
machines easily, but because of the presence of silica, the 
wood severely dulls the cutting edges of ordinary tools and 
is very hard on saws. 


The major volume of mersawa is used as plywood because 
conversion in this form presents considerably less difficulty 
than does the production of lumber. 


Mora 


Ny ASK 


Mora (Mora excelsa and 
M. gonggrijpii) is widely 
distributed in the Guianas 
and also occurs in the Ori- 
noco Delta of Venezuela. 


SO id 


The yellowish red—brown, 
reddish brown, or dark 
red heartwood with pale 


streaks is distinct from the yellowish to pale brown sap- 
wood. The texture is moderately fine to rather coarse, and 
the grain is straight to interlocked. Mora is a strong and 
heavy wood (density of air-dried wood is 945 to 1,040 kg 
m-3 (59 to 65 Ib ft-)); this wood is moderately difficult to 
work but yields smooth surfaces in sawing, planing, turn- 
ing, and boring. The wood is generally rated as moderately 
difficult to dry. Mora is rated as durable to very durable in 
resistance to brown- and white-rot fungi. M. gonggrijpii is 
rated very resistant to dry-wood termites, but M. excelsa is 
considerably less resistant. The sapwood responds readily 
to preservative treatments, but the heartwood resists 
treatment. 


Mora is used for industrial flooring, railroad crossties, 
shipbuilding, and heavy construction. 

Oak (Tropical) 

The oaks (Quercus) are 
abundantly represented in 
Mexico and Central Amer- 
ica with about 150 species, 
which are nearly equally 
divided between the red 
and white oak groups. 

4] More than 100 species 
occur in Mexico and about 25 in Guatemala; the number 
diminishes southward to Colombia, which has two species. 
The usual Spanish name applied to the oaks is encino or 
roble, and both names are used interchangeably irrespective 
of species or use of the wood. 


In heartwood color, texture, and grain characteristics, tropi- 
cal oaks are similar to the diffuse porous oaks of the United 
States, especially live oak (Quercus virginiana). In most 
cases, tropical oaks are heavier (density of air-dried wood 
is 704 to 993 kg m-3 (44 to 62 Ib ft-3)) than the U.S. spe- 
cies. Strength data are available for only four species, and 
the values fall between those of white oak (Q. alba) and 
live oak (Q. virginiana) or are equal to those of live oak. 
The heartwood is rated as very resistant to decay fungi 

and difficult to treat with preservatives. 


Utilization of the tropical oaks is very limited at present be- 
cause of difficulties encountered in the drying of the wood. 
The major volume is used in the form of charcoal, but the 
wood is used for flooring, railroad crossties, mine timbers, 
tight cooperage, boat and ship construction, and decorative 
veneers. 


Obeche 


Obeche (Triplochiton scleroxylon) trees of west-central Af- 
rica reach a height of 50 m (150 ft) or more and a diameter 
of up to 2 m (5 ft). The trunk is usually free of branches for 
a considerable height so that clear lumber of considerable 
size can be obtained. 


2-31 


The wood is creamy white 
to pale yellow with little 
or no difference between 
sapwood and heartwood. 
The wood is fairly soft, of 
uniform medium to coarse 
texture, and the grain is 
usually interlocked but 
sometimes straight. Air- 
dry wood weighs about 385 kg m3 (24 lb ft-3). Obeche 
dries readily with little degrade. It is not resistant to decay, 
and green sapwood is subject to blue stain. The wood is 
easy to work and machine, veneers and glues well, and 
takes nails and screws without splitting. 


The characteristics of obeche make it especially suitable for 
veneer and corestock. Other uses include furniture, com- 
ponents, millwork, blockboard, boxes and crates, particle- 
board and fiberboard, patterns, and artificial limbs. 


Ofram 


(see Limba) 


Okoume 


The natural distribution of 
okoume (Aucoumea klai- 
neana) is rather restricted; 
the species is found only 
in west-central Africa 

and Guinea. However, 
okoume is extensively 
planted throughout its 
natural range. 


The heartwood is salmon-pink in color, and the narrow 
sapwood is whitish or pale gray. The wood has a high luster 
and uniform texture. The texture is slightly coarser than that 
of birch (Betula). The nondurable heartwood dries readily 
with little degrade. Sawn lumber is somewhat difficult to 
machine because of the silica content, but the wood glues, 
nails, and peels into veneer easily. Okoume offers unusual 
flexibility in finishing because the color, which is of me- 
dium intensity, permits toning to either lighter or darker 
shades. 


In the United States, okoume is generally used for decora- 

tive plywood paneling, general utility plywood, and doors. 
Other uses include furniture components, joinery, and light 
construction. 


Opepe (Nauclea dider- 
richii) is widely distrib- 
uted in Africa from Sierra 
Leone to the Congo region 
and eastward to Uganda. 

It is often found in pure 
stands. 


2-32 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


The orange or golden yellow heartwood darkens on expo- 
sure to air and is clearly defined from the whitish or pale 
yellow sapwood. The texture is rather coarse, and the grain 
is usually interlocked or irregular. The density of air-dried 
wood (752 kg m3 (47 lb ft-3)) is about the same as that of 
true hickory (Carya), but strength properties are somewhat 
lower. Quartersawn stock dries rapidly with little checking 
or warp, but flat-sawn lumber may develop considerable 
degrade. The wood works moderately well with hand and 
machine tools. It also glues and finishes satisfactorily. The 
heartwood is rated as very resistant to decay and moder- 
ately resistant to termite attacks. The sapwood is permeable 
to preservatives, but the heartwood is moderately resistant 
to preservative treatment. 


Opepe is a general construction wood that is used in dock 
and marine work, boat building, railroad crossties, flooring, 
and furniture. 

Ossol 

(see Manni) 

Otie 

(see Ilomba) 

Ovangkol 

(see Benge) 


Palosapis 
(see Mersawa) 


Para-Angelim 
(see Sucupira) 


Pau Marfim 


The range of pau marfim 
(Balfourodendron riede- 
lianum) is rather limited, 
extending from the State 
of Sao Paulo, Brazil, into 
Paraguay and the provinces 
of Corrientes and Missio- 
nes of northern Argentina. 
In Brazil, it is generally 
known as pau marfim and in Argentina and Paraguay, as 
guatambu. 


In color and general appearance, pau marfim wood is very 
similar to birch (Betula) or sugar maple (Acer saccharum) 
sapwood. Although growth rings are present, they do not 
show as distinctly as those in birch and maple. There is no 
apparent difference in color between heartwood and sap- 
wood. The wood is straight grained and easy to work and 
finish, but it is not considered resistant to decay. Average 
density of air-dried wood is about 802 kg m-3 (50 lb ft-3). 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


In its areas of growth, pau marfim is used for much the 
same purposes as are sugar maple and birch in the United 
States. Introduced to the U.S. market in the late 1960s, pau 
marfim has been very well received and is especially es- 
teemed for turnery. 


Peroba, White 


(see Peroba de Campos) 


Peroba de Campos 


Peroba de campos (Pa- 
ratecoma peroba), also 
referred to as white peroba, 
grows in the coastal forests 
of eastern Brazil, ranging 
from Bahia to Rio de Ja- 
neiro. It is the only species 
in the genus Paratecoma. 


The heartwood varies in color but is generally shades of 
brown with tendencies toward olive and red. The sapwood 
is a yellowish gray and is clearly defined from the heart- 
wood. The texture is relatively fine and approximates that 
of birch (Betula). The grain is commonly interlocked, with 
a narrow stripe or wavy figure. The wood machines easily; 
however, particular care must be taken in planing to prevent 
excessive grain tearing of quartered surfaces. There is some 
evidence that the fine dust from machining operations may 
produce allergic responses in certain individuals. Density 
of air-dried wood averages about 738 kg m°> (46 lb ft). 
Peroba de campos is heavier than teak (Jectona grandis) or 
white oak (Quercus alba), and it is proportionately stronger 
than either of these species. The heartwood of peroba de 
campos is rated as very durable with respect to decay and 
difficult to treat with preservatives. 


In Brazil, peroba de campos is used in the manufacture of 
fine furniture, flooring, and decorative paneling. The prin- 
cipal use in the United States is shipbuilding, where peroba 
de campos serves as substitute for white oak (Quercus alba) 
for all purposes except bent members. 


Peroba Rosa 


Peroba rosa is the common 
name applied to a num- 
ber of similar species in 
the genus Aspidosperma. 
These species occur in 
southeastern Brazil and 
parts of Argentina. 


The heartwood is a dis- 
tinctive rose-red to yellowish, often variegated or streaked 
with purple or brown, and becomes brownish yellow to 
dark brown upon exposure to air; the heartwood is often 
not demarcated from the yellowish sapwood. The texture 


is fine and uniform, and the grain is straight to irregular. 
The wood is moderately heavy; weight of air-dried wood is 
752 kg m3 (47 lb ft). Strength properties are comparable 
with those of U.S. oak (Quercus). The wood dries with little 
checking or splitting. It works with moderate ease, and it 
glues and finishes satisfactorily. The heartwood is resistant 
to decay fungi but susceptible to dry-wood termite attack. 
Although the sapwood takes preservative treatment moder- 
ately well, the heartwood resists treatment. 


Peroba is suited for general construction work and is fa- 
vored for fine furniture and cabinetwork and decorative 
veneers. Other uses include flooring, interior woodwork, 
sashes and doors, and turnery. 


Pilon 


The two main species 

of pilon are Hieronyma 
alchorneoides and H. 
laxiflora, also referred 

to as suradan. These spe- 
cies range from southern 
Mexico to southern Brazil 
including the Guianas, Peru, 
and Colombia. Pilon species are also found throughout the 
West Indies. 


The heartwood is a light reddish brown to chocolate brown 
or sometimes dark red; the sapwood is pinkish white. The 
texture is moderately coarse and the grain interlocked. The 
wood air-dries rapidly with only a moderate amount of 
warp and checking. It has good working properties in all 
operations except planing, which is rated poor as a result of 
the characteristic interlocked grain. The strength of pilon 
is comparable with that of true hickory (Carya), and the 
density of air-dried wood ranges from 736 to 849 kg m-3 
(46 to 53 lb ft-). Pilon is rated moderately to very durable 
in ground contact and resistant to moderately resistant to 
subterranean and dry-wood termites. Both heartwood and 
sapwood are reported to be treatable with preservatives by 
both open tank and pressure vacuum processes. 


Pilon is especially suited for heavy construction, railway 
crossties, marinework, and flooring. It is also used for furni- 
ture, cabinetwork, decorative veneers, turnery, and joinery. 
Piquia 

Piquia is the common name 
generally applied to spe- 
cies in the genus Caryocar. 
This genus is distributed 
from Costa Rica southward 
into northern Colombia and 
from the upland forest of 
the Amazon valley to east- 
ern Brazil and the Guianas. 


2-33 


The yellowish to light grayish brown heartwood is hardly 
distinguishable from the sapwood. The texture is medium 
to rather coarse, and the grain is generally interlocked. The 
wood dries at a slow rate; warping and checking may de- 
velop, but only to a minor extent. Piquia is reported to be 
easy to moderately difficult to saw; cutting edges dull rap- 
idly. The heartwood is very durable and resistant to decay 
fungi and dry-wood termites but only moderately resistant 
to marine borers. 


Piquia is recommended for general and marine construc- 
tion, heavy flooring, railway crossties, boat parts, and fur- 
niture components. It is especially suitable where hardness 
and high wear resistance are needed. 


Primavera 


The natural distribution of 
primavera (Zabebuia don- 
nell—smithii) is restricted 
to southwestern Mexico, 
the Pacific coast of Guate- 
mala and El Salvador, and 
north-central Honduras. 
Primavera is regarded as 
one of the primary light-colored woods, but its use has been 
limited because of its rather restricted range and relative 
scarcity of naturally grown trees. Recent plantations have 
increased the availability of this species and have pro- 
vided a more constant source of supply. The quality of the 
plantation-grown wood is equal in all respects to the wood 
obtained from naturally grown trees. 


The heartwood is whitish to straw-yellow, and in some logs 
it may be tinted with pale brown or pinkish streaks. The 
texture is medium to rather coarse, and the grain is straight 
to wavy, which produces a wide variety of figure patterns. 
The wood also has a very high luster. Shrinkage is rather 
low, and the wood shows a high degree of dimensional 
stability. Despite considerable grain variation, primavera 
machines remarkably well. The density of air-dried wood 
is 465 kg m-3(29 lb ft-3), and the wood is comparable in 
strength with water tupelo (Nyssa aquatica). Resistance to 
both brown- and white-rot fungi varies. Weathering charac- 
teristics are good. 


The dimensional stability, ease of working, and pleasing ap- 
pearance make primavera a suitable choice for solid furni- 
ture, paneling, interior woodwork, and special exterior uses. 


Purpleheart 


Purpleheart, also referred 
to as amaranth, is the name 
applied to species in the 
genus Peltogyne. The cen- 
ter of distribution is in the 
north-central part of the 
Brazilian Amazon region, 
but the combined range of 


ae . 
eee Welty da 


2-34 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


all species is from Mexico through Central America and 
southward to southern Brazil. 


Freshly cut heartwood is brown. It turns a deep purple upon 
exposure to air and eventually dark brown upon exposure to 
light. The texture is medium to fine, and the grain is usually 
straight. This strong and heavy wood (density of air-dried 
wood is 800 to 1,057 kg m-3 (50 to 66 lb ft-3)) is rated as 
easy to moderately difficult to air dry. It is moderately dif- 
ficult to work with using either hand or machine tools, and 
it dulls cutters rather quickly. Gummy resin exudes when 
the wood is heated by dull tools. A slow feed rate and spe- 
cially hardened cutters are suggested for optimal cutting. 
The wood turns easily, is easy to glue, and takes finishes 
well. The heartwood is rated as highly resistant to attack by 
decay fungi and very resistant to dry-wood termites. It is 
extremely resistant to treatment with preservatives. 


The unusual and unique color of purpleheart makes this 
wood desirable for turnery, marquetry, cabinets, fine fur- 
niture, parquet flooring, and many specialty items, such as 
billiard cue butts and carvings. Other uses include heavy 
construction, shipbuilding, and chemical vats. 


Pycnanthus 


(see Ilomba) 


Ramin 


Ramin (Gonystylus banca- 
nus) is native to southeast 
Asia from the Malaysian 
Peninsula to Sumatra and 
Borneo. 


Both the heartwood and 
sapwood are the color 

of pale straw, yellow, or 
whitish. The grain is straight or shallowly interlocked. 
The texture is even, moderately fine, and similar to that of 
American mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla). The wood 
is without figure or luster. Ramin is moderately hard and 
heavy, weighing about 672 kg m-3 (42 Ib ft-3) in the air- 
dried condition. The wood is easy to work, finishes well, 
and glues satisfactorily. Ramin is rated as not resistant to 
decay but permeable with respect to preservative treatment. 


Ramin is used for plywood, interior woodwork, furniture, 
tumery, joinery, moulding, flooring, dowels, and handles of 
nonstriking tools (brooms), and as a general utility wood. 


Roble 


Roble, a species in the 
roble group of Tabebuia 
ef SF Ny (generally 7: rosea), ranges 

from southern Mexico 
Dit through Central America 
to Venezuela and Ecuador. 
The name roble comes 


pie oye? vi: @ aere! 
) Me 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


from the Spanish word for oak (Quercus). In addition, 

T. rosea is called roble because the wood superficially re- 
sembles U.S. oak. Other names for 7: rosea are mayflower 
and apamate. 


The sapwood becomes a pale brown upon exposure to air. 
The heartwood varies from golden brown to dark brown, 
and it has no distinctive odor or taste. The texture is me- 
dium and the grain narrowly interlocked. The wood weighs 
about 642 kg m-3 (40 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture content. 
Roble has excellent working properties in all machine op- 
erations. It finishes attractively in natural color and takes 
finishes with good results. It weighs less than the aver- 

age of U.S. white oaks (Quercus) but is comparable with 
respect to bending and compression parallel to grain. The 
heartwood of roble is generally rated as moderately to very 
durable with respect to decay; the darker and heavier wood 
is regarded as more decay resistant than the lighter-colored 
woods. 


Roble is used extensively for furniture, interior woodwork, 
doors, flooring, boat building, ax handles, and general 
construction. The wood veneers well and produces attrac- 
tive paneling. For some applications, roble is suggested as 
a substitute for American white ash (Fraxinus americana) 
and oak (Quercus). 


Rosewood, Brazilian 


Brazilian rosewood (Dal- 
bergia nigra), also referred 
to as jacaranda, occurs in 
eastern Brazilian forests 
from the State of Bahia to 
Rio de Janeiro. Because it 
was exploited for a long 
time, Brazilian rosewood 
is no longer abundant. 


The heartwood varies with respect to color, through shades 
of brown, red, and violet, and it is irregularly and conspicu- 
ously streaked with black. It is sharply demarcated from the 
white sapwood. Many kinds of rosewood are distinguished 
locally on the basis of prevailing color. The texture is 
coarse, and the grain is generally straight. The heartwood 
has an oily or waxy appearance and feel, and its odor is 
fragrant and distinctive. The wood is hard and heavy 
(weight of air-dried wood is 752 to 897 kg m-3 (47 to 

56 Ib ft-3)); thoroughly air-dried wood will barely float in 
water. Strength properties of Brazilian rosewood are high 
and are more than adequate for the purposes for which this 
wood is used. For example, Brazilian rosewood is harder 
than any U.S. native hardwood species used for furniture 
and veneer. The wood machines and veneers well. It can 

be glued satisfactorily, provided the necessary precautions 
are taken to ensure good glue bonds, with respect to oily 
wood. Brazilian rosewood has an excellent reputation for 


durability with respect to fungal and insect attack, including 
termites, although the wood is not used for purposes where 
durability is necessary. 


Brazilian rosewood is used primarily in the form of veneer 
for decorative plywood. Limited quantities are used in the 
solid form for specialty items such as cutlery handles, brush 
backs, billiard cue butts, and fancy turnery. 


Rosewood, Indian 


Indian rosewood (Dalber- 
gia latifolia) is native to 
most provinces of India 
except in the northwest. 


The heartwood varies in 
color from golden brown 
to dark purplish brown 
with denser blackish 
streaks at the end of growth zones, giving rise to an attrac- 
tive figure on flat-sawn surfaces. The narrow sapwood 

is yellowish. The average weight is about 849 kg m3 

(53 Ib ft-3) at 12% moisture content. The texture is uniform 
and moderately coarse. Indian rosewood is quite similar in 
appearance to Brazilian (Dalbergia nigra) and Honduran 
(Dalbergia stevensonii) rosewood. The wood is reported to 
kiln-dry well though slowly, and the color improves during 
drying. Indian rosewood is a heavy wood with high strength 
properties; after drying, it is particularly hard for its weight. 
The wood is moderately hard to work with hand tools and 
offers a fair resistance in machine operations. Lumber with 
calcareous deposits tends to dull tools rapidly. The wood 
tums well and has high screw-holding properties. If a very 
smooth surface is required for certain purposes, pores (ves- 
sels) may need to be filled. 


Indian rosewood is essentially a decorative wood for high- 
quality furniture and cabinetwork. In the United States, it is 
used primarily in the form of veneer. 


Sande 


Practically all commercial- 
ly available sande (mostly 
Brosimum utile) comes 
from Pacific Ecuador and 
Colombia. However, the 
group of species ranges 
from the Atlantic Coast in 
Costa Rica southward to 
Colombia and Ecuador. 


The sapwood and heartwood show no distinction; the wood 
is uniformly yellowish white to yellowish or light brown. 
The texture is medium to moderately coarse and even, and 
the grain can be widely and narrowly interlocked. The den- 
sity of air-dried wood ranges from 384 to 608 kg m-3 (24 
to 38 Ib ft-3), and the strength is comparable with that of 


2-35 


U.S. oak (Quercus). The lumber air dries rapidly with little 
or no degrade. However, material containing tension wood 
is subject to warp, and the tension wood may cause fuzzy 
grain as well as overheating of saws as a result of pinching. 
The wood is not durable with respect to stain, decay, and 
insect attack, and care must be exercised to prevent degrade 
from these agents. The wood stains and finishes easily and 
presents no gluing problems. 


Sande is used for plywood, particleboard, fiberboard, 
carpentry, light construction, furniture components, and 
moulding. 


Santa Maria 


Santa Maria (Calophyllum 
brasiliense) ranges from 
the West Indies to south- 
ern Mexico and southward 
through Central America 
into northern South 
America. 


The heartwood is pinkish 
to brick red or rich reddish brown and marked by fine and 
slightly darker striping on flat-sawn surfaces. The sapwood 
is lighter in color and generally distinct from the heartwood. 
The texture is medium and fairly uniform, and the grain is 
generally interlocked. The heartwood is rather similar in ap- 
pearance to dark red meranti (Shorea). The wood is moder- 
ately easy to work, and good surfaces can be obtained when 
attention is paid to machining operations. The wood aver- 
ages about 608 kg m-3 (38 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture content. 
Santa Maria is in the density class of sugar maple (Acer 
saccharum), and its strength properties are generally simi- 
lar; the hardness of sugar maple is superior to that of Santa 
Maria. The heartwood is generally rated as moderately du- 
rable to durable in contact with the ground, but it apparently 
has no resistance against termites and marine borers. 


The inherent natural durability, color, and figure on the 
quarter-sawn face suggest that Santa Maria could be used 
as veneer for plywood in boat construction. Other uses are 
flooring, furniture, cabinetwork, millwork, and decorative 
plywood. 


Sapele 


Sapele (Entandrophragma 
cylindricum) is a large Af- 
rican tree that occurs from 
Sierra Leone to Angola 
and eastward through the 
Congo to Uganda. 


The heartwood ranges in 
color from that of Ameri- 
can mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) to a dark reddish or 
purplish brown. The lighter-colored and distinct sapwood 


2-36 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


may be up to 10 cm (4 in.) wide. The texture is rather fine. 
The grain is interlocked and produces narrow and uniform 
striping on quarter-sawn surfaces. The wood averages about 
674 kg m-3 (42 lb ft-3) at 12% moisture content, and its me- 
chanical properties are in general higher than those of white 
oak (Quercus alba). The wood works fairly easily with ma- 
chine tools, although the interlocked grain makes it difficult 
to plane. Sapele finishes and glues well. The heartwood is 
rated as moderately durable and is resistant to preservative 
treatment. 


As lumber, sapele is used for furniture and cabinetwork, 
joinery, and flooring. As veneer, it is used for decorative 
plywood. 


Selangan Batu 


(see Balau) 

Sepetir 

The name sepetir applies 
to species in the genus Sin- 
dora and to Pseudosindora 
palustris. These species are 
distributed throughout Ma- 
laysia, Indochina, and the 
Philippines. 


The heartwood is brown 
with a pink or golden tinge that darkens on exposure to air. 
Dark brown or black streaks are sometimes present. The 
sapwood is light gray, brown, or straw-colored. The texture 
is moderately fine and even, and the grain is narrowly inter- 
locked. The strength of sepetir is similar to that of shellbark 
hickory (C. /aciniosa), and the density of the air-dried wood 
is also similar (640 to 720 kg m-3 (40 to 45 lb ft-3)). The 
wood dries well but rather slowly, with a tendency to end- 
split. The wood is difficult to work with hand tools and has 
a rather rapid dulling effect on cutters. Gums from the wood 
tend to accumulate on saw teeth, which causes additional 
problems. Sepetir is rated as nondurable in ground contact 
under Malaysian exposure. The heartwood is extremely 
resistant to preservative treatment; however, the sapwood is 
only moderately resistant. 


Sepetir is a general carpentry wood that is also used for fur- 
niture and cabinetwork, joinery, flooring (especially truck 
flooring), plywood, and decorative veneers. 


Seraya, Red and Dark Red 
(see Meranti Groups) 


Seraya, White 


ey yin “i } 


White seraya or bagtikan, 
\ | as itis called in the Philip- 
_ | pines, is a name applied to 
: the 14 species of Parasho- 
af rea, which grow in Sabah 
| and the Philippines. 
| 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


The heartwood is light brown or straw-colored, sometimes 
with a pinkish tint. The texture is moderately coarse and the 
grain interlocked. White seraya is very similar in appear- 
ance and strength properties to light red meranti, and some- 
times the two are mixed in the market. White seraya dries 
easily with little degrade, and works fairly well with hand 
and machine tools. The heartwood is not durable to moder- 
ately durable in ground contact, and it is extremely resistant 
to preservative treatments. 


White seraya is used for joinery, light construction, mould- 
ing and millwork, flooring, plywood, furniture, and cabinet 
work. 


Seraya, Yellow 


(see Meranti Groups) 


Silverballi, Brown 
(see Kaneelhart) 


Spanish-Cedar 


Spanish-cedar or cedro 
consists of a group of about 
seven species in the genus 
Cedrela that are widely dis- 
tributed in tropical America 
from southern Mexico to 
northern Argentina. 


The heartwood of span- 
ish cedar varies from light to dark reddish brown, and the 
sapwood is pinkish to white. The texture is rather fine and 
uniform to coarse and uneven. The grain is not interlocked. 
The heartwood is characterized by a distinctive odor. The 
wood dries easily. Although Spanish-cedar is not high 
in strength, most other properties are similar to those of 
American mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla), except for 
hardness and compression perpendicular to the grain, where 
mahogany is definitely superior. Spanish-cedar is consid- 
ered decay resistant; it works and glues well. 


Spanish-cedar is used locally for all purposes that require 
an easily worked, light but straight grained, and durable 
wood. In the United States, the wood is favored for mill- 
work, cabinets, fine furniture, boat building, cigar wrappers 
and boxes, humidores, and decorative and utility plywood. 
Sucupira (Angelin, Para-Angelim) 

Sucupira, angelin, and 
para-angelim apply to 
species in four genera 

of legumes from South 
America. Sucupira applies 
to Bowdichia nitida from 
northern Brazil, B. virgili- 
oides from Venezuela, the 
Guianas, and Brazil, and 


Diplotropis purpurea from the Guianas and southern Brazil. 
Angelin (Andira inermis) is a widespread species that oc- 
curs throughout the West Indies and from southern Mexico 
through Central America to northern South America and 
Brazil. Para-angelim (Hymenolobium excelsum) is generally 
restricted to Brazil. 


The heartwood of sucupira is chocolate-brown, red-brown, 
or light brown (especially in Diplotropis purpurea). Ange- 
lin heartwood is yellowish brown to dark reddish brown; 
para-angelim heartwood turns pale brown upon exposure 
to air. The sapwood is generally yellowish to whitish and 
is sharply demarcated from the heartwood. The texture of 
all three woods is coarse and uneven, and the grain can be 
interlocked. The density of air-dried wood of these species 
ranges from 720 to 960 kg m-3 (45 to 60 lb ft-3), which 
makes them generally heavier than true hickory (Carya). 
Their strength properties are also higher than those of true 
hickory. The heartwood is rated very durable to durable 

in resistance to decay fungi but only moderately resistant 
to attack by dry-wood termites. Angelin is reported to be 
difficult to treat with preservatives, but para-angelim and 
sucupira treat adequately. Angelin can be sawn and worked 
fairly well, except that it is difficult to plane to a smooth 
surface because of alternating hard (fibers) and soft (paren- 
chyma) tissue. Para-angelim works well in all operations. 
Sucupira is difficult to moderately difficult to work because 
of its high density, irregular grain, and coarse texture. 


Sucupira, angelin, and para-angelim are ideal for heavy 
construction, railroad crossties, and other uses that do not 
require much fabrication. Other suggested uses include 
flooring, boat building, furniture, turnery, tool handles, 
and decorative veneer. 

Suradan 


(see Pilon) 


Tangare 

(see Andiroba) 
Tanguile 

(see Meranti Groups) 


Teak 


Teak (Zectona grandis) 
occurs in commercial 
quantities in India, Burma, 
Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, 
Vietnam, and the East In- 
dies. Numerous plantations 
have been developed within 
its natural range and in trop- 
ical areas of Latin America and Africa, and many of these 
are now producing teakwood. The heartwood varies from 
yellow-brown to dark golden brown and eventually turns 

a rich brown upon exposure to air. Teakwood has a coarse, 


2-37 


uneven texture (ring porous), is usually straight grained, 
and has a distinctly oily feel. The heartwood has excellent 
dimensional stability and a very high degree of natural du- 
rability. Although teak is not generally used in the United 
States where strength is of prime importance, its properties 
are generally on par with those of U.S. oaks (Quercus). 
Teak is generally worked with moderate ease with hand 
and machine tools. However, the presence of silica often 
dulls tools. Finishing and gluing are satisfactory, although 
pretreatment may be necessary to ensure good bonding of 
finishes and glues. 


Teak is one of the most valuable woods, but its use is lim- 
ited by scarcity and high cost. Because teak does not cause 
rust or corrosion when in contact with metal, it is extremely 
useful in the shipbuilding industry, for tanks and vats, and 
for fixtures that require high acid resistance. Teak is cur- 
rently used in the construction of boats, furniture, flooring, 
decorative objects, and decorative veneer. 


Tornillo 


Tornillo (Cedrelinga 
cateniformis), also referred 
to as cedro-rana, grows 
in the Loreton Huanuco 
provinces of Peru and in 
the humid terra firma of 
the Brazilian Amazon re- 
a gion. Tornillo can grow up 
to 52.5 m (160 ft) tall, with trunk diameters of 1.5 to 3 m 
(5 to 9 ft). Trees in Peru are often smaller in diameter, with 
merchantable heights of 15 m (45 ft) or more. 


The heartwood is pale brown with a golden luster and 
prominently marked with red vessel lines; the heartwood 
gradually merges into the lighter-colored sapwood. The tex- 
ture is coarse. The density of air-dried material collected in 
Brazil averages 640 kg m-3 (40 Ib ft-3); for Peruvian stock, 
average density is about 480 kg m= (30 lb ft-3). The wood 
is comparable in strength with American elm (U/mus ameri- 
cana). Tornillo cuts easily and can be finished smoothly, but 
areas of tension wood may result in woolly surfaces. The 
heartwood is fairly durable and reported to have good resis- 
tance to weathering. 


Tornillo is a general construction wood that can be used for 
furniture components in lower-grade furniture. 


Trebol 
(see Macawood) 


Virola 
(see Banak) 


Waika 
(see Manni) 


Walele 


(see Ilomba) 


2-38 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Wallaba 
yy Wallaba is a common 

i | name applied to the species 
} in the genus Eperua. Other 
names include wapa and 
apa. The center of distribu- 
tion is in the Guianas, but 
the species extends into 
Venezuela and the Amazon 
region of northern Brazil. Wallaba generally occurs in pure 
stands or as the dominant tree in the forest. 


The heartwood ranges from light to dark red to reddish or 
purplish brown with characteristically dark, gummy streaks. 
The texture is rather coarse and the grain typically straight. 
Wallaba is a hard, heavy wood; density of air-dried wood 
is 928 kg m-3 (58 lb ft-3). Its strength is higher than that 

of shagbark hickory (Carya ovata). The wood dries very 
slowly with a marked tendency to check, split, and warp. 
Although the wood has high density, it is easy to work with 
hand and machine tools. However, the high gum content 
clogs sawteeth and cutters. Once the wood has been kiln 
dried, gum exudates are not a serious problem in machin- 
ing. The heartwood is reported to be very durable and 
resistant to subterranean termites and fairly resistant to 
dry-wood termites. 


Wallaba is well suited for heavy construction, railroad 
crossties, poles, industrial flooring, and tank staves. It is 
also highly favored for charcoal. 


Wapa 
(see Wallaba) 


Yang 
(see Keruing) 


Imported Softwoods 
Cypress, Mexican 


Native to Mexico and Gua- 
temala, Mexican cypress 
(Cupressus lusitanica) is 
now widely planted at high 
elevations throughout the 
tropical world. 


The heartwood is yellow- 
ish, pale brown, or pinkish, 
with occasional streaking or variegation. The texture is fine 
and uniform, and the grain is usually straight. The wood 

is fragrantly scented. The density of air-dried wood is 

512 kg m°> (32 lb ft-3), and the strength is comparable 

with that of yellow-cedar (Chamaecyparis nootkatensis) or 
western hemlock (Zsuga heterophylla). The wood is easy to 
work with hand and machine tools, and it nails, stains, and 
polishes well. Mexican cypress air dries very rapidly with 
little or no end- or surface-checking. Reports on durability 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


are conflicting. The heartwood is not treatable by the open 
tank process and seems to have an irregular response to 
pressure—vacuum systems. 


Mexican cypress is used mainly for posts and poles, furni- 
ture components, and general construction. 


Parana Pine 


The wood commonly 
called parana pine (Ar- 
aucaria angustifolia) is 

a softwood but not a true 
pine. It grows in south- 
eastern Brazil and adjacent 
areas of Paraguay and 
Argentina. 


Parana pine has many desirable characteristics. It is avail- 
able in large-size clear boards with uniform texture. The 
small pinhead knots (leaf traces) that appear on flat-sawn 
surfaces and the light or reddish-brown heartwood provide 
a desirable figure for matching in paneling and interior 
woodwork. Growth rings are fairly distinct and similar to 
those of eastern white pine (Pinus strobus). The grain is not 
interlocked, and the wood takes paint well, glues easily, and 
is free from resin ducts, pitch pockets, and pitch streaks. 
Density of air-dried wood averages 545 kg m3 (34 Ib ft-3). 
The strength of parana pine compares favorably with that of 
U.S. softwood species of similar density and, in some cases, 
approaches that of species with higher density. Parana 

pine is especially strong in shear strength, hardness, and 
nail-holding ability, but it is notably deficient in strength 

in compression across the grain. The tendency of the kiln- 
dried wood to split and warp is caused by the presence of 
compression wood, an abnormal type of wood with intrin- 
sically large shrinkage along the grain. Boards containing 
compression wood should be excluded from exacting uses. 


The principal uses of parana pine include framing lumber, 
interior woodwork, sashes and door stock, furniture case 
goods, and veneer. 


Pine, Caribbean 


Caribbean pine (Pinus 
caribaea) occurs along 
the Caribbean side of 
Central America from 
Belize to northeastern 
Nicaragua. It is also 
native to the Bahamas 
and Cuba. This low- 
elevation tree is widely 
introduced as a plantation species throughout the world 
tropics. 


PPG deep, 


i il eal 


; 
iveete besa te eet 


The heartwood is golden- to red-brown and distinct from 
the sapwood, which is light yellow and roughly 2 to 5 cm 
(1 to 2 in.) wide. This softwood species has a strong 


resinous odor and a greasy feel. The weight varies 
considerably and may range from 416 to 817 kg m3 

(26 to 51 Ib ft-3) at 12% moisture content. Caribbean pine 
may be appreciably heavier than slash pine (P. elliottii), but 
the mechanical properties of these two species are rather 
similar. The lumber can be kiln dried satisfactorily. Carib- 
bean pine is easy to work in all machining operations, but 
its high resin content may cause resin to accumulate on the 
equipment. Durability and resistance to insect attack vary 
with resin content; in general, the heartwood is rated as 
moderately durable. The sapwood is highly permeable and 
is easily treated by open tank or pressure—vacuum systems. 
The heartwood is rated as moderately resistant to preserva- 
tive treatment, depending on resin content. 


Caribbean pine is used for the same purposes as are the 
southern pines (Pinus spp.). 


Pine, Ocote 


Ocote pine (Pinus oocar- 
pa) is a high-elevation 
species that occurs from 
northwestern Mexico 
southward through Guate- 
mala into Nicaragua. The 
largest and most extensive 
stands occur in Guatemala, 
Nicaragua, and Honduras. 


The sapwood is a pale yellowish brown and generally up 

to 7 cm (3 in.) wide. The heartwood is a light reddish 
brown. The grain is not interlocked. The wood has a resin- 
ous odor, and it weighs about 656 kg m° (41 Ib ft-3) at 

12% moisture content. The strength properties of ocote pine 
are comparable in most respects with those of longleaf pine 
(P. palustris). Decay resistance studies have shown ocote 
pine heartwood to be very durable with respect to white-rot 
fungal attack and moderately durable with respect to brown 
rot. 


Ocote pine is comparable with the southern pines (Pinus 

spp.) in workability and machining characteristics. It is a 
general construction wood suited for the same uses as are 
the southern pines. 


Pine, Radiata 


Radiata pine (Pinus ra- 
diata), also known as 
Monterey pine, is rare in 
its native range on the 
coast of central California 
and Guadalupe Island, 
Mexico, but is planted ex- 
tensively in the southern 


a 
Shiu ee wer 


hemisphere, mainly in Chile, New Zealand, Australia, and 
South Africa. Plantation-grown trees may reach a height of 
26 to 30 m (80 to 90 ft) in 20 years. 


oe 


2-39 


The heartwood from plantation-grown trees is light brown 
to pinkish brown and is distinct from the paler cream- 
colored sapwood. Growth rings are primarily wide and dis- 
tinct. False rings may be common. The texture is moderately 
even and fine, and the grain is not interlocked. Plantation- 
grown radiata pine averages about 480 kg m3 (30 lb ft-3) at 
12% moisture content. Its strength is comparable with that 
of red pine (P. resinosa), although location and growth rate 
may cause considerable variation in strength properties. The 
wood air- or kiln-dries rapidly with little degrade. The wood 
machines easily, although the grain tends to tear around 
large knots. Radiata pine nails and glues easily, and it takes 
paint and finishes well. The sapwood is prone to attack by 
stain fungi and vulnerable to boring insects. However, 
plantation-grown stock is mostly sapwood, which treats 
readily with preservatives. The heartwood is rated as dura- 
ble above ground and is moderately resistant to preservative 
treatment. 


Radiata pine can be used for the same purposes as other 
pines grown in the United States. These uses include veneer, 
plywood, pulp, fiberboard, construction, boxes, and mill- 
work. 


2-40 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


Scientific Name Index 
U.S. Wood Species—Hardwoods 


Acer macrophyllum Pursh 

Acer negundo L. 

Acer nigrum Michx. f. 

Acer rubrum L. 

Acer saccharinum L. 

Acer saccharum Marsh. 

Aesculus glabra Willd. 

Aesculus octandra Marsh. 

Alnus rubra Bong. 

Betula alleghaniensis Britton 
Betula lenta L. 

Betula nigra L. 

Betula papyrifera Marsh. 

Betula populifolia Marsh. 

Carya aquatica (Michx. f.) Nutt. 
Carya cordiformis (Wangenh.) K. Koch 
Carya glabra (Mill.) Sweet 

Carya illinoensis (Wangenh.) K. Koch 
Carya laciniosa (Michx. f.) Loud. 
Carya myristiciformis (Michx. f.) Nutt. 
Carya ovata (Mill.) K. Koch 
Carya tomentosa (Poir.) Nutt. 
Castanea dentata (Marsh.) Borkh. 
Celtis laevigata Willd. 

Celtis occidentalis L. 

Fagus grandifolia Ehrh. 

Fraxinus americana L. 

Fraxinus latifolia Benth. 

Fraxinus nigra Marsh. 

Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marsh. 
Fraxinus profunda (Bush) Bush 
Fraxinus quadrangulata Michx. 
Gleditsia triacanthos L. 

Juglans cinerea L. 

Juglans nigra L. 

Liquidambar styraciflua L. 
Liriodendron tulipifera L. 
Lithocarpus densiflorus (Hook. & Arn.) Rehd. 
Magnolia acuminata L. 

Magnolia grandiflora L. 
Magnolia virginiana L. 

Nyssa aquatica L. 

Nyssa ogeche Bartr. ex Marsh. 
Nyssa sylvatica Marsh. 

Nyssa sylvatica var. biflora (Walt.) Sarg. 
Platanus occidentalis L. 

Populus balsamifera L. 

Populus deltoides Bartr. ex Marsh. 
Populus grandidentata Michx. 
Populus heterophylla L. 

Populus tremuloides Michx. 
Populus trichocarpa Torr. & Gray 


Maple, Bigleaf (Soft Maple Group) 
Boxelder (Soft Maple Group) 

Maple, Black (Hard Maple Group) 
Maple, Red (Soft Maple Group) 

Maple, Silver (Soft Maple Group) 
Maple, Sugar (Hard Maple Group) 
Buckeye, Ohio 

Buckeye, Yellow 

Alder, Red 

Birch, Yellow 

Birch, Sweet 

Birch, River 

Birch, Paper 

Birch, Gray 

Hickory, Water (Pecan Hickory Group) 
Hickory, Bitternut (Pecan Hickory Group) 
Hickory, Pignut (True Hickory Group) 
Hickory, Pecan (Pecan Hickory Group) 
Hickory, Shellbark (True Hickory Group) 
Hickory, Nutmeg (Pecan Hickory Group) 
Hickory, Shagbark (True Hickory Group) 
Hickory, Mockernut (True Hickory Group) 
Chestnut, American 

Sugarberry (Hackberry Group) 
Hackberry 

Beech, American 

Ash, American White (White Ash Group) 
Ash, Oregon (White Ash Group) 

Ash, Black (Black Ash Group) 

Ash, Green (White Ash Group) 

Ash, Pumpkin (Black Ash Group) 

Ash, Blue (White Ash Group) 
Honeylocust 

Butternut 

Walnut, Black 

Sweetgum 

Yellow-Poplar 

Tanoak 

Cucumbertree (Magnolia Group) 
Magnolia, Southern 

Sweetbay (Magnolia Group) 

Tupelo, Water 

Tupelo, Ogeechee 

Tupelo, Black 

Tupelo, Swamp 

Sycamore, American 

Balsam poplar (Cottonwood Group) 
Cottonwood, Eastern 

Aspen, Bigtooth 

Cottonwood, Swamp 

Aspen, Quaking 

Cottonwood, Black 


2-41 


Prunus serotina Ehrh. 
Quercus alba L. 

Quercus bicolor Willd. 
Quercus coccinea Muenchh. 
Quercus falcata Michx. 
Quercus falcata var. pagodaefolia Ell. 
Quercus garryana Dougl. 
Quercus kelloggii Newb. 
Quercus laurifolia Michx. 
Quercus lyrata Walt. 
Quercus macrocarpa Michx. 
Quercus michauxii Nutt. 
Quercus muehlenbergii Engelm. 
Quercus nigra L. 

Quercus nuttallii Palmer 
Quercus palustris Muenchh. 
Quercus phellos L. 

Quercus prinus L. 

Quercus rubra L. 

Quercus shumardii Buckl. 
Quercus stellata Wangenh. 
Quercus velutina Lam. 
Quercus virginiana Mill. 
Robinia pseudoacacia L. 
Salix nigra Marsh. 
Sassafras albidum (Nutt.) Nees 
Tilia americana L. 

Tilia heterophylla Vent. 
Ulmus alata Michx. 

Ulmus americana L. 

Ulmus crassifolia Nutt. 
Ulmus rubra Muh. 

Ulmus serotina Sarg. 

Ulmus thomasii Sarg. 


U.S. Wood Species—Softwoods 


Abies amabilis Dougl. ex Forbes 
Abies balsamea (L.) Mill. 


Abies concolor (Gord. & Glend.) Lindl. ex Hildebr. 


Abies fraseri (Pursh) Poir. 

Abies grandis (Dougl. ex D. Don) Lindl. 
Abies lasiocarpa (Hook.) Nutt. 

Abies magnifica A. Murr. 

Abies procera Rehd. 

Calocedrus decurrens (Torrey) Florin 
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana (A. Murr.) Parl. 
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis (D. Don) Spach 
Chamaecyparis thyoides (L.) B.S.P. 
Juniperus silicicola (Small) Bailey 
Juniperus virginiana L. 

Larix laricina (Du Roi) K. Koch 

Larix occidentalis Nutt. 

Picea engelmannii Parry ex Engelm. 

Picea glauca (Moench) Voss 

Picea mariana (Mill.) B.S.P. 


2-42 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Cherry, Black 

Oak, White (White Oak Group) 

Oak, Swamp White (White Oak Group) 
Oak, Scarlet (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Southern Red (Red Oak Group) 
Oak, Cherrybark (Red Oak Group) 
Oak, Oregon White (White Oak Group) 
Oak, California Black (Red Oak Group) 
Oak, Laurel (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Overcup (White Oak Group) 

Oak, Bur (White Oak Group) 

Oak, Swamp Chestnut (White Oak Group) 
Oak, Chinkapin (White Oak Group) 
Oak, Water (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Nuttall (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Pin (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Willow (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Chestnut (White Oak Group) 
Oak, Northern Red (Red Oak Group) 
Oak, Shumard (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Post (White Oak Group) 

Oak, Black (Red Oak Group) 

Oak, Live (Tropical Oak Group) 
Locust, Black 

Willow, Black 

Sassafras 

Basswood, American 

Basswood, White 

Elm, Winged 

Elm, American 

Elm, Cedar 

Elm, Slippery 

Elm, September 

Elm, Rock 


Fir, Pacific Silver (Fir, True; Western Species) 
Fir, Balsam (Fir, True; Eastern Species) 

Fir, White (Fir, True; Western Species) 

Fir, Fraser (Fir, True; Eastern Species) 

Fir, Grand (Fir, True; Western Species) 

Fir, Subalpine (Fir, True; Western Species) 

Fir, California Red (Fir, True; Western Species) 
Fir, Noble (Fir, True; Western Species) 
Incense-Cedar 

Port-Orford-Cedar 

Yellow-Cedar 

White-Cedar, Atlantic 

Redcedar, Southern (Redcedar, Eastern Group) 
Redcedar, Eastern 

Tamarack 

Larch, Western 

Spruce, Engelmann 

Spruce, White (Spruce, Eastern Group) 
Spruce, Black (Spruce, Eastern Group) 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


Picea rubens Sarg. 

Picea sitchensis (Bong.) Carr. 

Pinus banksiana Lamb. 

Pinus contorta Dougl. ex Loud. 
Pinus echinata Mill. 

Pinus elliottii Engelm. 

Pinus glabra Walt. 

Pinus jeffreyi Grev. & Balf. 

Pinus lambertiana Dougl. 

Pinus monticola Dougl. ex D. Don 
Pinus palustris Mill. 

Pinus ponderosa Dougl. ex Laws. 
Pinus resinosa Ait. 

Pinus rigida Mill. 

Pinus serotina Michx. 

Pinus strobus L. 

Pinus taeda L. 

Pinus virginiana Mill. 

Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirb.) Franco 
Sequoia sempervirens (D. Don) Endl. 
Sequoiadendron giganteum (Lindl.) Buchholz 
Taxodium distichum (L.) Rich. 

Thuja occidentalis L. 

Thuja plicata Donn ex D. Don 

Tsuga canadensis (L.) Carr. 

Tsuga heterophylla (Raf.) Sarg. 
Tsuga mertensiana (Bong.) Carr. 


Imported Woods—Hardwoods 


Andira inermis (W. Wright) H.B.K. 
Anisoptera spp. 

Aspidosperma spp. 

Astronium spp. 

Aucoumea klaineana Pierre 
Balfourodendron riedelianum (Engl.) Engl. 
Bowdichia spp. 

Brosimum utile (H.B.K.) Pittier 
Calophyllum brasiliense Cambess. 
Calycophyllum candidissimum (Vahl) DC. 
Carapa spp. 

Cariniana spp. 

Caryocar spp. 

Cedrela spp. 

Cedrelinga cateniformis (Ducke) Ducke 
Ceiba pentandra (L.) Gaertn. 

Ceiba samauma K. Schum. 


Chlorocardium rodiei (Schomb.) Rohwer, Richter & van der 
Werff 


Dalbergia latifolia Roxb. ex DC. 
Dalbergia nigra (Vell.) Allem. ex Benth. 
Dalbergia stevensonii Stand]. 
Dialyanthera spp. 

Dicorynia guianensis Amsch. 
Diplotropis purpurea (Rich.) Amshoff 
Dipterocarpus spp. 


Spruce, Red (Spruce, Eastern Group) 


Spruce, Sitka 
Pine, Jack 
Pine, Lodgepole 


Pine, Shortleaf (Pine, Southern Group) 
Pine, Slash (Pine, Southern Group) 


Pine, Spruce 


Pine, Jeffrey (see Pine, Ponderosa) 


Pine, Sugar 
Pine, Western White 


Pine, Longleaf (Pine, Southern Group) 


Pine, Ponderosa 
Pine, Red 

Pine, Pitch 

Pine, Pond 

Pine, Eastern White 


Pine, Loblolly (Pine, Southern Group) 


Pine, Virginia 
Douglas-Fir 

Redwood 

Sequoia, Giant 
Baldcypress 
White-Cedar, Northern 
Redcedar, Western 
Hemlock, Eastern 
Hemlock, Western 
Hemlock, Mountain 


Angelin (see Sucupira) 
Mersawa 

Peroba Rosa 
Gongalo Alves 
Okoume 

Pau Marfim 
Sucupira 

Sande 

Santa Maria 
Degame 

Andiroba 

Albarco 

Piquia 
Spanish-Cedar 
Tornillo 

Ceiba 

Lupuna (see Ceiba) 
Greenheart 


Rosewood, Indian 
Rosewood, Brazilian 
Rosewood, Honduran 
Cuangare (see Banak) 
Angelique 

Sucupira 

Keruing 


2-43 


Dryobalanops spp. 
Dyera costulata (Miq.) Hook. f. 


Entandrophragma cylindricum (Sprague) Sprague 


Eperua spp. 

Eschweilera spp. 

Eucalyptus diversicolor F. Muell. 
Eucalyptus marginata Donn ex Smith 
Gonystylus bancanus (Miq.) Baill. 
Guaiacum spp. 

Guibourtia spp. 

Hieronyma spp. 

Hura crepitans L. 

Hymenaea spp. 

Hymenolobium excelsum Ducke 

Intsia spp. 

Khaya spp. 

Koompassia malaccensis Maing. ex Benth. 
Licania spp. 

Licaria spp. 

Lophira alata Banks ex Gaertn. f. 
Manilkara bidentata (A. DC.) A. Chev. 
Milicia spp. 

Mora spp. 

Nauclea diderichii (De Wild.) Merrill 
Ochroma pyramidale (Cav. ex Lam.) Urban 
Ocotea rubra Mez 

Parashorea spp. 

Paratecoma peroba (Record & Mell) Kuhlm. 
Peltogyne spp. 

Pericopsis elata (Harms) v. Meeuwen 
Platymiscium spp. 

Prioria copaifera Griseb. 
Pseudosindora palustris Sym. 
Pycnanthus angolensis (Welw.) Warb. 
Quercus spp. 

Shorea spp. 

Shorea spp. 

Sindora spp. 

Swietenia macrophylla King 
Symphonia globulifera L. f. 

Tabebuia donnell-smithii Rose 
Tabebuia rosea (Bertol.) DC. 

Tabebuia spp. 

Tectona grandis L. f. 

Terminalia superba Engl. & Diels 
Tetraberlinia tubmaniana J. Leonard 
Triplochiton scleroxylon K. Schum. 
Turraeanthus africanus (Welw. ex DC.) Pellegr. 
Virola spp. 


Imported Woods—Softwoods 


Araucaria angustifolia (Bertol.) Kuntze 
Cupressus lusitanica Mill. 

Pinus caribaea Morelet 

Pinus oocarpa Schiede 

Pinus radiata D. Don 


2-44 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Kapur 

Jelutong 

Sapele 

Wallaba 
Manbarklak 

Karri 

Jarrah 

Ramin 
Lignumvitae 
Benge, Ehie, Bubinga 
Pilon 

Hura 

Courbaril, Jatoba 
Para-Angelim (see Sucupira) 
Merbau 
Mahogany, A frican 
Kempas 
Marishballi 
Kaneelhart 

Azobe 

Balata 

Troko 

Mora 

Opepe 

Balsa 

Determa 

Seraya, White 
Peroba de Campos 
Purpleheart 
Afrormosia 
Macawood 

Cativo 

Sepetir 

Tlomba 

Oak (Tropical) 
Balau 

Meranti 

Sepetir 
Mahogany, American 
Manni 

Primavera 

Roble 

Ipe 

Teak 

Limba 

Ekop 

Obeche 

Avodire 

Banak 


Parana Pine 
Cypress, Mexican 
Pine, Caribbean 
Pine, Ocote 

Pine, Radiata 


Chapter2 Characteristics and Availability of Commercially Important Woods 


Literature Cited 


Haynes, R.W. tech. coord. 2003. An analysis of the timber 
situation in the United States: 1952 to 2050. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
PNW-GTR-S560. Portland, OR. U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 
253 p. 


Haynes, R.W.; Adams, D.M.; Alig, R.J.; Ince, P.J.; Mills, 
J.R.; Zhou, X. 2007. The 2005 RPA timber assessment 
update. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-—GTR-699. Portland, OR: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station. 212 p. 


Howard, J.L. 2007. U.S. timber production, trade, consump- 
tion, and price statistics, 1965-2005. Res. Pap. FPL-RP-— 
637. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 91 p. 


Additional References 


Alden, H.A. 1995. Hardwoods of North America. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-83. Madison, WI: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
136 p. 


Alden, H.A. 1997. Softwoods of North America. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. FPL-GTR-102. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Ag- 
riculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 151 p. 


Berni, C.A.; Bolza, E.; Christensen, F.J. 1979. South 
American timbers—characteristics, properties, and uses of 
190 species. Melbourne, Australia: Commonwealth Sci- 
entific and Industrial Research Organization, Division of 
Building Research. 229 p. 


Bolza, E.; Keating, W.G. 1972. African timbers—the prop- 
erties, uses, and characteristics of 700 species. Melbourne, 
Australia: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organization, Division of Building Research. 


Chudnoff, M. 1984. Tropical timbers of the world. Agric. 
Handb. 607. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 464 p. 


Farmer, R.H. 1972. Handbook of hardwoods. 2nd ed. Build- 
ing Research Establishment, Princes Risborough Labora- 
tory; London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. 243 p. 


Hardwood Market Report [Current edition]. Memphis, 
TN: Lumber News Letter. 


Henderson, F.Y. 1977. A handbook of softwoods. Building 
Research Establishment, Princes Risborough Laboratory; 
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. 63 p. 


Keating, W.G.; Bolza, E. 1982. Characteristics, properties, 
and uses of timbers: Vol. 1. Southeast Asia, Northern Aus- 
tralia, and the Pacific. Melbourne, Australia: Inkata Press. 
362 p. 


Kukachka, B.F. 1970. Properties of imported tropical 
woods. Res. Pap. FPL 125. Madison, WI: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
67 p. 


Markwardt, L.J. 1930. Comparative strength properties of 
woods grown in the United States. Technical Bulletin 158. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 39 p. 


Markwardt, L.J.; Wilson, T.R.C. 1935. Strength and related 
properties of woods grown in the United States. Tech. Bull. 
479. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 99 p. 


Panshin, A.J.; deZeeuw, C. 1980. Textbook of wood tech- 
nology. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. 722 p. 


Record, S.J.; Hess, R.W. 1949. Timbers of the new world. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 640 p. 


Ulrich, A.H. 1981. U.S. timber production, trade, consump- 
tion, and price statistics, 1950-1980. Misc. Pub. 1408. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 


2-45 


Structure and Function of Wood 


Alex Wiedenhoeft, Botanist 


Contents 


Biological Structure of Wood at Decreasing 
Scales 3-2 


The Tree 3-2 
Softwoods and Hardwoods 3-2 
Sapwood and Heartwood 3-2 
Axial and Radial Systems 3—3 
Planes of Section 3-3 
Vascular Cambium 3-4 
Growth Rings 3-4 
Cells in Wood 3-6 
Cell Walls 3-7 
Pits 3-8 
Microscopic Structure of Softwoods and 
Hardwoods 3-9 
Softwoods 3-9 
Hardwoods 3-10 
Wood Technology 3-12 
Moisture Relations 3—12 
Density 3-12 
Juvenile Wood and Reaction Wood 3-13 
Appearance of Wood as Sawn Lumber 3-13 
Color and Luster 3-13 
Grain and Texture 3-13 
Plainsawn and Quartersawn 3-14 


Slope of Grain: Straight, Diagonal, 
Spiral, and Interlocked Grain 3-14 


Knots 3-15 

Decorative Features 3-15 
Wood Identification 3-16 
Literature Cited 3-16 


Wood is a complex biological structure, a composite of 
many chemistries and cell types acting together to serve the 
needs of a living plant. Attempting to understand wood in 
the context of wood technology, we have often overlooked 
the key and basic fact that wood evolved over the course of 
millions of years to serve three main functions in plants— 
conduction of water from the roots to the leaves, mechani- 
cal support of the plant body, and storage of biochemicals. 
There is no property of wood—physical, mechanical, chem- 
ical, biological, or technological—that is not fundamentally 
derived from the fact that wood is formed to meet the needs 
of the living tree. To accomplish any of these functions, 
wood must have cells that are designed and interconnected 
in ways sufficient to perform these functions. These three 
functions have influenced the evolution of approximately 
20,000 different species of woody plants, each with unique 
properties, uses, and capabilities, in both plant and human 
contexts. Understanding the basic requirements dictated by 
these three functions and identifying the structures in wood 
that perform them allow insight to the realm of wood as an 
engineering material (Hoadley 2000). A scientist who un- 
derstands the interrelationships between form and function 
can predict the utility of a specific wood in a new context. 
The objective of this chapter is to review the basic biologi- 
cal structure of wood and provide a basis for interpreting its 
properties in an engineering context. By understanding the 
function of wood in the living tree, we can better understand 
the strengths and limitations it presents as a material. 


The component parts of wood must be defined and delim- 
ited at a variety of scales. The wood anatomical expertise 
necessary for a researcher who is using a solid wood beam 
is different from that necessary for an engineer designing 

a glued-laminated beam, which in turn is different from 
that required for making a wood-resin composite with 
wood flour. Differences in the kinds of knowledge required 
in these three cases are related to the scale at which one 
intends to interact with wood, and in all three cases the 
properties of these materials are derived from the biological 
needs of the living tree. For this reason, this chapter explains 
the structure of wood at decreasing scales and in ways that 
demonstrate the biological rationale for a plant to produce 
wood with such features. This background will permit the 
reader to understand the biological bases for the properties 
presented in subsequent chapters. 


Although shrubs and many vines form wood, the remainder 
of this chapter will focus on wood from trees, which are the 


3-1 


GHAPTER 3 


predominant source of wood for commercial and engineer- 
ing applications and provide examples of virtually all fea- 
tures that merit discussion. 


Biological Structure of Wood 
at Decreasing Scales 


The Tree 


A living, growing tree has two main domains, the shoot and 
the roots. Roots are the subterranean structures responsible 
for water and mineral nutrient uptake, mechanical anchor- 
ing of the shoot, and storage of biochemicals. The shoot is 
made up of the trunk or bole, branches, and leaves (Raven 
and others 1999). The remainder of the chapter will be con- 
cemed with the trunk of the tree. 


If one cuts down a tree and looks at the stump, several 
gross observations can be made. The trunk is composed of 
various materials present in concentric bands. From 

the outside of the tree to the inside are outer bark, inner 
bark, vascular cambium, sapwood, heartwood, and the pith 
(Fig. 3-1). Outer bark provides mechanical protection to the 
softer inner bark and also helps to limit evaporative water 
loss. Inner bark is the tissue through which sugars (food) 
produced by photosynthesis are translocated from the leaves 
to the roots or growing portions of the tree. The vascular 
cambium is the layer between the bark and the wood that 
produces both these tissues each year. The sapwood is the 
active, “living” wood that conducts the water (or sap) from 
the roots to the leaves. It has not yet accumulated the often- 
colored chemicals that set apart the non-conductive heart- 
wood found as a core of darker-colored wood in the middle 
of most trees. The pith at the very center of the trunk is the 
remnant of the early growth of the trunk, before wood was 
formed. 


Softwoods and Hardwoods 


Despite what one might think based on the names, not all 
softwoods have soft, lightweight wood, nor do all hard- 
woods have hard, heavy wood. To define them botanically, 
softwoods are those woods that come from gymnosperms 
(mostly conifers), and hardwoods are woods that come 

from angiosperms (flowering plants). In the temperate por- 
tion of the northern hemisphere, softwoods are generally 
needle-leaved evergreen trees such as pine (Pinus) and 
spruce (Picea), whereas hardwoods are typically broadleaf, 
deciduous trees such as maple (Acer), birch (Betula), and 
oak (Quercus). Softwoods and hardwoods not only differ in 
terms of the types of trees from which they are derived, but 
they also differ in terms of their component cells. Softwoods 
have a simpler basic structure than do hardwoods because 
they have only two cell types and relatively little variation 
in structure within these cell types. Hardwoods have greater 
structural complexity because they have both a greater num- 
ber of basic cell types and a far greater degree of variability 
within the cell types. The single most important distinction 
between the two general kinds of wood is that hardwoods 


3-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 3-1. Macroscopic view of a transverse section 
of a Quercus alba trunk. Beginning at the outside of 
the tree is the outer bark (ob). Next is the inner bark 
(ib) and then the vascular cambium (vc), which is too 
narrow to see at this magnification. Interior toward the 
vascular cambium is the sapwood, which is easily dif- 
ferentiated from the heartwood that lies toward the in- 
terior. At the center of the trunk is the pith (p), which is 
barely discernible in the center of the heartwood. 


have a characteristic type of cell called a vessel element (or 
pore) whereas softwoods lack these (Fig. 3—2). An important 
cellular similarity between softwoods and hardwoods is that 
in both kinds of wood, most of the cells are dead at maturity, 
even in the sapwood. The cells that are alive at maturity are 
known as parenchyma cells and can be found in both soft- 
woods and hardwoods. 


Sapwood and Heartwood 


In both softwoods and hardwoods, the wood in the trunk of 
the tree is typically divided into two zones, each of which 
serves an important function distinct from the other. The ac- 
tively conducting portion of the stem in which parenchyma 
cells are still alive and metabolically active is referred to as 
sapwood. A looser, more broadly applied definition is that 
sapwood is the band of lighter colored wood adjacent to the 
bark. Heartwood is the darker colored wood found to the 
interior of the sapwood (Fig. 3-1). 


In the living tree, sapwood is responsible not only for 
conduction of sap but also for storage and synthesis of bio- 
chemicals. An important storage function is the long-term 
storage of photosynthate. Carbon that must be expended to 
form a new flush of leaves or needles must be stored some- 
where in the tree, and parenchyma cells of the sapwood 
are often where this material is stored. The primary storage 
forms of photosynthate are starch and lipids. Starch grains 
are stored in the parenchyma cells and can be easily seen 
with a microscope. The starch content of sapwood can have 
important ramifications in the wood industry. For example, 
in the tropical tree ceiba (Ceiba pentandra), an abundance 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


a ia 


ith i : 1 he 


Figure 3-2. A, the general form of a generic softwood tree. 
B, the general form of a generic hardwood tree. C, trans- 
verse section of Pseudotsuga mensiezii, a typical soft- 
wood; the thirteen round white spaces are resin canals. 

D, transverse section of Betula allegheniensis, a typical 
hardwood; the many large, round white structures are 
vessels or pores, the characteristic feature of a hardwood. 
Scale bars = 780 pm. 


of starch can lead to growth of anaerobic bacteria that pro- 
duce ill-smelling compounds that can make the wood com- 
mercially unusable (Chudnoff 1984). In southern yellow 
pines of the United States, a high starch content encourages 
growth of sap-stain fungi that, though they do not affect the 
strength of the wood, can nonetheless decrease the lumber 
value for aesthetic reasons (Simpson 1991). 


Living cells of the sapwood are also the agents of heartwood 
formation. Biochemicals must be actively synthesized and 
translocated by living cells. For this reason, living cells at 
the border between heartwood and sapwood are responsible 
for the formation and deposition of heartwood chemicals, 
one important step leading to heartwood formation 

(Hillis 1996). Heartwood functions in long-term storage of 
biochemicals of many varieties depending on the species in 
question. These chemicals are known collectively as extrac- 
tives. In the past, heartwood was thought to be a disposal 
site for harmful byproducts of cellular metabolism, the 
so-called secondary metabolites. This led to the concept of 
the heartwood as a dumping ground for chemicals that, to a 
greater or lesser degree, would harm living cells if not se- 
questered in a safe place. We now know that extractives are 
anormal part of the plant’s system of protecting its wood. 
Extractives are formed by parenchyma cells at the heart- 
wood-sapwood boundary and are then exuded through pits 
into adjacent cells (Hillis 1996). In this way, dead cells can 
become occluded or infiltrated with extractives despite the 
fact that these cells lack the ability to synthesize or accumu- 
late these compounds on their own. 


Extractives are responsible for imparting several larger-scale 
characteristics to wood. For example, extractives provide 
natural durability to timbers that have a resistance to decay 
fungi. In the case of a wood like teak (Tectona grandis), 
known for its stability and water resistance, these properties 
are conferred in large part by the waxes and oils formed and 
deposited in the heartwood. Many woods valued for their 
colors, such as mahogany (Swietenia mahagoni), African 
blackwood (Diospyros melanoxylon), Brazilian rosewood 
(Dalbergia nigra), and others, owe their value to the type 
and quantity of extractives in the heartwood. For these 
species, the sapwood has little or no value, because the de- 
sirable properties are imparted by heartwood extractives. 
Gharu wood, or eagle wood (Aquilaria malaccensis), has 
been driven to endangered status due to human harvest of 
the wood to extract valuable resins used in perfume mak- 
ing (Lagenheim 2003). Sandalwood (Santalum spicatum), a 
wood famed for its use in incenses and perfumes, is valuable 
only if the heartwood is rich with the desired scented extrac- 
tives. The utility of a wood for a technological application 
can be directly affected by extractives. For example, if a 
wood like western redcedar, high in hydrophilic extractives, 
is finished with a water-based paint without a stain blocker, 
extractives may bleed through the paint, ruining the product 
(Chap. 16). 


Axial and Radial Systems 


The distinction between sapwood and heartwood, though 
important, is a gross feature that is often fairly easily ob- 
served. More detailed inquiry into the structure of wood 
shows that wood is composed of discrete cells connected 
and interconnected in an intricate and predictable fashion 
to form an integrated system that is continuous from root 
to twig. The cells of wood are typically many times longer 
than wide and are specifically oriented in two separate sys- 
tems of cells: the axial system and the radial system. Cells 
of the axial system have their long axes running parallel to 
the long axis of the organ (up and down the trunk). Cells of 
the radial system are elongated perpendicularly to the long 
axis of the organ and are oriented like radii in a circle or 
spokes in a bicycle wheel, from the pith to the bark. In the 
trunk of a tree, the axial system runs up and down, functions 
in long-distance water movement, and provides the bulk 

of the mechanical strength of the tree. The radial system 
tuns in a pith to bark direction, provides lateral transport 
for biochemicals, and in many cases performs a large frac- 
tion of the storage function in wood. These two systems are 
interpenetrating and interconnected, and their presence is a 
defining characteristic of wood as a tissue. 


Planes of Section 


Although wood can be cut in any direction for examination, 
the organization and interrelationship between the axial and 
radial systems give rise to three main perspectives from 
which they can be viewed to glean the most information. 
These three perspectives are the transverse plane of sec- 
tion (the cross section), the radial plane of section, and the 


3-3 


tangential plane of section. Radial and tangential sections 
are referred to as longitudinal sections because they extend 
parallel to the axial system (along the grain). 


The transverse plane of section is the face that is exposed 
when a tree is cut down. Looking down at the stump one 
sees the transverse section (as in Fig. 3-3H); cutting a board 
across the grain exposes the transverse section. The trans- 
verse plane of section provides information about features 
that vary both in the pith to bark direction (called the radial 
direction) and also those that vary in the circumferential di- 
rection (called the tangential direction). It does not provide 
information about variations up and down the trunk. 


The radial plane of section runs in a pith-to-bark direction 
(Fig. 3-3A, top), and it is parallel to the axial system, so it 
provides information about longitudinal changes in the stem 
and from pith to bark along the radial system. To describe 

it geometrically, it is parallel to the radius of a cylinder, and 
extending up and down the length of the cylinder. In a prac- 
tical sense, it is the face or plane that is exposed when a log 
is split exactly from pith to bark. It does not provide any in- 
formation about features that vary in a tangential direction. 


The tangential plane is at a right angle to the radial plane 
(Fig. 3-3A, top). Geometrically, it is parallel to any tangent 
line that would touch the cylinder, and it extends along the 
length of the cylinder. One way in which the tangential 
plane would be exposed is if the bark were peeled from a 
log; the exposed face is the tangential plane. The tangential 
plane of section does not provide any information about 
features that vary in the radial direction, but it does provide 
information about the tangential dimensions of features. 


All three planes of section are important to the proper obser- 
vation of wood, and only by looking at each can a holistic 
and accurate understanding of the three-dimensional struc- 
ture of wood be gleaned. The three planes of section are 
determined by the structure of wood and the way in which 
the cells in wood are arrayed. The topology of wood and the 
distribution of the cells are accomplished by a specific part 
of the tree stem. 


Vascular Cambium 


The axial and radial systems and their component cells are 
derived from a part of the tree called the vascular cambium. 
The vascular cambium is a thin layer of cells that exists 
between the inner bark and the wood (Figs. 3—1, 3-4) that 
produces, by means of many cell divisions, wood (or sec- 
ondary xylem) to the inside and bark (or secondary phloem) 
to the outside, both of which are vascular conducting tis- 
sues (Larson 1994). As the vascular cambium adds cells to 
the layers of wood and bark around a tree, the girth of the 
tree increases, and thus the total surface area of the vascular 
cambium itself must increase, and this is accomplished by 
cell division as well. 


3-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


The axial and radial systems are generated in the vascular 
cambium by two component cells: fusiform initials and 

ray initials. Fusiform initials, named to describe their long, 
slender shape, give rise to cells of the axial system, and ray 
initials give rise to the radial system. For this reason, there 
is a direct and continuous link between the most recently 
formed wood, the vascular cambium, and the inner bark. 

In most cases, the radial system in the wood is continuous 
into the inner bark, through the vascular cambium. In this 
way wood, the water-conducting tissue, stays connected to 
the inner bark, the photosynthate-conducting tissue. They 
are interdependent tissues because the living cells in wood 
require photosynthate for respiration and cell growth and the 
inner bark requires water in which to dissolve and transport 
the photosynthate. The vascular cambium is an integral fea- 
ture that not only gives rise to these tissue systems but also 
links them so that they may function in the living tree. 


Growth Rings 


Wood is produced by the vascular cambium one layer of cell 
divisions at a time, but we know from general experience 
that in many woods large groups of cells are produced more 
or less together in time, and these groups act together to 
serve the tree. These collections of cells produced together 
over a discrete time interval are known as growth incre- 
ments or growth rings. Cells formed at the beginning of 

the growth increment are called earlywood cells, and cells 
formed in the latter portion of the growth increment are 
called latewood cells (Fig. 3-3D,E). Springwood and sum- 
merwood were terms formerly used to refer to earlywood 
and latewood, respectively, but their use is no longer recom- 
mended (I[AWA 1989). 


In temperate portions of the world and anywhere else with 
distinct, regular seasonality, trees form their wood in annual 
growth increments; that is, all the wood produced in one 
growing season is organized together into a recognizable, 
functional entity that many sources refer to as annual rings. 
Such terminology reflects this temperate bias, so a preferred 
term is growth increment, or growth ring (IAWA 1989). In 
many woods in the tropics, growth rings are not evident. 
However, continuing research in this area has uncovered 
several characteristics whereby growth rings can be cor- 
related with seasonality changes in some tropical species 
(Worbes 1995, 1999; Callado and others 2001). 


Woods that form distinct growth rings, and this includes 
most woods that are likely to be used as engineering 
materials in North America, show three fundamental pat- 
terns within a growth ring: no change in cell pattern across 
the ring; a gradual reduction of the inner diameter of con- 
ducting elements from the earlywood to the latewood; and 
a sudden and distinct change in the inner diameter of the 
conducting elements across the ring (Fig. 3-5). These pat- 
terns appear in both softwoods and hardwoods but differ in 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


100x Softwood p 
cells 


Hardwood 
cells 


Tangential 
plane 


Radial 
plane 


\ 


iiesie 
IK 
i hee 
50x | if 
Earlywood PS 
and latewood 
of single ' 
growthring JJ 
5x 
Straight 
grain 


Heartwood 


Figure 3-3. A, illustration of a cut-away tree at various magnifications, correspond- 
ing roughly with the images to its right; at the top, at an approximate magnification 

of 100, a softwood cell and several hardwood cells are illustrated, to give a sense 

of scale between the two; one tier lower, at an approximate magnification of 50%, is 

a single growth ring of a softwood (left) and a hardwood (right), and an indication of 
the radial and tangential planes; the next tier, at approximately 5x magnification, il- 
lustrates many growth rings together and how one might produce a straight-grained 
rather than a diagonal-grained board; the lowest tier includes an illustration of the 
relative position of juvenile and mature wood in the tree, at 1x magnification. B,C, light 
microscopic views of the lumina (L) and cell walls (arrowheads) of a softwood (B) and 
a hardwood (C). D,E, hand-lens views of growth rings, each composed of earlywood 
(ew) and latewood (Iw), in a softwood (D) and a hardwood (E). F, a straight-grained 
board; note that the line along the edge of the board is parallel to the line along the 
grain of the board. G, a diagonal-grained board; note that the two lines are markedly 
not parallel; this board has a slope of grain of about 1 in 7. H, the gross anatomy of a 
tree trunk, showing bark, sapwood, and heartwood. 


Figure 3-4. Light microscopic view of the vascular 
cambium. Transverse section showing vascular cam- 
bium (vc) and bark (b) in Croton macrobothrys. The 
tissue above the vascular cambium is wood. Scale 
bar = 390 um. 


Figure 3—5. Transverse sections of woods showing types 
of growth rings. Arrows delimit growth rings, when pres- 
ent. A-C, softwoods. A, no transition within the growth 
ring (growth ring absent) in Podocarpus imbricata. 

B, gradual transition from earlywood to latewood in Picea 
glauca. C, abrupt transition from earlywood to latewood 
in Pseudotsuga mensiezii. D-F, hardwoods. D, diffuse- 
porous wood (no transition) in Acer saccharum. E, semi- 
ring-porous wood (gradual transition) in Diospyros virgin- 
iana. F, ring-porous wood (abrupt transition) in Fraxinus 
americana. Scale bars = 300 ym. 


each because of the distinct anatomical differences between 
the two. 


Non-porous woods (or softwoods, woods without vessels) 
can exhibit any of these three general patterns. Some 
softwoods such as Western redcedar (Thuja plicata), north- 
ern white-cedar (Thuja occidentalis), and species of spruce 
(Picea) and true fir (Abies) have growth increments that 
undergo a gradual transition from the thin-walled wide- 
lumined earlywood cells to the thicker-walled, narrower- 


3-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


lumined latewood cells (Fig. 3—5B). Other woods undergo 
an abrupt transition from earlywood to latewood, such as 
southern yellow pine (Pinus), larch (Larix), Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii), baldcypress (Taxodium disticum), 
and redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) (Fig. 3—5C). Because 
most softwoods are native to the north temperate regions, 
growth rings are clearly evident. Only in species such as ar- 
aucaria (Araucaria) and some podocarps (Podocarpus) does 
one find no transition within the growth ring (Fig. 3—5A). 
Some authors report this state as growth rings being absent 
or only barely evident (Phillips 1948, Kukachka 1960). 


Porous woods (or hardwoods, woods with vessels) have two 
main types of growth rings and one intermediate form. In 
diffuse-porous woods, vessels either do not markedly differ 
in size and distribution from the earlywood to the latewood, 
or the change in size and distribution is gradual and no 

clear distinction between earlywood and latewood can be 
found (Fig. 3-5D). Maple (Acer), birch (Betula), aspen/cot- 
tonwood (Populus), and yellow-poplar (Liriodendron tulip- 
ifera) are examples of diffuse porous species. 


This pattern is in contrast to ring-porous woods wherein the 
transition from earlywood to latewood is abrupt, with ves- 
sel diameters decreasing substantially (often by an order or 
magnitude or more); this change in vessel size is often ac- 
companied by a change in the pattern of vessel distribution 
as well. This creates a ring pattern of large earlywood ves- 
sels around the inner portion of the growth increment, and 
then denser, more fibrous tissue in the latewood, as is found 
in hackberry (Celtis occidentalis), white ash (Fraxinus 
americana), shagbark hickory (Carya ovata), and northern 
red oak (Quercus rubra) (Fig. 3—5F). 


Sometimes the vessel size and distribution pattern falls more 
or less between these two definitions, and this condition is 
referred to as semi-ring-porous (Fig. 3—5E). Black walnut 
(Juglans nigra) is a temperate-zone semi-ring-porous wood. 
Most tropical hardwoods are diffuse-porous; the best- 
known commercial exceptions to this are the Spanish-cedars 
(Cedrela spp.) and teak (Tectona grandis), which are gener- 
ally semi-ring-porous and ring-porous, respectively. 


Few distinctly ring-porous species grow in the tropics and 
comparatively few grow in the southern hemisphere. In gen- 
era that span temperate and tropical zones, it is common to 
have ring-porous species in the temperate zone and diffuse- 
porous species in the tropics. The oaks (Quercus), ashes 
(Fraxinus), and hackberries (Celtis) native to the tropics 

are diffuse-porous, whereas their temperate congeners are 
ring-porous. Numerous detailed texts provide more informa- 
tion on growth increments in wood, a few of which are of 
particular note (Panshin and deZeeuw 1980, Dickison 2000, 
Carlquist 2001). 


Cells in Wood 


Understanding a growth ring in greater detail requires some 
familiarity with the structure, function, and variability of 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


cells that make up the ring. A living plant cell consists of 
two primary domains: the protoplast and the cell wall. The 
protoplast is the sum of the living contents that are bounded 
by the cell membrane. The cell wall is a non-living, largely 
carbohydrate matrix extruded by the protoplast to the exte- 
rior of the cell membrane. The plant cell wall protects the 
protoplast from osmotic lysis and often provides mechanical 
support to the plant at large (Esau 1977, Raven and others 
1999, Dickison 2000). 


For cells in wood, the situation is somewhat more compli- 
cated than this highly generalized case. In many cases in 
wood, the ultimate function of the cell is borne solely by the 
cell wall. This means that many mature wood cells not only 
do not require their protoplasts, but indeed must completely 
remove their protoplasts prior to achieving functional matu- 
rity. For this reason, a common convention in wood litera- 
ture is to refer to a cell wall without a protoplast as a cell. 
Although this is technically incorrect from a cell biological 
standpoint, this convention is common in the literature and 
will be observed throughout the remainder of the chapter. 


In the case of a mature cell in wood in which there is no 
protoplast, the open portion of the cell where the protoplast 
would have existed is known as the lumen (plural: lumina). 
Thus, in most cells in wood there are two domains; the cell 
wall and the lumen (Fig. 3-3B,C). The lumen is a critical 
component of many cells, whether in the context of the 
amount of space available for water conduction or in the 
context of a ratio between the width of the lumen and the 
thickness of the cell wall. The lumen has no structure per se, 
as it is the void space in the interior of the cell. Thus, wood 
is a substance that has two basic domains; air space (mostly 
in the lumina of the cells) and the cell walls of the compo- 
nent cells. 


Cell Walls 


Cell walls in wood give wood the majority of its properties 
discussed in later chapters. Unlike the lumen, which is a 
void space, the cell wall itself is a highly regular structure, 
from one cell type to another, between species, and even 
when comparing softwoods and hardwoods. The cell wall 
consists of three main regions: the middle lamella, the 
primary wall, and the secondary wall (Fig. 3-6). In each 
region, the cell wall has three major components: cellulose 
microfibrils (with characteristic distributions and organiza- 
tion), hemicelluloses, and a matrix or encrusting material, 
typically pectin in primary walls and lignin in secondary 
walls (Panshin and deZeeuw 1980). In a general sense, cel- 
lulose can be understood as a long string-like molecule with 
high tensile strength; microfibrils are collections of cellulose 
molecules into even longer, stronger thread-like macromole- 
cules. Lignin is a brittle matrix material. The hemicelluloses 
are smaller, branched molecules thought to help link the 
lignin and cellulose into a unified whole in each layer of the 
cell wall. 


Figure 3-6. Cut-away drawing of the cell wall, including 
the structural details of a bordered pit. The various lay- 
ers of the cell wall are detailed at the top of the drawing, 
beginning with the middle lamella (ML). The next layer is 
the primary wall (P), and on the surface of this layer the 
random orientation of the cellulose microfibrils is de- 
tailed. Interior to the primary wall is the secondary wall 
in its three layers: $1, S2, and S3. The microfibril angle 
of each layer is illustrated, as well as the relative thick- 
ness of the layers. The lower portion of the illustration 
shows bordered pits in both sectional and face view. 


To understand these wall layers and their interrelationships, 
it is necessary to remember that plant cells generally do not 
exist singly in nature; instead they are adjacent to many 
other cells, and this association of thousands of cells, 

taken together, forms an organ, such as a leaf. Each of the 
individual cells must adhere to one another in a coherent 
way to ensure that the cells can act as a unified whole. This 
means they must be interconnected to permit the movement 
of biochemicals (such as photosynthate, hormones, cell- 
signaling agents) and water. This adhesion is provided by 
the middle lamella, the layer of cell wall material between 
two or more cells, a part of which is contributed by each of 
the individual cells (Fig. 3-6). This layer is the outermost 
layer of the cell wall continuum and in a non-woody organ 
is pectin rich. In the case of wood, the middle lamella is 
lignified. 


The next layer formed by the protoplast just interior to the 
middle lamella is the primary wall (Fig. 3-6). The primary 
wall is characterized by a largely random orientation of 
cellulose microfibrils; like thin threads wound round and 
round a balloon in no particular order, where any microfibril 
angle from 0° to 90° relative to the long axis of the cell may 


be present. In cells in wood, the primary wall is thin and is 
generally indistinguishable from the middle lamella. For this 
reason, the term compound middle lamella is used to denote 
the primary cell wall of a cell, the middle lamella, and the 
primary cell wall of the adjacent cell. Even when viewed 
with transmission electron microscopy, the compound mid- 
dle lamella often cannot be separated unequivocally into its 
component layers. 


The remaining cell wall domain, found in virtually all cells 
in wood (and in many cells in non-woody plants or plant 
parts), is the secondary cell wall. The secondary cell wall is 
composed of three layers (Fig. 3-6). As the protoplast lays 
down the cell wall layers, it progressively reduces the lumen 
volume. The first-formed secondary cell wall layer is the S, 
(Fig. 3-6), which is adjacent to compound middle lamella 
(or technically, the primary wall). This layer is a thin layer 
and is characterized by a large microfibril angle. That is to 
say, the cellulose microfibrils are laid down in a helical fash- 
ion, and the angle between the mean microfibril direction 
and the long axis of the cell is large (50° to 70°). 


The next wall layer is arguably the most important cell wall 
layer in determining the properties of the cell and, thus, 

the wood properties at a macroscopic level (Panshin and 
deZeeuw 1980). This layer, formed interior to the S, layer, 
is the S, layer (Fig. 3-6). This is the thickest secondary cell 
wall layer and it makes the greatest contribution to the over- 
all properties of the cell wall. It is characterized by a lower 
lignin percentage and a low microfibril angle (5° to 30°). 
The microfibril angle of the S, layer of the wall has a strong 
but not fully understood relationship with wood properties 
at a macroscopic level (Kretschmann and others 1998), and 
this is an area of active research. 


Interior to the S, layer is the S, layer, a relatively thin wall 
layer (Fig. 3-6). The microfibril angle of this layer is rela- 
tively high and similar to the S, (>70°). This layer has the 
lowest percentage of lignin of any of the secondary wall 
layers. The explanation of this phenomenon is related 
directly to the physiology of the living tree. In brief, for wa- 
ter to move up the plant (transpiration), there must be adhe- 
sion between the water molecules and the cell walls of the 
water conduits. Lignin is a hydrophobic macromolecule, so 
it must be in low concentration in the S, to permit adhesion 
of water to the cell wall and thus facilitate transpiration. For 
more detail on these wall components and information on 
transpiration and the role of the cell wall, see any college- 
level plant physiology textbook (for example, Kozlowski 
and Pallardy 1997, Taiz and Zeiger 1991). 


Pits 
Any discussion of cell walls in wood must be accompanied 
by a discussion of the ways in which cell walls are modified 


to allow communication and transport between the cells in 
the living plant. These wall modifications, called pit-pairs 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


(or more commonly just pits), are thin areas in the cell walls 
between two cells and are a critical aspect of wood structure 
too often overlooked in wood technological treatments. Pits 
have three domains: the pit membrane, the pit aperture, and 
the pit chamber. The pit membrane (Fig. 3—6) is the thin 
semi-porous remnant of the primary wall; it is a carbohy- 
drate and not a phospholipid membrane. The pit aperture 

is the opening or hole leading into the open area of the pit, 
which is called the pit chamber (Fig. 3-6). The type, num- 
ber, size, and relative proportion of pits can be characteristic 
of certain types of wood and furthermore can directly affect 
how wood behaves in a variety of situations, such as how 
wood interacts with surface coatings (DeMeijer and others 
1998, Rijkaert and others 2001). 


Pits of predictable types occur between different types of 
cells. In the cell walls of two adjacent cells, pits will form in 
the wall of each cell separately but in a coordinated location 
so that the pitting of one cell will match up with the pitting 
of the adjacent cell (thus a pit-pair). When this coordination 
is lacking and a pit is formed only in one of the two cells, it 
is called a blind pit. Blind pits are fairly rare in wood. Un- 
derstanding the type of pit can permit one to determine what 
type of cell is being examined in the absence of other in- 
formation. It can also allow one to make a prediction about 
how the cell might behave, particularly in contexts that in- 
volve fluid flow. Pits occur in three varieties: bordered, sim- 
ple, and half-bordered (Esau 1977, Raven and others 1999). 


Bordered pits are thus named because the secondary wall 
overarches the pit chamber and the aperture is generally 
smaller or differently shaped than the pit chamber, or both. 
The portion of the cell wall that is overarching the pit cham- 
ber is called the border (Figs. 3-6, 3-7A,D). When seen in 
face view, bordered pits often are round in appearance and 
look somewhat like a doughnut (Fig. 3-6). When seen in 
sectional view, the pit often looks like a pair of V’s with 

the open ends of the V’s facing each other (Fig. 3-7A,D). 

In this case, the long stems of the V represent the borders, 
the secondary walls that are overarching the pit chamber. 
Bordered pits always occur between two conducting cells, 
and sometimes between other cells, typically those with 
thick cell walls. The structure and function of bordered pits, 
particularly those in softwoods (see following section), are 
much-studied and considered to be well-suited to the safe 
and efficient conduction of sap. The status of the bordered 
pit (whether it is open or closed) has great importance in the 
field of wood preservation and can affect wood finishing and 
adhesive bonding. 


Simple pits lack any sort of border (Fig. 3-7C,F). The pit 
chamber is straight-walled, and the pits are uniform in size 
and shape in each of the partner cells. Simple pits are typical 
between parenchyma cells and in face view merely look like 
clear areas in the walls. 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


Figure 3-7. Light micrographs and sketches of the three 
types of pits. A,D, longitudinal section of bordered pits in 
Xanthocyparis vietnamensis; the pits look like a vertical 
stack of thick-walled letter Vs. B,E, half-bordered pits in 
Pseudotsuga mensiezii; the arrow shows one half- 
bordered pit. C,F, simple pits on an end-wall in Pseu- 
dotsuga mensiezii; the arrow indicates one of five simple 
pits on the end wall. Scale bars = 20 um. 


Half-bordered pits occur between a conducting cell and a 
parenchyma cell. In this case, each cell forms the kind of pit 
that would be typical of its type (bordered in the case of a 
conducting cell and simple in the case of a parenchyma cell) 
and thus half of the pit pair is simple and half is bordered 
(Fig. 3—-7B,E). In the living tree, these pits are of great im- 
portance because they represent the communication between 
conducting cells and biochemically active parenchyma cells. 


Microscopic Structure of 
Softwoods and Hardwoods 


As discussed previously, the fundamental differences be- 
tween woods are founded on the types, sizes, proportions, 
pits, and arrangements of different cells that comprise the 
wood. These fine details of structure can affect the use of a 
wood. 


Softwoods 


The structure of a typical softwood is relatively simple. 
The axial or vertical system is composed mostly of axial 
tracheids, and the radial or horizontal system is the rays, 
which are composed mostly of ray parenchyma cells. 


Tracheids 


Tracheids are long cells that are often more than 100 times 
longer (1 to 10 mm) than wide and they are the major com- 
ponent of softwoods, making up over 90% of the volume of 
the wood. They serve both the conductive and mechanical 
needs of softwoods. On the transverse view or section 

(Fig. 3-8A), tracheids appear as square or slightly rectan- 
gular cells in radial rows. Within one growth ring they are 


typically thin-walled in the earlywood and thicker-walled in 
the latewood. For water to flow between tracheids, it must 
pass through circular bordered pits that are concentrated in 
the long, tapered ends of the cells. Tracheids overlap with 
adjacent cells across both the top and bottom 20% to 30% of 
their length. Water flow thus must take a slightly zigzag path 
as it goes from one cell to the next through the pits. Because 
the pits have a pit membrane, resistance to flow is substan- 
tial. The resistance of the pit membrane coupled with the 
narrow diameter of the lumina makes tracheids relatively 
inefficient conduits compared with the conducting cells of 
hardwoods. Detailed treatments of the structure of wood in 
relation to its conductive functions can be found in the lit- 
erature (Zimmermann 1983, Kozlowski and Pallardy 1997). 


Axial Parenchyma and Resin Canal Complexes 


Another cell type that is sometimes present in softwoods is 
axial parenchyma. Axial parenchyma cells are similar in size 
and shape to ray parenchyma cells, but they are vertically 
oriented and stacked one on top of the other to form a pa- 
renchyma strand. In transverse section they often look like 
axial tracheids but can be differentiated when they contain 
dark colored organic substances in the lumina of the cells. 

In the radial or tangential section they appear as long strands 
of cells generally containing dark-colored substances. Axial 
parenchyma is most common in redwood, juniper, cypress, 
baldcypress, and some species of Podocarpus but never 
makes up even 1% of the volume of a block of wood. Axial 
parenchyma is generally absent in pine, spruce, larch, hem- 
lock, and species of Araucaria and Agathis. 


In species of pine, spruce, Douglas-fir, and larch, structures 
commonly called resin ducts or resin canals are present axi- 
ally (Fig. 3-9) and radially (Fig. 3—9C). These structures are 
voids or spaces in the wood and are not cells. Specialized 
parenchyma cells that function in resin production surround 
resin canals. When referring to the resin canal and all the 
associated parenchyma cells, the correct term is axial or 
radial resin canal complex (Wiedenhoeft and Miller 2002). 
In pine, resin canal complexes are often visible on the trans- 
verse section to the naked eye, but they are much smaller 

in spruce, larch, and Douglas-fir, and a hand lens is needed 
to see them. Radial resin canal complexes are embedded in 
specialized rays called fusiform rays (Figs. 3-8C, 3—9C). 
These rays are typically taller and wider than normal rays. 
Resin canal complexes are absent in the normal wood of 
other softwoods, but some species can form large tangential 
clusters of traumatic axial resin canals in response to sub- 
stantial injury. 

Rays 

The other cells in Figure 3-8A are ray parenchyma cells 


that are barely visible and appear as dark lines running in 
a top-to-bottom direction. Ray parenchyma cells are 


siaet . 
tseeates! 


WHI ANAL Nt} hi 


Figure 3-8. Microscopic structure of Picea glauca, a typical 
softwood. A, transverse section, scale bar = 390 um; the 
bulk of the wood is made of tracheids, the small rectangles 
of various thicknesses; the three large, round structures 
are resin canals and their associated cells; the dark lines 
running from the top to the bottom of the photo are the 

ray cells of the rays. B, radial section showing two rays 
(arrows) running from left to right; each cell in the ray is a 
ray cell, and they are low, rectangular cells; the rays begin 
on the right in the earlywood (thin-walled tracheids) and 
continue into and through the latewood (thick-walled tra- 
cheids) and into the earlywood of the next growth ring, on 
the left side of the photo; scale bar = 195 pm. C, tangential 
section; rays seen in end-view, mostly only one cell wide; 
two rays are fusiform rays; there are radial resin canals 
embedded in the rays, causing them to bulge; scale bar = 
195 ym. 


rectangular prisms or brick-shaped cells. Typically they 

are approximately 15 um high by 10 um wide by 150 

to 250 um long in the radial or horizontal direction 

(Fig. 3-8B). These brick-like cells form the rays, which 
function primarily in synthesis, storage, and lateral transport 
of biochemicals and, to a lesser degree, water. In radial view 
or section (Fig. 3—8B), the rays look like brick walls and the 
ray parenchyma cells are sometimes filled with dark-colored 
substances. In tangential section (Fig. 3—8C), the rays are 
stacks of ray parenchyma cells one on top of the other form- 
ing a ray that is only one cell in width, called a uniseriate 
ray. 


When ray parenchyma cells intersect with axial tracheids, 
specialized pits are formed to connect the axial and radial 
systems. The area of contact between the tracheid wall and 
the wall of the ray parenchyma cells is called a cross-field. 
The type, shape, and size and number of pits in the 


3-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


KAN 0 
=| i th lll 


t ’ 


(=) 
(= 


— 
_ 
a 
_ 
=_— 
~— 
— 
es 
oD 


eer 


= 
cr 
so 
= 
fe) 


TY 

eae 
ceri 
éé@ 

ul 


BUOLELe 


a 
G 


St 
GU 
OF 


Figure 3-9. Resin canal complexes in Pseudotsuga men- 
siezii. A, transverse section showing a single axial resin 
canal complex. In this view the tangential and radial diam- 
eters of the canal can be measured accurately. Scale bar 
= 100 pum. B, radial section showing an axial resin canal 
complex embedded in the latewood. It is crossed by a ray 
that also extends into the earlywood on either side of the 
latewood. Scale bar = 195 um. C, tangential section show- 
ing the anastomosis between an axial and a radial resin 
canal complex. The fusiform ray bearing the radial resin 
canal complex is in contact with the axial resin canal com- 
plex. Scale bar = 195 pm. 


cross-field are generally consistent within a species and can 
be diagnostic for wood identification. 


Species that have resin canal complexes also have ray tra- 
cheids, which are specialized horizontal tracheids that nor- 
mally are situated at the margins of the rays. These ray tra- 
cheids have bordered pits like axial tracheids but are much 
shorter and narrower. Ray tracheids also occur in a few 
species that do not have resin canals. Alaska yellow-cedar, 
(Chamaecyparis nootkatensis), hemlock (Tsuga), and 
rarely some species of true fir (Abies) have ray tracheids. 
Additional detail regarding the microscopic structure of 
softwoods can be found in the literature (Phillips 1948, 
Kukachka 1960, Panshin and deZeeuw 1980, [AWA 2004). 


Hardwoods 

The structure of a typical hardwood is much more compli- 
cated than that of a softwood. The axial system is composed 
of fibrous elements of various kinds, vessel elements in vari- 
ous sizes and arrangements, and axial parenchyma in vari- 
ous patterns and abundance. As in softwoods, rays comprise 
the radial system and are composed of ray parenchyma cells, 
but hardwoods show greater variety in cell sizes and shapes. 


Vessels 

Vessel elements are the specialized water-conducting cells 
of hardwoods. They are stacked one on top of the other to 
form vessels. Where the ends of the vessel elements come 
in contact with one another, a hole is formed called a 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


perforation plate. Thus hardwoods have perforated tracheary 
elements (vessels elements) for water conduction, whereas 
softwoods have imperforate tracheary elements (tracheids). 
On the transverse section, vessels appear as large openings 
and are often referred to as pores (Fig. 3—2D). 


Vessel diameters may be small (<30 um) or quite large 
(>300 um), but typically range from 50 to 200 um. They 
are much shorter than tracheids and range from 100 to 
1,200 um, or 0.1 to 1.2 mm. Vessels can be arranged in vari- 
ous patterns. If all the vessels are the same size and more or 
less scattered throughout the growth ring, the wood is dif- 
fuse-porous (Fig. 3—S5D). If the earlywood vessels are much 
larger than the latewood vessels, the wood is ring-porous 
(Fig. 3-SF). Vessels can also be arranged in a tangential or 
oblique arrangement in a radial arrangement, in clusters, or 
in many combinations of these types (IAWA 1989). In addi- 
tion, individual vessels may occur alone (solitary arrange- 
ment) or in pairs or radial multiples of up to five or more 
vessels in a row. At the end of the vessel element is a hole 
or perforation plate. If there are no obstructions across the 
perforation plate, it is called a simple perforation plate. If 
bars are present, the perforation plate is called a scalariform 
perforation plate. 


Where vessel elements come in contact with each other 
tangentially, intervessel or intervascular bordered pits are 
formed. These pits range in size from 2 to >16 um in height 
and are arranged on the vessel walls in three basic ways. 
The most common arrangement is alternate, where the pits 
are offset by half the diameter of a pit from one row to the 
next. In the opposite arrangement, the pits are in files with 
their apertures aligned vertically and horizontally. In the 
scalariform arrangement, the pits are much wider than high. 
Combinations of these arrangements can also be observed in 
some species. Where vessel elements come in contact with 
ray cells, often half-bordered pits are formed called vessel— 
ray pits. These pits can be the same size and shape as the 
intervessel pits or much larger. 


Fibers 


Fibers in hardwoods function almost exclusively as me- 
chanical supporting cells. They are shorter than softwood 
tracheids (0.2 to 1.2 mm), average about half the width of 
softwood tracheids, but are usually two to ten times longer 
than vessel elements (Fig. 3-10B). The thickness of the fiber 
cell wall is the major factor governing density and mechani- 
cal strength of hardwood timbers. Species with thin-walled 
fibers, such as cottonwood (Populus deltoides), basswood 
(Tilia americana), ceiba, and balsa (Ochroma pyramidale), 
have low density and strength; species with thick-walled 
fibers, such as hard maple, black locust (Robinia pseudoaca- 
cia), ipe (Tabebuia serratifolia), and bulletwood (Manilkara 
bidentata), have high density and strength. Pits between fi- 
bers are generally inconspicuous and may be simple or bor- 
dered. In some woods such as oak (Quercus) and meranti/ 
lauan (Shorea), vascular or vasicentric tracheids are present, 


Figure 3-10. Fibers in Quercus rubra. A, transverse sec- 
tion showing thick-walled, narrow-lumined fibers; three 
rays are passing vertically through the photo, and there 
are a number of axial parenchyma cells, the thin-walled, 
wide-lumined cells, in the photo; scale bar = 50 ym. B, 
macerated wood; there are several fibers (f), two of which 
are marked; also easily observed are parenchyma cells 
(arrows), both individually and in small groups; note the 
thin walls and small rectangular shape compared to the 
fibers; scale bar = 300 pm. 


especially near or surrounding the vessels. These specialized 
fibrous elements in hardwoods typically have bordered pits, 
are thin-walled, and are shorter than the fibers of the spe- 
cies; they should not be confused with the tracheids in soft- 
woods, which are much longer than hardwood fibers. 


Axial Parenchyma 


Axial parenchyma in softwoods is absent or only occasion- 
ally present as scattered cells, but hardwoods have a wide 
variety of axial parenchyma patterns (Fig. 3-11). The axial 
parenchyma cells in hardwoods and softwoods are roughly 
the same size and shape, and they also function in the same 
manner. The difference comes in the abundance and specific 
patterns in hardwoods. Two major types of axial parenchy- 
ma are found in hardwoods. Paratracheal parenchyma is as- 
sociated with the vessels, and apotracheal parenchyma is not 
associated with the vessels. Paratracheal parenchyma is fur- 
ther divided into vasicentric (surrounding the vessels, Fig. 
3-11A), aliform (surrounding the vessel and with wing-like 
extensions, Fig. 3—-11C), and confluent (several connecting 
patches of paratracheal parenchyma sometimes forming a 
band, Fig. 3-11E). Apotracheal parenchyma is divided into 
diffuse (scattered), diffuse-in-aggregate (short bands, Fig. 
3—-11B), and banded, whether at the beginning or end of the 
growth ring (marginal, Fig. 3—11F) or within a growth ring 
(Fig. 3-11D). Each species has a particular pattern of 

axial parenchyma, which is more or less consistent from 
specimen to specimen, and these cell patterns are important 
in wood identification. 

Rays 

The rays in hardwoods are structurally more diverse than 
those found in softwoods. In some species such as willow 
(Salix), cottonwood, and koa (Acacia koa), the rays are 
exclusively uniseriate and are much like softwood rays. In 
hardwoods, most species have rays that are more than one 
cell wide. In oak and hard maple, the rays are two-sized, 
uniseriate and more than eight cells wide and in oak several 


3-11 


Figure 3-11. Transverse sections of various woods show- 
ing a range of hardwood axial parenchyma patterns. A, C, 
and E are woods with paratracheal types of parenchyma. 
A, vasicentric parenchyma in Enterolobium maximum; 
note that two vessels in the middle of the view are con- 
nected by parenchyma, which is the feature also shown 
in E; the other vessels in the image present vasicentric 
parenchyma only. C, aliform parenchyma in Afzelia afri- 
cana; the parenchyma cells are the light-colored, thin- 
walled cells, and are easily visible. E, confluent paren- 
chyma in Afzelia cuazensis. B, D, and F are woods with 
apotracheal types of parenchyma. B, diffuse-in-aggregate 
parenchyma in Dalbergia stevensonii. D, banded paren- 
chyma in Micropholis guyanensis. F, marginal paren- 
chyma in Juglans nigra; in this case, the parenchyma 
cells are darker in color, and they delimit the growth rings 
(arrows). Scale bars = 780 ym. 


centimeters high (Fig. 3—-12A). In most species the rays 

are one to five cells wide and <1 mm high (Fig. 3-12B). 
Rays in hardwoods are composed of ray parenchyma cells 
that are either procumbent or upright. As the name implies, 
procumbent ray cells are horizontal and are similar in shape 


and size to the softwood ray parenchyma cells (Fig. 3—12C). 


Upright ray cells have their long axis oriented axially 

(Fig. 3-12D). Upright ray cells are generally shorter than 
procumbent cells are long, and sometimes they are nearly 
square. Rays that have only one type of ray cell, typically 
only procumbent cells, are called homocellular rays. Those 
that have procumbent and upright cells are called heterocel- 
lular rays. The number of rows of upright ray cells, when 
present, varies from one to many and can be diagnostic in 
wood identification. 


The great diversity of hardwood anatomy is treated in many 
sources throughout the literature (Metcalfe and Chalk 1950, 
1979, 1987; Panshin and deZeeuw 1980; [AWA 1989; 


3-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Gregory 1994; Cutler and Gregory 1998; Dickison 2000; 
Carlquist 2001). 


Wood Technology 


Though briefly discussing each kind of cell in isolation is 
necessary, the beauty and complexity of wood are found in 
the interrelationship between many cells at a much larger 
scale. The macroscopic properties of wood such as density, 
hardness, bending strength, and others are properties derived 
from the cells that make up the wood. Such larger-scale 
properties are based on chemical and anatomical details 

of wood structure (Panshin and deZeeuw 1980). 


Moisture Relations 


The cell wall is largely made up of cellulose and hemicel- 
lulose, and the hydroxyl groups on these chemicals make 
the cell wall hygroscopic. Lignin, the agent cementing cells 
together, is a comparatively hydrophobic molecule. This 
means that the cell walls in wood have a great affinity for 
water, but the ability of the walls to take up water is limited 
in part by the presence of lignin. Water in wood has a strong 
effect on wood properties, and wood—water relations greatly 
affect the industrial use of wood in wood products. Addi- 
tional information regarding dimensional changes of wood 
with changing moisture content can be found in Chapters 4 
and 13. 


Density 


Density (or specific gravity) is one of the most important 
physical properties of wood (Desch and Dinwoodie 1996, 
Bowyer and others 2003). Density is the weight or mass 
of wood divided by the volume of the specimen at a given 
moisture content. Thus, units for density are typically ex- 
pressed as pounds per cubic foot (Ib ft-3) or kilograms per 
cubic meter (kg m-3). When density values are reported in 
the literature, the moisture content of the wood must also 
be given. Specific gravity is the density of the sample nor- 
malized to the density of water. (This topic is addressed in 
greater detail in Chap. 4, including a detailed explanation of 
wood specific gravity.) 


Wood structure determines wood density; in softwoods 
where latewood is abundant (Fig. 3—3D) in proportion to 
earlywood, density is higher (for example, 0.59 specific 
gravity in longleaf pine, Pinus palustris). The reverse is true 
when there is much more earlywood than latewood (Fig. 
3—5B) (for example, 0.35 specific gravity in eastern white 
pine, Pinus strobus). To say it another way, density increases 
as the proportion of cells with thick cell walls increases. 

In hardwoods, density is dependent not only on fiber wall 
thickness, but also on the amount of void space occupied by 
vessels and parenchyma. In balsa, vessels are large (typi- 
cally >250 um in tangential diameter) and there is an abun- 
dance of axial and ray parenchyma. Fibers that are present 
are thin walled, and the specific gravity may be <0.20. In 
dense woods, the fibers are thick walled, lumina are virtu- 
ally absent, and fibers are abundant in relation to vessels and 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


parenchyma. Some tropical hardwoods have specific gravi- 
ties >1.0. In all woods, density is related to the proportion of 
the volume of cell wall material to the volume of lumina of 
those cells in a given bulk volume. 


Juvenile Wood and Reaction Wood 


Two key examples of the biology of the tree affecting the 
quality of wood can be seen in the formation of juvenile 
wood and reaction wood. They are grouped together be- 
cause they share several common cellular, chemical, and 
tree physiological characteristics, and each may or may not 
be present in a certain piece of wood. 


Juvenile wood is the first-formed wood of the young tree— 
the rings closest to the pith (Fig. 3-3A, bottom). Juvenile 
wood in softwoods is in part characterized by the production 
of axial tracheids that have a higher microfibril angle in the 
S2 wall layer (Larson and others 2001). A higher microfibril 
angle in the S2 is correlated with drastic longitudinal shrink- 
age of the cells when the wood is dried for human use, re- 
sulting in a piece of wood that has a tendency to warp, cup, 
and check. The morphology of the cells themselves is often 
altered so that the cells, instead of being long and straight, 
are often shorter and angled, twisted, or bent. The precise 
functions of juvenile wood in the living tree are not fully 
understood but are thought to confer little-understood me- 
chanical advantages. 


Reaction wood is similar to juvenile wood in several re- 
spects but is formed by the tree for different reasons. Most 
any tree of any age will form reaction wood when the 
woody organ (whether a twig, branch, or the trunk) is de- 
flected from the vertical by more than one or two degrees. 
This means that all non-vertical branches form consider- 
able quantities of reaction wood. The type of reaction wood 
formed by a tree differs in softwoods and hardwoods. In 
softwoods, the reaction wood is formed on the underside 

of the leaning organ and is called compression wood 

(Fig. 3-13A) (Timmel 1986). In hardwoods, the reaction 
wood forms on the top side of the leaning organ and is 
called tension wood (Fig. 3-13B) (Desch and Dinwoodie 
1996, Bowyer and others 2003). As mentioned above, the 
various features of juvenile wood and reaction wood are 
similar. In compression wood, the tracheids are shorter, mis- 
shapen cells with a large S, microfibril angle, a high degree 
of longitudinal shrinkage, and high lignin content (Timmel 
1986). They also take on a distinctly rounded outline 

(Fig. 3-13C). In tension wood, the fibers fail to form a prop- 
er secondary wall and instead form a highly cellulosic wall 
layer called the G layer, or gelatinous layer (Fig. 3—-13D). 


Appearance of Wood as Sawn 
Lumber 


Color and Luster 


As mentioned previously when discussing heartwood and 
sapwood, the sapwood color of most species is in the white 


Figure 3-12. Rays in longitudinal sections. A and B show 
tangential sections, scale bars = 300 ym. A, Quercus fal- 
cata showing a wide multiseriate ray (arrow) and many 
uniseriate rays. B, Swietenia macrophylla showing numer- 
ous rays ranging from 1 to 4 cells wide; note that in this 
wood the rays are arranged roughly in rows from side to 
side. C and D show radial sections, scale bars = 200 pm. 
C, homocellular ray in Tilia americana; all cells in the ray 
are procumbent cells; they are longer radially than they 
are tall. D, two heterocellular rays in Khaya ivorensis; the 
central portion of the ray is composed of procumbent 
cells, but the margins of the ray, both top and bottom, 
have two rows of upright cells (arrows), which are as tall 
as or taller than they are wide. 


range. The color of heartwood depends on the presence, 
characteristics, and concentrations of extractives in the 
wood. The heartwood color of a given species can vary 
greatly, depending on growth history and health of the tree, 
genetic differences between trees, and other factors. Heart- 
wood formation, particularly as it relates to final timber 
color, is not fully understood. Description of color in wood 
is highly dependent on the particular author; assertions that 
a particular wood is exactly one color are spurious. 


Luster is a somewhat subjective characteristic of some 
woods and refers to the way in which light reflecting from 
the wood appears to penetrate into and then shine from the 
surface of the board. Genuine mahogany (Swietenia sp.) is 
one of the better-known woods with distinct luster. 


Grain and Texture 


The terms grain and texture are commonly used rather 
loosely in connection with wood. Grain is often used in 
reference to the relative sizes and distributions of cells, as 
in fine grain and coarse grain; this use of grain is roughly 
synonymous with texture (below). Grain is also used to in- 
dicate the orientation of the cells of the axial system (“fiber 
direction’), as in “along the grain,” straight grain, spiral 
grain, and interlocked grain, and this use of the term is pre- 
ferred. Grain, as a synonym for fiber direction, is discussed 
in detail relative to mechanical properties in Chapter 5. 


3-13 


** —S 
ew 
{ 5 
. 


eeereeee 
~ 


‘ete 
e®%~e" 
ee 
oe 

>. 
Se, 
7 
°%~« 
+ 

-@* 
ee” 

7 


Orvetcet 
Poimieset 
Poerers 


oO ae 


\o xt gyyyT) 


Figure 3-13. Macroscopic and microscopic views of reac- 
tion wood in a softwood and a hardwood. A, compression 
wood in Pinus sp.; note that the pith is not in the center 
of the trunk, and the growth rings are much wider in the 
compression wood zone. B, tension wood in Juglans nig- 
ra; the pith is nearly centered in the trunk, but the growth 
rings are wider in the tension wood zone. C, transverse 
section of compression wood in Picea engelmannii; the 
tracheids are thick-walled and round in outline, giving 
rise to prominent intercellular spaces in the cell corners 
(arrow). D, tension wood fibers showing prominent gelati- 
nous layers in Croton gossypiifolius; the gelatinous lay- 
ers in the fibers are most pronounced across the top of 
the image on either side of and just below the vessel; the 
fibers in the lower half of the image show thinner gelati- 
nous layers. Scale bars = 50 ym. 


Wood finishers refer to wood as open grained and close (or 
closed) grained, which are terms reflecting the relative size 
of the cells and the need for fillers prior to finishing. Texture 
is another word used to describe a macroscopic summary 

of the relative sizes of cells in wood. Fine-textured woods 
have uniform structure with typically small cells. Coarse- 
textured woods generally have structure with concentrations 
of large diameter cells (such as the earlywood in ring porous 
hardwoods, Fig. 3—SF) that produce areas of clearly differ- 
ent appearance to the naked eye. Even-textured woods may 
have uniformly large or small cells, but their distribution 

is not concentrated in particular areas, such as in diffuse 
porous hardwoods. Even if terms used for describing the 
appearance of wood were universally agreed upon (and they 
are not), variations in wood structure within a tree, between 
trees of the same species, and between two or more species 
would defy complete characterization using these terms. 
For this reason, when discussing wood, reference should be 
made to specific properties when possible. At a minimum, it 
is desirable to ensure that the same operating definitions of 
terms like “open grained” or “coarse textured” are used by 
all parties. 


3-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Plainsawn and Quartersawn 


When boards are cut from logs, a sawyer makes decisions 
about how to orient to the log with respect to the saw blade 
and in this way produces boards with different cuts. Specific 
nomenclature for these angles of cutting exists but is not 
precisely the same for hardwood lumber and softwood lum- 
ber; this unfortunate fact results in a parallel set of terms for 
hardwoods and softwoods. The sawyer can cut boards from 
a log in two distinct ways: (a) tangential to the growth rings, 
producing flatsawn or plainsawn lumber in hardwoods 

and flatsawn or slash-grained lumber in softwoods, and 

(b) radially from the pith or parallel to the rays, producing 
quartersawn lumber in hardwoods and edge-grained or ver- 
tical-grained lumber in softwoods (Fig. 3-14). In plainsawn 
boards, the surfaces next to the edges are often far from tan- 
gential to the rings, and quartersawn lumber is not usually 
cut strictly parallel with the rays. In commercial practice, 
lumber with rings at angles of 0° to 45° to the wide surface 
is called plainsawn and lumber with rings at angles of 45° 
to 90° to the wide surface is called quartersawn. Hardwood 
lumber in which annual rings form angles of 30° to 60° to 
the wide face is sometimes called bastard sawn. For many 
purposes, either plainsawn or quartersawn lumber is satis- 
factory, but each type has certain advantages that can be im- 
portant for a particular use. Some advantages of plainsawn 
and quartersawn lumber are given in Table 3-1. 


Slope of Grain: Straight, Diagonal, 
Spiral, and Interlocked Grain 


The slope of grain of a board is determined by the way in 
which the sawyer cuts the board and the basic biological 
characteristics of the log from which the board is cut, but it 
is distinct from the type of cut (plainsawn or quartersawn). 
In an idealized saw log, the cells of the axial system in the 
wood are parallel to the length of the log; they run straight 
up and down the trunk. When this is the case, the grain an- 
gle of a board cut from the log is wholly a function of how 
the sawyer cuts the board. It is assumed that when a board is 
cut from the log, the long edge of the board will be parallel 
(or nearly so) with the cells of the axial system, or parallel 
with the grain (middle of Fig. 3-3A, 3—3F). Boards prepared 
in this way are straight-grained boards. When the long edge 
of the board is not parallel with the grain, the board has 
what is called diagonal grain (middle of Fig. 3—3A, 3-3F). 
Boards with diagonal grain will show atypical shrinking and 
swelling with changes in moisture content (Chap. 4), and 
altered mechanical properties (Chap. 5) depending on the 
slope of grain. The degree to which the long edge of a board 
is not parallel to the grain is referred to as slope of grain and 
is addressed in Chapter 5. 


Not all logs have grain that runs perfectly straight up and 
down the length of the log. In some logs, the grain runs in a 
helical manner up the trunk, like the stripes on a barber pole 
or the lines on a candy cane. Such logs produce boards with 
spiral grain, and there is no way to cut long boards from 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


Table 3-1. Some advantages of plainsawn and quartersawn lumber 


Plainsawn 


Quartersawn 


Shrinks and swells less in thickness 


Surface appearance less affected by round or oval knots 
compared to effect of spike knots in quartersawn boards; 
boards with round or oval knots not as weak as boards 
with spike knots 


Shakes and pitch pockets, when present, extend through 
fewer boards 


Figure patterns resulting from annual rings and some 
other types of figure brought out more conspicuously 


Is less susceptible to collapse in drying 


Costs less because it is easy to obtain 


Shrinks and swells less in width 
Cups, surface-checks, and splits less in seasoning and in use 


Raised grain caused by separation in annual rings does not 
become as pronounced 


Figure patterns resulting from pronounced rays, interlocked 
grain, and wavy grain are brought out more conspicuously 


Does not allow liquids to pass through readily in some 
species 


Holds paint better in some species 


Sapwood appears in boards at edges and its width is limited 
by the width of the log 


TTT] 


\ 


\ \ 
Ce SSeS 


Figure 3-14. Quartersawn (A) and plainsawn (B) boards 
cut from a log. 


such a log to produce straight-grained lumber. In other logs, 
the angle of helical growth of the wood cells will change 
over time, such that the grain may curve in a right-handed 
helix (e.g., 5°) for a few years and then over the course 

of a few years change to a left-handed 5° helix, and so on 
over the life of the tree. This growth produces wood with 
interlocked grain. There is no way to saw a board from 
such a log to produce uniformly straight grain. Therefore, 

a straight-grained board can be cut only from a straight- 
grained log; a log with spiral or interlocked grain can never 
produce truly straight-grained lumber, regardless of the skill 
of the sawyer. 


Knots 


Knots are remnants of branches in the tree appearing in a 
board. In a flatwsawn board, knots appear as round and typi- 
cally brown pieces of wood perpendicular to the grain of 
the board. In a quartersawn board, knots can be cut along 
their length and are referred to as spike knots. Independent 
of the cut of the board, knots occur in two basic varieties: 
intergrown knots and encased knots. These terms refer to 
the continuity, or lack thereof, of stem wood with wood 

of the branch. If the branch was alive at the time when the 
growth rings making up the board were formed, the wood 
of the trunk of the tree and that branch is continuous; the 
growth rings continue uninterrupted out along the branch, 
forming an intergrown knot. If the branch was dead at the 
time when growth rings of the board were formed, the stem 
wood curves around the branch without continuing up the 
branch, giving rise to a knot that is not continuous with the 
stem wood; this produces an encased knot. With intergrown 
knots, the grain angle of the trunk wood in the vicinity of 
the knot is typically more disturbed than in encased knots, 
and this influences wood properties (Chap. 5). Encased 
knots generally disturb the grain angle less than intergrown 
knots. 


Decorative Features 


The decorative value of wood depends upon its color, fig- 
ure, luster, and the way in which it bleaches or takes fillers, 
stains, and transparent finishes. In addition to quantifiable 
or explicable characteristics, decorative value is also deter- 
mined by the individual preferences of the end user. 


The structure of a given wood, in conjunction with how 

the final wood product was cut from a log, gives rise to the 
majority of the patterns seen in wood. A general term for the 
pattern of wood is figure, which can refer to mundane fea- 
tures, such as the appearance of growth rings in a plainsawn 
board or the appearance of ray fleck on a quartersawn board, 


3-15 


or more exotic patterns determined by anomalous growth, 
such as birdseye, wavy grain, or wood burls. 


Wood Identification 


The identification of wood can be of critical importance to 
the primary and secondary wood using industry, govern- 
ment agencies, museums, law enforcement, and scientists 
in the fields of botany, ecology, anthropology, forestry, and 
wood technology. Wood identification is the recognition of 
characteristic cell patterns and wood features and is gener- 
ally accurate only to the generic level. Because woods of 
different species from the same genus often have different 
properties and perform differently under various conditions, 
serious problems can develop if species or genera are mixed 
during the manufacturing process and in use. Because for- 
eign woods are imported to the U.S. market, both buyers 
and sellers must have access to correct identifications and 
information about properties and uses. 


Lumber graders, furniture workers, those working in the in- 
dustry, and hobbyists often identify wood without laboratory 
tools. Features often used are color, odor, grain patterns, 
density, and hardness. With experience, these features can 
be used to identify many different woods, but the accuracy 
of the identification is dependent on the experience of the 
person and the quality of the unknown wood. If the un- 
known wood specimen is atypical, decayed, or small, often 
the identification is incorrect. Examining woods, especially 
hardwoods, with a 10x to 20x hand lens, greatly improves 
the accuracy of the identification (Panshin and deZeeuw 
1980, Hoadley 1990, Brunner and others 1994). Some 
foresters and wood technologists armed with a hand lens 
and sharp knife can accurately identify lumber in the field. 
They make a cut on the transverse surface and examine all 
patterns to make an identification. 


Scientifically rigorous, accurate identifications require that 
the wood be sectioned and examined with a light micro- 
scope. With the light microscope, even with only a 10x ob- 
jective, many more features are available for use in making 
a determination. Equally important as the light microscope 
in wood identification is the reference collection of correctly 
identified specimens to which unknown samples can be 
compared (Wheeler and Baas 1998). If a reference collec- 
tion is not available, books of photomicrographs or books 
or journal articles with anatomical descriptions and dichoto- 
mous keys can be used (Miles 1978, Schweingruber 1978, 
Core and others 1979, Gregory 1980, Ilic 1991, Miller and 
Détienne 2001). In addition to these resources, several com- 
puter-assisted wood identification packages are available 
and are suitable for people with a robust wood anatomical 
background, such as the on-line searchable resource Inside- 
Wood (http://insidewood.lib.ncsu.edu/). 


Wood identification by means of molecular biological tech- 
niques is a field that is still in its infancy. Substantial popu- 
lation-biological effects limit the statistical likelihood of a 


3-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


robust and certain identification for routine work (Canadian 
Forest Service 1999). In highly limited cases of great finan- 
cial or criminal import and a narrowly defined context, the 
cost and labor associated with rigorous evaluation of DNA 
from wood can be warranted (Hipkins 2001). For example, 
if the question were “Did this piece of wood come from 
this individual tree?” or “Of the 15 species present in this 
limited geographical area, which one produced this root?” 
it is feasible to analyze the specimens with molecular tech- 
niques (Brunner and others 2001). If, however, the question 
were “What kind of wood is this, and from which forest did 
it come?” it would not be feasible at this time to analyze 
the specimen. Workers have shown that specific identifica- 
tion can be accomplished using DNA among six species 

of Japanese white oak (Ohyama and others 2001), but the 
routine application of their methods is not likely for some 
time. As technological advances improve the quality, quan- 
tity, and speed with which molecular data can be collected, 
the difficulty and cost of molecular wood identification 
will decrease. We can reasonably expect that at some point 
in the future molecular tools will be employed in routine 
identification of wood and that such techniques will greatly 
increase the specificity and accuracy of identification. For 
now, routine scientific wood identification is based on mi- 
croscopic evaluation of wood anatomical features. 


Literature Cited 


Bowyer, J.; Shmulsky, R.; Haygreen, J.G. 2003. Forest 
products and wood science: an introduction. 4th ed. Iowa 
City, IA: Iowa State Press. 554 p. 


Brunner, I.; Brodbeck, S.; Buchler, U.; Sperisen, C. 2001. 
Molecular identification of fine roots from trees from the 
Alps: reliable and fast DNA extraction and PCR-RFLP anal- 
yses of plastid DNA. Molecular Ecology. 10: 2079-2087. 


Brunner, M.; Kucera, L.J.; Ziircher, E. 1994. Major timber 
trees of Guyana: a lens key. Tropenbos Series 10. Wagenin- 
gen, The Netherlands: The Tropenbos Foundation. 224 p. 


Callado, C.H.; da Silva Neto, S.J.; Scarano, F.R.; Costa, 
C.G. 2001. Periodicity of growth rings in some flood-prone 
trees of the Atlantic rain forest in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Trees 15: 492-497. 


Canadian Forest Service, Pacific Forestry Centre. 1999. 
Combating tree theft using DNA technology. Breakout ses- 
sion consensus. Victoria, BC. 


Carlquist, S. 2001. Comparative Wood Anatomy. 2nd ed. 
Berlin: Springer. 448 p. 


Chudnoff, M. 1984. Tropical timbers of the world. Agric. 
Handb. 607. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 464 p. 


Core, H.A.; Céte, W.A.; Day, A.C. 1979. Wood structure 
and identification. 2nd ed. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse Univer- 
sity Press. 182 p. 


Chapter 3 Structure and Function of Wood 


Cutler, D.F.; Gregory, M. 1998. Anatomy of the dicotyle- 
dons. 2nd ed. New York: NY: Oxford University Press. 
304 p. Vol. IV. 


DeMeijer, M.; Thurich, K.; Militz, H. 1998. Comparative 
study on penetration characteristics of modern wood coat- 
ings. Wood Science and Technology. 32: 347-365. 


Desch, H.E.; Dinwoodie, J.M. 1996. Timber structure, prop- 
erties, conversion and use. 7th ed. London, UK: Macmillan 
Press. 306 p. 


Dickison, W. 2000. Integrative plant anatomy. New York, 
NY: Academic Press. 533 p. 


Esau, K. 1977. Anatomy of the seed plants. 2nd ed. New 
York, NY: John Wiley and Sons. 550 p. 


Gregory, M. 1980. Wood identification: an annotated bibli- 
ography. [AWA Bull. 1. ISSN: New Series. 1(1): 3-41. 


Gregory, M. 1994. Bibliography of systematic wood anato- 
my of dicotyledons. [AWA Journal. Supplement 1. 


Hillis, W.E. 1996. Formation of robinetin crystals in vessels 
of Intsia species. [AWA Journal. 17(4): 405-419. 


Hipkins, V. 2001. DNA profiling and identity analysis of 
ponderosa pine evidence samples. In: NFGEL Annual 
Report. 


Hoadley, R.B. 1990. Identifying wood: accurate results with 
simple tools. Newtown, CT: Taunton Press. 223 p. 


Hoadley, R.B. 2000. Understanding wood: a craftsman’s 
guide to wood technology. 2nd ed. Newtown, CT: Taunton 
Press. 280 p. 


IAWA Committee. 1989. IAWA list of microscopic features 
for hardwood identification. In: Wheeler, E.A.; Baas, P.; 
Gasson, P., eds. IAWA Bull. 10. ISSN: New Series 

10(3): 219-332. 


IAWA Committee. 2004. IAWA list of microscopic features 
of softwood identification. In: Richter, H.G.; Grosser, D.; 
Heinz, I.; Gasson, P., eds. [AWA Journal. 25(1): 1-70. 


Tlic, J. 1991. CSIRO atlas of hardwoods. Bathurst, Australia: 
Crawford House Press. 525 p. 


Kozlowksi, T.T.; Pallardy, S.G. 1997. Physiology of 
woody plants. 2nd ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Chapters 11, 12. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Alden, H.A.; Verrill, S. 1998. Variations 
of microfibril angle in loblolly pine: comparison of iodine 
crystallization and X-ray diffraction techniques. In: But- 
terfield, B.G., ed. Microfibril angle in wood. New Zealand: 
University of Canterbury. 157-176. 


Kukachka, B.F. 1960. Identification of coniferous woods. 
Tappi Journal. 43(11): 887-896. 


Lagenheim, J.H. 2003. Plant resins: chemistry, evolution, 
ecology, and ethnobotany. Portland, OR: Timber Press. 
448 p. 


Larson, P.R. 1994. The vascular cambium, development and 
structure. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 725 p. 


Larson, P.R.; Kretschmann, D.E.; Clark, A., III; Isenbrands, 
J.G. 2001. Formation and properties of juvenile wood in 
southern pines: a synopsis. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-129. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Metcalfe, C.R.; Chalk, L. 1950. Anatomy of the Dicotyle- 
dons. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press. 2 vols. 1,500 p. 


Metcalfe, C.R.; Chalk, L. 1979. Anatomy of the Dicotyle- 
dons. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press. Vol. I. 
276 p. 


Metcalfe, C.R.; Chalk, L. 1987. Anatomy of the Dicotyle- 
dons. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press. Vol. HI. 
224 p. 


Miles, A. 1978. Photomicrographs of world woods. Building 
Research Establishment, Princes Risborough Laboratory; 
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. 233 p. 


Miller, R.B.; Détienne, P. 2001. Major timber trees of Guy- 
ana: wood anatomy. Tropenbos Series 20. Wageningen, The 
Netherlands: The Tropenbos Foundation. 218 p. 


Ohyama, M.; Baba, K.; Itoh, T. 2001. Wood identification 
of Japanese Cyclobalanopsis species (Fagaceae) based on 
DNA polymorphism of the intergenic spacer between trnT 
and trnL 5' exon. Journal of Wood Science. 47: 81-86. 


Panshin, A.J.; deZeeuw, C. 1980. Textbook of wood tech- 
nology. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. 722 p. 


Phillips, E.W.J. 1948. Identification of softwoods by micro- 
scopic structure. Forest Products Res. Bull. 22. 


Raven, P.; Evert, R.; Eichhorn, S. 1999. Biology of plants. 
6th ed. New York, NY: W.H. Freeman & Company. 944 p. 


Rijkaert, V.; Stevens, M.; de Meijer, M.; Militz, H. 2001. 
Quantitative assessment of the penetration of water-borne 
and solvent-borne wood coatings in Scots pine sapwood. 
Holz als Roh-und Werkstoff. 59: 278-287. 


Schweingruber, F. 1978. Microscopic wood anatomy. 
Birmensdorf: Swiss Federal Institute for Foreign Research. 
800 p. 


Simpson, W.T., ed. 1991. Dry kiln operator’s manual. Agric. 
Handb. AH-188. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 274 p. 


Taiz, L.; Zeiger, E. 1991. Plant physiology. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Benjamin-Cummings Publishing Company. 
Chapter 4. 


Timmel, T.E. 1986. Compression wood in gymnosperms. 
Heidelberg: Springer. 2,150 p. 


Wheeler, E.A.; Baas, P. 1998. Wood identification: a review. 


IAWA Journal. 19(3); 241-264. 


Wiedenhoeft, A.C.; Miller, R.B. 2002. Brief comments on 
the nomenclature of softwood axial resin canals and their 
associated cells. [AWA Journal. 23(3): 299-303. 


Worbes, M. 1995. How to measure growth dynamics in 
tropical trees: a review. [AWA Journal. 16(4): 337-351. 


Worbes, M. 1999. Annual growth rings, rainfall-dependent 
growth and long-term growth patterns of tropical trees in 
the Capar Forest Reserve in Venezuela. Journal of Ecology. 
87: 391-403. 


Zimmermann, M.H. 1983. Xylem structure and the ascent 
of sap. New York: Springer-Verlag. 143 p. 


3-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


CHAPTER 4 


Moisture Relations and Physical Properties 
of Wood 


Samuel V. Glass, Research Physical Scientist 
Samuel L. Zelinka, Materials Research Engineer 


Contents 
Wood-Moisture Relationships 4—1 
Moisture Content and Green Wood 4—1 


Fiber Saturation and Maximum Moisture 
Content 4—2 


Water Vapor Sorption 4—3 
Liquid Water Absorption 4—4 
Dimensional Stability 4-5 
Density and Specific Gravity 4-7 
Thermal Properties 4-10 
Thermal Conductivity 4-10 
Heat Capacity 4-11 
Thermal Diffusivity 4-12 
Coefficient of Thermal Expansion 4-14 
Electrical Properties 4-15 
DC Electrical Properties 4-15 
AC Electrical Properties 4-16 
Friction Properties 4-17 
Nuclear Radiation Properties 4-17 
Literature Cited 4-18 
Additional References 4-19 


Wood, like many natural materials, is hygroscopic; it takes 
on moisture from the surrounding environment. Moisture 
exchange between wood and air depends on the relative hu- 
midity and temperature of the air and the current amount of 
water in the wood. This moisture relationship has an impor- 
tant influence on wood properties and performance. Many 
of the challenges of using wood as an engineering material 
arise from changes in moisture content or an abundance of 
moisture within the wood. 


This chapter discusses the macroscopic physical proper- 
ties of wood with emphasis given to their relationship with 
moisture content. Some properties are species-dependent; 
in such cases, data from the literature are tabulated accord- 
ing to species. The chapter begins with a broad overview 
of wood—water relations, defining key concepts needed to 
understand the physical properties of wood. 


Wood-Moisture Relationships 


Moisture Content and Green Wood 

Many physical and mechanical properties of wood depend 
upon the moisture content of wood. Moisture content (MC) 
is usually expressed as a percentage and can be calculated 
from 


MC = “water (100%) (4-1) 
Mwood 


where Mater 1s the mass of water in wood and Myooq 1S 
the mass of the ovendry wood. Operationally, the moisture 
content of a given piece of wood can be calculated by 
Myet Magy 
Mary 
where myo is the mass of the specimen at a given moisture 
content and mg,y is the mass of the ovendry specimen. 


MC (100%) (4-2) 


Green wood is often defined as freshly sawn wood in which 
the cell walls are completely saturated with water and ad- 
ditional water may reside in the lumina. The moisture con- 
tent of green wood can range from about 30% to more than 
200%. In green softwoods, the moisture content of sapwood 
is usually greater than that of heartwood. In green hard- 
woods, the difference in moisture content between heart- 
wood and sapwood depends on the species. The average 
moisture content of green heartwood and green sapwood of 
some domestic species is given in Table 4—1. These values 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 4—1. Average moisture content of green wood, by species 


Moisture content Moisture content 
(%) (%) 


Species Heartwood Sapwood Species Heartwood Sapwood 
Hardwoods Softwoods 

Alder, red —— 97 Baldcypress 121 171 
Apple 81 74 Cedar, eastern red 33 — 
Ash, black 95 — Cedar, incense 40 213 
Ash, green — 58 Cedar, Port-Orford 50 98 
Ash, white 46 44 Cedar, western red 58 249 
Aspen 95 113 Cedar, yellow 32 166 
Basswood, American 81 133 Douglas-fir, coast type 37 115 
Beech, American 55 72 Fir, balsam 88 173 
Birch, paper 89 72 Fir, grand 91 136 
Birch, sweet 75 70 Fir, noble 34 115 
Birch, yellow 74 72 Fir, Pacific silver 55 164 
Cherry, black 58 — Fir, white 98 160 
Chestnut, American 120 — Hemlock, eastern 97 119 
Cottonwood 162 146 Hemlock, western 85 170 
Elm, American 95 92 Larch, western 54 119 
Elm, cedar 66 61 Pine, loblolly 33 110 
Elm, rock 44 57 Pine, lodgepole 41 120 
Hackberry 61 65 Pine, longleaf 31 106 
Hickory, bitternut 80 54 Pine, ponderosa 40 148 
Hickory, mockernut 70 52 Pine, red 32 134 
Hickory, pignut 71 49 Pine, shortleaf 32 122 
Hickory, red 69 52 Pine, sugar 98 219 
Hickory, sand 68 50 Pine, western white 62 148 
Hickory, water 97 62 Redwood, old growth 86 210 
Magnolia 80 104 Spruce, black 52 113 
Maple, silver 58 97 Spruce, Engelmann 51 173 
Maple, sugar 65 72 Spruce, Sitka 4] 142 
Oak, California black 76 75 Tamarack 49 — 
Oak, northern red 80 69 

Oak, southern red 83 75 

Oak, water 81 81 

Oak, white 64 78 

Oak, willow 82 74 

Sweetgum 79 137 

Sycamore, American 114 130 

Tupelo, black 87 115 

Tupelo, swamp 101 108 

Tupelo, water 150 116 

Walnut, black 90 73 

Yellow-poplar 83 106 


is called the fiber saturation point, MC;,. Operationally, the 
fiber saturation point is considered as that moisture content 
above which the physical and mechanical properties of 
wood do not change as a function of moisture content. The 
fiber saturation point of wood averages about 30% moisture 
content, but in individual species and individual pieces of 
wood it can vary by several percentage points from that 
value. 


are considered typical, but variation within and between 
trees is considerable. Variability of green moisture content 
exists even within individual boards cut from the same tree. 
Additional information on moisture in green lumber is given 
in Chapter 13. 


Fiber Saturation and Maximum Moisture 
Content 


Moisture can exist in wood as free water (liquid water or 
water vapor in cell lumina and cavities) or as bound water 
(held by intermolecular attraction within cell walls). The 
moisture content at which only the cell walls are completely 
saturated (all bound water) but no water exists in cell lumina 


Conceptually, fiber saturation distinguishes between the two 
ways water is held in wood. However, in actuality, a more 
gradual transition occurs between bound and free water 
near the fiber saturation point. Within a piece of wood, in 


42 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


100 
90 
80 


Temperature (°C) 
hoon 
oo Oo lO 


oe 
o 


10 12 1416 2024 


= N 
o oOo 


10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Relative humidity (%) 


Figure 4—1. Equilibrium moisture content of wood (la- 
beled contours) as a function of relative humidity and 
temperature. 


one portion all cell lumina may be empty and the cell walls 
partially dried, while in another part of the same piece, cell 
walls may be saturated and lumina partially or completely 
filled with water. Even within a single cell, the cell wall may 
begin to dry before all water has left the lumen of that same 
cell. 


The moisture content at which both cell lumina and cell 
walls are completely saturated with water is the maximum 
possible moisture content. Basic specific gravity G, (based 
on ovendry mass and green volume—see section on Density 
and Specific Gravity) is the major determinant of maximum 
moisture content. As basic specific gravity increases, the 
volume of the lumina must decrease because the specific 
gravity of wood cell walls is constant among species. This 
decreases the maximum moisture content because less room 
is available for free water. Maximum moisture content 


MC,,ax for any basic specific gravity can be estimated from 


MC ynax = 100(1.54 — Gy )/1.54G, (4-3) 
where the specific gravity of wood cell walls is taken as 
1.54. Maximum possible moisture content varies from 267% 
at G, = 0.30 to 44% at G, = 0.90. Maximum possible mois- 
ture content is seldom attained in living trees. The moisture 
content at which wood will sink in water can be calculated 
by 


MC ging = 100(1 -G,)/Gy (4-4) 


Water Vapor Sorption 


When wood is protected from contact with liquid water and 
shaded from sunlight, its moisture content below the fiber 


saturation point is a function of both relative humidity 

(RH) and temperature of the surrounding air. Wood in 
service is exposed to both long-term (seasonal) and short- 
term (daily) changes in relative humidity and temperature of 
the surrounding air, which induce changes in wood moisture 
content. These changes usually are gradual, and short-term 
fluctuations tend to influence only the wood surface. Mois- 
ture content changes can be retarded, but not prevented, 

by protective coatings such as varnish, lacquer, or paint 
(Chap. 16). The objective of wood drying is to bring the 
moisture content close to the expected value that a finished 
product will have in service (Chap. 13). 


Equilibrium Moisture Content 


Equilibrium moisture content (EMC) is defined as that mois- 
ture content at which the wood is neither gaining nor losing 
moisture. The relationship between EMC, relative humidity, 
and temperature is shown in Figure 4—1 and Table 4—2. For 
most practical purposes, the values in Table 4—2 may be ap- 
plied to wood of any species. These values have been calcu- 
lated from the following equation: 
1,800[ Kh 
a 


EMC(%) = - 
W \1-Kh 


K,Kh + 2K, K>K7h? 
ea ae on ae (4-5) 
1+ Ky Kh + K\ KK “he 
where h is relative humidity (decimal) and the parameters 
W, K, K,, and K, depend on temperature: 


For temperature 7 in °C, 
W = 349 + 1.29T + 0.013572 
K=0.805 + 0.000736T — 0.00000273 72 
K, = 6.27 — 0.009387 — 0.000303 72 
K, = 1.91 + 0.0407T — 0.000293 72 


For temperature 7 in °F, 
W = 330 + 0.452T + 0.0041572 
K=0.791 + 0.0004637 — 0.000000844 72 
K, = 6.34 + 0.0007757 — 0.0000935 72 
K, = 1.09 + 0.02847 — 0.000090472 


Simpson (1973) showed that this equation provides a good 
fit to EMC—RH-temperature data. 


Sorption Hysteresis 


The relationship between EMC and relative humidity at 
constant temperature is referred to as a sorption isotherm. 
The history of a wood specimen also affects its EMC; this 
is called sorption hysteresis and is shown in Figure 4—2. A 
desorption isotherm is measured by bringing wood that was 
initially wet to equilibrium with successively lower values 
of relative humidity. A resorption, or adsorption, isotherm 
is measured in the opposite direction (from the dry state 
to successively higher RH values). As wood is dried from 
the initial green condition below the fiber saturation point 
(initial desorption), the EMC is greater than in subsequent 
desorption isotherms (Spalt 1958). Furthermore, the EMC 


4-3 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 4—2. Moisture content of wood in equilibrium with stated temperature and relative humidity 


Temperature Moisture content (%) at various relative humidity values 
CC (°F) 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75% 80% 85% 90% 95% 
-1.1 (0) 14 26 37 46 55 63 7.1 #79 87 95 104 11.3 12.4 13.5 149 165 185 21.0 24.3 
44 (40) 14 26 37 46 55 63 7.1 79 87 95 104 11.3 12.3 13.55 149 16.5 18.5 21.0 24.3 
10.0 (50) 14 26 36 46 55 63 7.1 7.9 87 95 10.3 11.2 12.3 134 148 164 184 20.9 24.3 
15.6 (60) 13 25 36 46 54 62 70 78 86 94 102 11.1 12.1 133 146 16.2 18.2 20.7 24.1 
21.1 (70) 13 25 35 45 54 62 69 7.7 85 92 10.1 11.0 12.0 13.1 144 16.0 17.9 20.5 23.9 
26.7 (80) 13 24 35 44 53 61 68 76 83 91 99 10.8 11.7 12.9 14.2 15.7 17.7 20.2 23.6 
32.2 (90) 12 23 34 43 S51 59 67 74 81 89 9.7 10.5 11.5 12.6 13.9 15.4 17.3 19.8 23.3 
37.8 (100) 12 23 33 42 50 58 65 72 7.9 87 95 10.3 11.2 12.3 13.6 15.1 17.0 19.5 22.9 
43.3 (110) 21 22 32 40 49 56 63 70 7.7 84 9.2 10.0 11.0 12.0 13.2 14.7 166 19.1 22.4 
48.9 (120) 1.1 2.1 30 39 47 54 61 68 (75 82 89 9.7 10.6 11.7 12.9 14.4 16.2 18.6 22.0 
54.4 (130) 10 20 2.9 37 45 52 59 66 72 7.9 87 94 10.3 11.3 12.5 14.0 15.8 18.2 21.5 
60.0 (140) 09 19 28 36 43 50 5.7 63 7.0 7.7 84 9.1 10.0 11.0 12.1 13.6 15.3 17.7 21.0 
65.6 (150) 09 18 26 34 41 48 #55 61 67 74 81 88 9.7 106 11.8 13.1 14.9 17.2 20.4 
71.1 (160) O08 16 24 32 39 46 52 58 64 7.1 #78 85 93 10.3 11.4 12.7 14.4 16.7 19.9 
76.7 (170) O07 15 2.3 30 37 43 49 56 62 68 %74 82 90 99 11.0 12.3 14.0 16.2 19.3 
82.2 (180) 07 14 2.1 28 35 41 47 53 59 65 71 78 86 95 10.5 11.8 13.5 15.7 18.7 
87.8 (190) 06 13 19 26 32 38 44 50 55 61 68 %(75 82 91 101 114 13.0 15.1 18.1 
93.3 (200) O5 IJ. 17 24 30 35 41 46 52 58 64 7.1 7.8 87 9.7 10.9 12.5 14.6 17.5 
98.9 (210) 05 10 16 21 2.7 32 38 43 49 54 60 67 74 83 9.2 104 12.0 14.0 16.9 

104.4 (220) 04 09 14 #19 24 29 34 39 45 50 56 63 70 7.8 88 9.9 

110.0 (230) 03 O08 12 16 21 26 3.1 36 42 47 53 60 6.7 

115.6 (240) 03 06 09 13 #17 21 26 3.1 35 41 46 

121.1 (250) 02 04 07 10 13 #17 2.1 25 2.9 

126.7 (260) 02 03 05 07 O09 I1 14 

132.2. (270) O1 O1 02 03 O04 0.4 


for resorption (adsorption) is lower than for desorption. The 
ratio of adsorption EMC to desorption EMC varies with 
species, RH, and temperature, with a mean value of about 
0.8 near room temperature (Stamm 1964, Skaar 1988). EMC 
values in Table 4—2 were derived primarily for Sitka spruce 
under conditions described as oscillating vapor pressure 
desorption (Stamm and Loughborough 1935), which was 
shown to represent a condition midway between adsorption 
and desorption. The tabulated EMC values thus provide a 
suitable and practical compromise for use when the direc- 
tion of sorption is not always known. 


Liquid Water Absorption 


Wood products in service may be exposed to liquid water 
through a variety of mechanisms. Contact with liquid water 
can induce rapid changes in the moisture content of wood, 
in contrast to the slow changes that occur due to water va- 
por sorption. In addition, liquid water absorption can bring 
the moisture content of wood above fiber saturation (water 
vapor sorption alone cannot). As wood absorbs water above 
its fiber saturation point, air in the cell lumina is replaced 
by water. Absorption of liquid water may continue until the 
maximum moisture content is reached. 


The mechanism of water absorption is called capillary ac- 
tion or wicking. Water interacts strongly with the wood cell 
wall and forms a concave meniscus (curved surface) within 
the lumen. This interaction combined with the water—air 


44 


surface tension creates a pressure that draws water up the 
lumina. 


The rate of liquid water absorption in wood depends on 
several factors. The rate of absorption is most rapid in the 
longitudinal direction (that is, when the transverse section or 
end grain is exposed to water). The rate at which air can es- 
cape from wood affects water absorption, as water displaces 
air in the lumina. Chapter 16 discusses the ability of surface 
finishes such as water repellents to inhibit water absorption. 


International Standard ISO 15148 (ISO 2002) describes a 
method for measuring the rate of water absorption. One sur- 
face of a specimen is partially immersed in water. To limit 
absorption to this one surface and restrict moisture transport 
to one dimension, the sides of the specimen are coated with 
a water- and vapor-tight sealant. The specimen is periodi- 
cally removed, surfaces are blotted, and the specimen is 
weighed and again partially immersed in the water. The 
mass of water absorbed per unit area of specimen surface is 
plotted against the square root of time. The initial part of the 
curve is usually linear, and the slope of this linear portion 

is the water absorption coefficient A,, (kg m~ s~!). 
Measured values of A,, for softwoods are in the range 

10-16 g m? s~!” in the longitudinal direction and 

1-7 g m’ s~! in the transverse directions (IEA 1991; 
Kumaran 1999, 2002). 


The liquid water diffusivity D,, (m2 s~!) is a measure of 
the rate of moisture flow (kg m~ s~!) through a material 


Chapter 4 


32 


Initial desorption 
28 


Desorption 
24 ' 
20 Oscillating vapor pressure desorption 


16 


12 


Moisture content (%) 


Adsorption 


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
Relative humidity (%) 


Figure 4—2. Moisture content-relative humidity relation- 
ship for wood under adsorption and various desorption 
conditions. 


/ 

{ 

[ f 
{ | A/T = 
HLH | f WHE \ \ 


HUCHAVEATAAUUCCLUA 
| 


Tt 
N\\\ 


\W\\ 
\\ 


NUUCC(C UM) ) 


Figure 4-3. Characteristic shrinkage and distortion of 
flat, square, and round pieces as affected by direction 
of growth rings. Tangential shrinkage is about twice 
as great as radial. 


subjected to unit difference in moisture concentration 
(kg m3) across unit thickness (m). An order-of-magnitude 
estimate of D,, can be made using the value of A,, as 


2 
D. = *) 


\ sat 


(4-6) 


where c,,, is the moisture concentration (kg m-3) in water- 
saturated wood (Kumaran 1999). 


Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


Dimensional Stability 


Wood is dimensionally stable when moisture content is 
greater than the fiber saturation point. Below MC,, wood 
changes dimension as it gains moisture (swells) or loses 
moisture (shrinks), because volume of the cell wall depends 
on the amount of bound water. This shrinking and swelling 
can result in warping, checking, and splitting of the wood, 
which in turn can lead to decreased utility of wood products, 
such as loosening of tool handles, gaps in flooring, or other 
performance problems. Therefore, it is important that the 
dimensional stability be understood and considered when a 
wood product will be exposed to large moisture fluctuations 
in service. 


With respect to dimensional stability, wood is an anisotropic 
material. It shrinks (swells) most in the direction of the an- 
nual growth rings (tangentially), about half as much across 
the rings (radially), and only slightly along the grain (lon- 
gitudinally). The combined effects of radial and tangential 
shrinkage can distort the shape of wood pieces because 

of the difference in shrinkage and the curvature of annual 
rings. The major types of distortion as a result of these ef- 
fects are illustrated in Figure 4-3. 


Transverse and Volumetric Shrinkage 


Data have been collected to represent the average radial, 
tangential, and volumetric shrinkage of numerous domestic 
species by methods described in American Society for Test- 
ing and Materials (ASTM) D 143—Standard Test Meth- 
ods for Small Clear Specimens of Timber (ASTM 2007). 
Shrinkage values, expressed as a percentage of the green 
dimension, are listed in Table 4-3. Shrinkage values collect- 
ed from the world literature for selected imported species 
are listed in Table 44. 


The shrinkage of wood is affected by a number of variables. 
In general, greater shrinkage is associated with greater 
density. The size and shape of a piece of wood can affect 
shrinkage, and the rate of drying can affect shrinkage for 
some species. Transverse and volumetric shrinkage variabil- 
ity can be expressed by a coefficient of variation of approxi- 
mately 15% (Markwardt and Wilson 1935). 


Longitudinal Shrinkage 


Longitudinal shrinkage of wood (shrinkage parallel to the 
grain) is generally quite small. Average values for shrinkage 
from green to ovendry are between 0.1% and 0.2% for most 
species of wood. However, certain types of wood exhibit ex- 
cessive longitudinal shrinkage, and these should be avoided 
in uses where longitudinal stability is important. Reaction 
wood, whether compression wood in softwoods or tension 
wood in hardwoods, tends to shrink excessively parallel 

to the grain. Wood from near the center of trees (juvenile 
wood) of some species also shrinks excessively lengthwise. 
Reaction wood and juvenile wood can shrink 2% from green 


4-5 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 4-3. Shrinkage values of domestic woods 


Shrinkage" (%) from green 
to ovendry moisture content 


Shrinkage* (%) from green 
to ovendry moisture content 


Species Radial Tangential Volumetric Species Radial Tangential Volumetric 
Hardwoods Oak, white—con. 
Alder, red 4.4 7.3 12.6 Chestnut 5.3 10.8 16.4 
Ash Live 6.6 9.5 4.7 
Black 5.0 7.8 15.2 Overcup 5.3 12.7 16.0 
Blue 3.9 6.5 11.7 Post 5.4 9.8 16.2 
Green 4.6 7A 12.5 Swamp, chestnut 5.2 10.8 16.4 
Oregon 4.1 8.1 13.2 White 5.6 10.5 6.3 
Pumpkin 3.7 6.3 12.0 Persimmon, common 7.9 11.2 9.1 
White 49 7.8 13.3 Sassafras 4.0 6.2 10.3 
Aspen Sweetgum 5.3 10.2 5.8 
Bigtooth 3.3 7.9 11.8 Sycamore, American 5.0 8.4 4.1 
Quaking 35 6.7 11.5 Tanoak 4.9 11.7 73 
Basswood, American 6.6 9.3 15.8 Tupelo 
Beech, American 5.5 11.9 17.2 Black ppl 8.7 14.4 
Birch Water 4.2 7.6 2.5 
Alaska paper 6.5 9.9 16.7 Walnut, black 3.5 78 12.8 
Gray 5.2 = 14.7 Willow, black 3.3 8.7 13.9 
Paper 6.3 8.6 16.2 Yellow-poplar 4.6 8.2 12.7 
River 4.7 9.2 13.5 Softwoods 
Sweet 6.5 9.0 15.6 Cedar 
Yellow re) 9.5 16.8 Yellow 2.8 6.0 9.2 
Buckeye, yellow 3.6 8.1 12:5 Atlantic white 2.9 5.4 8.8 
Butternut 3.4 6.4 10.6 Eastern redcedar Sul: 47 7.8 
Cherry, black 3.7 Fl 115 Incense 3.3 5.2 7.7 
Chestnut, American 3.4 6.7 11.6 Northern white 2,2 4.9 7.2 
Cottonwood Port-Orford 4.6 6.9 0.1 
Balsam poplar 3.0 71 10.5 Western redcedar 2.4 5.0 6.8 
Black 3.6 8.6 12.4 Douglas-fir, 
Eastern 3.9 9.2 13.9 Coast? 4.8 7.6 2.4 
Elm Interior north? 3.8 6.9 0.7 
American 4.2 9.5 14.6 Interior west? 4.8 TS 1.8 
Cedar 4.7 10.2 15.4 Fir 
Rock 4.8 8.1 14.9 Balsam 2.9 6.9 11.2 
Slippery 4.9 8.9 13.8 California red 4.5 79 11.4 
Winged 5.3 11.6 17.7 Grand 3.4 ve} 1.0 
Hackberry 4.8 8.9 13.8 Noble 4.3 8.3 12.4 
Hickory, pecan 4.9 8.9 13.6 Pacific silver 4.4 9.2 3.0 
Hickory, true Subalpine 2.6 7A 9.4 
Mockernut Ta 11.0 17.8 White 3.3 7.0 9.8 
Pignut Tee 11.5 17.9 Hemlock 
Shagbark 7.0 10.5 16.7 Eastern 3.0 6.8 9.7 
Shellbark 7.6 12.6 19.2 Mountain 4.4 7A 11.1 
Holly, American 4.8 9.9 16.9 Western 4.2 7.8 12.4 
Honeylocust 4.2 6.6 10.8 Larch, western 4.5 9.1 14.0 
Locust, black 4.6 7.2 10.2 Pine 
Madrone, Pacific 5.6 12.4 18.1 Eastern white 2.1 6.1 8.2 
Magnolia Jack 3:7 6.6 10.3 
Cucumbertree 5.2 8.8 13.6 Loblolly 4.8 74 12.3 
Southern 5.4 6.6 12.3 Lodgepole 4.3 6.7 11.1 
Sweetbay 4.7 8.3 12.9 Longleaf Sel TS 12.2 
Maple Pitch 4.0 peal 10.9 
Bigleaf 3.7 71 11.6 Pond 5 El 11.2 
Black 4.8 9:3 14.0 Ponderosa 3.9 6.2 9.7 
Red 4.0 8.2 12.6 Red 3.8 7.2 11.3 
Silver 3.0 7.2 12.0 Shortleaf 4.6 17 12.3 
Striped 3.2 8.6 12.3 Slash 5.4 7.6 12.1 
Sugar 4.8 9.9 14.7 Sugar 2.9 5.6 7.9 
Oak, red Virginia 4.2 Te 11.9 
Black 4.4 11.1 15.1 Western white 4.1 74 11.8 
Laurel 4.0 9.9 19.0 Redwood 
Northern red 4.0 8.6 13.7 Old growth 2.6 4.4 6.8 
Pin 43 9.5 14.5, Young growth 2.2 4.9 7.0 
Scarlet 4.4 10.8 14.7 Spruce 
Southern red 4.7 11.3 16.1 Black 4.1 6.8 11.3 
Water 44 9.8 16.1 Engelmann 3.8 71 11.0 
Willow 5.0 9.6 18.9 Red 3.8 7.8 11.8 
Oak, white Sitka 43 7.5 11.5 
Bur 44 8.8 12.7 Tamarack B7: 7.4 13.6 


“Expressed as a percentage of the green dimension. 

Coast type Douglas-fir is defined as Douglas-fir growing in the States of Oregon and Washington west of the summit of the Cascade 
Mountains. Interior West includes the State of California and all counties in Oregon and Washington east of but adjacent to the Cascade 
summit. Interior North includes the remainder of Oregon and Washington and the States of Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming. 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


a 


Green dimension 
shrinkage (%) 
> 


0 6 12 18 24 30 
Moisture content (%) 


Figure 4—4. Typical moisture content-shrinkage 
curves. 


to ovendry. Wood with cross grain exhibits increased shrink- 
age along the longitudinal axis of the piece. 


Reaction wood exhibiting excessive longitudinal shrinkage 
can occur in the same board with normal wood. The 
presence of this type of wood, as well as cross grain, can 
cause serious warping, such as bow, crook, or twist, and 
cross breaks can develop in the zones of high shrinkage. 


Relationship between Moisture Content and Shrinkage 


For a sufficiently small piece of wood without moisture 
gradients, shrinkage normally begins at about the fiber satu- 
ration point and continues in a fairly linear manner until the 
wood is completely dry. However, in the normal drying of 
lumber or other large pieces, the surface of the wood dries 
first, causing a moisture gradient. When the surface MC 
drops below the fiber saturation point, it begins to shrink 
even though the interior can still be quite wet and not 
shrink. Because of moisture gradients, shrinkage of lumber 
can occur even when the average moisture content of the en- 
tire piece of lumber is above fiber saturation. With moisture 
gradients, the moisture content-shrinkage relationship is not 
linear but rather looks similar to the one in Figure 4-4. The 
exact form of the shrinkage curve with moisture gradients 
depends on several variables, principally size and shape of 
the piece, species of wood, and drying conditions used. 


Considerable variation in shrinkage occurs for any species. 
Tangential shrinkage data for Douglas-fir boards, 22 by 
140 mm (7/8 by 5-1/2 in.) in cross section, are given in 
Figure 4-5 (Comstock 1965). The material was grown in 
one locality and dried under mild conditions from green to 
near equilibrium at 32 °C (90 °F) and two different 
humidity conditions: (1) 60-65% RH and (2) 30% RH. The 
figure shows that accurately predicting the shrinkage of an 
individual piece of wood is impossible; however, the aver- 
age shrinkage of a quantity of pieces can be predicted 
accurately. 


Average shrinkage data in Tables 4-3 and 44 can be used 
to estimate shrinkage for a particular species if a great deal 


Tangential shrinkage (%) 
np w > a a ~ 


10 12 14 16 18 20 22 
Moisture content (%) 


Figure 4—5. Variation in individual tangential shrinkage 
values of several Douglas-fir boards from one locality, 
dried from green condition. 


0 2 4 


6 8 


of accuracy is not required. The following assumptions 

are made: (1) shrinkage begins at the fiber saturation point 
MC,,, and (2) dimensions decrease linearly with decreasing 
moisture content. The percent shrinkage S, from the green 
condition to final moisture content x can be calculated from 


x ) (4-7) 
MC, J 


} 


Sy = So} 1- 


where Sp is percent shrinkage from the green condition to 
ovendry (radial, tangential, or volumetric) from Table 4-3 
or 44. If MC,, is not known, 30% MC can be used as an 
approximation. Tangential values for S, should be used for 
estimating width shrinkage of plainsawn material and radial 
values for quartersawn material. For mixed or unknown ring 
orientations, tangential values are suggested. Shrinkage val- 
ues for individual pieces will vary from predicted shrinkage 
values. As noted previously, shrinkage variability is charac- 
terized by a coefficient of variation of approximately 15%. 
This applies to pure tangential or radial ring orientation and 
is probably somewhat greater in commercial lumber, where 
ring orientation is seldom aligned perfectly parallel or per- 
pendicular to board faces. Chapter 13 contains additional 
discussion of shrinkage—moisture content relationships, 
including a method to estimate shrinkage for the relatively 
small moisture content changes of wood in service. Shrink- 
age assumptions for commercial lumber, which typically 

is not perfectly plainsawn or quartersawn, are discussed in 
Chapter 7. 


Density and Specific Gravity 


The density p of a substance is defined as the ratio of its 
mass to its volume and is expressed in the international 
system (SJ) in units of kilograms per cubic meter (kg m-3), 
in the inch—pound system (I—P) in units of pounds per cu- 
bic foot (Ib ft-3), or in the centimeter-gram—second system 
(CGS) in units of grams per cubic centimeter (g cm-3). The 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 4—4. Shrinkage values of some woods imported into the United States* 


Shrinkage from Shrinkage? from 
green to ovendry green to ovendry 
moisture content (%) moisture content (%) 
Tan- Volu- Loca- Tan- Volu- Loca- 
Species Radial gential metric tion” Species Radial gential metric tion‘ 
Afrormosia (Pericopsis elata) 3.0 6.4 10.7. AF  Lauan, white (Pentacme contorta) 4.0 77 11.7. AS 
Albarco (Cariniana spp.) 2.8 5.4 9.0 AM _ Limba (Terminalia superba) 4.5 6.2 10.8 AF 
Andiroba (Carapa guianensis) 3.1 7.6 10.4. AM = Macawood (Platymiscium spp.) 2.7 3.5 6.5 AM 
Angelin (Andira inermis) 4.6 9.8 12.5 AM Mahogany, African (Khaya spp.) 2.5 4.5 8.8 AF 
Angelique (Dicorynia guianensis) D2. 8.8 14.0 AM _ Mahogany, true (Swietenia macrophylla) 3.0 4.1 7.8 AM 
Apitong (Dipterocarpus spp.) 5.2 10.9 16.1. AS = Manbarklak (Eschweilera spp.) 5.8 10.3. 15.9 AM 
Avodire (Turreanthus africanus) 4.6 6.7 12.0 AF Manni (Symphonia globulifera) a 9.7 15.6 AM 
Azobe (Lophira alata) 8.4 11.0 17.0 AM = Marishballi (Licania spp.) Le 11.7 17.2 AM 
Balata (Manilkara bidentata) 6.3 9.4 16.9 AM _ Meranti, white (Shorea spp.) 3.0 6.6 7.7 AS 
Balsa (Ochroma pyramidale) 3.0 7.6 10.8 AM = Meranti, yellow (Shorea spp.) 3.4 8.0 104 AS 
Banak (Virola spp.) 4.6 8.8 13.7. AM Merbau (ntsia bijuga and I. palembanica) 2.7 4.6 7.8 AS 
Benge (Guibourtia arnoldiana) 5.2 8.6 13.8. AF  Mersawa (Anisoptera spp.) 4.0 90 146 AS 
Bubinga (Guibourtia spp.) 5.8 8.4 14.2. AF Mora (Mora spp.) 6.9 98 188 AM 
Bulletwood (Manilkara bidentata) 6.3 9.4 16.9 AM _ Obeche (Triplochiton scleroxylon) 3.0 5.4 9.2 AF 
Caribbean pine (Pinus caribaea) 6.3 78 12.9. AM _ Ocota pine (Pinus oocarpa) 4.6 75 12.3. AM 
Cativo (Prioria copaifera) 2.4 5.3 8.9 AM _ Okoume (Aucoumea klaineana) 4.1 6.1 11.3. AF 
Ceiba (Ceiba pentandra) 2.1 4.1 10.4. AM _  Opepe (Nauclea spp.) 4.5 8.4 12.6 AF 
Cocobolo (Dalbergia retusa) Je 4.3 7.0 AM _ Ovangkol (Guibourta ehie) 4.5 8.2 12 AF 
Courbaril (Hymenaea courbaril) 4.5 8.5 12.7. AM  Para-angelium (Hymenolobium excelsum) 44 7A 10.2 AM 
Cuangare (Dialyanthera spp.) 4.2 9.4 12.0 AM _ Parana pine (Araucaria angustifolia) 4.0 79 11.6 AS 
Degame (Calycophyllum 4.8 8.6 13.2. AM _ Pau Marfim (Balfourodendron 4.6 8.8 13.4 AM 
candidissimum) riedelianum) 

Determa (Ocotea rubra) BA 7.6 10.4. AM _ Peroba de campos (Paratecoma peroba) 3.8 6.6 10.5 AM 
Ebony, East Indian (Diospyros spp.) 5.4 8.8 14.2. AS _ Peroba Rosa (Aspidosperma spp.) 3.8 64 116 AM 
Ebony, African (Diospyros spp.) 9.2 10.8 20.0 AF  Piquia (Caryocar spp.) 5.0 8.0 13.0 AM 
Ekop (Tetraberlinia tubmaniana) 5.6 10.2 15.8. AF Pilon (Hyeronima spp.) 5.4 11.7 17.0 AM 
Gmelina (Gmelina arborea) 2.4 4.9 8.8 AS Primavera (Cybistax donnell-smithii) 3.1 5.1 9.1 AM 
Goncalo alves (Astronium graveolens) 4.0 7.6 10.0 AM _ Purpleheart (Peltogyne spp.) 3.2 6.1 9.9 AM 
Greenheart (Ocotea rodiaei) 8.8 9.6 17.1 AM _ Ramin (Gonystylus spp.) 43 8.7 13.4 AS 
Hura (Hura crepitans) 2.7 4.5 7.3, AM Roble (Quercus spp.) 6.4 11.7 18.5 AM 
Ilomba (Pycnanthus angolensis) 4.6 8.4 12.8 AF _ Roble (Tabebuia spp. Roble group) 3.6 6.1 9.5 AM 
Imbuia (Phoebe porosa) 2.7 6.0 9.0 AM _ Rosewood, Brazilian (Dalbergia nigra) 2.9 4.6 85 AM 
Ipe (Tabebuia spp.) 6.6 8.0 13.2. AM _ Rosewood, Indian (Dalbergia latifolia) 2:7 5.8 85 AS 
Iroko (Chlorophora excelsa and C. regia) 2.8 3.8 8.8 AF Rubberwood (Hevea brasiliensis) 2:3 5.1 74 AM 
Jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata) dal 11.0 18.7. AS Sande (Brosimum spp. Utile group) 4.6 8.0 13.6 AM 
Jelutong (Dyera costulata) 2.3 5.5 7.8 AS _— Sapele (Entandrophragma cylindricum) 4.6 7A 14.0 AF 
Kaneelhart (Licaria spp.) 5.4 79 12.5 AM _ Sepetir (Pseudosindora spp. and Sindora spp.) 3.7 70 105 AS 
Kapur (Dryobalanops spp.) 4.6 10.2 14.8 AS — Spanish-cedar (Cedrela spp.) 4.2 6.3 10.3. AM 
Karri (Eucalyptus diversicolor) 78 12.4 20.2. AS — Sucupira (Diplotropis purpurea) 4.6 7.0 11.8 AM 
Kempas (Koompassia malaccensis) 6.0 74 14.5. AS Teak (Tectona grandis) 2.5 5.8 7.0 AS 
Keruing (Dipterocarpus spp.) 5.2 10.9 16.1 AS  Wallaba (Eperua spp.) 3.6 69 10.00 AM 
Lauan, light red and red (Shorea spp.) 4.6 8.5 143. AS 

Lauan, dark red (Shorea spp.) 3.8 7.9 13.1 AS 


“Shrinkage values were obtained from world literature and may not represent a true species average. 
Expressed as a percentage of the green dimension. 
“AF is Africa; AM is Tropical America; AS is Asia and Oceania. 


48 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


Table 4-5. Expressions for specific gravity and 
density of wood" 


Symbol Mass basis Volume basis 
Go Ovendry Ovendry 

Gy (basic specific gravity) Ovendry Green 

Giz Ovendry 12% MC 

G, Ovendry x%MC 

Po Ovendry Ovendry 

P12 12% MC 12% MC 

Py x% MC x% MC 


“x is any chosen moisture content. 


CGS system is convenient because of its relationship to 
specific gravity (also known as relative density). Specific 
gravity G is defined as the ratio of the density of a substance 
to the density of water p,, at a specified reference tem- 
perature, typically 4 °C (39 °F), where p,, is 1.000 g cm 
(1,000 kg m3 or 62.43 Ib ft-3). Therefore, a material with a 
density of 5 g cm- has a specific gravity of 5. 


At constant temperature, the density of materials that do 
not adsorb moisture is constant. For example, at room tem- 
perature the densities of steel, aluminum, and lead are 7.8, 
2.7, and 11.3 g cmr3, respectively. For materials that adsorb 
moisture but do not change volume, such as stone and brick, 
the density depends upon moisture content. For these mate- 
rials, the density can be calculated at any moisture content 
as the ratio of mass to volume, and the relationship between 
density and moisture content is linear. Specific gravity has 
only one definition for these materials (because volume is 
constant): the ratio of ovendry density to density of water. 


In contrast to these materials, for wood, both mass and 
volume depend on moisture content. The remainder of this 
section explains the relationships between moisture content, 
volumetric shrinkage, specific gravity, and density. 


The density of ovendry wood po varies significantly between 
species. Although the ovendry density of most species falls 
between about 320 and 720 kg m3 (20 and 45 lb ft), the 
range actually extends from about 160 kg m-3 (10 Ib ft-3) for 
balsa to more than 1,040 kg m-3 (65 Ib ft-3) for some other 
imported woods. Within a given species, Py varies because 
of anatomical characteristics such as the ratio of earlywood 
to latewood and heartwood to sapwood. For a limited num- 
ber of species, minerals and extractable substances may also 
affect density. A coefficient of variation of about 10% is 
considered suitable for describing the variability of ovendry 
density within common domestic species. 


Wood is used in a wide range of conditions and thus has 

a wide range of moisture content values in service. Deter- 
mining the density of wood (including water) at a given 
moisture content, p,, is often necessary for applications such 


as estimating structural loads or shipping weights. Several 
methods can be used for determining p,, as discussed in the 
following sections. The resulting value should be considered 
an approximation because of the inherent variability in the 
properties used in calculating p,. 


To make comparisons between species or products, a stan- 
dard reference basis is desirable. Several valid choices are 
possible for wood, including ovendry density pp and specific 
gravity G referenced to a particular volume basis. As shown 
in Table 4—5, the specific gravity of wood may be referenced 
to its volume at any moisture content, but in all cases G is 
based on ovendry mass. Commonly used bases for volume 
are (a) ovendry, (b) green, and (c) 12% moisture content. 
The combination of ovendry mass and ovendry volume is 
used in design specifications for wood, such as contained 

in the National Design Specification for Wood Construc- 
tion (AF&PA 2005). The combination of ovendry mass and 
green volume is referred to as basic specific gravity G,. 
Some specific gravity data are reported in Tables 5—3, 54, 
and 5—5 (Chap. 5) on both the green (basic) and 12% MC 
volume basis. 


Converting between Different Specific Gravity Bases 


In general, we use the symbol G,, to denote specific gravity 
based on the volume at a given moisture content x. If the 
value of G, is known for a particular moisture content, the 
value at any other moisture content can be approximated 
using expressions for volumetric shrinkage. Explicitly, if the 
specific gravity is known at moisture content x’, the value at 
x" is 

(100-S,. | 


Gy =Gy a 
\100-Sy0 J 


x 


(4-8) 


where S, is the percent volumetric shrinkage from the green 
condition to moisture content x. In the case where basic spe- 
cific gravity G, is known, the value at any moisture content 
x below the fiber saturation point is 

G, =G, (1-S,,/100) (4-9) 
The shrinkage—moisture content relationship can be reason- 
ably approximated using Table 4—3 or 44 and Equation 
(4-7). However, if the total volumetric shrinkage Sp is not 
known for the species of interest, it can be estimated from 
the basic specific gravity (Stamm 1964): 


S, = 26.5G,, (4-10) 
Using this relation, Equation (4—9) then becomes 
G, = G, /[l-0.265G, (1 - x/MCg, )] (4-11) 


0.82 
0.78 


d 


0.74 
0.70 
0.66 
pisacuacsece 
iad 
7c 
sre 


0.58 
0.54 
0.50 


0.46 


0.42 
Ue ty ign en 
0.38 


0.34 


He, 
: 
& 
|_| 
a 
= 
| 
= 
ia 
hs | 
ha 
a 
= 
= 
|_| 


nnn THe AT 
TT 
BERR RRRHR 


0.30 


Specific gravity G, (volume at current moisture content) 


0.26 


0.22 L444 


0.18 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 


Figure 4—6. Relationship of specific gravity and 
moisture content. 


Methods for Calculating Density 


The density of wood (including water) at a given moisture 
content, p,, may be determined by any of three methods: 


Method 1—Equations Using Basic Specific Gravity 

The specific gravity G,, based on volume at the moisture 
content of interest may be calculated from Equation (4-9) 
or (4-11) with basic specific gravity taken from Table 5-3, 
5—4, or 5—5 (Chap. 5). Density is then calculated by 


Px = PwG, (1 +x/100) (4-12) 
Method 2—Equations Using Ovendry Density 
Density is given by 
100 — So 
= poll + x/100) ———— 4-13 
Px = pol | Pose) (4-13) 


where S, is calculated using Equation (4—7) and S, is taken 
from Table 4-3 or 44. If Sp is not known for the particular 
species of interest, it can be estimated using the same rela- 
tion as in Equation (4-10), which in terms of ovendry 
density is 

(4-14) 


So = 26.5p (py, + 0.2659) 


4-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Method 3—Using Figure 4-6 and Table 4-6 


Figure 4—6 depicts the relationship between specific grav- 
ity G, and moisture content for different values of basic 
specific gravity. This figure adjusts for average dimensional 
changes that occur below the fiber saturation point (as- 
sumed to be 30% MC) and incorporates the assumptions in 
Equations (4—7), (4-10), and (4-11). The specific gravity of 
wood does not change at moisture content values above ap- 
proximately 30% because the volume does not change. To 
use Figure 4—6, locate the inclined line corresponding to the 
known basic specific gravity (volume when green). From 
this point, move left parallel to the inclined lines until verti- 
cally above the target moisture content. Then read the spe- 
cific gravity G, corresponding to this point at the left-hand 
side of the graph. 


For example, to estimate the density of white ash at 12% 
moisture content, consult Table 5—3a in Chapter 5. The aver- 
age basic specific gravity G,, for this species is 0.55 (volume 
when green). Using Figure 4—6, the dashed curve for 

G,, = 0.55 is found to intersect with the vertical 12% 
moisture content dashed line at a point corresponding to 

G,, = 0.605. The density of wood (including water) at this 
moisture content can then be obtained from Table 4—6 (these 
values are based on Eq. (4~12)). By interpolation, the spe- 
cific gravity of 0.605 corresponds to a density at 12% MC 
of 678 kg m-3 (42.2 lb ft-3). 


Thermal Properties 


Four important thermal properties of wood are thermal con- 
ductivity, heat capacity, thermal diffusivity, and coefficient 
of thermal expansion. 


Thermal Conductivity 


Thermal conductivity k is a measure of the rate of heat flow 
(W m~” or Btu h-! ft-) through a material subjected to unit 
temperature difference (K or °F) across unit thickness 

(m or in.). The thermal conductivity of common structural 
woods is much less than the conductivity of metals with 
which wood often is mated in construction. It is about two 
to four times that of common insulating materials. For ex- 
ample, the conductivity of structural softwood lumber 

at 12% moisture content is in the range of 0.10 to 

0.14 W mr! K-! (0.7 to 1.0 Btu in. h-! ft °F~!) compared 
with 216 (1,500) for aluminum, 45 (310) for steel, 0.9 (6) 
for concrete, | (7) for glass, 0.7 (5) for plaster, and 0.036 
(0.25) for mineral wool. Thermal resistivity is simply the 
reciprocal of the thermal conductivity. Insulating materials 
of a given thickness are commonly compared by their “R- 
value,” or thermal resistance, which is simply the thermal 
resistivity times the thickness. 


The thermal conductivity of wood is affected by a number 
of basic factors: density, moisture content, extractive con- 
tent, grain direction, structural irregularities such as checks 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


Table 4—6a. Density of wood as a function of specific gravity and moisture content (Sl) 


Moisture 

Lae Density (kg m™*) when the specific gravity G, is 
(%) 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 040 042 044 046 048 0.50 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68 0.70 
0 300 320 340 360 380 400 420 440 460 480 500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640 660 680 700 
4 312 333 354 374 395 416 437 458 478 499 520 541 562 582 603 624 645 666 686 707 728 
8 324 346 367 389 410 432 454 475 497 518 540 562 583 605 626 648 670 691 713 734 756 
12 336 358 381 403 426 448 470 493 515 538 560 582 605 627 650 672 694 717 739 762 784 
16 348 371 394 418 441 464 487 510 534 557 580 603 626 650 673 696 719 742 766 789 812 
20 360 384 408 432 456 480 504 528 552 576 600 624 648 672 696 720 744 768 792 816 840 
24 372 397 422 446 471 496 521 546 570 595 620 645 670 694 719 744 769 794 818 843 868 
28 384 410 435 461 486 512 538 563 589 614 640 666 691 717 742 768 794 819 845 870 896 
32 396 422 449 475 502 528 554 581 607 634 660 686 713 739 766 792 818 845 871 898 924 
36 408 435 462 490 517 544 571 598 626 653 680 707 734 762 789 816 843 870 898 925 952 
40 420 448 476 504 532 560 588 616 644 672 700 728 756 784 812 840 868 896 924 952 980 
44 432 461 490 518 547 576 605 634 662 691 720 749 778 806 835 864 893 922 950 979 1,008 
48 444 474 503 533 562 592 622 651 681 710 740 770 799 829 858 888 918 947 977 1,006 1,036 
52 456 486 517 547 578 608 638 669 699 730 760 790 821 851 882 912 942 973 1,003 1,034 1,064 
56 468 499 530 562 593 624 655 686 718 749 780 811 842 874 905 936 967 998 1,030 1,061 1,092 
60 480 512 544 576 608 640 672 704 736 768 800 832 864 896 928 960 992 1,024 1,056 1,088 1,120 
64 492 525 558 590 623 656 689 722 754 787 820 853 886 918 951 984 1,017 1,050 1,082 1,115 1,148 
68 504. 538 571 605 638 672 706 739 773 806 840 874 907 941 974 1,008 1,042 1,075 1,109 1,142 1,176 
72 516 550 585 619 654 688 722 757 791 826 860 894 929 963 998 1,032 1,066 1,101 1,135 1,170 1,204 
76 528 563 598 634 669 704 739 774 810 845 880 915 950 986 1,021 1,056 1,091 1,126 1,162 1,197 

80 540 576 612 648 684 720 756 792 828 864 900 936 972 1,008 1,044 1,080 1,116 1,152 1,188 

84 552 589 626 662 699 736 773 810 846 883 920 957 994 1,030 1,067 1,104 1,141 1,178 

88 564 602 639 677 714 752 790 827 865 902 940 978 1,015 1,053 1,090 1,128 1,166 

92 576 614 653 691 730 768 806 845 883 922 960 998 1,037 1,075 1,114 1,152 1,190 

96 588 627 666 706 745 784 823 862 902 941 980 1,019 1,058 1,098 1,137 1,176 

100 600 640 680 720 760 800 840 880 920 960 1,000 1,040 1,080 1,120 1,160 1,200 

110 630 672 714 756 798 840 832 924 966 1,008 1,050 1,092 1,134 1,176 1,218 

120 660 704 748 792 836 880 924 968 1,012 1,056 1,100 1,144 1,188 1,232 

130 690 736 782 828 874 920 966 1,012 1,058 1,104 1,150 1,196 1,242 1,288 

140 720 768 816 864 912 960 1,008 1,056 1,104 1,152 1,200 1,248 1,296 

150 750 800 850 900 950 1,000 1,050 1,100 1,150 1,200 1,250 1,300 1,350 


and knots, fibril angle, and temperature. Thermal conduc- 
tivity increases as density, moisture content, temperature, 
or extractive content of the wood increases. Thermal con- 
ductivity is nearly the same in the radial and tangential 
directions. However, conductivity along the grain has been 
reported as greater than conductivity across the grain by a 
factor of 1.5 to 2.8, with an average of about 1.8. 


For moisture contents below 25%, approximate thermal 
conductivity & across the grain can be calculated with a lin- 
ear equation of the form 


k=G(B+ Cx) +A (4-15) 
where G,, is specific gravity based on ovendry mass and vol- 
ume at moisture content x (%) and A, B, and C are constants. 
For G, > 0.3, temperatures around 24 °C (75 °F), and 

x < 25% MC, the values of the constants are as follows: 

A= 0.01864, B= 0.1941, C= 0.004064 (kin W m! K~!) 
A=0.129, B= 1.34, C=0.028 (kin Btu in. h-! ft-2 °F-!) 


Equation (4-15) was derived from measurements made by 


several researchers on a variety of species. Table 4—7 pro- 
vides average approximate conductivity values for selected 
wood species, based on Equation (4-15). However, actual 
conductivity may vary as much as 20% from the tabulated 
values. 


Although thermal conductivity measurements have been 
made at moisture content values above 25%, measurements 
have been few in number and generally lacking in accuracy. 
Therefore, we do not provide values for moisture content 
values above 25%. 


The effect of temperature on thermal conductivity is rela- 
tively minor: conductivity increases about 2% to 3% per 
10 °C (1% to 2% per 10 °F). 


Heat Capacity 

Heat capacity is defined as the amount of energy needed to 
increase one unit of mass (kg or Ib) one unit in temperature 
(K or °F). The heat capacity of wood depends on the tem- 
perature and moisture content of the wood but is practically 
independent of density or species. Heat capacity of dry 
wood C9 (kJ kg“! K"!, Btu Ib“! °F‘) is approximately re- 
lated to temperature T (K, °F) by 


Cy = 0.1031 + 0.0038677 (SI) (4-16a) 


4-11 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 4—-6b. Density of wood as a function of specific gravity and moisture content (I-P) 


Moisture 
Content Density (Ib fi) when the specific gravity G, is 
of wood 
(%) 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68 0.70 
0 18.7 20.0 21.2 22.5 23.7 25.0 26.2 27.5 28.7 30.0 31.2 32.4 33.7 34.9 36.2 37.4 38.7 39.9 41.2 42.4 43.7 
4 19.5 20.8 22.1 23.4 24.7 26.0 27.2 28.6 29.8 31.2 32.4 33.7 35.0 36.6 37.6 38.9 40.2 41.5 42.8 44.1 45.4 
8 20.2 21.6 22.9 24.3 25.6 27.0 28.3 29.6 31.0 32.3 33.7 35.0 36.4 37.7 39.1 40.4 41.8 43.1 44.5 45.8 47.2 
12 21.0 22.4 23.8 25.2 26.6 28.0 29.4 30.8 32.2 33.5 34.9 36.3 37.7 39.1 40.5 41.9 43.3 44.7 46.1 47.5 48.9 
16 21.7 23.2 24.6 26.0 27.5 29.0 30.4 31.8 33.3 34.7 36.2 37.6 39.1 40.5 42.0 43.4 44.9 46.3 47.8 49.2 50.7 
20 22.5 24.0 25.5 27.0 28.4 30.0 31.4 32.9 34.4 35.9 37.4 38.9 40.4 41.9 43.4 44.9 46.4 47.9 49.4 50.9 52.4 
24 23.2 24.8 26.3 27.8 29.4 31.0 32.5 34.0 35.6 37.1 38.7 40.2 41.8 43.3 44.9 46.4 48.0 49.5 51.1 52.6 54.2 
28 24.0 25.6 27.2 28.8 30.4 31.9 33.5 35.1 36.7 38.3 39.9 41.5 43.1 44.7 46.3 47.9 49.5 51.1 52.7 54.3 55.9 
32 24.7 26.4 28.0 29.7 31.3 32.9 34.6 36.2 37.9 39.5 41.2 42.8 44.5 46.1 47.8 49.4 51.1 52.7 54.4 56.0 57.7 
36 25.5 27.2 28.9 30.6 32.2 33.9 35.6 37.3 39.0 40.7 42.4 44.1 45.8 47.5 49.2 50.9 52.6 54.3 56.0 57.7 59.4 
40 26.2 28.0 29.7 31.4 33.2 34.9 36.7 38.4 40.2 41.9 43.7 45.4 47.2 48.9 50.7 52.4 54.2 55.9 57.7 59.4 61.2 
44 27.0 28.8 30.6 32.3 34.1 35.9 37.7 39.5 41.3 43.1 44.9 46.7 48.5 50.3 52.1 53.9 55.7 57.5 59.3 61.1 62.9 
48 27.7 29.6 31.4 33.2 35.1 36.9 38.8 40.6 42.5 44.3 46.2 48.0 49.9 51.7 53.6 55.4 57.3 59.1 61.0 62.8 64.6 
52 28.5 30.4 32.2 34.1 36.0 37.9 39.8 41.7 43.6 45.5 47.4 49.3 51.2 53.1 55.0 56.9 58.8 60.7 62.6 64.5 66.4 
56 29.2 31.2 33.1 35.0 37.0 38.9 40.9 42.8 44.8 46.7 48.7 50.6 52.6 54.5 56.5 58.4 60.4 62.3 64.2 66.2 68.1 
60 30.0 31.9 33.9 35.9 37.9 39.9 41.9 43.9 45.9 47.9 49.9 51.9 53.9 55.9 57.9 59.9 61.9 63.9 65.9 67.9 69.9 
64 30.7 32.7 34.8 36.8 38.9 40.9 43.0 45.0 47.1 49.1 51.2 53.2 55.3 57.3 59.4 61.4 63.4 65.5 67.5 69.6 71.6 
68 31.4 33.5 35.6 37.7 39.8 41.9 44.0 46.1 48.2 50.3 52.4 54.5 56.6 58.7 60.8 62.9 65.0 67.1 69.2 71.3 73.4 
72 32.2 34.3 36.5 38.6 40.8 42.9 45.1 47.2 49.4 51.5 53.7 55.8 58.0 60.1 62.3 64.4 66.5 68.7 70.8 73.0 75.1 
76 32.9 35.1 37.3 39.5 41.7 43.9 46.1 48.3 50.5 52.7 54.9 57.1 59.3 61.5 63.7 65.9 68.1 70.3 72.5 
80 33.7 35.9 38.2 40.4 42.7 44.9 47.2 49.4 51.7 53.9 56.2 58.4 60.7 62.9 65.1 67.4 69.6 71.9 74.1 
84 34.4 36.7 39.0 41.3 43.6 45.9 48.2 50.5 52.8 55.1 57.4 59.7 62.0 64.3 66.6 68.9 71.2 73.5 
88 35.2 37.5 39.9 42.2 44.6 46.9 49.3 51.6 54.0 56.3 58.7 61.0 63.3 65.7 68.0 70.4 72.7 
92 35.9 38.3 40.7 43.1 45.5 47.9 50.3 52.7 55.1 57.5 59.9 62.3 64.7 67.1 69.5 71.9 74.3 
96 36.7 39.1 41.6 44.0 46.5 48.9 51.4 53.8 56.3 58.7 61.2 63.6 66.0 68.5 70.9 73.4 
100 37.4 39.9 42.4 44.9 47.4 49.9 52.4 54.9 57.4 59.9 62.4 64.9 67.4 69.9 72.4 74.9 
110 39.3 41.9 44.6 47.2 49.8 52.4 55.0 57.7 60.3 62.9 65.5 68.1 70.8 73.4 76.0 
120 41.2 43.9 46.7 49.4 52.2 54.9 57.7 60.4 63.1 65.9 68.6 71.4 74.1 76.9 
130 43.1 45.9 48.8 51.7 54.5 57.4 60.3 63.1 66.0 68.9 71.8 74.6 77.5 80.4 
140 44.9 47.9 50.9 53.9 56.9 59.9 62.9 65.9 68.9 71.9 74.9 77.9 80.9 
150 46.8 49.9 53.0 56.2 59.3 62.4 65.5 68.6 71.8 74.9 78.0 81.1 84.2 
These formulas are valid for wood below fiber saturation 
Cpo = 0.2605 + 0.0005132T (I-P) (4-16b) at temperatures between 280 K (44 °F) and 420 K 


The heat capacity of wood that contains water is greater 
than that of dry wood. Below fiber saturation, it is the sum 
of the heat capacity of the dry wood and that of water (c,,,) 
and an additional adjustment factor A, that accounts for the 
additional energy in the wood—water bond: 


Cox = (Cp + Cpy X/100)/(1 + x/100) + A, (4-17) 

where x is moisture content (%). The heat capacity of water 

is about 4.18 kJ kg! K-! (1.00 Btu Ib-! °F-!). The adjust- 

ment factor can be calculated from 
A, =x(b, + b5T + b3x) (4-18) 

with 

b, =—0.06191, b, = 2.36 x 10-4, b,=-1.33 x 10+ (Tink) 


b, =-4.23 x 104, b, = 3.12 x 10-5, b,=-3.17 x 105 (Tin °F) 


4-12 


(296 °F). Representative values for heat capacity can be 
found in Table 4-8. The moisture content above fiber satura- 
tion contributes to heat capacity according to the simple rule 
of mixtures. 


Thermal Diffusivity 


Thermal diffusivity is a measure of how quickly a material 
can absorb heat from its surroundings. It is defined as the 
ratio of thermal conductivity to the product of density and 
heat capacity. Therefore, conclusions regarding its variation 
with temperature and density are often based on calculating 
the effect of these variables on heat capacity and thermal 
conductivity. Because of the low thermal conductivity and 
moderate density and heat capacity of wood, the thermal dif- 
fusivity of wood is much lower than that of other structural 
materials, such as metal, brick, and stone. A typical 

value for wood is 1.6 x 10-7 m2 s~! (0.00025 in? s-!), 
compared with 1 x 10-5 m2 s-! (0.02 in? s!) for steel and 
1x 10-6 m2 s“! (0.002 in? s~!) for stone and mineral wool. 
For this reason, wood does not feel extremely hot or cold to 
the touch as do some other materials. 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


Table 4-7. Thermal conductivity of selected hardwoods and softwoods* 


Conductivity Resistivity 
Specific (Wm! K' (Btuin.h'f#?°F')) =(KmW' (hft’°F Btu’ in. ')) 

Species gravity Ovendry 12% MC Ovendry 12% MC 
Hardwoods 
Ash 

Black 0.53 0.12 (0.84) 0.15 (1.0) 8.2 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 

White 0.63 0.14 (0.98) 0.17 (1.2) 7.1 (1.0) 5.8 (0.84) 
Aspen 

Big tooth 0.41 0.10 (0.68) 0.12 (0.82) 10 (1.5) 8.5 (1.2) 

Quaking 0.40 0.10 (0.67) 0.12 (0.80) 10 (1.5) 8.6 (1.2) 
Basswood, American 0.38 0.092 (0.64) 0.11 (0.77) 11 (1.6) 9.0 (1.3) 
Beech, American 0.68 0.15 (1.0) 0.18 (1.3) 6.6 (0.96) 5.4 (0.78) 
Birch 

Sweet 0.71 0.16 (1.1) 0.19 (1.3) 6.4 (0.92) 5.2 (0.76) 

Yellow 0.66 0.15 (1.0) 0.18 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 5.6 (0.81) 
Cherry, black 0.53 0.12 (0.84) 0.15 (1.0) 8.2 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 
Chestnut, American 0.45 0.11 (0.73) 0.13 (0.89) 9.4 (1.4) 7.8 (1.1) 
Cottonwood 

Black 0.35 0.087 (0.60) 0.10 (0.72) 12 (1.7) 9.6 (1.4) 

Eastern 0.43 0.10 (0.71) 0.12 (0.85) 9.8 (1.4) 8.1 (1.2) 
Elm 

American 0.54 0.12 (0.86) 0.15 (1.0) 8.1 (1.2) 6.7 (0.96) 

Rock 0.67 0.15 (1.0) 0.18 (1.3) 6.7 (0.97) 5.5 (0.80) 

Slippery 0.56 0.13 (0.88) 0.15 (1.1) 7.9 (1.1) 6.5 (0.93) 
Hackberry 0.57 0.13 (0.90) 0.16 (1.1) 7.7 (1.1) 6.4 (0.92) 
Hickory, pecan 0.69 0.15 (1.1) 0.19 (1.3) 6.6 (0.95) 5.4 (0.77) 
Hickory, true 

Mockernut 0.78 0.17 (1.2) 0.21 (1.4) 5.9 (0.85) 4.8 (0.69) 

Shagbark 0.77 0.17 (1.2) 0.21 (1.4) 5.9 (0.86) 4.9 (0.70) 
Magnolia, southern 0.52 0.12 (0.83) 0.14 (1.0) 8.4 (1.2) 6.9 (1.0) 
Maple 

Black 0.60 0.14 (0.94) 0.16 (1.1) 7.4 (1.1) 6.1 (0.88) 

Red 0.56 0.13 (0.88) 0.15 (1.1) 7.9 (1.1) 6.5 (0.93) 

Silver 0.50 0.12 (0.80) 0.14 (0.97) 8.6 (1.2) 7.1 (1.0) 

Sugar 0.66 0.15 (1.0) 0.18 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 5.6 (0.81) 
Oak, red 

Black 0.66 0.15 (1.0) 0.18 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 5.6 (0.81) 

Northern red 0.65 0.14 (1.0) 0.18 (1.2) 6.9 (1.0) 5.7 (0.82) 

Southern red 0.62 0.14 (0.96) 0.17 (1.2) 7.2 (1.0) 5.9 (0.85) 
Oak, white 

Bur 0.66 0.15 (1.0) 0.18 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 5.6 (0.81) 

White 0.72 0.16 (1.1) 0.19 (1.3) 6.3 (0.91) 5.2 (0.75) 
Sweetgum 0.55 0.13 (0.87 0.15 (1.1) 8.0 (1.2) 6.6 (0.95) 
Sycamore, American 0.54 0.12 (0.86) 0.15 (1.0) 8.1 (1.2) 6.7 (0.96) 
Tupelo 

Black 0.54 0.12 (0.86) 0.15 (1.0) 8.1 (1.2) 6.7 (0.96) 

Water 0.53 0.12 (0.84) 0.15 (1.0) 8.2 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 
Yellow-poplar 0.46 0.11 (0.75) 0.13 (0.90) 9.3 (1.3) 7.7 (1.1) 


4-13 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 4-7. Thermal conductivity of selected hardwoods and softwoods*—con. 


Conductivity Resistivity 
Specific (Wm'K' (Btuin.h'f?°F')) KmW' (hb ft’°F Btu’ in.) 
Species gravity Ovendry 12% MC Ovendry 12% MC 
Softwoods 
Baldcypress 0.47 0.11 (0.76) 0.13 (0.92) 9.1 (1.3) 7.5 (1.1) 
Cedar 
Atlantic white 0.34 0.085 (0.59) 0.10 (0.70) 12 (1.7) 9.9 (1.4) 
Eastern red 0.48 0.11 (0.77) 0.14 (0.94) 8.9 (1.3) 74 (1.1) 
Northern white 0.31 0.079 (0.55) 0.094 (0.65) 13 (1.8) 11 (1.5) 
Port-Orford 0.43 0.10 (0.71) 0.12 (0.85) 9.8 (1.4) 8.1 (1.2) 
Western red 0.33 0.083 (0.57) 0.10 (0.68) 12 (1.7) 10 (1.5) 
Yellow 0.46 0.11 (0.75) 0.13 (0.90) 9.3 (1.3) 7.7 (1.1) 
Douglas-fir 
Coast 0.51 0.12 (0.82) 0.14 (0.99) 8.5 (1.2) 7.0 (1.0) 
Interior north 0.50 0.12 (0.80) 0.14 (0.97) 8.6 (1.2) 7.1 (1.0) 
Interior west 0.52 0.12 (0.83) 0.14 (1.0) 8.4 (1.2) 6.9 1.0) 
Fir 
Balsam 0.37 0.090 (0.63) 0.11 (0.75) 11 (1.6) 9.2 (1.3) 
White 0.41 0.10 (0.68) 0.12 (0.82) 10 (1.5) 8.5 (1.2) 
Hemlock 
Eastern 0.42 0.10 (0.69) 0.12 (0.84) 10 (1.4) 8.3 (1.2) 
Western 0.48 0.11 (0.77) 0.14 (0.94) 8.9 (1.3) 7.4 (1.1) 
Larch, western 0.56 0.13 (0.88) 0.15 (1.1) 7.9 (1.1) 6.5 (0.93) 
Pine 
Eastern white 0.37 0.090 (0.63) 0.11 (0.75) 11 (1.6) 9.2 (1.3) 
Jack 0.45 0.11 (0.73) 0.13 (0.89) 9.4 (1.4) 7.8 (1.1) 
Loblolly 0.54 0.12 (0.86) 0.15 (1.0) 8.1 (1.2) 6.7 (0.96) 
Lodgepole 0.43 0.10 (0.71) 0.12 (0.85) 9.8 (1.4) 8.1 (1.2) 
Longleaf 0.62 0.14 (0.96) 0.17 (1.2) 7.2 (1.0) 5.9 (0.85) 
Pitch 0.53 0.12 (0.84) 0.15 (1.0) 8.2 (1.2) 6.8 (0.98) 
Ponderosa 0.42 0.10 (0.69) 0.12 (0.84) 10 (1.4) 8.3 (1.2) 
Red 0.46 0.11 (0.75) 0.13 (0.90) 9.3 (1.3) TIC) 
Shortleaf 0.54 0.12 (0.86) 0.15 (1.0) 8.1 (1.2) 6.7 (0.96) 
Slash 0.61 0.14 (0.95) 0.17 (1.2) 7.3 (1.1) 6.0 (0.86) 
Sugar 0.37 0.090 (0.63) 0.11 (0.75) 11 (1.6) 9.2 (1.3) 
Western white 0.40 0.10 (0.67) 0.12 (0.80) 10 (1.5) 8.6 (1.2) 
Redwood 
Old growth 0.41 0.10 (0.68) 0.12 (0.82) 10 (1.5) 8.5 (1.2) 
Young growth 0.37 0.090 (0.63) 0.11 (0.75) 11 (1.6) 9.2 (1.3) 
Spruce 
Black 0.43 0.10 (0.71) 0.12 (0.85) 9.8 (1.4) 8.1 (1.2) 
Engelmann 0.37 0.090 (0.63) 0.11 (0.75) 11 (1.6) 9.2 (1.3) 
Red 0.42 0.10 (0.69) 0.12 (0.84) 10 (1.4) 8.3 (1.2) 
Sitka 0.42 0.10 (0.69) 0.12 (0.84) 10 (1.4) 8.3 (1.2) 
White 0.37 0.090 (0.63) 0.11 (0.75) 11 (1.6) 9.2 (1.3) 


“Values in this table are approximate and should be used with caution; actual conductivities may vary by as 
much as 20%. The specific gravities also do not represent species averages. 


Coefficient of Thermal Expansion hardwoods and softwoods, the parallel-to-grain values 
have ranged from about 3.1 to 4.5 x 10-6 K"! 


The coefficient of thermal expansion is a measure of the 
(1.7 to 2.5 x 10-6 °F-}). 


relative change of dimension caused by temperature change. 


The thermal expansion coefficients of completely dry wood Thermal expansion coefficients across the grain (radial and 
are positive in all directions; that is, wood expands on heat- tangential) are proportional to specific gravity. These coeffi- 
ing and contracts on cooling. Limited research has been car- cients range from about 5 to more than 10 times greater than 
ried out to explore the influence of wood property variability _ the parallel-to-grain coefficients and are of more practical 
on thermal expansion. The thermal expansion coefficient of interest. The radial and tangential thermal expansion coef- 
ovendry wood parallel to the grain appears to be indepen- ficients for ovendry wood, a, and o,, can be approximated 


dent of specific gravity and species. In tests of both 


4-14 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


Table 4-8. Heat capacity of solid wood at selected 
temperatures and moisture contents 


Temperature Heat capacity (kJ kg! K™! (Btu Ib! °F"')) 
(K) (°C(°F)) Ovendry 5% MC 12%MC 20% MC 
280 7 (44) = 1.20.28) 1.3 (0.32) 1.5 (0.37) 1.7 (0.41) 
290 17(62) =1.2 (0.29) 1.4(0.33) 1.6 (0.38) 1.8 (0.43) 
300 =27 (80) ~=—: 11.3 (0.30) 1.4 (0.34) 1.70.40) 1.9 (0.45) 


320 47 (116) 
340 67 (152) 
360 87 (188) 


1.3 (0.32) 1.5 (0.37) 1.8 (0.43) 2.0 (0.49) 
1.4 (0.34) 1.6 (0.39) 1.9(0.46) 2.2 (0.52) 
1.5 (0.36) 1.70.41) 2.0 (0.49) 2.3 (0.56) 


by the following equations, over an ovendry specific gravity 
range of about 0.1 to 0.8: 


0, = (32.4G, + 9.9)10-6 KI (4-19a) 
0,.= (18Gy + 5.5)10-6 °F! (4—19b) 
0, = (32.4Gy + 18.4)10-6 K (4-20a) 
04, = (18Gp + 10.2)10-6 °F! (4—20b) 


Thermal expansion coefficients can be considered indepen- 
dent of temperature over the temperature range of —51 to 
54 °C (—60 to 130 °F). 


Wood that contains moisture reacts differently to varying 
temperature than does nearly ovendry wood. When moist 
wood is heated, it tends to expand because of normal ther- 
mal expansion and to shrink because of loss in moisture 
content. Unless the wood is very dry initially (perhaps 3% 
or 4% moisture content or less), shrinkage caused by mois- 
ture loss on heating will be greater than thermal expansion, 
so the net dimensional change on heating will be negative. 
Wood at intermediate moisture levels (about 8% to 20%) 
will expand when first heated, and then gradually shrink to 
a volume smaller than the initial volume as the wood gradu- 
ally loses water while in the heated condition. 


Even in the longitudinal (grain) direction, where dimen- 
sional change caused by moisture change is very small, such 
changes will still predominate over corresponding dimen- 
sional changes as a result of thermal expansion unless the 
wood is very dry initially. For wood at usual moisture lev- 
els, net dimensional changes will generally be negative after 
prolonged heating. 


Electrical Properties 


The electrical properties of wood depend strongly on mois- 
ture content, exhibiting changes that span almost 10 orders 
of magnitude over the range of possible moisture contents. 
Because electrical properties of wood undergo large changes 
with relatively small changes in moisture content below 
fiber saturation, electrical measurements have been used to 
accurately predict the moisture content of wood. 


The literature on electrical properties of wood has been di- 
vided into measurements of either dielectric constant or re- 
sistivity. In general, dielectric constant data were measured 
with alternating current (AC), whereas resistivity measure- 
ments used direct current (DC). In a way, this is a false 
dichotomy because the dielectric constant can be measured 
using DC signals for some materials, and the complex resis- 
tivity, which is related to impedance, can be measured from 
AC signals. Furthermore, given the AC dielectric constant, 
one can calculate the AC resistivity. The remainder of this 
section will review AC and DC measurements of the electri- 
cal properties of wood, with emphasis on clarifying the 
nomenclature that is often used in the wood literature. 


DC Electrical Properties 

Resistivity 

When an electric potential or voltage V is applied between 

two points on a conducting solid, the amount of current / 

that will flow between those points depends on the resis- 

tance R of the material. This measured resistance depends 

on the geometry of the specimen: 
R= ge 

A 

where L is the distance the current travels, A is the cross- 

sectional area through which the current travels, and p is 

a materials parameter, the resistivity with units of Q m. In 

some situations, it is more convenient to talk about the con- 

ductivity o, which is the reciprocal of the resistivity 


(c=1/p). 


The resistivity of wood is a strong function of moisture con- 
tent. For example, Figure 4—7 illustrates this dependence for 
slash pine (Pinus elliottii) in the longitudinal direction be- 
tween 8% MC and 180% MC (Stamm 1929, 1964). As the 
moisture content of wood increases from near zero to fiber 
saturation, resistivity can decrease by a factor of over 10!° 
(in comparison, the circumference of the earth at the equa- 
tor is 4 x 10!° mm). Resistivity is about 10!5—-10!6 O m for 
ovendry wood and 103-104 Q m for wood at fiber saturation 
(Stamm 1964). As the moisture content increases from fiber 
saturation to complete saturation of the wood structure, the 
further decrease in resistivity is smaller, generally amount- 
ing to less than a hundredfold. 


(4-21) 


The conductivity of wood also depends on temperature, 
grain angle, and the amount of water-soluble salts. Unlike 
conductivity of metals, the conductivity of wood increases 
with increasing temperature. Conductivity is greater along 
the grain than across the grain and slightly greater in the 
radial direction than in the tangential direction. Relative 
conductivity values in the longitudinal, radial, and tan- 
gential directions are related by the approximate ratio of 
1.0:0.55:0.50. When wood contains abnormal quantities of 
water-soluble salts or other electrolytic substances, such as 
preservative or fire-retardant treatment, or is in prolonged 


4-15 


10° 
a 
e 
e 
10} ° 
= 
g e 
2S 
> 
% 10° ° 
g e 
a“ e 
*e. 
10? dae fF te et 
0 50 100 150 200 


Moisture content (%) 


Figure 4-7. Resistivity of slash pine (Pinus elliottii) 
as a function of moisture content. 


contact with seawater, electrical conductivity can be sub- 
stantially increased. 


DC Dielectric Constant 


When an electric potential or voltage V is applied to a per- 
fectly insulating material (o = 0 ) between two parallel 
plates, no current will flow and instead charge will build up 
on the plates. The amount of charge per unit voltage that 
these plates can store is called the capacitance C and 

is given by 


C = £6 7 (4-22) 
where A and L have the same meanings as in 

Equation (4—21), ¢ is a unitless materials parameter, 

the DC dielectric constant, and é 9 is a universal constant, the 
permittivity of a vacuum, and is 8.854 x 10-!2 F m"!. The 
DC dielectric constant is the ratio of the dielectric permit- 
tivity of the material to €); it is essentially a measure of the 
potential energy per unit volume stored in the material in the 
form of electric polarization when the material is in a given 
electric field. As measured by practical tests, the dielectric 
constant of a material is the ratio of the capacitance of a ca- 
pacitor using the material as the dielectric to the capacitance 
of the same capacitor using free space as the dielectric. 


Because wood is not a perfect insulator (o #0 at any mois- 
ture content), the DC dielectric constant of wood is not well 
defined and theoretically cannot be measured with DC tech- 
niques. Nevertheless, researchers have tried to measure this 
quantity and have found that it is difficult to measure and 
depends on experimental technique (Skaar 1988). 


AC Electrical Properties 
AC Dielectric Constant and Related Properties 


When an alternating current is applied, the dielectric 
constant can no longer be represented by a scalar, because 


4-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


response will be out of phase with the original signal. The 
AC dielectric constant is a complex number ¢ = €'+ je" 
with real component ¢«', imaginary component é", and 

j =+-1. Instead of presenting the real and imaginary com- 
ponents of the dielectric constant, it is customary in the 
wood literature to present the real component of the dielec- 
tric constant ¢' and the loss tangent, tan(6) , defined by 

" 


é 
tan(d) = = (4-23) 
é 
It is also customary in the wood literature to refer to the real 
component of the dielectric constant ¢' as simply “the di- 
electric constant” and to represent this with € . This notation 
should not be encouraged, because it is ambiguous and also 


implies that the dielectric constant is not a complex number. 


Both ¢' and tan(6) depend non-linearly on the frequency at 
which they are measured. The frequency dependence is re- 
lated to the mechanism of conduction in wood, and this rela- 
tionship between the frequency dependence and mechanism 
has been explored in the literature (James 1975, Zelinka and 
others 2007). 


At a given frequency, ¢' increases with temperature and 
moisture content. At 20 Hz, ¢'may range from about 4 
for dry wood to near 1 = 10° for wet wood; at 1 kHz, from 
about 4 when dry to about 5,000 when wet; and at 1 MHz, 
from about 3 when dry to about 100 when wet. ¢' is larger 
for polarization parallel to the grain than across the grain. 


Another parameter, the dielectric power factor f, given by 


é 
(e')? +(e") 

is used in dielectric moisture meters (James 1988). The 
power factor of wood is large compared with that of inert 
plastic insulating materials, but some materials, for example 
some formulations of rubber, have equally large power fac- 
tors. The power factor of wood varies from about 0.01 for 
dry, low-density woods to as large as 0.95 for dense woods 
at high moisture levels. The power factor is usually, but not 
always, greater for electric fields along the grain than across 
the grain. 


fy = sin(5) = 


(4-24) 


Because the power factor of wood is derived from ¢'and é", 
it is also affected by frequency, moisture content, and tem- 
perature. These factors interact in such a way to cause f, 

to have maximum and minimum values at various 
combinations of these factors. 


Impedance 


Just as the AC dielectric constant was represented by a 
complex number to account for both magnitude and phase, 
the “resistance” of an AC circuit is also represented by a 
complex number called impedance, Z = Z'+jZ" with real 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


a —s 


Figure 4-8. Diagram depicting the forces acting on an 
object in contact with a surface. 


component Z' and imaginary component Z" . Impedance is 
related to the AC dielectric constant through 

Z=(joC,-e)' ay) 
where « is the angular frequency and C, is a geometrical 
factor needed for unit analysis and represents the capaci- 
tance of an empty cell (that is, C, = €A/L ) (MacDonald 
and Johnson 1987). In short, this transforms the real compo- 
nent of the dielectric constant to the imaginary component 
of the impedance, and vice versa. 


Recently, measurements of the impedance of wood have 
been used to determine moisture gradients (Tiitta and Olk- 
konen 2002), better understand the mechanism of electrical 
conduction in wood (Zelinka and others 2007), and quantify 
the corrosion of metals embedded in wood (Zelinka and 
Rammer 2005). 


Friction Properties 


Figure 4-8 depicts the forces acting on an object. The 
weight of the object Fy, (the gravitational force acting 
downward) is opposed by the normal force Fy exerted by 
the surface supporting it. The applied horizontal force F 
is opposed by the friction force F; parallel to the surface. 
In the case in which the object is not moving but is on the 
verge of sliding across the surface, the coefficient of static 
friction “, is defined as 

es ea) (4-26) 

Fy 

where F{max) is the magnitude of the maximum friction 
force and Fy is the magnitude of the normal force. In the 
case in which the object is sliding across the surface at con- 
stant speed, the coefficient of kinetic friction “4, is defined 
as 


ae 


Fy (4-27) 


Mk = 
These coefficients depend on the moisture content of the 
wood, the roughness of the wood surface, and the character- 
istics of the opposing surface. They vary little with species 


except for woods that contain abundant oily or waxy extrac- 
tives, such as lignumvitae (see Chap. 2). The coefficients of 
friction are an important safety consideration in applications 
such as wood decks, stairs, and sloped surfaces such as roof 
sheathing. 


On most materials, the coefficients of friction for wood in- 

crease continuously as the moisture content of the wood in- 
creases from ovendry to fiber saturation, then remain about 
constant as the moisture content increases further until con- 
siderable free water is present. When the surface is flooded 
with water, the coefficients of friction decrease. 


Coefficients of static friction are generally greater than those 
of kinetic friction, and the latter depend somewhat on the 
speed of sliding. Coefficients of kinetic friction vary only 
slightly with speed when the wood moisture content is less 
than about 20%; at high moisture content, the coefficient of 
kinetic friction decreases substantially as speed increases. 


Coefficients of kinetic friction for smooth, dry wood against 
hard, smooth surfaces commonly range from 0.3 to 0.5; 

at intermediate moisture content, 0.5 to 0.7; and near fiber 
saturation, 0.7 to 0.9. 


Nuclear Radiation Properties 


Several techniques using high-energy radiation can be used 
to measure density and moisture content of wood. Radiation 
passing through matter is reduced in intensity according to 
the relationship 

I= Ipexp(-yz) (4-28) 
where / is the reduced intensity of the beam at depth z in the 
material, /, is the incident intensity of a beam of radiation, 
and uw, the linear absorption coefficient of the material, is the 
fraction of energy removed from the beam per unit depth 
traversed. When density is a factor of interest in energy ab- 
sorption, the linear absorption coefficient is divided by the 
density of the material to derive the mass absorption coef- 
ficient. The absorption coefficient of a material varies with 
the type and energy of radiation. 


The linear absorption coefficient of wood for y radiation is 
known to vary directly with moisture content and density 
and inversely with the y ray energy. As an example, the ir- 
radiation of ovendry yellow-poplar with 0.047-MeV y rays 
yields linear absorption coefficients ranging from about 
0.065 to about 0.11 cm! over the ovendry specific gravity 
range of about 0.33 to 0.62. An increase in the linear absorp- 
tion coefficient of about 0.01 cm! occurs with an increase 
in moisture content from ovendry to fiber saturation. Ab- 
sorption of y rays in wood is of practical interest, in part for 
measuring the density of wood. 


The interaction of wood with B radiation is similar in 
character to that with y radiation, except that the absorption 
coefficients are larger. The linear absorption coefficient of 


4-17 


wood with a specific gravity of 0.5 for a 0.5-MeV 8 ray is 
about 3.0 cm!. The result of the larger coefficient is that 
even very thin wood products are virtually opaque to f rays. 


The interaction of neutrons with wood is of interest because 
wood and the water it contains are compounds of hydrogen, 
and hydrogen has a relatively large probability of interaction 
with neutrons. Higher energy neutrons lose energy much 
more quickly through interaction with hydrogen than with 
other elements found in wood. Lower energy neutrons that 
result from this interaction are thus a measure of the hy- 
drogen density of the specimen. Measurement of the lower 
energy level neutrons can be related to the moisture content 
of the wood. 


When neutrons interact with wood, an additional result is 
the production of radioactive isotopes of the elements pres- 
ent in the wood. The radioisotopes produced can be identi- 
fied by the type, energy, and half-life of their emissions, and 
the specific activity of each indicates the amount of isotope 
present. This procedure, called neutron activation analysis, 
provides a sensitive nondestructive method of analysis for 
trace elements. 


Discussions in this section assume moderate radiation levels 
that leave the wood physically unchanged. However, very 
large doses of y rays or neutrons can cause substantial deg- 
radation of wood. The effect of large radiation doses on 
mechanical properties of wood is discussed in Chapter 5. 


Literature Cited 


AF&PA. 2005. National design specification for wood 
construction. ANSI/AF&PA NDS-2005. Washington, DC: 
American Forest & Paper Association, American Wood 
Council. 174 p. 


ASTM. 2007. Standard test methods for small clear speci- 
mens of timber. ASTM Standard D143, 1994 (2007). West 
Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International. 


Comstock, G.L. 1965. Shrinkage of coast-type Douglas-fir 
and old-growth redwood boards. Res. Pap. FPL 30. Madi- 
son, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Forest Products Laboratory. 20 p. 


IEA. 1991. Catalogue of material properties. In: Internation- 
al Energy Agency, Annex XIV: Condensation and Energy. 
Leuven, Belgium: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Labora- 
tory for Building Physics. Report Annex XIV, Vol. 3. 


ISO. 2002. Hygrothermal performance of building materi- 
als and products—determination of water absorption coef- 
ficient by partial immersion. International Standard ISO 
15148:2002. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organiza- 
tion for Standardization. 


James, W.L. 1975. Dielectric properties of wood and hard- 
board: variation with temperature, frequency, moisture 


4-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


content, and grain orientation. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-245. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 32 p. 


James, W.L. 1988. Electric moisture meters for wood. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-6. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 

17 p. 


Kumaran, M.K. 1999. Moisture diffusivity of building mate- 
rials from water absorption measurements. Journal of Ther- 
mal Envelope and Building Science. 22: 349-355. 


Kumaran, M.K. 2002. A thermal and moisture transport 
property database for common building and insulating ma- 
terials. Final Report, ASHRAE Research Project 1018-RP. 
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating 
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc. 


MacDonald, J.R.; Johnson, W.B. 1987. Fundamentals of im- 
pedance spectroscopy. In: MacDonald, J.R., ed. Impedance 
spectroscopy emphasizing solid materials and systems. New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons: 1—26. 


Markwardt, L.J.; Wilson, T.R.C. 1935. Strength and related 
properties of woods grown in the United States. Tech. Bull. 
No. 479. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 


Simpson, W.T. 1973. Predicting equilibrium moisture con- 
tent of wood by mathematical models. Wood and Fiber. 
5(1): 41-49. 


Skaar, C. 1988. Wood—water relations. New York: Springer- 
Verlag. 283 p. 


Spalt, H.A. 1958. The fundamentals of water vapor sorption 
by wood. Forest Products Journal. 8(10): 288-295. 


Stamm, A.J. 1929. The fiber-saturation point of wood as ob- 
tained from electrical conductivity measurements. Industrial 
and Engineering Chemistry, Analytical Edition. 1(2): 94-97. 


Stamm, A.J. 1964. Wood and Cellulose Science. New York: 
Ronald Press. 549 p. 


Stamm, A.J.; Loughborough, W.K. 1935. Thermodynam- 
ics of the swelling of wood. Journal of Physical Chemistry. 
39(1): 121-132. 

Tuitta, M.; Olkkonen, H. 2002. Electrical impedance spec- 


troscopy device for measurement of moisture gradients in 
wood. Review of Scientific Instruments. 73(8): 3093-3 100. 


Zelinka, S.L.; Rammer, D.R. 2005. The use of electrochemi- 
cal impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to measure the corrosion 
of metals in contact with wood. TMS Letters. 2(1): 15-16. 


Zelinka, S.L.; Stone, D.S.; Rammer, D.R. 2007. Equivalent 
circuit modeling of wood at 12% moisture content. Wood 
Fiber Science. 39(4): 556-565. 


Chapter4 Moisture Relations and Physical Properties of Wood 


Additional References 


ASHRAE. 2009. 2009 ASHRAE Handbook—fundamentals. 
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating 
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc. 


Beall, F.C. 1968. Specific heat of wood—further 

research required to obtain meaningful data. Res. Note 
FPL—RN-0184. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 8 p. 


Kleuters, W. 1964. Determining local density of wood by 
beta ray method. Forest Products Journal. 14(9): 414. 


Kollman, F.F.P.; Coté, W.A., Jr. 1968. Principles of wood 
science and technology I—solid wood. New York: Springer- 
Verlag. 592 p. 


Kubler, H.; Liang, L.; Chang, L.S. 1973. Thermal expansion 
of moist wood. Wood and Fiber. 5(3): 257-267. 


Kukachka, B.F. 1970. Properties of imported tropical 
woods. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-125. Madison, WI: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Labora- 
tory. 67 p. 


Lin, R.T. 1967. Review of dielectric properties of wood and 
cellulose. Forest Products Journal. 17(7): 61. 


McKenzie, W.M.; Karpovich, H. 1968. Frictional behavior 
of wood. Munich: Wood Science Technology. 2(2): 138. 


Murase, Y. 1980. Frictional properties of wood at high slid- 
ing speed. Journal of the Japanese Wood Research Society. 
26(2): 61-65. 


Panshin, A.J.; deZeeuw, C. 1980. Textbook of wood tech- 
nology. New York: McGraw-Hill. Vol. 1, 4th ed. 


Simpson, W.T., ed. 1991. Dry kiln operator’s manual. Agric. 
Handb. AH-188. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 274 p. 


Simpson, W.T. 1993. Specific gravity, moisture content, 
and density relationships for wood. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
FPL—GTR-76. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 13 p. 


Steinhagen, H.P. 1977. Thermal conductive properties of 
wood, green or dry, from —40° to +100°C: a literature re- 
view. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-9. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 10 p. 


TenWolde, A.; McNatt, J.D.; Krahn, L. 1988. Thermal prop- 
erties of wood panel products for use in buildings. ORNL/ 
Sub/87—21697/1. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory. 38 p. 


Weatherwax, R.C.; Stamm, A.J. 1947. The coefficients of 
thermal expansion of wood and wood products. Transac- 
tions of American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
69(44): 421-432. 


4-19 


Mechanical Properties of Wood 


David E. Kretschmann, Research General Engineer 


Contents 
Orthotropic Nature of Wood 5-1 
Elastic Properties 5—2 
Modulus of Elasticity 5—2 
Poisson’s Ratio 5—2 
Modulus of Rigidity 5—3 
Strength Properties 5—3 
Common Properties 5—3 
Less Common Properties 5—15 
Vibration Properties 5—17 
Speed of Sound 5-17 
Internal Friction 5—17 


Mechanical Properties of Clear Straight-Grained 
Wood 5-21 


Natural Characteristics Affecting Mechanical 
Properties 5—26 


Specific Gravity 5-26 

Knots 5-26 

Slope of Grain 5-28 

Annual Ring Orientation 5-31 
Reaction Wood 5-31 

Juvenile Wood 5-32 
Compression Failures 5—33 
Pitch Pockets 5—33 

Bird Peck 5-33 

Extractives 5—34 

Properties of Timber from Dead Trees 5-34 


Effects of Manufacturing and Service 
Environments 5—34 


Temperature 5—35 

Time Under Load 5-38 

Aging 5-41 

Exposure to Chemicals 541 

Chemical Treatment 5—41 

Nuclear Radiation 5—43 

Mold and Stain Fungi 5-43 

Decay 5—43 

Insect Damage 5—44 
Literature Cited 544 
Additional References 5—44 


The mechanical properties presented in this chapter were 
obtained from tests of pieces of wood termed “clear” and 
“straight grained” because they did not contain characteris- 
tics such as knots, cross grain, checks, and splits. These test 
pieces did have anatomical characteristics such as growth 
rings that occurred in consistent patterns within each piece. 
Clear wood specimens are usually considered “homoge- 
neous” in wood mechanics. 


Many of the mechanical properties of wood tabulated in this 
chapter were derived from extensive sampling and analysis 
procedures. These properties are represented as the aver- 
age mechanical properties of the species. Some properties, 
such as tension parallel to the grain, and all properties for 
some imported species are based on a more limited number 
of specimens that were not subjected to the same sampling 
and analysis procedures. The appropriateness of these latter 
properties to represent the average properties of a species 
is uncertain; nevertheless, the properties represent the best 
information available. 


Variability, or variation in properties, is common to all 
materials. Because wood is a natural material and the tree 

is subject to many constantly changing influences (such as 
moisture, soil conditions, and growing space), wood proper- 
ties vary considerably, even in clear material. This chapter 
provides information, where possible, on the nature and 
magnitude of variability in properties. 


This chapter also includes a discussion of the effect of 
growth features, such as knots and slope of grain, on clear 
wood properties. The effects of manufacturing and service 
environments on mechanical properties are discussed, and 
their effects on clear wood and material containing growth 
features are compared. Chapter 7 discusses how these 
research results have been implemented in engineering 
standards. 


Orthotropic Nature of Wood 


Wood may be described as an orthotropic material; that is, 

it has unique and independent mechanical properties in the 
directions of three mutually perpendicular axes: longitudi- 
nal, radial, and tangential. The longitudinal axis L is parallel 
to the fiber (grain); the radial axis R is normal to the growth 
rings (perpendicular to the grain in the radial direction); and 
the tangential axis 7 is perpendicular to the grain but tangent 
to the growth rings. These axes are shown in Figure 5-1. 


5-1 


CHAPTER 5 


Radial 


Longitudinal 


Figure 5—1. Three principal axes of wood with respect to 
grain direction and growth rings. 


Elastic Properties 


Twelve constants (nine are independent) are needed to de- 
scribe the elastic behavior of wood: three moduli of elastic- 
ity E, three moduli of rigidity G, and six Poisson’s ratios yw. 
The moduli of elasticity and Poisson’s ratios are related by 
expressions of the form 


(5-1) 


——— a Ss 


LJ= LRT 


General relations between stress and strain for a homoge- 
neous orthotropic material can be found in texts on 
anisotropic elasticity. 


Modulus of Elasticity 


Elasticity implies that deformations produced by low stress 
are completely recoverable after loads are removed. When 
loaded to higher stress levels, plastic deformation or failure 
occurs. The three moduli of elasticity, which are denoted 

by E,, Ep, and E;, respectively, are the elastic moduli along 
the longitudinal, radial, and tangential axes of wood. These 
moduli are usually obtained from compression tests; how- 
ever, data for Ep, and £7, are not extensive. Average values 
of E, and £, for samples from a few species are presented in 
Table 5—1 as ratios with E£,; the Poisson’s ratios are shown 
in Table 5—2. The elastic ratios, and the elastic constants 
themselves, vary within and between species and with mois- 
ture content and specific gravity. 


The modulus of elasticity determined from bending, £,, 
rather than from an axial test, may be the only modulus of 
elasticity available for a species. Average E, values obtained 
from bending tests are given in Tables 5—3 to 5—5. Repre- 
sentative coefficients of variation of EZ, determined with 
bending tests for clear wood are reported in Table 5—6. As 
tabulated, £, includes an effect of shear deflection; E, from 
bending can be increased by 10% to remove this effect ap- 
proximately. This adjusted bending £, can be used to deter- 
mine Ep and E based on the ratios in Table 5—1. 


Poisson’s Ratio 


When a member is loaded axially, the deformation perpen- 
dicular to the direction of the load is proportional to the 


5-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—1. Elastic ratios for various species at 
approximately 12% moisture content* 


Species E/E, ERIE, GRE, G,/E, GrE, 
Hardwoods 
Ash, white 0.080 0.125 0.109 0.077 — 
Balsa 0.015 0.046 0.054 0.037 0.005 
Basswood 0.027 0.066 0.056 0.046 — 
Birch, yellow 0.050 0.078 0.074 0.068 0.017 
Cherry, black 0.086 0.197 0.147 0.097 — 
Cottonwood, eastern 0.047 0.083 0.076 0.052 — 
Mahogany, African 0.050 0.111 0.088 0.059 0.021 
Mahogany, Honduras 0.064 0.107 0.066 0.086 0.028 
Maple, sugar 0.065 0.132 O.111 0.063 — 
Maple, red 0.067 0.140 0.133 0.074 — 
Oak, red 0.082 0.154 0.089 0.081 — 
Oak, white 0.072 0.163 0.086 — 
Sweetgum 0.050 0.115 0.089 0.061 0.021 
Walnut, black 0.056 0.106 0.085 0.062 0.021 
Yellow-poplar 0.043 0.092 0.075 0.069 0.011 
Softwoods 
Baldcypress 0.039 0.084 0.063 0.054 0.007 
Cedar, northern white 0.081 0.183 0.210 0.187 0.015 
Cedar, western red 0.055 0.081 0.087 0.086 0.005 
Douglas-fir 0.050 0.068 0.064 0.078 0.007 
Fir, subalpine 0.039 0.102 0.070 0.058 0.006 
Hemlock, western 0.031 0.058 0.038 0.032 0.003 
Larch, western 0.065 0.079 0.063 0.069 0.007 
Pine 
Loblolly 0.078 0.113 0.082 0.081 0.013 
Lodgepole 0.068 0.102 0.049 0.046 0.005 
Longleaf 0.055 0.102 0.071 0.060 0.012 
Pond 0.041 0.071 0.050 0.045 0.009 
Ponderosa 0.083 0.122 0.138 0.115 0.017 
Red 0.044 0.088 0.096 0.081 0.011 
Slash 0.045 0.074 0.055 0.053 0.010 
Sugar 0.087 0.131 0.124 0.113 0.019 
Western white 0.038 0.078 0.052 0.048 0.005 
Redwood 0.089 0.087 0.066 0.077 0.011 
Spruce, Sitka 0.043 0.078 0.064 0.061 0.003 
Spruce, Engelmann 0.059 0.128 0.124 0.120 0.010 


“E, may be approximated by increasing modulus of elasticity values in 
Table 5-3 by 10%. 


deformation parallel to the direction of the load. The ratio 
of the transverse to axial strain is called Poisson’s ratio. 

The Poisson’s ratios are denoted by “;p, Urn Mim Lr LR 
and {irp. The first letter of the subscript refers to direction 

of applied stress and the second letter to direction of lateral 
deformation. For example, zp is the Poisson’s ratio for 
deformation along the radial axis caused by stress along 

the longitudinal axis. Average values of experimentally de- 
termined Poisson’s ratios for samples of a few species are 
given in Table 5—2. The ideal relationship between Poisson’s 
ratio and the moduli of elasticity given in Equation (5-1) are 
not always closely met. Two of the Poisson’s ratios, ip, and 
Ly; are very small and are less precisely determined than 
are those for other Poisson’s ratios. Poisson’s ratios vary 
within and between species and are affected by moisture 
content and specific gravity. 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—2. Poisson’s ratios for various species at 
approximately 12% moisture content 


Species HLR Hir EBrr Ere Fre Ere 
Hardwoods 

Ash, white 0.371 0.440 0.684 0.360 0.059 0.051 

Aspen, quaking 0.489 0.374 — 0.496 0.054 0.022 

Balsa 0.229 0.488 0.665 0.231 0.018 0.009 


Basswood 0.364 0.406 0.912 0.346 0.034 0.022 
Birch, yellow 0.426 0.451 0.697 0.426 0.043 0.024 
Cherry, black 0.392 0.428 0.695 0.282 0.086 0.048 
Cottonwood, eastern 0.344 0.420 0.875 0.292 0.043 0.018 
Mahogany, African 0.297 0.641 0.604 0.264 0.033 0.032 
Mahogany, Honduras 0.314 0.533 0.600 0.326 0.033 0.034 
Maple, sugar 0.424 0.476 0.774 0.349 0.065 0.037 


Maple, red 0.434 0.509 0.762 0.354 0.063 0.044 
Oak, red 0.350 0.448 0.560 0.292 0.064 0.033 
Oak, white 0.369 0.428 0.618 0.300 0.074 0.036 
Sweetgum 0.325 0.403 0.682 0.309 0.044 0.023 
Walnut, black 0.495 0.632 0.718 0.367 0.052 0.036 
Yellow-poplar 0.318 0.392 0.703 0.329 0.030 0.019 
Softwoods 
Baldcypress 0.338 0.326 0.411 0.356 — = 


Cedar, northern white 0.337 0.340 0.458 0.345 — — 
Cedar, western red 0.378 0.296 0.484 0.403 — — 
Douglas-fir 0.292 0.449 0.390 0.374 0.036 0.029 


Fir, subalpine 0.341 0.332 0.437 0.336 

Hemlock, western 0.485 0.423 0.442 0.382 — — 

Larch, western 0.355 0.276 0.389 0.352 — — 

Pine 
Loblolly 0.328 0.292 0.382 0.362 — — 
Lodgepole 0.316 0.347 0.469 0.381 — — 
Longleaf 0.332 0.365 0.384 0.342 — — 
Pond 0.280 0.364 0.389 0.320 — — 
Ponderosa 0.337 0.400 0.426 0.359 — — 
Red 0.347 0.315 0.408 0.308 — — 
Slash 0.392 0.444 0.447 0.387 — — 
Sugar 0.356 0.349 0.428 0.358 — — 
Western white 0.329 0.344 0.410 0.334 — _ 

Redwood 0.360 0.346 0.373 0.400 — —_ 

Spruce, Sitka 0.372 0.467 0.435 0.245 0.040 0.025 


Spruce, Engelmann 0.422 0.462 0.530 0.255 0.083 0.058 


Modulus of Rigidity 


The modulus of rigidity, also called shear modulus, indi- 
cates the resistance to deflection of a member caused by 
shear stresses. The three moduli of rigidity denoted by G;p, 
G,7, and Gprare the elastic constants in the LR, LT, and 
RT planes, respectively. For example, G,,p is the modulus 
of rigidity based on shear strain in the LR plane and shear 
stresses in the LT and RT planes. Average values of shear 
moduli for samples of a few species expressed as ratios with 
E,, are given in Table 5—1. As with moduli of elasticity, the 
moduli of rigidity vary within and between species and 
with moisture content and specific gravity. 


Strength Properties 


Common Properties 


Mechanical properties most commonly measured and repre- 
sented as “strength properties” for design include modulus 


of rupture in bending, maximum stress in compression par- 
allel to grain, compressive stress perpendicular to grain, and 
shear strength parallel to grain. Additional measurements 
are often made to evaluate work to maximum load in bend- 
ing, impact bending strength, tensile strength perpendicular 
to grain, and hardness. These properties, grouped according 
to the broad forest tree categories of hardwood and soft- 
wood (not correlated with hardness or softness), are given in 
Tables 5-3 to 5—5 for many of the commercially important 
species. Average coefficients of variation for these proper- 
ties from a limited sampling of specimens are reported in 
Table 5-6. 


Modulus of rupture—Reflects the maximum load-carrying 
capacity of a member in bending and is proportional to max- 
imum moment borne by the specimen. Modulus of rupture 
is an accepted criterion of strength, although it is not a true 
stress because the formula by which it is computed is valid 
only to the elastic limit. 


Work to maximum load in bending—Ability to absorb 
shock with some permanent deformation and more or less 
injury to a specimen. Work to maximum load is a measure 
of the combined strength and toughness of wood under 
bending stresses. 


Compressive strength parallel to grain—Maximum stress 
sustained by a compression parallel-to-grain specimen hav- 
ing a ratio of length to least dimension of less than 11. 


Compressive stress perpendicular to grain—Reported as 
stress at proportional limit. There is no clearly defined ulti- 
mate stress for this property. 


Shear strength parallel to grain—Ability to resist internal 
slipping of one part upon another along the grain. Values 
presented are average strength in radial and tangential shear 
planes. 


Impact bending—In the impact bending test, a hammer of 
given weight is dropped upon a beam from successively in- 
creased heights until rupture occurs or the beam deflects 
152 mm (6 in.) or more. The height of the maximum drop, 
or the drop that causes failure, is a comparative value that 
represents the ability of wood to absorb shocks that cause 
stresses beyond the proportional limit. 


Tensile strength perpendicular to grain—Resistance of 
wood to forces acting across the grain that tend to split a 
member. Values presented are the average of radial and 
tangential observations. 


Hardness—Generally defined as resistance to indentation 

using a modified Janka hardness test, measured by the load 
required to embed a 11.28-mm (0.444-in.) ball to one-half 

its diameter. Values presented are the average of radial and 
tangential penetrations. 


Tensile strength parallel to grain—Maximum tensile 
stress sustained in direction parallel to grain. Relatively few 
data are available on the tensile strength of various species 


5-3 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—3a. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (metric)* 


Static bending 


Com- 
Work to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus = maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular _ hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity’ load bending tograin tograin grain to grain ness 
names content gravity” (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m°) (mm) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (N) 
Hardwoods 
Alder, red Green 0.37 45,000 8,100 55 560 20,400 1,700 5,300 2,700 2,000 
12% 0.41 68,000 9,500 58 510 40,100 3,000 7,400 2,900 2,600 
Ash 
Black Green 0.45 41,000 7,200 83 840 15,900 2,400 5,900 3,400 2,300 
12% 0.49 87,000 11,000 103 890 41,200 5,200 10,800 4,800 3,800 
Blue Green 0.53 66,000 8,500 101 — 28,800 5,600 10,600 — — 
12% 0.58 95,000 9,700 99 — 48,100 9,800 14,000 — — 
Green Green 0.53 66,000 9,700 81 890 29,000 5,000 8,700 4,100 3,900 
12% 0.56 97,000 11,400 92 810 48,800 9,000 13,200 4,800 5,300 
Oregon Green 0.50 52,000 7,800 84 990 24,200 3,700 8,200 4,100 3,500 
12% 0.55 88,000 9,400 99 840 41,600 8,600 12,300 5,000 5,200 
White Green 0.55 66,000 9,900 108 970 27,500 4,600 9,300 4,100 4,300 
12% 0.60 103,000 12,000 115 1,090 51,100 8,000 13,200 6,500 5,900 
Aspen 
Bigtooth Green 0.36 37,000 7,700 39 — 17,200 1,400 5,000 — — 
12% 0.39 63,000 9,900 53 — 36,500 3,100 7,400 — — 
Quaking Green 0.35 35,000 5,900 44 560 14,800 1,200 4,600 1,600 1,300 
12% 0.38 58,000 8,100 52 530 29,300 2,600 5,900 1,800 1,600 
Basswood, American Green 0.32 34,000 7,200 37 410 15,300 1,200 4,100 1,900 1,100 
12% 0.37 60,000 10,100 50 410 32,600 2,600 6,800 2,400 1,800 
Beech, American Green 0.56 59,000 9,500 82 1,090 24,500 3,700 8,900 5,000 3,800 
12% 0.64 103,000 11,900 104 1,040 50,300 7,000 13,900 7,000 5,800 
Birch 
Paper Green 0.48 44,000 8,100 112 1,240 16,300 1,900 5,800 2,600 2,500 
12% 0.55 85,000 11,000 110 860 39,200 4,100 8300 — 4,000 
Sweet Green 0.60 65,000 11,400 108 1,220 25,800 3,200 8,500 3,000 4,300 
12% 0.65 117,000 15,000 124 1,190 58,900 7,400 15,400 6,600 6,500 
Yellow Green 0.55 57,000 10,300 111 1,220 23,300 3,000 7,700 3,000 3,600 
12% 0.62 114,000 13,900 143 1,400 56,300 6,700 13,000 6,300 5,600 
Butternut Green 0.36 37,000 6,700 57 610 16,700 1,500 5,200 3,000 1,700 
12% 0.38 56,000 8,100 57 610 36,200 3,200 8,100 3,000 2,200 
Cherry, black Green 0.47 55,000 9,000 88 840 24,400 2,500 7,800 3,900 2,900 
12% 0.50 85,000 10,300 79 740 49,000 4,800 11,700 3,900 4,200 
Chestnut, American Green 0.40 39,000 6,400 48 610 17,000 2,100 5,500 3,000 1,900 
12% 0.43 59,000 8,500 45 480 36,700 4,300 7,400 3,200 2,400 
Cottonwood 
Balsam poplar Green 0.31 27,000 5,200 29 — 11,700 1,000 3,400 — — 
12% 0.34 47,000 7,600 34 — 27,700 2,100 5400 — — 
Black Green 0.31 34,000 7,400 34 510 15,200 1,100 4,200 1,900 1,100 
12% 0.35 59,000 8,800 46 560 31,000 2,100 7,200 2,300 1,600 
Eastern Green 0.37 37,000 7,000 50 530 15,700 1,400 4,700 2,800 1,500 
12% 0.40 59,000 9,400 51 510 33,900 2,600 6,400 4,000 1,900 
Elm 
American Green 0.46 50,000 7,700 81 970 20,100 2,500 6,900 4,100 2,800 
12% 0.50 81,000 9,200 90 990 38,100 4,800 10,400 4,600 3,700 
Rock Green 0.57 66,000 8,200 137 1,370 26,100 4,200 8,800 — 
12% 0.63 102,000 10,600 132 1,420 48,600 8,500 13,200 — — 
Slippery Green 0.48 55,000 8,500 106 1,190 22,900 2,900 7,700 4,400 2,900 
12% 0.53 90,000 10,300 117 1,140 43,900 5,700 11,200 3,700 3,800 
Hackberry Green 0.49 45,000 6,600 100 1,220 18,300 2,800 7,400 4,300 3,100 
12% 0.53 76,000 8,200 88 1,090 37,500 6,100 11,000 4,000 3,900 


5-4 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—3a. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (metric)*"—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Work to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus  maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular to hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity’ load bending tograin tograin grain grain ness 
names content gravity” (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m°) (mm) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (N) 
Hickory, pecan 
Bitternut Green 0.60 71,000 9,700 138 1,680 31,500 5,500 8,500 — — 
12% 0.66 118,000 12,300 125 1,680 62,300 11,600 
Nutmeg Green 0.56 63,000 8,900 157 1,370 27,400 5,200 7,100 — — 
12% 0.60 114,000 11,700 173 — 47,600 10,800 
Pecan Green 0.60 68,000 9,400 101 1,350 27,500 5,400 10,200 4,700 5,800 
12% 0.66 94,000 11,900 95 1,120 54,100 11,900 14,300 — 8,100 
Water Green 0.61 74,000 10,800 130 1,420 32,100 6,100 9,900 — _ 
12% 0.62 123,000 13,900 133 1,350 59,300 10,700 
Hickory, true’ 
Mockernut Green 0.64 77,000 10,800 180 2,240 30,900 5,600 8,800 — 6,400 
12% 0.72 132,000 15,300 156 1,960 61,600 11,900 12,000 — 8,800 
Pignut Green 0.66 81,000 11,400 219 2,260 33,200 6,300 9,400 — 6,800 
12% 0.75 139,000 15,600 210 1,880 63,400 13,700 14,800 — 9,500 
Shagbark Green 0.64 76,000 10,800 163 1,880 31,600 5,800 10,500 — 6,500 
12% 0.72 139,000 14,900 178 1,700 63,500 12,100 16,800 — 8,400 
Shellbark Green 0.62 72,000 9,200 206 2,640 27,000 5,600 8,200 — 7,400 
12% 0.69 125,000 13,000 163 2,240 55,200 12,400 14,500 — 8,100 
Honeylocust Green 0.60 70,000 8,900 87 1,190 30,500 7,900 11,400 6,400 6,200 
12% — 101,000 11,200 92 1,190 51,700 12,700 15,500 6,200 7,000 
Locust, black Green 0.66 95,000 12,800 106 1,120 46,900 8,000 12,100 5,300 7,000 
12% 0.69 134,000 14,100 127 1,450 70,200 12,600 17,100 4,400 7,600 
Magnolia 
Cucumbertree Green 0.44 51,000 10,800 69 760 21,600 2,300 6,800 3,000 2,300 
12% 0.48 85,000 12,500 84 890 43,500 3,900 9,200 4,600 3,100 
Southern Green 0.46 47,000 7,700 106 1,370 18,600 3,200 7,200 4,200 3,300 
12% 0.50 77,000 9,700 88 740 37,600 5,900 10,500 5,100 4,500 
Maple 
Bigleaf Green 0.44 51,000 7,600 60 580 22,300 3,100 7,700 4,100 2,800 
12% 0.48 74,000 10,000 54 710 41,000 5,200 11,900 3,700 3,800 
Black Green 0.52 54,000 9,200 88 1,220 22,500 4,100 7,800 5,000 3,700 
12% 0.57 92,000 11,200 86 1,020 46,100 7,000 12,500 4,600 5,200 
Red Green 0.49 53,000 9,600 79 810 22,600 2,800 7,900 — 3,100 
12% 0.54 92,000 11,300 86 810 45,100 6,900 12,800 — 4,200 
Silver Green 0.44 40,000 6,500 716 740 17,200 2,600 7,200 3,900 2,600 
12% 0.47 61,000 7,900 57 640 36,000 5,100 10,200 3,400 3,100 
Sugar Green 0.56 65,000 10,700 92 1,020 27,700 4,400 10,100 — 4,300 
12% 0.63 109,000 12,600 114 990 54,000 10,100 16,100 — 6,400 
Oak, red 
Black Green 0.56 57,000 8,100 84 1,020 23,900 4,900 8,400 — 4,700 
12% 0.61 96,000 11,300 94 1,040 45,000 6,400 13,200 — 5,400 
Cherrybark Green 0.61 74,000 12,300 101 1,370 31,900 5,200 9,100 5,500 5,500 
12% 0.68 125,000 15,700 126 1,240 60,300 8,600 13,800 5,800 6,600 
Laurel Green 0.56 54,000 9,600 77 990 21,900 3,900 8,100 5,300 4,400 
12% 0.63 87,000 11,700 81 990 48,100 7,300 12,600 5,400 5,400 
Northern red Green 0.56 57,000 9,300 91 1,120 23,700 4,200 8,300 5,200 4,400 
12% 0.63 99,000 12,500 100 1,090 46,600 7,000 12,300 5,500 5,700 
Pin Green 0.58 57,000 9,100 97 1,220 25,400 5,000 8,900 5,500 4,800 
12% 0.63 97,000 11,900 102 1,140 47,000 7,000 14,300 7,200 6,700 
Scarlet Green 0.60 72,000 10,200 103 1,370 28,200 5,700 9,700 4,800 5,300 
12% 0.67 120,000 13,200 141 1,350 57,400 7,700 13,000 6,000 6,200 
Southern red Green 0.52 48,000 7,900 55 740 20,900 3,800 6,400 3,300 3,800 
12% 0.59 75,000 10,300 65 660 42,000 6,000 9,600 3,500 4,700 
Water Green 0.56 61,000 10,700 77 990 25,800 4,300 8,500 5,700 4,500 
12% 0.63 106,000 13,900 148 1,120 46,700 7,000 13,900 6,300 5,300 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—3a. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (metric)*—con. 


Static bending 
Com- 
Work to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus = maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity® load bending tograin tograin grain to grain ness 
names content gravity? (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m°) (mm) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (N) 
Oak, red—con. 
Willow Green 0.56 51,000 8,900 61 890 20,700 4,200 8,100 5,200 4,400 
12% 0.69 100,000 13,100 101 1,070 48,500 7,800 11,400 — 6,500 
Oak, white 
Bur Green 0.58 50,000 6,100 74 1,120 22,700 4,700 9,300 5,500 4,900 
12% 0.64 71,000 7,100 68 740 41,800 8,300 12,500 4,700 6,100 
Chestnut Green 0.57 55,000 9,400 65 890 24,300 3,700 8,300 4,800 4,000 
12% 0.66 92,000 11,000 716 1,020 47,100 5,800 10,300 — 5,000 
Live Green 0.80 82,000 10,900 85 — 37,400 14,100 15,200 — — 
12% 0.88 127,000 13,700 130 —_ 61,400 19,600 18,300 — oo 
Overcup Green 0.57 55,000 7,900 87 1,120 23,200 3,700 9,100 5,000 4,300 
12% 0.63 87,000 9,800 108 970 42,700 5,600 13,800 6,500 5,300 
Post Green 0.60 56,000 7,500 716 1,120 24,000 5,900 8,800 5,400 5,000 
12% 0.67 91,000 10,400 91 1,170 45,300 9,900 12,700 5,400 6,000 
Swamp chestnut Green 0.60 59,000 9,300 88 1,140 24,400 3,900 8,700 4,600 4,900 
12% 0.67 96,000 12,200 83 1,040 50,100 7,700 13,700 4,800 5,500 
Swamp white Green 0.64 68,000 11,000 100 1,270 30,100 5,200 9,000 5,900 5,200 
12% 0.72 122,000 14,100 132 1,240 59,300 8,200 13,800 5,700 7,200 
White Green 0.60 57,000 8,600 80 1,070 24,500 4,600 8,600 5,300 4,700 
12% 0.68 105,000 12,300 102 940 51,300 7,400 13,800 5,500 6,000 
Sassafras Green 0.42 41,000 6,300 49 — 18,800 2,600 6,600 — — 
12% 0.46 62,000 7,700 60 _ 32,800 5,900 8,500 — — 
Sweetgum Green 0.46 49,000 8,300 70 910 21,000 2,600 6,800 3,700 2,700 
12% 0.52 86,000 11,300 82 810 43,600 4,300 11,000 5,200 3,800 
Sycamore, American Green 0.46 45,000 7,300 52 660 20,100 2,500 6,900 4,300 2,700 
12% 0.49 69,000 9,800 59 660 37,100 4,800 10,100 5,000 3,400 
Tanoak Green 0.58 72,000 10,700 92 — 32,100 
12% — — — 
Tupelo 
Black Green 0.46 48,000 7,100 55 760 21,000 3,300 7,600 3,900 2,800 
12% 0.50 66,000 8,300 43 560 38,100 6,400 9,200 3,400 3,600 
Water Green 0.46 50,000 7,200 57 760 23,200 3,300 8,200 4,100 3,200 
12% 0.50 66,000 8,700 48 580 40,800 6,000 11,000 4,800 3,900 
Walnut, black Green 0.51 66,000 9,800 101 940 29,600 3,400 8,400 3,900 4,000 
12% 0.55 101,000 11,600 74 860 52,300 7,000 9,400 4,800 4,500 
Willow, black Green 0.36 33,000 5,400 76 — 14,100 1,200 4,700 — — 
12% 0.39 54,000 7,000 61 —_ 28,300 3,000 8,600 — — 
Yellow-poplar Green 0.40 41,000 8,400 52 660 18,300 1,900 5,400 3,500 2,000 
12% 0.42 70,000 10,900 61 610 38,200 3,400 8,200 3,700 2,400 
Softwoods 
Baldcypress Green 0.42 46,000 8,100 46 640 24,700 2,800 5,600 2,100 1,700 
12% 0.46 73,000 9,900 57 610 43,900 5,000 6,900 1,900 2,300 
Cedar 
Atlantic white Green 0.31 32,000 5,200 4l 460 16,500 1,700 4,800 1,200 1,300 
12% 0.32 47,000 6,400 28 330 32,400 2,800 5,500 1,500 1,600 
Eastern redcedar Green 0.44 48,000 4,500 103 890 24,600 4,800 7,000 2,300 2,900 
12% 0.47 61,000 6,100 57 560 41,500 6,300 — — 4,000 
Incense Green 0.35 43,000 5,800 44 430 21,700 2,600 5,700 1,900 1,700 
12% 0.37 55,000 7,200 37 430 35,900 4,100 6,100 1,900 2,100 
Northern white Green 0.29 29,000 4,400 39 380 13,700 1,600 4,300 1,700 1,000 
12% 0.31 45,000 5,500 33 300 =. 27,300 ~=—- 2,100 5,900 1,700 1,400 


5-6 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—3a. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (metric)*—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Work to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus = maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular — hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity’ load bending tograin tograin grain to grain ness 
names content gravity” (kPa) (MPa) (kJm*) (mm) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (N) 
Cedar—con. 
Port-Orford Green 0.39 45,000 9,000 51 530 =.21,600 §=2,100 5,800 1,200 1,700 
12% 0.43 88,000 11,700 63 710 43,100 5,000 9,400 2,800 2,800 
Western redcedar Green 0.31 35,900 6,500 34 430 19,100 1,700 5,300 1,600 1,200 
12% 0.32 51,700 7,700 40 430 31,400 3,200 6,800 1,500 1,600 
Yellow Green 0.42 44,000 7,900 63 690 21,000 2,400 5,800 2,300 2,000 
12% 0.44 77,000 9,800 72 740 43,500 4,300 7,800 2,500 2,600 
Douglas-fir® 
Coast Green 0.45 53,000 10,800 52 660 26,100 2,600 6,200 2,100 2,200 
12% 0.48 85,000 13,400 68 790 49,900 5,500 7,800 2,300 3,200 
Interior West Green 0.46 53,000 10,400 50 660 26,700 2,900 6,500 2,000 2,300 
12% 0.50 87,000 12,600 73 810 51,200 5,200 8,900 2,400 2,900 
Interior North Green 0.45 51,000 9,700 56 560 = 23,900 2,500 6,600 2,300 1,900 
12% 0.48 90,000 12,300 72 660 47,600 5,300 9,700 2,700 2,700 
Interior South Green 0.43 47,000 8,000 55 380 =. 21,400 +=2,300 =—6,600 ~=1,700 1,600 
12% 0.46 82,000 10,300 62 510 43,000 5,100 10,400 2,300 2,300 
Fir 
Balsam Green 0.33 38,000 8,600 32 410 18,100 1,300 4,600 1,200 1,300 
12% 0.35 63,000 10,000 35 510 36,400 2,800 6,500 1,200 1,700 
California red Green 0.36 40,000 8,100 44 530 19,000 2,300 5,300 2,600 1,600 
12% 0.38 72,400 10,300 61 610 37,600 4,200 7,200 2,700 2,200 
Grand Green 0.35 40,000 8,600 39 560 20,300 1,900 5,100 1,700 1,600 
12% 0.37 61,400 10,800 52 710 36,500 3,400 6,200 1,700 2,200 
Noble Green 0.37 43,000 9,500 4] 480 20,800 1,900 5,500 1,600 1,300 
12% 0.39 74,000 11,900 61 580 42,100 3,600 7,200 1,500 1,800 
Pacific silver Green 0.40 44,000 9,800 4] 530 =. 21,600 1,500 5,200 1,700 1,400 
12% 0.43 75,800 12,100 64 610 44,200 3,100 8,400 — 1,900 
Subalpine Green 0.31 34,000 7,200 — — 15,900 1,300 4,800 — 1,200 
12% 0.32 59,000 8,900 — — 33,500 2,700 7,400 — 1,600 
White Green 0.37 41,000 8,000 39 560 20,000 1,900 5,200 2,100 1,500 
12% 0.39 68,000 10,300 50 510 40,000 3,700 7,600 2,100 2,100 
Hemlock 
Eastern Green 0.38 44,000 7,400 46 530 =. 21,200 =. 2,500 ~=— 5,900 ~=—s:11,600 ~=—:1,800 
12% 0.40 61,000 8,300 47 530 37,300 4,500 7,300 — 2,200 
Mountain Green 0.42 43,000 7,200 76 810 19,900 2,600 6,400 2,300 2,100 
12% 0.45 79,000 9,200 72 810 44,400 5,900 10,600 — 3,000 
Western Green 0.42 46,000 9,000 48 560 23,200 1,900 5,900 2,000 1,800 
12% 0.45 78,000 11,300 57 580 49,000 3,800 8,600 2,300 2,400 
Larch, western Green 0.48 53,000 10,100 71 740 25,900 2,800 6,000 2,300 2,300 
12% 0.52 90,000 12,900 87 890 52,500 6,400 9,400 3,000 3,700 
Pine 
Eastern white Green 0.34 34,000 6,800 36 430 16,800 1,500 4,700 1,700 1,300 
12% 0.35 59,000 8,500 47 460 33,100 3,000 6,200 2,100 1,700 
Jack Green 0.40 41,000 7,400 50 660 20,300 2,100 5,200 2,500 1,800 
12% 0.43 68,000 9,300 57 690 39,000 4,000 8,100 2,900 2,500 
Loblolly Green 0.47 50,000 9,700 57 760 24,200 2,700 5,900 1,800 2,000 
12% 0.51 88,000 12,300 72 760 49,200 5,400 9,600 3,200 3,100 
Lodgepole Green 0.38 38,000 7,400 39 510 18,000 1,700 4,700 1,500 1,500 
12% 0.41 65,000 9,200 47 510 37,000 4,200 6,100 2,000 2,100 
Longleaf Green 0.54 59,000 11,000 61 890 =. 29,800 = 3,300) 7,200 =. 2,300 += 2,600 
12% 0.59 100,000 13,700 81 860 58,400 6,600 10,400 3,200 3,900 
Pitch Green 0.47 47,000 8,300 63 — 20,300 2,500 5,900 — — 
12% 0.52 74,000 9,900 63 — 41,000 5,600 9,400 — — 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—3a. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (metric)*—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Work to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus = maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel icular to dicular hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity’ load bending tograin tograin grain tograin ness 
names content gravity” (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m°) (mm) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) (N) 
Pine—con. 
Pond Green 0.51 51,000 8,800 52 — 25,200 3,000 6,500 — — 
12% 0.56 80,000 12,100 59 — 52,000 6,300 9,500 — — 
Ponderosa Green 0.38 35,000 6,900 36 530 16,900 1,900 4,800 2,100 1,400 
12% 0.40 65,000 8,900 49 480 36,700 4,000 7,800 2,900 2,000 
Red Green 0.41 40,000 8,800 42 660 18,800 1,800 4,800 2,100 1,500 
12% 0.46 76,000 11,200 68 660 41,900 4,100 8,400 3,200 2,500 
Sand Green 0.46 52,000 7,000 66 — 23,700 3,100 7,900 —- — 
12% 0.48 80,000 9,700 66 — 47,700 5,800 
Shortleaf Green 0.47 51,000 9,600 57 760 24,300 2,400 6,300 2,200 2,000 
12% 0.51 90,000 12,100 716 840 50,100 5,700 9,600 3,200 3,100 
Slash Green 0.54 60,000 10,500 66 — 26,300 3,700 6,600 — — 
12% 0.59 112,000 13,700 91 — 56,100 7,000 11,600 — 
Spruce Green 0.41 41,000 6,900 — — 19,600 1,900 6,200 — 2,000 
12% 0.44 72,000 8,500 _ — 39,000 5,000 10,300 — 2,900 
Sugar Green 0.34 34,000 7,100 37 430 17,000 1,400 5,000 1,900 1,200 
12% 0.36 57,000 8,200 38 460 30,800 3,400 7,800 2,400 1,700 
Virginia Green 0.45 50,000 8,400 75 860 23,600 2,700 6,100 2,800 2,400 
12% 0.48 90,000 10,500 94 810 46,300 6,300 9,300 2,600 3,300 
Western white Green 0.36 32,000 8,200 34 480 16,800 1,300 4,700 1,800 1,200 
12% 0.35 67,000 10,100 61 580 34,700 3,200 7,200 — 1,900 
Redwood 
Old-growth Green 0.38 52,000 8,100 51 530 29,000 2,900 5,500 1,800 1,800 
12% 0.40 69,000 9,200 48 480 42,400 4,800 6,500 1,700 2,100 
Young-growth Green 0.34 41,000 6,600 39 410 21,400 =‘ 1,900 6,100 2,100 1,600 
12% 0.35 54,000 7,600 36 380 36,000 3,600 7,600 1,700 1,900 
Spruce 
Black Green 0.38 42,000 9,500 51 610 19,600 1,700 5,100 700 1,500 
12% 0.42 74,000 11,100 72. 580 41,100 3,800 8,500 — 2,400 
Engelmann Green 0.33 32,000 7,100 35 410 15,000 1,400 4,400 1,700 1,150 
12% 0.35 64,000 8,900 44 460 30,900 2,800 8,300 2,400 1,750 
Red Green 0.37 41,000 9,200 48 460 18,800 1,800 5,200 1,500 1,600 
12% 0.40 74,000 11,400 58 640 38,200 3,800 8,900 2,400 2,200 
Sitka Green 0.37 39,000 8,500 43 610 18,400 1,900 5,200 1,700 1,600 
12% 0.40 70,000 10,800 65 640 38,700 4,000 7,900 2,600 2,300 
White Green 0.33 34,000 7,900 41 560 16,200 1,400 4,400 1,500 1,200 
12% 0.36 65,000 9,600 53 510 35,700 3,000 6,700 2,500 1,800 
Tamarack Green 0.49 50,000 8,500 50 710 24,000 2,700 5,900 1,800 1,700 
12% 0.53 80,000 11,300 49 580 49,400 5,500 8,800 2,800 2,600 


“Results of tests on clear specimens in the green and air-dried conditions, converted to metric units directly from Table 5—3b. Definition of properties: 
impact bending is height of drop that causes complete failure, using 0.71-kg (50-Ib) hammer; compression parallel to grain is also called maximum 
crushing strength; compression perpendicular to grain is fiber stress at proportional limit; shear is maximum shearing strength; tension is maximum tensile 
strength; and side hardness is hardness measured when load is perpendicular to grain. 

Specific gravity is based on weight when ovendry and volume when green or at 12% moisture content. 

“Modulus of elasticity measured from a simply supported, center-loaded beam, on a span depth ratio of 14/1. To correct for shear deflection, the modulus 
can be increased by 10%. 

“Values for side hardness of the true hickories are from Bendtsen and Ethington (1975). 

“Coast Douglas-fir is defined as Douglas-fir growing in Oregon and Washington State west of the Cascade Mountains summit. Interior West includes 
California and all counties in Oregon and Washington east of, but adjacent to, the Cascade summit; Interior North, the remainder of Oregon and 
Washington plus Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming; and Interior South, Utah, Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico. 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—3b. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (inch—pound)* 


Static bending 


Work Com- 
to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular — hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity® load bending tograin tograin grain tograin ness 
names content gravity? (Ibfin*) (x1l0°lbfin*) (in-lbfin“) (in) (Ibf in) (Ibfin) (Ibfin*) (bfin’) (bf) 
Hardwoods 
Alder, red Green 0.37 6,500 1.17 8.0 22 2,960 250 770 390 440 
12% 0.41 9,800 1.38 8.4 20 5,820 440 1,080 420 590 
Ash 
Black Green 0.45 6,000 1.04 12.1 33 2,300 350 860 490 520 
12% 0.49 12,600 1.60 14.9 35 5,970 760 1,570 700 850 
Blue Green 0.53 9,600 1.24 14.7 — 4,180 810 1,540 — — 
12% 0.58 13,800 1.40 14.4 —_ 6,980 ~—-1,420 2,030 — — 
Green Green 0.53 9,500 1.40 11.8 35: 4,200 730 1,260 590 870 
12% 0.56 14,100 1.66 13.4 32 7,080 1,310 1,910 700 ~—-1,200 
Oregon Green 0.50 7,600 1.13 12.2 39 3,510 530 1,190 590 790 
12% 0.55 12,700 1.36 14.4 33 6,040 = 1,250 1,790 720 ~=‘1,160 
White Green 0.55 9,500 1.44 15.7 38 3,990 670 1,350 590 960 
12% 0.60 15,000 1.74 16.6 43 7,410 1,160 1,910 940 = 1,320 
Aspen 
Bigtooth Green 0.36 5,400 1.12 5.7 = 2,500 210 730 = = 
12% 0.39 9,100 1.43 Tok — 5,300 450 1,080 — — 
Quaking Green 0.35 5,100 0.86 6.4 22 2,140 180 660 230 300 
12% 0.38 8,400 1.18 7.6 21 4,250 370 850 260 350 
Basswood, American Green 0.32 5,000 1.04 5.3 16 2,220 170 600 280 250 
12% 0.37 8,700 1.46 Ta 16 4,730 370 990 350 410 
Beech, American Green 0.56 8,600 1.38 11.9 43 3,550 540 1,290 720 850 
12% 0.64 14,900 1.72 15.1 41 7,300 ~=—-:1,010 2,010 1,010 1,300 
Birch 
Paper Green 0.48 6,400 1.17 16.2 49 2,360 270 840 380 560 
12% 0.55 12,300 1.59 16.0 34 5,690 600 1,210 — 910 
Sweet Green 0.60 9,400 1.65 15.7 48 3,740 470 1,240 430 970 
12% 0.65 16,900 2.17 18.0 47 8,540 1,080 2,240 950 ~—-:1,470 
Yellow Green 0.55 8,300 1.50 16.1 48 3,380 430 1,110 430 780 
12% 0.62 16,600 2.01 20.8 55 8,170 970 1,880 920 ~—-:1,260 
Butternut Green 0.36 5,400 0.97 8.2 24 2,420 220 760 430 390 
12% 0.38 8,100 1.18 8.2 24 5,110 460 1,170 440 490 
Cherry, black Green 0.47 8,000 1.31 12.8 33 3,540 360 1,130 570 660 
12% 0.50 12,300 1.49 11.4 29 7,110 690 1,700 560 950 
Chestnut, American Green 0.40 5,600 0.93 7.0 24 2,470 310 800 440 420 
12% 0.43 8,600 1.23 6.5 19 5,320 620 1,080 460 540 
Cottonwood 
Balsam, poplar Green 0.31 3,900 0.75 4.2 — 1,690 140 500 — — 
12% 0.34 6,800 1.10 5.0 — 4,020 300 790 — — 
Black Green 0.31 4,900 1.08 5.0 20 2,200 160 610 270 250 
12% 0.35 8,500 1.27 6.7 22 4,500 300 1,040 330 350 
Eastern Green 0.37 5,300 1.01 73 21 2,280 200 680 410 340 
12% 0.40 8,500 1.37 74 20 4,910 380 930 580 430 
Elm 
American Green 0.46 7,200 1.11 11.8 38 2,910 360 1,000 590 620 
12% 0.50 11,800 1.34 13.0 39 5,520 690 1,510 660 830 
Rock Green 0.57 9,500 1.19 19.8 54 3,780 610 1,270 = 940 
12% 0.63 14,800 1.54 19.2 56 7,050 1,230 1,920 — 1,320 
Slippery Green 0.48 8,000 1.23 15.4 47 3,320 420 1,110 640 660 
12% 0.53 13,000 1.49 16.9 45 6,360 820 1,630 530 860 
Hackberry Green 0.49 6,500 0.95 14.5 48 2,650 400 1,070 630 700 
12% 0.53 11,000 1.19 12.8 43 5,440 890 1,590 580 880 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5-3b. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (inch-pound)*—con. 


Static bending 


Work Com- 
to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity® load bending tograin tograin grain  tograin ness 
names content gravity? (Ibfin*) (x10°lbfin’) (in-lbfin*) (in.) (lbfin’) (lbfin*) (Ibfin*) (Ibfin*) (Ibf) 
Hickory, pecan 
Bitternut Green 0.60 10,300 1.40 20.0 66 4,570 800 1,240 = = 
12% 0.66 17,100 1.79 18.2 66 9,040 1,680 
Nutmeg Green 0.56 9,100 1.29 22.8 54 3,980 760 1,030 — —_ 
12% 0.60 16,600 1.70 25.1 = 6,910 1,570 
Pecan Green 0.60 9,800 1.37 14.6 53 3,990 780 1,480 680 1,310 
12% 0.66 13,700 1.73 13.8 44 7,850 1,720 2,080 — 1,820 
Water Green 0.61 10,700 1.56 18.8 56 4,660 880 1,440 = — 
12% 0.62 17,800 2.02 19.3 53 8,600 1,550 
Hickory, true” 
Mockernut Green 0.64 11,100 1.57 26.1 88 4,480 810 1,280 = 1,440 
12% 0.72 19,200 2.22 22.6 77 8,940 1,730 1,740 = 1,970 
Pignut Green 0.66 11,700 1.65 31.7 89 4,810 920 1,370 — 1,520 
12% 0.75 20,100 2.26 30.4 74 9,190 1,980 2,150 = 2,140 
Shagbark Green 0.64 11,000 1.57 23¢7. 74 4,580 840 1,520 — 1,460 
12% 0.72 20,200 2.16 25.8 67 9,210 1,760 2,430 = 1,880 
Shellbark Green 0.62 10,500 1.34 29.9 104 3,920 810 1,190 — 1,670 
12% 0.69 18,100 1.89 23.6 88 8,000 1,800 2,110 = 1,810 
Honeylocust Green 0.60 10,200 1.29 12.6 47 4,420 1,150 1,660 930 1,390 
12% — 14,700 1.63 13.3 47 7,500 1,840 2,250 900 1,580 
Locust, black Green 0.66 13,800 1.85 15.4 44 6,800 1,160 1,760 770 1,570 
12% 0.69 19,400 2.05 18.4 a7 10,180 1,830 2,480 640 1,700 
Magnolia 
Cucumbertree Green 0.44 7,400 1.56 10.0 30 3,140 330 990 440 520 
12% 0.48 12,300 1.82 12.2 3D: 6,310 570 1,340 660 700 
Southern Green 0.46 6,800 1.11 15.4 54 2,700 460 1,040 610 740 
12% 0.50 11,200 1.40 12.8 29 5,460 860 1,530 740 1,020 
Maple 
Bigleaf Green 0.44 7,400 1.10 8.7 23 3,240 450 1,110 600 620 
12% 0.48 10,700 1.45 7.8 28 5,950 750 1,730 540 850 
Black Green 0.52 7,900 1.33 12.8 48 3,270 600 1,130 720 840 
12% 0.57 13,300 1.62 12.5 40 6,680 1,020 1,820 670 1,180 
Red Green 0.49 7,700 1.39 11.4 32 3,280 400 1,150 — 700 
12% 0.54 13,400 1.64 12.5 32 6,540 1,000 1,850 — 950 
Silver Green 0.44 5,800 0.94 11.0 29 2,490 370 1,050 560 590 
12% 0.47 8,900 1.14 8.3 25 5,220 740 1,480 500 700 
Sugar Green 0.56 9,400 1.55 13.3 40 4,020 640 1,460 = 970 
12% 0.63 15,800 1.83 16.5 39 7,830 1,470 2,330 — 1,450 
Oak, red 
Black Green 0.56 8,200 1.18 12.2 40 3,470 710 1,220 —_ 1,060 
12% 0.61 13,900 1.64 13.7 41 6,520 930 1,910 = 1,210 
Cherrybark Green 0.61 10,800 1.79 14.7 54 4,620 760 1,320 800 1,240 
12% 0.68 18,100 2.28 18.3 49 8,740 1,250 2,000 840 1,480 
Laurel Green 0.56 7,900 1.39 11.2 39 3,170 570 1,180 770 1,000 
12% 0.63 12,600 1.69 11.8 39 6,980 1,060 1,830 790 1,210 
Northern red Green 0.56 8,300 1.35 13.2 44 3,440 610 1,210 750 1,000 
12% 0.63 14,300 1.82 14.5 43 6,760 1,010 1,780 800 1,290 
Pin Green 0.58 8,300 1.32 14.0 48 3,680 720 1,290 800 1,070 
12% 0.63 14,000 1.73 14.8 45 6,820 1,020 2,080 1,050 1,510 
Scarlet Green 0.60 10,400 1.48 15.0 54 4,090 830 1,410 700 1,200 
12% 0.67 17,400 1.91 20.5 53 8,330 1,120 1,890 870 1,400 
Southern red Green 0.52 6,900 1.14 8.0 29 3,030 550 930 480 860 
12% 0.59 10,900 1.49 9.4 26 6,090 870 1,390 510 1,060 


5-10 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—3b. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (inch-pound)*—con. 


Static bending 


Work Com- 
to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular  hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity® load bending tograin tograin grain tograin ness 
names content gravity? (lbfin’) (x10°lbfin’) (in-lbfin*) (in.) (bfin’) (Ibfin~) (lbfin*) (Ibfin~) (bf) 
Oak, red—con. 
Water Green 0.56 8,900 1.55 11.1 39 3,740 620 1,240 820 1,010 
12% 0.63 15,400 2.02 21.5 44 6,770 1,020 2,020 920 1,190 
Willow Green 0.56 7,400 1.29 8.8 35 3,000 610 1,180 760 980 
12% 0.69 14,500 1.90 14.6 42 7,040 1,130 1,650 — 1,460 
Oak, white 
Bur Green 0.58 7,200 0.88 10.7 44 3,290 680 1,350 800 1,110 
12% 0.64 10,300 1.03 9.8 29 6,060 1,200 1,820 680 1,370 
Chestnut Green 0.57 8,000 1.37 9.4 35 3,520 530 1,210 690 890 
12% 0.66 13,300 1.59 11.0 40 6,830 840 1,490 — 1,130 
Live Green 0.80 11,900 1.58 12.3 — 5,430 2,040 2,210 — — 
12% 0.88 18,400 1.98 18.9 — 8,900 2,840 2,660 — — 
Overcup Green 0.57 8,000 1.15 12.6 44 3,370 540 1,320 730 960 
12% 0.63 12,600 1.42 15.7 38 6,200 810 2,000 940 1,190 
Post Green 0.60 8,100 1.09 11.0 44 3,480 860 1,280 790 1,130 
12% 0.67 13,200 1.51 13.2 46 6,600 1,430 1,840 780 1,360 
Swamp chestnut Green 0.60 8,500 1.35 12.8 45 3,540 570 1,260 670 1,110 
12% 0.67 13,900 1.77 12.0 4] 7,270 1,110 1,990 690 1,240 
Swamp white Green 0.64 9,900 1.59 14.5 50 4,360 760 1,300 860 1,160 
12% 0.72 17,700 2.05 19.2 49 8,600 1,190 2,000 830 1,620 
White Green 0.60 8,300 1.25 11.6 42 3,560 670 1,250 770 1,060 
12% 0.68 15,200 1.78 14.8 37 7,440 1,070 2,000 800 1,360 
Sassafras Green 0.42 6,000 0.91 7A — 2,730 370 950 oo — 
12% 0.46 9,000 1.12 8.7 — 4,760 850 1,240 — — 
Sweetgum Green 0.46 7,100 1.20 10.1 36 3,040 370 990 540 600 
12% 0.52 12,500 1.64 11.9 32 6,320 620 1,600 760 850 
Sycamore, American Green 0.46 6,500 1.06 TS 26 2,920 360 1,000 630 610 
12% 0.49 10,000 1.42 8.5 26 5,380 700 1,470 720 770 
Tanoak Green 0.58 10,500 1.55 13.4 — 4,650 
12% — — — 
Tupelo 
Black Green 0.46 7,000 1.03 8.0 30 3,040 480 1,100 570 640 
12% 0.50 9,600 1.20 6.2 22 5,520 930 1,340 500 810 
Water Green 0.46 7,300 1.05 8.3 30 3,370 480 1,190 600 710 
12% 0.50 9,600 1.26 6.9 23 5,920 870 1,590 700 880 
Walnut, Black Green 0.51 9,500 1.42 14.6 37 4,300 490 1,220 570 900 
12% 0.55 14,600 1.68 10.7 34 7,580 1,010 1,370 690 1,010 
Willow, Black Green 0.36 4,800 0.79 11.0 — 2,040 180 680 — — 
12% 0.39 7,800 1.01 8.8 — 4,100 430 1,250 — — 
Yellow-poplar Green 0.40 6,000 1.22 15 26 2,660 270 790 510 440 
12% 0.42 10,100 1.58 8.8 24 5,540 500 1,190 540 540 
Softwoods 
Baldcypress Green 0.42 6,600 1.18 6.6 25 3,580 400 810 300 390 
12% 0.46 10,600 1.44 8.2 24 6,360 730 1,000 270 510 
Cedar 
Atlantic white Green 0.31 4,700 0.75 5.9 18 2,390 240 690 180 290 
12% 0.32 6,800 0.93 4.1 13 4,700 410 800 220 350 
Eastern redcedar Green 0.44 7,000 0.65 15.0 35 3,570 700 1,010 330 650 
12% 0.47 8,800 0.88 8.3 22 6,020 920 
Incense Green 0.35 6,200 0.84 6.4 17 3,150 370 830 280 390 
12% 0.37 8,000 1.04 5.4 17 5,200 590 880 270 470 
Northern White Green 0.29 4,200 0.64 a7 15 1,990 230 620 240 230 
12% 0.31 6,500 0.80 4.8 12 3,960 310 850 240 320 


5-11 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5-3b. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (inch-pound)*—con. 


Static bending 


Work Com- 
to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular  hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity® load bending tograin tograin grain tograin ness 
names content gravity? (lbfin’) (x10°lbfin’) (in-lbfin*)  (in.) (bf in’) (bf in *) (bfin)(Ibf in *) (bf) 
Cedar—con. 
Port-Orford Green 0.39 6,600 1.30 74 21 3,140 300 840 180 380 
12% 0.43 12,700 1.70 9.1 28 6,250 720 1,370 400 630 
Western redcedar Green 0.31 5,200 0.94 5.0 17 2,770 240 770 230 260 
12% 0.32 7,500 1.11 5.8 17 4,560 460 990 =. 220 350 
Yellow Green 0.42 6,400 1.14 9.2 27 3,050 350 840 330 440 
12% 0.44 11,100 1.42 10.4 29 6,310 620 1,130 360 580 
Douglas-fir® 
Coast Green 0.45 7,700 1.56 7.6 26 3,780 380 900 300 500 
12% 0.48 12,400 1.95 9.9 31 7,230 800 1,130 340 710 
Interior West Green 0.46 7,700 1.51 7.2 26 3,870 420 940 290 510 
12% 0.50 12,600 1.83 10.6 32 7,430 760 1,290 350 660 
Interior North Green 0.45 7,400 1.41 8.1 22 3,470 360 950 340 420 
12% 0.48 13,100 1.79 10.5 26 6,900 770 1,400 390 600 
Interior South Green 0.43 6,800 1.16 8.0 15 3,110 340 950 = 250 360 
12% 0.46 11,900 1.49 9.0 20 6,230 740 1,510 330 510 
Fir 
Balsam Green 0.33 5,500 1.25 4.7 16 2,630 190 660 180 290 
12% 0.35 9,200 1.45 5.1 20 5,280 400 940 180 380 
California red Green 0.36 5,800 1.17 6.4 21 2,760 330 770 380 360 
12% 0.38 10,500 1.50 8.9 24 5,460 610 1,040 390 500 
Grand Green 0.35 5,800 1.25 5.6 22 2,940 270 740 240 360 
12% 0.37 8,900 1.57 75 28 5,290 500 900 =240 490 
Noble Green 0.37 6,200 1.38 6.0 19 3,010 270 800 =. 230 290 
12% 0.39 10,700 1.72 8.8 23 6,100 520 1,050 220 410 
Pacific silver Green 0.40 6,400 1.42 6.0 21 3,140 220 750 240 310 
12% 0.43 11,000 1.76 9.3 24 6,410 450 1,220 — 430 
Subalpine Green 0.31 4,900 1.05 — — 2,300 190 700 — 260 
12% 0.32 8,600 1.29 — — 4,860 390 1,070 — 350 
White Green 0.37 5,900 1.16 5.6 22 2,900 280 760 300 340 
12% 0.39 9,800 1.50 Ted 20 5,800 530 1,100 300 480 
Hemlock 
Eastern Green 0.38 6,400 1.07 6.7 21 3,080 360 850 =. 230 400 
12% 0.40 8,900 1.20 6.8 21 5,410 650 1,060 — 500 
Mountain Green 0.42 6,300 1.04 11.0 32 2,880 370 930 330 470 
12% 0.45 11,500 1.33 10.4 32 6,440 860 1,540 — 680 
Western Green 0.42 6,600 1.31 6.9 22 3,360 280 860 290 410 
12% 0.45 11,300 1.63 8.3 23 7,200 550 1,290 340 540 
Larch, western Green 0.48 7,700 1.46 10.3 29 3,760 400 870 330 510 
12% 0.52 13,000 1.87 12.6 35 7,620 930 1,360 430 830 
Pine 
Eastern white Green 0.34 4,900 0.99 a2 17 2,440 220 680 250 290 
12% 0.35 8,600 1.24 6.8 18 4,800 440 900 310 380 
Jack Green 0.40 6,000 1.07 7.2 26 2,950 300 750 360 400 
12% 0.43 9,900 1.35 8.3 27 5,660 580 1,170 420 570 
Loblolly Green 0.47 7,300 1.40 8.2 30 3,510 390 860 260 450 
12% 0.51 12,800 1.79 10.4 30 7,130 790 1,390 470 690 
Lodgepole Green 0.38 5,500 1.08 5.6 20 2,610 250 680 220 330 
12% 0.41 9,400 1.34 6.8 20 5,370 610 880 =. 290 480 
Longleaf Green 0.54 8,500 1.59 8.9 35 4,320 480 1,040 330 590 
12% 0.59 14,500 1.98 11.8 34 8,470 960 1,510 470 870 
Pitch Green 0.47 6,800 1.20 9.2 — 2,950 360 860 — — 
12% 0.52 10,800 1.43 9.2 — 5,940 820 1,360 — — 


5-12 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—3b. Strength properties of some commercially important woods grown in the United States (inch—-pound)*—con. 


Static bending 
Work Com- 
to Com- pression Shear Tension 
Modulus Modulus maxi- pression perpen- parallel perpen- Side 
of of mum Impact parallel dicular to dicular hard- 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity® load bending tograin tograin grain’ tograin ness 
names content gravity? (Ibfin’) (x10°lbfin’) (in-Ibfin*)  (in.)~ (Ibf in’) (Ibfin*) (Ibfin~) (Ibfin~) (Ibf) 
Pine—con. 
Pond Green 0.51 7,400 1.28 7 oa 3,660 440 940 — — 
12% 0.56 11,600 1.75 8.6 — 7,540 910 1,380 — — 
Ponderosa Green 0.38 5,100 1.00 5.2 21 2,450 280 700 310 320 
12% 0.40 9,400 1.29 7.1 19 5,320 580 1,130 420 460 
Red Green 0.41 5,800 1.28 6.1 26 2,730 260 690 300 =. 340 
12% 0.46 11,000 1.63 99 26 6,070 600 1,210 460 560 
Sand Green 0.46 7,500 1.02 9.6 — 3,440 450 1,140 — — 
12% 0.48 11,600 1.41 9.6 — 6,920 836 
Shortleaf Green 0.47 7,400 1.39 8.2 30 3,530 350 910 320 = 440 
12% 0.51 13,100 1.75 11.0 33 7,270 820 1,390 470 690 
Slash Green 0.54 8,700 1.53 9.6 — 3,820 530 960 — — 
12% 0.59 16,300 1.98 13.2 — 8,140 1,020 1,680 — — 
Spruce Green 0.41 6,000 1.00 — — 2,840 280 900 — 450 
12% 0.44 10,400 1.23 - — 5,650 730 1,490 — 660 
Sugar Green 0.34 4,900 1.03 5.4 17 2,460 210 720 270 270 
12% 0.36 8,200 1.19 5:5 18 4,460 500 1,130 350 = 380 
Virginia Green 0.45 7,300 1.22 10.9 34 3,420 390 890 400 540 
12% 0.48 13,000 1.52 13.7 32 6,710 910 1,350 380 = 740 
Western white Green 0.35 4,700 1.19 5.0 19 2,430 190 680 260 260 
12% 0.38 9,700 1.46 8.8 23 5,040 470 1,040 — 420 
Redwood 
Old-growth Green 0.38 7,500 1.18 74 21 4,200 420 800 260 410 
12% 0.40 10,000 1.34 6.9 19 6,150 700 940 240 480 
Young-growth Green 0.34 5,900 0.96 a) 16 3,110 270 890 300 350 
12% 0.35 7,900 1.10 5.2 15 5,220 520 1,110 250 420 
Spruce 
Black Green 0.38 6,100 1.38 74 24 2,840 240 740 100 340 
12% 0.42 10,800 1.61 10.5 23 5,960 550 1,230 - 530 
Engelmann Green 0.33 4,700 1.03 5.1 16 2,180 200 640 240 260 
12% 0.35 9,300 1.30 6.4 18 4,480 410 1,200 350 = 390 
Red Green 0.37 6,000 1.33 6.9 18 2,720 260 750 220 340 
12% 0.40 10,800 1.66 8.4 25 5,540 550 1,290 350 = 530 
Sitka Green 0.37 5,700 1.23 6.3 24 2,670 280 760 250 350 
12% 0.40 10,200 1.57 9.4 25 5,610 580 1,150 370 = 510 
White Green 0.33 5,000 1.14 6.0 22 2,350 210 640 220 270 
12% 0.36 9,400 1.43 7.7 20 5,180 430 970 360 8410 
Tamarack Green 0.49 7,200 1.24 7.2 28 3,480 390 860 260 380 
12% 0.53 11,600 1.64 7.1 23 7,160 800 1,280 400 590 


“Results of tests on clear specimens in the green and air-dried conditions. Definition of properties: impact bending is height of drop that causes complete failure, 
using 0.71-kg (50-lb) hammer; compression parallel to grain is also called maximum crushing strength; compression perpendicular to grain is fiber stress at 
proportional limit; shear is maximum shearing strength; tension is maximum tensile strength; and side hardness is hardness measured when load is perpendicular 


to grain. 


Specific gravity is based on weight when ovendry and volume when green or at 12% moisture content. 
“Modulus of elasticity measured from a simply supported, center-loaded beam, on a span depth ratio of 14/1. To correct for shear deflection, the modulus can be 


increased by 10%. 


‘Values for side hardness of the true hickories are from Bendtsen and Ethington (1975). 
“Coast Douglas-fir is defined as Douglas-fir growing in Oregon and Washington State west of the Cascade Mountains summit. Interior West includes California 
and all counties in Oregon and Washington east of, but adjacent to, the Cascade summit; Interior North, the remainder of Oregon and Washington plus Idaho, 

Montana, and Wyoming; and Interior South, Utah, Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico. 


5-13 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—4a. Mechanical properties of some commercially important woods grown in Canada and imported 
into the United States (metric)* 


Static bending 


Compression Compression Shear 
Modulus of Modulus of parallel perpendicular parallel 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity to grain to grain to grain 
names content gravity (kPa) (MPa) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) 
Hardwoods 
Aspen 
Quaking Green 0.37 38,000 9,000 16,200 1,400 5,000 
12% 68,000 11,200 36,300 3,500 6,800 
Big-toothed Green 0.39 36,000 7,400 16,500 1,400 5,400 
12% 66,000 8,700 32,800 3,200 7,600 
Cottonwood 
Balsam, poplar Green 0.37 34,000 7,900 14,600 1,200 4,600 
12% 70,000 11,500 34,600 2,900 6,100 
Black Green 0.30 28,000 6,700 12,800 700 3,900 
12% 49,000 8,800 27,700 1,800 5,900 
Eastern Green 0.35 32,000 6,000 13,600 1,400 5,300 
12% 52,000 7,800 26,500 3,200 8,000 
Softwoods 
Cedar 
Northern white Green 0.30 27,000 3,600 13,000 1,400 4,600 
12% 42,000 4,300 24,800 2,700 6,900 
Western redcedar Green 0.31 36,000 7,200 19,200 1,900 4,800 
12% 54,000 8,200 29,600 3,400 5,600 
Yellow Green 0.42 46,000 9,200 22,300 2,400 6,100 
12% 80,000 11,000 45,800 4,800 9,200 
Douglas-fir Green 0.45 52,000 11,100 24,900 3,200 6,300 
12% 88,000 13,600 50,000 6,000 9,500 
Fir 
Subalpine Green 0.33 36,000 8,700 17,200 1,800 4,700 
12% 56,000 10,200 36,400 3,700 6,800 
Pacific silver Green 0.36 38,000 9,300 19,100 1,600 4,900 
12% 69,000 11,300 40,900 3,600 7,500 
Balsam Green 0.34 36,000 7,800 16,800 1,600 4,700 
12% 59,000 9,600 34,300 3,200 6,300 
Hemlock 
Eastern Green 0.40 47,000 8,800 23,600 2,800 6,300 
12% 67,000 9,700 41,200 4,300 8,700 
Western Green 0.41 48,000 10,200 24,700 2,600 5,200 
12% 81,000 12,300 46,700 4,600 6,500 
Larch, western Green 0.55 60,000 11,400 30,500 3,600 6,300 
12% 107,000 14,300 61,000 7,300 9,200 
Pine 
Eastern white Green 0.36 35,000 8,100 17,900 1,600 4,400 
12% 66,000 9,400 36,000 3,400 6,100 
Jack Green 0.42 43,000 8,100 20,300 2,300 5,600 
12% 78,000 10,200 40,500 5,700 8,200 
Lodgepole Green 0.40 39,000 8,800 19,700 1,900 5,000 
12% 76,000 10,900 43,200 3,600 8,500 
Ponderosa Green 0.44 39,000 7,800 19,600 2,400 5,000 
12% 73,000 9,500 42,300 5,200 7,000 
Red Green 0.39 34,000 7,400 16,300 1,900 4,900 
12% 70,000 9,500 37,900 5,200 7,500 
Western white Green 0.36 33,000 8,200 17,400 1,600 4,500 
12% 64,100 10,100 36,100 3,200 6,300 
Spruce 
Black Green 0.41 41,000 9,100 19,000 2,100 5,500 
12% 79,000 10,500 41,600 4,300 8,600 


5-14 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—4a. Mechanical properties of some commercially important woods grown in Canada and imported 


into the United States (metric)*—con. 


Static bending Compression Compression Shear 
Modulus of Modulus of parallel perpendicular parallel 
Common species Moisture = Specific rupture elasticity to grain to grain to grain 
names content gravity (kPa) (MPa) (kPa) (kPa) (kPa) 
Engelmann Green 0.38 39,000 8,600 19,400 1,900 4,800 
12% 70,000 10,700 42,400 3,700 7,600 

Red Green 0.38 41,000 9,100 19,400 1,900 5,600 
12% 71,000 11,000 38,500 3,800 9,200 

Sitka Green 0.35 37,000 9,400 17,600 2,000 4,300 
12% 70,000 11,200 37,800 4,100 6,800 

White Green 0.35 35,000 7,900 17,000 1,600 4,600 
12% 63,000 10,000 37,000 3,400 6,800 

Tamarack Green 0.48 47,000 8,600 21,600 2,800 6,300 
12% 76,000 9,400 44,900 6,200 9,000 


“Results of tests on clear, straight-grained specimens. Property values based on ASTM Standard D 2555-88. Information on additional 
properties can be obtained from Department of Forestry, Canada, Publication No. 1104. For each species, values in the first line are from tests 
of green material; those in the second line are adjusted from the green condition to 12% moisture content using dry to green clear wood 
property ratios as reported in ASTM D 2555-88. Specific gravity is based on weight when ovendry and volume when green. 


of clear wood parallel to grain. Table 5—7 lists average ten- 
sile strength values for a limited number of specimens of a 
few species. In the absence of sufficient tension test data, 
modulus of rupture values are sometimes substituted for 
tensile strength of small, clear, straight-grained pieces of 
wood. The modulus of rupture is considered to be a low or 
conservative estimate of tensile strength for clear specimens 
(this is not true for lumber). 


Less Common Properties 


Strength properties less commonly measured in clear wood 
include torsion, toughness, rolling shear, and fracture 
toughness. Other properties involving time under load 
include creep, creep rupture or duration of load, and fatigue 
strength. 


Torsion strength—Resistance to twisting about a longitu- 
dinal axis. For solid wood members, torsional shear strength 
may be taken as shear strength parallel to grain. Two-thirds 
of the value for torsional shear strength may be used as an 
estimate of the torsional shear stress at the proportional 
limit. 


Toughness—Energy required to cause rapid complete fail- 
ure in a centrally loaded bending specimen. Tables 5—8 and 
5—9 give average toughness values for samples of a few 
hardwood and softwood species. Average coefficients of 
variation for toughness as determined from approximately 
50 species are shown in Table 5-6. 


Creep and duration of load—Time-dependent deformation 
of wood under load. If the load is sufficiently high and the 
duration of load is long, failure (creep—rupture) will eventu- 
ally occur. The time required to reach rupture is commonly 
called duration of load. Duration of load is an important fac- 
tor in setting design values for wood. Creep and duration of 
load are described in later sections of this chapter. 


Fatigue—Resistance to failure under specific combina- 
tions of cyclic loading conditions: frequency and number 
of cycles, maximum stress, ratio of maximum to minimum 
stress, and other less-important factors. The main factors 
affecting fatigue in wood are discussed later in this chapter. 
The discussion also includes interpretation of fatigue data 
and information on fatigue as a function of the service 
environment. 


Rolling shear strength—Shear strength of wood where 
shearing force is in a longitudinal plane and is acting per- 
pendicular to the grain. Few test values of rolling shear in 
solid wood have been reported. In limited tests, rolling shear 
strength averaged 18% to 28% of parallel-to-grain shear 
values. Rolling shear strength is about the same in the longi- 
tudinal—radial and longitudinal—tangential planes. 


Nanoindentation hardness—This type of hardness mea- 
surement is conducted at the nanometer scale (the scale of 
the cell wall). Nanoindentation uses an extremely small 
indenter of a hard material and specified shape (usually a 
pyramid) to press into the surface with sufficient force that 
the wood deforms. The load and deformation history is used 
to develop mechanical property information. Nanoinden- 
tion hardness provides a method for describing a material’s 
response to various applied loading conditions at a scale that 
may explain differences in wood cell structures and help 
predict material performance after chemical treatments have 
been applied (Moon and others 2006). 


Fracture toughness—Ability of wood to withstand flaws 
that initiate failure. Measurement of fracture toughness 
helps identify the length of critical flaws that initiate failure 
in materials. 


To date, there is no standard test method for determining 
fracture toughness in wood. Three types of stress fields, and 


5-15 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—4b. Mechanical properties of some commercially important woods grown in Canada and imported 
into the United States (inch—pound)* 


Static bending 


Compression Compression Shear 
Modulus of Modulus of parallel to perpendicular parallel to 
Common species Moisture Specific rupture elasticity grain to grain grain 
names content gravity (Ibf in’) («10° Ibf in’) (Ibf in) (Ibf in’) (Ibf in’) 
Hardwoods 
Aspen 
Quaking Green 0.37 5,500 1.31 2,350 200 720 
12% 9,800 1.63 5,260 510 980 
Bigtooth Green 0.39 5,300 1.08 2,390 210 790 
12% 9,500 1.26 4,760 470 1,100 
Cottonwood 
Balsam, poplar Green 0.37 5,000 1.15 2,110 180 670 
12% 10,100 1.67 5,020 420 890 
Black Green 0.30 4,100 0.97 1,860 100 560 
12% 7,100 1.28 4,020 260 860 
Eastern Green 0.35 4,700 0.87 1,970 210 770 
12% 7,500 1.13 3,840 470 1,160 
Softwoods 
Cedar 
Northern white Green 0.30 3,900 0.52 1,890 200 660 
12% 6,100 0.63 3,590 390 1,000 
Western redcedar Green 0.31 5,300 1.05 2,780 280 700 
12% 7,800 1.19 4,290 500 810 
Yellow Green 0.42 6,600 1.34 3,240 350 880 
12% 11,600 1.59 6,640 690 1,340 
Douglas-fir Green 0.45 7,500 1.61 3,610 460 920 
12% 12,800 1.97 7,260 870 1,380 
Fir 
Balsam Green 0.34 5,300 1.13 2,440 240 680 
12% 8,500 1.40 4,980 460 910 
Pacific silver Green 0.36 5,500 1.35 2,770 230 710 
12% 10,000 1.64 5,930 520 1,190 
Subalpine Green 0.33 5,200 1.26 2,500 260 680 
12% 8,200 1.48 5,280 540 980 
Hemlock 
Eastern Green 0.40 6,800 1.27 3,430 400 910 
12% 9,700 1.41 5,970 630 1,260 
Western Green 0.41 7,000 1.48 3,580 370 750 
12% 11,800 1.79 6,770 660 940 
Larch, western Green 0.55 8,700 1.65 4,420 520 920 
12% 15,500 2.08 8,840 1,060 1,340 
Pine 
Eastern white Green 0.36 5,100 1.18 2,590 240 640 
12% 9,500 1.36 5,230 490 880 
Jack Green 0.42 6,300 1.17 2,950 340 820 
12% 11,300 1.48 5,870 830 1,190 
Lodgepole Green 0.40 5,600 1.27 2,860 280 720 
12% 11,000 1.58 6,260 530 1,240 
Ponderosa Green 0.44 5,700 1.13 2,840 350 720 
12% 10,600 1.38 6,130 760 1,020 
Red Green 0.39 5,000 1.07 2,370 280 710 
12% 10,100 1.38 5,500 720 1,090 
Western white Green 0.36 4,800 1.19 2,520 240 650 
12% 9,300 1.46 5,240 470 920 
Spruce 
Black Green 0.41 5,900 1.32 2,760 300 800 
12% 11,400 1.52 6,040 620 1,250 
Engelmann Green 0.38 5,700 1.25 2,810 270 700 
12% 10,100 1.55 6,150 540 1,100 
Red Green 0.38 5,900 1.32 2,810 270 810 
12% 10,300 1.60 5,590 550 1,330 


5-16 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—4b. Mechanical properties of some commercially important woods grown in Canada and imported 


into the United States (inch—pound)*—con. 


Static bending Compression Compression Shear 
Moisture Modulus of Modulus of parallel to perpendicular parallel to 
Common species Specific rupture elasticity grain to grain grain 
content : ae 6 eS i 2 2 2 
names gravity (bf in *) (x10° Ibf in) (bf in ~) (Ibf in“) (bf in ~) 
Sitka Green 0.35 5,400 1.37 2,560 290 630 
12% 10,100 1.63 5,480 590 980 
White Green 0.35 5,100 1.15 2,470 240 670 
12% 9,100 1.45 5,360 500 980 
Tamarack Green 0.48 6,800 1.24 3,130 410 920 
12% 11,000 1.36 6,510 900 1,300 


“Results of tests on clear, straight-grained specimens. Property values based on ASTM Standard D 2555-88. Information on additional properties 
can be obtained from Department of Forestry, Canada, Publication No. 1104. For each species, values in the first line are from tests of green 
material; those in the second line are adjusted from the green condition to 12% moisture content using dry to green clear wood property ratios as 
reported in ASTM D 2555-88. Specific gravity is based on weight when ovendry and volume when green. 


associated stress intensity factors, can be defined at a crack 
tip: opening mode (I), forward shear mode (II), and trans- 
verse shear mode (III) (Fig. 5—2a). A crack may lie in one of 
these three planes and may propagate in one of two direc- 
tions in each plane. This gives rise to six crack-propagation 
systems (RL, TL, LR, TR, LT, and RT) (Fig. 5—2b). Of these 
crack-propagation systems, four systems are of practical 
importance: RL, TL, TR, and RT. Each of these four systems 
allow for propagation of a crack along the lower strength 
path parallel to the grain. The RL and 7L orientations in 
wood (where R or T is perpendicular to the crack plane 

and L is the direction in which the crack propagates) will 
predominate as a result of the low strength and stiffness of 
wood perpendicular to the grain. It is therefore one of these 
two orientations that is most often tested. Values for mode I 
fracture toughness range from 220 to 550 kPa m!” (200 to 
500 Ibf in-2 in!/2) and for mode II range from 1,650 to 

2,400 kPa m!/2 (1,500 to 2,200 Ibf in? in!/2). Table 5-10 
summarizes selected mode I and mode II test results at 10% 
to 12% moisture content available in the literature. The 
limited information available on moisture content effects on 
fracture toughness suggests that fracture toughness is either 
insensitive to moisture content or increases as the material 
dries, reaching a maximum between 6% and 15% moisture 
content; fracture toughness then decreases with further 
drying. 


Vibration Properties 


The vibration properties of primary interest in structural 
materials are speed of sound and internal friction (damping 
capacity). 


Speed of Sound 


The speed of sound in a structural material is a function of 
the modulus of elasticity and density. In wood, the speed of 
sound also varies with grain direction because the transverse 
modulus of elasticity is much less than the longitudinal 
value (as little as 1/20); the speed of sound across the grain 
is about one-fifth to one-third of the longitudinal value. 


(a) Failure modes 


Cla ee Wy 
BBE 


(b) Orientations 


eee ge i 
EK. ©) Le 


TL TR RT 


Figure 5—2. Possible crack propagation systems for 
wood. 


For example, a piece of wood with a longitudinal modulus 
of elasticity of 12.4 GPa (1.8 x 106lbf in-2) and density of 
480 kg m3 (30 lb ft-3) would have a speed of sound in the 
longitudinal direction of about 3,800 m s~! (12,500 ft s~!). 
In the transverse direction, modulus of elasticity would be 
about 690 MPa (100 x 103 Ibf in-2) and the speed of sound 
approximately 890 m s! (2,900 ft s!). 


The speed of sound decreases with increasing temperature 
or moisture content in proportion to the influence of these 
variables on modulus of elasticity and density. The speed of 
sound decreases slightly with increasing frequency and am- 
plitude of vibration, although for most common applications 
this effect is too small to be significant. There is no recog- 
nized independent effect of species on the speed of sound. 
Variability in the speed of sound in wood is directly related 
to the variability of modulus of elasticity and density. 


Internal Friction 


When solid material is strained, some mechanical energy 
is dissipated as heat. Internal friction is the term used to 
denote the mechanism that causes this energy dissipation. 


5-17 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—5a. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 
(metric)* 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Modulus Workto pression Shear Side 
Common and of of maximum parallel _ parallel hard- 
botanical names Moisture Specific rupture — elasticity load to grain to grain ness Sample 
of species content gravity (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m°) (kPa) (kPa) (N) origin? 
Afrormosia (Pericopsis elata) Green 0.61 102,000 ~=12,200 135 51,600 11,500 7,100 AF 
12% 126,900 13,400 127 68,500 14,400 6,900 
Albarco (Cariniana spp.) Green 0.48 _ _ — _ — — AM 
12% 100,000 10,300 95 47,000 15,900 4,500 
Andiroba (Carapa guianensis) | Green 0.54 71,000 11,700 68 33,000 8,400 3,900 AM 
12% — 106,900 13,800 97 56,000 10,400 5,000 
Angelin (Andira inermis) Green 0.65 = = = = = = AF 
12% 124,100 17,200 oe 63,400 12,700 7,800 
Angelique (Dicorynia Green 0.6 78,600 12,700 83 38,500 9,200 4,900 AM 
guianensis) 
12% — 120,000 15,100 105 60,500 11,400 5,700 
Avodire (Turraeanthus Green 0.48 _ _ — _ — — AF 
africanus) 
12% 87,600 10,300 65 49,300 14,000 4,800 
Azobe (Lophira alata) Green 0.87 116,500 14,900 83 65,600 14,100 12,900 AF 
12% 168,900 17,000 — 86,900 20,400 14,900 
Balsa (Ochroma pyramidale) Green 0.16 _ — — _ — — AM 
12% 21,600 3,400 14 14,900 2,100 — 
Banak (Virola spp.) Green 0.42 38,600 ~=11,300 28 16,500 5,000 1,400 AM 
12% — 75,200 14,100 69 35,400 6,800 2,300 
Benge (Guibourtia arnoldiana) Green 0.65 — — — — — — AF 
12% 147,500 14,100 — 78,600 14,400 7,800 
Bubinga (Guibourtia spp.) Green 0.71 = = = = = = AF 
12% 155,800 17,100 — 72,400 21,400 12,000 
Bulletwood (Manilkara Green 0.85 119,300 18,600 94 59,900 13,100 9,900 AM 
bidentata) 12% 188,200 23,800 197 80,300 17,200 14,200 
Cativo (Prioria copaifera) Green 0.4 40,700 6,500 37 17,000 5,900 2,000 AM 
12% — 59,300 7,700 50 29,600 7,300 2,800 
Ceiba (Ceiba pentandra) Green 0.25 15,200 2,800 8 7,300 2,400 1,000 AM 
12% 29,600 3,700 19 16,400 3,800 1,100 
Courbaril (Hymenaea Green 0.71 88,900 12,700 101 40,000 12,200 8,800 AM 
courbaril) 12% — 133,800 14,900 121 65,600 17,000 10,500 
Cuangare (Dialyanthera spp.) Green 0.31 27,600 7,000 — 14,300 4,100 1,000 AM 
12% 50,300 10,500 — 32,800 5,700 1,700 
Cypress, Mexican (Cupressus Green 0.39 42,700 6,300 — 19,900 6,600 1,500 AF 
lustianica) 12% 71,000 7,000 — 37,100 10,900 2,000 
Degame (Calycophyllum Green 0.67 98,600 13,300 128 42,700 11,400 7,300 AM 
candidissimum) 12% 153,800 15,700 186 66,700 14,600 8,600 
Determa (Ocotea rubra) Green 0.52 53,800 10,100 33 25,900 5,900 2,300 AM 
12% 72,400 12,500 44 40,000 6,800 2,900 
Ekop (Tetraberlinia Green 0.6 — = = = = = AF 
tubmaniana) 12% 115,100 15,200 — 62,100 — — 
Goncalo alves (Astronium Green 0.84 83,400 13,400 46 45,400 12,100 8,500 AM 
graveolens) 12% — 114,500 15,400 72 71,200 13,500 9,600 
Greenheart (Chlorocardium Green 0.8 133,100 17,000 72 64,700 13,300 8,400 AM 
rodiei) 12% 171,700 22,400 175 86,300 18,100 10,500 
Hura (Hura crepitans) Green 0.38 43,400 7,200 41 19,200 5,700 2,000 AM 
12% 60,000 8,100 46 33,100 7,400 2,400 


5-18 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—5a. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 


(metric)*—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Modulus Workto pression Shear Side 
of of maximum parallel parallel hard- 
Common and botanical Moisture Specific rupture elasticity load to grain to grain ness Sample 
names of species content gravity (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m°) (kPa) (kPa) (N) origin? 

Llomba (Pycnanthus Green 0.40 37,900 7,900 — 20,000 5,800 2,100 AF 
angolensis) 12% 68,300 11,000 — 38,300 8,900 2,700 

Ipe (Tabebuia spp., Green 0.92 155,800 20,100 190 71,400 14,600 13,600 AM 
lapacho group) 12% 175,100 21,600 152 89,700 14,200 16,400 

Iroko (Chlorophora spp.) Green 0.54 70,300 8,900 72 33,900 9,000 4,800 AF 
12% 85,500 10,100 62 52,300 12,400 5,600 

Jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata) Green 0.67 68,300 10,200 = 35,800 9,100 5,700 AS 
12% — 111,700 13,000 — 61,200 14,700 8,500 

Jelutong (Dyera costulata) Green 0.36 38,600 8,000 39 21,000 5,200 1,500 AS 
15% 50,300 8,100 44 27,000 5,800 1,700 

Kaneelhart (Licaria spp.) Green 0.96 153,800 26,300 94 92,300 11,600 9,800 AM 
12% 206,200 28,000 121 120,000 13,600 12,900 

Kapur (Dryobalanops spp.) Green 0.64 88,300 11,000 108 42,900 8,100 4,400 AS 
12% 126,200 13,000 130 69,600 13,700 5,500 

Karri (Eucalyptus diversicolor) Green 0.82 77,200 ~=13,400 80 37,600 10,400 6,000 AS 
12% 139,000 17,900 175 74,500 16,700 9,100 

Kempas (Koompassia Green 0.71 100,000 16,600 84 54,700 10,100 6,600 AS 
malaccensis) 12% 122,000 18,500 106 65,600 12,300 7,600 

Keruing (Dipterocarpus spp.) Green 0.69 82,000 11,800 96 39,200 8,100 4,700 AS 
12% 137,200 14,300 162 72,400 14,300 5,600 

Lignumvitae (Guaiacum spp.) Green 1.05 = = = = = = AM 
12% 78,600 — 20,000 

Limba (Terminalia superba) Green 0.38 41,400 5,300 19,200 6,100 1,800 AF 
12% 60,700 7,000 61 32,600 9,700 2,200 

Macawood (Platymiscium spp.) Green 0.94 153,800 20,800 72,700 12,700 14,800 AM 
12% 190,300 22,100 — 111,000 17,500 14,000 

Mahogany, African Green 0.42 51,000 7,900 49 25,700 6,400 2,800 AF 
(Khaya spp.) 12% 73,800 9,700 57 44,500 10,300 3,700 

Mahogany, true Green 0.45 62,100 9,200 63 29,900 8,500 3,300 AM 
(Swietenia macrophylla) 12% — 79,300 10,300 52 46,700 8,500 3,600 

Manbarklak (Eschweilera spp.) Green 0.87 117,900 18,600 120 50,600 11,200 10,100 AM 
12% 182,700 21,600 230 77,300 14,300 15,500 

Manni (Symphonia globulifera) Green 0.58 77,200 = 13,500 77 35,600 7,900 4,200 AM 
12% 116,500 17,000 114 60,800 9,800 5,000 

Marishballi (Lincania spp.) Green 0.88 117,900 20,200 92 52,300 11,200 10,000 AM 
12% 191,000 23,000 98 92,300 12,100 15,900 

Merbau (Jntsia spp.) Green 0.64 88,900 13,900 88 46,700 10,800 6,100 AS 
15% — 115,800 15,400 102 58,200 12,500 6,700 

Mersawa (Anisoptera spp.) Green 0.52 55,200 12,200 = 27,300 5,100 3,900 AS 
12% 95,100 15,700 — 50,800 6,100 5,700 

Mora (Mora spp.) Green 0.78 86,900 16,100 93 44,100 9,700 6,400 AM 
12% 152,400 20,400 128 81,600 13,100 10,200 

Oak (Quercus spp.) Green 0.76 = = = = = = AM 
12% 158,600 20,800 114 — — 11,100 

Obeche (Triplochiton Green 0.3 35,200 5,000 43 17,700 4,600 1,900 AF 
scleroxylon) 12% 51,000 5,900 48 27,100 6,800 1,900 


5-19 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—5a. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 
(metric)*—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Work to __ pression Shear Side 
of Modulus of maximum parallel _ parallel hard- 
Common and botanical Moisture Specific rupture _ elasticity load to grain _ to grain ness Sample 
names of species content gravity (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m™°) (kPa) (kPa) (N) origin? 
Okoume (Aucoumea Green 0.33 — — — — — — AF 
klaineana) 12% 51,000 7,900 — 27,400 6,700 1,700 
Opepe (Nauclea diderrichii) Green 0.63 93,800 11,900 84 51,600 13,100 6,800 AF 
12% 120,000 13,400 99 71,700 17,100 7,300 
Ovangkol (Guibourtia ehie) Green 0.67 — — — — — — AF 
12% 116,500 17,700 — 57,200 — — 
Para-angelim (Hymenolobium Green 0.63 ~—100,700 13,400 88 51,400 11,000 7,700 AM 
excelsum) 12% 121,300 14,100 110 62,000 13,900 7,700 
Parana-pine (Araucaria Green 0.46 49,600 9,300 67 27,600 6,700 2,500 AM 
augustifolia) 12% — 93,100 11,100 84 52,800 11,900 3,500 
Pau marfim (Balfourodendron Green 0.73 99,300 11,400 — 41,900 a — AM 
riedelianum) 15% 130,300 — — 56,500 oa — 
Peroba de campos Green 0.62 — — — — — — AM 
(Paratecoma peroba) 12% 106,200 12,200 70 61,200 14,700 7,100 
Peroba rosa (Aspidosperma Green 0.66 75,200 8,900 72 38,200 13,000 7,000 AM 
spp., peroba group) 12% 83,400 10,500 63 54,600 17,200 7,700 
Pilon (Hyeronima spp.) Green 0.65 73,800 13,000 57 34,200 8,300 5,400 AM 
12% 125,500 15,700 83 66,300 11,900 7,600 
Pine, Caribbean (Pinus Green 0.68 77,200 13,000 74 33,800 8,100 4,400 AM 
caribaea) 12% — 115,100 15,400 119 58,900 14,400 5,500 
Pine, ocote (Pinus oocarpa) Green 0.55 55,200 12,000 48 25,400 7,200 2,600 AM 
12% — 102,700 15,500 75 53,000 11,900 4,000 
Pine, radiata (Pinus radiata) Green 0.42 42,100 8,100 — 19,200 5,200 2,100 AS 
12% — 80,700 10,200 — 41,900 11,000 3,300 
Piquia (Caryocar spp.) Green 0.72 85,500 12,500 58 43,400 11,300 7,700 AM 
12% 117,200 14,900 109 58,000 13,700 7,700 
Primavera (Tabebuia Green 0.4 49,600 6,800 50 24,200 7,100 3,100 AM 
donnell-smithii) 12% 65,500 7,200 44 38,600 9,600 2,900 
Purpleheart (Pe/togyne spp.) Green 0.67 94,000 13,800 102 48,400 11,300 8,100 AM 
12% 132,400 15,700 121 71,200 15,300 8,300 
Ramin (Gonystylus bancanus) Green 0.52 67,600 10,800 62 37,200 6,800 2,800 AS 
12% — 127,600 15,000 117 69,500 10,500 5,800 
Robe (Tabebuia spp., Green 0.52 74,500 10,000 81 33,900 8,600 4,000 AM 
roble group) 12% 95,100 11,000 86 50,600 10,000 4,300 
Rosewood, Brazilian Green 0.8 97,200 12,700 91 38,000 16,300 10,900 AM 
(Dalbergia nigra) 12% — 131,000 13,000 ae 66,200 14,500 = 12,100 
Rosewood, Indian (Dalbergia Green 0.75 63,400 8,200 80 31,200 9,700 6,900 AS 
latifolia) 12% 116,500 12,300 90 63,600 14,400 14,100 
Sande (Brosimum spp., Green 0.49 58,600 13,400 — 31,000 7,200 2,700 AM 
utile group) 12% 98,600 16,500 — 56,700 8,900 4,000 
Santa Maria (Calophyllum Green 0.52 72,400 11,000 88 31,400 8,700 4,000 AM 
brasiliense) 12% — 100,700 12,600 111 47,600 14,300 5,100 
Sapele (Entandrophragma Green 0.55 70,300 10,300 2 34,500 8,600 4,500 AF 
cylindricum) 12% — 105,500 12,500 108 56,300 15,600 6,700 
Sepetir (Pseudosindora Green 0.56 77,200 10,800 92 37,600 9,000 4,200 AS 
palustris) 12% 118,600 13,600 92 61,200 14,000 6,300 


5-20 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—5a. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 


(metric)*"—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Modulus Work to pression Shear Side 
of of maximum parallel parallel hard- 
Common and botanical Moisture Specific rupture _ elasticity load to grain to grain ness Sample 
names of species content gravity (kPa) (MPa) (kJ m°) (kPa) (kPa) (N) origin? 
Shorea (Shorea spp., Green 0.68 80,700 14,500 — 37,100 9,900 6,000 AS 
baulau group) 12% 129,600 18,000 — 70,200 15,100 7,900 
Shorea, lauan—meranti group 
Dark red meranti Green 0.46 64,800 10,300 59 32,500 7,700 3,100 AS 
12% 87,600 12,200 95 50,700 10,000 3,500 
Light red meranti Green 0.34 45,500 7,200 43 23,000 4,900 2,000 AS 
12% 65,500 8,500 59 40,800 6,700 2,000 
White meranti Green 0.55 67,600 9,000 57 37,900 9,100 4,400 AS 
15% 85,500 10,300 79 43,800 10,600 5,100 
Yellow meranti Green 0.46 55,200 9,000 56 26,800 7,100 3,300 AS 
12% 78,600 10,700 70 40,700 10,500 3,400 
Spanish-cedar (Cedrela spp.) Green 0.41 51,700 9,000 49 23,200 6,800 2,400 AM 
12% — 79,300 9,900 65 42,800 7,600 2,700 
Sucupira (Bowdichia spp.) Green 0.74 118,600 15,700 — 67,100 — — AM 
15% 133,800 —_ — 76,500 — — 
Sucupira (Diplotropis purpurea) Green 0.78 120,000 18,500 90 55,300 12,400 8,800 AM 
12% 142,000 19,800 102 83,700 13,500 9,500 
Teak (Tectona grandis) Green 0.55 80,000 9,400 92 41,100 8,900 4,100 AS 
12% 100,700 ~—-10,700 83 58,000 13,000 4,400 
Tornillo (Cedrelinga Green 0.45 57,900 — oan 28,300 8,100 3,900 AM 
cateniformis) 12% — = 
Wallaba (Eperua spp.) Green 0.78 98,600 16,100 — 55,400 _ 6,900 AM 
12% — 131,700 15,700 — 74,200 — 9,100 


“Results of tests on clear, straight-grained specimens. Property values were taken from world literature (not obtained from experiments conducted at the 
Forest Products Laboratory). Other species may be reported in the world literature, as well as additional data on many of these species. Some property 


values have been adjusted to 12% moisture content. 
°AF is Africa; AM, America; AS, Asia. 


The internal friction mechanism in wood is a complex func- 
tion of temperature and moisture content. In general, there 
is a value of moisture content at which internal friction is 
minimum. On either side of this minimum, internal friction 
increases as moisture content varies down to zero or up to 
the fiber saturation point. The moisture content at which 
minimum internal friction occurs varies with temperature. 
At room temperature (23 °C (73 °F)), the minimum occurs 
at about 6% moisture content; at —20 °C (—4 °F), it occurs at 
about 14% moisture content, and at 70 °C (158 °F), at about 
4%. At 90 °C (194 °F), the minimum is not well defined and 
occurs near zero moisture content. 


Similarly, there are temperatures at which internal friction 
is minimum, and the temperatures of minimum internal 
friction vary with moisture content. The temperatures of 
minimum internal friction increase as moisture content de- 
creases. For temperatures above 0 °C (32 °F) and moisture 
content greater than about 10%, internal friction increases 
strongly as temperature increases, with a strong positive 
interaction with moisture content. For very dry wood, there 
is a general tendency for internal friction to decrease as the 
temperature increases. 


The value of internal friction, expressed by logarithmic dec- 
rement, ranges from about 0.1 for hot, moist wood to less 
than 0.02 for hot, dry wood. Cool wood, regardless of mois- 
ture content, would have an intermediate value. 


Mechanical Properties of Clear 
Straight-Grained Wood 


The mechanical properties listed in Table 5—1 to Table 5—9 
are based on a variety of sampling methods. Generally, the 
most extensive sampling is represented in Tables 5—3 and 
5-4. Values in Table 5—3 are averages derived for a number 
of species grown in the United States. The tabulated value 
is an estimate of the average clear wood property of the spe- 
cies. Many values were obtained from test specimens taken 
at a height of 2.4 to 5 m (8 to 16 ft) above the stump of the 
tree. Values reported in Table 5-4 represent estimates of the 
average clear wood properties of species grown in Canada 
and commonly imported into the United States. 


Methods of data collection and analysis changed over the 
years during which the data in Tables 5—3 and 54 were 
collected. In addition, the character of some forests has 
changed with time. Because not all the species were 


5-21 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—5b. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 
(inch—pound)* 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Modulus Work to pression Shear Side 
of of maximum parallel parallel —_hard- 
Common and botanical Moisture Specific rupture elasticity load to grain tograin ness Sample 
names of species content gravity (Ibfin?) (x10°lbfin’) (in-lbf in) (Ibfin’) (Ibfin) (lbf) _ origin? 
Afrormosia (Pericopsis elata) Green 0.61 14,800 1.77 19.5 7,490 1,670 1,600 AF 
12% 18,400 1.94 18.4 9,940 2,090 1,560 
Albarco (Cariniana spp.) Green 0.48 = = = AM 
12% 14,500 1.5 13.8 6,820 2,310 1,020 
Andiroba (Carapa guianensis) Green 0.54 10,300 1.69 9.8 4,780 1,220 880 AM 
12% — 15,500 2 14 8,120 1,510  =1,130 
Angelin (Andira inermis) Green 0.65 — — _ AF 
12% 18,000 2.49 — 9,200 1,840 1,750 
Angelique (Dicorynia Green 0.6 11,400 1.84 12 5,590 1,340 ~=1,100 AM 
guianensis) 12% — 17,400 2.19 15.2 8,770 1,660 1,290 
Avodire (Turraeanthus Green 0.48 — — — AF 
africanus) 12% 12,700 1.49 9.4 7,150 2,030 1,080 
Azobe (Lophira alata) Green 0.87 16,900 2.16 12 9,520 2,040 2,890 AF 
12% 24,500 2.47 — 12,600 2,960 3,350 
Balsa (Ochroma pyramidale) Green 0.16 = = = AM 
12% 3,140 0.49 2.1 2,160 300 — 
Banak (Virola spp.) Green 0.42 5,600 1.64 4.1 2,390 720 320 AM 
12% — 10,900 2.04 10 5,140 980 510 
Benge (Guibourtia arnoldiana) Green 0.65 — — — AF 
12% 21,400 2.04 — 11,400 2,090 1,750 
Bubinga (Guibourtia spp.) Green 0.71 = — = AF 
12% 22,600 2.48 — 10,500 3,110 2,690 
Bulletwood (Manilkara Green 0.85 17,300 2.7 13.6 8,690 1,900 2,230 AM 
bidentata) 12% 27,300 3.45 28.5 11,640 2,500 3,190 
Cativo (Prioria copaifera) Green 0.4 5,900 0.94 5.4 2,460 860 440 AM 
12% — 8,600 1.11 7.2 4,290 1,060 630 
Ceiba (Ceiba pentandra) Green 0.25 2,200 0.41 1.2 1,060 350 220 AM 
12% 4,300 0.54 2.8 2,380 550 240 
Courbaril (Hymenaea Green 0.71 12,900 1.84 14.6 5,800 1,770 ~=1,970 AM 
courbaril) 12% — 19,400 2.16 17.6 9,510 2,470 2,350 
Cuangare (Dialyanthera spp.) Green 0.31 4,000 1.01 _ 2,080 590 230 AM 
12% 7,300 1.52 — 4,760 830 380 
Cypress, Mexican (Cupressus Green 0.39 6,200 0.92 = 2,880 950 340 AF 
lustianica) 12% 10,300 1.02 — 5,380 1,580 460 
Degame (Calycophyllum Green 0.67 14,300 1.93 18.6 6,200 1,660 1,630 AM 
candidissimum) 12% 22,300 2.27 27 9,670 2,120 1,940 
Determa (Ocotea rubra) Green 0.52 7,800 1.46 4.8 3,760 860 520 AM 
12% 10,500 1.82 6.4 5,800 980 660 
Ekop (Tetraberlinia Green 0.6 = = = AF 
tubmaniana) 12% 16,700 2.21 — 9,010 — — 
Goncalo alves (Astronium Green 0.84 12,100 1.94 6.7 6,580 1,760 1,910 AM 
graveolens) 12% — 16,600 2.23 10.4 10,320 1,960 2,160 
Greenheart (Chlorocardium rodiei) | Green 0.8 19,300 2.47 10.5 9,380 1,930 1,880 AM 
12% 24,900 3.25 25.3 12,510 2,620 2,350 
Hura (Hura crepitans) Green 0.38 6,300 1.04 5.9 2,790 830 440 AM 
12% 8,700 1.17 6.7 4,800 1,080 550 


5-22 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—5b. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 


(inch-pound)*—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Modulus Work to pression Shear Side 
of of maximum parallel parallel —_hard- 
Common and botanical Moisture Specific rupture elasticity load to grain tograin ness Sample 
names of species content gravity (Ibfin’) (x10°Ibfin*) (in-lbfin) (lbfin?) (Ibfin’) (lbf) — origin? 

Tlomba (Pycnanthus Green 0.4 5,500 1.14 — 2,900 840 470 AF 
angolensis) 12% 9,900 1.59 — 5,550 1,290 610 

Ipe (Tabebuia spp., Green 0.92 22,600 2.92 27.6 10,350 2,120 3,060 AM 
lapacho group) 12% 25,400 3.14 22 13,010 2,060 3,680 

Iroko (Chlorophora spp.) Green 0.54 10,200 1.29 10.5 4,910 1,310 1,080 AF 
12% 12,400 1.46 9 7,590 1,800 1,260 

Jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata) Green 0.67 9,900 1.48 — 5,190 1,320 1,290 AS 
12% — 16,200 1.88 — 8,870 2,130 = 1,910 

Jelutong (Dyera costulata) Green 0.36 5,600 1.16 5.6 3,050 760 330 AS 
15% 7,300 1.18 6.4 3,920 840 390 

Kaneelhart (Licaria spp.) Green 0.96 22,300 3.82 13.6 13,390 1,680 2,210 AM 
12% 29,900 4.06 17.5 17,400 1,970 2,900 

Kapur (Dryobalanops spp.) Green 0.64 12,800 1.6 15.7 6,220 1,170 980 AS 
12% 18,300 1.88 18.8 10,090 1,990 1,230 

Karri (Eucalyptus diversicolor) Green 0.82 11,200 1.94 11.6 5,450 1,510 1,360 AS 
12% 20,160 2.6 25.4 10,800 2,420 2,040 

Kempas (Koompassia Green 0.71 14,500 2.41 12.2 7,930 1,460 1,480 AS 
matlaccensis) 12% 17,700 2.69 15.3 9,520 1,790 1,710 

Keruing (Dipterocarpus spp.) Green 0.69 11,900 1.71 13.9 5,680 1,170 1,060 AS 
12% 19,900 2.07 23.5 10,500 2,070 = 1,270 

Lignumvitae (Guaiacum spp.) Green 1.05 = = = AM 
12% — — — — 11,400 — 4,500 

Limba (Terminalia superba) Green 0.38 6,000 0.77 dal 2,780 880 400 AF 
12% 8,800 1.01 8.9 4,730 1,410 490 

Macawood (Platymiscium spp.) Green 0.94 22,300 3.02 _ 10,540 1,840 3,320 AM 
12% 27,600 3.2 — 16,100 2,540 3,150 

Mahogany, African (Khaya spp.) Green 0.42 7,400 1.15 7.1 3,730 931 640 AF 
12% 10,700 1.4 8.3 6,460 1,500 830 

Mahogany, true Green 0.45 9,000 1.34 9.1 4,340 1,240 740 AM 
(Swietenia macrophylla) 12% — 11,500 1.5 75 6,780 1,230 800 

Manbarklak (Eschweilera spp.) Green 0.87 17,100 2.7 17.4 7,340 1,630 2,280 AM 
12% 26,500 3.14 33.3 11,210 2,070 3,480 

Manni (Symphonia globulifera) Green 0.58 11,200 1.96 11.2 5,160 1,140 940 AM 
12% 16,900 2.46 16.5 8,820 1,420 1,120 

Marishballi (Lincania spp.) Green 0.88 17,100 2.93 13.4 7,580 1,620 2,250 AM 
12% 27,700 3.34 14.2 13,390 1,750 3,570 

Merbau (/ntsia spp.) Green 0.64 12,900 2.02 12.8 6,770 1,560 1,380 AS 
15% — 16,800 2.23 14.8 8,440 1,810 1,500 

Mersawa (Anisoptera spp.) Green 0.52 8,000 1.77 — 3,960 740 880 AS 
12% 13,800 2.28 — 7,370 890 ~—- 1,290 

Mora (Mora spp.) Green 0.78 12,600 2.33 13.5 6,400 1,400 1,450 AM 
12% 22,100 2.96 18.5 11,840 1,900 =. 2,300 

Oak (Quercus spp.) Green 0.76 — — — AM 
12% 23,000 3.02 16.5 — — 2,500 

Obeche (Triplochiton Green 0.3 5,100 0.72 6.2 2,570 660 420 AF 
scleroxylon) 12% 7,400 0.86 6.9 3,930 990 430 


5-23 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5—5b. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 
(inch—pound)*—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Modulus Work to pression Shear Side 
of of maximum parallel parallel —_hard- 
Common and botanical Moisture Specific rupture elasticity load to grain tograin ness Sample 
names of species content gravity (Ibfin?) (x10°lbfin’) (in-lbfin +) (lbfin*) (Ibfin’) (Ibf) origin? 
Okoume (Aucoumea Green 0.33 = = = AF 
klaineana) 12% 7,400 1.14 — 3,970 970 380 
Opepe (Nauclea diderrichii) Green 0.63 13,600 1.73 12.2 7,480 1,900 1,520 AF 
12% 17,400 1.94 14.4 10,400 2,480 1,630 
Ovangkol (Guibourtia ehie) Green 0.67 — — = AF 
12% 16,900 2.56 — 8,300 — — 
Para-angelim (Hymenolobium Green 0.63 14,600 1.95 12.8 7,460 1,600 1,720 AM 
excelsum) 12% 17,600 2.05 15.9 8,990 2,010 ~=1,720 
Parana-pine (Araucaria Green 0.46 7,200 1.35 9.7 4,010 970 560 AM 
augustifolia) 12% — 13,500 1.61 12.2 7,660 1,730 780 
Pau marfim (Balfourodendron Green 0.73 14,400 1.66 — 6,070 — — AM 
riedelianum) 15% 18,900 — — 8,190 — — 
Peroba de campos Green 0.62 — — — AM 
(Paratecoma peroba) 12% 15,400 1.77 10.1 8,880 2,130 1,600 
Peroba rosa (Aspidosperma Green 0.66 10,900 1.29 10.5 5,540 1,880 1,580 AM 
spp., peroba group) 12% 12,100 1.53 9.2 7,920 2,490 1,730 
Pilon (Hyeronima spp.) Green 0.65 10,700 1.88 8.3 4,960 1,200 = 1,220 AM 
12% 18,200 2.27 12.1 9,620 1,720 1,700 
Pine, Caribbean (Pinus caribaea) Green 0.68 11,200 1.88 10.7 4,900 1,170 980 AM 
12% me 16,700 2.24 17.3 8,540 2,090 1,240 
Pine, ocote (Pinus oocarpa) Green 0.55 8,000 1.74 6.9 3,690 1,040 580 AM 
12% — 14,900 2.25 10.9 7,680 1,720 910 
Pine, radiata (Pinus radiata) Green 0.42 6,100 1.18 — 2,790 750 480 AS 
12% a 11,700 1.48 a 6,080 1,600 750 
Piquia (Carvocar spp.) Green 0.72 12,400 1.82 8.4 6,290 1,640 1,720 AM 
12% 17,000 2.16 15.8 8,410 1,990 1,720 
Primavera (Tabebuia Green 0.4 7,200 0.99 12 3,510 1,030 700 AM 
donnell—smithii) 12% 9,500 1.04 6.4 5,600 1,390 660 
Purpleheart (Peltogyne spp.) Green 0.67 13,700 2 14.8 7,020 1,640 1,810 AM 
12% 19,200 2.27 17.6 10,320 2,220 ~—1,860 
Ramin (Gonystylus bancanus) Green 0.52 9,800 1.57 9 5,390 990 640 AS 
12% — 18,500 2.17 17 10,080 1,520 1,300 
Robe (Tabebuia spp., Green 0.52 10,800 1.45 11.7 4,910 1,250 910 AM 
roble group) 12% 13,800 1.6 12.5 7,340 1,450 960 
Rosewood, Brazilian Green 0.8 14,100 1.84 13.2 5,510 2,360 2,440 AM 
(Dalbergia nigra) 12% — 19,000 1.88 — 9,600 2,110 2,720 
Rosewood, Indian (Dalbergia Green 0.75 9,200 1.19 11.6 4,530 1,400 ‘1,560 AS 
latifolia) 12% 16,900 1.78 13.1 9,220 2,090 3,170 
Sande (Brosimum spp., Green 0.49 8,500 1.94 — 4,490 1,040 600 AM 
utile group) 12% 14,300 2.39 — 8,220 1,290 900 
Santa Maria (Calophyllum Green 0.52 10,500 1.59 12.7 4,560 1,260 890 AM 
brasiliense) 12% aa 14,600 1.83 16.1 6,910 2,080 1,150 
Sapele (Entandrophragma Green 0.55 10,200 1.49 10.5 5,010 1,250 1,020 AF 
cylindricum) 12% — 15,300 1.82 15.7 8,160 2,260 =1,510 
Sepetir (Pseudosindora palustris) Green 0.56 11,200 1.57 13.3 5,460 1,310 950 AS 
12% 17,200 1.97 13.3 8,880 2,030 ~=1,410 


5-24 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5—5b. Mechanical properties of some woods imported into the United States other than Canadian imports 


(inch-pound)*—con. 


Static bending 


Com- 
Modulus Modulus Work to pression Shear Side 
of of maximum parallel parallel hard- 
Common and botanical Moisture Specific rupture elasticity load to grain tograin ness Sample 
names of species content gravity (lbfin*) (x10°lbfin~) (in-Ibfin*) (lbfin*) (Ibfin*) (Ibf) _ origin? 
Shorea (Shorea spp., Green 0.68 11,700 2.1 — 5,380 1,440 1,350 AS 
bullau group) 12% 18,800 2.61 — 10,180 2,190 1,780 
Shorea, lauan—meranti group 
Dark red meranti Green 0.46 9,400 1.5 8.6 4,720 1,110 700 AS 
12% 12,700 1.77 13.8 7,360 1,450 780 
Light red meranti Green 0.34 6,600 1.04 6.2 3,330 710 440 AS 
12% 9,500 1.23 8.6 5,920 970 460 
White meranti Green 0.55 9,800 1.3 8.3 5,490 1,320 1,000 AS 
15% 12,400 1.49 11.4 6,350 1,540 1,140 
Yellow meranti Green 0.46 8,000 1.3 8.1 3,880 1,030 750 AS 
12% 11,400 1.55 10.1 5,900 1,520 770 
Spanish-cedar (Cedrela spp.) Green 0.41 7,500 1.31 7.1 3,370 990 550 AM 
12% _ 11,500 1.44 9.4 6,210 1,100 600 
Sucupira (Bowdichia spp.) Green 0.74 17,200 2.27 — 9,730 — — AM 
15% 19,400 — — 11,100 — — 
Sucupira (Diplotropis purpurea) Green 0.78 17,400 2.68 13 8,020 1,800 1,980 AM 
12% 20,600 2.87 14.8 12,140 1,960 2,140 
Teak (Tectona grandis) Green 0.55 11,600 1.37 13.4 5,960 1,290 930 =6AS 
12% 14,600 1.55 12 8,410 1,890 1,000 
Tornillo (Cedrelinga Green 0.45 8,400 — — 4,100 1,170 870 AM 
cateniformis) 12% — _ — — 
Wallaba (Eperua spp.) Green 0.78 14,300 2.33 — 8,040 — 1,540 AM 
12% — 19,100 2.28 — 10,760 — 2,040 


“Results of tests on clear, straight-grained specimens. Property values were taken from world literature (not obtained from experiments conducted at the 
Forest Products Laboratory). Other species may be reported in the world literature, as well as additional data on many of these species. Some property 


values have been adjusted to 12% moisture content. 
DAF is Africa; AM, America; AS, Asia. 


reevaluated to reflect these changes, the appropriateness of 
the data should be reviewed when used for critical applica- 
tions such as stress grades of lumber. 


Values reported in Table 5—5 were collected from the world 
literature; thus, the appropriateness of these properties to 
represent a species is not known. The properties reported 
in Tables 5—1, 5—2, 5—5S, and 5—7 to 5—10 may not neces- 
sarily represent average species characteristics because of 
inadequate sampling; however, they do suggest the relative 
influence of species and other specimen parameters on the 
mechanical behavior recorded. 


Variability in properties can be important in both production 
and consumption of wood products. The fact that a piece 
may be stronger, harder, or stiffer than the average is often 
of less concern to the user than if the piece is weaker; how- 
ever, this may not be true if lightweight material is selected 
for a specific purpose or if harder or tougher material is 
difficult to work. Some indication of the spread of property 
values is therefore desirable. Average coefficients of varia- 
tion for many mechanical properties are presented in 

Table 5-6. 


The mechanical properties reported in the tables are sig- 
nificantly affected by specimen moisture content at time of 
test. Some tables include properties that were evaluated at 
different moisture levels; these moisture levels are reported. 
As indicated in the tables, many of the dry test data were 
adjusted to a common moisture content base of 12%. 


Specific gravity is reported in many tables because this 
property is used as an index of clear wood mechanical 
properties. The specific gravity values given in Tables 5—3 
and 5—4 represent the estimated average clear wood specific 
gravity of the species. In the other tables, specific gravity 
values represent only the specimens tested. The variability 
of specific gravity, represented by the coefficient of varia- 
tion derived from tests on 50 species, is included in Table 
5-6. 


Mechanical and physical properties as measured and re- 
ported often reflect not only the characteristics of the wood 
but also the influence of the shape and size of the test speci- 
men and the test mode. The test methods used to establish 
properties in Tables 5—3, 5—4, and 5—7 to 5—9 are based on 
standard procedures (ASTM D 143). Test methods for 


5-25 


Table 5-6. Average coefficients of variation for some 


mechanical properties of clear wood 


Coefficient 
of variation* 
Property (%) 
Static bending 
Modulus of rupture 16 
Modulus of elasticity 22 
Work to maximum load 34 
Impact bending 25 
Compression parallel to grain 18 
Compression perpendicular to grain 28 
Shear parallel to grain, maximum shearing strength 14 
Tension parallel to grain 25 
Side hardness 20 
Toughness 34 
Specific gravity 10 


“Values based on results of tests of green wood from approximately 


50 species. Values for wood adjusted to 12% moisture content may be 
assumed to be approximately of the same magnitude. 


Table 5-7. Average parallel-to-grain tensile 


strength of some wood species* 


Species 


Tensile strength 
(kPa (Ib in’’)) 


Hardwoods 

Beech, American 
Elm, cedar 
Maple, sugar 
Oak 

Overcup 

Pin 
Poplar, balsam 
Sweetgum 
Willow, black 
Yellow-poplar 


Softwoods 

Baldcypress 
Cedar 

Port-Orford 

Western redcedar 
Douglas-fir, interior north 
Fir 

California red 

Pacific silver 
Hemlock, western 
Larch, western 
Pine 

Eastern white 

Loblolly 

Ponderosa 

Virginia 
Redwood 

Virgin 

Young growth 
Spruce 

Engelmann 

Sitka 


86,200 
120,700 
108,200 


77,900 
112,400 
51,000 
93,800 
73,100 
109,600 


58,600 


78,600 
45,500 
107,600 


77,900 
95,100 
89,600 
111,700 


73,100 
80,000 
57,900 
94,500 


64,800 
62,700 


84,800 
59,300 


(12,500) 
(17,500) 
(15,700) 


(11,300) 
(16,300) 
(7,400) 

(13,600) 
(10,600) 
(15,900) 


(8,500) 


(11,400) 
(6,600) 
(15,600) 


(11,300) 
(13,800) 
(13,000) 
(16,200) 


(10,600) 
(11,600) 
(8,400) 

(13,700) 


(9,400) 
(9,100) 


(12,300) 
(8,600) 


“Results of tests on clear, straight-grained specimens tested green. 
For hardwood species, strength of specimens tested at 12% moisture 
content averages about 32% higher; for softwoods, about 13% 


higher. 


5-26 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


properties presented in other tables are referenced in the 
selected bibliography at the end of this chapter. 


Common names of species listed in the tables conform to 
standard nomenclature of the U.S. Forest Service. Other 
names may be used locally for a species. Also, one common 
name may be applied to groups of species for marketing. 


Natural Characteristics Affecting 
Mechanical Properties 


Clear straight-grained wood is used for determining funda- 
mental mechanical properties; however, because of natural 
growth characteristics of trees, wood products vary in spe- 
cific gravity, may contain cross grain, or may have knots 
and localized slope of grain. Natural defects such as pitch 
pockets may occur as a result of biological or climatic ele- 
ments influencing the living tree. These wood characteristics 
must be taken into account in assessing actual properties or 
estimating actual performance of wood products. 


Specific Gravity 


The substance of which wood is composed is actually heavi- 
er than water; its specific gravity is about 1.5 regardless of 
wood species. In spite of this, dry wood of most species 
floats in water, and it is thus evident that part of the volume 
of a piece of wood is occupied by cell cavities and pores. 
Variations in the size of these openings and in the thickness 
of the cell walls cause some species to have more wood 
substance per unit volume than other species and therefore 
higher specific gravity. Thus, specific gravity is an excellent 
index of the amount of wood substance contained in a piece 
of wood; it is a good index of mechanical properties as long 
as the wood is clear, straight grained, and free from defects. 
However, specific gravity values also reflect the presence of 
gums, resins, and extractives, which contribute little to me- 
chanical properties. 


Approximate relationships between various mechanical 
properties and specific gravity for clear straight-grained 
wood of hardwoods and softwoods are given in Table 5—11 
as power functions. Those relationships are based on aver- 
age values for the 43 softwood and 66 hardwood species 
presented in Table 5—3. The average data vary around the 
relationships, so that the relationships do not accurately 
predict individual average species values or an individual 
specimen value. In fact, mechanical properties within a spe- 
cies tend to be linearly, rather than curvilinearly, related to 
specific gravity; where data are available for individual spe- 
cies, linear analysis is suggested. 


Knots 


A knot is that portion of a branch that has become incorpo- 

rated in the bole of a tree. The influence of a knot on the me- 
chanical properties of a wood member is due to the interrup- 
tion of continuity and change in the direction of wood fibers 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


~ be 
> > . 
<a , J 
od 2 f 


Table 5-8. Average toughness values for a few hardwood 


species® 
Toughness” 
Moisture Specific Radial Tangential 
Species content gravity’ (J (in-Ibf)) (J (in-Ibf)) 
Birch, yellow 12% 0.65 8,100 (500) 10,100 (620) 


Hickory (mocker- Green 0.64 11,400 (700) 11,700 (720) 
nut, pignut, sand) 12% 0.71 10,100 (620) 10,700 (660) 


Maple, sugar 14% 0.64 6,000 (370) 5,900 (360) 
Oak, red 
Pin 12% 0.64 7,000 (430) 7,000 (430) 
Scarlet 11% 0.66 8,300 (510) 7,200 (440) 
Oak, white 
Overcup Green 0.56 11,900 (730) 11,100 (680) 
13% 0.62 5,500 (340) 5,000 (310) 
Sweetgum Green 0.48 5,500 (340) 5,400 (330) 
13% 0.51 4,200 (260) 4,200 (260) 
Willow, black Green 0.38 5,000 (310) 5,900 (360) 
11% 0.4 3,400 (210) 3,700 (230) 
Yellow-poplar Green 0.43 5,200 (320) 4,900 (300) 


12% 0.45 3,600 (220) 3,400 (210) 


“Results of tests on clear, straight-grained specimens. 

Properties based on specimen size of 2 cm square by 28 cm long; radial indicates 
load applied to radial face and tangential indicates load applied to tangential face of 
specimens. 

“Based on ovendry weight and volume at moisture content of test. 


associated with the knot. The influence of knots depends on 
their size, location, shape, and soundness; attendant local 
slope of grain; and type of stress to which the wood member 
is subjected. 


The shape (form) of a knot on a sawn surface depends upon 
the direction of the exposing cut. A nearly round knot is pro- 
duced when lumber is sawn from a log and a branch is sawn 
through at right angles to its length (as in a flatsawn board). 
An oval knot is produced if the saw cut is diagonal to the 
branch length (as in a bastard-sawn board) and a “spiked” 
knot when the cut is lengthwise to the branch (as in a quar- 
tersawn board). 


Knots are further classified as intergrown or encased 

(Fig. 5—3). As long as a limb remains alive, there is continu- 
ous growth at the junction of the limb and the bole of the 
tree, and the resulting knot is called intergrown. After the 
branch has died, additional growth on the trunk encloses 
the dead limb, resulting in an encased knot; bole fibers are 
not continuous with the fibers of the encased knot. Encased 
knots and knotholes tend to be accompanied by less cross- 
grain than are intergrown knots and are therefore generally 
less problematic with regard to most mechanical properties. 


Most mechanical properties are lower in sections containing 
knots than in clear straight-grained wood because (a) the 


clear wood is displaced by the knot, (b) the fibers around the 


Figure 5-3. Types of knots. A, encased knot; B, knot are distorted, resulting in cross grain, (c) the disconti- 


intergrown knot. 


nuity of wood fiber leads to stress concentrations, and (d) 
checking often occurs around the knots during drying. Hard- 
ness and strength in compression perpendicular to the grain 


5-27 


Table 5-9. Average toughness values for a few softwood 


species* 
Toughness” 
Moisture Specific Radial Tangential 
Species content gravity’ (J(in-lbf)) (J (in-lbf)) 
Cedar 
Western red 9% 0.33 1,500 (90) 2,100 (130) 
Yellow 10% 0.48 3,400 (210) 3,700 (230) 
Douglas-fir 
Coast Green 0.44 3,400 (210) 5,900 (360) 
12% 0.47 3,300 (200) 5,900 (360) 
Interior west Green 0.48 3,300 (200) 4,900 (300) 
13% 0.51 3,400 (210) 5,500 (340) 
Interior north Green 0.43 2,800 (170) 3,900 (240) 
14% 0.46 2,600 (160) 4,100 (250) 
Interior south Green 0.38 2,100 (130) 2,900 (180) 
14% 0.4 2,000 (120) 2,900 (180) 
Fir 
California red Green 0.36 2,100 (130) 2,900 (180) 
12% 0.39 2,000 (120) 2,800 (170) 
Noble Green 0.36 — — 3,900 (240) 
12% 039 — — 3,600 (220) 
Pacific silver Green 0.37 2,400 (150) 3,700 (230) 
13% 0.4 2,800 (170) 4,200 (260) 
White Green 0.36 2,300 (140) 3,600 (220) 
13% 0.38 2,100 (130) 3,300 (200) 
Hemlock 
Mountain Green 0.41 4,100 (250) 4,600 (280) 
14% 0.44 2,300 (140) 2,800 (170) 
Western Green 0.38 2,400 (150) 2,800 (170) 
12% 0.41 2,300 (140) 3,400 (210) 
Larch, western Green 0.51 4,400 (270) 6,500 (400) 
12% 0.55 3,400 (210) 5,500 (340) 
Pine 
Eastern white Green 0.33 2,000 (120) 2,600 (160) 
12% 0.34 1,800 (110) 2,000 (120) 
Jack Green 0.41 3,300 (200) 6,200 (380) 
12% 0.42 2,300 (140) 3,900 (240) 
Loblolly Green 0.48 5,000 (310) 6,200 (380) 
12% 0.51 2,600 (160) 4,200 (260) 
Lodgepole Green 0.38 2,600 (160) 3,400 (210) 
Ponderosa Green 0.38 3,100 (190) 4,400 (270) 
11% 0.43 2,400 (150) 3,100 (190) 
Red Green 0.4 3,400 (210) 5,700 (350) 
12% 0.43 2,600 (160) 4,700 (290) 
Shortleaf Green 0.47 4,700 (290) 6,500 (400) 
13% 0.5 2,400 (150) 3,700 (230) 
Slash Green 0.55 5,700 (350) 7,300 (450) 
12% 0.59 3,400 (210) 5,200 (320) 
Virginia Green 0.45 5,500 (340) 7,600 (470) 
12% 0.49 2,800 (170) 4,100 (250) 
Redwood 
Old-growth Green 0.39 1,800 (110) 3,300 (200) 
11% 0.39 1,500 (90) 2,300 (140) 
Young-growth Green 0.33 1,800 (110) 2,300 (140) 
12% 0.34 1,500 (90) 1,800 (110) 
Spruce, Green 0.34 2,400 (150) 3,100 (190) 
Engelmann 12% 0.35 1,800 (110) 2,900 (180) 


“Results of tests on clear, straight-grained specimens. 
Properties based on specimen size of 2 cm square by 28 cm long; radial 

indicates load applied to radial face and tangential indicates load applied to 
tangential face of specimens. 
“Based on ovendry weight and volume at moisture content of test. 


5-28 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5-10. Summary of selected fracture 
toughness results 


Fracture toughness 
(kPa m!” (bf in * in'”)) 


Mode I Mode II 
Species TL RL TL RL 
Douglas-fir 320 (290) 360 2,230 
(330) (2,030) 
Western hemlock 375 (340) 2,240 
(2,040) 
Pine 
Western white 250(225) 260 
(240) 
Scots 440 (400) 500 2,050 
(455) (1,860) 
Southern 375 (340) 2,070 
(1,880) 
Ponderosa 290 (265) 
Red spruce 420 (380) 2,190 1,665 


(1,990) (1,510) 
Northern red oak 410 (370) 
Sugar maple 480 (430) 
Yellow-poplar 517 (470) 


are exceptions, where knots may be objectionable only in 
that they cause nonuniform wear or nonuniform stress distri- 
butions at contact surfaces. 


Knots have a much greater effect on strength in axial tension 
than in axial short-column compression, and the effects on 
bending are somewhat less than those in axial tension. For 
this reason, in a simply supported beam, a knot on the lower 
side (subjected to tensile stresses) has a greater effect on the 
load the beam will support than does a knot on the upper 
side (subjected to compressive stresses). 


In long columns, knots are important because they affect 
stiffness. In short or intermediate columns, the reduction in 
strength caused by knots is approximately proportional to 
their size; however, large knots have a somewhat greater 
relative effect than do small knots. 


Knots in round timbers, such as poles and piles, have less 
effect on strength than do knots in sawn timbers. Although 
the grain is irregular around knots in both forms of timber, 
the angle of the grain to the surface is smaller in naturally 
round timber than in sawn timber. Furthermore, in round 
timbers there is no discontinuity in wood fibers, which re- 
sults from sawing through both local and general slope of 
grain. 


The effects of knots in structural lumber are discussed in 
Chapter 7. 
Slope of Grain 


In some wood product applications, the directions of im- 
portant stresses may not coincide with the natural axes of 
fiber orientation in the wood. This may occur by choice in 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5-11a. Functions relating mechanical properties to specific gravity of clear, 


straight-grained wood (metric) 


Specific gravity—strength relationship 


Wood at 12% 


Green wood moisture content 

Property* Softwoods Hardwoods Softwoods Hardwoods 
Static bending 

MOR (kPa) 109,600 G'"' —-118,700 G''® 170,700 G'_171,300 G3 

MOE (MPa) 16,100 G°" ~—- 13,900 G°”—s- 20,500 G°**_—- 16,500 G°” 

WML (kJ m™°) 147 Gi?! 229 G'?! 179 Gi 219G'™* 
Impact bending (N) 353 G'* 422 G'® 346 Gi? 423 G'® 
Compression parallel (kPa) 49,700 G°** =~ 49,000 G'"!' —-93,700 G°*?_——- 76,000 G°*” 
Compression perpendicular (kPa) 8,800 G'™ 18,500G?*85 16,500 G'*’_—- 21,600 G2” 
Shear parallel (kPa) 11,000G°? ~—-17,800G'**_— 16,600 G°* 21,900 G3 
Tension perpendicular (kPa) 3,800G°"8 —-10,500G'*’_—s- 6,000 G'""' 10,100 G'? 
Side hardness (N) 6,230 Gi"! 16,550G"*' 8,590 G'*? 15,300 G2” 


“Compression parallel to grain is maximum crushing strength; compression perpendicular to grain is fiber stress 
at proportional limit. MOR is modulus of rupture; MOE, modulus of elasticity; and WML, work to maximum 
load. For green wood, use specific gravity based on ovendry weight and green volume; for dry wood, use 
specific gravity based on ovendry weight and volume at 12% moisture content. Calculated using all data from 


Table 5-3. 


Table 5—11b. Functions relating mechanical properties to specific gravity of 
clear, straight-grained wood (inch—pound) 


Specific gravity—strength relationship 


Wood at 12% 


Green wood moisture content 

Property* Softwoods Hardwoods Softwoods Hardwoods 
Static bending 

MOR (Ib in) 15,890 G'"' 17,210 G'''® 24,760 G'*! 24,850 Gi? 

MOE (x10° Ib in”) 2.33 G°” 2.02G°" 2.97G°" 239 G°’ 

WML (in-lbf in) 21.33 G'?! 33.2G"! 259G'™% 31.8G'™ 
Impact bending (Ibf) 79.28 Gis 948G'" 7.746% 951G'® 
Compression parallel (Ib in’) 7,210G°" 7,110 G'!! 13,590 G°*” 11,030 Go” 
Compression perpendicular (Ib in*) 1,270G'S 2,680G°*8 2,390 G'*”_ 3,130 G?® 
Shear parallel (Ib in’) 1590G°" 2,580G'** 2,410G°* 3,170G'B 
Tension perpendicular (Ib in’) 550G° = 1,520G'77, 870 G'""'_—-1,460 G'? 
Side hardness (Ibf) 1,400G'"'! —3,720G"*!_—«1,930 G'? 3,440 G?® 


“Compression parallel to grain is maximum crushing strength; compression perpendicular to grain is fiber 
stress at proportional limit. MOR is modulus of rupture; MOE, modulus of elasticity; and WML, work to 
maximum load. For green wood, use specific gravity based on ovendry weight and green volume; for dry 
wood, use specific gravity based on ovendry weight and volume at 12% moisture content. Calculated 


using all data from Table 5-3. 


design, from the way the wood was removed from the log, 
or because of grain irregularities that occurred while the tree 
was growing. 


Elastic properties in directions other than along the natural 
axes can be obtained from elastic theory. Strength properties 
in directions ranging from parallel to perpendicular to the 
fibers can be approximated using a Hankinson-type formula 
(Bodig and Jayne 1982): 


PO 
Psin" @+ Ocos"@ 


(5-2) 


where AN is strength at angle 8 from fiber direction, 0 
strength perpendicular to grain, P strength parallel to grain, 
and n an empirically determined constant. 


This formula has been used for modulus of elasticity as well 
as strength properties. Values of n and associated ratios of 
Q/P tabulated from available literature are as follows: 


Property n O/P 

Tensile strength 1.52 0.04—0.07 
Compression strength 2-2.5 0.03—0.40 
Bending strength 1.5—2 0.04—0.10 
Modulus of elasticity 2 0.04—0.12 
Toughness 1.5—2 0.06—0.10 


The Hankinson-type formula can be graphically depicted as 
a function of Q/P and n. Figure 5—4 shows the strength in 
any direction expressed as a fraction of the strength parallel 


5-29 


Fraction of property parallel to the 
fiber direction N/P 


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Angle to fiber direction (deg) 


Figure 5—4. Effect of grain angle on mechanical proper- 
ty of clear wood according to Hankinson-type formula. 
QIP is ratio of mechanical property across the grain (Q) 
to that parallel to the grain (P); n is an empirically de- 
termined constant. 


“Growth ring 
A boundary 


Figure 5-5. Relationship of fiber orientation (O—-O) 

to axes, as shown by schematic of wood specimens 
containing straight grain and cross grain. Specimens 
A through D have radial and tangential surfaces; E 
through H do not. Specimens A and E contain no cross 
grain; B, D, F, and H have spiral grain; C, D, G, and H 
have diagonal grain. 


5-30 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


to fiber direction, plotted against angle to the fiber direction 
0. The plot is for a range of values of Q/P and n. 


The term slope of grain relates the fiber direction to the 
edges of a piece. Slope of grain is usually expressed by the 
ratio between 25 mm (1 in.) of the grain from the edge or 
long axis of the piece and the distance in millimeters (inch- 
es) within which this deviation occurs (tan 9). The effect of 
grain slope on some properties of wood, as determined 
from tests, is shown in Table 5—12. The values for modulus 
of rupture fall very close to the curve in Figure 5-4 for 
QO/P =0.1 and n = 1.5. Similarly, the impact bending values 
fall close to the curve for O/P = 0.05 and n =1.5, and the 
compression values for the curve for O/P = 0.1, n = 2.5. 


The term cross grain indicates the condition measured by 
slope of grain. Two important forms of cross grain are spiral 
and diagonal (Fig. 5—5). Other types are wavy, dipped, inter- 
locked, and curly. 


Spiral grain is caused by winding or spiral growth of wood 
fibers about the bole of the tree instead of vertical growth. 
In sawn products, spiral grain can be defined as fibers lying 
in the tangential plane of the growth rings, rather than paral- 
lel to the longitudinal axis of the product (see Fig. 5—5 for a 
simple case). Spiral grain in sawn products often goes unde- 
tected by ordinary visual inspection. The best test for spiral 
grain is to split a sample section from the piece in the radial 
direction. A visual method of determining the presence 

of spiral grain is to note the alignment of pores, rays, and 
resin ducts on a flatsawn face. Drying checks on a flatsawn 
surface follow the fibers and indicate the slope of the fiber. 
Relative change in electrical capacitance is an effective 
technique for measuring slope of grain. 


Diagonal grain is cross grain caused by growth rings that are 
not parallel to one or both surfaces of the sawn piece. Di- 
agonal grain is produced by sawing a log with pronounced 
taper parallel to the axis (pith) of the tree. Diagonal grain 
also occurs in lumber sawn from crooked logs or logs with 
butt swell. 


Cross grain can be quite localized as a result of the dis- 
turbance of a growth pattern by a branch. This condition, 
termed local slope of grain, may be present even though the 
branch (knot) may have been removed by sawing. The de- 
gree of local cross grain may often be difficult to determine. 
Any form of cross grain can have a deleterious effect on me- 
chanical properties or machining characteristics. 


Spiral and diagonal grain can combine to produce a more 
complex cross grain. To determine net cross grain, regard- 
less of origin, fiber slopes on the contiguous surface of a 
piece must be measured and combined. The combined slope 
of grain is determined by taking the square root of the sum 
of the squares of the two slopes. For example, assume 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5-12. Strength of wood members with 
various grain slopes compared with strength 
of a straight-grained member* 


Modulus Compression 

Maximum slope of Impact parallel to 
of grain in rupture bending grain 
member (%) (%) (%) 
Straight-grained 100 100 100 

1 in 25 96 95 100 

1 in 20 93 90 100 

1 in 15 89 81 100 

1 in 10 81 62 99 
lin5 55 36 93 


“Impact bending is height of drop causing complete failure 
(22.7-kg (50-lb) hammer); compression parallel to grain is 
maximum crushing strength. 


90° (R) 


0° (T) 


Figure 5-6. Direction of load in relation to direction of 
annual growth rings: 90° or perpendicular (R), 45°, 0° or 
parallel (7). 


that the spiral grain slope on the flat-grained surface of 
Figure 5—5D is | in 12 and the diagonal-grain slope is 1 in 
18. The combined slope is 


PP BEART 
y(1/18)° + (1/12)° = 1/10 
or a slope of | in 10. 


A regular reversal of right and left spiraling of grain in a tree 
stem produces the condition known as interlocked grain. 
Interlocked grain occurs in some hardwood species and 
markedly increases resistance to splitting in the radial plane. 
Interlocked grain decreases both the static bending strength 
and stiffness of clear wood specimens. The data from tests 
of domestic hardwoods shown in Table 5-3 do not include 
pieces that exhibited interlocked grain. Some mechanical 
property values in Table 5—S are based on specimens with 
interlocked grain because that is a characteristic of some 
species. The presence of interlocked grain alters the rela- 
tionship between bending strength and compressive strength 
of lumber cut from tropical hardwoods. 


Annual Ring Orientation 


Stresses perpendicular to the fiber (grain) direction may be 
at any angle from 0° (T direction) to 90° (R direction) to 
the growth rings (Fig. 5—6). Perpendicular-to-grain proper- 
ties depend somewhat upon orientation of annual rings with 
respect to the direction of stress. The compression perpen- 
dicular-to-grain values in Table 5—3 were derived from tests 
in which the load was applied parallel to the growth rings (J 
direction); shear parallel-to-grain and tension perpendicular- 
to-grain values are averages of equal numbers of specimens 
with 0° and 90° growth ring orientations. In some species, 
there is no difference in 0° and 90° orientation properties. 
Other species exhibit slightly higher shear parallel or ten- 
sion perpendicular-to-grain properties for the 0° orientation 
than for the 90° orientation; the converse is true for about an 
equal number of species. 


The effects of intermediate annual ring orientations have 
been studied in a limited way. Modulus of elasticity, com- 
pressive perpendicular-to-grain stress at the proportional 
limit, and tensile strength perpendicular to the grain tend to 
be about the same at 45° and 0°, but for some species these 
values are 40% to 60% lower at the 45° orientation. For 
those species with lower properties at 45° ring orientation, 
properties tend to be about equal at 0° and 90° orientations. 
For species with about equal properties at 0° and 45° orien- 
tations, properties tend to be higher at the 90° orientation. 


Reaction Wood 


Abnormal woody tissue is frequently associated with lean- 
ing boles and crooked limbs of both conifers and hard- 
woods. Such wood is generally believed to be formed as 

a natural response of the tree to return its limbs or bole to 

a more normal position, hence the term reaction wood. In 
softwoods, the abnormal tissue is called compression wood; 
it is common to all softwood species and is found on the 
lower side of the limb or inclined bole. In hardwoods, the 
abnormal tissue is known as tension wood; it is located on 
the upper side of the inclined member, although in some 
instances it is distributed irregularly around the cross sec- 
tion. Reaction wood is more prevalent in some species than 
in others. 


Many of the anatomical, chemical, physical, and mechanical 
properties of reaction wood differ distinctly from those of 
normal wood. Perhaps most evident is the increase in densi- 
ty compared with that of normal wood. The specific gravity 
of compression wood is commonly 30% to 40% greater than 
that of normal wood; the specific gravity of tension wood 
commonly ranges between 5% and 10% greater than that of 
normal wood, but it may be as much as 30% greater. 


Compression wood is usually somewhat darker than normal 
wood because of the greater proportion of latewood, and it 
frequently has a relatively lifeless appearance, especially in 
woods in which the transition from earlywood to latewood 
is abrupt. Because compression wood is more opaque than 


5-31 


3 


Word 
ips erm 
me eS 


2 be 
hay 


_ 


Figure 5—7. Projecting tension wood fibers on 
sawn surface of mahogany board. 


normal wood, intermediate stages of compression wood can 
be detected by transmitting light through thin cross sections; 
however, borderline forms of compression wood that merge 
with normal wood can commonly be detected only by mi- 
croscopic examination. 


Tension wood is more difficult to detect than is compression 
wood. However, eccentric growth as seen on the transverse 
section suggests its presence. Also, because it is difficult to 
cleanly cut the tough tension wood fibers, the surfaces of 
sawn boards are “woolly,” especially when the boards are 
sawn in the green condition (Fig. 5—7). In some species, ten- 
sion wood may be evident on a smooth surface as areas of 
contrasting colors. Examples of this are the silvery appear- 
ance of tension wood in sugar maple and the darker color 

of tension wood in mahogany. 


Reaction wood, particularly compression wood in the green 
condition, may be stronger than normal wood. However, 
compared with normal wood with similar specific gravity, 
reaction wood is definitely weaker. Possible exceptions to 
this are compression parallel-to-grain properties of compres- 
sion wood and impact bending properties of tension wood. 


Because of the abnormal properties of reaction wood, it 
may be desirable to eliminate this wood from raw material. 
In logs, compression wood is characterized by eccentric 
growth about the pith and the large proportion of latewood 
at the point of greatest eccentricity (Fig. S—8A). Fortunately, 
pronounced compression wood in lumber can generally be 
detected by ordinary visual examination. 


5-32 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 5-8. Effects of compression wood. A, eccentric 
growth about pith in cross section containing compres- 
sion wood—dark area in lower third of cross section is 
compression wood; B, axial tension break caused by ex- 
cessive longitudinal shrinkage of compression wood; 

C, warp caused by excessive longitudinal shrinkage. 


Compression and tension wood undergo extensive longitu- 
dinal shrinkage when subjected to moisture loss below the 
fiber saturation point. Longitudinal shrinkage in compres- 
sion wood may be up to 10 times that in normal wood, and 
in tension wood, perhaps up to 5 times that in normal wood. 
When reaction wood and normal wood are present in the 
same board, unequal longitudinal shrinkage causes internal 
stresses that result in warping. In extreme cases, unequal 
longitudinal shrinkage results in axial tension failure over a 
portion of the cross section of the lumber (Fig. 5—8B). Warp 
sometimes occurs in rough lumber but more often in planed, 
ripped, or resawn lumber (Fig. 5—8C). 


Juvenile Wood 


Juvenile wood is the wood produced near the pith of the 
tree; for softwoods, it is usually defined as the material 5 to 
20 rings from the pith depending on species. Juvenile wood 
has considerably different physical and anatomical proper- 
ties than that of mature wood (Fig. 5—9). In clear wood, the 
properties that have been found to influence mechanical 
behavior include fibril angle, cell length, and specific grav- 
ity, the latter a composite of percentage of latewood, cell 
wall thickness, and lumen diameter. Juvenile wood has a 
high fibril angle (angle between longitudinal axis of wood 
cell and cellulose fibrils), which causes longitudinal shrink- 
age that may be more than 10 times that of mature wood. 
Compression wood and spiral grain are also more prevalent 
in juvenile wood than in mature wood and contribute to 
longitudinal shrinkage. In structural lumber, the ratio of 
modulus of rupture, ultimate tensile stress, and modulus 

of elasticity for juvenile to mature wood ranges from 0.5 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


to 0.9, 0.5 to 0.95, and 0.45 to 0.75, respectively. Changes 
in shear strength resulting from increases in juvenile wood 
content can be adequately predicted by monitoring changes 
in density alone for all annual ring orientations. The same is 
true for perpendicular-to-grain compressive strength when 
the load is applied in the tangential direction. Compressive 
strength perpendicular-to-grain for loads applied in the ra- 
dial direction, however, is more sensitive to changes in ju- 
venile wood content and may be up to eight times less than 
that suggested by changes in density alone (Kretschmann 
2008). The juvenile wood to mature wood ratio is lower for 
higher grades of lumber than for lower grades, which indi- 
cates that juvenile wood has greater influence in reducing 
the mechanical properties of high-grade structural lumber. 
Only a limited amount of research has been done on juve- 
nile wood in hardwood species. 


Compression Failures 


Excessive compressive stresses along the grain that produce 
minute compression failures can be caused by excessive 
bending of standing trees from wind or snow; felling of 
trees across boulders, logs, or irregularities in the ground; 
or rough handling of logs or lumber. Compression failures 
should not be confused with compression wood. In some 
instances, compression failures are visible on the surface 

of a board as minute lines or zones formed by crumpling or 
buckling of cells (Fig. 5—10A), although the failures usu- 
ally appear as white lines or may even be invisible to the 
unaided eye. The presence of compression failures may be 
indicated by fiber breakage on end grain (Fig. 5—10B). Be- 
cause compression failures are often difficult to detect with 
the unaided eye, special efforts, including optimum lighting, 
may be required for detection. The most difficult cases are 
detected only by microscopic examination. 


Products containing visible compression failures have low 
strength properties, especially in tensile strength and shock 
resistance. The tensile strength of wood containing com- 
pression failures may be as low as one-third the strength of 
matched clear wood. Even slight compression failures, vis- 
ible only under a microscope, may seriously reduce strength 
and cause brittle fracture. Because of the low strength 


Increasing 
F = Properties that generally 
wcrease 


Speaic gravity 
~~ Decreasing —— 
? Cell wail thickness 
Transverse shrinkage 
Percert latewood 


Property 


Mature wood Path — 


Properties that generally 
decrease 


Fite angle 
Longtucinal shrinkage 
Moishae content 
Spiral grain 


Juvenile wood 


Figure 5-9. Properties of juvenile wood. 


associated with compression failures, many safety codes 
require certain structural members, such as ladder rails and 
scaffold planks, to be entirely free of such failures. 


Pitch Pockets 


A pitch pocket is a well-defined opening that contains free 
resin. The pocket extends parallel to the annual rings; it 

is almost flat on the pith side and curved on the bark side. 
Pitch pockets are confined to such species as the pines, 
spruces, Douglas-fir, tamarack, and western larch. 


The effect of pitch pockets on strength depends upon their 
number, size, and location in the piece. A large number 

of pitch pockets indicates a lack of bond between annual 
growth layers, and a piece with pitch pockets should be in- 
spected for shake or separation along the grain. 


Bird Peck 


Maple, hickory, white ash, and a number of other species are 
often damaged by small holes made by woodpeckers. These 
bird pecks often occur in horizontal rows, sometimes encir- 
cling the tree, and a brown or black discoloration known as 
a mineral streak originates from each hole. Holes for tapping 


Figure 5-10. Compression failures. A, compres- 
sion failure shown by irregular lines across grain; 
B, fiber breakage in end-grain surfaces of spruce 
lumber caused by compression failures below dark 
line. 


5-33 


Table 5—13. Intersection 
moisture content values for 
selected species* 


M, 
Species (%) 
Ash, white 24 
Birch, yellow 27 
Chestnut, American 24 
Douglas-fir 24 
Hemlock, western 28 
Larch, western 28 
Pine, loblolly 21 
Pine, longleaf 21 
Pine, red 24 
Redwood 21 
Spruce, red 27 
Spruce, Sitka 27 
Tamarack 24 


“Intersection moisture content is point 
at which mechanical properties begin 
to change when wood is dried from 
the green condition. 


maple trees are also a source of mineral streaks. The streaks 
are caused by oxidation and other chemical changes in the 
wood. Bird pecks and mineral streaks are not generally im- 
portant in regard to strength of structural lumber, although 
they do impair the appearance of the wood. 


Extractives 


Many wood species contain removable extraneous materials 
or extractives that do not degrade the cellulose—lignin struc- 
ture of the wood. These extractives are especially abundant 
in species such as larch, redwood, western redcedar, and 
black locust. 


A small decrease in modulus of rupture and strength in 
compression parallel to grain has been measured for some 
species after the extractives have been removed. The extent 
to which extractives influence strength is apparently a func- 
tion of the amount of extractives, the moisture content of the 
piece, and the mechanical property under consideration. 


Properties of Timber from Dead Trees 


Timber from trees killed by insects, blight, wind, or fire may 
be as good for any structural purpose as that from live trees, 
provided further insect attack, staining, decay, or drying 
degrade has not occurred. In a living tree, the heartwood is 
entirely dead and only a comparatively few sapwood cells 
are alive. Therefore, most wood is dead when cut, regardless 
of whether the tree itself is living or not. However, if a tree 
stands on the stump too long after its death, the sapwood is 
likely to decay or to be attacked severely by wood-boring 
insects, and eventually the heartwood will be similarly af- 
fected. Such deterioration also occurs in logs that have been 
cut from live trees and improperly cared for afterwards. Be- 
cause of variations in climatic and other factors that affect 
deterioration, the time that dead timber may stand or lie in 
the forest without serious deterioration varies. 


5-34 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Tests on wood from trees that had stood as long as 15 years 
after being killed by fire demonstrated that this wood was as 
sound and strong as wood from live trees. Also, the heart- 
wood of logs of some more durable species has been found 
to be thoroughly sound after lying in the forest for many 
years. 


On the other hand, in nonresistant species, decay may cause 
great loss of strength within a very brief time, both in trees 
standing dead on the stump and in logs cut from live trees 
and allowed to lie on the ground. The important consider- 
ation is not whether the trees from which wood products are 
cut are alive or dead, but whether the products themselves 
are free from decay or other degrading factors that would 
render them unsuitable for use. 


Effects of Manufacturing and Service 
Environments 


Moisture Content 


Many mechanical properties are affected by changes in 
moisture content below the fiber saturation point. Most 
properties reported in Tables 5—3 to 5—5 increase with de- 
crease in moisture content. The relationship that describes 
these changes in clear wood property at about 21 °C (70 °F) 
is 


Fi | (5-3) 


where P is the property at moisture content M (%), P,, the 
same property at 12% MC, P, the same property for green 
wood, and M, moisture content at the intersection of a 
horizontal line representing the strength of green wood and 
an inclined line representing the logarithm of the strength— 
moisture content relationship for dry wood. This assumed 
linear relationship results in an M, value that is slightly less 
than the fiber saturation point. Table 5—13 gives values of 
M, for a few species; for other species, M, = 25 may be 
assumed. 


Average property values of P,, and P, are given for many 
species in Tables 5—3 to 5—5. The formula for moisture con- 
tent adjustment is not recommended for work to maximum 
load, impact bending, and tension perpendicular to grain. 
These properties are known to be erratic in their response 
to moisture content change. 


The formula can be used to estimate a property at any mois- 
ture content below M, from the species data given. For ex- 
ample, suppose you want to find the modulus of rupture of 
white ash at 8% moisture content. Using information from 
Tables 5—3a and 5-13, 


4/12 


103.0007 5 
103,00¢ =119500kPa 


*, = 103,000 
A = 1050 66,000 | 


Care should be exercised when adjusting properties below 
12% moisture. Although most properties will continue to 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 
150 


120 


© 
o 


Property (MPa) 
& 


wo 
o 


0 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 


Moisture content (%) 


Figure 5-11. Effect of moisture content on wood strength 
properties. A, tension parallel to grain; B, bending; C, com- 
pression parallel to grain; D, compression perpendicular to 
grain; and E, tension perpendicular to grain. 


Table 5-14. Moisture content for maximum property 
value in drying clear Southern Pine and yellow poplar 
from green to 4% moisture content 


Moisture content 
at which peak 
property occurs 
(%) 


Southern Yellow 
Property Pine poplar 
Ultimate tensile stress 12.6 8.6 
parallel to grain 
Ultimate tensile stress 10.2 TA 
perpendicular to grain 
MOE tension perpendicular to grain 4.3 — 
MOE compression parallel to grain 4.3 4.0 
Modulus of rigidity, Ger 10.0 — 


increase while wood is dried to very low moisture con- 

tent levels, for most species some properties may reach 

a maximum value and then decrease with further drying 
(Fig. 5-11) (Kretschmann and Green 1996, 2008). For clear 
Southern Pine and yellow poplar, the moisture content at 
which a maximum property has been observed is given in 
Table 5-14. 


This increase in mechanical properties with drying assumes 
small, clear specimens in a drying process in which no 
deterioration of the product (degrade) occurs. For 51-mm- 
(2-in.-) thick lumber containing knots, the increase in prop- 
erty with decreasing moisture content is dependent upon 
lumber quality. Clear, straight-grained lumber may show 
increases in properties with decreasing moisture content 
that approximate those of small, clear specimens. However, 
as the frequency and size of knots increase, the reduction 

in strength resulting from the knots begins to negate the 
increase in property in the clear wood portion of the lumber. 
Very low quality lumber that has many large knots may be 
insensitive to changes in moisture content. Figures 5-12 and 
5—13 illustrate the effect of moisture content on the proper- 


Property (*10° Ibf in-*) 


120 

16 _ 
os £ 
a _ 
= a 
2 80 26 
2 x 
B a 
2 2 
Z 8 3 
2 2 
g@ 40 2 
ba o 
5 ‘2 
— a 
E 
s 
0 0 > 

8 12 16 20 24 


Moisture content (%) 


Figure 5-12. Effect of moisture content on tensile strength 
of lumber parallel to grain. 


Ultimate tensile stress («10° Ibf in) 


90 
= 12 
= 
£ 
ao 
& 
© 60 
7) 8 
o® 
> 
3 
n 
2 
= 30 
S 4 
o 
| 
E 
5 
0 0 
8 12 16 20 24 


Moisture content (%) 


Figure 5-13. Effect of moisture content on compressive 
strength of lumber parallel to grain. 


ties of lumber as a function of initial lumber strength (Green 
and others 1989). Application of these results in adjusting 
allowable properties of lumber is discussed in Chapter 7. 
Additional information on influences of moisture content 

on dimensional stability is included in Chapter 13. 


Temperature 
Reversible Effects 


In general, the mechanical properties of wood decrease 
when heated and increase when cooled. At a constant mois- 
ture content and below approximately 150 °C (302 °F), 
mechanical properties are approximately linearly related 

to temperature. The change in properties that occurs when 
wood is quickly heated or cooled and then tested at that 
condition is termed an immediate effect. At temperatures 


5-35 


nN 
[—] 
o 


150 


50 


Relative modulus of elasticity (%) 


0 
-200 
250 


Relative modulus of rupture (%) 


0 
-200 -150 -100 -50 0 50 


300 


Relative compressive strength (%) 


0 
-200 


-100 


-100 


(a) 


12% moisture content 


0 100 200 300 


0% moisture 
content 


100 150 


(c) 


9% moisture content 


0 100 200 300 
Temperature (°C) 


Figure 5—14. Immediate effect of temperature at two 
moisture content levels relative to value at 20 °C 

(68 °F) for clear, defect-free wood: (a) modulus of elas- 
ticity parallel to grain, (b) modulus of rupture in bend- 
ing, (c) compressive strength parallel to grain. The 
plot is a composite of results from several studies. 
Variability in reported trends is illustrated by 


width of bands. 


5-36 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 5-15. Approximate middle-trend effects of 
temperature on mechanical properties of clear wood at 
various moisture conditions 


Relative change in 
mechanical property 
from 20 °C (68 °F) at: 


Moisture ~—50 °C +50 °C 
condition? (—58 °F) (+122 °F) 

Property (%) (%) (%) 
MOE parallel to grain 0 +11 -6 
12 +17 -7 

>FSP +50 — 

MOE perpendicular to grain 6 _ —20 
12 — —35 

>20 = —38 

Shear modulus >FSP _ —25 
Bending strength <4 +18 —10 
11-15 +35 —20 

18-20 +60 —25 

>FSP +110 —25 

Tensile strength parallel to grain 0-12 — -4 
Compressive strength parallel 0 +20 —10 
to grain 12-45 +50 —25 
Shear strength parallel to grain >FSP _ —25 
Tensile strength perpendicular 4-6 = -10 
to grain 11-16 = —20 
218 = -30 
Compressive strength 0-6 = —20 
perpendicular to grain at 210 = 35 


proportional limit 


“>FSP indicates moisture content greater than fiber saturation point. 


below 100 °C (212 °F), the immediate effect is essentially 
reversible; that is, the property will return to the value at the 
original temperature if the temperature change is rapid. 


Figure 5—14 illustrates the immediate effect of tempera- 
ture on modulus of elasticity parallel to grain, modulus of 
rupture, and compression parallel to grain, 20 °C (68 °F), 
based on a composite of results for clear, defect-free wood. 
This figure represents an interpretation of data from several 
investigators. The width of the bands illustrates variability 
between and within reported trends. 


Table 5—15 lists changes in clear wood properties at —50 °C 
(—58 °F) and 50 °C (122 °F) relative to those at 20 °C 

(68 °F) for a number of moisture conditions. The large 
changes at —50 °C (—58 °F) for green wood (at fiber satura- 
tion point or wetter) reflect the presence of ice in the wood 
cell cavities. 


The strength of dry lumber, at about 12% moisture content, 
may change little as temperature increases from —29 °C 
(—20 °F) to 38 °C (100 °F). For green lumber, strength gen- 
erally decreases with increasing temperature. However, for 
temperatures between about 7 °C (45 °F) and 38 °C 

(100 °F), the changes may not differ significantly from those 
at room temperature. Table 5—16 provides equations that 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5-16. Percentage change in bending properties of lumber with 
change in temperature® 


Temperature 
Lumber Moisture —6?=Px)/P10)100= A+ BT + CT’ range 
Property grade? content A B Cc / a Rees 
MOE All Green 22.0350 —0.4578 0 0 32 
Green 13.1215 -0,1793 0 32 150 
12% 7.8553 —0.1108 0 -15 150 
MOR SS Green 34.13 —0.937 0.0043 —20 46 
Green 0 0 0 46 100 
12% 0 0 0 —20 100 
No. 2 Green 56.89 —1.562 0.0072 —20 46 
or less Green 0 0 0 46 100 
Dry 0 0 0 —20 100 


“For equation, P is property at temperature T in °F; P7, property at 21 °C (70 °F). 
°SS is Select Structural. 


have been used to adjust some lumber properties for the re- 
versible effects of temperature. 


93 °C (200 °F) 
Irreversible Effects 


te ~120 °C (250 °F) In addition to the reversible effect of temperature on wood, 
Cn a there is an irreversible effect at elevated temperature. This 
permanent effect is one of degradation of wood substance, 
which results in loss of weight and strength. The loss de- 
pends on factors that include moisture content, heating 
medium, temperature, exposure period, and to some extent, 
species and size of piece involved. 


“=. 
~-. 
“~—-.. 


value at 


The permanent decrease of modulus of rupture caused by 
heating in steam and water is shown as a function of tem- 


Modulus of rupture CBOE of 


0 8 16 24 32 


Heating period (h) 


Figure 5-15. Permanent effect of heating in water (solid 
line) and steam (dashed line) on modulus of rupture of 
clear, defect-free wood. All data based on tests of Doug- 
las-fir and Sitka spruce at room temperature. 


*~ 66 °C (150 °F 


- 


~ 
= = 


—— Modulus of rupture ~ 
- = = Work 


0 50 100 150 200 250 300 
Heating period (days) 


Property (percentage of 
untreated controls) 


Figure 5-16. Permanent effect of heating in water on work 
to maximum load and modulus of rupture of clear, defect- 
free wood. All data based on tests of Douglas-fir and Sitka 
spruce at room temperature. 


perature and heating time in Figure 5—15, based on tests of 
clear pieces of Douglas-fir and Sitka spruce. In the same 
studies, heating in water affected work to maximum load 
more than modulus of rupture (Fig. 5-16). The effect of 
heating dry wood (0% moisture content) on modulus of rup- 
ture and modulus of elasticity is shown in Figures 5—17 and 
5-18, respectively, as derived from tests on four softwoods 
and two hardwoods. 


Figure 5—19 illustrates the permanent loss in bending 
strength of Spruce—Pine—Fir, Southern Pine, and Douglas- 
fir standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) lumber 
heated at 66 °C (150 °F) and about 12% moisture content. 
Figure 5—20 illustrates the permanent loss in bending 
strength of Spruce—Pine—Fir, Southern Pine, Douglas-fir, 
and yellow-poplar standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 2- by 
4-in.) lumber heated at 82 °C (180 °F) and about 12% mois- 
ture content. The curves for Spruce—Pine—Fir heated at 

66 °C (150 °F) and about 12% moisture content are included 
for comparison. The trends in Figure 5—20 can be compared 
with the trends in 5—19. In general, there is a greater reduc- 
tion in MOR with time at the higher temperature. During 
the same time periods shown in Figures 5—19 and 5-20, 
modulus of elasticity barely changed. Acid hydrolysis of 
hemicellulose, especially of arabinose, appears to be the 
fundamental cause of strength loss resulting from thermal 


5-37 


115 °C (240 °F) 


fo] 
—] 


135 °C (275 °F) 


a 
o 


155 °C (310 °F) 
175 °C (350 °F) 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 

Time of exposure (days) 


Modulus of rupture (percentage 
of untreated controls) 
a Nn 
o o 


Figure 5-17. Permanent effect of oven heating at four 
temperatures on modulus of rupture, based on clear 
pieces of four softwood and two hardwood species. All 
tests conducted at room temperature. 


115 °C (240 °F) 

135 °C (275 °F) “. 
° 

° 


‘ 


155 °C (310 °F) 


of untreated controls) 
wo 
oa 


175 °C (350 °F) 


0 50 100 150 200 
Time of exposure (days) 


Modulus of elasticity (percentage 


250 300 


Figure 5—18. Permanent effect of oven heating at four 
temperatures on modulus of elasticity, based on clear 
pieces of four softwood and two hardwood species. All 
tests conducted at room temperature. 


Residual MOR 
oc :s 
o o 


© 
Ss 


—@®— Spruce—Pine-Fir 
—y— Southern Pine 
—<— Douglas-fir 


0 12 24 36 48 60 72 
Exposure time (months) 


Figure 5-19. Residual MOR for solid-sawn lumber at 66 °C 


(150 °F) and 75% relative humidity (Green and others 2003). 


5-38 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


degradation (Green and others 2005). It should be noted that 
most in-service exposures at 66 °C (150 °F) or 82 °C 

(180 °F) would be expected to result in much lower 
moisture content levels. 


The permanent property losses discussed here are based on 
tests conducted after the specimens were cooled to room 
temperature and conditioned to a range of 7% to 12% mois- 
ture content. If specimens are tested hot, the percentage of 
strength reduction resulting from permanent effects is based 
on values already reduced by the immediate effects. Repeat- 
ed exposure to elevated temperature has a cumulative effect 
on wood properties. For example, at a given temperature the 
property loss will be about the same after six 1-month expo- 
sures as it would be after a single 6-month exposure. 


The shape and size of wood pieces are important in analyz- 
ing the influence of temperature. If exposure is for only a 
short time, so that the inner parts of a large piece do not 
reach the temperature of the surrounding medium, the im- 
mediate effect on strength of the inner parts will be less than 
that for the outer parts. However, the type of loading must 
be considered. If the member is to be stressed in bending, 
the outer fibers of a piece will be subjected to the greatest 
stress and will ordinarily govern the ultimate strength of the 
piece; hence, under this loading condition, the fact that 

the inner part is at a lower temperature may be of little 
significance. 


For extended noncyclic exposures, it can be assumed that 
the entire piece reaches the temperature of the heating me- 
dium and will therefore be subject to permanent strength 
losses throughout the volume of the piece, regardless of 

size and mode of stress application. However, in ordinary 
construction wood often will not reach the daily temperature 
extremes of the air around it; thus, long-term effects should 
be based on the accumulated temperature experience of 
critical structural parts. 


Time Under Load 
Rate of Loading 


Mechanical property values, as given in Tables 5-3 to 

5—5, are usually referred to as static strength values. Static 
strength tests are typically conducted at a rate of loading or 
rate of deformation to attain maximum load in about 5 min. 
Higher values of strength are obtained for wood loaded at 
a more rapid rate, and lower values are obtained at slower 
rates. For example, the load required to produce failure in 
a wood member in | s is approximately 10% higher than 
that obtained in a standard static strength test. Over several 
orders of magnitude of rate of loading, strength is approxi- 
mately an exponential function of rate. See Chapter 7 for 
application to treated woods. 


Figure 5—21 illustrates how strength decreases with time to 
maximum load. The variability in the trend shown is based 
on results from several studies pertaining to bending, com- 
pression, and shear. 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Creep and Relaxation 


When initially loaded, a wood member deforms elastically. 
If the load is maintained, additional time-dependent defor- 
mation occurs. This is called creep. Creep occurs at even 
very low stresses, and it will continue over a period of years. 
For sufficiently high stresses, failure eventually occurs. This 
failure phenomenon, called duration of load (or creep rup- 
ture), is discussed in the next section. 


At typical design levels and use environments, after several 
years the additional deformation caused by creep may ap- 
proximately equal the initial, instantaneous elastic defor- 
mation. For illustration, a creep curve based on creep as a 
function of initial deflection (relative creep) at several stress 
levels is shown in Figure 5—22; creep is greater under higher 
stresses than under lower ones. 


Ordinary climatic variations in temperature and humidity 
will cause creep to increase. An increase of about 28 °C 

(50 °F) in temperature can cause a two- to threefold increase 
in creep. Green wood may creep four to six times the initial 
deformation as it dries under load. 


Unloading a member results in immediate and complete 
recovery of the original elastic deformation and after time, a 
recovery of approximately one-half the creep at deformation 
as well. Fluctuations in temperature and humidity increase 
the magnitude of the recovered deformation. 


Relative creep at low stress levels is similar in bending, ten- 
sion, or compression parallel to grain, although it may be 
somewhat less in tension than in bending or compression 
under varying moisture conditions. Relative creep across the 
grain is qualitatively similar to, but likely to be greater than, 
creep parallel to the grain. The creep behavior of all species 
studied is approximately the same. 


If instead of controlling load or stress, a constant deforma- 
tion is imposed and maintained on a wood member, the ini- 
tial stress relaxes at a decreasing rate to about 60% to 70% 
of its original value within a few months. This reduction 

of stress with time is commonly called relaxation. In 
limited bending tests carried out between approximately 

18 °C (64 °F) and 49 °C (120 °F) over 2 to 3 months, the 
curve of stress as a function of time that expresses relaxation 
is approximately the mirror image of the creep curve (defor- 
mation as a function of time). These tests were carried out 
at initial stresses up to about 50% of the bending strength of 
the wood. As with creep, relaxation is markedly affected by 
fluctuations in temperature and humidity. 


Duration of Load 


The duration of load, or the time during which a load acts 
on a wood member either continuously or intermittently, is 
an important factor in determining the load that the member 
can safely carry. The duration of load may be affected by 
changes in temperature and relative humidity. The constant 
stress that a wood member can sustain is approximately an 


—f— SPF MSR 

—we— DF 1800f-1.8E 

—?)— DF 2400f-2.0E 

—f— So. Pine MSR 

—O— So. Pine 2250f-1.9E 
—@®— Yellow-poplar, ungraded 


0 12 24 36 48 60 72 
Exposure time (months) 


1.2 
1.0 
& 0.8 
= Oras S==-0-<=<==7= 9 
$ 0.6 
v —<O-— SPF MSR 66 °C, 75% RH 
wn 
o 
4 


© 
iy 


Figure 5-20. Residual MOR for solid-sawn lumber at 82 °C 
(180 °F) and 80% relative humidity (RH); SPF at 66 °C (150 
°F) and 75% RH shown for comparison. SPF is Spruce— 
Pine—-Fir; MSR, machine stress rated; DF, Douglas-fir; and 
So. pine, Southern Pine (Green and others 2005). 


140 


=12% moisture content 


80 


Ultimate stress (percentage 
of static strength) 


10° 10° 10? 104 10° 10° 
Time to ultimate stress (s) 


Figure 5-21. Relationship of ultimate stress at short-time 
loading to that at 5-min loading, based on composite of 
results from rate-of-load studies on bending, compres- 
sion, and shear parallel to grain. Variability in reported 
trends is indicated by width of band. 


2 Stress 
MPa 10° Ibf in-? 


Creep deflection (multiple of 
initial deflection) 


0 100 200 300 400 500 
Time under load (days) 


Figure 5—22. Influence of four levels of stress on creep 
(Kingston 1962). 


5-39 


6% and 12% moisture content 


co 
o 


D> 
o 


Constant stress (percentage 
of static strength) 


10° 10* 10° 10° 10? 10* 10° 
Time to failure (h) 
Figure 5—23. Relationship between stress due to constant 
load and time to failure for small clear wood specimens, 
based on 28 s at 100% stress. The figure is a composite 
of trends from several studies; most studies involved 
bending but some involved compression parallel to grain 
and bending perpendicular to grain. Variability in report- 
ed trends is indicated by width of band. 


exponential function of time to failure, as illustrated in 
Figure 5—22. This relationship is a composite of results of 
studies on small, clear wood specimens, conducted at con- 
stant temperature and relative humidity. 


For a member that continuously carries a load for a long 
period, the load required to produce failure is much less than 
that determined from the strength properties in Tables 5—3 
to 5—5. Based on Figure 5—23, a wood member under the 
continuous action of bending stress for 10 years may carry 
only 60% (or perhaps less) of the load required to produce 
failure in the same specimen loaded in a standard bending 
strength test of only a few minutes duration. Conversely, if 
the duration of load is very short, the load-carrying capacity 
may be higher than that determined from strength properties 
given in the tables. 


Time under intermittent loading has a cumulative effect. 
In tests where a constant load was periodically placed on a 
beam and then removed, the cumulative time the load was 
actually applied to the beam before failure was essentially 
equal to the time to failure for a similar beam under the 
same load applied continuously. 


The time to failure under continuous or intermittent loading 
is looked upon as a creep—rupture process; a member has to 
undergo substantial deformation before failure. Deforma- 
tion at failure is approximately the same for duration of load 
tests as for standard strength tests. 


Changes in climatic conditions increase the rate of creep and 
shorten the duration during which a member can support 

a given load. This effect can be substantial for very small 
wood specimens under large cyclic changes in temperature 


5-40 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


and relative humidity. Fortunately, changes in temperature 
and relative humidity are moderate for wood in the typical 
service environment. 


Fatigue 


In engineering, the term fatigue is defined as the progressive 
damage that occurs in a material subjected to cyclic loading. 
This loading may be repeated (stresses of the same sign; 
that is, always compression or always tension) or reversed 
(stresses of alternating compression and tension). When 
sufficiently high and repetitious, cyclic loading stresses can 
result in fatigue failure. 


Fatigue life is a term used to define the number of cycles 
that are sustained before failure. Fatigue strength, the maxi- 
mum stress attained in the stress cycle used to determine 
fatigue life, is approximately exponentially related to fa- 
tigue life; that is, fatigue strength decreases approximately 
linearly as the logarithm of number of cycles increases. 
Fatigue strength and fatigue life also depend on several 
other factors: frequency of cycling; repetition or reversal of 
loading; range factor (ratio of minimum to maximum stress 
per cycle); and other factors such as temperature, moisture 
content, and specimen size. Negative range factors imply 
repeated reversing loads, whereas positive range factors im- 
ply nonreversing loads. 


Results from several fatigue studies on wood are given in 
Table 5—17. Most of these results are for repeated loading 
with a range ratio of 0.1, meaning that the minimum stress 
per cycle is 10% of the maximum stress. The maximum 
stress per cycle, expressed as a percentage of estimated 
static strength, is associated with the fatigue life given in 
millions of cycles. The first three lines of data, which list 
the same cyclic frequency (30 Hz), demonstrate the effect of 
range ratio on fatigue strength (maximum fatigue stress that 
can be maintained for a given fatigue life); fatigue bend- 
ing strength decreases as range ratio decreases. Third-point 
bending results show the effect of small knots or slope of 
grain on fatigue strength at a range ratio of 0.1 and fre- 
quency of 8.33 Hz. Fatigue strength is lower for wood con- 
taining small knots or a 1-in-12 slope of grain than for clear 
straight-grained wood and even lower for wood containing 
a combination of small knots and a 1-in-12 slope of grain. 
Fatigue strength is the same for a scarf joint in tension as 
for tension parallel to the grain, but a little lower for a finger 
joint in tension. Fatigue strength is slightly lower in shear 
than in tension parallel to the grain. Other comparisons do 
not have much meaning because range ratios or cyclic fre- 
quency differ; however, fatigue strength is high in compres- 
sion parallel to the grain compared with other properties. 
Little is known about other factors that may affect fatigue 
strength in wood. 


Creep, temperature rise, and loss of moisture content occur 
in tests of wood for fatigue strength. At stresses that cause 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


Table 5-17. Summary of reported results on cyclic 
fatigue® 


Approxi- 
Cyclic Maximum mate 
fre- stress per fatigue 
Range quency cycle? life 
Property ratio (Hz) (%) (x10° cycles) 
Bending, clear, 
straight grain 
Cantilever 0.45 30 45 30 
Cantilever 0 30 40 30 
Cantilever -1.0 30 30 30 
Center-point -1.0 40 30 4 
Rotational —-1.0 — 28 30 
Third-point 0.1 8-1/3 60 2 
Bending, third-point 
Small knots 0.1 8-1/3 50 2 
Clear, 1:12 slope 0.1 8-1/3 50 2 
of grain 
Small knots, 1:12 0.1 8-1/3 40 2 
slope of grain 
Tension parallel 
to grain 
Clear, straight grain 0.1 15 50 30 
Clear, straight grain 0 40 60 3.5 
Scarf joint 0.1 15 50 30 
Finger joint 0.1 15 40 30 
Compression parallel 
to grain 
Clear, straight grain 0.1 40 75 3.5 


Shear parallel to grain 
Glued-laminated 0.1 15 45 30 


“Initial moisture content about 12% to 15%. 
»Percentage of estimated static strength. 


failure in about 106 cycles at 40 Hz, a temperature rise of 
15 °C (27 °F) has been reported for parallel-to-grain 
compression fatigue (range ratio slightly greater than zero), 
parallel-to-grain tension fatigue (range ratio = 0), and 
reversed bending fatigue (range ratio = —1). The rate of 
temperature rise is high initially but then diminishes to mod- 
erate; a moderate rate of temperature rise remains more or 
less constant during a large percentage of fatigue life. Dur- 
ing the latter stages of fatigue life, the rate of temperature 
rise increases until failure occurs. Smaller rises in tempera- 
ture would be expected for slower cyclic loading or lower 
stresses. Decreases in moisture content are probably related 
to temperature rise. 


Aging 

In relatively dry and moderate temperature conditions where 
wood is protected from deteriorating influences such as de- 
cay, the mechanical properties of wood show little change 
with time. Test results for very old timbers suggest that 


significant losses in clear wood strength occur only after 
several centuries of normal aging conditions. The soundness 


of centuries-old wood in some standing trees (redwood, for 
example) also attests to the durability of wood. 


Exposure to Chemicals 


The effect of chemical solutions on mechanical proper- 
ties depends on the specific type of chemical. Nonswelling 
liquids, such as petroleum oils and creosote, have no ap- 
preciable effect on properties. Properties are lowered in the 
presence of water, alcohol, or other wood-swelling organic 
liquids even though these liquids do not chemically degrade 
the wood substance. The loss in properties depends largely 
on the amount of swelling, and this loss is regained upon 
removal of the swelling liquid. Anhydrous ammonia mark- 
edly reduces the strength and stiffness of wood, but these 
properties are regained to a great extent when the ammonia 
is removed. Heartwood generally is less affected than sap- 
wood because it is more impermeable. Accordingly, wood 
treatments that retard liquid penetration usually enhance 
natural resistance to chemicals. 


Chemical solutions that decompose wood substance (by hy- 
drolysis or oxidation) have a permanent effect on strength. 
The following generalizations summarize the effect of 
chemicals: 


e Some species are quite resistant to attack by dilute min- 
eral and organic acids. 


e Oxidizing acids such as nitric acid degrade wood more 
than do nonoxidizing acids. 


e Alkaline solutions are more destructive than are acidic 
solutions. 


e Hardwoods are more susceptible to attack by both acids 
and alkalis than are softwoods. 


e Heartwood is less susceptible to attack by both acids and 
alkalis than is sapwood. 


Because both species and application are extremely impor- 
tant, reference to industrial sources with a specific history 
of use is recommended where possible. For example, large 
cypress tanks have survived long continuous use where ex- 
posure conditions involved mixed acids at the boiling point. 
Wood is also used extensively in cooling towers because of 
its superior resistance to mild acids and solutions of acidic 
salts. 


Chemical Treatment 


Wood is often treated with chemicals to enhance its fire per- 
formance or decay resistance in service. Each set of treat- 
ment chemicals and processes has a unique effect on the 
mechanical properties of the treated wood. 


Fire-retardant treatments and treatment methods distinctly 
reduce the mechanical properties of wood. Some fire-retar- 
dant-treated products have experienced significant in-ser- 
vice degradation on exposure to elevated temperatures when 
used as plywood roof sheathing or roof-truss lumber. New 
performance requirements within standards set by ASTM 


5-41 


International (formerly the American Society for Testing 
and Materials) and American Wood Protection Association 
(AWPA) preclude commercialization of inadequately per- 
forming fire-retardant-treated products. 


Although preservative treatments and treatment methods 
generally reduce the mechanical properties of wood, any 
initial loss in strength from treatment must be balanced 
against the progressive loss of strength from decay when 
untreated wood is placed in wet conditions. The effects 

of preservative treatments on mechanical properties are 
directly related to wood quality, size, and various pretreat- 
ment, treatment, and post-treatment processing factors. The 
key factors include preservative chemistry or chemical type, 
preservative retention, initial kiln-drying temperature, post- 
treatment drying temperature, and pretreatment incising (if 
required). North American design guidelines address the 
effects of incising on mechanical properties of refractory 
wood species and the short-term duration-of-load adjust- 
ments for all treated lumber. These guidelines are described 
in Chapter 7. 


Oil-Type Preservatives 


Oil-type preservatives cause no appreciable strength loss 
because they do not chemically react with wood cell wall 
components. However, treatment with oil-type preservatives 
can adversely affect strength if extreme in-retort seasoning 
parameters are used (for example, Boultonizing, steaming, 
or vapor drying conditions) or if excessive temperatures or 
pressures are used during the treating process. To preclude 
strength loss, the user should follow specific treatment pro- 
cessing requirements as described in the treatment 
standards. 


Waterborne Preservatives 


Waterborne preservative treatments can reduce the mechani- 
cal properties of wood. Treatment standards include spe- 
cific processing requirements intended to prevent or limit 
strength reductions resulting from the chemicals and the 
waterborne preservative treatment process. The effects of 
waterborne preservative treatment on mechanical properties 
are related to species, mechanical properties, preservative 
chemistry or type, preservative retention, post-treatment 
drying temperature, size and grade of material, product type, 
initial kiln-drying temperature, incising, and both tempera- 
ture and moisture in service. 


Species—The magnitude of the effect of various waterborne 
preservatives on mechanical properties does not appear to 
vary greatly between different species. 


Mechanical property—Waterborne preservatives affect 
each mechanical property differently. If treated according 

to AWPA standards, the effects are as follows: modulus of 
elasticity (MOE), compressive strength parallel to grain, 
and compressive stress perpendicular to grain are unaffected 
or slightly increased; modulus of rupture (MOR) and ten- 


5-42 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


sile strength parallel to grain are reduced from 0% to 20%, 
depending on chemical retention and severity of redrying 
temperature; and energy-related properties (for example, 
work to maximum load and impact strength) are reduced 
from 10% to 50%. 


Preservative chemistry or type—Waterborne preservative 
chemical systems differ in regard to their effect on strength, 
but the magnitude of these differences is slight compared 
with the effects of treatment processing factors. Chemistry- 
related differences seem to be related to the reactivity of 
the waterborne preservative and the temperature during the 
fixation/precipitation reaction with wood. 


Retention— Waterborne preservative retention levels of 
<16 kg m3 (<1.0 lb ft-3) have no effect on MOE or com- 
pressive strength parallel to grain and a slight negative 
effect (-5% to -10%) on tensile or bending strength. How- 
ever, energy-related properties are often reduced from 15% 
to 30%. At a retention level of 40 kg m°> (2.5 lb ft 3), MOR 
and energy-related properties are further reduced. 


Post-treatment drying temperature—Air drying af- 

ter treatment causes no significant reduction in the static 
strength of wood treated with waterborne preservative at a 
retention level of 16 kg m-3 (1.0 lb ft-3). However, energy- 
related properties are reduced. The post-treatment redrying 
temperature used for material treated with waterborne pre- 
servative has been found to be critical when temperatures 
exceed 75 °C (167 °F). Redrying limitations in treatment 
standards have precluded the need for an across-the-board 
design adjustment factor for waterborne-preservative-treat- 
ed lumber in engineering design standards. The limitation 
on post-treatment kiln-drying temperature is set at 74 °C 
(165 °F). 


Size of material—Generally, larger material, specifically 
thicker, appears to undergo less reduction in strength than 
does smaller material. Recalling that preservative treatments 
usually penetrate the treated material to a depth of only 

6 to 51 mm (0.25 to 2.0 in.), depending on species and other 
factors, the difference in size effect appears to be a function 
of the product’s surface-to-volume ratio, which affects the 
relative ratio of treatment-induced weight gain to original 
wood weight. 


Grade of material—The effect of waterborne preserva- 
tive treatment is a quality-dependent phenomenon. Higher 
grades of wood are more affected than lower grades. When 
viewed over a range of quality levels, higher quality lumber 
is reduced in strength to a proportionately greater extent 
than is lower quality lumber. 


Product type—The magnitude of the treatment effect on 
strength for laminated veneer lumber conforms closely to 
effects noted for higher grades of solid-sawn lumber. The 
effects of waterborne preservative treatment on plywood 
seem comparable to that on lumber. Fiber-based composite 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


products may be reduced in strength to a greater extent than 
is lumber. This additional effect on fiber-based composites 
may be more a function of internal bond damage caused by 
waterborne-treatment-induced swelling rather than actual 
chemical hydrolysis. 


Initial kiln-drying temperature—A though initial kiln 
drying of some lumber species at 100 to 116 °C (212 to 
240 °F) for short durations has little effect on structural 
properties, such drying results in more hydrolytic degrada- 
tion of the cell wall than does drying at lower temperature 
kiln schedules. Subsequent preservative treatment and re- 
drying of material initially dried at high temperatures cause 
additional hydrolytic degradation. When the material is sub- 
sequently treated, initial kiln drying at 113 °C (235 °F) has 
been shown to result in greater reductions over the entire 
bending and tensile strength distributions than does initial 
kiln drying at 91 °C (196 °F). Because Southern Pine 
lumber, the most widely treated product, is most often ini- 
tially kiln dried at dry-bulb temperatures near or above 

113 °C (235 °F), treatment standards have imposed a maxi- 
mum redrying temperature limit of 74 °C (165 °F) to pre- 
clude the cumulative effect of thermal processing. 


Incising—Incising, a pretreatment mechanical process in 
which small slits (incisions) are punched in the surface of 
the wood product, is used to improve preservative penetra- 
tion and distribution in difficult-to-treat species. Incising 
may reduce strength; however, because the increase in 
treatability provides a substantial increase in biological 
performance, this strength loss must be balanced against the 
progressive loss in strength of untreated wood from the inci- 
dence of decay. Most incising patterns induce some strength 
loss, and the magnitude of this effect is related to the size 
of material being incised and the incision depth and density 
(that is, number of incisions per unit area). In <50-mm- 
(<2-in.-) thick, dry lumber, incising and preservative treat- 
ment induces losses in MOE of 5% to 15% and in static 
strength properties of 20% to 30%. Incising and treating 
timbers or tie stock at an incision density of <1,500 inci- 
sions m~ (<140 incisions ft-2) and to a depth of 19 mm 
(0.75 in.) reduces strength by 5% to 10%. 


In-service temperature—Both fire-retardant and preserva- 
tive treatments accelerate the thermal degradation of bend- 
ing strength of lumber when exposed to temperatures above 
54 °C (130 °F). 


In-service moisture content—Current design values apply 
to material dried to <19% maximum (15% average) mois- 
ture content or to green material. No differences in strength 
have been found between treated and untreated material 
when tested green or at moisture contents above 12%. 
When very dry treated lumber of high grade was tested at 
10% moisture content, its bending strength was reduced 
compared with that of matched dry untreated lumber. 


Duration of load—When subjected to impact loads, wood 
treated with chromated copper arsenate (CCA) does not 


exhibit the same increase in strength as that exhibited by 
untreated wood. However, when loaded over a long period, 
treated and untreated wood behave similarly. 


Polymerization 


Wood is also sometimes impregnated with monomers, such 
as methyl methacrylate, which are subsequently polymer- 
ized. Many of the mechanical properties of the resultant 
wood-plastic composite are greater than those of the origi- 
nal wood, generally as a result of filling the void spaces in 
the wood structure with plastic. The polymerization process 
and both the chemical nature and quantity of monomers in- 
fluence composite properties. 


Nuclear Radiation 


Wood is occasionally subjected to nuclear radiation. Exam- 
ples are wooden structures closely associated with nuclear 
reactors, the polymerization of wood with plastic using 
nuclear radiation, and nondestructive estimation of wood 
density and moisture content. Very large doses of gamma 
rays or neutrons can cause substantial degradation of wood. 
In general, irradiation with gamma rays in doses up to about 
10 kGy has little effect on the strength properties of wood. 
As dosage exceeds 10 kGy, tensile strength parallel to grain 
and toughness decrease. At a dosage of 3 MGy, tensile 
strength is reduced about 90%. Gamma rays also affect 
compressive strength parallel to grain at a dosage above 

10 kGy, but higher dosage has a greater effect on tensile 
strength than on compressive strength; only approximately 
one-third of compressive strength is lost when the total 

dose is 3 MGy. Effects of gamma rays on bending and shear 
strength are intermediate between the effects on tensile and 
compressive strength. 


Mold and Stain Fungi 


Mold and stain fungi do not seriously affect most mechani- 
cal properties of wood because such fungi feed on substanc- 
es within the cell cavity or attached to the cell wall rather 
than on the structural wall itself. The duration of infection 
and the species of fungi involved are important factors in 
determining the extent of degradation. 


Although low levels of biological stain cause little loss in 
strength, heavy staining may reduce specific gravity by 1% 
to 2%, surface hardness by 2% to 10%, bending and crush- 
ing strength by 1% to 5%, and toughness or shock resistance 
by 15% to 30%. Although molds and stains usually do not 
have a major effect on strength, conditions that favor these 
organisms also promote the development of wood-destroy- 
ing (decay) fungi and soft-rot fungi (Chap. 14). Pieces with 
mold and stain should be examined closely for decay if they 
are used for structural purposes. 


Decay 


Unlike mold and stain fungi, wood-destroying (decay) fungi 
seriously reduce strength by metabolizing the cellulose frac- 
tion of wood that gives wood its strength. 


5-43 


Early stages of decay are virtually impossible to detect. For 
example, brown-rot fungi may reduce mechanical proper- 
ties in excess of 10% before a measurable weight loss is 
observed and before decay is visible. When weight loss 
reaches 5% to 10%, mechanical properties are reduced from 
20% to 80%. Decay has the greatest effect on toughness, 
impact bending, and work to maximum load in bending, the 
least effect on shear and hardness, and an intermediate ef- 
fect on other properties. Thus, when strength is important, 
adequate measures should be taken to (a) prevent decay 
before it occurs, (b) control incipient decay by remedial 
measures (Chap. 14), or (c) replace any wood member in 
which decay is evident or believed to exist in a critical sec- 
tion. Decay can be prevented from starting or progressing if 
wood is kept dry (below 20% moisture content). 


No method is known for estimating the amount of reduc- 
tion in strength from the appearance of decayed wood. 
Therefore, when strength is an important consideration, the 
safe procedure is to discard every piece that contains even 
a small amount of decay. An exception may be pieces in 
which decay occurs in a knot but does not extend into the 
surrounding wood. 


Insect Damage 


Insect damage may occur in standing trees, logs, and un- 
dried (unseasoned) or dried (seasoned) lumber. Although 
damage is difficult to control in the standing tree, insect 
damage can be eliminated to a great extent by proper con- 
trol methods. Insect holes are generally classified as pin- 
holes, grub holes, and powderpost holes. Because of their 
irregular burrows, powderpost larvae may destroy most of 
a piece’s interior while only small holes appear on the sur- 
face, and the strength of the piece may be reduced virtually 
to zero. No method is known for estimating the reduction 
in strength from the appearance of insect-damaged wood. 
When strength is an important consideration, the safe proce- 
dure is to eliminate pieces containing insect holes. 


Literature Cited 


Bendtsen, B.A.; Ethington, R.L.1975. Mechanical properties 
of 23 species of eastern hardwoods. Res. Note FPL—RN- 
0230. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 12 p. 


Bodig, J.; Jayne, B.A. 1982. Mechanics of wood and wood 
composites. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. 


Green, D.W.; Evans, J.W.; Craig, B.A. 2003. Durability of 
structural lumber products at high temperatures I: 66°C at 
75% RH and 82°C at 30% RH. Wood and Fiber Science. 
35(4): 499-523. 

Green, D.W.; Evans, J.W.; Hatfield, C.A.; Byrd, P.J. 2005. 
Durability of structural lumber products after exposure at 
82°C and 80% relative humidity. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-631. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 21 p. 


5-44 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Green, D.W.; Shelley, B.E.; Vokey, H.P., eds. 1989. In-grade 
testing of structural lumber. Proceedings 47363. Madison, 
WI: Forest Products Society. 


Kingston, R.S.T. 1962. Creep, relaxation, and failure of 
wood. Research Applied in Industry. 15(4). 


Kretschmann, D.E. 2008. The influence of juvenile wood 
content on shear parallel, compression and tension perpen- 
dicular to grain strength and mode I fracture toughness of 
loblolly pine at various ring orientations. Forest Products 
Journal. 58(7/8): 89-96. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Green, D.W. 1996. Modeling moisture 
content—-mechanical property relationships for clear South- 
ern Pine. Wood and Fiber Science. 28(3): 320-337. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Green, D.W. 2008. Strength properties 
of low moisture content yellow-poplar. In: Proceedings, 
world conference timber engineering; 2008 June 2-5; Mi- 
yazaki, Japan: WCTE. 8p. 


Moon, R.J.; Frihart, C.R., Wegner, T. 2006. Nanotechnology 
applications in the forest products industry. Forest Products 
Journal. (56)5: 4-10. 


Additional References 


ASTM. [Current edition]. Standard methods for testing 
small clear specimens of timber. ASTM D143—94. West 
Conshohocken, PA: American Society for Testing and 
Materials. 


Bendtsen, B.A. 1976. Rolling shear characteristics of nine 
structural softwoods. Forest Products Journal. 26(11): 
51-56. 


Bendtsen, B.A.; Freese, F.; Ethington, R.L. 1970. Methods 
for sampling clear, straight-grained wood from the forest. 
Forest Products Journal. 20(11): 38-47. 


Bodig, J.; Goodman, J.R. 1973. Prediction of elastic 
parameters for wood. Wood Science. 5(4): 249-264. 


Boller, K.H. 1954. Wood at low temperatures. Modern 
Packaging. 28(1): 153-157. 


Chudnoff, M. 1984. Tropical timbers of the world. Agricul- 
ture Handbook 607. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 464 p. 


Coffey, D.J. 1962. Effects of knots and holes on the fatigue 
strength of quarter-scale timber bridge stringers. Madison, 
WI: University of Wisconsin, Department of Civil Engineer- 
ing. M.S. thesis. 


Gerhards, C.C. 1968. Effects of type of testing equipment 
and specimen size on toughness of wood. Res. Pap. 
FPL—RP-97. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 12 p. 


Gerhards, C.C. 1977. Effect of duration and rate of loading 
on strength of wood and wood based materials. Res. Pap. 


Chapter5 Mechanical Properties of Wood 


FPL—RP-283. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 24 p. 


Gerhards, C.C. 1979. Effect of high-temperature drying on 
tensile strength of Douglas-fir 2 by 4s. Forest Products 
Journal. 29(3): 39-46. 


Gerhards, C.C. 1982. Effect of moisture content and tem- 
perature on the mechanical properties of wood: an analysis 
of immediate effects. Wood and Fiber. 14(1): 4-36. 


Green, D.W.; Evans, J.W. 1994. Effect of ambient tem- 
peratures on the flexural properties of lumber. In: PTEC 

94 timber shaping the future: Proceedings, Pacific timber 
engineering conference; 1994 July 11-15; Gold Coast, Aus- 
tralia. Fortitude Valley MAC, Queensland, Australia: Timber 
Research Development and Advisory Council: 190-197. 
Vol. 2. 


Green, D.W.; Evans J.W.; Logan J.D.; Nelson, W.J. 1999. 
Adjusting modulus of elasticity of lumber for changes in 
temperature. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. Forest 
Products Journal. 49(10): 82-94. 


Green, D.W.; Rosales, A. 1996. Property relationships for 
tropical hardwoods. In: Proceedings, international wood 
engineering conference; 1996 October 21-31; New Orleans, 
LA. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society: 3-516—3-521. 


Hearmon, R.F.S. 1948. The elasticity of wood and plywood. 
Special Rep. 7. London, England: Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research, Forest Products Research. 


Hearmon, R.F.S. 1961. An introduction to applied anisotro- 
pic elasticity. London, England: Oxford University Press. 


Kollmann, F.F.P.; Cote, W.A., Jr. 1968. Principles of wood 
science and technology. New York: Springer—Verlag. 


Koslik, C.J. 1967. Effect of kiln conditions on the strength 
of Douglas-fir and western hemlock. Rep. D-9. Corvallis, 

OR: Oregon State University, School of Forestry, Forestry 
Research Laboratory. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Bendtsen, B.A. 1992. Ultimate tensile 
stress and modulus of elasticity of fast-grown plantation lob- 
lolly pine lumber. Wood and Fiber Science. 24(2): 189-203. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Green, D.W.; Malinauskas, V. 1991. 
Effect of moisture content on stress intensity factors in 
Southern Pine. In: Proceedings, 1991 international timber 
engineering conference; 1991 September 2-5; London. 
London: TRADA: 3.391-3.398. Vol. 3. 


LeVan, S.L.; Winandy, J.E. 1990. Effects of fire-retardant 
treatments on wood strength: a review. Wood and Fiber 
Science. 22(1): 113-131. 


Little, E.L., Jr. 1979. Checklist of United States trees (native 
and naturalized). Agric. Handb. 541. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. 375 p. 


MacLean, J.D. 1953. Effect of steaming on the strength of 
wood. American Wood-Preservers’ Association. 49: 88-112. 


MacLean, J.D. 1954. Effect of heating in water on the 
strength properties of wood. American Wood-Preservers’ 
Association. 50: 253-281. 


Mallory, M.P.; Cramer, S. 1987. Fracture mechanics: a tool 
for predicting wood component strength. Forest Products 
Journal. 37(7/8): 39-47. 


Mark, R.E.; Adams, S.F.; Tang, R.C. 1970. Moduli of rigid- 
ity of Virginia pine and tulip poplar related to moisture con- 
tent. Wood Science. 2(4): 203-211. 


McDonald, K.A.; Bendtsen, B.A. 1986. Measuring local- 
ized slope of grain by electrical capacitance. Forest Products 
Journal. 36(10): 75-78. 


McDonald, K.A.; Hennon, P.E.; Stevens, J.H.; Green, D.W. 
1997. Mechanical properties of salvaged yellow-cedar in 
southeastern Alaska—Phase I. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-565. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Millett, M.A.; Gerhards, C.C. 1972. Accelerated aging: re- 
sidual weight and flexural properties of wood heated in air 
at 115°C to 175°C. Wood Science. 4(4): 193-201. 


Nicholas, D.D. 1973. Wood deterioration and its prevention 
by preservative treatments. In: Degradation and Protection 
of Wood. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. Vol. I. 


Pillow, M.Y. 1949. Studies of compression failures and their 
detection in ladder rails. Rep. D 1733. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Sliker, A.; Yu, Y. 1993. Elastic constants for hardwoods 
measured from plate and tension tests. Wood and Fiber 
Science. 25(1): 8-22. 


Sliker, A.; Yu, Y.; Weigel, T.; Zhang, W. 1994. Orthotropic 
elastic constants for eastern hardwood species. Wood and 
Fiber Science. 26(1): 107-121. 


Soltis, L.A.; Winandy, J.E. 1989. Long-term strength of 
CCA-treated lumber. Forest Products Journal. 39(5): 64-68. 


Timell, T.E. 1986. Compression wood in gymnosperms. Vol. 
I-IIl. Berlin: Springer—Verlag. 


U.S. Department of Defense. 1951. Design of wood aircraft 
structures. ANC—18 Bull. Subcommittee on Air Force—Navy 
Civil Aircraft, Design Criteria Aircraft Commission. 2nd ed. 
Munitions Board Aircraft Committee. 


Wangaard, F.F. 1966. Resistance of wood to chemical degra- 
dation. Forest Products Journal. 16(2): 53-64. 


Wilcox, W.W. 1978. Review of literature on the effects of 
early stages of decay on wood strength. Wood and Fiber Sci- 
ence. 9(4): 252-257. 


5-45 


Wilson, T.R.C. 1921. The effect of spiral grain on the 
strength of wood. Journal of Forestry. 19(7): 740-747. 


Wilson, T.R.C. 1932. Strength-moisture relations for wood. 
Tech. Bull. 282. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. 


Winandy, J.E. 1994. Effects of long-term elevated tempera- 
ture on CCA-treated Southern Pine lumber. Forest Products 
Journal. 44(6): 49-55. 


Winandy, J.E. 1995a. Effects of waterborne preservative 
treatment on mechanical properties: a review. In: Proceed- 
ings, 91st annual meeting of American Wood Preservers’ 
Association; 1995, May 21-24; New York, NY. Woodstock, 
MD: American Wood Preservers’ Association. 91: 17-33. 


Winandy, J.E. 1995b. The influence of time to failure on the 
strength of CCA treated lumber. Forest Products Journal. 
45(2): 82-85. 


Winandy, J.E. 1995c. Effects of moisture content on 
strength of CCA-treated lumber. Wood and Fiber Science. 
27(2): 168-177. 


Winandy, J.E.; Morrell, J.J. 1993. Relationship between in- 
cipient decay, strength, and chemical composition of Doug- 
las-fir heartwood. Wood and Fiber Science. 25(3): 278-288. 


Woodfin, R.O.; Estep, E.M., eds. 1978. In: The dead timber 
resource. Proceedings, 1978 May 22—24, Spokane, WA. 
Pullman, WA: Engineering Extension Service, Washington 
State University. 


5-46 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


GHAR TERSG 


Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


David E. Kretschmann, Research General Engineer 


Contents 


Hardwood Lumber 6-2 
Factory Lumber 6-2 
Dimension and Component Parts 6—4 
Finished Market Products 6-4 
Lumber Species 6—6 
Softwood Lumber 6-6 
Lumber Grades 6—7 
Lumber Manufacture 6—10 
Softwood Lumber Species 6-11 
Softwood Lumber Grading 6-12 
Purchase of Lumber 6-12 
Retail Yard Inventory 6-12 


Important Purchase Considerations 6—17 


Round Timbers and Ties 6-18 
Standards and Specifications 6-18 
Material Requirements 6-18 
Availability 6-19 
Form 6-20 
Weight and Volume 6-21 
Durability 6—22 
Preservative Treatment 6—22 
Service Life 6-22 


Commonly Used Lumber, Round Timber, 


and Tie Abbreviations 6—23 
References 6-25 


When sawn, a log yields round timber, ties, or lumber of 
varying quality. This chapter presents a general discussion 
of grading, standards, and specifications for these commer- 
cial products. 


In a broad sense, commercial lumber is any lumber that is 
bought or sold in the normal channels of commerce. Com- 
mercial lumber may be found in a variety of forms, species, 
and types, and in various commercial establishments, both 
wholesale and retail. Most commercial lumber is graded by 
standardized rules that make purchasing more or less uni- 
form throughout the country. 


Round timbers and ties represent some of the most effi- 
cient uses of our forest resources. They require a minimum 
of processing between harvesting the tree and marketing 
the structural commodity. Poles and piles are debarked or 
peeled, seasoned, and often treated with preservative prior 
to use as structural members. Construction logs are usually 
shaped to facilitate construction. Ties, used for railroads, 
landscaping, and mining, are slab-cut to provide flat surfac- 
es. Because these products are relatively economical to pro- 
duce compared with glulam, steel, and concrete products, 
they are commonly used throughout the United States. 


To enable users to buy the quality that best suits their pur- 
poses, lumber, round timbers, and ties are graded into use 
categories, each having an appropriate range in quality. 


Generally, the grade of a piece of wood is based on the num- 
ber, character, and location of features that may lower its 
strength, durability, or utility value. Among the more com- 
mon visual features are knots, checks, pitch pockets, shake, 
and stain, some of which are a natural part of the tree. Some 
grades are free or practically free from these features. Other 
grades, which constitute the great bulk of solid wood prod- 
ucts, contain fairly numerous knots and other features. With 
proper grading, lumber containing these features is entirely 
satisfactory for many uses. 


The grading operation for most solid wood products takes 
place at the sawmill. Establishment of grading procedures is 
largely the responsibility of manufacturers’ associations. Be- 
cause of the wide variety of wood species, industrial practic- 
es, and customer needs, different grading practices coexist. 
The grading practices of most interest are considered in the 
sections that follow, under the major categories of hardwood 
lumber and softwood lumber, round timbers, and ties. 


6-1 


Hardwood Lumber 


The principal use of hardwood lumber is for remanufacture 
into furniture, cabinetwork, and pallets or direct use as floor- 
ing, paneling, moulding, and millwork. Hardwood lumber is 
graded and marketed in three main categories: Factory lum- 
ber, dimension parts, and finished market products. Several 
hardwood species are graded under the American Softwood 
Lumber Standard and sold as structural lumber (Chap. 7). 
Also, specially graded hardwood lumber can be used for 
structural glued-laminated lumber. 


Prior to 1898, hardwoods were graded by individual mills 
for local markets. In 1898, manufacturers and users formed 
the National Hardwood Lumber Association to standard- 

ize grading for hardwood lumber. Between 1898 and 1932, 
grading was based on the number and size of visual features. 
In 1932, the basis for grading was changed to standard 
clear-cutting sizes. 


Both Factory lumber and dimension parts are intended to 
serve the industrial customer. The important difference is 
that for Factory lumber, the grades reflect the proportion of 
a piece that can be cut into useful smaller pieces, whereas 
the grades for dimension parts are based on use of the entire 
piece. Finished market products are graded for their unique 
end-use with little or no remanufacture. Examples of fin- 
ished products include moulding, stair treads, and hardwood 
flooring. 


Factory Lumber 


Grades 


The rules adopted by the National Hardwood Lumber Asso- 
ciation are considered standard in grading hardwood lumber 


1. Determine Surface Measure (S.M.) using lumber 
scale stick or from formula: 


Width in inches xlength in feet _ 12 in. x12 ft 
12 12 
= 12 ft? S.M. 
2. No. 1 Common is assumed grade of board. 


Percent of clear-cutting area required for 
No. 1 Common—6623% or %12. 


3. Determine maximum number of cuttings 


permitted. 

For No. 1 Common grade (S.M.+1) + 3 
(i241) 4139 

= 5 i ie 4 cuttings. 


4. Determine minimum size of cuttings. 
For No. 1 Common grade 4 in. x 2 ft or 3 in. x3 ft. 


| gg] Cutting No. 1—3-1/2 in. by 4-1/2 ft = 15-3/4 units 


a 
Cutting No. 2—8-1/2 in. by 4-1/2 ft = 38-1/4 units 
 —— A te elem 
12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


intended for cutting into smaller pieces to make furniture or 
other fabricated products. In these rules, the grade of a piece 
of hardwood lumber is determined by the proportion of a 
piece that can be cut into a certain number of smaller pieces 
of material, commonly called cuttings, which are generally 
clear on one side, have the reverse face sound, and are not 
smaller than a specified size. 


The best grade in the Factory lumber category is termed 
FAS (Firsts and Seconds). The second grade is F1F (FAS 
one face). The third grade is Selects, which is followed by 
No. 1 Common, No. 2A Common, No. 2B Common, No. 
3A Common, No. 3B Common, and Sound Wormy. Except 
for F1F and Selects, the poorer side of a piece is inspected 
for grade assignment. Standard hardwood lumber grades are 
described in Table 6—1. This table illustrates, for example, 
that FAS includes pieces that will allow at least 83-1/3% 
of their surface measure to be cut into clear face material. 
Except for Sound Wormy, the minimum acceptable length, 
width, surface measure, and percentage of piece that must 
work into a cutting decrease with decreasing grade. Figure 
6-1 is an example of grading for cuttings. 


This brief summary of grades for Factory lumber should 
not be regarded as a complete set of grading rules, because 
many details, exceptions, and special rules for certain spe- 
cies are not included. The complete official rules of the 
National Hardwood Lumber Association (NHLA) should be 
followed as the only full description of existing grades (see 
Table 6—2 for addresses of NHLA and other U.S. hardwood 
grading associations). Table 6—3 lists names of commercial 
domestic hardwood species that are graded by NHLA rules. 


—— a ee oe ee ee ee ee 
Cutting No. 3—4-1/2 in. by 4-1/2 ft = 20-1/4 units | Socio 
Cutting No. 4—6 in. by 5-2/3 tt = 34 units 
ft 


12in 


5. Determine clear-face cutting units needed. 


For No. 1 Common grade S.M. x8 = 12 x8 
= 96 units 


6. Determine total area of permitted clear-face 
cutting in units. 


Width in inches and fractions of inches 
x length in feet and fractions of feet 
Cutting #1—31zin. x 442 ft = 15%4units 
Cutting #2—81zin. x 412 ft=38 units 
Cutting #3—412 in. x 412 ft = 20% units 
Cutting #44—6in. x 5% ft=34 units 
Total Units 108 


Units required for No. 1 Common—96. 


~ 


Conclusion: Board meets requirements for 
No. 1 Common grade. 


Figure 6-1. Example of hardwood grading for cuttings using No. 1 Common lumber grade. Current grading rules are 
written only in the inch-pound system of measurement. Standard lengths are in 1-ft increments. 


6-2 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Table 6—1. Standard hardwood lumber grades*” 


Minimum 
Allowable amount of Allowable 
surface piece in cuttings 
Allowable measure of  clearface 
width pieces cuttings Maximum Minimum 
Grade and allowable lengths (in.) (fi) (%) no. size 
FAS 6+ 4to7 83-1/3 1 4 in. by 5 ft 
8 to 16 ft 6 and 7 91-2/3 2 or 
and 8 to 11 83-1/3 2 3 in. by 7 ft 
FIF 8 to 11 91-2/3 3 
8 to 16 ft* 12 to 15 83-1/2 3 
12 to 15 91-2/3 4 
16+ 83-1/3 4 
Selects 6 to 16 ft 4+ 2 and 3 91-2/3 1 4 in. by 5 ft 
4+ —4 or 
3 in. by 7 ft 
No. | Common 4 to 16 ft (only 3+ 1 100 0 4 in. by 2 ft 
5% of minimum width is 2 75 1 or 
allowed) 3 and 4 66-2/3 1 3 in. by 3 ft 
3 and 4 75 2 
5 to7 66-2/3 2 
5 to7 75 3 
8 to 10 66-2/3 3 
11 to 13 66-2/3 4 
14+ 66-2/3 5 
No. 2 Common 4 to 16 ft 3+ 1 66-2/3 1 3 in. by 2 ft 
2 and 3 50 1 
2 and 3 66-2/3 2 
4 and 5 50 2 
4 and 5 66-2/3 3 
6 and 7 50 3 
6 and 7 66-2/3 4 
8 and 9 50 4 
10 and 11 50 5 
12 and 13 50 6 
14+ 50 7 
No. 3A Common 4 to 16 ft 3+ 1+ 33-1/3' —s 3 in. by 2 ft 
No. 3B Common 4 to 16 ft 3+ 1+ 25" —8 1-1/2 in. by 
Sound Wormy* 36 in” 


“Current grading rules are written only in the inch-pound system of measurement. 

"Inspection made on poorer side of piece, except in Selects grade. 

‘FAS is a grade that designates Firsts and Seconds. FIF is a grade that designates FAS one face. 

‘Same as F1F, with reverse side of board not below No. 1 Common. 

“Sound Wormy grade shall not be below No. 1 Common except that the natural characteristics of worm holes, 
bird pecks, stain, sound knot not exceeding 3/4 in. in diameter are admitted. Other sound defects that do not 
exceed in extent or damage the defects described are admitted in the cuttings. Unless otherwise specified, 
Sound Wormy shall include the full product of the log in No. 1 Common and Better Sound Wormy. 

‘Also admits pieces that grade not below No. 2 Common on the good face and reverse side of sound cuttings. 


"Unlimited. 
Cuttings must be sound; clear face not required. 


Standard Dimensions 


Standard lengths of hardwood lumber are in 305-mm (1-ft) 
increments from 1.2 to 4.9 m (4 to 16 ft). Standard thickness 
values for hardwood lumber, rough and surfaced on two 


widths; however, the grades do specify minimum width for 
each grade as follows: 


Minimum width 


sides (S2S), are given in Table 6-4. The thickness of S1S Grade (mm (in.)) 
lumber is subject to contract agreement. Abbreviations com- FAS 152 (6) 
monly used in contracts and other documents for the pur- FIF 152 (6) 
chase and sale of lumber are listed at the end of this chapter. Selects 102 (4) 
No. 1, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B Common 76 (3) 


Hardwood lumber is usually manufactured to random 
width. The hardwood lumber grades do not specify standard 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 6-2. Hardwood grading associations in United States® 


Species covered by grading rules 


Name and address (products) 


National Hardwood Lumber Association 
P.O. Box 34518 

Memphis, TN 38184-0518 
www.nhla.com 


All hardwood species (furniture 
cuttings, construction lumber) 


Wood Components Manufacturers Association 
741 Butlers Gate, Suite 100 

Marietta, GA 30068 
www.woodcomponents.org 


All hardwood species (hardwood 
furniture dimension, squares, 
laminated stock, interior trim, stair 
treads and risers) 


Maple Flooring Manufacturers Association 
111 Deer lake Road Suite 100 

Deerfield, IL 60015 

www.maplefloor.org 


Maple, beech, birch (flooring) 


National Oak Flooring Manufacturers Association Oak, ash, pecan, hickory, pecan, 
22.N. Front St., Suite 1080 beech, birch, hard maple (flooring, 
Memphis, TN 38103 including prefinished) 
www.nofma.org 


“Grading associations that include hardwood species in structural grades are listed in Table 6-5. 


If the width is specified by purchase agreement, S1E or S2E through one or more manufacturing stages. Completely fab- 
lumber is 10 mm (3/8 in.) scant of nominal size in lumber ricated parts have been completely processed for their end 
less than 203 mm (8 in.) wide and 13 mm (1/2 in.) scant in use. 


i 
tumiber =e02 ane ean) wide Finished Market Products 


Some hardwood lumber products are graded in relatively 
finished form, with little or no further processing antici- 
pated. Flooring is probably the finished market product with 
the highest volume. Other examples are lath, siding, ties, 
planks, carstock, construction boards, timbers, trim, mould- 
ing, stair treads, and risers. Grading rules promulgated for 
flooring anticipate final consumer use and are summarized 
in this section. Details on grades of other finished products 
are found in appropriate association grading rules. 


Dimension and Component Parts 


The term “dimension parts” for hardwoods signifies stock 
that is processed in specific thickness, width, and length, 

or multiples thereof and ranges from semi-machined to 
completely machined component products. This stock is 
sometimes referred to as “hardwood dimension stock” or 
“hardwood lumber for dimension parts.” This stock should 
not be confused with “dimension lumber,” a term used in the 
structural lumber market to mean lumber standard 38 mm to 


less than 89 mm thick (nominal 2 in. to less than 4 in. thick). Haniweed Hodraw-gencrlly igemdad underthequleset 


Dimension component parts are normally kiln dried and 
generally graded under the rules of the Wood Components 
Manufacturers Association (WCMA). These rules encom- 
pass three classes of material, each of which is classified 
into various grades: 


Hardwood Solid kiln-dried Solid kiln-dried 
dimension parts squares squares 
(flat stock) (rough) (surfaced) 
Clear two faces Clear Clear 
Clear one face Select Select 
Paint Sound Paint 
Core Second 


Sound 


Each class may be further defined as semifabricated (rough 
or surfaced) or completely fabricated, including edge-glued 
panels. The rough wood component parts are blank-sawn 

and ripped to size. Surfaced semifabricated parts have been 


6-4 


the Maple Flooring Manufacturers Association (MFMA) 
or the National Oak Flooring Manufacturers Association 
(NOFMA). Tongued-and-grooved, end-matched hardwood 
flooring is commonly furnished. Square-edge, square-end- 
strip flooring is also available as well as parquet flooring 
suitable for laying with mastic. 


The grading rules of the Maple Flooring Manufacturers 
Association cover flooring that is manufactured from hard 
maple, beech, and birch. Each species is graded into four 
categories: 


e First grade—one face practically free of all imperfec- 
tions; variations in natural color of wood allowed 


e Second grade—tight, sound knots (except on edges or 
ends) and other slight imperfections allowed; must be 
possible to lay flooring without waste 

e = Third grade—may contain all visual features common 
to hard maple, beech, and birch; will not admit voids 
on edges or ends, or holes over 10-mm (3/8-in.) in 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Table 6-3. Nomenclature of commercial hardwood lumber 


Commercial Commercial 
name for name for 
lumber Common treename — Botanical name lumber Common tree name Botanical name 
Alder, red Red alder Alnus rubra Maple, Oregon __ Big leaf maple Acer macrophyllum 
Ash, black Black ash Fraxinus nigra Maple, soft Red maple Acer rubrum 
Ash, Oregon Oregon ash Fraxinus latifolia Silver maple Acer saccharinum 
Ash, white Blue ash Fraxinus quadrangulata Oak, red Black oak Quercus velutina 
Green ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica Blackjack oak Quercus marilandica 
White ash Fraxinus americana California black oak = Quercus kelloggi 
Aspen (popple) Bigtooth aspen Populus grandidentata Cherrybark oak Quercus falcata var. 
pagodaefolia 
Quaking aspen Populus tremuloides Laurel oak Quercus laurifolia 
Basswood American basswood = Tilia americana Northern pin oak Quercus ellipsoidalis 
White basswood Tilia heterophylla Northern red oak Quercus rubra 
Beech American beech Fagus grandifolia Nuttall oak Quercus nuttallii 
Birch Gray birch Betula populifolia Pin oak Quercus palustris 
Paper birch Betula papyrifera Scarlet oak Quercus coccinea 
River birch Betula nigra Shumard oak Quercus shumardii 
Sweet birch Betula lenta Southern red oak Quercus falcata 
Yellow birch Betula alleghaniensis Turkey oak Quercus laevis 
Boxelder Boxelder Acer negundo Willow oak Quercus phellos 
Buckeye Ohio buckeye Aesculus glabra Oak, white Arizona white oak Quercus arizonica 
Yellow buckeye Aesculus octandra Blue oak Quercus douglasii 
Butternut Butternut Juglans cinerea Bur oak Quercus macrocarpa 
Cherry Black cherry Prunus serotina Valley oak Quercus lobata 
Chestnut American chestnut Castanea dentate Chestnut oak Quercus prinus 
Cottonwood Balsam poplar Populus balsamifera Chinkapin oak Quercus muehlenbergii 
Eastern cottonwood Populus deltoids Emory oak Quercus emoryi 
Black cottonwood Populus trichocarpa Gambel oak Quercus gambelii 
Cucumber Cucumbertree Magnolia acuminata Mexican blue oak Quercus oblongifolia 
Dogwood Flowering dogwood = Cornus florida Live oak Quercus virginiana 
Pacific dogwood Cornus nuttallii Oregon white oak Quercus garryana 
Elm, rock Cedar elm Ulmus crassifolia Overcup oak Quercus lyrata 
Rock elm Ulmus thomasii Post oak Quercus stellata 
September elm Ulmus serotina Swamp chestnut oak Quercus michauxii 
Winged elm Ulmus alata Swamp white oak Quercus bicolor 
Elm, soft American elm Ulmus Americana White oak Quercus alba 
Slippery elm Ulmus rubra Oregon myrtle  California-laurel Umbellularia californica 
Gum Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua Osage orange Osage-orange Maclura pomifera 
Hackberry Hackberry Celtis occidentalis Pecan Bitternut hickory Carya cordiformis 
Sugarberry Celtis laevigata Nutmeg hickory Carya myristiciformis 
Hickory Mockernut hickory Carya tomentosa Water hickory Carya aquatica 
Pignut hickory Carya glabra Pecan Carya illinoensis 
Shagbark hickory Carya ovata Persimmon Common Diospyros virginiana 
persimmon 
Shellbark hickory Carya lacinosa Poplar Yellow-poplar Liriodendron tulipifera 
Holly American holly Ilex opaca Sassafras Sassafras Sassafras albidum 
Ironwood Eastern Ostrya virginiana Sycamore Sycamore Platanus occidentalis 
hophornbeam 
Locust Black locust Robinia pseudoacacia Tanoak Tanoak Lithocarpus densiflorus 
Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos Tupelo Black tupelo, Nyssa sylvatica 
blackgum 
Madrone Pacific madrone Arbutus menziesii Ogeechee tupelo Nyssa ogeche 
Magnolia Southern magnolia Magnolia grandiflora Water tupelo Nyssa aquatica 
Sweetbay Magnolia virginiana Walnut Black walnut Juglans nigra 
Maple, hard Black maple Acer nigrum Willow Black willow Salix nigra 
Sugar maple Acer saccharum Peachleaf willow Salix amygdaloides 


diameter; must permit proper laying of floor and pro- 
vide a serviceable floor; few restrictions on imperfec- 
tions; must be possible to lay flooring properly 


e Fourth grade—may contain all visual features, but must 
be possible to lay a serviceable floor, with some cutting 


Combination grades of “Second and Better” and “Third 
and Better” are sometimes specified. There are also special 
grades based on color and species. 


The standard thickness of MFMA hard maple, beech, and 
birch flooring is 20 mm (25/32 in.). Face widths are 38, 51, 
57, and 83 mm (1-1/2, 2, 2-1/4, and 3-1/4 in.). Standard 
lengths are 610 mm (2 ft) and longer in First- and Second- 
grade flooring and 381 mm (1-1/4 ft) and longer in Third- 
grade flooring. 


The Official Flooring Grading Rules of NOFMA cover oak 
(unfinished and prefinished), beech, birch, hard maple, ash, 
and hickory/pecan. Flooring grades are determined by the 
appearance of the face surface. 


Oak is separated as red oak and white oak and by grain di- 
rection: plain sawn (all cuts), quartersawn (50% quartered 
character), rift sawn (75% rift character), and quarter/rift 
sawn (a combination). Oak flooring has four main grade 
separations—Clear, Select, No. | Common, and No. 2 
Common. Clear is mostly heartwood and accepts a 10-mm 
(3/8-in.) strip of bright sapwood or an equivalent amount 
not more than 25 mm (1 in.) wide along the edge and a 
minimum number of character marks and discoloration, al- 
lowing for all natural heartwood color variations. Select al- 
lows all color variations of natural heartwood and sapwood 


Table 6-4. Standard 
thickness values for rough 
and surfaced (S2S) 
hardwood lumber 


Rough Surfaced 
((mm)(Gin.)) —_ ((mm)(in.)) 
10 (3/8) 5 (3/16) 
13. (1/2) 8 (5/16) 
16 (5/8) 9 (7/16) 
19 (3/4) 14 (9/16) 
2% 86©6 a) 21 (13/16) 
32. (1-1/4) 27. (1-1/16) 
38 (1-1/2) 33. (1-5/16) 
44 (1-3/4) 38 (1-1/2) 


63 (2-1/2) 57 (2-1/4) 

76 ~~ (3) 70 (2-3/4) 

89 (3-1/2) 83 (3-1/4) 
102. (4) 95 (3-3/4) 
lid @ig. —* “= 
27 8G lu SS 
ia Giga —§§ = 
Be eS 


“Finished size not specified in rules. 
Thickness subject to special 
contract. 


6-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


along with characters such as small knots, pinworm holes, 
and brown streaks. No. 1 Common contains prominent 
variations in coloration, which include heavy streaks, sticker 
stains, open checks, knots, and small knot holes that fill. 

No. 2 Common contains sound natural variation of the for- 
est product and manufacturing imperfections to provide a 
serviceable floor. 


Average lengths for unfinished oak grades are as follows: 


Grade Standard packaging Shorter packaging 
Clear 1.14 m (3-3/4 ft) 1.07 m (3-1/2 ft) 
Select 0.99 m (3-1/4 ft) 0.91 m (3 ft) 
No.1 Common _ 0.84 m (2-3/4 ft) 0.76 m (2-/1/2 ft) 
No.2 Common 0.69 m (2-1/4 ft) 0.61 m (2 ft) 


Standard packaging refers to nominal 2.4-m (8-ft) pallets or 
nested bundles. Shorter packaging refers to nominal 2.1-m 
(7-ft) and shorter pallets or nested bundles. 


Standard and special NOFMA grades for species other than 
oak are as follows: 


Species Grade 
Standard Grades 
Beech, birch, First, Second, Third, Second & Better, Third 
andhard maple & Better 
Hickory and First, Second, Third, Second & Better, Third 
pecan & Better 
Ash Clear, Select, No. 1 Common, 
No. 2 Common 
Special Grades 
Beech and birch _‘ First Grade Red 
Hard maple First Grade White 
Hickory and First Grade White, First Grade Red, Second 
pecan Grade Red 


Standard thickness values for NOFMA tongue and groove 

flooring are 19, 13, 10 (3/4, 1/2, 3/8 in.), with 20 and 

26 mm (25/32 and 33/32 in.) for maple flooring. Standard 

face widths are 38, 51, 57, and 83 mm (1-1/2, 2, 2-1/4, and 
3-1/4 in.). Strips are random length from minimum 0.23 m 
to maximum 2.6 m (9 to 102 in.). 


Lumber Species 


Names used by the trade to describe commercial lumber in 
the United States are not always the same as names of trees 
adopted as official by the U.S. Forest Service. Table 6-3 
shows the commercial name, the U.S Forest Service tree 
name, and the botanical name. United States agencies and 
associations that prepare rules for and supervise grading of 
hardwoods are given in Table 6—2. 


Softwood Lumber 


For many years, softwood lumber has demonstrated the 
versatility of wood by serving as a primary raw material for 


Chapter 6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


construction and manufacture. In this role, softwood lum- 
ber has been produced in a wide variety of products from 
many different species. The first industry-sponsored grad- 
ing rules (product descriptions) for softwoods, which were 
established before 1900, were comparatively simple because 
sawmills marketed their lumber locally and grades had only 
local significance. As new timber sources were developed 
and lumber was transported to distant points, each produc- 
ing region continued to establish its own grading rules; thus, 
lumber from various regions differed in size, grade name, 
and allowable grade characteristics. When different species 
were graded under different rules and competed in the 

same consuming areas, confusion and dissatisfaction were 
inevitable. 


To minimize unnecessary differences in the grading rules of 
softwood lumber and to improve and simplify these rules, a 
number of conferences were organized by the U.S. Depart- 
ment of Commerce from 1919 to 1925. These meetings 
were attended by representatives of lumber manufacturers, 
distributors, wholesalers, retailers, engineers, architects, 

and contractors. The result was a relative standardization of 
sizes, definitions, and procedures for deriving allowable de- 
sign properties, formulated as a voluntary American Lumber 
Standard. This standard has been modified several times, 
including addition of hardwood species to the standard 
beginning in 1970. The current edition is the American Soft- 
wood Lumber Standard PS—20. Lumber cannot be graded as 
American Standard lumber unless the grade rules have been 
approved by the American Lumber Standard Committee 
(ALSC), Inc., Board of Review. 


Softwood lumber is classified for market use by form of 
manufacture, species, and grade. For many products, the 
American Softwood Lumber Standard and the grading rules 
certified through it serve as a basic reference. For specific 
information on other products, reference must be made to 
grade rules, industry marketing aids, and trade journals. 


Lumber Grades 


Softwood lumber grades can be classified into three major 
categories of use: (a) yard lumber, (b) structural lumber, and 
(c) Factory and Shop lumber. Yard lumber and structural 
lumber relate principally to lumber expected to function as 
graded and sized after primary processing (sawing and plan- 
ing). Factory and Shop refer to lumber that will undergo a 
number of further manufacturing steps and reach the con- 
sumer in a significantly different form. 


Yard Lumber 


Grading requirements of yard lumber are specifically related 
to the construction uses intended, and little or no further 
grading occurs once the piece leaves the sawmill. Yard lum- 
ber can be placed into two basic classifications, Select and 
Common. Select and Common lumber, as categorized here, 
encompass those lumber products in which appearance or 
utility is of primary importance; structural integrity, while 
sometimes important, is a secondary feature. 


Select Lumber—Select lumber is generally non-stress- 
graded, but it forms a separate category because of the 
distinct importance of appearance in the grading process. 
Select lumber is intended for natural and paint finishes. This 
category of lumber includes lumber that has been machined 
to a pattern and S4S lumber. Secondary manufacture of 
these items is usually restricted to on-site fitting such as 
cutting to length and mitering. The Select category includes 
trim, siding, flooring, ceiling, paneling, casing, base, step- 
ping, and finish boards. 


Most Select lumber grades are generally described by letters 
and combinations of letters (B&BTR, C&BTR, C Select, 

D, D Select) or names (Superior, Prime, Supreme, Choice, 
Quality) depending upon the species and the grading rules 
under which the lumber is graded. (See list of commonly 
used lumber abbreviations at the end of this chapter.) The 
specifications FG (flat grain), VG (vertical grain), and MG 
(mixed grain) are offered as a purchase option for some 
select lumber products. 


In cedar and redwood, there is a pronounced difference in 
color between heartwood and sapwood. Heartwood also has 
high natural resistance to decay, so some grades are denoted 
as “heart.” Because Select lumber grades emphasize the 
quality of one face, the reverse side may be lower in qual- 
ity. Select lumber grades are not uniform across species and 
products, so certified grade rules for the species must be 
used for detailed reference. 


Common Lumber—Common lumber is normally a non- 
stress-graded product. The grades of Common lumber are 
suitable for construction and utility purposes. Common lum- 
ber is generally separated into three to five different grades 
depending upon the species and grading rules involved. 
Grades may be described by number (No. 1, No. 2, No. 1 
Common, No. 2 Common) or descriptive term (Select Mer- 
chantable, Construction, Standard). 


Because there are differences in the inherent properties of 
various species and their corresponding names, the grades 
for different species are not always interchangeable. The 
top-grade boards (No. 1, No. 1 Common, Select Merchant- 
able) are usually graded for serviceability, but appearance 
is also considered. These grades are used for such purposes 
as siding, cornice, shelving, and paneling. Features such as 
knots and knotholes are permitted to be larger and more fre- 
quent as the grade level becomes lower. Intermediate-grade 
boards are often used for such purposes as subfloors, roof 
and wall sheathing, and rough concrete work. The lower 
grade boards are selected for adequate usability, not appear- 
ance. They are used for roof and wall sheathing, subfloor, 
and rough concrete form work (Fig. 6—2). 


Grading provisions for other non-stress-graded products 
vary by species, product, and applicable grading rules. For 
detailed descriptions, consult the appropriate grade rule 
for these products (see Table 6—5 for softwood grading 
organizations). 


6-7 


No. 1 


No. 2 


No. 3 


Figure 6—2. Typical examples of softwood boards in the 
lower grades. 


Structural Lumber—AImost all softwood lumber standard 
38 to 89 mm thick (nominal 2 to 4 in. thick, actual 1-1/2 to 
3-1/2 in. thick) is produced as dimension lumber. Dimension 
lumber is stress graded and assigned allowable properties 
under the National Grading Rule, a part of the American 
Softwood Lumber Standard. For dimension lumber, a single 
set of grade names and descriptions is used throughout the 
United States, although the allowable properties vary with 
species. Timbers (lumber standard 114 mm (nominal 5 in.) 
or more in least dimension) are also structurally graded un- 
der ALSC procedures. Unlike grade descriptions for dimen- 
sion lumber, grade descriptions for structural timbers are not 
standardized across species. For most species, timber grades 
are classified according to intended use. Beams and string- 
ers are members standard 114 mm (nominal 5 in.) or more 
in thickness with a width more than 38 mm (nominal 2 in.) 
greater than the thickness. Beams and stringers are primar- 
ily used to resist bending stresses, and the grade description 
of some timber grades for the middle third of the length of 
the beam is more stringent than that for the outer two-thirds. 
Posts and timbers are members standard 114 by 114 mm 
(nominal 5 by 5 in.) and larger, where the width is not more 
than 38 mm (nominal 2 in.) greater than the thickness. Post 
and timbers are primarily used to resist axial stresses. Struc- 
tural timbers of Southern Pine are graded without regard to 
anticipated use, as with dimension lumber. 


Other stress-graded products include decking and some 
boards. Stress-graded lumber may be graded visually or 


6-8 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


mechanically. Stress grades and the National Grading Rule 
are discussed in Chapter 6. 


Structural Laminations—Structural laminating grades 
describe the characteristics used to segregate lumber to be 
used in structural glued-laminated (glulam) timbers. Gen- 
erally, allowable properties are not assigned separately to 
laminating grades; rather, the rules for laminating grades are 
based on the expected effect of that grade of lamination on 
the combined glulam timber. 


There are two kinds of graded material: visually graded and 
E-rated. Visually graded material is graded according to one 
of three sets of grading rules: (1) the first set is based on 

the grading rules certified as meeting the requirements of 
the American Softwood Lumber Standard with additional 
requirements for laminating; (2) the second set involves 
laminating grades typically used for visually graded western 
species and includes three basic categories (L1, L2, L3); and 
(3) the third set includes special requirements for tension 
members and outer tension laminations on bending mem- 
bers. The visual grades have provisions for dense, close- 
grain, medium-grain, or coarsegrain lumber. 


The E-rated grades are categorized by a combination of 
visual grading criteria and lumber stiffness. These grades 
are expressed in terms of the size of maximum edge char- 
acteristic permitted (as a fraction of the width) along with 
a specified long-span modulus of elasticity (for example, 
1/6-2.2E). 


Radius-Edged Decking—Radius-edged decking is another 
substantial softwood lumber product. Radius-edged decking 
is intended for flatwise use and has oversized eased edges 
of a particular radius. Most often radius-edged decking is 
produced as 25- or 38-mm- (nominal 5/4- or 2-in.-, actual 1- 
or 1-1/2-in.-) thick by 140-mm- (nominal 4- to 6-in.-, actual 
3-1/2- to 5-1/2-in.-) wide pieces of lumber 2.4 to 4.9 m (8 to 
16 ft) in length. The standard radius for 25-mm-thick radius- 
edged decking product is 6.4 mm (1/4 in.), and 9.5 mm (3/8 
in.) for 38-mm-thick decking. Decking is usually separated 
into a minimum of two grades, most commonly Premium 
and Standard. 


Factory and Shop Lumber 


A wide variety of species, grades, and sizes of softwood 
lumber is supplied to industrial accounts for cutting to spe- 
cific smaller sizes, which become integral parts of other 
products. In the secondary manufacturing process, grade 
descriptions, sizes, and often the entire appearance of the 
wood piece are changed. Thus, for Factory and Shop lum- 
ber, the role of the grading process is to reflect as accurately 
as possible the yield to be obtained in the subsequent cutting 
operation. Typical of lumber for secondary manufacture are 
the factory grades, industrial clears, box lumber, moulding 
stock, and ladder stock. The variety of species available for 
these purposes has led to a variety of grade names and grade 
definitions. The following sections briefly outline some of 
the more common classifications. For details, reference must 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Table 6-5. Organizations promulgating softwood grades 


Name and address 


Species covered by grading rules 


Cedar Shingle & Shake Bureau 
515 116th Avenue NE, Suite 275 
Bellevue, WA 98004-5294 


National Hardwood Lumber Association 
P.O. Box 34518 
Memphis, TN 38184-0518 


National Lumber Grades Authority* 

406 First Capital Place 

960 Quamside Drive 

New Westminister, BC, Canada V3M6G2 


Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association, Inc." 


272 Tuttle Road, P.O. Box 87A 
Cumberland Center, ME 04021 


Northern Softwood Lumber Bureau* 
272 Tuttle Road, P.O. Box 87A 
Cumberland Center, ME 04021 


Redwood Inspection Service* 
405 Enfrente Drive, Suite 200 
Novato, CA 94949 


Southern Cypress Manufacturers Association 
400 Penn Center Boulevard Suite 530 
Pittsburgh, PA 15235 


Southern Pine Inspection Bureau* 
4709 Scenic Highway 
Pensacola, FL 32504 


West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau* 
Box 23145 

6980 SW. Varns Road 

Portland, OR 97223 


Western Wood Products Association* 
Yeon Building, 522 SW Fifth Avenue 
Portland, OR 97204-2122 


Western redcedar (shingles and 
shakes) 


Baldcypress, eastern redcedar 


Northern white-cedar, western 
redcedar, yellow-cedar, alpine fir, 
amabilis fir, balsam fir, Douglas-fir, 
grand fir, eastern hemlock, western 
hemlock, western larch, eastern white 
pine, jack pine, lodgepole pine, 
ponderosa pine, red pine, western 
white pine, black spruce, Sitka spruce, 
red spruce, Engelmann spruce, white 
spruce, tamarack, aspen, black 
cottonwood, balsam poplar, red alder, 
white birch 


Balsam fir, eastern white pine, red 
pine, eastern hemlock, black spruce, 
white spruce, red spruce, pitch pine, 
tamarack, jack pine, northern white 
cedar, aspen, mixed maple, beech, 
birch, hickory, mixed oaks, yellow 
poplar 


Eastern white pine, jack pine, red pine, 
pitch pine, eastern spruce (red, white, 
and black), balsam fir, eastern 
hemlock, tamarack, eastern 
cottonwood, aspen yellow poplar 


Redwood 


Baldcypress 


Longleaf pine, slash pine, shortleaf 
pine, loblolly pine, Virginia pine, 
pond pine, sand pine, baldcypress 


Douglas-fir, western hemlock, western 
redcedar, incense-cedar, Port-Orford- 
cedar, yellow-cedar, western true firs, 
mountain hemlock, Sitka spruce, 
western larch 


Ponderosa pine, western (Idaho) white 
pine, Douglas-fir, sugar pine, western 
true firs, western larch, Engelmann 
spruce, incense-cedar, western 
hemlock, lodgepole pine, western 
redcedar, mountain hemlock, red 
alder, aspen, subalpine fir, Sitka 
spruce, Port-Orford cedar 


“Publishes grading rules certified by the Board of Review of the American Lumber Standard Committee as 


conforming to the American Softwood Lumber Standard PS—20. 


be made to industry sources, such as certified grading rules. 
Availability and grade designation often vary by region and 
species. 


Factory (Shop) Grades—Traditionally, softwood lumber 
used for cuttings has been called Factory or Shop. This 
lumber forms the basic raw material for many secondary 
manufacturing operations. Some grading rules refer to these 
grades as Factory, while others refer to them as Shop. All 
impose a somewhat similar nomenclature in the grade struc- 
ture. Shop lumber is graded on the basis of characteristics 
that affect its use for general cut-up purposes or on the basis 
of size of cutting, such as for sash and doors. Factory Select 
and Select Shop are typical high grades, followed by No. 1 
Shop, No. 2 Shop, and No. 3 Shop. 


Grade characteristics of boards are influenced by the width, 
length, and thickness of the basic piece and are based on 
the amount of high-quality material that can be removed by 
cutting. Typically, Factory Select and Select Shop lumber 
would be required to contain 70% of cuttings of specified 
size, clear on both sides. No. 1 Shop would be required to 
have 50% cuttings and No. 2 Shop, 33-1/3%. Because of 
different characteristics assigned to grades with similar no- 
menclature, the grades of Factory and Shop lumber must be 
referenced to the appropriate certified grading rules. 


Industrial Clears—These grades are used for trim, cabinet 
stock, garage door stock, and other product components 
where excellent appearance, mechanical and physical 
properties, and finishing characteristics are important. The 
principal grades are B& BTR, C, and D Industrial. Grading 
is primarily based on the best face, although the influence of 
edge characteristics is important and varies depending upon 
piece width and thickness. In redwood, the Industrial Clear 
All Heart grade includes an “all heart” requirement for de- 
cay resistance in the manufacture of cooling towers, tanks, 
pipe, and similar products. 


Moulding, Ladder, Pole, Tank, and Pencil Stock—Within 
producing regions, grading rules delineate the requirements 
for a variety of lumber classes oriented to specific consumer 
products. Custom and the characteristics of the wood sup- 
ply have led to different grade descriptions and terminology. 
For example, in West Coast species, the ladder industry can 
choose from one “ladder and pole stock” grade plus two 
ladder rail grades and one ladder rail stock grade. In South- 
ern Pine, ladder stock is available as Select and Industrial. 
Moulding stock, tank stock, pole stock, stave stock, stadium 
seat stock, box lumber, and pencil stock are other typical 
classes oriented to the final product. Some product classes 
have only one grade level; a few offer two or three levels. 
Special features of these grades may include a restriction 

on sapwood related to desired decay resistance, specific re- 
quirements for slope of grain and growth ring orientation for 
high-stress use such as ladders, and particular cutting re- 
quirements as in pencil stock. All references to these grades 
should be made directly to current certified grading rules. 


6-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Lumber Manufacture 
Size 
Lumber length is recorded in actual dimensions, whereas 


width and thickness are traditionally recorded in “nominal” 
dimensions—actual dimensions are somewhat less. 


Softwood lumber is manufactured in length multiples of 
305 mm (1 ft) as specified in various grading rules. In 
practice, 610-mm (2-ft) multiples (in even numbers) are 
common for most construction lumber. Width of softwood 
lumber varies, commonly from standard 38 to 387 mm 
(nominal 2 to 16 in.). The thickness of lumber can be gener- 
ally categorized as follows: 


e Boards—lumber less than standard 38 mm (nominal 
2 in.) in thickness 


e Dimension—lumber from standard 38 mm (nominal 
2 in.) to, but not including, 114 mm (nominal 5 in.) in 
thickness 


e Timbers—lumber standard 114 mm (nominal 5 in.) or 
more in thickness in least dimension 


To standardize and clarify nominal to actual sizes, the Amer- 
ican Softwood Lumber Standard PS—20 specifies the actual 
thickness and width for lumber that falls under the standard. 
The standard sizes for yard and structural lumber are given 
in Table 6-6. Timbers are usually surfaced while “green” 
(unseasoned); however, dry sizes are also given. 


Because dimension lumber and boards of some species may 
be surfaced green or dry at the prerogative of the manu- 
facturer, both green and dry standard sizes are given. The 
sizes are such that a piece of green lumber, surfaced to the 
standard green size, will shrink to approximately the stan- 
dard dry size as it dries to about 15% moisture content. The 
definition of dry boards and dimension is lumber that has 
been seasoned or dried to a maximum moisture content of 
19%. The definition for dry timbers of the various species 
is found in the certified grading rules. Lumber may also be 
designated as kiln dried (KD), meaning the lumber has been 
seasoned in a chamber to a predetermined moisture content 
by applying heat. 


Factory and Shop lumber for remanufacture is offered in 
specified sizes to fit end-product requirements. Factory 
(Shop) grades for general cuttings are offered in thickness 
from standard 19 to 89 mm (nominal | to 4 in.). Thickness- 
es of door cuttings start at 29 mm (nominal 1-3/8 in.). Cut- 
tings are of various lengths and widths. Laminating stock is 
sometimes offered oversize, compared with standard dimen- 
sion sizes, to permit resurfacing prior to laminating. Indus- 
trial Clears can be offered rough or surfaced in a variety of 
sizes, starting from standard 38 mm (nominal 2 in.) 

and thinner and as narrow as standard 64 mm (nominal 

3 in.). Sizes for special product grades such as moulding 
stock and ladder stock are specified in appropriate grading 
rules or handled by purchase agreements. 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Table 6-6. American Standard Lumber sizes for yard and structural lumber for construction 


Thickness 


Face width 


Minimum dressed 


Minimum dressed 


Nominal Dry Green Nominal Dry Green 
Item (in.) (mm (in.)) (mm (in.)) (in.) (mm (in.)) (mm (in.)) 
Boards 1 19 (3/4) 20 (25/32) 2 38 (1-1/2) 40 = (1-9/16) 
1-1/4 25 (1) 26 (1-1/32) 3 64 (2-1/2) 65 = (2-9/16) 
1-1/2 32 (1-1/4) 33 (1-9/32) 4 89 (3-1/2) 90 = (3-9/16) 
5 114 (4-1/2) 117 (4-5/8) 
6 140 (5-1/2) 143 (5-5/8) 
7 165 (6-1/2) 168 (6-5/8) 
8 184 (7-1/4) 190 (7-1/2) 
9 210 (8-1/4) 216 (8-1/2) 
10 235 (9-1/4) 241 (9-1/2) 
11 260 (10-1/4) 267 ~~ (10-1/2) 
12 286 (11-1/4) 292 = (1-1/2) 
14 337 (13-1/4) 343 (13-1/2) 
16 387 (15-1/4) 394 = (15-1/2) 
Dimension 2 38 (1-1/2) 40 (1-9/16) 2 38 (1-1/2) 40  (1-9/16) 
2-1/2 51 (2) 52 (2-1/16) 3 64 (2-1/2) 65 = (2-9/16) 
3 64 (2-1/2) 65 (2-9/16) 4 89 (3-1/2) 90 = (3-9/16) 
3-1/2 76 (3) 78 (3-1/16) 5 114 (4-1/2) 117 (4-5/8) 
4 89 (3-1/2) 90 (3-9/16) 6 140 (5-1/2) 143 (5-5/8) 
4-1/2 102 (4) 103 (4-1/16) 8 184 (7-1/4) 190 (7-1/2) 
10 235 (9-1/4) 241 (9-1/2) 
12 286 (11-1/4) 292 = (1-1/2) 
14 337 (13-1/4) 343 (13-1/2) 
16 387 (15-1/4) 394 = (15-1/2) 
Timbers S5&6thick 13mm (1/2in. 13mm (1/2in. S&6wide 13mm (1/2in. 13mm (1/2in. 
off off) off off) off off) off off 
7-15 thick 19mm (3/4in. 13mm _ (1/2in. 7-I5wide 19mm = (3/4in. 13mm _ (1/2 in. 
off off) off off) off off) off off) 
>16thick 25mm (line 13mm (1/2in. 216wide 25mm (1 in. 13mm_= (1/2 in. 
off off) off off) off off) off off) 
Surfacing American Softwood Lumber Standard and further detailed 


Lumber can be produced either rough or surfaced (dressed). 
Rough lumber has surface imperfections caused by the pri- 
mary sawing operations. It may be greater than target size 
by variable amounts in both thickness and width, depending 
upon the type of sawmill equipment. Rough lumber serves 
as a raw material for further manufacture and also for some 
decorative purposes. A roughsawn surface is common in 
post and timber products. 


Surfaced lumber has been surfaced by a machine on one 
side (SIS), two sides (S2S), one edge (SIE), two edges 
(S2E), or combinations of sides and edges (SIS1E, S2S1E, 
S1S2, S4S). Lumber is surfaced to attain smoothness of 
surface and uniformity of size. 


Imperfections or blemishes defined in the grading rules 
and caused by machining are classified as “manufacturing 
imperfections.” For example, chipped and torn grain are 
surface irregularities in which surface fibers have been torn 
out by the surfacing operation. Chipped grain is a “barely 
perceptible” characteristic, while torn grain is classified by 
depth. Raised grain, skip, machine burn and gouge, chip 
marks, and wavy surfacing are other manufacturing imper- 
fections. Manufacturing imperfections are defined in the 


in the grading rules. Classifications of manufacturing imper- 
fections (combinations of imperfections allowed) are estab- 
lished in the rules as Standard A, Standard B, and so on. For 
example, Standard A admits very light torn grain, occasional 
very light chip marks, and very slight knife marks. These 
classifications are used as part of the grade rule description 
of some lumber products to specify the allowable surface 
quality. 


Patterns 


Lumber that has been matched, shiplapped, or otherwise 
patterned, in addition to being surfaced, is often classified 
as “worked lumber.” Figure 6—3 shows typical patterns. 


Softwood Lumber Species 


The names of lumber species adopted by the trade as stan- 
dard may vary from the names of trees adopted as official 
by the U.S. Forest Service. Table 6—7 shows the American 
Softwood Lumber Standard commercial names for lumber, 
the U.S. Forest Service tree names, and the botanical names. 
Some softwood species are marketed primarily in combina- 
tions. Designations such as Southern Pine and Hem-—Fir 
represent typical combinations. Grading rule agencies 


6-11 


Flooring (standard match) 


a - 


Ceiling (edge beading) 


ct 5 


Decking 


Heavy decking 


Drop siding (shiplapped) 


— 


Bevel siding 


c__\\__s 


Dressed and matched (center matched) 


es 


Shiplap 


Figure 6-3. Typical patterns of worked lumber. 


(Table 6—5) should be contacted for questions regarding 
combination names and species not listed in Table 6-7. 
Species groups are discussed further in Chapter 7. 


Softwood Lumber Grading 


Most lumber is graded under the supervision of inspection 
bureaus and grading agencies. These organizations super- 
vise lumber mill grading and provide reinspection services 


6-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


to resolve disputes concerning lumber shipments. Some of 
these agencies also write grading rules that reflect the spe- 
cies and products in the geographic regions they represent. 
These grading rules follow the American Softwood Lumber 
Standard (PS—20). This is important because it provides 

for recognized uniform grading procedures. Names and ad- 
dresses of rules-writing organizations in the United States 
and the species with which they are concerned are listed 

in Table 6—5. Canadian softwood lumber imported into the 
United States and graded by inspection agencies in Canada 
also follows the PS—20 standard. (Names and addresses of 
accredited Canadian grading agencies may be obtained from 
the American Lumber Standard Committee, P.O. Box 210, 
Germantown, MD 20874; email: alsc@alsc.org; 
www.alsc.org.) 


Purchase of Lumber 


After primary manufacture, most lumber products are 
marketed through wholesalers to remanufacturing plants 

or retail outlets. Because of the extremely wide variety of 
lumber products, wholesaling is very specialized—some 
organizations deal with only a limited number of species 

or products. Where the primary manufacturer can readily 
identify the customers, direct sales may be made. Primary 
manufacturers often sell directly to large retail-chain con- 
tractors, manufacturers of mobile and modular housing, and 
truss fabricators. 


Some primary manufacturers and wholesalers set up distri- 
bution yards in lumber-consuming areas to distribute both 
hardwood and softwood products more effectively. Retail 
yards draw inventory from distribution yards and, in wood- 
producing areas, from local lumber producers. The wide 
range of grades and species covered in the grade rules may 
not be readily available in most retail outlets. 


Transportation is a vital factor in lumber distribution. Of- 
ten, the lumber shipped by water is green because weight 

is not a major factor in this type of shipping. On the other 
hand, lumber reaching the East Coast from the Pacific Coast 
by rail is usually kiln-dried because rail shipping rates are 
based on weight. A shorter rail haul places southern and 
northeastern species in a favorable economic position in 
regard to shipping costs in this market. 


Changing transportation costs have influenced shifts in 
market distribution of species and products. Trucks have 
become a major factor in lumber transport for regional re- 
manufacture plants, for retail supply from distribution yards, 
and for much construction lumber distribution. 


The increased production capacity of foreign hardwood 
and softwood manufacturing and the availability of water 
transport have brought foreign lumber products to the U.S. 
market, particularly in coastal areas. 


Retail Yard Inventory 


Small retail yards throughout the United States carry soft- 
woods for construction purposes and often carry small 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Table 6-7. Nomenclature of principal commercial softwood lumber 


Commercial species or 
species group names 


under American Softwood 


Tree name used 


Lumber Standard in this handbook Botanical name 

Cedar 
Alaska yellow-cedar Chamaecyparis nootkatensis 
Eastern red eastern redcedar Juniperus virginiana 
Incense incense-cedar Libocedrus decurrens 
Northern white northern white-cedar Thuja occidentalis 
Port Orford Port-Orford-cedar Chamaecyparis lawsoniana 


Southern white 
Western red 
Cypress 
Baldcypress 
Pond cypress 
Fir 
Alpine 
Balsam 
California red 
Douglas Fir 
Fraser 
Grand 
Noble Fir 
Pacific Grand 
White 
Hemlock 
Carolina 
Eastern 
Mountain 
Western 
Juniper 
Western 


Larch 
Western 

Pine 
Bishop 
Coulter 
Digger 
Knobcone 
Idaho white 
Jack 
Jeffrey 
Limber 
Lodgepole 
Longleaf 


Northern white 
Norway 

Pitch 

Ponderosa 

Southern Pine Major 


Southern Pine Minor 


Southern Pine Mixed 


Atlantic white-cedar 
western redcedar 


baldcypress 
pond cypress 


subalpine fir (alpine fir) 
balsam fir 

California red fir 
Douglas-fir 

Fraser fir 

grand fir 

noble fir 

Pacific silver fir 

white fir 


Carolina hemlock 
eastern hemlock 
mountain hemlock 
western hemlock 


alligator juniper 

Rocky Mountain juniper 
Utah juniper 

western juniper 


western larch 


bishop pine 
Coulter pine 
Digger pine 
knobcone pine 
Western white pine 
jack pine 
Jeffrey pine 
limber pine 
lodgepole pine 
longleaf pine 
slash pine 
eastern white pine 
red pine 

pitch pine 
ponderosa pine 
loblolly pine 
longleaf pine 
shortleaf pine 
slash pine 
pond pine 

sand pine 
spruce pine 
Virginia pine 
loblolly pine 
longleaf pine 


Chamaecyparis thyoides 
Thuja plicata 


Taxodium distichum 
Taxodium distichum var. nutans 


Abies lasiocarpa 
Abies balsamea 

Abies magnifica 
Pseudotsuga menziesii 
Abies fraseri 

Abies grandis 

Abies procera 

Abies amabilis 

Abies concolor 


Tsuga caroliniana 
Tsuga canadensis 
Tsuga mertensiana 
Tsuga heterophylla 


Juniperus deppeana 

Juniperus scopulorum 
Juniperus osteosperma 
Juniperus occidentalis 


Larix occidentalis 


Pinus muricata 
Pinus coulteri 
Pinus sabibiana 
Pinus attenuata 
Pinus monticola 
Pinus banksiana 
Pinus jeffreyi 
Pinus flexilis 
Pinus contorta 
Pinus palustris 
Pinus elliottii 
Pinus strobus 
Pinus resinosa 
Pinus rigida 
Pinus ponderosa 
Pinus taeda 
Pinus palustris 
Pinus echinata 
Pinus elliottii 
Pinus serotina 
Pinus clausa 
Pinus glabra 
Pinus virginiana 
Pinus taeda 
Pinus palustris 


6-13 


6-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 6-7. Nomenclature of principal commercial softwood lumber—con. 


Commercial species or 
species group names 
under American Softwood 


Tree name used 


Lumber Standard in this handbook Botanical name 
pond pine Pinus serotina 
shortleaf pine Pinus echinata 
slash pine Pinus elliottii 


Radiata/Monterey Pine 
Sugar 
Whitebark 
Redwood 
Redwood 
Spruce 
Blue 
Eastern 


Engelmann 

Sitka 
Tamarack 

Tamarack 
Yew 

Pacific 
Coast Species 


Eastern Softwoods 


Hem-Fir 


Hem-Fir (North) 


Northern Pine 


North Species 


Virginia pine 
Monterey pine 
sugar pine 
whitebark pine 


redwood 


blue spruce 

black spruce 

red spruce 

white spruce 
Engelmann spruce 
Sitka spruce 


tamarack 


Pacific yew 
Douglas-fir 
western larch 
black spruce 

red spruce 

white spruce 
balsam fir 

eastern white pine 
jack pine 

pitch pine 

red pine 

eastern hemlock 
tamarack 

western hemlock 
California red fir 
grand fir 

noble fir 

Pacific silver fir 
white fir 

western hemlock 
Pacific silver fir 
jack pine 

pitch pine 

red pine 

northern white cedar 
western redcedar 
yellow-cedar 
eastern hemlock 
western hemlock 
Douglas-fir 
balsam fir 

grand fir 

Pacific silver fir 
subalpine (alpine) fir 
western larch 
tamarack 

eastern white pine 
jack pine 
lodgepole pine 
ponderosa pine 
red pine 

western white pine 
whitebark pine 


Pinus virginiana 
Pinus radiata 
Pinus lambertiana 
Pinus albicaulis 


Sequoia sempervirens 


Picea pungens 
Picea mariana 
Picea rubens 
Picea glauca 
Picea engelmannii 
Picea sitchensis 


Larix larcinia 


Taxus brevifolia 
Pseudotsuga menziesii 
Larix occidentalis 
Picea mariana 
Picea rubens 
Picea glauca 
Abies balsamea 
Pinus strobus 
Pinus banksiana 
Pinus rigida 

Pinus resinosa 
Tsuga canadensis 
Larix occidentalis 
Tsuga heterophylla 
Abies magnifica 
Abies grandis 
Abies procera 
Abies amabilis 
Abies concolor 
Tsuga heterophylla 
Abies amabilis 
Pinus banksiana 
Pinus rigida 

Pinus resinosa 
Thuja occidentalis 
Thuja plicanta 
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis 
Tsuga canadensis 
Tsuga heterophylla 
Pseudotsuga menziesii 
Abies balsamea 
Abies grandis 
Abies amabilis 
Abies lasiocarpa 
Larix occidentalis 
Larix laricina 
Pinus strobus 
Pinus banksiana 
Pinus contorta 
Pinus ponderosa 
Pinus resinosa 
Pinus monticola 
Pinus albicaulis 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Table 6-7. Nomenclature of principal commercial softwood lumber—con. 


Commercial species or 
species group names 


under American Softwood Tree name used 


Lumber Standard 


in this handbook 


Botanical name 


Southern Pine 


Spruce—Pine-Fir 


Spruce—Pine—Fir (South) 


Western Cedars 


Western Cedar (North) 


Western Woods 


Hemlock 


White Woods 


black spruce 
Engelmann spruce 
red spruce 

Sitka spruce 
bigtooth aspen 
quaking aspen 
black cottonwood 
balsam poplar 
loblolly pine 
longleaf pine 
shortleaf pine 
slash pine 

black spruce 
Engelmann spruce 
red spruce 

balsam fir 
subalpine (alpine) fir 
jack pine 
lodgepole pine 
black spruce 
Engelmann spruce 
red spruce 

Sitka spruce 
white spruce 
balsam fir 

jack pine 
lodgepole pine 
red pine 
incense-cedar 
western redcedar 
Port-Orford-cedar 
yellow-cedar 
western redcedar 
yellow-cedar 
Douglas-fir 
California red fir 
grand fir 

noble fir 

Pacific silver fir 
subalpine fir 
white fir 
mountain 

western hemlock 
western larch 
Engelmann spruce 
Sitka spruce 
lodgepole pine 
ponderosa pine 
sugar pine 
western white pine 
California red fir 
grand fir 

noble fir 

Pacific silver fir 
subalpine fir 
white fir 
mountain hemlock 
western hemlock 
Engelmann spruce 
Sitka spruce 
lodgepole pine 
ponderosa pine 
sugar pine 
western white pine 


Picea mariana 
Picea engelmannii 
Picea rubens 

Picea sitchensis 
Populus grandidentata 
Populus tremuloides 
Populus trichocarpa 
Populus balsamifera 
Pinus taeda 

Pinus palustris 
Pinus echinata 
Pinus elliottii 

Picea mariana 
Picea engelmannii 
Picea rubens 

Abies balsamea 
Abies lasiocarpa 
Pinus banksiana 
Pinus contorta 
Picea mariana 
Picea engelmannii 
Picea rubens 

Picea sitchensis 
Picea glauca 

Abies balsamea 
Pinus banksiana 
Pinus contorta 
Pinus resinosa 
Libocedrus decurrens 
Thuja plicata 


Chamaecyparis lawsoniana 
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis 


Thuja plicata 


Chamaecyparis nootkatensis 


Pseudotsuga menziesii 
Abies magnifica 
Abies grandis 
Abies procera 
Abies amabilis 
Abies lasiocarpa 
Abies concolor 
Tsuga mertensiana 
Tsuga heterophylla 
Larix occidentalis 
Picea engelmannii 
Picea sitchensis 
Pinus contorta 
Pinus ponderosa 
Pinus lambertiana 
Pinus monticola 
Abies magnifica 
Abies grandis 
Abies procera 
Abies amabilis 
Abies lasiocarpa 
Abies concolor 
Tsuga mertensiana 
Tsuga heterophylla 
Picea engelmannii 
Picea sitchensis 
Pinus contorta 
Pinus ponderosa 
Pinus lambertiana 
Pinus monticola 


6-15 


stocks of one or two hardwoods in grades suitable for finish- 
ing or cabinetwork. Special orders must be made for other 
hardwoods. Trim items such as moulding in either softwood 
or hardwood are available cut to standard size and pattern. 
Millwork plants usually make ready-for-installation cabi- 
nets, and retail yards carry or catalog many common styles 
and sizes. Hardwood flooring is available to the buyer only 
in standard patterns. Most retail yards carry stress grades of 
lumber. 


The assortment of species in general construction items 
carried by retail yards depends to a great extent upon geo- 
graphic location, and both transportation costs and tradition 
are important factors. Retail yards within, or close to, a 
major lumber-producing region commonly emphasize local 
timber. For example, a local retail yard on the Pacific North- 
west Coast may stock only green Douglas Fir and cedar 

in dimension grades, dry pine and hemlock in boards and 
moulding, and assorted special items such as redwood posts, 
cedar shingles and shakes, and rough cedar siding. The only 
hardwoods may be walnut and “Philippine mahogany” (the 
common market name encompassing many species, includ- 
ing tanguile, red meranti, and white lauan). Retail yards 
located farther from a major softwood supply, such as in 

the Midwest, may draw from several growing areas and 
may stock spruce and Southern Pine, for example. Because 
they are located in a major hardwood production area, these 
yards may stock, or have available to them, a different and 
wider variety of hardwoods. 


Geography has less influence where consumer demands are 
more specific. For example, where long construction lumber 
(6 to 8 m (20 to 26 ft)) is required, West Coast species are 
often marketed because the height of the trees in several 
species makes long lengths a practical market item. Ease 

of preservative treatability makes treated Southern Pine 
construction lumber available in a wide geographic area. 


Structural Lumber for Construction 


Dimension lumber is the principal stress-graded lumber 
available in a retail yard. It is primarily framing lumber for 
joists, rafters, and studs. Strength, stiffness, and uniformity 
of size are essential requirements. Dimension lumber is 
stocked in almost all yards, frequently in only one or two 
of the general purpose construction woods such as pine, 
fir, hemlock, or spruce. Standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 
2- by 4-in.) and wider dimension lumber is found in Select 
Structural, No. 1, No. 2, and No. 3 grades. Standard 38- by 
89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) dimension lumber may also 
be available as Construction, Standard, Utility, and Stud 
grades. Stud grade is also available in wider widths. 


Dimension lumber is often found in standard 38-, 89-, 140-, 
184-, 235-, and 286-mm (nominal 2-, 4-, 6-, 8-, 10-, and 
12-in.) widths and 2.4- to 5.5-m (8- to 18-ft) lengths in mul- 
tiples of 0.6 m (2 ft). Dimension lumber formed by struc- 
tural end-jointing procedures may be available. Dimension 
lumber thicker than standard 38 mm (nominal 2 in.) and 


6-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


longer than 5.5 m (18 ft) may not be commonly available in 
many retail yards. 


Other stress-graded products generally available are posts 
and timbers; some beams and stringers may also be in stock. 
Typical grades in these products are Select Structural, No. 1, 
and No. 2. 


Yard Lumber for Construction 


Boards are the most common non-stress-graded general 
purpose construction lumber in the retail yard. Boards are 
stocked in one or more species, usually in standard 19-mm 
(nominal 1-in.) thickness. Common widths are standard 38, 
64, 89, 140, 184, 235, and 286 mm (nominal 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 
10, and 12 in.). Grades generally available in retail yards 
are No. | Common, No. 2 Common, and No. 3 Common 
(Construction, Standard, No. 1, No. 2, etc.). Boards are sold 
square edged, dressed (surfaced) and matched (tongued and 
grooved), or with a shiplapped joint. Boards formed by end- 
jointing of shorter sections may constitute an appreciable 
portion of the inventory. 


Select Lumber 


Completion of a construction project usually depends on 

the availability of lumber items in finished or semi-finished 
form. The following items often may be stocked in only a 
few species, finishes, or sizes depending on the lumber yard. 


Finish—Finish boards usually are available in a local yard 
in one or two species, principally in grade C&BTR. Cedar 
and redwood have different grade designations: grades such 
as Clear Heart, A, or B are used in cedar; Clear All Heart, 
Clear, and B grade are typical in redwood. Finish boards are 
usually standard 19 mm (nominal | in.) thick, surfaced on 
two sides to 19 mm (nominal | in.); 38- to 286-mm (nomi- 
nal 2- to 12-in.) widths are usually stocked, in even 
increments. 


Siding—Siding is specifically intended to cover exterior 
walls. Beveled siding is ordinarily stocked in white pine, 
ponderosa pine, western redcedar, cypress, or redwood. 
Drop siding, also known as rustic or barn siding, is usually 
stocked in the same species as is beveled siding. Siding may 
be stocked as B&BTR or C&BTR except in cedar, where 
Clear, A, and B grades may be available, and redwood, 
where Clear All Heart, Clear, and B grades may be found. 
Vertical grain (VG) is sometimes part of the grade desig- 
nation. Drop siding is also sometimes stocked in C and D 
grades of Southern Pine, Douglas Fir, and hemlock. Drop 
siding may be surfaced and matched, or shiplapped. Knotty 
grades of cedar (Select Tight Knot (STK)) and redwood 
(Rustic) are commonly available. 


Flooring—F looring is made chiefly from hardwoods, such 
as oak and maple, and the harder softwood species, such 

as Douglas-fir, western larch, and Southern Pine. Often, at 
least one softwood and one hardwood are stocked. Flooring 
is usually 19 mm (nominal | in.) thick. Thicker flooring 

is available for heavy-duty floors. Thinner flooring is 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


available, especially for re-covering old floors. Vertical- and 
flat-grained (also called quartersawn and plainsawn) floor- 
ing is manufactured from both softwoods and hardwoods. 
Vertical-grained flooring shrinks and swells less than flat- 
grained flooring, is more uniform in texture, and wears more 
uniformly, and the edge joints have less tendency to open. 


Softwood flooring is usually available in B&BTR, C Select, 
or D Select grades. In maple, the chief grades are Clear, 

No. 1, and No. 2. The grades in quartersawn oak are Clear 
and Select, and in plainsawn, Clear, Select, and No. | 
Common. Quartersawn hardwood flooring has the same 
advantages as does vertical-grained softwood flooring. In 
addition, the silver or flaked grain of quartersawn flooring is 
frequently preferred to the figure of plainsawn flooring. 


Casing and Base—Casing and base are standard items 

in the more important softwoods and are stocked in most 
yards in at least one species. The chief grade, B&BTR, is 
designed to meet the requirements of interior trim for dwell- 
ings. Many casing and base patterns are surfaced to 17 by 
57 mm (11/16 by 2-1/4 in.); other sizes include 14 mm 
(9/16 in.) by 76 mm (3 in.), by 83 mm (3-1/4 in.), and by 

89 mm (3-1/2 in.). Hardwoods for the same purposes, such 
as oak and birch, may be carried in stock in the retail yard 
or obtained on special order. 


Shingles and Shakes—Commonly available shingles are 
sawn from western redcedar and northern white-cedar. For 
western redcedar, the shingle grades are No. 1, No. 2, and 
No. 3; for northern white-cedar, Extra, Clear, 2nd Clear, 
Clearwall, and Utility. 


Shingles that contain only heartwood are more resistant to 
decay than are shingles that contain sapwood. Edge-grained 
shingles are less likely to warp and split than flat-grained 
shingles, thick-butted shingles less likely than thin-butted 
shingles, and narrow shingles less likely than wide shingles. 
The standard thickness values of thin-butted shingles are 
described as 4/2, 5/2-1/4, and 5/2 (four shingles to 51 mm 
(2 in.) of butt thickness, five shingles to 57 mm (2-1/4 in.) 
of butt thickness, and five shingles to 51 mm (2 in.) of butt 
thickness). Lengths may be 406, 457, or 610 mm (16, 18, or 
24 in.). Random widths and specified (“dimension” shingle) 
widths are available in western redcedar, redwood, and 
cypress. 


Shingles are usually packed four bundles to a square. A 
square of shingles will cover roughly 9 m2 (100 ft?) of roof 
area when the shingles are applied at standard weather 
exposures. 


Shakes are hand split or hand split and resawn from western 
redcedar. Shakes are of a single grade and must be 100% 
clear. In the case of hand split and resawn material, shakes 
are graded from the split face. Hand-split shakes are graded 
from the best face. Shakes must be 100% heartwood. The 
standard thickness of shakes ranges from 9.5 to 32 mm 

(3/8 to 1-1/4 in.). Lengths are 457 and 610 mm (18 and 


24 in.), with a special “Starter—Finish Course” length of 
381 mm (15 in.). 


Pallet and Container Stock—Wood is often manufactured 
into lengths and sizes for wooden pallets and containers. 

As with other uses of wood, pallet and container stock 

must meet minimum wood quality requirements for checks, 
splits, shakes, wane, cross grain, decay, knots, and warp 
that are specific to their intended application. A detailed 
description of the recognized minimum quality require- 
ments for wood used in the principal types of wood pallets 
is documented in Uniform Standard for Wood Pallets, and 
that for packaging is detailed in the Uniform Standard for 
Wood Containers produced by the National Wooden Pallet 
and Container Association (NWPCA 2007, 2009). See these 
documents for a more complete description of terms com- 
monly understood among manufacturers, repairers, distribu- 
tors, and users of wood pallets and containers. The specifi- 
cations are specific to the expected number of uses, single 
or multiple, the item being manufactured is expected to see. 


Important Purchase Considerations 


Some points to consider when ordering lumber or timbers 
are the following: 


1. Quantity—Lineal measure, board measure, surface mea- 
sure, number of pieces of definite size and length. Con- 
sider that the board measure depends on the thickness 
and width nomenclature used and that the interpretation 
of these must be clearly delineated. In other words, such 
features as nominal or actual dimensions and pattern 
size must be considered. 


2. Size—Thickness in millimeters or inches—nominal 
or actual if surfaced on faces; width in millimeters or 
inches—nominal or actual if surfaced on edges; length 
in meters or feet—may be nominal average length, 
limiting length, or a single uniform length. Often a 
trade designation, “random” length, is used to denote a 
nonspecified assortment of lengths. Such an assortment 
should contain critical lengths as well as a range. The 
limits allowed in making the assortment random can be 
established at the time of purchase. 


3. Grade—As indicated in grading rules of lumber manu- 
facturing associations. In softwoods that are in compli- 
ance with the American Softwood Lumber Standard, 
each piece of lumber may be grade stamped with its 
official grade designation, species identification, a name 
or number identifying the producing mill, the dryness at 
the time of surfacing, and a symbol identifying the in- 
spection agency supervising the grading inspection. The 
grade designation stamped on a piece indicates the qual- 
ity at the time the piece was graded. Subsequent expo- 
sure to unfavorable storage conditions, improper drying, 
or careless handling may cause the material to fall below 
its original grade. 


Working or recutting a graded product to a pattern may 
change or invalidate the original grade. The purchase 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 6-8. Standards and specifications for round timbers and ties” 


Engineering design stresses 


Material Preservative 
Product requirements treatment Procedures Design values 
Utility poles ANSI 05.1 AWPA Commodity = ANSI 05.1 
Specification D 
Construction poles ANSI O5.1 AWPA Commodity ASTM D 3200 ASAE EP 388 
Specification D 
Piles ASTM D 25 AWPA Commodity ASTM D 2899 NDS 


Specification E 


Construction logs 
Ties AREA 


(See material supplier) 


AWPA Commodity — 


ASTM D 3957 (See material supplier) 
AREA 


Specification C, AREA 


“ANSI, American National Standards Institute; ASTM, ASTM International; ASAE, American Society of Agricultural Engineers; 
AREA, American Railway Engineers Association; NDS, National Design Specification (for Wood Construction); AWPA, 


American Wood Protection Association. 


specification should be clear in regard to regrading or 
acceptance of worked lumber. In softwood lumber, 
grades for dry lumber generally are determined after 
kiln drying and surfacing. However, this practice is not 
general for hardwood Factory lumber, where the grade is 
generally based on quality and size prior to kiln drying. 
To be certain the product grade is correct, refer to the 
grading rule by number and paragraph. 


4. Species or species group of wood—Such as Douglas 
Fir, Southern Pine, Hem—Fir. Some species have been 
grouped for marketing convenience; others are sold 
under a variety of names. Be sure the species or species 
group is correctly and clearly described on the purchase 
specification. 


5. Product—Such as flooring, siding, timbers, boards. 
Nomenclature varies by species, region, and grading 
association. To be certain the nomenclature is correct 
for the product, refer to the grading rule by number and 
paragraph. 

6. Condition of seasoning—Such as air dry, kiln dry. Soft- 
wood lumber less than 114 mm (nominal 5 in.) in thick- 
ness dried to 19% moisture content or less is defined 
as dry by the American Softwood Lumber Standard. 
Kiln-dried lumber is lumber that has been seasoned in a 
chamber to a predetermined moisture content by apply- 
ing heat. For lumber of nominal 5-in. or greater in thick- 
ness, some species are defined as dry having a maximum 
moisture content of greater than 19%. Green lumber is 
lumber less than 114 mm (nominal 5 in.) in thickness 
that has a moisture content in excess of 19%. For lumber 
of nominal 5-in. or greater thickness, green shall be de- 
fined in accordance with the provision of the applicable 
grading rules. If the moisture requirement is critical, the 
level of moisture content and the method by which it 
will be achieved must be specified. 


7. Surfacing and working—Rough (unplaned), surfaced 
(dressed, planed), or patterned stock. Specify condition. 
If surfaced, indicate code (S4S, S1S1E). If patterned, list 
pattern number with reference to appropriate grade rules. 


6-18 


8. Grading rules—Official grading agency name and name 
of official rules under which product is graded, product 
identification, paragraph and page number of rules, and 
date of rules or official rule edition may be specified by 
the buyer. 


9. Manufacturer—Name of manufacturer or trade name of 
specific product or both. Most lumber products are sold 
without reference to a specific manufacturer. If propri- 
etary names or quality features of a manufacturer are 
required, this must be stipulated clearly on the purchase 
agreement. 


10. Structural lumber and timbers should be stamped by an 
agency accredited by the Board of Review of the Ameri- 
can Lumber Standard Committee. 


11. Reinspection—Procedures for resolution of purchase 
disputes. The American Softwood Lumber Standard 
provides for procedures to be followed in resolution of 
manufacturer—wholesaler—consumer conflicts over qual- 
ity or quantity of ALS lumber grades. The dispute may 
be resolved by reinspecting the shipment. Time limits, 
liability, costs, and complaint procedures are outlined 
in the grade rules of both softwood and hardwood agen- 
cies under which the disputed shipment was graded 
and purchased. 


Round Timbers and Ties 


Standards and Specifications 


Material standards and specifications listed in Table 6-8 
were created through the joint efforts of producers and us- 
ers to ensure compatibility between product quality and end 
use. These guidelines include recommendations for produc- 
tion, treatment, and engineering design. They are updated 
periodically to conform to changes in material and design 
technology. 


Material Requirements 


Round timber and tie material requirements vary with in- 
tended use. The majority of uses involve exposure to harsh 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Figure 6-4. 
An example 
of round 
timber poles 
used for 
electrical 
utility 
distribution. 


environments. Thus, in addition to availability, form, and 
weight, durability is also an important consideration for 

the use of round timbers and ties. Availability reflects the 
economic feasibility of procuring members of the required 
size and grade. Form or physical appearance refers to visual 
characteristics, such as straightness and occurrence of knots 
and spiral grain. Weight affects shipping and handling costs 
and is a function of volume, moisture content, and wood 
density. Durability is directly related to expected service life 
and is a function of treatability and natural decay resistance. 
Finally, regardless of the application, any structural member 
must be strong enough to resist imposed loads with a rea- 
sonable factor of safety. Material specifications available for 
most applications of round timbers and ties contain guide- 
lines for evaluating these factors. 


Availability 

Material evaluation begins with an assessment of availabil- 
ity. For some applications, local species of timber may 

be readily available in an acceptable form and quality. 
However, this is not normally the case. Pole producers and 
tie mills are scattered throughout heavily forested regions. 
Their products are shipped to users throughout North 
America. 


Poles 


Most structural applications of poles require timbers that 
are relatively straight and free of large knots. Poles used to 
support electric utility distribution and transmission lines 
(Fig. 6-4) range in length from 6 to 38 m (20 to 125 ft) and 
from 0.13 to 0.76 m (5 to 30 in.) in diameter, 1.8 m (6 ft) 
from the butt. Poles used to support local area distribution 
lines are normally <15 m (<S0 ft) long and are predomi- 
nately Southern Pine. 


Hardwood species can be used for poles when the trees are 
of suitable size and form; their use is limited, however, by 
their weight, by their excessive checking, and because of the 
lack of experience in preservative treatment of hardwoods. 
Thus, most poles are softwoods. 


The Southern Pine lumber group (principally loblolly, 
longleaf, shortleaf, and slash) accounts for roughly 80% of 
poles treated in the United States. Three traits of these pines 
account for their extensive use: thick and easily treated 
sapwood, favorable strength properties and form, and avail- 
ability in popular pole sizes. In longer lengths, Southern 
Pine poles are in limited supply, so Douglas-fir, and to some 
extent western redcedar, ponderosa pine, and western larch, 
are used to meet requirements for 15-m (50-ft) and longer 
transmission poles. 


Douglas-fir is used throughout the United States for trans- 
mission poles and is used in the Pacific Coast region for 
distribution and building poles. Because the heartwood 

of Douglas-fir is resistant to preservative penetration and 
has limited decay and termite resistance, serviceable poles 
need a well-treated shell of sapwood that is free of check- 
ing. To minimize checking after treatment, poles should be 
adequately seasoned or conditioned before treatment. With 
these precautions, the poles should compare favorably with 
treated Southern Pine poles in serviceability. 


A small percentage of the poles treated in the United States 
are of western redcedar, produced mostly in British Co- 
lumbia. The number of poles of this species used without 
treatment is not known but is considered to be small. Used 
primarily for utility lines in northern and western United 
States, well-treated redcedar poles have a service life that 
compares favorably with poles made from other species 
and could be used effectively in pole-type buildings. 


Lodgepole pine is also used in small quantities for treated 
poles. This species is used both for utility lines and for 
pole-type buildings. It has a good service record when well 
treated. Special attention is necessary, however, to obtain 
poles with sufficient sapwood thickness to ensure adequate 
penetration of preservative, because the heartwood is not 
usually penetrated and is not decay resistant. The poles must 
also be well seasoned prior to treatment to avoid checking 
and exposure of unpenetrated heartwood to attack by decay 
fungi. 


Western larch poles produced in Montana and Idaho came 
into use after World War II because of their favorable size, 
shape, and strength properties. Western larch requires pre- 
servative treatment full length for use in most areas and, as 
in the case of lodgepole pine poles, must be selected for ad- 
equate sapwood thickness and must be well seasoned prior 
to treatment. Other species occasionally used for poles are 
listed in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
O5.1 standard. These minor species make up a very small 
portion of pole production and are used locally. Glued- 
laminated, or glulam, poles are also available for use where 


6-19 


Figure 6-5. Logs are used to construct logging bridges in 
remote forest areas. 


special sizes or shapes are required. The ANSI Standard 
O5.2 provides guidelines for specifying these poles. 


Piles 


Material available for timber piles is more restricted than 
that for poles. Most timber piles used in the eastern half of 
the United States are Southern Pine, while those used in 
western United States are coast Douglas-fir. Oak, red pine, 
and cedar piles are also referenced in timber pile literature 
but are not as widely used as Southern Pine and Douglas-fir. 


Construction Logs 


Round timbers have been used in a variety of structures, in- 
cluding bridges, log cabins, and pole buildings. Log stringer 
bridges (Fig. 6—5) are generally designed for a limited life 
on logging roads intended to provide access to remote areas. 
In Alaska where logs may exceed | m (3 ft) in diameter, 
bridge spans may exceed 9 m (30 ft). Building poles, on the 
other hand, are preservative-treated logs in the 0.15- to 
0.25-m- (6- to 10-in.-) diameter range. These poles rarely 
exceed 9 m (30 ft) in length. Although poles sold for this ap- 
plication are predominately Southern Pine, there is potential 
for competition from local species in this category. Finally, 
log cabin logs normally range from 0.2 to 0.25 m (8 to 

10 in.) in diameter, and the availability of logs in this size 
range is not often a problem. However, because logs are 

not normally preservative-treated for this application, those 
species that offer moderate to high natural decay resistance, 
such as western redcedar, are preferred. Pole buildings, 
which incorporate round timbers as vertical columns and 
cantilever supports, require preservative-treated wood. 
Preservative-treated poles for this use may not be readily 
available. 


Ties 

The most important availability consideration for railroad 
cross ties is quantity. Ties are produced from most native 
species of timber that yield log lengths >2.4 m (8 ft) with 


diameters >0.18 m (7 in.). The American Railway Engineer- 
ing Association (AREA) lists 26 U.S. species that may be 


6-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 6-9. Circumference taper 


Change in Change in 
circumference circumference 

per meter per foot* 
Species (cm) (in.) 
Western redcedar 3.4 0.38 
Ponderosa pine 2.4 0.29 
Jack, lodgepole, and red pine 2.5 0.30 
Southern Pine 2.1 0.25 
Douglas-fir, larch 1.7 0.21 
Western hemlock 1.7 0.20 


“Taken from ANSI 05.1. 


used for ties. Thus, the tie market provides a use for many 
low-grade hardwood and softwood logs. 


Form 


Natural growth properties of trees play an important role in 
their use as structural round timbers. Three important form 
considerations are cross-sectional dimensions, straightness, 
and the presence of surface characteristics such as knots. 


Poles and Piles 


Standards for poles and piles have been written with the 
assumption that trees have a round cross section with a cir- 
cumference that decreases linearly with height. Thus, the 
shape of a pole or pile is often assumed to be that of the 
frustum of a cone. Actual measurements of tree shape indi- 
cate that taper is rarely linear and often varies with location 
along the height of the tree. Average taper values from the 
ANSI O5.1 standard are shown in Table 6-9 for the more 
popular pole species. Guidelines to account for the effect 
of taper on the location of the critical section above the 
groundline are given in ANSI OS.1. The standard also tabu- 
lates pole dimensions for up to 15 size classes of 11 major 
pole species. 


Taper also affects construction detailing of pole buildings. 
Where siding or other exterior covering is applied, poles are 
generally set with the taper to the interior side of the struc- 
tures to provide a vertical exterior surface (Fig. 6—6). 


Another common practice is to modify the round poles by 
slabbing to provide a continuous flat face. The slabbed face 
permits more secure attachment of sheathing and framing 
members and facilitates the alignment and setting of inter- 
mediate wall and corner poles. The slabbing consists of a 
minimum cut to provide a single continuous flat face from 
the groundline to the top of intermediate wall poles and two 
continuous flat faces at right angles to one another from the 
groundline to the top of corner poles. However, preservative 
penetration is generally limited to the sapwood of most spe- 
cies; therefore slabbing, particularly in the groundline area 
of poles with thin sapwood, may result in somewhat less 
protection than that of an unslabbed pole. All cutting and 
sawing should be confined to that portion of the pole above 
the groundline and should be performed before treatment. 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


The ASTM International (formerly American Society for 
Testing and Materials) standard ASTM D 25 provides tables 
of pile sizes for either friction piles or end-bearing piles. 
Friction piles rely on skin friction rather than tip area for 
support, whereas end-bearing piles resist compressive force 
at the tip. For this reason, a friction pile is specified by butt 
circumference and may have a smaller tip than an end- 
bearing pile. Conversely, end-bearing piles are specified by 
tip area and butt circumference is minimized. 


Straightness of poles or piles is determined by two form 
properties: sweep and crook. Sweep is a measure of bow or 
gradual deviation from a straight line joining the ends of the 
pole or pile. Crook is an abrupt change in direction of the 
centroidal axis. Limits on these two properties are specified 
in both ANSI 05.1 and ASTM D 25. 


Construction Logs 


Logs used in construction are generally specified to meet the 
same criteria for straightness and knots as poles and piles 
(ASTM D 25). For log stringer bridges, the log selection 
criteria may vary with the experience of the person doing 
the selection, but straightness, spiral grain, wind shake, and 
knots are limiting criteria. Although no consensus standard 
is available for specifying and designing log stringers, the 
Design Guide for Native Log Stringer Bridges was prepared 
by the U.S. Forest Service. 


Logs used for log cabins come in a wide variety of cross- 
sectional shapes (Fig. 6-7). Commercial cabin logs are usu- 
ally milled so that their shape is uniform along their length. 
The ASTM D 3957 standard, a guide for establishing stress 
grades for building logs, recommends stress grading on the 
basis of the largest rectangular section that can be inscribed 
totally within the log section. The standard also provides 
commentary on the effects of knots and slope of grain. 


Figure 6—6. Poles provide economical foundation and wall 
systems for agricultural and storage buildings. 


Ties 

Railroad ties are commonly shaped to a fairly uniform sec- 
tion along their length. The American Railway Engineering 
Association (AREA) publishes specifications for the sizes, 
which include seven size classes ranging from 0.13 by 

0.13 m (5 by 5 in.) to 0.18 by 0.25 m (7 by 10 in.). These 
tie classes may be ordered in any of three standard lengths: 
2.4 m (8 ft), 2.6 m (8.5 ft), or 2.7 m (9 ft). 


Weight and Volume 


The weight of any wood product is a function of its vol- 
ume, density, moisture content, and any retained treatment 
substance. An accurate estimate of volume of a round pole 
would require numerous measurements of the circumference 
and shape along the length, because poles commonly exhibit 
neither a uniform linear taper nor a perfectly round shape. 
The American Wood Protection Association (AWPA) Factor 
3 section therefore recommends volume estimates be based 
on the assumption that the pole is shaped as the frustum of 

a cone (that is, a cone with the top cut perpendicular to the 
axis), with adjustments dependent on species. The volume 
in this case is determined as the average cross-sectional area 
A times the length. Estimates of average cross-sectional area 
may be obtained either by measuring the circumference at 
mid-length (A = C,,2/4z) or taking the average of the butt 
and tip diameters (A = 2(D + d)?/16) to estimate the area of 
a circle. The AWPA recommends that these estimates then 
be adjusted by the following correction factors for the given 
species and application: 


Oak piles 0.82 
Southern Pine piles 0.93 
Southern Pine and red pine poles 0.95 


Tables for round timber volume are given in AWPA Fac- 
tor 3 tables. The volume of a round timber differs little 
whether it is green or dry. Drying of round timbers causes 
checks to open, but there is little reduction of the gross di- 
ameter of the pole. 


Wood density also differs with species, age, and growing 
conditions. It will even vary along the height of a single 
tree. Average values, tabulated by species, are normally ex- 
pressed as specific gravity (SG), which is density expressed 
as a ratio of the density of water (see Chap. 5). For commer- 
cial species grown in the United States, SG varies from 


7 


4, 


rb, 


Figure 6-7. Construction logs can be formed in a variety 
of shapes for log homes. Vertical surfaces may be varied 
for aesthetic purposes, while the horizontal surfaces 
generally reflect structural and thermal considerations. 


6-21 


0.32 to 0.65. If you know the green volume of a round 
timber and its SG, its dry weight is a product of its SG, 

its volume, and the unit weight of water (1,000 kg m-3 
(62.4 Ib ft-3)). Wood moisture content can also be highly 
variable. A pole cut in the spring when sap is flowing may 
have a moisture content exceeding 100% (the weight of the 
water it contains may exceed the weight of the dry wood 
substance). If you know the moisture content (MC) of the 
timber, multiply the dry weight by (1 + MC/100) to get the 
wet weight. 


Finally, in estimating the weight of a treated wood product 
such as a pole, pile, or tie, you must take into account the 
weight of the preservative. Recommended preservative re- 
tentions are listed in Table 15—1 in Chapter 15. By knowing 
the volume, the preservative weight can be approximated 
by multiplying volume by the recommended preservative 
retention. This estimation will err on the side of over- 
estimating preservative weight because the actual retention 
specifications are based on an outer assay zone and not the 
entire volume. 


Durability 


For most applications of round timbers and ties, durability 
is primarily a question of decay resistance. Some species are 
noted for their natural decay resistance; however, even these 
may require preservative treatment, depending upon the 
environmental conditions under which the material is used 
and the required service life. For some applications, natural 
decay resistance is sufficient. This is the case for temporary 
piles, marine piles in fresh water entirely below the perma- 
nent water level, and construction logs used in building con- 
struction. Any wood members used in ground contact should 
be pressure treated, and the first two or three logs above 

a concrete foundation should be brush treated with a 
preservative—sealer. 


Preservative Treatment 


The American Wood Protection Association (AWPA) stan- 
dards covers the inspection and treatment requirements for 
various wood products including poles, piles, and ties. Fed- 
eral Specification TT—W—571 (U.S. Federal Supply Service 
(USFSS)) is no longer current, and government specifiers 
now use AWPA standards.) AWPA Standard T1 contains 
general pressure treatment specifications, Commodity 
Specification A covers treatment of lumber timbers, Com- 
modity Specification C covers treatment of ties, Commodity 
Specification D covers pressure and thermal treatment of 
poles, and Commodity Specification E covers round timber 
piles. The AREA specifications for cross ties and switch ties 
also cover preservative treatment. Retention and types of 
various preservatives recommended for various applications 
are given in Table 15-1. 


Inspection and treatment of poles in service has been ef- 
fective in prolonging the useful life of untreated poles and 
those with inadequate preservative penetration or retention. 


6-22 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


The Forest Research Laboratory at Oregon State University 
has published guidelines for developing an in-service pole 
maintenance program. 


Service Life 


Service conditions for round timbers and ties vary from mild 
for construction logs to severe for cross ties. Construction 
logs used in log homes may last indefinitely if kept dry and 
properly protected from insects. Most railroad ties, on the 
other hand, are continually in ground contact and are subject 
to mechanical damage. 


Poles 


The life of poles can vary within wide limits, depending 
upon properties of the pole, preservative treatments, service 
conditions, and maintenance practices. In distribution or 
transmission line supports, however, service life is often 
limited by obsolescence of the line rather than the physical 
life of the pole. 


It is common to report the average life of untreated or treat- 
ed poles based on observations over a period of years. These 
average life values are useful as a rough guide to the service 
life to be expected from a group of poles, but it should be 
kept in mind that, within a given group, 60% of the poles 
will have failed before reaching an age equal to the average 
life. 


Early or premature failure of treated poles can generally be 
attributed to one or more of three factors: (a) poor penetra- 
tion and distribution of preservative, (b) an inadequate re- 
tention of preservative, or (c) use of a substandard preserva- 
tive. Properly treated poles can last 50 years or longer. 


Western redcedar is one species with a naturally decay- 
resistant heartwood. If used without treatment, however, 
the average life is somewhat less than 20 years. 


Piles 


The expected life of a pile is also determined by treat- 

ment and use. Wood that remains completely submerged 

in water does not decay, although bacteria may cause some 
degradation; therefore, decay resistance is not necessary in 
all piles, but it is necessary in any part of the pile that may 
extend above the permanent water level. When piles that 
support the foundations of bridges or buildings are to be cut 
off above the permanent water level, they should be pres- 
sure treated to conform to recognized specifications such as 
AWPA Commodity Specification E. The untreated surfaces 
exposed at the cutoffs should also be given protection by 
thoroughly brushing the cut surface with copper naphthenate 
containing at least 1% elemental copper. A coat of pitch, as- 
phalt, or similar material may then be applied over the creo- 
sote and a protective sheet material, such as metal, roofing 
felt, or saturated fabric, should be fitted over the pile cut-off 
in accordance with AWPA Standard M4. Correct application 
and maintenance of these materials are critical in maintain- 
ing the integrity of piles. 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 


Piles driven into earth that is not constantly wet are subject 
to about the same service conditions as apply to poles but 
are generally required to last longer. Preservative retention 
requirements for piles are therefore sometimes greater than 
for poles (Table 15—1). Piles used in salt water are subject to 
destruction by marine borers even though they do not decay 
below the waterline. The most effective practical protection 
against marine borers has been a treatment first with a wa- 
terborne preservative, followed by seasoning with a creosote 
treatment. Other preservative treatments of marine piles are 
covered in AWPA Commodity Specification E and shown in 
Table 15-2. 

Ties 

The life of ties in service depends on their ability to resist 
decay and mechanical destruction. Under sufficiently light 
traffic, heartwood ties of naturally durable wood, even if of 
low strength, may give 10 or 15 years of average service 
without preservative treatment; under heavy traffic without 
adequate mechanical protection, the same ties might fail in 
2 or 3 years. Advances in preservatives and treatment pro- 
cesses, coupled with increasing loads, are shifting the pri- 
mary cause of tie failure from decay to mechanical damage. 
Well-treated ties, properly designed to carry intended loads, 
should last from 25 to 40 years on average. Records on life 


of treated and untreated ties are occasionally published in 
the annual proceedings of the AREA and AWPA. 


Commonly Used Lumber, Round 
Timber, and Tie Abbreviations 


The following standard lumber abbreviations are commonly 
used in contracts and other documents for purchase and sale 
of lumber. 


AAR Association of American Railroads 

AD air dried 

ADF after deducting freight 

AF alpine fir 

ALS American Lumber Standard 

AST antistain treated; at ship tackle (western 
softwoods) 

AV or avg Average 

AW&L all widths and lengths 

BIS see EB1S, CB1S, and E&CB1S 

B2S see EB2S, CB2S, and E&CB2S 

B&B, B&BTR B and Better 

B&S beams and stringers 

BD Board 

BD FT board feet 

BDL Bundle 

BEV bevel or beveled 

BH boxed heart 

B/L, BL bill of lading 

BM board measure 


BSND 


bright sapwood, no defect 


BTR 

CB 

CBIS 

CB2S 

CC 

eft or cu. ft. 
CF 

CIF 

CIFE 

CG2E 

C/L 

CLG 

CLR 

CM 

Com 
CONST 

CS 

CSG 

CV 

CV1S 

CVv2S 

DB Clg 

DB Part 
DET 

DF 

DF-L 

DIM 

DKG 

D/S, DS, D/Sdg 
D1S, D2S 
D&M 
D&CM 
D&SM 
D2S&CM 
D2S&SM 

E 

EBIS 

EB2S, SB2S 
EE 

EG 

EM 

EVIS, SV1IS 
EV2S, SV2S 
E&CB1S 
E&CB2S, DB2S, 
BC&2S 
E&CVIS, 
DVIS, V&CV1S 


E&CV2S, 
DV2S, V&CV2S 


ES 
F,, F, F,, Bs Fx 


FA 


Better 

center beaded 

center bead on one side 

center bead on two sides 

cubical content 

cubic foot or feet 

cost and freight 

cost, insurance, and freight 

cost, insurance, freight, and exchange 
center groove on two edges 
carload 

ceiling 

clear 

center matched 

Common 

construction 

caulking seam 

casing 

center V 

center V on one side 

center V on two sides 
double-beaded ceiling (E&CB1S) 
double-beaded partition (E&CB2S) 
double end-trimmed 

Douglas-fir 

Douglas-fir plus larch 

dimension 

decking 

drop siding 

see S1S and S2S 

dressed and matched 

dressed and center matched 
dressed and standard matched 
dressed two sides and center matched 
dressed two sides and standard matched 
edge 

edge bead one side 

edge bead on two sides 

eased edges 

edge (vertical or rift) grain 

end matched 

edge V one side 

edge V two sides 

edge and center bead one side 
edge and center bead two sides 


edge and center V one side 
edge and center V two sides 


Engelmann spruce 

allowable stress (MPa (Ib/in?)) in bending; 
tension, compression and shear parallel to 

grain; and in compression perpendicular to 
grain, respectively 

facial area 


6-23 


Fac 

FAS 

FAS 

FASIF 

FBM, Ft. BM 
FG 

FJ 


FLG, Flg 
FOB 
FOHC 
FOK 
FRT, Frt 
FT, ft 
FT. SM 


LGR 

LGTH 

Lft, Lf 

LIN, Lin 

LL 

LNG, Lng 
LP 

M 

MBM, MBF, 
M.BM 

MC, M.C. 
MERCH, Merch 
MFMA 

MG 

MH 

MLDG, Midg 
Mft 

M-S 


N 


6-24 


factory 

free alongside (vessel) 
Firsts and Seconds 

Firsts and Seconds one face 
feet board measure 

flat or slash grain 

finger joint; end-jointed lumber using finger- 
joint configuration 

flooring 

free on board (named point) 
free of heart center 

free of knots 

freight 

foot, feet 

feet surface measure 

girth 

grade marked 

grooved roofing 

hollow back 

hemlock 

mixed hemlock and fir (Hem—Fir) 
heart 

hit and miss 

hit or miss 

incense cedar 

inch, inches 

industrial 

Idaho white pine 

joists and planks 

jointed 

kiln dried 

kiln-dried after treatment 
western larch 

lumber 

less than carload 

longer 

length 

lineal foot, feet 

lineal 

longleaf 

lining 

lodgepole pine 

thousand 

thousand (feet) board measure 


moisture content 

merchantable 

Maple Flooring Manufacturers Association 
medium grain or mixed grain 

mountain hemlock 

moulding 

thousand feet 

mixed species 

machine stress rated 

nosed 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


NIE or N2E 
Ord 

PAD 

PAR, Par 
PART, Part 
PAT, Pat 


P&T 

PIS, P2S 
RDM 
REG, Reg 
Rfg. 
RGH, Rgh 
R/L, RL 
R/W, RW 
RES 
SBIS 
SDG, Sdg 
S-DRY 


SE 

SEL, Sel 
SE&S 
SG 
S-GRN 


SGSSND 
SIT. SPR 
S/L, SL, S/Lap 
SM 
Specs 

SP 

SQ 
SQRS 
SRB 
STD, Std 
Std. Igths. 
STD. M 
SS 

SSE 
SSND 
STK 
STK 
STPG 
STR, STRUCT 
SYP 
S&E 

SIE 

S2E 


net board measure 


National Oak Flooring Manufacturers 
Association 
number 


nosed one or two edges 
Order 

partially air-dried 
paragraph 

partition 

pattern 

pieces 

plain end 

precision end-trimmed 
ponderosa pine 

posts and timbers 

see S1S and S2S 

random 

regular 

roofing 

rough 

random lengths 

random widths 

resawn 

single bead one side 

siding 

surfaced dry; lumber <19% moisture content 
per ALS for softwood 
square edge 

Select or Select grade 
square edge and sound 
slash or flat grain 

surfaced green; lumber unseasoned, >19% 
moisture content per ALS for softwood 
sapwood, gum spots and streaks, no defect 
Sitka spruce 

shiplap 

surface measure 
specifications 

sugar pine 

square 

squares 

stress-rated board 

standard 

standard lengths 

standard matched 

Sitka spruce 

sound square edge 

sap stain, no defect (stained) 
Select tight knot 

stock 

stepping 

structural 

Southern Pine 

side and edge (surfaced on) 
surfaced one edge 

surfaced two edges 


NWPCA 2007. Uniform Standard for Wood Pallets. Alex- 
andria, VA: National Wooden Pallet and Container Associa- 
tion. 49 p. 


NWPCA 2009. Uniform Standard for Wood Containers. 
Alexandria, VA: National Wooden Pallet and Container 
Association. 44 p. 


Smith, L.W.; Wood, L.W. 1964. History of yard lumber size 
standards. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 59 p. 


Chapter6 Commercial Lumber, Round Timbers, and Ties 
S1S surfaced one side 
82S surfaced two sides 
S48 surfaced four sides 
S1S&CM surfaced one side and center matched 
S2S&CM surfaced two sides and center matched 
S4S&CS surfaced four sides and caulking seam 
SISIE surfaced one side, one edge 
S1IS2E surfaced one side, two edges 
S2S1E surfaced two sides, one edge 
S2S&SL surfaced two sides and shiplapped 
S2S&SM surfaced two sides and standard matched 
TBR timber 
T&G tongued and grooved 
TSO treating service only (nonconforming to 
standard) 
UTIL utility 
VG vertical (edge) grain 
VIS see EVIS, CV1S, and E&CV1S 
V28S see EV2S, CV2S, and E&CV2S 
WC western cedar 
WCH West Coast hemlock 
WCW West Coast woods 
WDR, wdr wider 
WF white fir 
WHAD worm holes (defect) 
WHND worm holes (no defect) 
WT weight 
WTH width 
WRC western redcedar 
WW white woods (Engelmann spruce, any true firs, 
any hemlocks, any pines) 
References 


ANSI. [Current edition]. ANSI O5.1. Specifications and 
dimensions for wood poles. New York, NY: American Na- 
tional Standards Institute. 


ASTM. [Current edition]. ASTM D 3957. Standard methods 
for establishing stress grades for structural members used in 
log buildings. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International. 


AWPA. [Current edition]. Book of standards (includes stan- 
dards on pressure and thermal treatment of poles, piles, and 
ties). American Wood-Preserver’s Bureau official quality 
control standards. Bethesda, MD: American Wood Protec- 
tion Association. 


DOC. [Current edition]. American softwood lumber stan- 
dard. Voluntary Product Standard PS—20-94. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Commerce. 


Muchmore, F.W. 1977. Design guide for native log stringer 
bridges. Juneau, AK: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Region 10. 


6-25 


CHAPTER 7 


Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, 
Round Timber, and Ties 


David E. Kretschmann, Research General Engineer 


Round timbers, ties, and lumber sawn from a log, regardless 
Contents of species and size, are quite variable in mechanical proper- 
ties. Pieces may differ in strength by several hundred per- 


Lumber 7-1 aie a ; : 
cent. For simplicity and economy in use, pieces of wood of 
Responsibilities and Standards for Stress similar mechanical properties are placed in categories called 
Grading 7—2 stress grades, which are characterized by (a) one or more 


sorting criteria, (b) a set of properties for engineering de- 

sign, and (c) a unique grade name. The most familiar system 
Machine-Graded Structural Lumber 7—7 is that for lumber. Sorting criteria have also been established 
for round timbers and ties. This chapter briefly discusses the 
stress grades and design properties for lumber, round timber, 


Visually Graded Structural Lumber 7—3 


Adjustment of Properties for Design Use 7-10 


Round Timbers and Ties 7—13 and ties. 
Strength Properties 7-13 Lumber 
Pole The U.S. Department of Commerce American Softwood 
Piles 7-14 Lumber Standard PS 20 describes sorting criteria for two 


stress-grading methods and the philosophy of how proper- 
ties for engineering design are derived. The derived proper- 
Ties 7-14 ties are then used in one of two design formats: (a) the load 
and resistance factor design (LRFD), which is based on a 
reference strength at the lower Sth percentile 5-min stress 
Additional References 7-15 (AF&PA [current edition]), or (b) the allowable stress de- 
sign (ASD), which is based on a design stress at the lower 
cues 19 Sth percentile 10-year stress. The properties depend on th 
percentile 10-year stress. The properties depend on the 
General 7-15 particular sorting criteria and on additional factors that are 
independent of the sorting criteria. Design properties are 


Construction Logs 7-14 


Literature Cited 7-14 


Foles i15 lower than the average properties of clear, straight-grained 

Piles 7-16 wood tabulated in Chapter 5. 

Construction Logs 7-16 From one to six design properties are associated with a 

Ties 7-16 stress grade: bending modulus of elasticity for an edgewise 
ies 7— 


loading orientation and stress in tension and compression 
parallel to the grain, stress in compression perpendicular to 
the grain, stress in shear parallel to the grain, and extreme 
fiber stress in bending. As is true of the properties of any 
structural material, the allowable engineering design proper- 
ties must be either inferred or measured nondestructively. 

In wood, the properties are inferred through visual grading 
criteria, nondestructive measurement such as flatwise bend- 
ing stiffness or density, or a combination of these properties. 
These nondestructive tests provide both a sorting criterion 
and a means of calculating appropriate mechanical 
properties. 


The philosophies contained in this chapter are used by a 
number of organizations to develop visual and machine 
stress grades. References are made to exact procedures 


(1) Formulation of stress grading principles 
University staff members 
Government researchers 
Industry R&D staff 
Consumer representatives 


(2) Product standard 
American Lumber Standard Committee 
and its Board of Review 
National Grading Rule Committee 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 


Review and adoption 


(3) Formulation and publication of 
stress-grading rules 
Rules-writing agencies 


(4) Grading agency accreditation 
American Lumber Standard Committee 


(5) Grade mark supervision and reinspection 
Rules-writing agencies 
Independent inspection agencies 


(6) Manufacture and marketing of American 
standard stress-graded lumber 
Sawmills 


Figure 7—1. Voluntary system of responsibilities for 
stress grading under the American Softwood Lumber 
Standard. 


and the resulting design stresses, but these are not presented 
in detail. 


Responsibilities and Standards for Stress 
Grading 


An orderly, voluntary, but circuitous system of responsibili- 
ties has evolved in the United States for the development, 
manufacture, and merchandising of most stress-graded 
lumber. The system is shown schematically in Figure 7-1. 
Stress-grading principles are developed from research find- 
ings and engineering concepts, often within committees and 
subcommittees of ASTM International (formerly the Ameri- 
can Society for Testing and Materials). 


American Lumber Standard Committee 


Voluntary product standards are developed under procedures 
published by the U.S. Department of Commerce. The De- 
partment of Commerce National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), working with rules-writing agencies, 
lumber inspection agencies, lumber producers, distributors 
and wholesalers, retailers, end users, members of Federal 
agencies, and others, works through the American Lumber 
Standard Committee (ALSC) to maintain a voluntary con- 
sensus softwood standard, the American Softwood Lumber 
Standard (PS 20). The PS 20 Standard prescribes the ways 
in which stress-grading principles can be used to formulate 
grading rules designated as conforming to the American 
Lumber Standard. Under the auspices of the ALSC is the 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 7-1. Sawn lumber grading agencies* 


Rules-writing agencies 

Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association (NeLMA) 
Northern Softwood Lumber Bureau (NSLB) 

Redwood Inspection Service (RIS) 

Southern Pine Inspection Bureau (SPIB) 

West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau (WCLIB) 

Western Wood Products Association (WWPA) 

National Lumber Grades Authority (NLGA) 


Independent agencies 

American Institute of Timber Construction 
Continental Inspection Agency, LLC 
Pacific Lumber Inspection Bureau, Inc. 
Renewable Resource Associates, Inc. 
Stafford Inspection and Consulting, LLC 
Renewable Resource Associates, Inc. 
Timber Products Inspection 

Alberta Forest Products Association 
Canadian Lumbermen’s Association 
Canadian Mill Services Association 
Canadian Softwood Inspection Agency, Inc. 
Central Forest Products Association 
Council of Forest Industries 

MacDonald Inspection 

Maritime Lumber Bureau 

Newfoundland and Labrador Lumber Producers Association 
Quebec Forest Industry Council 


“For updated information, contact American Lumber Standard 
Committee, P.O. Box 210, Germantown, MD 20875; 
alsc@alsc.org; www.alsc.org. 


National Grading Rule, which specifies grading characteris- 
tics for different grade specifications. 


Organizations that write and publish grading rule books 
containing stress-grade descriptions are called rules-writing 
agencies. Grading rules that specify American Softwood 
Lumber Standard PS 20 must be certified by the ALSC 
Board of Review for conformance with this standard. Or- 
ganizations that write grading rules, as well as independent 
agencies, can be accredited by the ALSC Board of Review 
to provide grading and grade-marking supervision and 
reinspection services to individual lumber manufacturers. 
Accredited rules-writing and independent agencies are listed 
in Table 7-1. The continued accreditation of these organiza- 
tions is under the scrutiny of the ALSC Board of Review. 


Most commercial softwood species lumber manufactured in 
the United States is stress graded under American Lumber 
Standard practice and is called American Lumber Standard 
(ALS) program lumber. Distinctive grade marks for each 
species or species grouping are provided by accredited 
agencies. The principles of stress grading are also applied to 
several hardwood species under provisions of the American 
Softwood Lumber Standard. Lumber found in the market- 
place may be stress graded under grading rules developed in 
accordance with methods approved by the ALSC or by some 
other stress-grading rule, or it may not be stress graded. 
Only those stress grades that meet the requirements of the 
voluntary American Softwood Lumber Standard system are 
discussed in this chapter. 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 


National Grading Rule 


Stress grading under the auspices of the ALSC is applied 

to many sizes and patterns of lumber that meet the Ameri- 
can Softwood Lumber Standard provision. However, most 
stress-graded lumber is dimension lumber (standard 38 mm 
to 89 mm (nominal 2 to 4 in., actual 1.5 to 3.5 in.) thick) 
and is governed by uniform specifications under the Na- 
tional Grading Rule. The National Grading Rule provides 
guidelines for writing grading rules for lumber in this thick- 
ness range and specifies grading characteristics for different 
grade specifications. American Softwood Lumber Standard 
dimension lumber in this thickness range is required to 
conform to the National Grading Rule, except for special 
products such as scaffold planks. Grade rules for other sizes, 
such as structural timbers (standard 114-mm and larger 
(nominal 5-in. and larger) thick) may vary between rules- 
writing agencies or species. 


The National Grading Rule establishes the lumber classifica- 
tions and grade names for visually stress-graded dimension 
lumber (Table 7—2). The ALSC Machine Grading Policy 
provides for the grading of dimension lumber by a combina- 
tion of machine and visual methods. Visual requirements for 
this type of lumber are developed by the respective rules- 
writing agencies for particular species grades. 


Standards 


Table 7—2 also shows associated minimum bending strength 
ratios to provide a comparative index of quality. The 
strength ratio is the hypothetical ratio of the strength of a 
piece of lumber with visible strength-reducing growth char- 
acteristics to its strength if those characteristics were absent. 
Formulas for calculating strength ratios are given in ASTM 
standard D 245. The corresponding visual description of the 
dimension lumber grades can be found in the grading rule 
books of the rules-writing agencies listed in Table 7-1. De- 
sign properties will vary by size, species, and grade and are 
published in the appropriate rule books and in the National 
Design Specification for Wood Construction (AF&PA). 


Grouping of Species 

Most species are grouped together and the lumber from 
them treated as equivalent. Species are usually grouped 
when they have about the same mechanical properties, 
when the wood of two or more species is very similar in 
appearance, or for marketing convenience. For visual stress 
grades, ASTM D 2555 contains procedures for calculating 
clear wood properties for groups of species to be used with 
ASTM D 245. ASTM D 1990 contains procedures for calcu- 
lating design properties for groups of species tested as full- 
sized members. The properties assigned to a group by such 
procedures will often be different from those of any species 
that make up the group. The group will have a unique iden- 
tity, with nomenclature approved by the Board of Review 
of the ALSC. The identities, properties, and characteristics 


Table 7-2. Visual grades described in National 
Grading Rule 


Bending 
strength 
ratio 
Lumber classification* Grade name (%) 
Light framing? Construction 34 
Standard 19 
Utility 9 
Structural light framing? Select Structural 67 
1 55 
2 45 
3 26 
Stud® Stud 26 
Structural joists and planks‘ — Select Structural 65 
1 55 
2 45 
3 26 


“Contact rules-writing agencies for additional information. 
Standard 38 to 89 mm (nominal 2 to 4 in.) thick and wide. Widths 
narrower than 89 mm (4 in. nominal) may have different strength 
ratio than shown. 

“Standard 38 to 89 mm (nominal 2 to 4 in.) thick, >38 mm ($4 in. 
nominal) wide. 

‘Standard 38 to 89 mm (nominal 2 to 4 in.) thick, >114 mm (25 in. 
nominal) wide. 


of individual species of the group are found in the grading 
rules for any particular species or species grouping. In the 
case of machine stress grading, the inspection agency that 
supervises the grading certifies by testing that the design 
properties in that grade are appropriate for the species or 
species grouping and the grading process. 


Foreign Species 


Currently, the importation of structural lumber is governed 
by two ALSC guidelines that describe the application of the 
American Lumber Standard and ASTM D 1990 procedures 
to foreign species. The approval process is outlined in 
Table 7-3. 


Visually Graded Structural Lumber 


Visual Sorting Criteria 


Visual grading is the original method for stress grading. It is 
based on the premise that mechanical properties of lumber 
differ from mechanical properties of clear wood because 
many growth characteristics affect properties and these 
characteristics can be seen and judged by eye. Growth char- 
acteristics are used to sort lumber into stress grades. The 
typical visual sorting criteria discussed here are knots, slope 
of grain, checks and splits, shake, density, decay, annual ring 
count and percentage latewood, pitch pockets, and wane. 


Knots 


Knots cause localized cross grain with steep slopes. A very 
damaging aspect of knots in sawn lumber is that the conti- 
nuity of the grain around the knot is interrupted by the 
sawing process. 


7-3 


In general, knots have a greater effect on strength in tension 
than compression; in bending, the effect depends on whether 
a knot is in the tension or compression side of a beam (knots 
along the centerline have little or no effect). Intergrown 

(or live) knots resist (or transmit) some kinds of stress, but 
encased knots (unless very tight) or knotholes resist (or 
transmit) little or no stress. On the other hand, distortion of 
grain is greater around an intergrown knot than around an 
encased (or dead) knot of equivalent size. As a result, over- 
all strength effects are roughly equalized, and often no dis- 
tinction is made in stress grading between intergrown knots, 
dead knots, and knotholes. 


The zone of distorted grain (cross grain) around a knot has 
less “parallel to piece” stiffness than does straight-grained 
wood; thus, localized areas of low stiffness are often associ- 
ated with knots. However, such zones generally constitute 
only a minor part of the total volume of a piece of lumber. 
Because overall stiffness of a piece reflects the character of 
all parts, stiffness is not greatly influenced by knots. 


The presence of a knot has a greater effect on most strength 
properties than on stiffness. The effect on strength depends 
approximately on the proportion of the cross section of the 
piece of lumber occupied by the knot, knot location, and 
distribution of stress in the piece. Limits on knot sizes are 
therefore made in relation to the width of the face and loca- 
tion on the face in which the knot appears. Compression 
members are stressed about equally throughout, and no 
limitation related to location of knots is imposed. In tension, 
knots along the edge of a member cause an eccentricity that 
induces bending stresses, and they should therefore be more 
restricted than knots away from the edge. In simply sup- 
ported structural members subjected to bending, stresses are 
greater in the middle of the length and at the top and bottom 
edges than at midheight. These facts are recognized in some 
grades by differing limitations on the sizes of knots in dif- 
ferent locations. 


Knots in glued-laminated structural members are not con- 
tinuous as in sawn structural lumber, and different methods 
are used for evaluating their effect on strength (Chap. 12). 


Slope of Grain 


Slope of grain (cross grain) reduces the mechanical prop- 
erties of lumber because the fibers are not parallel to the 
edges. Severely cross-grained pieces are also undesirable 
because they tend to warp with changes in moisture 
content. Stresses caused by shrinkage during drying are 
greater in structural lumber than in small, clear straight- 
grained specimens and are increased in zones of sloping or 
distorted grain. To provide a margin of safety, the reduction 
in design properties resulting from cross grain in visually 
graded structural lumber is considerably greater than that 
observed in small, clear specimens that contain similar 
cross grain. 


7-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 7-3. Approval process for acceptance of design 
values for foreign species 


1 Rules-writing agency seeks approval to include species in 
grading rule book. 

2 Agency develops sampling and testing plan, following 
American Lumber Standard Committee (ALSC) foreign 
importation guidelines, which must then be approved by 
ALSC Board of Review. 

3. Lumber is sampled and tested in accordance with approved 
sampling and testing plan. 

4 Agency analyzes data by ALSC Board of Review, ASTM 
D 1990 procedures, and other appropriate criteria (if 
needed). 

5 Agency submits proposed design values to ALSC Board of 
Review. 

6 Submission is reviewed by ALSC Board of Review and 
USDA Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 

7 Submission is available for comment by other agencies and 
interested parties. 

8 | ALSC Board of Review approves (or disapproves) design 
values, with modification (if needed) based on all available 
information. 

9 Agency publishes new design values for species. 


Checks and Splits 


Checks are separations of the wood that normally occur 
across or through the annual rings, usually as a result of sea- 
soning. Splits are a separation of the wood through the piece 
to the opposite surface or to an adjoining surface caused 

by tearing apart of the wood cells. As opposed to shakes, 
checks and splits are rated by only the area of actual open- 
ing. An end-split is considered equal to an end-check that 
extends through the full thickness of the piece. The effects 
of checks and splits on strength and the principles of their 
limitation are the same as those for shake. 


Shake 


Shake is a separation or a weakness of fiber bond, between 
or through the annual rings, that is presumed to extend 
lengthwise without limit. Because shake reduces resistance 
to shear in members subjected to bending, grading rules 
therefore restrict shake most closely in those parts of a bend- 
ing member where shear stresses are highest. In members 
with limited cross grain, which are subjected only to ten- 
sion or compression, shake does not affect strength greatly. 
Shake may be limited in a grade because of appearance and 
because it permits entrance of moisture, which results in 
decay. 


Density 


Strength is related to the mass per unit volume (density) of 
clear wood. Properties assigned to lumber are sometimes 
modified by using the rate of growth and percentage of 
latewood as measures of density. Typically, selection for 
density requires that the rings per unit length on the cross 
section and the percentage of latewood be within a speci- 
fied range. Some very low-strength pieces may be excluded 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 


from a grade by excluding those that are exceptionally low 
in density. 


Decay 


Decay in most forms should be prohibited or severely re- 
stricted in stress grades because the extent of decay is dif- 
ficult to determine and its effect on strength is often greater 
than visual observation would indicate. Decay of the pocket 
type (for example, Fomes pini) can be permitted to some 
extent in stress grades, as can decay that occurs in knots but 
does not extend into the surrounding wood. 


Heartwood and Sapwood 


Heartwood does not need to be taken into account in stress 
grading because heartwood and sapwood have been as- 
sumed to have equal mechanical properties. However, 
heartwood is sometimes specified in a visual grade because 
the heartwood of some species is more resistant to decay 
than is the sapwood; heartwood may be required if untreated 
wood will be exposed to a decay hazard. On the other hand, 
sapwood takes preservative treatment more readily than 
heartwood and it is preferable for lumber that will be treated 
with preservatives. 


Pitch Pockets 


Pitch pockets ordinarily have so little effect on structural 
lumber that they can be disregarded in stress grading if they 
are small and limited in number. The presence of a large 
number of pitch pockets, however, may indicate shake or 
weakness of bond between annual rings. 


Wane 


Wane refers to bark or lack of wood on the edge or corner of 
a piece of lumber, regardless of cause (except manufactured 
eased edges). Requirements of appearance, fabrication, or 
ample bearing or nailing surfaces generally impose stricter 
limitations on wane than does strength. Wane is therefore 
limited in structural lumber on that basis. 


Procedures for Deriving Design Properties 


The mechanical properties of visually graded lumber may 
be established by (a) tests of a representative sample of full- 
size members (ASTM D 1990 in-grade testing procedure) 
or (b) appropriate modification of test results conducted on 
clear specimens (ASTM D 245 procedure for small clear 
wood). Design properties for the major commercial soft- 
wood dimension lumber species given in current design 
specification and codes in the United States have been de- 
rived from full-size member test results. However, design 
properties for some species of softwood and most species 
of hardwood dimension lumber (standard 38- to 89-mm 
(nominal 2- to 4-in.) thick) and all species of structural tim- 
bers (standard 114-mm and larger (nominal 5-in. and larger) 
thick) are still derived using results of tests on small clear 
samples. 


a 


Figure 7—2. Effect of edge knot: A, edge knot in lum- 
ber; B, assumed loss of cross section (cross-hatched 
area). 


A 


100 


80 


60 


40 


Strength ratio (%) 


20 


0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
k/h 


Figure 7-3. Relation between bending strength ratio 
and size of edge knot expressed as fraction of face 

width. k is knot size; h, width of face containing the 
knot. 


Procedure for Clear Wood 


The derivation of mechanical properties of visually graded 
lumber was historically based on clear wood properties 
with appropriate modifications for the lumber characteris- 
tics allowed by visual sorting criteria. Sorting criteria that 
influence mechanical properties are handled with “strength 
ratios” for the strength properties and with “quality factors” 
for the modulus of elasticity. 


Piece to piece variation occurs in both the clear wood prop- 
erties and the occurrence of growth characteristics. The 
influence of this variability on lumber properties is handled 
differently for strength properties than for modulus of 
elasticity. 


Strength Properties—Each strength property of a piece 

of lumber is derived from the product of the clear wood 
strength for the species and the limiting strength ratio. The 
strength ratio is the hypothetical ratio of the strength of a 
piece of lumber with visible strength-reducing growth char- 
acteristics to its strength if those characteristics were absent. 
The true strength ratio of a piece of lumber is never known 


7-5 


Clear wood 5% exclusion limit 


s 


w 
Oo 


Ed 
Oo 


_— 
o 


0 
20 40 60 80 100 


Strength ratio (%) 


Expected bending strength (MPa) 
oOo 


Expected bending strength («10° Ib in-?) 


Figure 7—4. Example of relation between strength and 
strength ratio. 


and must be estimated. Therefore, the strength ratio assigned 
to a growth characteristic serves as a predictor of lumber 
strength. Strength ratio is expressed as a percentage, ranging 
from 0 to 100. 


Estimated strength ratios for cross grain and density have 
been obtained empirically; strength ratios for other growth 
characteristics have been derived theoretically. For example, 
to account for the weakening effect of knots, the assumption 
is made that the knot is effectively a hole through the piece, 
reducing the cross section, as shown in Figure 7—2. For a 
beam containing an edge knot, the bending strength ratio 
can be idealized as the ratio of the bending moment that can 
be resisted by a beam with a reduced cross section to that of 
a beam with a full cross section: 


k \2 
h 

where SR is strength ratio, k knot size, and h width of face 
containing the knot. This is the basic expression for the ef- 
fect of a knot at the edge of the vertical face of a beam that 


is deflected vertically. Figure 7-3 shows how strength ratio 
changes with knot size according to the formula. 


SR =[I 


Strength ratios for all knots, shakes, checks, and splits are 
derived using similar concepts. Strength ratio formulas are 
given in ASTM D 245. The same reference contains guide- 
lines for measuring various growth characteristics. 


An individual piece of lumber will often have several char- 
acteristics that can affect any particular strength property. 
Only the characteristic that gives the lowest strength ratio is 
used to derive the estimated strength of the piece. In theory, 
a visual stress grade contains lumber ranging from pieces 
with the minimum strength ratio permitted in the grade up 
to pieces with the strength ratio just below the next higher 
grade. In practice, there are often pieces in a grade with 
strength ratios of a higher grade. This is a result of grade 
reduction for appearance factors such as wane that do not 
affect strength. 


7-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


20 


12 


Frequency (%) 


0 
413 689 965 1241 15.17 17.93 
(0.6) (4.0) (1.4) (1.8) (2.2) (2.6) 


Modulus of elasticity in edgewise bending 
(GPa («10° Ib in-)) 


Figure 7-5. Histogram of modulus of elasticity ob- 
served in a single visual grade, from pieces selected 
over a broad geographical range. 


The range of strength ratios in a grade and the natural varia- 
tion in clear wood strength give rise to variation in strength 
between pieces in the grade. To account for this variation 
and to ensure safety in design, it is intended that the actual 
strength of at least 95% of the pieces in a grade exceed the 
design properties (before reduction for duration of load and 
safety) assigned to that grade. In visual grading, according 
to ASTM D 245, this is handled by using a near-minimum 
clear wood strength as a base value and multiplying it by the 
minimum strength ratio permitted in the grade to obtain the 
grade strength property. The near-minimum value is called 
the 5% exclusion limit. ASTM D 2555 provides clear wood 
strength data and gives a method for estimating the 5% ex- 
clusion limit. 


For example, suppose a 5% exclusion limit for the clear 
wood bending strength of a species in the green condition is 
48 MPa (7,000 Ib in-2). Suppose also that among the char- 
acteristics allowed in a grade of lumber, one characteristic 
(a knot, for example) provides the lowest strength ratio in 
bending—assumed in this example as 40%. Using the num- 
bers, the bending strength for the grade is estimated by mul- 
tiplying the strength ratio (0.40) by 48 MPa (7,000 lb in-2), 
equaling 19 MPa (2,800 lb in) (Fig. 7-4). The bending 
strength in the green condition of 95% of the pieces in this 
species in a grade that has a strength ratio of 40% is expect- 
ed to be >19 MPa (=2,800 Ib in). Similar procedures are 
followed for other strength properties, using the appropriate 
clear wood property value and strength ratio. Additional 
multiplying factors are then applied to produce properties 
for design, as summarized later in this chapter. 


Modulus of Elasticity—Modulus of elasticity E is a mea- 
sure of the ability of a beam to resist deflection or of a col- 
umn to resist buckling. The assigned £ is an estimate of the 
average modulus, adjusted for shear deflection, of the lum- 
ber grade when tested in static bending. The average modu- 
lus of elasticity for clear wood of the species, as recorded in 
ASTM D 2555, is used as a base. The clear wood average is 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 


Table 7-4. Common grades for machine-graded lumber* 


Bf, E i, Fa 

Grade name (MPa (Ib in *)) (GPa (x10° Ib in)) (MPa (Ib in’)) (MPa (Ib in *)) 
MSR 

1350f-1.3E 9.3 (1,350) 9.0 (1.3) 5.2 (750) 11.0 (1,600) 
1450f-1.3E 10.0 (1,450) 9.0 (1.3) 5.5 (800) 11.2 (1,625) 
1650f-1.5E 11.4 (1,650) 10.3 (1.5) 7.0 (1,020) 11.7. (1,700) 
1800f-1.6E 12.4 (1,800) 11.0 (1.6) 8.1 (1,175) 12.1 (1,750) 
1950f-1.7E 13.4 (1,950) 11.7 (1.7) 9.5 (1,375) 12.4 (1,800) 
2100f-1.8E 14.5 (2,100) 124 (1.8) 10.9 (1,575) 12.9 (1,875) 
2250f-1.9E 15.5 (2,250) 13.1 (1.9) 12.1 (1,750) 13.3 (1,925) 
2400f-2.0E 16.5 (2,400) 13.8 (2.0) 13.3 (1,925) 13.6 (1,975) 
2550f-2.1E 17.6 (2,550) 14.5 (2.1) 14.1 (2,050) 14.0 (2,025) 
2700f-2.2E 18.6 (2,700) 15.2 (2.2) 14.8 (2,150) 14.4 (2,100) 
2850f-2.3E 19.7 (2,850) 15.9 (2.3) 15.9 (2,300) 14.8 (2,150) 
MEL 

M-10 9.7 (1,400) 8.3. (1.2) 5.5 (800) 11.0 (1,600) 
M-11 10.7 (1,550) 10.3 (1.5) 5.9 (850) 11.5 (1,675) 
M-14 12.4 (1,800) 11.7 (1.7) 6.9 (1,000) 12.1 (1,750) 
M-19 13.8 (2,000) 11.0 (1.6) 9.0 (1,300) 12.6 (1,825) 
M-21 15.9 (2,300) 13.1 (1.9) 9.7 (1,400) 13.4 (1,950) 
M-23 16.5 (2,400) 12.4 (1.8) 13.1 (1,900) 13.6 (1,975) 
M-24 18.6 (2,700) 13.1 (1.9) 12.4 (1,800) 14.5 (2,100) 


“Forest Products Society (1997). Other grades are available and permitted. 


F,, is allowable 10-year load duration bending stress parallel to grain. 


E is modulus of elasticity. 


Fis allowable 10-year load duration tensile stress parallel to grain. 
F cl is allowable 10-year load duration compressive stress parallel to grain. 


multiplied by empirically derived “quality factors” to rep- 
resent the reduction in modulus of elasticity that occurs by 
lumber grade for pieces tested in an edgewise orientation. 

This procedure is outlined in ASTM D 245. 


For example, assume a clear wood average modulus of elas- 
ticity of 12.4 GPa (1.8 x 10° lb in-?) for the example shown 
earlier. The limiting bending strength ratio was 40%. ASTM 
D 245 assigns a quality multiplying factor of 0.80 for lum- 
ber with this bending strength ratio. The modulus of elastic- 
ity for that grade would be the product of the clear wood 
modulus and the quality factor; that is, 12.4 x 0.8 = 9.9 GPa 
(1.8 x 0.8 = 1.44 x 10° Ib in“). 


Actual modulus of elasticity of individual pieces of a grade 
varies from the average assumed for design (Fig. 7—5). 
Small individual lots of lumber can be expected to deviate 
from the distribution shown by this histogram. The addi- 
tional multiplying factors used to derive final design values 
of modulus of elasticity are discussed later in this chapter. 


In-Grade Procedure 


To establish the mechanical properties of specified grades 
of lumber from tests of full-size specimens, a representa- 
tive sample of the lumber population is obtained following 
procedures in ASTM D 2915 and D 1990. The specimens 
are tested using appropriate procedures given in ASTM D 
198 or D 4761. Because the range of quality with any one 
specific grade may be large, it is necessary to assess the 
grade quality index (GQI) of the sampled material in rela- 
tion to the assumed GQI. In the North American In-Grade 


Program, GQI was the strength ratio calculated according to 
formulas in ASTM D 245. The sample GQI and the assumed 
GQI are compared to see if adjustment to the test data is 
necessary. An average value for the edgewise modulus of 
elasticity or a near-minimum estimate of strength properties 
is obtained using ASTM D 1990 procedures. The grade GQI 
is also used as a scaling parameter that allows for modeling 
of strength and modulus of elasticity with respect to grade. 
These properties are further modified for design use by con- 
sideration of service moisture content, duration of load, and 
safety. 


Machine-Graded Structural Lumber 


Machine-graded lumber is lumber evaluated by a machine 
using a nondestructive test followed by visual grading to 
evaluate certain characteristics that the machine cannot or 
may not properly evaluate. Machine-stress-rated (MSR) 
lumber and machine-evaluated-lumber (MEL) are two types 
of machine-graded lumber used in North America. MSR is 
lumber that has modulus of elasticity E evaluated by me- 
chanical stress equipment, with each piece being marked 

to indicate the modulus of elasticity E. MEL is lumber that 
has a parameter, often density, nondestructively evaluated 
by mechanical grading equipment approved by the ALSC 
Board of Review to predict certain mechanical properties. 
The MEL machine evaluates each piece and sorts each 
piece into various strength classification grade categories. 
Machine-graded lumber allows for better sorting of material 
for specific applications in engineered structures. The basic 
components of a machine-grading system are as follows: 


7-7 


e Sorting and prediction of strength through machine-mea- 
sured nondestructive determination of properties coupled 
with visual assessment of growth characteristics 


e Assignment of design properties based on strength 
prediction 


e Quality control to ensure that assigned properties are 
being obtained 


The quality control procedures ensure 


(a) proper operation of the machine used to make the non 
destructive measurements, 


(b) appropriateness of the predictive parameter—bending 
strength relationship, and 


(c) appropriateness of properties assigned for tension and 
compression. 


The MSR and MEL systems differ in grade names, quality 
control, and coefficient of variation (COV) for E values. 
Grade names for MSR lumber are a combination of the 
design bending stress and average modulus of elasticity, 
whereas grade names for MEL lumber start with an M des- 
ignation. For quality control, MSR requires pieces to be 
tested daily for at least one strength property and bending 
modulus of elasticity in an edgewise orientation, whereas 
MEL requires daily tension quality control and edgewise 
bending strength and stiffness testing. Finally, MSR grades 
are assigned a COV = 11% on E, whereas MEL grades are 
assigned a COV < 15% on E. Grade names for a wide range 
of machine-graded lumber commonly available across North 
America are given in Table 7-4. Not all grades are available 
in all sizes or species. 


Machine Sorting Criteria 


The most common method of sorting machine-graded lum- 
ber is modulus of elasticity E. When used as a sorting crite- 
rion for mechanical properties of lumber, E can be measured 
in a variety of ways. Usually, the apparent £, or deflection 
related to stiffness, is actually measured. Because lumber is 
heterogeneous, the apparent E depends on span, orientation 
(edgewise or flatwise in bending), load speed of test (static 
or dynamic), and method of loading (tension, bending, con- 
centrated, or uniform). Any of the apparent E values can be 
used, as long as the grading machine is properly calibrated, 
to assign the graded piece to a “not to exceed” grade 
category. Most grading machines in the United States are 
designed to detect the lowest flatwise bending F that occurs 
in any approximately 1.2-m (4-ft) span and the average flat- 
wise £ for the entire length of the piece. 


Another method of sorting machine-graded lumber is using 
density measurements to estimate knot sizes and frequency. 
X-ray sources in conjunction with a series of detectors are 
used to determine density information. Density information 
is then used to assign the graded piece to a “not to exceed” 
grade category. 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


(a) 


Regression i 


“ 


Grouping of data 


Acceptable 
strength level 


Strength 


E sort 


Strength 


Acceptable 
strength level 


E sort 


Figure 7-6. Schematic E sort: (a) using a regression 
line as the predictor showing four categories: 1—ac- 
cepted correctly; 2—accepted incorrectly; 3—rejected 
correctly; and 4—rejected correctly; (b) using a lower 
confidence line as the predictor and showing the 
relatively low proportion of material in the accepted 
incorrectly category (lower right). 


In the United States and Canada, MSR and MEL lumber 
are also subjected to a visual assessment because the size 
of edge knots in combination with E is a better predictor of 
strength than is £ alone. Maximum edge knots are limited 
to a specified proportion of the cross section, depending 

on grade level. Other visual restrictions, which are primar- 
ily appearance rather than strength criteria, are placed on 
checks, shake, skips (portions of board “skipped” by the 
planer), splits, wane, and warp. 


Procedures for Deriving Design Properties 
Mechanical properties of machine-graded structural lumber 
may be established using ASTM D 6570. 


Allowable Stress for Bending 


A stress grade derived for machine-graded lumber relates 
design strength to a nondestructive parameter such as E or 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 


density. For this example, it will be considered to be E. Be- 
cause EF is an imperfect predictor of strength, lumber sorted 
solely by average EF falls into one of four categories, one of 
which is sorted correctly and three incorrectly (Fig. 7-6). 


Consider, for example, the simplest case (sometimes re- 
ferred to as “go” or “no go”) where lumber is sorted into 
two groups: one with sufficient strength and stiffness for a 
specific application, the other without. In Figure 7—6a, a re- 
gression line relating E and strength is used as the prediction 
model. The “accept—reject” groups identified by the regres- 
sion sort can be classified into four categories: 


e Category 1—Material that has been accepted correctly, 
that is, pieces have sufficient strength and stiffness as 
defined 


e Category 2—Material that has been accepted incorrectly, 
that is, pieces do not have sufficient strength 


e Category 3—Material that has been rejected correctly 
because it does not have sufficient strength 


e Category 4—Material that has been rejected correctly 
because it does not have sufficient stiffness 


Thus, the sort shown in Figure 7—6a has worked correctly 
for categories 1, 3, and 4 but incorrectly for category 2. 
Pieces in category 2 present a problem. These pieces are 
accepted as having sufficient strength but in reality they do 
not, and they are mixed with the accepted pieces of cate- 
gory 1. The number of problem pieces that fall in category 2 
depends on the variability in the prediction model. 


To minimize the material that falls into category 2, adjust- 
ments are made to the property assignment claims made 
about the sorted material. An appropriate model is one that 
minimizes the material in category 2 or at least reduces it 
to a lower risk level. Additional grading criteria (edge-knot 
limitations, for example) are also added to improve the effi- 
ciency of the sorting system relative to the resource and the 
claimed properties. 


Commonly, a lower confidence line is used as the predic- 
tion model (Fig. 7—6b). The number of pieces that fall into 
category 2 is now low compared with the regression line 
model. Furthermore, the probability of a piece (and thus the 
number of pieces) falling into category 2 is controlled by the 
confidence line selected. 


In actual MSR systems, the lumber is sorted (graded) into 

E classes. In the United States and Canada, the number of 
grades has increased as specific market needs have devel- 
oped for MSR lumber. Today, individual grading agencies 
list as many as 13 £ classifications and more than 20 differ- 
ent grades. The grades are designated by the recommended 
extreme fiber stress in bending F\, and edgewise modulus of 
elasticity E. For example, “2100F—1.8E” designates an MSR 
grade with a design stress F;, = 14 MPa (2,100 lb in-2) and 
E=12.4 GPa (1.8 x 10° Ib in“). 


Modulus of elasticity (*10° Ib in-*) 
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 


34.47 (5) 


Grade E 


27.58 (4) 


20.68 (3) 


_ 
© 
2 
© 
> 
— 
i) 
~~ 
© 
E 
= 
7) 
Ww 
— 


Modulus of rupture (MPa (*10° Ib in-?)) 


13.79 (2 
@) 11 12 13 14 15 16 


Modulus of elasticity (GPa) 


Figure 7-7. Typical assignment of F,—E values for 
MSR lumber in United States (solid lines are minimum 
E for the F,—E classification and bending strengths 
predicted by minimum E values). 


In theory, any /—E combination can be marketed that can 
be supported by test data. In practice, a mill will usually 
produce only a few of the possible existing F—EF classifica- 
tions depending on the potential of the timber being har- 
vested, mill production capabilities, and product or market 
demand. When a mill has determined the grades it would 
like to produce (based on their lumber resource and market- 
ing issues), grade boundary machine settings are used to 
separate the lumber into F—E classifications. A qualification 
sample of lumber is tested by a grading agency for strength 
and stiffness, to verify that the proper machine settings are 
being used. After initial qualification, additional quality con- 
trol tests are performed during production. 


Figure 7—7 illustrates how F,—£ classifications have been 
developed historically for species groups. Data for a par- 
ticular species group are collected, the relationship of E 
and modulus of rupture (MOR) is evaluated, and a lower 
confidence line is established for the species, as illustrated 
in Figure 7—6b. Using the lower confidence line of this re- 
lationship, a MOR value corresponding to the “minimum 
E” assigned to the grade is determined. The “minimum E£” 
assigned to the grade represents the Sth percentile of the E 
distribution. The Sth percentile value is expected to be ex- 
ceeded by 95% of the pieces in a grade or class. In 

this example, for a grade with an assigned E of 13.8 GPa 
(2.0 x 10° lb in), the “minimum £” is 11.3 GPa 

(1.64 x 10° Ib in). The corresponding MOR value from 
the lower confidence line prediction model, approximately a 
5th percentile MOR value, is 34.8 MPa (5.04 x 103 Ib in-). 
This value is then adjusted by a factor (2.1) for assumed 
10-year duration of load and safety to obtain F,. This factor 


7-9 


applied to an estimated 5th percentile MOR value of 
34.8 MPa (5.04 x 103 lb in) yields an F,, of 16.5 MPa 
(2.40 x 103 Ib in-2) for the 2.0E grade; in other words, a 
2400f —2.0E MSR grade. 


Design Stresses for Other Properties 


Properties in tension and compression are commonly devel- 
oped from relationships with bending rather than estimated 
directly by the nondestructive parameter F. In Canada and 
the United States, the relationships between the Sth percen- 
tile 10-year bending stress and those in tension and com- 
pression are based upon limited lumber testing for the three 
properties but supported by years of successful experience 
in construction with visual stress grades of lumber. For ten- 
sion, it is assumed that the ratio of design bending stress F', 
to design tensile stress F, is between 0.5 and 0.8, depending 
on the grade, whereas the relationship between F', and fiber 
stress in design compressive parallel-to-grain stress F’, is 
assumed to be 


F,= [0.338(2.1F,) + 2060.7]/1.9 


Strength in shear parallel to the grain and in compression 
perpendicular to the grain is poorly related to modulus of 
elasticity. Therefore, in machine stress grading these proper- 
ties are assumed to be grade-independent and are assigned 
the same values as those for visual lumber grades, except 


when predicted from specific gravity on a mill-by-mill basis. 


It is permissible to assign higher allowable stress for shear 
parallel to grain and compression perpendicular to grain to 
specific grades based on additional specific gravity research. 


Quality Control 


Quality control procedures are necessary to ensure that 
stresses assigned by a machine-grading system reflect the 
actual properties of the lumber graded. These procedures 
must check for correct machine operation. Verification of 
the relationships between bending and other properties may 
also be required by the rules-writing agency, particularly for 
fiber stress in tension F,. 


Daily or even more frequent calibration of machine opera- 
tion may be necessary. Depending upon machine principle, 
calibration may involve operating the machine on a calibra- 
tion bar of known stiffness, comparing grading machine 

E values to those obtained on the same pieces of lumber 

by calibrated laboratory test equipment, determining if 
machine-predicted density matches a calibration sample 
density, or in some instances, using two or more procedures. 
Machine operation should be certified for all sizes of lumber 
being produced. Machine settings may need to be adjusted 
to produce the same grade material from different widths. 


Quality control procedures of the MSR prediction model 
(E-bending strength relationship) have been adopted in 
Canada and the United States. Daily or more frequently, 
lumber production is representatively sampled and proof- 
loaded, usually in bending, with supplementary testing in 
tension. The pieces are proof-loaded to at least twice the 


7-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


design stress (Ff, or F;) for the assigned F,—F classification. 
In bending, the pieces are loaded on a random edge with the 
maximum-edge defect within the maximum moment area 
(middle one-third span in third-point loading) or as near to 
that point as possible. In tension, the pieces are tested with a 
2.4-m (8-ft) gauge length. 


If the number of pieces in the sample failing the proof-test 
load indicates a high probability that the population from 
which the pieces came does not meet the minimum grade 
criteria, a second sampling and proof test are conducted im- 
mediately. If the second sample confirms the results of the 
first sample, the MSR grading system is declared “out of 
control” and the operation is shut down to isolate and cor- 
rect the problem. The lumber that was incorrectly labeled is 
then correctly labeled. 


Cumulative machine calibration records are useful for de- 
tecting trends or gradual change in machine operation that 
might coincide with use and wear of machine parts. The 
proof-test results are also accumulated. Standard statistical 
quality control procedures (such as control charts) are used 
to monitor the production process so that it can be modified 
as needed in response to change in the timber resource, and 
to make the output fit the assumed model. 


Too many failures in one, or even consecutive, samples do 
not necessarily indicate that the system is out of control. If 
the prediction line is based on 95% confidence, it can be 
expected by chance alone that 1 sample in 20 will not meet 
the proof-load requirements. One or more out-of-control 
samples may also represent a temporary aberration in mate- 
rial properties (E—strength relationship). In any event, this 
situation would call for inspection of the cumulative quality 
control records for trends to determine if machine adjust- 
ment might be needed. A “clean” record (a period when the 
system does not go out of control) rectifies the evaluation of 
a system thought to be out of control. 


Adjustment of Properties for Design Use 


The mechanical properties associated with lumber quality 
are adjusted to give design unit stresses and a modulus of 
elasticity suitable for engineering uses. First, a lower con- 
fidence level is determined for the material, and this value 
is then adjusted for shrinkage, size, duration of load, and in 
ASD, an additional factor of safety. These adjustment fac- 
tors are discussed in the following text (specific adjustments 
are given in ASTM D 245 and D 1990). 


Shrinkage 


As described in Chapter 4, lumber shrinks and swells with 
changes in moisture content. The amount of dimensional 
change depends on a number of factors, such as species and 
ring angle. The American Softwood Lumber Standard PS 20 
lists specific shrinkage factors from green to 15% moisture 
content that were used historically to set green lumber di- 
mensions for most species (2.35% for thickness and 2.80% 
for width). The standard does provide a means of adjusting 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 


lumber dimensions to other moisture content by recogniz- 
ing an allowance of a tolerance below or above minimum 
standard dry sizes on a basis of 1% shrinkage or expan- 

sion for each 4% change in moisture content. (See sections 
6.2.3.1 and 6.2.5.1 of PS 20 for additional information.) The 
standard also provides specific shrinkage factors for species 
such as redwood and the cedars, which shrink less than most 
species. Using the PS 20 recommendations and an assumed 
green moisture content M,, we derive equations that can be 
used with most species to calculate the shrinkage of lumber 
as a function of percentage moisture content M. The equa- 
tion is applicable to lumber of all annual ring orientations. 
For dimension lumber, the dimensions at different moisture 
contents can be estimated with the following equation: 


| Lea bM3)/100 


d- 
> ""1-(a-bM,)/100 


where d, is dimension (mm, in.) at moisture content M,, d, 
dimension (mm, in.) at moisture content M,, M, moisture 
content (%) at d,, M@, moisture content (%) at d,, and a and 
b are variables from Table 7-5. 


Size Factor 


In general, a size effect causes small members to have great- 
er unit strength than that of large members. Two procedures 
can be used for calculating size-adjustment factors—small 
clear and In-grade. 


Small Clear Procedure 


ASTM D 245 provides only a formula for adjusting bending 
strength. The bending strength for lumber is adjusted to a 
new depth F’, other than 2 in. (51 mm) using the formula 


1 
d, \9 
Fy = (2s) Fo 
where d, is original depth (51 mm, 2 in.), d, new depth, and 
F, original bending strength. 


This formula is based on an assumed center load and a span- 
to-depth ratio of 14. A depth effect formula for two equal 
concentrated loads applied symmetrical to the midspan 
points is given in Chapter 9. 


In—Grade Test Procedures 


ASTM D 1990 provides a formula for adjusting bending, 
tension, and compression parallel to grain. No size 
adjustments are made to modulus of elasticity or for thick- 
ness effects in bending, tension, and compression. The size 
adjustments to dimension lumber are based on volume using 
the formula 


where P, is property value (MPa, lb in-2) at volume 1, P, 
property value (MPa, lb in-) at volume 2, W, width (mm, 


Table 7-5. Coefficients for equations to determine 
dimensional changes with moisture content change 
in dimension lumber 


Width Thickness 
Species a b a b M, 
Redwood, 3.454 0.157 2.816 0.128 22 


western redcedar, 
and northern 
white cedar 
Other species 6.031 0.215 


“M, is assumed green moisture content. 


5.062 0.181 28 


Table 7-6. Exponents for 
adjustment of dimension lumber 
mechanical properties with 
change in size* 


Exponent MOR UTS UCS 
w 0.29 0.29 0.13 
l 0.14 0.14 0 


“MOR, modulus of rupture; UTS, ultimate 
tensile stress; and UCS, ultimate 
compressive parallel-to-grain stress. 


in.) at P;, W, width (mm, in.) at P,, L, length (mm, in.) at 
P,, and L, length (mm, in.) at P,. Exponents are defined in 
Table 7-6. 


Moisture Adjustments 


For lumber <102 mm (<4 in.) thick that has been dried, 
strength properties have been shown to be related quadrati- 
cally to moisture content. Two relationships for modulus of 
rupture at any moisture content are shown in Figure 7-8. 
Both models start with the modulus of elasticity of green 
lumber. The curves with solid dots represent a precise qua- 
dratic model fit to experimental results. In typical practice, 
adjustments are made to correspond to average moisture 
contents of 15% and 12% with expected maximum moisture 
contents of 19% and 15%, respectively, using simplified ex- 
pressions represented by the open dot curves. Below about 
8% moisture content, some properties may decrease with 
decreasing moisture content values, and care should be ex- 
ercised in these situations. Equations applicable to adjusting 
properties to other moisture levels between green and 

10% moisture content are as follows: 


For MOR, ultimate tensile stress (UTS), and ultimate 
compressive stress (UCS), the following ASTM D 1990 
equations apply: 


For MOR < 16.7 MPa (2,415 Ib in-) 
UTS < 21.7 MPa (3,150 Ib in-) 
UCS < 9.7 MPa (1,400 Ib in?) 


F=f; 


Thus, there is no adjustment for stresses below these levels. 


7-11 


— 40 ‘ 
> £ 
a 2 
= - 
@ 30 > 
2 2 
2 | 
5 20 = 
pot 2-2-2 2-2-2 2 2-9-2 5 = 
5 " 6 
s 10 
3 s 
= = 
0 os 
18 20 23 25 


7 9 11 14 16 
Moisture content (%) 


Figure 7-8. Modulus of rupture as a function of 
moisture content for dimension lumber. Open dots 
represent the ASTM D 1990 model, and solid dots 
represent the more precise quadratic surface model 
on which the ASTM D 1990 model was based. 


For MOR > 16.6 MPa (2,415 lb in-2) 
UTS > 21.7 MPa (3,150 Ib in) 
UCS > 9.7 MPa (1,400 Ib in-2) 


P-B 
rR FOB anya) 


where M_ is moisture content | (%), M, is moisture content 
2 (%), and B , B, are constants from Table 7—7. 


For E, the following equation applies: 


_ g,{ 1:857-(0.0237My) 
1" "2'1.857—(0.0237M)) 


where F ; is property (MPa, lb in-2) at moisture content 1 
and E 5 is property (MPa, Ib in-?) at moisture content 2. 


For lumber thicker than 102 mm (4 in.), often no adjustment 
for moisture content is made because properties are assigned 
on the basis of wood in the green condition. This lumber is 
usually put in place without drying, and it is assumed that 
drying degrade offsets the increase in strength normally as- 
sociated with loss in moisture. 


Duration of Load 


Design may be based on either design stresses and a dura- 
tion of load factor or on ultimate limit state design stresses 
and a time effects factor. Both the duration of load and time 
effects factor describe the same phenomenon. In allowable 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 7-7. Coefficients for moisture adjustment 
of dimension lumber mechanical properties with 
change in moisture content* 


Property (MPa (Ib in°)) 


Coefficients MOR UTS UCS 
B, 16.6 (2,415) 21.7 (3,150) 9.6 (1,400) 
B, 0.276 (40) 0.552 (80) (0.234 (34) 


“MOR is modulus of rupture; UTS, ultimate tensile stress; and 
UCS, ultimate compressive parallel-to-grain stress. 


2.0 0.50 § 
£ 19 0.53 > 
aPis 0.56 = 8 
£3 17 0.59 22 
o= 1.6 0.62 35 
2¢ 1.5 0.67 Se 

= me) 
33/4 onze 
a. 13 ee ae 
oe 1.2 0.83 OF 
28 1.1 0.9155 
he 1.0 1.00 9° 

0.9 1.41 6 

> 2 5 2 €e ve * 
= 3s = & = Oo GG 
fo} c a) o > OO 
o = = - a >> 
4 E - oo 
pad - = rw 


Duration of load 


Figure 7-9. Relation of strength to duration of load. 


stress design, design stresses are based on an assumed 
10-year loading period (called normal loading). If duration 
of loading, either continuously or cumulatively, is expected 
to exceed 10 years, design stresses are reduced 10%. If the 
expected duration of loading is for shorter periods, pub- 
lished design stresses can be increased using Figure 7—9. Ul- 
timate limit-state design stresses are based on a 5-min load- 
ing period. If the duration of loading is expected to exceed 

5 min, limit-state design stresses are reduced by applying 
the time effects factor. Intermittent loading causes cumula- 
tive effects on strength and should be treated as continuous 
load of equivalent duration. The effects of cyclic loads of 
short duration must also be considered in design (see discus- 
sion of fatigue in Chap. 5). These duration of load modifica- 
tions are not applicable to modulus of elasticity. 


In many design circumstances, several loads bear on the 
structure, some acting simultaneously and each with a 


Table 7-8. Example of duration of load adjustments for ASD 


Equivalent 10-year 


Time Total load Load design load 
(year) (kPa (Ib ft )) adjustment* _ (kPa (Ib ft *)) 
1 4.8 (100) + 0.96 (20) = 5.7 (120) 0.93 5.36 (112) 
50 0.96 (20) 1.04 1.0 (21) 

“Figure 7-9. 


7-12 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 


different duration. When loads of different time duration are 
applied, the load duration factor corresponding to the short- 
est time duration is used. Each increment of time during 
which the total load is constant should be treated separately, 
and the most severe condition governs the design. Either the 
design stress or the total design load (but not both) can be 
adjusted using Figure 7-9. 


For example, suppose a structure is expected to support a 
load of 4.8 kPa (100 lb ft-2) on and off for a cumulative du- 
ration of 1 year. Also, it is expected to support its own dead 
load of 0.96 kPa (20 lb ft-2) for the anticipated 50-year life 
of the structure. The adjustments to be made to arrive at 

an equivalent 10-year design load for ASD are listed in 
Table 7-8. 


The more severe design load is 5.36 kPa (112 lb ft-2), and 
this load and the design stress for lumber would be used to 
select members of suitable size. In this case, it was conve- 
nient to adjust the loads on the structure, although the same 
result can be obtained by adjusting the design stress. 


Treatment Effects 


Treatments have been shown to affect the final strength of 
wood (see Chap. 5 for detailed discussion). There is a 5% 
reduction in F and a 15% reduction in strength properties of 
incised and treated dimension lumber for both dry- and wet- 
use conditions in the United States. In Canada, a 10% reduc- 
tion in E and a 30% reduction in all strength properties from 
incising are applied to dry-use conditions, whereas 5% and 
15% reductions are used for wet-use conditions. The wet- 
use factors are applied in addition to the traditional wet-use 
service factor. Reductions in energy-related properties are 
about 1.5 to 2 times those reported for static strength 
properties. There is no difference in long-term duration 

of load behavior between treated and untreated material 
(Fig. 7-10). Current design standards prohibit increases in 
design stresses beyond the 1.6 factor for short-term duration 
of load when considering impact-type loading for material 
treated with waterborne preservative. 


Temperature Effects 


As wood is cooled below normal temperatures, its properties 
increase. When heated, its properties decrease. The magni- 
tude of the change depends upon moisture content. Up to 

65 °C (150 °F), the effect of temperature is assumed by 
design codes to be reversible. For structural members that 


V Untreated 
A Treated 


Load duration factor C, 


0 2 4 6 8 10 
Log load duration (s) 


Figure 7-10. Load duration factor for material untreat- 
ed and treated with waterborne preservative. 


will be exposed to temperatures up to 65 °C (150 °F), de- 
sign values are multiplied by the factors given in Table 7-9 
(AF&PA). Prolonged exposure to heat can lead to a perma- 
nent loss in strength (see Chap. 5). 


Round Timbers and Ties 
Strength Properties 


Allowable strength properties of round timbers have been 
developed and published in several standards. In most cases, 
published values are based on strength of clear test samples. 
Allowable stresses are derived by adjusting clear test values 
for effects of growth characteristics, conditioning, shape, 
and load conditions as discussed in applicable standards. 

In addition, published values for some species of poles and 
piles reflect results of full-sized tests. 


Poles 


Most poles are used as structural members in support struc- 
tures for distribution and transmission lines. For this appli- 
cation, poles may be designed as single-member or guyed 
cantilevers or as structural members of a more complex 
structure. Specifications for wood poles used in single pole 
structures have been published by the American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI) in Standard O5.1. Guidelines for 
the design of pole structures are given in the ANSI National 
Electric Safety Code (NESC) (ANSI C2). 


Table 7-9. Property adjustment factors for in-service temperature exposures 


In-service Factor 
moisture T<37°C 37°C <T<52°C 52°C <T<65 °C 
Design values content += (T<100°F) = (100°F <T7<125°F) (125 °F < T< 150 °F) 
F,E Wet or dry 1.0 0.9 0.9 
Fo, Fin Fos Fey Dry 1.0 0.8 0.7 
Wet 1.0 0.7 0.5 


7-13 


The ANSI O5.1 standard gives values for fiber stress in 
bending for species commonly used as transmission or 
distribution poles. These values represent the near-ultimate 
fiber stress for poles used as cantilever beams. For most spe- 
cies, these values are based partly on full-sized pole tests 
and include adjustments for moisture content and pretreat- 
ment conditioning. The values in ANSI OS.1 are compatible 
with the ultimate strength design philosophy of the NESC, 
but they are not compatible with the working stress design 
philosophy of the National Design Specification (NDS). 


Reliability-based design techniques have been developed for 
the design of distribution—transmission line systems. This 
approach requires a strong database on the performance of 
pole structures. Supporting information for these design pro- 
cedures is available in a series of reports published by the 
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). 


Piles 


Bearing loads on piles are sustained by earth friction along 
their surface (skin friction) or by bearing of the tip on a 
solid stratum. Wood piles, because of their tapered form, are 
particularly efficient in supporting loads by skin friction. 
Bearing values that depend upon friction are related to the 
stability of the soil and generally do not approach the ulti- 
mate strength of the pile. Where wood piles sustain founda- 
tion loads by bearing of the tip on a solid stratum, loads may 
be limited by the compressive strength of the wood parallel 
to the grain. If a large proportion of the length of a pile ex- 
tends above ground, its bearing value may be limited by its 
strength as a long column. Side loads may also be applied to 
piles extending above ground. In such instances, however, 
bracing is often used to reduce the unsupported column 
length or to resist the side loads. 


The most critical loads on piles often occur during driving. 
Under hard driving conditions, piles that are too dry (<18% 
moisture content at a 51-mm (2-in.) depth) have literally 
exploded under the force of the driving hammers. Steel 
banding is recommended to increase resistance to splitting, 
and driving the piles into predrilled holes reduces driving 
stresses. 


The reduction in strength of a wood column resulting from 
crooks, eccentric loading, or any other condition that will 
result in combined bending and compression is not as great 
as would be predicted with the NDS interaction equations. 
This does not imply that crooks and eccentricity should be 
without restriction, but it should relieve anxiety as to the 
influence of crooks, such as those found in piles. Design 
procedures for eccentrically loaded columns are given in 
Chapter 9. 


There are several ways to determine bearing capacity of 
piles. Engineering formulas can estimate bearing values 
from the penetration under blows of known energy from the 
driving hammer. Some engineers prefer to estimate bearing 
capacity from experience or observation of the behavior of 


7-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


pile foundations under similar conditions or from the results 
of static-load tests. 


Working stresses for piles are governed by building code re- 
quirements and by recommendations of ASTM D 2899. This 
standard gives recommendations for adjusting small clear 
strength values listed in ASTM D 2555 for use in the design 
of full-sized piles. In addition to adjustments for properties 
inherent to the full-sized pile, the ASTM D 2899 standard 
provides recommendations for adjusting allowable stresses 
for the effects of pretreatment conditioning. 


Design stresses for timber piles are tabulated in the NDS for 
wood construction. The NDS values include adjustments for 
the effects of moisture content, load duration, and preserva- 
tive treatment. Recommendations are also given to adjust 
for lateral support conditions and factors of safety. 


Construction Logs 


Design values for round timbers used as structural mem- 
bers in pole or log buildings may be determined following 
standards published by ASTM International. The ASTM 
standard D 3200 refers pole designers to the same standard 
used to derive design stresses for timber piles (D 2899). 
Derivation of design stresses for construction logs used in 
log homes is covered in ASTM D 3957, which provides a 
method of establishing stress grades for structural members 
of any of the more common log configurations. Manufactur- 
ers can use this standard to develop grading specifications 
and derive engineering design stresses for their construction 
logs. 

Ties 

Railroad cross and switch ties have historically been over- 
designed from the standpoint of rail loads. Tie service life 
was limited largely by deterioration rather than mechanical 
damage. However, because of advances in decay-inhibiting 
treatment and increased axle loads, adequate structural de- 
sign is becoming more important in increasing railroad tie 
service life. 


Rail loads induce stresses in bending and shear as well as 
in compression perpendicular to the grain in railroad ties. 
The American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of- 
Way Association (AREMA) manual gives recommended 
limits on ballast bearing pressure and allowable stresses for 
cross ties. This information may be used by the designer to 
determine adequate tie size and spacing to avoid premature 
failure due to mechanical damage. 


Specific gravity and compressive strength parallel to the 
grain are also important properties to consider in evaluating 
cross tie material. These properties indicate the resistance of 
the wood to both pull out and lateral thrust of spikes. 


Literature Cited 


AF&PA. [Current edition]. Washington, DC: American 
Forest & Paper Association. 


Chapter 7 Stress Grades and Design Properties for Lumber, Round Timber, and Ties 


Design values for wood construction—a supplement to 
the national design specification for wood construction. 


National design specification for wood construction. 


Forest Products Society. 1997. Machine-graded lumber. 
Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. Wood Design Focus. 
8(2): 1-24. 


Additional References 


Lumber 


ALSC. 1995. Germantown, MD: American Lumber Stan- 
dards Committee. 


ASTM. [Current edition]. Section 04—Construction; Vol- 
ume 10—Wood. West Conshohocken, PA: American Soci- 
ety for Testing and Materials. 


ASTM D 198-05a. Standard methods of static tests of 
timbers in structural sizes. 


ASTM D 245-06. Standard methods for establishing 
structural grades for visually-graded lumber. 


ASTM D 1990-07. Standard methods for establishing 
allowable properties for visually-graded dimension 
lumber from in-grade tests of full-size specimens. 


ASTM D 2555-06. Standard methods for establishing 
clear wood strength values. 


ASTM D 2915-03. Standard practice for evaluating 
properties for stress grades of structural lumber. 


ASTM D 4761-05. Standard test methods for mechani- 
cal properties of lumber and wood-base structural 
materials. 


ASTM D 6570-04. Standard practice for assigning al- 
lowable properties for mechanically graded lumber. 


DOC. [Current edition]. American softwood lumber stan- 
dard. Voluntary Product Standard PS—20. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Commerce. 


Galligan, W.L.; Green, D.W.; Gromala, D.S.; Haskell, J.H. 
1980. Evaluation of lumber properties in the United States 
and their application to structural research. Forest Products 
Journal. 30(10): 45-51. 


Gerhards, C.C. 1977. Effect of duration and rate of loading 
on strength of wood and wood-based materials. Res. Pap. 
FPL-—RP-283. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 27 p. 


Green, D.W. 1989. Moisture content and the shrinkage of 
lumber. Res. Pap. FPL-RP—489. Madison, WI: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Labora- 
tory. 11 p. 


Green, D.W.; Evans, J.W. 1987. Mechanical properties of 
visually graded dimension lumber. PB—88—159-371. 


Springfield, VA: National Technical Information Service. 
Vol. 1—Vol. 7. 


Green, D.W.; Kretschmann, D.E. 1992. Properties and 
grading of Southern Pine timbers. Forest Products Journal. 
47(9): 78-85. 


Green, D.W.; Shelley, B.E. 2006. Guidelines for assigning 
allowable properties to visually graded foreign species. Ger- 
mantown, MD: Board of Review, American Lumber Stan- 
dards Committee. 10 p. 


Green, D.W.; Shelley, B.E. 2006. Guidelines for assigning 
allowable properties to mechanically graded foreign species. 
Germantown, MD: American Lumber Standard Committee. 
12 p. 


Green, D.W.; Shelley, B.E.; Vokey, H.P. 1989. In-grade test- 
ing of structural lumber. In: Proceedings of workshop spon- 
sored by In-grade Testing Committee and Forest Products 
Society. Proceedings 47363. Madison, WI: Forest Products 
Society. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Green D.W. 1996. Modeling moisture 
content—-mechanical property relationships for clear South- 
ern Pine. Wood Fiber Science. 28(3): 320-337. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Evans, J.W. 2010. History of lumber 
submissions under ASTM D 1990 since the North American 
in-grade testing program. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-189. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice. Forest Products Laboratory. 52 p. 


Winandy, J.E. 1995. The influence of time—to—failure on the 
strength of CCA-treated lumber. Forest Products Journal. 
45(2): 82-85. 


General 

AWPA. [Current edition]. Book of standards (includes stan- 
dards on pressure and thermal treatment of poles, piles, and 
ties). American Wood-Preserver’s Bureau official quality 
control standards. Bethesda, MD: American Wood Protec- 
tion Association. 


Engineering Data Management and Colorado State Univer- 
sity. 1989-1998. International conference—Wood poles and 
piles. Conference proceedings. Fort Collins, CO: Engineer- 
ing Data Management and Colorado State University. 


USFSS. [Current edition]. Poles and piles, wood. Fed- 

eral Specification MM—P-371c—ties, railroad (cross and 
switch); Federal Specification MM-—T-37 1d—wood preser- 
vation: treating practice; Federal Specification TT—W-571. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Federal Supply Service. 


Poles 


ANSI. [Current edition]. New York, NY: American National 
Standards Institute. 


ANSI 05.1. Specifications and dimensions for wood 
poles. 


ANSI C2. National electrical safety code. 


7-15 


ANSI OS.2. Structural glued laminated timber for util- 
ity structures. 


ASTM. [Current edition]. West Conshohocken, PA: Ameri- 
can Society for Testing and Materials. 


ANSI/ASTM D 1036-99. Standard methods of static 
tests of wood poles. 


ASTM D 3200-74. Standard specification and methods 
for establishing recommended design stresses for round 
timber construction poles. 


Carson, J.M.; Dougherty, M., eds. 1997. Post-frame build- 
ing handbook: materials, design considerations, construction 
procedures. Ithaca, NY: Northeast Regional Agricultural 
Engineering Service. 78 p. 


EPRI. 1981. Probability-based design of wood transmis- 
sion structures. (a) Vol. 1: Strength and stiffness of wood 
utility poles. (b) Vol. 2: Analysis and probability-based 
design of wood utility structures. (c) Vol. 3: Users’ manual. 
POLEDA-80. Pole design and analysis. Prepared by: Re- 
search Institute of Colorado for Electric Power Research 
Institute. Palo Alto, CA: Electric Power Research Institute. 
EL1-—2040. Vols. 1-3, Proj. 1352-1. September. 


EPRI. 1985. Wood pole properties. Vol. 1: Background and 
Southern Pine data. Prepared by: Research Institute of Colo- 
rado for Electric Power Research Institute. Palo Alto, CA: 
Electric Power Research Institute. EL—4109. Proj. 1352-2. 
July. 


EPRI. 1986. Wood pole properties. (a) Vol. 2: Douglas-fir 
data. (b) Vol. 3: Western redcedar. Prepared by: Research 
Institute of Colorado for Electric Power Research Institute. 
Palo Alto, CA: Electric Power Research Institute. EL—4109. 
Proj. 1352-2. January. 


Morrell, J.J. 1996. Wood pole maintenance manual. Corval- 
lis, OR: Oregon State University, College of Forestry, Forest 
Research Laboratory. 47 p. 


NRAES. 1997. Post-frame building construction. Ithaca, 
NY: Northeast Regional Agricultural Engineering Service. 


Thompson, W.S. 1969. Effect of steaming and kiln drying 
on properties of Southern Pine poles. Part I—mechanical 
properties. Forest Products Journal. 19(1): 21-28. 


Wood, L.W.; Erickson, E.C.O.; Dohr, A.W. 1960. Strength 
and related properties of wood poles. Philadelphia, PA: 
American Society for Testing and Materials. 83 p. 


Wood, L.W.; Markwardt, L.J. 1965. Derivation of fiber 
stresses from strength values of wood poles. Res. Pap. FPL 
39. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 12 p. 


Piles 


AF&PA. [Current edition]. National design specification for 
wood construction. Washington, DC: American Forest & 
Paper Association. 


7-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


AREA. 1982. Timber structures. In: Manual for railway en- 
gineering. Washington, DC: American Railway Engineering 
Association. Chapter 7. 


Armstrong, R.M. 1979. Structural properties of timber piles. 
In: Behavior of deep foundations. ASTM STP670. Phila- 
delphia, PA: American Society for Testing and Materials: 
118-152. 


ASTM. [Current edition]. West Conshohocken, PA: Ameri- 
can Society for Testing and Materials. 


ASTM D 25-99. Standard specification for round 
timber piles. 


ASTM D 2899-03. Establishing design stresses for 
round timber piles. 


AWPI. 1969. Pile foundations know-how. Washington, DC: 
American Wood Preservers Institute. 


Thompson, W.S. 1969. Factors affecting the variation in 
compressive strength of Southern Pine piling. Washington, 
DC: American Wood-Preservers’ Association. 


Construction Logs 


ASTM. [Current edition]. Standard methods for establishing 
stress grades for structural members used in log buildings. 
ASTM D 3957. West Conshohocken, PA: American Society 
for Testing and Materials. 


Muchmore, F.W. 1977. Design guide for native log stringer 
bridges. Juneau, AK: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Region 10. 12 p. 


Rowell, R.M.; Black, J.M.; Gjovik, L.R.; Feist, W.C. 1977. 
Protecting log cabins from decay. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-11. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 16 p. 


Ties 
AREMA. 2008. Ties. In: Manual for railway engineering. 


Washington, DC: American Railway Engineering and Main- 
tenance-of-Way Association. Volume |, Chapter 30. 


CHAPTER 8 


Fastenings 


Douglas R. Rammer, Research General Engineer 


Contents 
Nails 8-1 
Withdrawal Resistance 8—2 
Lateral Resistance 8-6 
Spikes 8-9 
Staples 8-9 
Drift Bolts 8-10 
Wood Screws 8-10 
Withdrawal Resistance 8—10 
Lateral Resistance 8-11 
Lag Screws 8-12 
Withdrawal Resistance 8—12 
Lateral Resistance 8-13 
Bolts 8-14 
Bearing Stress of Wood under Bolts 8-14 
Loads at an Angle to the Grain 8-15 
Steel Side Plates 8-15 
Bolt Quality 8-15 
Effect of Member Thickness 8—16 
Two Member, Multiple Member Joints 8—16 
Spacing, Edge, and End Distance 8-16 
Effect of Bolt Holes 8-16 
Pre-1991 Allowable Loads 8-17 
Post-1991 Yield Model 8-17 
Connector Joints 8-19 
Parallel-to-Grain Loading 8-19 
Perpendicular-to-Grain Loading 8—20 
Design Loads 8—20 
Modifications 8—21 
Net Section 8—23 
End Distance and Spacing 8—23 
Placement of Multiple Connectors 8—23 
Cross Bolts 8—24 
Multiple-Fastener Joints 8—24 
Metal Plate Connectors 8—25 
Joist Hangers 8—25 
Fastener Head Embedment 8-26 
Literature Cited 8-27 
Additional References 8—27 


The strength and stability of any structure depend heav- 

ily on the fastenings that hold its parts together. One prime 
advantage of wood as a structural material is the ease with 
which wood structural parts can be joined together with a 
wide variety of fastenings—nails, spikes, screws, bolts, lag 
screws, drift pins, staples, and metal connectors of various 
types. For utmost rigidity, strength, and service, each type of 
fastening requires joint designs adapted to the strength prop- 
erties of wood along and across the grain and to dimensional 
changes that may occur with changes in moisture content. 


Maximum lateral resistance and safe design load values for 
small-diameter (nails, spikes, and wood screws) and large- 
diameter dowel-type fasteners (bolts, lag screws, and drift 
pins) were based on an empirical method prior to 1991. Re- 
search conducted during the 1980s resulted in lateral resis- 
tance values that are currently based on a yield model theo- 
ry. This theoretical method was adapted for the 1991 edition 
of the National Design Specification for Wood Construction 
(NDS). Because literature and design procedures exist that 
are related to both the empirical and theoretical methods, we 
refer to the empirical method as pre-1991 and the theoretical 
method as post-1991 throughout this chapter. Withdrawal 
resistance methods have not changed, so the pre- and post- 
1991 refer only to lateral resistance. 


The information in this chapter represents primarily Forest 
Products Laboratory research results. A more comprehen- 
sive discussion of fastenings is given in the American Soci- 
ety of Civil Engineers Manuals and Reports on Engineering 
Practice No. 84, Mechanical Connections in Wood Struc- 
tures. The research results of this chapter are often modified 
for structural safety, based on judgment or experience, and 
thus information presented in design documents may differ 
from information presented in this chapter. Additionally, 
research by others serves as a basis for some current design 
criteria. Allowable stress design and limit states design cri- 
teria are presented in the National Design Specification for 
Wood Construction published by the American Forest and 
Paper Association. 


Nails 


Nails are the most common mechanical fastenings used in 
wood construction. There are many types, sizes, and forms 
of nails (Fig. 8-1). Most load equations presented in this 
section apply for bright, smooth, common steel wire nails 
driven into wood when there is no visible splitting. For nails 
other than common wire nails, the loads can be adjusted by 
factors given later in the chapter. 


8-1 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


| Table 8-1. Sizes of bright common wire 
nails 

Length Diameter 

Size Gauge (mm (in.)) (mm (in.)) 
6d 11-1/2 50.8 (2) 2.87 (0.113) 
8d 10-1/4 63.5 (2-1/2) 3.33 (0.131) 
10d 9 76.2 (3) 3.76 (0.148) 
12d 9 82.6 (3-1/4) 3.76 (0.148) 
16d 8 88.9 (3-1/2) 4.11 (0.162) 
20d 6 101.6 (4) 4.88 (0.192) 
30d 5 114.3 (4-1/2) 5.26 (0.207) 
7 7 40d 4 127.0 (5) 5.72 (0.225) 
50d 3 139.7 (5-1/2) 6.20 (0.244) 
Figure 8—1. Various types of nails: (left to right) bright 60d 2 152.4 (6) 6.65 (0.262) 


smooth wire nail, cement coated, zinc-coated, annu- 
larly threaded, helically threaded, helically threaded 
and barbed, and barbed. 


Table 8—2. Sizes of smooth box nails 


Length Diameter 

Nails in use resist withdrawal loads, lateral loads, or a com- Size Gauge (mm(in.)) (mm (in.)) 
bination of the two. Both withdrawal and lateral resistance 3d 14-1/2 31.8 (1-1/4) 1.93 (0.076) 
are affected by the wood, the nail, and the condition of use. 4d 14 38.1 (1-1/2) 2.03 (0.080) 
In general, however, any variation in these factors has a 5d 14 44.5 (1-3/4) 2.03 (0.080) 
more pronounced effect on withdrawal resistance than on ot rere ee ee ee) 
lateral resistance. The serviceability of joints with nails lat- ue iets ee ee 
! 8d ss 1-1/2. 63.5 (2-1/2) 2.87 (0.113) 
erally loaded does not depend greatly on withdrawal resis- 10d = 10-1/2 76.2 (3) 3.25 (0.128) 
tance unless large joint distortion is tolerable. 16d 10 88.9 (3-1/2) 3.43 (0.135) 
20d 9 101.6 (4) 3.76 (0.148) 


The diameters of various penny or gauge sizes of bright 
common nails are given in Table 8-1. The penny size desig- 
nation should be used cautiously. International nail produc- 
ers sometimes do not adhere to the dimensions of Table 8-1. 
Thus penny sizes, although still widely used, are obsolete. 


Table 8-3. Sizes of helically 
and annularly threaded nails 


Specifying nail sizes by length and diameter dimensions is Length Diameter 
recommended. Bright box nails are generally of the same nee Guat) een) 
length but slightly smaller diameter (Table 8-2), whereas 6d 50.8 (2) 3.05 (0.120) 
cement-coated nails such as coolers, sinkers, and coated box 8d 63.5 @-1/2) 3.05 (0.120) 
10d 76.2 (3) ~—-3.43 (0.135) 
nails are slightly shorter (3.2 mm (1/8 in.)) and of smaller 12d 82.6 (3-1/4) 3.43 (0.135) 
diameter than common nails of the same penny size. Heli- 16d 88.9 (3-1/2) 3.76 (0.148) 
cally and annularly threaded nails generally have smaller 20d 101.6 (4) 4.50 (0.177) 
diameters than common nails for the same penny size 30d =: 114.3 (4-1/2) 4.50 (0.177) 
(Table 8-3). 40d 127.0 (5) 4.50 (0.177) 
50d = 139.7 (5-1/2) 4.50 (0.177) 

Withdrawal Resistance 60d 152.4 (6) — 4.50 (0.177) 
The resistance of a nail shank to direct withdrawal from a he se 5 ae 
piece of wood depends on the density of the wood, the di- 90d 228.6 (9) 5.26 (0.207) 


ameter of the nail, and the depth of penetration. The surface 
condition of the nail at the time of driving also influences 


ihe uatal withdrawal resistance: where p is maximum load (N, Ib), Z depth (mm, in.) of pen- 


etration of the nail in the member holding the nail point, 

G specific gravity of the wood based on ovendry weight and 
volume at 12% moisture content (see Chap. 5, Tables 5—2 to 
5-5), and D diameter of the nail (mm, in.). (The NDS uses 
ovendry weight and volume as a basis.) 


For bright common wire nails driven into the side grain of 
seasoned wood or unseasoned wood that remains wet, the 
results of many tests have shown that the maximum with- 
drawal load is given by the empirical equation 
p=54.12G*'*pL 


(metric) (8-la) 


The loads expressed by Equation (8-1) represent average 
data. Certain wood species give test values that are 


=7,850G "DL 
P , somewhat greater or less than the equation values. A 


(inch—pound) (8—1b) 


8-2 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


Displacement (in.) 


0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.05 
160 

— ry 
< 120 = 
c so] 
bs 6d smooth box nail S 
ras 2.49 mm (0.098 in.) = 
$ diameter 80 g 
& 31.8 mm (1.25 in.) £ 
+ penetration depth 2 
5 Douglas-fir 40 = 

12% Moisture content 

0.54 Specific gravity 

0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 
Displacement (mm) 


Figure 8-2. Typical load—displacement curve for di- 
rect withdrawal of a nail. 


typical load—displacement curve for nail withdrawal 
(Fig. 8-2) shows that maximum load occurs at relatively 
small values of displacement. 


Although the equation for nail-withdrawal resistance indi- 
cates that the dense, heavy woods offer greater resistance 

to nail withdrawal than do the lower density ones, lighter 
species should not be disqualified for uses requiring high 
resistance to withdrawal. As a rule, the less dense species 

do not split as readily as the denser ones, thus offering an 
opportunity for increasing the diameter, length, and number 
of the nails to compensate for the wood’s lower resistance to 
nail withdrawal. 


The withdrawal resistance of nail shanks is greatly affected 
by such factors as type of nail point, type of shank, time the 
nail remains in the wood, surface coatings, and moisture 
content changes in the wood. 


Effect of Seasoning 


With practically all species, nails driven into green wood 
and pulled before any seasoning takes place offer about the 
same withdrawal resistance as nails driven into seasoned 
wood and pulled soon after driving. However, if common 
smooth-shank nails are driven into green wood that is al- 
lowed to season, or into seasoned wood that is subjected 

to cycles of wetting and drying before the nails are pulled, 
they lose a major part of their initial withdrawal resistance. 
The withdrawal resistance for nails driven into wood that 

is subjected to changes in moisture content may be as low 
as 25% of the values for nails tested soon after driving. On 
the other hand, if the wood fibers deteriorate or the nail cor- 
rodes under some conditions of moisture variation and time, 
withdrawal resistance is erratic; resistance may be regained 
or even increased over the immediate withdrawal resistance. 
However, such sustained performance should not be relied 
on in the design of a nailed joint. 


In seasoned wood that is not subjected to appreciable mois- 
ture content changes, the withdrawal resistance of nails may 
also diminish due to relaxation of the wood fibers with time. 
Under all these conditions of use, the withdrawal resistance 
of nails differs among species and shows variation within 
individual species. 


Effect of Nail Form 


The surface condition of nails is frequently modified during 
the manufacturing process to improve withdrawal resis- 
tance. Such modification is usually done by surface coat- 
ing, surface roughening, or mechanical deformation of the 
shank. Other factors that affect the surface condition of the 
nail are the oil film remaining on the shank after manufac- 
ture or corrosion resulting from storage under adverse con- 
ditions; but these factors are so variable that their influence 
on withdrawal resistance cannot be adequately evaluated. 


Surface Modifications—A common surface treatment 

for nails is the so-called cement coating. Cement coatings, 
contrary to what the name implies, do not include cement 
as an ingredient; they generally are a composition of resin 
applied to the nail to increase the resistance to withdrawal 
by increasing the friction between the nail and the wood. 
If properly applied, they increase the resistance of nails to 
withdrawal immediately after the nails are driven into the 
softer woods. However, in the denser woods (such as hard 
maple, birch, or oak), cement-coated nails have practically 
no advantage over plain nails, because most of the coat- 
ing is removed in driving. Some of the coating may also be 
removed in the side member before the nail penetrates the 
main member. 


Good-quality cement coatings are uniform, not sticky to the 
touch, and cannot be rubbed off easily. Different techniques 
of applying the cement coating and variations in its ingre- 
dients may cause large differences in the relative resistance 
to withdrawal of different lots of cement-coated nails. Some 
nails may show only a slight initial advantage over plain 
nails. In the softer woods, the increase in withdrawal resis- 
tance of cement-coated nails is not permanent but drops off 
significantly after a month or so. Cement-coated nails are 
used primarily in construction of boxes, crates, and other 
containers usually built for rough handling and relatively 
short service. 


Nails that have galvanized coatings, such as zinc, are in- 
tended primarily for uses where corrosion and staining resis- 
tance are important factors in permanence and appearance. 
If the zinc coating is evenly applied, withdrawal resistance 
may be increased, but extreme irregularities of the coating 
may actually reduce it. The advantage that uniformly coated 
galvanized nails may have over nongalvanized nails in re- 
sistance to initial withdrawal is usually reduced by repeated 
cycles of wetting and drying. 


Nails have also been made with plastic coatings. The useful- 
ness and characteristics of these coatings are influenced by 


the quality and type of coating, the effectiveness of the bond 
between the coating and base fastener, and the effectiveness 
of the bond between the coating and wood fibers. Some 
plastic coatings appear to resist corrosion or improve resis- 
tance to withdrawal, while others offer little improvement. 


Fasteners with properly applied nylon coating tend to retain 
their initial resistance to withdrawal compared with other 
coatings, which exhibit a marked decrease in withdrawal 
resistance within the first month after driving. 


A chemically etched nail has somewhat greater withdrawal 
resistance than some coated nails, as the minutely pitted 
surface is an integral part of the nail shank. Under impact 
loading, however, the withdrawal resistance of etched nails 
is little different from that of plain or cement-coated nails 
under various moisture conditions. 


Sand-blasted nails perform in much the same manner as 
chemically etched nails. 


Shape Modifications—Nail shanks may be varied from 

a smooth, circular form to give an increase in surface 

area without an increase in nail weight. Special nails with 
barbed, helically or annularly threaded, and other irregular 
shanks (Fig. 8-1) are commercially available. 


The form and magnitude of the deformations along the 
shank influence the performance of the nails in various 
wood species. In wood remaining at a uniform moisture 
content, the withdrawal resistance of these nails is gener- 
ally somewhat greater than that of common wire nails of 
the same diameter. From tests in which nails were driven in 
the side grain of seasoned wood, bright annularly threaded 
nails, with shank-to-thread-crest diameter difference greater 
than 0.2 mm (0.008 in.) and thread spacing between 1.27 
mm (0.05 in.) and 1.96 mm (0.077 in.), the immediate maxi- 
mum withdrawal load is given by the empirical equation 


p=73.11G?DL 


(metric) (8—2a) 


p =10,600G7 DI (inch—pound) (8-2b) 
where p is maximum load (N, lb), Z depth (mm, in.) of pen- 
etration of the nail in the member holding the nail point, G 
specific gravity of the wood based on ovendry weight and 
volume and oven dry moisture content (see Chap. 5, Tables 
5—2 to 5—5), and D shank diameter of the nail (mm, in.). 

The expression is valid only for the threaded portion of the 
nail. Comparison of Equations (8—1) and (8—2) indicates 
that the bright annularly threaded nail can have withdrawal 
resistances that are double the values of common nails. For 
galvanized annularly threaded nails, the immediate with- 
drawal strength is slightly lower. However, under conditions 
involving changes in moisture content of the wood, some 
special nail forms provide considerably greater withdrawal 
resistance than the common wire nail—about four times 
greater for annularly and helically threaded nails of the same 
diameter. This is especially true of nails driven into green 


8-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Spruce—pine-fir 


26 ~ 12% Moisture content 
~- 0.39 Specific gravity 
— 20- : 
s : 
= 
co —- ae 
8 1.5 | ue a“ : 
5 $ , 
- 1.0 — iN 
< oa 
ri ——— — - Annular 
0.5 — ] —~—- Helical 
"4 —— Smooth 
it | 
0 2 4 6 


Deformation (mm) 


Figure 8-3. Typical load—displacement curves de- 
formed and smooth shank for direct withdrawal of a 
nail. 


wood that subsequently dries. In general, annularly threaded 
nails sustain larger withdrawal loads, and helically threaded 
nails sustain greater impact withdrawal work values than do 
the other nail forms (Fig. 8-3). 


Nails with deformed shanks are sometimes hardened by heat 
treatments for use where driving conditions are difficult or 
to obtain improved performance, such as in pallet assembly. 
Hardened nails are brittle and care should be exercised to 
avoid injuries from fragments of nails broken during 
driving. 


Nail Point—A smooth, round shank nail with a long, sharp 
point will usually have a greater withdrawal resistance, 
particularly in the softer woods, than the common wire nail 
(which usually has a diamond point). However, sharp points 
accentuate splitting in certain species, which may reduce 
withdrawal resistance. A blunt or flat point without taper 
reduces splitting, but its destruction of the wood fibers when 
driven reduces withdrawal resistance to less than that of the 
common wire nail. A nail tapered at the end and terminating 
in a blunt point will cause less splitting. In heavier woods, 
such a tapered, blunt-pointed nail will provide about the 
same withdrawal resistance, but in less dense woods, its re- 
sistance to withdrawal is less than that of the common nail. 


Nail Head—Nail head classifications include flat, oval, 
countersunk, deep-countersunk, and brad. Nails with all 
types of heads, except the deep-countersunk, brad, and some 
of the thin flathead nails, are sufficiently strong to withstand 
the force required to pull them from most woods in direct 
withdrawal. One exception to this statement is for annularly 
threaded nails. Due to the increased withdrawal capacity 

for these type nails, nail head can be pulled into or through 
wood members. The deep-countersunk and brad nails are 
usually driven below the wood surface and are not intended 
to carry large withdrawal loads. In general, the thickness 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


and diameter of the heads of the common wire nails increase 
as the size of the nail increases. 


The development of some pneumatically operated portable 
nailers has introduced nails with specially configured heads, 
such as T-nails and nails with a segment of the head cut off. 


Corrosion and Staining 


In the presence of moisture, metals used for nails may cor- 
rode when in contact with wood treated with certain preser- 
vative or fire-retardant treatments (Chaps. 15 and 18). Use 
of certain metals or metal alloys will reduce the amount of 
corrosion. Nails of copper, silicon bronze, and 300 series 
stainless steels have performed well in wood treated with 
ammoniacal copper arsenate and chromated copper arsenate. 
Similarly, 300 series stainless steel nails have performed 
well in wood treated with copper azole and alkaline copper 
quaternary. The choice of metals for use with fire-retardant- 
treated woods depends upon the particular fire-retardant 
chemical. 


With the greater use of metal connecters, such as joist hang- 
ers, in outdoor environments, an additional corrosion con- 
cer is possible. Both the joist hanger and fastener should 
be of the same metal type; if not, the corrosion rate of either 
the fastener or hanger may increase due to galvanic (mixed 
metal) corrosion between the hanger and fastener. 


Organic coated fasteners, such as polymer coatings, resist 
corrosion on the principle of isolation. Any damage that oc- 
curs to the coating during insertion can give the corrosive 
environment a path to the substrate, and pitting or crevice 
corrosion will occur at these sites. 


Staining caused by the reaction of certain wood extractives 
(Chap. 3) and steel in the presence of moisture is a problem 
if appearance is important, such as with naturally finished 
siding. Use of stainless steel, aluminum, or hot-dipped gal- 
vanized nails can alleviate staining. 


In general, the withdrawal resistance of copper, other alloy, 
and polymer-coated nails is comparable with that of com- 
mon steel wire nails when pulled soon after driving. 

Driving 

The resistance of nails to withdrawal is generally greatest 
when they are driven perpendicular to the grain of the wood. 
When a bright nail is driven parallel to the wood fibers (that 
is, into the end of the piece) withdrawal resistance in wood 
ranges between 50% to 75% of the resistance obtained when 
the nail is driven perpendicular to the grain. The ratio be- 
tween the immediate end- and side-grain withdrawal loads 
is nearly constant for all specific gravities. In contrast to the 
immediate withdrawal case, nails pulled after a time interval 
or after moisture content changes experience a decreased 
load in both side and end grain. For most species the de- 
crease in the side grain withdrawal load is greater than in the 
end grain; therefore the resulting end- to side-grain ratio is 
larger. 


Toe nailing, a common method of joining wood framework, 
involves slant driving a nail or group of nails through the 
end or edge of an attached member and into a main member. 
Toe nailing requires greater skill in assembly than does ordi- 
nary end nailing but provides joints of greater strength and 
stability. Tests show that the maximum strength of toenailed 
joints under lateral and uplift loads is obtained by (a) using 
the largest nail that will not cause excessive splitting, 

(b) allowing an end distance (distance from the end of the 
attached member to the point of initial nail entry) of approx- 
imately one-third the length of the nail, (c) driving the nail 
at a slope of 30° with the attached member, and (d) burying 
the full shank of the nail but avoiding excessive mutilation 
of the wood from hammer blows. 


The results of withdrawal tests with multiple nail joints in 
which the piece attached is pulled directly away from the 
main member show that slant driving is usually superior to 
straight driving when nails are driven into dry wood and 
pulled immediately, and decidedly superior when nails are 
driven into green or partially dry wood that is allowed to 
season for a month or more. However, the loss in depth of 
penetration due to slant driving may, in some types of joints, 
offset the advantages of slant nailing. Cross slant driving of 
groups of nails through the side grain is usually somewhat 
more effective than parallel-slant driving through the end 
grain. 


Nails driven into lead holes with a diameter slightly smaller 
(approximately 90%) than the nail shank have somewhat 
greater withdrawal resistance than nails driven without lead 
holes. Lead holes also prevent or reduce splitting of the 
wood, particularly for dense species. 


Clinching 


The withdrawal resistance of smooth-shank, clinched nails 
is considerably greater than that of unclinched nails. The 
point of a clinched nail is bent over where the nail protrudes 
through the side member. The ratio between the loads for 
clinched and unclinched nails varies enormously, depending 
upon the moisture content of the wood when the nail is driv- 
en and withdrawn, the species of wood, the size of nail, and 
the direction of clinch with respect to the grain of the wood. 


In dry or green wood, a clinched nail provides 45% to 170% 
more withdrawal resistance than an unclinched nail when 
withdrawn soon after driving. In green wood that seasons 
after a nail is driven, a clinched nail gives 250% to 460% 
greater withdrawal resistance than an unclinched nail. How- 
ever, this improved strength of a clinched-nail joint does not 
justify the use of green lumber, because the joints may loos- 
en as the lumber seasons. Furthermore, laboratory tests were 
made with single nails, and the effects of drying, such as 
warping, twisting, and splitting, may reduce the efficiency 
of a joint that has more than one nail. Clinching of nails is 
generally confined to such construction as boxes and crates 
and other container applications. 


Nails clinched across the grain have approximately 20% 
more resistance to withdrawal than nails clinched along the 
grain. 


Fastening of Plywood 


The nailing characteristics of plywood are not greatly differ- 
ent from those of solid wood except for plywood’s greater 
resistance to splitting when nails are driven near an edge. 
The nail withdrawal resistance of plywood is 15% to 30% 
less than that of solid wood of the same thickness. The rea- 
son is that fiber distortion is less uniform in plywood than in 
solid wood. For plywood less than 12.5 mm (1/2 in.) thick, 
the greater splitting resistance tends to offset the lower 
withdrawal resistance compared with solid wood. The with- 
drawal resistance per unit length of penetration decreases as 
the number of plies per unit length increases. The direction 
of the grain of the face ply has little influence on the with- 
drawal resistance from the face near the end or edge of a 
piece of plywood. The direction of the grain of the face ply 
may influence the pull-through resistance of staples or nails 
with severely modified heads, such as T-heads. Fastener 
design information for plywood is available from APA— 
The Engineered Wood Association. 


Allowable Loads 


The preceding discussion dealt with maximum withdrawal 
loads obtained in short-time test conditions. For design, 
these loads must be reduced to account for variability, 
duration-of-load effects, and safety. A value of one-sixth 

the average maximum load has usually been accepted as the 
allowable load for long-time loading conditions. For normal 
duration of load, this value may be increased by 10%. Nor- 
mal duration of load is defined as a load of 10-year duration. 


Lateral Resistance 

Pre-1991 

Test loads at joint slips of 0.38 mm (0.015 in.) (approximate 
proportional limit load) for bright common wire nails in 
lateral resistance driven into the side grain (perpendicular 
to the wood fibers) of seasoned wood are expressed by the 
empirical equation 


p=KD*’ (8-2) 


where p is lateral load per nail, K a coefficient, and D 
diameter of the nail. Values of coefficient K are listed in 
Table 8-4 for ranges of specific gravity of hardwoods and 
softwoods. The loads given by the equation apply only 
where the side member and the member holding the nail 
point are of approximately the same density. The thickness 
of the side member should be about one-half the depth of 
penetration of the nail in the member holding the point. 


The ultimate lateral nail loads for softwoods may approach 
3.5 times the loads expressed by the equation, and for 
hardwoods they may be 7 times as great. The joint slip at 
maximum load, however, is more than 20 times 0.38 mm 
(0.015 in.). This is demonstrated by the typical load—slip 


8-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 8-4. Coefficients for computing test loads for 
fasteners in seasoned wood’ (pre-1991) 


Lateral load coefficient K (metric (inch—pound)) 


Specific 

gravity Lag 

range? Nails® Screws screws 
Hardwoods 

0.33-0.47 50.04 (1,440) 23.17 (3,360) 26.34 (3,820) 

0.48-0.56 69.50 (2,000) 31.99 (4,640) 29.51 (4,280) 

0.57-0.74 94.52 (2,720) 44.13 (6,400) 34.13 (4,950) 
Softwoods 

0.29-0.42 50.04 (1,440) 23.17 (3,360) 23.30 (3,380) 

0.43-0.47 62.55 (1,800) 29.79 (4,320) 26.34 (3,820) 

0.48-0.52 76.45 (2,200) 36.40 (5,280) 29.51 (4,280) 


“Wood with a moisture content of 15%. 

Specific gravity based on ovendry weight and volume at 

12% moisture content. 

“Coefficients based on load at joint slip of 0.38 mm (0.015 in.) 


Slip in joint (in.) 
0.12 0.24 


= 
Ww 
uo 


Load (kN) 
o 
oOo 
o 


Yield 
strength ee 8d common 


nail 


© 
s 
a 


3 6 
0.05 xX — Slip in joint 
fastener Pm ae ee 
diameter 


Figure 8-4. Typical relation between lateral load and 
slip in the joint and 5% offset definition. 


curve shown in Figure 8—4. To maintain a sufficient ratio 
between ultimate load and the load at 0.38 mm (0.015 in.), 
the nail should penetrate into the member holding the point 
by not less than 10 times the nail diameter for dense woods 
(specific gravity greater than 0.61) and 14 times the diam- 
eter for low-density woods (specific gravity less than 0.42). 
For species having densities between these two ranges, the 
penetration may be found by straight line interpolation. 


Post-1991 


The yield model theory selects the worst case of yield 
modes based on different possibilities of wood bearing and 
nail bending. It does not account for nail head effects, fric- 
tion between the main and side member, or axial forces 
transmitted along the length of the fastener. A description 
of the various combinations is given in Figure 8-5. 

Mode I is a wood bearing failure in either the main or side 
member; mode II is a rotation of the fastener in the joint 
without bending; modes III and IV are a combination of 
wood bearing failure and one or more plastic hinge yield 
formations in the fastener. Modes I,, and II have not been 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


Mode Ill. 


Mode lil, Mode IV 


~< << (b) 
> (Not applicable) 
“ <_ 


Mode |, Mode I, Mode II 
(Not applicable) ea 
Mode Il, Mode Ill, Mode IV 


Figure 8-5. Various combinations of wood-bearing and fastener-bending yields for (a) two-member connec- 
tions and (b) three-member connections. 


Table 8-5. The 5% offset lateral yield strength (Z) 
for nails and screws for a two-member joint 


Mode Z value for nails Z value for screws 
I, Dt, Fs Dt Fos 
In k,DpFom 
1+2R, — 
Ill, kDtFom k3Dt,Fem 
2+R, 2+R 
IV Pe [2FamFy #2 [LS Foal 
3(1+ R.) 3(1+ R.) 
Definitions 
D nail, spike, or screw diameter, mm (in.) (for 


F. em 


ky =-1+ 


annularly threaded nails, D is thread-root diameter; 
for screws, D is either the shank diameter or the root 
diameter if the threaded portion of the screw is in the 
shear plane) 

dowel bearing stress of main member 

(member holding point), MPa (Ib in”) 


, dowel bearing stress of side member, MPa (Ib in”) 


bending yield stress of nail, spike, or screw, MPa 

(Ib in *) 

penetration of nail or spike in main member, mm (in.) 
thickness of side member, mm (in.) 

offset lateral yield strength 

=F em/ FY es 


2F.,(1+2R.)D? 
HieRe ee S 
\ 3 FemP 


21+ Re) , 2Fyn(2+ Re)D* 
Ni oR 3 Fy 92 


em's 


2(1+ Re) , Fin(2+Re)D” 


y 2 Fnt2 


em’s 


observed in nail and spike connections. The yield model 
theory is applicable to all types of dowel fasteners (nails, 
screws, bolts, lag screws), and thus the wood bearing capac- 
ity is described by a material property called the dowel bear- 
ing strength. 


The yield mode equations (Table 8—5) are entered with the 
dowel bearing strength and dimensions of the wood mem- 
bers and the bending yield strength and diameter of the 
fastener. 


The dowel bearing strength of the wood is experimentally 
determined by compressing a dowel into a wood member. 
The strength basis is the load representing a 5% diameter 
offset on the load—deformation curve (Fig. 8—4). Dowel 
bearing strength F, (MPa, lb in-2) is empirically related to 
specific gravity G by 
F,=114.5G'" 


(metric) (83a) 


F, = 16,600G'™ (inch-pound) (8-3b) 
where specific gravity is based on ovendry weight and 


volume. 


Bending yield strengths for the common nails are 
determined by ASTM F 1575 tests with typical values 
ranging between 551 MPa (80,000 lb in-2) and 689 MPa 
(100,000 Ib in-2) for common nails. Smaller diameter nails 
have higher bending yield strength due to surface hardening 
during fabrication. 


Spacing 

End distance, edge distance, and spacing of nails should be 
such as to prevent unusual splitting. As a general rule, nails 
should be driven no closer to the edge of the side member 
than one-half its thickness and no closer to the end than the 
thickness of the piece. Smaller nails can be driven closer 
to the edges or ends than larger ones because they are less 
likely to split the wood. 


8-7 


Grain Direction Effects 


The lateral load for side-grain nailing applies whether the 
load is in a direction parallel to the grain of the pieces 
joined or at right angles to it. When nails are driven into the 
end grain (parallel with the wood fibers), limited data on 
softwood species indicate that their maximum resistance to 
lateral displacement is about two-thirds that for nails driven 
into the side grain. Although the average proportional limit 
loads appear to be about the same for end- and side-grain 
nailing, the individual results are more erratic for end-grain 
nailing, and the minimum loads approach only 75% of cor- 
responding values for side-grain nailing. 


Moisture Content Effects 


Nails driven into the side grain of unseasoned wood give 
maximum lateral resistance loads approximately equal to 
those obtained in seasoned wood, but the lateral resistance 
loads at 0.38 mm (0.015 in.) joint slip are somewhat less. 
To prevent excessive deformation, lateral loads obtained for 
seasoned wood should be reduced by 25% for unseasoned 
wood that will remain wet or be loaded before seasoning 
takes place. 


When nails are driven into green wood, their lateral propor- 
tional limit loads after the wood has seasoned are also less 
than when they are driven into seasoned wood and loaded. 
The erratic behavior of a nailed joint that has undergone one 
or more moisture content changes makes it difficult to estab- 
lish a lateral load for a nailed joint under these conditions. 
Structural joints should be inspected at intervals, and if it is 
apparent that the joint has loosened during drying, the joint 
should be reinforced with additional nails. 


Deformed-Shank Nails 


Deformed-shank nails carry somewhat higher maximum 
lateral loads than do the same pennyweight common wire 
nails, but both perform similarly at small distortions in 

the joint. It should be noted that the same pennyweight 
deformed-shank nail has a different diameter than that of the 
common wire nail. These nails often have higher bending 
yield strength than common wire nails, resulting in higher 
lateral strength in modes II and IV. 


Lateral Load—Slip Models 


A considerable amount of work has been done to describe, 
by mathematical models, the lateral load-slip curve of nails. 
These models have become important because of their need 
as input parameters for advanced methods of structural 
analysis. 


One theoretical model, which considers the nail to be a 
beam supported on an elastic foundation (the wood), 
describes the initial slope of the curve: 


J,=-Js)° | 
5-12 +t) , 


8-4 
(K, +K;) | eo) 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 8-6. Expressions for factors 
in Equation (8-4) 


Factor Expression® 

i A, sinh A,a cosh A,a—sin A,a cos Aya 
ky sinh? Aya-sin? Aya 

Ly Ay sinh Ab cosh Ayb—sin Ab cos Apb 
ky sinh? A,b-sin? A,b 

i Az sinh? Aya+sin? Aya 
ky sinh? Aya—sin? Aya 

I AB sinh? A,b+sin? Ayb 
ky sinh? A,b-sin? Ab 

K i sinh A,a cosh Aja +sin A,a cos Aya 
ky sinh? Aya -sin? Aya 

K, B sinh 2,b cosh A,b +sin A7b cos Ayb 
ko sinh? 2,b—sin? Ayb 


“ky = koid and kz = kod, where k, and ky are 
the foundation moduli of members | and 2, 
respectively. 


where P is the lateral load and 6 is the joint slip. The fac- 
tors L,, Ly, J), Jo, K,, and K, (Table 8-6) are combinations 
of hyperbolic and trigonometric functions of the quantities 
A,a and 2,5 in which a and b are the depth of penetration of 
the nail in members | and 2, respectively. For smooth round 
nails, 


4 | k 


\ <ED* 


ey 


(8-5) 


where kg is elastic bearing constant, D nail diameter, and 
E modulus of elasticity of the nail. For seasoned wood, the 
elastic bearing constant ky (N mm-%, lb in-3) has been shown 
to be related to average species specific gravity G if no lead 
hole is used by 

k, = 582G 


(metric) (86a) 


ky = 2,144, 000G (inch—pound) (8—6b) 
If a prebored lead hole equal to 90% of the nail diameter is 
used, 

k, = 869G 


(metric) (8-7a) 


ky = 3,200, 000G (inch—pound) (8—7b) 
Other empirically derived models attempt to describe the 
entire load—slip curve. Two such expressions are 


P=A log,,(1+ Bd) (8-8a) 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


1.5 


Force (KN) 
b 
wo Co 


! 
= 


-10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 
Displacement (mm) 


Figure 8-6. Load deformation curve for nails for a 
specific cyclic loading protocol. 


Table 8-7. Sizes of common wire 


spikes 

Length Diameter 
Size (mm (in.)) (mm (in.)) 
10d. 76.2 (3) 4.88 (0.192) 
12d 82.6 (3-1/4) 4.88 (0.192) 
16d. 88.9 (3-1/2) 5.26 (0.207) 
20d 101.6 (4) 5.72 (0.225) 
30d 114.3 (4-1/2) 6.20 (0.244) 
40d 127.0 (5) 6.68 (0.263) 
50d 139.7 (5-1/2) 7.19 (0.283) 
60d 152.4 (6) 7.19 (0.283) 
5/l6in. 177.8 (7) 7.92 (0.312) 
3/8 in. 215.9 (8-1/2) 9.53 (0.375) 


where the parameters A and B are empirically fitted, and 
a second model, which includes a load reducing behavior, 


P=(Py+nKdyl-e* 07%) 6 <6 
(8-8b) 
P=Fy +1rKo[5 - dy] dy SOS op 
where the parameters Ko, 7), 72, and Py are empirically deter- 
mined; 6, is deformation at ultimate load, and dy is defor- 
mation at failure. 


The previous two expressions represent fastener loading 
deformation response for monotonic loading. Recently, the 
load—deformation behavior of nails subjected to cyclic load 
has become of interest. The behavior of wood structures to 
dynamic or repeated loading condition from high wind or 
earthquakes is strongly linked to nail fastener models that 
consider the reversal of loading as an extension of the previ- 


ous monotonic fastener load deformation model to a spe- 
cific cyclic loading protocol as shown in Figure 8—6, where 
load—displacement paths OA and CD follow the monotonic 
envelope curve as expressed by Equation (8—8b). All other 
paths are assumed to exhibit a linear relationship between 
force and deformation. Unloading off the envelope curve 
follows a path such as AB with stiffness r,K,). Here, both the 
connector and wood are unloading elastically. Under con- 
tinued unloading, the response moves onto path BC, which 
has reduced stiffness r,Kp. Along this path, the connector 
loses partial contact with the surrounding wood because of 
permanent deformation that was produced by previous load- 
ing, along path OA in this case. The slack response along 
this path characterizes the pinched hysteresis displayed by 
dowel connections under cyclic loading. Loading in the op- 
posite direction for the first time forces the response onto 
the envelope curve CD. Unloading off this curve is assumed 
elastic along path DE, followed by a pinched response along 
path EF, which passes through the zero-displacement inter- 
cept F', with slope r,Ky. Continued reloading follows path 
F with degrading stiffness K,,. Hysteretic fastener models 
are not single analytical expressions and are typically used 
in computer models. 


Spikes 


Common wire spikes are manufactured in the same manner 
as common wire nails. They have either a chisel point or a 
diamond point and are made in lengths of 76 to 305 mm (3 
to 12 in.). For corresponding lengths in the range of 76 to 
152 (@ to 6 in.), they have larger diameters (Table 8—7) than 
common wire nails, and beyond the 60d size they are usu- 
ally designated by diameter. 


The withdrawal and lateral resistance equations and limita- 
tions given for common wire nails are also applicable to 
spikes, except that in calculating the withdrawal load for 
spikes, the depth of penetration is taken as the length of the 
spike in the member receiving the point, minus two-thirds 
the length of the point. 


Staples 


Different types of staples have been developed with vari- 
ous modifications in points, shank treatment and coatings, 
gauge, crown width, and length. These fasteners are avail- 
able in clips or magazines for use in pneumatically operated 
portable staplers. Most factors that affect the withdrawal and 
lateral loads of nails similarly affect the loads on staples. 
The withdrawal resistance, for example, varies almost di- 
rectly with the circumference and depth of penetration when 
the type of point and shank are similar to nails. Thus, Equa- 
tion (8—1) has been used to predict the withdrawal load for 
one leg of a staple, but no verification tests have been done. 


The load in lateral resistance varies approximately as the 
3/2 power of the diameter when other factors, such as qual- 
ity of metal, type of shank, and depth of penetration, are 
similar to nails. The diameter of each leg of a two-legged 


8-9 


oo 


Gage or 
diameter 


Length 


diameter 


Figure 8-7. Common types of wood screws: A, 
flathead; B, roundhead; and C, ovalhead. 


staple must therefore be about two-thirds the diameter of a 
nail to provide a comparable load. Equation (8—2) has been 
used to predict the lateral resistance of staples. However, 
yield model theory equations have not yet been experimen- 
tally verified for staples. 


In addition to the immediate performance capability of 
staples and nails as determined by test, factors such as cor- 
rosion, sustained performance under service conditions, and 
durability in various uses should be considered in evaluating 
the relative usefulness of a stapled connection. 


Drift Bolts 


A drift bolt (or drift pin) is a long pin of iron or steel, with 
or without head or point. It is driven into a bored hole 
through one timber and into an adjacent one, to prevent the 
separation of the timbers connected and to transmit lateral 
load. The hole in the second member is drilled sufficiently 
deep to prevent the pin from hitting the bottom. 


The ultimate withdrawal load of a round drift bolt or pin 
from the side grain of seasoned wood is given by 
p=4551G*DL 


(metric) (89a) 


p=6600G* DL (inch-pound) (8-9b) 
where p is the ultimate withdrawal load (N, Ib), G specific 
gravity based on the ovendry weight and volume at 12% 
moisture content of the wood, D diameter of the drift bolt 
(mm, in.), and Z length of penetration of the bolt (mm, in.). 


(The NDS uses ovendry weight and volume as a basis.) 


This equation provides an average relationship for all spe- 
cies, and the withdrawal load for some species may be 
above or below the equation values. It also presumes that 
the bolts are driven into prebored holes having a diameter 
3.2 mm (1/8 in.) less than the bolt diameter. 


Data are not available on lateral resistance of drift bolts. 
The yield model should provide lateral strength prediction, 
but the model has not been experimentally verified for drift 
bolts. Designers have used bolt data and design methods 


8-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


based on experience. This suggests that the load for a drift 
bolt driven into the side grain of wood should not exceed, 
and ordinarily should be taken as less than, that for a bolt 
of the same diameter. Bolt design values are based on the 
thickness of the main member in a joint. Thus the depth of 
penetration of the drift bolt must be greater than or equal to 
the main-member thickness on which the bolt design value 
is based. However, the drift bolt should not fully penetrate 
its joint. 


Wood Screws 


The common types of wood screws have flat, oval, or round 
heads. The flathead screw is most commonly used if a flush 
surface is desired. Ovalhead and roundhead screws are used 
for appearance, and roundhead screws are used when coun- 
tersinking is objectionable. The principal parts of a screw 
are the head, shank, thread, and core (Fig. 8—7). The root 
diameter for most sizes of screws averages about two-thirds 
the shank diameter. Wood screws are usually made of steel, 
brass, other metals, or alloys, and may have specific finishes 
such as nickel, blued, chromium, or cadmium. They are 
classified according to material, type, finish, shape of head, 
and diameter or gauge of the shank. 


Current trends in fastenings for wood also include tapping 
or self-drilling screws. Tapping screws have threads the full 
length of the shank and may have some advantage for cer- 
tain specific uses. Self-drilling screws have a drill-shaped tip 
to cut through both wood and steel material, eliminating the 
need for pre-drilling. 


Withdrawal Resistance 
Experimental Loads 


The resistance of wood screw shanks to withdrawal from 
the side grain of seasoned wood varies directly with the 
square of the specific gravity of the wood. Within limits, the 
withdrawal load varies directly with the depth of penetration 
of the threaded portion and the diameter of the screw, pro- 
vided the screw does not fail in tension. The screw will fail 
in tension when its strength is exceeded by the withdrawal 
strength from the wood. The limiting length to cause a ten- 
sion failure decreases as the density of the wood increases 
since the withdrawal strength of the wood increases with 
density. The longer lengths of standard screws are therefore 
superfluous in dense hardwoods. 


The withdrawal resistance of type A tapping screws, com- 
monly called sheet metal screws, is in general about 10% 
greater than that for wood screws of comparable diameter 
and length of threaded portion. The ratio between the with- 
drawal resistance of tapping screws and wood screws varies 
from 1.16 in denser woods, such as oak, to 1.05 in lighter 
woods, such as redwood. 


Ultimate test values for withdrawal loads of wood screws 
inserted into the side grain of seasoned wood may be ex- 
pressed as 

(metric) 


p =108.25G° DI (8—10a) 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


p =15,700G* DL (inch—pound) (8-10b) 


where p is maximum withdrawal load (N, lb), G specific 
gravity based on ovendry weight and volume at 12% mois- 
ture content, D shank diameter of the screw (mm, in.), and 
L length of penetration of the threaded part of the screw 
(mm, in.). (The NDS uses ovendry weight and volume as a 
basis.) These values are based on reaching ultimate load in 
5- to 10-min. 


This equation is applicable when screw lead holes have a 
diameter of about 70% of the root diameter of the threads in 
softwoods, and about 90% in hardwoods. 


The equation values are applicable to the screw sizes listed 
in Table 8—8. (Shank diameters are related to screw gauges.) 


For lengths and gauges outside these limits, the actual val- 
ues are likely to be less than the equation values. 


The withdrawal loads of screws inserted in the end grain of 
wood are somewhat erratic, but when splitting is avoided, 
they should average 75% of the load sustained by screws 
inserted in the side grain. 


Lubricating the surface of a screw with soap or similar lu- 
bricant is recommended to facilitate insertion, especially in 
dense woods, and it will have little effect on ultimate with- 
drawal resistance. 


Fastening of Particleboard 


Tapping screws are commonly used in particleboard where 
withdrawal strength is important. Care must be taken when 
tightening screws in particleboard to avoid stripping the 
threads. The maximum amount of torque that can be ap- 
plied to a screw before the threads in the particleboard are 
stripped is given by 

T =3,16+0.0096Y 


(metric) (8—-11a) 


T =27.98+1.36X (inch—-pound) (8—-11b) 
where T is torque (N—m, in—lb) and_X is density of the par- 
ticleboard (kg m-%, lb ft-3). Equation (8-11) is for 8-gauge 
screws with a depth of penetration of 15.9 mm (5/8 in.). The 
maximum torque is fairly constant for lead holes of 0% to 


90% of the root diameter of the screw. 


Ultimate withdrawal loads P (N, lb) of screws from particle- 
board can be predicted by 

P= KD'?(L - D/3)°'*G? (8-12) 
where D is shank diameter of the screw (mm, in.), Z depth 
of embedment of the threaded portion of the screw (mm, 
in.), and G specific gravity of the board based on ovendry 


weight and volume at current moisture content. For metric 
measurements, K = 41.1 for withdrawal from the face of the 


Table 8-8. Screw sizes 
appropriate for 
Equation (8-10) 


Screw length Gauge 

(mm (in.)) limits 
12.7. (1/2) 1 to 6 
19.0 (3/4) 2toll 
25.4 (1) 3 to 12 
38.1 (1-1/2) Stol4 
50.8 (2) 7 to 16 
63.5 (2-1/2) 9to 18 
76.2 (3) 12to20 


board and K = 31.8 for withdrawal from the edge; for inch— 
pound measurements, K = 2,655 for withdrawal from the 
face and K = 2,055 for withdrawal from the edge. Equation 
(8-12) applies when the setting torque is between 60% to 
90% of T (Eq. ( 8-11)). 


Withdrawal resistance of screws from particleboard is not 
significantly different for lead holes of 50% to 90% of the 
root diameter. A higher setting torque will produce a some- 
what higher withdrawal load, but there is only a slight dif- 
ference (3%) in values between 60% to 90% setting torques 
(Eq. (8—11)). A modest tightening of screws in many cases 
provides an effective compromise between optimizing with- 
drawal resistance and stripping threads. 


Equation (8-12) can also predict the withdrawal of screws 
from fiberboard with K = 57.3 (metric) or 3,700 (inch— 
pound) for the face and K = 44.3 (metric) or 2,860 (inch— 
pound) for the edge of the board. 


Lateral Resistance 
Pre-1991 


The proportional limit loads obtained in tests of lateral re- 
sistance for wood screws in the side grain of seasoned wood 
are given by the empirical equation 


p=KD* (8-13) 


where p is lateral load, D diameter of the screw shank, and 

Ka coefficient depending on the inherent characteristics of 
the wood species. Values of screw shank diameters for vari- 
ous screw gauges are listed in Table 8-9. 


Values of K are based on ranges of specific gravity of hard- 
woods and softwoods and are given in Table 8-4. They 
apply to wood at about 15% moisture content. Loads com- 
puted by substituting these constants in the equation are 
expected to have a slip of 0.18 to 0.25 mm (0.007 to 

0.010 in.), depending somewhat on the species and density 
of the wood. 


Equation (8-13) applies when the depth of penetration of 
the screw into the block receiving the point is not less 
than seven times the shank diameter and when the side 


Table 8-9. Screw shank 
diameters for various screw 


gauges 

Screw number Diameter 
or gauge (mm (in.)) 

4 2.84 (0.112) 

5 3.18 (0.125) 

6 3.51 (0.138) 

7 3.84 (0.151) 

8 4.17 (0.164) 

9 4.50 (0.177) 

10 4.83 (0.190) 

11 5.16 (0.203) 

12 5.49 (0.216) 

14 6.15 (0.242) 

16 6.81 (0.268) 

18 7.47 (0.294) 

20 8.13 (0.320) 

24 9.45 (0.372) 


member and the main member are approximately of the 
same density. The thickness of the side member should be 
about one-half the depth of penetration of the screw in the 
member holding the point. The end distance should be no 
less than the side member thickness, and the edge distances 
no less than one-half the side member thickness. 


This depth of penetration (seven times shank diameter) 
gives an ultimate load of about four times the load obtained 
by the equation. For a depth of penetration of less than 
seven times the shank diameter, the ultimate load is reduced 
about in proportion to the reduction in penetration, and the 
load at the proportional limit is reduced somewhat less rap- 
idly. When the depth of penetration of the screw in the hold- 
ing block is four times the shank diameter, the maximum 
load will be less than three times the load expressed by the 
equation, and the proportional limit load will be approxi- 
mately equal to that given by the equation. When the screw 
holds metal to wood, the load can be increased by about 
25%. 


For these lateral loads, the part of the lead hole receiving the 
shank should be the same diameter as the shank or slightly 
smaller; that part receiving the threaded portion should be 
the same diameter as the root of the thread in dense species 
or slightly smaller than the root in low-density species. 


Screws should always be turned in. They should never be 
started or driven with a hammer because this practice tears 
the wood fibers and injures the screw threads, seriously re- 
ducing the load carrying capacity of the screw. 


Post-1991 


Screw lateral strength is determined by the yield model 
theory (Table 8-5). Modes J, III, and IV failures may occur 
(Fig. 8-5). The dowel bearing strength values are based on 
the same specific gravity equation used to establish values 
for nails (Eq. (8—3)). Further discussion of screw lateral 


8-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


strength is found in ASCE Manual No. 84, Mechanical 
Connections in Wood Structures. 


Lag Screws 


Lag screws are commonly used because of their conve- 
nience, particularly where it would be difficult to fasten a 
bolt or where a nut on the surface would be objectionable. 
Commonly available lag screws range from about 5.1 to 
25.4 mm (0.2 to | in.) in diameter and from 25.4 to 406 mm 
(1 to 16 in.) in length. The length of the threaded part varies 
with the length of the screw and ranges from 19.0 mm 

(3/4 in.) with the 25.4- and 31.8-mm (1- and 1-1/4-in.) 
screws to half the length for all lengths greater than 254 mm 
(10 in.). Lag screws have a hexagonal-shaped head and are 
tightened by a wrench (as opposed to wood screws, which 
have a slotted head and are tightened by a screw driver). 
The following equations for withdrawal and lateral loads 
are based on lag screws having a base metal average tensile 
yield strength of about 310.3 MPa (45,000 Ib in-2) and 

an average ultimate tensile strength of 530.9 MPa 

(77,000 Ib in-). 


Withdrawal Resistance 


The results of withdrawal tests have shown that the max1- 

mum direct withdrawal load of lag screws from the side 

grain of seasoned wood may be computed as 
p=1254G°?D*"L 


(metric) (8-14a) 


p=8,100G*’*D**L — (inch-pound) — (8—-14b) 
where p is maximum withdrawal load (N, lb), D shank di- 
ameter (mm, in.), G specific gravity of the wood based on 
ovendry weight and volume at 12% moisture content, and 

L length (mm, in.) of penetration of the threaded part. (The 
NDS use ovendry weight and volume as a basis.) Equation 
(8-14) was developed independently of Equation (8—10) but 
gives approximately the same results. 


Lag screws, like wood screws, require prebored holes of the 
proper size (Fig. 8-8). The lead hole for the shank should 
be the same diameter as the shank. The diameter of the 
lead hole for the threaded part varies with the density of the 
wood: For low-density softwoods, such as the cedars and 
white pines, 40% to 70% of the shank diameter; for Doug- 
las-fir and Southern Pine, 60% to 75%; and for dense hard- 
woods, such as oaks, 65% to 85%. The smaller percentage 
in each range applies to lag screws of the smaller diameters 
and the larger percentage to lag screws of larger diameters. 
Soap or similar lubricants should be used on the screw to 
facilitate turning, and lead holes slightly larger than those 
recommended for maximum efficiency should be used with 
long screws. 


In determining the withdrawal resistance, the allowable 
tensile strength of the lag screw at the net (root) section 
should not be exceeded. Penetration of the threaded part 
to a distance about seven times the shank diameter in the 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


Figure 8-8. A, Clean-cut, deep penetration of thread 
made by lag screw turned into a lead hole of proper 
size, and B, rough, shallow penetration of thread made 
by lag screw turned into oversized lead hole. 


denser species (specific gravity greater than 0.61) and 10 to 
12 times the shank diameter in the less dense species (spe- 
cific gravity less than 0.42) will develop approximately the 
ultimate tensile strength of the lag screw. Penetrations at 
intermediate densities may be found by straight-line inter- 
polation. 


The resistance to withdrawal of a lag screw from the end- 
grain surface of a piece of wood is about three-fourths as 
great as its resistance to withdrawal from the side-grain sur- 
face of the same piece. 


Lateral Resistance 
Pre-1991 


The experimentally determined lateral loads for lag screws 
inserted in the side grain and loaded parallel to the grain of a 
piece of seasoned wood can be computed as 

p=KD’ (8-15) 
where p is proportional limit lateral load (N, Ib) parallel to 
the grain, K a coefficient depending on the species specific 
gravity, and D shank diameter of the lag screw (mm, in.). 
Values of K for a number of specific gravity ranges can be 
found in Table 8-4. These coefficients are based on average 
results for several ranges of specific gravity for hardwoods 
and softwoods. The loads given by this equation apply when 
the thickness of the side member is 3.5 times the shank 
diameter of the lag screw, and the depth of penetration in 
the main member is seven times the diameter in the harder 
woods and 11 times the diameter in the softer woods. For 
other thicknesses, the computed loads should be multiplied 
by the factors listed in Table 8-10. 


The thickness of a solid wood side member should be about 
one-half the depth of penetration in the main member. 


Table 8-10. Multiplication 
factors for loads computed 
from Equation (8—15) 


Ratio of thickness of 
side member to shank 
diameter of lag screw Factor 


2 0.62 
2.5 0.77 
3 0.93 
3.5 1.00 
4 1.07 
4.5 1.13 
5 1.18 
5.5 1.21 
6 1.22 
6.5 1.22 


Table 8-11. Multiplication 
factors for loads applied 
perpendicular to grain 
computed from 

Equation (8—15) with lag 
screw in side grain of 


wood 
Shank diameter 
of lag screw 
(mm (in.)) Factor 
4.8 (3/16) 1.00 
6.4 (1/4) 0.97 
7.9 (5/16) 0.85 
9.5 (3/8) 0.76 
11.1 (7/16) 0.70 
12.7 (1/2) 0.65 
15.9 (5/8) 0.60 
19.0 (3/4) 0.55 
22.2 (7/8) 0.52 
25.4 (1) 0.50 


When the lag screw is inserted in the side grain of wood and 
the load is applied perpendicular to the grain, the load given 
by the lateral resistance equation should be multiplied by the 
factors listed in Table 8-11. 


For other angles of loading, the loads may be computed 
from the parallel and perpendicular values by using the 
Hankinson formula for determining the bearing strength of 
wood at various angles to the grain, 


PQ 
ay es 
Psin* 0+Qcos’ 0 
where P is load or stress parallel to the grain, O load or 


stress perpendicular to the grain, and N load or stress at an 
inclination 9 with the direction of the grain. 


(8-16) 


Values for lateral resistance as computed by the preced- 
ing methods are based on complete penetration of the un- 
threaded shank into the side member but not into the main 
member. When the shank penetrates the main member, the 
permitted increases in loads are given in Table 8-12. 


Table 8-12. Permitted increases in 
loads when lag screw unthreaded 
shank penetrates foundation 
member 


Ratio of penetration of 


shank into foundation Increase 
member to shank in load 
diameter (%) 

1 8 

2 17 

3 26 

4 33 

5 36 

6 38 

7 39 


When lag screws are used with metal plates, the lateral loads 
parallel to the grain may be increased 25%, provided the 
plate thickness is sufficient so that the bearing capacity of 
the steel is not exceeded. No increase should be made when 
the applied load is perpendicular to the grain. 


Lag screws should not be used in end grain, because split- 
ting may develop under lateral load. If lag screws are so 
used, however, the loads should be taken as two-thirds those 
for lateral resistance when lag screws are inserted into side 
grain and the loads act perpendicular to the grain. 


The spacings, end and edge distances, and net section for 
lag screw joints should be the same as those for joints with 
bolts (discussed later) of a diameter equal to the shank di- 
ameter of the lag screw. 


Lag screws should always be inserted by turning with a 
wrench, not by driving with a hammer. Soap, beeswax, or 
other lubricants applied to the screw, particularly with the 
denser wood species, will facilitate insertion and prevent 
damage to the threads but will not affect performance of the 
lag screw. 


Post-1991 


Lag screw lateral strength is determined by the yield model 
theory table similar to the procedure for bolts. Modes I, 

III, and IV yield may occur (Fig. 8-5). The dowel bearing 
strength values are based on the same parallel- and perpen- 
dicular-to-grain specific gravity equations used to establish 
values for bolts. 


For other angles of loading, the dowel bearing strength val- 
ues for use in the yield model are determined by the Hankin- 
son equation, where P and Q are the values of dowel bear- 
ing parallel and perpendicular to grain, respectively. 


Bolts 


Bearing Stress of Wood under Bolts 


The bearing stress under a bolt is computed by dividing the 
load on a bolt by the product LD, where L is the length of a 


8-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


40 


bearing stress (%) 


nN 
o 


Ratio of long- to short-bolt 


0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
UD ratio 


Figure 8-9. Variation in bolt-bearing stress at the 
proportional limit parallel to grain with L/D ratio. 
Curve A, relation obtained from experimental evalua- 
tion; curve B, modified relation used for establishing 
design loads. 


bolt in the main member and D is the bolt diameter. Basic 
parallel-to-grain and perpendicular-to-grain bearing stresses 
have been obtained from tests of three-member wood joints 
where each side member is half the thickness of the main 
member. The side members were loaded parallel to grain for 
both parallel- and perpendicular-to-grain tests. Prior to 1991, 
bearing stress was based on test results at the proportional 
limit; since 1991, bearing stress is based on test results at a 
yield limit state, which is defined as the 5% diameter offset 
on the load—deformation curve (similar to Fig. 8—4). 


The bearing stress at proportional limit load is largest when 
the bolt does not bend, that is, for joints with small L/D val- 
ues. The curves of Figures 8—9 and 8—10 show the reduction 
in proportional limit bolt-bearing stress as L/D increases. 
The bearing stress at maximum load does not decrease as 
L/D increases, but remains fairly constant, which means 
that the ratio of maximum load to proportional limit load 
increases as L/D increases. To maintain a fairly constant 
ratio between maximum load and design load for bolts, the 
relations between bearing stress and L/D ratio have been 
adjusted as indicated in Figures 8-9 and 8-10. 


The proportional limit bolt-bearing stress parallel to grain 
for small L/D ratios is approximately 50% of the small clear 
crushing strength for softwoods and approximately 60% for 
hardwoods. For bearing stress perpendicular to the grain, the 
ratio between bearing stress at proportional limit load and 
the small clear proportional limit stress in compression per- 
pendicular to grain depends upon bolt diameter (Fig. 8—11) 
for small L/D ratios. 


Species compressive strength also affects the L/D ratio rela- 
tionship, as indicated in Figure 8-10. Relatively higher bolt 
proportional-limit stress perpendicular to grain is obtained 
with wood low in strength (proportional limit stress of 
3,930 kPa (570 Ib in-?) than with material of high strength 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


100 
3 90 
5 
” 
38 eo 
7) 
52 
Le 40 
oS 
o2 
= 20 
x 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
LID ratio 


Figure 8-10. Variation in bolt-bearing stress at the 
proportional limit perpendicular to grain with L/D ra- 
tio. Relations obtained from experimental evaluation 
for materials with average compression perpendicu- 
lar stress of 7,860 kPa (1,140 Ib in-2) (curve A-1) and 
3,930 kPa (570 Ib in-2) (curve A—2). Curves B-1 and 
B-2, modified relations used for establishing design 
loads. 


Bolt diameter (in.) 
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 


a 
i] 


on, BR DW wD ON F 


16 32 48 64 
Bolt diameter (mm) 


o 


Ratio of bolt bearing stress to compression 
perpendicular to grain proportional limit stress 


Figure 8-11. Bearing stress perpendicular to the 
grain as affected by bolt diameter. 


(proportional limit stress of 7,860 kPa (1,140 lb in-2)). This 
effect also occurs for bolt-bearing stress parallel to grain, 
but not to the same extent as for perpendicular-to-grain 
loading. 


The proportional limit bolt load for a three-member joint 
with side members half the thickness of the main member 
may be estimated by the following procedures. 


For parallel-to-grain loading, (a) multiply the species small 
clear compressive parallel strength (Tables 5—3, 5—4, or 5—5) 
by 0.50 for softwoods or 0.60 for hardwoods, (b) multiply 


2 100 A 

: 

2 80 

= B 

5 60 

$e 

ae? 

28 40 

ne 

4 

2 20 

ro) 

2 

& 

a 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
LID ratio 


Figure 8-12. Variation in the proportional limit bolt- 
bearing stress parallel to grain with L/D ratio. Curve 
A, bolts with yield stress of 861.84 MPa (125,000 Ib 

in-2); curve B, bolts with yield stress of 310.26 MPa 
(45,000 Ib in-2). 


this product by the appropriate factor from Figure 8—9 for 
the L/D ratio of the bolt, and (c) multiply this product by 
LD. 


For perpendicular-to-grain loading, (a) multiply the species 
compression perpendicular-to-grain proportional limit stress 
(Tables 5—3, 5-4, or 5—5) by the appropriate factor from Fig- 
ure 8-11, (b) multiply this product by the appropriate factor 
from Figure 8-10, and (c) multiply this product by LD. 


Loads at an Angle to the Grain 


For other angles of loading, the dowel bearing strength val- 
ues for use in the yield model are determined by the Hankin- 
son equation, where P and Q are the values of dowel bear- 
ing parallel and perpendicular to grain, respectively. 


Steel Side Plates 


When steel side plates are used, the bolt-bearing stress 
parallel to grain at joint proportional limit is approximately 
25% greater than that for wood side plates. The joint de- 
formation at proportional limit is much smaller with steel 
side plates. If loads at equivalent joint deformation are com- 
pared, the load for joints with steel side plates is approxi- 
mately 75% greater than that for wood side plates. Pre-1991 
design criteria included increases in connection strength 
with steel side plates; post-1991 design criteria include steel 
side plate behavior in the yield model equations. 


For perpendicular-to-grain loading, the same loads are ob- 
tained for wood and steel side plates. 


Bolt Quality 


Both the properties of the wood and the quality of the bolt 
are factors in determining the strength of a bolted joint. The 
percentages given in Figures 8—9 and 8-10 for calculat- 

ing bearing stress apply to steel machine bolts with a yield 
stress of 310 MPa (45,000 Ib in-2). Figure 8-12 indicates the 


1.6 LID = 2.67 


Ratio to joint with side member 
o 
> 


half the thickness of main member 


0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 
Side member thickness/main member thickness 


Figure 8-13. Proportional limit load related to side 
member thickness for three-member joints. Center 
member thickness was 50.8 mm (2 in.). 


increase in bearing stress parallel to grain for bolts with a 
yield stress of 862 MPa (125,000 lb in-). 


Effect of Member Thickness 


The proportional limit load is affected by the ratio of the 
side member thickness to the main member thickness 
(Fig. 8-13). 


Pre-1991 design values for bolts are based on joints with 
the side member half the thickness of the main member. 
The usual practice in design of bolted joints is to take no 
increase in design load when the side members are greater 
than half the thickness of the main member. When the side 
members are less than half the thickness of the main mem- 
ber, a design load for a main member that is twice the thick- 
ness of the side member is used. Post-1991 design values 
include member thickness directly in the yield model 
equations. 


Two-Member, Multiple-Member Joints 


In pre-1991 design, the proportional limit load was taken as 
half the load for a three-member joint with a main member 

the same thickness as the thinnest member for two-member 
joints. 


For four or more members in a joint, the proportional limit 
load was taken as the sum of the loads for the individual 
shear planes by treating each shear plane as an equivalent 
two-member joint. 


Post-1991 design for joints with four or more members also 
results in values per shear plane. Connection strength for 
any number of members is conservatively found by multi- 
plying the value for the weakest shear plane by the number 
of shear planes. 


Spacing, Edge, and End Distance 


The center-to-center distance along the grain should be 
at least four times the bolt diameter for parallel-to-grain 
loading. The minimum center-to-center spacing of bolts in 


8-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


the across-the-grain direction for loads acting through metal 
side plates and parallel to the grain need only be sufficient 
to permit the tightening of the nuts. For wood side plates, 
the spacing is controlled by the rules applying to loads act- 
ing parallel to grain if the design load approaches the bolt- 
bearing capacity of the side plates. When the design load 

is less than the bolt-bearing capacity of the side plates, the 
spacing may be reduced below that required to develop their 
maximum capacity. 


When a joint is in tension, the bolt nearest the end of a tim- 
ber should be at a distance from the end of at least seven 
times the bolt diameter for softwoods and five times for 
hardwoods. When the joint is in compression, the end mar- 
gin may be four times the bolt diameter for both softwoods 
and hardwoods. Any decrease in these spacings and margins 
will decrease the load in about the same ratio. 


For bolts bearing parallel to the grain, the distance from the 
edge of a timber to the center of a bolt should be at least 
1.5 times the bolt diameter. This margin, however, will usu- 
ally be controlled by (a) the common practice of having an 
edge margin equal to one-half the distance between bolt 
rows and (b) the area requirements at the critical section. 
(The critical section is that section of the member taken at 
right angles to the direction of load, which gives the maxi- 
mum stress in the member based on the net area remaining 
after reductions are made for bolt holes at that section.) For 
parallel-to-grain loading in softwoods, the net area remain- 
ing at the critical section should be at least 80% of the total 
area in bearing under all the bolts in the particular joint un- 
der consideration; in hardwoods it should be 100%. 


For bolts bearing perpendicular to the grain, the margin be- 
tween the edge toward which the bolt pressure is acting and 
the center of the bolt or bolts nearest this edge should be at 
least four times the bolt diameter. The margin at the opposite 
edge is relatively unimportant. 


The aforementioned prescriptive spacing recommendations 
are based on experimental information and have been found 
to be sufficient for a majority of designed connections. 
There is still a need to validate the design spacing using a 
mechanics-based method that considers wood strength. The 
prescriptive spacing requirement may not agree with the 
strength-based method, and the large spacing requirement 
should be used. One method for the design of fastener 
joints loaded in tension parallel to grain is highlighted in 
appendix E of the National Design Specification for Wood 
Construction. 


Effect of Bolt Holes 

The bearing strength of wood under bolts is affected consid- 
erably by the size and type of bolt holes into which the bolts 
are inserted. A bolt hole that is too large causes nonuniform 
bearing of the bolt; if the bolt hole is too small, the wood 
will split when the bolt is driven. Normally, bolts should 

fit so that they can be inserted by tapping lightly with a 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


— 
. 
| 


“yd 


a 
er 
e < 
4 
he. 
Fa | 


aos 


he iaae 


Y 


Ah 


ae 


F 


Figure 8-14. Effect of rate of feed and drill speed on 
the surface condition of bolt holes drilled in Sitka 
spruce. A, hole was bored with a twist drill rotating 
at a peripheral speed of 7.62 m min~ (300 in min-‘); 
feed rate was 1.52 m/min (60 in min-). B, hole was 
bored with the same drill at a peripheral speed of 
31.75 m min-— (1,250 in min-‘); feed rate was 50.8 mm 
min-1 (2 in min-‘). 


Deformation (in.) 
0 0.010 0.020 


Load (kN) 
FS) 


o 
Load («10° Ib) 


4 Fast feed 


0 1.5 3.0 4.5 6.0 7.5 
Deformation (mm) 


Figure 8-15. Typical load—deformation curves show- 
ing the effect of surface condition of bolt holes, re- 
sulting from a slow feed rate and a fast feed rate, on 
the deformation in a joint when subjected to loading 
under bolts. The surface conditions of the bolt holes 
were similar to those illustrated in Figure 8—14. 


wood mallet. In general, the smoother the hole, the higher 
the bearing values will be (Fig. 8-14). Deformations ac- 
companying the load are also less with a smoother bolt-hole 
surface (Fig. 8-15). 


Rough holes are caused by using dull bits and improper 
rates of feed and drill speed. A twist drill operated at a pe- 
ripheral speed of approximately 38 m min”! (1,500 in min“!) 
produces uniformly smooth holes at moderate feed rates. 


The rate of feed depends upon the diameter of the drill and 
the speed of rotation but should enable the drill to cut, rather 
than tear, the wood. The drill should produce shavings, not 
chips. 


Proportional limit loads for joints with bolt holes the same 
diameter as the bolt will be slightly higher than for joints 
with a 1.6-mm (1/16-in.) oversized hole. However, if drying 
takes place after assembly of the joint, the proportional limit 
load for snug-fitting bolts will be considerably less due to 
the effects of shrinkage. 


Pre-1991 Allowable Loads 


The following procedures are used to calculate allowable 
bolt loads for joints with wood side members, each half the 
thickness of the main member. 


Parallel to Grain—The starting point for parallel-to-grain 
bolt values is the maximum green crushing strength for the 
species or group of species. Procedures outlined in ASTM 
D 2555 are used to establish a 5% exclusion value. The 
exclusion value is divided by a factor of 1.9 to adjust to 

a 10-year normal duration of load and provide a factor of 
safety. This value is multiplied by 1.20 to adjust to a sea- 
soned strength. The resulting value is called the basic bolt- 
bearing stress parallel to grain. 


The basic bolt-bearing stress is then adjusted for the effects 
of L/D ratio. Table 8-13 gives the percentage of basic stress 
for three classes of species. The particular class for the spe- 
cies is determined from the basic bolt-bearing stress as in- 
dicated in Table 8-14. The adjusted bearing stress is further 
multiplied by a factor of 0.80 to adjust to wood side plates. 
The allowable bolt load in pounds is then determined by 
multiplying by the projected bolt area, LD. 


Perpendicular to Grain—The starting point for perpendic- 
ular-to-grain bolt values is the average green proportional 
limit stress in compression perpendicular to grain. Proce- 
dures in ASTM D 2555 are used to establish compression 
perpendicular values for groups of species. The average 
proportional limit stress is divided by 1.5 for ring position 
(growth rings neither parallel nor perpendicular to load dur- 
ing test) and a factor of safety. This value is then multiplied 
by 1.20 to adjust to a seasoned strength and by 1.10 to 
adjust to a normal duration of load. The resulting value is 
called the basic bolt-bearing stress perpendicular to grain. 


The basic bolt-bearing stress is then adjusted for the effects 
of bolt diameter (Table 8-15) and L/D ratio (Table 8-13). 
The allowable bolt load is then determined by multiplying 
the adjusted basic bolt-bearing stress by the projected bolt 
area, LD. 


Post-1991 Yield Model 


The empirical design approach used prior to 1991 was based 
on a tabular value for a single bolt in a wood-to-wood, 
three-member connection where the side members are each 


8-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 8-13. Percentage of basic bolt-bearing stress used for calculating 
allowable bolt loads 


L/D adjustment factor by class* 


Ratio of bolt 


length te eee peer 
digi grain O grain 
(L/D) 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 
1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 
2 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 
3 100.0 100.0 99.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 
4 99.5 97.4 92.5 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 
5 95.4 88.3 80.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 
6 85.6 75.8 67.2 100.0 100.0 100.0 96.3 
7 73.4 65.0 57.6 100.0 100.0 97.3 86.9 
8 64.2 56.9 50.4 100.0 96.1 88.1 75.0 
9 57.1 50.6 44.8 94.6 86.3 76.7 64.6 
10 51.4 45.5 40.3 85.0 76.2 67.2 55.4 
11 46.7 41.4 36.6 76.1 67.6 59.3 48.4 
12 42.8 37.9 33.6 68.6 61.0 52.0 42.5 
13 39.5 35.0 31.0 62.2 55.3 45.9 37.5 


“Class determined from basic bolt-bearing stress according to Table 8-14. 


Table 8-14. L/D adjustment class associated with basic bolt-bearing stress 


Basic bolt-bearing stress for species group (MPa (lb in ’)) 


L/D adjustment 


Loading direction Softwoods Hardwoods (Table 8-13) 
Parallel <7.93 (<1,150) <7.33 (<1,063) 1 
7.93-10.37 (1,150—-1,504) 7.33-9.58 (1,063-1,389) 2 
>10.37 (1,504) >9.58 (>1,389) 3 
Perpendicular <1.31 (<190) <1.44 (<209) 1 
1.31—2.00 (190-290) 1.44—2.20 (209-319) 2 
2.00-2.59 (291-375) 2.21—2.84 (320-412) 3 
>2.59 (>375) >2.84 (>412) 4 
Table 8—15. Factors for adjusting a minimum of one-half the thickness of the main member. 
basic bolt-bearing stress The single-bolt value must then be modified for any varia- 
perpendicular to grain for bolt tion from these reference conditions. The theoretical ap- 


diameter when calculating 


Allowable bolt loads proach, after 1991, is more general and is not limited to 


these reference conditions. 


Bolt diameter Adjustment 
(mm (in.)) factor The theoretical approach is based on work done in Europe 
6.35 (1/4) 2.50 (Johansen 1949) and is referred to as the European Yield 
9.53 (3/8) 1.95 Model (EYM). The EYM describes a number of possible 
12.70 (1/2) 1.68 yield modes that can occur in a dowel-type connection 
15.88 (5/8) 1.52 (Fig. 8-5). The yield strength of these different modes is 
ee an ee determined from a static analysis that assumes the wood 
25. 40 (1) 1.27 and the bolt are both perfectly plastic. The yield mode that 
31.75 (1-1/4) 1.19 results in the lowest yield load for a given geometry is the 
38.10 (1-1/2) 1.14 theoretical connection yield load. 
ae eo 7 Equations corresponding to the yield modes for a three- 
63.50 (2-1/2) 1.03 member joint are given in Table 8-16. (Equations for 
>76.20 (>3 or over) 1.00 two-member allowable values are given in the NDS.) The 


nominal single-bolt value is dependent on the joint geom- 
etry (thickness of main and side members), bolt diameter 
and bending yield strength, dowel bearing strength, and di- 
rection of load to the grain. The equations are equally valid 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


Table 8-16. The 5% offset yield lateral strength (Z) 
for three-member bolted joints 


Z value for three- 


Mode member bolted joint 
DtmFem 

Mode In Ko 
2D1,F xx 

Mode I, Ko 
2k4 Dt, F. em 

Mode III, (2+ Re )Ko 

Mode IV 2D* 2Feml yb 

iat Ky \30+R,) 
Definitions 


D nominal bolt diameter, mm (in.) 

Fm dowel bearing strength of main (center) 
member, MPa (Ib in *) 

F., dowel bearing strength of side members, 
MPa (Ib in *) 

Fy bending yield strength of bolt, MPa (Ib in’) 

Kg 1+ 8360 

tm thickness of main (center) member, mm (in.) 

t, thickness of side member, mm (in.) 

Z nominal single bolt design value 

0 angle of load to grain (degrees) 

R 


e = Fon/Fes 
14+R.) 2Fy(2+R.)D? 
kg =-l1+ as oy yb ( . 
Ry 3Famté 


for wood or steel side members, which is taken into account 
by thickness and dowel bearing strength parameters. The 
equations are also valid for various load-to-grain directions, 
which are taken into account by the Ky and F’, parameter. 


The dowel bearing strength is a material property not gen- 
erally familiar to structural designers. The dowel bearing 
strength of the wood members is determined from tests that 
relate species specific gravity and dowel diameter to bearing 
strength. Empirical equations for these relationships are as 
follows: 


Parallel to grain 


F, =77.2G (metric) (8-17a) 

fF, =11,200G (inch—pound) (8-17b) 
Perpendicular to grain 

F. =212.0G'* p* (metric) (8-18a) 

F, =6,100G' “p”*” (inch—pound) (8-18b) 


where F’, is dowel bearing strength (MPa, lb in-2), G specific 
gravity based on ovendry weight and volume, and D bolt 
diameter (mm, in.). 


Figure 8-16. Joint with split-ring connector showing 
connector, precut groove, bolt, washer, and nut. 


For other angles of loading, the dowel bearing strength 
values for use in the yield model are determined by the 
Hankinson equation, where P and Q are the values of dowel 
bearing parallel and perpendicular to grain, respectively. 


Connector Joints 


Several types of connectors have been devised that increase 
joint bearing and shear areas by utilizing rings or plates 
around bolts holding joint members together. The primary 
load-carrying portions of these joints are the connectors; the 
bolts usually serve to prevent transverse separation of the 
members but do contribute some load-carrying capacity. 


The strength of the connector joint depends on the type and 
size of the connector, the species of wood, the thickness and 
width of the member, the distance of the connector from the 
end of the member, the spacing of the connectors, the direc- 
tion of application of the load with respect to the direction 
of the grain of the wood, and other factors. Loads for wood 
joints with steel connectors—split ring (Fig. 8-16) and shear 
plate (Fig. 8-17)—are discussed in this section. These con- 
nectors require closely fitting machined grooves in the wood 
members. 


Parallel-to-Grain Loading 


Tests have demonstrated that the density of the wood is a 
controlling factor in the strength of connector joints. For 
split-ring connectors, both maximum load and proportional 
limit load parallel to grain vary linearly with specific grav- 
ity (Figs. 8-18 and 8-19). For shear plates, the maximum 
load and proportional limit load vary linearly with specific 
gravity for the less dense species (Figs. 8—20 and 8-21). In 
the higher density species, the shear strength of the bolts 
becomes the controlling factor. These relations were 


8-19 


Figure 8-17. 
Joints with 
shear-plate 
connectors 
with (A) wood 
side plates and 
(B) steel side 
plates. 


78 


Load (KN) 


on 
we 
Load («10° Ib) 


LS] 
oa 


a_— 0 
0 0.1 #O2 03 04 O5 06 0.7 
Specific gravity 


Figure 8-18. Relation between load bearing parallel 
to grain and specific gravity (ovendry weight, volume 
at test) for two 63.5-mm (2-1/2-in.) split rings with a 
single 12.7-mm (1/2-in.) bolt in air-dry material. Cen- 
ter member was thickness 101.6 mm (4 in.) and side 
member thickness was 50.8 mm (2 in.). 


Load (KN) 
Load («10° Ib) 


0 0.1 02 03 04 O05 0.6 07 
Specific gravity 


Figure 8-19. Relation between load bearing parallel 
to grain and specific gravity (ovendry weight, vol- 
ume at test) for two 101.6-mm (4-in.) split rings anda 
single 19.1-mm- (3/4-in.-) diameter bolt in air-dry ma- 
terial. Center member thickness was 127.0 mm (5 in.) 
and side member thickness was 63.5 mm (2-1/2 in.). 


8-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


150 Bolt diameter (mm(in.)) = 
19.0 (3/4 30 
120F ——— 15,9 (5/8 


25 


> 2 
= 90 20 6 
3 x 
60 4 
al 
§ 
30 


0 
0 01 02 03 04 O05 O06 07 
Specific gravity 


Figure 8-20. Relation between load bearing parallel to 
grain and specific gravity (ovendry weight, volume at 
test) for two 66.7-mm (2-5/8-in.) shear plates in air-dry 
material with steel side plates. Center member thick- 
ness was 76.2 mm (3 in.). 


obtained for seasoned members, approximately 12% mois- 
ture content. 


Perpendicular-to-Grain Loading 


Loads for perpendicular-to-grain loading have been estab- 
lished using three-member joints with the side members 
loaded parallel to grain. Specific gravity is a good indica- 
tor of perpendicular-to-grain strength of timber connector 
joints. For split-ring connectors, the proportional limit loads 
perpendicular to grain are 58% of the parallel-to-grain pro- 
portional limit loads. The joint deformation at proportional 
limit is 30% to 50% more than for parallel-to-grain loading. 


For shear-plate connectors, the proportional limit and maxi- 
mum loads vary linearly with specific gravity (Figs. 8-22 
and 8-23). The wood strength controls the joint strength for 
all species. 


Design Loads 


Design loads for parallel-to-grain loading have been estab- 
lished by dividing ultimate test loads by an average factor 
of 4. This gives values that do not exceed five-eighths of the 
proportional limit loads. The reduction accounts for vari- 
ability in material, a reduction to long-time loading, and a 
factor of safety. Design loads for normal duration of load are 
10% higher. 


For perpendicular-to-grain loading, ultimate load is given 
less consideration and greater dependence placed on load at 
proportional limit. For split rings, the proportional limit load 
is reduced by approximately half. For shear plates, the de- 
sign loads are approximately five-eighths of the proportional 
limit test loads. These reductions again account for material 
variability, a reduction to long-time loading, and a factor of 
safety. 


Design loads are presented in Figures 8-18 to 8—23. In prac- 
tice, four wood species groups have been established, based 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


250° Bolt diameter (mm(in.)) 
19.0 (3/4) 50 
200F ——— 15.9 (5/8) 


Load (kN) 
s 
Ww 
o 
Load («10° Ib) 


0 0.1 #O2 03 04 O58 0.6 O7 
Specific gravity 


Figure 8-21. Relation between load bearing parallel 
to grain and specific gravity (ovendry weight, volume 
at test) for two 101.6-mm (4-in.) shear plates in air- 
dry material with steel side plates. Center member 
thickness was 88.9 mm (3-1/2 in.). 


50, Bolt diameter (mm(in.)) 


19.0 (3/4) Z 
40+ ---- 15.9 (5/8) Pa 10 
——— 19.0 or 15.9 rae 3 2 
7 (3/4 or 5/8) Ny a 
=x 30 ° 
Ss) xs 
o 
8 20 3 
andl 
10 


0 
0 01 #02 03 04 05 O06 0.7 
Specific gravity 


Figure 8-22. Relation between load bearing perpen- 
dicular to grain and specific gravity (ovendry weight, 
volume at test) for two 66.7-mm (2-5/8-in.) shear 
plates in air-dry material with steel side plates. Cen- 
ter member thickness was 76.2 mm (3 in.). 


Bolt diameter (mm(in.)) 


19.0 (we ae 

72 ---- 15.9 (5/8 16 
——— 19.0 or 15.9 és a 
= (3/4 or 5/8) =: ai oa 
z 54 ao 128 
3 & 
5 36 8 3 
° 
ould 

18 4 

0 

0 0.1 0.2 03 04 05 06 07 


Specific gravity 


Figure 8-23. Relation between load bearing perpen- 
dicular to grain and specific gravity (ovendry weight, 
volume at test) for two 101.6-mm (4-in.) shear plates 
in air-dry material with steel side plates. Center 
member thickness was 88.9 mm (3-1/2 in.). 


Table 8-17. Species groupings for connector loads* 


Connector Species or species group 
Group 1 Aspen Basswood Cottonwood 
Western Balsam fir White fir 


redcedar 
Eastern hemlock Eastern white pine Ponderosa pine 


Sugar pine Western white pine Engelmann 
spruce 
Group 2 Chestnut Yellow-poplar Baldcypress 


Y ellow-cedar Port-Orford-cedar Western 


hemlock 
Red pine Redwood Red spruce 
Sitka spruce White spruce 
Group3 Elm, American — Elm, slippery Maple, soft 
Sweetgum Sycamore Tupelo 
Douglas-fir Larch, western Southern Pine 
Group 4 Ash, white Beech Birch 
Elm, rock Hickory Maple, hard 


Oak 


“Group 1 woods provide the weakest connector joints; group 4 woods, the 
strongest. 


primarily on specific gravity, and design loads assigned 

for each group. Species groupings for connectors are pre- 
sented in Table 8-17. The corresponding design loads (for 
long-continued load) are given in Table 8-18. The National 
Design Specification for Wood Construction gives design 
values for normal-duration load for these and additional 
species. 


Modifications 


Some factors that affect the loads of connectors were taken 
into account in deriving the tabular values. Other varied and 
extreme conditions require modification of the values. 


Steel Side Plates 


Steel side plates are often used with shear-plate connectors. 
The loads parallel to grain have been found to be approxi- 
mately 10% higher than those with wood side plates. The 
perpendicular-to-grain loads are unchanged. 


Exposure and Moisture Condition of Wood 


The loads listed in Table 8-18 apply to seasoned members 
used where they will remain dry. If the wood will be more 
or less continuously damp or wet in use, two-thirds of the 
tabulated values should be used. The amount by which 

the loads should be reduced to adapt them to other condi- 
tions of use depends upon the extent to which the exposure 
favors decay, the required life of the structure or part, the 
frequency and thoroughness of inspection, the original cost 
and the cost of replacements, the proportion of sapwood and 
durability of the heartwood of the species (if untreated), and 
the character and efficacy of any treatment. These factors 
should be evaluated for each individual design. Industry rec- 
ommendations for the use of connectors when the condition 
of the lumber is other than continuously wet or continuously 
dry are given in the National Design Specification for Wood 
Construction. 


8-21 


Table 8-18. Design loads for one connector in a joint® 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Load (N (1b)) 
Minimum thickness of wood 
member (mm (in.)) Group | woods Group 2 woods Group 3 woods —_ Group 4 woods 
With two Minimum At 0° At 90° At0? At90° AtO0° At90° AtO°  At90° 
With one connectorsin width all angle angle angle angle angle angle angle angle 
connector opposite faces, members to to to to to to to to 
Connector only one bolt” (mm (in.)) grain grain grain grain grain grain grain grain 
Split ring 
63.5-mm (2-1/2-in.) 25 (1) 51 (2) 89 (3-1/2) 7,940 4,693 9,274 5,471 11,032 6,561 12,789 7,673 
diameter, 19.0 mm (1,785) (1,055) = (2,085) (1,230) ~=(2,480) (1,475) (2,875) (1,725) 
(3/4 in.) wide, with 
12.7-mm (1/2-in.) 
bolt 
101.6-mm (4-in.) 38 (1-1/2) 76 (3) 140 (5-1/2) = 15,324 8,874 17,726 10,275 21,262 12,344 24,821 14,390 
diameter, 25.4 mm (3,445) (1,995) (3,985) (2,310) + (4,780) (2,775) (5,580) (3,235) 
(1 in.) wide, with 
19.0-mm (3/4-in.) 
bolt 
Shear plate 
66.7-mm (2-5/8-in.) 38 (1-1/2) 67 (2-5/8) = 89 (3-1/2) —- 8,407 4,871 9,742 5,649 11,699 6,784 11,854 7,918 
diameter, 10.7 mm (1,890) (1,095) = (2,190) (1,270) (2,630) (1,525) (2,665) (1,780) 
(0.42 in.) wide, 
with 19.0-mm 
(3/4-in.) bolt 
101.6-mm (4-in.) 44 (1-3/4) 92 (3-518) 140 (5-1/2) 12,677 7,362 14,701 8,518 17,637 10,231 20,573 11,943 
diameter, 16.2 mm (2,850) (1,655) = (3,305) (1,915) (3,965) (2,300) (4,625) (2,685) 


(0.64 in.) wide, with 
19.0-mm or 22.2-mm 
(3/4- or 7/8-in.) bolt 


“The loads apply to seasoned timbers in dry, inside locations for a long-continued load. It is also assumed that the joints are properly designed with 


respect to such features as centering of connectors, adequate end distance, and 
group 4 woods the strongest. Species groupings are given in Table 8-17. 


suitable spacing. Group | woods provide the weakest connector joints, 


>A three-member assembly with two connectors takes double the loads indicated. 


Ordinarily, before fabrication of connector joints, members 
should be seasoned to a moisture content corresponding as 
nearly as practical to that which they will attain in service. 
This is particularly desirable for lumber for roof trusses and 
other structural units used in dry locations and in which 
shrinkage is an important factor. Urgent construction needs 
sometimes result in the erection of structures and structural 
units employing green or inadequately seasoned lumber 
with connectors. Because such lumber subsequently dries 
out in most buildings, causing shrinkage and opening the 
joints, adequate maintenance measures must be adopted. 
The maintenance for connector joints in green lumber 
should include inspection of the structural units and tighten- 
ing of all bolts as needed during the time the units are com- 
ing to moisture equilibrium, which is normally during the 
first year. 


Grade and Quality of Lumber 


The lumber for which the loads for connectors are applica- 
ble should conform to the general requirements in regard to 
quality of structural lumber given in the grading rule books 
of lumber manufacturers’ associations for various commer- 
cial species. 


The loads for connectors were obtained from tests of joints 
whose members were clear and free from checks, shakes, 


8-22 


and splits. Cross grain at the joint should not be steeper than 
1 in 10, and knots in the connector area should be accounted 
for as explained under Net Section. 


Loads at Angle with Grain 


The loads for the split-ring and shear-plate connectors for 
angles of 0° to 90° between direction of load and grain may 
be obtained by the Hankinson equation (Eq. (8—16)). 


Thickness of Member 


The relationship between loads for different thicknesses of 
lumber is based on test results for connector joints. The least 
thickness of member given in Table 8—18 for the various 
sizes of connectors is the minimum to obtain optimum load. 
The loads listed for each type and size of connector are the 
maximum loads to be used for all thicker lumber. The loads 
for wood members of thicknesses less than those listed can 
be obtained by the percentage reductions indicated in Fig- 
ure 8-24. Thicknesses below those indicated by the curves 
should not be used. 


When one member contains a connector in only one face, 
loads for thicknesses less than those listed in Table 8-18 can 
be obtained by the percentage reductions indicated in Figure 
8-24 using an assumed thickness equal to twice the actual 
member thickness. 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


1 2 
100 
63.5 mm (2.5 in.) 
diameter, 
80 12.9 mm (0.5 in.) 
bolt 


100 


6.7 mm (2.625 in.) 
diameter, 

19 mm (0.75 in.) 
bolt 


80 


0 26 52 


Percentage of optimum load at 0° or 90° to grain 


Thickness of wood member with connector in each face (in.) 


3 4 5 


101.6 mm (4 in.) 
diameter, 

19 mm (0.75 in.) 
bolt 


Split ring 


101.6 mm (4 in.) diameter, 
19 or 22.2 mm (7/8 or 3/4 in.) bolt 


Shear plate 
78 104 130 


Thickness of wood member with connector in each face (mm) 


Figure 8-24. Effect of thickness of wood member on the optimum load capacity 


of a timber connector. 


Width of Member 


The width of member listed for each type and size of con- 
nector is the minimum that should be used. When the con- 
nectors are bearing parallel to the grain, no increase in load 
occurs with an increase in width. When they are bearing 
perpendicular to the grain, the load increases about 10% for 
each 25-mm (1-in.) increase in width of member over the 
minimum widths required for each type and size of con- 
nector, up to twice the diameter of the connectors. When 
the connector is placed off center and the load is applied 
continuously in one direction only, the proper load can be 
determined by considering the width of member as equal to 
twice the edge distance (the distance between the center of 
the connector and the edge of the member toward which the 
load is acting). The distance between the center of the con- 
nector and the opposite edge should not, however, be less 
than half the permissible minimum width of the member. 


Net Section 


The net section is the area remaining at the critical section 
after subtracting the projected area of the connectors and 
bolt from the full cross-sectional area of the member. For 
sawn timbers, the stress in the net area (whether in tension 
or compression) should not exceed the stress for clear wood 
in compression parallel to the grain. In using this stress, it is 
assumed that knots do not occur within a length of half the 
diameter of the connector from the net section. If knots are 
present in the longitudinal projection of the net section with- 
in a length from the critical section of one-half the diameter 
of the connector, the area of the knots should be subtracted 
from the area of the critical section. 


In laminated timbers, knots may occur in the inner lamina- 
tions at the connector location without being apparent from 
the outside of the member. It is impractical to ensure that 
there are no knots at or near the connector. In laminated 
construction, therefore, the stress at the net section is limited 
to the compressive stress for the member, accounting for the 
effect of knots. 


End Distance and Spacing 


The load values in Table 8-18 apply when the distance of 
the connector from the end of the member (end distance e) 
and the spacing s between connectors in multiple joints are 
not factors affecting the strength of the joint (Fig. 8-25A). 
When the end distance or spacing for connectors bearing 
parallel to the grain is less than that required to develop the 
full load, the proper reduced load may be obtained by mul- 
tiplying the loads in Table 8-18 by the appropriate strength 
ratio given in Table 8-19. For example, the load for a 102- 
mm (4-in.) split-ring connector bearing parallel to the grain, 
when placed 178 mm or more (7 in. or more) from the end 
of a Douglas-fir tension member that is 38 mm (1-1/2 in.) 
thick is 21.3 kN (4,780 Ib). When the end distance is only 
133 mm (5-1/4 in.), the strength ratio obtained by direct in- 
terpolation between 178 and 89 mm (7 and 3-1/2 in.) in Ta- 
ble 8-19 is 0.81, and the load equals 0.81 times 21.3 (4,780) 
or 17.2 kN (3,870 Ib). 


Placement of Multiple Connectors 


Preliminary investigations of the placement of connectors 

in a multiple-connector joint, together with the observed 
behavior of single-connector joints tested with variables that 
simulate those in a multiple-connector joint, are the basis for 
some suggested design practices. 


8-23 


Figure 8-25. Types of multiple-connector joints: 
A, joint strength depends on end distance e and 
connector spacing s; B, joint strength depends on 
e, clear c, and edge a distances; C, joint strength 
depends on end e and clear c distances; D, joint 
strength depends on end e, clear c, and edge a 
distances. 


When two or more connectors in the same face of a mem- 
ber are in a line at right angles to the grain of the member 
and are bearing parallel to the grain (Fig. 8—25C), the clear 
distance c between the connectors should not be less than 
12.7 mm (1/2 in.). When two or more connectors are acting 
perpendicular to the grain and are spaced on a line at right 
angles to the length of the member (Fig. 8—25B), the rules 
for the width of member and edge distances used with one 
connector are applicable to the edge distances for multiple 
connectors. The clear distance c between the connectors 
should be equal to the clear distance from the edge of the 
member toward which the load is acting to the connector 
nearest this edge. 


In a joint with two or more connectors spaced on a line par- 
allel to the grain and with the load acting perpendicular to 
the grain (Fig. 8—25D), the available data indicate that the 
load for multiple connectors is not equal to the sum of the 
loads for individual connectors. Somewhat more favorable 
results can be obtained if the connectors are staggered so 
that they do not act along the same line with respect to the 
grain of the transverse member. Industry recommendations 
for various angle-to-grain loadings and spacings are given in 
the National Design Specification for Wood Construction. 


8-24 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Cross Bolts 


Cross bolts or stitch bolts placed at or near the end of mem- 
bers joined with connectors or at points between connectors 
will provide additional safety. They may also be used to 
reinforce members that have, through change in moisture 
content in service, developed splits to an undesirable degree. 


Multiple-Fastener Joints 


When fasteners are used in rows parallel to the direction of 
loading, total joint load is unequally distributed among fas- 
teners in the row. Simplified methods of analysis have been 
developed to predict the load distribution among the fasten- 
ers in a row below the proportional limit. These analyses 
indicate that the elastic load distribution is a function of 

(a) the extensional stiffness EA of the joint members, where 
E is modulus of elasticity and A is gross cross-sectional 
area, (b) the fastener spacing, (c) the number of fasteners, 
and (d) the single-fastener load—deformation characteristics. 


Theoretically, the two end fasteners carry a majority of the 
load. For example, in a row of six bolts, the two end bolts 
will carry more than 50% of the total joint load. Adding 
bolts to a row tends to reduce the load on the less heavily 
loaded interior bolts. The most even distribution of bolt 
loads occurs in a joint where the extensional stiffness of the 
main member is equal to that of both splice plates. Increas- 
ing the fastener spacing tends to put more of the joint load 
on the end fasteners. Load distribution tends to be worse for 
stiffer fasteners. 


The actual load distribution in field-fabricated joints is dif- 
ficult to predict. Small misalignment of fasteners, variations 
in spacing between side and main members, and variations 
in single-fastener load—deformation characteristics can 
cause the load distribution to be different than predicted by 
the theoretical analyses. 


For design purposes, modification factors for application to 
a row of bolts, lag screws, or timber connectors have been 
developed based on the theoretical analyses. Tables are 
given in the National Design Specification for Wood Con- 
struction. 


A design equation was developed to replace the double entry 
required in the National Design Specification for Wood Con- 
struction tables. This equation was obtained by algebraic 
simplification of the Lantos analysis that these tables are 
based on: 

m (1-m?") ‘l+ Reg 


nl(+ Ream" 1+ m)— 1+ m2" 1 
BA 


(8-19) 


where C, is modification factor, n number of fasteners in 

a row, Rz, the lesser of (E,A,)/(Eq Am) OF (EmAm)/(E,Ay), 

£,, modulus of elasticity of main member, £, modulus of 
elasticity of side members, A,, gross cross-sectional area of 
main member, A, sum of gross cross-sectional areas of side 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


Table 8-19. Strength ratio for connectors for various longitudinal spacings and end 


distances* 
: b ; 
Caerse End distance” (mm (in.)) 
diameter Spacing® Spacing Tension Compression End distance 
(mm (in.)) (mm (in.)) strength ratio member member strength ratio 
Split-ring 
63.5 (2-1/2) 171.4+ (6-3/4+) 100 139.7+ (5-1/2+) — 101.6+ (4+) 100 
63.5 (2-1/2) 85.7 (3-3/8) 50 69.8 (2-3/4) 63.5 (2-1/2) 62 
101.6 (4) 228.6+ (9+) 100 177.8+ (7+) 139.7+ (5-1/2+) 100 
101.6 (4) 123.8 (4-7/8) 50 88.9 (3-1/2) 82.6 (3-1/4) 62 
Shear-plate 
66.7 (2-5/8) 171.4+ (6-3/4+) 100 139.7+ (5-1/2+) — 101.6+ (4+) 100 
66.7 (2-5/8) 85.7 (3-3/8) 50 69.8 (2-3/4) 63.5 (2-1/2) 62 
101.6 (4) 228.6+ (9+) 100 177.8+ (7+) 139.7+ (5-1/2+) 100 
101.6 (4) 114.3 (4-1/2) 50 88.9 (3-1/2) 82.6 (3-1/4) 62 


“Strength ratio for spacings and end distances intermediate to those listed may be obtained by interpolation and multiplied 
by the loads in Table 8-18 to obtain design load. The strength ratio applies only to those connector units affected by the 
respective spacings or end distances. The spacings and end distances should not be less than the minimum shown. 

*End distance is distance from center of connector to end of member (Fig. 8—25A). 

“Spacing is distance from center to center of connectors (Fig. 8—25A). 


Figure 8-26. Some typical metal plate connectors. 


members, m= u—yu>—-1,u=14 y(s/2)(/E,.A m + 
1/E.A,), 8 center-to-center spacing between adjacent fasten- 
ers ina row, and y load/slip modulus for a single fastener 
connection. For 102-mm (4-in.) split-ring or shear-plate 
connectors, 


= 87,560 KN m=! (500,000 Ib in-!) 


For 64-mm (2-1/2-in.) split ring or 67-mm (2-5/8-in.) split 
ring or shear plate connectors, 


y= 70,050 kN m~-! (400,000 Ib in!) 
For bolts or lag screws in wood-to-wood connections, 


y = 246.25 D!5 
= 180,000 D!5 


(metric) 
(inch—pound) 


For bolts or lag screws in wood-to-metal connections, 


y = 369.37 DIS 
= 270,000 D!5 


(metric) 
(inch—pound) 


where D is diameter of bolt or lag screw. 


Metal Plate Connectors 


Metal plate connectors, commonly called truss plates, have 
become a popular means of joining, especially in trussed 
rafters and joists. These connectors transmit loads by means 
of teeth, plugs, or nails, which vary from manufacturer 

to manufacturer. Examples of such plates are shown in 
Figure 8—26. Plates are usually made of light-gauge galva- 
nized steel and have an area and shape necessary to transmit 
the forces on the joint. Installation of plates usually requires 
a hydraulic press or other heavy equipment, although some 
plates can be installed by hand. 


Basic strength values for plate connectors are determined 
from load-slip curves from tension tests of two butted wood 
members joined with two plates. Some typical curves are 
shown in Figure 8-27. Design values are expressed as load 
per tooth, nail, plug, or unit area of plate. The smallest value 
as determined by two different means is the design load 

for normal duration of load: (1) the average load of at least 
five specimens at 0.38-mm (0.015-in.) slip from plate to 
wood member or 0.76-mm (0.030-in.) slip from member to 
member is divided by 1.6; (2) the average ultimate load of at 
least five specimens is divided by 3.0. 


The strength of a metal plate joint may also be controlled by 
the tensile or shear strength of the plate. 


Joist Hangers 


Joist hangers have become a popular means of joining 
wood-based joists to header beams or columns. Hangers are 
usually made of light-gauge steel or welded from plate steel 
with shape and configuration necessary to transmit forces 
through the joint. Loads are transmitted from the joist to 
the hanger primarily through direct bearing of the joist, but 
for the uplift forces, load transfer is due to lateral loading 
of fasteners. How loads are transferred from the hanger to 


8-25 


Slip, member to member (in.) 
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 


40 
_ Plug type plate 2 
= 30 2 
a x 
3 20 Toothed type plate a 
8 3 

10 S 

0 
0 05 10 15 20 25 3.0 3.5 


Slip, member to member (mm) 


Figure 8—27. Typical load-slip curves for two types of 
metal plate connectors loaded in tension. 


the header differs depending on whether the joist hanger is 
a face mount or top mount. Face-mount hangers transmit 
loads through lateral loading of dowel-type fasteners; top- 
mount hangers transmit loads by bearing on the top of the 
header and lateral loading of the dowel type fasteners. De- 
sign of the joist hanger varies from manufacturer to manu- 
facturer. Examples of such plates are shown in Figure 8—28. 


Design loads are limited to the lowest values determined by 
experiment or by calculations. By experiment, design loads 
for joist hangers are determined from tests in which a joist 
is loaded at midspan and supported by two joist hangers 
attached to headers, following ASTM D 7147 procedures. 
The smallest value as determined by two different means 

is the test design load for normal duration of load: (1) the 
average load at 3.2-mm (0.125-in.) deformation between the 
joist and header of at least six specimens and (2) the average 
ultimate load of at least six specimens divided by 3.0 or the 
least ultimate load for lower than six replicates divided by 
3.0. Design loads for calculations are also highlighted in 
ASTM D 7147. 


Fastener Head Embedment 


The bearing strength of wood under fastener heads is im- 
portant in such applications as the anchorage of building 
framework to foundation structures. When pressure tends 
to pull the framing member away from the foundation, the 
fastening loads could cause tensile failure of the fastenings, 
withdrawal of the fastenings from the framing member, or 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Fastener perimeter (in.) 
2 4 


o 
eo 
a 


iz) 
o 


> 
ui 


Maximum embedment load (KN) 
-_ w 
wo o 


o 
a 
o 
s 


90 120 150 
Fastener perimeter (mm) 


Maximum embedment load (*10? Ib) 


Figure 8-29. Relation between maximum embed- 
ment load and fastener perimeter for several spe- 
cies of wood. 


> Fastener head bearing area (in’) = 
= 0 2 33 6 
ce 35 7 
o 7 = 
E 30 rH 
3 6 2 
2 25 — 
5 20 7 3 
E 4 € 
— 15 > 
Ll i= 
N 10 2 
pas o 
s 5 1° 
3 & 
s 0 
S$ 0 5 10 15 20 3 
Fastener head bearing area (cm?) 3 


Figure 8-30. Relation between load at 1.27-mm (0.05- 
in.) embedment and fastener bearing area for sev- 
eral species. 


embedment of the fastener heads in the member. The fas- 
tener head could even be pulled completely through. 


The maximum load for fastener head embedment is related 
to the fastener head perimeter, whereas loads at low embed- 
ments (1.27 mm (0.05 in.)) are related to the fastener 

head bearing area. These relations for several species at 
10% moisture content are shown in Figures 8—29 and 8-30. 


When annularly threaded nails are used for withdrawal ap- 
plications, fastener head embedment or pull-through can be 
a limiting condition and should be considered in design. 


Figure 8-28. Typical joist hanger connectors. 


8-26 


Chapter 8 Fastenings 


Literature Cited 


Johansen, K.W. 1949. Theory of timber connections. Zurich, 
Switzerland: Publication of International Association for 
Bridge and Structural Engineering. 9: 249-262. 


Additional References 


AF&PA. 2005. National design specification for wood con- 
struction. Washington, DC: American Forest & Paper As- 
sociation. 


Anderson, L.O. 1959. Nailing better wood boxes and crates. 
Agric. Handb. 160. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. 


Anderson, L.O. 1970. Wood-frame house construction. 
Agric. Handb. 73 (rev.). Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture. 


ASCE. 1996. Mechanical connections in wood structures. 
Washington, DC: American Society of Civil Engineers. 


ASTM. [Current edition]. West Conshohocken, PA: 
American Society for Testing and Materials. 


ASTM D 1761-88. Standard test methods for mechanical 
fasteners in wood. 


ASTM D 2555-96. Standard methods for establishing clear 
wood strength values. 


ASTM D 5652-95. Standard test methods for bolted con- 
nections in wood and wood-base products. 


ASTM D 7147-05 Standard specifications for testing and 
establishing allowable loads of joist hangers. 


ASTM F 547. Standard terminology of nails for use with 
wood and wood-base materials. 


ASTM F 1575-03 Standard test method for determining 
bending yield moment of nails. 


ASTM F 1667. Specification for driven fasteners: nails, 
spiker, staples. 


Cramer, C.O. 1968. Load distribution in multiple-bolt ten- 
sion joints. Proc. Pap. 5939. Journal of Structural Division, 
American Society of Civil Engineers. 94(STS): 1101-1117. 


Doyle, D.V.; Scholten, J.A. 1963. Performance of bolted 
joints in Douglas-fir. Res. Pap. FPL 2. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Eckelman, C.A. 1975. Screw holding performance in 
hardwoods and particleboard. Forest Products Journal. 
25(6): 30-35. 


Fairchild, I.J. 1926. Holding power of wood screws. Tech- 
nol. Pap. 319. Washington, DC: U.S. National Bureau of 
Standards. 


Folz, B.; Filiatrault, A. 2001. Cyclic analysis of wood shear 
walls. ASCE Journal of Structural Engineering. 127(4): 
433-441. 


FPL. 1962. General observations on the nailing of wood. 
FPL Tech. Note 243. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


FPL. 1964. Nailing dense hardwoods. Research Note FPL— 
037. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


FPL. 1965. Nail withdrawal resistance of American woods. 
Res. Note FPL—RN—033. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Goodell, H.R.; Philipps, R.S. 1944. Bolt-bearing strength 
of wood and modified wood: effect of different methods of 
drilling bolt holes in wood and plywood. FPL Report 1523. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Jordan, C.A. 1963. Response of timber joints with metal 
fasteners to lateral impact loads. FPL Rep. 2263. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Kuenzi, E.W. 1951. Theoretical design of a nailed or bolted 
joint under lateral load. FPL Rep. 1951. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Kurtenacker, R.S. 1965. Performance of container fasteners 
subjected to static and dynamic withdrawal. Res. Pap. FPL 
29. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 

Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Lantos, G. 1969. Load distribution in a row of fasteners sub- 
jected to lateral load. Madison, WI: Wood Science. 
1(3): 129-136. 


Markwardt, L.J. 1952. How surface condition of nails af- 
fects their holding power in wood. FPL Rep. D1927. Madi- 
son, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Forest Products Laboratory. 


Markwardt, L.J.; Gahagan, J.M. 1930. Effect of nail points 
on resistance to withdrawal. FPL Rep. 1226. Madison, WI: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Markwardt, L.J.; Gahagan, J.M. 1952. Slant driving of nails. 
Does it pay? Packing and Shipping. 56(10): 7—9,23,25. 


McLain, T.E. 1975. Curvilinear load-slip relations in 
laterally-loaded nailed joints. Fort Collins, CO: Department 
of Forestry and Wood Science, Colorado State University. 
Ph.D. dissertation. 


Newlin, J.A.; Gahagan, J.M. 1938. Lag screw joints: their 
behavior and design. Tech. Bull. 597. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 


8-27 


NPA. 1968. Screw holding of particleboard. Tech. Bull. 3. 
Washington, DC: National Particleboard Association. 


Perkins, N.S.; Landsem, P.; Trayer, G.W. 1933. Modern con- 
nectors for timber construction. Washington, DC: U.S. De- 
partment of Commerce, National Committee on Wood Utili- 
zation, and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 


Rammer, D.R.; Mendez, A.M. 2008. Withdrawal strength of 
post-frame ring shank nails. Frame Building News. April. 
p. 59-67. 


Rammer, D.R.; Zelinka, S.L. 2004. Review of end grain 
nail withdrawal research. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-151. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Rammer, D.R.; Winistorfer, S.G.; Bender, D.A. 2001. With- 
drawal strength of threaded nails. Journal of Structural Engi- 
neering. 127(4): 442-449. April. 


Scholten, J.A. 1944. Timber-connector joints, their strength 
and design. Tech. Bull. 865. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture. 


Scholten, J.A. 1946. Strength of bolted timber joints. FPL 
Report R1202. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Scholten, J.A. 1950. Nail-holding properties of southern 
hardwoods. Southern Lumberman. 181(2273): 208-210. 


Scholten, J.A.; Molander, E.G. 1950. Strength of 
nailed joints in frame walls. Agricultural Engineering. 
31(11): 551-555. 


Skulteti, M.J.; Bender, D.A.; Winistorfer, S.G.; Pollock, 
D.G. 1997. Withdrawal strength of ring-shank nails embed- 
ded in southern pine lumber. Transactions of the ASAE, 
American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 40(2): 45 1— 
456. February. 


Soltis, L.A.; Wilkinson, T.L. 1987. Bolted connection de- 
sign. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR—S4. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Stern, E.G. 1940. A study of lumber and plywood joints 
with metal split-ring connectors. Bull. 53. State College, 
PA: Pennsylvania Engineering Experiment Station. 


Stern, E.G. 1950. Nails in end-grain lumber. Timber News 
and Machine Woodworker. 58(2138): 490-492. 


Trayer, G.W. 1932. Bearing strength of wood under bolts. 
Tech. Bull. 332. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. 


Truss Plate Institute. [N.d.] Design specification for metal 
plate connected wood trusses. TPI-78. Madison, WI: Truss 
Plate Institute. 


8-28 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Wilkinson, T.L. 1971. Bearing strength of wood under em- 
bedment loading of fasteners. Res. Pap. FPL 163. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Wilkinson, T.L. 1971. Theoretical lateral resistance of nailed 
joints. Proceedings of American Society of Civil Engineer- 
ing. Journal of Structural Division. ST5(97): (Pap. 8121): 
1381-1398. 


Wilkinson, T.L. 1978. Strength of bolted wood joints with 
various ratios of member thicknesses. Res. Pap. FPL 314. 

Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Wilkinson, T.L. 1980. Assessment of modification factors 
for a row of bolts or timber connectors. Res. Pap. FPL 376. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Wilkinson, T.L. 1991. Bolted connection allowable loads 
based on the European yield model. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Wilkinson, T.L. 1991. Dowel bearing strength. Res. Pap. 
FPL—RP-—505. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Wilkinson, T.L.; Laatsch, T.R. 1970. Lateral and withdrawal 
resistance of tapping screws in three densities of wood. For- 
est Products Journal. 20(7): 34-41. 


Zahn, J.J. 1991. Design equation for multiple-fastener 
wood connections. New York, NY: Journal of Structural 
Engineering, American Society of Civil Engineers. 

Vol. 117(11): 3477-3485. November. 


Zelinka, S.L.; Rammer, D.R. Corrosion rates of fasteners in 
treated wood exposed to 100% relative humidity. Journal of 
Materials in Civil Engineering, American Society of Civil 
Engineers. 21(12): 758-763. December. 


CHAPTER 9 


Structural Analysis Equations 


Douglas R. Rammer, Research General Engineer 


Equations for deformation and stress, which are the basis 


Contents for tension members and beam and column design, are dis- 
Deformation Equations 9-1 cussed in this chapter. The first two sections cover tapered 
Asia lsd 1 members, straight members, and special considerations such 


as notches, slits, and size effect. A third section presents 


Bending 9-1 stability criteria for members subject to buckling and for 

Combined Bending and Axial Load 9-3 members subject to special conditions. 

Torsion 9-4 Note that this chapter focuses primarily on presenting funda- 
Stress Equations 9-4 mental mechanics-based equations. For design procedures, 

Axial Load 9-4 the reader is encouraged to contact appropriate industry 

Bending 9-4 trade associations or product manufacturers. Current design 


information can be readily obtained form their web sites, 


Ponting aa eee technical handbooks, and bulletins. 


Torsion 9-7 

Stability Equations 9—7 Deformation Equations 
Axial Compression 9-7 Equations for deformation of wood members are presented 
Bending 9-8 as functions of applied loads, moduli of elasticity and rigid- 


interaction of Buckling Modes 9-9 ity, and member dimensions. They may be solved to deter- 

mine minimum required cross-sectional dimensions to meet 
Literature Cited 9-10 deformation limitations imposed in design. Average moduli 
Additional References 9-10 of elasticity and rigidity are given in Chapter 5. Consider- 
ation must be given to variability in material properties and 
uncertainties in applied loads to control reliability of the 
design. 


Axial Load 


The deformation of an axially loaded member is not usually 
an important design consideration. More important con- 
siderations will be presented in later sections dealing with 
combined loads or stability. Axial load produces a change of 
length given by 

PL 

AE Oo) 


b= 


where 6 is change of length, Z length, A cross-sectional 
area, E modulus of elasticity (E, when grain runs parallel to 
member axis), and P axial force parallel to grain. 


Bending 
Straight Beam Deflection 


The deflection of straight beams that are elastically stressed 

and have a constant cross section throughout their length is 
given by 

. kW kWh 

§6=—-— + = 

EI GA 


(9-2) 


where 6 is deflection, W total beam load acting perpendicu- 
lar to beam neutral axis, L beam span, A, and k, constants 


9-1 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 9-1. Values of k, and k, for several beam loadings 


Loading Beam ends Deflection at ky, k, 
Uniformly distributed Both simply supported Midspan 5/384 1/8 
Both clamped Midspan = 1/384_—s 1/8 
Concentrated at midspan Both simply supported Midspan 1/48 1/4 
Both clamped Midspan 1/192 1/4 
Concentrated at outer Both simply supported Midspan 11/768 = 1/8 


quarter span points 


Uniformly distributed 


Concentrated at free end Cantilever, one free, one clamped 


Both simply supported 


Cantilever, one free, one clamped 


Load point 1/96 1/8 
Free end 1/8 1/2 
Free end 1/3 1 


dependent upon beam loading, support conditions, and 
location of point whose deflection is to be calculated, J beam 
moment of inertia, A’ modified beam area, E beam modulus 
of elasticity (for beams having grain direction parallel to 
their axis, E = E,), and G beam shear modulus (for beams 
with flat-grained vertical faces, G = G,7, and for beams with 
edge-grained vertical faces, G = G,p). Elastic property 
values are given in Tables 5—1 and 5—2 (Chap. 5). The first 
term on the right side of Equation (9-2) gives the bending 
deflection and the second term the shear deflection. Values 
of k, and k, for several cases of loading and support are 
given in Table 9-1. 


The moment of inertia J of the beams is given by 


7 bh 


/ =—— for beam of rectangular cross section 


ad’ (9-3) 
64 for beam of circular cross section 


where b is beam width, / beam depth, and d beam diameter. 
The modified area A’ is given by 


5 * 
4’ =2 ph for beam of rectangular cross section 
€ 
; (9-4) 
E 
40 md~ for beam of circular cross section 


If the beam has initial deformations such as bow (lateral 
bend) or twist, these deformations will be increased by the 
bending loads. It may be necessary to provide lateral or tor- 
sional restraints to hold such members in line. (See Interac- 
tion of Buckling Modes section.) 


Tapered Beam Deflection 


Figures 9-1 and 9—2 are useful in the design of tapered 
beams. The ordinates are based on design criteria such as 
span, loading, difference in beam height (h, — ho) as required 
by roof slope or architectural effect, and maximum allow- 
able deflection, together with material properties. From this, 
the value of the abscissa can be determined and the smallest 
beam depth Ay can be calculated for comparison with that 
given by the design criteria. Conversely, the deflection of a 
beam can be calculated if the value of the abscissa is known. 
Tapered beams deflect as a result of shear deflection in ad- 
dition to bending deflections (Figs. 9—1 and 9-2), and this 


9-2 


shear deflection A, can be closely approximated by 


3WL 


A, = ———— for uniformly distributed load 
“ 20Gbhhy (9-5) 
3 > 
=— PL for midspan-concentrated load 
LOGhhy 


The final beam design should consider the total deflection 
as the sum of the shear and bending deflection, and it may 
be necessary to iterate to arrive at final beam dimensions. 
Equations (9-5) are applicable to either single-tapered or 
double-tapered beams. As with straight beams, lateral or 
torsional restraint may be necessary. 


Effect of Notches and Holes 


The deflection of beams is increased if reductions in cross- 
section dimensions occur, such as by holes or notches. The 
deflection of such beams can be determined by considering 
them of variable cross section along their length and ap- 
propriately solving the general differential equations of the 
elastic curves, El(d2y/dx2) = M, to obtain deflection expres- 
sions or by the application of Castigliano’s theorem. (These 
procedures are given in most texts on strength of materials.) 


Effect of Time: Creep Deflections 


In addition to the elastic deflections previously discussed, 
wood beams usually sag in time; that is, the deflection in- 
creases beyond what it was immediately after the load was 
first applied. (See the discussion of creep in Time under 
Load in Chap. 5.) 


Green timbers, in particular, will sag if allowed to dry un- 
der load, although partially dried material will also sag to 
some extent. In thoroughly dried beams, small changes in 
deflection occur with changes in moisture content but with 
little permanent increase in deflection. If deflection under 
longtime load with initially green timber is to be limited, 

it has been customary to design for an initial deflection of 
about half the value permitted for longtime deflection. If 
deflection under longtime load with initially dry timber is to 
be limited, it has been customary to design for an initial de- 
flection of about two-thirds the value permitted for longtime 
deflection. 


Water Ponding 


Ponding of water on roofs already deflected by other loads 
can cause large increases in deflection. The total short-term 


Chapter9 Structural Analysis Equations 


0.9 = 
n4p—“Figetsper__ If 
0.8 t : 
sry 


hy 


oe 4k 2. — — 22 


W = Total load on beam 
(uniformly distributed) 


A, = Maximum bending deflectio 


0.6 


Ww E= Elastic modulus of beam 
a b= Beam width 
=| 0.5 
T |e h-h 
ol= = —£ 9 
£/: 
2 
a 
<j 


Single taper 
0.4 9 P 


0.3 


0.2 Double taper 


0.1 


Figure 9-1. Graph for determining tapered beam 
size based on deflection under uniformly distrib- 
uted load. 


deflection A due to design load plus ponded water can be 
closely estimated by 


Ao 


~ 1=S/Sx 8) 


where Ag is deflection due to design load alone, S beam 
spacing, and S,, critical beam spacing (Eq. (9-31)). 


Combined Bending and Axial Load 
Concentric Load 


Addition of a concentric axial load to a beam under loads 
acting perpendicular to the beam neutral axis causes in- 
crease in bending deflection for added axial compression 
and decrease in bending deflection for added axial tension. 
The deflection under combined loading at midspan for pin- 
ended members can be estimated closely by 


Ao 


~ 1+ P/P, a 


where the plus sign is chosen if the axial load is tension 
and the minus sign if the axial load is compression, A is 
midspan deflection under combined loading, Ag beam 
midspan deflection without axial load, P axial load, and 


0.8 i a < L/2 > 
Single taper ——single taper |{* 


0.7 1" ; | 


os tK L 


0.5 Single taper 


Double taper 


0.3 
h-h 
[= 
0.2 f) 
= h-h, 
h,= 7 
0.1 P = Concentrated midspan load 


= Maximum bending deflection 
E = Elastic modulus of beam 
b= Beam width 


Y 


Figure 9-2. Graph for determining tapered beam 
size on deflection under concentrated midspan 
load. 


P,, a constant equal to the buckling load of the beam under 
axial compressive load only (see Axial Compression in Sta- 
bility Equations section.) based on flexural rigidity about the 
neutral axis perpendicular to the direction of bending loads. 
This constant appears regardless of whether P is tension or 
compression. If P is compression, it must be less than P,, 

to avoid collapse. When the axial load is tension, it is con- 
servative to ignore the P/P,, term. (If the beam is not sup- 
ported against lateral deflection, its buckling load should be 
checked using Eq. (9-35).) 


Eccentric Load 


If an axial load is eccentrically applied to a pin-ended mem- 
ber, it will induce bending deflections and change in length 
given by Equation (9-1). Equation (9-7) can be applied to 
find the bending deflection by writing the equation in the 
form 


bal) 


dp + € 
Lt P/ Py 


(9-8) 
where 6, is the induced bending deflection at midspan 

and €) the eccentricity of P from the centroid of the 

cross section. 


8 
7 
6 
> 
5 
[]n 
4 B 
3 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 


b/h 


Figure 9-3. Coefficient @ for determining torsional 
rigidity of rectangular member (Eq. (9 —11)). 


Torsion 


The angle of twist of wood members about the longitudinal 
axis can be computed by 


TL 


§ =—— 
GK 


(9-9) 


where 0 is angle of twist in radians, T applied torque, LZ 


member length, G shear modulus (use ¥@xe@xr , or approxi- 
mate G by £,/16 if measured G is not available), and K a 
cross-section shape factor. For a circular cross section, K is 
the polar moment of inertia: 

xD* 


K= (9-10) 
32 


where D is diameter. For a rectangular cross section, 

. hb? 

K =— (9-11) 

where h is larger cross-section dimension, 5 is smaller cross- 
section dimension, and @ is given in Figure 9-3. 


Stress Equations 


The equations presented here are limited by the assumption 
that stress and strain are directly proportional (Hooke’s law) 
and by the fact that local stresses in the vicinity of points of 
support or points of load application are correct only to the 
extent of being statically equivalent to the true stress distri- 
bution (St. Venant’s principle). Local stress concentrations 
must be separately accounted for if they are to be limited in 
design. 


Axial Load 


Tensile Stress 
Concentric axial load (along the line joining the centroids of 
the cross sections) produces a uniform stress: 


a= 


Kh = y (9-12) 


9-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


where f, is tensile stress, P axial load, and A cross-sectional 
area. 


Short-Block Compressive Stress 


Equation (9—12) can also be used in compression if the 
member is short enough to fail by simple crushing without 
deflecting laterally. Such fiber crushing produces a local 
“wrinkle” caused by microstructural instability. The member 
as a whole remains structurally stable and able to bear load. 


Bending 


The strength of beams is determined by flexural stresses 
caused by bending moment, shear stresses caused by shear 
load, and compression across the grain at the end bearings 
and load points. 


Straight Beam Stresses 


The stress due to bending moment for a simply supported 
pin-ended beam is a maximum at the top and bottom edges. 
The concave edge is compressed, and the convex edge is 
under tension. The maximum stress is given by 


M 
Z 
where f, is bending stress, M bending moment, and Z beam 


section modulus (for a rectangular cross section, Z = bh2/6; 
for a circular cross section, Z = 1D3/32). 


A= (9-13) 


This equation is also used beyond the limits of Hooke’s 
law with M as the ultimate moment at failure. The resulting 
pseudo-stress is called the “modulus of rupture,” values of 
which are tabulated in Chapter 5. The modulus of rupture 
has been found to decrease with increasing size of member. 
(See Size Effect section.) 


The shear stress due to bending is a maximum at the centroi- 
dal axis of the beam, where the bending stress happens to be 
zero. (This statement is not true if the beam is tapered—see 
following section.) In wood beams this shear stress may 
produce a failure crack near mid-depth running along the 
axis of the member. Unless the beam is sufficiently short 
and deep, it will fail in bending before shear failure can 
develop; but wood beams are relatively weak in shear, and 
shear strength can sometimes govern a design. The maxi- 
mum shear stress is 


feka 


y (9-14) 


where f, is shear stress, V vertical shear force on cross sec- 
tion, A cross-sectional area, and k = 3/2 for a rectangular 
cross section or k = 4/3 for a circular cross section. 


Tapered Beam Stresses 


For beams of constant width that taper in depth at a slope 
less than 25°, the bending stress can be obtained from Equa- 
tion (9-13) with an error of less than 5%. The shear stress, 
however, differs markedly from that found in uniform 
beams. It can be determined from the basic theory presented 


Chapter9 Structural Analysis Equations 


Values of hh 


1.0 718 = 3/4 2/3 1/2 


Particular tapered beam where M = Vx 
h=h,+xtan@ 


1/4 
— X 
| — x’ 
3/4a 


Figure 9-4. Shear stress distribution for a tapered beam. 


by Maki and Kuenzi (1965). The shear stress at the tapered 
edge can reach a maximum value as great as that at the neu- 
tral axis at a reaction. 


Consider the example shown in Figure 9-4, in which con- 
centrated loads farther to the right have produced a support 
reaction V at the left end. In this case the maximum stresses 
occur at the cross section that is double the depth of the 
beam at the reaction. For other loadings, the location of the 
cross section with maximum shear stress at the tapered edge 
will be different. 


For the beam depicted in Figure 9-4, the bending stress is 
also a maximum at the same cross section where the shear 
stress is maximum at the tapered edge. This stress situation 
also causes a stress in the direction perpendicular to the 
neutral axis that is maximum at the tapered edge. The effect 
of combined stresses at a point can be approximately ac- 
counted for by an interaction equation based on the Henky— 
von Mises theory of energy due to the change of shape. This 
theory applied by Norris (1950) to wood results in 


(9-15) 


where f, is bending stress, f, stress perpendicular to the neu- 
tral axis, and f,,, shear stress. Values of F,, F,, and F\,, are 
corresponding stresses chosen at design values or maximum 
values in accordance with allowable or maximum values 
being determined for the tapered beam. Maximum stresses 
in the beam depicted in Figure 9-4 are given by 


3M 
2bhg 


ty = Sx tan@ 


Sy = 
(9-16) 


Sy zh tan? 0 


Substitution of these equations into the interaction Equation 
(9-15) will result in an expression for the moment capacity 


M of the beam. If the taper is on the beam tension edge, the 
values of f. and f, are tensile stresses. 


Example: Determine the moment capacity (newton- 
meters) of a tapered beam of width b = 100 mm, depth 

hy = 200 mm, and taper tan 6 = 1/10. Substituting these 
dimensions into Equation (9—16) (with stresses in pascals) 
results in 


f, =375M 
fey =37.5M 
f, =3.75M 


Substituting these into Equation (9-15) and solving for M 
results in 


M = 


3.75 flot/F 2 +107/F2 +1/F 2] 


where appropriate allowable or maximum values of the F 
stresses are chosen. 


Size Effect 


The modulus of rupture (maximum bending stress) of wood 
beams depends on beam size and method of loading, and the 
strength of clear, straight-grained beams decreases as size 
increases. These effects were found to be describable by sta- 
tistical strength theory involving “weakest link” hypotheses 
and can be summarized as follows: For two beams under 
two equal concentrated loads applied symmetrical to the 
midspan points, the ratio of the modulus of rupture of beam 
1 to the modulus of rupture of beam 2 is given by 


nv 


r 1 
Ry _| Aah 21+ map /L) (9-17) 
Rs L hy + may, L,) 


where subscripts | and 2 refer to beam 1 and beam 2, R is 
modulus of rupture, / beam depth, L beam span, a distance 
between loads placed a/2 each side of midspan, and m a 
constant. For clear, straight-grained Douglas-fir beams, 

m = 18. If Equation (9-17) is used for beam 2 size (Chap. 5) 


loaded at midspan, then A, = 5.08 mm (2 in.), L, = 71.112 
mm (28 in.), and a, = 0 and Equation (9-17) becomes 

R, 361.29 
R, Ay Ly + ma, Ly) 


Lim 
| (metric) (9—18a) 


Lim 
__ | = | (inch-pound) (9-18b) 
R Ay Lyd +may,/L)) 
Example: Determine modulus of rupture for a beam 10 in. 
deep, spanning 18 ft, and loaded at one-third span points 
compared with a beam 2 in. deep, spanning 28 in., and 
loaded at midspan that had a modulus of rupture of 10,000 
Ib in-2. Assume m = 18. Substituting the dimensions into 
Equation (9-18) produces ‘rai 
R= 10,006 ace 
2.160(1 + 6) 
= 7,330 Ibin~ 
Application of the statistical strength theory to beams under 
uniformly distributed load resulted in the following relation- 
ship between modulus of rupture of beams under uniformly 
distributed load and modulus of rupture of beams under con- 
centrated loads: 


1/18 
Ry _| (+ 18a, /Le Miche (9-19) 
R. 3.876)ig Ln, 


where subscripts u and c refer to beams under uniformly 
distributed and concentrated loads, respectively, and other 
terms are as previously defined. 


Shear strength for non-split, non-checked, solid-sawn, and 
glulam beams also decreases as beam size increases. A 
relationship between beam shear t and ASTM shear block 
strength tTaspy, including a stress concentration factor for 
the re-entrant comer of the shear block, C;, and the shear 
area A, is 


oa LCT ASTM 


(9-20a) 
Al /5 


(metric) 
7 - 8G astm 


Alls 


where t is beam shear (MPa, Ib in-?), C; stress concentration 
factor, Tasty ASTM shear block strength (MPa, Ib in-2), and 
A shear area (cm/2, in2). 


(inch-pound) (9—20b) 


This relationship was determined by empirical fit to test 
data. The shear block re-entrant corner concentration factor 
is approximately 2; the shear area is defined as beam width 
multiplied by the length of beam subjected to shear force. 


Effect of Notches, Slits, and Holes 


In beams having notches, slits, or holes with sharp interior 
corners, large stress concentrations exist at the corners. The 
local stresses include shear parallel to grain and tension per- 
pendicular to grain. As a result, even moderately low loads 
can cause a crack to initiate at the sharp corner and propa- 
gate along the grain. An estimate of the crack-initiation load 


9-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


= ) 
on °o 


Aor B (x10 (kPa,/mm)-*) 
5 
A or B ((Ib/in?Vin.)“) 


o 


Figure 9-5. Coefficients A and B for crack-initiation 
criterion (Eq. (9—21)). 


can be obtained by the fracture mechanics analysis of Mur- 
phy (1979) for a beam with a slit, but it is generally more 
economical to avoid sharp notches entirely in wood beams, 
especially large wood beams, since there is a size effect: 
sharp notches cause greater reductions in strength for larger 
beams. A conservative criterion for crack initiation for a 
beam with a slit is 


6M ) i 3 e 
\ 2bh ) 
where / is beam depth, b beam width, M bending moment, 
and V vertical shear force, and coefficients A and B are 
presented in Figure 9—5 as functions of a/h, where a is slit 
depth. The value of A depends on whether the slit is on the 
tension edge or the compression edge. Therefore, use either 
A, or A, as appropriate. The values of A and B are dependent 
upon species; however, the values given in Figure 9-5 are 
conservative for most softwood species. 


J h A 


(9-21) 
\ bho 


Effects of Time: Creep Rupture, Fatigue, and Aging 


See Chapter 5 for a discussion of fatigue and aging. Creep 
rupture is accounted for by duration-of-load adjustment in 
the setting of allowable stresses, as discussed in Chapters 5 
and 7. 


Water Ponding 


Ponding of water on roofs can cause increases in bending 
stresses that can be computed by the same amplification fac- 
tor (Eq. (9—6)) used with deflection. (See Water Ponding in 
the Deformation Equations section.) 


Combined Bending and Axial Load 
Concentric Load 


Equation (9-7) gives the effect on deflection of adding an 
end load to a simply supported pin-ended beam already bent 
by transverse loads. The bending stress in the member is 
modified by the same factor as the deflection: 


= 9-22 
ZF Fr ( ) 


Chapter9 Structural Analysis Equations 


where the plus sign is chosen if the axial load is tension and 
the minus sign is chosen if the axial load is compression, f, 
is net bending stress from combined bending and axial load, 
Joo bending stress without axial load, P axial load, and P,,, 
the buckling load of the beam under axial compressive load 
only (see Axial Compression in the Stability Equations sec- 
tion), based on flexural rigidity about the neutral axis per- 
pendicular to the direction of the bending loads. This P,,, is 
not necessarily the minimum buckling load of the member. 
If P is compressive, the possibility of buckling under com- 
bined loading must be checked. (See Interaction of Buckling 
Modes.) 


The total stress under combined bending and axial load is 
obtained by superposition of the stresses given by Equations 
(9-12) and (9-22). 


Example: Suppose transverse loads produce a bending 
stress f,) tensile on the convex edge and compressive on the 
concave edge of the beam. Then the addition of a tensile 
axial force P at the centroids of the end sections will pro- 
duce a maximum tensile stress on the convex edge of 


Se max * __ Joo + P 
1+P/P,, A 
and a maximum compressive stress on the concave edge of 
Somax = Soo 7 E 
1+ P/P,, A 


where a negative result would indicate that the stress was in 
fact tensile. 


Eccentric Load 


If the axial load is eccentrically applied, then the bending 
stress fi, Should be augmented by +P¢,/Z, where €, is 
eccentricity of the axial load. 


Example: In the preceding example, let the axial load be 
eccentric toward the concave edge of the beam. Then the 
maximum stresses become 


fh max ~ fu Eis . ‘ 
cr . 

Je max ~ tet oe Peg Z = P 

+P/P, A 


Torsion 


For a circular cross section, the shear stress induced by 
torsion is 
. 167 
f = 


xD? (9-23) 


where T is applied torque and D diameter. For a rectangular 
cross section, 


r 


he Bhb? O24) 


5 
4 
a 

[ |p 

3 
b 

2 

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 


b/h 


Figure 9-6. Coefficient B for computing maximum 
shear stress in torsion of rectangular member 
(Eq. (9-24)). 


where T is applied torque, / larger cross-section dimension, 
and b smaller cross-section dimension, and B is presented in 
Figure 9-6. 


Stability Equations 


Axial Compression 


For slender members under axial compression, stability is 
the principal design criterion. The following equations are 
for concentrically loaded members. For eccentrically loaded 
columns, see Interaction of Buckling Modes section. 


Long Columns 


A column long enough to buckle before the compressive 
stress P/A exceeds the proportional limit stress is called a 
“long column.” The critical stress at buckling is calculated 
by Euler’s formula: 


? - 
_ WE, 


; (9-25) 
(L/r)- 


cr 


where E, is elastic modulus parallel to the axis of the mem- 
ber, Z unbraced length, and r least radius of gyration (for 

a rectangular cross section with b as its least dimension, 

r =b/412, and for a circular cross section, r = d/4). Equa- 
tion (9-25) is based on a pinned-end condition but may be 
used conservatively for square ends as well. 


Short Columns 


Columns that buckle at a compressive stress P/A beyond the 
proportional limit stress are called “short columns.” Usually 
the short column range is explored empirically, and appro- 
priate design equations are proposed. Material of this nature 
is presented in USDA Technical Bulletin 167 (Newlin and 
Gahagan 1930). The final equation is a fourth-power para- 
bolic function that can be written as 


4 {1 


f= F,1 [L [F | 9-26 
fect c 27n4 r \ E, ( —_ ) 


4 


9-7 


where F’, is compressive strength and remaining terms are 
defined as in Equation (9—25). Figure 9-7 is a graphical rep- 
resentation of Equations (9-25) and (9-26). 


Short columns can be analyzed by fitting a nonlinear func- 
tion to compressive stress—strain data and using it in place 
of Hooke’s law. One such nonlinear function proposed by 

Ylinen (1956) is 


et ed 2 
filed dd onoe,| ra] 


where € is compressive strain, f compressive stress, c a 
constant between 0 and 1, and £, and F, are as previously 
defined. Using the slope of Equation (9-27) in place of E, 


(9-27) 


in Euler’s formula (Eq. (9—25)) leads to Ylinen’s buckling 
equation 
. Fit Se +f. F,+ f. Ff. 
fee = tse ~“ele = (9-28) 
2c mi 2c c 


where F, is compressive strength and /, buckling stress 
given by Euler’s formula (Eq. (9—25)). Equation (9-28) 
can be made to agree closely with Figure 9-7 by choosing 
c= 0.97. 


Comparing the fourth-power parabolic function Equation 
(9-26) to experimental data indicates the function is non- 
conservative for intermediate L/r range columns. Using 
Ylinen’s buckling equation with c = 0.8 results in a better 
approximation of the solid-sawn and glued-laminated data, 
whereas c = 0.9 for strand lumber seems appropriate. 


Built-Up and Spaced Columns 


Built-up columns of nearly square cross section with the 
lumber nailed or bolted together will not support loads as 
great as if the lumber were glued together. The reason is that 
shear distortions can occur in the mechanical joints. 


If built-up columns are adequately connected and the axial 
load is near the geometric center of the cross section, Equa- 
tion (9-28) is reduced with a factor that depends on the type 
of mechanical connection. The built-up column capacity is 


Fo fe 
maar (9-29) 
where F,, f., and c are as defined for Equation (9—28). Kr 
is the built-up stability factor, which accounts for the effi- 
poe! of the connection; for bolts, K;= 0.75, and for nails, 

= 0.6, provided bolt and nail spacing requirements meet 
re specification approval. 


If the built-up column is of several spaced pieces, the spacer 
blocks should be placed close enough together, lengthwise 
in the column, so that the unsupported portion of the spaced 
member will not buckle at the same or lower stress than that 
of the complete member. “Spaced columns” are designed 
with previously presented column equations, considering 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


—— Eq. (9-28), c = 0.97 
—— Eq. (9-28), c= 0.8 


FPL fourth-power formula 


Fuler’s Formula 


0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 
| A2F JE 


Figure 9-7. Graph for determining critical buckling stress 
of wood columns. 


each compression member as an unsupported simple col- 
umn; the sum of column loads for all the members is taken 
as the column load for the spaced column. 


Columns with Flanges 


Columns with thin, outstanding flanges can fail by elastic 
instability of the outstanding flange, causing wrinkling of 
the flange and twisting of the column at stresses less than 
those for general column instability as given by Equations 
(9-25) and (9-26). For outstanding flanges of cross sections 
such as I, H, +, and L, the flange instability stress can be 
estimated by 


0.0446 — (9-30) 
be? 

where £ is column modulus of elasticity, ¢ thickness of the 

outstanding flange, and } width of the outstanding flange. If 

the joints between the column members are glued and rein- 

forced with glued fillets, the instability stress increases to as 

much as 1.6 times that given by Equation (9-30). 


Bending 


Beams are subject to two kinds of instability: lateral— 
torsional buckling and progressive deflection under water 
ponding, both of which are determined by member stiffness. 


Water Ponding 


Roof beams that are insufficiently stiff or spaced too far 
apart for their given stiffness can fail by progressive deflec- 
tion under the weight of water from steady rain or another 
continuous source. The critical beam spacing S,, is given by 
= 
Se. = mm = (9-31) 
pl 

where E is beam modulus of elasticity, J beam moment of 
inertia, p density of water (1,000 kg m3, 0.0361 Ib in-3), L 
beam length, and m = | for simple support or m = 16/3 for 


Chapter9 Structural Analysis Equations 


Table 9-2. Effective length for checking lateral- 
torsional stability of beams* 


Effective 
Support Load length L, 
Simple support Equal end moments L 
Concentrated force at center 0.742L 
1-2h/L 
Uniformly distributed force 0.8871 
1-2A/L 
Cantilever Concentrated force at end 0.783L 
1-2/2 
Uniformly distributed force 0.489L 
1-2h/L 


“These values are conservative for beams with a width-to-depth 
ratio of less than 0.4. The load is assumed to act at the top edge of 
the beam. 


fixed-end condition. To limit the effect of ponding, the beam 
spacing must be less than S,,. 


Lateral—-Torsional Buckling 


Because beams are compressed on the concave edge when 
bent under load, they can buckle by a combination of lateral 
deflection and twist. Because most wood beams are rectan- 
gular in cross section, the equations presented here are for 
rectangular members only. Beams of I, H, or other built-up 
cross section exhibit a more complex resistance to twist- 
ing and are more stable than the following equations would 
predict. 


Long Beams—Long slender beams that are restrained 
against axial rotation at their points of support but are oth- 
erwise free to twist and to deflect laterally will buckle when 
the maximum bending stress f, equals or exceeds the fol- 
lowing critical value: 


Svcr = > (9-32) 


a 


where o is the slenderness factor given by 


a Jind El, Lh (9-33) 
“VGK »b 


where EY, is lateral flexural rigidity equal to F L hb? |i 2,h 

is beam depth, b beam width, GK torsional rigidity defined 
in Equation (9-9), and L, effective length determined by 
type of loading and support as given in Table 9—2. Equation 
(9-32) is valid for bending stresses below the proportional 
limit. 

Short Beams—Short beams can buckle at stresses beyond 
the proportional limit. In view of the similarity of Equation 
(9-32) to Euler’s formula (Eq. (9—25)) for column buckling, 
it is recommended that short-beam buckling be analyzed by 


using the column buckling criterion in Figure 9—7 applied 
with o in place of L/r on the abscissa and fy, /F'\, in place 
of f,,/F,on the ordinate. Here F, is beam modulus of 
rupture. 


Effect of Deck Support—The most common form of 
support against lateral deflection is a deck continuously 
attached to the top edge of the beam. If this deck is rigid 
against shear in the plane of the deck and is attached to the 
compression edge of the beam, the beam cannot buckle. In 
regions where the deck is attached to the tension edge of 
the beam, as where a beam is continuous over a support, the 
deck cannot be counted on to prevent buckling and restraint 
against axial rotation should be provided at the support 
point. 


If the deck is not very rigid against in-plane shear, as for 
example standard 38-mm (nominal 2-in.) wood decking, 
Equation (9-32) and Figure 9—7 can still be used to check 
stability except that now the effective length is modified by 
dividing by 9, as given in Figure 9-8. The abscissa of this 
figure is a deck shear stiffness parameter t given by 


SGnL? 
22D 


9-34 
Zn (9-34) 


where EI, is lateral flexural rigidity as in Equation (9-33), 
S beam spacing, Gp in-plane shear rigidity of deck (ratio 
of shear force per unit length of edge to shear strain), and L 
actual beam length. This figure applies only to simply sup- 
ported beams. Cantilevers with the deck on top have their 
tension edge supported and do not derive much support 
from the deck. 


Interaction of Buckling Modes 


When two or more loads are acting and each of them has a 
critical value associated with a mode of buckling, the com- 
bination can produce buckling even though each load is less 
than its own critical value. 


The general case of a beam of unbraced length /, includes a 
primary (edgewise) moment M,, a lateral (flatwise) moment 
Mz, and axial load P. The axial load creates a secondary 
moment on both edgewise and flatwise moments due to the 
deflection under combined loading given by Equation (9-7). 
In addition, the edgewise moment has an effect like the sec- 
ondary moment effect on the flatwise moment. 


The following equation contains two moment modification 
factors, one on the edgewise bending stress and one on the 
flatwise bending stress that includes the interaction of bi- 
axial bending. The equation also contains a squared term for 
axial load to better predict experimental data: 


Cf, fy + Oe, /d)) (1.234 — 0.2348,,) 
=| + - 
\ Fo) Deft (9-35) 
foo + Mer /d>) f.01.234 = 0.2340.5) _ 
- os oe <=<-<1.0 
8 .2Fh2 


0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 
T 


Figure 9-8. Increase in buckling stress resulting 
from attached deck; simply supported beams. To 
apply this graph, divide the effective length by 6. 


where fis actual stress in compression, edgewise bending, 
or flatwise bending (subscripts c, b1, or b2, respectively), 

F buckling strength in compression or bending (a single 
prime denotes the strength is reduced for slenderness), e/d 
ratio of eccentricity of the axial compression to member 
depth ratio for edgewise or flatwise bending (subscripts 1 
or 2, respectively), and 8, moment magnification factors for 
edgewise and flatwise bending, given by 


: er S ) 
6.) =1-| =-+— Z 
avers) 40 
0.5 =1-| Ze + Lt Oler/Ai fe (9-37) 
- Fa Fey 
2 0.8225 
a : (9-38) 
(ley dy )~ 
pty = O822E_ (9-39) 
(le /42)° 
»  1A4E ds 
og SAE (9-40) 
I. d 


where /, is effective length of member and S and S,, are 
previously defined ponding beam spacing. 


Literature Cited 


Maki, A.C.; Kuenzi, E.W. 1965. Deflection and stresses 

of tapered wood beams. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-34. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 56 p. 


Murphy, J.F. 1979. Using fracture mechanics to predict fail- 
ure of notched wood beams. In: Proceedings of first inter- 
national conference on wood fracture; 1978 August 14-16; 
Banff, AB. Vancouver, BC: Forintek Canada Corporation. 
159: 161-173. 


Newlin, J.A.; Gahagan, J.M. 1930. Tests of large timber 
columns and presentation of the Forest Products 


9-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Laboratory column formula. Tech. Bull. 167. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 44 p. 


Norris, C.B. 1950. Strength of orthotropic materials sub- 
jected to combined stresses. Rep. 1816. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 40 p. 


Ylinen, A. 1956. A method of determining the buckling 
stress and the required cross-sectional area for centrally 
loaded straight columns in elastic and inelastic range. Zu- 
rich, Switzerland: Publication of the [ABSA (International 
Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering). Vol. 16. 


Additional References 


ASTM. [Current edition]. Standard methods for testing clear 
specimens of timber. ASTM D 143-94. West Conshohock- 
en, PA: American Society for Testing and Materials. 


Bohannan, B. 1966. Effect of size on bending strength of 
wood members. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-—56. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 30 p. 


Gerhardt, T.D.; Liu, J.Y. 1983. Orthotropic beams under 
normal and shear loading. American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE). Journal of Engineering Mechanics. 
109(2): 394-410. 


Kuenzi, E.W.; Bohannan, B. 1964. Increases in deflection 
and stress caused by ponding of water on roofs. Forest 
Products Journal. 14(9): 421-424. 


Liu, J.Y. 1980. Shear strength of wood beams: a Weibull 
analysis. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). 
Journal of Structural Division. 106(ST10): 2035-2052. 


Liu, J-Y. 1981. Shear strength of tapered wood beams. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). Journal of 
Structural Division. 107(ST5): 719-731. 


Liu, J.Y. 1982. A Weibull analysis of wood member bending 
strength. Transactions, American Society of Mechanical En- 
gineers. Journal of Mechanical Design. 104: 572-579. 


Liu, J-Y. 1984. Evaluation of the tensor polynomial strength 
theory for wood. Journal of Composite Materials. 18(3): 
216-226. (May). 


Liu, J.Y.; Cheng, S. 1979. Analysis of orthotropic beams. 
Res. Pap. FPL-RP-343. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
37 p. 


Malhorta, S.K.; Sukumar, A.P. 1989. A simplified procedure 
for built-up wood compression members. Annual confer- 
ence. St. John’s, Newfoundland: Canadian Society for Civil 
Engineering: 1-18 (June). 


Newlin, J.A.; Trayer, G.W. 1924. Deflection of beams 
with special reference to shear deformations. Rep. 180. 


Chapter9 Structural Analysis Equations 


Washington, DC: U.S. National Advisory Committee on 
Aeronautics. 18 p. 


Rammer, D.R.; Soltis, L.A. 1994. Experimental shear 
strength of glued-laminated beams. Res. Rep. FPL—RP-527. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 40 p. 


Rammer, D.R.; Soltis, L.A.; Lebow, P.K. 1996. Experimen- 
tal shear strength of unchecked solid sawn Douglas-fir. 
Res. Pap. FPL-RP-553. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 

35 p. 


Soltis, L.A.; Rammer, D.R. 1997. Bending to shear 
ratio approach to beam design. Forest Products Journal. 
47(1): 104-108. 


Trayer, G.W. 1930. The torsion of members having sections 
common in aircraft construction. Rep. 334. Washington, 
DC: U.S. National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics. 

49 p. 


Trayer, G.W.; March, H.W. 1931. Elastic instability of 
members having sections common in aircraft construction. 
Rep. 382. Washington, DC: U.S. National Advisory Com- 
mittee on Aeronautics. 38 p. 


Zahn, J.J. 1973. Lateral stability of wood beam-and-deck 
systems. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). 
Journal of Structural Division. 99(ST7): 1391-1408. 


Zahn, J.J. 1986. Design of wood members under combined 
loads. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). Journal 
of Structural Engineering. 112(ST9): 2109-2126. 


Zahn, J.J. 1988. Combined-load stability criterion for 
wood beam-columns. American Society of Civil Engineers 
(ASCE). Journal of Structural Engineering. 114(ST11): 
2612-2628. 


CHAP RERS TO 


Adhesives with Wood Materials 


Bond Formation and Performance 


Charles R. Frihart, Research Chemist 
Christopher G. Hunt, Research Chemist 


C Adhesive bonding of wood plays an increasing role in the 

ontents forest products industry and is a key factor for efficiently 

Surface Properties of Wood for Bonding 10—2 utilizing our timber resource. The main use of adhesives 
Lumber Surfaces 102 is in the manufacture of building materials, including ply- 


wood, oriented strandboard, particleboard, fiberboard, struc- 


Menger eueaces 0 tural composite lumber, doors, windows and frames, and 


Chemical Interference to Bonding 10-4 factory-laminated wood products. Adhesives are also used 

Bonding of Wood Composite Products and in the assembly of furniture and cabinets, manufacture of 

Nonwood Materials 10—5 engineered wood products, and construction of residential 
Physical Properties of Wood for Bonding 10—5 and commercial structures. 

Density and Porosity 10-5 Adhesives transfer and distribute loads between compo- 


nents, thereby increasing the strength and stiffness 
of wood products. Effective transfer of stress from one 
member to another depends on the strength of the links in 


Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 10—6 
Adhesives 10-8 


Composition 10-8 an imaginary chain across the adhesive-bonded joint 
Strength and Durability 10-9 (Fig. 10-1). Thus, the performance of a bonded joint de- 
Selection 10-10 pends on how well the complex factors that contribute to the 


properties of the individual links (wood, adhesive, and inter- 


Hevandsaey phase regions of wood and adhesive) are controlled during 


Bonding Process 10-14 product assembly, which ultimately determines the strength 
Moisture Content Control 10-14 of the chain. 
Surface Preparation 10-15 Adhesion involves both mechanical and chemical factors 
Spreading of Adhesive 10-15 that control the adhesive’s ability to hold together two wood 


surfaces. Because wood is porous, one mechanism of adhe- 
sion is mechanical interlocking. Effective mechanical in- 
terlocking takes place when an adhesive penetrates beyond 


Assembly and Pressing 10-16 
Post-Cure Conditioning 10-17 


Bonded Joints 10-18 the surface debris and damaged fibers into sound wood two 
Edge-Grain Joints 10-18 to six cells deep. Further penetration into the cell wall mi- 
End-Grain Joints 10-18 crostructure increases the mechanical interlocking and the 


surface area for adhesive contact with the wood. With many 


End-to-Edge-Grain Joints 10-18 adhesives, the most durable, water-resistant bonds develop 


Construction Joints 10-19 when the adhesive flows deeply into cell cavities and infil- 
Testing and Performance 10-19 trates inside the cell walls. The standard for excellent bonds 
Analytical, Chemical, and Mechanical Testing is that the wood breaks away from the adhesive joint and 
of Polymers 10-19 that = bond strength is equal to the strength of the solid 

wood. 


Mechanical Testing of Bonded Assemblies 10-20 
Short- and Long-Term Performance 10-21 
Product Quality Assurance 10—22 


Attractive forces between molecules of adhesive and wood 
contribute greatly to adhesion. Although covalent bonds— 
chemical bonds between the adhesive and wood—seem 
Standards 10-22 plausible with some adhesives, no evidence exists that they 
References 10—23 contribute to the strength of adhesive bonds. However, inter- 
molecular attractive forces, such as Van der Waal’s forces, 


10-1 


* Link 1—adhesive layer 

* Links 2 & 3—adhesive 
interphase layer 

* Links 4 & 5—adhesive- 
wood interface 

* Links 6 & 7—wood 
interphase layer 


* Links 8 & S9—wood 
layers 


Figure 10—1. Imaginary links of adhesive bond be- 
tween two pieces of wood using the schematic from 
Marra (1980). 


dipole—dipole forces, and hydrogen bonding, occur so fre- 
quently that they must be very important for bond strength, 
especially given the high contact area of the adhesive with 
the wood. With some wood surfaces, such as teak, wood 
extractives can interfere with the direct adhesive contact, 
leading to a chemically weak boundary effect and poor bond 
strength. 


For maximum adhesive bond strength, the liquid adhesive 
must “wet” the wood surface, flowing over and penetrat- 
ing into the wood. Molecules of adhesive must come into 
direct contact with molecules of wood to provide the best 
mechanical interlock and intermolecular attraction be- 
tween adhesive and wood. Wood surfaces may appear to be 
smooth and flat, but microscopic examination shows peaks, 
valleys, and crevices littered with loose fibers and other 
debris. Such surface conditions cause air pockets and block- 
ages that prevent complete wetting by the adhesive and 
introduce stress concentrations when the adhesive has cured. 
In addition, different characteristics of wood (such as grain 
angle, natural defects, and extractives) lead to widely dif- 
ferent surface energies, roughness, and chemistry. (Surface 
wetting is discussed in more detail in the section on Chemi- 
cal Interference to Bonding.) In addition to wetting, or com- 
pletely covering these different surfaces, adhesives must be 
fluid enough to flow into the microscopic holes, or capillary 
structure, of wood. Pressure enhances wetting by forcing 
liquid adhesive to flow over the surfaces, displace air block- 
ages, and penetrate to the sound wood. 


The adhesive bond forms once the adhesive solidifies, but 
full strength may take from hours to days to develop. The 
applied adhesive changes from liquid to solid by one or 
more of three mechanisms: (a) loss of solvent from adhesive 
through evaporation and diffusion into the wood, (b) cool- 
ing of a molten adhesive, or (c) chemical polymerization 
into cross-linked structures that resist softening on heating. 
Because water is a common carrier for most wood adhe- 
sives, loss of water and chemical polymerization often occur 
simultaneously. 


10-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Surface Properties of Wood for 
Bonding 


Because adhesives bond by surface attachment, the physical 
and chemical conditions of the wood’s surface are extremely 
important to satisfactory bond performance. The wood 
surface should be smooth, flat, and free of machine marks 
and other surface irregularities, including planer skips and 
crushed, torn, or chipped grain. The surface should be free 
of burnishes, exudates, oils, dirt, and other debris that form 
a weak boundary between the adhesive and the wood. 


Both mechanical and chemical properties of a wood sur- 
face influence the quality of adhesive bonds. Wood whose 
surface is highly fractured or crushed cannot form a strong 
bond even if the adhesive forms a strong bond with the 
surface. The weak wood underneath the surface is the weak 
link in the chain and the location of failure in the bonded as- 
sembly. In other cases, poor bond strength is due to chemi- 
cal properties of the surface. Sometimes natural extractives, 
overdrying, or chemicals added to modify the wood alter 
the surface chemistry enough to harm adhesive bond perfor- 
mance. Physical deterioration and chemical contamination 
interfere with essential wetting, flow, and penetration of 
adhesive, and contamination sometimes interferes with the 
cure of the adhesive and resulting cohesive strength of the 
bond. 


Lumber Surfaces 


Surfacing or resurfacing the wood within 24 h before bond- 
ing removes extractives and provides a more wettable 
surface. Surfacing also removes any unevenness that may 
have occurred from changes in moisture content. Parallel 
and flat surfaces allow the adhesive to flow freely and form 
a uniformly thin layer that is essential to optimal adhesive 
performance. 


Experience and testing have proven that a smooth, knife-cut 
surface is best for bonding. Surfaces made using saws are 
usually rougher than those made using planers and jointers. 
However, surfaces sawn with special blades on properly set 
straight-line ripsaws are satisfactory for both structural and 
nonstructural joints. Furniture manufacturers commonly use 
precision sawing of wood joints rather than two-step saw- 
ing and jointing to reduce costs for labor, equipment, and 
material. Unless the saws and feed works are well main- 
tained, however, joints made with sawed surfaces will be 
weaker and less uniform in strength than those made with 
sharp planer or jointer knives. Dull cutting edges of planer 
or jointer knives crush and burnish the cells on the wood 
surface. Not only are these cells weaker, they also inhibit 
adhesive wetting and penetration. Damage to the surface can 
be revealed by wiping a very wet rag over a portion of 

the surface, waiting for a minute or more, removing any 
remaining water with a dry paper towel, and comparing the 
roughness of the wet and dry surfaces. If the wetted area 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


Figure 10—2. Cross sections of bonded joints involv- 
ing undamaged and damaged Douglas-fir surfaces. 
The dark area at the center of micrograph is the 
adhesive bondline. Image A involves two undam- 
aged surfaces from planing with sharp knife (120*) 
and shows open wood cells with their distinct walls. 
Image B involves two damaged surfaces abrasively 
planed with 36-grit sandpaper and shows crushed 
cells with their indistinct walls in and adjacent to the 
bondline. 


is much rougher than the dry area, then the machining has 
damaged the surface. A weak joint results if the adhesive 
does not completely penetrate crushed cells to restore their 
original strength. 


Abrasive planing with grit sizes from 24 to 60 causes sur- 
face and subsurface crushing of wood cells. The adhesive 
industry typically recommends 60-80-grit sanding as ac- 
ceptable for wood bonding as this equates to 24 to 30 knife 
marks per inch when planing. Generally, anything above 
200 grit fuzzes the wood surface and is not recommended. 
Figure 10-2 shows bondlines of undamaged, knife- 

planed Douglas-fir lumber (A) compared with bondlines 
between surfaces damaged by abrasive planing (B). Such 
damaged surfaces are inherently weak and result in poor 


bond strength. If abrasive planing is to be used before bond- 
ing, belts must be kept clean and sharp, and sanding dust 
must be removed completely from the surface. However, 
abrasive planing is not recommended for structural joints 
that will be subjected to high swelling and shrinkage stress- 
es from water soaking and drying. 


Veneer Surfaces 


The desired properties of wood veneer are essentially 
similar to those of lumber, but manufacturing processes, 
including cutting, drying, and laminating into plywood, can 
drastically change physical and chemical surface properties 
of veneer. Special knowledge and attention to these proper- 
ties are required to ensure good wetting and penetration of 
the adhesive. 


Rotary-cut veneer is produced by rotating a log by its ends 
against a knife, which results in continuous sheets of flat- 
grain veneer. As the knife peels veneer from the log, the 
knife forces the veneer away from the log at a sharp angle, 
fracturing (checking) the veneer on the knife side. The 
checked side is commonly called the loose side, and the op- 
posite side without checking is called the tight side. When 
rotary-cut veneer is used for faces in plywood, the loose side 
should be bonded and the tight side finished. Otherwise, 
open checks in the faces produce imperfections in the finish. 
Adhesive overpenetration into lathe checks usually is not a 
problem if the adhesive spread rate is set correctly. 


Sliced veneer is produced in long strips by moving a 
squared log, called a flitch, against a knife. As in rotary cut- 
ting, the knife forces the veneer away from the flitch at a 
sharp angle, causing fine checking of the veneer on the knife 
side. This checked surface will show imperfections in a 
finished surface, so the loose side should be bonded and the 
tight side finished. For book-matched face veneers, where 
grain patterns of adjacent veneers are near mirror images, 
half the veneers will be loosely cut and must be finished 

so the veneer must be cut as tightly as possible. Generally, 
hardwood face veneers are sliced to reveal the most attrac- 
tive grain patterns. 


Sawn veneer is produced in long narrow strips from flitches 
that have been selected and sawn for attractive grain pat- 
terns. The two sides of sawn veneer are free from knife 
checks, so either surface may be bonded with satisfactory 
results. 


Veneer is dried promptly after cutting, using continuous, 
high-temperature dryers that are heated with either steam 
or hot gases from wood-residue- or gas-fired burners. 
Drying temperatures range from 170 to 230 °C (330 to 
446 °F) for short periods. Drying to very low moisture 
levels at very high temperatures or at moderate tempera- 
tures for prolonged periods inactivates the veneer surfaces, 
causing poor wetting of veneer and hence poor bonding. 
Residues deposited on veneer surfaces from incomplete 


10-3 


Figure 10-3. A simple water drop test shows differ- 
ences in wettability of yellow birch veneer surface. 
Three drops were applied to surface simultaneously 
and then photographed after 30 s. Left drop retained 

a large contact angle on aged and unsanded surface; 
center drop had a smaller contact angle and improved 
wettability after the surface was renewed by two pass- 
es with 320-grit sandpaper; right drop showed a small 
contact angle and good wettability after four passes 
with the sandpaper. 


combustion of gases and fuel oils can cause serious adhe- 
sion problems in plywood production. 


Veneer selected for its attractive appearance, or for use in 
sanded grades of plywood, should be uniform in thickness, 
smooth, and flat; be free from deep checks, knots, holes, 
and decay; and have face grain suitable for the intended face 
grade. For lower grade plywood, defect standards are not 

as strict. For example, loosely cut veneer with many deep 
checks and large defects is suitable for structural plywood, 
but this veneer requires more adhesive than does tightly cut 
veneer. 


Chemical Interference to Bonding 


Chemical interference that reduces the bondability of wood 
is more complicated and more difficult to detect than the 
mechanical weakening of wood surfaces. This interference 
can be from natural causes (migration of extractives to the 
surface), inadvertent wood alteration (overdrying of the 
wood surface), or intentional alteration (wood modifica- 
tion). A simple water test can reveal much about the state of 
a wood surface and any difficulties for wetting and bonding 
with an adhesive. This test allows estimation of the degree 
of surface inactivation of veneer towards wetting and pen- 
etration by placing a drop of water on the wood surface and 
observing how fast the drop spreads over the wood. A drop 
of water is placed in an area on the earlywood of a flat-grain 
surface that does not have checks or splits. A surface with 
good wettability and penetrability will absorb the drop with- 
in 20 s. If the drop spreads out but some water remains on 
the surface after 40 s, then the surface has good wettability 
and poor penetration, and may be difficult to bond. If after 
40 s the water drop retains much of its original shape with 
little spreading, then bonding problems from surface inacti- 
vation (poor wettability and penetrability) is a certainty. 


10-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 10-3 shows how the inactivated surface of veneer 
can be removed by sanding of the surface to allow the drop- 
let to flow into a wider droplet on the surface instead of 
staying as a bead. 


Extractives on wood surfaces contribute to surface inactiva- 
tion through both physical and chemical means. Most wood 
adhesives are waterborne; therefore, they do not properly 
wet and penetrate extractive-covered surfaces. Particularly 
troublesome extractives are pitch, especially in the southern 
pines and Douglas-fir, and oil, such as in teak. When sub- 
jected to high temperatures during processing, extractives 
migrate to the surface where they concentrate and physically 
block adhesive contact with wood. Furthermore, pitchy and 
oily extractives are hydrophobic (that is, they repel water). 
The acidity of extractives of some Southeast Asian hard- 
woods and oak species can interfere with the chemical cure 
of some adhesives. In contrast, alkaline extractives can re- 
tard normal polymerization of an acid-cured adhesive, such 
as urea-formaldehyde, which would compromise the integ- 
rity of the adhesive film and bond. 


Overdrying and overheating interfere with adhesion by 
causing extractives to diffuse to the surface, by reorienting 
surface molecules and exposing the less polar portion, by 
oxidizing or pyrolyzing the wood, or by irreversibly closing 
the larger micropores of cell walls. Airborne chemical con- 
taminants can also inactivate a wood surface. 


To reduce decay, wood is treated with a variety of preserva- 
tives, including creosote, pentachlorophenol, chromated 
copper arsenate (CCA), copper azole, ammoniacal copper 
quat, and boron compounds. These treatments generally de- 
crease the ability of the adhesive to wet the wood; the effect 
is greater with some treatments than others. Poor wetting 
reduces contact area and thus bond strength between adhe- 
sive and wood. In addition, some treatments are known to 
alter the curing of adhesives. By understanding the proper- 
ties of these modified woods, adhesive companies have been 
able to alter the adhesives and bonding process to provide 
sufficiently durable products. 


The most common fire-retarding chemicals used for wood 
are inorganic salts based on phosphorous, nitrogen, and bo- 
ron. These acid salts release acid at elevated temperatures 
to decrease flammable volatiles and increase char in wood, 
thereby effectively reducing flame spread. The elevated 
temperature and moisture conditions of hot-press curing can 
release some of these acids, inhibiting the cure of alkaline 
phenolic adhesives. Alkaline resins can still make durable 
bonds after some of these treatments by priming the wood 
with certain alkaline aqueous solutions or by selecting resins 
of appropriate molecular-size distribution. 


Chemical modification of wood by acetylation drastically 
reduces moisture-related dimensional changes and the 
rate of biodeterioration. Acetic anhydride reacts with the 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


hydroxyl groups of wood. The conversion of hydroxyl 
groups to acetyl groups results in a lower affinity for water. 
Room-temperature-curing resorcinolic and acid-catalyzed 
phenolic hot-press adhesives develop durable bonds to 
acetylated wood. Most other wood adhesives develop poorer 
bonds with acetylated wood than with untreated wood. 


Bonding of Wood Composite Products and 
Nonwood Materials 


The surfaces of wood composites such as plywood, oriented 
strandboard, particleboard, fiberboard, and hardboard gen- 
erally have poor wettability relative to that of freshly cut, 
polar wood surfaces. Surfaces of these materials may ap- 
pear glazed, indicating that they have been inactivated by 
pressing at high temperatures. During hot pressing, resinous 
extractives and added waxes migrate to the surface, adhe- 
sive on the outer surfaces of particles and fibers cures, and 
caul release agents remain on the surfaces—all of which 
reduce wetting by waterborne wood adhesives. Surfaces of 
composite products typically are more difficult to bond than 
surfaces of solid wood products. Lightly sanding with 320- 
grit sandpaper often improves adhesion to composite panel 
products having poor wettability (Fig. 10—3). Too much 
sanding can create an uneven surface and perhaps produce 
too much loose-fiber debris that can interfere with adhesion. 
Furthermore, the internal strength of composites often limits 
the strength of adhesive bonds. 


Products incorporating wood composites bonded to metal or 
plastic are becoming more common because of property and 
cost advantages, but they present special challenges. Metal 
foils and plastic films laminated to wood composites do not 
require high cohesive strength for indoor applications, but 
the adhesives still must be compatible with both the wood 
and nonwood surfaces. If a structural bond is required be- 
tween wood and metal or plastic, then only epoxy, polyure- 
thane, and isocyanate-based adhesives may be sufficiently 
compatible. Even then, good adhesion often requires clean- 
ing of the nonwood surfaces to remove contaminants or ap- 
plying coupling agents, primers, or other special treatments 
to chemically activate the surfaces. 


The difficulty with bonding metals to wood is usually metal 
surface inactivation. The surface energy of clean metals 

is higher than that of wood, but with exposure to air, met- 
als quickly adsorb contaminants and form metal oxides to 
produce a low-energy, weak boundary layer at the surface. 
A series of cleaning procedures is required to regenerate the 
high-energy surface and create microscale roughness neces- 
sary for structural bonding. Steps in surface preparation may 
include abrasion by sandblasting, cleaning with liquid or 
vapor organic solvents, alkaline washing, chemical etching, 
and/or priming with adhesive solutions or coupling agents. 


Plastic surfaces are difficult to bond because they are gen- 
erally low energy, nonpolar, and hydrophobic. Plastics are 


organic polymers that may be either thermoplastic (soften 
on heating) or thermosetting (cross-linked and resist soften- 
ing on heating). Thermoplastics generally are not as strong 
and stiff as wood, but the properties of thermoset materials 
approximate and even exceed the mechanical properties of 
wood. When plastics containing fibrous reinforcing materi- 
als such as fiberglass are bonded to woods, strength and 
stiffness of the composite materials can be greater than that 
of wood. Reinforced plastics that are effectively bonded to 
wood offer strong and cost-effective structural composites. 
Traditional waterborne wood adhesives do not bond well 

to plastics because they are polar and hydrophilic. Epoxies, 
polyurethanes, and isocyanate-based adhesives are capable 
of bonding many plastics to wood. Adhesion to plastic sur- 
faces occurs primarily by physical intermolecular attraction 
forces and, in some cases, hydrogen bonding. Abrading and 
chemical etching of plastic surfaces increase adhesion by 
providing some mechanical interlocking. Coupling agents 
have molecules that are capable of reacting with both the 
adhesive and the surface, making them particularly useful 
for bridging dissimilar materials. Plasma treatment of plastic 
surfaces can clean and activate surfaces for enhanced adhe- 
sion. Grafting of monomers onto cleaned plastic surfaces by 
means of plasma polymerization creates a polar surface that 
is more compatible with adhesives. 


Physical Properties of Wood for 
Bonding 


Density and Porosity 


Surface properties are not the only factors to control bond- 
ing in wood. Bond quality is also affected by the bulk physi- 
cal properties of wood, particularly density, porosity, mois- 
ture content, strength, and swelling—shrinking properties. 


Solid wood cell walls have a density of 1,500 kg m3 

(94 Ib ft-3), regardless of the wood species. However, 
density varies greatly with void volume and thickness of 
cell walls between wood species and within a species, and 
between earlywood and latewood growth (as discussed in 
Chap. 3). High-density wood has thick walls and small lu- 
mina, whereas low-density wood has thin walls and large 
lumina. Thus, higher density wood contains more material 
per unit of volume and can carry more load. 


Adhesively bonded wood assemblies typically increase in 
strength with wood density up to a range of 700 to 800 kg 
m3 (44 to 50 Ib ft) (moisture content 12%). Below this 
level, adhesion is usually easy and the strength of the wood 
limits the assembly strength. Above this level, high-strength 
joints with high wood failure are hard to produce consistent- 
ly. Wood failure refers to the percentage of the total failure 
area that is wood, rather than adhesive. High wood failure is 
preferred because the load design values can be based upon 
the known wood strength and not reduced because of the 
quality of the bondline. 


10-5 


Light microscopy cross 
sections taken at 16x, 
30-um-thick specimens 


Basswood 


Hard maple 


Soft maple 


Figure 10—4. Cross sections of three different species 
showing openness of cellular structure. Basswood is 
in the “bond easily” category in Table 10-1, soft maple 
“bond well,” and hard maple “bond satisfactorily.” The 
more easily bonded wood has greater lumen volume 
for adhesive penetration and less cell wall volume. The 
lower density of the basswood compared with the hard 
maple makes the wood weak, and therefore less force 
can be applied to the bondline. 


High-density woods are difficult to bond for several reasons. 
Because of their thicker cell walls and smaller diameter lu- 
mens, adhesives do not easily penetrate into the wood, limit- 
ing mechanical interlock to less than two cells deep. Much 
greater pressure is required to compress stronger, stiffer, 
high-density wood to bring contact between wood surfaces 
and adhesive. Higher concentration of extractives that may 
interfere with the cure of adhesives is common in high-den- 
sity species, particularly domestic oaks and imported tropi- 
cal hardwoods. High-density woods are strong and allow 
high loads to be placed upon the bondline. Finally, high- 
density woods tend to swell and shrink more with changes 
in moisture content than do low-density woods. 


Density is perhaps a crude indicator, but as previously not- 
ed, it is useful for estimating the bondability of a great vari- 
ety of wood species. Table 10-1 categorizes commonly used 
domestic and imported species according to their relative 
ease of bonding. The bondability categories for domestic 
woods are based on the average strength of side-grain joints 
of lumber as determined in laboratory tests and industrial 
experience. The laboratory tests included animal, casein, 
starch, urea-formaldehyde, and resorcinol-formaldehyde 
adhesives. The categories for imported woods are based on 
information found in the literature on bond strength, species 
properties, extractives content, and industrial experience. 


10-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


In most cases, fewer data are available for imported woods 
than domestic woods. Beware that a species that bonds 
poorly with one adhesive may develop much better bonds 
with another adhesive. A similar type of adhesive with 
somewhat different working, penetration, curing, and even 
strength properties can often dramatically improve bondabil- 
ity of a given species. Adhesive suppliers quite often adjust 
adhesive formulations to solve specific adhesion problems. 


Wood density and anatomy control wood porosity, which 
usually affects penetration and bond performance. To at- 
tain the highest joint strength, the adhesive must penetrate 
and interlock several cells deep into sound, undamaged cell 
structure. In wood, porosity varies according to the grain 
direction. End-grain surfaces are many times more porous 
than radial or tangential surfaces. Adhesives penetrate so 
easily into the open lumens along the grain that overpenetra- 
tion often occurs when gluing end-grain. This overpenetra- 
tion is a primary reason why it is so difficult to form strong, 
load-bearing bonds in butt joints. Across the grain, paths for 
adhesive flow are fewer and smaller, so overpenetration gen- 
erally is not a problem with a properly formulated adhesive. 


The porosity and resulting adhesive flow into wood varies 
greatly, both between hardwoods and softwoods and within 
each of these groups. In Figure 10-4, cross-section micro- 
graphs demonstrate the large differences in lumen volume 
between three diffuse-porous hardwood species. Softwoods 
have longitudinal tracheid lumens connected by bordered 
pits. Pits are the small openings between fibers that permit 
lateral transfer of fluids in living trees. Adhesives might use 
the network of pits to penetrate deeply, even in tangential 
and radial directions. In hardwoods, the thin-walled, rela- 
tively large longitudinal vessels have porous end walls, so 
adhesive can penetrate deeply along the end grain. Where 
two vessels are in lateral contact, multiple inter-vessel pit- 
ting can occur, which allows for lateral flow between ves- 
sels. The remaining thick-walled fibers have relatively few 
pits for lateral transfer of adhesive. Some species, such as 
red oaks, have large numbers of radially oriented rays that 
can allow excessive flow and overpenetration. Adhesives 
provided for customers who use large volume are specifical- 
ly formulated for hardwoods or softwoods, and for specific 
species within the groups, and have adjustable properties for 
specific manufacturing situations. 


Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


Water occurs naturally in living trees and affects wood 
properties and adhesive bond strength dramatically. 
Depending on extractives levels and wood chemistry, wood 
can typically take up 25% to 30% of its dry weight in water. 
The point at which wood cannot adsorb any more water is 
called the fiber saturation point. As wood dries below the 
fiber saturation point, it begins to shrink and become stiffer. 
Above the fiber saturation point, excess water simply fills 
lumens and makes wood heavier. Wood in service will 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


Table 10-1. Categories of selected wood species according to 
ease of bonding 


U.S. hardwoods U.S. softwoods Imported woods 
Bond easily* 

Alder Fir Balsa Hura 

Aspen White Cativo Purpleheart 

Basswood Grand Courbaril Roble 

Cottonwood Noble Determa? 

Chestnut, American Pacific 

Magnolia Pine 

Willow, black Eastern white 


Western white 
Redcedar, western 


Redwood 
Spruce, Sitka 
Bond well 

Butternut Douglas-fir Afromosia Meranti (lauan) 
Elm Larch, western‘ Andiroba Light red 

American Pine Angelique White 

Rock Sugar Avodire Yellow 
Hackberry Ponderosa Banak Obeche 
Maple, soft Redcedar, eastern Iroko Okoume 
Sweetgum Jarrah Opepe 
Sycamore Limba Peroba rosa 
Tupelo Mahogany _— Sapele 
Walnut, black African Spanish-cedar 
Yellow-poplar American  Sucupira 

Wallaba 
Bond satisfactorily“ 
Ash, white Yellow-cedar Angelin Meranti (lauan), 
dark red 

Beech, American _Port-Orford-cedar §Azobe Pau marfim 
Birch Pines, southern Benge Parana-pine 

Sweet Bubinga Pine 

Yellow Karri Caribbean 
Cherry Radiata 
Hickory Ramin 

Pecan 

True 
Madrone 
Maple, hard 
Oak 

Red? 

White? 

Bond with difficulty’ 

Osage-orange Balata Keruing 
Persimmon Balau Lapacho 


Greenheart Lignumvitae 
Kaneelhart Rosewood 
Kapur Teak 


“Bond very easily with adhesives of a wide range of properties and under a wide 
range of bonding conditions. 

*Difficult to bond with some phenol-formaldehyde adhesives. 

“Bond well with a fairly wide range of adhesives under a moderately wide range of 
bonding conditions. 

“Wood from butt logs with high extractive content is difficult to bond. 

“Bond satisfactorily with good-quality adhesives under well-controlled bonding 
conditions. 

‘Satisfactory results require careful selection of adhesives and very close control of 
bonding conditions; may require special surface treatment. 


10-7 


shrink and swell as it loses and gains moisture from the air; 
under typical indoor conditions, wood contains 5% to 12% 
moisture. The shrinking and swelling (dimensional changes) 
are different for the three principal directions in wood. Lon- 
gitudinal dimensional change (along the grain, or up and 
down in the standing tree) is the least and amounts to less 
than 1% between fiber saturation and ovendry. Tangential 
dimensional change is the greatest, typically 6% to 12%, 
while radial dimensional change is typically about half of 
the tangential movement. Wood with low density tends to 
have the smallest dimensional change. Chapter 4 provides a 
detailed discussion of wood— moisture relations. 


Wood dimensional changes that accompany changes in 
moisture content have broad-ranging and important con- 
sequences on the performance of bonded joints. As wood 
in bonded assemblies swells and shrinks, stresses develop 
that can damage the adhesive bond or wood. Damage may 
occur when moisture content changes in adjacent pieces of 
wood that have different swelling or shrinkage coefficients. 
This can arise with different species, different heartwood, 
sapwood, or juvenile wood content, or grain type, such as 
radial grain bonded to tangential or end grain bonded to 
cross grain. Even more stressful is when only one part of an 
assembly changes moisture content. Dimensional changes 
associated with water are a common cause of adhesive fail- 
ure. Moisture-driven stresses can be minimized by bonding 
pieces of wood with compatible grain directions and low 
shrinkage coefficients and by bonding at the moisture con- 
tent expected during service. 


The moisture in wood combined with water in adhesive will 
greatly influence the wetting, flow, penetration, and cure of 
waterborne wood adhesives. In general, optimum adhesive 
properties occur when the wood is between 6% and 14% 
moisture content. Special formulations are often used out- 
side this range. Aqueous adhesives tend to dry out when 
applied to wood below 6% moisture content. Wood absorbs 
water from the adhesive so quickly that adhesive flow and 
penetration into the wood are drastically inhibited, even 
under high pressure. Wood may become so dry below 3% 
moisture content that it temporarily resists wetting. 


Wood with too much moisture is also difficult to bond with 
normal waterborne adhesives. Water and low-molecular- 
weight portions of the adhesive migrate less effectively into 
wet wood cell walls than into drier cell walls. This leaves 
the adhesive more runny and prone to squeeze-out when 
pressure is applied. The extra adhesive mobility can also 
lead to overpenetration and starvation of the bond. In many 
adhesives, low-molecular-weight components infiltrating 
the cell walls are necessary for long-term durability. Control 
of moisture content is particularly critical when adhesive 

is cured in a hot press because the excess moisture turns to 
high-pressure steam inside the product. This pressurized 
steam can blast channels through the wood product or cause 


10-8 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


large internal voids, called blows, in panel products. Even 

if blows do not occur, excess moisture within thermosetting 
adhesives can prevent complete cross linking, thereby weak- 
ening the adhesive. Appropriate moisture content levels of 
wood for bonding by hot-press methods are well known, 

as are target moisture content levels for wood products 
throughout the United States. However, controlling moisture 
content during bonding of wood materials is not always easy 
(as discussed in the Moisture Content Control section). 


Adhesives 


Composition 


During the 20th century, wood adhesives shifted from 
natural to synthetic organic polymers. A polymer is a large 
molecule constructed of many small repeated units. Natu- 
ral polysaccharide and protein polymers in blood, hide, 
casein, soybean, starch, dextrin, and other biomass have 
been used as adhesives for centuries. These polymers are 
still in use today, although they have been largely replaced 
by petrochemical and natural-gas-based systems. The first 
wood adhesives based on synthetic polymers were produced 
commercially during the 1930s. Synthetic polymers can be 
made stronger, more rigid, and more durable than wood, and 
they generally have much greater water resistance than do 
traditional adhesives from natural polymers. However, re- 
cent advances in biomass-based adhesives have made them 
more competitive with fossil-fuel-based adhesives than are 
traditional ones. 


Whether a synthetic adhesive is thermoplastic or thermoset- 
ting has a major influence on its performance in service. 
Thermoplastics are long-chain polymers that soften and 
flow on heating and then harden again upon cooling. They 
generally have less resistance to heat, moisture, and long- 
term static loading than do thermosetting polymers. Com- 
mon thermoplastic adhesives for wood include poly(vinyl 
acetate) emulsions, elastomerics, contacts, and hot-melts. 
Thermosetting polymers make excellent structural adhe- 
sives because they undergo irreversible chemical change 
when cured, and on reheating, they do not soften and flow 
again. They form cross-linked polymers that can have high 
strength, have resistance to moisture and other chemicals, 
and are rigid enough to support high, long-term static loads 
without deforming. Phenol-formaldehyde, resorcinol-form- 
aldehyde, melamine-formaldehyde, urea-formaldehyde, iso- 
cyanate, and epoxy adhesives are examples of thermosetting 
polymers. 


When delivered, adhesives usually contain a mixture of 
several chemically active and inert materials, each added for 
specific properties such as working characteristics, strength 
properties, shelf life, or durability. Solvents dissolve or 
disperse adhesive polymers, act as carriers of polymer and 
additives, aid in wetting, and control flow and penetration of 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


the adhesive. Water is the carrier for most wood adhesives, 
primarily because water readily absorbs into wood, is inex- 
pensive, and does not have adverse effects on the environ- 
ment. Organic solvents are still used with elastomeric and 
contact adhesives, although waterborne adhesive systems 
are becoming more important in these markets as well. Re- 
inforcing fibers, mostly inert organics, can enhance mechan- 
ical properties of the adhesive film, especially toughness, 
impact resistance, and shrinkage. Fillers of both organic and 
inorganic origins contribute to rheological control of the 
fluid system, particularly in reducing the spreading and pen- 
etrating of the adhesive into wood. Extenders are like fillers, 
in that they control flow and working characteristics, but are 
different in that they do not reduce bond strength. 


Certain chemicals are added to plasticize adhesive poly- 
mers, enhance tackiness, improve heat resistance, or lower 
costs. Plasticizers, for example dibutyl phthalate, are used to 
soften the brittle vinyl acetate homopolymer in poly(vinyl 
acetate) emulsion adhesives. This is necessary to facilitate 
adhesive spreading and formation of a flexible adhesive film 
from the emulsion at and below room temperature. Pheno- 
lic polymers are used as tackifiers and adhesion promoters 
in neoprene and nitrile rubber contact adhesives. Reactive 
polymeric fortifiers, such as melamine-formaldehyde, can 
be substituted into urea-formaldehyde adhesives to improve 
resistance to moisture and heat. Substituting phenol-formal- 
dehyde for resorcinol-formaldehyde reduces adhesive costs 
without sacrificing adhesive strength and durability. 


Catalysts are chemicals used to accelerate the rate of chemi- 
cal reaction of polymeric components. Acids, bases, salts, 
peroxides, and sulfur compounds are a few examples of 
catalysts. Catalysts do not become a part of the reacted com- 
pound; they simply increase the rate of reaction. Usually, 
hardeners are added to base polymers as reactive compo- 
nents, and they do become a part of the reacted compound. 
Examples are an amine hardener added to epoxy and form- 
aldehyde added to resorcinol—both produce cross-linking 
reactions to solidify the adhesive. For curing urea-formalde- 
hyde and melamine-formaldehyde adhesives, hardeners are 
actually catalysts in that they cure the adhesive but do not 
become part of the polymer. Other chemicals, such 

as antioxidants, acid scavengers, preservatives, wetting 
agents, defoamers, or colorants, may be added to control or 
eliminate some of the less desirable characteristics of certain 
adhesive formulations. 


Strength and Durability 


Table 10-2 loosely classifies adhesives according to how 
much load they can bear and how long they can sustain the 
load without deforming when exposed to water, heat, or 
other environmental conditions. In building construction, 
adhesives that contribute strength and stiffness to the struc- 
ture during its life are considered structural. These adhesives 
generally are stronger and stiffer than the wood that they 


bond. Structural bonds are critical because bond failure 
could result in serious damage to the structure or its oc- 
cupants. Examples of structural applications include glued- 
laminated beams, prefabricated I-joists, and stressed-skin 
panels. Structural adhesives that maintain their strength and 
rigidity under the most severe cyclic water saturation and 
drying are considered fully exterior adhesives. Adhesives 
that degrade faster than wood under severe conditions, par- 
ticularly water exposure, are considered interior adhesives. 
Between exterior and interior adhesives are the intermediate 
adhesives, which maintain strength and rigidity in short- 
term water soaking but deteriorate faster than wood during 
long-term exposure to water and heat. Unfortunately, adhe- 
sives that are the strongest, most rigid, and most resistant 
to deterioration in service are typically the least tolerant of 
wide variations in wood surface condition, wood moisture 
content, and assembly conditions, including pressures, tem- 
peratures, and curing conditions. 


Semistructural adhesives impart strength and stiffness to an 
adhesive-bonded assembly, and in some instances, they may 
be as strong and rigid as wood. However, semistructural ad- 
hesives generally do not withstand long-term static loading 
without deformation. They are capable of short-term ex- 
posure to water although some do not withstand long-term 
saturation, hence their limited exterior classification. An- 
other semistructural adhesive application is the nailed—glued 
assembly where failure of the bond would not cause serious 
loss of structural integrity because the load would be carried 
by mechanical fasteners. 


Nonstructural adhesives typically support the dead weight 
of the material being bonded and can equal the strength and 
rigidity of wood in the dry condition. On exposure to water 
or high humidity, most nonstructural adhesives continue to 
support the weight of the material sufficiently, though a few 
lose the ability to transfer load. A major market for non- 
structural adhesives is furniture assembly. 


Elastomeric construction adhesives are categorized as non- 
structural but are normally used for field assembly of panel- 
ized floor and wall systems in the light-frame construction 
industry. These adhesive joints are much stiffer than me- 
chanically fastened joints, resulting in stiffer panels. In addi- 
tion to the adhesive, mechanical fasteners are used to carry 
the load in case of adhesive failure. 


Some adhesives listed in Table 10—2 could be easily 
included in more than one category because they can be 
formulated for a broad range of applications. Isocyanate and 
polyurethane adhesives are examples. Polymeric methylene 
diphenyl! diisocyanate, with a low molecular weight, devel- 
ops highly durable bonds in structural strandboard, even 
though strandboard products deteriorate from swelling and 
shrinkage stresses. One-part polyurethane adhesives have 
highly durable adhesive films, but as molecular weight 


10-9 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 10—2. Wood adhesives categorized according to their expected 
structural performance at various levels of environmental exposure”? 


Structural integrity Service environment 


Adhesive type 


Structural Fully exterior Phenol-formaldehyde 
(withstands long-term water Resorcinol-formaldehyde 
soaking and drying) Phenol-resorcinol-formaldehyde 

Emulsion polymer isocyanate 
Melamine-formaldehyde 
Isocyanate 
Limited exterior Melamine-urea-formaldehyde 
(withstands short-term water Epoxy 
soaking) Polyurethane 
Interior Urea-formaldehyde 
(withstands short-term high Casein 
humidity) 
Semistructural Limited exterior Cross-linked poly(vinyl acetate) 
Cross-linked soybean 
Nonstructural Interior Poly(vinyl acetate) 
Animal 


Elastomeric construction 
Elastomeric contact 
Hot-melt 

Starch 


“Assignment of an adhesive type to only one structural/service environment category does not 
exclude certain adhesive formulations from falling into the next higher or lower category. 
>Priming wood surfaces with hydroxymethylated resorcinol coupling agent improves resistance 
to delamination of epoxy, isocyanate, emulsion polymer isocyanate, melamine and urea, 
phenolic, and resorcinolic adhesives in exterior service environment, particularly bonds to treated 


lumber. 


increases, adhesion to porous wood generally decreases and 
bonds become increasingly susceptible to deterioration from 
swelling and shrinkage stresses. Soybean-based adhesives 
have limited wet strength on their own, but cross-linking 
agents can be added to increase water resistance. 


Selection 


Many factors need to be considered when selecting the best 
adhesive for a particular application. The adhesive must 

be applied, wet the surface, penetrate into the wood, cure, 
and maintain strength for sufficient time under different 
loads and environmental conditions. Table 10-3 describes 
the typical form, properties, preparation, and uses of many 
adhesive families, though considerable variation may occur 
within each family. A manufacturer and adhesive supplier 
should completely review the product, its intended service 
environment, and all production processes and equipment 
before choosing an appropriate adhesive. Whatever the ap- 
proach to adhesive selection might be, the following points 
are important. 


Strength—The amount of load the adhesive will be required 
to carry must be considered. 


Durability—The kind of environment the bond will be ex- 
posed to (liquid water, humidity, heat, cold, chemicals, light, 
loading level) and the length of exposure will determine 
durability. 


10-10 


Wetting—As discussed in the introduction, the chemistry of 
the surface and adhesive must be compatible. A waterborne 
adhesive on an oily surface is unlikely to spread out unless 
the adhesive contains surfactants, organic solvents, or other 
materials to help it spread and make molecular contact with 
the surface. 


Timing—Several timing factors must be considered. Pot 
life relates to the duration of time before the adhesive is ap- 
plied to the wood. Open time is the time between applying 
the adhesive and joining the pieces. Closed time refers to 
the time between joining the pieces and applying pressure. 
Clamp time is determined by the duration of set time until 
the finished piece can be unclamped. Increasing tempera- 
ture usually shortens set and cure time. Emulsion polymer 
isocyanates set very rapidly, which is an advantage in wood 
I-beam assemply. After hot or cold pressing, adhesives typi- 
cally need hours or weeks to completely cure. 


Consistency— The consistency, or viscosity, of the adhesive 
must be compatible with the application equipment, whether 
it be brush, spatula, extruder, curtain coater, spray, or pow- 
der metering device. In addition, the adhesive must be fluid 
enough to enter the void spaces in the wood but not so fluid 
that most of the adhesive is squeezed out of the bondline, 
causing a starved joint. 


Mixing—If water, a hardener, catalyst, filler, or extender 
must be mixed with a resin, appropriate equipment must be 
available. 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


Table 10-3. Working and strength properties of adhesives, with typical uses 


Type 


Form and color 


Preparation and application 


Strength properties 


Typical uses 


Natural origin 
Animal, protein 


Blood, protein 


Casein, protein 


Cross-linked 
soybean, 
protein 


Lignins and 
tannins 


Soybean, 
protein 


Synthetic origin 
Cross-linked 
poly(vinyl 
acetate) 
emulsion 


Elastomeric 
contact 


Solid and liquid; brown 
to white bondline 


Solid and partially dried 
whole blood; dark red to 
black bondline 


Powder with added 
chemicals; white to tan 
bondline 


Powder or dispersion 
with added chemicals; 
white to tan, similar color 
in bondline 


Powder or liquid; may be 
blended with phenolic 
adhesive; dark brown 
bondline 


Powder with added 
chemicals; white to tan, 
similar color in bondline 


Liquid, similar to 
poly(vinyl acetate) 
emulsions but includes 
copolymers capable of 
cross linking with a 
separate catalyst; white 
to tan with colorless 
bondline 

Viscous liquid, typically 
neoprene or styrene- 
butadine elastomers in 
organic solvent or water 
emulsion; tan to yellow 


Solid form added to water, 
soaked, and melted; adhesive 
kept warm during application; 
liquid form applied directly; 

both pressed at room temperature; 
bonding process must be adjusted 
for small changes in temperature 
Mixed with cold water, lime, 
caustic soda, and other chemicals; 
applied at room temperature; 
pressed either at room 
temperature or 120 °C (250 °F) 
and higher 

Dissolved in water under basic 
conditions; applied and pressed 

at room temperature 


Either dissolve the solid in water 
with other added chemicals or 
use a pre-dispersed soy, mix with 
cross linker prior to application; 
cured in hot press at 120 to 150 °C 
(250 to 300 °F) 

Blended with extender and filler 
by user; adhesive cured in hot- 
press 130 to 150 °C (266 to 

300 °F) similar to phenolic 
adhesive 

Mixed with cold water, lime, 
caustic soda, and other 
chemicals; applied and pressed at 
room temperatures, but more 
frequently hot pressed when 
blended with blood adhesive 


Liquid emulsion mixed with 
catalyst; cure at room 
temperature or at elevated 
temperature in hot press and 
radio-frequency press 


Liquid applied directly to both 
surfaces, partially dried after 
spreading and before pressing; 
roller-pressing at room 
temperature produces instant 
bonding 


High dry strength; low 
resistance to water and damp 
atmosphere 


High dry strength; moderate 
resistance to water and damp 
atmosphere and to 
microorganisms 


High dry strength; moderate 
resistance to water, damp 
atmospheres, and high 
temperatures; not suitable for 
exterior uses 


Good dry strength and decent 
resistance to water and damp 
atmospheres; good resistance to 
elevated temperatures 


Good dry strength; moderate to 
good wet strength; durability 
improved by blending with 
phenolic adhesive 


Moderate to low dry strength; 
moderate to low resistance to 
water and damp atmospheres; 
moderate resistance to 
intermediate temperatures 


High dry strength; improved 
resistance to warm 
temperatures and moisture, 
particularly long-term 
performance in moist 
environment 


Strength develops immediately 
upon pressing, increases slowly 
over a period of weeks; dry 
strengths much lower than 
those of conventional wood 
adhesives; low resistance to 
water and damp atmospheres; 
adhesive film readily yields 
under static load 


Assembly of furniture 
and stringed 
instruments; repairs of 
antique furniture 


Interior-type softwood 
plywood, sometimes 
in combination with 
soybean adhesive; 
mostly replaced by 
phenolic adhesive 
Mainly in interior 
doors, especially fire 
doors; used in 
laminated timbers 


Decorative plywood 
for interior use, 
laminated flooring, 
particleboard, and 
oriented strandboard 


Partial replacement 
for phenolic adhesive 
in composite and 
plywood panel 
products 

Decorative plywood 
for interior use; 
combinations with 
phenolics gives good 
moisture durability 


Interior and exterior 
doors; molding and 
architectural 
woodwork; cellulosic 
overlays 


On-the-job bonding of 
decorative tops to 
kitchen counters; 
factory lamination of 
wood, paper, metal, 
and plastic sheet 
materials 


10-11 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 10-3. Working and strength properties of adhesives, with typical uses—con. 


Type Form and color Preparation and application Strength properties Typical uses 
Elastomeric Putty-like consistency, Mastic extruded in bead to Strength develops slowly over Lumber to plywood or 
mastic synthetic or natural framing members by caulking several weeks; dry strength strandboard in floor 
(construction elastomers in organic gun or like pressure equipment; lower than conventional wood and wall systems; 
adhesive) solvent or latex nailing required to hold materials adhesives; resistant to water laminating gypsum 
emulsions; tan, yellow, in place during setting and and moist atmospheres; tolerant board and rigid foam 
gray service of outdoor assembly conditions; insulating; assembly 
gap-filling; nailing required to of panel system in 
ensure structural integrity manufactured homes 
Emulsion Liquid emulsion and Emulsion and hardener mixed by High dry and wet strength; very Laminated beams for 
polymer separate isocyanate user; reactive on mixing with resistant to water and damp interior and exterior 
isocyanate hardener; white with controllable pot-life and curing atmosphere; very resistant to use; lamination of 
hardener; colorless time; cured at room and elevated prolonged and repeated wetting plywood to steel 
bondline temperatures; radio-frequency and drying; adheres to metals _ metals and plastics; 
curable; high pressure required _ and plastics doors and 
architectural materials 
Epoxy Liquid resin and Resin and hardener mixed by High dry and wet strength to Laminating veneer 
hardener supplied as two __ user; reactive with limited wood, metal, glass, and plastic; and lumber in cold- 
parts; completely reactive, pot-life; cured at room or formulations for wood resist molded wood boat 
mainly solvent-free; clear elevated temperatures; only low water and damp atmospheres; _ hulls; assembly of 
to amber; colorless pressure required for bond delaminate with repeated wood components in 
bondline development wetting and drying; gap-filling aircraft; lamination of 


architectural railings 
and posts; repair of 
laminated wood 
beams and 
architectural building 
components; 
laminating sports 
equipment; general 
purpose home and 


shop 
Hot melt Solid blocks, pellets, Solid form melted for spreading; Develops strength quickly on Edge-banding of 
ribbons, rods, or films; bond formed on solidification; cooling; lower strength than panels; plastic 
solvent-free; white to requires special application conventional wood adhesives; lamination; patching; 
tan; near colorless equipment for controlling melt moderate resistance to moisture; film and paper 
bondline and flow gap-filling with minimal overlays; furniture 
penetration assembly; general 
purpose home and 
shop 
Isocyanate Liquid containing Adhesive applied directly by High dry and wet strength; very Flakeboards; 
monomers and oligomers spray; reactive with water; resistant to water and damp particleboard, strand- 
of methylene diphenyl requires high temperature and atmosphere; adheres to metals | wood products 
diisocyanate; light brown high pressure for best bond and plastics 
liquid and clear bondline development in flakeboards 
Melamine- and Powder with blended Dissolved in water; cured in hot High dry and wet strength; very Melamine—urea- 
melamine-urea- catalyst; may be blended _ press with platens at 120 to resistant to water and damp formaldehyde primary 
formaldehyde up to 40% with urea; 150 °C (250 to 300 °F) and atmospheres adhesive for durable 
white to tan; colorless lower internal temperatures; bonds in hardwood 
bondline particularly suited for fast curing plywood; end-jointing 
in high-frequency presses and edge-gluing of 


lumber; and scarf 
joining softwood 
plywood, ultra-low 
emitting form- 
aldehyde adhesive for 
particleboard and 
fiberboard 


10-12 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


Table 10-3. Working and strength properties of adhesives, with typical uses—con. 


Type Form and color Preparation and application Strength properties Typical uses 
Phenol- Liquid, powder, and dry _ Liquid blended with extenders High dry and wet strength; very Primary adhesive for 
formaldehyde film; dark red bondline —_and fillers by user; film inserted _ resistant to water and damp exterior softwood 
directly between laminates; liquid atmospheres; more resistant than plywood, flakeboard, 
or powder applied directly to wood to high temperatures and hardboard, and low 
flakes in composites; all chemical aging emission particleboard 
formulations cured in hot press at 
120 to 150 °C (250 to 300 °F) up 
to 200 °C (392 °F) in flakeboards 
Poly(vinyl Liquid ready to use; often Liquid applied directly; pressed High dry strength; low Furniture; flush doors; 
acetate) polymerized with other at room temperatures and in high- resistance to moisture and plastic laminates; 
emulsion polymers; white to tanto frequency press elevated temperatures; joints panelized floor and 
yellow; colorless bondline yield under continued stress wall systems in 
manufactured 
housing; general 
purpose in home and 
shop 
Polyurethane Low viscosity liquidto | Adhesive applied directly to one High dry and wet strength; General purpose home 
high viscosity mastic; surface, preferably to water- resistant to water and damp and shop; construction 
supplied as one-part or misted surface; reactive with atmosphere; limited resistance adhesive for panelized 
two-part systems; moisture on surface and in air; to prolonged and repeated floor and wall 
completely reactive; cures at room temperature; high wetting and drying; gap-filling systems; laminating 
color varies from clear pressure required, but mastic plywood to metal and 
to brown; colorless required only pressure from plastic sheet 
bondline nailing materials; specialty 
laminates; installation 
of gypsum board 
Resorcinol- Liquid resin and Liquid mixed with powdered or High dry and wet strength; very Primary adhesives for 
and phenol- powdered hardener liquid hardener; resorcinol resistant to moisture and damp laminated timbers and 
resorcinol- supplied as two parts; adhesives cure at room atmospheres; more resistant assembly joints that 
formaldehyde phenol may be temperatures; phenol-resorcinols than wood to high temperature must withstand severe 
copolymerized with cure at temperatures from 21 to and chemical aging service conditions 
resorcinol; dark red 66 °C (70 to 150 °F) 
bondline 
Urea- Powder and liquid forms; Powder mixed with water, High dry and wet strength; Hardwood plywood; 
formaldehyde may be blended with hardener, filler, and extender by moderately durable under damp furniture; medium 


melamine or other more 
durable resins; white to 

tan resin with colorless 

bondline 


user; some formulations cure at 
room temperatures, others require resistance to temperatures in 
hot pressing at about 120 °C 

(250 °F) for plywood and 210 °C 


atmospheres; moderate to low _ density fiberboard; 
particleboard; 
underlayment; flush 


doors; furniture cores 


excess of 50 °C (122 °F) 


(410 °F) for fiberboard and 
particleboard; curable with 


high-frequency heating 


Pressure—Pressure is applied to joints to ensure close con- 
tact between the parts. Typically, most wood adhesives do 
not fill gaps well and so require high pressure. Pressure also 
helps the adhesive to wet and penetrate the wood surface by 
forcing it into the void spaces of wood. However, too high a 
pressure, such that the adhesive largely squeezes out, should 
be avoided. 


Temperature—The adhesive should work under different 
temperature conditions. The temperature of the surround- 
ing environment can affect adhesive pot life, duration of 
open time, and curing. Phenol-formaldehyde, melamine- 
formaldehyde, urea-formaldehyde, and isocyanate adhesives 
must be cured at high temperatures and require expensive, 
heated presses. Some of these are cured within minutes in 


expensive, high-frequency, heated presses. Emulsion poly- 
mer isocyanates, poly(vinyl acetate), epoxy, polyurethanes, 
and resocinol-containing adhesives cure well at room tem- 
peratures. 


Moisture content—Many adhesives need low wood mois- 
ture content to penetrate the wood. However, isocyanates 
and polyurethanes are less sensitive and may even perform 
better at higher moisture contents. 


Color and finishing properties—In furniture and interior 
millwork where appearance is critical, adhesive color, abil- 
ity to absorb stains and finishes, and freedom from bleed- 
ing and staining are critical factors. Adhesives used in the 
furniture industry are usually formulated to produce a tan or 
colorless joint. 


10-13 


Ease and simplicity—One-part adhesives, such as 
poly(vinyl acetate), one-part polyurethane, hot-melt, and 
phenol-formaldehyde, are the simplest to use because there 
is no chance for error in weighing and mixing components. 
Waterborne adhesives are easy to clean up. Two- or multi- 
ple-part adhesives require careful measuring and mixing of 
components and often require special solvents for cleanup 
after bonding. High water resistance often means more dif- 
ficult cleanup when cured. 


Cost—Given that adhesives are more expensive than the 
wood, the cost of adhesive and cost of related application 
equipment and labor must all be considered. 


Safety and environment—Many adhesives cure by chemical 
reactions and therefore are hazardous in the uncured state. 
Even waterborne adhesives can have organic chemical com- 
ponents that evaporate, causing health concerns for workers 
and consumers. Frequently, adhesives are toxic to the skin 
or give off toxic fumes. Formaldehyde hardener for resor- 
cinol, phenol, melamine, and urea adhesives is a severe ir- 
ritant. Amine hardeners in some epoxy adhesives are strong 
skin sensitizers. Chemical sensitivity can be caused by 
repeated exposure to uncured adhesives. State and Federal 
regulations continue to require adhesives suppliers to reduce 
air emissions. In recent years, the cost of organic solvents 
and the cost of recovering volatiles to prevent air pollu- 

tion have increased. Substitute waterborne systems can be 
less expensive because of the low cost of the water solvent; 
however, raising of the wood grain, slower drying, and final 
product performance must be considered. 


Health and Safety 


Uncured adhesives can be harmful and require safety pre- 
cautions, while cured adhesives are usually safe for human 
contact. A notable exception is urea-formaldehyde adhesive, 
which can release low concentrations of formaldehyde gas 
from bonded wood products, especially under hot, moist 
conditions. Formaldehyde can react with proteins of the 
body to cause irritation and inflammation of membranes 

of eyes, nose, and throat, and may be a carcinogen. Driven 
by regulations mandating lower formaldehyde emissions, 
considerable research has led to new adhesive formulations 
with significantly reduced levels of formaldehyde emissions 
in both manufacturing operations and bonded wood prod- 
ucts. New standards in the United States and other countries 
have reduced the acceptable upper limit for formaldehyde 
emissions. Phenol(resorcinol)-formaldehyde adhesives, 
which are used to manufacture plywood, strandboard, and 
laminated beams, also contain formaldehyde. However, the 
highly durable phenol-formaldehyde, resorcinol-formalde- 
hyde, and phenol-resorcinol-formaldehyde polymers do not 
chemically break down in service; thus, no detectable form- 
aldehyde is released. Although not quite as durable in bond 
strength as the phenolics, melamine-formaldehyde polymers 
do not break down to yield formaldehyde. New ultra-low 
emitting formaldehyde (ULE F) adhesives are formulated 


10-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


to reduce formaldehyde emissions. Poly(vinyl acetate), iso- 
cyanate, and soy adhesives address the formaldehyde issue 
by being no added formaldehyde (NAF). Unless detailed 
knowledge of the safety of the adhesive is available, it 
should be assumed that uncured adhesives can be harmful at 
high concentrations or with chronic exposure. 


Diisocyanates are sensitizers that are capable of causing oc- 
cupational asthma. They also are highly reactive chemicals 
that polymerize rapidly on contact with strong alkali, miner- 
al acids, and water. Because polymeric methylene diphenyl 
diisocyanate (pMDI) adhesives develop strong and durable 
bonds to wood, they have gained acceptance in composite 
wood products. Any isocyanate is potentially hazardous if 
mishandled, but the low vapor pressure of pMDI adhesives 
coupled with adequate ventilation to remove airborne pMDI 
on dust particles permits manufacturing plants to operate 
safely. Emulsion polymerized isocyanates (EPI) and poly- 
urethanes also contain the reactive isocyanate group, and 

so chronic contact with these uncured adhesives should be 
avoided. Properly cured isocyanate adhesives are not con- 
sidered hazardous in bonded wood products. 


Thermoplastic adhesives are generally of low toxicity, but 
any added solvents may be toxic. Construction and contact 
adhesives contain organic solvents with low flash points. 
When used in small, unventilated spaces, the solvent can ac- 
cumulate in the air and cause an explosion if ignited. Some 
adhesive producers offer less flammable formulations based 
on chlorinated solvents. Solvents in these adhesives are gen- 
erally toxic, but harmful effects can be avoided by providing 
adequate ventilation and following the manufacturer’s safety 
instructions. 


Health and safety regulations require that toxic and hazard- 
ous chemicals have a visible label to warn of their dangers. 
Material safety data sheets (MSDS) or instructions are pro- 
vided with adhesive products to advise of proper handling 
procedures, protective gear and clothing, and procedures for 
dealing with spills and fire and to offer guidance for first-aid 
and professional treatment of injuries. The statements made 
in this book concerning the safety of adhesives and effects 
on the health of the user are general and not meant to be 
all-inclusive. The user should consult the MSDS and follow 
the manufacturer’s instructions and precautions before using 
any adhesive. 


Bonding Process 
Moisture Content Control 


After wood and adhesive selection, the next most important 
factor contributing to trouble-free service of adhesive bonds 
is control of wood moisture content before and during the 
bonding process. Moisture content strongly affects the final 
strength and durability of joints, development of surface 
checks in wood, and dimensional stability of the bonded 
assembly. Large changes in moisture content after bonding 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


8% average 
moisture content 


| >] SS 

| a 

anne 7 waa 
erage 


11% av 
moisture content 


Figure 10—5. Average equilibrium moisture content 
(EMC) for wood in building interiors in U.S. regions. 


will cause shrinking or swelling that can seriously weaken 
both wood and joint and can cause warping, twisting, and 
surface irregularities. Wood should not be bonded at high 
moisture content, particularly high-density wood that has a 
large coefficient of shrinkage, unless the in-service moisture 
content is also expected to be high. 


The moisture content of wood products should be targeted 
to the equilibrium moisture content (EMC) that the product 
will experience in service. The regional average EMC val- 
ues of wood in building interiors are shown in Figure 10-5. 
The average moisture content for most of the United States 
is 8%. Average moisture content increases to 11% along the 
Atlantic and Gulf coastal regions; in the arid southwest, the 
EMC is relatively low at 6%. The moisture content of wood 
outdoors averages near 12% and ranges from 7% to 14% 

in most of the United States. During winter in the northern 
states, heating of indoor air that is normally dry lowers 
wood EMC to 4% to 5% but can raise the moisture levels 
within the walls. Furniture manufactured in the southeast 

at 11% EMC, then sold or moved to northern states where 
EMC drops to 4%, may experience some splitting, delami- 
nation of joints, or other noticeable appearance defects. 
Manufacturers of bonded wood products must be aware of 
these regional and seasonal variations to condition the wood 
and bond it at moisture content levels consistent with re- 
gional service conditions. 


Wood should be dry enough so that even if moisture is 
added during bonding, the moisture content of the product 
is at about the level expected for the assembly in service. 

In lumber laminates, the proportion of glue to wood is so 
low that a waterborne adhesive adds only 1% to 2% to the 
total moisture content of the laminate. In particleboard or 
fiberboard, however, the water in the adhesive can be 3% 

to 7% of the wood weight. During hot pressing, some water 
evaporates when the board is removed from the press; to 
minimize deformation and prevent steam blisters or blows, 
the total moisture content of the assembly should not exceed 
10%. Lumber moisture content of 6% to 7%, assuming 1% 


to 2% will be added by aqueous adhesives, is satisfactory 
for cold pressing of furniture and interior millwork. Lumber 
laminated for exterior use should contain 10% to 12% mois- 
ture before bonding. Moisture content of 3% to 5% in ve- 
neer at the time of hot pressing is satisfactory for hardwood 
plywood intended for furniture and interior millwork and for 
softwood plywood intended for construction and industrial 
uses. 


Lumber that has been kiln dried to the approximate aver- 
age moisture content intended for bonding may nonetheless 
vary in moisture content level between boards and within 
individual boards. Large differences in moisture content 
between adjacent boards result in considerable stress on 

the common joint as the boards equalize toward a common 
moisture content. Best results are achieved when differences 
in moisture content are not greater than about 5% for lower 
density species and 2% for high-density species. 


Surface Preparation 


The section Surface Properties of Wood for Bonding covers 
the detailed relationships between surface condition and ad- 
hesive bond performance. Wood surfaces are best prepared 
for maximum adhesive wetting, flow, and penetration by 
removing all materials that might interfere with bond forma- 
tion to sound wood. Ideally, wood should be knife-planed 
within 24 h of adhesive spreading. However, other surfacing 
methods have been used successfully for certain types of 
bonded joints, including sawing for furniture and millwork, 
knife-cutting for veneer, and abrasive-planing for panels. All 
methods must produce smooth, flat, parallel surfaces, free 
from machining irregularities, such as burnishes, skips, and 
crushed, torn, and chipped grain. Properly planed flat sur- 
faces help ensure uniform adhesive spread rate. 


Spreading of Adhesive 


Regardless of method used for lamination, the purpose in 
spreading the adhesive is to distribute uniformly an ad- 
equate amount of adhesive over the bonding area, so that 
under pressure, the adhesive will flow into a uniformly thin 
layer. The amount of adhesive needed will depend on wood 
species, surface quality of wood, moisture content, type of 
adhesive, temperature and humidity of the air, assembly 
time, and application of adhesive to one or both surfaces. 
Adhesives can be spread by hand with brush, roller, or bead- 
extruder, but in manufacturing, adhesives are applied me- 
chanically, such as by roll-spreader, extruder, curtain-coater, 
or spray. Instead of applying a uniform film, extruders apply 
continuous, uniformly spaced beads of discreet diameter 
and flow rate (Fig. 10-6). Figure 10-7 shows the use of a 
pressurized extruder in the field to apply a single bead of 
elastomeric construction adhesive to joists for a plywood 
floor system. 


For composite manufacturing involving flakes, strands, par- 
ticles, or fibers, the adhesive is applied as a slow stream or 
as droplets using a spray nozzle or spinning disc, and then 


10-15 


* 


Figure 10—6. An extruder applies continuous and uni- 
formly sized and spaced beads of adhesive to veneer 
for laminating into laminated veneer lumber (LVL). 


Figure 10-7. A pressurized extruder applies a single 
bead of elastomeric construction adhesive to floor 
joists for assembly of a plywood floor system. 


distributed with a drum blender, kneader, or tube blender. 
These binder adhesives hold the product together by a se- 
ries of joints similar to spot welds rather than a continuous 
film. Microscopic analysis of droplet size and distribution 
illustrates adhesive distribution and its influence on board 
properties. 


Assembly and Pressing 


Adhesive viscosity is important during application, open 
time, closed time, and pressing. Sometimes keeping 

the viscosity correct throughout this process requires 
balancing a variety of factors. The relationship between ad- 


10-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


hesive viscosity and bonding pressure is illustrated in Figure 
10-8. Viscosity strongly affects wetting, flow, penetration, 
and, particularly, transfer of adhesive to opposing wood 
surfaces when pressure is applied to the assembly. Adhesive 
viscosity depends upon type of adhesive, type and quantity 
of solvent, age of adhesive mixture, and temperature. After 
application, adhesive viscosity will change depending on 
the amount of adhesive spread; species, moisture content, 
and temperature of wood; temperature and humidity of sur- 
rounding air; and evaporation and absorption of solvent. 
When the adhesive-covered surfaces remain open before 
assembly (open assembly), the adhesive thickens by los- 

ing solvent to the air by evaporation and to the wood by 
absorption. Bringing the adhesive-covered surfaces together 
(closed assembly) stops evaporation but not absorption. 
Cold-setting waterborne wood adhesives lose water by ab- 
sorption and evaporation, so that viscosity steadily increases 
until the adhesives eventually set. Thermosetting waterborne 
adhesives also dry out, but they continue to flow to some 
extent in the presence of heat, eventually hardening by 
chemical reaction. 


Pressure during bond assembly serves several useful 
purposes by 


e forcing trapped air from the joint, 


e bringing adhesive into molecular contact with the wood 
surfaces, 


e forcing adhesive to penetrate into the wood structure for 
more effective surface adhesion and mechanical inter- 
locking, 


@ squeezing the adhesive into a thin film, and 


e holding the assembly in position while the adhesive 
cures. 


If pressure is too high, however, the adhesive can be forced 
so deeply into (or in some cases out of) the wood that there 
is insufficient adhesive to fill the bondline. These conditions 
of overpenetration and excess squeeze-out result in a starved 
joint and produce inferior bond strength (Fig. 10-8). Over- 
penetration is especially common in low-density woods, 
whereas excess squeeze-out is common in high-density 
woods. The strongest joints are made with moderately high 
clamping pressure for the wood density, using adhesive with 
viscosity high enough to avoid overpenetration and excess 
squeeze-out at that pressure. 


Low pressures near 0.7 MPa (100 lb in) are suitable for 
low-density wood because the surfaces easily conform to 
each other, thus ensuring intimate contact between adhesive 
and wood. High pressures up to 1.7 MPa (247 lb in-2) are 
required for the highest density woods, which are difficult 
to compress. Small areas of flat, well-planed surfaces can be 
bonded satisfactorily at lower pressures. 


Because adhesives become thicker after they are applied 
to the wood and some start to cure immediately, assembly 
times can be very important. Some adhesives require time 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


aan { 
ERRRSALATALL 
Hyyy POPPERS 
TE PHA 


EEL ERT 


fi! /! Optimum |/ HY 
1} HH bonding HALT 


Pressure 


Poor adhesive 
transfer and 
thick joints 


Adhesive consistency 


Figure 10-8. Relationship between adhesive consis- 
tency and bonding pressure for affect on bond forma- 
tion using thermosetting adhesive. 


before pressing to allow solvents to evaporate or adsorb into 
the wood, so that the adhesive is thick enough to avoid 


overpenetration when pressure is applied. On the other hand, 


adhesives that dry or cure too much before pressing do not 
transfer, or wet the opposite surface, resulting in thick, weak 
bondlines. 


Bonded material should be kept under pressure until the 
adhesive is strong enough to resist any forces that may 
cause parts to shift or open gaps in the bondline. When cold- 
pressing lumber under normal conditions, this stage can be 
reached in as little as 15 min or as long as 24 h, depending 
on adhesive temperature and curing characteristics and the 
absorptive characteristics of the wood. During hot pressing, 
the time under pressure varies with temperature of platens, 
thickness of the assembly and species of wood, and adhe- 
sive formulation. Typical hot-pressing times are 2 to 15 min, 
and up to 30 min for very thick laminates. High-frequency 
heating can reduce the time under pressure to less than 

3 min. High-power radio frequency energy can travel 
through wood but is strongly absorbed by the water in 
adhesives, causing selective heating of the adhesive. High- 
frequency curing is commonly used for bonding lumber; 
forming end- and edge-grain joints; patching, scarfing, and 
fingerjointing plywood; and manufacturing various panel 
products. With high frequency, press times can be shorter 
than 30 s, as with parquet production using 4- by 10- by 
2-mm plies. Careful control of power and press time is es- 
sential to prevent arcing, or to control the more common 
problem of steam pressure that could blow apart the product. 


With the stiff structural adhesives (phenol-, resorcinol-, 
melamine-formaldehyde), the strongest bonds generally 


have bondlines between 0.08 and 0.15 mm (1/32 and 

1/16 in.) thick. Thinner bondlines do not effectively transfer 
stresses, particularly stresses from moisture-induced dimen- 
sional changes. As these bondlines become thicker, they be- 
come weaker and fracture more easily. These adhesives also 
contain solvents, which cause the adhesive to shrink upon 
curing and even leave voids. Thick bondlines result from 
inadequate pressure or incorrect adhesive consistency. When 
rough, warped, or poorly mated surfaces are joined, pressure 
will be uneven along the bondline. As a result, the adhesive 
flow from the areas of very high pressure to those of little 

to no pressure will result in very thick bondlines. Both the 
starved and thick areas of the bondline lead to weak bonds. 


For composites, the adhesive must have enough strength to 
withstand the steam pressure inside the panel as the applied 
press pressure is released. If the adhesive is not sufficiently 
strong, the internal steam pressure will cause a large delami- 
nation (blow) within the product. As the size of the compos- 
ite increases, there is less relative area for steam escape and 
the chance of delamination increases. Dry wood, high solids 
adhesives, less adhesive with better distribution, and faster 
curing adhesives can decrease the problem of delamination. 


Post-Cure Conditioning 


In the process of bonding edge-grain joints, the wood in the 
joint absorbs moisture from the adhesive, then swells. If the 
bonded assembly is surfaced before this excess moisture is 
evaporated or absorbed uniformly, more wood is removed 
along the swollen joint than elsewhere. Later, when the 
added moisture evaporates, the wood in the joint shrinks 
beneath the surface. These sunken bondlines become very 
conspicuous under a high-gloss finish. This is particularly 
important when using adhesives containing large amounts 
of water. Moisture can be redistributed by conditioning the 
bonded assembly for 24 h at 70 °C (158 °F), for 4 days at 
50 °C (122 °F), or at least 7 days at room temperature be- 
fore surfacing. In each case, the relative humidity must be 
adjusted to prevent drying the wood below the target mois- 
ture content. 


Conditioning to the moisture content of service is especially 
important for plywood, veneers, and other composites made 
of thin layers. During room-temperature bonding, water 
often needs to be removed, which can be done by control- 
ling humidity on a time schedule. If room-temperature- 
bonded products are dried too much, warping, checking, 
and debonding increase markedly. Softwood plywood is 
often very dry after hot pressing, which can be corrected by 
spraying the hot panels and stacking them tightly to allow 
the moisture to diffuse uniformly. This process also restores 
some of the panel thickness lost by compression during 

hot pressing and apparently minimizes warping in service. 
Many composite panels need time after pressing for the ad- 
hesive to cure completely and for the moisture to equilibrate 
throughout the panel. 


10-17 


Figure 10-9. Edge-grain joints: A, plain; B, tongue- 
and-groove. 


S 
TS 
‘e 


Figure 10-10. End-grain joints: A, butt; B, plain 
scarf; C, vertical structural fingerjoint; D, horizontal 
structural fingerjoint; E, nonstructural fingerjoint. 


Bonded Joints 


Edge-Grain Joints 


Edge-grain joints (Fig. 10—-9A) can be almost as strong as 
the wood in shear parallel to the grain, tension across 

the grain, and cleavage. The tongue-and-groove joint 

(Fig. 10-9B) and other shaped edge-grain joints have a 
theoretical strength advantage because of greater surface 
area than the straight, edge-grain joints, but they do not 
produce higher strength. The theoretical advantage is lost, 
wholly or partly, because the shaped sides of the two mating 
surfaces cannot be machined precisely enough to produce 
the perfect fit that will distribute pressure uniformly over 
the entire joint area. Because of poor contact, the effective 


10-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


bonding area and strength can actually be less in a shaped 
joint than on a flat surface. Tongue-and-groove and other 
shaped joints have the advantage that the parts can be quick- 
ly aligned in clamps or presses. A shallow-cut tongue-and- 
groove is just as useful in this respect as a deeper cut, and 
less wood is wasted. 


End-Grain Joints 


It is practically impossible to make end-grain butt joints 
(Fig. 10—10A) strong enough to meet the requirements of 
ordinary service with conventional bonding techniques. 
Even with special techniques, butt joints reach only about 
25% of the tensile strength of the wood parallel-to-grain. To 
approximate the tensile strength of clear solid wood, a scarf 
joint or fingerjoint (Fig. 10—10B-—E) should have a surface 
area at least 10 times greater than the cross-sectional area of 
the piece, because wood is approximately 10 times stronger 
in tension than in shear. Joints cut with a slope of 1 in 12 or 
flatter (12 times the cross-sectional area) produce the high- 
est strength. In plywood scarf and finger joints, a slope of 

1 in 8 (8 times the cross-sectional area) is typical for struc- 
tural products. For nonstructural, low-strength joints, these 
requirements are unnecessary. 


When fingerjoints are cut with a high slope, such as | in 12, 
the tip thickness must be no greater than 0.8 mm (1/32 in.). 
A thickness of 0.4 to 0.8 mm (1/64 to 1/32 in.) is about the 
practical minimum for machined tips. Sharper tips are possi- 
ble using dies that are forced into the end grain of the board. 


Fingerjoints can be cut with the profile showing either on 
the wide face (vertical joint) (Fig. 10-10C) or on the edge 
(horizontal joint) (Fig. 10—-10E). Vertical joints have greater 
area for designing shapes of fingers but require a longer cut- 
ting head with more knives. Vertical joints also cure faster 
than horizontal joints in high-frequency heating. A nonstruc- 
tural fingerjoint, with fingers much shorter than in the two 
structural fingerjoints, is shown in Figure 10—10E. 


A well-manufactured scarf, finger, or lap joint in end grain 
can have up to 90% of the tensile strength of clear wood and 
exhibit behavior much like that of clear wood. However, the 
cycles-to-failure for a well-manufactured end joint are often 
lower than for clear wood. 


End-to-Edge-Grain Joints 


It is difficult to design a plain end-to-edge-grain joint 

(Fig. 10—-11A) capable of carrying appreciable loading. As a 
result, it is necessary to design these joints with interlocking 
surfaces so that edge grain of the interlocking piece bonds 
to the edge grain of the adjoining piece. Increasing the joint 
surface area also helps by providing more bondline to trans- 
fer load. Some examples of strong connections are dowels, 
mortise and tenons, and rabbets (Fig. 10-11). Because wood 
swells so much more across the grain than along the grain, 
moisture changes in these joints produce large internal 
stresses. All end-to-edge-grain joints should be protected 
from changes in moisture content in service. 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


SS 


E 


Figure 10-11. End-to-edge-grain joints: A, plain; B, 
miter; C, dowel; D, mortise and tenon; E, dado tongue 
and rabbet; F, slip or lock corner; G, dovetail; H, 
blocked; I, tongue-and-groove. 


Construction Joints 


Elastomeric construction adhesives are commonly used 

in the light-frame construction industry for field assembly 
of panelized floor and wall systems. Structural panels are 
bonded to floor joists and wall studs with mastic adhesives 
that have the unique capability of bridging gaps up to 

6.5 mm (1/4 in.) between rough and poorly fitting surfaces 
(Fig. 10-12). Without any premixing, the adhesive is extrud- 
ed in a bead along framing members with a hand-held caulk- 
ing gun or a pressurized dispenser similar to that shown in 
Figure 10—7. Nails or screws provide the only pressure for 
bonding, and they hold materials in position while the adhe- 
sive sets. Elastomerics are also uniquely tolerant of the tem- 
perature and moisture content variations at field construction 
sites. Although they do not deliver the strength and durabil- 
ity of conventional structural adhesives, elastomerics are 
strong and flexible enough to give long-term performance 
under most conditions of installation and service. 


Construction adhesives enable a nailed or screwed floor 
system to act to some degree as a composite assembly with 
increased stiffness. Greater stiffness permits joists to be 
longer and spaced more widely, with one layer of plywood 


Figure 10-12. Gap-filling construction adhesive in 
field-assembled plywood floor system. 


subflooring replacing two. Floors are less bouncy with fewer 
squeaks and nail pops or screw pulls. However, structural 
design of the composite assembly is based only on the in- 
creased stiffness of nailed or screwed panel and framing ma- 
terials. The strength contributed by the adhesive cannot be 
factored into the engineering design but provides increased 
value to the homeowner. 


Testing and Performance 


Testing is necessary to ensure that adhesively bonded ma- 
terials hold together within a given service environment for 
the life of the structure. Many methods are available to test 
bonding performance, particularly for bonded assemblies. 
Generally, these testing methods attempt to predict how 
bonded joints are likely to perform in a specific loading 
mode (shear, tensile, creep) in an assembly at specific 
temperature and moisture conditions for a specific time. 


Most performance tests are short term. They are based on 
chemical, mechanical, and rheological laboratory tests of 
adhesive polymers, adhesives, and bonds. Intermediate-term 
tests of products that are conducted in pilot operations and 
field experiments are integrated with short-term laboratory 
tests in an effort to extrapolate these data into long-term per- 
formance. Long-term tests of bonded assemblies under ac- 
tual environmental exposures are conducted, but this infor- 
mation may not be available for 10 to 30 years. Therefore, 
short-term tests are extensively used to predict long-term 
performance. As we learn the relationships between chemi- 
cal structure and mechanical performance, and as companies 
are under continued pressure to launch new products, the 
reliance on short-term testing is increasing. 


Analytical, Chemical, and Mechanical Testing 
of Polymers 


Although many methods of characterizing adhesives are 
available, this section only briefly mentions some of the 
most important and common methods. 


10-19 


> 


Reo +- Adhesive 


Figure 10—13. Failure modes of adhesive bonds. 


Cleavage 


Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and other 
spectroscopic techniques help characterize the molecular 
structures of adhesive polymers. Molecular size distribution 
is commonly measured by gel permeation chromatogra- 
phy (GPC), also known as size exclusion chromatography 
(SEC). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and gel 
times provide information on rates of chemical curing reac- 
tions. The rheological properties of curing and cured ad- 
hesives are characterized by dynamic mechanical analysis 
(DMA) and torsional-braid analysis (TBA). Sophisticated 
fracture mechanics techniques are used to measure tough- 
ness of adhesive bonds as they fail in a cleavage mode. 
High-magnification microscopes, including scanning elec- 
tron microscope, transmission electron microscope, and 
atomic force microscope, enable scientists to see wood and 
adhesive surfaces in minute detail before, during, and after 
fracture. Fluorescent and confocal microscopes provide ex- 
cellent information on adhesive distribution, adhesive pen- 
etration, and bond fracture surfaces because of their ability 
to distinguish between wood and adhesive. 


Although much can be learned from measurements of chem- 
ical, mechanical, and rheological properties of polymers and 
adhesives before their application to wood, no correlation 
between laboratory test and product performance is perfect. 
There is no substitute for testing performance in bonded 
assemblies prepared with specific adhesives and materials 
and tested under specific loading modes, environmental 
conditions, and duration of loading. When adhesives are 
formulated through a blend of scientific analysis and art of 
formulation, they are tested for strength and durability in 
the laboratory and field, usually by industry-accepted stan- 
dard test methods and product specifications. 


Mechanical Testing of Bonded Assemblies 


In an attempt to promote communication and understand- 
ing, there are many standardized test methods for evaluating 
and comparing the performance of different materials. Most 
test methods, specifications, and practices for adhesives and 
bonded assemblies are consensus standards. ASTM Inter- 
national publishes a book of standard methods each year 
(ASTM [Current edition]). Several trade associations have 


10-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


their own specifications and performance standards that ap- 
ply to their specific wood products. The Federal government 
also has specifications that are used by the General Services 
Administration to purchase products. In all test modes, 
specific materials, conditions of materials and testing, and 
testing procedures are completely specified to ensure repeat- 
ability and enable valid comparisons of data. 


Two basic failure modes, shear and cleavage, are commonly 
used to test adhesive bonds to determine strength levels 
during impact, flexure, fatigue, and creep under long-term 
stress (Fig. 10-13). The following describes the basic stress 
modes in adhesive-bonded joints: 


e Shear, resulting from forces applied parallel to the 
bondline, either in compression or tension 


e Cleavage, resulting from forces applied perpendicu- 
lar to the bondline. These forces may be applied by a 
wedge or other crack-opening device, by pulling on a 
double cantilever beam, or by pulling two faces apart, 
such as in a section of particleboard. Tensile loads often 
result in cleavage failures. 


As the names imply, impact, fatigue, and creep are tests that 
pertain to the rate at which loads are applied. Standard test- 
ing is done so that load continues to increase until failure, 
typically occurring between | and 5 min. Impact loads are 
sudden; for example, hitting a specimen with a swinging 
arm. Fatigue is the loss in strength from repeated loading 
and unloading to reflect bond deterioration from mechani- 
cal stresses. Sometimes, environmental stresses such as 
moisture and temperature are added as well. Creep loads are 
static loads applied for long times, from a few days to years, 
usually under extreme environmental conditions. 


The common measures used to estimate potential perfor- 
mance of bonded wood joints are strength, wood failure, and 
delamination. The highest performance level after exposure 
to severe environmental conditions is bond strength greater 
than wood strength, wood failure in more than 85% of the 
bonded area, and less than 5% or 8% delamination of the 
joint, for softwoods and hardwoods, respectively. These per- 
formance values reflect how wood, adhesive, and environ- 
mental exposure interact in response to loading. 


Exceeding the strength of wood is an essential perfor- 
mance criterion, often more important than measured shear 
strength. Percentage wood failure is the amount of wood 
that fails as a percentage of the area of the bonded joint. In 
general, strong and durable bonds give high wood failure 
and fracture deep into the grain of the wood. If wood failure 
is shallow with only wood fibers remaining attached to the 
adhesive film, bond strength and probably durability are 
lacking. Thus, a consistently high level of wood failure, 
above 75% in some standards and above 85% in others, 
means that the shear strength associated with these bonds is 
a good estimate of the load-carrying capability of the joint. 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


High levels of wood failure in a wet and hot environment 
suggest that the adhesive bond is as strong as the wood. If 
cycles of alternate wetting and drying were included with 
cycles of wet and hot conditions, then high wood failure 
would indicate even more durable bonds. High wood failure 
in shear tests of water-saturated bonds is also a strong indi- 
cator of bond durability. Wood failure is considered a valid 
measure of bond strength only to solid wood, not to recon- 
stituted products made of bonded wood particles. 


High shear strength and high wood failure are not sufficient 
indicators of bond durability. Delamination is an indicator 
of how well the bonded joint withstands severe swelling and 
shrinking stresses in the presence of high moisture and heat. 
Delamination is the separation between laminates because 
of adhesive failure, either in the adhesive or at the interface 
between adhesive and wood. If adhesives are able to resist 
delaminating forces, any wood failure will occur adjacent to 
the bondline, but not within the adhesive. Delamination of 
adhesives in structural laminated wood products exposed to 
the cyclic delamination test in ASTM D 2559 cannot exceed 
5% in softwoods and 8% in hardwoods. 


Bonds in structural assemblies are expected to exceed the 
strength of the wood, so in traditional design of joints, adhe- 
sive strength has been ignored. Traditionally, adhesives that 
are not as strong as the wood simply have not been used in 
structural applications because methods for determining al- 
lowable mechanical properties of adhesives for engineering 
design had not been developed. One such method now ex- 
ists—ASTM D 5574. 


Short- and Long-Term Performance 


In the short term, mechanical properties of wood, adhesives, 
and bonded products vary with specific environmental ex- 
posure. In most cases, all properties decrease as temperature 
and moisture levels increase. Strength and stiffness may 
return to their original levels if the yield points of the ma- 
terials are not exceeded while under load. Wood properties 
degrade faster under heat and moisture than do rigid thermo- 
setting adhesives like resorcinol-, phenol-, and melamine- 
formaldehyde, but this is not true for urea-formaldehyde. 
Therefore, evaluating short-term performance of products 
made with these adhesives is simply a matter of testing 
bonds at room temperature in dry and wet conditions. With 
increased moisture and/or heat, thermoplastic adhesives 
such as poly(vinyl acetate), elastomerics, hot-melts, pres- 
sure-sensitive adhesives, soy and casein tend to lose stiff- 
ness and strength more rapidly than does wood. These adhe- 
sives must be tested dry, dry after water soaking, and after 
prolonged exposure to high humidity environments. In ad- 
dition, some specifications require testing bonded structural 
and nonstructural products at elevated temperatures similar 
to what might be encountered in roofs or enclosed shipping 
containers. A short-term dead-load test at elevated 
temperatures may also be required. Adhesive specifica- 
tions for structural products such as laminated beams and 


plywood require high minimum strength and wood failure 
values after several different water exposure tests. Adhesive 
bonds in laminated beams must show very little delamina- 
tion after exposure to severe cyclic moisture content and 
temperature changes. 


Long-term deterioration of wood, adhesives, and bonded 
products is determined by the levels of temperature, mois- 
ture, and stress, and, in some instances, by concentrations 
of chemicals and presence of microorganisms. Long-term 
performance is the ability of a product to resist loss of a 
measured mechanical property over the time of exposure. 
A durable bonded product is one that shows no greater loss 
of properties during its life in service than does solid wood 
of the same species and quality. 


Many adhesives in bonded products have decades of 
documented performance in many environments. Thus, it 

is possible to predict with a high degree of certainty the 
long-term performance of similar products. Well-designed 
and well-made joints with any of the commonly used wood- 
working adhesives will retain their strength indefinitely if 
the moisture content of the wood does not exceed approxi- 
mately 15% and if the temperature remains within the range 
of human comfort. However, some adhesives deteriorate 
when exposed either intermittently or continuously to tem- 
peratures greater than 38 °C (100 °F) for long periods. Low 
temperatures seem to have no significant effect on strength 
of bonded joints. 


Products made with phenol-formaldehyde, resorcinol-form- 
aldehyde, and phenol-resorcinol-formaldehyde adhesives 
have proven to be more durable than wood when exposed to 
warm and humid environments, water, alternate wetting and 
drying, and even temperatures high enough to char wood. 
These adhesives are adequate for use in products that are 
exposed to the weather indefinitely (Fig. 10-14). 


Well-made products with melamine-, melamine-urea-, and 
urea-formaldehyde resin adhesives have proven to be less 
durable than wood. Melamine-formaldehyde is only slightly 
less durable than phenol-formaldehyde or resorcinol- 
formaldehyde and is considered acceptable for structural 
products. Although considered less durable, melamine- 
urea-formaldehyde is also accepted in structural products 

at a melamine:urea ratio of 60:40. Urea-formaldehyde 

resin is susceptible to deterioration by heat and moisture 
(Fig. 10-14). 


Products bonded with poly(vinyl acetate) and protein-based 
adhesives will not withstand prolonged exposure to water 
or repeated high-low moisture content cycling in bonds of 
high-density woods. However, if properly formulated, these 
adhesives are durable in a normal interior environment. The 
use of poly(vinyl acetate) adhesives is prohibited for some 
structural applications. 


Some isocyanate, epoxy, polyurethane, emulsion polymer 
isocyanates, and cross-linked poly(vinyl acetate) adhesives 


10-21 


120 


100 od Resorcino|l Phenol Phenol-resorcino} 


Percentage of original strength 


Aging time (years) 


Figure 10-14. Relative rates of deterioration of 
bond strength of small specimens exposed di- 
rectly to weather. 


are durable enough to use on lower density species even 
under exterior conditions, but for most of these adhesives, 
exterior exposure must be limited. Some elastomer-based 
adhesives may be durable enough for limited exposure to 
moisture with lower density species in nonstructural appli- 
cations or in structural applications when used in conjunc- 
tion with approved nailing schedules. Polyurethane adhe- 
sives that chemically cure and remain flexible are among the 
most durable construction adhesives. 


New adhesives do not have a history of long-term perfor- 
mance in service environments, so accelerated laboratory 
exposures that include cycles of heat, moisture, and stress 
are used to estimate long-term performance. However, labo- 
ratory exposures cannot duplicate the actual conditions of a 
service environment. Estimates of long-term performance 
can be obtained by exposing specimens outdoors for up to 
30 years. Outdoor exposures may be intensified by facing 
specimens south at an angle perpendicular to the noonday 
sun and by establishing exposure sites in regions with the 
most extreme service environments, for example, southern 
coastal and arid southwestern regions. Only four long-term 
laboratory aging methods have been standardized, and none 
specifies minimum performance levels because the bonded 
product is the item that must meet code standards. There- 
fore, performance of any new adhesive or bonded product 
must be compared with performance of established adhe- 
sives or products tested in the same laboratory exposure. 


Product Quality Assurance 


After the short- and long-term performance of a product has 
been established, maintenance of the manufacturing process 
to ensure that the product will be made and perform at that 
level is the major concern of a quality-assurance program, 
which consists of three parts: 


1. Establishing limits on bonding process factors that will 
ensure acceptable joints and product 


10-22 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


2. Monitoring production processes and bond quality in 
joints and product 


3. Detecting unacceptable joints and product, determining 
the cause, and correcting the problem 


The structural panel, laminated-beam, particleboard, mill- 
work, and other industrial trade associations have estab- 
lished quality-assurance programs that effectively monitor 
the joint and product performance at the time of manu- 
facture for compliance with voluntary product standards. 
Product performance is usually evaluated immediately after 
manufacture by subjecting specimens from the product to a 
series of swell—shrink cycles. The treatments are more rigor- 
ous for products intended for exterior exposure. For exam- 
ple, exterior softwood plywood is subjected to two boil—dry 
cycles, while interior plywood is subjected to a single soak— 
dry cycle at room temperature. After exposure, specimens 
are evaluated for delamination, percentage wood failure, or 
both. Test results are compared with the minimum require- 
ment in the trade association’s standards. Lengthy experi- 
ence and correlations between exterior performance and 
accelerated laboratory tests have shown that products with 
at least the minimum values will probably perform satisfac- 
torily in service. If the product meets the requirement, it is 
certified by the association as meeting the standard for satis- 
factory performance. 


Standards 


AITC. [Current edition]. Inspection manual for structural 
glued laminated timber, AITC 200. Englewood, CO: Ameri- 
can Institute of Timber Construction. 


ANSI/AITC. [Current edition]. American national standard 
for wood products-structural glued laminated timber, ANSI/ 
AITC A190.1. Englewood, CO: American Institute of Tim- 
ber Construction. 


APA. [Current edition]. Performance standards and poli- 
cies for structural-use panels, APA PRP—108. Tacoma, WA: 
APA-The Engineered Wood Association. 


APA. [Current edition]. U.S. product standard PS1-07 for 
construction and industrial plywood with typical APA 
trademarks. Tacoma, WA: APA—The Engineered Wood 
Association. 


ASTM. [Current edition]. Annual book of ASTM standards, 
Vol. 15.06 Adhesives. West Conshohocken, PA: American 
Society for Testing and Materials. Many of the standards 
are related to wood bonding for specific types of 
applications. 


CPA. [Current edition.] Particleboard, ANSI A208.1. Lees- 
burg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. [Current edition]. Medium density fiberboard. ANSI 
A208.2. Leesburg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


Chapter 10 Adhesives with Wood Materials: Bond Formation and Performance 


Hardwood Plywood & Veneer Association. [Current edi- 
tion]. American national standard for hardwood and decora- 
tive plywood, ANSI/HPVA HP-1. Reston, VA. 


References 


Blomquist, R.F.; Christiansen, A.W.; Gillespie, R.H.; My- 
ers, G.E., eds. 1984. Adhesive bonding of wood and other 
structural materials. Clark C. Heritage memorial series on 
wood, Vol. 3. Educational modules for material science and 
engineering (EMMSE). University Park, PA: Pennsylvania 
State University. 436 p. 


Blomquist, R.F.; Vick, C.B. 1977. Adhesives for building 
construction. In: Skeist, I., ed. Handbook of adhesives, 
2nd ed. New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. 


Bryant, B.S. 1977. Wood adhesion. In: Skeist, I., ed. Hand- 
book of adhesives, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Company. 25 p. 


Caster, R.W. 1980. Correlation between exterior exposure 
and automatic boil test results. In: John, W.E.; Gillespie, 
R.H., eds. Proceedings of a symposium, Wood adhesives— 
research, application, needs; 1980 September 23—25; Madi- 
son, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Forest Products Laboratory. 


Christiansen, A.W. 1990. How overdrying wood reduces 
its bonding to phenol-formaldehyde adhesives: a critical 
review of the literature. Part I. Physical responses. Wood 
Fiber Science. 22(4): 441-459. 


Christiansen, A.W. 1991. How overdrying wood reduces 
its bonding to phenol-formaldehyde adhesives: a critical 
review of the literature. Part II. Chemical reactions. Wood 
Fiber Science. 23(1): 69-84. 


Collett, B.M. 1972. A review of surface and interfacial 
adhesion in wood science and related fields. Wood Science 
Technology. 6(1): 1-42. 


Dunky, M. 2003. Adhesives in the wood industry. In: Pizzi, 
A.; Mittal, K.L., eds. Handbook of adhesive technology, 
2nd ed. 887-956. 


Dunky, M.; Pizzi, A. 2003. Wood adhesives. In: Dillard, 
D.A.; Pocius, A.V., eds. Adhesion science and engineer- 
ing, Vol. 2: Issue surfaces, chemistry and applications. 
1039-1103. 


Frihart, C.R. 2005. Wood adhesion and adhesives. In: Row- 
ell, R.M., ed. Handbook of wood chemistry and wood com- 
posites. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis. 215-278. 


Gillespie, R.H. 1965. Accelerated aging of adhesives in ply- 
wood-type joints. Forest Products Journal. 15(9): 369-378. 


Gillespie, R.H. 1981. Wood composites. In: Oliver, J.F., ed. 
Adhesion in cellulose and wood-based composites. New 
York: Plenum Press. 167-189. 


Gillespie, R.H.; River, B.H. 1975. Durability of adhesives 
in plywood: dry-heat effects by rate-process analysis. Forest 
Products Journal. 25(7): 26-32. 


Gillespie, R.H.; River, B.H. 1976. Durability of adhesives in 
plywood. Forest Products Journal. 26(10): 21-25. 


Gillespie, R.H.; Countryman, D.; Blomquist, R.F. 1978. Ad- 
hesives in building construction. Agric. Handb. 516. Wash- 
ington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
165 p. 


Hoyle, R.J. 1976. Designing wood structures bonded 
with elastomeric adhesives. Forest Products Journal. 
26(3): 28-34. 


Jarvi, R.A. 1967. Exterior glues for plywood. Forest Prod- 
ucts Journal. 17(1): 37-42. 


Jokerst, R.W. 1981. Finger-jointed wood products. Res. Pap. 
FPL-RP-382. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 24 p. 


Lambuth, A.L. 1977. Bonding tropical hardwoods with phe- 
nolic adhesives. In: Proceedings, IUFRO meeting on pro- 
cessing of tropical hardwoods. 1977 October 2—9; Merida, 
Venezuela: Laboratorio Nacional de Productos Forestales. 


Marra, A.A. 1980. Applications of wood bonding. In: R.F. 
Bloomquist, A.W. Christiansen, R.H. Gillespie, and G.E. 
Myers, eds. Adhesive bonding of wood and other structural 
materials, Chapter IX. EMMSE Project, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA. 365-418. 


Marra, A.A. 1992. Technology of wood bonding-principles 
in practice. New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold. 454 p. 


McGee, W.D.; Hoyle, R.J. 1974. Design method for elas- 
tomeric adhesive bonded wood joist-deck systems. Wood 
Fiber Science. 6(2): 144-155. 


Miller, R.S. 1990. Adhesives for building construction. In: 
Skeist, I., ed. Handbook of adhesives, 3rd ed. New York, 
NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. 


Murmanis, L.; River, B.H.; Stewart, H.A. 1986. Surface and 
subsurface characteristics related to abrasive-planing condi- 
tions. Wood Fiber Science. 18(1): 107-117. 


Pizzi, A., ed. 1983. Wood adhesives chemistry and technol- 
ogy. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc. 364 p. Vol. 1. 


Pizzi, A., ed. 1989. Wood adhesives chemistry and technol- 
ogy. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc. 416 p. Vol. 2. 


Pizzi, A. 1994. Advanced wood adhesives technology. New 
York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc. 304 p. 


Pizzi, A.; Mittal, K.L. 2003. Handbook of adhesive technol- 
ogy. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc. 672 p. 


River, B.H. 1973. Mastic construction adhesives in fire 
exposure. Res. Pap. FPL-RP—198. Madison, WI: U.S. 


10-23 


Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 16 p. 


River, B.H. 1981. Behavior of construction adhesives under 
long-term load. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-400. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 16 p. 


River, B.H. 1984. Accelerated, real-time aging for 4 con- 
struction adhesives. Adhesives Age. (2): 16-21. 


River, B.H. 1994. Fracture of adhesive-bonded wood joints. 
In: Pizzi, A; Mittal, K.L., eds. Handbook of adhesive 
technology. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc. 27 p. 
Chapter 9. 


River, B.H.; Okkonen, E.A. 1991. Delamination of 
edge-glued wood panels—moisture effects. Res. Note 
FPL—RN-0259. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 11 p. 


River, B.H.; Gillespie, R.H.; Vick, C.B. 1991. Wood as an 
adherend. In: Minford, J.D., ed. Treatise on adhesion and 
adhesives. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc. 230 p. 
Vol. 7. 


Selbo, M.L. 1975. Adhesive bonding of wood. Tech. Bull. 
1512. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service. 129 p. 


Sellers, T., Jr. 1985. Plywood and adhesive technology. 
New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc. 661 p. 


Skeist, I., ed. 1977. Handbook of adhesives. 2nd ed. 
New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold. 921 p. 


Skeist, I., ed. 1990. Handbook of adhesives. 3rd ed. 
New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold. 779 p. 


Vick, C.B. 1971. Elastomeric adhesives for field-gluing 
plywood floors. Forest Products Journal. 21(8): 3442. 


Vick, C.B. 1994. Phenolic adhesive bonds to aspen veneers 
treated with amino-resin fire retardants. Forest Products 
Journal. 44(1): 33-40. 


Vick, C.B. 1995. Coupling agent improves durability of 
PRF bonds to CCA-treated Southern Pine. Forest Products 
Journal. 45(3): 78-84. 


Vick, C.B. 1996. Hydroxymethylated resorcinol coupling 
agent for enhanced adhesion of epoxy and other thermoset- 
ting adhesives to wood. In: Christiansen, A.W.; Conner, 
A.H., eds. Wood adhesives 1995. Proceedings of a sympo- 
sium; 1995 June 29-30; Portland, OR. Proc. 7296. Madison, 
WI: Forest Products Society. 


Vick, C.B.; Rowell, R.M. 1990. Adhesive bonding of acety- 
lated wood. International Journal of Adhesion and Adhe- 
sives. 10(4): 263-272. 


10-24 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Vick, C.B.; DeGroot, R.C.; Youngquist, J. 1990. Compat- 
ibility of nonacidic waterborne preservatives with 
phenol-formaldehyde adhesive. Forest Products Journal. 
40(2): 16-22. 


CHAPTER 11 
Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Panel Products, Glued-Laminated Timber, Structural 
Composite Lumber, and Wood—Nonwood Composite 
Materials 


Nicole M. Stark, Research Chemical Engineer 
Zhiyong Cai, Supervisory Research Materials Engineer 
Charles Carll, Research Forest Products Technologist 


C The term composite is being used in this chapter to describe 
ontents any wood material adhesively bonded together. Wood-based 
Scope 11-2 composites encompass a range of products, from fiberboard 


to laminated beams. Wood-based composites are used for a 
number of nonstructural and structural applications in prod- 
uct lines ranging from panels for interior covering purposes 


Conventional Wood-Based Composite Panels 11—2 
Elements 11-2 


Adhesives 11-3 to panels for exterior uses and in furniture and support struc- 
Additives 11-5 tures in buildings (Fig. 11-1). Maloney (1986) proposed 
Plywood 11-5 a classification system to logically categorize the array of 


wood-based composites. The classification in Table 11-1 


Opened Stan pean tt reflects the latest product developments. 


Particleboard 11-10 


Fiberboard 1112 The basic element for wood-based composites is the fiber, 


with larger particles composed of many fibers. Elements 


Speciality Composite Materials 11—15 used in the production of wood-based composites can be 
Performance and Standards 11-15 made in a variety of sizes and shapes. Typical elements in- 
Glulam Timber 11-17 clude fibers, particles, flakes, veneers, laminates, or lumber. 


Figure 11—2 shows the variation and relative size of wood 


pavoniages 11h) elements. Element size and geometry largely dictate the 


Types of Glulam Combinations 11-17 product manufactured and product performance. Perfor- 
Standards and Specifications 11-18 mance standards are in place for many conventional wood- 
Mannhactire 11-18 based composite products (Table 11-2). 


piuciiral ompast= Tumecttl2 A variety of wood sources are appropriate for use in wood- 


Laminated Veneer Lumber 11-21 based composites. Wood with localized defects (such as 
Parallel Strand Lumber 11-21 knots) can often be used effectively in wood-based compos- 
Latninated Strand Wambér and Oriented Stead ites. Reducing wood with defects to wood elements miti- 
Lumber 11-21 gates the influence of these characteristics in the manufac- 


tured products. Recovered wood from construction waste or 
Advantages and Uses 11-21 ; ; : ; 
industrial manufacturing processes, and wood derived from 

Standards and Specifications 11-22 small-diameter timber, forest residues, or exotic and inva- 
Wood—Nonwood Composite Materials 11—22 sive species, may also be effectively used in wood-based 
composites. Because natural wood properties vary among 
species, between trees of the same species, and between 
pieces from the same tree, solid wood cannot match com- 
Literature Cited 11-26 posite products in the uniformity and range of properties 
that can be controlled. 


Inorganic-Bonded Composite Materials 11—23 
Wood-Thermoplastic Composite Materials 11—25 


Table 11-1. Classification of wood- 
based composites 


Veneer-based material 
Plywood 
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL) 
Parallel-strand lumber (PSL) 


Laminates 
Glue-laminated timbers 
Overlayed materials 
Laminated wood—-nonwood composites” 
Multiwood composites (COM-PLY*) 


Composite material 
Fiberboard (low-, medium-, or high-density) 
Cellulosic fiberboard 
Hardboard 
Particleboard 
Waferboard 
Flakeboard 
Oriented strandboard (OSB) 
Laminated strand lumber (LSL) 
Oriented strand lumber (OSL) 


Wood-nonwood composites 
Wood fiber—-polymer composites 
Inorganic-bonded composites 


“Adapted from Maloney (1986). 

>Panels or shaped materials combined with nonwood 
materials such as metal, plastic, and fiberglass. 
“Registered trademark of APA—The Engineered 
Wood Association. 


Scope 


This chapter gives an overview of the general types and 
composition of wood-based composite products and the ma- 
terials and processes used to manufacture them. It describes 
conventional wood-based composite panels and structural 
composite materials intended for general construction, 
interior use, or both. This chapter also describes wood— 
nonwood composites. Mechanical properties of these types 
of composites are presented and discussed in Chapter 12. 
Because wood-based composites come in a variety of forms, 
we briefly describe several of the most common commercial 
products. 


This chapter is organized into three sections. The first sec- 
tion covers conventional wood-based composite panels. 
Materials, adhesives, and additives common to conventional 
wood-based composites are summarized. Specific products 
addressed include panel products such as plywood, oriented 
strandboard, particleboard, and fiberboard. Specialty 
composites are also discussed. The second section covers 
structural composite lumber, including glued-laminated 
timber, laminated veneer lumber, parallel strand lumber, 
laminated strand lumber, and oriented strand lumber. Wood— 
nonwood composites are discussed in the third section, 
including inorganic-bonded composites and wood-thermo- 
plastic composites. Books have been written about each of 


11-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 11-1. Wood-based composites used in the new 
Centennial Research Facility at the Forest Products 
Laboratory. Glulam timbers support composite I-joists 
and plywood sheathing. (Photo by Steve Schmieding, 
Forest Products Laboratory.) 


these categories, and the constraints of this chapter necessi- 
tate that the discussion be general and brief. References are 
provided for more detailed information. 


Conventional Wood-Based 
Composite Panels 


Conventional wood-based composites are manufactured 
products made primarily from wood with only a few percent 
resin and other additives. A useful way to classify conven- 
tional wood-based composites based on specific gravity, 
density, raw material, and processing methods is shown in 
Figure 11-3, which presents an overview of the most com- 
mon types of commercial panel products discussed in this 
chapter and a quick reference to how these composite mate- 
rials compare with solid wood from the standpoint of den- 
sity and general processing considerations. The raw material 
classifications of fibers, particles, and veneers are shown on 
the left y-axis. Specific gravity and density are shown on 

the top and bottom horizontal axes (x-axes), respectively. 
The right y-axis, wet and dry processes, describes in general 
terms the processing method used to produce a particular 
product. Selection of wood elements, adhesives, and pro- 
cessing techniques all contribute to product performance. 
Figure 11-4 shows examples of some commercial wood- 
based composites. 


Elements 


The primary component of wood-based composites is the 
wood element, often 94% or more by mass. Common ele- 
ments for conventional wood-based composites include 
veneers, strands, particles, and fibers. The physical charac- 
teristics of common elements can be seen in Figure 11-5. 
Properties of composite materials can be changed by chang- 
ing the size and geometry of the elements and by combin- 
ing, reorganizing, or stratifying elements. 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Table 11-2. Commercial product or performance standards for wood-based composites 


Product category Applicable standard Name of standard Source 
Plywood PS 1-07 Voluntary product standard PS 1-07 NIST 2007 
construction and industrial plywood 
PS 2-04 Voluntary product standard PS 2—04 NIST 2004 
performance standard for wood-based 
structural-use panels 
HP—1—2004 Voluntary product standard HPVA 2004 
HP—1—2004 hardwood and decorative 
plywood 
Oriented strandboard PS 2—04 Voluntary product standard PS 2-04 NIST 2004 
(OSB) performance standard for wood-based 
structural-use panels 
Particleboard ANSI A 208. 1—2009 Particleboard standard CPA 2009a 
Fiberboard ANSI A 208.2—2009 MDF standard CPA 2009b 
ANSI A 135.4—2004 Basic hardboard CPA 2004a 
ANSI A 135.5—2004 Pre-finished hardboard paneling CPA 2004b 
ANSI A 135.6—2006 Hardboard siding CPA 2006 
ASTM C 208-08a Cellulosic fiberboard ASTM 2008c 
Glued-laminated ANSI/AITC 190.1 American National Standard for Wood AITC 2007a 
timber (glulam) Products—structural glued-laminated 
timber 
Structural composite ASTM D 5456-07 Standard specification for evaluation ASTM 2008b 


lumber (including 


of structural composite lumber products 


laminated veneer 
lumber (LVL), 
laminated strand 
lumber (LSL), and 
parallel strand 
lumber (PSL)) 


Adhesives 


Bonding in most conventional wood-based composites 

is provided by thermosetting (heat-curing) adhesive 

resins. Chapter 9 provides a more thorough discussion of 
thermoset adhesive resins. Commonly used resin—binder 
systems include phenol-formaldehyde, urea-formaldehyde, 
melamine-formaldehyde, and isocyanate. 


Phenol-Formaldehyde 


Phenol-formaldehyde (PF) resins are typically used in the 
manufacture of construction plywood and oriented strand- 
board where exposure to weather during construction is a 
concern. Other moisture exposure situations, such as tem- 
porary weather exposure, occasional plumbing leaks, or wet 
foot traffic, may also necessitate the use of PF resins. PF 
resins are commonly referred to as phenolic resins. Phenolic 
resins are relatively slow-curing compared with other ther- 
mosetting resins. In hot-pressed wood-based composites, 
use of phenolic resin necessitates longer press times and 
higher press temperatures. Hot-stacking of pressed material 
shortly after emergence from the press is a fairly common 


industrial practice, used to attain adequate resin cure with- 
out greatly extending press time. Significant heat exposure 
associated with pressing of phenolic-bonded composites 
commonly results in a noticeable reduction in their hygro- 
scopicity. Cured phenolic resins remain chemically stable 
at elevated temperatures. Their bonds also are sometimes 
referred to as being “boil-proof” because of their ability to 
maintain composite dimensional and mechanical properties 
under wet conditions. The inherently darker color of PF res- 
in compared with other resins may make them aesthetically 
unsuitable for product applications such as interior paneling 
and furniture. 


Urea-Formaldehyde 


Urea-formaldehyde (UF) resins are typically used in the 
manufacture of products used in interior applications, pri- 
marily particleboard and medium-density fiberboard (MDF), 
because moisture exposure leads to a breakdown of the 
bond-forming reactions. Excessive heat exposure will also 
result in chemical breakdown of cured UF resins, therefore 
UF-bonded panels are typically cooled after emergence 


11-3 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Lumber 1-20 cm 
Veneer 
Long flakes 
“ 
Chips 1-20 mm 
~ 
Flakes 
‘ 
aaa 
Parts 
Fiber an 
a 
Paper fiber 
Pl 1-20 pm 
Wood flour ce ree: 
oe” 
Cellulose <1nm 


Figure 11-2. Basic wood elements, from largest to smallest (Kretschmann and others 2007). 


from the press. Advantages of UF resins include lower cur- 
ing temperatures than PF resins and ease of use under a 
variety of curing conditions. UF resins are the lowest cost 
thermosetting adhesive resins. They offer light color, which 
often is a requirement in the manufacture of decorative 
products. However, the release of formaldehyde from prod- 
ucts bonded with UF is a growing health concern. 


Melamine-Formaldehyde 


Melamine-formaldehyde (MF) resins are used primarily 

for decorative laminates, paper treating, and paper 

coating. They are typically more expensive than PF resins. 
MF resins may, despite their high cost, be used in bonding 
conventional wood-based composites. MF resins are often 
used in combination with UF. MF-UF resins are used when 
an inconspicuous (light color) adhesive is needed and when 
greater water resistance than can be attained with UF resin 
is required. 


Isocyanates 


The isocyanate wood adhesive is a polymeric methylene di- 
isocyanate (pMDI). It is used as an alternative to PF resin, 
primarily in composite products fabricated from strands. 
pMDI resins are typically more costly than PF resins but 
have more rapid cure rates and will tolerate higher moisture 
contents in the wood source. pMDI resin is sometimes used 
in core layers of strand-based composites, with slower- 
curing PF resin used in surface layers. Facilities that use 


11-4 


pMDI are required to take special precautionary protective 
measures because the uncured resin can result in chemical 
sensitization of persons exposed to it. Cured pMDI resin 
poses no recognized health concerns. 


Bio-Based Adhesives 


Bio-based adhesives, primarily protein glues, were widely 
used prior to the early 1970s in construction plywood. In the 
mid-1970s, they were supplanted by PF adhesives, on the 
basis of the superior bond durability provided by phenolics. 
The move toward “green” products has led to a renewed 
interest in bio-based adhesives. Several soy-protein-based 
resin systems, with bond durabilities similar to those pro- 
vided by PF resins, have recently been developed and com- 
mercialized. Durable adhesive systems may also be derived 
from tannins or from lignin. Tannins are natural phenol 
compounds that are present in the bark of a number of tree 
species. The tannins can be extracted from bark, modified, 
and reacted with formaldehyde to produce an intermedi- 
ate polymer that is a satisfactory thermosetting adhesive. 
Lignin-based resins have also been developed from spent 
pulping liquor, which is generated when wood is pulped for 
paper or chemical feedstocks. In the manufacture of wet- 
process fiberboard, lignin, which is an inherent component 
of lignocellulosic material, is frequently used as binder 
(Suchsland and Woodson 1986), although “natural” lignin 
bonding is sometimes augmented with small amounts of 
PF resin. 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Specific gravity 
t 0 01 #02 O03 O04 0.5 


< 
7) 
3 
© 
tv) 
= 


Particles —ot 


Raw material 


i Fibers 
oO 


200 400 


Waferboard 
a 


Oriented 
strandboard 


Solid wood 


06 #O7 O08 O09 10 1.1 


if sbsiasecy 


Process 


1,000 


Sere ia m-) 


Figure 11-3. Classification of wood composite panels by particle size, density, and process 
(Suchsland and Woodson 1986). Note that insulation board is now known as cellulosic fiber- 


board. 


Resin Choice 


Often a particular resin will dominate for a particular prod- 
uct, but each has its advantages. Factors taken into account 
include materials to be bonded together, moisture content 
at time of bonding, mechanical property and durability re- 
quirements of the composite products, anticipated end-use 
of the product, and resin system costs. 


PF, UF, and pMDI resins systems are expected to remain 
the dominant adhesives used for bonded wood-based 
composites. However, cost and reliable availability of 
petrochemicals may affect the relative predominance of PF, 
UF, and pMDI adhesives versus bio-based adhesives. More 
stringent regulation concerning emissions from formalde- 
hyde-containing products (driven by concern over indoor air 
quality) may affect the continued commercial predominance 
of UF resin in interior products. For example, the California 
Air Resources Board (CARB) has established formaldehyde 
emission standards that cover hardwood plywood, particle- 
board, and MDF. As a result, bio-based adhesive and resin 
systems may gain market share compared with petroleum- 
based synthetic resins. 


Additives 


A number of additives are used in the production of con- 
ventional composite products. The most common additive 
is wax, which is used to provide products with some re- 
sistance to liquid water absorption. In flake-, particle-, and 
fiberboard products, wax emulsions provide limited-term 


water resistance and dimensional stability when the board is 
wetted. Even small amounts (0.5% to 1%) act to retard the 
rate of liquid water pickup for limited time periods. These 
improved short-term water penetration properties are impor- 
tant for ensuring the success of subsequent secondary gluing 
operations and for providing protection upon accidental wet- 
ting of the product during and after construction. The addi- 
tion of wax has practically no effect on water vapor sorption 
or dimensional changes associated with changes in humid- 
ity. Other additives used for specialty products include 
preservatives, moldicides, and fire retardants. Composites 
containing additives are more thoroughly discussed in the 
section on Specialty Composite Materials. 


Plywood 


Plywood is a panel product built up wholly or primarily of 
sheets of veneer called plies. It is constructed with an odd 
number of layers with the grain direction of adjacent layers 
oriented perpendicular to one another. A layer can consist 
of a single ply or of two or more plies laminated with their 
grain direction parallel. A panel can contain an odd or even 
number of plies but always an odd number of layers. The 
outside plies are called faces, or face and back plies. Inner 
plies are plies other than the face or back plies. The outer 
layers and all odd-numbered layers have their grain direc- 
tion oriented parallel to the long dimension of the panel. The 
grain in even-numbered layers is perpendicular to the length 
of the panel. Inner plies whose grain direction runs parallel 
to that of the faces are termed “centers” whereas inner plies 


11-5 


Laminated 
veneer 
lumber 
(LVL) 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Parallel strand lumber (PSL) 


Laminated 
strand 
lumber 
(LSL) 


Plywood 


Oriented strand 
board (OSB) 


Particleboard 


Fiberboard 


Figure 11-4. Examples of various composite products. From top left, clock- 
wise: LVL, PSL, LSL, plywood, OSB, particleboard, and fiberboard. 


Figure 11-5. Common wood elements used in wood- 
based composites from top left, clockwise: shavings, 
sawdust, fiber, large particles, wafers, and strands. 


whose grain direction runs perpendicular to that of the faces 
are termed “crossbands.” To distinguish the number of plies 
(individual sheets of veneer in a panel) from the number 

of layers (number of times the grain orientation changes), 
panels are sometimes described as three-ply, three-layer or 
four-ply, three-layer, etc. The center layer may be veneer, 
lumber, particleboard, or fiberboard; however, all-veneer 
construction is most common in construction and industrial 
plywood. 


Plywood panels are used in various applications, including 
construction sheathing, furniture, and cabinet panels. 


11-6 


Plywood is also used as a component in other engineered 
wood products and systems in applications such as prefab- 
ricated I-joists, box beams, stressed-skin panels, and panel- 
ized roofs. 


Characteristics 


The properties of plywood depend on the quality of the 
veneer plies, the order of layers, the adhesive used, and the 
degree to which bonding conditions are controlled during 
production. The durability of the adhesive-to-wood bond 
depends largely on the adhesive used but also on control of 
bonding conditions and on veneer quality. The grade of the 
panel depends upon the quality of the veneers used, particu- 
larly of the face and back. 


Plywood panels have significant bending strength both 
along the panel and across the panel, and the differences in 
strength and stiffness along the panel length versus across 
the panel are much smaller than those differences in solid 
wood. Plywood also has excellent dimensional stability 
along its length and across its width. Minimal edge-swelling 
makes plywood a good choice for adhesive-bonded tongue- 
and-groove joints, even where some wetting is expected. 
Unlike most panels fabricated from particles, it undergoes 
minimal irreversible thickness swelling if wetted. The alter- 
nating grain direction of its layers makes plywood resistant 
to splitting, allowing fasteners to be placed very near the 
edges of a panel. In uses where internal knotholes and voids 
may pose a problem, such as in small pieces, plywood can 
be ordered with a solid core and face veneers. 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Classes of Plywood 


Two classes of plywood are commonly available, covered 
by separate standards: (a) construction and industrial ply- 
wood and (b) hardwood and decorative plywood. 


Most construction and industrial plywood used in the United 
States is produced domestically, and U.S. manufacturers 
export some material. The bulk of construction and indus- 
trial plywood is used where performance is more important 
than appearance. However, some grades of construction and 
industrial plywood are made with faces selected primarily 
for appearance and are used either with clear natural finishes 
or lightly pigmented finishes. Construction and industrial 
plywood has traditionally been made from softwoods such 
as Douglas-fir and southern yellow pine. However, true firs, 
western hemlock, and western pines are also used (Bowyer 
and others 2007). A large number of hardwoods qualify for 
use under the standard. PF resin is the primary adhesive type 
used in construction and industrial plywood. Construction 
and industrial plywood is categorized by exposure capability 
and grade using Voluntary Product Standard PS 1-07 (NIST 
2007). 


Hardwood and decorative plywood is made of many dif- 
ferent species, both in the United States and overseas. Well 
over half of all panels used in the United States are im- 
ported. Hardwood plywood is normally used in applications 
including decorative wall panels and furniture and cabinet 
panels where appearance is more important than strength. 
Most of the production is intended for interior or protected 
uses, although a very small proportion is made with ad- 
hesives suitable for exterior service, such as in marine ap- 
plications. A substantial portion of all hardwood plywood 
is available completely finished. Hardwood and decorative 
plywood is categorized by species and characteristics of 
face veneer, bond durability, and composition of center 
layers (veneer, lumber, particleboard, MDF, or hardboard) 
(HP—1—2004, HPVA 2004). 


Exposure Capability 


Construction and industrial plywood is classified as either 
Exposure | or Exterior in Voluntary Product Standard PS 
1-07 (NIST 2007). Exposure 1 plywood is intended for 
applications not permanently exposed to weather, whereas 
Exterior plywood is suitable for repeated wetting and dry- 
ing, or long-term exposure to weather. Bond quality of ply- 
wood of either bond classification (Exposure | or Exterior) 
is evaluated by the same test procedure, but a higher level 
of performance in the test procedure is required for Exterior 
plywood. The test procedure involves water saturation, boil- 
ing, and high-temperature exposure (in excess of boiling 
temperature). The majority of construction and industrial 
plywood sold in North America is of Exposure | classifica- 
tion. Exposure | panels may undergo rain-wetting during 
building construction but will be protected from wetting 
after the building is enclosed. 


Two exposure classes of hardwood and decorative plywood 
are recognized by ANSI/HPVA HP-1-—2004, Exterior and 
Interior. The standard actually lists two different Exterior 
classes, Technical and Type I, but the bond performance 
requirements for these classes, as determined by test proce- 
dures outlined in the standard, are the same. 


Plywood Grades 


Plywood grades may indicate the intended use, a type of 
surface treatment, or the grades of the face and back ve- 
neers, and in some cases, a combination of these. Agencies 
that provide quality certification services for plywood mills 
have coined their own trademarked grade names for speci- 
fied end uses through proprietary product standards. Grade 
stamps are used to identify plywood products (Figs. 11-6 
and 11-7). An example of plywood CARB third-party iden- 
tification is also shown in Figure 11-7. 


Veneer quality is a factor in construction and industrial ply- 
wood based on visually observable characteristics. Knots, 
decay, splits, insect holes, surface roughness, number of 
surface repairs, and other defects are considered. Veneer 
species and characteristics are also a major factor in catego- 
rization of hardwood and decorative plywood. 


Specialty Plywood Panels 


Plywood is easily pressure-treated with waterborne preser- 
vatives and fire retardants. Because plywood is not prone 
to irreversible thickness swelling, its bond integrity is unaf- 
fected by pressure treatment with waterborne chemicals. 
Treatment is typically performed by commercial entities 
specializing in treatment rather than by the plywood manu- 
facturer. Treatments for plywood have been standardized 
(AWPA 2007a,b). This allows specification by reference to 
a commercial standard. Special grades of plywood are pro- 
duced for specific uses such as boat construction, concrete 
form work, or special exterior applications such as highway 
signage. 


Oriented Strandboard 


Oriented strandboard (OSB) is an engineered structural-use 
panel manufactured from thin wood strands bonded together 
with water-resistant resin, typically PF or pMDL. It is used 
extensively for roof, wall, and floor sheathing in residential 
and commercial construction. The wood strands typically 
have an aspect ratio (strand length divided by width) of at 
least 3. OSB panels are usually made up of three layers of 
strands, the outer faces having longer strands aligned in the 
long-direction of the panel and a core layer that is counter- 
aligned or laid randomly using the smaller strands or fines. 
The orientation of different layers of aligned strands gives 
OSB its unique characteristics, including greater bending 
strength and stiffness in the oriented or aligned direction. 
Control of strand size, orientation, and layered construction 
allows OSB to be engineered to suit different uses. 


OSB technology and the raw material used originally 
evolved from waferboard technology, for which aspen was 


RATED SHEATHING 
5 32/16 15/32INCH «—4 


3 SZEDFORSPACING <— 6 
"+ EXPOSURE 1 
2 —————+ P5147 C-D PRP.108 «8 


(a) 


i—_-+ APA 


RATED SHEATHING 
5 ————+ 32/16 1sazmcn * 4 


9 
2 25 2.04 HEATING 
8 08 HUD-UM-40 7 
(c) 


1) Third-party inspection agency 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


EXPOSURE 1 3 
c-D 
SHEATHING SPAN® 
15/32" 32/16 5 


SIZED FOR SPACING 


MILL XXX 9 


(b) 


STRENGTM AXIS 
THIS DIRECTION 
MILL NO. 9 


ADDITIONAL 
MANUFACTURER 
INFORMATION 


(d) 


2) Conformance to indicated product standard 


3) Exposure durability classification 
4) Thickness 
5) Span rating 


6) Denotes panels that have been sized to allow for spacing of panel edges during 
installation to reduce the possibility of buckling 

7) Recognition as a quality assurance agency 

8) Performance rated panel standard indicating structural-use panel test procedures 


9) Manufacturing mill identification number 


10) Grade of face and core veneers 
11) Strength axis (OSB only) 


Figure 11-6. Typical grade stamps for plywood and OSB. (Courtesy of 
TECO, Sun Prairie, Wisconsin, and APA-The Engineered Wood Associa- 
tion, Tacoma, Washington. Used by permission.) 


the predominant wood species used. As the industry learned 
to control strand size, placement, and orientation, the per- 
formance and utility of OSB products improved to the 
point that their performance was similar to that of structural 
plywood. As a result, product acceptance and the industry 
expanded as OSB began to replace softwood plywood in 
construction applications. 


Raw Materials 


In North America, aspen is the predominant wood used 
for OSB. Species other than aspen, such as Southern Pine, 
spruce, birch, yellow-poplar, sweetgum, sassafrass, and 
beech, are also suitable raw materials for OSB production. 
High-density species such as beech and birch are often 
mixed with low-density species such as aspen to maintain 
panel properties (Bowyer and others 2007). 


Manufacturing Process 


To manufacture OSB, debarked logs are sliced into long, 
thin wood elements called strands. The strands are dried, 
blended with resin and wax, and formed into thick, loosely 
consolidated mats that are pressed under heat and pressure 
into large panels. Figure 11-8 shows an OSB manufactur- 
ing process. A more detailed description of each individual 
manufacturing step follows. 


During stranding, logs are debarked and then sent to a 
soaking pond or directly to the stranding process. Long log 
disk or ring stranders are commonly used to produce wood 
strands typically measuring 114 to 152 mm (4.5 to 6 in.) 
long, 12.7 mm (0.5 in.) wide, and 0.6 to 0.7 mm (0.023 to 
0.027 in.) thick. Green strands are stored in wet bins and 
dried in a traditional triple-pass dryer, a single-pass dryer, a 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


FORMALDEHYDE SIMULATED «—4 FLAME SPREAD 
EMISSION 0.05 PPM | DECORATIVE FINISH CLASS C 
MEETS CARB ATCM ON PLYWOOD 200 OR LESS 

PHASE 2 ASTM E84 «7 

REQUIREMENTS YY 


— 


BOND LINE 
LAY UP 16 ,“ 5—sMILL 000 TYPE lla—— 8 

3.6 MM THICK SPECIALTY ANSI/HPVA 
HP-SG-96 GRADE + _, HP-1-2004 «—$ 


DESIGNATION KEY 


1. HPVA Laboratory Registered Trademark - Hardwood Plywood & 
Veneer Association; CARB TPC-8. 

2. Formaldehyde Emissions Classification - in accordance with ASTM 
E1333 Standard Test Method for Determining Formaldehyde 
Concentrations in Air and Emissions Rates from Wood Products Using a 
Large Chamber. Demonstrates compliance below California Air Resource 
Board (CARB), U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD), and other approved regulations and standards on air emissions 

3. Structural Layup Description — meets structural panel attributes as 

outlined in HPVA design guide HP-SG-96, Structural Design Guide for 
Hardwood Plywood Wall Panels 

. Face Species or Finish Type (not required for specialty or simulated 

finishes) 

. HPVA Mill Number 

. Face/Back Veneer Grade (grade of back follows face for industrial 

panels and is optional for specialty grade panels) 

Flame Spread Index Classification - in accordance with ASTM E84 

Standard Test Method for Surface Buming Characteristics of Building 

Materials 

. Plywood Bond Line Type — Type! (interior), Type II (exterior) 

. ANSI/HPVA HP-1-2004 - Standard Governing Manufacture 


N OO & 


SAMPLE HPVATPC-S CARB Certification Label: 


HARDWOOD PLYWOOD & VENEER ASSOCIATION 


INDUSTRIAL HARDWOOD PLYWOOD 
ARB TPC-8 Certified 


MEETS CARB ATCM 
FORMALDEHYDE EMISSIONS 
PHASE 2 


MILL 000 


COMPANY NAME 
LOCATION 0.05 PPM 


PRODUCT LOT NUMBER: 


Figure 11-7. Typical grade stamps for hardwood plywood. (Courtesy of Hard- 
wood Plywood & Veneer Association, Reston, Virginia. Used by permission.) 


11-9 


Log hauling and 


Forming line 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Finishing line Shipping 


Figure 11-8. Schematic of OSB manufacturing process. (Courtesy of TECO, Sun Prairie, Wisconsin. 


Used by permission.) 


combination triple-pass/single-pass dryer, or a three-section 
conveyor dryer. A recent development is a continuous chain 
dryer, in which the strands are laid on a chain mat that is 
mated with an upper chain mat and the strands are held in 
place as they move through the dryer. New drying tech- 
niques allow the use of longer strands, reducing surface 
inactivation of strands, and lowering dryer outfeed tempera- 
tures. Dried strands are screened and sent to dry bins. 


Dried strands are blended with adhesive and wax in a highly 
controlled operation, with separate rotating blenders used 
for face and core strands. Typically, different resin formula- 
tions are used for face and core layers. Face resins may be 
liquid or powdered phenolics, whereas core resins may be 
phenolics or isocyanates. Several different resin application 
systems are used; spinning disk resin applicators are the 
most common. 


The strands with adhesive applied are sent to mat formers. 
Mat formers take on a number of configurations, ranging 
from electrostatic equipment to mechanical devices contain- 
ing spinning disks to align strands along the panel’s length 
and star-type cross-orienters to position strands across the 
panel’s width. All formers use the long and narrow char- 
acteristic of the strand to place it between spinning disks 

or troughs before it is ejected onto a moving screen or 
conveyor belt below the forming heads. Oriented layers of 
strands within the mat are dropped sequentially onto a mov- 
ing conveyor. The conveyor carries the loose, layered mat 
into the press. 


11-10 


Once the mat is formed, it is hot-pressed. Hot-pressing 
consolidates the mat by heating it at 177 to 204 °C (350 to 
400 °F), which cures the resin in 3-5 minutes. As many as 
sixteen 3.7- by 7.3-m (12- by 24-ft) panels may be formed 
simultaneously in a multiple-opening press. A more recent 
development is the continuous press which presses the mat 
between rollers as it is conveyed. 


OSB Grade Marks and Product Certification 


OSB that has been grade marked is manufactured to comply 
with voluntary industry product performance standards. 
Inspection or certification programs also generally require 
that the quality control system of a production plant meet 
specified criteria. OSB panels conforming to product perfor- 
mance standards are marked with grade stamps (Fig. 11-6). 


Particleboard 


Particleboard is produced by mechanically reducing the 
wood raw material into small particles, applying adhesive to 
the particles, and consolidating a loose mat of the particles 
with heat and pressure into a panel product. The particle- 
board industry initially used cut flakes as a raw material. 
However, economic concerns prompted development of 

the ability to use sawdust, planer shavings, and to a lesser 
extent, mill residues and other waste materials. To manufac- 
ture particleboard with good strength, smooth surfaces, and 
equal swelling, manufacturers ideally use a homogeneous 
raw material. 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Particleboard is typically made in layers. But unlike OSB, 
the faces of particleboard usually consist of fine wood par- 
ticles and the core is made of coarser material. The result is 
a smoother surface for laminating, overlaying, painting, or 
veneering. Particleboard is readily made from virtually any 
wood material and from a variety of agricultural residues. 
Low-density insulating or sound-absorbing particleboard 
can be made from kenaf core or jute stick. Low-, medium-, 
and high-density panels can be produced with cereal straw, 
which has been used in North America. Rice husks are com- 
mercially manufactured into medium- and high-density 
products in the Middle East. 


All other things being equal, reducing lignocellulosic mate- 
rials to particles requires less energy than reducing the same 
material into fibers. However, particleboard is generally not 
as strong as fiberboard because the fibrous nature of ligno- 
cellulosics (that is, their high aspect ratio) is not exploited 
as well. Particleboard is widely used in furniture, where it 
is typically overlaid with other materials for decorative 
purposes. It is the predominant material used in ready-to- 
assemble furniture. Particleboard can also be used in floor- 
ing systems, in manufactured houses, and as underlayment. 
Thin panels can also be used as a paneling substrate. Since 
most applications are interior, particleboard is usually 
bonded with a UF resin, although PF and MF resins are 
sometimes used for applications requiring more moisture 
resistance. 


Manufacturing Process 


Manufacturing particleboard is a dry process. The steps 
involved in particleboard manufacturing include particle 
preparation, particle classification and drying, adhesive ap- 
plication, mat formation, pressing, and finishing. 


Standard particleboard plants use combinations of hogs, 
chippers, hammermills, ring flakers, ring mills, and attrition 
mills to obtain particles. Particles are classified and sepa- 
rated to minimize negative effect on the finished product. 
Very small particles (fines) increase particle surface area 
and thus increase resin requirements. Oversized particles 
can adversely affect the quality of the final product because 
of internal flaws in the particles. While some particles are 
classified through the use of air streams, screen classifica- 
tion methods are the most common. In screen classification, 
the particles are fed over a vibrating flat screen or a series of 
screens. The screens may be wire cloth, plates with holes or 
slots, or plates set on edge. Particles are typically conveyed 
by mechanical means. Sometimes damp conditions are 
maintained to reduce break-up of particles during 
conveying. 


Desirable particles have a high degree of slenderness (long, 
thin particles), no oversize particles, no splinters, and no 
dust. Depending on the manufacturing process and board 


configurations, specifications for the ideal particle size are 
different. For a common three-layer board, core particles are 
longer and surface particles shorter, thinner, and smaller. For 
a five-layer board, the particles for the intermediate layer 
between surface and core are long and thin, which builds a 
good carrier for the fine surface and gives the boards high 
bending strength and stiffness. Particleboard used for quality 
furniture uses much smaller core particles. The tighter core 
gives a better quality edge which allows particleboard to 
compete more favorably with MDF. 


The raw materials (or furnish) do not usually arrive at the 
plant at a low enough moisture content for immediate use. 
Furnish that arrives at the plant can range from 10% to 
200% dry basis moisture content. For use with liquid resins, 
for example, the furnish must be reduced to about 2% to 7% 
moisture content. The moisture content of particles is criti- 
cal during hot-pressing operations and depends on whether 
resin is to be added dry or as a solution or emulsion. The 
moisture content of materials leaving the dryers is usually 
in the range of 4% to 8%. The main methods used to dry 
particles are rotary, disk, and suspension drying. A triple- 
pass rotary dryer consists of a large horizontal, heated, rotat- 
ing drum. Operating temperatures depend on the moisture 
content of the incoming furnish. The drum is set at a slight 
angle, and material is fed into the high end and discharged 
at the low end. A series of flights forces the furnish to flow 
from one end to the other three times before being dis- 
charged. The rotary movement of the drum moves the mate- 
rial from input to output. 


Frequently used resins for particleboard include UF and, to 
a much lesser extent, PF, MF, and isocyanates. The type and 
amount of resin used for particleboard depends on the type 
of product desired. Based on the weight of dry resin solids 
and ovendry weight of the particles, the overall resin content 
can range between 4% and 10%, but usually ranges between 
6% and 9% for UF resins. The resin content of the outer lay- 
ers is usually higher (about 8% to 15%) than that of the core 
(about 4% to 8%). UF resin is usually introduced in water 
solutions containing about 50% to 65% solids. Besides res- 
in, wax is added to improve short-term moisture resistance. 
The amount of wax ranges from 0.3% to 1% based on the 
ovendry weight of the particles. 


After the particles have been prepared, they are laid into an 
even and consistent mat to be pressed into a panel. This is 
accomplished in batch mode or by continuous formation. 
The batch system traditionally employs a caul or tray on 
which a deckle frame is placed. The mat is formed by the 
back-and-forth movement of a tray or hopper feeder. The 
production of three-layer boards requires three or more 
forming stations. 


In more common continuous mat-forming systems the par- 
ticles are distributed in one or several layers on traveling 


11-11 


TECO National 


Report Number 
from Council of 


Officials (CABO) 


ANSI-A208.1-93<— Performance 


Standard 

for wood-based 
structural-use 
panels 


MILL NAME 
LOCATION OR NO. 


Evaluation Service 


American Building 


TYPE OF BOND Exposure durability 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


SAMPLE MANUFACTURED HOME DECKING STAMP 


MANUFACTURE 


STANDARD 
REFERENCE 
IN BUILDING 


HOME DECKING = 


CONFORMS TO ANSI 
RA 


A208.1 GRADE D-2 

AND PARTICLEBOARD 
FORMALDEHYDE EMISSION 
REQUIREMENTS OF 


GRADE NAME 


HUD 24 CFR 3280 


MILL 000 


MILL NUMBER 


CPA 
CERTIFIED 
GRADEMARK OF 


SSEueeA"N. COMPANY 
LOCATION 


PRODUCTION: DATE/SHIFT 


Figure 11-9. Examples of grade stamps for particleboard. (Courtesy of TECO, Sun Prairie, Wiscon- 
sin, and Composite Panel Association, Leesburg, Virginia. Used by permission.) 


cauls or on a moving belt. Mat thickness is controlled volu- 
metrically. Batch-formed or continuous-formed mats are 
often pre-pressed to reduce mat height and help consolidate 
the mat for pressing. 


After pre-pressing, the mats are hot-pressed into panels. 
Presses can be divided into platen and continuous types. 
Further development in the industry has made possible the 
construction of presses for producing increasingly larger 
panel sizes in both single- and multi-opening presses. Both 
of these types of presses can be as wide as 3.7 m (12 ft). 
Multi-opening presses can be as long as 10 m (33 ft), and 
continuous presses, up to 30 m (100 ft) long. 


After pressing, panels are trimmed to obtain the desired 
length and width and to square the edges. Trim losses usu- 
ally amount to 0.5% to 8%, depending on the size of the 
panel, the process employed, and the control exercised. 
Trimmers usually consist of saws with tungsten carbide 
tips. After trimming, the panels are sanded or planed prior 
to packaging and shipping. Particleboards may also be ve- 
neered or overlaid with other materials to provide a decora- 
tive surface, or they may be finished with lacquer or paint. 
Treatments with fire-resistant chemicals are also available. 


Particleboard Grade Marks and Product Certification 


A grade mark on particleboard ensures that the product 

has been periodically tested for compliance with voluntary 
industry product performance standards. Inspection or certi- 
fication programs also generally require that the quality con- 
trol system of a production plant meets strict criteria. Par- 
ticleboard panels conforming to these product performance 
standards are marked with grade stamps (Fig. 11-9). 


11-12 


Fiberboard 


The term fiberboard includes hardboard, medium-density 
fiberboard (MDF), and cellulosic fiberboard. Several things 
differentiate fiberboard from particleboard, most notably the 
physical configuration of the wood element. Because wood 
is fibrous by nature, fiberboard exploits the inherent strength 
of wood to a greater extent than does particleboard. 


To make fibers for composites, bonds between the wood 
fibers must be broken. Attrition milling, or refining, is the 
easiest way to accomplish this. During refining, material 

is fed between two disks with radial grooves. As the mate- 
rial is forced through the preset gap between the disks, it is 
sheared, cut, and abraded into fibers and fiber bundles. Re- 
finers are available with single- or double-rotating disks, as 
well as steam-pressurized and unpressurized configurations. 


Refining can be augmented by steaming or chemical treat- 
ments. Steaming the lignocellulosic weakens the lignin 
bonds between the cellulosic fibers. As a result, fibers are 
more readily separated and are usually less damaged than 
fibers processed by dry processing methods. Chemical treat- 
ments, usually alkali, are also used to weaken the lignin 
bonds. Although treatments help increase fiber quality and 
reduce energy requirements, they may also reduce yield and 
modify the fiber chemistry. For MDF, steam-pressurized 
refining is typical. 


Fiberboard is normally classified by density and can be 
made by either dry or wet processes (Fig. 11-3). Dry 
processes are applicable to boards with high density 
(hardboard) and medium density (MDF). Wet processes are 
applicable to both high-density hardboard and low-density 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


cellulosic fiberboard. The following subsections briefly de- 
scribe the manufacturing of high- and medium-density dry- 
process fiberboard, wet-process hardboard, and wet-process 
low-density cellulosic fiberboard. Suchsland and Woodson 
(1986) and Maloney (1993) provide more detailed 
information. 


Dry-Process Fiberboard 


Dry-process fiberboard is made in a similar fashion to par- 
ticleboard. Resin (UF or MF—UF) and other additives are 
applied to the fibers by spraying in short-retention blenders 
or introduced as wet fibers are fed from the refiner into a 
blow-line dryer. Alternatively, some fiberboard plants add 
the resin in the refiner. The adhesive-coated fibers are then 
air-laid into a mat for subsequent pressing, much the same 
as mat formation for particleboard. 


Pressing procedures for dry-process fiberboard differ some- 
what from particleboard procedures. After the fiber mat is 
formed, it is typically pre-pressed in a band press. The den- 
sified mat is then trimmed by disk cutters and transferred to 
caul plates for the hardboard pressing operation; for MDF, 
the trimmed mat is transferred directly to the press. Many 
dry-formed boards are pressed in multi-opening presses. 
Continuous pressing using large, high-pressure band presses 
is also gaining in popularity. Panel density is constantly 
monitored by moisture sensors using infrared light as an 
indicator of panel quality. 


MDF is frequently used in place of solid wood, plywood, 
and particleboard in many furniture applications. It is also 
used for interior door skins, mouldings, and interior trim 
components. ANSI A208.2 classifies MDF by physical and 
mechanical properties, and identifies dimensional tolerances 
and formaldehyde emission limits (CPA 2009b). An ex- 
ample of an MDF formaldehyde emissions certification tag 
is shown in Figure 11-10. 


Wet-Process Hardboard 


Wet-process hardboards differ from dry-process fiberboards 
in several significant ways. First, water is used as the fiber 
distribution medium for mat formation. The technology is 
really an extension of paper manufacturing technology. Sec- 
ondly, some wet-process boards are made without additional 
binders. If the lignocellulosic contains sufficient lignin and 
if lignin is retained during the refining operation, lignin can 
serve as the binder. Under heat and pressure, lignin will flow 
and act as a thermosetting adhesive, enhancing the naturally 
occurring hydrogen bonds. 


Refining is an important step for developing strength in wet- 
process hardboards. The refining operation must also yield 

a fiber of high “freeness” (that is, it must be easy to remove 
water from the fibrous mat). The mat is typically formed 

on a Fourdrinier wire, like papermaking, or on cylinder 
formers. The wet process employs a continuously traveling 
mesh screen, onto which the soupy pulp flows rapidly and 


smoothly. Water is drawn off through the screen and then 
through a series of press rolls. 


Wet-process hardboards are pressed in multi-opening press- 
es heated by steam. The press cycle consists of three phases 
and lasts 6 to 15 min. The first phase is conducted at high 
pressure, and it removes most of the water while bringing 
the board to the desired thickness. The primary purpose of 
the second phase is to remove water vapor. The third phase 
is relatively short and results in the final cure. A maximum 
pressure of about 5 MPa (725 lb in-2) is used in the first 
and third phases. Heat is essential during pressing to induce 
fiber-to-fiber bond. A high temperature of up to 210 °C 
(410 °F) is used to increase production by causing faster 
vaporization of the water. Insufficient moisture removal 
during pressing adversely affects strength and may result in 
“springback” or blistering. 


Wet-formed composite technology has lost market share 
compared with dry-formed technology over the past few 
decades because of processing speed and perceived 
environmental issues related to process water. However, 
wet-formed technology does offer unique opportunities for 
forming geometric shapes that yield enhanced structural 
performance and decrease weight, elimination of fiber dry- 
ing prior to forming, and reduced need for adhesive resins. 
It also greatly increases the ability to use recovered paper 
and some other woody fibers. Recent advances in process 
wastewater recycling and remediation also bode well for 
wet-formed technologies. Wet-formed composite technol- 
ogy may become more important because of reduced energy 
demands, increased composite structural performance and 
decreased weight, and the virtual elimination of (or drastic 
reduction in) process water concerns. 


Several treatments are used to increase dimensional stability 
and mechanical performance of hardboard. Heat treatment, 
tempering, and humidification may be done singularly or 

in conjunction with one another. Heat treatment—exposure 
of pressed fiberboard to dry heat—improves dimensional 
stability and mechanical properties, reduces water adsorp- 
tion, and improves interfiber bonding. Tempering is the heat 
treatment of pressed boards, preceded by the addition of oil. 
Tempering improves board surface hardness, resistance to 
abrasion, scratching, scarring, and water. The most common 
oils used include linseed oil, tung oil, and tall oil. Humidifi- 
cation is the addition of moisture to bring the board 
moisture content to levels roughly equivalent to those an- 
ticipated in its end-use environment. Air of high humidity 

is forced through the stacks where it provides water vapor 
to the boards. Another method involves spraying water on 
the back side of the board. Typical hardboard products are 
prefinished paneling, house siding, floor underlayment, and 
concrete form board. A typical grade stamp for hardboard 
siding is shown in Figure 11-11. 


11-13 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Sample Bundle Tag for non-EPP MDF Certified to ANSI A208.2-2009. 


COMPLIES WITH ANSI A208.1-2009 AND 
CALIFORNIA 93120 PHASE 1 FORMALDEHYDE 


EMISSION LIMITS 


J 


| MILL 000 


CPA 


CERTIFIED 


CALIFORNIA ARB APPROVED THIRD PARTY CERTIFIER TPC-1 


MANUFAC TURER’S NAME 


LOCATION 


PRODUCTION SHIFT/CREW 
PRODUCTION LOT/BATCH 


Figure 11-10. Example of MDF formaldehyde emissions certification tag. 
(Courtesy of Composite Panel Association, Leesburg, Virginia. Used by 


permission.) 


Cellulosic Fiberboard 


Cellulosic fiberboards are low-density, wet-laid panel prod- 
ucts. In the manufacture of cellulosic fiberboard, the need 
for refining and screening is a function of the raw material 
available, the equipment used, and the desired end-product. 
Cellulosic fiberboards typically do not use a binder, and they 
rely on hydrogen bonds to hold the board components to- 
gether. Sizing agents are usually added to the furnish (about 
1%) to provide the finished board with a modest degree of 
water resistance and dimensional stability. 


As in the manufacture of wet-process hardboard, cellulosic 
fiberboard manufacture is a modification of papermaking. 

A thick fibrous sheet is made from a low-consistency pulp 
suspension in a process known as wet felting. Felting can 
be accomplished through use of a deckle box, Fourdrinier 
screen, or cylinder screen. A deckle box is a bottomless 
frame that is placed over a screen. A measured amount of 
pulp suspension is put in the box and a vacuum is applied to 
remove most of the water. The use of a Fourdrinier screen 
for felting is similar to that for papermaking, except that line 
speeds are reduced to 8 to 18 m min“! (25 to 60 ft min!). 


Cellulosic fiberboard formed in a deckle box is cold- 
pressed to remove the free water after the mat is formed. 
Compression rollers on the Fourdrinier machines squeeze 


11-14 


out the free water. The wet mats are then dried to the final 
moisture content. Dryers may be a continuous tunnel or a 
multideck arrangement. The board is generally dried in 
stages at temperatures ranging from 120 to 190 °C 

(248 to 374 °F). Typically, about 2 to 4 h is required 

to reduce moisture content to about 1% to 3%. 


After drying, some boards are treated for specific applica- 
tions. Boards may be given tongue-and-groove or shiplap 
edges or grooved to produce a plank effect. Other boards are 
laminated by means of asphalt to produce roof insulation. 


Cellulosic fiberboard products include sound-deadening 
board, insulation boards, structural and nonstructural sheath- 
ings, backer board, and roof decking in various thicknesses. 
An example of a grade mark stamp for these cellulosic fiber- 
board products conforming to ASTM C 208 (ASTM 2008c) 
is shown in Figure 11-12. 


Finishing Techniques 


Several techniques are used to finish fiberboard: trimming, 
sanding, surface treatment, punching, and embossing. Trim- 
ming consists of reducing products into standard sizes and 
shapes. Generally, double-saw trimmers are used to saw the 
panels. Trimmers consist of overhead-mounted saws or mul- 
tiple saw drives. If thickness tolerance is critical, hardboard 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


WN 


CPA 


CERTIFIED 


CONFORMS 
ANSI A135.6-2006 
MILL 000 


MANUFACTURER'S NAME 
LOCATION 
LOT NUMBER / PRODUCTION DATE 


Figure 11-11. Typical grade stamp for hardboard sid- 
ing. (Courtesy of Composite Panel Association, Lees- 
burg, Virginia. Used by permission.) 


Figure 11-12. Typical grade 
stamp for cellulosic fiber- 
board. (Courtesy American 
Fiberboard Association, 
Palatine, Illinois. Used by 
permission.) 


CONFORM 


ASTM C 208 


is sanded prior to finishing. S1S (smooth on one side) panels 
require this process. Sanding reduces thickness variation and 
improves surface paintability. Single-head, wide-belt sand- 
ers are used with 24- to 36-grit abrasive. Surface treatments 
improve the appearance and performance of boards. Panels 
are cleaned by spraying with water and then dried at about 
240 °C (464 °F) for 30 s. Panel surfaces are then modified 
with paper overlay, paint, or stain or are printed directly on 
the panel. Punching changes panels into perforated sheets 
used as peg board. Embossing consists of pressing the un- 
consolidated mat of fibers with a textured form. This process 
results in a slightly contoured panel surface that can enhance 
the resemblance of the panel to that of sawn or weathered 
wood, brick, and other materials. 


Specialty Composite Materials 


Special-purpose composite materials are produced to obtain 
enhanced performance properties such as water resistance, 
mechanical strength, acidity control, and fire, decay, and 
insect resistance. Overlays and veneers can also be added 
to enhance both structural properties and appearance 

(Fig. 11-13). 


Water-Repellant Composites 


Sizing agents are used to increase the water repellency of 
wood-based composites. Sizing agents cover the surface of 
fibers, reduce surface energy, and increase fiber hydropho- 
bicity. Sizing agents can be applied in two ways. In the first 
method, water is used as a medium to ensure thorough mix- 
ing of sizing and fiber. The sizing is precipitated from the 
water and is fixed to the fiber surface. In the second method, 
the sizing is applied directly to the fibers. 


Common sizing agents include rosin, wax, and asphalt. 
Rosin is obtained from living pine trees, from pine stumps, 
and as a by-product of kraft pulping of pines. Rosin is added 
in amounts of less than 3% solids based on dry fiber weight. 
Waxes are high-molecular-weight hydrocarbons derived 
from crude oil. Wax is used in solid form in dry-process 
fiberboard production. For wet processes, wax is added in 
solid form or as an emulsion. Wax tends to lower strength 
properties to a greater extent than rosin does. Asphalt is also 
used to increase water resistance, especially in low-density 
wet-process cellulosic fiberboard. Asphalt is a black—brown 
solid or semi-solid material that liquefies when heated. As- 
phalt is added to the process water as an emulsion and pre- 
cipitated onto fiber by the addition of alum. 


Flame-Retardant Composites 


Two general application methods are available for improv- 
ing the fire performance of composites with fire-retardant 
chemicals. One method consists of pressure impregnating 
the wood with waterborne or organic solvent-borne fire 
retardant chemicals (AWPA 2007a). The second method 
consists of applying fire-retardant chemical coatings to the 
wood surface. The pressure impregnation method is usually 
more effective and longer lasting; however, this technique is 
standardized only for plywood. It is not generally used with 
structural flake, particle, or fiber composites, because it can 
cause swelling that permanently damages the wood—adhe- 
sive bonds in the composite and results in the degradation of 
some physical and mechanical properties of the composite. 
For wood in existing constructions, surface application of 
fire-retardant paints or other finishes offers a possible meth- 
od to reduce flame spread. 


Preservative-Treated Composites 


Composites can be protected from attack by decay fungi 
and harmful insects by applying selected chemicals as wood 
preservatives. The degree of protection obtained depends 

on the kind of preservative used and the ability to achieve 
proper penetration and retention of the chemicals. Wood 
preservatives can be applied using pressurized or non-pres- 
surized processes (AWPA 2007b). As in the application of 
fire-retardant chemicals, the pressurized application of wood 
preservatives is generally performed after manufacture and 
is standardized for plywood. Post-manufacture pressurized 
treatments are not standardized for all types of flake, par- 
ticle, or fiber composite due to the potential for swelling. 
Preservatives can be added during the composite manu- 
facturing process, but the preservative must be resistant to 
vaporization during hot pressing. Proprietary flakeboard and 
fiberboard products with incorporated nonvolatile preser- 
vatives have been commercialized. Common preservative 
treatments include ammoniacal copper quat (ACQ), copper 
azol (CA), and boron compounds. 


Performance and Standards 


Standards for conventional wood-based composite products 
are typically established under a series of internationally 


11-15 


Figure 11-13. Medium-density fiberboard with veneer 
overlay. Edges can be shaped and finished as required 
by end product. 


accredited consensus review processes involving users, pro- 
ducers, and general interests. Then, commercial wood com- 
posites are manufactured to conform to these commercial 
product or performance standards (Table 11—2). These prod- 
uct or performance standards are cited in the International 
Building Code (IBC) and other similar documents. The IBC 
is the model building code produced by the International 
Code Council (ICC), a non-profit organization established in 
1994 dedicated to developing a single set of comprehensive 
and coordinated construction codes. Since the adoption of 
the first edition of the IBC in 2000, most building codes in 
the U.S. are based on the IBC. Previously, there were three 
model code organizations that produced model codes with 
largely regional acceptance. The ICC also produces the In- 
ternational Residential Code (IRC) and other related model 
code documents. 


The ICC—Evaluation Service (ICC-—ES) issues advisory 
reports on their evaluation of building products, compo- 
nents, methods, and materials for their compliance with the 
IBC. The ICC-ES was created in 2003 with the merger of 
the four existing evaluation services. ICC-ES also issues 
ICC-ES Acceptance Criteria documents for specific types 
of products that specify the performance criteria and the 
data that needs to be submitted for the evaluations. These 
evaluation reports and the acceptance criteria documents are 
available on the web site of the ICC—ES (www.icc-es.org). 


Types of Product Standards 


Product standards may be classified as manufacturing 
standards or performance standards. The best example of a 
manufacturing method standard is Voluntary Product Stan- 
dard PS 1-07 for construction and industrial plywood (NIST 
2007). Specifications in the standard include which wood 
species and grades of veneer may be used, what repairs are 
permissible, and how repairs must be made. Limited per- 
formance-based evaluations may also be specified in manu- 
facturing standards for issues relating to adhesive durability 
and strength. 


11-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Standard PS 2—04 (NIST 2004) is a performance-based 
standard because it applies to all structural-use wood-based 
panels, including plywood and OSB. This standard includes 
performance requirements and test methods suitable for a 
given application (qualification) and also require that prop- 
erties of a qualified product remain in control during pro- 
duction over time (certification). With respect to plywood, 
the PS 2—04 standard is not a replacement for PS 1-07, 
which contains necessary veneer-grade and adhesive-bond 
requirements as well as lay-up provisions, but it is broad 
enough to also include many plywood grades not covered 
under PS 1-07. PS 2-04 specifies that certification be per- 
formed by an independent third party. 


The American National Standards for particleboard and 
MDF (ANSI A208.1 and A208.2 respectively) are sponsored 
by the Composite Panel Association (CPA) in Leesburg, 
Virginia (CPA 2009a, b). These performance standards 
require the composite products to show certain minimally 
acceptable physical and mechanical properties. The test re- 
quirements give some indication of product quality, but the 
tests were not specifically developed to correlate with per- 
formance of whole panels in specific end uses. 


Role of Standards in Construction 


Conventional wood-based composite panels and lumber ele- 
ments manufactured in conformance with product standards 
(Table 11-2) are approved under the International Build- 
ing Code. These wood-based composites can be used for 
construction applications such as sheathing for roofs, sub- 
flooring, and walls. Similarly, many types of wood-based 
composite lumber can be used for joists, purlins, stringers, 
beams, and columns. 


Design properties and basic installation guidelines of 
structural-use panels have become standardized by the ICC. 
The ICC requires independent third-party certification of 
these panels, and several such third-party certification agen- 
cies exist, such as APA—The Engineered Wood Association 
(www.apawood.org) and TECO (www.tecotested.com). 
These agencies and others offer a variety of technical infor- 
mation on the proper selection, design, and installation of 
structural-use panels. 


Plywood panels conforming to PS 1—07 are marked with 
grade stamps (Fig. 1 1—6a,b). Flake-based composites, such 
as OSB, are usually marketed as conforming to a product 
standard for sheathing or single-layer sub-flooring or un- 
derlayment and are also marked with grade stamps (Fig. 
11-6c,d). 


Structural-use panels are also span-rated. Span ratings re- 
fer to on-center spacing of support members (expressed in 
inches), with the long panel dimension (in plywood this is 
the same direction as the face grain) placed across the sup- 
ports, assuming that there are at least two spans (a minimum 
of three supports). Span-rating of construction plywood 

and OSB simplifies materials specification in light-frame 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


construction by allowing specification without resorting to 
specific structural engineering design calculations. Panels in 
PS 2-04 are designated by application (wall, roof, sub-floor, 
or single floor) and by span rating. Specification by applica- 
tion and span is more convenient for builders than specifica- 
tion by species or species group, veneer grade, and panel 
thickness. A panel may be suitable for use as either roof 
sheathing or sub-flooring, with different span ratings for the 
two applications. Such panels will have a dual span-rating, 
the first (and larger) number indicating allowable span when 
used as roof sheathing, the second number indicating the 
allowable span when used as sub-flooring. 


Glulam Timber 


Structural glued-laminated timber (glulam) is one of the 
oldest glued engineered wood products. Glulam is an en- 
gineered, stress-rated product that consists of two or more 
layers of lumber that are glued together with the grain of all 
layers, which are referred to as laminations, parallel to the 
length. Glulam is defined as a material that is made from 
suitably selected and prepared pieces of wood either in a 
straight or curved form, with the grain of all pieces essen- 
tially parallel to the longitudinal axis of the member. The 
maximum lamination thickness permitted is 50 mm (2 in.), 
and the laminations are typically made of standard 25- or 
50-mm- (nominal 1- or 2-in.-) thick lumber. North American 
standards require that glulam be manufactured in an ap- 
proved manufacturing plant. Because the lumber is joined 
end to end, edge to edge, and face to face, the size of glulam 
is limited only by the capabilities of the manufacturing plant 
and the transportation system. 


Douglas Fir—Larch, Southern Pine, Hem—Fir, and Spruce— 
Pine—Fir (SPF) are commonly used for glulam in the United 
States. Nearly any species can be used for glulam timber, 
provided the mechanical and physical properties are suitable 
and gluing properties acceptable. Industry standards cover 
many softwoods and hardwoods, and procedures are in 
place for including other species. 


Advantages 


Compared with sawn timbers as well as other structural 
materials, glulam has several distinct advantages. These in- 
clude size capability, architectural effects, seasoning, varia- 
tion of cross sections, grades, and effect on the environment. 


Size Capabilities 

Glulam offers the possibility of manufacturing structural 
timbers that are much larger than the trees from which the 
component lumber was sawn. In the past, the United States 
had access to large trees that could produce relatively large 
sawn timbers. However, the present trend is to harvest 
smaller diameter trees on much shorter rotations, and nearly 
all new sawmills are built to accommodate relatively small 
logs. By combining the lumber in glulam, the production of 


large structural elements is possible. Straight members up 
to 30 m (100 ft) long are not uncommon, and some span up 
to 43 m (140 ft). Sections deeper than 2 m (7 ft) have been 
used. Thus, glulam offers the potential to produce large tim- 
bers from small trees. 


Architectural Effects 


By curving lumber during the manufacturing process, a 
variety of architectural effects can be obtained with glulam 
that are impossible or very difficult with other materials 
(Fig. 11-14). The degree of curvature is controlled by the 
thickness of the laminations. Thus, glulam with moderate 
curvature is generally manufactured with standard 19-mm- 
(nominal 1-in.-) thick lumber. Low curvatures are possible 
with standard 38-mm (nominal 2-in.) lumber, whereas 

13 mm (1/2 in.) or thinner material may be required for very 
sharp curves. As noted later in this chapter, the radius of 
curvature is limited to between 100 and 125 times the 
lamination thickness. 


Seasoning Advantages 


The lumber used in the manufacture of glulam must be sea- 
soned or dried prior to use, so the effects of checking and 
other drying defects are minimized. This allows design on 
the basis of seasoned wood, which permits greater design 
values than can be assigned to unseasoned timber. 


Varying Cross Sections 


Structural elements can be designed with varying cross 
sections along their length as determined by strength and 
stiffness requirements. Similarly, arches often have varying 
cross sections as determined by design requirements. 


Varying Grades 


One major advantage of glulam is that a large quantity 

of lower grade lumber can be used within the less highly 
stressed laminations of the beams. Grades are often varied 
within the beams so that the highest grades are used in the 
highly stressed laminations near the top and bottom edges, 
with the lower grades used in the inner section (toward the 
center) of the beams. Species can also be varied to match 
the structural requirements of the laminations. 


Types of Glulam Combinations 
Bending Members 


The configuring of various grades of lumber to form a 
glulam cross section is commonly referred to as a glulam 
combination. Glulam combinations subjected to flexural 
loads, called bending combinations, were developed to 
provide the most efficient and economical section for resist- 
ing bending stress caused by loads applied perpendicular 
to the wide faces of the laminations. This type of glulam is 
commonly referred to as a horizontally laminated member. 
Lower grades of laminating lumber are commonly used for 
the center portion of the combination, or core, where bend- 
ing stress is low, while a higher grade of material is placed 


11-17 


Figure 11-14. Erected in 1934 at the Forest Products 
Laboratory in Madison, Wisconsin, this building is one 
of the first constructed with glued-laminated timbers 
arched, designed, and built using engineering prin- 
ciples. 


on the outside faces where bending stress is relatively high. 
To optimize the bending stiffness of this type of glulam 
member, equal amounts of high-quality laminations on the 
outside faces should be included to produce a “balanced” 
combination. To optimize bending strength, the combination 
can be “unbalanced” with more high-quality laminations 
placed on the tension side of the member compared with the 
quality used on the compression side. For high-quality lum- 
ber placed on the tension side of the glulam combination, 
stringent requirements are placed on knot size, slope 

of grain, and lumber stiffness. 


For compression-side laminations, knot size and slope-of- 
grain requirements are less stringent and only lumber stiff- 
ness is given high priority. In the case where the glulam 
member is used over continuous supports, the combina- 
tion would need to be designed as a balanced member for 
strength and stiffness because of the exposure of both the 
top and bottom of the beam to tensile stresses. The knot and 
slope-of-grain requirements for this type of combination 
are generally applied equally to both the top and bottom 
laminations. 


Axial Members 


Glulam axial combinations were developed to provide the 
most efficient and economical section for resisting axial 
forces and flexural loads applied parallel to the wide faces 
of the laminations. Members having loads applied parallel 
to the wide faces of the laminations are commonly referred 
to as vertically laminated members. Unlike the practice for 
bending combinations, the same grade of lamination is used 
throughout the axial combination. Axial combinations 

may also be loaded perpendicular to the wide face of the 


11-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


laminations, but the nonselective placement of material 
often results in a less efficient and less economical member 
than does the bending combination. As with bending com- 
binations, knot and slope-of-grain requirements apply based 
on whether the axial member will be used as a tension or 
compression member. 


Curved Members 


Efficient use of lumber in cross sections of curved glulam 
combinations is similar to that in cross sections of straight, 
horizontally laminated combinations. Tension and compres- 
sion stresses are analyzed as tangential stresses in the curved 
portion of the member. A unique behavior in these curved 
members is the formation of radial stresses perpendicular to 
the wide faces of the laminations. As the radius of curvature 
of the glulam member decreases, the radial stresses formed 
in the curved portion of the beam increase. Because of the 
relatively low strength of lumber in tension perpendicular- 
to-the-grain compared with tension parallel-to-the-grain, 
these radial stresses become a critical factor in designing 
curved glulam combinations. Curved members are common- 
ly manufactured with standard 19- and 38-mm- (nominal 

1- and 2-in.-) thick lumber. Naturally, the curvature that is 
obtainable with the standard 19-mm- (nominal 1-in.-) 

thick lumber will be sharper than that for the standard 
38-mm- (nominal 2-in.-) thick lumber. 


Tapered Straight Members 


Glulam beams are often tapered to meet architectural re- 
quirements, provide pitched roofs, facilitate drainage, and 
lower wall height requirements at the end supports. The 
taper is achieved by sawing the member across one or more 
laminations at the desired slope. It is recommended that 

the taper cut be made only on the compression side of the 
glulam member, because violating the continuity of the 
tension-side laminations would decrease the overall strength 
of the member. 


Standards and Specifications 
Manufacture 


The ANSI/AITC A190.1 standard of the American National 
Standards Institute (AITC 2007a) contains requirements for 
the production, testing, and certification of structural glulam 
timber in the United States. A standard for glulam poles, 
ANSI 05.2 (ANSI 2006), addresses special requirements for 
utility uses. 


Derivation of Design Values 


ASTM D 3737 (ASTM 2008a) covers procedures to estab- 
lish design values for structural glulam timber. Properties 
considered include bending, tension, compression parallel to 
grain, modulus of elasticity, horizontal shear, radial tension, 
and compression perpendicular to grain. 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Design Values and Procedures 


Manufacturers of glulam timber have standardized the target 
design values in bending for beams. For softwoods, these 
design values are given in AITC 117, “Standard Specifica- 
tions for Structural Glued-Laminated Timber of Softwood 
Species” (AITC 2004a). This specification contains design 
values and recommended modification of stresses for the 
design of glulam timber members in the United States. A 
comparable specification for hardwoods is AITC 119, “Stan- 
dard Specifications for Structural Glued-Laminated Timber 
of Hardwood Species” (AITC 1996). For additional design 
information, see the Zimber Construction Manual (AITC 
2004b). 


Manufacture 


The manufacture of glulam timber must follow recognized 
national standards to justify the specified engineering design 
values. When glulam is properly manufactured, both the 
quality of the wood and the adhesive bonds should demon- 
strate a balance in structural performance. 


The ANSI/AITC standard A190.1 (AITC 2007a) has a two- 
phase approach to all phases of manufacturing. First is the 
qualification phase, in which all equipment and personnel 
critical to the production of a quality product are thoroughly 
examined by a third-party agency and the strength of sam- 
ples of glued joints is determined. In the second phase, after 
successful qualification, daily quality assurance procedures 
and criteria are established, which are targeted to keep each 
of the critical phases of the process under control. An em- 
ployee is assigned responsibility for supervising the daily 
testing and inspection. The third-party agency makes unan- 
nounced visits to the plants to monitor the manufacturing 
process and the finished product and to examine the daily 
records of the quality assurance testing. 


The manufacturing process can be divided into four major 
parts: (a) drying and grading the lumber, (b) end jointing the 
lumber, (c) face bonding, and (d) finishing and fabrication. 
In instances where the glulam will be used in high-moisture- 
content conditions, the member must also be pressure- 
treated with preservative. 


A final critical step in ensuring the quality of glulam is pro- 
tection of the glulam timber during transit and storage. 


Lumber Drying and Grading 


To minimize dimensional changes following manufacture 
and to take advantage of the increased structural properties 
assigned to lumber compared with large sawn timbers, the 
lumber must be properly dried prior to glulam manufacture. 
This generally means kiln drying. Matching the moisture 
content of the glulam timber at the time of manufacture to 
that which it will attain in application minimizes shrinkage 
and swelling, the main causes of checking. Most manufac- 
turers use a continuous in-line moisture meter to check the 


moisture content of each piece of lumber as it enters the 
manufacturing process. Pieces that have a high moisture 
level are removed and redried. 


Grading standards published by the regional lumber grading 
associations describe the characteristics that are permitted 
in various grades of lumber. Manufacturing standards for 
glulam timber describe the combination of lumber grades 
necessary for specific design values (AITC 117) (AITC 
2004). The rules for visually graded lumber are based en- 
tirely upon the characteristics that are readily apparent. The 
lumber grade description consists of limiting characteristics 
for knot sizes, slope of grain, wane, and several other char- 
acteristics. 


Manufacturers generally purchase graded lumber and verify 
the grades through visual inspection of each piece and, if E- 
rated, testing of a sample. To qualify the material for some 
of the higher design stresses for glulam timber, manufactur- 
ers must also conduct additional grading for material to be 
used in the tension zone of certain beams. Another option 

is to purchase lumber manufactured under a quality assur- 
ance system that meets the required tensile strength. Another 
option practiced by at least one manufacturer has been to 
use laminated veneer lumber (LVL) to provide the required 
tensile strength. 


End Jointing 


To manufacture glulam timber in lengths beyond those com- 
monly available for lumber, laminations must be made by 
end jointing lumber to the proper length. The most common 
end joint, a fingerjoint, is about 28 mm (1.1 in.) long. Other 
configurations are also acceptable, provided they meet spe- 
cific strength and durability requirements. The advantages 
of fingerjoints are that they require only a short length of 
lumber to manufacture (thus reducing waste) and continuous 
production equipment is readily available. Well-made joints 
are critical to ensure adequate performance of glulam tim- 
ber. Careful control at each stage of the process—determin- 
ing lumber quality, cutting the joint, applying the adhesive, 
mating, applying end pressure, and curing—is necessary to 
produce consistent high strength joints. 


Face Bonding 


The assembly of laminations into full-depth members is an- 
other critical stage in manufacture. To obtain clear, parallel, 
and gluable surfaces, laminations must be planed to strict 
tolerances. The best procedure is to plane the two wide faces 
of the laminations just prior to the gluing process. This en- 
sures that the final assembly will be rectangular and that the 
pressure will be applied evenly. Adhesives that have been 
pre-qualified are then spread, usually with a glue extruder. 
Phenol resorcinol is the most commonly used adhesive for 
face gluing, but other adhesives that have been adequately 
evaluated and proven to meet performance and durability 
requirements may also be used. 


11-19 


The laminations are then assembled into the required layup; 
after the adhesive is given the proper open assembly time, 
pressure is applied. The most common method for applying 
pressure is with clamping beds; the pressure is applied with 
either a mechanical or hydraulic system. This results in a 
batch-type process, and the adhesive is allowed to cure at 
room temperature from 6 to 24 h. Some newer automated 
clamping systems include continuous hydraulic presses and 
radio-frequency curing to shorten the face gluing process 
from hours to minutes. Upon completion of the face bond- 
ing process, the adhesive is expected to have attained 90% 
or more of its bond strength. During the next few days, cur- 
ing continues, but at a much slower rate. 


The face bonding process is monitored by controls in the 
lumber planing, adhesive mixing, and adhesive spreading 
and clamping processes. Performance is evaluated by con- 
ducting shear tests on samples cut off as end trim from the 
finished glulam timber. Thus, the adhesive bonds are ex- 
pected to develop nearly the full strength of the wood soon 
after manufacture. 


Finishing and Fabrication 


After the glulam timber is removed from the clamping 
system, the wide faces are planed to remove the adhesive 
that has squeezed out between adjacent laminations and to 
smooth out any slight irregularities between the edges of 
adjacent laminations. As a result, the finished glulam timber 
is slightly narrower than nominal dimension lumber. The 
remaining two faces of the member can be lightly planed or 
sanded. 


The appearance requirements of the beam dictate the ad- 
ditional finishing necessary at this point. Historically, three 
classifications of finishing have been included in the in- 
dustry standard, AITC 110: Industrial, Architectural, and 
Premium (AITC 2001). Industrial appearance is generally 
applicable when appearance is not a primary concern, such 
as industrial plants and warehouses. Architectural appear- 
ance is suitable for most applications where appearance is 
an important requirement. Premium appearance is the high- 
est classification. The primary difference among these clas- 
sifications is the amount of knot holes and occasional planer 
skips that are permitted. A recently introduced classification, 
called Framing, consists of hit-and-miss planing and permits 
a significant amount of adhesive to remain on the surface. 
This finishing is intended for uses that require one member 
to have the same width as the lumber used in manufacture 
for framing into walls. These members are often covered in 
the finished structure. 


The next step in the manufacturing process is fabrication, 
where the final cuts are made, holes are drilled, connec- 
tors are added, and a finish or sealer is applied, if specified. 
For various members, different degrees of prefabrication 
are done at this point. Trusses may be partially or fully 


11-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


assembled. Moment splices can be fully fabricated, then 
disconnected for transportation and erection. End sealers, 
surface sealers, primer coats, and wrapping with waterproof 
paper or plastic all help to stabilize the moisture content of 
the glulam timber between the time it is manufactured and 
installed. The extent of protection necessary depends upon 
the end use and must be specified. 


Preservative Treatment 


In instances where the moisture content of the finished 
glulam timber will approach or exceed 20% (in most 
exterior and some interior uses), the glulam timber should 
be preservative-treated following AITC 109 (AITC 2007b). 
Three main types of preservatives are available: creosote, 
oilborne, and waterborne. Creosote and oilborne preserva- 
tives are applied to the finished glulam timbers. Some light 
oil solvent treatments can be applied to the lumber prior to 
gluing, but the suitability must be verified with the manu- 
facturer. Waterborne preservatives are best applied to the 
lumber prior to the laminating and manufacturing process 
because they can lead to excessive checking if applied to 
large finished glulam timbers. 


Structural Composite Lumber 


Structural composite lumber (SCL) was developed in re- 
sponse to the increasing demand for high-quality lumber at 
a time when it was becoming difficult to obtain this type of 
lumber from the forest resource. Structural composite lum- 
ber products are characterized by smaller pieces of wood 
glued together into sizes common for solid-sawn lumber. 


One type of SCL product is manufactured by laminating 
veneer with all plies parallel to the length. This product is 
called laminated veneer lumber (LVL) and consists of spe- 
cially graded veneer. Another type of SCL product consists 
of strands of wood or strips of veneer glued together under 
high pressures and temperatures. Depending upon the com- 
ponent material, this product is called laminated strand lum- 
ber (LSL), parallel strand lumber (PSL), or oriented strand 
lumber (OSL). These types of SCL products can be manu- 
factured from raw materials, such as aspen or other under- 
utilized species, that are not commonly used for structural 
applications. Different widths of lumber can be ripped from 
SCL for various uses. Compared with similar size solid- 
sawn lumber, SCL often provides a stronger, more reliable 
structural member that can often span greater distances and 
has less dimensional change. 


Structural composite lumber is a growing segment of the en- 
gineered wood products industry. It is used as a replacement 
for lumber in various applications and in the manufacture of 
other engineered wood products, such as prefabricated wood 
I-joists, which take advantage of engineering design values 
that can be greater than those commonly assigned to sawn 
lumber. 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Laminated Veneer Lumber 


Work in the 1940s on LVL targeted the production of high- 
strength parts for aircraft structures using Sitka spruce ve- 
neer. Research on LVL in the 1970s was aimed at defining 
the effects of processing variables for veneer up to 12.7 mm 
(1/2 in.) thick. Since the 1990s, production of LVL uses 
veneers 3.2 to 2.5 mm (1/8 to 1/10 in.) thick, which are hot 
pressed with phenol-formaldehyde adhesive into lengths 
from 2.4 to 18.3 m (8 to 60 ft) or more. Today LVL is com- 
monly used as the flanges in composite I-joists. 


Veneer for the manufacture of LVL must be carefully se- 
lected for the product to achieve the desired engineering 
properties. Veneers are often sorted using ultrasonic testing 
to ensure that the finished product will have the desired en- 
gineering properties. 


End joints between individual veneers may be staggered 
along the product to minimize their effect on strength. These 
end joints may be butt joints, or the veneer ends may over- 
lap for some distance to provide load transfer. Some produc- 
ers provide structural end joints in the veneers using either 
scarf or fingerjoints. LVL may also be made in 2.4-m (8-ft) 
lengths, having no end joints in the veneer; longer pieces 

are then formed by end-jointing these pieces to create the 
desired length. 


Sheets of LVL are commonly produced in 0.6- to 1.2-m 

(2- to 4-ft) widths in a thickness of 38 mm (1.5 in.). Contin- 
uous presses can be used to form a potentially endless sheet, 
which is cut to the desired length. Various widths of lumber 
can be manufactured at the plant or the retail facility. 


Parallel Strand Lumber 


Parallel strand lumber (PSL) is defined as a composite of 
wood strand elements with wood fibers oriented primarily 
along the length of the member. The least dimension of the 
strands must not exceed 6.4 mm (0.25 in.), and the average 
length of the strands must be a minimum of 150 times the 
least dimension. PSL is a proprietary product, sold as Paral- 
lam®. It is often used for large beams and columns, typically 
as a replacement of solid-sawn lumber or glulam. 


Parallel strand lumber is manufactured using veneer about 

3 mm (1/8 in.) thick, which is then clipped into strands 
about 19 mm (3/4 in.) wide. These strands are commonly 

at least 0.6 m (24 in.) long. The manufacturing process was 
designed to use the material from roundup of the log in the 
veneer cutting operation as well as other less than full-width 
veneer (Fig. 11-15). Thus, the process can utilize waste ma- 
terial from a plywood or LVL operation. Species commonly 
used for PSL include Douglas-fir, southern pines, western 
hemlock, and yellow-poplar, but there are no restrictions 

on using other species. 


The strands are coated with a waterproof structural adhe- 
sive, commonly phenol-resorcinol formaldehyde, and 
oriented in a press using special equipment to ensure proper 


orientation and distribution. The pressing operation results 
in densification of the material, and the adhesive is cured 
using microwave technology. Billets larger than those 

of LVL are commonly produced; a typical size is 0.28 by 
0.48 m (11 by 19 in.). This product can then be sawn into 
smaller pieces, if desired. As with LVL, a continuous press 
is used so that the length of the product is limited by han- 
dling restrictions. 


Laminated Strand Lumber and Oriented 
Strand Lumber 


Laminated strand lumber (LSL) and oriented strand lumber 
(OSL) products are an extension of the technology used to 
produce oriented strandboard (OSB) structural panels. The 
products have more similarities than differences. The main 
difference is that the aspect ratio of strands used in LSL 

is higher than for OSL (AF&PA 2006). One type of LSL 
uses strands that are about 0.3 m (12 in.) long, which is 
somewhat longer than the strands commonly used for OSB. 
Waterproof adhesives are used in the manufacture of LSL. 
One type of product uses an isocyanate type of adhesive 
that is sprayed on the strands and cured by steam injection. 
This product needs a greater degree of alignment of the 
strands than does OSB and higher pressures, which result in 
increased densification. Both LSL and OSL are proprietary 
products; LSL is sold as TimberStrand®. Applications such 
as studs and millwork are common. 


Advantages and Uses 


In contrast with sawn lumber, the strength-reducing charac- 
teristics of SCL are dispersed within the veneer or strands 
and have much less effect on strength properties. Thus, 
relatively high design values can be assigned to strength 
properties for both LVL and PSL. Whereas both LSL and 
OSL have somewhat lower design values, they have the 
advantage of being produced from a raw material that need 
not be in a log size large enough for peeling into veneer. All 
SCL products are made with structural adhesives and are 
dependent upon a minimum level of strength in these bonds. 


All SCL products are made from veneers or strands that are 
dried to a moisture content that is slightly less than that for 
most service conditions. Thus, little change in moisture con- 
tent will occur in many protected service conditions. When 
used indoors, this results in a product that is less likely to 
warp or shrink in service. However, the porous nature of 
both LVL and PSL means that these products can quickly 
absorb water unless they are provided with some protection. 


All types of SCL products can be substituted for sawn lum- 
ber products in many applications. Laminated veneer lumber 
is used extensively for scaffold planks and in the flanges of 
prefabricated I-joists, which take advantage of the relatively 
high design properties. Both LVL and PSL beams are used 
as headers and major load-carrying elements in construc- 
tion. The LSL and OSL products are used for band joists in 


11-21 


Parallel strand lumber 


Veneer lathe 


Pressure 
& curing 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Clipper 


<_ =, 
~~ | Defect 
—— removal 
=~ Adhesive 


J application 


Finished 
product 


Figure 11-15. Generalized process for manufacturing PSL. (Courtesy of iLevel by Weyerhaeuser, 


Federal Way, Washington. Used by permission.) 


floor construction and as substitutes for studs and rafters in 
wall and roof construction. Various types of SCL are also 
used in a number of nonstructural applications, such as the 
manufacture of windows and doors. 


Standards and Specifications 


The ASTM D 5456 (ASTM 2008b) standard provides meth- 
ods to develop design properties for SCL products as well as 
requirements for quality assurance during production. Each 
manufacturer of SCL products is responsible for developing 
the required information on properties and ensuring that the 
minimum levels of quality are maintained during produc- 
tion. An independent inspection agency is required to moni- 
tor the quality assurance program. 


Unlike lumber, no standard grades or design stresses have 
been established for SCL. Each manufacturer may have 
unique design properties and procedures. Thus, the designer 
should consult information provided by the manufacturer. 


Wood-—Nonwood Composite 
Materials 


Wood may be combined with inorganic materials and 

with plastics to produce composite products with unique 
properties. Wood—nonwood composites typically contain 
wood elements suspended in a matrix material (for example 
in fiber-reinforced gypsum board, or in thermoplastic mate- 
rial), in which the proportion of wood elements may account 
for less than 60% of product mass. 


11-22 


The primary impetus for developing such products has come 
from one or more of the following research and develop- 
ment goals: 


e Develop “green” or “environmentally benign” products 
with enhanced sustainability. 


e Reduce material costs by combining a lower cost mate- 
rial (acting as a filler or extender) with an expensive 
material. 


e Develop products that can utilize recycled materials and 
be recyclable in themselves. 


e Produce composite products that exhibit specific prop- 
erties that are superior to those of the component mate- 
rials alone (for example, increased strength-to-weight 
ratio, improved abrasion resistance, enhance resistance 
to fire, decay, and insects). 


Composites made from wood and other non-wood materi- 
als create enormous opportunities to match product perfor- 
mance to end-use requirements. The following discussion 
includes the most common type of wood—nonwood compos- 
ites: inorganic-bonded and wood-thermoplastic composites. 


Inorganic-Bonded Composite Materials 


Inorganic-bonded wood composites have a long and varied 
history that started with commercial production in Austria 
in 1914. They are now used in many countries in the world, 
mostly in panel form. Applications include panel products, 
siding, roofing tiles, and precast building members. 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Inorganic-bonded wood composites are molded products or 
boards that contain between 10% and 70% by weight wood 
particles or fibers and conversely 90% to 30% inorganic 
binder. Acceptable properties of an inorganic-bonded wood 
composite can be obtained only when the wood particles are 
fully encased, and the binder is a continuous matrix materi- 
al. This differs considerably from conventional wood-based 
composites, where flakes or particles are “spot welded” by 

a binder applied as a finely distributed spray or powder. 
Because of this difference and because hardened inorganic 
binders have a higher density than most thermosetting 
resins, the required amount of inorganic binder per unit 
volume of composite material is much higher than that of 
resin-bonded wood composites. The properties of inorganic- 
bonded wood composites are significantly influenced by the 
amount and type of the inorganic binder and the wood ele- 
ment as well as the density of the composites. 


Inorganic-bonded composites include gypsum-bonded, 
cement-bonded, and ceramic-bonded composites. Magnesia 
and Portland cement are the most common cement binders. 
Gypsum and magnesia cement are sensitive to moisture, 
and their use is generally restricted to interior applications. 
Composites bonded with Portland cement are more durable 
than those bonded with gypsum or magnesia cement and are 
used in both interior and exterior applications. Inorganic- 
bonded composites are made by blending wood elements 
with inorganic materials in the presence of water and allow- 
ing the inorganic material to cure or “set up” to make a rigid 
composite. Some inorganic-bonded composites are very re- 
sistant to deterioration by decay fungi, insects, and vermin. 
Most have appreciable fire resistance. 


An advantage of inorganic-bonded composites is that their 
manufacture is adaptable to either end of the cost and tech- 
nology spectrum. This is facilitated by the fact that no heat 
is required to cure the inorganic material. This versatility 
makes inorganic-bonded composites ideally suited to a va- 
riety of lignocellulosic materials. With a very small capital 
investment, satisfactory inorganic-bonded lignocellulosic 
composite building materials can be produced on a small 
scale using mostly unskilled labor. If the market for such 
composites increases, technology can be introduced to in- 
crease manufacturing throughput. The labor force can be 
trained concurrently with the gradual introduction of more 
sophisticated technology. 


Gypsum-Bonded Composite Materials 


Paper-faced gypsum boards have been widely used since the 
1950s for the interior lining of walls and ceilings. They are 
commonly called drywall because they often replaced wet 
plaster systems. These panels are critical for good fire rat- 
ings in walls and ceilings. Paper-faced gypsum boards also 
find use as exterior wall sheathing. Gypsum sheathing pan- 
els are primarily used in commercial construction, usually 
over steel studding, and are distinguished from gypsum dry- 


wall by their water repellent additives in the paper facings 
and gypsum core. The facings of drywall and of gypsum 
sheathing panels are adhered to the gypsum core, providing 
the panels with impact resistance, and bending strength and 
stiffness. The paper facings of gypsum panels are derived 
from recycled paper fiber. 


An alternative to adhered facings is to incorporate lignocel- 
lulosic fiber (typically recycled paper fiber) in the gypsum 
core to make what are termed fiber-reinforced gypsum pan- 
els. In the production process, a paste of gypsum and water 
is mixed with the recycled paper fiber and extruded into a 
panel without facings. Shortly after formation, the panel is 
dried in an oven. Bonding occurs between the gypsum and 
the fiber as hydrate crystals form. 


Fiber-reinforced gypsum panels are typically stronger and 
more resistant to abrasion and indentation than paper-faced 
drywall panels and also have a moderate fastener-holding 
capability. They are marketed for use as interior finish pan- 
els (drywall). Additives can provide a moderate degree of 
water resistance, for use as sheathing panels, floor underlay- 
ment, roof underlayment, or tile-backer board. 


Cement-Bonded Composite Materials 


The properties of cement-bonded composites are influenced 
by wood element characteristics (species, size, geometry, 
chemical composition), cement type, wood—water—cement 
ratio, environmental temperature, and cure time (Jorge and 
others 2004). They are heavier than conventional wood- 
based composites but lighter than concrete. Therefore they 
can replace concrete in construction, specifically in applica- 
tions that are not subjected to loads. Wood—cement com- 
posites provide an option for using wood residues, or even 
agricultural residues. However, species selection can be im- 
portant because many species contain sugars and extractives 
that retard the cure of cement (Bowyer and others 2007). 


Magnesia-Cement-Bonded Composite Materials 


Fewer boards bonded with magnesia cement have been 
produced than Portland-cement-bonded panels, mainly be- 
cause of price. However, magnesia cement does offer some 
manufacturing advantages over Portland cement. First, the 
various sugars in lignocellulosics do not have as much ef- 
fect on the curing and bonding. Second, magnesia cement is 
more tolerant of high water content during production. This 
opens up possibilities to use lignocellulosics not amenable 
to Portland cement composites, without leaching or other 
modification, and to use alternative manufacturing processes 
and products. Although composites bonded with magnesia 
cement are considered water sensitive, they are much less so 
than gypsum-bonded composites. 


One successful application of magnesia cement is a low- 
density panel made for interior ceiling and wall applications. 
In the production of this panel product, wood wool (excelsi- 
or) is laid out in a low-density mat. The mat is then sprayed 


11-23 


Figure 11-16. Commercial cement-bonded composite 
panel. (Courtesy of Ty-Mawr Lime Ltd., UK. Used by 
permission.) 


with an aqueous solution of magnesia cement, pressed, and 
cut into panels (Fig. 11-16). 


Other processes have been suggested for manufacturing 
magnesia-cement-bonded composites. For example, a slurry 
of magnesia cement, water, and lignocellulosic fiber may be 
sprayed onto existing structures as fireproofing. Extrusion 
into a pipe-type profile or other profiles is also possible. 


Portland-Cement-Bonded Composite Materials 


The most widely used cement-bonded composites are those 
bonded with Portland cement. Portland cement, when 
combined with water, reacts in a process called hydration 

to solidify into a solid stone-like mass and bind aggregate 
materials. Successfully marketed Portland-cement-bonded 
composites consist of both low-density products made with 
excelsior and high-density products made with particles and 
fibers. 


Low-density products may be used as interior ceiling and 
wall panels in commercial buildings. In addition to the 
advantages described for low-density magnesia-bonded 
composites, low-density composites bonded with Port- 
land cement offer sound control and can be decorative. In 
some parts of the world, these panels function as complete 
wall and roof decking systems. The exterior of the panels 
is coated with stucco, and the interior is plastered. High- 
density panels can be used as flooring, roof sheathing, fire 
doors, load-bearing walls, and cement forms. Fairly com- 
plex shapes, such as decorative roofing tiles or non-pressure 
pipes, can be molded or extruded. 


11-24 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


The largest volume of cement-bonded wood-based compos- 
ite materials manufactured in North America is fiber-cement 
siding. Fiber-cement siding incorporates delignified wood 
fiber into a Portland cement matrix. 


Problems and Solutions of Cement-Bonded Composite 
Materials 


The use of cement for wood-based composites involves lim- 
itations and tradeoffs. Embrittlement of the lignocellulosic 
component is known to occur and is caused by the alkaline 
environment provided by the cement matrix. In addition, 
hemicellulose, starch, sugar, tannins, and lignin, each to a 
varying degree, affect the cure rate and ultimate strength of 
these composites. To make strong and durable composites, 
measures must be taken to ensure long-term stability of the 
lignocellulosic in the cement matrix. To overcome these 
problems, various schemes have been developed. The most 
common is leaching, whereby the lignocellulosic is soaked 
in water for 1 or 2 days to extract some of the detrimental 
components. However, in some parts of the world, the water 
containing the leachate is difficult to dispose of. Low water— 
cement ratios are helpful, as is the use of curing accelerators 
like calcium carbonate. Conversely, low-alkali cements have 
been developed, but they are not readily available through- 
out the world. Two other strategies involve the use of natu- 
ral pozzolans and carbon dioxide treatment. 


Pozzolans—Pozzolans are defined as siliceous or siliceous 
and aluminous materials that can react chemically with 
calcium hydroxide (slaked lime) at normal temperatures in 
the presence of water to form cement compounds. Some 
common pozzolanic materials include volcanic ash, fly ash, 
rice husk ash, and condensed silica fume. All these materials 
can react with lime at normal temperatures to make a natural 
water-resistant cement. 


In general, when pozzolans are blended with Portland ce- 
ment, they increase the strength of the cement but slow the 
cure time. More importantly, pozzolans decrease the alkalin- 
ity of the product. 


Carbon Dioxide Treatment—In the manufacture of a 
cement-bonded lignocellulosic composite, the cement hy- 
dration process normally requires from 8 to 24 h to develop 
sufficient board strength and cohesiveness to permit the 
release of consolidation pressure. By exposing the cement to 
carbon dioxide, the initial hardening stage can be reduced to 
less than 5 min. This phenomenon results from the chemical 
reaction of carbon dioxide with calcium hydroxide to form 
calcium carbonate and water. 


Reduction of initial cure time of the cement-bonded ligno- 
cellulosic composite is not the only advantage of using car- 
bon dioxide injection. Certain species of wood have various 
amounts of sugars and tannins that interfere with the hydra- 
tion or setting of Portland cement. Research has shown that 
the use of carbon dioxide injection reduces the likelihood 
that these compounds will inhibit the hydration process, 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


thus allowing the use of a wider range of species. In addi- 
tion, research has demonstrated that composites treated with 
carbon dioxide can be twice as stiff and strong as untreated 
composites (Geimer and others 1992). Finally, carbon- 
dioxide-treated composites do not experience efflorescence 
(migration of calctum hydroxide to surface of material), 

so the appearance of the surface of the final product is not 
changed over time. 


Ceramic-Bonded Composite Materials 


In the last few years a new class of inorganic binders, non- 
sintered ceramic inorganic binders, has been developed. 
These non-sintered ceramic binders are formed by an acid— 
base aqueous reaction between a divalent or trivalent oxide 
and an acid phosphate or phosphoric acid. The reaction slur- 
ry hardens rapidly, but the rate of setting can be controlled. 
With suitable selection of oxides and acid-phosphates, a 
range of binders may be produced. Recent research sug- 
gests that phosphates may be used as adhesives, cements, or 
surface augmentation materials to manufacture wood-based 
composites (Jeong and Wagh 2003, Wagh and Jeong 2003). 


As adhesives, the reaction slurry resulting from the acid— 
base reaction may be used as an adhesive similar to the cur- 
rent polymer resins. Thus, phosphate adhesives can be used 
to coat individual fibers and form a composite by binding 
the fibers to each other. The adhesives will behave much 
like current polymer resins and may be used with existing 
equipment. The binder content is typically 15% to 20 % by 
weight. 


As a cement, phosphate binders can be used to produce bulk 
composites. When conventional cement is used in fiber- 
based products, typical cement loading is approximately 
30% or higher; phosphate cements may be used in a similar 
manner. The slurry formed by the acid—base reaction may 
be mixed with fiber or any other extender to produce solid 
composites (Jeong and Wagh 2003). 


Phosphate binders may also be used for coating wood-based 
composite panels to enhance surface properties. The phos- 
phate slurry is very smooth; thin (<1 mm) coatings can be 
applied, suitable for providing fire or water resistance. 


Wood-Thermoplastic Composite Materials 


In North America and Europe, wood elements have been 
combined with thermoplastics for several decades. How- 
ever, it is only in the past decade that wood—thermoplastic 
composites have become a widely recognized commercial 
product in construction, automotive, furniture, and other 
consumer applications (Oksman Niska and Sain 2008). 
Commercialization in North America has been primarily due 
to penetration into the construction industry, first as decking 
and window profiles, followed by railing, siding, and roof- 
ing. Interior molding applications are also receiving atten- 
tion. The automotive industry in Europe has been a leader 


in using wood-thermoplastic composites for interior panel 
parts and is leading the way in developing furniture ap- 
plications. Manufacturers in Asia are targeting the furniture 
industry, in addition to interior construction applications. 
Continued research and development will expand the avail- 
able markets and each application will penetrate the global 
marketplace. 


Materials 


Broadly defined, a thermoplastic softens when heated and 
hardens when cooled. Thermoplastics selected for use with 
wood generally melt or soften at or below the thermal deg- 
radation temperature of the wood element, normally 200 to 
220 °C (392 to 428 °F). These thermoplastics include poly- 
propylene, polystyrene, vinyls, and low- and high-density 
polyethylenes. 


The term wood-thermoplastic composites is broad, and the 
class of materials can include fibers derived from wood or 
other natural sources. Geographical location often dictates 
the raw material choice. In North America, wood is the most 
common raw material, in Europe natural fibers such as jute, 
hemp, and kenaf are preferred, while rice hull flour and 
bamboo fiber are typical in Asia. The wood is incorporated 
as either fiber bundles with low aspect ratio (wood flour) or 
as single fibers with higher aspect ratio (wood fiber). Wood 
flour is processed commercially, often from post-industrial 
materials such as planer shavings, chips, and sawdust. Sev- 
eral grades are available depending upon wood species and 
particle size. Wood fibers, although more difficult to process 
than wood flour, can lead to superior composite proper- 

ties and act more as a reinforcement than as a filler. A wide 
variety of wood fibers are available from both virgin and 
recycled resources. 


Other materials can be added to affect processing and prod- 
uct performance of wood—thermoplastic composites. These 
additives can improve bonding between the thermoplastic 
and wood component (for example, coupling agents), prod- 
uct performance (impact modifiers, ultraviolet (UV) light 
stabilizers, flame retardants), and processability (lubricants). 


Wood-thermoplastic composites are of two main types. In 
the first type, the wood element serves as a reinforcing agent 
or filler in a continuous thermoplastic matrix. In the second 
type, the thermoplastic serves as a binder to the wood ele- 
ments much like conventional wood-based composites. The 
presence or absence of a continuous thermoplastic matrix 
may also determine the processability of the composite ma- 
terial. In general, if the matrix is continuous, conventional 
thermoplastic processing equipment may be used to process 
composites; however, if the matrix is not continuous, other 
processes may be required. For the purpose of discussion, 
we present two scenarios—composites with high and low 
thermoplastic content. 


11-25 


Composite Materials with High Thermoplastic Content 


The vast majority of commercially available wood—ther- 
moplastic composites have high thermoplastic content. In 
composites with high thermoplastic content, the thermoplas- 
tic component is a continuous matrix and the wood element 
serves as a reinforcement or filler. The wood content is typi- 
cally less than 60% by weight. In the great majority of re- 
inforced thermoplastic composites available commercially, 
inorganic materials (for example, glass, clays, and minerals) 
are used as reinforcements or fillers. Wood-based materials 
offer some advantages over inorganic materials: they are 
lighter, much less abrasive, and renewable. Wood elements 
reinforce the thermoplastic by stiffening and strengthening 
and can improve thermal stability of the product compared 
with that of unfilled material. 


The manufacture of thermoplastic composites is usually a 
two-step process. The raw materials are first mixed together 
in one step, and the composite blend is then formed into a 
product in the second step. The combination of these steps is 
called in-line processing, and the result is a single process- 
ing step that converts raw materials to end products. In-line 
processing can be very difficult because of control demands 
and processing trade-offs. As a result, it is often easier and 
more economical to separate the processing into a com- 
pounding step and a forming step (Clemons 2002). 


Compounding is the feeding and dispersing of the wood ele- 
ment in a molten thermoplastic to produce a homogeneous 
material. Various additives are added and moisture is re- 
moved during compounding. Compounding may be accom- 
plished using either batch mixers (for example, internal and 
thermokinetic mixers) or continuous mixers (for example, 
extruders and kneaders). 


The compounded material can be immediately pressed or 
shaped into an end product while still in its molten state 

or pelletized into small, regular pellets for future reheating 
and forming. The most common types of product-forming 
methods for wood—-thermoplastic composites involve forc- 
ing molten material through a die (sheet or profile extrusion) 
or into a cold mold (injection molding), or pressing in cal- 
enders (calendering) or between mold halves (thermoform- 
ing and compression molding). Most wood—thermoplastic 
composites in North America are formed using profile extru- 
sion. Products such as decking, siding, railings, and window 
profiles readily lend themselves to extrusion through a two- 
dimensional die (Fig. 11-17). Injection-molded applications 
such as consumer household goods and furniture parts are 
gaining importance (Fig. 11-18). Thermoforming or com- 
pression molding is the forming method of choice for the 
automotive industry. 


Several factors must be considered when processing 
wood with thermoplastics. Moisture can disrupt many 
thermoplastic processes, resulting in poor surface quality, 
voids, and unacceptable parts. Either materials must be 


11-26 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 11-17. Extruded wood-thermoplastic compos- 
ites being evaluated for a siding application (Clemons 
and Stark 2007). 


Figure 11-18. Injection-molded wood-thermoplastic 
composites in a variety of shapes and forms. 


pre-dried or vented equipment must be used to remove 
moisture. The low thermal degradation temperature of wood 
must also be considered. As a general rule, melt tempera- 
tures should be kept below 200 °C (392 °F), except for short 
periods. Higher temperatures can result in the release of 
volatiles, discoloration, odor, and embrittlement of the wood 
component. Although processing wood flour in thermoplas- 
tics is relatively easy, the low bulk density and difficulty of 
dispersing fibrous materials in thermoplastics is more dif- 
ficult. More intensive mixing and the use of special feeding 
equipment may be necessary to handle longer fibers. 


Composite Materials with Low Thermoplastic Content 


In composites with low thermoplastic content, the thermo- 
plastic component is not continuous, acting more as a binder 
for the fiber much the same way as binders in conventional 
wood-based composites. Thermoplastic content is typically 


Chapter 11 Wood-Based Composite Materials 


less than 30% by weight. In their simplest form, lignocellu- 
losic particles or fibers can be dry-blended with thermoplas- 
tic granules, flakes, or fibers and pressed into panel prod- 
ucts. An alternative is to use the thermoplastic in the form of 
a textile fiber. The thermoplastic textile fiber enables a vari- 
ety of lignocellulosics to be incorporated into a low-density, 
non-woven, textile-like mat. The mat may be a product in 
itself, or it may be consolidated into a high-density product. 


Because the thermoplastic component remains molten when 
hot, different pressing strategies must be used than when 
thermosetting binders are used. Two options have been 
developed to accommodate these types of composites. In 
the first, the material is placed in the hot press at ambient 
temperature. The press then closes and consolidates the ma- 
terial, and heat is used to melt the thermoplastic component, 
which flows around the lignocellulosic component. The 
press is then cooled, “freezing” the thermoplastic so that the 
composite can be removed from the press. Alternatively, the 
material can be first heated in an oven or hot press. The hot 
material is then transferred to a cool press where it is quick- 
ly consolidated and cooled to make a rigid panel. Some 
commercial nonstructural wood—thermoplastic composite 
panels are made in this way. 


Literature Cited 


AF&PA. 2006. Structural composite lumber & glued lami- 
nated timber awareness guide. Washington, DC: American 
Forest & Paper Association. 


AITC. 1996. Standard specifications for structural glued 
laminated timber of hardwood species. AITC 119. Centen- 
nial, CO: American Institute of Timber Construction. 


AITC. 2001. Standard appearance grades for structural 
glued laminated timber. AITC 110. Centennial, CO: Ameri- 
can Institute of Timber Construction. 


AITC. 2004a. Standard specifications for structural glued 
laminated timber of softwood species. AITC 117. Centen- 
nial, CO: American Institute of Timber Construction. 


AITC. 2004b. Timber Construction Manual. American Insti- 
tute of Timber Construction. 5th ed. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons. 


AITC. 2007a. Standard for wood products: structural glue- 
laminated timber. ANSI/AITC 190.1. Centennial, CO: 
American Institute of Timber Construction. 


AITC. 2007b. Standard for preservative treatment of 
structural glued laminated timber. AITC 109. Centennial, 
CO: American Institute of Timber Construction. 


ANSI. 2006. Structural glued laminated timber for utility 
structures. ANSI 05.2. New York: American National Stan- 
dards Institute. 


ASTM. 2008a. ASTM D 3737-08. Standard practice for 
establishing allowable properties for structural glued lami- 
nated timber (glulam). Annual Book of ASTM Standards. 


Philadelphia, PA: American Society for Testing and 
Materials. 


ASTM. 2008b. ASTM D 5456-03. Standard specification 
for structural composite lumber. Annual Book of ASTM 
Standards. Philadelphia, PA: American Society for Testing 
and Materials. 


ASTM. 2008c. ASTM C 208-08a. Standard specification 
for cellulosic fiber insulating board. Annual Book of ASTM 
Standards. Philadelphia, PA: American Society for Testing 
and Materials. 


AWPA. 2007a. Commodity specification H: fire retardants. 
AWPA Standard U—1: USS: User standard for treated wood. 
Birmingham, AL: American Wood Protection Association. 


AWPA. 2007b. Commodity specification F: wood compos- 
ites. AWPA Standard U—1: USS: User standard for treated 
wood. Birmingham, AL: American Wood Protection Asso- 
ciation. 


Bowyer, J.L.; Shmulsky, R.; Haygreen, J.G. 2007. Forest 
Products and Wood Science. 5th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell 
Publishing Professional. 558 p. 


Clemons, C.M. 2002. Wood-plastic composites in the Unit- 
ed States: the interfacing of two industries. Forest Products 
Journal. 52(6): 10-18. 


Clemons, C.; Stark, N. 2007. Use of saltcedar and Utah 
juniper as fillers in wood-plastic composites. Res. Pap. FPL 
RP-641. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 17 p. 


CPA. 2004a. Basic hardboard. ANSI A 135.4—2004. 
Leesburg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2004b. Prefinished hardboard paneling. ANSI 
A 135.5—2004. Leesburg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2006. Hardboard siding. ANSI A 135.6—2006. 
Leesburg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2009a. Particleboard. ANSI A 208. 1—2009. Leesburg, 
VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2009b. Medium density fiberboard (MDF). ANSI 
A 208.2—2009. Leesburg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


Geimer, R.L.; Souza, M.R.; Moslemi, A.A.; Simatupang, 
M.H. 1992. Carbon dioxide application for rapid production 
of cement particleboard. In: Moslemi, A., ed. Proceedings, 
inorganic bonded wood and fiber composite materials con- 
ference. Spokane, WA. September 27-30, 1992. 


HPVA. 2004. American national standard for hardwood and 
decorative plywood. ANSI/HPVA HP-—1-—2004. Reston, VA: 
Hardwood Plywood & Veneer Association. 


IRC. 2009. International residential code for one- and two- 
family dwellings. Washington, DC: International Code 
Council. 


11-27 


Jeong, S.; Wagh, A. 2003. Cementing the gap between ce- 
ramics, cements and polymers. Materials Technology. 18(3): 
162-168. 


Jorge, F.C.; Pereira, C.; Ferreira, J.M.F. 2004. Wood-cement 
composites: a review. Holz als Roh-und Werkstoff. 62: 
370-377. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Winandy, J.; Clausen, C.; Wiemann, 
M.; Bergman, R.; Rowell, R.; Zerbe, J.; Beecher, J.; White, 
R.; McKeever, D.; Howard, J. 2007. Wood. In: Kirk-Othmer 
Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 60 p. 


Maloney, T.M. 1986. Terminology and products defini- 
tions—a suggested approach to uniformity worldwide. In: 
Proceedings, 18th international union of forest research or- 
ganization world congress; September. Ljubljana: Yugosla- 
via. IUFRO World Congress Organizing Committee. 


Maloney, T.M. 1993. Modern particleboard and dry-process 
fiberboard manufacturing. San Francisco, CA: Miller Free- 
man Publishing, Inc. 681 p. 


NIST. 2004. Voluntary product standard PS 2—04. Perfor- 
mance standard for wood-based structural-use panels. Na- 
tional Institute of Standards and Technology. Gaithersburg, 
MD: U.S. Department of Commerce. 


NIST. 2007. Voluntary product standard PS 1-07. Structural 
plywood. National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
Gaithersburg, MD: U.S. Department of Commerce. 


Oksman Niska, K.; Sain, M., eds. 2008. Wood-polymer 
composites. Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Publishing, Ltd. 
384 p. 


Suchsland, O.; Woodson, G.E. 1986. Fiberboard manufac- 
turing practices in the United States. Agric. Handb. 640. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 263 p. 


Wagh, A.S.; Jeong, S.Y. 2003. Chemically bonded phos- 
phate ceramics: I, a dissolution model of formation. Journal 
of the American Ceramic Society. 86(11): 1838-44. 


11-28 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


CEP PER 12 


Mechanical Properties of Wood- Based 


Composite Materials 


Zhiyong Cai, Supervisory Research Materials Engineer 
Robert J. Ross, Supervisory Research General Engineer 


The term composite is used to describe any wood material 
Contents bonded together with adhesives. The current product mix 
Elastic Properties 12-2 ranges from fiberboard to laminated beams and components. 
Modulus of Elasticity 12—2 In this chapter, wood-based composite materials are classi- 
Shear Modulus 12-3 fied into the following categories: panel products (plywood, 


oriented strandboard (OSB), particleboard, fiberboard, 


Sirens enopenics 1-3 medium-density fiberboard (MDF), hardboard); structural 


Panel Products 12-3 timber products (glued-laminated timber (glulam), lami- 
Plywood 12-3 nated veneer lumber (LVL), laminated strand lumber, paral- 
Oriented Strandboard (OSB) 12-4 lel strand lumber); and wood—nonwood composites (wood 


Particleboard 12-4 fiberthermoplastics, inorganic-bonded composites). 


Hardboard 12-4 Wood-based composites are used for a number of structural 
and nonstructural applications. Product lines include panels 


Medium-Density Fiberboard 12-5 for both interior and exterior uses, furniture components, 


Timber Elements/Structural Composite Lumber 12-5 and support structures in buildings. Knowledge of the me- 
Glued-Laminated Timber 12-5 chanical properties of these products is of critical impor- 
Structural Composite Lumber 12-6 tance to their proper use. 

Wood-Nonwood Composites 12—7 Wood-based composites are made from a wide range of 
Wood-Plastic Composite 12-7 materials—from fibers obtained from underutilized small- 


diameter or plantation trees to structural lumber. Regardless 
of the raw material used in their manufacture, wood-based 
Testing Standards 12-9 composites provide uniform and predictable in-service 
Literature Cited 12-10 performance, largely as a consequence of standards used 

to monitor and control their manufacture. The mechanical 
properties of wood composites depend upon a variety of 
factors, including wood species, forest management regimes 
(naturally regenerated, intensively managed), the type of ad- 
hesive used to bind the wood elements together, geometry of 
the wood elements (fibers, flakes, strands, particles, veneer, 
lumber), and density of the final product (Cai 2006). 


Inorganic-Bonded Composites 12—9 


A wide range of engineering properties are used to charac- 
terize the performance of wood-based composites. Mechani- 
cal properties are typically the most frequently used to eval- 
uate wood-based composites for structural and nonstructural 
applications. Elastic and strength properties are the primary 
criteria to select materials or to establish design or product 
specifications. Elastic properties include modulus of elastic- 
ity (MOE) in bending, tension, and compression. Strength 
properties usually reported include modulus of rupture 
(MOR, bending strength), compression strength parallel to 
surface, tension strength parallel to surface, tension strength 
perpendicular to surface (internal bond strength), shear 
strength, fastener holding capacity, and hardness. Model 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 12-1. Static bending properties of different wood and wood-based composites 


Static bending properties 


Modulus of elasticity 


Modulus of rupture 


Specific 
Material gravity GPa («10° Ib in’) MPa (Ib in *) 
Clear wood 
White oak 0.68 12.27 (1.78) 104.80 (15,200) 
Red maple 0.54 11.31 (1.64) 92.39 (13,400) 
Douglas-fir (Coastal) 0.48 13.44 (1.95) 85.49 (12,400) 
Western white pine 0.38 10.07 (1.46) 66.88 (9,700) 
Longleaf pine 0.59 13.65 (1.98) 99.97 (14,500) 
Panel products 
Hardboard 0.9-1.0 3.10-5.52 (0.45-0.80) 31.02-56.54 (4,500-8,200) 
Medium-density fiberboard 0.7—-0.9 3.59 (0.52) 35.85 (5,200) 
Particleboard 0.6-0.8 2.76414 (0.40-0.60) = 15.17-24.13.  (2,200-3,500) 
Oriented strandboard 0.5-0.8 4.41-6.28 (0.64-0.91)  21.80-34.70  (3,161-5,027) 
Plywood 0.4-0.6 6.96-8.55 (1.01-1.24) 33.72-42.61 (4,890-6,180) 
Structural timber products 
Glued-laminated timber 0.4-0.6 9.00-14.50 (1.30-2.10)  28.61-62.62  (4,150—9,080) 
Laminated veneer lumber 0.4-0.7  8.96-19.24 (1.30-2.79) —33.78-86.18 (4,900-12,500) 
Wood-nonwood composites 
Wood plastic 1.53-4.23  (0.22-0.61) 25.41-52.32 — (3,684—7,585) 


building codes in the United States stipulate that plywood 
used for structural applications such as subflooring and 
sheathing must meet the requirements of certain U.S. De- 
partment of Commerce standards. Voluntary Product Stan- 
dard PS 1-07 for construction and industrial plywood (NIST 
2007) and Performance Standard PS 2—04 for wood-based 
structural-use panels (NIST 2004) spell out the ground rules 
for manufacturing plywood and establishing plywood or 
OSB properties, respectively. These standards have evolved 
over time from earlier documents (O’Halloran 1979, 1980; 
APA 1981) and represent a consensus opinion of the mak- 
ers, sellers, and users of plywood products as well as other 
concerned parties. 


Many of the questions that arise with wood-based compos- 
ites have to do with their mechanical properties, especially 
how properties of one type of material compare with those 
of clear wood and other wood products. Although an ex- 
tensive review that compares all properties of wood-based 
materials and products is beyond the scope of this chapter, 
Table 12-1 provides some insight to how static bending 
properties of these materials vary and how their properties 
compare with those of solid, clear wood. Although the me- 
chanical properties of most wood composites might not be 
as high as those of solid wood, they provide very consistent 
and uniform performance. 


The mechanical property data presented in this chapter were 
obtained from a variety of reports of research conducted 

to develop basic property information for a wide range of 
wood-based composite materials. The wood-based com- 
posites industry is very dynamic, with changes occurring 
frequently in the manufacture of these materials and cor- 
responding changes in design information. Consequently, 


12-2 


this chapter primarily focuses on presenting fundamental 
mechanical property information for wood-based composite 
materials. For design procedures and values, the reader is 
encouraged to contact the appropriate industry trade asso- 
ciation or product manufacturers. Current design informa- 
tion can be readily obtained from their websites, technical 
handbooks, and bulletins. 


The organization of this chapter follows closely that of 
Chapter 5. Basic mechanical property information is pre- 
sented following a brief background discussion of these 
products. A discussion of performance and testing standards 
covering their manufacture and use is also presented. 


Elastic Properties 
Modulus of Elasticity 


Elasticity implies that deformations produced by low stress 
below the proportional limit are completely recoverable 
after loads are removed. When loaded to stress levels above 
the proportional limit, plastic deformation or failure occurs. 
Typically, the stress-strain curve for wood-based compos- 
ites is linear below the proportional limit. The slope of the 
linear curve is the MOE. In compression or tensile tests, this 
slope is sometime referred to as Young’s modulus to differ- 
entiate it from bending MOE. Bending MOE is a measure 
of the resistance to bending deflection, which is relative to 
the stiffness. Young’s modulus is a measure of resistance 

to elongation or shortening of a member under tension or 
compression. The procedure to determine MOE is fully de- 
scribed in ASTM D 1037 for fiber- and particle-based panel 
products, ASTM D 3043 for structural wood-based panels, 
ASTM D 5456 for structural composite lumber products, 


Chapter 12 Mechanical Properties of Wood-Based Composite Materials 


ASTM D 7031 for wood-plastic composites, and ASTM D 
7341 for glulam products. 


Shear Modulus 


Shear modulus, also called modulus of rigidity, indicates 
the resistance to deflection of a member caused by shear 
stresses. Shear stress is different from tension or compres- 
sion stress in that it tends to make one side of a member slip 
past the other side of a member adjacent to it. There are two 
main types of shear in different planes of wood-based pan- 
els: interlaminar shear and edgewise shear or shear through- 
the-thickness. Interlaminar shear is also commonly called 
planar shear (or rolling shear, or horizontal shear) in ply- 
wood panels to describe stress that acts between the veneers 
that are glued with grain direction in adjacent pieces per- 
pendicular to one another. For example, when the plywood 
panel is loaded in the middle with its two ends simply sup- 
ported, the layers or veneers tend to slip horizontally past 
each other as the panel bends. The glue-bonding between 
the laminates of veneers resists the slipping and often dic- 
tates the panel stiffness. Edgewise shear is also commonly 
called racking shear. The moduli of rigidity vary within and 
between species, resin application, moisture content, and 
specific gravity. The procedure to determine different shear 
moduli for fiber- and particle-based panels is described in 
ASTM D 1037 and for structural panels in ASTM D 3044. 


Strength Properties 


Strength refers to the maximum stress that can be developed 
in a member due to applied loads prior to failure. Mechani- 
cal properties most commonly measured and represented as 
“strength properties” for design include modulus of rupture 
in bending, tension strength parallel-to-surface, tension 
strength perpendicular-to-surface, compression strength 
parallel-to-surface, shear strength, fastener holding strength, 
and hardness. Strength tests are typically made on speci- 
mens at moisture equilibrium under prescribed conditions 
or after soaking. The procedures to determine strengths for 
wood-based composites are described in ASTM D 1037, 
ASTM D 3044, ASTM D 5456, ASTM D 3737, and 

ASTM D 7031. 


Modulus of rupture reflects the maximum load-carrying 
capacity of a member in bending and is proportional to max- 
imum moment borne by the specimen. Modulus of rupture 
is an accepted measure of strength, although it is not a true 
stress because the formula by which it is computed is valid 
only to the elastic limit (McNatt 1973). 


Tension strength parallel-to-surface is the maximum stress 
sustained by a specimen from a test with tension forces ap- 
plied parallel to the surface. Tests are made with the long di- 
mension of the specimen cut both parallel and perpendicular 
to the long dimension of the board to determine the strength 
in each of the primary panel directions. 


Tension strength perpendicular-to-surface (internal bond 
strength) is the maximum stress sustained by a specimen 
from a test with tension forces applied perpendicular to the 
surface. Tests are made on specimens in the dry condition 
to determine the resistance of the specimen to delamination 
or splitting in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the 
board. 


Compression strength parallel-to-surface is the maximum 
stress sustained by a specimen from a test with compres- 
sion forces applied parallel to the surface. Tests are made 
with the long dimension of the specimen cut both parallel 
and perpendicular to the long dimension of the board to de- 
termine the material’s resistance to crushing in each of the 
primary panel directions. 


Interlaminar shear (planar shear) indicates the ability to 
resist internal slipping of one layer upon another within the 
panel. It is used to describe the glue line or bonding perfor- 
mance inside or between the test materials. 


Hardness is measured as resistance to indentation using a 
modified Janka hardness test, measured by the load required 
to embed an 11.3-mm (0.444-in.) diameter ball to one-half 
its diameter. 


Fastener holding strength is the maximum resistance to 
separate or withdraw a fastener in a plane normal to the 
testing face. It usually contains three tests: nail withdrawal, 
nail-head pull-through, and direct screw withdrawal. 


Panel Products 
Plywood 


Plywood is separated into two general classes: (a) construc- 
tion and industrial plywood and (b) hardwood and decora- 
tive plywood. Construction and industrial plywood are 
covered by Product Standard PS 1-07 (NIST 2007), and 
hardwood and decorative plywood are covered by Ameri- 
can National Standard ANSI/HPVA—1—2004 (HPVA 2004). 
Each standard recognizes different exposure durability clas- 
sifications, which are primarily based on moisture resistance 
of the adhesive and the grade of veneer used. In addition, 
model building codes require that plywood manufacturers 
be inspected and their products certified for conformance 

to PS 1-07, PS 2-04, APA PRP-108, or TECO PRP-133 
(TECO 1991) by qualified independent third-party agencies 
on a periodic unannounced basis. With PS 1-07, as long as 
a plywood panel is manufactured using the veneer grades, 
adhesive, and construction established in the standard’s pre- 
scriptive requirements, the panel is by definition acceptable. 


All hardwood plywood represented as conforming to Ameri- 
can National Standard ANSI/HPVA—1—2004 (HPVA 2004) 
is identified by one of two methods: by marking each panel 
with the Hardwood Plywood & Veneer Association (HPVA) 
plywood grade stamp or by including a written statement 
with this information with the order or shipment. 


12-3 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 12-2. Selected properties of plywood sheathing products* 


Static bending 


Fiber stress at 
proportional 
MOR limit 


Glue line shear 
strength 


Rail shear 


MOE strength 


Specific («10° 


Species gravity GPa lbin’) MPa (lbin*) GPa (Ibin*) MPa (lbin~) MPa (lb in”) 


Baldcypress 0.50 7.58 (1.10) 39.23 (5,690) 29.4 (4,260) 5.6 (805) 2.7 (389) 


Douglas-fir 0.53 7.45 (1.08) 41.37 (6,000) 39.3 (5,700) 3.8 (556) 1.4 (207) 
Lauan 0.44 743 (1.08) 33.72 (4,890) 28.1 (4,070) 4.3 (628) 1.3 (192) 
Western 0.41 855 (1.24) 37.37 (5,420) 33.3 (4,830) 4.6 (674) 1.7 (240) 
redcedar 

Redwood 0.41 6.96 (1.01) 42.61 (6,180) 37.4 (5,420) 5.3. (769) 1.5 (220) 


Southern Pine 0.57. 7.70 (1.12) 37.09 (5,380) 26.2 (3,800) 5.5 (800) 1.6 (233) 


“From Biblis (2000). 


If design calculations are desired, a design guide is provided 
by the APA-The Engineered Wood Association in Plywood 
Design Specification (PDS) and APA Technical Note N375B 
(APA 1995a,b). The design guide contains tables of grade 
stamp references, section properties, and allowable stresses 
for plywood used in construction of buildings and similar 
structures. Table 12—2 shows selected properties of various 
species of plywood. 


Oriented Strandboard (OSB) 


Oriented strandboard is an engineered, structural-use panel 
manufactured from thin wood strands bonded together with 
water-resistant adhesive under heat and pressure. It is used 
extensively for roof, wall, and floor sheathing in residential 
and commercial construction. Design capacities of perfor- 
mance-rated products, which include OSB and waferboard, 
can be determined by using procedures outlined in Techni- 
cal Note N375B (APA 1995a). In this reference, allowable 
design strength and stiffness properties, as well as nominal 
thickness and section properties, are specified based on the 
span rating of the panel. Additional adjustment factors 
based on panel grade and construction are also provided. 
Table 12-3 shows selected properties of OSB obtained from 
the literature. 


Under PS 2-04, a manufacturer is required to enter into an 
agreement with an accredited testing agency to demonstrate 
that its panels conform to the requirements of the chosen 
standard. The manufacturer must also maintain an in-plant 
quality control program in which panel properties are 
regularly checked, backed by a quality assurance program 
administered by an independent third-party. The third-party 
agency must visit the mill on a regular unannounced basis. 
The agency must confirm that the in-plant quality control 
program is being maintained and that panels meet the mini- 
mum requirements of the standard. 


Particleboard 


Particleboard is typically made in three layers. The faces 
of the board consist of fine wood particles, and the core is 


12-4 


made of the coarser material (Chap. 11). Particleboard is 
used for furniture cores and case goods, where it is typically 
overlaid with other materials for decorative purposes. Par- 
ticleboard can be used in flooring systems, in manufactured 
houses, for stair treads, and as underlayment. Requirements 
for grades of particleboard and particleboard flooring prod- 
ucts are specified by the American National Standard for 
Particleboard A208.1-1999 (CPA 1999). Table 12—4 repre- 
sents some of selected properties of different particleboard 
manufacturers. 


Hardboard 


Basic hardboard physical properties for selected products 
are presented in ANSI A135.4—2004 (CPA 2004a). The uses 
for hardboard can generally be grouped as construction, fur- 
niture and furnishings, cabinet and store work, appliances, 
and automotive and rolling stock. Typical hardboard prod- 
ucts are prefinished paneling (ANSI A135.5—2004 

(CPA 2004b)), house siding (ANSI A135.6—2006 (CPA 
2006)), floor underlayment, and concrete form board. 

Table 12—5 shows selected physical and mechanical proper- 
ties of hardboard from different manufacturers. Hardboard 
siding products come in a great variety of finishes and tex- 
tures (smooth or embossed) and in different sizes. For ap- 
plication purposes, the Composite Panel Association (CPA) 
classifies siding into three basic types: 


Lap siding—boards applied horizontally, with each board 
overlapping the board below it 


Square edge panels—siding intended for vertical applica- 
tion in full sheets 


Shiplap edge panel siding—siding intended for vertical ap- 
plication, with the long edges incorporating shiplap joints 


The type of panel dictates the application method. The CPA 
administers a quality conformance program for hardboard 
for both panel and lap siding. Participation in this program 
is voluntary and is open to all (not restricted to CPA mem- 
bers). Under this program, hardboard siding products are 


Chapter 12 Mechanical Properties of Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Table 12-3. Selected properties of oriented strandboard (OSB) products 


Bending MOE Bending MOR 
Internal 
Parallel Perpendicular Parallel Perpendicular bond 
Mill Specific («10° («10° 
Reference Species no. gravity GPa Ibin’) GPa lbin*) MPa (lbin*) MPa (lbin’) MPa (lb in”) 
Biblis Southen 1 0.80 4.41 (0.640) 2.89 (0.419) 23.8 (3,445) 24.2 (3,515) 0.57 (83) 
(1989) Pine 2 0.70 4.78 (0.694) 2.61 (0.378) 26.0 (3,775) 22.1 (3,205) 0.28 (41) 
3. 0.68 5.75 (0.834) 3.17 (0.460) 32.0 (4,645) 23.8 (3,445) 0.32 (47) 
Pu and Southen 4 0.51 4.41 (0.640) 2.40 (0.348) 21.8 (3,161) 25.4 (3,685) 0.23 (34) 
others Pine 5 0.60 5.67 (0.822) 2.61 (0.378) 27.8 (4,039) 27.1 (3,925) 0.28 (41) 
(1992) 6 0.58 4.41 (0.640) 2.97 (0.431) 23.9 (3,473) 28.7 (4,165) 0.26 (38) 
Aspen 7 0.65 6.28 (0.911) 2.03 (0.294) 32.2 (4,672) 30.4 (4,405) 0.43 (62) 
8 0.66 5.69 (0.825) 1.92 (0.278) 31.6 (4,584) 32.0 (4,645) 0.41 (60) 
9 0.74 6.31 (0.915) 2.79 (0.404) 34.7 (5,027) 33.7 (4,885) 0.34 (50) 
Wangand Southenm 10 0.63 5.01 (0.726) 2.26 (0.327) 30.2 (4,379) 16.8 (2,436) 0.36 (52) 
others Pine 11 0.66 5.30 (0.769) 2.32 (0.336) 28.1 (4,075) 14.4 (2,088) 0.43 (62) 
(2003a) 12. 0.67 5.12 (0.742) 2.56 (0.371) 30.7 (4,452) 21.1 (3,060) 0.32 (46) 
13. 0.66 4.91 (0.712) 2.24 (0.325) 28.3 (4,104) 19.8 (2,871) 0.38 (55) 
Hardwood 14 0.68 5.15 (0.747) 1.77 (0.257) 26.9 (3,901) 11.8 (1,711) 0.28 (40) 
mixture 15 0.67 5.87 (0.851) 1.40 (0.204) 33.9 (4,916) 7.8 (1,131) 0.23 (33) 
16 0.70 6.73 (0.976) 2.25 (0.326) 36.9 (5,351) 15.8 (2,291) 0.45 (66) 
Aspen 17 0.63. 6.50 (0.943) 3.10 (0.450) 38.0 (5,510) 21.5 (3,118) 0.28 (41) 
18 0.62 7.90 (1.146) 3.10 (0.450) 38.8 (5,626) 23.2 (3,364) 0.46 (66) 
19 0.61 6.10 (0.885) 2.50 (0.363) 30.7 (4,452) 19.7 (2,857) 0.34 (49) 
20 0.61 6.50 (0.943) 1.80 (0.261) 35.5 (5,148) 13.7. (1,987) 0.25 (36) 
21 0.66 ~=6.75 (0.979) 2.45 (0.356) 37.3 (5,409) 19.3 (2,799) 0.38 (55) 
22 «0.63 ~=5.80 (0.840) 2.40 (0.348) 26.9 (3,901) 17.9 (2,596) 0.40 (58) 


Table 12-4. Selected properties of industrial particleboard products* 


Static bending properties 


Tensile properties 


Modulus of Modulus of Modulus of Ultimate tensile 

intense elasticity rupture elasticity stress Internal bond 
content Specific («10° (x10° 
Mill (%) gravity GPa lbin’) MPa (bin?) GPa Ibin*) MPa (Ibin*) MPa (lbin’) 
A 8.7 0.71 3.0 (0.44) 16.8 (2,430) 2.2 (0.32) 7.72 (1,120) 0.79 (115) 
B 9.1 0.72 3.5 (0.51) 20.6 (2,990) 2.6 (0.38) 9.38 (1,360) 1.07 (155) 
Cc 9.8 0.76 3.5 (0.51) 18.9 (2,740) 2.3 (0.34) 8.27 (1,200) 1.00 (145) 
H 8.0 0.77 4.0 (0.58) 22.8 (3,310) 3.0 (0.44) 10.89 (1,580) 1.17 (170) 
J 8.5 0.72 3.0 (0.43) 17.2 (2,500) 1.9 (0.28) 7.45 (1,080) 0.45 (65) 
K 9.1 0.68 2.8 (0.40) 15.2 (2,206) 1.6 (0.23) 5.58 (810) 0.31 (45) 
L 9.3 0.62 3.2 (0.46) 17.0 (2,470) 1.8 (0.26) 6.69 (970) 0.48 (70) 
M 9.7 0.65 3.6 (0.52) 18.9 (2,740) 2.2 (0.32) 8.07 (1,170) 0.69 (100) 
N 8.3 0.60 3.1 (0.45) 17.0 (2,470) 3.7 (0.54) 8.00 (1,160) 0.31 (45) 
“From McNatt (1973). 


tested by an independent laboratory in accordance with 
product standard ANSI A135.6. 


Medium-Density Fiberboard 

Minimum property requirements for MDF are specified by 
the American National Standard for MDF, ANSI A208.2- 
2002 (CPA 2002), and some of selected properties are given 
in Table 12—6 from different manufacturers. Medium-densi- 
ty fiberboard is frequently used in furniture applications. 

It is also used for interior door skins, moldings, flooring 


substrate, and interior trim components (Cai and others 
2006, Youngquist and others 1993). 


Timber Elements/Structural 
Composite Lumber 
Glued-Laminated Timber 


Structural glued-laminated timber (glulam) is an engineered, 
stress-rated product that consists of two or more layers of 
lumber that are glued together with the grain of all layers, 


12-5 


Table 12-5. Selected properties of hardboard products* 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Modulus of Modulus of Ultimate tensile 
Reine elasticity rupture stress Internal bond 

Type of content Specific («10° 
Mill hardboard (%) gravity GPa Ibin’) MPa (lbin*) MPa (lbin’) MPa (lbin”) 
A 1/8-in. 4.6 0.9 3.83 (556) 31.44 (4,560) 23.24 (3,370) 1.24 (180) 
B standard 6.5 1.02 4.36 (633) 33.92 (4,920) 23.17 (3,360) 2.76 (400) 
C 5.2 0.94 4.20 (609) 45.85 (6,650) 37.58 (5,450) 2.17 (315) 
D 5.6 0.9 3.32 (482) 38.75 (5,620) 28.61 (4,150) 1.55 (225) 
E 6.5 0.95 3.55 (515) 47.50 (6,890) 32.96 (4,780) 3.52 (510) 
F Ld 0.91 3.23, (468) 37.85 (5,490) 25.72 (3,730) 1.93 (280) 
B 1/4-in. 6.4 1.02 4.45 (645) 33.85 (4,910) 22.61 (3,280) 1.86 (270) 
E standard 6.0 0.90 3.88 (563) 38.96 (5,650) 23.65 (3,430) 1.65 (240) 
A 1/4-in. 49 0.99 5.30 (768) 53.02 (7,690) 31.58 (4,580) 1.79 (260) 

tempered 
F 1/4-in. 6.9 0.98 5.14 (745) 55.57 (8,060) 30.61 (4,440) 1.86 (270) 

tempered 


“From McNatt and Myers (1993 


). 


Table 12-6. Selected properties of medium-density fiberboard products* 


Screw- 
Modulus of Modulus of holding 
rupture elasticity Internal bond edge Capacity face 
Mill Density («10° 
no. (gcm*) MPa (lbin*) GPa lbin’) MPa (lbin*) kg (lb) kg (lb) 
1 0.73. 33.6 (4,873) 3.21 (466) 0.86 (125) 117 (257) 148 (326) 
2 0.90 34.0 (4,932) 3.97 (576) 0.94 (136) 147 (325) 185 (407) 
3 0.79 23.2 (3,366) 2.98 (432) 1.94 (282) 150 (330) 202 (445) 
4 0.82 39.3 (5,703) 4.38 (635) 0.83 (121) 114 (252) 148 (326) 
5 0.95 246 (3,565) 3.56 (517) 0.92 (133) 184 (405) 231 (509) 
6 0.80 36.4 (5,278) 3.99 (578) 0.71 (103) 143 (315) 183 (404) 
7 0.77. 374 (5,421) 3.94 (572) 1.23. (179) 163 (360) 210 (464) 
8 0.71 35.2 (5,107) 3.34 (485) 1.09 (158) 147 (324) 189 (416) 


“From Suchsland and others (1979). 


which are referred to as laminations, parallel to the length. 
Table 12-7 provides some selected properties of glulam 
products from different research studies. 


Douglas—Fir—Larch, Southern Pine, yellow-cedar, Hem—Fir, 
and Spruce—Pine—Fir are commonly used for glulam in the 
United States. Nearly any species can be used for glulam 
timber, provided its mechanical and physical properties are 
suitable and it can be properly glued. Industry standards 
cover many softwoods and hardwoods, and procedures are 
in place for using other species. 


Manufacturers of glulam timber have standardized the target 
design values in bending for beams. For softwoods, these 
design values are given in “Standard for Wood Products: 
Structural Glued-Laminated Timber” (AITC 2007). This 
specification contains design values and recommended mod- 
ification of stresses for the design of glulam timber members 
in the United States. The National Design Specification for 
Wood Construction (NDS) summarizes the design informa- 
tion in ANSI/AITC 190.1 and defines the practice to be 


12-6 


followed in structural design of glulam timbers (AF&PA 
2005). APA—The Engineered Wood Association has also de- 
veloped design values for glulam under National Evaluation 
Report 486, which is recognized by all the building codes. 


Structural Composite Lumber 


Structural composite lumber (SCL) products are character- 
ized by smaller pieces of wood glued together into sizes 
common for solid-sawn lumber. One type of SCL product is 
manufactured by laminating veneer with all plies parallel to 
the length. This product is called laminated veneer lumber 
(LVL) and consists of specially graded veneer. Another type 
of SCL product consists of strands of wood or strips of ve- 
neer glued together under high pressures and temperatures. 
Depending upon the component material, this product is 
called laminated strand lumber (LSL), parallel strand lum- 
ber (PSL), or oriented strand lumber (OSL). 


In contrast with sawn lumber, the strength-reducing charac- 
teristics of SCL are dispersed within the veneer or strands 
and have much less of an effect on strength properties. Thus, 


Chapter 12 Mechanical Properties of Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Table 12-7. Selected properties of glulam products 


Static bending properties 


Modulus of Modulus of 
iisieties elasticity rupture 
content Number of («10° 

Reference Species (%) laminations GPa Ibin*) MPa (lbin’) 
Manbeck Red maple 12 8 12.3 (1.78) 62.6 (9,080) 
and others 12 12 12.2 (1.77) 55.0 (7,980) 
(1993) 12 16 12.3. (1.78) 54.2 (7,860) 
Moody Yellow 8.2 8 13.0 (1.89) 55.6 (8,060) 
and others poplar 7.5 12 13.4 (1.94) 52.1 (7,560) 
(1993) 8 17 12.3 (1.79) 45.3. (6,570) 
Shedlauskus Red oak 12.8 8 13.0 (1.88) 60.5 (8,770) 
and others 11.1 18 12.8 (1.86) 46.0 (6,670) 
(1996) 
Janowiak Red maple 12.6 12 12.2 (1.77) 55.0 (7,980) 
and others 8.9 5 12.8 (1.86) 
(1995) 8.9 5 12.9 (1.87) 45.7 (6,630) 
Hernandez Ponderosa 8.8 8 9.44 (1.37) 31.4 (4,560) 
and others pine 8.8 13 9.07 (1.32) 29.6 (4,290) 
(2005) 
Hernandez Southern — 10 14.1 (2.04) 61.7 (8,950) 
and Moody Pine — 17 13.5 (1.96) 49.8 (7,230) 
(1992) 
Marx and Southern 10 4, 8, 10 11.2 (1.63) 46.5 (6,740) 
Moody Pine 10 4,8, 11 10.8 (1.56) 33.9 (4,920) 
(1981 a,b) Douglas-fir- 11 4, 8, 12 13.9 (2.02) 47.2 (6,840) 

larch 11 4, 8, 13 13.6 (1.97) 40.7 (5,910) 
Moody Southern 11.8 17 9.3 (1.35) 28.6 = (4,150) 
(1974) Pine 11.9 17 10.3 (1.49) 31.4 (4,560) 


relatively high design values can be assigned to strength 
properties for both LVL and PSL. Whereas both LSL and 
OSL have somewhat lower design values, they have the ad- 
vantage of being produced from a raw material that need not 
be in a log size large enough for peeling into veneer. 


All types of SCL products can be substituted for sawn lum- 
ber products in many applications. Laminated veneer lum- 
ber is used extensively for scaffold planks and in the flanges 
of prefabricated I-joists. Both LVL and PSL beams are used 
as headers and major load-carrying elements in construc- 
tion. The LSL and OSL products are used for band joists in 
floor construction and as substitutes for studs and rafters in 
wall and roof construction. Various types of SCL are also 
used in a number of nonstructural applications, such as the 
manufacture of windows and doors. Table 12—8 provides 
some selected properties of LVL products from different 
research studies. 


Wood-—Nonwood Composites 


Wood-Plastic Composite 

The use of wood—plastic composite lumber in North Amer- 
ica has experienced tremendous growth in the past decade, 
largely because of residential construction applications. 


Common applications in North America include decking, 
railings, window profiles, roof tiles, and siding. These lum- 
ber products are generally manufactured using profile extru- 
sion. Some generalizations can be made regarding the per- 
formance of wood-plastic composites, but there are excep- 
tions. Flexural and tensile properties of wood—plastic com- 
posite lumber generally fall between those of solid wood 
lumber and unfilled plastics. Most commercial wood-plastic 
composites are considerably less stiff than solid wood but 
are stiffer than unfilled plastic (Clemons 2002). Compared 
with solid wood lumber, wood—plastic composites have bet- 
ter decay resistance and dimensional stability when exposed 
to moisture. Compared with unfilled plastics, wood—plastic 
composites are stiffer and have better dimensional stability 
when exposed to changes in temperature. 


Table 12—9 shows mechanical properties of unfilled poly- 
propylene and several wood—polypropylene composites. 
One of the primary reasons to add wood filler to unfilled 
plastics is to improve stiffness. Strength of the unfilled plas- 
tic can also increase but only if the wood component acts as 
reinforcement with good bonding between the two compo- 
nents. Table 12—9 illustrates how wood—plastic composite 
properties can vary with changing variables. For example, 
adding wood fiber instead of wood flour to polypropylene 


12-7 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


(EPL (0S9°6 (06101 
01'S) ZTIS-99E (LOI-6E'I) 9EI-96 —O0F69) $99-8Lr —-OESL) COL-GIS (68 I-LZ7I) OF€I-88 (86I-E1) LEI-8'6 lg WoYNos (£661) 
(OOT‘L (0L7'6 (0S8‘6 s1oyj0 pur 
-020'€)  T6r-8'07 (O8I-V7'1) 8 TZI-S8 —006r) 6E9-B'EE -O00S'S) G6LO-GLE (S6OI-OET) LEI-06 (8 I-O€1) 8 ZI-0'6 IWe-se[snoq uueuyosjory 
(9007) stey0 
= = (pS°Z) LI (677) ST Ul Woynog pue ueUIpUTH 
(q¢007) 
Ea clente) 
= = — (180°) €€8 (p9°T) ell (9¢°1) S01 ajdew poy pue sue 
(ZL61) 
SI9}0dq pue 
= —_— —_— _— (osr‘Z1) 0°98 (OZL‘T 1) 3°08 (€1'Z) Lyi (70°27) Tp] ould wiaynosg Apooy 
(Sz0°S) Ove (961) Cel = = = — — dU WayNOg (ZL61) 
(osr‘s) OLE (L0°@) ia — — _— _— — Jj-se[snoq Apoow 
(€L61) 
= = = (Ol€'6) TH9 00°0 00 (161) TEL «Ug WayINog Yoox 
(8L61) 
(Ser‘9) vbr (r0'@) Trl (ert) 8°8L _ — (pE7) 19 (1¢7) 6ST —- -sejsnoq ysouny 
(O0L‘9 (090°6 (O0r‘0I (7861) 
-00S°S) ZT9P-OLE (POT-LTZ) €07Z-9'ST —-O98L) $'9-TPS —O%H'8) LIL-O'8S (O87-E77) EC6I-VSI (6L°%-STZ) TEI-S'ST J-se[snoq sung 

(ozs‘¢ 
099%) 8-81 (OS I-I91) FZI-T IIT (p86) 
(os9‘s sIoyjO pue 
-0g0'p) 0'6E-1'8Z (LI'Z-£0°%)  O'SI-0'F1 = = = = = qy-sepsnog —jsinbsunox 
(pL61) 
(S0z‘r) 66°87 (072) TSI — = — = = I-sepsnoqg ua[yog 
(ur aD ed (uw q edd (ur ap ed (ur qn ed (uw q] ed) (, Urq] ed) soroadg DOUdIOJOY 
01x) gOTx) 901x) 
SSO1S Ayloyseya yep q o3pyq eA ospq 


oyIsua} ayeurNT 


jo sn[npoyy 


oinjdni Jo sntnpoyy 


Aytorseya JO snjnpoy| 


sorjiodoid apisua Jy, 


sonsodoid Surpuaq one1S 


syonpold Jaquin| 8}!Sodwod jeinjyonjj}s JO} JEQuIN] 199UA pa}eUIWE] Jo Sansadoid pa}oajasg “g—-Z]) aIqeL 


12-8 


Chapter 12 Mechanical Properties of Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Table 12-9. Selected properties of wood-plastic products* 


Tensile properties 


Flexural properties Izod impact 


energy 
Strength Modulus Strength Modulus (Jm"') 
Specific (x10° (x 10° 

Composite gravity MPa (lbin’) GPa Ibin*) MPa (lbin*) GPa bin’) Notched Unnotched 
Polypropylene 0.90 28.5 (4,134) 1.53 (0.22) 38.30 (5,555) 1.19 (0.17) 20.9 656 
(PP) 
PP +40% wood 1.05 25.4 (3,684) 3.87 (0.56) 44.20 (6,411) 3.03 (0.44) 22.2 73 
flour 
PP +40% wood = 1.05 32.3 (4,685) 4.10 (0.59) 53.10 (7,702) 3.08 (0.45) 21.2 78 
flour + 3% 
coupling agent 
PP +40% wood = 1.03 28.2 (4,090) 4.20 (0.61) 47.90 (6,947) 3.25 (0.47) 23.2 91 
fiber 
PP +40% wood 1.03 52.3 (7,585) 4.23 (0.61) 72.40 (10,501) 3.22 (0.47) 21.6 162 
fiber + 3% 


coupling agent 


“From Stark and Rowlands (2003). 


improved the strength and stiffness. Generally, adding a 
coupling agent to the mix also improved mechanical prop- 
erties. Adding wood to polypropylene was not without 
tradeoffs. Impact resistance of such composites decreased 
compared with that of unfilled polypropylene. 


In addition to these commercial deck products, wood-—plas- 
tic composites are being developed for structural applica- 
tions such as foundation elements, deck substructures, in- 
dustrial decking, and shoreline structures (Bender and others 
2006). Table 12-10 shows the range of average mechanical 
properties of extruded wood-plastic composites by polymer 
type. In general, polyvinylcholoride and polyethylene for- 
mulations produce higher mechanical properties than those 
produced from polyethylene alone. Formulations that use 
coupling agents with either polypropylene or high-density 
polyethylene result in improved strength, stiffness, and re- 
duced moisture absorption properties. 


Properties of wood-—plastic composites can vary greatly de- 
pending upon such variables as type, form, weight fractions 
of constituents, type of additives, and processing methods 
(Stark and Rowlands 2003, Wolcott and others 2006). Be- 
cause formulations from each commercial manufacture are 
proprietary, design data should be obtained directly from the 
manufacturer. 


Inorganic-Bonded Composites 


Inorganic-bonded wood composites are molded products or 
boards that contain between 10% and 70% by weight wood 
particles or fibers and conversely 90% to 30% inorganic 
binder. Acceptable properties of an inorganic-bonded wood 
composite can be obtained only when the wood particles are 
fully encased with the binder to make a coherent material. 
This differs considerably from the technique used to manu- 
facture thermosetting-resin-bonded boards, where flakes or 


particles are “spot welded” by a binder applied as a finely 
distributed spray or powder. Because of this difference and 
because hardened inorganic binders have a higher density 
than that of most thermosetting resins, the required amount 
of inorganic binder per unit volume of composite material 

is much higher than that of resin-bonded wood composites. 
The properties of inorganic-bonded wood composites are 
significantly influenced by the amount and nature of the in- 
organic binder and the woody material as well as the density 
of the composites. 


Inorganic binders fall into three main categories: gypsum, 
magnesia cement, and Portland cement. Gypsum and mag- 
nesia cement are sensitive to moisture, and their use is 
generally restricted to interior applications. Composites 
bonded with Portland cement are more durable than those 
bonded with gypsum or magnesia cement and are used in 
both interior and exterior applications. Inorganic-bonded 
composites are made by blending proportionate amounts of 
lignocellulosic fiber with inorganic materials in the presence 
of water and allowing the inorganic material to cure or “set 
up” to make a rigid composite. All inorganic-bonded com- 
posites are very resistant to deterioration, particularly by 
insects, vermin, and fire. Typical properties of low-density 
cement-wood composite fabricated using an excelsior-type 
particle are shown in Table 12-11. 


Testing Standards 


The physical and mechanical properties of wood-based 
composite materials are usually determined by standard 
ASTM test methods. The following are the commonly used 
methods described in ASTM (2009): 


ASTM C 208-08. Standard specification for cellulosic 
fiber insulating board. 


12-9 


Table 12-10. Selected properties of extruded wood-—plastic products 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Compression Dowel bearing 
Tensile strength strength Bending strength Bending modulus _ Shear strength strength 

Composite (MPa (lb in))  (MPa(Ibin’)) (GPa(x10°lbin’)) | (MPa(lbin*)) (MPa(lbin’)) (MPa (lb in’*)) 
Polypropylene 20.0 (2,900) 55.2 (8,000) 3.49-5.97 22.2-60.8 22.0 (3,190) 84.8 (12,300) 
(PP)*° (0.506—0.866) (3,220-8,820) 
High-density 5.5-15.2 11.7-26.9 1.79-5.17 10.3—25.5 7.79-10.3 35.7 (5,180) 
polyethylene (800-2,200) (1,700-3,900) (0.260-0.750) (1,500-3,700) (1,130-1,500) 
(HDPE)* 
Polyvinylchloride 25.1 (3,640) 61.2 (8,880) 4.81-7.58 35.9-54.5 20.2 (2,930) 72.4-128.2 
(PVC)* (0.697—1.100) (5,200-7,900) (10,500-18,600) 
“From Slaughter (2004). 
>From Kobbe (2005). 
‘From Wolcott (2001). 


Table 12-11. General properties of low- 
density cement—wood composite fabricated 
using an excelsior-type particle”” 


Value range (MPa (Ib in ”)) 


ASTM D 5456-09. Specification for evaluation of 
structural composite lumber products. 


ASTM D 7031-04. Standard guide for evaluating me- 
chanical and physical properties of wood-plastic com- 
posite products. 


ASTM D 7032-08. Standard specification for establish- 


Property Low High 

Bending strength 1.7 (250) 5.5 (800) 

Modulus of 621 (90,000) 1,241 (180,000) 
elasticity 

Tensile strength 0.69 (100) 4.1 (600) 

Compression 0.69 (100) 5.5 (800) 
strength 

Shear® 0.69 (100) 1.4 (200) 

EIG ratio® 40.0 100.0 


“Data present compilation of raw data from a variety of 
sources for range of board properties. Variables include 
cement—wood mix, particle configuration, density, and 
forming and curing method. 

Specific gravity range from 0.5 to 1.0. 

“Shear strength data are limited to small samples having a 
specific gravity of 0.5 to 0.65. 

°E/G is ratio of bending modulus of elasticity to shear 
modulus. For wood, this ratio is about 16. 


ing performance ratings for wood-plastic composite 
deck boards and guardrail systems. 


ASTM D 7341-09. Standard practice for establishing 
characteristic values for flexural properties of structural 
glued laminated timber by full-scale testing. 


ASTM E 1333-96 (2002). Test method for determining 
formaldehyde concentration in air and emission rate 
from wood products using a large chamber. 


Literature Cited 
AF&PA. 2005. Guideline—wood I-joist ASD manual for 


engineering wood construction. ANSI/AF&PA NDS-—2005. 


ASTM D 1037-06a. Standard test methods for evalu- 
ating the properties of wood-based fiber and particle 


: tion. 
panel materials. 


National Design Specification® (NDS®) for Wood Construc- 
tion. Washington, DC: American Forest & Paper Associa- 


AITC. 2007. Standard for wood products: structural glued- 


ASTM D 2718-00 (2006). Standard test method for 
structural panels in planar shear (rolling shear). 


ASTM D 2719-89 (2007). Standard test methods for 
structural panels in shear through-the-thickness. 


ASTM D 3043-00 (2006). Standard test methods of 
testing structural panels in flexure. 


ASTM D 3044-94 (2006). Standard test method for 
shear modulus of wood-based structural plywood. 


ASTM D 3500-90 (2003). Standard test methods for 
structural panels in tension. 


ASTM D 3501-05a. Standard test methods of testing 
plywood in compression. 


ASTM D 3737-08. Standard practice for establishing 
allowable properties for structural glued laminated tim- 
ber (glulam). 


12-10 


laminated timber. ANSI/AITC 190.1—2007. Centennial, CO: 
American Institute of Timber Construction. 


APA. 1981. Performance standards and policies for APA 
structural use panels. Tacoma, WA: American Plywood As- 
sociation. | p. 


APA. 1991. Performance standards and policies for struc- 


tural use panels. APA PRP—108. Tacoma, WA: APA — The 
Engineered Wood Association. 


APA. 1995a. Design capacities of APA performance-rated 
structural-use panels. Tech. Note N375 B. Tacoma, WA: 
APA — The Engineered Wood Association. 12 p. 


APA. 1995b. Plywood design specification. Tacoma, WA: 
APA — The Engineered Wood Association. 10 p. 


ASTM. 2007. Annual book of ASTM standards. Philadel- 
phia, PA: American Society for Testing and Materials. 


Chapter 12 Mechanical Properties of Wood-Based Composite Materials 


Bender, D.A.; Wolcott, M.P.; Dolan, J.D. 2006. Structural 
design and applications with wood-—plastic composites. 
Wood Design Focus. 16(3): 13-16. 


Biblis, E.J. 1989. Properties of commercial OSB from three 
Southern Pine mills. Forest Products Journal. 39(1): 55-57. 


Biblis, E.J. 2000. Effect of weathering on surface quality 
and structural properties of six species of untreated commer- 
cial plywood siding after 6 years of exposure in Alabama. 
Forest Products Journal. 50(5): 47—S0. 


Bohlen, J.C. 1974. Tensile strength of Douglas-fir laminat- 
ed-veneer lumber. Forest Products Journal. 24(1): 54-58. 


Cai, Z. 2006. Selected properties of MDF and flakeboard 
overlaid with fiberglass mats. Forest Products Journal. 
56(11/12): 142-146. 


Cai, Z.; Muehl, J.H.; Winandy, J.E. 2006. Effects of panel 
density and mat moisture content on processing medium 
density fiberboard. Forest Products Journal. 56(10): 20-25. 


Clemons, C.M. 2002. Wood-plastic composites in the Unit- 
ed States: the interfacing of two industries. Forest Products 
Journal. 52(6): 10-18. 


CPA. 1999. Particleboard standard. ANSI A 208.1-1999. 
Leesburg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2002. MDF standard. ANSI A 208.2—2002. Leesburg, 
VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2004a. Basic hardboard. ANSI A 135.4—2004. Lees- 
burg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2004b. Prefinished hardboard paneling. ANSI A 
135.5—2004. Leesburg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


CPA. 2006. Hardboard siding. ANSI A 135.6—2006. Lees- 
burg, VA: Composite Panel Association. 


Hernandez, R.; Moody, R.C. 1992. Improved performance 
of Southern Pine structural glued-laminated timber. Res. 
Pap. FPL-RP-514. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 22 p. 


Hernandez, R.; Green, D.W.; Kretschmann, D.E.; Verrill, 
S.P. 2005. Improved utilization of small-diameter ponderosa 
pine in glulam timber. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-—625. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 38 p. 


Hindman, D.P.; Janowiak, J.J.; Manbeck, H.B. 2006. Com- 
parison of ASTM D 198 and five-point bending for elastic 
constant ratio determination. Forest Products Journal. 
56(7/8): 85-90. 


HPVA. 2004. American national standard for hardwood and 
decorative plywood. ANSI/HPVA—1—2004. Reston, VA: 
Hardwood Plywood & Veneer Association. 35 p. 


Janowiak, J.J.; Manbeck, H.B.; Hernandez, R.; Moody, 
R.C.; Blankenhorn, P.R.; Labosky, P. 1995. Efficient 


utilization of red maple in glued-laminated timber beams. 
Res. Pap. FPL-RP-541. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 23 
p. 


Jung, J. 1982. Properties of parallel-laminated veneer from 
stress-wave tested veneers. Forest Products Journal. 32(7): 
30-35. 


Kobbe, R.G. 2005. Creep behavior of a wood—polypropyl- 
ene composite. MS Thesis. Pullman, WA: Washington 
State University. 96 p. 


Koch, P. 1973. Structural lumber laminated from 1/4-inch 
rotary-peeled Southern Pine veneer. Forest Products Journal. 
23(7):17-25. 


Kretschmann, D.E.; Moody, R.C.; Pellerin, R.F.; Bendtsen, 
B.A.; Cahill, J.M.; McAlister, R.H.; Sharp, D.W. 1993. Ef- 
fect of various proportions of juvenile wood on laminated 
veneer lumber. Res. Pap. FPL-RP-521. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 35 p. 


Kunesh, R.H. 1978. MICRO-LAM: structural laminated 
veneer lumber. Forest Products Journal. 28(7): 41-44. 


Manbeck, H.B.; Janowiak, J.J.; Blankenhorn, P.R.; Labosky, 
P.; Moody, R.C.; Hernandez, R. 1993. Red maple glulam 
timber beam performance. FPL—RP-519. Madison, WI: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 32 p. 


Marx, C.M.; Moody, R.C. 1981a. Bending strength of shal- 
low glued-laminated beams of a uniform grade. Res. Pap. 
FPL—RP-380. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 19 p. 


Marx, C.M.; Moody, R.C. 1981b. Strength and stiffness 

of small glued-laminated beams with different qualities 

of tension laminations. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-381. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 48 p. 


McNatt, J.D. 1973. Basic engineering properties of particle- 
board. Res. Pap. FPL—206. Madison, WI: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


McNatt, J.D. Myers, G. 1993. Selected properties of com- 
mercial high-density hardboards. Forest Products Journal. 
43(4): 59-62. 

Moody, R.C. 1972. Tensile strength of lumber laminated 
from 1/8-inch-thick veneers. Res. Pap. FPL-RP—181. Madi- 


son, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Forest Products Laboratory. 28 p. 


Moody, R.C. 1974. Flexural strength of glued-laminated 
timber beams containing coarse-grain Southern Pine lumber. 
Res. Pap. FPL—222. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 42 p. 


12-11 


Moody, R.C.; Peters, C.C. 1972. Strength properties of 
rotary knife-cut laminated Southern Pine. FPL—RP-178. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 1 p. 


Moody, R.C.; Hernandez, R.; Davalos, J.F.; Sonti, S.S. 
1993. Yellow poplar glulam timber beam performance. Res. 
Pap. FPL—-RP-—520. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 30 p. 


NIST. 2004. Voluntary product standard PS 2-04. Perfor- 
mance standard for wood-base structural-use panels. Na- 
tional Institute of Standards and Technology. Gaithersburg, 
MD: U.S. Department of Commerce. 


NIST. 2007. Voluntary product standard PS 1-07. Construc- 
tion and industrial plywood. National Institute of Standards 
and Technology. Gaithersburg, MD: U.S. Department of 
Commerce. 


O’Halloran, M.R. 1979. Development of performance speci- 
fications for structural panels in residential markets. Forest 
Products Journal. 29(12): 21-26. 


O’Halloran, M.R. 1980. The performance approach to ac- 
ceptance of building products. In: Proceedings, 14th Wash- 
ington State University particleboard symposium. Pullman, 
WA: 77-84. 


Pu, J.; Tang, R.C.; Davis, W.C. 1992. Creep behavior of 
commercial oriented strandboard under high relative humid- 
ity. Forest Products Journal. 42(4): 49-54. 


Shedlauskas, J.P.; Manbeck, H.B.; Janowiak, J.J.; Hernan- 
dez, R.; Moody, R.C.; Labosky, P., Jr.; Blankenhorn, P.R. 
1996. Efficient use of red oak for glued-laminated beams. 
Transactions of ASAE. 39(1): 203-209. 


Slaughter, A.E. 2004. Design and fatigue of a structural 
wood-—plastic composite. MS Thesis. Pullman, WA: Wash- 
ington State University. 150 p. 


Stark, N.M.; Rowlands, R.E. 2003. Effects of wood fiber 
characteristics on mechanical properties of wood/polypro- 
pylene composites. Wood Fiber Science. 35(2): 167-174. 


Suchsland, O.; Lyon, D.E.; Short, PE. 1979. Selected prop- 
erties of commercial medium-density fiberboard. Forest 
Products Journal. 29(9): 45-49. 


TECO. 1991. Performance standards and policies for 
structural-use panels. TECO PRP-—133. Eugene, OR: Timber 
Engineering Company. 


Wang, S.; Gu, H.; Neimsuwan, T.; Wang, S.G. 2003a. Layer 
thickness swell and related properties of commercial OSB 
products: a comparative study. In: Proceedings, 37th inter- 
national particleboard and composite materials symposium. 
2003 April 7-10. Pullman, WA: Washington State Univer- 
sity. 65-76. 


12-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Wang, X.; Ross, R.J.; Brashaw, B.K.; Verhey, S.A.; Fors- 
man, J.W.; Erickson, J.R. 2003b. Flexural properties of 
laminated veneer lumber manufactured from ultrasonically 
rated red maple veneer. A pilot study. Res. Note 
FPL—RN-0288. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
Sp. 


Wolcott, M.P. 2001. Final report: engineered wood com- 
posites fro naval waterfront facilities. Contract Nooo 14- 
97-C-0395. Arlington, VA: Office of Naval Research. 


Wolcott, M.P.; Smith, P.M.; Englund, K.R. 2006. Technol- 
ogy and market issues driving wood-plastic product devel- 
opment. Wood Design Focus. 16(3): 3-5. 


Youngquist, J.A.; Laufenberg, T.L.; Bryant, B.S. 1984. End 
jointing of laminated veneer lumber for structural use. For- 
est Products Journal. 34(11/12): 25-32. 


Youngquist, J.A.; Myers, G.E.; Muehl, J.M. 1993. Compos- 
ites from recycled wood and plastics. Final Rep., U.S. Envi- 
ronmental Protection Agency, Project [IAG DW12934608-2. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory. 3 p. 


Crear iE Res 


Drying and Control of Moisture Content 
and Dimensional Changes 


Richard Bergman, Research Forest Products Technologist 


In the living tree, wood contains large quantities of water. 


Con tents As green wood dries, most of the water is removed. The 
moisture remaining in the wood tends to come to equilibri- 
Determination of Moisture Content 13-1 um with the relative humidity of the surrounding air. Correct 
Oven-Drying Method 13-2 drying, handling, and storage of wood will minimize mois- 
Electrical Method 13—2 ture content changes that might occur after drying when the 


wood is in service. If moisture content is controlled within 
reasonable limits by such methods, major problems from 
dimensional changes can usually be avoided. 


Recommended Moisture Content 13-3 
Timbers 13-3 
Lumber 13-3 
Glued Wood Products 13-3 The discussion in this chapter is concerned with moisture 
evineor wood 13-5 content determination, recommended moisture content val- 
; ; ues, drying methods, methods of calculating dimensional 
Air Drying 13-6 changes, design factors affecting such changes in structures, 


Accelerated Air Drying and Pre-Drying 13-6 and moisture content control during transit, storage, and 
Kiln Drying 13-6 construction. Data on green moisture content, fiber satura- 
Drying Mechanism 13-6 tion point, shrinkage, and equilibrium moisture content 
Drying Stresses 13~7 are given with information on other physical properties in 
Dry Kilns 13-8 ees 

Kiln Schedules 13-2 Wood in service is always undergoing slight changes in 
Drying Defects 13-9 moisture content. These changes that result from daily 


humidity changes are often small and usually of no conse- 
quence. Changes that occur because of seasonal variation, 
although gradual, tend to be of more concern. Protective 


Moisture Content of Dried Lumber 13-11 
Moisture Control during Transit and Storage 13-13 


Plywood and Structural Items 13-14 coatings can retard dimensional changes in wood but do not 
Finish and Factory Lumber 13-14 prevent them. In general, no significant dimensional changes 
Dimensional Changes in Wood 13-15 will occur if wood is fabricated or installed at a moisture 
Estimation Using Dimensional Change content corresponding to the average atmospheric condi- 
Coefficient 13-15 tions to which it will be exposed. When incompletely dried 


material is used in construction, some minor dimensional 


a eee ee ed changes can be tolerated if the proper design is used. 


Design Factors Affecting Dimensional Change 13-17 
Framing Lumber in House Construction 13-17 Determination of Moisture Content 


Heavy Timber Construction 13-18 The amount of moisture in wood is ordinarily expressed as a 


Interior Finish 13-18 percentage of wood mass when oven-dried. Four methods of 

Flooring 13-18 determining moisture content are covered in ASTM D 4442 
Wood Care and Installation during (ASTM 2007). Two of these—the oven-drying and the elec- 
Construction 13-18 trical methods—are described in this chapter. 

Lumber and Trusses 13-18 The oven-drying method has been the most universally 

Exterior Trim and Millwork 13-19 accepted method for determining moisture content, but it 

Finished Flooring 13-19 is slow and necessitates cutting the wood. In addition, the 

Interior Trim 13-19 oven-drying method may give values slightly greater than 


Plastering 13-19 true moisture content with woods containing volatile extrac- 


Literature Cited 13-19 


tives. The electrical method is rapid, does not require cutting 
the wood, and can be used on wood installed in a structure. 
However, considerable care must be taken to use and in- 
terpret the results correctly. Use of the electrical method is 
generally limited to moisture content values less than 30%. 


Oven-Drying Method 


In the oven-drying method, specimens are taken from rep- 
resentative boards or pieces of a quantity of lumber. With 
lumber, obtain the specimens at least 500 mm (20 in.) from 
the end of the pieces. They should be free from knots and 
other irregularities, such as bark and pitch pockets. Speci- 
mens from lumber should be full cross sections and 25 mm 
(1 in.) long. Specimens from larger items may be represen- 
tative sectors of such sections or subdivided increment borer 
or auger chip samples. Convenient amounts of chips and 
particles can be selected at random from larger batches, with 
care taken to ensure that the sample is representative of the 
batch. Select veneer samples from four or five locations in a 
sheet to ensure that the sample average will accurately indi- 
cate the average of the sheet. 


To prevent drying or uptake of moisture, weigh each speci- 
men immediately. If the specimen cannot be weighed im- 
mediately, place it in a plastic bag or tightly wrapped in 
metal foil to protect it from moisture change until it can be 
weighed. After weighing, place the specimen in an oven 
heated to 101 to 105 °C (214 to 221 °F), and keep it there 
until no appreciable weight change occurs in 4-h weighing 
intervals. A lumber section 25 mm (1 in.) along the grain 
will reach a constant weight in 12 to 48 h. Smaller speci- 
mens will take less time. The constant or oven-dry mass 
and the (original) mass of the specimen when cut are used 
to determine the percentage of moisture content (MC) using 
the formula 


Mass when cut — Ovendry mass 


MC (%) 100 (13-1) 


Ovendry mass 


Electrical Method 


The electrical method of determining the moisture content 
of wood uses the relationships between moisture content 
and measurable electrical properties of wood, such as con- 
ductivity (or its inverse, resistivity), dielectric constant, or 
power-loss factor. These properties vary in a definite and 
predictable way with changing moisture content, but cor- 
relations are not perfect. Therefore, moisture determinations 
using electrical methods are always subject to some uncer- 
tainty. 


Electric moisture meters are available commercially and 
are based on each of these properties and identified by the 
property measured. Conductance-type (or resistance) me- 
ters measure moisture content in terms of the direct current 
conductance of the specimen. Dielectric-type meters are of 


13-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


two types. Those based principally on dielectric constant are 
called capacitance or capacitive admittance meters; those 
based on loss factor are called power-loss meters. 


The principal advantages of the electrical method compared 
with the oven-drying method are speed and convenience. 
Only a few seconds are required for the determination, and 
the piece of wood being tested is not cut or damaged, except 
for driving electrode needle points into the wood when us- 
ing conductance-type meters. Thus, the electrical method is 
adaptable to rapid sorting of lumber on the basis of moisture 
content, measuring the moisture content of wood installed in 
a building, or establishing the moisture content of a quantity 
of lumber or other wood items, when used in accordance 
with ASTM D 4442. 


For conductance meters, needle electrodes (pins) of various 
lengths are driven into the wood. The two general types of 
electrodes are insulated and uninsulated. Uninsulated elec- 
trodes will sense the lowest resistance (highest conductance) 
along their length, thus highest moisture content level. 
Moisture gradients between the surface and the interior can 
lead to confusion; therefore, insulating the electrode except 
the tip is useful to show moisture gradients. If the wood is 
wetter near the center than the surface, which is typical for 
drying wood, the reading will correspond to the depth of the 
tip of the insulated electrodes. If a meter reading increases 
as the electrodes are being driven in, then the moisture gra- 
dient is typical. In this case, drive the pins about one-fifth to 
one-fourth the thickness of the wood to reflect the average 
moisture content of the entire piece. Dried or partially dried 
wood sometimes regains moisture in the surface fibers from 
rewetting therefore the surface moisture content is greater 
than that of the interior. An example of this is when dried 
wood is rained on. In this case, the meter with the uninsu- 
lated pins will read the higher moisture content surface, pos- 
sibly causing a significant deviation from the average mois- 
ture content. To guard against this problem, electrodes with 
insulated shanks have been developed. They measure mois- 
ture content of only the wood at the tips of the electrodes. 


Dielectric-type meters are fitted with surface contact elec- 
trodes designed for the type of specimen material being test- 
ed. The electric field from these electrodes penetrates well 
into the specimen, but with a strength that decreases rapidly 
with depth of penetration. For this reason, the surface layers 
of the specimen influence the readings of dielectric (pin- 
less) meters predominantly, and the meter reading may not 
adequately represent the material near the core if there is a 
large moisture content gradient. 


To obtain accurate moisture content values, use each instru- 
ment in accordance with its manufacturer’s instructions. 

The electrodes should be appropriate for the material 

being tested and properly oriented according to the meter 
manufacturer’s instructions. Take the readings after inserting 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


the electrode. Apply a species correction supplied with the 
instrument when appropriate. Make temperature corrections 
if the temperature of the wood differs considerably from 
the temperature of calibration used by the manufacturer. 
Approximate corrections for conductance-type (resistance) 
meters are made by adding or subtracting about 0.5% for 
each 5.6 °C (10 °F) the wood temperature differs from the 
calibration temperature. Add the correction factors to the 
readings for temperatures less than the calibration tempera- 
ture and subtract from the readings for temperatures greater 
than the calibration temperature. Temperature corrections 
for older dielectric meters are rather complex and are best 
made from published charts (James 1988). Newer dielec- 
tric meters perform this temperature calibration internally, 
although newer dielectric meters require a specific gravity 
adjustment. 


Although some meters have scales that go up to 120%, the 
range of moisture content that can be measured reliably 

is 4% to about 30% for commercial dielectric meters and 
about 6% to 30% for resistance meters. The precision of the 
individual meter readings decreases near the limits of these 
ranges. Readings greater than 30% must be considered only 
qualitative. When the meter is properly used on a quantity 
of lumber dried to a constant moisture content below fiber 
saturation, the average moisture content from the corrected 
meter readings should be within 1% of the true average. 


Recommended Moisture Content 


Install wood at the moisture content levels that the wood 
will experience in service. This minimizes the seasonal 
variation in moisture content, thus dimensional changes, 
after installation, avoiding problems such as floor buckling 
or cracks in furniture. The in-service moisture content of 
exterior wood (siding, wood trim) primarily depends on 
the outdoor relative humidity and exposure to rain or sun. 
The in-service moisture content of interior wood primar- 
ily depends on indoor relative humidity, which in turn is a 
complex function of moisture sources, ventilation rate, de- 
humidification (for example, air conditioning), and outdoor 
humidity conditions. 


Recommended values for interior wood presented in this 
chapter are based on measurements in well-ventilated build- 
ings without unusual moisture sources and without air con- 
ditioning. In air-conditioned buildings, moisture conditions 
depend largely on the proper sizing of the air-conditioning 
equipment. Installing wood in basements or over a crawl 
space may experience moisture contents greater than the 
range given. Wood in insulated walls or roofs and attics may 
experience moisture contents greater or less than the range. 
Nevertheless, the recommended values for installation pro- 
vide a useful guideline. 


Timbers 


Ideally, dry solid timbers to the average moisture content 
the material will reach in service. Although this optimum is 
possible with lumber less than 76 mm (3 in.) thick, it is sel- 
dom practical to obtain fully dried timbers, thick joists, and 
planks. When thick solid members are used, some shrinkage 
of the assembly should be expected. In the case of built- 

up assemblies, such as roof trusses, it may be necessary to 
tighten bolts or other fastenings occasionally to maintain 
full bearing of the connectors as the members shrink. 


Lumber 


Match the recommended moisture content of wood as close- 
ly as is practical to the equilibrium moisture content (EMC) 
conditions in service. Table 13—1 shows the EMC conditions 
in outdoor exposure in various U.S. cities for each month. 
The EMC data are based on the average relative humidity 
and temperature data (30 or more years) available from the 
National Climatic Data Center of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration. The relative humidity data are 
the averages of the morning and afternoon values. In most 
cases, these values are representative of the EMC attained 
by the wood. However, in some locations, early morning 
relative humidity may occasionally reach 100%. Under 
these conditions, condensation may occur on the wood 
surface, therefore surface fibers will exceed the EMC. The 
moisture content requirements are more exacting for fin- 
ished lumber and wood products used inside heated and air- 
conditioned buildings than those for lumber used outdoors 
or in unheated buildings. For various areas of the United 
States, the recommended moisture content values 

for wood used inside heated buildings are shown in Fig- 
ure 13-1. Values and tolerances for both interior and exte- 
rior uses of wood in various forms are given in Table 13-2. 
If the average moisture content is within 1% of that recom- 
mended and all pieces fall within the individual limits, the 
entire lot is probably satisfactory (Simpson 1998). 


General commercial practice is to kiln dry wood for some 
products, such as flooring and furniture, to a slightly lower 
moisture content than service conditions demand. This 
anticipates a moderate increase in moisture content during 
processing, transportation, and construction. This practice is 
intended to ensure uniform distribution of moisture among 
the individual pieces. Common grades of softwood lumber 
and softwood dimension lumber are not normally dried to 
the moisture content values indicated in Table 13-2. Dry 
lumber, as defined in the American Softwood Lumber Stan- 
dard, has a maximum moisture content of 19%. Some indus- 
try grading rules provide for an even lower maximum. For 
example, to be grade marked KD 15, the maximum moisture 
content permitted is generally 15%. 


Glued Wood Products 


When veneers are bonded with cold-setting adhesives 
to make plywood, they take up comparatively large 


13-3 


13-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 13—1. Equilibrium moisture content for outside conditions in several U.S. locations prior to 1997 


Equilibrium moisture content* (%) 


State City Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. 
AK — Juneau 165 160 15.1 139 136 13.9 15.1 165 181 180 17.7) 18.1 
AL = Mobile 13.8 13.1 13.3 13.3 134 133 142 144 13.9 13.0 13.7 14.0 
AZ Flagstaff 11.8 114 10.8 9.3 8.8 1 97 11.1 10.3 10.1 108 11.8 
AZ Phoenix 9.4 8.4 7.9 6.1 5.1 4.6 62 69 69 70 82 9.5 
AR Little Rock 13.8 13.2 12.8 13.1 13.7 13.1 133 135 13.9 13.1 13.5 13.9 
CA Fresno 164 141 126 10.6 9.1 8.2 78 84 92 103 13.4 16.6 
CA Los Angeles 122 130 138 138 144 148 150 15.1 145 138 124 12.1 
CO Denver 10.7. 10.5 10.2 9.6 10.2 9.6 94 96 95 95 11.0 11.0 
DC Washington 11.8 115 113 12 116 11.7 11.7) 123 126 12.5 12.2 12.2 
FL = Miami 13.5 13.1 12.8 123 127 140 13.7 141 145 135 139 13.4 
GA Atlanta 13.39 123 12.0 11.8 125 13.0 13.8 142 13.9 13.0 12.9 13.2 
HI ~—- Honolulu 13.3 12.8 11.9 11.3 108 106 106 10.7 108 11.3 12.1 12.9 
ID Boise 15.2 13.5 11.1 10.0 9.7 9.0 730 #73 84 100 13.3 15.2 
IL Chicago 1442 13.7 134 125 122 124 128 133 133 12.9 140 149 
IN Indianapolis 15.1 146 13.8 128 130 12.8 139 145 142 13.7) 148 15.7 
IA Des Moines 140 13.9 133 126 124 126 13.1 134 13.7 12.7. 13.9 14.9 
KS Wichita 13.8 134 124 124 132 125 11.5 118 126 124 13.2 13.9 
KY Louisville 13.7. 133 126 120 128 13.0 13.3 13.7) 14.1 13.3 13.5 13.9 
LA New Orleans 149 143 140 142 141 146 152 153 148 140 142 15.0 
ME Portland 13.1. 12.7) 12.7) 12.1. 126 130 130 134 13.9 13.8 140 13.5 
MA Boston 11.8 116 119 21.7 122 12.1 11.9 12.5 13.1 12.8 126 12.2 
MI Detroit 1447 141 135 126 12.3 123 126 133 13.7 135 144 15.1 
MN Minneapolis-St.Paul 13.7) 136 133 120 11.9 123 125 132 13.8 133 143 14.6 
MS _ Jackson 15.1 144 13.7 138 141 #139 146 146 146 141 143 14.9 
MO _ St. Louis 145 141 132 124 128 126 129 133 13.7 13.1 140 14.9 
MT Missoula 16.7 15.1 128 114 116 11.7) 10.1 98 11.3 129 162 17. 
NE Omaha 140 138 13.0 12.1. 126 12.9 133 138 140 13.0 13.9 148 
NV Las Vegas 8.5 7.7 7.0 5.5 5.0 4.0 45 52 53 59 7.2 84 
NV Reno 12.3 10.7 9.7 8.8 8.8 8.2 77 #79 84 94 10.9 12.3 
NM _ Albuquerque 10.4 9.3 8.0 6.9 6.8 6.4 80 89 87 86 96 10.7 
NY New York 12.2 119 115 110 115 118 11.8 124 126 12.3 12.5) 12.3 
NC Raleigh 12.8 12.1 122 11.7) 13.1 134 138 145 145 13.7) 12.9 12.8 
ND Fargo 142 146 152 129 11.9 12.9 132 13.2 13.7 13.5 15.2 15.2 
OH = Cleveland 146 142 13.7 126 12.7) 12.7) 128 13.7) 13.8 13.3 13.8 14.6 
OK = Oklahoma City 13.2 12.9 122 12.1. 134 13.1 11.7 118 12.9 12.33) 12.8 13.2 
OR Pendleton 15.8 140 116 10.6 9.9 9.1 74 7.7 88 11.0 146 16.5 
OR Portland 165 153 142 135 13.1 124 11.7 11.9 12.6 15.0 168 174 
PA Philadelphia 126 11.9 11.7 11.2 118 11.9 121 124 13.0 13.0 12.7) 12.7 
SC Charleston 13.39 126 125 124 128 135 141 146 145 13.7) 13.2 13.2 
SD _ Sioux Falls 142 146 142 129 126 128 126 133 13.6 130 146 15.3 
TN Memphis 13.8 13.1 124 122 127 128 130 13.1 13.2 125 12.9 13.6 
TX  Dallas—Ft. Worth 13.6 13.1 12.9 132 139 13.0 116 11.7) 12.9 12.8 13.1 13.5 
TX El Paso 9.6 8.2 7.0 5.8 6.1 6.3 83 91 93 88 90 9.8 
UT Salt Lake City 146 13.2 11.1 10.0 9.4 8.2 7.1 74 85 10.3 12.8 14.9 
VA _— Richmond 13.2 12.5 12.0 11.3 12.1. 124 130 13.7) 13.8 13.5 12.8 13.0 
WA Seattle-Tacoma 15.6 146 154 13.7 130 12.7) 122 12.5 13.5 15.3 163 16.5 
WI Madison 145 143 141 128 125 128 134 144 #149 141 15.2 15.7 
WV Charleston 13.7 130 12.1 114 125 133 141 143 140 13.6 13.0 13.5 
WY Cheyenne 10.2 104 10.7 104 10.8 10.5 99 99 97 9.7 10.6 10.6 


“EMC values were determined from the average of 30 or more years of relative humidity and temperature data available from the 
National Climatic Data Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


8% average 
moisture content 


FAA A 
CESS 


moisture conten 
11% av 
moisture content 


Figure 13-1. Recommended average moisture con- 
tent for interior use of wood products in various 
areas of the United States. 


quantities of moisture. To keep the final moisture content 
low and to minimize the need for re-drying the plywood, 
the initial moisture content of the veneer should be as low 
as practical. However, dry veneer is brittle and difficult to 
handle without damage, so the minimum practical moisture 
content is about 4%. Freshly glued plywood intended for 
interior service should be dried to the moisture content val- 
ues given in Table 13-2. 


Hot-pressed plywood and other board products, such as 
particleboard and hardboard, usually do not have the same 
moisture content as lumber. The high temperatures used in 
hot presses cause these products to assume a lower moisture 
content for a given relative humidity. Because this lower 
equilibrium moisture content varies widely, depending on 
the specific type of hot-pressed product, it is recommended 
that such products be conditioned at 30% to 40% relative 
humidity for interior use and 65% for exterior use. 


Lumber used in the manufacture of large laminated mem- 
bers should be dried to a moisture content slightly less than 
the moisture content expected in service. This is done so 


that the moisture adsorbed from the adhesive will not cause 
the moisture content of the product to exceed the service 
value. The range of moisture content between laminations 
assembled into a single member should not exceed 5 per- 
centage points. 


Although laminated members are often massive and respond 
rather slowly to changes in environmental conditions, it is 
desirable to follow the recommendations in Table 13-2 for 
moisture content at time of installation. 


Drying of Wood 


Drying is required for wood to be used in most products. 
Dried lumber has many advantages over green lumber for 
producers and consumers. Removal of excess water reduces 
weight, thus shipping and handling costs. Proper drying 
reduces shrinking and swelling of wood while in use to 
manageable amounts under all but extreme conditions of 
relative humidity or rewetting such as flooding. As wood 
dries, most of its strength properties increase, as well as its 
electrical and thermal insulating properties. Properly dried 
lumber can be cut to precise dimensions and machined more 
easily and efficiently; wood parts can be more securely fitted 
and fastened together with nails, screws, bolts, and adhe- 
sives; warping, splitting, checking, and other harmful effects 
of uncontrolled drying are largely eliminated; and paint, 
varnish, and other finishes are more effectively applied and 
maintained. Wood must be relatively dry before gluing or 
treating with decay-preventing and fire-retardant chemicals. 


The key to successful and efficient drying is control of the 
drying process. Timely application of optimum or at least 
adequate temperature, relative humidity, and air circulation 
conditions is critical. Uncontrolled drying leads to drying 
defects that can adversely affect the serviceability and eco- 
nomics of the product. The usual strategy is to dry as fast as 
the particular species, thickness, and end-product require- 
ments allow without damaging the wood. Slower drying can 
be uneconomical and can introduce the risk of stain. 


Table 13-2. Recommended moisture content values for various wood products at time of 


installation 


Recommended moisture content (%) for areas in the United States 


Most areas of the 


Dry Damp, warm 


United States southwestern area* coastal area* 
Individual Individual Individual 
Use of wood Average” pieces Average” pieces Average” _ pieces 
Interior: woodwork, flooring, 8 6-10 6 4-9 11 8-13 
furniture, wood trim 
Exterior: siding, wood trim, 12 9-14 9 7-12 12 9-14 


sheathing, laminated timbers 


“Major areas are indicated in Figure 13-1. 


*To obtain a realistic average, test at least 10% of each item. If the quantity of a given item is small, make several tests. 
For example, in an ordinary dwelling containing 60 floor joists, at least six tests should be made on joists selected at 


random. 


13-5 


Softwood lumber intended for framing in construction is 
usually targeted for drying to an average moisture content 
of 15%, not to exceed 19%. Softwood lumber for many ap- 
pearance grade uses is dried to a lower moisture content of 
10% to 12% and to 7% to 9% for furniture, cabinets, and 
millwork. Hardwood lumber for framing in construction, al- 
though not in common use, should also be dried to an aver- 
age moisture content of 15%, not to exceed 19%. Hardwood 
lumber for furniture, cabinets, and millwork is usually dried 
to 6% to 8% moisture content. 


Lumber drying is usually accomplished by some combina- 
tion of air drying, accelerated air drying or pre-drying, and 
kiln drying. Wood species, initial moisture content, lumber 
thickness, economics, and end use are often the main factors 
in determining the details of the drying process. 


Air Drying 

The main purpose of air drying lumber is to evaporate as 
much of the water as possible before end use or prior to 
kiln-drying. Air drying lumber down to 20% to 25% mois- 
ture content prior to kiln-drying is common. Sometimes, 
depending on a mill’s scheduling, air drying may be cut 
short at a higher moisture content before the wood is sent 

to the dry kiln. Air drying saves energy costs and reduces 
required dry kiln capacity. Limitations of air drying are gen- 
erally associated with uncontrolled drying. The drying rate 
is very slow during the cold winter months. At other times, 
hot, dry winds may increase degrade and volume losses as 

a result of severe surface checking and end splitting. End 
coating may alleviate end checking and splitting. Warm, 
humid periods with little air movement may encourage 

the growth of fungal stains, as well as aggravate chemical 
stains. Another limitation of air drying is the high cost of 
carrying a large inventory of high value lumber for extended 
periods. Air drying time to 20% to 25% moisture content 
varies widely, depending on species, thickness, location, and 
the time of year the lumber is stacked. Some examples of 
extremes for 25-mm- (1-in.-) thick lumber are 15 to 30 days 
for some of the low-density species, such as pine, spruce, 
red alder, and soft maple, stacked in favorable locations and 
favorable times of the year; 200 to 300 days for slow-drying 
species, such as sinker hemlock and pine, oak, and birch, in 
northern locations and stacked at unfavorable times of the 
year. Details of important air-drying considerations, such as 
lumber stacking and air drying yard layout, are covered in 
Air Drying of Lumber: A Guide to Industry Practices (Rietz 
and Page 1971). 


Accelerated Air Drying and Pre-Drying 


The limitations of air drying have led to increased use of 
technology that reduces drying time and introduces some 
control into drying (green) wood. Accelerated air drying 
involves the use of fans to force air through lumber piles 
in a shed. This protects the lumber from the elements and 
improves air circulation compared with air drying, thus 


13-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


improving quality. Heat is sometimes added to reduce the 
relative humidity and slightly increase the shed temperature 
to aid drying. Pre-dryers take this acceleration and control 
a step further by providing control of both temperature and 
relative humidity and providing forced air circulation in a 
completely enclosed compartment. Typical conditions in 

a pre-dryer are 27 to 38 °C (80 to 100 °F) and 65% to 

85% relative humidity. 


Kiln Drying 

In kiln drying, higher temperatures and faster air circulation 
are used to significantly increase the drying rate. Specific 
kiln schedules have been developed to control temperature 
and relative humidity in accordance with the moisture con- 
tent and stress situation within the wood, thus minimizing 
shrinkage-caused defects (Boone and others 1988). 


Drying Mechanism 

Water in wood normally moves from high to low zones of 
moisture content, which means that the surface of the wood 
must be drier than the interior if moisture is to be removed. 
Drying can be broken down into two phases: movement of 
water from the interior to the wood surface and evaporation 
of water from the surface. The surface fibers of most species 
reach moisture equilibrium with the surrounding air soon af- 
ter drying begins. This is the beginning of the development 
of a typical moisture gradient (Fig. 13—2), that is, the differ- 
ence in moisture content between the inner and outer por- 
tions of a board. If air circulation is too slow, a longer time 
is required for the wood surface to reach moisture equilib- 
rium. This is one reason why air circulation is so important 
in kiln drying. If air circulation is too slow, the drying rate 
is also slower than necessary and mold could develop on the 
surface of lumber. If drying is too fast, electrical energy in 
running the fans is wasted, and in certain species, surface 
checking and other drying defects can develop if relative 
humidity and air velocity are not coordinated. 


Water moves through the interior of wood as a liquid or 
vapor through various air passageways in the cellular struc- 
ture of the wood, as well as through the wood cell walls. 
Moisture moves in these passageways in all directions, both 
across and with the grain. In general, lighter species dry 
faster than heavier species because the structure of lighter 
wood contains more openings per unit volume, and moisture 
moves through air faster than through wood cell walls. Wa- 
ter moves by two main mechanisms: capillary action (liq- 
uid) and diffusion of bound water (vapor). Capillary action 
causes the free water to flow through cell cavities and the 
small passageways that connect adjacent cell cavities. Dif- 
fusion of bound water moves moisture from areas of high 
concentration to areas of low concentration. Diffusion in the 
longitudinal direction is about 10 to 15 times faster than ra- 
dial or tangential diffusion, and radial diffusion is somewhat 
faster than tangential diffusion. This explains why flatsawn 
lumber generally dries faster than quartersawn lumber. AI- 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


t<,<t, 


Initial moisture content 


Moisture content 


0 20 40 60 80 100 
Thickness (percentage of total thickness) 


Figure 13-2. Typical moisture gradient in lumber 
during drying at time increasing from t, to ¢,. 


Dry shell-tensio 
Wet core-compression__ 


Se 


Figure 13-3. End view of board showing develop- 
ment of drying stresses (a) early and (b) later in 
drying. 


though longitudinal diffusion is much faster than diffusion 
across the grain, it generally is not of practical importance in 
lumber that is many times longer than it is thick. In addition, 
a direct result of longitudinal diffusion may be end-checking 
or splitting without proper care. 


Because chemical extractives in heartwood plug up passage- 
ways, moisture generally moves more freely in sapwood 
than in heartwood; thus, sapwood generally dries faster than 
heartwood. However, the heartwood of many species is low- 
er in moisture content than is the sapwood. Thus heartwood 
can reach final moisture content as fast as the sapwood. 


The rate at which moisture moves in wood depends on the 
relative humidity of the surrounding air, the steepness of the 
moisture gradient, and the temperature of the wood. Lower 
relative humidity increases capillary flow. Low relative 
humidity also stimulates diffusion by lowering the mois- 
ture content at the surface, thereby steepening the moisture 
gradient and increasing the diffusion rate. The greater the 
temperature of the wood, the faster moisture will move from 
the wetter interior to the drier surface, thus the steeper the 
moisture gradient. If relative humidity is too low in the early 
stages of drying, excessive shrinkage may occur, resulting 
in surface and end checking. If the temperature is too high, 
collapse, honeycomb, or strength reduction can occur. 


Drying Stresses 


Drying stresses are the main cause of nonstain-related dry- 
ing defects. Understanding these stresses provides a means 
for minimizing and recognizing the damage they can cause. 
The cause of drying stresses is the differential shrinkage 
between the outer part of a board (the shell) and the interior 
part (the core) that can result in drying defects. Early in 
drying, the fibers in the shell dry first and begin to shrink. 
However, the core has not yet begun to dry and shrink; 
consequently, the core prevents the shell from shrinking 
fully. Thus, the shell goes into tension and the core into 
compression (Fig. 13-3). If the shell dries too rapidly, it is 
stressed beyond the elastic limit and dries in a permanently 
stretched (set) condition without attaining full shrinkage. 
Sometimes surface cracks, or checks, occur from this initial 
stage of drying and can be a serious defect for many uses. 
As drying progresses, the core begins to dry and attempts to 
shrink. However, the shell is set in a permanently expanded 
condition and prevents normal shrinkage of the core. This 
causes the stresses to reverse; the core goes into tension and 
the shell into compression. The change in the shell and core 
stresses and in the moisture content level during drying is 
shown in Figure 13—4. These internal tension stresses may 
be severe enough to cause internal cracks (honeycomb). 


Differential shrinkage caused by differences in radial, tan- 
gential, and longitudinal shrinkage is a major cause of warp. 
The distortions shown in Figure 4—3 in Chapter 4 are due 

to differential shrinkage. When juvenile or reaction wood is 
present on one edge or face of a board and normal wood is 


13-7 


< Maximum 
3 compression 
7) fs in center 
o Maximum y 
2. tension 
‘ 5 in outside ALT lh 
oO 
8° olRTH. - F LF = Ww |i 
” o 
2 
2 90 5 days 10 days 18 days 
= 
oo~ 
5S 6oly 
2S 
Of 30 | 
=9 co 
OULLITTTTT 
Thickness 
< 
2 , Final 
e Stress Maximum _ case- 
2 reversal tension hardened 
= in outside incenter ¥ state 
ge a 
a | | | | af___ ae 
ee ee ee | i 
7 
5 90 28 days 36 days 50 days 
os 
_— 
] ~ 
0S 
fe} 4 
=6 
o 


Thickness 


Figure 13—4. Moisture—stress relationship during six 
stages of kiln drying 50-mm- (2-in.-) thick red oak. 


Automatic vents 


Reversible 


Booster coil 


Figure 13—5. Lineshaft, double-track, compartment 
kiln with alternately opposing fans. Vents are over 
fan shaft between fans. Vent on high pressure side of 
fans becomes fresh air inlet when direction of circu- 
lation is reversed. 


13-8 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


present on the opposite side, the difference in their longitu- 
dinal shrinkage can also cause warp. 


Dry Kilns 

Most dry kilns are thermally insulated compartments de- 
signed for a batch process in which the kiln is completely 
loaded with lumber in one operation and the lumber remains 
stationary during the entire drying cycle. Temperature and 
relative humidity are kept as uniform as possible throughout 
the kiln and can be controlled over a wide range. As the 
wood dries, kiln temperature and relative humidity change 
based on a schedule that takes into account the moisture 
content or the drying rate, or both, of the lumber. All dry 
kilns use some type of forced-air circulation, with air mov- 
ing through the lumber perpendicular to the length of the 
lumber and parallel to the spacers (stickers) that separate 
each layer of lumber in a stack. This forced-air circulation 
allows for uniform air flow in the dry kiln. 


Three general types of kilns are in common use. One is the 
track-loaded type (Fig. 13-5), where lumber is stacked on 
kiln trucks that are rolled in and out of the kiln on tracks. 
Most softwood lumber in the United States is dried in this 
kiln type. Another major type is the package-loaded kiln 
(Fig. 13-6), where individual stacks of lumber are fork- 
lifted into place in the kiln. Package-loaded kilns are com- 
monly used for drying hardwood lumber. Indirect-steam 
heat is common for these two types although softwood 
lumber kilns are sometimes directly heated using combus- 
tion gases from burning fuel. A third common type of kiln, 
usually package loaded, is the dehumidification kiln. Instead 
of venting humid air to remove water, as the other two types 
of kilns do, water is removed by condensation on cold dehu- 
midifier coils (Fig. 13-7). 


Kiln Schedules 


Akiln schedule is a carefully developed compromise 
between the need to dry lumber as fast as possible for 
economic efficiency and the need to avoid severe drying 
conditions that will lead to drying defects. A kiln schedule 
is a series of temperatures and relative humidities that are 
applied at various stages of drying. In most schedules, the 
temperature is gradually increased and the relative humidity 
decreased, thus lowering the EMC. The schedule for South- 
ern Pine structural lumber is an exception to this general 
tule. This is lumber usually dried at a constant temperature 
and relative humidity. Temperatures are chosen to balance 
the highest drying rate with the avoidance of objectionable 
drying defects. The stresses that develop during drying are 
the limiting factor in determining the kiln schedule. The 
schedule must be developed so that the drying stresses do 
not exceed the strength of the wood at any given tempera- 
ture and moisture content. Otherwise, the wood will crack 
either on the surface or internally or be crushed by forces 
that collapse the wood cells. Wood generally becomes 
stronger as the moisture content decreases, and to a lesser 


Chapter 13 


Steam 
spray line 


Controller 
dry bulb 4 


Automatic ventilators aR 


Heating coils 


Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


NY 
REN 


FE INR 


S 


‘ontroller 


, 


# _ Control 
room 


Recorder- 
controller 


Figure 13-6. Package-loaded kiln with fans connected directly to motors. 


extent, it becomes weaker as temperature increases. The 

net result is that as wood dries it becomes stronger because 
of the decreasing moisture content and can tolerate higher 
drying temperatures and lower relative humidities without 
cracking. This is a fortunate circumstance because as wood 
dries, its drying rate decreases at any given temperature, and 
the ability to increase drying temperature helps maintain a 
reasonably fast drying rate. Thus, rapid drying is achieved in 
kilns by the use of temperatures as high as possible and rela- 
tive humidities as low as possible. 


Drying schedules vary by species, thickness, grade, mois- 
ture content, and end use of lumber. The two general types 
of kiln schedules are moisture content schedules and time- 
based schedules. Most hardwood lumber is dried by mois- 
ture content schedules. This means that the temperature and 
relative humidity conditions are changed according to the 
percentage moisture content of the lumber during drying. 

A typical hardwood schedule might begin at 49 °C (120 °F) 
and 80% relative humidity when the lumber is green. By the 
time the lumber has reached 15% moisture content, the tem- 
perature is as high as 82 °C (180 °F). A typical hardwood 
drying schedule is shown in Table 13-3. Some method of 
monitoring moisture content during drying is required for 
schedules based on moisture content. One common method 
is the use of kiln samples that are periodically weighed, 
usually manually but potentially remotely with load cells. 


Alternatively, imbedded electrodes in sample boards sense 

the change in electrical conductivity with moisture content. 
This system is limited to moisture content values less than 

30% (Simpson 1991, Denig and others 2000). 


Softwood kiln schedules generally differ from hardwood 
schedules in that changes in kiln temperature and relative 
humidity are made at predetermined times rather than mois- 
ture content levels. Examples of time-based schedules, both 
conventional temperature (<100 °C (<212 °F)) and high 
temperature (>110 °C (>230 °F )), are given in Table 13-3. 
Some hardwoods used as structural lumber also use a time- 
based schedule as shown in Table 13-3 (Simpson and Wang 
2001, Ross and Erickson 2005). 


Drying Defects 


Most drying defects or problems that develop in wood prod- 
ucts during drying can be classified as fracture or distortion, 
warp, or discoloration. Defects in any one of these catego- 
ries are caused by an interaction of wood properties with 
processing factors. Wood shrinkage is mainly responsible 
for wood ruptures and distortion of shape. Cell structure and 
chemical extractives in wood contribute to defects associ- 
ated with uneven moisture content, undesirable color, and 
undesirable surface texture. Drying temperature is the most 
important processing factor because it can be responsible for 
defects in each category. 


13-9 


1-Compressor 4-Condenser 7-Water drain 
2-Blower 5-Control valve 8-Auxiliary heater 
3-Evaporator 6-Main fan 9-Wood stack 


Basic dehumidification 
drying principle 


Auxiliary 
heater 


Kiln 


Thermostatic 
expansion valve 


Warm humid air 
<——______ 


Evaporator 


Condensate 
to drain 


Compressor 


Figure 13-7. A typical dehumidification kiln (top) and 
dehumidification drying system (bottom). 


Fracture or Distortion 


Surface checks occur early in drying when the shell of a 
board is stressed in tension enough to fracture the wood. 
These checks occur most often on the face of flatsawn 
boards and are illustrated in Figure 13—8. End checks 
(Fig. 13—9) are similar to surface checks but appear on the 
ends of boards and logs. End checks occur because the 
rapid longitudinal movement of moisture causes the end 
to dry very quickly and develop high stresses, therefore 


13-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


fracturing. End coatings, on either the log or freshly sawn 
(green) lumber, are an effective preventative measure. Col- 
lapse is a distortion, flattening, or crushing of wood cells. 

In severe cases (Fig. 13—10), collapse usually shows up as 
grooves or corrugations, a washboarding effect. Less severe 
collapse shows up as excessive thickness shrinkage and may 
not be a serious problem. Honeycomb (Fig. 13-11) is an 
internal crack that occurs in the later stages of kiln drying 
when the core of a board is in tension. This internal defect 
is caused when the core is still at a relatively high moisture 
content and drying temperatures are too high for too long 
during this critical drying period. It may go unnoticed until 
the lumber is machined. Nondestructive testing methods, 
using speed of sound, have been found to be effective in de- 
tecting the presence of these cracks in dried lumber. Knots 
may loosen during drying because of the unequal shrinkage 
between the knot and the surrounding wood (Fig. 13-12). 


Warp 


Warp in lumber is any deviation of the face or edge of a 
board from flatness or any edge that is not at right angles to 
the adjacent face or edge. Warp can be traced to two causes: 
(a) differences between radial, tangential, and longitudinal 
shrinkage in the piece as it dries or (b) growth stresses. 
Warp is aggravated by irregular or distorted grain and the 
presence of abnormal types of wood, such as juvenile and 
reaction wood. The six major types of warp are bow, crook, 
twist, oval, diamond, and cup (Fig. 13-13). 


Discoloration 


Discoloration impairs the use of dried wood products, par- 
ticularly when the end use requires a clear, natural finish. 
Unwanted discoloration can develop in the tree, during 
storage of logs and green lumber, or during drying. The two 
general types of discoloration are chemical and fungal. 


Chemical discoloration is the result of oxidative and en- 
zymatic reactions with chemical compounds in wood. 
Discolorations range from pinkish, bluish, and yellowish 
hues through gray and reddish brown to dark brown shades. 
Brown stain in pines and darkening in many hardwoods is 
a common problem when drying temperatures are too high 
(Fig. 13-14). A deep grayish-brown chemical discoloration 
can occur in many hardwood species if initial drying is too 
slow or too high of an initial kiln temperature (Fig. 13-15) 
(Wiemann and others 2009). 


Fungal stains, often referred to as blue or sap stain, are 
caused by fungi that grow in the sapwood (Fig. 13-16). 
Blue-stain fungi do not cause decay of the sapwood, and 
fungi generally do not grow in heartwood. Blue stain can 
develop if initial drying is too slow. 


Another common type of stain develops under stickers 
(Fig. 13-17). This stain results from contact of the sticker 
with the board. Sticker stains (sometimes called shadow) 
are imprints of the sticker that are darker or lighter than 
the wood between the stickers and can be caused by either 
chemical or fungal action, or both. 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


Table 13-3. Typical dry kiln schedules for lumber 


Moisture-content-based schedule for 25-mm (1-in.) (4/4) black 
walnut, dried to 7% moisture content 


Moisture Relative Equilibrium 


content Temperature (°C (°F)) humidity moisture content 
(%) Dry-bulb Wet-bulb (%) (%) 
Above 50  49.0(120) 45.0 (113) 80 14.4 
50 to 40 49.0(120) 43.5 (110) 72 12.1 
40 to 35 49.0(120) 40.5 (105) 60 9.6 
35 to 30 49.0(120) 35.0 (95) 40 6.5 
30 to 25 54.5 (130) 32.0 (90) 22 4.0 
25 to 20 60.0 (140) 32.0 (90) 15 2.9 
20 to 15 65.5(150) 37.5 (100) 18 3.2 
15 to 7 82.2(180) 54.4 (130) 27 3.7 
Equalize 82.2 (180) 58.3 (137) 30 3.8 
Condition 82.2(180) 76.7 (170) 79 11.1 


Time-based schedule for 25- to 50-mm (1- to 2-in.) (4/4 to 8/4) 
Douglas-fir, upper grades, dried to 12% moisture content 


Relative Equilibrium 

Time Temperature (°C (CF)) humidity alae content 
(h) Dry-bulb Wet-bulb (%) (%) 

0 to 12 76.5 (170) 73.5 (164) 86 14.1 

12 to 24 76.5 (170) = 71.0 (160) 78 11.4 

24 to 48 79.5 (175) — 71.0 (160) 69 9.1 

48 to 72 82.2 (180) 71.0 (160) 62 ee 

72 to 96 82.2 (180) — 60.0 (140) 36 4.5 

or until dry 


High-temperature schedule for 50- by 100-mm to 50- by 
250-mm (2- by 4-in. to 2- by 10-in.) Southern Pine, dried 
to 15% moisture content 


Relative Equilibrium 
Time Temperature (°C (°F)) humidity moisture content 
(h) (%) (%) 
Dry-bulb Wet-bulb 
0 until dry 116 (240) = 82.2 (180) 29 25 


Time-based schedule for 50- by 150-mm (2- by 6-in.) sugar 
maple, dried to 15% moisture content in 5 days 


SANS Relative Equilibrium 

Time Tenpeaens COLE) humidity moisture content 

(h) Dry-bulb Wet-bulb (%) (%) 

0 to 24 71.0(160) 67.2 (153) 84 14.1 

24 to 48 71.0(160) 65.6 (150) 78 12.1 

48 to 60 71.0(160) 62.8 (145) 69 10.1 

60 to 72 71.0(160) 57.2 (135) 52 74 

72 to 84 76.7(170) 54.4 (130) 35 4.9 

84 to 115 82.2 (180) 54.4 (130) 2] 3.7 
Moisture Content of Dried Lumber Shipping Dry 
Although widely used, the trade terms “shipping dry,” “air Shipping dry means lumber that has been partially dried to 
dry,” and “kiln dry” may not have identical meanings as prevent stain or mold during brief periods of transit; ideally 
to moisture content in the different producing regions. De- the outer 3.2 mm (1/8 in.) is dried to 25% or less moisture 
spite the wide variations in the use of these terms, they are content (McMillen 1978). 
sometimes used to describe dried lumber. The following Ai 

; i : ir Dry 

statements, which are not exact definitions, outline these 


Air dry means lumber dried by exposure to the air outdoors 


categories. . . : : 
or in a shed or by forced circulation of air that has not been 


13-11 


Figure 13-8. Surface checking on white oak 
5/4 lumber. 


Figure 13-10. Severe collapse in western redcedar. 


13-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 13-11. Red cedar timber end shows honey- 
comb (top). Surface of the timber shows no honey- 
comb (bottom). 


Figure 13-12. Large knot in treated Southern Pine. 


heated above 49 °C (120 °F). Commercial air-dry stock gen- 
erally has an average moisture content low enough for rapid 
kiln drying or rough construction use. Moisture content is 
generally in the range of 20% to 25% for dense hardwoods 
and 15% to 20% for softwoods and low-density hardwoods. 
Extended exposure can bring standard 19- and 38-mm 
(nominal 1- and 2-in.) lumber within one or two percentage 
points of the average exterior equilibrium moisture content 
of the region. For much of the United States, the minimum 
moisture content of thoroughly air-dried lumber is 12% to 
15%. 


Kiln Dry 


Kiln dry means lumber that has been dried in a kiln or by 
some special drying method to an average moisture content 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


Point of greatest 
deflection 


——— 


Point of greatest 
deflection 


Oval Diamond Cup 
Figure 13-13. Various types of warp that can develop 


in boards during drying. 


Tangential grain End grain 


Heartwood 


Figure 13-14. Brown sapwood stain in Southern Pine 
lumber. 


specified or understood to be suitable for a certain use. The 
average moisture content should have upper and lower toler- 
ance limits, and all values should fall within these limits. If 
the moisture contents fall outside these limits, use the dry 
kiln to equalize the lumber until the moisture is inside these 
limits. Kiln-dried softwood dimension lumber generally 

has an average moisture content of 19% or less; the average 
moisture content for many other softwood uses is 10% 

to 20%. Hardwood and softwood lumber for furniture, 


Figure 13-15. Soft maple sapwood boards (surface, 
end, edge) showing patches of oxidative stain. 


cabinetry, and millwork usually has a final moisture con- 
tent of 6% to 8% and can be specified to be free of drying 
stresses. Drying stresses built up during the drying cycle are 
relieved by conditioning inside the dry kiln. The importance 
of suitable moisture content values is recognized, and provi- 
sions covering them are now incorporated in some softwood 
standards as grading rules. Moisture content values in the 
general grading rules may or may not be suitable for a 
specific use; if not, a special moisture content specification 
should be made (USDC 2005). 


Moisture Control during Transit 
and Storage 


Lumber and other wood items may change in moisture con- 
tent and dimension while awaiting shipment, during fabrica- 
tion, in transit, and in storage. 


When standard 19-mm (nominal |-in.) dry softwood lumber 
is shipped in tightly closed boxcars, shipping containers, or 
trucks or in packages with complete and intact wrappers, 
average moisture content changes for a package can gener- 
ally be held to 0.2% or less per month. In holds or between 
decks of ships, dry material usually adsorbs about 1.5% 
moisture during normal shipping periods. If green material 
is included in the cargo, the moisture regain of the dry lum- 
ber may be doubled. On the top deck, if unprotected from 
the elements, the moisture regain can be as much as 7%. 


When standard 19-mm (nominal 1-in.) softwood lumber, 
kiln dried to 8% or less, is piled solid under a good pile roof 
in a yard in warm, humid weather, average moisture content 
of a pile can increase at the rate of about 2% per month dur- 
ing the first 45 days. A moisture uptake rate of about 1% per 
month can then be sustained throughout a humid season. 
Comparable initial and sustaining moisture uptake rates are 
about 1% per month in open (roofed) sheds and 0.3% per 
month in closed sheds. Stock piled for a year in an open 


13-13 


Figure 13-16. Sap stain in Ponderosa Pine. Color rang- 
es from bluish gray to black. 


shed in a western location increased 2.7% on the inside of 
solid piles and 3.5% on the outside of the piles. Protect all 
manufactured stock from precipitation and spray, because 
liquid water on a solid pile tends to be absorbed by the 
wood instead of evaporating. The extent to which additional 
control of the storage environment is required depends upon 
the final use of the wood and the corresponding moisture 
content recommendations. It is important to determine the 
moisture content of all stock when received. If moisture 
content is not as specified or required, stickered storage in 
an appropriate condition could ultimately bring the stock 
within the desired moisture content range. If a large degree 
of moisture change is required, the stock must be redried 
(Rietz 1978). 


Plywood and Structural Items 


It is good practice to open-pile green or partially dried lum- 
ber and timbers using stickers and protect from sunshine and 
precipitation by a tight roof. Framing lumber and plywood 
with 20% or less moisture content can be solid-piled (no 
stickers) in a shed that has good protection against sunshine 
and direct or wind-driven precipitation. However, a better 
practice for stock with greater than 12% moisture content is 


13-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


the use of stickered piling to bring moisture content more in 
line with the moisture content in use. Dry lumber piled solid 
in the open for relatively short periods with a minimum pile 
cover of waterproofed paper whenever possible. Because 
keeping rain out completely is difficult, storing solid-piled 
lumber in the open for long periods is not recommended. If 
framing lumber must be stored in the open for a long time, 
pile on stickers with good base support and cover the piles. 
Re-pile using stickers for solid-piled material that has be- 
come wet again is good practice. 


Finish and Factory Lumber 


Keep kiln-dried items such as exterior finish, siding, and ex- 
terior millwork in a closed unheated shed. Place material on 
supports raised above the floor, at least 150 mm (6 in.) high 
if the floor is paved or 300 mm (12 in.) if not paved. Interior 
trim, flooring, cabinet work, and lumber for processing into 
furniture should be stored in a room or closed shed where 
relative humidity is controlled. In addition, store kiln-dried 
and machined hardwood dimension or softwood cut stock 
under controlled humidity conditions. 


Dried and machined hardwood dimension or softwood lum- 
ber intended for remanufacture should also be stored under 
controlled humidity conditions. Under uncontrolled condi- 
tions, the ends of such stock may attain a higher moisture 
content than the rest of the stock. Then, when the stock is 
straight-line ripped or jointed before edge gluing, subse- 
quent shrinkage will cause splitting or open glue joints at 
the ends of panels. The simplest way to reduce relative hu- 
midity in storage areas of all sizes is to heat the closed space 
to a temperature slightly higher than that of the outside air. 
Dehumidifiers can be used in small, well-enclosed spaces. 


If the heating method is used, and there is no source of 
moisture except that contained in the air, the equilibrium 
moisture content can be maintained by increasing the 
temperature of the storage area greater than the outside 
temperature by the amounts shown in Table 13-4. When a 
dehumidifier is used, monitor or control if needed the aver- 
age temperature in the storage space. Select the proper rela- 
tive humidity in Table 4—2 in Chapter 4 to give the desired 
average moisture content. Wood in a factory awaiting or fol- 
lowing manufacture can become too dry if the area is heated 
to 21 °C (70 °F) or greater when the outdoor temperature is 
low. This often occurs in the northern United States during 
the winter. Under such circumstances, exposed ends and 
surfaces of boards or cut pieces will tend to dry to the low 
equilibrium moisture content condition, causing shrinkage 
and warp. In addition, an equilibrium moisture content of 
4% or more below the moisture content of the core of fresh- 
ly crosscut boards can cause end checking. Simple remedies 
are to cover piles of partially manufactured items with plas- 
tic film and lower the shop temperature during non-work 
hours. Increased control can be obtained in critical shop and 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


underestimating dimensional change, by about 5% of the 
true change. Many changes of moisture content in use are 
over the small moisture content range of 6% to 14%, where 
the shrinkage—moisture content relationship is linear 

(Chap. 4, Fig.4—4). Therefore, a set of shrinkage coeffi- 
cients based on the linear portion of the shrinkage—moisture 
content curve has been developed (Table 13—5). Estimating 
approximate changes in dimension using this simple equa- 
tion utilizes these dimensional change coefficients, from 
Table 13-5, when moisture content remains within the range 
of normal use. (Dimensional changes are further discussed 
in Chaps. 4 and 7.) 


Estimation Using Dimensional Change 
Coefficient 

The change in dimension within the moisture content limits 
of 6% to 14% can be estimated satisfactorily by using a 
dimensional change coefficient based on the dimension at 
10% moisture content: 


AD = D, [Cy (My - My)] (13-2) 


where AD is change in dimension, D, dimension in units of 
length at start of change, C; dimensional change coefficient 
tangential direction (for radial direction, use Cp), My; mois- 
ture content (%) at end of change, and M, moisture content 

(%) at start of change. 


Figure 13-17. Sticker stain in sapwood of sugar maple 
after planing. 


storage areas by humidification. In warm weather, cooling Values for C; and Cp, derived from total shrinkage values, 
can increase relative humidity and dehumidification may be are given in Table 13-5. When M, < M,, the quantity 


necessary (FPL 1972). (M; — M,) will be negative, indicating a decrease in dimen- 


. . F sion; when greater, it will be positive, indicating an increase 
Dimensional Changes in Wood a. aHeneiOn, 

Dry wood undergoes small changes in dimension with nor- 
mal changes in relative humidity. More humid air will cause 
slight swelling, and drier air will cause slight shrinkage. 


These changes are considerably smaller than those involved 


As an example, assuming the width of a flat-grained white 
fir board is 232 mm (9.15 in.) at 8% moisture content, its 
change in width at 11% moisture content is estimated as 


with shrinkage from the green condition. Equation (13—2) AD = 232[0.00245(11 — 8)] 
can be used to approximate dimensional changes caused by = 232(0.00735) 
shrinking and swelling by using the total shrinkage coef- = 1.705 mm 

ficient from green to oven-dry. However, the equation as- 

sumes that the shrinkage—moisture content relationship is AD = 9.15[0.00245(11 — 8)] 
linear. Figure 4-4 (Chap. 4) shows that this is not the case, = 9.15[0.00735] 

so some error is introduced. The error is in the direction of = 0.06725 or 0.067 in. 


Table 13-4. Increase in storage area temperature above outside 
temperature to maintain the desired wood moisture content 


Outside 

esa Temperature differential (°C (°F)) for desired wood moisture content 
humidity 

(%) 6% T% 8% 9% 10% 11% 12% 
90 18.3 (33) 16.1(29) 12.8(23) 10.0(18) 8.3(15) 6.1(11) 5.0(9) 
80 16.7 (30) 13.9(25) 10.5(19) 7.8(14) 6.111) 44(8) 3.3 (6) 
70 13.9(25) 11.1(20) 83(15) 5.6(10) 3.9(7) 2.2(4) 1.7() 
60 11.1(20) 8315) 5.0(9) 3.3(6) 1.7(3) — — 
50 8.3(15) 5.6(10) 2.8 (5) 0.6 (1) — — 


13-15 


13-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 13—5. Dimensional change coefficients (Cr, radial; Cr, tangential) for shrinking or 
swelling within moisture content limits of 6% to 14% 


Dimensional Dimensional 
change change 
coefficient* coefficient* 
Species CR Cr Species CR Cr 
Hardwoods 
Alder, red 0.00151 0.00256 Honeylocust 0.00144 0.00230 
Apple 0.00205 0.00376 Locust, black 0.00158 0.00252 
Ash, black 0.00172 0.00274 Madrone, Pacific 0.00194 0.00451 
Ash, Oregon 0.00141 0.00285 Magnolia, cucumbertree 0.00180 0.00312 
Ash, pumpkin 0.00126 0.00219 Magnolia, southern 0.00187 0.00230 
Ash, white 0.00169 0.00274 Magnolia, sweetbay 0.00162 0.00293 
Ash, green 0.00169 0.00274 Maple, bigleaf 0.00126 0.00248 
Aspen, quaking 0.00119 0.00234 Maple, red 0.00137 0.00289 
Basswood, American 0.00230 0.00330 Maple, silver 0.00102 0.00252 
Beech, American 0.00190 0.00431 Maple, black 0.00165 0.00353 
Birch, paper 0.00219 0.00304 Maple, sugar 0.00165 0.00353 
Birch, river 0.00162 0.00327 Oak, black 0.00123 0.00230 
Birch, yellow 0.00256 0.00338 Red Oak, commercial 0.00158 0.00369 
Birch, sweet 0.00256 0.00338 Red oak, California 0.00123 0.00230 
Buckeye, yellow 0.00123 0.00285 Red oak: water, laurel, willow 0.00151 0.00350 
Butternut 0.00116 0.00223 White Oak, commercial 0.00180 0.00365 
Catalpa, northern 0.00085 0.00169 White oak, live 0.00230 0.00338 
Cherry, black 0.00126 0.00248 White oak, Oregon white 0.00144 0.00327 
Chestnut, American 0.00116 0.00234 White oak, overcup 0.00183 0.00462 
Cottonwood, black 0.00123 0.00304 Persimmon, common 0.00278 0.00403 
Cottonwood, eastern 0.00133 0.00327 Sassafras 0.00137 0.00216 
Elm, American 0.00144 0.00338 Sweetgum 0.00183 0.00365 
Elm, rock 0.00165 0.00285 Sycamore, American 0.00172 0.00296 
Elm, slippery 0.00169 0.00315  Tanoak 0.00169 0.00423 
Elm, winged 0.00183 0.00419 Tupelo, black 0.00176 0.00308 
Elm, cedar 0.00183 0.00419 Tupelo, water 0.00144 0.00267 
Hackberry 0.00165 0.00315 Walnut, black 0.00190 0.00274 
Hickory, pecan 0.00169 0.00315 Willow, black 0.00112 0.00308 
Hickory, true 0.00259 0.00411 Willow, Pacific 0.00099 0.00319 
Holly, American 0.00165 0.00353 Yellow-poplar 0.00158 0.00289 
Softwoods 

Baldcypress 0.00130 0.00216 Pine, eastern white 0.00071 0.00212 
Cedar, yellow- 0.00095 0.00208 Pine, jack 0.00126 0.00230 
Cedar, Atlantic white- 0.00099 0.00187 Pine, loblolly 0.00165 0.00259 
Cedar, Eastern Red 0.00106 0.00162 Pine, pond 0.00165 0.00259 
Cedar, incense 0.00112 0.00180 Pine, lodgepole 0.00148 0.00234 
Cedar, northern white- 0.00101 0.00229 Pine, Jeffrey 0.00148 0.00234 
Cedar, Port-Orford- 0.00158 0.00241 Pine, longleaf 0.00176 0.00263 
Cedar, western red? 0.00111 0.00234 Pine, ponderosa 0.00133 0.00216 
Douglas-fir, Coast-type 0.00165 0.00267 Pine, red 0.00130 0.00252 
Douglas-fir, Interior north 0.00130 0.00241 Pine, shortleaf 0.00158 0.00271 
Douglas-fir, Interior west 0.00165 0.00263 Pine, slash 0.00187 0.00267 
Fir, balsam 0.00099 0.00241 Pine, sugar 0.00099 0.00194 
Fir, California red 0.00155 0.00278 Pine, Virginia 0.00144 0.00252 
Fir, noble 0.00148 0.00293 Pine, western white 0.00141 0.00259 
Fir, Pacific silver 0.00151 0.00327 Redwood, old-growth? 0.00120 0.00205 
Fir, subalpine 0.00088 0.00259 Redwood, second-growth? 0.00101 0.00229 
Fir, grand 0.00112 0.00245 Spruce, black 0.00141 0.00237 
Fir, white 0.00112 0.00245 Spruce, Engelmann 0.00130 0.00248 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


Table 13—5. Dimensional change coefficients (Cr, radial; Cr, tangential) for shrinking or 
swelling within moisture content limits of 6% to 14%—con. 


Dimensional Dimensional 
change change 
coefficient* coefficient* 

Species Cr Cr Cr Cr 
Hemlock, eastern 0.00102 0.00237 Spruce, red 0.00130 0.00274 
Hemlock, western 0.00144 0.00274 Spruce, white 0.00130 0.00274 
Larch, western 0.00155 0.00323 Spruce, Sitka 0.00148 0.00263 

Tamarack 0.00126 0.00259 

Imported Woods 

Andiroba, crabwood 0.00137 0.00274 Light red “Philippine mahogany” 0.00126 0.00241 
Angelique 0.00180 0.00312 Limba 0.00151 0.00187 
Apitong, keruing® 0.00243 0.00527 Mahogany? 0.00172 0.00238 
(all Dipterocarpus spp.) Meranti 0.00126 0.00289 
Avodire 0.00126 0.00226 Obeche 0.00106 0.00183 
Balsa 0.00102 0.00267 Okoume 0.00194 0.00212 
Banak 0.00158 0.00312 Parana, pine 0.00137 0.00278 
Cativo 0.00078 0.00183 Paumarfim 0.00158 0.00312 
Cuangare 0.00183 0.00342 Primavera 0.00106 0.00180 
Greenheart® 0.00390 0.00430 Ramin 0.00133 0.00308 
Iroko? 0.00153 0.00205 Santa Maria 0.00187 0.00278 
Khaya 0.00141 0.00201  Spanish-cedar 0.00141 0.00219 
Kokrodua? 0.00148 0.00297 Teak? 0.00101 0.00186 
Lauans: dark red 0.00133 0.00267 
“Philippine mahogany” 


“Per 1% change in moisture content, based on dimension at 10% moisture content and a straight-line relationship between 
moisture content at which shrinkage starts and total shrinkage. (Shrinkage assumed to start at 30% for all species except 


those indicated by footnote b.) 


Shrinkage assumed to start at 22% moisture content. 


Then, dimension at end of change 


D,+ AD 


= 232+1.7 
= 233.7 mm 


(= 9.15 + 0.067) 
(= 9.217 in.) 


The thickness of the same board at 11% moisture content 


Design Factors Affecting 
Dimensional Change 


Framing Lumber in House Construction 


can be estimated by using the coefficient Cy = 0.00112. 


Because commercial lumber is often not perfectly flatsawn 
or quartersawn, this procedure will probably overestimate 
width shrinkage and underestimate thickness shrinkage. 
Note also that if both a size change and percentage moisture 
content are known, Equation (13-2) can be used to calculate 
the original moisture content. 


Calculation Based on Green Dimensions 
Approximate dimensional changes associated with mois- 
ture content changes greater than 6% to 14%, or when one 
moisture content value is outside of those limits, can be 
calculated by 

dD (M ;: = M, ) 


~ 30(100)/S- = 30+, (13-3) 


where Sy is tangential shrinkage (%) from green to ovendry 
(Chap. 4 Tables 4-3 and 4-4) (use radial shrinkage Sp when 
appropriate). 


Neither MM, nor M; should exceed 30%, the assumed mois- 
ture content value when shrinkage starts for most species. 


Ideally, house framing lumber should be dried to the mois- 
ture content it faces in use to minimize dimensional changes 
as a result of frame shrinkage. This ideal condition is diffi- 
cult to achieve, but some drying and shrinkage of the frame 
may take place without being visible or causing serious 
defects after the house is completed. If, at the time the wall 
and ceiling finish is applied, the moisture content of the 
framing lumber is not more than about 5% above that which 
it will reach in service, there will be little or no evidence of 
defects caused by shrinkage of the frame. For heated houses 
in cold climates, joists over heated basements, studs, and 
ceiling joists may reach a moisture content as low as 6% to 
7% (Table 13-2). In mild climates, the minimum moisture 
content will be greater. 


The most common signs of excessive shrinkage are cracks 
in plastered walls, truss rise, open joints, and nail pops in 
dry-wall construction; distortion of door openings; uneven 
floors; and loosening of joints and fastenings. The extent of 
vertical shrinkage after the house is completed is propor- 
tional to the depth of wood used as supports in a horizontal 
position, such as girders, floor joists, and plates. After all, 


13-17 


shrinkage occurs primarily in the width and thickness of 
members, not the length. 


Thoroughly consider the type of framing best suited to the 
whole building structure. Methods should be chosen that 
will minimize or balance the use of wood across the grain 
in vertical supports. These involve variations in floor, wall, 
and ceiling framing. The factors involved and details of 
construction are covered extensively in Wood-Frame House 
Construction (Sherwood and Stroh 1991). 


Heavy Timber Construction 


In heavy timber construction, a certain amount of shrinkage 
is to be expected. A column that bears directly on a wood 
girder can result in a structure settling as a result of the per- 
pendicular-to-grain shrinkage of the girder. If not provided 
for in the design, shrinkage may cause weakening of the 
joints or uneven floors or both. One means of eliminating 
part of the shrinkage in mill buildings and similar structures 
is to use metal post caps; the metal in the post cap separates 
the upper column from the lower column. The same thing is 
accomplished by bolting wood corbels (tassels or braggers) 
to the side of the lower column to support the girders. 


When joist hangers are installed, the top of the joist should 
be above the top of the girder; otherwise, when the joist 
shrinks in the stirrup, the floor over the girder will be higher 
than that bearing upon the joist. Heavy planking used for 
flooring should be near 12% moisture content to mini- 
mize openings between boards as they approach moisture 
equilibrium. When standard 38- or 64-mm (nominal 2- or 
3-in.) joists are nailed together to provide a laminated floor 
of greater depth for heavy design loads, the joist material 
should be somewhat less than 12% moisture content if the 
building is to be heated. 


Interior Finish 


Normal seasonal changes in the moisture content of interior 
finish are not enough to cause serious dimensional change if 
the woodwork was properly installed. Large members, such 
as ornamental beams, cornices, newel posts, stair stringers, 
and handrails, should be built up from comparatively small 
pieces. Wide door and window trim and base should be hol- 
low-backed. Backband trim, if mitered at the corners, should 
be glued and splined before erection; otherwise butt joints 
should be used for the wide faces. Design and install large, 
solid pieces, such as wood paneling, so that the panels are 
free to move across the grain. Narrow widths are preferable. 


Flooring 


Flooring is usually dried to the moisture content expected 

in service so that shrinking and swelling are minimized and 
buckling or large gaps between boards do not occur. For 
basement, large hall, or gymnasium floors, however, leave 
enough space around the edges to allow for some expansion. 


13-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Wood Care and Installation during 
Construction 
Lumber and Trusses 


Although it is good housekeeping practice, lumber is often 
not protected from the weather at construction sites. Lumber 
is commonly placed on the ground in open areas near the 
building site as bulked and strapped packages. Place sup- 
ports under such packages that elevate the packages at least 
150 mm (6 in.) off the ground to prevent wetting from mud 
and ground water. In addition, cover the packages with plas- 
tic tarpaulins for protection from rain. 


Pile lumber that is green or nearly green on stickers under a 
roof for additional drying before building into the structure. 
The same procedure is required for lumber treated with a 
waterborne preservative but not fully re-dried. Prefabricated 
building parts, such as roof trusses, sometimes lie unprotect- 
ed on the ground at the building site. In warm, rainy weath- 
er, moisture regain can result in fungal staining. Wetting of 
the lumber also results in swelling, and subsequent shrink- 
age of the framing may contribute to structural distortions. 
Extended storage of lumber at moisture contents greater 
than 20% without drying can allow decay to develop. 


If framing lumber has a greater moisture content when 
installed than that recommended in Table 13-2, shrinkage 
can be expected. Framing lumber, even thoroughly air-dried 
stock, will generally have a moisture content greater than 
that recommended when it is delivered to the building site. 
If carelessly handled in storage at the site, the lumber can 
take up more moisture. Builders can schedule their work 

so an appreciable amount of drying can take place during 
the early stages of construction. This minimizes the effects 
of additional drying and shrinkage after completion. When 
the house has been framed, sheathed, and roofed, the fram- 
ing is so exposed that in time it can dry to a lower moisture 
content than could be found in yard-dried lumber. The 
application of the wall and ceiling finish is delayed while 
wiring and plumbing are installed. If this delay is about 

30 days in warm, dry weather, the framing lumber should 
lose enough moisture so that any additional drying in place 
will be minimal. In cool, damp weather, or if wet lumber is 
used, the period of exposure should be extended. Checking 
moisture content of door and window headers and floor and 
ceiling joists at this time with an electric moisture meter is 
good practice. When these members approach an average of 
12% moisture content, interior finish and trim can normally 
be installed. Closing the house and using the heating system 
will hasten the rate of drying. 


Before the wall finish is applied, the frame should be ex- 
amined and defects that may have developed during drying, 
such as warped or distorted studs, shrinkage of lintels (head- 
er) over openings, or loosened joints, should be corrected. 


Chapter 13 Drying and Control of Moisture Content and Dimensional Changes 


Exterior Trim and Millwork 


Exterior trim, such as cornice and rake mouldings, fascia 
boards, and soffit material, is typically installed before the 
shingles are laid. Protect trim, siding, and window and door 
frames on the site by storing in the house or garage until 
time of installation. Although items such as window frames 
and sashes are usually treated with some type of water- 
repellent preservative to resist absorption of water, store in a 
protected area if they cannot be installed soon after delivery. 
Wood siding is often received in packaged form and can or- 
dinarily remain in the package until installation. 


Finished Flooring 


Cracks develop in flooring if the material takes up moisture 
either before or after installation, then shrinks when the 
building is heated. Such cracks can be greatly reduced by 
observing the following practices: 


e = Specify flooring manufactured according to association 
tules and sold by dealers that protect the material prop- 
erly during storage and delivery. 


e Measure random pieces of flooring using a non-pene- 
trating meter to ensure moisture content is correct upon 
arrival and prior to installation. 


e Have flooring delivered after masonry and plastering 
are completed and fully dry, unless a dry storage space 
is available. 


e Install the heating plant before flooring is delivered. 


e Break open flooring bundles and expose all sides of 
flooring to the atmosphere inside the structure. 


e Close up the house at night and increase the tempera- 
ture about 8 °C (15 °F) greater than the outdoor tem- 
perature for about 3 days before laying the floor. 


e If the house is not occupied immediately after the floor 
is laid, keep the house closed at night or during damp 
weather and supply some heat if necessary. 


Better and smoother sanding and finishing can be done 
when the house is warm and the wood has been kept dry 
(FPL 1961). 


Interior Trim 


In a building under construction, average relative humidity 
will be greater than that in an occupied house because of 
the moisture that evaporates from wet concrete, brickwork, 
plaster, and even the structural wood members. The average 
temperature will be lower because workers prefer a lower 
temperature than is common in an occupied house. Under 
such conditions, the interior trim tends to have greater mois- 
ture content during construction than it will have during 
occupancy. 


Before the interior trim is delivered, the outside doors and 
windows should be kept closed at night. In this way, interior 
conditions are held as close as possible to the higher 


temperature and lower humidity that ordinarily occurs dur- 
ing the day. Such protection may be sufficient during dry 
warm weather, but during damp or cool weather, it is highly 
desirable to heat the house, particularly at night. Whenever 
possible, the heating plant should be placed in the house 
before the interior trim is installed, to be available for sup- 
plying the necessary heat. Portable heaters can also be used. 
Keep the inside temperature during the night about 8 °C 
(15 °F) greater than the outside temperature but not below 
about 21 °C (70 °F) during the summer or 17 °C (62 °F) 
when the outside temperature is below freezing. 


After buildings have thoroughly dried, less heat is needed, 
but unoccupied houses, new or old, should have some heat 
during the winter. A temperature of about 8 °C (15 °F) 
greater than the outside temperature and above freezing at 
all times will keep the woodwork, finish, and other parts of 
the house from being affected by dampness or frost. 


Plastering 


During a plastering operation in a moderate-sized, six-room 
house, approximately 450 kg (1,000 Ib) of water is used, 

all of which must dissipate before the house is ready for 

the interior finish. Adequate ventilation removes the evapo- 
rated moisture and keeps it from being adsorbed by the 
framework. In houses plastered in cold weather, the excess 
moisture can also cause paint to blister on exterior finish and 
siding. During warm, dry weather, with the windows wide 
open, the moisture will be gone within a week after the final 
coat of plaster is applied. During damp, cold weather, the 
heating system or portable heaters are used to prevent freez- 
ing of plaster and to hasten its drying. Provide adequate ven- 
tilation constantly because a large volume of air is required 
to carry away the amount of water involved. Even in the 
coldest weather, the windows on the side of the house away 
from the prevailing winds should be opened 50 to 75 mm 

(2 to 3 in.), preferably from the top. 


Literature Cited 


ASTM. 2007. Standard test methods for direct moisture 
content measurement of wood and wood-base materials. 
Standard D 4442. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM 
International. 


Boone, R.S.; Kozlik, C.J.; Bois, P.J.; Wengert, E.M. 1988. 
Dry kiln schedules for commercial woods: temperate and 
tropical. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-57. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 158 p. 


Denig, J.; Wengert E.M.; Simpson, W.T. 2000. Drying hard- 
wood lumber. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR—118. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 138 p. 


FPL. 1961. Wood floors for dwellings. Agric. Handb. 204. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service. 44 p. 


13-19 


FPL. 1972. Methods of controlling humidity in woodwork- 
ing plants. Res. Note FPL-RN—0218. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 6 p. 


James, W.L. 1988. Electric moisture meters for wood. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-6. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 

17 p. 


McMillen, J.M. 1978. Overseas protection of logs and lum- 
ber. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture,Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 4 p. 


Rietz, R.C. 1978. Storage of lumber. Agric. Handb. 531. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 63 p. 


Rietz, R.C.; Page, R.H. 1971. Air drying of lumber: A guide 
to industry practices. Agric. Handb. 402. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 120 p. 


Ross, R.J.; Erickson, J.R. 2005. Undervalued Hardwoods 
for Engineered Materials and Components. Forest Products 
Society. Madison, WI. 144 p. 


Sherwood, G.E.; Stroh, R.C. 1991. Wood-frame house con- 
struction. Agric. Handb. 73. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. 268 p. 


Simpson, W.T., ed. 1991. Dry kiln operator’s manual. Agric. 
Handb. 188. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 274 p. 


Simpson, W.T. 1998. Equilibrium moisture content of wood 
in outdoor locations in the United States and worldwide. 
Res. Note FPL-RN—268. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 

11 p. 


Simpson, W.T.; Wang, X. 2001. Time-based kiln drying 
schedule for sugar maple for structural uses. Res. Note 
FPL—RN-—0279. Madison, WI: USDA Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 4 p. 


USDC. 2005. American softwood lumber standard. NIST 
Voluntary Product Standard PS 20-05. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Commerce. 50 p. 


Wiemann, M.C.; Bergman, R.D.; Knaebe, M.; Bowe, S.A. 
2009. Exploring methods for prevention of oxidative stain 
in soft maple. Res. Pap. FPL-RP-654. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 6 p. 


13-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Biodeterioration of Wood 


Carol A. Clausen, Supervisory Research Microbiologist 


Contents 
Fungus Damage and Control 14—1 
Molds and Fungal Stains 14-1 
Chemical Stains 14—2 
Decay 14-3 
Prevention of Mold, Stain, and Decay 14-6 
Bacteria 14-9 
Insect Damage and Control 14—9 
Beetles 14-9 
Termites 14-11 
Carpenter Ants 14-13 
Carpenter Bees 14-13 
Marine Borer Damage and Control 14—13 
Shipworms 14-13 
Pholads 14-14 
Limnoria and Sphaeroma 14-14 
Protection from Marine Borers 14—14 
References 14-15 


CHAPTER 14 


Under proper conditions, wood will give centuries of ser- 
vice. However, under conditions that permit the develop- 
ment of wood-degrading organisms, protection must be 
provided during processing, merchandising, and use. 


The organisms that can degrade wood are principally fungi, 
insects, bacteria, and marine borers. 


Molds, most sapwood stains, and decay are caused by 
fungi, which are microscopic, thread-like microorganisms 
that must have organic material to live. For some of them, 
wood offers the required food supply. The growth of fungi 
depends on suitably mild temperatures, moisture, and air 
(oxygen). Chemical stains, although they are not caused by 
organisms, are mentioned in this chapter because they re- 
semble stains caused by fungi. 


Insects also may damage wood and in many situations must 
be considered in protective measures. Termites are the major 
insect enemy of wood, but on a national scale, they are a 
less serious threat than fungi. 


Bacteria in wood ordinarily are of little consequence, but 
some may make the wood excessively absorptive. In addi- 
tion, some may cause strength losses over long periods of 
exposure, particularly in forest soils. 


Marine borers can attack susceptible wood rapidly in salt 
water harbors, where they are the principal cause of damage 
to piles and other wood marine structures. 


Wood degradation by organisms has been studied exten- 
sively, and many preventive measures are well known and 
widely practiced. By taking ordinary precautions with the 
finished product, the user can contribute substantially to en- 
suring a long service life. 


Fungus Damage and Control 


Fungus damage to wood may be traced to three general 
causes: (a) lack of suitable protective measures when storing 
logs or bolts; (b) improper seasoning, storing, or handling 
of the raw material produced from the log; and (c) failure to 
take ordinary simple precautions in using the final product. 
The incidence and development of molds, decay, and stains 
caused by fungi depend heavily on temperature and mois- 
ture conditions (Fig. 14-1). 


Molds and Fungal Stains 


Molds and fungal stains are confined to a great extent to 
sapwood and are of various colors. The principal fungal 


14-1 


Climate index 


Less than 35 
35 to 65 


More than 65 


Figure 14—1. Climate index for decay hazard. Higher num- 
bers indicate greater decay hazard. 


Figure 14-2. 
Typical radial pen- 
etration of log by 
stain. The pattern 
is a result of more 
rapid penetration 
by the fungus 
radially (through 
the ray) than 
tangentially. 


stains are usually referred to as sap stain or blue stain. The 
distinction between molding and staining is made primarily 
on the basis of the depth of discoloration. With some molds 
and the lesser fungal stains, there is no clear-cut differentia- 
tion. Typical sap stain or blue stain penetrates into the sap- 
wood and cannot be removed by surfacing. Also, the discol- 
oration as seen on a cross section of the wood often appears 
as pie-shaped wedges oriented radially, corresponding to the 
direction of the wood rays (Fig. 14-2). The discoloration 
may completely cover the sapwood or may occur as specks, 
spots, streaks, or patches of various intensities of color. The 
so-called blue stains, which vary from bluish to bluish black 
and gray to brown, are the most common, although various 
shades of yellow, orange, purple, and red are sometimes 
encountered. The exact color of the stain depends on the 
infecting organisms and the species and moisture condition 
of the wood. The fungal brown stain mentioned here should 
not be confused with chemical brown stain. 


Mold discolorations usually become noticeable as fuzzy or 
powdery surface growths, with colors ranging from light 
shades to black. Among the brighter colors, green and yel- 
lowish hues are common. On softwoods, though the fungus 
may penetrate deeply, the discoloring surface growth often 
can easily be brushed or surfaced off. However, on large- 


14-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


pored hardwoods (for example, oaks), the wood beneath 

the surface growth is commonly stained too deeply to be 
surfaced off. The staining tends to occur in spots of various 
concentration and size, depending on the kind and pattern of 
the superficial growth. 


Under favorable moisture and temperature conditions, stain- 
ing and molding fungi may become established and develop 
rapidly in the sapwood of logs shortly after they are cut. 

In addition, lumber and such products as veneer, furniture 
stock, and millwork may become infected at any stage of 
manufacture or use if they become sufficiently moist. 
Freshly cut or unseasoned stock that is piled during warm, 
humid weather may be noticeably discolored within 5 or 

6 days. Recommended moisture control measures are given 
in Chapter 13. 


Ordinarily, stain and mold fungi affect the strength of the 
wood only slightly; their greatest effect is usually confined 
to strength properties that determine shock resistance or 
toughness (Chap. 5). They increase the absorbency of wood, 
and this can cause over-absorption of glue, paint, or wood 
preservative during subsequent processing. Increased poros- 
ity also makes wood more wettable, which can lead to sub- 
sequent colonization by typical wood-decay fungi. 


Stain- and mold-infected stock is practically unimpaired 

for many uses in which appearance is not a limiting factor, 
and a small amount of stain may be permitted by standard 
grading rules. Stock with stain and mold may not be entirely 
satisfactory for siding, trim, and other exterior millwork be- 
cause of its greater water absorbency. Also, incipient decay 
may be present, though inconspicuous, in the discolored 
areas. Both of these factors increase the possibility of decay 
in wood that is rain-wetted unless the wood has been treated 
with a suitable preservative. 


Chemical Stains 


Nonmicrobial or chemical stains are difficult to control and 
represent substantial loss in wood quality. These stains, 
which should not be confused with fungal brown stain, 
include a variety of discolorations in wood that are of- 

ten promoted by slow drying of lumber and warm to hot 
temperatures. Such conditions allow naturally occurring 
chemicals in wood to react with air (enzymatic oxidation) 
to form a new chemical that is typically dark in color. Com- 
mon chemical stains include (a) interior sapwood graying, 
prevalent in oak, hackberry, ash, and maple, (b) brown stain 
in softwoods, and (c) pinking and browning in the interior 
of light-colored woods such as maple. Another common 
discoloration, iron stain, is caused by the interaction of iron 
with tannins in wood. Iron stain is more prevalent in hard- 
woods (for example, oak and many tropical hardwoods) and 
in some softwoods such as Douglas-fir. Control is achieved 
by eliminating the source of iron. 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 


Spores Spores germinating 
35) 

e*o 
¢ ° oe 


Infected wood cells 


; wpe Mil 


AN 
i| iit } 


Figure 14—3. The decay cycle (top to bottom). 
Thousands of spores produced in a fungal fruit- 
ing body are distributed by wind or insects. On 
contacting moist, susceptible wood, spores ger- 
minate and fungal hypha create new infections in 
the wood cells. In time, serious decay develops 
that may be accompanied by formation of new 
fruiting bodies. 


Decay 


Decay-producing fungi may, under conditions that favor 
their growth, attack either heartwood or sapwood in most 
wood species (Fig. 14—3). The result is a condition 
designated as decay, rot, dote, or doze. Fresh surface 
growths of decay fungus may appear as fan-shaped patches 
(Fig. 14-4), strands, or root-like structures that are usually 
white or brown in color. Sometimes fruiting bodies are pro- 
duced that take the form of mushrooms, brackets, or crusts. 
The fungus, in the form of microscopic, threadlike strands 
called hyphae, permeates the wood and uses parts of it as 
food. Some fungi live largely on cellulose, whereas others 
use lignin and cellulose. 


Certain decay fungi colonize the heartwood (causing heart 
rot) and rarely the sapwood of living trees, whereas others 
confine their activities to logs or manufactured products, 


Figure 14—4. Mycelial fans on a wood door. 


such as sawn lumber, structural timbers, poles, and ties. 
Most fungi that attack trees cease their activities after the 
trees have been cut, as do the fungi causing brown pocket 
(peck) in baldcypress or white pocket in Douglas-fir and 
other conifers. Relatively few fungi continue their destruc- 
tion after the trees have been cut and worked into prod- 
ucts and then only if conditions remain favorable for their 
growth. Although heartwood is more susceptible to decay 
than is sapwood in living trees, for many species, the sap- 
wood of wood products is more susceptible to decay than is 
the heartwood. 


Most decay can progress rapidly at temperatures that favor 
growth of plant life in general. For the most part, decay is 
relatively slow at temperatures below 10 °C (50 °F) and 
above 35 °C (95 °F). Decay essentially ceases when the 
temperature drops as low as 2 °C (35 °F) or rises as high 
as 38 °C (100 °F). 


Serious decay occurs only when the moisture content of 
the wood is above the fiber saturation point (average 30%). 
Only when previously dried wood is contacted by water in 
the form of rain or condensation or is in contact with wet 
ground will the fiber saturation point be reached. By itself, 
the water vapor in humid air will not wet wood sufficiently 
to support significant decay, but it will permit development 
of some mold fungi. Fully air-dried wood usually will have 
a moisture content not exceeding 20% and should provide 
a reasonable margin of safety against fungal damage. Thus, 
wood will not decay if it is kept air dry, and decay already 
present from prior infection will not progress. 


Wood can be too wet for decay as well as too dry. If the 
wood is water-soaked, the supply of air to the interior of a 
piece may not be adequate to support development of typi- 
cal decay fungi. For this reason, foundation piles buried 
beneath the water table and logs stored in a pond or under a 
suitable system of water sprays are not subject to decay by 
typical wood-decay fungi. 


14-3 


Figure 14-5. Representative samples of four com- 
mon types of fungal growth on wood: (a) mold 
discoloration; (b) brown rotted pine (note the dark 
color and cubical checking in the wood); (c) white rot 
in maple (note the bleached appearance); (d) soft- 
rotted preservative-treated pine utility pole (note the 
shallow depth of decay). 


The early or incipient stages of decay are often accompanied 
by a discoloration of the wood, which can be difficult to 
recognize but is more evident on freshly exposed surfaces 
of unseasoned wood than on dry wood. Abnormal mottling 
of the wood color, with either unnatural brown or bleached 
areas, is often evidence of decay infection. Many fungi that 
cause heart rot in the standing tree produce incipient decay 
that differs only slightly from the normal color of the wood 
or gives a somewhat water-soaked appearance to the wood. 


Typical or late stages of decay are easily recognized, be- 
cause the wood has undergone definite changes in color and 
properties, the character of the changes depending on the 
organism and the substances it removes. 


Two kinds of major decay fungi are recognized: brown rot 
and white rot. With brown-rot fungi, only the cellulose is 
extensively removed, the wood takes on a browner color, 
and it can crack across the grain, shrink, collapse, and be 
crushed into powder (Fig. 14-5). With white-rot fungi, both 
lignin and cellulose usually are removed, the wood may lose 
color and appear “whiter” than normal, it does not crack 
across the grain, and until severely degraded, it retains its 


14-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


outward dimensions, does not shrink or collapse, and often 
feels spongy (Fig. 14-5). Brown-rot fungi commonly colo- 
nize softwoods, and white-rot fungi commonly occur on 
hardwoods, but both brown- and white-rot fungi occasion- 
ally colonize both types of wood. 


Brown, crumbly rot, in the dry condition, is sometimes 
called dry rot, but the term is incorrect because wood must 
be damp to decay, although it may become dry later. A few 
fungi, however, have water-conducting strands; such fungi 
are capable of carrying water (usually from the soil) into 
buildings or lumber piles, where they moisten and rot wood 
that would otherwise be dry. They are sometimes referred to 
technically as dry-rot fungi or water-conducting fungi. The 
latter term better describes the true situation because these 
fungi, like the others, must have water. 


A third and generally less important kind of decay is known 
as soft rot. Soft rot is caused by fungi related to the molds 
rather than those responsible for brown and white rot. Soft 
rot typically is relatively shallow, primarily affecting the 
outer surface of wood; the affected wood is greatly degraded 
and often soft when wet, but immediately beneath the zone 
of rot, the wood may be firm (Fig. 14-5). Because soft rot 
usually is rather shallow, it is most damaging to relatively 
thin pieces of wood such as slats in cooling towers. It is fa- 
vored by wet situations but is also prevalent on surfaces that 
have been alternately wet and dry over a substantial period. 
Heavily fissured surfaces, familiar to many as weathered 
wood, generally have been quite degraded by soft-rot fungi. 


Decay Resistance of Wood 


The heartwood of common native species of wood has vari- 
ous degrees of natural decay resistance. Untreated sapwood 
of essentially all species has low resistance to decay and 
usually has a short service life under conditions favoring 
decay. The natural decay resistance of heartwood is greatly 
affected by differences in preservative qualities of the wood 
extractives, the attacking fungus, and the conditions of ex- 
posure. Considerable differences in service life can be ob- 
tained from pieces of wood cut from the same species, even 
the same tree, and used under apparently similar conditions. 
There are further complications because, in a few species, 
such as the spruces and the true firs (not Douglas-fir), heart- 
wood and sapwood are so similar in color that they cannot 
be easily distinguished. 


Precise ratings of decay resistance of heartwood of differ- 
ent species are not possible because of differences within 
species and the variety of service conditions to which wood 
is exposed. However, broad groupings of many native spe- 
cies, based on service records, laboratory tests, and general 
expertise, are helpful in choosing heartwood for use under 
conditions favorable to decay. Groupings by natural resis- 
tance of some domestic and imported wood species to decay 
fungi are shown in Table 14—1, which ranks the heartwood 
of a grouping of species according to decay resistance. The 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 


Table 14—1. Grouping of some domestic and imported woods according to average 


heartwood decay resistance* 


Very Moderately Slightly 
resistant Resistant resistant or nonresistant 
Domestic 
Black locust Baldcypress, old growth Baldcypress, young growth Alder, red 
Mulberry, red Catalpa Cherry, black Ashes 
Osage-orange Cedar Douglas-fir Aspens 
Yew, Pacific Atlantic white Honey locust Beech 

Eastern redcedar Larch, western Birches 


Incense 
Northern white 
Port-Orford 
Western redcedar 
Yellow 
Chestnut 
Cypress, Arizona 
Junipers 
Mesquite 
Oaks, white? 
Redwood, old growth 
Sassafras 
Walnut, black 


Imported 

Angelique Aftotmosia (Kokrodua) 

Azobe Apamate (Roble) 

Balata Balau? 

Goncalo alves Courbaril 

Greenheart Determa 

Ipe (lapacho) Iroko 

Jarrah Kapur 

Lignumvitae Karri 

Purpleheart Kempas 

Teak, old growth Mahogany, American 
Manni 
Spanish-cedar 
Sucupira 
Wallaba 


Pine, eastern white, old growth 
Pine, longleaf, old growth 
Pine, slash, old growth 
Redwood, young growth 
Tamarack 


Buckeye 
Butternut 
Cottonwood 
Elms 
Basswood 
Firs, true 
Hackberry 
Hemlocks 
Hickories 
Magnolia 
Maples 

Pines (other than those listed)” 
Spruces 
Sweetgum 
Sycamore 
Tanoak 
Willows 
Yellow-poplar 


Andiroba Balsa 
Avodire Banak 
Benge Cativo 
Bubinga Ceiba 
Ehie Hura 
Ekop Jelutong 
Keruing? Limba 


Mahogany, African 
Meranti, dark red° 


Meranti, light red” 
Meranti, yellow? 


Mersawa? Meranti, white? 
Sapele Obeche 
Teak, young growth Okoume 
Tornillo Parana pine 
Ramin 
Sande 
Sepitir 


Seraya, white 


“Decay resistance may be less for members placed in contact with the ground and/or used in warm, humid climates. 
Substantial variability in decay resistance is encountered with most species, and limited durability data were available for 
some species listed. Use caution when using naturally durable woods in structurally critical or ground-contact applications. 
’More than one species included, some of which may vary in resistance from that indicated. 


extent of variations in decay resistance of individual trees 
or wood samples of a particular species is much greater for 
most of the more resistant species than for the slightly or 
nonresistant species. 


Natural resistance of wood to fungi is important only where 
conditions conducive to decay exist or may develop. Where 
decay hazard exists, heartwood of a species in the resistant 

category generally gives satisfactory service for wood used 
above-ground, while those in the very resistant category 


generally give satisfactory performance in contact with the 
ground. Heartwood of species in the other two categories 
will usually require some form of preservative treatment. 
For mild decay conditions, a simple preservative treat- 
ment—such as a short soak in preservative after all cutting 
and boring operations are complete—may be adequate for 
wood low in decay resistance. For more severe decay haz- 
ards, pressure treatment is often required. Even the very de- 
cay-resistant species may require preservative treatment for 
important structural uses or other uses where failure would 


14455 


endanger life or require expensive repairs. When select- 

ing naturally decay-resistant wood species for applications 
where conditions are conducive to decay, it is important 

to utilize heartwood. Marketable sizes of some species are 
primarily second growth and contain a high percentage of 
sapwood. Consequently, substantial quantities of heartwood 
lumber of these species are not available. If wood is subject- 
ed to severe decay conditions, pressure-treated wood, rather 
than resistant heartwood, is generally recommended. Preser- 
vative treatments and methods are discussed in Chapter 15. 


Effect of Decay on Strength of Wood 


Decay initially affects toughness, or the ability of wood to 
withstand impacts. This is generally followed by reductions 
in strength values related to static bending. Eventually, all 
strength properties are seriously reduced. 


Strength losses during early stages of decay can be consider- 
able, depending to a great extent upon the fungi involved 
and, to a lesser extent, upon the type of wood undergoing 
decay. In laboratory tests, losses in toughness ranged from 
6% to >50% by the time 1% weight loss had occurred in the 
wood as a result of fungal attack. By the time weight losses 
resulting from decay have reached 10%, most strength loss- 
es may be expected to exceed 50%. At such weight losses 
(10% or less), decay is detectable only microscopically. It 
may be assumed that wood with visually discernible decay 
has been greatly reduced in all strength values. 


Prevention of Mold, Stain, and Decay 
Logs, Poles, Piles, and Ties 


The wood species, geographic region, and time of year 
determine what precautions must be taken to avoid serious 
damage from fungi in logs, poles, piles, ties, and similar 
thick products during seasoning or storage. In dry climates, 
rapid surface seasoning of poles and piles will retard devel- 
opment of mold, stain, and decay. The bark is peeled from 
the pole and the peeled product is decked on high skids or 
piled on high, well-drained ground in the open to air-dry. In 
humid regions, such as the Gulf States, these products often 
do not air-dry fast enough to avoid losses from fungi. Pre- 
seasoning treatments with approved preservative solutions 
can be helpful in these circumstances. 


For logs, rapid conversion into lumber or storage in water 
or under a water spray (Fig. 14—6) is the surest way to avoid 
fungal damage. Preservative sprays promptly applied to the 
wood will protect most timber species during storage for 

2 to 3 months, except in severe decay hazard climates, such 
as in Mississippi (Fig. 14-1). For longer storage, an end 
coating is needed to prevent seasoning checks, through 
which infection can enter the log. 


Lumber 


Growth of decay fungi can be prevented in lumber and 
other wood products by rapidly drying them to a moisture 
content of 20% or less and keeping them dry. Standard air- 


14-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 14-6. Spraying logs with water protects them 
against fungal stain and decay. 


Figure 14~7. A sanitary, well-drained air-drying yard. 


drying practices will usually dry the wood fast enough to 
protect it, particularly if the protection afforded by drying 
is supplemented by dip or spray treatment of the stock with 
an EPA-approved fungicidal solution. Successful control by 
this method depends not only upon immediate and adequate 
treatment but also upon proper handling of the lumber after 
treatment. However, kiln drying is the most reliable method 
of rapidly reducing moisture content. 


Air-drying yards should be kept as sanitary and as open 

as possible to air circulation (Fig. 14-7). Recommended 
practices include locating yards and sheds on well-drained 
ground; removing debris (which serves as a source of infec- 
tion) and weeds (which reduce air circulation); and employ- 
ing piling methods that permit rapid drying of the lumber 
and protect against wetting. Storage sheds should be con- 
structed and maintained to prevent significant wetting of the 
stock. Ample roof overhang on open sheds is desirable. In 
areas where termites or water-conducting fungi may be trou- 
blesome, stock to be held for long periods should be set on 
foundations high enough so that the wood can be inspected 
from beneath. 


The user’s best assurance of receiving lumber free from 
decay other than light stain is to buy stock marked by a 
lumber association in a grade that eliminates or limits such 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 


quality-reducing features. Surface treatment for protection 
at the drying yard is only temporarily effective. Except for 
temporary structures, lumber to be used under conditions 
conducive to decay should be all heartwood of a naturally 
durable wood species or should be adequately treated with 
a wood preservative (Chap. 15). 


Buildings 

The lasting qualities of properly constructed wood buildings 
are apparent in all parts of the country. Serious decay prob- 
lems are almost always a sign of faulty design or construc- 


tion, lack of reasonable care in the handling the wood, or 
improper maintenance of the structure. 


Construction principles that ensure long service and avoid 
decay in buildings include (a) building with dry lumber, free 
of incipient decay and not exceeding the amounts of mold 
and blue stain permitted by standard grading rules; (b) us- 
ing construction details and building designs that will keep 
exterior wood and wood-based building components dry and 
that will promote their drying if they become wet; (c) using 
wood treated with a preservative or heartwood of a decay- 
resistant species for parts exposed to aboveground decay 
hazards; and (d) using pressure-treated wood for the high 
hazard situation associated with ground contact. 


A building site that is dry or for which drainage is provided 
will reduce the possibility of decay. Grading around the 
building is an important consideration, as is adequate plan- 
ning for management of roof runoff (Chap. 17). Stumps, 
wood debris, stakes, or wood concrete forms are frequently 
subject to decay if left under or near a building and may be- 
come a source for decay infestation for the building. 


Wet or infected wood should not be enclosed until it is thor- 
oughly dried. Wet wood includes green (unseasoned) lum- 
ber, lumber that has been inadequately dried, or dried lum- 
ber that has been rewetted as a result of careless storage and 
handling. Wood can become infected because of improper 
handling at the sawmill or retail yard or after delivery to the 
job site. 


Untreated wood parts of substructures should not be permit- 
ted to contact the soil. Minimums of 200 mm (8 in.) clear- 
ance between soil and framing and 150 mm (6 in.) between 
soil and siding are recommended. Where frequent hard rains 
occur, a foundation height above grade of 300 to 460 mm 
(12 to 18 in.) is advocated. An exception may be made for 
certain temporary constructions. If contact with soil is un- 
avoidable, the wood should be pressure treated (Chap. 15). 


Sill plates and other wood resting on a concrete slab founda- 
tion generally should be pressure treated and protected by 
installing a moisture-resistant membrane, such as polyethyl- 
ene, beneath the slab. Girder and joist openings in masonry 
walls should be big enough to ensure an air space around 
the ends of these wood members. If the members are below 
the outside soil level, moisture proofing the outer face of the 
wall is essential. 


In buildings without basements but with crawl spaces, wet- 
ting of the floor framing and sheathing by condensation 

may result in serious decay damage. The primary source of 
condensation is soil moisture. Isolating the crawl space from 
soil moisture can be achieved by laying a barrier such as 
polyethylene on the soil. To facilitate inspection of the crawl 
space, a minimum 460-mm (18-in.) clearance should be left 
under wood Joists. 


Wood and wood-based building components should also be 
protected from rain during construction. Continuous protec- 
tion from rainwater or condensation in walls and roofs will 
prevent the development of decay. Thus, design, work qual- 
ity, and maintenance of wall and roofing systems are critical, 
particularly at roof edges and points where roofs interface 
with walls. A fairly wide roof overhang (0.6 m (2 ft)) 

with gutters and downspouts that are kept free of debris 

is desirable. 


The use of sound, dry lumber is equally important for the 
interior of buildings. Primary sources for interior moisture 
are humidity and plumbing leaks. Interior humidity control 
is discussed in Chapter 17. Plumbing leaks can result in seri- 
ous decay problems within buildings, particularly if they are 
undetected for long periods. 


Where service conditions in a building are such that the 
wood cannot be kept dry, the use of preservative-treated 
wood (Chap. 15) or heartwood of a durable species is ad- 
vised. Examples include porches, exterior steps, and decking 
platforms and such places as textile mills, pulp and paper 
mills, and cold storage plants. 


In making repairs necessitated by decay, every effort should 
be made to correct the moisture condition that led to the 
damage. If the condition cannot be corrected, all infected 
parts should be replaced with preservative-treated wood or 
with all-heartwood lumber of a naturally decay-resistant 
wood species. If the sources of moisture that caused the 
decay are entirely eliminated, it is necessary only to replace 
the weakened wood with dry lumber. 


Other Structures and Products 


In general, the principles underlying the prevention of mold, 
stain, or decay damage to veneer, plywood containers, 
boats, and other wood products and structures are similar 
to those described for buildings—dry the wood rapidly and 
keep it dry, or treat it with approved protective and preser- 
vative solutions. Interior grades of plywood should not be 
used where the plywood will be exposed to moisture; the 
adhesives, as well as the wood, may be damaged by fungi 
and bacteria and degraded by moisture. With exterior-type 
panels, joint construction should be carefully designed to 
prevent the entrance and entrapment of rainwater. 


In treated bridge or wharf timbers, checking may occur and 
may expose untreated wood to fungal attack. Annual in- 
place treatment of these checks will provide protection from 


14-7 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 14—2. Types of damage caused by wood-attacking insects 


Type of 
damage 


Pin holes 


Grub holes 


Network of 
galleries 


Pitch pocket 
Black check 


Pith fleck 
Gum spot 


Ring 
distortion 


14-8 


Description 


0.25 to 6.4 mm (1/100 to 1/4 in.) in diameter, 
usually circular 
Tunnels open: 
Holes 0.5 to 3 mm (1/50 to 1/8 in.) in diameter, 
usually centered in dark streak or ring in 
surrounding wood 
Holes variable sizes; surrounding wood rarely 
dark stained; tunnels lined with wood-colored 
substance 
Tunnels usually packed with fine sawdust: 
Exit holes 0.8 to 1.6 mm (1/32 to 1/16 in.) in 
diameter; in sapwood of large-pored hardwoods; 
loose floury sawdust in tunnels 
Exit holes 1.6 to 3 mm (1/16 to 1/8 in.) in 
diameter; primarily in sapwood, rarely in 
heartwood; tunnels loosely packed with fine 
sawdust and elongate pellets 
Exit holes 2.5 to 7 mm (3/32 to 9/32 in.) in 
diameter; primarily sapwood of hardwoods, 
minor in softwoods; sawdust in tunnels fine to 
coarse and tightly packed 
Exit holes 1.6 to 2 mm (1/16 to 1/12 in.) in 
diameter; in slightly damp or decayed wood; 
very fine sawdust or pellets tightly packed in 
tunnels 
3 to 13 mm (1/8 to 1/2 in.) in diameter, circular or 
oval 
Exit holes 3 to 13 mm (1/8 to 1/2 in.) in diameter; 
circular; mostly in sapwood; tunnels with coarse to 
fibrous sawdust or it may be absent 
Exit holes 3 to 13 mm (1/8 to 1/2 in.) in diameter; 
mostly oval; in sapwood and heartwood; sawdust 
tightly packed in tunnels 
Exit holes ~6 mm (~1/4 in.) in diameter; circular; 
in sapwood of softwoods, primarily pine; tunnels 
packed with very fine sawdust 
Exit holes perfectly circular, 4 to 6 mm (1/6 to 1/4 
in.) in diameter; primarily in softwoods; tunnels 
tightly packed with coarse sawdust, often in decay 
softened wood 
Nest entry hole and tunnel perfectly circular ~13 
mm (~1/2 in.) in diameter; in soft softwoods in 
structures 


Systems of interconnected tunnels and chambers 


Walls look polished; spaces completely clean of 
debris 


Walls usually speckled with mud spots; some 
chambers may be filled with “clay” 

Chambers contain pellets; areas may be walled off 
by dark membrane 


Openings between growth rings containing pitch 
Small packets in outer layer of wood 


Narrow, brownish streaks 
Small patches or streaks of gum-like substances 


Double growth rings or incomplete annual layers 
of growth 


Stained area more than 25.4 mm (1 in.) long 
introduced by insects in trees or recently felled 
logs 


Causal agent 


Ambrosia beetles 


Timber worms 


Lyctid powder-post 
beetles 


Anobiid powder-post 
beetles 


Bostrichid powder- 
post beetles 


Wood-boring weevils 


Roundheaded borers 
(beetles) 


Flatheaded borers 
(beetles) 


Old house borers 
(a roundheaded 
borer) 
Woodwasps 


Carpenter bees 


Social insects with 
colonies 
Carpenter ants 


Subterranean termites 


Dry-wood termites 
(occasionally damp 
wood termites) 
Various insects 
Grubs of various 
insects 

Fly maggots or adult 
weevils 

Grubs of various 
insects 

Larvae of defoliating 
insects or flatheaded 
cambium borers 
Staining fungi 


Damage 


Begins 


In living trees and 
unseasoned logs and 
lumber 

In living trees and 
unseasoned logs and 
lumber 


During or after 
seasoning 


Usually after wood in 
use (in buildings) 


Before seasoning or if 
wood is rewetted 


In slightly damp wood 
in use 


In living trees and 
unseasoned logs and 
lumber 

In living trees and 
unseasoned logs and 
lumber 

During or after 
seasoning 


In dying trees or fresh 


logs 


In structural timbers, 
siding 


Usually in damp partly 
decayed, or soft- 
textured wood in use 
In wood structures 

In wood structures 

In living trees 

In living trees 

In living trees 


In living trees 


In living trees 


With insect wounds 


Ends 


During seasoning 


Before seasoning 


Reinfestation continues 
until sapwood destroyed 


Reinfestation continues; 
progress of damage very 
slow 


During seasoning or 
redrying 


Reinfestation continues 
while wood is damp 


When adults emerge 
from seasoned wood or 
when wood is dried 
When adults emerge 
from seasoned wood or 
when wood is dried 
Reinfestation continues 
in seasoned wood in use 


When adults emerge 
from seasoned wood, 
usually in use, or when 
kiln-dried 

Nesting reoccurs 
annually in spring at 
same and nearby 
locations 


Colony persists unless 
prolonged drying of 
wood occurs 

Colony persists 
Colony persists 

In tree 

In tree 

In tree 


In tree 


In tree 


With seasoning 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 


decay. Similarly, pile tops may be protected by treatment 
with a wood preservative followed by application of a suit- 
able capping compound or shield. 


Wood boats present certain problems that are not encoun- 
tered in other uses of wood. The parts especially subject to 
decay are the stem, knighthead, transom, and frameheads, 
which can be reached by rainwater from above or condensa- 
tion from below. Frayed surfaces are more likely to decay 
than are exposed surfaces, and in salt water service, hull 
members just below the weather deck are more vulner- 

able than those below the waterline. Recommendations for 
avoiding decay include (a) using only heartwood of durable 
species, free of infection, and preferably below 20% mois- 
ture content; (b) providing and maintaining ventilation in 
the hull and all compartments; (c) keeping water out as 
much as is practicable, especially fresh water; and (d) where 
it is necessary to use sapwood or nondurable heartwood, 
impregnating the wood with an approved preservative and 
treating the fully cut, shaped, and bored wood before instal- 
lation by soaking it for a short time in preservative solution. 
Where such mild soaking treatment is used, the wood most 
subject to decay should also be flooded with an approved 
preservative at intervals of 2 or 3 years. During subsequent 
treatment, the wood should be dry so that joints are rela- 
tively loose. 


Bacteria 


Most wood that has been wet for a considerable length of 
time probably will contain bacteria. The sour smell of logs 
that have been held under water for several months, or of 
lumber cut from them, manifests bacterial action. Usually, 
bacteria have little effect on wood properties, except over 
long periods, but some may make the wood excessively ab- 
sorptive. This can result in excessive absorption of moisture, 
adhesive, paint, or preservative during treatment or use. This 
effect has been a problem in the sapwood of millwork cut 
from pine logs that have been stored in ponds. There also is 
evidence that bacteria developing in pine veneer bolts held 
under water or sprayed with water may cause noticeable 
changes in the physical character of the veneer, including 
some strength loss. Additionally, a mixture of different bac- 
teria and fungi was found capable of accelerating decay of 
treated cooling tower slats and mine timbers. 


Insect Damage and Control 


The more common types of damage caused by wood- 
attacking insects are shown in Table 14—2 and Figure 14-8. 
Methods of controlling and preventing insect attack of wood 
are described in the following paragraphs. 


Beetles 


Bark beetles may damage the surface of the components of 
logs and other rustic structures from which the bark has not 
been removed. These beetles are reddish brown to black and 


Figure 14-8. Types of insect damage most likely 
to occur in a building. Upper left—Termite attack; 
feeding galleries (often parallel to the grain) con- 
tain excrement and soil. Upper right—Powder-post 
beetle attack; exit holes usually filled with wood 
flour and not associated with discolored wood. 
Lower left—Carpenter ant attack; nesting galleries 
usually cut across grain and are free of residue. 
Lower right—Beetle attack; feeding galleries 
(made in the wood while green) free of residue 
and surrounding wood darkly stained. 


vary in length from approximately 1.5 to 6.5 mm (1/16 to 
1/4 in.) They bore through the outer bark to the soft inner 
part, where they make tunnels in which they lay their 
eggs. In making tunnels, bark beetles push out fine 
brownish-white sawdust-like particles. If many beetles are 
present, their extensive tunneling will loosen the bark and 
permit it to fall off in large patches, making the structure 
unsightly. 


To avoid bark beetle damage, logs may be debarked rapidly, 
sprayed with an approved insecticidal solution, stored in 
water or under a water spray, or cut during the dormant sea- 
son (October or November, for instance). If cut during this 
period, logs should immediately be piled off the ground and 
arranged for good air movement to promote rapid drying of 
the inner bark. This should occur before the beetles begin to 
fly in the spring. Drying the bark will almost always prevent 
damage by insects that prefer freshly cut wood. 


Ambrosia beetles, roundheaded and flatheaded borers, and 
some powder-post beetles that get into freshly cut timber 


14-9 


can cause considerable damage to wood in rustic structures 
and some manufactured products. Certain beetles may com- 
plete development and emerge several years after the wood 
is dry, often raising a question as to the origin of the 
infestation. 


Proper cutting practices, rapid debarking, storing under 
water, and spraying with an approved chemical solution, as 
recommended for bark beetles, will control these insects. 
Damage by ambrosia beetles can be prevented in freshly 
sawn lumber by dipping the product in a chemical solution. 
The addition of one of the sap-stain preventives approved 
for controlling molds, stains, and decay will keep the lum- 
ber bright. Powder-post beetles attack both hardwoods and 
softwoods and both freshly cut and seasoned lumber and 
timber. Powder-post damage is indicated by holes made in 
the surface of the wood by the winged adults as they emerge 
and by the fine powder that may fall from the wood. The 
powder-post beetles that cause most of the damage to dry 
hardwood lumber belong to the genus Lyctus. They attack 
the sapwood of ash, hickory, oak, and other large-pored 
hardwoods as it begins to season. Eggs are laid in pores of 
the wood, and the larvae burrow through the wood, mak- 
ing tunnels from 1.5 to 2 mm (1/16 to 1/12 in.) in diameter, 
which they leave packed with a fine powder. Species of ano- 
biid beetles colonize coniferous materials. 


Susceptible hardwood lumber used for manufacturing 
purposes should be protected from powder-post beetle at- 
tack as soon as it is sawn and when it arrives at the plant. 
An approved insecticide applied in water emulsion to the 
green lumber will provide protection. Such treatment may 
be effective even after the lumber is kiln dried, until it is 
surfaced. Heat sterilization is another way to kill insects in 
green lumber. To effectively kill insects in lumber or tim- 
bers, heat sterilization requires that the center of the wood 
be held at 56 °C (133 °F) for 30 min. The time required to 
reach that temperature is highly variable and depends on 
thickness of boards, dimension of timbers, and moisture 
content of the wood (Chap. 20). For example, heating time 
increases with increasing board thickness or increasing 
cross-sectional dimension. 


Good plant sanitation is extremely important in alleviating 
the problem of infestation. Proper sanitation measures can 
often eliminate the necessity for other preventative steps. 
Damage to manufactured items frequently is traceable to 
infestation that occurred before the products were placed on 
the market, particularly if a finish is not applied to the sur- 
face of the items until they are sold. Once wood is infested, 
the larvae will continue to develop, even though the surface 
is subsequently painted, oiled, waxed, or varnished. 


When selecting hardwood lumber for building or manufac- 
turing purposes, any evidence of powder-post infestation 
should not be overlooked, because the beetles may continue 
to be active long after the wood is put to use. Heat steriliza- 


14-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


tion under conditions that ensure the center of the wood 
will be held at 56 °C (133 °F) for 30 min will effectively 
kill insects in infested lumber. Those conditions vary with 
moisture content, size, and dimension of wood—see Chap- 
ter 20 for further information on heat sterilization. A 3-min 
soaking in a petroleum oil solution containing an insecticide 
is also effective for checking infestation or preventing at- 
tack on lumber up to standard 19 mm (nominal | in.) thick. 
Small dimension stock also can be protected by brushing or 
spraying with approved chemicals. For infested furniture or 
finished woodwork in a building, the same insecticides may 
be used, but they should be dissolved in refined petroleum 
oil, such as mineral spirits. Because Lyctus beetles lay their 
eggs in the open pores of wood, infestation can be prevented 
by covering the entire surface of each piece of wood with a 
suitable finish. 


Powder-post beetles in the family Anobiidae, depending 

on the species, infest hardwoods and softwoods. Their life 
cycle takes 2 to 3 years, and they require wood moisture 
content around 15% or greater for viable infestation. There- 
fore, in most modern buildings, the wood moisture content 
is generally too low for anobiids. When ventilation is inad- 
equate or in more humid regions of the United States, wood 
components of a building can reach the favorable moisture 
conditions for anobiids. This is especially a problem in air- 
conditioned buildings where water condenses on cooled 
exterior surfaces. Susceptibility to anobiid infestation can be 
alleviated by lowering the moisture content of wood through 
improved ventilation and the judicious use of insulation and 
vapor barriers. Insecticides registered for use against these 
beetles are generally restricted for exterior applications to 
avoid potential safety hazards indoors. Wood being reused 
or recycled from older structures often has lyctid or anobiid 
larvae in it. Such wood should be fumigated or kiln dried 
before use in another structure. 


Beetles in the family Bostrichidae and weevils in the family 
Curculionidae are associated with wood moisture contents 
favorable for wood-infesting fungi because they may benefit 
nutritionally from the fungi. Thus, protection against these 
insects consists of the same procedures as for protection 
against wood-decay fungi. 


A roundheaded beetle, commonly known as the old house 
borer, causes damage to seasoned, coniferous building mate- 
rials. The larvae reduce the sapwood to a powdery or granu- 
lar consistency and make a ticking sound while at work. 
When mature, the beetles make an oval hole approximately 
6.5 mm (1/4 in.) in diameter in the surface of the wood and 
emerge. Anobiid powder-post beetles, which make holes 

1.6 to 3.2 mm (1/16 to 1/8 in.) in diameter, also cause dam- 
age to pine joists. Infested wood should be drenched with a 
solution of one of the currently recommended insecticides in 
a highly penetrating solvent. Beetles nesting in wood behind 
plastered or paneled walls can be eliminated through fumi- 
gation of the building by a licensed operator. 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 


Figure 14-9. A, the northern limit of recorded damage 
done by subterranean termites in the United States; B, 
the northern limit of damage done by dry-wood termites. 


Termites 


Termites superficially resemble ants in size, general appear- 
ance, and habit of living in colonies. About 56 species are 
known in the United States. From the standpoint of their 
methods of attack on wood, termites can be grouped into 
two main classes: (a) ground-inhabiting or subterranean 
termites and (b) wood-inhabiting or nonsubterranean 
termites. 


Subterranean Termites 


Subterranean termites are responsible for most of the termite 
damage to wood structures in the United States. This dam- 
age can be prevented. Subterranean termites are more preva- 
lent in the southern than in the northern states, where low 
temperatures do not favor their development (Fig. 14-9). 
The hazard of infestation is greatest (a) beneath buildings 
without basements that were erected on a concrete slab 
foundation or were built over a crawl space that is poorly 
drained and lacks a moisture barrier (see Chap. 17) and (b) 
in any substructure wood component close to the ground or 
an earth fill (for example, an earth-filled porch). 


Subterranean termites develop their colonies and maintain 
their headquarters in the ground. They build their tunnels 
through earth and around obstructions to reach the wood 
they need for food. They also must have a constant source 
of moisture, whether from the wood on which they are feed- 
ing or the soil where they nest. The worker members of the 
colony cause destruction of wood. At certain seasons of the 
year, usually spring, male and female winged forms swarm 
from the colony, fly a short time, lose their wings, mate, and 
if successful in locating a suitable home, start new colonies. 
The appearance of “flying ants” or their shed wings is an 
indication that a termite colony may be near and causing 
serious damage. Not all “flying ants” are termites; therefore, 
suspicious insects should be identified before investing in 
eradication (Fig. 14-10). 


Subterranean termites normally do not establish themselves 
in buildings by being carried there in lumber; they primarily 


Termites 


Straight 
antennae 


Ants 


Forewings 
longer than 
hindwings 


Figure 14-10. A, winged termite; B, winged 
ant (both greatly enlarged). The wasp waist 
of the ant and the long wings of the termite 
are distinguishing characteristics. 


enter from ground nests after the building has been con- 
structed. An introduced species, the Formosan termite, is 
adept at initiating aboveground infestations and nests 

in structures where wood remains wet for prolonged 
periods, such as from roof leaks. Telltale signs of subterra- 
nean termite presence are the earthen tubes or runways built 
by these insects over the surfaces of the foundation or other 
exposed areas to reach the wood above. Another sign is the 
swarming of winged adults early in the spring or fall. In the 
wood itself, the termites make galleries that generally fol- 
low the grain, leaving a shell of sound wood to conceal their 
activities. Because the galleries seldom show on the wood 
surfaces, probing with a pick or knife is advisable if the 
presence of termites is suspected. 


The best protection for wood in areas where subterranean 
termites are prevalent is to prevent the termites from gaining 
hidden access to a building. The foundations should be of 
concrete, pressure-treated wood, or other material through 
which the termites cannot penetrate. With brick, stone, or 
concrete block, cement mortar should be used because ter- 
mites can work through some other kinds of mortar. Also, 


14-11 


it is a good precaution to cap the foundation with 100 mm 
(4 in.) of reinforced concrete. Posts supporting floor girders 
should, if they bear directly on the ground, be of concrete. 
If there is a basement, it should be floored with concrete. 
Untreated posts in such a basement should rest on concrete 
piers extending a few inches above the basement floor. 
However, pressure-treated posts can rest directly on the 
basement floor. With the crawl-space type of foundation, 
wood floor joists should be kept at least 460 mm (18 in.) and 
girders 300 mm (12 in.) from the earth with a polyethylene 
vapor barrier covering exposed soil and extending partially 
up the foundation wall. Moisture condensation on the floor 
joists and subflooring, which may cause conditions favor- 
able to decay and contribute to infestation by termites, can 
be avoided by covering the soil below with a moisture barri- 
er and assuming proper drainage of rainwater away from all 
sides of a structure by managing rain and roof runoff with 
gutters, downspouts, and proper grading around the founda- 
tion. All concrete forms, stakes, stumps, and wastewood 
should be removed from the building site because they are 
possible sources of infestation. Generally, the precautions 
effective against subterranean termites are also helpful 
against decay. 


The principal method of protecting buildings in high ter- 
mite areas is to thoroughly treat the soil adjacent to the 
foundation walls and piers beneath the building with a soil 
insecticide. When concrete slab floors are laid directly on 
the ground, all soil under the slab should be treated with an 
approved insecticide before the concrete is poured. Further- 
more, insulation containing cellulose that is used as a filler 
in expansion joints should be impregnated with an approved 
chemical toxic to termites. Sealing the top 13 mm (1/2 in.) 
of the expansion joint with roofing-grade coal-tar pitch also 
provides effective protection from ground-nesting termites. 
Several soil treatments and insecticidal bait control meth- 
ods are currently available. Information on current control 
methods is available from national pest control operator as- 
sociations. These organizations should be consulted to take 
advantage of the latest technology in termite control. 


To control termites already in a building, contact between 
the termite colony in the soil and the woodwork must be 
broken. This can be done by blocking the runways from soil 
to wood, treating the soil, repairing leaks that keep wood 
within the structure wet (for example, plumbing leaks), or 
some combination of these techniques. Possible reinfesta- 
tion can be guarded against by frequent inspections for 
signs of termites. 


Nonsubterranean Termites 


In the United States, nonsubterranean termites have been 
found only in a narrow strip of territory extending from cen- 
tral California around the southern edge of the continental 
United States to Virginia (Fig. 14-9) and in the West Indies 
and Hawaii. Their principal damage is confined to an area 
in southern California, to parts of southern Florida, notably 


14-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Key West, and to the islands of Hawaii. They also are a lo- 
calized problem in Arizona and New Mexico. 


The nonsubterranean termites, especially the dry-wood type, 
do not multiply as rapidly as the subterranean termites and 
have a somewhat different colony life and habits. The total 
amount of destruction they cause in the United States is 
much less than that caused by the subterranean termites. The 
ability of dry-wood termites to live in dry wood without out- 
side moisture or contact with the ground, however, makes 
them a definite menace in the regions where they occur. 
Their destruction is not rapid, but they can thoroughly riddle 
timbers with their tunneling if allowed to work undisturbed 
for many years. Nonsubterranean termites are often moved 
from structure to structure in infested items such as 
furniture. 


In constructing a building in localities where the dry-wood 
type of nonsubterranean termite is prevalent, it is good 
practice to inspect the lumber carefully to see that it was not 
infested before arrival at the building site. If the building is 
constructed during the swarming season, the lumber should 
be watched during the course of construction, because in- 
festation by colonizing pairs can easily take place. Because 
paint is a good protection against the entrance of dry-wood 
termites, exposed wood (except that which is preserva- 

tive treated) should be kept covered with a paint film. Fine 
screen should be placed over any openings to the interior 
unpainted parts of the building. As in the case of ground- 
nesting termites, dead trees, old stumps, posts, or wood 
debris of any kind that could serve as sources of infestation 
should be removed from the premises. 


If a building is infested with dry-wood termites, badly dam- 
aged wood should be replaced. If the wood is only slightly 
damaged or is difficult to replace, further termite activity 
can be arrested by injecting a small amount of an approved 
pesticidal dust or liquid formulation into each nest. Current 
recommendations for such formulations can be found from 
state pest control associations. Buildings heavily infested 
with nonsubterranean termites can be successfully fumigat- 
ed. This method is quicker than the use of poisonous liquids 
and dusts and does not require finding all of the colonies. 
However, it does not prevent the termites from returning 
because no poisonous residue is left in the tunnels. Fumiga- 
tion is very dangerous and should be conducted only by li- 
censed professional fumigators. Infested pieces of furniture, 
picture frames, and other small pieces can be individually 
fumigated, heated, or placed in a freezer for a short time. 

In localities where dry-wood termites do serious damage 

to posts and poles, the best protection for these and similar 
forms of outdoor timbers is full-length pressure treatment 
with a preservative. 


Naturally Termite-Resistant Woods 


Only a limited number of woods grown in the United States 
offer any marked degree of natural resistance to termite 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 


attack. The close-grained heartwood of California redwood 
has some resistance, especially when used above ground. 
Very resinous heartwood of Southern Pine is practically im- 
mune to attack, but it is not available in large quantities and 
is seldom used. 


Carpenter Ants 


Carpenter ants are black or brown. They usually occur in 
stumps, trees, or logs but sometimes damage poles, struc- 
tural timbers, or buildings. One form is easily recognized by 
its giant size relative to other ants. Carpenter ants use wood 
for shelter rather than for food, usually preferring wood that 
is naturally soft or has been made soft by decay. They may 
enter a building directly by crawling or may be carried there 
in firewood. If left undisturbed, they can, in a few years, 
enlarge their tunnels to the point where replacement or ex- 
tensive repairs are necessary. The parts of dwellings they 
frequent most often are porch columns, porch roofs, window 
sills, and sometimes the wood plates in foundation walls. 
They often nest in hollow-core doors. The logs of rustic cab- 
ins are also attacked. 


Precautions that prevent attack by decay and termites are 
usually effective against carpenter ants. Decaying or in- 
fested wood, such as logs, stumps, or retaining walls, should 
be removed from the premises, and crevices present in the 
foundation or woodwork of the building should be sealed. 
Particularly, leaks in porch roofs should be repaired because 
the decay that may result makes the wood more desirable to 
the ants. 


When carpenter ants are found in a structure, any badly 
damaged timbers should be replaced. Because the carpenter 
ant needs high humidity in its immature stages, alterations in 
the construction may also be required to eliminate moisture 
from rain or condensation. In wood not sufficiently damaged 
to require replacement, the ants can be killed by injection of 
approved insecticide into the nest galleries. Carpenter ant 
nests are relatively easy to find because they keep their in- 
ternal nest sites very clean and free of debris. As particles of 
wood are removed to create galleries or as pieces of insects 
that have been fed upon accumulate, the debris is removed 
from the nest and then accumulates below the nest opening. 


Carpenter Bees 


Carpenter bees resemble large bumblebees, but the top of 
their abdomen is hairless, causing their abdomens to shine, 
unlike bumblebees. The females make large (13-mm- (1/2- 
in.-) diameter) tunnels into unfinished soft wood for nests. 
They partition the hole into cells; each cell is provided with 
pollen and nectar for a single egg. Because carpenter bees 
reuse nesting sites for many years, a nesting tunnel into a 
structural timber may be extended several feet and have 
multiple branches. In thin wood, such as siding, the holes 
may extend the full thickness of the wood. They nest in 
wood that has been finished with a stain or thin paint film, 
or light preservative salt treatments, as well as in bare wood. 


A favorite nesting site is in unfinished exterior wood not 
directly exposed to sunlight (for example, the undersides of 
porch roofs, and grape arbors). 


Control is aimed at discouraging the use of nesting sites 

in and near buildings. The tunnel may be injected with an 
insecticide labeled for bee control and plugged with caulk. 
Treating the surface around the entry hole will discourage 
reuse of the tunnel during the spring nesting period. A good 
paint film or pressure preservative treatment protects exte- 
rior wood surfaces from nesting damage. Bare interior wood 
surfaces, such as in garages, can be protected by screens and 
tight-fitting doors. 


Marine Borer Damage and Control 


Damage by marine-boring organisms to wood structures in 
salt or brackish waters is practically a worldwide problem. 
Evidence of attack is sometimes found in rivers even above 
the region of brackishness. The rapidity of attack depends 
upon local conditions and the kinds of borers present. Along 
the Pacific, Gulf, and South Atlantic Coasts of the United 
States, attack is rapid, and untreated pilings may be com- 
pletely destroyed in a year or less. Along the coast of the 
New England States, the rate of attack is slower because 

of cold water temperatures but is still sufficiently rapid to 
require protection of wood where long life is desired. The 
principal marine borers from the standpoint of wood dam- 
age in the United States are described in this section. Con- 
trol measures discussed in this section are those in use at 
the time this handbook was revised. Regulations should be 
reviewed at the time control treatments are being considered 
so that approved practices will be followed. 


Shipworms 


Shipworms are the most destructive of the marine borers. 
They are mollusks of various species that superficially are 
worm-like in form. The group includes several species of 
Teredo and several species of Bankia, which are especially 
damaging. These mollusks are readily distinguishable on 
close observation but are all very similar in several respects. 
In the early stages of their life, they are minute, free-swim- 
ming organisms. Upon finding suitable lodgment on wood, 
they quickly develop into a new form and bury themselves 
in the wood. A pair of boring shells on the head grows rap- 
idly in size as the boring progresses, while the tail part or 
siphon remains at the original entrance. Thus, the animal 
grows in length and diameter within the wood but remains 
a prisoner in its burrow, which it lines with a shell-like 
deposit. It lives on the wood borings and the organic mat- 
ter extracted from the sea water that is continuously being 
pumped through its system. The entrance holes never grow 
large, and the interior of wood may be completely hon- 
eycombed and ruined while the surface shows only slight 
perforations. When present in great numbers, shipworms 
grow only a few centimeters before the wood is so com- 
pletely occupied that growth is stopped. However, when not 


14-13 


Figure 14—11. Lim- 
noria damage to 


piling. 


crowded, they can grow to lengths of 0.3 to 1.2 m (1 to 4 ft) 
depending on the species. 


Pholads 


Another group of wood-boring mollusks is the pholads, 
which clearly resemble clams and therefore are not included 
with the shipworms. They are entirely encased in their 
double shells. The Martesia are the best-known species, 

but another well-known group is the Xylophaga. Like the 
shipworms, the Martesia enter the wood when they are very 
small, leaving a small entrance hole, and grow larger as they 
burrow into the wood. They generally do not exceed 64 mm 
(2-1/2 in.) long and 25 mm (1 in.) in diameter but are ca- 
pable of doing considerable damage. Their activities in the 
United States appear to be confined to the Gulf Coast, San 
Diego, and Hawaii. 


Limnoria and Sphaeroma 


Another distinct group of marine borers are crustaceans, 
which are related to lobsters and shrimp. The principal bor- 
ers in this group are species of Limnoria and Sphaeroma. 
Their attack differs from that of the shipworms and the 
Martesia in that the bore hole is quite shallow; the result is 
that the wood gradually is thinned from the surface inward 
through erosion by the combined action of the borers and 
water erosion. Also, the Limnoria and Sphaeroma do not 
become imprisoned in the wood but may move freely from 
place to place. 


Limnoria are small, 3 to 4 mm (1/8 to 1/6 in.) long, and 
bore small burrows in the surface of wood. Although they 
can change their location, they usually continue to bore in 
one place. When great numbers of Limnoria are present, 
their burrows are separated by very thin walls of wood that 
are easily eroded by the motion of the water or damaged by 
objects floating upon it. This erosion causes the Limnoria to 
burrow continually deeper; otherwise, the burrows would 
probably not become greater than 51 mm (2 in.) long or 13 
mm (1/2 in.) deep. Because erosion is greatest between tide 


14-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


levels, piles heavily attacked by Limnoria characteristically 
wear within this zone to an hourglass shape (Fig. 14-11). In 
heavily infested harbors, untreated piling can be destroyed 
by Limnoria within a year. 


Sphaeroma are somewhat larger, sometimes reaching a 
length of 13 mm (1/2 in.) and a width of 6 mm (1/4 in.). In 
general appearance and size, they resemble the common 
sow bug or pill bug that inhabits damp places. Sphaeroma 
are widely distributed but are not as plentiful as Limnoria 
and cause much less damage, although damage caused by 
Sphaeroma action resembles that of Limnoria. Nevertheless, 
piles in some structures have been ruined by them. It has 
been reported that Sphaeroma attack salt-treated wood in 
Florida. Occasionally, they have been found in fresh water. 


The average life of well-creosoted structures in areas sus- 
ceptible to marine borer attack is many times the average 
life obtained from untreated structures. However, even 
thorough creosote treatment will not always stop Martesia, 
Sphaeroma, and especially Limnoria; shallow or erratic 
creosote penetration affords only slight protection. The spots 
with poor protection are attacked first, and from there, the 
borers spread inward and destroy the untreated interior of 
the pile. 


When wood is to be used in salt water, avoidance of cutting 
or injuring the surface after treatment is even more impor- 
tant than when wood is to be used on land. No cutting or 
injury of any kind for any purpose should be permitted in 
the underwater part of the pile. Where piles are cut to grade 
above the waterline, the exposed surfaces should be pro- 
tected from decay. This may be accomplished by in-place 
application of a wood preservative followed by a suitable 
capping compound. 


Protection from Marine Borers 


No wood is immune to marine-borer attack, and no com- 
mercially important wood of the United States has sufficient 
marine-borer resistance to justify its use untreated in any 
important structure in areas where borers are active. The 
heartwood of several foreign species, such as greenheart, 
jarrah, azobe, and manbarklak, has shown resistance to 
marine-borer attack. Service records on these woods, how- 
ever, do not always show uniform results and are affected by 
local conditions. Borer damage to wooden marine structures 
can be prevented, but knowing the type of borer present in 
the geographic location is important for selection of proper 
preservative and treatment retention to protect the structure 
from surface erosion. 


Protection of Permanent Structures 


The best practical protection for piles in sea water with ship- 
worms and moderate Limnoria hazard is heavy treatment 
with coal-tar creosote or creosote coal-tar solution. Where 
severe Limnoria hazard exists, dual treatment (copper- 
arsenate-containing waterborne preservatives followed by 
coal-tar creosote) is recommended. The treatment must be 


Chapter 14 Biodeterioration of Wood 


thorough, the penetration as deep as possible, and the re- 
tention high to give satisfactory results in heavily infested 
waters. It is best to treat such piles by the full-cell process to 
refusal; that is, to force in all the preservative the piles can 
hold without using treatments that cause serious damage to 
the wood. For highest retentions, it is necessary to air- or 
kiln-dry the piling before treatment. Details of treatments 
are discussed in Chapter 15. 


The life of treated piles is influenced by the thoroughness of 
the treatment, the care and diligence used in avoiding dam- 
age to the treated shell during handling and installation, and 
the severity of borer attack. Differences in exposure condi- 
tions, such as water temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, 
water depth, and currents, tend to cause wide variations in 
the severity of borer attack even within limited areas. Ser- 
vice records show average-life figures of 22 to 48 years on 
well-treated Douglas-fir piles in San Francisco Bay waters. 
In South Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico waters, creosoted 
piles are estimated to last 10 to 12 years and frequently 
much longer. On the North Atlantic Coast, where exposure 
conditions are less severe, piles can last even longer than the 
22- to 48-year life recorded in the San Francisco Bay. 


Metal armor and concrete or plastic jacketing have been 
used with various degrees of success for the protection of 
marine piles. The metal armor may be in the form of sheets, 
wire, or nails. Sheathing of piles with copper or muntz metal 
has been only partially successful, owing to difficulty in 
maintaining a continuous armor. Theft, mechanical damage 
from driving, damage by storm or driftwood, and corrosion 
of sheathing have sooner or later let in the borers, and in 
only a few cases has long pile life been reported. Attempts 
during World War II to electroplate wood piles with copper 
were not successful. Concrete casings are now in greater use 
than is metal armor, and they appear to provide better pro- 
tection when high-quality materials are used and carefully 
applied. Unfortunately, they are readily damaged by ship 
impact. For this reason, concrete casings are less practical 
for fender piles than for foundation piles that are protected 
from mechanical damage. 


Jacketing piles by wrapping them with heavy polyvinyl 
plastic is one form of supplementary protection. If properly 
applied, the jacketing will kill any borers that may have 
already become established by creating stagnant water, 
thereby decreasing oxygen levels in the water that is in con- 
tact with the piles. Like other materials, the plastic jacket is 
subject to mechanical damage. 


Protection of Boats 


Wood barges have been constructed with planking or 
sheathing pressure-treated with creosote to protect the hull 
from marine borers, and the results have been favorable. 
Although coal-tar creosote is an effective preservative for 
protecting wood against marine borers in areas of moderate 
borer hazard, it has disadvantages in many types of boats. 


Creosote adds considerably to the weight of the boat hull, 
and its odor is objectionable to boat crews. In addition, anti- 
fouling paints are difficult to apply over creosoted wood. 


Antifouling paints that contain copper protect boat hulls 
against marine-borer attack, but the protection continues 
only while the coating remains unbroken. Because it is dif- 
ficult to maintain an unbroken coating of antifouling paint, 
the U.S. Navy has found it desirable to impregnate the hull 
planking of some wood boats with certain copper-containing 
preservatives. Such preservatives, when applied with high 
retentions (40 kg m-3 (2.5 lb ft-3)), have some effectiveness 
against marine borers and should help to protect the hull of 
a boat during intervals between renewals of the antifouling 
coating. These copper preservatives do not provide protec- 
tion equivalent to that furnished by coal-tar creosote; their 
effectiveness in protecting boats is therefore best assured if 
the boats are dry docked at regular and frequent intervals 
and the antifouling coating maintained. The leach-resistant 
wood preservatives containing copper arsenates have 
shown superior performance (at a retention of 40 kg m3 
(2.5 lb ft-3)) to creosote in tests conducted in areas of severe 
borer hazard. 


Plywood as well as plank hulls can be protected against 
marine borers by preservative treatment. The plywood hull 
presents a surface that can be covered successfully with a 
protective membrane of reinforced plastic laminate. Such 
coverings should not be attempted on wood that has been 
treated with a preservative carried in oil, because the bond 
will be unsatisfactory. 


References 


Beal, R.H. 1967. Formosan invader. Pest Control. 35(2): 
13-17. 


Beal, R.H.; Maulderi, J.K.; Jones, S.C. 1983. Subterranean 
termites, their prevention and control in buildings. Home & 
Garden Bull. 64 (rev.). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. 30 p. 


Cassens, D.L.; Eslyn, W.E. 1981. Fungicides to prevent 
sapstain and mold on hardwood lumber. Forest Products 
Journal. 31: 39-42. 


Ebeling, W. 1975. Wood destroying insects and fungi. In: 
Urban entomology. Berkeley, CA: University of California, 
Division of Agriculture Science: 128-216. 


Esenther, G.R.; Beal, R.H. 1979. Termite control: decayed 
wood bait. Sociobiology. 4(2): 215-222. 


Eslyn, W.E.; Clark, J.W. 1976. Appraising deterioration in 
submerged piling. Materials und Organismen. Supplement 
3: 43-52. 

Eslyn, W.E.; Clark, J.W. 1979. Wood bridges—decay in- 
spection and control. Agric. Handb. 557. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 32 p. 


14-15 


Forest Products Society. 1997. Prevention of discolorations 
in hardwood and softwood logs and lumber. FPS Proceed- 
ings 7283. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 90 p. 


Greaves, H. 1969. Wood-inhabiting bacteria: general consid- 
erations. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organization, Forest Products Newsletter 359. 


Hartley, C.; May, C.; 1943. Decay of wood in boats. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Path. Spec. Release 8. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 12 p. 


Highley, T.L. 1995. Comparative durability of untreated 
wood in use above ground. International Biodeterioration & 
Biodegradation. pp. 409-419. 


Highley, T.L.; Eslyn, W.E. 1982. Using fumigants to control 
interior decay in waterfront timbers. Forest Products Jour- 
nal. 32: 32-34. 


Highley, T.L.; Scheffer, T.C. 1978. Controlling decay in 
above-water parts of waterfront structures. Forest Products 
Journal. 28: 40-43. 


Hunt, G.M.; Garratt, G.A. 1967. Wood preservation, 3rd 
ed. The American Forestry Series. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company. 457 p. 


Johnson, B.R.; Lebow, S.T. 1996. Relative tolerance of 
CCA by larvae and adults of the common shipworm, Bankia 
gouldi. Material und Organismen. 30(1): 73-78. 


Johnson, B.R.; Rice, S.A. 1990. Protection of wood from 
marine borers. In: Proceedings, National Marine Research 
Conference. Wickford, RI. International Marine Institute. 


Jones, E.B.G.; Eltringham, S.K., eds. 1971. Marine borers, 
fungi and fouling organisms of wood. In: Proceedings of 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
1968 March 27—April 3. Paris, France: OECD. 367 p. 


Krishna, K.; Weesner, F.M., eds. 1969. Biology of termites. 
New York: Academic Press. Vol. I. 598 p. 


Krishna, K.; Weesner, F.M., eds. 1970. Biology of termites. 
New York: Academic Press. Vol. II. 643 p. 


Lee, K.E.; Wood, T.G. 1971. Termites and soils. New York: 
Academic Press. 251 p. 


Moore, H.B. 1979. Wood-inhabiting insects in houses: their 
identification, biology, prevention, and control. Prepared as 
part of interagency agreement IAA—25—75 between the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, and the Depart- 
ment of Housing and Urban Development. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, and the De- 
partment of Housing and Urban Development. 133 p. 


Morrell, J.J. 1996. Wood pole maintenance manual. Res. 
Contribution 15. Corvallis, OR: Forest Research Laboratory, 
Oregon State University. 55 p. 


14-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Morrell, J.J.; Corden, M.E. 1982. Controlling wood dete- 
rioration with fumigants: a review. Forest Products Journal. 
36(10): 26-34. 


NPCA. 1963. Carpenter bees. Tech. Release 3-63. Dunn 
Loring, VA: National Pest Control Association. 


NPCA. 1964. The horntails. Tech. Release 14-64. Dunn 
Loring, VA: National Pest Control Association. 


NPCA. 1976. Carpenter ants. Tech. Release ESPC 052101. 
Dunn Loring, VA: National Pest Control Association. 


Rietz, R.C. 1978. Storage of lumber. Agric. Handb. 531. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 63 p. 


Roff, J.W.; Cserjesi, A.J.; Swann, G.W. 1980. Prevention 
of sap stain and mold in packaged lumber. Forintek Canada 
Corporate Technical Report. 14R. Vancouver, BC: Forintek 
Canada Corporation. 


Scheffer, T.C. 1972. A climate index for estimating potential 
decay in wood structures above ground. Forest Products 
Journal. 21(10): 25-31. 


Scheffer, T.C.; Eslyn, W.E. 1976. Winter treatments protect 
birch roundwood during storage. Forest Products Journal. 
26: 27-31. 


Scheffer, T.C.; Verrall, A.F. 1973. Principles of protecting 
wood buildings from decay. Res. Pap. FPL 190. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 56 p. 


Schmidt, E. 1990. Remedial decay treatment with fused bo- 
rate rods: Recent developments and opportunities. In: Pro- 
ceedings, first international conference on wood protection 
with diffusible preservatives: 1989 November; Nashville, 
TN. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society: 91-92. 


Sherwood, G.E.; TenWolde, A. 1982. Moisture movement 
and control in light frame structures. Forest Products Jour- 
nal. 32: 69-73. 


Simpson, W.T.; Wang, X.; Verrill, S. 2003. Heat steriliza- 
tion time of Ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir boards and 
square timbers. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-—607. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 24 p. 


Weesner, F.M. 1965. The termites of the United States, a 
handbook. Elizabeth, NJ: National Pest Control Association. 
70 p. 


Wilcox, W.W. 1978. Review of literature on the effect of 
early stages of decay on wood strength. Wood and Fiber. 9: 
252-257. 


Williams, L.H. 1973. Anobiid beetles should be controlled. 
Pest Control. 41(6): 18, 20, 22, 38, 40, 42, 44. 


Zabel, R.A.; Morrell, J.J. 1992. Wood microbiology: Decay 
and its prevention. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 476 p. 


Wood Preservation 


Stan T. Lebow, Research Forest Products Technologist 


Contents 
Wood Preservatives 15—1 
Waterborne Preservatives 15-3 


Preservatives with ICC—ES Evaluation 
Reports 15—9 


Oil-Borne or Oil-Type Preservatives 15—10 
Treatments for Wood Composites 15—12 


Water-Repellent and Nonpressure 
Treatments 15-12 


Selecting Preservatives 15-12 
Evaluating New Preservatives 15—13 
Preservative Effectiveness 15-13 
Effect of Species on Penetration 15—15 
Preparation of Wood for Treatment 15—15 
Peeling 15-15 
Drying 15-16 
Conditioning of Green Products 15-17 
Incising 15-17 
Cutting and Framing 15-18 
Application of Preservatives 15-18 
Pressure Processes 15—18 
Effect on Mechanical Properties 15—20 
Nonpressure Processes 15—20 
In-Place and Remedial Treatments 15-22 
Best Management Practices 15—23 
Quality Assurance for Treated Wood 15-25 
Treating Conditions and Specifications 15—25 
Inspection of Treatment Quality 15—25 
Effects on the Environment 15-26 
Recycling and Disposal of Treated Wood 15-26 
References 15—27 


CHAPTER 15 


Many commonly used wood species can deteriorate if ex- 
posed to conditions that support growth of wood-degrading 
organisms (see Chap. 14). Wood products can be protected 
from the attack of decay fungi, harmful insects, or marine 
borers by applying chemical preservatives. Preservative 
treatments greatly increase the life of wood structures, thus 
reducing replacement costs and allowing more efficient 

use of forest resources. The degree of protection achieved 
depends on the preservative used and the proper penetration 
and retention of the chemicals. Some preservatives are more 
effective than others, and some are more adaptable to certain 
use requirements. To obtain long-term effectiveness, ad- 
equate penetration and retention are needed for each wood 
species, chemical preservative, and treatment method. Not 
only are different methods of treating wood available, but 
treatability varies among wood species—particularly their 
heartwood, which generally resists preservative treatment 
more than does sapwood. Although some tree species pos- 
sess naturally occurring resistance to decay and insects (see 
Chap. 14), many are in short supply or are not grown 

in ready proximity to markets. 


In considering preservative treatment processes and wood 
species, the combination must provide the required protec- 
tion for the conditions of exposure and life of the structure. 
All these factors are considered by the consensus techni- 
cal committees in setting reference levels required by the 
American Wood Protection Association (AWPA, formerly 
American Wood-Preservers’ Association)) and ASTM Inter- 
national (formerly American Society for Testing and Materi- 
als). Details are discussed later in this chapter. The charac- 
teristics, appropriate uses, and availability of preservative 
formulations may have changed after preparation of this 
chapter. For the most current information on preservative 
formulations, the reader is encouraged to contact the appro- 
priate regulatory agencies, standardization organizations, or 
trade associations. Note that mention of a chemical in this 
chapter does not constitute a recommendation. 


Wood Preservatives 


Wood preservatives must meet two broad criteria: (1) They 
must provide the desired wood protection in the intended 
end use, and (2) they must do so without presenting unrea- 
sonable risks to people or the environment. Because wood 
preservatives are considered to be a type of pesticide, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible 
for their regulation. Federal law requires that before 

selling or distributing a preservative in the United States, 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Synopsis of EPA-approved consumer information sheets for wood treated with 
CCA, ACZA, creosote, or pentachlorophenol 


NOTE: This is only a synopsis of information contained in consumer information 
sheets. For complete consumer information sheets, contact your treated wood supplier 
or the website of the Environmental Protection Agency. 


Handling Precautions 


Avoid frequent or prolonged inhalation of sawdust from treated wood. When sawing, 
sanding, and machining treated wood, wear a dust mask. Whenever possible, these 
operations should be performed outdoors to avoid indoor accumulations of airborne 
sawdust from treated wood. When power-sawing and machining, wear goggles to 
protect eyes from flying particles. Wear gloves when working with the wood. After 
working with the wood, and before eating, drinking, toileting, and use of tobacco 
products, wash exposed areas thoroughly. Avoid frequent or prolonged skin contact 
with creosote- or pentachlorophenol-treated wood. When handling creosote- or pen- 
tachlorophenol-treated wood, wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants and use gloves 
impervious to the chemicals (for example, gloves that are vinyl coated). Because 
preservatives or sawdust may accumulate on clothes, they should be laundered before 
reuse. Wash work clothes separately from other household clothing. 


Treated wood should not be burned in open fires or in stoves, fireplaces, or residential 
boilers, because toxic chemicals may be produced as part of the smoke and ashes. 
Treated wood from commercial or industrial use (such as construction sites) may be 
burned only in commercial or industrial incinerators or boilers in accordance with 
state and Federal regulations. CCA-treated wood can be disposed of with regular 
municipal trash (municipal solid waste, not yard waste) in many areas. However, state 
or local laws may be stricter than federal requirements. For more information, please 
contact the waste management agency for your state. 


Use Site Precautions 


All sawdust and construction debris should be cleaned up and disposed of after con- 
struction. Do not use treated wood under circumstances where the preservative may 
become a component of food or animal feed. Examples of such sites would be use of 
mulch from recycled arsenic-treated wood, cutting boards, counter tops, animal bed- 
ding, and structures or containers for storing animal feed or human food. Only treated 
wood that is visibly clean and free of surface residue should be used for patios, decks, 
and walkways. Do not use treated wood for construction of those portions of beehives 
which may come into contact with honey. Treated wood should not be used where it 
may come into direct or indirect contact with drinking water, except for uses involv- 
ing incidental contact such as docks and bridges. 


Logs treated with pentachlorophenol should not be used for log homes. Wood treated 
with creosote or pentachlorophenol should not be used where it will be in frequent or 
prolonged contact with bare skin (for example, chairs and other outdoor furniture), 
unless an effective sealer has been applied. Creosote- and pentachlorophenol-treated 
wood should not be used in residential, industrial, or commercial interiors except for 
laminated beams or building components that are in ground contact and are subject to 
decay or insect infestation and where two coats of an appropriate sealer are applied. 
Do not use creosote- or pentachlorophenol-treated wood for farrowing or brooding 
facilities. Wood treated with pentachlorophenol or creosote should not be used in the 
interiors of farm buildings where there may be direct contact with domestic animals 
or livestock that may crib (bite) or lick the wood. In interiors of farm buildings where 
domestic animals or livestock are unlikely to crib (bite) or lick the wood, creosote- or 
pentachlorophenol-treated wood may be used for building components that are in 
ground contact and are subject to decay or insect infestation and where two coats of 
an appropriate sealer are applied. Sealers may be applied at the installation site. Ure- 
thane, shellac, latex epoxy enamel, and varnish are acceptable sealers for pentachlo- 
rophenol-treated wood. Coal-tar pitch and coal-tar pitch emulsion are effective sealers 
for creosote-treated wood-block flooring. Urethane, epoxy, and shellac are acceptable 
sealers for all creosote-treated wood. 


15-2 


a company must obtain registration 
from EPA. Before registering a new 
pesticide or new use for a registered 
preservative, EPA must first ensure 
that the preservative can be used with 
a reasonable certainty of no harm to 
human health and without posing un- 
reasonable risks to the environment. 
To make such determinations, EPA 
requires more than 100 different scien- 
tific studies and tests from applicants. 
This chapter discusses only wood pre- 
servatives registered by the EPA. 


Some preservatives are classified as 
“restricted use” by the EPA and these 
can be used only in certain applica- 
tions and can be applied only by certi- 
fied pesticide applicators. Restricted 
use refers to the chemical preservative 
and not to the treated wood prod- 

uct. The general consumer may buy 
and use wood products treated with 
restricted-use pesticides; EPA does 
not consider treated wood a toxic 
substance nor is it regulated as a pes- 
ticide. Although treated wood is not 
regulated as pesticide, there are limita- 
tions on how some types of treated 
wood should be used. Consumer In- 
formation Sheets (EPA-approved) are 
available from retailers of creosote-, 
pentachlorophenol-, and inorganic- 
arsenical-treated wood products. The 
sheets provide information about the 
preservative and the use and disposal 
of treated-wood products (see Syn- 
opsis of EPA-Approved Consumer 
Information Sheets for Wood Treated 
with CCA, ACZA, Creosote, or Pen- 
tachlorophenol). The commercial 
wood treater is bound by the EPA 
regulation and can treat wood only 
for an end use that is allowed for that 
preservative. Some preservatives that 
are not classified as restricted by EPA 
are available to the general consumer 
for nonpressure treatments. It is the 
responsibility of the end user to apply 
these preservatives in a manner that is 
consistent with the EPA-approved la- 
beling. Registration of preservatives is 
under constant review by the EPA, and 
a responsible State or Federal agency 
should be consulted as to the current 
status of any preservative. 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Before a wood preservative can be approved for pressure 
treatment of structural members, it must be evaluated to 
ensure that it provides the necessary durability and that it 
does not greatly reduce the strength properties of the wood. 
The EPA typically does not evaluate how well a wood pre- 
servative protects the wood. Traditionally this evaluation 
has been conducted through the standardization process of 
the AWPA. The AWPA Book of Standards lists a series of 
laboratory and field exposure tests that must be conducted 
when evaluating new wood preservatives. The durability of 
test products are compared with those of established durable 
products and nondurable controls. The results of those tests 
are then presented to the appropriate AWPA subcommittees 
for review. AWPA subcommittees are composed of represen- 
tatives from industry, academia, and government agencies 
who have familiarity with conducting and interpreting dura- 
bility evaluations. Preservative standardization by AWPA is 
a two-step process. If the performance of a new preservative 
is considered appropriate, it is first listed as a potential pre- 
servative. Secondary committee action is needed to have the 
new preservative listed for specific commodities and to set 
the required treatment level. 


More recently the International Code Council—Evaluation 
Service (ICC-—ES) has evolved as an additional route for 
gaining building code acceptance of new types of pressure- 
treated wood. In contrast to AWPA, the ICC—ES does not 
standardize preservatives. Instead, it issues Evaluation Re- 
ports that provide evidence that a building product complies 
with building codes. The data and other information needed 
to obtain an Evaluation Report are first established as Ac- 
ceptance Criteria (AC). AC326, which sets the performance 
criteria used by ICC—ES to evaluate proprietary wood pre- 
servatives, requires submittal of documentation accredited 
third party agencies in accordance with AWPA , ASTM, and 
EN standard test methods. The results of those tests are then 
reviewed by an evaluation committee to determine if the 
preservative has met the appropriate acceptance criteria. 


Wood preservatives have traditionally been divided into 
two general classes: (1) Oil-type or oil-borne preservatives, 
such as creosote and petroleum solutions of pentachloro- 
phenol, and (2) waterborne preservatives that are applied as 
water solutions or with water as the carrier. Many different 
chemicals are in each of these classes, and each has different 
effectiveness in various exposure conditions. Some preser- 
vatives can be formulated so that they can be delivered with 
either water or oil-type carriers. In this chapter, both oil- 
borne and waterbome preservative chemicals are described 
as to their potential end uses. Tables 15—1 and 15—2 sum- 
marize preservatives and their treatment levels for various 
wood products. 


Waterborne Preservatives 


Waterborne preservatives are often used when cleanliness 
and paintability of the treated wood are required. Formula- 
tions intended for use outdoors have shown high resistance 


to leaching and very good performance in service. Water- 
borne preservatives are included in specifications for items 
such as lumber, timber, posts, building foundations, poles, 
and piling (Table 15—1). Because water is added to the wood 
in the treatment process, some drying and shrinkage will 
occur after installation unless the wood is kiln-dried after 
treatment. 


Copper is the primary biocide in many wood preservative 
formulations used in ground contact because of its excellent 
fungicidal properties and low mammalian toxicity (Table 
15-3). Because some types of fungi are copper tolerant, pre- 
servative formulations often include a co-biocide to provide 
further protection. 


Inorganic arsenicals are a restricted-use pesticide. For use 
and handling precautions of pressure-treated wood contain- 
ing inorganic arsenicals, refer to the EPA-approved Con- 
sumer Information Sheets. 


Acid Copper Chromate (ACC) 


Acid copper chromate (ACC) contains 31.8% copper oxide 
and 68.2% chromium trioxide (AWPA PS). The solid, paste, 
liquid concentrate, or treating solution can be made of cop- 
per sulfate, potasstum dichromate, or sodium dichromate. 
Tests on stakes and posts exposed to decay and termite at- 
tack indicate that wood well impregnated with ACC gener- 
ally provides acceptable service. However, some specimens 
placed in ground contact have shown vulnerability to attack 
by copper-tolerant fungi. ACC has often been used for treat- 
ment of wood in cooling towers. Its current uses are re- 
stricted to applications similar to those of chromated copper 
arsenate (CCA) (Table 15-4). ACC and CCA must be 

used at low treating temperatures (38 to 66 °C (100 to 

150 °F)) because they are unstable at higher temperatures. 
This restriction may involve some difficulty when higher 
temperatures are needed to obtain good treating results in 
woods such as Douglas-fir. 


Ammoniacal Copper Zinc Arsenate (ACZA) 


Ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate (ACZA) is commonly 
used on the West Coast of North America for the treatment 
of Douglas-fir. The penetration of Douglas-fir heartwood 

is improved with ACZA because of the chemical composi- 
tion and stability of treating at elevated temperatures. Wood 
treated with ACZA performs and has characteristics similar 
to those of wood treated with CCA (Table 15-1). 


ACZA should contain approximately 50% copper oxide, 
25% zinc oxide, and 25% arsenic pentoxide dissolved in a 
solution of ammonia in water (AWPA P5). The weight of 
ammonia is at least 1.38 times the weight of copper oxide. 
To aid in solution, ammonium bicarbonate is added (at least 
equal to 0.92 times the weight of copper oxide). 


ACZA replaced an earlier formulation, ammoniacal copper 
arsenate (ACA) that was used for many years in the United 
States and Canada. 


15-3 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 15—1. Typical use categories and retentions for preservatives used in 
pressure treatment of Southern Pine species* 


Retentions (kg m *)° for each type of exposure and AWPA 
use category designation 


Exterior Soil or 
; above-ground fresh water 
Interior, 

dry or Vertical, Severe/ Very severe/ 

damp coated Horizontal General critical critical 
Preservative 1,2 3A 3B 4A 4B 4C 4C (piles) 

Waterborne: Listed by the AWPA 
ACC NL° NL° 4.0 8 
ACZA 4.0 4.0 4.0 6.4 9.6 9.6 — 
ACQ-B 4.0 4.0 4.0 6.4 9.6 9.6 — 
ACQ-C 4.0 4.0 4.0 6.4 9.6 9.6 — 
ACQ-D 2.4 2.4 2.4 6.4 9.6 9.6 — 
CA-B 1.7 1.7 1.7 3.3 5.0 5.0 — 
CA-C 1.0 1.0 1.0 2.4 5.0 5.0 — 
CBA-A 3.3 3.3 3.3 6.5 9.8 9.8 — 
CCA NL° NL° 4 6.4 9.6 9.6 12.8 
CX-A 3.3 3.3 3.3 
CuN (waterborne) 1.12 1.12 1.12 1.76 
EL2 0.30 0.30 0.30 
KDS 3.0 3.0 3.0 ee 
PTI 0.21 0.21 0.21/0.29° 
SBX 2.8/4.5°  — — 
Oil-type: Listed by the AWPA 
Creosote 128/NR‘ 128.0 128.0 160 160 192 192 
Penta P9 Type AOil 6.4/NR' 6.4 6.4 8.0 8.0 8.0 9.6 
Penta P9 TypeC Oil 6.4/NR' 6.4 6.4 8.0 8.0 8.0 9.6 
CuN (oilborne) 0.64/NR' 0.64 0.64 0.96 1.2 1.2 1.6 
Cu8 0.32 0.32 0.32 
Waterborne: Evaluation reports from ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. 

ESR-1721 0.8 0.8 0.8 2.2 3.6 5.3 5.3 
ESR-1980 2.4 2.4 2.4 5.4 9.6 9.6 — 
ESR-2067 0.3 0.3 0.3 
ESR-2240 1.0 1.0 1.0 2.4 3.7 
ESR-2325 1.1 1.1 1.1 2.6 3.8 a — 
ESR-2711 2.1/2.78 2.1/2.7% — 2.1/2.78 4.5 6.9 — — 


“Some exceptions exist for specific applications. See AWPA Standard U1 or ICC ES Evaluation Reports for 
details on specific applications. See Table 15—2 for seawater applications. 

To convert to retention expressed as lb ft*, divide these values by 16.0. 

‘NL, not labeled. EPA labeling does not currently permit use of wood newly treated with these 
preservatives in most applications within these use categories. See Table 15—4 for more details. 

“Higher retention specified if the preservative is used without a stabilizer in the treatment solution. 

‘Higher retention for areas with Formosan subterranean termites. 

‘NR, not recommended for interior use in inhabited structures. 


89.1 kg m* retention limited to decking and specialty use items. 


Chromated Copper Arsenate (CCA) this labeling change and that the EPA has not recommended 
Wood treated with CCA (commonly called green treated) removing structures built with CCA-treated lumber. These 
dominated the treated-wood market from the late 1970s changes were made as part of the ongoing CCA re-registra- 
until 2004. However, as the result of the voluntary label tion process, and in light of the current and anticipated at 
changes submitted by the CCA registrants, the EPA labeling ket demand for alternative preservatives for nonindustrial 
of CCA currently permits the product to be used for primar- applications. Allowable uses for CCA are based on specific 
ily industrial applications (Table 15-4), and CCA-treated commodity standards listed in the 2001 edition of the AWPA 
products are generally not available at retail lumber yards. standards. The most important of these allowable uses do 
CCA can no longer be used for treatment of lumber intended _ based on the standards for poles, piles, and wood used in 
for use in residential decks or playground equipment. It is highway construction. A list of the most common allowable 
important to note that existing structures are not affected by uses is shown in Table 15-4. 


15-4 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Although several formulations of CCA have been used in 
the past, CCA Type C has been the primary formulation and 
is currently the only formulation listed in AWPA standards. 
CCA-C was found to have the optimum combination of 
efficacy and resistance to leaching, but the earlier formula- 
tions (CCA—A and CCA-B) have also provided long- 

term protection for treated stakes exposed in Mississippi 
(Table 15—5). CCA-C has an actives composition of 47.5% 
chromium trioxide, 34.0% arsenic pentoxide, and 18.5% 
copper oxide. AWPA Standard P5 permits substitution of 
potassium or sodium dichromate for chromium trioxide; 
copper sulfate, basic copper carbonate, or copper hydroxide 


Table 15-2. Preservative treatment and retention 
necessary to protect round timber piles from severe 
marine borer attack* 


Retention (kg m™)? 


Round Sawn 
Marine borers and preservatives piles materials 
Limnoria tripunctata only 
Ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate 40, 24° 40 
Chromated copper arsenate 40, 24° 


Creosote 320, 256° 400 


Limnoria tripunctata and Pholads 
(dual treatment) 
First treatment 
Ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate 
Chromated copper arsenate 
Second treatment 
Creosote 
Creosote solution 


16, (1.0) 24 
16, (1.0) 24 


320, (20.0) 320 
320, (20.0) 320 


“See AWPA Commodity Specification G for more information. 

To convert to retention expressed as Ib ft *, divide these values by 16.0. 
“Lower retention levels are for marine piling used in areas from New 
Jersey northward on the East Coast and north of San Francisco on the 
West Coast in the United States. 


for copper oxide; and arsenic acid, sodium arsenate, or 
pyroarsenate for arsenic pentoxide. 


High retention levels (40 kg m°3 (2.5 lb ft-3)) of CCA 
preservative provide good resistance to attack by the 
marine borers Limnoria and Teredo (Table 15-2). 


Alkaline Copper Quat (ACQ) 


Alkaline copper quat (ACQ) has an actives composition 

of 67% copper oxide and 33% quaternary ammonium 
compound (quat). Multiple variations of ACQ have been 
standardized. ACQ type B (ACQ-B) is an ammoniacal cop- 
per formulation, ACQ type D (ACQ—D) is an amine cop- 
per formulation, and ACQ type C (ACQ-C) is a combined 
ammoniacal-amine formulation with a slightly different 
quat compound. The multiple formulations of ACQ allow 
some flexibility in achieving compatibility with a specific 
wood species and application. When ammonia is used as the 
carrier, ACQ has improved ability to penetrate difficult-to- 
treat wood species. However, if the wood species is readily 
treatable, such as Southern Pine sapwood, an amine carrier 
can be used to provide a more uniform surface appearance. 
Recently ACQ has been formulated using small particles 

of copper rather than copper solubilized in ethanolamine. 
These formulations are discussed in more detail in the Pre- 
servatives with ICC—ES Evaluation Reports section. Use of 
particulate copper formulations of ACQ is currently limited 
to permeable woods (such as species of pine with a high 
proportion of sapwood), but efforts continue to adapt the 
treatment to a broader range of wood species. 


Alkaline Copper DCOI (ACD) 


Alkaline copper DCOI (ACD) is a recently proposed formu- 
lation of alkaline copper ethanolamine that utilizes 4,5-di- 
chloro-2-N-octyl-4-isothiazolin-3-one (DCOJ as co-biocide 


Table 15-3. Active ingredients in waterborne preservatives used for pressure treatments 


Active ingredient Preservative 
Inorganic actives 
Arsenic ACZA, CCA 
Boron CBA-A, CX—A, SBX, KDS 
Chromium ACC, CCA 
Copper ACC, ACZA, ACQ-B, ACQ-C, ACQ-D, CA-B, CA-C, CBA-A, CCA, CXA, 
ESR-1721, ESR—-1980, ESR—2240, ESR—2325, KDS, KDS-B, ESR-2711 
Zinc ACZA 
Organic actives 
Alkylbenzyldimethy1 ACQ-C 
ammonium compound 
DCOI EL2, ESR-2711 
Didecyldimethyl ACQ-B, ACQ-D 


ammonium compound 
HDO: Bis-(N-cyclo- 
hexyldiazeniumdioxy)Cu 


CX-A 


Imdiacloprid EL2, PTI, ESR-2067 
Propiconazole CA-C, PTI, ESR-1721 
Polymeric betaine KDS, KDS-B 
Tebuconazole 


PTI, ESR-1721, ESR-2067, ESR—2325 


15-5 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 15—4. Generalized examples of products that may still be treated with CCA under 


conditions of current label language” 


2001 AWPA 
Type of end use still allowed standard 
Lumber and timbers used in seawater C2 
Land, fresh-water, and marine piles C3 
Utility poles C4 
Plywood C9 
Wood for highway construction C14 
Round, half-round, and quarter-round fence posts C16 
Poles, piles, and posts used as structural members on farms C16 
Members immersed in or frequently splashed by seawater C18 
Lumber and plywood for permanent wood foundations C22 
Round poles and posts used in building construction C23 
Sawn timbers (at least 5 in. thick) used to support residential and commercial structures C24 
Sawn cross-arms C25 
Structural glued-laminated members C28 
Structural composite lumber (parallel strand or laminated veneer lumber) C33 
Shakes and shingles C34 


“Refer to the EPA or a treated-wood supplier for the most recent definition of allowable uses. 


to provide protection against copper-tolerant fungi. The 
ratio of alkaline copper to DCOI in the formulation ranges 
from 20:1 to 25:1. The ACD formulation is listed as a pre- 
servative in AWPA standards. It has been proposed for both 
above-ground and ground-contact applications, but at the 
time this chapter was finalized it had not yet been standard- 
ized for treatment of any commodities. 


Copper bis(dimethyldithiocarbamate) (CDDC) 


Copper bis(dimethyldithiocarbamate) (CDDC) is a reaction 
product formed in wood as a result of the dual treatment of 
two separate treating solutions. The first treating solution 
contains a maximum of 5% bivalent copper—ethanolamine 
(2-aminoethanol), and the second treating solution con- 
tains a minimum of 2.5% sodium dimethyldithiocarbamate 
(AWPA PS). Although this preservative is not currently 
commercially available, CDDC-treated wood products are 
included in the AWPA Commodity Standards for uses such 
as residential construction. 


Copper Azole (CA—B, CA—C and CBA-A) 


Copper azole (CA—B) is a formulation composed of amine 
copper (96%) and tebuconazole (4%). Copper azole (CA-C) 
is very similar to CA—B, but half the tebuconazole is re- 
placed with propiconazole. The active ingredients in CA—C 
are in the ratio of 96% amine copper, 2% tebuconazole, and 
2% propiconazole. An earlier formulation (CBA—A) also 
contained boric acid. Although listed as an amine formula- 
tion, copper azole may also be formulated with an amine— 
ammonia formulation. The ammonia may be included when 
the copper azole formulations are used to treat refractory 
species, and the ability of such a formulation to adequately 
treat Douglas-fir has been demonstrated. Inclusion of am- 
monia, however, is likely to have slight affects on the sur- 
face appearance and initial odor of the treated wood. 


15-6 


Copper HDO (CXA) 


Copper HDO (CXA) is an amine copper water-based pre- 
servative that has been used in Europe and was recently 
standardized in the United States. The active ingredients are 
copper oxide, boric acid, and copper-HDO (bis-(N-cyclo- 
hexyldiazeniumdioxy copper). The appearance and handling 
characteristics of wood treated with copper HDO are similar 
to those of the other amine copper-based treatments. It is 
also referred to as copper xyligen. Currently, copper HDO is 
standardized only for applications that are not in direct con- 
tact with soil or water. 


Copper Naphthenate (Waterborne) 


Waterborne copper naphthenate (CuN—W) has an actives 
composition similar to oil-borne copper naphthenate, but the 
actives are carried in a solution of ethanolamine and water 
instead of petroleum solvent. Wood treated with the water- 
borne formulation has a drier surface and less odor than the 
oil-borne formulation. The waterborne formulation has been 
standardized for above-ground and some ground-contact 
applications (Table 15-1). 


Inorganic Boron (Borax—Boric Acid) 


Borate preservatives are readily soluble in water and highly 
leachable and should be used only above ground where the 
wood is protected from wetting. When used above ground 
and protected from wetting, this preservative is very ef- 
fective against decay, termites, beetles, and carpenter ants. 
Inorganic boron (SBX) is listed in AWPA standards for 
protected applications such as framing lumber. The solid or 
treating solution for borate preservatives (borates) should be 
greater than 98% pure, on an anhydrous basis (AWPA P5). 
Acceptable borate compounds are sodium octaborate, so- 
dium tetraborate, sodium pentaborate, and boric acid. These 
compounds are derived from the mineral sodium borate, 
which is the same material used in laundry additives. 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Table 15-5. Results of Forest Products Laboratory studies on 38- by 89- 
by 457-mm (nominal 2- by 4- by 18-in.) Southern Pine sapwood stakes, 
pressure-treated with commonly used wood preservatives, installed at 
Harrison Experimental Forest, Mississippi 


Preservative 


Average retention 
(kg m° (Ib ft *))* 


Average life or condition 
at last inspection 


Controls (untreated stakes) 
Acid copper chromate 


Ammoniacal copper arsenate 


Chromated copper arsenate 
Type I (Type A) 


Type II (Type B) 


Type HI (Type C) 


Oxine copper 
(Copper-8-quinolinolate) 
AWPA P9 heavy petroleum 


Copper naphthenate 
0.11% copper in No. 2 fuel oil 
0.29% copper in No. 2 fuel oil 
0.57% copper in No. 2 fuel oil 
0.86% copper in No. 2 fuel oil 
Creosote, coal-tar 


2.08 (0.13) 
2.24 (0.14) 
4.01 (0.25) 
4.17 (0.26) 
4.65 (0.29) 
5.93 (0.37) 
8.01 (0.50) 

12.18 (0.76) 


2.56 (0.16) 
3.52 (0.22) 
3.84 (0.24) 
4.01 (0.25) 
7.37 (0.45) 
8.17 (0.51) 

15.54 (0.97) 

20.02 (1.25) 


2.40 (0.15) 
3.52 (0.22) 
4.65 (0.29) 
7.05 (0.44) 
7.05 (0.44) 
3.68 (0.23) 
4.17 (0.26) 
5.93 (0.37) 
8.33 (0.52) 

12.66 (0.79) 

16.66 (1.04) 
2.24 (0.14) 
3.20 (0.20) 
4.00 (0.25) 
4.33 (0.27) 
6.41 (0.40) 
6.41 (0.40) 
9.61 (0.60) 
9.93 (0.62) 

12.66 (0.79) 
0.22 (0.014) 
0.48 (0.03) 
0.95 (0.059) 
1.99 (0.124) 


0.19 (0.012) 
0.46 (0.029) 
0.98 (0.061) 
1.31 (0.082) 
52.87 (3.3) 
65.68 (4.1) 
67.28 (4.2) 
73.69 (4.6) 
124.96 (7.8) 
128.24 (8.0) 
132.97 (8.3) 
160.20 (10.0) 
189.04 (11.8) 


1.8 to 3.6 years 
11.6 years 
6.1 years 
80% failed after 40 years 
80% failed after 60 years 
4.6 years 
60% failed after 60 years 
50% failed after 40 years 
22% failed after 40 years 
16.6 years 
80% failed after 30 years 
38.7 years 
60% failed after 40 years 
20% failed after 40 years 
10% failed after 60 years 
No failures after 60 years 
No failures after 60 years 


28.7 years 
45% failed after 40 years 
30% failed after 60 years 
10% failed after 40 years 
20% failed after 60 years 
30% failed after 40 years 
No failures after 46 years 
No failures after 46 years 
No failures after 46 years 
No failures after 46 years 
No failures after 46 years 
No failures after 25 years 
No failures after 35 years 
20% failed after 20 years 
10% failed after 25 years 
No failures after 35 years 
No failures after 25 years 
No failures after 35 years 
No failures after 25 years 
No failures after 25 years 


26.9 years 
27.3 years 
31.3 years 
No failures after 45 years 


15.9 years 
21.8 years 
27.1 years 
29.6 years 
24.9 years 
14.2 years 
17.8 years 
21.3 years 


70% failed after 54-1/2 years 


90% failed after 60 years 
50% failed after 46 years 
90% failed after 55 years 
50% failed after 60 years 


15-7 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 15—5. Results of Forest Products Laboratory studies on 38- by 89- 
by 457-mm (nominal 2- by 4- by 18-in.) Southern Pine sapwood stakes, 
pressure-treated with commonly used wood preservatives, installed at 
Harrison Experimental Forest, Mississippi—con. 


Average retention 
(kgm? (lb ft *))* 


Preservative 


Average life or condition 
at last inspection 


Creosote, coal-tar (con.) 


211.46 (13.2) 
232.29 (14.5) 
264.33 (16.5) 


20% failed after 54-1/2 years 
No failures after 55 years 
10% failed after 60 years 


Pentachlorophenol 
Stoddard solvent 2.24 (0.14) 13.7 years 
(mineral spirits) 2.88 (0.18) 15.9 years 
3.20 (0.20) 9.5 years 
3.20 (0.20) 13.7 years 
6.09 (0.38) 80% failed after 39 years 
6.41 (0.40) 15.5 years 
10.73 (0.67) No failures after 39 years 
Heavy gas oil 3.20 (0.20) 89% failed after 50 years 
(Mid-United States) 6.41 (0.40) 80% failed after 50 years 
9.61 (0.60) 20% failed after 50 years 
No. 4 aromatic oil 3.36 (0.21) 21.0 years 
(West Coast) 6.57 (0.41) 70% failed after 50 years 
AWPA P9 (heavy petroleum) 1.76 (0.11) 90% failed after 39 years 
3.04 (0.19) 60% failed after 39 years 
4.65 (0.29) No failures after 39 years 
8.49 (0.53) No failures after 35 years 
10.73 (0.67) No failures after 39 years 
Petroleum solvent controls 64.08 (4.0) 7.6 years 
65.68 (4.1) 4.4 years 
75.29 (4.7) 12.9 years 
123.35 (7.7) 14.6 years 
126.56 (7.9) 90% failed after 50 years 
128.16 (8.0) 19.7 years 
128.16 (8.0) 23.3 years 
128.16 (8.0) 14.6 years 
129.76 (8.1) 3.4 years 
136.17 (8.5) 20.9 years 
157.00 (9.8) 6.3 years 
192.24 (12.0) 17.1 years 
193.84 (12.1) 80% failed after 50 years 
310.79 (19.4) 9.1 years 


“Retention of active ingredients for preservatives and total solvent for petroleum solvent controls. 


In addition to pressure treatments, borates are commonly 
sprayed, brushed, or injected to treat wood in existing 
structures. They will diffuse into wood that is wet, so these 
preservatives are often used as a remedial treatment. Borates 
are widely used for log homes, natural wood finishes, and 
hardwood pallets. 


EL2 


EL2 is a waterborne preservative composed of the fungicide 
4,5-dichloro-2-N-octyl-4-isothiazolin-3-one (DCOD), the 
insecticide imidacloprid, and a moisture control stabilizer 
(MCS). The ratio of actives is 98% DCOI and 2% imida- 
cloprid, but the MCS is also considered to be a necessary 
component to ensure preservative efficacy. EL2 is currently 
listed in AWPA standards for above-ground applications 
only (Table 15-1). 


15-8 


KDS 


KDS and KDS Type B (KDS-B) utilize copper and poly- 
meric betaine as the primary active ingredients. The KDS 
formulation also contains boron, and has an actives com- 
position of 41% copper oxide, 33% polymeric betaine, and 
26% boric acid. KDS—B does not contain boron and has an 
actives composition of 56% copper oxide and 44% poly- 
meric betaine. KDS is listed for treatment of commodities 
used above ground and for general use in contact with soil 
or fresh water. It is not listed for soil or fresh water contact 
in severe exposures. The listing includes treatment of 
common pine species as well as Douglas-fir and western 
hemlock. KDS-B is currently in the process of obtaining 
listings for specific commodities. The appearance of KDS- 
treated wood is similar to that of wood treated with other 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


alkaline copper formulations (light green—brown). It has 
some odor initially after treatment, but this odor dissipates 
as the wood dries. 


Oligomeric Alkylphenol Polysulfide (PXTS) 


PXTS is a recently developed and somewhat unusual pre- 
servative system. It is an oligomer formed by the reaction of 
cresylic acid and sulfur chlorides in the presence of excess 
sulfur. PXTS is a solid at room temperature but becomes 

a liquid when heated to above approximately 58 °C. It can 
also be dissolved and diluted in some aromatic and organic 
chlorinated solvents. PXTS is not currently listed for treat- 
ment of any commodities and is currently not commercially 
available. 


Propiconazole and Tebuconazole 


Propiconazole and tebuconazole are organic triazole bio- 
cides that are effective against wood decay fungi but not 
against insects (AWPA P5, P8). They are soluble in some 
organic solvents but have low solubility in water and are 
stable and leach resistant in wood. Propiconazole and tebu- 
conazole are currently components of waterborne preserva- 
tive treatments used for pressure-treatment of wood in the 
United States, Europe, and Canada. They are also used as 
components of formulations used to provide mold and sap- 
stain protection. Propiconazole is also standardized for use 
with AWPA P9 Type C or Type F organic solvents. 


Propiconazole—Tebuconazole—Imidacloprid (PTI) 


PTI is a waterborne preservative solution composed of two 
fungicides (propiconazole and tebuconazole) and the insec- 
ticide imidacloprid. It is currently listed in AWPA standards 
for above-ground applications only. The efficacy of PTI is 
enhanced by the incorporation of a water-repellent stabilizer 
in the treatment solutions, and lower retentions are allowed 
with the stabilizer (Table 15-1). 


Preservatives with ICC—ES Evaluation 
Reports 


Some commercially available waterborne wood preserva- 
tives are not standardized by the AWPA. Instead, they have 
obtained ICC-ES evaluation reports. In this chapter we refer 
to these preservatives by their Evaluation Report number 
(Table 15-1). 


ESR-1721 


ESR-1721 recognizes three preservative formulations. 

Two are the same formulations of copper azole (CA—B and 
CA-C) also listed in AWPA standards. The other (referred to 
here as ESR—1721) uses particulate copper that is ground to 
sub-micron dimensions and dispersed in the treatment solu- 
tion. Wood treated with ESR-1721 has a lighter green color 
than the CA—B or CA-C formulations because the copper 

is not dissolved in the treatment solution. All three formula- 
tions are listed for treatment of commodities used in a range 
of applications, including contact with soil or freshwater. 


Use of ESR-1721 (dispersed copper) is currently limited to 
easily treated pine species. 


ESR-1980 


ESR-1980 includes a listing for both the AWPA standard- 
ized formulation of ACQ—D and a waterborne, micronized 
copper version of alkaline copper quat (referred to here as 
ESR-1980). The formulation is similar to ACQ in that the 
active ingredients are 67% copper oxide and 33% quater- 
nary ammonium compound. However, in ESR—1980 the 
copper is ground to sub-micron dimensions and suspended 
in the treatment solution instead of being dissolved in etha- 
nolamine. The treated wood has little green color because 
the copper is not dissolved in the treatment solution. The 
use of the particulate form of copper is currently limited to 
the more easily penetrated pine species, but efforts are un- 
derway to adapt the formulation for treatment of a broader 
range of wood species. ESR—1980 is listed for treatment of 
commodities used in both above-ground and ground-contact 
applications. 


ESR-2067 


ESR-2067 is an organic waterborne preservative with an 
actives composition of 98% tebuconazole (fungicide) and 
2% imidacloprid (insecticide). The treatment does not im- 
part any color to the wood. It is currently listed only for 
treatment of commodities that are not in direct contact 
with soil or standing water. 


ESR-2240 


ESR-2240 is a waterborne formulation that utilizes finely 
ground (micronized) copper in combination with tebucon- 
azole in an actives ratio of 25:1. It is listed for above-ground 
and ground-contact applications. In addition to wood prod- 
ucts cut from pine species, ESR—2240 can be used for treat- 
ment of hem—fir lumber and Douglas-fir plywood. 


ESR-2325 


ESR-2325 is another waterborne preservative that utilizes 
finely ground copper particles and tebuconazole as actives. 
The ratio of copper to tebuconazole in the treatment solu- 
tion is 25:1. Its use is currently limited to more readily 
treated species such as the Southern Pine species group, but 
Douglas-fir plywood is also listed. ESR—2315 is listed for 
treatment of wood used above-ground and in contact with 
soil or fresh water. 


ESR-2711 


ESR-2711 combines copper solubilized in ethanolamine 
with the fungicide 4,5-dichloro-2-N-octyl-4-isothiazolin-3- 
one (DCOI). The ratio of copper (as CuO) to DCOIT ranges 
from 10:1 to 25:1. The ESR listing provides for both above- 
ground and ground-contact applications. The appearance of 
the treated wood is similar to that of wood treated with other 
formulations utilizing soluble copper, such as ACQ. It is 
currently only listed for treatment of pine species. 


15-9 


Oil-Borne or Oil-Type Preservatives 


Oil-type wood preservatives are some of the oldest preser- 
vatives, and their use continues in many applications. Wood 
does not swell from treatment with preservative oils, but it 
may shrink if it loses moisture during the treating process. 
Creosote and solutions with heavy, less volatile petroleum 
oils often help protect wood from weathering but may ad- 
versely influence its cleanliness, odor, color, paintability, 
and fire performance. Volatile oils or solvents with oil-borne 
preservatives, if removed after treatment, leave the wood 
cleaner than do the heavy oils but may not provide as much 
protection. Wood treated with some preservative oils can be 
glued satisfactorily, although special processing or cleaning 
may be required to remove surplus oils from surfaces before 
spreading the adhesive. 


Coal-Tar Creosote and Creosote Solutions 


Coal-tar creosote (creosote) is a black or brownish oil made 
by distilling coal tar that is obtained after high-temperature 
carbonization of coal. Advantages of creosote are (a) high 
toxicity to wood-destroying organisms; (b) relative insolu- 
bility in water and low volatility, which impart to it a great 
degree of permanence under the most varied use conditions; 
(c) ease of application; (d) ease with which its depth of 
penetration can be determined; (e) relative low cost (when 
purchased in wholesale quantities); and (f) lengthy record of 
satisfactory use. Creosote is commonly used for heavy tim- 
bers, poles, piles, and railroad ties. 


AWPA Standard P1/P13 provides specifications for coal-tar 
creosote used for preservative treatment of piles, poles, and 
timber for marine, land, and freshwater use. The character of 
the tar used, the method of distillation, and the temperature 
range in which the creosote fraction is collected all influence 
the composition of the creosote, and the composition may 
vary within the requirements of standard specifications. Un- 
der normal conditions, requirements of these standards can 
be met without difficulty by most creosote producers. 


Coal tar or petroleum oil may also be mixed with coal-tar 
creosote, in various proportions, to lower preservative costs. 
AWPA Standard P2 provides specifications for coal-tar solu- 
tions. AWPA Standard P3 stipulates that creosote—petroleum 
oil solution shall consist solely of specified proportions 

of 50% coal-tar creosote by volume (which meets AWPA 
standard P1/P13) and 50% petroleum oil by volume (which 
meets AWPA standard P4). However, because no analyti- 
cal standards exist to verify the compliance of P3 solutions 
after they have been mixed, the consumer assumes the risk 
of using these solutions. These creosote solutions have a 
satisfactory record of performance, particularly for railroad 
ties and posts where surface appearance of the treated wood 
is of minor importance. Compared with straight creosote, 
creosote solutions tend to reduce weathering and checking 
of the treated wood. These solutions have a greater tendency 
to accumulate on the surface of the treated wood (bleed) and 
penetrate the wood with greater difficulty because they are 


15-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


generally more viscous than is straight creosote. High tem- 
peratures and pressures during treatment, when they can be 
safely used, will often improve penetration of high-viscosity 
solutions. 


Although coal-tar creosote or creosote solutions are well 
suited for general outdoor service in structural timbers, creo- 
sote has properties that are undesirable for some purposes. 
The color of creosote and the fact that creosote-treated wood 
usually cannot be painted satisfactorily make this preserva- 
tive unsuitable where appearance and paintability are 
important. 


The odor of creosote-treated wood is unpleasant to some 
people. Also, creosote vapors are harmful to growing plants, 
and foodstuffs that are sensitive to odors should not be 
stored where creosote odors are present. Workers some- 
times object to creosote-treated wood because it soils their 
clothes, and creosote vapor photosensitizes exposed skin. 
With precautions to avoid direct skin contact with creosote, 
there appears to be minimal danger to the health of workers 
handling or working near the treated wood. The EPA or the 
wood treater should be contacted for specific information on 
this subject. 


In 1986, creosote became a restricted-use pesticide, and its 
use is currently restricted to pressure-treatment facilities. 
For use and handling of creosote-treated wood, refer to the 
EPA-approved Consumer Information Sheet. 


Freshly creosoted timber can be ignited and burns readily, 
producing a dense smoke. However, after the timber has 
seasoned for some months, the more volatile parts of the 
oil disappear from near the surface and the creosoted wood 
usually is little, if any, easier to ignite than untreated wood. 
Until this volatile oil has evaporated, ordinary precautions 
should be taken to prevent fires. Creosote adds fuel value, 
but it does not sustain ignition. 


Other Creosotes 


Creosotes distilled from tars other than coal tar have been 
used to some extent for wood preservation, although they 
are not included in current AWPA specifications. These 
include wood-tar creosote, oil-tar creosote, and water—gas- 
tar creosote. These creosotes provide some protection from 
decay and insect attack but are generally less effective than 
coal-tar creosote. 


Pentachlorophenol Solutions 


Water-repellent solutions containing chlorinated phenols, 
principally pentachlorophenol (penta), in solvents of the 
mineral spirits type, were first used in commercial dip treat- 
ments of wood by the millwork industry in about 1931. 
Commercial pressure treatment with pentachlorophenol in 
heavy petroleum oils on poles started in about 1941, and 
considerable quantities of various products soon were 
pressure treated. AWPA Standard P8 defines the properties 
of pentachlorophenol preservative, stating that pentachloro- 
phenol solutions for wood preservation shall contain not less 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


than 95% chlorinated phenols, as determined by titration of 
hydroxyl and calculated as pentachlorophenol. 


AWPA standard P9 defines solvents and formulations for 
organic preservative systems. The performance of penta- 
chlorophenol and the properties of the treated wood are in- 
fluenced by the properties of the solvent used. A commercial 
process using pentachlorophenol dissolved in liquid petro- 
leum gas (LPG) was introduced in 1961, but later research 
showed that field performance of penta-LPG systems was 
inferior to penta—P9 systems. Thus, penta—LPG systems 
are no longer used. The heavy petroleum solvent included 
in AWPA P9 Type A is preferable for maximum protection, 
particularly when wood treated with pentachlorophenol is 
used in contact with the ground. The heavy oils remain in 
the wood for a long time and do not usually provide a clean 
or paintable surface. 


Because of the toxicity of pentachlorophenol, care is neces- 
sary when handling and using it to avoid excessive personal 
contact with the solution or vapor. Do not use indoors or 
where human, plant, or animal contact is likely. Pentachlo- 
rophenol became a restricted-use pesticide in November 
1986 and is currently only available for use in pressure 
treatment. For use and handling precautions, refer to the 
EPA-approved Consumer Information Sheet. 


The results of pole service and field tests on wood treated 
with 5% pentachlorophenol in a heavy petroleum oil are 
similar to those with coal-tar creosote. This similarity has 
been recognized in the preservative retention requirements 
of treatment specifications. Pentachlorophenol is effec- 

tive against many organisms, such as decay fungi, molds, 
stains, and insects. Because pentachlorophenol is ineffective 
against marine borers, it is not recommended for the treat- 
ment of marine piles or timbers used in coastal waters. 


Copper Naphthenate 


Copper naphthenate is an organometalic compound formed 
as a reaction product of copper salts and naphthenic acids 
that are usually obtained as byproducts in petroleum refin- 
ing. It is a dark green liquid and imparts this color to the 
wood. Weathering turns the color of the treated wood to 
light brown after several months of exposure. The wood 
may vary from light brown to chocolate brown if heat is 
used in the treating process. AWPA P§8 standard defines the 
properties of copper naphthenate, and AWPA P9 covers the 
solvents and formulations for organic preservative systems. 


Copper naphthenate is effective against wood-destroying 
fungi and insects. It has been used commercially since the 
1940s and is currently standardized for a broad range of 
applications (Table 15—1). Copper naphthenate is not 

a restricted-use pesticide but should be handled as an 
industrial pesticide. It may be used for superficial treatment, 
such as by brushing with solutions with a copper content of 
1% to 2% (approximately 10% to 20% copper naphthenate). 


Water-based formulations of copper naphthenate may also 
be available. 


Oxine Copper (copper-8-quinolinolate) 


Oxine copper (copper-8-quinolinolate) is an organometalic 
compound, and the formulation consists of at least 10% cop- 
per-8-quinolinolate, 10% nickel-2-ethylhexanoate, and 80% 
inert ingredients (AWPA P8). It is accepted as a stand-alone 
preservative for aboveground use for sapstain and mold 
control and is also used for pressure treating (Table 15-1). 
A water-soluble form can be made with dodecylbenzene 
sulfonic acid, but the solution is corrosive to metals. 


Oxine copper solutions are greenish brown, odorless, toxic 
to both wood decay fungi and insects, and have a low toxic- 
ity to humans and animals. Because of its low toxicity to hu- 
mans and animals, oxine copper is the only EPA-registered 
preservative permitted by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin- 
istration for treatment of wood used in direct contact with 
food. Some examples of its uses in wood are commercial 
refrigeration units, fruit and vegetable baskets and boxes, 
and water tanks. Oxine copper solutions have also been used 
on nonwood materials, such as webbing, cordage, cloth, 
leather, and plastics. 


Zinc Naphthenate 


Zinc naphthenate is similar to copper naphthenate but is less 
effective in preventing decay from wood-destroying fungi 
and mildew. It is light colored and does not impart the char- 
acteristic greenish color of copper naphthenate, but it does 
impart an odor. Waterborne and solventborne formulations 
are available. Zinc naphthenate is not widely used for pres- 
sure treating. 


3-lodo-2-Propynyl Butyl Carbamate 


3-Iodo-2-propynyl butyl carbamate (IPBC) is a fungi- 

cide that is used as a component of sapstain and millwork 
preservatives. It is also included as a fungicide in several 
surface-applied water-repellent-preservative formulations. 
Waterborne and solvent-borne formulations are avail- 
able. Some formulations yield an odorless, treated product 
that can be painted if dried after treatment. It is listed as a 
pressure-treatment preservative in the AWPA standards but 
is not currently standardized for pressure treatment of any 
wood products. IPBC also may be combined with other 
fungicides, such as didecyldimethylammonium chloride in 
formulations used to prevent mold and sapstain. 


IPBC/Permethrin 


IPBC is not an effective insecticide and has recently been 
standardized for use in combination with the insecticide per- 
methrin (3-phenoxybenzyl-(1R,S)-cis, trans-2, 2-dimethyl- 
3-(2,2-dichlorovinyl) cycloproanecarboxylate) under the 
designation IPBC/PER. Permethrin is a synthetic pyrethroid 
widely used for insect control in agricultural and structural 
applications. The ratio of IPBC to permethrin in the IPBC/ 
PER varies between 1.5:1 and 2.5:1. The formulation is 


15-11 


carried in a light solvent such as mineral spirits, making it 
compatible with composite wood products that might be 
negatively affected by the swelling associated with water- 
based pressure treatments. The IPBC/PER formulation is 
intended only for use in above-ground applications. The 
formulation is listed as a preservative in AWPA standards, 
but at the time this chapter was finalized it had not yet been 
standardized for treatment of any commodities. 


Alkyl Ammonium Compounds 


Alkyl ammonium compounds such as didecyldimethylam- 
monium chloride (DDAC) or didecyldimethylammonium 
carbonate (DDAC)/bicarbonate (DDABC) have some ef- 
ficacy against both wood decay fungi and insects. They are 
soluble in both organic solvents and water and are stable in 
wood as a result of chemical fixation reactions. DDAC and 
DDABC are currently being used as a component of alka- 
line copper quat (ACQ) (see section on Waterborne Preser- 
vatives) for above-ground and ground-contact applications 
and as a component of formulations used for sapstain and 
mold control. 
4,5-Dichloro-2-N-Octyl-4-Ilsothiazolin-3-One (DCOIl) 
4,5-dichloro-2-N-octyl-4-isothiazolin-3-one (DCOD) is a 
biocide that is primarily effective against wood decay fungi. 
It is soluble in organic solvents but not in water, and it is 
stable and leach resistant in wood. The solvent used in the 
formulation of the preservative is specified in AWPA P9 
Type C. DCOI can be formulated to be carried in a water- 
borne system, and it is currently used as a component in 
the waterborne preservative EL2. It has also recently been 
proposed for use as co-biocide in a copper ethanolamine 
formulation referred to as ACD. 


Chlorpyrifos 


Chlorpyrifos (CPF) is an organophosphate insecticide that 
has been widely used for agricultural purposes. It has been 
standardized by the AWPA as a preservative but is not cur- 
rently used as a component of commercial pressure treat- 
ments. Chloropyrifos is not effective in preventing fungal 
attack and should be combined with an appropriate fungi- 
cidal preservative for most applications. 


Treatments for Wood Composites 


Many structural composite wood products, such as glued- 
laminated beams, plywood, and parallel strand and lami- 
nated veneer lumber, can be pressure-treated with wood pre- 
servatives in a manner similar to lumber. However, flake- or 
fiber-based composites are often protected by adding preser- 
vative during manufacture. A commonly used preservative 
for these types of composites is zinc borate. Zinc borate is 

a white, odorless powder with low water solubility that is 
added directly to the furnish or wax during panel manufac- 
ture. Zinc borate has greater leach resistance than the more 
soluble forms of borate used for pressure treatment and 

thus can be used to treat composite siding products that are 
exposed outdoors but partially protected from the weather. 


15-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Zinc borate is currently listed in AWPA Commodity Stan- 
dard J for nonpressure treatment of laminated strand lumber, 
oriented strandboard, and engineered wood siding. The stan- 
dard requires that these products have an exterior coating or 
laminate when used as siding. Another preservative that has 
been used to protect composites is ammoniacal copper ac- 
etate, which is applied by spraying the preservative onto the 
OSB flakes before drying. 


Water-Repellent and Nonpressure 
Treatments 


Effective water-repellent preservatives will retard the in- 
gress of water when wood is exposed above ground. These 
preservatives help reduce dimensional changes in the wood 
as a result of moisture changes when the wood is exposed to 
rainwater or dampness for short periods. As with any wood 
preservative, the effectiveness in protecting wood against 
decay and insects depends upon the retention and penetra- 
tion obtained in application. These preservatives are most 
often applied using nonpressure treatments such as vacuum 
impregnation, brushing, soaking, or dipping. Preservative 
systems containing water-repellent components are sold un- 
der various trade names, principally for the dip or equivalent 
treatment of window sash and other millwork. The National 
Wood Window and Door Association (NWWDA) standard, 
WDMA LS. 4-07A, Water Repellent Preservative Treatment 
for Millwork, lists preservative formulations that have met 
certain requirements, including EPA registration and effi- 
cacy against decay fungi. 


The AWPA Commodity Specification I for nonpressure 
treatment of millwork and other wood products provides re- 
quirements for these nonpressure preservatives but does not 
currently list any formulations. The preservative must also 
meet the Guidelines for Evaluating New Wood Preservatives 
for Consideration by the AWPA for nonpressure treatment. 


Water-repellent preservatives containing oxine copper are 
used in nonpressure treatment of wood containers, pallets, 
and other products for use in contact with foods. When 
combined with volatile solvents, oxine copper is used to 
pressure-treat lumber intended for use in decking of trucks 
and cars or related uses involving harvesting, storage, and 
transportation of foods (AWPA P§8). 


Nonpressure preservatives sold to consumers for household 
and farm use typically contain copper naphthentate, zinc 
naphthenate, or oxine copper. Their formulations may also 
incorporate water repellents. 


Selecting Preservatives 


The type of preservative applied is often dependent on the 
requirements of the specific application. For example, direct 
contact with soil or water is considered a severe deteriora- 
tion hazard, and preservatives used in these applications 
must have a high degree of leach resistance and efficacy 
against a broad spectrum of organisms. These same 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Figure 15—1. Field stake test plot at Harrison Experi- 
mental Forest in southern Mississippi. 


preservatives may also be used at lower retentions to protect 
wood exposed in lower deterioration hazards, such as above 
the ground. The exposure is less severe for wood that is par- 
tially protected from the weather, and preservatives that lack 
the permanence or toxicity to withstand continued exposure 
to precipitation may be effective in those applications. Other 
formulations may be so readily leachable that they can be 
used only indoors. 


To guide selection of the types of preservatives and loadings 
appropriate to a specific end use, the AWPA recently devel- 
oped use category system (UCS) standards. The UCS stan- 
dards simplify the process of finding appropriate preserva- 
tives and preservative retentions for specific end uses. They 
categorize treated wood applications by the severity of the 
deterioration hazard (Table 15—6). The lowest category, Use 
Category | (UC1), is for wood that is used in interior con- 
struction and kept dry; UC2 is for interior wood completely 
protected from the weather but occasionally damp. UC3 is 
for exterior wood used above ground; UC4 is for wood used 
in ground contact in exterior applications. UCS includes ap- 
plications that place treated wood in contact with seawater 
and marine borers. Individual commodity specifications then 
list all the preservatives that are standardized for a specific 
use category along with the appropriate preservative 
retention. 


Although some preservatives are effective in almost all 
environments, they may not be well-suited for applications 
involving frequent human contact or for exposures that 
present only low to moderate biodeterioration hazards. Ad- 
ditional considerations include cost, potential odor, surface 
dryness, adhesive bonding, and ease of finish application. 


Evaluating New Preservatives 


Wood preservatives often need to provide protection from a 
wide range of wood-attacking organisms (fungi, insects, ma- 
rine borers, and bacteria). Because they must protect wood 
in so many ways, and protect wood for a long time period, 


evaluating wood treatments requires numerous tests. Some 
of the most important tests are mentioned here, but they 
should be considered only as a minimum, and other tests are 
useful as well. Appendix A of the AWPA Standards provides 
detailed guidelines on the types of tests that may be needed 
to evaluate new wood preservatives. 


The laboratory leaching test helps to evaluate how rapidly 
the treatment will be depleted. A treatment needs leach re- 
sistance to provide long-term protection. In this test small 
cubes of wood are immersed in water for 2 weeks. 


The laboratory decay test is used to challenge the treated 
wood with certain fungal isolates that are known to aggres- 
sively degrade wood. It should be conducted with specimens 
that have been through the leaching test. The extent of decay 
in wood treated with the test preservative is compared to 
that of untreated wood and wood treated with an established 
preservative. This test can help to determine the treatment 
level needed to prevent decay. 


Field stake evaluations are some of the most informative 
tests because they challenge the treated wood with a 

wide range of natural organisms under severe conditions 
(Fig. 15-1). Stakes are placed into the soil in regions with 

a warm, wet climate (usually either the southeastern United 
States or Hawaii). At least two different sites are used to 
account for differences in soil properties and types of organ- 
isms present. The extent of deterioration in wood treated 
with the test preservative is compared to that of untreated 
wood and wood treated with an established preservative. 


Above-ground field exposures are useful for treatments that 
will be used to protect wood above ground. Although not 
as severe as field stake tests, above-ground tests do provide 
useful information on above-ground durability. Specimens 
are exposed to the weather in an area with a warm, wet 
climate (usually either the southeastern United States or 
Hawaii). The specimens are designed to trap moisture and 
create ideal conditions for above-ground decay. The extent 
of deterioration in wood treated with the test preservative is 
compared to that of untreated wood and wood treated with 
an established preservative. 


Corrosion testing is used to determine the compatibility of 
the treatment with metal fasteners. 


Treatability testing is used to evaluate the ability of a treat- 
ment to penetrate deeply into the wood. Shallow surface 
treatments rarely provide long-term protection because 
degrading organisms can still attack the interior of the wood. 


Strength testing compares the mechanical properties of 
treated wood with matched, untreated specimens. Treatment 
chemicals or processes have the potential to damage the 
wood, making it weak or brittle. 


Preservative Effectiveness 


Preservative effectiveness is influenced not only by the pro- 
tective value of the preservative chemical, but also by the 


15-13 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 15-6. Summary of use category system developed by the American Wood Protection Association 


Common agents of 


Use category Service conditions Use environment deterioration Typical applications 
UCI Interior construction Continuously protected Insects only Interior construction and 
Above ground from weather or other furnishings 
Dry sources of moisture 
UC2 Interior construction Protected from weather, but Decay fungi and insects _ Interior construction 
Above ground may be subject to sources 
Damp of moisture 
UC3A Exterior construction Exposed to all weather Decay fungi and insects Coated millwork, siding, 
Above ground cycles, not exposed to and trim 
Coated and rapid water prolonged wetting 
runoff 
UC3B Ground contact or fresh Exposed to all weather Decay fungi and insects Fence, deck, and 
water cycles, normal exposure guardrail posts, crossties 
Non-critical components —_ conditions and utility poles (low 
decay areas) 
UC4A Ground contact or fresh Exposed to all weather Decay fungi and insects Fence, deck, and 
water cycles, normal exposure guardrail posts, crossties 
Non-critical components —_ conditions and utility poles (low 
decay areas) 
UC4B Ground contact or fresh Exposed to all weather Decay fungi and insects Permanent wood 
water cycles, high decay potential with increased potential foundations, building 
Critical components or includes salt-water splash for biodeterioration poles, horticultural 
difficult replacement posts, crossties and 
utility poles (high decay 
areas) 
UC4C Ground contact or fresh Exposed to all weather Decay fungi and insects Land and fresh-water 
water cycles, severe environments, with extreme potential piling, foundation piling, 
Critical structural extreme decay potential for biodeterioration crossties and utility 
components poles (severe decay 
areas) 
UCSA Salt or brackish water Continuous marine exposure Salt-water organisms Piling, bulkheads, 
and adjacent mud zone (salt water) bracing 
Northern waters 
UCSB Salt or brackish water Continuous marine exposure Salt-water organisms, Piling, bulkheads, 
and adjacent mud zone (salt water) including bracing 
NJ to GA, south of San creosote-tolerant 
Francisco Limnoria tripunctata 
UCSC Salt or brackish water and Continuous marine exposure Salt-water organisms, Piling, bulkheads, 


adjacent mud zone 
South of GA, Gulf Coast, 
Hawaii, and Puerto Rico 


(salt water) 


including Martesia, 
Sphaeroma 


bracing 


method of application and extent of penetration and reten- 
tion of the preservative in the treated wood. Even with an 
effective preservative, good protection cannot be expected 
with poor penetration or substandard retention levels. The 
species of wood, proportion of heartwood and sapwood, 
heartwood penetrability, and moisture content are among the 
important variables that influence the results of treatment. 
For various wood products, the preservatives and retention 
levels listed in the AWPA Commodity Standards or ICC—ES 
evaluation reports are given in Table 15-1. 


Determining whether one preservative is more effective 
than another within a given use category is often difficult. 


15-14 


Few service tests include a variety of preservatives under 
comparable conditions of exposure. Furthermore, service 
tests may not show a good comparison between different 
preservatives as a result of the difficulty in controlling for 
differences in treatment quality. Comparative data under 
similar exposure conditions, with various preservatives and 
retention levels, are included in the U.S. Forest Service, For- 
est Products Laboratory, stake test studies. A summary of 
these test results is included in Table 15—5. Note, however, 
that because the stakes used in these studies are treated un- 
der carefully controlled conditions, their performance may 
not reflect variability in performance exhibited by a broad 
range of commercially treated material. 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Figure 15—2. During pressure treatment, preservative 
typically penetrates only the sapwood. Round mem- 
bers have a uniform treated sapwood shell, but sawn 
members may have less penetration on one or more 
faces. 


Similar comparisons have been conducted for preservative 
treatments of small wood panels in marine exposure (Key 
West, Florida). These preservatives and treatments include 
creosotes with and without supplements, waterborne pre- 
servatives, waterborne preservative and creosote dual treat- 
ments, chemical modifications of wood, and various chemi- 
cally modified polymers. In this study, untreated panels were 
badly damaged by marine borers after 6 to 18 months of 
exposure, whereas some treated panels have remained free 
of attack after 19 years in the sea. 


Test results based on seawater exposure have shown that 
dual treatment (waterborne copper-containing preservatives 
followed by creosote) is possibly the most effective method 
of protecting wood against all types of marine borers. The 
AWPA standards have recognized this process as well as the 
treatment of marine piles with high retention levels of am- 
moniacal copper zinc arsenate (ACZA) or chromated copper 
arsenate (CCA). The recommended treatment and retention 
in kilograms per cubic meter (pounds per cubic foot) for 
round timber piles exposed to severe marine borer hazard 
are given in Table 15—2. Poorly treated or untreated heart- 
wood faces of wood species containing “high sapwood” that 
do not require heartwood penetration (for example, southern 
pines, ponderosa pine, and red pine) have been found to 
perform inadequately in marine exposure. In marine appli- 
cations, only sapwood faces should be allowed for water- 
borne-preservative-treated pine in direct seawater exposure. 


Effect of Species on Penetration 


The effectiveness of preservative treatment is influenced by 
the penetration and distribution of the preservative in the 
wood. For maximum protection, it is desirable to select 
species for which good penetration is assured. 


In general, the sapwood of most softwood species is not dif- 
ficult to treat under pressure (Fig. 15-2). Examples of spe- 
cies with sapwood that is easily penetrated when it is well 
dried and pressure treated are the pines, coastal Douglas-fir, 


western larch, Sitka spruce, western hemlock, western red- 
cedar, northern white-cedar, and white fir (A. concolor). Ex- 
amples of species with sapwood and heartwood somewhat 
resistant to penetration are the red and white spruces and 
Rocky Mountain Douglas-fir. Cedar poles are commonly 
incised to obtain satisfactory preservative penetration. With 
round members, such as poles, posts, and piles, the penetra- 
tion of the sapwood is important in achieving a protective 
outer zone around the heartwood. 


The proportion of sapwood varies greatly with wood spe- 
cies, and this becomes an important factor in obtaining ad- 
equate penetration. Species within the Southern Pine group 
are characterized by a large sapwood zone that is readily 
penetrated by most types of preservatives. In part because 
of their large proportion of treatable sapwood, these pine 
species are used for the vast majority of treated products 

in the United States. Other important lumber species, such 
as Douglas-fir, have a narrower sapwood band in the living 
tree, and as a result products manufactured from Douglas-fir 
have a lower proportion of treatable sapwood. 


The heartwood of most species is difficult to treat. There 
may be variations in the resistance to preservative penetra- 
tion of different wood species. Table 15-7 gives the relative 
resistance of the heartwood to treatment of various soft- 
wood and hardwood species. Although less treatable than 
sapwood, well-dried white fir, western hemlock, northern 
red oak, the ashes, and tupelo are examples of species with 
heartwood that is reasonably easy to penetrate. The southern 
pines, ponderosa pine, redwood, Sitka spruce, coastal Doug- 
las-fir, beech, maples, and birches are examples of species 
with heartwood that is moderately resistant to penetration. 


Preparation of Wood for Treatment 


For satisfactory treatment and good performance, the wood 
product must be sound and suitably prepared. Except in spe- 
cialized treating methods involving unpeeled or green mate- 
rial, the wood should be well peeled and either seasoned or 
conditioned in the cylinder before treatment. It is also highly 
desirable that all machining be completed before treatment, 
including incising (to improve the preservative penetration 
in woods that are resistant to treatment) and the operations 
of cutting or boring of holes. 


Peeling 


Peeling round or slabbed products is necessary to enable the 
wood to dry quickly enough to avoid decay and insect dam- 
age and to permit the preservative to penetrate satisfactorily. 
Even strips of the thin inner bark may prevent penetration. 
Patches of bark left on during treatment usually fall off in 
time and expose untreated wood, thus permitting decay to 
reach the interior of the member. 


Careful peeling is especially important for wood that is to 
be treated by a nonpressure method. In the more thorough 


15-15 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 15-7. Penetration of the heartwood of various softwood and hardwood species* 


Ease of treatment Softwoods 


Hardwoods 


Least difficult Bristlecone pine (Pinus aristata) 
Pinyon (P. edulis) 
Pondersosa pine (P. pondersosa) 


Redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) 


Moderately 
difficult 


Baldcypress (Taxodium distichum) 
California red fir (Abies magnifica) 
Douglas-fir (coast) (Pseudotsuga taxifolia)) 
Eastern white pine (Pinus strobus) 
Jack pine (P. banksiana) 

Loblolly pine (P. taeda) 

Longleaf pine (P. palustris) 

Red pine (P. resinosa) 

Shortleaf pine (P. echinata) 

Sugar pine (P. lambertiana) 

Western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla) 


Difficult Eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis) 
Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmanni) 
Grand fir (Abies grandis) 

Lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta var. latifolia) 
Noble fir (Abies procera) 

Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis) 

Western larch (Larix occidentalis) 

White fir (Abies concolor) 


White spruce (Picea glauca) 


Very difficult Alpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa) 


Corkbark fir (A. /asiocarpa var. arizonica) 


Douglas-fir (Rocky Mountain) (Pseudotsuga taxifolia) 


Northern white-cedar (Thuja occidentalis) 
Tamarack (Larix laricina) 
Western redcedar (Thuja plicata) 


American basswood (Tilia americana) 

Beech (white heartwood) (Fagus grandifolia) 
Black tupelo (blackgum) (Nyssa sylvatica) 
Green ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica var. lanceolata) 
Pin cherry (Prunus pennsylvanica) 

River birch (Betula nigra) 

Red oak (Quercus spp.) 

Slippery elm (U/mus fulva) 

Sweet birch (Betula lenia) 

Water tupelo (Nyssa aquatica) 

White ash (Fraxinus americana) 


Black willow (Salix nigra) 

Chestnut oak (Quercus montana) 
Cottonwood (Populus sp.) 

Bigtooth aspen (P. grandidentata) 
Mockernut hickory (Carya tomentosa) 
Silver maple (Acer saccharinum) 
Sugar maple (A. saccharum) 

Yellow birch (Betula lutea) 


American sycamore (Platanus occidentalis) 
Hackberry (Celtis occidentalis) 

Rock elm (U/mus thomoasi) 

Yellow-poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera) 


American beech (red heartwood) (Fagus grandifolia) 
American chestnut (Castanea dentata) 

Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia) 

Blackjack oak (Quercus marilandica) 

Sweetgum (redgum) (Liquidambar styraciflua) 
White oak (Quercus spp.) 


“As covered in MacLean (1952). 


processes, some penetration may take place both longitu- 
dinally and tangentially in the wood; consequently, small 
strips of bark are tolerated in some specifications. Processes 
in which a preservative is forced or permitted to diffuse 
through green wood lengthwise do not require peeling of the 
timber. Machines of various types have been developed for 
peeling round timbers, such as poles, piles, and posts (Fig. 
15-3). 


Drying 

Drying of wood before treatment is necessary to prevent 
decay and stain and to obtain preservative penetration. 
However, for treatment with waterborne preservatives by 
certain diffusion methods, high moisture content levels may 
be permitted. For treatment by other methods, however, dry- 
ing before treatment is essential. Drying before treatment 
opens up the checks before the preservative is applied, thus 
increasing penetration, and reduces the risk of checks 


15-16 


opening after treatment and exposing unpenetrated wood. 
Good penetration of heated organic-based preservatives may 
be possible in wood with a moisture content as high as 40% 
to 60%, but severe checking while drying after treatment 
can expose untreated wood. 


For large timbers and railroad ties, air drying is a widely 
used method of conditioning. Despite the increased time, 
labor, and storage space required, air drying is generally the 
most inexpensive and effective method, even for pressure 
treatment. However, wet, warm climatic conditions make it 
difficult to air dry wood adequately without objectionable 
infection by stain, mold, and decay fungi. Such infected 
wood is often highly permeable; in rainy weather, infected 
wood can absorb a large quantity of water, which prevents 
satisfactory treatment. 


How long the timber must be air dried before treatment 
depends on the climate, location, and condition of the 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Figure 15—3. Machine peeling of poles. The outer bark 
has been removed by hand, and the inner bark is being 
peeled by machine. Frequently, all the bark is removed 
by machine. 


Figure 15—4. Deep incising permits better penetration 
of preservative. 


seasoning yard, methods of piling, season of the year, timber 
size, and species. The most satisfactory seasoning practice 
for any specific case will depend on the individual drying 
conditions and the preservative treatment to be used. There- 
fore, treating specifications are not always specific as to 
moisture content requirements. 


To prevent decay and other forms of fungal infection during 
air drying, the wood should be cut and dried when condi- 
tions are less favorable for fungus development (Chap. 14). 
If this is impossible, chances for infection can be minimized 
by prompt conditioning of the green material, careful pil- 
ing and roofing during air drying, and pretreating the green 
wood with preservatives to protect it during air drying. 


Lumber of all species, including Southern Pine poles, is 
often kiln dried before treatment, particularly in the south- 
ern United States where proper air seasoning is difficult. 
Kiln drying has the important added advantage of quickly 
reducing moisture content, thereby reducing transportation 
charges on poles. 


Conditioning of Green Products 


Plants that treat wood by pressure processes can condition 
green material by means other than air and kiln drying. 
Thus, they avoid a long delay and possible deterioration 
of the timber before treatment. 


When green wood is to be treated under pressure, one of 
several methods for conditioning may be selected. The 
steaming-and-vacuum process is used mainly for southern 
pines, and the Boulton or boiling-under-vacuum process is 
used for Douglas-fir and sometimes hardwoods. 


In the steaming process, the green wood is steamed in the 
treating cylinder for several hours, usually at a maximum of 
118 °C (245 °F). When steaming is completed, a vacuum is 
immediately applied. During the steaming period, the outer 
part of the wood is heated to a temperature approaching 
that of the steam; the subsequent vacuum lowers the boiling 
point so that part of the water is evaporated or forced out 

of the wood by the steam produced when the vacuum is ap- 
plied. The steaming and vacuum periods used depend upon 
the wood size, species, and moisture content. Steaming and 
vacuum usually reduce the moisture content of green wood 
slightly, and the heating assists greatly in getting the preser- 
vative to penetrate. A sufficiently long steaming period will 
also sterilize the wood. 


In the Boulton or boiling-under-vacuum method of partial 
seasoning, the wood is heated in the oil preservative under 
vacuum, usually at about 82 to 104 °C (180 to 220 °F). This 
temperature range, lower than that of the steaming process, 
is a considerable advantage in treating woods that are es- 
pecially susceptible to injury from high temperatures. The 
Boulton method removes much less moisture from heart- 
wood than from sapwood. 

Incising 

Wood that is resistant to penetration by preservatives may 
be incised before treatment to permit deeper and more uni- 
form penetration. To incise, lumber and timbers are passed 
through rollers equipped with teeth that sink into the wood 
to a predetermined depth, usually 13 to 19 mm (1/2 to 

3/4 in.). The teeth are spaced to give the desired distribution 
of preservative with the minimum number of incisions. A 
machine of different design is required for deeply incising 
the butts of poles, usually to a depth of 64 mm (2.5 in.) 
(Fig. 15-4). 


Incising is effective because preservatives usually penetrate 
the wood much farther along the grain than across the grain. 
The incisions open cell lumens along the grain, which 


15-17 


greatly enhances penetration. Incising is especially effective 
in improving penetration in the heartwood areas of sawn 
surfaces. 


Incising is practiced primarily on Douglas-fir, western hem- 
lock, and western larch ties and timbers for pressure treat- 
ment and on cedar and Douglas-fir poles. Incising can result 
in significant reductions in strength (Chap. 5). 


Cutting and Framing 


All cutting and boring of holes should be done prior to pre- 
servative treatment. Cutting into the wood in any way after 
treatment will frequently expose the untreated interior of the 
timber and permit ready access to decay fungi or insects. 


In some cases, wood structures can be designed so that 

all cutting and framing is done before treatment. Railroad 
companies have followed this practice and have found it 
not only practical but economical. Many wood-preserving 
plants are equipped to carry on such operations as the adz- 
ing and boring of crossties; gaining, roofing, and boring of 
poles; and framing of material for bridges and specialized 
structures, such as water tanks and barges. 


Treatment of the wood with preservative oils results in little 
or no dimensional change. With waterborne preservatives, 
however, some change in the size and shape of the wood 
may occur even though the wood is redried to the moisture 
content it had before treatment. If precision fitting is nec- 
essary, the wood is cut and framed before treatment to its 
approximate final dimensions to allow for slight surfacing, 
trimming, and reaming of bolt holes. Grooves and bolt holes 
for timber connectors are cut before treatment and can be 
reamed out if necessary after treatment. 


Application of Preservatives 


Wood-preserving methods are of two general types: (a) pres- 
sure processes, in which the wood is impregnated in closed 
vessels under pressures considerably above atmospheric, 
and (b) nonpressure processes, which vary widely in the 
procedures and equipment used. 


Pressure Processes 


In commercial practice, wood is most often treated by im- 
mersing it in a preservative in a high-pressure apparatus and 
applying pressure to drive the preservative into the wood. 
Pressure processes differ in details, but the general principle 
is the same. The wood, on cars or trams, is run into a long 
steel cylinder, which is then closed and filled with preserva- 
tive (Fig. 15—5). Pressure forces the preservative into the 
wood until the desired amount has been absorbed. Consider- 
able preservative is absorbed, with relatively deep penetra- 
tion. Three pressure processes are commonly used: full cell, 
modified full cell, and empty cell. 


Full Cell 


The full-cell (Bethel) process is used when the retention 
of a maximum quantity of preservative is desired. It is a 


15-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


standard procedure for timbers to be treated with creosote 
when protection against marine borers is required. Water- 
borne preservatives may be applied by the full-cell process 
if uniformity of penetration and retention is the primary con- 
cern. With waterborne preservatives, control over preserva- 
tive retention is obtained by regulating the concentration of 
the treating solution. 


Steps in the full-cell process are essentially the following: 


1. The charge of wood is sealed in the treating cylinder, 
and a preliminary vacuum is applied for a half-hour or 
more to remove the air from the cylinder and as much 
as possible from the wood. 


2. The preservative, at ambient or elevated temperature 
depending on the system, is admitted to the cylinder 
without breaking the vacuum. 

3. After the cylinder is filled, pressure is applied until the 
wood will take no more preservative or until the re- 
quired retention of preservative is obtained. 

4. When the pressure period is completed, the preservative 
is withdrawn from the cylinder. 


on 


A short final vacuum may be applied to free the charge 
from dripping preservative. 


When the wood is steamed before treatment, the preserva- 
tive is admitted at the end of the vacuum period that follows 
steaming. When the timber has received preliminary condi- 
tioning by the Boulton or boiling-under-vacuum process, the 
cylinder can be filled and the pressure applied as soon as the 
conditioning period is completed. 


Modified Full Cell 


The modified full-cell process is basically the same as the 
full-cell process except for the amount of initial vacuum and 
the occasional use of an extended final vacuum. The modi- 
fied full-cell process uses lower levels of initial vacuum; the 
actual amount is determined by the wood species, material 
size, and final retention desired. The modified full-cell pro- 
cess is commonly used for treatment of lumber with water- 
borne preservatives. 


Empty Cell 

The objective of the empty-cell process is to obtain deep 
penetration with a relatively low net retention of preserva- 
tive. For treatment with oil preservatives, the empty-cell 
process should always be used if it will provide the desired 
retention. Two empty-cell processes, the Rueping and the 
Lowry, are commonly employed; both use the expansive 
force of compressed air to drive out part of the preservative 
absorbed during the pressure period. 


The Rueping empty-cell process, often called the empty-cell 
process with initial air, has been widely used for many years 
in Europe and the United States. The following general pro- 
cedure is employed: 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Figure 15—5. Typical steps in pressure treating process: A, untreat- 
ed wood is placed in cylinder; B, a vacuum is applied to pull air out 
of the wood; C, the wood is immersed in solution while still under 
vacuum; D, pressure is applied to force the preservative into the 
wood; E, preservative is pumped out, and a final vacuum is pulled 
to remove excess preservative; F, excess preservative is pumped 
away, and the wood is removed from the cylinder. 


1. Air under pressure is forced into the treating cylinder, 2. After the period of preliminary air pressure, preserva- 
which contains the charge of wood. The air penetrates tive is forced into the cylinder. As the preservative is 
some species easily, requiring but a few minutes appli- pumped in, the air escapes from the treating cylinder 
cation of pressure. In treating the more resistant species, into an equalizing or Rueping tank, at a rate that keeps 
common practice is to maintain air pressure from the pressure constant within the cylinder. When the 
1/2 to 1 h before admitting the preservative, but the treating cylinder is filled with preservative, the treating 
necessity for lengthy air-pressure periods does not seem pressure is increased above that of the initial air and is 
fully established. The air pressures employed generally maintained until the wood will absorb no more preser- 
range from 172 to 689 kPa (25 to 100 Ib in-2), depend- vative, or until enough has been absorbed to leave the 
ing on the net retention of preservative desired and the required retention of preservative in the wood after the 
resistance of the wood. treatment. 


15-19 


3. At the end of the pressure period, the preservative is 
drained from the cylinder, and surplus preservative 
is removed from the wood with a final vacuum. The 
amount of preservative recovered can be from 20% to 
60% of the gross amount injected. 


The Lowry is often called the empty-cell process without 
initial air pressure. Preservative is admitted to the cylinder 
without either an initial air pressure or a vacuum, and the air 
originally in the wood at atmospheric pressure is imprisoned 
during the filling period. After the cylinder is filled with the 
preservative, pressure is applied, and the remainder of 

the treatment is the same as described for the Rueping 
treatment. 


The Lowry process has the advantage that equipment for the 
full-cell process can be used without other accessories that 
the Rueping process usually requires, such as an air com- 
pressor, an extra cylinder or Rueping tank for the preserva- 
tive, or a suitable pump to force the preservative into the 
cylinder against the air pressure. However, both processes 
have advantages and are widely and successfully used. 


With poles and other products where bleeding of preserva- 
tive oil is objectionable, the empty-cell process is followed 
by either heating in the preservative (expansion bath) at a 
maximum of 104 °C (220 °F) or a final steaming for a speci- 
fied time limit at a maximum of 116 °C (240 °F) prior to the 
final vacuum. 


Treating Pressures and Preservative Temperatures 


The pressures used in treatments vary from about 345 to 
1,723 kPa (50 to 250 lb in-?), depending on the species and 
the ease with which the wood takes the treatment. Most 
commonly, pressures range from about 862 to 1,207 kPa 
(125 to 175 lb in). Many woods are sensitive to high 
treating pressures, especially when hot. For example, 
AWPA standards permit a maximum pressure of 1,050 kPa 
(150 lb in-2) in the treatment of redwood, eastern hemlock, 
and eastern white pine, while the limitation for oak is 

1,723 kPa (250 lb in). 


AWPA T1 standard requires that the temperature of creo- 
sote and creosote solutions, as well as that of the oil-type 
preservatives, during the pressure period not be greater 

than 100 °C (212 °F). For the waterborne preservatives that 
contain chromium (ACC and CCA), the maximum solution 
temperature is limited to 50 °C (120 °F) to avoid premature 
precipitation of the preservative. For most other waterborne 
preservatives, the maximum solution temperature is 65 °C 
(150 °F), although a higher limit 93 °C (200 °F) is permitted 
for inorganic boron solutions. 


Effect on Mechanical Properties 


Coal-tar creosote, creosote solutions, and pentachlorophenol 
dissolved in petroleum oils are practically inert to wood and 
have no chemical influence that would affect its strength. 


15-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Chemicals commonly used in waterborne salt preservatives, 
including chromium, copper, arsenic, and ammonia, are 
reactive with wood. Thus, these chemicals are potentially 
damaging to mechanical properties and may also promote 
corrosion of mechanical fasteners. 


Significant reductions in mechanical properties may be ob- 
served if the treating and subsequent drying processes are 
not controlled within acceptable limits. Factors that influ- 
ence the effect of the treating process on strength include 

(a) species of wood, (b) size and moisture content of the 
timbers treated, (c) type and temperature of heating medium, 
(d) length of the heating period in conditioning the wood for 
treatment and time the wood is in the hot preservative, 

(e) post-treatment drying temperatures, and (f) amount of 
pressure used. Most important of those factors are the sever- 
ity and duration of the in-retort heating or post-treatment 
redrying conditions used. The effect of wood preservatives 
on the mechanical properties of wood is covered in 

Chapter 5. 


Nonpressure Processes 


The numerous nonpressure processes differ widely in the 
penetration and retention levels of preservative attained, and 
consequently in the degree of protection they provide to the 
treated wood. When similar retention and penetration levels 
are achieved, wood treated by a nonpressure method should 
have a service life comparable to that of wood treated by 
pressure. Nevertheless, results of nonpressure treatments, 
particularly those involving surface applications, are not 
generally as satisfactory as those of pressure treatment. The 
superficial processes do serve a useful purpose when more 
thorough treatments are impractical or exposure conditions 
are such that little preservative protection is required. 


Nonpressure methods, in general, consist of (a) surface 
application of preservatives by brief dipping, (b) soaking 
in preservative oils or steeping in solutions of waterborne 
preservatives, (c) diffusion processes with waterborne pre- 
servatives, (d) vacuum treatment, and (e) a variety of mis- 
cellaneous processes. 


Brief Dipping 


It is a common practice to treat window sash, frames, and 
other millwork, either before or after assembly, by dipping 
the item in a water-repellent preservative. 


In some cases, preservative oil penetrates the end surfaces 
of ponderosa pine sapwood as much as 25 to 76 mm 

(1 to 3 in.). However, end penetration in such woods as the 
heartwood of southern pines and Douglas-fir is much less. 
Transverse penetration of the preservative applied by brief 
dipping is very shallow, usually less than a millimeter (a few 
hundredths of an inch). The exposed end surfaces at joints 
are the most vulnerable to decay in millwork products; 
therefore, good end penetration is especially advantageous. 
Dip applications provide very limited protection to wood 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


used in contact with the ground or under very moist condi- 
tions, and they provide very limited protection against attack 
by termites. However, they do have value for exterior wood- 
work and millwork that is painted, not in contact with the 
ground, and exposed to moisture only for brief periods. 


Cold Soaking and Steeping 


The methods of cold soaking well-seasoned wood for sever- 
al hours or days in low-viscosity preservative oils or steep- 
ing green or seasoned wood for several days in waterborne 
preservatives have provided a range of success on fence 
posts, lumber, and timbers. 


Pine posts treated by cold soaking for 24 to 48 h or longer in 
a solution containing 5% of pentachlorophenol in No. 2 fuel 
oil have shown an average life of 16 to 20 years or longer. 
The sapwood in these posts was well penetrated, and preser- 
vative solution retention levels ranged from 32 to 96 kg m> 
(2 to 6 lb in-3). Most species do not treat as satisfactorily as 
do the pines by cold soaking, and test posts of such woods 
as birch, aspen, and sweetgum treated by this method have 
failed in much shorter times. 


Preservative penetration and retention levels obtained by 
cold soaking lumber for several hours are considerably bet- 
ter than those obtained by brief dipping of similar species. 
However, preservative retention levels seldom equal those 
obtained in pressure treatment except in cases such as sap- 
wood of pines that has become highly absorptive through 
mold and stain infection. 


Steeping with waterborne preservatives has very limited use 
in the United States but it has been used for many years in 
Europe. In treating seasoned wood, both the water and the 
preservative salt in the solution soak into the wood. With 
green wood, the preservative enters the water-saturated 
wood by diffusion. Preservative retention and penetration 
levels vary over a wide range, and the process is not 
generally recommended when more reliable treatments 

are practical. 


Diffusion Processes 


In addition to the steeping process, diffusion processes are 
used with green or wet wood. These processes employ 
waterborne preservatives that will diffuse out of the water of 
the treating solution or paste into the water of the wood. 


The double-diffusion process developed by the Forest Prod- 
ucts Laboratory has shown very good results in fence post 
tests and standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) stake 
tests, particularly for full-length immersion treatments. This 
process consists of steeping green or partially seasoned 
wood first in one chemical solution, then in another. The 

two chemicals then react in the wood to form a precipitate 
with low solubility. However, the preservatives evaluated in 
this process do not currently have EPA registration for use in 
nonpressure treatments. 


Vacuum Process 


The vacuum process, or “VAC—VAC” as referred to in Eu- 
rope, has been used to treat millwork with water-repellent 
preservatives and construction lumber with waterborne and 
water-repellent preservatives. 


In treating millwork, the objective is to use a limited quan- 
tity of water-repellent preservative and obtain retention 
and penetration levels similar to those obtained by dipping 
for 3 min. In this treatment, a quick, low initial vacuum is 
followed by filling the cylinder under vacuum, releasing 
the vacuum and soaking, followed by a final vacuum. This 
treatment provides better penetration and retention than the 
3-min dip treatment, and the surface of the wood is quickly 
dried, thus expediting glazing, priming, and painting. The 
vacuum treatment is also reported to be less likely than dip 
treatment to leave objectionably high retention levels in 
bacteria-infected wood referred to as “sinker stock.” 


Lumber intended for buildings has been treated by the 
vacuum process, either with a waterborne preservative or 

a water-repellent/preservative solution, with preservative 
retention levels usually less than those required for pressure 
treatment. The process differs from that used in treating 
millwork in employing a higher initial vacuum and a longer 
immersion or soaking period. 


In a study by the Forest Products Laboratory, an initial 
vacuum of —93 kPa (27.5 inHg) was applied for 30 min, fol- 
lowed by a soaking for 8 h, and a final or recovery vacuum 
of —93 kPa (27.5 inHg) for 2 h. Results of the study showed 
good penetration of preservative in the sapwood of dry 
lumber of easily penetrated species such as the pines. How- 
ever, in heartwood and unseasoned sapwood of pine and 
heartwood of seasoned and unseasoned coastal Douglas-fir, 
penetration was much less than that obtained by pressure 
treatment. Preservative retention was less controllable in 
vacuum than in empty-cell pressure treatment. Good control 
over retention levels is possible in vacuum treatment with 

a waterborne preservative by adjusting concentration of the 
treating solution. 


Miscellaneous Nonpressure Processes 


Several other nonpressure methods of various types have 
been used to a limited extent. Many of these involve the 
application of waterborne preservatives to living trees. The 
Boucherie process for the treatment of green, unpeeled 
poles has been used for many years in Europe. This process 
involves attaching liquid-tight caps to the butt ends of the 
poles. Then, through a pipeline or hose leading to the cap, a 
waterborne preservative is forced under hydrostatic pressure 
into the pole. 


A tire-tube process is a simple adaptation of the Boucherie 
process used for treating green, unpeeled fence posts. In 
this treatment, a section of used inner tube is fastened tight 
around the butt end of the post to make a bag that holds a 


15-21 


solution of waterbome preservative. There are now limita- 
tions for application of these processes because of the poten- 
tial loss of preservative to the soil around the treatment site. 


In-Place and Remedial Treatments 


In-place treatments may be beneficial both during construc- 
tion and as part of an inspection and maintenance program. 
Although cutting or drilling pressure-treated wood during 
construction is undesirable, it cannot always be avoided. 
When cutting is necessary, the damage can be partly over- 
come by a thorough application of copper naphthenate (1% 
to 2% copper) to the cut surface. This provides a protective 
coating of preservative on the surface that may slowly mi- 
grate into the end grain of the wood. The exposed end-grain 
in joints, which is more susceptible to moisture absorption, 
and the immediate area around all fasteners, including drill 
holes, will require supplemental on-site treatment. A special 
device is available for pressure-treating bolt holes that are 
bored after treatment. For treating the end surfaces of piles 
where they are cut off after driving, at least two generous 
coats of copper naphthenate should be applied. A coat of as- 
phalt or similar material may be thoroughly applied over the 
copper naphthenate, followed by some protective sheet ma- 
terial, such as metal, roofing felt, or saturated fabric, fitted 
over the pile head and brought down the sides far enough to 
protect against damage to the treatment and against the en- 
trance of storm water. AWPA Standard M4 contains instruc- 
tions for the care of pressure-treated wood after treatment. 


Surface Applications 


The simplest treatment is to apply the preservative to the 
wood with a brush or by spraying. Preservatives that are 
thoroughly liquid when cold should be selected, unless it is 
possible to heat the preservative. When practical, the preser- 
vative should be flooded over the wood rather than merely 
painted. Every check and depression in the wood should 

be thoroughly filled with the preservative, because any un- 
treated wood left exposed provides ready access for fungi. 
Rough lumber may require as much as 40 L of preservative 
per 100 m2 (10 gallons per 1,000 ft?) of surface, but 
surfaced lumber requires considerably less. The transverse 
penetration obtained will usually be less than 2.5 mm (0.1 
in.), although in easily penetrated species, end-grain (longi- 
tudinal) penetration is considerably greater. The additional 
life obtained by such treatments over that of untreated wood 
will be affected greatly by the conditions of service. For 
wood in contact with the ground, service life may be from 

1 to 5 years. 


For brush or spray applications, copper naphthenate in oil is 
the preservative that is most often used. The solution should 
contain 1% to 2% elemental copper. Copper naphthenate is 
available as a concentrate or in a ready-to-use solution in 
gallon and drum containers. Borate solutions can also be 
sprayed or brushed into checks or splits. However, because 
they are not fixed to the wood they can be leached during 


15-22 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


subsequent precipitation. Borates are sold either as concen- 
trated liquids (typically formulated with glycol) or as pow- 
ders that can be diluted with water. 


Another type of surface treatment is the application of wa- 
ter-soluble pastes containing combinations of copper naph- 
thenate, copper quinolinolate, copper hydroxide, or borates. 
The theory with these treatments is that the diffusible com- 
ponents (such as boron) will move through the wood, while 
the copper component remains near the surface of a void or 
check. These pastes are most commonly used to help protect 
the ground-line area of poles. After the paste is applied, it is 
a covered with a wrap to hold the paste against the pole and 
prevent loss into the soil. In bridge piles this type of paste 
application should be limited to terrestrial piles that will 

not be continually or frequently exposed to standing water. 
These pastes may also be effective if used under cap beams 
or covers to protect exposed end-grain. Reapplication sched- 
ules will vary based on the manufacturers recommendations 
as well as the method and area of application. 


Internal Diffusible Treatments 


Surface-applied treatments often do not penetrate deeply 
enough to protect the inner portions of large wooden mem- 
bers. An alternative to surface-applied treatments is instal- 
lation of internal diffusible chemicals. These diffusible 
treatments are available in liquid, solid, or paste form and 
are applied into treatment holes that are drilled deeply into 
the wood. They are similar (and in some cases identical) to 
the surface-applied treatments or pastes. Boron is the most 
common active ingredient, but fluoride and copper have also 
been used. In timbers, deep holes are drilled perpendicular 
to the upper face on either side of checks. In round piles, 
steeply sloping holes are drilled across the grain to 
maximize the chemical diffusion and minimize the number 
of holes needed. The treatment holes are plugged with tight 
fitting treated wooden plugs or removable plastic plugs. 
Plugs with grease fittings are also available so that the paste 
can be reapplied without removing the plug. 


Solid rod treatments have advantages in environmentally 
sensitive areas or in applications where the treatment hole 
can only be drilled at an upward angle. However, the chemi- 
cal may not diffuse as rapidly or for as great a distance 

as compared to a liquid form. Solid forms may be less 
mobile because diffusible treatments require moisture to 
move through wood. Concentrated liquid borates may also 
be poured into treatment holes and are sometimes used in 
conjunction with the rods to provide an initial supply of 
moisture. When the moisture content falls below 20%, little 
chemical movement occurs, but fortunately growth of decay 
fungi is substantially arrested below 30% moisture. Because 
there is some risk that rods installed in a dry section of a 
timber would not diffuse to an adjacent wet section, some 
experience in proper placement of the treatment holes is 
necessary. The diffusible treatments do not move as far in 
the wood as do fumigants, and thus the treatment holes must 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


be spaced more closely. A study of borate diffusion in tim- 
bers of several wood species reported that diffusion along 
the grain was generally less than 12 cm (5 in.), and diffusion 
across the grain was typically less than 5 cm (2 in.). 


Internal Fumigant Treatments 


As with diffusibles, fumigants are applied in liquid or solid 
form in predrilled holes. However, they then volatilize into 
a gas that moves through the wood. To be most effective, 

a fumigant should be applied at locations where it will not 
readily volatilize out of the wood to the atmosphere. When 
fumigants are applied, the timbers should be inspected thor- 
oughly to determine an optimal drilling pattern that avoids 
metal fasteners, seasoning checks, and severely rotted wood. 
In vertical members such as piles, holes to receive liquid fu- 
migant should be drilled at a steep angle (45° to 60°) down- 
ward toward the center of the member, avoiding seasoning 
checks. The holes should be no more than 1.2 m (4 ft) apart 
and arranged in a spiral pattern. With horizontal timbers, the 
holes can be drilled straight down or slanted. As a rule, the 
holes should be extended to within about 5 cm (2 in.) of the 
bottom of the timber. If strength is not jeopardized, holes 
can be drilled in a cluster or in pairs to accommodate the re- 
quired amount of preservative. If large seasoning checks are 
present, the holes should be drilled on each side of the mem- 
ber to provide better distribution. As soon as the fumigant 

is injected, the hole should be plugged with a tight-fitting 
treated wood dowel or removable plastic plug. For liquid 
fumigants, sufficient room must remain in the treating hole 
so the plug can be driven without displacing the chemical 
out of the hole. The amount of fumigant needed and the size 
and number of treating holes required depends upon the tim- 
ber size. Fumigants will eventually diffuse out of the wood, 
allowing decay fungi to recolonize. Fortunately, additional 
fumigant can be applied to the same treatment hole. Fumi- 
gant treatments are generally more toxic and more difficult 
to handle than are diffusible treatments. Some are classified 
as restricted-use pesticides by the U.S. EPA. 


One of the oldest and most effective fumigants is chloropic- 
rin (trichloronitromethane). Chloropicrin is a liquid and has 
been found to remain in wood for up to 20 years; however, 
a 10-year retreatment cycle is recommended, with regular 
inspection. Chloropicrin is a strong eye irritant and has high 
volatility. Due to chloropicrin’s hazardous nature, it should 
be used in areas away from buildings permanently inhabited 
by humans or animals. During application, workers must 
wear protective gear, including a full face respirator. Me- 
thylisothiocyante (MITC) is the active ingredient in several 
fumigants, but is also available in a solid-melt form that is 
97% actives. The solid-melt MITC is supplied in aluminum 
tubes. After the treatment hole is drilled the cap is removed 
from the tube, and the entire tube is placed into the whole. 
This formulation provides ease of handling and applica- 
tion to upward drilled sloping treatment holes. Metham 
sodium (sodium N-methldithiocarbamate) is a widely used 


liquid fumigant that decomposes in the wood to form the 
active ingredient MITC. Granular dazomet (tetrahydro-3, 
5-dimethyl-2-H-1,3,5, thiodazine-6-thione) is applied in a 
solid granular form that decomposes to a MITC content of 
approximately 45%. Dazomet is easy to handle but slower 
to decompose and release MITC than the solid-melt MITC 
or liquid fumigants. Some suppliers recommend the addition 
of a catalyst such as copper naphthenate to accelerate the 
breakdown process. 


Best Management Practices 


The active ingredients of various waterborne wood pre- 
servatives (copper, chromium, arsenic, and zinc) are water 
soluble in the treating solution but resist leaching when 
placed into the wood. This resistance to leaching is a result 
of chemical stabilization (or fixation) reactions that render 
the toxic ingredients insoluble in water. The mechanism and 
requirements for the stabilization reactions differ, depending 
on the type of wood preservative. 


For each type of preservative, some reactions occur very 
rapidly during pressure treatment, while others may take 
days or even weeks, depending on storage and processing 
after treatment. If the treated wood is placed in service be- 
fore these fixation reactions have been completed, the initial 
release of preservative into the environment may be much 
greater than if the wood has been conditioned properly. 


With oil-type preservatives, preservative bleeding or ooz- 
ing out of the treated wood is a particular concern. This 
problem may be apparent immediately after treatment. Such 
members should not be used in bridges over water or other 
aquatic applications. In other cases, the problem may not 
become obvious until after the product has been exposed to 
heating by direct sunlight. This problem can be minimized 
by using treatment practices that remove excess preservative 
from the wood. 


Best management practice (BMP) standards have been de- 
veloped to ensure that treated wood is produced in a way 
that will minimize environmental concerns. The Western 
Wood Preservers Institute (WWPI) has developed guidelines 
for treated wood used in aquatic environments. Although 
these practices have not yet been adopted by the industry 

in all areas of the United States, purchasers can require that 
these practices be followed. Commercial wood treatment 
firms are responsible for meeting conditions that ensure 
stabilization and minimize bleeding of preservatives, but 
persons buying treated wood should make sure that the firms 
have done so. 


Consumers can take steps to ensure that wood will be treat- 
ed according to the BMPs. Proper stabilization may take 
time, and material should be ordered well before it is needed 
so that the treater can hold the wood while it stabilizes. If 
consumers order wood in advance, they may also be able to 
store it under cover, allowing further drying and fixation. In 
general, allowing the material to air dry before it is used is 


15-23 


a good practice for ensuring fixation, minimizing leaching, 
and reducing risk to construction personnel. With all preser- 
vatives, the wood should be inspected for surface residue, 
and wood with excessive residue should not be placed in 
service. 


CCA 


The risk of chemical exposure from wood treated with 
CCA 1s minimized after chemical fixation reactions lock 
the chemical in the wood. The treating solution contains 
hexavalent chromium, but the chromium reduces to the 

less toxic trivalent state within the wood. This process of 
chromium reduction also is critical in fixing the arsenic and 
copper in the wood. Wood treated with CCA should not be 
immersed or exposed to prolonged wetting until the fixation 
process is complete or nearly complete. The rate of fixation 
depends on temperature, taking only a few hours at 66 °C 
(150 °F) but weeks or even months at temperatures below 
16 °C (60 °F). Some treatment facilities use kilns, steam, or 
hot-water baths to accelerate fixation. 


The BMP guideline for CCA stipulates that the wood should 
be air seasoned, kiln dried, steamed, or subjected to a hot- 
water bath after treatment. It can be evaluated with the 
AWPA chromotropic acid test to determine whether fixation 
is complete. 


ACZA and ACQ-B 


The key to achieving stabilization with ACZA and ACQ-B 
is to allow ammonia to volatilize. This can be accomplished 
by air or kiln drying. The BMPs require a minimum of 

3 weeks of air drying at temperatures higher than 16 °C 

(60 °F). Drying time can be reduced to 1 week if the ma- 
terial is conditioned in the treatment cylinder. At lower 
temperatures, kiln drying or heat is required to complete 
fixation. There is no commonly used method to determine 
the degree of stabilization in wood treated with ACZA or 
ACQ-B, although wood that has been thoroughly dried is 
acceptable. If the wood has a strong ammonia odor, fixation 
is not complete. 


ACQ-C, ACQ-D, and Copper Azole 


Proper handling and conditioning of the wood after treat- 
ment helps minimize leaching and potential environmental 
impacts for these preservatives. Amine (and ammonia in 
some cases) keeps copper soluble in these treatment solu- 
tions. The mechanism of copper’s reaction in the wood is 
not completely understood but appears to be strongly influ- 
enced by time, temperature, and retention levels. As a gener- 
al rule, wood that has been thoroughly dried after treatment 
is properly stabilized. 


Copper stabilization in the copper azole CA—B formulation 
is extremely rapid (within 24 h) at the UC3B retention of 
1.7 kg m3 (0.10 Ib ft-3) but slows considerably at higher 
retentions unless the material is heated to accelerate fixation. 


15-24 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Pentachlorophenol, Creosote, and Copper 
Naphthenate 


For creosote, the BMPs stipulate use of an expansion bath 
and final steaming period at the end of the charge. 


Expansion Bath—Following the pressure period, the creo- 
sote should be heated to a temperature 6 to 12 °C (10 to 

20 °F) above the press temperatures for at least | h. Creo- 
sote should be pumped back to storage and a minimum 
gauge vacuum of —81 kPa (24 inHg) should be applied for at 
least 2 h. 


Steaming—A fter the pressure period and once the creosote 
has been pumped back to the storage tank, a vacuum of not 
less than —74 kPa (22 inHg) is applied for at least 2 h to re- 
cover excess preservative. The vacuum is then released back 
to atmospheric pressure and the charge is steamed for 2 to 

3 h. The maximum temperature during this process should 
not exceed 116 °C (240 °F). A second vacuum of not less 
than —74 kPa (22 inHg) is then applied for a minimum of 
4h. 


The BMPs for copper naphthenate are similar to those for 
creosote and pentachlorophenol. The recommended treat- 
ment practices for treatment in heavy oil include using an 
expansion bath, or final steaming, or both, similar to that 
described for creosote. When No. 2 fuel oil is used as the 
solvent, the BMPs recommend using a final vacuum for at 
least 1 h. 


Handling and Seasoning of Timber after Treatment 


Treated timber should be handled with sufficient care to 
avoid breaking through the treated shell. The use of pikes, 
cant hooks, picks, tongs, or other pointed tools that dig 
deeply into the wood should be prohibited. Handling heavy 
loads of lumber or sawn timber in rope or cable slings can 
crush the corners or edges of the outside pieces. Breakage 
or deep abrasions can also result from throwing or dropping 
the lumber. If damage results, the exposed areas should be 
retreated, if possible. 


Wood treated with preservative oils should generally be 
installed as soon as practicable after treatment to minimize 
lateral movement of the preservative, but sometimes cleanli- 
ness of the surface can be improved by exposing the treated 
wood to the weather for a limited time before installation. 
Lengthy, unsheltered exterior storage of treated wood before 
installation should be avoided. Treated wood that must be 
stored before use should be covered for protection from the 
sun and weather. 


With waterborne preservatives, seasoning after treatment is 
important for wood that will be used in buildings or other 
places where shrinkage after placement in the structure 
would be undesirable. Injecting waterborne preservatives 
puts large amounts of water into the wood, and considerable 
shrinkage is to be expected as subsequent seasoning 

takes place. For best results, the wood should be dried to 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


approximately the moisture content it will ultimately 
reach in service. During drying, the wood should be care- 
fully piled and, whenever possible, restrained by sufficient 
weight on the top of the pile to prevent warping. 


Quality Assurance for Treated Wood 
Treating Conditions and Specifications 


Specifications on the treatment of various wood products by 
pressure processes have been developed by AWPA. These 
specifications limit pressures, temperatures, and time of con- 
ditioning and treatment to avoid conditions that will cause 
serious injury to the wood. The specifications also contain 
minimum requirements for preservative penetration and 
retention levels and recommendations for handling wood 
after treatment to provide a quality product. Specifications 
are broad in some respects, allowing the purchaser some 
latitude in specifying the details of individual requirements. 
However, the purchaser should exercise great care so as not 
to hinder the treating plant operator from doing a good treat- 
ing job and not to require treating conditions so severe that 
they will damage the wood. 


Penetration and Retention 


Penetration and retention requirements are equally impor- 
tant in determining the quality of preservative treatment. 
Penetration levels vary widely, even in pressure-treated ma- 
terial. In most species, heartwood is more difficult to pen- 
etrate than sapwood. In addition, species differ greatly in the 
degree to which their heartwood may be penetrated. Incising 
tends to improve penetration of preservative in many refrac- 
tory species, but those highly resistant to penetration will 
not have deep or uniform penetration even when incised. 
Penetration in unincised heartwood faces of these species 
may occasionally be as deep as 6 mm (1/4 in.) but is often 
not more than 1.6 mm (1/16 in.). 


Experience has shown that even slight penetration has some 
value, although deeper penetration is highly desirable to 
avoid exposing untreated wood when checks occur, par- 
ticularly for important members that are costly to replace. 
The heartwood of coastal Douglas-fir, southern pines, and 
various hardwoods, although resistant, will frequently show 
transverse penetrations of 6 to 12 mm (1/4 to 1/2 in.) and 
sometimes considerably more. 


Complete penetration of the sapwood should be the goal 

in all pressure treatments. It can often be accomplished in 
small-size timbers of various commercial woods, and with 
skillful treatment, it may often be obtained in piles, ties, and 
structural timbers. Practically, however, the operator cannot 
always ensure complete penetration of sapwood in every 
piece when treating large pieces of round material with thick 
sapwood (such as poles and piles). Therefore, specifications 
permit some tolerance. For instance, AWPA Processing and 
Treatment Standard T1 for Southern Pine poles requires 

that 89 mm (3.5 in.) or 90% of the sapwood thickness be 


penetrated for waterborne preservatives. The requirements 
vary, depending on the species, size, class, and specified 
retention levels. 


Preservative retentions are typically expressed on the basis 
of the mass of preservative per unit volume of wood within 
a prescribed assay zone. The retention calculation is not 
based on the volume of the entire pole or piece of lumber. 
For example, the assay zone for Southern Pine poles is be- 
tween 13 and 51 mm (0.5 and 2.0 in.) from the surface. To 
determine the retention, a boring is removed from the assay 
zone and analyzed for preservative concentration. The pre- 
servatives and retention levels listed in the AWPA Commod- 
ity Standards and ICC-ES evaluation reports are shown in 
Table 15—1. The current issues of these specifications should 
be referenced for up-to-date recommendations and other de- 
tails. In many cases, the retention level is different depend- 
ing on species and assay zone. Higher preservative retention 
levels are specified for products to be installed under severe 
climatic or exposure conditions. Heavy-duty transmis- 

sion poles and items with a high replacement cost, such as 
structural timbers and house foundations, are required to be 
treated to higher retention levels. Correspondingly, deeper 
penetration or heartwood limitations are also necessary for 
the same reasons. It may be necessary to increase retention 
levels to ensure satisfactory penetration, particularly when 
the sapwood is either unusually thick or is somewhat resis- 
tant to treatment. To reduce bleeding of the preservative, 
however, it may be desirable to use preservative-oil reten- 
tion levels less than the stipulated minimum. Older specifi- 
cations based on treatment to refusal do not ensure adequate 
penetration or retention of preservative, should be avoided, 
and must not be considered as a substitute for results-type 
specification in treatment. 


Inspection of Treatment Quality 


AWPA standards specify how charges of treated wood 
should be inspected to ensure conformance to treatment 
standards. Inspections are conducted by the treating com- 
pany and also should be routinely conducted by independent 
third-party inspection agencies. These third-party agencies 
verify for customers that the wood was properly treated in 
accordance with AWPA standards. The U.S. Department of 
Commerce American Lumber Standard Committee (ALSC) 
accredits third-party inspection agencies for treated-wood 
products. Quality control overview by ALSC-accredited 
agencies is preferable to simple treating plant certificates or 
other claims of conformance made by the producer without 
inspection by an independent agency. Updated lists of ac- 
credited agencies can be obtained from the ALSC website at 
www.alsc.org. Each piece of treated wood should be marked 
with brand, ink stamp, or end-tag that shows the logo of an 
accredited inspection agency and other information required 
by AWPA standards (Fig. 15—6). Other important informa- 
tion that should be shown includes the type of preservative, 
preservative retention, and the intended use category 


15-25 


20081 


TradeName™ 
For Above Ground Use?’ 


Alkaline Copper* 


AWPA® 0.257 
UC3B _pef 


NoName Wood® 
Preserving Company 
Anytown, AnyState 


1 Year(s) of treatment 

2 Tradename of preservative treatment 
3 Intended end-use 

4 Standard name of preservative 

5 Third party inspection agency 

® AWPA Use Category 

7 Retention of Preservative in wood 

§ Treating company 


Figure 15—6. Typical end tag for preservative-treated 
lumber conforming to the ALSC accreditation 
program. 


(exposure condition). Purchasers may also elect to have an 
independent inspector inspect and analyze treated products 
to ensure compliance with the specifications—recom- 
mended for treated-wood products used for critical struc- 
tures. Railroad companies, utilities, and other entities that 
purchase large quantities of treated timber usually maintain 
their own inspection services. 


Effects on the Environment 


Preservatives intended for use outdoors have mechanisms 
that are intended to keep the active ingredients in the wood 
and minimize leaching. Past studies indicate that a small 
percentage of the active ingredients of all types of wood 
preservatives leach out of the wood. The amount of leaching 
depends on factors such as fixation conditions, preserva- 
tive retention in the wood, product size and shape, type of 
exposure, and years in service. Ingredients in all preserva- 
tives are potentially toxic to a variety of organisms at high 
concentrations, but laboratory studies indicate that the levels 
of preservatives leached from treated wood generally are too 
low to create a biological hazard. 


In recent years, several studies have been conducted on pre- 
servative releases from structures and on the environmental 
consequences of those releases. These recent studies of the 
environmental impact of treated wood reveal several key 
points. All types of treated wood evaluated release small 
amounts of preservative components into the environment. 
These components can sometimes be detected in soil or 
sediment samples. Shortly after construction, elevated levels 
of preservative components can sometimes be detected in 
the water column. Detectable increases in soil and sediment 
concentrations of preservative components generally are 
limited to areas close to the structure. Leached preservative 
components either have low water solubility or react 

with components of the soil or sediment, limiting their 


15-26 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


mobility and limiting the range of environmental contami- 
nation. Levels of these components in the soil immediately 
adjacent to treated structures can increase gradually over the 
years, whereas levels in sediments tended to decline over 
time. Research indicates that environmental releases from 
treated wood do not cause measurable impacts on the abun- 
dance or diversity of aquatic invertebrates adjacent to the 
structures. In most cases, levels of preservative components 
were below concentrations that might be expected to affect 
aquatic life. Samples with elevated levels of preservative 
components tended to be limited to fine sediments beneath 
stagnant or slow-moving water where the invertebrate com- 
munity is not particularly intolerant to pollutants. 


Conditions with a high potential for leaching and a high 
potential for metals to accumulate are the most likely to af- 
fect the environment (Fig. 15-7). These conditions are most 
likely to be found in boggy or marshy areas with little water 
exchange. Water at these sites has low pH and high organic 
acid content, increasing the likelihood that preservatives 
will be leached from the wood. In addition, the stagnant wa- 
ter prevents dispersal of any leached components of preser- 
vatives, allowing them to accumulate in soil, sediments, and 
organisms near the treated wood. Note that all construction 
materials, including alternatives to treated wood, have some 
type of environmental impact. In addition to environmental 
releases from leaching and maintenance activities, the alter- 
natives may have greater impacts and require greater energy 
consumption during production. 


Recycling and Disposal of Treated 
Wood 


Treated wood is not listed as a hazardous waste under Fed- 
eral law, and it can be disposed of in any waste management 
facility authorized under State and local law to manage such 
material. State and local jurisdictions may have additional 
regulations that impact the use, reuse, and disposal of treat- 
ed wood and treated-wood construction waste, and users 
should check with State and local authorities for any special 
regulations relating to treated wood. Treated wood must not 
be burned in open fires or in stoves, fireplaces, or residen- 
tial boilers, because the smoke and ashes may contain toxic 
chemicals. 


Treated wood from commercial and industrial uses (con- 
struction sites, for example) may be burned only in commer- 
cial or industrial incinerators or boilers in accordance with 
State and Federal regulations. Spent railroad ties treated 
with creosote and utility poles treated with pentachlorophe- 
nol can be burned in properly equipped facilities to generate 
electricity (cogeneration). As fuel costs and energy demands 
increase, disposal of treated wood in this manner becomes 
more attractive. Cogeneration poses more challenges for 
wood treated with heavy metals, and particularly for wood 
treated with arsenic. In addition to concerns with emissions, 
the concentration of metals in the ash requires further 
processing. 


Chapter 15 Wood Preservation 


Figure 15—7. Wood preservative leaching, environmen- 
tal mobility, and effects on aquatic insects were evalu- 
ated at this wetland boardwalk in western Oregon. 


As with many materials, reuse of treated wood may be a vi- 
able alternative to disposal. In many situations treated wood 
removed from its original application retains sufficient du- 
rability and structural integrity to be reused in a similar ap- 
plication. Generally, regulatory agencies also recognize that 
treated wood can be reused in a manner that is consistent 
with its original intended end use. 


The potential for recycling preservative-treated wood de- 
pends on several factors, including the type of preservative 
treatment and the original use. Researchers have demon- 
strated that wood treated with heavy metals can be chipped 
or flaked and reused to form durable panel products or 
wood-—cement composites. However, this type of reuse has 
not yet gained commercial acceptance. Techniques for ex- 
traction and reuse of the metals from treated wood have also 
been proposed. These include acid extraction, fungal degra- 
dation, bacterial degradation, digestion, steam explosion, or 
some combination of these techniques. All these approaches 
show some potential, but none is currently economical. In 
most situations landfill disposal remains the least expensive 
option. For treated wood used in residential construction, 
one of the greatest obstacles is the lack of an efficient pro- 
cess for collecting and sorting treated wood. This is less of a 
problem for products such as railroad ties and utility poles. 


References 


AWPA. [Current edition]. Annual proceedings. (Reports of 
preservations and treatment committees containing informa- 
tion on new wood preservatives considered in the develop- 
ment of standards). Birmingham, AL: American Wood Pro- 
tection Association. 


AWPA. 2008. Book of standards. (Includes standards on 
preservatives, treatments, methods of analysis, and inspec- 
tion.) Birmingham, AL: American Wood Protection Associa- 
tion. 


Archer, K.; Lebow, S.T. 2006. Wood preservation. Second 
edition. Primary wood processing, principals and practice, 
Walker, J.C.F. ed. The Netherlands: Springer. 596 p. 


Baechler, R.H.; Roth, H.G. 1964. The double-diffusion 
method of treating wood: a review of studies. Forest Prod- 
ucts Journal. 14(4): 171-178. 


Baechler, R.H.; Blew, J.O.; Roth, H.G. 1962. Studies on the 
assay of pressure-treated lumber. Proceedings of American 
Wood Preservers’ Association. 58: 21-34. 


Baechler, R.H.; Gjovik, L.R.; Roth, H.G. 1969. Assay zones 
for specifying preservative-treated Douglas-fir and Southern 
Pine timbers. Proceedings of American Wood Preservers’ 
Association. 65: 114-123. 


Baechler, R.H.; Gjovik, L.R.; Roth, H.G. 1970. Marine 
tests on combination-treated round and sawed specimens. 
Proceedings of American Wood Preservers’ Association. 
66: 249-257. 


Barnes, M.H., ed. 2007. Wood protection 2006. Publication 
No. 7229. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 388 p. 


Blew, J.O.; Davidson, H.L. 1971. Preservative retentions 
and penetration in the treatment of white fir. Proceedings of 
American Wood Preservers’ Association. 67: 204-221. 


Boone, R.S.; Gjovik, L.R.; Davidson, H.L. 1976. Treatment 
of sawn hardwood stock with double-diffusion and modified 
double-diffusion methods. Res. Pap. FPL—RP—265. Madi- 
son, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Forest Products Laboratory. 


Brooks, K.M. 2000. Assessment of the environmental 
effects associated with wooden bridges preserved with 
creosote, pentachlorophenol or chromated-copper-arsenate. 
Res. Pap. FPL-RP-587. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
100 p. 


Cassens, D.L.; Johnson, B.R.; Feist, W.C.; De Groot, R.C. 
1995. Selection and use of preservative-treated wood. 
Publication N. 7299. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 


Crawford, D.M; Woodward, B.M.; Hatfield, C.A. 2002. 
Comparison of wood preservative in stake tests. 2000 Prog- 
ress Report. Res. Note FPL—-RN-—02. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Eaton, R.A.; Hale, M.D.C. 1993. Wood: decay, pests and 
protection. New York, NY: Chapman & Hall. 


Forest Products Laboratory. Environmental impact of pre- 
servative treated wood in a wetland boardwalk. Res. Pap. 
FPL—RP-582. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 126 p. 


15-27 


Gaby, L.I.; Gjovik, L-R. 1984. Treating and drying com- 
posite lumber with waterborne preservatives: Part I. Short 
specimen testing. Forest Products Journal. 34(2): 23-26. 


Gjovik, L.R.; Baechler, R.H. 1970. Treated wood founda- 
tions for buildings. Forest Products Journal. 20(5): 45-48. 


Gjovik, L.R.; Davidson, H.L. 1975. Service records on 
treated and untreated posts. Res. Note FPL—068. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Gjovik, L.R.; Johnson, D.B.; Kozak, V.; [and others]. 1980. 
Biologic and economic assessment of pentachlorophenol, 
inorganic arsenicals, and creosote. Vol. I: Wood preserva- 
tives. Tech. Bull 1658—1. Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, in cooperation with State Agricultural Exper- 
imental Stations, Cooperative Extension Service, other state 
agencies and the Environmental Protection Agency. 


Groenier, J.S.; Lebow, S. 2006. Preservative-treated wood 
and alternative products in the Forest Service. Tech. Rep. 
0677—2809-MTDC. Missoula, MT: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Missoula Technology and De- 
velopment Center. 44 p. 


Hunt, G.M.; Garratt, G.A. 1967. Wood preservation. Third 
edition. The American Forestry Series. New York, NY: Mc- 
Graw-Hiill. 


ICC-ES. Evaluation Reports, Section 06070—wood 
treatment. Whittler, CA: ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. 
www.icc-es.org. 


Johnson, B.R.; Gutzmer, D.I. 1990. Comparison of preser- 
vative treatments in marine exposure of small wood panels. 
Res. Note FPL—-RN—0258. Madison, WI: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Lebow, S. 1996. Leaching of wood preservative components 
and their mobility in the environment—summary of perti- 
nent literature. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-93. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Lebow, S.T.; Foster, D.O. 2005. Environmental concentra- 
tions of copper, chromium and arsenic released from a chro- 
mated-copper-arsenate (CCA-C) treated wetland boardwalk. 
Forest Products Journal. 55(2): 62—70. 


MacLean, J.D. 1952. Preservation of wood by pressure 
methods. Agric. Handb. 40. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 


NFPA. 1982. The all-weather wood foundation. NFPA 
Tech. Rep. 7. Washington, DC: National Forest Products 
Association. 


NFPA. 1982. All-weather wood foundation system, design 
fabrication installation manual. NFPA report. Washington 
DC: National Forest Products Association. 


15-28 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Richardson, B.A. 1993. Wood preservation. Second edition. 
London: Chapman and Hall. 226 p. 


Schlultz, T.P.; Militz, H.; Freeman, M.H.; Goodell, B.; Nich- 
olas, D.D.; eds. 2008. Development of commercial wood 
preservatives. ACS Symposium Series 982. Washington, 
DC: American Chemical Society. 655 p. 


Western Wood Preservers Institute. 2006. Best management 
practices for the use of treated wood in aquatic environ- 
ments. Vancouver, WA: Western Wood Preservers Institute. 
34 p. 


Western Wood Preservers Institute. 2006. Treated wood in 
aquatic environments. Vancouver, WA: Western Wood Pre- 
servers Institute. 32 p. 


CHAPTER 16 


Finishing of Wood 


R. Sam Williams, Supervisory Research Chemist (Retired) 


Cc ontents Wood finishes (paint, varnish, and stain, for example) give 
a desired appearance, protect wood surfaces, and provide 
a cleanable surface. Many people consider appearance 
most important when choosing finishes for wood (lumber 
and wood composites). However, from a technical aspect, 
protection is most important for wood used outdoors, and 
providing a cleanable surface is most important for wood 
used indoors. When selecting a finish, one should consider 
appearance, protection, and cleanability and also how bulk 
and surface properties of wood affect finish application and 
performance (how long a finish lasts—its service life). 


Factors Affecting Finish Performance 16—2 
Wood Surface Properties 16—2 
Wood Products 16-8 
Weathering 16-11 
Decay and Insects 16-13 
Control of Water and Water Vapor 16-13 
Compliance of VOC Finishes with Pollution 
Regulations 16-15 

Exterior Wood Finishes 16-16 
Weathered Wood as Natural Finish 16-16 


Penetrating Wood Finishes 16-16 Wood properties such as density (specific gravity), growth 
Film-Forming Finishes 16-21 rate, heartwood—sapwood, earlywood-—latewood, grain 

Application of Finishes, Special Uses 16-24 angle, vessels, and texture vary within and across wood spe- 
Porches, Decks, Deck Railings, and Fences 16-24 cies. Wood composites, such as plywood, fiberboard, and 
Treated Wood 16-24 oriented strandboard (OSB), have different properties. Of 
Marine Uses 16-24 the 18,000 to 25,000 known wood species (exact number 
Boats 16-25 varies depending on the grouping of species), approximately 
Panel Products 16-25 50 are commercial species used in the United States and 
Fire-Retardant Coatings 16-25 Canada. Chapters 2—4 give their properties. Of these com- 
Back-Priming 16-25 mercial species, researchers report finishing characteristics 
Factory Finishing 16-25 for only a few species common to North America, Europe, 

Finish Failure or Discoloration 16-25 Japan, and the tropics. However, if one understands how 
Paint Cracking (parallel to grain) 16-26 wood properties, finish, and environmental conditions inter- 
Peeling and Flaking 16-26 act, it should be possible to estimate finish performance for 
Cross-Grain Cracking 16-26 most wood species. 


Water Blisters 16-26 

Mill Glaze 16-26 

Intercoat Peeling 16-27 
Chalking 16-28 

Mildew 16-28 

Loss of Gloss and Fading 16-29 
Water Soluble Extractives 16-29 
Blue Stain 16-30 

Iron Stain 16-30 


Performance depends on choosing an appropriate finish for 
wood, considering the use conditions, and applying finishes 
correctly in sufficient amount. For long service life, choose 
wood products and finishes appropriate for environments 
where they are used. Indoor use places less stress on finishes 
than outdoor use. A climate having severe seasonal changes 
(U.S. Upper Midwest, for example) places greater stress on 
finishes then does a mild climate (such as the Pacific North- 


west). 

Knots 16-31 

Pitch 16-31 Guidelines in this chapter explain how to obtain long service 
Finishing Interior Wood 16-32 life for contemporary finishes on lumber and wood com- 

Type of Finish and Wood Fillers 16-32 posites used in the United States and Canada. The chapter 

Finishes for Wood Floors 16-33 begins with a review of wood properties important for wood 

Finishes for Items Used for Food 16-34 finishing and describes effects of water and weathering on 
Wood Cleaners and Brighteners 16-34 wood and finishes. This background establishes a basis for 
Paint Strippers 16-35 describing finishes for wood, their application, and common 

Mechanical Methods 16-35 types of finish failures (and ways to avoid them). Publica- 

Chemical Methods 16—36 tions listed at the end of this chapter provide additional 
Lead-Based Paint 16-36 information. 


Literature Cited 16-37 
Additional References 16—37 


Factors Affecting Finish 
Performance 


Wood surface properties, type of wood product, and weather 
affect finish performance. 


Wood Surface Properties 


Wood anatomy, manufacturing processes, moisture content 
(MC), dimensional change, extractives, and changes as 
wood ages determine wood surface properties. 


Anatomy 


Wood species (thus its anatomy) is the primary factor that 
determines surface properties of wood—properties that af- 
fect adhesion and performance of finishes. Wood anatomy 
determines whether a wood species is a hardwood or soft- 
wood, not the density (specific gravity) or its hardness. 
Finish performance is affected by 


e density (overall density, earlywood (EW)-latewood 
(LW) density difference, and how abruptly density 
changes at the EW—LW boundary), 


e = thickness of LW bands, 

e ray cells (number and placement), 
e vessels (size and location), 

e extractives content, and 


e growth rate (some species grow faster than others, 
and environment affects growth rate within a specific 
species). 


Most wood cells (called tracheids in softwoods, fibers in 
hardwoods) align parallel (axial) to the stem or branch. 
Softwood tracheids support the tree and transport water 
and nutrients. Hardwood fibers just support the tree; hard- 
woods have special cells (vessels) for transporting water 
and nutrients. Vessel cells are open at each end and stacked 
to form “pipes.” Axial tracheids and fibers are hollow tubes 
closed at each end. In softwoods, liquids move in the axial 
direction by flowing from one tracheid to another through 
openings called pits. Liquid transport between the bark and 
center of the stem or branch in hardwoods and softwoods is 
by ray cells. Figures 16-1 to 16—3 are micrographs show- 
ing the orientation of axial and ray cells for white spruce, 
red oak, and red maple, respectively. Note that the soft- 
wood (Fig. 16-1) has no vessels. The large openings are 
resin canal complexes (common to spruce, pine, larch, and 
Douglas-fir). Figure 16—2 shows red oak, a ring-porous 
hardwood. Large-diameter vessels in ring-porous species 
form along with EW; later in the growing season, the ves- 
sels have smaller diameters. Figure 16—3 shows red maple, a 
diffuse-porous hardwood; small vessels having similar size 
form throughout the EW and LW. Hardwoods can also be 
semi-ring porous. 


Axial and ray cells form in the cambium, a layer of cells just 
under the bark. In the early part of the growing season 


16-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 16-1. Micrograph of white spruce showing 
gradual transition of cell wall thickness and resin canal 
complexes. (Micrographs prepared by H.A. Core, W.A. 
Cété, and A.C. Day. Copyright by N.C. Brown Center for 
Ultrastructure Studies, College of Environmental Sci- 
ence and Forestry, State University of New York, Syra- 
cuse, New York. Used with permission.) 


Figure16—2. Micrograph of red oak showing ring- 
porous vessels. (Micrographs prepared by H.A. Core, 
W.A. Coté, and A.C. Day. Copyright by N.C. Brown Cen- 
ter for Ultrastructure Studies, College of Environmental 
Science and Forestry, State University of New York, 
Syracuse, New York. Used with permission.) 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Figure 16—3. Micrograph of red maple showing diffuse- 
porous vessels. (Micrographs prepared by H.A. Core, 
W.A. Coté, and A.C. Day. Copyright by N.C. Brown 
Center for Ultrastructure Studies, College of Environ- 
mental Science and Forestry, State University of New 
York, Syracuse, New York. Used with permission.) 


Figure 16—4. Cross-section micrographs of (A) a tropi- 
cal softwood (Podocarpus imbricate), (B) white spruce 
(Picea glauca), (C) Douglas-fir, Pseudotsuga menziesii 
(D) sugar maple (Acer saccharum), (E) persimmon 
(Diospyros virginiana), and (F) white ash (Fraxinus 
americana). The arrows show a single growth year for 
the temperate species. 


(temperate species), the cells have large open centers (lu- 
mens) and thin cell walls. This is earlywood (also called 
springwood). As the growing season progresses, cell walls 
become thicker, forming latewood (also called summer- 
wood). The combination of EW—LW (and vessels in hard- 
woods) gives annual growth rings. The properties of these 
growth rings affect the ease with which finishes can be ap- 
plied (paintability) and how long finishes last (service life). 


Cross-section micrographs of three softwoods and hard- 
woods (Fig. 16—4) show three types of growth character- 
istics. Softwoods may show “no transition” (no EW—LW 
boundary, Fig. 16—-4a), gradual transition (Fig. 16—4b), or 
abrupt transition (Fig. 16—4c). Note: the “no transition” 
softwood is a tropical species (that is, no seasons, therefore 
no EW-LW transition). Hardwoods may be diffuse porous 
(Fig. 16—4d), semi-ring porous (Fig. 16—4e), or ring porous 
(Fig. 16—4f). As a first approximation for explaining finish- 
ing characteristics of wood, the various wood species can be 
grouped into three categories: 


e Easy to finish (“no transition” or gradual-transition soft- 
woods and diffuse-porous hardwoods) 


© Moderately easy to finish (abrupt-transition softwoods 
having narrow LW bands and semi-ring-porous 
hardwoods) 


e Difficult to finish (abrupt-transition softwoods having 
wide LW bands and ring-porous hardwoods) 


The important message from wood anatomy is to look at 
the wood. The six micrographs showing end-grain wood- 
cell structure do not include all possible combinations of 
growth rate, grain, and surface texture. When determining 
paintability, look at grain angles. Look at the width of the 
LW bands and the transition between them (Fig. 16—5). The 
blocks show radial and tangential surfaces (that is, vertical- 
and flat-grain surfaces for six softwoods and quarter-sawn 
and flat-sawn for two hardwoods). Note the abrupt transi- 
tions on the southern yellow pine and Douglas-fir and the 
gradual transitions on the western redcedar and white pine. 
Also, note the growth rate and width of the LW bands. Sur- 
faces having abrupt transition, rapid growth rate, and wide 
LW bands are difficult to finish, particularly on flat-grain 
wood. Moisture-induced dimensional change increases as 
wood density increases. Changes are greater for LW than 
EW. Different dimensional change for abrupt-transition (or 
ring-porous) species at the EW—LW boundary places stress 
on coatings. 


Shrinkage values given in Table 16—1 were obtained from 
drying wood from its green state (fiber saturation) to oven- 
dry (0% MC); swelling rates would be approximately the 
same. Some species have wide bands of EW and LW. These 
distinct bands often lead to early paint failure. Wide, promi- 
nent bands of LW are characteristic of the southern yellow 
pines, radiata pine, and Douglas-fir (Fig. 16—5Sa,b,c), and 
getting good paint performance is more difficult on these 
species. In contrast, white pine, redwood, and western 
redcedar (Fig. 16—5d,e,f) do not have wide LW bands, and 
these species give excellent paint performance. Diffuse- 
porous hardwoods such as aspen (Fig. 16—5g) have a fine 
surface texture and are easy to finish, whereas red oak 

(Fig. 16—Sh) has a highly textured surface and requires 
surface preparation prior to finishing. 


16-3 


Figure 16—5. Wide LW bands characteristic 
of (a) the southern yellow pines, (b) radiata 
pine, and (c) Douglas-fir and narrow LW 
bands characteristic of (d) white pine, (e) 
redwood, and (f) western redcedar; (g) and 
(h) are examples of the difference in surface 
texture between diffuse-porous and ring 
porous hardwoods, respectively; (e) shows 
examples of second or third growth (left) 
and old-growth (right) redwood. 


16-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Fifty years ago, most exterior siding and trim were vertical- 
grain heartwood of western redcedar or redwood. All-heart- 
wood vertical-grain grades of these species are still avail- 
able as resawn bevel siding and lumber and are excellent 
wood substrates for painting (Table 16-1). Other species are 
generally available only as flat-grain or a mix of flat- and 
vertical-grain lumber (for example, western hemlock, east- 
ern white pine, lodgepole pine, eastern white cedar, radiata 
pine, and southern yellow pine). Finishing characteristics of 
flat-grain western redcedar and redwood are similar to other 
low-density wood species having moderate EW—LW transi- 
tion (such as eastern white pine, eastern white cedar, and 
yellow poplar) Sawing to yield vertical grain is only practi- 
cal with fairly large-diameter logs. Species available 

in small-diameter logs yield mostly flat-grain lumber. 


Other wood properties, such as knots, juvenile wood, and 
extractives, affect wood finishing. Extractives include many 
chemicals with different solubilities in water, organic sol- 
vents, and paint resins (also called binders). 


Manufacturing 


The axial EW and LW cells in a log yield lumber of vari- 
ous grain angles (Fig. 16-6). At one extreme (board a), the 
growth rings are perpendicular to the plane of the board; at 
the other extreme (board c), growth rings are parallel to the 
plane of the board (although they have an arc). Grain var- 
ies between these two extremes. Vertical-grain lumber has a 
grain angle from 90° (growth rings perpendicular to surface) 
to approximately 45°. From 45° to the other extreme (board 
c), lumber is considered flat grain. Board b is different. 
Lumber cut close to the pith (the center of the log) contains 
abnormal wood cells. These abnormal cells are juvenile 
wood and have extremely high longitudinal dimensional 
change (2%) compared with normal wood (0.1-0.2%). The 
values are the change from green to ovendry (see Chap. 4). 
A 10-ft (3-m) board could shrink 2.4 in. (61 mm). This 
dimensional instability leads to severe warping and cross- 
grain checking in lumber containing juvenile wood (see 
Chap. 5). 


The bark side and pith side of flat-grain or flat-sawn lum- 
ber have slightly different properties. The pith side is more 
prone to have raised grain than the bark side, particularly 
with abrupt-transition wood species (southern yellow pine, 
Douglas-fir, and oak (Table 16—1)). The bark side tends to 
check more, and the checking is more pronounced in the 
LW bands. 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Table 16—1. Painting characteristics of common wood species 


Is LW 
Specific . 0/10 greater than 
gravity* phrases) Paintability’ EW/LW_ about 1/3 0f — Color of 

Wood species (green/dry) Tangential Radial (latex paint) —_transition® GR* heartwood 
Softwoods 
Baldcypress 0.42/0.46 6.2 3.8 II A No Light brown 
Cedars I 

Incense 0.35/0.37 5.2. 3.3 I G No Brown 

Northern white 0.29/0.31 4.9 2.2 I G No Light brown 

Port-Orford 0.39/0.43 6.9 4.6 I G No Cream 

Western red 0.31/0.32 > 2.4 I G No Brown 

Alaska yellow 0.42/0.44 6 2.8 I G No Yellow 
Douglas-fir"? 0.45/0.48 7.6 4.8 Ill A Yes Pale red 
Pines 

Eastern white 0.34/0.35 6.1 2.1 I G No Cream 

Ponderosa 0.38/0.42 6.2 3.9 II A Yes/No Cream 

Southern® 0.47/0.51° 8 5 Ul A Yes Light brown 

Western white 0.36/0.38 74 4.1 I G No Cream 

Radiata 0.45/0.53 7.0 4.2 Ill A Yes/No Cream 
Redwood’ 0.38/0.40 4.4 2.6 I A No Dark brown 
Spruce’ 0.33/0.35 7.1 3.8 I G No White 
Tamarack/larch 0.49/0.53 7A-9.1 3.7-4.5 II A Yes/No Brown 
True fir 0.37/0.39 7.0 3.3 I G No White 
Western hemlock 0.42/0.45 7.8 4.2 II G/A Yes/No Pale brown 
Hardwoods 
Red alder 0.37/0.41 73 4.4 I D NA Pale brown 
Ash 0.55/0.60 8 5 Il R Yes Light brown 
Aspen/cottonwood 0.36/0.40 7.0-9.2  3.5-3.9 I D NA Pale brown 
Basswood 0.32/0.37 7.8 5.9 I D NA Cream 
Beech 0.56/0.64 11.9 3.2 I D NA Pale brown 
Birch 0.55/0.62 9.5 13 I D NA Light brown 
Butternut 0.36/0.38 6.4 3.4 II SR Yes Light brown 
Cherry 0.47/0.50 7.1 301. I D NA Brown 
Chestnut 0.40/0.43 6.7 3.4 Il R Yes Light brown 
Elm, American 0.46/0.50 9.5 4.2 Il R Yes Brown 
Hickory 0.64/0.72 11 7 I R Yes Light brown 
Maple, sugar 0.56/0.63 9.9 4.8 I D NA Light brown 
Oaks 

White oak group 0.60/0.68 8.8 4.4 I R Yes Brown 

Red oak group 0.56/0.63 8.6 4.0 Il R Yes Brown 
Sweetgum 0.46/0.52 10.2 5.3 I D NA Brown 
Sycamore 0.46/0.49 8.4 5 I D NA Pale brown 
Walnut 0.51/0.55 7.8 5.5 II SR Yes Dark brown 
Yellow-poplar 0.40/0.42 8.2 4.6 I D NA Pale brown 


“Specific gravity based on weight ovendry and volume at green or 12% moisture content. 

‘Dimensional change obtained by drying from green to ovendry. Values reported here are averages from a variety of sources and are provided 
for comparative purposes. For more specific values, see Chapter 4. 

‘I, easy to finish; III, difficult to finish. 

4A, abrupt-transition softwood; G, gradual-transition softwood; R, ring-porous hardwood; D, diffuse-porous hardwood; SR, semi-ring-porous 
hardwood. 

“GR, growth ring; NA, not applicable; yes/no, depends on the specimen. In ring-porous hardwoods, the growth rate (number of rings per 
centimeter or inch) will determine the relative proportions of earlywood and latewood. 

‘Lumber and plywood. 

®Coastal Douglas-fir. 

"Loblolly, shortleaf; specific gravity of 0.54/0.59 for longleaf and slash. 

‘Redwood is listed as paintability “I” because its LW band is very narrow. 

‘Spruce. Values are for Engelmann spruce; other species are similar. 


16-5 


a 
eee = 


Figure 16-6. Lumber grain affects finish perfor- 
mance: (a) edge-grain (vertical-grain or quarter- 
sawn) board; (b) edge-grain board containing pith; 
(c) flat-grain (slash-grain or plain-sawn) board. 
Arrows show radial (R), tangential (T), and 
longitudinal (L) orientation of wood grain. 


Moisture content 


Moisture content (MC) is the amount of water (in any of 

its forms) contained in wood (see Chap. 4). MC includes 
water or water vapor absorbed into cell walls and free water 
within the hollow center of the cells (lumina); it is expressed 
as weight percentage. The amount of water vapor wood can 
absorb, depends on wood species; most species can absorb 
water vapor to increase their mass approximately 30% 
above an ovendry MC condition. This water is hydrogen 
bound within the cell wall matrix of hemicelluloses and, 

to some extent, cellulose. The limit to the amount of water 
bound in the wood cell wall is the fiber saturation point. 


The amount of water vapor wood absorbs depends on the 
relative humidity (RH) of the surrounding air. If wood is 
stored at 0% RH, the MC will eventually approach 0%. If 


16-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Moisture 


The chemical commonly called water (HO) has three 
states according to temperature and pressure conditions: 
gas (water vapor or steam), liquid (water), or solid (ice). 
When water interacts with wood, it can occur in a fourth 
state (bound water). Moisture is not one of the states of 
water; it is a term with the power to indicate uncertainty 
about the water’s state, or to refer collectively to water in 
all its states in wood. For example, some of the moisture in 
a board at 50% moisture content will occur as liquid water 
(or ice, depending on the temperature) within cell cavities 
of the wood, some will occur as water vapor, and some will 
be bound water (bound within cell walls). Moisture thus ac- 
counts for any or all of these states in a single word. In this 
chapter, the term water designates water in its liquid state. 


wood is stored at 100% RH, the MC will eventually reach 
fiber saturation (approximately 30% moisture). Of course, 
if kept at a constant RH between these two extremes, wood 
will stabilize at a MC between 0% and 30%. The RH con- 
trols the MC, and when the MC is in balance with the RH, 
the wood is at its equilibrium moisture content (EMC). This 
rarely happens because as the RH changes, so does the MC 
of the wood, and atmospheric RH is continually changing. 
It varies through daily and seasonal cycles, thus driving the 
MC of wood through daily and seasonal cycles. See Chapter 
4 for more information on MC and EMC. 


Finishes cannot change EMC; they affect only the rate at 
which absorption and desorption occur (see Moisture- 
Excluding Effectiveness). 


Wood outdoors in most areas of the United States cycles 
around a MC of approximately 12% to 14%. In the Pa- 

cific Northwest, average MC can be slightly higher (12% 

to 16%), and in the Southwest, slightly lower (6% to 9%) 
(Chap. 13, Tables 13-1 and 13-2). Daily and annual MC 
may vary from these averages. In general, wood outdoors 
decreases MC during the summer and increases MC during 
the winter. (Wood indoors in northern climates increases 
MC during the summer and decreases MC during the winter. 
In the south, this distinction is not clear because air con- 
ditioning affects indoor RH and thus MC.) Even in humid 
areas, RH is rarely high enough for a long enough period 

to bring the MC of wood above 20%. Wood warmed by the 
sun experiences a virtual RH far below the ambient RH. The 
surface dries faster than the rest of the lumber. This is why 
cupping and checking often occur on decking boards; the 
top surface is much drier than the rest of the board. Shrink- 
age of the top surface commensurate with this dryness 
causes cupping and checking parallel to the grain. (Juvenile 
wood often checks perpendicular to the grain.) 


As mentioned, fiber saturation is the limit to the amount of 
water vapor that wood absorbs. Water vapor absorbs slowly 
compared with liquid water. Liquid water can quickly bring 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


wood to fiber saturation, and it is the only way to bring the 
MC of wood above fiber saturation. As wood continues to 
absorb liquid water above its fiber saturation point, the wa- 
ter is stored in the lumen; when water replaces all the air in 
the lumen, the wood is waterlogged and its MC can be as 
high as 200%. 


Wood can get wet many ways (such as windblown rain, 
leaks, condensation, dew, and melting ice and snow). The 
result is always the same—poor performance of wood and 
finish. Water is usually involved if finishes perform poorly 
on wood. Even if other factors initially cause poor perfor- 
mance, water accelerates degradation. Fortunately, the MC 
of lumber can be controlled. However, all too often, this 
critical factor is neglected during construction and finishing. 


Paint wood when its average MC is about that expected to 
prevail during its service life (approximately 12% for most 
of the United States and Canada). Painting wood after it 
acclimates to a MC commensurate with the environment 
minimizes stress on film-forming finishes. The MC and thus 
the dimensions of the piece will still fluctuate somewhat, 
depending on the cyclic changes in atmospheric RH, but 
the dimensional change should not be excessive. Therefore, 
film-forming finishes (such as paints) are not stressed and 
should not fail by cracking. 


Most siding and trim is kiln dried to less than 20% MC 
before shipment, and if it has been kept dry during ship- 
ment and storage at the construction site, it should be close 
to EMC by the time it is finished. If wood gets wet during 
shipping or storage or at the construction site, a MC of less 
than 20% is not likely. If wet wood is used, it will dry in 
service and shrinkage may cause warping, twisting, and 
checking. If the MC of wood exceeds 20% when the wood 
is painted, the risk of blistering and peeling is increased. 
Moreover, water-soluble extractives in species such as 
redwood and western redcedar may discolor paint. 


Plywood, particleboard, hardboard, and other wood compos- 
ites change MC during manufacture. Frequently, the MC of 
these materials is not known and may vary depending on the 
manufacturing process. As with other wood products, condi- 
tion wood composites prior to finishing. 


Dimensional Change 


Dimensional change depends on wood species and varies 
within a particular species. Average shrinkage values ob- 
tained by drying wood from its green state to ovendry vary 
from 2.4% for radial western redcedar to 11.9% for tangen- 
tial beech (Table 16—1). Dimension in service does not vary 
to this extent because the MC seldom goes below 6% (Chap. 
13, Table 13-1). A film-forming finish would likely decrease 
this range, but only if the end grain is sealed; unsealed end 
grain increases MC of painted wood (see Moisture Exclud- 
ing Effectiveness). 


Shrinkage vs dry specific gravity 


S14 
Q 

Q 12 

£ 10 

5 

@ 8 

a) 

€ 6 

° 

= 4 

S 

§ 2 

c 

£4 

% 0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 

Dry specific gravity 


Figure 16-7. Plots of radial (1) and tangential (¢) 
shrinkage from green to oven dry (OD) as a function of 
specific gravity for various hardwoods and softwoods 
from Table 16-1. Lines show least-squares fit. 


Wood having little tendency to shrink and swell gives a 
stable surface for painting. Vertical-grain surfaces are more 
stable than flat-grain surfaces (Table 16-1, Fig. 16-6), espe- 
cially outdoors where periodic wetting may produce rapid 
dimensional change. Wood species having low specific 
gravity tend to be more dimensionally stable than those hav- 
ing high specific gravity (Fig. 16-7). Low-specific-gravity 
wood species (that is, those that are more dimensionally 
stable) hold paint better than high-specific-gravity wood 
species; however, other factors, such as wood anatomy and 
manufacturing, also affect paint adhesion. 


Wood Extractives 


Highly colored extractives occur in heartwood of softwoods 
such as western redcedar and redwood and hardwoods such 
as walnut and mahogany. Extractives give heartwood its 
color, and many extractives are soluble in water. Discolor- 
ation of painted or unpainted wood may occur when rain 
leaches water-soluble extractives from wood. (If indoors, 
plumbing leaks or high RH can also cause it.) The water 
carries extractives to wood or paint surfaces and evaporates, 
leaving extractives as a yellow to reddish brown stain on the 
surface. Some paints, such as oil-alkyd stain-blocking prim- 
ers, block leaching of water-soluble extractives. 


Wood also contains compounds (resins and oils) that are in- 
soluble in water. Species and growing conditions determine 
the type and amount of these compounds. For example, 
many pines contain pitch, and knots of almost all species 
contain sufficient oils and resins to discolor light-colored 
paint. These oils and resins are similar chemically to oil- 
alkyd paints; therefore, oil-alkyd stain-blocking primers 
cannot block them. Latex-based formulations are also inef- 
fective (see Knots and Pitch). 


Shellac (a natural product made from the secretion of 
lac-producing insects such as Kerria lacca) and specially 
formulated synthetic finishes block extractives bleed from 
knots. Use shellac or synthetic knot sealers only over knots 
and paint over them to protect them from water. Blocking 
diffusion of extractives from knots is difficult, and no easy 
fix is available other than the extra step of sealing knots 
before priming. By doing this extra step, you can minimize 
discoloration of white paint on knotty pine—but it is not 
easy. If you want white, use knot-free wood. Difficulty seal- 
ing knots is the main reason manufacturers cut out the knots 
to make fingerjointed/edge-glued lumber. 


Another option for knots is to use them to accentuate the 
wood. Use a stain to bring out the color and make the knots 
a part of the desired appearance. 


Wood Products 


Six types of wood products are commonly used on the exte- 
rior of structures: (1) lumber, (2) plywood, (3) fingerjointed 
wood, (4) reconstituted wood products (such as hardboard 
and oriented strandboard (OSB)), (5) wood-—plastic com- 
posites, and (6) preservative- or fire-retardant-treated wood. 
Each product has unique characteristics that affect applica- 
tion and performance of finishes. 


Lumber 


Lumber (such as siding, trim, and decking) for exterior use 
is available in many species and products, and several publi- 
cations describe grades: 


e “Standard Grading Rules for West Coast Lumber,” West 
Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau, Portland, Oregon 


e “Standard Grading Rules for Canadian Lumber,” Na- 
tional Lumber Grades Authority, New Westminster, 
British Columbia 


e “Western Lumber Grading Rules,” Western Wood Prod- 
ucts Association, Portland Oregon 


e “Standard Grading Rules for Northeastern Lumber,” 
Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association, Cum- 
berland Maine 


e “Standard Grading Rules,” Northern Softwood Lumber 
Bureau, Cumberland Maine 


e “Standard Specifications for Grades of California Red- 
wood Lumber,” Redwood Inspection Service, Pleasant 
Hill, California 


e “Standard Grading Rules for Southern Pine Lumber,” 
Southern Pine Inspection Bureau, Pensacola Florida 


These publications are the basis for selecting wood to meet 
codes. They give specifications for appearance grades (such 
as siding and trim) and for structural lumber (such as fram- 
ing and decking). Western redcedar and redwood are the 
only species available in vertical-grain grades and saw- 
textured surfaces (Table 16—1). Southern yellow pine and 
Douglas-fir plywood are available in saw-textured surfaces. 


16-8 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


‘SPECIFYING 
CEDAR cinemeer 


Figure 16-8. Examples of trade association brochures 
describing wood products. 


Unless specified as vertical grain, the grade contains mostly 
flat-grain lumber. Lumber used for board and batten, drop, 
or shiplap siding is frequently flat grain. Bevel siding is 
commonly produced in several grades. The highest grade of 
redwood and western redcedar bevel siding is vertical grain 
and all heartwood. Other grades of redwood and western 
redcedar may be flat, vertical, or mixed grain and may not 
be all heartwood. Grade is important because species, grain 
orientation, and surface texture affect paint-holding charac- 
teristics. 


Descriptions of grades and pictures of many wood species 
are contained in brochures published by trade associations 
(such as Western Red Cedar Lumber Association, California 
Redwood Association, Western Wood Products Associa- 
tion, Southern Forest Products Association, and Northeast 
Lumber Manufacturing Association) (Fig. 16-8), and these 
brochures reference the grade rules. When specifying lum- 
ber, refer to the grade rules for the product to ensure that the 
product meets code requirements and use the association 
brochures to get an idea of appearance. 


Textures (roughness or smoothness) of wood surfaces af- 
fect selection, application, and service life of finishes. Until 
recently, a general rule of thumb for matching substrates to 
finishes was to paint smooth wood and stain saw-textured 
wood. This easy rule of thumb no longer applies. Although 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Figure 16-9. Early paint failure on plywood caused by 
penetration of moisture into surface face-checks. 


Figure 16—10. Differences in stain from extractives on 
fingerjointed wood from the white pine group (either 
eastern or western species) painted with acrylic solid- 
color stain. 


penetrating finishes such as solvent-borne oil-based semi- 
transparent stains last longer on saw-textured wood than on 
smooth-planed wood, many film-forming finishes such as 
opaque stains and paints also last longer on saw-textured 
wood than on smooth-planed wood. Finishes adhere better, 
film buildup is thicker, and service life of the finish is longer 
on saw-textured surfaces than smooth-planed surfaces, par- 
ticularly for flat-grain lumber. 


Plywood 


As with lumber, species, grain orientation, and surface tex- 
ture affect finishing of plywood. Manufacturers of softwood 
plywood use a lathe to peel logs to give flat-grain veneer. 
Peeling causes small checks parallel to grain. When the 

face veneer is laid up to form the plywood panel, the side 
of the veneer having lathe checks is placed interior to give 

a surface free of checks. However, after plywood is placed 


outdoors, wet—dry cycles (swelling and shrinking) cause 
the checks to propagate to the surface (face checking). Face 
checking sometimes extends through paint coatings to 
detract from the appearance and durability of the paint 
(Fig. 16-9). 


Veneer produced by peeling gives flat-grain plywood and 
it is commonly available with a saw-textured, abrasively 
planed (smooth), or paper overlay surface. Douglas-fir and 
southern yellow pine are available saw-textured (Table 
16-1). Saw-textured plywood holds paint much better than 
does smooth plywood. If smooth plywood is to be painted, 
scuff-sand it with 50-grit sandpaper and use high-quality 
latex paint. Latex primer and top-coat generally perform 
better than oil-alkyd paint. Paint performs poorly on smooth 
plywood if used as siding but reasonably well on smooth 
plywood in protected areas such as soffits. Resin-treated 
paper bonded to plywood forms a medium-density overlay 
(MDO); MDO eliminates cracks caused by lathe checking 
and provides plywood with excellent paintability, but the 
edges are still vulnerable to water. Seal the edges with oil- 
alkyd primer or an edge sealer formulated for this use. Paper 
over-laid products should not be finished with semitrans- 
parent stain or other penetrating finishes. Use film-forming 
finishes such as paints or solid-color stains and ensure suf- 
ficient film thickness (0.004—0.005 in. (0.10—0.13 mm), or 
4-5 mils). 


APA-The Engineered Wood Association (Tacoma, Washing- 
ton) provides information on plywood grades and standards 
(see Chap. 11). 


Fingerjointed Lumber 


To obtain “knot free” lumber, mills produce lumber that 
consists of many small pieces of wood edge-glued and fin- 
gerjointed at the end-grain (see Chaps. 10 and 12). Although 
fingerjointed lumber contains no knots or other obvious de- 
fects, most mills do not sort wood pieces prior to gluing to 
give lumber with similar grain orientation and heartwood— 
sapwood content. A particular board may contain pieces 
from different trees, and each piece may have different 
finishing characteristics; therefore, finishing requirements 
are determined by the most difficult-to-paint component in a 
fingerjointed board. Fingerjointed lumber is commonly used 
for fascia boards, interior and exterior trim, siding, win- 
dows, and doors. Paint often fails in a “patchwork” manner 
according to the paintability of various pieces. The board 
pictured in Figure 16-10 shows extractive bleed on the com- 
ponent to the right, but not on the component to the left. 


Some manufacturers decrease variability in fingerjointed 
lumber. For example, fingerjointed redwood siding is avail- 
able in clear all-heart vertical grain and clear flat grain. 


Finishing fingerjointed lumber requires care to ensure con- 
sistent finish performance on the whole board. To hide color 


16-9 


ee 
Figure 16—11. Absorption of water causes differential 


dimensional change of surface flakes to give an un- 
even surface (telegraphing). 


differences of the various pieces, use opaque finishes rather 
than natural finishes (such as semitransparent stain). As with 
other wood products, planed surfaces should be scuff-sand- 
ed with 50-grit sandpaper prior to priming. Saw-textured 
lumber should hold paint better than planed lumber. 


Particleboard and Similar Reconstituted Wood 
Products 


Reconstituted wood products are made by forming small 
pieces of wood into large sheets; sheets are cut into 1.2- by 
2.4-m (4- by 8-ft) panel products or other sizes such as sid- 
ing. These products are classified as particleboard or fiber- 
board, depending upon the nature of the wood component 
(see Chap. 11). 


Particleboard is made from splinters, chips, flakes, strands, 
or shavings. Flakeboard is a type of particleboard made 
from large flakes or shavings. Oriented strandboard (OSB) 
is a refinement of flakeboard; the flakes have a large length- 
to-width aspect ratio and are laid down in three layers, with 
the flakes in each layer oriented 90° to each other as are 
veneers in plywood (see Chap. 11). Most OSB is used inside 
the external envelope of structures for sheathing and under- 
layment, however it contains “exterior” adhesives and water 
repellent. The water repellent gives OSB water resistance 
while in transit and storage prior to construction. The water 
repellent does not decrease paint adhesion. 


Lumber characteristics, such as grain orientation, specific 
gravity, grain boundary transition, warping, and splitting, 
are not considerations with particleboard, but paint applied 
directly to particleboard performs poorly. Differential di- 
mensional change of surface flakes causes telegraphing, and 
paint usually cracks and peels (Fig. 16-11). Telegraphing is 
the formation of an uneven paint surface caused by swelling 
of flakes and particles under the paint. Telegraphing occurs 
on all types of particleboard, but not on fiberboard. Adhe- 
sive failure leads to loss of flakes from the surface. Figure 
16-11 shows painted flakeboard after 3 years outdoors. The 
area on the left has one coat of acrylic-latex top-coat and 


16-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


the area on the right has one coat of oil-alkyd primer and 
acrylic-latex top-coat. The single coat (top-coat only) has 
failed, and the area having two-coats (primer and top-coat) 
is starting to fail, particularly over large flakes. Products 
intended for outdoor use, such as siding, are overlaid with 
MDO or wood veneer to improve paint performance. Prod- 
ucts having MDO can be finished in the same way as other 
paper-overlaid products. Seal edges with a product specifi- 
cally formulated for this use, and apply an oil-alkyd primer 
to give additional water resistance (see Plywood). 


When finishing particleboard that does not have a paper 
overlay, use a three-coat latex paint system on the surface 
and seal edges as described above. However, do not expect 
long-term paint performance. 


When particleboard or OSB, without an overlay, is used 
outdoors, it requires a rigorous maintenance schedule (often 
every 6 to 12 months). 


Mechanical pulping produces wood fibers that are dry- or 
wet-formed into fiberboard (Chap. 11). Hardboard is a dense 
fiberboard often used for exterior siding. Hardboard is avail- 
able in 152- to 203-mm (6- to 8-in.) widths as a substitute 
for solid-wood beveled siding. The surface of fiberboard ac- 
cepts and holds paint well, and MDO improves paintability. 
As with particleboard, seal edges with oil-alkyd primer or 
other suitable sealer. 


Wood-Plastic Composites 


Wood-plastic composites (WPCs) account for approxi- 
mately one-fourth of wood decking. Manufacturers combine 
wood flour, fibers, particles, or a combination, with poly- 
ethylene, polyvinyl chloride, or polypropylene and extrude 
“boards” in various profiles. Wood content and particle size 
in the boards vary and thus their ability to accept a finish 
varies. Boards high in wood content with large particle size 
may accept a finish; boards high in plastic content may not. 
Finish a small area to ensure the finish will wet the surface. 
After the finish cures, check adhesion using the tape pull-off 
test (see Chalking). Plastics are routinely finished in indus- 
trial applications, such as car parts, by activating the plastic 
surface using flame or plasma. This technology is not used 
on WPCs for the construction industry, because most manu- 
facturers do not expect their products to be finished. 


Treated Wood 


Wood used in structures fully exposed to the weather, such 
as in decks and fences (particularly those portions of the 
structure in ground contact), needs preservative treatment to 
protect it from decay (rot) and termites. Wood used in ma- 
rine exposure also requires preservative treatment to protect 
it from decay and marine borers. For some uses, building 
codes may require treatment of wood with either preserva- 
tive or fire-retardant, or both. 


Wood is pressure-impregnated with three types of preserva- 
tives: (a) preservative oils (such as coal-tar creosote), (b) 
organic solvent solution (such as pentachlorophenol), and 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Figure 16—12. Artist’s rendition of weathering process 
of round and square timbers. As cutaway shows, inte- 
rior wood below surface is relatively unchanged. 


(c) waterborne salts (such as copper quaternary ammonium 
complexes, copper azole, and chromated copper arsenate 
(CCA)) (Chap. 15). Note: Except for the all-wood 
foundation, CCA-treated wood is not used in residential 
construction. 


Components for doors and windows are usually dip-treated 
with a water-repellent preservative (WRP). The American 
Wood Protection Association sets standards for pressure- 
impregnated and dip-preservative treatment of wood 
(AWPA 2008). 


Wood treated with waterborne preservatives, such as cop- 
per-based systems, can be painted or stained if the wood 

is clean and dry. Bleed of preservative through finishes, 
particularly latex-based paints and solid-color stains, can 
occur if wood is still wet from the preservative treatment. 
Allow wood to dry before painting; 1 week should be suffi- 
cient. Wood treated with coal-tar creosote or other dark oily 
preservatives is not paintable, except with specially formu- 
lated finishes such as two-component epoxy paints; even if 
the paint adheres to the treated wood, the dark oils tend to 
discolor paint, especially light-colored paint. Wood treated 
with a water-repellent preservative, by vacuum-pressure or 
dipping, is paintable. 


Fire-retardant- (FR-) treated wood is generally painted rath- 
er than left unfinished because the FR treatment may darken 
or discolor wood. FR treatment does not generally interfere 
with adhesion of finishes; however, you should contact the 
paint manufacturer, the FR manufacturer, and the treating 
company to ensure that the products are compatible. Some 
fire retardants may be hydroscopic and cause wood to have 
high MC. FRs for wood used outdoors are formulated to 
resist leaching. 


Weathering 


Weathering is the general term describing outdoor deg- 
radation of materials and manifests itself physically and 


chemically (for example, cracking and exfoliation of rock, 
corrosion of metals, and photodegradation of organic ma- 
terials). Ultraviolet (UV) radiation in sunlight catalyzes 
photodegradation of organic materials exacerbated by mois- 
ture, temperature change, freeze-thaw cycles, abrasion by 
windblown particles, and growth of microorganisms. Degra- 
dation occurs near the surface of wood, wood products, and 
finishes. 


Effect on Wood 


Weathering takes many forms depending on the material; 
wood and wood products initially show color change and 
slight checking. Leaching of water-soluble extractives, 
chemical changes, and discoloration of the surface by mi- 
croorganisms cause color change. As weathering continues, 
wood develops checks on lateral surfaces and checks and 
cracks near the ends of boards, and wood fibers slowly 
erode from the surface. Wood consists of three types of 
organic components: carbohydrates (cellulose and hemicel- 
luloses), lignin, and extractives. Weathering affects each of 
these components differently, and physical and chemical 
changes affect paintability. 


Carbohydrates 


Carbohydrates (cellulose and hemicelluloses) are polymers 
of sugars and make up 55% to 65% of wood (Chap. 3). 
Carbohydrates do not absorb UV radiation and are therefore 
resistant to UV degradation. However, hemicelluloses and 
amorphous cellulose readily absorb—desorb moisture; this 
cyclic wetting and drying may cause different dimensional 
change for EW/LW bands. Differential dimensional change 
roughens wood, raises grain, and causes checks, cracks, 
warping, and cupping. Fewer checks develop in woods with 
moderate to low specific gravity than in those with high 
specific gravity; vertical-grain boards develop fewer checks 
than do flat-grain boards; and vertical-grain boards warp and 
cup less than do flat-grain boards. To minimize cupping, the 
width of a board should not exceed eight times its thickness. 
The tendency to cup increases with the specific gravity and 
width/thickness ratio. 

Lignin 

Approximately 20% to 30% of wood is composed of lignin, 
a polymer that helps bond cellulose and hemicelluloses 
within cell walls and bonds cells together. The volume be- 
tween adjacent wood cells (middle lamella) is rich in lignin. 
If exposed to UV radiation, lignin in the middle lamella, at 
the surface of wood, begins to degrade within a few hours. 
The changes are not obvious visually, but they affect the sur- 
face chemistry of wood and thus adhesion of finishes. Lig- 
nin photodegrades, leaving cellulose fibers loosely attached 
to the surface. Further weathering causes fibers to be lost 
from the surface (a process called erosion), but this process 
is slow. Approximately 6 mm (1/4 in.) of wood is lost in a 
century (Fig. 16-12). Erosion is slower for most hardwoods 
and faster for low-density softwoods. Other factors such as 


16-11 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 16—2. Erosion of earlywood and latewood on smooth planed surfaces of various wood species 


after outdoor exposure* 


Erosion (um) after various exposure times® 


Ave 4 years 8 years 10 years 12 years 14 years 16 years 
Wood species sG LW EW LW EW LW EW LW EW LW EW LW EW 
Western redcedar — 170 580 290 920 455 1,095 615 1,165 805 1,355 910 1,475 
plywood 

Redwood plywood — 125 440 295 670 475 800 575 965 695 1,070 845 1,250 
Douglas-fir plywood — 110 270 190 390 255 500 345 555 425 770 515 905 
Douglas-fir 0.46 105 270 210 720 285 905 380 980 520 1,300 500 1,405 
Southern Pine 0.45 135 320 275 605 315 710 = 335 710 445 1,180 525 1,355 
Western redcedar 0.31 200 500 595 1,090 765 1,325 970 1,565 1,160 1,800 1,380 1,945 
Redwood 0.36 165 405 315 650 440 835 555 965 670 1,180 835 1,385 
Loblolly pine 0.66 80 205 160 345 220 490 

Western redcedar 0.35 115 495 240 1,010 370 1,225 

Southern Pine 0.57 95 330 180 640 195 670 

Yellow-poplar 0.47 — 220 — 530 — 640 

Douglas-fir 0.48 75 255 175 605 225 590 

Red oak 0.57 180 245 340 555 440 750 

Ponderosa pine 0.35 130 270 315 445 430 570 Decay Decay Decay Decay — — 
Lodgepole pine 0.38 105 255 265 465 320 580 475 745 560 810 — = 
Engelmann spruce 0.36 125 320 = 310 545 390 650 505 795, 590 950. — _ 
Western hemlock 0.34 145 320 310 575 415 680 515 1,255 600 1,470 — = 
Red alder 0.39 — 295 — 545 — 620 — 920 = 955 = = 


“Data from three studies are shown. Specimens were exposed vertically facing south. Radial surfaces were exposed with the grain vertical. 


EW denotes earlywood; LW, latewood. 
°SG is specific gravity. 


“All erosion values are averages of nine observations (three measurements of three specimens). 


growth rate, degree of exposure, grain orientation, tempera- 
ture, and wetting and drying cycles affect erosion rate. 
Table 16—2 shows erosion rates for several wood species 
measured over 16 years. 


Extractives 


Extractives (chemicals in heartwood that give each species 
its distinctive color) change color when exposed to UV ra- 
diation or visible light, and this color change indicates deg- 
radation of extractives near the surface. The color change 
causes wood to lighten or darken. Some wood species 
change color within minutes of outdoor exposure. Wood 
also changes color indoors. Ordinary window glass blocks 
most UV radiation, therefore visible light causes indoor 
color change. UV stabilizers in finishes do not prevent color 
change. 


Biological Factors 


The most common biological factor is mildew, a microor- 
ganism that contributes to color change. Mildew does not 
cause degradation, but it may cause initial graying or an un- 
sightly dark gray or black blotchy appearance. Dark-colored 
fungal spores and mycelia on the wood surface cause this 
color. In advanced stages of weathering, after extractives 
and lignin have been removed leaving a cellulose surface, 
wood may develop a bright silvery-gray sheen. This sheen 
on weathered wood occurs most frequently in arid climates 
or coastal regions (see Mildew). 


16-12 


Algae can also grow on wood, particularly in damp loca- 
tions; algae is usually green, and it often grows in combina- 
tion with mildew. 


Effect on Paint Adhesion 


Wood erosion is slow, but chemical changes occur within a 
few weeks of outdoor exposure. Badly weathered wood hav- 
ing loosely attached fibers on the surface cannot hold paint. 
This is not obvious on wood that has weathered for only 

2 to 3 weeks. The wood appears unchanged. Research has 
shown that surface degradation of wood exposed to sunlight 
for 1, 2, 4, 8, or 16 weeks prior to painting (preweathering) 
affects service life of subsequently applied paint. The longer 
the wood preweathered, the shorter the time until the paint 
began to peel. For boards preweathered 16 weeks, the paint 
peeled within 3 years; for boards preweathered only 1 week, 
the paint peeled after 13 years. Panels that were not pre- 
weathered showed no sign of peeling after 20 years. Paints 
were commercial oil-alkyd or acrylic-latex primer with one 
acrylic-latex top-coat over planed all-heartwood vertical- 
grain western redcedar. For species with low specific grav- 
ity, finish the wood as soon as possible after installation, or 
better yet, prime it before installation. In other tests using 
wood species having higher specific gravity (such as 
Douglas-fir and southern yellow pine), little loss of paint 
adhesion occurred until boards had been preweathered for 

3 to 4 weeks. 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Effect on Wood Finishes 


Finish resins (ingredients that form films or penetrate wood) 
are organic polymers, and as with lignin in wood, UV radia- 
tion degrades the polymer, causing slow erosion. Erosion 
rate depends on the resistance of the polymer to UV radia- 
tion. Paints and stains based on latex polymers are more 
resistant to UV radiation than those based on oil-alkyds. UV 
radiation does not usually degrade paint pigments; therefore, 
as resin degrades, pigments loosen and erode from the sur- 
face. Degraded resin and loose pigments give film-forming 
finishes a chalky appearance. Pigment erodes from oil-based 
semitransparent stains to expose wood. 


Decay and Insects 


Decayed wood does not hold paint. One expects wood used 
for new construction to be free of decay; contractors can 

do several things to keep it that way. If possible, paint all 
end grain surfaces with an oil-alkyd primer (such as ends of 
siding and trim, brick molding, railings, balustrade, posts, 
beams, and edges of panel products (plywood, T1-11 siding, 
medium-density fiberboard, and OSB). 


When repainting, inspect wood for decay. Problematic areas 
include end grain of balustrade, brick molding, siding that 
butts against a roof, and bottoms of posts on porches. Decay 
often occurs in the center of wood and the surface can ap- 
pear sound; probe several areas with an ice pick to ensure 
the wood is sound. Replace boards having decay. Siding 
intersecting a sloping roof should have a 2-in. (50-mm) gap 
between the end grain of the siding and the roof shingles. 
Check for a finish on the end grain; if there is no finish, treat 
end grain with a WRP, prime, and top-coat. If there is al- 
ready a coating on the end grain, keep it painted. End grain 
of siding that butts directly against roof shingles (a bad 
practice—see Structure Design and Construction Practices) 
is not accessible for painting, however you can try to wick 
WRP into the end grain from a wet brush. 


Insects seldom cause problems with finishes. However, 
when repainting a structure, inspect it for termite tunnels 
and carpenter ants. A termite tunnel is a sure sign of infesta- 
tion. Presence of carpenter ants may indicate decay in the 
structure. Carpenter ants do not eat wood, but they often 
tunnel out decayed areas to build their nests. Note that 
woodpecker holes often indicate insect infestation. 


Control of Water and Water Vapor 


Control of liquid water and water vapor requires different 
types of finishes. 


Water Repellents 


Water repellents and WRPs retard the absorption of liquid 
water into wood, particularly at the end grain. They are an 
excellent treatment for wood used outdoors because they 
inhibit absorption of rain yet allow wood to dry after rain. 
WRPs and similar penetrating finishes (tinted clear finishes 
and oil-based semitransparent stains) have almost no effect 


on diffusion of water vapor; that is, they have little effect on 
the change in wood moisture content caused by changes in 
RH. 


Moisture-Excluding Effectiveness 


Moisture-excluding effectiveness (MEE) of a finish is a 
measure of its resistance to diffusion of water vapor (that is, 
a measure of the permeability of a coating to water vapor); 
it is not a measure of water repellency. A coating that blocks 
all water vapor is 100% effective; however, no coating is 
impermeable. A coating that excludes water vapor merely 
slows its absorption or desorption; it cannot change the 
EMC (Chap. 4). MEE depends on a number of variables: 
coating film thickness, defects and voids in the film, type 
and amount of pigment, chemical composition and amount 
of resin, vapor-pressure gradient across the film, and length 
of exposure. 


Table 16—3 lists coatings and their MEE. Note that maleic- 
alkyds, two-part polyurethane, and paraffin wax have high 
MEE. Coatings that retard water vapor diffusion also repel 
liquid water. Porous paints, such as latex and low-luster 
(flat) paints, afford little protection against water vapor 
transmission. They may not repel liquid water, either. In 
general, a low MEE value also indicates low resistance to 
absorption to liquid water. These finishes permit entry of 
water vapor and water from dew and rain unless applied 
over a nonporous primer (such as oil-alkyd primer). Latex 
finishes contain surfactants that can encourage absorption of 
water into the coating and wood, particularly just after the 
coating has been applied. Most of these surfactants wash out 
of the coating after a short time. MEE also gives a measure 
of vapor transmission out of wood. Paint film can inhibit 
drying (Fig. 16-13). Retardation of drying after periodic 
wetting of wood causes it to reach a MC where decay can 
occur. This type of wood paint failure usually occurs on 
painted fences and porch railings that are fully exposed to 
weather (Fig. 16-14). Paint coatings usually crack at the 
joint between two pieces of wood, water enters the wood 
through these cracks, and the coating slows drying. Prim- 
ing the end grain of wood used in these applications inhibits 
water absorption; thus, end-grain priming works with the 
coating on the lateral surface to keep the wood dry. 


Structure Design and Construction Practices 


Structure design and construction practices affect finish 
performance. Design and construct structures to keep water 
out and to remove it when water gets through the structure 
envelope. This section summarizes recommendations for 
improving finish performance. 


Large roof overhangs protect siding from rain and dew; gut- 
ters and downspouts greatly decrease the amount of water 
draining down the siding. 


Flash all wall and roof penetrations. Shingle the flashing to 
keep water moving out of the structure. Sealants, caulking 
compounds, and similar compounds that come in a tube 


16-13 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 16-3. Moisture-excluding effectiveness of 18.5 


.] 
various finishes on ponderosa pine® 8 * i -—Unfinished wood 
Moisture-excluding a ; 4 —— Alkyd paint 
effectiveness (%) © 45.54 Adsorption ; Desorption 
Shy at 90% RH | at 30% RH 
No 1 7 14 S H 
Finish ofcoats day days days 5. 
Linseed oil 1 2 oO 0 = 12.5 
2 22 0 0 = H 
3 33 #2 «0 er. 
Water repellent” 1 12 0 0 S : 
2 46 2 0 © 
3 7 27° Pr 
Latex flat wall paint 1 Ps 0 0 3 “0 50 100 150 200 250 300 
(vinyl acrylic resin) 2 11 0 0 = Time (days) 
3 22 0 0 
Latex primer wall paint 1 78 37 20 Figure 16-13. Change in moisture content of pon- 
(butadiene-styrene resin) 2 860 47 27 derosa pine sapwood finished with three coats of 
3 88 = 55 33 aliuminum-pigmented alkyd paint and exposed to 
Alkyd flat wall paint 1 9 1 0 90% and 30% RH at 26 °C (80 °F), compared with 
(soya alkyd) 2 21 2 0 moisture content of unfinished wood. 
3 37 5 0 
Acrylic latex house 1 43 6 1 
primer paint 2 66 14 2 
3 72 20 4 
Acrylic latex flat 1 52 12 5 
house paint 2; 77 28 11 
3 84 39 16 
Solid-color latex stain 1 5 0 0 
(acrylic resin) 2 38 4 0 
3 50 6 0 
Solid-color oil-based stain 1 45 7 1 
(linseed oil) 2 84 48 26 
3 90 64 42 > , 
Semitransparent oil-based 1 7 0 0 ; 
stain (commercial) 2 13 0 0 , ’ 
pon fs nD 
Alkyd house primer paint 1 85 46 24 
(maleic-alkyd resin) 2 93 70 49 Figure 16—14. Decay and paint failure in wood railing 
3 95 78 (60 fully exposed to weather. 
Urethane varnish 1 55 10 2 
(oil-modified) 2; 83 43 23 
3 90 64 44 i 
4 91 68 Si need to work in concert with flashing; they are not a substi- 
5 93 #72 57 tute for flashing. 
6 93 76 62 Vent clothes dryers, showers, and cooking areas to outside, 
Polyurethane paint, gloss / 91 66044 not to the crawl space or attic. Place an air barrier in exterior 
(eu component) : - i . walls and top-floor ceilings, and flash penetration through 
. : exterior walls (doors, windows, and vents). Vent to soffits if 
Aluminum flake pigmented 3 98 91 84 : : : ‘ai ; 
varnish (oil-¢odified) 4 98 93. 87 possible. Avoid using humidifiers. If the structure contains 
Baraiiin wax, brushed I 97 -82.—«69 a crawl space, cover the soil with a vapor-retarding material 
Pannen wad dipped 1 100 97.~—«9S such as black plastic or tar paper. 


“Sapwood was initially finished and conditioned to 26 °C (80 °F) Do not seal the overlap of lap siding. 
and 30% RH, then exposed to the same temperature and 90% RH. . : ‘ 
'WRP would be about the same. In northern climates, use an air barrier—vapor retarder on the 


interior side of all exterior walls and top-floor ceiling to 
prevent condensation in the walls and attic. In buildings 
that are air-conditioned most of the year, place the air 
barrier—vapor retarder on the exterior side. 


16-14 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Figure 16-15. Demonstration of sid- 
ing installation over a secondary 
drainage plane (rain screen) showing 
wall studs, sheathing, water-resistive 
barrier (WRB), furring strips, and in- 
terleaved WRB at the butt joint. Note 
that the butt joint is centered directly 
over the furring strip and the underly- 
ing stud and the end grain has been 


sealed. 
ve) 
j i] | ‘ 
: ‘ 7 : 
a 
So 


Figure 16-16. Demonstration of proper and improper 
z-flashing installation: (top) siding installed with a 9-mm 
(3/8-in.) gap between the z-flashing and siding to allow 
water to drain off the siding; (bottom) siding installed 
without a gap, which gives easy access for water ab- 
sorption into the siding and thus shows extractives 
staining. 


Prevent moisture-related problems in siding by using rain- 
screen design (that is, by furring out the siding 9 to 19 mm 
(3/8 to 3/4 in.) from the sheathing—house wrap) 

(Fig. 16-15). 


eo ee. | 


| 
4s 


Figure 16—17. Shingles installed with insufficient 
gap later warped when they expanded after getting 
wet. 


Seal all end-grain surfaces with oil-alkyd primer or WRP. 
Ensure adequate space (approximately 50 mm (2 in.)) 
between siding and roof shingles in places where a side-wall 
intersects a roof. Siding and panel products above z-flashing 
need to be placed approximately 9 to 12 mm (3/8 to 1/2 in.) 
above the flashing to form a drip edge (Fig. 16-16). 


When installing siding or shingles, ensure that the spacing is 
commensurate with the MC of the wood and the anticipated 
MC during the service life. Figure 16-17 shows shingles 
that were spaced too closely and buckled in service. 

Avoid inside—outside beams and joists. For example, a 
second-floor floor joist that penetrates a wall to form a porch 
rafter is destined to have moisture problems and subsequent 
decay and finish failure. This type of wall penetration is dif- 
ficult to seal to avoid air movement. Air carries water vapor 
that condenses in the space between floors or the porch 
ceiling. 


Compliance of VOC Finishes with Pollution 
Regulations 


Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are organic chemicals 
in finishes that evaporate as finishes dry and cure. VOCs are 
air pollutants, and the amount that evaporates for a given 
amount of solids (such as binder and pigments) in finishes is 
regulated. Under the 1990 New Clean Air Act, the U.S. En- 
vironmental Protection Agency (EPA) required paint compa- 
nies to decrease the amount of VOCs in their finishes. 


Traditional solvent-borne wood finishes containing mineral 
spirits are no longer available, including oil-based semi- 
transparent stains, oil- and oil-alkyd-based primers and 
top-coats, solvent-borne water repellents, and solvent-borne 
water-repellent preservatives. Solvent-borne finishes are still 
available, but the solvent systems are more complex than 
mineral spirits. Prior to VOC regulations, penetrating fin- 
ishes, such as semitransparent stains, had low solids content 


16-15 


Figure 16—18. Front view of exterior grade of ply- 
wood siding after 10 years of exposure. The right- 
hand portion was exposed to the weather, whereas 
the left-hand side was covered with a board to give 
a board-and-batten appearance. 


(pigment, oils, and polymers). Reformulated finishes may 
contain more solids, new types of solvents and co-solvents, 
or other nontraditional additives. These high-solids formula- 
tions are prone to form films rather than penetrate wood. 


The paint industry also reformulated latex-based finishes 
to meet stringent requirements for water-based paints. 


Exterior Wood Finishes 


Exterior finishes either penetrate wood cell walls or form 
films on the surface. Penetrating finishes give a more 
“natural” look to the wood than film-forming finishes— 
that is, they allow some of the character of wood to show 
through the finish. In general, the more natural a finish, 
the less durable it is. This section also discusses weathered 
wood as a “finish.” 


Weathered Wood as Natural Finish 


Leaving wood to weather to a natural finish may seem like 
an inexpensive low-maintenance alternative to finishing, 

but this approach leads to problems. Wood surfaces erode, 
some wood species decay, lumber is more prone to split 

and check, and in most climates in North America, exterior 
wood develops blotchy mildew growth. To avoid decay, 
wood must be all heartwood from a decay-resistant spe- 

cies such as redwood or western redcedar and be vertical 
grain to decrease the potential for splitting, raised grain, and 
cupping. Only limited areas have a climate conducive to 
achieving a driftwood-gray appearance as wood weathers 
naturally; the climate along the coast of New England seems 
conducive to developing the silvery-gray weathered patina 
that some people desire. Even when the climatic conditions 
favor the development of silvery-gray patina, it takes several 
years to achieve this appearance. Protected areas under the 
eaves will not weather as fast as areas that are not protected, 


16-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


which leads to a different appearance at the top and bottom 
of a wall. 


Do not leave composite wood products, such as plywood, 
unprotected. The surface veneer of plywood can be com- 
pletely destroyed within 10 years if not protected from 
weathering. Figure 16—18 shows weathering of unfinished 
plywood (right); the intact portion of the plywood (left) had 
been covered with a board to give a board-and-batten ap- 
pearance. 


Penetrating Wood Finishes 


Penetrating finishes such as transparent or clear WRPs, 
lightly colored WRPs, oil-based semitransparent stains, and 
oils do not form a film on wood. However, semitransparent 
stains having high-solids content may form a thin film. 


Penetration into Wood 


Finishes penetrate wood in two ways: flow of liquid into cut 
cells at the surface and absorption into cell walls. 


Lumber is almost never cut aligned with axial wood cells; 
therefore, the surface has cut axial cells (and of course, ray 
cells) and, if it is a hardwood, cut vessels. Cut cells and ves- 
sels give macroscopic porosity. The diameter of lumina and 
vessels varies depending on the wood species, but in all spe- 
cies, the hollow spaces formed by cut lumina and vessels are 
quite large compared with pigment particles and binders in 
finishes (that is, a high-molecular-weight (MW) latex mol- 
ecule is small compared with these openings). Any finish 
can easily flow into cut lumina and vessels. 


Penetration of a finish into the cell wall takes place at the 
molecular scale. The finish or components of the finish ab- 
sorb into void space of hemicelluloses, amorphous cellulose, 
and lignin polymers contained in the cell wall. Penetration 
is excellent for resins having a MW less than 1,000 Daltons. 
The limit to penetration into these void spaces is a MW of 
approximately 3,000 Daltons. Natural oils (such as linseed 
oil and tung oil), solvents, oil-alkyds, and low-MW polymer 
precursors can penetrate the cell wall and thus modify the 
properties of cells located near the surface. Cell walls modi- 
fied with finish typically absorb less water and swell less 
than do unmodified cell walls. 


Traditional solvent-borne finishes such as water-repellent 
preservatives and solvent-borne oil-based stains can pen- 
etrate cell walls. To some extent, some of the excess oil 

in a long-oil-alkyd primer can penetrate cell walls. High- 
molecular-weight polymers such as acrylics and vinyl acryl- 
ics and pigments are too large to penetrate cell walls and 
therefore cannot modify cell wall properties. Water in these 
formulations penetrates the cell wall, but the polymer does 
not. As water absorbs into wood, it enters the cell wall and 
hydrogen-bonds to the hemicelluloses and amorphous cellu- 
lose to cause swelling. Water absorption causes raised grain, 
and as a latex finish coalesces, the finish deforms around the 
raised grain while it is still flexible. Thus, latex finishes are 
less likely to crack if the surface develops raised grain. 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Table 16—4. Suitability and expected service life of finishes for exterior wood surfaces* 


Paint and solid-color stain 


Tinted finishes such as Semitransparent Expected service 
deck finishes stain life‘ (years) 
Expected Expected Solid- 
Suit- service life® Suit- service life® Suit- color 
Type of exterior wood surface ability (years) ability (years) ability Paint stain 
Siding 
Cedar and redwood 
Smooth (vertical grain) Low 1-2 Moderate 2-4 High 10-15 8-12 
Smooth (flat grain) Low 1-2 Moderate 24 Moderate 8-12 6-10 
Saw-textured High 2-3 High 4-8 Excellent 15-20 = 10-15 
Pine, fir, spruce 
Smooth (flat grain) Low 1-2 Low 2-3 Moderate 6-10 6-8 
Saw-textured (flat grain) High car High 47 Moderate 8-12 8-10 
Shingles (sawn shingles used High 2-3 High 4-8 Moderate 6-10 6-8 
on side-walls) 
Plywood 
Douglas-fir and Southern Pine 
Sanded Low 1-2 Moderate 2-4 Moderate 4-8 4-6 
Saw-textured Low 2-3 High 4-8 Moderate 8-12 6-10 
MDO plywood* — — — — Excellent’ 12-15 10-15 
Hardboard, medium density® 
Unfinished = = = = High 8-12 6-10 
Preprimed — = = al High 8-12 6-10 
MDO overlay — — — — Excellent’ 10-15 10-15 
Decking 
New (smooth-sawn) High 1-2 Moderate 2-3 Low = = 
Weathered or saw-textured High 2-3 High 3-6 Low — — 
Oriented strandboard — — Low 1-3 Moderate 4-5 4-5 


“Estimates were compiled from observations of many researchers. Expected life predictions are for average location in the 
contiguous USA; expected life depends on climate and exposure (such as desert, seashore, and deep woods). 
*The higher the pigment concentration, the longer the service life. Mildew growth on surface usually indicates the need for 


refinishing. 


“Smooth unweathered surfaces are generally finished with only one coat of stain. Saw-textured or weathered surfaces, which are 
more adsorptive, can be finished with two coats; second coat is applied while first coat is still wet. 

“Expected service life of an ideal paint system: three coats (one primer and two top-coats). Applying only a two-coat paint system 
(primer and one top-coat) will decrease the service life to about half the values shown in the table. Top-quality latex top-coat paints 
have excellent resistance to weathering. Dark colors may fade within a few years. 


“Medium-density overlay (MDO) is painted. 
‘Edges are vulnerable to water absorption and need to be sealed. 


®Water-repellent preservatives and semitransparent stains are not suitable for hardboard. Solid-color stains (latex or alkyd) will 
perform like paints. Paints give slightly better performance because the solids content of paint is higher than that for solid-color 
stains and thus paints give greater film build for the same volume of finish used. 


Penetrating Clear and Lightly Colored (Tinted) 
Finishes 


Penetrating transparent clear finishes have no pigments and 
the generic names for them are water repellents (WRs) or 
water-repellent preservatives (WRPs). A typical WR formu- 
lation contains 10% resin or drying oil, 1% to 3% wax or 
other water repellent, and solvent. WRPs contain a fungicide 
such as 3-iodo-2-propynyl butyl carbamate (IPBC). They 
were traditionally formulated using turpentine or mineral 
spirits, but now paint companies formulate them using 
VOC-compliant solvent and waterborne systems to comply 
with VOC regulations. 


WRPs give wood a bright, golden-tan color close to the 
original appearance of the wood and are the first step in 


protection from weathered wood as a finish. WRPs decrease 
checking, prevent water staining, and help control mildew 
growth. The first application of these finishes to smooth- 
planed lumber lasts approximately one year on exposed lat- 
eral wood surfaces; subsequent applications may last longer 
because weathered boards absorb more finish. WRPs absorb 
readily into end grain and can last for years to retard water 
absorption into end grain. WRPs last longer if applied to 
saw-textured wood. 


Few companies manufacture traditional clear WRs and 
WRPs; almost all WR and WRP formulations are lightly 
pigmented and contain other additives to extend their ser- 
vice life (Table 16-4). Lightly pigmented finishes perform 
well on decks. Water- and solvent-borne formulations are 
available; waterborne formulations may be a water emulsion 


16-17 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 16—19. Effect of water-repellent preservative 
treatment after 5 years of outdoor exposure. A, win- 
dow sash and frame treated with a water-repellent pre- 
servative and then painted; B, window sash and frame 
not treated before painting. 


of synthetic polymers. Synthetic polymers do not penetrate 
the cell wall, but form a thin film, seal the surface, and pro- 
vide water repellency. Finely ground pigment gives color 
and partially blocks UV radiation. Pigment, UV stabilizers, 
and other additives give these finishes a service life of 2 

to 3 years, but they lack sufficient pigment to inhibit UV 
degradation of the wood. As with clear WRPs, they usually 
contain a preservative to retard mildew growth. 


Caution: Fungicides in WRPs and semitransparent stains 
are toxic and may be herbicides; use caution to avoid skin 
contact and breathing vapors, and protect plants and the 
soil around them from accidental contamination. 


Prior to changes in finish formulation because of VOC regu- 
lation, paint companies formulated solvent-borne WRPs for 
use as a pretreatment prior to priming. At this time, finding a 
WRP formulated for this use is difficult. In fact, paint manu- 
factures seldom honor a finish warranty, if customers apply 
a WRP prior to using their finish, particularly if a different 
paint company made the WRP. In spite of decades of re- 
search showing the benefits of WRP treatment of wood prior 
to priming, they are seldom used. Information on WRPs as 

a wood treatment, prior to priming, is included in this chap- 
ter in case a paint manufacturer markets a WRP specially 
formulated for this use in the future. They are particularly 
effective for improving the service life of paint on difficult- 
to-paint wood species and decay-prone areas (Fig. 16-19). 
Currently available WRPs can be used for sealing end grain 


16-18 


Protect wood and wood-based products from water and 
sunlight prior to delivery and while stored at the construc- 
tion site. Avoid contaminating them with dirt, oil, or other 
contaminants. Finish wood as soon as possible after 
installing it. 


of lumber, edges of plywood, and back-priming and are dis- 
cussed in several sections of this chapter. 


Penetrating finishes that use paraffin oil as the solvent are 
also available. These formulations penetrate wood, and the 
oil helps improve water repellency. Paraffin oil is not a vola- 
tile solvent; therefore, these finishes comply with air qual- 
ity requirements. They are usually a good value, because 
virtually all of what comes in the can ends up in the wood. 
The service life is approximately | year, but they are easy to 
apply. If an excessive amount is applied, the wood surface 
may remain oily for a few weeks. Do not use them as a pre- 
treatment prior to applying other finishes. 


Application, New Construction 


For new construction, the most effective method for apply- 
ing a WR or WRP is to dip the entire board into the finish 
(Table 16—5). If finish is roller or spray applied, back brush 
following application to work the finish into the wood. Fin- 
ish the back side of siding, particularly for highly colored 
wood species (see Back-Priming). 


When wood is finished following installation, apply lib- 
eral amounts of WRP to all end grain areas, edges of panel 
products, and other areas vulnerable to water, such as the 
bottoms of doors and window frames. Coverage is approxi- 
mately 6.1 m2 L~! (250 ft? gal-!) on a smooth surface or 3.7 
m2? L~! (150 ft? gal!) on a saw-textured surface. Smooth 
wood will usually accept only a single coat; a second coat 
will not penetrate the wood. WRP treatment lasts longer 

on saw-textured surfaces than on smooth surfaces because 
more finish penetrates the wood. As a natural finish, the life 
expectancy of a WRP is only | to 2 years, depending upon 
the wood and exposure. However, reapplication is easy, 
particularly on decks and fences. 


Refinishing 


Clear and lightly colored finishes (penetrating natural fin- 
ishes such as WRPs and lightly pigmented deck finishes) do 
not peel; they fade, and if pigmented, the pigments erode. 
As clear finishes weather, they lose their water repellency, 
turn gray, and develop mildew. Lightly pigmented finishes 
lose color. If not blackened by mildew, they can often be 
prepared for refinishing by removing dirt with a stiff-bristle 
brush. If discolored by mildew, wash the wood with com- 
mercial mildew cleaner or dilute liquid household bleach 
and detergent prior to refinishing (see Mildew). 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Table 16—5. Initial application and maintenance of exterior wood finishes* 


Maintenance 

Finish Application process Appearance of wood Process Service life? 

Water-repellent Brush-apply | coat or Grain visible; wood tan Brush to remove 1—3 years 

preservative (WRP) dip. Apply a second coat to brown, fades to gray _ surface dirt; wash 
only if it will absorb. with age to remove mildew 

Tinted clear finish Brush-apply | coat or Grain and natural color Same as with WRP 2-3 years 

(slightly pigmented dip. Apply a second coat _ slightly changed 

deck finish) only if it will absorb. 

Semitransparent stain Brush-apply | coat or Grain visible; coloras | Same as with WRP 4-8 years (on 
dip. Apply a second coat desired saw-textured or 
only if it will absorb. weathered 

wood) 

Paint and solid-color = Brush-, roller-, or spray-. Grain and natural color Clean and apply 10-20 years 


stain apply primer and 2 


top-coats 


obscured 


for paint®; 6-15 
years for solid- 
color stain® 


topcoat if old finish 
is sound; if not 
sound, remove peeled 
finish, prime, and 
apply topcoats‘ 


“Compilation of data from observations of many researchers. 


Vertical exposure; service life depends on surface preparation, climate and exposure, amount and quality of finish, and the wood 


species and its surface texture. 


“Service life of 20 years if primer and two coats of top-quality latex top-coats are used on gradual transition wood species having a 


saw-textured surface. Dark colors may fade within a few years. 


‘Tf old finish does not contain lead, sand to feather rough edges of paint surrounding bare areas and areas of weathered wood (see 


Lead-Based Paint). 


“Service life of 15 years if primer and two top-coats are used on saw-textured wood. 


Refinish exterior wood when the old finish has worn thin 
and no longer protects the wood. If all factors are working 
in concert (good structure design to shed water, effective 
flashing, paintable wood surface, and end grain sealed), 
paint degradation is benign weathering of paint to expose 
the primer or in the case of a penetrating finish, to expose 
the wood surface. In these cases, there is rarely much 
surface preparation other than mild washing prior to re- 
finishing. Mildew growth is not paint degradation, but an 
appearance problem; remove it with a commercial cleaner 
or bleach—detergent solution. If factors are not working in 
concert, paint may crack and peel. 


Oil-Based Semitransparent Stains 


Oil-based semitransparent stains have more pigment than 
tinted WRPs, and the pigment gives more protection to 
wood. Stains usually contain a WR and fungicide. Addi- 
tional pigment maintains color and increases finish service 
life, but pigments give stain a less natural appearance than 
lightly colored finishes because they partially hide wood 
grain and color. Pigment content in semitransparent stains 
can vary, thus providing a range of UV protection and color. 
Most people prefer colors that accentuate the natural color 
of the wood. 


Oil or oil-alkyd resin in oil-based semitransparent stains can 
flow into cut lumina at the wood surface carrying pigment 
with it. Some resin penetrates the cell wall; the rest re- 
mains on the surface and bonds the pigments to the surface. 


Semitransparent stains are porous and do not form surface 
films like paints and solid-color stains; therefore, they will 
not blister or peel even in the presence of excessive water. 
Service life varies considerably depending on substrate and 
amount of pigment (Table 16-4). 


Resin and paint manufacturers have tried to achieve the 
properties of solvent-borne semitransparent stains using wa- 
terborne formulations. These finishes achieve a semitrans- 
parent appearance by forming a thin coating on the wood. 


Recently, paint companies have developed “‘semipenetrat- 
ing” stains. Semipenetrating stains partially penetrate the 
cell wall and form a surface film. This finish is similar to a 
high-solids oil-based semitransparent stain. 


Application, New Construction 


Semitransparent stains perform well on saw-textured sur- 
faces. If used on smooth wood, expect approximately half 
the service life compared with saw-textured surfaces (Table 
16-4). They are an excellent finish for weathered wood. 


To get consistent application and good penetration of stain, 
brush-apply oil-based semitransparent penetrating stains. 
The finish is too fluid to use a roller and spraying leads to 
an uneven appearance and lap-marks. Brushing works the 
finish into the wood and evens out the application to mini- 
mize lap marks. Lap-marks form when application of a stain 
overlaps a previously stained area (Fig. 16—20). Prevent lap- 
marks by staining two or three boards at a time and keep- 
ing a wet edge. This method prevents the front edge of the 
stained area from drying before reaching a logical stopping 


16-19 


Figure 16—20. Lap marks on wood finished with semi- 
transparent stain. 


place (corner, door, or window). If possible, work in the 
shade to slow drying. Coverage is approximately 

4.9 to 9.8 m2 L~! (200 to 400 ft? gal-!) on smooth wood and 
from 2.4 to 4.9 m2 L~! (100 to 200 ft? gal-!) on saw-textured 
or weathered wood. 


To increase service life of oil-based semitransparent stains 
on saw-textured or weathered lumber, apply two coats. Ap- 
ply the first coat keeping a wet edge to prevent lap marks. 
Then, work on another area so that the first coat can soak 
into the wood for 20 to 60 min. Apply the second coat be- 
fore the first dries (wet on wet application). (Again, apply 
stain keeping a wet edge to prevent lap-marks.) If the first 
coat dries completely, it seals the wood surface so that the 
second coat cannot penetrate. About an hour after applying 
the second coat, use a cloth, sponge, or brush lightly wetted 
with stain to wipe off excess stain that has not penetrated 
into the wood. Where stain failed to penetrate, it forms an 
unsightly shiny surface film. Stir the stain occasionally and 
thoroughly during application to prevent settling of pigment. 


Two coats of semitransparent penetrating stain may last 10 
years on saw-textured wood. By comparison, the life expec- 
tancy of one coat of stain on new smooth wood is only 2 to 
4 years; however, as the stained wood ages, it becomes more 
porous and subsequent staining lasts longer (Table 16-5). 


Semitransparent stain formulations have changed because 
of VOC regulations. Solvent systems have changed, and the 
amount of solids has increased. Formulations having high 
solids may leave excess resin on the surface (particularly the 
LW) even if the resin has a low MW. If the finish appears 
shiny an hour after application, the finish has not penetrated 
the wood. Remove the excess finish on the surface to avoid 
forming a thin film; thin films crack and peel within a year 
or two. Even if the wood surface has weathered or is saw- 
textured, it may not be possible for a second coat of these 
finishes to absorb into wood. 


16-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Caution: Sponges, cloths, and paper towels that are wet 
with oil-based stain, any other oil or oil-alkyd, or urethane 
finish are particularly susceptible to spontaneous combus- 
tion. To prevent fires, immerse such materials in water and 
seal in a water-filled air-tight metal container immediately 
after use. 


Refinishing 

Oil-based semitransparent penetrating stains degrade by 
slow erosion of pigments to give a gray slightly weathered 
appearance. Refinish when wood begins to show before all 
pigment is lost. Stains do not crack or peel unless excessive 
stain formed a film. Simply use a dry stiff-bristle brush to 
remove surface dirt, dust, and loose wood fibers and re- 
stain. As with clear finishes, remove mildew prior to refin- 
ishing. The subsequent application of penetrating stain often 
lasts longer than the first because it penetrates the porous 
weathered surface. 


If oil-based semitransparent stain did not penetrate prop- 
erly and formed a film, it may fail by cracking and flaking. 
In this case, surface preparation may involve scraping and 
sanding. For wood having a thick film, it may be necessary 
to remove all the old finish with a paint stripper prior to re- 
staining. This is a difficult situation; parts of the structure 
may have areas where the old finish eroded and the surface 
is weathered; parts may have an intact or peeling film. 
Oil-based stains do not penetrate areas having a film; film- 
forming finishes (paint or solid color stain) do not bond to 
weathered areas. Either remove the finish in places having a 
film and re-stain or scuff sand the weathered area, scrap and 
scuff sand the area having a film, and refinish with solid- 
color stain or paint. 


When refinishing semitransparent stains, the stain must 
penetrate wood. As mentioned above, stain service life 
varies with exposure (that is, the weathering of the stain); 
therefore, stain may not penetrate well in some areas. For 
example, an area under the eaves, even on the south side of 
a structure, may be relatively unweathered compared with 
the lower part of the wall. When applying stain to such an 
area, feather the new stain into the old. If the stain does not 
penetrate the wood within an hour, remove excess stain to 
avoid forming shiny spots, which indicate a film. The north 
side of a structure may not need to be re-stained nearly as 
often as the south side (northern hemisphere). 


Do not apply oil-based semitransparent stains over solid- 
color stain or paint. 


Note: Do not use steel wool or wire brushes to clean wood 
or to prepare a surface for refinishing because they con- 
taminate the wood with iron. Minute amounts of iron react 
with tannins in woods like western redcedar, redwood, and 
oak to yield dark blue-black stains (see Finish Failure or 
Discoloration). 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Oils 

Drying oils, such as linseed and tung, are appropriate natural 
finishes for indoor use and are fine for indoor furniture and 
other interior uses not subjected to water or high humidity. 
Oils perform poorly outdoors because they are natural prod- 
ucts and therefore provide food for mildew. When used on 
highly colored woods such as redwood or the cedars, they 
tend to increase mildew growth. Even if formulated with a 
mildewcide, they may not give adequate performance out- 
doors. The original “Madison Formula” for a semitranspar- 
ent stain could be formulated with up to 60% linseed oil and 
it contained 5% pentachlorophenol as a mildewcide. Even 
with this mildewcide, it was prone to develop mildew. 


Film-Forming Finishes 

In a range of least to most protection from UV radiation and 
photochemical degradation of wood, film-forming finishes 
are ranked as follows: clear varnish, pigmented varnish, 
waterborne latex semitransparent stains, solid-color stains, 
and paints. 


Clear Varnish 


Clear varnish is a transparent film-forming finish that en- 
hances the natural beauty and figure of wood. In a book 
originally published in 1904, A.H. Sabin listed 16 types of 
varnish (architectural, cabinet, carriage, marine, and piano, 
to name just a few) (Sabin 1927). These varnishes were a 
solution of natural resins, linseed or tung oil, or both, and 
turpentine. In a recent publication, Wicks and others (2007) 
describe modern varnishes as urethane-modified alkyds. 
Spar varnish (a combination of novolac phenolics resin and 
tung and linseed oils) is also available. Urethane-based var- 
nishes have good abrasion resistance and perform well on 
furniture, floors, and interior woodwork. However, varnish 
lacks exterior permanence unless protected from direct sun- 
light; varnishes in direct sunlight generally require refinish- 
ing every | to 2 years. Varnishes embrittle by exposure to 
sunlight and develop severe cracking and peeling. They last 
longer in protected areas, such as soffits, doors protected by 
porches, or the north side of structures; however, even in 
protected areas, apply a minimum of three coats. Staining 
the wood (oil-based semitransparent stain) prior to applying 
varnish improves its service life; the pigments in the stain 
decrease the photodegradation of the wood, thus maintain- 
ing varnish adhesion. Varnish is a high-maintenance finish 
and is not generally used on the exterior of structures. 


Clear varnish usually fails by a combination of cracking and 
UV degradation of the wood at the wood—varnish interface. 
This can be identified by examining the back of a chip of 
varnish and finding wood fiber attached. Refinishing usually 
requires scraping, sanding, or power-washing the finish off 
and then reapplying the finish. 


Pigmented Varnish 


Finish manufacturers have modified clear varnish to im- 
prove exterior performance by adding finely ground inor- 


ganic pigments (nanopigments). These pigments partially 
block UV radiation yet allow much of the visible light to 
pass through the finish—that is, they appear transparent. The 
particle size of these pigments is similar to the wavelength 
of UV radiation (300-400 nm), and much like dust in the at- 
mosphere that blocks UV radiation and blue wavelengths of 
visible light to make the sun appear red during a sunset, pig- 
ments block UV radiation to protect wood. These products 
perform better than traditional clear varnishes. However, 

as with clear varnishes, pigmented varnish gives excellent 
performance in protected areas. The varnish is less prone 

to peel; degradation initially occurs on the film surface as 
crazing. Refinishing before the crazing develops into cracks 
restores the appearance. Eventually, however, the buildup of 
coats will block visible light and the wood will appear dark. 


Varnish can give years of service on outdoor furniture if 
the furniture is covered with an opaque waterproof cover 
when not in use. The cover protects the varnished wood 
from UV degradation and discourages birds from roosting 
on the furniture. Several coats of varnish eliminate splin- 
ters, allow the beauty of the wood to show, and give 

a cleanable surface. 


Waterborne Latex Semitransparent Stains 


Waterborne latex semitransparent stains (introduced in the 
section on Oil-Based Semitransparent Stains) are discussed 
here because they form films. These finishes are usually an 
acrylic or modified acrylic and have high MW;; the polymers 
are too large to penetrate the cell wall. Considerable confu- 
sion remains concerning penetration of these finishes. As 
mentioned previously, penetration of a finish into cut lumina 
on the wood surface is not penetration into wood. Filling 

the lumen does not modify the wood cells near the surface. 
Latex semitransparent stains give the look of an oil-based 
semitransparent stain by forming a thin film. 


Whereas oil-based semitransparent stains slowly erode, la- 
tex semitransparent stains tend to crack and flake. The film 
buildup is not sufficient to give performance needed for a 
film-forming finish. If applied in sufficient coats to give 
more than a few years performance, they give the appear- 
ance of a solid-color stain. Some formulations are modified 
with oil-alkyds. The oil penetrates the surface, thus improv- 
ing the performance of the finish. Paint companies continue 
to improve these formulations; check with paint suppliers 
for the latest information on new products. 


Application, New Construction 


Latex-based semitransparent stains should be brush-applied. 
As with oil-based semitransparent stains, they are suscep- 
tible to forming lap marks. Apply the second coat within 

2 weeks after the first has dried. Latex-based stains last 
longer on saw-textured wood. 


16-21 


Refinishing 

Scrape areas where the stain has flaked, wash, if necessary, 
and refinish. As with oil-based semitransparent stains, to 
avoid an uneven appearance, it may be necessary to feather 
the new finish into the old in areas where the old stain is still 
in good condition. Waterborne latex stains form a thin film 
and may not adhere well to weathered wood. 


Solid-Color Stains 


Solid-color stains are opaque finishes (also called hiding, 
heavy-bodied, or blocking stains) that come in many colors 
and are made with a higher concentration of resin and pig- 
ment than are semitransparent penetrating stains; therefore, 
solid-color stains obscure the natural color and grain of 
wood. They are available in latex-based (usually acrylic or 
modified acrylic polymers) and oil-based formulations. Oil 
and latex solid-color stains are similar to paints; they form 
a film. 


Application 

Apply solid-color stains by brush, sprayer, or roller. If using 
a sprayer or roller, back-brush to even out the application 
and work the finish into the surface, particularly on saw- 
textured wood. One coat of solid-color stain is not adequate 
for smooth wood; apply a sufficient number of coats to give 
a 0.10—0.13-mm (0.004—0.005-in., or 4—5-mil) dry film 
thickness. If applied in a single coat to smooth wood, they 
tend to crack and flake; the film lacks sufficient cohesive 
strength to accommodate moisture-driven changes in dimen- 
sion of the substrate. Two coats of solid-color stain applied 
over a quality latex or oil primer should give service life 
similar to that of a good paint system on smooth-planed 
wood. Some manufacturers recommend using the first coat 
of a solid-color stain as a primer, but primer paint might be 
better, particularly for wood containing extractives (such as 
cedar and redwood). On saw-textured wood, sufficient film 
thickness may be possible with a single coat, but primer and 
one top-coat will usually give 15 to 20 years service life. 
Solid-color stains lack abrasion resistance and manufactur- 
ers do not generally recommended them for horizontal wood 
surfaces such as decks. 


Refinishing 
Solid-color stains can usually be applied over paint. See the 
following section (Paint) for additional information on refin- 


ishing. If the old finish has cracked or peeled, remove it and 
scuff-sand the wood prior to refinishing. 


Paint 


Paint appears somewhere on almost all buildings. For ex- 
ample, brick-, vinyl-, and aluminum-sided buildings often 
have painted wood trim. Paints are highly pigmented film- 
forming coatings and give the most protection against UV 
radiation. Paints protect wood surfaces from weathering, 
conceal some surface defects, provide a cleanable surface, 
offer many colors, and give high gloss (high gloss is not 


16-22 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


possible with stains). Paint is the only finish that can give 

a bright white appearance. Paint retards penetration of 
moisture, decreases discoloration by wood extractives, and 
retards checking and warping of wood. However, paint is 
not a preservative. It will not prevent decay if conditions are 
favorable for fungal growth. 


Paint is available in two general types: solvent-borne oil- 
alkyds and waterborne latexes (usually acrylic or vinyl 
acrylic polymers). 


Oil-based paint is a mixture of finely ground inorganic pig- 
ment in a resin (binder) with additives to speed curing, im- 
prove application, and give mildew resistance. The simplest 
resin is a drying oil, such as linseed oil. Modern oil-based 
paints have the drying oil combined with a poly functional 
alcohol to form an oil-alkyd. Oil-alkyds for wood have ex- 
cess oil (that is, long-oil-alkyds), making them more flexible 
than short-oil-alkyds (that is, having a shortage of oil). Oil- 
alkyds form a film by reacting with oxygen in the air to give 
a cross-linked polymeric network. Prior to regulation of the 
amount of organic solvent in oil-alkyds, they contained tur- 
pentine or mineral spirits. Modern oil-alkyds have complex 
solvent systems to meet VOC requirements. 


Latex-based paint is also a mixture of finely ground pigment 
in a resin. The resin is a synthetic polymer, and it coalesces 
to form a film; these polymers do not react with oxygen. The 
main solvent is water, with other solvents to keep the poly- 
mer flexible while it coalesces. Acrylics and vinyl acrylics 
are typical resins in wood finishes. 


Oil-alkyd or latex primers link wood to top-coats and pro- 
vide a base for all succeeding top-coats (initial top-coats and 
refinishing). Primers seal the surface to prevent extractives 
bleed, provide adhesion between the wood and top-coats, 
and give color base to even out differences in wood color 
and top-coat color. Primers flow into void spaces at the 
wood surface to improve top-coat adhesion and block ex- 
tractives in species such as redwood and western redcedar. 
At this time, oil-alkyd primers block extractives better than 
do latex primers, but paint manufacturers continue to im- 
prove latex primers. Oil-alkyd primers block water absorp- 
tion into end grain and, to a limited extent, can penetrate 
wood cell walls, thus modifying the surface and improving 
its dimensional stability. Latex primers do not penetrate cell 
walls but merely flow into cut cells and vessels. Latex prim- 
ers do not seal the end grain as well as oil-alkyd primers 

do. Latex primers are more flexible and stay more flexible; 
thus, they are less likely to crack as they age. Latex primers 
are porous and thus permeable to water and water vapor; 
oil-alkyd paints are less permeable to water and water vapor 
(Table 16-3). 


Latex top-coats can be applied over oil-alkyd primers. Latex 
paints formulated with acrylic resins are resistant to weath- 
ering; they maintain their gloss better than oil-alkyd paints. 
Oil-alkyd top-coats tend to lose gloss within a year or two 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


and are prone to embrittle over time. Latex paints (primers 
and top-coats) permit water cleanup; oil-alkyd paints require 
organic solvents for cleanup. Sufficient dry film thickness 
on smooth-planed surfaces obscures wood grain and texture; 
on saw-textured surfaces, some surface texture remains. 


Application, New Construction 


On smooth-planed wood, apply a primer and two top-coats 
to achieve a 0.10—0.13-mm (4—5-mil) dry film thickness; on 
saw-textured wood, primer and one top-coat may suffice. 

As with solid-color stains, apply paints with brush, roller, 

or sprayer. If using a roller or sprayer, back-brush to get an 
even coating and ensure the finish wets the surface. Apply 
the first coat of film-forming finishes (paint, latex semitrans- 
parent stains, and solid-color stains) within 2 weeks after 
installing smooth-planed exterior wood products; timely 
application ensures good paint adhesion. Improve film adhe- 
sion to smooth-planed flat-grain products, particularly those 
species having abrupt grain transition, by wetting the wood 
to raise the grain and scuff sanding (lightly sanding with 
50-80 grit sandpaper) after it dries. 


For woods with water-soluble extractives, such as redwood 
and western redcedar, primers block extractives bleed into 
the top-coat. Use a primer that is labeled to “block extrac- 
tives bleed,” usually an oil-alkyd-based paint. Some manu- 
facturers also formulate stain-blocking acrylic-latex primers. 
Allow latex stain-blocking primer to dry for at least 24 to 
48 h before applying the first top-coat. If the primer has not 
fully coalesced, extractives may bleed into the top-coat. For 
species, such as pine, that do not tend to have extractives 
bleed, a quality primer is still necessary to give a good base 
for top-coats. Follow the application rates recommended by 
the manufacturer to achieve sufficient film thickness. A uni- 
form primer coating having sufficient thickness distributes 
wood swelling stresses and thus helps prevent premature 
paint failure. Primer should cover approximately 6.1 to 

7.4 m2 L~! (250 to 300 ft? gal-!) on smooth unfinished 
wood; coverage is considerably less on saw-textured wood. 


Apply two coats of acrylic latex paint over the primer. If ap- 
plying two top-coats to the entire structure is not practical, 
consider two top-coats for fully exposed areas on the south 
and west sides and a single top-coat on other areas. Two top- 
coats over a properly applied primer should last more than 
10 years on smooth wood (Tables 16—4 and 16—5) and many 
three-coat paint systems in test at FPL have lasted 20 years. 
To avoid peeling between paint coats, paint manufacturers 
recommend applying the first top-coat within 2 weeks after 
the primer and the second top-coat within 2 weeks of the 
first. If more than 2 weeks elapse between paint coats, it 
may be necessary to wash the paint with mild detergent and 
rinse thoroughly. If the primer has been exposed for several 
months, it may need to be primed again prior to applying the 
top-coats. However, some primer may not weather as quick- 
ly and some top-coats may adhere well to weathered primer; 
check with manufacturers for information on their products. 


Avoid applying oil-alkyd paint to a hot surface in direct 
sunlight and to a cool surface that the sun will heat within 

a few hours. The heat causes the surface of the coating to 
dry, trapping solvent in the film. The trapped solvent forms 
a “temperature blister,” which usually occurs within a day or 
two after painting. They do not contain water. Do not cool 
the surface by spraying with water. 


Apply latex-based waterborne paints when the temperature 
is at least 10 °C (50 °F) and expected to remain above this 
temperature for 24 h. (The dew point is a good estimate of 
nighttime low temperature.) Most latex paints do not co- 
alesce properly if the temperature drops below 10 °C 

(50 °F). Oil-alkyd paint may be applied when the tempera- 
ture is at least 4 °C (40 °F). Check with paint manufacturers 
on the temperature requirements because some paints can be 
applied at lower temperatures than these. As with oil-alkyd 
paints, avoid painting hot surfaces in direct sunlight. Prior 
to applying latex paints, the surface can be cooled with wa- 
ter spray and allowed to dry. 


Avoid painting late in the afternoon if heavy dew is expect- 
ed during the night. Water absorption into partially cured 
oil-alkyds or partially coalesced latexes can cause wrinkling, 
fading, loss of gloss, and streaking. 

Refinishing 

In the absence of catastrophic failure such as cracking, flak- 
ing, and peeling, solid-color stains and paints slowly erode. 
A three-coat finish system (0.10—0.13 mm thick) may last 
20 years on saw-textured wood. When the top-coats begin 
to wear thin exposing the primer, reapply one or two new 
top-coats. One coat may be adequate if the old paint surface 
is in good condition. Surface preparation merely involves 
washing the surface to remove mildew, dirt, and chalk. 
Paint erodes at different rates, depending on the exposure 
to sunlight; therefore, different sides of a structure do not 
need to be painted on the same schedule. Paint on the north 
side lasts twice as long as that on the south side (northern 
hemisphere). When repainting, coverage should be approxi- 
mately 9.8 m2 L~! (400 ft? gal-'). 


Clean areas that are protected from sun and rain, such as 
porches, soffits, and walls protected by overhangs. These ar- 
eas tend to collect dirt that decreases adhesion of new paint. 
Repainting protected areas every other time the structure is 
painted usually gives adequate performance. 


Do not paint too often. If paint is sound, but discolored 

with mildew, wash it. It does not need repainting. Frequent 
repainting may form an excessively thick film; thick oil- 
based paint is likely to crack across the grain of the wood 
(see Cross-Grain Cracking). Latex paints seldom develop 
cross-grain cracking because they are more flexible than are 
oil-based paints. Since latex paints have replaced oil-based 
top-coats for most exterior applications, cross-grain crack- 
ing is rare except for latex paint applied over thick oil-based 


16-23 


paint. However, too many coats of latex paint can eventually 
lead to adhesion failure of the primer. 


In situations where catastrophic failure has occurred, refin- 
ishing paint and solid-color stains may require extensive 
surface preparation. First, scrape off all loose paint. In the 
absence of lead-based paint, sand areas of exposed wood 
with 50- to 80-grit sandpaper to remove the weathered sur- 
face and to feather the abrupt paint edge. Wash the remain- 
ing old paint using a commercial cleaner or a dilute house- 
hold bleach and detergent solution to remove dirt and mil- 
dew and rinse thoroughly (see Mildew). Prime the areas of 
exposed wood, then top-coat. If the old paint has excessive 
chalking, it may be necessary to re-prime (see Chalking). 


Note: Do not sand lead-based paint. Use special precau- 
tions if the old paint contains lead (see Lead-Based Paint). 


Table 16—4 summarizes the suitability and expected life of 
commonly used exterior finishes on several wood species 
and wood-based products. The information in these tables 
gives general guidelines. Many factors affect paintability of 
wood and service life of wood finishes. Table 16—5 summa- 
rizes the properties, treatment, and maintenance of exterior 
finishes. 


Application of Finishes, Special 
Uses 


Porches, Decks, Deck Railings, and Fences 


Porches get wet from windblown rain; therefore, apply a 
WRP or primer to end grain of flooring, railings, posts, and 
balustrade prior to or during construction. Primers and top- 
coats for porch floors are formulated to resist abrasion. 


Decks are usually finished with penetrating clears, lightly 
pigmented clears, or semitransparent stains. These finishes 
need more frequent application than does paint but do not 
need extensive surface preparation, because they seldom fail 
by cracking and peeling. Limit the application of semitrans- 
parent stain to what the surface can absorb. The best appli- 
cation method is by brush; roller and spray application may 
put too much stain on horizontal surfaces. Unless specially 
formulated for use on decks, solid-color stains should not be 
used on decks or porches because they lack abrasion resis- 
tance and they tend to fail by peeling. 


Like decks, fences are fully exposed to the weather, and 
some parts (such as posts) are in contact with the ground; 
therefore, wood decay and termite attack are potential prob- 
lems. Use lumber pressure-treated with preservatives or 
naturally durable wood species for all posts and other fence 
components that are in ground contact. When designing and 
constructing fences and railings for decks and porches, ar- 
chitects and contractors need to consider protecting exposed 
end-grain of components to resist water absorption. 


16-24 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Film-forming finishes on fences and railings trap moisture 
if the end grain is not sealed during construction. Figure 
16-14 shows a railing 8 years after construction. Water 
flowed down the railing and absorbed into the end grain, 
and the paint kept the wood from drying. If railings are to 
be painted, seal the end grain or use pressure-treated wood, 
particularly where decay of wood is a safety hazard (railings 
on decks and porches high off the ground). 


Concerning the service life of naturally durable wood spe- 
cies compared with wood pressure-treated with preserva- 
tives, there are no absolute “rules.” However, for in-ground 
contact uses and structural components of decks and porches 
(beams, joist, and railings), pressure-treated wood is proba- 
bly better and may be a code requirement in some areas. The 
service lives of naturally durable and preservative-treated 
woods are quite comparable in aboveground exposures, such 
as decking boards. In selecting wood for porches, decks, and 
fences, whether preservative treated or a naturally durable 
species, consider the exposure conditions, design of the 
structure, properties of the wood, and the finish to be used. 
Wood weathering can be as much a factor in long-term 
service life of decks and fences as decay. Protect naturally 
durable wood species and preservative-treated wood with a 
finish. Periodic treatment with a penetrating sealer, such as a 
WRP or lightly pigmented deck finish will decrease check- 
ing and splitting. Pigmented finishes retard weathering. 


Treated Wood 


Copper-based preservatives (copper azole, ammoniacal cop- 
per quat (ACQ), ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate (ACZA), 
chromated copper arsenate (CCA)), creosote, and penta- 
chlorophenol are common factory-applied preservatives. 

Of these, wood treated with copper azole and ACQ is often 
used to construct porches, decks, and fences. The treatment 
has little effect on finishing once the wood has dried; species 
and grain orientation affect finishing more than preservative 
treatment does. Waterborne treatments containing copper 
may maintain a brown color for approximately 2 years. 
Some copper-based preservatives may have a water repel- 
lent included in the treatment to give the treated wood better 
resistance to weathering. Even if the manufacturer treated 
the wood with water repellent, maintain it with a finish to 
extend its service life. People often replace decking because 
of weathering, not decay. 


Creosote and pentachlorophenol are generally used for 
industrial and commercial applications where applying a 
finish is not considered practical. Creosote is oily, and wood 
treated with creosote does not accept a finish. Pentachloro- 
phenol is often formulated in heavy oil. Wood treated with 
preservatives formulated in oil will not accept a finish. 


Marine Uses 


The marine environment is particularly harsh on wood 
because of wind-blown salt spray, abrasion by sand, and 
direct and reflected UV radiation. Any of the types of finish 
discussed previously can be used in marine environments. 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


WRPs, tinted clears, and oil-based semitransparent stains 
give some protection; however, a paint system gives the best 
protection against photochemical degradation. If possible, 
finish wood with a WRP prior to painting. Consult paint 
manufacturers for products formulated for marine use. 


Note: Any wood in contact with water must be pressure 
treated to specifications for marine use. Chromated cop- 
per arsenate (CCA) is still used in marine environments, 
and the chromium in the formulation improves the perfor- 
mance of stains and paints. 


Boats 


Varnish enhances the appearance and protects wood trim 
on boats (hence the name spar varnish), but it is exposed 
to more sunlight and water than on structures. Therefore, it 
needs regular and frequent refinishing. Paint manufactur- 
ers recommend three to six coats for best performance. 
Applying oil-based semitransparent stain to wood prior to 
varnishing increases the service life of the varnish, but the 
stain obscures some of the color of the wood. Keeping the 
appearance of wood trim bright and new is labor intensive 
but often well worth the effort. 


Finish hulls with marine paint (two-part epoxy- or urethane- 
paint). Protect areas below the water line with antifouling 
paint. Consult manufacturers for information on these 
products. 


Panel Products 


The edges of panel products such as plywood, OSB, and fi- 
berboard are vulnerable to absorption of water. To minimize 
edge swelling and subsequent finish peeling, seal the edges 
of these products with a WRP, oil-alkyd primer, or sealer 
formulated for this use. The type of edge sealer depends on 
the surface finish. Prior to staining (oil-based semitranspar- 
ent stain), seal with the stain or a WRP; prior to painting 
(paint or solid-color stain), seal with an oil-alkyd primer. 


Plywood siding products may have a saw-textured surface 
(such as T1—11 siding) or a paper overlay (MDO). Saw-tex- 
tured surfaces may be finished with oil-based semitranspar- 
ent stain, solid-color stain, or paint. Paint gives the longest 
service. Paper overlay products will not accept a penetrating 
finish (such as oil-based semitransparent stain); finish with 
paint or solid-color stain. 


During pressing of OSB and fiberboard panels for exterior 
use, manufactures usually include MDO. The panels are 

cut to give lap siding. The MDO protects the surface from 
moisture and gives a good surface for film-forming finishes. 
However, as with plywood, the edges and areas around fas- 
teners are vulnerable to water absorption and need to 

be sealed. 


Fire-Retardant Coatings 


Fire-retardant finishes have low surface flammability, and 
when exposed to fire, they “intumesce” to form an expanded 


low-density film. The expanded film insulates the wood 
from heat and retards combustion. The finishes have addi- 
tives to promote wood decomposition to charcoal and water 
rather than flammable vapors. 


Back-Priming 

Back-priming is applying primer or WRP to the back side 
of wood (usually siding) before installing it. Back-priming 
with stain-blocking primer retards extractives staining, par- 
ticularly run-down extractives bleed. It decreases absorption 
of water, thus improving dimensional stability. Siding is less 
likely to cup, an important consideration for flat-grain wood. 
Improved dimensional stability decreases stress on the fin- 
ish, thus decreasing paint cracking. 


At the time siding is back-primed, seal end grain with oil- 
alkyd primer. This process has an even greater effect in stop- 
ping water absorption than back-priming. Primed end-grain 
eliminates paint failure near the ends of boards. Prime ends 
cut during installation. 


Factory Finishing 

Factory priming hardboard siding has been a standard indus- 
try practice for many years, and recently, factory-finished 
(primer and top-coats) siding, trim, and decking have 
become common. Factory finishing offers several advan- 
tages: avoids finishing during inappropriate weather, gives 
consistent film thickness, contributes to timely completion 
of structures, and decreases overall cost. Factory finishing 

is advantageous in northern climates where exterior finish- 
ing is impossible during the winter. Controlled application 
ensures consistent 0.10 to 0.13 mm (4 to 5 mil) dry film 
thickness. Siding is normally primed on all sides, including 
the end grain. When installing factory-finished siding, prime 
following cross-cuts. Controlled conditions enable many 
factory finishers to guarantee their products against crack- 
ing, peeling, and blistering for 15 years. 


Finish Failure or Discoloration 


Properly applied to a compatible substrate on a well-de- 
signed and constructed structure, finishes rarely fail prema- 
turely. In the absence of finish failure (cracking and peeling) 
or discoloration (extractives bleed, iron stain, and mildew 
growth), finishes undergo a slow erosion lasting several 
years—even decades. This section is about “when things go 
wrong”. 


The most common causes of premature failure of film-form- 
ing finish (paint and solid-color stains) are water, weathering 
of wood prior to painting, inadequate surface preparation, 
and insufficient film thickness. Structure design, wood spe- 
cies, and grain angle can also affect performance. Topics 
covered in this section are paint cracking (parallel to grain), 
cross grain cracking, peeling, intercoat peeling, chalking, 
mill-glaze, mildew, blue stain, iron stain, and brown stain 
over knots. 


16-25 


Exterior paint is subject to wetting from rain, dew, and frost. 
Equally serious is “unseen moisture” (water vapor) that 
moves from inside to outside structures in cold climates and 
from outside to inside of air-conditioned buildings in hot 
climates. Effective air and vapor barriers can minimize wa- 
ter vapor movement (see Chapter 13). 


Paint Cracking (parallel to grain) 


Cracking parallel to grain occurs on smooth flat-grain lum- 
ber, particularly with wood species having abrupt transition 
between EW and LW bands (such as southern yellow pine, 
Douglas-fir, and oak). LW bands are compressed into EW 
during planing. Normal rebound of LW bands after wood is 
in service causes films to crack along the EW—LW bound- 
ary. Other contributing factors are coatings having insuf- 
ficient thickness and lacking flexibility. If the cracking is not 
too severe, scuff sand and apply one or two top-coats to give 
additional film-build. 


Peeling and Flaking 


Peeling and flaking (adhesion failure between wood and the 
primer) can have several causes: water, wood weathering, 
and dimensional change of thick LW bands on flat grain of 
high-density wood species. Flaking often follows cracking; 
small cracks in paint caused by raised grain allow water to 
enter. Flaking is similar to peeling; small pieces of finish 
peel from the surface usually along an EW—LW boundary. 
Flaking often occurs with cracking parallel to grain and is 
attributed to thin films. It can occur with thinly applied film- 
forming finishes and with oil-based semitransparent stains 
if they do not absorb properly. Water is the main cause, but 
other factors can also cause it. 


Water speeds the failure by other causes. One cause is 
weathering of wood prior to primer application. Protect 
wood from the weather prior to installation and paint it as 
soon as possible after installing it. Leaving smooth-planed 
lumber exposed to the weather for as little as 2 weeks de- 
creases its paint-holding properties. If wood was exposed 
more than 2 weeks, scuff sand it prior to painting. In fact, 
scuff sanding is always a good idea on planed lumber. The 
wide bands of LW on flat-grain surfaces hold paint poorly. 
If possible, flat-grain boards should be installed “bark-side” 
out to minimize raised grain particularly with wood species 
having abrupt EW/LW transition. Paint applied to weathered 
wood often fails over large areas and can be easily diag- 
nosed by inspecting the back side of the peeled paint. Wood 
fibers are attached to the film clearly showing the grain of 
the wood. 


Priming end grain with oil-alkyd paint eliminates peeling 
at the ends of boards. Saw-texture greatly improves finish 
adhesion to all species and grain angles. Paint and solid- 
color stains adhere quite well to difficult-to-paint wood 
species such as flat-grain southern yellow pine, Douglas- 
fir, and radiata pine, if applied to saw-textured surfaces. 


16-26 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 16-21. Water blisters (also called moisture blis- 
ters) caused bubble-like deformation of paint film. 


Cross-Grain Cracking 


Modern waterborne latex finishes seldom fail by cross-grain 
cracking. If latex finishes crack across the grain, dimen- 
sional instability of wood under the finish causes it. For ex- 
ample, cross-grain checking of juvenile wood causes paint 
to crack. In this case, replace the board and repaint. 


If juvenile wood is not to blame, cross-grain cracking usu- 
ally occurs on structures having thick layers of oil-alkyd 
paint. If the wood is not the cause of paint failure, remove 
the old paint and apply new finish to the bare wood. Old 
paint probably contains lead (see Lead-Based Paint). 


Water Blisters 


Water Blisters (also called moisture blisters) are bubble-like 
deformation of paint films (Fig. 16-21). As the name im- 
plies, these blisters usually contain water when they form. 
Water blisters form between the wood substrate and the first 
coat of paint. After the blisters appear, they may dry out and 
collapse. Small blisters may disappear completely and large 
ones may leave rough spots; in severe cases, the paint peels. 
Oil-alkyd paint recently applied to wet wood is most likely 
to blister. Old paint films are too rigid to swell and form 
blisters; they usually crack and peel. Water blisters are not 
common on latex paint systems. 


Minimizing water absorption into wood is the only way 

to prevent water blisters. Water blisters may occur on sid- 
ing and trim where rain enters through improperly flashed 
doors, windows, and vents; they are common near unsealed 
end grain of siding and trim. Water from ice dams and 
overflow from blocked gutters can also cause water blisters. 
Movement of water vapor from the inside of a structure to 
siding and trim may also cause water blisters. Plumbing 
leaks, humidifiers, and shower spray are sources of inside 
water. Minimizing water absorption also prevents decay 
(rot), warping, and checking of wood. 


Mill Glaze 


Since the mid-1980s, a condition known as “mill glaze” 
(also called planer’s glaze) has been reported to cause paint 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Figure 16-23. Intercoat peeling of paint, usually 
caused by poor preparation of old paint surface or 
excessive weathering of primer prior to application of 


Figure 16—22. (a) Cross-section view of flat-grain 
southern yellow pine showing dense LW bands 
crushed into less dense EW directly beneath them; (b) 
raised grain caused by rebound of LW bands following 
wetting; (c) a thin coat of film-forming finish applied 
over a stressed flat-grain surface will crack as the 
wood rebounds. 


failure. Controversy exists over the exact cause of this con- 
dition, and many people use it as a catch all for unexplained 
paint failures. They attributed the paint failure to dull planer 
blades or excessive heat during planing. However, investi- 
gations of reported mill glaze by FPL scientists showed that 
other factors caused finish failure; scientists were unable to 
duplicate mill glaze in the laboratory. FPL scientists found 
three causes for paint failures that others had attributed to 
“mill glaze”: (1) raised grain under a thin film, particularly 
on smooth flat-grain lumber, (2) wood weathering prior to 
application of film-forming finishes, and (3) moisture (usu- 
ally water). These factors often occurred together. 


Paint failure occurred because of raised grain on flat-grain 
boards, particularly on species having abrupt EW—LW tran- 
sitions. Planer blades tend to crush dense LW bands into less 
dense EW that lie directly beneath them on flat-grain sur- 
faces (Fig. 16-22a). Later, when these boards are exposed 
to moisture, crushed EW absorbs moisture and rebounds, 
which causes the surface LW bands to protrude from the 
surface (Fig. 16—22b). A thin coat of film-forming finish 
applied over a stressed flat-grain surface will crack as the 
wood rebounds (Fig. 16—22c; see Paint Cracking). Failure is 
most common on flat-grain siding finished with insufficient 
film build of oil-based solid-color stain. Thin coatings of oil- 
based solid-color stain and to some extent waterborne latex 
stains are weak and do not withstand the stresses caused by 
raised grain. These low-solids coatings provide only 0.03 to 
0.05 mm (1 to 2 mil) of dry-film thickness, whereas a brush- 
applied three-coat paint system (primer and two top-coats) 


top coat. 


provides 0.10 to 0.13 mm (4 to 5 mil) of dry-film thickness. 
Raised grain is less likely to occur with vertical-grain wood 
because the EW—LW bands are perpendicular to the surface 
and the EW is not crushed during planing. 


Install flat-grain bevel siding saw-textured side out. Saw- 
textured surfaces do not have LW bands compressed into the 
EW. The saw-textured side is the side of choice for applica- 
tion of penetrating semitransparent stains and film-forming 
finishes. The film buildup on the saw-textured side will 

be greater than on a planed surface, and the film will have 
greater mechanical adhesion or “bite.” 


If flat-grain siding must be installed smooth-side out, re- 
move the planing stresses by wetting the surface, then allow 
2 to 3 days for the surface to dry. Scuff-sand the surface 
with 50- to 80-grit sandpaper and apply primer and two 
top-coats. 


Another paint failure that has been attributed to “mill glaze” 
is peeling caused by wood weathering prior to applying 
film-forming finishes (see Weathering, Effect on Paint Ad- 
hesion). Water causes paint to peel (see Peeling and Flaking 
and Water Blisters). 


Intercoat Peeling 


As the name implies, intercoat peeling is loss of adhesion 
between coats of finish, usually peeling of a new paint from 
old paint (Fig. 16-23). It usually occurs within a year of re- 
painting. Prevent intercoat peeling by ensuring that old paint 
is free of dirt, mildew, and chalk prior to repainting. 


Intercoat peeling can also result from allowing too much 
time between applying primer and top-coat. If more than 

2 weeks elapse between applying an oil-based primer and a 
top-coat, clean the surface before applying the second coat. 
If the primer (particularly oil-alkyd primers) has weathered 
for several months, it may be necessary to re-prime prior to 
applying the top-coats (see Testing for Adhesion). 


16-27 


Figure 16-24. Mildew is most common in shaded, 
moist, or protected areas (a) on wood and (b) on paint- 
ed wood. 


Chalking 


Weathering of paint causes chalking; chalk is a residue of 
degraded resin and pigments. These degradation products 
form a fine powder. Some chalking is desirable because 

it allows the paint to self-clean. However, chalking is ob- 
jectionable when the degradation products (especially the 
pigments) wash down a surface having a different color or 
when it causes premature paint failure through excessive 
erosion. Most paints chalk to some extent, but chalking is 
minimal with modern latex paints. 


Latex paint or solid-color stain can be applied over existing 
paint if the old paint is clean and sound (chalk free). Prior to 
refinishing a chalky surface, scrub it thoroughly with a de- 
tergent solution to remove degraded finish residue and dirt. 
Rinse thoroughly before repainting. To check for excessive 
chalking, lightly rub the paint surface with a dark (for light- 
colored paint) or white (for dark-colored paint) cloth. The 
amount of pigment removed by the cloth is a good indica- 
tion of chalking. If the surface is still chalky after cleaning, 
it may need to be primed prior to repainting. Otherwise, the 
new paint may peel. Before repainting surfaces, conduct a 
simple test (see Testing for Adhesion). 


16-28 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Testing for Adhesion 


After preparing old paint for repainting, repaint a small in- 
conspicuous area and allow it to dry at least overnight. To 
test for adhesion, firmly press one end of an adhesive ban- 
dage onto the repainted surface. Remove the bandage with 
a snapping action. If the tape is free of paint, the new paint 
is well-bonded to the old surface and does not need prim- 
ing or additional cleaning. If the new latex paint adheres to 
the tape, the old surface is too chalky and needs additional 
cleaning or priming with an oil-alkyd primer. If both the 
new latex paint and the old paint coat adhere to the tape, 
the old paint is not well bonded to the wood and must be 
removed before repainting. You should test several areas 
of the structure to determine the extent of poor paint bonds 
before stripping all the paint. 


Mildew 


In the absence of catastrophic paint failures described 
above, mildew is probably the most common problem 

with finishes. Mildew is the term for fungi that infect wood 
(Fig. 16—24a) and painted wood (Fig. 16—24b). These mi- 
croorganisms can live on any surface that supplies a food 
source from either within the material or from air or liquids 
that contact the surface. Although the organisms cannot 
decay wood, they can metabolize some of the extractives in 
wood and natural oils (such as linseed oil) in finishes. They 
usually discolor wood or finishes with black deposits and 
often grow in combination with algae (usually green discol- 
oration). 


Mildew may be found anywhere on a building and is com- 
mon on walls behind trees or shrubs where air movement is 
restricted and walls stay damp. Mildew may also be associ- 
ated with dew patterns of structures. Dew forms on parts of 
structures that cool rapidly, such as eaves, soffits, and ceil- 
ings of carports and porches. The dew provides a source of 
water for mildew. 


Mildew can be distinguished from dirt by examining it with 
a 10x magnifying glass (such as a jeweler’s eye loupe). In 
the growing stage, when the surface is damp or wet, the fun- 
gus has threadlike growth. In the dormant stage, when the 
surface is dry, the fungus has numerous egg-shaped spores; 
by contrast, granular particles of dirt appear irregular in 

size and shape. A simple test for the presence of mildew on 
wood or paint is to apply a drop or two of liquid household 
bleach (5% sodium hypochlorite) to the discolored area. The 
dark color of mildew will usually bleach out in | to 2 min. 
Surface discoloration that does not bleach is probably dirt, 
extractives bleed, or iron stain. Mildew can grow through a 
surface coating or under a clear finish. In these cases, it may 
be difficult to test for or to clean the mildew; the finish pro- 
tects the mildew from the cleaning solution. 


To remove mildew, use a commercial cleaner or a dilute 
solution of household bleach with detergent. If using house- 
hold bleach, use as dilute a solution as possible. One part 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


bleach to five parts water should be adequate. In no case 
should a mixture stronger than one part bleach to three 
parts water be necessary. Add a little powdered detergent to 
help remove the dirt. Do not use liquid detergent because 

it may contain ingredients that react with bleach to give 
toxic fumes. Gently scrub the surface with a bristle brush 
or sponge and rinse thoroughly. Rinse using a garden hose, 
keeping the water stream pointed down to avoid flooding 
the back side of siding with water. If using a power-washer, 
keep the pressure low to avoid damaging the wood and, as 
with the garden hose, keep the water stream pointed down. 
Refinish the cleaned surface as soon as it has dried using a 
finish containing a mildewcide. 


Household bleach mildew remover 

¢ | part (5%) sodium hypochlorite (household bleach) 
(1 gallon) 

¢ 3 to 5 parts warm water (3-5 gallons) 

A little powdered household detergent (1/2 cup) 


Warning: Do not mix bleach with ammonia or with any 
detergents or cleansers that contain ammonia. Mixed 
together, bleach and ammonia form a toxic combination, 
similar to mustard gas. Many household cleaners contain 
ammonia, so be careful in selecting the type of cleaner to 
mix with bleach. Avoid splashing the cleaning solution on 
yourself or plants. 


Loss of Gloss and Fading 


Loss of gloss and fading typically occurred with traditional 
oil-alkyd finishes. Although modern acrylic-based latex 
finishes do not give the high gloss of an oil-alkyd, they 
maintain gloss much longer. Some pigments fade more than 
others; check with the paint manufacturer to ensure that the 
colors will last. White is always a safe choice. The paint 
and solid-color service-life estimates given in Tables 16—4 
and 16-5 do not take into account loss of gloss and fading. 
Many dark-colored finishes will fade to give unacceptable 
performance long before the finish fails. 


Water-Soluble Extractives 


In many hardwoods and softwoods, the heartwood contains 
water-soluble extractives. (Sapwood does not contain water- 
soluble extractives.) Western redcedar and redwood are 

two common softwoods that contain highly colored water- 
soluble extractives; extractives give these species their at- 
tractive color, but they can also discolor paint. When wood 
gets wet, water dissolves some extractives; then as the wood 
dries, water carries water-soluble extractives to the surface. 
The water evaporates leaving extractives behind as a reddish 
brown stain. Discoloration shows in two ways: diffused and 
run-down extractives bleed. 


Diffused extractives bleed is caused by (1) water from rain 
and dew that penetrates a porous or thin paint coating, (2) 
water that penetrates joints in the siding, railings, or trim, 


Figure 16-25. High moisture content of wood can 
cause diffuse extractives bleed, particularly if a stain- 
blocking primer is not used. 


} ‘ 
i f ’ f 


s* ; y 
wh 
Figure 16—26. Water-soluble extractive discoloration 


can result from water wetting the back of the siding 
and then running down the front of the board. 


and (3) absorption of water vapor in high humidity areas 
such as bathrooms, swimming pools, and greenhouses 
(Fig. 16-25). 


Good painting practices prevent diffused extractives bleed. 
Use an oil-alkyd stain-blocking primer or a latex primer 
formulated for use over woods like redwood. Do not use 
porous paints such as flat alkyds or latexes directly over 
extractive-rich woods. If the wood is already painted and 
is discolored by extractives, clean the surface and apply a 
stain-blocking primer. Allow sufficient time for the primer 
to cure so that it blocks the extractives, and then apply top- 
coat. 


Run-down extractives bleed is caused by (1) water draining 
behind siding from roof leaks, faulty gutters, or ice dams, 
(2) condensation of water vapor, originating inside the struc- 
ture, on the back side of siding, and (3) wind-blown water 
that wets the back side of siding. The water on the back side 
of the siding dissolves extractives and runs off of the back 


16-29 


Figure 16—27. Blue stain may infect sapwood. 


side of the siding onto the front side of the siding below it, 
where it evaporates leaving red streaks (Fig. 16-26). 


Prevent run-down extractives bleed by (1) fixing roof leaks, 
maintaining gutters, and preventing ice dams, (2) decreas- 
ing condensation or the accumulation of moisture in wall by 
lowering indoor humidity and installing effective air barriers 
in wall systems, (3) designing structures having adequate 
roof overhang to minimize wetting by dew and wind-blown 
rain, (4) back-priming siding prior to installation with a 
stain-blocking primer, and (5) using rain-screen construction 
to vent the back side of siding (see Back-Priming). 


By eliminating the cause of extractives bleed, the discolor- 
ation will usually weather away in a few months. However, 
extractives in protected areas (under the eaves, soffits, and 
porch ceilings) become darker and more difficult to remove 
with time. In these cases, wash the discolored areas with a 
mild detergent soon after the problem develops. Paint 
cleaners containing oxalic acid may remove stains. 


Blue Stain 


Blue stain is a fungus that can infect sapwood of trees and 
logs (Fig. 16-27). Insects, such as the pine beetle, may carry 
it into a living tree. Pine beetle infestation often disrupts the 
flow of nutrients, thus killing the tree. Sapwood of lumber 
from beetle-killed trees usually contains blue stain. Blue 
stain may also infect logs after harvest while the MC is still 
high. The fungus causes a blue discoloration of the wood, 
but the organism does not weaken wood structurally. The 
fungus lacks the enzymes necessary to digest wood poly- 
mers; it lives off the unpolymerized sugars in the sapwood 
(see Chap. 14). Neither commercial mildew cleaners nor 
household bleach with detergent can remove it. If the color 
is objectionable, use a pigmented finish to hide it (see Mil- 
dew). 


Effective control of blue stain takes place prior to using 
lumber at the construction site: maintain healthy forests, 


16-30 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


apply fungicides to logs while in storage prior to cutting 
lumber, use kiln dry lumber, and keep lumber dry. 


Iron Stain 


Iron stains occur from rusting of fasteners or by the reaction 
of iron with tannins in wood. The appearance is different for 
each of these reactions. 


In wood species that lack tannins, iron merely rusts, giving 
a brown stain to the wood surrounding the fastener. The iron 
also causes slight degradation of the wood near it (often 
referred to as “wood sickness’’). This discoloration develops 
over many months or years of exposure. 


In those wood species that have tannins, a chemical reaction 
takes place between the iron and the tannins. Tannins are 
just one of the many chemicals (extractives) in wood. Spe- 
cies such as the cedars, the oaks, and redwood are rich in 
tannins. Iron reacts immediately with the tannins to give a 
blue-black discoloration. 


Steel fasteners are the most common source of iron 

(Fig. 16-28), but traces of iron left from cleaning wood 
with steel wool or wire brushes cause iron stain. Poor qual- 
ity galvanized nails corrode easily and, like uncoated steel 
nails, usually cause unsightly staining of the wood. 


If iron stain is a serious problem on a painted surface, coun- 
tersink the fastener, caulk, spot prime, and top-coat. This 
costly and time-consuming process is only possible with 
opaque finishes. Little can be done to give a permanent fix 
to iron stains on wood having a natural finish. Removing 
fasteners, cleaning the affected areas with oxalic acid solu- 
tion, and replacing the fasteners may not give a permanent 
fix because residual iron left behind continues to cause 
staining. Removing the fasteners often splits the siding. Us- 
ing the wrong fastener can be costly—it may become neces- 
sary to replace all the siding (Fig. 16-28). Use corrosion- 
resistant fasteners such as stainless steel rather than risk iron 
stain, particularly when using natural finishes on wood con- 
taining high amounts of tannin (such as western redcedar, 
redwood, and oak). If using galvanized fasteners, they must 
be hot-dipped galvanized fasteners meeting ASTM A 153/A 
specification. Other galvanized fasteners fail. Unfortunately, 
contractors and their employees may have difficulty 
recognizing the difference among galvanized fasteners 

(Fig. 16-28). 


Iron stain occurring beneath a finish is extremely difficult to 
fix. The coating must be removed before the iron stain can 
be removed. Oxalic acid will remove the blue-black discol- 
oration. Apply a saturated solution (0.5 kg of oxalic acid per 
4L (1 lb gal!) of hot water) to the stained surface. Many 
commercial brighteners contain oxalic acid, and these are 
usually effective for removing iron stains. After removing 
the stain, wash the surface thoroughly with warm water to 
remove the oxalic acid. If even minute traces of iron remain, 
the discoloration will recur. 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Figure 16—28. lron stain on newly installed wood sid- 
ing. Poor quality galvanized nails corrode easily and, 
like uncoated steel nails, usually cause unsightly stain- 
ing of the wood. 


Figure 16—29. Pitch flow from wound. 


Caution: Oxalic acid is toxic; take care when using it. 
(It is the poison in rhubarb leaves.) 


Knots 


Knots in many species contain an abundance of resins and 
other highly colored compounds. These compounds can 
sometimes cause paint to peel or turn brown. Eliminating 
paint discoloration caused by extractives in knots is difficult 
because some of the extractives are soluble in oil-based 
primers and diffuse through them. Latex-based formula- 
tions do not block them either. Coat the knot with shellac or 
specially formulated knot sealer. Do not use varnish to seal 
knots; varnish is not formulated for this use. After sealing 
knots, apply primer and two top-coats. Knots usually check 
as wood dries; if the checks form after the wood has been 


painted, the checks cause the paint to crack (see Wood 
Extractives). 


Pitch 


Pitch and other resins are one of the defense mechanisms 
that a tree uses to protect itself from harmful pathogens and 
insects following injury. When a tree’s bark is damaged, 
pitch flows into these areas to protect the wound 

(Fig. 16-29). Pitch exists as a normal part of the wood of 
pines (Pinus spp.), spruces (Picea spp.), larches (Larix 
spp.), and Douglas-firs (Pseudotsuga spp.), and it can be 
found in specialized wound structures called pitch pockets 
in the wood of most softwood species. Pitch is a solution of 
natural rosins and turpentine in species such as spruce, pine, 
and fir. It remains in the lumber from these species. The ease 
with which it exudes to the surface of lumber depends on 
the amount of turpentine in which the pitch is dissolved and 
the temperature (that is, the more turpentine, the more fluid 
the pitch; the higher the temperature, the more fluid 

the pitch). Pitch exudation can occur in isolated spots 

(Fig. 16—30a) or in large pockets or seams (Fig. 16—30b). 
When pitch bleed occurs, high temperature is the cause. If 
the temperature at the surface of the wood increases, usually 
from being exposed to direct sunlight, the pitch oozes to the 
surface. If the wood is finished, the pitch may exude through 
the coating or cause the finish to discolor or blister. 


The only way to prevent pitch bleed is to remove the turpen- 
tine from the wood during lumber processing. Depending on 
the species, specific kiln schedules can be used to drive off 
most of the turpentine, thus “fixing” or “setting” the pitch 
(making it less fluid). However, not all end uses of lumber 
require pitch to be set; construction grades of lumber, even 
if kiln-dried, seldom have the pitch set. This is usually not a 
problem for construction grades because the wood surface is 
seldom visible. The difficulty occurs with appearance grades 
of lumber, such as for siding and trim. 


Kiln schedules for setting pitch involve higher temperatures 
and last longer than normal drying schedules. For a com- 
plete guide to drying schedules, refer to publications such 
as the Dry Kiln Operator ’s Manual. 


Pitch can be removed in several ways, depending on how 
fluid it is. If the pitch has not hardened (it still contains a lot 
of turpentine), remove it with turpentine or mineral spirits. 
Once it has hardened, scrape it off with a putty knife or 
paint scraper. However, if the pitch is still soft, such pro- 
cedures smear it over the surface of wood or paint. Let it 
harden, and then scrape it off. After removing pitch, sand to 
bare wood, spot prime, and top-coat. Shellac seals extrac- 
tives but not pitch. Paint will not prevent future bleeding of 
pitch during periods of high temperature. If pitch is a recur- 
ring problem, it may be necessary to replace the board. One 
should note that many paints, particularly oil-alkyds, fade as 
they age and repainting the spots where pitch was removed 
may show color differences. 


16-31 


Figure 16—30. (a) Pitch exudation from an isolated spot; 
(b) pitch exudation from a large pocket or seam. 


Finishing Interior Wood 


Many finishes and finishing methods are used indoors 
because of the breadth of wood products and uses—from 
wood floors to cutting boards. This section includes general 
information on a few common products used for interior 
wood finishing and brief subsections on finishing wood 
floors and kitchen utensils. Many finishing methods exist for 
just furniture. Factory finishing of furniture is often propri- 
etary and may involve more than a dozen steps. Methods for 
furniture finishing are not included in this chapter, but most 
public libraries contain books on furniture finishing. Product 
literature for furniture finishes often contains recommenda- 
tions for application. Interior wood products require less 
protection against water and UV radiation than do exterior 
wood products, and finishes usually last for decades. How- 
ever, interior wood products have more exacting standards 
for appearance and cleanability than do exterior wood 
products. 


As with wood used outdoors, wood changes color as it ages 
indoors, whether unfinished or finished. In general, dark 
wood gets lighter and light wood gets darker. Color change 
is natural aging of newly cut wood and is caused by visible 
light, not UV radiation associated with outdoor weather- 
ing. If removing a picture from paneling shows a color 
difference (shadowing by the picture), correct it by leaving 
the wood exposed to light. The color will usually even out 
within several months. To avoid shadowing, keep all paint- 
ings and other wall coverings off paneling until most color 
change has occurred (usually 2 to 3 months, depending on 
the light intensity). 


16-32 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Fingerjointed lumber has become common for interior trim. 
Pieces of wood for fingerjointed lumber often come from 
different trees having different amounts of extractives. 
These extractives can discolor finishes, particularly in humid 
environments such bathrooms and kitchens (Fig. 16—10). 
When painting fingerjointed lumber, use a stain-blocking 
primer to minimize discoloration. In new buildings, allow 
wood adequate time to reach EMC before finishing. 


Types of Finish and Wood Fillers 

Opaque Finishes 

Interior woodwork, especially wood trim, requires smooth 
surfaces, consistent color, and a lasting sheen. Therefore, 
enamels, high-gloss or semi-gloss, are preferable to flat 
paints. However, the higher the gloss, the more the finish 
accentuates imperfections such as planer marks, hammer 
marks, and raised grain. Raised grain is troublesome on flat- 
grain surfaces having abrupt EW—LW transitions, because 
planing crushes LW bands into the EW; later, when the MC 
changes, the EW swells causing raised grain. To obtain a 
smooth finish, sponge unfinished wood with water to raise 
the grain, allow it to dry thoroughly, sand, remove surface 
dust with a tack cloth, and finish. 


Stains 


Stains accentuate wood grain by absorbing differently into 
EW, LW, knots, vessels, and flaws. Stains color EW more 
than LW, reversing the natural color gradation. For uniform 
color, apply a penetrating sealer (“wash coat”) before apply- 
ing stain. It impedes stain absorption into the EW. Interior 
stains are often natural or synthetic dyes dissolved in water 
or organic solvent. Water-soluble stains give depth to a fin- 
ish, dry slowly, raise the grain, and require sanding. Solvent- 
borne stains dry quickly, do not raise the grain, and need 
little or no sanding. A combination of solvent- and water- 
borne stains or dyes can give the finish color “depth.” 


If stain absorbs into wood unevenly, causing a blotchy ap- 
pearance, blue-stain fungi or bacteria probably infected 

the tree prior to cutting for lumber. Blue stain on lumber is 
easy to see. However, bacteria-infected areas have no color 
and wood appears normal. Infected areas absorb excessive 
amounts of stain quickly, giving wood an uneven blotchy 
appearance. The infection occurs across grain boundaries. 
This problem is not very common, but should it occur, it 
cannot be fixed once the stain is applied. If wood is to be 
used for furniture or fine woodwork, it might be a good idea 
to check lumber before using it by applying a stain or dena- 
tured alcohol to identify infected areas. (Schofield (2008) 
describes diagnosing blotching and treating boards prior to 
staining.) Discard pieces on which stain appears blotchy, 
apply a wash coat to decrease absorption, or use them where 
they will not show. Sealing the lumber with dewaxed shel- 
lac prior to staining may help; commercial sealers are also 
available. 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Fillers 


Hardwoods are ring porous, semi-ring porous, or dif- 

fuse porous according to size and location of vessels (see 
Anatomy). Diffuse-porous and semi-ring-porous hardwoods 
with small vessels may be finished with paints, enamels, and 
varnishes in the same way as softwoods. Vessels in most 
ring-porous hardwoods need to be filled to obtain a smooth 
finished surface. Filler may be a paste or liquid, natural or 
colored. Wipe the filler across wood grain to pack it into the 
vessels; then, wipe with a few light strokes with the grain. 
Remove surplus filler immediately after the glossy wet ap- 
pearance disappears. After the filler dries thoroughly, lightly 
sand it before finishing the wood. 


Use slightly different methods for opaque and clear coat- 
ings. For opaque finishes, fill vessels, sand, and apply 
primer/sealer and top-coats. For clear finishes, stain prior to 
filling to bring out the color of the vessels. Transparent fill- 
ers do not affect finish or wood color; colored fillers match 
or contrast with wood color. 


Sealers 


Sealers are thinned varnish, shellac, or lacquer used to pre- 
vent absorption of finish and prevent bleeding of stains into 
surface coatings, especially lacquer coatings. Lacquer and 
shellac sealers dry quickly. 


Transparent Finishes 


Transparent film-forming finishes such as varnish give 
excellent performance on wood indoors. However, as with 
high-gloss finishes, transparent finishes accentuate surface 
blemishes. Remove all blemishes, such as planer marks and 
raised grain before finishing. Transparent finishing consists 
of sanding, staining, filling, sealing, finishing, and some- 
times waxing. 


Transparent coatings may be gloss varnish, semi-gloss var- 
nish, shellac, nitrocellulose lacquer, natural oils, or wax. 
Wax provides protection without forming a thick coating 
and enhances the natural luster of wood. Other coatings, 
such as shellac, linseed or tung oil, lacquer, and varnish ac- 
centuate the natural luster of some hardwoods and seem to 
give the surface “depth.” Shellac applied by the laborious 
process of French polishing probably achieves this impres- 
sion of depth most fully, but the coating is expensive and 
easily marred by water. Rubbing varnishes give almost as 
much depth. Lacquers have the advantages of drying rapidly 
and forming a hard surface, but lacquer requires more coats 
than varnish to obtain a lustrous appearance. Sufficient film 
thickness is needed for long service life, particularly for 
products that are cleaned often, such as kitchen cabinets 

and tabletops. Varnishes are usually alkyd-modified poly- 
urethane and are available in solvent-borne and waterborne 
formulations. Waterborne finishes are more likely to raise 
grain than are solvent-borne finishes and may appear like a 
plastic film, rather than bringing out the “depth” of the wood 


Figure 16-31. Number 2 grade of hickory finished to 
accentuate the beauty of the various colors, knots, and 
grain pattern of this species. 


substrate. Apply varnish directly to wood or stain prior to 
varnishing. 


Varnish and lacquer usually dry to a high gloss. To decrease 
gloss, rub finish surface with polishing compound (water- 
proof sandpaper or powdered pumice stone and water or 
polishing oil). The final sheen varies with the fineness of 

the polishing compound; coarse powders make a dull sur- 
face and fine powders produce a bright sheen. For a smooth 
surface with high polish, use rottenstone and oil for final 
polishing. Varnish and lacquer that give a semi-gloss or satin 
finish are also available. Do not use steel wool (see Iron 
Stain). 


Natural oils such as linseed oil or teak oil and commercial 
formulations such as Danish oil are popular. These finishes 
penetrate wood and do not form a film. Apply two or more 
coats of oil followed by a paste wax. Oil finishes are easy 
to apply and maintain, but they soil more easily than film- 
forming finishes. 


Finishes for Wood Floors 


Wood is highly desirable flooring for homes, factories, and 
public buildings and is available in many wood species. 
Natural color and grain accentuate many architectural styles. 
Finishes enhance the natural beauty of wood floors, protect 
them from excessive wear, and make them easier to clean 
(Fig. 16-31). Detailed procedures and specific products de- 
pend largely on the species of wood used and finish prefer- 
ence. Obtain additional information specific to your needs 
from flooring associations or individual flooring manufac- 
turers. 


Finishing floors consists of four steps: sanding the surface, 
applying filler, staining to achieve a desired color, and 
finishing with a clear coat. Careful sanding to provide a 


16-33 


smooth surface is essential for a good appearance because 
the finish accentuates any irregularities or roughness in the 
surface. A smooth surface requires sanding in several steps 
with progressively finer sandpaper, usually with a machine 
unless the area is small. After sanding, remove all dust. 
Never use steel wool on floors because minute steel particles 
left in wood cause iron stains. Filler is necessary for wood 
with large pores, such as red oak, to obtain a smooth glossy 
appearance (Table 16—1). Stain to obtain a uniform color or 
to accent the grain pattern. Stain should be an oil-based or 
non-grain-raising type. Stains penetrate wood only slightly; 
therefore, protect the stained surface with a clear coating. 
Refinish the clear top-coats as needed to prevent wearing 
through to the stained wood. Staining worn spots in a way 
that will match the color of the surrounding area is difficult. 


Whether the wood is stained or not, sealers or varnishes give 
a clear finish for wood floors. Floor varnish is usually alkyd- 
modified polyurethane. Sealers are usually thinned varnish 
and penetrate the surface without forming a coating of ap- 
preciable thickness. Prolong the service life of floor finishes 
by keeping them waxed. Paste wax generally provides better 
appearance and lasts longer than liquid wax. Re-waxing or 
resealing and waxing of high traffic areas are relatively sim- 
ple maintenance procedures, as long as the stained surface 
of the wood has not been worn. 


Finishes for Items Used for Food 


The durability and beauty of wood make it an attractive 
material for bowls, butcher blocks, and other items used to 
serve or prepare food. A finish helps keep wood dry, which 
makes it less prone to harbor bacteria, check, or crack. Fin- 
ishes that repel water decrease the effects of brief periods 
of wetting (washing). Finished wood is easier to clean than 
unfinished wood. 


Types of Finish 
Sealers and Drying Oils 


Sealers and drying oils penetrate wood and cure (dry) to 
form a barrier to liquid water. Many commercial sealers are 
similar to thinned varnish (e.g., polyurethane or alkyd-mod- 
ified polyurethane). Drying oils such as tung, linseed, and 
walnut can also be used as sealers. Sealers and drying oils 
give a surface that is easy to clean and resistant to scratch- 
ing. Sealers are easy to apply and cure quickly. Drying oils 
may require several weeks to cure. 

Nondrying Oils 

Nondrying oils (vegetable and mineral oils) penetrate wood 
but do not cure. As with sealers and drying oils, they im- 
prove water resistance. Vegetable oils (such as olive, corn, 
peanut, and safflower) are food for microorganisms such as 
mildew or bacteria. Vegetable oils can become rancid and 
may impart undesirable odors or flavors to food. Mineral (or 
paraffin) oil is a nondrying oil from petroleum. Mineral oil 
is not a natural product; therefore, it is not prone to mildew 
or to harbor bacteria. 


16-34 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Varnish and Lacquer 


Finishes that form a film, such as varnish or lacquer, give a 
smooth cleanable surface. These finishes resist staining and 
should perform well if you minimize their exposure to wa- 
ter; avoid placing them in a dishwasher. However, eventu- 
ally the finish may crack, chip, and peel. 


Paraffin Wax 


Paraffin wax is similar to paraffin oil but is solid at room 
temperature. Paraffin wax is one of the simplest ways to fin- 
ish wood utensils, especially countertops, butcher blocks, 
and cutting boards. 


Food Service Items 


Food service items such as salad bowls and eating utensils 
need a finish that is easy to clean and resistant to abrasion, 
water, acids, and stains. Varnishes, lacquers, penetrating 
wood sealers, and drying oils can be used; however, varnish- 
es and lacquers are easiest to keep clean and most resistant 
to absorption of stains. 


Note: Whatever finish is chosen for wood utensils used to 
store, handle, or eat food, be sure the finish is safe and not 
toxic. Also, be sure the finish you select is recommended for 
use with food or is described as food grade. For information 
on the safety and toxicity of any finish, check the label, con- 
tact the manufacturer or the Food and Drug Administration, 
or check with your local extension home economics expert 
or county agent. 


Butcher Blocks and Cutting Boards 


The simplest finish for wood butcher blocks and cutting 
boards is melted paraffin wax (the type used for home can- 
ning). Melt wax using hot plate or other low-temperature 
heat source—do not use an open flame. Brush melted wax 
on the wood. Use an iron to melt excess wax that has solidi- 
fied on the surface so that it absorbs into the wood, or just 
scrape off the excess wax. Refinishing is simple and easy. 
Other penetrating finishes (sealers, drying and nondrying 
oils) may be used for butcher blocks and cutting boards, 
but as mentioned in the subsection on eating utensils, veg- 
etable oils may become rancid. Film-forming finishes such 
as varnish or lacquer perform poorly on butcher blocks and 
cutting boards. 


Wood Cleaners and Brighteners 


The popularity of wood decks and the desire to keep them 
looking bright and new has led to a proliferation of commer- 
cial cleaners and brighteners. The active ingredient in many 
of these products is sodium percarbonate (2Na,CO,°3H,O,). 
Sodium percarbonate is bleach; however, it is oxygen bleach 
rather than chlorine bleach such as laundry bleach—sodium 
hypochlorite and calcium hypochlorite. Oxygen bleaches 
remove mildew and have been reported to be less likely 

to damage wood surfaces than “chlorine” bleaches, particu- 
larly with low-density woods like western redcedar, Alaska 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


yellow-cedar, and redwood. However, it is difficult to com- 
pare the advantages and disadvantages of the two types of 
cleaner (oxygen versus chlorine) because of the wide range 
of active ingredient concentrations in the cleaners, additives 
in the cleaners, and various wood substrates that have been 
used for evaluating the cleaners. Some commercial products 
contain household bleach. Commercial cleaners usually 
have a surfactant or detergent to enhance the cleansing 
action. 


At the other extreme from the reported gentle bleaching ac- 
tion of sodium percarbonate are those cleaners containing 
sodium hydroxide. Sodium hydroxide is a strongly alkaline 
chemical that pulps wood and is used in some paint strip- 
pers. These cleaners may be necessary where mildew is 
imbedded in a surface finish; however, they should be used 
only as a last resort. 


Manufacturers of some cleaners and brighteners report that 
their products restore color to wood. Cleaning wood does 
not add color. Removing mildew reveals the original color. 
Brightening the wood may make it appear as if it has more 
color. Weathered wood has a silvery gray appearance be- 
cause weathering removes colored components from the 
surface. If you want to restore color, stain the wood. Some 
commercial cleaners pulp the wood surface and subsequent 
power washing removes the pulped surface. In this case, the 
color is “restored” because the surface of the wood was re- 
moved. Sanding would give the same result. 


Some brighteners contain oxalic acid. Oxalic acid removes 
extractives bleed and iron stains, but it is not effective for 
removing mildew. 


Paint Strippers 


Removing paint and other film-forming finishes from wood 
is a time-consuming and often difficult process. Finish 
removal is necessary if a finish has extensive cracking or 
peeling (see Finish Failure or Discoloration). It may be nec- 
essary to remove paint containing lead; however, if the paint 
is still sound and it is not illegal to leave it on the structure, 
paint over the lead-based paint to seal in the lead (see Lead- 
Based Paint). 


Methods described here can remove finishes from furniture; 
however, companies that specialize in stripping furniture 
usually immerse the furniture in a vat of paint stripper, then 
clean and brighten the wood. 


Mechanical and chemical are general types of stripping 
methods. Consult product literature for additional informa- 
tion on appropriate uses and safety precautions. Regardless 
of the method used to strip paint, sand the wood prior to 
applying new finish. 


Note: Dust caused by mechanical stripping methods and 
fumes given off by chemical strippers are usually toxic. 
Use effective safety equipment, including a respirator, 
even if the paint does not contain lead (see Lead-Based 
Paint). Dust masks sold in hardware stores do not block 
chemical fumes and are not very effective against dust. 


Mechanical Methods 


Scraping, sanding, wet or dry sandblasting, spraying with 
pressurized water (power washing), and using electrically 
heated pads, hot air guns, and blowtorches are mechanical 
methods for removing finishes. 


Scraping is effective for removing loosely bonded paint 

or paint that has already partially peeled from small areas 
of the structure. If possible, sand weathered surfaces and 
feather edges of paint still bonded to wood. Do not sand if 
the old paint contains lead (see Lead-Based Paint). 


If paint has partially debonded on large areas of a structure, 
contractors usually remove the finish by power washing. 
This methods work well for paint that is loosely bonded. If 
paint is tightly bonded, complete removal can be difficult 
without severely damaging wood. The pressure needed to 
debond tightly bound paint from wood can easily cause deep 
erosion of wood. If high pressure is necessary to remove 
paint, the paint probably does not need to be removed prior 
to refinishing. Power washing erodes less dense EW more 
than dense LW, leaving behind ridges of LW, which are dif- 
ficult to repaint. Power washing is less damaging to wood 
than is wet or dry sandblasting, particularly if low pres- 
sure is used. If more aggressive mechanical methods are 
required, wet sandblasting can remove even tightly-bonded 
paint. Dry sandblasting is not suitable for removing paint 
from wood because it severely erodes wood along with the 
paint and it tends to glaze the surface. Power washing and 
wet and dry sandblasting are not suitable for paint con- 
taining lead. 


Power sanders and similar devices are available for com- 
plete paint removal. Some devices are suitable for removing 
paint that contains lead; they have attachments for contain- 
ing the dust. Equipment that has a series of blades similar 
to a power hand-planer is less likely to “gum up” with paint 
than equipment that merely sands the surface. Planers and 
sanders cannot be used unless the fasteners are countersunk. 
Consult the manufacturers’ technical data sheets for detailed 
information to determine the suitability of their equipment 
for your needs and to meet government regulations on lead- 
containing paint. 


Paint can be softened using electrically heated pads, hot air 
guns, or blow torches, then removed by scraping it from the 
wood. Heated pads and hot air guns are slow methods and 
cause little damage to the wood. Blowtorches have been 


16-35 


used to remove paint, but they are extremely hazardous; 

the flame can easily ignite flammable materials beneath 

the siding through gaps in the siding. These materials may 
smolder, undetected, for hours before bursting into flame 
and causing loss of the structure. Heated pads, hot air guns, 
and blowtorches are not suitable for paint containing lead. 
These methods volatilize lead at their operating tempera- 
tures. Lead fumes are released at approximately 371 °C 
(700 °F). 


Note: Removing paint from wood with a blowtorch is not 
recommended. 


Chemical Methods 


Efficient paint removal may involve mechanical and chemi- 
cal methods. Stripping paint chemically has the following 
steps: apply paint stripper, wait, scrap off the softened paint, 
neutralize the stripper (if necessary), wash the wood, and 
sand the surface to remove wood damaged by the strip- 

per and raised grain caused by washing. Chemical paint 
strippers, although tedious to use, are sometimes the most 
reasonable choice. Some are extremely strong chemicals 
that quickly remove paint but are dangerous to use. Others 
remove the paint slowly but are safer. With the exception of 
alkali paint stripper, how safe a product is and how fast it 
removes paint seem to be inversely correlated. 


Solvent-Based Strippers 


Fast-working paint strippers usually contain methylene 
chloride, a possible carcinogen that can burn eyes and skin. 
Eye and skin protection and a supplied-air respirator are 
essential when using this paint stripper. Paint strippers hav- 
ing methylene chloride can remove paint in as little as 10 
min. Some paint strippers are formulated using other strong 
solvents because of concerns with methylene chloride; the 
same safety precautions should be used with these formula- 
tions as with those containing methylene chloride. Consult 
product literature and strictly observe safety precautions. 


Alkali-Based Strippers 


As an alternative to strong solvents, some paint strippers 
contain strong bases (alkali). As with solvent-based paint 
strippers, alkali-based strippers require eye and skin protec- 
tion. Follow manufacturers’ recommendations concerning 
use of a respirator. Although alkali-based paint strippers 
soften paint rather slowly, they are strong chemicals and can 
severely damage wood. Strong alkali pulps the wood sur- 
face. After paint removal, neutralize the surface with mild 
acid. Unfortunately, balancing the acid and base concentra- 
tions is difficult. If excess alkali remains in the wood, it may 
degrade the wood and subsequent paint coating. Excess acid 
can also damage wood. Alkali strippers are often left on 
painted wood a full day or overnight and are usually cov- 
ered to slow evaporation. These covered types of products 
have the advantage of containing the paint stripper and paint 
quite well, an important consideration when removing paint 


16-36 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


containing lead. Do not let alkali chemicals dry on the 
surface, particularly on those finishes containing lead. The 
dry chemicals contain lead dust. 


Note: Alkali-based strippers require extra care to ensure 
that the wood is neutralized and that residual salts are 
washed from the wood. The surface usually needs to be 
sanded before repainting to remove raised grain. 


“Safe” Paint Strippers 


Several manufactures have marketed “safe” paint strippers. 
These strippers work slower than those having methylene 
chloride. The active ingredient in such paint strippers is 
usually proprietary. Concerning safety, follow the manufac- 
turer’s recommendations. 


Avoidance of Problems 


Avoid finish failure subsequent to removing the old finish 
by using methods that do not damage wood. The best way 
to remove paint may involve a combination of methods. For 
example, use power washing to remove as much loosely 
bound paint as possible. Then, use a chemical paint stripper 
on tightly-bonded paint. Avoid using excessive amounts of 
chemical stripper. Applying too much stripper or leaving it 
on painted wood too long can damage wood. Use less paint 
stripper and reapply it rather than trying to remove all the 
paint with one application and risk damaging wood. 


The range of wood species and finishes and the possibil- 

ity of finishes containing lead complicates paint removal. 
Companies may optimize paint stripper formulation with- 
out considering the effects on wood. Removing paint from 
wood is only half the task. Getting a paintable surface is the 
other half. Companies that formulate paint strippers should 
consider this other half. Those who use paint strippers need 
to understand the added burden of surface preparation. 


Disposal of Old Paint 


No matter what method you use to remove paint, be care- 
ful in disposing of old paint, particularly paint that contains 
lead. Lead paint is hazardous waste; follow all regulations, 
national and local, during the removal, storage, and disposal 
of all paint, especially paint containing lead (see Lead- 
Based Paint). 


Lead-Based Paint 


Lead-based paint was widely used in residential structures 
in the United States until the early 1940s, and its use contin- 
ued to some extent, for the exterior of dwellings, until 1976. 
In 1971, Congress passed the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning 
Prevention Act, and in 1976, the Consumer Product Safety 
Commission (CPSC) issued a ruling under this Act that lim- 
ited the lead content of paint used in residential dwellings, 
toys, and furniture to 0.06%. Prior to any paint restoration 
on structures built prior to 1976 (and probably a good idea 
on any structure), check paint for lead. Check for lead using 
a solution of 6% to 8% sodium sulfide in water or using a 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


test kit. Test kits should be available in most paint and hard- 
ware stores. Be certain to check all paint layers, because the 
older ones are more likely to contain lead. 


Lead-based paint is still manufactured for applications not 
covered by the CPSC ruling, such as paint for metal prod- 
ucts, particularly those made of steel. Occasionally, such 
lead-based paint inadvertently gets into the hands of con- 
sumers. Imported products may also contain lead paint. 
Studies have shown that ingestion of even minute amounts 
of lead can have serious effects on health; lead causes hy- 
pertension, fetal injury, damage to the brain, kidneys, and 
red blood cells, partial loss of hearing, impairment of mental 
development, growth retardation, and inhibited metabolism 
of vitamin D. The American Academy of Pediatrics regards 
lead as one of the foremost toxicological dangers to 
children. 


Lead-based paint on the exterior of structures weathers to 
give flakes and powder. The degraded paint particles accu- 
mulate in the soil near the structure. Lead-based paint used 
on interior surfaces can also degrade to produce lead-con- 
taining dust. Sanding coatings prior to repainting generates 
lead dust. Sanding the exterior of a structure without proper 
equipment can cause lead contamination inside the structure. 


Methods used to remove lead paint can themselves gener- 
ate lead dust. This is particularly true when unacceptable 
methods and work practices are used. Poorly performed 
abatement can be worse than no abatement. Micron-sized 
lead dust particles can remain airborne for substantial peri- 
ods and cannot be completely removed by standard cleaning 
methods. When working on old painted surfaces, assume 
that one or more of the paint coats contain lead. Take pre- 
cautions accordingly. 


Check with the U.S. Department of Health and Urban De- 
velopment (HUD), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), and American Coatings Association for the latest 
regulations and guidelines for remediating lead-based paint 
(www.hud.gov/offices/lead) (www.epa.gov/lead) 
(www.paint.org/issues/lead.cfm). 


Caution: Remodeling or refinishing projects that require 
disturbing, removing, or demolishing portions of struc- 
tures coated with lead-based paint pose serious health 
risk. The consumer should seek information, advice, and 
perhaps professional assistance for addressing these risks. 
Contact HUD for the latest information on the removal of 
lead-based paints. Debris coated with lead-based paint is 
hazardous waste and must be disposed of in accordance 
with federal and local regulations. 


Literature Cited 


AWPA. 2008. Book of standards. Birmingham, AL: Ameri- 
can Wood Protection Association. 


Sabin, A.H. 1927. Technology of paint and varnish. 3rd ed. 
London: John Wiley & Sons. 


Schofield, M. 2008. Fine wood working. Newtown, CT: The 
Taunton Press. September/October (Issue 200): 52-58. 


Wicks, Z.W., Jr.; Jones, F.N.; Pappas, S.P.; Wicks, D.A. 
2007. Organic Coatings: Science and Technology. 3rd ed. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 


Additional References 


APA. 1979. Stains and paints on plywood. Pamphlet B407B. 
Tacoma, WA: American Plywood Association. 


Arnold, M.; Feist, W.C.; Williams, R.S. 1992. Effect of 
weathering of new wood on the subsequent performance 
of semitransparent stains. Forest Products Journal. 42(3): 
10-14. 


ASTM. 2003. Standard specification for zinc coating (hot- 
dip) on iron and steel hardware. A 153/A 153M—Ola. West 
Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International. 1(6). 


Black, J.M.; Mraz, E.A. 1974. Inorganic surface treatments 
for weather-resistant natural finishes. Res. Pap. FPL—232. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 44 p. 


Bussjaeger, S.; Daisey, G.; Simmons, R.; Spindel, S.; 
Williams, S. 1999. Mildew and mildew control for wood 
surfaces. JCT Coatings Tech. 71(890): 67-69. 


Cassens, D.L.; Feist, W.C. 1980a. Wood finishing: finishing 
exterior plywood, hardboard and particle board. North Cen- 
tral Region Extension Pub. 132. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue 
University, Cooperative Extension Service. 


Cassens, D.L.; Feist, W.C. 1980b. Wood finishing: paint 
failure problems and their cure. North Central Region Ex- 
tension Pub. 133. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University, 
Cooperative Extension Service. 


Cassens, D.L.; Feist, W.C. 1980c. Wood finishing: discol- 
oration of house paint—causes and cures. North Central 
Region Extension Pub. 134. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue 
University, Cooperative Extension Service. 


Cassens, D.L.; Feist, W.C. 1980d. Wood finishing: selection 
and application of exterior finishes for wood. North Central 
Region Extension Pub. 135. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue 
University, Cooperative Extension Service. 


Cassens, D.L.; Feist, W.C. 1980e. Wood finishing: finishing 
and maintaining wood floors. North Central Region Exten- 
sion Pub. 136. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University, 
Cooperative Extension Service. 


Daniels, T.; Hirsch, M.; McClelland, K.; Ross, A.; Williams, 
R.S. 2004. Clear exterior finishes: finding the balance 
between aesthetics and durability. JCT Coatings Tech. 

1(9): 42-48. 


Feist, W.C. 1979. Protection of wood surfaces with chro- 
mium trioxide. Res. Pap. FPL—339. Madison, WI: U.S. 


16-37 


Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 11 p. 


Feist, W.C. 1982a. Weathering characteristics of finished 
wood-based panel products. JCT Coatings Tech. 
54(686): 43-50. 


Feist, W.C. 1982b. Weathering of wood in structural uses. 
In: Meyer, R.W.; Kellogg, R.M., eds. Structural use of wood 
in adverse environments. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company. 156-178. 


Feist, W.C. 1990. Outdoor wood weathering and protec- 
tion. In: Rowell, R., ed. Archaeological wood, properties, 
chemistry, and preservation. Advanced in Chemistry Series 
No. 225. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society: 
263-298. Chapter 11. 


Feist, W.C. 1996. Finishing exterior wood. Federation Series 
on Coatings Technology. Blue Bell, PA: Federation of Soci- 
eties for Coatings Technology. 


Feist, W.C.; Hon, D.N—S. 1984. Chemistry of weathering 
and protection. In: Rowell, R.M., ed. The chemistry of solid 
wood. Advances in Chemistry Series No. 207. Washington, 
DC: American Chemical Society: 401-451. Chapter 11. 


Feist, W.C.; Mraz, E.A. 1980. Performance of mildewcides 
in a semitransparent stain wood finish. Forest Products Jour- 
nal. 30(5): 43-46. 


Feist, W.C.; Ross, A.S. 1995. Performance and durability 
of finishes on previously coated CCA-treated wood. Forest 
Products Journal. 45(9): 29-36. 


Feist, W.C.; Williams, R.S. 1991. Weathering durability of 
chromium treated Southern Pine. Forest Products Journal. 
41(1): 8 14. 


Gorman, T.M.; Feist, W.C. 1989. Chronicle of 65 years of 
wood finishing research of the Forest Products Laboratory. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-60. Madison, WI: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Labora- 
tory. 


Jourdain, C.; Dwyer, J.; Kersall, K.; Mall, D.; Springate, 

R.; Williams, S. 1999. Changing nature of wood products— 
what does it mean for coatings and finish performance? JCT 
Coatings Tech. 71(890): 61-66. 


Kalnins, M.A.; Feist, W.C. 1993. Increase in wettability of 
wood with weathering. Forest Products Journal. 
43(2): 55-57. 


Kiguchi, M.; Evans, P.D.; Ekstedt, J.; Williams, R.S.; Ka- 
toaka, Y. 2001. Improvement of the durability of clear coat- 
ings by grafting of UV-absorbers on to wood. Surface 
Coatings International Part B: Coatings Transactions. 
84(B4): 263-270. 


16-38 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Mall, D.D.; Bonura, T.; Bussjaeger, S.; Carll, C.; Panila, D.; 
Williams, R.S. 2004. Frequently asked questions: wood and 
coatings applications. JCT Coatings Tech. 1(3): 36-49. 


McDonald, K.A.; Falk, R.H.; Williams, R.S.; Winandy, J.E. 
1996. Wood decks: materials, construction, and finishing. 
Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 94 p. 


Miller, R.B.; Wiedenhoeft, A.C.; Williams, R.S.; Stockman, 
W.; Green, F. 2003. Characteristics of ten tropical hard- 
woods from certified forests in Bolivia: part II, 

natural durability to decay fungi. Wood and Fiber 

Science. 35(3): 429-433. 


Niemiec, S.S.; Brown, T.D. 1988. Care and maintenance of 
wood shingle and shake roofs. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State 
University Extension Service. EC 1271. (September). 


Richter, K.; Feist, W.C.; Knaebe, M.T. 1995. The effect of 
surface roughness on the performance of finishes. Part 1. 
Roughness characterization and stain performance. Forest 
Products Journal. 45(7/8): 91-97. 


Ross, A.; Daisey, G.; Jourdain, C.; Williams, R.S. 1998. 
Cleaners and restorers for wood decks. The Paint Dealer. 
(April): 30-33. 


Ross, A.S.; Feist, W.C. 1993. The effects of CCA-treated 
wood on the performance of surface finishes. American 
Paint and Coatings Journal. 78(9): 41-54. 


Ross, A.S.; Bussjaeger, R.C.; Feist, W.C. 1992. Professional 
finishing of CCA-pressure-treated wood. American Painting 
Contractor. 69(7): 107-114. 


Sell, J.; Feist, W.C. 1986. Role of density in the erosion 
of wood during weathering. Forest Products Journal. 
36(3): 57-60. 


Simpson, W.T., ed. 1991. Dry kiln operator’s manual. Agric. 
Handb. 188. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 274 p. 


Tichy, R.J. 1997. Interior wood finishing: industrial use 
guide. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 113 p. 


USDA. 1998. Rehabilitation of wood-frame houses. Agric. 
Handb. 804. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service. 240 p. 


WDMA. 1999. Industry standard for water-repellent pre- 
servative treatment for millwork. IS4—99. Des Plaines, IL: 
Window and Door Manufacturer’s Association. 


Williams, R.S. 1986. Effects of acid rain on painted wood 
surfaces: importance of the substrate. In: Baboian, R., ed. 
Materials degradation caused by acid rain. ACS Symposium 
Series 318. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society: 
310-331. 


Williams, R.S. 1990a. Acidic deposition: state of science 
and technology. In: Effects of acidic deposition on materials. 


Chapter 16 Finishing of Wood 


Report 19. National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program. 
19/165 19/202. Vol. 3. 


Williams, R.S. 1990b. Effects of acidic deposition on paint- 
ed wood. In: Effects of acidic deposition on materials. State 
of Science and State of Technology, Report 19. National 
Acid Precipitation Assessment Program: 19/165—19/202. 
Vol. 3. 


Williams, R.S. 1991. Effects of acidic deposition on painted 
wood: a review. JCT Coatings Tech. 63(800): 53 73. 


Williams, R.S. 2005. Weathering of wood. In: Rowell, R.M., 
ed. Handbook of Wood Chemistry and Wood Composites. 
Boca Raton: CRC Press. Chapter 7. 


Williams, R.S.; Feist, W.C. 1993a. Durability of paint or 
solid-color stain applied to preweathered wood. Forest 
Products Journal. 43(1): 8-14. 


Williams, R.S.; Feist, W.C. 1993b. Effect of weathering of 
wood prior to finishing on paint bond strength and durabil- 
ity. In: Proceedings of the Polymeric Materials Science and 
Engineering Division. Denver, CO: American Chemical 
Society Spring Meeting. 1993; March 29 April 2. 


Williams, R.S.; Feist, W.C. 1994. Effect of preweathering, 
surface roughness, and wood species on the performance of 
paint and stains. JCT Coatings Tech. 66(828): 109-121. 


Williams, R.S.; Feist, W.C. 1999. Selection and application 
of exterior stains for wood. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GTR-106. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser- 
vice, Forest Products Laboratory: 1-9. 


Williams, R.S.; Feist, W.C. 1999. Water repellent and water 
repellent preservative finishes for wood. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
FPL—GTR-109. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory: 1—12. 


Williams, R.S.; Feist, W.C. 2001. Duration of wood pre- 
weathering: effect on the service life of subsequently ap- 
plied paint. JCT Coatings Tech. 73(930): 65-72. 


Williams, R.S.; Feist, W.C. 2004. The service life of 
semitransparent stain, solid color stain, and latex paint on 
yellow-poplar and sweetgum plywood and the effect of 
these finishes on wood durability. Forest Products Journal. 
54(7/8): 96-101. 


Williams, R.S.; Knaebe, M. 2000. Restoration of severely 
weathered wood. JCT Coatings Tech. 72(902): 43-51. 


Williams, R.S.; Knaebe, M.T.; Feist, W.C. 1996. Finishes 
for exterior wood. Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 


Williams, R.S.; Miller, R.B.; Gangstad, J. 2001. Charac- 
teristics of ten tropical hardwoods from certified forests in 
Bolivia: part I, weathering characteristics and dimensional 
stability. Wood and Fiber Science. 33(4): 618-626. 


Williams, R.S.; Plantinga, P.L.; Feist, W.C. 1990. Photo- 
degradation of wood affects paint adhesion. Forest Products 
Journal. 40(1): 45-49. 


Williams, R.S.; Sotos, P.; Feist, W.C. 1999. Evaluation of 
several paint systems on severely weathered wood. JCT 
Coatings Tech. 71(895): 97-102. 


Williams, R.S.; Winandy, J.E.; Feist, W.C. 1987a. Adhe- 
sion of paint to weathered wood. Forest Products Journal. 
37(11/12): 29-31. 


Williams, R.S.; Winandy, J.E.; Feist, W.C. 1987b. 
Paint adhesion to weathered wood. JCT Coatings Tech. 
59(749): 43-49. 


Williams, R.S.; Winandy, J.E.; Feist, W.C. 2002. Correla- 
tion of adhesive strength with service life of paint applied to 
weathered wood. Paper 161. In: Proceedings, 9th durability 
of building materials and components conference. Brisbane, 
Australia: 17-20 March. 


Williams, R.S.; Jourdain, C.; Daisey, G.; Springate, R.W. 
2000. Wood properties affecting finish service life. JCT 
Coatings Tech. 72(902): 35-42. 


Williams, R.S.; Knaebe, M.T.; Evans, J.W.; Feist, W.C. 
2001. Erosion rates of wood during natural weathering: part 
IL, effect of exposure angle on erosion rates. Wood and Fi- 
ber Science. 33(1): 50-57. 


Williams, R.S.; Knaebe, M.T.; Sotos, P.G.; Feist, W.C. 2001. 
Erosion rates of wood during natural weathering: part I, ef- 
fect of grain angle and surface texture. Wood and Fiber Sci- 
ence. 33(1): 33-42. 


Williams, R.S.; Lacher, S.; Halpin, C.; White, C. 2005. 
Evaluating weather factors and material response during 
outdoor exposure to determine accelerated test protocols for 
predicting service life. In: Martin, J.W.; Ryntz, R.A.; Dickie, 
R.A., eds. Service Life Prediction, Challenging the Status 
Quo, Federation of Societies for Coatings Technology. Pro- 
ceedings, 3rd international symposium on service life pre- 
diction. Sedona, AZ. 2004 February 1-6. 


Williams, R.S.; Ross, A.S.; Sotos, P.; Cheeks, C.N. 2001. 
Water-repellent preservative treatment of brick molding 
prior to factory priming improves paint service life. In: 
Proceedings of the annual meeting of the American Wood 
Preserver’s Association. (Vol. 97): 65-67. 


16-39 


Use of Wood in Buildings and Bridges 


James P. Wacker, Research General Engineer 


Contents 
Light-Frame Buildings 17-1 
Foundations 17—2 
Floors 17-2 
Exterior Walls 17-3 
Ceiling and Roof 17-4 
Wood Decks 17-4 
Post-Frame and Pole Buildings 17—4 
Log Buildings 17-6 
Heavy Timber Buildings 17-6 
Timber Frame 17-6 
Mill Type 17-7 
Glulam Beam 17-7 
Arch Structure 17-8 
Dome 17-8 
Timber Bridges 17-8 
Log Stinger 17-8 
Sawn Lumber 17-9 
Glulam 17-9 
Structural Composite Lumber 17-9 
Considerations for Wood Buildings 17-9 
Structural 17-9 


Thermal Insulation and Air Infiltration 
Control 17-9 


Moisture Control 17-10 
Sound Control 17-11 
Literature Cited 17-12 


In North America, most housing and commercial structures 
built prior to the 20th century used wood as the major struc- 
tural material. The abundant wood resource formed the ba- 
sic structure for most houses, commercial buildings, bridges, 
and utility poles. Today, houses and many light commercial 
and industrial buildings are made using modern wood struc- 
tural materials. Recently, there has been increased interest 

in using wood for various types of transportation structures, 
including highway bridges. 


In this chapter, the features of various types of building 
systems are described. Emphasis is placed on how these 
systems have adapted to the use of modern materials and 
techniques. For example, where floor, wall, and roof sheath- 
ing for light-frame construction were once commonly 

made from wood boards, sheathing is now commonly 

made from structural panel products, such as plywood and 
oriented strandboard (OSB). Compared with boards, these 
panel products are quicker to install and provide improved 
structural resistance to wind and earthquake loadings. Fur- 
thermore, prefabricated floor and wall panels along with 
prefabricated roof and floor trusses or I-joists are replacing 
piece-by-piece on-site construction with dimension lumber. 
A structure can be enclosed within a short time on site using 
factory-made panelized systems. 


Engineered wood products are being used increasingly for 
transportation structures. A brief description of the uses of 
wood in railroad and highway bridges and other transporta- 
tion structures is included. 


Light-Frame Buildings 


Historically, two general types of light-frame construction 
have been used—balloon and platform framing. Balloon 
framing, which was used in the early part of the 20th centu- 
ry, consists of full-height wall framing members for two-sto- 
ry construction. Additional information on balloon framing 
is available from older construction manuals. Since the latter 
part of the 20th century, platform framing has dominated the 
housing market and is widely used in commercial and light 
industrial applications. Platform framing features the con- 
struction of each floor on top of the one beneath. Platform 
framing construction differs from that of 60 years ago in 

the use of new and innovative materials, panel products for 
floor and roof sheathing, and prefabricated components and 
modules as opposed to “stick built” or on-site construction. 
A detailed description of the platform-type of construction 


17-1 


CErEAP RE Rely, 


is given in Wood Frame House Construction (Sherwood and 
Stroh 1989); additional information is given in the Wood 
Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-Family 
Dwellings, 2001 (AF&PA 2001). 


Foundations 


Light-frame buildings with basements are typically sup- 
ported on cast-in-place concrete walls or concrete block 
walls supported by footings. This type of construction with a 
basement is common in northern climates. Another practice 
is to have concrete block foundations extend a short dis- 
tance above ground to support a floor system over a “crawl 
space.” In southern and western climates, some buildings 
have no foundation; the walls are supported by a concrete 
slab, thus having no basement or crawl space. 


Treated wood is also used for basement foundation walls. 
Basically, such foundations consist of wood-frame wall 
sections with studs and plywood sheathing supported on 
treated wood plates, all of which are preservatively treated 
to a specified level of protection. To distribute the load, the 
plates are laid on a layer of crushed stone or gravel. Walls, 
which must be designed to resist the lateral loads of the 
backfill, are built using the same techniques as conventional 
walls. The exterior surface of the foundation wall below 
grade is draped with a continuous moisture barrier to pre- 
vent direct water contact with the wall panels. The backfill 
must be designed to permit easy drainage and provide drain- 
age from the lowest level of the foundation. 


Because a foundation wall needs to be permanent, the pre- 
servative treatment of the plywood and framing and the 
type of fasteners used for connections are very important. 
A special foundation (FDN) treatment has been established 
for the plywood and framing, with strict requirements for 
depth of chemical penetration and amount of chemical re- 
tention. Corrosion-resistant fasteners (for example, stainless 
steel) are recommended for all preservatively treated wood. 
Additional information and materials and construction pro- 
cedures are given in Permanent Wood Foundation Basic 
Requirements (AF&PA 2007). 


Floors 


For houses with basements, the central supporting structure 
may consist of wood posts on suitable footings that carry 

a built-up girder, which is frequently composed of planks 
the same width as the joists (standard 38 by 184 mm to 38 
by 286 mm (nominal 2 by 8 in. to 2 by 12 in.)), face-nailed 
together, and set on edge. Because planks are seldom suffi- 
ciently long enough to span the full length of the beam, butt 
joints are required in the layers. The joints are staggered in 
the individual layers near the column supports. The girder 
may also be a glulam beam or steel I-beam, often supported 
on adjustable steel pipe columns. Similar details may be 
applied to a house over a crawl space. The floor framing in 
residential structures typically consists of wood joists on 


17-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


400- or 600-mm (16- or 24-in.) centers supported by the 
foundation walls and the center girder (Fig. 17-1). 


Joist size depends on the anticipated loading, spacing be- 
tween joists, distance between supports (span), species, and 
grade of lumber. Commonly used joists are standard 38- by 
184-mm or 38- by 235-mm (nominal 2- by 8-in. or 2- by 
10-in.) lumber, prefabricated wood I-joists, or parallel chord 
trusses. Lumber joists typically span from 3.6 to 4.8 m 

(12 to 16 ft). Span tables are available from the American 
Forest & Paper Association (AF&PA 2005b). Span capabili- 
ties of prefabricated wood I-joists or parallel chord trusses 
are recommended by the manufacturer. 


Floor openings for stairways, fireplaces, and chimneys may 
interrupt one or more joists. Preferably, such openings are 
parallel to the length of the joists to reduce the number of 
joists that will be interrupted. At the interruption, a sup- 
port (header) is placed between the uninterrupted joists 

and attached to them. A single header is usually adequate 
for openings up to about 1.2 m (4 ft) in width, but double 
headers are required for wider openings. Special care must 
be taken to provide adequate support at headers (using joist 
hangers, for example). 


Cutting of framing members to install items such as plumb- 
ing lines and heating ducts should be minimized. Cut mem- 
bers may require a reinforcing scab, or a supplementary 
member may be needed. Areas of highly concentrated loads, 
such as under bathtubs, require doubling of joists or other 
measures to provide adequate support. One advantage of 
framing floors with parallel-chord trusses or prefabricated 
I-joists is that their longer span capabilities may eliminate 
the need for interior supports. An additional advantage is 
that the web areas of these components are designed for 
easy passing of plumbing, electrical, and heating ducts. 


Floor sheathing, or subflooring, is used over the floor fram- 
ing to provide a working platform and a base for the fin- 
ish flooring. Older homes have board sheathing but newer 
homes generally use panel products. Common sheathing 
materials include plywood and OSB, which are available in 
a number of types to meet various sheathing requirements. 
Exterior-type panels with water-resistant adhesive are desir- 
able in locations where moisture may be a problem, such as 
floors near plumbing fixtures or situations where the sub- 
floor may be exposed to the weather for some time during 
construction. 


Plywood should be installed with the grain direction of the 
face plies at right angles to the joists. Oriented strandboard 
also has a preferred direction of installation. Nailing pat- 
terns are either prescribed by code or recommended by the 
manufacturer. About 3 mm (1/8 in.) of space should be left 
between the edges and ends of abutting panels to provide for 
dimensional changes associated with moisture content. 


Chapter 17 Use of Wood in Buildings and Bridges 


Double joists 

under partitions 
Solid bridging 
under load bearing 
partitions only 


Lap Joists 
over girder 
10 cm minimum (4 in.) 
or butt scab 


Stringer joist 


Figure 17-1. Typical floor details for platform construction with joists spliced on center beam. 


Literature from APA-The Engineered Wood Association 
includes information on the selection and installation of the 
types of structural panels suitable for subfloors (APA 2007). 


Exterior Walls 


Exterior walls of light-frame structures are generally load 
bearing; they support upper floors and the roof. An excep- 
tion is the gable ends of a one- or two-story building. Basi- 
cally, wall framing consists of vertical studs and horizontal 
members, including top and bottom plates and headers (or 
lintels) over window and door openings. The studs are gen- 
erally standard 38- by 89-mm, 38- by 114-mm, or 38- by 
140-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in., 2- by 5-in., or 2- by 6-in.) 
members spaced between 300 and 600 mm (12 and 24 in.) 
on center. Selection of the stud size depends on the load the 
wall will carry, the need for support of wall-covering mate- 
rials, and the need for insulation thickness in the walls. 
Headers over openings up to 1.2 m (4 ft) are often 38 by 
140 mm (2 by 6 in.), nailed together face to face with spac- 
ers to bring the headers flush with the faces of the studs. 
Special headers that match the wall thickness are also avail- 
able in the form of either prefabricated I-joists or structural 
composite lumber. Wall framing is erected over the platform 
formed by the first-floor joists and subfloor. In most cases, 
an entire wall is framed in a horizontal position on the sub- 
floor, then tilted into place. If a wall is too long to make this 
procedure practical, sections of the wall can be formed hori- 
zontally and tilted up, then joined to adjacent sections. 


Corner studs are usually prefabricated in such a configura- 
tion as to provide a nailing edge for the interior finish 


(Fig. 17-2). Studs are sometimes doubled at the points of 
intersection with an interior partition to provide backup sup- 
port for the interior wall finish. Alternatively, a horizontal 
block is placed midheight between exterior studs to support 
the partition wall. In such a case, backup clips on the parti- 
tion stud are needed to accommodate the interior finish. 


Upper plates are usually doubled, especially when rafters 

or floor joists will bear on the top plate between studs. The 
second top plate is added in such a way that it overlaps the 
first plate at corners and interior wall intersections. This pro- 
vides a tie and additional rigidity to the walls. In areas sub- 
ject to high winds or earthquakes, ties should be provided 
between the wall, floor framing, and sill plate that should be 
anchored to the foundation. If a second story is added to the 
structure, the edge floor joist is nailed to the top wall plate, 
and subfloor and wall framing are added in the same way as 
the first floor. 


Sheathing for exterior walls is commonly some type of pan- 
el product. Here again, plywood or OSB may be used. Fi- 
berboard that has been treated to impart some degree of wa- 
ter resistance is another option. Several types of fiberboard 
are available. Regular-density board sometimes requires 
additional bracing to provide necessary resistance to lateral 
loads. Intermediate-density board is used where structural 
support is needed. Numerous foam-type panels can also be 
used to impart greater thermal resistance to the walls. 


In cases where the sheathing cannot provide the required 
racking resistance, diagonal bracing must be used. Many 
foam sheathings cannot provide adequate racking resistance, 


17-3 


2 by 4 block 


(a) Nailing areas for 
inside finish 


Metal wall board 
backup clip 


a UY | 


Figure 17—2. Corner details for wood stud walls 
that provide support for interior sheathing: (a) tra- 
ditional three-stud corner with blocking; (b) three- 
stud corner without blocking; (c) two-stud corner 
with wallboard backup clips. 


so either diagonal braces must be placed at the comers or 
structural panels must be applied over the first 1.2 m (4 ft) 
of the wall from the corner. When light-weight insulating 
foam sheathings are used, bracing is commonly provided by 
standard 19- by 89-mm (nominal 1- by 4-in.) lumber or steel 
strapping. 


17-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Ceiling and Roof 


Roof systems are generally made of either the joists-and- 
rafter systems or with trusses. Engineered trusses reduce 
on-site labor and can span greater distances without inter- 
mediate support, thus eliminating the need for interior load- 
carrying partitions. This provides greater flexibility in the 
layout of interior walls. Prefabricated roof trusses are used 
to form the ceiling and sloped roof of more than two-thirds 
of current light-frame buildings. For residential buildings, 
the trusses are generally made using standard 38- by 89- 
mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) lumber and metal plate connec- 
tors with teeth that are pressed into the pieces that form the 
joints (TPI 2007). 


Joists and rafter systems are found in most buildings con- 
structed prior to 1950. Rafters are generally supported on 
the top plate of the wall and attached to a ridge board at the 
roof peak. However, because the rafters slope, they tend to 
push out the tops of the walls. This is prevented by nailing 
the rafters to the ceiling joists and nailing the ceiling joists 
to the top wall plates (Fig. 17—3a). 


A valley or hip is formed where two roof sections meet per- 
pendicular to each other. A valley rafter is used to support 
short-length jack rafters that are nailed to the valley rafter 
and the ridge board (Fig. 17—3b). In some cases, the roof 
does not extend to a gable end but is sloped from some point 
down to the end wall to form a “hip” roof. A hip rafter sup- 
ports the jack rafters, and the other ends of the jack rafters 
are attached to the top plates (Fig. 17—3c). In general, the 
same materials used for wall sheathing and subflooring are 
used for roof sheathing. 


Wood Decks 


A popular method of expanding the living area of a home is 
to build a wood deck adjacent to one of the exterior walls. 
Decks are made of preservatively treated lumber, which is 
generally available from local building supply dealers and, 
depending upon the complexity, may be built by the “do- 
it-yourselfer.” To ensure long life, acceptable appearance, 
and structural safety, several important guidelines should be 
followed. Proper material selection is the first step. Then, 
proper design and construction techniques are necessary. Fi- 
nally, proper maintenance practices are necessary. Detailed 
recommendations for all these areas are included in Wood 
Decks: Materials, Construction, and Finishing (McDonald 
and others 1996) and Prescriptive Residential Wood Deck 
Construction Guide (AWC 2009). 


Post-Frame and Pole Buildings 


In post-frame and pole buildings, round poles or rectangular 
posts serve both as the foundation and the principal vertical 
framing element. This type of construction was known as 
“pole buildings” but today, with the extensive use of posts, 


Chapter 17 Use of Wood in Buildings and Bridges 


\ 


(a) Z, Top plates 


Valley rafter 


Nailer for 
(b) cornice trim 


4 


q IN ato 


Ridge board 


\_ Collar beam 


— Rafter 


Block 


“bird’s mouth” 


Hip rafter 


(c) 


Figure 17-3. (a) A rafter-type roof with typical framing details for (b) a valley and (c) a hip corner. 


is commonly referred to as “post-frame” construction. For 
relatively low structures, light wall and roof framing are 
nailed to poles or posts set at fairly frequent centers, com- 
monly 2.4 to 3.6 m (8 to 12 ft). This type of construction 
was originally used with round poles for agricultural build- 
ings, but the structural principle has been extended to com- 
mercial and residential buildings (Fig. 17-4). 


Round poles present some problems for connecting framing 
members; these problems can be eased by slabbing the outer 
face of the pole. For corner poles, two faces may be slabbed 
at right angles. This permits better attachment of both light 
and heavy framing by nails or timber connectors. When the 
pole is left round, the outer face may be notched to provide 
seats for beams. 


Rectangular posts are the most commonly used and may be 
solid sawn, glulam, or built-up by nail laminating. Built-up 


posts are advantageous because only the base of the post 
must be preservatively treated. The treated portion in the 
ground may have laminations of various lengths that are 
matched with the lengths of untreated laminations in the up- 
per part of the post. The design of these types of posts must 
consider the integrity of the splice between the treated and 
untreated lumber. The wall system consists of horizontal 
girts often covered by light-gauge metal that provides some 
degree of racking resistance. Roof trusses made with metal 
plate connectors are attached to each pole, or post, and roof 
purlins are installed perpendicular to the trusses at spacings 
from 1.2 to 3.7 m (4 to 12 ft), with 2.4 m (8 ft) as a com- 
mon spacing. For 2.4-m (8-ft) truss spacing, these purlins 
are often standard 38 by 89 mm (nominal 2 by 4 in.) spaced 
on 0.6-m (2-ft) centers and attached to either the top of the 
trusses or between the trusses using joists hangers. The roof- 
ing is often light-gauge metal that provides some diaphragm 


17-5 


Roof structure 


Round pole or square post 
Finish floor 


Subfloor 


Gravel or concrete 


Auger drilled hole 
Concrete pad 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Roof structure 


Perimeter plate 
Panel top plate 


Conventional 
stud wall 


Post 


Sole plate 
Finish floor 


Subfloor 


Joist 
Ribbon plate 


Concrete 


Auger-drilled hole 


Figure 17-4. Pole and post-frame buildings: (left) pole or post forms both foundation and wall; 
(right) pole or post forms only the foundation for conventional platform-framed structure. 


stiffness to the roof and transmits a portion of the lateral 
loading to the walls parallel to the direction of the load. De- 
tailed information on the design of post-frame buildings is 
provided by the National Frame Builders Association (1999) 
or Walker and Woeste (1992). 


Log Buildings 


Interest is growing in log houses—from small, simple 
houses for vacation use to large, permanent residences 

(Fig. 17-5). Many U.S. firms specialize in the design and 
materials for log houses. Log houses nearly always feature 
wall systems built from natural or manufactured logs rather 
than from dimension lumber. Roof and floor systems may 
also be built with logs or conventional framing. Log house 
companies tend to categorize log types into two systems: 
round and shaped. In the round log system, the logs are ma- 
chined to a smooth, fully rounded surface, and they are gen- 
erally all the same diameter. In the shaped system, the logs 
are machined to specific shapes, generally not fully round. 
The exterior surfaces of the logs are generally rounded, but 
the interior surfaces may be either flat or round. The inter- 
face between logs is machined to form an interlocking joint. 


Consensus standards have been developed for log 
grading and the assignment of allowable properties, and 
these standards are being adopted by building codes 
(ASTM 2009). Builders and designers need to realize that 
logs can reach the building site at moisture content levels 
greater than ideal. The effects of seasoning and the 


17-6 


consequences of associated shrinkage and checking must be 
considered. Additional information on log homes is avail- 
able from The Log Home Council, National Association of 
Home Builders, Washington, D.C., or in Standard on the 
Design and Construction of Log Structures (ICC 2007). 


Heavy Timber Buildings 


Timber Frame 


Timber frame houses were common in early America and 
are enjoying some renewed popularity today. Most barns 
and factory buildings dating prior to the middle of the 20th 
century were heavy timber frame. The traditional timber 
frame is made of large sawn timbers (larger than 114 by 
114 mm (5 by 5S in.)) connected to one another by hand- 
fabricated joints, such as mortise and tenon. Construction 
of such a frame involves rather sophisticated joinery, as il- 
lustrated in Figure 17-6. 


In today’s timber frame home, a prefabricated, composite 
sheathing panel (1.2 by 2.4 m (4 by 8 ft)) is frequently ap- 
plied directly to the frame. This panel may consist of an 
inside layer of 13-mm (1/2-in.) gypsum, a core layer of rigid 
foam insulation, and an outside layer of exterior plywood 

or OSB. Finish siding is applied over the composite panel. 
In some cases, a layer of standard 19-mm (nominal 1-in.) 
tongue-and-groove, solid-wood boards is applied to the 
frame, and a rigid, foam-exterior, plywood composite panel 
is then applied over the boards to form the building exterior. 


Chapter 17 Use of Wood in Buildings and Bridges 


Figure 17-5. Modern log homes are available in a vari- 
ety of designs. 


Drop 


Figure 17-6. Timber frame structure with typical 
joint details. 


Local fire regulations should be consulted about the accep- 
tance of various foam insulations. 


Framing members are cut in large cross sections; therefore, 
seasoning them before installation is difficult, if not impos- 
sible. Thus, the builder (and the owner) should recognize the 
dimensional changes that may occur as the members dry in 
place. The structure must be designed to accommodate these 
dimensional changes as well as seasoning checks, which are 
almost inevitable. 


Mill Type 


Mill-type construction has been widely used for warehouse 
and manufacturing structures, particularly in the eastern 
United States. This type of construction uses timbers of 
large cross sections with columns spaced in a grid accord- 
ing to the available lengths of beam and girder timbers. The 
size of the timbers makes this type of construction resistant 
to fire. The good insulating qualities of wood as well as the 
char that develops during fire result in slow penetration of 
fire into the large members. Thus, the members retain a large 
proportion of their original load-carrying capacity and stiff- 
ness for a relatively lengthy period after the onset of fire. 


To be recognized as mill-type construction, the structural 
elements must meet specific sizes—columns cannot be 

less than standard 184 mm (nominal 8 in.) in dimension, 
and beams and girders cannot be less than standard 140 by 
235 mm (nominal 6 by 10 in.) in cross section. Other limita- 
tions must be observed as well. For example, walls must be 
made of masonry, and concealed spaces must be avoided. 
The structural frame has typically been constructed of solid- 
sawn timbers, which should be stress graded. These timbers 
can now be supplanted with glulam timbers, and longer 
spans are permitted. 


Glulam Beam 


A panelized roof system using glulam roof framing is 
widely used for single-story commercial buildings in the 
southwestern United States. This system is based on sup- 
porting columns located at the corners of pre-established 
grids. The main glulam beams support purlins, which may 
be sawn timbers, glulam, parallel chord trusses, or prefab- 
ricated wood I-joists. These purlins, which are normally on 
2.4-m (8-ft) centers, support preframed structural panels. 
The basic unit of the preframed system is a 1.2- by 2.4-m 
(4- by 8-ft) structural panel nailed to standard 38- by 89-mm 
or 38- by 140-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in. or 2- by 6-in.) stiff- 
eners (subpurlins). The stiffeners run parallel to the 2.4-m 
(8-ft) dimension of the structural panel. One stiffener is lo- 
cated at the centerline of the panel; the other is located at an 
edge, with the plywood edge at the stiffener centerline. The 
stiffeners are precut to a length equal to the long dimension 
of the plywood less the thickness of the purlin, with a small 
allowance for the hanger. 


In some cases, the purlins are erected with the hangers in 
place. The prefabricated panels are lifted and set into place 
in the hangers, and the adjoining basic panels are then at- 
tached to each other. In other cases, the basic panels are at- 
tached to one purlin on the ground. An entire panel is lifted 
into place to support the loose ends of the stiffeners. Ad- 
ditional details on this system and other glulam details are 
available from the American Institute of Timber Construc- 
tion (www.aitc-glulam.org). 


17-7 


Tension 


ring * 


Rod 
bracing 


7 : 
Elevation 


Figure 17-7. Member layout for a radial-rib dome. 


Arch Structure 


Arch structures are particularly suited to applications in 
which large, unobstructed areas are needed, such as church- 
es, recreational buildings, and aircraft hangars. Many arch 
forms are possible with the variety limited only by the imag- 
ination of the architect. Churches have used arches from the 
beginning of glulam manufacture in the United States. Ad- 
ditional information on the use and design of arches is given 
in The Timber Construction Manual (AITC 2004). 


Dome 


Radial-rib domes consist of curved members extending from 
the base ring (tension ring) to a compression ring at the top 
of the dome along with other ring members at various 
elevations between the tension and compression rings 

(Fig. 17-7). The ring members may be curved or straight. 

If they are curved to the same radius as the rib and have 
their centers at the center of the sphere, the dome will have 
a spherical surface. If the ring members are straight, the 
dome will have an umbrella look. Connections between the 
ribs and the ring members are critical because of the high 
compressive loads in the ring members. During construc- 
tion, care must be taken to stabilize the structure because the 
dome has a tendency to rotate about the central vertical axis. 


Other dome patterns called Varax and Triax are also used. 

Their geometries are quite complex, and specialized com- 
puter programs are used in their design. Steel hubs used at 
the joints and supports are critical. An example of a Triax 

dome is shown in Figure 17-8. 


17-8 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Figure 17-8. This 161.5-m- (530-ft-) diameter Tacoma 
dome (Tacoma, Washington), built in 1982-1983, 

is one of the longest clear roof spans in the world. 
(Photo courtesy of Western Wood Structures, Inc., 
Tualatin, Oregon.) 


Timber Bridges 


Prior to the 20th century, timber was the major material used 
for both highway and railroad bridges. The development of 
steel and reinforced concrete provided other options, and 
these have become major bridge building materials. How- 
ever, the U.S. inventory does contain a substantial number 
of timber bridges, many of which continue to carry loads 
beyond their design life. A recent initiative in the United 
States has focused research and technology transfer efforts 
on improving the design and performance of timber bridges. 
As a result, hundreds of timber highway bridges were built 
across the United States during the past several years, many 
using innovative designs and materials. 


Bridges consist of a substructure and a superstructure. The 
substructure consists of abutments, piers, or piling, and it 
supports the superstructure that consists of stringers and/ 
or a deck. The deck is often covered with a wearing surface 
of asphalt. Timber may be combined with other materials 
to form the superstructure, for example, timber deck over 
steel stringers. Several bridge railing systems were recently 
crash-tested and approved for use by the Federal Highway 
Administartion (Faller and others 1999). Covered bridges 
are also undergoing a resurgence of interest, with a recent 
national program for the rehabilitation and restoration of 
numerous historic structures. The various types of timber 
bridge superstructures are described in the following sec- 
tions. Detailed information on modern timber bridges is 
given in Timber Bridges: Design, Construction, Inspection, 
and Maintenance (Ritter 1992). 


Log Stringer 

A simple bridge type that has been used for centuries con- 
sists of one or more logs used to span the opening. Several 
logs may be laid side-by-side and fastened together. The log 
stringer bridge has been used to access logging areas and is 
advantageous when adequate-sized logs are available and 
the bridge is needed for only a short time. Unless built with 
a durable species, the life span of log stringer bridges is usu- 
ally limited to less than 10 years. 


Chapter 17 Use of Wood in Buildings and Bridges 


x 


Figure 17-9. Glulam beam bridge over the Dangerous 
River, near Yukatat, Alaska, consists of three 43.5-m 
(143-ft) spans. Each span is supported by four 2.3-m- 
(91.5-in.-) deep glulam beams. 


Sawn Lumber 


Several types of bridges can be built with sawn lumber. 
Even though the span is usually limited to about 9 m (30 ft) 
because of the limited size of lumber available, this span 
length entails the majority of timber bridges in the United 
States. 


Several timbers can be used to span the opening, and a 
transverse lumber deck can be placed over them to form a 
stringer and deck bridge. Lumber can be placed (on-edge) 
side-by-side and used to span the entire opening, forming 
a longitudinal deck bridge. The lumber can be fastened to- 
gether with nails or large spikes in partial-width panelized 
bridge systems or compressed together with high-strength 
tension rods to form a “stress-laminated” slab-type deck. 


Glulam 


Structural glued-laminated (glulam) timber greatly extends 
the span capabilities of the same types of bridges described 
in the previous paragraph. Glulam stringers placed 0.6 to 
1.8 m (2 to 6 ft) on center can support a glulam deck system 
and result in spans of 12 to 30 m (40 to 100 ft) or more 

(Fig. 17-9). Using glulam panels to span the opening results 
in a longitudinal deck system, but this is usually limited to 
about 9-m (30-ft) spans. These panels are either intercon- 
nected or supported at one or more locations with transverse 
distributor beams. Glulam beams can be used to form a solid 
deck and are held together with high-stress tension rods 

to form a stress-laminated slab-type deck. Curved glulam 
members can be used to produce various aesthetic effects 
and long-span bridges (Fig. 17—10). 


Structural Composite Lumber 


Two types of structural composite lumber (SCL)—laminat- 
ed veneer and oriented strand—are beginning to be used to 
build timber bridges. Most of the same type of bridges built 
with either solid-sawn or glulam timber can be built with 
SCL (Chap. 11). 


Considerations for Wood Buildings 


Many factors must be considered when designing and con- 
structing wood buildings, including structural, insulation, 
moisture, and sound control. The following sections provide 
a brief description of the design considerations for these 
factors. Fire safety, another important consideration, is ad- 
dressed in Chapter 18. 


Structural 


The structural design of any building consists of combining 
the prescribed performance requirements with the anticipat- 
ed loading. One major performance requirement is that there 
be an adequate margin of safety between the structure’s 
ultimate capacity and the maximum anticipated loading. The 
probability that the building will ever collapse is minimized 
using material property information recommended by the 
material manufacturers along with code-recommended de- 
sign loads. 


Another structural performance requirement relates to ser- 
viceability. These requirements are directed at ensuring that 
the structure is functional, and the most notable one is that 
deformations are limited. It is important to limit deforma- 
tions so that floors are not too “bouncy” or that doors do not 
bind under certain loadings. Building codes often include 
recommended limits on deformation, but the designer may 
be provided some latitude in selecting the limits. The basic 
reference for structural design of wood in all building sys- 
tems is the National Design Specification for Wood Con- 
struction (AF&PA 2005a). 


Thermal Insulation and Air Infiltration Control 


For most U.S. climates, the exterior envelope of a build- 
ing needs to be insulated either to keep heat in the building 
or prevent heat from entering. Wood frame construction is 
well-suited to application of both cavity insulation and sur- 
face-applied insulation. The most common materials used 
for cavity insulation are glass fiber, mineral fiber, cellulose 
insulation, and spray-applied foams. For surface applica- 
tions, a wide variety of sheathing insulations exist, such as 
rigid foam panels. Insulating sheathing placed on exterior 
walls may also have sufficient structural properties to pro- 
vide required lateral bracing. Prefinished insulating paneling 
can be used as an inside finish on exterior walls or one or 
both sides of the interior partitions. In addition, prefinished 
insulation can underlay other finishes. 


Attic construction with conventional rafters and ceiling 
joists or roof trusses can be insulated between framing 
members with batt, blanket, or loose-fill insulation. In some 
warm climates, radiant barriers and reflective insulations 
can provide an additional reduction in cooling loads. The 
“Radiant Barrier Attic Fact Sheet” from the U.S. Depart- 
ment of Energy (1991) provides information on climatic 
areas that are best suited for radiant barrier applications. 
This document also provides comparative information on 


17-9 


Figure 17-10. The Alton Sylor Memorial Bridge is a 
glulam deck arch bridge crossing Joncy Gorge in An- 
gelica, New York. The center three-hinged arch spans 
52 m (171 ft) and is the longest clear span in the Unit- 
ed States. (Photo courtesy of Laminated Concepts, 
Inc., Big Flats, New York.) 


the relative performance of these products and conventional 
fibrous insulations. 


Existing frame construction can be insulated pneumatically 
using suitable loose-fill insulating material. When loose-fill 
materials are used in wall retrofit applications, extra care 
must be taken during the installation to eliminate the exis- 
tence of voids within the wall cavity. All cavities should be 
checked prior to installation for obstructions, such as fire 
stop headers and wiring, that would prevent the cavity from 
being completely filled. Care must also be taken to install 
the material at the manufacturer’s recommended density to 
ensure that the desired thermal performance is obtained. Ac- 
cessible space can be insulated by manual placement of batt, 
blanket, or loose-fill material. 


In addition to being properly insulated, the exterior envelope 
of all buildings should be constructed to minimize air flow 
into or through the building envelope. Air flow can degrade 
the thermal performance of insulation and cause excessive 
moisture accumulation in the building envelope. 


More information on insulation and air flow retarders can be 
found in the ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals, chapters 
22 to 24 (ASHRAE 2005). 


Moisture Control 


Moisture sources for buildings can be broadly classified as 
follows: (1) surface runoff of precipitation from land areas, 
(2) ground water or wet soil, (3) precipitation or irrigation 
water that falls on the building, (4) indoor humidity, 

(5) outdoor humidity, (6) moisture from use of wet building 
materials or construction under wet conditions, and (7) er- 
rors, accidents, and maintenance problems associated with 
indoor plumbing. At a given instant of time, the categories 
are distinct from each other. Water can change phase and 


17-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


can be transported over space by various mechanisms. Water 
may therefore be expected to move between categories over 
time, blurring the distinctions between categories. Christian 
(1994) provides quantitative estimates of potential moisture 
loads from various sources. 


Moisture accumulation within a building or within parts of 
a building can affect human comfort and health, influence 
building durability, and necessitate maintenance and repair 
activities (or can require that these activities be undertaken 
more frequently). Moisture accumulation in the building’s 
thermal envelope is also likely to influence the building’s 
energy performance. Some problems associated with mois- 
ture accumulation are easily observed. Examples include: 
(a) mold and mildew, (b) decay of wood-based materials, 
(c) corrosion of metals, (d) damage caused by expansion of 
materials from moisture (such as buckling of wood floors), 
and (e) decline in visual appearance (such as paint peeling, 
distortion of wood-based siding, or efflorescence on mason- 
ry surfaces). Some problems associated with moisture ac- 
cumulation may not be readily apparent but are nonetheless 
real; an example is reduced performance of insulated assem- 
blies (resulting in increased energy consumption). Detailed 
discussions on the effects and the control of moisture in 
buildings can be found in an ASTM standard (ASTM 2008), 
the ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals, chapters 23 and 
24 (ASHRAE 2005), and Lstiburek and Carmody (1999). 


Mold, Mildew, Dust Mites, and Human Health 


Mold and mildew in buildings are offensive, and the spores 
can cause respiratory problems and allergic reactions in 
humans. Mold and mildew will grow on most surfaces if 
the relative humidity at the surface is above a critical value 
and the surface temperatures are conducive to growth. The 
longer the surface remains above this critical relative hu- 
midity level, the more likely mold will appear; the higher 
the humidity or temperature, the shorter the time needed 

for germination. The surface relative humidity is a complex 
function of material moisture content, material properties, 
local temperature, and humidity conditions. In addition, 
mold growth depends on the type of surface. Mildew and 
mold can usually be avoided by limiting surface relative 
humidity conditions >80% to short periods. Only for nonpo- 
rous surfaces that are regularly cleaned should this criterion 
be relaxed. Most molds grow at temperatures approximately 
above 4 °C (40 °F). Moisture accumulation at temperatures 
below 4 °C (40 °F) may not cause mold and mildew if the 
material is allowed to dry out below the critical moisture 
content before the temperature increases above 4 °C (40 °F). 


Dust mites can trigger allergies and are an important cause 
of asthma. They thrive at high relative humidity levels 
(>70%) at room temperature, but will not survive at sus- 
tained relative humidity levels less than 50%. However, 
these relative humidity levels relate to local conditions in 
the typical places that mites tend to inhabit (for example, 
mattresses, carpets, soft furniture). 


Chapter 17 Use of Wood in Buildings and Bridges 


Paint Failure and Other Appearance Problems 


Moisture trapped behind paint films may cause failure of 
the paint (Chap. 16). Water or condensation may also cause 
streaking or staining. Excessive swings in moisture con- 
tent of wood-based panels or boards may cause buckling 

or warp. Excessive moisture in masonry and concrete can 
produce efflorescence, a white powdery area or lines. When 
combined with low temperatures, excessive moisture can 
cause freeze-thaw damage and spalling (chipping). 


Structural Failures 


Structural failures caused by decay of wood are rare but 
have occurred. Decay generally requires a wood moisture 
content equal to or greater than fiber saturation (usually 
about 30%) and temperatures between 10 and 43 °C (50 and 
100 °F). Wood moisture content levels above fiber saturation 
are only possible in green lumber or by absorption of liquid 
water from condensation, leaks, ground water, or other satu- 
rated materials in contact with the wood. To maintain a safe- 
ty margin, a 20% moisture content is sometimes used during 
field inspections as the maximum allowable level. Once 
established, decay fungi produce water that enables them to 
maintain moisture conditions conducive to their growth. See 
Chapter 14 for more information on wood decay. 


Rusting or corrosion of nails, nail plates, or other metal 
building products is also a potential cause of structural 
failure. In the rare cases of catastrophic structural failure 

of wood buildings (almost always under the influence of a 
large seismic load or an abnormally high wind load), failure 
of mechanical connections usually plays a critical role. Cor- 
rosion may occur at high relative humidity levels near the 
metal surface or as a result of liquid water from elsewhere. 
Wood moisture content levels >20% encourage corrosion 
of steel fasteners in wood, especially if the wood is treated 
with preservatives. In buildings, metal fasteners are often 
the coldest surfaces, which encourages condensation on, 
and corrosion of, fasteners. 


Effect on Heat Flow 


Moisture in the building envelope can significantly degrade 
the thermal performance of most insulation materials but 
especially the thermal resistance of fibrous insulations and 
open cell foams. The degradation is most pronounced when 
daily temperature reversals across the insulation drive mois- 
ture back and forth through the insulation. 


Moisture Control Strategies 


Strategies to control moisture accumulation fall into two 
general categories: (1) minimize moisture entry into the 
building envelope and (2) provide for removal (dissipa- 
tion) of moisture from the building envelope. Inasmuch as 
building materials and assemblies are often wetted during 
construction, design strategies that encourage dissipation 
of moisture from the assemblies are highly recommended. 
Such strategies will also allow the building to better with- 
stand wetting events that occur rarely, and thus are largely 


unanticipated, but which nonetheless occur at least once 
during the building’s lifespan. Effective moisture dissipation 
strategies typically involve drainage and ventilation. 


The transport mechanisms that can move moisture into or 
out of building envelopes have various transport capabili- 
ties. The mechanisms, in order of the quantities of mois- 
ture that they can move, are as follows: (a) liquid water 
movement, including capillary movement; (b) water vapor 
transport by air movement; and (c) water vapor diffusion. 
Trechsel (2001) discusses these in detail. In design for con- 
trol of moisture entry, it is logical to prioritize control of the 
transport mechanisms in the order of their transport capa- 
bilities. A logical prioritization is thus as follows: (a) control 
of liquid entry by proper site grading and installing gutters 
and downspouts and appropriate flashing around windows, 
doors, and chimneys; (b) control of air leakage by installing 
air flow retarders or careful sealing by taping and caulking; 
and (c) control of vapor diffusion by placing vapor retarders 
on the “warm” side of the insulation. Trechsel (2001) makes 
the point that although air leakage can potentially move 
much greater amounts of moisture than diffusion, the poten- 
tial for moisture damage is not necessarily proportional to 
the amount of moisture movement, and thus that moisture 
diffusion in design of building envelopes should not be 
ignored. 


In inhibiting vapor diffusion at the interior surfaces of build- 
ing assemblies in heating climates (or alternatively, encour- 
aging such diffusion at interior surfaces of building assem- 
blies in cooling climates), control of indoor humidity levels 
is usually important. In heating climates, ventilation of the 
living space with outdoor air and limiting indoor sources 
of moisture (wet firewood, unvented dryers, humidifiers) 
will lower indoor humidity levels. This is very effective at 
lowering the rate of moisture diffusion into the building’s 
thermal envelope. In cooling climates, the lower indoor hu- 
midity levels afforded by mechanical dehumidification will 
encourage dissipation of moisture (to the interior) from the 
building’s thermal envelope. More information on the defi- 
nition of heating and cooling climates and specific moisture 
control strategies can be found in the ASHRAE Handbook 
of Fundamentals, chapter 24 (ASHRAE 2005). 


Sound Control 


An important design consideration for residential and office 
buildings is the control of sound that either enters the struc- 
ture from outside or is transmitted from one room to an- 
other. Wood frame construction can achieve levels of sound 
control equal to or greater than more massive construction, 
such as concrete. However, to do so requires designing for 
both airborne and impact noise insulation. 


Airborne noise insulation is the resistance to transmission of 
airborne noises, such as traffic or speech, either through or 
around an assembly such as a wall. Noises create vibrations 
on the structural surfaces that they contact, and the design 
challenge is to prevent this vibration from reaching and 


17-11 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 17-1. Sound transmission class (STC) ratings for typical wood-frame walls 
STC 


rating _—_- Privacy afforded Wall structure 


25 Normal speech easily understood 6-mm (1/4-in.) wood panels nailed on each side of standard 38- by 89-mm 
(nominal 2- by 4-in.) studs. 

30 Normal speech audible but not 9.5-mm (3/8-in.) gypsum wallboard nailed to one side of standard 38- by 

intelligible 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) studs. 

35 Loud speech audible and fairly 20-mm (5/8-in.) gypsum wallboard nailed to both sides of standard 38- by 

understandable 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) studs. 

40 Loud speech audible but not Two layers of 20-mm (5/8-in.) gypsum wallboard nailed to both sides of 

intelligible standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) studs. 

45 Loud speech barely audible Two sets of standard 38- by 64-mm (nominal 2- by 3-in.) studs staggered 0.2 m 
(8 in.) on centers fastened by standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) base 
and head plates with two layers of 20-mm (5/8-in.) gypsum wallboard nailed on 
the outer edge of each set of studs. 

50 Shouting barely audible Standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) wood studs with resilient channels 
nailed horizontally to both sides with 20-mm (5/8-in.) gypsum wallboard 
screwed to channels on each side. 

55 Shouting not audible Double row of standard 38- by 89-mm (nominal 2- by 4-in.) studs 0.4 m (16 in.) 


on centers fastened to separate plates spaced 25 mm (1 in.) apart. Two layers of 
20-mm (5/8-in.) gypsum wallboard screwed 0.3 m (12 in.) on center to the 
studs. An 89-mm- (3.5-in.-) thick sound-attenuation blanket installed in one stud 


cavity. 


leaving the opposite side of the structural surface. Sound 
transmission class (STC) is the rating used to characterize 
airborne noise insulation. A wall system with a high STC 
rating is effective in preventing the transmission of sound. 
Table 17-1 lists the STC ratings for several types of wall 
systems; detailed information for both wall and floor are 
given in FPL-GTR-43 (Rudder 1985). 


Impact noise insulation is the resistance to noise generated 
by footsteps or dropping objects, generally addressed at 
floor—ceiling assemblies in multi-family dwellings. Impact 
insulation class (IIC) is the rating used to characterize the 
impact noise insulation of an assembly. Both the character 
of the flooring material and the structural details of the floor 
influence the IIC rating. Additional information on IIC rat- 
ings for wood construction is given in FPL-GTR—S59 (Sher- 
wood and Moody 1989). 


Literature Cited 


AF&PA. 2001. Wood frame construction manual for 
one- and two-family dwellings, 2001 edition. Washington, 
DC: American Forest & Paper Association. 


AF&PA. 2005a. National design specification for wood 
construction. Washington, DC: American Forest & Paper 
Association. 


AF&PA. 2005b. Span tables for joists and rafters. 
Washington, DC: American Forest & Paper Association. 


AF&PA. 2007. Permanent wood foundation design 
specification. Washington, DC: American Forest & Paper 
Association. 


17-12 


AITC. 2004. Timber construction manual, 5th edition. 
American Institute of Timber Construction. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


APA. 2007. Engineered wood construction guide: floor con- 
struction. Section 2, Form E30. September 2007. Tacoma, 
WA: APA-The Engineered Wood Association. 


ASHRAE. 2005. Handbook of fundamentals. Atlanta, 
GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and 
Air-Conditioning Engineers. 


ASTM. 2008. Standard guide for limiting water-induced 
damage to buildings. ASTM E241-08. West Conshohocken, 
PA: American Society for Testing and Materials. 


ASTM. 2009. Standard methods for establishing stress 
grades for structural members used in log buildings. ASTM 
D3957-09. West Conshohocken, PA: American Society for 
Testing and Materials. 


AWC. 2009. Prescriptive wood deck construction guide. 
Washington, DC: American Wood Council. 


Christian, J.E. 1994. Moisture sources. Chapter 8 in mois- 
ture control in buildings, ASTM MNL18 (ISBN 0-803 1- 
2051-6). Philadelphia, PA. American Society for Testing 
and Materials. 


Faller, R.K.; Ritter, M.A.; Rosson, B.T.; Duwadi, S.R. 1999. 
Railing systems for use on timber deck bridges. Under- 
ground and other structural design issues. Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press. Transportation research 
record 1656. pp. 110-119. 


Chapter 17 Use of Wood in Buildings and Bridges 


ICC. 2007. Standard on the design and construction of log 
structures. ICC400-2007. Washington, DC: International 
Code Council. 


Lstiburek, J.; Carmody, J. 1999. Moisture control handbook: 
principles and practices for residential and small commer- 
cial buildings. New York: Wiley. 


McDonald, K.A.; Falk, R.H.; Williams, R.S.; Winandy, J.E. 
1996. Wood decks: materials, construction, and finishing. 
Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 


National Frame Builders Association. 1999. Post frame 
building design manual. Glenview, IL: National Frame 
Builders Association. 


Ritter, M.A. 1992. Timber bridges—design, construction, 
inspection and maintenance. EM 7700-8. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Engineering 
Staff. 


Rudder, F.F. Jr. 1985. Airborne sound transmission loss 
characteristics of wood-frame construction. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
FPL—GTR-43. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Sherwood, G.E.; Moody, R.C. 1989. Light-frame wall and 
floor systems—analysis and performance. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
FPL—GTR-S59. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Sherwood, G.E.; Stroh, R.C. 1989. Wood frame house con- 
struction. Agric. Handb. 73. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern- 
ment Printing Office. (Also available from Armonk Press, 
Armonk, NY.) 


TPI. 2007. National design standards for metal plate con- 
nected wood truss construction. ANSI/TPI 1—2007. Alexan- 
dria, VA: Truss Plate Institute. 


Trechsel, H.R. 2001. Moisture primer. Chapter | in mois- 
ture analysis and condensation control in buildings. ASTM 
MNL40 (ISBN 0-803 1-2089-3). West Conshohocken, PA. 
ASTM International. 


U.S. Department of Energy. 1991. Radiant barrier attic fact 
sheet. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 


Walker, J.N.; Woeste, F.E. 1992. Post-frame building design. 
ASAE Monograph No. 11. St. Joseph, MI: American Soci- 
ety of Agricultural and Biological Engineers. 


17-13 


CHAPTER 18 


Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


Robert H. White, Research Forest Products Technologist 
Mark A. Dietenberger, Research General Engineer 


Fire safety is an important concern in all types of construc- 
Contents tion. The high level of national concern for fire safety is 
reflected in limitations and design requirements in building 


Bae OMe en ane Pyelueuen Sa! codes. These code requirements and related fire performance 


Types of Construction 18-2 data are discussed in the context of fire safety design and 
Ignition 18-2 evaluation in the initial section of this chapter. Because 
basic data on fire behavior of wood products are needed to 


Exterior Fire Exposure in the Wildland—Urban : ; 
Tnterhace 163 evaluate fire safety for wood construction, the second major 


section of this chapter provides additional information on 


Fie Croan We Compaanean Te fire behavior and fire performance characteristics of wood 


Containment to Compartment of Origin 18-6 products. The chapter concludes with a discussion of fire- 
Fire-Performance Characteristics of Wood 18-8 retardant treatments that can be used to reduce the combus- 

Thermal Degradation of Wood 18-8 tibility of wood. 

Tenion. 18s? Fire Safety Design and Evaluation 


Heat Release and Smoke 18-11 : . d : : 
Fire safety involves prevention, detection, evacuation, con- 

Flame Spread 18-12 tainment, and extinguishment. Fire prevention basically 

Charring and Fire Resistance 18-13 means preventing the sustained ignition of combustible 
Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood 18—15 materials by controlling either the source of heat or the 
combustible materials. This involves proper design, instal- 
lation or construction, and maintenance of the building and 
its contents. Proper fire safety measures depend upon the 


Pressure Treatments 18—15 
Performance Requirements 18—16 


Fire-Retardant Coatings 18-17 occupancy or processes taking place in the building. Smoke 
Literature Cited 18-18 and heat detectors can be installed to provide early detection 
Additional ReGrences 18-18 of a fire. Early detection is essential for ensuring adequate 


time for egress. Egress, or the ability to escape from a fire, 


General 18-18 often is a critical factor in life safety. Statutory requirements 


Fire Test Standards 18-19 pertaining to fire safety are specified in building codes or 
Ignition 18-19 fire codes. Design deficiencies are often responsible for 
Flame Spread 18-20 spread of heat and smoke in a fire. Spread of a fire can be 


prevented with designs that limit fire growth and spread 
Flashover and Room/Corner Tests 18-20 within a compartment and contain fire to the compartment 
Heat Release and Heat of Combustion 18-20 of origin. Sprinklers provide improved capabilities to extin- 
Combustion Products 18—21 guish a fire in its initial stages. These requirements fall into 
two broad categories: material requirements and building 
requirements. Material requirements include such things as 
combustibility, flame spread, and fire resistance. Building 
requirements include area and height limitations, firestops 
and draftstops, doors and other exits, automatic sprinklers, 
and fire detectors. 


Fire Resistance 18-21 
Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood 18—22 


Adherence to codes will result in improved fire safety. Code 
officials should be consulted early in the design of a build- 
ing because the codes offer alternatives. For example, floor 
areas can be increased if automatic sprinkler systems are 
added. Code officials have the option to approve alternative 
materials and methods of construction and to modify 


18-1 


provisions of the codes when equivalent fire protection and 
structural integrity are documented. 


Most current building codes in the United States are based 
on the model building code produced by the International 
Code Council (ICC) (International Building Code® (IBC)) 
and related International Code® (I-Codes®) documents). 

In addition to the documents of the ICC, the National Fire 
Protection Association’s (NFPA’s) Life Safety Code (NFPA 
101) provides guidelines for life safety from fire in buildings 
and structures. NFPA also has a model building code known 
as NFPA 5000. The provisions of the ICC and NFPA docu- 
ments become statutory requirements when adopted by local 
or state authorities having jurisdiction. 


Information on fire ratings for different products and as- 
semblies can be obtained from industry literature, evaluation 
reports issued by ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. (ICC-ES) 
and other organizations, and listings published by testing 
laboratories or quality assurance agencies. Products listed 
by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL), Intertek, and other 
such organizations are stamped with the rating information. 


The field of fire safety engineering is undergoing rapid 
changes because of the development of more engineering 
and scientific approaches to fire safety. This development 
is evidenced by the publication of the fourth edition of The 
Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Handbook of 
Fire Protection Engineering. Steady advances are being 
made in the fields of fire dynamics, fire hazard calculations, 
fire design calculations, and fire risk analysis. Such efforts 
support the worldwide trend to develop alternative building 
codes based on performance criteria rather than prescriptive 
requirements. Additional information on fire protection can 
be found in various publications of the NFPA and SFPE. 


In the following sections, various aspects of building code 
provisions pertaining to fire safety of building materials are 
discussed under the broad categories of (a) types of con- 
struction, (b) ignition, (c) fire growth within compartment, 
(d) containment to compartment of origin, and (e) exterior 
fires. These are largely requirements for materials. Informa- 
tion on prevention and building requirements not related to 
materials (for example, detection) can be found in NFPA 
publications. 


Types of Construction 


A central aspect of the fire safety provisions of building 
codes is the classification of buildings by types of construc- 
tion and use or occupancy. Based on classifications of build- 
ing type and occupancy, the codes set limits on areas and 
heights of buildings. Building codes generally recognize 
five classifications of construction based on types of materi- 
als and required fire resistance ratings. The two classifica- 
tions known as Type I (fire-resistant construction) and Type 
II (noncombustible construction) basically restrict 

the building elements to noncombustible materials. Wood 

is permitted to be used more liberally in the other three 


18-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


classifications, which are Type III (ordinary), Type IV 
(heavy timber), and Type V (light-frame). Type II construc- 
tion allows smaller wood members to be used for interior 
walls, floors, and roofs including wood studs, joists, trusses, 
and I-joists. For Type IV (heavy timber) construction, in- 
terior wood columns, beams, floors, and roofs are required 
to satisfy certain minimum dimensions and no concealed 
spaces are permitted. In both Types II and IV construc- 
tion, exterior walls must be of noncombustible materials, 
except that fire-retardant-treated (FRT) wood is permitted 
within exterior wall assemblies of Type III construction 
when the requirements for fire resistance ratings are 2-h or 
less. In Type V construction, walls, floors, and roofs may be 
of any dimension lumber and the exterior walls may be of 
combustible materials. Types I, H, II, and V constructions 
are further subdivided into two parts—A (protected) and B 
(unprotected), depending on the required fire resistance rat- 
ings. In Type V-A (protected light-frame) construction, most 
of the structural elements have a |-h fire resistance rating. 
No general fire resistance requirements are specified for 
buildings of Type V-B (unprotected light-frame) construc- 
tion. The required fire resistance ratings for exterior walls 
also depend on the fire separation distance from the lot line, 
centerline of the street, or another building. Such property 
line setback requirements are intended to mitigate the risk of 
exterior fire exposure. 


Based on their performance in the ASTM E 136 test (see list 
of fire test standards at end of chapter), both untreated and 
FRT wood are combustible materials. However, building 
codes permit substitution of FRT wood for noncombustible 
materials in some specific applications otherwise limited to 
noncombustible materials. Specific performance and treat- 
ment requirements are defined for FRT wood used in such 
applications. 


In addition to type of construction, height and area limita- 
tions also depend on the use or occupancy of a structure. 
Fire safety is improved by automatic sprinklers, property 
line setbacks, or more fire-resistant construction. Building 
codes recognize the improved fire safety resulting from 
application of these factors by increasing allowable areas 
and heights beyond that designated for a particular type of 
construction and occupancy. Thus, proper site planning and 
building design may result in a desired building area classi- 
fication being achieved with wood construction. 


Ignition 

The most effective ways to improve fire safety are pre- 
ventive actions that will reduce or eliminate the risks of 
ignition. Some code provisions, such as those in electrical 
codes, are designed to address this issue. Other such provi- 
sions are those pertaining to separations between heated 
pipes, stoves, and similar items and any combustible ma- 
terial. In situations of prolonged exposures and confined 
spaces, wood has been known to ignite at temperatures 
much lower than the temperatures normally associated with 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


wood ignition. To address this concern, a safe margin of fire 
safety from ignition even in cases of prolonged exposures 
can be obtained if surface temperatures of heated wood are 
maintained below about 80 °C, which avoids the incipient 
wood degradation associated with reduction in the ignition 
temperature. 


Other examples of regulations addressing ignition are re- 
quirements for the proper installation and treatment of cel- 
lulosic installation. Proper chemical treatments of cellulosic 
insulation are required to reduce its tendency for smoldering 
combustion and to reduce flame spread. Cellulosic insula- 
tion is regulated by a product safety standard of the U.S. 
Consumer Product Safety Commission. One of the required 
tests is a smoldering combustion test. Proper installation 
around recessed light fixtures and other electrical devices is 
necessary. 


Exterior Fire Exposure in the Wildland—Urban 
Interface 


In areas subjected to wildfires, actions to remove ignition 
sources around the home or other structures and prevent 
easy fire penetration into such buildings can significantly 
improve the chances that a structure will survive a wildfire. 
This includes appropriate landscaping to create a defensible 
space around the structure. Particular attention should be 
paid to the removal of vegetation and other combustible 
exterior items (such as firewood, fence, landscape mulch) 
that are close to openings (vents, windows, and doors), 
combustible surfaces of the building, and soffits. Openings 
in building exteriors can allow the fire to penetrate into the 
building and cause interior ignitions. Building design and 
maintenance should be done to limit the accumulation of 
combustible debris that could be ignited by firebrands that 
originate from burning trees and buildings, with particular 
attention paid to nooks and crannies that allow accumulation 
of debris. The firebrands’ distribution is such that they can 
cause destruction of unprotected structures that are some 
distance from the actual flames of the wildfire. Regardless 
of the type of material used for the exterior membrane, the 
type and placement of the joints of the membrane can affect 
the likelihood that a fire will penetrate the exterior mem- 
brane. For example, birdstops should be installed at the ends 
of clay tile barrel roof coverings to prevent firebrands from 
igniting the underlining substrate. 


Rated roof covering materials are designated Class A, B, 

or C according to their performance in the tests described 

in ASTM E 108, Fire Tests of Roof Coverings. This test 
standard includes intermittent flame exposure, spread of 
flame, burning brand, flying brand, and rain tests. Each of 
the three classes has a different version of the pass—fail test. 
The Class A test is the most severe, Class C the least. In the 
case of the burning brand tests, the brand for the Class B test 
is larger than that for the Class C test. FRT wood shingles 
and shakes are available that carry a Class B or C fire rating. 
A Class A rated wood roof system can be achieved by using 


Class B wood shingles with specified roof deck and 
underlayment. 


For other exterior applications, FRT wood is tested in accor- 
dance with ASTM E 84. An exterior treatment is required to 
have no increase in the listed flame spread index after being 
subjected to the rain test of ASTM D 2898. At the present 
time, a commercial treated-wood product for exterior appli- 
cations is either treated to improve fire retardancy or treated 
to improve resistance to decay and insects, not both. 


Various websites (such as www.firewise.org) provide addi- 
tional information addressing the protection of homes in the 
wildland—urban interface. The national Firewise Communi- 
ties program is a multi-agency effort designed to reach be- 
yond the fire service by involving homeowners, community 
leaders, planners, developers, and others in the effort to pro- 
tect people, property, and natural resources from the risk of 
wildland fire, before a fire starts. The Firewise Communities 
approach emphasizes community responsibility for planning 
in the design of a safe community and effective emergency 
response, along with individual responsibility for safer home 
construction and design, landscaping, and maintenance. 


The ICC’s International Wildland—Urban Interface Code 
provides model code regulations that specifically address 
structures and related land use in areas subjected to wild- 
fires. NFPA 1144 is a standard that focuses on individual 
structure hazards from wildland fires. In response to losses 
due to wildfires, the California State Fire Marshal’s Of- 
fice (www.fire.ca.gov) has implemented ignition-resistant 
construction standards for structures in the wildland—urban 
interface. These test requirements intended to address ignit- 
ability of the structure are based on tests developed at the 
University of California for exterior wall siding and sheath- 
ing, exterior windows, under eave, and exterior decking. 


Fire Growth within Compartment 
Flame Spread 


Important provisions in the building codes are those that 
regulate the exposed interior surface of walls, floors, and 
ceilings (that is, the interior finish). Codes typically exclude 
trim and incidental finish, as well as decorations and fur- 
nishings that are not affixed to the structure, from the more 
rigid requirements for walls and ceilings. For regulatory 
purposes, interior finish materials are classified according 
to their flame spread index. Thus, flame spread is one of 
the most tested fire performance properties of a material. 
Numerous flame spread tests are used, but the one cited by 
building codes is ASTM E 84 (also known as NFPA 255 
and UL 723), the “25-ft tunnel” test. In this test method, the 
508-mm-wide, 7.32-m-long specimen completes the top of 
the tunnel furnace. Flames from a burner at one end of the 
tunnel provide the fire exposure, which includes forced draft 
conditions. The furnace operator records the flame front 
position as a function of time and the time of maximum 
flame front travel during a 10-min period. The standard 


18-3 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 18-1. ASTM E 84 flame spread indexes for 19-mm-thick solid lumber of 
various wood species as reported in the literature® 


Smoke 

Flame spread developed 
Species? index® index® Source® 
Softwoods 
Yellow-cedar (Pacific Coast yellow cedar) 78 90 CWC 
Baldcypress (cypress) 145-150 — UL 
Douglas-fir 70-100 _ UL 
Fir, Pacific silver 69 58 CWC 
Hemlock, western (West Coast) 60-75 — UL 
Pine, eastern white (eastern white, northern white) 85, 120-215 122,—  CWC,UL 
Pine, lodgepole 93 210 CWC 
Pine, ponderosa 105—230° — UL 
Pine, red 142 229 CWC 
Pine, Southern (southern) 130-195° = UL 
Pine, western white 75° — UL 
Redcedar, western 70 213 HPVA 
Redwood 70 — UL 
Spruce, eastern (northern, white) 65 — UL, CWC 
Spruce, Sitka (western, Sitka) 100, 74 —, 74 UL, CWC 
Hardwoods 
Birch, yellow 105-110 _ UL 
Cottonwood 115 — UL 
Maple (maple flooring) 104 = CWC 
Oak (red, white) 100 100 UL 
Sweetgum (gum, red) 140-155 - UL 
Walnut 130-140 — UL 
Yellow-poplar (poplar) 170-185 = UL 


“Additional data for domestic solid-sawn and panel products are provided in the AF&PA—AWC DCA 
No. 1, “Flame Spread Performance of Wood Products.” 

*In cases where the name given in the source did not conform to the official nomenclature of the Forest 
Service, the probable official nomenclature name is given and the name given by the source is given in 
parentheses. 

“Data are as reported in the literature (dash where data do not exist). Changes in the ASTM E 84 test 
method have occurred over the years. However, data indicate that the changes have not significantly 
changed earlier data reported in this table. The change in the calculation procedure has usually resulted in 
slightly lower flame spread results for untreated wood. Smoke developed index is not known to exceed 
450, the limiting value often cited in the building codes. 

“CWC, Canadian Wood Council (CWC 1996); HPVA, Hardwood Plywood Manufacturers Association 
(Tests) (now Hardwood Plywood & Veneer Assoc.); UL, Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (Wood-fire 
hazard classification. Card Data Service, Serial No. UL 527, 1971). 

“Footnote of UL: In 18 tests of ponderosa pine, three had values over 200 and the average of all tests is 
154. 

‘Footnote of UL: Due to wide variations in the different species of the pine family and local connotations 
of their popular names, exact identification of the types of pine tested was not possible. The effects of 
differing climatic and soil conditions on the burning characteristics of given species have not been 


determined. 
prescribes a formula to convert these data to a flame spread sprinklers. In other areas, no flammability restrictions are 
index (FSD, which is a measure of the overall rate of flame specified on the interior finish, and unclassified materials 
spreading in the direction of air flow. In the building codes, (that is, more than 200 FSI) can be used. The classification 
the classes for flame spread index are A (FSI of 0 to 25), B labels of I, II, and III have been used instead of A, B, and C. 


(FSI of 26 to 75), and C (FSI of 76 to 200). Generally, codes 
specify FSI for interior finish based on building occupancy, 
location within the building, and availability of automatic 
sprinkler protection. The more restrictive classes, Classes A 
and B, are generally prescribed for stairways and corridors 
that provide access to exits. In general, the more flammable 
classification (Class C) is permitted for the interior finish 

of other areas of the building that are not considered exit 
ways or where the area in question is protected by automatic 


The FSI for most domestic wood species is between 90 

and 160 (Table 18-1). Thus, unfinished lumber, 10 mm or 
thicker, is generally acceptable for interior finish applica- 
tions requiring a Class C rating. Fire-retardant treatments 
are necessary when a Class A flame spread index is required 
for a wood product. Some domestic softwood species meet 
the Class B flame spread index without treatment. Other 
domestic softwood species have FSIs near the upper limit of 
200 for Class C. All available data for domestic hardwoods 


18-4 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


are for Class C. Some high-density imported hardwood spe- 
cies have FSIs in Class B. Additional FSI data for domestic 
solid-sawn and panel products are provided in the American 
Forest and Paper Association (AF&PA)—American Wood 
Council (AWC) design for code acceptance (DCA) 

No. | (see list of references at end of chapter). Report 128 
of APA-The Engineered Wood Association (APA) discusses 
the flame spread indexes of construction plywood panels. 


Code provisions pertaining to floors and floor coverings 
include those based on the critical radiant flux test (ASTM 
E 648). In the critical radiant flux test, the placement of the 
radiant panel is such that the radiant heat being imposed on 
the surface has a gradient in intensity down the length of 
the horizontal specimen. Flames spread from the ignition 
source at the end of high heat flux (or intensity) to the other 
end until they reach a location where the heat flux is not suf- 
ficient for further propagation. This is reported as the critical 
radiant flux (CRF). Thus, low CRF reflects materials with 
high flammability. 


Depending on location and occupancy, building code re- 
quirements are for a minimum critical radiant flux level 

of 2.2 kW m-? (0.22 W cm”) for Class II or 4.5 kW m2 
(0.45 W cm) for Class I. These provisions are mainly 
intended to address the fire safety of some carpets. One 
section in the International Building Code (IBC) (Sec. 804) 
where this method is cited exempts wood floors and other 
floor finishes of a traditional type from the requirements. 
This method is also cited in standards of the National Fire 
Protection Association (NFPA) such as the Life Safety 
Code. Very little generic data is published on wood prod- 
ucts tested in accordance with ASTM E 648. In one report 
published during the development of the test, a CRF of ap- 
proximately 3.5 to 4.0 kW m? was cited for oak flooring 
(Benjamin and Davis 1979). Company literature for propri- 
etary wood floor products indicates that such products can 
achieve CRF in excess of the 4.5 kW mr? for Class I. For 
wood products tested in accordance with the similar Euro- 
pean radiant panel test standard (EN ISO 9239-1 (2002)) 
(Ostman and Mikkola 2006, Tsantaridis and Ostman 2004), 
critical heat flux (CHF) ranged from 2.6 to 5.4 kW m-? for 
25 wood floorings tested without a surface coating. Most 
densities ranged from 400 to 600 kg m-3. One additional 
wood flooring product had a CHF of 6.7 kW mr. Additional 
results for the wood flooring products tested with a wide 
range of coating systems indicated that the non-fire- 
retardant coatings may significantly improve the CHF 

to levels above 4.5 kW m~. 


The critical radiant flux apparatus is also used to test the 
flammability of cellulosic insulation (ASTM E 970). There 
are many other test methods for flame spread or flammabil- 
ity. Most are used only for research and development or 
quality control, but some are used in product specifications 
and regulations of materials in a variety of applications. 


Figure 18-1. 
Flashover in 
standard room 
test. 


Other tests for flammability include those that measure heat 
release. 


Flashover 


With sufficient heat generation, the initial growth of a fire 
in a compartment leads to the condition known as flashover. 
The visual criteria for flashover are full involvement of 

the compartment and flames out the door or window 
(Figure 18-1). The intensity over time of a fire starting in 
one room or compartment of a building depends on the 
amount and distribution of combustible contents in the 
room and the amount of ventilation. 


The standard full-scale test for pre-flashover fire growth 

is the room-corner test (ASTM E 2257). In this test, a gas 
burner is placed in the corner of the room, which has a sin- 
gle door for ventilation. Three of the walls are lined with the 
test material, and the ceiling may also be lined with the test 
material. Other room-corner tests use a wood crib or similar 
item as the ignition source. Such a room-corner test is used 
to regulate foam plastic insulation, a material that is not 
properly evaluated in the ASTM E 84 test. Observations are 
made of the growth of the fire and the duration of the test 
until flashover occurs. Instruments record the heat genera- 
tion, temperature development within the room, and the 
heat flux to the floor. Results of full-scale room-corner 

tests are used to validate fire growth models and bench- 
scale test results. In a series of room-corner tests using a 
100/300-kW burner and no test material on the ceiling, the 
ranking of the different wood products was consistent with 
their flame spread index in the ASTM E 84 test (White and 
others 1999). Another room-corner test standard (NFPA 
286) is cited in codes as an alternative to ASTM E 84 for 
evaluating interior wall or ceiling finishes for Class A 
applications. 


18-5 


Smoke and Toxic Gases 


One of the most important problems associated with evacu- 
ation during a fire is the smoke produced. The term smoke 
is frequently used in an all-inclusive sense to mean the 
mixture of pyrolysis products and air that is present near 
the fire site. In this context, smoke contains gases, solid 
particles, and droplets of liquid. Smoke presents potential 
hazards because it interacts with light to obscure vision and 
because it contains noxious and toxic substances. Generally, 
two approaches are used to deal with the smoke problem: 
limit smoke production and control the smoke that has been 
produced. The control of smoke flow is most often a factor 
in the design and construction of large or tall buildings. In 
these buildings, combustion products may have serious ef- 
fects in areas remote from the actual fire site. 


The smoke yield restrictions in building codes are also 
based on data from the ASTM E 84 standard. Smoke mea- 
surement is based on a percentage attenuation of white light 
passing through the tunnel exhaust stream and detected 

by a photocell. This is converted to the smoke developed 
index (SDJ), with red oak flooring set at 100. Flame spread 
requirements for interior finish generally are linked to an 
added requirement that the SDI be less than 450. Available 
SDI data for wood products are less than 450 (Table 18-1). 


In the 1970s, the apparatus known as the NBS smoke cham- 
ber was developed and approved as an ASTM standard for 
research and development (ASTM E 662). This test is a 
static smoke test because the specimen is tested in a closed 
chamber of fixed volume and the light attenuation is re- 
corded over a known optical path length. The corresponding 
light transmission is reported as specific optical density as a 
function of time. Samples are normally tested in both flam- 
ing (pilot flame) and nonflaming conditions using a radiant 
flux of 25 kW m-. Some restrictions in product specifica- 
tions are based on the smoke box test (ASTM E 662). As 
discussed in a later section, dynamic measurements of 
smoke can be obtained with the cone calorimeter 

(ASTM E 1354) and the room-corner test (ASTM E 2257). 


Toxicity of combustion products is a concern. Fire victims 
are often not touched by flames but die as a result of ex- 
posure to smoke, toxic gases, or oxygen depletion. These 
life-threatening conditions can result from burning contents, 
such as furnishings, as well as from the structural materials 
involved. The toxicity resulting from the thermal decompo- 
sition of wood and cellulosic substances is complex because 
of the wide variety of types of wood smoke. Composition 
and the concentration of individual constituents depend 

on such factors as the fire exposure, oxygen and moisture 
present, species of wood, any treatments or finishes that 
may have been applied, and other considerations. The vast 
majority of fires that attain flashover do generate dangerous 
levels of carbon monoxide, independent of what is burning. 
Carbon monoxide is a particularly insidious toxic gas and is 
often generated in significant amounts in wood fires. Small 


18-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


amounts of carbon monoxide are particularly toxic because 
the hemoglobin in the blood is much more likely to combine 
with carbon monoxide than with oxygen, even with plenty 
of breathable oxygen (carboxyhemoglobin) present. 


Containment to Compartment of Origin 


The growth, intensity, and duration of the fire is the “load” 
that determines whether a fire is confined to the room of ori- 
gin. Whether a given fire will be contained to the compart- 
ment depends on the fire resistance of the walls, doors, ceil- 
ings, and floors of the compartment. Requirements for fire 
resistance or fire resistance ratings of structural members 
and assemblies are another major component of the building 
code provisions. In this context, fire resistance is the ability 
of materials or their assemblies to prevent or retard the pas- 
sage of excessive heat, hot gases, or flames while continu- 
ing to support their structural loads. Fire resistance ratings 
are usually obtained by conducting standard fire tests. The 
standard fire resistance test (ASTM E 119) has three failure 
criteria: element collapse, passage of flames, or excessive 
temperature rise on the non-fire-exposed surface (average 
increase of several locations exceeding 139 or 181 °C at 

a single location). 


Doors can be critical in preventing the spread of fires. Doors 
left open or doors with little fire resistance can easily defeat 
the purpose of a fire-rated wall or partition. Listings of fire- 
rated doors, frames, and accessories are provided by vari- 
ous fire testing agencies. When a fire-rated door is selected, 
details about which type of door, mounting, hardware, and 
closing mechanism need to be considered. 


Fires in buildings can spread by the movement of hot fire 
gases through open channels in concealed spaces. Codes 
specify where fireblocking and draftstops are required in 
concealed spaces, and they must be designed to interfere 
with the passage of the fire up or across a building. In addi- 
tion to going along halls, stairways, and other large spaces, 
heated gases also follow the concealed spaces between floor 
joists and between studs in partitions and walls of frame 
construction. Obstruction of these hidden channels provides 
an effective means of restricting fire from spreading to 
other parts of the structure. Fireblockings are materials used 
to resist the spread of flames via concealed spaces within 
building components such as floors and walls. They are gen- 
erally used in vertical spaces such as stud cavities to block 
upward spread of a fire. Draftstops are barriers intended 

to restrict the movement of air within concealed areas of a 
building. They are typically used to restrict horizontal dis- 
persion of hot gases and smoke in larger concealed spaces 
such as those found within wood joist floor assemblies with 
suspended dropped ceilings or within an attic space with 
pitched chord trusses. 


Exposed Wood Members 


The self-insulating quality of wood, particularly in the large 
wood sections of heavy timber construction, is an important 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


factor in providing a degree of fire resistance. In Type IV or 
heavy timber construction, the need for fire resistance re- 
quirements is achieved in the codes by specifying minimum 
sizes for the various members or portions of a building and 
other prescriptive requirements. In this type of construction, 
the wood members are not required to have specific fire 
resistance ratings. The acceptance of heavy timber construc- 
tion is based on historical experience with its performance 
in actual fires. Proper heavy timber construction includes 
using approved fastenings, avoiding concealed spaces under 
floors or roofs, and providing required fire resistance in the 
interior and exterior walls. 


The availability and code acceptance of a procedure to 
calculate the fire resistance ratings for large timber beams 
and columns have allowed their use in fire-rated buildings 
not classified as Type IV (heavy timber) construction. In 

the other types of construction, the structural members and 
assemblies are required to have specified fire resistance 
ratings. There are two accepted procedures for calculating 
the fire ratings of exposed wood members. In the first such 
procedure, the equations are simple algebraic equations that 
only need the dimensions of the beam or column and a load 
factor. Determination of the load factor requires the mini- 
mum dimension of column, the applied load as a percentage 
of the full allowable design load, and the effective column 
length. The acceptance of this procedure is normally limited 
to beams and column with nominal dimensions of 152 mm 
(6 in.) or greater and for fire ratings of 1 h or less. This pro- 
cedure is applicable to glued-laminated timbers that utilize 
standard laminating combinations. Because the outer tension 
laminate of a glued-laminated beam is charred in a 1-h fire 
exposure, a core lamination of a beam needs to be removed 
and the equivalent of an extra nominal 51-mm- (2-in.-) thick 
outer tension lamination added to the bottom of the beam. 
Details on this procedure can be found in various industry 
publications (American Institute of Timber Construction 
(AITC) Technical Note 7, AF&PA-AWC DCA #2, APA 
Publication EWS Y245A) and the IBC. 


A second more flexible mechanistic procedure was incor- 
porated within the National Design Specification for Wood 
Construction (NDS®) in 2001 and is referred to as the NDS 
Method. As an explicit engineering method, it is applicable 
to all wood structural members covered under the NDS, 
including structural composite lumber wood members. Nor- 
mal engineering calculations of the ultimate load capacity 
of the structural wood element are adjusted for reductions in 
dimensions with time as the result of charring. As discussed 
more in a later section, a char depth of 38 mm (1.5 in.) at 

1 his generally used for solid-sawn and structural glued- 
laminated softwood members. The char depth is adjusted 
upward by 20% to account for the effect of elevated tem- 
peratures on the mechanical properties of the wood near the 
wood-char interface. This procedure also requires that core 
lamination(s) of glued-laminated beams be replaced by extra 
outer tension laminate(s). A provision of the NDS procedure 


addresses the structural integrity performance criteria for 
timber decks, but the thermal separation criteria are not ad- 
dressed. This second procedure was developed by the Amer- 
ican Wood Council and is fully discussed in their Technical 
Report No. 10. Fire resistance tests on glued-laminated 
specimens and structural composite lumber products loaded 
in tension are discussed in FPL publications. 


The fire resistance of glued-laminated structural members, 
such as arches, beams, and columns, is approximately 
equivalent to the fire resistance of solid members of similar 
size. Laminated members glued with traditional phenol, 
resorcinol, or melamine adhesives are generally considered 
to be at least equal in their fire resistance to a one-piece 
member of the same size. In recent years, the fire resistance 
performance of structural wood members manufactured 
with adhesives has been of intense interest. As a result of 
concerns about some adhesives that were being used in 
fingerjointed lumber, industry test protocols and accep- 
tance criteria were developed to address this issue. When a 
wood-frame assembly is required to have a fire resistance 
rating, any finger-jointed lumber within the assembly must 
include the HRA designation for heat-resistant adhesives in 
the grademark. The designation is part of the Glued Lumber 
Policy of the American Lumber Standard Committee, Inc. 
The activities to address questions concerning the adhesives 
have included the development of ASTM standard test 
methods and revisions to the ASTM standard specifications 
for the applicable wood products. 


Light-Frame Assemblies 


Light-frame wood construction can provide a high degree 
of fire containment through use of gypsum board as the in- 
terior finish. This effective protective membrane provides 
the initial fire resistance rating. Many recognized assemblies 
involving wood-frame walls, floors, and roofs provide a 

1- or 2-h fire resistance rating. Fire-rated gypsum board 
(Type X or C) is used in rated assemblies. Type X and the 
higher grade Type C gypsum boards have textile glass fila- 
ments and other ingredients that help to keep the gypsum 
core intact during a fire. Fire resistance ratings of various 
assemblies are listed in the IBC and other publications such 
as the Gypsum Association Fire Resistance Design Manual, 
AF&PA-AWC DCA #3, and product directories of listing 
organizations, such as UL and Intertek. Traditional construc- 
tions of regular gypsum wallboard (that is, not fire rated) 

or lath and plaster over wood joists and studs have fire 
resistance ratings of 15 to 30 min. In addition to fire-rated 
assemblies constructed of sawn lumber, there are rated as- 
semblies for I-joists and wood trusses. 


Fire-rated assemblies are generally tested in accordance 
with ASTM E 119 while loaded to 100% of the allowable 
design load calculated using the NDS. The calculation of the 
allowable design load of a wood stud wall is described in 
ASTM D 6513. Some wood stud wall assemblies were 
tested with a load equivalent to 78% of the current design 


load (NDS dated 2005) calculated using a /./d of 33. Less 
than full design load in the fire test imposes a load restric- 
tion on the rated assembly. 


While fire resistance ratings are for the entire wall, floor, or 
roof assembly, the fire resistance of a wall or floor can be 
viewed as the sum of the resistance of the interior finish and 
the resistance of the framing members. In a code-accepted 
procedure, the fire rating of a light-frame assembly is cal- 
culated by adding the tabulated times for the fire-exposed 
membrane to the tabulated times for the framing. For ex- 
ample, the fire resistance rating of a wood stud wall with 
16-mm-thick Type X gypsum board and rock wool insula- 
tion is computed by adding the 20 min listed for the stud 
wall, the 40 min listed for the gypsum board, and the 15 min 
listed for the rock wool insulation to obtain a rating for the 
assembly of 75 min. Additional information on this compo- 
nent additive method (CAM) can be found in the IBC and 
AF&PA DCA No. 4. More sophisticated mechanistic models 
have been developed. 


The relatively good structural behavior of a traditional wood 
member in a fire test results from the fact that its strength is 
generally uniform through the mass of the piece. Thus, the 
unburned fraction of the member retains high strength, and 
its load-carrying capacity is diminished only in proportion 
to its loss of cross section. Innovative designs for structural 
wood members may reduce the mass of the member and 
locate the principal load-carrying components at the outer 
edges where they are most vulnerable to fire, as in structural 
sandwich panels. With high strength facings attached to a 
low-strength core, unprotected load-bearing sandwich pan- 
els have failed to support their load in less than 6 min when 
tested in the standard test. If a sandwich panel is to be used 
as a load-bearing assembly, it should be protected with gyp- 
sum wallboard or some other thermal barrier. In any protect- 
ed assembly, the performance of the protective membrane is 
the critical factor in the performance of the assembly. 


Unprotected light-frame wood buildings do not have the 
natural fire resistance achieved with heavier wood members. 
In these, as in all buildings, attention to good construction 
details is important to minimize fire hazards. Quality of 
workmanship is important in achieving adequate fire resis- 
tance. Inadequate nailing and less than required thickness of 
the interior finish can reduce the fire resistance of an assem- 
bly. The method of fastening the interior finish to the fram- 
ing members and the treatment of the joints are significant 
factors in the fire resistance of an assembly. The type and 
quantity of any insulation installed within the assembly may 
also affect the fire resistance of an assembly. 


Any penetration in the membrane must be addressed with 
the appropriate fire protection measures. This includes the 
junction of fire-rated assemblies with unrated assemblies. 

Fire stop systems are used to properly seal the penetration 
of fire-rated assemblies by pipes and other utilities. 


18-8 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Through-penetration fire stops are tested in accordance with 
ASTM E 814. Electrical receptacle outlets, pipe chases, and 
other through openings that are not adequately firestopped 
can affect the fire resistance. In addition to the design of 
walls, ceilings, floors, and roofs for fire resistance, stair- 
ways, doors, and firestops are of particular importance. 


Fire-Performance Characteristics 
of Wood 


Several characteristics are used to quantify the burning 
behavior of wood when exposed to heat and air, including 
thermal degradation of wood, ignition from heat sources, 
heat and smoke release, flame spread in heated environ- 
ments, and charring rates in a contained room. 


Thermal Degradation of Wood 


As wood reaches elevated temperatures, the different chemi- 
cal components undergo thermal degradation that affect 
wood performance. The extent of the changes depends on 
the temperature level and length of time under exposure 
conditions. At temperatures below 100 °C, permanent re- 
ductions in strength can occur, and its magnitude depends 
on moisture content, heating medium, exposure period, and 
species. The strength degradation is probably due to depo- 
lymerization reactions (involving no carbohydrate weight 
loss). The little research done on the chemical mechanism 
has found a kinetic basis (involving activation energy, pre- 
exponential factor, and order of reaction) of relating strength 
reduction to temperature. Chemical bonds begin to break at 
temperatures above 100 °C and are manifested as carbohy- 
drate weight losses of various types that increases with the 
temperature. Literature reviews by Bryan (1998), Shafiza- 
deh (1984), Atreya (1983), and Browne (1958) reveal the 
following four temperature regimes of wood pyrolysis and 
corresponding pyrolysis kinetics. 


Between 100 and 200 °C, wood becomes dehydrated and 
generates water vapor and other noncombustible gases 
including CO,, formic acid, acetic acid, and H,O. With pro- 
longed exposures at higher temperatures, wood can become 
charred. Exothermic oxidation reactions can occur because 
ambient air can diffuse into and react with the developing 
porous char residue. 


From 200 to 300 °C, some wood components begin to un- 
dergo significant pyrolysis and, in addition to gases listed 
above, significant amounts of CO and high-boiling-point tar 
are given off. The hemicelluloses and lignin components are 
pyrolyzed in the range of 200 to 300 °C and 225 to 450 °C, 
respectively. Much of the acetic acid liberated from wood 
pyrolysis is attributed to deactylation of hemicellulose. De- 
hydration reactions beginning around 200 °C are primarily 
responsible for pyrolysis of lignin and result in a high char 
yield for wood. Although the cellulose remains mostly un- 
pyrolyzed, its thermal degradation can be accelerated in the 
presence of water, acids, and oxygen. As the temperature 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


increases, the degree of polymerization of cellulose de- 
creases further, free radicals appear and carbonyl, carboxyl, 
and hydroperoxide groups are formed. Overall pyrolysis 
reactions are endothermic due to decreasing dehydration 
and increasing CO formation from porous char reactions 
with H,O and CO, with increasing temperature. During this 
“low-temperature pathway” of pyrolysis, the exothermic 
reactions of exposed char and volatiles with atmospheric 
oxygen are manifested as glowing combustion. 


The third temperature regime is from 300 to 450 °C because 
of the vigorous production of flammable volatiles. This be- 
gins with the significant depolymerization of cellulose in the 
range of 300 to 350 °C. Also around 300 °C, aliphatic side 
chains start splitting off from the aromatic ring in the lignin. 
Finally, the carbon-carbon linkage between lignin structural 
units is cleaved at 370 to 400 °C. The degradation reaction 
of lignin is an exothermic reaction, with peaks occurring be- 
tween 225 and 450 °C; temperatures and amplitudes of these 
peaks depend on whether the samples were pyrolyzed un- 
der nitrogen or air. All wood components end their volatile 
emissions at around 450 °C. The presence of minerals and 
moisture within the wood tend to smear the separate pyroly- 
sis processes of the major wood components. In this “high- 
temperature pathway,” pyrolysis of wood results in overall 
low char residues of around 25% or less of the original dry 
weight. Many fire retardants work by shifting wood degra- 
dation to the “low-temperature pathway,” which reduces the 
volatiles available for flaming combustion. 


Above 450 °C, the remaining wood residue is an activated 
char that undergoes further degradation by being oxidized to 
CO,, CO, and H,O until only ashes remain. This is referred 
to as afterglow. 


The complex nature of wood pyrolysis often leads to select- 
ing empirical kinetic parameters of wood pyrolysis appli- 
cable to specific cases. Considering the degrading wood to 
be at low elevated temperature over a long time period and 
ignoring volatile emissions, a simple first-order reaction fol- 
lowing the Arrhenius equation, dm/dt =—mA exp(—E/RT), 
was found practical. In this equation, m is mass of specimen, 
tis time, A is the preexponential factor, E is activation en- 
ergy, R is the universal gas constant, and 7 is temperature in 
kelvins. The simplest heating environment for determination 
of these kinetic parameters is isothermal, constant pressure, 
and uniform flow gas exposures on a nominally thick speci- 
men. As an example, Stamm (1955) reported on mass loss 
of three coniferous wood sticks (1 by 1 by 6 in.}—Southern 
and white pine, Sitka spruce, and Douglas-fir—that were 
heated in a drying oven in a temperature range of 93.5 to 
250 °C. The fit of the Arrhenius equation to the data re- 
sulted in the values of A = 6.23 x 107s"! and E= 124 kJ 
mol-!, If these same woods were exposed to steam instead 
of being oven dried, degradation was much faster. With the 
corresponding kinetic parameters, A = 82.9 s-! and EF = 66 


kJ mol-!, Stamm concluded that steam seemed to act as a 
catalyst because of significant reduction in the value of acti- 
vation energy. Shafizadeh (1984) showed that pyrolysis pro- 
ceeds faster in air than in an inert atmosphere and that this 
difference gradually diminishes around 310 °C. The value of 
activation energy reported at large for pyrolysis in air varied 
from 96 to 147 kJ mol. 


In another special case, a simple dual reaction model could 
distinguish between the low- and high- temperature path- 
ways for quantifying the effect of fire retardant on wood 
pyrolysis. The reaction equation, dm/dt = (m.,g—m)[A, 
exp(—E,/RT) + A, exp(—E,/RT)] , was found suitable by 
Tang (1967). In this equation, m,,,4 is the ending char mass, 
and subscripts | and 2 represent low- and high-temperature 
pathways, respectively. A dynamic thermogravimetry was 
used to span the temperature to 500 °C at a rate of 3 °C per 
minute using tiny wood particles. The runs were made in 
triplicate for ponderosa pine sapwood, lignin, and alpha- 
cellulose samples with five different inorganic salt treat- 
ments. Tang’s derived values for the untreated wood are 
Meng = 0.21 of initial weight, A, = 3.2 x 105 s-!, FE, = 96 

kJ mol, A, = 6.5e+16 s|, and E, = 226 kJ mol". A well- 
known fire-retardant-treatment chemical, monobasic am- 
monium phosphate, was the most effective chemical tested 
in that char yield was increased to 40% and £, decreased to 
80 kJ mol-!, thereby promoting most volatile loss through 
the low-temperature pathway. The alpha-cellulose reacted 
to the chemicals similarly as the wood, while the lignin did 
not seem to be affected much by the chemicals. From this 
we conclude that flammable volatiles generated by the cellu- 
lose component of wood are significantly reduced with fire 
retardant treatment. For applications to biomass energy and 
fire growth phenomology, the kinetic parameters become 
essential to describe flammable volatiles and their heat of 
combustion but are very complicated (Dietenberger 2002). 
Modern pyrolysis models now include competing reactions 
to produce char, tar, and noncondensing gases from wood as 
well as the secondary reaction of tar decomposition. 


Ignition 

Ignition of wood is the start of a visual and sustained com- 
bustion (smoldering, glow, or flame) fueled by wood pyroly- 
sis. Therefore the flow of energy or heat flux from a fire or 
other heated objects to the wood material to induce pyroly- 
sis is a necessary condition of ignition. A sufficient condi- 
tion of flaming ignition is the mixing together of volatiles 
and air with the right composition in a temperature range 

of about 400 to 500 °C. An ignition source (pilot or spark 
plug) is therefore usually placed where optimum mixing of 
volatiles and air can occur for a given ignition test. In many 
such tests the surface temperature of wood materials has 
been measured in the range of 300 to 400 °C prior to piloted 
ignition. This also coincides with the third regime of wood 
pyrolysis in which there is a significant production of flam- 
mable volatiles. However, it is possible for smoldering or 


18-9 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 18-2. Derived wood-based thermophysical parameters of ignitability 


Density Moisture kl pc* 

Thickness (kgm~) content (%) Material Tig (m/s) kpc* 
Material (mm) p M emissivity a (K) x10’ (ki? m‘*K?s") 
Gypsum board, Type X 16.5 662 _ 0.9 N/A 608.5 3.74 0.451 
FRT Douglas-fir plywood 11.8 563 9.48 0.9 0.86 646.8 = 1.37 0.261 
Oak veneer plywood 13 479 6.85 0.9 1.11 563 1.77 0.413 
FRT plywood (Forintek) 11.5 599 11.17 0.9 0.86 650 1.31 0.346 
Douglas-fir plywood (ASTM) 11.5 537 9.88 0.85 0.863 604.6 1.37 0.221 
FRT Southern Pine plywood 11 606 8.38 0.9 1.43 672 2.26 0.547 
Douglas-fir plywood (MB) 12 549 6.74 0.89 0.86 619 1.38 0.233 
Southern Pine plywood 11 605 7.45 0.88 0.86 620 1.38 0.29 
Particleboard 13 794 6.69 0.88 1.72 563 2.72 0.763 
Oriented strandboard 11 643 5.88 0.88 0.985 599 1.54 0.342 
Hardboard 6 1,026 5.21 0.88 0.604 593 0.904 0.504 
Redwood lumber 19 421 7.05 0.86 1.0 638 1.67 0.173 
White spruce lumber 17 479 7.68 0.82 1.0 621 1.67 0.201 
Southern Pine boards 18 537 7.82 0.88 1.0 644 1.63 0.26 
Waferboard 13 631 5.14 0.88 1.62 563 2.69 0.442 


“Formulas for wood thermal conductivity k, heat capacity c, and density p, at elevated temperatures used to calculate thermal inertia kpc and 


thermal diffusivity k/pc are as follows: 


k= ilo. 1941+ 0.004064M \ pq «103 )s 0.01864|7;, /297x 10°) kWm!K! 


c¢=1.25(1+0.025M\Tm/297) kJkg'K7 
Poa = p/(1+0.01M) kgm 


where 7;z is ignition temperature, ambient temperature 7, = 297 K, mean temperature 7, = (7, + Tig)/2, and the parameter r is an adjustment factor 
used in the calculation of the thermal conductivity for composite, engineered, or treated wood products (Dietenberger 2004). 


glow to exist prior to flaming ignition if the imposed radia- 
tive or convective heating causes the wood surface to reach 
200 °C or higher for the second regime of wood pyrolysis. 
Indeed, unpiloted ignition is ignition that occurs where no 
pilot source is available. Ignition associated with smoldering 
is another important mechanism by which fires are initiated. 


Therefore, to study flaming or piloted ignition, a high heat 
flux (from radiant heater) causes surface temperature to rap- 
idly reach at least 300 °C to minimize influence of unwanted 
smoldering or glow at lower surface temperatures. Surface 
temperature at ignition has been an elusive quantity that 

was experimentally difficult to obtain, but relatively recent 
studies show some consistency. For various horizontally 
orientated woods with specific gravities ranging from 0.33 
to 0.69, the average surface temperature at ignition increases 
from 347 °C at imposed heat flux of 36 kW m-? to 377 °C 

at imposed heat flux of 18 kW m-~. This increase in the ig- 
nition temperature is due to the slow decomposition of the 
material at the surface and the resulting buildup of the char 
layer at low heat fluxes (Atreya 1983). In the case of natu- 
rally high charring material such as redwood that has high 
lignin and low extractives, the measured averaged ignition 
temperatures were 353, 364, and 367 °C for material thick- 
nesses of 19, 1.8, and 0.9 mm, respectively, for various 

heat flux values as measured in the cone calorimeter 

(ASTM E 1354) (Dietenberger 2004). This equipment 


18-10 


along with the lateral ignition and flame spread test (LIFT) 
apparatus (ASTM E 1321) are used to obtain data on time to 
piloted ignition as a function of heater irradiance. From such 
tests, values of ignition temperature, critical ignition flux 
(heat flux below which ignition would not occur), and ther- 
mophysical properties have been derived using a transient 
heat conduction theory (Table 18—2). In the case of red- 
wood, the overall piloted ignition temperature was derived 
to be 365 °C (638 K) in agreement with measured values, 
regardless of heat flux, thickness, moisture content, surface 
orientation, and thin reflective paint coating. The critical 
heat flux was derived to be higher on the LIFT apparatus 
than on the cone calorimeter primarily due to the different 
convective coefficients (Dietenberger 1996). However, the 
heat properties of heat capacity and thermal conductivity 
were found to be strongly dependent on density, mois- 

ture content, and internal elevated temperatures. Thermal 
conductivity has an adjustment factor for composite, engi- 
neered, or treated wood products. Critical heat fluxes 

for ignition have been calculated to be between 10 and 

13 kW m* for a range of wood products. For exposure to 

a constant heat flux, ignition times for solid wood typically 
ranged from 3 s for heat flux of 55 kW m~ to 930 s for heat 
flux of 18 kW m2. Estimates of piloted ignition in various 
scenarios can be obtained using the derived thermal proper- 
ties listed in Table 18—2 and an applicable heat conduction 
theory (Dietenberger 2004). 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


Some, typically old, apparatuses for testing piloted ignition 
measured the temperature of the air flow rather than the 
imposed heat flux with the time to ignition measurement. 
These results were often reported as the ignition temperature 
and as varying with time to ignition, which is misleading. 
When the imposed heat flux is due to a radiant source, such 
reported air flow ignition temperature can be as much as 
100 °C lower than the ignition surface temperature. For a 
proper heat conduction analysis in deriving thermal proper- 
ties, measurements of the radiant source flux and air flow 
rate are also required. Because imposed heat flux to the sur- 
face and the surface ignition temperature are the factors that 
directly determine ignition, some data of piloted ignition are 
inadequate or misleading. 


Unpiloted ignition depends on special circumstances that re- 
sult in different ranges of ignition temperatures. At this time, 
it is not possible to give specific ignition data that apply to 
a broad range of cases. For radiant heating of cellulosic 
solids, unpiloted transient ignition has been reported at 

600 °C. With convective heating of wood, unpiloted 
ignition has been reported as low as 270 °C and as high as 
470 °C. Unpiloted spontaneous ignition can occur when a 
heat source within the wood product is located such that the 
heat is not readily dissipated. This kind of ignition involves 
smoldering and generally occurs over a longer period of 
time. Continuous smoking is visual evidence of smoldering, 
which is sustained combustion within the pyrolyzing mate- 
rial. Although smoldering can be initiated by an external 
ignition source, a particularly dangerous smoldering is that 
initiated by internal heat generation. Examples of such fires 
are (a) panels or paper removed from the press or dryer and 
stacked in large piles without adequate cooling and (b) very 
large piles of chips or sawdust with internal exothermic re- 
actions such as biological activities. Potential mechanisms 
of internal heat generation include respiration, metabolism 
of microorganisms, heat of pyrolysis, abiotic oxidation, and 
adsorptive heat. These mechanisms, often in combination, 
may proceed to smoldering or flaming ignition through a 
thermal runaway effect within the pile if sufficient heat is 
generated and is not dissipated. The minimum environmen- 
tal temperature to achieve smoldering ignition decreases 
with the increases in specimen mass and air ventilation, and 
can be as low as air temperatures for large ventilating piles. 
Therefore, safe shipping or storage with wood chips, dust, 
or pellets often depends on anecdotal knowledge that ad- 
vises maximum pile size or ventilation constraints, or both 
(Babrauskas 2003). 


Unpiloted ignitions that involve wood exposed to low-level 
external heat sources over very long periods are an area of 
dispute. This kind of ignition, which involves considerable 
charring, does appear to occur, based on fire investigations. 
However, these circumstances do not lend themselves easily 
to experimentation and observation. There is some evidence 
that the char produced under low heating temperatures can 


have a different chemical composition, which results in a 
somewhat lower ignition temperature than normally re- 
corded. Thus, a major issue is the question of safe working 
temperature for wood exposed for long periods. Tempera- 
tures between 80 and 100 °C have been recommended as 
safe surface temperatures for wood. As noted earlier, to ad- 
dress this concern, a safe margin of fire safety from ignition 
can be obtained if surface temperatures of heated wood are 
maintained below about 80 °C, which avoids the incipient 
wood degradation associated with reduction in ignition 
temperature. 


Heat Release and Smoke 


Heat release rates are important because they indicate the 
potential fire hazard of a material and also the combustibil- 
ity of a material. Materials that release their potential chemi- 
cal energy (and also the smoke and toxic gases) relatively 
quickly are more hazardous than those that release it more 
slowly. There are materials that will not pass the current 
definition of noncombustible in the model codes but will 
release only limited amounts of heat during the initial and 
critical periods of fire exposure. There is also some criticism 
of using limited flammability to partially define noncom- 
bustibility. One early attempt was to define combustibility 
in terms of heat release in a potential heat method (NFPA 
259), with the low levels used to define low combustibil- 

ity or noncombustibility. This test method is being used to 
regulate materials under some codes. The ground-up wood 
sample in this method is completely consumed during the 
exposure to 750 °C for 2 h, which makes the potential heat 
for wood identical to the gross heat of combustion from the 
oxygen bomb calorimeter. The typical gross heat of combus- 
tion averaged around 20 MJ kg~! for ovendried wood, de- 
pending on the lignin and extractive content of the wood. 


A better or a supplementary measure of degrees of combus- 
tibility is a determination of the rate of heat release (RHR) 
or heat release rate (HRR). This measurement efficiently 
assesses the relative heat contribution of materials—thick, 
thin, untreated, or treated—under fire exposure. The cone 
calorimeter (ASTM E 1354) is currently the most common- 
ly used bench-scale HRR apparatus and is based on 

the oxygen consumption method. An average value of 

13.1 kJ g-! of oxygen consumed was the constant found for 
organic solids and is accurate with very few exceptions to 
within 5%. In the specific case of wood volatiles flaming 
and wood char glowing, this oxygen consumption constant 
was reconfirmed at the value of 13.23 kJ g-! (Dietenberger 
2002). Thus, it is sufficient to measure the mass flow rate 

of oxygen consumed in a combustion system to determine 
the net HRR. The intermediate-scale apparatus (ASTM E 
1623) for testing 1- by 1-m assemblies or composites and 
the room full-scale test (ASTM E 2257) also use the oxygen 
consumption technique to measure the HRR of fires at larger 
scales. 


18-11 


350 


kW m? 
NO wo 
oa o 
So So 


200 


Heat release rate (kW 


50 


0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1,000 


Time (s) 


Figure 18—2. Heat release rate curves for 12-mm-thick 
oriented strandboard (OSB) exposed to constant heat 
flux of 20, 35, 50 and 65 kW m-2. 


The cone calorimeter is ideal for product development with 
its small specimen size of 100 by 100 mm. The specimen is 
continuously weighed by use of a load cell. In conjunction 
with HRR measurements, the effective heat of combustion 
as a function of time is calculated by the ASTM E 1354 
method. Basically, the effective heat of combustion is the 
HRR divided by the mass loss rate as determined from the 
cone calorimeter test as a function of time. Typical HRR 
profiles, as shown in Figure 18—2, begin with a sharp peak 
upon ignition, and as the surface chars, the HRR drops to 
some minimum value. After the thermal wave travels com- 
pletely through the wood thickness, the back side of a wood 
sample reaches pyrolysis temperature, thus giving rise to a 
second, broader, and even higher HRR peak. For FRT wood 
products, the first HRR peak may be reduced or eliminated. 


Heat release rate depends upon the intensity of the imposed 
heat flux. Generally, the averaged effective heat of combus- 
tion is about 65% of the oxygen bomb heat of combustion 
(higher heating value), with a small linear increase with ir- 
radiance. The HRR itself has a large linear increase with the 
heat flux. This information along with a representation of 
the heat release profile shown in Figure 18—2 has been used 
to model or correlate with large scale fire growth such as 
the Steiner tunnel test and the room-corner fire test (Dieten- 
berger and White 2001) 


The cone calorimeter is also used to obtain dynamic mea- 
surements of smoke consisting principally of soot and CO in 
the overventilated fires and of white smoke during unignited 
pyrolysis and smoldering. The measurements are dynamic 
in that smoke continuously flows out the exhaust pipe where 
optical density and CO are measured continuously. This 
contrasts with a static smoke test in which the specimen is 
tested in a closed chamber of fixed volume and the light at- 
tenuation is recorded over a known optical path length. In 


18-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


the dynamic measurements of smoke, the appropriate smoke 
parameter is the smoke release rate (SRR), which is the opti- 
cal density multiplied by the volume flow rate of air into the 
exhaust pipe and divided by the product of exposed surface 
area of the specimen and the light path length. Often the 
smoke extinction area, which is the product of SRR and the 
specimen area, is preferred because it can be correlated lin- 
early with HRR in many cases. This also permits compari- 
son with the smoke measured in the room-corner fire test 
because HRR is a readily available test result (Dietenberger 
and Grexa 2000). Although SRR can be integrated with time 
to get the same units as the specific optical density, they 

are not equivalent because static tests involve the direct ac- 
cumulation of smoke in a volume, whereas SRR involves 
accumulation of freshly entrained air volume flow for each 
unit of smoke. Methods investigated to correlate smoke be- 
tween different tests included alternative parameters such as 
particulate mass emitted per area of exposed sample. As per- 
taining to CO production, some amount of correlation has 
been obtained between the cone calorimeter’s CO mass flow 
rate as normalized by HRR to the corresponding parameter 
measured from the post flashover gases during the room- 
corner fire test. Thermal degradation of white smoke from 
wood into simpler gases within the underventilated fire test 
room during post flashover is not presently well understood 
and can have dramatic effects on thermal radiation within 
the room, which in turn affects wood pyrolysis rates. 


Flame Spread 


The spread of flames over solids is a very important phe- 
nomenon in the growth of compartment fires. Indeed, in 
fires where large fuel surfaces are involved, increase in HRR 
with time is primarily due to increase in burning area. Much 
data have been acquired with the flame spread tests used in 
building codes. Table 18—1 lists the FSI and smoke index 

of ASTM E 84 for solid wood. Some consistencies in the 
FSI behavior of the hardwood species can be related to their 
density (White 2000). Considerable variations are found for 
wood-based composites; for example, the FSI of four struc- 
tural flakeboards ranged from 71 to 189. 


As a prescriptive regulation, the ASTM E 84 tunnel test is 

a success in the reduction of fire hazards but is impractical 
in providing scientific data for fire modeling or in useful 
bench-scale tests for product development. Other full-scale 
tests (such as the room-corner test) can produce quite differ- 
ent results because of the size of the ignition burner or test 
geometry. This is the case with foam plastic panels that melt 
and drip during a fire test. In the tunnel test, with the test 
material on top, a material that melts can have low flamma- 
bility because the specimen does not stay in place. With an 
adequate burner in the room-corner test, the same material 
will exhibit very high flammability. 


A flame spreads over a solid material when part of the 
fuel, ahead of the pyrolysis front, is heated to the critical 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


condition of ignition. The rate of flame spread is controlled 
by how rapidly the fuel reaches the ignition temperature in 
response to heating by the flame front and external sources. 
The material’s thermal conductivity, heat capacitance, 
thickness, and blackbody surface reflectivity influence the 
material’s thermal response, and an increase in the values of 
these properties corresponds to a decrease in flame spread 
rate. On the other hand, an increase in values of the flame 
features, such as the imposed surface fluxes and spatial 
lengths, corresponds to an increase in the flame spread rate. 


Flame spread occurs in different configurations, which are 
organized by orientation of the fuel and direction of the 
main flow of gases relative to that of flame spread. Down- 
ward and lateral creeping flame spread involves a fuel ori- 
entation with buoyantly heated air flowing opposite of the 
flame spread direction. Related bench-scale test methods are 
ASTM E 162 for downward flame spread, ASTM E 648 for 
horizontal flame spread to the critical flux level, and ASTM 
E 1321 (LIFT apparatus) for lateral flame spread on verti- 
cal specimens to the critical flux level. Heat transfer from 
the flame to the virgin fuel is primarily conductive within a 
spatial extent of a few millimeters and is affected by ambi- 
ent conditions such as oxygen, pressure, buoyancy, and ex- 
ternal irradiance. For most wood materials, this heat transfer 
from the flame is less than or equal to surface radiant heat 
loss in normal ambient conditions, so that excess heat is not 
available to further raise the virgin fuel temperature; flame 
spread is prevented as a result. Therefore, to achieve creep- 
ing flame spread, an external heat source is required in the 
vicinity of the pyrolysis front (Dietenberger 1994). 


Upward or ceiling flame spread involves a fuel orientation 
with the main air flowing in the same direction as the flame 
spread (assisting flow). Testing of flame spread in assisting 
flow exists in both the tunnel tests and the room-corner burn 
tests. The heat transfer from the flame is both conductive 
and radiative, has a large spatial feature, and is relatively un- 
affected by ambient conditions. Rapid acceleration in flame 
spread can develop because of a large, increasing magnitude 
of flame heat transfer as a result of increasing total HRR in 
assisting flows (Dietenberger and White 2001). These com- 
plexities and the importance of the flame spread processes 
explain the many and often incompatible flame spread tests 
and models in existence worldwide. 


Charring and Fire Resistance 


As noted earlier in this chapter, wood exposed to high tem- 
peratures will decompose to provide an insulating layer of 
char that retards further degradation of the wood (Figure 
18-3). The load-carrying capacity of a structural wood 
member depends upon its cross-sectional dimensions. Thus, 
the amount of charring of the cross section is the major 
factor in the fire resistance of structural wood members. 


When wood is first exposed to fire, the wood chars and 
eventually flames. Ignition occurs in about 2 min under the 


Char layer 
Char base 


Pyrolysis zone 
Pyrolysis zone base 


Normal wood 


Figure 18-3. Illustration of charring of wood slab. 


standard ASTM E 119 fire-test exposures. Charring into the 
depth of the wood then proceeds at a rate of approximately 
0.8 mm min~! for the next 8 min (or 1.25 min mm). There- 
after, the char layer has an insulating effect, and the rate 
decreases to 0.6 mm min“! (1.6 min mm~!). Considering the 
initial ignition delay, the fast initial charring, and then the 
slowing down to a constant rate, the average constant char- 
ring rate is about 0.6 mm min! (or 1.5 in. h-!) (Douglas-fir, 
7% moisture content). In the standard fire resistance test, 
this linear charring rate is generally assumed for solid wood 
directly exposed to fire. There are differences among species 
associated with their density, anatomy, chemical composi- 
tion, and permeability. In a study of the fire resistance of 
structural composite lumber products, the charring rates 
of the products tested were similar to that of solid-sawn 
lumber. Moisture content is a major factor affecting char- 
ring rate. Density relates to the mass needed to be degraded 
and the thermal properties, which are affected by anatomi- 
cal features. Charring in the longitudinal grain direction 
is reportedly double that in the transverse direction, and 
chemical composition affects the relative thickness of the 
char layer. Permeability affects movement of moisture be- 
ing driven from the wood or that being driven into the wood 
beneath the char layer. Normally, a simple linear model for 
charring where f¢ is time (min), C is char rate (min mm~!), 
and x, is char depth (mm) is 
t=(Cx, (18-1) 
The temperature at the base of the char layer is generally 
taken to be 300 °C or 550 °F (288 °C). With this tempera- 
ture criterion, empirical equations for charring rate have 


18-13 


Table 18-3. Charring rate data for selected wood species 


Wood exposed to ASTM E 119 exposure* 


Non- 
Linear linear Thermal 
Char charring charring penetra- 
con- rate® rate’ tion 
Density® traction (min (min depth® 
Species (kg m*) factor* mm! mm |?) (mm) 
Softwoods 
Southern 509 0.60 1.24 0.56 33 
Pine 
Western 310 0.83 1.22 0.56 33 
redcedar 
Redwood 343 0.86 1.28 0.58 35 
Engelmann 425 0.82 1.56 0.70 34 
spruce 
Hardwoods 
Basswood 399 0.52 1.06 0.48 32 
Maple, hard 691 0.59 1.46 0.66 31 
Oak, red 664 0.70 1.59 0.72 32 
Yellow- 504 0.67 1.36 0.61 32 
poplar 


“Moisture contents of 8% to 9%. 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Wood exposed to a constant heat flux? 


Thermal penetration Average mass 


Linear charring rate® depth d® loss rate 
(min mm!) (mm) (gms!) 

18- 55- 18- 55- 18- 55- 
kW m? kW m? kW m? kW m? kW m? kW m? 
heat heat heat heat heat heat 
flux flux flux flux flux flux 
2.27 1.17 38 26.5 3.8 8.6 
1.68 0.98 36.5 24.9 2.9 6.0 
1.32 0.76 38.2 22.1 4.5 9.3 
2.56 1.38 27.7 27.0 4.1 9.6 


°Charring rate and average mass loss rate obtained using ASTM E 906 heat release apparatus. Test durations were 50 to 98 min for 18-kW m7 heat 
flux and 30 to 53 min for 55-kW m7 heat flux. Charring rate based on temperature criterion of 300 °C and linear model. Mass loss rate based on 
initial and final weight of sample, which includes moisture driven from the wood. Initial average moisture content of 8% to 9%. 


“Based on weight and volume of ovendried wood. 


“Thickness of char layer at end of fire exposure divided by original thickness of charred wood layer (char depth). 


“Based on temperature criterion of 288 °C and linear model. 


‘Based on temperature criterion of 288 °C and nonlinear model of Equation (18-3). 


®As defined in Equation (18-6). Not sensitive to moisture content. 


been developed. Equations relating charring rate under 
ASTM E 119 fire exposure to density and moisture content 
are available for Douglas-fir, Southern Pine, and white oak. 
These equations for rates transverse to the grain are 


C = (0.002269 + 0.00457u)p + 0.331 for Douglas-fir 
(18—2a) 

C= (0.000461 + 0.00095u)p + 1.016 for Southern Pine 
(18-2b) 

C= (0.001583 + 0.00318u)p + 0.594 for white oak 
(18-2c) 


where U is moisture content (fraction of ovendry mass) and 
p is density, dry mass volume at moisture content pt (kg 
m3). 

A nonlinear char rate model has been found useful. This al- 
ternative model is 


1.23 


t=mx, (18-3) 


where m is char rate coefficient (min mm—!.23), 


A form of Equation (18-3) is used in the NDS Method for 
calculating the fire resistance rating of an exposed wood 
member. Based on data from eight species (Table 18-3), the 


18-14 


following equation was developed for the char rate 
coefficient: 


m = 0.147 + 0.000564p + 1.21u+0.532f, (18-4) 


where p is density, ovendry mass and volume, and /, is char 
contraction factor (dimensionless). 


The char contraction factor is the thickness of the residual 
char layer divided by the original thickness of the wood 
layer that was charred (char depth). Average values for the 
eight species tested in the development of the equation are 
listed in Table 18—3. These equations and data are valid 
when the member is thick enough to be a semi-infinite slab. 
For smaller dimensions, the charring rate increases once the 
temperature has risen above the initial temperature at the 
center of the member or at the unexposed surface of the pan- 
el. As a beam or column chars, the corners become rounded. 


Charring rate is also affected by the severity of the fire ex- 
posure. Data on charring rates for fire exposures other than 
ASTM E 119 have been limited. Data for exposure to con- 
stant temperatures of 538, 815, and 927 °C are available in 
Schaffer (1967). Data for a constant heat flux are given in 
Table 18-3. 


The temperature at the innermost zone of the char layer is 
assumed to be 300 °C. Because of the low thermal conduc- 
tivity of wood, the temperature 6 mm inward from the base 
of the char layer is about 180 °C. This steep temperature 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


gradient means the remaining uncharred cross-sectional area 
of a large wood member remains at a low temperature and 
can continue to carry a load. Once a quasi-steady-state char- 
ring rate has been obtained, the temperature profile beneath 
the char layer can be expressed as an exponential term or a 
power term. An equation based on a power term is 


2 
T=T, + (00-7, 1-2] 


where T is temperature (°C), 7; initial temperature (°C), x 
distance from the char front (mm), and d thermal penetra- 
tion depth (mm). 


(18-5) 


In Table 18-3, values for the thermal penetration depth pa- 
rameter are listed for both the standard fire exposure and the 
constant heat flux exposure. As with the charring rate, these 
temperature profiles assume a semi-infinite slab. The equa- 
tion does not provide for the plateau in temperatures that 
often occurs at 100 °C in moist wood. In addition to these 
empirical data, there are mechanistic models for estimating 
the charring rate and temperature profiles. The temperature 
profile within the remaining wood cross section can be used 
with other data to estimate the remaining load-carrying ca- 
pacity of the uncharred wood during a fire and the residual 
capacity after a fire. 


Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood 


Wood products can be treated with fire retardants to improve 
their fire performance. Fire-retardant treatments results 

in delayed ignition, reduced heat release rate, and slower 
spread of flames. HRRs are markedly reduced by fire-re- 
tardant treatment (Fig. 18—4). In terms of fire performance, 
fire-retardant treatments are marketed to improve the flame 
spread characteristics of the wood products as determined 
by ASTM E 84, ASTM E 108, or other flammability tests. 
Fire-retardant treatment also generally reduces the smoke- 
developed index as determined by ASTM E 84. A fire- 
retardant treatment is not intended to affect fire resistance of 
wood products as determined by an ASTM E 119 test in any 
consistent manner. Fire-retardant treatment does not make 

a wood product noncombustible as determined by ASTM E 
136 nor does it change its potential heat as determined by 
NFPA 259. 


Because fire-retardant treatment does reduce the flamma- 
bility of the wood product, FRT wood products are often 
used for interior finish and trim in rooms, auditoriums, and 
corridors where codes require materials with low surface 
flammability. Although FRT wood is not a noncombustible 
material, many codes have specific exceptions that allow 
the use of FRT wood and plywood in fire-resistive and non- 
combustible construction for framing of non-load-bearing 
partitions, nonbearing exterior walls, and roof assemblies. 
Fire-retardant-treated wood is also used for such special 
purposes as wood scaffolding and for the frame, rails, and 
stiles of wood fire doors. 


__ 250 
E 
200 
= Untreated Douglas fir 
o plywood, 12.5 mm thick 
@ 150 
® 
e 
100 i 
<= 
—_ 
-) 
2 50 
© : 
in H FRT treated 


0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 
Time (s) 
Figure 18—4. Heat release curves for untreated and fire- 


retardant-treated (FRT) Douglas-fir plywood, 12.5 mm 
thick. 


To meet specifications in building codes and various stan- 
dards, FRT lumber and plywood is wood that has been 
pressure treated with chemicals to reduce its flame spread 
characteristics. In the case of other composite wood prod- 
ucts, chemicals can be added during the manufacture of the 
wood product. Fire-retardant treatment of wood generally 
improves the fire performance by reducing the amount of 
flammable volatiles released during fire exposure or by 
reducing the effective heat of combustion, or both. Both 
results have the effect of reducing HRR, particularly during 
the initial stages of fire, and thus consequently reducing the 
rate of flame spread over the surface. The wood may then 
self-extinguish when the primary heat source is removed. 
FRT products can be found in the Underwriters Laborato- 
ries, Inc., “Building Materials Directory,” evaluation reports 
of ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. (ICC—ES), and other such 
listings. 


Pressure Treatments 


In impregnation treatments, wood is pressure impregnated 
with chemical solutions using pressure processes similar to 
those used for chemical preservative treatments. However, 
considerably heavier absorptions of chemicals are necessary 
for fire-retardant protection. Penetration of chemicals into 
the wood depends on species, wood structure, and moisture 
content. Because some species are difficult to treat, the 
degree of impregnation needed to meet the performance re- 
quirements for FRT wood may not be possible. 


Inorganic salts are the most commonly used fire retardants 
for interior wood products, and their characteristics have 
been known for more than 50 years. These salts include 
monoammonium and diammonium phosphate, ammonium 
sulfate, zinc chloride, sodium tetraborate, and boric acid. 
Guanylurea phosphate is also used. Chemicals are combined 
in formulations to develop optimum fire performance yet 
still retain acceptable hygroscopicity, strength, corrosivity, 
machinability, surface appearance, glueability, and 


18-15 


paintability. Cost is also a factor in these formulations. Ac- 
tual formulations of commercial fire-retardant treatments 
are generally proprietary. For the two interior fire-retardant 
treatments listed in American Wood Protection Association 
(AWPA) (formerly American Wood-Preservers’ Association) 
standards, the chemicals listed are guanylurea phosphate 
and boric acid for FR-1 and phosphate, boric acid, and am- 
monia for FR-2. Species-specific information on the depth 
of chemical penetration for these two formulations can be 
found in Section 8.8 of AWPA Standard T1. Traditional fire- 
retardant salts are water soluble and are leached out in exte- 
rior applications or with repeated washings. Water-insoluble 
organic fire retardants have been developed to meet the 

need for leach-resistant systems. Such treatments are also 

an alternative when a low-hygroscopic treatment is needed. 
These water-insoluble systems include (a) resins polymer- 
ized after impregnation into wood and (b) graft polymer 

fire retardants attached directly to cellulose. An amino resin 
system based on urea, melamine, dicyandiamide, and related 
compounds is of the first type. 


There are AWPA standards that describe methods for testing 
wood for the presence of phosphate or boron. Such tests can 
be used to determine the presence of fire-retardant treat- 
ments that contain these chemicals. AWPA Standard A9 is a 
method for analysis of treated wood and treating solutions 
by x-ray spectroscopy. The method detects the presence 

of elements of atomic number 5 or higher including B(5) 
and P(15). AWPA Standard A26 has a method for analysis 
of fire retardant FR1 solutions or wood by titration for the 
percentages of boric acid and guanylurea phosphate. AWPA 
Standard A3 describes methods for determining penetra- 
tion of fire retardants. Included are two methods for boron- 
containing preservatives and fire retardants and one method 
for phosphorus-containing fire retardants. The compositions 
of commercial fire-retardant treatments are proprietary. In 
the case of boron, tests for its presence cannot distinguish 
between treatments for preservation and those for fire re- 
tardancy. Such chemical tests are not an indicator of the 
adequacy of the treatment in terms of fire retardancy. Small- 
scale fire tests such as the cone calorimeter (ASTM E 1354), 
oxygen index (ASTM D 2863), fire tube (ASTM E 69), and 
various thermal analysis methodologies can also be used to 
determine the presence of fire retardant treatment. 


Performance Requirements 


The IBC has prescriptive language specifying performance 
requirements for FRT wood. The fire performance require- 
ment for FRT wood is that its FSI is 25 or less when tested 
according to the ASTM E 84 flame spread test and that it 
shows no evidence of significant progressive combustion 
when this 10-min test is continued for an additional 

20 min. In addition, it is required that the flame front in the 
test shall not progress more than 3.2 m beyond the center- 
line of the bummer at any given time during the test. In the 
IBC, FRT wood must be a wood product impregnated with 


18-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


chemicals by a pressure process or other means during 
manufacture. In applications where the requirement being 
addressed is not for “fire-retardant-treated wood” but only 
for Class A or B flame spread, the treatment only needs to 
reduce the FSI to the required level in the ASTM E 84 flame 
spread test (25 for Class A, 75 for Class B). 


In addition to requirements for flame spread performance, 
FRT wood for use in certain applications is required to meet 
other performance requirements. Wood treated with inor- 
ganic fire-retardant salts is usually more hygroscopic than is 
untreated wood, particularly at high relative humidities. In- 
creases in equilibrium moisture content of this treated wood 
will depend upon the type of chemical, level of chemical re- 
tention, and size and species of wood involved. Applications 
that involve high humidity will likely require wood with low 
hygroscopicity. Requirements for low hygroscopicity in the 
IBC stipulate that interior FRT wood shall have a moisture 
content of not more than 28% when tested in accordance 
with ASTM D 3201 procedures at 92% relative humidity. 


Exterior fire-retardant treatments should be specified when- 
ever the wood is exposed to weather, damp, or wet condi- 
tions. Exterior type treatment is one that has shown no in- 
crease in the listed flame spread index after being subjected 
to the rain test of ASTM D 2898. Although the method of 
D 2898 is often not specified, the intended rain test is usu- 
ally Method A of ASTM D 2898. Method B of D 2898 in- 
cludes exposures to UV bulbs in addition to water sprays, is 
described in FPL publications, and is an acceptable method 
in AWPA Standard U1 for evaluating exterior treatments. 
The ASTM D 2898 standard practice was recently revised to 
include Methods C and D. Method C is the “amended rain 
test” described in the acceptance criteria for classified wood 
roof systems (AC107) of the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. 
Method D is the alternative rain test described in ASTM E 
108 for roof coverings. 


Fire-retardant treatment generally results in reductions in the 
mechanical properties of wood. Fire-retardant-treated wood 
is often more brash than untreated wood. For structural ap- 
plications, information on mechanical properties of the FRT 
wood product needs to be obtained from the treater or chem- 
ical supplier. This includes the design modification factors 
for initial strength properties of the FRT wood and values 
for the fasteners. Adjustments to the design values must take 
into account expected temperature and relative humidity 
conditions. In field applications with elevated temperatures, 
such as roof sheathings, there is the potential for further 
losses in strength with time. Fire-retardant-treated wood 
that will be used in high-temperature applications, such as 
roof framing and roof sheathing, is also strength tested in 
accordance with ASTM D 5664 (lumber) or ASTM D 5516 
(plywood) for purpose of obtaining adjustment factors as 
described in ASTM D 6841 (lumber) and ASTM D 6305 
(plywood). The temperatures used to obtain the adjustment 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


factors also become the maximum temperature that can be 
used in kiln drying of lumber or plywood after treatment. 


Corrosion of fasteners can be accelerated under conditions 
of high humidity and in the presence of fire-retardant salts. 
For fire-retardant treatments containing inorganic salts, 

the types of metal and chemical in contact with each other 
greatly affect the rate of corrosion. Thus, information on 
proper fasteners also needs to be obtained from the treater or 
chemical supplier. Other issues that may require contacting 
the treater or chemical supplier include machinability, glu- 
ing characteristics, and paintability. 


Fire-retardant treatment of wood does not prevent the wood 
from decomposing and charring under fire exposure (the rate 
of fire penetration through treated wood approximates the 
rate through untreated wood). Fire-retardant-treated wood 
used in doors and walls can slightly improve fire resistance 
of these doors and walls. Most of this improvement is asso- 
ciated with reduction in surface flammability rather than any 
changes in charring rates. 


There are specifications for FRT wood issued by AWPA 
and NFPA. In terms of performance requirements, these 
specifications are consistent with the language in the codes. 
The AWPA standards C20 and C27 for FRT lumber and 
plywood have recently been deleted by AWPA. They have 
been replaced by AWPA “Use Category System Standards” 
for specifying treated wood. The specific provisions are 
Commodity H of Standard U1 and Section 8.8 of Standard 
T1. The fire protection categories are UCFA for interior 
applications where the wood is protected from exterior 
weather and UCFB for exterior applications where any 
water is allowed to quickly drain from the surface. Neither 
category is suitable for applications involving contact with 
the ground or with foundations. Commodity Specification 
H is fire-retardant treatment by pressure processes of solid 
sawn and plywood. The performance requirements for Com- 
modity Specification H treatments are provided in Standard 
U1. Section 8.8 of Standard T1 provides information on the 
treatment and processing (that is, drying) of the products. 


There is also NFPA standard 703 for FRT wood and fire- 
retardant coatings. In addition to the performance and 
testing requirements for FRT wood products impregnated 
with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during 
manufacture, this NFPA standard provides separate specifi- 
cations for fire-retardant coatings. 


For parties interested in developing new fire-retardant treat- 
ments, there are documents that provide guidelines on the 
data required for technical acceptance. In the AWPA Book 
of Standards, there is “Appendix B: Guidelines for evaluat- 
ing new fire retardants for consideration by the AWPA.” The 
ICC-ES has issued an “Acceptance criteria for fire-retar- 
dant-treated wood” (AC66), which provides guidelines for 
what is required to be submitted for their evaluation reports. 
There is also “Acceptance criteria for classified wood roof 


systems” (AC107). Because of the relative small size of the 
specimen, FPL uses the cone calorimeter in its research and 
development of new FRT products. 


Fire-Retardant Coatings 


For some applications, applying the fire-retardant chemical 
as a coating to the wood surface may be acceptable to the 
authorities having jurisdiction. Commercial coating prod- 
ucts are available to reduce the surface flammability charac- 
teristics of wood. The two types of coatings are intumescent 
and nonintumescent. The widely used intumescent coatings 
“intumesce” to form an expanded low-density film upon 
exposure to fire. This multicellular carbonaceous film insu- 
lates the wood surface below from high temperatures. In- 
tumescent formulations include a dehydrating agent, a char 
former, and a blowing agent. Potential dehydrating agents 
include polyammonium phosphate. Ingredients for the char 
former include starch, glucose, and dipentaerythritol. Po- 
tential blowing agents for the intumescent coatings include 
urea, melamine, and chlorinate parafins. Nonintumescent 
coating products include formulations of the water-soluble 
salts such as diammonium phosphate, ammonium sulfate, 
and borax. 


NFPA standard 703 includes specifications for fire-retardant 
coatings. Because coatings are not pressure impregnated or 
incorporated during manufacture, fire-retardant coated wood 
is not FRT wood as defined in most codes or standards in- 
cluding NFPA 703. In NFPA 703, a fire-retardant coating is 
defined as a coating that reduces the flame spread of Doug- 
las-fir and all other tested combustible surfaces to which it 
is applied by at least 50% or to a flame spread classification 
value of 75 or less, whichever is the lesser value, and has a 
smoke developed rating not exceeding 200 when tested in 
accordance with ASTM E 84, NFPA 255, or UL 723. There 
is no requirement that the standard test be extended for an 
additional 20 min as required for FRT wood. NFPA 703 dif- 
ferentiates between a Class A coating as one that reduces 
flame spread index to 25 or less and a Class B coating as 
one that reduces flame spread index to 75 or less. 


Fire-retardant coatings for wood are tested and marketed to 
reduce flame spread. Clear intumescent coatings are avail- 
able. Such coatings allow the exposed appearance of old 
structural wood members to be maintained while providing 
improved fire performance. This is often desirable in the 
renovation of existing structures, particularly museums and 
historic buildings. Studies have indicated that coatings sub- 
jected to outdoor weathering are of limited durability and 
would need to be reapplied on a regular basis. 


Although their use to improve the resistance ratings of wood 
products has been investigated, there is no general accep- 
tance for using coatings to improve the fire resistance rating 
of a wood member. There is a lack of full-scale ASTM E 
119 test data to demonstrate their performance and validate 
a suitable calculation methodology for obtaining the rating. 


18-17 


Literature Cited 


Atreya, A. 1983. Pyrolysis, ignition, and flame spread on 
horizontal surfaces of wood. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University. Ph.D. dissertation. 


Babrauskas, V. 2003. Ignition Handbook. Issaquah, WA: 
Fire Science Publishers. 


Benjamin, I.A.; Davis, S. 1979. Flammability testing for 
carpets. Fire Technology. 15(3): 189-194. 


Browne, F.L. 1958. Theories of the combustion of wood 
and its control—a survey of the literature. Rep. No. 2136. 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Bryan, K.M. 1998. Computational modeling of wood 
combustion. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin— 
Madison. Ph.D. dissertation. 


Dietenberger, M.A. 1994. Protocol for ignitability, lateral 
flame spread, and heat release rate using LIFT apparatus. 
In: Nelson, G.L., ed. Fire and polymers II. Materials and 
tests for hazard prevention: Proceedings of 208th national 
meeting of the American Chemical Society; 1994 August 
21-26; Washington, DC. ACS symposium series 599. 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1995. 
Chapter 29. 


Dietenberger, M.A. 1996. Ignitability analysis using the 
cone calorimeter and LIFT apparatus. Proceedings of 
the international conference on fire safety, Vol. 22; 1996 
July 22-26. Columbus OH: Product Safety Corporation. 
Sissonville, WV: 189-197. 


Dietenberger, M.A. 2002. Update for combustion properties 
of wood components. Fire and Materials Journal. (26): 
255-267. 


Dietenberger, M.A. 2004. Ignitability of materials 

in transitional heating regimes. Proceedings of Sth 
international scientific conference on wood & fire safety; 
2004 April 18-22. Slovak Republic. Zvolen, Slovakia: 
Faculty of Wood Sciences and Technology, Technical 
University of Zvolen, 2004: 31-41. 


Dietenberger, M.A.; Grexa, O. 2000. Correlation of smoke 
development in room tests with cone calorimeter data for 
wood products. Proceedings of 4th international scientific 
conference on wood & fire safety; 2000 May 14-19. Slovak 
Republic: The High Tatras, Hotel Patria, Strbske Pleso. 


Dietenberger, M.A.; White, R.H. 2001. Reaction-to-fire 
testing and modeling for wood products. In: Proceedings 
of 12th annual BCC conference on flame retardancy; 
2001 May 21-23. Stanford, CT. Norwalk, CT: Business 
Communications Co., Inc. 54-69. 


Ostman, B.A.-L.; Mikkola, E. 2006. European classes for 
the reaction to fire performance of wood products. Holz als 
Roh- und Werkstoff. 64: 327-337. 


18-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Schaffer, E.L. 1967. Charring rate of selected woods- 
transverse to grain. Res. Pap. FPL 69. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Shafizadeh, F. 1984. The chemistry of pyrolysis and 
combustion. In: Rowell, R.M., ed. The chemistry of solid 
wood, advances in chemistry series 207. Washington, DC: 
American Chemical Society. 489-530. 


Stamm, A.J. 1955. Thermal degradation of wood and 
cellulose. Presented at the symposium on degradation 
of cellulose and cellulose derivatives. Sponsored by the 
Division of Cellulose Chemistry, 127th national meeting 
of the American Chemical Society. Cincinnati, OH. 
(April 4-7). 


Tang, W.K. 1967. Effect of inorganic salts on pyrolysis of 
wood, alpha-cellulose, and lignin determined by dynamic 
thermogravimetry. Res. Pap. FPL 71. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Tsantaridis, L.; Ostman, B. 2004. European classes for 
the reaction to fire performance of wood floorings. Tratek 
Rapport 0411026. Stockholm: Institute for Traéteknisk 
Forskning. 


White, R.H. 2000. Fire performance of hardwood species. 
NTIS #PB2001-107912WBT. In: XXI IUFRO World 
Congress, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; 2000 August 7-12. 


White, R.H.; Dietenberger, M.A.; Tran, H.; Grexa, O.; 
Richardson, L.; Sumathipala, K.; Janssens, M. 1999. 
Comparison of test protocols for the standard room/corner 
test. Fire and Materials. 23: 139-46. 


Additional References 


General 


APA. [Current edition]. Fire-rated systems. Tacoma, WA: 
APA-The Engineered Wood Association. www.apawood. 
org. 


CWC. 1996. Fire safety design in buildings. Ottawa, ON, 
Canada: Canadian Wood Council. www.cwc.ca. 


ICC. [2006 or current edition]. International building code. 
Country Club Hills, IL: International Code Council, Inc. 
www.iccsafe.org. 


International wildland-urban interface code 
International fire code 

International residential code for one- and two-family 
dwellings 

International Code Council performance code for 
buildings and facilities 


NFPA. [Current edition]. Fire protection handbook. Quincy, 
MA: National Fire Protection Association. www.nfpa.org. 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


NFPA 1144. Standard for reducing structure ignition 
hazards from wildland fire. 
NFPA 101. Life safety code. 


Society of Fire Protection Engineers. [Current edition]. 
The Society of Fire Protection Engineers handbook of 
fire protection engineering. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association. www.nfpa.org. 


Fire Test Standards 
ASTM. [Current edition]. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM 
International. www.astm.org. 


ASTM D 2863. Measuring the minimum oxygen 
concentration to support candle-like combustion of 
plastics (oxygen index). 


ASTM D 2898. Accelerated weathering of fire-retardant 
treated wood for fire testing. 


ASTM D 6513. Calculating the superimposed load on 
wood-frame walls for standard fire-resistance tests. 


ASTM E 69. Combustible properties of treated wood 
by fire-tube apparatus. 


ASTM E 84. Surface burning characteristics of building 
materials. 


ASTM E 108. Fire tests of roof coverings. 


ASTM E 119. Fire tests of building construction and 
materials. 


ASTM E 136. Behavior of materials in a vertical tube 
furnace at 750 °C. 


ASTM E 162. Surface flammability of materials using a 
radiant heat energy source. 


ASTM E 648. Critical radiant flux of floor-covering 
systems using a radiant heat energy source. 


ASTM E 662. Specific optical density of smoke 
generated by solid materials. 


ASTM E 814. Fire tests of through-penetration fire 
stops. 


ASTM E 906. Heat and visible smoke release rates 
from materials and products. 


ASTM E 970. Critical radiant flux of exposed attic floor 
insulation using a radiant heat energy source. 


ASTM E 1321. Determining material ignition and flame 
spread properties. 


ASTM E 1354. Heat and visible smoke release rates for 
materials and products using an oxygen consumption 
calorimeter. 


ASTM E 1623. Determination of fire and thermal 
parameters of materials, products, and systems using an 
intermediate scale calorimeter (ICAL). 


ASTM E 1678. Measuring smoke toxicity for use in fire 
hazard analysis. 


ASTM E 2257. Room fire test of wall and ceiling 
materials and assemblies. 


ASTM E 2579. Specimen preparation and mounting of 
wood products to assess surface burning characteristics. 


NFPA. [Current edition]. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association. www.nfpa.org. 


NFPA 251. Fire resistance of building construction and 
materials. 


NFPA 253. Critical radiant flux of floor covering 
systems using a radiant heat energy source. 


NFPA 255. Surface burning characteristics of building 
materials. 


NFPA 259. Potential heat of building materials. 


NFPA 286. Evaluating contribution of wall and ceiling 
interior finish to room fire growth. 


UL. [Current edition]. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters 
Laboratories, Inc. www.ul.com. 


ANSI/UL 723. Surface burning characteristics of 
building materials. 


Ignition 
Atreya, A. 1998. Ignition of fires. London, England: 


Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
(356): 2787-2813. 


Brenden, J.J.; Schaffer, E. 1980. Smoldering wave-front 
velocity in fiberboard. Res. Pap. FPL 367. Madison, WI: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Dietenberger, M.A. 1994. Ignitability analysis of siding 
materials using modified protocol for LIFT apparatus. 
In: Proceedings, 3rd fire and materials conference; 1994 
October 27—28; Crystal City, VA. London: Interscience 
Communications Limited: 259-268. 


Kubler, H. 1990. Self-heating of lignocellulosic materials. 
In: Nelson, G.L., ed. Fire and polymers—hazards 
identification and prevention. ACS symposium series 425. 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society: 429-449. 


LeVan, S.; Schaffer, E. 1982. Predicting weight loss from 
smoldering combustion in cellulosic insulation. Journal of 
Thermal Insulation. 5: 229-244. 


Matson, A.F.; Dufour, R.E.; Breen, J.F. 1959. Part I. Survey 
of available information on ignition of wood exposed to 
moderately elevated temperatures. In: Performance of 

type B gas vents for gas-fired appliances. Bull. of Res. 51. 
Chicago, IL: Underwriters Laboratories: 269-295. 


18-19 


Schaffer, E.L. 1980. Smoldering in cellulosics under 
prolonged low-level heating. Fire Technology. 16(1): 22-28. 


Shafizadeh, F.; Sekiguchi, Y. 1984. Oxidation of chars 
during smoldering combustion of cellulosic materials. 
Combustion and Flame. 55: 171-179. 


Flame Spread 


AWC. [Current edition]. Flame spread performance of wood 
products. Design for code acceptance No. 1. www.awc.org. 


Bengelsdorf, M.F. [Current edition]. Fire-hazard 
classification of construction plywood panels. Report 128. 
Tacoma, WA: APA-The Engineered Wood Association. 
www.apawood.org. 


Gardner, W.D.; Thomson, C.R. 1988. Flame spread 
properties of forest products. Comparison and validation of 
prescribed Australian and North American flame spread test 
methods. Fire and Materials. 12: 71-85. 


Holmes, C.A.; Eickner, H.W.; Brenden, J.J.; White, R.H. 
1979. Fire performance of structural flakeboard from 
forest residue. Res. Pap. FPL-RP-315. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Sumathipala, K.; White, R.H. 2006. Flammability tests 
for regulation of building and construction materials. In: 
Vivek, B.A., ed. Flammability testing of materials used in 
construction, transport and mining. Cambridge, England: 
Woodhead Publishing, Ltd. 217-30. Chapter 10. 


UL. 1971. Wood-fire hazard classification. Card Data 
Service, Serial No. UL527. Chicago, IL: Underwriters 
Laboratories, Inc. 


UL. [Current edition]. Building materials directory. 
Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
www.ul.com. 


Yarbrough, D.W.; Wilkes, K.E. 1997. Thermal properties 
and use of cellulosic insulation produced from recycled 
paper. In: The use of recycled wood and paper in building 
applications. Proc. 7286. Madison, WI: Forest Products 
Society: 108-114. 


Flashover and Room/Corner Tests 


Bruce, H.D. 1959. Experimental dwelling—room fires. Rep. 
1941. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Dietenberger, M.A.; Grexa, O.; White, R.H. [and others]. 
1995. Room/corner test of wall linings with 100/300 kW 
burner. In: Proceedings, 4th international fire and materials 
conference; 1995 November 15-16. Crystal City, MD. 
London: InterScience Communications Limited: 53-62. 


Holmes, C. 1978. Room corner-wall fire tests of some 
structural sandwich panels and components. Journal of Fire 
& Flammability. 9: 467-488. 


18-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Holmes, C.; Eickner, H.; Brenden, J.J. [and others]. 1980. 
Fire development and wall endurance in sandwich and 
wood-frame structures. Res. Pap. FPL 364. Madison, WI: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Schaffer, E.L.; Eickner, H.W. 1965. Effect of wall linings on 
fire performance within a partially ventilated corridor. Res. 
Pap. FPL 49. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Tran, H.C. 1991. Wall and comer fire tests on selected wood 
products. Journal of Fire Sciences. 9: 106-124. March/ 
April. 


Heat Release and Heat of Combustion 


Babrauskas, V.; Grayson, S.J., eds. 1992. Heat release in 
fires. New York: Elsevier Applied Science. 


Chamberlain, D.L. 1983. Heat release rates of lumber 
and wood products. In: Schaffer, E.L., ed. Behavior of 
polymeric materials in fire. ASTM STP 816. Philadelphia, 
PA: American Society for Testing and Materials: 2141. 


Hagge, M.J.; Bryden, K.M.; Dietenberger, M.A. 2004. 
Effect of backing board materials on wood combustion 
performance. In: Proceedings, 5th international scientific 
conference on wood & fire safety; 2004 April 18-22. 


Tran, H.C. 1990. Modifications to an Ohio State University 
apparatus and comparison with cone calorimeter results. In: 
Quintiere, J.G.; Cooper, L.Y., eds. Heat and mass transfer 
in fires. Proceedings, AIAA/ASME thermophysics and heat 
transfer conference; 1990 June 18-20; Seattle, WA. New 
York: The American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
(141): 131-139. 


Tran, H.C. 1992. (B) Experimental data on wood materials. 
In: Babrauskas, V.; Grayson, S.J., eds. Heat release in fires. 
New York: Elsevier Applied Science: 357-372. Chapter 11, 
Part B. 


White, R.H. 1987. Effect of lignin content and extractives 
on the higher heating value of wood. Wood and Fiber 
Science. 19(4): 446-452. 


White, R.H.; Dietenberger, M.A. 2004. Cone calorimeter 
evaluation of wood products. In: 15th annual conference on 
recent advances in flame retardancy of polymeric materials. 
Stamford, CT. Norwalk, CT: Business Communications 
Company, Inc.: 331-342. 


White, R.H.; Dietenberger, M.A.; Stark, N. 2007. Cone 
calorimeter tests of wood-based decking materials. In: 
Proceedings, 18th annual conference on recent advances 
in flame retardancy of polymeric materials. Stamford, CT. 
Norwalk, CT: BCC Research. (2): 326-337. 


Combustion Products 


Brenden, J.J. 1970. Determining the utility of a new 
optical test procedure for measuring smoke from various 


Chapter 18 Fire Safety of Wood Construction 


wood products. Res. Pap. FPL 137. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


Brenden, J.J. 1975. How nine inorganic salts affected 
smoke yield from Douglas-fir plywood. Res. Pap. FPL 
249. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Hall, J.R., Jr. 1996. Whatever happened to combustion 
toxicity. Fire Technology. 32(4): 351-371. 


Tran, H.C. 1990. Correlation of wood smoke produced from 
NBS smoke chamber and OSU heat release apparatus. In: 
Hasegawa, H.K., ed. Characterization and toxicity of smoke. 
ASTM STP 1082. Philadelphia, PA: American Society for 
Testing and Materials: 135-146. 


Fire Resistance 


AITC. [Current edition]. Calculation of fire resistance of 
glued laminated timbers. Tech. Note 7. Englewood, CO: 
American Institute of Timber Construction. www.aitc- 
glulam.org. 


APA. [Current edition]. Calculating fire resistance of glulam 
beams and columns. Publ. No. EWS Y245A. Tacoma, WA: 
APA-The Engineered Wood Association. www.apawood. 
org. 


ASCE. 1982. Evaluation, maintenance and upgrading of 
wood structures—a guide and commentary. New York: 
American Society of Civil Engineers. 428 p. 


AWC. [Current edition]. Calculating the fire resistance of 
exposed wood members. Tech. Rep. 10. Washington, DC: 
American Forest & Paper Association—American Wood 

Council. www.awc.org. 


AWC. [Current edition]. Chapter M16: Fire design. In: 
ASD/LRFD manual for engineered wood construction. 
Washington, DC: American Forest & Paper Association— 
American Wood Council. www.awc.org. 


AWC. [Current edition]. Component additive method 
(CAM) for calculating and demonstrating assembly fire 
endurance. Design for code acceptance No. 4. Washington, 
DC: American Forest & Paper Association—American 
Wood Council. www.awe.org. 


AWC. [Current edition]. Design of fire-resistive exposed 
wood members. Design for code acceptance No. 2. 
Washington, DC: American Forest & Paper Association— 
American Wood Council. www.awc.org. 


AWC. [Current edition]. Fire rated wood floor and wall 
assemblies. Design for code acceptance No. 3. Washington, 
DC: American Forest & Paper Association—American 
Wood Council. www.awc.org. 


Gypsum Association. [Current edition]. Fire resistance 
design manual. Washington, DC: Gypsum Association. 
www.gypsum.org. 


HUD. 1980. Guideline on fire ratings of archaic materials 
and assemblies. Rehabilitation guidelines, part 8. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, Superintendent of Documents. http://www. 
huduser.org/Publications/PDF/fire.pdf. 


Intertek. [Current edition]. Directory of listed product. 
www. intertek-etlsemko.com. 


Janssens, M. 1994. Thermo-physical properties for 
wood pyrolysis models. In: Proceedings, Pacific timber 
engineering conference; 1994 July 11-15; Gold Coast, 
Australia. Fortitude Valley MAC, Queensland, Australia: 
Timber Research and Development Advisory Council: 
607-618. 


Janssens, M.L.; White, R.H. 1994. Short communication: 
temperature profiles in wood members exposed to fire. Fire 
and Materials. 18: 263-265. 


Ross, R.J.; Brashaw, B.K.; Wang, X.; White, R.H.; Pellerin, 
R.F. 2004. Wood and timber condition assessment manual. 
Madison, WI: Forest Products Society. 


Schaffer, E.L. 1966. Review of information related to the 
charring rate of wood. Res. Note FPL—145. Madison, WI: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Schaffer, E.L. 1977. State of structural timber fire 
endurance. Wood and Fiber. 9(2): 145-170. 


Schaffer, E.L. 1984. Structural fire design: Wood. Res. Pap. 
FPL 450. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Tran, H.C.; White, R.H. 1992. Burning rate of solid wood 
measured in a heat release calorimeter. Fire and Materials. 
16: 197-206. 


UL. [Current edition]. Fire resistance directory. Northbrook, 
IL: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. www.ul.com. 


White, R.H. 2003. Fire resistance of engineered wood rim 
board products. FPL Res. Pap. 610. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 22 p. 


White, R.H. 2004. Fire resistance of exposed wood 
members. In: Proceedings, Sth international wood & fire 
safety conference. Zvolen, Slovak Republic: Technical 
University of Zvolen, Faculty of Wood Science and 
Technology. 337-44. 


White, R.H. 2006. Fire resistance of structural composite 
lumber products, Res. Pap. FPL-RP—633. Madison, WI: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 28 p. 


White, R.H. 2008. Analytical methods for determining fire 
resistance of timber members. In: SFPE handbook of fire 
protection engineering. 4th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association. 


18-21 


White, R.H.; Nordheim, E.V. 1992. Charring rate of wood 
for ASTM E 119 exposure. Fire Technology. 28: 5—30. 


White, R.H.; Tran, H.C. 1996. Charring rate of wood 
exposed to a constant heat flux. In: Proceedings, wood & 
fire safety, 3rd international conference. The High Tatras; 
1996 May 6-9; Zvolen, Slovakia. Zvolen, Slovakia: Faculty 
of Wood Technology, Technical University: 175-183. 


Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood 


ASTM. [Current edition]. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM 
International. www.astm.org. 


ASTM D 3201. Hygroscopic properties of fire-retardant 
wood and wood-base products. 


ASTM D 5516. Evaluating the mechanical properties 
of fire-retardant treated softwood plywood exposed to 
elevated temperatures. 


ASTM D 5664. Evaluating the effects of fire-retardant 
treatments and elevated temperatures on strength 
properties of fire-retardant treated lumber. 


ASTM D 6305. Calculating bending strength design 
adjustment factors for fire-retardant-treated plywood 
roof sheathing. 


ASTM D 6841. Calculating design value treatment 
adjustment factors for fire-retardant-treated lumber. 


AWPA. [Current edition]. Gransbury, TX: American 
Wood Protection Association (formerly American Wood- 
Preservers’ Association). www.awpa.com. 


Standard A2. Analysis of waterborne preservatives and 
fire-retardant formulations. 


Standard A3. Determining penetration of preservative 
and fire retardants. 


Standard A9. Analysis of treated wood and treating 
solutions by X-ray spectroscopy. 


Standard A26. Analysis of fire retardant solutions and 
wood by titration. 


Standard T1. Use category system: processing and 
treatment standard. 


Standard U1. Use category system: user specification 
for treated wood. 


Holmes, C.A. 1977. Effect of fire-retardant treatments on 
performance properties of wood. In: Goldstein, LS., ed. 
Wood technology: chemical aspects. Proceedings, ACS 
symposium series 43. Washington, DC: American Chemical 
Society. 


ICC-ES. [Current edition]. Whittier, CA: ICC Evaluation 
Service, Inc. www.icc-es.org. 


AC66. Acceptance criteria for fire-retardant-treated 
wood. 


18-22 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


AC107. Acceptance criteria for classified wood roof 
systems. 


Lebow, P.K., Winandy, J.E. 2003. Using kinetic models 
to predict thermal degradation of fire-retardant-treated 
plywood roof sheathing. Paper 048. In: Proceedings, 31st 
annual conference of North American Thermal Analysis 
Society; 2003 September 22—24; Albuquerque, NM. 


LeVan, S.L. 1984. Chemistry of fire retardancy. In: Rowell, 
R.M., ed. The chemistry of solid wood. Advances in 
Chemistry series 207. Washington, DC: American Chemical 
Society. 


LeVan, S.L.; Tran, H.C. 1990. The role of boron in flame- 
retardant treatments. In: Hamel, M., ed. Proceedings 47355, 
Ist international conference on wood protection with 
diffusible preservatives; 1990 November 28-30; Nashville, 
TN. Madison, WI: Forest Products Research Society: 39-41. 


LeVan, S.L.; Winandy, J.E. 1990. Effects of fire-retardant 
treatments on wood strength: a review. Wood and Fiber 
Science. 22(1): 113-131. 


LeVan, S.L.; Ross, R.J.; Winandy, J.E. 1990. Effects of fire 
retardant chemicals on the bending properties of wood at 
elevated temperatures. Res. Pap. FPL—-RP-498. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


NAHB. 1990. Home builders guide to fire retardant treated 
plywood. Evaluation, testing, and replacement. Upper 
Marlboro, MD: National Association of Home Builders, 
National Research Center. 


NFPA. [Current edition]. Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association. www.nfpa.org. 


NFPA 703. Fire retardant-treated wood and fire- 
retardant coatings for building materials. 


Winandy, J.E. 1995. Effects of fire retardant treatments 
after 18 months of exposure at 150 °F (66 °C). Res. 
Note FPL-RN-0264. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Winandy, J.E.; LeVan, S.L.; Ross, R.J.; Hoffman, S.P.; 
McIntyre, C.R. 1991. Thermal degradation of fire-retardant- 
treated plywood—development and evaluation of a test 
protocol. Res. Pap. FPL—RP-501. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 


CHAPTER 19 


Specialty Treatments 


Rebecca E. Ibach, Research Chemist 


Many specialty treatments can be applied to wood to ei- 
ther improve its performance or change its properties. 
Treatments addressed in this chapter are those that make 


Contents 
Plasticizing Wood 19-1 


Principles of Plasticizing and Bending 19-1 
Bent Wood Members 19-2 

Laminated Members 19-2 

Veneered Curved Members 19-3 

Bending of Solid Members 19-3 

Selection of Stock 19-3 

Moisture Content of Bending Stock 19-3 
Bending Operation and Apparatus 19-4 
Fixing the Bend 19-4 

Characteristics of Bent Wood 19-4 


Modified Woods 19-4 


Resin-Treated Wood—Not Compressed 
(Impreg) 19-4 

Resin-Treated Wood—Compressed 
(Compreg) 19-5 

Heat Treatments 19-9 

Heating Wet Wood 19-9 


Heating Wet Wood Followed by 
Compression 19-10 


Heating Dry Wood 19-10 


Heating Dry Wood Followed by 
Compression 19-10 


Wood Treated with Polyethylene Glycol 
(PEG) 19-10 

Wood-—Polymer Composites 19-11 
Chemical Modification 19-12 
Paper-Based Plastic Laminates 19-12 
Industrial Laminates 19-12 

Decorative Laminates 19-13 
Lignin-Filled Laminates 19-14 
Paper-Face Overlays 19-14 


References 19-14 


permanent changes in the shape of a wood product, im- 
provements in dimensional stability, or improvements in 
performance through combinations with nonwood resources. 


Plasticizing Wood 
Principles of Plasticizing and Bending 


In simple terms, the wood cell wall is a composite made of 
a rigid cellulose polymer in a matrix of lignin and the hemi- 
celluloses. The lignin polymer in the middle lamella and 

S2 layer is thermoplastic; that is, it softens upon heating. 
The glass transition temperature 7, of the lignin in the ma- 
trix is approximately 170 °C (338 °F). Above the matrix 7,, 
it is possible to cause the lignin to undergo thermoplastic 
flow and, upon cooling, reset in the same or modified con- 
figuration. This is the principle behind bending of wood. 


The matrix can be thermoplasticized by heat alone, but the 
T, of the unmodified matrix is so high that some fiber de- 
composition can occur if high temperatures are maintained 
for a lengthy period. The 7, of the matrix can be decreased 
with the addition of moisture or through the use of plasticiz- 
ers or softeners. 


Heat and moisture make certain species of wood sufficiently 
plastic for bending operations. Steaming at atmospheric or 
a low gauge pressure, soaking in boiling or nearly boiling 
water, or microwave heating moist wood are satisfactory 
methods of plasticizing wood. Wood at 20% to 25% mois- 
ture content needs to be heated without losing moisture; at 
lower moisture content, heat and moisture must be added. 
As a consequence, the recommended plasticizing processes 
are steaming or boiling for about 15 min cm~! (38 min in~!) 
of thickness for wood at 20% to 25% moisture content and 
steaming or boiling for about 30 min cm~! (75 min in-!) of 
thickness for wood at lower moisture content levels. Steam- 
ing at high pressures causes wood to become plastic, but 
wood treated with high pressure steam generally does not 
bend as successfully as does wood treated at atmospheric 
or low pressure. Microwave heating requires much shorter 
times. 


Wood can be plasticized by a variety of chemicals in ad- 
dition to water. Common chemicals that plasticize wood 
include urea, dimethylol urea, low-molecular-weight 
phenol-formaldehyde resin, dimethyl sulfoxide, and liquid 
ammonia. Urea and dimethylol urea have received limited 


commercial attention, and a bending process using liquid 
ammonia has been patented. Wood members can be read- 
ily molded or shaped after immersion in liquid ammonia or 
treatment under pressure with ammonia in the gas phase. As 
the ammonia evaporates, the lignin resets, the wood stiffens 
and retains its new shape. Plasticization of the lignin matrix 
alone can be done using chemical modification technolo- 
gies, which are covered later in this chapter. 


It is also possible to bend wood without softening or plasti- 
cizing treatments. However, the stability of the final product 
may not be as permanent as from treatments in which soft- 
ening and plasticizing methods are used. 


Bent Wood Members 


Bending can provide a variety of functional and esthetically 
pleasing wood members, ranging from large curved arches 
to small furniture components. The curvature of the bend, 
size of the member, and intended use of the product deter- 
mine the production method. 


Laminated Members 


At one time in the United States, curved pieces of wood 
were laminated chiefly to produce small items such as parts 
for furniture and pianos. However, the principle was extend- 
ed to the manufacture of arches for roof supports in farm, 
industrial, and public buildings and other types of structural 
members (see Chap. 11). The laminations are bent without 
end pressure against a form and adhesively bonded together. 
Both softwoods and hardwoods are suitable for laminated 
bent structural members, and thin material of any species 
can be bent satisfactorily for such purposes. The choice of 
species and adhesive depends primarily on the cost, required 
strength, and demands of the application. 


Laminated curved members are produced from dry stock 
in a single bending and adhesive bond formation operation. 
This process has the following advantages compared with 
bending single-piece members: 


e Bending thin laminates to the required radius involves 
only moderate stress and deformation of the wood fi- 
bers, eliminating the need for treatment with steam or 
hot water and associated drying and conditioning of 
the finished product. In addition, the moderate stresses 
involved in curving laminated members result in stron- 
ger members when compared with curved single-piece 
members. 


e = The tendency of laminated members to change shape 
with changes in moisture content is less than that of 
single-piece bent members. 


e Ratios of thickness of member to radius of curvature 
that are impossible to obtain by bending single pieces 
can be attained readily by laminating. 

e Curved members of any desired length can be 
produced. 


19-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Straight-laminated members can be steamed and bent after 
they are bonded together. However, this type of procedure 
requires an adhesive that will not be affected by the steam- 
ing or boiling treatment and complicates conditioning of the 
finished product. 


Curved Plywood 


Curved plywood is produced either by bending and adhesive 
bonding the plies in one operation or by bending previously 

bonded flat plywood. Plywood curved by bending and bond- 
ing simultaneously is more stable in curvature than plywood 
curved by bending previously bonded material. 


Plywood Bent and Adhesively Bonded Simultaneously 


In bending and bonding plywood in a single operation, 
adhesive-coated pieces of veneer are assembled and pressed 
over or between curved forms. Pressure and sometimes 
heat are applied through steam or electrically heated forms 
until the adhesive sets and holds the assembly to the desired 
curvature. Some laminations are at an angle, usually 90°, 

to other laminations, as in the manufacture of flat plywood. 
The grain direction of the thicker laminations is normally 
parallel to the axis of the bend to facilitate bending. 


A high degree of compound curvature can be obtained in an 
assembly made up of a considerable number of thin veneers. 
First, for both the face and back of the assembly, the two 
outer plies are bonded at 90° to each other in a flat press. 
The remaining veneers are then adhesive-coated and assem- 
bled at any desired angle to each other. The entire assembly 
is hot-pressed to the desired curvature. 


Bonding the two outer plies before molding allows a higher 
degree of compound curvature without cracking the face 
plies than could otherwise be obtained. Where a high degree 
of compound curvature is required, the veneer should be 
relatively thin (less than 3 mm (1/8 in.)) with a moisture 
content of about 12%. 


The molding of plywood with fluid pressure applied by flex- 
ible bags of some impermeable material produces plywood 
parts of various degrees of compound curvature. In “bag 
molding,” fluid pressure is applied through a rubber bag by 
air, steam, or water. The veneer is wrapped around a form, 
and the whole assembly is enclosed in a bag and subjected 
to pressure in an autoclave, the pressure in the bag being 
“bled.” Or the veneer may be inserted inside a metal form 
and, after the ends have been attached and sealed, pressure 
is applied by inflating a rubber bag. The form may be heated 
electrically or by steam. 


The advantages of bending and bonding plywood simul- 
taneously to form a curved shape are similar to those for 
curved-laminated members. In addition, the cross plies give 
the curved members properties that are characteristic of 
cross-banded plywood. Curved plywood shells for furniture 
manufacture are examples of these bent veneer and adhe- 
sive-bonded products. 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 


Plywood Bent after Bonding 


After the plies are bonded together, flat plywood is often 
bent by methods that are somewhat similar to those used in 
bending solid wood. To bend plywood properly to shape, 

it must be plasticized by some means, usually moisture or 
heat, or a combination of both. The amount of curvature 
that can be introduced into a flat piece of plywood depends 
on numerous variables, such as moisture content, direction 
of grain, thickness and number of plies, species and quality 
of veneer, and the technique applied in producing the bend. 
Plywood is normally bent over a form or a bending mandrel. 


Flat plywood bonded with a waterproof adhesive can be 
bent to compound curvatures after bonding. However, no 
simple criterion is available for predetermining whether a 
specific compound curvature can be imparted to flat ply- 
wood. Soaking the plywood prior to bending and using 
heat during forming are aids in manipulation. Usually, the 
plywood to be postformed is first thoroughly soaked in hot 
water, and then dried between heated forming dies attached 
to a hydraulic press. If the use of postforming for bending 
flat plywood to compound curvatures is contemplated, ex- 
ploratory trials to determine the practicability and the best 
procedure are recommended. Remember that in postform- 
ing plywood to compound curvatures, all the deformation 
must be by compression or shear because plywood cannot 
be stretched. Hardwood species, such as birch, poplar, and 
gum, are usually used in plywood that is to be postformed. 


Veneered Curved Members 


Veneered curved members are usually produced by bonding 
veneer to one or both faces of a curved solid-wood base. 
The bases are ordinarily sawn to the desired shape or bent 
from a piece grooved with saw kerfs on the concave side at 
right angles to the direction of bend. Pieces bent by making 
saw kerfs on the concave side are commonly reinforced and 
kept to the required curvature by bonding splines, veneer, or 
other pieces to the curved base. Veneering over curved solid 
wood is used mainly in furniture. The grain of the veneer is 
commonly laid in the same general direction as the grain of 
the curved wood base. The use of crossband veneers, that is, 
veneers lay with the grain at right angles to the grain of the 
back and face veneer, decreases the tendency of the member 
to split. 


Bending of Solid Members 


Wood of certain species that is steamed, microwaved, or 
soaked in boiling water can be compressed as much as 
25% to 30% parallel to the grain. The same wood can be 
stretched only 1% to 2%. Because of the relation between 
attainable tensile and compressive deformations, if bending 
involves severe deformation, then most of the deformation 
must be compression. The inner or concave side must as- 
sume the maximum amount of compression, and the outer 
or convex side must experience zero strain or a slight ten- 
sion. To accomplish this, a metal strap equipped with end 


Figure 19-1. Chair back being bent through an arc of 
180° in a bending machine. 


fittings is customarily used. The strap makes contact with 
the outer or convex side and, acting through the end fittings, 
places the whole piece of wood in compression. The tensile 
stress that would normally develop in the outer side of the 
piece of wood during bending is borne by the metal strap. A 
bending form is shown in Figure 19-1. 


Selection of Stock 


In general, hardwoods possess better bending quality than 
softwoods, and certain hardwoods surpass others in this 
quality. This is interesting from a theoretical point of view 
because hardwoods contain less lignin than softwoods. 
Hardwoods also contain much more hemicelluloses in the 
matrix than do softwoods. The species commonly used to 
produce bent members are white oak, red oak, elm, hickory, 
ash, beech, birch, maple, walnut, sweetgum, and mahogany. 
As stated, most softwoods have a poor bending quality and 
are not often used in bending operations. However, Pacific 
yew and yellow-cedar are exceptions to this rule. In addi- 
tion, Douglas-fir, southern yellow pine, northern and At- 
lantic white-cedar, and redwood are used for ship and boat 
planking for which purpose they are often bent to moderate 
curvature after being steamed or soaked. 


Bending stock should be free from serious cross grain and 
distorted grain, such as may occur near knots. The slope of 
cross grain should not be steeper than about | to 15. Decay, 
knots, shake, pith, surface checks, and exceptionally light or 
brittle wood should be avoided. 


Moisture Content of Bending Stock 


Although green wood can be bent to produce many curved 
members, difficulties are encountered in drying and fixing 
the bend. Another disadvantage with green stock is that 
hydrostatic pressure may be developed during bending. 
Hydrostatic pressure can cause compression failures on the 
concave side if the wood is compressed by an amount 
greater than the air space in the cells of the green wood. 


19-3 


Bending stock that has been dried to low moisture content 
level requires a lengthy steaming or soaking process to in- 
crease its moisture content to the point where it can be made 
sufficiently plastic for successful bending. For most chair 
and furniture parts, the moisture content of the bending 
stock should be 12% to 20% before it is steamed or micro- 
wave heated. The preferred moisture content level varies 
with the severity of the curvature to which the wood is bent 
and the method used in drying and fixing the bent member. 
For example, chair-back slats, which have a slight curva- 
ture and are subjected to severe drying conditions between 
steam-heated platens, can be produced successfully from 
stock at 12% moisture content. For furniture parts that need 
a more severe bend where the part must be bent over a form, 
15% to 20% moisture content is recommended. 


Bending Operation and Apparatus 


After being plasticized, the stock should be quickly placed 
in the bending apparatus and bent to shape. The bending 
apparatus consists essentially of a form (or forms) and a 
means of forcing the piece of steamed wood against the 
form. If the curvature to be obtained demands a difference 
of much more than 3% between lengths of the outer and in- 
ner surfaces of the pieces, then the apparatus should include 
a device for applying end pressure. This generally takes the 
form of a metal strap or pan provided with end blocks, end 
bars, or clamps. 


Fixing the Bend 


After being bent, the piece should be cooled and dried while 
held in its curved shape. One method is to dry the piece in 
the bending machine between the plates of a hot-plate press. 
Another method is to secure the bent piece to the form and 
place both the piece and the form in a drying room. Still an- 
other is to keep the bent piece in a minor strap with tie rods 
or stays so that it can be removed from the form and placed 
in a drying room. When the bent member has cooled and 
dried to moisture content suitable for its intended use, the 
restraining devices can be removed and the piece will hold 
its curved shape. 


Characteristics of Bent Wood 


After a bent piece of wood is cooled and dried, the curvature 
will be maintained. An increase in moisture content may 
cause the piece to lose some of its curvature. A decrease in 
moisture content may cause the curve to become sharper, 
although repeated changes in moisture content bring about 

a gradual straightening. These changes are caused primarily 
by lengthwise swelling or shrinking of the inner (concave) 
face, the fibers of which were wrinkled or folded during the 
bending operation. 


A bent piece of wood has less strength than a similar unbent 
piece. However, the reduction in strength brought about by 
bending is seldom serious enough to affect the utility value 
of the member. 


19-4 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Modified Woods 


Wood can be chemically modified to improve water repel- 
lency, dimensional stability, resistance to acids or bases, 
ultraviolet radiation, biodeterioration, and thermal degrada- 
tion. Wood can also be chemically treated, then compressed 
to improve dimensional stability and increase hardness. 
Sheets of paper treated with resins or polymers can be lami- 
nated and hot pressed into thick panels that have the ap- 
pearance of plastic rather than paper. These sheets are used 
in special applications because of their structural properties 
and in items requiring hard, impervious, and decorative sur- 
faces. 


Modified woods, modified wood-based materials, and paper- 
based laminates are usually more expensive than wood be- 
cause of the cost of the chemicals and the special processing 
required producing them. Thus, modified wood use is gener- 
ally limited to special applications where the increased cost 
is justified by the special properties needed. 


Wood is treated with chemicals to increase hardness and 
other mechanical properties, as well as its resistance to de- 
cay, fire, weathering, and moisture. The rate and extent of 
swelling and shrinking of the wood when in contact with 
water is decreased by application of water-resistant chemi- 
cals to the surface of wood, impregnation of the wood with 
such chemicals dissolved in water or volatile solvents, or 
bonding chemicals to the cell wall polymer. Such treatments 
may also decrease the rate at which wood changes dimen- 
sion as a result of humidity, even though these treatments do 
not affect the final dimensional changes caused by lengthy 
duration exposures. Paints, varnishes, lacquers, wood-pene- 
trating water repellents, and plastic and metallic films retard 
the rate of moisture absorption but have little effect on total 
dimensional change if exposure to moisture is extensive and 
prolonged. 


Resin-Treated Wood—Not Compressed 
(Impreg) 

Permanent stabilization of the dimensions of wood is 
needed for certain specialty uses. This can be accomplished 
by depositing a bulking agent within the swollen structure 
of the wood fibers. The most successful bulking agents that 
have been commercially applied are highly water-soluble, 
thermosetting, phenol-formaldehyde resin-forming systems, 
with initially low molecular weights. No thermoplastic res- 
ins have been found that effectively stabilize the dimensions 
of wood. 


Wood treated with a thermosetting, fiber-penetrating resin 
and cured without compression is known as impreg. The 
wood (preferably green veneer to facilitate resin pickup) is 
soaked in the aqueous resin-forming solution or, if air dry, is 
impregnated with the solution under pressure until the resin 
content equals 25% to 35% of the weight of dry wood. The 
treated wood is allowed to stand under nondrying conditions 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 


for 1 to 2 days to permit uniform distribution of the solution 
throughout the wood. The resin-containing wood is dried at 
moderate temperatures to remove the water, and then heated 
to higher temperatures to cure the resin. 


Uniform distribution of the resin has been effectively ac- 
complished with thick wood specimens only in sapwood of 
readily penetrated species. Although thicker material can 
be treated, the process is usually applied to veneers up to 
about 8 mm (0.3 in.) thick, because treating time increases 
rapidly with increases in thickness. Drying thick, resin- 
treated wood may result in checking and honeycombing. For 
these reasons, treatments should be confined to veneer and 
the treated-cured veneer used to build the desired products. 
Any species can be used for the veneer except the resinous 
pines. The stronger the original wood, the stronger the end 
product. 


Impreg has a number of properties differing from those of 
normal wood and ordinary plywood. These properties are 
given in Table 19-1, with similar generalized findings for 
other modified woods. Data for the strength properties of 
yellow birch impreg are given in Table 19-2. Information on 
thermal expansion properties of ovendry impreg is given in 
Table 19-3. 


The good dimensional stability of impreg is the basis of 

one use where its cost is not a deterrent. Wood dies of au- 
tomobile body parts serve as the master from which the 
metal-forming dies are made for actual manufacture of 
parts. Small changes in moisture content, even with the most 
dimensionally stable wood, produce changes in dimension 
and curvature of an unmodified wood die. Such changes cre- 
ate major problems in making the metal-forming dies where 
close final tolerances are required. The use of impreg, with 
its high antishrink efficiency (ASE) (Table 19-4), almost 
entirely eliminated the problem of dimensional change dur- 
ing the entire period that the wood master dies were needed. 
Despite the tendency of the resins to dull cutting tools, pat- 
tern makers accepted the impreg readily because it machines 
with less splitting than unmodified wood. 


Patterns made from impreg are also superior to unmodified 
wood in resisting heat when used with shell-molding tech- 
niques where temperatures as high as 205 °C (400 °F) are 
required to cure the resin in the molding sand. 


Resin-Treated Wood—Compressed (Compreg) 


Compreg is similar to impreg except that it is compressed 
before the resin is cured within the wood. The resin-forming 
chemicals (usually phenol-formaldehyde) act as plasticiz- 
ers for the wood so that it can be compressed under modest 
pressure (6.9 MPa, 1,000 lb in-2) to a specific gravity of 
1.35. Some properties of compreg are similar to those of im- 
preg, and others vary considerably (Tables 19—1 and 19-2). 
Compared with impreg, the advantages of compreg are its 
natural lustrous finish that can be developed on any cut 


surface by sanding with fine-grit paper and buffing, its 
greater strength properties, and its ability to mold (Tables 
19-1 and 19-2). However, thermal expansion coefficients of 
ovendry compreg are also increased (Table 19-3). 


Compreg can be molded by (a) gluing blocks of resin- 
treated (but still uncured) wood with a phenolic glue so that 
the gluelines and resin within the plies are only partially set; 
(b) cutting to the desired length and width but two to three 
times the desired thickness; and (c) compressing in a split 
mold at about 150 °C (300 °F). Only a small flash squeeze 
out at the parting line between the two halves of the mold 
needs to be machined off. This technique was used for mo- 
tor-test propellers and airplane antenna masts during World 
War IL. 


A more satisfactory molding technique, known as expan- 
sion molding, has been developed. The method consists 

of rapidly precompressing dry but uncured single sheets 

of resin-treated veneer in a cold press after preheating the 
sheets at 90 to 120 °C (195 to 250 °F). The heat-plasticized 
wood responds to compression before cooling. The heat is 
insufficient to cure the resin, but the subsequent cooling sets 
the resin temporarily. These compressed sheets are cut to the 
desired size, and the assembly of plies is placed in a split 
mold of the final desired dimensions. Because the wood was 
precompressed, the filled mold can be closed and locked. 
When the mold is heated, the wood is again plasticized and 
tends to recover its uncompressed dimensions. This exerts 
an internal pressure in all directions against the mold equal 
to about half the original compressing pressure. On contin- 
ued heating, the resin is set. After cooling, the object may 
be removed from the mold in finished form. Metal inserts 

or metal surfaces can be molded to compreg or its handles 
are molded onto tools by this means. Compreg bands have 
been molded to the outside of turned wood cylinders with- 
out compressing the core. Compreg tubes and small airplane 
propellers have been molded in this way. 


Past uses of compreg were related largely to aircraft; how- 
ever, it is a suitable material where bolt-bearing strength is 
required, as in connector plates, because of its good specific 
strength (strength per unit of weight). Layers of veneer mak- 
ing up the compreg for such uses are often cross laminated 
(alternate plies at right angles to each other, as in plywood) 
to give nearly equal properties in all directions. 


As a result of its excellent strength properties, dimensional 
stability, low thermal conductivity, and ease of fabrication, 
compreg is extremely useful for aluminum drawing and 
forming dies, drilling jigs, and jigs for holding parts in place 
while welding. 


Compreg has also been used in silent gears, pulleys, water- 
lubricated bearings, fan blades, shuttles, bobbins, and picker 
sticks for looms, nuts and bolts, instrument bases and cases, 
musical instruments, electrical insulators, tool handles, and 
various novelties. At present, compreg finds considerable 


19-5 


Table 19-1. Properties of modified woods 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Property 


Impreg 


Compreg 


Staypak 


Specific gravity 
Equilibrium swelling 
and shrinking 
Springback 

Face checking 

Grain raising 


Surface finish 


Permeability to water 
vapor 


Decay and termite 
resistance 


Acid resistance 
Alkali resistance 
Fire resistance 
Heat resistance 
Electrical 
conductivity 


Heat conductivity 


Compressive strength 


Tensile strength 


Flexural strength 


Hardness 


Impact strength 
Toughness 


Izod 
Abrasion resistance 
(tangential) 


Machinability 


Moldability 


Gluability 


15% to 20% greater than 
normal wood 


1/4 to 1/3 that of normal wood 


None 
Practically eliminated 


Greatly reduced 


Similar to normal wood 


About 1/10 that of normal 
wood 


Considerably better than 
normal wood 


Considerably better than 
normal wood 
Same as normal wood 


Same as normal wood 


Greatly increased 
1/10 that of normal wood 


at 30% RH; 1/1,000 that of normal 


wood at 90% RH 
Slightly increased 


Increased more than 
proportional to specific gravity 
increase 


Decreased significantly 


Increased less than 
proportional to specific gravity 
increase 


Increased considerably more 
than proportional to specific 
gravity increase 


About 1/2 of value for normal 
wood, but very susceptible 

to the variables of manufacture 
About 1/5 of value for normal 
wood 


About 1/2 of value for normal 
wood 

Cuts cleaner than normal wood, 
but dulls tools more 

Cannot be molded but can be 
formed to single curvatures at 
time of assembly 


Same as normal wood 


Usually 1.0 to 1.4 


1/4 to 1/3 that of normal wood at right angle 
to direction of compression, greater in 
direction of compression but very slow to 
attain 

Very small when properly made 

Practically eliminated for specific gravities 
less than 1.3 

Greatly reduced for uniform-texture woods, 
considerable for contrasting grain woods 
Varnished-like appearance for specific 
gravities greater than about 1.0; cut surfaces 
can be given this surface by sanding and 
buffing 

No data, but presumably much less than 
impreg 

Considerably better than normal wood 


Better than impreg because of 
impermeability 


Somewhat better than normal wood because 
of impermeability 

Same as normal wood for long exposures, 
somewhat better for short exposures 
Greatly increased 


Slightly more than impreg at low relative 
humidity values due to entrapped water 


Increased about in proportion to specific 
gravity increase 

Increased considerably more than 
proportional to specific gravity increase 


Increased less than proportional to 

specific gravity increase 

Increased less than proportional to specific 
gravity increase parallel to grain, increased 
more perpendicular to grain 


10 to 20 times that of normal wood 


1/2 to 3/4 of value for normal wood, but 
very susceptible to the variables of 
manufacture 

1/3 to 3/4 of value for normal wood 


Increased about in proportion to specific 
gravity increase 

Requires metalworking tools and 
metalworking tool speeds 

Can be molded by compression and 
expansion molding methods 


Same as normal wood after light sanding or 
in the case of thick stock, machining 
surfaces plane 


1.25 to 1.40 


Same as normal wood at right angle to 
direction of compression, greater in 
direction of compression but very slow to 
attain 

Moderate when properly made 

About the same as in normal wood 


About the same as in normal wood 


Varnished-like appearance; cut surfaces 
can be given this surface by sanding and 
buffing 


No data, but presumably less than impreg 


Normal, but decay occurs somewhat more 
slowly 

Better than normal wood because of 
impermeability, but not as good as 
compreg 

Somewhat better than normal wood 
because of impermeability 

Same as normal wood for long exposures, 
somewhat better for short exposures 


No data 
No data 


No data, but should increase about in 
proportion to specific gravity increase 
Increased about in proportion to specific 
gravity increase parallel to grain, increased 
more perpendicular to grain 

Increased about in proportion to specific 
gravity increase 

Increased proportional to specific gravity 
increase parallel to grain, increased more 
perpendicular to grain 


10 to 18 times that of normal wood 


Same to somewhat greater than normal 
wood 


Same to somewhat greater than normal 
wood 

Increased about in proportion to specific 
gravity increase 

Requires metalworking tools and 
metalworking tool speeds 

Cannot be molded 


Same as normal wood after light sanding, 
or in the case of thick stock, machining 
surfaces plane 


19-6 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 


Table 19-2. Strength properties of normal and modified laminates’ of yellow birch and a laminated paper plastic 


Compreg Staypak Paper laminate 
Normal Impreg (impregnated, (unimpregnated, (impregnated, 
laminated (impregnated, highly highly highly 
Property wood” uncompressed)° compressed)* compressed)” compressed)" 
Thickness of laminate (mm (in.)) 23.9 (0.94) 26.2 (1.03) 16.0 (0.63) 12.2 (0.48) 3.2 (0.126) 
13.0 (0.512) 
Moisture content at time of test (%) 9.2 5.0 5.0 4.0 —_— 
Specific gravity (based on weight and volume at test) 0.7 0.8 1.3 1.4 1.4 


Parallel laminates 

Flexure—grain parallel to span (flatwise)° 
Proportional limit stress (MPa (Ib in ”)) 
Modulus of rupture (MPa (Ib in °)) 
Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in ’)) 


Flexure—grain perpendicular to span (flatwise)° 
Proportional limit stress (MPa (Ib in *)) 
Modulus of rupture (MPa (Ib in*)) 

Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in *)) 


Compression parallel to grain (edgewise)* 
Proportional limit stress (MPa (Ib in *)) 
Ultimate strength (MPa (Ib in~)) 
Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in *)) 


Compression perpendicular to grain (edgewise)' 
Proportional limit stress (MPa (Ib in ”)) 
Ultimate strength (MPa (Ib in) 

Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in ’)) 

Compression perpendicular to grain (flatwise)° 
Maximum crushing strength (MPa (Ib in*)) 


Tension parallel to grain (lengthwise) 
Ultimate strength (MPa (Ib in) 
Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in *)) 


Tension perpendicular to grain (edgewise) 
Ultimate strength (MPa (Ib in )) 
Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in ’)) 


Shear strength parallel to grain (edgewise)' 
Johnson double shear across laminations (MPa (Ib in *)) 
Cylindrical double shear parallel to laminations 
(MPa (Ib in )) 
Shear modulus 
Tension method (GPa (1,000 lb in™)) 
Plate shear method (FPL test) (GPa (1,000 Ib in ’)) 


Toughness (FPL test edgewise)' (J (in-lb)) 


Toughness (FPL test edgewise)' (J mm of width 
(in-Ib in”! of width)) 

Impact strength (Izod)—grain lengthwise 
Flatwise (notch in face) (J mm of notch (ft-lb in! of 
notch)) 
Edgewise (notch in face) (J mm of notch (ft-lb in! of 
notch)) 


Hardness 
Rockwell flatwise* (M—numbers) 
Load to embed 11.3-mm (0.444-in.) steel ball to 1/2 
its diameter (kN (1b)) 
Hardness modulus (H)" (MPa (Ib in”’)) 
Abrasion—Navy wear-test machine (flatwise)° wear per 
1,000 revolutions (mm (in.)) 


79.3 (11,500) 
140.6 (20,400) 
16.0 (2,320) 


6.9 (1,000) 
13.1 (1,900) 
1.0 (153) 


44.1 (6,400) 
65.5 (9,500) 
15.8 (2,300) 


4.6 (670) 
14.5 (2,100) 
1.1 (162) 


153.1 (22,200) 
15.8 (2,300) 


9.6 (1,400) 
1.1 (166) 


20.5 (2,980) 
20.8 (3,020) 


1.2 (182) 


26.6 (235) 
1.1 (250) 


0.75 (14.0) 


0.60 (11.3) 


7.1 (1,600) 


37.2 (5,400) 
0.76 (0.030) 


109.6 (15,900) 
129.6 (18,800) 
16.4 (2,380) 


9.0 (1,300) 
11.7 (1,700) 
1.5 (220) 


70.3 (10,200) 
106.2 (15,400) 
17.0 (2,470) 


6.9 (1,000) 
24.8 (3,600) 
1.7 (243) 


29.5 (4,280) 


108.9 (15,800) 
17.3 (2,510) 


9.6 (1,400) 
1.6 (227) 


23.8 (3,460) 
24.5 (3,560) 


1.8 (255) 


14.1 (125) 
0.53 (120) 


0.12 (2.3) 


0.10 (1.9) 


22 
10.7 (2,400) 


63.4 (9,200) 
1.45 (0.057) 


184.1 (26,700) 
250.3 (36,300) 
25.4 (3,690) 


29.0 (4,200) 
31.7 (4,600) 
4.3 (626) 


113.1 (16,400) 
180.0 (26,100) 
26.1 (3,790) 


33.1 (4,800) 
96.5 (14,000) 
3.9 (571) 


115.1 (16,700) 


255.1 (37,000) 
27.2 (3,950) 


22.1 (3,200) 
4.3 (622) 


50.8 (7,370) 
39.2 (5,690) 


3.1 (454) 


16.4 (145) 
1.0 (230) 


0.23 (4.3) 


0.17 (3.2) 


84 


284.8 (41,300) 
0.46 (0.018) 


138.6 (20,100) 
271.6 (39,400) 
30.7 (4,450) 


22.1 (3,200) 
34.5 (5,000) 
4.2 (602) 


66.9 (9,700) 
131.7 (19,100) 
32.2 (4,670) 


17.9 (2,600) 
64.8 (9,400) 
4.0 (583) 


91.0 (13,200) 


310.3 (45,000) 
31.8 (4,610) 


22.8 (3,300) 
4.0 (575) 


43.9 (6,370) 
21.2 (3,080) 


2.6 (385) 
28.2 (250) 
2.3 (515) 


0.68 (12.7) 


302.0 (43,800) 
0.38 (0.015) 


109.6 (15,900) 
252.3 (36,600) 
20.8 (3,010) 


72.4 (10,500) 
167.5 (24,300) 
10.2 (1,480) 
49.6 (7,200) 
144.1 (20,900) 
21.5 (3,120) 
29.0 (4,200) 
125.5 (18,200) 
11.0 (1,600) 
291.0 (42,200) 


245.4 (35,600) 
25.1 (3,640) 


137.9 (20,000) 
11.8 (1,710) 


122.7 (17,800) 
20.7 (3,000) 


6.3 (909) 


0.25 (4.7) 


0.036 (0.67) 


110 


245.4 (35,600) 
0.46 (0.018) 


19-7 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 19-2. Strength properties of normal and modified laminates’ of yellow birch and a laminated paper plastic—con. 


Compreg Staypak Paper laminate 
Normal Impreg (impregnated, (unimpregnated, (impregnated, 
laminated (impregnated, highly highly highly 
Property wood? uncompressed)° compressed)° compressed)” compressed)" 
Water absorption (24-h immersion) increase in weight (%) 43.6 13.7 2h: 4.3 2.2 
Dimensional stability in thickness direction 
Equilibrium swelling (%) 9.9 2.8 8.0 29 = 
Recovery from compression (%) = 0 0 4 —_ 
Crossband laminates 
Flexure—face grain parallel to span (flatwise)° 
Proportional limit stress (MPa (Ib in ’)) 47.6 (6,900) 55.8 (8,100) 99.3 (14,400) 78.6 (11,400) 86.9 (12,600) 
Modulus of rupture (MPa (Ib in”) 90.3 (13,100) 78.6 (11,400) 157.2 (22,800) 173.0 (25,100) 215.8 (31,300) 
Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in ”)) 9.0 (1,310) 11.5 (1,670) 17.1 (2,480) 20.0 (2,900) 15.4 (2,240) 
Compression parallel to face grain (edgewise)' 
Proportional limit stress (MPa (Ib in) 22.8 (3,300) 35.8 (5,200) 60.0 (8,700) 35.8 (5,200) 34.5 (5,000) 
Ultimate strength (MPa (Ib in”) 40.0 (5,800) 78.6 (11,400) 164.8 (23,900) 96.5 (14,000) 130.3 (18,900) 
Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in’)) 9.4 (1,360) 10.3 (1,500) 15.8 (2,300) 18.6 (2,700) 16.3 (2,370) 
Tension parallel to face grain (lengthwise) 
Ultimate strength (MPa (Ib in *)) 84.8 (12,300) 54.5 (7,900) 113.8 (16,500) 168.9 (24,500) — 187.5 (27,200) 
Modulus of elasticity (GPa (1,000 Ib in )) 8.9 (1,290) 10.1 (1,460) 15.1 (2,190) 17.7 (2,570) 18.6 (2,700) 
Toughness (FPL test edgewise)' (J mm’ of width 0.47 (105) 0.18 (40) 0.51 (115) 1.4 (320) = 


(in-Ib in“ of width)) 


“Laminates made from 17 plies of 1.6-mm (1/16-in.) rotary-cut yellow birch veneer. 

Veneer conditioned at 27 °C (80 °F) and 65% relative humidity before assembly with phenol resin film adhesive. 

“‘Impregnation, 25% to 30% of water-soluble phenol-formaldehyde resin based on the dry weight of untreated veneer. 

‘High-strength paper (0.076-mm (0.003-in.) thickness) made from commercial unbleached black spruce pulp (Mitscherlich subtile), phenol resin content 
36.3% based on weight of treated paper, Izod impact abrasion, flatwise compression, and shear specimens, all on 12.7-mm- (1/2-in.-) thick laminate. 
“Load applied to the surface of the original material (parallel to laminating pressure direction). 

‘Forest Products Laboratory (FPL) test procedure: load applied to edge of laminations (perpendicular to laminating pressure direction). 

®Values as high as 0.53 J mm’! (10.0 ft-Ib in ') of notch have been reported for compreg made with alcohol-soluble resins and 0.37 J mm (7.0 ft-lb in ') 
with water-soluble resins. 

Values based on the average slope of load-penetration plots where Hy is an expression for load per unit of spherical area of penetration of the 11.3-mm 
(0.444-in.) steel ball expressed in MPa (Ib in’). 


Table 19-3. Coefficients of linear thermal expansion per degree Celsius of wood, hydrolyzed wood, 
and paper products* 


Linear expansion per °C 
(values multiplied by 10°) 


Perpendicular Cubical 

to fiber expansion 
or machine per °C 
Specific Resin Fiber or direction (values 

gravity of content® machine in plane of Pressing multiplied 
Material? product (%) direction laminations direction by 10°) 
Yellow birch laminate 0.72 3.1 3.254 40.29 36.64 80.18 
Yellow birch staypak laminate 1.30 4.7 3.406 37.88 65.34 106.63 
Yellow birch impreg laminate 0.86 33.2 4.648 35.11 37.05 76.81 
Yellow birch compreg laminate 1.30 24.8 4.251 39.47 59.14 102.86 
1.31 34.3 4.931 39.32 54.83 99.08 
Sitka spruce laminate 0.53 6.04 3.887 37.14 27.67 68.65 
Parallel-laminated paper laminate 1.40 36.5 5.73 15.14 65.10 85.97 
Crossbanded paper laminate 1.40 36.5 10.89 11.0° 62.2 84.09 
Molded hydrolyzed-wood plastic 1.33 25 42.69 42.69 42.69 128.07 
Hydrolyzed-wood sheet laminate 1.39 18 13.49 224.68 7741 115.58 


“These coefficients refer to bone-dry material. Generally, air-dry material has a negative thermal coefficient, because the shrinkage 
resulting from the loss in moisture is greater than the normal thermal expansion. 

All wood laminates made from rotary-cut veneer, annual rings in plane of sheet. 

“On basis of dry weight of product. 

“Approximate. 

“Calculated value. 


19-8 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 


Table 19-4. Comparison of wood treatments 
and the degree of dimensional stability achieved 


Antishrink efficiency 

Treatment (%) 

Simple wax dip 2 to5 
Wood-plastic combination 10 to 15 
Staypak/Staybwood 30 to 40 
Impreg 65 to 70 
Chemical modification 65 to 75 
Polyethylene glycol 80 to 85 
Formaldehyde 82 to 87 
Compreg 90 to 95 


use in handles for knives and other cutlery. The expansion- 
molding techniques of forming and curing of the compreg 
around the metal parts of the handle as well as attaching 
previously made compreg with rivets are two methods used. 
Compreg is currently manufactured worldwide, including 
the United States, United Kingdom, Pakistan, and India. 


Veneer of any nonresinous species can be used for making 
compreg. Most properties depend upon the specific grav- 
ity to which the wood is compressed rather than the species 
used. 


Heat Treatments 


Heating wood changes the properties of wood. It can de- 
crease the hygroscopicity and improve the dimensional 
stability and decay resistance. Yet, at the same time, the 
increase in stability and durability also increases the brittle- 
ness and loss in some strength properties, including impact 
toughness, modulus of rupture, and work to failure. The 
treatments usually cause a darkening of the wood and the 
wood has a tendency to crack and split. 


Wood can be heated various ways: heating in the presence 
of moisture, heating in the presence of moisture followed by 
compression, heating dry wood, and heating dry wood fol- 
lowed by compression. The effect of the heating process on 
wood properties depends on the process itself. As the wood 
is heated, the first weight loss is due to the loss of water, fol- 
lowed by a variety of chemistries that produce degradation 
products and volatile gasses. As the temperature increases, 
wood cell wall polymers start to degrade. Pyrolysis of the 
hemicelluloses takes place about 270 °C followed closely by 
cellulose. Lignin is much more stable to high temperature. 


Many of the commercial heat treating processes take place 
in the absence of air at temperatures ranging from 180 to 
260 °C for times ranging from a few minutes to several 
hours. Temperatures lower than 140 °C result in less change 
in physical properties, and heating above 300 °C results in 
severe wood degradation. Wood has been heated in steam, 
in an inert gas, below molten metal, and in hot oil baths. 
Improved dimensional stability and durability are thought 
to be due to a loss of hydroscopic hemicellulose sugars and 
their conversion to furan-based polymers that are much less 


hydroscopic, and the lost sugars decrease the ability of fungi 
to attack the heated wood. The weight loss is proportional to 
the square of the reduction in swelling. 


A variety of thermal modification processes have been 
developed. The results of the process depend on several 
variables, including time and temperature, treatment atmo- 
sphere, wood species, moisture content, wood dimensions, 
and the use of a catalyst. Temperature and time of treatment 
are the most critical elements. Treatments done in air result 
in oxidation reactions not leading to the desired properties 
of the treated wood. Generally, weight loss occurs to 

a greater extent in hardwoods than in softwoods. 


Several names have been given to the various heat-treated 
products and treatments for wood, including Staypak and 
Staybwood in the United States, Lignostone and Lignofol in 
Germany, Jicwood and Jablo in the United Kingdom, Ther- 
moWood in Finland, Plato in the Netherlands, and Perdure 
and Retification in France. 


Heating wood under a variety of conditions is an environ- 
mentally benign process requiring no added chemicals and 
gives rise to a variety of products with decreased moisture 
contents and some durability against biological degradation. 
However, it is not recommended to be used in ground con- 
tact. Most physical properties are decreased, especially abra- 
sion resistance and toughness, and it is therefore not suitable 
for load-bearing applications. 


Heating Wet Wood 


Wood with moisture content close to its equilibrium mois- 
ture content (EMC) that is heated to 180 to 200 °C results in 
a wood with greatly decreased moisture content. The high 
temperature degrades the hemicellulose sugars to furan- 
based intermediates and volatile gasses. The furan interme- 
diates have a lower EMC than the sugars and increase bond- 
ing of the wood structure. At a weight loss of approximately 
25%, the EMC is lowered by almost the same percentage. 
Dimensional stability is also increased but not as much as 
heating followed by compression (discussed in the follow- 
ing section). 


Two current processes are based on heating wet wood for 
stability and increased biological resistance. Thermo Wood 
was developed by VTT in Finland and is a three-stage pro- 
cess done in the presence of steam, which helps protect the 
wood from oxidative reactions. In the first stage, the wood 
is heated to 100 °C for almost 20 h. In the second stage, the 
wood is heated to 185 to 230 °C for 10 h, followed by the 
lowering of the temperature in the presence of a water spray. 


Plato (Proving Lasting Advanced Timber Option) wood was 
developed by Royal Dutch Shell in The Netherlands and 
involves a four-stage process. The first stage involves heat- 
ing the wood to 150 to 180 °C under high-pressure steam 
for 4 to 5 h. The wood is then dried to a moisture content of 
8% to 10% and then heated again at 150 to 190 °C for 12 to 


19-9 


16 h, resulting in a drop in moisture content to less than 1%. 
The wood is then conditioned to 4% to 6% moisture over 

a 3-day period. The wood is dark brown in color but will 
weather to the normal gray color in time. It has a 5% to 20% 
decrease in modulus of rupture but a slightly higher modu- 
lus of elasticity. 


The Le Bois Perdure process was developed by the French 
company BCI in the mid-1990s and has been commercial- 
ized by PCI Industries, Inc., based in Quebec. The process 
involves drying and heating the wood at 200 to 230 °C in 
steam. 


All heat-treated wood is gluable and paintable and can be 
used for furniture, flooring, decking, door and window com- 
ponents, and exterior joinery. 


Heating Wet Wood Followed by Compression 


When wet wood is heated to 180 to 220 °C and compressed, 
the wood structure is compressed and remains in this com- 
pressed state when dried. The compressed wood is much 
harder and has a much higher modulus of rupture and elon- 
gation. Re-wetting the compressed wood reverses the pro- 
cess and it swells back to its original thickness. 


Heating Dry Wood 


Heating wood under drying conditions at higher tempera- 
tures (95 to 320 °C (200 to 600 °F)) than those normally 
used in kiln drying produces a product known as Staybwood 
that decreases the hygroscopicity and subsequent swelling 
and shrinking of the wood appreciably. However, the stabili- 
zation is always accompanied by loss of mechanical proper- 
ties. Toughness and resistance to abrasion are most seriously 
affected. 


Under conditions that cause a reduction of 40% in shrinking 
and swelling, the toughness is decreased to less than half 
that of the original wood. Extensive research to minimize 
this loss was not successful. Because of the reduction in 
strength properties from heating at such high temperatures, 
wood that is dimensionally stabilized in this manner was 
never commercialized. 


One commercial process produces dry-heated wood prod- 
ucts. Retification is a process developed in France by Ecole 
des Mines de St. Etienne and involves heating wood in a 
nitrogen atmosphere to 180 to 250 °C for several hours. 


Heating Dry Wood Followed by Compression 


To meet the demand for a tougher compressed product than 
compreg, a compressed wood containing no resin (staypak) 
was developed. A temperature range of 150 to 170 °C is 
used, and the wood is compressed while heated. It does not 
lose its compression under swelling conditions as does un- 
treated compressed wood. In making staypak, the compress- 
ing conditions are modified so that the lignin-cementing 
material between the cellulose fibers flows sufficiently to 
eliminate internal stresses. 


19-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Staypak is not as water resistant as compreg, but it is about 
twice as tough and has higher tensile and flexural strength 
properties (Tables 19-1 and 19-2). The natural finish of 
staypak is almost equal to that of compreg. Under weather- 
ing conditions, however, it is definitely inferior to compreg. 
For outdoor use, a good synthetic resin varnish or paint fin- 
ish should be applied to staypak. 


Staypak can be used in the same way as compreg where 
extremely high water resistance is not needed. It shows 
promise in tool handles, forming dies, connector plates, 
propellers, and picker sticks and shuttles for weaving, where 
high impact strength is needed. Staypak is not impregnated; 
therefore, it can be made from solid wood as well as from 
veneer. The cost of staypak is less than that of compreg. 


A material similar to staypak was produced in Germany 
prior to World War II. It was a compressed solid wood 

with much less dimensional stability than staypak and was 
known as lignostone. Another similar German product was a 
laminated compressed wood known as lignofol. 


Wood Treated with Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) 


The dimensional stabilization of wood with polyethylene 
glycol-1000 (PEG), also known as Carbowax, is accom- 
plished by bulking the fiber to keep the wood in a partially 
swollen condition. PEG acts in the same manner as does 
the previously described phenolic resin. It cannot be further 
cured. The only reason for heating the wood after treat- 
ment is to drive off water. PEG remains water soluble in the 
wood. Above 60% relative humidity, it is a strong humectant 
and, unless used with care and properly protected, PEG- 
treated wood can become sticky at high levels of relative 
humidity. Because of this, PEG-treated wood is usually fin- 
ished with a polyurethane varnish. 


Treatment with PEG is facilitated by using green wood. 
Here, pressure is not applied because the treatment is based 
on diffusion. Treating times are such that uniform uptakes of 
25% to 30% of chemical are achieved (based on dry weight 
of wood). The time necessary for this uptake depends on 

the thickness of the wood and may require weeks. The PEG 
treatment is being effectively used for cross-sectional wood 
plaques and other decorative items. Table tops of high qual- 
ity furniture stay remarkably flat and dimensionally stable 
when made from PEG-treated wood. 


Another application of this chemical is to decrease the 
checking of green wood during drying. For this application, 
a high degree of PEG penetration is not required. This meth- 
od of treatment has been used to decrease checking during 
drying of small wood blanks or turnings. 


Cracking and distortion that old, waterlogged wood un- 

dergoes when it is dried can be substantially decreased by 
treating the wood with PEG. The process was used to dry 
200-year-old waterlogged wooden boats raised from Lake 
George, New York. The “Vasa,” a Swedish ship that sank 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 


Table 19-5. Strength properties of wood—polymer composites® 


Strength property Unit Untreated” Treated” 
Static bending 
Modulus of elasticity MPa (xl0°lbin’) 9.3 (1.356) 11.6 (1.691) 
Fiber stress at proportional limit MPa (lb in *) 44.0 (6,387) 79.8 (11,582) 


Modulus of rupture 
Work to proportional limit 
Work to maximum load 


Compression parallel to grain 
Modulus of elasticity 
Fiber stress at proportional limit 
Maximum crushing strength 
Work to proportional limit 
Toughness 


MPa (Ib in) 


73.4 (10,649) 130.6 (18,944) 


uJ mm? (in-Ib in?) 11.4 (1.66) 29.1 (4.22) 
wl mm? (in-lb in?) 69.4 (10.06) 122.8 (17.81) 
GPa(x10°lbin*) 7.7 (1.113) 11.4 (1.650) 
MPa (Ib in’) 29.6 (4,295) 52.0 (7,543) 
MPa (Ib in’) 44.8 (6,505) 68.0 (9,864) 
uJ mm (in-Ib in) 77.8 (11.28) 147.6 (21.41) 
uJ mm (in-Ib in*) 288.2 (41.8) 431.6 (62.6) 


“Methyl methacrylate impregnated basswood. 
*Moisture content 7.2%. 


on its initial trial voyage in 1628, was also treated after it 
was raised. There have been many applications of PEG 
treatment for the restoration of waterlogged wood from 
archeological sites. 


Wood-Polymer Composites 


In the modified wood products previously discussed, most 
of the chemical resides in cell walls; the lumens are essen- 
tially empty. If wood is vacuum impregnated with certain 
liquid vinyl monomers that do not swell wood and are 

later polymerized in situ by gamma radiation or chemical 
catalyst-heat systems, the resulting polymer resides almost 
exclusively in the lumens. Methyl methacrylate is a com- 
mon monomer used for wood—polymer composites. It is 
converted to polymethyl methacrylate. The hygroscopic 
characteristics of the wood substance are not altered because 
little, if any, polymer penetrates the cell walls. However, 
because of the high polymer content (70% to 100% based 
on the dry weight of wood), the normally high void volume 
of wood is greatly decreased. With the elimination of this 
very important pathway for vapor or liquid water diffusion, 
the response of the wood substance to changes in relative 
humidity or water is very slow, and moisture resistance or 
water-repellent effectiveness (WRE) is greatly improved. 
Water-repellent effectiveness is measured as follows: 


(19-1) 
2 

where S, is the swelling or moisture uptake of the control 
specimen during exposure to water for ¢ minutes, and S, is 
the swelling or moisture uptake of the treated specimen 
during exposure to water also for ¢ minutes. 


Wood—polymer composite materials offer desirable aes- 
thetic appearance, high compression strength and abrasion 
resistance, and increase in hardness and are much stronger 
than untreated wood (Table 19-5). Commercial application 
of these products is largely based on increased strength and 
hardness properties. Improvements in physical properties 


of wood—polymer composites are related to polymer load- 
ing. This, in turn, depends not only on the permeability of 
the wood species but also on the particular piece of wood 
being treated. Sapwood is filled to a much greater extent 
than heartwood for most species. The most commonly used 
monomers include styrene, methyl methacrylate, vinyl ace- 
tate, and acrylonitrile. Industrial applications include certain 
sporting equipment, musical instruments, decorative objects, 
and high-performance flooring. 


At present, the main commercial use of wood—polymer 
composites is hardwood flooring. Comparative tests with 
conventional wood flooring indicate that wood—polymer 
materials resisted indentation from rolling, concentrated, 
and impact loads better than did white oak. This is largely 
attributed to improved hardness. Abrasion resistance is 

also increased. A finish is usually used on these products to 
increase hardness and wear resistance even more. Wood— 
polymer composites are also being used for sporting goods, 
musical instruments, and novelty items. 


In addition to the use of vinyl monomers for wood—polymer 
composites, polysaccharides from renewable resources are 
also used. Examples include the use of furfuryl alcohol from 
primarily corn cobs and the use of modified polysaccharides 
primarily from soy and corn starch. The process (Indurite) 
involves the impregnation of wood with a water-soluble 
polysaccharide solution made from soy and corn starch, fol- 
lowed by a curing step at 70 °C. The treatment improves the 
dimensional stability and hardness of wood and is used in 
production of flooring materials. 


Modification of wood with furfuryl alcohol is called fur- 
furylation. Stamm started research on furfurylation at the 
Forest Products Laboratory in the 1950s. The process was 
industrialized in the mid-1960s in the United States, and 
furfurylated wood products included knife handles, bench 
tops, and rotor blades, but production ceased by the 1970s. 
Interest renewed in the late 1980s, and now products are 
marketed in the United States and Europe. Furfurylation 


19-11 


involves a full cell impregnation step of the treatment solu- 
tion, an intermediate drying step, a reaction curing step, and 
a final kiln-drying step. Products are available for decking, 
marine application, cladding, window joinery, poles, roofs, 
garden furniture, building materials, and flooring. Impact 
strength is strongly decreased (from —25% at 15% WPG to 
—65% at 125% WPG). Stiffness increases from 30% to 80%. 
The ASE ranges from 30% to 80%. Fungal durability and 
insect resistance are high at high weight gains. 


Chemical Modification 


Through chemical reactions, it is possible to add an organic 
chemical to the hydroxyl groups on wood cell wall compo- 
nents. This type of treatment bulks the cell wall with a per- 
manently bonded chemical. Many reactive chemicals have 
been used experimentally to chemically modify wood. For 
best results, chemicals used should be capable of reacting 
with wood hydroxyls under neutral or mildly alkaline condi- 
tions at temperatures less than 120 °C. The chemical system 
should be simple and must be capable of swelling the wood 
structure to facilitate penetration. The complete molecule 
should react quickly with wood components to yield stable 
chemical bonds while the treated wood retains the desirable 
properties of untreated wood. Reaction of wood with chemi- 
cals such as anhydrides, epoxides, isocyanates, acid chlo- 
rides, carboxylic acids, lactones, alkyl chlorides, and nitriles 
result in antishrink efficiency (ASE) values (Table 19-4) of 
65% to 75% at chemical weight gains of 20% to 30%. Anti- 
shrink efficiency is determined as follows: 
= 2% x10 (19-2) 
Y 
where S is volumetric swelling coefficient, V, is wood vol- 
ume after humidity conditioning or wetting with water, and 
V, is wood volume of ovendried sample before conditioning 
or wetting. Then, 


52751. 
1 
where ASE is reduction in swelling or antishrink efficiency 
resulting from a treatment, S, is treated volumetric swelling 
coefficient, and S; is untreated volumetric swelling coef- 

ficient. 


ASE= 100 (19-3) 


Reaction of these chemicals with wood yields a modified 
wood with increased dimensional stability and improved 
resistance to termites, decay, and marine organisms. 


Mechanical properties of chemically modified wood are es- 
sentially unchanged compared with untreated wood. 


Modification of wood with acetic anhydride has been re- 
searched extensively. The acetylation process involves 
impregnation of acetic anhydride followed by heat to start 
the reaction. The last step is to remove the acetic acid by- 
product and any remaining acetic anhydride. The hydroxyl 
groups of the cell wall polymers are converted to acetyl 


19-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


groups, making the wood hydrophobic. As a result, biologi- 
cal durability and dimensional stability increase signifi- 
cantly compared with unmodified wood. Acetylated wood is 
now commercially available. 


The reaction of formaldehyde with wood hydroxyl groups is 
an interesting variation of chemical modification. At weight 
gains as low as 2%, formaldehyde-treated wood is not at- 
tacked by wood-destroying fungi. An antishrink efficiency 
(Table 19-4) of 47% is achieved at a weight gain of 3.1%, 
55% at 4.1%, 60% at 5.5%, and 90% at 7%. The mechanical 
properties of formaldehyde-treated wood are all decreased 
from those of untreated wood. A definite embrittlement is 
observed, toughness and abrasion resistance are greatly de- 
creased, crushing strength and bending strength are 
decreased about 20%, and impact bending strength is 
decreased up to 50%. 


Paper-Based Plastic Laminates 


Commercially, paper-based plastic laminates are of two 
types: industrial and decorative. Total annual production is 
equally divided between the two types. They are made by 
superimposing layers of paper that have been impregnated 
with a resinous binder and curing the assembly under heat 
and pressure. 


Industrial Laminates 


Industrial laminates are produced to perform specific func- 
tions requiring materials with predetermined balances of 
mechanical, electrical, and chemical properties. The most 
common use of such laminates is electrical insulation. The 
paper reinforcements used in the laminates are kraft pulp, 
alpha pulp, cotton linters, or blends of these. Kraft paper 
emphasizes mechanical strength and dielectric strength per- 
pendicular to laminations. Alpha paper is used for its electric 
and electronic properties, machineability, and dimensional 
stability. Cotton linter paper combines greater strength than 
alpha paper with excellent moisture resistance. 


Phenolic resins are the most suitable resins for impregnat- 
ing the paper from the standpoint of high water resistance, 
low swelling and shrinking, and high strength properties 
(except for impact). Phenolics also cost less than do other 
resins that give comparable properties. Water-soluble resins 
of the type used for impreg impart the highest water resis- 
tance and compressive strength properties to the product, 
but they make the product brittle (low impact strength). 
Alcohol-soluble phenolic resins produce a considerably 
tougher product, but the resins fail to penetrate the fibers as 
well as water-soluble resins, thus imparting less water resis- 
tance and dimensional stability to the product. In practice, 
alcohol-soluble phenolic resins are generally used. 


Paper-based plastic laminates inherit their final properties 
from the paper from which they are made. High-strength 
papers yield higher strength plastic laminates than do low- 
strength papers. Papers with definite directional properties 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 


result in plastic laminates with definite directional properties 
unless they are cross laminated (alternate sheets oriented 
with the machine direction at 90° to each other). 


The use of higher strength paper has helped in the develop- 
ment of paper-based laminates suitable for structural use. 
Pulping under milder conditions and operating the paper 
machines to give optimum orientation of the fibers in one 
direction, together with the desired absorbency, contribute 
markedly to improvements in strength. 


Strength and other properties of a paper—plastic laminate are 
shown in Table 19—2. The National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association L1—1 specification has additional information 
on industrial laminates. Paper is considerably less expen- 
sive than glass fabric or other woven fabric mats and can 

be molded at considerably lower pressures; therefore, the 
paper-based laminates generally have an appreciable price 
advantage over fabric laminates. However, some fabric lam- 
inates give superior electrical properties and higher impact 
properties. Glass fabric laminates can be molded to greater 
double curvatures than can paper laminates. 


During World War II, a high-strength paper plastic known as 
papreg was used for molding nonstructural and semistruc- 
tural airplane parts such as gunner’s seats and turrets, am- 
munition boxes, wing tabs, and the surfaces of cargo aircraft 
flooring and catwalks. Papreg was used to a limited extent 
for the skin surface of airplane structural parts, such as wing 
tips. One major objection to its use for such parts is that it 

is more brittle than aluminum and requires special fittings. 
Papreg has been used to some extent for heavy-duty truck 
floors and industrial processing trays for nonedible materi- 
als. Because it can be molded at low pressures and is made 
from thin paper, papreg is advantageous for use where accu- 
rate control of panel thickness is required. 


Decorative Laminates 


Although made by the same process as industrial laminates, 
decorative laminates are used for different purposes and 
bear little outward resemblance to industrial laminate. They 
are used as facings for doors and walls and tops of counters, 
flooring, tables, desks, and other furniture. 


These decorative laminates are usually composed of a com- 
bination of phenolic- and melamine-impregnated sheets of 
paper. Phenolic-impregnated sheets are brown because of 
the impregnating resins and make up most of the built-up 
thickness of the laminate. Phenolic sheets are overlaid with 
paper impregnated with melamine resin. One sheet of the 
overlay is usually a relatively thick one of high opacity and 
has the color or design printed on it. Then, one or more 
tissue-thin sheets, which become transparent after the resin 
is cured, are overlaid on the printed sheet to protect it in 
service. The thin sheets generally contain more melamine 
resin than do the printed sheets, providing stain and abrasion 
resistance as well as resistance to cigarette burns, boiling 
water, and common household solvents. 


The resin-impregnated sheets of paper are hot pressed, 
cured, and then bonded to a wood-based core, usually 
plywood, hardboard, or particleboard. The thin transpar- 

ent (when cured) papers impregnated with melamine resin 
can be used alone as a covering for decorative veneers in 
furniture to provide a permanent finish. In this use, the im- 
pregnated sheet is bonded to the wood surface in hot presses 
at the same time the resin is cured. The heat and stain resis- 
tance and the strength of this kind of film make it a superior 
finish. 


The overall thickness of a laminate may obviously be varied 
by the number of sheets of kraft-phenolic used in the core 
assembly. Some years ago, a 2-mm (0.08-in.) thickness was 
used with little exception because of its high impact strength 
and resistance to substrate show through. Recently, a |-mm 
(0.04-in.) thickness has become popular on vertical surfaces 
such as walls, cabinet doors, and vertical furniture faces. 
This results in better economy, and the greater strength of 
the heavier laminate is not necessary. As applications have 
proliferated, a series of thicknesses have been offered, from 
20 to 60 mm (0.8 to 2.4 in.), even up to 150 mm (6 in.) 
when self-supportive types are needed. These laminates may 
have decorative faces on both sides if desired, especially in 
the heavier thicknesses. Replacement bowling lanes made 
from high-density fiberboard core and phenolic-melamine, 
high-pressure laminated paper on the face and back are 
commercially used. 


The phenolic sheets may also contain special postforming- 
type phenolic resins or extensible papers that make it 
possible to postform the laminate. By heating to 160 °C 
(320 °F) for a short time, the structure can readily undergo 
simple bending to a radius of 10 mm (0.4 in.), and 5 to 

6 mm (0.20 to 0.24 in.) with careful control. Rolled furniture 
edges, decorative moldings, curved counter tops, shower 
enclosures, and many other applications are served by this 
technique. Finally, the core composition may be modified to 
yield a fire-retardant, low-smoking laminate to comply with 
fire codes. These high-pressure decorative laminates are 
covered by the National Electrical Manufacturers Associa- 
tion Specification LD-3. 


Paper will absorb or give off moisture, depending upon 
conditions of exposure. This moisture change causes paper 
to shrink and swell, usually more across the machine direc- 
tion than along it. In the same manner, the laminated paper 
plastics shrink and swell, although at a much slower rate. 
Cross laminating minimizes the amount of this shrinking 
and swelling. In many furniture uses where laminates are 
bonded to cores, the changes in dimension as a result of 
moisture fluctuating with the seasons are different than those 
of the core material. To balance the construction, a paper 
plastic with similar properties may be glued to the opposite 
face of the core to prevent bowing or cupping caused by 
moisture variation. 


19-13 


Lignin-Filled Laminates 


The cost of phenolic resins at one time resulted in consid- 
erable effort to find impregnating and bonding agents that 
were less expensive and yet readily available. Lignin-filled 
laminates made with lignin recovered from the spent liquor 
of the soda pulping process were developed as a result of 
this search. Lignin is precipitated from solution within the 
pulp or added in a pre-precipitated form before the paper 
is made. The lignin-filled sheets of paper can be laminated 
without the addition of other resins, but their water resis- 
tance is considerably enhanced when some phenolic resin 
is applied to the paper in a second operation. The water 
resistance can also be improved by impregnating only the 
surface sheet with phenolic resin. It is also possible to in- 
troduce lignin, together with phenolic resin, into untreated 
paper sheets. The lignin-filled laminates are always dark 
brown or black. They have better toughness than phenolic 
laminates; in most other strength properties, they are 
comparable or lower. 


Reduction in cost of phenolic resins has virtually eliminated 
the lignin-filled laminates from U.S. commerce. These lami- 
nates have several potential applications, however, where a 
cheaper laminate with less critical properties than phenolic 
laminates can be used. 


Paper-Face Overlays 


Paper has found considerable use as an overlay material for 
veneer or plywood. Overlays can be classified into three 
different types according to their use—masking, structural, 
and decorative. Masking overlays are used to cover minor 
defects in plywood, such as face checks and patches, mini- 
mize grain raising, and provide a more uniform paintable 
surface, thus making possible the use of lower grade veneer. 
Paper for this purpose need not be of high strength, because 
the overlays do not need to add strength to the product. For 
adequate masking, a single surface sheet with a thickness of 
0.5 to 1 mm (0.02 to 0.04 in.) is desirable. Paper impregnat- 
ed with phenolic resins at 17% to 25% of the weight of the 
paper gives the best all-around product. Higher resin content 
makes the product too costly and tends to make the overlay 
more transparent. Appreciably lower resin content gives a 
product with low scratch and abrasion resistance, especially 
when the panels are wet or exposed to high relative 
humidities. 


The paper faces can be applied at the same time that the 
veneer is assembled into plywood in a hot press. Thermal 
stresses that might result in checking are not set up if the 
machine direction of the paper overlays is at right angles to 
the grain direction of the face plies of the plywood. 


The masking-paper-based overlays or vulcanized fiber 
sheets have been used for such applications as wood house 
siding that is to be painted. These overlays mask defects in 
the wood, prevent bleed-through of resins and extractives 
in the wood, and provide a better substrate for paint. The 


19-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


paper-based overlays improve the across-the-board stability 
from changes in dimension as a result of changes in mois- 
ture content. 


The structural overlay, also known as the high-density over- 
lay, contains no less than 45% thermosetting resins, general- 
ly phenolic. It consists of one or more plies of paper similar 
to that used in the industrial laminates described previously. 
The resin-impregnated papers can be bonded directly to the 
surface of a wood substrate during cure of the sheet, thus 
requiring only a single pressing operation. 


The decorative-type overlay is described in the Decorative 
Laminates section. 


References 


Clark, W.M. 1965. Veneering and wood bending in the fur- 
niture industry. New York, NY: Pergamon Press. 


Deka, M.; Saikia, C.N. 2000. Chemical modification of 
wood with thermosetting resin: effect on dimensional 
stability and strength property. Bioresource Technology. 
73(2): 179-181. 


Finnish Thermowood Association. 2000. Helsinki, Finland: 
Wood Focus Oy, P.O. Box 284, Snellmaninkatu 13, FIN- 
00171. www.thermowood.fi. (December 2000). 


FPL. 1962. Physical and mechanical properties of lignin- 
filled laminated paper plastic. FPL Rep. 1579. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Franich, R. 2007. The Indurite™ Process—a review from 
concept to business. In: Hill, C.A.S.; Jones, D.; Militz, H.; 
Ormondroyd, G.A., eds. Proceedings, 3rd European confer- 
ence on wood modification. Cardiff, UK: 23-29. 


Goldstein, I.S. 1955. The impregnation of wood to impart 
resistance to alkali and acid. Forest Products Journal. 
5: 265-267. 


Heebink, B.G. 1959. Fluid-pressure molding of plywood. 
FPL Rep. 1624. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Heebink, B.G. 1963. Importance of balanced construction 
in plastic-faced wood panels. Res. Note FPL—021. Madison, 
WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory. 


Heebink, B.G.; Haskell, H.H. 1962. Effect of heat and hu- 
midity on the properties of high-pressure laminates. Forest 
Products Journal. 12(11): 542-548. 


Hill, C.A.S. 2006. Wood modification: chemical, thermal 
and other processes. Chitchester, West Sussex, UK: John 
Wiley and Sons, Ltd. 


Hoadley, R.B. 1980. Understanding wood: a craftsman’s 
guide to wood technology. Newtown, CT: The Taunton 
Press. 


Chapter 19 Specialty Treatments 


Hurst, K. 1962. Plywood bending. Australian Timber 
Journal. (June.) 


Inoue, M.; Norimoto, M.; Tanahashi, M.; Rowell, R.M. 
1993. Steam and heat fixation of compressed wood. Wood 
and Fiber Science. 25(3): 224-235. 


Jorgensen, R.N. 1965. Furniture wood bending, part I. 
Furniture Design and Manufacturing. (December.) 


Jorgensen, R.N. 1966. Furniture wood bending, part II. 
Furniture Design and Manufacturing. (January.) 


Langwig, J.E.; Meyer, J.A.; Davidson, R.W. 1968. Influence 
of polymer impregnation on mechanical properties of bass- 
wood. Forest Products Journal. 18(7): 33-36. 


McKean, H.B.; Blumenstein, R.R.; Finnorn, W.F. 1952. 
Laminating and steam bending of treated and untreated oak 
for ship timbers. Southern Lumberman. 185: 2321. 


Meyer, J.A. 1965. Treatment of wood—polymer systems 
using catalyst-heat techniques. Forest Products Journal. 
15(9): 362-364. 


Meyer, J.A. 1981. Wood-polymer materials: state of the art. 
Wood Science. 14(2): 49-54. 


Meyer, J.A.; Loos, W.E. 1969. Treating Southern Pine wood 
for modification of properties. Forest Products Journal. 
19(12): 32-38. 


NEMA. [Current edition]. Standard specification for indus- 
trial laminated thermosetting products, Designation L1-—1; 
standard specification for high-pressure decorative lami- 
nates, Designation LD-3. Washington, DC: National Electri- 
cal Manufacturers Association. 


Peck, E.C. 1957. Bending solid wood to form. Agric. 
Handb. 125. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. 


Perry, T.D. 1951. Curves from flat plywood. Wood Products. 
56(4). 
Rapp, A.O. 2001. Review on heat treatments of wood. Cost 


Action E22. Proceedings of special seminar; 2001 February 
9; Antibes, France. 66 p. 


Rowell, R.M. 1975. Chemical modification of wood: ad- 
vantages and disadvantages. Proceedings, American Wood 
Protection Association (AWPA), formerly American Wood- 
Preservers’ Association. 71: 41-51. 


Rowell, R.M., ed. 1984. The chemistry of solid wood. 
Advances in Chemistry Series No. 207. Washington, DC: 
American Chemical Society. 


Rowell, R.M., ed. 2005. Handbook of wood chemistry and 
wood composites. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 487 p. 


Rowell, R.M.; Lange, S.; McSweeny, J.; Davis, M. 2002. 
Modification of wood fiber using steam. In: Proceedings, 


6th Pacific Rim bio-based composites symposium. Portland, 
OR. 


Schneider, M. 1994. Wood polymer composites. Wood and 
Fiber Science. 26(1): 142-151. 


Schneider, M.; Witt, A-E. 2004. History of wood polymer 
composites commercialization. Forest Products Journal. 
54(4): 19-24. 


Schuerch, C. 1964. Principles and potential of wood plasti- 
cization. Forest Products Journal. 14(9): 377-381. 


Seborg, R.M.; Inverarity, R.B. 1962. Preservation of old, 
waterlogged wood by treatment with polyethylene glycol. 
Science. 136(3516): 649-650. 


Seborg, R.M.; Vallier, A-E. 1954. Application of impreg 

for patterns and die models. Forest Products Journal. 

4(5): 305-312. 

Seborg, R.M.; Millett, M.A.; Stamm, A.J. 1945. Heat-stabi- 
lized compressed wood (staypak). Mechanical Engineering. 
67(1): 25-31. 


Seidl, R.J. 1947. Paper and plastic overlays for veneer and 
plywood. Madison, WI: Forest Products Research Society 
Proceedings. 1: 23-32. 


Shafizadeh, F.; Chin, P.P.S. 1977. Thermal degradation of 
wood. In: Goldstein, I.S., ed. Wood technology: chemical 
aspects. ACS Symposium Series 43: 57-81. 


Spielman, F. 1980. Working green wood with PEG. New 
York, NY: Sterling Publishing Company. 


Stamm, A.J. 1959. Effect of polyethylene glycol on 
dimensional stability of wood. Forest Products Journal. 
9(10): 375-381. 


Stamm, A.J. 1964. Wood and cellulose science. New York, 
NY: Ronald Press. 


Stamm, A.J.; Hansen, L.A. 1937. Minimizing wood 
shrinkage and swelling. Effect of heating in various gasses. 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry. 29(7): 831-833. 


Stamm, A.J.; Seborg, R.M. 1951. Forest Products Labora- 
tory resin-treated laminated, compressed wood (compreg). 
FPL Rep. 1381. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Stamm, A.J.; Seborg, R.M. 1962. Forest Products Labora- 
tory resin-treated wood (impreg). FPL Rep. 1380 (rev.). 
Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Stamm, A.J.; Burr, H.K.; Kline, A.A. 1946. Staybwood. 
Heat stabilized wood. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry. 
38(6): 630-634. 


Stevens, W.C.; Turner, N. 1970. Wood bending handbook. 
London, England: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. 


19-15 


Tiemann, H.D. 1915. The effect of different methods of 
drying on the strength of wood. Lumber World Review. 
28(7): 19-20. 


Weatherwax, R.C.; Stamm, A.J. 1945. Electrical resistivity 
of resin-treated wood (impreg and compreg), hydrolyzed- 
wood sheet (hydroxylin), and laminated resin-treated paper 
(papreg). FPL Rep. 1385. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 


Weatherwax, R.C.; Stamm, A.J. 1946. The coefficients of 
thermal expansion of wood and wood products. Transac- 
tions of American Society of Mechanical Engineering. 
69(44): 421-432. 


Welzbacher, C.R.; Rapp, A.O. 2007. Durability of thermally 
modified timber from industrial-scale processes in different 
use classes: results from laboratory and field tests. Wood 
Material Science and Engineering. 2: 4-14. 


Westin, M.; Lande, S.; Schneider, M. 2003. Furfurylation 
of wood—process, properties and commercial production. 
In: Van Acker, J.; Hill, C.A.S., eds. Proceedings, Ist Euro- 
pean conference on wood modification. Ghent, Belgium: 
289-306. 


19-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


CHAPTER 20 


Heat Sterilization of Wood 


Xiping Wang, Research Forest Products Technologist 


Insects and other pests can travel between countries in pal- 


Con tents lets and other wood packaging materials through interna- 
tional trade. Because these pests can cause significant eco- 

Heat Treatment Standards 20-1 logical damage, their invasion into non-native countries is 

Factors Affecting Heating Times 20-2 undesirable. Heat sterilization is currently the most practical 


Energy Source 20-2 and environmentally friendly treatment to kill pests in solid 

wood materials and prevent their transfer between conti- 
Heating Medium 20-2 nents and regions. Consequently, regulations requiring heat 
Air Circulation 20-2 sterilization are becoming more and more common. 


Size and Configuration of Wood 20-2 Two important questions should be considered in heat steril- 
Species 20-2 izing solid wood materials: First, what temperature-time 
Stacking Methods 20-2 regime is required to kill a particular pest? Second, how 
much time is required to heat the center of any wood con- 
figuration to the kill temperature? The entomology research 
on the first question has facilitated the development of in- 
MacLean Equations 20-5 ternational standards for heat sterilization of various solid 
Multiple Regression Models 20-7 wood materials. This chapter primarily addresses the second 
question. It focuses on various factors that should be con- 
Eaforcement Rewulations 20-9 sidered when planning and implementing a heat treatment 
process, discusses experimentally derived heating times for 
Quality Mark 20-11 commonly used wood products, and presents analytical and 
Other Considerations 20-11 empirical methods for estimating heating times that can be 
Literature Cited 20-13 used as starting points in the development of heat treatment 
schedules. Current wood packaging material enforcement 
regulations and several additional practical considerations 
for heat treatment operations are also presented. 


Heating Times for Wood in Various Forms 20-4 
Methods for Estimating Heating Times 20-5 


American Lumber Standard Committee (ALSC) 


The preferred units of measure for this chapter are in the 
in—lb system because of the current high demand for this 
information in the United States. Metric units or conversion 
factors are also provided. 


Heat Treatment Standards 


The current international standard for heat sterilization of 
solid wood packaging materials is the International Standard 
for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM) Pub. No.15, “Guidelines 
for Regulating Wood Packaging Material in International 
Trade,” which requires heating wood to a minimum core 
temperature of 133 °F (56 °C) for a minimum of 30 min 
(IPPC 2002, APHIS 2004). These guidelines are for all 
forms of wood packaging material that may serve as a path- 
way for plant pests posing a threat mainly to living trees. 
This temperature-time regime is chosen in consideration of 
the wide range of pests for which this combination is docu- 
mented to be lethal and a commercially feasible treatment. 
Table 20-1 lists the pest groups associated with wood pack- 
aging material that can be practically eliminated by heat 
treatment under ISPM 15 standard. Although some pests 

are known to have a higher thermal tolerance, quarantine 


20-1 


Table 20-1. Pest groups that are 
practically eliminated by heat treatment 
under ISPM 15 standard 


Insects 
Anobiidae 
Bostrichidae 
Buprestidae 
Cerambycidae 
Curculionidae 
Isoptera 
Lyctidae (with some exceptions for HT) 
Oedemeridae 
Scolytidae 
Siricidae 
Nematodes 
Bursaphelenchus xylophilus 


pests in this category are managed by the National Plant 
Protection Organizations (NPPOs) on a case-by-case basis 
(IPPC 2002). Future development may identify other tem- 
perature—time regimes required to kill specific insects or 
fungi. 


Factors Affecting Heating Times 


From a practical standpoint, the time required for the center 
of solid wood material to reach the kill temperature depends 
on many factors, including the type of energy source used 

to generate the heat, the medium used to transfer the heat 
(for example, wet or dry heat), the effectiveness of the air 
circulation in the heating facility, the species and physical 
properties (configurations, specific gravity, moisture content, 
initial wood temperature) of the wood and wood products 
being sterilized, and the stacking methods used in the heat 
treatment process. 


Energy Source 


Energy is the amount of heat supplied during the heat treat- 
ment process. Heat-treating chambers typically employ 
systems that utilize steam, hot air (direct fire), electricity, 
and hot water or hot oil as mechanisms to generate the heat 
necessary to sterilize the wood. The choice of heat energy 
primarily depends on the heat treatment method, energy 
resources available, and the cost of the energy. 


Heating Medium 


The temperature and humidity of the heating medium sig- 
nificantly affect heating times. Higher heating temperatures 
obviously yield shorter heating times, and heating wood 
in saturated steam (wet heat) results in the shortest heating 
times. When the heating medium is air that is not satu- 
rated with steam, the relative humidity is less than 100% 
(wet-bulb depression > 0 °F), and drying occurs as water 
evaporates from the wood surface. As the heating medium 
changes from wet to dry heat, the time needed to reach 

the required temperature increases. This is illustrated in 
Figure 20-1, which shows experimentally derived heating 
times as a function of wet-bulb depression for a series of 
lumber and timber products. 


20-2 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


When the wet-bulb temperature in the heating medium ap- 
proaches or falls below the target center temperature, heat- 
ing time becomes much longer than with wet heat (Simpson 
2002, Simpson and others 2003) because evaporation of 
water from the wood surface with dry heat cools the surface 
and lowers its temperature, reducing the surface-to-center 
temperature gradient that is the driving force for transferring 
heat. With wet heat there is little or no evaporation of mois- 
ture and thus little surface cooling to slow heat transfer. 


Air Circulation 


Maintaining adequate air circulation is also important in 
heat sterilization. The circulating air performs two func- 
tions, as it does in kiln drying: it carries heat to the wood 

to effect evaporation, and it removes the evaporated water 
vapor. Good air circulation ensures uniform heat distribu- 
tion in the chamber and keeps the wood surface temperature 
high so that the surface-to-center temperature gradient is as 
high as possible. This is usually accomplished with fans and 
baffles in a treatment chamber. 


Size and Configuration of Wood 


The heat treatment process is affected by wood configura- 
tion and size, as would be expected. Heating time increases 
with size and at a rate that is more than proportional to the 
configuration. For example, heating time can range from 
only a few minutes for thin boards to many hours for large 
timbers. The effect of wood configuration on heating time 
can be seen in Figure 20-1 for a series of web-bulb 
depressions. 


Species 

Studies of five hardwood species (red maple, sugar maple, 
red oak, basswood, and aspen) at the USDA Forest Service 
Forest Products Laboratory (FPL) have indicated that the 
actual effect of species was not large (Simpson and others 
2005). In fact, the differences in heating times of different 
species are of a similar magnitude to the expected natural 
variability between individual boards and square timbers. In 
heat treatment operation, there is no practical reason to heat- 
treat different hardwood species separately. Figure 20—2 
illustrates the effects of species on heating times of boards 
and square timbers for five hardwood species. 


No data are currently available to directly assess the effect 
of species in heat-treating softwood products. However, 
there are practical reasons to separate species in drying 
softwood lumber, and heat treatment for softwood products 
is often accomplished as part of the wood drying process. 
Detailed information on heating times for softwood products 
is presented in the sections of stacking methods, heating 
times for wood in various forms, and methods for estimating 
heating times. 


Stacking Methods 


Proper stacking of lumber or timbers is an essential aspect 
of the heat treatment process because it directly affects heat 


Chapter 20 Heat Sterilization of Wood 


70 


60 


50 


40 


30 


20 


10 


12 by 12 in 12 by 12 in 


Time for center to reach 135 °F (min) 


10 by 10 in 


10 by 10 in 


6 by 6 in 


3.5 by 3.5 in 


2 4 6 8 10 12 
Wet-bulb depression (°F) 


Figure 20-1. Dependence of heating time on wet-bulb depression for (a) 1- to 2-in.-thick 
ponderosa pine boards; (b) 4- to 12-in. ponderosa pine timbers; (c) 3/4- to 1-1/2-in.-thick 
Douglas-fir boards; and (d) 3-1/2- by 3-1/2-in. Douglas-fir timbers (initial temperature: 60 °F). 
(°C = (°F — 32)/1.8; 1 in. = 25.4 mm) 


1-1/2-in.-thick by 6-in.-wide boards 4- by 4-in. squares 
40 RM 140 RM 
sm _RO 
SM RO AS 120 BA 


BA 


= 30 100 

© 80 
E 20 

D 60 

8 40 40 

20 

0 0 


Figure 20-2. Effect of species on heating times of boards and squares. RM, red maple; SM, sugar 
maple; RO, red oak; BA, basswood; AS, aspen. The solid rectangle represents 2 °F (1.1 °C) wet- 
bulb depression. The entire rectangle represents 10 °F (5.6 °C) wet-bulb depression. 


20-3 


Ratio of solid to stickered heating time 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


(c) 


12 by 12 


Figure 20-3. Ratio of heating times of solid-piled boards and timbers (4 by 3.2 ft) to stickered boards 
and timbers for (a) Douglas-fir, 1.5 °F/2.2 °F (0.8 °C/1.2 °C) wet-bulb depression; (b) Douglas-fir, 12.5 
°F/13.8 °F (7.0 °C/7.7 °C) wet-bulb depression; (c) ponderosa pine, 2.5 °F/2.8 °F (1.4 °C/1.6 °C) wet- 
bulb depression; and (d) ponderosa pine, 12.0 °F/13.4 °F (6.7 °C/7.5 °C) wet-bulb depression. 


transfer and, consequently, heating times. If a heat treatment 
facility receives solid-piled bundles of lumber or timbers, it 
may be desirable to heat-treat in the solid-piled configura- 
tion. However, a solid bundle of lumber or timbers requires 
much longer heating times than a comparable quantity of 
stickered lumber or timbers. Figure 20-3, for example, 
shows the ratio of heating times for equal quantities of 
lumber or timbers, one being heat treated as a solid bundle 
(4 by 3.2 ft) and the other treated after stickering. Note that 
the ratio ranges from about 2 for 12- by 12-in. timbers to 
more than 14 for 1- by 6-in. boards, which indicates that 
heat-treating stickered materials can result in substantial 
decreases in heating times. In addition, a higher degree of 
variation in heating times for solid-piled materials than for 
stickered materials results from how closely the individual 
pieces fit together in a stacking bundle (Simpson and others 
2003). Gaps between individual pieces allow hot air to pen- 
etrate and thus warm the surface more than where adjacent 
pieces fit tightly together. In commercial practice, this high 
variability would cause complications in estimating heating 
times. 


20-4 


Heating Times for Wood in Various Forms 


Aseries of heating experiments were conducted at the FPL 
(Simpson 2001, 2002; Simpson and others 2003, 2005). 
Tables 20—2 and 20-3 summarize experimental heating 
times for ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir boards and square 
timbers to a center temperature of 133 °F (56 °C) in a heat- 
ing environment of 160 °F (71 °C) dry-bulb temperature and 
various wet-bulb depressions. Table 20—4 summarizes aver- 
age heating times required to reach 133 °F (56 °C) for six 
sizes of five hardwood species (red maple, sugar maple, red 
oak, basswood, and aspen) at two wet-bulb depressions 

(0 and 10 °F (0 and 5.6 °C)). Note that heating times in 
these tables are for wood in green condition and that these 
data were obtained through laboratory experiments in a 
small-scale dry kiln (approximately 1,500 board foot 

(3.5 m3) capacity) under well-controlled heating conditions. 
Although the experimental results have not been calibrated 
to commercial operation, they have served as the bases for 
developing heat treatment schedules for industrial applica- 
tions (ALSC 2009). 


Chapter 20 Heat Sterilization of Wood 


Methods for Estimating Heating 


Times 


Many combinations of wood configurations, heating temper- 
atures, wet-bulb depressions, and initial wood temperatures 


Table 20-2. Summary of experimental heating times to heat 
ponderosa pine boards and square timbers to a center 
temperature of 133 °F (56 °C) in a heating environment of nominal 
160 °F (71 °C) dry-bulb temperature and various wet-bulb 
depressions 


ee Experimental heating times (min)* 
(°F (°C)) 1 by 6° 2 by 6 4by 4 6 by 6 12 by 12 


Stickered 
2.5 (1.4) 17(8.1) 43(13.1) 153 (8.9) 299 (17.7) 1,006 (15.5) 
6.2 (3.4) 16(5.9) 53(2.4) 180 (6.0) 271 (6.2) 980 (12.1) 
12.0(6.6) 23(3.1) 67(15.0) 207(17.3) 420(28.3) 1,428 (8.2) 
26.8 (14.9) 188 (45.2) 137(12.5) 256(19.0)  568(7.2) 1,680 (13.9) 
47.5 (26.4) 427 (18.1) 361 (30.7) 817(53.9) 953 (38.1) 2,551 (22.2) 
Solid-piled® 
2.8(1.6) 166(70.3) 361 (64.9) 831(14.0) 1,201 (30.1) 1,736 (26.4) 
13.4(7.4) 201 (22.7) 391 (23.4) 710(48.1) 1,617 (26.7) 2,889 (22.4) 


“Values in parentheses are coefficients of variation (%). 
>Actual sizes are the same as nominal sizes. 
“Solid pile 4 ft wide and 3.2 ft high. 


Table 20-3. Summary of experimental heating times to heat 
Douglas-fir boards and square timbers to a center temperature of 
133 °F (56 °C) in a heating environment of nominal 160 °F (71 °C) 
dry-bulb temperature and various wet-bulb depressions 


Wet-bulb 


depression Experimental heating times (min)* 


(°F (°C)) lby6’ = 2by6 4 by 4 6 by 6 12 by 12 


Stickered 

2.2(1.2)  7(22.2) 21(21.3) 78(12.5) 209(8.9) 840 (8.8) 

6.3 (3.5) 810.3) 25(21.9) 91(10.5) 202(11.6) 914 (13.9) 
12.5(6.9) 10(6.7)  34(22.3) 138(17.8)  262(7.7) 1,153 (7.0) 
27.1 (15.0) 216 (39.9) 157(23.1) 255 (25.1) 715 (22.8) 1,679 (3.1) 
44.2 (24.6) 233 (62.8) 223 (20.3) 362(28.0) 849(6.1) 2,005 (23.3) 

Solid-piled® 

1.5 (0.8) 103 (45.2) 137(46.9) 432(27.2) 977(9.3) 1,931 (13.5) 

13.8 (7.7) 143 (69.1) 195 (77.4) 521 (54.7) 1,847 (25.7) 1,847 (25.7) 


“Values in parentheses are coefficients of variation (%). 
’Nominal sizes. 
“Solid pile 4 ft wide and 3.2 ft high. 


Heat conduction is considered to be about 2.5 times faster 
in the longitudinal grain direction than across the grain. 


However, because the length of many typical timbers and 


are possible. No one experiment of practical scope would simplified. 


cover them all. Therefore, analytical methods are needed 


Round Cross Section 


to estimate the heating times for combinations not directly 


measured experimentally. 


MacLean Equations 


mating heating times in steam and showed experimentally 
that they worked well. The equations are for two-dimension- 
al heat flow (heating is from all four cross-sectional faces) nel “WY 1M“ 


rounds is much greater than the cross-sectional dimension, 
longitudinal conduction is ignored and the equations thus 


The heat conduction equations for round cross sections are 
taken from MacLean (1930), further refined by Ingersoll and 
Zobel (1948). The temperature T at any point on radius r is 


MacLean (1930, 1932, 1941) developed equations for esti- given by 


and apply only to heating in a saturated steam environment. 


av wood, (z, ri 2 /p2 
T =T, +2(f)-T, Jy aa exp car? R°) (20-1) 
Zz Z,) 


20-5 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 20-4. Summary of experimental heating times to 133 °F (56 °C) for six 
sizes of five hardwood species heated at a nominal dry-bulb temperature of 
160 °F (71 °C) and two wet-bulb depressions’ 


Heating time (min)? 


Wet-bulb 
depression Piece size Red Sugar Red 
(°F (°C)) (in.)° maple maple oak Basswood Aspen 
0 (0) 1 by 6 14 (15) 13 (14) 14 (15) 12 (14) 13 (14) 
1-l/2by6 29(31) 28 (30) 26 (28) 26 (28) 29 (32) 
2 by 6 50 (52) 48 (49) 49 (53) 46 (48) 50 (54) 
3 by 3 59 (64) 58 (61) 57 (60) 51 (58) 61 (64) 
4 by 4 115(119) = 107(113) =109(112) ~=—:100 (108)_~—s: 1113 (117) 
6by6 265 (283) 255(277) 252(259) 226 (243) 262 (278) 
10 (5.6) 1 by 6 17 (18) 14 (15) 15 (16) 15 (17) 15 (16) 
1-1/2by6 36 (38) 31 (34) 32 (33) 29 (31) 32 (33) 
2 by 6 59 (62) 53 (56) 56 (59) 54 (58) 57 (62) 
3 by 3 85 (96) 63 (67) 66 (69) 63 (69) 69 (74) 
4by 4 137 (143) =: 121 (127) ~—s- 124129) ~—s:114120) ~—s:129 (133) 
6by6 294(304) 284(299) 284(298) 262 (284) 285 (195) 


“Heating times were adjusted to a common initial temperature of 60 °F (16 °C) and the overall actual 


average heating temperature of 157 °F (69 °C). 


values in parentheses are 99% upper confidence bounds of heating times. 


“Actual sizes. 


where 


T,is surface temperature (which must be attained 
immediately), 


initial temperature, 

zero-order Bessel function, 

first-order Bessel function, 

nth root of Jo(z,) = 0, 

any point on radius of cross section, 
radius of cross section, 

thermal diffusivity (dimension2/time), and 
heating time. 


7 Rm N USS 


To calculate the temperature at the center of the cross sec- 
tion, r = 0, Equation (20-1) becomes 
(— az? R?) 


T, =T, +2(T> -T,))-—> (20-2) 


n=] 
Equations (20-1) and (20-2) converge quickly, so only the 
first few terms are necessary. The first few terms of Equa- 
tion (20—2) are 


Zn (Zn) 


. nia = _ 5 . 22 /R?) aa t22/R2 
T, =T, + 2(1 T,)| SP atzy /t 4, XPC@ 29 ) 


Zo/1(Z2 ) (20-3) 


2/1 ( 2 ) 
exp(— aizz / R~) 


23J)(Z3) 


From Watson (1958), the first five roots of J(z,,) = 0 are 
Zz, = 2.405 


20-6 


z= 5.520 
2, = 8.654 

z,= 11.792 
z= 14.931 


and the first five values of J,(z,,) are 
J,(2.405) = 0.5191 
J,(5.520) = —0.3403 
J,(8.654) = 0.2714 
J,(11.792) = -0.2325 
J,(14.931) = 0.2065 


Rectangular Cross Section 
The equation for rectangular cross sections is taken from 
MacLean (1932) and is the solution to the differential equa- 
tion of heat conduction in the two dimensions of a rectangu- 
lar cross section. The temperature T at any point x and y is 
given by 

T=T,+ (Ty) - T,)(16/n2) x 

{sin(ax/a) sin(ny/b) exp[—n71(0.,/a*+0,/b7)] 

+(1/3) sin(32x/a) sin(ay/b) exp[—174(90.,/a?+0,/b7] 
+(1/3) sin(ax/a) sin(3ny/b) exp[—171(a,/a?+9a,/b7] 


+(1/5) sin(ax/a) sin(Say/b) exp[—171(a,/a?+25a,/b7] 

+(1/7) sin(7xx/a) sin(ay/b) exp[—11(49a,/a?+a,/b?] 

+(1/7) sin(ax/a) sin(7ny/b) exp[—171(a,/a?+49a,,/b] 
+...} 


+(1/5) sin(Sax/a) sin(ay/b) exp[—171(25a,/a*+a,/b7]_ (20-4) 


Chapter 20 Heat Sterilization of Wood 


140 


120 


100 


80 


White birch - 2x8 in. (51*203 mm) 
Specific gravity = 0.51 

Moisture content = 73.3% 
Heating temperature = 133 °F (56 °C) 
Initial temperature = 42.6 °F (6 °C) 


0 40 80 120 160 200 


Temperature (°F) 
8 
o 


180 


Red pine - 2x6 in. (51*152 mm) 
Specific gravity = 0.39 
Moisture content = 67.1% 
Heating temperature = 212 °F (100 °C) 
Initial temperature = 74.3 °F (24 °C) 


140 


100 
— Calculated 
® Experimental (Gu & Garrahan) 


0 40 80 120 160 200 
Time (min) 


Figure 20—4. Comparison of experimental heating 
times of Gu and Garrahan (1984) with times calcu- 
lated using MacLean equations for white birch and 
red pine. 


where 


T,is surface temperature (which must be attained 


immediately), 

Ty initial temperature, 

a one cross-sectional dimension, 

b other cross-sectional dimension, 

a, thermal diffusivity in the x direction 
(dimension2/time), 

a, thermal diffusivity in the y direction, and 

t heating time. 


Equation (20-4) converges quickly, so only the first few 
terms are necessary. Because thermal conductivity and ther- 
mal diffusivity do not differ much in the radial and tangen- 


tial directions of wood, in Equation (20-4) we can set 

a, = a, (MacLean 1941). Equation (20-4) can easily be con- 
verted to calculate the temperature at the center of the cross 
section by setting x = a/2 and y = B/2. 


Gu and Garrahan (1984) experimentally confirmed that 
MacLean’s equations were valid for estimating heating 
times. Figure 20-4 shows close agreement of experimental 
heating times of Gu and Garrahan (1984) with times calcu- 
lated using MacLean’s heat conduction equation. Simpson 
(2001) further confirmed the validity of MacLean’s equa- 
tions and used them to develop a series of tables of heat- 
ing times (to the center) of round and rectangular sections. 
Variables in the tables were wood specific gravity, moisture 
content, initial temperature, heating temperature, and target 
center temperature. 


Specific gravity and moisture content values were chosen 
to represent several species that might be subjected to heat 
sterilization. Target center temperatures other than 133 °F 
(56 °C) were included because future heat sterilization re- 
quirements are not known and might include higher 
temperatures. As an example, Table 20-5 tabulates the esti- 
mated heating times to heat lumber of selected sizes to 

133 °F (56 °C) for wood specific gravity of 0.35 (Cheung 
2008). Tables for other combinations of variables are pre- 
sented in Simpson (2001). 


Heat experiments at the Forest Products Laboratory indi- 
cated that MacLean’s equations are able to estimate heating 
times in steam to a degree of accuracy that is within about 
5% to 15% of measured heating times. The equations offer a 
powerful way to include the effects of all the variables that 
affect heating time—specific gravity, moisture content, ini- 
tial temperature, heating temperature, target center tempera- 
ture, and cross-sectional dimensions. 


MacLean’s approach requires full access of all four faces 

to the heating medium. This might not be achieved in the 
close edge-to-edge contact of the stickered configuration or 
the solid-piled configuration. In practice, his approach will 
probably require some small level of gapping between adja- 
cent boards or timbers. 


Multiple Regression Models 


MacLean’s equations apply only to heating in a saturated 
steam environment. When the heating medium is air that is 
not saturated with steam, there is a wet-bulb depression (the 
relative humidity is less than 100%), and drying occurs as 
water evaporates from the wood surface. The consequence 
is that heating time increases and MacLean’s equations no 
longer apply. An alternative method to estimate the heating 
time when simultaneous drying occurs is to use a strictly 
empirical approach. 


The following multiple regression model proved to have a 
good ability to predict heating time from size, wet-bulb 
depression, and initial wood temperature as long as the 


20-7 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 20—5. Estimated heating times to heat lumber to 133 °F (56 °C) for wood with a specific gravity of 0.35 


Estimated heating time (min) from four initial wood temperatures and four MC levels 


Thickness Heat 
30 °F 50 °F 0 °F 0 °F 
(¢) and width temp. i z 


(w) (in.) (°F) 25% 70% 100% 130% 25% 70% 100% 130% 25% 70% 100% 130% 25% 70% 100% 130% 
140 21 21 20 19 19 19 18 17 17 17 16 15 1S 14 13 12 


150.15 15 14 13 14 13 13 12 12 11 11 10 10 9 9 8 
160 = 13 12 12 11 11 11 10 9 10 9 9 8 8 7 7 6 
t=1.0 17011 10 10 9 10 9 8 8 8 7 7 7 6 6 6 5 
w=4.0 180 9 9 9 8 8 8 7 oi 7 6 6 6 6 B) 5 4 
190 9 8 8 7 7 7 7 6 6 6 5 5 5 4 4 4 
200 8 7 7 6 7 6 6 5 6 5 5 4 5 4 4 3 
210 7 E 6 6 6 6 5 5 2) 5 4 4 4 4 3 3 
140 21 21 20 19 19 19 18 17 17 17 16 15 1S 14 13 12 
150.15 15 14 13 14 13 13 12 12 11 11 10 10 9 9 8 
160 = 13 12 12 11 11 11 10 9 10 9 9 8 8 7 7 6 
t=1.0 17011 10 10 9 10 9 8 8 8 7 vi 7 6 6 6 5 
w= 6.0 180 9 9 9 8 8 8 7 7 7 6 6 6 6 5 5 4 
190 9 8 8 7 7 7 7 6 6 6 5 5 5 4 4 4 
200 8 7 7 6 7 6 6 5 6 5 5 4 5 4 4 3 
210 7 7 6 6 6 6 5 5) 5 5 4 4 4 4 ] 3 
140 75 74 #470 66 8669 67 = 64 59 62 59 56 53 54. 50 48 45 
150 56 = =655 52 49 51 49 46 43 45 42 40 38 38 = 35 33 31 
160 46 45 43 40 42 40 38 35 37 34 33 30 30-28 26 25 
t=2.0 170 41 39 37 35.36 34 33 30 32 29 28 26 26 24 22 21 
w=4.0 180 36 35 33 31 32 30 2-29 27 28 26 24 23 23, 21 20 18 
190 33 31 30 28 29 27 = 26 24 25 23 22 20 21 18 17 16 
200 30 28 27 25 27 25 24 22 23 21 20 19 19 17 16 15 
210 28 26 25 23°, 25 23-22 20 22 19 18 17 18 15 15 14 
140 86 85 81 76 79 77 ~=73 68 71 67 64 60 61 57 54 50 
150 63 )=662 59 55 57 55 52 49 50 47 45 42 41 38 36 34 
35 


160 52 50 48 45 46 44 42 39 40 37 33 32 30 28 26 
t=2.0 170 44 ~=43 41 38 39 37.35 33 34 31 30 28 21 25 24 22 
w= 8.0 180 39 37 36 3335 32.31 29 30 27 26 24 24 21 20 19 
190 35 33 32 30031 29 27 26 27 24 23 21 21 19 18 17 
200 32 30 29 27 = =29 26 825 23 24 22 21 19 19 17 16 15 
210 30 28 26 24 26 24 23 Zl 22 20 19 18 18 16 15 14 


140 188 186 177 166 173 168 160 150 157 149 142 132) 136 127 120) 112 
150 141) 138 131 123, 128 123 117 110 114 107 102 95 
160 118 114 109 102 107 102 97 90 94 88 83 78 
t=4.0 170 103 99 94 88 93 88 83 78 82 76 72 67 
w= 4.0 180 93 88 84 78 «84 78 74 69 73 67 64 59 
190 85 80 76 71 76 71 67 63 67 61 58 54 
200 79 74 70 65 71 65 62 57 62 56 53 49 
210 74 68 65 60 66 60 57 53 58 52 49 46 
140 335 332 316 296 309 300 286 267 278 265 252 235. 239 224 213 198 
150 248 243 232 217° 225 216 206 192 198 187 178 166 165 153 145 = 135 
160 205 199 190 177. 184 «175 «167 156 160 150 142 133. «131 #120) «6114 ~~ 106 
t=4.0 170 177 171 162 152.158 149 142 133. 136-126 ~—:120 112. 111 _~=(101 95 89 
w= 12.0 180 158 150 143 133, 140 131 124 116 120 110 105 98 97 887 83 77 
190 143 135 128 119 126 117 111 104 108 98 93 87 87 — 78 74 69 
200 131 122 116 108 115 106 101 94 98 89 84 78 79 70 67 62 
210 121 112 106 99 107 97 92 86 91 81 TE 72 73 64 61 57 


so 
on 
~] 00 
No 
WM BD oo 
OOM 
nxn 
Oo 


Nn 
n 


AO ala 
ND | oo 
BUYUND 
DnOWN 
RR 
WwnNN 
BHA 
ofl 


& 
oo 
a 
Oe 
a 
Co 
we 
~ 


20-8 


Chapter 20 Heat Sterilization of Wood 


Table 20-6. Coefficients for multiple regression models (Eq. (20—5)) for estimating time 
required to heat stickered ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir boards and timbers to a 133 
°F (56 °C) center temperature in a 160 °F (71 °C) heating medium? 


Coefficients 
Application Ina b Cc d R? 
Ponderosa pine, 1- and 2-in. boards, WBD < 12 °F 5.04 = 1.55 0.257 0.627 0.978 
Ponderosa pine, 4-, 6-, and 12-in. timbers, WBD < 12 °F 4.59 1.61 0.205 -0.521 0.967 
Douglas-fir, 1- and 2-in. boards, WBD < 12 °F 8.04 = 1.63 0.265 -1.35 0.925 
Douglas-fir, 4-, 6-, and 12-in. timbers, WBD < 12 °F 15.03 0.455 0.336 -2.70 0.984 


“Too = (Tor — 32)/1.8; °C = °F/1.8; 1 in. = 25.4 mm. 


wet-bulb temperature in the heating chamber is greater than 
the target center temperature: 


In T)33 =Ina+b (Int)"+cln(WBD)+dIn(7) (20-5) 

where 

T,33. is __ time for the center to reach 133 °F (56 °C) 
(min), 

ft thickness of boards or cross-sectional 
dimension of timbers (in.), 

WBD wet-bulb depression (°F), 

T; initial wood temperature (°F), 

a,b,c,d regression coefficients, 

n either | or 2. 


Simpson and others (2003) developed a series of regres- 
sion models to estimate heating times for ponderosa pine 
and Douglas-fir boards and timbers. The regression coef- 
ficients (a, b, c, and d) and coefficients of determination (R2) 
are shown in Table 20-6. The models worked well when 
the wet-bulb depression was less than or equal to about 12 
°F (6.7 °C) and the boards or timbers were stickered. The 
heating time estimates for a series of sizes, wet-bulb depres- 
sions, and initial temperature generated using these equa- 
tions are presented in Tables 20—7 to 20-10. The estimates 
for ponderosa pine cover initial temperatures from 40 to 

80 °F (4.4 to 26.7 °C) (in 10 °F (5.6 °C) increments). The 
estimates for Douglas-fir cover only initial temperature of 
60 to 80 °F (15.6 to 26.7 °C) because of the seasonal timing 
of the experiments. 


The estimated heating times in Tables 20—7 to 20-10 are 
average times and give a reasonable general estimate of the 
time required to heat the center of wood to 133 °F (56 °C). 
In any group of lumber and timbers, the average time does 
not ensure that all pieces will achieve the target tempera- 
ture because some will require more than the average time. 
Therefore, the upper statistical confidence levels for the 
heating times need to be considered. Equations for calculat- 
ing the upper confidence levels of heating times for pon- 
derosa pine and Douglas-fir boards and timbers are provided 


in Simpson and others (2003). In Tables 20-7 to 20-10, the 
heating time values of 99% upper confidence bounds are 
presented in parentheses. 


American Lumber Standard 
Committee (ALSC) Enforcement 
Regulations 


Heat treatment of wood is typically accomplished in a heat 
chamber. Heat chamber is defined as any enclosed equip- 
ment used to heat-treat lumber or wood packaging material 
and includes kiln, heat boxes, or any other appropriate ap- 
paratus. Depending on the treating schedules used, products 
from heat treatment processes are of two types: 


1. Heat treated (HT)—lumber or used, previously assem- 
bled or repaired wood packaging that has been placed 
in a closed chamber with artificial heat added until the 
lumber or packaging achieves a minimum core temper- 
ature of 133 °F (56 °C) for a minimum of 30 min. 

2. Kailn-dried heat-treated (KD HT)—lumber or used, pre- 
viously assembled or repaired wood packaging that has 
been placed in a closed chamber with artificial heat add- 
ed until the lumber or packaging achieves a minimum 
core temperature of 133 °F (56 °C) for a minimum of 
30 min and that is dried to a maximum moisture content 
of 19% or less. 


ALSC enforcement regulations require that a heat treatment 
facility should be inspected and verified by an accredited 
third-party agency for initial qualification. Agencies will 
verify the accuracy of temperature-measuring and recording 
devices in the heating chamber and require that thermo- 
couples be located to accurately measure the temperature 
achieved in the heat chamber and that an appropriate num- 
ber of thermocouples are utilized given the chamber con- 
figuration. A thermocouple verification study is needed for 
any kiln schedule operating in a heat chamber using (1) both 
dry and wet heat (steam) with wet-bulb temperature of less 
than 140 °F (60 °C) or (2) only dry heat of less than 160 °F 
(71 °C). In such a verification study, an appropriate number 


20-9 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 20-7. Summary of heating times (at 160 °F (71 °C)) to 
133 °F (56 °C) for ponderosa pine boards estimated by multiple 
regression models* 


ee -\b 
Wet-bulb _Initial Heating time (min) 


depression temperature 1.00in. 1.25in. 1.50in. 1.75in. 2.00 in. 


(°F) (°F) thick thick thick thick ~_ thick 

f 40 18 (39) 26 (53) 34(67) 43 (82) 53 (98) 
4 40 22 (45) 31 (60) 41(76) 52 (93) 64 (112) 
6 40 24 (48) 34 (65) 45(83) 58 (101) 71 (121) 
8 40 26 (51) 37 (69) 49(87) 62 (107) 76 (128) 
10 40 28 (54) 39 (72) 52(92) 66 (112) 81 (134) 
12 40 29 (56) 41 (75) 54(95) 69 (117) 85 (139) 
2 50 16 (28) 22 (37) 30(47) 38 (58) 46 (70) 
4 50 19 (31) 27 (42) 36(54) 45 (66) 55 (80) 
6 50 21 (34) 30 (46) 39(59) 50 (72) 62 (87) 
8 50 23 (36) 32 (49) 42(62) 54 (77) 66 (92) 
10 50 24 (38) 34 (51) 45 (65) 57 (80) 70 (97) 
7 50 25 (39) 36 (53) 47(68) 60 (84) 74 (101) 
2 60 14 (21) 20 (28) 27(36) 34 (45) 41 (55) 
4 60 17 (24) 24 (33) 32(42) 40 (52) 49 (63) 
6 60 19 (26) 27 (35) 35(46) 45 (57) 55 (70) 
8 60 20 (28) 29 (38) 38(49) 48 (61) 59 (75) 
10 60 21 (29) 30 (40) 40(52) 51 (65) 63 (79) 
12 60 22 (30) 32 (42) 42(54) 53 (68) 66 (83) 
2 70 13 (17) 18 (24) 24(31) 31 (39) 38 (48) 
4 70 15 (20) 22 (27) 29(36) 37 (46) 45 (57) 
6 70 17 (22) 24 (30) 32(40) 41 (51) 50 (64) 
8 70 18 (23) 26 (33) 34(43) 44 (56) 54 (70) 
10 70 19 (25) 27 (35) 36(46) 46 (59) 57 (74) 
12 70 20 (26) 29 (36) 38(45) 48 (63) 60 (78) 
2 80 12 (15) 17 (21) 22(29) 28 (37) 35 (46) 
4 80 14 (18) 20 (26) 26(35) 34 (45) 41 (56) 
6 80 16 (20) 22 (29) 29(39) 37 (51) 46 (64) 
8 80 17 (22) 24 (1) 32(42) 40 (55) 49 (70) 
10 80 18 (23) 25 (33) 33(45) 43 (59) 52 (75) 
12 80 19 (24) 26 (35) 35(48) 45 (63) 55 (79) 


“Tec = (Tor — 32)/1.8; °C = °F/1.8; 1 in. = 25.4 mm. 
Values in parentheses are 99% upper confidence bounds of heating times. 


of thermocouples are used to accurately measure the tem- b. FPL—RP-604, Effect of wet-bulb depression on 
perature conditions of the chamber and the wood to ensure heat sterilization time of slash pine lumber (Simp- 
that time and temperature requirements for heat treating are son 2002); or 

met. Any equipment variance of more than +5 °F (+2.8 °C) c. CFIA PI-07, The technical heat treatment guide- 
requires recalibration or replacement. lines and operating conditions manual, Option C 
Heat treatment facilities are also required to monitor tem- 2006): 

peratures throughout the heat treatment cycle by any of the 3. Direct measurement of wood core temperature of the 
following options: thickest piece(s) by use of thermocouple(s) properly 


sealed with non-conductive material 
1. Wet- and dry-bulb temperature . ; 
Heat treatment facilities are currently required to annually 


2. Dry-bulb only—unless the specific schedule has been calibrate the temperature-monitoring and recording equip- 
verified, required heating times shall be equal to or ment for each facility heat-treating chamber and requalify 
greater than the time specified for the applicable sched- a heat-treating chamber any time there is a major change 
ule assuming the maximum wet-bulb depression as pro- in equipment or remodeling of the chamber. Except in the 
vided in either of the following: case of wood core temperature of the thickest piece(s) be- 
a. FPL-RP-607, Heat sterilization time of ponderosa ing directly measured by using thermocouples, when wood 

pine and Douglas-fir boards and square timbers moisture content is not determined at the beginning of the 
(Simpson and others 2003); or heat treatment cycle, facilities are required to select and use 


20-10 


Chapter 20 Heat Sterilization of Wood 


Table 20-8. Summary of heating times (at 160 °F (71 °C)) to 133 °F (56 °C)) for 
ponderosa pine square timbers estimated by multiple regression models* 


Wet-bulb Initial ore op 
depression temperature Heine Heme (in) 
(°F) (°F) 4 by 4 6 by 6 8 by 8 10 by 10 12 by 12 
2 40 155 (225) 297 (429) 473 (682) 677 (980) 90 (1,321) 
4 40 178 (259) 343 (492) 545 (782) 780 (1,123) 1,04 (1,512) 
6 40 194 (282) 372 (535) 592 (850) 848 (1,220) 1,13 (1,643) 
8 40 206 (299) 395 (569) 628 (903) 899 (1,296) 1,20 (1,745) 
10 40 215 (314) 413 (597) 657 (947) 941 (1,359) 1,26 (1,830) 
12 40 223 (327) 429 (621) 682 (986) 977 (1,414) 1,31 (1,904) 
2 50 138 (200) 265 (382) 421 (609) 603 (878) — 80 (1,185) 
4 50 159 (229) 305 (437) 485 (697) 695 (1,003) 93 (1,354) 
6 50 173 (249) 332 (475) 527 (756) 755 (1,088) 1,01 (1,468) 
8 50 183 (264) 352 (504) 559 (802) 801 (1,155) 1,07 (1,558) 
10 50 192 (277) 368 (529) 585 (841) 838 (1,210) 1,12 (1,633) 
12 50 199 (288) 382 (550) 607 (875) 870 (1,258) 1,16 (1,697) 
2 60 125 (182) 241 (350) 383 (559) 548 (807) 73 (1,091) 
4 60 144 (208) 278 (400) 441 (638) 632 (921) — 84 (1,245) 
6 60 157 (226) 302 (433) 479 (692) 687 (998) 92 (1,349) 
8 60 166 (240) 320 (460) 508 (734) 728 (1,058) 97 (1,430) 
10 60 174 (251) 335 (482) 532 (769) 762 (1,108) 1,02 (1,497) 
12 60 181 (261) 348 (501) 552 (799) 791 (1,151) 1,06 (1,555) 
2 70 116 (169) 222 (326) 353 (523) 506 (755) 67 (1,022) 
4 70 133 (193) 256 (372) 407 (596) 583 (860) 78 (1,164) 
6 70 145 (210) 278 (403) 442 (645) 634 (932) 85 (1,260) 
8 70 154 (222) 295 (427) 469 (684) 672 (987) 90 (1,335) 
10 70 161 (233) 309 (448) 491 (716) 703 (1,033) 94 (1,398) 
12 70 167 (242) 321 (465) 510 (743) 730 (1,073) 97 (1,451) 
2 80 108 (160) 207 (308) 330 (494) 472 (715) 63 (968) 
4 80 124 (182) 239 (351) 380 (563) 544 (814) 73 (1,102) 
6 80 135 (197) 260 (380) 413 (609) 591 (880) 79 (1,192) 
8 80 143 (209) 275 (403) 438 (645) 627 (932) 84 (1,262) 
10 80 150 (219) 288 (421) 458 (675) 656 (975) 88 (1,321) 
12 80 156 (227) 299 (438) 476 (701) 681 (1,013) 91 (1,371) 


“Toc = (Tor — 32)/1.8; °C = °F/1.8; 1 in. = 25.4 mm. 


Values in parentheses are 99% upper confidence bounds of heating times. 


appropriate time-temperature schedules assuming the low- 
est initial wood moisture content from one of the following 
publications: 


a) FPL-GTR-130, Heating times for round and rectangu- 
lar cross sections of wood in steam (Simpson 2001); 

b) FPL-RP-607, Heat sterilization time of ponderosa pine 
and Douglas-fir boards and square timbers (Simpson 
and others 2003); 

c) FPL—RP-604, Effect of wet-bulb depression on heat 
sterilization time of slash pine lumber (Simpson 2002); 
or 

d) CFIA PI-07, The technical heat treatment guidelines 


and operating conditions manual, Option C (CFIA 
2006). 


Quality Mark 


ISPM 15 requires that treated packaging must be marked 
with an official stamp that includes an International Plant 


Protection Convention (IPPC) symbol, an International 
Standards Organization (ISO) two-letter country code, and 
abbreviation of the type of treatment used (heat treatment is 
indicated by the mark HT), and a unique number assigned 
by the country’s national plant protection organization to the 
producer of the wood packaging material, who is responsi- 
ble for ensuring that appropriate wood is used and properly 
marked (Figure 20-5). If wood packaging materials arrive in 
a member country without this quality mark, officials at the 
port of arrival have the right to refuse entry or require treat- 
ment (such as fumigation) at the port—a costly situation. 
Recycled, remanufactured, or repaired wood packing mate- 
rial should be recertified and remarked. All components of 
such material are required to be properly treated. 


Other Considerations 


Heating capacity—lIt is critical in heat sterilization that the 
heating and humidification system be designed to meet the 
production schedule. Typically, the heating capacity of a 


20-11 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Table 20-9. Summary of heating times (at 160 °F (71 °C)) to 
133 °F (56 °C) for Douglas-fir boards estimated by multiple 
regression models* 


10 80 (15) 15 (24) 22 (35) 29 (47) 
12 80 10 (16) 16 (25) 23 (36) 31 (49) 
“Tec = (Ter — 32)/1.8; °C = °F/1.8; 1 in. = 25.4 mm. 

>Values in parentheses are 99% upper confidence bounds of heating times. 


Wet-bulb Initial Heating time (min)" 

depression temperature 0.75 in. 1.00 in. 1.25 in. 1.50 in. 
(°F) (°F) thick thick thick thick 
2 60 9 (25) 14 (37) 21 (53) 28 (70) 
4 60 11 (29) 17 (44) 25 (62) 34 (82) 
6 60 12 (32) 19 (49) 28 (68) 38 (91) 
8 60 13 (4) 21 (52) 30 (74) 41 (98) 
10 60 14 (36) 22 (55) 32 (78) 43 (104) 
12 60 15 (38) 23 (58) 34 (82) 45 (109) 
2 70 7 (15) 12 (22) 17 (32) 23 (42) 
4 70 9 (17) 14 (26) 20 (37) 27 (49) 
6 70 10 (19) 16 (29) 23 (41) 31 (55) 
8 70 11 (20) 17 Ql) 24 (44) 33 (59) 
10 70 11 (22) 18 (33) 26 (47) 35 (63) 
12 70 12 (23) 19 (35) 27 (49) 37 (66) 
2 80 6 (10) 10 (16) 14 (23) 19 (31) 
4 80 7 (12) 12 (19) 17 (27) 23 (37) 
6 80 8 (13) 13 (21) 19 (30) 25 (41) 
8 80 9 (15) 14 (23) 20 (32) 28 (44) 

9 
0 


Table 20-10. Summary of heating times (at 160 °F (71 °C)) to 133 °F (56 °C) for Douglas-fir 
square timbers estimated by multiple regression models* 


Wet-bulb Initial : : 3 <5 

depression temperature Heating time (min) 

(°F) (°F) 4 by 4 6 by 6 8 by 8 10 by 10 12 by 12 

2 60 159 (229) 285 (406) 473 (667) 738 (1,034) 1,098 (1,534) 
4 60 200 (298) 360 (526) 597 (862) 932 (1,334) 1,386 (1,974) 
6 60 229 (349) 412 (615) 684 (1,007) 1,068 (1,556) 1,588 (2,299) 
8 60 253 (391) 454 (689) 754 (1,126) 1,176 (1,739) 1,749 (2,567) 
10 60 272 (427) 489 (752) 812 (1,229) 1,267 (1,897) 1,885 (2,799) 
12 60 289 (459) 520 (809) 863 (1,321) 1,347 (2,038) 2,004 (3,006) 
2 70 105 (143) 188 (256) 312 (426) 487 (669) 724 (1,003) 
4 70 132 (181) 237 (323) 394 (535) 614 (836) 914 (1,251) 
6 70 151 (209) 272 (372) 451 (615) 704 (959) 1,047 (1,432) 
8 70 167 (232) 299 (412) 497 (680) 775 (1,061) 1,153 (1,580) 
10 70 179 (252) 323 (447) 535 (737) 835 (1,148) 1,243 (1,709) 
12 70 191 (270) 343 (478) 569 (788) 888 (1,226) 1,321 (1,824) 
2 80 73 (103) 131 (188) 217 (315) 339 (499) 505 (753) 
4 80 92 (127) 165 (230) 274 (386) 428 (609) 637 (918) 
6 80 105 (144) 189 (261) 314 (436) 491 (688) 730 (1,036) 
8 80 116 (159) 209 (286) 346 (477) 540 (752) 804 (1,130) 
10 80 125 (171) 225 (307) 373 ~~ (513) 582 (807) 866 (1,212) 
12 80 133 (182) 239 (326) 397 (544) 619 (855) 921 (1,283) 


“Toc = (Top — 32)/1.8; °C = °F/1.8; 1 in. = 25.4 mm. 
>Values in parentheses are 99% upper confidence bounds of heating times. 


20-12 


Chapter 20 Heat Sterilization of Wood 


XX — 000 
YY 


Figure 20-5. ISPM 15 requires the use of a quality 
mark on wood packaging materials to certify that 
proper treatment has occurred. 


hardwood kiln ranges from 0.5 to 1.5 boiler horsepower per 
thousand board feet of lumber (7,100 to 21,300 Btu/h per 
cubic meter of lumber). To get the rapid heating needed, 
the boiler horsepower needs to be sized from 6.0 to 12.5 
boiler horsepower per thousand board feet (85,100 to 
177,300 Btu/h per cubic meter), depending on the lumber 
used and starting temperature (Denig and Bond 2003). 


Structure damage—The environment used for heat steriliza- 
tion of wood can be extremely corrosive and damaging to 
some structures. In addition to using the proper materials, a 
floor drain system should be used, especially when using the 
high-humidity schedules. 


Mold prevention—Heat sterilization kills only mold, fun- 
gus, and insects that are present when the material is steril- 
ized. In certain cases, mold and fungus have rapidly infested 
heat-sterilized lumber that was not dry (Denig and Bond 
2003). It is critical for the pallet operator and user to keep 
their production facility free of waste wood, minimize pallet 
inventory of heat-treated pallets, and ensure some air move- 
ment around green pallets that have been heat-treated. 


Literature Cited 


ALSC. 2009. Wood packaging material enforcement regu- 
lations. Germantown, MD: American Lumber Standards 
Committee, Inc. 


APHIS. 2004. Rules and regulations—importation of wood 
packaging material. In: Convention, animal and plant 
protection convention. 7 CFR, Part 319. Federal Register. 
69(179): 55,719-55,733. 


CFIA. 2006. The technical heat treatment guidelines and 
operating conditions manual. CFIA PI-09. Ottawa, Canada: 
Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Plant Health Division. 
27 p. 


Cheung, K.C.K. 2008. Rules and regulations regarding 
the heat treatment of wood—an American perspective. In: 
Conference, quality drying for the 21st Century: energy and 


market realities; 2006 November 15—17; Bellingham, WA. 
Madison, WI: Forest Products Society: 83-85. 


Denig, J.; Bond, B. 2003. Heat sterilization of hardwood 
pallets and pallet material. Pallet Phytosanitary Project Tech. 
Rep. No. TP—1. North Carolina: A cooperative effort of the 
limestone bluffs resources conservation and development 
area and the wood education and resources center. Septem- 
ber 2003. 8 p. 


Gu, L.B.; Garrahan, P. 1984. The temperature and moisture 
content in lumber during preheating and drying. Wood Sci- 
ence and Technology. 18: 121-135. 


Ingersoll, L.R.; Zobel, A.C. 1948. Heat conduction. New 
York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc. 278 p. 


IPPC. 2002. Guidelines for regulating wood packaging ma- 
terial in international trade. ISPM Pub. No. 15. FAO, Rome: 
International Plant Protection Convention. 


MacLean, J.D. 1930. Studies of heat conduction in wood. 
Pt. I. Results of steaming green round Southern Pine tim- 
bers. In: Proceedings, American Wood Preservers’ Associa- 
tion. 26: 197-217. 


MacLean, J.D. 1932. Studies of heat conduction in wood. 
Pt. II. Results of steaming green sawed Southern Pine tim- 
bers. In: Proceedings, American Wood Preservers’ Associa- 
tion. 28: 303-329. 


MacLean, J.D. 1941. Thermal conductivity of wood: heat- 
ing, piping and air conditioning. In: Proceedings, American 
Wood Preservers’ Association. 13: 380-391. 


Simpson, W.T. 2001. Heating times for round and rectan- 
gular cross sections of wood in steam. General Technical 
Report FPL—GTR-130. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
103 p. 


Simpson, W.T. 2002. Effect of wet bulb depression on 

heat sterilization time of slash pine lumber. Research Paper 
FPL—RP-604. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 6 p. 


Simpson, W.T.; Wang, X.; Verrill, S. 2003. Heat sterilization 
time of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir boards and square 
timbers. Research Paper FPL—RP-607. Madison, WI: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products 
Laboratory. 24 p. 


Simpson, W.T.; Wang, X.; Forsman, J.W.; Erickson, J.R. 
2005. Heat sterilization times of five hardwood species. Re- 
search Paper FPL-RP-626. Madison, WI: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory. 
10 p. 


Watson, G.N. 1958. A treatise on the theory of Bessel func- 
tions. 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
804 p. 


20-13 


Adherend. A body that is held to another body by an 
adhesive. 


Adhesion. The state in which two surfaces are held together 
by interfacial forces, which may consist of valence forces or 
interlocking action or both. 


Adhesive. A substance capable of holding materials together 
by surface attachment. It is a general term and includes ce- 
ments, mucilage, and paste, as well as glue. 


Assembly Adhesive—An adhesive that can be used for 
bonding parts together, such as in the manufacture of a 
boat, airplane, furniture, and the like. 


Cold-Setting Adhesive—An adhesive that sets at tem- 
peratures below 20 °C (68 °F). 


Construction Adhesive—Any adhesive used to assemble 
primary building materials into components during build- 
ing construction—most commonly applied to elasto- 
mer-based mastic-type adhesives. 


Contact Adhesive—An adhesive that is apparently dry 
to the touch and that will adhere to itself instantaneously 
upon contact; also called contact bond adhesive or dry 
bond adhesive. 


Gap-Filling Adhesive—An adhesive capable of form- 
ing and maintaining a bond between surfaces that are not 
close fitting. 


Hot-Melt Adhesive—An adhesive that is applied in a 
molten state and forms a bond on cooling to a solid state. 


Hot-Setting Adhesive—An adhesive that requires a tem- 
perature at or above 100 °C (212 °F) to set it. 


Room-Temperature-Curing Adhesive—An adhesive 
that sets in the temperature range of 20 to 30 °C (68 to 
86 °F), in accordance with the limits for Standard Room 
Temperature specified in the Standard Methods of Con- 
ditioning Plastics and Electrical Insulating Materials for 
Testing (ASTM D 618). 


Solvent Adhesive—An adhesive having a volatile or- 
ganic liquid as a vehicle. (This term excludes water-based 
adhesives.) 


Structural Adhesive—A bonding agent used for transfer- 
ring required loads between adherends exposed to service 
environments typical for the structure involved. 


Air-Dried. (See Seasoning.) 


Allowable Property. The value of a property normally 
published for design use. Allowable properties are identified 
with grade descriptions and standards, reflect the orthotropic 
structure of wood, and anticipate certain end uses. 


Allowable Stress. (See Allowable Property.) 


American Lumber Standard. The American Softwood 
Lumber Standard, Voluntary Product Standard PS—20 (Na- 
tional Institute of Standards and Technology), establishes 
standard sizes and requirements for the development and 
coordination of lumber grades of various species, the assign- 
ment of design values when called for, and the preparation 
of grading rules applicable to each species. It provides for 
implementation of the standard through an accreditation and 
certification program to assure uniform industry-wide mark- 
ing and inspection. A purchaser must, however, make use of 
grading association rules because the basic standards are not 
in themselves commercial rules. 


Anisotropic. Exhibiting different properties when measured 
along different axes. In general, fibrous materials such as 
wood are anisotropic. 


Assembly Joint. (See Joint.) 
Assembly Time. (See Time, Assembly.) 


Balanced Construction. A construction such that the forces 
induced by uniformly distributed changes in moisture con- 
tent will not cause warping. Symmetrical construction of 
plywood in which the grain direction of each ply is perpen- 
dicular to that of adjacent plies is balanced construction. 


Bark Pocket. An opening between annual growth rings that 
contains bark. Bark pockets appear as dark streaks on radial 
surfaces and as rounded areas on tangential surfaces. 


Bastard Sawn. Lumber (primarily hardwoods) in which the 
annual rings make angles of 30° to 60° with the surface of 
the piece. 


Beam. A structural member supporting a load applied trans- 
versely to it. 


Bending, Steam. The process of forming curved wood 
members by steaming or boiling the wood and bending it to 
a form. 


Bent Wood. (See Bending, Steam.) 


Bird Peck. A small hole or patch of distorted grain result- 
ing from birds pecking through the growing cells in the tree. 
The shape of bird peck usually resembles a carpet tack with 
the point towards the bark; bird peck is usually accompanied 
by discoloration extending for considerable distance along 
the grain and to a much lesser extent across the grain. 


Birdseye. Small localized areas in wood with the fibers in- 
dented and otherwise contorted to form few to many small 
circular or elliptical figures remotely resembling birds’ eyes 
on the tangential surface. Sometimes found in sugar maple 
and used for decorative purposes; rare in other hardwood 
species. 


Blister. An elevation of the surface of an adherend, some- 
what resembling in shape a blister on human skin; its bound- 


GLOSSARY 


aries may be indefinitely outlined, and it may have burst and 
become flattened. (A blister may be caused by insufficient 
adhesive; inadequate curing time, temperature, or pressure; 
or trapped air, water, or solvent vapor.) 


Bloom. Crystals formed on the surface of treated wood by 
exudation and evaporation of the solvent in preservative 
solutions. 


Blow. In plywood and particleboard especially, the devel- 
opment of steam pockets during hot pressing of the panel, 
resulting in an internal separation or rupture when pressure 
is released, sometimes with an audible report. 


Blue Stain. (See Stain.) 
Board. (See Lumber.) 


Board Foot. A unit of measurement of lumber represented 
by a board 12 in. long, 12 in. wide, and | in. thick or its 
cubic equivalent. In practice, the board foot calculation for 
lumber | in. or more in thickness is based on its nominal 
thickness and width and the actual length. Lumber with a 
nominal thickness of less than | in. is calculated as 1 in. 


Bole. The main stem of a tree of substantial diameter— 
roughly, capable of yielding sawtimber, veneer logs, or large 
poles. Seedlings, saplings, and small-diameter trees have 
stems, not boles. 


Bolt. (1) A short section of a tree trunk. (2) In veneer pro- 
duction, a short log of a length suitable for peeling in a 
lathe. 


Bond. (1) The union of materials by adhesives. (2) To unite 
materials by means of an adhesive. 


Bondability. Term indicating ease or difficulty in bonding a 
material with adhesive. 


Bond Failure. Rupture of adhesive bond. 


Bondline. The layer of adhesive that attaches two 
adherends. 


Bondline Slip. Movement within and parallel to the bond- 
line during shear. 


Bond Strength. The unit load applied in tension, compres- 
sion, flexure, peel impact, cleavage, or shear required to 
break an adhesive assembly, with failure occurring in or 
near the plane of the bond. 


Bow. The distortion of lumber in which there is a deviation, 
in a direction perpendicular to the flat face, from a straight 
line from end-to-end of the piece. 


Box Beam. A built-up beam with solid wood flanges and 
plywood or wood-based panel product webs. 


Boxed Heart. The term used when the pith falls entirely 
within the four faces of a piece of wood anywhere in its 
length. Also called boxed pith. 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Brashness. A condition that causes some pieces of wood 

to be relatively low in shock resistance for the species and, 
when broken in bending, to fail abruptly without splintering 
at comparatively small deflections. 


Breaking Radius. The limiting radius of curvature to which 
wood or plywood can be bent without breaking. 


Bright. Free from discoloration. 
Broad-Leaved Trees. (See Hardwoods.) 
Brown Rot. (See Decay.) 

Brown Stain. (See Stain.) 


Built-Up Timbers. An assembly made by joining layers of 
lumber together with mechanical fastenings so that the grain 
of all laminations is essentially parallel. 


Burl. (1) A hard, woody outgrowth on a tree, more or less 
rounded in form, usually resulting from the entwined growth 
of a cluster of adventitious buds. Such burls are the source 
of the highly figured burl veneers used for purely ornamen- 
tal purposes. (2) In lumber or veneer, a localized severe 
distortion of the grain generally rounded in outline, usually 
resulting from overgrowth of dead branch stubs, varying 
from one to several centimeters (one-half to several inches) 
in diameter; frequently includes one or more clusters of sev- 
eral small contiguous conical protuberances, each usually 
having a core or pith but no appreciable amount of end grain 
(in tangential view) surrounding it. 


Butt Joint. (See Joint.) 


Buttress. A ridge of wood developed in the angle between a 
lateral root and the butt of a tree, which may extend up the 
stem to a considerable height. 


Cambium. A thin layer of tissue between the bark and 
wood that repeatedly subdivides to form new wood and bark 
cells. 


Cant. A log that has been slabbed on one or more sides. 
Ordinarily, cants are intended for resawing at right angles 
to their widest sawn face. The term is loosely used. (See 
Flitch.) 


Casehardening. A condition of stress and set in dry lumber 
characterized by compressive stress in the outer layers and 
tensile stress in the center or core. 


Catalyst. A substance that initiates or changes the rate of 
chemical reaction but is not consumed or changed by the 
reaction. 


Cell. A general term for the anatomical units of plant tissue, 
including wood fibers, vessel members, and other elements 
of diverse structure and function. 


Cellulose. The carbohydrate that is the principal constituent 
of wood and forms the framework of the wood cells. 


Cellulosic Fiberboard. (See Wood-Based Composite 
Panel.) 


Glossary 


Check. A lengthwise separation of the wood that usually 
extends across the rings of annual growth and commonly 
results from stresses set up in wood during seasoning. 


Chemical Brown Stain. (See Stain.) 


Chipboard. A paperboard used for many purposes that may 
or may not have specifications for strength, color, or other 
characteristics. It is normally made from paper stock with a 
relatively low density in the thickness of 0.1524 mm (0.006 
in.) and up. 


Cleavage. In an adhesively bonded joint, a separation in the 
joint caused by a wedge or other crack-opening-type action. 


Close Grained. (See Grain.) 
Coarse Grained. (See Grain.) 


Cohesion. The state in which the constituents of a mass of 
material are held together by chemical and physical forces. 


Cold Pressing. A bonding operation in which an assembly 
is subjected to pressure without the application of heat. 


Collapse. The flattening of single cells or rows of cells in 
heartwood during the drying or pressure treatment of wood. 
Often characterized by a caved-in or corrugated appearance 
of the wood surface. 


Compartment Kiln. (See Kiln.) 


Composite Assembly. A combination of two or more mate- 
rials bonded together that perform as a single unit. 


Composite Panel. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 


Compound Curvature. Wood bent to a compound curva- 
ture, no element of which is a straight line. 


Compreg. Wood in which the cell walls have been impreg- 
nated with synthetic resin and compressed to give it reduced 
swelling and shrinking characteristics and increased density 
and strength properties. 


Compression Failure. Deformation of the wood fibers re- 
sulting from excessive compression along the grain either 

in direct end compression or in bending. It may develop in 
standing trees due to bending by wind or snow or to internal 
longitudinal stresses developed in growth, or it may result 
from stresses imposed after the tree is cut. In surfaced lum- 
ber, compression failures may appear as fine wrinkles across 
the face of the piece. 


Compression Wood. Abnormal wood formed on the lower 
side of branches and inclined trunks of softwood trees. 
Compression wood is identified by its relatively wide an- 
nual rings (usually eccentric when viewed on cross section 
of branch or trunk), relatively large amount of latewood 
(sometimes more than 50% of the width of the annual rings 
in which it occurs), and its lack of demarcation between 
earlywood and latewood in the same annual rings. Compres- 
sion wood shrinks excessively longitudinally, compared 
with normal wood. 


Conditioning (pre and post). The exposure of a material to 
the influence of a prescribed atmosphere for a stipulated pe- 
riod of time or until a stipulated relation is reached between 
material and atmosphere. 


Conifer. (See Softwoods.) 


Connector, Timber. Metal rings, plates, or grids that are 
embedded in the wood of adjacent members, as at the bolted 
points of a truss, to increase the strength of the joint. 


Consistency. That property of a liquid adhesive by virtue of 
which it tends to resist deformation. (Consistency is not a 
fundamental property but is composed of rheological prop- 
erties such as viscosity, plasticity, and other phenomena.) 


Construction Adhesive. (See Adhesive.) 


Contact Angle. The angle between a substrate plane and the 
free surface of a liquid droplet at the line of contact with the 
substrate. 


Cooperage. Containers consisting of two round heads and a 
body composed of staves held together with hoops, such as 
barrels and kegs. 


Slack Cooperage—Cooperage used as containers for 
dry, semidry, or solid products. The staves are usually 
not closely fitted and are held together with beaded steel, 
wire, or wood hoops. 


Tight Cooperage—Cooperage used as containers for 
liquids, semisolids, or heavy solids. Staves are well fitted 
and held tightly with cooperage-grade steel hoops. 


Copolymer. Substance obtained when two or more types of 
monomers polymerize. 


Corbel. A projection from the face of a wall or column sup- 
porting a weight. 


Core Stock. A solid or discontinuous center ply used in pan- 
el-type glued structures (such as furniture panels and solid 
or hollowcore doors). 


Coupling Agent. A molecule with different or like function- 
al groups that is capable of reacting with surface molecules 
of two different substances, thereby chemically bridging the 
substances. 


Covalent Bond. A chemical bond that results when elec- 
trons are shared by two atomic nuclei. 


Creep. (1) Time-dependent deformation of a wood member 
under sustained wood. (2) In an adhesive, the time-depen- 
dent increase in strain resulting from a sustained stress. 


Crook. The distortion of lumber in which there is a devia- 
tion, in a direction perpendicular to the edge, from a straight 
line from end-to-end of the piece. 


Crossband. To place the grain of layers of wood at right 
angles in order to minimize shrinking and swelling; also, 
in plywood of three or more plies, a layer of veneer whose 
grain direction is at right angles to that of the face plies. 


Cross Break. A separation of the wood cells across the 
grain. Such breaks may be due to internal stress resulting 
from unequal longitudinal shrinkage or to external forces. 


Cross Grained. (See Grain.) 


Cross-Link. An atom or group connecting adjacent mol- 
ecules in a complex molecular structure. 


Cup. A distortion of a board in which there is a deviation 
flatwise from a straight line across the width of the board. 


Cure. To change the properties of an adhesive by chemi- 
cal reaction (which may be condensation, polymerization, 
or vulcanization) and thereby develop maximum strength. 
Generally accomplished by the action of heat or a catalyst, 
with or without pressure. 


Curing Agent. (See Hardener.) 

Curing Temperature. (See Temperature, Curing.) 
Curing Time. (See Time, Curing.) 

Curly Grained. (See Grain.) 


Curtain Coating. Applying liquid adhesive to an adherend 
by passing the adherend under a thin curtain of liquid falling 
by gravity or pressure. 


Cut Stock. (See Lumber for Dimension.) 


Cuttings. In hardwoods, portions of a board or plank having 
the quality required by a specific grade or for a particular 
use. Obtained from a board by crosscutting or ripping. 


Decay. The decomposition of wood substance by fungi. 


Advanced (Typical) Decay—The older stage of decay 
in which the destruction is readily recognized because 
the wood has become punky, soft and spongy, stringy, 
ringshaked, pitted, or crumbly. Decided discoloration or 
bleaching of the rotted wood is often apparent. 


Brown Rot—In wood, any decay in which the attack con- 
centrates on the cellulose and associated carbohydrates 
rather than on the lignin, producing a light to dark brown 
friable residue—hence loosely termed “dry rot.” An ad- 
vanced stage where the wood splits along rectangular 
planes, in shrinking, is termed “cubical rot.” 


Dry Rot—A term loosely applied to any dry, crumbly rot 
but especially to that which, when in an advanced stage, 
permits the wood to be crushed easily to a dry powder. 
The term is actually a misnomer for any decay, since all 
fungi require considerable moisture for growth. 


Incipient Decay—The early stage of decay that has not 
proceeded far enough to soften or otherwise perceptibly 
impair the hardness of the wood. It is usually accompa- 
nied by a slight discoloration or bleaching of the wood. 


Heart Rot—Any rot characteristically confined to the 
heartwood. It generally originates in the living tree. 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Pocket Rot—Advanced decay that appears in the form of 
a hole or pocket, usually surrounded by apparently sound 
wood. 


Soft Rot—A special type of decay developing under very 
wet conditions (as in cooling towers and boat timbers) 

in the outer wood layers, caused by cellulose-destroying 
microfungi that attack the secondary cell walls and not the 
intercellular layer. 


White-Rot—In wood, any decay or rot attacking both 
the cellulose and the lignin, producing a generally whit- 
ish residue that may be spongy or stringy rot, or occur as 
pocket rot. 


Delamination. The separation of layers in laminated wood 
or plywood because of failure of the adhesive, either within 
the adhesive itself or at the interface between the adhesive 
and the adherend. 


Delignification. Removal of part or all of the lignin from 
wood by chemical treatment. 


Density. As usually applied to wood of normal cellular 
form, density is the mass per unit volume of wood substance 
enclosed within the boundary surfaces of a wood-plus-voids 
complex. It is variously expressed as pounds per cubic foot, 
kilograms per cubic meter, or grams per cubic centimeter at 
a specified moisture content. 


Density Rules. A procedure for segregating wood according 
to density, based on percentage of latewood and number of 
growth rings per inch of radius. 


Dew Point. The temperature at which a vapor begins 
to deposit as a liquid. Applies especially to water in the 
atmosphere. 


Diagonal Grained. (See Grain.) 


Diffuse-Porous Wood. Certain hardwoods in which the 
pores tend to be uniform in size and distribution throughout 
each annual ring or to decrease in size slightly and gradually 
toward the outer border of the ring. 


Dimension. (See Lumber for Dimension.) 


Dipole—Dipole Forces. Intermolecular attraction forces 
between polar molecules that result when positive and nega- 
tive poles of molecules are attracted to one another. 


Dote. “Dote,” “doze,” and “rot” are synonymous with “de- 
cay” and are any form of decay that may be evident as either 
a discoloration or a softening of the wood. 


Double Spread. (See Spread.) 


Dry-Bulb Temperature. The temperature of air as indicated 
by a standard thermometer. (See Psychrometer.) 


Dry Kiln. (See Kiln.) 
Dry Rot. (See Decay.) 


Glossary 


Dry Strength. The strength of an adhesive joint deter- 
mined immediately after drying under specified conditions 
or after a period of conditioning in a standard laboratory 
atmosphere. 


Drywall. Panel product used as an interior wall and ceiling 
covering made of gypsum plaster with paper facings. The 
gypsum plaster may be reinforced with recycled fiber. 


Durability. A general term for permanence or resistance to 
deterioration. Frequently used to refer to the degree of re- 
sistance of a species of wood to attack by wood-destroying 
fungi under conditions that favor such attack. In this con- 
nection, the term “decay resistance” is more specific. As 
applied to bondlines, the life expectancy of the structural 
qualities of the adhesive under the anticipated service condi- 
tions of the structure. 


Earlywood. The portion of the growth ring that is formed 
during the early part of the growing season. It is usually less 
dense and weaker mechanically than latewood. 


Edge Grained. (See Grain.) 
Edge Joint. (See Joint.) 


Elastomer. A macromolecular material that, at room tem- 
perature, is deformed by application of a relatively low force 
and is capable of recovering substantially in size and shape 
after removal of the force. 


Embrittlement. A loss in strength or energy absorption 
without a corresponding loss in stiffness. Clear, straight- 
grained wood is generally considered a ductile material; 
chemical treatments and elevated temperatures can alter the 
original chemical composition of wood, thereby embrittling 
the wood. 


Encased Knot. (See Knot.) 
End Grained. (See Grain.) 
End Joint. (See Joint.) 


Equilibrium Moisture Content. The moisture content at 
which wood neither gains nor loses moisture when sur- 
rounded by air at a given relative humidity and temperature. 


Excelsior. (See Wood Wool.) 


Extender. A substance, generally having some adhesive ac- 
tion, added to an adhesive to reduce the amount of the pri- 
mary binder required per unit area. 


Exterior Plywood. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 


Extractive. Substances in wood, not an integral part of the 
cellular structure, that can be removed by solution in hot or 
cold water, ether, benzene, or other solvents that do not react 
chemically with wood components. 


Extrusion Spreading. A method of adhesive application 
in which adhesive is forced through small openings in the 
spreader head. 


Factory and Shop Lumber. (See Lumber.) 


Failure, Adherend. Rupture of an adhesive joint, such that 
the separation appears to be within the adherend. 


Failure, Adhesive. Rupture of an adhesive joint, such that 
the plane of separation appears to be at the adhesive—adher- 
end interface. 


Failure, Cohesive. Rupture of an adhesive joint, such that 
the separation appears to be within the adhesive. 


Feed Rate. The distance that the stock being processed 
moves during a given interval of time or operational cycle. 


Fiber, Wood. A wood cell comparatively long (<40 to 300 
mm, <1.5 to 12 in.), narrow, tapering, and closed at both 
ends. 


Fiberboard. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 


Fiber Saturation Point. The stage in the drying or wet- 
ting of wood at which the cell walls are saturated and the 
cell cavities free from water. It applies to an individual cell 
or group of cells, not to whole boards. It is usually taken 
as approximately 30% moisture content, based on ovendry 
weight. 


Fibril. A threadlike component of cell walls, invisible under 
a light microscope. 


Figure. The pattern produced in a wood surface by annual 
growth rings, rays, knots, deviations from regular grain such 
as interlocked and wavy grain, and irregular coloration. 


Filler. In woodworking, any substance used to fill the holes 
and irregularities in planed or sanded surfaces to decrease 
the porosity of the surface before applying finish coatings. 
As applied to adhesives, a relatively nonadhesive substance 
added to an adhesive to improve its working properties, 
strength, or other qualities. 


Fine Grained. (See Grain.) 
Fingerjoint. (See Joint.) 


Finish (Finishing). (1) Wood products such as doors, stairs, 
and other fine work required to complete a building, espe- 
cially the interior. (2) Coatings of paint, varnish, lacquer, 
wax, or other similar materials applied to wood surfaces to 
protect and enhance their durability or appearance. 


Fire Endurance. A measure of the time during which a ma- 
terial or assembly continues to exhibit fire resistance under 
specified conditions of test and performance. 


Fire Resistance. The property of a material or assembly 
to withstand fire or give protection from it. As applied to 
elements of buildings, it is characterized by the ability to 
confine a fire or to continue to perform a given structural 
function, or both. 


Fire Retardant. (See Flame Retardant.) 


Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood. As specified in building 
codes, a wood product that has been treated with chemicals 
by a pressure process or treated during the manufacturing 
process for the purpose of reducing its flame spread perfor- 
mance in an ASTM E 84 test conducted for 30 min to per- 
formance levels specified in the codes. 


Flake. A small flat wood particle of predetermined dimen- 
sions, uniform thickness, with fiber direction essentially 
in the plane of the flake; in overall character resembling a 
small piece of veneer. Produced by special equipment for 
use in the manufacture of flakeboard. 


Flakeboard. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 


Flame Retardant. A treatment, coating, or chemicals that 
when applied to wood products delays ignition and reduces 
the flame spread of the product. 


Flame Spread. The propagation of a flame away from the 
source of ignition across the surface of a liquid or a solid, or 
through the volume of a gaseous mixture. 


Flat Grained. (See Grain.) 
Flat Sawn. (See Grain.) 
Flecks. (See Rays, Wood.) 


Flitch. A portion of a log sawn on two or more faces—com- 
monly on opposite faces leaving two waney edges. When 
intended for resawing into lumber, it is resawn parallel to its 
original wide faces. Or, it may be sliced or sawn into veneer, 
in which case the resulting sheets of veneer laid together 

in the sequence of cutting are called a flitch. The term is 
loosely used. (See Cant.) 


Framing. Lumber used for the structural member of a 
building, such as studs and joists. 


Full-Cell Process. Any process for impregnating wood with 
preservatives or chemicals in which a vacuum is drawn to 
remove air from the wood before admitting the preservative. 
This favors heavy adsorption and retention of preservative 
in the treated portions. 


Furnish. Wood material that has been reduced for incorpo- 
ration into conventional wood-based composites; including 
flakes, particles, and fiber. 


Gelatinous Fibers. Modified fibers that are associated with 
tension wood in hardwoods. 


Girder. A large or principal beam used to support concen- 
trated loads at isolated points along its length. 


Gluability. (See Bondability.) 


Glue. Originally, a hard gelatin obtained from hides, 
tendons, cartilage, bones, etc., of animals. Also, an adhe- 
sive prepared from this substance by heating with water. 
Through general use, the term is now synonymous with the 
term “adhesive.” 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Glue Laminating. Production of structural or nonstructural 
wood members by bonding two or more layers of wood to- 
gether with adhesive. 


Glued Laminated Timber (Glulam). A manufactured 
structural timber product composed of layers of dimensional 
lumber glued together. 


Glueline. (See Bondline.) 


Grade. The designation of the quality of a manufactured 
piece of wood or of logs. 


Grain. The direction, size, arrangement, appearance, or 
quality of the fibers in wood or lumber. To have a specific 
meaning the term must be qualified. 


Close-Grained (Fine-Grained) Wood—Wood with nar- 
row, inconspicuous annual rings. The term is sometimes 
used to designate wood having small and closely spaced 
pores, but in this sense the term “fine textured” is more 
often used. 


Coarse-Grained Wood—Wood with wide conspicuous 
annual rings in which there is considerable difference 
between earlywood and latewood. The term is sometimes 
used to designate wood with large pores, such as oak, 
keruing, meranti, and walnut, but in this sense, the term 
“open-grained” is more often used. 


Cross-Grained Wood—Wood in which the fibers deviate 
from a line parallel to the sides of the piece. Cross grain 
may be either diagonal or spiral grain or a combination of 
the two. 


Curly-Grained Wood—Wood in which the fibers are dis- 
torted so that they have a curled appearance, as in “birds- 
eye” wood. The areas showing curly grain may vary up to 
several inches in diameter. 


Diagonal-Grained Wood—Wood in which the annual 
rings are at an angle with the axis of a piece as a result of 
sawing at an angle with the bark of the tree or log. A form 
of cross-grain. 


Edge-Grained Lumber—Lumber that has been sawed 
so that the wide surfaces extend approximately at right 
angles to the annual growth rings. Lumber is considered 
edge grained when the rings form an angle of 45° to 90° 
with the wide surface of the piece. 


End-Grained Wood—The grain as seen on a cut made 
at a right angle to the direction of the fibers (such as on a 
cross section of a tree). 


Fiddleback-Grained Wood—Figure produced by a 
type of fine wavy grain found, for example, in species of 
maple; such wood being traditionally used for the backs 
of violins. 


Flat-Grained (Flat-Sawn) Lumber—Lumber that has 
been sawn parallel to the pith and approximately tangent 


Glossary 


to the growth rings. Lumber is considered flat grained 
when the annual growth rings make an angle of less than 
45° with the surface of the piece. 


Interlocked-Grained Wood—Grain in which the fibers 
put on for several years may slope in a right-handed di- 
rection, and then for a number of years the slope reverses 
to a left-handed direction, and later changes back to a 
right-handed pitch, and so on. Such wood is exceedingly 
difficult to split radially, though tangentially it may split 
fairly easily. 


Open-Grained Wood—Common classification for 
woods with large pores such as oak, keruing, meranti, and 
walnut. Also known as “coarse textured.” 


Plainsawn Lumber—Another term for flat-grained 
lumber. 


Quartersawn Lumber—Another term for edge-grained 
lumber. 


Side-Grained Wood—Another term for flat-grained 
lumber. 


Slash-Grained Wood—Another term for flat-grained 
lumber. 


Spiral-Grained Wood—Wood in which the fibers 
take a spiral course about the trunk of a tree instead of 
the normal vertical course. The spiral may extend in a 
right-handed or left-handed direction around the tree 
trunk. Spiral grain is a form of cross grain. 


Straight-Grained Wood—Wood in which the fibers run 
parallel to the axis of a piece. 


Vertical-Grained Lumber—Another term for 
edge-grained lumber. 


Wavy-Grained Wood—Wood in which the fibers collec- 
tively take the form of waves or undulations. 


Green. Freshly sawed or undried wood. Wood that has be- 
come completely wet after immersion in water would not 
be considered green but may be said to be in the “green 
condition.” 


Growth Ring. The layer of wood growth put on a tree dur- 
ing a single growing season. In the temperate zone, the an- 
nual growth rings of many species (for example, oaks and 
pines) are readily distinguished because of differences in the 
cells formed during the early and late parts of the season. 

In some temperate zone species (black gum and sweetgum) 
and many tropical species, annual growth rings are not eas- 
ily recognized. 


Gum. A comprehensive term for nonvolatile viscous plant 
exudates, which either dissolve or swell up in contact with 
water. Many substances referred to as gums such as pine and 
spruce gum are actually oleoresins. 


Hardboard. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 


Hardener. A substance or mixture of substances that is part 
of an adhesive and is used to promote curing by taking part 
in the reaction. 


Hardness. A property of wood that enables it to resist 
indentation. 


Hardwoods. Generally one of the botanical groups of trees 
that have vessels or pores and broad leaves, in contrast to 
the conifers or softwoods. The term has no reference to the 
actual hardness of the wood. 


Heart Rot. (See Decay.) 


Heartwood. The wood extending from the pith to the sap- 
wood, the cells of which no longer participate in the life 
processes of the tree. Heartwood may contain phenolic com- 
pounds, gums, resins, and other materials that usually make 
it darker and more decay resistant than sapwood. 


Hemicellulose. A celluloselike material (in wood) that is 
easily decomposable as by dilute acid, yielding several dif- 
ferent simple sugars. 


Hertz. A unit of frequency equal to one cycle per second. 
High Frequency Curing. (See Radiofrequency Curing.) 


Hollow-Core Construction. A panel construction with 
faces of plywood, hardboard, or similar material bonded to a 
framed-core assembly of wood lattice, paperboard rings, or 
the like, which support the facing at spaced intervals. 


Honeycomb Core. A sandwich core material constructed of 
thin sheet materials or ribbons formed to honeycomb-like 
configurations. 


Honeycombing. Checks, often not visible at the surface, 
that occur in the interior of a piece of wood, usually along 
the wood rays. 


Hot-Setting Adhesive. (See Adhesive.) 


Hydrogen Bond. An intermolecular attraction force that 
results when the hydrogen of one molecule and a pair of 
unshared electrons on an electronegative atom of another 
molecule are attracted to one another. 


Hydrophilic. Having a strong tendency to bind or absorb 
water. 


Hydrophobic. Having a strong tendency to repel water. 


Impreg. Wood in which the cell walls have been impregnat- 
ed with synthetic resin so as to reduce materially its swell- 
ing and shrinking. Impreg is not compressed. 


Incising. A pretreatment process in which incisions, slits, or 
perforations are made in the wood surface to increase pen- 
etration of preservative treatments. Incising is often required 
to enhance durability of some difficult-to-treat species, but 
incising reduces strength. 


Increment Borer. An augerlike instrument with a hollow 
bit and an extractor, used to extract thin radial cylinders of 


G-7 


wood from trees to determine age and growth rate. Also 
used in wood preservation to determine the depth of pen- 
etration of a preservative. 


Inorganic-Bonded Composites. Manufactured wood-based 


composites where an inorganic binder, typically gypsum, 
Portland-cement, or magnesia-cement, acts as a continuous 
matrix and fully encapsulates the wood elements. 


Intergrown Knot. (See Knot.) 

Interior Plywood. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 
Interlocked Grained. (See Grain.) 

Interlocking Action. (See Mechanical Adhesion.) 


Internal Stresses. Stresses that exist within an adhesive 
joint even in the absence of applied external forces. 


Interphase. In wood bonding, a region of finite thickness 
as a gradient between the bulk adherend and bulk adhesive 
in which the adhesive penetrates and alters the adherend’s 
properties and in which the presence of the adherend in- 
fluences the chemical and/or physical properties of the 
adhesive. 


Intumesce. To expand with heat to provide a low-density 
film; used in reference to certain fire-retardant coatings. 


Isotropic. Exhibiting the same properties in all directions. 
Joint. The junction of two pieces of wood or veneer. 


Adhesive Joint—The location at which two adherends 
are held together with a layer of adhesive. 


Assembly Joint—Joints between variously shaped parts 


or subassemblies such as in wood furniture (as opposed to 
joints in plywood and laminates that are all quite similar). 


Butt Joint—An end joint formed by abutting the squared 
ends of two pieces. 


Edge Joint—A joint made by bonding two pieces of 
wood together edge to edge, commonly by gluing. The 
joints may be made by gluing two squared edges as ina 
plain edge joint or by using machined joints of various 
kinds, such as tongued-and-grooved joints. 


End Joint—A joint made by bonding two pieces of wood 
together end to end, commonly by finger or scarf joint. 


Fingerjoint—An end joint made up of several meshing 
wedges or fingers of wood bonded together with an adhe- 
sive. Fingers are sloped and may be cut parallel to either 
the wide or narrow face of the piece. 


Lap Joint—A joint made by placing one member partly 
over another and bonding the overlapped portions. 


Scarf Joint—An end joint formed by joining with ad- 
hesive the ends of two pieces that have been tapered or 
beveled to form sloping plane surfaces, usually to a feath- 
eredge, and with the same slope of the plane with respect 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


to the length in both pieces. In some cases, a step or hook 
may be machined into the scarf to facilitate alignment of 
the two ends, in which case the plane is discontinuous and 
the joint is known as a stepped or hooked scarf joint. 


Starved Joint—A glue joint that is poorly bonded be- 
cause an insufficient quantity of adhesive remained in the 
joint. 

Sunken Joint—Depression in wood surface at a joint 
(usually an edge joint) caused by surfacing material too 
soon after bonding. (Inadequate time was allowed for 
moisture added with the adhesive to diffuse away from 
the joint.) 


Joint Efficiency or Factor. The strength of a joint 
expressed as a percentage of the strength of clear 
straight-grained material. 


Joist. One of a series of parallel beams used to support floor 
and ceiling loads and supported in turn by larger beams, 
girders, or bearing walls. 


Kiln. A chamber having controlled air-flow, temperature, 
and relative humidity for drying lumber. The temperature is 
increased as drying progresses, and the relative humidity is 
decreased. 


Kiln Dried. (See Seasoning.) 


Knot. That portion of a branch or limb that has been sur- 
rounded by subsequent growth of the stem. The shape of the 
knot as it appears on a cut surface depends on the angle of 
the cut relative to the long axis of the knot. 


Encased Knot—A knot whose rings of annual growth are 
not intergrown with those of the surrounding wood. 


Intergrown Knot—A knot whose rings of annual growth 
are completely intergrown with those of the surrounding 
wood. 


Loose Knot—A knot that is not held firmly in place by 
growth or position and that cannot be relied upon to re- 
main in place. 


Pin Knot—A knot that is not more than 12 mm (1/2 in.) 
in diameter. 


Sound Knot—A knot that is solid across its face, at least 
as hard as the surrounding wood, and shows no indication 
of decay. 


Spike Knot—A knot cut approximately parallel to 
its long axis so that the exposed section is definitely 
elongated. 


Laminate. A product made by bonding together two or 
more layers (laminations) of material or materials. 


Laminate, Paper-Based. A multilayered panel made by 
compressing sheets of resin-impregnated paper together into 
a coherent solid mass. 


Glossary 


Laminated Strand Lumber (LSL). (See Structural Com- 
posite Lumber.) 


Laminated Veneer Lumber (LVL). (See Structural Com- 
posite Lumber.) 


Lap Joint. (See Joint.) 


Latewood. The portion of the growth ring that is formed af- 
ter the earlywood formation has ceased. It is usually denser 
and stronger mechanically than earlywood. 


Latex Paint. A paint containing pigments and a stable water 
suspension of synthetic resins (produced by emulsion po- 

lymerization) that forms an opaque film through coalescence 
of the resin during water evaporation and subsequent curing. 


Lathe Checks. In rotary-cut and sliced veneer, the fractures 
or checks that develop along the grain of the veneer as the 
knife peels veneer from the log. The knife side of the veneer 
where checks occur is called the loose side. The opposite 
and log side of the veneer where checking usually does not 
occur is called the tight side. 


Layup. The process of loosely assembling the adhe- 
sive-coated components of a unit, particularly a panel, to be 
pressed or clamped. 


Lbs/MSGL. Abbreviation for rate of adhesive application 
in pounds of adhesive per 1,000 ft? of single glueline (bon- 
dline). (See Spread.) When both faces of an adherend are 
spread as in some plywood manufacturing processes, the 
total weight of adhesive applied may be expressed as Lbs/ 
MDGL (pounds per 1,000 ft? double glueline). 


Lignin. The second most abundant constituent of wood, 
located principally in the secondary wall and the middle 
lamella, which is the thin cementing layer between wood 
cells. Chemically, it is an irregular polymer of substituted 
propylphenol groups, and thus, no simple chemical formula 
can be written for it. 


London Dispersion Forces. Intermolecular attraction forces 
between nonpolar molecules that result when instantaneous 
(nonpermanent) dipoles induce matching dipoles in neigh- 
boring molecules. London forces also exist between polar 
molecules. 


Longitudinal. Generally, parallel to the direction of the 
wood fibers. 


Loose Knot. (See Knot.) 


Lumber. The product of the saw and planing mill for which 
manufacturing is limited to sawing, resawing, passing 
lengthwise through a standard planing machine, crosscutting 
to length, and matching. Lumber may be made from either 
softwood or hardwood (See also Lumber for Dimension.) 


Board—Lumber that is less than 38 mm standard (2 in. 
nominal) thickness and greater than 38 mm standard (2 in 
nominal) width. Boards less than 140 mm standard (6 in. 
nominal) width are sometimes called strips. 


Dimension—Lumber with a thickness from 38 mm 
standard (2 in. nominal) up to but not including 114 mm 
standard (5 in. nominal) and a width of greater than 38 
mm standard (2 in. nominal). 


Dressed Size—The dimensions of lumber after being 
surfaced with a planing machine. The dressed size is 
usually 1/2 to 3/4 in. less than the nominal or rough size. 
A 2- by 4-in. stud, for example, actually measures about 
1-1/2 by 3-1/2 in. (standard 38 by 89 mm). 


Factory and Shop Lumber—Lumber intended to be cut 
up for use in further manufacture. It is graded on the per- 
centage of the area that will produce a limited number of 
cuttings of a specified minimum size and quality. 


Matched Lumber—Lumber that is edge dressed and 
shaped to make a close tongued-and-grooved joint at the 
edges or ends when laid edge to edge or end to end. 


Nominal Size—As applied to timber or lumber, the size 
by which it is known and sold in the market (often dif- 
fers from the actual size). 


Patterned Lumber—Lumber that is shaped to a pat- 
tern or to a molded form in addition to being dressed, 
matched, or shiplapped, or any combination of these 
workings. 


Rough Lumber—Lumber that has not been dressed 
(surfaced) but has been sawed, edged, and trimmed. 


Shiplapped Lumber—Lumber that is edge dressed to 
make a lapped joint. 


Shipping-Dry Lumber—Lumber that is partially dried 
to prevent stain and mold in transit. 


Shop Lumber—(See Factory and Shop Lumber.) 


Side Lumber—A board from the outer portion of the 
log—ordinarily one produced when squaring off a log 
for a tie or timber. 


Structural Lumber—Lumber that is intended for use 
where allowable properties are required. The grading of 
structural lumber is based on the strength or stiffness of 
the piece as related to anticipated uses. 


Surfaced Lumber—Lumber that is dressed by running 
it through a planer. 


Timbers—Lumber that is standard 114 mm (nominal 5 
in.) or more in least dimension. Timbers may be used as 
beams, stringers, posts, caps, sills, girders, or purlins. 


Yard Lumber—A little-used term for lumber of all sizes 
and patterns that is intended for general building pur- 
poses having no design property requirements. 


Lumber for Dimension. The National Dimension Manu- 
facturers Association defines both hardwood and softwood 
dimension components as being cut to a specific size from 


kiln-dried rough lumber, bolts, cants, or logs. Dimension 
components include Flat Stock (solid and laminated) for 
furniture, cabinet, and specialty manufactures. This term has 
largely superceded the terms “hardwood dimension” and 
“dimension parts.” (See also Lumber). 


Lumen. In wood anatomy, the cell cavity. 


Manufacturing Defects. Includes all defects or blemishes 
that are produced in manufacturing, such as chipped grain, 
loosened grain, raised grain, torn grain, skips in dressing, hit 
and miss (series of surfaced areas with skips between them), 
variation in sawing, miscut lumber, machine burn, machine 
gouge, mismatching, and insufficient tongue or groove. 


Mastic. A material with adhesive properties, usually used in 
relatively thick sections, that can be readily applied by ex- 
trusion, trowel, or spatula. (See Adhesive.) 


Matched Lumber. (See Lumber.) 


Mechanical Adhesion. Adhesion between surfaces in which 
the adhesive holds the parts together by interlocking action. 


Medium-Density Fiberboard. (See Wood-Based Compos- 
ite Panel.) 


Millwork. Planed and patterned lumber for finish work in 
buildings, including items such as sash, doors, cornices, 
panelwork, and other items of interior or exterior trim. Does 
not include flooring, ceiling, or siding. 


Mineral Streak. An olive to greenish-black or brown dis- 
coloration of undetermined cause in hardwoods. 


Modified Wood. Wood processed by chemical treatment, 
compression, or other means (with or without heat) to im- 
part properties quite different from those of the original 
wood. 


Moisture Content. The amount of water contained in the 
wood, usually expressed as a percentage of the weight of the 
ovendry wood. 


Molecular Weight. The sum of the atomic weights of the 
atoms in a molecule. 


Moulding. A wood strip having a curved or projecting sur- 
face, used for decorative purposes. 


Monomer. A relatively simple molecular compound that can 
react at more than one site to form a polymer. 


Mortise. A slot cut into a board, plank, or timber, usually 
edgewise, to receive the tenon of another board, plank, or 
timber to form a joint. 


Nanoindentation Hardness. A hardness measurement 
conducted at the nanometer scale. Nanoindentation hard- 
ness uses an extremely small indenter of a hard material and 
specified shape to press into the surface of a specimen with 
sufficient force to cause deformation. 


Naval Stores. A term applied to the oils, resins, tars, and 
pitches derived from oleoresin contained in, exuded by, or 


G-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


extracted from trees, chiefly species of pines (genus Pinus). 
Historically, these were important items in the stores of 
wood sailing vessels. 


Nominal-Size Lumber. (See Lumber for Dimension.) 
Nonpolar. (See Polar.) 


Nonpressure Process. Any process of treating wood with a 
preservative or fire retardant where pressure is not applied. 
Some examples are surface applications by brushing or brief 
dipping, soaking in preservative oils, or steeping in solu- 
tions of waterborne preservatives; diffusion processes with 
waterborne preservatives; and vacuum treatments. 


Oil Paint. A paint containing a suspension of pigments in 
an organic solvent and a drying oil, modified drying oil, 

or synthetic polymer that forms an opaque film through a 
combination of solvent evaporation and curing of the oil or 
polymer. 


Old Growth. Timber in or from a mature, naturally estab- 
lished forest. When the trees have grown during most if not 
all of their individual lives in active competition with their 
companions for sunlight and moisture, this timber is usually 
straight and relatively free of knots. 


Oleoresin. A solution of resin in an essential oil that oc- 
curs in or exudes from many plants, especially softwoods. 
The oleoresin from pine is a solution of pine resin (rosin) in 
turpentine. 


Open Assembly Time. (See Time, Assembly.) 
Open Grain. (See Grain.) 


Oriented Strandboard. (See Wood-Based Composite 
Panel.) 


Oriented Strand Lumber (OSL). (See Structural Com- 
posite Lumber.) 


Orthotropic. Having unique and independent properties in 
three mutually orthogonal (perpendicular) planes of symme- 
try. A special case of anisotropy. 


Ovendry Wood. Wood dried to a relatively constant weight 
in a ventilated oven at 102 to 105 °C (215 to 220 °F). 


Overlay. A thin layer of paper, plastic, film, metal foil, or 
other material bonded to one or both faces of panel products 
or to lumber to provide a protective or decorative face or a 
base for painting. 


Paint. Any pigmented liquid, liquifiable, or mastic composi- 
tion designed for application to a substrate in a thin layer 
that converts to an opaque solid film after application. 


Pallet. A low wood or metal platform on which material can 
be stacked to facilitate mechanical handling, moving, and 
storage. 


Paperboard. The distinction between paper and paperboard 
is not sharp, but broadly speaking, the thicker (greater than 


Glossary 


0.3 mm (0.012 in.)), heavier, and more rigid grades of paper 
are called paperboard. 


Papreg. Any of various paper products made by impregnat- 
ing sheets of specially manufactured high-strength paper 
with synthetic resin and laminating the sheets to form a 
dense, moisture-resistant product. 


Parallel Strand Lumber (PSL). (See Structural Compos- 
ite Lumber.) 


Parenchyma. Short cells having simple pits and functioning 
primarily in the metabolism and storage of plant food mate- 
rials. They remain alive longer than the tracheids, fibers, and 
vessel elements, sometimes for many years. Two kinds of 
parenchyma cells are recognized—those in vertical strands, 
known more specifically as axial parenchyma, and those in 
horizontal series in the rays, known as ray parenchyma. 


Particleboard. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 


Particles. The aggregate component of particleboard manu- 
factured by mechanical means from wood. These include 
all small subdivisions of wood such as chips, curls, flakes, 
sawdust, shavings, slivers, strands, wafers, wood flour, and 
wood wool. 


Peck. Pockets or areas of disintegrated wood caused by ad- 
vanced stages of localized decay in the living tree. It is usu- 
ally associated with cypress and incense-cedar. There is no 
further development of peck once the lumber is seasoned. 


Peel. To convert a log into veneer by rotary cutting. In an 
adhesively bonded joint, the progressive separation of a 
flexible member from either a rigid member or another flex- 
ible member. 


Phloem. The tissues of the inner bark, characterized by 
the presence of sieve tubes and serving for the transport of 
elaborate foodstuffs. 


Pile. A long, heavy timber, round or square, that is driven 
deep into the ground to provide a secure foundation for 
structures built on soft, wet, or submerged sites (for exam- 
ple, landing stages, bridge abutments). 


Pin Knot. (See Knot.) 


Pitch Pocket. An opening extending parallel to the annual 
growth rings and containing, or that has contained, pitch, 
either solid or liquid. 


Pitch Streaks. A well-defined accumulation of pitch in a 
more or less regular streak in the wood of certain conifers. 


Pith. The small, soft core occurring near the center of a tree 
trunk, branch, twig, or log. 


Pith Fleck. A narrow streak, resembling pith on the surface 
of a piece; usually brownish, up to several centimeters long; 
results from burrowing of larvae in the growing tissues of 
the tree. 


Plainsawn. (See Grain.) 


Planing Mill Products. Products worked to pattern, such as 
flooring, ceiling, and siding. 


Plank. A broad, thick board laid with its wide dimension 
horizontal and used as a bearing surface. 


Plasticizing Wood. Softening wood by hot water, steam, or 
chemical treatment to increase its moldability. 


Plywood. (See Wood-Based Composite Panel.) 
Pocket Rot. (See Decay.) 


Polar. Characteristic of a molecule in which the positive and 
negative electrical charges are permanently separated, as op- 
posed to nonpolar molecules in which the charges coincide. 
Water, alcohol, and wood are polar in nature; most hydro- 
carbon liquids are not. 


Polymer. A compound formed by the reaction of simple 
molecules having functional groups that permit their combi- 
nation to proceed to high molecular weights under suitable 
conditions. Polymers may be formed by polymerization 
(addition polymer) or polycondensation (condensation poly- 
mer). When two or more different monomers are involved, 
the product is called a copolymer. 


Polymerization. A chemical reaction in which the mol- 
ecules of a monomer are linked together to form large mol- 
ecules whose molecular weight is a multiple of that of the 
original substance. When two or more different monomers 
are involved, the process is called copolymerization. 


Pore. (See Vessel Elements.) 


Postformed Plywood. (See Wood-Based Composite 
Panel.) 


Post Cure. (1) A treatment (normally involving heat) ap- 
plied to an adhesive assembly following the initial cure, 

to complete cure, or to modify specific properties. (2) To 
expose an adhesive assembly to an additional cure, follow- 
ing the initial cure; to complete cure; or to modify specific 
properties. 


Pot Life. (See Working Life.) 


Precure. Condition of too much cure, set, or solvent loss of 
the adhesive before pressure is applied, resulting in inad- 
equate flow, transfer, and bonding. 


Preservative. Any substance that, for a reasonable length of 
time, is effective in preventing the development and action 
of wood-rotting fungi, borers of various kinds, and harmful 
insects that deteriorate wood. 


Pressure Process. Any process of treating wood in a closed 
container whereby the preservative or fire retardant is forced 
into the wood under pressures greater than one atmosphere. 
Pressure is generally preceded or followed by vacuum, as in 
the vacuum-pressure and empty-cell processes respectively; 


or they may alternate, as in the full-cell and alternating-pres- 
sure processes. 


Progressive Kiln. (See Kiln.) 


Psychrometer. An instrument for measuring the amount of 
water vapor in the atmosphere. It has both a dry-bulb and 
wet-bulb thermometer. The bulb of the wet-bulb thermom- 
eter is kept moistened and is, therefore, cooled by evapora- 
tion to a temperature lower than that shown by the dry-bulb 
thermometer. Because evaporation is greater in dry air, the 
difference between the two thermometer readings will be 
greater when the air is dry than when it is moist. 


Quartersawn. (See Grain.) 


Radial. Coincident with a radius from the axis of the tree 
or log to the circumference. A radial section is a lengthwise 
section in a plane that passes through the centerline of the 
tree trunk. 


Radiofrequency (RF) Curing. Curing of bondlines by the 
application of radiofrequency energy. (Sometimes called 
high-frequency curing.) 


Rafter. One of a series of structural members of a roof de- 
signed to support roof loads. The rafters of a flat roof are 
sometimes called roof joists. 


Raised Grain. A roughened condition of the surface of 
dressed lumber in which the hard latewood is raised above 
the softer earlywood but not torn loose from it. 


Rays, Wood. Strips of cells extending radially within a tree 
and varying in height from a few cells in some species to 4 
or more inches in oak. The rays serve primarily to store food 
and transport it horizontally in the tree. On quartersawn oak, 
the rays form a conspicuous figure, sometimes referred to as 
flecks. 


Reaction Wood. Wood with more or less distinctive ana- 
tomical characters, formed typically in parts of leaning or 
crooked stems and in branches. In hardwoods, this consists 
of tension wood, and in softwoods, compression wood. 


Relative Humidity. Ratio of the amount of water vapor 
present in the air to that which the air would hold at satura- 
tion at the same temperature. It is usually considered on the 
basis of the weight of the vapor but, for accuracy, should be 
considered on the basis of vapor pressures. 


Resilience. The property whereby a strained body gives up 
its stored energy on the removal of the deforming force. 


Resin. (1) Solid, semisolid, or pseudosolid resin—An or- 
ganic material that has an indefinite and often high molecu- 
lar weight, exhibits a tendency to flow when subjected to 
stress, usually has a softening or melting range, and usually 
fractures conchoidally. (2) Liquid resin—an organic poly- 
meric liquid that, when converted to its final state for use, 
becomes a resin. 


G-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Resin Ducts. Intercellular passages that contain and trans- 
mit resinous materials. On a cut surface, they are usually 
inconspicuous. They may extend vertically parallel to the 
axis of the tree or at right angles to the axis and parallel to 
the rays. 


Retention by Assay. The determination of preservative 
retention in a specific zone of treated wood by extraction or 
analysis of specified samples. 


Rheology. The study of the deformation and flow of matter. 


Ring Failure. A separation of the wood during seasoning, 
occurring along the grain and parallel to the growth rings. 
(See Shake.) 


Ring-Porous Woods. A group of hardwoods in which the 
pores are comparatively large at the beginning of each an- 
nual ring and decrease in size more or less abruptly toward 
the outer portion of the ring, thus forming a distinct inner 
zone of pores, known as the earlywood, and an outer zone 
with smaller pores, known as the latewood. 


Ring Shake. (See Shake.) 
Rip. To cut lengthwise, parallel to the grain. 


Roll Spreading. Application of a film of a liquid material to 
a surface by means of rollers. 


Room-Temperature-Setting Adhesive. (See Adhesive.) 
Rot. (See Decay.) 

Rotary-Cut Veneer. (See Veneer.) 

Rough Lumber. (See Lumber.) 

Sap Stain. (See Stain.) 


Sapwood. The wood of pale color near the outside of the 
log. Under most conditions, the sapwood is more suscep- 
tible to decay than heartwood. 


Sash. A frame structure, normally glazed (such as a win- 
dow), that is hung or fixed in a frame set in an opening. 


Sawn Veneer. (See Veneer.) 


Saw Kerf. (1) Grooves or notches made in cutting with a 
saw. (2) That portion of a log, timber, or other piece of wood 
removed by the saw in parting the material into two pieces. 


Scarf Joint. (See Joint.) 


Schedule, Kiln Drying. A prescribed series of dry- and 
wet-bulb temperatures and air velocities used in drying a 
kiln charge of lumber or other wood products. 


Seasoning. Removing moisture from green wood to im- 
prove its serviceability. 


Air Dried—Dried by exposure to air in a yard or shed, 
without artificial heat. 


Kiln Dried—Dried in a kiln with the use of artificial heat. 


Glossary 


Second Growth. Timber that has grown after the removal, 
whether by cutting, fire, wind, or other agency, of all or a 
large part of the previous stand. 


Semitransparent Stain. A suspension of pigments in either 
a drying oil—organic solvent mixture or a water—polymer 
emulsion, designed to color and protect wood surfaces by 
penetration without forming a surface film and without hid- 
ing wood grain. 


Set. A permanent or semipermanent deformation. In refer- 
ence to adhesives, to convert an adhesive into a fixed or 
hardened state by chemical or physical action, such as con- 
densation, polymerization, oxidation, vulcanization, gela- 
tion, hydration, or evaporation of volatile constituents. 


Shake. A separation along the grain, the greater part of 
which occurs between the rings of annual growth. Usually 
considered to have occurred in the standing tree or during 
felling. 


Shakes. In construction, shakes are a type of shingle 
usually hand cleft from a bolt and used for roofing or 
weatherboarding. 


Shaving. A small wood particle of indefinite dimensions 
developed incidental to certain woodworking operations 
involving rotary cutterheads usually turning in the direc- 
tion of the grain. This cutting action produces a thin chip of 
varying thickness, usually feathered along at least one edge 
and thick at another and generally curled. 


Shear. In an adhesively bonded joint, stress, strain, or fail- 
ure resulting from applied forces that tends to cause adjacent 
planes of a body to slide parallel in opposite directions. 


Sheathing. The structural covering, usually of boards, 
building fiberboards, plywood, or oriented strandboard, 
placed over exterior studding or rafters of a structure. 


Shelf Life. (See Storage Life.) 
Shiplapped Lumber. (See Lumber.) 
Shipping-Dry Lumber. (See Lumber.) 
Shop Lumber. (See Lumber.) 

Side Grained. (See Grain.) 

Side Lumber. (See Lumber.) 


Siding. The finish covering of the outside wall of a frame 
building, whether made of horizontal weatherboards, verti- 
cal boards with battens, shingles, or other material. 


Slash Grained. (See Grain.) 
Sliced Veneer. (See Veneer.) 
Soft Rot. (See Decay.) 


Softwoods. Generally, one of the botanical groups of trees 
that have no vessels and in most cases have needlelike or 
scalelike leaves, the conifers, also the wood produced by 


such trees. The term has no reference to the actual hardness 
of the wood. 


Solid Color Stains (Opaque Stains). A suspension of pig- 
ments in either a drying oil—organic solvent mixture or a wa- 
ter—polymer emulsion designed to color and protect a wood 
surface by forming a film. Solid color stains are similar to 
paints in application techniques and in performance. 


Solids Content. The percentage of weight of the nonvolatile 
matter in an adhesive. 


Solvent Adhesive. (See Adhesive.) 
Sound Knot. (See Knot.) 


Specific Adhesion. Adhesion between surfaces that are held 
together by valence forces of the same type as those that 
give rise to cohesion. 


Specific Gravity. As applied to wood, the ratio of the oven- 
dry weight of a sample to the weight of a volume of water 
equal to the volume of the sample at a specified moisture 
content (green, air dry, or ovendry). 


Spike Knot. (See Knot.) 
Spiral Grained. (See Grain.) 


Spread. The quantity of adhesive per unit joint area applied 
to an adherend. (See Lbs/MSGL.) 


Single spread—Refers to application of adhesive to only 
one adherend of a joint. 


Double spread—Refers to application of adhesive to 
both adherends of a joint. 


Squeezeout. Bead of adhesive squeezed out of a joint when 
pressure is applied. 


Stain. A discoloration in wood that may be caused by such 
diverse agencies as micro-organisms, metal, or chemicals. 
The term also applies to materials used to impart color to 
wood. 


Blue Stain—A bluish or grayish discoloration of the 
sapwood caused by the growth of certain dark-colored 
fungi on the surface and in the interior of the wood; made 
possible by the same conditions that favor the growth of 
other fungi. 


Brown Stain—A rich brown to deep chocolate-brown 
discoloration of the sapwood of some pines caused by a 
fungus that acts much like the blue-stain fungi. 


Chemical Brown Stain—A chemical discoloration of 
wood, which sometimes occurs during the air drying or 
kiln drying of several species, apparently caused by the 
concentration and modification of extractives. 


Sap Stain—A discoloration of the sapwood caused by the 
growth of certain fungi on the surface and in the interior 
of the wood; made possible by the same conditions that 
favor the growth of other fungi. 


Sticker Stain—A brown or blue stain that develops in 
seasoning lumber where it has been in contact with the 
stickers. 


Starved Joint. (See Joint.) 


Static Bending. Bending under a constant or slowly applied 
load; flexure. 


Staypak. Wood that is compressed in its natural state (that 
is, without resin or other chemical treatment) under con- 
trolled conditions of moisture, temperature, and pressure 
that practically eliminate springback or recovery from com- 
pression. The product has increased density and strength 
characteristics. 


Stickers. Strips or boards used to separate the layers of lum- 
ber in a pile and thus improve air circulation. 


Sticker Stain. (See Stain.) 


Storage Life. The period of time during which a packaged 
adhesive can be stored under specific temperature conditions 
and remain suitable for use. Sometimes called shelf life. 


Straight Grained. (See Grain.) 


Strand. (1) A type of wood flake with a high aspect ratio 
which allows for orientation. It is used in oriented strand- 
board, oriented strand lumber, and laminated strand lumber. 
(2) A wood element with a high aspect ratio manufactured 
from veneer. It is used in parallel strand lumber. 


Strength. (1) The ability of a member to sustain stress 
without failure. (2) In a specific mode of test, the maximum 
stress sustained by a member loaded to failure. 


Strength Ratio. The hypothetical ratio of the strength of 
a structural member to that which it would have if it con- 
tained no strength-reducing characteristics (such as knots, 
slope-of-grain, shake). 


Stress-Wave Timing. A method of measuring the apparent 
stiffness of a material by measuring the speed of an induced 
compression stress as it propagates through the material. 


Stressed-Skin Construction. A construction in which pan- 
els are separated from one another by a central partition of 
spaced strips with the whole assembly bonded so that it acts 
as a unit when loaded. 


Stringer. A timber or other support for cross members in 
floors or ceilings. In stairs, the support on which the stair 
treads rest. 


Structural Composite Lumber (SCL). (Wood elements 
glued together to form products that are similar in size to 
solid-sawn lumber) 


Laminated Strand Lumber (LSL)—Similar to ori- 
ented strand lumber with somewhat longer strands. 


Laminated Veneer Lumber (LVL)—Structural com- 
posite lumber manufactured from veneers laminated 


G-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


into a panel with the grain of all veneer running parallel 
to each other. The resulting panel is ripped to common 
lumber dimensions. 


Oriented Strand Lumber (OSL)—Structural com- 
posite lumber made from wood strand elements similar 
to those used in oriented strand board. The strands are 
oriented primarily along the length of the member. 


Parallel Strand Lumber (PSL)—Structural composite 
lumber made from high aspect ratio wood strand ele- 
ments manufactured from veneer oriented primarily 
along the length of the member. It is manufactured in 
billets and cut to lumber dimensions. 


Structural Lumber. (See Lumber.) 


Structural Timbers. Pieces of wood of relatively large size, 
the strength or stiffness of which is the controlling element 
in their selection and use. Examples of structural timbers are 
trestle timbers (stringers, caps, posts, sills, bracing, bridge 
ties, guardrails); car timbers (car framing, including upper 
framing, car sills); framing for building (posts, sills, gird- 
ers); ship timber (ship timbers, ship decking); and crossarms 
for poles. 


Stud. One of a series of slender wood structural members 
used as supporting elements in walls and partitions. 


Substrate. A material upon the surface of which an adhe- 
sive-containing substance is spread for any purpose, such 

as bonding or coating. A broader term than adherend. (See 
Adherend.) 


Surface Inactivation. In adhesive bonding to wood, physi- 
cal and chemical modifications of the wood surface that re- 
sult in reduced ability of an adhesive to properly wet, flow, 
penetrate, and cure. 


Surface Tension. The force per unit length acting in the 
surface of a liquid that opposes the increase in area of the 
liquid (spreading). 


Surfaced Lumber. (See Lumber.) 


Symmetrical Construction. Panels in which the plies on 
one side of a center ply or core are essentially equal in thick- 
ness, grain direction, properties, and arrangement to those 
on the other side of the core. 


Tack. The property of an adhesive that enables it to form a 
bond of measurable strength immediately after adhesive and 
adherend are brought into contact under low pressure. 


Tangential. Strictly, coincident with a tangent at the cir- 
cumference of a tree or log, or parallel to such a tangent. In 
practice, however, it often means roughly coincident with 

a growth ring. A tangential section is a longitudinal section 
through a tree or limb perpendicular to a radius. Flat-grained 
lumber is sawed tangentially. 


Temperature, Curing. The temperature to which an adhe- 
sive or an assembly is subjected to cure the adhesive. The 


Glossary 


temperature attained by the adhesive in the process of curing 
(adhesive curing temperature) may differ from the tempera- 
ture of the atmosphere surrounding the assembly (assembly 
curing temperature). 


Temperature, Setting. (See Temperature, Curing.) 


Tenon. A projecting member left by cutting away the wood 
around it for insertion into a mortise to make a joint. 


Tension. In an adhesively bonded joint, a uniaxial force 
tending to cause extension of the assembly, or the counter- 
acting force within the assembly that resists extension. 


Tension Wood. Abnormal wood found in leaning trees of 
some hardwood species and characterized by the presence 
of gelatinous fibers and excessive longitudinal shrinkage. 
Tension wood fibers hold together tenaciously, so that sawed 
surfaces usually have projecting fibers and planed surfaces 
often are torn or have raised grain. Tension wood may cause 
warping. 


Texture. A term often used interchangeably with grain. 

Sometimes used to combine the concepts of density and 
degree of contrast between earlywood and latewood. In 
this handbook, texture refers to the finer structure of the 
woodrather than the annual rings. (See also Grain.) 


Thermoplastic. (1) Capable of being repeatedly softened 
by heat and hardened by cooling. (2) A material that will 
repeatedly soften when heated and harden when cooled. 


Thermoset. A cross-linked polymeric material. 


Thermosetting. Having the property of undergoing a chem- 
ical reaction by the action of heat, catalyst, ultraviolet light, 
and hardener, leading to a relatively infusible state. 


Timbers, Round. Timbers used in the original round form, 
such as poles, piling, posts, and mine timbers. 


Timber, Standing. Timber still on the stump. 
Timbers. (See Lumber.) 


Time, Assembly. The time interval between the spread- 

ing of the adhesive on the adherend and the application of 
pressure or heat, or both, to the assembly. (For assemblies 
involving multiple layers or parts, the assembly time begins 
with the spreading of the adhesive on the first adherend.) 


Open Assembly Time—The time interval between the 
spreading of the adhesive on the adherend and the com- 
pletion of assembly of the parts for bonding. 


Closed Assembly Time—tThe time interval between 
completion of assembly of the parts for bonding and the 
application of pressure or heat, or both, to the assembly. 


Time, Curing. The period during which an assembly is sub- 
jected to heat or pressure, or both, to cure the adhesive. 


Time, Setting. (See Time, Curing.) 


Toughness. A quality of wood that permits the material to 
absorb a relatively large amount of energy, to withstand 
repeated shocks, and to undergo considerable deformation 
before breaking. 


Tracheid. The elongated cells that constitute the greater part 
of the structure of the softwoods (frequently referred to as 
fibers). Also present in some hardwoods. 


Transfer. In wood bonding, the sharing of adhesive between 
a spread and an unspread surface when the two adherends 
are brought into contact. 


Transverse. Directions in wood at right angles to the wood 
fibers. Includes radial and tangential directions. A transverse 
section is a section through a tree or timber at right angles to 
the pith. 


Treenail. A wooden pin, peg, or spike used chiefly for fas- 
tening planking and ceiling to a framework. 


Trim. The finish materials in a building, such as moldings, 
applied around openings (window trim, door trim) or at the 
floor and ceiling of rooms (baseboard, cornice, and other 
moldings). 


Truss. An assembly of members, such as beams, bars, rods, 
and the like, so combined as to form a rigid framework. All 
members are interconnected to form triangles. 


Twist. A distortion caused by the turning or winding of the 
edges of a board so that the four comers of any face are no 
longer in the same plane. 


Tyloses. Masses of parenchyma cells appearing somewhat 
like froth in the pores of some hardwoods, notably the white 
oaks and black locust. Tyloses are formed by the extension 
of the cell wall of the living cells surrounding vessels of 
hardwood. 


Ultrasonics. (See Stress-Wave Timing.) 


van der Waal Forces. Physical forces of attraction between 
molecules, which include permanent dipole, induced dipole, 
hydrogen bond, and London dispersion forces. 


Vapor Retarder. A material with a high resistance to vapor 
movement, such as foil, plastic film, or specially coated 
paper, that is used in combination with insulation to control 
condensation. 


Veneer. A thin layer or sheet of wood. 


Rotary-Cut Veneer—Veneer cut in a lathe that rotates a 
log or bolt, chucked in the center, against a knife. 


Sawn Veneer—Veneer produced by sawing. 


Sliced Veneer—Veneer that is sliced off a log, bolt, or 
flitch with a knife. 


Vertical Grained. (See Grain.) 


Vessel Elements. Wood cells in hardwoods of compara- 
tively large diameter that have open ends and are set one 
above the other to form continuous tubes called vessels. The 
openings of the vessels on the surface of a piece of wood are 
usually referred to as pores. 


Virgin Growth. The growth of mature trees in the original 
forests. 


Viscoelasticity. The ability of a material to simultaneously 
exhibit viscous and elastic responses to deformation. 


Viscosity. The ratio of the shear stress existing between 
laminae of moving fluid and the rate of shear between these 
laminae. 


Wane. Bark or lack of wood from any cause on edge or cor- 
ner of a piece except for eased edges. 


Warp. Any variation from a true or plane surface. Warp 
includes bow, crook, cup, and twist, or any combination 
thereof. 


Water Repellent. A liquid that penetrates wood that mate- 
rially retards changes in moisture content and dimensions 
of the dried wood without adversely altering its desirable 
properties. 


Water-Repellent Preservative. A water repellent that con- 
tains a preservative that, after application to wood and dry- 
ing, accomplishes the dual purpose of imparting resistance 
to attack by fungi or insects and also retards changes in 
moisture content. 


Weathering. The mechanical or chemical disintegration and 
discoloration of the surface of wood caused by exposure 

to light, the action of dust and sand carried by winds, and 
the alternate shrinking and swelling of the surface fibers 
with the continual variation in moisture content brought by 
changes in the weather. Weathering does not include decay. 


Wet Strength. The strength of an adhesive joint determined 
immediately after removal from water in which it has been 
immersed under specified conditions of time, temperature, 
and pressure. 


Wet-Bulb Temperature. The temperature indicated by the 
wet-bulb thermometer of a psychrometer. 


Wettability. A condition of a surface that determines how 
fast a liquid will wet and spread on the surface or if it will 
be repelled and not spread on the surface. 


Wetting. The process in which a liquid spontaneously ad- 
heres to and spreads on a solid surface. 


White-Rot. (See Decay.) 


Wood-Based Composite Panel. A generic term for a ma- 
terial manufactured from wood veneer, strands, flakes, 
particles, or fibers or other lignocellulosic material and a 
synthetic resin or other binder. 


G-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Cellulosic Fiberboard—A generic term for a low-density 
panel made from lignocellulosic fibers characterized by 
an integral bond produced by interfelting of the fibers, to 
which other materials may have been added during manu- 
facture to improve certain properties, but which has not 
been consolidated under heat and pressure as a separate 
stage in manufacture; has a density of less than 496 kg 
nr} (31 Ib ft-) (specific gravity 0.50 ) but more than 160 
kg mr (10 lb ft) (specific gravity 0.16). 


Exterior Plywood—A general term for plywood bonded 
with a type of adhesive that by systematic tests and ser- 
vice records has proved highly resistant to weather; mi- 
croorganisms; cold, hot, and boiling water; steam; and dry 
heat. 


Fiberboard—A generic term inclusive of panel products 
of various densities manufactured of refined or partially 
refined wood (or other lignocellulosic) fibers. Bonding 
agents may be added. 


Flakeboard—A generic term indicating a manufactured 
panel product composed of flakes bonded with a synthetic 
resin. 


Hardboard—A generic term for a panel manufactured 
primarily from interfelted lignocellulosic fibers (usually 
wood), consolidated under heat and pressure in a hot press 
to a density of 496 kg m3 (31 lb ft) or greater. May be 
manufactured using either a dry-process or wet-process. 


Interior Plywood—A general term for plywood manu- 
factured for indoor use or in construction subjected to 
only temporary moisture. The adhesive used may be inte- 
rior, intermediate, or exterior. 


Medium-Density Fiberboard—A dry-process fiberboard 
manufactured from lignocellulosic fibers combined with 

a synthetic resin or other suitable binder. The panels are 
manufactured to a density of 496 kg m°3 (31 lb ft-3) (0.50 
specific gravity) to 880 kg m-3 (55 lb ft) (0.88 specific 
gravity) by the application of heat and pressure by a pro- 
cess in which the interfiber bond is substantially created 
by the added binder. 


Oriented Strandboard—A type of flakeboard prod- 
uct composed of strand-type flakes that are purpose- 
fully aligned in directions that make a panel stronger, 
stiffer, and with improved dimensional properties in the 
alignment directions than a panel with random flake 
orientation. 


Particleboard—A panel product manufactured from 
wood particles usually in three layers. For good surface 
characteristics, the outer layers have smaller particles and 
the interior uses coarser particles. The particles in the core 
may or may not be aligned. 


Plywood—A glued wood panel made up of relatively thin 
layers of veneer with the grain of adjacent layers at right 


Glossary 


angles or of veneer in combination with a core of lumber 
or of reconstituted wood. The usual constructions have an 
odd number of layers. 


Wood Failure. The rupturing of wood fibers in strength 
tests of bonded joints usually expressed as the percentage of 
the total area involved that shows such failure. (See Failure, 
Adherend.) 


Wood Flour. Wood reduced to finely divided particles, ap- 
proximately the same as those of cereal flours in size, ap- 
pearance, and texture, and passing a 40 to 100 mesh screen. 


Wood Substance. The solid material of which wood is 
composed. It usually refers to the extractive-free solid 
substance of which the cell walls are composed, but this is 
not always true. There is not a wide variation in chemical 
composition or specific gravity between the wood substance 
of various species. (The characteristic differences of species 
are largely due to differences in extractives and variations in 
relative amounts of cell walls and cell cavities.) 


Wood-Thermoplastic Composite. Manufactured com- 
posite materials consisting primarily of wood elements and 
thermoplastic. The wood element may either serve as a rein- 
forcement or filler in a continuous thermoplastic matrix, or 
the thermoplastic may act as a binder to the wood element. 


Wood Wool. Long, curly, slender strands of wood used 
as an aggregate component for some particleboards and 
cement-bonded composites. Sometimes referred to as 
excelsior. 


Workability. The degree of ease and smoothness of cut ob- 
tainable with hand or machine tools. 


Working Life. The period of time during which an adhe- 
sive, after mixing with catalyst, solvent, or other compound- 


ing ingredients, remains suitable for use. Also called pot life. 


Working Properties. The properties of an adhesive that 
affect or dictate the manner of application to the adherends 
to be bonded and the assembly of the joint before pressure 
application (such as viscosity, pot life, assembly time, set- 
ting time). 


Xylem. The portion of the tree trunk, branches, and roots 
that lies between the pith and the cambium (that is the 
wood). 


Yard Lumber. (See Lumber.) 


G-17 


Accelerated air-drying, 13-6 
Acid copper chromate (ACC): 
components, 15-3 
effectiveness and leaching, 15-3 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t 
Southern pine sapwood stakes retention 
and life span test results, 15-7t to 15-8t 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-20 
Adherends: 
bond strength properties, 10-21 
density and porosity, 10-6 
ease of bonding by species, 10-7t 
extractives on surface, effect on, 10-4 
knife- and abrasive-planed surfaces, 
10-2 to 10-3, 10-3fig 
mechanical testing of bonded 
assemblies, 10-20 to 10-21 
moisture content: 
and dimensional change, 10-6 to 10-7 
control, 10-14 to 10-15 
U.S. averages, 10-15, 10-15fig 
surface preparation, 10-15 
surface properties, 10-2 to 10-3 
veneer surfaces, 10-3 to 10-4 
wettability, 10-4 
wood and nonwood composites, 10-5 
Adhesives: 
affected by: 
physical properties, 10-5 to 10-8 
surface properties, 10-5 
wood density, 10-6 
wood moisture content, 10-6 
wood porosity, 10-8 
analytic chemical and mechanical testing 
of polymers, 10-20 to 10-21 
assembly and pressing, 10-16 to 10-17, 
10-17fig 
composition, 10-8 to 10-9 
consistency, effect of, 10-16 to 10-17, 
10-17fig 
definition, 10-1 
ease of bonding by species, 10-7t 
form and color of types, 10-11t to 10-13t 
health and safety, 10-14 
mechanical testing of bonded 
assemblies, 10-20 to 10-21 
post-cure conditioning, 10-17 
preparation and application, 10-11t to 
10-13t 
quality assurance programs, 10-22 
short- and long-term performance, 10-21 
to 10-22, 10-22fig 
selection, 10-10 to 10-14 
spreading, 10-15, 10-16fig 
strength and durability, 10-9 to 10-10, 
10-10t, 10-11t to 10-13t 
strength properties, 10-21 


uses, 10-1, 10-11t to 10-13t 
use on veneers, 10-3 to 10-4 
use on wood and nonwood composites, 
10-5 
use with chemically modified wood, 
10-4 
use with fire-retardant-treated woods, 
10-4 
use with preservative-treated wood, 10-4 
working life, 10-10, 10-14 
Adjustment of properties for design use, 
7-10 to 7-13 
Advantages of using wood for structures, 
2-2 
Afara. See Limba 
Afrormosia: 
characteristics, 2-19 
decay resistance, 2-19 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-19 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-19 
Air-drying advantages and limitations, 13-6 
Albarco: 
characteristics, 2-19 
locality of growth, 2-19 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-19 
workability, 2-19 
Alder, red: 
characteristics, 2-3 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
locality of growth, 2-3 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
shock resistance, 2-3 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
uses, 2-3 
Alkaline copper quat (ACQ): 
common types, 15-5 
composition of common types, 15-6t 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t 
uses, 15-5 
Alkyl ammonium compound: 
effectiveness, 15-12 
in ammoniacal copper quat, 15-5 
solubility, 15-9 
Almon. See Meranti 
Alpha paper, 19-12 
Amaranth. See Purpleheart 


INDEX 


American Lumber Standard Committee 
(ALSC): 
accepting design values for foreign 
species, 7-3, 7-4t 
design properties, 7-4 
stress grading, 7-2 to 7-3 
American Society of Testing and Materials 
(ASTM): 
calculating design properties, 7-8 to 7-9 
calculating strength ratios, 7-3 
calculating wood properties for visual 
stress grades, 7-3 
critical radiant flux of floorcovering 
systems using a radiant heat energy 
source (ASTM E 648), 18-5 
related test methods, 18-8 to 18-9 
cone calorimeter (ASTM E 1354), 18-6, 
18-7 
fire tests of roof covering (ASTM E 
108), 18-3 
fire-resistance test (ASTM E 119), 18-6 
to 18-7 
flame spread (ASTM E 84), 18-3 to 18- 
5, 18-4t, 18-6, 18-12 
flame spread index for solid sawn 
lumber, 18-4t 
NBS smoke chamber (ASTM E 662), 
18-6 
American Softwood Lumber Standard, 6-2, 
6-7, 6-8, 7-2 
American standard lumber sizes, 6-10, 
6-11t 
American Wood Preservers’ Association: 
fire-retardant-treated wood, 18-16 to 
18-17 
Ammonia for plasticizing wood, 19-2 
Ammoniacal copper citrate (CC): 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t 
solution percentages, 15-9 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-18 
Ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate (ACZA): 
composition, 15-3 
replacement for ACA, 15-3 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-18 
uses, 15-3 
use with Douglas-fir, 15-3 
Anani. See Manni 
Anaura. See Marishballi 
Andiroba: 
characteristics, 2-19 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
durability, 2-19 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-19 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 


nomenclature, 2-19, 2-43t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-19 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-19 
workability, 2-19 
Angelin (See also Sucupira): 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Angelique: 
characteristics, 2-19 to 2-20 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
machining properties, 2-20 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-20 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-20 
Animal adhesives: 
structural performance, 10-10t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Ants, carpenter, 14-13 
Annual growth rings. See Growth rings 
Apa. See Wallaba 
Apamate. See Roble 
Apitong. (See also Keruing): 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Apple: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
Ash: 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
for flooring, 6-4, 6-6 
Ash, black: 
characteristics, 2-3 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-3 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
species, 2-3 
specific gravity, 2-3 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-3 
Ash, blue: 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
Ash, green: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
Ash, Oregon: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
Ash, pumpkin: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Ash, white: 
characteristics, 2-3 to 2-4 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
locality of growth, 2-3 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
shock resistance, 2-3 
species, 2-3 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-4 
Aspen: 
characteristics, 2-4 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-4 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
shock resistance, 2-4 
species, 2-4 
uses, 2-4 
workability, 2-4 
Aspen, bigtooth: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-16t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Aspen, quaking: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Avodire: 
characteristics, 2-20 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-20 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
shock resistance, 2-20 
uses, 2-20 
workability, 2-20 
Axial load, deformation, 9-1, 9-leq 
Azobe: 
characteristics, 2-20 


decay resistance, 14-5t 

ease of bonding, 10-7t 

locality of growth, 2-20 

mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-20 
marine borers, 14-13 to 14-15 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 

workability, 2-20 

uses, 2-20 


Bacteria causing decay, 14-9 
Back priming, 16-25 
Bagtikan. See Seraya, white 
Balata: 
characteristics, 2-20 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-20 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-20 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-20 
workability, 2-20 
Balau: 
characteristics, 2-21 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-21 
species, 2-21 
uses, 2-21 
Baldcypress: 
characteristics, 2-11 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-11 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
pecky cypress, 2-11 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-11 
Balsa: 
characteristics, 2-21, 2-44t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
locality of growth, 2-21 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-21 
Banak: 
characteristics, 2-21 
decay resistance, 14-5t 


Index 


dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-21 
machining properties, 2-21 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
nomenclature, 2-21, 2-44t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-21 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-21 
Bark: 
growth, 3-2 
inner and outer, 3-2fig 
Basswood: 
characteristics, 2-4 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
charring rate data, 18-14t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-St 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flammability data, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-4 
machinability, 2-4 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
in wood—polymer composites, 19-11t 
thermal conductivity, American, 4-13t 
uses, 2-4 
workability, 2-4 
Basswood, American: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
Bastard sawn lumber, definition, 3-14 
Beams: 
bending deflection, 9-3 to 9-4, 9-2eq, 
9-2t, 9-4eq 
bending stress, 9-4, 9-Seq, 9-9 
combined bending and axial load, effect 
of, 9-3, 9-6 
compressive stress, 9-4 
deformation, 9-1 to 9-4 
end loading, effect of, 9-6 
lateral buckling, 9-9 to 9-10, 9-9eq, 9-9t 
modulus of rupture, 9-4, 9-4eq 
notches and holes, effect of, 9-2, 9-6 to 
9-7 
shear deflection, 9-2, 9-2eq, 9-2t 
shear stress, 9-4, 9-4eq 
size, effect on strength, 9-5, 9-5eq, 9-6eq 
size, effects on modulus of rupture, 9-5, 
9-6eq 
stability, 9-7 to 9-10 
tapered beams: 
bending stress, 9-5 to 9-6, 9-5eq 
deflections, 9-3, 9-3eq, 9-3fig 
glulam combinations, 11-17 to 11-18 
shear stresses, 9-4 to 9-6, 9-5fig 


tensile, stress, 9-4, 9-4eq 
time, effect of, 9-2, 9-7 
twist, 9-4, 9-4eq 
waterponding, effect of, 9-2, 9-3eq, 9-6, 
9-8, 9-8eq 
Beech: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
for flooring, 6-4, 6-6 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Beech, American: 
characteristics, 2-4 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-4 
machinability, 2-4 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shock resistance, 2-4 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-4 
Bees, carpenter, 14-13 
Beetles: 
ambrosia beetles, 14-9 to 14-10 
damage caused by, 14-8t 
bark beetles, 14-9 
old house borers, 14-10 
damage caused by, 14-8t 
powder-post beetles, 14-10 
damage caused by, 14-9fig, 14-8t 
Bending: 
creep, 5-39 
strength and temperature, 5-37t 
Bending of glulam, 11-17 
Bending properties, affected by 
temperature, 5-37, 5-37t 
Bending stiffness: 
bending strength, stress grading, 7-6 
Bending stress: 
derivations for machine-graded lumber, 
7-8 to 7-10, 7-12fig 
Bending of wood: 
apparatus, 19-4 
chemicals used, 19-2 
fixing the bend, 19-4 
moisture content of stock, 19-3 to 19-4 
principles of plasticizing and bending, 
19-1 
selection of stock, 19-3 
solid members, 19-3, 19-3fig 
steaming, 19-1 
Benge: 
characteristics, 2-21 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 


nomenclature, 2-21 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-22 
workability, 2-21 
Bent wood members: 
characteristics, 19-4 
solid wood members, species used, 19-3 
uses, 19-2 
Birch: 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
for casing and base, 6-17 
for flooring, 6-4, 6-6 
heat release data, 18-12fig 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Birch, gray, shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Birch, paper: 
characteristics, 2-4 to 2-5 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-5 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
uses, 2-5 
Birch, river: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Birch, sweet: 
characteristics, 2-5 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-5 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-5 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-5 
Birch, yellow: 
characteristics, 2-5 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
laminated: 
strength properties, 19-7t to 19-8t 
thermal expansion coefficients, 19-8t 
locality of growth, 2-5 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
shock resistance, 2-5 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
uses, 2-5 


Bird peck: 
description, 5-33 
effect on strength, 5-33 
species involved, 5-33 
Black locust. See Locust, black 
Blood adhesive, working and strength 
properties, and uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Blue stain, description, 14-2 
Boats, wood: 
control of decay in, 14-9 
control of marine borers, 14-14 to 14-15 
use of varnish on, 16-25 
Bolts: 
bearing stress of wood under: 
bolt diameter, effect perpendicular to 
grain, 8-15fig 
intermediate angle to grain loading, 
8-14, 8-13fig 
L/D ratios, 8-14 
parallel to grain loading, 8-14, 8-14fig 
perpendicular to grain loading, 8-14, 
8-14 fig 
bearing stress with steel side plates, 8-15 
bolt holes, effect on, 8-16 to 8-17, 
8-16fig 
bolt quality, effect on joint strength, 
8-15, 8-14 fig, 8-15fig 
drift, 8-10 
member thickness, effect of, 8-15, 
8-15fig 
multiple bolt joints, 8-15 to 8-16 
pre-1991 allowable loads: 
parallel to grain, 8-17 to 8-18, 8-17t 
perpendicular to grain, 8-17, 8-18t, 
8-19eq 
post-1991 yield model, 8-17, 8-19eq, 
8-19t 
spacing, edge and end distance, 8-16 
Bondability: 
of metals and plastics to wood, 10-5 
of wood species, 10-6, 10-7t 
Bonded joints: 
basic stress modes, 10-20 to 10-21 
construction joints, 10-19 to 10-20, 10- 
19fig 
edge-grain joints, 10-18, 10-18fig 
end-grain joints, 10-18, 10-18fig 
end-to-edge grain joints, 10-18, 10-18fig 
mechanical testing of, 10-19 to 10-21 
Bonding: 
adhesive selection, 10-10 to 10-15 
assembly and pressing, 10-16 to 10-17, 
10-17fig 
effect of: 
moisture content and dimensional 
change, 10-14 to 10-15 
wood density, 10-5 to 10-6 
wood porosity, 10-6 
elements of, 10-1 to 10-2 
moisture content control, 10-14 to 10-16 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


quality assurance programs, 10-22 
short- and long-term performance of 
adhesives, 10-21 to 10-22, 10-22fig 
strength and durability of adhesives, 
10-9 to 10-10, 10-10t, 10-18 
strength properties of adhesives, 10-21 
surface preparation, 10-15 
with veneers, 10-3 to 10-4 
wettability of wood, 10-2, 10-4fig 
wood and nonwood composites, 10-5 
Boxelder, nomenclature, 6-5t 
Box nails, 8-2, 8-2t 
Bridges, 17-8 to 17-9, 17-9fig 
Brown rot, 14-4 
Bubinga (See also Benge): 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Buckeye: 
characteristics, 2-5 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-5 
machinability, 2-5 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
shock resistance, 2-5 
species, 2-5 
uses, 2-5 
yellow, shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Buckling: 
interaction of buckling modes, 9-9 to 
9-10, 9-9eq, 9-10eq 
of beams, 9-9 to 9-10, 9-9eq, 9-9t, 
9-10fig 
of columns, 9-7 to 9-9, 9-7eq, 9-8fig 
of deck beams, 9-9, 9-10fig 
of roof beams, 9-9 
Building codes: 
classifications of construction, 18-2 
fire safety: 


containment to compartment of origin, 


18-6 to 18-8 


fire growth within compartments, 18-3 


to 18-6 
types of construction, 18-2 
organizations producing, 18-2 
Buildings, control of decay in, 14-4, 14-7 
Built-up columns, 9-8 
Bulletwood (See also Balata): 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Butternut: 
characteristics, 2-5 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-5 
machinability, 2-5 


nomenclature, 6-5t 
shock resistance, 2-5 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
uses, 2-5 

Buttonwood. See Sycamore 


Cambium, 3-2fig, 3-4, 3-6fig 
Carapa. See Andiroba 
Carbon impact: 
construction performance indices, 1-2t 
contained, 1-3 
deforestation, 1-2 
emissions, net carbon, 1-3, 1-4t 
photosynthesis, 1-2 
process, 1-2 
sequestration, 1-2 
sustainability, defined, 1-3 
Carbon monoxide, 18-6 
Carpenter ants: 
damage caused by, 14-11fig, 14-8t 
discussed, 14-13 
Carpenter bees: 
damage caused by, 14-8t 
discussed, 14-13 
Casing and base, availability, 6-17 
Casein adhesive: 
structural performance, 10-10t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Catalpa: 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
Catalysts and adhesion, 10-10 
Cativo: 
characteristics, 2-22 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-22 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-22 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-22 
Cedar: 
availability at retail lumber yards, 6-16 
for finish boards, 6-16 
Cedar, Atlantic-white: 
characteristics, 2-18 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-18 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shock resistance, 2-18 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-18 
Cedar, eastern red: 
characteristics, 2-16 


Index 


decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
heat release data, 18-12fig 
locality of growth, 2-16 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shock resistance, 2-16 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-16 

Cedar, incense: 
characteristics, 2-12 to 2-13 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-St 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-12 
moisture content, 4-2t 
pecky, 2-13 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shock resistance, 2-13 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
uses, 2-13 

Cedar, northern white: 
characteristics, 2-18 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-St 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
for shingles, 6-17 
locality of growth, 2-18 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-18 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-18 

Cedar, Port-Orford: 
characteristics, 2-16 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-16 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shock resistance, 2-16 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-16 

Cedar, western red: 
characteristics, 2-16 


characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
charring rate data, 18-14t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
for shingles and shakes, 6-17 
for siding, 6-16 
locality of growth, 2-16 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-16 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-12t, 5-7t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
used for poles, 6-19 
uses, 2-16 
Cedar, yellow: 
characteristics, 2-18 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-18 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
shock resistance, 2-18 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-18 
Cedro. See Spanish-cedar 
Cedro macho. See Andiroba 
Cedro-Rana. See Tornillo 
Ceiba: 
characteristics, 2-22 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-22 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-22 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-22 
workability, 2-22 
Cells of wood: 
description, 3-7, 3-9 to 3-12 
fibers, 3-11 
functions of various types, 3-9 to 3-12 
parenchyma, 3-9, 3-11 


rays, 3-9, 3-11 
tracheids, 3-9 
vessels, 3-10 
Cellulose, discussion, 3-7 
Cellulose insulation, product safety 
standard, 18-2 to 18-3 
Cement-bonded composites, 11-23 to 11- 
25, 11-24fig 
magnesia-cement-bonded, 11-23 
mechanical properties, 12-9, 12-10t 
Portland-cement-bonded, 11-24 
problems, 11-24 
treatment, 11-24 
Cement-coated nails, 8-2fig, 8-3 
Ceramic-bonded composites, 11-25 
Chalking, 16-28 
Checks: 
development due to weathering, 16-6, 
16-11, 16-11 fig 
during drying, 13-7, 13-9 to 13-10, 13- 
12fig 
in decking boards, 16-6 
in lumber stress grading, 7-4 
in glued-laminated timbers, 11-19 
in veneer adhesion, 10-4 
Chemical discolorations during drying, 
13-10, 13-13fig 
Chemicals, effect on wood: 
discussion, 5-41 
strength and mechanical properties, 5-41 
to 5-42 
Cherry: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Cherry, black: 
characteristics, 2-5 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
locality of growth, 2-5 
machinability, 2-5 
moisture content, 4-2t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-5 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-1, 2-5 
Cherry, pin, penetration, 15-16t 
Chestnut: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Chestnut, American: 
availability, 2-5 to 2-6 
characteristics, 2-6 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-5 


moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-6 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-6 
workability, 2-6 
Chewstick. See Manni 
Chlorothalonil/chlorpyrifos: 
component rations, 15-12 
effectiveness, 15-12 
Chlorpyrifos: 
effectiveness, 15-12 
in combination, 15-12 
Chromated copper arsenate (CCA): 
common types, 15-4 
component substitutions, 15-4 
composition of common types, 15-5t 
effectiveness of common types, 15-4 
effect on adhesion, 10-4 
finishing wood treated with, 16-24 
resistance to marine borers, 15-5 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-5t 
Southern pine sapwood stakes retention 
and life span test results, 15-7t to 15-8t 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-18 
use with Douglas-fir, 15-3 
Coal-tar creosote. See Creosote 
Cocobolo, shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Coefficient of friction, 4-17 
Coefficient of thermal expansion, 4-14 
Coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
Collapse during drying, 13-10, 13-12fig 
Columns: 
built-up and spaced columns, 9-8 
flanged columns, 9-8 
long columns, compressive stress, 9-7, 
9-7eq 
short columns, compressive stress, 9-7 to 
9-8, 9-8eq 
Composite products: 
classification, 11-2t 
conventional wood-based composite 
panels, 11-2 to 11-17 
additives, 11-5 
adhesives, 11-3 to 11-5 
classification, 11-2t 
elements, 11-2, 11-6fig 
fiberboard, 11-12 to 11-15 
oriented strandboard, 11-7 to 11-10 
particleboard, 11-10 to 11-12 
performance and standards, 11-1, 
11-3t 
plywood, 11-5 to 11-7 
specialty composites, 11-15 
glued-laminated timber (glulam), 11-17 
to 11-20 
mechanical properties, 12-2t 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


specific gravity, 12-2t 
standards, 11-3t 
structural composite lumber, 11-20 to 
11-22 
description, 11-20 
laminated strand lumber, 11-21 
laminated veneer lumber, 11-21 
oriented strand lumber, 11-21 
parallel strand lumber, 11-21 
test standards, 12-5 to 12-7 
wood elements, 11-4fig 
wood-nonwood composites, 11-22 to 
11-27 
description, 11-22 
inorganic-bonded composites, 11-22 
to 11-25 
wood-thermoplastic composites, 11- 
25 to 11-27 
Compreg: 
advantages, 19-5 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
molding, 19-5, 19-9 
plasticizers, 19-5 
properties, 19-5, 19-6t 
thermal expansion coefficients, 19-8t 
uses, 19-5 to 19-9 
Compressed wood, untreated (staypak) 
appearance, 19-10 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
purpose, 19-7t to 19-6t 
strength properties, 19-7t to 19-8t 
uses, 19-10 
Compression failures: 
causes, 5-33 
description, 5-33, 5-33fig 
effect on strength, 5-33 
Compression wood: 
definition, 5-31 
density increase, 5-31 
in juvenile wood, 5-32 
shrinkage, 4-5, 5-32 
Compression strength parallel to grain: 
affected by temperature, 5-36t 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
defined, 5-3 
Compressive stress of columns, 9-7 to 9-9, 
9-7eq 
Compression stress perpendicular to grain: 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
defined, 5-3 
Condensation in crawl spaces, 14-7 
Conductance meters and moisture content, 
13-2 to 13-3 
Conductivity, thermal: 
definition, 4-10 
discussion, 4-10 to 4-15 
Cone calorimeter, 18-12 
Connector joints: 
cross bolts, 8-24 
design loads, 8-20, 8-20fig, 8-21fig 


end distance and spacing, 8-23 
multiple connectors, 8-23 to 8-24, 
8-24 fig 
net section stress, 8-23 
parallel to grain loading, 8-19, 8-20fig 
perpendicular to grain loading, 8-19 to 
8-20, 8-20fig 
shear plate connector, 8-19fig 
split-ring connector, 8-19fig 
strength components, 8-18 to 8-19 
strength ratios, 8-25t 
working loads: 
exposure and moisture condition, 
effect of, 8-21 
grade and quality of lumber, 8-22 
loads at angle with grain, 8-22, 8-7fig, 
8-13eq, 
species grouping, 8-21t, 8-22t 
steel side plates, effect of, 8-21 
thickness of member, effect of, 8-22, 
8-22t, 8-23fig 
width of member, effect of, 8-23 
Consortium for Research on Renewable 
Industrial Materials (CORRIM): 
calculations, 1-2 
standards, 1-2 
Construction, design factors affecting 
dimensional change, 13-18 
Construction logs: 
availability, 6-20 
form, 6-21, 6-21 fig 
standards and specifications, 6-18t 
strength properties, 7-14 
uses, 6-20 
Copper azole - Type A (CBA-Type A): 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t 
solution percentages, 15-6 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-18 
Copper bis(dimethyldithiocarbamate) 
(CDDC): 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t, 15-5t 
solution percentages, 15-6 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-18 
uses, 15-6 
Copper HDO (CXA), 15-6 
Copper naphthenate: 
color transfer and changes, 15-6 
effectiveness, 15-6 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t 
solution values, 15-6 
Southern pine sapwood stakes retention 
and life span test results, 15-7t to 15-8t 
treatment for cutting pretreated wood, 
15-25 
Copper naphthenate (waterborne), 15-6 
Cotton linter paper, 19-12 


Index 


Cottonwood: 
characteristics, 2-6 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-St 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-6 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-6 
species, 2-6 
uses, 2-6 
workability, 2-6 
Cottonwood, balsam poplar: 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
Cottonwood, black: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Cottonwood, eastern: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Courbaril: 
characteristics, 2-22 to 2-23 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-22 
machinability, 2-23 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-23 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-23 
Covalent chemical bonds, 10-1 to 10-2 
Crabwood. See Andiroba 
Crack propagation systems, 5-17 
Creep: 
defined, 5-39 
discussed, 5-39 
influence of stress on, 5-39fig 
Creosote, coal-tar: 
advantages, 15-10 
appearance, 15-10 
composition variability, 15-10 
EPA-approved customer 
information sheet, 15-2 
effect on mechanical properties, 15-25 to 
15-26 
for non-pressure treatments, 15-12 
handling precautions, 15-2 


in pressure treatment process, 15-18 
odor and vapors, 15-2 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t, 15-St 
standards, 15-2 to 15-3 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-25 
treatment for cutting pretreated wood, 
15-25 
use site precautions, 15-2 
volatility, 15-10 
Creosote-coal-tar solutions: 
properties, 15-10 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-St 
standards by volume, 15-10 
temperature for pressure treating, 5-42 
Creosote-petroleum oil solutions: 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-St 
Cristobal. See Macawood 
Critical radiant flux test, 18-5 
Cross grain: 
effect on mechanical properties, 5-27 to 
5-30 
types, 5-27 to 5-30 
Cuangare (See also Banak): 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Cucumber, nomenclature, 6-5t 
Cypress: 
for siding, 6-16 
Cypress, Arizona, decay resistance, 14-5t 
Cypress, Mexican 
characteristics, 2-38 to 2-39 
locality of growth, 2-38 
machinability, 2-38 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
uses, 2-39 


Dead trees, strength, 5-34 
Decay: 
and exposure to weather, 16-10, 16-13 
appearance of fungi, 14-4 
brown rot, 14-4 
conditions favoring, 14-4 
control in: 
boats, wood, 14-7 
buildings, 14-7 
logs, poles, piling, or ties, 14-6 
lumber, 14-6 
plywood, 14-7, 14-9 
cycle, 14-3fig 
dead trees, 5-34 
dry rot, 14-4 
dry rot fungi, 14-4 
effect on mechanical properties, 5-44 
effect on strength, 5-43 to 5-44, 14-4 to 
14-5, 14-6 
fungal stain and molds, 14-4 


heartwood, susceptibility to, 14-3 to 
14-4 
incipient, 14-4 
sapwood, susceptibility to, 14-3 
soft rot, 14-4 
white rot, 14-4 
Decay hazard climate index, 14-2fig 
Decay resistance: 
extractives, 3-3 
heartwood, 3-3, 4-2t, 14-3 to 14-4 
in visual stress grading, 7-5 
Decks: 
discussed, 17-4 
finishes, suitability and expected service 
life, 16-17t 
finishing, 16-24 
supports, 9-9, 9-10fig 
use of cleaners, 16-34 to 16-35 
Deflections of beams: 
effect of time, creep, 9-2 
straight beams, 9-1 to 9-2, 9-2t, 9-leq 
tapered beams, 9-2, 9-2eq, 9-3fig 
Deformation equations: 
axial load, 9-1, 9-leq 
bending: 
effect of notches and holes, 9-2 
effect of time, creep deflection, 9-3 
straight beam deflection, 9-1 to 9-2, 
9-leq, 9-2t 
tapered beam deflection, 9-2, 9-2eq, 
9-3fig 
water ponding, 9-2, 9-3eq 
combined bending and axial load: 
concentric load, 9-3 to 9-4, 9-4eq 
eccentric load, 9-7, 9-7eq 
torsion, 9-7, 9-7eq, 9-7fig 
Deformed shank nails, strength of, 8-8 
Degame: 
characteristics, 2-23 
locality of growth, 2-23 
machinability, 2-23 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-23 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
strength, 2-23 
uses, 2-23 
Delamination and adhesive failure, 10-21 
Density: 
as function of specific gravity and 
moisture content, 4-7 to 4-10, 4-11t, 
4-12t 
definition, 3-12 
effect on adhesive bonding, 10-5 to 10-6 
effect on withdrawal resistance of nails, 
8-2 to 8-3 
in sorting machine-graded lumber, 7-8 
in visual stress grading, 7-5 
variation, 4-7 
Design factors affecting dimensional 
change in structures: 
flooring, 13-18 


framing lumber in house construction, 
13-17 
heavy timber construction, 13-18 
interior finish, 13-18 
Design properties: 
and stress grading, 7-3 
procedures for deriving, 7-5 to 7-7 
Design values: 
for foreign species, approval 
process, 7-4t 
Determa: 
characteristics, 2-23 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-23 
machinability, 2-23 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-23 
uses, 2-23 
Diagonal grain, 5-28 to 5-31 
Dielectric constant, definition, 4-15, 4-16 
Dielectric meters and moisture content, 
13-2 to 13-3 
Dielectric power factor, 4-16, 4-17 
Dimensional change and wood paintability, 
16-2, 16-3 
Dimensional changes in wood: 
affected by design factors, 13-17 
calculation based on green dimensions, 
13-17, 13-17eq 
care during construction, 13-18 to 13-19 
estimation using coefficients, 13-15 to 
13-17, 13-15eq, 13-16t, 13-17t 
Discoloration: 
by mildew, 16-12, 16-28, 16-28fig 
by mold and fungal stains, 14-2 
by nonmicrobial or chemical stains, 14-2 
from water-soluble extractives, 16-28 to 
16-30 
of paint due to extractives, 16-25, 16-29 
to 16-31 
use of wood cleaners, 16-34 to 16-36 
Dogwood, nomenclature, 6-St 
Doors, fire resistance in frame construction, 
18-3 to 18-6 
Douglas-fir: 
availability at retail yards, 6-16 
characteristics, 2-11 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
charring rate equation, 18-13 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
for flooring, 6-16 
for siding, 6-16 
fracture toughness, 5-28t 
kiln drying schedule, 13-11t 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


locality of growth, 2-11 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
preservative pressure and temperature, 
15-18, 15-20 
preservative treatment to prevent marine 
borer attack on piles, 15-St 
preservatives used, 15-10 to 15-12 
shrinkage, 4-5, 4-7fig 
used for poles, 6-19 
uses, 2-11 
Douglas-fir, coast: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
Douglas-fir, interior north 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
Douglas-fir, interior west 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
Douglas-fir, interior south 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
Draftstops, 18-6 
Dried wood, moisture control during transit 
and storage, 13-14 to 13-15, 13-15t 
Drift bolts, 7-10 
Dry kilns, 13-6 to 13-8, 13-8fig 
Drying of wood: 
accelerated air drying and predrying, 
13-6 
advantages, 13-5 
affect of properties, 13-5 
air drying, 13-6 
drying mechanism, 13-6 to 13-7, 13-6fig 
drying defects: 
discoloration, 13-10, 13-13fig, 
13-14 fig 
fracture or distortion, 13-10, 13-12fig 
warp, 13-10, 13-13fig 
drying schedules, 13-8 to 13-9, 13-11t 
drying stresses, 13-7, 13-7fig 
kiln drying, 13-6 
hardwood lumber targets, 13-5 
softwood lumber targets, 13-5 


Duration of load: 
adjustment of design properties, 7-10 to 
7-13, 7-12t, 7-13fig 
defined, 5-15, 5-39 
effect on mechanical properties, 5-39 to 
5-40 
relationship to failure, 5-40fig 

Dutch elm disease, 2-6 


Earlywood: 
effect on paintability, 16-2, 16-3fig, 16- 
Afig, 16-3 to 16-4 
description, 3-4 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
Ebony, shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Edge-grained lumber: 
preferred for painting, 16-8, 16-6fig 
weathering and check development, 
16-11 
Ehie (See also Benge): 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
Ekki. See Azobe 
Ekop: 
characteristics, 2-23 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-23 
machinability, 2-23 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-23 
EL2, 15-8 
Elastic properties of clear wood: 
discussion, 5-2 
values of: 
modulus of elasticity ratios, 5-2t 
modulus of rigidity ratios, 5-3t 
Poisson’s ratio, 5-2 
Elastomeric adhesives: 
in light-frame construction, 10-19, 
10-19fig 
performance over time, 10-21 to 10-22, 
10-22fig 
structural performance, 10-10t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Electrical properties of wood: 
conductivity, 4-15 to 4-17 
dielectric constant, 4-15, 4-16 
power factor, 4-16, 4-17 
resistance and moisture content, 4-1 6fig 
Elm: 
characteristics, 2-6 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
disease, 2-6 
locality of growth, 2-6 
moisture content, 4-2t 
species, 2-6 
uses, 2-6 


Index 


Elm, American: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Elm, cedar: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
Elm, rock: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Elm, slippery: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Elm, soft: 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Elm, winged: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Encased knots, definition, 5-27 
Encino. See Oak 
End joints in glued laminated timber, 11-19 
Engineered trusses and light-frame 
construction, 17-4 
Environmental benefits of wood: 
discussion, 1-1 
wood industry fuel sources, 1-2t 
Epoxy: 
performance over time, 10-21 to 10-22 
structural performance, 10-10t 
use with wood and nonwood composites, 
10-5 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Erosion: 
of earlywood and latewood planed 
surfaces, 16-12t 
of finishes, 16-13 
of wood, discussed, 16-11 
rates for hardwood and softwoods, 
16-12t 
Equilibrium moisture content: 
definition, 4-3, 16-6 
relative humidity as related to, 4-4t 
values for U.S. cities, 13-3, 13-4t 


Extractives: 
and mill glaze, 16-26 to 16-27 
discoloration, water-soluble, 16-25, 
16-29 
discussion, 3-3, 5-34 
effect on painting, 16-7, 16-12 to 16-13, 
16-29 
effect on strength, 5-34 
heartwood, 3-3 
species involved, 5-34 


Factory-finished wood products, 16-25 
Factory lumber (See also Hardwood 
lumber): 
grades, 6-2 
standard dimensions, 6-3 
Fastener head embedment, 8-26, 8-27fig 
Fasteners: 
and iron stain, 16-30 
corrosion and fire-retardant treated 
wood, 18-15 
fire resistance in frame construction, 
18-7 to 18-8 
multiple-fastener joints, 8-24 to 8-25 
Fatigue: 
defined, 5-15, 5-40 
discussed, 5-40 to 5-41 
summary of fatigue studies, 5-40t 
Fences, finishing, 16-13, 16-24 
Fiberboard: 
attrition milling or refining, 11-12 
cellulosic fiberboard, 11-14 
grade stamp, 11-15fig 
manufacture, 11-14 
products, 11-14 
sizing agents, 11-14 
standards, 11-3t 
classification, 11-1, 11-2t, 11-5fig 
fibers used, 11-12 
finishing techniques, 11-14 to 11-15 
hardboard: 
dry-process, 11-13 
grade stamp, 11-15fig 
heat treatment, 11-13 
humidification, 11-13 
manufacture, 11-13 
mechanical properties, 12-6t 
specific gravity, 12-6t 
standards, 11-3t 
tempering, 11-13 
wet-process, 11-13 
medium-density fiberboard (MDF): 
density, 12-6t 
grade stamp, 11-14fig 
mechanical properties, 12-6t 
resins used, 11-13 
standards, 11-3t 
uses, 11-13 
with veneer overlay, 11-15, 11-16fig 


Fiber orientation, related to slope of grain, 
5-28 to 5-31, 5-30fig 
Fibers: 
description, 3-11 
length, 3-11 
shape, 3-11 
Fiber saturation point: 
average, 4-2 
definition, 4-2 
Finger joints, in laminated members, 11-19 
Finger-jointed lumber: 
defined, 16-9 
finishing, 16-10, 16-32 
Finish board, availability, 6-16 
Finish failure: 
chalking, 16-28 
cross-grain cracking, 16-26 
discoloration from water-soluble 
extractives, 16-29, 16-29fig 
intercoat peeling, 16-27, 16-27fig 
mill glaze, 16-26 to 16-27 
moisture blisters, 16-26, 16-26fig 
stain: 
blue, 16-30, 16-30fig 
brown stain over knots, 16-25, 16-31 
iron, 16-25, 16-30 
rust, 16-30 
Finishes: 
application and maintenance, 16-14t, 
16-17t, 16-19t 
application of: 
paint, 16-22 
semitransparent penetrating stain, 
16-20 
caution in use, 16-20, 16-19t 
solid-color stain, 16-22 
water-repellant preservative, 16-13 
drying oils, 16-21 
function, 16-21 
factors affecting performance: 
extractives, 16-7, 16-29 to 16-30 
knots, 16-31 
texture of wood, 16-8 
weathering: 
as a natural finish, 16-16 
effect on paint adhesion, 16-12 
effect on wood, 16-11 
effect on wood finish, 16-13 
wood moisture content, 16-6 to 16-7 
back-priming, 16-25 
wood product characteristics: 
finger-jointed lumber, 16-9, 16-32 
lumber, 16-8 to 16-9 
plywood, 16-9 
reconstituted wood products: 
fiberboard, 16-8 to 16-10 
particleboard, 16-10 
treated wood: 
fire-retardant treated, 16-11 
preservative treated, 16-10 


wood properties, 16-2 to 16-3, 
16-32 
moisture-excluding effectiveness of, 
16-6 to 16-8, 16-13 
on ponderosa pine, 16-14t 
nondrying oils, 16-34 
on: 
butcher blocks and cutting boards, 
16-34 
floors, 16-33 to 16-34 
interior wood, 16-32 
items used for food, 16-34 
porches, decks, fences, 16-24 
treated wood, 16-24 
wood exposed to marine 


environments, 16-24 to 16-25 


paintability values, 16-7, 16-12 
paraffin wax, 16-33 to 16-34 
refinishing, 16-22 to 16-23 
suitability and expected service life for 
exterior wood surfaces, 16-17t 
types: 
film-forming: 
effect on water and vapor 
absorption, 16-13 
fire-retardant coatings, 16-11, 16-25 
paint, 16-7, 16-12, 16-22 
solid-color stain, 16-22 
varnish: 
clear, 16-21 
pigmented, 16-21 
opaque, 16-32 
penetrating, 16-17 to 16-18 
lightly colored, 16-16 to 16-17 
semitransparent stains, 16-19 to 
16-20 
transparent clear, 16-17 
oils, 16-21 
stains, 16-16 to 16-24 
surface coats, 16-33 
transparent, 16-33 
use of fillers, 16-33 
use of sealers, 16-33 
VOC regulation compliance, 16-15 to 
16-16 
See also Paint and Water-repellant 
preservatives 
Fire performance characteristics of wood: 
charring: 
differences in wood species, 18-13 to 
18-15 
discussed, 18-13 to 18-15 
equations for charring rates, 18-13 to 
18-15 
moisture content, 18-10 
flame spread: 
and heat release rate, 18-11 
configurations, 18-9 
factors influencing, 18-11 


I-10 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


flammability data for wood species, 
18-14t 
heat release rate: 
discussed, 18-11 to 18-13 
measuring, 18-11 
ignition: 
piloted, 18-9 
unpiloted, 18-10 
smoke: 
approaches for dealing with, 18-11 
carbon monoxide, 18-6 
defined, 18-6 
release rate, 18-8 
tests for determining yield, 18-6 to 
18-8 
toxicity, 18-6 
smouldering, 18-6 to 18-7 
stages of degradation, 18-8 
Fire resistance: 
calculating, 18-13 
defined, 18-13 
failure criteria, 18-14 
in heavy timber construction, 18-7 
in light-frame construction, 18-7 
in glued laminated members, 18-2 
ratings, 18-2 
Fire-retardant coatings, 16-11, 16-25, 
18-17 
Fire-retardant-treated wood: 
and hygroscopicity, 18-15 
and mechanical properties, 18-17 
discussed, 18-15 
effect on adhesion, 10-4 
fastener corrosion, 18-17 
heat release rates, 18-12 to 18-13 
in high temperature applications, 18-11 
paintability, 16-22 
performance requirements, 18-11 
uses, 18-11 
Fire-retardant treatments: 
application methods, 18-15 
chemical penetration, 18-16 
inorganic salts, 18-15 
Fire safety design: 
cellulosic insulation, 18-3 
code organizations, 18-2 
code requirements, 18-1 
components, 18-1 
containment to compartment of origin: 
firestops and draftstops, 18-6 
fire resistance, 18-6 
of heavy timber construction, 18-2 
in light-frame construction, 18-7 
of glued-laminated members, 18-2, 
18-7 
fire safety engineering, 18-7 
flame spread index, 18-3 to 18-5 
flashover, 18-5 
flooring, 18-5 
roof covering materials, 18-5 


types of construction: 
heavy timber, 18-2 
light frame, 18-7 
ordinary, 18-2 
Fire tests: 
critical radiant flux, 18-5 
flame spread index: 
discussed, 18-3 
values for solid lumber, 18-4t 
roof coverings, 18-5 
room/corner test, 18-5 
tunnel test, 18-3 
wood ignition, 18-9 
Firestops, 18-6 
Fir, balsam: 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
Fir, California red: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
Fir, grand: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
Fir, noble: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
Fir, Pacific silver: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
Fir, subalpine: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 


Index 


elastic ratio, 5-2t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
Poisson’s ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Firs, true (Eastern species): 
characteristics, 2-11 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-11 
shock resistance, 2-11 
strength properties, 2-11 
uses, 2-11 
Firs, true (Western species): 
decay resistance, 14-St 
locality of growth, 2-12 
species, 2-12 
uses, 2-12 
Fir, white: 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
Flame-retardant composites, 11-15 
Flame spread index (FSI): 
classes for, 18-2 
discussed, 18-3 
values for solid lumber, 18-4t 
wood usage, 18-4 
Flat-sawn lumber: 
and mill glaze, 16-26 to 16-27 
disadvantages for finishing, 16-1, 16-25 
Flashover, discussed, 18-5 
Flooring: 
care during construction, 13-19 
design factors affecting dimensional 
change, 13-17 
recommended moisture content, 13-5t 
retail yard availability, 6-16, 6-17 
Forest certification programs: 
discussion, 1-3 to 1-4 
systems used, 1-4 
American Tree Farm System (ATFS): 
standards, 1-4 
program location, 1-4 


Canadian Standards Association (CSA): 


standards, 1-5 
program location, 1-5 
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC): 
standards, 1-4 
program location, 1-4 
Programme for the Endorsement of 
Forest Certification (PEFC) Schemes: 
standards, 1-5 
program location, 1-5 


Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI): 
standards, 1-4 
program location, 1-4 

Formaldehyde adhesives: 

performance over time, 10-21 to 10-22, 

10-22fig 

safety concerns, 10-14 

structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 

use with composite products, 11-3 to 

11-4 
Formosan termite, 14-11 
Foundations for light-frame buildings, 17-2 
Fracture toughness, defined, 5-15 
Friction, coefficient of, 4-17 
Fungi: 

appearance of, 14-4 

conditions favorable to growth, 14-1 

definition, 14-1 

discoloration caused by, 14-1 to 14-2 

effect on wood, 14-2 

prevention of damage from, 14-6 
Fungus damage: 

causes, 14-1 to 14-2 

stains, 14-2 


Glued-laminated timber (Glulam): 
advantages, 11-17 
architectural effects, 11-7 
combinations: 
axial members, 11-18 
bending members, 11-18 to 11-19 
curved members, 11-18 
tapered straight members, 11-18 
cross section variation, 11-17 
finishes, suitability and expected service 
life, 15-15t 
fire resistance, 17-5 
grade variation, 11-17 
manufacture: 
end jointing, 11-19 
face bonding, 11-19 to 11-20 
finishing and fabrication, 11-20 
lumber drying and grading, 11-19 
preservative treatment, 11-20 
mechanical properties, 12-7t 
preservative retention levels, 14-5t to 
14-6t 
seasoning advantages, 11-17 
size capabilities, 11-17 
standards 11-18 to 11-19, 11-3t 
Glulam. See Glued-laminated timber 
(Glulam) 
Glulam beam construction, 16-8 
Glulam timber bridge, 16-10, 16-10fig 
Gluing properties of different wood, 
classification of species, 9-8t 
Gmelina, shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Gola. See Ekop 
Goncalo alves: 
characteristics, 2-24 


decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-24 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to fungus attack, 2-24 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
species, 2-24, 2-43t 
strength, 2-24 
uses, 2-24 
Grades and lumber, purchasing 
consideration, 6-17 to 6-18 
Grading hardwood lumber, 6-2 to 6-4 
Grading, machine, 7-7 to 7-11 
Grading softwood lumber, 6-7 to 6-10 
Grading, visual, 7-3 to 7-7 
Grain and texture of wood: 
and finish performance, 16-6fig 
and paintability, 16-7 to 16-8 
discussion, 3-13 to 3-15 
Green building: 
bioenergy, 1-2 
biomass, 1-2 
carbon neutral, 1-2 
defined, 1-1 
embodied energy, 1-1 
fossil fuels, 1-2 
production uses, 1-1 to 1-2 
wood products, 1-2 
Greenheart: 
characteristics, 2-24 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-24 
machinability, 2-24 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-24 
marine borers, 14-13 to 14-15 
uses, 2-24 
Green wood: 
and clinched nails, 8-5 
bending properties, 19-3 
creep and relaxation under load, 5-39 
definition, 4-1 
relationship of mechanical properties to 
specific gravity, 5-29t 
treatment with polyethylene glycol 
(PEG), 19-10 
Growth rings: 
cross section showing, 3-5fig, 3-6fig 
discussion, 3-4, 3-6 
effect on strength properties, 5-30 to 
5-31 
grain, 3-14 
in sawn boards, 3-14 
principal axes with respect to, 5-2 
shrinkage, 4-5 to 4-7, 4-7fig 
Guatambu. See Pau marfim 
Guayacan. See Ipe 
Gum: 


I-11 


nomenclature, 6-5t 
Gurjun. See Apitong 
Gypsum board, use in wood-frame 
construction to provide fire resistance, 18-7 
to 18-8 
Gypsum-bonded composites, 11-23 


Hackberry: 
characteristics, 2-6 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-6 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-6 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-4t, 5-9t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-6 
Hardness: 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
definition, 5-3 
Hardwood flooring, grading rules: 
Maple Flooring Manufacturers 
Association, 6-4, 6-4t 
National Oak Flooring Manufacturers 
Association, 6-4, 6-4t 
Hardwood lumber: 
drying targets, 13-5 
finished market products: 
flooring: 
grading rules, 6-2 to 6-6 
standard dimensions, 6-3 to 6-4 
types, 6-4, 6-6 
kiln drying schedules, 13-8 to 13-9, 
13-11t 
grades, 6-2, 6-2fig, 6-3t 
grading associations and rules, 6-4, 6-3t, 
6-4t 
minimum widths, 6-3 
standard dimensions, 6-3 
standard thicknesses, 6-6t 
uses, 6-2 
Hardwoods: 
availability, 2-1 to 2-3 
bending properties, 19-3 
charring rates, 18-14t 
definition, 2-2 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
flammability data, 18-10t 
heat release data, 18-12fig 
imported, 2-19 to 2-38 
locality of growth, 2-2 
moisture content, heartwood and 
sapwood, 4-2t 
preservative penetration, 15-16t 
relationship of mechanical properties to 
specific gravity, 5-29t 


I-12 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


species by region, 2-3t 
uses, 2-2 
vessels, 3-10 to 3-11 
Heartwood: 
color, 4-2t 
decay resistance in different species, 3-3, 
14-St 
extractives content, 3-3 
for shakes, 6-17 
in visual stress grading, 7-5 
moisture content and drying, 13-7 
Heat capacity: 
defined, 4-11 to 4-12 
discussed, 4-11 
of solid wood, 4-15t 
Heat release rate: 
and smoke release rate, 18-11 
discussed, 18-11 to 18-12 
Heat sterilization: 
American Lumber Standard Committee 
(ALSC) regulations, 20-9 to 20-11 
quality mark, 20-11, 20-13fig 
standards: 
discussion, 20-1 
International Standard for 
Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM), 20-1 to 
20-2 
pest groups, 20-1, 20-2t 
heating times: 
experimental, 20-4t 
factors affecting: 
air circulation, 20-2 
energy source, 20-2 
heating medium, 20-2, 20-3fig 
size and configuration of wood, 
20-2, 20-3fig 
species, 20-2, 20-3fig 
stacking methods, 20-2, 20-4 fig 
methods for estimating: 
MacLean equations, 20-5, 20-Seq, 
20-6eq, 20-7fig 
degree of accuracy, 20-7 
heat conduction, 20-5eq 
summary of estimates, 20-8t 
multiple regression models, 20-7 
coefficients for, 20-9t 
summary of estimates, 20-10t, 
20-11t, 20-12t 
Heat treatment. See Heat sterilization 
Heavy-timber construction: 
fire resistance of, 18-2, 18-7 to 18-8 
wood used in, 18-2 
Hemicellulose, 3-7 
Hemlock: 
availability at retail yards, 6-17 
for siding, 6-16 
Hemlock, eastern: 
characteristics, 2-12 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 


locality of growth, 2-12 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-12 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-12 
Hemlock, mountain: 
characteristics, 2-12 
locality of growth, 2-12 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-12 
Hemlock, western: 
characteristics, 2-12 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
fracture toughness, 5-28t 
locality of growth, 2-12 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-12 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-12 
Hickory: 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Hickory, bitternut: 
moisture content, 4-2t 
strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 
Hickory, mockernut: 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
Hickory, nutmeg, strength properties, 5-5t, 
5-10t 
Hickory, pecan: 
characteristics, 2-6 to 2-7 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
for flooring, 6-4, 6-6 
locality of growth, 2-6 to 2-7 


Index 


shrinkage values, 4-6t 
species, 2-6 
strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-7 
Hickory, pignut: 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
Hickory, red, moisture content, 4-2t 
Hickory, sand: 
moisture content, 4-2t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
Hickory, shagbark: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Hickory, shellbark: 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
Hickory, water: 
moisture content, 4-2t 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
Hickory, true: 
characteristics, 2-7 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-7 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
species, 2-7 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
uses, 2-7 
Holly, nomenclature, 6-St 
Holly, American: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Honeylocust: 
availability, 2-7 
characteristics, 2-7 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-7 
shock resistance, 2-7 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
uses, 2-7 
Hot melt adhesives: 
bonding, 10-9 
structural performance, 10-10t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Hot-press bonding, affect on moisture 
content, 10-15 
Hot pressing: 
fiberboard, 11-13 to 11-14 
oriented strandboard, 11-8, 11-10 
particleboard, 11-11 


Hura: 
characteristics, 2-24 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-24 
machinability, 2-24 
mechanical properties, 5-18t, 5-22t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-24 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-24 


Identification of wood, 3-16 
Ignition of wood: 
piloted, 18-9 
unpiloted, 18-10 
Tlomba: 
characteristics, 2-24 to 2-25 
locality of growth, 2-24 
machinability, 2-25 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-25 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-25 
Imbuia, shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Imported woods, commercially important, 
2-18 to 2-40 
Impact bending: 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
defined, 5-3 
Impreg: 
bulking agents, 19-4 to 19-5 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
process, 19-4 to 19-5 
properties, 19-6t 
species, 19-5 
strength properties, 19-7t to 19-8t 
Incising: 
and fire-retardant treatments, 18-15 to 
18-16 
effect on strength properties, 5-43 
Incense-cedar. See Cedar, Incense 
Inorganic boron (borax/boric acid): 
acceptable compounds, 15-13 to 15-15 
effectiveness, 15-13 to 15-15 
solubility, 15-6, 15-8 
temperature for pressure treating, 15-20 
uses, 15-6, 15-8 
Insect damage and control: 
beetles, 14-9 to 14-10 
carpenter ants, 14-13 
bees, 14-13 
effect on strength, 5-44 
naturally termite-resistant wood, 14-12 
to 14-13 
termites, 14-11 to 14-12 
types of damage, 14-8t, 14-9fig 
Insulation for sound control for wood 
buildings, 17-11, 17-12t 
Insulation in wood building, 17-11 to 17-12 
Intergrown knots, 3-15, 5-27 


Interlocked grain: 
definition, 3-15 
effect on strength, 5-30 
in Sweetgum, 2-9 
Interior finishes, care during construction, 
13-19 
Internal friction, 5-17, 5-21 
Invasive species. See Heat sterilization 
Ipe: 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-25 
machinability, 2-25 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-25 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-25 
Ipil. See Merbau 
Iroko: 
characteristics, 2-25 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-25 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-25 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
species, 2-25 
workability, 2-25 
uses, 2-25 
Tron stain, 14-2, 16-25, 16-30 
Ironwood, nomenclature, 6-5t 
Isocyanate adhesives: 
performance over time, 10-21 
structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 
use with composite products, 11-4 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 


Jacaranda. See Rosewood, Brazilian 
Jarrah: 
characteristics, 2-25 to 2-26 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-25 
machinability, 2-26 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-25 to 
2-26 
marine borers, 14-13 to 14-15 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-26 
Jatoba. See Courbaril 
Jelutong: 
characteristics, 2-26 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-26 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-26 
workability, 2-26 


1-13 


Jequitiba. See Albarco 
Joints, glued, strength, 10-4 to 10-5 


Joists and light-frame construction, 17-1 


to 17-2 


Joists and rafter systems in light-frame 


construction, 17-3 
Juniper, decay resistance, 14-St 
Juvenile wood: 

discussion, 3-13 


effect on mechanical properties, 5-32 to 


5-33 


effect on strength properties, 5-32 to 


5-33 
properties, 5-33, 5-33fig 
shrinkage of, 5-32 


Kakaralli. See Manbarklak 
Kaneelhart: 
characteristics, 2-26 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-26 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-26 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-26 
Kapur: 
characteristics, 2-26 
decay resistance, 14-St 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-26 
machinability, 2-26 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-26 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
strength properties, 2-26 
uses, 2-26 
Karri: 
characteristics, 2-26 to 2-27 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-26 to 2-27 
machinability, 2-27 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-27 
Kauta. See Marishballi 
KDS, 15-8 
Kempas: 
characteristics, 2-27 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-27 
machinability, 2-27 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-27 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-27 
Keruing: 
characteristics, 2-27 
decay resistance, 14-5St 


dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 


I-14 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


ease of bonding, 10-7t 
durability, 2-27 
locality of growth, 2-27 
machinability, 2-27 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-27 
Khaya (See Mahogany, African): 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
Kiln drying: 
advantages, 13-6 
importance of air circulation, 13-6 
kiln schedules, 13-8 to 13-9, 13-11t 
types of kilns, 13-6 to 13-8, 13-10fig 
Knots: 
changes during drying, 13-10, 13-12fig 
definition, 5-26 
discoloration through paint, 16-25 
effect on: 
in determining strength ratios, 7-5 to 
7-6, 7-6fig 
mechanical properties of wood, 5-26 
to 5-28, 5-34 
stiffness, 7-4 
strength properties, 7-3 to 7-4 
encased, 5-27, 7-4 
in lumber stress grades, 7-4 
intergrown, 5-27, 7-4 
knotholes, 7-4 
Kokrodua (See also Afrormosia): 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
Korina. See Limba 
Krabak. See Mersawa 
Kraft paper, 19-12 
Kwila. See Merbau 


Lag screws. See Screws, lag 

Laminated members, curved: 
advantages, 19-2 to 19-3 
species, choice of, 19-2 to 19-3 
uses, 19-2 

Laminated members, glued. See Glued 

structural members. 

Laminated strand lumber, 11-21 

Laminated veneer lumber, 11-21 
mechanical properties, 12-8t 

Laminated wood, strength properties, 19-7t 

to 19-8t 

Laminates. See Paper-based plastic 

laminates 

Laminating grades, 6-8 

Lapacho (See also Ipe): 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 

Lap marks, 16-19, 16-20fig 

Lapuna. See Ceiba 

Larch, western: 
characteristics, 2-13 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 


dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 

elastic ratio, 5-2t 

for flooring, 6-16 

locality of growth, 2-13 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 

penetration, 15-16t 

Poisson ratio, 5-3t 

shock resistance, 2-13 

strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 

thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 

used for poles, 6-19 

uses, 2-13 


Lateral buckling, of beams, 9-9 to 9-10 
Lateral resistance: 


and the National Design Specification 


for Wood Construction, 8-1 


of lag screws, 8-12 to 8-14 
of nails, 8-5 
of wood screws, 8-10 to 8-11 


Latewood: 


description, 3-4 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
paintability, 16-7 to 16-8, 16-12 


Lauans: 


dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 


Lemonwood. See Degame 
Light-frame construction: 


balloon framing, 17-1 

ceiling and roof, 17-4 

decks, 17-4 

exterior walls, 17-3 to 17-4 
fire resistance of, 18-2 to 18-3 
floors, 17-2, 17-3fig 
foundations, 17-2 

platform framing, 17-1 to 17-2 
use of elastomeric adhesives, 10-19 to 
10-20, 10-19fig 

wood use in, 18-2 


Lignin: 


discussion, 3-7 
weathering, 16-11 to 16-12 


Lignumvitae: 


characteristics, 2-27 to 2-28 

decay resistance, 14-5t 

ease of bonding, 10-7t 

locality of growth, 2-28 

mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
species, 2-27 to 2-28 

uses, 2-28 

working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 


Limba: 


characteristics, 2-28 
decay resistance, 14-5t 


Index 


dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-28 
machinability, 2-28 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-28 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-28 
Limnoria, 14-14 
Locust, black: 
characteristics, 2-7 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-7 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-7 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
uses, 2-1, 2-7 
Lodgepole pine, used for poles, 6-19 
Log homes, 6-21, 17-6, 17-7fig 
Logs, control of mold, stain, decay, 14-6 
Longitudinal shrinkage of wood, 4-5 
Lumber: 


commonly used abbreviations, 6-23 to 
6-25 
development of grading rules, 6-7 
grading organization, 6-9t, 6-12 
hardwood: 
drying targets, 13-5 
finished market products: 
flooring: 
grading rules, 6-6 to 6-7 
standard dimensions, 6-3 to 6-4 
types, 6-6 
kiln drying schedules, 13-8 to 13-9, 
13-11It 
grades, 6-2, 6-3t, 6-2fig 
grading associations and rules, 6-2, 
6-3t 
minimum widths, 6-3 
standard dimensions, 6-3 
standard thicknesses, 6-6t 
uses, 6-2 
purchase: 
distribution yards, 6-12 
primary manufacturers: 
customers, 6-12 
retail yard inventory: 
availability of hardwood and 
softwoods, 6-12, 6-16 
boards and yard lumber, 6-16 
casing and base, 6-17 
dimension and structural lumber 
stocked, 6-16 
finish boards, 6-16 
flooring, 6-16, 6-17 
shingles and shakes, 6-17 
siding, 6-16 


purchase consideration, 6-17 to 
6-18 
softwood: 
American Lumber Standards, 6-7 
classification by grades: 
factory and shop lumber: 
factory (shop) grades, 6-10 
industrial clears, 6-10 
ladder and pole stock, 6-10 
moulding stock, 6-10 
pencil stock, 6-10 
tank stock, 6-10 
structural lumber: 
dimension lumber, 6-8 
structural laminations, 6-8 
yard lumber: 
select lumber, 6-7 
common lumber, 6-7, 6-8fig 
development of grading rules, 6-7 
drying targets, 13-5 
grading organizations, 6-9t 


kuln drying schedules, 13-8 to 13-9, 


13-11t 
manufacture: 
size, 6-10 to 6-11, 6-11t 
surfacing, 6-11 
patterns, 6-11, 6-12fig 
species, 6-13t to 6-15t, 6-16 
transportation, 6-12 


Macacauba. See Macawood 
Macawood: 
characteristics, 2-28 
common names, 2-44t 
locality of growth, 2-28 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-28 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-28 
workability, 2-28 
Machine-graded structural lumber: 


allowable stress for bending, 7-8 to 7-10 


common grades, 7-7, 7-7t 
components of system, 7-8 


design stresses for other properties, 7-10 


machine sorting criteria, 7-8 

procedures for deriving design 

properties, 7-8 

quality control, 7-10 
Machinmango. See Manbarklak 
Madrone, Pacific: 


dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 


ease of bonding, 10-7t 

nomenclature, 6-5t 

shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Magnesia-cement-bonded composites, 
11-23 
Magnolia: 

characteristics, 2-7 to 2-8 

decay resistance, 14-5t 


dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-7 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 

shock resistance, 2-8 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 

species, 2-7 

strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-7 


Mahogany: 


species, 2-28 


Mahogany, African: 


characteristics, 2-28 

dimensional change coefficients, 13-17t 
decay resistance, 2-29, 14-5t 

ease of bonding, 10-7t 

elastic ratio, 5-2t 

locality of growth, 2-28 

machinability, 2-29 

mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 

shrinkage values, 4-8t 


species, 2-28 
uses, 2-29 

Mahogany, American 
characteristics, 2-29 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-29 
machinability, 2-29 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
uses, 2-29 

Mahogany, Honduras: 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 


Mahogany, Phillippine, availability at retail 


yards, 6-16 

Manbarklak: 
characteristics, 2-29 
locality of growth, 2-29 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
nomenclature, 2-29, 2-44t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-29 

marine borers, 14-13 to 14-15 

uses, 2-29 
workability, 2-29 

Manni: 
characteristics, 2-29 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-29 
machinability, 2-29 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to insects, 2-29 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-29 

Maple, black: 


dimensional change coefficients, 13-16t 


I-15 


shrinkage values, 4-6t 

strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Maple, bigleaf: 

dimensional change coefficients, 13-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 

strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 
Maple, hard: 

characteristics, 2-8 

charring rate data, 18-14t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 

ease of bonding, 10-7t 

heat release data, 18-12fig 
locality of growth, 2-8 
nomenclature, 6-5t 

shock resistance, 2-8 

species, 2-8 

uses, 2-8 

Maple, Oregon, nomenclature, 6-5t 
Maple, red: 

dimensional change coefficients, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 

Poisson ratio, 5-3t 

shrinkage values, 4-6t 

strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 


Maple, silver: 


dimensional change coefficients, 13-16t 
moisture content, 4-2t 

penetration, 15-16t 

shrinkage values, 4-6t 

strength properties, 5-St, 5-10t 

thermal conductivity, 4-13t 


Maple, soft: 


connector joint strength, 8-21t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-8 
nomenclature, 6-5t 

species, 2-8 

uses, 2-8 


Maple, sugar: 


characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
dimensional change coefficients, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 

fracture toughness, 5-27t, 5-28t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 

Poisson ratio, 5-3t 

shrinkage values, 4-6t 

strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
toughness values, 5-27t 


Maple flooring: 


availability, 6-16 to 6-17 
grading, 6-6 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


locality of growth, 2-29 to 2-30 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-30 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-30 
Marine borer damage and control, 14-13 
to 14-15 
Malayapis. See Lauans 
Mata-mata. See Manbarklak 
Mayflower. See Roble 
Mechanical interlocking and adhesives, 
10-1 to 10-2 
Mechanical properties of wood adjusted for 
design use, 7-10 to 7-13 
affected by: 
adhesion to metals, 10-5 
age, 5-41 
changes in moisture content, 5-34 
chemicals: 
exposure to, 5-41 
treatment, 5-41 to 5-43 
cross grain, 5-30 
decay, 5-43 to 5-44 
duration of load, 5-39 to 5-40 
fire-retardant treatments, 18-15 
insect damage, 5-44 
knots, 5-26 to 5-27 
juvenile wood, 5-32 to 5-33 
mold and stain fungi, 5-43 
rate of loading, 5-38 
slope of grain, 5-30t 
temperature, 5-35 to 5-38 
waterborne preservatives, 5-42 
relation to specific gravity, 5-26, 5-29t 
relation to stress grades, 7-2 
Medium-density fiberboard: 
grade stamp, 11-14fig 
properties, 11-13, 12-5, 12-6t 
resins used, 11-13 
standards, 11-3t 
uses, 11-13 
with veneer overlay, 11-15, 11-16fig 
Medium-density hardboard, finishes, 
suitability and expected service life, 16-17t 
Medium density overlays: 
finishes, suitability and expected service 
life, 16-17t 
to improve paintability of plywood, 16-9 
Melamine adhesives: 
performance over time, 10-21 to 10-22 
use with composite products, 11-4 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Meranti: 
characteristics, 2-30 
color, 2-30t 


machinability, 2-30 
mechanical properties, 5-21t, 5-25t 
uses, 2-30 
Merbau: 
characteristics, 2-30 
locality of growth, 2-30 
machinability, 2-30 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to insects, 2-30 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-30 
Mersawa: 
characteristics, 2-31 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-31 
machinability, 2-31 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-31 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-31 
Metal bonding, 10-5 
Metal plate connectors, 8-25, 8-26fig 
Mildew: 
discoloration of wood, 16-28 to 16-29, 
16-28fig 
removal, 16-28 to 16-29 
Mill glaze, 16-26 to 16-27 
Mill work, finishes, suitability and 
expected service life, 16-17t 
Modified woods: 
formaldehyde-treated wood: 
dimensional stability, 19-9t, 13-12 
mechanical properties, 19-11 to 19-12 
resistance to fungi, 19-12 
chemical modification: 
antishrink efficiency calculations, 
19-12 
conditions for, 19-12 
chemicals used, 19-12 
dimensional stability, 19-9t, 19-11 
mechanical properties, 19-11 to 19-12 
cost, 19-5 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
purposes, 19-4 to 19-5 
resin-treated compressed wood 
(Compreg): 
advantages, 19-5 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
molding, 19-5, 19-9 
plasticizers, 19-5 
properties, 19-5, 19-6t 
strength properties, 19-7t to 19-8t 
thermal expansion coefficients, 19-8t 
uses, 19-9 
resin-treated wood (Impreg): 
bulking agents, 19-4 to 19-5 


Maple Flooring Manufacturers Association, 
grading rules, 6-6 
Marishballi: 

characteristics, 2-29 to 2-30 


decay resistance, 14-5t 

dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 

locality of growth, 2-30 


dimensional stability, 19-9t 
process, 19-5 

properties, 19-6t 

strength properties, 19-7t to 19-8t 


I-16 


Index 


untreated compressed wood (Staypak): 


appearance, 19-10 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
properties, 19-9 to 19-10, 19-6t 
purpose, 19-9 
strength properties, 19-7t to 19-8t 
uses, 19-9 to 19-10 
untreated heated wood (Staybwood): 
loss of mechanical and strength 
properties, 19-9 
purpose, 19-9 
wood—polymer composites: 
advantages, 19-11 to 19-12 
changing characteristics, 19-11 to 
19-12 
monomers, 19-11 
species used, 19-11 
strength properties, 19-11t 
uses, 19-11 
wood treated with polyethylene glycol 
(PEG): 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
finishing, 19-10 
process, 19-10 
uses, 19-10 


Modulus of elasticity: 


and columns with flanges, 9-8 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
discussed, 5-3 

effect of temperature, 5-35, 5-36fig, 
5-37t 

of machine graded lumber, 7-7 to 7-8 
of visually graded lumber, 7-6 to 7-7 
values, 5-2t 


Modulus of rigidity: 


discussion, 5-3 
ratios, 5-3t 


effect on bonded joints, 10-9 
effect of strength properties, 5-34, 
5-35fig 
equilibrium: 
discussion, 4-3, 4-3fig 
relative humidity as related to, 4-4t 
green wood, 4-1, 4-2t 
heartwood, 4-2t 
in wood exposed outdoors, 16-7 
recommended for: 
exterior siding, 13-5t 
flooring, 13-5t 
furniture, 13-5t 
interior woodwork, 13-5t 
laminated members, 13-5, 13-5t 
lumber, 13-3, 13-4t, 13-5t 
plywood, 13-5, 13-5t 
sheathing, 13-5t 
timbers, 13-3 
trim, 13-5t 
veneer, 13-3 
sapwood, 4-2t 
shrinkage as related to, 4-5 to 4-7, 4-10 
shrinkage curves, 4-7fig 
specific gravity, 4-7, 4-9, 4-10fig 
Moisture content of dried lumber: 
air-dry, 13-11 
kiln dry, 13-12 
shipping dry, 13-11 
Moisture content during transit and 
storage: 
finish and factory lumber, 13-14 
general, 13-14, 13-15t 
plywood and structural items, 13-14 
Moisture-gradient, typical in lumber, 13-6, 
13-7fig 
Molding resin-treated compressed wood 


post-1991: 


direction of driving, effect of, 8-6 
load-slip curves, 8-8, 8-8eq, 8-9fig 
moisture content, effect of, 8-8 
seasoning, effect of, 8-8 

shank form, effect of, 8-8 

spacing, 8-7 

yield model theory, 8-6, 8-7eq, 8-9fig, 
8-7t 


sizes: 


box nails, 8-2t 

common, 8-2fig 

helically and annularly threaded, 8-2, 
8-2t 

penny size, 8-2 

wire nails, 8-2, 8-2t 


toenailed joints, strength of, 8-5 
withdrawal resistance: 


affected by, 8-2, 8-3 

allowable loads,8-6 

clinched nails, 8-5 

corrosion, 8-5 

density of wood, effect of, 8-3 
direction of driving, 8-5 

etched nails, 8-4 

load displacement curve, 8-3, 8-3fig 
moisture content, effect of, 8-3, 8-4 
nail heads, 8-4 

nail points, effect of, 8-4 

plywood, 8-6 

prebored lead holes, effect of, 8-5 
seasoning, effect of, 8-3 

shank form, effect of, 8-4 

surface coatings, effect of, 8-3 to 8-4 
surface coating, used for 8-4 


Nanoindentation hardness, 5-15 
Naphthenate, copper: 


Modulus of rupture: 
and moisture content, 7-11, 7-11t, 


(Compreg), 19-5, 19-9 
Molds: 


color transfer and changes, 15-6 
effectiveness, 15-6 


7-12fig appearance of, 14-2 retention levels for various wood 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t distinction from stain, 14-2 products, 15-4t, 15-5t 

defined, 5-3 effect on wood, 14-2 solution values, 15-3 to 15-9 

effect of temperature, 5-36fig, 5-36t, Moment capacity, 9-5, 9-5eq Southern pine sapwood stakes retention 
5-37fig Mora: and life span test results, 15-7t, 15-8t 
of beams, 9-5, 9-6 characteristics, 2-31 treatment for cutting pretreated wood, 
temperature effect, 5-36 locality of growth, 2-31 15-25 


Moisture blisters, 16-26 

Moisture content: 
adsorption/desorption curve, 4-5fig 
adjustment for, 7-12 
and decay, 14-4 
and electrical resistance, 4-15 


mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-31 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-31 
workability, 2-31 

Multiple-fastener joints, 8-24 to 8-25, 


Naphthenate, zinc: 

effectiveness, 15-11 

inappropriate uses, 15-11 

properties, 15-11 
National Grading Rule, 7-2, 7-3, 7-3t 
National Fire Protection Association, 18-2, 


and heat capacity, 4-11 8-24eq 18-5 

changes in finished ponderosa pine National Hardwood Lumber Association, 
sapwood, 16-14fig Nails: 6-2, 6-4t 

definition, 4-2, 16-6 lateral resistance of common wire nails: National Oak Flooring Manufacturers 


determined by: 
electrical method, 13-2 to 13-3 
ovendrying method, 13-2, 13-2eq 
dimensional changes, 10-6 to 10-8 


pre-1991: 
equations, 8-8 
lateral load coefficients, 8-6t 
load-slip curve, 8-6, 8-6fig 


Association, grading rules, 6-6 to 6-7 
Nomenclature, 6-5t, 6-13t 

Nuclear radiation: 

discussion, 4-17 

effect on wood strength, 5-43 


I-17 


Oak: 
for casing and base, 6-17 
used in piles, 6-20 
Oak, black: 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Oak, bur: 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Oak, California black, moisture content, 
4-2t 
Oak, cherrybark, strength properties, 5-St, 
5-10t 
Oak, chestnut, strength properties, 5-6t, 
5-11t 
Oak, laurel, strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
Oak, live, strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
Oak, northern red: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
fracture toughness, 5-28t 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
Oak, overcup: 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
Oak, pin: 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
Oak, post, strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
Oak, red: 
availability for purchase, 6-17 
characteristics, 2-8 
charring rate data, 18-14t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
flammability data, 18-10t 
heat release data, 18-12fig 
locality of growth, 2-8 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
species, 2-8 
uses, 2-8 
Oak, scarlet: 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
Oak, southern red: 
moisture content, 4-2t 
strength properties, 5-5t, 5-10t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Oak, swamp chestnut, strength properties, 
5-6t, 5-11t 
Oak, swamp white, strength properties, 
5-6t, 5-11t 


I-18 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Oak, tropical: 
characteristics, 2-31 
locality of growth, 2-31 
resistance to fungi, 2-31 
specific gravity, 2-31 
uses, 2-31 
Oak, water: 
moisture content, 4-2t 
strength properties, 5-St, 5-11t 
Oak, white: 
characteristics, 2-1, 2-8 to 2-9 
characteristics for painting, 15-16t 
charring rate equation, 18-13 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 2-9, 14-St 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-8 to 2-9 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
species, 2-8 to 2-9 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
uses, 2-9 
Oak, willow, moisture content, 4-2t 
Oak flooring, 6-6 
Obeche: 
characteristics, 2-31 to 2-32 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-44 
machinability, 2-32 
mechanical properties, 5-19t, 5-23t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-32 
Ofram. See Limba 
Oilborne preservatives. See preservatives, 
oilborne 
Oil-type preservatives, strength loss, 5-42 
Okoume: 
characteristics, 2-32 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-32 
machinability, 2-32 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-32 
Old house borer, 14-10 
Oligomeric alkylphenol polysulfide 
(PXTS), 15-9 
Opaque finishes, 16-32 
Opepe: 
characteristics, 2-32 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 


locality of growth, 2-32 
machinability, 2-32 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-32 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-32 
Ordinary construction: 
code requirements for fire protection, 
18-2 
description, 18-2 
Oriented strandboard: 
adhesive application or blending, 11-10 
adhesives used, 11-7 
certification, 11-10, 11-8fig 
defined, 11-7 
drying process, 11-8, 11-10 
finishes, suitability and expected service 
life, 16-17t 
grade stamps, 11-8fig 
hot pressing, 11-10 
manufacturing process, 11-8, 11-10, 
11-10fig 
mat formation, 11-10 
mechanical properties, 12-5t 
species used, 11-8 
specific gravity, 12-5t 
standards, 11-3t 
stranding process, 11-8 
Oriented strand lumber, 11-21 
Orthotropic nature of wood, 5-1 
Osage-orange: 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Ossol. See Manni 
Otie. See Ilomba 
Ovangkol (See also Benge): 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Ovendry weight, specific gravity, 4-9, 4-9t 
Oxine copper: 
composition, 15-11 
corrosiveness, 15-11 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t, 15-5t 
Southern pine sapwood stakes retention 
and life span test results, 15-7t to 15-8t 
toxicity, 15-11 


Pacific yew, nomenclature, 6-14t 
Paint: 
adhesion bandage test, 16-28 
application and maintenance, 16-19t, 
16-20 to 16-21 
characteristics of wood, 16-5t 
cracking, 16-26 
discussed, 16-26 to 16-27 
disposal, 16-36 
failure caused by: 
dimensional changes in wood, 16-7 


Index 


earlywood/latewood band, 16-2 
face checks in plywood, 16-9, 16-9fig 
grain orientation, 16-8 
moisture content of wood, 16-6 to 
16-7 
temperature at time of painting, 16-22 
to 16-23 
texture of wood, 16-9 
water soluble extractives, 16-29 
weathering, 16-11 
failure in finger-jointed lumber, 16-9 to 
16-10 
lead-based: 
dust from, 16-36 to 16-37 
health effects, 16-36 to 16-37 
removal of, 16-36 to 16-37 
use of, 16-36 
mildew removal, 16-29 
moisture blisters, 16-26 
on treated wood, 16-24 
on preweathered panels, 16-12 
peeling: 
avoiding with proper painting, 16-24 
caused by water, intercoat, 16-27 
protection against moisture, 16-13 
preweathering before painting, 16-13 
repainting, 16-24, 16-32 to 16-33 
removal, 16-35 to 16-36 
service life, 16-25 
strippers: 
chemical: 
alkali-based, 16-36 
solvent-based, 16-36 
mechanical, 16-35 
“safe”, 16-36 
VOC regulation compliance, 16-15 to 
16-16 
Pallet and container stock, 6-17 
Palosapis. See Mersawa 
Panel products: 
classification, 11-5fig 
fiberboard, 11-12 to 11-15 
oriented strandboard, 11-7 to 11-10 
particleboard, 11-10 to 11-12 
performance standards, 11-3t 
plywood, 11-5 to 11-7 
product standards, 11-3t 
Paper-based plastic laminates: 
decorative laminates: 
process, 19-12 to 19-13 
thicknesses, 19-13 
uses, 19-12 to 19-13 
industrial laminates: 
cost advantage, 19-12 
papreg, 19-13 
resins used, 19-13 
strength, 19-12, 19-7t to 19-8t 
uses, 19-12 
lignin-filled laminates: 
strength properties, 19-14 


resins used, 19-14 
shrinking and swelling, 19-13 
Paper-faced overlays: 
manufacture, 19-14 
types: 
decoratives, 19-13 
masking, 19-14 
structural, 19-14 
uses, 19-13 
Papreg, 19-13 
Para-Angelim (See also Sucupira): 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
Parallell strand lumber, 11-21 
Parana pine: 
characteristics, 2-39 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-39 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-39 
Particleboard, 11-10 to 11-12 
adhesives, 11-11 
certification, 11-12 
finishing, 11-12 
hot pressing, 11-12 
mat formation, 11-11 
mechanical properties, 12-5t 
particle classifications and conveying, 
11-11 
particle drying, 11-11 
production, 11-11 
resins and wax, 11-11 
screw withdrawal, 8-10 
specific gravity, 12-5t 
standards, 11-3t 
uses, 11-11 
Pau marfim: 
characteristics, 2-32 to 2-33 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-32 
machinability, 2-32 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to decay, 2-32 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
specific gravity, 2-32 
strength values, 2-32 
uses, 2-33 
Pecan (See also Hickory, pecan): 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Pecky cypress, 2-11 
Pentachlorophenol: 
and nonpressure treatments, 15-20 to 
15-21 
approved uses, 15-10 
effect on mechanical properties of wood, 
15-20 


effectiveness, 15-10 
EPA-approved consumer information 
sheet, 15-2 
handling precautions, 15-2 
ineffective against marine borers, 15-10 
paintability, 15-10 
retentions for various wood products, 
15-4t, 15-5t 
solution standards, 15-10 
solution performance, 15-10 
use site precautions, 15-2 
Peroba, white. See Peroba de Campos 
Peroba de campos: 
characteristics, 2-33 
locality of growth, 2-33 
machinability, 2-33 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to decay, 2-33 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-33 
Peroba rosa: 
characteristics, 2-33 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-33 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-33 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-33 
Persimmon: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
Phenolic adhesives: 
performance over time, 10-22, 10-22fig 
structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 
use with composite products, 11-3, 11-5 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Phenolic resins: 
for laminates, 19-13 
Pholads, 14-14 
Photodegradation. See Weathering 
Piles: 
knots, effect on strength, 5-26 to 5-28 
marine, protection against insects, 14-14 
to 14-15 
preservative retention levels, 15-4t to 
15-5t 
preservative treatments, 6-22 
service life, 6-22 
standards and specifications, 6-18t, 6-20 
to 6-21 
standards for end-bearing piles, 6-21 
for friction piles, 6-21 
straightness, 6-21 
strength properties, 7-14 
timber availability, 6-20 
weight and volume, 6-21 to 6-22 


I-19 


Pilon: 
characteristics, 2-33 
locality of growth, 2-33 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to insects, 2-33 
uses, 2-33 
workability, 2-33 

Pine, Caribbean: 
characteristics, 2-39 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-39 
machinability, 2-39 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to insects, 2-39 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-39 

Pine, eastern white: 
characteristics, 2-13 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-13 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-13 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-13 
workability, 2-13 

Pine, jack: 
characteristics, 2-13 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-13 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-13 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-13 

Pine, loblolly: 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 


1-20 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 

Pine, lodgepole: 
characteristics, 2-13 to 2-14 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-13 to 2-14 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-14 
shrinkage values, 2-14, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
used for poles, 6-19 
workability, 2-14 
uses, 2-14 

Pine, longleaf: 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 

Pine, ocote: 
characteristics, 2-39 
locality of growth, 2-39 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to fungi, 2-39 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
strength properties, 2-39 
uses, 2-39 

Pine, pitch: 
characteristics, 2-14 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-14 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
shock resistance, 2-14 
shrinkage values, 2-14, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-7t, 5-12t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-14 

Pine, pond: 
characteristics, 2-14 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-14 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-14 
shrinkage values, 2-14, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 


uses, 2-14 


Pine, ponderosa: 


characteristics, 2-14 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
for siding, 6-16 
fracture toughness, 5-28t 
Jeffrey, 2-14 
locality of growth, 2-14 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
changes in finished sapwood samples, 
16-14fig 
moisture-excluding effectiveness of 
finishes on, 16-14t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-14 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
used for poles, 6-19 
uses, 2-14 


Pine, radiata: 


characteristics, 2-39 to 2-40 

ease of bonding, 10-7t 

locality of growth, 2-39 
machinability, 2-40 

mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
uses, 2-40 


Pine, red: 


characteristics, 2-14 

connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 

heat release index, 18-10t 

locality of growth, 2-14 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
penetration, 15-16t 

preservative treatments to prevent 
marine borer attacks on piles, 15-5t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 

shock resistance, 2-14 

shrinkage values, 4-6t 

strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 

uses, 2-14 


Pine, sand, strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
Pine, scots, fracture toughness, 5-28t 


Index 


Pine, shortleaf: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 

Pine, slash: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
decay resistance, 14-5St 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 

Pine, southern: 
characteristics, 2-14 to 2-15 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
charring rate data, 18-14t 
charring rate equation, 18-13 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-6, 10-7t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
flammability data, 18-10t 
for flooring, 6-16 to 6-17 
fracture toughness, 5-28t 
grading, 6-8 
kiln drying schedule, 13-8, 13-11t 
moisture content and property values, 
5-36t 
nomenclature, 6-13t 
preservative retention and life span tests, 
15-7t to 15-8t 
preservative treatments to prevent 
marine borer attacks on piles, 15-5t 
shock resistance, 2-15 
shrinkage values, 2-15, 4-6t 
species, 2-14 to 2-15 
used for piles, 6-20 
used for poles, 6-19 
uses, 2-15 

Pine, spruce: 
characteristics, 2-15 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-15 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
uses, 2-15 

Pine, sugar: 
characteristics, 2-15 
connector joint strength, 8-12t 
decay resistance, 14-St 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
locality of growth, 2-15 
moisture content, 4-2t 


nomenclature, 6-14t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-15 
shrinkage values, 2-15, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-15 
workability, 2-15 

Pine, Virginia: 
characteristics, 2-15 to 2-16 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-15 
shock resistance, 2-15 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-16 

Pine, western white: 
characteristics, 2-16 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
for siding, 6-17 
fracture toughness, 5-28t 
heat release data, 18-12fig 
locality of growth, 2-16 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
paintability rating, 16-14fig 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-16 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-16 
workability, 2-16 

Pitch pockets: 
description, 5-33 
effect on strength, 5-33 
in lumber stress grading, 7-5 
species involved, 5-33 

Pith, 3-2, 3-2fig 

Piquia: 
characteristics, 2-33 to 2-34 
locality of growth, 2-33 
machinability, 2-34 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-34 
uses, 2-34 

Plainsawn lumber: 
advantages, 3-15t 
method of producing, 3-14 


shrinkage, 4-5 
Plasticizing adhesive polymers, 10-9 
Plasticizing wood: 
bent wood members, 19-2 
bending operation and apparatus, 19-4 
characteristics of bent wood, 19-4 
chemicals used, 19-2 
fixing the bend, 19-4 
laminated members, 19-2 to 19-3 
moisture content of bending stock, 19-3 
to 19-4 
principles of plasticizing and bending, 
19-1 
resin-treated compressed wood, 19-5 
selection of stock, 19-3 
steaming, 19-1 
veneered curved members, 19-3 
Plastering, care during construction, 13-19 
Plastic bonding, 10-5 
Plastic-coated nails, 8-4 
Port-Orford Cedar, See Cedar, Port-Orford 
Plywood: 
adhesives, 11-7 
advantages over solid wood, 11-6 
assembly, 11-5 
classification by: 
exposure capability, 11-7 
grades, 11-7 
description, 11-5 
erosion of planed surfaced, 16-12t 
finishes, suitability and expected service 
life, 16-17t 
finishing, 16-16 
fire-retardant treated, 18-15 
grade stamp, 11-8fig, 11-9fig 
in light-frame construction, 17-3 
mechanical properties, 11-6, 12-4t 
piles, 14-6 
plies, 11-6 
preservative retention levels, 15-4t to 
15-5t 
product standard, 11-7, 11-3t 
protecting from decay, 14-6 
specialty panels, 11-7 
specific gravity, 12-4t 
standards, 11-3t 
types: 
construction and industrial, 11-7 
hardwood and decorative, 11-7 
weathering of, 16-9 
Plywood curved members: 
bent after gluing: 
common hardwoods for, 19-3 
procedure for, 19-2 
bent and glued simultaneously: 
advantages, 19-2 to 19-3 
procedure for, 19-2 
Poisson’s ratio: 
discussion, 5-2 
values, 5-3t 


I-21 


Pole buildings, 17-4 to 17-5, 17-5fig, 17- 
6fig, 6-20 
Poles: 
availability, 6-19 
characteristics relating to: 
Douglas-fir, 6-19 
lodgepole pine, 6-19 
ponderosa pine, 6-19 
southern pine, 6-19 
western larch, 6-19 
western redcedar, 6-19 
control of mold, stain, and decay, 14-6 
form and taper, 6-20 to 6-21, 6-20t 
preservation and seasoning, 6-22 
preservative treatment, retention levels, 
15-4t to 15-St 
specifications, 6-18t 
service life, 6-22 
species selection, 6-19 
standards and specifications, 6-18t 
strength properties, 7-13 to 7-14 
weight and volume, 6-21 to 6-22 
Polymeric methylene diphenyl diisocyanate 
(PMDI) adhesives, 10-14 
Polymerization, effect on mechanical 
properties, 5-43 
Polymers, organic and synthetic, and 
adhesion, 10-9 to 10-10 
Polymers, analytic chemical and 
mechanical testing, 10-19 to 10-20 
Polyurethane bonding with wood and 
nonwood composites, 10-5 
Polyurethane adhesives: 
performance over time, 10-21 to 10-22 
structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Polyvinyl adhesives: 
structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Porches: 
cleaning before refinishing, 16-23 to 
16-24 
finishing, 16-25 
pests, 14-13 
Pores. See Vessels 
Portland-cement-bonded composites, 
11-24, 12-9 
Post-frame buildings, 17-4 to 17-5, 17-5fig, 
17-6fig 
Pre-drying, 13-6 
Prefinished wood products, 16-25 
Preservative penetration: 
heartwood, 15-13 to 15-15, 15-16t 
incising, effect of, 15-17 to 15-18 
sapwood, 15-13 to 15-15, 15-16t 
softwoods, 15-16t 
Preservative-pressure-treated wood, EPA- 
approved customer information sheets, 
15-2 


1-22 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Preservative retention tests, pressure 
treated, 15-4t to 15-St 
Preservatives: 
copper-containing, control of marine 
borers with, 14-14 to 14-15 
effect on mechanical properties, 15-20 
effect on paintability, 16-24 to 16-25 
effect on strength of oil-type, 5-42 
EPA regulations, 15-1 to 15-2 
inorganic arsenicals: 
EPA-approved information sheet, 15-2 
handling precautions, 15-2 
use site precautions, 15-2 
oilborne, various types: 
alkyl ammonium compound: 
effectiveness, 15-12 
in ammoniacal copper quat, 15-5 
solubility, 15-5 
chlorothalonil/chlorpyrifos: 
component rations, 15-12 
effectiveness, 15-12 
chlorpyrifos: 
effectiveness, 15-12 
in combination, 15-12 
copper naphthenate: 
color transfer and changes, 15-11 
effectiveness, 15-11 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
solution values, 15-11 
Southern pine sapwood stakes 
retention and life span test results, 
15-7t to 15-8t 
treatment for cutting pretreated 
wood, 15-18 
creosote, coal-tar: 
advantages, 15-10 
appearance, 15-10 
composition variability, 15-10 
EPA-approved customer 
information sheet, 15-2 
effect on mechanical properties, 
15-20 to 15-21 
for non-pressure treatments, 15-20 
handling precautions, 15-2 
in pressure treatment process, 15-18 
odor and vapors, 15-2 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
standards, 15-2 
temperature for pressure treating, 
15-18 
treatment for cutting pretreated 
wood, 15-18 
use site precautions, 15-2 
volatility, 15-10 
creosote-coal-tar solutions: 
properties, 15-10 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 


standards by volume, 15-10 
temperature for pressure treating, 
5-41 
creosote-petroleum oil solutions: 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
oxine copper: 
composition, 15-11 
corrosiveness, 15-11 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
Southern pine sapwood stakes 
retention and life span test results, 
15-7t to 15-8t 
toxicity, 15-11 
pentachlorophenal solutions: 
and nonpressure treatments, 15-20 
solution standards, 15-10 to 15-11 
solution performance, 15-10 to 
15-11 
pentachlorophenol: 
approved uses, 15-10 
effect on mechanical properties of 
wood, 15-20 
effectiveness, 15-10 
EPA-approved consumer 
information sheet, 15-2 
handling precautions, 15-2, 15-10 
ineffective against marine borers, 
15-10 
paintability, 15-10 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
Southern pine sapwood stakes 
retention and life span test results, 
15-7t to 15-8t 
use site precautions, 15-2 
propiconazole: 
effectiveness, 15-9 
solubility, 15-9 
uses, 15-9 
tebuconazole: 
effectiveness, 15-9 
solubility, 15-9 
zinc naphthenate: 
effectiveness, 15-11 
inappropriate uses, 15-11 
properties, 15-11 
3-iodo-2-propyny] butyl carbamate: 
effectiveness, 15-11 
paintability, 15-11 
retail marketing, 15-11 
use in combination, 15-11 
uses, 15-11 
4, 5-dichloro-2-N-octyl-4- 
isothiazolin-3-one: 
effectiveness, 15-12 
inappropriate uses, 15-12 
solubility, 15-12 
waterborne, general: 


Index 


and non-pressure treatment, 15-12 
application and maintenance of 
exterior wood finish, 16-19t 
effectiveness, 15-12 
effect on mechanical properties, 5-41 
to 5-43 
effect on strength, 5-41 to 5-43 
finishing, 16-24 
for marine piles, 15-3 
initial kiln-drying temperature, 5-42 
paintability, 15-12 
post-treatment kiln drying 
temperatures, 5-42 to 5-43 
retention levels effect of strength, 
5-15 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
retentions necessary for marine borer 
protection, 15-5t 
temperature considerations, 15-3 
waterborne, various types: 
acid copper chromate (ACC): 
components, 15-3 
effectiveness and leaching, 15-3 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
Southern pine sapwood stakes 
retention and life span test results, 
15-7t to 15-8t 
temperature for pressure treating, 
15-21 
alkaline copper quat (ACQ): 
common types, 15-5 
composition of common types, 
15-5t 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t 
ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate 
(ACZA): 
composition, 15-3 
replacement for ACA, 15-3 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-5t 
temperature for pressure treating, 
15-20 
use, 15-3 
use with Douglas-fir, 15-3 to 15-4 
chromated copper arsenate (CCA): 
common types, 15-4 to 15-5 
component substitutions, 15-4 to 
15-5 
composition of common types, 
15-5t 
effectiveness of common types, 
15-4 to 15-5 
effect on adhesion, 10-4 
finishing wood treated with, 16-24 
to 16-25 
resistance to marine borers, 15-5 
retention levels for various wood 


products, 15-4t to 15-St 
Southern pine sapwood stakes 
retention and life span test results, 
15-7t to 15-8t 
temperature for pressure treating, 
15-20 
use with Douglas-fir, 15-3 to 15-4 
copper azole - Type A (CBAType A): 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-St 
solution percentages, 15-6 
temperature for pressure treating, 
15-20 
copper bis(dimethyldithiocarbamate) 
(CDDC): 
retention levels for various wood 
products, 15-4t to 15-St 
solution percentages, 15-6 
temperature for pressure treating, 
15-20 
uses, 15-6 
copper HDO (CXA), 15-6 
copper naphthenate (waterborne), 
15-6 
EL2, 15-8 
ICC-ES evaluation report 
preservatives, 15-9 
inorganic boron (borax/boric acid): 
acceptable compounds, 15-6, 15-8 
effectiveness, 15-6, 15-8 
solubility, 15-6, 15-8 
temperature for pressure treating, 
15-20 
uses, 15-6, 15-8 
KDS, 15-8 
oligomeric alkylphenol polysulfide 
(PXTS), 15-9 
propiconazole, 15-9 
tebuconazole, 15-9 
propiconazole—tebuconazole— 
imidacloprid (PTD, 15-9 
Preservatives, recommended retentions, 
15-21, 15-4t to 15-5t 
Preservatives, water-repellant, and non- 
pressure treatments: 
effectiveness, 15-12 
federal specifications, 15-12 
uses, 15-12 
Preservative-treated wood: 
best management practices, 15-23 to 
15-24 
cut surfaces, protection of, 15-18 
effect on adhesion, 10-6 
finishing, 16-24 
handling, 15-23 to 15-24 
inspection, 15-25, 15-26fig 
quality assurance, 15-25 to 15-26, 
15-26fig 
seasoning required, 15-24 
service life, 15-25 


specifications, 15-25 
strength as affected by preservatives, 
15-25 
timing of use, 15-25 
Preservative treatment for: 
composite products, 11-15 
light-frame construction, 17-2 
Preservative treatment, effect on strength, 
7-13 
Preservative treatment, preparing for: 
air-drying practices, 15-16 
conditioning green lumber, 15-17 
Boulton or boiling-undervacuum 
process, 15-17 
steaming-and-vacuum process, 15-17 
cutting and framing: 
common uses, 15-18 
potential size changes, 15-18 
timing, 15-18 
drying, 15-17 to 15-18 
incising: 
method, 15-17, 15-17fig 
purpose, 15-17 
primary species, 15-17 
peeling, 15-17, 15-17fig 
preventing decay while drying, 15-16 
Preservative treatments, nonpressure: 
Boucherie process for green unpeeled 
poles, 15-21 
brushing: 
application, 15-22 
choice of preservative, 15-22 
effectiveness, 15-22 
penetration obtained, 15-22 
cold-soaking process: 
effectiveness, 15-21 
method, 15-21 
retentions and penetrations, 15-21 
compared to pressure treatment, 15-21 
diffusion processes: 
butt or groundline treatment of poles 
or posts, 15-21 
double diffusion, 15-21 
dipping: 
effectiveness, 15-20 
method, 15-20 
penetration obtained, 15-20 
steeping process: 
effectiveness, 15-21 
method, 15-21 
wood used, 15-21 
tire-tube method for green, unpeeled 
fencepost, 15-17 
vacuum processes: 
contrasted to pressure treating, 15-21 
effectiveness, 15-21 
methods, 15-21 
uses, 15-21 
Preservative treatments, pressure: 
advantages, 15-20 


1-23 


and preservative temperature, 15-20 
empty-cell processes: 
Lowry process, 15-20 
Rueping process, 15-18 to 15-19 
full-cell process: 
description, 15-18 
following other conditioning, 15-18 
modified full-cell, 15-18 
penetration and retention levels, 15-18 
pressures used, 15-18 
Primavera: 
availability, 2-34 
characteristics, 2-34 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
locality of growth, 2-34 
machinability, 2-34 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to fungi, 2-34 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-34 
Propiconazole: 
effectiveness, 15-9 
solubility, 15-9 
uses, 15-9 
Purlins and glulam beam construction, 17-7 
Purpleheart: 
characteristics, 2-34 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-34 
machinability, 2-34 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-34 
Pycnanthus. See Ilomba 


Quartersawn lumber: 
advantages, 3-15t 
method of producing, 3-14 
shrinkage, 4-5 
Quality control in preservative-treated 
wood, 15-25, 15-26fig 


Radius-edged decking, 6-8 
Rafters in light-frame construction, 17-3 
to 17-4 
Ramin: 
characteristics, 2-34 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-34 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to decay, 2-34 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-34 
workability, 2-34 
Rays, definition and discussion, 3-9 to 
3-10, 3-11 to 3-12 
Reaction wood: 


1-24 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


compression wood, 3-13, 5-31 
increase in density, 5-31 
shrinkage, 4-5, 5-32 
tension wood, 3-13, 5-32 
Redcedar, eastern. See Cedar, Eastern red 
Redcedar, western. See Cedar, Western red 
Redwood: 
characteristics, 2-17 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
charring rate data, 18-14t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 2-17, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
flammability data, 18-10t 
for finish board, 6-17 
for siding, 6-16 
heat release data, 18-12fig 
locality of growth, 2-17 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-14t 
paintability rating, 16-14fig 
penetration, 15-16t 
preservative pressure and temperature, 
15-20 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-17 
workability, 2-17 
Relative humidity: 
equilibrium moisture content, 4-3 
moisture content of wood, 4-4t, 16-6 to 
16-7 
Remedial treatment, 14-7, 14-9 
Resorcinol adhesives: 
performance over time, 10-21 to 10-22, 
10-22fig 
structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Roble: 
characteristics, 2-34 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-34 to 2-35 
machinability, 2-35 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to decay, 2-35 
shrinkage values, 2-35, 4-8t 
uses, 2-35 
Rolling shear strength, defined, 5-17 
Roof beams and water ponding, 9-8 
Rosewood, ease of bonding, 10-7t 
Rosewood, Brazilian: 
characteristics, 2-35 


locality of growth, 2-35 
machinability, 2-35 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-35 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-35 

Rosewood, Indian: 
characteristics, 2-35 
locality of growth, 2-35 
machinability, 2-35 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-35 

Round timber and ties: 
availability, 6-19 to 6-20 
durability, 6-22 
form, 6-20 to 6-21 
material requirements, 6-18 to 6-19 
standards and specifications, 6-18t 
strength properties, 7-13 
weight and volume, 6-21 to 6-22 


Sande: 
characteristics, 2-35 to 2-36 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-35 
machinability, 2-36 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to decay and insects, 2-36 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-36 
fire resistance, 18-7 
Santa Maria: 
characteristics, 2-36 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
locality of growth, 2-36 
machinability, 2-36 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
resistance to insects, 2-36 
uses, 2-36 
Sapele: 
characteristics, 2-36 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-36 
machinability, 2-36 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-36 
Sap stain, 13-10, 13-13fig, 14-2 
Sapwood: 
function, 3-2 
in visual stress grading, 7-5 
location, 3-2, 3-2fig 
moisture content, 4-2t 
moisture content and drying, 13-7 
preservative retention and stake lifespan, 
15-7t to 15-8t 
Sassafras: 
characteristics, 2-9 


Index 


decay resistance, 2-9, 14-St 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-9 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
shock resistance, 2-9 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
uses, 2-9 
Screws, lag: 
description, 8-12 
post-1991 lateral load, yield model 
theory, 8-13 to 8-14, 8-7t, 8-13t 
pre-1991 lateral loads, 8-13 to 8-14, 
7-12eq, 8-12t, 8-13fig 
lateral resistance, 8-13, 8-14t 
lubrication, 8-14 
prebored lead hole, size required, 8-11, 
8-13 fig 
spacing, 8-16 
withdrawal resistance, 8-10 to 8-13, 
8-10eq 
Screws, tapping: 
described, 8-10 
use in particleboard, 8-11 
withdrawal loads, 8-11, 8-lleq 
withdrawal resistance, 8-10 
Screws, wood: 
gauges, 8-11t 
ateral load coefficients, 8-6t 
lateral resistance, 8-10 to 8-11, 8-10eq, 
8-Lleq 
lead hole and load, 8-11 
lubrication, 8-10 
penetration depth and load, 8-11 
sizes, 8-11t 
types, 8-10, 8-10fig 
withdrawal loads for particleboard, 8-11, 
8-lleq 
withdrawal resistance, 8-10 to 8-11, 
8-lleq 
yield model theory, 8-8t, 8-11 
Seasoning and lumber purchasing 
considerations, 6-17 to 6-18 
Selangan Batu. See Balau 
Select lumber availability, 6-16 to 6-17 
Sepetir: 
characteristics, 2-36 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-36 
mechanical properties, 5-20t, 5-24t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-36 
workability, 2-36 
Seraya, white: 
characteristics, 2-36 to 2-37 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
locality of growth, 2-36 
machinability, 2-37 
uses, 2-37 


Shakes: 
in lumber stress grading, 7-4 to 7-5 
Shear strength parallel to grain: 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
defined, 5-3 
Shear stress of beams, 9-6 
Sheathing and light-frame construction, 
17-3, 17-4fig 
Shingles and shakes, availability, 6-17 
Shingles, finishes, suitability and expected 
service life, 16-17t 
Shipworms, 14-13 
Shrinkage: 
adjustment for design use, 7-10 
affect on painting, 16-3, 16-4t 
coefficients for changing moisture 
content by species, 13-16t, 13-17t 
coefficient of variation, 4-7, 4-9 
compression wood, 4-7 
discussion, 4-5 to 4-9 
fiber saturation point as related to, 4-2 
longitudinal, 4-5 
moisture content curves, 4-5fig 
of domestic woods, 4-6t 
of imported woods, 4-8t 
radial, 4-6t, 4-8t 
species, 4-6t, 4-8t 
tangential, 4-6t, 4-8t 
volumetric, 4-6t, 4-8t 
Siding: 
and mill glaze, 16-26 to 16-27 
availability, 6-16 
back-priming, 16-25 
finishes, suitability and expected service 
life, 16-17t 
lumber finishing, 16-8 to 16-9 
prefinished at the factory, 16-25 
removing weathered surface, 16-13 
use of plywood, 16-9 
Silverballi, brown, See Kaneelhart 
Size factor: 
for design use, 7-11 to 7-12 
procedures for design use: 
in-grade test, 7-11 to 7-12 
small clear, 7-11 
Slash-grained lumber. See Flat-grained 
Slope of grain: 
determination, 5-28 to 5-30, 5-29eq 
in visual sorting, 7-4 
relationship to fiber orientation, 5-30fig 
types, 5-29 to 5-31 
Smoke: 
approaches for dealing with, 18-6 
carbon monoxide, 18-6 
defined, 18-6 
release rate, 18-11 
tests for determining yield, 18-9 to 18-10 
toxicity, 18-10 
Soft rot, 14-4 
Softwood lumber: 


American Lumber Standard, 6-7 
classification by grades: 
factory and shop lumber: 
factory (shop) grades, 6-10 
industrial clears, 6-10 
ladder and pole stock, 6-10 
moulding stock, 6-10 
tank stock, 6-10 
structural lumber: 
dimension lumber, 6-8 
structural laminations, 6-8 
yard lumber: 
common lumber, 6-7, 6-8fig 
select lumber, 6-7 to 6-8 
development of grading rules, 6-7 
drying targets, 13-5 
grading organizations, 6-9t 
kiln drying schedules, 13-8 to 13-9, 
13-11t 
manufacture: 
size, 6-10, 6-11t 
surfacing, 6-11 
patterns, 6-11, 6-12fig 
species, 6-13t to 6-15t 
Softwoods: 
availability, 2-2 
bending properties, 19-3 
charring rates, 18-14t 
definition, 2-2 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
flammability data, 18-10t 
heat release data, 18-12fig 
imported, 2-38 to 2-40 
moisture content, heartwood and 
sapwood, 4-2t 
preservative penetration, 15-7t to 15-8t 
relationship of mechanical properties to 
specific gravity, 5-29t 
species by region, 2-3t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-2 
Sorption hysteresis, discussed, 4-3 
Solvents and adhesion, 10-9 
Sound, speed of, 5-17 
Southern pine sapwood stakes, preservative 
retention and life span tests, 15-7t to 15-8t 
Soybean adhesives: 
structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 
Spanish-cedar: 
characteristics, 2-37 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-37 
mechanical properties, 5-21t, 5-25t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-37 
workability, 2-37 


1-25 


Specific gravity: 
and paintability of wood, 16-1, 16-2 to 
16-7 
and weathering of wood, 16-11 
coefficient of variation, 4-7, 4-9, 4-9t, 
5-26t 
definition, 4-7 
density as a function of, 4-9t, 4-11t 
influence on mechanical properties, 
5-26, 5-29t 
moisture content, 4-1, 4-3fig, 4-5fig 
of reaction wood, 5-31 

Speed of sound, 5-17 

Sphaeroma, 14-14 

Spikes, 8-9 

Spiral grain, 5-30, 5-30fig 

Splits: 
in lumber stress grading, 7-4 

Spruce, black: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 

Spruce, Eastern: 
characteristics, 2-17 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-17 
nomenclature, 6-14t 
species, 2-17 
uses, 2-17 
workability, 2-17 

Spruce, Engelmann: 
characteristics, 2-17 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
charring rate data, 18-14t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
locality of growth, 2-17 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-14t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-17 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
toughness values, 5-28t 
uses, 2-17 

Spruce, red: 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
fracture toughness, 5-28t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 5-34t 


1-26 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
Spruce, Sitka: 
characteristics, 2-17 to 2-18 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
locality of growth, 2-17 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-14t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-18 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 2-18, 5-8t, 5-13t 
tensile strength, 5-26t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
uses, 2-18 
Spruce, white: 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
penetration, 15-16t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 
thermal conductivity, 4-14t 
Stability: 
beams: 
water ponding, 9-9, 9-9eq 
lateral-torsion buckling, 9-9 to 9-10, 
9-9eq, 9-10t 
deck support, effect of, 9-9, 9-9eq, 
9-10fig 
built-up and spaced columns, 9-8, 9-8eq 
column flanges, 9-8, 9-8eq 
long columns, 9-7, 9-7eq 
interaction of buckling modes, 9-9 to 
9-10, 9-9eq, 9-10eq 
short columns, 9-7 to 9-8, 9-8eq, 9-8fig 
Stain: 
penetrating: 
use on exterior plywood, 16-9 
semi-transparent: 
application and maintenance, 16-19t, 
16-19 to 16-20 
discussed, 16-17 
refinishing, 16-18 to 16-20 
solid color: 
and mill glaze, 16-26 to 16-27 
application and maintenance, 16-19t, 
16-19 to 16-20 
discussed, 16-22 
reconstituted wood products, 16-25 
refinishing, 16-22 
use on floors, 16-33 to 16-34 
Stains. See also Discoloration 
Stains, chemical, discussed 14-2 


Stains, fungal: 
blue, 16-30 
discussed, 14-1 to 14-2 
distinction from mold, 14-2 
during drying, 13-10, 13-13fig 
effect on wood, 14-2 
Stains, iron, 16-30 
Stake tests with preservatives, pressure- 
treated, 15-7t to 15-8t 
Standard lengths of lumber, 6-3 
Standard lumber abbreviations, 6-23 to 
6-25 
Standard thicknesses of lumber: 
for flooring, 6-6 
table, 6-6t 
Standard widths of lumber, 6-3 
Staples, 8-9 to 8-10 
Starch adhesive, structural performance, 
10-11t to 10-13t 
Staybwood, 19-10 
Staypak: 
appearance, 19-10 
dimensional stability, 19-9t 
properties, 19-6t, 19-9 to 19-10 
purpose, 19-10 
strength properties, 19-7t to 19-8t 
uses, 19-10 
Sterilization of wood. See Heat sterilization 
Sticker stain during drying, 13-10, 13-14fig 
Stiffeners and glulam beam construction, 
17-7 
Stiffness, affected by knots, 7-4 
Storage of lumber: 
care in yards, 13-14 to 13-15, 14-7 
green or partially seasoned, 13-14 
storage shed temperature, 13-14t 
Storing lumber: 
finish and factory items, 13-14 
sheathing and structural items, 13-14 
Strength and duration of load adjustments, 
7-12 
Strength ratio: 
definition, 7-3 
equations, 7-6, 7-6fig 
estimating, 7-5 
ranges in visual grading, 7-6 
Strength properties: 
bird pecks, effect of, 5-33 
compression failures, effect of, 5-33 
creep, 5-39 
dead trees, 5-34 
derived for small clear wood, 7-5 
duration of load, effect, 5-39 to 5-40 
extractives, effect of, 5-34 
fire-retardant treatments, 5-41 to 5-42 
for commercially important woods, 5-4t 
to 5-13t 
insect damage, effect of, 5-44 
juvenile wood, 5-32 to 5-33 
knots, effect of, 5-26 to 5-28 


Index 


moisture content as related to, 5-5 
nuclear radiation, 5-43 
pitch pockets, effect of, 5-33 
rate of loading, 5-38 
slope of grain, 5-28 to 5-31 
treatment, effect of, 7-13 
Strength, related to slope, 5-31t 
Stress equations: 
axial load: 
tensile stress, 9-4, 9-4eq 
short-block compressive stress, 9-4, 
9-4eq 
bending: 
notches, slits and holes, effect 9-6 to 
9-7 
size effect, 9-5, 9-5eq 
straight beam stresses, 9-4 
tapered beam stresses, 9-4 to 9-6, 
9-5fig, 9-5eq, 9-6eq 
time effects, 9-6 
water ponding, 9-6 
combined bending and axial load: 
concentric load, 9-6, 9-6eq 
eccentric load, 9-7, 9-7eq 
torsion, 9-7, 9-7fig, 9-7eq 
Stress-graded lumber, American Standard 
lumber sizes, 6-11t 
Stress grading: 
American Lumber Standard Committee 
(ALSC): 
accredited rules-writing and 
independent agencies, 7-2t 
American Softwood Standard, 7-2 
National Grading Rule, 7-3, 7-3t 
American Society of Testing and 
Materials (ASTM): 
calculating clear wood properties for 
visual stress grades, 7-3 
design properties, 7-1 
strength ratio, 7-3 
U.S. responsibility structure, 7-2, 7-2fig 
Stress, relationship between constant load 
and failure, 5-39 to 5-40, 5-39fig, 5-40fig 
Structural composite lumber (SCL) in 
bridges, 17-9 
Structural flakeboard and light-frame 
construction, 17-3 
Sucupira: 
characteristics, 2-37 
decay resistance, 14-5St 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-37 
mechanical properties, 5-21t, 5-25t 
resistance to fungi and insects, 2-37 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-37 
workability, 2-37 
Sugarberry (See also Hackberry) 
Suradan. See Pilon 


Sweetgum: 
characteristics, 2-9 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
interlocked grain, 2-9 
locality of growth, 2-9 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-9 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
uses, 2-9 
Swelling, coefficient for changing moisture 
content, by species, 13-16t to 13-17t 
Sycamore: 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Sycamore, American: 
characteristics, 2-9 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-9 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-9 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
uses, 2-9 


Tamarack: 
characteristics, 2-18 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
locality of growth, 2-18 
mechanical properties, 5-14t, 5-15t 
moisture content, 4-2t, 5-34t 
nomenclature, 6-14t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-8t, 5-13t 


uses, 2-18 
Tangare. See Andiroba 
Tanoak: 


characteristics, 2-9 to 2-10 

decay resistance, 14-5t 

dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
locality of growth, 2-9 

machinability, 2-10 

nomenclature, 6-5t 

shrinkage values, 4-6t 


strength properties, 2-9, 5-6t, 5-11t 
uses, 2-10 
Teak: 
characteristics, 2-37 to 2-38 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-17t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-37 
machinability, 2-38 
mechanical properties, 5-21t, 5-25t 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-38 
Tebuconazole: 
effectiveness, 15-9 
solubility, 15-9 
Temperature, effect on: 
fatigue strength, 5-40 to 5-41 
mechanical properties: 
irreversible effects, 5-37 to 5-38, 
5-38 fig 
reversible effects, 5-35 to 5-36, 
5-36fig 
properties, 7-13, 7-13t 
relative humidity and moisture content, 
4-4t 
Tensile strength, end-grain bonded joints, 
10-18 
Tensile strength parallel to grain: 
average values, 5-26t 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
defined, 5-3 
Tensile strength perpendicular to grain, 5-3 
Tension wood: 
definition, 5-32 
density increase, 5-31 
description, 5-32 
effect on strength, 5-32 
shrinkage, 5-32 
Texture of wood, 3-13 to 3-14 
Texture, effect on paintability, 16-6 
Termites: 
damage caused by, 14-8t, 14-11 fig 
nonsubterranean, 14-12 
subterranean, 14-11 to 14-12 
termite-resistant wood, 14-12 to 14-13 
Thermal, conductivity of wood: 
definition, 4-10 
determination, 4-12 
factors affecting, 4-10, 4-11 
selected species, 4-13t to 4-14t 
Thermal diffusivity of wood, 4-12 
Thermal expansion, 4-14 
Thermal properties of wood, 4-10 
Thermoplastics and adhesion, 10-9 to 
10-10 
Ties: 
availability, 6-20 
preservative penetration levels, 15-4t to 
15-5t 
service life, 6-23 
sizes, 6-20 


1-27 


standards and specifications, 6-18t 
strength properties, 7-14 
weight and volume, 6-21 to 6-22 
Timber: 
inventory, 2-2 
resources, 2-2 
Timber bridges: 
glulam, 17-7, 17-9, 17-9fig 
log stringer, 17-8 
sawn lumber, 17-9 
structural composite lumber, 17-9 
Timber buildings: 
arch structure, 17-8 
dome, 17-8, 17-8fig 
glulam beam, 17-7 
mill-type construction: 
fire resistance, 17-7 
specifications, 17-7 
timber frame houses, 17-6 to 17-7, 
17-7fig 
Timbers, recommended moisture content, 
13-3 
Timber from dead trees, properties of, 5-34 
Time, effect on strength: 
creep, 5-39 
duration of load, 5-39 to 5-40 
Tornillo: 
characteristics, 2-38 
decay resistance, 14-5St 
locality of growth, 2-38 
mechanical properties, 5-21t, 5-25t 
uses, 2-38 
workability, 2-38 
Torsion, strength, 5-15 
Toughness: 
average values, 5-27t, 5-28t 
coefficient of variation, 5-26t 
defined, 5-25 
Tracheids, description and function, 3-9 
Transverse and volumetric shrinkage of 
wood, 4-5 to 4-7 
Treated wood recycling and disposal, 
15-26 
Trebol. See Macawood 
Trim, exterior: 
care during construction, 13-19 
recommended moisture content, 13-5t 
Trusses: 
care during construction, 13-8 to 13-19 
in light-frame construction, 17-4 
in pole and post-frame construction, 
17-4 to 17-6 
Truss plates, 8-25, 8-25fig 
Tupelo: 
characteristics, 2-10 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
locality of growth, nomenclature, 6-5t 
shock resistance, 2-10 
species, 2-10 
uses, 2-10 


1-28 


General Technical Report FPL-GTR-190 


Tupelo, black: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
Tupelo, swamp, moisture content, 4-2t 
Tupelo, water: 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
moisture content, 4-2t 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 


Urea and dimethylol urea for plasticizing 

wood, 19-1 

Urea adhesives: 
performance over time, 10-21 to 10-22, 
10-22fig 
structural performance, 10-11t to 10-13t 
use with composite products, 11-3 
working and strength properties, and 
uses, 10-11t to 10-13t 


Van der Waal’s forces, 10-1 to 10-2 
Varnish: 
application and maintenance, 16-19t 
clear, 16-21 
use on boats, 16-25 
use on floors, 16-33 to 16-34 
Veneer: 
and adhesion, 10-3 to 10-4 
use with plywood, 11-5 
Veneered curved members, 19-3 
Ventilation and anobiids, 14-10 
Vertical-grained lumber. See Edgegrained 
lumber 
Vessel: 
definition, 2-2 
function, 3-10 to 3-11 
Vibration properties, 5-17 
Virola. See Banak 
Visual grades in the National Grading 
Rule, 7-3t 
Visual grading: 
deriving strength properties for small 
clear wood, 7-5 to 7-6, 7-5fig 
deriving modulus of elasticity for small 
clear wood, 7-5, 7-6fig 
in-grade procedures, 7-7 
sorting criteria, 7-3 to 7-4 
Visual sorting criteria in lumber stress 
grading: 
checks and splits, 7-4 
decay, 7-5 
density, 7-5 
explanation, 7-3 
heartwood and sapwood, 7-5 
knots, 7-3 to 7-4 
pitch pockets, 7-5 


shakes, 7-4 
slope of grain, 7-4 
wane, 7-5 


Waika. See Manni 
Walele. See Ilomba 
Wallaba: 
characteristics, 2-38 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-38 
machinability, 2-38 
mechanical properties, 5-21t, 5-25t 
resistance to insects, 2-38 
shrinkage values, 4-8t 
uses, 2-38 
Walnut, black: 
availability at retail yards, 6-16 
characteristics, 2-10 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
kiln drying schedule, 13-11t 
locality of growth, 2-10 
moisture content, 4-2t 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-10 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
uses, 2-10 
workability, 2-10 
Wane in lumber stress grading, 7-5 
Wapa. See Wallaba 
Warp: 
and finishing, 16-13 to 16-14 
and weathering, 16-11 
during drying, 13-7 
Waterborne preservatives. See 
Preservatives, waterborne 
Waterponding, effect on bending stress, 9-8 
Water repellants (See also water repellant 
preservative): 
application and maintenance, 16-19t, 
16-20 
discussed, 16-13 
moisture-excluding coatings, different 
from, 16-13 
used as a finish, 16-13 
Water-repellant preservatives: 
application and maintenance, 16-19t 
as a first step in finishing, 16-11 
back-priming, 16-25 
caution in use, 16-25 
effect of use on window sash and frame, 
16-18fig 
on wood exposed to marine 
environments, 16-24 to 16-25 


Index 


paintability, 16-24 to 16-25 
refinishing, 16-25 
used as a finish, 16-25 
use on edges of reconstituted wood 
products, 16-10 
use on end grain, 16-6fig 
Wax in composite products, 11-5 
Weathering of wood: 
and mill glaze, 16-26 to 16-27 
artist’s rendition of, 16-11 fig 
as a natural finish, 16-16 
effect on extractives, 16-7 
effect on lignin, 16-11 
effect on paint adhesion, 16-12 
erosion rates for hardwoods and 
softwoods, 16-12t 


in marine environments, 16-24 to 16-25 


of finishes, 16-16 
process, 16-24 
warp, 16-12 to 16-13 
Western redcedar, used for poles, 6-19 
White-cedar: 
Atlantic. See Cedar, Atlantic white 
Northern. See Cedar, Northern white 
White rot, 14-4 
Willow, black: 
characteristics, 2-10 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
locality of growth, 2-10 
nomenclature, 6-5t 
penetration, 15-16t 
shock resistance, 2-10 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
uses, 2-10 
Withdrawal resistance: 
of lag screws, 8-12 to 8-13 
of nails, 8-2 to 8-5 
of wood screws, 8-10 to 8-11 
Wood buildings, consideration: 
moisture control: 
effect on heat flow, 17-11 


mold, mildew, mites and health, 17-10 


moisture control strategies, 17-11 


paint failure and appearance problems, 


17-11 
structural failure, 17-11 
sound control, 17-11 to 17-12, 17-12t 
structural performance and 
serviceability, 17-9 to 17-10 
thermal insulation and air infiltration 
control, 17-9 to 17-10 
Wood cells. See cells of wood 
Wood cleaners and brighteners, 16-34 to 
16-35 
Wood Components Manufacturers 
Association, 6-4, 6-4t 


Wood fillers, 16-33 
Wood identification, 3-16 
Wood-thermoplastic composites: 
materials, 11-25 
production, 11-26 
with high thermoplastic composites: 
advantages, 11-26 
compounding, 11-26 
disadvantages, 11-26 
manufacture, 11-26 
mechanical properties, 12-9t 
specific gravity, 12-9t 
with low thermoplastic composites: 
manufacture, 11-27 
Wood screws. See screws, wood 
Work to maximum load in bending, 5-3 


Yang. See Keruing 
Yellow-cedar. See Cedar, yellow 
Yellow-poplar: 
characteristics, 2-10 to 2-11 
characteristics for painting, 16-5t 
charring rate data, 18-14t 
connector joint strength, 8-21t 
decay resistance, 14-5t 
dimensional change coefficient, 13-16t 
ease of bonding, 10-7t 
elastic ratio, 5-2t 
erosion of planed surfaces, 16-12t 
flame spread index, 18-4t 
fracture toughness, 5-27t, 5-28t 
locality of growth, 2-10 
moisture content, 4-2t 
penetration, 15-16t 
Poisson ratio, 5-3t 
shock resistance, 2-11 
shrinkage values, 4-6t 
strength properties, 5-6t, 5-11t 
thermal conductivity, 4-13t 
toughness values, 5-27t 
uses, 2-11 


Zinc-coated nails, 8-3 

Zinc naphthenate: 
effectiveness, 15-11 
inappropriate uses, 15-11 
properties, 15-11 


1-29 


