HAER No. MA-14 


Boston. Elevated Railway; Companys 
•. Elevated Mainline Structure 
(Metropolitan Bay Transportation 
: Authority, ..Orange Line) 

Boston 

Suffolk County 
Massachusetts 





I 


PHOTOGRAPHS 

WRITTEN HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA 


Historic American Engineering Record 
National Park Service 
Department of the Interior 
Washington, D.C. 20013-7127 









Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 


Date: 

Page 

TRANSMITTAL FORM 

July, 1986 

1 

Kabr 

pA /\S S « 

I £ - fi© $T ? 

Project Name: 

Boston Elevated Railway Company: 
Mainline Elevated Structure 

(MBTA- 

* 2 . 7 - 

Orange Line) 

Staff Member 

Eric N. Delony, Principal Architect 

Phone: 

202-343-9629 

Col lection: 

HABS HAER X HABSI OAHPI 

DTHER 


State(s): 

Massachusetts 



County(s): 

Suffolk 




City(s) or Vicinity(s): Boston _ 

Neighborhood or District: South End, Roxbury and Jamaica Plain _ 

An Elevated Rapid Transit Railroad structure 
Site(s) and/or Structured): with Six Stations __ 

Addendum: No X ; Yes _; To: _ 


Sponsors: 

U.S. Department of Transportation, Urban Mass Transit Administration 
address and contact person unknown 


Massachusetts Bay Transporation Authority, Southwest Corridor Project 
500 Arborway, 8oston, Mass. Daniel L. Ocasio, Director of Design & 

Development, Southwest Corridor Project. 

Kaiser Engineers/Fay Spofford & Thorndike (sub-consultants to MBTA) 
Six St. James Avenue, Boston, MA 02116, Charles D. Shaker, Manager, 
Urban Desgin 

SHPO: 

Ms. Valerie Talmadge: Executive Director 

Massachusetts Historical Commission 

80 Boylston Street 

Boston, MA 02116 


Regional Directors: James W. Coleman, Jr., Regional Director _ 

MTd-AtYantic Office, National Park Service 
_ 143 South 3rd, Street, Philadelphia, PA 19106 


Comments: 

This report was compiled to serve as a mitigatory documentation of the struc¬ 
ture to comply with the requirements of the Memorandum of Agreement, signed 
February 1978 by the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation; the Massachu¬ 
setts Say Transportation Authority (M8TA); Boston Landmarks Commission; Urban 
Mass Transportation Administration, and the Massachusetts Historic Preserva¬ 
tion Officer. The preparation of this report has been financed in part 
through a grant from the U.S. Department of Transportation Administration, 
under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1965, as amended. 



United States Department of 
National Park Service 
Washington, D.C. 2024D 

the Interior 

HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD 
SITE DATA FORM 

STATE 

COUNTY 

TOWN OR VICINTY 

Massachusetts 

Suffolk 

Boston 

HISTORIC NAME 


HAER NO. 


Boston Elevated Railway Company: Elevated Mainline Structure MA-14 

SECONOARY OR COMMON NAMES 
MBTA - Orange Line 

COMPLETE AOORESS (DESCRIBE LOCATION FOR RURAL AREAS) 

Washington Street, Boston, Mass, from Oover Street to Forest Hills and 
through the South End, Roxbury and Jamaica Plain. 

DATE - OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEER, BUILDER, OR FABRICATOR 

Engineering Department - former Boston Elevated Railway Company 
George A. Kimball - Chief Engineer 1898-1901 & 19D6-1909 

SIGNIFICANCE TTECHNOIOGICAL ANO HISTORICAL, INCLUOE ORIGINAL USE) 

Elevated structure is the last remaining portion of a formerly extensive 
elevated rapid transit system built at the turn of the century in Boston. 

STYLE (IF APPROPRIATE)- 

Elevated structure to support rapid transit railway system (electric) 

MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION (INCLUDE STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS) 

Tracks spiked to wood ties bolted to steel trusses (longitudinal) which are 
framed into transverse bents which in turn frame into two columns supported 
by concrete foundations on solid material under street. 

SHAPE AND' DIMENSIONS' (SkETCHE'D 'FLOOR' PL'A'NS 0OEPARA7E TOES m 'ACCEPTABLE')— 

See reproductions of original drawings. 

rXTOTOTTTEATLrftTS' "OF 'NOTE- 

Three variants of a then common elevated structure constructed of sections built 
up of riveted assemblages of rolled structural steel. Stations were designed 
in several styles (Beaux Art fashion) to adapt to the steel elevated structure. 

'INTERIOR''FEATURES OF NOTE (DESCRIBE MECHANICAL”SYSTEMS, MACHINERY OR EQUIPMENT) 
Trains were from four to eight cars long powered by electricity, gathered from 
a third rail and run by the "multiple unit" system of propulsion. 

mA’J'OT* 'Alterations AND additions wiftf oaYFs 

Oudley Station altered in 1908 and in 1948. Forest Hills extension opened 
for use in 1909. 

PRESENT CONDITION ANb USE 

Structure has lost 30% of its metal through corrosion but is presently 
structurally adequate for regular rapid train service. 

OTHER INFORMATION AT APPRflPRIAE 

The structure is currently in use but is slated for demolition in 1987, 
when it will be supplanted by a new relocated Organe Line. 

SOURCES 'OF' INFORMATION (1NC L UDING" ITS TINS' UTOAT I'ONAL REGISTER, PROFESSIONAL 
ENGINEERING SOCIETY LANDMARK DESIGNATIONS, ETC.) 

Information not available 

COMPILER, - AFFIL I ATTOn DATE 

Cynthia R. Zaitzevsky, Consultant in Architectural History July, 1986 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Rage 2 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 3 


HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD 

BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY COMPANY - ELEVATED MAINLINE STRUCTURE 

(MBTA - ORANGE LINE) 


HAER NO. MA-14 

LOCATION: The extant (1986) portion of the original elevated Mainline of 

the former Boston Elevated Railway Company (BERy) is located on 
Washington Street, in the South End, Roxbury and Jamaica Plain 
districts of Boston, Mass, and runs between the South Portal of 
the Washington Street tunnel and the Forest Hills Station, repair 
shops, and storage yards (Bents #1215 to #772). The original 
Mainline of the Boston Elevated Railway ran from Sullivan Square, 
Charlestown to Dudley Street, Roxbury and was later extended to 
the Forest Hills Station. The remaining structure consists of six 
stations. Bent numbers are indexed on plans in the files of the 
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) Engineering 
Department. Grid Coordinates refer to the Boston South Quad. 


STATIONS 

1. ) Dover Street (Bents #1174-1181) 

2. ) Northampton Street (Bents #1093-1098) 

3. ) Dudley Street (Bents #1024-1040) 

4. ) Egleston (8ents #908-915) 

5. ) Green Street (8ents #857-864) 

6. ) Forest Hills (8ents 783-789) 


GRID COORDINATES 
19.0329780E.4689820N 
19.0328880E.4689000N 
19.0328260E.4688250N 
19.0328030E.4686760N 
19.0326500E.4686070N 
19.0325780E.4685100N 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 4 


DESCRIPTION: The Mainline of the BERy at one time consisted of six sections 

which traversed the congested areas of Boston and Charlestown to 
Roxbury and Jamaica Plain. For convenience these sections will 
be categorized alphabetically, according to their original loca¬ 
tions, and hereafter will be referred to by Section letter. The 
main body of this report concerns Section F . The sections are 
indexed on plans of the former BERy, MTA and the current MBTA. 
These plans have been included in this study as Fig. No. HD-1, 

HD-2, HD-3, HD-4, and HD-5 . 

★ * * * 

This report with the accompanying illustrations was compiled to 
serve as a mitigatory documentation of this structure in order to 
comply with the requirements of the Memorandum of Agreement, 
signed February 1978 by the Advisory Council on Historic Preser ¬ 
vation; Urban Mass Transportation Administration; and the Massa¬ 
chusetts State Historic Preservation Officer. 

★ ★ ★ ★ 

SECTION A 

Formerly the Charlestown Division of the Boston Elevated Railway Company 
(BERy). Constructed in 1898-1901. Sullivan Square Terminal southerly 
through Charlestown to the North Portal of the subway. Included City 
Square, Thompson Square, North Station stations and the Charlestown 
drawbridge over the Charles River (built in 1896-1899 by the Boston 
Transit Commission). This section was abandoned in 1975 and was demolished 
in 1976-1977 when the new Orange Line subway was extended to Medford along 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 5 


the Boston and Maine Railroad right of way. Only Tower "C" was saved from 
demolition and moved to the Seashore Trolley Museum at Kennebunkport, 

Maine. 

SECTION A-l 

Extension of the Charlestown Division line easterly into Everett. Con¬ 
structed in 1916-1919. Included only one station -- Everett (built by the 
BERy). Discontinued in 1975 and demolished in 1976-1978. 

SECTION B 

North Portal to Pleasant Street Station (now Broadway) via the outer tracks 
of the Tremont Street Tunnel which was adapted to elevated train use in 
1901 by the construction of higher platforms. This link was returned to 
full streetcar use in 1908 with the construction of the Washington Street 
Tunnel. 

SECTION C 

Pleasant Street Station, up the incline, over the Boston and Albany and New 
Haven Railroad right-of-way tracks, and along Castle Street as an elevated 
structure, to Tower "0" (Bent #1200) on Washington Street. Constructed by 
the BERy in 1901 to link the Washington Street elevated to the South 
Portal of the Tremont Street Subway. Abandoned in 1908. Demolished in 
1935. Incline portion remained until demolition in 1961. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 6 


SECTION D 

Elevated structure along Atlantic Avenue from Tower C at North Station to 
Tower D at Washington Street. Constructed in 1901 and in use until 1938. 
Demolished in 1942. 

SECTION E 

North Portal to South Portal via Washington Street Tunnel. Built in 
1904-1908 by the Boston Transit Commission. This section will continue in 
use after demolition of the elevated structure. 

SECTION F 

South Portal to Forest Hills repair shops. This line was originally known 
as the Roxbury Division of the BERy. The line is divided for identifica¬ 
tion purposes into the following sub-sections: 

SECTION F-l 

South Portal (Bent #1215) to Tower D at Washington Street. Built in 1908 by 
the BERy to connect the new subway tunnel to the Washington Street line of 
the Roxbury Division. Structural system is plate girder bents with longi¬ 
tudinal plate girders. 

SECTION F-2 

Tower D at Bent #1200 to Bent #1143 south of Dover Street Station. Built 
between 1899 and 1901 as part of the BERy Roxbury Division to Dudley 
Terminal. Plate girder bents with longitudinal truss girders. 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 7 


SECTION F-3 

Bents #1143 to #1068 along Washington Street. Built between 1899 and 1901 
by the BERy. Includes Northampton Street Station. Arched truss bents with 
longitudinal truss girders. 

SECTION F-4 

Bents #1143 through #1100 to the Bartlett Street Yard. Built in 1899 to 
1901 by the BERy as part of the original Roxbury Division. Includes the 
Dudley Terminal and the Guild Street yards and repair shops (discontinued 
in 1923). Plate girder bents with longitudinal truss girders. Loop around 
Dudley Station is marked by Bents T-l through T-28. 

SECTION F-5 

This section is the beginning of the Forest Hills Division. Construction 
work began on May 2, 1906 and service began on November 22, 1909. Work 
included rebuilding the loops and platforms at Dudley Street Station and 
the construction of Egleston Station. Section F-5 runs as an elevated 
structure from Bent #1000 to #797 at the Arborway yards. Construction is 
plate girder bents with plate longitudinal girders. Green Street Station 
was added on as a suspended structure in 1912. 

SECTION F-6 

This section was a specially designed steel framework encased in concrete. 
Bents #979 to #783 include Forest Hills Station. Built in 1908-1909 by the 
BERy. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 8 


SECTION F-7 

Bents #783 through #772 constitute the Forest Hills train storage yards and 
the repair shops. This extension was built in 1921. Repair shops built in 
1923. Includes Tower "H“. This section was demolished in 1984. 

Oates of Construction: Sections F-l through F-4: 1898 - 1901 

Sections F-5 through F-6: 1906 - 1910 
Section F-7: 1921 - 1923 

Engineers/Builders: Boston Elevated Railway Company Engineering Department: 

George A. Kimball, Chief Engineer 

Present Owner: Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) 

10 Park Plaza, Boston, Mass. 02116 

Present Use: Remaining portion of the original BERy elevated Mainline 

Structure is currently in use as part of the MBTA's 
Orange Line rapid transit service from Forest Hills to 
Medford, Mass. The elevated portion (Section F-l 
through F-7) serves from the South End through Jamaica 
Plain. The entire structure is slated for demolition 
when the new Southwest Corridor segment of the Orange 
Line rapid transit is completed. 

Significance: 


This portion of the Orange Line elevated is historically 
significant as Boston's first elevated line, built 
during a period of world-wide interest and experimen- 



Historians: 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 9 

tation with elevated railways; and as the product of 
Boston's last privately-owned transit company, the 
Boston Elevated Railway Company. 

Architecturally, it is significant for the quality of 
its original station architecture, which was designed by 
the prominent local architect, Alexander Wadsworth Long¬ 
fellow. Later alterations were carried out under con¬ 
sultation with other leading Boston architects, such as 
Robert Swain Peabody and Edmund Wheelwright. In gen¬ 
eral, it represented the most advanced transportation 
planning of its day and is a good case study, on a small 
scale, of rapid transit at the turn of the century. 

Cynthia Zaitzevsky - Consultant in Architectural History 
to Kaiser Engineers, Inc./Fay, Spofford and Thorndike, 
Inc. (Coordinating Consultants to the MBTA for design 
and construction of the new relocated Orange Line — 
Southwest Corridor Project) 

Christine Fernandez Carvajal - Research Assistant 

Calvin Opitz - Assistant on Structural Engineering 
Portion 


Nikita Zaitzevsky - Assistant 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 
Page 10 


BOSTON ELEVATEO RAILWAY COMPANY - ELEVATED MAINLINE STRUCTURE 

(MBTA - ORANGE LINE) 


Submitted to the 

HISTORIC AMERICAN ENGINEERING RECORD 

by 

Cynthia Zaitzevsky 

Consultant in Architectural History to 
Kaiser Engineers, Inc./Fay, Spofford and Thorndike, Inc. 
Six St. James Avenue 
Boston, Mass. 02116 
for 

Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority 


Contributing Authors: 

Christine Fernandez Carvajal 
Calvin Opitz 
Nikita Zaitzevsky 


The preparation of this report 
has been financed in part 
through a grant from the U.S. 
Department of Transportation 
Administration, under the Urban 
Mass Transportation Act of 
1964, as amended. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 11 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Orange Line Documentation 

' “ ~~ Pages 

Chapter 1 12 

Introduction and Discussion of Significance 

Chapter 2 14 

History of Early Public Transportation in Boston 

Chapter 3 24 

Construction of the Elevated Structure - 1898-1901 

Chapter 4 34 

Construction of the Forest Hills Extension 

Chapter 5 40 

Architectural Description of the Stations 

Chapter 6 50 

Structural Analysis and Description 
of the Elevated Structure 

Bi bliography 63 

Appendix A 68 

Chronological History of Orange Line up to 1918. 

Appendix B 74 

Description of the Early Electrical Systems 

(Abstract of Contemporary Description by Frank J. Sprague) 

Appendix C 84 

List of Historical Photographs. 

Appendix D 

List of Historic Drawings. 


212 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 12 


Chapter 1 

Introduction and Significance of the Orange Line Elevated 

Ever since Boston's earliest days Washington Street has been the main route 
for transportation between Boston and Roxbury and all other towns in the 
southwest portion of the larger city. The earliest stagecoach followed by the 
omnibus and later by horse-drawn and then the electric streetcar all used this 
route that was to become so heavily travelled that by the 1880‘s it had become 
imperative to build an elevated railway to provide rapid transit north and south 
of Boston. This section of the elevated structure from Oover Street to Forest 
Hills is the last remnant of a larger system of elevated railroads that served 
Boston at the turn of the century. 

Boston was one of the last major American cities to build an elevated rapid 
transit line. The system was developed first in New York City and refined in 
Chicago, where third-rail electric motive power was first used. 

Because it was built comparatively late, the Boston Elevated structure 
could use advanced rapid transit technology borrowed from many different sour¬ 
ces. It is today a good case study, on a small scale, of the "State of the Art" 
of rapid transit at the turn of the century. 

The Orange Line is significant not only from the point of view of tech¬ 
nology but it also represented the most advanced transportation planning of its 
day. The BERy was the first company in the United States to include subways, 
elevated transit and surface trolleys -- all operating under one management. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 13 

In contrast to a system with many competing lines and companies (the usual 
situation in most cities), the public could transfer from one section to another 
of the BERy without paying more than one fare. 

The early history of the Boston Elevated Railway and the Orange Line 
illustrates how Boston avoided the excesses of both total public control and 
free-wheeling private enterprise. All major cities building transit systems at 
that time had such problems in common, but in Boston a balance was struck: 
private management ran the system but government regulated it and also built 
the subways. 

Although it was a small system, Boston's distinctive topography caused many 
difficult planning and engineering problems. Narrow curving streets, high den¬ 
sity in the downtown area, limited arteries into the center of Boston, the hilly 
terrain, the Boston Common and Public Garden, and settled residential districts 
made the task difficult for the Civil Engineer. Contemporary descriptions of 
the system continually extolled the work. It remains today an impressive under¬ 
taking. By studying this system today, we learn on a modest scale about the 
problems of other transit systems of that era. We can also more fully appre¬ 
ciate the engineering capabilities that built this system. 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 14 


Chapter 2 

History of Public Transportation in Boston 

Until the mid 19th century, Boston was a peninsula surrounded by water on 
three sides and connected to Roxbury on the south by a neck of land. Cambridge 
to the west and Charlestown to the north, connected to Boston by bridges, were 
the only other important communities. People lived close to their work and 
rarely travelled beyond their own communities. Except for private coaches and 
horses for the well to do, stagecoaches, omnibuses and, later, trains were the 
only methods of distant travel. 

The omnibus, a horse-drawn bus with a rear entrance, was the first form of 
public transportation running on a regularly scheduled basis. In 1826 the first 
omnibus line in Boston opened. This ran to Cambridge, and by 1830 there was a 
similar line to Roxbury. Both were privately operated. 

These early omnibus lines used approximately the same routes as at least two 
of the major branches of Boston's later public transportation system: The Red 
Line serving Cambridge/Boston and Ordnge Line serving Roxbury/Boston/ 

Charlestown (HP-1) (For explanation of illustration designations, see Notes, 
Chapter 2.) 

In 1856, the first horse-drawn street cars were introduced from Harvard 
Square, Cambridge to Bowdoin Square, Boston. Although steam railroads had 
been operating since the 1830s under charters from the Massachusetts 
Legislature, their service was limited largely to routes between cities and 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 15 

towns. By the middle of the century, Boston's population had increased greatly 
and there was a pressing need for rapid transit within the city. 

The first such company was the Cambridge/Boston Company (1856), followed by 
the Metropolitan Railroad Line. This change underscored the evolution of Boston 
from a compact mercantile city to a larger one fed by the suburbs. Horse 
railways operating under a public franchise offered a faster and more comfor¬ 
table ride than the omnibus. Under Massachusetts law, a franchise was a revo¬ 
cable right, granted by a municipality, to operate over public roads; thus the 
public had some control over the privately operated horse railways. 

The Legislature and the Boston City Council subscribed to the then universal 
belief that free competition among many companies on public streets would pro¬ 
vide the best service for the general public. In most large cities, especially 
New York and Chicago, there were many independent lines spread out over a wide 
geographical area. In spite of municipal corruption, the traction franchises 
still ensured reasonably good public service. 

In Boston, because of local topography, the situation worked out dif¬ 
ferently. All traffic from the north and south was funnelled into the downtown 
along the two main downtown streets: Tremont and Washington. As Boston's popu¬ 
lation and business district grew, the surrounding towns became bedroom suburbs, 
and in turn caused the public transportation system to become overloaded. 

By 1865 there were four main horse street railways: 

The Middlesex Railroad - serving the North (Charlestown); 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 
Page 16 


Union Railway - serving the West (Brighton, Cambridge, Somerville, 

Watertown, and Arlington); 

Metropolitan Railroad - serving the Southwest (Brookline, Dorchester, 

Roxbury, West Roxbury); 

South Boston Railroad - serving the South (South Boston, Dorchester). 

In 1872 and 1881, the Highland Street Railway , serving Roxbury and 
Dorchester, and the Charles River Railway , serving Cambridge and Boston 
were established. 

The lines were largely independent, and there were few crosstown lines or 
transfers. In the congested downtown area, the lines had to share a few tracks 
along Tremont and Washington Streets (HP-2, HP-3). Fragmented service and 
competing lines were not the answer to Boston's expanding business growth and 
population. 

By 1860, traffic was 50 million riders, and, in 1885, it had climbed to 80 
million. All large American cities had similar transportation problems and 
tried various solutions. In 1873, the cable car was invented in San Francisco 
and quickly was adopted in New York, Chicago and Washington, D.C. The horse- 
drawn street car had reached the limits of its effectiveness. It could not tra¬ 
vel long distances at a high speed or carry heavy loads of passengers, and the 
cost of maintaining large stables of many horses was becoming prohibitive. 

The cable car was the first practical method of increasing the effectiveness 
of mass transportation. Although the cable cars worked well in cities with 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 17 

broad straight avenues, they were not feasible on Boston's crowded streets, 
which had to carry several lines. 

In Berlin, in 1881, Werner Siemens put into operation the world's first 
electric streetcar. This was followed by various attempts by Charles Van 
Depoele and Leo Daft in the United States to develop a workable electric 
streetcar. 

The rapid development of technology in the 1880s provided a solution. The 
first practical electric streetcar system was realized by Frank Julian Sprague 
in Richmond, Virginia in 1887 -- a major step in transit history. 

Meanwhile in 1886, Henry Melville Whitney, Eben Jordan and others had 
purchased a vast amount of land along Beacon Street in Boston and Brookline to 
develop as real estate. They also chartered the West End Railway to provide 
street car transportation into Boston. Whitney soon realized that all seven of 
the then competing roads would have to be combined into one economical line. 

His strong financial backing and his political role as an enlightened Democratic 
business man gave him the legislative support to create the requisite transit 
monopoly in Boston and its major suburbs. 

Whitney, in less than a year, had organized the seven separate lines into a 
single integrated transit system using the "division system" of organization 
employed by major railroad companies. The best executives from the old lines 
were placed in responsible positions within the new company. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 18 

Frank L. Sprague's success with the electric street car in Richmond, 

Virginia convinced Whitney that electric traction was the solution to the short¬ 
comings of the horse cars. He electrified the Beacon Street Line of the West 
End Railway in 1887, making Boston the first major city in the world to employ 
electric streetcars. By 1892, the trolley cars accounted for two thirds of the 
city use, and, by 1894, more than 90% of the lines were electrified (HD-100). 

Contemporary accounts describe the progress of the West End: 

Within a single year this company, through the financial 
genius of its organizers, had accomplished the consoli¬ 
dation of all the great street railway companies of the 
city, operating 231 miles of track, the largest street 
railway system in the world.... It is probable that 
more problems of mechanical engineering and of railway 
administration have been grappled 'ab initio 1 by this 
one company than by any other team of street railway 
companies in the last fifty years. [1] 

Although the West End provided excellent transit service, there were still 
problems. Ridership kept increasing, and the number of persons and streetcars 
going into downtown Boston began to choke the downtown streets again. There 
were many proponents of an elevated railroad to provide rapid transit. This had 
been the solution in New York City, where the first elevated railroad powered by 
steam locomotives was built. Chicago, another city with broad, long avenues, 
also had a network of elevated railroads beginning in 1892. Most Bostonians did 
not want the noise and ugliness of elevateds in downtown Boston, but the resi- 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 19 

dents of outlying sections of the city were in favor of an elevated railroad 
that would shorten travel time into Boston. Charles Cheape has chronicled the 
complex struggles that went on in Boston as the public sought a solution to the 
traffic jams in downtown Boston. [2] 

In 1891, the Legislature set up a Rapid Transit Commission to resolve the 
transit impasse. After many hearings and much research, the Commission made 
several recommendations for Boston's future transportation system. Three recom¬ 
mendations were especially important: 

1) North and South Stations should replace the numerous railroad stations 
then serving Boston; 

2) An electric streetcar subway should be built under Tremont Street; 

3) A system of elevated and subway lines should be built to Charlestown, 
Roxbury, Cambridge, and Boston. 

Stat. 1894 Chap. 548 -- An Act that incorporated the Boston Elevated Railway 
Company (the "Meigs Charter") and authorized numerous transit routes in the Boston 
Metropolitan area -- was the first regional approach to mass transportation. 

Later Acts were: 

1) Stat. 1895 Chap. 440 -- An Act that authorized the construction of 
subways in the City of Boston; 

2) Stat. 1896 Chap. 492 -- An Act that placed limits on the West End 
Railway in its use of the subway; 

3) Stat. 1897 Chap. 500 — An Act that authorized the Mass. Railroad 
Commission to use other systems besides the Meigs. This law also: 
a) Authorized construction of the Cambridge Subway; 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 20 


b) Laid out routes of a proposed elevated railway; 

c) Gave the Mayor of Boston authority to review and approve 
architectural and engineering plans of an elevated railway; 

d) Established a five-cent fare with right of free transfer; 

e) Required that the elevated railway run through a subway in the center 
of Boston; 

f) Authorized construction of a new rapid transit bridge from Boston to 
Cambridge across the Charles River; 

g) Authorized construction of a rapid transit tunnel to East Boston 
under Boston Harbor; 

h) Declared franchise rights of the BERy to be irrevocable. 

This was an unusually comprehensive and well thought out law that resolved most 
of Boston's transportation dilemmas. From this point on, good public policy and 
sound traction management were to be characteristic of the city's transportation 
system for many years to come. 

After Henry Whitney left the West End Railway in 1893, that company lost its 
strong direction and failed to take advantage of the new legislation. A com¬ 
peting group of financiers headed by J. P. Morgan bought out the old Meigs 
franchise through the Boston firm of Kidder Peabody in 1895. The new directors 
had the requisite backing to finance construction of the "Elevated." They also 
proved able to overcome the public's objection to the structure. After some 
maneuvering, the Morgan group bought control of the West End, which, on December 
9, 1897, was absorbed by the Morgan run Boston Elevated Railway. The new BERy 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No* MA-14 
Page 21 

now had both a financial and legal monopoly over most public transportation in 
Boston and its suburbs. 

The Act of 1897 also resolved the dispute over the location of the Elevated 
structure. In 1B95, the Boston Transit Commission had begun construction on the 
Tremont Street Subway, which opened on September 1, 1B97. The new charter 
allowed the BERy to use the Tremont Street Subway for its elevated trains. This 
solution prevented the disfigurement of downtown Boston by elevated tracks while 
providing for their construction in the outlying suburbs of Roxbury and 
Charlestown. 

The creation of the West End Railway and the BERy had understandably caused 
many reform minded individuals, led by Louis D. Brandeis, to fear that these 
giants would abuse their potential monopoly powers. It was a complex dilemma. 
There was little confidence in the ability of the often corrupt municipal 
governments to operate public transportation. Therefore the prevailing sen¬ 
timent favored private enterprise. Yet only a company with near total monopoly 
powers could operate rapid transit systems effectively. Boston l s eventual solu¬ 
tion of public and private control was unique in the United States. 

In other major American cities, traction companies managed to wrest total 
control from the public. By contrast, in Europe, municipal governments sub¬ 
sidized and completely controlled public transportation. 

In Boston, the public component was the Boston Transit Commission chartered 
by the State Legislature. The Commission built the subway and leased it to the 
BERy to be used by its rolling stock. Thus the major capital expenditures for 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 22 

subway construction (more costly than an elevated structure but more desirable 
for use in the downtown area) would be undertaken by the City of Boston using 
its lower interest rate on bonds. The BERy, with the approval of, the State and 
the City, then built the elevated structure and connected it to the subway. 

With its impressive financial resources, it could build the structure, the sta¬ 
tions and the outlying street lines and operate the entire system. The public 
benefited because the monopoly was partially under control of the electorate. 
The individual rider benefited more directly from the five-cent fare and the 
right of free transfer. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 23 


NOTES 
Chapter 2 

[1] The Street Railway System of Boston - Street Railway Journal - April 1895. 

[2] Charles W. Cheape, Moving the Masses - 1980. 


References to illustrations are designated as follows: 

HP-1 through HP-117 refer to Historic Photographs and are indexed in 
Appendix "C." 

HD-1 through HD-100 refer to Historic Drawings and are indexed in 
Appendix "D." 

MA-14-1 through MA-14-85 refer to Contemporary Photographs and are listed 
in the "Index to Photographs." 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 24 


Chapter 3 


Construction of the Elevated Structure 1898-1901 

Once the legal problems surrounding the granting of a clear charter to the 
Boston Elevated Railway and its franchise to build a third-rai1 , electrically 
operated , elevated rapid transit system (using the then new multiple unit cars) 
had been resolved, the management of the BERy immediately began planning work 
for the proposed elevated structure. 

George A. Kimball (1850-1912), a respected local civil engineer, was 
appointed chief of the Engineering Division to plan, design and construct the 
elevated railway. Kimball had served for eleven years as chief engineer for the 
City of Somerville and had gone on to distinguish himself as the engineer for 
the Metropolitan Sewage Commission. In the 1880‘s this agency had been pri¬ 
marily responsible for building a vast regional sewage system for metropolitan 
Boston -- a major civil engineering feat for its day. 

Under the terms of Chap. 500 Acts of 1897, the BERy was first required to 
submit plans of the route to the Massachusetts Railroad Commission, which at 
that time was empowered to supervise all railroads and street railways, for 
review and approval. The plans then had to be approved by the Mayor and Common 
Council of the City of Boston. 

The main public criteria were that the structure be light and airy and that 
the stations be of superior architectural appearance. Although New York City 
had been constructing and operating elevated railways since 1873 and Chicago 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 25 

since 1885 (HP-4), Boston was just now accepting this already standard form of 
rapid transit. New York's system of steam locomotives pulling wooden railroad 
cars had not impressed Bostonians. The structure of the New York Elevated 
(HP-5, HP-6), though elegant and open in the early stage of development, became 
less attractive as solid plate girders were used in the later extensions. The 
combination of noisy, smoky, dirty trains runnning over structures that blocked 
out the sunshine on the streets below was something that 8ostonians wished at 
al1 costs to avoid. 

Moreover, with its sophisticated architectural and civil engineering forms, 
the Berlin elevated railway system set a standard of excellence which Bostonians 
tried to achieve (HR-14). [1] The BERy executives made every effort within 
their limited budget to avoid the mistakes of the New York systems and to 
emulate the successes of the Germans. 

The basic design of the elevated structure was quite similar to the one 
developed in New York City (HP-7) and later perfected in Chicago. The prelimi¬ 
nary designs were done under the direction of J.A.L. Waddell, who had been pri¬ 
marily responsible for the design of the Chicago system. The structural and 
civil engineering work was done by the Engineering Department of the Boston 
Elevated Railway Company. ( Chapter 6...Structural Analysis and Description of 
the Elevated Structure discusses in greater detail the engineering aspects of 
the elevated structure.) 

In general, the tracks were laid 24 feet apart on center except on narrow 
streets where they were 12 feet apart (HD-15). The rails were 85 lbs ASCE 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 26 

sections spiked to hard pine ties 16 inches on center, which in turn were bolted 
to the steel structure. Every fourth tie was extended out to support a sidewalk 
for track maintenance men. The trackwork was supported on bents consisting of 
steel columns supported on heavy concrete foundations. Heavy cross girders con¬ 
nected the columns and longitudinal girders with cross bracing supported the 
tracks. After a long design review process, the final approval for the system 
came on April 29, 1898. 

Construction began on the Dudley Station site on January 23, 1899. 

Property condemnation proceedings had already commenced allowing for demolition 
of any structures in the way. Contracts for steel work along the Roxbury 
Division were awarded primarily to the Pencoyd Bridge Co. of Pencoyd 
Pennsylvania, a noted bridge building company, which already had considerable 
experience with the then new steel technology of fabrication and construction. 
Other steel work was executed by the Carnegie Steel Co. and the Pennsylvania 
Steel Co. Terry and Trench Co. of New York City were selected as general 
contractors for the steel erection primarily because of their experience in 
putting up elevated railroad structures in New York City. 

While construction on some parts of the Elevated, in Charlestown and on 
Pleasant Street and Atlantic Avenue (HP-26, HP-27), was carried on in a normal 
fashion during the day, most of the work on the Washington Street segment was 
done at night. While efficiency and speed were considerations, the main reason 
was to avoid touching the live wires that fed the trolley cars running along 
Washington Street. (The lines were either removed from the portion under 
construction at night or else the power was cut.) 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 27 

The BERy specifications stipulated that, wherever there were surface 
tracks, materials should be delivered to the narrow portions of the streets each 
evening after 7pm and that construction could take place only between the hours 
of midnight and Bam. Columns and girders were fabricated in the shops of the 
bridge companies doing the work, delivered by railroad car to the nearest 
siding and finally hauled to the site by trucks pulled by horse teams (HP-24). 
Photographs show how the first columns were erected on Washington Street near 
Dover Street (HP-19). After the cross members were in position, a traveller was 
installed to lift succeeding bents into place. Incandescent lights were also 
hung from the traveller. All steel members were riveted together. As each bent 
was set into place and the longitudinal girders attached, the traveller pulled 
itself forward along the tops of the girders on rollers to the next stop and 
installed the next section (HP-21, HP-22). 

The work was carried out in five segments (HD-1): 

a. ) The Charlestown Main Division; 

b. ) The portion over the Charlestown Bridge which itself had been built in 

1895 by the Boston Transit Commission; 

c. ) The conversion of the Tremont Street Subway, which originally consisted 

of four tracks for streetcars and was modified by the BERy to allow use 
of the high platform third rail trains on the two outside tracks; 

d. ) Building an inclined connector between the tunnel portal at Pleasant 

Street across the Boston and Albany Railroad tracks and Tower D at 
Washington St. (HP-9, HP-11, HD-5); 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 28 

e.) The construction of the Roxbury Main Line along Washington Street (now 
called the elevated portion of the Orange Line) to the terminal at 
Dudley Street. 

The line was planned as an elevated rapid transit railway between several 
stations spaced at long intervals for passengers arriving by surface streetcars. 
Since Boston streets were too narrow to allow more than two tracks, the New York 
and Chicago system of four-track lines consisting of express trains and local 
trains was not used. Since the BERy also had the unique advantage of 
controlling all local lines with the right of free transfer , the system of a 
limited number of stations spread far apart was feasible. The Roxbury Division 
was planned to service local lines at Dover Street, Northampton and finally 
Dudley. These street car lines served Brookline, Newton, Dorchester, Roxbury, 
Jamaica Plain, South Boston, and connected to other companies serving com¬ 
munities to the southwest of Boston as far as Walpole. Lines that formerly ran 
into downtown Boston either along the streets or, after 1898, through the 
Tremont Street Subway were now serviced by the Elevated, thus cutting down the 
time of travel. 

Construction on the Castle Street/Pleasant Street connector began in the 
fall of 1900 just as the work on the Pleasant Street portal and the new viaduct 
was mostly done. Construction photographs show the rapid progress of steel 
erection during December 19D0 and January 1901. To accommodate the longer 
multiple unit, three car trains inside the Tremont Street Subway, the outer two 
tracks were converted to third-rail use; and, inside each Subway station, high 
wooden platforms were erected to allow direct access to the trains. Since the 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 29 

Subway had been designed with short trolley cars in mind, some of the radii were 
too tight, and certain walls and platforms had to be modified to allow clearance 
for the new trains. Most of the conversion work was done in the Subway in the 
week prior to the opening of the new elevated line in order to minimize obstruc¬ 
tion to trolley cars using the Subway (HP-12, HP-13, and HP-18). 

Steel erection on the Washington Street section began on August 19, 1899, 
and, by December 20, 1899, the structure had been erected as far as Sterling 
Street -- a remarkably fast performance by today's construction standards. (In 
1980, a modern flat plate girder replaced the existing trussed girder to allow 
for the passage of the new Melnea Cass Boulevard under the structure (HP-40, 
HA-14-27)). 

Project planning was done under what we now call a fast-track method. As 
soon as planning approvals were obtained, structural design and detail drawings 
were begun, and contracts were signed with steel companies for the required ton¬ 
nage of steel. First column foundations were poured. Erection of the structure 
began as soon as possible. The main line structure was already up while archi¬ 
tectural drawings for the stations were being completed. A completion date of 
Oecember 1900 had originally been scheduled but was delayed a few months. The 
construction progress photographs show a last minute push in the winter of 1901 
to finish the stations and other facilities. Concurrently with this work, the 
BERy was erecting the Atlantic Avenue loop (Section D), which joined the North 
and South Terminal Railroad stations and created a downtown transit circuit 
through the Tremont Street Subway (Section B) (HP-15, HP-27). 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 30 


Dover Street Station was built in 1900 as a center platform type of struc¬ 
ture. Like Northampton Street Station, it was designed to be used by four-car 
trains. After the opening, traffic on the elevated line was so heavy that the 
BERy decided to lengthen the station platforms to accommodate six-car trains 
originally and eight-car trains later (HP-30, HP-31, HD-50 through HD-54). 

Schematic plans were drawn from 1906 on for extending platform lengths and 
increasing the station's capabilities of handling more passengers. The final 
plan of July 1909, in which the center platform and station were removed, the 
tracks brought close together, and a new station built flanking the tracks, was 
carried out. The same plan shows that the center platform and waiting room were 
eliminated (HD-58). When work was completed, the platform had been lengthened 
to accommodate an eight-car train. 

While the new pavilion with waiting room and change booths on the inter¬ 
mediate level with the enlarged station meant a more functional plan capable of 
moving large numbers of passengers from streetcars to elevated train, the final 
architectural configuration of the station that emerged was clearly inferior to 
that of the first. 

In April 1911, plans were issued for the erection of a temporary Dover 
Street Station built of wood that would temporarily replace the regular one 
while the complete renovations were under way (HP-32). [2] 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 31 


Northampton Street was built according to plan and opened in 1901 and 
remains today as the only station that has undergone little change other than 
the lengthening of the platforms to accommodate six-car trains in 1908 (HP-34, 
HP-35, HP-36, HP-37, HP-39). 

Dudley Station 

Dudley Station was conceived as the southern terminal of the Main Line. 
Storage and repair yards were built at Bartlett Street, and a three-track spur 
extended from Dudley station along Washington Street to join them. The terminal 
itself was a complex tri-level combination of elevated train platforms and sur¬ 
face and intermediate-level platforms for transfer to street cars. This ter¬ 
minal serviced all the streetcars coming to Dudley Station from Jamaica Plain, 
Roxbury, West Roxbury, and parts of Dorchester. Southbound trains from Sullivan 
Square would arrive at Dudley, go around the loop, and pull into the northbound 
platform to unload and load passengers. These passengers came from streetcars 
that rode up the inclines feeding the east and west loops which acted as 
passenger platforms (HP-77). On the surface level, there were other surface 
lines bearing passengers. All these surface lines could take passengers as far 
out as Dedham, Westwood and Walpole(HP-41 through HP-50). [3] 

The communities to the southwest of Boston were now more populous, and the 
original spine of Washington Street to Roxbury (now called the "Orange Line") 
extended beyond the Boston city limits. By 1900, the BERY decided to build a 
separate tunnel under Washington Street to connect the two ends of the Main Line 
with a direct link. Also the Tremont Street Subway could be returned to its 
former use as as streetcar subway. The Acts of 1903, Chap. 534 authorized the 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 32 

Boston Transit Commission to build the tunnel and lease it back to the BERy, 
which would in turn furnish the tracks and operating equipment. 

In retrospect, this decision seems wise. In its implementation, it repre¬ 
sented another stage in the continuing struggle between the management of the 
BERy and the reform elements in Boston who feared the monopolistic potential of 
such a huge corporation. While the construction of the tunnel was done by the 
Boston Transit Commission, the interiors of the tunnels and the station fur¬ 
nishings were the responsibility of the BERy. The designs for the interiors and 
entrances were carried out under the direction of the noted Boston architect 
Robert S. Peabody. The tracks and related equipment were designed and installed 
by the Engineering Department of the BERy under George Kimball. Similarly the 
connection from the South Portal to the main line at Tower D (HP-16, HP-17) were 
also the responsibility of the BERy's Engineering Division as was the super¬ 
vision of construction. The design of the tunnel station platforms allowed the 
use of eight-car trains along the entire line, and plans were undertaken to 
lengthen the platforms at all stations. 

During 1903, the BERy decided to extend the elevated structure to Forest 
Hills. Again approval was sought from the Massachusetts Railroad Commission, 
which held the requisite public hearings, and from the Mayor and Board of 
Aldermen of the City of Boston. The approval for the structure with locations 
of stations was received on January 4, 1904. Soon after that date, engineering 
drawings were undertaken. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 33 


NOTES 
Chapter 3 


[1] For a more complete description of the Berlin Elevated Railway see: 

Report of the Rapid Transit Commission to the Massachusetts Legislature, 
April 5, 1892. This description was written primarily by Commission Member 
Congressman John E. Fitzgerald. 


[2] The temporary Dover Street Station opened in July 29, 1912 and renovation 
work on the old station began. The new station opened December 7, 1912. 


[3] On December 28, 1908 the platforms had been extended enough to allow 
eight-car train service. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 34 


Chapter 4 


Forest Hills Extension 


The extension of the elevated to Forest Hills was structurally less 
complex. With the exception of the Arborway crossing, plate girders, framed in 
both directions, were used in the structure. There are no extant contemporary 
records that explain this decision. Presumably economics dictated the use of a 
cheaper but less attractive system. Remnants of transmittal letters (in the 
MBTA files) indicate that the structure was approved by the Mass. Railroad 
Commission and by the City of Boston, and construction began on May 2, 1906 with 
the erection of the first bents at Guild Street (HD-37). [1] 

The same system that had been used earlier on Washington Street — bents 
delivered to the site during the day and set in place by the traveller at night 
--was employed. Numerous construction photographs and drawings illustrate how 
the work progressed and reveal the methods of steel erection and track laying 
at that time (HP-78 through HP-90). 

Again, progress in steel erection was rapid. By late August of 1906, the 
traveller had reached the Egleston Square station area and, by January of 1907, 
the structure was approaching Forest Hills, At this point, the chronology be¬ 
comes unclear. The BERy annual report of December 31, 1906 notes that the com¬ 
pany had not yet received approval for plans for new stations at Egleston and 
Forest Hills nor the changes at Oudley. Presumably, the management was preoc- 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 35 

cupied with the extra work on the Washington Street Tunnel and the numerous 
other projects then starting in Cambridge and East Cambridge. 

Robert S. Peabody's daybooks for 1907 indicate that the BERy's committee of 
architectural advisors met repeatedly during that year reviewing designs, not 
only for Forest Hills Station and the Arborway crossing, but also for the 
Causeway across the Charles River to East Cambridge. [2] By early 1908, the 
designs for all stations had been approved, and work resumed on the elevated 
structure crossing the Arborway and on the Forest Hills Station itself. 

Peabody, the chief architect to the BERy, appears to have decided to have a 
line of single massive piers supporting the main line structure. At this point, 
where the structure crossed the Arborway, the piers would be encased in concrete 
and made to look like rough hewn stone. Peabody and his committee of architec¬ 
tural advisors chose the same solution for the BERy crossing over the Charles 
River Oam (the Lechmere extension), which was designed at the same time. 

The crossing of the Arborway (HP-103) was a particularly sensitive design 
problem, since the architects wished their structure to harmonize with both the 
landscape design of Frederick Law Olmsted and the nearby Forest Hills Railroad 
viaduct, a massive granite bridge designed by Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge from 
preliminary plans by the landscape architects and constructed approximately ten 
years before. Peabody chose concrete treated to simulate masonry as a suitable 
compromise (HP-116). This BERy station was also intended by the Mass. Railway 
Commission to connect with the then important Forest Hills commuter railway sta¬ 
tion and the West Roxbury branch line of the New Haven Railroad. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 36 

The new design for Dudley Station took an already sophisticated multi-level 
scheme and enhanced it. A new southbound platform for trains going to Forest 
Hills was constructed over Washington Street along the West Loop of the ter¬ 
minal. The mainline continued out toward Guild Street and along Washington 
Street to Egleston Square. Two new pedestrian bridges connected a new south¬ 
bound platform with the existing terminal. The northbound platform built in 
1900 was lengthened to receive the longer eight-car trains (HP-74). 

At the same time, numerous changes were made on the surface level. The 
most interesting additions consisted of the two pavilion-type waiting rooms that 
were placed inside the old loops (HP-70). The trolley loops were also enclosed. 
Work on the new platform began in the summer of 1908. November 22, 1909 was the 
opening date for extended service from Forest Hills to Sullivan Square. Yet we 
know that heavy steel work was still in progress under the southbound platform 
after that date. Progress photos show that, while the new platform and bridges 
were almost complete, work on the framing of the new loop enclosures was just 
beginning in October of 1909. Work on Dudley Terminal was essentially completed 
by the summer of 1910, but final roofing was still being done in September of 
that year (HP-61 through HP-68). 

Dudley Terminal has always been a busy area, and minor changes have 
constantly been made in the interior to improve passenger flow and expedite 
movement of transit vehicles. In 1948 the east pavilion was completely rebuilt 
to allow use of the trackless trolleys that were replacing the old electric 
streetcars in the Roxbury/Dorchester area. The center pavilion was removed and 
a new roof with factory skylights installed. Gradually the service at the West 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 
Page 37 

loop was phased out. In the early 1970's, that loop was completely demolished. 
Old photographs are the only record of the appearance of Dudley Station in its 
prime. By the 1960's, the MTA had substituted bus service for the trackless 
trolleys. The surface area under the station (Ziegler Street) formerly used by 
trolley lines became a major bus connector (MA-14-28 through MA-14-43). 

Egleston Station was planned to relieve Dudley Terminal and serve as a 
collection point for passengers coming in by streetcar from points in Jamaica 
Plain and Dorchester. In its construction, concrete passenger platforms were 
used for the first time on the line. Originally a stairway descended right into 
the middle of Washington Street at the intersection of Columbus Avenue, In 1916 
a trolley barn built with a low cost factory type of construction was added as 
a station for surface loading of passengers. A bridge and escalator connected 
the new structure with the existing structure (HP-93 through HP-97). The 
architect for the station is unknown. 

Forest Hills Station was an extension of the Arborway crossing of the main 
line. Designed by the architect Edmund S. Wheelwright, a member of the advisory 
committee, under the direction of R.S. Peabody, it was framed of heavy steel 
encased in concrete. The BERy built an extension of the regular steel bent 
construction system, beyond the station, to allow trains to reverse direction 
over a diamond shaped crossover. This work also included construction of a 
spur-track incline out over the present Arborway yards for storing trains. On 
November 5, 1921, the Forest Hills station structure was extended southward. A 
storage yard was built, and the Arborway inclined yard was removed. By 1923, a 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 38 

new car repair shop had been built which replaced the smaller shops and storage 
yards at the Guild Street yard (HP-104 through HP-117). [3] 

Green Street Station 

When the BERy submitted its first proposals for the Forest Hills extension 
to the Mass. Railroad Commission, the plans included a site for a passenger sta¬ 
tion at Green Street, but that particular location was not utilized at first. 

It was only after the extension had been opened that the BERy decided to build 
Green Street Station in 1910. The simplest construction method was used: a 
suspension system of hanging the lobby from the bottom of the tracks and 
building a steel-frame concrete platform with canopy on top of the structure. 

The station was completed and opened in 1912 and served as a local station for 
commuters from the neighboring sections of Jamaica Plain (HP-98, HP-99), 

Egleston Square Sub-Station 

The extension of the Main Line to Forest Hills required the construction of 
a sub-station at Egleston Square for the conversion of alternating current 
generated at the South Boston Plant to direct current for use in this portion of 
the rapid transit system. The station was designed by Robert S. Peabody and 
consisted of a steel framed building to house the sub-station equipment. The 
exterior was of stucco trimmed in brick (MA-14-56). 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 39 


NOTES 
Chapter 4 


[1] Copies of Letters of Transmittal between the BERy and various governmental 
agencies are on file in the MBTA Plan File Room. 


[2] Robert S. Peabody, Daybooks, 1907-1909. Courtesy of Professor Wheaton A. 
Holden, Northeastern University, Boston. The committee consisted of 
Boston architects Charles A. Coolidge, Charles D. Maginnis, Clarence H. 
Blackhall, Ralph Adams Cram, and Edmund M. Wheelwright under Peabody's 
directi on. 


[3] For additional information on the Forest Hills Station see the 
September/October 1984 issue of Rollsign (BSRA). 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 40 


Chapter 5 


Architectural Description of the Stations 

The orginal way stations of the Boston Elevated Railway were conceived as 
parts of a single theme, designed by a single architect, and constructed over a 
short period of time. They reflected a much more unified concept than the 
stations that stand today. Indeed, the winning design submitted by Alexander 
Wadsworth Longfellow, Jr. (1854-1934) was often illustrated in trade journals by 
a single, ’’typical station" (HP-B). [1] 

The style of each station was "early French Renaissance," combining classi¬ 
cal and Gothic features in true Beaux Arts fashion. The result, everyone 
agreed, was appeal ling for the "lightness, symmetry and beauty" of the stations 
themselves and of their relationship to the graceful, web-like structure that 
weaved over the streets of Boston. 

The "typical station" of 1901 dotted the original line between the Sullivan 
Square and Dudley Street terminal stations. Subsequent alterations have 
obscured the original Longfellow design. Of the "Roxbury Division’s" first sta¬ 
tions -- Dover, Northampton and Dudley Street stations -- only Northampton Street 
has retained its original character. It reveals perhaps the most enduring merit 
of the original design: stations of competent but unremarkable design, which 
were adapted in every sense to their site: the elevated structure. The quali¬ 
ties that are aesthetically noteworthy in the elevated structure -- the sense of 
motion, light and air; the expressive, curvilinear grace of the truss-work; 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 41 

subtle adaptations to the site; rhythmic, elegant arches and carefully crafted 
details -- are also found in the stations. 

DOVER STREET AND NORTHAMPTON STREET STATIONS 

Dover Street and Northampton Street Stations were originally "island" 
stations, perched between two tracks on top of the elevated platform, enclosed 
in rectangular huts with Renaissance details. Northampton Street Station was 
approximately 12 1/2 x 40 feet long, and Dover Street station was slightly 
longer. Each had a covered platform 160 feet long, and was sheathed in copper 
panels and capped by an overhanging copper-paneled ridge roof brindled with 
standing ribs. Standard features were three dormer windows and a central Beaux 
Arts cupola flanked by two finials, one over each gable. On the east and west 
elevations, a band of sash windows (configured slightly differently at Dover and 
Northampton Street Stations) was surmounted by a diamond-paned clerestory and 
separated by copper paneled pilasters decorated with a diamond motif. The 
diamond motif was repeated on the copper panels just beneath the windows and 
pilasters (HD-52 through HD-63). 

The stations were reached by means of iron stairways of approximately 38 
steps, covered by a running copper canopy that was ribbed like the station roof. 
Each landing was covered by a copper pavilion roof supported on four posts and 
decorated with a copper finial. A wrought iron balustrade enclosing the stair¬ 
way on either side was decorated with scrolls and copper panels. 

At the first landing, the passenger entered an arched double door with 
diamond-paned lights and semi-circul ar transom. The second flight of stairs led 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 42 

directly to the waiting room lobby, where the passenger purchased his ticket at 
the ticket office. He waited for the train inside the waiting room (similar to 
HP-38) or outside the station on a canopied platform. (When he disembarked on 
the opposite side of the platform, he descended a connecting exit stairway which 
led directly to the street.) 

The station interiors were sheathed in oak, with hard pine for the floors 
in both the station rooms and platforms. The furnishings, also designed by 
Longfellow, included a ticket office, turnstiles, wooden benches, porters' clo¬ 
sets and rest rooms. The ticket offices, octagonal or semi-octagonal booths 
that stood in front of the entrance stairs, were distinguished by their classi¬ 
cal detailing, elaborate iron work and varied materials. To either side of the 
ticket window were arched, sash or spring-balanced windows. Decorating the 
ticket window were a keystone and scrolled, wrought-iron grille. A thick marble 
slab served as the ticket ledge. The lower portion of the office was sheathed 
in wood and copper, and stood on a base of wood and Tennessee marble. At Dover 
Station the ticket office was originally crowned by an oak balustrade with 
knobbed posts above a paneled architrave. In the early days of operation of the 
trains, passengers first bought a ticket and surrendered it at a turnstile 
(HD-61, HD-62, HD-63). 

In the center of the room were a pair of back-to-back wooden benches. 

Beside these were the restrooms and porters’ closets. Oak sheathed the interior 
walls and separated the sash windows. The ceiling, also sheathed in oak, was 
patterned in the center panels with the diamond motif. Incandescent and arc 
lights illuminated the interior (HP-38). 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 43 


The platforms were notable for the quality of their engineering details. 
(MA-14-22). 


DUDLEY STATION 

Dudley Station, the southern terminal until 1909, was designed to harmonize 
with the way stations, punctuate the elevated railway with a strong design, and 
meet the requirements of its function as a turn-around, transfer station and 
junction of several surface lines. Its complex vehicular circulation was 
explained in a Boston Elevated Railway Company publication: 

The rapid-transit track passed through the center of 
the station, with a loading and unloading platform on 
each side. Surface cars reached the same level as that 
of the rapid-transit platforms by easy inclines, a loop 
track being provided on either side of the station so 
that transfers between surface cars and rapid-transit 
trains could be readily made. Through cars ran through 
the lower level of the station and the upper level was 
reached by an adequate number of stairways. [2] 

The elevated platforms to either side of the station were covered by copper 
canopies which flanked the station below the clerestory and extended north on 
the east and west sides. The central, rapid-transit entrance on the north end 
was arched and flanked by stairways which led to the surface level. Two cupolas 
surmounted the station's ridge roof; and a finial stood on each gable (HD-64 
through HD-69). 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 
Page 44 

To either side of this entrance were enclosed waiting rooms, each 18 feet 
square and surrounded by paired, sash windows with diamond-paned upper sashes 
(HD-70 through HD-73). The exterior elevation was framed by a row of copper panels 
and pilasters embellished with the diamond-triangle motif. Set in the north¬ 
easterly and northwesterly corners of the station, these waiting rooms were entered 
via the elevated loading platforms under the station's main roof. The exteriors 
featured a ribbed mansard roof and an entrance decorated with classical ornament, a 
tympanum with a paneled roundel, a scrolled arch, and a finial. The interior was 
paved with terrazzo. 

The central loading platform was spacious, elegant and richly furnished. 

In addition to the two enclosed waiting rooms, it housed a magazine and tobacco 
stand (HP-49), storage rooms, a ticket office, public toilets, built-in wooden 
seats and, to either side of the platforms, wrought iron stairways leading to 
the central waiting room, just below track level. 

An oak ceiling was carried on a series of open steel trusses gracefully 
arched and supported below the clerestory on copper brackets. The arch theme 
was continued in the station walls, which were open to the unloading platforms 
outside the station via an arcade consisting of uncovered steel columns and 
copper-paneled arches springing from copper brackets. The arches were 
embellished with keystones and copper-paneled roundels in the spandrels. Above 
these were rectangular paneled spandrels with a triangle/semi-circle motif, and 
a clerestory of diamond-paned sash windows (HP-50, MA-14-36). 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 45 

In the center of the room, to either side of the platforms, iron stairways 
provided access to the central waiting room on a level below the track. This 
was an octagonal room, approximately 160 feet in diameter. Richly articulated, 
it featured an oak dado with stone mouldings, buff brick walls, a maple floor 
and a coffered oak ceiling. 

In 1909 Dudley Street Station was altered to provide for separation of 
loading and unloading traffic, and for the accommodation of eight-car trains. 

The east and west loops were rebuilt, each containing a polygonal waiting room 
pavilion (HP-69). These had circular clerestories of paired, diamond-paneled 
windows, a copper pavilion roof with standing ribs and a finial on top. The 
interiors were lined with built-in wooden seats. A polygonal wooden bench, 
shaped like the exterior of the pavilion, stood in the center. The walls were 
sheathed in oak, and were decorated with paneled arches and keystones. New 
loading and unloading platforms were built, accessible by new covered bridges 
with stairway connections (HP-68 through HP-74, HD-73, HD-74). 

A reinforced concrete bus loop was built in 1948 to accommodate the 
trackless trolley (MA-14-32, MA-14-33). 

EGLESTON STATION 

Egleston Station, built in 1909, was the first station in which the plat¬ 
forms, galleries and stair landings were designed for reinforced concrete 
(HP-93). A 350-foot platform was built to accommodate eight-car trains. At 
this time the other elevated station platforms were also enlarged for the same 
purpose (HD-80). The waiting room station on the first level was suspended from 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 46 

the track support system and was reached by cantilevered stairways. The design 
was a simplified, unembellished version of the original Longfellow station; a 
rectangular structure, 44* x 22' with a half copper ribbed roof, windows, 
pilasters and copper panels (HD-81, HP-94, HP-95). More decorative emphasis was 
given to the platform, which was positioned above the station on the second 
level. It featured a ribbed copper canopy supported on iron columns and a 
gallery with arched, sash windows and keystones, which the passenger entered via 
a waiting room stairway (HP-96, HD-81). The waiting room contained an alcove on 
the west side, wooden benches, and an octagonal ticket office which was sheathed 
in copper, finished in white ash, and detailed similarly to the original ticket 
offices. The floors of the waiting room, platform and gallery were of rein¬ 
forced concrete (HD-82, HD-83). 

In 1916, an enclosed footbridge with a patterned ceiling was constructed to 
connect the original station to a surface car station (HD-84, HD-85). 

GREEN STREET STATION 

References to the original construction of Green Street are scarce. 

However, there have been few major changes made to the exterior since it was 
built in 1912. Its design marks a clear departure from the Longfellow stations. 
The east and west elevations were devoted almost totally to large, plate glass 
windows. Above these were copper spandrels decorated with an unusual circle- 
lappet motif. The window-spandrel composition was unified by a copper string¬ 
course and paneled pilasters decorated with the circle-lappet motif. Above the 
stringcourse was a clerestory of smaller plate glass windows separated by 
recessed pilasters (HD-89). Most of the station’s interior was sheathed in bead 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 47 

ash, including the ticket office, which featured an ash grille in the ticket 
window and a center fence with an ash handrail (HD-87, HD-88). In 1976, the 
interior was completely rebuilt after it was badly damaged by a fire. 

FOREST HILLS STATION 

More is known about Forest Hills Station, including the name of its 
designer, Edmund March Wheelwright, an important local architect who also 
designed Park Street Station. Not only was this station widely publicized at 
the time of its construction, but it has been virtually unaltered since its 
erection in 1909. Built as a terminus, it markedly differed in design and 
construction from earlier stations. Wheelwright intended it to harmonize with 
the Arborway, part of the Boston park system designed by Frederick Law Olmsted. 
Wheelwright was also clearly influenced by the stations of the Vienna Stadtbahn 
designed by Otto Wagner in the 1890's, particularly the Gumpendorfer Strasse, 
Josephstadter Strasse, and Alser Strasse stations on the Gurtellinie. [3] 

A massive structure of elegant proportions, it was constructed of rein¬ 
forced concrete and embellished with copper details. Trains approached the 
station on a reinforced concrete viaduct which carried a double-track line 
(HP-110, HP-112). High concrete balustrades minimized noise. Supporting the 
viaduct was a single row of massive steel posts encased in concrete and sup¬ 
ported on foundations 11'6" square and 12' deep. The main framing was of deck 
construction with steel plate cross and longitudinal girders. All timber work, 
including ties, guard rails and feeder box, was of hard pine. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 48 

The exterior of the station consisted of two concrete pavilions joined by a 
long, double platform which was supported on a massive arcade of reinforced 
(HP-113, HP-114) concrete piers. Spanning the arches were two tiers of large, 
double-hung glass and wood windows, the upper tier adjusted in shape to the cur¬ 
vature of the arch. The north pavilion was supported on two concrete posts and 
a massive central pier. Trains entered an arched portal, which was framed by 
copper pilasters and keystone. Recessed copper pilasters, panels, and crenela- 
tions embellished the cornice (HD-93 through HD-96). Inside the pavilion were 
waiting rooms. The track was open to the sky; the platforms on either side were 
covered by copper canopies supported on posts, braces and diaphragm arches. The 
south pavilion was similar to the north pavilion except for its roof, which was 
hipped instead of flat. [4] Despite its scale and material, the overall effect 
is light and graceful. The station is admirably adapted, not only to its site 
but to the elevated system as a whole (HD-97, HD-98, HD-99). 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 49 


NOTES 
Chapter 5 


Engineering News (Supplement), March 31, 1898; Railroad Gazette (Vol XXX, 
noT 16), April 22, 1898; Street Railway Journal (VoT."XIV, no. 9), Sept. 
18, 1898, 501. 


BERy Co., 50 Years of Unified Transportation in Metropolitan Boston - 1938. 


Heinz Geertsegger and Max Peintner, Otto Wagner, 1848-1918 (New York: 
Rizzoli, 1979), pp. 47-78. 


In March 31, 1910 a large illuminated sign reading “Elevated" 
over the South Portal. 


was installed 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 50 


Chapter 6 


Orange Line - 

Structural Analysis and Description of the Elevated Structure 
Section F-l thru F-7 
I. General Description 

The Orange Line south elevated structure rises from the South 
Portal of the Washington Street Tunnel, and then runs along 
Washington Street to its terminus at Forest Hills. The great 
majority of the elevated structure consists of one of three 
variants of a "regular elevated railway deck type" [1] 
structural bay constructed of sections built up of riveted 
assemblages of rolled structural steel. The rolled sub¬ 
components are all standard sections with the exception of 
the channels used as column flanges. These were "specially 
rolled ... with rounded corners, thus allowing abundance of 
wheel room and nothing to catch the hubs." [2] 

HD-15 Generally the structural action of these bays is as follows. 

Tracks carry the train loads through their supporting ties, 
to the longitudinal trusses or girders. These longitudinal 
HP-21 members frame into the top girders of transverse bents. The 

HD-9 transverse girders frame into two columns, supported by 

HD-26 concrete foundations, resting on solid rock, compacted earth 
or pile clusters, depending on subsoil conditions. [3] 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 51 

The longitudinal members occur in pairs, generally under the 
two tracks, and the members of the pair are braced together 
laterally by a system of transverse and/or diagonal members 
in the horizontal plane. They are further stabilized by a 
system of "sway frames" consisting of crossed members running 
HD-14 from the top chord of one truss or girder to the bottom chord 
of its mate. The longitudinal system is supported by an 
expansion pocket at the end of every third span. Between 
these points rigid connections were used. Later analysis 
revealed this to be one of the few design faults in the 
system. The designers considered the longitudinal system to 
act as a series of simple spans, but the rigid connections 
made them approximate three span continuous beams. (See 
Anderson - Nichols & Co. report). [4] 

There are three principal variations upon the "standard" bay 
described above. The first consists of both longitudinal and 
transverse girders constructed from plate girders. The 
second consists of transverse girder bents and longitudinal 
HD-19 trusses. The third consists of longitudinal trusses sup¬ 
ported by "arched truss-bents ("type F")". These three carry 
the bulk of the elevated system. There are many very minor 
variations along the right-of-way to accomodate local con¬ 
ditions and more substantial variations at a few special 
stations. The design drawing "Typical Elevations and Cross 


HD-15 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 52 

Sections" shows the typical support conditions and their 
reasons for use which are principally a function of street 
width. 

Variations in the supporting structure occur to support the 
additional functions required at stations and in response to 
special structural requirements. Examples of the latter 
include the special bent transverse girders composed of 
hybrid truss and plate girders specialized additional longi¬ 
tudinal bracing, extra bracing for unusually high bents 
longitudinal members with raised bottom chords longitudinal 
members of varying depth and other atypical bracing. 

For purposes of discussing specifics of the structure, the 
right-of-way has been divided into a series of segments 
starting in the north and proceeding southward; these are 
defined by the section: 

1. South Portal to Tower "D" - Section "F-l" 

2. Tower "0", past Oover Station, to the Cathedral 

- Section "F-2" 

3. The Cathedral to Thorndike Street (Bent #1068) 

- Section "F-3" 

4. Thorndike Street thru Dudley Station to Guild 
Street - Section "F-4" 

5. Guild Street to the Arborway - Section "F-5" 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 53 

6. Arborway to the Forest Hills Station and to the 
storage yards. Sections "F-6" and "F-7" 

II. Description by Segments 

(1) SECTION F-l 

South Portal to Tower D (Bents #1215-#!200) 

The initial segment of the elevated system, after it emerges 
from the Washington Street Tunnel, and up to the point where 
it crosses the current location of the Massachusetts 
HD-32 Turnpike (formerly the B&A R.R.) does not run colinearly with 

MA-14-2 a street on grade. It does, however, cross some minor 

streets. Since no street runs beneath the rail line, the 
designers chose to support the system with fully braced fra- 
HD-30 mes, presumably for reasons of structural efficiency. The 

bracing consists of "X's“ running from the support girder at 
one column to the base of its paired column. Since the 
transverse girders are relieved of their moment resisting 
function, they are relatively shallow. In addition, the 
HD-31 spans are short in this segment and the longitudinal members 
are framed with girders. 

(2) SECTION F-2 

Tower D past the Cathedral (Bents #1215-#l143) 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 54 


HD-6 

MA-14-3 

MA-14-4 


MA-14-5 


HD-18 

MA-14-7 

MA-14-12 

HP-28 

HP-32 

MA-14-10 


HD-24 


MA-14-12 

HP-33 


After crossing the turnpike the structure joins Washington 
Street. This is the location of the original "Wye" con¬ 
necting the Roxbury Division with the Atlantic Avenue loop 
(Section D). Elements of the original framing remain along 
with the original switch tower and its supports. 

Supplementary cross girders span between the columns of bents 
1198 and 1199, forming secondary "transverse" bents, presu¬ 
mably to support the old "Wye". Remaining track support gir¬ 
ders and trusses run perpendicular to the later alignment at 
this point. 

Approaching Dover Street solid girder bents were employed. 

At the station the longitudinal trusses diverge although the 
tracks now run in a straight line. This appears to be a 
vestige of the station before its rebuilding in 1912. Upset 
girders were employed for track support at the station pro¬ 
viding headroom for the ticketing lobby below the station. 

These are interesting in that no secondary framing was used, 
but instead oversized ties span between the bottom flanges of 
the girders to carry the rail loads. Platforms are carried 
by additional longitudinal girders. At the station, the 
standard girder bents are fitted with cantilevered 
outriggers, supporting the platform structure. 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 55 


MA-14-13 Proceeding south from the station, Washington Street starts 
out quite narrow, and the bents span from sidewalk to 
MA-14-14 sidewalk. Shortly, the street widens a bit, and short spans 
replace the larger ones with columns coming down into the 


street. Some solid web and some trussed girders are used. 


As Washington Street veers to the West, a substantial offset 

occurs between the road alignment and the rail alignment 

MA-14-15 giving rise to very asymmetrical loading conditions. These 
MA-14-16 

MA-14-17 are marked by a series of special transverse bents some with 
HD-22 

HD-16 cantilevers and some with a hybrid truss - plate girder form 
HD-23 

of construction. 


SECTION F-3 


The Cathedral to Thorndike Street (Bents #1143-01068) 


HD-19 As Washington Street passes the Cathedral it starts to widen. 

MA-14-18 The rail line supports become variants of the type "F" arch¬ 
truss bent. The road and track alignments still differ, 
inducing asymmetry in the supporting structure. Columns are 
frequently centered under one track, and a shallow trussed 
girder is used in place of the full arch design. Cantilevers 
are employed as necessary to resolve the alignment 
differences. 


Beyond the Cathedral, Washington Street becomes wider and 
regular. The standard elegant type "F" arch-truss bent sup 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 56 


HD-20 

MA-14 

HP22 

HP23 


MA-14 

HD-17 

HP-35 

HP-39 

HD-26 


ports the system here. Since columns are directly under the 
track loads, the bents could be designed as light, efficient 
forms although subsequent analysis has revealed deficiencies 
in the lateral force resistance of the design. (See 

■20 

Anderson-Nichols & Co. report). [4] Washington Street is 
quite level in this area, so that bents have a fairly 
constant height. Longitudinal members are trussed adding 
to the light "airy" appearance of this portion of the line. 
Engineering News observed, "The structure ... leaves the 
street much more open and unobstructed than does the usual 
elevated railway, and the cross struts being arched present a 
handsome appearance as well." [5] 

At Northampton Station, columns move to the ends of the 
24 bents, apparently to allow more horizontal clear space below 
the tracks for surface vehicles. An additional pair of 
longitudinal trusses supports the platform areas between the 
tracks. In place of an arch, the transverse bents have a 
constant depth with trusses used under the platform areas and 
solid web girders under the station house. 

(4) SECTION F-4 

Thorndike Street to Guild Street (Bent #1068 - Guild Street) 

Beyond the station, Washington Street continues regularly 
till it starts to aproach Oudley Street and the type "F" 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 57 


MA-14-26 bents continue through #1068. After this, the tracks converge 
and the street narrows and winds to the west. Girder type 
transverse bents with a three-hole style knee brace span 
MA-14-42 the street to carry the longitudinal support members which 
continue as trusses. 


MA-14-28 Dudley Station was the original terminus of the system. The 
HP-41 

line terminated in a loop of fairly tight radius, necessi- 
HD-29 tating considerable additional lateral bracing and support. 

Around the tight curve, non-prismatic transverse girders were 
employed to create the necessary banking. Even so, this 
curve was the scene of a major derailment in 1910, shown in 
photographs HP-59 and HP-60. In addition, platform and station 
supports, as well as support for the elevated surface line 
loops complicate the appearance of the structure here. 

In the areas of the station where "a minimum elevation of the 
HD-25 tracks was desired, with the standard head-room below for 

street cars and where it was necessary to prevent drippings, 
a special through girder and solid floor construction was 
employed.'* [6] 


Supporting structure for three tracks wye off from the loop 
MA-14-44 and continue south along Washington Street, forming part of 
MA-14-45 the former Guild Street Yard. The end of the yard segment 
marks the end of the old style trussed longitudinal girders, 



HP-53 

HP-54 

MA-14-46 


HD-37 

HP-83 

HP-84 

HP-85 

HP-86 

HD-38 

HD-42 


MA-14-53 

HP-82 

MA-14-47 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 58 

and the end of the knee braces with three holes. Two of the 
three yard tracks form the connecting link to the line exten¬ 
sion south of Dudley Station. 

(5) SECTION F-5 

Guild Street to the Arborway 

Proceeding southward from Dudley Station, Washington Street 
becomes narrower and passes through a much hillier area. The 
portion of the rail line which follows this section presents 
a more utilitarian aspect than did the original portion north 
of Dudley Station. In addition to solid web plate girder 
transverse bents, longitudinal members are now structured as 
solid web members. Knee braces have been redesigned with a 
single hole, giving the whole structure a heavier appearance. 

In certain areas, Washington Street dips markedly, and extra 
high bents were designed to maintain the rail grade. These 
Bents, #920 through #932 and #962 through #969, have an 
additional line of secondary bracing comprising a laced 
member spanning between the columns. "X" bracing runs bet¬ 
ween the transverse girder and the horizontal brace. 

Conversely, when Washington Street passes over a hill, very 
short bents are used, such as number 947. Where cross 
streets occur at an area of short bents, longitudinal girders 
have been redesigned with lower chords which arch upward to 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 59 


gain clearance. The arch is usually composed of curved 
MA-14-62 segments at the span ends, while the center of the span is 
still ususally straight. Occasionally the bottom chord is 
formed as a single long curve. 


MA-14-50 Track and street do not always align in this section, but the 
HP-88 misalignment is not so great as in the northern portion. 

HD-39 Individual girders are adjusted to accomodate the varying 

load position, usually by varying the size and location of 
flange cover plates and web stiffeners, but occasionally by 
means of cantilevered outriggers. 

Standard track support framing is employed at Egleston 

HP-94 

HD-83 Station, with the exception of one span where upset girders, 
HD-82 

with floor beams and stringers, were used to gain headroom 
over the passenger access ways. 

This section of Washington Street from Egleston Station to 
Green Street Station becomes very regular, and the track sup- 
MA-14-63 port structure is also very regular. Typical bays occur 

throughout the section, modified only by the occasional arch- 
chord longitudinal girders as described above. 


HP-98 Green Street station was added to the system in 1912 after 

HP-99 the main design was complete. As a result, the principal 

MA-14-64 track support structure is unchanged through the station. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 
Page 60 


MA-14-66 

MA-14-68 


HD-41 

HD-48 


HP-104 

HP-106 


HD-44 

HP-109 

HD-45 

HD-46 

HD-47 


HP-114 


MA-14-78 


MA-14-82 


The ticketing area is hung as a gallery under the main longi¬ 
tudinal structure. 

(6) Green Street to Forest Hill Terminal 

Proceeding South from Green Street, the typical framing con¬ 
tinues until the Arborway is approached. This is the final 
terminal on the system and its design varies greatly from the 
rest of the line. The support structure is steel encased in 
concrete, with single pylon-like columns carrying both longi¬ 
tudinal supports by means of a "Tee" shaped double can¬ 
tilevered head. Each pylon actually contains a cluster of 
four steel columns, laced transversely. The longitudinal 
support is encased in concrete with a long arched soffit 
spanning the center line between the columns. 

Within the station, two-span transverse bents support longi¬ 
tudinal girders. The exterior columns of these bents are 
encased in the concrete outer structure of the station. The 
longitudinal structure comprises both conventional deck-type 
girders and upset through-type girders. The major design 
features of the station are more architecturally noteworthy 
rather than structurally exceptional. 

South of the Forest Hills terminal, regular plate girder 
transverse bents carry the tracks along Washington Street a 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 
Page 61 


short distance, and begin a gentle grade to the existing 
storage yards at the end of the system. 

III. Subsequent Analysis 

Between 1972 and 1973, the consulting firm of Anderson- 
Nichols and Company, Inc. prepared an analysis of the state 
of the Orange Line at that time. Their report [4] gives a 
detailed description of the corrosion and disrepair the ele¬ 
vated structure had fallen into, after 30 or more years 
without repainting. While that discussion is not directly 
relevant to this description, their analysis contains some 
interesting information. The original structure was very 
conservatively designed, with a maximum design stress of 16 
kips per square inch, and most areas they investigated deve¬ 
loped stresses around 10 to 12 kips per square inch. This 
overdesign was responsible for the continued serviceability 
of the structure, even though corrosion amounting to as much 
as 30% loss of original metal had occurred. 

Design inadequacies highlighted by sophisticated computerized 
analyses were very few and were mentioned above. Their 
conclusions were that, corrosion notwithstanding, "the struc¬ 
ture was found to presently be in an operable condition." A 
program of repairs and painting was proposed and carried out 
which extended the useful life of the system into the 1980s. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 62 


NOTES 
Chapter 6 

Engineering News, Vol. XL I, No. 19, May 11, 1899, p.304 

Engineering News, Vol. XL III, No. 11, March 15, 1900, p.180 

Engineering News, Vol. XL I, No. 19, May 11, 1899, p.304 

Structural Investigation and Analysis, Elevated Structure and 
Stations, MBTA Orange Line. February 1973. 

Consultants: Anderson-Nichols and Company, Inc. 

Engineering News, Vol. XLIII, No. 11, March 15, 1900, p.180 

Engineering News, Vol. XLI, No. 19, May 11, 1899, p.304 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 63 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Blodgett, Geoffrey. The Gentle Reformers: Massachusetts Democrats in Cleveland 
Era . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1966. 

Boston: City Planning Board. A Compendium of Reports and Studies Relating to 

the Commerce and Industries of Boston. Boston: Boston Printing Department 

19ZT. 

Boston Elevated Railway Company. Fifty Years of Unified Transportation in 
Metropolitan Boston . Boston, - 1938. 

__ Reference List of Literature on Electric Railway Transportation in 

Boston as of February, 1927. Boston: Boston Elevated Railway Library, 

1927 : 

_ Statutes, Surface Railway Leases, Contracts , etc., 1887-1916. 

Boston, 1916. 

_ Urban and Electric Railways: A Selected Reference List of General 

Literature . Boston: Boston Elevated Railway Library, 1930, 

Boston Local Transit Companies. Annual reports, financial and other documents 
of the Boston Elevated Railway Company, the West End Street Railway Company 
and Boston horse railways. Corporate Records Division of Baker Library at 
Harvard Business School. 

_ Scrapbooks and miscellaneous data. Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority 

Library. 

Boston Street Railway Association: The Boston Transit Album Bulletins No. 
Fourteen and No. Seventeen - Bradley Clarke. 

Boston Transit Commission. Annual Reports, 1895-1918 . 

Cheape, Charles W. Moving the Masses . Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University 
Press, 1980. 

Cudahy, Brian J. Change at Park Street Under: The Story of Boston's Subways . 
Brattleboro, Vermont: S. Greene Press, 1972. 

Geretsegger, Heinz and Max Peintner, Otto Wagner, 1848-1918 (New York: Rizzoli, 
1979), 

McKay, John P. Tramways and Trolleys: The Rise of Urban Mass Transit in Europe. 
Princeton, New Jersey : Princeton UniversTt/Press, 1976 . 


Mason, Alpheus T. Brandeis: A Free Man's Life . New York: Viking Press, 1956 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 64 


Mason, Edward S. The Street Railway in Massachusetts: The Rise and Decline of 
an Industry . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1932. 

Massachusetts. Board of Railroad Commissioners. Annual Reports, 1880-1913 . 

Massachusetts General Court: Committees. Boston Elevated Railways, 1925. 
Reference List of Literature Pertaining to the Transportation System of 
Metropolitan Boston, 1910-1924 . Boston, 1925. 

_ Rapid Transit Commission. Report of the Rapid Transit Commission to the 

Massachusetts Legislature, April 5, 1892 . 

_ Charles E. Powers' collection of clippings in the Massachusetts 

Statehouse Library about elevated railroads in Boston and New York. 

3 vols. 1878-82. 

Meigs, Joe Vincent. The Meigs Elevated Railway System . Boston, 1887. 

Middleton, William D. The Time of the Trolley . Milwaukee, Wisconsin: Kalmbach 
Publishing Company, 1967. 

Miller, John A. Fares, Please! New York: Dover Publications, 1960. 

Peabody, Robert Swain, Hoiiday Study of Cities and Ports (Boston: Boston 
Society of Architects, 1908). 

Pinanski, Abraham Edward. The Street Railway System of Metropolitan Boston 
New York: McGraw Publishing Company, 1908. 

Reed, Robert C. The New York Elevated. New York: A.S. Barnes and Company, 
1978. 

Reeves, William F. The First Elevated Railroads in Manhattan and the Bronx, 
the City of New York . New York: New York Historical Society, 1936. 

Sprague, Frank J. "The Electric Railway," Century Magazine, 70 (July-August 
1905), 434-451, 512-526. 

Street Railway Journal , 1884-1907. 

Street Railway Review , 1891-1906. 

Warehousepoint Trolley Museum. Transportation Bulletin No. 82 Jan. 1975: Bay 
State Street Railway . 

Warner, Sam B. Streetcar Suburbs: The Process of Growth in Boston. 1870-1900 . 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1962. 

_ The Urban Wilderness: A History of the American City . New York: 

Harper and Row, 1972. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 

Page 65 , 


Whitehill, Walter M. Boston: A Topographical History . Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1963. 



Zaitzevsky, Cynthia, Frederick Law Olmsted and the Boston Park System 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Unversity Press, 1982. 


Zaitzevsky, Cynthia, Nikita Zaitzevsky and Calvin Opitz, "Four Bridges on the 
Providence Division of the New Haven Railroad," HAER Report, 1980. 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 66 


Notations 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 67 


Notations 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 68 


APPENDIX A 


Chronological History of Orange Line up to 1918 




1/43: 

Stagecoach service established be¬ 
tween Cambridge and Boston over Vest 
Boston Bridge 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
BAER No. MA-14 
Page 69 



s o 


Boston Rapid Transit 

^Lnqe “he 8,15enera ’ ,r " 1S,t ” 8 ° St0n Surface Iransit in 0t,,er CUies Sapid *n Other cities 


8osfon Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 70 


4J|4J ■— 

UJ Q. • 
O flJ-r- C 


O <iJ *j[ 
Ol 

<Ti *-> 41 

cola; o — 
— *hc <-» 4i 


N <V VI X 
<*» 3 3 
CO ^ v* 

r-* #— 

I- 3 * 
- O- '+- 


r —1 in O 
3 li- 3 O 
O M- </» **> 


dv *-» O 
A5C CCO 
^ i O 

® w n o 
c v> 

41 OI^ 
C CL 5 $ 
3 cx o i 
o c 


2cS 

c o «*■*- 

o • t. ** 

-r- <A as - u 

</l 4> <SJ 3 

•lu C t_ 

— 3 S. O *> 

■ w U <J o' 

1 <W (. M C 

3 w -woo 

o </» xm u 


o I-- 

• « c • 
cu® on 

O 11 - ' « 

— IS *J c 
w <u • u ai 
u a. — 4> a. 
« s i/i © 


: jssj 
:<3£Lsj? 


• • c « — 
i ° a 
©» — g »- 
<0u 40 
—I <w o 

C VI 
* O >h 4 » 

Jr * 3 
»- O — «J 
— o — <o 
3 C W *J 

—3 ►-> ac <V» 




— O 

fc. Ul <9 

4* — 

I 4 c o c 

a o i- o 

$uu 

U VI C • 
4 IOOO 

o a uu 


O *J e — *J o 

— — wo *j u 

4 J — > 4-1 >1 »• — 

■o <- t> v — tu — 
.j o. — o 3 — <a 

m < j co tUi a 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 71 


— > »-> Qi 
11 ^ U 
O i— C 4) 


ON O *J <7\ 
ON Q t— <J\ 
CO ^ 3 CO 

CD £ »•“* 


. x ? * 
< 

o .* z 
O L. -o 
o c e 

CM -r- 


c c 

• o -o 

<li — <D 

c u c +j 

•*“ 3 <0 

.-1(0 Oi> 


>JQ 4» <11 

i—l vn i L5- 


<DOL<3 
> <*|0 C 
•C * 


C * t- 

o • c w 

«J C 
O W 

, V w •*- 

O *-> C 

c c w a 


? 

“ oiSi'S. 


a* rvlo «-> 


t. Ufc*- 

«WW «c 

3 « »l « U 

e c- e i- u 
« ■— o w « 

"jht v vo JC 


U 0131 V> 

e -O V « 

— eo — 

L^i (_ _. L. 

vi co l£> 

— C r» C 

« 1M I 

41 5 o 

*3 —> I- <_> 

». ifl <U «. 

«4 V 


41 4» «-* «— 
o a c a • — 4) 
>iO 3 
> vi « 3. C 

«i — «l O & >4) 

v* » >— a * < o 

a. 4i w — 

R «1 VI ftj u » 

e« 3u — t- 

*J «- vC * VU 41 

> C vi — 3 « 

41 — -a L. cr — c. 

— « e •— e o o 


N & — C 

O « H- — 3 
3i C O 3 — 
— -» -O M 

41 V* 
U3 fvT 3 £ ”| 

<M O I 

» VI O 5 


2°£5Z, 

— vi x e 
a i a 

4* O O 3 l_ 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA -14 
Page 72 


>> 4> 

S 8- 


a; «/> 

C T3 
C 
C7> 

4> 

v» *-> 
a; ^ 


e e 

h O D 
r— o 


,is 


r- 73 
a c tj 
< n 4) 
O 

ft AJ *Q <T» 

4> C 
TD *J ■»“ 
<U *3 73 
4-i > U 

41 O 
U O 
3 a> u 


-“t & 


q j a ^ 


sro s u o o 
c 4-» -i“ <-> I 


O V* 0.-0 ^ 


3 


4* 

t? 


o O o 

*-» *j 

u> (rt *o 

ooe 

tOffl « 


llr 


£ -2 


*• « Ol 
a.*a 
co * ■<- 


o w a 
Hw -« 

[irt * u 


<A 41 *-* 
if a 3 
at o ■*- 


p 

u . 

o *-* 

“■ £ 
c <~ 
o *-> 
lA 
VI 

c ts 

WO 

«*•*- 
K<3 


^ w> ^ t/> 


4> •> 

3- 


£ 

C *-> 


'S 


to «. 


s 


• JU 

r~- <J 

88^ 


§% 

Z1 

+ 4* 

♦J 4-» 

Vi K 


V 4* 

8 S 

Op W 


L. 1_ VI 

£ tA — 


■ •,0 •« V* 

r~|W » 4) 
ole <M c. 
Oh- — O 
—*Lj lu u. 




../5S 

o|o c 




2 c 

■>“ 41 


4J *J tA 
< 3 
J= jC 


o w r> 
c 

4i m m 
o <J 
h~ -O 
»4J V 
*- W 4. 







U til 
41 VI 

> a 







8oston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Pag® 73 




ra \J 

* C 

o“^2l 

o «- u 
41 w * 
C Irt T3 Q. 
3 O C 0J 
Tamo 


•— t^a x) 
3I3 C O 
"3 to. W *J 



open at Forest 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 74 


APPENDIX B 


Copy of Contemporary Description 
of Electrical Systems by 
Frank J. Sprague, 1901 
as Published in 
THE ELECTRICAL REVIEW 
Dec. 13, 1901 through Dec. 27, 1901 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 75 


fVoL49. No. 1,258, 40 ' N ' ,x ‘• 2 ’ 5 - Decemre ' 1 > 3 - 1W '1 THE ELECTRICAL REVIEW. 


9 o 9 


*popuU*ioa.of orsr 6,000,000.uid U 
to 1*/ ifcrei* on the proriiioa mid> 

» “»ex o/ th* Z* 

depoutioD that the rate. WooU £ 

! Administration of Abe Are. 

• the sdrirebilicy of Dropping to thTi. 
woce lt> be held next year in Lr.nH, * 
7 of Mr NlehotaoD. S^nteui * 
*??/■ The system 
i»t it considerably reducer the timeow_ 

0 ot rhe foCabnUry has appeared^, 


OPEN AND CLOSED. 


OPXN 

■'“her 18th, Tenders are invite | 

y of the Colonies for the inpply ot i 

1st. The municipal anthoritia 

dots until the Hsreh 1st, 1902, /« a 
■ lighting installation. Tender* u* t* . 
to Le College, EchevinAI, Ghent .t 
tmed from Le Bnrecn des Trarsar 

Corporation Tramways CoooiiflM 
ot the following store* for the II mZ] 
>2;—Poplar wood blocks; cast-iwnb 
s; motor grease: titer sad 1 
brushes. ’ 

ith. Electric lighting of Sues u 

rom the Minister ot Pablio Works, Ci* 

16th. Estimate* will be opeoedn 
*> Prance, on 16th prox., for th* m*] 
pomps, for th* pupoM ot raisin* m 
ge station; and at the Hotelde V&» 
e date, supply of two electric greop*.' 1 
Information in each case tress 

l“fch, Tenders are being iotiUi 
French Post and Telegraph aothontia a 
o KUomatres of iron pipes for possasM 
x sent to Le 8ou* Uecretariat dltst ta 
103, Boo de Qrenelio, Paria, wbtas 

15th, Pipework and mechanic*! 
setricity work* for the U.D.C. fcrj 

• 6th. 

•17th, Meten (D.C.) and cot- 1 

'**■ 8ee " Official Notion" Doers«. 

8th. Piping, pump*, feed heaitr, 

■c* " Official Notices " to-day, 

•ion Electrical Engineer (Hr, Jj 
o ndrcrttsc for tenders for (1) motto* 
» H,p. wakr-tol* boiler; (3) ows«^ 

• plant; and (t; one dynamo sad t**l 

ibi<nrd. . ■ 

■ith, Boiler* and eoonoatord 

ipes, dynamo and feeder panels 

6th. 

1,1 h, Electric fire ilann 

d, Hampstead, for the MetropoW**’ 
il Notices" Norember 26th. 

tor l-lili, Steam piping, trutf-’ 
sitery, switchboard, arc lamps, t»U* 
ghtiog wotkt. See " OfficuJ Nsties*' j 


*r 13th, Stoneware oondniU f<* 
a, ic., for T.C. CuusoJUn* sogisssn ] 

I 

19tb, Electric light fitting tai 
adding* for the Coloration. 9s* 
ilfa. 

r 17th, Tender* ere invited f* 

I and 3 of • mb way for electric csbta 
ace nod Qoeeo Street, Bmdiurd. 

i <n gag* 1017 .) 


SPRAGUE MULTIPLE UNIT SYSTEM, 

As Applied on the Boston Elevated Railway. 


Br FRANK J. BPRAQUE. 


The multiple unit system, reduced to commercial practice in 
Chicago only four years ago by the writer, is now recognised 
is the preferable method of operating electric railways on all 
eoDgteied service where there are frequent trains of variable 
.eogth, and the need is felt of quick and economic hand¬ 
ing of units at high schedule speeds, It has received the 
iigh«t pra< tical endorsement, the adoption already of over 
,j-0,<iOO B.p. of equipment, and it is reasonably safe to say 
:hat for the class of service for which it is designed, no 
other method of train operation can approach it for efTec- 
ijrenesa. 

The system ia really a method of train operation and 
control, by means of which care are equipped with motors 
Jid motor-controllers, individual to these cars, ao that they 



FlO. 1.— or Bostos Elbvitsd Railway. 


FiO. 2 .—•ThbeC'Ca'i 
Tn.iur ASCENomo 6 rtn 
ci.vr. Gs.iottNT trom 
Scbway 



**■* be united with any nnmber of other car* similarly a train of any length, and n|ernted from aa many joints os 
pipped, or with any nnmber which have no motor*, into de*ired through a controlling line common to all cars. The 

F 










Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 76 


THE ELECTRICAL REVIEW (v-i. . 0 . 


number of care, their sequence, and their end-to-end 
relation, are matters of indifference, and the character 
and capacity of the equipment are dependent upon the 
schedule specified, varying from every car. where the hi idlest 
schedule is required, down to two cars in a train. 

ft is evident lliat such a system lends itself to every con¬ 
dition of congested passenger service. The similarity of 
equipment ensures flexibility of train operation, and provides 
a motive power | iroportioned to the requirements, f.oco- 
motive operations are abolished, trains can lie reversed at 
any ero's-over. and traffic concentrated on any section of a 
road. • The safe interval between trains is dependent upon 
the maximum speed and the power of control, and lienee 
botlt the time and the distance intervals between trains can 
he reduced. 

With higli-power equipments any required schedule up 
to the maximum Incomes possible, and the number of cars 
in service can be made a minimum. Where a crowded 
sysiem has main tracks with branches, units for the different 
branches can be combined on the main line, and split up at 
Junctions. w.:il 



Fid. i.— SrB.votE Foidixo Cab. 

The operation of the system is simple. Every anit being 
self-contained, and every aggregation of such being simply 
an extension in the length of the unit without changing its 
general character, operation becomes habit. Like hand and 
like train movements exist whatever the combination of 
units. ► Protected by automatic devices, a mau of ordinary 
intelligence can handle trains with left trouble, to far 
as the electrical apparatus is concerned, and with leas instruc¬ 
tion than is required for the air brake. The highest safety 
being essential, the system of operation obviously provides it. 
In cafe of failure of brakes, the machines tbronghont the 
entire train can be safely reversed, The current input to 
the machines ia automaticuliy limited on each one to its safe 
capacity. In case of Occident to sn operator, the entire 
power ia instantly removed from tiie train, and if the master 
switch on the leading car is inoperative the train can I* 
operated from cither end of any other, (u fogs and on 
slippery rails, u fixed schedule erm l>c maintained mote 
effectively because of the lower maximum speed, anil the 
loss distance travelled in braking. 

The multiple unit system ha* now bicome a necessity, for 
without it some of tbe modem railway work would be impos¬ 


sible. In the history of transportation uo more difficult 
problem has Iieen undertaken than the inauenration of the 
elevated service on the lines->f llie Boston Elevated-Raikar 
The transportation problem in Boston is most complex, yj,,. 



Fio. 5.—M'-rrn.r.isTnotLKrt, EsaiNF.nti V\cvr, \.so Air 
O x'ok. 

streets are narrow and crooked, and the inner terminus (or 
moat of the travelling public is a restricted area and 
extremely crowded. The congestion of the car service «a< 
considerably removed by the construction of the - Snbway," 
built by the Rapid Transit Commissioners of Boetou »cd 
leased to the street railway company, This afforded temporary 
relief, but it was early fonnd to be inadequate for Boston - ' 
gTowing needs. 

The necessity for improved service being seen, plans ne 
made and work actively prosecuted -one result being the 
elevated system shown in the accompanying map 
(fig, 1) —all of which, except the portions marked as, 
crossing the Charles River, and c n, to South Boston, u 
built and in operation, with about 1‘ miles of track. Witbom 
personal inspection of the road, the boldness of tbe concept** 



PlO. 7.--Plf.(vr Motor mt>, «k6 frmsi if >i\ i •,.\TRwU r '- 

ein hardly be appreciated. On a trifle over 10 mile*; 
track, the western route alone, there is an aggregate of 
of enrvature, and the longest stretch of straight track u 
than - 28 mile, if the track were laid out with this a® 081 - 



fcSBiO, 




Fig r, —yt 


.toond in the subway, an 
•iracture at each coil of the 1 

On:\rNi. 

Surface cara lmd been run or 

f the elevated lines since the 
:> make the track connection* 
:■> reconstruct the subway p 
necessary to discontinue t 
:5 *. subway, With a view 
■-flieuce to the public as ry 
mug a week-end. On Sal 
surface car • 
1 Monday morning, June lot 
'mcewaa begun. Over j, 
time in making the chan" 
;«tracic, signals, platforms a 
sred in operation, the largest 
Y*-»rrangc the operation’of 
. * for “* changed condition. 
■m surface care are ran on i 
■’"ra- Daring the change. 
,f «7 schedules and lines 
l^iou. This ivould not 
*ble during the middle of tl 
* street traffic would not r 
^Dumber of cars to be on tl 
iV?"* cf the elevate 
;fred the changing of :, 
ar| d the inan-urat 
Pent*, (t also ctillet 
{ «ou of a new transfer 
wing the instruction of no 
" conductors of the surface i 
■'O.Ono daily passengers, 
c«t. were diverted fre 
route* of travel, 
^ ' s ^timated 

? rried P« 

Jl 00 tnnsferred st t he Soilim 

^iong. 

£“* service was nndert 
..J* the trainmen had ev.- r 
f*** trip orer roa ,j , 
«ver bad any experience r 
. ^“'pment was omirelv n< 
. “joruy of the patron* had r 

Extraordinary conditions sn 
'•* « IR * rc " dcre<1 f'ory poesilil 
rTa I improvement conducive 









Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 77 



c.,1 .nv PRfrmmu i3. looi.] t h K ELECTRICAL HE VIEtV. 


• M x - * i !;.i-.'MifitLrn. Esaisr.vn'i Valve, asd Am 

0 >'c>- 

• narrow and erookrd. and tbe inner terminus for 
the travelling public is a restricted area and 
crowded. The congestion of the car service wa« 

hlv removed bv ibc construction of the “Subway, 
ibo Rapid Transit Commissioners of Boston and 
be*! reel rail wav company. ' I'li is afforded temporary 
[ it was early found to be inadequate for Boston * 

need. 4 , , . , 

.ccsiilv for improved service being seen, plans 
<1 work aciivclv prosecuted —one result being it* 
svsiem shown in the accompanying map 
-ail of which, except tbe portions marked x s. 
the Charles River, and ' i>, u> Sooth Baton, 

1 ill Operation, with about 1 ■ miles of track. Witbooi 
inspection of the road, the boldness of tbe conception 



P,.r Xf.-T-.l: ft' 'II'D r«o» V i' 1 ' i - i*'<TS"a r * 
be nppreciaU'l. «>» a. trifle over 1" 

cstern route alone, then' isan aggregate • 

and tbe longest stretch Of straight track 
le. If the track were laid oat with thiiaro*» 


i curvature from a common centre, it would complete nearly 
circles. Many of the corves are as low as SO ft. radius, 
fix ascending grades are as high aa 5 per cent., or ?64 ft. 
•.itinile ■. the descending grades as much as 122 ft. per 
-:!e. or ft per cent. (tig. 2). 

nf ihe prrer-nt railway tracks, about 227 roilea arc nnder- 



Fio. C.—Main CosnioixEit, Orr.s ron Inspection. 


nnd in the subway, and the temainder on elevntcil 
-innre at each cud of the road. 

OPKMK'- of Roap. 

rarface cars bad been run on the sohway tracks no woeenpied 
M elevated li nes since the subway wss opened. In order 
•nake tbe track connections to tbe elevated structure, and 
rrconstrnct tbe anhway platforms for elevated trains, it 
j oecewary to discontinue tbe surface cars on the tracks in 
: subway. With a view to causing as little iDcon- 
::foce to tbe public aa possible, this chsoge was made 
nog a week-end, On Saturday evening, June 8tb, at 
dock, the last surface car was run over theae tracks, and 
Monday morning, June 10th, at 5.30o’clock, the elevated 
i« waa begun, Over 1,200 men were busied doriDg 
• time in making the change. In addition to perfecting 
■.rack, signals, platforms and equipment necessary to be 
el in operation, the largest task in this limited time was 
'MJTttigc the operation of the surface lines, and to pro- 
:i for the changed conditions of traffic, 

*1 mrface cart sre run on tbe Boston 
•vtn. I'uriug the change-over tern- 
uy icbednlcs aad lines were in 
rahoo. This wobld not have been 
•abto during the middle of the week, as 
wrwt traffic woold not permit the 
c: oamber of care to be on the streets. 
r« starting of the elevated service 
wtd the changing of M lines of 
•‘1« cars and the inauguration of 2:5 rf 4? 

"-*r point*. called for the 

aiiHi of a new transfer syetom, HI 71 

hog the instruction of no less thnn HPlJ 

vcoodnctore of the surface lines. <>f ' HClJ 

4; A0*s0 daily passengera, fnlly 4.‘» - 

<*at. were diverted from their ___ 

^oo»d route* of travel. On their H ~ 

'•-a? day it is estimated tint Cfi 
<ud car* carried v.OO.itOO people, aud |*f| 

transferred at the Sullivan Sounre wfcl 


The gnard rails are of 10<1 lbs. section, and are rigidly 
fastened. They are placed somewhat higher than tbe track 
rail, so that tbe possibility of derailment is practically 
eliminated. Tbe strength and rigidity of tbe structure is 
exceptional (fig, :!), and the excellence of tbe detail* <>f 
track alignment and special work ia notable. Tbe move • 
mem of trains is governed completely 
by interlocking stations and by automatic 
block signals of the electro-pneumatic 
type. One of the track rails is insulated 

\ from tbe other, so that a truck circuit 
signal system can be used. The cars 
are all provided with automatic trip-. 
t so that if a train is run past a stop 

signal, the air on the train ia immediately 
thrown into “emergency." 

The qnestion of control and equipment 
of the trains was one which called for 
the most exacting consideration. It was 
early appreciated that more than the usual 
motive power should be used. Equip¬ 
ment on more than one car in the tram 
and the "multiple unit" system were 
considered imperative. In order to 
determine the safest and best system 
for their use, it was decided to invite the 
installation of three different equipments 
on test trains to be run over the most 
difficult portion of the road—the subway. 
Tbe tests and investigations made were 
tbe most complete and elaborate ever undertaken in com¬ 
petition for an electric railway eqnipment, The contract 
for the controlling system was finally awarded tbe '>pra?ue 
Electric Company, and this w*g followed by two additional 
contracts, aggregating 150 motor cars, of which 100 are 
already installed. 

For the construction of the can and the installation of all 
apparatus on them most careful and exacting specifications 
were made. The care are substantial and very solidly built; 
tbe seat* are longitudinal, and centre doors are used. Tbe 
platforms are longer than customary. Tbe familiar “ Sprague" 
folding cab (fig. 4) ia nsed for the motorman and operating 
apparains. It permits the gates on each side of the platfoira 
to be of tbe same size, and gives free access across the plat¬ 
form. The cars seat 48 passengers ; *0 more can comfort¬ 
ably stand up. Both motor and trailer trucks are solidly 
hnilt and of heavy constrnction. The motor axles are <■ j, in. 
diameter at centre with 7k in. wheel-fits. The wheel base 
of the motortruck is it ft., and the wheels 3.1 in. in diameter. 



•* l transferred at the Sullivan Squnre 
■ ■m. i 

T l*n this service was undertaken not 
■f the trainmen had ever made a 
i-kte trip over the road, nnd few 
«er had any experience with train acrvice, The 
‘ «|nipmcnt was entirely new, and la*t, but not least, 
lujority of the |<iiirons had ne'er ridden on an elevated 

<«inordinary conditions surrounding the operation of 
~ trams rendered every possible safeguard imperative, so 
,T «7 improvement conducive to safety has been adopted. 


Fio a.—Mils Rrvrnsrn. Open ron Jasprc-rinx 

The wheel base of the trailer track is . r > ft. and the wheel' 
HO in. in diameter, The wheels are steel-tired, nnd the 
genre aolid and pressed on the axles. Automatic coupler* of 
extra heavy construction arc used. Each car ia piij'i1 
with two K'O-h.i 1 . motors, with side bar suspension. They 
are rights and lefts, so tlisii the commutators are on the Mine 
side to permit of ready inspection. 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 78 


THE ELECTRICAL REVIEW. 


The air-brake «vstem is that of the Christensen Engineer¬ 
ing Company. The motor-driven compressor has a capacity 
of 20 cubic ft. per minute to a pressure of 90 lbs. The 
engineer's valves have esresa pressure adjustment (fig. 5). 
The governors are of the equalising type, and control all 
of ihe compressors in a train. The cars are healed and 
ligltcnl electrically. 

The multiple-unit control equipment is of the Sprague type. 
The working apparatus is located iu a compartment under a 
portion of the seat at one side of the car. This compartment 
is open through the bottom of the car. Complete isolation 
of working current* from the inside of cars is therefore 
secured, with all the advantages of ready and efficient in¬ 
spection which such location ensures. The protection 3nd 
isolation of the car wiring is a matter to which especial 
attention has been given. It was realised that the current 
value of any short circuit would be in excess of any reached 
in any service existing elsewhere, and that racb short circuit 
might be hazardous. The current is collected from four 
contact shoes carried on long wooden shoe beams on the 
tracks, and the main car wiring is led to each shoe through 
a detachable shoe fuse. The shoe fuse clears any accidental 
“ ground ” either on the car or by a contact shoe. From the 
junction of the contact shoe leads the main wiring extends 
to a protected compartment in the hood at one end of the 
car. where cbe taps are made for lights, heats air and control 
apparatus, to the main switch, then back to an enclosed 
main fuse of the “ Xoark“ type, located under the car; 
then to the control apparatus and motors. 

All of the truck, car and motor wiring is of special high- 
grade :J.O00-volt insulation. It is removed from all vibra¬ 
tion as far as possible, and enclosed for mechanical protection. 
The controller equipment for each car is made up of five 
component parts:—a main circuit-breaking reverser for deter¬ 
mining direction of movement •. a main controller for 
determining speed by variation of resistance and grouping of 
motors ; two master switches connected to switch lines for 
determining the movement of the main controller and 
reverser: a secondary controlling train line terminating in 
couplers at each end of the car ; and a reversible jamper for 
connecting up the train line* on the several cars. In 
addition there is a set of relays and the throttle. These 
several part* are shown in the accompanying figures. 

Mars Controller. 

The main controller (fig. r.) is of an 11 ironclad" 
type. All cables are led to bolted terminal* insnlated on 
flate, and connections are made outside the controller. The 
main contact segments on the cylinder are provided with 
removable 1 j-in. copper tips, and each carriet only the cur¬ 
rent of one motor. The contact fingers are screw adjmted, 
and are provided with springs of substantial design, rein¬ 
forced by a shnnt of leaf copper. The finger bases are cast 
solid with the terminal stods. The arc deflectors are of recon¬ 
structed granite, which combioes in a moat efficient way high 
insolation and heat condaction. The control limit contact* 
and segments are iioiated from the main contact* by a 
vnlcabeston partition. All exposed metal anrfaces, other 
than contact surface*, in the interior of the controller, are 
covered by insolation, and are finished hard and smooth. 
The blow-oot coil i* of simple and substantial construction, 
of liberal dimension*, and protected from working 
contacts. Means are provided for adequate ventilation 
of conwcta and coil. The insulationa on the shaft are 
double-keyed, to prevent possible loosening, and are set under 
pressure. 

The pilot-motor (fig. 7). which drives tbia main controller 
spindle, is rigidly bolted to the controller bate, and ia 
removable as a whole, or the fields can be removed separately. 
It drives the controller by a stepped movement through a 
powerful spring and locking pawl. These are of the moat 
efficient design, to enanre *' quick make " of contact*, and to 
secure positive notching. The gears ran in an oil chamber. 
The armature support and shaft are forged from one piece of 
steel. The pilot-motor armature L* so made as to seenre 
rigidity of construction a* well as protection of the winding*. 
The commutator is of copper, insnlated with mic*. and the 
brashes are of carbon, with automatic feed. All coil ter¬ 
minal* are of heavy copper, secnrel/ fastened, with meant 
for bolting the connecting wire*. 


The reverser (fig. $) is of the same " ironclad" type u 
the controller. The contact plates, fingers, and finger bL-- 
deflectors, bearings, and blow-out coils are interchaDeeab- 
with those of the controller. In addition to the aot?. 
reversing contact*, the reverser has a mutHed double •• 
break" i«olated by vuleabestou partitions from both tj> 
motor and the limit contact*. The reverser coils are woe: 
with a liberal margin above service requirements, and j; 
effective between :S0U and UuO volts. The plungers are ktr 
central, and guided by phosphor-bronze rods. The rererse: . 
brought to “open” by a powerful eccentric springeoaoeciit-: 
and the link connection to reverser cylinder is construe■ 
that the reverser is “dead beat" when open. Provision is mac 
for the release of the cylinder from the driving mechan:.:. 
for the purpose of ready inspection. 

(To h* ronlinved.) 


THE ELECTRIC TRAIN CONTROL SYSTEM 
ON THE GREAT NORTHERN AND CITY 
RAILWAY. 


Eisc-raic traction U bow being applied on ell the new rulnTi. 
London, and Mem) destined at no diitant date to snpenede-.:; 
steam locomotive on all City and snborban lines. One of ibe 'm.s 
linn to adopt electricity a* a motive power from the ooliet is m 
Orest Northern and City Railway, which will mu from Fiq.i.- 



PlO. I — MiSTX* COSTBOULMdOFl*. C0TX»- 


Part to tfooifala Strew*, a dietaoew of aome 31 *** " 

intermediate etope, _ , 

To deal with tha haary paaaeogav tralBe between taa 
labarbe on tble line, it i» naceaeary to hare a rapid 
aavnea of lraise, and a* the ttalioaa are comparmti *eiy oe“ 
it is clean (let to employ a high rite of acceleration- ^ 

Aeoiher requirement of the line ia that the two mo» 
of operation inteitber direction and fro os either «**»* 
time and ipace required for the ebantiaa of e loeomor 
crowded termini may be avoided. 


liter t iborough investigji, 0 a cf K, 
.r ums, ibe Great N'oilhern ,v (.'ilv iiaitv 
:ie|iip lbflr wiih U. c mailer <-oi 

;v.m»oo-Houston Company. Limited 
\j sect r.'-e abo< e re-,uife«.eot • ■ 

Tt< traioi will ean, icivh il«tur 2l;<. |, 
tad will consist ..f sewn coaches :n ail. ' 
«ad two end cq«i— will each bcicquippid 


The moion, each of u-l... h has a rated i- ; 

British Tboni'OQ- Houston C< ii.paqy , * 
:e latest improvemenu. iDtludio - n.e.-aj 
"v ibe most perfect Teijnlativo. t-r m 
je'became a. tbo* which have been' ,u 
•,<r.ted Railway, of _N ew Vork, »lior i--, 
cdtihaustire lrials of ihe.r cepabiiilrot ' 
mS"* “* Q0 * “ ,| '*'» clo 'Tvperai; i 

The master control syuem cousins in *«: 

electrically opcroied 
.tun in, the sene.-parallel motor ccm 
.frteot combination) of the motors, and v 
■“* m circuit with item, and a <en.ro. 


Flo. 3 — CoxstN.Tio.vs von Tart. 


JmrwtJch; aecood, iwo master control 
M *'* QT operate the m- 

5* tO „ A C * bl * W0QM,<1 10 

tb * c * n *** motor care < 
IU* “"Pi*" r « vonoeotmg the cars. 
r*h tlw ^ 0O * ** Uon ot th * “otot coa 

«« movement of th. master coatroile 
connect too* and motor combi oati- 











Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 79 



43. Ho. 1,266, Diosnn 20,1901. 


ks now being erected cocaut of 
id accumulator room. The boll era are 
, and are fitted with chain grate (token 
»ter» wilt alio be added. Two Beilin 
ker ijoamos are being put down: eaeh 
ag 13 ii o.n.r. with a atcam pre ware of 
id ie made (or the addition of a larger 
try of accumulators ii being sopplied 
ariue a capacity of 350 ampcfe hoan 
;re* The system adopted ii the three- 
!i a pressure of 240 rolta at the lamp*, 
by Messrs. Kelvin & Jamea While, of 
of the cables will be laid by Menu, 
tem, and it is hoped that thq supply 
try. The whole of the work it bcieg 
Electric SDpply Company, under the 
engineer, Mr. W. E. Milna. Mem. 
tors. 

ime ago the Tramways Committee 
o the E L. Committee for a redaction of 
d to them for tramway purposes. Mr. 
r, drew up a report showing I he charges 
st week it was decided that the Com- 
price of 2d. per unit now charged. The 
oittee hnd lojt considerably last year on 
it for electricity for the trams being 
go charge only 2 33d. 
roC0«ii:i”S of tbc District Conocil 
liiirao's oper.n, or of the alary o( 
Bridly, the EX. Committee elected a 
chairman, knowing that Mr. 8h»w «u 
e latter theD presided at a meeting o( 
t aaaiost the Council’s electric light 
mmittec passed a resolotion of want of 
goed. and afterwards tried to get the 
lected, bat without succesa. 

men. electrical engineer to the 
had been called in to report on the pre- 
ut of lighting the docks, reported that 
ling maintenance, wm 1 S77d. par unit, 
e generation of electricity at the docki 
ration at Id. per unit, provided it was 
300,000 nnitt per annum. With main 
reseed the opinion that ljd. per aait 
ooJd be done for, and probably it would 
j offer the Harbour Trust tha neoesaary 
i a minimum qcautily of 300,000 anils 

ting of the T.C. last week the town 
•( lbe ssoction of the Local Goveromeoi 
a 11,000 for electric lightiog parpose*. 
' clerk of work*, for the erection of lbe 
, it wei decided to select three or more 
the Committee, sod after the interne* 
, was appointed at a salary of £3 3i per 
he coustroctioo of the tramways was 
e to confer with the electrical engineers 
report. 

Ifliurt,— The U.D.C. baa appointed 
g engineer to the Council. 

.lrponitioo has deferred consideration 
erne for six months. 

The T.C. bss decided to apply to tbe 
loan for establishing electric iighdag 

cctric light receipts for the September 
i. After meeting the cost of prodactlsa 
st and siukiog fund, llicre waa a sarptas 
vrter. There arc now 56* eostomu* with 
ly of electricity aold was 100,967 onita 


3 TRACTION NOTES. 


h delivered by the Italian Premier, 
last, be slated that aa soon ** the Cham bss 
without hariog recourse to private «*»• 
Naples electric railway pro)act before the 
project stipulates for the accomplish*** 
e two cilies in 21 houre. 
trial of the high-speed electric tail**' 
e was made sod a speed of 00 kilometres 
lined. The train waa composed of »*° 

<3vent of the L.l'.T. trams in tb* 
of *akiog up the local shopkeepers oetbc 
om are putting in new fronts and oth**' 
>r popular patronage, 
tie usd «* jtoy*tl049.) 




Tei. to. NoDecennea 2o, loot.] THE ELECTRICAL REVIEW 


1045 


SPRAGUE MULTIPLE UNIT SYSTEM. 


As Applied on the Boston Elevated Raitavay. 


Bt FRANX J. SPBAOUE. 


A 


(Continuni from page 072.) 

Master Stvrrcu. 

Tbe master switch (fig. 10) is of the cylinder type. Right 
sid left movement of a single detachable handle, normally 



Fto. 10 . 

Inched in a central position, produces ahead and reverse 
motion, mid any desired variation of speed. Movement 
is opposed by a spring, which return* the handle to tbc 
■tntiiil or " off " position when released, and automatically 
cats off the main current. The oaver is lined with mica, 
well lacquered. and is easily removable, The vnlcabeston 
separators are hinged to facilitate inspection. The switch is 
of such form and dimensions as Dot to restrict in any way 
tbe clear passageway across the ear platform. 

Train Line Coupler and Jumper. 

The train line is s compoond cable, each wire bcavily 
intnlated and tested at 4,OoO volu, aud tbei whole sheathed 
viih a waterproof braid. The couplers (fig, 11) are iron 
<heltsenclosing a block of insulating material, which supports 
the split-spring terminals of tbe train wires. They are con- 
nictwl to tbe train line at juoctiou boxes. Tbe terminal* arc 



separated by an insulating partition, and are well insulated. 
Tbe couplers are shrouded, and tre self-closing when not in 
«e. Tbe jumper, whose end* are constructed in a similar 
rosnner to the couplers, and have complementary female 
contacts, is reversible, and can be coupled in one plane only. 
Both the jumper and the coupler are connected to tbe cable* 
permanently st tbe back, the intervening spacea being filled 
with insulating compound. Each conductor is iuaulated 
with rabbet, and protected with braid of various colour* to 
fscihtate connections. 


Relays, Automatic Stop, and Throttle. 

The relays, automatic stop, and throttle (fig. 1 2) are 
mounted vertically upon a slate support, thoroughly insu¬ 
lated, aud the contacts are well separated and rigidly 
secured. The coils are held firmly id place, and the plungers 
arc positively guided. Platinum or 6i|ver tips are used for 
the throttle in order to require minimum attention and to 
ensure perfect contact. The bridging discs have universal 
adjustment and spring cushion. The protective fuses for 
the control circuits are carried by clips on the relay slate, 
which also carries for convenience the cut-out switches and 
part of the adjusting resistances, 



Fks. 12. 


Resistances. 

The grid resistance* (fig. 13) for the main motors are of 
n special cast material, and are of a loop form to ensure 
flexibility. They are supported in longitudinal mtic.il 
planes on reconstructed granite insulators carried by angle 
irons for attachment to the car. Their construction permits of 
easy installation and repair, and secures reliable insulation 
as well aa efficient radiation. 

They are of sufficient section to withstand the shocks of 
service, and are of ample carrying capacity for the most 
extreme demands. All wire connections are made hy means 
of bolted terminals. 



Fin. 13. 

Weights op Fvt H'ments. 
These arc ns fi Hows :— 

Two *a **t coo l roll ere 

Ooe MS relay*, fa***, *witebrt, Ac. 

Oo* <Mio controller sad pitot motor 

On* revanar 

Two Junction boie* 

Two ooaplere, with Attached cable* 

Oo* jumper 

Om **t of grid rtaiateaea* 

Om tet of i*m*T switch tad train cable 

Total 


lb*. 

45 

9« 

520 

660 

6 

25 

10 

660 

50 

1.971 











Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 80 


10-16 


TOE ELECTKICaL 8EVTETV [Voi *o no. 1,23-5, d«c»bm 20, mi, I Voi. no. ixa Dec*M B *a ?o. 1001.] XSE 


Ol'Klt.l TION, 

In tb? Boston equipment the motor switch ia a separate 
pii-ce of apparatus, operated when the ilieosint switch is in 
an open circuit position, but for convenience of illustration 


W 11 


, iu \a\ii\w\ 

II- 4 M 


aod description it may be sbowoon the some cylinder as the 
rheostat. The typical circuits are arranged at shown in 
tig, 14, io which the various parts of a full equipment are 
indicated, aa well as tbe inter-connection of circuits. 

In ordinary operation the main motors are first thrown 
into series with a resistance, which is cut oat until half tbe 
|ire«snre is supplied to each motor, which is tbe half-speed 
combination. Ia goiDg thence to full speed, tbe main cir¬ 
cuits are first opened instantly at tbe main controller or 
keverser, or, if desired, progressively through resistances and 
Podepeodent main contacts. Tbe motors are then thrown 
into parallel, with a resistance in circuit 
of about one-quarter that used in the 
first series position, which is progressively 
cutout umil the motors have IdJI pressure, 
and run at their full capacity and speed. 

The quartering of tbe resistances on'the 
first position ia effected by asm? independent 
resistances for each motor, throwing them 
in series and parallel relation the same ,is 
the motors aDd using the same progressive 
>teps. 

In any position of the controller the i 
current can be cut off instantly hi the 
reverser, which has also independent main¬ 
line contacts on the same spindle. Provision I 
;s made for dead-beat movement, and also for 
mter-comicction of controlling circuits hr 
contacts on the same cylinder a* the roaiu 
contacts. The circuit for the it reiser puses 
through tbe automatic stop coil, aod is 
completed through a by-pasi on the con- 
1 roller in the first contact position, or through 
a con met made by the automatic, so that once 
epened it cannot be operated again unless the 
umiroller ia in a safe position for the motors, 

The cylinder of the main controlk-r is 
driven with an mteimittent motion by a 
pilot motor through a powerful locked 
■pring, so that the armatare of the pilot 
motor and the spindle of the cylinder do 
not move either in synchronism, or to an 
exactly like extent. This is uecessary to 
ensure freedom from hot contacts and drag¬ 
ging of arcs. 

The pilot motor is governed by five relays, 
called, respectively, the "coast," "series,” 
and "multiple" relays, the "automatic 
Mop" and the "throttle." 

^■Chere are three ordinary running 
^wsitious for s pair of railway motors; Ts 

the coast or open circuit position, the 
series position, when the two motor* are in series without 
any resistance in circuit, and the parallel position, when the 
two motor* are independently across tbe line without any 


resistance. In addition, the motors can be ran temporarily 
with more or less of the resistance* in circuit for the purpose 
of switching. On heavy railroad work, such as on elevated 
and suburban road*, minor variation of running speed in 
cither the series or multiple relation of the 

--- motor* by llie use of resistances is rarely 

j5T| practised, and is never necessary, save in 

-i < ; __ starting, Tbe apparatus is especially 

iiilTTR arranged to discourage any such vamtioii 

m " of running speed. 

lj[ .in] The circuit which operates the pilot motor 

lllhl»vvwi on each car is a purely local circuit, coming 

. . , from Che car shoee and returning to the 

]][ , r! track, just as the main circuit of the motor 

does. It is not connected to tbe train line 
or the master switches ia any way, Its p»ch 
is through the Held magnets, brake aod 
' jJgg it'J' armature of the pilot motor, through tbe 

Jji contacts of the coast, series, or multiple 

1 ' relays, and also through the contacts of the 

throttle and automatic stop. If either tbe 

__J- ~. throttle or tbe automatic is in an open 

' circuit position, it is impossible for the pilot 

motor to move in one direction, and benre 
impossible for the controller to be advsuced, 
although if in the advanced position it can be reversed. The 
circuits through the relay contacts aod the pilot motor 
also pass through limit switches on the controller cylinder. 
If tbis control cylinder is in tbe "off” position, and tbe 
throttle and automatic stop are ia the proper position, closing 
the coasting relay will not cause any movement what¬ 
ever. but closing the series relay will allow the. pilot, if 
otherwise uninterrupted, to move the controller to the seri»s 
position, where it will automatically stop, In the same wav 
closing the multiple relay will move the controller either 
from the coast or series position to full parallel, where it 





Tk CtaTEat Tcttraova Bxcbasos — Va* ©» Marts B*c*. 


will be automatically stopped. Opening the throttle, how¬ 
ever, will either arrest or retard tbe rotation of tbe (*** 
motor aod the progrenioo of the controller, and dropping 


the automatic by opening the reverser circui 
the controller to open circuit or any oili' 
position, regardless ol the mocorman, 

The throttle is operated auwm.aicnliy by ; 
one of the motors, and serves a double pnrpos, 
or stops the forward movement of the main cu 
desired current increment, and since it respo' 
mined value of the current, it can become an ,iut 
for providing a definite rate of iicedentk-n. 
prevent any desired slower race of aceclerat;' 
way remove from the moiornwn the positive 
main controller at will within the limits of ■uitV 
current input. 

The coast series and parallel relays are ••ner; 
form-switch circuits, which terminate in tbv n 
To this switch are brought also tbe terminal 
solenoids operating the reverser, Except as t 
is limited by the automatic features, or lunde?' 
stances which he esnnot, anil is not intended t> 
operation either of the particular car or the irai 
at tbe master switch, 

(To b* (ontinved.) 


THE CENTRAL EXCHANGE OF THE 
POST OFFICE TELEPHONE 

(Continual from ptujo letT.) 

"We may now proceed to describe the connect! 
system of working. 

At the subscribers' station there is .1 rant- 
receiver and induction coil, a transmitter, ai 
coDdeaser. The connections 0 / these are -dionn 1 : 
ing diagram. It will be seen chat when the recen 
book, tbe receiver and transmitter are cue ot 
and the subscriber's circuit is open to direct car 
line* are, however, bridged by the magneto-bi 



Baca \isw o» Loci. Bo.tao, cndui < o.v.ra 

with the condenser 1 consequently the circuit .1 
alternating current*, and thu* tbe subscriber <•»•. 
from the exchange. 

Following the lines to the exchange, we 
constant potential difference of -0 volts is maipt.i 
them by means of a storage buttery. When tl. 
takes his receiver from the hook, bis speaking 


























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 81 




fVol 49- No. 1,25$, Dacaxisu 20,190L 


In addition, the motore can be run temporarily 
•r less of the resistances in circuit for the purpose 
U. On hear? railroad work, such as on elevated 
an roads, minor variation of running speed in 
either the series or multiple relation of tbe 
motors hr ilie use of resistances is rarelv 
practised, and is never necessary, save j D 
storting. The apparatus is especially 
in ranged to discourage any such variation 
of running speed. 

The circuit which operates the pilot motoi 
on each car is a purely local circuit, comin" 
from the car shots and returning to the 
track, just as the main circuit of the motor 
does. It is not connected to the train line 
or the master switches iu any way. Its path 
is through the livid raagneu, brake and 
armature of the pilot motor, through the 
contacts of the coast, series, or multipit 
relays, and also through the contacts of the 
throttle and automatic atop. If either the 
throttle or the automatic is in a'n open 
ciicuit position, it is impossible for the pilot 
motor to move in one direction, and hence 
impossible for the controller to be adrauced, 
:i the advanced position it can be reversed. The 
ugli the relay contacts and the pilot motor 
rough limit switches on the controller cylinder, 
troi cylinder is in the "off" position, and the 
automatic slop are in the proper position, closing 
z relay will not cause any movement what- 
losing’the scries relay will allow the pilot, if 
lintcrrnpted, to move the controller to the serits 
-re it will automatically stop. In the same way 
multiple relay will move the controller either 
ar series position to full parallel, where it 


n 


n 



Exchange —View or Mtrta JUc*. 

nnalically stopped. Opening the throttle, bo*- 
•Tier arrest or retard the routioo of the pih* 
the progression of the controller, and dropp“Hl 


voi. 49 . no. 1 . 356 , dicnbu a), 1901 ] t h w. E LE CTRICAL REVIEW. 


1047 


the automatic by opening the rererscr circuit will return 
the controller to open circuit or any other determined 
position, regardless of the motorman. 

The throttle ia operated automatically by the current in 
one of the motors, and serves a double purpose. It retards 
or stops the forward movement of the main controller at any 
desired enrrent increment, and since it responds to a deter¬ 
mined value of the enrrent, it can become nn automatic awitcb 
for providing a definite rate of acceleration. It does not 
prevent nny desired slower rate of acceleration, or in any 
way remove from the motorman the positive operation of the 
main controller at will w ithin the limits of safe and desirable 
current input, 

The coast series and parallel relay* are energised by plat¬ 
form-switch circuits, which terminate in the master switch. 
To this switch are brought also the terminal wires of the 
solenoids operating the reverses Except as the motorman 
is limited by the automatic features, or hindered by circum¬ 
stances which he cannot, and is not intended to control, all 
operation cither of the particular car or the train ia initiated 
at the master switch. 

(To bo continued.) 


THE CENTRAL EXCHANGE OF THE LONDON 
POST OFFICE TELEPHONES. 


(Continued from page 937.) 

We may now proceed to describe the connections and the 
system of working. 

" At the subscribers’ station there ia a magneto-bell, a 
receiver and induction coil, a transmitter, and a 2-mfd. 
condenser, The connection! of these are shown in the adjoin¬ 
ing diagram, It will be seen that when the receiver is on the 
hook, the receiver and transmitter are cut oot of circuit, 
and the subscriber’s circuit ia open to direct currents. The 
lines are, however, hridged by the magneto-bell in aeries 



B.ci \u« or Loc*u Board, oMDka CoscmccTioa. 


with the condenser ; consequently the circuit is complete for 
alternating current#, and thus the subscriber can be rung op 
from ihe exchange. 

FhI lowing the line* to the exchange, we aee that a 
cm.suiu potential difference of 20 volte is maintained between 
1 hem by means of a storage battery, When the subscriber 
talus hi* iecei\cr from the hook, hi* speaking circuit* are 


closed by the switch-book, allowing ,'a corrcnt to flow 
through the transmitter and the primary of the induction 
coil ; the small shupt enrrent through the receiver, the 
secondary coil, and the magneto bell is negligible. 

Attheexcbange.tbiscurrenlpassesiooueof thelinesiliroii’.’b 
tbe line relay, of GOw resistance -. tliis switches on the line 
indicator calling lamp across a pressnre’of 2f volte, causing 



Duomvm or iToxsectioss Btnvccw Subscribes* Station 
iXD Elua.l.lGU. 


it to light np, so us to attract the attention of the operator. 
A lamp of tit) v resistance is inserted iu series ivnh lire oilier 
line: it* function will be deni l with later. 

The indicator lamp it directly under the jack .illoited 
to tbe subscriber who ia calling. Hence, the i|>craior 
h*i uo need to recognise a number as iu tbe older 
method*. and to find the corresponding jack S-im? inches or 

feat away, in fact, she does not require even to . .. ihv 

number of the calling aubscribcr. 

laacrting nn answering plug into the jack indicated« «Irere- 
npon the Calling lamp goes out), and pressing forward a 
switch on the keyboard, the operator is nluncc in v-nniium- 
Cition with tbe subscriber, ascertain* the number wanted, 
and proceeds to make the desired connection, 

For this purpose ahe tukes op the calling pine c irre- 
sponding with the answering plug just used, mid ups the 
brass bush of the (ranted •ubjCriber'* jack, mtti the 
tip of tbe plug. If she hear* a click in her receiver, die 
kuows that the subscriber'* line is engaged, and inform* the 
calling subscriber of the fact. If silence reigns, however, 
she pushes home the plug, and pull* over the switch |ue- 
viooslv used to speak to the caller. The first operation 
causes a lamp to glow, and the second rings the 
bd! of the subscriber wanted. Ihrcctly lie lifts hi* 
receiver bis "clearing lamp" goes out. ac-piauning the 
operator *ith tbe fact that the aubsenbers are CiuiQe* !cd, 
she then presses a button, which registers one call <*-.i h«-r 
owq meter and ou that of tbe caller. When the t*.<-in- 


1 




























8oston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 82 


No. 1,8W, D»nnni» *7, 1901. 


ttremely low flat rate. Take 
xmsumer, in hit teach Ikkit 
pay 1-fid. per ooit l>y the 
although Mr. Wright’s own 
uires l'36d. As the produc- 
. and the total cost (including 
1 -igd., he still pays a certain 
1-by charges. If, however, he is 
o latter, then at Id. per ooit he 
ery peony representing ?d. costa 
ppcns that one London supply 
rate and 4d. after for the hoore 
d. per unit on a hat rate for the 
urpose) during the hours of dsy- 
bt, the 4d. rate will be halved, 
1. initial, and 2d. follow-on, will 
id hours of darkness, and 2d. 
iring daylight boors, which 
'.t. Wright’e ‘’ideal*’ tariff, 
meters, one , for the ” day " 
>ht’’ tnpply, with a- single 
with the latter, the oousnmerran 
md dear supplies compare. It is 
ay change-over switch, with in 
rated hy hand, may throw one or 
into circuit-, or if the meters of 
Vulcan type be in use, a clock 
the shunt circuit of that meter 
ster, the main coils of the two 
In the latter case, howev«, the 
d the top or greatest maximum 
erely that of the load registered 
I which must have occurred at a 


and lbelr Prevention,—At a 
.od Counties Instilnts of Engineers, 
Derby, apaper by Mr. L. W. dsOrsv. 

> 3oroe Electric Accidents, and the 
was read. Tbe tnlhor divided sod' 
k " sad " fire." Accident* from firw 
.its, and (4 bad contact*. In enlarging 
i, the writer sis ted that it might be 
re, sir, or rope power, that a plant, 
and maintained, wai perfectly mfe. 
He then dealt with the techni*»l 
x>n»t ruction,and tbe proper prowiaionol 
mutation of wires were snggostsd, sod 
:r method of srtificial respiration for 
ion*. Mr. Deacon said that ho fonnd 


workmen igainst eloctric aocidoats ia 
re* underground, in s puddltd-elay 
to »llw« traffic over them withow* 
observed that the Pari* polios wore 
method of restoring eloobocstsd 
replied to tbs remarks that bad 
ible wi«, in hi* opinion, tho k**S 
many years without baring known • 
suggestion of borying tha wvt* ia 
a very good one; bs bad oaad it biaa 
admirably. India-inbbar glove* ba 
,'eo if they contained a pin' bolt tbay 
iucb so, in fact, u if the wearer bad an 
I. Inoot works be knewnl, wbare gbrea 
pair w.v> before being oawd always *ob- 
t. There was tbe additional drawback, 
t "all thumbs." It followed that tha 
'eloped would not expenanoa the same 
to tbe mnsctiiar *j stem. Ha cited tha 
shock and lived for only 10 minow 
cial respiration. Tee ooioner’a verdict 
shock. As a matter of fact, tha de¬ 
part end simple, the attendant* having 
ne, which had become contracted aad 
i diKtuaion on the papw was adjownad 



YoL *s>. »o. 14S7, UM»on S7, iooi.] THE ELBCTE1CAL KEYIEW. 1067 


SPRAGUE MULTIPLE UHIT SYSTEM. 


As Applied on the Boston Elevated Rail w at, 


Bt FRANS J. 8PRAGUE. 


(Concluded from page 1047.) 

Tbe roaster ewjtch has (1) the off or normal position, u> 
•hicb the handle ia spring-retracted in caae the operator lets 
go of it; (2) for ahead movement, three running positions, 
coast, aeries and multiple or full speed, with no contact* 
between ; and (3) for the backward movement, two running 
positions, coast and series or half-speed position. The car 
an be stopped and reversed by s single throw of the handle 
of the master switch from one side of the open position to 
the other. 

Ordinarily, when a motor-man withes to go ahead at half 
fpeed he moves the master ewitcb to the aerioa position. The 
rrverser ia instantly set for movement ahead, the series relay 
a closed, the pilot motor starts np, the driving spring ia pat 
under tension, sad the controller spindle movre forward 
intermittently notil the pilot limits nop it at the half 
ipeed position. If, daring this operation, the throttle should 
lift, this advance of the controller cylinder will be retarded 
or stopped. If the automatic stop should drop, the advance 
act only will be stopped, hut the controller wilt at onoe run 
backward to an open circuit or other determined position 
nthout regard to the set of the aeries relay, or the wish of 
the man at the master switch. 

Being at the series position, if tbe motorman wishes to go 
it full speed, the handle of the master switch is moved to 
that position, when similar operations take place at tbe 
relays and pilot motor ; or the operator may move him 
twitch handle at once from the open cireoit to multiple, 
fithout regard to series, and the main controller, controlled 
by the throttle, will advance to full speed position. Of 
coarse, the sdvauoe of the main ooutroliar may be made at 
till, step hy step, by touch-and-go oontact at the master 
witch, and its advance can he arrested inaiantly. If desir- 
sWe, when a coast relay ia used, its connection can bw 
changed so as to, at will, throw the throttle out of action, 
tlthough this is not desirable. 

Comparison of the movements of the master switch and 
ibe mam controller illustrates very clearly the in ter-connection 
of controlling circuits and their utility, and how they are 
intended to provide for every emergency whatever. To all 
ipparent intents and purposes the controller seems possessed 
if an independent intelligence, because the relay system and 
(he interconnection are anch that all local emergencies are 
provided for, aa they moat be, without regard to the wishes, 
interns, or carelessness of an operator. 

The description thus far is that of ths operation of a 
angle car. To connect two or more cars together, and to 
frovide for tbe initiation of the operation of the ooottoltere on 
■eh other can aa may be fully equipped from one or more 
4 the matter twitches, as well aa to transmit control 
(bough cars not equipped with motors, tbe independent train 
be ii provided, which ia the extension of the platform- 
writch circuit from car to car, through fixed train cables on 
terminating in couplers at the end* of the can, and 
kxibte and reversible train cables, or jumpers, terminating 
ia couplers with complementary coo tads, and ssrving to 
join the several train cable* together at the end* of the oars, 
fbese tram lines and jomperi are so connected to the 
sapling heads that the controlling circuit* are antomsticaliy 
paired to ensure proper operation of the various main con- 
troflens for any master switch without regard to what are the 
•batting ends of the cars, their number or sequence, or bow 
the jnmpers are reversed, or whether, a* in practice, they 
« coupled indifferently on one side or other on (he oars. 

While some reads only change sequence of can in tbe 
aake-np of trains, in many they are reversed, is in the 
operation of open-end relays, cross-overt, loops and yards. 
Therefore, in additioo to general pairing of the set* of 
feed sod direction circuite, the individual speed circuits 
buk always be paired alike, while the individual direction 
dreuiu must at time* be changed in connection. Provision 
is made so that local circuits can be cut off from the train 
Ime sod independently tented. 


Normally, Chen, movement of say master switch (the 
others for the time being inoperative sod held at open 
circuit) closes like relays oo each car and starts the sequence 
of operation* indicated for a single car, but here also the 
automatic variation of movement described in regard to a 
particular controller takes place independently at each car, 
and different kinds aod degrees of movements of the cou- 
troUnra of different care can take place simultaneously if 
necessary. Not only that, but to provide for difference of 
wheel diameter*, difference of tractive coefficients on different 
wheels, and to provide also against any irregular condition 
on any car, similar movement* may be differently timed, 
and different control]ere may take different relative positions 
when measured by time, each accommodating itself to tbe 
limited current input determined for iteelf. 

It therefore becomes posaihle hy this combination of posi¬ 
tive sod semi-automatic control to comhine care having 
controllers of different sizes, motors of different capacities, 
resistance* of different gradations, gears of different ratios, 
aad wheels at different diameters, sod to aa/ely operate 
them all from one or more controlling poin u, all of which, 
of course, would be sbsolotsly impossible to a hand-method 
of control, or anything approaching to it. 

Current Supply. 

Current for the Boston Elevated service i* delivered from 
the stations as follows: — 


i 

auuixu 

| Ifulaio 
Am*am. 

1 Ctr*. o\b. 

j 

hello 

•U->w4 

• tUudora. 

Central . 

40,360 

: 8.000,000 

800 

Sa*t Ota bridge- 

7,860 

8,000,000 

6,000 

Cbsrleetown . 

4,340 

1 4,000,000 

1,000 

Lincoln ... ... 

11,1*0 

*0,000,000 

200 


Reference to this table will show the possibility of cur¬ 
rent flow which wonld follow a short circuit on the elevated 
lines. By reason of the grades and alignment of the system, 
and the high speed and frequent service maintained, the 
fluctuations of load are severe. A* the stations feed both 
elevated and surface line*, the fluctuations due to tbe 
elevated service are taken oare of witbont difficulty. 
Observations so far made indicate that tbe current demand 
for a section of the elevated 1ms 1 i miles long, haring ia 
operation nine trains, varies from 500 to 6,000 amperes. 
Even with such demand* for current the mini mum voltage 
at the contact rail i* 500 volte, because of the luge section 
of feeders sod the proximity of the power stations. The 
feeders used sre of 2,000,000 tire. mik, section, and are run 
in oondnit to the structure, where bare tin-copper cahles 
mounted on glass imolatorv are need. They are covered by 
a cable box, the top of which formfl a convenient walk on 
the structure. The several sections of the contact nil are 
tied together by enclosed feeders of 2,400 ampere* capacity. 

Some of the elevated and surface line section* are fed 
from two or more separata station*. This tie* the stations 
together, and distributes hesry polls among the different 
station*. To further assist in this distribution of ” pull*," 
the generators are given a drooping characteristic. Thai, 
when an extremely heavy pull occurs in close proximity to 
one station it* voltage falls, and the other stations-assist in 
carrying it. In addition, if any station hy reason of 
Isoally heavy traffic is overloaded, a portion of ia load is 
shifted to ocher station* hy voltage reduction at the gene¬ 
rators hy tbe field rheostats. Tbs feeder sytien. is carefully 
laid out so that any section may be cot oot without inter¬ 
fering with the operation of tbe rest of the system. In 
order to prevent the oootaet shoes bridging from a live 
■action to one in troahle, a rail of suitable length fed through 
pomaoent resistance is inserted between the two sections. 
Specially designed “ protected ” rail-bonds are in ase for 
feeder taps to tbe contact rail. The track is bonded to the 
structure to provide an efficient return circuit. 

Tbe Lincoln power station i* the one most recently hoilL It 
a ti. orooghly modern in every respect. Vwticai engines direct 
conto generators of 2,700 rw normal capacity are used 
(ass fig. 15). The ultimate rated capacity of this station will 
be 18,200 rw., with ability to carry for one hoar 26,000 rw,. 
and for brief periods 38,000 tv, Daring acceleration 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 
Page 83 


1088 


THE ELECTRICAL REVIEW. £▼* «• Ko. vttt. d»«bii jt, i«l 


each car, which weigh# empty 59,000 lb*., and ban 634 per 
cent, of the weight on the drivers, take* a rrtaximnm of 550 
amperes, and an acceleration of 1'8 mile* per honr per 
woond is obtained, The maximum speed reached between 
stations is 46 miles per hoar. The acceleration is nniform, 
and the track is of such excellent construction that it is meat 
difficult to realise the high speeds that are obtained. 

As near as has been determined, the energy consumption 
per car-mile ia 4'5 kw. -hours. The present mileage is 
abont 20.000 car-miles per day. The grades enconntered 
and the high speeds run are reflected strikingly in the extreme 
wear of the hrake-shoes and wheels The shoes first used 
were completely worn ont after 200 miles of service. Special 
shoes are now used, and longer service is aecnred, This also 
means exceptional wear on the wheel tires. 

One run. that from the Boylatou Street (Subway) station, 
also t well illustrates the difficult character of the service. 
From this’station descent is made down an 8 per cent, grade 



Fio. 16.—1,700-sw. Srut Drautft. 


ronnd a sharp reveres cam without connecting tangent, 
round other corvee and over a changing grade, s u an ding 
4'5 per cent., descending 8 per cent, as c en din g 2*9 par 
cent., descending 3 per cent, eaosndiog 6 per coot, tun 
finally descending 1 '5 per cent, to the Pleaaans Street st ati on, 
located just outside the subway, at the foot of the incline to 
the elevated structure. 

The passenger traffic is especially oompkx, because of the 
system of transfers. A tone station there are isuaed to no lees 
than 37 lines of surface roods radiating throughout the city. 
At tbs northerly terrain os connection is made with 16 linsaef 
surface oars running to the suburbs, and how is many ts 
24,000 passengers Ln an hoar, and 126,000 in a day, have 
been transferred. At the southern terminus oceuwotioa k 
made with >4 lines of surface can, aed than is hoe also a 
heavy transfer of passengers. 

Them brief statements will indicate the extrema density 
of traffic over the whole line, and how imperative are the 
appointments for the safe and rapid h and l ing of. the sarrica. 
Hoc the least important are the platform arrangements 
necessary to care for inch troffla At the term in a ls, and 
also at the busy stations in the subway, fret teems on the 
same level is given between elevated and surface can. At 
other points ticket tranxftn are issued to asd from the 
street. The traffic has so far exceeded ail expectations that 


both the platform gates and centre doors are used at ill 
stations. On each platform opposite the car entrance is pamud 
“ Enter here,” to ensure the prompt loading of pasaengm. ‘ ‘ 
By printed notices in the can and signs at stations passengn 
are requested to leave the can at the centre door and ents 
at the gates. At each station the trains are rung off by t 
large gong. The gates are then shut immediately, and the 
station stops are thus reduced. There has been a mem 
marked development in the alacrity which the patrons cf 
the road have attained in entering and leaving trains, and 
the positive manner in which the gates are shot on signal hu 
much to do with this. The smoothness of operation, sod 
the speed of the trains, have served to make the service very 
popular. 

Plans are being made for the extension of the elevated 
structure and for the construction of an additional subway. 
The future will doubtless see no lea than 50 miles of elevUed 
track and 600 can in operation. 

The equipment and operation of this syrtem in its entirety 
is of the most advanced type, and reflects the highest credit 
npon the officers and engineers of Beaton Elevated, who ban 
had for solution a problem of unprecedented difficulty. 



THE TESTING AND MANAGEMENT OP 
ELECTRIC MOTORS. 

Bv P. T. WHITS, Wigan Electricity Works 

It has always appeared to the writer a matter of deep regret 
that persons of an ultra-mathematical, bat otherwise well- 
meaning disposition, should endeavour to befog the simples 
operetione of central station testing with involved algebraic 
formal*. M Figures can be made to prove anythin®,” saps- 
cially when, one can introdnoe those God-studs of tbs 
•* mixed ” mathematician—constants—often, alu 1 of « 
home-hailfc sad rectifying nature. 

Of web, I am assured, are the formulae ;— 

_ - 4 (w + u>) r 

C --"j r 

_ . 100 w 

Per cent, efficiency = g - (c ~. 

and the methods of testing appearing in a recent issue, is 
an ibetract from an American contemporary, under tbe bead¬ 
ing " Electric Motor Testing withoat a Dynamometer." 
The efficiency of the machine considered is stated as 86DS7. 
It is t pity that the remit was followed to three plane «f 
decimals only. In my opinion it shook! have been ptffmd 
to the bitter end—or a " repeotsr, ” 

Although it is now many yean since I left the cainJs 
behind me, and eves now l seldom employ algebra in ay 
everyday calculations, I have little hesitation in hating the* 
tbe efficiency of that motor ia nearer 88 pur cent 
The beat method of testing an electric motor is to put u 
artificial load npou it, and determine the mechacicai taq* 
of its armatnra is expremed in tbe output of e dhne 
msohins whose dynamic efficiency hu been found by sobs 
romimn norm method. In tbe article referred lo *» «" 
asked, among other things, to secure tbe armature shaft, ud 
connect tbe brashes to tbs circuit through a resistaoce, m 
carefully adjusted, that a D.P. of 220 volts was tooed dowi 
to } volt. Then, with 

<■-»)*. 

we got tbe armature oore sad friction low in watt*. Afw 
both these feats, and tbe fink ia no mail ooe. I thought 1 bad 
“ arrived,” but my hoses were dashed to tbe ground, so » 
•peak, whew I read u tbe formulas for fall load correct *■* 
baasd epoo tbe Mwnmprinu that tbe core km, annatae 
friction, windage, and poie-pieoe eddy current km « 
remain constant from no load to foil load. While * 
not strictly true, tbe error Introduced ia practically «*»* 
gjble.” Certainly; bat had it not been eo negligible, to 
might have had to introdnoe a few more decimals into ta* 
computations. In pairing, may I oomanBd some asusr 
m e th o d to tbs gtntiatnen who write yoa r$ tbeir cool » 
■amptkn par aait oi oupoi. 


Tot 48. No. 1,367, Daemon *7.1901.] 

As already stated the ’* artificial load ” 
&s beet, aed the one most generally era 
taring task is employed, she greatest cart 
■o instance, and the writer speaks from p 
ihoaid such a test be left in tbe charge 
foolish man. Even when the dynamo sic 
lion is properly equipped with ent-outa o 
are is necessary, When it is not, disasce 
*>me so-called tests witnessed by the write 
deemed necessary to put an ammeter iu 
seta had, however, been pnt across the . 
tod the operator was somewhat distressed 
ninnies from the start his volts began to . 
esme to the conclasion that this was due t< 
tad went forth in search of some resin, i 
be armature of a valuable machine burnt 
la too strongly impressed apoa the man wl 
d testing for tbe first time that an ammet 
enteue afcoolntely nece*»ry. It will pny i 
quipped testing board even when verv litr 

A method, even better than the •• pond 
Sstion lighting and power circuits. I 
wslly made np on a board in snch a mic 
be transferred from one side to the othe 
ifsttca to assist in maintaining the batacc 
be aomaed that all motor-testing operation 
doling the daytime, when the station c 
•ployed for the purpose. Where the &u 
« in course of erection, it will pay en? 
board which will meet these special reqni 
where the station is completed, methods c 
a trifling oost, will readily commend then 
wen. In small stations where the numb 
toted is very small, it will pay to makeup 
of arcs, incandescent*, and the shunts 
Whenever it is posaaible, it would be i 
toting of apparatus famishing the load i 
letere, for instance, which, in some » 
properly tested (too mnch reliance beiog 
toker’s teat scrip), can be inclnded in the 

An important adjunct of any station wi 
power toad is a small alternator of, say, 15 

* terminal voltage of 2,000 or .3,000. ‘ 
‘bis, it will be easy for en engineer to reje 
Wore expense has been inenrred npon t 
dtomstiag between windings and frame 
Ught^-in more ways than one—the wea 
Bochina. Of oonrae it is evident that set 
be submitted to this test at the same time 

This brings' me to the discnasion of a 
toting motors, and one which I should wi 
m. With the help of a short connterchu 
■*** of pulleys to snit the varying spee- 
Afferent motors, the alternator can aU< 
fonish e load of incandescent lamps t 
ksoafonner, I see no reason why the re* 
*4 be the station lighting load, though 
tony engineers will rise in aims against u 
<f both systems wonld be the same, or n« 
*reu if they “clashed"—and with prope 
<hoold not occur—nothing more serious 
•cold result. Of course it will be unde 
rit-tote only, and not circuit breakers, ar 
IW is, however, tbe rather remote dai 
•toio* primary invading tbe secondary 
tantfonner breakdown; bot even if thi 
tooWi would only be momentary. TJ 
totor fnaes would instantly go, There i 
wi minds of many station engineers wl 
•ffernsting carrenU is limited, and whose 
•ee of same/iff, a decided prejudice iigai 
■tot. This may be attributed to their 
own shock. Naturally, where high pote 
•ployed, the great eat care erase be 
’‘getting into ” the circuit. There aura 
***dty* safeguards are adopted which, 
gKwttfce recurrence of the many fatal i 
ptoT— of theindnetry in its early day 

* high p ote nt ial is generally ioaccesuh 
•■••Uy negligent, but in th* old days t. 












Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 
Page 84 

APPENDIX C 

List of Historical Photographs 

The following Historical Photographs are taken from the photographic 
collections of the following public and private organizations: 

Bostonian Society, Boston, Mass. (Boston Society) 

Boston Public Library (Boston Pub. Lib.) 

Boston Street Railroad Society - Library (BSRA) 

Carpenter Center, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. (Carp. Center) 

Library, Massachusetts Bay Transportration Authority, Boston, Mass. (MBTA) 

Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities (SPNEA) 

Certain photographs are borrowed from the collections of private individ¬ 
uals who in most cases prefer to remain anonymous. 

The present collection of glassplate negatives at the Carpenter Center at 
Harvard University includes most of the construction progress photographs taken 
during the construction of the Forest Hills extension. While the Boston Transit 
Commission and the BERy both took extensive photographs during construction of 
the different segments of the Boston Transit system, only scattered remnants of 
the first section survive. Fortunately the Carpenter Center has preserved 
largely intact the documentation of the Main Line from Dudley to Forest Hills 
from 1905 to 1912. The MBTA library has a partial collection of photographs 
documenting the construction of the Roxbury Division. Many of these photographs 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 85 

are reproduced in this study not only to document the elevated structure when it 
was at its pristine best, but also to serve as a fascinating history of heavy 
steel construction methods for that early time. 

(Note: Sometime in late 1986 the Carpenter Center collection of glass plate 
negatives was transferred to the library of the SPNEA.) 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 86 


List of Historical Photographs 


Fig. No. 

Description 

Date 


Grig. No. 

Source 

HP1 

Omnibus and Horse Drawn Streetcar on 

July 8, 

1889 

. 

Boston. Society 


Washington Street. 





HP2 

Horse drawn Streetcars - Tremont Street. 


1890 

- 

Boston. Society 

HP3 

Electric Streetcars on Tremont Street. 

July 12, 

1895 

- 

Boston. Society 

HP4 

Copy of Photograph - Elevated Structure 






with Steam Train of New York Elevated • 

(Oate of Copy) 




Railway - 59th. Street and 9th Avenue. 

Oec. 23, 

1903 

3976 

Carp. Center 

HP5 

Manhattan Elevated Railroad - 9th Ave. 






@ 84th St. Earliest Elevated train Structure. 

1891 

- 

Carp. Center 

HP6 

New York Elevated - St. Nicholas Ave., 






8th Avenue. 

March 11, 

1891 

- 

Carp. Center 

WiP7 

Union Elevated Railroad - New York 





• 

Later Version of Elevated Structure. 


1900 

- 

Carp. Center 

HP8 

Entries for Station Design-Architectural 






Competition for the BERy Elevated Mainline 





Structure. 


1898 

- 

Boston Pub. Lib 

HP9 

Pleasant Street Incline 






Looking up from Subway. 

April 30, 

1901 

778A 

MBTA 

HP10 

Pleasant Street Station under 






Construction. 

June 5, 

1901 

821A 

Private 

Collection 

HP11 

Pleasant Street Incline Crossing B&A 






Tracks to Castle Street. 

June 5, 

1901 

82 3A 

MBTA 

HP12 

Movable Platform Scollay Square Station 






Northbound Track for Temporary Use of 
Elevated Trains. 

Jan. 3, 

1903 

3383 

Carp. Center 

HP13 

Movable Platform Haymarket Station 






Northbound Track for Temporary Use of 
Elevated Trains. 

Jan. 5, 

1903 

3385 

Carp. Center 

HP14 

Four Representative Photographs of the 






Berlin Elevated Railway - Reproduced 





a 

by the BERy. 

- 


- 

Carp. Center 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page B7 


List of Historical Photographs 


Fig. No. 

Description 

Date 


Orig. No 

HP15 

Atlantic Avenue Line Beginning @ Castle 
& Washington Streets & Tower 1 D*. 

Sept. 

23, 

1901 

1803 

HP16 

Extension of Washington Street Mainline 
to Connect with South Portal of Washington 
Street Tunnel. View Looking North under 

Tower D @ Castle Street. Nov. 

11, 

1907 

5209 

HP17 

Castle Street Wye, Tower 'O' and 

Extension of Mainline toward Washington 
Street Tunnel (under construction). 

Nov. 

11, 

1907 

5208 

HP1B 

Temporary Platform @ Park Street for 
Southbound Elevated Mainline Trains. 



1901 

- 

HP19 

First Columns on Washington Street Mainline- 
Roxbury Division Corner Cobb Street. Aug. 

19, 

1899 

291 


First Three Bents #191, #192, #193 Erected 
on Washington Street, Corner of Cobb 

Street, Aug. 

26, 

1899 

316 

HP21 

Southerly View along Washington Street 
Showing Air Compressor Machine for 
Riveting Hammers. 

Sept. 

22, 

1899 

325 

HP 2 2 

North along Washington Street @ Cathedral 
View from Street. 

Nov, 

. 1, 

1B99 

333 

HP23 

North Along Washington Street 0 Malden 
Street and Cathedral. View from 

Rooftop. 

Nov, 

. 1, 

1B99 

33B 

HP24 

Wagon for Hauling Girders with Horse 

Team. 

Nov, 

. 1, 

1B99 

339 

HP 2 5 

Closeup of Compressed Air Machine for 
Riveting Hammers, 

Dec. 

28, 

1899 

38B 


HP26 Erection of Bents along Atlantic Avenue 

(One of few photographs showing traveller 

and erection crew at work during day 

time hours), Feb. 1, 


1901 


Source 

MBTA 

Boston. Society 

Carp. Center 
SRA Library 
Boston. Society 

Boston. Society 

MBTA 

MBTA 

MBTA 

MBTA 

MBTA 


1373 


MBTA 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 


• 


Page 88 




List of Historical 

Photographs 



Fig, No. 

Description 

Date 


Orig. No. 

Source 

HP27 

Erection of Transverse 8eams on Atlantic 
Avenue Elevated Structure. 

Feb. 2, 

1901 

1384 

MBTA 

HP28 

Dover Street Station Looking North 
along Washington Street. 

April 30, 

1901 

776A 

MBTA 

HP29 

Elevation of Dover Street Station 
Structure Looking West along Dover St. 
(now Berkley Street). 


1900 

864 

Boston. Society 

HP30 

Erection of Canopy Framing at 

Dover Street Station. 

- 


- 

MBTA 

HP31 

Mainline Looking South at Dover Street 
Station. Tracklaying. 

Jan. 16, 

1901 

799 

MBTA 

HP32 

• 

Washington Street Mainline - Looking South 

Just above Laconia Street & South of 

Dover Street Station. View of Temporary 

Dover Street Station under Construction. June 12, 

1912 

832C 

Boston. Society 

HP33 

View under Dover Street Looking South 
Showing Reconstruction of Dover Street 
Station. 

Aug. 26, 

1912 

844C 

8oston. Society 

HP34 

Structural Steel Framing - Northampton 
Street Station. 

Oct. 20, 

1900 


MBTA 

HP35 

Northampton Street Station - Progress 
Photo Exterior Sheathing. 

Dec. 21, 

1900 

855 

MBTA 

HP36 

Northampton Street Station - View Prior 
to Opening. 

May 23, 

1901 

811A 

MBTA 

HP37 

Northampton Street Station in Use. 

Rooftop View. 

Aug. 5, 

1901 

854A 

MBTA 

HP38 

Interior View - Rowes Wharf Station 
(Similar to that of Dover and 
Northampton Stations.) 

July 29, 

1901 

1B38 

MBTA 

HP39 

• 

View along Mainline - Looking South at 
Northampton Street Station Platform 
Extension. 

Nov. 25, 

1908 

914B 

Carp. Center 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page B9 


Fig. No. 


List of Historical Photographs 


Description 

Date 


Orig. No. 

Source 

Erecting of Steel along Washington Street 
@ Sterling Street - View from Rooftop. 

Oec. 20, 

1899 

394 

Boston. Society 

Oudley Street @ Washington Street - 
Wye on Mainline Site of Future Tower F. 
Track laying. 

Jan. 9, 

1901 


MBTA 

Oudley Street Terminal - Construction 

View of Interior-Looking South from East 
Loop Platform. 

Oec. 29, 

1900 

B51 

Boston. Society 

Dudley Street Station - West Waiting Room 
Looking North, Interior View. 

Oec. 29, 

1900 

B4B 

Boston, Society 

Oudley Terminal - Interior View Looking 
North Prior to Opening. 

May 3, 

1901 

784A 

SPNEA 

Oudley Street Terminal - East Loop. 

Oct. 29, 

1901 

880A 

SPNEA 

Oudley Street Terminal - View of Inclines 
from South. 

April 24, 

1902 

914A 

MBTA 

Oudley Street Terminal - View of East 

Loop from Roof. 

June 5, 

1902 

925A 

MBTA 

Oudley Street Terminal - View from Roof 
toward West. 

June 6, 

1902 

927A 

MBTA 

Oudley Street Terminal - West Side of Track 

View of Newstand. May 5, 

1902 

- 

BTA 

Dudley Street Terminal - East Side of Track 
Interior View Looking South. Nov. 5, 

1902 

. 3337 

MBTA 

Interior of Switch Tower F at Dudley 
Street. 

July 17, 

1901 

3216 

MBTA 

Switch Tower G at Bartlett Street - 
Exterior View. 

Sept. 9, 

1901 

B6BA 

MBTA 

View along Mainline Track from Oudley 
Street to Guild Street Yard Looking 

South at Bartlett Building. 


190B 

991B 

Carp. Center 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 90 


List of Historical Photographs 


Fig. 

No. Description 

Oate 

'■Orig. No. 

Source 

HP54 

View of Guild Street Yard at Washington 
and Guild Streets - Looking South. 

Oec. 18, 1901 

882A 

MBTA 

HP55 

Open Vestibule Wooden Elevated Car 
#0110 @ Tower F. 

May, 19, 1902 

- 

M8TA 

HP56 

Interior View of Early Elevated Train 

Car #069. 

Sept. 6, 1902 

3314 

MBTA 

HP57 

View of Berlin Train and Elevated Station 

Sept. 9. 1901 

- 

Carp. Center 

HP58 

End Elevation & Cross Section of #3 
Elevated Car. 

Sept. 10, 1909 

- 

MBTA 

HP59 

View of Wreck at Oudley Street to East 
of Tower F. 

Aug. 4, 1910 

• 801C 

MBTA 

HP60 

View of Bent Beams over Oudley Street 
after Train Wreck. 

Aug. 4, 1910 

- 

MBTA 

HP61 

Oudley Street Station - New Steel Work 
for New Southbound Platform. 

View looking West. 

Aug. 24, 190B 

979B 

Carp. Center 

HP62 

Oudley Street Station. View Looking 
South along Mainline with New Framing 
for Southbound Platform. 

Aug. 24, 190B 

981B 

Carp. Center 

HP63 

Oudley Street Station. View from Street 
Looking North at New Construction on 
Loop. 

April 10, 1908 

998B 

Carp. Center 

HP64 

Oudley Street Station. Work on East 

Loop. View from Street. 

Jan. 1, 1909 

B88B 

Carp. Center 

HP65 

Oudley Street Station. Surface Level 
Looking Southeast. 

Oct. 7, 1909 

7878 

Carp. Center 

HP66 

Oudley Street Station View from Street- 
Looking East at New Work under 
Southbound Platform. 

Nov. 29, 1909 

7648 

Carp. Center 

HP67 

Oudley Street Station Platform of 

West Loop. 

Oec. 16, 1909 

741C 

Carp. Center 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 91 


List of Historical Photographs 


Fig. 

No. Description 

Date 


’•Orig. No 

HP68 

Dudley Street Station. View Looking 

North at Progress on Platforms and 
Footbridge, 

Jan. 

20, 

1910 

748C 

HP69 

Dudley Street Station. Interior View of 
Waiting Room Pavilion - East Loop, 

Apri 1 

7, 

1910 

758C 

HP70 

Dudley Street Station. View of East Loop 
from Roof, 

April 

17, 

1910 

761C 

HP71 

Dudley Street Station Work on East 
Loop-Looking North. 

April 

27, 

1910 

767C 

HP72 

Dudley Street Station-East Loop 
and Pavi1 ion. 

May 24, 

1910 

770C 

HP73 

Dudley Street Station. East Loop. 

View Looking North from Platform. 

May 24, 

1910 

774C 

HP74 

Dudley Street Station. Birdseye View 
of Complex, Looking North, after 
Reconstruction, 

Sept. 

20, 

1910 

819C 

HP7 5 

Dudley Street Station. View along 

Warren Street of East Loop Looking 

North. 



1940 


HP76 

Dudley Street Station. View along Dudley 
Street Looking West at Loop. 


1940 

- 

HP7 7 

Dudley Street Station. View of 12 Bench 
Open Car Looking South from Platform 
of West Loop Incline. 



1910 

. 

HP 7 8 

Guild Street Yard at Washington Street- 
Looking South. View of Traveller Starting 

Work on Forest Hills Extension. May 3, 

1906 

6024 

HP79 

Washington Street Looking North, View 
of Guild Street Yard and Air Compressor 
Machine for Riveting Hammer. 

May 

12, 

1906 

6030 

HP80 

Traveller on Washington Street 
near Cedar Street-Looking North. 

May 

12, 

1906 

6033 


Source 

Carp. Center 
Carp. Center 
Carp. Center 
Carp. Center 
Carp. Center 
Carp. Center 

Carp. Center 

Carp. Center 
Carp, Center 

MBTA 

Carp. Center 

Carp, Center 
Carp. Center 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 92 


List of Historical Photographs 


Fig. 

No. Description 

Date 

'•Orig. No. 

Source 

HP81 

View North along Washington Street 
near Guild Street. 

May 12, 1906 

6034 

Carp. Center 

HP82 

View South along Washington Street 
at Kingsbury Street-Showing Start 
of Transverse Bracing. 

June 19, 1906 

6071 

Carp. Center 

HP83 

View of Mainline Looking West at 

Highland Park. 

July 2, 1906 

6075 

Carp. Center 

HP84 

View South along Washington Street 
from Townsend Street. 

July 16, 1906 

6078 

Carp. Center 

HP85 

View South along Structure at Townsend 
Street Showing Installation of Cross 
Bracing between Girders. 

July 16, 1906 

6080 

Carp. Center 

HP86 

View North along Washington Street @ Bray 
Street Showing Second Section of 
Transverse Bracing. 

Aug. 13, 1906 

6081 

Carp. Center 

HP87 

View South along Washington Street @ 
Bragdon Street-Showing Staging for 
Riveting Crews. Egleston Square is in 

Distance. 

Aug. 13, 1906 

6083 

Carp. Center 

HP88 

View of Egleston Square Station Looking 
North along Washington Street. 

Aug. 22, 1906 

6088 

Carp. Center 

HP89 

View Looking North along Mainline Structure 
at Franklin Brewery Company. Sept. 25, 1906 

6095 

Carp. Center 

HP90 

View North along Mainline Showing Tie 
Laying near Circuit Street. 

Oct. 18, 1906 

6103 

Carp. Center 

HP91 

View Towards Structure South of Forest 
Hills Street and North of Green Street. 

Oct. 19, 1906 

6106 

Carp. Center 

HP92 

View South along Washington Street 
near Union Avenue. 

Nov. 7, 1906 

6114 

Carp. Center 

HP93 

Egleston Square Station View South from 
New Concrete Platform. 

July 30, 1908 

6239 

Carp. Center 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 93 


Fig. 

HP94 

HP95 

HP96 

HP97 

HP98 

HP99 

HP100 

HP101 

HP102 

HP103 

HP104 

HP105 

HP106 

HP1Q7 


List of Historical Photographs 


Description 

Date 


‘•Orig. No. 

Source 

View of Egleston Square Station Looking 
South from Columbus Avenue. 

Sept. 10, 

1908 

6269 

Carp. Center 

Egleston Square Station-East Elevation. 

Oct. 5, 

1908 

6271 

Carp, Center 

Egleston Square Station Looking 

North at Canopy Framing. 

Oct. 6, 

1908 

6273 

Carp. Center 

Interior of Lower Level - Egleston 

Square Station. 

May 29, 

1909 

6368 

Carp. Center 

View along Mainline at Green Street 
Station Looking North. Framing of 
Platforms. 

Feb. 21, 

1912 

6061A 

Carp. Center 

View from under Green Street Station 
Looking South. 

Feb. 21, 

1912 

6062A 

Carp. Center 

Setting of Column Bolts in Concrete 
Foundation. 

May 23, 

1908 

6043 

Carp. Center 

Setting Column Shoe Casting on Anchor 
Bolts. 

June 6, 

1906 

6061 

Carp. Center 

Stony Brook Culvert with Concrete Piers 
for Bent #774. 

May 13, 

1908 

6218 

Carp. Center 

View of Forest Hills Square and Forest 

Hills Railroad Station Showing Streetcars 

Bound for Destinations Southwest of Boston. c. 

View North of Traveller Erecting a Single 

Pylon Portion of Structure over 

Arborway. Aug. 19, 

1905 

1908 

6242 

Private 

Col 1ection 

Carp. Center 

View North from Forest Hills - Team and 
Wagon Unloading Steel Girder, 

Aug. 19, 

1908 

6246 

Carp. Center 

Forest Hills - View of New Haven R.R. 
Bridge over Arborway and of Mainline 
Crossing Arborway. 

Aug. 24, 

1908 

6250 

Carp. Center 

Mainline Structure Entering Forest Hills 

Station Structural Framing, View Looking 

North along Washington Street. April 16, 

1909 

6313 

Carp. Center 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 94 


List of Historical Photographs 


Fig. No. 

Oescription 

Date 

\0rig. No. 

Source 

HP108 

View North Underneath Forest Hills 

Station Structural Steel Framing. 

May 5, 1909 

6331 

Carp. Center 

HP109 

Concrete Reinforcing on Arborway Crossing. 

May 8, 1909 

6333 

Carp. Center 

HP 110 

Reinforcing for Concrete on Mainline over 
Arborway View Looking West. 

May 21, 1909 

6360 

Carp. Center 

HP111 

Covering Steel Girder with Concrete at 
Arborway. 

June 28, 1909 

6394 

Carp. Center 

HP 112 

Metal Lath Installed over Steel Girders 
Prior to Concreting. View along Mainline 
Looking South. 

June 1, 1909 

6375 

Carp. Center 

HP 113 

Forest Hills Station - View South from 
Platform. 

Feb. 8, 1912 

605 8A 

Carp. Center 

HP114 

Forest Hills Station - View from Arborway 
Looking South. 

July 28, 1910 

6031A 

Carp. Center 

HP 115 

Forest Hills Station - View Looking North 
from Railroad Embankment. 

Nov. 16, 1909 

6489 

Carp. Center 

HP 116 

Forest Hills Station and New Haven R.R. 
Station - View from Coal Tower Looking 
South. 

Nov. 18, 1982 

6498 

Carp. Center 

HP 117 

View of Arborway Train Storage Yard 

Incline from Mainline - Looking East. 

1910 

6045A 

Private 

Collection 



Roston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-1 
Page 95 










































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-3 
Page 97 














































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-5 
Page 99 



MANHATTAN ELEVATED RAILROAD NEW YORK 

B- AVC. *T ST. 













Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 HP-6 
Page 100 





























Ejgsgffi9®t5s> 

'?’ y r„ 1 X 




l\\))iuun\^ 


Omi.n £A«u.9«.u • 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 

HAER No. MA-14 HP-7 
Page 101 


IPpipi^gi 


iplll 






















COMPETITIVE DESIGNS FOR BOSTON ELEVATEO RAILWAY STATIONS. 





















































































aVp » 5' 




!$*T' 

!»W ; 


: ' -li 8j0W* 

i£Sw. 


,-*,: J*' 


i IB : 


5‘. S'V VJ '’ > x .!$• "' 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 HP-9 
Page 103 



















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-11 

Page 105 










Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 ’ HP-12 

Page 106 




















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-13 

Page 107 




















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-14 

Page 108 










u?r^ on ^ eva t e d Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-15 

Page 109 









Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-17 
























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-I4 HP-18 
Page 112 
















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-19 

Page 113 



Cot, 




































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-20 

Page 114- 






























































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-22 

Page 116 














































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-24 

Page 118 



— 




31 ' 
















































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-25 

Page 119 






















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-26 

Page 120 













Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-27 

Page 121 















Jifaiktii 




■&&*& 

■': m ■ ■ 




WAsfS; 

'■ *•%■< 1 *^V,-r^»«ii'^rV»4i>ii.S.iiL j, 


» . jfS". 


... *-..m*i* • 

•W*. *>• >» ,vl 


■ 1 

V j 

,‘xayr * v? 

il 

-&$£&] 


■ >>1 


;&•;> •sl’Wf&r i- 
•■■ • ■•:</& K>, .. 

i. ; :.*.'S&i>.„.- 




^«v 

■^SjrsSS*' 

'*'■ •. -.st; ■*••’ «•■■ 

■ «. /•■• - A'vH.-jM?*’-' -Of:'- s^i 

r - -vj 


-« A -V j 


£$%•• «*» - ■ 










* ■?;. t/-* 

*';;S: t: ■ WJ*? v'i « v;• • 


• v ■*•• •' ' 

«, y//.; ^iy >> 

i, *V*v. ; v J •. .' -' « —a... 
: ';v. f -v t « *.{ 




v ■ 

■•■■..• * . 

■* - j 


- 













Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-28 

Page 122 




















































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-30 

Page 124 




















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-31 

Page 125 






































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-32 

Page 126 






















































Boston Elevated Rai 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 127 


[imii] 

















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-34 

Page 128 



























































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-35 

Page 129 

































































-1s; •'*' 


Elevated Railway Company 
!o. MA-14 HP-36 





















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-37 

Page 131 























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-39 

Page 133 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-40 

Page 134 













Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-41 

Page 135 


















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-42 

Page 136 






















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-43 

Page 137 
































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-45 

Page 139 



_ _- " 





















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-46 

Pa no 1 AH 


















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-47 

Page 141 



































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-49 

Page 143 






Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-50 

Page 144 








































Kgpsllpfpl 




'i 


*/iSv: : -V\:cv- : 'J‘^l-i 


V'y/./.V' 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-51 

Page 145 


























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-52 

Page 146 









'j 




■ : 












■$p& : *v 


























*>! 




TOO’ 


«2f*.T- . v . 

• • •• VTS- 
‘a 





























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-54 









Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-55 

Page 149 












































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-56 

Page 150 












Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-57 

Page 151 





























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-58 

Page 152 



DeoxMTWvcw} 
MO 3 tUVATtC 








































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-59 

Page 153 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 HP-60 

Page 154 















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-61 

Page 155_ 
































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-62 

Page 156 

















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-63 


Page 157 



aS> 





















'f't'r'zA 
1 w 


Boston Elevated Railway Company . 

HAER No. MA-14 HP-64 ■V./'"' 

Page 158 

































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-65 

Page 159 




-A* / . \o V<lv . ,« Vuv'n.- 



















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-66 

Page 160 




























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-67 

Page 161 














Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-68 

Page 162 

















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-69 

Page 163 



ty^CVQ 




























*1 




























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-71 

Page 165 












































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-73 

Page 167 


































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-75 

Page 169 








Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-76 

Page 170 










Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-77 

Page 171 







; -/.r'r 









































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-78 

Page 172 









































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-79 





















8oston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-80 

Page 174 






























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-81 

Page 175 















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-82 

Page 176 _ 




























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-84 

Page 178 

























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-85 

Page 179 


























4.v^ 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-86 

Page 180 








































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-88 

Page 182 





















































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-90 

Page 184 






































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-91 

Page 185 













WSs’i'i: 



















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-92 

Page 186 













Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-93 

Page 187 





















































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-94 
















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-95 

Page 189 





























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-97 

Page 191 























































It A 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-98 





























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-99 

Page 193 








Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-100 

Page 194 












Bostc 

HAER 





























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-102 

Page 196 











Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-103 

Page 197 











Boston-Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-104 

Page 198 















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-105 

Page 199 






























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-107 

Page 201 


am 





















































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 HP-109 

Page 203 







Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-110 


















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-111 

Page 205 











Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-112 

Page 206 














ra,<: .iaff »* • ■ 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-113 



Page 207 


Volts'. 





























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-114 

Page 208 
















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-115 










































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HP-116 

























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. HA-14 HP-117 

Page 211 







8oston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 212 



APPENDIX D 

List of Historic Drawings 

Original Architectural and Engineering drawings from which these copies were made 
are in the plan files of the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) 
Engineering Department, Boston, Mass. Access and use of these drawings currently 
(1986) is restricted and may be reproduced only with the owner's permission. 


HAER Number 


Structural Drawings 
Description _ 


Date 


Original BERy 
Drawing Number 


HD-1 

Map of Mainline between Dudley Street 
Roxbury and Sullivan Sq., Charlestown. 

19D3 


- 

HD-2 

Map of Rapid Transit Lines - Forest 
Hills to Sullivan Square. 

1913 


26455 

HD-3 

Map of Forest Hills and Roxbury 

Sections of the Mainline. 

April 9, 

1956 

M-a-15946 

HD-4 

Map of the Charlestown-Everett 

Section and Washington Street Tunnel. 

April 9, 

1956 

M-a-15947 

HD-5 

Map of Elevated Lines - Distances 
between Stations, Length of Platforms, 
Capacity of Car Houses & Sidings. 

June 19D1 

1D863 

HD-6 

Map of Pleasant Street Connection. 

- 


2D8D1 

HD-7 

Map of Boston Neighborhood Popula¬ 
tions Serving the Boston Elevated 
Systems. 

Feb. 23, 

191D 

38D9B 

HD-8 

Elevated Railway Foundations Compiled 
by Boston Elevated Railway. 

19D5 


3748A 

HD-9 

Typical Foundation Drawing for 

Roxbury Mainline. 

June ID, 

1899 

11235 

HD-1D 

General Drawing Bents #112-#121: 

Roxbury Division 

Concord Street to Newton Street. 

Feb. 21, 

1899 

25676 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 213 


Structural Drawings 


Original BERy 

HAER Number _ Description _ Date _ Drawing Number 

HD-11 Plan Typical Portion of Mainline along 

Washington Street: Bents #11D-#122. 1899 25656 


HD-12 

General Plan: Bents #4D-#66 

Mainline between Garfield Street and 
Harrison Avenue. 

Apri 1 

21 

, 1899 

25652 

HD-13 

Typical Longitudinal Girder - 
12 panels. 

Dec. 

21. 

1897 

2D258 

HD-14 

Typical Lateral Bracing Steelwork 

No. 3. 

Dec. 

28, 

1897 

2D 2 54 

HD-15 

Typical Elevations and Cross-Sections 
Showing Form and Methods of Construc¬ 
tion of Elevated Mainline Structure. 

Dec. 

21, 

1897 

20252 

HD-16 

Typical Cross Girder 'A' - Tracks out 
of Centre. 

March 

i 4, 

1899 

2D286 

HD-17 

Typical Cross Girder, Elevation of 
Cross Truss and Posts-Design 'A'. 

Dec. 

27, 

1897 

2D259 

HD-18 

Typical Cross Girder Oesign 'E' 
Elevation of Cross Girder and Posts. 

Dec. 

18, 

1897 

2D256 

HD-19 

Design 1 F 1 Typical Arched Bent 
Elevation of Cross Truss. 

Dec. 

14, 

1897 

20258 

HD-20 

Design 'F‘ Preliminary Study Orawing, 
Plan, Elevation and Section. 

Feb. 

8, 

1898 

- 

HD-21 

Typical Cross Truss'L'. 

Jan. 

28, 

1899 

2D277 

HO-22 

Typical Cross Truss 1 N*. 

Jan. 

28, 

1899 

20279 

HO-23 

Typical Cross Girder 'O'. 

Jan. 

27, 

1899 

20280 

HD-24 

Typical Cross Girder 'P 1 . 

Jan. 

27. 

1899 

20281 

HD-25 

Details of Cross Girders and Posts: 
Bents #19 & #20 

Roxbury Division. 

April 

15 

, 1899 

25713 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 214 


Structural Drawings 


Original BERy 

HAER Number_ Description _ Date _ Drawing Number 


HD-26 

Roxbury Division - Details of Open 
Webbed Cross-Girder Bent #6D. 

April 

26, 1899 

25716 

HD-27 

Roxbury Division - Details of 

Bent #96. 

Mar. 

29, 1899 

2D294 

HD-28 

Roxbury Division - Bents #2D5 & #206 - 
Typical of Bents along the Pleasant 
Street Extension. 

Jan. 

1899 

20323 

HD-29 

Roxbury Division - Cross Girders & 

Posts Bents #1212-#1218. 

Oct. 

1899 

2D33D 

HD-30 

South Approach - Washington Street 
Tunnel, Transverse Girders & Columns - 
Bents #1232-#124D. 

Mar. 

19D6 

25737 

HD-31 

South Approach - Washington Street 
Tunnel. Diagrams of Bents #123D-#1231- 
#1233-#1234-#1238-#1239-#1241-#1242. 

Mar. 

19D6 

25743 

HD-32 

South Approach - Washington Street 
Tunnel. Foundations for Columns - 
Bents #1227—#1228—#1229. 

Mar. 

19D7 

2D575 

HD-33 

Roxbury Division. Foundation for 

Post #1DDDE - Washington Street at 
Circuit Street - Showing Utility Pipes 
passing under foundation. 

Jan. 

31, 19D2 

11419 

HD-34 

Dudley Street Terminal - Cross Section 
of Loop Structure with Deck Girders. 

Feb. 

6, 1899 

26373 

HD-35 

Detailed Plan of Wye at Dudley & 
Washington Streets. 

1899 

13D1D 

HD-36 

Drawing - Typical Foundation - 
Forest Hills Extension. 

Feb. 

23, 19D6 

11423 

HD-37 

Plan - Forest Hills Extension. 

Nov. 

21, 19D4 

26454 

HD-38 

Forest Hills Extension - Diagram of 
Bents #778-#782. 

Feb. 

19D8 

26764 






Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 215 


Structural Drawings 





Original BERy 

HAER Number 

Description 

Date 

Drawing Number 

HD-39 

Forest Hills Extension - Details of 

Bent #783. 

April 19D8 

26722 

HD-40 

Forest Hills Extension - Plan of 
Foundations 836E & 837W - Stony 

Brook near Williams Street. 

Sept. 21, 1906 

20574 

HD-41 

Forest Hills Section - Details at 

Cross Girder #887. 

Sept. 17, 1929 

- 

HD-42 

Forest Hills Extension - Diagram for 
8ents #920-#932 - Showing Stiffeners. 

April 21, 1905 

26714 

HD-43 

Plan - Washington Street. Forest 

Hills to 4D0 Feet North of Arborway. 
Section F-6, 


26751 

HD-44 

Forest Hills Extension - Bents #791-#796 

26751 

) 

over Arborway - Showing Steel Plate 
Structure Encased in Reinforced 


• 


Concrete. 

Mar. 1908 

26766 

HD-45 

Forest Hills Extension - Details of 
Reinforced Concrete Encased 

Bent #797 above the Arborway. 

Apr. 1909 

26789 

HD-46 

Forest Hills Extension - Details of 
Reinforced Concrete above the 




Arborway. 

Apr. 1909 

26786 

HD-47 

Forest Hills Extension - Details of 
Reinforced Concrete Bents #790 & #797. 

Apr. 1909 

26790 

HD-48 

Forest Hills Extension - General 

Drawing - Bents #798-#804 

Plan and Elevation Showing Abandoned 
Ramp to Former Arborway Storage Yard. 

Jan. 1908 

26754 

HD-49 

Forest Hills Yard Leads - Layout of 
Steelwork - Bent #80QE to #FH6 - Plan 
and Elevation of Ramp to Arborway 
Storage Yard. 

Sept. 1909 

29600 




Boston Elevated 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 216 



List of Historic Drawings 
Architectural Orawings 


HAER Number 

Description 

Oate 


H0-50 

Oover Street - Station Plan of Main 
and Intermediate Platforms. 

July 20, 

1960 

HO-51 

Oover Street Station Contract Plan - 
Original Center PI atform Layout. 

Aug. 7, 1900 

HO-52 

Oover Street Station - Sections and 
Interior Elevations. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

1900 


HO-53 

Plan, Cross Section, and Elevation of 
Standard Platform Canopy. 

March 4, 

1899 

HO-54 

Steelwork at Oover Street Station for 
Center Platform Layout. 

June 21, 

1898 

HO-55 

• 

Oover Street Station - Elevations of 
Canopy Roof - Entrance Stairs. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

April 23, 

1901 

HO-56 

Oover Street Station - Oetails of 

Ticket Office. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

1900 


HD-57 

Dover Street Station - Section through 
Side Wall. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

1900 



HO-58 Oover Street Station - Plans and 

Elevations of Modifications and Changes 

for a New Station. April 1911 

HO-59 Oover Street Station- Additions and 

Reconstruction Elevations. Aug. 1912 

HD-60 Cross Section of a Typical Center 

Platform "Island" Station. 

(Commonly used on First Phases of 

Mainline Construction). 1899 

HO-61 Northampton Street Station - Platform 

Plan and East Elevation. 


Railway Company 

Original BERy 
Drawing Number 

37421 

21650 

21652 

20297 

20300 

27370 

21659 

21653 

28237 


Aug. 6, 1900 


21604 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 
Page 217 



List of Historic Drawings 
Architectural Drawings 

Original BERy 

HAER Number _ Description _ Date _ Drawing Number 


HD-62 

Northampton Street Station - Plan & 
Elevations. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

1899 

216DD 

HD-63 

Sections thru Northampton and Dover 
Street Stations Showing Details of 
Plumbing. 

Dec. 17, 1900 

21612 

HD-64 

Dudley Street Terminal - General Plan. 

Dec. 9, 1898 

25355 

HD-65 

Oudley Street Station - Surface Plan. 

19D2 

27566 

HD-66 

Dudley Street Station - Elevations. 

1899 

- 

HD-67 

Dudley Street Station - Cross Section - 
Central Waiting Room. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

19DD 

21533 

HD-68 

Dudley Street Station - East Elevation. 
(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

19DD 

21561 

HD-69 

Dudley Street Station - North Elevation 
& Cupola Details. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

190D 

21562 

HD-7D 

Dudley Street Station - North Elevation 
of Northeast Waiting Room. 

(A.W. Longfellow jr. Architect) 

19DD 

21564 

HD-71 

Dudley Street Station - Transverse 
Section thru Centre of Central 

Waiting Room. 

190D 

21567 

HD-72 

Dudley Street Terminal - Cross Section 
of Building at Bent #T16. 

March 13, 1899 

26386 

HD-73 

Oudley Street Station - Elevations & 
Sections Showing Proposed Changes. 

Dec. 19D6 

2758D 

HD-74 

Dudley Street Station - Elevated Level 
Plan Showing Proposed Changes. 

Aug. 19D9 

27583 






Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 218 


H AER Number 
HD-75 
HD-76 

HD-77 

HD-78 

HD-79 

HD-80 
HD-81 

HD-82 

HD-83 

HD-84 

HD-85 

HD-86 
HD-87 

HD-88 


List of Historic Drawings 
Architectural Drawings 

Original BERy 


Description 

Date 

Drawing Number 

Dudley Street Station - Surface Level. 

Aug. 1911 

27588 

Dudley Street Station - Elevated 

Level. 

Aug. 1911 

27589 

Roxbury Division - Elevation - 
Bartlett Street Switch Tower. 

June 26, 1901 

21919 

Dudley Street Station - Platform Plan - 
Showing Reconstruction of East Loop. 

Nov. 7, 1973 

74825 

Dudley Street Station - Lower Level 

Plan, 

April 3, 1949 

37419 

Egleston Square - Station Plan. 

March 24, 1961 

37417-1 

Egleston Square Station - Plan & 
Elevations. 

Dec. 19D6 

2838D 

Egleston Square Station - Sections & 
Elevations at Gallery. 

Dec. 1906 

28382 

Egleston Square Station - Interior 
Details & Section thru Canopy at 
Enclosure. 

Dec. 19D6 

28391 

Egleston Square Station - Surface 

Plan Showing Addition for Surface 

Car Station. 

May 1916 

28619 

Egleston Square Station - Enlargement - 
Elevation on Columbus Avenue of Surface 
Car Station. 

May 1916 

28621 

Green Street - Station Plan. 

June 16, 196D 

37416 

Green Street Station - Sections and 
Elevations of Waiting Room. 

Jan. 1912 

35085 

Green Street Station - Sections and 
Interior Elevations. 

Jan. 1912 

35D87 




Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 
Page 219 


List of Historic Orawings 
Architectural Drawings 

Original BERy 

HAER Number _ Description _ Oate _ Orawing Number 


HO-89 

Green Street Station - Details of 
Elevation and Section. 

Jan. 1912 

35089 

H0-90 

Forest Hills Station - Plan of 

Surface Level. 

Sept. 15, 1909 

28676 

HO-91 

Forest Hills Station - Plan of 

Elevated Level. 

Sept. 1911 

28688 

HO-92 

Forest Hills Station - Surface 

Level Plan. 

Sept. 1911 

28689 

HD-93 

Forest Hills Station - Elevations and 
Section. 

Feb. 1909 

- 

HO-94 

Forest Hills Station - Longitudinal 
Elevations through Platform 

Bents #783-#786. 

Oct. 1908 

28160 

HO-95 

Forest Hills Station - Detail Concrete 
Form Work for North Wall of Station. 

July 1909 

28672 

HO-96 

Forest Hills Station - Details of 
Reinforced Concrete Bents #784-#788. 

June 1909 

28658 

HD-97 

Forest Hills Station - Interior 
Elevations - East Elevated Platform. 

Sept. 1909 

28675 

HO-98 

Forest Hills Station - Details of 
Reinforced Concrete North and South 
Pavillions. 

April 1909 

28657 

HO-99 

Forest Hills Station - Details of 

Form Work for First Story Pilasters 

Span 7 90. Span 7 84 is similar. 

April 1909 

28659 

HO-lOO 

Map of Streetcar Lines prior to 




Construction of Rapid Transit Systems. 


1885 





Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 HP-1 
Page 220 

















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HO-3 
Page 222 





































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-5 
Page 224 


BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 

•-—ELEVATED lines- 

Distances, between Stations, Length of Platforms, 
Capacity or Cap Houses &. Sidings 


Correct 


Approx. Scale £500 “I 

m&k. Juno ,90 ' 




4 1 . 1 / S/d/ntf 


CJSTANC£ TABLE 


a 7A T/ONS 
TQWMJCNO ST. 

C£OAk ST. 
DUOL2Y ST 
WOATHAMPTON 3 7 
oore/t sr. 
PiSASANT ST. 


dCNSYvAY 

Sou"! BfKi.’r*/ 


:<*« I.IVAN .'AH IllUC-f 
. SM (,A J t/n/Of i/ ,‘Uv.lr 

. r . 


SULLIVAN SQ 

p/ar/ss' 


/ 


Chiet Engineer 


/#k jr» 

2*99 J04 
♦ JW 1 Sis 
{ A/it' .7X1 
1 23*7 ATT 

££>£ *«™TON ST 

ZZL' Jri **** st. 

J SCCltAY SO. 

AO ATT S JO 
NAY/TAA/CET SO 


770~J4* 

S9o‘Jif 

-flfj J ,°f r NONTN STATION 
C/7Y SO. 
THOMPSON SO. 
# JUUJYAN SO. 


Tff 

/its 

S3S3 

4/32. 
2307 
/ 7JO 
7030 
/SJO 

/SOO 

7029 

29// 

/J9/ 

SAOS 


r*m» focar aiding’ 


1C43 * 

'** j 

47S % 
J 2 » 6 

*°+ 3 

iM S 
294 

./W 

SS/ ^ 

< 

<WJZ ■N 


THOMPSON SO. 

War mo’ 


T/kr p/atfor/ns at Par// St.Jta for Jeon oouru/ /r,////s 
amd at Hey market. J/j.Jfo for vVort/t duund wi,/ furn/s// 

\food acccvnodar/or/J tor foree cars and for on/y T/n> c.?. 
at Hey market Jy.JAo Jeut/r dourd 
tour r&r/rams can tutrurr Out foe en/ranre pier for ms 
Of /mo cars at Park Jr Jfa Jeufo oourd and ok or>a car 
at ttaym&rket Sy.Jra Norm doom/ cr/// s/and .5 ",v ,'e 
arret/ from foe srat/cn & at forms, due /o curves 

//? frocks 




HANOVER ST. 

P/at. rzo' 


STATE ST. 

Pi at. /SO' 


ROWES WMARf 

P/at. /38‘ 


BOYLSTON ST. 
P/or r jo ' 

PLEASANT 3T. X 
P/ot. /no ‘ 

3 


'S'3 

6 EACH ST. 

a> p/ar. 746 ' 


\_s- /tear 5/d/njf 

SOUTH STATION 

p/ar./60‘ 


t DOVER ST. 
P/at /k 2 ' 



NORTHAMPTON ST 

P/at /AS' 


O/Jrpt/Cf TPBLEvfo PTLPNT/CAV£, 


.vovtr/i aovr/n 
rtt/n, 


SCnr S/ri/ri f* 


Bartlett st car hoijst \ oum » < r,r. 

/SCmrj ins/d*/ of Tt/iuse \ \ 

Z2, ou'S'eT/r - Y, 


fT’Y' _ 

I ‘Y ■ TOWNSEND •. I 


'933 

3*39 
l 309 / 
V> 4/99 
^ JJ»* 
Lj /s/a 
! 23/3 

\ *■'* 

• 2*3/ 

4*34 


JSa 
S04 
333 
.790 
044 
233 
4T7 
■ '39 
4J9 
73/ 
.■S3 
99/ 


STATIONS 

TOvynsenO ST. 

C£OAP ST. 

DOOLZY 3T. 
r/opTHArfpror/sr 
DOVE a sr. 
bsach sr 
so urn STATION 
POtYCJ VYAfAPr 
STATE ST. 

HANOYfk ST 
c/ rr so 
r/torirsO/Y so. 
sou/VAN SQ. 


rots] jse 

jasr 4 t 74/s * 

4/tt % .T3A ? 

>*«,«/ 5 

' 437 A .234 

2So3 % 473 , 

Xe'j^oee. 
4" 7 .790. »« 
733/ .332 ^ 
S 3 SS /.033 , 


y#S£<3 








Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-6 
Page 225 
















































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-7 
Page 226 




east boston tunnel 


B — SERVED BV ELEVATED (NORTH)/WASHINGTON ST. TUNNEL 
C — TOBE SERVED BV CAMBRIDGE SUBWAY/ EAST CAMBRIDGE ELEVATED 
Q — TO be; SERVED BV RIVERBANK SUBWAY^RESERVATION LINES 

E, — SERVED BV ELEVATED (SDUTH^/WASHINGTON ST. TUNNEL 

ALL RAPID TRANSIT LINES SUPPLEMENTED BV SURFACE LINES 

SURFACE TRACKS SHOWN THUS; - 

EXISTING SUBWAYS/ELEVATED LINES SHOWN THUS: — i 
PROPOSED SUBWAYS^ ELEVATED LINES SHOWN THUS> 







New York and Boston Elevated Railways 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-8 

Page 227 



METROPOLITAN WEST SIDE CHICAGO ANO SOUTH SIOE LAKE ST ELEVATEO NORTHWESTERN fc UNION 














BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 
-ELEVATED LINES- 

Typical Foundation 

fecksfaf Caff/hjr Base: 13^3‘x 13lo‘' 7 Course: s' 

$cale:i*f v June 10,(893 




£, / V - / \ (Asli/bttf? 

Chief Engineer 


/bundnti'on tio be fir^/nnc/ Ctwent 
Concrete /wteed in proportions 
ns fo/Sows: -' 

Coc/roeo l- 3 /:3‘6 

4-6 /:2i'S- 

7 f:f:3 


EIlevation 



Center //he of Se n/ ' 



Plan* 



//2SC 


D 9 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-9 

Page 228 







< I w £ -o' 

eg * 

w 2 _ u 
q z Q § CD 

yj j £ 

t? a £ ! $ 

g | |l | 

w 2 1 K * 

B Lt - « y-> - 
, ! □ ■ 



Z P $ S > 

ft hi] 

11, Hit 

.§ JJ S ? 5 , a 



Boston Elevated Railway 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-I 

Page 229 






















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-12 

Page 231 






















Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-13 
Page 232 
















sto; 










































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-15 

Page 234 

































































ELEVATION of CROSS TRUSS 











































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-18 

Page 237 



CO AYM1IVH (BI.V.WIIN0JSP3 




















































































































































































































Typical Cross Girder P 

Scale £ir>* I FT. Jan. 27 1599 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-24 

Page 243 



CAOSS SECTION or 

LONGITUDINAL GIRDERS 

'Shotting Solid Flooring under Tracks 
























SION 

Posts Bents is a zo 

Jpri! 15 1595. 































































or ExrANSiOf. FbCKtrs 






















































I 

i 





o o o o o o o '< 


er ■ tf HO/J57? 


■t-jc-.fT* 

, r .jy J l 



<yeonx/xj 

oar 


Vo 

st^yjrY^v /So 

.e-.Jfw? <= 

yj ooy-oo'fj' 0 , . 

"■"S' 5 


»• 3 •: \o~ryr. 


> IK?: ••* 

4$w4 





: 

4<* 


%r* •«-#■*>*** 
*w-*»e -t.‘r*trr* 


> »<!«.* 


335 S"S A ' ■'** 

1 


g 4 /**'.?/***£/ 

WWr% ??> . 





*7’^ 

o*-- f. 47 e* 
M € 'W ^S**/ 


1 J 

Tv 

v*,« 2 ^ 

t!?lSE4 ,■ ~ >, 



■secr/w c-d 
































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-29 

Page 248 









.« ivr /'V 


.*•.» /S/ 
r/r / c v 


; s|-1 v oi 

■ M * ^ 

;fip 

up! 

\W 




* 

? ! 

• \\ .*5 . r 









































































































































































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 

haer°n<>• ma- 1 4 ho-33 BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 

Page 252 

-ELEVATED LINE5-- 

Roxbury Dtv. 
Foundation for Post 1000 E 
Washington St. at Circuit St. 


Wash. St. 


/e £0 =/ 


Scale 4 =1 


Jan.31,1902. 


Chief Engineer. 


" • !• i! :i 


S'/cya/ions 
- - sais? 

— — — ... .. _ ^7.26^ 

Cost*,?? A _ ^ oy ^ 


r 


u 

/ 

11 

/f~Z 

H 

ii_ 

11*** 

1* 

,i 




■i 

a 

lV,™ 


SdVJ 

ft 


- - ■9-S'O/- 


IPW 


jjC -r- 9 

§ 

Elevation 

Sc c/e ^ =*/' 


j>i 6- n' 5 ® —--J 

ij 

c- ; 


L..3477 


£'/CY(7//o/?S 

a-4-6.09 

6-9S.33 
c-4-$:zz. 
c/-+sro7 
e-*7. <96 
9/ 

C2j4-&- &0 

h-37.77 








BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 
-ELEVATED LINES- 

DUDLEY ST. TERMINAL 

Cross Section or Loop Structure with Deck Girders 

Jeo. 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-34 

Page 253 

a 

K 

t: 

\ . 



e/cez 


























BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 
■-ELEVATED LINES- 

“Typical^ Foundation 

Base l'.i x 1- 6’ 3Courses 
Scale:*-1' Feb. 23 ,1906 




Foundation to be of FbrF/and Ce/nenti 

Concrete mixed in the proportion /-'JS# itT 


Elevation 



Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-36 

Page 255 







BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 

-ELEVATED CONSTRUCTION- 

FOREST HILLS EXTENSION 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-37 

Page 256 



26454 

















FOREST HILLS EXTENSION 













































































































































ELEVATED CONSTRUCTION 


Pag© 259 



Section OD ^Section £“F. 
















































































FOREST HILLS EXTENSION 


Boston EIeva+ed Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-42 

Page 261 


(vj § 'll i 

t i 


* 

2 v mSmBBt 

I ipw 

1 * tilitilS 

i « 

<r C it?!>*•*>iK&BtRp5 

l s Uiiiilfpjl 

I 

5 <1111131 

s, h» 

3 Uifepgi: 

ft- *rcSpS^5$T£ 

mm 

| sslsisIsIpsSs 

e 5 •!•!• • I* *H* ■ " • 


1 .1 s a 

m is 


m !i 

111 












Bettor t«d Compaq 
















FOREST HILLS EXTENSION 
























































■.,Zb73i> 


















































oosTon tievareo Kail way company 
HA£R No. MA-14 HD-46 


Pag© 265 








































8os+on Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-48 




























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-49 

Page 268 


































BOSTON ELEVATED F 

ELEVATED LINES 



2/6 SO 





























































































































































































U SOU 6 M 
















































































































































































































































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-58 

Page 277 




















































































































































































































































Section through Typical Island Station 

















































































































































































































































































































































































































































Warren 




J.C dJB&J. 


m 


Sf jfc iu j&i 




































































BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 



•■/inf rfi/T. 


Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-67 

Page 286 




















BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 

ELEVATED LINES 



2/se/ 





















































































































































































































































XASV7 





















































































































































BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 

-ELEVATED LINES- 

DUDLEY ST. TERMINAL 
Cross Section of Building at BentTi6 



















































































































H ■‘—c, 


m 


















Warren 

















Z/OS9 





































































































































































-ELEVATED CONSTRUCTION- 

















































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 HO-82 

Page 301 






























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-91 


Page 310 

































BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 























BOSTON ELEVATED RAILWAY 



East Elevation 




























Boston Elevated Railway Company 
HAER No. MA-14 HD-94 

Page 313 


MStt/’j 










































































































































UffV 



• $TARTtaj C*via a*c 5ta«h KitV. * Ea»T PtArroe* 































































































































































































































































Boston Elevafed Railway Company 
HAER No, MA-14 HD-100 
Page 319 



MAP OF BOSTON, SHOWING LINES OF THE WEST END STREET RAILWAY CO. 


